ui Ыз өү 
ы НЫНЫ: 


24 


етте eee et $3 4-9 99 99 99 ҰЗ +ç 
т i 


« 
% 
E | 
[= 
© 
= 
© 
© 
[= 
5 
o 
ш 
e 
N 
> 
à 
o 
Ф 
N 
= 
o 
a 
E 
9 
© 
S 
© 
o 
- 
© 
z 
3 
E 
© 
a 
2 
ш 
g 
o 
= 
i=: 
2 
= 
o 
5 
х 
= 
х 
5 
Ë 
5 
© 
= 
о 
o 


$99999€904-94- $99. 99969 $990 5 eer : 
^ 


EM : З 


© РУР? 
ppp o rs 


» 
etr amt enn 


C-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar 
: qe Ru — m < GE” 2 p 


| \ FRONTISPIECE 


С 
( 
ËL 
+ 
~ 
TEE FEAF 
|! | 1 
E Қ! 
| 
\ 
і 
1 
D. 
ч. 
f 
\ 
X 
Ay 
1% 
€ 
| L 1 
; 
$ 


SVASTIKA MANSION (FRONT VIEW) 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ENCYCLOPAEDIA 


OF 


HINDU ARCH ITECTURE 


BY 
MEA BAR PDA LE.S. 


2 <= ко. ae 
ау pU 


MANASARA SERIES ; VOLUME VII 


PUBLISHED By THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY 


АТС , MADRAS 
CHINA, JAPAN 


AHL ла GHINIHd 
3 Foundation USA 


ES: Bo Ren 


SUPERINTENDENT, 


PRINTING AND STATIONERY, 


U. P., ALLAHABAD, 


гики! Kangri University Haridwar Collectilin. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


/ 


/ 


/ 


2 
MANASARA SERIES 


TA Dictionary of Hindu Architecture (1927). 


VOLUME 
ccording to Manasara Silpa- 


VoruwE II—Indian Architecture a 
° Sastra (1927). 
VOLUME III—Manas4ra—WSanskrit Text with Critical Notes (1934). 
VOLUME IV—Architectur 

ur 2 (1934). 
^VoruwE V—Architectyfe of: Manasára—Plates r-oxxxv ( 
RT tural), ots Gv (Sculptural) (1934). 
Woruwg VI—Hindf. Architecture in India and Abroad (1946). 
VOLUME УП А4 Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture (1946). 


ey 


= 


2 of Manasüra—Iranslation in English 


Architec- 


—— Е 


i 
| 
| 
| 
j 


f 
| 
| 
l 
1 


| 
| 
| 
I 
! 
| 
| 


| 
| 
1 
x 
| 
| 


| 
4 
L 


| 
| 


D oet 


HI FOREWORD 


HIS is the seventh and the last volume of the Manasüra series so far 

_ 45 the present writer is concerned. А few more volumes are, however, 
required to complete the. work. Those new volumes will have to 
deal with the practical conclusions and workable plans and designs. 
This remaining work will involve an additional expenditure and an 
engineering study and.draughtsmen's survey, estimate, calculations . 
and comparisons with the few extant structures ТӨБЕСІ to in the 
Writer's sixth volume, ‘the Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad. In 
fulfilment of the fateful prediction of the late Professor E. J. Rapson 
of Cambridge University, the whole of the official career of the pre- 
sent writer commencing from the eventful year of 1914 has been fully 
occupied in preparing and seeing through press some 5,000 pages 
of these seven volumes. As the decree of fate would have it the war 
of 1914-18 caused from the very beginning of this task all possible 
interruption, risk and inconvenience while the work was carried out 
in London, Oxford, Cambridge, and Leyden. The difficult Indian 
conditions presented the familiar dilemma either to give up the self- 
imposed task altogether as is usually done by us after securing a degree 
and an appointment to a permanent post, or to carry it through, with- 
out much encouragement and assistance from any quarter, shoulder- 
ing in addition to the peculiar duties of an occasionally unfortunate 
Professor of an Indian University the heavy burden of research. 
lhe unusual exigencies of the reconstructed Allahabad University 
demanded of the writer preparation and delivery of lectures to 
B. A., M. A., and Research classes up to 30 times per week and 
never less than 18, and also to do the departmental administration, 
and the routine work of various committees and examinations. 

Contrary to the Sadler Committee's policy recommended for the 

new type of Indian Universities research activities even for the 
professors ofthe highest rank became practically of no importance; 
the teaching and social activities, as in schools and colleges, being 
much better appreciated by the authorities. Thus for instance our : 5 
autonomous University considered it a useless waste of public funds ers 

—to-include a few pages in its annual report in order to give publi- | E 
city to the mere titles of papers and books written and published | | 
by their teachers. Our non-interfering Government authorities alo 25 
ceased to take any notice of their own servants who- were 
* foreign service, or rather banished to the universities. 3 


a ІХ 


FOREWORD AN ENCYCLOPAE, 


The great educationist Governor, late. Sir Harcourt Bu 
sanctioned the cost of publication of these volumes to be advanc 
from the public funds before the delegation of the writer to th 
Allahabad University. But he left to Sir Claude de la Fosse, who 
was the first Vice-Chancellor of the reconstructed Allahabad Univer- 
Sity for a few months, to settle the terms of the publications includ- 
ing the author's royalty and reward. Sir Harcourt was sorry to 
learn of the changes which had taken place since his retirement from 

. India and was ‘shocked ° when he was told in ‘London in 1933 that 
an Indian successor of Sir Claude, as the Head of , the Education 
Department of the Government, actually questioned in an official 
correspondence ‘the public importance of printing Indian Architec- 
tural researches.’ 


The commitment of his predecessor had, however, to be carried out, 


and the Government, at the Suggestion of again an Indian Adviser . 


.to the Governor, have since decided that after the realization of 
the full sum of money advanced by the Government for the cost of 
prinüng and publishing through the Oxford University Press, the 
further sale-proceeds, if there be any, will go to the successors of the 
writer. ‘This is certainly a business arrangement. But the question 
of profits was not unfortunately “considered when the first five 
volumes were published, for, the first two volumes published in 1927 
actually gave a small profit to the Government of Rs.300 to Rs.400 
despite the fact that only 250 copies were then published for circula- 
tion among scholars and that the prices of those volumes were fixed 
not as a business proposition, but merely to realize the cost of publica- 


on. 
а Шана under such circumstances-one would not feel encouraged 
to put in further labour and incur enormous expenditure, which are 
needed for the preparation of the remaining volumes and completion 
of the series. And there is not much hope either that. the Govern- 
ments and the various corporations, municipal boards, and other 
authorities who sanction the plan of a private building or erect a public 
structure will interest themselves in introducing an Indian policy 
in architecture until the new order following the present devastating 
` war comes into being and until the new nations are able to 


= rebuild and repair the rackless destruction. In the pre-war and - 
| peaceful times, however, facilities were freely provided by the State, | 


1gri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
э E - 


жесі 


|. HINDU ARCHITECTURE. FOREWORD 


|. especially in the big European and American cities like London k 
j Leyden, Paris, Berlin, Rome, Washington, New York, etc., to hold m 
_ extramural evening classes and deliver popular lectures оп architec- ^d 


| ture. Cities like Milan used to hold perpetual exhibition of - k 
model houses іп order to educate the public in the construction of 
suitable dwellings. Perhaps a time will come even in countries like - 
| India, when it may be considered barbarous to question * the public 
© importance of architectural researches. The common sense of civiliz- 
ed and progressive peoples has recognized that residential buildings 
are more important in some respects than even food and clothes. It - š 
is well known that among the amenities of life, houses afford in a Е 
large degree not only comfort and convenience but also health and 
longevity of life, safety, and security. Nomads are not considered 
civilized ; they àre not attached to any locality ; they have no fixed 
hearth and home ; they are not inclined to spend their fortune in 
erecting dignified edifices, everlasting ancestral residences, memorials, 
monuments, temples, churches, mosques, mausoleums, towers of > % 
silence, monasteries and pagodas. Тһе art and culture of a people 
are reflected and preserved in such monuments. Тһеу sustain and 
stimulate national pride. "Thus the architectural structures differ in 
various countries to suit their economic and climatic conditions, 
weather and soil, taste and aspiration, and material moral and 
` spiritual progress. It is, therefore, necessary to set*le the architectural 


| policy of each country in its own way. -For India no better ; E 
. authority containing the experience of generations and experiments 224 
‚ ` of centuries will ever be available than what is revealed Бу the E 
` 


; Manasara series. ior > | HE 
' . Apart from supplying cultural and historical information these | ; 

volumes contain а key which when understood may help the tackling | 

of Indian housing problems. It has been shewn and recognized by — || 
. . discerning authorities that whatever elements have been introduced | 
`“ to India by the Persians, Moghals, Pathans, and the Europeans, have 
| failed to suit the Indian climatic and soil conditions. Neither th 
| desert houses of Arabia nor the rain-coats and the snow covers ot Eur 


` perience of generations and experiments of centuries are с 
our Vastu-Sastras (science of architecture). Like the I 
of решш vegetarian dishes азаа sk th 


E : хі = A s 


== 


FOREWORD AN ENCY CLOPAEDIA OF 


Indian houses of our Sastra (scientific) styles 
suitable for us. А wide dissemination of an accurate knowledge of 
true Indian architecture as revealed for the first time in these volumes 
must be the first step of the housing reform in India. 
The present volume is a revised and enlarged edition of the writers 
Dictionary of Hindu Architecture which was published ‘in 1927, without 
any plates. Its change of title to An Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture 
"was originally suggested to the London University and missed by 
several learned scholars. А respected one! commented in his 
review of the Dictionary on this point very strongly : * The Dictionary 
is a book which is so well done that it appears to be no exaggeration 
to say that for many decades it cannot be improved upon unless, of 
course, the South reveals to us more hidden treasures. . If there is 
anything to object to, it is the title of the book, which does less than 
justice to it. “ Encyclopaedia” would be a fitter ‘title. The term 
** Dictionary " is associated in our minds with word-meanings, while 
Dr. Acharya's work is very much more than ** word-meaning." Each 
term is followed by its meanings, mostly technical, an exhaustive 
account of the subject, and references to standard works of a wide 
range of literature. Thus, it will be seen, the work deserves а 
better title than ** Dictionary." Іп fact Dr. Acharya himself suggested 
to the London University the compiling of “Ап Encyclopaedia of | 
Hindu Architecture," and it appears to have been a mere freak of 
fortune that when the University decided to entrust the learned 
` Doctor with the work of compiling, they chose the term ‘‘ Dictionary." 
They appear to have been led to do this by the nature of the usual run 
of work done by modern scholars who in many cases have the 
unhappy knack of *'shirking work "'; but in being led away by the 
prejudice, the University were unfair to their alumnus, who has, by this 
work, more than justified the title that he had himself suggested. 
. . . [tisa matter of special gratification to us of the Allahabad 
University that we have at the head of our Sanskrit Department a 
scholar capable of doing work which, as a monument of industry 
and patience, compares favourably with the best of that class of 
scholarly work which has hitherto been regarded as German.’ | 
1 Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha, Indian Review, March, 1928. 
3 For similar comments by several other Reviewers, please see the concluding 


are naturally more 


appendix of this volume and also рр. ІА to ПА of the writer’s Architecture of | E 
"Mánasüra (Volume IV of the Manasara Series). = | 


NI 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | e 


“HINDU ARCHITECTURE FORET ONE 
The distinguished 2008. Dr. Abanindra Nath Tagore, сік. 
observes also that the Dictionary is ‘in the nature of an Encyclopaedia 
embracing all the existing treatises on Indian art. He (the author) 
has herein presented before us all the information that so long la 
hidden and scattered all over the world it may be Е 
priately called the Mahabharata of the literature on Indian art for 
in it we find all that there is to know about Indian art. n 
Hitherto it has been extremely difficult to be able to read all the om 
` nected literature that is to be found in libraries whether in India or- 
outside. Everyone of us does not know the language in which the 
treatises are written. Moreover, most of the original texts are preserved 
in distant lands. In the circumstances, a volume of this nature, 
written in English and containing as perféct a compendium as 18 
possible, of all the existing treatises on art, came to be a necessity, not 
only for us but for foreign artists as well. ., . . I cannot adequately 
express the extent to which I shall be able to make use of it `. 
` and the profit which my pupils will derive from it. 1 ; , 
* Students of Indian architecture should be grateful to him (author) 
for accomplishing with such thoroughness a task which has been long 
overdue, and which must have entailed a tremendous amount of 
patient and often disinteresting work, in a number of different lan- 
guages. The Dictionary of Hindu Architecture contains all the architec- 
tural terms used in the /Мйпазйға and in the known Vastu-sastras, 
published inscriptions and other archaeological records with full 
references and explanations.’ 2 
- Professor Acharya's Dictionary of Hindu Architecture is а monumen~ 
fal ‘work, the first of its kind. It deals with three thousand words 
-relating to architecture and sculpture and cognate arts. Under each 
term is brought together all the necessary information in the form of a 
short article illustrated with copious quotations from the ancient 
printed books, as well as manuscripts, the general literature and the 
. archaeological records. And this has been done with a thoroughness 
and accuracy which are the authors own. Full quotations for 
bringing out each and every shade of the meaning ofa word: are 


1 Translated by Mr. В. N. Lahiri, M.A., I-P., from the Pravasi, April, 1928. 
2 The Times Literary Supplement, May 31, 1928. 
xii 


FOREWORD . ` AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


given. In effect the Dictionary becomes more of an Encyclopaedia 
rather than a dictionary.’ 1 | | 
: In consideration of such comments and in view of the fact that 
illustrative plates containing. measured drawings and photographs 
have been added, the Government and the Oxford University Press 
have agreed to the Present title. But -“ the freak of fortune’ truly 
designated by Sir Ganganatha has continued to the very end in other 
respects as referred to in the opening paragraphs and mentioned 
-later on. Re 
The prediction that ‘ for many decades it cannot be improved upon? 
has also. proved literally true. “Мо hidden treasures * have been 
revealed in any quarter. All the new publications including all 
archaeological explorations and reports which came out between 
1928 and 1943 have been closely searched. The very extensive 
volumes, reports, and explorations relating to Central Asia which have 
been largely due to Sir Aurel Stein, as well as the voluminous publica. 
tions of the Dutch, the French and lately of the Indian scholars 
relating to the Far East and Insulindia have also been patiently gone 
through.? But not many new “terms? have been discovered. The 
new terms added. in this volume will be hardly one or two per cent, 
` of the original list. But à number of new © articles? under the old and 
the new terms have been added. Articles like the playhouse (under 
Ranca) and Svastika symbol, etc., contain all information which is at 
present available. Articles on fine arts (under KALA) and Indo- 
Persian Architecture, and Maya Architecture of Central America, 
etc., are also new.? | 
Thus although the matter has largely increased, Lt.-Col. D. W. 
Crighton decided to reduce the unwieldy bulk of the volume by the 
device of smaller types, larger pages, and closer printing, which, it 
is hoped, will not cause any inconvenience to the readers. Colonel 
- Crighton and Mr. M. С. Shome, his successor, as the Superin- 
. tendent of Government Press, have endeavoured to produce a faultless 
` volume comparable with the best of European publications. 
— 1The Pioneer, February 13, 1928. 


|... 3 See further reference to these works under * Sources "in the Preface which 
ows this Foreword (pp. xvii-xviii) and also the Bibliography, pp. 679-84. 

* Another additional and very expensive effort, which is not directly concerned 
the present volume, has been made in erecting a residential house for a demons- 


the result of which is elaborated in the Preface of Volume-VI (Hindu Archi- 


' XIV 


x 


iversity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA | 


A. N i 


0 
or „ИНИН 


| 
| 


` 


HINDU ARCHITECT URE FOREWORD 


Тһе original plan and scope as well as the ideal and general method 
followed in the Dictionary 1 have Бсеп retained in this Encyclopaedia 
also.? г 
- What remains to We added 220 to further instances of the ° freak 
of . fortune? Under the war’ conditions of 1914-18 the work was 
commenced and under the present devastating war conditions it is 
completed. Among various. ‘other disappointments it is painful- to 
recall that in April, 1939, Lt.-Col. D. W. Crighton took to England | 
about 250 pages manuscripts of the present volume and after the 
declaration of the war in the fateful month of September, the Colonel 
wrote that he would send back the manuscripts together with his sug- 
gestions for printing. His suggestions were received and have been 
followed but the original manuscripts never came back. They had 
to be prepared again with all the annoyance and labour involved in 
such a process. Some of the new entries and additions and altera- · 
tions made in the missing pages during the past ‘twelve years may 
have been, however, lost altogether. ‘Those who work along this line. 
may share the writer's disappointment and will recognize the fact 
that it is hardly possible for a writer to re-write, an article in the 
same spirit, with the same fulness and анат ав аї the first 
inspiration. 

Another unfortunate incident alluded to in the Preface refers to 
the eye-trouble which started as the result of a very close examination 
and decipherment for several years of a huge quantity of very badly 
preserved old manuscripts оп ‘ Silpa-sástras ушып in five different 
scripts, and of some 50,000 lines of inscriptions." Over and above this 
the eyes were severely exercised by the reading of three proofs of 
Some 5,000 pages of these seven volumes, of which not only every 
` word but also every letter and every line thereof had to be minutely 
scrutinized at least three times each. All this strain for the past 
thirty years aggravated the ailment to such an extent that the 
proofs of this last volume had to be read, despite medical advice, with. 
one eye only, the other being unserviceable and requiring a risky 
and expensive operation which had to be postponed with a view to 
completing this work. 


_ ® See pp. x-xii. : 2 For details, see рр. xX-xxii. 
| ху 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation САДЕ Е т 


S 


FOREWORD 
) АМ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


cost of publication of all the seven volumes. Му 


г үй о reprint certain plates 
: . ч. Mukerjee, B.A., C.D., A.R.C., 
A.I.I.A., and his draughtsmen have supplied all Ті n RE 
and the plates for the illustration of certain objects of which no extant 
examples are available. "These drawings and plates had to be pre- 
pared from the description found in the texts and required great skill 
in representation. Thus they have earned my gratitude. 

Lt.-Col. D. W. Crighton, and, after his retirement, his successor, 
as the Superintendent of the Government Printing and Stationery, 
Mr. M. С. Shome, and their staff have endeavoured to produce 
a faultless volume. Colonel Crighton's plan and arrangement 
of the matter has been strictly followed. Іп his great wisdom he 
cast the new types for the last two volumes of the series and 
stocked „the required amount of paper excepting those for plates 
before the war of 1939 was declared. I shall always remain 
grateful to Colonel Crighton, Mr. Shome and their staff for all they 
have done to bring out these volumes and to mitigate my drudgery 
for more than a quarter of а century during which these volumes 


passed through the Press. 


My thanks are due to Mr. М. S. Sharma, M.A.,L.T., who assisted me 
substantially in preparing the Index of the modern archictectural 
terms as translated in the body of the work together with their 
Sanskrit equivalents. 

I am also thankful to Mr. M. G. Nayar, Senior Reader of 
the Government Press, for arranging the plates and the final 


revision of the last proof. 
P. K. ACHARYA. 


` ALLAHABAD UNIVERSITY : 


April, 1944-46. 


Xvi 


GC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


Origin and: scope 0 f the work— his Dictionary (encyclopaedia) owes its 
name to the University of London." A glossary of the architectural 
terms used in the Manasara, the standard work on Hindu architecture 
was prepared for my private use when I found it indispensable, 
after struggling for two and a half years to edit for the first time and 
translate into English a text, which is written in five different scripts, 
possesses eleven badly preserved manuscripts, has undergone five 
recensions, and comprises more than ro,ooo lines of a language 
rightly remarked by Dr. Bühler as the © most barbarous Sanskrit. - 
In this connexion there arose an occasion for me to express to the 
University the opinion that an encyclopaedia of Hindu architecture 
was badly needed. Architectural expressions appear throughout 
the whole field of general Sanskrit literature and epigraphical 
records, as well as in the extensive special branch of literature 
known ав Vaástu-íastras, more familiarly called Silpa-Sastras. Existing 
dictionaries, in Sanskrit, English or any other language, do not 
elucidate architectural expressions; and the texts of the Vastu- 
Sastras have been waiting for hundreds of years to be unearthed 
from manuscripts which are quite inaccessible without the guidance >з ЖЕН 
of а special dictionary that would also be instrumental in bringing 
to light many new things hitherto left unexplained in inscriptions RT 
and general literature. The University selected me as the person EO. 
most immediately concerned and entrusted me with the task, 
suggesting that I should * make a full “ dictionary ” of all architec- | 
tural terms used in the Mdnasdra, with explanations in English, 
and illustrative quotations from cognate literature where available — : 
for the purpose.’ 4 : = 
| Thus the terms included in this encyclopaedia are primarily those ` 
| found in the Mámasara. But all the new architectural terms of | 


THES с. 


Universi 


TOR l MER ЦЕ 


d It. has developed out of a Thesis, which was accepted by the 
the D. Lit. degree. See the Foreword for the change of title to “Еп 


2 Grantha, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, апа Nagari. | | 
8 Ep. Ind., Vol. I, p. 377; compare also Sir R. 
| ХІ, PP. 140, 141. m Mies edet cur E 


PREFACE AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


any importance discovered in all the known architectural treatises, 
epigraphical documents, and general literature have aó been 
added. I should estimate the new terms at about one-fourth of the 
total, numbering approximately three thousand. No record has, 
however, been kept of the extent of the architectural manuscripts 
or the general literature searched, but some 50,000 pages of 
archaeological documents have been gone through almost line by 
line. 


architecture is taken in its broadest sensé and implies what is built 
or constructed in lasting materials and with a design and an 
ornamental finis. Thus, in the first place, it denotes all sorts of 
buildings, religious, residential and military, and their auxiliary 
members and component mouldings. Secondly, it implies town- 
planning ; laying out gardens ; constructing market places; making 
roads, bridges, gates; digging wells, tanks, trenches, drains, sewers, 
moats; building enclosure walls, embankments, dams, railings, 
ghats, flights of steps for hills, ladders; etc. Thirdly, it denotes 
articles of house furniture, such as bedsteads, couches, tables, chairs, 


thrones, fans, wardrobes, clocks, baskets, conveyances, cages, nests, . 


mills, etc. 
Architecture also implies sculpture, and deals with the making 


of phalli, idols of deities, statues of sages, images of.animals and 
` birds. It includes the making of garments and ornaments, etc. 
Architecture is also concerned with such preliminary matters 
as the selection of site, testing of soil, planning, designing, finding 
out cardinal points by means of a gnomon, dialling; and astrono- 
mical and astrological calculations. 


These and similar matters are expressed by technical names 


which ате to be understood ds architectural terms for the purpose 


of this dictionary (encyclopaedia). | 


mely, literary and archaeological. The former includes all the 
үп Vastu-íastras, mostly in manuscript, which are avowedly 
itectural treatises, such as the Manasara, etc.; architectural 


28 and incorporated in this volume. 
ICT +. xviii 


~, 


I 5 a IE 
Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


>: 


Extent of architectural terms comprehended—In the Vastu-Sastras - 


- Principal sources and arrangement of materials—The sources drawn | 
_ upon in this compilation may be classified under two divisions, 


Foreword for a reference to the further additional terms discovered E 


Am 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PREFACE 
portions of the Agamas, and the Puranas, 
Vedic and classical literature, such as the Brahmanas, the Sütras 
the Epics, Ka&uoas, dramas, etc. The archaeological recone 
comprise all the inscriptions and other cognate matters published 
in-the following series : Epigraphia Indica (first 13 volumes) ; Indian 
Antiquary (first 44 volumes) ; Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum (2 
volumes) ; Epigraphia Carnatica (12 volumes, in 15 parts) ; South 
Indian Inscriptions of Dr. E. Hultzsch, late Rai Bahadur V. 
Venkayya, and Rao Sahib H. Krishna Sastri (3 volumes, in 8 
parts); General Sir A. Cunningham's Archaeological Survey Reports 
(23 volumes) ; Archaeological Survey, New Imperial Series (Vols. IV, 
XI, XII, XVIII, XXI, XXIII, XXIV, XXXIIL XXXIV); 
, and Mysore Archaeological Survey Reports (Vols. I, II, III), [Serindia, 
ру on Aurel Stems Report on Archaeological Tour with 
X Bunar Field Force (1900), by Stein ; Ancient Khotan (Vols. I, IL), 
by Stein, Ville de Khotan, by Remusat ; L'Art de Gandhara, 
by M. Foucher ; Notes Chinoise, by M. S. Levi; Fa-hien's Travels, 
by Legge ; Asiatic Researches (Vols. I—XIV) ; Marco Polo (Vols. I, 
I1), by Yule ; Ancient Colonies in the Far East, Бу R. С. Mazumdar ; 
History of Siam, by Wood ; History of Burma, Бу РІ. те; Inventaire 
Descriptif des Monuments Chams de L'Annam (Vols. I, ID, by 
M. H. Parmentier ; Cambodge (Vols. I, II, III), by E. Aymonier ; 
Le Cambodge, by M. L. Delaparte ; Java and Her Neighbours, by 
A. S. Walcott ; De Sutrantraasche Period. der Javansche Geschiedenis 
(1922), by Krom ; Bijdragen tot-de Taal-Land en Volken-Kunde 
van Nederlandsche Indie (1018); Buddhist Records, translated by 
Bil; History of Art in Persia, by Perrot and Chipiez ; Etudes 
lraniennes, by Darmesteter; Scritores rerum Alexandri Magni, 
Бу C. Müller ; Architectural Remains: Anuradhapur (Ceylon), by 
Smitter; etc.!]. s 
Illustrative quotations from these sources are, to speak very 
` generally, arranged in the order in which they are mentioned above. 
Illustrations from other sources of smaller extent have been given 
- Where they seemed most suitable. | 
Appendices—A sketch of the important Sanskrit treatises оп 
_ architecture is given in Appendix I. In Appendix II is given an 


cognate portions of the 


"See further details under Bibliography. 
xix 


PREFACE - 22 AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


alphabetical list of the historical architects mentioned in the 
archaeological records, together with short notes on their works 
and dates, where available. This list does not include those names 
which are casually mentioned without a reference to their works in 
the general literature, Puranas, Agamas, and in the Silpa-Sastras., 

Ideal and general method—Dr. Е. W. Thomas was the first to 
Suggest the idea of compiling such an encyclopaedia long before 
I felt the necessity of the glossary mentioned above. In carrying out 
Dr. Thomas’s kind advice it seemed to me that the most natural 
method was the one suggested by Dr. Burgess (Ind. Ant., Vol. XIV, 
Рр. 319-20), for collecting materials for the ancient Geography of 
India by indexing separately all the geographical words occurring 
in the archaeological and literary. documents. Dr. Fleet illustrated 
this principle by making a topographical list of such words found 
in the Brihat-samhita (Ind. Ant., Vol. XXII, p. 169). This was 
followed by a similar list of words from the Bhagavata-Purdna, by 
Кеуа. J. E. Abbott (Ind. Ant., Vol. XXVIII, p. I, f). There such 
list-making stopped. It would have been much easier for me if 
I could have made use of any such list of architectural terms from 

. any of the documents consulted.! 

Professor L. D. Barnett, M.A., LITT.D., suggested that I should 
take Dr. S. Sórensen's Index to the names in the Mahabharata as 
my model. I have followed his method, as well as that of Professors 
Macdonell and Keith in the Vedic Index, so far as these indices are 

] concerned in bringing together everything useful in the form of a 
NER short article. | 
Despite its bulk, Sórensen's Index mostly confines itself to 
the proper names contained in the Mahabharata, and does not 
include any illustrative quotations. But I had to go much beyond 
a single work and consult an extensive field of literature, like the 
veteran workers of the Vedic Index of zames and subjects, which, 
ugh it contains subjects in addition to proper names, has not, for 
reasons, cited the original passages in text or translation in 
to giving references to them. In this respect I took the 


қ “е, 


omaraswamy published a short list after the publication of my 
to a few new terms from the Buddhist literature and the 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PREFACE 
Jargest Sanskrit work,, the St. Petersburg Dictionary, as my ideal. 
But there, too, I had to differ from its immortal authors, Messrs. 
‘Bohtlingk and Roth, the fathers of the most useful Sanskrit re- 
searches, in two important points. First, the St. Petersburg Dic- 
tionary does not, for obvious reasons, give in all cases the full context 
of the passages quoted therein. For instance, from the illustrations 
like ‘prasadarudha’ and ‘prasadangana’ (see St. Pet. Dict., 
under PRAsADA), it is difficult to see whether fprasada' implies a 
temple, or a palace, or an ordinary residential building, or (һе 
assembly room and confessional hall of the Buddhist priesthood. 
In spite of some tremendous difficulties, I found it unavoidably 
necessary to cite long passages, in text or translation, or sometimes 
both, to illustrate the particular bearing of a term. іа, 
for example, implies a seat, an altar, a platform, the pedestal ofa 
column, the basement of a building, the plinth, the yoni part of the 
liga, etc. ; these different shades of meanings cannot be made 
clear by such quotations as ‘pithopari * or ‘pitham ashtangu- 
lam.’ The second point, by far the more significant, will further 
explain the need of long contexts. The St. Petersburg Dictionary 
refers only to well-known treatises which, though covering an 
extensive field, are yet easily accessible, and does not deal with 
manuscripts locked up and preserved as relics ; nor has it anything 
to do with the epigraphical documents. My literary quotations 
are in most cases from a large number of works and manuscripts 
some of which are written in unfamiliar scripts and most of which 


. PREFAGE AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


the vowels and the phonetical arrangement of them, seemed . 
unsuitable for the terms Which are included in this dictionary 
(encyclopedia.) In either of the alphabets, the transliterated - 
Sanskrit words in some cases would be more or less confusing (e.g. 
Rishi, Riksha, Rintika, Ripu). But for the difficulties of making 
typewritten copies! before the dictionary went to press, I 
should have preferred to have Sanskrit words written in Sanskrit 
characters. Following the order of the Sanskrit alphabet, words 
like *varía, and ‘ganku’? are given not before ‘vakra’ and 
‘Saka’ (as in the St. Pet. Dict., M. W. Dictionary and the Vedic 
Index), but after ‘vahana’ and '$ashpa.: The anusvara is derived 
/ from at least four nasal characters of the Sanskrit alphabet (n, fi, 
n, m). Logically the anusvüra should follow the order of the 
original letters : *$arhku ° should be where *$anku would be 
placed ; but this is an extremely confusing arrangement (see Apte’s 
Dictionary). There is no reason why '$amku? should be read 
before ‘aka,’ there is also no reason for its being placed after 
* Sashpa,' although one should be quite justified in doing so when 
he is following the order of a particular alphabet, and does 
not hesitate to read in another alphabet e after d, i after h, o 
= after z, апа и after t, or / after k, h after g, and so. forth. 


In transliteration I have followed the system of the Archaeologi- E | 


A . cal Survey of India. But I have not made any distinction between 
Ж ' eand 6,0 and б, simply because there is по such distinction in the 
Sanskrit language. These deviations from the trodden paths, 

- Which seem to be untenable, will not, it may be hoped, cause any 

inconvenience to readers, = 

: Acknowledgment—Except іп important cases which deserve 

- special notice, the names of the scholars who have edited a parti- 

е lar inscription or written an article have not been added after 


ful to the scholars to whom I owe the quotations. It seems, 
A of little interest to know the name or names of the authors 
of a particular Passage, quoted occasionally a dozen = 
references to the article where it occurs. * Vedi,’ 


Thesis referred to above had to be submitted to the 


quotations. This need not offend anybody. I am sincerely ~ 


- РР. 422-49. 


HINDU ARGHITEG TURE PREFACE 


for example, implying a throne, has a Parallel instance in а Passage 
quoted from an inscription. The Passage is borrowed from de 
editors and my indebtedness is Shown by the usual quotation 
marks, and I have stated that this Passage occurs in « Inscription 
from Nepal, no. r5, inscription of Jayadeva, verse 25, Ind. Ant 

Vol. IX, PP: 179, 182.’ It, however, in no way enlightens the 
reader to know the names of the editors, Pandit Bhagwanlal 
Indraji and Dr. С. Bühler, с... 


Again, a portion of a verse of the Sankhayana Srauta-sitra is 
quoted in the St, Petersburg Dictionary, but the full context is given in 
our encyclopaedia, and it is stated thus: Sankhayana Srauta-sitra 
XVI, 18, 13 (St. Pet. Dict.). Beyond this, it seems unnecessary ДО 
add the names of Messrs. Bóhtlingk and Roth. Lastly, in cases of 


Compare, for example, a Glossary of Grecian Architecture, an 
anonymous work; and Silpa-a ftra-sára-sarieraha] Sivanáraya- 
naimajena prachina-granthebhyah sram uddhritya prakasitah—Silpa- fástra- 
sára-sameraha, compiled by collecting essential portions -of the 
ancient treatises by a son of Sivanàràyana'; again, Visvakarma- 
апа, corrected (Sarnsodhita) by Krishna-sankara-éastri ; the 


author, if there were a teal one beyond the mythical Vi$vakarman 


(Creator of the Universe), is not Stated anywhere in the treatise 
itself. | Б: 
Need of showing the results achieved —Although it would be 


| presumptuous for anybody to say that the subject of a dictionary | 


1 See the © Extracts from Opinions and Reviews,’ at the end of t] 
also of the Architecture of Manasara, Volume IV (1934), by the 5 
Others Think’ in the writer's Hindu Architecture in India and . 


< 


PREFACE AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


tremendous difficulties of a compilation like this will perhaps be not 
fully brought home to all readers, because ‘no one but those who 
have taken part in similar labours, can at all realize the amount of 
tedious toil, I might almost say drudgery, involved in doing 
everything singlehanded, collecting the quotations and verifying 
references and meanings, making indices and lists of words, sorting 
and sifting an ever-increasing store of materials, revising old work, 
arranging and re-arranging new, correcting and re-correcting, 
writing and re-writing, and interlineating * copy," till reams upon 
reams of paper have been filled, putting the eyesight, patience, 
and temper to a severe trial.’ . 
Aids and encouragement received —Myy sincere obligations are due, 
to the Secretary of State for India in Council for all facilities and 
help which I had the privilege of receiving as a Government of 
India State scholar and which were needed by a pioneer in this 
most exacting branch of oriental researches, specially during the 
Great European War of 1914-18. I take this opportunity to offer 
my respectful thanks in particular to late Sir Austen Chamberlain, 
late Sir Т. W. Arnold, c.1.£., and late Mr. N. C. Sen, о.в.к. Words | 
fail me to express adequately my gratitude to Professor Dr. F. W. si 
Thomas, c.1.E., the then Librarian of India Office, London. As stated ; 
above, I owe to him the inception of the idea and courage to under- ) 
take this task. Не placed at my disposal all the materials in the India 
Office and procured for me most of the available manuscripts from 
different libraries in India and Europe. Не facilitated my work 
in Holland. Не arranged, through the appreciation and kindness 
of Sir John H. Marshall, c.1.£., D.LITT., the then Director General of 
Archaeology in India, the creation of a prize post for me directly 
under the Governor in Madras for the publication of this work ; E 
` this arrangement, unfortunately, fell through owing to absence ; 
Ж on leave of Sir John Marshall and retirement of Lord Pentland at 
e time when I went to take up this appointment. It was again 
hrough Dr. Thomas's introduction that Sir Claude de la Fosse, 
Е., M.A., D.LITT., the first Vice-Chancellor of the reconstructed 
ad University, became personally interested in this work 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PREFACE 


I take this opportunity to express my respectful gratitude to Sir I 
Harcourt Butler and his Government. And to Sir Claude I am sS% 
further indebted for his scholarly sympathy, friendly advice, and / Le 
constant encouragement. "Го those great lovers of oriental eto 4773 
ship, Rai Rajeshwar Bali Sahib, о.в.в., the then Minister of Educa- - 2 
tion; Kunwar Jagdish Prasad, C.I.E., О.В.Е., 1.с.5., the Education 
(then Chief) Secretary; and late Mr. A. H. Mau M.A., B.SC., А 
the Director of Public Instruction, І am in a debt of sr si : » 
for further encouragement, which has kept up the energy and E 
spirit needed in bringing out this dictionary, after working on it for 
the past twelve years. 
For suggesting many improvements I am indebted to the veteran we 
orientalists, Dr. L. D. Barnett, of British Museum, London, and late É 
Professor E. J. Rapson, of Cambridge University, who examined the E 
whole manuscript before it went to press. I am thankful to Pro- | 2233 
fessor Т. Ph. Vogel, рн.р., of Leiden University, for helping me with 
all necessary books during my stay there. То Mr. Е.І. С. den 
Dooren de Jong and Miss Ch. L. Du Ry van Beest Holle of Zooto- E. 
mical Laboratory, Leiden, I owe many friendly services in соп- 
mexion with this work, but for which it would have been impos- 
sible for me to get on in Holland. 'To another talented lady friend, 
late Miss E. J. Beck, who took the trouble of putting in the 
diacritical marks to a duplicate typewritten copy of this dictionary, 
I owe, like many other Indian шс more obligations than I сап 
adequately express. 
. Last but not least І am pleased to record my grateful thanks 

to Major W. С. Abel, м.в.к.; V.D. lately the Superintendent 
of Government Press, Allahabad, and to his able successor, 
Mr. D. W. Crighton, and to their.staff for their ever Rs 


this. А 
= š P= K. AGHAI 


SANSKRIT DEPARTMENT, 
UNIVERSITY OF ALLAHABAD : 
August, 1927. 


THE ORDER or THE ROMAN CHARACTERS AND THE METHOD | 
OF TRANSLITERATION ADOPTED 


a, à;i I; u, ü; ri, ri; e, ai ; o, au; 

k, kh; g, gh; ñ; ch, chh;j,jh; ñ; 

f, ths d, dh; n; t th; d, dh; n; de 
р, ph; b, bh;m;y,r,l v; Ў 
S sh, s; h; m; h. 


| 
í 
н 
£ 
- 


кай ic ad 
Sed, % 


PAGES x 
FOREWORD 34 NC SG оо БЯ zs ix-xviii 
PREFACE TO THE First EDITION (DICTIONARY) 2 .. — Xix-xxvii 3 
THE ORDER OF ROMAN CHARACTERS AND THE METHOD OF 7 234 
TRANSLITERATION ADOPTED Bd durs bd xxix : 
 Lisr or ILLUSTRATIONS оо оо Бо .. ххкі-хххіу 
TEXT OF THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA = 52 zs ЕЕ 1013 : 
APPENDIX Ī—A SKETCH OF SANSKRIT TREATISES ON ARCHITEC- 
TURE оо T qM E 615-59 
APPENDIX ПІ--А List or HISTORICAL ARCHITECTS WITH SHORT : 
NOTES ON THEIR WORKS 255 55 = 6677 
BIBLIOGRAPHY .. 209: oc ot га 679-84 
EXTRACTS FROM OPINIONS ON THE DICTIONARY sis 2% ІА-І8А 3 


CONTENTS 


INDEX TO MODERN ARCHITECTURAL TERMS WITH THEIR 
CORRESPONDING SANSKRIT EQUIVALENTS is Ss 


Serial no. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Facing page ГЫ 
I. Svastika Mansion (front view) . . Frontispiece 5 
2. Anghri (Half plans pac up and looking down) 4% 12 | 
9. Anghrika-vari o 42 12 ЖЕ” 
4. Алда 2а oc on бо Ob 12 } 
5. АйБһайса  .. Bo .. оо - 2% 12 , 
6. Adhishthana .. m AE ос dc 16 
т. Anu-$ala M. ss 5% БС ae 38 
8. Antara А Us " en P 38 T 
9. Anila-bhadraka ác өс бс 86 39 1 
10. Abja o8 ud TEE oc go 38 
11. Amrita-nandana do oc оо оо 39 
12. Alaksha 3. 5р 56 бо de 38 
19. Ardha-prana e 5o ЗА x 46 NI 
14. Ardha-mandapa 25 =A ne Д6 : 
15. Amésuka ob ze ао 35 oo 46 E 
16. Ayaka-skambha z M = = 46- E 
17. Ardha-hara .. n Ж, zz С 46 = 
18. Alindaka oo 35 T 5c có 49 "s 
10. Alpa-nasika ..  - 5 T oc со 48 n 
ао. Abhahga .. en CC 52 x 48 TE 
от. Alinga 5 т z = a 48 
22. Andola 22 os = ae 55 52 
29. Asana me m p T 25 64 
24. Asana 324 So БА 55 = 64 
25. Indra-kīla .. as жы 25 ed 66 
.96. Indra-koša .. E mS da T 67 
27. Ishtaka © ES s 25 % 66 
28. Upa-pàda .. s " ae Be 66 
29. Upana Lg 55 36 ae do 67 
go. Ugrapitha .. 59 oo 88 E 
91. Uttara ap, бо oo. -. 
92. Uttana-patta co et e БЕ 
39. Гра-уейі . zz де z 
94. Upa-tua .. 50 E $5 EL 
35. Upa-pitha .. E 5% > Ciber nS 
36. Ushnîisha .. +: -. ni g 
597. Kataka dm UL = . 21 
` 98. Kapota — == óc 
89. Kapota-palika ` 
40. Karoti Бор 2-05 


= Karna-patra .. 


Sertal по. 
Kampa-bandha 
Kadanga T 
Kabandhana.. 
Karnika En 
Karņa 
Karnika ТЖ 
Kalpadruma 
Kavata ss 


Kufijaraksha .. 
Kumari-pura 


Kuntala 
Kumbha-pafijara 
Kuta 55 
Kokila "s 
Kubjaka sh 
Keyüra оо 
Kokilargala 

1 Kona-loshta 

Ў Kumbha-stambha 


Kostha-stambha 
Kudya-stambha 
Kumuda |... 
Kshudra-nasa 
Kshepana .. 


Garuda-stambha 
Gavaksha .. 
Guru-dvara 
Goji ES 


Kharvata 

Kheta 

Garbha 5; 
Ganda-bherunda | 
Gabhara oc 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Facing page 


102 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
119 
118 
118 
119 
124 
128 
128 
128 
130 
130 
131 
130 
132 
132 
136 
136 
136 
136 
138 
138 
146 
148 
148 
149 
148 
148 
156 
156 
5156 
156 
158 


174 . 


174 
174 


174. ` 


184 


184 
184 _ 


І 


Serial по. Facing page 
92. Taranga zs Б A “= w: 222 
93. Tatika at об A aa Не 222 
94. Trikarpa .. be E SERR m 222 
95. ,lripatta Sd RE e 22 2с 222 
96. Tribhanga we Wes А = 222 
97. Danta-kila = oc 5 tn 226 
98. Danta-nala оо 5%, fis AE. coe 
99. Dipa-danda 2 Tue F EY 226 
roo. Dipa-stambha T 2 ss 2% 226 
ror. Dhara-kumbha ds ze nx S 226 
102. Dhvaja-stambha oe | zd E ЗЕ 226 
109. Natya-griha re 52 "e x 274 
104. Natya-griha 22 Те t up DTE 
105. Nala-geha Ж m =" eka 278 
106. Naga-kala SA Бе = ET. 280 54 
тоу. Nataka S = 52. T ae 280 š : 
108. Nasika <> ae at Se 24 280 - Er 
109. Nidhana ·.. ve x: е 3 280 £: 
110. Nidra o5 Soe X B Ji 280 net 
іші. Pafijara zs a zs 22 x 288 
119. Pafijara-sala 22 Ж = = 288 
114. Patra Go ee оо T co A 
114. Patra-torana ot 96 оъ T 288 
115. Padmasana T 2. 59 =e 298 
116. Padma аз D. So Фо 2 302 
117. Padma-pitha 5; 20 Б st 302 
118. Parigha s L a сз ES ee 302 
119. Parna-mafijisha _ 2 56 p 2; 302 
120. Padajala | .. 2% 2% ame 2 302 
121. Palika zi T Ж verc Е 402 
122. Pitha = do X Us ae 309, 
123. Potra é aos Gc 55 tuc 308 
124. Prachchhadana i jn 20 <= e 
125. Pratoli ae oc EU со ze 
126. Phana So VAR - e Bem 
127. Phalaka Re E 0 ns s 
128. Pralamba .. TE -. E 
129. Prastara іш Ex Sc 35 
190. Bolika Se T -. -. 
191. ^ we 52 Lu 25554 со 
199. Bahala us 98 od 35 
148. Ваһша ue T PERI =s 
134. Brahma-mastaka = “ғр : 
135. Bhadra oo ses .. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Bhrama ,  .. 
Bhraum даваа 


Serial no. 
139. 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
ІБІ. 
152. 
159. 
154. 

. 155. 
156. 
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Manika а 
. Mani-dvara 
Mamndapa  .. 
Mandapa .. 
Masiti 55 
Masüraka .. 
Mukula t 
Yüpa-stambha 
Raja-harmya 
Lakshmi-stambha 
Lupa ККК ГУ 
Vedi 35 
Sanku P 
Sala (Dandaka) ` 
Sikhara bs 
rivatsa 55 

Setu 35 
Stupi 53 
Stàmbha Ts 
Svastika 55 
Hasti-nakha 


Hasti-hasta 


Facing page 
222394 
394 
396 
406 
414. 
414 
414 
414 
438 
442 
442 
442 
2416 
454 
52 
526 
526 
526 
534 
бол. 
612 
612 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


A 


AKSHA—The base of a column, the eye, а die. 
(1) The base of a column : 
Athavaksharn (=adhishthanarh) navarhéochcharh janma chaikena 
karayet! — (Manasára, xiv, 17, note.) 
(2) The eye : ; 
Asyayamarh tri-matrarh syad vistārarh chaika-matrakam | 
Akshayamardha-matrath syàd vistararn yuktito nyaset | 
f А ; M., тх, 29-30 
(3) A die: x — 
Akshaih sphatika-sarnyuktarn tula-bhajanam eva chai 
(M., хуш, 28.) 
(4) Referring to the window-like part of a dola (swing,.hammock 
palanquin), and of a chariot : : | ; 
г Puratah prishthato madhye parva(darpa)narh bhadra-sarhyutam | 
Parávayor va(dva)ranarn kuryat tasyadho’ksharh susamyutamA —— 
| x ` (M., т, 165-166) 
Tasyadhah karnanarh kuryad akshotsedhardham eva cha | 
A : (M., XLI, 51, see further context under AKSHA-BHARA.) 
See GAVAKSHA— Cf. Mitakshara (ed. Cal. 1829) 146, 1 (Pet. Dict.) : 
Akshah pada-stambhayor upari-nivishta-tuladhara-pattah | 
Akshagra-kila | 
Pushkaraksha (see Panini, 5» 4, 76). š , aa 
Dharabhir aksha-matradhih (Arjunasamagama, ed. Bopp, 8, 4.) RES 
AKSHA-BHARA—A lower part of a chariot. | > 
: Tasyadho (below the рада or pillar) karnarh kuryad 


> 


dham eva cha | : 
Tat-tad-deée tu chhidrarn syad aksha-bhar 
Chhidre pravesayet kılam yuktya cha pattay 


AKSHI-REKHA | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


AKSHI-REKHA—The eye-lines. 
Akshi-rekharh samalikhya savye'kshi krishna-mandalam | 
( M., LXX, 69.) 
AKSHI-SUTRA—The line of the eyes. 
Mukhayamarn tridhà bhavet i 
Akshi-sütravasanam cha tasyadhas tat-padantakam | 
Hikkà-sütrád adho bahu-dirgharh rikshangularh bhavet | 
(М., LXV, 12-13.) 
AGNI-DVARA—The door on the south-east. 
Chatur-dikshu chatush-kone maha-dvararh prakalpayet i 
Pürva-dvàram athai$ane chagni-dvararh tu dakshine | 
Pitur-dvararm tu tat-pratyag vayau dvàram tathottaram | 
(M., 1x, 292, 294-295.) 


AGRAHARAC—A village inhabited by the Brahmanas. 
Viprair vidvadbhir abhogyarn mangalarh cheti kirtitarh | 
Agraharas tad evam.uktar viprendrah Kamikagame i 
(Kamikagama, xx, 3.) 
Agrahararn vinanyeshu sthan:yadishu vastushu | 
Prag-adishu chatur-dikshu vayau ise $ivalayah u 
NiLAKANTHA, 16, 3—(Pet. Dict.) : 
Agram brahmana-bhojanam tad-artharn hriyante raja-dhanat prithak 
kriyante te agraharah kshetradayah | 
Chatur-bhuja (tbid ; comm. Mbh.) : Agrahara=Sasana. 
AGHANA-—Not solid, a hollow moulding, column or pillar. 
Ghanaíi-chapy aghanafichaiva vinyasam atha vakshyate | 
(Vistarayama-Sobhadi-pirvavad-gopurantakam) 1 
Yam manam bahir anyena chilika-mana-sarnmitam | 
(M., XXXII, 290-292, see also 293-309.) 
Referring to windows (or rather window-post) : 
` "Tad-vistàra-ghanara sarvam kuryad vai silpi(a)vit-tamah i 
Gopure küta-kosht(h)adi-grive padantare tatha | 


(ibid., xxvi, 32.) 


Ghane vapy aghane vapi yathà vatayanair-yutam | — (ibid., 592—594.) 


Gf. Vistaram cha dvi-màtram syad agram ekangularh bhavet i 
Ghana ekaügulam chaiva! . (M., 1х, 17-18.) 
Referring to the image of a bull : 
Сапат vapy aghanarh vapi kuryattu Silpi(a)-vit-tamah | 


2 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


(M., LXIL, 17.) . 


- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANKA(GA)NA 
AGHANA-MANA (see GHANA 


)—Measurement by the interior 
of a structure. 


Evam tat(d) ghana-mànam uktam aghanam vakshyate’ dhuna ıı 
Vistérayama-bhaktih syad uktavat(d)yuktito nyaset | 
Dvi-tribhaga-visale tu ãyata tat prakalpayet | 
Bhakti-tri-bhagam ekarhgarh bhitti-vistaram eva cha | 

Sesharh tad garbha geham tu madhya-bhage tu veáanam i 


(M., xxxur, 331-335.) 
ANKA(GA)NA (see PRANGANA)—Same as Angana, a court, 
a courtyard. 


Yathà madhye'ñkanarn kuryat paficha-bhagena vistritam | 


(М., xxxiv, 143.) 
Kalpa-drumasya purato bahir ankanam syatt (М., хімш, 72.) 
Athatah sampravakshye'ham anganasya tu lakshanam | 
Anganarh dhvaja-yonih syan mukhayamabhisarnyutam ıı 
Padukanath bahir-bhagam anganarh tat vidur budhah | 
Dhvajah sarvatra sarnpanna iti $astra-nidarfanam 1 


(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, VI, 1-2.) 
Madhye tu pranganarh karyarh visalenaika-pamktikam | 
Ardha-parhkti-vivridhya tu trirnšat parhkty antam ishyate | 
Ayame chaika-parhkty adi tri-gunantam visalata | 
Evar brahmanganarn kàryarn jala-pata-yutarn navà 1 
Madhyamarn changana-sthanam mandapena yutar tu và I 
Prag anganarn pradhanarn syat pragavaganganarh jvarah u 

(Kamikagama, xxxv, 40, 41, 66, 131.) 

Ujatangana-bhümishu 1 — (Raghuvariía, ed. Cal. 1, 52, Pet. Dict.). 
Vimanarh harhsa-yuktam etat tishthati te’ngane | 


(Devimahatmya, ed. Cal. 5, 50.) 
Nripangana—(Kauya chandrika, 166, 15 ibid.). 
Nripangana—(dental n, Bhartrihari, 2, 46, ibid.). 


“= m 


Maharajanganarh Sirah pravisantu mahodayam | 
Li 


(Ramayana, II, 3, 19, ibid) | 

Matsya-tirthada sannidhanadali Linganna bagitinda dodda-asva 
balige angana то madida seva—'Linganna with devotion 

` (а mantapa of) то anganas near the big asvattha tre хі 

the Matsyatirtha, on the bank of the Arkapushk 

Vol. rv, Edatore Taluq, no. 3, Roman text, p. 84, Г 


ANGA-DÜSHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ANGA-DUSHANA—The defects of the limbs; the penalties for 
a defective construction. 
Мяпазаға, Chap. LXIX, 1-73: 

The chapter is named Angadishana in the colophon. The term would 
literally mean the defects. of the limbs. The chapter opens with the 
proposal that the penalties on the master, the king, and the kingdom 
following a defective construction will be described : 

Alayadyanga-sarveshu hinadhikyarn bhaved yadi 1 
Raja-rashtradi-kartrmam dosha-praptim (-r)ihochyate (1-2). 

There should not be, as stated, any defect in the width, height, plinth, 
lintel, pillar, entablature, finial, dome, door, adytum, staircase, terrace, 
gate-house, pavilion, wall, etc. (3-10). 

Cf. Tasmat tu dosha-sarhprapti(h) &lpidrishti(r) nivarayet (11). 

Тһе illustrations, too, of penalties for defective construction are taken 
from the different architectural objects, such as door, staircase, pillar, 
wall, dome, spire, etc. Thus it is stated that if the altar (vedika) be 
defective, the master would lose his eyesight (26) ; if the dome be larger 
or shorter, the people would suffer from poverty (29); if the pillars 
be larger or shorter, the race of the master would be exterminated (23), 
and so forth. 

ANGULA—A finger, a finger-breadth, a measure of about threc- 

fourths of an inch ; one of some equal parts, into which an architec- 

tural or sculptural object is divided for proportional measurement. 
' (x) Мапаѕаға, Chap. п: 

The definition of paramanu or atom : 

Muninàm nayanodvikshya(s) tat paramanur udahritam (40). 

Gf. Brihat-Samhita (below). 

(Paramanu or atom is the lowest measurement.) 

The details of the angula-measure (41-46): 

8 Paramanu (atoms) = 1 Ratha-dhüli (car-dust), 


8 Car-dusts = 1 Valagra (hairs end), 
8 Hair’s ends = 1 Liksha (nit), 

8 Nits = 1 Yuka (louse), 

8 Lice ^ = 1 Yava (barley corn), 
8 Barley corns = 1 Angula (finger). 


Three kinds of angulas are distinguished, the largest of , which is equal 
to 8 yavas, the intermediate one 7 yavas, and the smallest one 6 yavas 


(47-48). 
Eu 2 4 


^N 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA S 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANGULA 


Further details (49-53) : 


12 Angulas — I Vitasti (span). 

2 Spans or 24 ahgulas = 1 Kishku-hasta (smallest cubit). 
25 Angulas = I Prajapatya-hasta. 

26 б, — 1 Dhanur-mushti-hasta. 

27 — і Dhanur-graha-hasta. 

4 Cubits т Dhanuh or danda (bow or rod). 


8 Dandas (rods) r Rajju (rope). 
Direction is given with regard to the use of the cubits of different lengths 
and other measures (54-58) : conveyances and bedsteads, etc. are stated 
to be measured in the cubit of 24 angulas, buildings in general (vimana) 
in the cubit of 25 afgulas, the ground or land (vastu) in the cubit of 26 
angulas, and the villages, etc. in the cubit of 27 angulas. The cubit of 24 
angulas can, however, be employed, as stated in measuring all these 
objects. 
Chap. Lv: 
Three kinds of the angula-measure : 
Matrangula-gatarh proktam angularn tri-vidham bhavet | (53). 
The manangula is the standard measure ; it is equal to 8 barley corns : 
Yava-tarashta-matram syan manañgulam iti smritam (56). 
‘The mátrangula is the measure taken in the middle finger of the master : 
Kartur dakshina-hastasya madhyamangula-madhyame 1 
Parva-dirgharh tan-naharh matrangulam udahritam | (57-58). 
The details of the deha-labdhangula are left out ; but this measure is 
frequently referred to : 
Trayas-triméach chhatantarh syad deha-labdhangulena va (64). 5 
Тһе deha-labdhangula is to be understood as the measure, which is 
equal to one of the equal parts, into which the whole height of a statue 
- js divided for sculptural measurement. “This alone should otherwise be 
. called агаба (part) ; but the term (arnša) is indiscriminately used for all 
the three angula-measures, as well as for the term matra. Compare, for 
example, Chap. ху: ; 
Mardh(n)adi-pada-paryantam tuńga-mānarh praśasyateı (2). 
Chatur-viméach-chhatam Етіуа tathaivarnšena mānayetı (3). 
Ushnishat keša-paryantarn chatur-matram prašasyate (4). 
Ardharnšarn gala-manam syàd vedam$am gala-tuñgakam | (6). 
Sa yava-tryarnšakarn chaivanamikayamam ishyate | (26). + 
Medhrantam üru-dirgham syat sapta-vimsangulam bhavet! (0). 
. The deha-labdhangula is also called the bera- (idol) angula and the 
linga- (phallus) angula, Chap. LXIV, 49-53 : 
АтабаКата manam. evoktam angulair manam uchyate | 
Yal-inga-tuhgam samgrahya chatur-virhSach-chhatantakam | 
Lingangulam iti proktarn beram talavasad apil | | 
Kritvà berangularh proktarn manangulam ihochyate | 
Yava-tarashta-matram syad devanam angulam bhavet | 


` ANGULA . AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The deva- (god’s) angula mentioned in the last line (53) is apparently 
the māna- (standard) angula. 
(2) Brihat-Samhita, туш, 1-2 : | 
Jalantarage bhanau yad-anutaram dar$anam rajo уай! 
Tad vindyàt paramanum prathamarh tad-dhi pramananam ıı 
Paramanu-rajo-valagra-liksha-yika yavo'ngulam cheti ı ' 
Ashta-gunani yathottaram angulam ekarh bhavati matra ıı 
Commentary quotes a parallel passage, the former stanza of which 
recurs in Manu, уш, 132 (cf. below), whereas the latter wholly differs ; 
Tatha cha jalantara-gate bhanau yat sükshmarh dri$yate rajah i 
 Prathamarn tat pramananarh trasa-renum prachakshate u 
Tasmad rajah kachagrarn cha liksha yuka yavo’ngulam 1 
Kramad ashta-gunam jñeyarn jina-sarnkhyangulaih samah ti 
From an unknown author are the verses quoted by 
(з) Bapü-Deva in his edition of the Siddhanta-iromami, p. 52: 


Vesmantah patiteshu bhaskara-kareshvalokyate yad-rajah i 
Sa proktah paramanur ashta gunitais tair eva renur bhavet Il ` 
Tair valagram athashtabhih kacha-mukhair liksha cha yükashtabhih i 
Syat tribhischa tadashtakena cha yavo’shtabhis cha tair angulam | 
‘Digit (angula) has here (B.S., туш, 4) по absolute, but a relative value ; 
| it is the module and equal to 535 of the whole height of the idol, or ті of 
— — jdol and seat together.’ 

Commentary: yasmat kashthat pashanadikad va pratima kriyate tad 
dairghyarm pitha-pramana-vivarjitam dvada$a-bhagavibhaktam kritva 
tatraiko bhago navadha karyah, so'ngula-sajfiako bhavati, yasmad 
- ashtadhikam angula-Satam pratima pramanam vakshyati—(Kern, 7.8.4.8. 
N. S., Vol. у, p. 323, notes 1, 2). à : 

) Intr duction (pp. 8-9) to Rajavallabha Mandana, ed. Narayana 
| and Yaśovanta Bharati : . 


2552 Ang II Angulas = go-karna. 
Ай I2 `, = vitasti (span). 
14 5, = anàha-pada. 
21- , = ratni. 
2 =» — aratni. 
pos _ = kishku. 


— = (height of a man). | 
E c Шал сс 
na (see below).. - 


, 
| HINDU ARCHITECTURE | ANGULA 


(5) Brahman da-Purana, Chap. уп (Vayu-prokte pürva-bhage dvitiye 
| anushanga-pade) gives a curious origin of the añgula measure : 


Ч 

i It is stated (in vv. 91-95) that people at first used to live in caves, 

a mountains, rivers, etc. They began to build houses in order to protect 22% 

themselves from cold and heat (Sitoshna-varanat). Then they built khetas * 

(towns), puras (houses), gramas (villages) and nagaras (cities). And to - 

| measure their length, breadth, and the intermediate distance between | 

| two settlements (sannive$a) the people instinctively (yatha-jianam) em- 
ployed their own fingers. Thence forward the angulas are used as 


standards of measurement. 


Then follow the details of the angula measurement (vv. 96-101) : 4 
Jayangula-pradesarns trin hastah kishkurh dhanümshi cha | | 
Dafgatvangula-parvani pradeša iti samjfiitah и (96). 
Angushthasya pradeSinya vyasa(h) prade$a uchyate! | 
Tàlah smrito madhyamaya gokarna$ chapyanamaya (97). 
Kanishthayà vitastis tu  dvada$angula uchyate | 
Ratnir angula-parvani samkhyaya tvekavirnSatih u (98). 
Chatvari-virhSatis chaiva hastah syad angulani tu | 
Kishkuh smrito dviratnis tu dvi-chatvariméad angulah ц (oo). 
Chatur hasto dhanur dando пака yugam eva cha | 
Dhanuh sahasre dve tatra gavyütis taih krita tada u (roo). 
Ashtau dhanuh sahasrani yojanarn tair vibhavitam | 
Etena jojaneneha sanniveSas tatah kritah u (ror). cv 


(6) Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ссгуш, vv. 17-19 : 
Jalantara-pravishtanarh bhaninarh yad rajah sphutam! 
'Trasa-renuh sa vijñeyo valagram tair athashtabhih (17). 
Tad-ashtakena tu likhyatu yüka likhyashtakair mata! 


! š Javo yükashtakarn tad-vad ashtabhis tais tad angulam u (18). 
A Svaktyanguli-manena mukharh syad dvadasangulam | 
2 s= Mukha-manena kartavya sarvavayava-kalpana t (19)- 


(0 Vàstu-vidyà, ed. Ganapati Sastri, r, 3-5 f: 
Tatradau sathpravakshyami sarvesham mána-sadhanam | 
snes e loke vastu e yatahu ` 


ANGULA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(8) Bimbamana, MS. (British Museum 558, 5292), v. 9 : 
Yad-bimba-pramanena mànàngula(m) vibhàjite i 
Tena bimbasya mānarh tu tatra(m) àyàmam ishyate | 
- (9) Suprabhedàágama, Patala, xxx, vv. I-9: 
Athatah sarhpravakshyami angulànàm tu lakshanam i 
Manangularh tu prathamarh syat matrangulam dvitiyakam і (1) 
Deha-labdha-pramanarh tu trittyam angular smritam | 
Yasmat param ариг nàsti paramanus tad uchyate tt (2) 
Рагатапиг adha$ chaivapi cha kesagra eva cha | 
R(l)iksha-yükà-yavas tatra krama§o’shta-gunair matam Il (3). 
Manangulam iti proktarh tato matrangularh érinu | 
Acharya-dakshine haste madhyamanguli-madhyame tt (4). 
Parva(m) matrangularh jfieyarh deha-labdhangularh érinu | 
Pratimayas tathotsedhe tala-ganyena bhàjite u (5). 
Teshvekarh bhaga-van-manath  deha-labdhàngularmh smritam | 
The objects measured in the three kinds of angulas : 
Prasada-mandapars chaiva ргакагап gopuràn api lı (6). 
Gramadya-kshetra-ganyeshu manangula-vidhanatah | 
Acharya-dakshangulibhir mite vyasa-mitadhikaih (sic) n (7). 
Kirche pavitrake chaiva sruve srugbhir athanyakaih i 
Yage prayojitaniha matranguli-vidhis charet u (8). 
Atha manangulair vapi karayed yaga-karmani | 
Deha-labdhangulenaiva pratimàm karayed budhah ıı (9). 
Then follow the technical names of the angulas (vv. 10-16): 
One angula is called bindu, moksha. 
kala (elsewhere it is the name of one 
angula), kolaka, padma, akshi, аќуіпі. 
rudrakshi, agni, guna, sila (and) vidya. 
yuga (and) bhaga, veda, and turiya. 


Two angulas are ,, 


Three 22 PP) 25 


. Four 22 WD Æ 
Five 5. 5 M rudranana, indriya, bhüta, and vàna. 
Six 55 ES 55 karman, anga, ауапа, and rasa. 
Seven 5 А 3; patala, muni, dhàtu, and abdhi. 


Eight 35 25 3 basu, loke$a, and mūrti. 
dvara, sūtra, graha, and Sakti. 


Nine دد‎ 2 » 
| Теп = z Б; diś, nadi, ayudha, and pradurbhàva, 
Twenty ,, 2: T trishu (and) vishku. 


Thirty » » » gati. 


Forty 35 52 55 trijagat (?). 


Fifty 7 5 54 Sakvari. 
atiSakvari. 


8 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


, 


is 


> 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANGULA 


Seventy angulas are ealled yashti. 

Eighty ,, 5 » atyashti. 

Ninety э ш нати 

Hundred ,, 5 55 atidhriti. 

The cardinal numbers are described (vv. 17-20): 
Ekam dašarn $atam chaiva sahasram ayutam punah 11 (17). с 
пушаш. prayutam chaiva kotim chaiva yatharbudam | > 
Brindam kharvarh nikhvararh cha $ankharn padmam atah param 11 (18). 
Samudra-madhyantarakhyam apara tatha | ў 
Parardham evakhyatarh da$a-vritt(-ddh)yuttarottaram 11 (19). 

Evam etàni choktàni samkhya-sthanam virnšatih | 

Three kinds of the vitasi (span), which is equal to 12 angulas, are dis- 

tinguished by their technical names : 

Talarn yamar tri-bhagath cha shat-kala$ cha vitastakam 11 (20). 
Shat-kolakarn mukham chaiva dvada$angula-samjfiakam | 
Angushtha-tarjani-yuktarh pradeSam iti kirtitam 11 (21). 
(Madhyamangushtha-sarhyuktarh tala-manam iti smritam 1) 
Angushthanamika-yuktarh vitastir iti chochyate 11 (22). 
Kanishthangushthayor yuktarn go-karnam iti samjfükam | 

The correct reading of the last two lines should be : 

Angushthanamika-yuktarh go-karnam iti sarhjfikam Il (22). 
Kanishthangushthayor yuktarh(-ta) vitastir iti chochyate | 
i Cf. Brahmanda-Purana, 1, Vu, 97, 98. 
(See under Goxarya and Vrrasrr.) 
Pradega§ cha vitasti$ cha gokarņaś cha ime trayah 11 (23). 
The two kinds of the measure by the fist : 
Jajñadike prayoktavyah prásadadau na mapayet | 
Ratnih sarnvrita-mushtih syad aratnih prasritangulilt 11 (24). 

"Different kinds of the hasta or cubit measures : г 
Kishkus cha pràjapataya$ cha dhanur-mushti-dhanu(r)grahau у. É 
Angulas tu chatur-virnsat kishkur ityuchyate budhaih 11 (25). 
Paficha-viméatibhi$ chaiva prajapatyam udahritam 1 
Shad-virhfati-dhanur-mushtih sapta-virnsad-dhanu(r)grahah it (26). E: 

Тһе objects measured in these cubits : 
Kishku-hastadi-chatvari-manangula-vasat-tamah (?) 1 
Ebhir hasta-pramanais tu prasadadini karayet 11 (27). 
Sayanam chasanam chaiva kishku-màna-va$at kuru t 5 
Lingam cha pindikam chaiva prasadam gopuram tatha ıı (28). 
Pràkara-mandapam chaiva prajapatya-karena tu | 


9 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitize yy 53 


ANGULA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The higher measures: 
Dhanu(r)grahas chatushkath yad danda-manarh prakirtitam |! (29). 
Sahasra-danda-mànena kroga-matrarh vidhiyate | 
Gavyütir dvi-gunarh jfieyarh tad-dhi (dvi)-gunarh cha ghatakam 11 (30). 
Ghatakasya chatushkar tu yojana parikirtità 11 (31). 

(ro) Manu-Samhita, vin, 271 (cf. under Brihat-Samhità above) : 
Nikshepyo'yomayah gankur jvalannasye dasangulah | 

(тт) Ramayana, ут, оо, оо: l 
Na hyaviddharht ayor gātre babhivangulam antaram | 


(12) Aratni, cubit. According to the Sulvasütra of Baudhayana (Fleet, 
F-R.A.S., 1912, 231, 2), this measure is equal to 24 angulas or finger- 
breadths. Тһе Satapatha-Brahmana (x, 2, 1, 3) also mentions 24 
angulas or finger-breadths as а measure, but without reference to 
the aratni (see below), cf. Eggeling, Sacred Books of the East, 43, 300, 
Ms G) 

(13) ‘ Pradega frequently occurs in the Bréhmanas (Vedic Index 
п, 152), (Aitareya, үш, 5 : Satapatha, їп, 5, 4, 5, Chhandogya Upani- 
shad, v. 18, т, etc.,) as a measure of length, a span ° (ibid., п, 50). 
(14) The Satapatha-Brahmana, IO, 2, I, 2: Tasy-aish-àvamà mitra 
yad angulayah, this is his lowest measure, namely the fingers. 

(15) * In some table the aratni is distinguished from the hasta, and 
is defined as measuring 21 aügulas. But the Sulvasitra of Bau- 
dhayana defines it as equal to 2 prādeśa, each of 12 angulas, and so 
agrees in making it equal to 24 angulas. In any case, our present 
point is that the Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra gives its value as 24 angulas.’ 
(Fleet, Z.R.A.S., 1912, p. 231, notes 1, 2.) 

Compare also zbid., pp. 231, 232, 233. 

(16) ‘Like some of the other Hindu tables, it (Kautiliya- Artha- 
fastra) starts (p. 106, line 3) with the paramànu or ‘ most minute 
atom.’ It takes its measures up to the angula, through four inter- 
mediate grades, by eights; it defines the angula (line 7) as being 
equal to 8 yava-madhya, or 8 barley-corns laid side by side ; and it 
further defines it as the middle breadth of the middle finger of a 


-middle-sized man. It tells us (line rr) that 12 angulas are 1 vitasti 


or span, and (line 13) that 2 vitastis are r aratni ; here, by its aratni 
of 24. angulas it means the measure which in other tables is usually 


IQ 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


w. 5 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANGHRI 


called hasta or kara, the forearm, the cubit ; and, in fact, it adds 
prajapatya hasta as another name of the its aratni. | 

‘In the regular course of the table it tells us next (line 20) that 4 
aratnis (i.e. 4 hasta or cubits) are 1 danda, staff or dhanus, bow (from 
which it follows that 1 dhanus = 96 angulas).’ 


* Now the angula or finger-breadth may be the theoretical unit 
it may well have been originally the actual unit and the source of the 
other measures. But we can hardly doubt that the hasta or cubit 
eventually took its place as the practical unit ; and that а correct 
scale was maintained by keeping in public offices a standard hasta 
marked off into 2 vitasti and 24 angulas. At any rate, the hasta 
is the practical measures to which we must attend in estimating 
all the others.’ 

(17) * Following Colebrooke (Essays, I, 540, note), I take the hasta 
for easy computation at exactly 18 inches, which gives $ inch as the 
value of the angula.’ 


ANGHRI—A foot, generally a small (dwarf) pillar constructed on 
a large one, or in the upper parts of a storey, and pilaster ; a turret. 
Tad-dvayam changhri-tungarh syad ekarnšarn prastaranvitam 1 
: d (M., хп, 35.) 
Chatush-padam tri-padarh cha dvi-padaikahghrim eva va | 
M., xxvm, 8. 
Tatra hinadhikarh chet pada-sthananghrikasrayam 1 | es 
Sarvesham bhitti-màneshu tatra dosho na vidyate | —(M., т.хіх, 60-61.) 
As a synonym of the pillar : 
Jangha cha charanam chaiva sthali stambhamanghrikam I 


(M., ху, 4.) 
As a pillar of the first floor : | 
Tadürdhve'hghri šaramšarh syat | —(M., хх, 16.) 
Adri-sopana-parsve tu na kuryat рӣтЅуауог anghrikam | 
(M., xxx, 163.) 


As a dwarf pillar placed upon a larger column : 
Athava sapta-saptarhsarh  vibhajet tritalodaye | 
. Chatur-bhagam adhishthanarn tad-dvayarn pada-tungakam | 
Adhishthana-samath mañcham mafichordhve'rdhena vapra-yuk | 
Sa-tripada-shadarnSena chordhve padodayath bhavet 1 
Tadardhve prastarottungam sa-tri-padamh tri-padakam 1 
Tadürdhve'rdhena уарга syat tadürdhve'nghri shad-am$akam | 
(M., xxt, 12-17.) 


11 


ANGHRIKA-VARI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 


A subordinate pillar : la 
Müla-pãda-viéalarh và tat-tri-pada-visalakam | 
Etat kumbhanghrikarn proktam antaralam cha yojayet | 
4 (M., ху, 228-29.) E 
ANGHRIKA-VĀRI—A moulding of the lamp-post (dipa-danda) | 
of the shape of a water-pot, a rope, a trap, a cover, or a band. E O 
Agre cha phalakantarh cha tatikadyair vibhüshitam 1 
Athavanghrika-varim syad ürdhve cha kudmalanvitam 1 4-7 
(M., L, 78-79.) ES 
ACHALA-SOPANA (see SopAna)—A flight of stationary or immov- A 
. able steps. ЕС 
Achalam cha chalarh chaiva dvidhà sopanam iritam | —(M., xxx, 90.) | 
See the contents of lines 93-124 under SoPANA. ; 
Cf. Evam tu chala-sopānam achalam tat pravakshyate | (151) 
Then follows the measurement (152-54). 
АТТА, ATTALA—High, lofty. 
ATTALAKA—An apartment on the roof, an upper storey, a tower, 
a military post. 
ATTALIKA—‘ A house of two or more storeys, a lofty house 
palace.’ —( M. W. Dict.) 
(т) Kautilzya- Artha-sastra : к Ж 
Vishkambha-chatura$ram attalakam utsedha-samavakshepa-sopanarh 
karayet. | 
"rim$ad-dandàntaram cha. dvayor attalakayor madhye sa-harmya- | 
dvi-talam dvyardhayamarn pratolirh karayet. ! 
Attalaka-pratoli-madhye tri-dhanushkadhishthanarn sapididhana-chch- 
hidra-phalaka-sarhhatam itindrakosarh karayet.—(Chap. xxiv, 52.) 
(2) Kamikdgama, xxxv : 
Agrato'lindakopetam attalarh salakantare 1 
Gopurasya tu . . . 11 (126). 
(3) Rajatarangini : ` | 
“ I. 274 : prakarattala-mandalam ... kinnara-puram | 
~~ Î. gor: nagaryah . . . trutyad attala-mekhalah | 
` __ (4) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
II. 80, 30: przkarattalakeshu | 
III. 15,16: рші... sattalakagopura 1 
ІП. 160, 30 : Vaiéšravanavasam . . . prakarena parikshiptam | 
27... chayattalaka-Sobhinam | 
III. 173, 3: puram . ... gopurattalakopetam | 
ІП. 207, 7: Mithilam . . . gopurattalakavatim | : EM 
XV. 5,16: puram attalaka-sambadham (with very high storey). 
XVI. 6,24: nagarim . . . prakarattalakopetam |. тық 


0 — —— Ста). 


unm 
— 


12 


A ر‎ 
AE / / 
Ka ТІ А 
| (Eee 
Ш. c 
| ; ATIBHANGA 
em 


HALF PLAN|HALF PLAN 


Looking-up (Looking-down- 


ANGHRIKA-VÀRI 


Page 12 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


. WNDU ARCHITECTURE ATI-BHANGA 


=== ) Ramayana : 


LT SIT Uchchattala-dhvaja-vatim Sataghni-éata-samkulam | 
Commentary : attala upari griham (lit. house at the top). 
II. 6,11: Chaityeshvattalakeshu cha | 
Commentary : attalakah prakaroparitana-yuddha 
lakas imply the military towers built on the top of the 
V. 3, 33: Іаћкат . . . sdtta-prakara-toranim | 


-sthanam (atta- 
enclosure walls). 


V. 37, 39: satta-prakara-toranam lankàm | 
У. 55, 32: lanka satta-prakara-torana | 
У. 51, 36: purirh satta-pratolikam 1 
У. 58, 158: purim satta-gopuram | 
М2 із [ий em attalaka-Satakirnam | 
| WO о Кот рите vapra-prakara-jaghanam 1 


Sataghni-Sula-ke$antam attalakavatamgakam | 
VI. 75, 6: gopuratta-pratolishu сһагуаѕи cha vividhasu cha | 
| (6) Turrets : ; 


Giri-Sikhara-taru-tat-attalak-opatalpa-dvára-$aranochchhraya. Com- 
pare with : RaghuvamSa. xvi, її, vi$irna talpatta Sato nive$ah—(Kielhorn, 
Junagadh Rock Inscrip. of Rudradaman, line 6, Ep. Ind., Vol. уш; рр. 43, 46 
and note 3.) 


ANDA—A cupola. 


Shodasandayutah (furnished with 16 cupolas), vibhishito’ndaig cha 
viméatyà (adorned with 20 cupolas)—(Brihat-Samhita, LVI, 22, 24, 28 ; Kern, 
J-R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 319, 320). 

Sobhanaih patra-vallibhir andakai$ cha vibhüshitah 1 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ccrxix, v. 20, see also v. 37.) 


ATI-BHANGA (see BHANGA)—A pose, іп which the idol is bent 
n more than two or three places. 


Sarvesham deva-devinam bhanga-manam ihochyate | 
Abhangarh sama-bhangarh cha ati-bhangam tridhà bhavet | 
(M., Lxvu, 95-96.) 
Evam tu sama-bhangarh syad ati-bhangam ihochyate 1 
Parshnyantaram $arangulyam tat-padangushthayor antare | 
| . Tad dvayor madhyame vimšad angulyam dvyantarar bhavet | 
Taj-janu-dvayor madhye dvyantaram dvadasangulam | 
Üru-müla-dvayor madhye sardha-dvyangula-kantakam | 
Evam ati-bhangarh syad etani yuktito nyaset | —(ibid., 117-22.) 


13 


“ 
СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ADBHUTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ` 


ADBHUTA (see UrskpHA)—One of the five proportions of d 


measurement of the height; in this proportion the height is twic. 
| the breadth. 


(1) Manasara : || 
Pafichadhotsedham utkrishtarh manat paficha-vidharh nama | | m 
Santikam paushtikam $reshtham pàárshnikar (also, jayadam) B 

madhya-màne tu | f 
Hinam tu dvayarn ta(d)-dvi-gunorh chadbhutarh kathitam | I 
Kara(sama)dhikodayam-harmye sarvakamikam udiritam | 

(M., xt, 20-22.) | 
Santikarn paushtikarn jayadam chadbhutarh uttungum sarvakami- 
kam | —( M., xr, 76). ; : — 
А clear statement of the rule: 
Tad-vistara-samottungam sapadardhar tu tungakam 1 
Tri-padahikam utsedharh vistàrarn dvi-gunodayam 11 
Prathamam $antikotsedham dvitiyarh paushtikodayam | 
Tritiyam jayadottungam chaturtharh dhanadodayam (i.e. sarvakà- 
mikam) | 
Pafichamarh chadbhutotsedharh janmadi-stupikantakam | 


Жалы 


ue. _ 
SE 


88 


`“ 


eea سے‎ 


I 


as. 


=n — a ME uas 
— 
а کچ‎ = d ion oe 


at 


(М., xxxv, 21-25.) 
(2) Kamikagama, L, 94-98: 
A measurement of the height : i 
: Santikarh pushti-jayadam adbhutarn sarvakamikam | 
Utsedhe dvi-guna-vyasah padadhikyarh cha sammatam 1! (24). 
Vistara-dvi-gunad ashtarhéadhikarh vadhiyojayet | 
Kshudranam evam uddishtam kanishthànam athochyate 11 (25). 
Saptamse tu krite vyase saptarhéarn và shad-arhgakam | 3 
Vistarad adhikas tungo madhya-manam athochyate 11 (26). 
Vistaram pürvavat kritva chatush-pafichadhikarh tu yat | 
Madhya-manam idam proktam uttamanam trayarhgakam 11 
Pürvam uddesa-manarh syad etam nirddesa-manakam 1) (27). 
Eka-dvi-tri-karayor yuktarh màna-hinam tu vadhikam | 
Utsedham kalpayed dhiman sarvesham api sadmanàm 11 (28). 
(3) A class of the two-storeyed buildings. 
(See M., xx, 94, 28-33, under Prasapa. 
A class of buildings—( Sze Kamikagama, xiv, 61a, under MALIKA.) 


- ADRI-SOPANA (see SoPANA)—A flight of steps for a hill : 


Adri-sopana-pàr$ve tu na kuryat рагбуауо anghrikam | 


КЕ‏ د те‏ سس 


_ ag 


(M., xxx, 164.) 
Adri-sopána-de$e tu dirgha-mànam yatheshtakam | — (ibid, 196.) 
Adri-dese samarohya yatra tatraiva karayet | —(ibid., 118.) 


14 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


ADHIMANDAPA—A pavilion built over and above another, a 
double-storeyed pavilion. (Pavilons are generally single-storeyed 
buildings, 544 MANDAPA.) 


Kshudra-devalayarn sarvarn pürvavaj janmadim ийат | 
Mandapam  nava-talam kuryad bhavanam anya(madhya)-rangam 
vàdhimandapakàram—(M., хі, 143-44). 


ADHISHTHANA—Etymologically (adhi-sthà, to stand) it denotes 
an object on which something stands. Hence it is the basement 
or the lowest member of a building. In the same way, it implies 
the stand or base of the column, being the member between the 
shaft and the pedestal, if there be any. Its identification with the 
| base and the basement need not be questioned. It is clear beyond 
doubt by а comparison of the component parts and the offices it 
serves with the corresponding details (quoted below) of the Grecian 
| and Roman architecture. 
(1) Kamikagdma, XXXV : | 
Үајатӣпаѕуа jànvantam navyantarn hridayavadhi | 
Galavadhi Siro'ntam cha padardharh va tri-bhagikam 11 (22). 
Tri(tra)yadi-shodaSa-bhaganam adhikarh vokta-manatah | 
Adhisthanasya manam syàt . . . Il (29). 
Taladhishthana-padebhyah kimchid-una-pramanakam 11 (114). 
Müla-dhàma-talottungadhishthana-tala-samyutam | 
Tad-vihina-talam vapi sama-sthala-yutam tu уа 11 (116). 
Adhishthanadi shad-vargarn tan-manam upapithake | 
Dvarotsedhaya dātavya samam vapyadhikam tu va 11 (122). 


Ibid., LV, 202 : 


Masürakam adhishthanarn  vastvadharam  dharatalam 1 

Talan kuttimadyangam adhishthanasya kirtitam 11 
- These are stated to be the synonyms of adhishthana.'But they appear 
as the component parts of it. 


/ (2) Suprabhedagama, хххї: 
Tato jàngala-bhümi$ ched adhishthanam prakalpayet| | 
Tach-chatur-vidham akhyatam iha Sastre vi$eshatah 11 (16). 
Padma-bandharn cháru-bandham  pàda-bandham prati-kramam | 
Vistarasya chaturthàméam adhishthanochchhrayam bhavet I! (17). 
(See the mouldings of these four bases under those terms.) 
Padayamam adhishthanam dvi-gunam sarva-sammatam Il (29). 


15 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | |. | 


(3) Manasara, Chap. xiv (named Adhishthana, 1-412) : 
Twelve kinds of heights (from one large span to four large cubits) to be 
3 employed in twelve storeyes, one above the other : 

Trayodasangulam arabhya shat-shad-angula-vardhanat | 

Chatur-hastavasánam syat kuttima (= adhishthana)-dva- 

daSonnatam | > | 

Eka-dva-dasa-bhumyantam harmyāntarh tat kramāt nyaset | (2-4). 

These heights vary in buildings of the different castes and ranks : 
Vipranarm tu chatur-hastam bhü-patinarn tri-hastakam | 
Sardha-dvi-hastam utsedharh yuva-rajasya harmyake | 
Dvi-hastarh tu visarh proktam eka-hastarh tu $üdrake | (5-7). са 

These heights are stated to be proportionate to the heights of the 

buildings : 

Harmya-tunga-vasat proktarn tasya màsu(ü)rakonnatam | 

Janmadi-vajanantarn syat kuttimodayam iritam 1 (8-0). 

Тһе height of the base as compared with that of the pedestal : 

Adhishthanonnate dese chopapitham hi sarhéritam | 

Etar tat-tvam adhishthànam tungam tach chatur-arhsakam | 
(M., хш, 2-3.) 

The comparative heights of the base, pedestal and shaft or pillar : 

In a Tamil fragment of a manuscript, purporting to be a 
translation of Mayamata (? Mayamata), it is said: * The height 
of the shaft or pillar is to be divided into four parts, and one to be © 
given to the base, which шау or may not be accompanied by а 
pedestal, and in the case where a pedestal is joined to the base, 
the height of the pedestal may be either equal to that of the base, or 
twice or three times as much.’—(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind., p. 26.) 

According to Ram Кал, the passage, M., хш, 2-3, quoted above, 
is meant to imply that the height of the pedestal consists ‘ of from 
one-quarter to six times the height of the base.’—(Jbid., p. 26.) 

б According to the Мйлазйта (xxr, 13, see below) and the Supra- 
bhedagama (xxxi, quoted above) the base is half of the pillar (pada). 
The Kamikagama does not give exact proportion, but says (xxxv, 
114, see above) that the tala (the lowest part, or the pedestal 
and the base) is a little less (kirnchid una) than the pillar or shaft 
(рада). 

Compare also verses 22, 23 of the same Agama quoted above. 

MR "The height of the base is sometimes included in that of the 
Cod pillar : 
Pádayamavasanarm cha adhishthanodayena cha | —(M., xv, 9.) 


16 


Й f 
| A ) 
* р 


MESS PIRE ESU 
ACRAS SS i 


qm mme lae Hog eere АСТ 


карны . 
Eme E х 
сезе a уру 


: ngri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | 


OF 9004 


—-sl3vd 8€ do 
FSAL HINO 


— ызч4 ce dO 


Залі амо>з5 


VNYH.LESIHGV 


— 6<14У4 Lz dO 
зада СІН 


— Siuvd ye do 
ddALiSsald 


SSID 
-чначуачача 3HI 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ЖЕГЕ” { 


J| | HIN. 
4 | 
ji | TVDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 
I| nishe 
= M Further comparative measurement of the base. 
| Bràh Athavà sapta-saptamáam vibhajet tri-talodaye | 
A Chatur-bhagam adhishthanam tad-dvayarh pada-tungakam І 
| Adhishthana-samarmaficharn matichordhve rdhena vaprayuk | 
| | ; (M., xxr, 12-14.) 
| °  Adhishthàna implying the basement of a building ° 
| Garbhavatasya (of the foundation Pit) nimnarm syad 
||! adhishthàna (rh)-samonnatam E 
| Ishtakair api pāshāņaiś chaturagram samar bhavet | 
с (М., хп, 6-7.) 
| E The employment of various bases recommended, referring to 


the building of three storeys : 2 
Nanadhishthana-sarhyuktarh nana-padair alankritam | 
Nana-gopana-sarnyuktarh kshudra-nasyair vibhüshitam | 


: А (M., xx, 65-66.) 
The penalty for having a disproportionate base : 


Adhishthanottunga-hinarh syat sthana-našarn dhana-kshayam 1 


(M., LXIX, 20.) 
The 64 types of bases : 


Evam P arul-shashti-masürakáni(—adhishthanam) šastrokta- 
manena vibhajitani | 
Jiiatva prakurvann iha Silpi-varyas tad vastu-bhartuh pradadati 
sàmpat | —( M., XIV, 393-96.) 
These 64 bases are described under 10 technical class names 
( 10-372) ; the details thereof are as follows : 
Manasára, Chap. xiv (The mouldings are arranged in the Successive 
Order, as given in the text, from the bottom upwards) : 
I.—Pàda-bandha (10-22) : 
(2) 24 parts : Parts 
(1) Vapraka (plinth) 
(2) Kumuda (astragal) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Karna (ear) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) 
(6) Pattika (band, fillet) 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 
(b) 29 parts : 
(1) Janman ( plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) a - 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 95 A 25 І 
The rest as before. 


мо M ہہ یں‎ «I со 


N n 


kc 


zi [ө] r H Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
CC-0. Gurukul Kangri Unive! sity агідма! 


M — J —asn 2 


Г. 2 


The rest as before. 
(d) 28 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Vapra (cavetto) 
(4) Kandhara (dado) 
'The rest as before. 
II.—Uraga-bandha (23- 43) : 
(a) 18 parts : 
(1) Vapra (plinth) X: 2 R 7 
š _ (2) Kumuda (astragal) » 2; d б 
a З І 
І 


Nm амы» 


(3) Катра (fillet) . 
(4) Kandhara (dado) 


(5) Patta 
(б) рана а) (Ше) Ж BP cr 
(7) Kampa (fillet) » e ES o 


(8) 20 parts : 
(1) Vajana (fillet) 4 ж e 
(2) Kandhara (dado) aos eee od 2 
(3) Vajana (fillet) ° ; a 
The rest as before. 
(c) 22 parts : | 
(т) Kampa (fillet) gbove kumbha ше; 
(о) Кагпа (еаг) .. 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Kandhara (dado) 
(6) Vajana (fillet) 
(7) Kandhara (dado) 
` (8) Gopanaka (beam) 
(9) Prati-vajana (cavetto) . 
(a) 24 parts : ы | 
` (x) Марга (plinth) | = 7 
` (2) Kumuda (torus) (the таайан of this genie 5 is 
f that it is decorated with makara or shark); etc. 
ота (fillet) 


% 


= NO ы HM = HM HM нн 


= 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA / 
(с) 29 parts : i. Pari 
(1) Janman (plinth) $ = UNI 


l 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 
These four types of bases are shaped like the face of а snake and fur- 
nished with two pratis or . . . at the top : and their kumbha (pitcher) 
: is circular. These are employed in the buildings of gods (i.e. temples), 
| Brahmans, and kings. 
III.—Prati-krama (44-64) : 
(а) 21 parts : 


| Parts 
(1) Kshudropàna (small plinth) I 
(2) Padma (cyma) = 24 


(3) Kampa (fillet) 14 

(4) Vapra (cavetto) ХЕ 65 oc 7 

(5) Dhara-kumbha (supporting pitcher) ы: 6 

(6) Aliüga (fillet) F Ж I 

(7) Antarita (fillet) 5% ae 55 I 

_ (8) Padma (cyma) or Kampa (fillet) Patta (band) I Or 2 
This base is decorated with elephants; horses, and makaras (sharks), 

А j| fc. (XIV, 53). 


(6) 22 parts (kambhe kumudordhve viseshatah, specially above 
the pitcher and torus) : 


Parts 
(1) Alinga (fillet) I 
(2) Vajana (fillet) I 
(3) Kandhara (dado) 2 
(4) Pattika (band) I 


(5) Vajana (fillet) (this part is decorated with the 
Carvings of trees and all ornaments) oc I 
The rest should be as before. 
(c) 23 parts (Kumbhantam pürvavat sordhve) : 
(1) Kampa (fillet) 
(2) Kandhara (dado) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Karna (ear) .. 
(5) Vajana (fillet) T 
The rest should be as before. 
(d) 24 parts : 
(1) Kampana (fillet) (upper and lower). . I 
(2) Antara(rita) (intervening fillet) e I 
(3) Tripatta (three bands) .. 56 .. 2 
I 
I 
I 


м N = = = 


each 


(4) Antara (intervening fillet) ° 
(5) Pratima (? Prati-vajana=cavetto) 
(6) Vajana (fillet) oc 
The rest should be as before. 
These are employed in the buildings of gods and three higher castes 
(ХІУ, 100-101). . 


19 


ICM e‏ کک 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri-University-Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


aa $; "x m 


Е 
ADHISHTHANA | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


IV.—Kumuda-bandha (65-77) : 
(a) 27 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) P S xe. us 2 
(2) Ambuja (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Vapra (cavetto) 
(5) Padma (cyma) 
(6) Karna (ear) .. 
(7) Атаба (filament) 
(8) Padma (cyma) 
(9) Kumuda (astragal) 
(10) Padma (cyma) 
(11) Padma (cyma) 
(12) Karna (ear) 
(13) Kampa (fillet) 
(14) Abja (cyma) .. 
(15) Patta (band) 
(16) Abja (cyma) 
- (17) Катра (fillet) 
(b) 27 parts (pattike tu viseshatah) : 
Gopana (beam) .. Ex. aaa s В 
` . Some authorities recommend Tripatta іп place of kumuda (astrag... 
which should be equal to the nàga or snake. 
Pattas (bands) in the middle are decorated with flowers and jewels. 
It is supplied with a declivity (kataka) or it may be circular. 
` Kumuda (astragal) may be triangular or hexagonal. d | 
In this way, eight kinds of (such) bases should be made: Evam ashta- | 
vidham  kuryát. | =a) 
V.—Padma-kesara (suitable for all buildings) (78-91) : 
(а) 19 parts: 5 : U Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) з es x 2 
(о) Vapra (cavetto) | oo + 


ю 


Be Ñ m = بر = = یر‎ о коюы к gn 


4 

: (3) Padma (сута) T MENS x pak 

- (4) Kandhara (dado) v. oo ° mot 
E 5. Ardha-padma (half cyma) оо туі 
ا‎ i I 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE y ADHISHTHANA 


Parts 
(то) Kampa (fillet) 


(11) Padma (cyma) 
(12) Pattika (band) 
(13) Padma (суша) 
(14) Kampa (fillet) 
(b) 19 parts : 
` (1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) : 
The rest should be as before. 
(c) 19 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) : 
The rest should be as before. 


. (d) 19 parts : 
In this last sort of this base, there is a slight difference p 
. (kifichit Sesharh vigeshatah). There should be two pattikas or (one) 
. kapota and the rest as before. 


VI.—Pushpa-pushkala (suitable, as stated, for all the storeys of the 
buildings of the small, intermediate, and large sizes) (92- 108) : 
(a) 32 parts : Parts 

(1) Janman (plinth) 

(2) Vàjana (fillet) 

(3) Maha-padma (large eyma) 

(4) Karņa (ear) à 

(5) Ambuja (cyma) 

(6) Kumbha (pitcher) 

(7) Padma (cyma): 

(8) Kampa (fillet) 2 

(9) Gala (dado) у 

x (то) Kampa (fillet) 
(11) Gala (dado) 

(12) Сорапа (beam) 

(13) Aliñga (fillet) 

(14) Antarita (fillet) 

(15) Prati-mukha (а face-like ОООО, 

(16) Vajana (fillet) 

(b) 32 parts : 


= پم‎ N t> мн 


t ہم‎ 
hie 


a = 


N 


720 ЭБ 
PAGE ` 
6o 794 


Padma (cyma) above the large portion is one part more and 
the rest should be as béfore. 


21 


[M омым ¬“ ص‎ Oe = HM = oH 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


~ 


b LN 
- = : < % 
) ; "m 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | B. 
In i 

| ( 

(c) 32 parts: | Р | | | 

The cyma above the plinth is one part and the rest should be "m 
as before. ^ 
(d) 32 parts : Parts 4 

(1) Kampa (fillet) below mahambuja (large 029 г | ШЕ 

(2) Mahàmbuja (large сута) A : 6 T" 

The rest should be as before. | | ; | 
. VII—Sri-bandha (suitable for the palaces of emperors and the 4 | 
temples of Vishnu and Siva) (109-22) : i) ji 
(a) 26 parts : _ Parts 5 

(1) Janman (plinth) сс; ts P I Ди 
(2) Уарга (сауеїїо) b iA 52 6 | \ | 


(3) Kumuda (torus) 
(4) Karna (ear) 
(5) Karna (ear) 
(6) Kampa (fillet) - 
(7) Padma (cyma) 
(8) Gopàna (beam) 
(9) Alinga (fillet) 
(10) Antarita (fillet) 
к (11) Prati-vaktra (а face-like RETA) 
(12) Vajana (fillet) 
(b) 26 parts : ; 
(1) Janman (plinth) s 2 / 
(2) Pratika (—Prati-vaktra, а face- like. ornament) 
Тһе rest should be as before. 
(c) 26 parts :. 
(т) Kshepana (above Janman or plinth) (projection) т 
(2) Gopàna (beam) 2 1 
(3) Анара (fillet) = A а 
(4) Antarita (fillet) Ж : HE I 
I 
i 


к ТЫ) Cue УЧ Сі уч үр: "уч (әр 


ы 


(5) Prati-vaktra (a face-like ome) 
(6) Ardha-vajana (half fillet) 
The rest should be as before. | 


TR 26 parts : 


(1) Jannah (plinth) os 2% T. fe 
| (2) Abjaka (smallcyma) .. a x I 
) Kampa (fillet) 2 z ace Ik 


he rest should be as before. 


OO — ۳ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


~; VIII.—Maficha-bandha (for temples and palaces) (123-143) 2 
(а) 26 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) Ж +. X i 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Vapra (cavetto) 
(6) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 
| (8) Kandhara (dado) 
Ош. (9) Kampa (fillet) 
(10) Patta (band) 
| (11) Kshepana (projection) .. 
(12) Alinga (fillet) 
(13) Kampa (fillet) 
(14) Prati (fillet)... 
(15) Vajana (fillet) st 42 
This is decorated with the carvings (rüpa) of vyalas (snakes) 
lions, and sharks, etc. (137). 
(b) 26 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) = d А; 2 
(2) Ambuja (cyma) е 
(3) Kshepana (projection) .. 
(4) Vapra (cavetto) 
(5) Kumuda (torus): 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 
(7) Kandhara (dado) 
(8) Kampa (fillet) 
(9) Pattika (band) 
(10) Kampa (fillet) 
(11) Karna (ear).. 
(12) Vajana (fillet) 
(13) Prati (fillet) 
(14) Vajana (fillet) 
(c) 26 parts : 
The Kumuda and prati are furnished with a tripatta 
(threefold band); and the rest as before, and the ornaments also 
are the same. 


BON N N ® 


ba ب‎ mM t ы بم‎ ы № HM 
t= 


H м мо м mH Ñ == N = Om N 


(d) 26 parts : ; Parts 
(1) Pattika (fillet) same as before ; 
- (2) Kandhara (dado) Bs xe ET I 


Тһе rest as before. 


23 


CC-0. Gurukul.Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
(е) 26 parts : 


bs Pattika is the samc but the Kandhara above is one part, 
and the rest as before. The ornaments should be discreetly made 


(148). 
IX.—Sreni-bandha (for temples and all other buildings) (144-169) : ` 
(а) 18 parts : | c] Ups 
(1) Janman (plinth) s rs жс I} 


(2) Kshudra-kampa (small fillet) 
(3) Mahàmbuja (large cyma) 
(4) Kandhara (dado) 
(5) Abja (cyma) 
(6) Kumbha (pitcher) 
^ (7) Padma (cyma) 
(8) Alinga (fillet) 
(9) Vajana (fillet) 
(10) Prati (fillet) 
(11) Vajana (fillet) 25 de 
(b) 22 parts: ` А | Ih 
(1) Janman (plinth) ЖА, сз т | 
(2) Kshudra-kshepana (small projection) 
(3) Ambuja (cyma) Fa s 
(4) Kandhara (dado) 
(5) Abjaka (small cyma) 
2 (6) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(7) Padma (cyma) 
(8) Kampa (fillet) 
(9) Kandhara (dado) 
(10) Kshepana (projection) 
(11) Padma (cyma) 
(12) Pattika (band) 
(13) Padma (cyma) 
(14)- Vajana (fillet) 
(c) 23 parts: 
(1) Paduka (plinth) š 2 
> (2) Катра (fillet) T оо ro 4 
(3) Mahambuja (large cyma бүлк As 5 
I 
I 
3 
I 


КУУ h9 fe 1-2 T) GS CO CS (Gu KS 


MN 


нм ҥн N Ron ку FH HO) ны ын ы N 
--- 


Kandhara (dado) 
(5) Padma (cyma) 

(6) Kumuda (astragal). 
7) Padma (cyma) 


- 
2 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


(8) Kampa (fillet) 5 = ШІ 
(9) Kandhara (dado) P. 
(то) Vàjana (fillet) 
(11) Antarita (fillet) 
(12) Prati (fillet) .. 
(13) Vajana (fillet) 
(d) 24 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) fs 
(2) Kshudra-padma (small cyma) 
(3) Vajana (fillet) 
(4) Mahà-padma (large ст) 
(5) Dala (petal) 4 
The rest as before. 
These are decorated with lions, etc. (174). 
X.—Padma-bandha (for the temples of gods and goddesses) (170-194): 
(а) 21 parts: 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(5) Kshepana (projection) 
(6) Adhah-padma (lower cyma) 
(7) Karna (ear) гЁ 
(8) Катра (fillet) 
(о) Pattika (band) 
(10) Kampa (fillet) 
(11) Kandhara (dado) 
(12) Patta (band) 
(b) 21 parts: 
(1) Upana (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kumuda (astragal) 
(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Padma (cyma) 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 
(7) Gala (dado) 
(8) Kshepana (projection) 
(о) Padma (cyma) 
(10) Kapota (dove-cot) 
(11) Kampa (fillet) 


me NM OQ) м et 


Hoe ҥш H 


Parts 
I 


K m M N ЮМ HOO м on on 


= Ю EB ою ән» MO - (9 


25 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 4 


і (c) 91 parts: 
24 (1) Abja (cyma) as before ; 
E (2) Kampa (fillet) 

(3) Karna (ear) .. 

(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Antarita (fillet) 
(6) Prati (fillet) .. 

(7) Vajana (fillet) 
The rest as before. 

10 parts: 

(т) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 

(3) Kandhara (dado) 
(4) Padma (cyma) 
(5) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(6) Padma (cyma) 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 

(8) Karna (ear) .. 
(9) Padma’ (сута) 
(10) Kapota (dove-cot) 
(1r) Alinga (fillet) 
(12) Antarita (fillet) 
(тз) Prati-vajana (fillet) 


(d 


— 


These аге discreetly adorned with grahas (sharks), lions, etc. (203). 


= XI.—Kumbha-bandha (195-239) : 
ET (а) 24 parts: - 
E: (1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
` (3) Катра (fillet) 
(4) Karna (ear) .. 
(5) Kampa (fillet) 
(6) Pattika (band) 
(7 Kampa (fillet) 
(8) Padma (сута) 
9) Karna (ear) . 
Padma (cyma) 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


зы = N m= 


кыл ы ы. эы лач е м M^ 


І 


Parts ^. 3 
5% | 


=“ = بر ص‎ HRQ ы ہم س‎ к оҥ о сән 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


(b) 24 parts : Parts 
(1) Kumbha (pitcher) v 


) 
(2) Nimnaka (drip) 
(3) Janman (plinth) 


m 


4) Padma (cyma) 
) Nimna (drip) 
) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 
(8) Kandhara (dado) 
) Kampa (fillet) 
(10) Kampa (fillet) 

I) Kapota (dove-cot) 
) 


м w = = = = = = N NM t> 


(12) Vajana (fillet) 175 > 
) Padma (cyma) А, Же 2 14 
(14) Nimna (drip) 5% ПЕ 
(15) Padma (сута) T T X 12 
(16) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(17) Padma (cyma) 
(18) Nimna (drip) E 
(19) Kshepana (projection) .. 
(20) Nimna (drip) 
(21) Prati (fillet) 
(c) 24 parts: 
(1) Janman (plinth) 2 
(2) Padma (cyma) 2 
(3) Kandhara (dado) I 
(4) Kumbha (pitcher) : 5% 25 І 
(5) Nimna (drip) T t I 
(6) Kshudra-patta (small band) I 
(7) Abja (cyma) I 
(8) Kapota (dove-cot) T 2 
(9) Kshepana (projection) .. I 


(10) Padma (cyma) 05 : 55 Ха І} 
(11) Kandhara (dado) “з Жо E. І} 
(12) Padma (сута) 7. 2% ie 1} 
(19) Kumbha (pitcher) ЗА БА 2 3 
(14) Adhah-padma (lower cyma) si A I 
(15) Kandhara (dado) оо t dc I 
(16) Kampa (fillet) оо со $e I 3 
(17) Kshudrabja (small cyma) - 1s І} , 
(18) Kapota (dove-cot) 3 2. n 2(?}) , 
(19) Prati-vajana (fillet), the remainder. 
27 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


NAE 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(4) 26 parts : Parts 

(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Kandhara (dado) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) 
(6) Padma (cyma) 
(7) Pattika (band) 
(8) Padma (cyma) 
(9) Alinga (fillet) 

. (то) Padma (cyma) 
(11) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(12) Padma (cyma) 
(13) Padma (cyma) 
(14) Kendra (central БОН) 
(15) Kampa (fillet) 
(16) Abja (cyma) 
(17) Kapota (dove cot) 
(18) Kampa (fillet) 
Тһе rest should be discreetly made. 

These should be decorated with sharks, etc. and kshudra-nàsi Gu 
nose) (246). | 

'This is stated to be of five kinds [see (b) (1), (2) above] specially in ti 
Kumbha part (247). 

These may be circular, triangular (tri-patta), rectangular (? dharaya 
and should be furnished with katakas. These are suitable for tempk 
and palaces (248). 

XII.—Vapra-bandha (SR : 


ю 


мәә FH SB SH юуны н DY SH DY 


(а) (?) 31 parts: | f : Parts | 
(1) Janman (plinth) o Es wel 72 ) 
(2) Катра (fillet) 39 a 45 1 I 
(3) Padma (суша). I 53 vv tapa 
(4) Vajana (fillet) Soa a: БА 1 | | 
E (5) Vapra (cavetto) БА e ad m 31 | 
(6) Padma (суша) 22 3 жуй ЗАР} 4 4 
| (7) Катра (fillet) "i Mae SE Ж 1 1 
(8) Kandhara (dado) 2% ike Ei сл A E 
) Kampa (fillet) 725 д (| | 
Ñ : : ie 
т ДЁ 
i Же 


Le 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


(13) Vajana (fillet) tee 
(14) Karna (ear) 5% i 
(15) Kshepana (projection) Е 
(16) Ambuja (сута) 5 1 
(17) Kapota (dove-cot) 2 
(18) Prati-vajana (fillet) i 


XIII.—Vajra-bandha (249-259) : 


(а) 31 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Padma (cyma) 
(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Kandhara (dado) 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 
(7) Padma (cyma) 5 
(8) Vajra-kumbha (round pitcher) 
(9) Saro-ruha (cyma) За 
(10) Катра (fillet) 
(11) Karna (ear) 
(12) Kampa (fillet) 
(13) Ambuja (cyma) 
(14) Kapota (dove cot) 
(15) Prati-vàjana (fillet) 
(16) Kandhara (dado) zs 
(17) Kampa-padma (fillet and cyma) 
(18) Vajra-patta (round band) 
(19) Padma-kampa (cyma and fillet) 
XIV.—Sri-bhoga (260-280) : 


[Om 


н Nm ы MONS Dp u زم‎ фа кє an rn 


(а) 27 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) 5% оо d 24 
. (2) Kshudra-kampa (small fillet) 6 olo } 


(3) Ambuja (сута) 2% T 5 3 
(4) Kshudra-padma (small cyma) (it is attached to $ 
the small karņa, line 275); à 
(5) Karna (ear) I 
(6) Kampa (fillet) ° i 
(7) Kshudrabja (small cyma) ds 42 3 
(8) Kumuda (astragal) T m TES 
(9) Padma (cyma) ap $ 


29 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ж \ : : 
22 ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
Parts 1 
- (10) Kshepana (projection) . 1 i 
(11) Karna (ear) I | 
" (12) Kampa (fillet) : 4 l 
(13) Padma (cyma) Ex 301) í 
(14) Pattika (band) І 
(15) Padma (сута) 1 
(16) Kampa (fillet) i 
(17) Kandhara (dado) a 2; 2 
(18) Kampa-padma (fillet and cyma) .. 1(91--і) 
(19) Kapotaka(dove-cot) 2 
(20) Alinga (fillet) 2 
(b) 27 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) 2 
(2) Kshudropàna (small plinth) I 
(3) Mahàmbuja (large сута) 3 
(4) Kshudra-pañkaja (small суша) i 
(5) Kampa-karna (fillet and ear) 52 i 
(6) Kampa-padma (fillet and сута) ` , I 
(7) two Kapotas (dove-cots) : 2 
(8) Gala (dado) I 
(о) Prati-vajana (fillet) I 
(то) Gala (dado) i 
(11) Padma-kampa (сута ed ш І 
(12) Pattika (band) 2 
(13) Gala (dado) i 
3 _ (14) Vājana (fillet) д 
E: (15) Kampa (fillet) 1 
54% 2 (16) Padma (cyma) 21 
22% (17) Kapota (dove-cot) 2} 
E (18) Prati(ma) (fillet) 2 
B FT Ree (5120). 
— (a) 26 parts: Paris 
(1) Janman (plinth) 11 
(2) Kshudra-vajana (small fillet) 1 
(3) Vapra (cavetto) Я: 1(?3) 


(4) Padma Ca 
(5) Asana AR 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


Parts 
(9) Kampa (fillet) 


(10) Abja (cyma) 

(11) Ratna-kampa dea fillet) 
(ı2) Kampaja (fillet) 

(13) Kampa (fillet) 

4) Kandhara (dado) s 
5) Kampa padma (fillet and cyma) .. 
6) Ratna-patta (jewelled fillet) 

7) Padma-kampa (cyma and fillet) 

8) Karna (ear) . З 

) 

) 

) 

) 


tol 


Vajana (fillet) 
Abja (cyma) 
Kapota (dove-cot) 
22) Alinga (fillet) 8 ӨМ 
(23) Prati-vajana (fillet), the remainder. 
This part is adorned with the carvings of snakes and sharks, etc., and 
all other parts are decorated with jewelled lotuses. This base should be 
made in the temples of Siva and Vishnu (lines 307-309). 
XVI.—Patta-bandha (297-304) : 
26 parts : Parts 


9 
0 
1 


(1 
(1 
(1 
(1 
(1 
(1 
(2 
(2 
(2 


= Юю RE Re ба мон N u Nj N op t 


to 


(1) Janman (plinth) 2 
(2) Vajana (fillet) } 
(3) Mahabja (large cyma) 21 
(4) Padma-kampa (сута and fillet) I 
(5) Nimna-kampa (drip and E I 
(6) Padma (cyma) I 
(7) Maha-patta (large ed) 2 
(8) Padma-kampa (cyma and fillet) I 
(9) Kandhara (dado) I 
(10) Kshepana-abja (projection and 0 5 
(11) Kapota (dove-cot) : Es 2 

(12) Prati-vajana (fillet), the remainder. 

This is adorned with all ornaments (line 318). 
XVII.—Kaksha-bandha (305- 346) : 
(а) 18 parts : Parts 

(1) Janman (plinth) 52 i sË 2 
(2) Kampa (fillet) T bo 2 i 
(3) Mahambuja (large сута) = 26 24 
(4) Padma-kampa (сута and fillet) 5 X I 
(5) Nimna (drip) Е h. d L 


31 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


(6) Antarita (fillet) 
(7) Prati (fillet) 
(8) Vàjana (fillet) 
(9) Kandhara (dado) сө : 
(10) Kampa-padma (fillet and сута) . 
(11) Vritta-kumbha (round pitcher) 
(12) Padma-kshepana (cyma and projection) 
(13) Karna (ear) 56 
(14) Kampa-padma (fillet and cyma) 
(1 5) Kapota (dove-cot) : бо 
(16) Vajana (fillet) Be zt sh 1 
This is adorned with all ornaments, and sharks and snakes, etc. (line 328). 
(b) 19 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) А 
(4) Mahambuja (large сута) 
(5) Padma-nimna (сута and drip) 
(6) Abja (cyma) 
(7) Kumuda (astragal) 
(8) Abja (cyma) 
(9) Karna (ear) .. д 
(10) Abja (cyma) 2% 
(11) Pattika (band) 
(12) Padma-kampa (cyma and fillet) 
(13) Nimnaka (drip) T 
(14) Antarita (fillet) 
(15) Prati (fillet) 
(16) Vajana (fillet) 
(17) Kandhara (dado) 
(18) Kampa (fillet) 
(19) Padma (cyma) 
(20) Kapota (dove-cot) 
(21) Vajana (fillet) ae at ; 
(22) Prati-bandha (fillet and band) — .. ob 
The rest should be as before and it sh 2 , 
all ornaments (line 340), sasi уш 


Mon n шыны 


i 


E x =‏ بر سبح 


pn м N ыны ә 


кә 


az tj n ҥн‏ پر پر t n SU ыўз‏ ہم سم 


е ғ уы ш 
toa 


(c) 26 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 5. ^ pe 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 5% 5 ‘i i 
32 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARGHITEGTURE ADHISHTHANA 


Parts 


(3) Kandhara (dado) 56 29 2 


(4) Kampa (fillet) I 
(5) Padma (cyma) I 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 22784 z: I 
(7) Argala (bar) s 3s > I 
(8) Kampa (fillet) I 
(9) Padma (cyma) I 
(10) Kapota (dove-cot) c 2 
(11) Prati-vajana (fillet), the remainder. 
Patta-kampa, Kapota, and the two Pattas may be circular 
(line 348). 
The parts of the two lower karnas are adorned with images of snakes, 
etc. (line 349). 


(d) 24 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) T со Jc 3 
(2) Kampa (fillet) : T = І 
(3) Nimna (drip) sis 50 X I 
(4) Bhadras (projecting ornaments) .. a 5 (each) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) ae 5% a I 


(6) Nimnaka (drip) 
(7) Antarita (fillet) 
(8) Prati (fillet) .. 
(9) Kampa (fillet) 
(10) Kandhara (dado) 
(11) Kampa (fillet) 
(12) Padma (cyma) 
(13) Kapota (dove-cot) 
(14) Kandhara (dado) 
(15) Prati (fillet) 
(16) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(? octangular). 
There should be Bhadra-patta (front fillet) and Patra-patta (leaf 
fillet) in the Kapota part (line 359). 
XVIII.—Kampa-bandha (347-358) : 
36 parts : А Parts 
(1) Tunga (elevation) 46 .. 
(2) Kshudra-upana (small plinth) 
(3) Mahabja (large cyma) 
(4) Kshudrabja (small cyma) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) $c 


COM сс ш @9 m ra фу v3 C3 c - 


/ 


ч Som A 


33 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


N 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


(6) Nimna (drip) Í 
(7) Vajana (fillet) I 
(8) Padma (cyma) .. ө І 
(9) Kumbha-mahàbja (pitcher and сута) 5 
(10) Abja (cyma) ê je r 
(11) Kampa (fillet) " 
(12) Alinga (fillet) i 
(13) Antarita (fillet) T 29 x I 
(14) Prati (fillet) T .. .. 2 
(15) Vajana (fillet) 5 I 
(16) Kshepana (projection) .. I 
(17) Kandhara (dado) I 
(18) Kampa (fillet) I 
(19) Padma (cyma) I 
(20) Kapota (dove-cot) A. i 
(21) Alinga (fillet) — - m As Т 2 
(22) Prati (fillet) Y I 
XIX.—Sri-kanta (359-372) : 
36 parts : Parts 
(1) Upana (plinth) ер е 
(2) Kshudropàna (small plinth) E 5 
(3) Mahàmbuja (large cyma) 
(4) Kshudrabja (small cyma) 
(5) Kandhara (dado) 
(6) Padma (cyma) 
(7) Pattika (band) T 
(8) Kshudra-kampa (small fillet) 
(9) Padma (cyma) oc 
(10) Kshudrabja (small cyma) 
(11) Nimna (drip) a 
(12) Padma (cyma) 
(13) Kumbha (pitcher) 
(14) Kampa (fillet) 
(15) Kshepana (projection) 
(16) Kandhara (dado) 
(17) Kampa (fillet) 
(18) Padma (cyma) 
(19) Kapota (dove-cot) 
(20) Alinga (fillet) 
(21) Prati (fillet) 


34 


= " . 
E. - ı CC-0. Gurukul Kangri Univérsity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` HINDU ARCHITECTURE ADHISHTHANA 


This Sri-kanta is stated to be of four kinds (line 376) but only one 
type is illustrated. 

In the kumbha-part it should be round or there should be patta 
(line 372). These should be constructed in the temples of Siva and 
Vishnu (line 387). Ç 

Projections (lines 318-409) : 

Projections are the peculiarities of the mouldings from the plinth 
to the crowning fillet : 
Janmadi-vajanantaim cha am$anàm tad viseshatah I (373) 

These projections vary from being equal to one-fourth of the mould- 
ings (lines 376-384) : 

Tat-samam nirgamarh vapi tri-padam ardhardham eva cha | 
Tad-eva kshepanarh sarve yatha-sobharh tu karayet | 
Upàna-tunga-samarh vàpi tat-pàdona-vivardhanat | 
Tungena tri-vidhànàm cha tri-pàdarmn nirgamarn bhavet | 
Vaprochcharh tu samarh уарі yavat kumuda-nirgamam | 
Kumudochchar vapra-pattàntam pattika-nirgamarh bhavet | 
Tat-samam nirgamarh vapi pattan gopana-nirgamar | 
Kshudra-pankaja-sarveshàrh tat-samarh nirgamarh bhavet | 
Yathà-sobharh balat sarvam айрапата sahito(-arh) пуаве | 

These general rules are illustrated by giving in danda (rod) and hasta 
(cubit). measures the projections of some plinth (lines 402-409). 

For а comparative study and general knowledge of the subject the 
details of the bases employed in early European architecture are given 
below. Each column has its particular base :- 

I.— Tuscan order (Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 2555): 
Base of the column r2 parts : 


Projection from the axis of 
column in parts of a 


module 
(1) Fillet 5 oo di 192 
(2) Torus .. oo G 164 
(3) Plinth so @ 164 
II.—Doric order (Art. 2565) : 
Base of the column 19 parts : 
Projection 
(1) Apophyge or congé .. о I2 
(2) Fillet  .. rl 14. 
(3) Astragal .. .. IP 143 
(4) Torus | .. оо di 17 
(5) Plinth .. Y а 17 


35 


і igiti i A 
СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation US 


x 
pal 


` 4 


ADHISHTHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Grecian Doric : 
Cornice—15:32 parts; Entablature—Frieze 14°88 parts; ~ 
architrave 17:10 parts; Capital—11-16 parts. 
Column (proper)—Shaft 20°30 modules; rst step or plinth 
6:90; 2nd step or plinth 6:70 ; grd step or plinth 6*9o. 
. IIT.— Ionic order (Art. 2573) : 
Base of the column 191 parts, excluding apophyge 2 parts and a 
projection 18: І 


Projection in parts of a 
module from axis of 


the column ' E 
(1) Fillet 25 у 20 1 
(>) Тогив 3. талын 224 f 
(3) Fillet ^ br 20} | 
(4) Scotia x ОА КОА 20 
(5) Fillet ©; зү 22 | 
(6) Two beads 3t TE? 224 
3 (7) Fillet et А2 52% 22 
(8) Scotia 2 30 A 2I 
(9) Fillet 55 Sad 24 E 
(10) Plinth Me б 25 : ` 3 
Grecian Ionic (art. 2581) : | 
Ë Base of the column 99.27 parts : И 
oo (1) Apophyge ae 3:7 11080 ; : Š 
| (2) Fillet s оо. PIS) 18* 960 
` (3) Bead ` .. 00 19:320 
(4) Torus (horizontally : 
= MES ain fluted) Er .. 6-120 22°500 
(5) Fillet “et so OP ARID) 22°500 
` (6) Scotia 2% z. 6:000 21-840 ` | 
(g) miller - 4. .. 07450 23640 


© Torus 2% so 5'760 24: 960 
Phi nh : E oo 11°880 2 26:520 


* 


Height in parts Projection in parts 
of a module of a module 


- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANU-GRIHA 


Height in parts Projection in parts 


of a module of a module 
(5) Two beads a as I 22 ' 
(6) Fillet бе 22 i 21 
(7) Scotia oo -. 1% 2d 
(8) Fillet on m 1 23 
(9) Тогив oc +. 4 25 
(10) Plinth А 6 25 


V.— Composite order (Art. 2591) : 
The base of the column 18 parts : 1 
Height in parts Projection in parts 


(г) с * of a module of a module 
1) Congé 5с 2 20 
(2) Fillet Xe t r4 20 
(3) Torus 55 ос 3 22 
(4) Fillet T T i 201 
(5) Scotia еі oe I$ 20 
(6) Fillet Ei ^ o9 i 214 
(7) Bead s : We i 213 
(8) Fillet 3t 55 1 214 
(9) Ѕсойа i ac 2 202 
(ro) Fillet ot ЖС 2 23 
(тт) Torus T T 4 25 
(12) Plinth С со 6 25 


From the details given above it would be easy to understand and 
. subscribe to the following remark : 

‘The Indian (pedestals and) bases аге made more systematically, 
and afford by far a greater variety of proportions and ornaments 
than the Grecian and Roman. In the European architecture, the 
forms and dimensions of pedestals and bases are fixed by invariable 
rules, with respect to the orders in which they are employed, but in 
the Indian, the choice is left to the option of the artists.'—(Raàm Raz 
Ess. Arch. of Hind., pp. 39-40 and see Plate п.) ` 

ANANTA (see LuPA)—A kind of Пара or “а sloping and projecting 
member of the entablature representing a continued pent-roof. ° 

Ambaram cha ууауата jyotir gaganar cha vihayasi | 

Anantam chantariksham cha prastaram (? pushkalam) chash- 
tadha lupah 1—(M., хуш, 174-175.) 

ANU-GRIHA—The roof of a house. 

Cf. Karna-kilaya-sarbandho'nugriham setuh— The fastening of 

the roof of a house to the transverse beam by means of iron bolts is called 
Setu.’—(Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, Chap. Lxv, p. 166.) 8 


37 


f 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ANU-SALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ANU-SALA (of. SALA)—An ante-chamber, a hall or room behind 
or at the side of a main hall. 
Manasára, xxvi : 9, 10,2%: 

(а) Shodasàmsakam adhikyarh bhagarh harmya-visalakam | (7) 
Ekarnšarn karna-kütarn syad dhàràntara(m) Sivarhgakam | (8) 
Dvi-bhagenanu-é4la cha tad-ardharh chantaralakam 1 (9) 
Saptarnšena maha-éala harmyam etat tu vinyaset | (10) 

(5) Athavashtadasàrh£e tu küta-hàrà cha pürvavat | (16) 
Shad-bhagena maha-éala chatuh-éalà tri-bhagikam | (17) 
Madhya-sala yugaméena bhadra-$alà cha madhyame | (18) 
Anuśālā cha madhye cha chaika-bhagena bhadrakam | (19) 

(c) Ekona-virnéad-arngena ashta-bhimi-visdlake | (21) 
Ekaika-küta-vistàrarn mahà-$àlà saràméakam 1 (22) 

Anu$alà tri-bhàga và bha(ha)rantara(rh) dvi-bhagikam l (23) 

Maha-$alà tri-bhagena bhadra-&ala visalata | (24) 
ANEKA-LINGA (see Livca)—A class of the phallus, phalli in 
group as exist in many places. 

Vedasrarh уазуабтаКата và vrittam chaivarh proktaneka-linga- 

mile | 
Ekanekan chokta-linge sivarhée kuryad dhara shodasadi-dvayena | 
(M., тп, 128-129, 132-133.) 

ANILA-BHADRAKAC-—A kind of chariot. 


(See M., xum, 114, under RATHA) 


ANTARA (see ANTARITA)—Literally the distance between any two 
objects, hence it implies a moulding which separates two other larger 
mouldings. Іп this office it would resemble the fillet, listel or annu- 
let (see Gwilt, Art. 2532, fig. 874). А moulding of the pedestal and 


the base. i | 
Shad-arnšarn chantare karne uttararéath tad-ürdhake | 
(M., xm, 121.) 
Purvottara-pradeáe tu kampanarh chàntaraméakam | 
Dvirnsakar cha tri-pattarn syat tad-ürdhve chantaram bhavet | 
(М., xiv, 59-60.) 
ANTARALA(KA)—The intermediate Space, the interior (—antara- 
laya), corridor.—(M., ххш, o) | 
(1) Intercolumnation : 
Müla-pada-visalar va tat-tri-pada-visalakarn | 
Etat kumbhanghrikarn proktam antaralam cha yojayet | 
| (М., ху, 231-232.) 
38 


i i і igiti dation USA 
CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by paroh ati 


ANU-SALA. 


ч 


SECTION THRO. 
BOSS STONE (ANGHRI.) 


LONG SECTION. 


ALAKSHA, 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collectio 


MADHYA-KOSHTHA, 


“АТАКА OR SCOTIA 


Digitized by S3 Foundation USA. 
ЈА 


ANTAR-JANMAN AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


ё А crowning moulding of the pedestal and the base : 
(т) Tad-urdhve'ntaritam charhéarh tat-samam prativajanam | 
Ekar chantaritath chordhve sardhaméarh prativajanam | 
(M., хш, 58, 69, etc.) 
Alingam aréakarh chaiva tat-samántaritam tathà | 
Aliigam arnšakarn chordhve arhśenāntaritarh tathà | D 
(M., XIV, 51, IOI, etc.) 
(2) The tenth moulding from the top of the entablature.— (See Kamik 
agama, тлу, 2, under PRAsADA.) 


(See Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind, p. 25 ` 


ANTAR-JANMAN—An inner plinth. 
Antarjanma bahirjanma nimnonnataya sthitam 11 
Nirvarn$ameva tat sarvath kartri-varnsath bhaved dhruvam 1 
(М., LXIX, 16, 17.) 
ANTARITA-MANDAPA—The ante-chamber in front of a shrine. 
a (Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., 
New. Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, р. 37. 
ANTAR-BHITTI—An inner wall, partition wall, etc. | 
Тап-тапе tu salànam vinà-bhittim sabhittikarh | 
Antar-bhittis tu chaivam syàd bahir-bhittis tu sarvada ıı 


(2/2. XL, 51, 52. 


ANTAR-MANDALA—The circular court in the interior of a com-) 


pound. 


Antar-mandalam arabhya mahámaryàdikantakam 1 
3 Paficha-kut(d)yasya chotsedharh pratyekarh pafichadha bhavet | 


(M., ххх, 57-58.) 
ANTAR-MUKHA —Literally, with face towards the inside. 


Cf. Griha-garbharh (=foundations) antar-mukham syad gràma- 
garbham bahir-mukhan 1--(М., xu, 216.) 


ANTAR-VAPRA—The internal rampart, the internal side ofthe 
rampart. 


Cf. Antar-vaprath bahir-bhitti$ cheshtarn dirgham cha chülikà | 
(M., їх, 362.) 


Page 39 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ANTAH-SALA 


(1) Ramayana (Cock): 
П. 3,13 : Antah-purasya dvarani sarvasya nagarasya cha | 
II. 14, 29 : Dadaréantah-puram sriman nana-dhvaja-ganayutam | 
П. 14,66: Nirjagama . . . sdgara-hrada-samkaéat  sumant- 
ro’ntah-purach chhubhat | 
П. 15, 18: Ityuktvantahpura-dvaram àjagàma puranavit | 
V. 4, 80: Sa hema-jambu-nada-chakravalarn maharha- muktamani 
bhüshitàntam | 
Pararghya-kalaguru- chandanarham sa Ràvanantahpuram 
ргауіуеќа 11 
П. 15,47: Sarnriddham antahpuram ӛуіуеба ha 1. 
Tatodri'-küta-chala-megha-sannibharhn mahavimano- 
pama-vesma-samyutam | 
VII. 42,27: Pürvàhne dharma-kàryani kritvà dharmena dharma- 
vit | 
Sesharh divasa-bhágardham antahpura-gato bhavet tı 


Compare also II, 10, 11-17 ; | 70,20; П, 70, 27 ; П, 114, 29; Ш, 54, 
13 ; IV, 26, 22; V, 4, 24. 


(2) Paüchatantra, ed. Bombay, I, pp. 38, 58, 61, 168 : 

Gatvà kanyantahpure . . . raja-kanyam . . . sapta-bhümi-ka- 

prasada pranta-gatam . . . bhaja || 

Tha rajñas tu tanaya Patalityasti kanyaka 1 

Uparyantah-pure $à cha ratnam ityabhirakshyate I1 

Pravisya so'drisrihgagra-tunga-vátàyanena tam | 

Antahpure dadarsatha suptarn rahasi Patalim 11 

Pravrajakas cha gatvaiva vatayana-pathena sah | 

Pravisyantah-purarh prapa suptarh nisi nripatmajam 11 
(3) ° When the great minister, Verggade of the female apartments 
(antahpura), great master of robes? . . .—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikar- 
pur Taluq. no. 144, Transl., p. 107; Roman text, p. 191.) 


АМТАН-НАКА -The second inner court, internal enclosure in а 
temple or house, the whole compound being divided into five courts 
or enclosures.—(M., хххі, 11-14.) 
(See under PRAKARA.) 
ANTAH-SALA—Inner rooms, internal portions of a mansion. 
Antah-éala уаш of dandakasyoktavat kuru 1—(М., xxxv, 281.) 
ANa SATA JI :ternal partition. 
~ Cf. Lupakaradijadanam manayyya-salam-ihochyate | 
Ambaradyashtadhamani nidat M., XL, 114, see also XXXVI, 79 ; XL, 44.) 
4 


M 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` 


ANTIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ANTIKA—A class of the two-storeyed buildings. 


(M., Xx, 94, 26-27, see under PRASADA.) 


ANTIMA—Limit, boundary, pilaster terminating the side-wall ofa ` 
temple, and having base and capital generally differing from those 
of adjacent columns, same as prastara (entablature or plinth). 
Tad (—prati)-ürdhve sardha-paficharnsarh padayamarn tritiyakam 1 
Antimam cha dvi-bhagarh syad vedikodayam iritam | 
(M., ххх, 226-227.) 
ANYA-RANGA—The second court or theatre of a compound. 


Mandapam nava-talam kuryad bhavanam anya-rangam vadhiman 
dapakaram 1—(/М., хі, 144.) 


ANVANTA—A synonym of maficha or a raised platform or couch. 


(M., хут, 43, see under MaNcua.) 


APACHCHHAYA—A light shadow. 


(See AVACHGHHAYA.) 
APASAMCHITA—A class of buildings in which the width (at the 
bottom) is the standard of measurement ; the temples in which the 
principal idol is in the recumbent posture. 


Pratyekarn tri-vidharn proktarh sarnchitarn chapy-asarnchitam ` upa- 
(apa)-samchitamityeva 1 (Kamikagama, XLV, 6-7.) 

Utsedhe manarn grihyarh chet sthanakarh tat prakathyate | 

Vistare manam sarnkalpya сһаѕапаг tad udiritam | 

Parinahe pade vapi manarh бауапата iritam | 

Asanarh samchitam proktam sthanakarn syad asarhchitam | ' 

Apasamchitarn $ayanam chet tat tat tri-vidha-harmyake | 


(M., xix, 7-11.) 
Samchitasamchitanarm cha arnšair ayadibhir yutam 1 
Apasamchita-harmyanar tithyantarn shad grahishyate | 
(M., xxx, 173-174.) 


АРОНА (se Ümna)—An additional or unprescribed member 
attached to a structure. 


| ж Er | 
ABJA (see Рарма)--А lotus, the Cyr, . ‘а moulding taking its 
name from its contour resembling 1S 2 eee in 
its upper part and swelling belowZ zl ) 
two sorts, the cyma recta, just е; 


(AA тх. 395. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridy r Collection. DIgIüized-by USA 


ts 


Ж Page 39 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE AMBARA 


wherein the upper part swells, whilst the lower is hollow. By the 
workmen these are called “ ogées.”’ 


Compare the lists of movldings given under ADHISHTHANA and 
UPAPITHA. 


ABJA-KANTA—A class of the ten-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxvi, 18, see under PRASADA.) 
ABHAYA—Fearless, a refuge-offering pose of the hand of an image. 
Chatur-bhujarn tri-netrarn cha jata-mukuta-bhishitam | 
Varadabhaya-samyuktarh krishna-paragu-dharinam | 
(M., xit, 120-121.) 
Abhayar dakshine . . .—(M., уп, 159.) 
Purve cha tvabhayam . . .—(ibid., 166.) 
Varadam chabhayarh pürve vàme tu dvàra-hastakam | 
(M., шу, 154.) 
ABHAYA-HASTA (see ABHAYA)—With hand in the pose of offering 
refuge. 
Varadàabhaya-hastam cha jatà-mukuta-manditam 1—(M., ur, 30.) 
ABHISHEKA-MANDAPA (see MANDAPA)—The coronation hall. 
Nripanam abhishekartharh mandapam 1--(М., xxxiv, 38.) 
See Inscrip. of Rajaraja III (no. 39, Н.8.1.1., Vol. ш, p. 86) under 
MANDAPA. ; 
ABHYAVAHARA-MANDAPA—A dining-hall. | 
See Ranganatha inscript. of Sundarapandya (v. 23, Ер. Ind., Vol. ш 
рр. 13, 16) under MANDAPA. 
AMALASILA— The crowning part of the (Hindu) &ikhara. 
(Fergussion, History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture, p. 323, note; п, p. 129.) 
AMALASARA (5% AMALAKA)— The flat scolloped cushion or cog- 
wheel member surmounting the Sikhara (dome or tower). 


(Cousens : Somanath and other Medieval 
Temples іп Kathiavad, рр. 41, 45, 17.) 


AMRITA-NANDANA—A pavilion with 58 pillars. 


N 


? 


(Matsya-Purüna, Chap. corxx, v. 8, see under MANDAPA.) 
АМВАКА— Тһе sky, one of the eight kinds of the lupa ог pent-roof. 
(M., хуш, 174-175, see under ANANTA.) 
Cf. Lupakaradi jadanarn manayen manavit-tamah | 252. 
Ambaradyashtadhamani nidanam lupamanayet 1—(4., хуш, 329-330.) 
43 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


AMBUJA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


AMBUJA—Lotus, the cyma (see АвТА and PADMA). 
Cf. Tad-dvayarh chambujarh chordhve kapotochcharh gunarhgaka | 


А (M., хш, 57.) 
(A)RANGA—A Synonym of harmya (building). 


Arangam iti chaitàni harmyam uktarh puratanaih I—(M., ш, 8.) 
ARATNI (see under ANGULA)—A measure, 


(1) A cubit of 24 angulas (Introduct., Rajavallabha Mandana and Brah- 
mandana-Purána, x, уп, 99. see under ANGULA) ` 

А measure equal to the length of the forearms with the fingers fully 
stretched (Suprabhedagama, ххх, 24, see under ANGuLA). 

(2) A measure equal to the first With fully stretched fingers (Suprabheda 
Sama, XXX, 24, see under ANGULA). 

According to this Agama 'ibid., v.25) and the Manaséra (п, 49) a 
measure of 24 angulas is called kishku (hasta). : 

‘This word (aratni), which primarily means © elbow," occurs fre- 
quently from the Rig-Veda onwards. (R.-V., уш, 80,8; 4.-V., xix, 57, 
6; Aitareya Bráhmana, VIII, 5; Satapatha-Brahmana, WLS 1) ED Gü) 
as denoting a measure of length (ell or cubit), the distance from the elbow 
to the tip of the hand. The exact length nowhere appears from the 
early texts.” (Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, т, 34.) 

Satapatha-Brahmana also VII, I, 2, 6. 

Kau$ika-Sütra, 85 (Pet. Dict.) : Bàhur và aratnih | 


ARKA-KANTA—A class of the eleven-storeyed buildings. 


Evar tu vajra-kantarn sydd arka-kantam ihocyhate | 
Tad eva $alà-prante tu pārśve chaikena saushtikam | 
Tad-dvayor antare deée tat-samath kshudra-harayoh ! 
Pürvavat kita-vistararh éesharh һагатї4а-рай]агатп | 
Tan-madhye tu tri-bhagena kshudra-éala-visalatah(tà) l 
Tat-pārśve tri-tri-bhàgena hāra-madhye sa-bhadrakam l 
Kshudra-sala-tri-bhagena madhya-bhadrarm samanvitam | 
Kshudra-hara cha sarvesharn nasika-pafijaranvitam | 
"Madhye madhye mahanasi пеіга-418 cha parsvayoh | 
Sarvalankara-samyuktarh shad-vidham (ekádasa-talarn) parikirtitam | . 

7 (M., xxix, 25-94.) 

ARGALA—A bolt or pin for fastening a door. 
Argalam dakshine bhage vama-bhage tu talpakam ıı 
Kavata-yugmarh kartavyam kokilargala-sarhyutam || 
(Kamikagama, ту, 49» 52.) 


44 


1 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ARDHA-MANDAPA 


А moulding of the base (see Kakshabandha, under ADHISHTHANA). 
Kampam ekarn tad-ürdhve cha ekenargalam eva cha | 


(M., xiv, 331, note.) 
ARDHA-CHITRA (see АвнАза)--Ап image made in half or middle 
relief. 
Ardhanga-drigyamanam cha tad ardha-chitram iti smritam | 
(M., LI, 10.) 
Chitrangam ardha-chitrangam abhasangarh tridhochyate | : 
(M., ur, 8.) 
Sthavararh jangarh vapi dāru-śailarn cha lohajam 1 
Chitrarh và chàrdha-chitram cha chitrabhasam athapi và | 
(М., тм, 14-15.) 
ARDHA-NARISVARA—A name of Siva, an image the right half of 
which is the representation of Siva and the left half of his consort 
Durga. Е 
Pa$chima-müla-tale madhye koshthe lingam adbhutam | 
Athavardha-narisvara(th) sthanakam 1—(М., xix, 224-225.) 
ARDHA-PRANA (see SANDHI-KARMAN)—A kind of joinery resem- 
bling the shape of the bisected heart. 
Sarveshàm арі dārūņārh sandheh prante tu yojayet 1 
Yatheshtarh phana(m)-samgrahyam chodayed vistarantakam | 
Milagre kilakarh yuktam ardha-pranam iti smritam | 
Tad eva dvi-lalate cha vistarardhardha-chandravat | 
Madhye cha danta-sarnyuktam agra-mile tu yojayet | 
Sesharh tu pürvavat kuryat mahàvritam iti smritam 1 
(M., хуп, 97-102.) 
ARDHA-MANDAPA—A half-pavilion, a vestibule, a court, a 
porch. 
(1) Idam ayadikarh chardha-mandape Sishta-mandape 11 
(Kamikagama, L, 68.) 
Ardha-mandapa-daksharhge vighne$a-nritta-rüpinam | 
(ibid., Lv, 73.) 
(2) * On the west wall of the ardha-mandapa in front of the rock-cut 


JambukeSvara shrine at Tiruvellarai?—(Inscription no. xm, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xxxiv, p. 268.) 


(3) The *court in a temple next to the sacred shrine. Winslow, 
Tamil Dictionary (loc. cit.). 


45 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ARDHA-SALA | АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA ор 


(4) * Ardha-mandapa : the enclosed building in front of a shrine.’ 
(Chalukyam Architecture, Rea, Arch, Surv., 

New. Imp. Series, Vol. XXI, р. 37.) 

The detached building, sometimes -open and sometimes enclosed, in 


front of a shrine, is generally called the mukhamandapa (the pavilion in 
front of the shrine). 

(5) The ardha-mandapa is ‘a narrow passage or vestibule connecting’ 
the garbha-griha and mukha-mandapa, and *is open on two Sides to 
permit the priestly worshipper circumambulating the central shrine.’ 


(H. Krishna Sastri, South Indian Images of Gods 
and Goddesses, p. 2. For this reference І 
am indebted to Prof. R. W. Frazer.) 


ARDHA-SALA—A half-hall, an antechamber with one or more 
closed sides. 
Ardha-$alà visesho'sti chordhva-salà-éamanvitam | 
Madhya-koshtharn dvi-parsve tu chardha-sala-samanvitam | 
(M., xx, 67, 73.) 
Netra-$alàrdha-éalà cha bhadra-$alàdi-bhüshitam I—(A., xxvi, 67.) 
Bhadra-sal4 maha-nasi chardha-saladhyalankritam 1—(М., xxv, 94.) 
ARDHA-HARA—A half chain of 64 strings, an ornament, a string 
of pearls worn round the neck. . š 
Nakshatra-malàm арі chardha-haram | 
Suvarna-sütrarn paritah stanabhyam 1-(М., 1, 297-298.) 
Cf. Brihat-Samhita, LXXXII, 32. 
ALAKSHA—A member of the entablature, some screen-work with 
small (invisible) apertures. 
Etat tu sarvato-bhadram alakshakritir ihochyate | 
Tad eva karnavagad varhéarn prastiryat tu sarvagah 1 
Uttaraih prag-uktanghrih syat tad-vagat parito nyaset | 
Tad evantam alakshath cha karnayo$ chottaram vina I 
(M., xvr, 185-188.) 
ALANKARA-MANDAPA The dressing room, an attached hall ` 
or detached pavilion of a temple where the idols are dressed. 
(H. S. I. I., Vol. I, р. 127, first para., see under MANDAPA.) 
ALINDA(KA)—A corridor, a terrace, a balcony, a gallery. 
(т) * Alinda-Sabdena &ala-bhitter bahye yà gamanika jalakavritangana- 
sammukha kriyante’ (commentary on Brihat-Samhita or Kirana-tantra, see 


Be 46 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ELEVATION 


GARBHA-GEHA, 


x 


< 
© a 
< < 
о а 
= 2 
< < 
z = 
< < 
P ЗЕ 
x a 
E с 
5 < 


PLAN. 


ARDHA-MANDAPA. 


AMSUKA. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ALINDA(KA) 


below). By the word *alinda' is understood the lattice-covered path 
beyond the wall of a hall and facing (or in front of) the courbyard. 
Gf. Amarakosha (2, 2, 12). 
(2) Senapati-nripatinam saptati-sahite dvidha-krite vyase | 
Salà-chatur-daáa-hrite pañcha-trirnšad-vrite '(a)lindah 11 
* Add the number of 70 to those for the breadth of the mansions of the 
King and the Commander-in-Chief.’ 
Тһе same is more plainly expressed in Visvak : 
* Write down the sum at two places. Divide it, in one place, by 


I4; this gives the measure for a hall. Divide the sum by 35; the 
quotation is the measure of the terrace.’ 


Pramitarh tveka-salarh tu $ubhadarh tat prakirtitam | 
Senapati-nripadinarh saptatya sahite krite 11 
Vyase chaturda$a-hrite §ala-manarh vinirdišet | 
Paficha-triméad-hrite’nyatralinda-manam bhavech cha tat I! 
* The word might as well be rendered by balcony, gallery.’ 
(Kern, Brihat-Samhita, vu, 17; J-R.A.S., 
N. S., Vol. vr, p. 282, note 3.) 
Apratishiddhalindarn samantato vastu sarvato-bhadrar 1 


“Ап edifice with uninterrupted terraces on every side is termed 


Sarvato-bhadra.’ 
Nandyavartam alindaih $ala-kudyat pradakshinantargataih | 

* Nandyàvarta is the name of a building with terraces that form the 
wall of the room extending to the extremity in a direction from east to 
south (alias from left to right).’ 

“Тһе Vardhamana has a terrace before the (chief) entrance, ex- 
tending to the end ; then, when you proceed in a direction from left 
to right, another beautiful terrace, and there on, again, another in the 
aforesaid direction.’ 

‘ The Svastika (house) is auspicious, if it has the terrace on the east 
side, and one continual terrace along the west side, at the ends whereof 
begin two other terraces going from west to east, while between the 
extremities of the latter lies a fourth terrace.’ : 

‘ The Ruchaka (house) has a western and eastern terrace running 

. to the end, and between their extremities two others.’—(Jbid., vv. 31-35, 
рр. 285-286.) 
(3) Agnt-Purdna, Chap. сут, уу. 20-24: 
Chatuh-éalar tri-Salarh và dvi-salam chaika-salakam | 
Chatuh-sala-grihànam tu salalindaka-bhedatah и 


47 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by $3 Founda 


ALPA Ў AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Sata-dvayam tu jayante pafichagat-paficha teshvapi | 
Tri-salani tu chatvari dvi-salani tu pafichadhà и 
Eka-salani chatvàri ekalindani vachmi cha 1 
Ashtà-vim£ad-alindàni grihani nagaràni cha || 
Chaturbhih saptabhi§ chaiva paficha-pafichásad eva tu | 
Shad-alindàni virhgaiva ashtabhir virnša eva hi || 
Ashtalindarh bhaved evarn nagaradau grihàni hi | 
(4) Kamikagama, xxxv : | 
Asam (=śālānām) agre tu alinda(h) syuh pradhane và vi$eshatah | 
Eka-dvi-tri-chatush-paficha-shat-saptalinda-sarhyutah !! (37) j 
Prishthe pārśve tathaiva syuh ishta-dese'thavà punah | 
Prithu-dvarag cha ауага cha суат eva prakalpayet 11 (48) 
Alindah prithu-dvàrena samo và chardha-manatah ll (44) 
Alinde dvàram еуата syad anyatrapy-evam eva tu || (49) 
Alindasya samantat tu bhagenaikena-varakam II (77) 
See also ibid., L, 74, 75» 87. 
Ibid., ту, 201 (the synonyms of alinda). 
. andhàram griham adyakam | 
Parimandana(m) salinda va alindasyabhidanakam 11 
(5) Chàntarale tvalindake 1—(М., LXIX, 8.) 
Urdhvordhva-talanam tu chaika-bhagendlindakam | 
(M., xxiv, 45, etc.) 
(6) See the views of the corridors (Pallaba Architecture, Arch, Surv., 
Mew. Imp. Series, Vol. XXXIV, plates ут, vir, үш, IX.) 
ALPAC-—A class of buildings. —(x amikagama, XLV, 53-54, see under MALIKA.) 
ALPA-NASIKA (see NAsA)—A small nose, a small vestibule. 
Chatur-dikshu chatur-dvàram chatuh-shashty-alpa-nasikam | 
j (M., xxxiv, I06.) 
AVACHCHHAYA—A dim light, shadowless spot, a light shadow. 
Kanya-vrishabha-màsau cha-avachchhaya па vidyate 1 
Meshe cha mithune chaiva tula-simha-chatushtaye | 
Evam hi dvyangulam nyastarn vri$chikashadha-minayoh l 
Chatur-angulam prakartavyarn dhanuh-kumbhau shad angulam | 
Makare'shtangulam proktam apachchhayarh viseshatah | 


m. i (М., V, 31-35.) 
Cf. Vitruvius, Book 1x, Chap. үш, under Sanxu. 


AVALAMBANA—A pendant. 
Bahu-valaya-dama cha skandha-màlavalambanam 1—(М., L, 15.) 
AVASATHA (see PRATISRAYA) the rest-house, a house. 
Ramyamavasatham chaiva datvamum lokamašritah | ` 


* Having given away a charming house, he attained the other 
world.’—(Hemadri, p. 646.) 


48 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


———— нан R 7 x я чр. : 2 —- шге 


NASIKA. 


PLAN. 
м 


АГРА 


) 


) 
ALINGA. 


) 
ABHANGA 


( & 


( 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ALINDAKA. 


ж 


Page +5 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ASHTA-TALA 


Ramyamé chavasathan datva dvijebhyo divam àgatah 1 
* Having given away charming houses to the twice-born and gone 
to heaven. (Mbh. AnuSdasanika-parvan, Chap. схххуп, v. 10). 
(Jnd. Ant., Vol. хп, p. 142, с. 1-2.) 
AVASANA (see MANCHA)—A synonym of the тайсһа or a raised 
platform.—(M. хм, 43.) 


ASVATTHA-VRIKSHA—The holy fig-tree, carved along with 
Buddha images. 
Referring to the Bauddha images : 
Sthàánákam chasanarn vapi simhàsanadi-samyutam | 
Aévattha-vriksha-samyuktam kalpa-vriksham tatha nyaset 1 
А (М., LVI, 3-4-) 
ASHTA-TALA —The eighth storey. 
(Manasára, xxvi, 1-76, see under PRASADA.) 
A^ description of the seventh floor including the proportion and orna- 
ments of the component parts (lit. limbs) from the plinth to the tower : 


Evan éreshtham tvashta-tale sarvalankara-samyutam 1 
Janmadi-stüpi-paryantam changa-manam ihochyate 1 
Saikashta-pafichakamáéa-harmye tuñgarn vibhajite 1 

Adhàram chashta-bhagena vedamšarn charanayatam | - 
Tad-ardharn valabhyutsedham sardharn vahnyamgam anghrikam | 
Sa-tri-padaméakarh maficham ürdhve padam gunamáakam і 
Tad-ardharh chordhva-maficharn syat tri-padakshanghri-tungakam! 
Sa-padarnšarn prastarottungam dvyardhamáéam charanayatam | 
Tad-ardham prastarotsedham janghayamar cha sardhakam | 
Prastaram chaika-bhagena dvyarnfa-padadhikanghrikam | 
Urdhva-maficharm tri-padam syat sa-bhagam pada-tungakam | 
Ekarnšarn prastarotsedham tad-ürdhve cha tri-bhagikam | 
Tat-tri-bhagaika(a) vedim(h) syad dvi-bhagam gala-tungakam 1 
Sa-pàdam charnšakarn chordhve Sirah-Sesharh Sikhodayam | 
Kechit tad eva tunge tu sapta-bhagadhikam tatha | 
Urdhvordhva-pàda-müle tu yuktyam$ena masürakam | 
Talanam chaika-bhagena karna-harmyavritam nyaset | 
Antara(m) prastaropetam sarvalankara-samyutam | 
Tasyantasyaika-bhagena kuryad avartyalindakam | 

Mile bhàge padarnšena chordhve'rdha-talaméakam 1 
Netra-salardha-sala cha bhadra-$aladi-bhüshitam 1 

Toranair nida-$aladi nasikabhir alankritam | 

Kosht(h)c §4ladi-madhye cha chordhva-sala cha manditam l 
Nasika-pafijara-sala küta-kosthe tu bhüshitam 1 
Nasika-pafijaradyasya bhadra-éalyair alankritam | 
Kshudra-$alà-prade$e tu sarvalankara-samyutam | 


49 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collec 


cond pocta MS 


ASHTA ТАҺА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Karna-kitanga-madhye tu nasika-pafijaranvitam 1 
Sarvangam kshudra-nasyangarn prastarálankriti-kriyà | 
Nanadhishthana- sarhyuktarh nana-padair alankritam | 


Sarvalankara-sarhyuktarh purvavat parikalpayet | 
(M., xxv1, 47-76.) 
ASHTA-TALA (see under TALa-mAna)—A kind of sculptural mea- 


surement in which the whole height of an idol is generally eight 
times the face. 


ASHTA-TRIMSAT-KALA—Thirty-eight kinds of mystic marks 
on the body of an image. 

Padadi-mirdha-paryanta(m) paryayadi-chakshararh nyaset 1 

Ashta-triméat-kalàh sarvàs tat-tad angàni vinyaset 1 

(M., LXX, 90-091. 

ASHTA-VARGA—The eight component parts of a single-storeyed 
building, namely, adhishthàna (basement), anghri (dwarf pillar), 
prastara (entablature), grīva (a platform or neck), sikhara (tower) 
stüpi (dome), griva-maficha (a projecting seat at the neck) and 
vedika (a raised platform).—(M., xix, 80-85.) 
ASHTAS(S)RA—Eight-cornered, a kind of single-storeyed building 
which is octangular in plan and has one cupola. 

(т) Brihat-Samhita, тлі, 28, Ka$yapa, 7.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. хі, p. 320, 
note 1 (see under PRASADA). 

(2) Matsya-Purána, Chap. ccrxix, vv. 29, 53 (see under PRASADA). 

(3) Bhavishya-Purdna, Chap. Cxxx, у. 25 (see under PRAsADA). 
ASAMCHITA—A class of buildings in which the height is tbe 
standard of measurement, the temples in which the main idol is in 
the erect posture.—(M., xix, 7-11 ; xxx, 173-174, see under APASAMCHITA.) 

Pratyekarn tri-vidharh proktarn sarnchitarn chapyasarhchitam upasam- 

chitam ityevam 1— (Kamikagama, xuv, 6-7.) 

AMSA (see SHapvarca). А part, one of the six varga formulas 

for ascertaining the right proportion. — 

AMSARU—The rim, the edge. 

Cf. pum suvrittam syad arn$aru kichid unnatam 1 
(M., L, 117.) 

AMSUKA—A moulding of the БС! generally placed between a 
сута and a corona (kapota).—(M., xv, 122, see under UrAPiTHA.) 


50 


4 
i 
) 

} 


ا 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE AGARA 


А 


ACHARYA-KULA—Residences of professors, sufficiently comfort- 
able even for princes and ordinary male and female pupils to be in 
residence for instruction, teachers” family establishment with pupils ° 
quarters in separate blocks. These might have supplied the general 
plan of the later monastic establishments of Buddhists, Jains, Brah- 
mans, comprising a quadrangular structure with cells on all sides 
and the shrine and abbot's cell in the centre or the east. ‘ These 
may be looked upon as the beginnings out of which the pre-Buddhistic 
and Buddhistic centres of learning like in Nalanda of the residential 
university type were evolved.’—(Sarkar, Social History of India, 
р. 13.) 
АСАМА--Тһе scriptures, different from the Agama treatises of 
Southern India some of which are predominently architectural texts. 
Cf. M., XLIX, 176. 
AGARA—A house, a room, a cell. 
For synonyms, see Amarakosha (П, 2, 5). 
Cf. (1) Ramayana (Cock) : 
V. 3, 18: Koshthagaravatamsikam . . . nagarim | 
П. 3, 44: Koshthagara-yudhagaraih kritva samnichayan bahün 1 
VI. 127, 56: Aneka-é$atarn bhavàn ko$am koshthagaram griham 
balam 1 
(2) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
XII. 69, 54: Bhadagara-yudhagaran yodhagarams cha загуабаһ | 
A$vagaran gajagaran baladhikaranani cha | 
XII. 86, 121 : Bhandagaàra-yudhagaran prayatnenabhivardhayet | 
I. 134, 11: Prekshagararn suvihitam chakrus te tasya Silpinah | 
 Rajüiah sarvayudhopetam strinam сһаіуа narar- 
shabha I 
I. 134, 14 : Mukta-jala-parikshiptarn vaidurya-mani-Sobhitam 1 
Sata-kumbhamayam divyam prekshagaram upaga- 
tam 1! 
IV. 23, 16: Yad etan nartanagaram matsya-rajena karitam 1 
Divya-atra kanya nrityanti ratrau yanti yathagri- 
ham I! 
(3) /Мапазата (xxv, 29, etc.) : 
Tale tale bhadra-koshthasramagaram parikirtitam | 


51 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


“a 


— 


ACHCHHADANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(4) Dharmma-sastra-prachoditam уові-(а)рагап ^ idam  proktam 

suribhih pariveshtitam 1 š 
“Арага, abode, room, covered place, cell.’ Fleet.—(Skt. and Old 
Canarese Inscriptions, no. cxxx, line 3, Ind. Ant., Vol. хш, p. 222, note 44.) 
(5) Vikhyata $àntalakhya sa Лпасагат akarayat—‘ The celebrated 


lady had this Jina temple made'.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. u, no. 62, Roman - 


Text, p. 59, last line, Translation, p. 148, last line.) 


ACHCHHADANA—A roof, the eighth covering moulding from 
the top of the entablature. 
(Kamikagama, тлу, 2, see under PRAsADA.) 


ADIKA—Literally first or principal, ? a fast conveyance. 
Adikarh syandanam 4ilpi(n) sibika cha ratharh tatha 1 
Sarvair yanam iti khyatam $ayanam vakshyate tathà 1 
(M., ur, 9-10.) 


A(R)DRA-PUSHAKRITI (see under LiNGA)—A kind of phallus 
looking like the rising sun. 
Lingakaram ihochyate . . . 
Daivikam dindimakararn mànush(am)a(r)dra-püshàkriti(h) | 
(M., тл, 237, 240.) 
ADHARA—The basement, the plinth. 
Dvitalanam alankaram vakshye sarnkshipyate’dhuna 1 
Upanadi-stüpi-paryantam ashtaviméad vibhàjite 1 
Adhàrochcham gunarnšarh syat pada-tungarh shad-arngakam | 
(М., хх, 1, 3-4.) 
Janmaádi-stüpi paryantam chànga-mànam ihochyate | 
Saikashta-pafichakarná$am harmye tuhgam vibhajite 1 
Adhàram chashta-bhagena vedarnšarn charanayatam | 
ЕЕ (М., хут, 48-50.) 
Uttaram vajanadharam adheyam $ayanarn tatha 1 
Uddhritar cha mürdhakam chaiva maha-tauli svavamáakam | 
Prachchhadanasy(am) adharam etat paryàyam iritam | 
(M., хут, 56-58.) 
Parimána-virodhena rekha-vaishamya-bhishita 1 
Adhàras tu chatur-dvàras chatur-mandapa-$obhitah 11 
Sata-$ringa-samayukto Meruh prasada-uttamah | 
Mandapas tasya karttavya bhadrais tribhir alankrita(h) 11 
Ghatanakara-mananam bhinna bhinna bhavanti te (prasadah) 1 
Kiyanto yeshu chadhara niradharag cha kechana 11 
> (Garuda-Puràna, Chap. хуп, vv. 38-40.) 
Valabhi chhadiradharah 1 
- (Hemachandra, Abhidhdna-chintamani, 1011, Pet. Dict.) 


7 52 


a 
a 
j 
| 
4 
tst 
i 
i 
3 
} 
і 
i 


SREY A aras] СЕЕ 


p—Ü 


cnet 


—— 
کاک کے ی 


ET 


Se 


FE MES ES CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VIOGNY 


SSS — OS 


(REG LEER CONC 4. A = 
( aS 1 / 
77759. W 

7 /); 


2X =€ 2 рде) >> ? = 


SS WEGENER 
WAN ES SSS RES NS 
SSS SS 
SN ` N N 
S ` NNN 
S S SS N NSSS ` N 
N RRR S 
N N 


WN 


~ 

SN, N 
ММҸ 
ҚАЗЫ 


SN 
NN ON 


il 


Li» 
m 


SN 


jo 
fm 


| 


C 
TS 


NS 


OM 
| 


z 


MG 
n 


N N 
059) 


es a 
A a> 


VIS 
€ 
(5,25 


"n 
m 


N 
ANNANN 


WN 


NS 
ANN 


NN 


1 


ГГ Z 


ПІШІН) 


a Sie 
[eI sess 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= ELM ТЕТ 
CMS SI АСА 
ot „мы pd en ¿ МЛ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE APANA 


ADHI—Foundations.—(An inscription from Dabhoi, v. ш, Ер. Indic, ` 
Vol. r, p. 31, see footnote, p. 24.) 


. ANDOLA—A swing, a hammock. 
Tad-ürdhve pattikam nyasya kilagre cha Гаралар a ! 
Chaturbhih srinkhala-yuktam andolam chaikatopari 1 
Deva-bhü-sura-bhüpànàm anyesham éayanarthakam | 
i (M., хілу, 69-71.) 
ANDHARA (-RIKÀ)—A closed verandah, a balcony, a blind 
screen. E a 
Kamikagama, v : ; а 
Pañjaro(raś) chardha-bhago va tri-pado vatha bhagikah | | 
Alindandharikandhara-hara bhagena kalpitah 11 (74) 
Nava-bhaga-tri-bhago và vyasa-nali-grihanvitah | 
Bahir àndhZrikàndhàra-hàra bhagena vistritah 11 (76) 
Pa&üchalindam shat-kudyam bahir àndhaàrikavritam 11 (83) 
Andharandhari-harokta-khanda-harmya-viseshitam (vimanam) 11 (91) 
< Andharika ' and * andhara ° are used as the synonyms of © griha-pindi ' 
- and ‘alinda’ respectively (see Kamikagama, Lv, 201, under ALINDA). 
APANA—A shop, a market-place. 
(т) Ramayana (Cock) : 
II. 6,12: Nànà-panya-samriddheshu vanijam apaneshu | 4 
IL 14,27: Samriddha-vipanapanam . . . (purim) I 
II. 114, 13 : Sarkshipta-vipanapanàm (Ayodhyam) l 
VII. 43,13: Chatvārāpaņa-rathyāsu 1 | 
II. 71,41: Malyapaneshu rajante nadya panyani уа tatha | А 
II. 42,23: Samvritapana-vedikàm . . . (purim) 1 АУ мс 
П. 41,21: Sarhvritapana-vithika 1 ; k 
I. 5, 10: Su-vibhaktantarapanam . . . (purim) 1 
П. 57,15: Anvantarapanam 1 г 
VI. 112,42: (Ayodhyàm) sikta-rathantarapanam | 
VII. ror, 13: Ubhe (Takshagila and Pushkalavati) . . . suvibhaktan- | 
tarapane | P: 


(2) ауа, I, 201, etc. : Riddhapanam . . . nagaram і 
(3) Mahabharata (ibid.) : š 35% 
XII. 86,8: Chatvarapana-$obhitam (puram) | | жо ы 
XIII. 30, 17 : (Varanasim) . . . samriddha-vipanapanam | 
IL. 21, 25 : Malyapananam cha dadrisuh $riyam utt 


. APANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


IX. 25, 33: Vipanyapana-panyanam | i 
Comm. Nilkantha: Vipanaih panya-vithika | 
Арапа hattah panyani vikreya-dravyani 1 
(4) Vapi-kiipa-tadaga-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayan 1 
Sauvarna-dhvaja-toranapana-pura-grama-prapa-mandapan 1 
. . . vyadhapayad ayam Chaulukya-chidamanih | 
(Sridhara’s Deva pattana Pragasti, v. ro, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. п, pp. 440-441.) 


APANA—A tavern, a liquor-shop, a watering station, huts on road- 
sides where drinking water is distributed gratis. 

Devànam-piye Piyadasi Јаја hevarh aha (:) magesu-pi me nigohàni 
lopapitani (:) chhayopagani hosamti pasumunisanarh ; ambavadikya 
lopapita (;) adhak(o)s(i)kyani рі me uda-pànàni (2) khanapitani (;) 
nimsidhiya cha kalapita (;) apanan ime bahukani tata tata kalapitani 
patibhogyaye pasu-munisanam (.) 

“Арапа cannot have here its usual meaning, namely, tavern, liquor 
shop.’ 

* As professor Kern (Der Buddhismus, Vol. u, p. 385) assumes, it must 
denote a watering station. Probably the huts on the roads are meant, 
where water is distributed to travellers and their beasts gratis or against 
payment. Тһе usual Sanskrit name is prapà. Dr. Bühler. 


n 
x 


(Pillar edict of Asoka, no. vu, lines 2-3, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. u, pp. 270, 274.) 
ABHANGA (see under ATIBHANGA and BHANGA)—A pose in which 
the idol is slightly bent. 
Sarveshàm deva-devinam bhanga-manam ihochyate 1 
Abhanga-sama-bhangam chaati-bhangam tridha bhavet 1 
(M., LXVI, 95-96.) f 
ABHASA.—A class of buildings, pavilions, doors, etc. One of the = 
nine materials of which idols are made, sand glass, lacquer (M., 
LXI, 15-16), a marble, bas-relief ( M., LI, 11), painting (2bid., 12, LVI, 
14-16). 
A class of buildings : 
(т) Etaj jati-vasat proktarh chhandadinam santikotsedham | 
Nava-tale tri-paficha-vidham vai vipulam kanyasadi-Sreshtham 


pravakshyate | | 
Kramatas tri-padam ardha-karam padam cha idam samkalpam ШЕ. 
abhasam idam 1—(М., Ix. 103-104.) 


54 


i 
| П 


j СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ABHASA 


Eka-bhümi-vidhir vakshye lakshanam vakshyate’dhuna 1 
Jati$ chhandarm vikalpam tu chabhasarn tu chatur-vidham | 
Pürva-hastena sarn-yuktarn harmyarn jatir iti smritam | 
Chhandam tri-pada-hastena vikalpam syat tad-ardhakam | 
Abhàásam chardha-hastena harmyadinarn tu manayet 1 
(М., хіх, 1-5.) 
Eka-tri-pàdam ardharm cha pada-hastarh yatha-kramam | 
Jàti$ chhanda(m) vikalparn cha-àbhasam chatur-vidham | 
Etat tad eva samyuktam harmyanam mana-kalpanam | 
(M., xxx, 175-177.) 
Pavilions of some particular shape : 
Devanàm bhu-suranarmn cha mandaparn jati-ripakam | 
Bhüpànam mandape sarve chhanda-rüpam itiritam | 
Vaisyakanam tu sarvesharn vikalparn cheti kathyate | 
Sudranath mandapam sarvarh chabhàsam iti kirtitam | 
(M., XXXIV, 54725505) 
In connexion with doors : 
Sapta-virnfodayarm hy-evarn tad-ardharn vistritarh bhavet | 
Evar jati-vasat proktarn chhandadinam pravakshyate 1 
Trayovim§a-Satantarh syach chhanda-dvara-vigalakam | 
Paficha-virnsangulam arabhya dvi-dvyangula-vivardhanat 1 
Eka-virnáangulam àrabhya dvi-dvyangula-vivardhanat 1 
Eka-virnSa(m)-Satantarh syad vikalpa-dvara-vistritam | 
Nava-panktyangulam arabhya dvi-dvyangula-vivardhanat | 
Eka-panktyanguladhikyam $atantam abhàsa-vistritam 1 
(M., xxxix, 28-35.) 
In connexion with the phallus : 
Játich-chhanda-vikalparn cha-abhasarh tu chatur-vidham 1 
(M., тп, 49.) 
А kind of glass of which idols and statues are made : 


Brahma-vishnu-mahešanarn lakshanam vakshyate'dhuna 1 
Hiranya-rajatenaiva tamrenaiva Sile vapi | 
Darve уа sudhe vapi Sarkarabhasa-mrittika(-bhih) 1 
Etais tu navadha dravyai($) chottamadi trayarn trayam 1 
Chalarn chapy-achalam chapi nava-dravyais tu nirmitah | 
c Lohajair mrit-sudha chaiva $arkarabhasa-mrittika 1 
i Chala-dravyam iti proktam anyesham chachalarn viduh | 
/ | (M., LI, 1-7.) 


55 


‚ CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


Dy 


ABHASA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Three kinds : pP 
Chitrangam ardha-chitrangam abhasangar tridhochyate 1 
Sarvaügar drifya-manam yat chitram evar prakathyate 1. 
Ardhànüga-dri$yamanar cha tad ardha-chitram iti smritam | 
Ardhardha-darsanam (dri$ya)-manam ābhāsam iti kathyate | 

; (М., r1, 8-11.) 
Uttamam lohajam bimbarn pithabhasam tu chottamam | 


(ibid., 19.) 
Cf. Eka-kale kritam sarvam sudha-mrit-kata-Sarkaraih | 
(ibid., 24-25.) r 
Beranam dravyam ityuktam . . . lohaje vā Sile’thava | 
Darvabhasa-ratnena sudhà-mrit-kata-$arkara(aih) 1 
Ghanam vàpy-aghanam vapi kuryat tu Silpi(a)vit-tamah 1 
(M., LXI, 15-17.) 
(2) Silodbhavanam v(b)imbanam chitrābhāsasya và punah | 
Jaladhivasanam proktarn vrishendrasya prakirtitam 11 
(Linga-Purana, Part II, uttara-bhaga, 
Chap. хгуш, v. 43.) 
(3) Pratima saptadha proktà bhaktanarn $uddha-vriddhaye 1 


Kafichani rajati tàmri parthivi $ailaja smrita 11 
Varkshi chalekhyakà veti mürti-sthanàni sapta vai 1 
* Alekhyaka? and ‘abhasa’ seem to have the same meaning and 
indicate the same material.—(BAavishya-Purána, Chap. CXXXI, vv. 2, 3.) 
(4) Indhanàni cha vinyasya palalani cha vinyaset | 
Tasmin loshtani vinyasya palàlai$ chhadayet punah n 
Palalabhasakaih pa$chad brihyàbhàsais tushais tatha 1 
| ў Achchhadyadbhir atha ѕійсһесһ chhakharh prajjvalayet punah ıı 
(Vastu-uidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, xvi, 32-33.) 
(5) Another class of buildings : > 
(Jati) Chhandarh Vikalpam Abhasam ekaike tu dvisarnkhyakam i 
(K'amikagama, 1., 13.) 


| 
| 
| 


A class of küta-koshtha or top-room, being a combination of the chhanda 
and vikalpa classes (Kamikdgama, Lv, 130, 123-127, see under КАВМА- 
KÜTA). М 
(6) Suprabhedagama, хххіу, 3-4 (refers to the image of Išvara) : | 
Chitrarn chitrardham evarn tu chitrabhasarn tathaiva chal 


Sarvavayava-sarnpürnarn dri$yam tach chitram uchyate II v -S 
Ardhàvayava-samdri$yam ardha-chitram chaiva cha | і ^ 
Pate bhittau cha yo(ya) likhyam chitrabhasam ihochyate 11 \ 


j 
! 
6 ( 
| \ 
\ 
; ! 
H ó \ 
CÇç-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA i 


سے 


Б. ` Qampa, 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE АВНА5А 


Exactly similar definitions are given in the Мапазаға, but therein 
ç abhàsa refers to a material of which an idol is made, whereas in this 
Agama, * abhasa ° refers to the image itself made in full, middle or quar- 
ter relief, and to the paintings made on cloth and walls. 


Materials of which images are made : 


Mrinmayam yadi kuryàch chech chhülana(m) tatra prakalpayet i 
Lohajarh cha vi$eshena madhüchchhishtena nirmitam 1--(1014.; 31.) 


(7) Lohajatve madhüchchhishtam agninardrikritas tu yat | 


Vastrena $odhayet sarvam dosharh tyaktva tu Silpina ti 


(Karandgama, xt, 41.) 


(8) Mürtis tu vriksha-pashana-loha-dravyaih prakarayet | 


The image should be made of materials like timber, stone, and iron. 


(Silpa-fastra-sara-samgraha, хі, 5.) 


(о) Sauvarni rajati vapi tàmri ratnamayi {аза | 


бай dàrumayi chapi loha-sisa-mayi tatha 11 
Ritika-dhàtu-yuktà và tamra-karhsa-mayi tatha | 
Sudhà-dàru-mayi vapi devatarcha praSasyate 11 

(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLVIH, vv. 20-21.) 


(то) Mrinmayi dàru-ghatità lohaja ratnaja tatha и 


(11) 


(12) 


Sailajà gandhajà chaiva kaumudi saptadha smrita | 
Karhsamayi gandhaja chaiva mrinmayi pratima tatha 11 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. хі, vv. 9-10.) 

Mrinmaye prativ(b)imbe tu vaset kalpa-yutarh divi 1 
Daru-pashana-dhatiinam kramad da$a-gunadhikam 11 
Mrinmaye vahane datte yat phalam jayate bhuvi i 
Daruje tad-daga-gunarh Silaje tad-dasadhikam 11 
Ritika-karhsa-tamradi-nirmite deva-vahane | 
Datte phalam àpnoti kramat $ata-gunadhikam 11 

(Mahaànirvàna- Tantra, хп, 22, 30, 91.) 


Svarnadi-lauha-bimbe cha deha-garbham na karayet || (4) 
Kashtha-pàáshàna-bimbe cha yat sandhau vidhir uchyate t! (6) 
Yat bimbe cha krite dravyarn svarnam tamram tu mrinmaye | 
Saile kashthe ishtika-chirnarhn bimbarn tatra prachakshate u (3) 
(Bimbamana, British Museum, MS. r, 558, 
5292, VV. 4, 6 ; MS. 2, 5291, 559, v. 3.) 


(13) * Here they produced a lihga, of seven metals, viz. gold, silver, 
tin, lead, copper, iron and bell-metal.'—(Sahyadri-khanda of the Skanda- 
Purána, Ind. Ant., Vol. ur, p. 194, c. r, last para.) 


57 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AMALAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
Gf. ‘ Again, when the people make images and chaityas which consist 6 


of gold, silver, copper, iron, earth, lacquer, bricks, and stone, or (? and) 
when they heap up the snowy sand (lit. sand-snow, ? аЬһаза), they put 
in images or chaityas two kinds of Sariras (relics) —(1) the relics of the great 
Teacher, and (2) the gatha of the chain of causation’.—(Itsing’s work, 
Record of the Buddhist Religion, Transl., Takakusu, p. 150, quoted by V. A. 
Smith, Jnd. Ant., Vol. хххіп, р. 175.) 


AMALAKA (cf. AMALASITA and AMALASARA)—A massive circular 
stone supporting a vase known as kalasa. It figures as the crowning 
member of šikhara (tower), as the crown of the simulated roofs, 
and as the cushion-shaped portion of the capital of massive columns 
(of Agoka and at Elephanta). Іп $ikhara it has a structural purpose 
to serve, while in other places itis a mere ornament. It has 
been frequently referred to by Fergusson, Burgess, Hanell, Coomara- 
swamy and their followers, but rarely occurs in the Silpa-sastras 
or other Sanskrit texts. The following line has been quoted by some 
writer from some text of the Mayamata Silpa-Sastra : 


Tathamalaka-pakvabham dirgha-vrittarh cha golakam 11 

It is held that the term as referring to the crown of a temple ‘ must 
have arisen from a wrong rendering of the Chinese symbols O-mo-lo-kia- 
ko, describing the great vihara at Buddha Gaya as Amalaka.’ 

Free conjectures have thus been made by modern writers on its origin 
from the dmalaka, fruit or tree, or from lotus. A writer has referred to the 
matter in the Calcutta Oriental Journal (1934, Vol. r, pp. 189-195) and 
accepts the lotus-theory because of its popularity as a Buddhist and Hindu 
symbol, and also because it fits in well asa part of the sikhara. 


AMALAKA-VANTIKA-PITHA-— Chairs with many legs. 
(Mahavagga, vv. 10, 2.) E 


AYA (see under SHApvARGA)— One of the six varga formulas for 
ascertaining the right proportion of measurement. 


AYAKA-SKAMBHA (see under STAMBHA)—A sort of pillar built 
upon the rectangular projection from the dome and drum-like 
parts of the Mahachaityas (of Amaravati and Nagarjunakonda). 
Their identification has been rendered certain by the inscriptions 


they contain; therein these pillars are designated as ‘Ayaka- -.. - 
khambha. According to Vogel (Ер. Ind., xx, p. 2) it ‘had no ! Em 
structural function but utilized for sculpturing in low relief, | 

r . M 


\ 
| 
| 
( 
) 
y 

CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA l 
d > 1 


cr авла E =. sa 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE АҮАТАМА 


Buddhist emblems and dedicatory inscriptions.’ "Vaddari Apparao 
thinks that it means * a pillar erected near the gate.’—(Indian Culture, 
October, 1936, pp. 389-390.) 
AYATANA-—An enclosure, earlier an abode, a house, later an 
enclosed settlement, temples and monasteries, an assembly hall. 
(R.-V.1v, 4,35 37,13 V- 3,63 УІ, 21, 45 
vu, 56, 22; 61,3; X, 91,2.) 
A dwelling, a temple where an idol is installed : 
(1) Pürvena phalino vrikshah kshtra-vrikshas tu dakshine | 
Paáchimena jalarn $reshtharn padmotpala-vibhüshitam 11 
Uttare saralais tàlaih Subha syat pushpa-vatika 11 
Sarvatas tu jalarn $reshtharn sthiram asthiram eva cha | 
Yàmye tapovana-sthànam uttare matrika-griham | 
Маһапазага tathagneye nairritye' tha vinayakam 11 
Varune $rinivàsas tu vàyavye griha-malika | 
Uttare yajíia-$alà tu nirmalya-sthànam uttare II 
Vàrune soma-daivatye bali-nirvapanam smritam | 
Purato vrishabha-sthanam $eshe syat kusumayudhah 11 
Jale vapi tathais$ane Vishnus tu |а1а-баууарі | 
Evam ayatanam kuryàt kunda-mandapa-samyutam 11 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ссіхх, vv. 28-34.) 
(2) Pafichayatana-madhye tu Vàasudevarn nive$sayet | 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. хш, v. r.) 
(3) Devatayatana-vapi-kipa-tadagadi-nirmanam | 
(Narada-Purdna, Part I, Purva-bhaga, 
Chap. хш, Colophon.) 
(4) Chatuh-shashti-padarh kuryat devayatanarh ада! 
(Bhavishya-Puradna, Chap. axxx, v. 17; 
Brihat-Samhitad, LVI, 10.) 
Pura-madhyam samáàéritya kuryad ayatanam raveh 11 
(Bhavishya-Puràna, Chap. axxx, v. 40 ; see also v. 41.) 
(5) Ramayana (Cock) : 
І. 5, 12: purim . . . devàyatanai$ chaiva vimanair api 
Sobhitam | 
I. 13, 37 : yajfiayatana | 
I. 77, 13 : devatayatanani | 
- II. 6, 4: $rimatyayatane vishnoh | 


59 


peg NOT 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AYADI-KARMAN AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


II. 6, 11: sitabhra-Sikharabheshu devatayataneshu | 

П. 3, 18: devayatana-chaityeshu 1 

II. 25, 4: chaityeshv-ayataneshu cha | 

II. 52, 00: tirthàny-ayatanani cha 1 

П. 56, 33: chaityanyayatanani cha | 

II. 71, 42: devàyatana-chaityeshu 1 

VII. 101, 15: ubhe purottame . . . $obhite $obhaniyai$ cha 

devayatana-vistaraih | 

(6) Mahabharata, п, 80, 30, etc. (ibid.) : 

Devayatana-chaityeshu 1 
(7) Taittiriya-Samhitd, 2, 2, 6, r, etc. (Pet. Dict.) : 
Devànàm evayatane yatate jayati {ата samgramam | 
(8) Satapatha-Brahmana, 4, 4, 5,3; 5,2, 1350, 2, 1,14; 12,5, I, 17, 
etc. (ibid.) : 
Кара iva hi sarpanam ayatanani 1 
Chhandogya-upanishad, 6, 8, 2, etc. (ibid.) : 
Sa yathà $akunih sütrena prabaddho dióam dišarn patitvanya- 
trayatanamalabdhva bandhanam еуораќгауаќе 1 

(9) біуазуауайапага ramyarh chakre— built a beautiful We of 
Siva.’ —(An Abu Inscrip. of the reign of Bhimadeva II, а. Ant., Vol. 
рр. 221, 222.) 

(то) Chakàrayatanam $ambhor ambhonidhi-samarh sarah—‘ he built 
the temple of Sambhu and a tank equal to the sea.’ —(Harsauda Inscrip. of 
Devapaladeva, line 13-14, Ind. Ant., Vol. xx, p. 312.) 

(11) Sri-Nanigasvami devàyatanam Кагаріќат 1 

‘The temple of the illustrious god Nànigasvàmin was caused to be 
made.’—(Atpur Inscrip. of Sakti-kumàra, line 1-2, Ind. Ant, Vol. xxxix, 
Р- 191.) 

(12) SomeSvarayatana-mandapam uttarena |—(Cintra Ргаќаѕіі of the reign 
of Sarangadeva, vv. 40, 41, 42, 45, 72 ; Ep. Ind., Vol. I, p. 284.) 

AYADI-KARMAN (see under SHap-varca)—The consideration of 
Ауа and other formulas for the verification of correct dimensions. 
Evam tu dandakarh (gramarn) proktarh tasyayamam ihochyate | 
Vistàràd dvi-dandena vardhayed dvigunantakam 1 
Yah Subhayadi-karmartharh danda-hinàdhikam tu vā | 
(M., 1x, 12-14.) 
| AYADI-BHÜSHANA (see under SHap-vARGA)—The consideration 
of Áya, and other formulas for ascertaining right proportions. ; 
Padanam api sarvesharn lakshanarn vakshyate’dhuna 1 
Ayamanm cha visalarn cha ayadi bhüshanadikam 1—(M., ху, 1-2.) 


6o 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized.by S3 Foundation USA 
{ s 
i жишш 


MEE Oa. - 
Ры > 
1 " 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | ARAMA 


AYADI-SHAD-VARGA (see under SHAD-VARGA.)—The six formulas 
for the verification of correct dimensions called aya, ууауа, riksha, 
yoni, vara, and аа or tithi. 


Evam ayadi shad-vargam kuryat tatra vichakshanaih(nah) 1 


5 ; (M., тх, 74.) 
AYIKA-PADA (cf. STAMBHA)—A kind of pillar. 


Vedàm$am changhri-tuhgam chardharh prastarotsedham 1 
Tad-dvayam àyika-pàdarn вагаһатабаті prastaram uttungam 1 
Tad-ürdhvànghri gunamšarn tad-ardharh ürdhva-mafichochcham I 
(M., XXVIII, 25-27.) 
ARAMA (cf. UpyAna)—A pleasure-garden, a garden-house, an 
orchard. A Buddhist convent (vihàra), rest-house for quiet people 
built * not too far from the town and not too near, convenient for 
going and for coming, easily accessible for all who wish to visit him, 
by day not two crowded, by night not exposed to too much noise 
and alarm. The whole compound is enclosed with ramparts of 
three kinds, namely, brick walls, stone walls and wooden fences, 
which are again surrounded with bamboo fences, thorn fences and 
ditches. —(Chullavagga, VI; 4, 8 ; 3, ro.) 
(1) Nagasya уатаке yamye kuryad àràma-desakam | 
Pushpodyanarh tatah kuryat mukhya-bhallatake'pi cha | 
Nrittagararh tatah kuryan nàna-nrittànganàni cha | 
(M., XL, 119-121.) 
(2) Pràntach-chhàyà-vinir-muktà na manojíia jalasayah | 
Yasmad ato jala-pranteshvaraman viniveSayet 11 
“ Considering that water reservoirs without shade on the margin are 
not lovely, one ought to have gardens laid out on the banks of the water. 


(Brihat-Samhitd, LV, 1, F.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. 


с VI, р. 312.) 
(3) Ramayana (Cock): 


II. 51, 23: aramodyana-sampannam . . . ràjadhanim I 
VII. 70, 13: агатаі$ cha vihàrai$ cha Sobhamanam(-naih) saman- 
tatah 11 
Sobhitàm . . . purim 11 
(4) Mahabharata (ibid.), хи, 69, 11, etc. : 

Vihàreshu . . . arameshu tathodyane 1 
(5) Garden : 

Kashte kale kalavapy-abhibhavati jagat küpa-vapi-tadágair asan- 
narama-sattraih sura-sadana-mathairm-manditayam amushyam 
nagaryàm |—(Dewal Pra$asti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 20, Ер. Ind., Vol 
1, рр. 79, 83.) В 

бі 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


——————— T s m 


ARSHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(6) Pleasure-garden houses, orchards : 
Aramany-atanot saran sarobhié $obhitarntaraih 1 
_ Utphulla-karhja-kimjalka-purhja-pimjaritantaraih 11 
(Two pillar inscriptions at Amaravati, 
no. A, Inscrip. of Keta, II, v. 42, 
Ep. Ind., v1, p. 152.) 
(7) Satra-prapa-prasraya-vrishotsargga-vapi-kipa-tadagarama-devalaya- 
di-karanopakaranartham cha | 
(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, line 58, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vu, pp. 41-46.) 
(8) Krishnayasasa агата--рагаеп (Sir E. C. Bayley, Dr. Vogel) : vihára 
or monastery (Sir A. Cunningham) of Ктізһпауаба. 
(Rock Inscriptions in the Kangra valley, 
the Kanhiara Inscrip., Ef. Ind., Vol. | 
VII, pp. 117-118.) | 
(9) Grove (Dr. Lüders) : ( 
Yamoda-pushkaraninarn pa$chimà pushkarani udapano ¿ramo stambho 
. . . Sila patto cha— “а tank, the western tank of these twin tanks, a 
reservoir, a grove, a pillar and this stone slab’ (was caused to be made). 


(Three early Brahmi inscriptions, iii, 
Mathura stone inscrip. of the time of 
Sondasa, lines 2-3, Ер. Ind., Vol. тх, 
р. 247.) 
(10) Nana-desa-prabhava-suphala-vrata - bharati-namra-vriksha-éreni- 
niyama-khachitah $ala-samgupta-madhyah | 
Aramo’yamh  surabhi-sumanoràji-sarnarájamánah ^ nànà-virullal 
tasaranih pürna-kamah sadastam 11 
(Inscriptions from Nepal, no. 23, Inscrip, 
of Queen Lalita-tripura-sundari, v. 2, 
second series, Ind. Ant., ix, p. 194.) ç 
ARSHA—Belonging or relating to the ascetics, a phallus of Siva. 
A kind of phallus.—(Kamikágama, L, 35, 37, see under LiNGA )—(M., ru 
232, see under LINGA.) 
ALAMBANA —The base, plinth of a railing (vedi) or balustrade. 


Sarveshath mukha-bhadranarh syat lakshanarh vakshyate’ dhunà 1 
Sikharalambanarh chadau tat palikavasanakam | 


(M., хуш, 275-276, etc.) 

ALAMBANA-BAHU—The balustrade, a small pillar used as a 

support to the rail of a staircase : balustrade or a row of balusters 
62 


i CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


- AVRITA (se PRAKARA)—An enclosure. 


` AVASA—A residence, a dwelling-house. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE AVRITA 


joined by a rail forming an ornamental parapet to a balcony. 
See Indian Architecture, p. 13, Mahasudassana Sutta, 1, 59 : Chullavagga, 
VI; 3,3. ç 

ALAYA—A temple; a house. 

Ràme$varaya ghanamantapa-vapra-saudharamalayarn samatanot sama- 
tarasajfiah— he erected a temple (alaya), adorned with a solid hall (man- 
tapa), a wall (уарга), and a plastered mansion (saudha) to Rameégvara’ . 

(Mangalagiri pillar inscrip., v. 39, Ep. ; 

Tnd., Vol. vr, рр. r23, 114.) a 

ALINGA (c. ANTARITA)—A moulding like the fillet, but with 

greater projection. Itis а flat moulding placed alternately together 
with the Antarita and is inseparably connected with the latter. 

The ninth moulding from the top of the entablature (Kamikagama, LIV, 
2, see under PRASADA). 

A crowning moulding of the pedestal and the base (e.g. M., хш, 126; 
XIV, 50, etc., see the lists of mouldings under ApuisHTHANA and UPAPITHA). 

A similar moulding of a throne : 

Alingàntaritarn chordhve prativajanam uchyate 1—(M., xiv, 110.) 


AVASATHA-—A dwelling, an abode, “а structure of some sort 

for the reception of guests on the occasions of feasts and sacrifice, 
later Dharma-$alà or rest-houses. E 

(A.-V., 1x, 6,5; Taitt. Brà., 1, 1, то, 6; 

ш, 7, 4, 6, Sat. Bra., xu, 4, 4, 6; 

Chhand. Upa., 1у, 1, 1 ; Apa. Stambha 

Srauta Sūtra., у, 9, 3; Ара. Dh. Sūtra., 

: п, 9, 25, 4; A.-V., xiv, 2, 6.) 

AVARANA- Minor and associated deites. 


(M., xv, 400.) 


Avàsa-vàsa-veámadau pure grame vanik-pathe 11 
.Prasadàràma-durgeshu devalaya-matheshu cha | 

(Garuda-Puràna, Chap. XLVI, vv. 2, 3.) 
Nirjagama пгірауаѕап manya-manah priyarn mahat 1 ide 
(Ramayana, п, 15-28.) 


Sikhare chàvrite pare sabhà-mandapa gopure 


AVRITA-MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 

AVRITA-MANDAPA—An open pavilion surrounding a building. ; 

(т) Kamikagama, xxxv : Ë 
Evambhutasya vasasya samantàn mandapam nayet 11 (97) f! 
 Pañcha-bhāgāvasānāntarn kuryād āvrita-maņdapam 11 (98) ] 
Hasta-manena và kuryàt tri-hastad arddha-vriddhitah | y 
Pañcha-daša-karantarn tu kuryad avrita-mandapam I (99) Ë 
Mandapena vina vapi tena manena pithikà 11 (тоо) Í 


(2) Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 137 : 

Prakara-bhittim āśritya kuryad avrita-mandapam 11 
AVESANA—An architectural office, a studio, a place where art- 
works are taught and carried out. 


Ауебалата $ilpi-$alà ргара paniya-salika I—(Amarakàësha, п, 5, 7.) 


ASRAMA (see under SHopASA-MANDIRA-CHAKRA)—A temple, a her- 
mitage, a dwelling. A religious establishment comprising the main 
temple, its attached tank, kitchen, alms-house, guest-house, store- 
house, cow-sheds, halls dressing-houses for the deity, bed-rooms 
and other houses and flower gardens, orchards and the surrounding 
walls. 

Surebhyah puratah karyo yasyagneyyarh mahànasam | 

Va(? ka)pi-nirgamane yena pürvvatah sat(t)ra-mandapam 11 Í 

Gandha-pushpa-griharn karyyam aišanyarn patta-sarhyutam | Í / 

Bhàndagaram cha kauberyyarh goshthagararn cha vayave 11 l 

2 


CEDE ganar ERRANT" 


Udagasrayam cha varunyarn vatayana-samanvitam | 
Samit-kusendhana-sthanam ayudhanam cha nairrite 11 | 
Abhyagatalayarh ramya-sa$ayyásana-pádukam | | 
Toyagni-dipa-sad-bhrityair yuktarn dakshinato bhavet 11 

Grihantarani sarvani sajalaih kadali-grihaih | | 
Pañcha-varnaiš cha kusumaih sobhitàni prakalpayet 11 | 
Prakaram tad-bahir dadyat paficha-hasta-pramanatah | Jl 
Evam vishnvaéramam kuryyàd vanai$ chopavanair ушат 11 | А, 

(Garuda-Purána, Chap. XLVI, vv. 14-19.) 


ASRAMAGARA—A class of the seven-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxv, 29, see under PRAsADA.) 
ASANA—A class of buildings, a seat, a throne, a bedstead, a mould- | 
ing, a site-plan, a temple, a type of dwellings, a sitting posture. | 
(1) Manasara : 
A class of the three-storeyed buildings. | 
(M., ххх, 12-31, see under PRAsADA.) | 


64 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


LO TE — ym гк 


AVRITA-MANDAPA 

AVRITA MANDAPA—An open pavilion surrounding a bi 
(т) Kamikagama, xXXV * 

Evambhutasya vasasya s 

Р Paficha-bhagavasanantam 

Hasta-manena va kuryat 

Paficha-daga-karantam tu à 

Mandapena vina vapi tena ma 

(2) Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 137 * | 

_Prakara-bhittim a$ritya kuryad àvrita-mandapa 


amantān mandaparh nayet l! (97) 
kuryad Avrita-mandapam 11 (98) 
tri-hastad arddha-vriddhitah | 
kuryad Avrita-mandapam 11 (99) 

nena pithika і! (100) 


m 11 


AVESANA—An architectural office, а studio, a place wl 
works are taught and carried out. 

Ауебалата Silpi-sala prapa paniya-salika |\—(Amarakosha, п, 5 
ASRAMA (see under SHO DASA-MANDIRA-CHAKRA)—A temple 
mitage, a dwelling. A religious establishment comprising 1 
temple, its attached tank, kitchen, alms-house, guest-hous 
house, cow-sheds, halls dressing-houses for the deity, be 
and other houses and flower gardens, orchards and the sur 
walls. 

Surebhyah puratah karyo yasyagneyyàm mahanasam 1 

Va(? ka)pi-nirgamane yena pürvvatah sat(t)ra-mandapam 11 

Gandha-pushpa-grihath karyyam aisSanyam patta-sarhyutam 

Bhandagararh cha kauberyyàm goshthagaram cha vayave 11 

Udagasrayam cha varunyam vatayana-samanvitam | 

Samit-kugendhana-sthanam ayudhanam cha nairrite 11 

Abhyagatalayath ramya-saSayyasana-padukam | 

Toyagni-dipa-sad-bhrityair yuktarn dakshinato bhavet 11 

Grihantarani sarvani sajalaih kadali-grihaih | 

Paficha-varnai$ cha kusumaih sobhitani prakalpayet 11 

Ргакагатп tad-bahir dadyat paficha-hasta-pramanatah 1 

Evam vishnvaéramam kuryyad vanai$ chopavanair yutam 

| (Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, 1 

ASRAMAGARA—A class of the seven-storeyed buildings. 

(M., xxv, 29, see under 

ASANA—A class of buildings, a seat, a throne, a bedstead, 

Ing, a site-plan, a temple, a type of dwellings, a sitting postu 
(1) Manasara : 

А class of the three-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxx, 12-31, see under 


64 


THE THREE: STOREYED BUILDINGS: 


THE ELEVATION TOWARDS TRE BREADTH 


NOTE ~ 

hLLTHESE TYPES MAY BE UTILISED BOTA 
AS TEMPLES AND DOMESTIC BUILDINGS 
WITH SLIGHT DIFFERENCE IN DETAIL TO 


BE INDICATED M THE SECTION 


THE OTHER FIVE TYPES SHOULD BE DRAWN 
WITH PROPORTIONSAS FOLLOW — SRI-KANTA 
=6 PARTS AS HEIGHT KESARA -)5 
KAMALANGA AND BRAHMA-KANTA= 2.8 
MERU-KANTA = 50 PARTS 


jg qi 
Da tial 


о s‏ < و شد 


| 


ІНЕ SITE PLANS. 
ASANA PLAN OF 100 PLOTS 


Bb т 


mmm 


BHUDHARA 


ASURA 


AMEN 
BRAHMA 


Mu a Tbe FIL. од E 


MITRA 


PU SHPA- DANT: ADITYA 


INDRA-JAYA SAVITRA 
NIVASVAT 
mm RA 
BHRINGARAJA 
NOTE ~ 


THE DETAILS OF THIS PLAN HAVE 
BEEN OBTAINED FROM SILPA-RATMA ETC. 


ARYAMAN 


53 IKSHA 


Bn DAUVARIKA E 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ASANA 


А class of buildings in which the breadth is the standard of measure- 
ment ; the temples in which the idol is in the sitting posture. 
| (М., хіх, 7-11, see under APASAMCHITA.) 
А synonym of $ayana ог bedstead.—(M., іп, 10-12, see under SAYANA.) 
A site-plan the area of which is divided into roo equal squares : 
Па5атпата Sata-padam syan namanam(namna) àsanam iritam | 
(M., уш, 11, see details under PADAVINYASA.) 
А moulding of the base.—(M., xiv, 296, see under ADHISHTHANA.) 
The seat underneath the base of a pillar : 
Tan (pillar's)-müle chasanarh kuryat padukarn và sahambujam 1 
(M., xv, 31.) 
A seat as opposed to a bedstead : 
Evarh tu §ayanadinam àsananam cha darubhih(rini) | 
(M., XLIV, 74.) 
A throne : 
Devànàm bhü-patinam cha bhishanartham tu toranam 1 
Asanopari vinyasya sarveshath toranam |—(M., хім, r, 3.) 
. toranam | 
Devanarh bhü-patinàm cha sthanakasyasanasya cha | 
(ibid., 29-30.) 
Devànàm bhü-patinaàm cha sthanakadsana-yogyakam | 
Mukta-prapanga-manarh cha lakshanam vakshyate’dhuna | 
(M., XLVI, 1-2.) 
Devanarh chakravaryadi-bhi-palanam cha yogyakam | 
Kalpa-vriskhadinam tarara manam lakshanarh uchyate | 
Toranodaya-padarh tu padardhadhikodayam | 
Еуата vrikshasya tungasya аѕапаѕуорагі nyaset | 
Asanayama-madhye tu toranasyopari nyaset I—(M., XLVII, 1-5.) 
The sitting posture (of the Garuda image) : ; 
Sthànkam chasanarn chaiva gamanam cha yathavidhi | 
(M., LXI, 19.) 
Evam proktam simha-rüpam ... | 
Sayanam và sthanakam сһаѕапаі và . . . 1—(M., LXII, 44, 49.) 
'The sitting posture in connexion with the plumb-lines : 
Sarveshàm  deva-edvinam  riju-sthanakam сһаѕапе | 
Mana-sütra-vidhim samyak(g) lakshanam  vakshyate'dhuna | 
(M., LXVI, 1-2.) 


65 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


NM 


калалар atr digo. D: UOI aec 


ASANDA 


(2) Ramayana (Cock) : 
V, 15, 4: Bahvasana-kuthopetam . . . (aSoka-vanikam) | 
VII, 42, 16 f. : Bahvasana-grihopetam . . . aSoka vanikàm | 
. pravisya Raghu-nandanah | 
Asane cha Subhakare pushpa-prakara-bhishite 11 
KuSastarana-sarnstirne Ramah samnisasáda ha | 


(3) Katyayana-Srauta-sittra (Pet. Dict.) Sabhasana (4, 15, 33) ; 
Salasana (7, 5, 8) ; Brahma-yajamanayor àsane (1, 8, 27; 7, 4, 32; 
9, 9, 12, 4, 15, etc.). 

(4) Manu-Samhita (ibid.) : 


| 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 


( 


! pr 
Sahasana (8,281); Sahakhatvasana (8,357); Rahah sthandsanam 


(6,59) ; asaneshüpakalpiteshu (3,208) ; and Kumara-sambhava (7,12) ; 
Sarhpraptaya tvathithaye pradadyad asanodake (3,99) ; dadyach chaivasa- 
nam svakam (4,154) ; of: 

Rajño mahatmike sthane sadyah $aucham vidhiyate | 

Prajanam parirakshartham asanam channa-karanam || (5, 94). 

Amatya-mukham . . . | 

Sthapayed àsane tasmin iva nah karye kshane nrinàm 11 (7, 141). | 


(5) Bhagavadgita (ibid.), 6, 11: 
Suchau dese pratishthapya sthiram аѕапат atmanah | 
(6) Nalopakhyana (ibid.) 5, 4 
Asaneshu vividheshvasinah 7 
(7) Raghu-vamsa (ed. Cal. Bibl. 134), 2, 6 
Sayyàasane'dhyácharite preyasa | 
(Cf. padmasana, bhadrasana, vajrasana, virasana, and svastikasana 
(see M. W. Dict., loc. cit.). 


(8) Bahu-hathika-àsana  bhagavato Mahadevasa—‘ The seat of 
the blessed Mahadeya (under the banyan tree) Bahuhastika (where 
many elephants are worshipping).’ 

(Bharaut Inscriptions, по. 160, Ind. Ant., xxi, p. 299.) 


ASANDA—)A settee, a throne-like seat, large couches, cushions, 

ASANDI— J chairs, rectangular chairs, a throne carried by four 
persons (Digha Nikaya m, 23; Chullavagga, VI, 14, 1; Mahdvagga, 
V, 10, 3. See Childers Dictionary, Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Bud- 
-dhist Sutta, 27, 107, 209), with 200 frame-work for chiefs and 


_ kings. —(A.-V., xv, 3, Ait. Bra. уш, 5 ; 6; 12.) 


66 


Ú 


ғ. 


by S3 Foundation USA EAM 
d ee Eum Е Se SZ А? Ж NC nior 


XS 
A 
z 
=< 
ES 
SUGGESTED SECTION 
THE WIDTH OF THIS _OF FOUNDATION 
FOUNDATION HAS BEES = 
TAKEN TOBE SCUNITS ISHTAKA INDRA-KILA. 


(ЗА? IS A-G) INSTEAD CF 
3 RODS 


DWARF PILLAR. 
| MINOR PILLAR. 


UPA-PADA. 


ELEVATION. 


Page 66 


` Йй -= 


_ Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


WATCH-TOWER 


S 


` 


FORT GATEWAY, 


ж.2 CIS 
INDRA-KOSA. | 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE INDRA KILA(-KA) 


ASTHANA-MANDAPA (see under MANDAPA)—An assembly room, 
an audience-hall, a sitting room, a drawing room, a recreation 
iground with a pavilion in it. 

(т) Asthana-mandapam chaiva chatur-dikshu vidikshu cha 1 

(M., xxxi, 73.) 
Samà$ram vatha vedàéram kuryàd asthàna-mandapam | 
(M., XXXIV; 208.) 
Asthana-mandapam kuryat pushkarinyàm cha vayave | 
(M., XL, 118.) 
(2) Riksha-bhallata-someshu bhaved asthana-mandapam 1 
(Kamikdgama, XXXV, 191.) 

(3) See first Draksharama pillar Inscrip. 1, 9, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 
329, 330, under Manpapa. 

(4) A hall (Vanapalli Plates of Anna-Vema, v. 10, Ef. Ind., Vol. ш, 
pp. 61, 59). 

Cf. Asthana-sila-mandapa (First Draksharama pillar Inscrip., line o, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 329, 330). 

(5) Cf. “Тһе curious long series of subterranean chambers to the 
west of Chitaldoorg, now forming part of the Ankli matha, are deserv- 
ing of notice. They are approached by a good stone staircase, which 
leads down to rooms of various sizes at different levels. Іп these are 
shrines, lingas, baths, and pedestals, the latter apparently for yogasana.’ 

(Ep. Carnat., Vol. xr, Introduct., pp. 31-32.) 
ASYA—A facia. 


I 
IKSHU-KANTA—A class of the six-storeyed buildings. 


(M., XXIV, 55, see under PRASADA.) 
INDRA-KANTA—A class of the four-storeyed buildings, and of the 
gate-houses. 
(M., xxu, 60-88, see under PRAsADA.) 
A class of gate-houses.—(M.; хххш, 558, see under GoPuna.) 
INDRA KILA(-KA)—A pin, a nail, a bolt. 
Phalaka bhajanordhve tu tad-urdhve chendrakilakam | 
Tatah pratima-samyuktarh sthapayet sthapatir budhah 1 
(M., хп, 125-126.) 
An iron bolt : aratnir indrakilah—the iron bolt is one cubit long. 
(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. xxiv, p. 53.) 
67 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


INDRA-KOSA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


INDRA-KOSA— A projection of the roof of a house forming 
INDRA-KOSHTHA— h kind of balcony, holes or jali work in 
arches, crenelle, an opening in a parapet for shooting through. 
Attalaka-pratoli-madhye — tri-dhanushkàdhishthànam sapi-dhanach- 
chhidra-phalaka-samhatam itindrako$am karayet | 
(Kautiliya-Artha-$astra, Chap. xxiv, р. 52.) 


ISHTAKA—Brick, a building material, burnt (pakva, Sat. Brd., 
VI, I, 2, 22 ; VII, 2,1, 7), naturally perforated (svayamatrinna, Taitt. 
Sam., IV, 2, 95 9, 2; Etc., у, 2, 3), of all colours (Taitt. Sam., v, 7, 8), 
circular (mandala, Tat. Sam., IV, 4, 5; V, 3, 9), cornerless 
(vikarni, Taitt., v, 3, 7), conical (choda, 721%. Sam., ту, 4, 3), gold- 
headed or enamelled (vàmabhrit, Тай. Sam., IV, 2, 9; У, 5, 3), 
pot-shaped (kumbha, Тай. Sam., v, 6, 1). Thus the brick- 
laying was already a developed art in the age of the Yajurveda 
(1000 в.с.). But in 3000 B.c. burnt bricks were in use in Mohen- 
jodaro, etc. 
(1) Silàbhi$ cheshtakair vapi darubhih . . —(M., xxx, 95.) 
Eka-dva-dasa-bhimyantam cheshtake dva-daéantatah | 
Harmyam nirmanato vakshye prathameshtaka-lakshanam | 
(M., xu, 188-189.) 
(2) Trinàdi-nirmitam yo dadyat рагатпебуагі 1 
Varsha-koti-sahasrani sa vased deva-veSmani 11 
Ishtaka-griha-dane tu tasmach chhata-gunam phalam | 
Tato'yuta-gunam punyam $ila-geha-pradanatah 11 
(Mahàanirvaga- T antra, xut, 24, 25.) 
(3) ‘ The following written declaration (vyavastha) is (also) granted 
(for the guidance of the donee) : Mansions of burnt tiles (bricks) may 
be built (without special permission) ; . . . with the written declaration 
thus defined (the village) was placed in the (hands) of the assembly 
as a deva dana, with all immunities, to the (God) Mahadeva of the 
Yajüe$vara (temple).'—(Velurpalaiyam plates, lines 47 to 63 ; no. 98, K. S. 
I. I., Vol. u, p. 512.) | 
(4) ‘Mansions and large edifices may be built of burnt bricks.’ 
 (T'andantottam Plates, по. 99, lines 26-38 : 
K. S. I. I., Vol. u, p. 541.) 
(5) * The walls of the temple . . . are in great preservation, the 
bricks, which compose them, are of well-burnt red earth, each measur- 
ing 12 inches by 7 and 12 thick, disposed with about one-eighth of an 
inch of chunam between them, and the layers, being quite even, look 
as if the plaster had just been stripped off. · 


68 


Р қ 2 * 
ul si laridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
ы | oc... 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


THE SITE PLANS 
UGRA PITHA PLAN OF 36 PLOTS 


. BRAHMA 


ARY AKA 
ADITYA 


THIS IS AN AMPLIFICATION OF 
THE UPA PITHA TYPE 


Page 68 


Ж 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UCHCHHRAYA 


Lieutenant Fagan (Ceylon Government Gazette, August 1, 1820) after 
describing about twenty buildings (temples and edifices) made of such 
burnt bricks concludes : 

‘I will leave it to the curious in Ceylon antiquities to discover 
the reason that the people, who built these great edifices, should take 
the trouble of making so many millions of bricks for the work, where 
there was abundance of fine stone well calculated for their construc- 
tion in the immediate neighbourhood.’—(An account of the ruins of 
Topary, Ind. Ant., Vol. хххуш, p. 110, с. 2, line 12 Ё; c. 2, para. 2.) 


I 
15А-КАМТА--А class of the eleven-storeyed buildings. 


(M., XXIX, 10-11, see under PRASADA.) 
ISVARA-KANTA—A site-plan, a class of buildings. 
A site-plan in which the whole area is divided into 961 equal 
squares : 
. . chaika trimmSat-vidhane tu | 
Eka-shashti-samadhikyam padarn nava-$ata-yutam | 
Evam i$vara-kantam syàt . . . | 
(M., уп, 46-48, see further context under PADA-vINYASA.) 
A class of the four-storeyed buildings. 


(М., ххп, 44-46, see under PRAsADA.) 
U 


UGRA-JATI—Base-born, people of low castes, for whom buildings 
of certain number of storeys are prescribed. 
(M., хі, 138.) 
UGRA-PITHA—A site-plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 36 equal squares. 
(M., уп, 7, see further details under PADA-vINYASA.) 
UCHCHHRAYA-—A kind of pillar, pillars of victory. 
Giri-Sikhara-tarü-talattalakopatalpa-dvara-$aranochchhraya (raised 
places of shelter) Kielhorn quotes also Drs. Indraji and Bühler who 
translate *$arana? by ‘shelter’ and * uchchhraya' by * pillars of 
victory °. 
(Junagadh rock Inscrip. of Rudradaman, line 6, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. уп, pp. 43, 46 and note 3.) 


69 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA cu و‎ 


UNHISA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


UNHISA—A headline running along the top of the banisters, a 


figure-head at the lower end of such a head line. 
(Rhys David’s Buddhist Sutta, p. 262 
Sudassanasutta, 1, 59-) 


UTTAMA-NAVA-TALA—A sculptural measurement : in this sys- 
tem the whole height of an image is divided into 112 equal parts 
which are proportionately distributed among the different parts of 
the body from head to foot. Тһе measurement of breadth of the 
various limbs is not included in these i12 parts. The measurement 
of the arms is also excluded from these. 

For details, see M., тлх, 14-64, under ТАгА. 


UTTAMA-DASA-TALA—A sculptural measurement in which the 
whole height of an image is generally divided into 120 equal parts. 
(M., LXV, 2-179, see details under TALA.) 


ОТТАМВНА—А kind of rectangular building. 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, vv. 21-22 
26-27, see under PRAsADA.) 


UTTARA—A rectangular moulding, а fillet. (For its synonyms, 
see М., хут, 56-58 below.) It is used sometimes to signify the whole 
architrave or the beam, i.e. the lowest division of the entablature, 
which extends from column to column ; also applied to the moulded 
frame which bounds the sides and head of a door or window open- 
ing. It also denotes a particular member of the pedestal and en- 
tablature and resembles the corona or the square projection of the 
upper part of the cornice, having a broad and vertical face generally 
plain. 
(Gf. Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., p. 25.) 
(1) Manasara : 
A crowning moulding of the pedestal : 
Uttaram charnšakarn chordhve kshepanardhadhikambujam | 
Uttararn chardha-kampam syat tad-ürdhve cha saro-ruham | 
(M., xur, 67, 76, etc., see the lists of 
mouldings under UPAPITHA.) 
A similar moulding of the column : 
Adhishthanoparisht(h)at tu chottaradho’vasanakam | 
Upapithoparisht(h)at tu janmadau chottarantakarh | 
Padayamavasanarh cha adhishthanodayena cha 1 
(M., ху, 7-9.) 


79 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Раде 70 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA "m 15. тё 


UPA TULA. 


— í 
BHARA TULA 


UPA TULA. 


Dage 71 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | UTSAVA 


A similar moulding of the entablature : 
Uttarordhve chatush-paficha-shat-saptashtakarn bhavet | 
Pürva-bhagika-mànena  chottarochcharn gunarnšakarn | 


(M., хут, 30, 59, etc., see the lists of 
mouldings under PRAsTARA.) 


Its synonyms (or terms of similar signification) : 
Uttararn bhajanam adhàram adheyarh $ayanam tatha 1 
Uddhritar cha mürdhakarn chaiva mahatauli svavam$akam | 
Prachchhadanasyadharam etat paryayam iritam | 
(M., хм, 56-58.) 
(2) Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, Ix, І: 
Atha vakshyami samkshepat pada-manarh yathavidhi 1 
Uttaropanayor madhya-gatam etat prakirtitam 11 : 
(3) Катікарата, (тлу, see under STAMBHA) : The moulding at the top 
of the entablature. 
(4) Suprabhedágama (XXXI, 107, see STAMBHA) : A crowning moulding 
of a column. 


UTTAROSHTHA (see under SrAMBHA)—The upper lip, the : 
ovolo or the moulding above the cavetto or mouth (see Gwilt., ED. 
Encycl., fig. 867, and also the list of mouldings in the five orders, 
e.g. Art. 2553). : 
Stambham vibhajya  navadha  vahanam bhāgo  ghato'sya 
bhago’nyah 1 
Padmarn tathottaroshtharh kuryad bhagena 11 
(Brihat-Samhita, тш, 29.) 
UTTANA-PATTA—A pavement. 
Vyddham chottana-pattam sakala-kanakhale . . . ya$ chakara— ‘ who 
made a broad pavement of (stone) slabs in the whole of Kanakhala.’ 
(An Abu inscrip. of the reign of Bhumadeva II, 
V. 9, Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, pp. 221, 222.) 
UTSAVA (see UTsEDHA)—The height of a draught animal (vahana) 
in comparison with that of the idol of whom the former is the 


vehicle. 
(т) Muüla-bera-va$arn manam utsavodayam iritam 1-(/М., Lv, 34.) 5 
Brahma vishnu($ cha)-rudranam buddhasya ja(ji)nakasya cha | + 22 


Anyai$ cha . . . шапата tu samgraham | 

Evam tu chotsavadinam sthavara(m)-jamgamadinam | 4 em 
; (M. LXIV, 91-93.) T m 
7 E 3 С ^ EY 


UTSAVA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 


Vihanga-raja-manam cha lakshanarn vakshyate’dhuna | 
Mila-bera-samottunga(rh) tat-tri-padardham eva va | 
Utsavochcha-samam vapi dvi-gunam tri-gunam tu và | 
Tri-gunam vadhikam vapi tach-chatur-gunam eva va | 
Evam navodayam proktam uttamadi trayam trayam | 

(M., LXI, 1-5.) 


Vrishasya lakshanarh samyag vakshyate’dhuna | 
Vayor abhimukham sthàpyam pithe và chotsave’pi va | 
Vimàne mandape vapi charopari parinyaset I—(M., LXI, 1-3.) ] 
Three types : < 
Müla-berodayam šreshtha(rn) tri-padarn madhyamarn bhavet | і 
Tungardham Капуаѕаі proktarh tri-vidharh chotsavodayam | 
(M., Lv, 35 -36. 
Berotsedha-samarn $reshtharn karnantarh madhyamarh bhavet | 
Bahvantarh kanyasam proktarh utsavam vrishabhodayam | 
(M., LXI, 10-11.) 
Nine kinds : ú 
д Evam linga-va$at proktarn vishnu-bera-vašo(ad u)chyate | e 
j Mila-bera-samam vapi netrāntam và putantakam | 
Hanvantath bahu-simantarh stanantarh hridayàntakam | 
Nabhyantam medhra-simantarh nava-manarh chotsavodayam | 
Tad-ardham kautukotsedharh kanyasadi trayarh trayam 1 


(M., LXIV, 2 4-28. 


Athava tena manena shodaéaméam vibhàjite | 

Ë Ekaikarnšakarn tasmat pañcha-virnšarnšakantakam | 

Pu Kanyasad uttamantarn syān nava-mànarh utsavodayam 1 
7% Athava müla-berasya ke$antam tu bhruvantakam | 

| Netrantam nasikagrantarh hanvantam bahu-simakam | 
Stanantam hridayantarh cha nàvyantam cha navodayam | 
Kanyasad uttamantarh syat nava tad utsavodayam | 

Utsave. chardha-manena kautukodayam iritam | 
Tan-manam chashta-bhagaikarh nava-bhagavasanakam | 
Kanyasad uttamantath уап nava-manarh kautukodayam | 


(M., Lv, 37-46. 


It is measured in the idol's finger : 
Müla-berangulam chaiva manayed utsavodayam 1—(M., Lv, 55.) 
Tat-tan-màna-va$at kechin müla-bera-va$àn nayet | 
Utsave chotsavarn proktam añgularh mana-visvatah | 


(M., LXI, 21-22.) 


72 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UTSEDHA 


UTSAVA-MANDAPA—A festive hall. 
See under MANDAPA and с/.: 
Gopura-prakarotsava-mamtapair upachitarh $riramabhadraya cha | 
(Kondavidu Inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v. 27, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. v1, pp. 237, 231.) 
UTSAVA-VIGRAHA —Images for procession, idols to be carried in 
procession. 
Utsava-vigrahala samarpirnchi—‘ presented idols to be carried in pro- 
cession ’. 
(Kondavidu Inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v. 28, lines 118-119, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 231, 232, 237.) 
UTSEDHA (see MANA)—The height called $antika, paushtika, 
jayada, sarvakamika or dhanada, and adbhuta : they are respectively 
equal to the breadth, 14, 14, 14 , and twice of it. 


(See M., xxxv, 22-26, under Арвнота.) 

The height of a buidling is stated to be measured from the basement to 
the top of the dome : 

Utsedharn janmadi-stüpikantam—(M., xxxv, 26.) 

The technical names of the proportions of the height are significant. 
The first one is called “бапаКа” or peaceful. In this proportion the height is 
equal to the breadth (/М., xxxv line 22) ; and this is aesthetically a gracefu 
proportion. The second one is called ‘ paushtika? which might be 
rendered as strong, eminent, rich, complete, or perfect. In this proportion 
the height is 14 of the breadth (ibid., line 22) ; and this would give the 
building a good stability. Тһе third one is called ‘jayada’ ог joy-giving. 
In this proportion the height is 13 of the breadth (ibid., line 22) ; and this 
gives a pleasantappearance to the building. The fourth one has two names, 
‘ sarva-kàmika ° or good in every way, and ‘ dhanada’ or wealth-giving. In 
this proportion the height is 12 of the breadth (zbid., line 23) ; and according 
to the literal meaning of the term *sarvakamika' this would make the 
building strong as well as beautiful. The fifth or last one is called * adbhuta ° 
ог marvellous. In this proportion the height is twice the breadth (ibid., 
line 22) ; and this would give a wonderful loftiness and gorgeous look 
to the building. 

The comparative height of the component members of an architectural 
structure is technically called ‘ganya-mana.’ The details thereof will be 
found under GANYA-MANA. 

Six kinds of measurements are prescribed for an image : тайпа 
(full height of the image), pramana (breadth), parimana (width 


73 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


UDAPANA 


or circumference), lambamana (length by the plumb-lines), unmana 
(thickness) and upamàna (measurement of the interspace, e.g. between 
the two feet, M., Lv, 3-9, see under MANA). Of these, mana or height 
is stated to be compared with nine objects such as the adytum, door, 
basement, and the height of the worshipper, etc. (ibid., lines 11-14, see 
under MANA). In each case, the height of the idol admits of nine kinds 
as it is made equal to nine successive parts of the object (ibid., lines 15-33). 
When compared with the worshipper, it is equal to his full height, 
reaches his hair-limit (on the forehead), nose-tip, chin, arm-limit (to the 
shoulder), breast, heart, navel and sex-organ : 


Kanyasad uttamantam syàd yajamánodayam param | 

KeSantarh nàsikagrantam hanvantarh bahu-simakam | 

Stanàntam hridayantam cha nabhyantarh medhra-simakam | 

Navadha kanyasantam syat sthavararh jangamodayam 1 

(М., Lv, 30-33.) 

Ў The height of the riding animals (vàhana) of the gods is divided 
* into two kinds, utsava and kautuka (see details under these terms). The 
latter is stated to be half of the former, and it does not seem to bear | 
any other independent signification. Тһе former is compared with | 
the height of the main idol, exactly in the same way as the idol is com- 
pared with the height of the worshipper (see e.g. M., LXIV, 24-28; Lv, 
40-43, under UrsavA). à 


UDAPANA—A well, a pool or pond near a well. 
Ima-kshayamada-pushkaraninàm ^ pa$chima-pushkaranim ^ udapàna- 
arama-stambhah |—(Mathura inscriptions, no. 1, line 2, Cunningham, Arch. 
Surv. Reports., Vol. ur, p. 30.) 


See Bhagavadgita, u, 46. 
UDUMBARA—The threshold of a house, a door. 1 


(1) Uchchhrayat рада-уізігпа śākhā tad-vad udumbarah— the 
side-frame of the door has a breadth of } of the altitude; likewise < 
the threshold? Sakha-dvaye’pi karyarn sardharn tat sydd udum- | 


barayoh—- the thickness of the two side-frames of a door is as many digits 4 

(angulas) as the altitude numbers cubits, one and a half that measure | 

gives the thickness of the threshold and upper timber.’ d ! 
(Brihat-Sathhita, um, 26 ; 1м, 13, Kern, £ 


J-R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, pp. 284, 318.) 

(2) Garbha-griha-udumbara-pramana— measures of the central hall 

and the threshold'.— (Prasadamandana-Vastu-sastra of Sütra-dhara Mandana, ш, 
MSS., Egg. 3147, 2253 fol. 152.) 


74 


жады қағанын 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UDYANA 


(3) Plaksha-dvararn bhavet pürvarn yamye chodumbararn bhavet | 
Тһе back-door should be at the east and the udumbara or front-door 
at the south’.—(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrxiv, v. 15.) 
Таһа dvi-guna-vistirna-mukhas tad-vad udumbarah | 
(Ibid., Chap. ccrxx, v. 20.) 
(4) Vistàrad dvi-gunam dvàram kartavyarh tu su$obhanam 1 
Udumbarau tad-ürddhvam cha nyasech chhasnam (?) suman 
galaih I1 
Dvarasya tu chaturthamée karyau chanda-prachandakau 11 
Višvak senavat sadantau Sikharddhodumbara-ériyar 11 
(Agni-Purdna, Chap. хіл, vv. 19-20.) 
(5) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. CXXX, v. 20) has the same verse as (1) 
except that it reads * udumbari in place of * udumbarah' in the Brihat- 
Samhita. 
(6) See jamb ornaments, Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Suro., 
New Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, plates cL, figs. 2, 3. 


UDDHRITA—A synonym of uttara or a crowning fillet. 


(M., xvi, 56-58, see under UTTARA.) 


UDBHUTA—A kind of phallus. 
(M., ілі, 226, 233, 236, 238, 241, see under LiNGA.) 
UDYANA (cf. ARAMA)—A. pleasure-garden. 
(т) Ramayana (Cock) п, 71, 21: 
Esha nàtipratità me punyodyana yaSasvini | 
Ayodhya dri$yate dürat . . . Il 
Ibid., 22—26 : 
Udyànàni hi sayahne kriditvoparatair naraih 11 
Samantàd vipradhavadbhih prakasante mamanyatha I 
Tànyadyànurudantiva parityaktani kamibhih II 
Aranya-bhüteva puri sarathe pratibhati mam | 
Nahyatra yànair dri$yante na gajair na cha vajibhih i 
Niryànto vabhiyanto và nara-mukhya yatha pura | 
Udyanàni pura bhanti matta-pramuditani cha 11 
Jananam rati-sarnyogeshvatyanta-gunavanti cha | 
Tanyetanyadya pa$yàmi niranandani sarva$ah 11 
Ibid. п, 67, 19: 
Narajake jana-pade vahanaih $ighra-vahibhih | 
Nara niryantyaranyani naribhih saha kaminah 11 


75 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


UNMANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Lilodyana or pramadodyana—pleasure-garden, on the Dharagiri 
hill, the scene of the second Art. 
(Dhar Prafasti of Arjunavarman, lines 6, 
12, 31, verse 30, lines 36, 75, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. уш, рр. 99-100.) 
UNMANA (see MANA)—The measurement of thickness or diameter. 
(М., Lv, 3-9, see under МАма.) 
Atah-pararh pravakshyami mànonmanarm viseshatah | 
| (Matsya-Purana, Chap. согуш, v. 16.) 
Manarn tad-vistararn proktarn unmanam nàham eva cha 11 
Pramanam dirgham ityuktam manonmana-pramanatah 11 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXIV, 35, 36.) 
UPAKANTA—A class of the six-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxiv, 16, see under PRASADA.) 
UPATULA (see TuLA)—A part of the column. 
(Brihat-Samhita, тап, 30, see under Tula.) 
UPATALPA—An upper storey, a room on the top of a house. 
(Raghu-variía, XVI, 11, etc.) 
UPADVARA-—The smaller door. 
(See Manasara, їх, 306, 309, 354, 360, under DvAra.) 
Upadvaro(ramu)ktavat kuryad vishnu-dhisnarh tu paschime 1 
(M., тх, 109.) 
Chatur-dikshu chatur dvàram upadvaram antardlake | 
= (М., хххі, 77.) 
UPADHANA (see under SAYANA)—A pillow, an article of furniture. 


UPAPADA—tThe upper or dwarf pillar which is subordinate to a 
larger column. 
Upapadani sarveshàm pürva (? müla)-pade tu yojayet | 
Ekopapada-samyuktam dvi-try-upapadena samyutam | 
Vedopapada-samyuktam brahma-kantam iritam | 
(M., xv, 239, 242, 244, see also 245, 247.) 
UPAPITHA (cf. Рітна)--Тһе pedestal, the upper pedestal, the 
outer surface, a site-plan. Тһе ‘pedestal is the lowest division 
in an order of columns, called also stylobates and stereobates. It 
consists of three principal parts—the die, the cornice, and the base. 
(1) “Тһе pedestal is not only placed under the base of a column or 
pilaster, but frequently employed, both singly and together with the 


76 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


USE 


ZR 
po 


; * аріп өй 
me ETE 


eee 


—— - = preme 
oS _ —— ہے‎ 


THE SME Р А МӘ 
UPA-DITHA PLAN ОҒ 25 PLOTS 


JAUICHYA | SOMA 


SosHA | RUDRA | BHUDHARATAPAVATSA | JAYACUTA 


VARUNA | MITRA | BRAHMA  ARYAKA | ADITYA 


SUGRIVA | INDRA | VIVASVAT | SAVITRA | BHRISA 


BHRINGA- 
PITA) -RAJA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UPAPITHA 


latter, as a pavement for temples and porticoes, over cornices of edifices 
consisting of several storeys in height, and also as a platform for thrones, 
and as seats for statues.’ 

In a Tamil fragment of a manuscript, purporting to be a translation 
of Мауатаіа, it is said that ‘the height of the shaft or pillar is to be 
divided into four parts, and one to be given to the base which may or 
may not be accompanied by a pedestal, and in the case where a pedestal 
is joined to the base, the height of the pedestal may be either equal to 
that of the base, or twice, or three times as much. Here, the greatest 
height, given to a pedestal, namely, three times that of the base, is equal 
to a little more than a third part of the highest column, which is not 
perhaps a bad proportion. 


(Ràm Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., pp. 23, 26.) 
(2) Kaümikagama, XXxv : 
Tad-varddhitopapitham và tad-varddhita-masürakam 1! (115). 
Adhishthanadi-shad-vargarh tan-mànam upapithake 11 (122). 
(3) Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 12 : 
Pithasya tri-gunarh garbham ta(t)-tri-bhagaika-bhittikam 1 
Samvikshya sama-bhiimis ched upapitham prakalpayet 11 
(4) Manasara : š 
А site-plan in which the whole area is divided into 25 equal 
squares (see under PADAVINYASA) : 
Pafüichamam paficha-pafichaméam upapitham iti smritam | 


(M., уп, 6.) 
Evam sütra-sthitàn devan padasthamá chopapithake |—(zhid., 70.) 
In connexion with foundations : 
Ekarnšarn koshtha-bhittyuchchhra(ya)m ghanam prag-uktavan- 
nayet | 
Upapitham pade devan koshtharn chokta-kramam nyaset 1 


(M., хп, 38-39.) 
In connexion with the ‘ pita" or yoni part of the linga : 
Athava kumbha-dig-bhagam padma-tunga(m) yugarm$éakam | 
Sesharn prag-ukta-vat kuryad upapitham prakalpayet | 
The pedestal of the column (M., хш, 2-156) : 
Its situation : 
Adhishthanonnate dese chopapitham hi sarhsritam 1 (2) 
Its heights (cf. also Мауатайа, quoted above) : 
Ete tattvam adhishthànam tach-chatur-amSakam 1 
Vibhajet tvàdimaméena ekaikaméam vivardhanat | 
Tad ashtaméavasanam суа) janmadi-pattikantikam 1 


77 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— — 712 E 


рете 


ОРАРІТНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Evam tu chopapithochcharh navabhir bhedam iritam | 
Athava kshudra-harmye tu chatur-bhagaméam unnatam | 
Dvi-bhàgarh và tri-bhàgam và chatur-bhagam athapi va | 
Paüicha-da$odayam  vàpi ri($a)ntikadi-$arodayam | 
(3-9, see also 10-15, under UTSEDHA.) 
Тһе general description : 
Bhaga-padadi-sarvesham udgrivam vāstu-vaśān nyaset | 
Padanam api sarvesharh patrajatibhir alankritam | 
Antre natakair yuktarh padmanarn tu dalair yutam | 
Chatur-asrákritim chaiva prathamadin kampa-vajanaih | 
Athava ratna-pushapaé cha patradyair alankritam syat | 
"AE Anyair yuktarn svalankritya prativajana-de$ake | 
Prativajanakam tesham krite karkarikritam | 
Anyena vàntaram chaiva vyàla-simhàdi-rüpakaih | 
Khadgeva Sroni-sarnyuktarn vrittàéram pushpakair yutam | 
Anyanyamuktar cha sarveshàm yuktya tatraiva yojayet | (145-154). 
Sixteen types of pedestals are described under three technical names, 
details whereof are given below (37-127). (The mouldings are arranged 
in the successive order, as given in the text, from bottom upwards.) 
I. Vedibhadra (lines 27-59) : 


(a) 24 parts : . Parts ү” 
(1) Upana (plinth) 29 а 52 5. , T 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 3o Ss 5% I j 
(3) Griva (dado) e ae AE SUID f 
(4) Kampa (fillet) T 5c 5 І | 
(5) Vajana (fillet with greater projection) a 4 | 
(6) Kampa (fillet) : do i I 


(b) 12 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Padma (cyma) 
(3) Kampa (fillet) oo 
(4) Kantha (dado) со T 
7 (5) Kshepana (projection) .. oo 
(6) Padma (cyma) oc 5 
(7) Pattika (fillet) 
(8) Kampa (fillet) 
(c) 12 parts: 
P Ж (1) Paduka (plinth) MAC ed 
(2) Abja (cyma) ос 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 
(4) Griva (dado) 


De ta BO M (л ә mH N 
t= 


= = 
top bu 


сл 
ыа э 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


Parts 
(5) Kshepana (projection) .. $e i i 
(6) Padma (cyma) со a 4% i 
(7) Vàjana (fillet) Ro $ I 
(8) Kampa (fillet) % a i 
(d) 12 parts: 
(т) Upàna (plinth) z T T І 
(2) Abja (cyma) .. T © +: 
(3) Kampa (fillet) 55 AME 2: i 
(4) Karna (ear): .. Sc 
(5) Pattika (fillet) od 
(6) Kandhara (dado) ac 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 
(8) Vajana (fillet) 
(9) Kampa (fillet) 2 
These are suitable for all kinds of оо 2 
Sarva-harmyeshu уоратп syad vedibhadrarn chaturvidham | (52) 
II. Pratibhadra (lines 53-89) : 
(а) 26 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) dg ос 2. 3 
(2) Катра (fillet) / T dio 55 І 
(3) Abja (сута) ° со 


pe N м бл м 


2 

(4) Катра (fillet) І 
(5) Griva (dado) I 
(6) Kampa (fillet) б оо T I 
(7) Ambuja (cyma) T 56 LERE? 
3 

I 

I 


м 


(8) Катра (fillet) Gc 

(9) Antarita (fillet) 

(10) Prati-vajana (cavetto) .. 
(b) 32 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kshepana (projection 
(3) Padma (cyma) 
(4) Kshudrabja (small суша) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) : 
(6) Kandhara (dado) . оо 3: 
(7) Катра (Ше) . oc co од 
(8) Abja (сута) oto 2 
(9) Pattika (fillet) 
(10) Padma (cyma) 


UPAPITHA 


due M ن نچ‎ D نز نز‎ Юан Ñ 


UPAPITHA 


(11) Kampa (fillet) 
(12) Kandhara (dado) 
(13) Kampa (fillet) 
(14) Padma (cyma) 
(15) Kampa (fillet) 
(16) Kandhara (dado) 
(17) Uttara (fillet) 


(18) Kshepana (projection) .. 


(19) Ambuja (cyma) 

(20) Kapota (corona) 
(21) Alinga (fillet) 

(22) Antarita (fillet) 

(23) Prati-vajana (cavetto) 


(с) 33 parts : 
(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Padma (cyma) 
(4) Kampa (fillet) 
(5) Kandhara (dado) 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 
(7) Ambuja (cyma) 


(8) Vajrakumbha (round pi 


(9) Dala (petal) 
(10) Gala (dado) 
(11) Uttara (fillet) 


(12) Ardha-kampa  (half-fillet) 


(13) Saroruha (cyma) 

(14) Kapota (corona) 

(15) Alinga (fillet) 

(16) Antarita (fillet) 

(17) Prati-vajana (cavetto) 


(d) 33 parts : 

(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 

(3) Padma (cyma) 

(4) Kampa (fillet) 

(5) Karna (ear) 

(6) Kampa (fillet) 

(7) Ambuja (cyma) 

80 


tcher) 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


ON QO te tja коон ula tj he О 


Lad 
te 


M 


HO = sy M (л ай t£ к De га QO سردا‎ CS 
t>; 


= м о 
кн 


кз 


top سم‎ tja 9469 з 9 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i cM A 11. 5 "2 2 ығ. „йы зы diem cal y 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UPAPITHA 


Parts 

(8) Ratna-patta (jewelled Es Ws ji i 
(9) Dala (petal) ° 

(ro) Kshepana (projection) . 

(11) Karna (ear) .. 

(12) Kshepana CEO 

(14) Ambuja (cyma) 44 

(14) Kshepana (projection) .. Be T 
(15) Kantha (dado) 26 35 m at 

(16) Uttara (fillet) 

(17) Ardha-kampa (half- ШУ 

(18) Ambuja (сута) 

(19) Kapota (corona) 

(20) Alinga (fillet) 

(21) Antarita (fillet) 

(22) Prati-vajana (cavetto) a dc 

(23) Vajana (fillet) da oc 3c 14 


tM з 


= = oH M муч муч oH HM rà кч ыы Nl tS 
NM 


— 


These are suitable for temples, buildings of the Brahmanas, апа palaces 
of kings (91). 


III. Mafichahbadra (lines 90-124) : 
(а) 30 parts : Parts 
(1) Janman (plinth) A 24% zt 3 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 3 5 Js i 
(3) Mahambuja (large суаты) Зи T 3 
(4) Kampa (fillet) AC 22 i: i 
(5) Kantha (dado) 5% б z 4% > 
(6) Kampa (fillet) 4% us 56 1} 
(7) Ambuja (cyma) ae 2% ae 14 
(8) Kapota (corona) T об 25 24 
(9) Prati-vajana (cavetto) .. ` od 29 І 
(10) Kantha (dado) T Be T 8 
(11) Uttara (fillet) Ss Se oo I 
and the remaining parts are distributed among the following 
members : 


(12) Kshepana (projection). 
(13) Padma (cyma). 

(14) Gopànaka (beam). 
(15) Alinga (fillet). 

(16) Antarita (fillet). 

(17) Prati-vajana (cavetto). 


81 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


OL REPRE 


mw Аш Абы мб 
"DN 


EA Ma 


AQ 


UPAPITHA 


(b) 31 parts : 
(1) Орапа (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Saroruha (cyma) 


(4) Kshepana (projection) .. 


(5) Kampa (fillet) 
(6) Karna (ear) 
(7) Ambuja (cyma) 
(8) Gopana (beam) 
(9) Prati-vajana (cavetto) 
(10) Gala (dado) 
(11) Uttara (fillet) 
(12) Kampa (fillet) 
(13) Abja (cyma) 
(14) Kapota (corona) 
(15) Alinga (fillet) 
(16) Antarita (fillet) 
(17) Prati-vajana (cavetto) 
(c) 32 parts : 
(1) Орапа (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Mahambuja (large SE) 
(4) Kshudrabja (small cyma) 
(5) Kampa (fillet) 
(6) Antarita (fillet) 
(7) Kampa (fillet) 
(8) Padma (cyma) 
(9) Pattika (fillet) 
(то) Padma (сута) ` 
(11) Kampa (fillet) 
(ı2) Gala (dado) . 
(19) Uttara (fillet) 
(14) Kampa (fillet) 
(ı5) Ambuja (cyma) 
(16) Ardha-kampa (half-fillet) | 
(17) Prati-vajana (cavetto) 
(18) Antarita (fillet) 
(19) Karna (ear) 
(20) Uttara (fillet) 
(21) Kampa (fillet) 
(22) Padma (cyma) 
82 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


1 


м 
bo t) 


oe 


нч tet фа QO момын ОООО № tue tet tot 


we 


to сн муз ot OT назым Nt‏ چن بر نیم نردم 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


| 
4 
"dee 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


(23) Kapota (corona) 
(24) Alinga (fillet) 
(25) Antarita (fillet) 
(26) Gala (dado) .. 
(27) Uttara (fillet) 


(d) 34 parts : 


(1) Janman (plinth) 
(2) Kampa (fillet) 
(3) Abja (cyma) 56 
(4) Kshudra-padma (small сута) 
(5) Катра (fillet) dc 
(6) Gala (dado) .. 
(7) Antara (fillet) 
(8) Kampa (fillet) 
(9) Padma (cyma) 
(10) Am$uka (filament) 
r1) Kapota (corona) 
2) Antara (fillet) 
) Karna (ear) and 
) Uttara (fillet) 
(15) Kampa (fillet) 
(16) Abja (cyma) .. 
(17) Gopana (beam) 
(18) Vajana (fillet) 


3 
(14 


Projections (lines 125-144) : 


Tat-tad-angani sarveshàm upanadi-tathakramam | 


UPAPITHA 


Parts 


M N u= eH OO 
бйз نرم‎ [em 


© н ку wee кч I M) سیم‎ ОО wj Q2 


M OO чын н 


The projection of the plinth (and other members) is equal to the 
moulding, larger by one-fourth, one-half, three-fourths, or twice : 


Tat-samarh nirgamarn vapi tat padadhikam eva cha 1 

Tad ardhadhika-bhagarm vapi tat-tri-bhagadhikarn tatah | 
Tat-samadhikarh evarn và padad upana-nirgamam | (128-131). 
Janma-nirgamam evoktarn padma-nirgamam ishyate | (148). 


The projection of the cyma is not up to twice of it : 


Tungarh tat-samam evarn уа padadhikyardham adhikam 1 
Padona-dvi-gunarn vapi padmam evam tu nirgamar | (139-140). 
Upamànasya manena yuktya padmasya tu nirgamarn | (142). 


The projections of the other mouldings are (generally) equal to them : 


Kshudra-padmani kampaàni tat-samam vatha nirgamam | 
Pattikadini sarvani tat-samarh nirgamam bhavet | (143-144). 


83 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


"EM pei Ye т 


R II. 
. Cornice, 6 parts . " 


( 
Dies 5 2. 
Base .. | 
| | 


Я m 


N 


Cornice, 113 parts 


Die (4 modus) .. o. 


Base, 10 parts 


I5 


ae 
= 


эў Согпісе, 144 parts 


2 © OS mets mc 


III. In the Ionic order : 


bns e cali 


AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Projection 
Height in from the axis 
parts of a of column in 


In the Doric order (Art. 2665): 


. IV. In the Corinthian order (Art. 2582) : 


module parts of a 
module 
Listel ad T i 29 
Echinus .. ne I 223 
Fillet 33 T 4 21% 
Corona... m. 294 21 
Cyma reversa оо и 181 
Die, 4 modules. 
Congé I 17 
Fillet I 18 
Astragal I 18% 
. Cyma (inverted) ey 19 
Second plinth e 24 21 
First plinth оо 4 21% 
Fillet ao - i 35 
Cyma reversa Jede 341 
Corona .. do АЗ 331 
Fillet of the drip 3n i 30 
Ovolo Te соз Eg 202 
Bead oo »5 oH 27 
Fillet оо oó. M 261 
Congé o9 ы II 25 
Die © .. 19% rmod.7 
Congé 994) oo A 25 
Fillet оо ag c 27 
Bead об doy IR) 28 
Cyma reversa oo @ 273 
Fillet оо оо š 91% 
Plinth T o A 33 
Fillet оо - i 331 
Cyma reversa ond P 331 
Corona... жал 3 32 
Throat 35 IE 30% 
Bead оо LT 263 
Fillet дош NS EUN. 25i 
Frieze ob TONER] 25 


Bead 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


12. 
13. 


| 
Base, 144 parts ..< 16. 


V. In the Composite order (Art. 2591) : 


( 


N м 


Cornice, 14 parts 


ب چ ېو ва‏ ې و ب 


Die, g4 parts 


нн 
ю 


— ۸ے 


м 
OO 


On the comparison of the pedestals employed in the early periods of 
Indian and European architecture, 
opinion that ‘the most finished specimens of them (Indian pedestals) 
may be justly said to surpass anything of the kind in the Grecian or 
Roman orders, both in the beauty of their proportions and the richness 


UPAPITHA 
Projection 
Height іп from the axis 
parts of а — ofcolumn in 
module parts of a 
module 
Fillet T PY i 261 
Congé бс с IL 25 
Die T .. 87} 25 
Fillet ed 62 HE 25 
Congé .. T: à 261 
Bead AS HN 710. 271 
Inverted cyma reversa 3 26% 
Fillet "OP en 301 
Torus 36 ESAE D 324 
Plinth 6 324 
Fillet 4% T $ 33 
Сутпа reversa 22 14 321 
Corona 3 314 
Cyma recta 1} 284 
Fillet 1 261 
Cavetto I 251 
Frieze 5 25 
Bead I 27 
Fillet I 271 
Congé 1} 25 
Die х 88% 25 
Apophyge.. 2 27 
Fillet I 27 
Bead SENI 271 
Inverted cyma reversa % 304 
Fillet I 311 
'Torus 2 oe 3 33 
Plinth об oo LS 33 


of their ornament.’—(Ram Raz, p. 23.) 


(6) See Ranganatha inscription of Sundarapandya.—(Verse 19, Ep. 


Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 13, 16.) 


97 


Ram Ràz and others are of 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ЕРЕ M ы ы 


UPABHAVANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF / 
The ends of the ring (of the Konkadara plates of Allava-Dodda) are Е 


secured in the crescent-shaped base of an oblong fedestal which bears a 
recumbent figure of the sacred bull Nandin, with the symbols of the 
sun and the moon in front of it.—(Ep. Ind., Vol. v, p. 53.) 
(7) *One lower pedestal (upapitha), on which this image stood, set 
with jewels (and measuring) one muram and eleven viral in length, 
three-quarters (of a muram) and five viral in breadth, and seven viral 
іп height. —(Inscription of Rajaraja, no. 34, para. 6, H.S.I.I., Vol. u, p. 144.) 
(8) *One pedestal (having or called) an auspicious mark (bhadra). 
“Тһе word, bhadra, occurs in two other inscriptions in the description ~ 
of a pedestal (above, p. 223, para. 4; р. 225, para. 4).—(V.S.I.I., Vol. 
п, nO. 79, para. 4, p. 398, note 2.) 
(9) See Essay on Arch. of Hind., Ram Raz, Plate r, figs. 1-12. 
(10) See pedestal ofstatue inside the great temple at Gaya, Cunning- 
ham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. 1, Plate v, p. 6, ibid., Vol, rx, Plate ru 
(plan and section of pedestal for statues). 


UPABHAVANA—A sub-temple. 

* Caused to be erected a sub-temple (upabhavana) adorned with the 
images of Нагі and Gane$a'.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Arsikere Taluq i 
no. 79, Transl., p. r42, last two lines.) ч 

UPAMANA--The measurement of the interspace. 
(М., Lv, 3, 9; see under MANA.) 
UPALEPANA —Plastering. 
Tad-vasati-sambandhi -nava -karmmottara - bhàvi -khanda - sphutita- 
sam-marjjanopalepana-paripalanadi I—(Konnur Inscrip. of Amogha- 
varsha I, line 37, Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 31, 36.) 
Deva-grihari Кагаруа punas tasya upalepana |—(Buchkala Inscrip. of 
Naga Bhatta, lines 17-18, Ep. Ind., Vol. Ix, p. 200.) 
UPAVANA-—A pleasure-garden, a planted forest. 
Upavanam atha chakre tena meghe$varasya sphurita-kusumarenu- 
$reni-chandràátapa-éri | í 
Avirata-makaranda-syanda-sandoha-varshair ^ ddhrita-rati-pati- | 
lilayan-tradharagrihatvam II—(Two Вһиуапебуаг Inscriptions, no. A 
of Svapneśvara, v. 26, Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, p. 202.) 
UPAVASANA—A coverlet, an upper garment. 


UPAVEDI—The upper or the smaller pedestal, a seat or dais. 


aw 


Suddha-toyena sarhpirya vedikopari vinyaset | | 
Í Upavedyopari sthapya choktavach chashta-mangalam | WA 
(M., LXX, 41, 45.) 


5- 


98 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE UPANA 


UPASATHAGARA—A building belonging to a Buddhist monastery 
used for the performance of the priestly ceremony of confession, in 
which every member of the order is to acknowledge the faults he has 
committed.—(Childer's S. V., Kern, quoted by W. Geiger: Mahavarnia, p. 296.) 
UPASTHANA (cf. Asthana-mandapa)—A reception-room. 
‘ The meritorious gift of а reception-room (upasthana) by the two 
men. —(Junnar Inscriptions, no. 2, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. rv, 


p. 92.) 
UPASTHANA-BHÜMTI-A hall of audience. 
Yasyopasthàna-bhümi . . . © whose hall of audience.'—(Kahaun Stone 


Pillar Inscrip. of Skandagupta, line r, C. J. I., Vol. ur, F. б. I., no. 15, p. 67.) 


UPANA—A rectangular moulding, a fillet; it corresponds, in the 
import of the term and the purpose to which it is applied, to the 
plinth or the lower square member of the base of a column or the 
projecting base of any moulding (cf. Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., 
р. 25). 
Atha  vakshyàmi sarnkshepat pada-manarh yatha-vidhi i 
Uttaropanah(-y)or madhya-gatam etat prakirtitam Il 
Apparently * upanaha ’ is used in the sense of * арапа.” 
(Vastu-uidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, 1x, 1.) 
The bottom of the foundation-pit : 
Tat-pàda-müle deSe và tathopàna-prade$ake | 
Kudya-stambhe griha-stambhe harmya-garbham vinikshipet 1 
(M., хп, 130-131.) 
The moulding (plinth) at the bottom of a pedestal, it is also called 
Janman : 
Utesedhe tu chatur-viméat pañcharnšam upanam iritam | 
Ekena kampam ityuktam grivochcharh dva-dasamSakam | 
Kampam ekam tu vedarnšarn vajanarh kampam amé$akam | 
Vedibhadram iti proktam athava dvàa-da$am$akam | 
Janma dvayarnšakarn padarn kampam ardhena karayet | 
(M., xut, 36-40, see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA.) 
The similar moulding of the base is also called * janman °: 
Eka-virnšarnšakarn tunge kshudropanam $ivam$akam | 
Janmadi-vajanantarn cha sapta-vimi$am$am uchchhrayet 1 
Dvi-bhagarh janma-tungarh syat tat-samarh chambujodayam | 
(M., хіу, 44, 65-66.) 
It is also called paduka and vapra, see the lists of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA. 


89 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


a a oo SEE 


UBHAYA-CHANDITA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


UBHAYA-CHANDITA—A site:plan of one hundred and sixty- 
nine е plots. 
(M. уп, 15-16, cf. PADA-VINYASA.) 


URAGA-BANDHA (5% under ADHISHTHANA)—A class of bases. It 
has four types differing from one another in the height and num- 
ber of the mouldings. (See the details under ADHISHTHANA.) 
It is shaped like the face of a snake (uraga) and is furnished with two 
pratis at the top (M., хіу, 44). The pitcher-shaped moulding of this 
class of bases is circular or round.—(M., xiv, 45.) 


USHNISHA—The top of a building, а diadem, a crownet, the top 
knot on the Buddha's head. 
(т) Manasara : 
The top of a building : 
Salavrite $alaküte cha піде cha gikhare chordhva-kütake 1 
Lupa-yukta-bhramakare tat-tad-ushnisha-desike | 
. Stipikavahanarh bhavet | (M., хуш, 333-334.) 
Тһе top knot on the crown of a Buddhist image : 
Bauddhasya lakshanarh vakshye samyak cha vidhinadhuna | 
Dvi-bhujath cha dvi-netrarn cha choshnishojjvala-maulikam | 
(M., LVI, 1, 10.) 
The crown of the statue of a devotee (bhakta) : 
Ushnishat pàda-paryantam  bhavottara-$atàméakam | 
Ushnisham tu chatur-matram netrantarh tu yugangulam | 
(M., LIX, 14-15.) 
Referring to the situation of the plumb-lines : 
Ushnisha-madhyame chaiva lalàtam(sya) chaiva madhyame i 
Ushnishat tu yatha pārśve lalatasya tu pārśvake | 
Ushnishat pürva-pàr$ve tu yathoktam netra-madhyame 1 
(M., Lxvu, 98, 103, 107.) 
(2) The word * ushnisha * usually means a turban, but is used by the 
Buddhists as a technical term for the top knot on Buddha's head, by 
which all figures of him are distinguished : * he is never represented in 
Indian sculpture with any sort of covering on his head.’ Dr. Burgess.— 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, p. 195, note 3.) 
USHNISHI—A type of round buildings. 


(1) Agni-Purana, Chap. civ, vv. 17-18 (see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 23, 28-20 (see under PRASADA). 


go 


UT 


— 
* 


аат 


т К 


MSUNISHA Page 90 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


bon. 
2 CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


* = е, 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ÜHAPOHA 


Ü 


UHAPOHA—Philosophically ‘uha?’ implies a conjecture, a 
guess, ‘a hypothetical reasoning which helps the right recognition,’ 
hence architecturally an additional moulding or member to fill 
up any unspecified gap ; “ароһа” or © pratyüha ° means * a removal,’ 
hence leaving out a moulding, or an architectural member to complete 
a structure. Thus the former implies the addition and the latter 
the omission of a moulding. 


(1) Manasara : 
In connexion with the ground-plan : 
Ajñanad anga-hinam cha kartā chaiva vina$yati | 
Tasmat tu Silpibhih prajfiair ühapohan na yojayet | 
(M., уп, 268-269.) 
Referring to two-storeyed buildings : 
Sarvesharh devata-harmye pürvavad devatah nyaset 1 
Ukta-vach chhàstra-màrgena thapohena yojayet | 
(M., xx, 105-106.) 
In connexion with penalties for defects in important members : 
Uhàpohadi-kirtibhyarn $astrokte tu yad(th)à tatha 1 
Uhi(üha)-hina chokta-hina tvadhikartri(ta) уіпаќуай 1 
Tasmāt tu Silpa-vidvadbhih parigrahoktavat kuru | 
(/М., Lxıx, 66-68. 
(2) Kamikagama, XLI : 
Sabhavad vihità bahye prasadavad alankrita | 
Üha-pratyüha-samyuktà ya sabha sa cha malika и (4). 
Antara-prastaropetam ühà-pratyüha-samyutam 11 (13). 
Ibid, XLI : 
Üha-pratyüha-samyuktam) yatha-yukti yatha-ruchi tt (37). 
(3) Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 71: 


A quadrangular moulding of an arch : 
Vritter ürdhve u(ü)hàm kritva chatur-ayatam eva tu Il 


(For the context, see vv. 68-70, under Токалма.) 


(4) Mahabharata, 1, 3, 139 : 
Nagalokam . . .  aneka-vidha-prasada-har mya-valabhi- 
niryüha-éata-samkulam | 2 


91 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


EMO = TA 


URDHVA-DHARANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ÜRDHVA-DHARANAC—A kind of phallus and pedestal combined. 
In connexion with the phallus : 
Berasyaika-sila proktam lingànarm tach-chatuh-sila | 
Nandyavarta(a)-kritih sthapya tatha chaika$manà bhavet 1 
Atho(dhah) pashana-kurmakhyath chordhva-dharanam iti smri- | 
tam I (M., тл, 176-178.) 
URDHVA-SALA (see SALA)—The upper room or hall. 
Referring to two-storeyed buildings : 
Nana-gopana-sarhyuktarh kshudra-nasyair vibhisitam 1 | 
Ardha-$ala-visesho'sti chordhva-$ala-samanvitam | 
(М., xx, 66-67, etc.) 
UVARAKA—A kind of room, an inner room, a store room, an 
apartment. 
Ramadattasya deya-dhamà$ cha bhikshu-griharh uyaraka$ cha- 
bharyayah sa velidattaya deyadharma uyarakah | 
А dwelling for the ascetics and ап uyaraka (has) been dedicated as 


- a charitable gift by Ràmadatta . .. and an uyaraka (has been given) 
as a charitable gift by his wife Velidata (Velidatta), whose husband is 
alive. 


< Uyaraka apparently corresponds with čvaraka of Nasik no. 24. 
Transactions of Congr. 1874, p. 347, which Professor Bhandarkar renders 
by apartment. Childers’ Pali Dict. gives ovaraka with the meaning of | 

- inner or store room and this explanation fits here also very well.’—Prof. | 
Н. Jacobi.—(Ind. Ant., Vol. vu, Kuda inscriptions, no. 8, p. 256.) 1 


Ro | 
RIKSHA-NAYAKA (see бімна)--А kind of round buildings. E 


(Аепі-Ригапа, Chap. civ, vv. 19-20, see under PRASADA.) 


E 


ЕКА-ТАТА(-ВНО МІ) (se under РвАзАрА)-А single-storey 
building, the ground floor. 
Ahatyam (vibhajya) ashtadha harmyarh ganya-manam ihochyate | 
Utsedhe chashta-bhage tu chamsena masürakam | 
- Dvi-bhágarn changhrikottungarh maficham ekena karayet I 
Kandharam tat-samam kuryat tad-dvayam sikharodayam | 
Tad-ardham stupikottungam vaktram shad-vidham iritam | 
; (M., xix, 20-24.) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE EKA-PAKSHA 


Athava manu-bhagam tu harmya-tuüga(m) vibhajite | 

Sa-tri-padam adhishthanarh tad-dvayarn changhri-bhajite(-kon- 
natam)! 

Tad-ardharn prastarotsedharn yugarméam griva-tungakam | 

Tad-ardham éikharottungarn tad-ürdhve stupikarnšakam | 

Griva-mafichordhvam агпбепа yatheshtadhishthana-sarhyutam 1 

Ürdhve padodaye bandharh(=4)bhagam ekarnsa(rn)-vedikami 

Sesharh purvavat kuryad ashta-varga-vido viduh |—(Jbid., 80-86.) 

Evam proktarn harmyake madhya-bhadram | 

Sala-koshthamn dig-vidike küta-yuktam | 

Hara-Sranta-nasika-pafijaradhyam | 

Kuryàt sarvan vedika-bhadra-yuktam | 

Harmya-tara-samam chatur-afrakam tat-tri-padam ardham athapi 
cha | 

Kudya-tara-samadi (?) yatha-kramam | 

Kanyasam tri-vidharn mukha-mandapam | 

Tan-mukha-mandapam mukhya-vimàne | 

Madhya-vimanasya mandapa-parsve | 

Ambaram dandam atha dvayam | 

Harmya-vasad upave$ana-yuktam | 

Yat tat kshudra-vimane tan-mukhe mandapam  syati—(Ibid. 
192-203.) . 

Anya-mandapa-deSe yan-manoramyam alankritam | 

Mandape prastarasyordhve karna-harmyadi-manditam | 

Yat tan namantaralam chordhve паѕіка jala-pafijararh vapi! 

Tat-tan-mandapa-madhye prasada-vasad dvara(m)-sarmnkalpyam | 

Pürvavat kavata-yuktarh mandapasyantah sa-kila~yuktam | 

i (Ibid., 213-217.) 

Eka-bhümim kuryād adhikam chopapīțha(rn)- ruchirartha(m)- 
sam-yutam I 

Sopapitha-bhavanair yutar tu và karayet tu kathitarn puratanaih | 

Evar sarva-harmyálankàra-yuktyà nana-pàdair- vedika-tara-mafi, 
cham (kuryat) i—(bid., 258-261.) 


EKATALA (see under TALA)—A kind of sculptural measurement. 
EKA-PAKSHA (cf. DvipaxsHA)—One side, a road or wall having 
the footpath on one side only. 


Antar-vithi chaika-paksham bahya-vithi dvi-pakshakam | 
(M., тх, 396., 


Anyat salam tu sarvesharh chaika-pakshalaya-kramat | 
Anyat salarh tu sarvesham alayartham dvi-pakshakam | _ 
(M., xxxvi, 86-87.) 
See also M., їх, 351-354, 465, under Dvi-PAKSHA. 


93 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


A tet 


ІШІ! 


=, 
m 
— 


EKA-LINGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


EKA-LINGA—The single phallus as opposed to phalli in group. 
Sarvesham chaika-harmye tu ekaika-linge tu sammatam | 
Bahudha sarva-lingeshu tat-tri-karnam па karayet | 
Dvi-karnam bahu-linge tu tri-karnam-chaika-lingake | 
Evam tu chaika-lingar syad vistararn parikirtitam | 
(M., xn, 71-73, 82.) 
ЕКА-ЅАТ.А — Mansion consisting of one row of buildings. 
(M., xxxv, 9, 35-) 
EKA-HARA (cf. HARA)—With one chain-like ornament below the 
neck of the column, head or astragal. 
In connexion with a single-storeyed building : 
Sala-küta-dvayor madhye chaika-hara ѕарайјагат |—(M., хіх, 57.) 
EKADASA-TALA—An eleven-storeyed building, the eleventh storey. 
Tad-adhastat talarnh chaika-da$a-dva-da$a-bhümikam | 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 86.) 
Sesha-bhagarh tu sarvesharh yuktyà tatraiva yojayet | 
Evam vistara-ganyam syat tunga-ganyam ihochyate | 
Janmádi-stüpi-paryantarn uktavat sarmgraharn viduh | 
ЕКа-4абатпба-Бһарепа da$a-talodayadhikam | 
Tad eva sardha-bandh(v)amn$am masürakottungam ishyate | 
Saptarnsarn pada-dirgharh syat tad-ardam prastarodayam | 
Sesharh prag-uktavad ganyam ekà-da$a-talodaye | 
Talordhvordhva-tale sarve karna-harmyadi-manditam | 
Eka-bhaga-dvi-bhagam va parito'lindam ishyate | 
Nanadhishthàna-samyuktarn nana-padair alankritam | 
Sala-kütai$ cha uktavat samalankritam | 
Harantare küta-$ala cha griva-de$okta-devatan(h) | 
Anu-salashta-dik-palas tat-tad-vahana-sarnyutam | 
Yaksha-vidyadharadinam garudadini vinyaset | 
Ganetyadi-ganai$ chaiva sarva-harmyeshu nikshipet | 
(M., XXIX, 35-49-) 
ETAKA-PADAKA-PITHA—A chair raised on a pedestal. 


(Mahavagga, у, 10, 2.) 
EVAMKANTA—A column connected with one, two or three minor 
pillars, and having a lotus-shaped base. 


Ekopapada-samyukt ima dvi-try-upapadena sarnyutam | 
Evarn-kantam iti proktarn mile padmasananvitam | 


(M., ху, 242-243.) 
94 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KATAKA 


AI 


AIRAVATA-—The great elephant, the riding animal (vahana) of 
the god Iga (? Indra). 
Isa-mürtim iti dhyatva rakta-varnam cha $ishpatam (Sachipatim) 1 
Dvi-bhujam dvi-netram cha rathairavata-vahanam | 


(М., уп, 190-191.) 
А class of the five-storeyed buildings. 


(/М., xxi, 3-12, see under PRASADA.) 
K 


KAKSHA The armpit of an image, a residential room. 
Kakshayor antararh tararh vim$a-matrarn pra$asyate | 
(M., LIX, 29.) 
Eka-virnšañgularn chordhve kakshayor antara-sthale | 


(M., xxv, 52, etc.) 
KAKSHA-BANDHA—A class of bases. 


See the four types, the component mouldings and other details under 
ADHISHTHANA.—(M., xiv, 320-358.) 


KATA—A mat of split cane or bamboo. 


(Тай. Sam., v, 3, 12, 2 : Sat. Bra., xut, 3, r, 3.) 


KATAKA—An architectural ornament (like a ring) of a base, a 
bracelet for an image, camp, capital. 


Madhye pattair vi$esharn tu pushpa-ratnai$ cha $obhitam | 

Katakavritam eva và $uddha-vrittam athapi và I—(M., xiv, 75-76.) 
Compare also the list of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA. 

Vrittarn vidhirh tri-pattarh và dharaya-katakanvitam 1—(Ibid., 238.) 

Etat tu chitra-kalparh (--ап ornament) tu natakabhi(kai)r alankri- 

tam |—(M., L, II.) 

Keyüra-katakair yuktarn prakoshtha-valayam tathà 1—( M., uv, 1 9- 
See also M. тл, 57, udder KATr-sÜTRA. 
In connexion with the plumb-lines : 

Saktinàm pushpa-hastarh tu stanàntarn katakagrakam 1 

Tad-angushthavasanantam cha dvyantaram chatur-angulam | 

(M., тхуп, 135-136.) 

* One pair of bracelets (kataka) for the arms of the goddess (consisting 
of) fifty-six karanju, two manjadi and (one) kunri of gold.’ — (Inscriptions of 
Rajaraja, по. 2, line 37, Н.8.1.1., Vol. u, p. 19.) 


95 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KATAKAKARA 


* One pair of bracelets (kataka) for the arms of the goddess, consist- 
ing of thirty-nine karanju and seven manjadi of gold.'— (Inscriptions of 
Rajendra-Chola, no. 8, line 19, Н. S. I. I., Vol. п, p. 89.) 

Astyuttara- -giri katake (declivity of the Northern Mountain) Vijaya- 
puram-nāmā nripa-dhàni |—(Grant of жану of Vijaya-pura, line 6, Ind. 
Ant., Vol. xxt, р. 170.) 

*Inthe world-renowned Raya-chalukya's camp (or capital, kataka), 
the bodyguard Keta-nayaka gained unlimited fame and the greatest 
reputation for energy and readiness.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Chan- 
narayapatna Taluq, no. 210; Transl., p. 216, line 9 of no. 210.) 


KATAKAKARA-—An ornament shaped like a bracelet or ring. 


Referring to lupa or a pent-roof : Y 
Evam cha lakshanarh proktam katakakaram tu yojayet | 


(M., хуш, 249.) 


KATI—The hip-part of a building, the hip of an image, a flight 
of steps. 
(1) Yo vistaro bhaved yasya dvi-guna-tat-samunnatih 1 
Uchchhrayad yas tritiyo rnšas tena tulyà katir bhavet 1 


‘The height of a building should be twice its width and its kati 
(lit. hip) should be (equal to) 2 of its height.—(Brihat-Sarhita, LVI, 11.) 

Dr. Kern translates ‘kati’ by *the flight of steps’ (7.R.A.S., N. S., 
Vol. уі, p. 318); but in this sense the word never occurs in dictionaries 
or literature ; nor does this rendering suit the context here, first, because 
the description concerns a single-storeyed building, where the flight 
of steps, if there be any at the entrance, would not be usually one-third 
of the height of the whole building ; secondly, the measures of the flight 
of steps mostly in buildings of more than one storey are never considered 
in any architectural treatises as being ече оп the height of the 
building or the storey. 


(2) Chatuh-shashti-padarh kritva madhye dvaram prakalpayet | 
Vistarad dvi-gunochhrayam tat-tri-bhagah katir bhavet I1 ` 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrxx, v, 18.) 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. cxx, v. 18) has the same verse as (1), 
except ‘ tasya ° in place of *yasya' in the first line, and ‘atha’ for 
‘amsa’ in the second line. Brthat-Samhita seems to have improved 
the lines. 

96 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KANTHA 


(4) In the sense of the hip or buttocks : 
Kati($) chorü-vi$alarn syan madhya-kafichina-lambavat t 
(M., LIV, 91.) 
Kati-tàram bhaskararnšam syàd ashtàméam choru-vistritam 1 
Mukharn vakshag cha kukshis cha kati-dirghe dvadašarnšakam 1 
(М., туп, 32, 55.) 


se sm ie , 


KATI-SOTRA—The (plumb) line by the hip or buttocks, a girdle. 
Kati-sütravasanam syat pura-sütram iti smritam 1 
Kati-sütram tu sarhyuktarh kati-prante sa-pattika 1—(M., L, 21, 27.) 
Tasmat kati-sütràntam sapta-virhsangularh bhavet 1 
Trayoda$améakam chaiva kati-sütram tu vistritam | 
(M., Lxv, 150, 164.) 
A girdle. 

Katakam kati-sütram cha keyüram ratna-püritam 1—(М., и, 57.) 
KANTHA—Also called * gala,’ ‘griva; * kandhara,’ meaning literally 
the neck or throat. This is а quadrangular moulding, sometimes 
square and sometimes rectangular. * When employed in pedestals 


(see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA), it is made very high and 
it resembles the dado (or the portion of a pedestal between its base 


and cornice, also applied to the lower portions of the walls). But 


everywhere else it serves as a neutral member from which the pro- 
ection of the rest of the mouldings are generally measured. 
(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., p. 25.) 


The neck of a column (Suprabhedagama, XXX1, 58, see under STAMBHA). 
Tunge triméati-bhagena . . . 1 
'Tad-ürdhve kantham ashtàméam . . . 1--(/М., хш, 90, 94.) 
Utsedhe tu chatur-viméat . . . | 
Grivochcharn dvà-da$aàm$akam 1—(Ibid., 36-37.) 
'Tad-evam$éena . . 


Pafichaméa(m) kandharam proktam . . .-(1042., 48, 50.) 
Tad-evaméa (of 30 parts)... 
Tad-irdhve galam ashtarnšam . . .—(Ibid., 97, 101.) 


For further examples, see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA. 
Gala-tungarh yugangulam 1 


Gala-tararn ѕагаһат ashtarnšam . . . 1—(M., LIX, 71, 81.) 
For further examples, see the lists of limbs under TALA-MANA. 
97 


. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


er) ————— 
ч i 


KADANGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


КАПАХСА--А large trench, a ditch, a boundary mark. 

° Kadangas ог war-trenches are described in the Rev. С. Ritcher's Manual 
of Coorg (pp. 190-191) : these are enormous trenches defended by a bank 
of the excavated soil, and stretch over hills, woods, and comparatively 
flat countries, for miles and miles, at some place branching off in various 
directions, or encircling hilltops. Mr. Ritcher quotes old records to show 
that they were constructed by ancient Ràjas to fortify the principality. 
In South Kanara also these trenches abound.’ | 

‘ So, too, great and massive walls, 8 feet high, half as thick, and ex- 
tending for long distances, are found buried in deep forest on the crest of 
the ghats between Kanara and Maisur, with large trees rooted in them.' 
(See GRAMA and compare the above with the surrounding defensive 
ditches of the village as given in the Мйпазйға.) 

(Ind. Ant., Vol. rv, p. 162, c. r., last para. 
Iine 2 f. ; c. 2, line 6.) 

‘From this it appears to follow that the Coorg Kadangas or large 

trenches, originally were intended for landmarks.—(Three Kongu inscrip- 
. tions, no. п, Ind. Ant., Vol. vr, p. 103, с. r, line 29, Transl. and footnote, 
last para.) 


KANDARA-GRIHA (see DARI-GRIHA)—A cave-house. 
` Khyàtam (? syātam) kanakadi-kandaragrihodirna-prataparh divi 
khyatam naikavanig-visala-bibhavo bhütabhi$obharn $ubham | 


(Description of the town of Atapura, Atpur 
inscrip. of Saktikumàra, v, m, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xxxix, pp. 19r, note 25, 187.) 


KANDHARA—The neck, the dado. 

See KANTHA and compare the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA. 
КАМҮА--А girl, a virgin, the name of a month, the lower part of an 
architectural object. 

Lupàm prag-ukta-vistaram tat-tad-varn$anghri-kantakam 1 

Adho(ah)-padasya lupadyai$ cha tatra dosho na vidyate | 

Karnat kanyávasanarn syan nava-sütrum prasarayet | 

À (M., хуш, 231-233.) 

KAPATA (see KAvATA)—A door, the panel of a door. 

Kapata-torana-vatim suvibhakantarapanam 1—(Ramayana, 1, 5, 10.) 

Dridha-baddha- kapatani mahaparighavanti cha |—(Jbid., у, 3, 11.) 
KAPOTA—A pigeon, a section of circular moulding made in the form 
of a pigeon’s head, from which it takes it name. It is a crowning 


98 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KAPOTA 


member of bases, pedestals, and entablatures. Compare the lists of 
mouldings, from the Manasára, given under UPAPITHA (where Kapota 
occurs eight times), ADHISTHANA (fifteen times), and PRASTARA (five 
times) and also see Gwilt (Encycl. of Arch., Art. 2532, 2555, pp. 806, 
813-814). When employed in the entablature, it serves the pur- 
pose of a spout in the shape of a pigeon's beak to throw off water 
falling on the cornice. In this office it resembles, in some measure, 
the corona having a broad vertical face and with its soffit or under 
portion recessed so as to form a drip which prevents water running 
down the building. Its synonyms are: vaktra-hasta (face supported 
by hand, wherefrom it takes its shape), lupa (pent-roof), gopánaka 
(beam), and chandra (the moon). (Also see M., хут, 18-20.) 


(1) Manasara : 
Referring to the pedestal : 
Tad-dvayarn chambujarn chordhve kapotochcharh gunam$akam | 
(М., хш, 57.) 
For further illustrations, see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA. 
Referring to the base : 
Padmam arnšarn tad-ürdhve tu kapotochcham tri(y)améakam | 


(M., xiv, 357.) 
For further illustrations, see the lists of mouldings under Apuisn- 
THANA. 
Referring to the entablature : 
'Tad-ürdhve vàjanam chaika dhatu-bhagam kapotakam | 
(M., хм, 27.) 
For further illustrations, see the lists of mouldings under PRASTARA. 
A synonym of the entablature : 
Kapotam prastram chaiva maficham prachchhadanam tatha | 
. paryaya-vachakah |—(Jbid., 18, 20.) 
Referring to the six-storeyed buildings : 
Prastaràdi-kapotantam khsudra-nasya vibhüshitam | 
(M., xxiv, 39.) 
(2) * A kapotam is a section of moulding made in the form of а 
pigeon's head. It is a crowning member of cornices, pedestals and 
entablatures. When employed in the latter, it often connects 
utility with beauty, inasmuch as the beak of the bird is so 


placed as to serve the purpose of a spout.’—(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of 
Hind., p. 24.) 


99 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KAPOTA-PALIKA(-PALI) 


KAPOTA-PALIKA(-PALI)—A pigeon-house, an aviary, “properly 
dove-ridge, dove-list, may be rendered by crown-work, fillet, gable- 
edge, and even by cornice. A water-spout used at the roof to drain 
off water having the shape of pigeon’s head or beak. In Tamil, 
kapotakam is explained as a moulding in masonry : see Winslow’s 
Tam. Dict. i. v) Then Dr. Kern quotes Ram Raz's passage noticed 
under ‘ Kapota’ and adds ‘the same author (Кат Каз) notices 
(p. 51) that the spout may be made to spring from the head of a 
lion, etc.’ 
With this, Kern compares Utpala’s definition : 
Kapota-palika grahanena bahir nirgatà mukhani kashthany 
uchyante—by the acceptation of Kapota-pali, the projecting lion- 
face timbers (mouldings) are understood; (and also Višvak, 6 

767): 

Prasadau nirgatau karyau kapotau garbha-manatah 1 
Urdhvam bhitty-uchchhrayat tasya mafijararh tu prakalpayet 1 
Mafijaryas chardha-bhagena $uka-nasam prakalpayet | 
Ürdhvam tathardha-bhagena vedi-bandho bhaved iha и 

Then Kern finds fault with Colebrooke’s rendering of Kapota- 
palika and vitanka (in his Amara-Kosha, quoted below) as ‘ dove- 
cot’ and says ‘ Colebrooke’s error, strange to say, has been per 
petuated in all dictionaries ; the more reason now to draw atten- 
tion to it.’—(7.R.A.S., N. S., у, p. 320, note 2.) 

* A storey's altitude is of 108 digits (angulas) according to Maya 
but Vi$va-karman pronounces it to be of 3 cubits and а half, 

(i. e. 84 digits). As to this, however, able architects have declared 
that in reality there is no discrepancy of opinion, for, if you add 
the height of the crown-work (kapota-pali), the smaller number 
will equal (the greater).  (Brihat-Samhità, LVI, 29, 30.) 

There is a compound word <“ kapota-palika’ or ‘ kapota-pali ° 
(dove-cot) in Sir William's Dict., p. 202, с. 3. Similarly the 
words, ‘kapota’ and 'palika' or “рап” occur together in the 
Brihat-Samhita and (its commentary) Ütpala quoted above. But they 
do not occur as one word іп Winslow's Tamil Dict., in Viávak 
and in Ram Raz. In the twenty-eight instances in the Manasara, 
too, pointed out above (under КАРОТА), only the word * Kapota ° 
occurs. There is a different moulding called both * Pali’ and < Palika’ 
in the Manasára. As regards the correctness of Dr. Kern's render- 
ing of the term by ‘ dove-ridge,’ or of Colebrooke’s and Sir M. 
William's by ‘ dove-cot* nothing can be stated definitely as the term 


100 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


KALASA AS САР MOULDING. 


KALASA 


KALASA ) 


1N3WYNWO УЯУІУЯ 


KATAKA. 


ا 


KAPOTA 


4 
`= 
m 
x 
с. 
`< 
= 
о 
a 
< 
x 


| 


KARNA PA 


° 


KAROTI. 


KAROTI. 


= 
- 
BE 
x< 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


-VAKTRA. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE K(H)A-BHITTI 


is used figuratively to indicate a moulding and both the interpre- 
tations аге possible. 
Kapota-pàálini-yukta-mato gachchhati tulyatam | 
(Bhavishya-Purana, Chap. cxxx, v. 37.) 
Kona-paravatarh kuryät stipy-achchhadanakani cha 11 
Kona-paravatarn nyasya kona-loshtani vinyaset 11 
(Vastu-vidyà, ed. Ganapati Sastri, ху, 27, 36.) 
Bahih kapota-karanarn vajanopari kalpayet I1 
Ardha-tri-pada-dandath và kapota-lambanam bhavet 11 
(K'amikagama, LIV, 21, 22 : see also vv. 36, 97.) 
Chatur-gunam (of the main temple) mukhayamam prakaranam 
viSeshatah | 
Kapotàntam samutsedham  hasta-vistara-bhittikam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, ххх, 119.) 
Kapota-palikayàm tu vitankam pum-napurnsakar 11 s 
(Amarakésha, u, 3, 15.) 
KAPOLA—tThe cheek of an image, an upper part of a building. 
(т) Prāsādāu nirgatau karyau kapolau garbha-manatah 1 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrxix, v. 11.) 
(2) Chaturdha $ikharam bhajya(m) ardha-bhaga-dvayasya tu | 
Suka-nàsam prakurvita tritiye vedika mata 11 
Kantham āmalasāram tu chaturthe parikalpayet | 
Kapolayos tu samharo dvi-guno’tra vidhiyate |! 
(Jbid., Chap. corxix, 18-19.) 
(3) Mukha-taram kapolantarh nava-matram praśasyate | 
(М., LXM, 7.) 
KABANDHANA—A knob at the end of the nail above the post of 
the bedstead. 
Adhah kilena pàdanàm madhye randhram praveSayet | 
Tad-ürdhve pattikath nyasya kilagre cha kabandhanam | 
Chaturbhih $rinkhala-yuktam andolam chaikatopari ! 
Deva-bhü-sura-bhüpànam anyeshàm $ayanarthakam ! 
(M., хілу, 68-71.) 
K(H)A-BHITTI—An upper storey-wall, an upper wall, ‘kha’ 
implying ‘ sky ° and * bhitti’ wall. 
Garbhadhana-kramanakam kah(kha)-bhittir mukhya-dhàmani I 
Kah(kha)-bhittir dakshine bhage saumyavasah ргаѕаѕуаќе II 
IOI 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` KAMALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Kah-(kha)-bhitty-agrabhitter dvara-dvayarn kuryàd viseshatah | 
Vàstu-dvara-yutam chaiva k(h)a-bhitte$ cha viseshatah 11 
Vàstünàm pārśvayor madhye stambha-sajiiarh nidhapayet 1 
K(h)a-bhitti-vistritartharh tu tat-par$vayor dvayor hi (tat) 11 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, 45, 47, 48, 62 : Lv, 31.) 
KAMALA—A lotus, a class of the six-storeyed buildings. 


(M., xxiv, 17-18, see under РвАзАрл.) 


KAMALANGA—A class of the three-storeyed buildings. 
(M., хх, 33-38, see under PRAsADA.) | 
КАМРА--А fillet, a small flat band which occurs chiefly between у 
mouldings to connect or separate them. ‘Of all the rectangular | 
mouldings it has the least height. Its projection, though generally 
equal to its altitude, frequently varies according to the position of 
the principal members, which it is employed, to connect or to separate. 
It answers in every respect to the fillet.’ 
(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., p. 24.) 
Referring to the pedestal: 
Utsedhe tu chatur-viméat . . .! 
Ekena kampam ityuktam . . . | 
Kampam ardham tathà karpam . . . 1—(M., хш, 36-37, 49.) 
For further examples, see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA. 
Referring to the base : 
Ekena-triméad angam (—améam) tu tungam kritva . . . | 
Kampam ekena kartavyam . . . I—(M., xiv, 14-16.) 
For further examples, see the lists of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA. 


KAMPA-DVARA—A side-door, a private entrance. 
(1) Kampa-dvaram tu và kuryan madhya-pàréva-dvayos tatha | 
= (Kamikagama, ххху, 49.) 
(2) nya haa tu tad-vàme kampa-dvararn tad-anyake | 
(Jbid., LV, 32.) 


KAMPANA (same:as Kampa)—A fillet. 
Cf. the lists о mouldings under ADHISHTHANA. 

E KAMPA-BANDHA—A class of bases. It has four types differing 

> from one another in height and in the addition or omission of some 

mouldings.—(Se M., xiv, 361-372, under ADHISHTHANA.) 

KAMPA-VRITTA—The round or circular fillet. 

Kampa-vrittam cha lupa-mile $obhartham tu balarthakam | 

(M., хуш, 274.) 


102 


idwar r Collection. Ва By S3 голдор usp 


501 bye SLA ISO HR 
746У4 NHGNNXS- Yd WN?l 


— snn 


s 


Jd ЧНУГУА NO Q3SVQ SONIQT0OY AAVICISANS 2 
Viina- VAT VA 7 7)У145 YO NN WIN VININNINS 


ХЕШ 


VdKVM 


NOTIS 


ЧНУГУЛ-ШУЯд MUR YNY VN 1 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KAROTI(I) 


KARANDAC-—A head-gear, a basket or bec-hive-like ornament. 
Karanda-mukutopetam rakta-vastrottariyakam | 
Karanda-mukutopetam dhyàtva . . . 1—(M., уп, 164, 205.) 
Devànàm bhüpatinànm cha mauli-lakshanam uchyate 1 
Jatà-mauli-kiritam cha karandam cha Sirastrakam(-stranam) | 
Kanyasa(m) devatànam cha karanda-makutanvitam 1 

(M., XLIX, 12-13, 19.) 
Dvi-bhujàm cha dvi-netram cha karanda-mukutanvitam | 
(M., тау, 69, 76.) 

KARAVIRA—A fragrant plant, or flower (oleander or JVerinm 

odorum), an ornament of that shape, a pent-roof having the slope 

(or colour) of that flower. 

In connexion with the pent roof : 
Sroynàm madhya-lupah sarve(và) lupa-sarnkhya yatheshtaka 1 
Karavira-bahu-varna samputabham vikalpayet | 
(M., ххуш, 242-243.) 

KARI-KARNA(NIKA)—The ear of the elephant, (? the tip of an 

elephant’s trunk, karnika), an ornament of that shape. 

Upabja(m) karikarna-(another reading, karnika)-yuktam kuryat 
tat kshudra-pithakam 1--(М., XXXI, 117.) 

KARIKA—A moulding of a column. 

Vira-karna(-kantha)syodayam jñatva nava-bhaga(e) vibhajite | 
EkamSam padukam kuryat paficha-bhagarn tu samgraham | 
Tad-ürdhve karikaméam syàd abjam arnšena yojayet | 

- (M., xv, 176-178.) 

KARUNA-VINA—A flute, a sculptural ornament. 
Vadana-garuda-bhavam bahukau paksha-yuktau 1 
Mukuta-kamala-yuktam pushpa-sachchhaya-varnam | 
Parita(h) karunavina kinnarasya rüpakam 1--(/М., гуш, 21-22.) 

KAROTI(I)—A basin, the drum of the ear of an image, an archi- 

tectural ornament. 

An ornament of the pent-roof : 

Evam uktam lupa chordhve $ikharair vambare'pi va 1 
Phalaka-kshepanam vapi tamram vayasi kilayet | 
Hemajena karoti уа mrit-karotim vidhanayet t 
55,246 (M., хуш, 269-271.) 
Referring to a single-storeyed building : 
Karotivad alankritya lambane patra-samyutam 1--(М., xix, 41.) 


103 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


КАККАТА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KARKATA—A crab, a moulding, a kind of joinery resembling the 
crab’s leg. 
Karkatakanghrivat kritvà pautra-nasanghrim veSayet 1 
Etat sarhkirna-sandhih syàt sarva-harmyeshu yogyakam 1 
(М., хуп, 143-148.) 
KARKARI-KRITA—Paved with small pieces of stone. Consoli- 
dated with kankar (nodular limestone or gravels). 
(1) Maha-margarn tu sarveshar vithinàm karkari-kritam | 
Vither(thyah) etad dvayam  proktam  tan-madhye  karkari- 
kritam 1—(4., 1x, 197, 333.) 
Referring to the pedestal : 
Prativajanakam teshàm kriteh karkari-kritam 1—(M., хш, 151.) 
Referring to the gate-house (gopura) : 
Etat tu Sikharam proktarh karkari-nàsika-kritam 1 


(M., XXXI, 561.) 
Referring to the mandapa (pavilion) : 


Tach-chatush-karna-deSe tu karkari chashta-bhadrakam 1 
Tat karnarh cha dvayor bhadram chaturtharh karkari-kritam 1 
Karkari-bhadra-samyuktam mandapasya visalakam | 

(M., xxxiv, 305, 308, 309.) 
Mandape chordhva-kütarn syat salakararh tu yojayet 1 
Ashta-vaktra-samayuktam karneshu karkari-kritam 1 


get (Ibid., 530-531.) 
Referring to the $ala (hall, mansion) : 


Veda-vedarnšakarn madhye vivritarh sarhvritank(g)anam 1 
Tad-bahi$ chavritarnšena karkari-samalankritam | 
(M., xxxv, 300-301.) 
(2) In connexion with the description of a Svastika (shaped)-house : 
Prishthe tu dirgha-koshtharh syāt pürva-koshtharn tatha bhavet | 
- Bahya(-e) bahya(-e) $ala-dvayarh netrarh yuktarh tu karkari-yutam 11 
(Kamtkagama, XLII, 7.) 
KARNA—The ear of an image, a moulding, any side-object, 
a corner-tower. 
Kampam ardharn tatha karnarh tad-ürdhve'rnsena рака 1 


(M., хш, 49.) 
For further examples, see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA. 
A moulding of the base : 
Karna-tunga(m) tr(i)yarnšarn syat tad-ürdhve kampa(th) śivāmśa- 
kam П--(М, XIV, 12.) 


104 


^ 


FOUNDATION TRENCH. 


FORTIFICATION TRENCH. 


KADANGA 


TOTO | 


KARIKA. 


COVER FILLET 


KARNIKA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


KARNA-KÜTA 


For further examples, see the lists of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA. 
A moulding of the column : 
Kumbhayamam tathotkarnam ürdhve karna(rn) samam bhavet I 


(M., xv, 54-) 
Referring to the vimàna (building in general, temple) : 
Padmasyopari karnarh syat tat-tridha kumbha-vistritam I 


(M., хуш, 129.) 
Karnat Капуауазапатп ѕуап nava-sütram prasárayet 1—(10:4., 235.) 
Referring to the door : 


Ardhena kampa-sarnyukatarn karna(m) bandh(v)arngam iritam 1 
Referring to the tula (balance) : 


(M., хххіх, 69.) 
Suvritta-nala-deSe tu patra-müle tu karna-yuk 1—(4M., L, 205.) 
A moulding of a vedika (altar, railing, platform) : 


Vedikayam vihinarn chet kartri-drishti(r) dinarn vrajet 1 
Tat-karne'dhika-hinarn ched bhojanena vina$anam | 
Referring to a single-storeyed building : 


(M., LXIX, 26-27.) 
Tad eva vedikam$ena nava-bhaga(-e) vibhajite) 1 


Dvi-bhagarh vajanarn mule chordhve karnarn рапатпбаКата 1 
(M., хіх, 64-65.) 

KARNASHTAKAC-—A site-plan of 324 square plots. 
(M. уп, 213-24, see PADA-VINYASA.) 
KARNA-KÜTA (see KüTA-KOsHTHA)— Ihe tower at the corner of 

the roof, the side-niches, corner pavilions, the attic. 
(т) Karna-harmyasya vistararn shad-bhagam(ge) tu vibhajite 1 
Ekàrnéarn karna-kütarh syan madhye $alà dvayaméakam 1 


(M., хіх, 54-55, see also 167.) 
In connexion with the six-storeyed buildings : 


Ekarn vatha dvi-bhagam và karna-küta-visalakam | 
Tale tale karna-küta-koshtha-haradi-bhüshitam 1 


Karna-kita-visale tu tri-bhagaikam madhya-bhadrakam | 


(M., ххіу, 29, 30, 33.) 
Ekar vatha dvi-bhagarn và karna-kita-visalakam 1--(/М., xxv, 17.) 
In connexion with the gate-house (gopura) 2 

Evarn lalatayo$ chaiva dirgham vinyasyam uchyate 1 
Karna-küta-dvayam chaiva tad-bhaga-dvayam iritam i 


Madhya-koshtharn chaturtham cha karna-kitam chatushtayam | 


(M., xxx, 418-424.) 
105 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


KARNA-PATRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Agra-karna-samayuktarh karna-küta-dvayanvitam 11 
Karna-küta-vihinam va chanyat sarvam tu vastushu 11 
Chatush-kone chatush-kütam tad-vistarena nirmitam 11 
Pafijara-dvitayarn karyam karna-küta-samodayam | 
Pradhànàvaàsa-netrastha-nctra-küta-dvayam nayet 11 
(Kamikdgama, xxxv, 65, 66, 73, 75.) 
Sarvam angam sabhakararh karna-küta-vivarjitam 11 
Chatasras tu барһа Кагуа kona-küta-chatushtayam 11 
(Jbid., XLV, 41, 44.) 
Küta-koshthaka-nidanam pramanam iha kirtitam | 
Kita-koshthadi-sarvangarn màna-sütràd bahir nayet 11 
Antah pramàna-sütrat tu vešanarn sarva-de$adam | 
Chatur-asram vasvasram shoda$asram tu vartulam 11 
Mastakam stüpikopetamn karna-kütam idarh matam | 
Madhye nàsa-samàyuktam ardha-küti-samanvitam 11 
Mukha-pattikayopetarh Sakti-dvaya-sama vitam | 
Aneka-stüpikopetam koshthakarh madhyaso bhavet 11 
Harnsa-tunda-nibham prishthe $alakaram mukhe mukhe | 
Pafijaram vihitam küta-koshthayor antaram dvijah 11 
Parsva-vaktram tad evashtarn hasti-tunda-sa-mandanam | 
Esha jati-kramat proktah karna-koshtha-samanvitam 11 
Madhye kütam tayor madhye kshudra-koshthadi-sobhitam | 
Chhandam etat samuddishtam kütam và koshthakam tu va |! 
Antara-prastaropetam nimnarn vonnatam суа và | 
Vikalpam iti nirdishtam abhasarh tad vimiéritam 11 
(Jbid., Lv, 123-130.) 
(3). Prastarad-ürdhva-bhage tu karna-küta-samayutam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, ххх, 30.) 


* The attic is formed of different kinds of little pavilions. Those which are 

at the angles of the edifice are called karna-küta. They have a roof of 
- square or circular section and are surrounded by a single awn, stipi.’ 

“Those which are placed in the middle are called Sala, they have an 
elongated roof and have three stüpis. —(Gf. M., хіх, 54-55.) 

‘Between the karna-küta and sala are found some kinds of little 
windows called paijara.’—(Dravidian Architecture, by Jouveau-Dubreuil, ed. S. 
Krishna Swami Aiyangar, pp. 13, 5.) 


KARNA-PATRAC-—A leaf-like ornament for the ear, a corner leaf. 


Tasyadho ratna-damai$ cha lalatordhve'rdha-chandravat 1 
Karna-patra-samayuktarn érotrordhve karna-pushpayuk | 
Tasmat tu lambanam dāma sarva-ratnair alankritam | 


2 (M., XLIX, 112-114.) 
106 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ° KARNA-HARMYA 


KARNA-PORAKA—An ear ornament. 
Kuryat tri-valayopetam па kuryat tu sikha-manim | 
Sarva-ratnam vinyasya vina cha karna-pürakam | 
(M., xLIX, 138-139.) 
KARNA-BANDHA—An ornament for the ear, а part of the ear. 
Karna-bandhaih karna-rudraksha-mala 1—(М., хп, 67.) 
The lower part of the ear : 
Hanvantam karna-bandhantarh dvayàntaram dasangulam 1 
(М., LXV, 102.) 


KARNA-HARMYA—A tower, а side-tower, a minaret, a turret. 


In connexion with single-storeyed buildings : 
Karna-harmyasya vistàram shad-bhagarh tu vibhajite 1 
Ekamésam karna-kütarh syàn madhye $ala dvayaméakam 1 
Ekam và dvi-tri-dandena nirgamam bhadram eva уа! 
Salà-küta-dvayor madhye chaika-harasa-pafijaram 1 
Tat-tunga(m) sapta-bhagam syad ekàméam vedikodayam | 
Tad-ürdhve'dhyardha-bhagena galam tryarn$ena mastakam 1 
Tad-ardham stüpikottungarn karna-harmyam iti smritam | 
(M., хіх, 54-60.) 
Mandape prastarasyordhve karna (another reading, khanda)- 
harmyadi-manditam |—(Jbid., 214.) 
Stüpi-tungam dvayarnšarn syad dvi-tale tad dvitiyakam 1 
Tad evordhvam adhishthànam vimanarnSeka(aika)-vitastikam | 
Tad-irdhve’nghri $aràm$arn syat karna-harmyadi-manditam | 
(M., xx, 14-16.) 
Prachchhadanopari stambham karna-harmyadi-manditam 1 
(M., XXXI, ro.) 
Tad-ürdhve mandapanam cha chülika karna-harmyakam | 
(M., хххіу, 64.) 
Harmye chordhva-tale pàdam bahya-kütadi(m) vinyaset 1 
Karna-harmyakritim vatha santara-prastaram tu va | 
(М., хх, 57-58.) 
Cf. ‘ They (tomb of the Rajas at Mahadevapura in Coorg from 1809) 
are square buildings, much in the Muhammadan style, on well raised 
basements, with a handsome dome in the centre, and minaret-like turrets 
at the four corners (? karna-harmya ) surmounted by basavas or bulls. 
On the top of the dome is a gilded ball, with a vane. АП the windows 
have well-carved syenite frames with solid brass bar . . . Good wood- 
carving may sometimes be seen in the domestic architecture.'—(Ep. Gar- 
nat., Vol. 1, Introduction, p. 27, last paragraph.) f 


107 


кЖазь- ае E ett 


"EE ——— inm n n 


KARNIKÁ AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KARNIKA—Generally implies a crowning projection and resembles В) 28 

the cornice, i.e., the crowning or upper portion of the entablature, [ 

а creeper-like ornament. 
Vistare paficha-bhage tu vedàrdham padma-vistritam | | 
Padma-tara-tri-bhagaikarh karnikà-vistritam bhavet 1 I 

(M., XXXII, 110-111.) 
A moulding of the entablature : 
Kapota-nàsika-kshudra-nivrordhve sthita-karnikà 11 
Vatahata-chalach-charu-latavat karnikà-kriyà 11 


(Kamikagama, LIV, 37, 40.) < 
KARNIKARA—A pavilion with twenty pillars, a tree, a class of с 
people. j 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ccrxx, v. 13; il 
see under MANDAPA.) Г 
Mahendre vàtha satye và karnikaralayam bhavet 1 | 
( M., IX, 238, XL, 109.) | 


KALAS(S)A (cf. Srip1)—A pitcher, а cupola, a finial, а dome, | 
a pinnacle, a tower, a type of round buildings. i 
(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. civ, vv. 17-18, see under РвАвАрл). 18: 

(2) Garuda-Puràna (Chap. XLVII, vv. 21, 23, 28-20, see under PRASADA). а 

(3) Stambhardham kalasad bàhye latà-vartanam ishyate 11 | 

Mushti-bandhopari kshiptarh vyalantam kala$avadhi 11 
(Катагата, LV, 103, 109.) | 

(4) Dome: Kañdhananda-kalasa 1—(КҺајигаһо Inscrip. no. v, line 19, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, p. 150.) 

(5) Pinnacle : Vimanopari sauvarnnah kalaśā . . . pratishthapitah 1 
Placed golden pinnacle on the shrine.—(Yena-Madala Inscrip. of Gana- 
pamba, v. 17, Ep. Ind., Vol. ut, pp. 99, 102.) | 

(6) Dome or pinnacle : | 

Devalayais sudha-Subhrais suvarna-kala$amkitah 1 p 
Pataka-chumbitambhodair yyad-dharmmo nita unnatim 11 

(Two pillar Inscrip. at Amaravati, no. A, Inscrip. of | 

Keta, П, v. 43, Ep. Ind., Vol. vi, p. 152.) | 


(7) Prasadarn  navabhi$ cha hema-kalasair atyunnatam gopura- | 
prãkarotsava-marntapair upachitam śri-Rāmabhadrāya cha 1 Д 
“Ап exceedingly high temple furnished with nine gilt domes, a gate- 41 
tower, a wall, and a festive hall, to the holy Ramabhadra.' | 
(Kondavidu Inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v, 27, ы 
m Ә 


Ер. Ind., Vol. v1, pp. 297, 331.) 
108 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KALASA 


(8) Suvarnna-kalasa-sthapana cha— in setting golden pinnacles (on 
temples)'.—(Karkala Inscrip. of Bhairava II, line 18, Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, 
рр. 132, 135.) 

(9) Abhinava-nishpanna-preksha-madhya-mamdape . 

Suvarnnamaya-kalaga-ropana-pratishtha krità—* the ceremony of 
placing a golden cupola on the newly-made central hall, intended for 
dramatic performances, was carried out.—(The Chahamanas of Marwar, 
по. XIX, Jalor stone Inscrip. of Samarasimhadeva, lines 5, 6, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. хі, p. 55.) 


(10) Utturngataspada-devayatanagra-hema-kalafarhn . . . pürnna- 
kala$am . . . ‘ The golden cupola оп the summit of the god’s dwelling, 
a seat of exaltation... like a full pitcher.’ —(Inscrip. at Ittagi, A of 


A. D. 1112, V. 64, Ef. Ind., Vol. хш, pp. 46, 56.) 

(11) ‘And Visvakarmma built his temple (Ananta-Koti$vara) with 
complete devotion, adorned with all manner of pictures, its fronts 
brilliant with many golden kala$as decked with precious stones, its tower 
kissing the clouds.’ — (Ep. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part 1, Sorab Taluq, no. 276; 
Transl., p. 47, second para. last sentence.) 

(12) * We grant to you, in addition, two five-branched torches, five 
kala$as above the palanquin and so forth.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part r, 
Nagar Taluq, no. 68, p. 158; Transl., line 12.) 

(тз) Chakre jàmbü-nadyair gurutara-kalagair bhasvarair ekavirhSaih 1 

Nepàla-kshoni-palah prathita-bhuja-bhiishanarh tanmathasya 11 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 17, Inscrip. of Siddhi 
Nrisimha of Lalita pattana, v. 17, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. 1x, рр. 185, 187, с. 1.) 

(14) ‘ Above the seventh or highest row of cells, there is a roomy 
terrace occupied by four large bulls couchant at the corners, and from 
the centre rises a comparatively slender neck surmounted by an 
umbrella or semi-dome crowned by the usual Ка1а$а or finial.’—(Gangai- 
Konda-puram Saiva temple, Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, p. 118, с. I.) 

(15) < Erected a new gopura with golden finials (suvarna-kala$a) in 
the Chàmunde$vari hill)—(ZEp. Carnat., Vol. ш, Mysore ТаШша, no. 20; 
Transl., p. 3; Roman text, p. 6.) 

(16).* The pinnacle (Ка!аба) of a ruined temple іп the fort of Bel- 
lur, in Nàga-mangala Taluq, shows exactly what the finial ornament 
of this style of temple was, which Fergusson, from its appearance in 
photographs mistook for a lantern and though unable to account for 
so incongruous a feature introduced it into his picture of Halebid tem- 
ple restored’ (Hist. of Ind. and East. Arch., p. 400). “Тһе crowning 
ornament is really a Ка!аба or sacrificial vase, such as is used at the 


109 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KALASA-BANDHA 


final consecration ceremonies round the rim of which is tied a cloth 
in narrow folds and knotted into a bunch at each of the four cardinal 
points. In later ornamentation the cloth was replaced by wreaths of 
leaves and flowers with a cluster or bouquet at the four points, the 
sprays and flowers depending from which went down as far as the foot 
of the vase, and thus produced the appearance which in the picture 
suggested a lantern.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, Introduction, p. 38.) 


(17) Saumya-keSava-nathasya gopuragre hiranmayi | 
Sthapita kalasi gunda-danda-nathena śāśvatī 11 
Saudhagram ujvalad апуйп a-divakarabho | 
Balatapa-pratima-kantir aharniéam yah 11 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part т, Belur Taluq, no. 3; 
Roman text, p. 103, last two verses ; Transl., 
р. 45, para. 1, last two lines.) 


(18) Murahara-bhavanada éalàkheyam madisi vistaradirh kalasama 
nilisida—' He made a spire to the temple of Murahara, and fixed a 
kala$a upon it.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Arsikere Taluq, no. 131 ; Roman 
text, p. 396; Transl., p. 172.) 

(19) neka-ratna-khachita-ruchira-mani-kula$a-kalita-küta-koti-ghati- 
tam-apy-uttu.iga-chaityalayarh— having erected . . . a lofty chaityà- 
laya, with kala$as (perhaps by mistake Mr. Rice has put in gopuras) 
or towers surmounted by rounded pinnacles set with all manner of 
jewels.'—(Ep. Сатаі., Vol. уі, Mudgere Taluq, no. 22 ; Roman text, р. 148, 
line 12 ; Transl., p. 63, para. 2.) 

(20) ' Kala$a, a term applied generally to the summit of a tower ; 
also а pot or vessel with water and some grains in it—(Rca, Chàlukyàn 
Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxt, p. 38.) 

(21) ‘Kalasa (Kalas)—pinnacle of temple steeple.— (Smith, Gloss., 
loc. cit., to Cunningham Arch. Surv. Reports.) š 

(22) See Марһ« Arch. of Fatehpur-Sikri, Smith, Arch. Surv., New 
Imp. Series, Vol. xviii; Plate LXII, fig. 1, 2, 3. | 

(23) Essay on Arch. of Hind., Ram Кат, Plates xx to XLII 2 

(24) Mysore Arch. Report, 1914-15, Plate xiv, fig. 3, р: 28 5 fig. Т. 
p. 22; Plate v, fig. о, p. 10; Top of tower of Bhoganandisvara 
shrine at Nandi, ibid., 1913-14, Plate уі, fig. 2, p. r6. 

(25) Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. vu, Plates хуп (showing 
the details of the mouldings of the tower of the temple at Khalari), 
xiv (showing the mouldings and section of another temple tower). 


KALASA-BANDHA (see KUMBHA-BANDHA)—A. class of bases. 


(M., XIV, 195-239 ; see under ADHISHTHANA.) 
TIO 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KALA 


KALA—Art, sciences dealing with the traditional sixty-four branches 
which some authorities reckon as 528. 


(1) Gita, (2) vadya, (3) nritya, (4) alekhya, (5) vi$eshaka-chchhedya, 
(6) tandula-kusuma-vali-vikara, (7) pushpástarana, (8) da$ana-vasana- 
anga-raga, (9) mani-bhiimika-karma, (10) $ayana-rachana, (11) udaka- 
vadya, (12) udakaghata, (13) chitra-yoga, (14) malya-grathana-vikalpa, (15) 
$ekharakà-pidana-yojanà, (16) nepathya-prayoga, (17) karna-patra-bhanga, 
(18) gandha-yukti, (19) bhüshana-yojana, (20) aindra-jala, (21) kauchumara- 
yoga, (22) hasta-laghava, (23) vichitra-$aka-yüsha-püpa-bhakshya-vikara 
kriya, (24) рапаКагаза-гаразауа-уо)апа, (25) süchi-vaya-karma, (26) sūtra- 
kridà (27) vina-damaruka-vadya, (28) prahelika, (29) pratimala, (зо) durva- 
сһаКа-уора, (31) pustaka-vachana, (32) nàtakakhyayika-dar$ana, (33) kavya- 
samasyà-pürana, (34) pattika-vetra-vana-vikalpa, (35) tarku-karman, (36) 
takshana, (37) vastu-vidya, (38) suvarna-rüpya-pariksha, (39) dhatuvada, 
(40) mani-ragakara-jfiana, (41) vrikshayur-veda-yoga, (42) mesha-kukkuta- 
lavaka-yuddha-vidhi, (43)  $uka-sarika-pralàpana, (44) utsadana-sarnva- 
hana-ke$amardana-màrjana-kau$ala, (45) akshara-mushtika-kathana, (46) 
mlechchhita-kutarka-vikalpà, (47) deSa-bhasha-vijfiana, (48) pushpa-saka- 
пка, (49) nimitta-jñana, (50) yantra-màtrika, (51) dhàranà-matrika, (52) 
sampathya, (53) manasi-kavya-kriya, (54) abhidhana-kosha, (55) chhanda- 
jñana, (56) kriya-vikalpa, (57) chhalitaka-yoga, (58) vastra-gopana, (59) 
dyüta-viSesha, (бо) akarsha-krida, (61) bala-kridanaka, (62) vaitalika, (63) 
vaijayika, (64) vyayamika-vainayika-vidya-jnana.—(Kamasiitra of Vatsya- 
уапа, ed. Bombay, pp. 32-353 see also pp. 43, 95.) 

See F.R.A.S., 1924, Pp. 355-367. 


Compare the lists from (1) Kalpasitra (211), (2) Dasakumara-charita 
(п, 21), (3) Ка4атбат, р. 75, (4) Каіаойаѕа by Kshemendra, (5) Samavaya- 
sūtra, (6) Ramachandra’s Commentary on Сһатригатауапа by Vidabharaya, 
(7) Nàràyana's Commentary on Lalita-sahasranama, (8) Srimad-Bhagavata, (9) 
Kamasilra of Vatsyayana, апа (го) Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on Lalita- 
ғаһазтапата (N. S. P., 1917), p. 72. 

Similar lists are also given by Sridhara in his Commentary on Srimad- 
Bhagavata (Part x, Chap. xtv, у. 36), Jiva-gosvàmi in explaining Sridhara's 
commentary refers also to the Vishnu-Purdna, and Hari-vamsa ; in the Buddhist 
Lalitavistara (Chap. x, ed. R. L. Mitra, p. 182 ; see also p. 186), and in 
the Jain Uttaradhyüyana-sütra (text, Chap. xxr, 6, Transl., S. В. E., Vol. xv, 
p. 108). See also The Kalas, by Venkatasubbia (pp. 25-32). 

Chatuhshashthikalah, Sarngadhariye kathamge cha Sridhariya-Lak- 
shmipithikàyam cha vailakshanyena ganitasta nishkrishya likhyante : Then 
follows a list of sixty-four arts including eighteen scripts, various languages, 

ІІІ 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


г ооч MER Ал. ©, ыы, of a o dad. tice TPS Ms ond V t " i E 
МАТУ, «Жез: p » > dss 4. - 


KALAPAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


poetry books, Nàtakas (dramas), alankar (poctics), vedas, upa-vedas, 
vedangas, Sastras (without specification), Tantras, Puranas, Smritis, 
agriculture, witchcraft, sorcery, gambling, etc. 


For fuller details see the writer's article * Fine Arts’ (Indian Historical 
Quarterly) and ‘Fine Arts in Our System of Education’ (Convocation 
address, Gurukula, Brindavan, 1937, The Hindustan Review, June, 1936, 
pp. 784-796). Vide the Introduction to the writer’s Hindu Architecture in 
India and Abroad. 


KALAPAKA—A tuft of braided hair, a sectarian mark on the fore- 
head of an image. 


Prakoshte valayam chaiva mani-bandha-kalapakam 1 
(M., 1, 16, etc.) 


KALKAC-—A paste used as plaster or cement, also called ‘ yoga’ 
(mixture). і 

(Brihat-Samhita, туп, 3, 6, 7, 8, Z.R.A.S., 

М. S., Vol. уі, pp. 321, 322.) 


KALPA-DRUMA— 1 The ornamental tree, employed as a carv- 
KALPA-VRIKSHA— | ing (se SRI-VRIKSHA). 


Compare Akshaya-vata at Prayag (Allahabad), Siddha-vata at Ujjain, 
and Bodhi-tree at Gaya. 


(1) Manasdra (Chap. xrvm, 1-77) : 


The name of the chapter is Kalpa-vriksha, which literally means a 
tree yielding all wishes, or, in other words, an all-productive trec. 
This tree is used as an ornament of the throne of gods and kings 
(lines 1-2). Such a tree is made above the throne and the arch 
as well as at the middle of the length of the throne (lines 4-5). It is 
also constructed inside the Mukta-prapanga or an open courtyard, 
the mandapa or a pavilion, and the royal palace (lines 68-69). Be- 
yond the front of the ornamental tree, there should be represented 
a yard where the votaries of gods and kings are seated in the pose 
of praising and worshipping them (lines 70-75). 

The minute description and measurement of all, the various 
parts of the tree are given. The tree is coiled round with a 
serpent, the outspread hood of which reaches the top (lines 11-12). 
The measurement of the hood and tail of the serpent is described 
at great length (lines 13-20). Тһе number of branches as also the 
measurement of them varies according to the various thrones 
for the decoration of which the tree is constructed (lines 21-43). 


112 


THE ORNAMENTAL TREE 


| FOR THRONES OF GODS ARD KINGS 
| HOT TO SCALE 


| تر‎ yh, 
x JERN To 
| ге = MS 22а 


ONT ZÁ L6 1 NESS Mt, 


| | 
ЕР __ Ua l im АЛЫ SEA, 


——n-QMA 
T NO олау 


Page 112 


di 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KALPA-VRIKSHA 


The tree is beautifully decorated with creepers, leaves and flowers 
of various colours and forms (lines 114-155, 62-66). Bees are repre- 
sented on the branches (line 56). Jewels and garlands of pearls 
are inserted in suitable places (line 57). Тһе figures of monkeys, 
deities and semi-divine beings (Sidhas, Vidyadharas, etc.) are beauti- 
fully carved in the intervals between the branches (lines 58-61). 
Many other particulars regarding the ornamental tree are 
expressly left to the choice and discretion of the artists : 
Evam tu kalpa-vrikshah syat Sesharh yuktya prayojayet 1 
Tasya madhye cha range tu muktikena prapànvitam | 
Tan-madhye $asanàdinam  toranam kalpa-vrikshakam | 
(M., xxxiv, 167, 218-219.) 
A carving on the car : Л 
Kalpa-vriksha-yuta-chakravartibhir manditam Киги sarvavedi- 
bhih | 
(М., хїлп, 169-170.) 
'The materials of which the tree is constructed : 
- Simhàsanamn makara-torana-kalpa-vriksham | 
Mukta-prapangam api.daàru-$ileshtakadyaih | 
Ratnair aneka-bahu-loha-vi$eshakai$ cha (kuryat) | 
(M., хуп, 30-33.) 
Paśchāt simhàasanadhyai$ cha kalpa-vriksharn cha toranam | 
(M., XLIX, 185.) 
Padma-pitharn mahà-pitham tri-mürtinàm cha yojayet | 
Ргара cha toranam vapi kalpa-vriksham cha samyutam | 
(M., ті, 86-87.) 
Apare tu niryüham kuryan makara-toranam | 
Tad-ürdhve kalpa-vriksham  syat sa-ha(? ga)jendra-$va(? sva) 
raih saha 1—(M., rv, 79-80.) 
(2) *(He) covered with fine gold the enclosure, the gate-towers, halls 
g and buildings surrounding the shrine of pure gold . . . covered with 
splendid gold the altar on which offerings abound . . . covered with 
pure gold and adorned with numerous strings of large round pearls 
thesacred car temple . . . was pleased to build a long temple street 


of mansions covered with jewels and called it after his royal prosperous 
name, and made numberless splendid insignia, beginning with dishes 


IIS 


KALYANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


cut off fine gold, together with а kalpa (tree) of pure gold.’—(Inscrip. ай 
Tirumalavadi, no. 79, lines 14-23, H.S.I. I., Vol. ur, p. 185.) 
hs Doshonmosha-vrisha-praghosha-divishat-santosha-posha-kshamah 
pe 1 samya-tatula-tirtha-bhüta-parishat-satkara-kalpa-drumah | 
| Nànà-mangala-divya-vastu-nivritas taurya-trikollasito hridyah ko'pi 
sa vasarah samabhaval-loka-pramodojjvalah 11 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, Inscrip. of 
Queen Lalita-tripura-sundari, v. 4, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. rx, p. 194.) 
KALYANA—A class of the five-storeyed buildings (same as GRIHA- 
KANTA). 
| (М., ххш, 30-32 ; see under PRAsADA.) 
KALYANA-MANDAPA—A wedding pavilion. 
(See details under Manpapa.) 
KAVATA—The leaf or panel of a door, a door. 
(1) Vastu-vidya (ed. Ganapati Sastri) xiv, r: 
Kavata-dvitayam kuryan maátri-putry-abhidham budhah 11 
(2) Kautiltya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. xxiv, p. 53: 
Tri-paficha-bhagikau dvau kavata-yogau | 
(3) Kamikagama, ІМ: 
Deva-dvija-narendranam kavata-yugalarh matam 1 
Anyayor ekam uddishtam maha-dvare chatur-yugam 11 (51) 
Aneka-$rinkhalopetarn bahu-kundala-bhushitam | 
Kavata-yugmam kartavyarn kokilargala-sarnyutam 11 (52) 
Bhitti-madhyad bahis tasya(h) stambha-yoga-kavataMyuk | 
Kavata-yugelath va-ekarh ghatanodghatarh samam 11 (166) 
See also verses, 38, 49, 53. 
Jalakas cha kavatas cha bahye bahye prakalpayet 11 (Jbid., xur, 8). 
(4) Ramayana, VI, 31, 27, etc. : 
Purim maha-yantra-kavata-mukhyàm 1 
E (5) Manasara : 
[D E Yon(g)yarh kavata-yugmarh cha Sreshtharh madhyarn cha harmyaket . 
; (М., хіх, 152.) 
Dakshine cha kavate tu dvaram kuryat tu mukhyake 1 
Devanam cha manushyanam maha-dvararn kavatake | 
(М., хххуш, о, 11.) 


114 


жан cen 


"TN D 
— — —À 


` 
— MÀ 


\ 
i 
| 
| 


-HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


As compared with * prakara ° 
Dakshinasya kavatarn tu visaladhikam ayatah 1 
Eka-dvi-tryangularh vapi kavatarh syat dvi-hastakam | 
Kuryat kavata-dirgheshu kshepanarn vistrito'dhikam 1 
Ргакаге cha mahà-dvàrarn kshudra-dvárarn kavatake | 
(M., XXXIX, 101, 102, 108, 115; see also 124-197.) 
(6) *He, the emperor of the south, caused to be made of stone for Vijaya- 
пагауапа temple, latticed window, secure door-frame (dridha-kavatam) 
door-lintel, kitchen, ramparts, pavilion, and a pond named the Vasüdeva 
tirtha.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Belur Taluq, no. 72, Transl., p. бі; 
Roman text, p. 142, line 7.) 


coo РА mat, a cushion, a golden seat. 


(R.-V. x, 100, 10: Тай. Aran., VI, 9, 1: A.-V. VI, 138, 5.) 
KAKASHTA—A synonym of рагуайКа or bedstead, a couch of 


eight-fold crow design. 
(М., ш, 11-19; see under PARYANKA.) 


KACHA—A house with a southern and northern hall. 
(Brihat-Samhità, тїп, 40.) 
KANTA—A type of pavilions. 
(M., XXXIV, 513-516 ; see under МАМРАРА.) 
КАМТАВА-А large forest, a difficult road, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings. 
(M., xxiv, 13-14; see under PRASADA.) 
KAMA-KOSHTA—A comfortable compartment, usually a bed- 
room, a temple of one of the thirty-two attendant deities. 
Jayante bhàskaram sthapya(m) i$e pàá$upatam tatha | 
Athava kama-koshtham syad àlayam kalpayet sudhih 1 
Dvàtriméan mürtir evarh và kuryat tu parivarakam 1 
(M., xxxi, 58-60.) 
KAMAKSHI-DHARMA-MANDAPA—A type of pavilions. 
(Madras Museum Plates of Srigiri-bhi-pala, уу. 21-22 
Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 311, 316 ; see under MANDAPA. 
KAMYA—A class of buildings, a chamber in the shrine used as bed- 
room of deities. 
Paficha-prakara-harmyanam adhuna vakshyate kramat | 
Kamyadi-bheda-harmyanam tan-manena vinyaset I—(M., xxxi, 2-3.) 
Nitya-naimittikakhyadi-kamyair api cha sarvabhih 1—(AM., XLVI, 27.) 


II5 


KARAPAKA ———— AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF Í 


KARAPAKA—Persons appointed to look after the construction of | 
а temple. l ҮТ 
КагараКаз tu ds pitamahakhyasya satya-devakhyah 1 
Goshthyà prasadaparaya nirupito janmanà sa vanik 11 
‘The Karapaka selected by the goshthi (assembly) to see this work 
through was Satyadeva, the son of Pitàmaha, who was a merchant by 
birth.’ Dr. Bhandarkar also refers to Prof. Kielhorn (Ind. Ant., Vol. 
хіх, p. 62, по. 53), * persons appointed to look after the construction of 


the temple.’ Т 
enc gadh Inscrip. of Varmalata, v. 9, Ер. Ind., e 
Vol. 1x, pp. 192, 189, notes 4 and 3. ) 
Cf. GOMANASA KARAVAKASA | 
‘The gift of Gomàna the Karavaka’ (=karapaka). 


(Four early Inscrip. no. B, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. xu, p. 301.) 


KARMUKA—A kind of village. It is situated on the banks of 
a river or sea (nadi-tire’bdhi-tire và kàrmukam cha vinyaset). Its 
plan is like a bow (tad-dyayor vithi-bahye tu karmukakaravat 
prithak). See further details under GRAMA. 


(M., тх, 3, 459, 463, 452-472.) 


KARYA-SATRA—Working lines, the plumb-lines drawn for the 
purpose of the sculptural measurement. 


(M., LXVI, 93 ; see under PRALAMBA.) 


KALA-KUTA—A kind of poison, the cobra represented on the neck 


Т 

| 

j 

1 

of the image of Siva. j 

7 Grivasya vama-par$ve tu kala-küta-samanvitam 1—(М., їл, 80.) s ; 
K 


KALA-MUKHA—A kind of phallus. 


(M., Lu, 2, хуш, 2 ; see under LINGA.) 


KALINGA-(KANTA)—A class of the twelve-storeyed buildings 
once prevailing in the country along the Coromandal coast. 
Madhya-kantam iti proktarh tasya kuta-dvi-bhagike | 
Anu-$ala shad-arnšarn syat tasyangarh pürvavad bhavet | 
Evam kalinga-kantam syàn nanakaranga-sarhnyuktam | 
І (M. xxxi 14-16.) | 


116 


Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE - KIRTANA 


KIRITA—A diadem, a crown, a tiara. 
Devanarh bhü-patinàm cha mauli-lakshanam uchyate 1 
Jata-mauli-kiritam cha karandarm cha éirastrakam | : 
(M., XLIX, 12-13.) 
Kirita-makutarh chaiva nārāyaņāmśa-yogyakam 1—(10:4., 18.) 


KIMBARA(-RI)—A crocodile, a shark, used both as ап architec- 
tural and sculptural object. 
Chitra-toranam . . . graha-kirhbara-sarnyuktam | 
(M., XLVI, 52-53.) 
буата-уагпата mukharh sarvan kirnbari-makarananam | 
(M., хуш, 311.) 
In connexion with the 54145 or buildings : 
Sarve(a)-Sala-nasika-toranadyaih 1 
Patrai$ chitraih kirhbari-vaktra-yuktam 1—(M., xxxv, 401-402.) 
In connexion with the single-storeyed buildings : 
Nasikagrantarn sarvam kirhbari-samalankritam 1—(М., хіх, 36.) 
KISHKU—A measure, a cubit of 24 or 42 angulas. 
Kishku(h) smrito dvi-ratnis tu dvi-chatvariméad angulah | 
(Brahmanda-Purdna, Part І, 2nd Anushanga-pada, 
Chap. vit, v. 99.) 

But according to the Suprabhedágama (xxx, 25 ; see under ANGULA), 
it is a cubit of 24 angulas, which іп the above Purana (v. 99) is called 
© aratni.’ 

KIRTANA (also KiRTTANA)—A temple, a shrine. 

(1) S(§)arabhor yo dvà-das($)àpi vyarachayad achirat kirttanani 
— who erected (soon) twelve temples of Sambhu. ‘Mr. Telang at the 
suggestion of Pandit Bhagvan Lal. 

(New Silara copper plate grant, line 7, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. rx, pp. 34, 36, and note 13.) 

(2) Kartàpi уазуа khalu vismayam ара $ilpi tan-nama-kirttanam 

akaryyata rajíia | ; 

‘This is the abode of Svayambhu Siva, and no artificially made 
(dwelling) ; Sri (if she could be) seen (would be) such as this, 
Verily even the architect who built it felt astonishment, saying 
« (the utmost) perseverance would fail to accomplish such a work 
again; aho! how has it been achieved by те?” (and), by reason 
of it the king was caused to praise his name.’ Dr. Fleet. 

(Skt. and Old Canarese Inscrip. no. сххуп, line 
14 f.; Ind. Ant., Vol. хп, рр. 159, 163, с. r.) 


117 


KIRTI-VAKTRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA Oi 


(3) Dr. Hultzsch referring to the passage quoted above says : 

‘The word, Kirtana, has been understood in its usual and etymo- 
logical sense by Dr Fleet and the first translator (B.A.S.7., Vol. уш, 
p. 292 f., Mr. Prinsep) ; that sense is not at all appropriate here 
and the word must be taken to signify a temple.’ He then refers to 
the Silara grant mentionel above and quotes the following : 

(а) Kirtanani cha karayet | 

‘Cause temples to be constructed.’ —(Agni-Puràna, Bib. Ind., 
Vol. 1, p. ІП.) 

(b) Kurvan kirtanani lekhayan $àsanàni . . . prithivim vicha- 
chara—‘ he travelled the earth, . . . constructing temples, causing 
grants to be written, etc. (Bana's Kadambari).’ 

(с) Pürta-kirtanodharanena tu— by the restoration of dilapidated 
works of public utility (such as tanks, wells, etc.) and temple.’ 

(Ind. Ant., Vol. xu, pp. 228-229.) 
(4) ‘In addition to the authorities quoted by Bhandarkar in 
support of this meaning of Kirttana (in no. 2 above), I have since 
found that it is used in the same sense in the five inscriptions of Deva- 
labdhi, the grandson of the Chandella king Yasovarman and the son 
of Krishnapa and Asarva, іп the temple of Brahma at Dudahi (Arch. 
Surv. of Ind., Vol. x, Plate xxxm).’—Dr. Fleet. 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. хп, p. 289, c.2.) 
(5) Achikarat kirttanam— built temples.’—(Gwalior Inscrip. v. 15 
Ind. Апі, Vol. xv, pp. 203, 202, note 8.) 
(6) Kirttanam idam sarvvam karitam (a. line 9 Ё). 

Kirttanam idam sarvvam арі (b. line 8 f.). 

Sarvva-kirttanam idam (с. line 5). 

Saktam kirttanam idam (d. line 3). 

Kirttanam idam (е). 

. In all these places, * Kirttana? means a temple.—(Chandella Inscrip. 
по. А, Dudahi stone Inscrip. of Devalabdhi, a grandson of Үобоуагтап, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хуш, p. 997.) 

(7) Gf. Sa dakshinarkkasya . . . chakara kirttirh bahu-kirttinathah— 
` * he famous for many (good) deeds made the temple of Dakshinarka'. 

4 . (Gaya Inscrip: of Vikrama-samvat 1429, lines 4-5, 8; 

Ind. Ant., Vol. xx, pp. 314-315.) 


KIRTI-VAKTRA—The monumental face, used as an architectural 


member. 


s Ron with the * mukha-bhadra? or front tabernacle, porch 
or ha 


 адышануе kirti-vaktram tu nirgamakriti(r) bhavet 1 
(М., хуш, 293.) 


118 


U г тезу Неланаг Collection шоч gi S3 Foundation USA 2 


HEEL ecl. 


PLAN OF RAMPARTS, ` SECTION 


KUMARI- 


ELEVATION 


PIVOTED. 


FIXING KNOB. 


т 


ШЕ EK 


4 


к. 


[== 


Ж 
O 


4 i 


Tn mr ua === > 
REAR_VIEW. FRONT VIEW. | E 


KAVATA.. 


—O.a. 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HNIDU ARCHITECTURE KUKSHI 


КІКТІ-5ТАМВНА--А memorial or monumental pillar. 
(Ahmadabad Arch., Burgess, Arch. Surv., New. Imp. 
Series, Vol. хххш, p. 94; see under STAMBHA.) 
KILA—A stake, pin, nail, wedge, post. 

Etat tu pratimarn bhavet | 

Kila-tàra-samady-ardham dvi-gunam va galaka bhavet 1 
(M., хп, 122-129.) 
In connexion with joinery : 

Milagre kilakarh yuktam ardha-pranam iti smritam | 

(M., хуп, 99.) 
In connexion with a mirror or the looking-glass : 
Darpanasya tri-bhagaikam mile kilayatam tatha 1 
(М., L, 120; see also M., XXXIX, 121-123.) 
KILA-BHAJANA—The pin-hold. 
In connexion with the door : 
Kila-bhajanam ity-uktam kilanam tu pravakshyate 1 
(M., XXXIX, 119; see also 120-131.) 
KILA-SOLAKA—The pin-point. 
In connexion with the door : 

Kuryat tat kavatanam yuktya tat kila-stilakam 1—(M., xxxix, 128.) 
KUKSHI—tThe belly, а cavity, the middle part, the interior, the 
hub of the wheel. 

(M., XLV, 12.) 
In connexion with the foundations : 

Gràmàdinàm nagaradinam pura-pattana-kharvate 1 

Koshtha-koladi-sarvesham garbha-sthanam ihochyate 1 

Sthira-vastu-kukshi-deSe tu chara-vastu tathapi cha 1 

Grama-dvarasya yoge và garbha-$vabhram prakalpayet 1 

(M., хп, 168-171.) 
In connexion with the pent roof (lupà) : 
'Tat-sütràd adho dese kukshirh jíiatvà purordhvake 1--(/М., хуш, 236.) 
In connexion with the front porch or tabernacle (mukha-bhadra) : 
Pañcharnša-dvi (-уа)габа-(агатп syad ardham уа kukshi-vistritam | 
Kukshy-antararh sadma-sarhyuktarh vatayanam athapi và | 
(Ibid., 286-287.) 
In connexion with the single-storyed buildings : 
Nasi-tàrar tri-bhagaikarn kukshshi-taram iti-smritam | 
(M., xix, 37.) 
II9 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 
е p 


KUKSHI-BANDHA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


In connexion with the chariot (ratha) : 
Vistàram cha tridha kritva madhye kukshy(im)-arhSakena tu | 
Paficha-dafam cha vipularh nalam kuksh(as)yà veSanam 1 
(M., хип, 12, 14.) 


In connexion with the arch : 
Ratnakaranganair yuktam kukshir avrita-lambitam 1 
Toranasyopari deśe tu bhujanga-pada dvayor api | 
(M., XLVI, 59.) 
Mukharh vaksha§ cha kukshi$ cha kati-dirghe dva-dasarhgakam 1 
(M. туп, 55.) 
Kukshi-tarashta-matram syàt . . . I—(M., LX, 14.) 
KUKSHI-BANDHA—A class of bases, it has four types differing 
from one another in height and the addition or omission of some 


mouldings. 
(M., XIV, 319-359; see under ADHISHTHANA.) 


KUCHA-BANDHANA —An ornament for the (female) breast. 
Kucha-bandhana-sáryuktarn báhu-málà-vibhüshini 
(M., Liv, 12.) 


KUNJARA—A type of building which is shaped like the elephant’s 
back, 16 cubits long and broad at the bottom and has a roof with 
three dormer-windows. 
(1) Brihat-Samhita (LVI, 25, 7. В. A. S., N. S., Vol. VI, p. 319). 
(2) Matsya-Puràna (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 36, 41, 49, 53 ; see under PRASADA). 
(3) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. axxx, v. 32 ; see under PRASADA). 
KUNJARAKSHA (c. VATAYANA)—A window resembling the 
elephant's eye in design. 
Naga-bandharh tatha valli gavaksharh kufijarakshakam | 
. esharh vatayanam rüpam 1—(М., хххш, 581, 582, 585.) 
Gavakshakararn yuktya cha pattikordhve samantatah | 
Kufijaraksham alaksharh va patra-pushpady-alaükritam | 
(М., XLIV, 22, 23.) 
KUTI (see GANDHA-KUTI)—A hall, a cottage, cornice, entabla- 
ture. 
Kosarhba-kuti— The hall at Kausambi.’—Dr. Hultzsch— (Bharaut 
Inscrip. no. 39 ; Ind. Ant., Vol. xxi, p. 230). 
I20 


, 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KUTTIMA 


KUTIKAC- A village under one headman. 
Eko gràmaniko yatra sa-bhritya-paricharakah 1 
Kutikam tad vijaniyad eka bhogah sa eva tu 11 


(Kàmikagama, XX, 4.) 


KUTUMBA-BHÜMI-—The ground for houses, a site where a house 
is built. 


Kutumbha-bhümi-mànarh tu vata-kshetra-vivarjitam | 
(Jbid., XXI, 3.) 


KUTTIMA—A floor, a base, a wall, a pavement, an entablature, 
a cottage, a small house, the ground prepared for the site of a 
building, a paved ground. 

It is also used as a synonym of Prastara or entablature.—( M., XVI; 2-4 ; 

see under PRASTARA.) 

(1) Same as adhishthana or the base ofa column : 
Adhishthàna-vidhim vakshye šastri sarnkshipyate’ dhuna | 
Trayodasangulam arabhya shat-shad-angula-vardhanat | 
Chatur-hastavasanam ѕуа kuttima-dvadasonnatam | (M., xiv, 1-3.) 
Janmadi-vajanantam syat kuttimodayam iritam 1— (Jbid., 9.) 
Vimaàna-$aleshu cha mandapeshu | 
Nidhàna-sadmeshv-api gopureshv-api | 
Eteshv-adho-de$a-talopapithe 1 
Tasyoparishthat krita-kuttimani |—(Jbid., 397-400.) 

Referring to the entablature : 

Shad-vidham kuttimottungarn prastarodayam iritam |—(M., XVI, 4.) 

In connexion with the four-storeyed buildings : 

Tad-ürdhve рада (m)-bandhvarnáam gopanochcharn tad-ardhakam | 
Tad-ürdhve kuttimarn charhsarh sardha-pakshanghri-tungakam | 
(M., xxu, 36-37.) 

In connexion with the gopura or gate-house : 

Dvi-bhagarn chopapithochcharn tasmad ekarnša(m) Ки тата | 

(M., хххіп, 249.) 

(2) As а synonym of the wall (bhitti) : 

. . . dvari копда cha kuttiman | 

Bhitter akheyeyam akhyatam . . . u—(Kamikagama, Lv, 199-200.) 
As a member (lit. limb) of the base : 

Masürakam adishthanarh vastvadharam dharatalam | 

Talarn kuttimady-angam adhisthanasya kirtitam І--(/74., 202.) 

I2I 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


КОТТІМА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(3) Prasada-$ata-sambadham mani-pravara-kuttimam | 
Karayamasa vidhivad dhema-ratna-vibhüshitam 11 
(Mahabharata, xiv, 25, 22.) 
: prasadaih sukritochhrayaih 11 
Suvarna-jala-sarhvritair mani-kuttima-bhüshanaih 11 
(Ibid., 1, 185, 19-20.) 
(4) Kuttimo'stri nibaddha-bhis chandra-sala $irogriham | 
Commentary : Pashanadi-nibadhha-bhuh sa kuttima ity-ekam 1 
(Amarakosha, п, 5-8.) 
(5) Griham kafichana-kuttimam І--(Ейтауала, хі, 37, 27, etc.) 
(6) Tan... pathi . . . mamlatur na mani-kuttimochitau | 
(Raghuvamsa, ed. Stenzler, п, 9.) 
(7) Padangushthalulita-kusume Ките 1 
1 (Malavikagnimitra, ed. Tullberg, п, 27.) 
(8) Vedikeyam tu ѕатапуа kuttimanam prakiritità | 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati SAstri, rx, 19.) 

(9) Mani-kuttima—* jewel-paved floor.—(Kadaba plates of Prabhuta- 
varsha, line 29 ; Ep. Ind., Vol. rv, pp. 341, 342.) 

(то) Vàpi-küpa-tadaga-kuttima-matha-prásada-satralayàn | 

Sauvarna-dhvaja-toranapana-pure-grama-prapa-marhdapan 11 
ә о vyadhapayad ayam Chaulukya-chüdà-manih | 

Here “Ки ша” is evidently a detached building. 

(Sridhara's Devapattana Prasasti, v. 10; 
Ер. Ind., Vol. m, p. 440.) 

(11) Mani-kuttima—‘ jewel-paved floor? ‘ And it must have been an 
uncommonly magniflcent building, for nearly the sixth part of whole 
inscription (of 103 lines) is devoted to its description, and its erection is the 
only deed of the king, which the author has thought worth mentioning. 
The temple spoken of here must, therefore, necessarily be that splendid 
Siva temple which, according to the Baroda-grant was built by Krishna 
on the hill of Etapura, the modern Elura.’—(Kadaba plates of Prabhuta- 
varsha, line 34, Ep. Ind., Vol. ту, p. 337 and note 2; Ind. Ant, Vol. xu, 
P. 159 and p. 228 f.) 

(12) Srikrishna-kshiti-pala-datta-manibhir vidvat-kavinàm grihã nānā- 
ratna-vichitra-kuttima-bhuvo ratnakaratvar gatah—‘ Through the precious 
stones presented by the glorious king Krishna, the houses of the learned 
and the poets have pavements (? floor) sparkling with jewels of different 
kinds, and have (thus) become jewel-mines.’—(Two inscrip. of Krishnaraya 
no. A, Mangalagiri pillar, Inscrip. у. 7, Ep. Ind., Vol. у, pp. 118, 128.) 


122 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE KUDYA 


(13) Mani-kuttima-vithishu muktà-saikata-setubhih | 
Danambini nirumdhaàna yatra kridanti balikah 11 
* There the girls play on roads paved with precious stones, stopping by 
embankments of pearl and the water poured out at donations.’ 


(Vijayanagara Inscrip. of Harihara, II, v. 27, H. S. I., 
Vol. 1, no. 152, pp. 158, 160.) 
(14) Lokaika-chidamanina mani-kuttima-sankramta-prati-bimba- 
vyajena svayam ауайгууа . . . | 
“Тіс sun . . . under pretence of seeing his reflection in the jewelled 
floor.’ 


(Ер. Carnat., Vol. хп, Gubbi Taluq, no. 61 ; Roman 
text, p. 49, line 32 ; Transl., p. 29, line 20.) 


-KUDYA—A wall, plastering. 


Bhittih stri kudyam | 
‘Bhittih kudye prabhede cha’ iti Haimah | 
‘Kudyarh bhittau vilepane’ iti Мейірі \—(Amarakésha, 2, 2, 4.) 
(1) Prasada-harmya-valabhi-linga-pratimasu kudya-küpeshu 1 
‘In the temple, mansion, roof, phallus, image (idol), wall, and tank 
(the cement should be used). 
(Brihat-Samhità, туп, 4, Z.R.A.S., 
N.S., Vol. v1, p. 322.) 
(о) Silayà cha mridapy-athava taruna rachayed atha kudyam ativa- 
dridham | 
Tad-ihottara-vistaratah sadrisarh bahalarh kathitarh talipadi-yutami 
Svotsedha-dararm$aika-hina-mastakam eva tat 1 
Kudyarm kuryad bahir-bhagam svantar-bhagarh bhavet samam Ii 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati-Sastri, xv, 1-2.) 
(3) Para-kudyam udakenopaghnato—‘ cause to collect water and thereby 
injure the wall of a neighbouring house. 
(Kautilzya-Artha-sastra, Chap. Lxv, p. 167.) 
(4) Pafichalindarn shat-kudyam bahir andharikavritam 11 
Linge Silànte cha krodhe bhitti(h) paficha$a-varjitah 1 
Kirhchin nyünam alindarn và $esharn kudyeshu yojayet 11 
(Kamikagama, L, 83, 87.) 
Jàlakarn phalakarn $ailam aishtarh kudyam cheshyate 1 
Jalakair bahubhir yuktarn jalakarn kudyam ishyate 11 
Nishpadarn và sa-padam уа kudyam $ailam atheshtakam 1 
Athava mrinmayam vapi kudyam ishtam dvijottamah Il 
129 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ко s = E ? 


KUDYA-STAMBHA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


* 


Kudye stambha-latà Кагуа vastvadharasya chopari 1 
Vedikordhvadhaàre küta-koshtadinam tridha tridhà smritah 11 
(Катікавата, LV, 94, 97, 98.) 
Jalaka cha kavata§ cha bahye bahye prakalpayet 1 
Sarvatah kudya-samyuktarh mukhya-dhamatra kirtitam 11 
Anta-vivrita-pàdam cha bahye kudyarn prakirtitam 11 
Bahir abhyantare mukhya-geharh vidhiyate 1ı—(Ibid., хи, 8, 9, 14.) 
(5) In connexion with the number of walls (sala) in the buildings of the 
kings of various ranks : 
Ekadikarh tri-salantarh pattadharadibhis tribhih 1 
Práhàrakastragráhabhyàm kudyam etad (? ekarn) dvayantakam 11 
(M., XL, 42-43.) 
Geha-tridhaika-parito bahi(h) kudya-taram I—(M. rm. 59). 
Kudya(ama)ty-adhika-hinam ched vistare chodaye’pi va | 
Dvi-jati-sarva-varnanarn ѕагуа-паќакагагћ bhavet | 
(M. LXIX. 57, 58.) 


KUDYA-STAMBHA—The column of the wall, thus the pilaster or 
a square pillar projecting from the wall. 
Sila-stambharn &ilà-kudyam narāvāse na karayet ıı 
(Kamikdgama, xxxv. 161.) 
In connexion with the foundations : 
Kudya-stambhe griha-stambhe harmya-garbham vinikshipet 1 
(М. хп. 132.) 
Referring to the pillar : 
Tri-chatush-paficha-shan-matram kudya-stambha-visalakam | 
Tad-dvi-gunitarh vapi tri-gunar và chatur-gunam 
Etat(s) kampa (-bha)-visalarn syad athava tunga-mànatah | 
(М. xv. 14-16.) 
See Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Suro. New Imp. series, vol. xxr, 
plates xvi, XLVI, fig. 3 ; plate гххуш, figs. 1, 2 ; Buddhist Cave Temples, 
ibid, vol. ту, plate хуш, no. 3 ; plate xxu, no. 2 ; plate xxix. no. 2. 
KUNDA—A pool or well in or about a temple. 
Sarvatah kunda-sarnyuktarh griha-dvara-samanvitam | 
(Kamikagama, xxxv. 64.) 
“Ас Kapadvanj . .. is a large spuare kunda or reservoir in the 
market place. This occupies an area about a hundred feet square with 


. a platform below the first descent, from which a series of short stairs, 


parallel to the sides, lead down from one narrow landing to another, 


124 


ity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA - 


æ 


ри 


X: 5 ae E. 


ux 


еч 
өре” 1 
ET 


NS 


p] 
[E ee 
cf ч 
BR CSS SHC 
QUOI 
УЙ, 


е 


УА 
s SSS 


SN 


b 2 27 ۵ ° 

? ` ; < © 

СГ Қ ЕЕ 

САҚ E 7 
\ : 
Q y— 2 UT Vr. M СА 
Dp PE N NT ESS сұлы 
Vike N T 


KUNTALA 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


| 
| 
| 
x 


лн —= 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KUMARI-PURA 


and reaching a broader one about 33 fect from the first. Between each 

pair of descending steps in each of five tiers is a niche—some hundred 

and thirty-six in all—originally occupied by images . . . In the 
centre is a deep well about nine and a half feet square.’ 

(Ahmadabad Arch., Burgess, Arch. Surv. New. Imp. 

series, vol. xxxi, p. 94, plates LXXX, LXXXI.) 


KUNDIKA—A water pot on the hand of an image. 


Kundikà chàksha-màlà cha vame vame kare kramat 1—(М. и. 31.) 
Kundika vàma-haste cha dharayet tu sarasvati 1—(М. ілу. 22.) 


KUNTALA—A head gear, a lock of hair. 


Devànàm bhipatinam cha mauli-lakshanam uchyate 1 
Jata-mauli-kiritarh cha karandar cha Sirastrakam | 

Kuntalarn kefa-bandham cha dhammillalaka-chüdakam | 
Mukutarn cheti khyatam . . . 1—(M. XLIX 12-15). 
Duküla-vasanopetam mukutam kunu talan (уа |1—(M., тлу, 78.) 
Kechit tu kuntala-nibharn tungam makutarn kuntalam tu và | 


(ZIbid., 119.) 
KUBJAKA (see Nacara)—Hump backed, crooked, a town of the 
similar plan (cf. KANyaA-KuBJA), according to the Kamikagama, 
it is a suburb or a place on the confines of any city or large village. 
Gramidinam samipam yat sthanam kubjam iti smritam 11 
(Катікавата, хх, 15.) 
Sarveshàm nagaradinarn bhedam lakshanarh uchyate | 
Kubjakam pattanam chaiva . . . | 
. durgam ashta-vidham bhavet 1—(M., x, 37, 40, 42.) 


KUMARI- PURA—A gymnasium or school for higher studies, a 
stadium, arena or sports ground. 
Sotsedha-randhra-praàkaram sarvatah khatakavritam | 
Ruchaka(h)-pratika-dvaram kumáàri-puram eva cha 11 
Dvi-hastah srotasa $reshtharn kumari-puram aíichatam | 
Hasta-$ato-da$a-éreshtho navahasto’shta eva cha П 
(Brahmanda-Purana, Part r, 2nd Anusamga-pada 
Chap. уп, vv. 103, 104.) 
Prakara-madhye kritva vapim pushkarinimh dvararh chatu$-Salam 
adhyardhantaranikarn kumari-purarn munda-harmyam dvi-talam mun- 
daka-dvaraim bhümi-dravya-vaé$ena уа tribhagadhikayamah bhanda- 
vahini(h)-kulyah karayet |\—(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, XXIV, 54, see Translation 
under Chüli-harmya.) 


125 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


4 
Pat 
5 
I 

я. 


KUMUDA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KUMUDA--The water-lily. ‘A semi-circle projecting from a 
vertical diameter. It is chiefly employed in cornices and bases. It 
corresponds with the astragal (a small circular moulding ornamented 
with a bead or reel), or with torus’ (a large convex moulding used 
principally in the bases of columns). (Ram-Raz, Arch. Hind., p. 23.) 
In bases it may be triangular or hexagonal. 
(М., хіу, 83.) 
In connexion with the foundations : 
Таптапбага vathava prantarh kumudaàntam và galàntakam | 
Pattikantam kshipech chapi vinyaset prathameshtakam | 
(M., xu, 202-203.) 
A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 12, etc.; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA). 
А moulding of the throne : 
Tach-chhesham dvi-bhage tu kumudarn vrittàkritis tatha 1 
(M., XLV, 136.) 
A headgear 
Etesham mahishbibhyam(-shyoh) cha dhammilla(m) © kumuda- 
kritam 1—(М., XLIX, 28.) 


KUMUDA-BANDHA-—A class of bases, it has four types differing 
from one another in height and in the addition or omission of some 
mouldings. 


(M., xiv, 65-108, see under ADHISHTHANA.) 


KUMBHA (see KALASA)—A pitcher, the capital, a moulding, the 
cupola, a plinth. (/М., хіу, 33, etc., see the lists of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA). A kind of building (see under Guata). 


А part of a column (Suprabhedàgama, xxxi, 58, see under STAMBHA). 
A pinnacle : 


Prasadam  apy-amala-kafichana-kumbha--ampata-sambhàvaniyam- 
akarod anukarmma &1раіһ I—(Chebrolu Inscrip. of Jaya, postscript, 
lines 9-11, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 150, 151.) 

Ghanam prasadam  nava-hema-kumbha-kalitam ramyam таһа- 
mamtapam— a solid temple adorned with nine golden pinnacles 
and a beautiful large hall.’-—(Mangalagiri Pillar Inscrip., v. 51, Ef. Ind., 
Vol. vi, pp. 125, 115.) 


126 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KULA 


Prottumge'py-aparàjite$a-bhavane ^ sauvarnna-kumbha-dhvajaropi 
rüpyaja-mekhalà-vitaranas tasyaiva devasva yah . . . 1 
* He placed a golden cupola (kumbha) and a flagstaff (dhvaja) on 
the temple of (the god) Aparàjite$a, to whom at the same time 
he gave a silver girdle.’ —Pro. Kielhorn. 
(T he Chahamanas of Naddula, по. C, Sundha Hill 
Inscrip. of Chachigadeva, у. 51, Ef. Ind., 
Vol. 1x, pp. 78, 74.) 
Prasidam ürdhva-s($)ikhara-sthira-hema-kumbham—- © (Into) the 
temple (which by the stately display of) firm golden capital, upon 
lofty spires.'—(Bhubaneswar Inscrip., v. 15, Ef. Ind., Vol. xm, pp. 152, 154.) 
KUMBHAKA —The base of a column. 
Ayam kumbhaka-dànam . . . . ‘This pillar-base (where the ins- 
cription is written) is the gift of . . . ° 
The same inscription is repeated on many other bases of pillars. 
(Catalogue of the Arch. Museum at Mathura, 
sections 21, 22, 25, 30, 32, рр. 176, 177, 178.) 
KUMBHA-PANJARA (cf. PASJARA)—A niche in the wall. It con- 
sists of a vase, a pilaster and a little pavilion (pañjara) at the top. 


KUMBHA-PADA (cf. STAMEBHA)— Literally the pillar at the foot of 
a pitcher, an upper pillar of the two-storeyed buildings (M., xx, 63), 
of the bedstead ( M., XLIV, 59). 
KUMBHA-BANDHA—A class of bases, it has five types differing 
from one another in height and in the addition or omission of some 
mouldings. 
(M., XIV, 195-239 ; see under ADHISHTHANA.) 
KUMBHALANKARA —Ornaments of the column, mouldings of the 
pedestal, base, and entablature. 
(M., xv, 201-232 ; see under UPAPITHA, 
ADHISHTHANA and PRASTARA.) 
KUMBHA-STAMBHA (see SrAMBHA and compare KumBHa- 
PADA)—A small pillar, generally employed at the upper part of 
a structure. 
(M., xv, 72-200 ; see under STAMBHA.) 
KULA (see AcHARYA-KULA)—A residence, a residential private 
school, a dwelling house of a small individual family (R.-V., x, 179, 
2;A.-V.,1, 14, 3; Sat. Brahmana, x, 1, 2, 4513, 1, 4,434, I, 14; XI, 5, 
3, 115 8, r, 3, Brihat-Upanishad, 1, 5, 32 ; Ghhànd. Upa., ur, 15, б), 
a sanctuary, a temple. 


127 


n 
“ж 


Ё 1 


NET asas asss 
> V ae, I 


ы. me Ms 


KULA-DHARANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KULA-DHARANA-—A type of pavilion. 
(М., xxxiv, 262 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
KULAMBHA-DVARA—A front door, the threshold. 
(M., xxxiv, 365.) 
KULIKANGHRI(KA) (se SrAMBHA)—An ornament of the en- 
tablature, the main pillar, calyx, see NATAKA. 
Vallika patra-valli cha chitrangam kulikanghrikam 1 
Etat paryàya-vàkyàni . . . 1—(M., ху, 54-55.) 
KULI(I)RA—A crab, a part of the joinery shaped like a crab. 
(M., хуп, 159.) 
KUHARA—A window, the interior windows. 
Tatra shad-aérir merur dvadaga-bhaumo vichitra-kuhara§ cha | 
Commentary: Kuhara abhyantara-gavakshah | 
(Brihat-Samhità, LVI, 20, 7.R.A.S., 
М. S., Vol. v1, р. 318.) 
Merur dvada$a-bhaumo vividha-kuharaá cha 1 
(Bhavishya-Purdna, Chap. CXXX, v, 27.) 
КОТА--Гһе peak or summit, head, top of a building. 
(1) The top of a building : karna-küta, $alà-küta.—(M., xix, 55, 57; 
XV, 1343 LX, 45; LXX, 20.) 
(2) Ekaika-bhagam syat tu kita-saladikarh nayet | 
Adho bhaga-dvayenatha kütam ekena và bhavet | 
Küta-$alà (v. 92), müla-küta, vana-kita (95). 
(Kamikagama, L, 88, 9o, 92,495.) 
(3) Pinnacle: ^ Máta-küta-pràkàra-khanda-sphutita-jirnoddhárakam 
— for the repairs of whatever might become broken‘or torn or worn 
out belonging to the enclosure, with beautiful pinnacles'.— (Inscrip. 
at Ablur, no. E, lines 59, 76, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 249, 257, 258.) 
Sivagamokta-vage parvvata-pramanada degulamam  tri-küta vage— 
‘in accordance with Siva traditions, founded a temple with three 
pinnacles, as vast as а mountain’.—(Jbid., no. E, line 74, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, 
рр. 250, 258.) 
(4) Tara-ganeshinnata-kita-koti-tatarppitasijvala-dipikasu 1 
* Like clusters of stars the bright lamps be placed on its pinnacles.’ 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. хп, Gubbi Taluq, no. 61 ; 
Roman text, p. 49, lines 98; 
Transl., p. 29, line 17.) 
128 


TR CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


'ELEVATION. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | КОРА 


(5) Sarnbhoš charu-Subhair аКагї bhavanarn pashàna-kütair idam | 
* He built this temple of Sambhu with beautiful and brilliant most 
excellent stones.—Dr. Bühler. This translation of kuta does not seem 
to suit the context. 
(T'wo Skt. Inscrip. in the British Museum, no. r, 
line 12, Ind. Ant., Vol. хп, p. 251.) 
(6) Aneka-ratna-khachita ruchira-mani-kala$a-kalita-küta-koti-ghati- 
tam apy-uttuhga-chaityalayam —' (having erected) a lofty chait- 
yalaya, with ‘kalaSas’ or towers surmounted by rounded pinnacles 
set with all manner of jewels.’ (For © kalaga ) Mr. Rice has put in 
ТЕ ‘ gopura, perhaps a slip.) 
(Ep. Carnat. Vol. vr, Müdgere Taluq, по. 22 ; Roman text, 
р. 148, line 12 ; Transl., p. 63, para. 2.) 
| (7) Sri-vira-somanátha-devara  tri-küta-devalaya—* the three pin 
| nacled temple of the god Vira-Somanatha’.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu, 
| Channagiri Taluq, no. 52; Roman text, р. 322, line 18; Transl., p. 189.) 


KÜCHAKRA (see Kripa)—Water-wheels for wells (R.-V., x, 102, 
II, cf. Zimone, All. Lib., 157). 


N | . KÜTA-KOSHTHAC-—A compartment on the top of a building, 
an attic room. 


(Kamikagama, Lv, 123-130 ; see under KARNA-KUTA.) 
KUTA-SALA—A small room on the top of a building. 
Kita-sala sabharh kritva bhoga-bhogyarn viseshatah 11 
| Kuta-šala-yutarn vapi küta-$alantam eva cha | 
Prakarena samayuktarn gopurena vidhiyate 11 
| (Suprabhedagama, хххі, 113, 120.) 


| KUTAGARA (see KüTA-SALA)—A small room at the top of a 
building. Window-chambers (W. Griger : MahdvamSa, p. 297). 
i Ramayana (1, 5, 15, etc.) : 
Kutagarais cha sampūrņām indrasyevamaravatim 11 
| Commentary: Kütakhyair āgāraih strinarn krida-grihair iti yāvt 
| kütah $alagaram) griham anye | 
КОРА —А well with its mechanism of water-wheels, etc. (R.-V., x, 
109, II ; VII, 36, 3; IX, 97, 4), masonry sides (Par$u, R.-V., 1, 105, 8; 
ы X, 33, 2) and metal fittings or ribbed resembling sickles (see 


KUCHAKRA). 7 
(1) Dewal Praśasti of Lalla the Chhinda (v. 20, Ер. Ind. Vol. 1, 
PP- 79» 83)- 
129 
=. 
ы. 
T a £ 
CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA eds qu 


KRISHNA-MANDALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(о) Sridhara’s Devapattana Praśasti (v. 10, Ef. Ind., Vol., п, p. 440). 


(3) A well with flights of steps: 
Sita-svádu-vi$uddha-bhüri-salilam sopàna-maàlojjvalam | 
küpam chainam akaàrayad | 


(Gangdhar stone Inscrip. of Visvavarman, lines 38, 

39; С.І. I., Vol. ш, Е. G. I., no. 17, p. 76.) 

(4) Anamda-putrena Sarhgamitrena Кие (Кара) katite mata- 

pitae puyae save-satana hida-suhae— This well was excavated 

‘by Samgamitra, the son of Ananda, in honour of his father (and, 
mother (and) for the well-being and happiness of all beings. 


(Paja Inscrip. of the year 11, New Kharoshthi Inscrip. 
from the Lahcre Museum, no. п, line 2, 
Ind. Ant., xxxvu, p. 65.) 


(5) Khane Кіре Dashaverana—he dug well of Dashaveras. 
l (Inscrip. of Ara, lines 4-5, Ind. Ant., Vol. хип, p. 133.) 
KRISHNA-MANDALA —The iris of the eye of an image. 
(M., Lxv, 66, LXVI, 65, LXX, 69.) 
KEYORA—tThe armlet worn on the upper arm of an image. 
“(М2 т, 14, LIV, 13, etc.) 
KERALA-(KANTA)—A class of the twelve-storeyed buildings, once 
prevailing in the ancient country of Kerala. 
Tad eva bhüta-bhagena kshudra-sala-visalakam | 
Hara cha tat-tri-bhagena cha yuktya samalankritam 1 
Sesham prag-ukta-vat kuryad eva(m) kerala-kantakam 1 
(M., xxx, 28-30; see under VARATA, ibid. 17-27.) 
KESA-KUTAKA—The tip of the hair, the top knot of an image. 
(M., L, 301 ; see UsHNISHA.) 
KESA-BANDHA—A head-gear for the images of goddesses and 
queens. 
(M., XLIX, 14, 88 ; Liv, 88; see details under Вн05нАмА.) 
KESARA—A lion's or horse's mane, the filament of a lotus, a mould- 
ing, a type of building. 
A class of the single-storeyed buildings ( M., хіх, 173-175 ; see 
under PRASADA). 
A class of the three-storeyed buildings ( M., XXI, 31-39 ; see under 
PRASADA). 
130 


\ СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


E 


\ 
= KONA-LOSHTA 
CD) 
Vm) КОМА LOSHTA. 


iic 
LL ll ME 


| GENERAL OUTLINE OF KUBJAKATOWN 
| 


> 
= 


SN \ 


Š SSS 
AWE 


LOPS SSS SES 


TE OTT 4 вава К үс 


% E. KOKILARGALA. 


Page 131 


HINDU АРСНІТЕСТОРЕ KONA 


KAILAS(S)A—A type of building which 
eight storeys, and turrets. 


(1)  Brihat-Samhità (LVI, 21; J.R.A.S., М. S., мі, p. 319; see under 
PRASADA). | 


(2) A class of the three-storeyed buildings. 


is 28 cubits wide, has 


(M., XXI, 52; see under PRASADA.) 
(3) Mata Purane (Chap. ccLxix vv., 32, 47, 53 ; see under PRASADA.) 
(4) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. CXXX, v, 28; see under PRASADA). 


(5) A building with four śālās (compartments, halls) and four kütas 
(towers or domes): 


Chatuh-$ala-chatush-küta-yuktah kailaga eva hill 


(Suprabhedágama, xxxi, 42.) 
A class of buildings, circular in plan and names as follows : 
(1) Balaya, (2) Dundubhi, (3) Padma, (4) Maha-padma, (5) 


Varddhani, (6) Ushnisha, (7) бал һа, (8) Kalasa and (9) Sva- 
vrik-sha. 


(6) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 


29, 24-29; 5% under 
PRASADA). 


(7) Agni-Purána (Chap. Civ, vv. п, 17, 18 ; see under PRASADA). 
KOKILA—A moulding of the throne. 


(M., XLV, 125, see under SIMHASANA.) 
KOKILARGALA—A latch, bolt or bar attached to the throne. 
Aneka-šrinkhalopetarn bahu-kundala-bhüshitam | 
Kavata-yugmarn kartavyam kokilargala-sarnyutam | 


(Kamikagama, Lv, 52.) 


KOCHCHHA—A cane-bottomed тей; 


(Mahavagga, v, 10, 2.) 
KOTA—A fort, a hut, a shed. 


Atyuchair bhitti-bhagair divi divasa-pati-syandanam va vigrihnan 
yenakari kotah | “Ву whom the fort (in this place) was built 


which perhaps may arrest the chariot of the sun in the sky by its 
high walls.’ 


(An Abu Inscrip. of the reign of Bhimadeva, II, v. 9, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, pp. 221, 222.) 


KONA—A class of buildings. 


(Kamikagama, XLV, 55-58 ; see under MALIKA. Ye 
131 


— —— Y PY Tp s 


igi COLUMNS 


THE KUMBHA-STAMBHA AND KOSTHA-STAMBHA 
CLASSES 


mc 


F 


GENERAL PROPORTION WHOLE ORDER = 6PARTS 

PEDESTAL = IPART DIAMETER OF BOTH THE CLASSES 
aa = 4 с в 
SHAFT - XA J HEIGHT OF COL: 


IND ew o 
ENTABLATURE ~| + 


FOR ENTABLATURE 


ARCHITRAVE asove JÎT T 
THIS SHOULD BE OMIT || ПІШІП 
TED AND THAT Space ПІШІП 
SHOULD BETREATEDING® 
A DIFFERENT WAY 


1 


HALF CIRCULAR | HALF SQUARE 


PLAN AT AA 
LOOKING UP 


PLAN AT EE 


LOCKING UP 


PLAN AT CC 
LOOKING UP 


PLANI AT GG 
LOOKing UP 
| 
I 
| 


МОТЕ- Е 


ІТ APPEARS ^ L 


THAT IN GENERAL, 
THE PILASTER SHOULD = f 
BE OF THE SAME FORM 
ASTHE COLUMN, BUT A | 
PILASTER AS DRAWN HER | | | 
SHOULD BE USED WHEN | | | 
THERE 15 KO COLUMN | 


OPPOSITE IT | 


THE LEFT HALF OF THE 
COLUMN 15 TO BE CON- 

“SIDERED AS CIRCULAR 
AND THE ORNAMENTS ARE TO 
ҺЕ DRAWN Beo bey. 


PLAM AT DD 
LOOKING DOWN 1 


PLAN AT HH 
LOOKING pow 


LOOKING Down 


EQUIVALENT TO GREEK ANTA 
MANCHA-BHADRA 


TYPE | 


PEDESTALS IN ALL 
CASES SHOULD BE 
SQUARE ІМ PLAN 


: % SQUARE. OR CIRCULAR OCTAGONAL HEXAGONAL PENTAGONAL 
ў ВРАНМА-КАМТА OR RUDRA-KANTA NISHNU-KANTA SKANDA-KANTA SIVA-KANTA 


` 


^ 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 E | 


KONA-PARAVATA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


KONA-PARAVATA (se KAPOTA-PALIKA)—A dove-cot or dove- 
ridge. Ë 
І (Vastu-vidyd, xvi, 27, 36 ; see under KAPOTA-PALIKA.) 
KONA-LOSHTA—A moulding, the pendulent-like ornament at the 
corner of a pent-roof. 
(See details under LosuTa.) 
KOLAKA (see ANGULA)—A measurement of two angulas, а fort, 
a village, a building material. 
A kind of village (M., 1x, 486 ; see under GRAMA). 
A kind of fort (M., x, 41 ; see under Durca and NAGARA). 
Some fruit or material employed in the foundation-pit. 
( M., xu, 98.) 


KOLHI-VESMIKA—A hall-mansion. 

Sri-krishnagiri-maharaja-maha-vihare upa$ama-kolhive$mikàh басһ1- 
varikah sametà akshainitih dramma-Sataikena karapitah—‘ have had 
hall-mansions (suitable) for meditation built at this great monastery of the 
famous mount of Krishna and have given as a perpetual endowment 
one hundred drammas.’ 

Srimat-krishna-giri-maha-vihare bhadra-éri-vishnu-bhikshünarm tatra- 
stharya-(samghasya) drammànarm Satamekarh (datva) pagamana-sadigam 
chivarikadi-labha-samanvitarn kolhive$mikam kshityarh nyavivisat— 
* gave one hundred drammas to the monks of the worshipful community 
dwelling at the great monastery of the famous mount of Krishna, and 
caused to be built in the ground a hall-mansion suitable for meditation, — 
Dr. Hultzsch. š 

Тһе translations quoted above are, it should be noticed, too free, Тһе 
term ‘kolhi’ also does not sound like a Sanskrit word; but there 
are words like ‘kalhana’; there is a phonetic resemblance between 
‘kolhi’? and “Ешуа” which means something belonging to the family 
and hence ‘ main’ or * chief? 

(Three Inscrip. from Kanheri, no. 15, line 4 f. ; no. 43А, 
line 2 £, Ind. Ant., Vol. xm, рр. 134, 135, 136.) 


KOSA—A coffer with a pillow (A.-V., xiv, 1, 6) ‘ rent along with a 
bride to her husband's house ° which may be used as a couch or bed 
(of. Germanic marriage coffers). 
KOSA-MANDAPA—A store-room, a treasury. 
(M., xxxu, 68 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
132 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


2 
Ж 


` 


\ HINDU ARCHITEC TURE KOSHTHAGARA 


А KOSHTHA—A store-room, a granary, a chamber, a wall ; the 
22 mezzanine room. 
(M., xxxv, 210, etc.) 
Eka-nàsikayà yuktarh pafijaram samudahritam | 
Küteshu nasika-yuktarn koshtam etat prakirtitam || 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 80.) 
KOSHTHAKA—A part of the pillar, a granary, a surrounding 
wall. 
1 Ko hthakàsty-iha chatvaraég chatush-koneshy Chaiva hi | 
(Suprabhedagama, XXI, 50.) 
Koshthakarh tad-dvi-paréve tu janma-padakriti(s) tatha | 
(М., xv, 85.) 
Astam tavat pratoli tad-upavirachitarn koshthaka-dvarm-dvam getat 
prauchchair alàna-yugmarn vijaya-(vara)-kareh (-karinah) Satru-laksh- 
myas cha sadma— near the gate-way were constructed two granaries.’ 
(Hansi Stone Inscrip. of Prithviraja, V. S. 1224, 
: V. 6, Ind. Ant., Vol. хы, pp. 19, 17.) 
KOSHTHAKARA—A type of Nepalese chaityas, erected on a low 
flat mound one-tenth of its diameter in height. 
(See Woodcut т 56, Fergusson, History of Indian 
and Eastern Architecture, Vol. I, p. 280.) 
KOSHTHA-SALA—A kind of closed hall. 


(M., oe 37 i see under Sara.) 
. KOSHT HA-STAMBHA —A kind of pillar, a pilaster. 


(M., xv, 84-87 ; see under STAMBHA.) 


KOSHTHAGARA—A store-house, a class of Buddhist chaityas in 


Nepal where there is a four-faced Пара of Siva with a correspond- 
ing emblem. 
Sravastiyanam maháà-màtràpàrm <аѕапањ manavasiti-katat | 
Srimati vamsa-grame  evaite дуе koshthagare (duve kotagalani), 
trigarbhe . . . | (Translated into Sanskrit by Dr. Bühler.) 
‘ The order of the great officials of Sravasti (issued) from their camp 
at Manavasitikata ” : 
“These two store-houses with three partitions (which are. situated 
even in famous Varngagrama), require the storage of loads (bharaka) of 
black Pancium.? 
(Sohgaura copper plate Inscrip. 1-2, Ind. Ant., Vo]. XXV, pp. 265, 
262 ; see B. A. Society Proceedings of 1894, p. 84 f.) 
133 


ion. Digiti i SA 
CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation U | 


KAUTUKODAYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Narayana-devara kottaravan akalpam аре yakshe$ana bhandaram 
enalu madisidan udàram ballala-deva dharani-nàthar | 
‘Erected a kottara (koshthagara) giving it the name of Yakshefa- 
bhandara (=store-house).’ 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 20 ; Text, p. 119, 
line 3 f. ; Transl., p. 52 ; see Fergusson, Ind. and 
East. Arch., 11, 979, Woodcut, 156.) 


KAUTUKODAYA (c. UrsavA and see UTsEDHA)—A kind of 
height, lit. (?) the height of an image made as a plaything (experi- 
ment) rather than for worship. Е 
Utsave(-savasys) chardha-mànena kautukodyam iritam 1 
(M., LXI, 22 ; see context under UrsAva.) 
Nabhyantarh medhra-simantarh nava -manarh chotsavodayam | 
Таа-агаһата kautukotsedharh kanyasadi trayarh trayam | 
(M., LXIV, 27-28 ; see context under UTSAVA.) 


KAUSALYA—A pavilion with fifty-six pillars. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v, 8; 
see under МАМРАРА.) 


KAUSIKA—A type of pavilion. 


(M., xxxiv, 249 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


KRIDA-KETANA—A pleasure-house. 
Tirthottumga-sarasvati-krita-parishvamgasya sarasvatam | 
Ka-ketanam etad atra vidadhe vàramnidhe rodhasi 11 

‘ (The poet Nànaka erected here) this Sarasvata pleasure-house on 
the banks of the sea that has been embraced by the high tirtha 
(sacred banks) of the Sarasvati. 


(Sanskrit Grants and Inscrip. Prasasti по. rv, 33, 

Ind. Ant., Vol. x1, рр. 103, 106.) 

KSHANIKA-BERA—An idol for temporary use, as is carved 
generally with mud by the worshipper himself. 
š (M. тхуш, 26, etc.) 
KSHANIKALAYA—A temple where temporary idols are wor- 


hipped. 
PPS (M., LXI, 127.) 


KSHUDRA-GOPANA (5% GoPANA)—The small beam, а mould- 
ing of the entablature, the plinth, the base, and the capital, etc. 
(Kamikagama, тту, 2 ; see under PRASTARA.) 


134 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ah 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KSHEPANA 


KSHUDRA-NASA(-I)—The small nose, a moulding resembling the 
nose, a vestibule (prati, pratimukha) side pillar, lower pillars. 

It terminates by the beam in entablatures; all the kshudra-naéas 
correspond to lower pillars ; and that corresponding to the karnapada 
(side pillar) is half of the forepart of the column (or entablature).— 
(M., хут, 92-95 ; XLVI, 24, ctc.) 

Tilaka-kshudra-nàsi-yukta-toranai$ cha samanvitam (vimanam) 1 
(Kamikagama, L, 93.) 
See Amarakosha (u, ij, 15) under СОРАМА. 


KSHUDRA-SALA—A small hall, room or house. 
Khsudra-sala-pradege tu sarvalankàra-sarnyutam | 
(M., XXVI, 71, etc ; see SALA.) 
KSHUDRABJA—A small lotus, a moulding of the pedestal, a small 
cyma. 
(M., хш, 61, etc.; see the lists of mouldings 
under UPAPiTHA.) 
KSHEPANA—LZit. projection. A drip-moulding ; the door-frame, 
a moulding above the plinth in pedestal, generally placed between 
а dado and сута, a fillet and сута, or a petal and fillet. Etymologi- 
cally it would indicate a moulding like а spout to throw off water, 
and in this office it would resemble the corona (kapota), i.e. the 
square projection having a broad vertical face and the soffit or under- 
portion recessed so as to form a drip which prevents water from 
running down the building. Іп bases it would resemble a cornice 
(cf. M., xiv, 370) which is used as the term for any crowning projec- 
tion. In this sense it is also found in the western architecture (cf. 
Fletcher, Hist. of Arch., figs. 191, 192, 197, 198). In Indian 
architecture it also implies a door-frame ( M., XXXIX, 105-110). 
A moulding of the pedestal (M., хш, 45, etc. ; see the lists of mould- 
ings under UPAPITHA). 
A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 120, etc. ; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA). 
In connexion with the door : 
Madhye tu kshepanarn vame Suddha-dvaravasanakam 1 
(M., xxxix, 105.) 
In connexion with the bedstead : 
Ekam vàtha dvayam vapi kshepanam bahudhanvitam 1 
(M., XLIV, 20.) 


135 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


KSHEMA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


A moulding of the pitha or pedestal of the phallus : 
Utsedhe shoda$amée tu prathamochcharn dvi-bhagikam | 
Padmochcham tu tri-bhagam syàt tat-urdhve kshepanaméakam | 
(M., LUI, 30, 31.) 
KSHEMA-—A class of buildings. 
(Катікавата, XXXV, 32-934 ; see under MALIKA.) 


KSHONI—A kind of pent-roof, stated to be employed in residential 
buildings. 
(M., хуш, 177-178.) 


KH 


КНАТТАКА(-ТТА)--А bedstead, a seat, a pedestal or throne. ‚ Же 
Mürttinam iha prishthatah kari-vadhü-prishtha-pratishtha-jushàm 
tau-mürttir уате aáma-khattaka-gatah karnta-sameta dasa | 

* Behind the statues placed on the backs of female elephants, . . . 

(he) caused to be made here ten images of those persons mentioned 
above) together with their wives on khattaka of spotless stones.' 

‘The word, khattaka, judging from the context, seems to have 

the meaning of pedestal or throne.’ Dr. Luders. 
(Mount Abu Inscrip. no. 1, v. 64, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. уш, рр. 212, 218, 200.) 


disrupt Ca Ch ML YA 


КНАТУА--А long couch, a bedstead. 
KHAD СА—А type of octangular building. E 


(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVII, vv. 21, 23, 
91-92; see under PRASADA.) E 
"EHANDA-HARMYA- A sectional tower, a tower with open veran- 
dahs or balconies. - 


Adho-bhaga-dvayenatha kütam ekena và bhavet | 
"Talam ekarn bhaved grasarn (?) khanda-harmyarh tri-bhümike 11 
-Andharandhari-harokta-khanda-harmya-vigeshitam (vimanam) 11 


(Kamikagama, L, 80, 91.) 3 
ОТТАКА-А kind of entablature (prastara). 
la-vistara-vistaram samodaya-samanvitam 1 
ottaram iti jfieyarn padenotesedharn sarnyutam II | i 
i Е (Ibid., LIV, 5.) : 


д 


NASA. 


x 


KSHEPANA 


Ом 
KSHEPANA. 


< 
с 
а 
=) 
ES 
(22) 
x 


KSHEPANA 
AS PROJECTI 


г 


» 4 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KHARVATA 


KHARVATA—A village, a fort, a fortified city. 
(1) A village ( M., rx, 456), a fortified town ( M., x., 36). 


In connexion with the foundations : 
Gramadinam nagaradinam pura-pattana-kharvate | 
Koshtha-koladi-sarvésharn garbha-sthanam ihochyate 1 
(M., xu, 168-169.) 
A kind of pavilion used as the dining hall of the king : 
Nripanam bhojanartham syat kharvatakhyarn tu mandapam 1 
(M., XXXIV, 455 ; see also 456-472, 567.) 
(2) A fortress to defend a group of two hundred villages : 
Dvyi-Sata-gramya kharvatikam | 
(Kautiliya-Artha-$astra, Chap. хп, p. 46.) 
(3) Kshullaka-prakara-veshtitarh kharvatam | 
(Rayapaseni-sütra-vyakhyane, ibid., p. 206.) 
(4) Karvatani kunnagarani 1 
(Prasna-vyakarana-siitra-vyakhyane, ibid., p. 306.) 
(5) Dhanuh-$atam parinaho grama-kshetrantaram bhavet 1 
Dve Sate kharvatasya syan nagarasya chatuh-Satam 1 
(Yajfiavalka, п, 167.) 
(6) Vanijàm api bhogyarn tu tad-vad e.a (like nagara) samiritam 1 
Yat sthanarn brahmananam tu kharvatam puravasinam | 
Nagaryavartanam yat kharvatam tad udahritam | 
(Kamikagama, хх, 7, 9.) 

(7) Iya-khavadamhi— (By means of his vase Марга Maréga’s son 
Kamagulya, who has fixed his residence) in this place Khavata . . 
Mr. Pargiter. 

So far the editor is right. But in his long note on this expression he has 
rather too elaborately dwelt on a number of conjectures without however 
having been able to arrive at any conclusion whatever. This Prakrit 
expression can easily be rendered into Sanskrit by atra kharvate (in this city 
or town). 

(The Inscrip. on the Wardak vase, line 1, Ef. Ind., 
Vol. xr, pp. 210, 211, 212, last para.) 

(8) * An ornament to the Kuntala-deSa was the Vanavase twelve thousand 
Kingdom, the chief capital (pradhana-rajadhani) was  Chandragupt, 
with another name of Gomanta-parvata, in the twelve kharvata country 
(attached to which), in Nagarakhanda of Yada-nada Kantapuri, other- 
wise named Vira-Marapapuri, belonging to Kamattampuri, situated on 
the bank of the Varada-river, the king, in order that his government might 


197 


KHALURAKA(-RIKA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


continue as long as sun and moon, as an offering to Krishna (with all the usual 
rights), gave, free of all imposts.’—(Z. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part 1, Sorab Taluq, 
no. 375, Transl, pp. 66, last para.) 

(9) Grama-nagara-kheda-karvvada-madamba-dronamukha-pattananigali- 
nidam anceka-mata-kita-prasada-devayatananigalidam oppuva-agrahara- 
pattanamgalimdam atisàyav-appa . . . | 

€ At Teridal a merchant town situated in the centre and the first in 
importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious Kundi three thousand, 
adorned with villages, towns, hamlets, villages sorrounded by hills, groups 
of villages, sea-girt towns, and chief cities, with elegant mansions, palaces 
and temples, and with shining agrahara-towns in the country of Kuntala.’ 

(Old Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line 58, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, pp. 19, 25.) 


(то) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occupations, 
stream of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure-gardens, separated lovers, splendid 
tanks, full lotus-beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, ghatika-sthanas 
(religious centres), the supports of dharmma and mines of enjoyment, 
moats which were as if the sea being overcome had returned here on account 
of the collection of gems, groups of the lotus faces of beautiful women fair 
as the moon (grama-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-dronamukha-pura- 
pattana-rajadhani), on whatever side one looked, in these nine forms did 
the Kuntala-defa shine.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. уш, Shikarpur Taluq, по. 197 ; 
Transl., p. 124, para. 1, last seven lines ; Roman text, p. 214, line 27, f.) 


KHALÜRAKA(-RIKA)—Waffenübungen  bestimter Platz (Pat. 
Dict.), a parade, а place for military exercise (M. Williams, Dict.), 
a parlour, a reception-hall or a drawing-room round a house ; an 
enclosure-building round a house, village, city or fort. 
(Kamikagama, Lv, 20 ; see below.) 
(т) Etad dronarn cha bhüupanam ayudhabhydsa-mandapam | 
Sarvam dašarnšakarn dirgharn netra-tri-bhaga-mandapam | 
Tat-pure’lindam ekarnšarn navàm$ena yutankanam | 
'Tat-pár$ve purata$ chaiva te yugmàm$e khalirikah 1 
Dronakhya-mandapam chaivam esha yuddhartha-yogyakam | 
(M., XXXIV, 434-439.) 
Ashtashtamáéa-vistaram àyàmam tatra kalpayet | 
„ Tan-madhye dvi-dvi-bhagena kalpayet vivritankanam | 
Tad-bahi§ chàvrittàmena kuryach chaika khalürika 11 
4 (Ibid., 440-442.) 
138 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— ÀÀ— Pit Ame 


on Шо; 


4 о 
г \ 
| INISTERS 
/ 
aspe 


i ILL ALL ROUND 


GENERAL OUTLINE OF KHARVATA TOWA 


RIVER S jj jp = 
+£— 


HARBOUR 


me 


GENERAL OUTLINE OF KHETA TOWN 
THERE SHOULD BE NO RESIDENCE OF KINGS OR DPPER 
CASTE PEOPLE IN THIS VILLAGE 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwa r Colle 


чыз” 


о о м и | ИЩ) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KHETAKA 


See also lines 433-453, and then compare : 
Nripànam bhojanartharhn syat kharvatakhyam tu mandapam | 
(М., xxxiv, 455.) 


Then ‘ khalürika ' is stated (lines 446, 450) to be built round a dining- 
hall and hence not for any military purpose ; it appears like a parlour. x 


Compare also : 
Tan-madhye pañcha-bhagena sapta-bhagankanarn tatha | 
Tad-bàhye paritarngena kuryad antar alindakam 1 
Kalürikapi tad-bahye tri-tri-bhagena mandapam | 
(Ibid., 284-286.) 
Evam vasanta-yogyarm syat devànàm kshatriyadinam 1 
(Ibid., 296.) 
Tad-vibhaga-dvi-bhagena vistaram mandapam bhavet 1 
Dvi-tri-bhagankanam pürve eka bhàgam khalürakam | 
(Jbid., 351-352.) 
(2) Evambhitasya vàsasya samantat syat khalirika 1 
Уаза-ууазата chatur-bhagarn kritvà chaikadi-bhagatah 11 
Vriddhyam vàsasya bahye tu shodasavadhi-bhagak4n | 
Vyapohya. paritah kuryat prathamàvaranaditah ıı 
Kalirikam(s) tu chaikadi-sapta-bhagavasanakah | 
Mukhe cha pàr$vayoh prishthe pattayah syur yatheshtatah n 
Oja-yugma-pramanena nyünà vapy-adhika tu và | 
Sabhadra và vibhadrà và khalüri syad yatheshtatah 11 
Etàsàm antaràlam tu samam va vishamarh tu va | 
Kaliri-dhama-madhyam tu tad-vad eva vidhiyate II 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, 103-107 ; see also 108-116.) 
Etàm hkalürikàm kuryat prasadadishu buddiman 11 
Devànàm manujanam cha višeshad raja-dhamani 11 
Gopuram cha khalüri cha müla-vàstu nirikshitam 11 
(Ibid., 107a, 118, 128.) 
Samavrita khalürika tàny-evoktani panditah 1 
Nagara-grama-durganam Seshany-uktani ve$manam 11 
(Ibid., Lv, 20.) 
KHETAKA—A village ( M., 1x, 456), a fortified town ( M., x, 36, 39). 
(т) Tatas tan-nirmayàmaàsuh khetàni cha purani cha и 
Gramams chaiva yathabhagam tathaiva nagarani cha 11 
Khetanàm cha puranam cha gramanam chaiva загуабаһ | 
Tri-vidhanam cha durganàm parvatodaka-dhanvinam 11 


1389 


қ 
E 
B 
2 
ЮР 
= 
= 
a = 
"an 


айе EET 


т“ 


Man ro eua. МЫ 
97 اا‎ 


KHETAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Nagarad ardha-vishkambah khetarn param tad-ürddvatah 1 “> 
I Nagarad yojanam khetarn khetàd gramo'rdha-yojanam 11 
| (Brahmanda-Purána, Part 1, 2nd Anusharnga-pada, 
| Chap. уп, vv. 93, 94, 105, III.) 
| (2) Pàmsu-prakàra-nibaddha-khetam | 
(Rayapaseni--sütra-vyakhyane, ( р. 206.) 
(3) Khetani dhüli-prakàropetani | 
(Prasna-vyakarana-siitra-vyakhyane, p. 306.) 
(See Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, Chap. xxii, p. 46, footnote.) 


) 
(4) Vane jana-pade chaiva kevale $üdra-sevitah | сө 
Kantakah khetako gramah kramat tri-vidham iritah | | 
(Kümikagama, xx, 10.) | 
(5) Марагапі khetàn jana-padams tatha | | 
| (Mahabharata, тп, 13, 220, etc.) | 
) (6) Pura-gramakara-kheta-vata-Sibira-vraja-ghosha . . . ) 
(Bhagavata-Purana, 5, 30.) 
(7) One of the 750 villages ‘which are designated by (their chief 


town) Sri-Harsapura.’—Rashtrakuta Grant of Krishna II, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, | 
. рр. 55» 57» line 33, p. 53, footnote 3.) |: 
EL. (8) ‘ The modern kheda (khaira).’—(Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 378 ; Vol. xiv» ы 
‚ 198. 
| | Š (9) versis khetaka-mandalantarggatah Kevaficha- F 
d nama gramah I—(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, line 52, Ep. Ind., 1 
! ў Vol. уп, pp. 40, 45.) { 
| 3 (то) Sri-khetakahare-uppalaheta-pathake mahilabali-nama-gramah 1 
Lu ‘ The village, named Mohibabali, in the Uppalahetapathaka in the 
3% famous Khetaka ( ? city) ahara.’—(Ind. Ant., Vol. vu, p. 72, Plate п, 


lines 5-6.) 
: (11) Khetakahàaram | vishaye — bandarijidri-pathakantarggata-a$ila- 
pallika gramah | 
< Khetaka is of course the modern Kheda or Kaira itself (lat. 22° 
44’ N. ; long. 72° 45’ E.).’ 
(Alina Copper Plate Inscrip. of Siladitya уп, lines 
66-67, С. I. I., Vol. ш, F. С. I., no. 39, 
рр. 179, 189, 173, and notes 2, 3.) 
(12) Grama-nagara-kheda-karvvada - madamba - dronamukha - patta 
nanigalimdam aneka-mata-kita-prasada-devayatanam galidam 
oppuva-agrahara-pattanamgalimdam atisayavappa | 
‘At Teridala, a merchant-town situated іп the centre and the 
first in importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious, Kundi. 


140 


"Мм 
Жы. ^ 
ts Ў 

e ss aaar haa + 


[ Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE САМҮА-МАМА 


Three thousand, adorned with villages, towns, hamlets, villages, surround- 
ed by hills, groups of villages, sea-grit towns, and chief cities, with 
elegant mansions, palaces, and with shining temples, and артаһага- 
towns іп the country of Kuntala.’ 
(Old Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line { 
58, Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, pp. 19, 25.) | 
(13) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable осси- 
pations, streams of the nine sentiments, pleasure-gardens, separated 
lovers, splendid tanks, fulllotus beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, 
ghatika-sthanas (religious centres), the supports of dharmma апа 
mines of enjoyment, moats which were as if the sea being over- 
come had returned here on account of the collection of gems, | 
groups of the lotus faces of beautiful women fair as the moon (grama- 
nagara - kheda - kharvvana - madamba - dronamukha- pura-pattana-raja 
dhànim) on whatever side one looked, in these nine forms did the 
Kuntala-de$a shine.) (It should be noticed that the passage within 
brackets is almost identical with the corresponding passage in quotation 
no. 12 above.) 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 197, 
Transl., p. 194; para. 1, last seven lines ; 
Roman text, p. 214, line 27 Ё). 


G 


GAGANA—A kind of pent-roof. 
(M., хуш, 174-180 ; see under LuPA.) 
САУА (c. EHasrTI-PRISHTHA)—A moulding, a type of building 
(see under KuRJARA), a kind of oval buildings. 
(1) Agni-Purána (Chap. crv, vv. 19-20; see under PRAsADA). 5 
(2) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. XLVII, vv. 29-30 ; see under PRASADA). ES 
(3) See the plan and sections of а Gaja-prishthakriti building.— 
(Znd. Ant., Vol. хп, between pages 104-5.) 
GANYA-MANA —The comparative height of the component mem- 
bers of an architectural structure. In the sculptural measurement, 
the similar height is generally called < tala-mana.’ 
Implying the comparative height of the component members of the 
buildings of one to twelve storeys : 
Janmaàdi-stüpi-paryantam ganya-manam ihochyate 1 
Harmye chashta-tale tunge sashta-bhagadhikam tatha 1 


ч 


КНЕТАКА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Sardha-dvyam$am adhishthanam tad-dvayarh pada-tungakam | 
Tad-ardham prastarotsedham sesham ashta-taloktavat | 
Evam nava-talotsedham sarvalankàra-samyutam | 


(M., xxvi 35-39.) 
Evam vistára-ganyam syat tunga-ganyam ihochyate 1 
Janmádi-stüpi-paryantam uktavat samgraham viduh | 
(M., xxix, 36-37 ; see also 38-49 under 
EKA-DASA-TALA.) 
See the details of the other storeys under EkA-TALA, DVI-TALA, TRI- 
ТАҺА, GHATUS-TALA, PANCHA-TALA, SHAT-TALA, SAPTA-TALA, ASHTA 
ТАТА, DASA-TALA, EKA-DASA-TALA and DvA-pASA-TALA. 
The similar comparative measurement referring to the sixteen storeys 
of the gopuras (gate-houses) 
Tunge cha trayo-viméad bhagam evarh vibhàjite 1 
Eka-da$opapitham cha chatur-bhaga(rm) masirakam 1 
Vasu-bhaganghri-tungarn syat shad-bhagarh tu vibhàjite | 
Tri-bhàgam chopapitharh tu $iva-bhaga(m) masürakam 1 
Dvi-bhagam pada-tungarh syat tad-ürdhve prastaràd(h)ikam 1 
бікҺатһбата chordhva-mane tu talànàm adhunochyate 1 
Adhishthana-samam maficha(m) tat-samam gala-tungakam 1 
Galochcha-dvi-gunarh proktam Sikharasyodayarh nyaset 1 
Sikharordhva(m) $ikhottungarn stüpi(pi)-traya-sam(m)eva cha 1 
Evam eka-talarn proktam dvi-taladi-tala(m) eva cha 1 
Kshudra-madhyam cha mukhyànàm gopure tu viseshatah | 
Prastaradi ( ? upanadi)-Sikhantarh syat ganya-mànam pravakshyate | 
(M., XXXII, 133-144.) 
Pürvavat prastaràdy-antam chordhve stupikantakam | 
Ganya-manam cha sarvesham bhàga-màna(m)-vasochyate 1 
(Jbid., 215-216.) 
Bhaga-mana-vasad ganya-manam yat prochyate budhaih | 


^ 


: (Jbid., 247.) I 
- : Тһе similar comparative measurement referring to the componet parts of 
23% tbrone : i 

Sarvesharn manam ity-uktarn ganya-manam ihochyate 1 

Asanasyodayšrdharn và tri-bhagaikonam eva và | 

Upapithodayam hy-eva(m) chokta-tunge'dhikam tu và 1 

Sesharn masürakarn yapi samadhishthana-tungakam | 

Utsedha-ravi-bhage tu janma-tungam $ivam$akam | 

Tad-irdhve chardha-kampam syat pada-bhagena yojayet | 

š (M., XLV, 85, 96-100.) 


——r — 71) 


142 


~ 


5 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GANDHA-KUTI(-I) 


GANITA—A site plan of 369 square plots. 
(M. уп, 25-26 ; see PADA-VINYASA.) 


The similar measurement referring to the component mouldings of the 
Pitha (yoni or the pedestal of the phallus) : 
Pitha-tungam iti proktarh ganya-manam ihochyate 1 
Utsedhe shodašarnše tu prathamochcharn dvi-bhagikam 1 
Padmochcham tu tri-bhagarn syat tad-ürdhve kshepanamSakam 1 
Kandharam cha tri-bhagarh syat tad-ürdhve kampam arn$akam 1 
Urdhva-padmam tr(i)yarhSarh syad vajanarn cha tri-bhagikam | 
Ekàm$ar ghrita-vari syad bhadra-pitham iti smritam 1 
(M., ип, 29-34.) 
The similar measurement referring to the component mouldings of the 
upa-pitha or pedestal of the column : 
Etat tu nirgamarn proktarh ganya-manam ihochyate | 
Utsedhe tu chatur-virhSat pafichamsopanam iritam | 
Ekena kampam ity-uktam grivochcharh dva-dasamSakam 1 
Kampam ekar tu vedarhSarh vajanarn kampam arhSakam | 
Vesi-bhadram iti proktam athava dva-dasarmSakam 1 


” 


(M., хш, 35-39.) 
GANDA-BHERANDA-(STAMBHA)—A kind of pillar. 
(See under STAMBHA.) 


GADA—A type of octangular buildings. 
(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. CIV, vv. 20-21 ; see under PRASADA.) 
(2) Garuda-Purána (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 23, 31-32; see under PRASADA.) 


GANDHA-KUTI(-I)—The Buddhist temple, any chamber used by 
Budhha. Originally Buddha’s abode in the Jetayana monastery 
at Sravasti, later, all chapels and temples wherein the Buddha 
images were installed. 

(1) PunyoddeSa-vasAch chakara ruchiram Sauddhodaneh Sraddhaya 

$rimad-gandha-kutim imam iva kutirn mokshasya saukhyasya cha 1 

* —has constructed this gandha-kuti of Buddha, graceful and like a hall 
of emancipation and bliss for the spiritual benefit of '— 

* Gandha-kuti ’ is literally a ‘ chamber of perfume; ап epithet applied to 
Buddha temples. Тһе large temple at Buddha Gaya is called, in the ` 
inscriptions, ° Maha-gandha-kuti-prasada ° (Ind. Ant., Vol. Іх, pp. 142-143) 
and the room in which Buddha lived in Jetavana at Sravasti was also known 


143 


—————— Qus p 


GANDHA-MADANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


by this name (Cunningham’s Bharhut Stipa, Plate хххуш, and page 133, 
no. 22). 

(An Inscrip. at Gaya, v. 9, Ind. Ant., 

Vol. x, pp. 342, 343, note 8.) 

(2) Kritavantau cha n vinàm ,ashta-maha-sthàna-$aila-gandha-kutim— 
*they constructed this new gandha-kuti (made) of stones (coming from) 
eight holy places.’ 

Gandhakuti—‘ perfumed chamber, any private chamber dovoted to 
Buddha’s use." Childers (s. v.). 

The gandha-kuti at Jetavana near Sravasti is represented on а Bharhut 
bas-relief. 

See also Gunningham’s Bharhut Stipa (Plate гуп). 

See Sarnath inscription of Mahipalala (line 2, Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, p. 140, 
note 7). 

(3) ° Garndha-kuti °— the hall of perfumes,’ i.e., ‘ the Buddhist temple.’ 
(Bharaut Inscrip. no. 40, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxr, p. 230, note 34 refers to Arch. 
Surv. of W. India, Vol. v, p. 77 and to Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, p. 140, already 
quoted above.) 

(4) ‘On the other side of his (Buddha’s) body, towards the west, he caused 
to be built a beautiful gandha-kuti, pleasing to the eye.’—(Ajanta Inscrip. 
no. 4, line 27, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 1v, pp. 130, 132.) 


GANDHA-MADANA-—A class of pavilions. 


(M., xxxiv, 154 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


GANDHARVA—A class of demi-gods inhabiting Indra’s heaven, 
and serving as celestial musicians. See the description of their 
images. | 

(М., туш, 8, 16-19.) 
GABHARA (GARBHAGARA)—An underground shrine, the sanc- 
tuary of a temple, the room where the deity is placed, a private room, 
the female apartments, a lying-in chamber. 

‘ Through the door at the east end of the hall, we descent by some 
nine steps into the gabhara or shrine, which is also square, measuring 
13 feet 9 inches each way.'—(The temple of Amarnath, Ind. Ant., Vol. ur, 
p- 318, с. 1, last para.) 

GARUDA-—The king of birds, the sun-eagle; ‘ winged beings, 
resembling the griffin, mythical creatures (suparna), foes of nagas ° 
(Gründel: Buddhist Kunst in India, p. 47); a type of building 


144 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GARBHA 


which is shaped like the sun-eagle (garuda), has wings and tail, and 
seven storeys, twenty cupolas (anda) and 24 cubits wide. 
Nandi tadakritir jfieyah pakshadi-rahitah punah 11 
Garudákriti$ cha garudah | 
Commentary quotes clearer description from Kasyapa : 
Garudo garudakarah paksha-puchchha-vibhishitah 1 
Cf. Karanarn shat-chatushkam$ cha vistirnau sapta-bhümikau 1 
Da$abhir dvigunair andair bhüshitau Кагауе tu tau 11 
(1) Brihat-Samhitd (ім, 24. J.R.A S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 319). 
(2) Matsya-Purána (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 41-43, 51 ; see under PRASADA). 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. CXXX, v. 31 ; see under PRASADA). 
A type of oval building : 
(4) Garuda-Puràna (Chap. XLVI, vv. 29-30 ; see under PRASADA). 
In connexion with the temples of the attendant deities : 
(5) Yan-müla-harmye vrishabhadi-vishnur-adi 
Mandapadi-garudadi cha gopuradin | 
Tan-mila-harmya-paritah sthita pa$yate'smin (?) 
Kuryat tu sarva-parivaram idarh pra$astam 1--(/М., хххп, 168-171.) 
The description of the image of Garuda—(M., LXI, 1-148). 
Compare also M., хіх, 224. 


GARUDA-SK(-T)AMBHA (see under SrAMBHA)—Pillars gene- 
rally bearing the statues of the garuda-bird and belonging to the 
Vaishnavas. 

‘Had the temple built, and setting up this $a$ana erected a garuda- 
stambha in front.'— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. хп, Pavugada Taluq, no. 78; Transi. 
p. 150.) 

GARUTMAN (see Garupa)—A type of oval buildings. 


(Agni-Purana, Chap, crv, vv. 19-20 ; 

see under PRASADA.) 

GARBHA—tThe womb, the foundation, the adytum, the chamber in 

a temple where the deity is placed, halls of various shapes and sizes 

used for various purposes. Compare NALIKA-GARBHA (rectangular 

halls), ŚIBIKĀ-GARBHA (square halls), and HARMYA-GARHBA (top 
rooms, etc.). 


(т) Vistarardharn bhaved garbho bhitty-anyah samantatah | 
Garbha-padena vistirnam dvararn dvi-gunam uchchhritam 11 


145 


- ЛЮ 94% 


m" 


L 


| 
x 
x 


GARBHA-GE(-RI)HA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


* The adytum measures half the extent (of the whole) and has its separate 
walls all around. Its door is one-fourth of the adytum in breadth and twice 
as high.’ 

(Brihat-Samhita, uxt, 12, Z.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 318.) 

(2) Raja prasada-garbham gatva | 

(Hitopadeía, ed. Botlingk, p. 157, etc.) 

(3) The foundations of the village (M., тх, 7). 

The adytum : 
Garbhe nanda-vibhage tu ekaikarn linga-tungakam | 
Garbha-tara-samam Sreshtham tri-vidharn linga-tungakam 1 
(M., їл, 16, 21.) 
(4) Sravastiyanarh maha-matranam śāsanarh manavasiti-katat | 
Srimati varhfagrama evaite dve koshthagare tri-garbhe . . . | 

* The order of the great officials of Sravasti (issued from their camp at) 
Manavasitikata ; these two store-houses with three partitions (which are 
situated) even in famous Varhsagrama require the storage of black loads 
of panicum.’ 

(Sohgaura Copper Plate, lines 1-2, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxv, р. 265.) 


GARBHA- GE(- RI)HA—The central hall, the adytum, the sanctu- 
ary in the middle of which is placed the statue of the deity ; this 
is sometimes called müla-sthana (see GaRBHAGARA). 


(1) Harmya-tare tu bhütarnšarn tr(1)yam$am garbha-gehakam 1 
(M., xix, 114; see also 119.) 
Garbha-geha, madhya-koshtha, and nàli-geha are used in the same 
sense (central hall, cf. M., XXXII, 301, 305, 309, 313 and 318). 
Dvi-tale tara-saptamSam vedam$am garbha-gehakam 1 
(M., ххх, 164; see also 161.) 
Garbha-gehe tu manarn уа linga-tungar prakalpayet | 
(M., тп, 22 ; see also їли, 4.) 
. (2) “Апа the balance he will apply to building the garbha-griha and 
enclosure of the goddess’s temple. —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part I, Sagar 
Taluq, no. 145; Roman text, p. 225; Transl., p. 119, last para., last line.) 
(3) * His wife (with various praises) Kallard-Siyamma had the shrine 
(garbba-grihada) of the god Sidda-Mallikarjuna renewed.'—(Ep. Carnat., 
Vol. xu, Gubbi Taluq, no. 29; Roman text, р. 41; Transl., p. 23, line 8.) 
(4) Garbha-griha-sthita-mantapa-Sikhara—' the ruined tower over the 


shrine (of the god Arkanatha).'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Malavalli Taluq, 
no. 64; Roman text, p. 127, line 3; Transl., p. 63.) 


146 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 


mr 


54x 27е x ка, s 
5 x S4 хо), 


DYex6 54x 15Je. == г 
GJ» с із 
SMALL SIZE BRICKS 


TRXxIS X50 n 


1$x15x50 
INTERMEDIATE SIZE BRICKS 


LARGE SIZE BRICKS 
е P2yrxf2VLXAS 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri Universi 


"m. 


p 


C — 3< — —— 
” 4 ме 


Hs 
< А. - 
N 
2 ` 
5 
S 
© 
oO 
о 
E 
==; 

о 
[ra 
e - 
[7] я 
> 
S 
2 
N i 
on ҳ 
A 
= "à 
о 4 
S 
so B 
s ; 
E 
Ж 
AT 
5 » 
FM. 
c^ E 
^ = 
i > 2. л 
кр ا‎ d 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GARBHA-MANJUSHA-(-IKA) 


(5) ‘ Garbha-griha—sanctum of a temple.’ 


(6) Vincent Smith's Gloss. (loc. cit.) to Cunningham's Arch. Surv. 
Reports. 


GARBHA-NYASA—Laying the foundation, the foundations. 
Manasára (Chap. хп, 1-128, named Garbha-nyasa) : 
The foundation is classed under three heads—for buildings (lines 


4-169) for villages, etc. (lines 172-186) and for tanks, etc. (lines 
188-216). 
The last-named foundation, which is meant for a tank, well or pool 


is said to Бе as high as the joint palm of man (narañjali, line 188). 


The foundation of buildings is first divided into two classes, as it belongs 
to temples (lines 4-149) and to human dwellings (lines 155-169). Of 
temples, those of Vishnu (lines 4-137) and Brahman (lines 139-149) are 
illustrated and the others are said to be like these (cf. line 132). 


Of the human dwellings, there are four classes according to the four 

castes—Brahman, Kshatriya, Vai$ya and Sidra. 

Тһе depth of the foundation-pit is stated to be equal to the basement : 
Garbhavatasya nimnarn syad adhishthana(m)-samonnatam | 
Ishtakair api pashanais chatur-aSrarn samar bhavet | 

| (M., xu, 6-7.) 

The details of laying the foundations are given (M., хуп, 6-9) : 


The best ground selected for foundations is excavated. to the depth 
of a man's height with uplifted arms. The bottom of the pit thus 
excavated should be rocky or water, and the pit is filled with sands 
and water which are closely pressed and hardened by means of wooden 
hammers shaped like the elephant's foot. Upon such foundations, 
the strength whereof varies according to the weight of the construc- 
tion above, various structures are constructed. 


From this it would appear that the best soils for receiving foundations 
are rock, gravel, or closely-pressed sandy earth. 
GARBHA-BHAJANA—The foundation-pit, the excavation. 
(Ibid, 103.) 


GARBHA-MAN JUSHA(-IKA)—The basket-shaped roof upon the 
foundation-pit, the vault. 
(Ibid, 47.) 
147 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


GARBHA-VINYASA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


GARBHA-VINYASA (see  GaRBHA-NYAsA)— Ihe arrangement of 
the foundation, the foundations. 
(M., xu, 2.) 
Garbha-nyàsa-vidhim vakshye gramadinarn cha sadmanàm 1 
Sa-garbharh sarva-sampattyair vigarbharn na$anarn bhavet 11 
. (Kamikagama, ххх, 2-104.) 
GARBHA-SUTRA—The line in the interior or middle, the inner or 
central line of a foundation. 
тр азштазуа karnaiš cha dvi-dvi-Sankurh nikhànayet | 


(M., VI, 105.) 


САКВНАУАТА--Тһе foundation-pit, the excavation. 

(M., хп, 5; see under GARBHA-NYASA.) 
GALA (se KawTHA)—Ihe neck, a moulding called dado, the 
frieze of the entablature. 


See the lists of mouldings under АрніѕнтнАмА., UPAPiTHA and Pnas- 
TARA. 


See Kamikagama (тлу, 47) under PRASTARA. 


GALA-KUTA (see KüTA)—A. side-tower, a dome at the neck-part 
of a building. 

GALANGA—Literally neck portion, the middle member, the frieze 
of the entablature which lies between the architrave and the 
cornice. 


(See Kamikagama, LIV, 47, under PRASTARA.) 


GAVAKSHA (se VATAYANA)—Windows resembling the cow's 
eye, a latticed window. 
Sardha-gavakshakopeto nirgavaksho'thava bhavet | 
(Garuda-Purdna, Chap. xrvm, v. 36.) 
Cf. M., хуш, 290 ; xx, 81; XXXUI, 582, etc. 
‘The chief adornment of the temple at Gangai-konda-puram is the 
repetition everywhere on the cells and GMOS of the fanlike window 
ornament resembling a spread peacock's tail.* + (Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, р. 118, c. 1, 
para. 9, last sentence.) 
See Pallava Architecture (Arch. Surv., New. Imp. Series, Vol. xxxiv, 
Plate сххп). 
See the pierced window in Bhoganandi$vara shrine (Mysore Arch. Report, 
1913-14, Plate v, fig. 2, p. 14). 
148 


(ІІІ 
“Ее = 


| WITH SHUTTER WITH STONE LATTICE 


GAVAKSHA 


GARUDA STAMBIVA 


ERE 


Î PRIEST. PRAYER HALL. 


VERANDAH. 
COURT YARD. 


VERANDAH. 


PLAN 
GURU-DVARA. 


Ar 


E 
= 


САМОА BHERUHPD 4 
-.. .. 


= 
GABHARA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GUHA-RAJA 


GAVAKSHAKARA—Resembling the cow's eye, а moulding or 
structure shaped like a cow's eye. 
In connexion with the bedsteads : 
Vrittàkritishta-pàdanàm yuktya varnena lepayet | 
Gavakshakara-yuktya cha pattikordhve samantatah | 
Kufijaraksham alaksharh уа patra-pushpady-alankritam 1 
(М., XLIV, 21-29.) 


GATRA—Literally the body, the columns of a pavilion. 


(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 102-103 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


GANAVA—A kind of phallus. 
(Kamikagama, L, 35, 37 ; see under кол.) 


GIRI-DURGA (se Durca)—A fort, a hill-fort. 
Gf. ‘In the reign of Chikka-Deva-Raya-vodeya-raiya the servant of 
the lord of this village, Bilugeli Kempar-ajayya's son Dasarajayya began to 
po build the stone fort of Nijagal, which has received another name of Sura- 
‹ giri-durgga.’ 
Ж * In 1698 to 1700 the bastions of the fort and the town-gate on the east 
NS = were completed. In 1701 to 1702 the town-gate оп the south was made. 
| Іп Parthiva (1705) the elephant-gate on the east, this hall and the chavadi 
T with the tiger-face gate, and the VighneSvara temple at the town-gate on 
| the south ° (were built).—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rx, Nelamangala Taluq, no. 65 ; 
Тыр . Roman text, p. 54; Transl., p. 45.) 
GURU-DVARA—A Sikh monastery, the Sikh temple where the E. 
Grantha Saheb is worshipped. Literally, same as the Jain ; 22 
Tirthankara or path-maker. z. 


See Vincerit Smith's Gloss. (loc. ctt.) to Cunningham's Arch. Suro. Reports. 


GUVA-VRIKSHA—A type of round buildings. 


(Garuda-Puraga, Chap. хіп, vv. 21, 23, 28-20; 
see under PRASADA.) 


GUHA-RAJA——A type of building which is 16 cubits wide and has — 
a roof with three dormer-windows. || UIT 
(1) Brihat-Samhit (LVI, 25, 7.R.A.$., N. S., Vol. у, p. 319; see under | 

' PRASADA.) lere = ae 
(2) Bhavishya-Purāna (Chap. CXXX, v. 32; 546 under в] 


мое a D EE 


СКІНА AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


GRIHA—The house, a building, а room, a hall, a family home. 
(R.-V., х, 91-92.) 
Griharn gehodavasitarn ve$ma sadma niketanam 11 
Ni$anta-vastya-sadanarm bhavanagara-mandiram | 
Grihah pursi cha bhümny-eva nikayya-nilayalayah u 
(Amaraküsha, п, li, 4, 5.) 
Cf. Sudipika-griham—‘a house of beautiful lamps’.—(Three Inscrip. from 
Travancore, no. B, line 3, Ef. Ind., Vol. Iv, p. 203.) 
See M., IX, 7,8; XXXVI, 2 ; XXXVII, І; XL, 78, etc. 
GRIHA-KANTA—A class of the five-storeyed buildings. 


(M., ххш, 30-32 ; see under PRAsADA.) 


GRIHA-GARBHA (se  GaARBHA-NYAsA)— Ihe foundation of а 
house. 
Griha-garbham iti proktarh grama-garbham ihochyate | 
Griha-garbham antar-mukharh уай gràma-garbham Баһіг- 
mukham | 
(M., хп, 167, 216.) 
GRIHA-CHULLI—A building with an eastern and western hall, 
*a house with two rooms contiguous to each other, but one facing 
west and the other east.’ 
(Brihat-Samhita, LIN, 40.) 
GRIHA-PINDI (see PINDIKA)—The basement of a building. 
Š griha-pindir athochyate 11 
Madhye chasavritam vasavasa-pindikandhariketi cha 1 
Samjíieyam griha-pindeh sayat . . . 1 
(Катікавата, LV, 200-201.) 
GRIHA-PRAVESA—The opening of or the first entry into the 
house, the house-warming ceremony. 
Manasara (Chap. хххуш, 1-89, named Griha-prave$a). 
The ceremonies in connexion with the opening of and first entry into 
a house are described in detail (lines 1-90). Тһе consideration of auspi- 
cious day and moment, and the worship and sacrifice in this connexion 
are also described in detail (lines 5-74). The masters of the ceremonies are 
stated to be the sthapati (architect) and the sthapaka (lines 14, 15, 16, 17, 
58, 73, 74, 83, 85). They lead the procession in circumambulating the 
village and the compound before the ceremonial entry into a new house 
(lines 73-90). The guardian-angel of the house (Griha-Lakshmi) is prayed 
150 : 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GRIHA-VINYASA 


to after completing the worship and sacrifice to confer happiness, comfort, 
plenty of wealth, children, health and long life to the master and other 
members of the family (lines 67-72). 

The chapter closes with the description of an elaborate scheme of feeding 
the Brahmans and the artists, and of liberal gifts to them for the sake of 
prosperity and success of the family (lines 84-90). (See also M., 1X, 8.) 


GRIHA-MANGALA—An auspicious ceremony in connexion with 
a newly-built house. 
Sarva-mangala-ghoshais cha svasti-vachana-purvakam | 
Pagchat(d) griha-mangalam kuryat nana-vastrais cha $obhitam | 
(M., XXXVI, 55-56.) 
GRIHA(-MANA-STHANA)-VINYASA—The dismensions and 
situation of houses, the location of various rooms in dwelling houses 
and temples and palaces. 
(1) Manasára (Chap. XXXVI, 1-96, named Griha-mana-sthana vinyasa) : 
The dimensions of houses in general (lines 6-1 9): the breadth 
of a house is said to be of five kinds, from two or three dandas 
(4 or 6 yards) to ten ог eleven dandas (20 or 22 yards). The 
length may be equal to, 12, 14, 13, or twice of, the breadth. 
The situation : houses are built in villages, towns, settlements, 
suburbs, groves, hermitages, near а hill, and on the banks of a 
sea or river (lines 1-5): 
Dvi-jàtinàm cha sarveshàrn varnanam vàsa-yogyakam 1 
Grihanam màna-vinyasam sthanam cha vakshyate'dhuna 1 
Grime cha nagare vapi pattane khetake'pi và ! 
Vane và chàérame vapi nadyadri(e)$ cha pārśvake | 
Teshàm tu уебталаһ sthànam kalpayech chhilpavit-tamah 1 
In the chapter on pavilions (mandapas) various sorts of houses 
` are stated to be located in different parts of the five courts into which 
the whole compound is divided. In that chapter houses for various 
purposes of a family are located in different squares in which a 
single court is divided, and which have been described in the chapter 


called Pada-vinyasa. 

Тһе Brahma-sthana or the central squar 
for a residential building (line 15). The temp 
is generally built in this part. Round this are constructed all other 
houses (lines 16-85), such as the house for the master of the family, 
for his wife, for the children, for servants, for cows, horses, fowls, " 
etc., for kitchen and dining-hall, etc., for guests, for the library or 


I5I 


e is stated to be unfit 
le of the family god 


CC- i Universi i I 
C-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
Е: a ж; 2 < 3 


GRIHA-VINYASA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


study, for the daily sacrifices of the upper castes, for amusements and 
music, for the dancing girls, and for all other domestic purposes, 
But the distribution of these several detached buildings is left to the 
choice of the master of the house (line 85). 

(2) Kautiliya-Artha-fastra (Chap. xxvi p. 53): 

Adi-talasya paficha-bhagah $àlà уарі, sima-griharh cha daša- 
bhagikau dvau prati-mafichau, antarà mani-harmyarh cha sam- 
uchchhrayad ardha-talam, sthinavabandhag cha ārdhavāstukam 
uttamagararh tri-bhagantararh уа ishtakavabandha-pàrávarn, vamatah 
pradakshina-sopanarn giidha-bhittisopanam, itaratah  dvi-hastarn 
torana-Sirah, tri-paficha-bhagikau dvau kaváta-yogau, dvau dvau 
parighau, aratnir indra-kilah, paficha-hasta-mani-dvàram, chatvaro 
hasti-parighah, nive$ardharh has‘i-nakhah mukha-samas-sankrimo’ 
samharyo và bhümi-mayo và | 

* Of the first floor, five parts (are to be taken) for the formation 
of a hall, а well, and a boundary house ; two-tenths of it for the 
formation of two platforms opposite to each other ; and upper storey 
twice as high as its width, carvings of images, an uppermost storey 
half or three-fourths as broad as the first floor ; side-walls built of 
bricks ; on the left side, a staircase circumambulating from left to 
right ; on the right a secret staircase hidden in the wall, a top-support 
of ornamental arches projecting as far as 2 cubits, two door-panels 
(each) occupying three-fourths of the Space, two and two cross-bar 
(to fasten the door) ; an iron bolt (indrakila) as long as an aratni 
(24 angulas) ; a boundary-gate, 5 cubits in width, four beams to 
shut the door against elephants ; and turrets (hasti-nakha, outside 
the rampart) raised up to the height of the face of a man, remov- 
able or irremovable, or made of earth in places devoid of water.’ 


(3) The plan of a house having a quadrangular courtyard in the centre 
and comprising sixteen rooms (Vastu-tattva, Lahore, 1853, р. I f): 


In the north-east corner is stated to be (1) the family chapel (deva- 


griha) ; in the east (2) the room for all things (sarva-vastu-griha), (3) ` 


the bathroom (snana-griha), and (4) the room for churning milk (dadhi- 
manthana); in the south-east corner (5) the kitchen; in the south (6) 
the bri(vri)tasagriha (2), (7) the Saina-griha, (2 sayana—bedroom), 
and (8) the lavatory (purisha-griha) ; in the south-west corner (9) the 
library (&ástra-griha) ; іп the west (ro) the study (vidyabhyasa-griha), (rr) 
the dining-hall (bhojana-griha), and (12) the weeping (reception-)-room 
(rodana-griha) ; in the north-west corner (13) the granary (dhanya-griha) ; 
in the north (14) the bedroom or drawing-room (sambhoga-griha, ог 


152 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


В сс 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GRIHA-VINYASA 


the house for enjoying oneself in), (15) the store-room (dravya-griha), 
and (16) the room for invalids or medicine (aushadha-griha). 

In this plan the houses face the north where the residential rooms are 
located. Неге north is the best direction, and the west, the east and the 
south come in order of inferiority. This plan is suitable for western and 
northern India where the northern and western winds are salubrious. 

(4) Vastu-pravandha (u, 25, 26, compiled by Rajakisora Varmma) : 

Stha(Sna)nagaram di§i prachyam agneyyàrn pachanialayam | 
Yamyayam бауапарагата nairrityàm $astra-mandiram 11 
Pratichyàm bhojanagararh vayavyarh pagu-mandiram | 
Bhanda-kofarh chottarsyàm aisinyarn deva-mandiram || 

This is a smaller house with eight rooms. Here the bedroom is located 
in the south, indicating the southern aspect of the house, suitable for 
southern and eastern provinces. 

(5) Sipa-fastra-sára-samgraha (тх, 24-28) : 

I$anyàm devata-geharh pürvasyàih snana-mandiram | 
Agneyyath paka-sadanarn dravyagaram tathottare I1 
Agneya-pirvayor madhye dadhi-manthana-mandiram | 
Agni-pretesayor madhye ajya-geharh ргабавуағе 11 
Yamya-nairrityayo(r) madhye purisha-tyaga-mandiram | 
Nairrityàm-bu(?)payor madhye vidyabhasasya-mandiram ti 
Paschimanilayor madhye rodanartharh griharn smritam | 
Vayavottarayo(r) madhye rati-geharh pragasyate 1! 
Uttaresanayor madhye aushadhartharh tu karayet 1 
Nairrityàm sitika-geharh nripanam bhütim ichchhatàm 11 

(6) Matsya-Purana (Chap. corvi vv. 33-36) : 

Ї<апе devatagararh tatha $anti-griharh bhavet 11 

Mahànasam tathagneye tat-par$ve chottare jalam | 
Grihasyopaskaram sarvarh nairritye sthapayed budhah 11 
Ba(n)dha-sthanam bahih kuryat snana-mandapam eva cha! 
Dhana-dhanyarn cha vayavye karmma-Salam tato bahih 11 
Evàm vastu-viSeshah syad griha-bharttuh Subhavahah tt 

In plans (5) and (6) it should be noticed, the bandha-sthana (lit. place 
to bind in? slaughter-house, vadha-sthana), the bathroom and the 
office (karmma-$alaà) are directed to be built outside the (residential 
building proper). Both these are nine-roomed houses facing the north-east, 
In this house, rooms are all built in the corner, the four main directions 


being left entirely vacant. This is stated to bring peace, prosperity and 
health to householders. 


153 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation US. 


ise Ж» کر‎ 


T Z 2204 2 2 2 


GRIHA-VINYASA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(7) Agni-Purana (Chap. суі, vv. 18-20) : 
Purvayath $ri-griham proketam agneyyarh vai mahànasam | 
Sayanam dakshinasyàm tu nairrityam ayudhasrayam 11 
Bhojanam paśchimayām tu vàyavyàm dhànya-sarhgrahah | 
Uttare dravya-samsthànam aifanyárh devata-griham 11 
Chatuh-Sàlàm tri-áalàm và dvi-$alàm chaika-éalàkam 1 
Chataub-$ala-grihànàm tu éalalindaka-bhedatah 11 
This plan is specially meant for houses in towns, etc. (cf. vv. 1-12). It 
recommends the four typical arrangement of houses, namely, rooms being 
built covering the four sides with the courtyard in the middle ; rooms being 
on three sides and the fourth side in continuation of the courtyard being 
left free for light and air ; rooms being built on two sides only ; and rooms 
being built on one side only, apparently without any courtyard. This 
is an eight-roomed plan. 
(8) Griha-vastu-pradipa (Lucknow, 1901) quotes from some authority 
without mentioning his name the following : 
Atha nripànàm shoda$a-griha-rachanopayah | 
Snana-paka-Sayanátra-bhujesva(?)-dhànya-bharndára-daivata-grihàni 
cha pürvata(h) syuh 1 
Tan-madhyas tu mathana-ajya-purisha-vidyabhyasakhya-rodana- 
rataushadha-sarva-dhama 11 
(9) Kamikagama (xxxv, 177-191): 
AiSanyàm pachana-sthanarh brahmananam vidhiyate | : 
(And of the Kshatriyas to the south-east, of the Vai$yas to the south- 
west, and of the Südras to the north-west, vv. 177-178). 
Pürvasyam bhojana-sthanam agneyyam tu mahanasam | 
Yamyayarn éayana-sthanarn nairrityàm àyudhalayah ıı (179) 
Maitra-sthanarh tu tatra tatra varunyam udakalayah | 
Goshthagararh cha vayavyam uttarasyàm dhanalayah || (180) 
Nitya-naimittikartharh syad aisanyath yaga-mandapam | 
Kafji-lavanayoh pātram prag-udag-disi vinyaset 11 (181) 
Antarikshe’ pi và chullyulükhali savita api | 
Аппа-ргаќапат агуата$е chendragnyarh cha savitrake || (182) 
Vivasvad-amSe éravanam vivado maitra-degake | 
Kshaudram indrajaye vidyad vayau some cha và bhavet || (183) 
Vitathopanayos chaiva pitri-dauvarika pade | 
Sugrive pushpa-dante cha Prasuti-griham ishyate 11 (184) 
Apavatse tu košah syat kundam ape vidhiyate || (1844) 
Ankanam tu mahendrarhée peshani cha mahidhare || (185) 
Arishtagaram ishta syat tatropaskara-bhimikam ІІ (186) 
Vahanath dvara-yame syat snāna-śālā cha varune | 


194 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Ie 


Ж 


жылы A TE Ege. 2 


% 
b^ 
і 
і 


| 
| HINDU ARCHITECTURE GRIHA-VINYASA 


* Asure dhanya-vasah syad ayudhad (7) indra-rajake 11 (187) 
Mitravasas tathà mitre торе volükhalarn matam | 
| Bhüdare koša-geharn syan nagarhsSe ghritam aushadham 11 (188) 


| ' Jayante chapavatse cha parjanye cha sive kramati 
: Visha-pratyaushadharn chaiva Кіре deva-griharn bhavet 11 (189) 
| Riksha-bhallata-someshu bhaved asthana-mandapam |» (191) 

This is a plan with the southern aspect. It comprises thirty rooms 
and the arrangement is much like in the Manasara. 

Compare the Manasára (хі, 71-111, antah-Sala, or houses in the inner 
court ; 112-153, bahih-sala, or buildings forming the part of the palace in 
the outer court, see under RAJA-HARMYA.) 

Тһе internal arrangement of rooms in small dwelling houses is essentially 
| like those described above. In the large edifices, palaces and mansions the 
buildings of various storeys are artistically arranged. There are stated to 
be one to seven enclosures in palaces of kings of nine orders. These 
enclosures are surrounded by walls, each of which is furnished with a large 

J gateway known as the gopuram. In the innermost court (antarmandala, 

with the gateway called the dvarasobha) are erected the residential palaces 

( of the king, queens and princesses, and would be analogous to the Muslim 

a harem. In the second circle (antanihara, with the gateway called dvara- 
! 5418) are built the edifices for the crown prince and other princes, royal 
priests, ministers and such other people. In the middle court (madhyama 
hara, with the gateway dvara-prasada) are built mansions for council 
| halle office rooms, and quarters for the resident members of the council, 
Í high civil and military officers, resident clerks and others. Within this 
| enclosure in some properly secured lanes are built secret residences for the 
| king. In the fourth enclosure (prakara, with gateway dvara-harmya) 
| are quartered the foregin offices, for negotiating war, peace and such other 
i matters. Та the fifth court (mahamaryada, with the gateway called the 
| great gate-house) are erected military quarters, barracks, and offices of ` 
e ; smaller importance. Тһе sixth and the seventh enclosures, which are not 
i included in the smaller palaces, are reserved for the defence forces, guards, 
royal stables, houses for domestic animals, zoological gardens, etc. which 
are sometimes accommodated in the fifth court also. Prisons, cemeteries, 
cremation grounds and temples of certain fearful deities are quartered 
beyond the palace compounds. Temples are built within each court. 
The pleasure-gardens, orchards, tanks, etc. are suitably built within all 
the enclosures. In each of the enclosures mansions of one to twelve storeys 
are artistically arranged in rows varying from one to ten, while the gate- 
houses are furnished with one to seventeen storeys. | C. 


155 | s= Ç 


Е‏ ی 
p ES Ay‏ 


.CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


qu 


GRIHA-MUKHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The exact situation of particular private and public buildings is specified. 
Thus it is stated that the main royal chapel should be built in the central 
plot known as the Brahmapitha, and the public audience hall in the quarter 


ES. of Yama, Soma, Vàyu, or Nairrita in accordance with the situation of the 
d palace in a particular province or city, and so forth. 

ү For fuller details vide the writer's article А Рееф into the Early Hindu 
12% Architecture,—The Modern Review, September, 1934, рр. 282-287. 


GRIHA-MUKHA—A door, a façade, the exterior, front or face of 
a building. 
Dàanam ghara-mukha | 
: 1 (Karle Сауе Inscrip. nos. 4, 6, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. vit, pp. 52-53.) 
“А façade implies also the architrave and sculpture round the door 
with the arc over it. Dr. Burgess.—(Karle Inscrip. no. 4, Arch. Surv., 
New Imp. Series, Vol. гу, p. 90, note 4.) 
GRIHA-RAJA (see Суна-вАуА)--А type of building. 

(1) Bhavishya-Purüna (Chap. оххх, v. 32 ; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Agni-Purdna (Chap. crv, vv. 16-17; see under PRASADA). 

(3) Garuda-Purána (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21-22, 26-27; see under PRASADA). 
GRIHA-STAMBHA—The main column of the house, the pillar 
regulating the whole composition. 

Kudya-stambhe griha-stambhe harmya-garbharn vinikshipet | 


: (M., хп, 132.) 
See more details under ЅтАМВНА. 


GEHA(-KA)—A hall or room, a house, a habitation. 

Copurarn tri-talarh nyàsam lakshanarh vakshyate'dhuna | 
Dvi-bhagarh bhitti-vistàrarh paritah $esharh tu gehakam | 

À (М., хххш, 489, 492.) 

GOKARNA—A measure, the distance between the tips of the fully 

stretched thumb and the ring-finger. 

. (1) Talah smrito madhyamaya gokarna§ chapy-anamaya | 

с (Brahmanda-Purana, Part 1, 2nd anushanga-pada, 

Chap. vu, v. 97.) 

(2) Angushthanamika-yuktarn gokarnam iti Sarhjfikam | x 


GOKHLA—The niche, a recess іп a wall. SMe s 
£ In the east wall of the mandapa on each side, is a gokhla or niche 
for images, and in thaton the south side is a defaced Ganesa.’ 
‘In the vestibule to the shrine are also small recesses one on each hand.” 
Кешн; (Тһе Temple at Amarnath, Ind. Ant., Vol. ш, 
Р. 318, с. r, para. 2, middle.) 
156 . : 


: 


GOPANA OR OVOLO 


| م a m‏ ی 


ASTHANA 


GHATIK 


© 


i 


с) Ў 


— 


Q 


(E 


LM 


тт, al‏ د :د 


«ФА 
HAD 


x L Ca 


Page 156 


< 
e 
= 
с 
S 
£ 
o 
ә 
С 
= 
о 
LL 
[se] 
N 
> 
a 
"2 
Ф 
N 
E= 
9 
a 
Е 
S 
E 
2 
5 
О 
= 
oO 
5 
5 
= 
oO 
ae 
> 
Б 
2 
0 
2 
= 
= 
= 
о 
е 
oO 
NE 
3 
E 
E 
ы 
=i 
© 
© 
Š 
© 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GOPURA 


GOJI—The septum of the nose, the bridge-like part between the two 

nostrils connecting the tip of the nose with the surface of the upper 
lip of an image. 

(М., LXV, 105, etc., see the lists of limb 

under TALA-MANA. 


GOTRA—A cowstall (Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary). 


. СОРАМА--(СорАмакА)--А moulding, the entablature, the beam. 


. A moulding of the pedestal generally placed between a cyma and cavetto 
oracyma and fillet (M., хш, 95, тоо, etc.; see the list of mouldings 
under ТУрАРІТНА). 

A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 32, etc. ; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISTHANA). 

A synonym of the entablature ( M., хут, 19, see under PRASTARA). 

A beam-like member of the single-storeyed buildings (М. хіх, 46). 

A similar member of the buildings of two to twelve storeys. 


(See M., хх, 25, etc.) 
A moulding of the entablature : 


Dandikordhve valayarh gopanarh syat tad-ürdhvatab | 
(Kamikagama, 11v, 34.) 
Gf. Gopànasi tu valabhi-chhadane vakra-daruni | 

(Amarakésha I, ii, r5.) 

GOPURA—Probably originated from Vedic Gomati-pur and еріс 
Go-grihar, the fortified extensive cowstalls, and connected with the 
divine bull, thus a gate-house, doors in general, the colossal buildings 
over or near the gate giving entrance to a city, temple, monastery, 


etc. 
Pura-dvaraim tu gopuram | 


Dvara-matre tu gopuram | 
(Ibid, ii, 16: ш, ñi, 182.) 


(1) P asadat pada-hinarh tu gopurasyochchhrayo bhavet | 
(Agni-Purdna, Chap. хіп, v. 22.) 
(ә) Prakara-samarh mukham avasthapya tri-bhaga-godha-mukham 
gopurarn Қагауеі-“А turret above the gate and starting from the top 
of the parapet shall be constructed, its front resembling an alligator up 
to three-fourths of its height.’—(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. xxiv, p. 53.) 
(3) Sala-gopurayos tuügas tv-adhika$ chapi mülatah | 
Gopurasyapy-alankaram $alalankaravan nayet ll 
Sabhàkara-éiro-yuktarn §alakara-Sirah-kriyam | 
Mandapàkara-samyuktam  chüli-harmya-vibhüshitam t 


157 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ze 


Dr EE Ë г mU S 


GOPURA 


In the ab 
house does not belong to а temple ; 


house. 


(4) 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


tàlam salakantare | 
-bhagad eka-bhagikam 11 

tu paficha-bhagaika-bhagikah | 
кагаа bahyato bhavet 11 


Agrato'lindakopetam at 
Gopurasya tu vistara-tri 
Chatur-bhagaika-bhagas 
Nirgamo gopuranam tu pra 
Gopuram cha khaluri cha mila-vastu-nirikshitam | 
Antare raja-devinam grihany-antar-mukhani cha Il 
(Kamikdgama, XXXV, 124-128. ) 
ove instance, it should be noticed, the gopura or gate- 
it is the part of a residential 


Ramayana : VI, 75, 6, etc. : Gopuratta-pratolishu charyasu 1 


(5) Mahabharata : 


ш, 173, 3: Puram gopurattalakopetam | 
ш, 207, 7 : Mithilàm gopurattalakavatim | 
These two examples will s 


how that gopura denotes gate-houses of 


palaces and cities, and that they need not necessarily belong to temple 


alone. 


(6) 


Manasara : 
The gate-house of a town (M, x, 48). 
In connexion with the height of storeys (bhümi-lamba) : 
Devatalayanarh nripanarh sala-gopure (c)vam uttungam | 
(М., XI, 113-) 
In connexion with the base (M., xiv, 415). 
In connexion with the column : 
Prāsāde mandape vàpi ргакаге gopure tatha | z 
; (M., ху, 433-) 
In connexion with the windows (M., хххш, 594) 
In connexion with images of Yakshas Vidyadharas, etc. : 
Jànv-uérita-hastau gopurodhrita-hastakau 1 
Evam vidyadharah proktah sarvabharana-bhishitah | 
(M., туш, 16-17.) 


Chapter xxxi (named Gopura) 1-601 : 


The gate-houses are built for temples and residential buildings 
alike (line r). Hence it will be inaccurate to suppose that gopuras 
are constructed only for temples. In the Mánasara, rules аге laid 
down forgopuras belonging to residential buildings of various 
descriptions (cf. lines 2-601). 

They are built in front of each of the five courts into which 
the whole compound of a house is divided. The gopura belong-: 


| ing to the first (antar-mandala) is technically called the dvara- 
-$obhà or the beauty of the gate (line 8) ; that belonging to the 


158 


4 


ab 


—— ae кулынга татаал 


THE GATE.BOUSES AND WINDOWS 


NOTE = 
LLTHESE GATE HOUSES OTH FOR 
TEMPLES AND RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS - 
ІҢ RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS THE GOPURA 
SHOULD ALWAYS BE LESS IN NUMBER OF STOREYS 
THAN THE MAIN EDIFICE BUT NOTSOINTEMPLES. 


COMPOUND 
WALL 
+ 


о 4 8 2 16 20 24 28 


32 
ЭС ЬШЕО Б ar m ee ES SS SESE E EE] 


LENGTH CIN PLAN) = 14 WIDTH 
HBEIGHTUN ELEVATION) = 1⁄2 WIDTE 


VARA-SOBBA TYPE OF СОРОКА 
FOR THE INNERMOST ENCLOSURE 


HINDU ARGHITEGTURE GOPURA 


second court is known as dvara-éala ог gate-house (line 9). 
The gate-house of the third court is called dvaraprasida (line 
9), and of the fourth court dvara-harmya (line 9). The gate- 
house of the fifth court or at the furthest boundary (maha- 
maryada) is known as maha-gopura or the great gate-house 
(line ro). i 

The gopuras are furnished with as many as sixteen storey s 
(lines 97, 103). They are divided into ten classes (line 564) with 
regard to the number of architectural members designated as 
Sikharas or cupolas, domes (stūpikā), side-tower or dome (gala-küta) 
and vestibules (kshudra-nàsi) (lines 536-564). A gopura is thus 
technically called Sribhoga when its &ikha (spire) is like $414 (hall), 
it has a circular surrounding dome and is furnished with a 
side-tower, four small vestibules and eight large vestibules (lines 
553-564). The remaining nine classes are called respectively 
Srivisala, Vishnu-kànta, Indra-kanta, Brahma-kànta, Skanda- 

.kànta, Sikhara, Stüpika and Saumya-kànta (lines 556-564). 

The fifteen kinds of gate-houses referred to above may have 
one to sixteen or seventeen storeys. But the details of five storeys 
only are given, others being left to the discretion of the architects 
and stated to be built in the same way as those five storeys illus- 
trated so minutely. 

The measurement, both absolute and comparative, of length, 
breadth, and height of each storey belonging to each of the fifteen 
kinds of gate-houses is described at great length. The ornaments 
and mouldings of each storey are also given in detail. The central 
or main hall as well as all other rooms, together with different 
parts such as pillars, entablatures, walls, roofs, floors, and 
windows, etc., are described in great detail (cf. lines 2-601). 

- (7) Gate-tower (Hampe Inscrip. of Krishnaraya, line 33, north 
face, Ep. Ind., Vol. т, p. 336). 

(8) Tower (Ranganath Inscrip. of Sundarapandya, v. 7, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. тп, pp. 12, 15). 

(9) Durggarh cha Tamranagarim abhito vyadhatta - prakaram 
umnatam udarhchita-gopurarhn sah— he surrounded Tarhranagari with 
a wall surmounted by towers.’—Hultzsch—(Chebralu Inscrip. of Jaya, 
V. 27, Ер. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 147, 149.) 

(10) Gate-tower : 

Vapra-gopura-mayair nava-harmaih—. by erecting new build- 
ings adorned with a wall and a gate-tower.’—(Mangalagiri Pillar 

Inscrip., v. 29, Ер. Ind., Vol. vi, РР. 121, 131.) 


159 


Е ам 


ғады АЛАД А REET 


м: 


EP P EAR. 
e: P 


A RAE 


GOPURA | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(тт) Vapra-gopura-yutair-nava-harmyaih (verse 26). 

Gopura-prakarotsava-mathtapair upachitarh (verse 27). 

| Sikhara-marhtapa-gopuralu (line 116). 

| i (Kondavidu Inscrip. of Krishnaraya, vv. 26, 27, Іле | 
116, Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 236, 237, 321, 322.) 

(12) Vipulottumga-gopuram deva-mamdiram—- the temple of god 
(adorned) with lofty towers.’—(Krishnapuram Plates of Sadasivaraya, 
V. 56, Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, рр. 336, 341.) | 

(13) * In it (Taulava) country, on the south bank of the Ambu river 
shining like the Sri-pundra (central sectarian mark on the forehead 
of Vaishnavas) is Kshemapura, like Purandara (Indra's city), with 
glittering gopuras (temple-towers).’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part 1, Sagar 
Taluq, по. 55; Transl., p. тоо.) 

(14) * Built (in the year specified) the tower of the temple (gopura) 
of the god Sivamigvaram udaiyar.—(Ep. Сатай. Vol. rx, Bangalore 
Talug, по. 1304; Transl., p. 26; Roman Text, p. .32.) 

(15) ‘ Brought to the door of the gopura of the mantapa facing 
mukha-mantapa of the god Varadaraja, and having the wood-work done 
by the hand of the carpenter Bevoja’s son Chaja-oja, and having the 
door set up and the iron work done by the hand of the blacksmith, 
Anjala Divingoja.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Malur Taluq, no. 3 ; Roman Text, 
р. 186; Transl, р. 154.) 

(16) Gate-pyramid, gate-way tower.—(Colonel B. R. Branfill. Ind. Ant., 
Vol. Ix, р. 117, с. r, P. 110, С. По) 

(17) Мағапа-уӛрі gopuravarn kattiói &opura-pratishthe suvarna- ' 
= kalasa-pratishthe saha madisi—‘ erected a new gopura with golden 
=? finials in the Chamundeévari hill/—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Mysore Taluq, 
n по. 20; Roman Text, p. 6; Transl., p. 3.) 

E ˆ (18) Vira sri-chika-deva-raya-nripati reme pure samvasan | 
= Srirahge ramaniya-gopuravati kshoni-vadhü-bhüshane || 
The heroic king Chikka-Deva Raya, residing in the beautiful 
city Sriranga having (i. e. which is furnished with) splendid gate- 
ways (* gate-house) an ornament to the lady Earth Š 
It should be noticed that from this instance it s Clear beyond doubt 
that gopuras or gate-houses were constructed not only in connexion d 
with temples but also as parts (of residential houses and) of the A 
city-gates. 544 il 
(Ep. . Carnat., Vol. ur Malavalli ТаШша, no. бі 8 | 
Roman Text, р. 126, line rz f. ; Transl., p. 62.) \ 
(19) < With his approvai causing a gopura of seven storeys to 4 
. be newly erected on the eastern side of the holy presence dedicated the 
gopura together with its golden kala£as, for the services of the god, to 


160 


| HINDU ARGHITECTURE GOSHTHA 


Ë continue as long as sun and moon.’ —(Ep. Carnat. Vol. ш, 
Taluq, по. 1; Transl., р. 95; Roman Text, p. 183.) 

| (20) Meroś śriñgam utandhakari-bhavanarn praleya-prithvi-dhritah 

1 kutam kim muravairi-nirmmita-maha-dvaravati-gopuram "n 

Kir và kir maya-6ilpa-sára-sahitarh pàndüdbhavànàm sabha- 


dvàram gunda-chamüpa-nirmita-mahàshatkarn samujrim- 
bhate |! 


Nànjangüd 


Sapta-dvipa-samudra-gotra-dhara-loka-chhanda-rishyasvasari 
Khyataneka-jagan-nidhana-mahaniyasesha-vastu-ériyam I 
Sararn gopura-nishtha-sapta-bhuvana-vyajena shatko mahan 
ekibhütam ivàvabhàti satatam sri-gunda-dandadhipah 11 


‘Rebuilt with seven storeys the борша, over the doorway ( 


and 
its praise). 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur 
по. 3 ; Roman Text, ш, Р. 103, 
Transl., p. 45.) 

(21) * In front of the temple of Harihara-nàtha, he made a wide 
and beautifu! gateway (gopura) of five storeys, adorned with golden 
kala$as.)— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. хі, Davanagere Taluq, no. 36 ; Transl., p. 47, 
Roman Text, p. 77-78; see Introduction, p. 32, para. 2, line 9 f.) 

(22) See ‘Views of the second main entrance-gopura, Kailàía- 
пайа temple.—(Pallava Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, 
Vol. xxxiv, Plate v.) 


GOPURAKARA(-KRITT)— Buildings of the gate-house shape. 
Кеса vai malikakara kechid vai gopurakritih || 
Matrinam alayarn kuryàd gopurakaram eva tu || 


Taluq, 
line 10 Ғ; 


(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 123, 129.) 
cows, a cowstall. 
ya v(b)uddhya so’karayad goma- 


GO-MATHA —Literally a monastery for 
Yo dharmma-purhjam hi vichar 
(th)a-nàmdheyam 11 
V(b)atihadim-pure гатуе go-mat(th)ah. karitah Subhah | 
4 A$rayah sarvva-jantünar kailas(§)adrir ivaparah ıı 
. ' Caused to be made the place known by the name of Gomatha (2)? 
° This auspicious gomatha (?) was caused to be made in the beautiful 


town of Batihadim. (It is) a shelter to all being like another Kailãéa.— 
(R. В. Hira Lal, в.а.) 


i But fom the context the meaning of go-matha 


(Ht. house for cows) 


3) 8 seems certain : it is pasu-sala or sheds for animals. 

а (Batihagarh Stone Inscrip., vv. 8, 9, Ер. Ind., 

b Vol. хп, pp. 46-47.) 
3 GOSHTHA—A cowstall. : 


IGI = 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


GOSHTHA-PANJARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


GOSHTHA-PANJARA (see PARJARA)— Ihe niche or recess in the 
wall which igenerally contains a statue, and sometimes serves as 
a decoration. Ç 
GOSHTHI-(KA)—A committee, trustees, the managing committee 
of a building, a club-house. 
Members of Pañch or committee entrusted with the management of 
religious endowments. Prof. Bühler.—(Ep. Ind., Vol. r, p. 190, note 50; 
* trustee,’ Dr. Hultzch, Ind. Ant, Vol. жі, p. 338, last line of the text.) 
Gf. Goshthika-bhütena idarh stambham ghatitam | 3 
(Deogadh Pillar Inscrip. of Bhojadeve of Kanauj, no. A, 
ы line 9, Ер. Ind., Vol. ту, p. 310, 829, note 5.) \\ 
' 'The managing committee of a building : 
1 Garishtha-guna-goshthyadah samudadidharad-dhira-dhiru-daram 
atisumdaram prathama-tirthankrin-marhdiram 11 
(Bijapur Iriscrip. of Dhavala of Hastikundi, 
v. 34, Ep. Ind., Vol. x, p. 22.) 


GEYA—A class of buildings. 5 


(Катікавата, хім, 58a-59, see under MALIKA.) 


| 

| 
GRAMA (of, NAGARA)—A village, slightly different from towns and | 
cities in size mostly. | 
| 

| 

| 


(1) ‘The primitive sense of this word, which occurs frequently 
from the Rig-Veda! onwards, appears to have been village. The Vedic 
Indians must have dwelt in villages, which were scattered over the country, 
some close together,? some far apart and were connected by roads.? 
The village is regularly contrasted with the forest (aranya), and its ani- 
mals and plants with those that lived or grew wild in the woods. The 
villages contained cattle, horses, and other domestic animals, as well 
as men.5 Grain was also stored in them. Іп the evening the cattle 
regularly returned thither from the forest.” The villages were probably 


146, I, 


11, 44, 10; 114, I, ii, 12, 7 (perhaps to be taken as in то); X, 149, 1 
батша, | 


Eo 149745 etc., A-V., ту, 36, 7, 8, v. 17, 4, УІ, 40, 2, etc. , Vajasaneyi- 
I, 45, XX, 17, etc. 

2%. А Satapatha-Brahmana, хш, 2, 4, 2, Aitareya Brahmana, ш, 44: 

ER оваа уш, 6,2. — B. 
Age су : R-V., x, 90, 8, A-V, п ш, IO, 6, 91,9, aU" 
iā, VIL, 2, 2,1, Kathaka Sahhila, vu, 7 , 85 ^ Vajasancyi-Samhita, 1%, 92 
a-Brahmana, ху, 1, 9, Satapatha-Brahmana, ш, 8, 4, 16, etc. Plan 
Ий, V. 2, 5, 5, VI, 9, 4, 1, etc. š 2 
V, 22, 2, VIII, 7, 11, etc. 236 
anyaka-Upanishad, уі, 3, 13 (Капуа, 22, Madhyamdina). 
» 149, 4, Maitrayant-Samhita, ту. 1, 1. 


CDM 162 ' 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GRAMA 


open, though perhaps a fort (pur) might on occasion be built inside,1 
Presumaby they consisted of detached houses with enclosures, but no 
details are to be found in Vedic literature. Large villages (mahagra- 
mah) were known.’2 

(Professors Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, 


Vol. 1. pp. 244-245.) 
(2) Kümikügama (xx, 4, the definition) : i 


Viprair athanyair varnair và bhogyo grama udahritah || 
The situation of the village-gods and temples (ibid., ххут, 1-41). 
The general arrangement (2044., XXVII, I-21), 
Further details of the same (ibid., тх, 1-0 and XXX, 1—22). 
Cf.  Jaty-otkarsha-vasenaiva sthanarh yuktyà prakalpayet | 
Utkrishtànárh samipe syàn nikrishtànàm tu düratah ıı 
(Ibid., xxx, 9.) 
(3) Brahménda-Purana (Part 1, опа anusharnga-pada, Chap. уп, 
VV. 105, ІІІ; see also v 04): 
Khetanarn cha purànàrm cha gramanam chaiva Sarvasah | 
Tri-vidhanarh cha durganam parvatodaka-dhanvinàm |! 
Nagarad yojanam khetarh khetad gramo'rddha-yojanam | 
Dvi-krosah parama-simà kshetra-sima chatur-dhanuh |! 
(4) Kautiliya-Artha-sastra (Chap. xxm, p. 45, 46): 
Südra-karshaka-pràyarn kula-$atavararn paficha-éata-kulapararn 
gramam kro$a-dvi-kros$a-simànam anyonya-raksharn піуебауес | 
Nadi-saila-vana-ghrishti-dari-setubandha-éalmali-sami-kshira-vri- 
kshàn anteshu simnàrn sthapayet | 
Ashta-Sata-gramya madhye sthàniyam chatu$-éata-gràmyà drona- 
mukharn dvi-sata-gramya khàrvatikarn da$a-grámi-sarhgrahena 
samgrahanam sthapayet | 
‘Villages consisting each of not less than a hundred families and 
of not more than 500 families of agricultural people of Sudra caste, 
with boundaries extending as far as a kroga (2,250 yards.) or two, 
and capable of protecting each other shall be formed. Boundaries 
shall be denoted by a river, a mountain, forests, bulbous plants, 
Caves, artificial buildings (? setubandha=bridge) or by trees such 
as Salmali Sami and milky trees,’ 
“There shall be set up a sthaniya (fortress of that name) in the 
centre of eight hundred villages, a drona-mukha іп the centre of 
1 As now-a-days," see Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, 144, citing Hugel, Kash- 
mir, 2, 45. 
2 Jaiminiya- Upanishad-Brahmana, Ш, 13, 4. 


163 


| 

7 

E 
Ez 
| 

| 
73 


% 


GRAMA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ahana inthe midst of a collec- 


four hundred villages, and а samgr 
tion of ten villages.’ Е liz 
Vajnavalka-Samhita (п, 107, etc.) : | : i 
» "Dhanuh-&atarh рагіпаһо grama-kshetrantaram bhavet | i 
Dve gate kharvatasya уап nagarasya chatuh-satam 11 
(6) Manu-Samhita (уш, 237, etc.) : š 
һапаһ-байагіз pariharo gramasya syat samantatah | 
- Samyápátàs trayo vapi tri-guno nagarasya tu II 
(7) Mahabharata (xx1t, 69, 35) : š i : 1 
Ghoshàn nyaseta margeshu graman utthapayed арі | + 
Praveśayech cha tàn sarvan śākhā-nagareshv-api I 1 
Ibid, 2, 5, 81 : l | 
ç Kechid nagara-gupty-artharn grama nagaravat kritah | | 
ЕТ (8) Manasara, Chap. 1x (named Grama), 1-538 : ; 
E i According to shape the villages are divided into eight classes, namely; ( 
= Dandaka, Sarvatobhadra, Nandyavarta, Padmaka, Svastika, Prastara, | 


Karmuka, and Chatur-mukha (lines 2-4). (For the plans represented 
$ by these eight names, see Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind., Plates хілп to 
XLVI, and the writer’s illustrations.) The measurement, the ground 
plans, the offerings to the presiding deity, the internal arrangement, 
the laying out of the houses, and the ceremonial opening of new 
buildings are described in order (lines 5-8) : 
Prathamam grama-mànam cha dvitiyarn padam vinyaset | 
Tritiyarn tad-balim datva chaturtharh grama(m) vinyaset 1 
Paüchamam griha-vinyasarh tatra garbharh vinikshipet 1 
Shatkarh griha-praveSarh cha tan-manam adhunochyate | 
The general plan (lines 95-503) : 

Each village is surrounded by a wall made of brick or stone, strong and 
high enough to prevent leaping over (lines 143, etc.). Beyond this wall there 
is a ditch broad and deep enough to cause a great obstruction in the event 
of an attack on the village (lines 143, etc.). There are generally four main 
gates at the middle of the four sides and as many at the four corners (lines 
109-110, 144, etc.). Inside the wall there is a large street around the village. 
ë ium This street is generally used for circumambulation on some special occasion, 
у: A 8 = zm pd of the police, open-air drive and similar matters of public | 

-o OTa A other large streets are those which run from one gate to 
ane ther in the middle of the wall on each side. They intersect each other 
vise Gi the village, where a temple or a hall is generally built for 


to the other of a main block. The | 
104 : | 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GRAMA 


ground-floor of the houses on the main streets are used as shops. The 
surrounding street has footpaths and houses only on one side. These 
houses are mainly public buildings, such as schools, colleges, libraries, 
guest-houses, etc. All other streets generally have residential buildings 
on both sides. The houses high or low are always uniform in make (line 
500, see also line 501). Congestion is carefully avoided. The drains or 
jala-dvara (lit. water-passage) are made towards the slope of the village. 
Tanks and ponds are dug in all the inhabited parts and located in such 
quarters as can be conveniently reached by a large number of inhabitants. 
d» The temples of public worship as well as the public commons, gardens 
1 and parks are similarly located. Тһе people of the same caste or profession 
are generally housed in the same quarter. 
(9) The following conclusions drawn by Mr. E. B. Havell will correctly 
i elucidate some of the points referred to above (Ancient and Medieval 
( Architecture of India, pp. 9, 13, 12) : 
i ‘The experience of many generations had proved that they (plans of vil- 
| lages) were the best for purposes of defence, and gave the most healthy, 
| pleasant and practical layout Юг an Indian village or town. The easterly 
axis of the plan ensured that the principal streets were purified by the rays 
a of the sun sweeping through them from morning till evening: while the inter- 
section of main streets by shorter ones running north and south provided a 
perfect circulation of air and the utmost benefit of the cool breezes.’ 
‘The Manasáüra recognizes forty different classes of villages and towns 
j ` according to the extent of the lands owned by them : commencing with a 
| village-unit which was 500 dandas, ог 4,000 feet square, so that the extent 
| of the largest cities would be 20,000 dandas or about go English miles 
square. Of this area about one-third was devoted to building space, and 
| the rest to the agricultural lands owned Бу the community. . . . In the 
| description of Ayodhya given in the Ramayana (see under NAGARA), the 
proportion between its breadth and length is as one is to four. Pataliputra 
Ф was about 9 miles in length and 1j miles in breadth. Hindu Gaur was 
? also а long rectangle, one of the long sides generally faced а lake or river, 
an arrangement which provided bathing facilities for all the inhabitants 
and obviated the necessity of building defensive works all round.’ 
| «Тһе Manasara gives the maximum width of the main village-streets as 
5 dandas ( a danda, rod or pole=8 feet). The others varied in width from 
1 to 5 dandas. The size of a single cottage was reckoned as being 24 feet 
by 16 feet to 40 feet by 32 feet. They were generally grouped together by 
fours, so as to form an inner square or quadrangle. The magic of the square 
depends on the fact that it afforded the best protection for the cattle of ше 
joint household when they were driven in from pastures every evening. 


165 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA : 


t ӨЗҮ: қы” э: ç z 
аа 2 EY ی‎ — 


GRAMA-GARBHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


А (то) * Of stone-built walls, such as ancient Indian r. ez or 
town possessed, there is an extant example older than t е са century 
в. с. in the hill-fortress of Giribraja, near the modern Rajgir, said to have 
been planned by a master-builder called Maha-govinda.’—(Rhys Davids, 

tst India, p. 37- 
RB ашыр magara-kheda-karvaga-madamba-drona-mukha-pattanarh 
galimdam aneka-mata-kiita-prasada-devayatanan1 galidampppuva-agrahara 
pattanamgalimdam айѕауау-арра. . . . | 
“(Ағ Teridala, а merchant-town situated in the centre and the first Ф 
іп importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious Kundi Three 
Thousand, adorned, with)—villages, towns, hamlets, sea-girt towns, and | 
chief cities, with elegant mansions, palaces and temples, and with shining 
agrahara-towns іп the country of Kuntala. . . . > 
Е (Old Капагеѕе Inscrip. at Terdal, line 58, б 
S Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, рр. 19, 25.) | 
(12) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occupations, | 
streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure-gardens, separated lovers, splendid ) 
tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, ghatika-sthanas A | 
(religious centres), the supports of dharmma and mines of enjoyment, 1 
moats which were as if the sea being overcome had returned here on account e 
of the collection of gems, groups of the lotus faces of beautiful women fair 
as the moon—(Grama-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha- 
pura-pattana-rajadhani)—on whatever side one looked, in these nine forms 
did the Kuntala-deSa shine. (It should be noticed, that the passage within . 
brackets is almost identical with the corresponding passage in quotation 
no. rr above.) 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur Taluq, по. 197, 
Transl., p. 124, para. 1, last seven lines ; 
Roman Text, p. 214, line 27 f.) 
GRAMA-GARBHA (see under GARBHA-NYASA)— The foundation Ф 
оҒа уШаре. 


GRAMA-MARGA—The village-road (see details under GRAMA). 
VirnSad-dhanur grama-margah sima-margo da$aiva tu | 


(Brahmanda-Purána, Part 1, опа anusharhga- 


z āda, Chap. Bv 9) 
See further details under GRAMA and NAGARA. E шры у D) 


3 

| 

2 i 
E GRAMA-LAKSHANA—The description of the village. 4 
(M., тх; see under GRAMA.) p 


Eo ` GRAMA-VINYASA (see GRAMA)—The arrangement of laying-out — . é 
^ 1 


» of the village. 
E - 166 


= CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar.Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA : 5 | r 
s š х 


а. ` Š J. 
pear [- : 1 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GHATA 


GRAHA—A crocodile, a shark, an architectural and sculptural 
ornament. 


A kind of mukha-bhadra or front porch, hall, or tabernacle. 


(М., хуш, 302, etc.) 
An ornament of the arch : 


Graha-kinnara-sarnyuktam | 

Graha-kinnara-bhishitam | 

Graha-puchchhadi-sarvesharh svarna-ratnena bandhayet | 

Grahantarn sarva-ratnai$ cha puritarh $reni-sarnyutam | 

(M., хім, 59, 56, 57, бо.) 
GRAHA-KUNDALA—The crocodile-shaped ear-ring for an image. 
Gf. Graha-kundala-bhishanam 1—(М., иу, 8.) 

Anyatha sarva-Saktinàrh graha-kundala-bhishinim 1—(M., tiv, 168.) 
GRĪVA (see Клхтна)--Гһе neck, the dado; as а member of the 
pillar it comprises vedika (altar), griva (dado proper), and bhüshana 
(ornament).—(M., xv, 105-107) 

GRIVA-BHUSHANA—The ornament of the neck, a part of the 
pillar. It comprises uttara (fillet), vajana (fillet), gala (dado), and 
vajana (fillet).—(M., xv, 111-113.) 
GRAIVEYAKA—A necklace for an image. 
Sapta-suvarnna-nishka-kalitarh graiveyakarn kantimat—‘ charming neck- 
lace made of seven nishkas of gold.'—(Four Inscrip. at Srikurmam, no. D, 
line 6, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, р. 37-) 


GH 


GHATA—A pot, jar, pitcher, same as kumbha of the column (see 

SrAMBHA), the torus (see Gwilt, Encycl. fig. 870), a type of building, 
a carving on the door. 

Gf. Stambharh vibhajya navadha уаһапата bhago ghato'sya bhago'nyah | 

(Brihat-Samhita, uru, 29.) 

Dr. Kern’s rendering by ‘ base’ seems rather doubtful.—(J.R .4.5., N.S., 

: Vol. vr, p. 285.) 

(1) A type of building which is shaped like а water jar (kala$a) and is 


8 cubits wide.—(Brihat-Samhità, LVI, 26, j.R.A.S., N.S., Vol. у, р. 319, see 
: under PRASADA.) 


A. jar-shaped carving (on the doorframe) : 
Sesharh mangalya-vihagaih éri-vriksha-svastika-ghataih | 


Mithunaih patra-vallibhih pramathais chopasobhayet 11 
(Ibid., лп, 15.) 


167 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


/ 
f 


GHATTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


A type of building : . 

(ә) Matsya-Purana (Chap. согхіх, vv. 37, 49» 53; See under PRASADA.) | 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. оххх, v. 33 ; $ under PRASADA.) 
(4) Manasara (xu, 15-18): : 

Shat-saptashtangularn vapi sila-stambharh visalakam | 

Vrittam va chatur-a‘rarh уа ashtasram shodagagrakam | 

Pada-tunge’shta-bhage tu trimáenordhvam alankritam | 

Bodhikam mushti-bandham cha phalaka-tatika-ghatam | 

(See further context under SILA-STAMBHA.) 


GHATTA (see SoPANA)—A flight of steps. 
Sri-vatsa-raja-ghatto’yarn nünam tenatra karitah | 
Brahmandam ujjvalam kirttim àrohayitum atmanah 11 
‘He indeed caused this flight of steps to be built here, of the 
illustrious Vatsa-raja, in order to make his bright fame ascend up into | 


the universe.’ | 
(Chandella Inscrip. по. В, Deogadh Rock | 


Inscrip. of Kirtivarman, v. 7, Ind, Š 
Ant., Vol. хуш, pp. 238, 239.) | 
Cf. 'Ghàt—(ri) A flight of steps leading to water, (2) a } 
mountain pass, (3) a ferry.’ e 
[Vincent Smith's Gloss. (loc. cit.) to Cunningham's 
Arch. Surv. Reports.] 
GHATIKALAYA—The building where the water-clock is placed. 
(Cintra Prasasti of the reign of Sarangadeva, 
v. 40, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 284, 276.) 
GHATIKA-STHANA—The place or building where a clock is 
placed, a religious centre, an institution, a hermitage, a temple. 
(1) Uttankoktyà sàma-vede vyadhattam ghatikasramam—‘ іп accord- 
ance with Uttanka's saying in the Sdma-veda, the ghatika (hermitage) т 
was established.’ (It should be noted that this inscription is on the 1 


door of the Ammanavaragudi in the enclosure of the same Janardana- 
svami temple.) 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1, Chamunaraya- 

patna Taluq, no. 178, Roman Text, 1 

| р. 462, Transl., p. 202.) 4 

(2) <“ Possessor of thirty-two velama, eighteen cities, sixty-four i 

yoga-pithas, and sixty-four Bhatika-sthanas(?).’—( Ep. Carnat., Vol. vır, Shikar- 
pur Talug, no. 94; Transl., p. 61, line 6 f, Roman Test, p. 114, Esc 4 £) 


8) ‘He Set out for the city of the Pallava Kings, together with Á 
his guru Virašarmma, desiring to be proficient in pravachana, entered 
168 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


, 
p rna е Mess 


МЈ, 
ores 


E 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GHAT (-TA) 


into all religious centres (ghatika-sthana) and (so) became a quick (or 
ready) debator (or deputant).'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Chamunaraya- 
patna ТаШша, no. 176, Transl., p. 113, para. last, but one.) 

(4) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occu- 
pations, streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure-gardens, separated 
lovers, splendid tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, 
ghatika-sthanas(?), the supports of dharmma and mines of enjoyment 

. did the Kuntala-de$a shine.'—(Jbid., по. 197, Transl., p. 127, first 
para. last seven lines; Roman Text, p. 214, line 30.) 

(5) Mr. Rice is not certain about the accurate meaning of the 
term. He refers to quotations nos. I, 2, 9, 4, and seems to think that 
it means some kind of institution. He says that Mr. Pathak has trans- 
lated it as *':eligious centre’ (Ind. Ant., xiv 34). Dr. Kielhorn has 
published an article on the subject (Gottingen Nachrichten for 1900, 
Heft 3) with special reference to the use of the word in this inscription 
(quotation no. 3 above) and gives quotations in support of his 
view that it means something like brahma-puri.’ It is to be noted 
that Mr. Rice's reference to Ind. Ant. is not accurate, see below. 

(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уп, Introduct., p. 8, note 2.) 

(6) Dva-triméat tu velavuramum ashtada$a-pattanamum basa shati- 
yoga-pithamum aruvattanalku-ghatika-sthanamum —(the people of 
the) ‘ thirty-two seaside towns, the 18 towns, 62 seats of contemplation, 
and 64 religious centres? (together with . . . held a convocation there). 

(Old Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line 60 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хіу, рр. 19, 25. 


GHANA—Solid, a kind of measurement, thickness. 
Eka-hasta-samam dirgharh tad-ekangula-vistritam 1 
Ghanam ardhangularh proktarh hasta-nischitya yojayet | 
(М., п, 64-65; see also xxxm, 311-313, 593-595, 
LX, 17-18; LXU, 17, under AGHANA.) 
СНАМА-МАМА (ce AGHANA-MANA)—The measurement by the 
exterior of a structure. = 
(М., ххх, 291-330, and 331-335 › see under AGHANA-MANA. ) 
f. Yogadi-ghana-manain cha kritva bahye navaméakam | 
(М., xxxix, 64.) 
GHAT (-ТА) (c. Тіктна)--А landing, a flight of steps leading 
to water, a mountain pass, a ferry. 


(See Vincent Smith's Gloss. to Cunningham’s 
Arch. Suro. кб; loc. gets 


CC-0. Gurukul 


GHATANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


GHATANA—A bolt. 
Yogyam kaváta-yugmam Sreshtham madhyam cha harmyake | 
Antar vapi bahir vapi ghatanarh kila-sarhyutam | 
(M., xix, 152-153.) 
GHRITA-VARI (cf. PirHA)—The water-pot, a part of the Pitha 
or the pedestal of the Phallus. 


Pithasyordhve viśāle tu chatusli-paficha-shad-arnéake | 
Ekàméena cha $esham tu ghrita-vari-visalakam | 
с (M., їлп, 24-52.) 


CH 
CHAKRA—The disc of Vishnu, a type of buildings. 


š (See Manasara LXV, 145; LIV, 147; XXXII, 125, etc.) 
A class of octangular buildings : 
(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. xLvu, vv. 20-21; see under РкАѕАра). 
(2) Garuda-Purána (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 23, 91-32; see under PRASADA). 
In connexion with the foundations : 
Madhye chakra tu bhaumena bhajanantarh vinikshipet | 
(M., хп, 197; see also 158.) 
CHAKRA-KANTA—A class of the eleven-storeyed buildings. 
| i (М., XXXIX, 11-15 ; see under PRAsADA.) 
CHANDITA—A type of storeyed building, a site-plan. 

A class of the nine-storeyed buildings (M., ххуп, 11-19; see under 
PRASADA). 

A site-plan in which the whole area is divided into 64 equal 
squares (M., уп, 9, see, for details, 77-110, cf. also vin, 99; IX, 166, 
іп connexion with the village; xv, 390, etc.). 

CHAT UR-ASRA (see CHATUSHKONA)—A type of building which 
15 quadrangular in plan, has one storey and five cupolas. 


(1) Brihat-Samhità (LVI, 28, and Kafyapa, J.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 
320, note 1). ; | 


(2) Matsya-Purana (Chap. corxix, vv. 28, 53; see under Pnàsapa). 
ers (3) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. cxxx, v. 25; see under PRAsADA). 
HATUR-MUKHA (see under GRAMA and SALA)— Literally four- 
d, a class of villages, a type of building, a kind of hall. 
lass of the four-storeyed buildings (М., xxm, 12-23 ; see under - 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHATUH-SALA 


A class of villages (M., 1x, 3, cf. the description n detail, 490-507 ; see 
also XIX, 212). 

A class of 52185 (hall, mansion, pavilion, etc. M., xxxv, 3-4; 
see under SALA). 

Cf. Sarvatobhadra -chatur- mukha -ratna - traya-rüpa -tri -bhuvana 
tilaka-Jina-chaityalayavanu—' the — Tribhuvana-tilaka-Jina-chaityalaya 
(temple, whichis) auspicious on every side (sarvatobhadra), has four 
faces (chaturmukha), and is the embodiment of the three jewels.’ 

‘The temple has four doors each of which opens on three identical 
ets stone images of the Tirthamkaras Ara, Malli and Munisuvrata.’ 


(Karkala Inscrip. of Bhairava II, line r7, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 132, 135, notes rr, 


12, and p. 134, note 3.) 

x CHATUR-VARGA—A set of four mouldings of the door, consisting 
b of vedikà (platform), рада (pillar), Sirah (spire) and śikhā (finial). 
| (М., XXXIX, 154-156, see also хххіп, 591.) 
| СНАТОВ-УАВСА-КАМТАКА—А set of four architectural mem- 
| bers. 
| (M., хххш, 531.) 
CHATUSH-KONA—Literally four-cornered, a type of quadran- 
| gular buildings (see under CHATUR-ASRA). 
(1) Bhavishya-Purana (Chap. cxxx, v. 95; see under PRASADA). 
| (2) Brihat-Samhita (Chap. тут, 18, 28; see under РвАзАра). 
| -  CHATUH-SALA—A house with four Salas (rooms or halls), an 
open or closed quadrangle surrounded by buildings on all four sides, 
an enclosed courtyard, a mansion with four rows of buildings. 

(M., xxxv, 35.) 
| Evam chatur-griham proktam $alayam kalpayen па va |! 
Ф Chatuś-śālā-pradeśe tu tad-adho-bhümir uchyate | 
3 Madhya-mandapa-samyuktar chatur-griham udahritam |1 
| (Kamikagama, XXXV, 5-7, 70, 99.) 
| Chatuh-Sala-gra(gri) har Sreshtharn  tri-Salarh madhyamam 
| bhavet | Е 
| Dvi-alam adhamarh proktam hinarh syad eka-Salakam II 
1 (Ibid., xxv, 19, 14.) 
г Salaika danda-khandabha dvi-Sala tad-dvayena tu | 
| Tat-trayena tri-§ala syat chatuh-$ala chatushtayi U 
a Saptabhih sapta-Sala syad evam anyar tu kirütah(-m) Il 
š (Ibid., xxxv, 34, 35.) 


171 


24 
ч 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
ЖЕ? € - 7 c н те Se 2 ine 


a X FX a 


CHATUH-SILA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ч а-&а]а -§ala tri-bhagikam | 
Shad-bhagena mahā-śālā chatuh-sala tri g 
Madhya-Sala (-ir) yugaméena bhadra-sala cha madhyame | 
Anu$ilà cha madhye cha chaika-bhagena bhadrakam | 
(M., XXVI, 17-19.) 
Chatuh-salam—(Amarakasha, u, ii, б). 
CHATUH-SILA—Literally four pieces of stone, a pedestal. = 
Benasyaika(-ka)-Sila proktam Шарапа tach-chatuh-sila | 
(M., Lu, 177.) 
CHATUH-STALA—The fourth storey, its general description 
(M., хп, 89 106), the eight classes (ibid., 1-88). 
(See under РвАзАрА.) 
CHANDRA-KANTA—A site-plan in which the whole area is 
divided into 1,024 equal squares ( M., уп, 50 ; see under PADAVINYASA), 
a class of ten-storeyed buildings (M., xxvm, 6-8 ; see under PRAsADA), 
one of the five Indian orders (Suprabhedigama, xxxi, 65, 66; see 
under STAMBHA). 


CHANDRA-SALA (-LIKA)—A room at the top of a house, a kind 
of windows, sky-lights, dormer-windows. 

(1) Tri-chandra-$ala bhaved valabhi—the roof must have three 
dormer-windows.—(Brihat-Samhitd, LVI, 25, 27, J.R.A.S., М. 5. Vol. vi 
РР- 319, 320.) 

(2) Parávayo$ chandra-éale'sya uchchhrayo bhumikà-dvayam | 

(Matsya-Purána, Chap. ccrxix, v. 38 ; 
see also VV. 40, 41, 42, 46.) 
(3) Chandra-éalanvità karyya bheri-Sikhara-sarnyutà 11 j 
(Garuda-Purána, Chap. хуп, v. 44.) 
(4) Tri-chandra-sala bhaved valabhi ıı 
Babu-ruchira-chandra-salah shad-virhSad-bhaga-bhimié cha | 
(Bhavishya-Purdna, Chap. axxx, уу. 32, 94.) 
(5) Hasti-prishtha-yuktarh chandra-Salabhié cha samanyitam (vim- 
anam) i š 


> 


(Kamikégama, 1, 92.) 
(6) Kuttimo'stri nibaddhà bhaé chandra-$ala $irogriham | 
Commentary : chandràdi-dvayarn grihoparitana-grihasya uparam 4di- 
attal ityadi prasiddasya 1 
(Amarakésha, m, 5, 8.) 
СНАКАМА--А nonym of the. pillar (M., xv, 4), a foot 
(M., туш, 3, etc.). 


(See under STAMBHA.) 
I 7 2 


——— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHITRÀ 


CHARA-VASTU—A movable structure, a temporary building. 
Gràmàdinàm nagaradinam pura-pattana-kharvate | 
Koshtha-kolàdi-sarveshàm garbha-sthanam ihochyate 1 
Sthira-vàstu-kukshi-de$e tu chara-vastu tathapi cha | 


(М., хи, 168-170.) 
CHARUKA (see Еоснака)--А type of building. 
Nispatarn charukarh vidyat sarvatraiva viseshatah | 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 91 ; see also 88-90, 
under NANDYAVARTA.) 
CHALA-DANDA—The movable lamp-post. 
Chatur-agrarh và tad ashtagrarh vrittarn và chala-dandakam | 
Sthira-danda-visale tu manangula-vasan nayet | 
(M., L, 84-85.) 
CHALA-SOPANA—The movable staircase, a ladder. 
(M., ххх, 190; see under SoPANA.) 
CHARA—A platform. 
Vrishabhasya lakshanarh samyag vakshyate’dhuna | 
Vimàne mandape vàpi charopari parinyaset | 
(M., LXI, 1, 9.) 
CHARU-BANDHA—A type of base of the pillar. 
Tato jàngala-bhumié ched- adhishthanam prakalpayet | 
Tach chatur-vidham àkhyatam iha Sastre viseshatah l 
Padma-bandham сһага-Балаһага pada-bandham pratikramam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxx, 16-17.) 
CHARYA—A road which is 8 cubits broad. 
Ashta-hasta-pramana-margah | 
(See Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, under PATHA.) 


CHITRA—An image, a painting, a marble, glass, high or full relief. 
A painting (M., xxxv, 402, etc.). | 
A kind of marble or glass (M., LVI, 15, etc.). 
A kind of octangular building (Agni-Purdna, Chap. CIV. vv. 20-21; 
see under PRASADA). 
А full relief or image whose whole body 15 fully shown : 
Sarvàngam dri$yamaánam yat chitram evam prakathyate | 
(M., L, 1-9.) 
See Suprabhedágama (xxxiv, 3) under ABHASA. 


173 


АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


CHITRA-KALPA ` 


CHITRA-KALPA—A head-gear, an ornament for an image. 
Patra-kalpam chitra-kalparh ratna-kalparh cha misritam | 
Esham chatur-vidharh proktarh kuryad abharanarh budhah i 


(М., 1, 3-4.) 


CHITRA-KARNA—A kind of pillar. 


(М., xv, 30 ; 546 under STAMBHA.) 


CHITRA-TORANA (see Torana)—A type of arches, an ornamental 
arch employed in gods’ temples and kings! palaces as well as in 
their thrones, decorated with the images of demi-gods, demons, 
lions, leographs, and geese. 


Tad eva (like the Makara-torana) рагбуауог madhyam püritarh 
cha dvayor (makarayor) арі | 

Nakra-tunda-prag-grahai$ cha tayor Asya-vinirgataih Il 

Vidyadharai$ cha bhitaié cha sirnhe(-hairi)va vyala-harnsakair api | 

Bale srag-dandakair anyair mani-bandhair vichitritam 11 

Chitra-toranarh etat syad devanam bhü-bhritàm varam | 

Ihàsu pratimadyàsu padah sarvanga-$obhitàh 11 

Chatur-asrashta-vrittabha kumbha-mandyà samyutàh 1 

Pottika-sahità và syur viyuktà và prakirtitah 11 

Utsandhad avalambam tu kuryàn makara-prishthakam |I 


: : (Kamikagama, LV, 66-70.) 
E - СНІТКА-РАТТА--А moulding of the pillar, an ornamented band. 
“ie (М., ху, 94; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA and ОрАрітна.) 


E CHITRA-SKAMBHA—A column with all characteristics of the 
padma-kanta (see below) except the àsana (seat). 


(M., ху, 39 ; see under STAMBHA.) 


 CHITRAGARA.—A picture gallery. 


) (Rhys David's Buddhist Sula, p. 68.) 
CHITRABHASA (see ÁBHASA)—A ki 


nd of marble, glass, an image. 


| (М., тм, 15; see under Авназа.) 
22 Silodhavanarh vi(bi)mbanarh chitrabhasasya va punah | 
= Jaladhivasanarn proktarn vrishendrasya prakirtitam || 
= (Linga-Purana, Part п, Uttara-bhàga, Chap. хгуш, v. 48.) 
i age painted оп a раға (a piece of cloth, а tablet, а pla 
iprabhedagama, xxxiv, 4; see under Авнава). 


mE 174 


te) or 


ELEVATION. 


@ Mav BELT By 
TOP OPENINGS 


PLAN. 
CHANDRA SALA. 


x m » x ш 


. . COURT YARD. 
. Е ` D 
| 1 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHÜLLHARMYA 


v CHITRARDHA—A half relief or an image half of whose body is 
В shown. 
| (Suprabhedagama, XXXIV, 4, 5 under АвнАзА.) 
| CHULLĪ—A building lacking a southern hall, an apartment of three 
divisions, one looking north, another east, and the third west. 
Yamya-hinam chulli tri-Salakarn vitta-naša-karam etat | 
| (Brihat-Samhita, їлп, 48, J. В. А. S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 282.) 
CHULIKA (CHULI)—A tower, a head ornament, the capital, 
the top. 
(1) Antar vapra(h) bahir bhitti$ cheshtarh dirghar cha chülikà | 
(М., тх, 362.) 
k In connexion with the joinery : 
; Etat suvritta-padanarh tri-karnam vakshyate’dhuna | 
Tad eva cha tri-karpam syat tri-chülikam eva cha 1 
Ç (M., XVII, 104-105.) 
In connexion with the gopura or gate-house.—(M., xxxi, 313.) 
In connexion with the mandapa (pavilion) : 
Tad (prastara)-ürdhve mandapanàm cha chülika-karna- 


` harmyakam | 


| (М., XXXIV,4.) 

| An ornament for the head : ' 

| Lamba-hàram api chülikadibhih 1 (M., 1, зот. 
(2) Stambhasya parikshepash shad-ayama dvi-guno nikhatah сһаһ" 


| kayas chatur-bhagah— ‘ in fixing a pillar 6 parts are to form its 
| height on the floor, twice as much 


| (12 parts) to be entered into the 
ground, and one-fourth for its capital.’ —(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. xxiv 


L р. 53) 

1 (3) Trichüli vaigya-Sidranam райсһа sapta mahibhritam | 

| Brahmananam tathaiva syur екадаба tu vedikah ll 
Pashandaéraminam yugma-samkhya chüli vidhiyate II 

(Kamikagama, XXXV, 160, 161.) 

The synonyms of chulika : 
St(h)üpika cha ghatah kilo śūlakah st(h)üpir ity-api | 
Sikha st(h)üpir ій khyata chilika cha dvijottamah |! 

(Ibid., LV, 207-) 


CHULI-HARMYA (c. Cmurri)—A tower, а room at the top of 


a house, an attic room, the garret. 


(1) Prastarordhve visesho'sti chili-harmyadi-manditam | 


(М, xxxiv, 499-) 
175 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


“ 


б КАРОР шары санасы s ee S 


eS БЕРЕС 22.69 


CHAITYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Ekàneka-talàntam syàt chüli-harmyádi-manditam | 
(M., xxxv, 37, etc.) 
(3) Chili-harmya-yutarh chorddhve chagra-dvara-Samanvitam 11 
Sorddhva-vastavya-sarhyuktarh chüliharmya-yutam tu và |I 
Sa bhümir mandapagara-chili-harmya-vibhishita 11 
Athava mandaporddhve tu chüli-harmya-vibhüshitam | 
Taladhisthana-padebhyah kimchid-üna-pramànakam 11 
(Kamikàgama, xxxv, 63, 65, 71, 114.) 
(4) Prakara-madhye kritvà vàpirh pushkarinim dvàram chatus-salam 
adhyardhantaranikarh kumari-purarh munda-harmyarn dvi-talarn mundaka- 
dvàram bhimi-dravya-vagena và tri-bhagadhikayamah bhanda-vahinih 
kulyah Кагауе | 
“Іп the centre of the parapets, there shall be constructed a deep lotus 
pool ; a rectangular building of four compartments, one within the other, 
an abode of the goddess Kumari (?) having its external area 13 times as 
broad as that of its innermost room ; а circular building with an archway ; 
and in accordance with available space and materials, there shall also be 
constructed canals (?) to hold weapons and three times as long as broad.’ 
Pandit Shama Sastri’s translation, as given above, does not seem to have 
resulted from a happy construction of the text. * Kumaripura,’ “типаа- 
һаттуа” and : dvi-tala’ (two-storeyed) ‘ mundaka-dvara ° bear apparently 


some technical meanings which are not well expressed in the translation. 

° Munda-harmya ° might be identical with * chüli-harmya ° inasmuch as 
“munda’ and * chili’ are almost synonyms, both meaning top or summit 
(see KUMARI-PURA). 

(Kautilzya- Artha-£astra, Chap. xxiv, p. 54-) 
CHAITYA (CHAITYALAYA)—Primarily a heap or tumulus, 
implies also a place of sacrifice or religious Worship, an altar: 

О с = 9 2 
derived from ‘ chita » а heap, an assemblage, etc. ; a monumental 


tomb, a sanctuary, a monastery, a shrine, a temp] i 
> А ple, the church-lik 
Buddhist assembly halls. “АП structures of the natur d 


are chaityas, so that sacred trees, statues, religious i 
Sacred places come also under this general name.’ 
(1) Tasminn Truga-dandeéa-pure charu-Silamayam | 
Sri-Kurhthu-Jinanathasya chaityalayam achikarat lI 
: In this city the general Iruga caused to be built of fine 
(chaityalaya) of the blessed Kunthu, the Lord of Jinas: 
(Vijayanagara Inscrip, of Harihara 
Н.8.1.1., Vol, I, no. I | 
I76 


е of sanctuaries 
nscriptions and 


Stones a temple 


П, v. 28, 
52; PP. 158, r6o.) 


x š CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHAITYA 


. (2) Parévanathasya Arhatah šilamayarn chaityalayam achikarat | 
‘Caused a temple (chaityalaya) of stone to be built to the Arhat Pār- 
$vanatha.’ 

| Cf. Bhavya-paritosha-heturn Silamayarh setum akhiladharmmasya 1 

Chaityagaram ^ achikarad adharani-dyumani-hima-kara-sthai- 
ryyam 11 

(Vijayanagara Inscrip. of Devaraja II, v. 20, 
H.S.Ll., по. 153, pp. 162, 164, 166.) 
| (3) Sri-yogasvaminah. . . . esha Malukaya-chaitya—‘ this is the 
Malukaya temple of the god Yoga Svàmin.'— (Sanskrit and old Kanarese 
Inscrip. no. 170, Asni Inscrip. of Mahipala, line 7 Ё; Ind. Ant. Vol xvi; 

p. 175, note 12.) 

(4) Abode chatiyarn-— The chaitya on (Mount) Arbuda.’ 

Miga-sakadakarn chetaya—‘ The chaitya which gladdens the an- 

. telopes.’—-(Bharaut Inscrip. nos. 5, 11, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxi, pp. 227, 228.) 

i (5) “Кауазһа Palhadeva (or Palhaja) . . . built a tank and a 

( temple (chaitya) of Sambhu (Siva), and also laid out a garden.'—(Narawar 

Stone Inscrip. of Ganapati of Nalapura, vv. 22-25, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxi, p. 81.) 
(6) ‘ Ve$ali is beautiful and beautiful are the Udena, Gotamaka, Sat- 
tambaka, Bahuputta, Sarandada, and Chapala chetiyas.’ (Digha-Nikaya, 
Р II, p. 102, Udana, VI, 1.) : 
| ‘In speaking of these shrines we are not to think of the venerated 
trees only, apart from some structure of art and architecture, an enclosed 
terrace at the foot, and, in some instances, a temple near by, the trees them- 
selves standing as natural landmarks of the sacred sites.’—(Barua, 7.1.2.1, 
І р. 126.) 

(7) Воррапарага-патаћка& ^ chaityalayam . achikarat—'he, having 
another name Boppana, had the Jaina temple made.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, 
no. 66; Roman Text, p. бо; Transl., p. 149.) 
| (8) “Тһеу caused to be erected the lofty chaityalaya called Trijagan- 
| mangalam, and set up (the god) Manikya-deva ; also caused to be rapaired 
4- the Parame$vara-chaityalaya which the blessed. ones (Jains) had formerly 
erected in Hullanahalli and granted lands to privide for the offerings at 
the two chaityalayas.—(Ep. Carat, Vol. ш, Nanjangüd Taluq, no. 64 ; 
Transl., рр. 101, 102 ; Roman Text, p. 193.) 5 
| (9) ° Caused to be set up afresh the image of the Tirtha(ñ)-kara Chandra- 
E prabha, the god Vijaya and the goddess Jvalini, in the chaityalaya at 
Kelasür, which he had caused to be repaired and painted anew.'—Ep. 
Carnat., Vol. ту, Gundlupet Taluq, no. 18; Transl., p. 38.) 

(то) Aneka-ratna-khachita-ruchira-mani-kala$a-kalita-küta-koti-ghatitam 
apy-uttunga-chaityalayamarh— having erected . . . а lofty chaityalaya, 


177 29 ; 


` CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


ia = x қаста ees‏ و 


p 3 р p БУ С РРР RS 


СНАТТҮА 
with kalagas or towers surmounted by rounded pinnacles set with all manner 
of jewels)—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. у, Mudgere Taluq, no. 22; Roman Text, 


p. 148, line 12 ; Transl, p. 69, para. 2.) à P 
(rr) ‘ Chaityas or assembly halls— These in Buddhist art correspond in 


every respect with the churches of the Christian religion. Their plans, the 
position of the altar or relic-casket, the aisles and other peculiarities are the 
same in both, and their uses are identical in so far as the ritual forms of the 
one religion resemble those of the other.—(Fergusson, Hist. of Ind. and East. 
Arch., рр. 50-51.) 
For architectural details of the existing (Buddhist) chaitya-halls see Fer- 
gusson : 
Plans of Chaity Hall at Sanchi (p. 105, fig. 41). 
Lomas Rishi Cave (p. 109, figs. 43, 44). 
Plan and Elevation of Chaitya Cave at Bhaja (pp 110-111, figs, 
45-47.) 
Plan of Cave at Nasik (p. 115, fig. 49). 
Plan, section, elevation and views of Cave at Karle .(pp. 117- 
118, 120, figs. 54, 53, 55, 56). 
Cross Section and View of Caves at Ajunta (pp. 129-125, figs. 
57» 58, 59 and 60). 
Cave at Ellora (p. 128, fig. 63). 
Plan of Cave at Dhumnar (p. 131, fig. 65). 
(12) See Buddhist cave-temples (Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series 
Vol. ту, the chaitya-cave at Kondane, photo, facing the title page). 
(13) ‘The word, chaitya, is derived from the root, chin, chayane 
to collect, and the commentary on Amara, called the Gurubala. 
prabodhika, says that it denotes a building, because it is the result 
of the collection, or putting together of stones (chiyate pashanadina 
сһайуат). But it will be seen that in some of the above quotations 
cm word is те close connexion with yüpa, the sacrificial post. 
ceremony performed at the end of the great sacrifices is called 
chayana, ie., the collection of the sacred ashes and other relics and 
the grouping them into the form of a tortoise, or of the bird Garutmat 
as in the sacrifice called Garuda-chayana, chita being the scared thi a 
thus collected, it appears that the building constructed to pres m 
them for the purpose of worship was called chaitiya or dieto 2536 
‘This place of worship, from its i ее E 
probably of older date OR the ees куше 


o ro clear that the Ramayana alludes % the Brahma- - 


gical and not to ili Bauddha Chaitya. The commentators are 
not consistent in.saying that chaitya means a Brahmanical building 


178 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


NES 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ 


ید د 


SOT аы Sy 


PDS 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHAITYA-GRIHA 


when it is mentioned in connexion with Rama and his country, a 
Buddhist building when mentioned in connexion with the enemy's 
country, forgetting that Valmiki has peopled Lanka with Vedic 
students and sacrificers without ever mentioning the Buddhists.’ 

“Мо. 7 (Ramayana, v. 12, 17) mentions chaitya trees so called 
probably because instead of constructing a building it was also the 
custom to plant trees with revetment round their stems where the 
chayana ceremony was performed. In course of time, however, all 
revetted trees began to be called chaitya trees ; and to such trees, which 
are generally found in all villages Kalidasa evidently alludes when 
describing the Daśārņa country in his Meghadita. Mallinatha quotes 
Viéva (chaityam ayatane Buddhavandye choddešapadape) 

“Тһе ceremony performed after the burning of dead bodies is 
samchayana, in which, after collecting the bones, a portion of the ashes 
is grouped into a human form and ba$ali or food offered to it. I take 
the sma$ana-chaitya alluded to in no. 9, to be a monumental building 
erected on such spot in memory of departed kinzs and other great 
personages.’ 

‘It may, therefore, be presumed that in accordance with custom 
a chaitya was built in memory of Buddha, and that his disciples 
began to worship and multiply it by taking his funeral relics to 
different parts of the country while the sacrificial chaityas of the Brah- 
mans became scarce owing to the opposition made by the Bauddhas 
to animal sacrifices, and the Brahmans themselves having prohibted the 
a$vamedha for the Kaliyuga.’ 

‘ It will be seen that the Ramayana mentions temple: and idolatry ; 
but these seem to be of old date in India, though not so very prevalent 
as at present. Stenzler’s Gautama Sutra (9, 66) prescribes the going 
round of Devayatana; griha-devatas or household gods are mentioned 
(in 5, 13). 

(Ind. Ant., Vol. x1, pp. 21-22.) 

(14) ‘ Properly speaking it is not temple (chaitya-griha) but the dagaba 
inside it that is called a chaitya. In a secondary sense it is used by Jainas 
and Buddhists, however, to denote a temple containing a chaitya, and 
is also applied in Buddhist books to a sacred tree as well as to a stupa.’ 

‘ Hence it is closely connected in meaning with stüpa. Chaityas were 
known before Buddha’s time (see 7. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. vu, p. 1001, cf. 
Alwis’ Buddhism, рр. 22, 23). Dr. Burgess.—(Jbid., pp. 20, 21, notes r, 2.) 


CHAITYA-GRIHA (see STUPA-GRIHA)—A dome-like construction in 


tope, supported by pillars. 


(W. Geiger : Mahàvama, p. 295.) 
: 179 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


m 


> کک‎ emer! ee 


CHERIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


CHERIKA (cf. PANDI-CHERI)—A village, a town, a fortified capita] 
city on the hill top and on the banks of a river or sea, flourishing 
and well inhabited by people of Brahman and other castes and 
containing royal residence and king’s palace. 
A suburb town inhabited by the weavers : 
Gramadinam samiparh yat sthanarh kubjam iti smritam 11 
Tad eva cherikà proktà nagari tantuvaya-bhuh 11 
(Катікаста, xx, 15, 16.) 
According to the /Мйпазйға, itis a prosperous capital city connected 
With rivers and hills, and well fortified : 
- Nadyadi-kananopetam bahu-tira-janalayam | 
Ràja-mandira-samyuktarn skandhavara-samanvitam | 
Par$ve chanya-dvi-jatniarh grihantas cherikoditah | 
(М., x, 85-88.) 


CHAUCHALA(-VADI)—A building with four sloping roofs. 


‘In the tiger-face chavadi (i.e. chauvadi) he set up images of his family 


gods (named).'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1, Channarayapatna Taluq, no. 160 . ` 


Transl., p. 196 ; Roman Text, p. 451.) 
In East Bengal also the term is used in the same sense, but there is 
generally denotes straw-built houses. 


CHH 


CHHAT(-T)RA(-I ) (see SATTRA)—Free quarters in connexion with 
temples, finial or spire of a building. 

(Fergusson, Hist. of Indian Architecture, Vol. 1, р. 279.) 

(1) See Inscriptions from Northern Gujarat (no. хуп; line 6, and no. хіх, 


line 6, Ep. Ind., Vol, п, рр. 30, 31). 

(2) ‘And as a work of dharma, (I) wish to erect a chhatra in the 
Presence of the god Minayaka . o . and erecting a chhatra for daily 
feeding of six Brahmans in the presence of the god Vinayaka.——(Ep. 
Carnat., Vol. x, Mulbagal Taluq, no. 259 ; Transl., р. 132.) 

(3) “Апа (he) presented. the land to Amare$vara-tirtha-Sripáda, for 
a chhatra (perhaps by slip Mr. Rice puts in chatra, because in the 
Tu the on x chhatra) in connexion with this matha providing 
or I уап, 4 Brahman pilgrims, and 2 cooks, alt | 
the proceeds of. cultivating the land.’ HH ee 

From this passage it is clear beyond doubt that < chhatra’ and ‘sattra’ 
point to the same object, namely, а building or buildings constructed in 


180 


CC-0. Gurukel Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


> <= à 5 a 


E. 


yo 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE CHHELA (PHELA) 


connexion with a temple, matha, or chaityalaya to provide lodgings and 
food gratis to deserving persons. 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vr, Koppa Taluq, no. 27; 
Transl., p. 80, Roman Text, p. 274, para. 
2, line 5 f.) 
CHHANDA (see ViMANA-CHHANDA)—A building, a door, a phallus. 
The temple (prasada) named vimana belonging to the chhanda class. 
(Brihat-Samhita, LVI, 17, 22.) 
A class of buildings (Kamikagama, хим, 20). 
Karne $alà барһа madhye chhandam ѕуасһ chhandam eva tat 11 
: (Ibid, т, 13 and 7.) 
A type of küta-koshtha or top-room (7074., Lv, 129, 123-127). 
А class of buildings or top-rooms (M., хі, 104-107; xIx, 1-5; xxx, 
175-177 ; XXXIV, 549-552 ; see under ABHASA.) 
A class of doors (M., xxxix, 28-35 ; see under ABHAsA). 
A type of the phallus (.M., LU, 49 ; see under АвнАзА). 


CHHANDA-PRAKARA—The court or the enclosure ofthe chhanda- 
class of buildings. | 
| (М., хххі, 24.) 
CHHANNA-VIRA—A sculptural ornament. It passes over shoulders 
and hips, crossing and fastening in the middle of the breasts and the 
back of an image. 
(See Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, x, XXXI, 
M. F. A. Bulletin no. 152, p. 90, and 
Coomaraswamy F. 4. O. S. 48, 3, p.255.) 
Ürdhva-káye cha haradi pàr$vayor bala-lambanam | 
Madhye dāma cha lambarh вуасһ chhanna-viram iti smritam |1 
(М., 1,35-36.) 
CHHELA (PHELA) (see GARBHA-MARJUsHA)— Ihe vault of the 
foundation-pit. 
Hemakarena tàmrena chhelam và karayed budhah 11 
Chhelotsedham tri-pàdam уай apidhanasya samuchchhrayah 11 
Chhela pafichangula prokta grihànam nadhika bhavet |! 
Phelà is perhaps the same as * chhela’ 
Shad-angula(iÀ pramanarh tu chatur-viméangulantakam | 
Bhajanasya samantat tu savakasa-samanvitam |l 
Tathà$mana chestakaya phelakaram tu garttakam Il 
(Kamikagama, xxxi, named Garbha-nyàsa- 
vidhi, 6, 7, 12, 74, 75.) 
181 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


F< Л ed 


NP Janu- 


Н. (M., туп, 33, etc.) 


ЈАСАТА (-ТІ) - AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


| m w 


(1) Pithika-lakshanarn vakshye yathavad anupūrvaśah Ш 
Pithochchhrayam yathavach cha bhagan shoda'a karayet l 
Bhiimavekah pravishtah syach chaturbhir jagati mata || 


ATI)— i f the base, or of the | | 
АСАТА(-ТІ) (c. JATI—A moulding of t 
d 4 SEN or phallus, a class of buildings, platform over ә | 
well. | 


! 
(Matsya-Purána, Chap. ccrxi, vv. 1-2, see also 4-5.) | 
(2) Sikharena samarh kàryam agre jagati(ti)-vistaram | | м 
Dvi-gunenapi karttavyarh yathà-Sobhánurüpatah || | 
(Agni-Purdna, Chap. xum, v. 5.) | 
Jagati-vistararddhena tri-bhagena kvachid bhavet || | 
(bid., Chap. crv, v. 6.) | 
(3) Pravrità jagati Кагууа phala-pushpa-jalanvità || | 
(Garuda-Purdna, Chap. xtyn, v. 47-) | 
(4) Pada-bandha-vimane tu geha-garbhopari nyaset | 
Pratibandha-vimàne tu vriter upari vinyaset |1 
Vriter upari vipránàm kumudopari bhübhritam | 


Jagaty-upari vai$yànàm $üdràánàm padukopari 11 ( 
(Kamikdgama, xxx, gr, 92.) ‹ 

(5) А moulding of the base (adhishthana) : Í 
` Jagati tu shad-arnga syad dvi-bhagardha-dali kramat || x | 
Shad-bhàgà agati proktà kumudar paficha-bhagikam 11 a 


(Suprabhedàgama, ххх, 19, 24.) 


(6) A class of buildings (Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, Pp. 165, 277 ; Ind. Ant.. 


Vol. xiv, p. 161, note 22). 
JANGAMA- (BERA)—The movable idol. 


Sthavararh jangamarh chaiva dvi 


-vidham beram uchyate 1 
= Jahgamarh chotsavarh bhavet sarvam sthàvaram ishyate | E. 
(М., тл, 17-18.) 2 | 

Evam tu chotsavadinàm sthavararh jangamadinah(-nam) І 


(М., LXIV, 93.) 


JANGHA—The leg of an image, the pillar in a building, a column. 


- (т) А synonym of the pillar (М., xv, 4; see under STAMBHA). 


А pillar in an upper storey ( M., XXVI, 55; see under 5тамвна). 
А part of the leg from the ankle to the knee : | 


taram šaraárnšarn syaj jangha-tararh yugam$akam | _ 


EC ee 182 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE JANMA-NIRGAMA 


(2) Janghochchhrayarh tu karttavyam chatur-bhagena chayatam 1 
Janghayarh (-yah) dvi-gunochchhrayarh mafijaryyah kalpayed 


budhah I1 
(Agni-Purána, Chap. v, 423.) 


(3) Ürddhva-kshetra-sama-jangharddha-dvi-gunam bhavet | 
Tad-dvidhà cha bhaved dhitir jangha tad vistararddhaga t 
Tad-vistàra-samà jangha sikharam dvi-gunam bhavet II 

(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, vv. 
9, I2, 17; see also v. 13.) 
JANGHA-PATHA (se RAJA-PATHA)— The footpath, a road, a 
street, a lane. 
Jangha-pathas chatush-padas tri-padas cha grihantaram | 
Dhriti-margas türddhva-shashtharn kramagah padikah smritah 11 
(Brahmanda-Purdna, Part T, 2nd anusharhga-pada, Chap. 
š VII, V, 115 ; see also vv. 113, 114 under RAjA-PATHA.) 
JAJNA-KANTA—A class of the five-storeyed buildings. 
(M., ххш, 41 ; see under PRASADA.) 
JANAKA(JANA-KANTA)—A class of the eight-storeyed and of 


the twelve-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxvi, 39 ; see under PRASADA.) 


A class of the twelve-storeyed buildings once prevailing in the ancient 
country of Janaka (Mithila) : 
Tad eva mahā-śālā tu dvi-bhagarh madhya-bhadrakam | 
Jana-kantam iti proktarh $réshtho ravi-talanvitam | 
(M., ххх, 35-36 ; see also 33-34, under MAGADHA-KANTA.) 
JANA-CHAPAKRITI—A type of bow-shaped arch. 
Vrittarn vatha tri-yugmam và chardha-chandrakritis tatha | 
Jana-chapakritir vapi yatheshtakara-toranam | 
(M., XLVI, 31-32.) 
JANMAN (cf. UpAna)—The base, the plinth, the basement. 


The basement (M., хі, 125, 126 ; хп, 202, etc.) 
The plinth of the pedestal (M., xm, 5, etc., see the lists of mouldings 
under UPAPITHA).’ . < 
The plinth of the base (M., xiv, 16, etc., see the lists of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA.) 
JANMA-NIRGAMA (-NISHKRAMANA)—The projection ог ех- 


tension of the base or basement. 
(M., хш, 198 ; Vi, 106, tc.) 


183 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


^ 


` JAYADA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


JAYADA (see UTSEDHA)—A height which.is 14 of the breadth. 
(M., xxxv, 22, 26, and Kámikàgama, 
L, 24 f, see under ADBHUTA.) 
` JAYANTA-PURA—A town, a village, an establishment for pious 
and learned Brahmans. 


(Kamauli Plates of the Kings of Kanauj, no. U, 
line 28, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 128, 129.) 


JAYANTI(-I)—A column, a post, a moulding, a flag, a banner. 
(1) A synonym of the balance-post (tulà-danda) : ч 
- Tula-dandam jayanti cha phalakà paryaya-vachakah | 
(M., xvi, 48.) 
(2) A part of the column : 
Mudrikach cha tuladhikya jayanti tu tulopari іі 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 108 ; see also 105-109, under STAMBHA) | 
(3) A moulding of the column : 
Tula-vistara-tarochcha jayanti syat tulopari || 
Jayanti varhsaka jfieya tulavad anumargakam 11 : 
<: Ў (Kamikagama, LIV, 13, 16.) 
JAYANTIKA(-KA)—A post, a moulding, a flag, a banner, the 
parapet staff. 
In connexion with the entablature (prastara) : 
Etat prachchhadanat sthane dandath chopari Sayayet | 
Etad dvara-vasad dirgharh tasyopari jayantikam | 
Daru-dandarh sila yapi ishtakena jayantikam | 
- Athava даги jayanti§ cha ША chet saha-dandakam | 
Vina dendarh tatha kuryat pashanarh phalaka nyaset | 
Etat sarvalaye kuryad deva-harmye vigeshatah | 
(М., xvi, 124-129.) 
Adhára-patta-sarhyuktarh sa-tularh tu jayantikam | 
` (Ibid., xvi 149; see M., XXXIII, 372-974.) - 
JAYA-BHADRA—A pavilion with twenty-two columns. 


Mis > 5 (Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 102, 100; see under Manpapa.) 
|. JAYA-STAMBHA—A pillar of victory (see under SrAMBHA). 
2 JAYALA—A type of pavilion. | алох 

oF eie (M., xxxiv, 294 ; see under MANDAPA.) 

_ JAYAVAHA—A pavilion with fifty pillars. = 

De - (Matsya-Purapa, Chap. COLXX, v. о; 

ЕЙ ^ see under Maypapa,) 


5 == зе 184 


E um 


— | SX ‘SHAPE OF WATER RETAINING WALL 
KE THE 


18 PENTA GONAL OR LIKE 
PALM OF HUMAN HAND. 


JAYA STAMBHA 


*JA-A GARBHA 


JALA DVARA, 


—  —s>'< yə >—... Ñ Ü? 


TOP SURFACE OF 
PEDESTAL JAGATI. 


JAGATI AS TOP 
MOULDING. 


PART OF A PEDESTAL. 
УАСАТІ. 


Page 184 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| HINDU ARGHITEGTURE JALA-STHALA 


1 $ JALA-GARBHA (see GARBHA)—The water-foundations, the founda- 
ae tion of a tank, etc. 
ТЕҢ (M., хп, 184-180; see under GARBHANYASA.) 


JALA-DURGA (see under Durca)—A water-fort. 
(т) Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxiv, para. r, P: 51; see under 


^ DuncA). 


Ж (2) See Sukrantti under Durga. 
% | JALA-DVARA—The watér-door, a gutter, a drain. 
в. Jala-dvàràm punas teshàm pravakshyàmi niveśānām | 
| | In the three following lines the positions of the water-door are described. 
| (Kamikagama, xxxv, 167.) 
a | A gutter : 
Kuryat tu bhitti-müle tu jala-dvarath yatheshta-dik | 
(M., ххх, 99; see also ІХ, 310-312, under Буава.) 
Jala-dvaram yathasara (-salarh) nimna-dege prakalpayet | 
B (M., хххуш, 8; see also 40.) 
| JALA-DHARA —The gutter-like part of the pedestal (pitha) of the 
Е | phallus. š 
2 Nala-tara-tri-bhagaikarh jala-dhàra-visalakam | 
E (M., тїп, 23, etc.) 
ps JALA-PURITA-MANDAPA—A detached building where water is 
preserved for bathing, washing, etc. 
Parjanye majjanarthaya jala-pürita-mandapam | 
(М., хххи, 56, etc.) 
JALA-STHALA—A reservior of water. 


In connexion with the three-storeyed buildings : 
Parita$ chaika-bhagena kiita-éaladi-bhishitam l 
Tasyanta$ chavritarnšena chordhva-deśe Jala-sthalam 1 
22 (М. xxt, 58-59.) 
In connexion with the four-storeyed buildings : 

Ekena karna-harmyadi tasyantar jala-(tat)-sthalam 1 
(M^ xxm, 78, etc.) 
In connexion with the nine-storeyed buildings : 

Sreshtharh nava-talar proktarh vi$va-kantam udiritam | 

Tad-ürdhve dvyamáa-mànena vakshye chordhve jala-sthalam | 

` (M., xxvu, 33, 34, etc.) 
In connexion with the prakara buildings : 
Shad-angulavasanarh syat kramāt (? bhramat) sarve jala-sthale 1 
(М., хххі, 95.) 


185 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


JALANTA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


JALANTA—Foundations reaching the underground water in con- 
nexion with buildings. 


(1) Khanayed bhi-talarn Sreshtham purushàfijali-matrakam 1 
Jalantarh va $ilàntam và pürayed vàlukair jalaih ti 
(M., хуш, 6-7.) 
(2) Samgraha-siromani, by Sarayü Prasáda (xx, 23) quotes from Мап- 
dayva : E 
Jalantarh prastarantarh và purushantam athàpi và | 
? Kshetrarh. sarhodhya chodhritya $alya-sadanam àrabhet | 
E j (3) Vastu-yaga-tattva by Raghunandana quotes from the Linga(-Pu- 
EC ; тара) without any reference : 
Agratah Sodhayitva tu bhümirh yasya puroditam | 
b. Dvi-hastarh chatur-hastarh và jalantarh vapi Sodhya cha 11 


JALA-SUTRA(-SUTRADA)—A channel, a hydraulic engineer. 


(1) “Тһе engineers of the Ве а Kings did not confine their attention 
to building alone, but irrigation works were also taken іп hand. Tradition 
has it that the waters of the Yagachi which flows through a valley distant 
10 miles and divided by a range of hills from the Halabid valley, were 
a brought by a channel to supply the capital with water and fill the neighbour- 

; ing tanks ; a deep cutting on the Hasan-Bailur road at the 16th mile, works 


Р. 44, С. 2, para. 9 middle.) 


(2) * Where as we constructed a new dam in the Kaveri and led a channel 
therefrom, and the Brahmans of Harahu made with us the following agree- 
ment in order that the channel might be brought within the limits of their 


village Harahu.— gy, Carnat., Vol. ш, Seringapatam Taluq, no. 139 ; Transl. 
Р. 33, line 8, Roman Text, p. 77, line 5.) 


ange—'erecting а jalandara (?) for the 
god’ (р temple) -—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rr, Malavalli Taluq, по. 64; Roman 
Text, p. 147, line 3; Transl., p. 64.) 


г to Penugonde—and that Singaya-bhatta con- 
the Siruvera tank gave to the channel the name 
mandala channel and had this $asana written.’ 

ase is recorded in this inscription : when the 
Was Governor of Penugonda in A. D. 1388, he 
engineer to bring the Henne river (the modern 


ER z 186 


the spot where the channel crossed the saddle of the hills?^—(Ind. Ant. Vol. r, | 


г 
x. UMS 
Ж. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE JATI-SALA 


Реппаг) to the city. Accordingly a channel was made from Kal. 
lüdi to the Siravera tank, ro miles to the north. How the water 
was carried beyond that does not appear. An amusing accounr 
is given of the accomplishments of the engineer who was mastet 
of ten science; 
Jala-sütra-svara-$àstre rasa-vaidye satya-bhashayam 1 
Rudraya-singari-bhavatah sadri$ah ko và mahi-tale Sirah 11 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Goribidpur Taluq, no. 6; Roman 
Text, p. 259 f.; Transl., p. 212 ; Preface, p. 2. 
(5) * Saying to them “© you must make this channel ? they sent for 
the last Voja's son Peda-Bayiraboja, and gave them the contract. 
And they dug a channel from before Peda Nandisiyüru and carrying 
it on below led it so as to fill the tank.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Bagepalli 
Taluq, no. 10 ; Roman Text, p. 285; Transl., p. 232.) 


“ТАТІ--А class of buildings, а door, a type of top-room, a phallus, a 
kind of measure. 
KeSaryadi-prasada-jati— the Kesari and other classes of buildings.’ 
(Prasada- Mandana- Vastu-sastra of Sutra-dhara- 
Mandana, vr, MS. Egg. 3147, 2259, fol. 26 b.) 
A class of building 
Karna-madhye'natre küta-koshthe pafijara-sarnyutam | 
Shad-vargaka-samayuktarh jatir esharh hy-anarpitam |1 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 19 ; see also 7 and gf. L, (s, 10%) 
А class of küta-koshtha ог top rooms (Катікавата, LV, 129-128 ; 
see under KARNA-KÜTA). 
A class of buildings (M., хі, 104-107 ; XIX, 1-5 ; XXX, 175-177 ; XXXIV, 
549-552 ; LV, 51; see under АвнАвА). 


Gf. Kechid bhadra-viseshena jatir uktarh puratanaih 1 


(М., XXXIV, 553.) 


А class of doors (M., xxxix, 28-35 ; see under ABHASA). 
А type of the phallus (M., Lu, 49 ; see under ÁBHASA). 


JATI-PRAKARA—The enclosure-(buildings) of the Jati class. 


(M., XXXI, 95 ; See under PRAKARA.) 


JATI-SALA (see J Arr) —Ihe gala (hall, mansion) of the Jati class. 
Evam tu jati-sala cha kuryad-dharmya-vasat sudhih | 
( M., XXXI, 20, etc.) 


187 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


JATI-HARMYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


JATI-HARMYA—The buildings of the Jati class. 
Vaksh’harh jati-harmyanam àyadi-lakshanam kramit l 
(M., ххх, 169, etc.) 
JALA-(KA, KA) (cf. VATAYANA)—A latticed window, an ornament. 
(1) Manasara : Eg | 
In connexion with the single-storeyed buildings : š 
Yat tan námantaralarh chordhve nàsikà Jàla-pafijararn vapi | 
(M., xix, 215.) 
In connexion with the seven-storeyed buildings : 
Nànà-prastara-samyuktar jalakabhir alankritam 1 


E M., xxv, 37.) 
In connexion with the nine-storeyed buildings : 


Toranady-anga-nidai$ cha jalakadi-vibhishitam | 


(M., ххуп, 44.) 
In connexion with the gopuras (gate-houses) : 


Naràpàm jalakam sarvarh devànàm api yogyakam | 


(M., xxxi, 572.) 
In connexion with the mandapas (pavilions) : 


Tad eva cheshta-dig-vàsarn kuryad еуа tu jalakam | 


: (M., xxxiv, 205.) 
In connexion with the door : 
Jayante và mrige Vapi chopadvaram tu jalakam | 


(M., xxxvi, I9.) 


In connexion with the doors of the kitchen (latticed windows 


Ë` are provided for the easy passage of smoke) : 
= Tad-ardhva-gamanarthaya kshudra-jalaka-sarhyuktam | 
(М., хххуш, 36.) 
dvàram tu jalakam | 


M., xxxix, 138.) 
-nà$anam | 


Devanarn harmyake Sarvam madhya- 
= Jalakadhika-hinarh syad éri-hinam artha 


- M., 3 0 
Ап ornament for the feet : ( en х 
Ratnanguliyakau hastau pàdam jàla-saratnakam | 


Chamundi jvala 
kam(-ka) | 


= (M., їл, 39.) 
(R jala)-mauli cha bhairavi pibaràla- 


| (2) Manu-Samhita (УШ, 132, etc.) : ` = o HR 136.) 
BE Jalantara gate-bhanau 
` (8) Ramayana ( Cock) : 

EC 2 49 : (Purirh) Sata-kumbh 

e | J— pamàm! 


yat stkshmarh dri$yate rajah | 


"nibhair jalair gandharva-nagaro- 


| 
| 
| HINDU ARCHITECTURE JALA-(KA, КА) 
r V. 2, 53: Maharha-jambhu-nada-jala-toranarh (Lankam) | 
Ë V. 4, 6: Vajra-jala-vibhishitaih griha-meghaih | 
| V. 8, 1: Mahad vimànam . . . pratapta-jambu-nada-jala-kritri- 
| mam 1 
V. 9,22: (Salam). . . hema-jala-virajitam | 
V. 54, 22: Kafichanajalani. . . (bhavanani) 1 
III, 55, 10: Hema-jalavrita$ chasarns tatra prasada-panktayah | 
| (4) Mahabharata : 
| I. 185, 19-20: Prasádaih sukritochchhrayaih | 
? | Suvarna-jala-sarnvritair mani-kuttima-bhüshanaihl 


І. 134, 14: Mukta-jala-parikshiptam vaidürya-mani-šobhitam | 
Sata-kumbha-mayam divyarn prekshagaram upagatam | 
I. 128, 40: Gavakshakais tatha jalaih | 
П. 34, 21: (Avasatham) . . . suvarna-jala-samvitan | 
(5) Silpa-fastra-sara-samgraha (Ix, 23) : 
Eka-bhàga$ chatus-stambha$ chatur-dvarah sa-jalakah | 
Chhadya-gharhta-yuto mada-Sobhitah $ridharamatah | 
(6) Катікавата (Lv, 94, 158-163) : 
| Jalakarh palakarh $ailam aishtarh kudyam cha ishyate | 
Jalakair bahubhir yuktarn jalakarn kudyam ishyata 11 (94) 
5 Тһе seven kinds of the latticed windows : 
Riju-jalakam adyarh syat gavaksharh kufijarakshakam | 
Go-mitrarh ganika-patra(rn) nandyavartarh cha saptadha t! (158) 
Riju-kampa-yutarh yat tu riju-jalakam uchyate | 
Karna-gatyà yada $rotrarn gavaksham iti kirtitam || (159) 
Tad eva chatur-aérotthar kufijaraksham iti smritam | 
Vidig vaktra-gatarn drishtirn go-mütram iti kirtitam 1! (160) 
Milam apy-agra-gulika-mridu-bhitty-antararchitam | 
Nana-chchhidra-samayuktarn ganika-jalakarh bhavet I1 (161) 
Patrair vichitrarh randhrarn patra-jalakam ishyate | 
Patra-siitra-gatarh randhrarh pradakshinya-kramena tu | (162) 
^ Nandyavartam iti proktarn vedy-ürdhve jalakarn nayet | 
Svayambhuvadi linge tu yathakamam prayojayet 11 (163) 
'The situation of latticed windows : ; 
Jalakarh cha kavatarh cha bahye bahye prakalpayet | 
Sarvvatah kudya-samyuktam mukhya-dhamatra-kirtitam II 
Chatur-dig-bhadra-sarhyuktam dvara-j alaka-Sobhitam 1! 
(М., хи, 8, 26.) 
The ornaments and component parts of such windows : 
Jalaka-stambha-kudyanga-nasika-torananvitam l 
Prastara-kshudra-sopanarn sopanadi-samanvitam M — . 
(M., xiu, 25.) 
189 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` 


JALA-GAVAKSHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(7) Suprabheddgama (XXXI, 52, etc.) : | č: 
Vedikā-jālakopetā (parvatàkritih, a building). 

(6) “Не, the emperor of the south, caused to be made of stone for 
Vijaya-Nārāyaņa (temple) latticed window ( jālaka-jālakam), secure door- 
frame (kavatam), door-lintel, kitchen, ramparts, pavilion, and a pond 
named the Vasu-deva-tirtha.’ 

‘The pierced stone-windows, which form one of the most beautiful 
features of the Belur temple, may be of а later date, about 1200 (refers 
to the inscription quoted above) and due to Ballala II.’ 

In connexion with the same windows, Mr. Rice quotes Mr. Fergusson : 
* The richness and variety of pattern displayed in the windows of the 
porch are astonishing. They are twenty-eight in number, and all are 
different . . . The pierced slabs themselves, however, are hardly so 
remarkable as the richly-carved base on which they rest, and the deep 
cornice which overshadows and protects them.’ 

(Ep. Сатаі., Vol. v, Part т, Belur Taluq 
no. 72; Transl., p. бі; Roman Text, 
р. 61, line 7; Introduction, Pp. XXXVI, 

XXXVII, XXXIX.) 

(7) See bars on the perforated windows.—(Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. 
Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, Plate xxxvu, fig. 2.) 
` (8) See samples of the perforated windows.—(Jbid., Vol. xxu, Plate 
LXXIV, tbid., Vol. xxix, Plate хіп.) 

(9) See 264 kinds of geometrical and very artistic patterns of 
screens.—(7ala Kaumudi, by Pandit Kundanlal, pp. 188, second paging.) 


JALA-GAVAKSHA —The latticed window. 
(1) Jàla-gavakshaka-yuktah— furnished with latticed windows.’ 

(Brihat-Samhita, ті, 22, J-R.A.S., 
N. S., Vol. xt, p. 319.) 

(2) Jala-gavakshair yuktah (Bhavishya-Purána, Chap. оххх, v. 29.) 
(3) Mundana jalàndravam madisidaru—‘ had: the latticed win- 
dows made for the Tirthankaras, which their father had had 

made.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 78; Roman Text, p. 62; Transl., p. 151.) 


JALI—A trellis window or screen. 
4 Sri-uttare$vara-deva-mandape jali karapita—‘a trellis was caused 


to be made in the temple of’. . , -—(Abmadabad Inscrip. of Visaladeva, . 


E- A.D. 1251, lines 7-8, Ер. Ind., Vol. V, рр. 103, 102.) 


e n) (see T'RTHANKARA)—The temple of the Jains, the Jain 
| city. 

ч (М., хіх, 252 ; XXXI, 165; хып, 145, etc.) 
E 190 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


m. 


= 
- 


ғ 
a 
ü 
| 
[| 
18 
В 
t] 
m 
В 
ТІ 
IN 
№ 
W 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE JVARA-DEVALAYA 


The description of the Jain deities (Manasara, Chap. Lv, 71-95): 
They are either stationary or movable (71). 

The general features : 

Dvi-bhujarh cha dvi-netraim cha munda-taram cha $irshakam | 
(72) 
Sphatika-Sveta-raktarh cha pita-yama-nibharh tatha | (86) 

They are made in the erect, sitting or recumbent posture (line 
73-76) and in the lotus-seat pose (padmasana). 

The attendant deities are Narada, Yakshas, Vidyadharas, Мареп- 
dra, Dik-palas and Siddhas (lines 82-88). They are stated to be 
five classes (line 80). 

The 24 Tirthas (i.e. Tirthankaras or apostles) are mea ured accord- 
ing to the dasa-tala system (line 91). 

Their general features (lines 91-92) : 

Nirabharana-sarvangarh nirvastranga-manoharam 1 
Savya-vaksha(h)-sthale hema-varnam grivatsa-lafichhanam | 


ЈҮА (see LuPA)—A kind of pent-roof. 
(M., хуш, 177; see under LuPA.) 
JYOTIH (see LupA)—A kind of pent-roof. 


(М., хуш, 174 ; see under LupA.) 


JYOTISH-KANTA—A class of six-storeyed buildings. 


(М., ххіу, 20; see under PRASADA.) 


JVARA-DEVALAYA—The temple of the god of fever, a hospital 
or dispensary for curing patients of fever which represents all 
- diseases. 
Agnim (agnau) püsha-pade vapi jvara-devalayam bhavet | 
(M., хі; 390.) 
‘This (по. 43 апа the next following seven, 44-50, Velur, ins- 
criptions record grants to Jvara Khandešvarasvamin of Velur, i.e. to the 
Vellore temple, which is now-a-days called Jala-kanthesvara (North 
Arcot Manual, p. 189). The name of the temple is spelt Jvara-kan- 
дебуага in five inscriptions, Jvara-kanthesvara in two others, and Jvara- 
kandheévara in one of them. The Sanskrit original of these various 
forms seems to have been Jvara-khande$vara. Jvara-khanda, “the des- 
troyer of fever” would be synonym of Jvara-hara, which is applied to Siva 
in the name of one of the Kafichipuram temples. (Sewell’s Lists of Anti- 
quities, Vol. 1, p. 180). '—(H.SJ. І, Vol 1, Velur Inscrip. nos. 43-50; 
p. 69, para. 2, notes 3, 4-) 
101 


= ; беге 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= a ы ae сова 


DOLA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


р H 
DOLA (for DorA)—A hammock, a swing, а litter. | 


(M., 1, 47, 152-171 ; see under PARYANKA.) | 
T 
TAKSHAKA (see SrHAPATI)—AÀ wood-cutter, a carpenter. 


(See details under STHAPATI.) | 
TADAGA—A tank, a pool. | 
(1) Mina-mandika-makara-kirmmas cha jala-jantavah 1 | 
Кагуа dhatu-mayas chaite karttri-vittanusaratah 11 
Matsyau svarnamayau kuryàt шарап vapi hemajau | 
Rajatau makarau kürmma-mithunam tamra-ritikam 11 
Etair jala-charaih sàrddham tadagain api dirghikàm | 
Sagaram cha samutsrijya prarthayan парат archchayet 11 
Тһе execution of the images offish, shark, frog and tortoise for a 
tank with metals like gold, silver, copper, etc., is worth notice. 


(Mahanirvana-lantra, хш, 167, 168, 169.) 
(2) See Dewal Prašasti of Lalla the Ghhinda (v. 20, Ер. Ind., Vol. x, 
P- 79, 83.) 
(3) See Khajuraho Inscrip. no. iv (v. 38, Ер. Ind. Vol. 1, p 144). 
(4) See Sridhara's Devapattana Prasasti (v. 10, Ер. Ind., Vol. u, p. 440). 
(5) Anarhta-prani-supriti-karibhir bhuribhih | 
Tadagais sagarabhogair yo vibhüshita-bhu-talah 11 
(Two pillar Inscrip. at Amaravati, no. A, Inscrip, 


of Keta II, v. 41, Ep. Ind., Vol. : о 
(6) Wayside tank : Касс оъ 5 Bee 


Apàm §ala-malah pathi pathi tadagah | 
(Two Bhuvanesvara Inscrip. no. A, of Svap- | 
ne$vara, v. 30, Ef. Ind., Vol. ут, p. 202.) \ 
(7) Khsetresasya tathà suralaya-varam sphitarn tadagam tathà bandharn i 
Kaudika-sarnjfiakam bahu-jalarn dirgharn tathà khanitam | 
(Kanker Inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 7, 
(8) P Ер. Ind. Vol. Ix, p. 127.) 
ratinidhim udadhinàm samch i ita j 1 
WEN gen GST chayan toyasrishter akrita jagati-kesar- 
And who constructed a tank (which he called 
kesarin, which equalled the oceans, and which ace 
of water. —(Ekamranath Inscrip 
рр. 200, 201.) 


) by (his) name Jagati- 
umulated the downpour 
. of Ganapati, v. 9, Ind. Апі, Vol XXI, 


192 


` CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 
| 
| 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA 


TANDULA«MANDAPA—The store-room, a granary, a detached 
building where stores are kept. j 
(M., xxxi, 64; 5% under MANDAPA.) 
TADBHADRA—A site plan in which the whole area is divided into 
196 equal squares. 
(M., уп, 18 ; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
TANTRA—Used іп the same sense as SA$rRA or the science of 
architecture ( M., хі, 1, 14, 102, 145; M., хп, 67). 
Gf. SILPA-TANTRA ( M., хп, 67). 
TAPASH-KANTA—A class of the eight-storeyed buildings. 
(M., XXVI, 41-42 ; see under PRASADA.) 
"TARANGA-—Waves, an ornament or moulding employed in capitals 
terminating by undulating lines. 
Bodhikochcha-tarangarh syat sarvalankara-sarnyutam | 
Tad eva tunga-mane tu dvà-da$arn$e vibhajite | 
Adho-bhage tri-bhagena tarangakriti(rh) vinyaset | 
(M. xv, 155-157, see also 164.) 
A similar ornament of the entablature : 
Devanath bhü-patinam cha chordhve madhye tarangakam | 
(М., xvi, 202.) 
Taranga-vetra-sarnyuktarm kufijarakshair alankritam | 
Padanam cha tarangarh va choktavat samalankritam | 
(М., L, 267-268.) 
ТАТА (see Вн8мі)--Гһе storey, the palm, the sole, a moulding of 
the column. 
(т) Manasara : 
Buildings of one to twelve storeys are prescribed for people (and 
animals) of different ranks : 
Ekàdi-dvi-bhümyantam kalpa-gramasya harmyake bhavati | 
Ekadi-tri-bhümyantam prabhakarasya chàlayam proktam | 
Ekàdi-chatué-talàntarm pattabhak-chalayam iti kathitam 1 
Tri-talady-ashta-talantarh narendrasya chàlayam proktam | 
Tri-taladi-nava-talantam maharajasya bhavanam uditam 1 
Paficha-talady-arka-talantam chakravarti-harmyath syat | 
Ekadi-tri-talantarh yuva-rajasya chalayam proktam | 
Sàmanta-pramukhanam chaikadi-tri-tala-paryantam. syat | 
Kshudra-bhüpasya(-pànam)  sarvesham ekadi-tri-tala-bhimi- 
paryantam | 


193 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


S, жыйы —À‏ ا 


TALPA(KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Sthapati-sthapakanam tu gabhastikadikam(-kanàm) tu yüthakanàrh 
cha 1 


( 
nae 
Dvi-jàti-5(-sm)arànàm tv-eka-dvi-tri-tala-paryantam 1 { 
Ugraiva-jivinàm chaiva Salaika-dvi-tri-tala-paryantam | 
Gajasvadi-salanarn talam ekarh kartavyarn prokam | | 
Devanam api sarveshārh hary-aikady-anta-bhipatinam chaiva | 
Anyat sarva-jatinarh nava-talarh kuryat tad-alayam proktam | 
Mandapam  nava-talam kuryad bhavanam anya-rangarn vadhi- | 
mandapakaram | | 
Etat tu bhimi-lambam puranaih sarvais tantravit-proktam | + 
(M., хі, 127-141, 144-145.) 

The sole : ( 

Nalakantarh tri-mátram syat tala-tárarh yugangulam | | 


(M., туп, 34; see also LXVI, I9, etc.) 
The palm : 
Tala-dirgharh shad-angulyarh SesharhSarh madhyamangulam | 
(M., rix, 49, etc.) 
(2) Eka-bhimarh dvi-bhümarn và kshudrànàm bhavanarh nrinàm 1 
Südranarh tri-talarn kuryàd vai$yànàr tu chatus-talam |1 
Kshatriyadeh paficha-bhumir dvijanàm raga-bhimikam 11 
Saptadhyarh mandalikanam bhü-bhujàm nava-bhümikam 11 
Ekada$a-tala-geharn vidadhyach chakra-varttinàm 11 
Udayarkarka-bhagena hina ürdhordhva-bhümikàh ıı 
(Silpa-fastra-sara-samgraha, уш, 29-31.) 
(3) Aruroha . . . prasadam hima-pandurarh bahu-tala-samutsedham 1 
(Ramayana, VI, 26, 5, etc.) 
(4) A moulding of the column. 


(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 108, 105-107 ; see under STAMBHA. 


TALPA(KA)—‘ A couch, bed, sofa, an upper storey, a room on the 
top of a house, a turret, a tower ° made of heavy and strong udum- 
bara wood (Taitt. Bra., x, 2, 6, 5), * with four feet and four frame 
pieces (ushyala) fashioned (moulded and carved) by tvashtar (car- 
penter) and embroidered and inlaid.’ Nuptial bedstead (R.-V., уп, 
55,8; A.-V., IV, 5, 33У, 7» 12 for king and his wife ; xiv, 2, 31, 41 
bridal: Тай. Sam., VI, 2, 6, 4 : Тай. Bra., п, 2, 5, 3; Panch. Bra., 
ххш, 4, 2; XXV, r, ro) Compare TALPYA (legitimate son born in 
nuptial bed, Guru-lalpa (bed for preceptor). Base ofthe neck of a 
dome on the top of an edifice (M., хуш, 170). 


194 


(СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


Argalam dakshine bhage vama-bhage tu talpakam Il 
Yugme mahati talpe cha dakshinasthe kavatake ıı 
(Катікавата, tv, 49, 42; see also 39, 48.) 
TAT(-D)ANKA—An ornament for the ear of an image. 
(1) Karne vibhüshanam kuryan makarankita-kundalam | 
Athava svarna-tatankau. . . | 
(М., L, 49-44 ; see also 294, etc.) 
(2) See Deopara Inscrip. of Vijayasena (v. 11, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, 
рр- 308, 813). 
(3) Tadanka-darpano nama dvitiyo'kah—*the second act named 
the reflecting ear-ring. —(Dhara Pragasti of Arjunavarman, line 82, Ep. 
Ind., Vol. уш, рр. 116, roo.) 


TATIKA—A moulding of the column, tenia. 
(M., xv, 60, 142 ; see under STAMBHA.) 
Kumbhadhaé chordhva-de$e tu vata-patrádi-$obhitam | 
Nimnarm tatikadini yuktya prag-uktaban nayet | 
(M., xv, 189-190.) 
Pada-tunge’shta-bhage tu... | 
Bodhikarh mushti-bandharh cha phalaka-tatika-ghatam | 
(М., XLVI 17-18.) 
Agre cha phalakantarh cha tatikadyair vibhüshitam | 
(М. 1,78) 
TALA-MANA—A sculptural measurement. In this system the 
length of the face (including the top of the head) is stated to be the unit 
(Matsya-Purána, Chap. согуш, v. 19). But it seems more logical to 
have the span or the distance between the tips of the fully stretched 
thumb and middle-finger, which is technically called tàla (see below), 
as the unit. It admits of many varieties : the ten-tala measures are 
mentioned in the Manasdra. But the Bimbamana has reference to 
twelve kinds (see below). Each of these ten or twelve kinds is again 
subdivided into three types, namely, the uttama or the largest, the 
madhyama or the intermediate, and the adhama or the smallest. 
Thus an image is of da$a-tala! measure when its whole length is equal 
to ten times the face (including the top of the head). In the largest 


1 The idea of dasa-tala may have been originated from the following : 
weer AISA qus: TEHT | TET | 
q ufu чач: oT |1 (Чо Fo 1, Е. х.) 
19 


C CE Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ` 


type of the daga-tala system, however, the whole length is divided into 
124 equal parts which are proportionately distributed over the 
different parts of the body; in the intermediate type, the whole 
length is divided into 120 equal parts, and in the smallest type into 
116 equal parts. In the nava-tàla system, the whole length would 
be nine times the face, in the ashta-tàla, eight times, and so forth. 
The details of the following tala measures are given in the Manasara : 

The largest type of the two-tala system in which the goose, the riding 

animal of Brahma, is measured (M., Lx, 6-35) : 


Parts 
(1) Height of head 56 2. 2% 4 
(2-3) height of neck i a 20 8 
(4) height (length) of heart (chest) з 55 II 
(5) (below this) height of thigh 5c 3o 12 
(6) height of knee RS es 56 Е І 
(7) length of leg 55 E IM. i$ 
(8) height of foot I 
(9) breadth of face as 3 
(то) at the back of the head 2 
(11) length of face .. 4 


(12) neck at the root [it tapers from bottom to top and 
is furnished with two faces (beaks)] 

(19) length of belly (kukshi) "m 

(14) place of the stomach (udara-sthana) 

(15) from the belly to the root of the tail 

(16) breadth of wing 

(17) length of wing 

(18) height of wing 12 x 

(19) height of wing at the edge (agra) . 

(20) thickness of wing о ae 

(21) length of arm (bahu) 

(22) elbow oc оо сус 

(23) width at theforepart of the head .. | 

(24) width at the root of the perfectly round thigh 

(25) breadth at the forepart E 

(26) breadth of knee 522 52 

(27) breadth of leg t 

(28) breadth of sole (palm) .. 2% 

(29) breadth of middle-finger at the forepart 

f two fingers on either side 


к 


a nap ocru p an он н ы Co с› со соғ 
toj әде 


; (30) each o 
| (31) length of face : 
E 


= 


CC-0. UU Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


UN 


ЕБЕ Е > БЕРІ ді < — = — с» 
— =Z - ~ - = 2 
> DA > TNN ` 
OT i.c SER и ERO 


—_ s 
کے‎ © 
e е: 


E 


` 


T NES 


> хры 
л + 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ` TALA-MANA 


Parts 

(32) breadth of face ad F: óc I 
(33) length of eye and its breadth should be propor- 

tionate 3c бо oc óc 
(34) distance between the eye-line and ear-line 4 2 yavas 
(35) the crest above the head оо .. I Or 2 parts 
(36) its width ending by the back of head 25 6 
(37) its breadth 4 


and the rest is left to the discretion of the artist : 


Sesharh yuktyà prayojayet (35). 


In the seve 


n-tala system the whole height is divided into 84 equal 


parts which are distributed as follows : 


Parts 
‚ (1) Crown of the head (murdhni) 2% e 2 
(2) face BY oc oc «> 0 
(3) neck Bc T со ЗЕ 3 
(4) (from neck to) heart yess ЖЕУ wa 10 
(5) (from heart to) navel .. óc Jo. Ж 
(6) (from navel to) sex-organ X 2. 5 
(7) suraga (? hole) is of same parts as the back (pithamša) 
(8) thigh (üru) Ер т T 3 
(9) knee (janu) 3 
(zo) leg (pada) 3 
(rr) length of arm 22 20 20 
(12) elbow an 5 59 26 1$ 
(13) forearm (prakoshtha) .. 5% SE LG 
. (14) palm (including fingers) .. oc iuc 
(15) foot оо T ос ECCO 
(16) breadth of the face со at forces) 
(17) width of the neck v. бо 7 5 
(18) width at the arm-joint 4% бо 5 
(19) width of the chest between armpits са MA 
(20) width by heart x. < EOM 
(21) width by mid-belly Ж 55 n 
(22) width by loins (kati) 22 2% ыға 
(29) width of the thigh ó soc 
(24) width of the knee 2: 2% 5С 5 
(25) width of the leg (jangha) .. О Е 
(26) width at the ankle a 59 — ¿° 3 
4 


(27) width of the sole 


2397. 


TALA-MANA 


In the eight-tala system the whole | 


(28) width of the forepart of arm 
(29) width of the forearm 
(30) the wrist E 
(31) width of the palm 

and length of the plam 
(32) length of finger 


which are distributed as follows : 


In the largest type of the nine-tala syst 
112 equal parts (M., их, 14-64) : 


into 


the rest should be as before. 


(1) Crown (head proper) 

face (comprising) = соз 
(2) (thence) forehead (up to the eye-line) 
(3) thence to tip of nose = 
(4) thence to chin 
(5) neck 25 
(6) thence to heart Я 
198 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 


4 
4% 
І 
3% 
4 


ї 


ength is divided into 96 equal parts 


(1) Head from the crown (ushnisha) to the end of the m 
hair on the forehead FT ° 3 
(2) thence the face (up to the chin) то} 
(3) thence the neck = 3 
(4) thence to heart 101 
(5) thence to navel 55 2. то} 
(6) thence the mid-belly (up to sex organ) 10} 
(7) the thigh (below sex organ up to knee) 21 
(8) knee об 55 = 3 
(9) leg je 21 
(то) foot (height) .. 3 
(11) length of foot 14 
(12) breadth of face `9 
(19) width of neck со К od 6 
(14) shoulder (up to arm-joint) - 59 .. 45 (8 and 13) 
(15) width at the root ofarm .. z 52 6 
(16) length of arm .. T 50 21 
(17) elbow оо da co 11 
(18) (from elbow) forearm (half of face) .. 5i 
(19) palm (including fingers) (equal to face) 104 


em the whole length is divided 


Parts 
4 
12 
4 
4 
4 


4 
12 


29 


e- 


| 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


_— — 


Parts 
(7) thence to navel & z: АТО 
(8) thence to sex organ - ae бо 50 
| (9) thigh (twice the face) pas 20 оо ОД 
| (то) knee (—neck) 2% 2% = 4 
| (тт) leg (—thigh).. г 2% v 524 
I (12) foot (—knee) .. 2% 4 
і (13) palm (from thumb to forefinger) 52 nG 
| (14) arm - T 20 oo SY) 
i (15) elbow go 50 ac - 2 
| (16) forearm ос ос Js 2 ue 
| (17) palm (up to the tip of middle-finger) Ber 
| (18) breadth of face is d І 
(19) width of neck co 2% vis 8 
(20) width round the arm-joint 26 25 8 
(21) width of knee 24 > oc 8 
(22) shoulder s óo 35 5 
(23) chest between the armpits oc ооу #® 
(24) width (breadth) at the mid-bely  .. 225216 
(25) width at buttocks s ос sss D 
G (26) width of the loins 22 29 6a HG) 
(27) width at фе root of the thigh an .. 10% 
(28) width at the root of the leg x i: 71 
(20) width at the middle of the leg 20 5c 6 
(30) breadth at the middle of the leg oc 3 4 
(31) knee-tube X оо 2% oc 1$ 
| (32) ankle 2s ©з “a MEET 
| (33) heel breadth .. = " ACUTE 
| (34) breadth of prapada (forepart of the foot) 52 MH) 
: (35) breadth of the palm ( ? sole) > oc 5 
| (36) length of the largest toe .. Sa Ji 4 
4 (37) breadth of the largest toe со оо 2 
: (breadth of mails is half of their length) 
(38) length of fore-toe (=thumb) БЕР, cie 4 
(39) breadth of fore-toe E ©. ту: r (? 2) 
(40) middle toe (breadth 7 yavas) 56 oc 3 
(41) fourth toe (breadth 6 yavas) Be Z 2$ 
} (42) little toe (breadth 5 yavas) 2, T 2 
i (breadth of nails is half the breadth of the fingers) 
(43) width at the middle of the arm ¿“PPE 
4 (44) width at the elbow .. 25 ac 7 
| 199 
1 
e 


7 1 pu CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= 


TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
Parts Ж. 
(45) width at the forearm  .. 7 x 4 
_ (46) width at the wrist 2 3 
(47) breadth at the root of the palm ae 6 
(48) breadth at the forepart of the palm ve 4 
(49) length of the palm e 3c 6 ú 
and the remainder is the middle-fingers (?) 
(5о) forefinger od ob T zu 51 
(51) ring-finger O се 20 = 54 
(52) little finger .. ос со e 1 8 
(53) breadth of thumb зо 35 oe I 
(54) breadth of forefinger — .. 55 59 6 уауа 
(55) breadth of middle-finger Sc ос unas 
(56) breadth of ring-finger = бя 
(57) breadth of littlefinger .. 2% ^s A E 
Fingers are made tapering from the root towards the 
tip. Тһе forepart of the nails is ог 2 more than their 
length and their breadth at the tip is one, two, or 
three yavas. The thumb is divided into two parts 
(parvan) and the other fingers into three parts (parvan). 4 
` 


The line of wisdom and such other lines are drawn on 
the palm. The eyebrow should extend from the eye-line 
to the hair (near the ear). | 
(58) Length of eye 
(59) breadth of eye 
(60) length of ear 
(61) drum of ear | 
(62) breadth of ear S $ : 
the rest should be as in the (uttama) da$a-tala system : 
Navatalottamarn proktam $esharn cha daga-talavat | (64). 


He + н ND 


- 


In the intermediate type of the nine-tala system the whole length is 
divided into ro8 equal parts : 


Parts 
(1) Head s X ae 32 3 
(2) neck x 5 = T 3 
(3) knee оо оо T -. 3 
(4) foot оо = = Z= 3 
(5) face Xa 56 32 523512 
(6) chest B 25 * .. 2 
(7) belly оо T оо МӨ) 


200 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


Parts 
(8) loins А oc 5G TIO 
(9) thigh ob T oc Ao. EX, 
(10) leg оО Us әб 355224 
(11) arm с, 
(12) (from arm) CE acy aid E SEIS 
(13) largest toe (up to heel) —face әз 79A "a 
(14) foot Ss 2522715 M 
the rest should be discreetly made; E 
In the smallest type of the ten-tala system the whole жесі is divided into 6” 
116 equal parts ( M., LIx, 67-100): E 
Parts | 2 
(1) Head (from crown to hair-line in the forehead) .. 4 E 
face (comprising) Z MIO a 
(2) thence to the eye-line Ge es acha) ЖОЕ M 
(3) thence to the tip of the nose 5 M ri am 
(4) thence to the chin $6 2: 56 9% lc 
(5) neck-joint ae 25 Ж 9: 1j E 
(6) neck 24 T 2 2 4 2 
(7) thence to heart 22 T Boer 51%) А 
(8) thence ќо navel 2% BS 7 MIO ^ 
(9) thence to sex organ 3 So ЕТІС 
(10) thigh (from below sex organ) 2 E 
(11) knee o ЗА s 4 
(12) leg ae Sc do 2.2 95 
(13) foot AAA, 
(14) length of foot Ronn heel to сс c 164 
(15) length of arm below the line d RE (dotis) 25 
(16) length of elbow оо 2 
(17) length of forearm 4722116 
(18) length of palm (up to the ti of mide ings dios RIZA 
(19) breadth of face : ast; 25%; 
(20) width of neck со = 2% 84 
(21) width of arm .. 50 = 58 81 
(22) width of knee .. 5 46 8% š 
(23) width of arm by root, Albers; D 6, 6, 14 
(24) length of shoulder Bo co So з 
(25) width of the mid-bel .. 20 Dune voy. 


(26) width of the buttocks 
(27) breadth ofthe loins š ос 
(28) width at the root of thigh | ©: 


201 


TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
P. 
(29) width of the knee-(cap) .. - 52 сі 
(30) breadth ог width of knee-tube as 5s 4 


(31) breadth of ankle 5 
(32) prapada (tip of the жей” sis e 6 
(33) length of largest toe 222 zs 7. 4 
(34) length of fore-toe 4 

3 


(85) length of other toes (half a a De fee i | 

and their breadth or width is the same (? half of det is 
length) 

(36) breadth of elbow 5c 3o x 6%” Ы 

(37) breadth of forearm 5 | 

(38) breadth of wrist zs 2 5. | 

(39) breadth of palm га oe oto 5 | 

(40) length of palm 29 7 | 

(41) length of middle-finger .. 5} | 

(42) length of forefinger 73 222 5 

(43) length of ring-finger | .. 3 = 5 

(44) length of little finger A => 27: 44 

(45) length of thumb = 3e 55 4i | 

(46) length of ear .. © Bt 27; 44 8 

(47) height of ear-drum М: 25 . 44 


the rest not specified here should be as in case of die 
largest type of ten-tala system. 
In the intermediate type of the ten-tala system the whole height of 
the image (of а famale delay) is divided into 120 equal parts ( M., LXVI, 


2-78): 
Parts 
(1) Head (from crown to hair-line on the forehead) 4 | 
(2) forehead (up to eye-line) .. 5% 5 X 
(3) nose (up to the tip) 6 2 2 4 і 
(4) thence to chin A : 52 A cod | 
(5) neck-joint se ao zs 5 i | 
(6) neck 245 m 4 | 
(7) from аас (glottis) to heart 2% еее | 
(8) thence to the limit of navel xs sg 
(9) thence to sex organ за s 252229 | 
(ro) thigh below sex organ 26 | 
(11) knee = 55 50 .. 4 | 
(12) leg 25 = x so. AS 4 
(13) foot 25 оо 50 -. 4 } 
202 | 
f 
| 
Es. 5 Е CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA | 


n 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE . TALA-MANA 


3 Parts 
(14) length of foot (from heel to the tip of largest toe) 16 
(15) length of arm below the line of windpipe (glottis) 26 


(16) elbow sc 2с 5 2 

(17) forearm o6 T 2: 227,520 
| (18) palm (ар to the tip of middle-finger) Ss Eg 
| (19) middle-finger .. 2% % Бе 6 
Ë and palm proper the remainder .. = 7 
| (20) thumb ae 55 P & 4 
4 (21) forefinger T 5c 52 ЖЧ 5} 

(22) ring-finger Er s ¢ Je 5i 
| (23) little finger .. 7: ao 32 4 
| (24) breadth of face up to ear 12 


| (25) breadth of face (below this) from ear to ear 11 


(26) breadth of neck (at root, middle, and top) .. 7 
(27) breadth of chest (between armpits) 2.7 MEAS 
(28) width of each breast .. БО A 91 
(29) height of breast э $ 44 
| (30) distance between breasts (nipples) .. = I 
| (31) width of the nipple .. 56 MEE 
4 (32) breadth (below the breasts) by the heart og 918 
(33) width of mid-belly 54 bà S ST 
(34) breadth (below this) by the navel 36 Т m 
(35) breadth (of lower belly) below navel SSMUS 
(36) width of buttocks T Pr .. 20 
(37) width of loins ° m oc ОЙ 
(38) width at the root of each thigh .. ISTIS 
(39) width by the mid-thigh E Ато 
(до) width at the fore-part of the thigh 6% 9 
X (41) width of knee оо T Ж сеу 
bU (42) width at the root of leg 6 
| (43) width at the mid-leg : 
| (44) breadth of knee-tube 4 
| (45) breadth of ankle 41 
| (46) width of sole = 4 
(47) breadth of sole at the fore-part 5 
(48) breadth of heel ос 4 
(49) length of largest toe 4 
(50) length of fore-toe 2. 
(51) length of middle-toe . : 


(52) length of fourth toe. 
203 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i 
| 
à 
| 
l 
{ 
| 
| 2 


ТАТ,А-МАМА АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
(53) length of little toe Т. a T po | 
(54) width (breadth) of largest toe Sese vs 2 | 
(55) width (breadth) of fore-toe vs v. Ц--8 | 
yavas) l 


(56) width (breadth) of middle toe 7 
(57) width (breadth)of fourth toe 6 
(58) width (breadth) oflittle toe 5 
(59) width at the root of arm 3 
and width of knee о 

(бо) width at mid-arm A E zs 6 
(61) width at fore-part of arm E ea 6 
vs 5 

5 

4 

4 

3 


= 
t3 
ж 


(62) width at elbow 

(63) width at root of forearm 

(64) width at middle of forearm 

(65) width at fore-part of forearm 

(66) width at wrist A B 2% 

(67) width (breadth) of the palm (from thumb to | 

little finger) š - = = 

(68) width (at the root) ofthe fore finger 5 6 уауаз 

(69) width (at the root) of ring-finger (same) z бз; 6 

(70) width (at the root) little finger = 

(71) width (at the root) of middle-finger zz 

Eyebrows are placed between forehead and eyes. 

(72) Breadth of eye 

(73) length of eye 20 5а 

(74) breadth of nose up to end of the tip , 

(75) width of nose at the middle 

(76) width of nose at the root 

(77) distance between the eyes 

(78) distance between the eyebrows 

(79) length of eyebrow : d 

(80) breadth of eyebrow 25 SO 22 

The interior of the eye is divided into three (equal) 
parts (as before), of which the black sphere is one part ; 
the rest of the detail is stated to be found in the list 
of the largest type of the ten-tala systems. 

(81) Breadth and height of nostril (each) i 

(82) width of face (up to the corner) 4 

(83) width of upper lip 2 i ЕЕ 5 уауаз 

(84) width of lower lip бо oo со 

(85) length oflip .. 2 


wH 


“No 
M 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


NO = RH NO м 
ко 


204. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


Parts 
(86) ear— mid-eyebrow J: bic A (2) 
(87) height of ear 2% ga 4 


(88) length of the drum of ear 4 
(89) depth (of the drum of ear) Же T 
(9o) width of sex organ 2e eur £ 4 
(91) length of sex organ T 7 
(92) upper breadth of sex organ (сана) E 7 
The rest should be asin the case of the largest type of the 
ten-tala system. 
In the largest type of the ten-tala system the whole height of a male 
person (god) is divided into 124 equal parts (M., Lxv, 2-179) : 


(1) Head (from crown to hair-line on the forehead) ЖА 
(2) face (from hair-line on the forehead to chin) .. 14 
(3) neck .. 5c 2% 1 
(4) neck to heart (chest) ж с> ТЕСТІСІ 
(5) heart to navel 5n 2 ye 191 
(6) naval to sex organ x 95 ode HG, 
(7) thigh from below sex organ 22 оя 
(8) knee o0 ос 50 y 4 
(9) leg oc 5c 20 15112977) 
(10) foot 4 


The length of face. is диа ‘into three ТЕШЕ, head 
to eye-line, eye-line to lip-line, lip-line to windpipe-line. 
(11) Length of arm from (below the line 2) windpipe 27 


(12) elbow А . 20 2 
(13) forearm (ааа. to oxi «ofi : 2I 
(14) length of palm (up to the tip of mae inge) 134 
comprising (a) palm proper со 7 
(0) pud 5% оо 61 
(15) length of foot ос ENT 
(16) largest toe (from heel) . .. 2: a 4} 
; its breadth .. ос оо ос 21 
its mail oc - оо oo Ig 
breadth of aedi i 


Тһе nail is made circular and its freed eel is fleshy and 
one part in extent. 


(17) Fore-toe So 50 oc сс 4 less 
I yava 
its breadth .. x = Be 1 and 
I уауа 
205 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


n 


TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF : 


(18) middle toe 
its breadth 
(19) fourth toe 


its breadth 


(20) little toe 
its breadth 


Their nails are half of their respective breadths. 
(21) The middle line from ankle to the tip of sole 


(22) from this line to the root of heel 
breadth of heel 


(23) from side to heel 
(24) root of heel  .. к 
(25) width of mid-sole (below ankle) 


(26) breadth of sole (at the fore-part) 

(27) its thickness 92 

(28) height of the mid-foot 

The toes have two parts (parvan). 

(29) Breadth of ankle 2 95 

(30) breadth of the tube (above) uus 

(gr) breadth at the middle of leg 

(32) width at the root of leg 

(33) width of knee 5 

(34) width of  mid-thigh о 

(35) width at the root of thigh .. 

(36) width of loins : 3o 

(37) width of buttocks (above) 

(38) width of mid-belly 

(39) width at the heart 

(40) width by the chest 

(41) distance between the armpits 

(42) breadth above this 

(43) breadth between the arms 

(44) breadth of neck ; "E 

(45) breadth of face in its fore-part 
206 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


g - - ЕЕ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


i Parts 
' (46) breadth of head by the hair-line on the forehead то 
| ° From the hair-ine on the forehead to the eye-line 

there are two (equal) parts, one of which is the forehead, 

and the remainder is the eye-part. Between the forehead 

and the eyes, the places for eyebrows are left. 


(47) Length of eyebrow 4s 2 RAS 
| (48) breadth of eyebrow : 2} 
4 Тһе breadth at the middle is half of this eat the prone 
4 taper from root to the other end. 
i] (49). Distance between two brows A .. апа 
| 6 yavas 
| (50) length of eye г» ss yt 3 
| (51) breadth of eye : I x 
| (52) distance between two oes 2 
| Тһе interior of the eye is divided into disi parts of 
| which the black sphere is one part and the remainder 
| is the white sphere. Тһе shiny sphere within the black 


sphere is one part. Тһе sight (retina) proper is situated. 
within.the shiny sphere. The upper and lower coverings 
(lids) of the interior of the eye are each two parts. The 
eyes are shaped like the fish and the brows like a bow. 


(53) Length of ear ca оо v. 
(54) drum ofear  .. td Be 582551 
(55) fore-part of ear (=mid-brow) x dn IL 
(56) ear-hole; its length oc oc T 2 
and breadth — .. d ss I 
(57) distance between the drums 56 T 2 
(58) depth (befitting the ear) .. as o6 I 
(59) breadth of ear 20 21 
The rest is left to the dicite of the dita 
(60) Distance from eye to ear go 56 7 
(61) width of nose = = 75 21 
(62) tip of nose .. 22 E оо І 
(63) breadth of nostril s 52 9 i 
(64) length of nostril es 8o .. . 6 yavas 
(65) hole of nostril A ос ome. 
(66) its breadth — .. 5 yavas 
(67) height of nose-tip (pushkara or four-faced perd І M 
(68) breadth of nose-tip . dos 2 
(69) breadth of the middle ar nose Soy 


TALA-MANA 


(70) breadth at the root of nose 

(71) height of nose 5 

(72) height of nose (from bottom to ДӨЙ 

(73) ар (from below рш) з s 
(74) drip 5 N: ыз = 
(75) breadth i 2% 
(76) circumference (above this) 

(77) breadth of upper lip below this 

(78) lower lip : : 

(79) width of upper Tha ats 5 

(80) length of crescent-shaped lower lip сз 
(81) three-faced part (trivaktra), length and breadth . 
(82) circumference (above) 


Teeth numbering 32 are in both lower and төсе jaws. 


(83) Chin below the lower lip 

(84) length of jaw .. 

(85) from this (jaw) to coh 
(86) height of drip between the jaws 
(87) breadth of semi-circular jaw 
(88) goji (nose bottom) from jaw 


(89) mid-neck (from jaw to its root) 

(90) its projection 

(91) the eye on the forehead (third eye) ле ог š part sf 
other eyes. There should be 98 eye-lashes ; the hairs 
on the neck and face should be discreetly made. 


(92) Width at mid-arm 


(93) width of elbow 
(94) width at mid-forearm 


(95) width of wrist .. 

(96) breadth at the root of palm 
(97) breadth of mid-palm 

(98) breadth of fore-palm 


(99) back of palm up to wrist 
thence the length of the fingers СА Бе SIE 
tionate as stated before. 
(100) Length of ring-finger and of middle-finger 
| 208 ` 


.. €C-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parts 
1$ 


14 


е 


each 


Ñ Ñ O м мн оно 


I and 

2 yavas 
2 

I 


Parts 
8 and 
2 yavas 


@- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 

Parts 

(ror) length of forefinger 5 

(102) length of thumb 4 

(103) length of little finger 4 

(104) width at the root of thumb 11 

(105) width at the root of forefinger I 

(106) width at the root of ring-finger I 

(107) width at the root of middle finger . 3 


The width of (tapering) fingers at their tips is 2 or 
one-fourth less than at the root. The width of the nails 
is $ of the breadth of the respective finger tips, and the 
length of the nails is } greater than their width, and the 
fore-parts of the nails measure two yavas. The four fingers 
(beginning with the fore-finger) are each divided into 
three parts and the thumb into two parts. 

(108) The portion between the roots of forefinger and 

thumb 

(109) its thickness 

(110) thence to wrist 

(111) thickness of the portion Below the imb 

(112) its width 5 

(113) breadth of heel 

(114) its thickness 

(115) its fore-part 


Ll 


(116) interior of palm 
(117) its width 
The palm is lined with the five marks like of lotus, 
trident, couch, disc., etc. And the rest regarding the 
hand should be ақсай made by the wise artist. 
Measurement by the back-side : 
(118) width at the back of head 
(119) thence to the end of ear 
(120) thence to the end of nose 
(121) shoulder (above the line of f windpipe) from the 
neck-joint 
. (122) from neck-joint to wap. 22 
(123) thence to the line of buttocks 
(124) thence to anus 
(125) breadth to the left of it . 
(126) width of the back of lies 


209 


% 


2 yavas 
2 
4 yavas 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= = EO ь _ =. — کے‎ 


— iae X 


| TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 
A Parts | 
| (127) width of the back or middle-body (madhya-kaya) 
above this .. du] 
(128) distance between the breadth above his Sa 
(129) distance between the arm-pits 2% 2:507 
i (130) drip of the back-bone .. ТОРЕ 
l: (131) breadth of the loins-joint connected with the 
back-bone .. 35 ju Pl 
Тһепсе should be measured the Den 
(132) Width (breadth) of ribs-plank ЕР 41219 
(133) distance between ribs-planks T со ا‎ ° 
(134) height from ribs-plank to shoulder .. е Б 
(135) the portion between the breast апа back-bone 
(brihati) = 5c 252077 
(136) its length (up to — ye es (9) | 
(137) brihati up to breast limit га .. 164 
- (138) breadth of loins line ot ate 2,218 
(139) projection of the root of thigh ой [А 
(140) width of perfectly round or dunes palis 2220 
(141) width at the back of perfectly round breast 2 
H (142) drip or depth of windpipe on с yava 
| (143) drip or depth of heart .. қ Бл жан 
| (144) distance between the limit of Breasts .. 184 | 
(145) distance between windpipe and armpit .. 19% | 
(146) depth of navel o 56 .. 2 yavas | 
5765; Тһе navel-pit is made circular. | 
É (147) Length of lower belly from navel to loins 546 | 
4 2: (148) lower belly from navel to where cloth is attached | 
EA d to body $s UA | 
p- 2. (149) height from loins to the ЖЕЗ of sex "M e Ор 
i. Y (150) breadth of sex organ at the back 20 өсе d 
4 (151) thence (? loins) the length of sex organ 5o 3€] 
I (152) length of testicle Ds UM 5559422 
: (153) breadth of testicle T оо go Cx 
(154) breadth of sex organ z aT 


The rest is left to the discretion of the aii. 
Sesharn yuktito nyaset—(M., LXV, 179.) 

Thislargesttype of the ten-tala measure is used in measuring the 
images of Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and such other gods (M., LI, 29; 
xLv, 184-185) and of the statues of the devotees of the Sayujya class 
(M., rix, 12). 

210 


арар tt cR MEAM 9 -—— a ы E = 


—. СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


| 
d 
| 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


These rules are for the general guidance, there is no restriction in 
altering them for aesthetic reasons by not more than one part : 
Tad evadhika-hinarn уа Sobhartharh chaika-matrakam | 
Ukta-manangakaih sarvaih tatra dosho no vidyate | 
Tad-irdhve’dhika-hinarh chet sarva-dosha-samudbhavam 1 
Tasmat pariharech chhilpi pratimànarn tu sarvada | 
(M., LXV, 180-182.) 
(2) See Amfumadbheda of Ка5уара (MS. Egg. 3148, 3012; fol. 251, 
different kinds of the tala measures). 
(3) Talah smrito madhyamaya gokarna$ chapy-anamaya 1 
Тһе distance between the tips of the fully stretched thumb and the 
middle-finger is called Таја. 


(Втаһтапаа-Ритапа, Part т, and Anushaüga-pada, Chap. уп, v. 97.) . 


(4) Tala is the distance between the tips of the fully-stretched thumb 
and the middle-finger. 
(Suprabhedágama, ххх, 22, see under ANGULA.) 
(5) Bimbamána (British Museum, MS. no. 558-592): 

Illustration in minute detail of the largest type of the ten-tala 

measure (vv. 71-72). 

Description of the plumb-lines and the horizontal measurement 
of the idol (vv. 73-91). 

The measurement of the idol when it is made in the sitting 
posture, such as Yogasana (vv. 92-122) and the recumbent posture 
(vv. 123-138). 

In an appendix are given the rules regarding the objects to be 
measured in twelve-tala measures : 

One (eka) tala is used for measuring the vandhuka, probably 
misread for kabandha, a headless trunk, also a class of rakshasa or 
demon whose ‘ head and thighs were forced into the body by Indra and 
reduced to long arms and a huge mouth in the belly.’ (See nos. 5, 6.) 

Two (dvi) tala is used for measuring the birds. 

Three (tri) tāla ,, 33 35 „ kinnaras (mythical 
beings with human body and horse’s head). 

Four (chaturthaka) tala is used in measuring bhutas (goblins). 

Five (paficha) tala D 23 Сапеба (a mythi- 
cal deity with human body and elephants head). 

Six (shat) tala is used for measuring the tiger. 

Seven (sapta) tala 5 55 55 ә yakshas (demi-gods). 


Eight (ashta) tala 55 55 m man (male and female). 
Nine (nava) tala T 25 5; danavas (demons). 
Теп (da$a) tala 5$ 3 5 superhuman beings and 
Buddha. 
211 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


LI d a c.a с> - 


ж p Ф: 7 
ت‎ - ы к py. EF 


TALA-MANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Eleven (ekadaga) tala is used for measuring gods. 
Twelve (dvada$a) tala is used for measuring rakshasas (fiends). 
Cf. Brahmàdi-loke$vara-deva-devam surdsura-danava-rakshasarh 
cha yaksham cha naga-garudarh cha nà-kinnaram bhutarh cha 
kumbhanda-nara-svaruparh ууарһгата chatush-páda-vihanga- 
mAadi-sarvarh tu dirghayata-vandhukadi-tala-pramanam bhuva- 
natrayoktam | 
This is followed by the details of the twelve tala measures quoted 
above. | 
The next appendix gives the аһуапав (features) of the eight 
deities (ashta-nàtha). 
(6) Suprabhedagama (xxxiv, 30-34). 
I$varádi-chatur-murttim da$a-tàlena kàrayet 11 
Saktinam anya-devànàm  nava-talam  prakittitam | 
Divyam агѕһа-тапиѕһуапат ashta-talena karayet 11 
Rakshasam asuranàm cha sapta-talena ihochyate | 
Shat-talenaiva gandharvàn paficha-talena vighnakam 11 
Vamanat (-narn) paficha-talais tu chatus-talais tu bhütakàn 1 
Tritalam kinnaranarh tu matsyànàm tu dvi-talakam Il 
Eka-talas tu kusmandat (?) рібасһа virnšad-angulah | 
Sthila-sikshma-prabhedams tu tala-bhedam ihochyate 11 
Measures of the ten tala of three types each (Suprabhedágama ххх, 
f 31—40) : 
| Рга{їтауаз tad-utsedham tala-dandena bhajayet 11 (31) 
Chatur-viméach chhatam chaiva uttamarm daśa-tālakam | 
Viméach chhatam cha madhyar tu kanyasam shodasadhikam I1 
(32). 
Dva-dasadhikam evam yan nava-talottamarh bhavet | 
Ashtau $atam chatuh $atarn. madhyamarh kanyasarh tatha 11 (33) 
Satam shan-navati$ chaiva navaty-uttara-kara-dvayam | 


f 

| H Ashta-talam idam proktam tri-vidharh purvah-paddhatih | (34) 

| di Есу-еуата bhaga-hinarn syad eka-talarn tam eva hil , 

LH Measurement of the face: 

Hi Trayo-dagardharh mukharn jyeshtharn  trayo-da$am tu madhya- 
i mam 11 (35) 


Tad-dvā-daśärdham adhamam uttamat(-m)daśa-tālake | 
Nava-talottame chaiva mukharn vai dva-dasangulam 11 (36) 
Ardhardhangula-hinena madhyamadhamam uchyate | 

The statues measured in these tala measures (cf. above xxxiv, 30- 


34) : 
Tri-vidha daéa-talena tri-murttinam tu kirttita || (37) 


'Tri-vidham nava-talena devanarh yoshitam api | 
212 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Tf. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TALA-MANA 


Ashta-talena martyànàm sapta-talena rakshasam 11 (38) 
Shat-talena tu gandharvan paficha-talo ganadhipah | 
Vamanasya tathaiva syach chatus-talas tu bhutakah 11 (39) 
Tri-talam kinnaranam tu matsyánam tu dvi-talakam | 
Anujanàm tathaikarh syat ріѕасһапа tu vimfatih 11 (40) 

(7) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ссіміп, v. 19) : 

Svakiyanguli-manena mukharh syad dva-dasangulam 1 
(8) Brihat-Samhita (туш, 4): 
Svair angula-pramanair dvà-daáa-vistirnam ayatam cha mukham! 
Naganajita tu chatur-da$a-dairghyena drávidam kathitam 11 
According to one’s own angula (finger-breadth) the face of his 
own statue is twelve angulas long and broad. But according 
to (the architect) Nagnajit it should be fourteen angulas in the 
Dravida style. 
The commentary quotes Nagnjit in full: 
Vistirnam dvadasa-mukham dairghyena cha chatur-daáa 1 
Angulani tatha karyarn tan-mànam dravidam smritam 11 
The face shall be 12 angulas broad and 14 angulas long ; such 
a measure is known as Dravida (i.e. this is the Dravida style 
of measurement). 
(Brihat-Samhita, туш, 4; 7. В. A. S., N. S., 
Vol. уі, р. 323, note 3.) 

(9) See The Elements of Hindu lconographgy by Т. А. Gopinatha 
Rao, Vol. 1, Appendix B. 

(10) See Some Hindu Silpa Sdastras in their relation to South 
Indian Sculpture by Mr. W. S. Hadaway ( Ostasiatische Zeitschrift, 
April-June, 1914, vol. rr, no. I). 

(11) See Iconometry by Т. A. Gopinath Rao (Archaeological Survey of 
India, Memoir, no. 3, 1920) and compare: ‘In Appendix B, the author 
(Gopinatha Rao) gives a detailed description of the uttama-dafatala 
measure to be used in the making of images, and shows that the 
formal, apparently mechanical, rules for construction followed by Indian 
artists work out in practice as the adequate expression of aesthetic 
principle. The same subject has been treated on broader lines . . ., 
by Mr. W. S Hadaway (see above), who is himself a worker in metal,- 
with practical knowledge of the application of the rules. (Тһе war, 
unfortunately, has prevented the author from continuing WE valuable 
study, as he had hoped to do). ? 

‘The Hindu image-maker or sculptor,’ Mr. Hadaway observes, 
* does not work from life, as is the usual practice among Europeans, 
but he has, in place of the living model, a most elaborate and 
beautiful system of proportions, which he uses constantly, combining 


213 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ТІТНІ | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF nF 


these with those observations and study of natural detail. It is, in ° 
fact, а series of anatomical rules and formule, of infinitely more 
practical use than any European system which I know of, for the 
Indian one treats of the actual proportion and of the surface form, 
rather than the more scientific attachments of muscles and the 
articulation of bones. ° Y 
‘There is in the Hindu system nothing complicated or difficult 
| to understand or remember, but like every other canon of artistic 
ON х proportion, these methods аге no more capable of producing works 
of art in unskilled hands than are any other aids or methods ... “ 
These $astras are the common property of Hindu artisans, whether | 
of northern or southern India.'—Mr. V. A. Smith. 1 
(Architecture and Sculpture in Mysore, | 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хілу, pp. 90-91.) 


TILAMAKAC-—A channel, a watercourse, a pipe. 


(1) Viditam astu bhavatàm . . . yushmadiya-gramanam upakaraya 
š yo'sau tilamaka anito'bhüt pratisarnskarabhavad vinashtam ud- 
vikshya . . . yushmad-gramanam  evopakaraya pratisarhskritah | 


TITHI—One of the six varga-formulas (see details under SHAD- | 
` VARGA) Íor ascertaining the right dimensions for an architectural | 
v object. j 

TILAKA—A mark made on the forehead ud between the eyebrows f 

either as an | ornament Or as а sectarian distinction of an image. Ji 

(M., уп, 160, LI, 41.) 1 

Gf. Tilaka-kshudra-nàsi-yuktamn toranai$ cha amanvitam | | 
(Kamikagama, L, 93.) | 

| 


‘Be it known to you that, seeing the watercourse, which the e 
illustrious lord and great king Arnšuvarman led to your villages i 
. for your benefit, destroyed through want of repairs (we being 
addressed by the feudal. chief Chandravarman, have presented it 
to him; that he, with our permission) has repaired it for the 
benefit of your villages." d | 
‘The word, tilamaka, is not found іп any dictionary. But 
it seems certain, from the context, that it must be some kind 
of watercourse. Probably it denotes a channel which leads the | 
` water from the hillside over the fields which rise in terraces one 
BLOTS the other.—Pandit Bhagvanlal Inderjit and Dr. Bühler. 
: (Inscriptions from Nepal, no. 9, Jishnugupta's Inscrip., E" 
line 6 £, Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, p. 172, note зо.) um = 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


TUNGA 


(2) Devena yathayam tilamako bhabatam anyesh(en)àm chopaka- 


ray | 


(Inscription from Nepal, no. 10, line 14, p. 173-) 
(3) Tilamakaé cha saptadha vibhajya paribhoktavyah 1 


«Тһе watercourse is to be used by dividing it into seven parts.’ 
(Ibid., no. 14, line 10, p. 177.) 
TIRTHA (see TinTHANKARA)—A stairs of a landing place, a shrine, 


a holy place, a Jain teacher. 


TIRTHANKARA~—A path-maker, the foundation of a religious or 


philosophical school, a Jain arhat or saint. 


The twenty-four Jain saints or apostles—(M., Lv, 90.) 
Cf. Fergusson, Hist. of Ind. and East. Arch. (p. 748): 


Name 
Adinatha 
Adjitanatha 
Sambhunatha 
Abhayanandanatha 
Sumatinatha 
Supadmanatha 
Suparsvanatha 
Chandraprabha 
Pushpadanta 
ro  Sitalanatha 
II. Sri-Amáanàtha 
12. Vasupadya 
13. Vimalanatha 
I4. Anantanatha 
15. Dharmmanatha 
16. Sàntanatha 
17. Kunthanatha 
18. Aranatha 
19. Mallinatha 
20. Munisuvrata.. 

21. Naminatha 

22. Neminatha 

29. Par$vanatha 

24. Wardhamana ог Mahavira 

For reference to their images see Jie 


озі сул > ON н 


© 


TUNGA (see Uts—EDHA)—Height, plinth, vault, arched roof. 


215 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


x=; 


-—— eT a z 


Distinction sign 

Bull. 

Elephant. | 
Horse. | 
Monkey. | 
Chakwa (red кооче) 

Lotus. 

Swastika. 

Cresent moon. 

Crocodile. 

Tree or flower. 

Rhinoceros. 

Buffalo. 

Boar. 

Porcupine. 

Thunderbolt. 

Antelope. 

Goat. 

Fish. 

Pinnacle. 

Tortoise. 

Lotus with stalk. 

Shell. 

Snake. 

Lion. 


(M., хіх, 120.) 


ты 


TULA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
TULA (see under ӛтлмвна)--А balance, a moulding of the column, 
a month, a beam. 
(т) Stambha-samarh bahulyarn — bhàra-tulànàm ^ upary-upary- 
asam | 
Bhavati tulopatulanàm ünam padena padena 11 
(Brihat-Samhità, тлп 30 : see Kern's Transl., 


к: J. В. А. S., N. S., Vol. у, р. 285.) 
A moulding of the entablature : 


(2) Mahàa-bhàra-tulà karya balikordhve viśeshatah 1 
Tula-vistara-tarochcha  jayanti syat tulopari 11 
Tula-balikayor madhye dvi-dandam athava punah II 
(Kamikagama, LIV, 13, 16.) 
(3) A member of a column (Suprabheddgama, XXXI, 108, 105-107, sec 
under SrAMBHA). 
(4) The name of a month (М. хі, 32), the beam of a balance ( M., хп, 
163), а balance (M., L, 48, 172-195.) 


TULA-DANDA-—Ihe horizontal rod of a balance, the beam, its 
synonyms. 
Tuladandarn jayanti cha phalaka-paryaya-vachakàh | 
(M., xvi, 48, etc.) 
TULA-BHARA-An article of furniture used as a hanging balance. 
Bhupanarn cha tula-bhara-tula-lakshanarh uchyate 1—(., r.., 48.) 
In connexion with the pavilion: 
Evam tu nripa-harmye tu tula-bhàram tu yogyakam | + 
; 4 (М., xxxiv, 987.) 
TAILA-MANJUSHIKA—An oil-pot, used as an article of furniture. 
(M., L, 144: see under BHÜsHANA.) 
TORANA—An arch, a canopy, а gate-way of a temple or stüpa, 
a peg, a mechanical arrangement of blocks of any hard material 
disposed in the line of some curve and supporting one another by 
their. mutual pressure. It is employed both as an architectural 
member, as well as an ornament to buildings, thrones, pedestals for 
an image, boundary walls, and over gate-ways, cars and chariots. 
In modern architectural treatises arches are considered in three 
4 aspects, namely, (i) form, (ii) the mode in which their parts аге 
2s . constructed, and (iii) the thrust they exert. ` 
In respect of their form arches are either straight, ` triangular, 
a semi-circular or circular. The  Manasára adds another form 
called bow-shape which is apparently a little wider than the 
ae 216 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ! TORANA 


semi-circle. ‘The investigation of the equilibrium of arches’ 
as truly said by Mr. Gwilt (Епсусі., article 1353), ‘by the 
laws of statics does not appear to have at all entered into the 
thoughts of the ancient architects. Experience, imitation and 
a sort of mechanical intuition seem to have been their guides. 
They appear to have preferred positive solidity to nice balance 
and the examples they have left are rather the result of art 
than of science. Vitruvius, who speaks of all the ingredients 
necessary to form a perfect architect (see under 5ТНАРАТІ), does not 
alude to the assistance which may be afforded in the construction 
of edifices by a knowledge of the resolution of forces nor the aid that 
may be derived from the study of such a science as descriptive geo- 
metry, though of the latter it seems scarcely possible the ancients 
could have been ignorant, seeing how much it must have been 
(practically, at least) employed іп the construction of such vast 
buildings as the Coliseum, and other similarly curved structures, 
as respects their plan.’ 

(2) * Whoever invented the true or radiating arch, the Romans 
were the first who applied it as a regular and essential architectural 
feature, and who at the same time introduced its complements, the 
radiating dome, into architectural construction at what period it is not 
now known.’ (Fergusson: Hist. of Ind. and East. Architecture, p. 212.) 
But we have got clear references to it in the Ramayana (see below) which 
must be placed before sixth or seventh century B c. 

(3) Müanasara, Chap. хгут (named Torana) 1-77: 

The torana is an ornament (bhishana) for all kinds of thrones 
(line 1), as well as for temples and royal palaces (line 30). These arches 
admit of various forms. They may be circular, semi-circular, triangular 
(? hexagonal, tri-yugma), bow-shaped, or of any other desirable 
forms (lines 31-32, 33-36). The directions for making these arches as 
well as the measurements of their different parts are given in detail 
(lines:3-29, 45-76). With regard to ornaments and decorations, arches 
are divided into four kinds, technically called, Patra-torana (leaf-arch), 
Pushpa-torana (flower-arch), Ratna-torana (jewelled arch), and Chitra- 
torana (ornamental-arch) (lines 27-48). 

АЛ these arches are both structurally and ornamentally decorated with 
the carvings of gods, sages, demi-gods, goblins, crocodiles, sharks, fishes, 
leographs, serpents, lions, flowers, leaves, creepers, etc., and are beautifully 
set with jewels : 5 

Sarvesharn torana-madhye chordhve tumburu-naradam | 
Tad-pradese dvi-pár$ve tu makaradi-vibhüshitam I 


217 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


oT NEA 


Y лу mp w 
W ب‎ ц А م .ت‎ 


TORANA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Toranasyagra-mile tu graha-patrai§ cha bhüshitam 1 

Toranadyarh tu patradi-bhüta-vyàla-samanvitam 1 

Padanarh cha dvi-par$ve tu vyala-torana-dharinam | 
(M., XLVI, 45-49.) 

Ratnakaranganair yuktarh kuksh‘(r) àvrita-lambitam 1 

Toranasyopari-de$e tu bhujanga-pada-dvayor арі | 

Grahantarn sarva-ratnai$ cha piritarh éreni-sarnyutam | 


(ibid, 58-60.) 
But these arches may as well be quite plain, that is, without any such 


carvings (chitra-hina)—(zbid, 68, уо.) 


In connexion with a detached pavilion (mandapa) : 
Chatur-dikshu chatur-dvararn chatus-torana-sarnyutam 1 


(M., LXX, 21 : see also xxxiv, 217.) 
In connexion with the pedestal of an image : 


Padma-pitham maha-pitharn tri-mirtinarh cha yojayet | 
Prapa cha toranam vapi kalpa-vriksharh cha sarhyutam | 


- қ (M., тл, 86-87.) 
In connexion with the coronation-hall : 
Paschat simhadyaié cha kalpa-vriksham cha toranam | 


- š ы з (М., XLIX, 185.) 
In connexion with the car or chariot : 


Sikhi-Sikhandaka-chamara-toranam! (M., xum, 156.) 
In connexion with the two-storeyed buildings : 
Toranair nida-bhadradi(-dyaih) mile chordhve cha bhüshitam | 


4 (M., хх, 64) 
In connexion with buildings in general (vimana) : 


Sala cha nàsika-bhadre kuta-nidais tu toranaih } 


Š (M., хуш, 201, etc.) 
In connexion with the dome and the pillar : 


Athava toranam kritva stambhasyopari vajanam | 
Tad-üdhve toranasyante makara-patra-samyutam | 
'Tad-ürdhve toranantarn syad eka-dandam tu tach-chhiram | 
Makari-vaktra-samyuktam. . 


(M., xiv, 130, 133-135.) 


(4) Tilaka-kshudra-nasi-yukta-toranaié cha samanvitam 11 


(Kamikagama, L, 93, etc.) 
See ibid., LV, 59-63, 56-70, and compare : 


Toranam tri-vidharn  patra-toranam makaranvitam | 
Chitra-toranam ity-eshài mandanam chadhunochyate 11 
Deva-dvija-narendranam toranarh makarakhyakam | 
Toranarm chitra-sajfiarn tu vai$yanam pravidhiyate | 
Padma(patra)khya-toranarm $üdre sarvam sarvatra và matam 11 
(Ibid, LV, 64, 93-) 
218 


ul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i 

; 
t; 
i 


рер 


E 


gra 9094 VNVUOL 


514446- HUY 518949 = 0314 


H2 VINDNYIY 4 


38244 NNODNXIH HOY чулпох1!2 


Sluvda-Houw SLHV4? - Wald 2m -WONN 5184946» Said 


чоч 014У45-М094 HWY 424ҮҢ5 15325442 


а а b а. — l .و‎ 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


7142501 LON 


S3dAI УТМС 
pe SIR 


j 
Y 
ў 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE TORANA 


(5)... Тогапаћ vakshyate'dhuna | 
Prishthe tu pàr$vayo$ chaiva kartavyas toranas tatha 11 
Dvarasyotsedha-manam yat toransyochchhrayarn bhavet | 
Tad-ardhath vistarara proktam uchchhraye shad-vibhajite 11 
Makaram tu dv(i)yarhgena šesharn padam iti smritam 1 
Mila-padasya ckardhena tasya pada-pramanakam 11 
Makaràméam tad-ürdhve tu madhye vrittarh sa-nimnakam | 
Vritter ürdhve uham kritva ckatur-àyatam eva tu Il 
Pramanarh toranasyoktam prastaram cha tatah $rinu 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 68—72.) 
(6) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
XIV, 25, 23:  Stambhàn kanaka-chitráàms cha toraņāni 
vritanti cha 1 
XIV, 85, 29 : Toranàni $ata-kumbha-mayàni | 
XV,5,16: Puram. . . . dridha-prakara-toranam | 
XII, 44, 8 : Hema-torana-bhüshitam griham 1 
VIII, 33, 19 : Bahu-prakara-toranam | 
V, 191, 21: Sthüna-bhavanam. . . . uchcha-prakara-toranam 
See also У, 143, 23 ; ш, 284, 2 ; Ш, 160, 39 ; ш, 15, 5; 11 ; 9, I;I 3, 
26, I, 185, 17 ; 1, 109, 8, etc. 
(7) Ramayana (Cock) : 
II, 91, 32: Harmya-prasaáda-samyukta-toranàni | | 
I, 5, 10: Kapata-torana-vatim. . . . purim | 
П, 15, 92: Ràma-veáma. . . . mani-vidruma-toranam | 
III, 45, rr: Hema-kakshyà puri ramyà vaidurya-maya-torana | 
V, 3, 33°: Nagarim lankarh satta-prakara-toranam | 
V, 4, 24: Griham. . . . mahaà-hàtaka-toranam 1 
See also IV, 33, 17 ; V, 2, 18, 51 ; v. 6,4; У, 18, 8; v, 27, 91 5; У, 97, 
89; V, 41, 21; V, 42, 27; V, 39, 42; V, 44, 6; V, 42, 6 ; v, 46, 
20, 41; V, 47, 7, 38; У, 53, 39; V, 55» 32; УІ, 25, 24, 30; VL 
26, 12; УІ, 41; 31, 56 ; VI, 42, 15; УІ, 75, 213 VIL 9, 27; ХИ, Б, 
25: VU, 13; 5; VII; 14; 24; 27; 98; 29; УП, I5, 36; VII. 38. 17- 
(8) Matsya-Purana (Chap. CCLXIV, v. 15): 
Chaturbhis toranair yukto mandapa(h) syach chatur-mukhah 11 
The pavilion should have four faces and be furnished with four 
arched gateways (arches). 
Aishtaka dar(a)vas chaiva $ailà và syuh sa-torana 11 
(Ibid., Chap. ccrxix, v. 46.) 
(9) Vayu-Purana (Part I, Chap. xxxix, vv. 36, 51, бо): 
Harmya-prasada-kalilah prarnšu-prakara-toranah 11 
A$itya-amara-pury-àbha maker-prakara-toranah t 
Pandure charu-sikhare maha-prakara-torane 11 
219 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ë "id - 


= - š کک‎ 


| - 
JL an š 
T TORANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


| | | (то) Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxiv, p. 53) : 


Dvi-hastam torana-Sirah—‘ a top-support of ornamental arches 


|. | 
| projecting as far as two cubits.’ 


(11) Sarva-deva-maya-charu-toranarh svarga-khandam iva vedhasa 
svayam—‘ the beautiful porch which contains all the gods like a 


{| portion of heaven made by the Creator himself. ° 


I: > * In his account of the ruins of the temple, Mr. Dean speaks of а 
| doorway relieved by an architrave of most elaborate sculpture, 
f divilded into twelve compartnents, in each of which a group 
| from the Hindu Pantheon occupies a place.’ 
| (Harsha Stone Inscrip., v. 44, Ef. Ind., Vol. u, 
рр. 121, 126, 124, 128 ; cf. note 72.) 
(12) A sort of triumphal arch, supported by two pillars : 
| Atma-bàhu-yuga-sauhrid-amchita-stambha-saurabha-$ubharh su- 
| 3 ` toranarn—(Cintra Prašasti of the reign of Saranga-deva, v. 46, Ep., Ind., 
Vol. 1, pp. 284, 276.) 
(13) See Sridhara's- Devapattana prasasti (verse 10, Ер. Ind., Vol. u, 
р. 440), and compare : : 
Sughatita-vrisha-$ata-torana-dvàram—* an excellent porch at 
which a bull is skilfully carved. ’—(Jbid., v. 12, p. 121.) 
(14) Ornamental arch.(for the temple) : Prasada-toranam | 
(Jaina Inscrip. from Mathura, no. 1, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. u, p. 198.) 


(15) A semi-circular arch with sculpture. 
(Specimens of sculptures from Mathura, Plate 
ш, Ер. Ind., Vol. п, p. 320-321.) 


(16) Makara-torana—‘ arch with a shark.’ 
(Ranganatha Inscrip. of Sundarapandya, у. 9, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 12, 15.) 
(r7) Arch (Cochin plates of Bhaskara Ravivarman, line то, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. III, р. 68, 69). 
(ı8) Vyadhatta $ri-some$aspada-mukutavat toranam kamchanasya | 
‘Erected a golden torana like a diadem for the abode of the 


holy Some$a. ° 
/ (The Chahamanas of Naddula, no. c, 


Sundha Hill Inscrip. of Chachigadeva 
> v. 34, Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, pp. 77, 72.) 
(19) * In front of the basadi of nokkijabbe, the family goddess of her 
husband Vira-Santara, she had а makara-torana made. '—(Ep. Carnat., 
Vol. уш, Part I, Nagar Taluq, no. 47, Transl., p. 151, para. 2.) 
220 


.CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


t 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | TORANA 


(20) * We grant to you in addition throne, crown palanquin, white 
umbrella, сһатагаѕ on both sides, makara-torana (a kind of arched 
canopy), fan, day-light torch, yellow and red flags and such insignia, 
with cymbals, . . J—(IJbid., no. 67, Transl., p. 157, line 14 f.) 

(21) * Who  (Sri-Rajendra-Sola-Devar, А. р. 1034)—having sent 
(many ships in the midst of the bellowing sea) and having captured 
Sangirama-visaiyot-tungapannam, the king of Kidàram, along with his 
victorious fine elephants which had (well formed) frontal globes and 
resembled the impetuous sea—took the large heap of treasure which 
he had rightfully amassed, the Vichchadira-toranam at the war-gate 
of the enemy's extensive city, the wicket-door set with jewels of great 
splendour, and the door set with large jewels.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. тх, 
Channapatna Taluq, nos. 82, 83 ; Roman Text, p. 185, line 5 from the bottom 
upwards ; Transl., 149.) 

(22) * White chàmaras, the crown banner, makara-torana, herds of 
camels.’—(Jbid. no. 85; Transl., p. 150.) 

(23) ‘ Built a beautiful stone temple with the torana-gate and the surround- 
ings walls. Having provided the temple with а. flower-garden, kitchen, 
pond, suitable environs, musical instrument (two named) and ornaments 
(some named) . . .'—(£. Carnat., Vol. x, Kolar Taluq, no. 132; Roman 
text, p. 54 ; Transl., p. 49.) 

(24) Svarna-dvararh sthapitarh toranena sarddharn Srimal-Lokanathasya 

gehe | 

* Placed a golden door and torana in the temple of glorious Lokanátha." 

The inscription is * on the:lintel of the door of the temple of Avalokites- 
vara in Bungmati. The door is made of gilt brass plates, and adorned by 
relieves. The arch or torana above the door, which is likewise made of brass, 
encloses three images of Loke$vara.^ 

(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 21, Inscrip. of Srinivasa, 
line 6 £, Ind., Ant., Vol. тх, p. 192, note 62.) 

(25) Suganarn raje.. . . Dhanabhütina karitarh toranam silakarnmarnta 
cha uparnno (=Sunganam гајуе . . . Dhanabhütina karitam toranarm 
$lakarmanta$ chotpannah) | 

‘ During the reign of the Sungas (first or second century в. с.) this gate- 


way was erected, and the masonry finished by Vachhi-puta (Vatsi-putra) 
Dhanabhiti.’ 


(Sunga Inscrip. of the Bharhut Stupa, line 9 f., Ind. Ant., 

Vol. xiv, pp. 138, 139; no. І, Vol. xxr, p. 227.) 

(26) * Pulling down the temple which had fallen to ruin, had it securely 

rebuilt with a gopura, а makara-torana for the god Durgi$vara, and god 

Vrishabha.’—(Ep. Carnat, Vol. ш, Tirumakidlu-Narasipir Talug, no. 103: 
Transl., p. 88; Roman Text, p. 170.) \ 


221 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— سے ا 


TAULI | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(27) ‘ The sculptor Kalidasi, champion over the proud, a thunderbolt 
to the rock (vajra-giri), titled sculptor, made the makara-torana (or 
carved headpiece for the lintel).—(Zf. Сата, Vol. v, part I, Supplement, 
Belur Taluq, no. 239 ; Transl., p. 275 ; Roman Text, p. 592.) 

(28) ‘ Those Brahmans, pleased with Basi-Setti, gave to his wife and 
children a large palanquin and a canopy (torana) to descend to his 
children.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v1, Chikmagalür Taluq, no. 44; Transl., р. 39; 
Roman Text, p. 104.) 

(29) ‘The Vira-bhikshavati-udana-svami honoured the Svami of the 
Galipuje throne with the follwing : a palanquin with silver mountings, 
a pearl necklace, a golden umbrella, the double chamaras, а makara (torana) 
canopy ... for the feet, a Mukkanna drum, a Basava drum, а Nandi flag, 
etc. —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vi, Chikmagalür Taluq, по. 109 ; Transl., p. 51, para 
2; Roman Text, p. 124, line 8 f.) 

(30) * Toran(a)—A structure formed of one or more horizontal beams 
resting on columns: a gateway or other detached entrance.’—(Rea, 
Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxi, p. 40.) 

(31) See Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports (Vol. xxi, Plate xr, Torana 
of great temple, Nand-Chand). 

(32) ‘ Torana—(1) Gate-way ofa temple or Stüpa, (2) a peg used in 
marriage ceremonies.’—(Vincent Smith, Gloss. to Cunningham's Arch. Surv. 
Reports.) 

TAULI- “The top of a building, a roof, the ceiling. 
Mukhottarayate nyasya tiryak taulim prakalpayet 1 
Padarn vàyate taulim kuryad yuktya vichakshanah | 
Tad-ürdhve jayantikam kuryàt tat-tat-prachchhadananvitam | 
(M., хххіп, 372--374-) 
See PRACHCHHADANA and compare PRATAULI. 
TRI-KARNA—A kind of joinery, of three-earn pattern. 
(M., хуп, 106 ; see under SANDHI-KARMAN.) 
TRI-TALA—tThe second floor, the third storey. 

Тһе description of the third storey.—(M., xxr, 56-72; the eight classes, 
2-55 ; see under PRASADA.) 

TRI-PATTA—A three-fold band, a moulding. 

A moulding of the vase.—(M., xiv, 74, 143, 248, etc.; compare the lists of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) | 
TRI-BHANGA (see BHANGA)—A pose іп which the image is bent 

in three places. In this pose a figure has its head and hips displaced 


about one ama (part) to ane right or left of the centre line. 
(See details under BHANGA.) 


` 
TARANGA 


| TRIPATTA 


— Qd mm b 


i 
1 
| ТАТІКА. 


TRIKARMA i 

TRIBHAÑGA. 2 Ж 
Page 222 

СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA Ge 

d p z 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DANDA(-MANA) 


TRI-BHITT-(IKA)—A three-fold wall, a structure having such а 
wall. 
(M., xxxiv, 74.) 
TRI-BHUMI (see TRrTALA)— he third storey, а three-storeyed 
building. 
In connexion with an image : 
Evam tu Vishnu-mürtih syach chhakti-yuktam tu par$vayoh 1 
Tri-bhümirdakshine vame sthavare jangame’piva | 
(М., іл, 62-63.) 
TRI-MURTI—The triad, the images of Brahma, Vishnu and 
Siva. 
(M., LI, 2-95.) 
TRI-YUTA-—A site plan in which the whole area is divided into 


289 equal squares. 
(M., уп, 99; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 


TRI-VARGAKA~—A set of three architectural members or mould- 
ings. 
Pinopapitharn harmyarh cheva mandapam cha tri-vargakam-! 
(M.,' xxxiv, 68.) 
Nanda-pahkty-arnéa(-$e) vibhajet chatus-tale tu tri-vargakam | 
> (M., хххш, 505.) 
In connexion with the foundations : 
Mafijüshochchrayam chatur-bhàgarn tat-tad ekasanarn. bhavet 1 
Tad-dvayarn chànüghri-tungarn syad ekarnšarn prastaranvitam | 
Tri-varga-mandapakaram adbhih svantam pravishtake | 
(M., хп, 34-36.) 
TRI-VISHTAPA—A class of buildings, octangular in plan and called 
(1) Vajra, (2) Chakra, (3) Svastika, (4) Vajra-svastika, (5) Chitra, 
(6) Svastika-khadga, (7) Gada, (8) Srikantha, and (9) Vijaya. 
(т) Agni-Purdna—(Chap. сту, vv. 12, 20-21 ; see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purána—(Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 22, 23, 31-32 ; see under PRASADA.) 


TVASHTRI—An architect (see details under 5ТНАРАТІ). 
D 


DANDA(-MANA)—A measure, a type of building, a flag-staff, a 
pillar, a parapet (M., хут, 194-196). 
(1) A measure of four cubits (see under ANGULA) : 
Chatur-hastarhn dhanur dandam dandashtam rajjum eva cha | 
(M., п, 53-) 


223 


DANDAKA | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Compare hasta-danda ( M., u, 68), mana-danda (ibid., 76). 
A stick (.M., п, 223), a measure (M., IX, 10, etc.) ; in connexion with 
joinery ( M., хуп, 200). 
(2) A house with a northern and eastern hall (see DANDA-KANTA). 
(Brihat-Samhità, wm, 39.) 
(3) Chatur-hasto dhanur dando nàlika-jugam eva cha | 
(Вғаһтапаа-Риғапа, Part I, опа Anushanga- 
рада, Chap. vit, v. 100.) 
(4) А class of buildings.—(Kamikagama, XLV, 64 ; see under MALIKA.) 
(5) Achale$a-damdam uchchaih sauvarnnarñ Samara-bhüpalah Кагауа- 
masa | | 
* The protector of the earth, Samara, caused a golden flagstaff to be erect- 
ed here (in the temple at Abu) for the lord of the mountain. 
(Mount Abu Inscrip. of Samarasimha 
V. 54, Ind. Ant., Vol. xvi, pp. 350, 355. 
(6) Danda— an ie ted measure, also called Stambha.’—Bamani 
Inscrip. of the Silahara Vijayaditya, lines 20, 21, 23, Ef. Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 212, 


219.) 
š DANDAKAC-—A pillar, а village, a pavilion, a hall, a moulding. 
9 r - (т) А part of a column. 


(Suprabhedagama, ххх, 586, etc.; see under STAMBHA.) 
(2) Manasara : 
A class of villages (M., тх, 2, etc.; see under СвАма). 
A part (? shaft) of the column (M., xv, 44, 149; L, 85). 
А small pillar (M., хуш, 172). 
type of pavilion with two faces : 
Dvi-vaktram dandakam proktam tri-vaktrarh svastikarn tathà | 
(M., хххіу, 552; see further context under MANDAPA.) 
A class of halls or storeyed mansions built in a single гоу/--(/М., xxxv, 
3, description ibid, 65-66, 82-05, see under SALA.) 
DAN DA-KANTA—A class of halls, a type of storeyed mansions. 


Е (M., xxxv, 104; 5% DANDAKA.) 
DANDIKA-— The fifth moulding from the top of the entablature. 
(Kamikagama, LIV, 2; see under PRASTARA.) 
` DANDITA— Smaller buildings, pavilions near the door. 
G. Dyara-manam tathaivarh syat dandita-dvaram ardhatah i 
: ` (Ibid, xxxv, 45, etc.) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DASA-TALA 


DANTA-KILA—A kind of tooth-like joinery. 
(M., хуп, 177; see SANDHI-KARMAN.) 
DANTA-NALA—A tooth-like drain or canal. 
In connexion with the general description of the single-storeyed build- 
ings : 
Madhyame chottame harmye danta-nalarh pramanakam | 


(M., xix, 168.) 
DAM(A) (see DHAMAN)—A house. 
(R.-V., 1, 1, 8 ; 1, 1, 2 ; Vj. Sam. уш 24, etc.) 
DARI-GRIHA (see KANDARA-GRIHA)—The cave-house generally 
hewn out of rocks, underground rooms. 
See Kalidasa's Kumdrasambhava (1, 10, 14; quoted also by Professor Lüder) 
Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxiv, p. 199.) 
DARPANA-—A looking-glass, a mirror, an ornament. 
In connexion with the single-storeyed buildings : 
Palike lambanarh tatra $renyà darpana(m) proktavat 1—(M., xix, 42. 
In connexion with the car or chariot : 
Rathanam chordva-deSasya alankaram pravakshyate | 
Vividha-kinkini-nirmala-darpanam. . . . 1—(М, хшп, 148, 157.) 
An article of furniture (M., L, 46), its description (?bid., 111-131). 
DARBHA—A type of pavilion, used as stables for elephants. 
(M., XXXIV, 253; see under MANDAPA.) 
DALA—A petal, a leaf, a moulding of leaf-pattern. 
A moulding of the pedestal ( M., xm, 75, 82, etc.; see the lists of mould- 
ings under UPAPITHA). 
A moulding of the throne (M., xLv, 160, etc.). 
DASA-KANTA—A collective name of the ten classes of twelve- 
storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxx, 7.) 
DASA-TALA—The tenth storey, the ten-storeyed buildings. 
Etad da$a-talarn proktam rajju-sütram adhas-talam 1 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 85.) 


The description of the tenth storey) (M., ххуш, 20-40), six classes (ibids. 
2-18 ; see under PRASADA). 


225 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


&-- 
7%. 
a 
т 


ae oe амынан -— --‏ ر 


атои а [NE = 


“ж, *. te т” - — 


BYTE" ЫЫ, 
ЧАП, E к 


Ре; 


DASA-TALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


DASA-TALA—A sculptural measure (see under TALA-MANA). 
See Amsumadbheda of Ka$yapa (MS. Egg. 3148, 3012, fol. 266, the largest 
type of the daga-tala measure ; and fol. 274, the smallest type of the same.) 
DASA-BHUMI (see Daga-TALA)—The tenth storey, the ninth floor: 
DAGABA—A Singalese word applied to a stüpa, derived from Sanskrit 
‘ dhatu,’ a relic, element, and garbha, a womb, receptacle, or shrine. 
See further details under DHATUGARBHA, cf. Vinaya Texts, 4, 308. 
They were pre-Buddhistic in origin, see White Yajurvéda, Chap. xxxv. 
DIPA-DANDA—A lamp-post, a lamp-bearing pillar. 
Compare Dipa-stambha, and Dipa-skambha under 5ТАМВНА and see 
the plates referred to. 


ла: 


7۹ 


i 


ig 


А < = ч vs рад > ч 
A 
м z 
(Кез ТРИ 
eurn ire КЕ. — ыы eee тесі 


Тһе stationary lamp-post is generally built in front of the house 
(М., L. 64); the movable lamp-stand is square, octagonal or circular 
(tbid., 84) ; they are made of iron, wood, or stone (ibid., 71-89) ; their 
description in detail (2014., 57-83, 84, 96). 
DIPA-DANA—A lamp-pillar. In the south (of India) it is usually 
a high monolith, with an iron lamp-bracket on the top. In the north- 
west ofthe Presidency of Madras such pillars are sometimes constructed 
in courses, with lamp-brackets inthe joints. "These pillars are erected s 
outside the front entrance. > 
(Chalukyàn Architecture, p. 38, Arch. Surv., New 3 A 
: Imp. Series, Vol. xxı ; see Plate cix, fig. 1.) Ai 
DIPA-MALA(-SKAMBHA, DIPA-STAMBHA, ПІРТІ-5ТАМ. А 
BHA) (see 5тамвна)--А lamp-bearing pillar, generally belonging Ў 
to the Jain monuments. z 
А small lamp-pillar, standing inside the temple (Chalukyan Architec- 
ture, p. 38, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xx1; see Plate crx, fig. 1). 


DUNDUBHI—A type of round buildings. z 

(т) Agni-Purána (Chap. civ, vv. 17-18; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 23, 28, 29, see under PRAsADA). 
DURGA-—Zi. < difficult to go’ into, hence a fortified place, a fort, 
а fortified city. і 

(1) Мапазаға: 

As fortified cities, the forts are called $ibira, vahini-mukha, 
sthaniya, dronaka, sarnbidhha, kolaka, nigama апа skandh- 
ауага. 


ТІП 


(M., X, 40-42.) 
226. 


ELEVATION. 


DHARA KUMBHA. - 1 DIPA DANDA 


BAMBOO PEGS. 


DANTA KILA. 


emt 


DHVAJA STAMBHA 
DIPA 5ТАМВНА, 2 


TOOTH-SHAPED. 


DENTICULATED. E gt 
DANTA NALA. 


Page 226 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangrf University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA м” бе 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DURGA 


For purely military purposes, they are classified as giri-durga (hill- 
fort), vana-druga (forest-fort), salila-durga (water-fort), panka-durga 
(clay-fort), ratha-durga (chariot-fort), deva-durga (divine-fort), and 
misra-durga (mixed fort) (M., x, 90-91). Their description in detail 
is given (ibid., 90-103). | 

Their common features : 


` 


Sarveshām арі durganarh vaprai$ cha parikhair vritam | 
Prave$a-nirgama-sthane  dvàrair api samanvitam | 
Ishtakadi-kritam vapram hasta-dvadasakochchhrayam | 
Tad-ardham bhitti-mile tu sarncharaih saha vistritam | 
(M., x. 106—109.) 
(2) Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxiv, para 1, p. 51): 
Chatur-dis$ar jana-padante samparayikam daiva-kritarn durgarn 
karayat antar-dviparn sthalarh và nimnavaruddham audakam 
prastaram guham và parvatam nirudaka-stambam-irinamh và 
dhànvanam kha-janodakarn  stamba-gahanam va vana- 
durgam | 
Teshàm nadi-parvata-durgam jan-padaraksha-sthanam dhan- 
vana-vana-durgam atavi-sthanam арадуа prasaro уа! 
Then follows the very interesting description of the plan and 
other architectural details, the military defences, and interna 
arrangement for the comfort and convenience of the inhabitants. 
The contents of Chapters xxiv, xxv, and xxm, when taken to- 
gether, will give a good idea of the ancient fortified cities : 
They can be circular, square or rectangular. They are sur- 
rounded with moats (parikha), enclosure walls and ramparts 
(ргакага and уарга), and are furnished with various entrances, 
exits and gateways  (pratoli) Circumambulating flights of 
steps (pradakshina-sopàna) and secret staircases in the walls (gudha 
bhitti-sopana) are constructed. Towers are built on the enclo- 
sure walls and warlike weapons are placed therein. In the interior 
are constructed tanks, ponds, canals, etc: Various kinds of roads 
are constructed, and buildings for the people of different castes 
and professions are erected in a suitable manner. 
(3) Sukraniti (Chap. tv. sect. vi, vv. 2-16, 23-28, ed. Jivananda Vidya E 
. варага, p. 447 f.) 
* Fortresees are made inaccessible through ditches, thorns, 
rocks and deserts. Тһе Parikha fort is that which is surrounded оп 
all sides by great ditches (parikha); and the Parigha fortis known 


* 


to be that which is protected by walls of bricks, stones and mud. 2 ў 
227 i 
7- 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
Е СХ 


реж А See та РОНДА 


ІНІНІ 


DURGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The Vana or forest-fort is one which is encircled by huge thorns and 
clusters of trees. The Dhanva-durga is known to be that round about 
which there is no water. The 7ala-durga or water-fort is that which 
is surrounded by great sheets of water. The Giri-durga or hill-fort 
is described as that one which is on the high level and is supplied 
with plenty of water. The Sainya-durga or troop-fort is that one 
which is defended by heroes well up in vyuhas or military defence 
and hence impregnable. The Sahdya-durga or help-fort is known to 
be that which belongs to valorous and friendly kinsfolk. ° 
(4) Lankapuri niràlambà deva-durga-bhayavaha | 
Nàdeyam parvatarh vanyam kritrimam cha chatur-vidham 11 
Sailàgre rachita-durgà sà pür deva-puropama | 
(Ramayana, Lankakanda, Sarga 3, vv. 20, 22%) 
(5) Khetánàm cha puranàm cha gramanam chaiva sarvagah! ` 
Tri-vidhanam cha durganarh parvatodaka-dhanvinam 11 
(Brahmanda-Purdna, Part 1, опа Anushanga- 
pada, Chap. уп, v. 105 ; see also v. 102.) 
(6) Dhanur-durga-mahi-durgam ab-durgarh varksharh eva va | 
Nri-durgam giri-durgam và sama$éritya vaset puram 11 
(Мапи-батһИй, vu, 70, etc.) 
(7) Shad-vidharn durgam 4sthaya purany-atha niveéayet | 
Sarva-sarhpat-pradhanam yad Баһшуага chapi sambhavet 11 
Dhanva-durgami mahi-durgam giri-durgarh tathaiva cha | 
Manushya-durgam mrid-durgam vana-durgam cha tani shat Il 
Then follows the description of details of these fortified places. 
(Mahabharata, хп, 86, 4-5, etc.) 


(8) Yo yam samastam api mandalam à$u śatror achchhidya kirtti- 


giri-lurgam idam vyadhatta—‘ having quickly wrested from the enemy 
this whole district (mandala) made this fort of Kirtigiri.'—(Chandella 
Inscrip. no. B, Deogattha rock Inscrip. of Kirtivarman, v. 6, Ind. Ant., Vol. 


хуш, pp. 238, 239.) 


(9) Lakshmi-nrisirnha-paripalita-pürva-tishte durge su-bhima-parighe 
Malavalli-namni | š 
Vedantagaih  érutiparaih smriti-dharma-vidyaih рӧгпе sma 
karayati deva-nripas-saro'gryam || 
‘In the fort named Malavalli, protected оп the east by (the 
temple of) Lakshmi-Nrisirnha, having a deep moat, filed with 
men learned in the Vedanta (i.e., philosophy), Sruti (Vedas), 
Smriti and Dharma-$àstra that Deva-nripati made a maginificent 
ропа.” 


228 


y 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


== > D- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DEVA-DURGA 


Evidently this * durga or fortis nota military post or station ; 
its inmates are people learned not in the military science but in 
philosophy and religion. At the same time it is protected by 
‘deep moat.’ It is, therefore, just like the villages or towns 
described in the Médnasara. 

š (Ер. Carnat, Vol. ш, Malavalli Taluq 
no. 61; Roman Text, last verse; 
p. 126; Transl., p. 62.) 
(10) See the fort-temple. 
(Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. 
Series, Vol. ххі, Plate схіу, figs. 1, 2.) 
DURYA—Door-posts, belonging to doors, dwellings. 
(R.-V., 1, 9, 18; о, 12/5 уп, т, II LOLLO ДО, 
I9 ; ТаШ. Sam., 1, 6, 3, 1; Йй]. Sam.,-1, 11.) 
DURLABHA-GRAMA-—A village situated close to a large village 
(maha-grama) and inhabited by the free-holders (agraharopajivin). 


(М., x, 79-80; see under GRAMA.) 


DEVA-KANTA—A class of the cight-storeyed buildings. 


(M., xxvi, 46—47 ; see under PRASADA.) 


DEVA-KULA(-IKA)—A chapel, a shrine, a temple, a statue shrine, 
a statue gallery. 


(1) ‘Kandagenan (Skandasena) . . . caused (this) temple (deva-kula) 
to be made.’—(Vallam Inscip. of Mahendrapotaraja, по. 72, A. В; Н, S. I. L, 
Vol. п, p. 341.) 


(2) See inscriptions from Northern Gujarat (no. xxr, line 4, Ef. 
Ind., Vol. u, p. 31.) 


(3) See the inscription of the Samvat 168 in Sarada character at 
Peshwar Museum. 


(4) Compare statue gallery of Ikshvaku Kings described in the Pra- 
tima Nataka of Bhàsa, and Kushan Kings Vamatakeshma and Kanishka 
and the Saka Satrap Chastana excavated in a mound near Mathura and 
preserved in the Mathura Museum. 

DEVA-GARBHA—Foundations of temples (see under GARBHA- 
NYASA). 
DEVATA-MANDAPA—A class of pavilions. 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 96, 98 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
DEVA-DURGA (see Durca)—A god’s fort, a divine or natural 
fort. 
229 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
< 3 а чэ Жі, ausi сз Ж — а. ets = ee ص‎ n 


- 


LT 


-- 


MORES Ese 


—L o 


Р‏ پت 


"ntm 


DEVA-NIKETA-MANDALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


* Having sacked deva-durga, which formerly the Chola King (or the 
Chola named Narendra) had made certain could not be taken, he by his 
valour captured Uchchangi, together with all the empire of the Pandya 
King.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1 ; Belur Taluq, no. 119 ; Transl, p. 78; 
Roman Text, pp. 182-183.) 


DEVA-NIKETA-MANDALA—A group of temples. 


Achikarad deva-niketa-mandalam . . . stambha-varo-chchhraya-pra- 
bhase—‘ caused to be made a group of temples . . . which is 
beautiful with the erection of (this) best of columns. '—(Bihar Stone 
Pillar Inscrip. of Skandagupta, lines 5-6, C.II., Vol. ш, F. С. I. no. 12, 
РР. 49, 51.) 


DEVA-BHUSHANA-MANDAPA—A detached pavilion where the 
idols are dressed, a dressing room in a temple. 
(M., хххп, 71; see under MANDAPA.) 


DEVAYATANA (see AYATANA)—A temple. 


Kritvà prabhütam salilam araman vinive$ya cha | 
Devàyatanam kuryad yaso-dharmabhivriddhaye 11 
* Having made great waterreservoirs and laid out gardens, let one 
build a temple to heighten one's reputation and merit.’ 
(Brihat-Sarhità, LVI, 1 : J. В. A. S, N. S 
Vol. vr, p. 316.) 
Ramayana (Cock): | 
I. 5, 13: (Purim) . . . devàyatanai$ chaiva vimànair api- 
| $obhitàm | 
I. 77, 13: Devayatanani | 
II. 6, 4: Srimaty-ayatane vishnoh | 
II. 6, 11: Sitabhra-sikharabheshu devayataneshu | 
II. 3, 18: Devayatana-chaityesbu (also п, 71, 72). 
II. 25, 4: Deveshv-ayataneshu. cha 1 
VII. ror, 15: (Ubhe purottame) . . . $obhite $obhaniyai$ cha 
devayatana-vistaraih 1 ; 
Devayatana-chaityeshu I—(Aahabharata, п, 80, 30, etc.) ` 
Cf. Grama-nagara-kheda-karvvada-madamba-drona-mukha-pattanam 
galimdam aneka-máàta-kuta-prasada-devayatanamgalidarn-oppuva- 
agrahara-pattanamgalimdam ati$ayav-appa . . . | 
- [At Teridala, а merchant-town situated in the centre and the 
first in importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious Kundi. 
yree-Thousand, adorned with]— villages towns, hamlets, villages 
rounded by hills, groups of villages, sea-girt towns, and chief cities | 
€ э, eap 230 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DEVALAYA 


with elegant mansions, palaces and temples, and with shining agrahara 
towns in the country of Kuntala . . .’ 


(Old Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line 58 ; 
Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, pp. 19, 25.) 


DEVALAYAC-—A god's residence or dwelling, in the sense of temple 
itis of very common occurrence and needs no illustrative quotations. 
But the passages quoted below are the most descriptive of all the 


essential features of a Hindu temple and will fully explain the denota- 
tion of the term. 


The general plan : 


(1) * Sometimes a portico is made round the garbha-griha (shrine 
and antarala (corridor) together. The whole being closed on all 
sides but the front, in which are the doors for entrance, approached 
by the front portico, which is generally a peristyle, and it serves as 
the innermost court for pradakashina (circumambulation).? 

*'Temples on a large scale have three or four successive porti- 
coes (mandapa) attached to them in the front, which are called 
ardha-mandapa, ^ mahà-mandapa,  sthapana-mandapa, ; vritya 
mandapa, etc.’ 

‘A water spout is made over the base on the back wall of 
the garbha-griha on the left side of the idol. On the surface of 
the spout a cavity is made for discharging water. The spout 
may be made to spring from the head of a lion, etc. and the 
whole so devised as to project like a plantain flower.’ 

(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind., рр. 49, 50, 51.) 

(2) ‘ Krishnaraja-udayar, having created Chamaraja-nagara, 
created the Chàmaràje$vara temple (devalaya), together with its 
precincts (prakara), gopura (gateway) adorned with golden kalagas 
and tower (vimàna),—set up the great (maha) linga under the 
name of Chamaraješvara, and in the shrine (garbha-griha) to his left 
set up the goddess named Kempa-Nafijamaba, and in the shrine to 
his right the goddess Chamunde$vari,—and at the main entrance 
(mahadvara) on the east set up a gopura, on the colonnade 
(kaisaleyalli), to the south the ancient images (puratana-vigraha), 
on the colonnade to the west a row of lingas forming the thousand 
(sahasra) lihgas and on the colonnade to the north twenty-five 
pleasing statues (lilamirti, cf. dhyana-mürti)—and on the south- 
west side building a separate temple (mandapa), set up the god 
Narayana together with Lakshmi.'— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, Chamaraj- 
nagar Taluq, no. 86 ; Transl., p. rr, line 4 f. ; Roman Text, p. 18, line 8 f.) 


231 


А 
қ 


M 
: | 


" m —— a 
n RST — a neman) 


Ë | DEVALAYA АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОҒ | 
3 | 
(3 *InLakkugundi, which was his birth-place, Amritadanda- E 


dhiša built a temple (devalaya), made a large tank, established 
а satra, formed an agrahàra, and set up a water-shed. '—(Ep. 
Carnat., Vol. vi, Kadur Taluq, no. 36 ; Roman Text, p. 22, line 11 Ё; 
Transl., p. 8.) 

(4) Devalayaih prathayata nija-kirttim uchchaih—‘ who spread 
н his fame aloft by (building) temple. *—(Sharq; Arch. of Jaunpur, Shahet- 
i Mahet Inscrip., v. 14, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. хі, pp. 72, 73.) 
| The general plan : 
(5) ‘ The temple itself consists of the usual three parts: an 


AZ 


BT x; рь Der mg cA 


" open тардара on a base, . . . . with a double row of pillars on € 
the three exposed sides, and roofed by a large ribbed dome | 
standing on the twelve inner pillars; on each of the three outer I: 


sides it has a large projecting porch. Beyond this is the principal 
тардара . . . in the inner corner of this mandapa are two rooms. 
: . . . "Three doors with richly carved thresholds lead from the 
| ; hall into the shrine. —(Ahmedabad Arch., Burgess, Arch. Surv., New 


| + Imp. Series, Vol. XXXII, p. 29.) 
| (6) ‘It (the Malle$vara temple at Hulikat) faces north and consists 
ү of a garbha-griha, an open sukha-nàsi а nava-ranga and a porch.’ 
‘The Chennekegava temple, which faces east, consists of a é 


garbha-griha, а sukha-nàsi and а nava-ranga, and may have had а 
porch once." 
< The newly restored Saradà temple, situated to the north of 
the Vindya-$ankara, is a fine structure in the Dravidian style 
consisting of а garbha-griha, ѕикһа-паѕі, а nava-ranga, and a 
prakara or enclosure. It faces east and has three entrances 
on the north, south, and east, the east entrance, which is the 
main entrance, having two open mandapas at the sides inside." 
(Mysore Arch. Reports, 1915-16, p. 4, para. ro; 
р. 5, рага. 12; p. 15, para. 19; see Plate ш, 


ы š - figs. I, 2.) 
р . (7) * There is, however, no doubt that it (the Hindu temple at | 
Danui) was in the form of а cross with the usual ardha-mandapa, ; 


mandapa, maha-mandapa, antarala, and griha-garbha (garbha-griha).’ = 
(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. vu, 
р. 40: see also ibid., plate, хіх, showing in ç 
detail the mouldings of the Narayana-pura 
temple, ibid., Vol. xiv, Plate уп, Ionic temple 
of sun, ibid., Vol. xv, Plate уп, island temple, 
ibid., Vol. хш, Plates хі, хп, хш, xiv, Xv, 
xvi, groups of temples.) 


232 


ити ee دو و‎ a 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DRÁVIDA 


DESYA—A site plan of one hundred and forty-four squares. 
(M. уп, 13, 14; see PADA-VINYASA.) 
DEHARI(-LI)—A temple, the threshold of a door, a raised terrace. 


(See inscriptions from Northern Gujarat nos. xxu, line 3; xxxm, line 2 

XXIV, line 1; xxv, line 2; Ep. Ind., Vol. u, p. 32.) 
DEHI—A defensive wall, trench or rampart. 

(R.-V., VI, 47, 2 ; уп, 6, 5, Schroder Pre-historic : 

Antiquities, 344 ; Zimner, All. Lib., 143, 

as in the names Videha or even Delhi.) 

DEHA-LABDHANGULA (see under ANGULA)—A measure equal 

to one of the equal parts into which the whole height of the statue 

of a god (or of the master and sometimes of the sculptor too) is divided 

according to the tala measures. This is employed in measuring 

the sculptural objects like the image of a god or man. 
(Suprabhedagama, Xxx, 5, 6, 9 ; see under ANGULA.) 


DEHARA—A porch, a terrace. 


(т) ‘In a discourse on dharmma in an assembly held in the porch 
or terrace (dehara), the chaplain . . . set up a god in the name 
of their father. '—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Arsikere Taluq, по. 123; 
Transl., p. 167, para. 2, line 4.) 

(2) *From Vira-Hoysala he obtained (the appointment) of ins- 
pector of the servants of the porch or terrace (dehara).’— (Jbid., no. 127, 
Transl., p. 170, para. 2, line 16.) 

DAIVIKA-(LINGA)—A type of phallus, a phallus of divine origin. 
Devaiś cha sthapitam lingarb daivikam lingam uchyate | 
(M., іл, 230. See Kamikagama 
L, 35, 37, under LINGA.) 
DOLA—A swing, a hammock. i 

‘The great minister caused to be erected a dipti-stambha for the 
Krittika festival of lights and а swing (dola) for the swinging rade 
festival (dolarohotsavakke) of the god Chenna-KeSava of Belur. ’— 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, по. 14; Transl., p. 47; Roman Text, 
p. 107. See Мапаѕӣта, under BHUSHANA.) 

DRAVIDA—A style of achitecture, a type of building once prevailing 
in the ancient Dravida country (see details under Nacara), India 
south of the Krishna corresponding to Tamil India. 


(S. K. Aiyangar, 7. I. 8. О. A. of June, 1934, p. 23.) | 


233 


TTT a 


TOTT Sere зк 


1 L ee - E New, 
ын n nt epee —— E Tr 
$ м E 4 ү >; Уг 
M М, 


DRUPADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


A class of the twelve-storeyed builings : 
Ravi-bhümi-viéale tu chàshta-viméaméakam bhavet | 
Maha-$ala da$àm$am syat $esham pürvavad Acharet | 
Pàüchalam dràvidarm chaiva ravi-bhümy-alpha harmyake | 
(M., xxx, 8-10.) 


DRUPADA-—Ihe civic and sacrificial posts, symbolical of royal 
and divine power to which offenders and sacrificial victims were 


tied. 
(R.-V., 1, 24, 13 ; IV, 32, 29; vu, 86, 5; A.-V" 
63,3 ; 115, 2 ; xix, 47, 9 : Va@. Sam., хх, 20. 
DRONAKA (see under DuncA апа Nacara)—A fortified city 
situated on the bank of a sea, a sea-side town. 
Samudratatini-yuktam tatinya dakshinottare | 
Vanighih saha nanabhih janair yuktarh janaspadam E 
Nagarasya prati-tate grahakai$ cha samavritam | 
Kraya-vikraya-samyuktam dronantaram udahritam 1 
2 (M., x, 75-78.) 
A class of pavilion.—(M., xxxiv, 423 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
DRONA-MUKHA—A fort, a fortified town, a fortress. 
A fortress to defend a group of 400 villages : 
(т) Chatus-Sata-gramya drona-mukham | 
(Kau tiliya-Artha-Sastya, Chap. xxu, p. 46.) 
(2) Nagarani kara-varjitani nigama-vanijam sthanàni janapada 
Че$аһ pura-varani nagaraika-deSa-bhutani drona-mukhàni 
jala-sthalapathopetani | 
(Prasna-Vyakarana-siitra-vyakhyane, 
р. 306, ibid., p. 46, footnote.) 


(3) Gràma-nagara -kheda -karvvada - madamba-drona-mukha - pat- 
tana-galimdam ^ anecka-màta-küta-prasada-devayatanamgal-imdam- 
oppuva-agrahara-pattanargalimdamatisayav-appa. 


. [At Tridala, a merchant town situated in the centre and the first : 


in importance among the twelve (towns); in the glorious Kundi 


 "Three-Thousand adorned with] < villages, towns, hamlets, villages ` 
surrounded by hills, groups of villages, sea-girt towns and chief cities, 


with elegant mansions, palaces and temples, and with shining 
gr. hara towns in the EM of Kuntala. бт. Kanarese Inscrip. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DVARA 


(4) ‘ With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable 
occupations, streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure gardens, 
separated lovers, splendid tanks, full lotus-beds, gilded boats for 
spring festivals, ghatika-sthanas (religious centres), the supports of 
dharmma and mines of enjoyment, moats which were as if the sea 
being overcome had returned here on account of the collection of 
gems, groups of the lotus faces of beautiful women fair as the moon 
(gràma-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-drona- mukha-pura- patta- 
na-raja-dhani), on whatever side one looked, in these nine forms did 
the Kuntala-des: shine.’ 2 

(Itshould be noticed that the passage within brackets is almost 
identical with the corresponding passage in quotation no. % above). 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 

197 ; Transl., p. 124, para. 1, last seven 

lines; Roman Text, p. 214, line 27 f.) 

DVA-DASA-TALA—The  twelve-storeyed buildings, the twelfth 
storey. 

(1) See Manasára (Chap. xxx, 1-191, ten classes, ibid., 5-7, 8-36, see 
under PRASADA ; the general description of the twelfth storey, ibid., 37-88, 
89-191). 

(2) Tad-adhastat talarn chaikadasa-dva-dasa-bhimikam 1 

` (Kamkdgama, xxxv, 86.) > 
(3) Advà-da$a-talàd evam bhümau bhümau prakalpayat | en 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 33.) 


DVARAC-—A door, a gate, an entrance. Compare GURUDVARA. 


(1) Manasàára (Chap. XXXVIII, 2-54 ; XXXIX, 1-163) : 
The situation of gates in the village or town (called Nandyà- 
varta) : 

Gramasya parito bahye rakshartham vapra-samyutam | 
Tad-bahih parito yukatam paritoya-pravedakaih | 
Chatur-dikshu chatush-kone maha-dvararh prakalpayet 1 
Vrittam уа chatur-a$ram va vastu-sva(-a)-kriti-vaprayuk | 
Pürva-dvàram athai$ane chagni-dvaram tu dakshine | 
Pitur dvàram tu tat-pratyag vàyau dvaram tathottaram | 
Purva-paschima-tad-dvarau (-rayoh) riju-sutram tu yojayet | 
Dakshinottarayor dvarau tatra $esham (-deSe) vi$eshatah | 
Dakshinottaratah sūtra vinyasech chhilpavit-tamah | 
Tasya sütrat tu tat-pürve hastam tad-dvara-madhyame і 
Evam dakshinato dvararn tad-dhi taro(-rarh) шокан 
Uttare dvaram tat sutrat pratyag hastas - 


ip 
| 


DVARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОҒ 


Chatur-dikshu chatur-dvàram yuktarn và neshyate budhaih 1 
Pürve pa$chimake vàpi dvaram etad(-karn) dvayor api 1 
Parita$ chatur-agragrad dvàram kuryat tu sarvada | 
Etat sarvan maha-dvaram upa-dvàram ichochyate | 
The smaller doors: 
Маре vapi mrige vatha aditis-chodito’pi và | 
Parjanye vantarikshe và püshe và vitathe’thava 1 
| Gandharve bhringaraje và sugrive vasure’thava | 
Yathesht(am)evam upa-dvàram kuryat tal-lakshanoktavat 1 
The water-doors (drains) : 


Mukhyake vatha bhallate mrige va chodite’pi va | 
Jayante va mahendre và satyake và Бһгібе һауа 1 
Evam evam jala-dvaram kuryàt tatra vichakshana 1 


(M., 1x, 290-313.) 


: d The gates of villages : 
Í š Svastikagrarn chatur-dikshu dvàrarn tesharn prakalpayet | 
{ Evam chashta-maha-dvaram dikshu dikshu dvayam tatah | 
Mrige chaivantarikshe va bhringaràja-bhri$e tatha | 
Seshe vapi cha горе và chaditau chodite’pi và | 

Evam etad upa-dvaram kuryat tatra vichakshanah | 
Maha-dvararh tu sarvesham langalakara-sannibham | 
Kapata-dvaya-samyuktam dvàranàm tat prithak prithak | 


(Jbid., 355-361.) 
Chatur-dikshu chatur-dvaram upa-dvaram antaralake | 
Devanam chakravartinam madhye dvararn prakalpayet 1 
"Mahà-dvàram iti proktam upa-dvaram tu choktavat | 
Bhü-surádi-naranam cha madhye dvararh na (cha) yojayet | 
Madhya-sütram tu vame tu harmya-dvàram prakalpayet I 


"ыл о ыен EE. 


(M., xxxi, 77-81.) 
Referring to the two-storeyed buildings : 
Tat-pure madhyame dvàrarm gavaksham vatha kalpayet | = 
Dakshine madhyame dvararn syad agre madhya-mandapam ! 
Chatur-dvara-samayuktam pürve sopana-samyutam | 
(M., xx, 81-83.) 
Two entire chapters are devoted to the description of doors of the 
residential buildings and temples, in one of which (Chap. хххіх, 1-163), 
the measurement and the component parts and mouldings are given ; 
mainly the situation of the doors is described in the other (Chap. 
хххуш, 2-54). : 


——————————_—_—_— өчү VE 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DVARA 


It is stated (Chap. xxxix) that the height ofthe door should be 
twice its width (line 14). But various alternative measures are also 
given, (lines 17-18). Тһе height may vary from 12 cubits to 7 cubits 
(line 7). Тһе height of the smaller doors vary from 1 cubit to 3 cubits 
(lines 9-10). Тһе height of the windows which are sometimes made іп 
place of smaller doors vary from half a cubit to 2 cubits. This measure- 
ment is prescribed for doors in the Jati class of buildings (line 28). Such 
other measurements are given to doors of buildings of the Chhanda, 
Vikalpa, and Abhasa classes (line 29 f.). The pillars, joints, planks, 
shutters, panels, frames, and other parts of doors are described at great 
length (lines 50, 111-163). Doors are generally of two flaps ; but one- 
flapped door are also mentioned (line 08). 


Doors are profusely decorated with the carvings of leaves and 
creepers (line 116). The images of GaneSa, Sarasvati and other deities 
are also carved on both sides of a door (cf. the concluding portions of 
Chaps. xix, Xxx). 

The chapter closes with a lengthy description of the six or rather the 
four main parts of doors. The door-panel (kavata), . door-joint (dvara- 
sandhi), door-plank (phalaka), bolt (kilabhajana), etc. are minutely 
described (line 137 f.). 


It is stated (Chap. хххуш) that four main doors should be constructed 
on the four sides of all kinds of buildings of gods and men (lines 2-4) 
. and the smaller doors are stated to be constructed at convenient places 
(line 4). Many other still smaller doors are constructed at the intervening 
spaces (lines 19, etc). Тһе gutters are made conveniently and sloped 
downwards (lines 5-7). Drains or jala-dvara (water-gate) are made 
beneath the halls (line 8). The main doors are always furnished with a 
flight of stairs (line 12). 

In some residential buildings the entrance door is made, not in the 
middle of the frontage, but on either side of the middle (line 17), 
although the general rule is to make the door in the middle of the 
(front wall, lines 6, etc.). But in temples and in case of kitchens in 
particular, the doors are generally made at the middle ofthe wall (line 
35, see also Chap. xxxix, 140). For the easy upward passage (ürdhva- 
gamana) of the kitchen smoke, they are furnished with the lattice (jala, 
line 37). 

(2) Varaha-mihira (Brihat-Samhita, тіп, 26-27, 70-82; LVI, 10) has 
condensed the contents of the two chapters, dealing with the measure- 
ment of door (dvàra-màna) and situation of the door (dvara-sthana) 
of the Manasára. But he does not give any absolute measurement. As 


237 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collectio 1. Digiti: 


ac x” > aal Eee, E 


ҰМЫС ЖАТ У; 


i 
d 
` 
^ 
: 


DVARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


regards the situation of door, the principle seems to be two-fold in all the 
architectural treatises. ‘The door is made on either said of the middle 
of the wall, mostly in private residential buildings for ladies in parti- 
cular.” But according to Ram Raz (p. 46) ‘if the front of the house 
be ten paces in length, the entrance should be between five on the right 
and four on the left.’ 

After this, Dr. Kern quotes Utpala to show the different prin- 

ciples : 

Tathà cha karyani yathà bhananam grihabhyantaram anganarh 
visatarh tany-eva vàsa-grihani dakskinato dakshinasyam di§i bha- 
vanti | Etad uktam bhavati pran-mukhasya grihasyangana-(sya- 
gara)-dvaram  uttararabhimukham karyarh dakshinabhimukhasya 
pran mukham paschimabhimukhasya dakshinabhimukham uttarabhi- 
mukhasya paschimabhimukham iti 1 

* How a house can be said to face the east, without having its 
door facing the same quarter, is beyond our comprehension Kern. 
Compare no. 4 below. 

(J.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. vi, p. 201, note 1.) 

Varaha-mihira himself, however, states (Brihat-Samhità, LVI, ro) 
the most general principle of the position of the door, which Dr. 
Kern does not seem to have taken any notice of (compare his trans- 
lation of the following verse, 7. R. А. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 318) : 

Chatuh-shashti-padam  kàryam devayatanam sada | 

Dvaram cha madhyamar tatra samadikstham praáasyate 11 
‘ The (area of the) temple is always divided into 64 squares (see 

PADA-VINYASA). Therein (i.e. in the temple) the door is made at the 

middle (of the front wall) and it is highly commendable, when the 

door is placed at the same line (lit. same direction) with the idol.’ 

Dr. Kern interprets the second line as ‘ the middle door in one of 
the four cardinal points.) The rules in the /Мйпазйта as also the 
existing temples support the' interpretation, namely, “the door is 
made at the middle °’ (of the front wall). 

(3) Vastu-sara (by one Mandana, Ahmedabad, 1878) lays down (1, 6) 
that the house may have the front side (with entrance) at any direction 
according to the choice of the occupants, and states distinctly that the 
face of the house may be made at four directions (kuryach chatur-disarn 
mukham). 

(4) Garga-Samhita (MS. R. 15, 96, Trinity College, Cambridge) has 
apparently three chapters on the subject of door: dimensions of door 
(dvara-pramana, fol. 575, 680, same as dvara-màna of the Manasara) ; 


238 


| СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DVARA 


situation of door (dvara-nirdeSa, Chap. ur, fol. 57a, corresponds more or 
less with dvara-sthana or position of door, of the Manasaára) ; and height 
of the door-pillar (dvara-stambhochchhraya-vidhi, fol. 605) ; there is no 
such separate chapter in the Mdnasdra, although door pillars аге occa- 
sionally described. 

As regards dvàra-dosha (penalties of defective doors), Varahamihira 
seems to have condensed (Brihat-Samhita, іп, 72-80) the. contents of 
Garga (fol. 680). 

(5) Vastu-Sastra (of Rajavallabha Mandana, v. 98, ed. Narayana 
Bharati and Yasovanta Bharati, Anahillapura, S. V. 947) : 

Dvàrarn matsya-matànusári da$akam уоруата vidheyam bu- 
dhaih—‘ following the rules of the Matsya- Purana the learned (archi- 
tects) recommend ten suitable doors (for a building)’. 

(6) Vastu-pravandha (п, 8, compiled by Rajakisora Varmma) : 
Dvarasyopari ya(d)-dvararn dvarasyanya (?) cha sammukham | 
Vyayadam tu yada tach cha na karttavyarn Subhepsubhih t! 

*'Those, who want prosperity, should not make one door above 
or in front of another because it is expensive.’ 

(7) Silpa-fastra-sara-samgraha, уп, 24 : 

Chatur-dvàrarn chatur-dikshu chaturam (?) cha gavakshakam | 

Nripánàm bhavane $reshtham anyatra parivarjayet 11 
‘It is highly commendable for the buildings of the kings to make 

four doors at four directions and four windows. This rule need not 
be observed in other cases. ' 

(8) Bhavishya-Puràna (Chap. оххх, v. 17) has the same verse as (2) 
except that it reads © samadik sarhpraSasyate’ in place of ‘ samadikstham 
pragasyate ° of the Brihat-Samhita. 

(9) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ccLv, vv. 7-9): 

Vasa-geharh sarveshàm praviSed dakshinena tu | 
Dvàràni tu pravakshyàmi pra$astaniha yani tu 1 
Pürvenendrarn jayantarh cha dvàrarn sarvatra Sasyate | 
Yàmyar cha vitatharn chaiva dakshinena vidur budhah 11 
Раќсһіте pushpadantam cha уагипата cha pra$asyate 1 
Uttarena tu bhallatarn saumyarn tu śubhadarn bhavet I1 

For all kinds of residential buildings the southern face of the house is 
expressly recommended here, while doors are directed to be constructed 
at all the eight cardinal points. 

Cf. Da$a-dvàràni chaitàni kramenoktani sarvada | 

(Ibid., Chap. сс хх, v. 28.) 


239 


x 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University На! 


ae ES Tie CE‏ کے 


ridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Found: 
`= ¿Ze Шаға м 


msc ERES QE w - x< VUWYNTHE mcn 


DVARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(то) Agni-Puràna (Chap. civ, v. 24) : 
Dikshu dvarani karyani na vidikshu kadachana | 
“Тһе doors should be seien at the cardinal points and never 
at the intermediate corners ' 
Qus) Garuda- Purana (Chap. XLVI, v. 31) : 
Dvàram dirgharddha-vistararn dvarany-ashtausmritani cha | : 
‘The breadth of the door should be half of its height (length) E 
and there should be eight doors (in each house). 
5 (12) Vastu-vidyà (ed. Ganapati Sastri, rv, 1-2, 19-22; v. 21; xm, 
қ 24-39; XIV, 1-8): 
Atha dve pranmukhe dvàre kuryad dve dakskinamukhe | 
Dvare pratyanmukhe dve cha dve cha kuryad udanmukhe 11 (1) 
Mahendre prànümukham dvàram prašastarn Sishta-jatishu | 
Aparam tu tatha dvàram jayante praha niéchayat 11 (2) 
Antar-dvarani choktàni bahir-dvararn athochyate 11 (19) 
Yatronnatam tato dvaram yatra nimnam tato griham | 
Gribe chapy-ashtame rāśau tatra dvararn na karayet | (20) 
Grihakshate cha mahendre braàhmanànam prakirtitam | : 


Mahidhare cha some cha pha(bha)llatargalayos tatha 11 (21) ҰШ 
Sayaniyam tu kartavyarn pragastarh pirvatah $ikhà | | 
Nava-dvarakritam kuryàd antarikshe mahanasam 11 (22) E 


Dvaram yatra cha vihitam tad-dig-adhisadhiparn bhaved dhàma 1 z | 
Eka-talam уа dvi-talam dvi-tale dvi-mukham cha nirmukham E | 
và syat 11 (21) 

Position of the door : 
Dvàram cha dikshu kartavyarn sarveshàm арі ve$manàm | 
Madhyastha-dvara-madhyam syàd vàastu-mandira-sütrayoh 11 (24) 
Upadvarani yujyantani pradakshinyat sva-yonitah | 
Dvara-padasya vistaram tulyam uttara-taratah 11 (25) 

ae ; Sva-sva-yonyà grihadinarn Кагїаууа dvara-yonayah | (26) 
Agneyyam mandiram dvàram dakshinabhimukharn smritam | 
Pratyaümukharn tu nairrityam vayavyàr tad udanmukham 11 (31) 
15е tat pranmukham kuryàt tani syuh padukopari | (32) 

'Then follows the measurement of the mouldings of the door (26-30). 

Тһе door-panels are described next: 
Kavata-dvitayam kuryàn maátri-putry-abhidham budhah | 

ES 24 Dvara-tare chatush-paficha-shat-saptashta vibhajite 1! (1) 

ЕЕ. Ekaméa(m) sütra-pattih syat samarn và bahalam bhavet | 
Ardham và pada-hinam và bahalam parikirtitam 11 (2) 

Dyarayama-samayama karya yugmas cha panktayah | 
A$vyàdi-veáma-paryantah panktayah parikirtitah 11 (3) 
2 240 


- 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE DVARA 


(13) Matha-pratisthà, by Raghunandana quotes from the Devi-Purana 
without further reference : 
Plaksharh dvàram bhavet pürve yamye chaudumbarar bhavet + 
Раќсһаа a$vattha-ghatitarn naiyagrodham tathottare | 
(14) Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxiv, pp. 52, 53, 54): 
Agrahye dese pradhàvitikam niskhura-dvararn cha | 
Praákaram ubhayato mandalaka-madhyardha-dandam  kritva 
pratoli-shat-tulantaram dvàram niveSayet | 
Paficha-hasta-mani-dvaram | 
Prakara-madhye kritvà vàpim pushkarinim dvararh chatu$-$à- 
lam adhyardhantaranikam kumari-purarh munda-harmyam dvi- 
talarn mundaka-dvaram bhümi-dravya-va$ena уа tri-bhagadhi- 
kayamah bhanda-vahini-kulyah karayet | 
Sa-dvàda$a-dvàro yuktodaka-bhümich-chhanna-pathah | 
Sainapatyàni. dvarani bahih parikhayah | 
(Ibid., Chap. xxv, p. 54 f.) 
Kishku-matra-mani-dvaram  antarikayam khanda-phullartham 
asampatam Кагауе | 
Pratiloma-dvara-vatayana-badhayam cha  anyatra raja-marga- 
rathyabhyah 1 
(Ibid., Chap. Lxv, pp. 166, 167.) 
(15) Ramayana (Lankakanda, Sarga 3, 1, 11, 13, 16): 
Dridha-vaddha-kapatani maha-parigha-vanti cha | 
Chatvari vipulàny-asyà dvarani sumahanti cha 11 (11) 
Dvareshu samskrita bhimah kalaya-samayah sitah 1 
бағабо rachita viraih $ataghnyo rakshasa ganaih 11 (13) 
Dvàreshu tàsam chatvarah sakramah paramayatah 11 
Yantrair upeta bahubhir mahadbhir griha-panktibhih 11 (16) 
(16) Катікавата (xxxv, 6-13) : 
Bhallate pushpadante cha mahendre cha graha(griha)kshate 1 
Chatur-dvaram prakartavyarn sarveshàm api vastünam 11 (6) 
Then are given the details concerning the position of doors in various 
quarters (7-9). Next follows their measurement (10-12). 
` Gf. Devanarh manujanàm cha viseshad raja-dhamani | 
Pushpadante cha bhallate mahendre cha graha(griha)kshate 11 
Upa-madhye’thava dvaram upa-dvararh tu уа nayet і 
(Jbid., v. 118, 118a.) 
Pratyahmukham tu $ayanam doshadam dakshinamukham | 
Dvàre pàádetu neshta(m) syat nodak-pratyak chh(§)iro bhavet 11 
Bhojanam nànuvaméam syach chhayanam cha tathaiva cha | 
Anuvarhfa-griha-dvaram naiva karyam Subharthibhih 11 
(Ibid, v. 146, 157.) 


241 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


` i 


ге 


о теу 
Г” 


DVARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Bhallate dvaram ishtarh ѕуаа brahmananarh vigeshatah 11 
Madhya-sütrasya vàme va dvàram vidhivad àcharet 11 
(Ibid., v. 165, 168.) 
Jala-dvàram punas teshàm pravakshyami niveé$anàm | 
(Ibid., v. 167-176.) 
Devanàm ubhayam grahyam madhya-dvaram tu vai tale 11 
Gopuram cha khalüri cha müla-vàstu-nirikshitam 11 
Antare raja-devinàm grihany-antar-mukhani cha 11 
(Ibid., XXXV, 54, 128.) 
Dandika-vara-samyuktam shan-netra-sama-vaméakam | 
VarnSopari gatah 52185 chattaro'shtànananvitah 11 
(Ibid., хип, 19.) 

(17) Suprabhedagama (XXXI, 7, 131-133) : 

Bahya-bhittau chatur-dvaram athavà dvàram ekatah 11 (7) 

Referring to the temples of the attendant deities built in the five 

courts (ргакага) : 

Prakara-samyutam  kritvà bahye vabhyantare’pi уа! 

Pürve tu paschime dvàaram pa$chime pürvato mukham 11 (131) 

Dakshine chottara-dvaram uttare dakshinonmukham | 

Vahniéana-sthitam yat tat pagchime dvaram ishyate 11 (132) 

Nilanila-sthitarh chaiva purva-dvararh praSasyate | 

Vrishasya mandapam tatra chatur-dvara-samayutam 11 (133) 

(18) Mahabharata (v. 91, 3 ; 1, 185, 110-122): 

Tasya (duryodhana-grihasya) kakshya vyatikramya tisro dvah- 
sthair avaritah 11 

Prasadaih sukritochhrayaih 11 

Suvarnajàla-samvritair mani-kuttima-bhüshanaih 11 

Sukhàrohana-sopanair mahasana-parichchhadaih 1! 

Asambadha-Sata-dvaraih $ayanasana-$obhitaih 11 

(19) See Ep. Ind. (Vol. т, Dabhoi Inscrip, v. 111, p. 31). 

(20) Vijaya-vikshepat bharukachchha-pradvaravasakatat—‘ from the 
camp of victory fixed before the gates of Bharukachchha.'—(Umeta grant 
of Dadda п, line r, Ind. Ant., Vol. vu, pp. 63, 64.) 

(21) Svarna-dvarar sthapitam toranena sarddham $rimal-lokanathasya 
gehe—- placed a golden door and a torana in the temple of glorious 
Lokanatha.’ 

* The inscription is on the lintel of the door of the temple of Avaloki- 
te$vara in Bungmati. The door is made of gilt brass plates, and adorned 
by relieves. The arch or torana above the door, which is likewise made of 
brass, encloses three images of LokeSvara.’—(Inscriptions from Nepal, 
по. 21, Inscrip. of Srinivasa, line 6 f., Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, p. 192, note 62.) 


242 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 
| 


— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DVARA-SOBHÁ 


(22) Atirtha-dvara-paksha-Sobharttharn madisidam— had the side- 
doors of that tirtha made for beauty. — (Ep. Carnat., Vol. u, no. 115; 
Roman Text, p. 87; Transl., p. 171.) 

(23) See Chalukyan Architecture.—(Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 
xx, Plates v, flgs. 1, 2; LIV; LXXIV ; XCV ; CXII, figs. I, 2.) | 

(24) See Buddhist Cave Temples.—(Jbid., Vol. rv, Plates xxiv ; xxiv, 
no. I ; XXXII, DOS. I, 2 ; XXXV ; XLII, no. 2.) 

(25) See Cunningham's Arch. Surv. Reports.—(Wol. хіх, Plates xix.) 

DVARAKA—A gate-house. | 
Prasade mandape sarve gopure dvarake tatha | 
Sarva-harmyake kuryat tan-mukka-bhadram 1—(M., хуш, 326-328.) 
DVARA-GOPURA (same as ManA-copura)—The gate-house of 
the fifth or last court. 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 125 ; 
DVARA-KOSHTHA(-KA)—A gate-chamber. 

The index of the Divyavadàna quoted by way of comparison with 
Svakiyavasanika-dvaroshtha, dvaroshtha-nishkasapravesaka, and nish- 
kasa-praveSa-dvaroshthaka. 


see under PRAKARA.) 


(Siyodoni Inscrip., lines 14, 32, 33, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 165, 175, 177.) 
DVARA-PRASADA—The gate-house of the third court. 


See Manasára (ххх, 9, under СОРОКА). 
See also Suprabheddgama (XXXI, 124, under PRAKARA). 


DVARA-SAKHA (se SAxHA)—The door-lintel, the door-frame, 
jamb or post. 

* He, the emperor of the South, caused to be made of stone for 
Vijaya-narayana (temple), latticed window, secure door-frame, door- 
lintel (doara-sakhali), kitchen, ramparts, pavilion and a pond named 
Vasudeva-tirtha.’ 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1, Belure Taluq, no. 72; 
Transl.j p. бї; Roman Text, p. 142, line 7.) 


DVARA-SALA (see Gopura)—A gate-house. 
The gate-house of the second court. 
(M., xxxii, 8, and Suprabhedagama, 
: XXXI, I24 ; see under PRAKARA.) | 
DVARA- SOBHA (see GoPURA)—A gate-house. Р Ж 


The gate-house of the first court. = 
(M., ххх, 8, and. Suprabheddgama, 
XXXI, 123 ; see under PRAKARA.) EUR 


RS 
um 


DVARA-HARMYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


DVARA-HARMYA (see Gopura)—A gate-house. 


The gate-house of the fourth court. 
(M., ххх, 9, and Suprabhedagama, 
XXXI, I25 ; 5646 under PRAKARA.) 


DVI-TALA—The two-storeyed buildings. 


Мапазаға describes the two-storeyed buildings in a separate chapter 
(xx, 1-115); the eight classes (7074., 2-45; see under РвАзАрА); the 
general description of the second floor (ibid., 46-115). 

Cf. Purato'sya shodašanarn vararhgakanarh dvi-bhumika-grihàni àli- 
dvayena ramyàny-achikaraj jaya-sainye$ah—' in front of the temple 
he (Jaya) erected two rows of double-storeyed house for sixteen female 
attendants.’—(Chebrolu Inscrip. of Jaya, v. 46, Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 40, 39.) 


DVI-TALA—A sculptural measure (see details under TALA-MANA.) 


DVI-PAKSHA (cf. Exa-paxsHa)—Two sides, a street (ог wall) 
having footpaths on both sides. 
Dakshinottara-rathyam tat tat sarnkhya yatheshtaka | 
Evam vithir dvi-paksham(-sha) syan madhya-rathyena(-ka)-paksha- 
kam | 
Tasya mülagrayo(r) desa kshatra( ? kskudro)-manarn prakarayet | 
Bahya-vithir dvi-paksham (-ѕһа) syat tad-bahi$ chavritarh budhaih | 
| (M., тх, 350-353.) 
Rathyà  sarvà  dvi-paksham(-sha)  syàt tiryan-margarh yathech- 
chhaya 1 
(Ibid., 465. See also M., 1x, 396 ; xxxvi, 
86-87 ; under EKA-PAKSHA.) 


DVI-VAJRAKA—A column with sixteen rectangular sides. 


Cf. Vajro’ shtasrir dvi-vajrako dvi-gunah | 
(Brihat-Samhita, тли, 28 ; see under STAMBHA.) 


DVYASRA-VRITTA—A two-angled circle, an oval building. 


(M., XIX, 171 ; XI, 3, etc. ; see under PRASADA.) 


DH 


DHANADA (see UrsEDHA)—A type of pavilion, a kind of height, | 


ап image. 
A height which is 1% of the breadth of an object— (See M., xxxv, 
22—26 and çf. Kamikagama, L, 24-28, under ADBHUTA). 
The image of the god of wealth—(M., xxxi, 140). 
A class of pavilions—(M., xxxru, 398 ; see under MANDAPA). 


244. 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE DHARMALAYA 


DHANUR-GRAHA-—A measure, a cubit (hasta) of 27 angulas. 
(M., п, 52, and Suprabhedagama, 
XXX, 26; see under ANGULA.) 

DHANUR- MUSHTI—A measure, a cubit (hasta) of 26 angulas. 


(М., п, 51, and Suprabhedagama, 
ххх, 26 ; see under ANGULA.) 


DHANUS—A measure of four cubits. 


(M., п, 52; see under ANGULA.) 
DHANVA-DURGA-—A fort (see details under DuRGA). 


DHAM MILLA—tThe braided and ornamented hair of a woman tied 
round the head and intermixed with flowers, pearls, etc. 
A headgear (M., XLIX, 14, etc.). 


DHARMA-GANJA—A library in the University of Nalanda, com- 
prising three buildings known as Ratnodadhi, Ratnasagara, and Ratna- 
ranjaka. 

(Tibetan account of the Univeristy of Nalanda.) 
DHARMA-DHATU-MANDALA—The relic ‘shrine of Nepalese 
temples, situated at the fourth storey of five-storeyed pagoda-like 
structures, the basal floor being occupied by Sakya-muni, second by 
Amitabha, the third being a small chaitya, and the fifth or apex 
being called vajra-dhatu-mandala. 

(See Deva Bhavani temple, Bhatgaon, Fergusson : 


History of Ind. and East. Arch., 1910, 
Vol. 1, p. 281.) 


DHARMA-RAJIKA—A monument, a tope. 
Tau darmma-ràjikam sangarn dharmma-chakram punar navam і 
‘They repaired the dharma-rajika (i.e. stüpa) and the dharma- 
chakra with all its parts.’—(Sarnath Inscrip. of Mahipala, line 2, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xiv, p. 140, note 6.) t 


DHARMA-SALA—A rest-house. 


(Vincent Smith, Gloss., loc. cit., to ` 


Cunningham's Arch. Surv. Reports.) 
DHARMA-STAMBHAC-—A kind of pillar. 


(М., XLVI, 14; see.under STAMBHA.). 


DHARMALAYA—A rest-house. 
Tatraiva sa(t)tra-$ala va agneye paniya-mandapam | 
Anya-dharmalayam) sarvarh yatheshtarn di$ato bhavet 1 
(AL, тх, 139-1, 


| 
| 
! 
DHATU AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 
DHATU (cf. TRIDHĀTUSARANA)—Storey. (R.-V., 1v, 200.) Т 
DHATU-GARBHA-—Buddhist dagoba, same as chaitya and as ! 


only to the dome of the stüpa, sometimes called the anda or egg.’ 
These monuments were ‘ not merely relics in the literal sense, but 
memorials in an extended acceptation, and were classified as corporeal | 
remains ; objects belonging to the teacher, as his staff, bowl, robe 
holy spots, etc., and any memorial, text of a sacred book, cenotaph 
of a teacher, etc.’ «> 


DHANYA-STAMBHA—A kind of pillar. 


(М., хуп, 14; see under STAMBHA.) 


stupa, the relic receptacle or inner shrine, and is ‘ strictly applicable | 
| 
| 


DHAMANC-—A dwelling house. | 
(RET. TD 144; 1; п,8, 2; ш, 55; IO 5 уш; | 
бї 42: х, 19, 1 AJ. ту; 25; 7 ЭМ | 
68, 1 ; хп, 52 ; Va) Sam., ту, 34; Тай. | 
Sam., п, 7, 2.) | 
DHARANA—A type of building, a pillar, a roof, a tree. 
A class of the seven-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxv, 26 ; see under PRASADA.) 
А synonym of pillar (M., xv, 6) and of roof (M., xvr, 52). 
A kind of tree of which pillars are constructed (M., xv, 348-350). 
DHARA-KUMBHA—A moulding of the base. 


(M., xiv, 46 ; see the lists of mouldings, 
under ADHISHTHANA.) 


DHARA-NILA—A blue stream of water, the line of sacred water 
descending from the phallus. 
In connexion with the phallus: 
Garbha-geha-sthale dhàra-nila-madhye samar bhavet | í 
(M., Lu, 173.) е 
DHARA-LINGA—A kind of phallus with fluting at the top portion. 
( M., Lu, 135 ; Lim, 48; see details under LINGA.) 
DHVAJA-STAMBHA (see SrAMBHA)—-Flagstaffs, free-pillars erect- 
ed generally by the worshippers of Siva, a pillar or pilaster decorated 
with banner or flag (dhvaja) at the top. 


N 
NAKULA—The cage of the mungoose (M., L, 245; see under 
$ BHŪSHAŅA). 
] 246 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA(-RT) 


NAKHA—The nail, its measurement, сіс., when belonging to an 
image. 


(M., LIX, LXV, еіс, 21.) 
NAKSHATRA-MALA—The garland of stars, an ornament. 
(M., L, 297; see under BHÜSHANA.) 


NAGARA(-RI) (cf. GRAMA)—Probably from Naga, lit. immovable 
or rock, implying permanence and strength with reference to stone- 
walls, etc. The purs were mere fort while pura as in Tripura апа 
Mahapura was something much bigger (Тай. Sam., VI, 2, 3, 4; 
Kath. Sam., xxiv, 10 ; Sat. Bra. VI, 3, 3, 35 ; Ait. Bra., п, її; Май. 
Sam., 11, 8, т). Thus pur might have been the prototype of pura, the 
developed city, and nagara the full-fledged capital city. 
(1) Definition : 
Janaih parivritam dravya-kraya-vikrayakadibhih 1 
Aneka-jati-samyuktam karmakaraih samanvitam 11 
Sarva-devataà-samyuktam nagaram chabhidhiyate 11 
(Kamikagama, XX, 5-6.) 
(ә) Dhanu-Satarn parihàro gramasya syat samantatah | 
Samyapatas trayo vapi tri-guno nagarasya tu 11 
(Manu-Samhitd, уш, 237.) 
(3) Dhanuh-Satarh pariharo grama-kshetrantararh bhavet | 
Dve gate kharvatasya syan nagarasya chatuh $atam 11 
(Yajiavalka, п, 167.) 
(4) Nagaradi-vasturh cha vakshye rajyadi-vriddhaye | 
Yojanarh yojanarddham và tad-artham sthanam aé$rayet 11 
Abhyarchya vàstu-nagaram prakaradyam tu karayet | 
lsadi-triméat-padake pürva-dvàram cha süryake 11 
Gandharvabhyam dakshine syad varunye paschime tatha | 
Saumya-dvararh saumya-pade karya hatyàs tu vistaràh Il 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. суі, v. 1-3.) 
Then follows the location of the people of different castes and 
professions in various quarters (ibid., v. 6-17). 
(5) Chhinna-karna-vikarnam cha vyajanakriti-sarhsthitam 11 
Vrittarn vajram cha dirgham cha nagaram па pra$asyate 11 
(Brahmanda-Purana, Part I опа Anushnaga-pada, 
Chap. vir, vv. 107, 108 ; see also vv. 94, 110, III.) 


247 


1 
CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


LA 3 нымы ái 


NAGARA (-RT) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
(6) Kautiliya-Artha-fastra (Chap. xxtr, p. 46, footnote) : ! 
Nagararm raja-dhani | 


(Rayapaseni—siitra—vyakhyane, p. 206.) 
Nagràni kara-varjitàni nigama-vanijàm sthànàni 1 
(Prasna—vyakarana—sütra-vyàkhyáne, p. 306.) 
(7) Manasara (Chap. x, named Nagara) : 
The dimension of the smallest town unit is 100X 200 X4 
cubits; the largest town-unit is 7200X 14400X4 cubits (lines 
3-33). A town may be laid out from east to west or north to ғ 
south according to the position it occupies (line 102). There 
should be one to twelve large streets in a town (lines r10-111). 
It should be built near a sea; river or mountain (lines 73, 51), and 
should have facilities for tradc and commerce (lines 48, 74) with 
the foreigners (line 69). It should have defensive walls, ditches 
and forts (line 47) like a village. There should be gate-houses 
(gopura, line 46), gates, drains, parks, commons, shops, exchanges, 
temples, guest houses, colleges (line 48 f.) etc., on a bigger scale 
than in a village. 
Towns are divided into eight classess, namely, Raja-dhani, e 
Nagara, Pura, Nagari, Kheta, Kharvata, Kubjaka, and Pattana 
(lines 36-38). : 
The general description of towns given above is applicable 
more or less to all of these classes. 
For purposes of defence, the capital towns commanding 
strategic points are well fortified and divided into the following 
classes : Sibira, Vahini-mukha, Sthaniya, Dronaka, Samvidda, 
Kolaka, Nigama, and Skandhavara (lines 38-41, 65-86). The forts 
for purely military purposes are called giri-durga, vana-durga, 
salila-durga, panka-durga, ratha-durga, deva-durga and miéra- 
durga (lines 86-87, lines 88-90 90-107; see under DURGA). 4 
(8) < On the banks of the Sarayü is a large country called Ko$ala 
gay and happy and abounding with cattle, corn and wealth. In that 
country was a famous city called Ayodhya, built formerly by Manu, 
the lord of men. A great city twelve yojanas (108 miles) in length and A 
nine yojanas (81 miles) in breadth, the houses of which stood in triple 
and long extended rows. It was rich and perpetually adorned with 
new improvements, the streets and lanes were admirably disposed, | 
and the principal streets well watered. It was filled with merchants | 


of various descriptions, and adorned with abundance of jewels; A 
difficult of access, filled with spacious houses, beautified with gardens, 
248 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA(-RT) 


and groves of mango trees, surrounded by a deep and impassable 
moat, and completely furnished with arms; was ornamented with 
stately gates and porticoes and constantly guarded by archers. As 
Maghavan protects Amaravati, so did the magnanimous Daáaratha, 
the enlarger of his dominions, protects Ayodhya, fortified by gates, 
firmly barred, adorned with areas disposed in regular order, and 
abounding with a variety of musical instruments and war-like wea- 
pons; and with artifices of every kind. Prosperous, of unequalled 
splendour it was constantly crowded with charioteers and messengers, 
furnished with $ataghnis (did. an instrument capable of destroying a 
hundred at once, that is, a cannon) and parighas (a kind of club), 
adorned with banners and high-arched porticoes, constantly filled with 
dancing girls and musicians, crowded with elephants, horses and chariots, 
with merchants and ambassadors from various countries, frequented 
by the chariots of the gods, and adorned with the greatest magnificence. 
It was decorated with various kinds of jewels, filled with wealth, and 
amply supplied with provisions, beautified with temples and sacred 
chariots (large cars), adorned with gardens and bathing tanks and 
spacious buildings and full of inhabitants. It abounded with learned 
sages, in honour cqual to the immortals; it was embellished with 
magnificent palaces, the domes of which resemble the tops of mountains, 
and surrounded with the chariots of the gods like the Amaravati of 
Indra, it resembled a mine of jewels ог the residence of Lakshmi 
(the goddess of prosperity) ; the walls were variegated with divers 
sorts of gems like the division of a chess-board, and it was filled with 
healthful апа -happy inhabitants; the houses formed. one continued 
row, of equal height, resounding with the delightful music of the tabor, 
the flute and the harp.’ 

‘The city, echoing with the twang of the bow, and sacred sound of 
the Veda was constantly filled with convivial assemblies and societies 
of happy men. lt abounded with food of the most excellent kinds ; 


- the inhabitants were constantly fed with the Sali rice; it was perfumed 


with incense, chaplets of flowers, and articles for sacrifice, by their 
odour cheering the heart.’ 

‘It was guarded by heroes in strength equal to the quarter-masters 
and versed in all §ãstras ; by warriors, who protect it, as the nagas guard 
Bhogavati. As the Great Indra protects his capital, so was this city, 
resembling that of the gods, protected by King DaSaratha, the chief of 
the Ikshvakus. This city was inhabited by the twiceborn who main- 
tained the constant sacrificial fire, (men) deeply read in the Veda 
and its six Añgas, endowed with excellent qualities, profusely generous, 


249 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


NAGARA(-RI) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


- full of truth, zeal, and compassion, equal to the great sages, and having 
their minds and appetites in complete subjection. —(Räāmāyaņa, t, 5> 
5-17.) 

“Тапка, filled with mad elephants, ever rejoiceth. She is great, 

thronging with cars and inhabited by Rakshasas. Her doors are 
firmly established and furnished with massy bolts. And she hath 
four wide and giant gates. (At those gates) are powerful and large 
arms, stones and engines, whereby a hostile host approaching is opposed. 
At the entrance are arrayed and set in order by bands of heroic Rak- 
shasas, hundreds of sharp iron $atagnis (firearms, guns). She hath 
a mighty impassable golden wall, having its side emblazoned in the 
centre with costly stones, coral, lapises and pearls. Round about is 
a moat, exceedingly dreadful, with cool water, eminently grand, 
fathomless, containing ferocious aquatic animals, and inhabited 
by fishes. At the gates are four broad bridges, furnished with machines 
and many rows of grand structures. On the approach of the hostile 
forces, their attack is repulsed by these machines, and they are thrown 
into the ditch. One amongst these bridges is immovable, strong 
and fast established ; adorned with golden pillars and daises 

And dreadful and resembling a celestial citadel, Lanka cannot be 
ascended by means of any support. She hath fortresses composed 
of streams (cf. JALA-DURGA), those of hills, and artificial ones of four 
kinds. And way there is none even for barks, and all sides destitude 
of division. And that citadel is built on the mountain’s brow; and 
resembling the metropolis of the immortals, the exceedingly invin- 
cible Lanka is filled with horses and elephants. And a moat and 
$ataghnis and various engines adorn the city of Lanka, belonging 
to the wicked Ravana . . . his abode consists of woods, hills, moat, 
gateways, walls, and dwellings.’—(Jbid., уі, Lankakanda, grd Sarga.) 

(9) The Mahabharata has ‘ short but comprehensive account of the city 
of Dvàrakà (1, 111, 15), Indra-prastha (1, 207, 30 f.), the floating city 
(ш, 173, 3), Mithila (ur 207, 7), Ravana’s Lanka (ш, 283, 3 and 284, 
4, 30), the sky-town (уш, 33, 19), and the ideal town (xv, 5, 16). In the 
Ramayana we find nearly the same descriptions as those in this later part 
of the Epic (/М04.).? 

(то) * We may examine the general plan of a Hindu city... it 
had high, perhaps concentric, walls about it, in which were watch- 
towers. "Massive gates, strong doors! protected chiefly by а wide bridge 
moat, the latter filled with crocodiles and armed with palings, guarded 


1 xv, 16, 3: the king left Hastinapur by a high gate. 
| 250 


~ 


dt 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA(-RI) 


the walls. Тһе store-house was built near the rampart. Тһе city 
was laid out in several squares. The streets were lighted with 
ќогсһеѕ.2 The traders and the king's court made this town their resi- 
dence. 'The farmers lived in the country, each district guarded if 
not by a tower modelled on the great city, at least by a fort of some 
kind. Out of such fort grew the town. Round the town as round 
the village, was the common land to some distance’ (later converted 
into public gardens, as we see in the Mudrárakshasa). 


* [n the city special palaces existed for the king, the princes, the chief 
priests, ministers and military officers. Besides these and humble 
dwellings (the larger houses being divided into various courts), there 
were various assembly halls, dancing-halls, liquor-saloons, gambling 
halls, courts of justice, and the booths of small traders with goldsmiths, 
shops, and the work-places of other artisans. The arsenal appears to 
have been not far from the king’s apartments. Pleasure parks abounded. 
The royal palace appears always to have had its dancing-hall attached. 
The city-gates ranged in number from four to eleven, and were guarded 
by squads of men and single wardens. Door-keepers guarded the 
courts of the palace as well as the city gates. 4—(Hopkins, 7.4.0.5., 13, 
рр. 175» 176.) 

(11) *It will probably be a revelation to modern architects to know 
how scientifically the problems of town-planning are treated in these 
ancient India's architectural treatises. Beneath a geat deal of mysticism 
which may be scoffed at as pure superstition, there is a foundation of 
sound common sense and scientific knowledge which should appeal to the 
mind of the European expert. 


*'The most advanced science of Europe has not yet improved upon 
the principles of the planning of the garden cities of India based 
upon the Indian village-plan as a unit.’ 


1 The Mbh. recommends six squares, but I find only four mentioned in the 
Ramayana, u, 48, 19. 

Mbh., xv, 5, 16: Puram Sapta-padarn sarvato-disam (town of seven walls, 
but Hopkins does not think that there were walls) 

2 Ramayana, VI, 119, 42: Sikta-rathyantarapana. 

Mbh., 1, 221, 36 : Indraprastha is described as sammrishtasikta-pantha. 

3 Kathaka-U panishad, v, 1, speaks of a town with eleven gates as a possibility 
(the body is like a town with eleven gates.) Nine gates are given to a town 
by Varàha, р. 52, 5: Nava dvaram . . . ekastambharh chatushpatham. 
Lankà has four bridged gates (eight in all and eight walls) (R., vr, 99, 7). 
Four gates are implied in the 6th act of Mrichchhakatika where the men 
are told to go to the four quarters to the gates. 

4 These courts have mosaic pavements of gold. (R., vr, 37, 27, 58, Mbh., 1, 
185, 20; п, 33 and 34.) 2 


TM 


NAGARA (-RI) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


“Тһе Indo-Aryan villages took the layout of the garden-plot as 
the basis of its organization. But more probably the village scheme 
was originally the plan of the military camp of the Aryan tribes when 
they first established themselves in the valley of the Indus.’— (Havel 
A Study of Indian Civilization, рр. 7-8, 18.) 

(12) The principles of Indian town-planning have some striking 
similarity to those of early European cities. It would be interesting to 
compare the Manasára with Vitruvius : 

* In setting out :the walls of a city the choices of a healthy situation 
is of the first importance. It should be on high ground neither 
subject to fogs nor rains ; its aspects should be neither violently hot 
nor intensely cold, but temperate in both respects 1 

‘A city on the sea-side, exposed to the south or west, will be 

insalubrious.'—(Vitruvius, Book I, Chap. ту.) 

* When we are satisfied with the spot fixed on for the site of thc city, 
as well as in respect of the goodness of the air as of the abundant supply of 
provisions for the support of the population, the communications by good 
roads and river or sea navigation for the transport of merchandise, we should 
take into consideration the method of constructing the walls and towers of 
the city. These foundations should be carried down to a solid bottom 
(cf. Мапазйға under GARBHA-NYASA) if such can be found, and should 
be built thereon of such thickness as may be necessary for the proper support 
of that part of the wall which stands above the natural level of the ground. 
They should be of the soundest workmanship and materials, and of greater 
thickness than the walls above. From the exterior face of the wall, towers 
must be projected, from which an approaching enemy may be annoyed by . 
weapons, from the ambrasures of those towers, right and left. An easy 
approach to the walls must be provided against ; indeed they should be sur- 
rounded by uneven ground, and the roads leading to the gates be winding 
and turn to the left from the gates. Ву this arrangement the right side of 
the attacking troops, which are not covered by their shields, will be open 
to the weapons of the besieged.’ 

‘ The plan of the city should not be square, nor formed with acute angles, 
but polygonal, so that the motions of the enemy may be open to observa- 
OS cr 

< The thickness of the walls should be sufficient for two armed men to pass 
each other with ease. Тһе walls ought to be tied, from front to rear, with 
many pieces of charred olive wood; by which means the two faces, thus 
connected, will endure for ages.’ 

“Тһе distance between each tower should not exceed an arrow's 
flight. . . . The walls will be intercepted by the lower parts of the towers 


252 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA(-RT) 


where they occur, leaving an interval equal to the width of the tower ; which 
space the tower will consequently occupy. Тһе towers should be made 
either round or polygonal А square (tower) is a bad form, on 
account of its being easily fractured at the quoins by the battering 
ram ; whereas the circular tower has this advantage, that when battered, 
the pieces of masonry whercof it is composed being cuneiform, they cannot 
be driven in towards their centre without displacing the whole mass. 
Nothing tends more to the security of walls and towers than backing them 
with walls or terraces ; it counteracts the effects of rams as well as of under- 
mining. 

* In the construction of ramparts, very wide and deep trenches are to be 
first excavated ; the bottom of which must be still further dug out for receiving 
the foundation of the wall. This must be of sufficient thickness to resist 
the pressure of the earth against it. Then, according to the space requisite 
for drawing up the cohorts in military order on the ramparts, another wall 
is to be built within the former, towards the city. Тһе outer and inner 
walls are then to be connected by cross walls, disposed on the plan after the 
manner of the teeth of a comb or a saw, so as to divide the pressure 
of the filling in earth into many and less forces, and thus prevent the walls 
from being thrust out) Тһе materials are stated to be * what аге found 
in the spot : such as square stones, flint, rubble stones, burnt or unburnt 
bricks.’ —(Vitruvius, Book I, Chap. v.) 

* The lanes and streets (of which no details are given) of the city being set 
out, the choice of sites for the convenience and use of the state remains to be 
decided оп; for sacred edifices, for the forum, and for other public buildings. 
If the place adjoin the sea, the forum should be seated close to the harbour ; 
if inland it should be in the centre of the town. The temples of the gods, 
protectors of the city, as-those of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, should be on 
some eminence which commands a view of the greater part of the city. Тһе 
temple of Mercury should be either in the forum or, as also the temple of 
Isis and Serapis in the great public square; those of Apollo and Father 
Bacchus near the theatre. Ifthere be neither amphitheatre nor gymnasium, 
the temple of Hercules should be near the circus. Тһе temple of 
Mars should be out ofthe city, in the neighbouring country; that 
- of Venus near to the gate. According to the revelations of the 
Hetrurian Haruspices, the temples of Venus, Vulcan and Mars 
should be so placed that those of the first be not in the way of con- 
taminating the matrons and youth with the influence of lust; that 
those of the Vulcan be away from the city, which would consequently 
freed from the danger of fire ; the divinity presiding over that element 
“pring drawn away by the rites and sacrifices performing in his temple. 


253 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


- 


H 


NAGARA(-RÍ) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 1 


The temple of Mars should be also out of the city, that no armed 6» 
frays may disturb the peace of the citizens, and that this divinity 1 
may, moreover, be ready to preserve them from their enemies and 
the perils of war. Тһе temple of Ceres should be in а solitary spot 
out of the city, to which the public are not necessarily led but for the 
purpose of sacrificing to her. This spot is to be reverenced with i 
religious awe and solemnity of demeanour by those whose affairs lead ; 
them to visit it. Appropriate situations must also Бе" chosen for the i 
temple and places of sacrifice to the other divinities.’ —(Vitruvius, Book I, Қ 
Chap. vir.) d 
(13) Vijitya visvarh vijayabhidhanam  vi$vottaràn уо nagarim 
vyadhatta 1 
Ya hema-kutam nija-sala-bahu-lata-chhaleneva parishvajanti 11 


k= 


Yat-prakara-Sikhavali-parilasat - kiñjalka - pufijachitarh yach 
chhaka-pura-jala-nachitarn sad-danti-bhringanvitam | 


t ye tr 


Sphayad yat-parikha-jala-prati-phalad yat-pranta-prithvi-dhara- 
chchhaya-nalam idam purabjam naigarh lakshmya sahalam- 
bate 11 
‘Having conquered all the world, he (Bukka-Ràja) built a 
splendid city called the City of Victory (Vijayanagari). Its four 
walls were like arms stretching out to embrace Hema-kuta. The 
points of the battlemants like its filaments, the suburbs like its 
blossom, the elephants like bees, the hills reflected in the water 
of the moat like stems,—the whole city resembled the lotus on 
which Lakshmi is ever seated.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol, v, Part I, | 
Channarayapatna Taluq, по. 256 ; Roman Text, p. 521, lines 1-6 ; Transl., Ë 
р. 732, para. 2, line 4.) ! p 
(14) Grama -nagara - kheda- karvvada - madamba -drona -mukha - pat {з 
tanam galimdam aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatanamga- 
lidam oppuva-agrahàra-patta-namgalimdam ati$ayav-apya. 
[At Tridala, а merchant-town situated in the centre and the 
first in importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious i 
Kundi Three-Thousand, adorned with] * villages, towns, ham- i 
lets, villages surrounded by hills, groups of villages, sea-girt Ë 
| 
š 


"mI ттен т ні 


+ 


towns, and chief cities, with elegant mansions, palaces and | 
temples, and with shining agrahara towns in the country of | 
Kuntala.’—(Old Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line 58, Ind. Ant., Vol. 2. 
XIV, pp. 19, 25.) = 
(15) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occu- \_- 
pations, streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure gardens, separated : 
lovers, splendid tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, 


254 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NANDI-MANDAPA 


ghatika-sthanas (religious centres), the supports of dharmma and mines 
of enjoyment, moats which were as if the sea being overcome had 
returned here on account of the collection of gems, groups of the 
lotus faces of beautiful women fair as the moon (gràma-nagara-kheda 
kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha-pura-pattana-raja-dhani) on what- 
ever side one looked, in these nine forms did the Kuntala-deía 
shine.’ 
(It should be noticed that the passages within brackets is almost 
indentical with the corresponding passage in quotation no. 14 above.— 
Ер. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur ТаШша, no. 197; Transl., p. 124, 
para. 1, last seven lines; Roman Text, p. 214, line 27 f.) 

(16) * Visiting? the gramas, nagaras, khedas, kharvvadas, madambas, 
pattanas, drona-mukhas and sarnvahanas,—the cities of the elephants at 
the cardinal points.—(£p. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur ТаШша, по. 118; 
Transl., p. 86, last para., line 14.) 

(17) * Thus entitled in many ways to honour, residents of Ayyavole 
Challunki and many other chief gramas, nagaras, khedas, kharvvadas 
madambas, drona-mukhas, puras, and pattanas, of Lala Gaula, Bangala 
Kašmira, and other countries at the points of the compass.’—(Jbid, no. 119, 
Transl., p. 90, рага. 6.) 

NANDANA (cf. NANDA-VRITTA)—A storeyed building, a pavilion. 


A type of building which has six storeys and sixteen cupolas (anda), 
and is 32 cubits wide : 
(т) Brihat-Samhilà (хі, 22, Z.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. VI, p. 319 ; see 
under PRASADA). ) 
(2) Matsya-Purana (Chap. ссі/хіх, v. 29, 33, 48, 53; see under 
PRASADA). 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. cxxx, v. 29; see under PRASADA). 
A type of quadrangular building : 
(4) Garuda-Purána (Chap. XLVI, v. 242-5 ; see under PRASADA). 
(5) A pavilion with thirty pillars (Matsya—Purana, Chap. ccrxxur, 
V. 19; see under Manpapa, and compare  Suprabhedagama, under 
INANDA-VRITTA). 
NANDA-VRITTA—An open pavilion, gracefully built with sixteen 
columns. 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 101 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
NANDI-MANDAPA (see under Manpapa)—A pavilion. 
See Pallava Architecture. 
(Arch. Surv., New Imp. Serirs, Vol. xxxiv 
plate rxix, fig. 4.) 


255 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


NANDYAVARTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NANDYAVARTA—A type of building where rooms are surrounded ж 
with terraces, a village, а window, а pavilion, a phallus, a ground- 
plan, an entablature (see under PRASTARA), a joinery (see under 
SANDHI-KARMAN). 
(1) Manasara : 
A class of the six-storeyed buildings (M., xxiv, 24; see under 
PRASADA). ; ! 
А class of villages (M., rx, о; see under САма). 
A kind of joinery ( M., хуп, 54 ; see under SANDHI-KARMAN). 


A type of window (M., xxxii, 583; see under VATAYANA). ж 
A type of four-faced pavilion (M., xxxiv, 555: see under MAy- CT | 
DAPA). ко! 
į 


In connexion with the phallus (M., іл, 177; see under LINGA). *! MSS, 
In connexion with the site-plan (M., vm, 35; see under 1 ; 
PADA-VINYASA). 1 
(2) Nandyāvartam alindaih śālā-kudyāt pradakshinantargataih | W i 
Dvàram paśchimam asmin vihāya $esharn kāryāņi 11 | 
‘ Nandyavarta is the name of a building with terraces that from T 
the wall of the room extends to the extremity in a direction from east 
to south (alias from left to right). It must have doors on every side, 
except the west. ’—(Brihat-Samhita, uru, 32, Z.R.A.S., М. S., Vol., vr, p. 285.) 
(3) Sarvatobhadram ashtasyarn vedasyarn vardha-manakam 11 
Dakshine chottare chaiva shan-netram svastikarn matam | 
Par$vayoh purata$ chaiva chatur-netra-samayutam 11 
Nandyavartam smritam purve dakshine paáchime tatha | 
Uttare saumya-éaladi $alanàm Asyam iritam 11 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 88, 89, go.) 
An entablature (ibid., Liv. 7). 
Ibid., хтл (named Nandyavarta-vidhi : 1-37) : 
The three sizes (1-6), and the four classes, namely, Jati, chhanda, 
vikalpa and abhasa (7-9): 
Nandyavartam chatush-pattam mulenatra vihinakam | 
Dvaram chatushtayam vapi yatheshtha- digi va bhavet 11 (7) 
Jalaka$ cha kavataé cha bahye bahye prakalpayet | 
Sarvatah kudya-samyuktam mukhya-dhamiatra kirtitam 11 (8) 
Antar-vivrita-padam cha bahye kudyarm prakirtitam | 
Chatur-dikshu vinishkrantam ardha-kutam prayojayet 11 
Dandika-vara-sarnyuktam jati-rupam idam matam || (9) 
The other details of this and the remaining three classes and the 
sub-classes are also given (10-36) : 
Evarn shodafadha proktarh nandyávartam dvijottamah 11 (37) 


256 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NABHASVAN 


(4) A class of buildings : 
. .. Nandyavartam iti $rinu | 
Chatush-kuta$ chatuh-$ala$ chatvarah pàár$va-nasikah 11 
Mukha-nàsi tathà yuktarn dva-dašarn chanu-nasikah 11 
Chatuh-sopana-samyuktam bhümau bhümau vi$seshatah 11 
Nandyàvartam idam vatsa. . .. й 
: | (Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 48, 49, 50.) 
A pavilion with 36 columns (ibid., xxxi, 103; see under MANDAPA). 


NANDIKA—A type of quadrangular building. 


(Agni-Purána, Chap. civ, vv. 14-15; see 
under PRASADA.) е 


NANDI-VARDHANA—A type of building. 


(1) A kind of building which is shaped like the sun-eagle, but is devoid 
of the wings and tail, has seven storeys and twenty cupolas, and is 24 
cubits wide : 

Garudàkriti cha garuda nanditi cha shat-chatushka-vistirnah | 
Karyaá cha sapta-bhaumo vibhüshito'ndai$ cha virnáatya 11 
Commentary quotes the clearer description from Kafyafa : 
Garudo garudakarah paksha-puchchha-vibhüshitah 1 2 
Nandi tad-akritir jüieyah pakshadi-rahitah punah 11. 
Karanam shat-chatushkamá cha vistirnau sapta-bhümikau | 
DaSabhir dvi-gunair andair bhüshitau karayct tu tau ll 
(Brihat-Samhita, туп, 94; J.R.A.S., М. S., 
Vol. vi, p. 319.) 
(2) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ccrxix, vv. 33, 48, 53 ; see under PRASADA). 
(3) Bhavishya-Pardna (Chap. CXXX, vv. 28, 31 ; see under PRASADA). 
A kind of quadrangular building : 

(4) Agni-Purána (Chap. crv, vv. 14-15 ; see under PRASADA). 

(5) Guruda-Puràna (Chap. XLVII; vv. 24-95 ; see under PRASADA). 
NAPUMSAKA (c. STRILINGAa and PumiiNca)—A neuter type of 
building (see under PRASADA). 

Cf. Paüicha-varga-yutam miáram arpitanarpitangakam | 

Pashandanam idam $astam napumsaka-samanvitam 11 
(Kamikagama, X11, 11.) 


For the meaning of paficha-varga, see ibid., xxxv, 21, under SHAD- (0 
VARGA, | ET 
МАВНАЅУАМ—А class of chariots. А 


(М., xım, 112; see under RATHA.) | 


NAYANONMILANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NAYANONMILANA—Chiselling the eye of an image ; sculpturally 
it would imply the finishing touch with regard to making an image. 
For details, see M., xxx (named Nayanonilana) 1-114. 


NARA-GARBHA—The foundation of residental buildings. 


(See details under GanBHA-NYAsaA.) 


NALINAKAC-—A class of buildings distinguished by open quad- 


rangles and surrounded by buildings, and furnished with platforms 
and stairs. 


Chatuh-sala-samayukto vedi-sopána-samyutah | 
Nalinakas tu sarnprokta(-tah) . . . n 
(Suprabhedágama, xxxi, 46.) 
NAVA-TALA—The nine-storeyed buildings (M., ххуп, 2-47) ; the 
description of the ninth storey (ibid., 35-47) ; seven classes (2-33) 
(see under PRASADA). 
NAVA-TALA—A sculptural measurement in accordance with which 
the whole length of an image is nine times the height of the face 
which is generally twelve angulas (nine inches) ; this length is divided 
into 9X12 = 108 equal parts which are proportionally distributed 
over the different limbs. (See under TALAMANA.) 
Cf. Nava-tala-pramanas tu deva-danava-kinnarah | 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrvrr, v. 16.) 
Evam nàrishu sarvasu devanarh pratimasu cha 1 
Nava-talam  proktam lakshanam  pàpa-nà$anam 11 
(Ibid., v. 75.) 
The details of this system of measure employed both for male 
and female statues are given. (Jbid., vv. 26-74.) 
NAVA-BHUMI (same as Nava-Tata)—WNine-storeyed buildings, 
the ninth storey (see NAVA-TALA). 
NAVA-RANGA (see SAPTA-RANGA)—A detached pavilion (with 
108 columns). 
(т) Salindam nava-rangam syàd ashtottara-$atanghrikam | 
(M., xxxiv, 107.) 
(2) Копегі ‘ erected а nava-ranga of ro ankanas, with secure 
foundation and walls, for the god Tirumala of the central street of 


Malalavadi.'— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. iv, Hunsur Taluq, no. I; Transl., p. 83; 
Roman Text, p. 134.) 


258 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NÀGA 


(3) Santigramada nava-rangada kalla-bagilann kattisi huli-mukha- 
van—(Deva Mahārāya) “caused the stone gateway of Santigráma 
to be constructed and ornamented with the tiger-face. (This work 
was carried out by Singanahe-baruva of the village).'—(Ep. Carnat. , 
Vol. v, Part I, Hassan Taluq, no. 17 ; Roman Text, p. 75; Transl., p. 34.) 

(4) Sri-gopala-svamiyavara nava-ranga-patta-$ale-prakaravanu 
kattisi—for the god Gopala ‘he erected a nava-ranga-patta-Sale (a 
nava-ranga and a pattasala, see below) and an enclosure wall (and 
promoted a work of merit). 


Nava-ranga-prakara-patta-sale-samasta-dharmma— this nava-ranga, 
enclosure wall, patta-sala and all the work of merit were carried 
ош... .2—(ibid, Channarayapatna Taluq no. 185; Roman Text, p. 467 
lines 8, 17; Transl., p 205.) 

(5) Compare Sapta-ranga (at Comillain Bengal) which is a pagoda- 
‘shaped detached building of seven storeys built on the right side 
of the ranga-mandapa, another detached building, facing the front 
side of the main shrine or temple of the god Jagannatha. АП these 
buildings and the tank behind the shrine are within the enclosing 
wall (prakara). 

(6) * It (Malle$vara temple at Hulikat) faces north and consists of 
a garbha-griha, an open sukha-nàsi, a nava-ranga, and a porch. 
The garbha-griha, sukha-nàsi and porch are all of the same dimensions 
being zhout 44 feet square, while the nava-ranga measures 16 feet by 
14. feet. "—( Mysore Arch. Report, 1015-16, р. 4 para. 10; ‘see also p. 5, para. 
12, Plate ш, fig. 2.) 

* The nava-ranga is an open hall with two rows of four pillars at 
the side, all the pillars except two being carved with large female 
figures in relief in the front. "—(Jbid., p. 15, para. 19.) 


-NAVA-RATNA.—Nine gems, ruby (padma-raga), diamond (vajra), 
coral (vidruma), sapphire (nila), topaz (pushpa-raga), emerald 
(marakata), pearl (muktà), lapis lazuli (sphatika), and gomedaka. 


(M., хуш, 390—394-) 


NAGA—Supernatural beings, © snake-demons, sometimes represent- 
ed in human form with a snake's hood in the nake, sometimes as 
mixed forms, half man, half snake. Their sworn enemies are _ 
Garuda. ° 


(W. Gieger: Mahavamsa, p. 294; Grünwedel: 
Buddhist Kunst, P. 42, i ) 


259 


NÀGA-KALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NAGA-KALA—A stone on which the image of a serpent is carved. 


(See Chalukyan Architecture Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, 
р. 39, Plates xcrx, fig. 2 ; хо, figs. 2, 3.) 


NAGA-BANDHA—A kind of window resembling the hood of 
a cobra. 


(M., xxxi, 582 ; see under VATAYANA.) 


NAGARA—One of the three styles of architecture; it is quadrangular 
in shape, the other two (Vesara and Dravida) being respectively 
round and octagonal. 

(г) Manasara : 

The characteristic feature of the three styles : 
Muüladi-stüpi-paryantami vedàéram chayatasrakam | 
Dvya$ram  vrittàkritam vatha grivadi-sikharakritih | 
Stüpi-karna-samyyuktam dvayarh va chaikam eva val 
Chatur-asrakritim yas tu Nàgaram tat prakirtitam | 
Mulàgram vrittam akararh tad yat ayatam eva val 
Grivadi-stipi-paryantam yuktatho (-dhas) tad yugasrakam | 
Vrittasyagre dvya$rakam tad Vesara-namakarh bhavet | 
Mulagrat stüpi-paryantam ashtasram уа shad-a$rakam | 
Tad-agram chayatarn vapi grivasyadho yugasrakam | 
Pürvavach chordhva-de$am syad Dravidam tat prakirtitam | 
SamaS$raika-sikha-yuktarh chayame tach-chhikha-trayam | 
Dryasra-vrittopari-stipi vrittam va chatur-aérakam | 
Padmadi-kudmalantam syad uktavad vakriti(m) nyaset | 

(M., хуш, 90-102.) 


Compare Vishnu-dharmottara (a supplement to the Vishnu-Purana), 
Part III, Chap. xri where paintings are divided into four classes—Satya, 
Vainika, Nagara and Misra. (Cf. S. Kramrisch : A Treatise on Indian 
Painting and Image-making, 1928, рр. 8, 51; А. K. Coomaraswamy's 
article, Rupam, January, 1929.) 


The Марага style is distinguished by its quadrangular shape, | 


the Vesara by its round shape and the Dravida by its octagonal 
or hexagonal shape : 
See Suprabhedágama below and compare : 


(Referring to the pedestal of the pallus) : 
Nagaram chatur-asram ashtaéram Dravidam tatha | 
Vrittam cha Vesaram proktam etat pithakritis tatha | 


(M., rur, 53-54.) 
: 260 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— ——— 4 
WP 


| 
| 
| 
I 
j 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA 


These distinguishing features are noticed generally at the upper 
part of a building : 


Griva-mastaka-sikha-pradeSake | 
Nagaradi-samalankritoktavat 1—(М., xxt, 71-72.) 
Nagara-Dravida-Vesaradin(-dinam) sikhanvitam (harmyam) 1 


(M., xxvi, 75.) 

Referring to chariots (ratha): 

Vedàéáram Nagaram proktarn vasvasrarn Dravidam bhavet 1 

Suvrittam Vesaram proktarh  ra(A)ndhram syat tu shad- 

a$rakam I—(M., хып, 123-124.) 

An important addition is noticed in this passage; this style is 
designated as Randra, which is perhaps a corruption of Andhra. 

In an ephigraphical record Kalinga also is mentioned as 
a distinct style of architecture (see below). 

If the identification of Vesara with Telugu or Tri-kalinga is 
accepted (see below), and if the reading Andhra for Randhra 


is also accepted, the Kalinga and the Andhra would be two 


branches of Vesara. And as the Dravida style is stated to be of the 
hexagonal or octagonal shape (see above) it would appear that the 
Dravida proper is octagonal and the Andhra, which is placed 
between the Dravida and the Vesara, is hexagonal (see further 
discussion below). 
The same three styles are distinguished in sculpture also: 
(Lingam) Nagarami  Dravidam chaiva Vesram cha tridha 
matam | 
(M., tm, 76, also тоо.) 
Kuryat tu nagare linge pitham Nagaram eva cha | 
Dravide Dràvidarn proktam vesare Vesaram tatha | 
(Ibid., 46-47, etc.) 
(2) Silparatna of Srikumara. (ху, 51-53) : 
Maladi-sikhararn yugasra-rachitam geha smritam nagarar | 
Müladi-Sikhara-kriyarn shaduraga$rodbheditam dravidam | 
Malad va galato'thava parilasat-vrittatmakam vesaram | 
Teshvekam prithagallakshma suridadadhyadatmanah sam- 
matam 11 (51) 
Janmaáàdi-stüpiparyantam yugašram nagaram bhavet | 
Vasvasram Sirshakarh karnam (kantham) dravidam bhavanam 
viduh 11 (52) 
Vritta-karna (kantha)-Siropetarh уезагатп harmamiritam | 
Kita-koshthadi-hinanam harmyanam kathim tvidar 11 (53) 
261 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


NAGARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


This treatise locates Nàgara region from the Himalayas to the 
Vindhyas, Dravida region from the Vindhyas to the Krishna, and | 
Vesara region from the Krishna to the Cape Comorin (see verses | 
4.0-50). 

But it expressly says (v. 44) that buildings of all these styles 
may be found in all countries according to some authorities. This 
is quite natural and would further indicate the migration of styles 
from the land of their origin. 


The unwarranted assumption of Messrs. F. H. Gravely and T. N. Rama- I 
chandran, in the Bulletin of the Madras Government Museum (New Series— L 
General Section, Vol. ІП, Part 1, 1934), that all Silpa-Sastras including 1 
the Manasára originated and restricted their jurisdiction іп the South, is respon- | | 
sible for a series of further assumptions raised like а house of cards. Under | | 
the plea of ‘ Three Main Styles of temple Architecture ? the authors of this article | | 
of 26 pages deliberately ignored both the references to other objects of these | | 
styles as also the examination of North Indian buildings of Nagara style except ] 
a passing mention of a single structure at Bareilly District and excluded the places 
north of the Vindhya range which are known by the name of Nàgara. Тһе 
alternative designations of Vesara style by Andhra and Kaliñga have equally 
been ignored. Thus the learned authors had to delimit the Indian Continent 
by the Vindhya range of limited eastern boundary as the northern limit, and 
of this truncated India, Dravida being the south and Nagara and Vesara the 
two northern flanks. There was no necessity for any discussion to explain the 
mixture of РаПауа and Chalukyan types. The migration of styles also is very | 
common апа natural in architecture. | 


The contention that the styles, Nagara, Vesara, Dravida, all belong to the 
south has been disproved by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar (Journal of the Indian Society 
of Oriental Art, Vol. 11, no. 1, June 1934, pp. 23-27) : ‘the primary division 
is Nàgara, India north of the Vindhyas, Vesara, India between the Vindhyas 
and the Krishna, corresponding to Dakhan of secular history, and Dravida or 
India south of the Krishna corresponding to Tamil India,’ . . . ‘But in 
regard to Vesara from VeSya, Mr. Jayaswal ( 7. І. S. О. А., Vol. r, no. 1, 


" E р. 57) has little authority to rest on’. . . . ‘our derivation may fail or may 
А prove satisfactory, but that is something entirely different from what the artist 
or the craftsman understood by the terms’. . . . ‘That they (Nàgara, Vesara; 


Dravida) had no territorial significance would be to argue too much, in the 
face of the explicit statement by the text writers.’ 
(3) Kamikagama (Lxv, 6-7, 12-18) : 
Pratyekam tri-vidham proktam samchitam chàpy-asarnchitam | 
Upasamchitam ity-evarn Nàgaram Dravidam tatha 11 (6) 
VeSaram cha tatha jati$ chhando vaikalpam eva cha 11 (7) 
Savistara-va$ach chhanna-hasta-purnayatanvitam | 
262 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE NÁGARA 


Yugmayugma-vibhagena Nàgararh syát samikritam 11 (12) 
Antara-prastaropetam üha-pratyüha-saryutam | 
Nivra-sandhara-sarnstambha-vrate paridridhaih $ubhaih !! (13) 
Dràvidam vakshyate’ thàtah vistara-dvayorghakam (7) 1 
Raktachchhanna-pratikshepat yugmàyugma-vi$eshatah 11 (14) 
Hitvà tatra samibhütarn bhadralankara-samyutam | 
Ancka-dvàara-samyuktam shad-vargam Dràvidam smritam | 
Labdha-vyàsayatam yat tu nàtiriktam na hinakam | 
Bahu-varga-yutarh vapi dandika-vara-Sobhitam 11 (16) 
Maha-varam vimanordhve nirvühanana-samyutam (?) | 
Sakshetropeta-madhyamghri-yuktarh tad Vesaram matam 11 (17) 
Yatinarh ganikanarn cha jivinàm krura-karmanah 1 
Pragastarn Усвагатп tesharn anyeshàm itare $ubhe 11 (18) 
The details of the three styles are described more briefly but 
explicitly in the following Agama : 
(4) Suprabhedàgama (xxxt, 37-39): 
Dvàára-bhedam idarn proktarh jàti-bhedam tatah érinu 11 (37) 
Nagararh Dràvidam chaiva Vesaram cha tridha matam | 
Kanthad arabhya vrittarn yad Vesaram iti smritam 11 (38) 
Grivam arabhya chashtam$am vimanarn Dravidakhyakam | 
Sarvar vai chaturaéram yat prasadarn Nagararh tu-idam 11 (39) 
According to this Agama, the buildings of the Nagara style are 
quadrangular from the base to the top; those of the Dravida style 
are octagonal from the neck to the top; and those of the Vesara style 
are round from the neck to the top. Apparently the lower part of the 
buildings of the two latter styles is quadrangular. 
(5) Svair angula-pramanair dva-daga-vistirnam ayatam cha mukham : 
Nagnajità tu chatur-daša dairghyena Dravida(m) kathitam 11 
According to one's own angula (finger) the face (of his own 
statue) is twelve angulas long and broad. But according to (the 
architect) Nagnajit it should be fourteen angulas in the Dravida 
style. 
Тһе commentary quotes Nagnajit in full : 
Vistirpnam dva-daga-mukham dairghyena cha chatur-daáa | 
Angulani tatha kàryam tan-manam Dravidam smritam H 
The face should be twelve angulas broad and fourteen angulas long : 
such a measure is known as Dravida (i. e.,this is the Dravida style of. 


measurement).—(Zrihat-Sarmhita, туш, 4, J.R.A.S., М. S., Vol vr, p. 32% | 


note 


3) 
(6) * Like the face of the lady Earth shone the Vanavase-nad оп which 


Nágara-khanda at all times was conspicuous . like the tilaka, a sign of ae = =. 26 
"S me 


263 


NAGARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


fortune (then follows a description of its groves, gardens, tanks, etc.). In 
the Nagara-khanda shone the splendid Bandhavanagara.’ 

‘In Nàgara-khanda, like the mouths of Hara, were five agraharas, from 
which proceeded the sounds of all Brahmans reading and teaching the read- 
ing of all the Vedas, Puranas, moral precepts, Sastras, logic, agamas, poems, 
dramas, stories, smriti, and rules for sacrifices.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. үп, Shikar- 
pur Taluq, no. 225; Transl., p. 132, paras. 6, 7 ; Roman Text, p. 229, line 24 to 
p. 235, line 2.) 

(7) * In the world beautiful is the Kuntala-land, in which is the charming 
Vanavasa country ; in it is the Nagara-khanda, in which was the agreeable 
Bandhavapura. (The list of its trees and other attractions.) In that royal 
city (rajadhani) was formerly a king of that country famed for his liberality 
Sovi-deva.’—(Ibid., по. 235 ; Transl., p. 135, para. 2; Roman Text, р. 238, 
line 20, f.) 

(8) Nàgari-khanda and Nagari-khanda (/014., no. 236; Transl., p. 137, 
paras. 3, 4), Nagara-khanda seventy (no. 240; Transl., p. 138), Nagara- 
khandanada (no. 241; Transl., p. 138), Nagara-khanda (по. 243 ; Roman 
Text, p. 248, line 8), Nagara-khanda seventy (no. 267 ; Transl., p. 143, last 
para., line 7), Nagari-khanda seventy (no. 277; Transl., p. 145, largest para. , 
line 5). | 

(9) Nagara-bhuktau  valavi-vaishayika-Saiva . . . padralik (? ksh) 
antash-pati Varunika-grama—‘ Of the village of Varunika, which lies . . 
іп the Nàgara bhukti (and) belonging to the Valavi-vishaya.’—(Deo ich 
nark Inscrip. of Jivitagupta п, lines 6-7: C. І. I, Vol, ш, Е. G. I. no. 46, 
pp. 216, 218.) 

(то) ‘When that king (king Harihara's son Deva-Raya) of men was ruling 
the kingdom in peace and wisdom, shining in beauty beyond all countries 
was the entire Karnnata province ; and in that Karnnata country famous 
was the Gutti-nàd, which contained eighteen Kampanas in which the most 
famous nad was “ Nàgara-khanda " to which Kuppatür was an ornament, 
owing to the settlement of the Bhavyas (or Jains), and its (Get aya 
beautiful with lotus ponds, pleasure gardens and fields of gandha-Sali rice. 
(Further description of its attractions) "— (Ер. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part I, Sorab 
Taluq, no. 261 ; Roman Text, p. 82; Transl., p. 41.) 

(11) ‘In the island of Jambu trees (Jambu-dvipa), in the Bharata-kshetra 
near the holy mountain (Sridhara), protected by the wise Ghandragupte! 
"an abode of the good usages of eminent Kshatriyas, filled with a eps: 
tion worthy of gifts (dakshina-patra), a place of unbroken wealth, was the 
district (vishaya) named Naga-khanda of good fortune, possessed of all com- 
forts, and from being ever free from destruction (laya) of the wise, called 
Nilaya (an asylum). There, adorned with gardens of various fruit trees 


264. 


ЕЕ” 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA 


(named), shines the village named Kuppatür, protected by GopeSa. There 
like the forehead-ornament to the wife, in the territory of king Harihara, 
was a Jina Chaityalaya which had received a $asana from the Kadambas.’— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. үш, Part I, Sorab ТаШа, no. 263; Roman Text, p. 86; 
'Transl., p. 43.) 

The identity of Nàgara-khanda with Naga-khanda is undoubted owing 
to the fact that the one and same village Kuppatür is contained in both. 

(12) * The headman of Pithamane village, the first in the Kuppatür 
Twenty-six of the Nàgara-khanda Malu-nad, belonging to the Chandragutti- 
venthe, of the Banavasi Twelve Thousand in the South country 
(Ibid., no. 265; Roman Text, p. 87,Transl., p. 43). 

(13) In Jambudvipa, іп the Karnnataka-vishaya, adorned with all 
manner of trees (named) is Nagara-khanda.’—(Jbid., по. 329; Transl., 
р. 58, para. 2, line 4.) 

(14) The expression ‘ Nagara-khanda Seventy’ occurs in several of the 
Sorab Talug Inscriptions, e.g., nos. 326, 327, 328, 336, 337, etc. 

“То the ocean-girdled earth like a beautiful breast formed for enjoyment 
was Nàgara-khanda in the Banavasi-mandala.’—(Ibid., по. 345 ; Transl. 
p. 60.) 

(15) * In the ocean-girdled Jambu-diva (dvipa) is the Mandara mountain 
to the south of which is the Bharata-kshetra, in which is . . . wherein is 
the beautiful Nàgara-khanda. Among the chief villages of that nad is the 
agrahara named Kuppatira.’ 

: Grants were also made (as specified) by the oil-mongers, the betel-sellers 
and the gandas(?) of Nagara-khanda for the perpetual lamp.’ —(Ibid., no. 
276; Transl., p. 47.) 

(16) ‘In the pleasant Nagara-khanda is the agrahara which is jewel 
mirror to the earth, the beautiful Kuppatir, with its splendid temples, its 
golden towers, its lofty mansions, its streets of shops, its interior surrounded 
with a moat, its . . ., and the houses of dancing girls,—how beautiful to 
the eyes was Kuppatür. It surpassed Alakapura, Amaravati and Bhoga- 
vati. Within that village, vying with Kailasa, stood the temple of Koti- 
natha, built by Visvakarmma and carved with complete devotion, planned in 
perfect accordance with the many rules of architecture, and freely decorated 
with dravida, bhumija:and nāgara? ‘These and bhadropeta appear to be 
technical terms of the % ра-545іга or science of architecture. —Mr. Rice. 

(They are evidently the three styles of architecture called the Dravida, 
Vesara and Nagara in the Мапаѕаға and elsewhere—Ep. Carnat., Vol. 
уш, Part I; Sorab Taluq, no. 275; Roman Text, p. 92, line 9 from bottom 
upwards ; transl, p. 46, note r.) $ 

(17) ` The earliest Vijayanagar inscription (Sb. 263, noted above) contains 
the interesting statement that the district (vishaya) named Naga-khanda 


265 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


NAGARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


generally Nágara-khanda, corresponding more or less with the Shikarpur 
Taluq was (formerly) protected by the wise Chandragupta, an abode of 
the usages of eminent Kshatriyas.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol., үш, Part I ; Introduc- 
tion, p. II, para. 5.) 

(18) The Sorab Taluq Inscriptions (no. 261 f.) have reference to Nagara- 
khanda and its pompous buildings (temples), picturesque gardens and other 
natural and artificial beauties. From these it may be inferred that the 
buildings of Nagara-khanda possessed, as stated in (һе Manasara, a distinct 
style of architecture like those of the Dravida and Vesara countries. 

(19) Compare Fah Hian's Kingdom of the Dakshina (Ind. Amt., Vol., 
VII, pp. 1-7, note 2) : 

*Going two hundred yojanas south from this, there is a country 
called Ta-thsin (Dakshina). Неге is а Sangharama of the former 
Buddha, Ка5уара. It is constructed out of a great mountain of rock 
hewn to the proper shape. This building has altogether five storeys. 
The lowest is shaped into the form of an elephant, and has five hundred 
stone cells in it. The second is in the form of a lion and has four 
hundred chambers. The third is shaped like a horse, and has three 
hundred chambers. The fifth storey is in the shape of a dove, and 

` has one hundred chambers in it. At the very top of all is a spring of 

water, which flowing in a stream before the rooms, encircles each tier 
and so, running in a circuitous course, at last arrives at the very lowest 
storey of all, where, flowing past the chambers as before, it finally issues 
through the door of the building. Throughout the consecutive tiers, 
in various parts of the building, windows have been pierced through the 
solid rock for the admission of light, so that every chamber is quite illu- 
minated, and there is no darkness (throughout the whole). At the 
four corners of this edifice they have hewn out the rock into steps, 
as a means for ascending. Men of the present time point out a small 
ladder which reaches up to the highest point (of the rock) by which men 
of old ascended it, one foot at a time (?). They derive the name which 
they give to this building, viz. Po-loya, from an Indian word (paravata) 
signifying “ pigeon.” There are always Arhtas abiding here. This 
land is hilly and barren, without inhabitants. At a considerable 
distance from the hill there are villages, but all of them are inhabited 
by heretics. They know nothing of the law of Buddha or Sramanas, of 
Brahmans, or of any of the different schools of learning. The men of 
that country continually see persons come flying to the temple. On 
a certain occasion there were some Buddhist pilgrims from different 


countries who came here with a desire to pay religious worship at this . 


temple. Then the men of the villages above alluded to ask them saying 
266 


- 


uruk ul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
ñ Қара Ú Б š 


d 25 
Жыла... Мат” 22. media ÉL IL 
Манн eS ы... CT IRR ЕНШЕ 5 дла 


| 


— Sn 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA 


“Why do you not fly to it? We behold the religious men who 
occupy those chamber constantly on the wing." “ Because our wings 
are not yet perfectly formed." The country of Ta-thsin is precipitous, 
and the road dangerous and difficult to find. Those who wish to go 
there ought to give a present to the king of the country, cither money 
or goods. Тһе king then deputes certain men to accompany them as 
guides, and so they pass the travellers from one place to another, each 
party pointing out their own roads and intricate bye-paths. Fah Hian 
finding himself in the end unable to proceed to that country, reports 
іп the above passages merely what һе heard.’—(Beal’s Travels of Fah Hian 
and Sung-Yan, рр. 139, 141.) 

(20) ‘ The territory (Dravida) which also includes the northern half 
of Ceylon, extends northwards up to an irregular line drawn from a 
point on the Arabian sea about 1,000 miles below Goa along the Western 
Ghats as far as Kolhapur, thence north-east through Hyderabad, and 
farther eastwards to the Bay of Bengal.’—(Lneyclopaedia, Brit. ed. 11, 
р. 550.) 

(21) Vesara is otherwise called Andhra or Telugu. “Тһе old Telugu 
country covers about 8,000 square miles, and is bounded on the east 
by the Bay of Bengal, on the north by the river Godavari, on the south 
by the Krishna.’ (Dr. Barnett, Catalogue of the Telugu Books, Preface.) 

The boundaries of the Telugu or Vesara country are given in detail 
in the Linguistic Survey of India: ‘The Telugu country is bounded 
towards the east of the Bay of Bengal from about Barwa in the Ganjam 
District in the north to Madras in the south. From Barwa the frontier 
line goes westwards through Ganjam to the Eastern Ghats, and then 
southwards, crosses the Sobari on the border of the Sunkum and the 
Bijai Talukas in the Baster state, and thence runs along the range of the 
Bela Dila to the Indravati. It follows that river to its confluence with 
the Godavari, and then runs through Chanda, cutting off the southern 
part of the district, and further eastwards, including the southern border 
of the district Wun. It then turns southwards to the Godavari at its 
confluence with the Mafijira, and thence further south, towards Bidar 
where Telugu meets with Kanarese.’—(Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. rv; 
р. 577.) 

See also the following : 

Trikandasesha (Bibl., 258, Cal., 2, 8, 44). 

Hemachandra-abhidhdna-chintdmani (12, 53). 

Halàyudha (2, 295). — . 

JNaishadha-kárikà (Bibl., Cal., ro, 8). 
“- Brihadaranyaka-upanishad (8, 15). 
Sisupalabadha (Bibl., 141, Cal. 12, 19). 


NÁGARA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


(22) Nagara scems to be a very popular geographical name (see 
3. A. S. B., 1896, Vol. rxv, Part r, рр. 116-117) : 

It is clear from the references that Nàgara was formerly the capital 
of Birbhum in Bengal; that Nagara is the name of a famous port in 
Tanjore ; that it is the name of an extensive division in Mysore ; that 
a town named Nagara and an ancient place called Nagarakota are 
situated on the Bias in the district of Kangra, in the Punjab; that 
we find Nagaravasti in Darbhanga, the town Nagaraparken in Sindh 
and Nagarakhas in the district of Basti; that there is a number of 
ancient villages in the Deccan called Nagaram; and that Nagara is 
the name of two rivers in North Bengal, the name of a village in the 
district of Dacca; and that of some nine or ten places, called Nagara 
in Rajputana proper, three being towns, that a fortified village in the 
Santal Parganah is called Nagara. The ancient Madhyamika, 
which was once besieged by Menander, is now called Nagari near 
Chitor (Smith's History, p. 187). Hieun “siang also mentions 
Nagara (modern Jellalabad) which was a province of ancient Kapisa 
(Kadphisa), the people whereof were the followers of Buddha (see 
his Travels, Index). 

The Nàgaras are mentioned in the list of countries and peoples‘ 
given in the Yogdvasistha-Ramdyana (Utpatti-prakarana, xxxv, 33) 
as a people. The same list refers to the Dravidas (ibid., 40) also as 
a people living south of the mount Chitra-küta, below the river 
Godavari. In this list the Andhras, Kalingas, and Chaulikas are clear- | 
ly distinguished from the Dravidas (ibid., 26-27). | 

Nagara is the name of a script also mostly prevailing in Northern 1 
India. There lives a powerful tribe called Nagara, in the moun- | 
taneous tract of Kabul in Afghanistan. Марага is the designation of 
a sect of Brahmins also who, itis held, came over from some part of 
Northern India and settled down in Gujrat ata place known as Na- 
garanandapura. From these Nagara Brahmans, it is said, came the 
use of the Nagari alphabet. A portion (part VI) of the Skanda- ‘ 
Purana bears the name  Nagara-khanda. From this instance, it 
would appear that the expression Nagara is at least as old as the 
Nàgara-khanda incorporated into the Skanda-Purdna which was 

B according to a general concensus, composed in honour of, or, ot 
least, named after Skandagupta (A.D. 455-480), the seventh Emperor £ 


of the early Gupta dynasty. 
Why the Nagara-khanda, the 6th part of the Skanda-Purana, is so 


called is not explained explicitly in the Purana itself. But from the 
contents of Chapters CXIV, CLXIII, cxcrx, cc, ccr and cout of this (6th) 
part, it seems to have been named after the Марага Brahmins. 


268 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NAGARA 


The etymological origin of the term nagara is, however, explained in 
Chapter cxiv of the Nagara-khanda. It is stated (vv. 76, 77, 78, 
93) to have arisen from an incantation of snake-posioning (cf. verses 
1-119, nagara, no poison). Compare the following : 

Garam visham iti proktarn na tatrasti cha sampratam 11 

Na garam na garam chaitach chhrutva ye pannagadhamah | 

Tatra sthasyanti te vadhya bhavishyanti yatha-sukham | 

Adya prabhriti tat sthanarh (Chamatkara-puram) nagarakhyarh 

dhara-tale 1 
Bhavishyati su-vikhyatam tava kirtti-vivarddhanam 11 
Evam tan nagaram jatam asmat kalad anantaram 11 
(Skanda-Purana, Part ут, Nagara-khanda, 
Chap. схгу, vv., 76, 77, 78, 93.) 

From all the literary and epigraphical instances given above, 
it appears certain that the expressions Nagara, Vesara, and Dravida 
are primarily geopraphical. But the precise boundaries of Марага, 
like those of Dravida and Vesara, are not traceable. The epigraphical 
quotations, however, would tend to localize Nàgara somewhere 
within the territory of modern Mysore. But the Nagara script, the 
Nagara-khanda of the Skanda-Purdpa, and the Nagara-Brahmins, 
representing some way or other the Northern India from the Himalaya 
to the Vindhya and from Gujrat to Magadha, would jointly give 
a wider boundary to Nagara. Besides the author of the Manasdra 
shows his acquaintance with buildings of the whole of India in the 
passage where he divides the best types of buildings by the following 
designations, namely, Padchala, Dravida, Madhya-kanta (meaning 
apparently MadhyadeSa), Kalinga, Varata (Virata), Kerala, Vam- 
бака, Magadha, Janaka, and Sphürjaka—(M., xxx, 5-7.) 

If the country of Nagara, like those of Dravida and Vesara be 
included in Southern India, in other words, if Northern India be 
excluded from the scope of the styles of buildings mentioned in records 
quoted above, the passage, mentioning the ten different types of 
buildings of the ten countries covering the whole of India, will have to 
be treated as what is called a spurious record, a term under which the 
conflicting ideas are reconciled by many a scholar. Let whatever be 
the boundaries of Nagara, it is clear beyond doubt that the three 
styles of architecture have arisen from three geographical names, 
Nagara, Vesara, and Dravida. And there we have a parallel instance 
of similar divisions in the early Grecian architecture : 

The three ancient orders—-the Doric, Ionic, Corinthian—on 
which were based the three styles of Grecian architecture have 
been traced by Vitruvius, an authority on architecture of the 
first century. 


269 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


NAGARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


* In this country (Smyrna) allotting different spots for different pur- 
poses, they began to erect temples, the first of which was dedicated 
to Apollo Panionios, and resembled that which they had seen in 
Achaia, and they gave it the name of Doric, because they had first 
seen that species in the cities of Deoria.’ — (Book ту, Chap. r.) 

Gwilt comments on it thus: ‘ The origin of the Doric order is 
a question not easily disposed of. Many provinces of Greece bore 
the name of Doria; but the name is often the least satisfactory mode 
of accounting for the birth of the thing which bears it.'—(Encyd., 
Art. 142.) 

‘The Ionic order, at first chiefly confined to the states of Asia 
Minor, appears to have been coeval with the Doric order.’—(Gwilt., 
Encycl.. Art. 153). ‘ That species, of which the Ionians (inhabitants, 
of Ion) were the inventors, has received the appellation of Ionic.— 
(Vitruvius, Book rv, Chap. 1.) 

E. The third species, Corinthian, is so called because ‘Callimachus, 

3 who for his great ingenuity and taste was called by the Athenians 
Catatechnos, happening at this time to pass by the tomb, observed 

the basket and the delicacy ofthe foliage which surrounded it. Pleased 
with the form and novelty of combination, he constructed, from 

the hint thus afforded, columns of this species in the country about 

Corinth.’ —(Ibid., Chap. 1.) 

* When Solomon ascended the throne, anxious to fulfil the wish of 
his father had long entertained of erecting a fixed temple for the ` 
1 reception of the ark, һе was not only obliged to send to Tyre for work- 
Ev" men, but for an architect also. Upon this temple a dissertation has 
been written by a Spaniard of the name of Villalpanda, wherein he, 
with consummate simplicity, urges that the orders, instead of being 
invention of the Greeks, were the invention of God Himself, and that Calli- 
machus most shamefully put for the pretentions to the formation of 
the Corinthian capital which, he says, had been used centuries before 
in the temple at Jerusalem.’—(lbid., Art. 52.) 

*'The other two orders, Tuscan and Composite, which are of 
a later date than the time of Vitruvius, are of Italian or Roman origin. 
Тһе Composite, as its title denotes, is the combination of other orders 
and has thus no independent importance. Тһе Tuscan order has 
also reference to the country of Tuscany, formerly called Eutruria, 
> a country of Italy.—(Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 178.) 

E Тһе origin of the Indian architecture is attributed to a mytholo- 
gical person Vi$vakarman, literally the Creator of the Universe. 
But the styles of architecture are stated to have been invented by 
one Bammoja. 


270 


IHINDU ARCHITECTURE 


МАСАКА 


“Ап interesting record from Holal is the label cut on the capital 
of a finely carved pillar іп the Amrite$vara temple. It is called in 
the inscription a Sükàra-pillar. Speaking of the sculptor who made 
it, the record says that he, Bammoja, the pupil of Padoja of Soge, 
was a Vi$vakarma, i.c. the architect of the gods in this Kali age, the 
master of the sixty-four arts and sciences, the clever builder of the 
sixty-four varieties of mansions and the architect who had invented 
(discovered) the four types of buildings, viz. Nagara, Kalinga, 
Dravida and Vesara. An earlier sculptor of about A. D. ninth 
century of whom we hear from an inscription on a pedestal at 
Kogali, was a grandson of Sivananni. It is stated that he made the 
image of the sun (divasa-kara) of which the stone in question was 
evidently the pedestal.— (Government of Madras С. О. по. 1260, 15th 
August, 1915, p. 90, see also Progress Report of the Assistant Archaeological 
Superintendent for Epigraphy, Southern Circle, 1914—15, p. 9o.) 

It has been pointed out already that Kalinga is mentioned in 
the Manasára (ххх 5-7) as the name of a type of building, but 
therein it is never stated as a style like the арага, Vesara and 
Dravida, the Kalinga type of buildings being apparently included 
in one of these three styles. In the same treatise there is another 
passage, pointed out above, where Randhra or Andhra is mentioned 
as a type of chariots. It has also been stated above that these 
Kalinga and Andhra might be two branches of the Vesara, being 
geographically placed on the two sides of it, the three together 
forming Tri-Kalihga or three Kalingas. In one of the epigraphical 
quotations (no. 15) Bhümija is mentioned alongside Dravida and 
Nagara, and this Bhümija (Jit. originated in the land or the style 
of the land, where the document was written) is apparently same 
as Vesara. | 

Some of the numerous literary and epigraphical quotations given 
above must be placed in dates later than the time of Bammoja, men- 
tioned in the present document. But neither his name nor his style 
(Kalinga) is associated with the three styles, Nagara, Vesara, Dra- 
vida, in any of the instances quoted above. It is not unlikely that 
Bammoja *discovered? the three styles, which had been perhaps 
existing long before him, and adding his own invention (Kalinga) 
claimed the originality for all the four. Such instances of unscru- 
pulously adding to the works of one's predecessors and claiming the 
originality are not rare in the literary or the archaeological records. 

It does not seem probable that any one person could have invented 
all the styles of architecture at one time and issued them as a royal 
command; they are more likely to have arisen out of the. Tum 


271 cH 


E 


p E 


МАТАКА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


circumstances at different periods, before they were recorded, 
presumably first in the architectural treatises and then in the 
epigraphical records. š 

The object of this article is not, however, to identify the country 
of Nagara, nor to find out the inventor or inventors of the styles, 
although on them depend many interesting points of the ancient 
Indian architecture. Неге 16 15 clear that the expressions Nagara, 
Vesara and Dravida are geographical, and that they imply three 
styles of architecture in its broadest sense. 

But on the last point, too, modern authorities hold different views. 
In discussing the styles of Indian architecture, Mr. Havell is of opi- 
nion (Study of the Indian Civilization, Preface) that they are Siva 
E and Vishnu, and not Northern and Southern, or the Indo-Aryan and 
= the Dravidian, as Fergusson and Burgess suppose to be (ef. History 
of Ind. and East. Arch., 1910). Тһе Silpd-Sastra and the Agamas 
X seem to disagree to Havell's theory nor do they wholly support the 
= с views of Fergusson and Burgess. Тһе division proposed by Havell, 

being not geographical, may be systematically applied to religious 
architecture, while that adopted by Fergusson and Burgess being of 
a geographical nature, is more in agreement with the system of the 
Silpa-Sastras than Havell’s division. 

The fact that the Hindu art-consciousness is largely dominated 
by a spiritual motive being strictly adhered to, it would follow that 
Havell’s division into Siva and Vishnu, or others, into Hindu, Buddhist 
and Jain, would be more logical than that into Northern, Eastern 
and Southern, or Nagara, Vesara and Dravida. But even admit- 
ting this, we must not forget that the Hindus knew the point where 
exactly to draw the line between religion, on the one hand, and 
social and political life, on the other. It is needless to observe that 
within the three geographical styles the sectarian subdivisions are 
quite feasible. 

NATAKA—A moulding, a theatre, a calyx, a crowning, moulding 
or ornament of a pillar; it is generally used together with petals ; 
the part of the capital which supports the abacus (phalaka) is some- 
E times so called ; a cardinal number. 

Padanam арі sarveshàm  patra-jatyair alankritam | 

Antare natakair yuktam padmanam tu dalair yutam | 

(M., xiv, 149-150.) 
In connexion with the entablature : Natakanta-mrinalika | 
(M., ху, 53.) 


272 


«т aa n cWAIIV AAA. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NATYA-GRIHA 


Narair và natakange tu kuryad devalayadinam | 
Harmyantaralayah sarve птіпдіп nataka-sarnyutam | 
Etat tu prastarasyordhve naàtakasyordhvaráavat 1 
(M., хут, 112, 114, 117.) 

Athava tapasvininàm cha Кафе va natakahakam (mandapam) 1 

г (М., хххіу, 426.) 

In connexion with pavilions (mandapa) : 

Natka-vistararhn paficha-paficha-bhagena yojayet 1 


х 1 (Ibid., 503.) 
In connexion with the arch (torana) : 


Makara-kimbari-vaktram natakadi-bhujangavat | 
Kesari-mandanam bhavati chitra-torana-natakaih | 


(M., хімі, 66-67.) 
The cardinal number ten : 


Shat-saptashtaka-dandam và nanda-nàtaka-rudrákam | 
(М., тх, 430.) 
Its synonym аге anta, mrinalika vallika, patra, valli, chitranga and 
kulikànghrika.—(M. ху, 53-55.) 
МАТІКА-А moulding. 
In connexion with the arch (torana) : 


Майка phalaka mushti-bandhanam patra-vallikam | 


b (M., хім, 65.) 
In connexion with the pillar : š 


Kumbhayamarn tathotkantam ürdhve karna-samarn bhavet I 
Tat-samam natikakhyarn syad unnatarn tad višeshtah | 
(M., xv, 54-55.) 

| NATYA-GRIHA(-MANDAPA, -УЕ5МА, -SALA)—The play- 
| house, ‘heatre, music hall, dancing pavilion, used for enacting a 
drama (abhinaya), holding a music performance (sangita) or dancing 
show (nritta). It is built in connexion with a temple, a palace, and 
independently for the use of general public in towns, countryside 
and mountain valley. It is built in various shapes—circular (vritta) 
semi-circular (vikrishta), quadrangular (chatura$ra), and triangular 
((гуабга). Abhinava-gupta, the commentator of Bharata-Natya-Sastra 
refers to some eighteen varieties with reference to shape and size. 

It consistsof two main parts : the auditorium (preksha-griha) and the stage 
(rahga-mandapa). "Тһе former faces the latter and is one storey (bhümi) 
lower insituation.. The auditorium supplies the seating arrangement which 
varies in accordance with the shape of the theatre and in consideration 
of its being attached to a temple, or palace, or built independently for the 
use of the general public. In an open variety of the theatre built in the 


273 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


y Ü€IIÉIŠII€€III€I€I€IIÉIIOIWIIIIŠIOIIOWQIIIOAIƏI.AIÓI€IIIIIIIIIIIITI و‎ E TT 


NATYA-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


courtyard of a temple * all kinds of seats are assigned for ordinary, special, 
and occasional uses to Chakravartin and other classes of kings, as well for the 
gods, to be seated together with their consorts, as also for the accommoda- 
tion of ordinary people.’ (Manasdra, хуп, 26-29). In а closed variety of 
the palace theatre the seating arrangement is more specifically shown. 
The first row corresponding to stall and facing the stage is occupied in the 
centre by the court ladies (varangana) having the learned courtiers on their 
right and the bards on their left. Immediately behind the court ladies is the 
royal seat, on the left of which seats are reserved for the harem (antahpura) 
and on the right is the seat for the chief queen and others. The stage pro- 
per consists of ranga-Sirsha (stage-front), ranga-pitha (the place immediate- 
ly behind for acting), and nepathya-griha (green-room). It is shaped like 
a mountain cave and have two floors. The upper floor or the platform 
(vedika) is made of wood, and the surrounding walls, of bricks. 

Like many other things the Indian tradition has ascribed a divine, that 
is, an indigenous origin to Sanskrit drama rather than a Grecian influence. 
The JVatyaveda is stated to have been created by Brahma for the benefit of 
all castes including the Südras who had no access to the Vedas. It is signi- 
ficant that dramas were intended at origin to provide facilities for the enjoy- 
ment of all classes of people, thus indicating popularity and interest to the 
subject of the general public, men, women and children, who could hardly be 
expected even if they were all literate, to read the texts in Sanskrit in order 
to enjoy the dramas. Thus the drama is stated to have been compiled of the 
element of recitation from the Rig-Veda, the element of chanting or songs 
from the Sama-Veda, the element of mimic art from the Yajur-Veda, and the 
element of sentiment from the Athar-Veda. Siva and Parvati are stated 
to have contributed the Tandava and Lasya dances, and Vishnu : the four 
dramatic styles essential to the effect of any play. Viśvakarman, the divine 


architect, is stated to have built the first playhouse in which the sage Bharata 


carried into practice the dramatic art thus created.! 

This traditional account has been gathered from the Bharata-Nà tya-sàstra 
which treatise the Western scholars have placed in the third century of the 
Christian era. There is also a class of works, called JVafasutra, referred to 
in Panini's grammar (4, 3, 110), dealing with directions to actors (nata). 
But the dialogues and other elements have been discovered in the early 
Vedas. These dialogues are romantic in nature and dramatic in essence. 
Thus the conversations between Yama and Yami, or Purüravas and Ürvaši 
would charm a modern audience in а most up-to-date theatre. Professor 
Keith has further recognized that 'the Vedic ritual contained within 


1Keith : Sanskrit Drama, p. 12. 
? For instance Rig-Veda, v. 10, 51-53, 86, 95, 108; уш, тоо; 1, 179, 28; 
IV, 18. 


274 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` 


А SUGGESTION FOR THE INTERIOR. 


10 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 


SCALE OF = EET. 


| GREEN ROOM STAGE 
—  - Т” CHANG!NG, 
> S 5 
2 1 z 
Š N MN =< 
° š 
% 
AUDITORIUM. b т / 
/ e 
/ @ 
№ 


PLAN-SEMI CIRCULAR ТҮРЕ. 
МАП ҮА GRIHA 
——— 


GREEN ROOM 
QREEN ROOM 


PLAN—TRIANGULAR TYPE 
SCALE 16 FT. = ONE INCH, 


NA. YA GRIHA. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


GREEN ROOM 


GREEN ROOM 


PLAN—QUADRARGULAR TYPE 
SCALE В FT. «ONE INCH 


0. Gurukul Kangri University. Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= U ARCHITECTURE NATYA-GRIHA 


=í the germs of drama’ and in the ceremonies ‘ there was undoubtedly 


— ent the element of dramatic representation." 1 

—i n the Ramayana mention is made of the dramatic artists (nata), pro- 
= sional dancer (nartaka), and plays in mixed languages (Vyamisraka). 
---ц the Harivamsa which is а continuation of the Mahabharata mention is 
— —Jwade of players who made а drama out of the Ramayana legend. The 


—widence of dramas being actually played in а theatre is found in the 
— JMahübhàshya ‘which mentions representations of Karisa-vadha (slaying of 
— YWKarsa) and the Balibandha (binding of Bali). 
The Prekshagara or auditorium is mentioned in the Málavikágnimitra 
(Act I). Sangita-Sala or music hall is referred to in the Sakuntala (Act У). 
(x, 5-18) refers to three types of theatres and thirty 


The Bhavaprakasana 
different kinds of dramas which were actually played by a dramatic company 


under the direction of Divakara : 

Chaturagra-tryasra-vritta-bhedat so'pi tridha bhavet 1 
The Sangita-chidamant, a text in manuscript, describes the drop scene 
and other curtain : ‹ the first curtain is the front drop which is removed as 
soon as the show begins. Behind the mist-like curtain, the danseuse performs 
the dance called 1а5уа (nude) ' (Triven;, р. 722). Sceneries аге described 
in great detail in the Bharata-Natya-Sastra : 

Kaksha-vibhage jñeyani grihani nagarani cha | 

Udyanarama sarid-asrama atavi хайа ll 

Prithivi sagara$ chaiva trailokyam sacharacharam | 
Varshani sapta-dvipas cha parvata vividhas tatha 11 
Alokaš chaiva lokas cha rasatalamathapi cha | 
haiva griham bhuvanàm cha 11 


Daityanam alayas с 
Nagare cha vane chapi varshe vai parvate tatha | 


Yatra vartha pravarteta tatra kaksham prayojayet ll 
Báhyam va madhyamam vapi tathaivabhyantaram punah | 
Düram va sannikishtarn va дебата tu parikalpayet | 
(Natya-Sastra, ed. Joan Grosset, Paris, 1898.) 
particulars and dimensions the 


The same text describes with minute 
auditorium of three types : 
) Idam prekshagriham drishtva dhimata Vigvakarmana | 
| Tri-vidhah sannivesascha Sastratah parikalpitah ! 
! Viprakrishtas-chaturasras cha tryaéras chaiva tu mandapah | 

Prekshagrihanam sarvesharn tri-prakaro vidhih smritah 11 
(Natya-Sastra, Gaekwad’s Series, 
xxxvi, Chap. n, 7» 8, 25.) 


À 1 Keith : Sanskrit Drama, р. 23- 


1 : 2 Mahabhashya on Panini 3, 1,» 26; see Macdonell, History of Sanskrit 
; Literature, p- 347: - 
Е 275 — 
چ‎ 


(w uwa қы 


NATYA-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 


The pillars, doors, walls, green-rooms, etc. are fully described : 
Stambham dvararh cha bhittim cha nepathyagriham eva cha | f 
Evam utthāpayet tajjño vidhi-drishtena karmaņā 11 
(Nātya-śāstra, Gaekwad's Series, 
xxxvi, Chap. п, 65-66.) 
Тһе stage proper with its different members are also described : 
Ranga-pitham tatah karyam vidhi-drishtena karmana | 
(bid., п, 71.) 
Ranga-Sirsharh tu kartavyarh shad-daru-samanvitam 1 
Kàryam dvàra-dvayam chatra nepathyasya grihasya cha | 
(Ibid., п, 71, 72 ; see also 78.) " 
Evam kàshtha-vidhim kritva bhitti-karnena prayojayet | 
Nirvyüha-kuharopctam nànà-gratitha-vedikam | 
Кагуаһ Saila-guhakaro dvi-bhümir nàtya-mandapah | 
(Ibid., u, 70, 84.) 

Compare DARIGRIHA  (Kumára-sambhava, I, 10, 14) and SILA-VESMAN 
( Megha-diita, 1, 25). 

The Silpa-raina of Srikumara also describes two or three types of play- 
houses (Chap. xxxix, 60-68). 

The playhouses belonging to temples, palaces and ordinary dwelling 
houses are described in the M@nasara (хуп, 2-12, 16, 20, 24-20, see 
quotations under MADHYARANGA). j 4 

The epigraphical evidences are also not wanting. Thus from its a’ range- | 
ments and inscriptions the cave in Ramgarh hill in Sarguja ' appears to 
have been evidently intended for dramatic performances.’ 1 Тһе queen’s i 
cave and that of Ganeša in Udayagiri ‘ are further examples: they represent | 2 
the doings of these ladies and gentlemen (actresses and actors) in a highly he 
realistic way.'? “Ву Naga, the Vira-Ballala-pattam-svami, were built the 
dancing hall and terrace of Parsva-deva, and in front of the Basadi of 
Kamatha Parsva Deva stone pillars and a dancing hall were made.’ 3 M 1 

All these documents, comprising general literature, technical works on E 
music, architectural texts, and epigraphical records, may supply a fairly | 2 
complete picture of the playhouse of the Hindu period. It needs no elucida- I 
tion that the Hindu mind is essentially musical. Music was required for the (% | 
Windus to celebrate one’s birth, wedding and similar other happy occasions. \ 


1 Dr. Block : Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen, Bd., тутп, S. 455. 

2 Lüders : Indian Caves as Pleasure Resorts, Indian Antiquary XXXIV, рр. 
199-200. But Jacobi is still under the old prejudice when referring to the cave 
theatre of Ramgarh hill he says that ‘it is arranged after the Greek pattern.’ 
The cave threatres are, however, referred to in the Kumdra-sambhava (1, 10, 14) 


and Megha-dūta (1, 25) of Kalidasa. | | 
3 Rice : Ep. Carnat., Vol. u, no. 130; Translation, p. 178. See also the Hampe К 
Inscription of Krishnaraya, lines 24, 32, North Face. i 
276 ( 
( 
| 

сс-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 8 ! | 


Mod 
Шаа 


ш j) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


NATYA-GRIHA 


It was also required to mourn one’s death and similar sad incidents 
including even calamities as like earthquakes and epidemics. Religious 
ceremonies had to be accompanied by music. These musics include both 
vocal and instrumental songs, dancing, and enacting of plays varying 
from a single act or scene to a performance which continued for days and 
nights. Thus the elements of drama are available in the earliest Vedas. The 
excavations at Mahenjo-Daro, Harappa and other sites may supply 
evidence of regular theatre even for the Pre-Vedic period. In order to 
carry out into practice the musical habit of the Hindus, which was so con- 
vincingly in existence for milleniums, no doubt suitable accommodation 
had to be found out by indigenous efforts and evolution. It would 
be the limit of prejudice to imagine that although the Hindus knew all 
about a dramatic performance and although the art of building was under- 
stood and successfully practised at least between 3000 and 4000 В. С. when 
Mahenjo-Daro edifices might have been erected, yet they did not think of 
constructing a playhouse even after the model of the then existing natural 
caves until the Grecian invaders supplied the pattern between 300 and 350 
B.C. Those who are not thus prejudiced will find it easy to infer from the 
evidences quoted above and to come to the conclusion that there were in 
Hindu India rustic theatres for folk dance or popular performance, as well 
as regularly constructed playhouses of various shapes and sizes. They were 
built with scientific knowledge of acoustics, light, ventilation, safety and 
security. ‘They were erected in villages, small country towns, centres of 
pilgrimages, and in big capital cities. They were attached to commodious 
dwelling houses, king’s palaces, and god’s temples. In all these constructions 
provisions were distinctly made for the stage proper and the auditorium. 
The former comprised the platform with a thick drop scene in front 
and the theatre proper with various realistic sceneries and curtains 
behind which even semi-nude dance could be performed, the indecency 
being prevented by the mistiness caused by the device of thin curtains and 


‘light. The green-rooms and other rooms were made for dressing and rest- 


ing of the actors and actresses, and even for an interview with them by some 
fascinated audience. ‘The auditorium with the orchestra in front provided 
seats for all classes and ranks of audience, which were artistically arranged 
in tiers and galleries. It was adorned with beautiful doors, windows, bal- 
conies, and walls and ceilings with carvings and paintings on them. There 
were also open air auditorium with surrounding walls and terraces which 
latter served as galleries. But the stage appears never to have been uncover- 
ed either on the sides or at the top.* 


1 Еог further details, see the writer’s article, ‘The Playhouse of the Hindu 
Period’ (Modern Review, April, 1935, PP. 370-378, Krishnaswami Aiyangar’s 
Commemoration Volume, pp. 363-380). z 


277 


NATYA-MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF . 


NATYA-MANDAPA—The stage proper consisting of ranga-Sirsha | 


(stage-front), ranga-pitha (place for acting), and nepathya-griha 
(green-room). In shape it should be like a mountain cave and have 
two floors : 
Кагуаһ Sailaguhakaro dvi-bhümir natya-mandapa | 
(Bharata-Natya-Sastra п, 84, also 91.) 
The upper floor or the platform (Vedika, ibid., п 80) should be made of 
wood : 
Evarn kashtha-vidhim kritva bhitti-karma prajojayet |—(Jbid., п, 82.) 
The surrounding walls should be made of bricks (Slishteshtaka). 
NATTA (NATYA)-SALA—A detached building used as a music 
hall. 
Natta-Sala cha karttavyà dvàra-de$a-samaérayaà 1 
And the music hall should be built attached to the gateway (of the 
temple). 
(Garuda-Puràána, Chap. XLVI, v. 45.) 
А mandapa or hall for religious music, built in front of the main temple : 
Durgga-devalayasyabharanam iva purah sthapayamasa gurvvirh $rimàn 
$rinatha-viryyah sthagita-daSa-disan nàtya-$alam chhalena | 
(Dirghasi Inscrip. of Vanapati, lines 14—15, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, p. 316.) 
NABHI-VITHI—A road proceeding from the central part of a 
village or town. 
Brahma-bhaga-vriddhya vithir nabhi-vithiti kathyate | 
(Kamikagama, xxv, 1.) 
МАКАМА—А temple of Vishnu. 
(Note on a Tamil Inscription in Siam, Hultsch, 
J. Ë A. S., 1913, рр. 337-339.) 
NARACHA—A road running towards the east. 


Pran-mukha vithayah sarva narachakhye(a i)ti smritah 1, 


7а 


(Катікавата, xxv, 3.) 
NALA—A canal or gutter, channel, lotus stalk (М., хіх, 144, 148; 
153, etc.), a tubular vessel of the body (M., L, 198, 201, 205, etc. uL 
middle, central ( M., ххх, 360, хип, 14). 
In connexion with the phallus.—(M., ш, 294-296, еіс.) 
3 278 


v quus Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ыз Ta 


- - * 


7 
| 
| 


1 
I 
i 
| 
) 
Ж 


l = 

E 

| | 

|| 

| 

| 9 5 NO NOILO3S 
Ж 4 SS ном змо YNDI 1:18 37У25 

тоа рҮ с=т" -----д/ 
/UN , "j. 


NN З1у9 321016 мула 


| — 303 NO NOLLO3S , 
r= Н 


| 
| 
T 
ann 3ULN3O (| Ц... 
а ч 


'ONIHO.LId 
| | жона 


"DNIHOLId -~ 
жоо“: 


аа 220 | e 
NO NOILO3S 


‚ ы 


DNIHOLId 
моо E 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


j HINDU ARCHITECTURE NASA 


NALA-GEHA—A canal-house, channel, middle chamber, central 
hall. 

. . . Bhitti-geham ihochyate 1 

Tri-chatush-paficha-shad-bhagarh saptarhSarn kudya-vistaram | 

Sesharh tu nàla-geham tu... . | 

(M., хххш, 359, 360.) 

NALANDA—tThe famous Buddhist institution at Bihar, comprising 
several vihdra, sangarama, dharmaganja, and chaya buildings ; 
there were colleges, halls, libraries, observatories, priests’ chambers, 
‘richly adorned towers and the fairy-like turrets’ and * brilliant 
and magnificent memorial’ buildings. “Тһе whole establishment 
is surrounded by a brick-wall. One gate opens into the great 
college, from which are separated eight other halls, standing in the 
middle. (Accounts of Hiuen Tsiang, I-tsing, Tibetan writers, 
Excavations, Archaeological Survey, and Sankalia); see under 
ViISVAVIDYALAYA. 


NALIKA (see NALA)—A canal, the lower leg. 
Ekaméarn tad-dhatam  bhitti-tàram $esham cha nalikal 
(M., ххх, 438.) 
The lower leg.—(M., XLV, 42, etc.) 
NALIKA-GARBHA—A rectangular hall of the length twice the 
breadth. 
Nalika gabbho ti bitt harato dvigunita-gunayamo digha-gabbho 1 
(Buddhaghosha, Chullavagga, vt, 33.) 
The interpretation of Oldenberg and Rhys Davids as ‘ palanquin-shaped’ 
given under the translation ofthe term is not supported by the commenta- 
tor Buddhaghosha as quoted above. 
NALIKA-GRIHA (see NALA-GEHA)—A canal house. 
| (M., xix, 98, etc.) 
“ NALI (see NALIKA)—A canal, a gutter. 
; š Geha-tare tu saptarnšarn nali-taram yugarnšakam | 
(М., хіх, 115; see also 116.) 
МА5А--А nose, а nose-shaped object, the upper piece of a door, 
a vestibule. 
Vijñeya паѕіка паза паза dvarordhva-daru cha | 
(Amarakósha, п, ii, 13.) 
In connexion with the base: 
Grahadi-chitra-sarvesham kshudra-nasadi-bhishitam | 
(M., xiv, 236, etc.) 


i 279 ` 


val 
| CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA y 


NASIKA-(SI) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NASIKA(-SI) (see NAsA)—A nose-shaped architectural object, 
a vestibule, an open court or porch before a house, a hall next to 
the entrance to a house, a bracket. 


In connexion with the pillar (M., хуі, 76, 77, 90, 120, etc). | 

Some component part of a building (M., xvm, 207; XIX, 174, etc.). 
Ghatur-dikshu chatur-nasi (M., L, 284). 

Suprabhedagama, xxxi (referring to a class of buildings): 
Ghatush-küta$ chatuh-$ala$ chatvarah par$va-nasikah | (48) 
Mukha-nàsi tathà yuktarn dva-da$am chànu-nàsikàh | (49) 
Chatur-nasi-samayuktam anu-nàsi-da$ashtakam 11 (51) 
Küta-$alà-samáyuktà punah райјага-паѕіка || (52) 

Par$vayor nasika-yuktarn tan-madhye tanu(tvanu)-nasika 1} (79) 
Eka-nasikaya yuktam pafijararn samudahritam | 
Küteshu nàsikà-yuktam koshtham etat prakirtitam 11 (80) 

Kamikagama, ту (eight kinds of Nasika) : 

Nasika tv-ashtadha |йеуа tasyadau simha-samjfiitam | 
Ѕагаһа-райјагат anyat syat tritiyarh matam 11 (132) 

Shaped like the nose (M., xxxm, 541). 

Its height ends by the fore-part of the dome ( M., ххх, 549). 

See also M., ххх, 550-561. 

Shaped like ala, sikha, circular, galaküta (M., XXXII, 552-553). 
Кігуйһа-рай)атага pa$chat райсһатпата lamba-nasikam | 
Simha-$rotram tu shashtam syat khanda-niryühakam tatha | 
Jhasa-paiijaram anyat syat tasàm lakshanam uchyate 11 (133) 

They are also called paíijaras : 

Sarveshàm pafijaranam tu manam evam udãhritam 11 (149) 

The details of these nasikas or pafijaras (ibid., 134-146). 
Slishta-prasada-nivranga-vipularn sama-nirgamam 1 
Shat-varga-sahitam $akti-dhvajayor mukha-pattikam 1 (134) 
Vedika-jalaka-stambha-rajitam simha-pafijaram | 
Tri-dandàdi-chatur-danda-paryantam vipulanvitam 11 (135) 
Yatharhayama-sarhyuktarn süchi-pàda-dvayam dvijah | Ë 
Sarveshàm pañjaranarn tu madhyame sarnprayojayet 11 (136) 

Dhamni prasadam ašlishtarn sanivram chardha-nirgatam | 

_ Adhisthanadi-pañchanga-šakti-dhvaja-samanvitam 11 (137) 

Mukha-pattikayopetarn vedika-jalakanvitarn 11 

Karna-pada-yutarn sardha-pañjararn tu vidhiyate 11 (138) 

Pragvad vipula-sarnyuktarn pāda-nirgamānvitam | 

Tri-bhagam nirgatarn vapi vrita-sphatika-sannibham H! (139) 

Pañjarasyadimarn $esha(rn) pragvad atra samiritam 11 (140) 

Syanuripa-sikhasy-agrarn §lishta-nivranga-karnakam | 
280 


laridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


co) aT 


de 
4 
р 
“ 
H 


NASIKA 


NATAKA NAGA-KALA. 


HEET IRO 
LINING. 


TO SAFE 
DEPOSIT VAULT- 


о 
о 
о 
с 
z 
m 
z 
^ 


|Цсоинтен 


NIORA 


` "OFFICE. 


_ LONG SECTION. 
NIDHANA. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NIDHANA 


Kapotadyanga-sarnyuktam etan пігуйһа-рай)агатп 1! (141) 
Sarn$lishta-nivra-karnanghri-krita-naga-talam Sirah | 
Niryüha-rahitarh yuktarh sarvangarh lamba-nàsikam 11 (142) 
Tad eva simha-érotrabha-Sikharn yad-vad nivrakam | 
Sarnšritarn karna-padena simha-$rotram tad uchyate 11 (143) 
Vistare pafichamamSe tu dvyarmšam nirgamananvitam | 
Nivradhastat kapotadyair améair mandita-rupakam 11 
Namna tu khanda-niryüha(rh) jňātvā samyak prayojayet і! (144) 
Danda-dandànta-nishkrantam nivradhastad upary-adhah | 
Angair yuktarn kapotadyaih kandharam torananvitam 11 (145) 
Jhasa-pafijaram etat syad ashtamarh namatah dvijàh 11 (146) 
NAHA-LINGA—A kind of phallus. 
Achàrya-hastena và lingarh $ishya -(sya)s tu naha-linga-vat 1 
(М., іл, 335; see details under Lincs.) 
МІСАМА-А town, the quarters inhabited by traders, a market. 
(M., X, 42; see details under NAGARA.) 
Cf. Nagara-nigama-jana-padanam—‘ towns, marts and rural parts 
(e. g. Grama-nagara-nigama, Нагзћасћатйа, p. 220, 1, 1.)’—(Junagadh 


Inscrip. of Rudradaman, lines 10-11, Ep. Ind., Vol. үш, рр. 43, 37, апа 
note 5.) 


Nigama-sabhaya-nibadha—registered at the town’s hall.—(Senart, Nasik 
Cave Inscrip. по. 12, line 4, Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, рр. 82, 83.) 
NIGAMA-SABHA (see  NiGAMA)—-A  guild-hall the traders, 
assembly. 
Cf. Eta cha sarva-sravita-nigama-sabhaya nibaddha cha phalaka- 


уйге charitrà iti—‘ and all this has been proclaimed in the guild-hall 
and has been written on boards according to custom. ° 


‘Nigama-sabhaya, ‘in the guild-hall,' may also be translated “іп 
the assembly of the traders.’ Dr. Burgess.—(Kshatrapa Inscrip. no. 9, 
line 4, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. IV, pp. 102, 103, note 3 on page 103.) 


NIDRA—A moulding. 
Vajanam chaika-bhagena nidreka vajanarh tribhih 11 
Vàjanarn chaika-bhagena tatha nidra tri-bhagatah 11 
(Kamikagama, Lv, 10, 11.)- 
NIDHANA—A store-room, a treasury. 


Vimana-Saleshu cha mandapeshu nidhàna-sadmeshv-api gopuresh_ 
vapi | 
(M., xiv, 397-400.) 
281 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


+ 


NIB(-V)IDA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NIB(-V)IDA—An ornament covering the lower part of the pent- 
roof, a moulding. 
Астат vikašitabharn syan mülarn cha nibidanvitam 1 
(M., хуш, 245, etc.) 


NIMNA(-KA)—The cavity, depth, depressed part, drip, projection, 
edge of an architectura) or sculptural object, a moulding. 


A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 247, etc.; see the lists of mould- 
ings under ADHISHTHANA). 
A moulding of the column (M., xv, 52). 
A moulding of the pitha or pedestal of the phallus (М., іш, 27). 
Chatur-dikshu sabhadram va chaika-dvy-amena nimnakam | 
^ (M., 1, 285.) 
The depressed part of the chin : 
Hanvantam tad-dvayor madhye nimna-tungam Sivayatam 1 
(M., XLV, 103.) 
NIRGAMA—tThe projection. 
(1) Manasara : 
The projections of the mouldings of the base (M., xiv, 385-412 ; see 
under ADHISHTHANA). 
The projections of the mouldings of the pedestal ( M., хш, 128-146; see 
under UÜPAPITHA.) 
The projection of the (whole) pedestal (zbid.. 20-35). 
Cf. Nirgamodgamane vapi putra-nà$am avapnuyat |—(M., LXIX, 19.) 
(2) Nirgamar tu punas tasya yavad vai Sesha-pattika | 
(Matsya—Purdna, Chap. ссіхп, v. 4.) 
Chatur-diksku tatha jñeyarn nirgamam tu tatoh budhaih | 
(Ibid., Chap. ccrxix, v. 2.) 
(3) Ashtamarnšena garbhasya rathakanam tu nirgamah | 
(Agni—Purdna, Chap. хіп, v. 13 ; see also v. 14.) 
(4) Nirgamas tu $ukanghre$ cha uchchhraya-Sikhararddhagah 11 
Chatur-dikshu tatha jñeyo nirgamas tu tatha budhaih 11 (9) 
Bhàgam ekarh grihitva tu nirgamarn kalpayet punah tt (то) 
Nirgamas tu samakhyatah Sesharh pürvavad eva tu |1 (14) 
 Sukanghrih pürvavaj jfieyà nirgamochchhráyakarn bhavet ıı (17) 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, vv. 4, 9, 10, 14,17.) 
(5) Salanàm tu chatur-dikshu chaika-bhagaditah kramat | 
Pada-bhaga-vivriddhya cha ashta-bhagavasanakam 11 (101) 
Vinirgamasya chayamo tad-vriddhya tasya: vistarah I! (102) 
Nirgamo oo M tu prakarad bahyato bhavet || (127) 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, ror, 102, 127.) 


282 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NIRVASA-MANDAPA 


Madhyagara-vinishkranta-nirgamena samanvitah |! 
_Nirgamas tu dvi-bhagena vistara-dv(a)yarh$a-manatah t 
(Kamikagama, хім, 24, 26.) 
Adhyardha-dvi-tri-dando và nirgama$ chodgamo bhavet 11 M 


(Ibid., LIV, 21.) 
(6) Sarvesham eva pàdànaàrn tat-padarh nirgarn bhavet 11 - 
Of all columns the projection is one-fourth of the height. : 
(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 65.) 7 
NIRGALAC-—A part of a swing, а moulding. 2% 


Ауаве nirgalarn kuryad yojayet rajjum eva va 11 

Vastrordhve chaika-hastantarh dolaya phalakantakam 1 

Tad-irdhve vajanantarn syàn nirgalayamam iritam t 2 

Nirgalagre dvayagrarn syat phalaka-valayanvitam | 
(M., L, 168-171.) 7 


NIRETANA-—The forepart of the branch of an ornamental tree 

(kalpa-vriksha). 
Cf. Bhramarair abhirayuktarh sarva-$akhà-niretane | RU 
(M., XLVI, 58.) 


NIRYUHA—A kind of a turret-like ornament on columns or gates 
a pinnacle, a turret; a chaplet, a crest, a head ornament, the crest 
of a helmet; a peg or bracket projecting from a wall to hang or 
place anything upon (cf. NAGA-NIRYUHA) ; wood placed in a wall 
for doves to build their nest upon : a door, a gate. 
(1) Niryühàdyair alankritya (M., XLIX, 186, еќс.). 
(2) Ramayana : 
У. 9, 20 : Vimànair hema-niryühaih | 
V. о, 58 : Charu-torana-niryühà (lanka) | 
(3) Mahabharata : 
I. 43, 44 : Dvàra-torana-niryühair yuktam nagaram | 
: I. 7, 96: Aneka-vidha-prasada-harmya-valabhi-nirytha-Satasam- 
kulah (naga-lokah) | 
(4) Нагіуатаба (Pet. Dict.), 5021 (5015, 5018, 5023) : 
Марагуаһ paschimarh dvaram uttararh naga-dvararh pürvarn nagara- 
i niryüham dakshinarn nagara-dvaram | 
NIRVASA-MANDAPA—A pavilion for banishment, a private room. 
Tat-pure’lindam ekarhSam athava nirvasa-mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 326, etc.) | 
283 к m 


NIRVYUHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NIRVYUHA—A cross circle, a small tower. 


Cf. Maha-vararh vimanordhve nirvyühánana-samyutam | . 
(Катікавата, XLV, 17.) 
NIVATA-BHADRAKA—A class of chariots. 


 (M., хиш, 113 ; see under RATHA.) 


NIVESANA—A resting place, a stall for cattle, a colonial settle- 
ment. 
(R.-V., 19, 9 ; vit, 19, 5.) 
NISHADAJA(-DHA)—A class of pavilions, a type of building. 
(M., XXXIV, 152 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
A class of buildings without the kita-$ala (top-hall) but with eight 
other halls and eight aviaries : 
Prasado nishadhas tatra küta-Sala-vihinakah | 
Ashta-Sala-samayukta$ chashta-pafijara-sarnyutah 11 
з (Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 45.) 
NISHADYA—A bedstead, a couch, a hall, a shop, a market place. 
(Sisupala-vadha, хуш, 15, etc.) 
NISHIDHI (see МівАррні)--А monument. 
NISHKALA—A site plan. 


Yugmam nishkalam proktam ayugmarh sakalam tatha | 
(M., vit, 73 ; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
NISHKASA—A verandah, a portico, a balcony, a projection. 
Prag-grivah paficha-bhagena nishkàsas tasya chochyate | 
Karayet sushiram tadvat ргаКагаѕуа tri-bhagatah 11 
Prag-grivah paficha-bhagena nishkasena viseshatah | 
Kuryàd va paficha-bhagena-prag-grivarn karna-mülatah 11 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 24-25.) | 


NISADDHI(NISIDI) (see Мівнірні)--А house for rest, a tomb, 
a monument. - 

(т) Rami settiyara Nisidi—‘ The Nisidi of Rami setti." 

* Nisidi is given by Sanderson as a bill of acquaintance; Dr. Bhau Dàji 
(Journ. Bom. Вт. В. As. Soc., Vol., Ix, p. 315, Inscription, по. 4) translates it 
by house of rest, on the analogy of an inscription in the Udayagiri cave in 
Orissa ; this is probably its meaning as used here.’ Dr. Fleet.—Sanskrit and 

. old Kanarese Inscrip. no. LVI, Ind. Ant., Vol. уш, p. 246, note 48.) 

(Ep. Garnat., Vol. u, Inscriptions on Chandragiri, Vindhyagiri and in the 
town.) 

284 


on. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA - 


d 
A 


ғы 


^ 


 KXCE"-—-—-—-X«—9 ——— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE NISADDHI (М15101) 


(2) * Erected a stone hall for gifts in Jinanathapura and set up a tomb 
(nisidhiyarn) in memory of the Maha-mandalacharyya Devakirtti Pandita 
Deva. (No. 40; Roman Text, p. 10, line 3 from the bottom upwards; 
Transl., p. 122, line 19 Ғ.) 

(3) ‘By Madhavachandra Deva was the tomb (Nishadyakakarayeta) 
raised to his memory.’ (No. 41; Roman Text, p. 12, line 15; Transl., 
p. 123, line 5.) 

(4) * The excellent minister Nàga-deva erected in memory of the famous 
Yogi Nayakirtti . . . a tomb (nishidhyalayam) to endure as along as sun, 
moon and stars continue. (No. 42; Roman Text, p. 16, line 10, Transl., 
р- 124, line 4.) 

(5) ° Raised a tomb (nisidhigeharh) to her memory.’ (No. 44; Roman, 
Text, p. 20, line 23 ; Transl., p. 125, line 20.) 

(6) ‘A group of tombs (nisidhika), a collection of ponds and lakes, who 
(but him) made these in memory of Nayakirtti Deva Saiddhantika.’ 
(No. 9o ; Roman Text, p. 73, line 23; Transl., p. 159, line 1.) 

(7) < He, from devotion to his guru, set up his tomb (nishayam). 
(Хо. 105; Roman Text, p. 80, line 27; Transl., p. 165, line зо.) 

(8) ‘Mankabbe Сапа had erected a tomb (nisidhiggehadyam) 
for her guru.’ (Хо. 139; Roman Text, p. rro, line 6 from bottom 
upwards; Transl., p. 185, line 9.) 

(9) ‘ Had a tomb (nisidhigeham) for him.’ (No. 144 ; Roman Text, 
p. 114, line 22 ; Transl., p. 8, line о from bottom upwards.) 

(10) ‘His son Taila-gauda made a grant for the god Siddesvara 
and setup this monument (nisaddhi).’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. үп, Honnali 
Taluq, no. 79; Transl., p. 174.) 

(11) “А third feature, even more characteristic of the style, is 
found in the tombs of the priests, a large number of which isin the 
neighbourhood of Moodbidri. Three of these are illustrated in the 
woodcut (no. 154, Fergusson). They vary much in size and magni- 
ficence, some being from three to five or seven storeys in height, 
but they are not, like the storeys of Dravidian temples, ornamented 
with simulated cells and finishing with domical roofs. Тһе division 
of each storey is a sloping roof, like those of the pagodas at Katmandhu, 


and in China or Tibbet. ° 
(Fergusson, Ind. and East. Arch., p. 275.) 


In Bengal, especially in Comilla and Noakhali Districts, these tombs 
or monuments, which are even now built, have generally the cone- 
shape. At the bottom there is in most cases a square cell or chamber. 
They are sometimes constructed in groups and supplied with chambers 
at the top, cf. Chatkhil Noakhali. 


285 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NIHARA (see PRAKARA)—A court of the compound, a courtyard. 
Dvitiyam anta-nihara cha madhyama-hara tritiyakam 11 
; (М., хххі, 11.) 
NIDA—A nest, a lair, а covered place. 
In connexion with buildings : 
Nidasya chadho grivo-vatayanam karayet 1--(М., хуш, 329.) 
au Toranair nida-bhadradi-mule chordhve cha bhüshitam | 
h: А (М., хх, 64.) 
_ NIPYA(? RA)—The lower portion, the end, the border as of a cloth 
(Mayamata, xxxi, 62, 63, 64.. 
NRITTA(-TYA)-MANDAPA (see Manpapa)—A detached build. 
ing used as a music hall, a pavilion. 
Nripanam abhishekartharh mandapam nritta-mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 38, etc.) 
A pavilion generally in front of a temple, where religious music 
is preformed (Suprabhedagama, хххі, 96, 98; see under Manpapa). 
NETRA—tThe eye, a side portico or porthole, gable-window 
(М., xxxiv, 396), a wing (M., х2ху, 101), face (M., xxxv, 257-260). 
Same as LALATA ( M., xxxv. 257-260). Ж; 
МЕТКА-КОТА (se KARNA-KÜTA)—A front apartment, a side- 
hall, a corner-tower. 
"Pradhanavaàsa-netrastha-netra-küta-dvayar nyayet 11 
(Катікарата, xxxv, 75.) 
NETRA-BHADRA (see MUKHA-BHADRA)—A side tabernacle, side 
porch, portico. 
Parito’lind(r)a-bhagena vàranam mukha-bhadrakam 1 
Athava netra-bhadram syat 1--(М., xxxiv, 251-252.) 
Karnaika-kara-bhadram syat salagre netra-bhadrakam | 
| (М., xxxv, 246, etc.) 
NETRA-BHITTI—A side-wall. 
Dakshine netra-bhittau уа grabhadhanarm prakirtitam | 
EC (Kamikagama, xxxv, 46, etc.) 
dE NETRA-SALA—A side-hall. 
Tad-adho bhu-prave$e tu tad dvàrasyavasanakam | 
Shannàm vai netra-$alanam antaràle cha va sthalam 11 
à : (tbid., 81.) 
Tach-chhalaya dvi-par$ve tu netra-$ala sa-bhadrakam і j 
(M., xxvi, 40, etc.) 


286 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PAK SHA-SALA 


МЕРНАТНҮА-СКІНА--Тһе green-room in a theatre (see details 
under NATYAGRIHA). 


NEMI (see PRAKARA апа РклраквнімА)--Гһе circumference, 
a surrounding verandah or balcony. 
(1) Nemih padena-vistirna prasadasya samantatah | 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. civ, v. 7.) 
(2) Nerih padena vistirna prasadasya samantatah | 
Garbhar tu dvi-gunarh karyyarh nemya mànarh bhaved iha 11 
(Garuda—Purana, Chap. хімп, vv. 19-20.) 


P 
PAKSHA-(KA)—A side, a flank, a footpath. 


In connexion with staircases (M., xxx, 100, etc.). 
In connexion with streets : 
Evarn vithir dvi-paksham syan madhya-rathyaika-pakshaka | 
| (M., хі, 350.) 
In connexion with walls : 
Anyat salam tu sarvesham chaika-pakshalayakshma-kramat 1 
Anyat salar tu sarvesham alayartharn dvi-pakshakam | 
(M., xxxvi, 86-87.) 
Compare chatus-paksham iva chhadih (square roof), and 
Ya dvipaksha chatush-paksha shat-paksha ya nirmayate | 
Ashtà-pakshàm da$a-pakshairn salarn manasya patnim agnir garte 
'jva$aye | 
(Atharva-Veda, тх, 3.) 
See further illustration under EKA-PAKSHA and DVI-PAKSHA. 


РАК5НАСНМА--А type of building. 
Yamya hinarh chulli tri-&alakarn vitta-na$a-karam etat | 
Pakshaghanam арагауа varjitam suta-dhvam§a-vaira-karam | = 
“A building lacking a southern hall is called chulli; it causés loss 
of prosperity, one in which there is no western hall (the so-)called 
Pakshaghna, occasions the loss of children and (the) enmity.’—(Bythat- 
Samhita, um, 88, 7.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 286.) 


PAKSHA-SALA—A side-hall. 
Madhya-koshthasya ale tu bhadra-$ala viSeshatah | 
Paksha-S$alanvitamrn vatha ürdhva-$alanvitam tu va | i 
| (М., хххш, 518-519.) | 
O 


д» 


“yaa ұсак ғ 


РАХКА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


PANKA—A moulding of the pillar. 
Sikharasyordhve pattochcham uttarochcharh samarh bhavet | 
Tad-irdhve vàjanam pankam nimnam kumbham sadandakam | 
(M., xv, 126-127.) 
In connexion with joinery : 
Eka-rüpa(m) cha pañkarn cha vidhih syad eka-rupakam | 
(М., хуп, 159.) 
РАСНАМАТ,АҮА--А kitchen, the refectory of a temple. 

Devànàm pachana-mandapam— built a beautiful stone temple with 
the torana-gate and the surrounding walls, having provided the temple 
with a flower garden, kitchen, pond and suitable environs.’ — (Ep. Carnat., 
Vol. x, Kolar Taluq, no. 132 ; Roman Text, p. 54 ; Transl., p. 49.) 

PANGHA-TALA-— The fifth storey, the five-storeyed buildings. 
(M., ххш, 1-55.) 

А description of the fifth storey ( M., ххх, 48-51). 

The eight classes (ibid., 1-48 ; see under PRASADA). 
PANCHA-PRAKARA-HARMYA—The various attached апа 
detached buildings constructed in the five courts into which the whole 
compound is divided (see PRAKARA). 

| (M., xxxi, 2.) 
PANCHA-BHUMI (see PA&CHA-TALA)— Ihe fifth storey, the five 
storeyed buildings. 
PANCHA- SALA—The enclosure wall of the fifth court. 
(M., xxxi, 98, 29.) 

Cf. Tatah pafichama-sala cha maha-maryadim iritam | 
| (M., xxxi, 13, etc.) 

PANCHAYATANA—A phallus with five heads. 

(Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New 

Imp. Series, Vol., ххі, р. 39.) 

PANJARA—A cage, an aviary, a nest, an architectural object, 
windows. 

The cages for domestic birds and animals, such as pigeon, tiger, 
etc; are counted among the articles of furniture (M., L, 50-55), their 
та description (¿bid., 213-288) aa, LV, 144-146 ; see 
under NAsIKA.) 

PANJARA-SALA—A small top-room, a small window, а: class of 
storeyed buildings, a type of bedstead, a шш; а nest-like 
architectural object. ` 

288 


—a Tm 


_PATRA-TORANA ARCH 


ИШ 


As zum] 
ELEVATION. 


Ë 
am] 


CAGE FOR PARROT. 


PANJARA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


(1) Manasara : 
A. small room above the dome (stüpi) : 
Etat pafijara-Salarh cha padmam ekar śikhā-trayam | 
(M., Xv, 191.) 
А class of the seven-storeyed buildings (M., xxv, 27; 5% under 
PRASADA). 
A synonym of the bedstead ( M., тп, п). 
A member of the pillar (M., xv, 89, 98, 99-103, etc.) 
In connexion with buildings of one to twelve storeys : 
Sala-küta-dvayor-madhye chaika-hara sa-pafijaram | 
(М., хіх, 57 ; see also 178, etc.) 
(2) Kamikagama, xxxv, 75: 
Pafijara-dvitayam karyarn karna-küta-samodayam 11 
Ibid, 1, 99: 
Küta-$alanvitam yat tu paíijarai$ cha samanvitam (vimanam) 11 
Ibid., Lv, 196-198 (the synonyms of the paíijara) : 
Pramana-bhavanam karma-prásadasyàashtakarn tatha | 
Sabheti küta-nama syàch chhaya valabhi(r) eva cha 11 
Brahma-dvaram tato madhye mandapam koshthake matam 11 
Riju-vaktram dvijavasam kridam syat simha-vaktrakam | 
Pafijarabhidhanam syat tl—(See further details under NASIKA.) 
(3) Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 80 : 
Eka-nasikaya yuktam pafijaram samudahritam | 
» Küteshu nàsika-yuktam koshtham etat prakirtitam 11 
(See also v. 79, under NAsIKA.) 
(4) ‘ Between the ‘‘ karna-küta " and * &а1а " are found some kinds 
of little windows called pafijara. '—(Dravidian Arch., by Jouveau-Dubreuil, 
ed. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, p. 5.) 
(5) ‘His son Kangala-deva having wandered abroad (as a 
mendicant) (апа brought alms, had a küta-pafijaa made for the 
i! god Hanumanta, and that. fame might come to all, hada lipi-$asana 
made and set up it. '—(Ef. Carnat., Vol, уп, Channegiri Taluq, no. 17, 
Transl., p. 180 ; Roman Text, p. 317.) 
(6) See Chalukyàn Architecture (Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 
XXI, Plates XXVI, XCVII). 
(7) See Mysore Arch. Report (1915-16, p. 22, Plate x, fig. 2). 
(8) See Cunningham : Arch. Surv. (Vol. 1, Plate v, p. 6). 
PATTA— сү А band, a fillet, a moulding of the base, etc., an 
РАТТІКА- ornament for the body, а crown, а diadem, 
PATTI— J a turban, an upper garment, a cloth, a plate, 


280 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


qu c NNI КУ И CERE RPM 


a 


РАТТІ AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


a slab, а seat, a junction, a town, an edict, a lintel (M., хіх, 149), 
a staircase (M., ххх, 140-143), a spoke ( M., хип, rr). 

(1) ‘It is often confounded with the moulding called ` vajana”’ 
especially in pedestals and bases as it appears to be of the same form 
to be used in the same situation, and to have the same height and 
projection with the latter, but when employed in architraves and 
friezes its height and projection increases considerably. (Кат Raz; 
Ess. Arch. Hind., -p. 25.) 

(2) In connexion with the plough : phala-patta, tri-patta, madhya- 
patta (/М., v, 52, бт, 73). 

In connexion with the foundations : 

Pattikantam kshipech chàpi vinyaset prathameshtakam 1 
(M., xu, 203.) 

A crowning moulding of the pedestal (M., хш, 5, 49, 82, etc.; 
see the lists of mouldings under Upapirua). 

A moulding of the base (M., хіу, 13, 26, 48, etc.; see the lists 
of mouldings under ADSHISHTHANA). 

A moulding of the pillar (M., xv, 121, 35, etc.). 

In connexion with the staircase (M., xxx, 140). 

In connexion with the door (M., xxxix, 73, сіс.). 

In connexion with the bedstead (M., хілу, 18, 19, etc.). 

An ornament for the body : 

Kati-sütram tu sarhyuktam kati-prante sa-pattika | 
(М., L, 97; see also 28, etc.) 

Athava ratna-pattarn syat svarna-tatanka-karnayoh | 
(M., шу, 47.) 

Compare ‘ Patta-dhara,' and ‘ Patta-bhaj,’ meaning kings, with 
special crowns.—(M., 11, 3, 4.) 

(3) Bhagais tribhis tatha kantah khantha-pattas tu bhagatah | 
Bhaga (? go) bhyasam ürdhva-patta$ cha $esha-bhàgena pattikà 11 
Nirgamas tu punas tasya yàvad vai $esha-pattika 11 
‘The neck (of the pedestal of an idol or phallus) is made of 

three parts and the Бапа of the neck of one part. The аБһуаза 

(2 is one part, the upper band is also one part, and the remaining 

partis pattika (fillet or band). Its projection should extend ав 

far as the last pattika. '—(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссьхп, vv. 3, 4.) 

(4) Vedikàm prastara-samam shad-amsikritya bhagašah 1 
Ekarnšarn prati-pattam syad améabhyam antari bhavet 11 
Urdhva-vajanam ekāmśam armari tat-pattika bhavet | 
Urdhva-pattarn tad-ekārhśam antari kusumair yutà 11 

(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, 1x, 23, 24.) 
290 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


T». 


| 
| 


ИИН. 


 HINDU ARCHITECTURE PATTA-BANDHA 


(5) PolakeSir apy-avadid anujan pratibaddha-pattam avantu 1 
‘Pulakesi too declared to his brethren (in the presence of his vassals) 
that they were to support the encircling diadem of his sons and grand- 
sons. '—(Grant of Kusumayudha IV, line 18, Ind. Ant., Vol. хххп, pp. 282, 
284.) 
PATTANA(-NA) (see PATTANA)—A town, a commercial city acces- 
sible by water-ways. 
(1) Kaufiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. ххп, p. 46, footnote) : 

Pattanarn Sakatair gamyarn ghatikair naubhir eva cha | 

Naubhir eva tu уай gamyarn pattanam tat prachakshate 11 

Drona-mukharn jala-nirgama-prave$am pattanam ity-arthah | 

(Rayapaseni-siitra-vyakhyane, p. 206.) 
(2) Karya-vikraya-samyuktam abdhi-tira-samaéritam | 
DeSantara-gata-janair nana-jatibhir anvitam 11 - аА 
Pattanam tat samakhyàtar vai$yair adhyushitam 11 
(Kamikagama, xx, 8, 9.) 
PATTA-BANDHA —The coronation, a crown, a class of bases com- 
prising four types which differ from one another in height and 
in the addition or omission of some mouldings. 7 
See the lists of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA (M., xiv, 297-304). u 
А part of the crown (/М., L, 111). 

Nija-patta-bandha-samaye—‘ at the time of his coronation. '— 
(Six Eastern Chalukya Grants, Bervada Plates of Chalukya-Bhima I, line 
20, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 129, 130.) l 

Godávari-tata-samipasthe Kapitthakagrāme patta-v(b)andha- 

mahotsave tulā-purusham āruhya. 

“Тһе term Pattabandha, which literally means “ binding of the 
fillet? has been generally supposed to signify “ coronation cere- 
mony." But, it does not suit here.' Mr. D. R. Bhandarkar.— 
(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, line 46, Ер. Ind., Vol. vit, pp. 40, 27, note 2.) 

Sri-patta-bandhotsavaya Kurundakam ара(епа тауа | 

(The grants of Indraraya m, по. 11, line 47, 
| Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 36, 40, 25, note 2 
refers to Vol. vir, p. 27, note 2.) 


Coronation and crown : 
: dvà-da$a-varshe tu janmanah pattam 1 
Yo’dhad udaya-girindro ravim iva lokanuragaya 11 í 
*Put on to please the world the fillet (crown) in the twelfth 
year of (his) birth." 5: 


PATTA-SALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Niravadya-dhavalah Kataka-ràja-patta-Sobhita-lalàtah—: (his son 
was) Niravadyadhavala, whose forehead was decorated with the 
fillet (crown) of Katakaraja” Dr. Hultzsch.—(Maliyapundi grant of 
Ammaraja II, lines 40, 45, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, рр. 53, 55, 56.) 

PATTA-SALA—A religious establishment. 

See Mandhata Plates of Jayasimha of Dhara (line 11, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. ur, pp. 49, 47). ` 

Cf. “(То provide) for the cight kinds of ceremonies of the god 
Mallinatha of the patta-éale(là) which they had made within 
precincts of that Santinatha basadi.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, 
Belur Taluq, no. 129; Transl., p. 86; Roman Text, p. 193.) 

PANDI-SALA—A kind of hall, a two-storeyed mansion consisting 
ofa single row of building which look like a broken staff at the 
forehead part above the second storey. 

(M., xxxv, 97; see details under SALA.) 


PATTANA (see PATTANA)—A village, a town, a commercial city 
on the bank of a river or sea, a new settlement. 
(1) A village inhabited mostly by traders (Vaisyas). 
(M., тх, 456-457.) 
А town (M., х, 40). 
A seaside commercial city : 
Abdhi-tira-pradese tu nana-jati-grihair vritam | 
Vanig-jatibhir akirnarh kraya-vikraya-püritam 1 
Ratnair dvipantarair nityaih kshaumaih karpüradibhih | 
Etat pattanam akhyàtam vaprayata-samanvitam | 
(M., x, 63-66.) 
(2) A seaside commercial city inhabited mostly by tradesmen. 
(Kamikagama, хх, 8, 9; see under PATTANA.) 
(3) Kaufiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxi, p. 46, footnote) : 
Pattanam $akatair gamyarh ghàtikair naubhir eva cha 1 
Naubhir eva tu уай gamyarh pattanam tat prachakshate 11 
(Rayapaseni-sütra-vyakhyüne, p. 206.) 
(4) Pattanani jala-sthala-pathayor anyatara-yuktàni 1 
- (Prasna-vyakarana-siitra-vyakhyane, p. 306.) 
(5) Tad-bhuktau pattanam ramyarh $amipátiti nàmakam | 
(The Chahanas of Marwar, no. rv, Sevadi stone inscrip. 
of Katukaraja, v. 6, Ep. Ind., Vol. x1, p. 31.) 
(6) ‘ Piriya-Rajaiya-Deva, son of—, caused this town (pattana) 
to be rebuilt and gave it the name of Piriyaraja pattana (patana in 


292 


ge зы жә, 


جص 


= 
Se 


М _ 
! 


l 


HINDU ARCHITEG TURE PATRA-PATTA 


the text) after himself. . . . Whoever calls it Singapattana is guilty 
of kiling his father and mother. —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. Iv, Hunsür Taluq, 
по. 15; Transl, p. 84; Roman Text, p. 135-126.) 

(7) Dvaà-triméa(t) tu velavuramum ashtada$a-pattanamurn basashti 
yoga-pithamum— (the people of) the thirty-two seaside towns, the 18 
towns, 62 seats of contemplation. . . . (held a convocation there) ^—(Old 
Kanarese Inscrip. at Terdal, line 6o, Ind. Ат.) Vol. xiv, pp. Ig, 25.) 

(8) Grama-nagara-kheda-karvvada-madarhba-dronamukha-pattanarh- 
galimdam ancka-màta-küta-prásáda-deváyatanarhgali-dam oppuvaagra- 
hàra-pattanargalimdam atiSayav-appa. . . . | 

‘(At Teridàla, a merchant town situated іп the centre and the 
first in importance? among the twelve (towns) in the glorious Kundi 
Three Thousand, adorned with] —villages, towns, hamlets, villages 
surrounded by hills, groups of villages, sea-girt towns, and chief 
cities, with elegant mansions, palaces and temples, and with shining 
agrahara-towns in the country of Kuntala. . Ота КАТТО? 
Inscrip. at Terdal, line 58, Ind. Ant., Vol. XIV, pp. I9, 25.) 

(9) ° With myriads of people, practices of virtues, agreeable occu- 
pations, streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure gardens, separated 
lovers, splendid tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for Spring festivals, 
ghatika-sthanas (religious centres), the supports of dharmma and 
mines of enjoyments, moats which were as if the sea being overcome 
had returned here on account of the collection of gems, groups of 
the lotus faces of beautiful women fair as the moon (grama-nagara- 
sbeda-kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha-pura-pattana-raya-dhani) on 
whatever side one looked in these nine forms did the Kuntala deša 
shine. ° 

(It should be noticed that the passage within brackets is almost 
indentical with the Corresponding passages in quotation no. 8 'above).— 
(Ep. Carnat, Vol. уп, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 197; Transl., p. 124, para. r, 
last seven lines, Roman Text, p. 124, line 27 f) 


PATRA—A leaf, a leaf-like ornament, a moulding. 


An ornament of the pillar (M., xv, 36, etc.). 

A member of the 8818 or hall (М., xxxv, 402). 

Cf. Vatsararambha-lekhartharh patram—A leaf for writing the 
almanac on.—(A., L, 49.) 

In connexion with the balance (tula) (M., r, 190-1091, 197, 199). 

See more details under BHÜSHANA. 


PATRA-PATTA—A leaf-shaped diadem, a moulding. 


A turban or crown (М., XLIX, 16). 
А moulding of the base ( M., xiv, 345)- 


293 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Бе 5 паре, 


PADMA-(KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


plots ; and the thirty-second, Chandrakanta, is of 1,024 plots (M. vu, 

2-50, see also 51—271). 

(2) Nagara-grama-durgadya(-der) griha-prásada-vriddhaye | 

Eka$iti-padair-vastu(m) рӣјауеё siddhaye dhruvam 11 
(Agni-Purdna, Chap. су, v. 1.) 

(3) See Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. п, Plate хсуп (site 
plans of Saiva temples), p. 419; Plate хсуш (site plans of Vaishnava 
temples), p. 421; Vol. xx, Plate xx (site plan of a Jaina temple). 
Vol. xxr, Plate хіл (site plan of Slab temples of Kundalpur); Vol, 
xxm, Plate хуш (site plan of Jaina temple of Naulakha, mark 
the Svastika figures) ; Vol. хп, Plate v (plan of a temple); Vol. хуп 
Plate xxr (peculiar plan of a temple). 

(4) See elements of Hindu Iconography, by Т. А. Gopinatha Rao 
(Appendix А, pp. 1-45, diagrams facing pp. 1, 11). 

PADMA-(KA)—A lotus, an eye, a moulding, a cyma recta, a cyma 
reversa or reversed cyma also called орес or talon (see Gwilt, 
Encycl, figs. 869, 869), a site plan, a pavilion, a type of village, 
a class of buildings. 

(1) * The moulding, called Padma (abja, ambuja or saroruha, etc.), 
literary lotus, is supposed to resemble a petal of that flower. It is 
a sort of compound figure, partly convex and partly concave ; and its 
section is composed of two opposite curves, meeting at the bisecting 
point of a line drawn between the points of recess and projection, 
and very much resembling the “ сута recta” and “ сута reversa ^ 
of the Western architects. This moulding is distinguished into greater 
and less, and forms the principal ornaments of Indian architecture. 
It is generally employed, in detached pairs, in bases and cornices, 
onc facing the other in opposite directions, and is formed upright 
or the reverse according to its situation, either as a crowning member 
of the former or the supporting ornament ofthelatter. Тһе concave 
part of it, when placed with its bottom reversed, is often so designed 
as to project forward or rise up, after having touched as it were, 
the fillet below, with a small perpendicular curvature, resembling in 
shape the petal of the lotus, with its pointed head somewhat inclined 
towards the top. In some specimens, this moulding is placed at the 
base of columns, and looks very much like ап apophyge or ogee of 
the Ionic and Corinthian orders being formed either with a curved 
line having more or less convexity at the top, or with an upright 
tangent to the concave part below. It is sometimes made exactly in 
the form of an ovolo of the Western architects. — (Кат Raz, Ess. 
Arch. Hind., p. 32-24.) 


296 


4 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


~D 


O — s 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PADMA-PITHA 


Manasüra : 

A site plan ( M., уш, 36 f., see PADA-VINYASA). 

A kind of village (M., IX, о; see under GRAMA). 

A moulding of the pedestal and the base (M., xm, 41, 61, 64, 68, etc. ; 

ХІУ, 68, etc. ; see the tests of mouldings under UPAPITHA and ADHISHTHANA). 
A type of pavilion : 
Evarn tu padmakam proktarh devanarh pachanàálayam | 
Padmakhyarh pushpa-mandapam. . . . | 
(M., xxxiv, 173, 180; see MANDAPA.) 
A moulding of pitha or the pedestal of the phallus (M., іл, 31). 
(3) Stambharh vibhajya navadha vahanam bhàgo ghato'sya bhago’- 
nyah | 
Padmam tathottaroshtham kuryad bhagena bhagena 11 
Here, Kern's rendering of ‘ padma ° by ‘ capital? seems untenable. 
(Brihat-Samhita, LIN, 29, F.R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, 
р. 285; see details under STrAMBHA.) 

А type of building which is planned like a lotus, has only one storey 

and one spire, and is (?) 8 cubits wide (Sayanashtau) : 

(4) Brihat-Samhità (Lvr, 23, see under PRAsADA). 

(5) Matsya- Purana (Chap, CCLXIX, vv. 30, 39, 49, 59: see under PRASADA; 

(6) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. сххх, v. 30 ; see under PRASADA). 

A class of round buildings : 

(7) Agni-Purána (Chap. сту, vv. 17-18; see under PRASADA). 

(8) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. XLVII, vv. 21, 23, 28-29; see under PRASADA.) 
PADMA-KANTA—A special type of pillar (M., xv, 38). It is based 
оп a seat (àsana), plinth or lotus (сута). Its cornice or edge of 
the capital is decorated with opening buds. Its base is decorated 
with a bridge-like moulding (palika). The ornamental fillets are 
constructed and two angulas (13 inches) on all sides аге adorned 
with foliage, jewels, flowers, etc. (ibid., 30-37). 

A class of the six-storeyed buildings (M., XXIV, 3-12; see under PRASADA). 


PADMA-KES(-S)ARA—A type of base, a kind of throne. 


A class of bases (M., xiv, 81-94 ; see under ADHISHTHANA). 
А type of throne (M., XLV, 11-12 ; see under SIMHASANA). 


PADMA-GARBHA-—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 


into 256 squares. dd 
., VII, 2I. 


PADMA-PITHA—A lotus-shaped pedestal for an image. 
(M., 12, 86.) 


297 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PADMA-BHADRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


PADMA-BHADRA—A type of throne. 


(M., XLV, 12; see under ЅІМНАЗАМА.) 


PADMA-BANDHA—A class of bases comprising four types which 
differ from one another in height and in the addition or omission of 
some mouldings. 
(M., xiv, 170—194 ; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISTHANA.) 
A base (cf. Suprabhedagama, xxx, 18-22) : 
Utsedharh sapta-virn$at tu dvi-bhaga pattika bhavet 11 
Ekam$am dalam evoktam upànam chaika-bhagikam 1 
Jagati tu 5һай-атпба syad dvi-bhagardha-dali-kramat 11 
Ardha-bhagam bhavet skandham bhagam ürdhva-dalam tatha | 
'Tri-bhagam kumudam vidyad adho'bjarn bhagam eva tu 11 
Pattika chaika-bhaga tu griva chaiva dvi-bhagika | 
Tad-irdham eka-bhagarn tu padma-bandham tata upari 11 
Dvi-bhaga pattika ya tu cka-bhagena yojanar | 
Tad vrite$ chaika-bhagarn tu padma-bandham iti smritam 11 
PADMASANA—A lotus seat, а lotus-like posture in which ап 
image is carved, a throne, a type of base, a kind of pedestal. 


A lotus-shaped pedestal and base of a column (M., ху, 67 ; XLVII, 19). 
А type of throne (M., XLV, 12 ; see under SIMHASANA). 
A lotus-shaped pedestal for an image (M., Liv, 36, etc.). 


PARATA (corrupted into PArata)—The parapet, the coping of 


`a wall. 


Cf. Badaviya Durggavanu  müdana paàratavanu  Chàmaràja— 
* Chàmaraja constructed the fort and the eastern parapet of that 
same Badavi.—(Sanskrit and Old Kanarese Inscrip., no. LXXXVII, lines 13, 
14, Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 63, notes 51, 53.) 


PARAMA-S$ADHI(-YI)KA—A site plan in which the whole area is 
divided into 81 equal squares (see PADA-vINYAsA). 
(M., уп, 10, 72, 110: almost same in 
Brihat-Samhita, тап, 42 f.) 
In connexion with the plan of a village (M., 1x, 174) and ofa wall 
(M., xr. 72). 
PARARTHA-LINGA—A phallus for the public worship. 
(M., тл, 249 ; see details under LINGA.) 
PARIKHA—A ditch, а moat, a trench round a fort or town, 
298 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— — 


562 ebd VNFSVIVdFd 


ПР 2% 


% 22 


Ë 


555% ERD 8 


Lab: ST > 
S 25-0) ОР ER 


< 


Ms А 
ú 


ЇЙ ӨЛҮГҮ 


ТТ 


бека AT eet eR Ea a 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PARIKHA 


(1) Manasara : 
In connexion with a village and a fortified city : 
Vaprarnša-bhitti-rakshartharn paritah parikhanvitam | 
(M., 1X, 354.) 
Sarveshàm api durganam vaprai$ cha parikhair vritam | 
(M., x, 106.) 
Bahye prakara-samyuktam paritah parikhanvitam | 
(M., тх, 450.) 
Paritah parikha bahye vapra-yuktam tu karayet 1 
| (М., х, 108.) 
Paritah parikha bahye kuryad grameshu ѕагуаќаһ | 
(M., тх, бо, etc.) 
(2) Kautiliya-Artha-sastra (Chap. ххту, pp. 51, 56, paras. 2, 3) : 

Tasya parikhas tisro dandantara karayet chatur-daga 4уа-4аба 
daseti dandanuvistirnah vistarad avagadhah padünam ardham va 
tri-bhaga-mula mile chaturasrah pashanopahitah pashaneshtaka- 
baddha-parsva va toyantikoragas tu  toyapürnà va sa- 
parivahah padma-grahatih | 

Chatur-dandàvakrishtam parikhayah shad-dandochchhritam ava- 
ruddham tad-dviguna-vishkambham khatad vapram karayet | 

Ibid., Chap. xxv, para. 1 : 
Dvarani bahih parikhayah 1 
(3) Durga-gambhira-parikhàm durgam anyair dur-asadam | 
Sarvata$ cha maha-bhimah Sita-toyasayah $ubhah 11 
Agadha graha-sampürnah parikha mina-sevitah 11 
(Ramayana, 1, 5» 13, 15.) 
Yantrais tair avakiryante parikhasu samantatah 11 
Parikhaá cha $ataghnya$ cha yantrani vividhani cha 11 
(Ibid., vx, 3, 17, 23.) 
Parikhabhih sapadmabhih sotpalabhir alamkritam 11 
(Ibid., VI, 5, 2, 14.) 
(4) Parighe for Parikhe (Satyamangalam plates of Devaraya 11, v. 22, 
Ep., Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 38, 40). 
(5) Durllarngha - dushkara - vibheda-visala - sala-durggadha - dustara- 
brihat-parikha-parita |! 

‘(The city of Kafichi) whose large rampart was insurmountable 

and hard to be breached (and) which was surrounded by a great 


moat, unfathomable and hard to be crossed.’—-(Gadval Plates of Vikra- 
maditya 1, v. 6, line 21, Ер. Ind., Vol. x, pp. 103, 105.) 


299 


- 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PARIKHA-DURGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(6) Kanakojjvala-sala-ra$mi-jalaih parikharhbu-pratibimbitair alarn ya 
vasudheva vibhati badabarchchir vrita-ratnakara-mekhala-parità 11 

‘Through the mass of the rays (which issue from) its golden walls, 
and which are reflected in the water of its moat, this (city, Vijaya- 
nagara) closely resembles the earth, that is surrounded by the girdle 
of the ocean, which is encircled by the lustre of the submarine fire.— ` 
(Vijayanagara Inscrip. of Devaraja II, lines 7-8, H.S.LI. Vol. r, по. 153, 
рр. 162, 164.) | 

(7) Durge subhima-parighe Malavalli namni—‘in the fort named 
Malavalli, having а deep moat.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Malavalli Taluq, 
no. 61, Roman Text, last verse, p. 126 ; Transl., p. 62.) 


PARIKHA-DURGA—A ditch-fort, a fort. 


For details see Sukraniti, etc., under DURGA. 


PARIGHA(-GHA)—Cross-bars to fasten the door, a beam ; metal 
bolts. 

(Chhand. Upanishad, п, 24, 6, 10, a 

(r) Dvau dvau parighau (Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. XXXIV, p. 53). 

Chatvaro hasti-parigha— four beams to shut the door against 

elephants.'—(/bid., Chap. xxiv, р. 53.) 
(2) Dridha-vaddha-kapatam тарап ивуапы сһа 1 
(Ramayana, Vr, 3, 11.) 


PARINAHA—Otherwise called Marga, Prave$a, Parinaha, Naha, 
Vriti, Avriti and Nata, the width, breadth, circumference, extent. | 
Griva-madhya-parinahas chatur-vimSatikangulah 1 
Nabhi-madhya-parinaho dvi-chatvarimfad-angulah | 
The width by the middle of the neck is 24 angulas. 
The width by the middle of the navel is 42 angulas. 
(Matsya- Purana, Chap. согуш, уу. 43, 58 ; see also vv. 41, 
47» 59, 51, 53, 54 55» 56, 57» 59, 63, 66, еіс.) 
See Manasüra (іх, 68,etc.); Kiratarjuniya (хп, 20, etc.) ;  Mrich- 
chhakatika (ur, 9, etc.) ; Mahdvira-charita (уп, 24, etc.) ; Málati- 
müdhava (ш, 15: Stana-parináha, etc.) ; Ratnavali (п, 13, etc.); 
Sifupala-vadha (x. 19, etc.). 
PARIMANA— The measurement of width or circumference. 


(М., Lv, 3-9 ; see under MANA.) 
PARIRATHYA A road suitable for chariots (A.-V., уп, 8, 22 ; хп, 
1, 47)- ' p 


300 


Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


mwa n | 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PARIVARA(-RALAYA) 


PARIVARA(-RALAYA)—The family ; the attendant deities ; the 
subordinate temples, attached or detached, of a large religious 
establishment, where the attendant deities are enshrined. 
(1) Manasára, Chap. xxxi (named Parivara) : 
The temples of these deities are stated to be built round the Pra- 
kara (the fourth enclosure): 
Sarveshàm api devanàm prakaranta-pravishtake | 
Paritah parivarànam lakshanam vakshyate’ dhuna | (1-2) 


At the eight cardinal points of the innermost or the first cour 
the temples of the group of eight deities are built (lines 3-5). The 
groups of sixteen and thirty-two deities are housed in the second and 
the third court respectively (lines 6-7). Between the third and the 
fifth court is stated to be the Viniyoga (offering)-pavilion (line 8). 
The description of the location of temples for cach of the deities of 
these three groups is given (lines 10-110). Тһе temples of the 
attendant deities of Vishnu are specified (lines 121-156). Тһе 
temples and the attendant deities of Gane$a and Kshetrapala and 
also those of Buddha, Jina and all such petty (kshudra) gods are 
passed over and stated to be built in accordance with the rules of 
Sastras (lines 157-166). 

It should be noticed that the description of temples intended for 
so many deities does not contain any measurement, etc. It is solely 
occupied with the position of these temples or deities in the com- 
pound. But a considerable portion of the chapter is devoted to the 
description of the mandapas (pavilions) for such purpose as bath, 
bed, assembly, horses, musicians, dancing girls, and cows, etc. 
(lines 67-101). 

(2) Ete parivara vastoh püjaniyà prayatnatah | 
(Mahanirvaána— T antra, хш, 45.) 
(3) Pārśvataś chapi kartavyarh parivaradikalayam | 
At the side (too) should be built temples for the attendant and 
other deities. 

(Maisya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. 30.) 

(4) Parivaralaye tunga-harmye anyasmin prakalpayet 11 
(Kamikagama, L, 69. 

Parivaralayanam tu külavat karma chacharet | 

Sàlanàr tu chatushkoneshv-ishta-de$e pragrihyatam 11 

Malika-yukta-salarh chet kona-stambhe dvitiyake | 

Prathamavarane vapi dvitiyavarane nyaset 11 

` (Ibid., xxxr, 95, 96.) 
301 


EIN! d$ i тт 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— шыде. 


ense К 


I 
= 


PARI-VENA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(5) Paticha-prakaram evam syàt parivaralayam érinu 11 
Prasadasya chaturtham và tad-ardharn vardham eva va | 
Matrinam (of female deities) àlayam kuryad gopurakaram eva 
tu It 

Hasti-prishtham tapa (tam) proktam prasadam tu viśeshatah | 

Madhyar tu pachanakaram chatuh-salaika-S$alakam 11 

Pràákàra-samyutarm kritva bahye vabhyantare’ pi và 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 128-31.) 


Then follows the description of their faces and doors (ibid., vv. 131- 
133, see under DvARA). 


(6) * (He) gave to the (image of) Pillaiyar Ganapati in the surrounding 
hall (parivaralaya) of the temple of the Lord Sri Rājarājeśvara one 
brass spittoon (padikkam) which he had caused to be made of octagonal 
shape in the Ceylon fashion (Iraparigu) (and) which weighed palam.'— 
(Inscrip. of Rajaraja, no. 36, H.S.LI., Vol. u, p. 149 f.) 


(7) ‘ This image was probably in the central shrine and was known 
as Alaiyattu Pillaiyar perhaps to distinguish him from the Parivara- 
laiyattu-Pillaiyar set up apparently in the enclosing verandah of the 
temple.’—(V. S. I. I., Vol. п, no. 85, p. 407, last para.) 


* The gold presented until the twenty-ninth year (of the king's reign) 
by the Lord Sri Rajarajadeva to (the image of) Pillaiyar Ganapatiyar in 
the parivaralaya of the temple of the Lord Sri Ràjaràjes$varamudaiyàr 
. . .  parivaralayah, і.е. the temple (alaya) of the attendant deities 
(рагіуага) which was probably in the enclosing hall.)—(Ibid., no. 86 
para. I, p. 410, note 1.) 


*One bell-dish . . . was presented . . . to (the shrine of) Pillaiyàr 
Ganapatiyar in ,parivaralaya of the temple of the Lord Sri Raja- 
ràje$varamudaiyàr . . . ’—(Jbid., no. 88, p. 412.) 


(8) Parivara-devata-vistaramam linga-pratishtheyarh máàdisidam | 
* He also set up а linga, with the associated gods, іп Bandanika.’— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 242 ; Transl, p. 139, para. 6, last 
two lines ; Roman Text, p. 248, lines 1-2.) 


PARI-VENA—Monk’s cell, the private dwelling of a Bhikhu within 
the monastery. 


(W. Greiger : Mahdvarmsa, p. 294-) 


PARNA-MANJÜSHAC-—A basket made of leaves, an article of furni- 
ture. 


(M., L, 47, 132-146; see details under BHUSHANA.) 
302 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Р — —— 


| 
CENTRE LINE P 


em. 
PARIGHA 


аа ВВ 8. š 
sees, 4 i 
2 255. қ 

74 5.5585. 
“в sss-ss EE. 2 


ав. 
"su 
t 
пап 


PARIGHA 


к a — — MMÓ— 


ОТИШ, 


LI | 


CAPITAL 


JALIKA | 


РАОМА РІТНА. 


PADAJALA. 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PÁDA 


PARYANKAC—A couch, a bedstead. 
Manasüra, Chap. хим (named Sayana): 


Bedsteads are meant for the use of deities, the twice-born and all 

other people : 
They are of two kinds—the small (bala-paryanka) and the large 
(paryanka) (lines 26, 28). 'The former is intended to be used by 


children and the latter by the grown-up, the one being distinguished from 
the other by its size alone. 


The measurement and various parts of the two kinds of bedsteads are 
described separately (lines 3-79). 


The materials of which bedsteads and seats (asana) are generally 
constructed are various kinds of timber (line 74). 
PARVATA—A class of buildings. 
Küta-$ala-samayuktà punah pafijara-nasika | 
Vedika-jalakopeta parvatakritir uchyate 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 52.) 
See details under PRAsADA. 
PALLANKAC-—A bedstead. 
(Chullavagga, vx, 141 ; Mahavagga, v, 10, 3.) 
PAVANAC-—A type of chariot. 
(М., хп, 113; see under RATHA.) 
PASTYA(A)—A dwelling house, a stall for horses (a$vapastyà), 
a home with its adjuncts and surroundings, a family settlement 
(harmya-pastya), a noble man's abode with stables, etc., a group 
of houses, a river having groups of houses on its banks. (R.-V., 1, 25, 
IO, 40, 7, 164, 303 IV, I, II; VI, 49, 0; VIL, 97, 5; VII, 7, 291, 27, 
53 Ix, 65, 2%; x, 46, 6, 96, 10, іі; Ix, OO, AILS AVE VL sss 
MIX, 55, I.) 
PAit CHALA—A class of the twelve-storeyed buildings once pre- 
vailing in the ancient country of Pafichala (the Gangetic Doab). 
For details, see M., xxx, 8-10, under ТАГА and DRAVIDA. 


PADA (see SrAMBHA)—The foot, the lowest part, a quarter, the 
fourth part, the architrave, a pillar, a column. 
(т) M., xv (named Stambha), 1-448 : 
Its synonyms аге jangha, charana, stali, stambha, añghrika, sthanu 
sthüna, рада, kampa, arani, bharaka, and dharana (ibid., 4-6). 
393 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


pu 


ма 0 


PADA-JALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Atha vakshyàmi samkshepàt pàda-mànam yatha-vidhi | 
Uttaropanayor madhya-gatam etat prakirtitam 11 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, rx, 1.) 
(3) The architrave of the entablature (Кат арата, xxxv, 97; ШУ, 
47; see under PRASTARA). 
(4) The comparative measures of рада (pillar), adhishthana (base) 
and prastara (entablature) : 
Padayamam adhishthanam dvi-gunam sarva-sarnmatam | 
Padardham prastaram proktarh karnarh prastaravat samam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 28.) 
The five kinds of pillars and their characteristic features. 
(See Suprabhedagama, under STAMBHA.) 
PADA-JALA—An ornament for the foot. 
(М., L, 33; LI, 59; LIV, 17, etc.; see BHÜSHANA.) 
PADA-BANDHA—A class of bases. 
(M., xiv, 10-32; see the lists of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) 
А base in connexion with the bedstead : 
Pada-bandham adhishtahnam sarva-jatyarhakarh bhavet | 
(M., xLIV, 44.) 
Су. Suprabhedagama (XXXI, 23-26) : - 
Adhishthanasya chotsedham chatur-virnéati-bhájitam | 
Dvi-bāgā pattika prokta hy-upanam chaika-bhagikam 11 
Shad-bhaga jagati prokta kumudam paficha-bhagikam | 
Ekarnša pattika prokta grīvā chaiva tryaméaka 11 
Ekarnša pattika viddhi (h) tr(i)yarnáa chordhva-pattika 1 
Maha-pattika tr(i)yam$a ekam vajanam uchyate 11 
Pada-bandham iti khyatarn sarva-karyeshu püjitam 11 


PADA-BANDHAKAC—A type of throne. 
(M., XLV, 15; see under SINHASANA.) 
PADA-VEDI The storeyed base of a Buddhist stüpa (Maha- 
vamsa, 35, 2), the balustrade, the railing. 
(W. Greiger : Mahdvamsa, p. 297.) 
PADANGA —Literally the lowest member, hence, the architrave or 
the bottom portion of the entablature. 
(See Kamikagama, LIV, 47, under PRASTARA.) 


PADUKA—The plinth, the pedestal, the base, а moulding. 


The plinth or the base (M.. xiv, 162; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA). 


304 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PASHYA 


The pedestal (or base) of a column : 
'Tan-müle chasanam kuryat padukam và sahambujam | 
Ekarnšarn pàdukarn kuryat paficha-bhagarh tu sarngraham 1 
(M., xv, 31, 177.) 
A moulding at the bottom of the pedestal (M., xm, 43; see the lists of 
mouldings under UPAPiTHA). 
PARAVATA-NIDA—A nest for the pigeon, an article of furniture. 
(M., L, 52, description of its architectural details, 224-227.) 
` PARTYATRA—A class of pavilions. 
(M., XXXIV, 154 ; see under МАМРАРА.) 
PARSVA-PULI—An ornament, a part of the crown. 
(M., XLIX, 94.) 


PARSVA-PURITA—Same as karna-püra or patra—ear-ring. 

(M., XLIX, 96, 106, 115, 117-119, 141; cf. L, 14-26, 302.) 
PALIKA(-I)—A boundary, a margin, an edge, an ornament, а 
bridge-like moulding of the column. 


Atha vakshye vi$eshena kumbhalankaram uchyate 1 
Tan-mile palikotsedhe vibhajet tu shad-arnšakam | 
(M., xv, 201-202; see also 220, 44, 
33, 70, etc.; cf. XXXVII, 40.) 
In connexion with the lips : 
Tr(i)yam$ardhadharayàrn chardha(m)-chandravad-akriti | 
Tri-vaktram chottara pali cha( ? sa) ntarai$ chaiva samyutam | 
(M., XLV, 95-96; see also 89.) 
PALIKA-STAMBHA—A kind of pillar. 


(М., xv, 39-73; see under STAMBHA.) 


(M., іл, 2; LXVII, 2; see under LINGA.) 


PASHANA-KÜRMAC-—A stone tortoise, a component part of a 


| phallus. 
| (М., іл, 178.) 


PASHANA-VEDI—The stone terrace on which the sacred trees 
usually stand, cf. Маћаоатћҳа, 36, 52. 
PASHYA —Stone-bulwarks. 


l 
| PASUPATA—A kind of phallus. 
| 


(R.-V. 1, 56, 6.) 


шш‏ 4-6 == کر ا سے 


995 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


РІТНА(-ТНІКА) _ AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


In connexion with the palm of the hand : 
Patra-tulyam yugangulyam pithe tunga(m) dvayangulam 1 
(М., L, 197.) 
The pedestal of an image : 
Uttamam lohajarn bimbam pithabhasam tu chottamar | 
i (M., LI, 19; see also LVI, 16 ; LXI, 13, etc.) 


The pedestal of the phallus (M., іл, 245, 246, 247.) 

(2) Etat samanyam uddishtam prasadasya hi lakshanam | 
Linga-manam ato vakshye pitho linga-samo bhavet 11 
Dvàravat pitha-madhye tu $esham sushirakam bhavet 11 

(Garuda-Purana, Chap. xrvm, vv. 11, 16.) 


The pedestal or the yoni part of the linga : 
(3) Linga-vishkambha-manena bhaved dvi-tri-chatur-gunah | 
Tatha paficha-guno vapi pitha-vistara ishyate 11 
(Kamikagama, L, 45 ; see also vv, 44, 47, 48, 50.) 
The altar : 
Brahma(-me) và madhyame bhage pitham parikalpayet 11 
(Jbid., xxvn, 18.) 
` Pafich-da$a-karantam tu kuryàd àvrita-mandapam 11 
Mandapena vina vapi tena тапепа pithika | 
Vibhadra уа sabhadra уа kartavya тарка budhaih 1 
(Ibid., XXXV, 99, 100.) 

Here 'pithika' would indicate the projecting part of the base- 

ment, resembling the Buddhist railing round a tree, etc. 

(4) Үауа! lingasya vishkambham tri-gunam pitha-vistaram 11 
Pajamsam dvi-gunam pitham tri-gunam va viseshatah 11 
Pithasya tri-gunam garbham ta(t)-tri-bhagaika-bhittikam | 

(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 9, 11, 12.) 

(5) Bhaga-dvayena pratima tri-bhagikritya tat punah | 
Pithika bhagatah karya пайпісһа na chochchhrita || (25) 
Pithika lakshanam vakshye yathavad anupürvaéah | 
Pithochchrayath yathàvach cha bhāgān shodafa karayet 11 (т) 
Bhümavekah pravishtah syach chaturbhir jagati mata | 

Vritto bhagas tathaikah syad vritah patala-bhagatah 11 (2) 
Bhagais tribhis tathà kanthah kantha-pattas tu bhagatah | 
Bhagabhyasam ürdhva-patta$ cha $esha-bhagena pattika 11 (3) 
Pravishtam bhagam ekaikam  jagatirn yavad eva tu | 
Nirgamam tu punas tasya yàvad vai $esha-pattika 11 (4) 
Vari-nirgamanartharn tu tatra karyah prandlakah | 
Pithikanam tu sarvasàm etat samanya-lakshanam 11 (6) 


308 


University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
ы ж. + b. - SS 7 > » 
ҮЗ м Ее 


CEILING PLAN 
МАНА TAULI 


PHALAKA 


Page 308 


+ CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
. 


— 16 pants, ——4 
Ка; РАЯТ5. =] 


BHADRA PITHA. 


SRI BHADRA. 


SRI VISALA. 
PITHA AS PART OF LINGAM. 


РВАТОШ 


Page1369 М 


ized by S3 Foundation USA 
NEN Tu "ET 


> E 


br i 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PITHA(-THIKA) 


Рагпа-сһапага vajra cha padma уагаһа-5абі tatha 1 
Tri-kona da$ami tašarn samsthanam va nibodhatah 11 (7) 
Devasya yajanartham tu pithika ааба kirtitah 11 (19) 
Linga-püja-pramànena kartavya pithika budhaih 1! (8) 
(Matsya-Puràna, Chap. ccrvir, v. 25 ; Chap. сіхп, 
vv. 1-4, 6-7, 19; Chap. ссгхіх, v. 8.) 
Vibhajya navadha garbham madhye syal linga-pithika 


(Ibid., Chap. corxix, v. 15.) 

(6) Райсһа-һаѕќаѕуа devasya eka-hasta tu pithika | 

When the idol is 5 cubits high, its pedestal is one cubit. 

(Agni-Purana, Chap. хіп, v. 22.) 

(7) * One pedestal (pitha) on which the god and the goddess stood, 
(measuring) one muram and two viral in length, sixteen viral in 
breadth, and six viral in height. '—(Inscrip. of Rajaraja, no. 30, para. 7, 
H.S.I.I., Vol п, p. 137.) 

(8) * One pedestal (surmounted by) a lotus (padma-pitha) on which 
this (image of Pafichadeha Siva) stood (measuring) three viral and four 
torai in height, and fifteen viral and four torai square.'—(Inscrip. of Raja- 
гаја, no. 30, on a pillar of the south enclosure, para. 4, H.S.LI, Vol. п, 
p. 138.) 

(9) * The hero Madavan of Anda . . . got this pidam (pedestal) made.— 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Kolar Taluq, no. 109 6; Transl., p. 40.) 

* He had a temple and а bali-pitha built for the god Chandra-$ekhara, 
the processional form of the god Sankare$vara of Kergodi.’—(Ibid., Vol. уп, 
Tiptur Taluq, no. 79; Transl, p. 57.) 

(1o) * Whose daughter, Vinapati, having at this very place bestowed the 
entire gift of a Hiranya-garbha, and having made a pedestal (pitha) for the 
god with rubies.’—(Sanskrit and Old Kanarese inscrip., no. xciv, line 7, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 103.) 

(11) * He made petition at the feet of Vidyaranya-Sripada, representing 
that in Sringapura, in (connexion with) the dharmma-pitha (religious 
throne,—simhasane dharmamaye, in the original) established by Sankara- 
сһагууа(-сһагуа, іп the original), there must be a matha and agrahara.’ 

Of this dharma-pitha (simhásana), Mr. Rice further says : * The Sringeri 
dharma-pitha or religious throne was established as is well known (refers to 
the inscription quoted above) by Sankaracharya, the great Saiva reformer 
of the eighth century. It is situated on the left bank of the Tunga river, 
in a fertile tract near the Western Ghats. Тһе celebrated scholar Madhava 
or Vidyaranya (forest of learning), author of the Veda-bhashya, who was 
instrumental in founding the Vijayanagar Empire in 1336, was the head of 


309 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


PRITHIVI-DHARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


the establishment at that time.’ (Then is added that his brother was Sayana, 
the well-known commentator of the Rig-Veda. Тһе architectural charac- 
teristics are, however, not given.) —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vr, Sringeri Jagir, no. 11; 
Transl., p. 95, last para.; Roman Text, p. 195, lines 1, 12 f ; Introduct., p. 23, 
para. 5.) 

(12) * Possessor of thirty-two velàma, cighteen cities, sixty-four yoga- 
pithas, and sixty-four ghatika-sthanas.'—(Ef. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur 
Taluq, no. 94; Transl., р. 61, line 7f; Roman Text, p. 114, line 4 f.) 

(13) Dvà-triméat tu velàvuramum ashtadaša-pattanamurn — basashti- 

yoga-pithamum aruvattanalku-ghatika-sthanamurn | 

* (The poeple of) the thirty-two scaside towns, the 18 towns, 62 seats of 
contemplation, and 66 religious centres . . . (held a convocation.)'— 
(Old Kanarese inscrip. at Terdal, line бо, Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, pp. 19, 25.) 

(14) * Having thirty-two velàma, cighteen cities, sixty-four yoga-pithas, 
апа āśramas at the four points of the compass.’—(£p. Carnat., Vol. vu, 
Shikarpur Taluq, no. 118; Transl., p. 86, last para., line.6.) 

(15) * Made a grant . . . of the Mallasamudra village . . . belonging 
to the Sadali throne (рКа). ”--(Ер. Carnat., Vol. x, Sidla-ghatta Taluq, 
no. 94; Transl., p. 194, last para.) 

(16) Pithi—a pedestal (Ranganath inscrip. of Sundara-pandya, v. 19, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 13, 16). 

(17) Purana-pithe pithamtararh sa chaturam vidhivad vidhaya | 

(Chebrolu Inscrip. of Jaya, postscrip., lines 7-8, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. v, рр. 115-151.) 

(18) Pithika—a platform of stone (see Specimens of Jain Sculptures from 

Mathura, Plate ш, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, p. 320). 


PRITHIVI-DHARA—A type of oval building. 
(1) Agnt-Purdna—(Chap. civ, vv. 19-20, see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purdna—(Chap. хіуп, vv. 29-30 ; see under PRASADA). 
PUNDARIKA—A class of the seven-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxv, 3-293; see under PRASADA.) 
PUR—A fortification, a small fortified place, a township (see 
NAGARA). 


PURA—A big fortified city as in Tripura апа Mahapura described 
in the Yajur- Veda апа Brahmanda-Puràna (see references under NAGARA) 
but apparently less pretentious than the capital cities (nagara), a 
castle, a fortress, a village, a fortified town, a city, a wall, a rampart, 
a house, an abode, a residence, the female apartments, a store-house, 
an upper storey. 


310 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHIECTURE PURATO-BHADRA 


А village (M., Ix, 215, etc.), a town (M., x 39, etc.). 
Gramàdinam nagaradinarn pura-pattana-kharvate | 
Koshtha-koladi-sarvesham garbha-sthanam ihochyate | 


(M., хп, 168-169.) 
Khetanàm cha puranarh cha gramanam chaiva sarva$ah | 
Trividhanàm cha durganam parvatodaka-dhanvinam H 
Param ardhardham ayamam prag-udak-plavanam puram 11 
Chatur-asra-yutarh divyarn pra$astarn taih purarn kritam 11 
(Втаһтапаа-Риғапа, Part 1, 2nd anushamgapada, 

Chap. уп, уу. 105, 107, 108 ; see also v. 99.) . 

Pura-madhyarh samašritya kuryad ayatanarn raveh | 


(Bhavishya-Purdna, Chap. сххх, v. 40.) 

(4) Karkkotadhina-raksharh svapuram idam atho nirmame Javrishakhyam 
— then built this town of his named Javrisha, the protection of which was 
entrusted to Karkota.’—(Buddhist Stone inscrip. from Sravasti, lines 4-5, Ind- 
Ant., Vol. хуп, pp. 62, 63.) 

(5) Jagapala purarn jatar krite dese punar nnave—in the newly re-creat- 
ed site, the town of Jagapala grew up (1.е., was built).— (Rajim inscrp. of 
Rajapal, line 12, Ind. Ant., Vol. хуп, p. 140.) 

(6) * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occupa- 
tions, streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure gardens, separated 
lovers, splendid tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for spring festivals, 
ghatika-sthanas (religious centres), the supports of dharmma and 
mines of enjoyment, moats which were as if the sea being overcome 
had returned here on account of the collection of beautiful women 
fair as the moon (grama-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-drona- 
mukha pura-pattana rajadhani) on whatever side one looked in these 
nine forms did the Kuntala-dega shine. ’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikar- 
pur Taluq, no. 197; Transl., p. 124, para. 1, last seven lines; Roman Text, 
p. 214, line 27 f.) 

(7) “Тһе three puras belonging to the great royal city (? rajadhani) 
Balligave.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu., Shikarpur Taluq, no. 99; Transl., p. 66- 
last two lines.) 

PURATO-BHADRA (se MukHA-BHADRA)— Ihe front tabernacle, 
a porch, a portico, a vestibule. 

Deva-Sri-Sasibhishanasya (i.e., of Siva) kritva devalayam karitarn- 

yugmam marmdapa-$obhitam cha purato-bhadram pratolya saha | 

* I have not been able to find purato-bhadra іп the Kosas to which 
I have access, but sarvato-bhadra is described as a kind of house (?) 
with four doors facing the four quarters (here refers to Ram 


311 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


s. R 


j u www -—— sc RR 


РОКЦ-1) АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Raz’s Essay on Architecture of the Hindus, 1834, p. 43; here a village 
called sarvato-bhadra is described not a house of the same name). 
From this I infer that a purato-bhadra was a building with only one 
door in front. '—Mr. Hira Lal. 


But there does not seem to be much doubt that purato-bhadra and 
mukha-bhadra are identical and that they are an essential part of 


the ancient Hindu buildings, resembling more or less the front 
tabernacle.—(Kanker inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 7, Ер. Ind., Vol. тх, pp. 127, 
125, and note 4.) 
PURI(-I)—A temple, an adytum, a building, a town. 
(The second Prašasti of Baijnath, v. 25, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. 1, pp. 117, 114; see also no. 32.) 
PURUSHANJALI—The palm of a man. It refers to the depth of 
foundations upon which buildings of one to twelve storeys are 
stated to be erected. 
Khanayed bhütalam $éreshtham purushafijali-matrakam 1 
Jalàntam va $ilàntam уа... 1--(М., хуш, 6-7.) 

The depth is stated here to reach water or stone under ground. 
Hence the expression seems to imply a depth, measured by the 
height of a man with uplifted arms. 

'The following passage seems to be a parallel instance : 

Chibnam арі chardha-purushe manduka-panduro’tha mrit- 
pitah | 


Puta-bhedaka§ cha tasmin pashano bhavati toyam adhah 11 
Commentary : purusha-Sabdenordhfiva-bahuh purusho jfieyah, sa cha 
vim$at-adhikam angula-$atam bhavati—by the word © purusha ` is 
to be understood the man with uplifted arms, that is, 120 angulas 
(or 5 cubits).—(Brihat-Samhita, xiv, 7, 7.В.А.8., М. S., Vol. vr р. 301° 
note I.) 
PUSHKARA-—A blue lotus, a part, a portion, the forepart of 
the nose (M., LXV, 84), water, a cage, a type of building, a class 
of buildings (Kamikagama, xiv, 61, 6%; see under MALIKA). 
PUSHKARINI (see ТАРАСА and УАРІ) —А tank, a lotus-pool. 
Datia-putrena thai Norena pukarani karavita savrasapana puyae ! 
‘By the son of Dati, the Thera Nora, a tank was caused to be 
made for the worship of all snakes.'—(New Kharoshti inscrip. from 
Swat, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxv, p. 141, and Vol. хххуп, p. 66.) 
PUSHKALA—A class of storeyed buildings, a tree, a type of pent- 
roof. 


312 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PUSHPA-VATIKA 


A class of the two-storeyed buildings (M., xx, 94, 42-43; see under 
PRASADA). 
A tree (M., xv, 354, etc.). 
A kind of pent-roof (M., хуш, 188). 
PUSHPAKA—A flower, the car of Kubera, a bracelet, a type of 
pavilion, a class of buildings. 
A pavilion with sixty-four pillars (Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLXX, v. 7; 
see under MANDAPA). 
A class of buildings, rectangular in plan and named (1) Ba(va) labhi 
(2) Griharaja, (3) Salagriha or Salamandira, (4) Visala, (5) Sama, 


(6) Brahma-mandira or Brahma-bhuvana, (7) Prabhava, (8) Sivika, and 
(9) Ve$ma: 


(1) Agni-Pu*'àna (Chap. civ, vv. ІІ, 16-17; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Garuda-Puràna (Chap. хіхп, vv. 2-22, 26-27; see under PRASADA). 
PUSHPA-PATTA—A flower plate, a turban, a head-gear, a tiara, 
a diadem. 


(М., LXIX, 16; see details under BHOSHASNA.) 
PUSHPA-PUSHKALA —A class of bases. 
(M., xiv, 97-112; see the lists of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) 
PUSHPA-BANDHAC-—A type of window of flower-band design. 
(M., xxxi 584; see under VATAYANA.) 
PUSHPA-BANDHANA-MANDAPA—A detached building where 
flowers are garlanded for the worship of the deity. 
Pushpa-danta-pade chaiva pushpa-bandhana-mandapam 1 
(M., хххп, 42.) 
PUSHPA-BODHAKA-—A type of capital. 


(M., xv, 155-168 ; see under 5тамвна.) 
PUSHPA-BHADRA—A pavilion with sixty-two pillars. 
(Matsya-Purand, Chap. ccLxx, v. 7; see MANDAPA.) 
PUSHPA-RATHA—A chariot. 
(Abulala-perumal inscrip. of Champa, 
lines 3-4, Ep. Ind., Vol. ur, p. 71.) 
PUSHPA-VATIKA (see VATIKA)—A garden, a bower, an arbour. 
Uttare saralais talaih $ubha syat pushpa-vatika | 
( Matsya- Purana, Chap. ccrxx, v. 29.) 
313 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Нм ae eT --.---... ee 


PUMLINGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


PUMLINGA (see Samchita)—A class of buildings with the six - 
main component parts (see under SHAD-VARGA) and with terraces, 
a masculine type of building, a division of the architectural and 
sculptural objects as distinguished from the faminine (strilinga) 
and neuter(napumsaka) types. 
Alinda-sahitam shad-varga-sahitam cha уай arpitam | 
Samchitarm proktam pumlingam tad ghani-kritam 11 
Devànam asuranam cha siddha-vidyadhareshv-api | 
Raksha-gandharva-yakshanam ^ praéastanam cha janminam 
(bhogyam) 11 
(Kamikdgama, XLV, 8, 9.) 
See the Manasára and the Agamas under PRAsADA, and compare Stri- 
LINGA and NAPUMSAKA. 


PURANA-KAMBA—A vase, a moulding. 

“Тһе panel or flat part of the back wall of each recess between the 
projecting tower-like compartments, is ornamented by a vase or some 
very florid object called pürana-kambam.* 

(Gangai-Kondo Puram Temple, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. rx, p. 118, c. 2, para 4.) 
РОКТА—А well, a pond, a step-well. 4 

(т) Рагбатһ vàpi-küpa-tadakadikam—(the word) pürta implies the step- 
well, well, and pond, etc. 

(2) Vapi-kipa-tadakadi-devatayatanani cha 1 

Anna-pradanaramah pürtam ity-abhidhiyate 11 

Тһе step-well, well, pond, and the temple (and) the pleasure-house 
(alm-house, hotel) where food is given (gratis)—these are called the 
* purta.” 

(3) Vàpi-küpa-tadakadi-pürtam ayatanani cha | 

Svarga-sthitim sada kuryat tada tat pürta-sajiiitam | 


Тһе step-well, well, pond and temples are pürta. It always ensures Р 
the residence in heaven (for the doer), it is for this reason designated 
as pürta. i 


(Quotations from the Commentary, Kašyapa, 
оп the Brihat-Samhita, LVI, 2; 7. В. A. S, 
N. S., Vol. vr, pp. 316-37, note 1.) 
(4) Vàpi-küpa-tadagadi-devatayatanani cha 1 
Anna-pradanaramah pürtam aryah prachakshate 11 
(Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, p. 318, note 3.) 
PRISHTHA-SOTRA—tThe plumb-line drawn by the back-bone. 


(M., LXVII, 80 ; see under PRALAMBA.) | 


314 


j 
— Арль 
у 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU-ARCHITECTURE PRACHCHHADANA 


РЕСНАКА--аАп owl, the tip or root of an elephant’s tail, a couch, а 
bed, a shelter on a street, a site plan of four squares. 


1 (M. уп, 3.) 
In connexion with streets in а village : 


Pechakam vatha рат) va rathya yuktam tu vinyaset | 
(М., тх, 423, etc. 
PAISACHA (see PADA-VINYASA)—A site plan of four squares. 
(M. уп, 3.) 
POTA(-I)KA (POTTIKA)—A part of a column, the site of а 
house. 
Tat-samotsedham potikalankriti-kriya I—(Kamikagama, LIV, 11.) 
Potikantavalambam va tulantaritam antaram |—(Jbid., 23.) 
Pottika (zbid., Lv, 69 ; see under MAKARA-TORANA). 
А part of the bottom of a column.—(Suprabhedagama, xxxt, бо ; see under 
STAMBHA.) 
РОТКА--А moulding, an architectural object resembling the snout 
of a hog or a ploughshare. 
In connexion with joinery : 
Karkatanghrivat kritvà potra-nasanghrim ve$ayet | 
(M., хуп, 143.) 
PAUSHTIKA (see  UrsEDHA)—A height which is 12 of the 
breadth, a class of buildings. ; 
See Manasara (xxxv, 22-26) and compare Kamikagama (L, 24, 28), 
under Арвнота. 
A class of the two-storeyed buildings (M., xx, 93, 19-25 ; see under 
PRASADA). 
PRAKOSHTHA(KA)—The forearm, a hall, a room near the gate, 


of a palace, a court, a quadrangle, a part of the door-frame. 
Ekamsam madhya-bhadram tu madhye yuktya prakoshthakam 1 


(M., xxvi, 108.) 
The forearm : 


Prakoshtharn shodašarnšarn syat talam ashtamsam ayatam | 
(M., туп, 26, etc.) 
PRACHCHHADANAC-—A covering, a canopy, the roof, ап entab- 
lature. 
А synonym of the entablature (/М., хут, 18; see under PRASTARA). 
In connexion with the three-storeyed buildings : 
Prachchhadanopari stambham karna-harmyadi-manditam | 
(M., xxr, 9.) 
315 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ee س‎ 


PRANALA(KA* AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The roof : н d 
Prastarasyopari-deSe mee m ! T ды. 
stya hadanam kuryat sudheshtakadi-gulodakaih | 
Yuktya prachchha an т kury (pH if 
Padarn vayate taulim kuryad yuktyà vichakshanah r ( | 
Tad-ürdhve jayantikam kuryat tat-tat-prachchhádanànvitam | 
(M., XXXIII, 373-374-) 
Prachchhadanankanarh kuryan na prachchhàdanarh eva cha | 
(M., xxxv, 295.) 
Prachchhadanarh yathà-harmye dvararh kuryat tathaiake | 
ау (М., хххуш, 7.) 
Prastarochcham iti proktam prachchhadanam ihochyate | 
Prasadadini(-nam) sarvesharh prachchhadanadi-lakshanam | 
Etat prachchhadanarn gehe proktam mama muni$varaih 1 
Anyat-vàstüni-(nàm) sarvesharh prachchhadanam ihochyate | 
(M., ху, 120-121, 143-144 ; the proposed 
description, ibid., 121-142, 145-168, 170-204.) 
= The materials of which they are constructed : 
Kevalarh cheshtaka-harmye daru-prachchhadananvitam 1 
Sila-harmye éila-taulirh kuryat tat tad viseshatab | 
From this passage especially, it apears that the term * prachchhàdana? 
indicates the roof of a building.—(Jbid., 133-134.) 


E. PRANALA(KA)—The drip or channel-like part of the pedestal of 
E- the linga (phallus), a gutter, a canal, a patter, a bracket. 
(1) Vari-nirgamanartham tu tatra karyah praņālakah | 


= Therein (in the pedestal) should be made the pranala (gutter) as an out- 
let for water. 


(Matsya-Purána, Chap. COLXI, v. 6.) 
Ardhangula-bhruvo-raji pranala-sadrisi sama | 


(Jbid., Chap. согуш, v.37.) 


(2) A square or round platter or bracket to which a spout is attached for 


ornamental purposes : 


Аз$апуага pranalam Syat pürvasyàm và prakirtita || 


Kamika, th 

See Manasara, їл, 208, etc. iu QS 
= PRANALA(-LIKA,-LI)—A canal, a spout, a conduit, a water- 
course, a drain. 


m (1) Pituh punyabhivriddhaye karita Sat-pranaliyam . . . | 


* This conduit has been built . . . for the increase of his father's spiritual 
merit.’—(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 8, Vibhuvarman’s inscrip. 1: 
Ep ns a ns inscrip., line 2 f., Tad. 400, 


316 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRATIMA 
(2) Kügráme pranalikaya’ cha khanda-sphutita-samadhanartham— 
* for repairing the spout of the water-course in Kügrama.'--(Ibid., no. 11 
line 15, p. 174.) ; 
PRATIKA(-I)—A moulding of crescent shape, the frieze ; for its 
synonyms, see M., XVI, 42-44. It is shaped like а petal in two 
parts (М., XVI, 45). 
(1) A moulding of the base ( M., xiv, 39, 138, 148, etc.; see the lists of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA). 
A moulding of the-column (М., xv, 217; хххш, 225, etc.). - 
(2) Pratirh nivesayet tasya tri-tri-bhagaika-bhagatah 1! ~ 
Anyayo$ chardha-chandrabha prati karya dvijottamah I1 
(Kamikagama, тлу, 44, 46.) 


PRATI- KRAMA—A class of bases comprising four types which 
differ from one another in height and in the addition or omission of | 
some mouldings. 
(M., xiv, 44-64 ; see under ADHISHTHANA.) 
Vedikeyarn tu samanya kuttimanarh prakirtita | 
Pratikramasya chotsedhe chatur-virn$ati vibhàjite lI 

(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, 1x, 19.) 


Pratikramarh viseshena kartavyarh pada-bandhavat 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxt, 26 ; see the details under PADA-BANDHA.) 


PRATI-BANDHA—A moulding of the base. 


(M., xiv, 324 ; see the lists of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) | 


PRATI-BHADRA—One of the three classes of the pedestals, the 
| other two being Mañcha-bhadra and Vedi-bhadra : it has four types 
2 differing from one another in height and in the addition or omission 
ж. of some mouldings. | 
| (М., хш, 53-89 ; see the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA.) 


| | PRATIMA—A moulding, an architectural object. 
|} In connexion with foundations : 
NI : Brahma-garbham iti proktarn pratimarh tat sva-rüpakam t 
| Evam tu pratimarn proktam etad garbhopari nyaset | 
(M., хп, 149, 166. А 
A moulding of the base ( M., xiv, Gu 197, 279; see the lists бошад vá ERA. 
under ADHISHTHANA). E | = E 


PI 


E 


PRATIMA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


PRATIMA—An image, an idol, a bust, a statue. 


(х) Мапазата, Chap. LXIV (named Pratima) : Е 
Description of the images of the sixteen attendant deities of the 
Vishnu temple (lines 1-92). 


Gf. Pratimam lohajarn choktarh tatha ratnam tu vinyaset | 


(M., LXX, 100.) 


Pratimadhikara (М., LXVII, colophon). 
(2) An image or idol (Brihat-Samhita, LVI, 16, 7.R.A.S., N. S., Vol. rv, 


. 918). 
à () TET dvi-hastà và tri-hasta và pramanatah l 
Tatha sarva tri-hasta cha savituh pratima Subha 11 
(Bhavishya-Purana, Chap. CXXXI, v. 1.) 
(4) Athatah sampravakshyami sakalanarh tu lakshanam 11 
Sarvavayava-drigyatvat pratima tv-iti chochyate 11 
Iévaradi-chatur-mirttih pathyate sakalarh tv-iti 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxiv, 1—2.) 
Angushtha-parvad arabhya vitastir-yavad eva tu | 
Griheshu pratima karya nadhika $asyate budhaih |! 
Ashodaga tu prásade karttavya nadhika tatah | 
Madhyottama-kanishtha tu karya vittanusaratah 11 
Dvarochchhrayasya yan-manam ashtadha tat tu karayet | 
Bhagam ekam tatas tyaktva parisishtam tu yad bhavet Il 
Bhaga-dvayena pratima tri-bhagikritya tat punah | 
Pithika bhagatah karya nati nicha nachochchhrita 11 
(Matsya-Purána, Chap. согуш, vv. 22-25.) 

(6) Vinirmmita rajate Chamkirajena Supár$va-pratimà uttama— the. 
excellent image of Suparsva made by Charhkiraja adorns there.’ (Нормай. 
inscrip. of Somesvara I, line 32, Ind. Ant, Vol. xix, p. 273.) 

(7) < An image (pratima) may be very lofty and yet have no beauty 
or it may be lofty and of real beauty, but have no dignity ; but height, iue 
beauty and exceeding dignity being all united in him, how highly is he worthy 
of worship in the world, Gommate$vara, the very form of Jina himself. 
Should Maya address himself to drawing a likeness, the chief of Naka- 
loka (Indra) to look on it or the Lord of Serpents (Adisesha) to priase it 
it is unequal ; this being so, who else are able to draw the likeness, to look 
fully upon or praise the unequalled form of the зината evi E with 
its wondrous beauty.’— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, Vindhyagiri inscrip., ло: 85; 
Transl., р. 154, line 13 Ё; Roman Text, р. 67 f.) Я š 
A (8) * In the presence of these gods, setting up the stone images (Silà-pratima) | 
of the crowned queen Lakshmivilasa, the lawful queen Krishnavilasa, and 


418 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRATI-VAKTRA 


the lawful queen Ramavilasa, together with my own.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, 
Ё Chamarajnagar Taluq, no. 86; Transl., p. 11, para. 3 ; Roman Text, p. 18, 
| para. 1, last three lines.) 

(9) Vichitiye Jina-dasiya pratima Bhagavata pitamahasa pratima pratish- 
thapita I—(Mathura Inscrip. no. 16, line 2 ; Bitha Inscrip. no. C, lines I-3 ; 
Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. їп, pp. 34, 48.) 

(ro) ‘ In the highly celebrated Somanatha-pura he made a great temple EC 
setting up therein according to all the directions of the Agama the various 
incarnations of Vishnu,—and shone with the fame he had acquired, Soma- 
chamupati, the Gayi-govala. Under the profound name of Prasanna- 
chenna he set Кебауа on the right-hand side, and the source of world's ^4 
pleasure, his form Gopala, the lord who fills the mind with joy, Тапагаһа, 


—these three forms, united among themselves, were the chief in the Vishnu e 
temple іп that pura. А cause of all manner of festivity were all the various E 

forms around the enclosure, as they were all exhibited in different ways : pe 
the Matsya and others, all the ten incarnations, Кебауа and others, Sañ- ж 


| karshana and others, twelve in name, Narayana and others to the number 
| of thirty-four, including eighteen, Krishna and others ; Ganapa, Bhairava, 
I '  Bhàskara, Vishvaksena, Durggi, and such gods numbering seventy-three 
j adorned the Vishnu temple in the middle of pura. And in the south- 
I east of the pura Soma-dandadhipa set up Bijjale$vara, Perggade$vara, - 
Revaleśvara, and  Bayirale$vara, with Somanatha Siva-linga іп the 
„ middle .. . And he set up Bhava named Nrisimhesvara, Yoga-Narayana 
s” and Lakshmi-Nrisithha in the middle of the Kaveri at Somanathapura.— “а 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. хі, Davanagere Taluq, no. 36; Transl., p. 46, para. 3, 
line 7f.; Roman Text, pp. 76, 77). 
PRATIMA-MANDAPA—A detached building used as а temple, а 
pavilion. f 


РКАТІ-МОКНА--А moulding of the base. 


( M., xiv, 102 ; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA.) 


PRATI-PATTA (see PATTA)—A moulding, а band, a plate, a slab, 
a tablet. 


(M., xxxiv, 55.) 


(Vastu-vidya, xx, 23-24 ; see under PATTA.) 
РКАТІ-ЕОРА--А moulding of the entablature. 
(M., xvi, 45 ; see the lists of mouldings 


x under PRASTARA.) 

PRATI-VAKTRA—A moulding of the base. 
zb ot (M., xiv, 118 ; see the lists of mouldings — — 
under ADHISHTHANA.) | 


319 a. 


7 


PRATI-VAJANA АМ ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


` PRATI-VAJANA-—A concave moulding resembling the cavetto. к 


See Fletcher (Hist. Arch., p. 101). : | | 
It is ° the same thing in the pedestal to answer to the yaana : 1ts | 
form, though generally rectangular, is sometimes, when placed in cornices, | 
found to be externally a little more inclined to опе side than to the other, 
and in this situation it resembles the cavetto.—(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. { 
Hind., p. 25.) | 
Alingantararh chordhve prativajanam uchyate 1—(М.. xLv, 111.) 

А moulding of the pedestal (M., хш, 58, 99, 111, etc.; see the lists of | 
mouldings under UrAPiTHA.) | 

A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 39, etc.; see the lists of mouldings i 
under ADHISHTHANA.) 

PRATISRAYA—Help, a shelter house for travellers, a dwelling 
house, a residence, a sacrificial hall, an assembly. 

(1) Satra-prapà-pra(ti)&raya-vrishotsargga- vapi-küpa -tadarama-devala- 
yadi-karanopakaranartham iha—‘ for the purpose of (supplying) requisite 
materials for preparing alms-house (feeding establishment), a place for 
distributing water gratis to travellers, a shelter-house for travellers, a 
vrishotsargga (see below, Ind. Ant., Vol. хп, p. 142), reservoirs, wells, tanks, - 
orchards, temples, etc.'—(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, line 58, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. уп, рр. 41, 46, note 8.) 

(2) Chatu$-salavasadha-pratiéraya-pradena arama-tadaga-udapana - 
karena— has given the shelter of quadrangular rest-houses, has made 
wells, tanks, and gardens.’—(Nasik Cave inscrip. no. ro, line 2, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. уш, pp. 78, 79.) 

* But pratiéraya, as I have stated in a note (Nasik inscr ption, the Inter- 
national Congress of the Orientalists held in London in 1874) is what is 
in these days called an anna-sattra, i.e. a house where travellers put up 
and are fed without charge.’—Dr. Bhankarkar, and compares: - 

(3) Hemadri (p. 152) : Pratisrayah pravasinarh Aérayah, i.e., a shelter 
house for travellers. 

(4) Vahni-Purana (p. 763, quoted also by Dr. Hoernle) : 

Pratigrayarh suvistirnarh sad-annarh sujalanvitam 1 

Dina-natha-janarthaya karayitva griharh $ubham | 

Nivedayet pathisthebhyah $ubha-dvárarh manoharam П 

‘ Having caused to be constructed for poor and helpless persons a prati- 
$raya (in the shape of) a good house, very commodious (wide), having food 
and plentiful water, provided with a good door, and charming, he should 
dedicate it to travellers.’—(Ind. Ant., Vol. хп, p. 142, c. 1-2.) 
Я 320 


D 


| 
| 
x HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRATOLI 


PRATISHTHA—An establishment, a fixed abode. 
(A.-V., vr, 32, 3, Sankh. Aran., хп, 14.) 
| PRATI (see Рвлті)--А moulding. 
| PRATOLI—A gate-way, sometimes provided with a flight of steps, 
| a small turret, the main road of a town. 
| (1) Rathya pratoli visikha syách сһауо vapram astriyam | 

(Amarakésha, п, ii, з.) 
| (2) "Lriméad-dandàmtararh cha dvayor attalakayor-madhye saharmya- 
dvi-talam dvy-ardhayamarh pratolirh karayet | 


à Attalaka-pratoli-madhye — tri-dhanushkadhishthanarn sapidhana- 
chchhidra-phalaka-sarnhatam indra-kosarn karayet | 
Ргакагат ubhayato mandalakam adhyardha-dandarh kritva pratoli- 
shat-tulantararh dvàram nivegayet | 
(Kau tiliya-Artha-fástra, Chap. XXIV, 
paras. 8, 9, 15, pp. 52, 52.) 
(3) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
XIV, 25, 21: Tam cha šala-chayarh érimat sampratoli sugha- 
ttitam | 
: XII, 69, 55 : Parikhas chaiva kauravya pratolir nishkütani cha 1 
> (4) Ramayana (Cock): 


П, 80, 18: Pratolivara-Sobhitah . . . (nive$àh) | 

IV; Әзіл? (Балқаш) o o < pandurabhih pratolibhir uchchabhir 
abhisarhvritam 1 

VI, 75, 6: Gopuratta-pratolishu charyàsu vividhasu cha 1 


(5) See * The Sanskrit Pratoli and its new Indian derivatives.’—(J.R.A.S., 
Vol. хіх, July, 1906.) 


(6) Kritvà . . . abihramarh muni-vasatirh . . . -svargga-sopanarüpam 
kaubera-chchhanda-bimbarh sphatika-marndala-bhasa-gauram 
pratolim | 


‘Having made a gateway, charming (and) . . . the abode of Saints, 
Í (and) having the form of a staircase leading to heaven (and) resembling a 
| (pearl-)necklace of the kind called Kauberachchanda (and) white with the 
adiance of pieces of crystalline gems.’ 
* That the word (pratoli) has the meaning in the present inscription of a 
gateway with a flight of steps seems to be shown by the comparison of the 
pratoli with a svarga-sopana or flight of steps, or ladder, leading to heaven, 
and by its being described as white with the radiance of pieces of crystalline 
gems (in the stones of which it was constructed).'—(Bilsad stone pillar inscrip. 


of Kumaragupta, line ro, C. I I, Vol ш, F. G. I., no. 10, pp. 44, 45, 43, 
and note 1.) | 


/ 


821 


PRATYANGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(7) Hammira vira kva sa tava mahima nirdišamti dhvajágrair-divya- 
kára-pratoli-hridayami-bhuvo nirmità Kilhanena | | 

Astàm tavat pratoli tad-upavirachitarh koshthaka-dvarh-dvam- etat 

prochchair-alana-yugmam Vijaya[vara]kareh Satrulakshmag cha 


al : 1 ithviràj 
sadm (Hansi stone inscrip. of Prithviraja, V. S. 1224, 


vv. 5, 6, Ind. Ani., Vol. XLI, pp. 19, 17.) 
(8) Asyam uttunga-sriiga-sphuta-Sasi-kirana-(svetabhasa-sanatharh- 
ramyarama) pratoli-vividha-jana-pada-stri-vilasabhiramam 1 
«In this (city of Benares there was) a place, renowned on earth (bathed 
in the white light) of the bright rays of the moon (as they fell on its) lofty 
turrets ; charming with the gracefulness of the wives of the various inha- 
bitants of the (beautiful and extensive, lit. whose extent was charming) 
streets,’—(Benares inscrip. of Pantha, v. 2, Ef. Ind., Vol. тх, pp. бо, бі.) 
(9) Deva-ri-SaSi-bhüshanasya kritina devalayarn kàritam yugmam 
marndapa-Sobhitarh cha purato-bhadrami pratolya saha | 
* Claused to be built two temples of the god whose ornament is the moon 
(viz. Mahadeva), together with halls, a purato-bhadra with a gateway.'— 
(Kanker inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 7, Ef. Ind., Vol. rx, pp. 127, 128, 125, 
note 3.) 
PRATYANGA—A minor limb, a moulding of the entablature. 


(Kamikagama, LIV, 2; see under PRASTARA.) 
PRATYUHA (see Una)—Zit. an obstacle, hence апу architec- 
tural moulding or member separating two others, a supporting 
member, a moulding, an architectural object. 


` PRATHAMASANA—The throne for the preliminary coronation. 
Cf. Prathamabhisheka-yogyarh syat prathamásanam eva cha | 
А (M., XLV; 2-3.) 
PRADAKSHINA—A surrounding terrace or verandah, a circum- 
ambulating path round a temple, a circular road round a village 
or town. 1 i 
(1) Sikharardhasya chārdhena vidheyā tu pradakshiņā 1 
Garbha-sütra-dvayarn chagre vistaro mandalasya tu 11 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. сох, v. 4.) . 
(2) Pradakshinarn bahih kuryàt prasadadishu và na va | 
` (Agni-Purána, Chap. civ, v. 9.) 
(3) Sikhararddhasya charddhena vidheyas tu pradakshinah 1 
+ (Garuda-Purána, Chap. хімп, v. 8.) 


2 


322 


АМ | UMS 
н A fub 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRAPA 


Sce Matsya-Purana above : this line is identical, except that it is used in 
the plural number here. 

(4) ‘ The procession-path round the cell—called Pradakshina—as that 
round apse, remained for some centuries as a common but not a universal 
feature. The verandah disappeared. Round a windowless cell it was 
useless, and the pillared porches contained in themselves, all the elements 
of shelter or of the shadow that were required.’—(Fergusson : Hist. of Ind. 
and East. Arch., p. 291.) : 

(5) * In the pradakshina or passage behind images, are other two gratings 
over shafts from the lower hall.’—(Ahmadabad Arch. Burgess : Arch. Surv., 
New Imp. Series, Vol. xxxi, p. 87.) 

PRADAKSHINA-SOPANA—A surrounding flight of steps. 


(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra ; see under SOPANA.) 


PRAPATHA—A broad path, long journey by a broad road, high 
roads for travellers, rest-houses thereupon (R.-V., x, 17, 4, 6; 63, 
16 ; Kath. Sam., XXXVI, 14; Ait. Brà., vu, 1 5). А prince is landed 
for his prapathas (R.-V., уш, 1, 30). 
PRAPA (PRAPANGA)—A shed on the roadside for accommodat- 
ing travellers with water, a place where water is distributed, a 
cistern, a tank, a building. 
(1) Kulluka (M. W. Dict.) : Paniya-dana-griha—a house where water is 
given (gratis). 
(2) Amarakósha (п, 5, 7) : AveSanarh śilpi-śālā ргара paniya-salika | 
(3) A synonym of harmya (edifice) (M., п, 7). 
In connexion with the staircase : : 
Ргараћве pramukhe bhadre sopanarh pürva-par$vayoh | 
(M., ххх, 105.) 
In connexion with mandapas (pavilions) : > 
Bhakti-manarh tatha bhitti-vistararh chapy-alindakam | 
Prapanga-mandapakararh paficha-bhedarn kramochyate 1 
(M., xxxiv, 3-4; see also 15.) 
Madhye prachchhadanarh kuryat prapáñgarn vadhikalpayet | 
Tasya madhye cha range tu mauktikena prapanvitam | 
Mandapagre prapangarh syat . . . | 
(Ibid., зот, 218, 222; see also 224-225.) 
Ргара is shed as an alternative for pavilion. 
Prapanga is shed with open yards.—(M., xxxiv, 567-568.) 
Mandapasya bahir-deSe praparh paritas tu karayet |—(Jbid., 290.) 


323 ` 


PRAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


In connexion with madhya-ranga (central quadrangle or courtyard) : 
Devanarh cha nripanarh cha sthanakasana-yogyakam | 
Mukta-prapanga-manam cha lakshanam vakshyate’dhuna l 
Yad-ukta-madhya-range tu chatus-trimgad vibhajite | 
Ekaikarh-bhaga-hinarh syat prapa-vistaram ishyate | 
.. . prapa-tungam $ivam$arm syat | CE saa ne 

In connexion with the pedestals of the images of the Triad : 

Prapà cha toranarh vapi kalpa-vriksharn cha samyutam I 
(M., 1л, 87.) 
(4) Prág-varhéayor anya-vaméai$ cha nalikera-daladibhih 1 
Achchhaditah(-ta) prapà nama prastararh chatra mandapah 1 
(Kamikagama, r, 88.) 
(5) Ргарау25 cha mandapam—‘ hall for the supply of water.’ 
(Inscrip. of the Chandella Viravarman, v. 19, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. т, pp. 328, 930.) | 
(6) Vapi-küpa-tadaga-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayán | | 
Sauvarna-dhvaja-toranapana-pura-grama-prapa-marhdapan I i 
Vyadhāpayad ayam Chaulukya-chüdamanih 1 
Неге “Ртара” (shed) does not, evidently, mean a tank, which idea is 
expressed by the words vāpi, kūpa, and tadāga.—(Sridhara’s Devapattana 
Praśasti, v. ro, Ep. Ind., Vol. u, p. 440.) 
(7) See Ranganath inscrip. of Sundarapandya (v. 15, Ep. Ind., Vol. ur, 
рр. 13, 16.) ; a 
(8) Satra-prapà-praéraya-vrishotsargga-vápi-küpa-tadaràma-devala-yàdi- 
karapopakaranàrtham cha | 
Prapa—(?) a place of distributing water gratis (D. R. Bhandarkar).— 
(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, line 58, Ep. Ind., Vol. уп, pp. 41, 46.) 
(9) Nadinarh ubhato tirarh sabha prapá-karena— erected on both banks 
shelters for meeting and such for gratuitous distributing of water.’—(Nasik 
Cave inscrip. no. 10, line 2 f., Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 78, 79.) 
(10) Aneka-devatayatana-sabha-praparamavasatha-vihara-karayita— 

‘who caused to be built many temples of the gods, halls, drinking-foun- 

tains, gardens, rest-houses, and (Buddhist) monasteries.’—(Palitana Plates of | 

Simhaditya, line 12, Ep. Ind., Vol. x1, pp. 18, 19, note 4.) í 
(11) Dakshina-disabhage kàrápità vapi tathà prapeyam cha—‘in the 

southern part there has been made an irrigation well also a watering-trough." 

Таша prapa-kshetram dvitiyarh tatha grame uttara-disayam— in the 
northern part of the village there is given a second field, for the watering 

trough.’—(Grant of Bhimadeva п, Vikrama Samvat 1266, lines 26, 27, 31, 32, 

Ind. Ant., Vol. хуш, pp. 113, 115.) : 


324 


— Ñas. A 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRALAMBA 


(12) “Арапа cannot have here (Asoka pillar-edict, vu, lines, 2-3) its 
usual meaning * tavern, liquor-shop.” As professor Kern (Der Buddhism, 
Vol. 11, p. 385) assumes, it must denote a watering station. Probably the 
huts on the roads are meant, where water is distributed to travellers and 
their beasts gratis or against payment. "Гһе usual Sanskrit name is ргара. 
Dr. Bihler.—(Zp. Ind., Vol. u, p. 274, i.) 

РКАВНАУА--А type of rectangular building. 
(Agni-Purdna, Chap. ctv, vv. 16-17 ; see under PRASADA.) 
PRABHANJANA—A type of chariot. 
(M., хп, 119; see under КАТНА.) 
PRABHA—A canopy, a city. 
Sailam Sobhita-Sata-kumbha-vilasat kumbharh таһа-тапдаратһ рга- 
kararh paramalika-vilasitarh muktamayirh cha prapa(-bha)m 1 

‘A great maha-mandapa of stone, resplendent with pitchers (? domes) 
of shining gold, a surrounding wall, adorned with excellent buildings, and 
a canopy of pearls.’ Dr. Hultzsch.--(Fourteen inscrip. at Tirukkovalur, 
no. К, Inscrip. of Rajendradeva, lines 1-2, Ef. Ind., Vol. vu, рр. 145-46.) 


PRAMANA—The measurement of breadth. 


(M., Lv, 3-6 ; see under Мама.) 
Pramanarh dirgham ity-uktarn manonmana-pramanatah 11 
: (Suprabhedagama, хххіу, 36.) 
PRALAMBA—The plumb-lines or the lines. drawn through an 
image in order to find out the perpendicular and the horizontal. 
measurement of the different parts of the body. 4 
(1) See Bimbamána (vv. 73-91, 92-122, 123-138) under TALAMANA. - 
(2) Mdnasara (Chap. хуп, named PRALAMBA) : 

The instrument by means of which the plumb-lines are drawn is 
called pralamba-phalaka. This is a square plank of four, three, 
two or one añgulain thickness with the sides equal to three-fourths or 
half of the length ofthe image (line 6). Another plank of the same 
Size is made and used as thestoolon which the image is placed. The 
other plank (pralamba-phalaka) is fixed to the crown of the head of the 
image. The planks are kept level to each other. Some holes are made 
in the upper plank of the pralamba-phalaka wherefrom are suspended 
Some strings at the other end of which are attached small balls 
made ofiron or stone (lines 7-16). The number of holes and the strings 
suspended through the planks, by which the plumb-lines are deter- 
mined, varies from five to eleven, according to the different postures 
and poses of theimage. The five principal plumb-lines consist of one 


325 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


PRALAMBA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ 


drawn from the centre of the upper plank corresponding to the crown 
of the head, and four on the four sides of the body (line 10). Two 
other lines drawn adjoining the right and left sides of the face make 
the number seven (line 20). Another two lines drawn on the right 
and left sides of the back of the head make the number nine (line 
22); and two lines drawn from the two armpits make the total of 
lines eleven (line 28). 

The line drawn from the crown of the head (Sikha-mani) passes by the 
middle of the front, root and patta (band) of the diadem (mauli), middle of 
the forehead, eyebrows, nose, chin, neck, chest (hridaya), navel, sex organ, - 
root of the thighs, half way between the knees, nalakas (ankles), heels, soles 
(feet) and two largest toes (lines 32-40). Тһе perpendicular and horizon- 
tal distances between the different parts of the body are described in detai] 
(lines 41-78, 99-139). Тһе variations of these measurements are consi- 
dered with regard to postures (lines 1-96), namely, erect (sthánaka), sitting 
(asana) and recumbent (Sayana), and poses (lines 98-140), called ábhanga, 
sama-bhanga, ati-bhanga and tri-bhanga (see under BHANGA). 

These plumb-lines are stated to be drawn only for the purpose of measur- 
ing: 

à Evarh tu karya-sütrarn syat lambayet Silpavittamah | (91) 

The principles and mechanism of plumb-lines followed by the European 
architects are almost similar. The following quotations from Vitruvius 
and Gwilt would throw more light on the point : 

(3) * Agatharcus . . . was the first who contrived scenery, upon which he 
left a treatise. This led Democritus and Anaxagarus, who wrote thereon, 
to explain how the points of sight and distance ought to guide the lines, 
as in nature, to a centre, so that by means of pictorial deception, the real 
appearances of buildings appear on the scene, which, painted on a flat 
vertical surface, seem, nevertheless, to advance and recede.’—(Vitruvius 


Book vu, Introduction.) 

* This (levelling) is performed either with the dioptra, the level (libra 
acquaria) or the chorobates. The latter instrument is, however, the beste 
inasmuch as the dioptra and level are often found to be incorrect. The 
chorobates is а rod about 20 feet in length, having two legs at its extre- 
mities of equal length and dimensions, and fastened to the ends of the rod 
at right angles with it ; between the rod the legs are cross-pieces per 
with tenons, whereon vertical lines are correctly marked, шош whic 
corresponding plumb-lines hang down from the rod, When the roc is Ub 
these will coincide with the lines marked, and show that the instrumen 


stands level.’ —(ibid., Book үш, Chap. VI.) A 
(4) * Plumb-rule, plumb-line, or plummet is an instrument use Ry 
masons, carpenters (sculptors), etc., to draw perpendiculars or verticals, for 


^ 326 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


CT P 


Page 228 


PRALAMBA 


{ / uc. x 
= 2- -—— St ee есте ep 
* \ i ^ N 
| N N N N 
NN ABL! nd N А ? = ) Se 
AE = y — 
| Ji š 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


4 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRALINAKA 


ascertaining whether their work be upright, horizontal and so on. Тһе 
- instrument is little more than a piece of lead or plummet at the end of а 
string, sometimes descending along a wooden or metal ruler raised perpendi- 
T cularly on another, and then it is called a level.’—(Gwilt, Encycl., p. 1241.) 
| ‘The term, level, is used substantively to denote an instrument which 
shows the direction of a straight line parallel to the plane of the horizon. 
Тһе plane of the sensible horizon is indicated in two ways : by the direction 
of the plummet or the plumb-line, to which it is perpendicular ; and by the 
surface of a fluid at rest. Accordingly, levels are formed either by means 
of the plumb-line, or by the agency ofa fluid applied in some particular 


D 

i manner.’ 

| ` “They all depend, however, upon the same principle, namely, the action 
|o» of terrestrial gravity. Тһе carpenter's level consists of a long rule, straight 


Í оп its lower edge, about 10 ог 12 feet in length, with an upright fixed 
to its upper edge, perpendicular to and in the middle of the length, having 
its sides in the same plane with those of the rule, and a straight line drawn on 
{ one of its sides perpendicular to the straight edge of the rule. This standing 
Ec piece is generally mortised into the other, and finally braced on each side 

to secure it from accident, and has its upper end kerfed in three places, 

viz. through the perpendicular line, and on each side. The straight edge cf 
b. the transverse piece has a hole, or notch, cut out on the other side equal on 
Ü a each side of the perpendicular line. А plummet is suspended by a string 
| from the middle kerf, at the top of the standing piece, to vibrate freely in the 
| hole or notch when hanging at full length. When the straight edge of the 
| ë level is applied to two distant points, with its two sides placed vertically, 
| if the plummet hangs freely, and the string coincides with the straight line 
| š on the standing piece, the two points are level. If not, suppose опе of the 
| points to be at the given height, the other must be lowered or raised, as the 
case may require, till the string is brought to a coincidence with the per- 


| pendicular line. By two points is meant two surfaces of contact, as two 
Ji blocks of wood, or the upper edges of two distant beams." 
ў ‘The mason’s level is formed of three pieces of wood, joined іп the form 


of an isosceles triangle, having a plummet suspended from the vertex over 
{ a mark in the centre of the base.. —(Gwilt, Encycl., p. 1217.) 
I PRALAMBA-PHALAKA (see under PRALAMBA)— The square plank 
| through which the plumb-lines are drawn. 
i PRALINAKA—A class of buildings, a column. with 32 rectangular 
E sides, i.e., 32-sided shaft : : 
ШЕ æ Dva-trirhgat tu madhye Pralinakah (Brihat-Samhita, тїп, 28). 

Pralinakam atah $rimu . . . Il 


327 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collec 


7 жа 2 , 2 > s Ë 
UTE um ЕҮЖІІС” Е 


PRASTARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Sirshakarh chatur-asram tu par$vayoh koshtha-samyutah 1 
Pañjararn nāsikā-yuktarn sopanarh pür$vayos tatah II 
Pralinaka iti proktà (-ah) . . . \—(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 46, 47, 48.) 
PRASTARA—The entablature. It comprises the parts of an 
order above a column. The assemblage is divided into three parts 
in the European architecture, namely the architrave which rests 
i immediately on the column, the frieze next over the architrave being 
£ the middle member, and the cornice which is the uppermost part. 
| These three parts are again variously subdivided. For its synonyms, 
see M., xvi, 18-20, 42-44. It is also used as a synonym for plinth 
(M., XXXII, 220-227). 

(1) The entablature is stated to be half of the column : 

Prastaram pada-di(-ai)rghyasya chardha-manena karayet 17 
Nyünar vapi chadhikarh vapi prastaram karayed budhah ıı 
Prastarokta-pramanarh tu sarvam kanthe vidhiyate 11 

(Kamikagama, XXXV, 27, 28, 29.) 

Ibid. Chap. Liv (named Prastara-vidhi) : 

Three essential parts of the prastara (entablature) : 

Hinadhikarh tu сһаһрапата prastarasya dvijottamah | 
Padanganam tathà kuryad galange cha masürake 11 (47) 
The pada (foot, pedestal, base), gala (neck, middle part), and masüraka 
(lintel) would, apparently, correspond to the architrave, frieze, and 
cornice. À 

The mouldings of the prastara (entablalure) : 

Uttaram vājanarn chaiva mushti-bandharh mrinalikam 11 (1) 
Dandika valaya-kshudra-gopānāchchhādanar cha 11 | 
Alingantarita chaiva pratyangarh vajanarh kramat 11 (2) 

Their comparative measurement : 
Tryarnsaikam$am-pafichaika-dvi-tri-bhágaika-bhagaih | 
Tri-bhagenaika-bhagena upary-upari yojatet 11 (3) 

"Three kinds of the prastara : 

Etani prastaràngani tri-vidharh chottararn bhavet | 
Khandottararh patra-bandharh rüpottaram iha dvijah 11 (4) 
Their description (уу. 5-6; see under those: terms). 
Further classification under SVASTIKA, VARDHAMANA, NANDYAVARTA and 
SARVATOBHADRA (vv. 7-8). i 

Тһе other details of the prastara (vv. 9-46). 
= ‘Ibid., Lv, 204 (synonyms) : ; 
ES Prastaram chaiva gopanarh kapotarh maficham eva cha | 
— Nivram ity-evam akhyatarn prastarasya dvijottamah | 


? 
i 
\ 
iq 


چ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ! PRASTARA 


Prastara (entablature) compared with base, pillar, tower (karna), 
finial or dome ($ekhara) : 


Кел 


Padayamam adhishthanam dvi-gunarn sarva-sammatam | 
- Радагаһага prastararn proktarn karnarn prastaravat samam II 
Prastara-dvi-gunayamam Sekhararn hi tam uchyate || 
Prastarad ürdhva-bhage tu karna-küta-samayutam 11 
(Kamikagama., xxx1, 28-30.) 
Vedikàrn prastara-samàrm shad nero bhagagah | 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, 1x, 23.) 
Sva-sva-yonya grihadinarh kartavya dvara-yonayah t 
Prastarottarayor madhyarn pafichadhà vibhajed budhah it 
(1014. хш, 26; see also 28.) 


(3) . . . prastararn cha tatah Srinu 1 


Prastarotsedha-mánam tu paíicha-bhaga-vibhajitam 11 
Tri-bhagarn uttarotsedharn padonottara-vajanam | 
Eka-bhagam tad-ürdhve tu kartavyà padma-pattika 11 
Gaja-Srenith mriga-$renim prastaranteshu yojayet | 
Evarh prastaram akhyatam talarh prati viseshatah 11 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 72, 73, 74; 
see also vv. 68-71, under Товама.) 


(4) Manasára (Chap. хм, named PRASTARA) : 


The height of the entablature as compared with that of the base 
is of six kinds (line 4). Тһе former may be equal to the latter, or less 
by 4, or greater by 4, 4, 3, or twice (lines 2-3) ; or in cubit measure- 
ment, these six kinds of height of the entablature begin with 7 cubits 
and end in 44 cubits, the decrement being by $ cubit (lines 5-6). 
These six kinds of entablatures are respectively employed in the 
houses of the gods, the Brahmans, the king or Kshattriyas, the crown 
princes, the Vaisyas, and the Südras (lines 8-9). 


The height of the entablature as compared with that of the column may 
be half, three-fourths, equal, or greater Бу £, $, and 3 (lines 10-12). These 
six heights of entablature should discreetly be employed (line 13). Another 
set of six heights is also prescribed : the height of the pillar being divided into 
8 parts, 7, 6, 5, 4, 9, 2, may be given to that of the entablature. 

These entablatures are divided into eight or rather nine classes, the details 
of which are given below : 


I. ді parts (ibid., lines 22-29) : , 
(1) Uttara (fillet) 55 zi ЗЕ 
(2) vajana (fillet) oo об І 
(3) valabhi(-bhi) Шо! ext) ЗА sae и 


329 


M REO 
RES AND ROOFS 


FOR EACH TYPE VARIES FROM 
WHAT IS GIVEN IN THE TEXT 


DO MOT SUIT OTHERS ШИШИЙ 


` 


SECOND TYPE. 


lection. [ 


THIRD TYPE. FOURTH TYPE 


. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Col 


THE SEVENTH TYPE 
V, IES FROM THE 


DETAILS 


PROBABLE SECTION 
OF WOODEN ROOF 


MT is 


SIXTH TYPE 


E PRASTARA 
же JE. 
K š : N 

$ € i ж | ҚҰ” 

Е МА 


PRASTARA 


(4) vajana (fillet) 
(5) uttara (fillet) 
(6) vajana (fillet) 


(7) kshudra-padma (small СО) 
(8) mahā-padma (large сута) 


(9) vajana (fillet) 
(10) kapota (corona) 
(11) alinga (fillet) 
(12) antarita (fillet) 
(13) prastara (ovolo) 
(14) vàjana (fillet) 


AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


3 


ҥнҥ M SR A < ысу ыы 


d 


t. 


The projection of these mouldings are in most cases equal to them, 
but in some cases they may be š, 4, or 2 of them. 


П. 


(1) Uttara (fillet) 

(2) kampa (fillet) 

(8) valabhi (roof, capital) 
(4) abja (cyma) 

(5) vajana (fillet) 

(6) mushti-bandha (band) 
(7) vajana (fillet) 

(8) mrinalika (stalk) 

(9) kandhara (dado) 

(10) kshepana (projection) 
(11) padma (сута) 

(12) vajana (fillet) 
(13) adhara (base) 

(14) patta (band) 

(15) vajana (fillet) 
(16) mushti-bandha (band) 
(17) vajana (fillet) 
(18) mahavajana (large flle) . 
(19) abja (cyma) 


ІП. 36 parts (ibid., lines тет): 
(1) Base, etc., should be as before; 


(2) alinga (fillet) 

(3) vajana (fillet) 

(4) antarita (fillet) 

(5) “kampa (fillet) 

(6) prati (-vajana) (cavetto) . 
(7) vajana (fillet) 


330 


31 parts (ibid., lines 50-71): 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


“= N м ооо H ю 


>. “ы 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASTARA 


IV. 3o parts (ibid., lines 78-88) : 
1) Uttara (fillet) 22 
2) kampa (fillet) 

) valabhi (roof, capital) 

) vajana (fillet) 

) kapota (corona) 
) alinga (fillet) 
) 
) 


( 
( 
(3 
(4 
(5 
(6 
(7) antarita (fillet) 
(8) nimna (drip) 
(9) prati-vajana (cavetto) 
(10) kandhara (dado) 
(11) vajana (fillet) 
(12) griha (? grīva, dado) 
(13) vajana (fillet) 
(14) kapota (corona) 
(15) айпра (fillet) 
(16) antarita (fillet) 
(17) nimna (drip) 
(18) prastara_(ovolo) a 
V. 30 parts (ibid., lines 89-99) : 
(1) Mala (base) as before ; 
(2) gopana (beam) as before ; 
(3) vajana (fillet) 2 
(4) kulikanghri (main айға) (this part i is с 
with nataka) bo 5 
(5) nataka (theatre, Spell н) a as before ; 
(6) kapota (corona) as before ; 
(7) kshudra-nàsi (small nose or vestibule) as before ; 
the rest as before. 
This entablature is decorated all over with crocodiles and bees (makara 
and bharamara, 94-95). 
VI. 26 parts (2%4., lines 100-109) : 
(т) Uttara (fillet) ° 
(2) vajana (fillet) 
(3) padma (cyma) 
(4) vajana (fillet) 
(5) mushti-bandha (band) 


ыы (лю nuc 


ыз 


7 
8 
9 


ном кым ч Ю = N 


(6) vàjana (fillet) E s 
(7) mrinalika (stalk) Bo 
(8) vajana (fillet) 22 zm 


Be س‎ OO بر‎ N км = «(9 


(9) pattika (band) 
š 331 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


EE рек е 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


PRASTARA 


(ro) vajana (fillet) 

(11) kampa (fillet) 

(12) padma (cyma) 

(19) vajana (fillet) 

(14) kapota (corona) 

(15) alinga (fillet) 

(16) vajana (fillet) 

(17) antarita (fillet) 

(18) prati-vajana (cavetto) 

VII. 26 parts (ibid., lines 110-116): 

(1) Nàtaka (theatre, quadrangular part) as before ; 
(2) upper columns as before ; 


(3) lower columns as before. J 
Above these, all the members are same as before except that their 


projections are half or one-fourth of them, or their projections may be 
one, two, or three dandas. 

The images of Bhütas (imps), Ganas (attendant demi-gods of Ganeša), 
Yakskas (attendant demi-gods of Kubera), Vidyadharas (semi-divine 
beings), or of men are carved in the nataka (crowning or capital) parts 
of temples. In the corresponding parts of the palaces, the images of 
Yakshas and Vidyadharas are carved ; in all other residential buildings, 
the human figures are made in the nataka (crowning) parts. АП the 
mushti-bandhas (fishbands) are made straight with the columns. The 
rest should be as before. js 
VIII. 26 parts (ibid., lines 117 Ё): 

(1) Kapota:(corona) 8 тоге; (2) nataka (theatre, quadrangular 
part) 8 more ; the rest should be as before. 

IX. 34 parts (ibid., lines 117-110): 

Nataka (theatre, quadrangular part) 8 parts more, and the rest 
should be as before. ` 
With these may be compared the details of the early European entab- 
ature : 2 
The height of the entablatures of the different orders : 
(1) In the Tuscan order, 4 of 7—r$ diameters. 
(2) In the Doric order, 3 of 8—2 diameters. 
(3) In the Ionic order, 2 of g=21 diameters. 
(4) In the Corinthian order, } of 10—21 diameters: 
(5) In the Composite order, 3 of 11—22 diameters. 
According to Vitruvius both to the Corinthian and the Composite orders 
ten parts are given. 
_Entablature is fourth part of the column. “In general terms, its sub- 
_ divisions of architrave, frieze, and cornice are obtained by dividing its height 
into ten equal parts, whereof three are given to architrave, three to frieze, 


332 


++ кч ўз Mj) RR ne найы ч 


, 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASTARA 


and four to cornice ; except in the Roman Doric order in which the whole 
height of the entablature is divided into eight parts of which two are given 
to the architrave, three to the frieze, and three to the cornice.’ 

* From these general proportions variations have been made by different 
masters, but not so great as to call for particular observation.’ —(Gwilt, 
Encycl. Arch., Art. 2542, 2543, 2549.) 


Pntablature Height in parts 
of a module 


Projection from the 
axis of column in 
parts of a module 


I. Tuscan (Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 2555) : 


Í [ (т) Quarter round 4 271 
Cymtinum 4 (2) Asragal Р І 

| апа рагіѕ ( (3) Fillet · 52 5 23h 
( (4) Congé or cavetto I 22] 
Cornice, 16 | (5) Corona 5 22% 
parts Bed mould- J (6) Drip V. i QUE 

: (7) Sinking from 
| mé corona or hollow i 101 
(8) Fillet о 4 14 
| L (9) Ogee T 4 13] 
Frieze,14 parts .. (10) Frieze оо 14 9% 
(Filet .. (11) Fillet or listel 2 II} 

Architrave, | 7 f (12) Congé or small 
12 pars EM 4 cavetto- бі: 2 91 
LG3) Fascia š 8 9% 


The height of the drip under the corona is йаа on that member, and that 
of the hollow in the height of the fillet. 


` II. Doric (Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 2564, 2562) : 


Projection from the 


Entablature Height in parts axis of column in 
of a module parts of a module 
f (1) Fillet of corona I 34 
(2) Cavetto 3 31 
| (3) Fillet 1 26 
| (4) Супа reversa 1} 30 
ees | (5) Согопа 4 285 
ornice, 4 (6) Drip i 271 
18 parts (7) Fillet i 25 
(8) Gutta under the corona i 242 
(9) Dentil 8 I5 
(1o) Fillet i 13 
(тт) Cyma reversa 2 12] 
L(12) Capital of triglyph 2 II 


333 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRASTARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


M ts Projection from the 
Height in parts axis of column іп 


Entablature of a module parts of a module 
Frieze, { (13) Triglyph . 18 10% 
18 parts (14) Metope A ae 18 10 
[ (15) Listel 3 ss, 2 11} 
Architrave, Jj (16) Capital of eens " i II 
IO parts { (17) Guttae is 3 1j II 
((18) Fascia 5% 52 10 10 
Mutular Doric : 
(1) Fillet of the corona I 34 і 
(2) Сута 3 31 
(3) Fillet i 81 | 
(4) Cyma reversa .. I зоф 
| (5) Согопа 3% 30 
Согпісе, 18 (6) Сута reversa.. I 291 
parts | (7) Mutule 3 284 
(8) Drip i 28 Í 
| (9) Guttae of the mutule i 26 d 
| (zo) Echinus or quater round .. 2 13$ \ 
(11) Fillet i 114 
R 12) Capital of triglyph 2 II 
Frieze, 18 I (13) Triglyph 18 10$ 
parts (14) Metope 18 10 
(15) Listel E 2 19 
[| 16) Capital of the guttae i II} 
Architrave, < (17) Guttae I} II} 
I2 parts ] (18) First fascia 6 104 
( (19) Second fascia .. 4 IO 
Grecian Doric (Parthenon) TE Art. 2579 ; \ 
Í (1) Fillet о-бо 22:10 
| (2) Echinus jg aot oo оп 20:40 
| (3) Fillet, with sunk cyma 
Cornices, | reversa 5% ss 2-20 
1512 j (4) Corona da 4.:88 18-08 
parts | (5) Fillet 7: оо Шой) 18 -80 
(6) Capitals of mutules 1%10 
| (7) Mutules 0:32 18 -66 
L (8) Bead and capital of triglyph 2-00 11-46 
Frieze,14 -88 { (9) Frieze (in metope) oc шо 
parts (10) Triglyph оо -. 14:88 II ‘40 


334 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


Entablature 


( (11) Fillet 


Architrave, | (12) Cap of guttae 
17 ‘IO 
Шол (13) Guttae 


((14) Architrave below guttae 


ПІ. Ionic (Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 2573, 2581) : 


(1) Fillet of cyma 
(2) Cyma recta 


) Fillet 


(3 
| (4) Сута reversa 
| (5) Corona 
| (6) Fillet of the drip 

Cornice, 34 4 (7) Ovolo 

parts | (8) Astragal 
| (9) Fillet 
| (то) Dentel fillet 
| (11) Dentels ác 
| (x2) Fillet 
L (8) Сута reversa 
Frieze, 27 parts (14) Frieze 
(15) Listel 
[© Сута reversa 
(17) First fascia 
Атешаус, | (18) Second fascia 
XE SE ] (19) Third fascia , 
| (20) Capital on the side 
| (21) Capital on the coussinet or 
cushion ° 
Grecian Ionic (in the temple on the с) 
f (1) Fillet 
(2) Cyma recta 
Cornice, | (4) Fillet 
supposed | (4) Echinus 
height, 4 (5) Corona 


18 -33 (6) Drip 
parts (7) Сута reversa 
(8) Fillet 


( (9) Echinus 
335 


Height in parts 
of a module 


1-50 
I-00 
0:20 

14:40 


- 
NH 


+ mH Oe ым ым н> ы сую SRO 
wH 


16 


restored 


PRASTARA 


Projection from the 


axis of column in 
parts of a module 


12:50 
12:40 


II ‘20 


46 


4I 
40} 
38} 
29% 
284 
25 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRASTARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Projection from the 


Entablature Height in parts axis of column in 
of a module parts of a module 
Frieze, (10) Frieze 72 .. 90901 17 ‘400 
29 :901 
parts 
( (11) Fillet 1:920 30:520 
чу? | (12) Echinus 2:520 20 ‘100 
EM (13) Bead . R І ·200 17 :880 
(5) Fascia Ot зо 9774926) 17-160 
IV. Corinthian (Gwilt, Encycl., Art. 2583) : 
Í (1) Fillet of cornice I 53 
| (2) Cyma recta 5 53 
(3) Fillet 2 48 
| (4) Cyma reversa . . 14 45% 
| (5) Согопа 5 46 
| (6) Сута reversa. . 1} 45i 
А | (7) Modillion š 6 444 
Cornice, 38 4 (8) Fillet (remainder of mode 
parts | lion band) i 284 
(9) Ovolo 4 28 
(10) Bead I 25 
| (11) Fillet 1 241 
| (12) Dentils 6 24 
(13) Fillet i 20 
( (14) Hollow or congé 3 19$ 
Frieze, 1 
mod.,73 (15) Frieze diee 2; m 15 
parts 
| (16) Fillet I 20 
(17) Cyma reversa 4 102 
18) Bead z 
( 1 17 
Architrave, | 19) First fascia 7) 161 | 
27 parts | (20) Cyma reversa 2 16% | 
(21) Second fascia .. 6 154 | 
| (22) Bead I 15} 
L (23) Third fascia š 
5 I5 
V. Composite (Gwilt., Encycl., 2591) : 
( (1) Fillet of cornice I} 5I 


Cornice, 364 (2) Сута tectam S: m 5 51 
parts L (3) Fillet t. 


m 
ны 
(ер 


336 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRAKARA 


Projection from the 
axis of column in 
parts of a module 


Entablature Height in parts 
of a module 


[ (4) Сута reversa .. 


2 45% 
|G) Bead I 5 
| 6) Corona 5 43 
| (7) Cyma under corona I} 41 
Cornice, 36 (8) Fillet 33 
parts 1 (9) Сута reversa. . 4 391 
| (10) Fillet of the dentils i 28 
| (1r) Dentils 7i 29 
| (12) Fillet I 23 
( (13) Ovolo 5 22 
( (14) Bead I 17 
| (15) Fillet 1 16} 
Frieze, 27 1 (16) Congé ; i 15 
parts (17) Upright face .. 17} 15 
; L (18) Apophyge 7 22 
Г (19) Fillet I 22 
| (20) Cavetto #2 20} 
Architrave, ) сі pe 2 d } 
ERE НЕ Ы o. p o 17 
| (24) Сутпа reversa € 2 16% 
L (25) Second fascia... T 8 15 


From the details given above it would be clear that both the Indian and 
European entablatures have much similarity in their composition and 
relative proportion. In the words of Ram Raz, ' the massiveness of the 
Indian entablature offers a striking contrast to the lightness of the 
Grecian; but the richness of the former may be said to be unrivalled.'— 
(Ess. Arch. of Hind., p. 40, also see Plate xix, figs. 1-4.) 

PRASTIRYA—Same as Prasrara or entablature. 
- (М., хуі, 184, 186.) 
PRAVESA—The front door, the gate, the entrance. 
PraveSa-nirgama-sthane dvàrair api samanvitam | 
(М., x, 107; see also хххш, 536.) 
PRAKARA—A wall, an enclosure, a fence; a rampart, a surrounding 
wall elevated on a mound of earth. In the Sankhyayana Srauta- 
sutra (хут, 18, 14, quoted below) it denotes a walled mound support- 
ing a raised platform (ргавада) for spectators. But in the Manasara 


337 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRAKARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


it is used in a slightly different sense and implies the fourth of the 
five courts into which the compound of a house is divided. 

(1) Mûnasara (Chap. хххі, named Prakara, 1-134) : 

The uses of the ргакагаѕ : 
They are built for bala (strength), parivara (attendant deity), 
$obhà (beauty), and rakshana (defence) : 
Balartharh parivarartham $obhàrtham rakshanarthakam 1 
Paficha-prakara-harmyanim adhunà vakshyate kramat | 

The whole compound of a house or temple is divided into five courts. 
The first опе is called the antar-mandala or the innermost court (line 11). 
The second is known as antar-nihara and the third as madhyama-hara 
(line то). Тһе fourth court is technically named prakara (line 12). The 
fifth and last one is known as the maha-maryada or the extreme boundary 
where the large gatc-houses (gopuras) are constructed (line 14). As the 
name of the chapter (Prakara-lakshana, description of Prakara) indicates, 
the greater part of it describes only the fourth court (lines 15-102). 
Prakaras are also divided into the Jati, Chhanda, Vikalpa (Abhàsa) and 
Катуа classes (lines 3-5). Under each class a number of buildings (Salas) 
are exhaustively described (lines 6-86). 

A further classification (Sarnkirna, etc.) is made with regard to materials 
of which these prakara-buildings are made (line 103). Тһе materials аге 
same as in other cases, namely stone, brick and wood (line 102). Тһе 
gopura or gate-house of the first court (antar-mandala) is technically 
called dvara-Sobha or beauty of the gate; and those of the second, third 
fourth and fifth courts are called respectively dvara-Sala, dvara-prasada, 
dvara-harmya, and mahà-gopura (ibid., хххш, o). 

(2) Suprabhedagama (Chap. хххі, 115-198): 

Five courts or enclosure buildings : 
Prakaranam paritam kuryat prāsādasya pramanatah | 
Bhümau vinyasya vistararh prasadasya su-nischitam 11 
Prasadasya tu vistararh tasya dandam ihochyate | 
Dandat tena kritam yatra tv-antarmala-samaiva hi 11 
Eka-dandantar-bhara tu madhya-bhara dvi-dandatah 1 
Chatur-danda-pramanena kritva maryyàdi-bhittikam 1) 
Maha-maryyadi-bhittih syat sapta-danda-pramànatah | 
Prishthe chaivagrato' py-ardharn dvi-gunarn tri-gunar tu và || 
Chatur-gunam mukhayamarh prakaranarh vigeshatah | 
Kapotantarh samutsedharh hasta-vistara-bhittikam 11 
Kuta-Sala-yutarn vapi küta-Salantam eva chal 
Prakarena samayuktarh gopurasya vidhiyate 11 


338 


ке. СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE PRAKARA 


Mandale dvarake vatha dvàra-Salam tu bharake | 
Prasadarh madhya-bharayam maryyadau harmyam eva cha 11 
Gopuram tu maha-madhye суат paficha-vidhi smritam 1 
Chatur-dikshu cha sarnyojyah prakaranarn prithak prithak 1 
Kechid vai таһкакага kechid vai gopurakritih | 
Cf. The measurement of the five gate-houses (gopuras) of the five prakaras: 
Vistararh dvara-Sobhaya dvi-tri-paiicha-kararh bhavet ti 2 
Shat-saptashta-nava-karair dvara-Sala prakirttita | 
Eka-daSa-trayo-daSa-hastarh (dvàra)-prasada-vistritam 11 F 
Chatur-daša-pañcha-daša-dvara-harmyam iti smritam | 
Eka-virn$a trayo-virnSa dvāra-gopuram uchyate 11 I Б. 
Their height as compared with length and breadth : 
Vistàra-dvi-gunayamam ayama-dvi-gunochchhrayam l 
Bhaumordhvottara-simantam dvarasyochchhraya-lakshanam "I 
Tad-ardham vistararh proktarn(m) alañkararn vimanavat | E. 
Prakara-bhittim a$ritya kuryàd àvrita-mandapam II 
Tad-bahye’bhyantare vapi malika-manddaparh hi và | 
Paficha-prakaram evarh syat privaralayar $rinu 11 


PRSE à 


Then follows the description of the temples of the attendant deities (v. 
129 f). These buildings are built in the five prakaras (see under PARIVA- 
RALAYA). 

(9) Saükhyayana-Srauta-sütra (xvi, 18, 13, 14, Bibliotheca Indica, Vol. 1, 
р. 210): 

Sarhsthite madhyame'hany-àhavaniyam abhito dikshu prasadan 
viminvanti 11 (13) : 
Тап uparishtat sarhvyadhaih prakaraih parighnanti 11 (14) 
(4) Matsya-Purana (Chap. ccrxix, v. 24): 
Prag-grivah paficha-bhagena nishkas($)as tasya chochyate | 
Karayet sushirarn tadvat prakarasya tri-bhagatah и 
(5) Agni-Purdna (Chap. хш, 812) : 
Tatha prakara-vinyase yajed dvà-trim$ad antagan | 
Ргаѕадаѕуа chaturtharnSaih prakarasyochchhrayo bhavet ıı 
Ibid., Chap. суі, 1-2 : 
Nagaradika-vasturn cha vakshye rajyadi-vriddhaye 1 
Yojana-yojanarddharh va tad-artharh sthanam āśrayet 11 s "M 
Abhyarchya vàstu-nagaram prakaradyam tu karayet lt E 
In this instance * prākāra ’ indicates the whole city wall. dis gu 
(6) Garuda-Purána (Chap. хім, 19): "- 
Prakaram tad-bahir dadyat paficha-hasta-pramanatah | 


339 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. 
an чы Ж Ж? 


ORT ee ea 9 RP; 


eo 


PRAKARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(7) Brahmanda-Purdna (Part I, 2nd Anusharhga-pada, Chap. vu, 103): 
Sotsedha-rarhdra-prakararh sarvatah khatakavritam | 
(8) Kautiliya-Artha-Sasira (Chap. XXIV, рр. 52, 53, 54): 
Vaprasyopari prakarath vishkambha-dvi-gunotsedham aishtakarh- 
dva-da$a-hastàád ürdhvam ojamÀ yugmam va 4Achatur-virnSati 
hastad iti karayet 1 
Antareshu  dvi-hasta-vishkambham parve chatur-gunayamam 
anuprakaram ashta-hastayatarh deva-patham karayet | 
Ргакагат ubhayato mandalakam adhyardha-dandam kritva prato- 
lishat-lulantararn dvararh niveéayet 1 
Prakara-samam mukham avasthapya tri-bhaga-godhà mukharh 
gopuram karayet | 
Prakara-madhyc kritvà vapirh pushkarinim 
(9) Ратауапа (Cock): 
VI. 3,14 :Sauvarna$cha mahārhs (азуаһ ргакаго dushpradhar- 
shanah 1 
Mani-vidruma-vaidirya-mukta-virachitantarah ll 
VII. 5, 29: Dridha-prakara-parikharh . . . lankàm 1 
2 V. 55,32: Lanka atta-prakara-toranà | 
V. 3,6 :(purim).. . $ata-kumbhena mahata prakarenabhisam- 
vritam | 
IV. 41,97: У, 2. 16: Kafichanenàvritàm ргакагела mahapurim | 
III. 48, 11: (Lankà-nàma puri барһа) ... prakarena-parikshipta 
pandurena | 
See also V, 3, 7, 33 ; V, 4, 2 ; v, 37> 39; V, 55, 32; VI, 3, 29; V, 3, 32; 
VL 24, 34 ; УІ, 25, 24; VI, 25, 30; VI, 26, 12 ; VI, 38, IO, 11 ; VI, 31, 56, 98 ; 
VI, 42, 15, 21, 22, 45, 46; УІ, 51, 8, 10; VI, бо, I5 ; УІ, 65, 53; VI, 66, 1; 
` VI, 67, 169; VI, 3, 27 ; УП, 5, 25 ; VII, 38, 37. 
(10) Mahabharata : 
I. 207,30 : Prakarena cha sampannam... (pura-Sreshtham) | 
П. 80,30  : Prákàràttalakeshu 1 
III. 160,38f : (Vaisravanavasam) . . . prakarena parikshiptam | 
Sauvarnena samantatah Sarva-ratna-dyutimata | 
ІП. 200, до; 206, 7 : (Mithilarh) ... harmya-prakara-Sobhanarn | 
`$ е also ш, 284, 2 IV, 11, 1 ; v, 143, 23 ; УШ, 33, 19 ; xm, 86,6; XV, 5, 
16; хут, 6, 24. 


(11) * This inscription (Ranganatha inscrip. of Sundarapandya) was 
discovered on the east wall of the second prakara of the temple.’ 


340 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRAKARA 


* Inscription on the north wall of the fourth prakara of the Ranganatha 
temple at Srirangam.’ 

© Inscription on the west wall of the second prakara of the Jambukesvara 
temple." 3 

* Inscription on the south wall of the second prākāra of the Ranganatha 
temple.’ 

* Inscription on the south-west corner of the third prakara of the same 
temple.’—(Ranganatha inscrip. of Sundarapandya, Ер. Ind., Vol. nt, pp. 7, 9, 10.) 
| (12) ‘This inscription (Jambuke$vara inscrip. of Valaka-Kamaya) 
| is engraved on the north wall of the second prakara of the Saiva temple of 
| Jambukešvara on the island of the Srirañgam near Trichinopoly.— (Ep. Ind., 
| Vol. ur, p. 72.) 
| (13) ‘ This Grantha inscrip. is engraved on the north wall of the first 
! ргакӣга of the Ādipurīśvara temple at Tiruvattiyur near Madras. —(Ep. 
Ind. Vol. v, p. 106.) 

(14) * Ranganatha inscrip. of Ravivarman of Kerala’ is on the north wall 
of the second prakara of the temple of Ranganatha (Vishnu) on the island 
of Srirangam.’—(Ep. Ind., Vol. ту, p. 148.) 

(15) Silaprakara—an enclosure of stone for the temples of Kunti Madhava 
and Bhime$vara.—(Pithapuram Pillar inscrip. line 11, second Draksharama 
Pillar inscrip., lines 13-14, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 329, 330-) 

(16) Durggarh cha Tàmra-nagarim abhito vyadhatta Ргакагат urm- 
natam udarhchita-gopurarh sah—‘he surrounded the Tamra nagari 
with a wall surmounted by towers.’—(Chebrolu inscrip. of Jaya, v. 27, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 147, 149.) 

(17) Mata-kiita-prakara-khanda-sphutita-jirnnoddharakarh— for Ње 
reparis of whatever might become broken or torn or worn out belonging to 
the enclosure’ (the more usual expression here would be * Prāsāda °), 
Dr. Fleet, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, p. 249, note 6.—(Inscrip. at Ablur, no. E, lines 
59, 75, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 249, 257, 250, 258.) 

(18) Kirhjalpitena bahuna grava-prakara-valaya-bahyam iha | 

(Gadag inscrip. of Vira-Ballala II, 
v. 47, Ep. Ind., Vol. vt, p. 97.) 
(16) Prakáram atyunnatarh—a very high wall. * 
(Mangalagiri Pillar inscrip. v. 47, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 124, 125.) 
(20) Prakaraih patitais samyak parikhah paripüryya yah | 
Pradhvasarh ripu-durgganam prag-bhava-samar vyadhat 1 
(Two pillar inscrip. at Amaravati, no. A, inscrip. of 
Keta П, v. 19, Ep. Ind., Vol. хі, p. 150.) 


341 


` CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRAKARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(21) Tha vijayinà prākāra-śrīr mmahopala-nirmmita jala-dharagatir 
aty-aty-unna niroddhum ivoddhata | 

(Two Bhuvane$vara inscrip. no. A, of Svapnes- 

vara, v. 24, Ер. Ind., Vol. хі, p. 202.) 


(22) Gopura-prakarotsava-marhtapair upachitam | 
(Kondavidu inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v. 27, 
line 118, Ep. Ind., Vol. v1, pp. 237, 231, 232.) 
(23) Mahàmandapar prakararh para-malikavilasitarh muktamayith cha 
prapa(bha)m | 
(Fourteen inscrip. at Tirukkovalur, no. K, 
lines 1-2, Ep. Ind., Vol. уп, 145-46.) 


(24) Ргакагаһ Kanakachale virachitah—built extensive ramparts on the 
Kanakachala (the name of the fort of Jalar, Mr. Ojha). Prof. Kielhorn.— 
(The Chahamanas of Naddula, no. C, Sundha Hill inscrip. of Chachigadeva, 
v. 38, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 77, 73.) 

(25) Paritah pranavakara-pra(pra)kara-valayarhchitarh— encircled by 
a wall of the shape of the pranava.’—(Krishnapuram plates of Sadasivaraya, 
V, 55, Ep.Ind., Vol. Ix, pp. 336, 341.) 

(26) * There are several similar inscriptions in the outer wall of the (Velur) 
temple, viz., two on the pedestal of the two dvàra-pàlakas in front of the 
gopura, one on the left outer wall of the inner prakara . . ^—(H.S.I.I., 

- Vol. 1, p. 127.) 

(27) ‘This inscription (no. 85, Н..1.1., Vol. ш) is engraved on the 
right of the entrance into the cast wall of the prakàra of the Vàmana- 
puri$vara temple at Tirumanikuli in the Cuddalore Taluka of the South 
Arcot District.'—(H.S.I.I., Vol. ur, p. 209.) 3 

(28) * This inscription (/1.$.1.1.‚ Vol. ш, no. 88) is engraved on the 
left of the entrance to the north wall of the fourth prākāra of the Ranga- 
natha temple оп the island of Srirahga near Trichinopoly.—(H.S.L1., 
Vol. m, p. 217.) | 

(29) * For this Prasanna-Virüpaksha, a temple, enclosing wall (prakara), 
gopura, finial covered with gold, and a Manmatha tank were cons- 
tructed."— (Ер. Carnat., Vol. x, Mulbagal Taluq, no. 2; Roman Text, p. 82; 
Transl., p. 71.) š 

(30) Kafichipura-pràkarantarita-pratàpam akarod yah Pallavanam 
patim—- he caused leader of the Pallavas . . . to hide his prowess behind 
the ramparts of (the city) of Kafichipura.’—(Sanskrit and Old Kanarese 
inscrip., no. Lv, line 14, Ind. Ant., Vol. уш, pp. 242, 245, c. 1, line 23 f.) 

(31) * There are three enclosures (prakaras) in the Tiruvellarai Temple, 
the first two being studded with inscriptions.’ —(Notes in the Tiruvellarai 
inscrip, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxiv, p. 264, para. 5, lines 1-2.) a 


342 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


(32) * The stone prakara or compound wall (of the Amrite$vara temple at 
Amritapura in the Tarikere Taluq, described and illustrated in the Mysore 
Archaeological Reports for 1911-12, pp. 24-26, and frontispiece) is now in 
ruins. It had on the top all round thick stone discs, about 61 feet in 
diameter, with rectangular bases, both in one piece, the outer faces being 
sculptured with fine figures of flowers, animals, gods, ctc., in relief . . . The 
prakara must have once presented the appearance of a veritable art-gallery, 
seeing that the artistically carved figures are of various kinds and designs.’ — 
(V. A. Smith, Architecture and Sculpture in Mysore, Ind. Ant., Vol. xurv, 
P- 93, para. 6.) 

PRAGATA—A type of pavilion. 
4 (М., XXXIV, 410 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
PRAG-VAMSA—An auxiliary shed to a sacrificial room. 
PRANGANA (see ANcANA)—The court, the courtyard. 
(1) Katha-sarit-sigara (Pet. Dict.) : 
59, 26 : Nripasthana-pranganam | 
15, 89 : Sa prangana-dvara-kavatanta-vilambini | 
(2) Hitopade£a (2, 3, etc.) : Tasya prangane gardhabho baddhas tishthati 
Š kukkuraš chopavishtah 1 

(3) Rdjatarangini (1, 247, etc.) : Prahganàd bahih 1 

(4) See the first Prasasti of Baijnath, v, 34, Ef. Ind., Vol. r, pp. 107, 111. 

(5) СА Kalapriya(name of the god and temple of Mahakala at Ujjain), 
pranganam tirnnà I—(Cambay Plates of Govinda IV, v. 19, Ep. Ind., Vol. уп, 
рр. 38, 29.) 

RADESA (see ANcuLA)—The distance -between the -tips of the 
fully-stretched thumb and forefinger. 

(1) Dagatva(? 4)ngula-parvani pradeša iti sarhjfiitah 11 

Angushthasya pradesinya vyasa-(h) pradeša uchyate | 
(Brahmanda-Purana, Part Y, 2nd Anu- 
shangapada, Chap. vir, vv. 96, 97.) 
(2) Angushtha-tarjani-yuktarh pradešam iti kirtitam | 
(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 21.) 
PRASADA—A temple, a palace, an edifice, buildings in general, 
a platform, a Buddhist assembly or confessional hall. 
Harmyadi dhaninam vasah prasido deva-bhü-bhujam 1 
(Amaraküsha, п, 2, 9.) 
(1) Manasara : 
Temple : 
Prasada-mandaparh chaiva sabha-$alà-prapa-(m) tatha 1 
(A)rangam iti chaitani harmyam uktam(-tàni) puratanaih | 
(M., ш, 7-8.) 


343 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


pc ee 
dE. ee AS P. 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Prasada-mandapam tathà varunddi-deée | 
Sange cha gopura-pade tv-apareshu sarve | 
(There should not be any defect). 
(M., LXIX, 70, 71.) 


The palace of a king : 
Nripa-prasada-sarhyukta (bhumih) батпа chaitya-samipagá | 
(M., 1v, 23.) 

Palaces are elaborately described ( M., XLI, 1-51 ; see under RAJAHARMYA.) 

Buildings in general (called Vimàna in the Ménasdra and Ргавада in 
the works quoted below) : 

The general description ( M., хуш, 1-418) : 
They are used as residences of gods and men : 
Taitilanarh dvijàtinài varnanarh vàsa-yogyakam 1 (2) 
Their sizes (see details below)—from one to twelve storeys : 
Eka-bhümi-vimànádi-ravi-bhümy-avasánakam | (3) 
Their plans (lines 12-91) ; see under VIMANA-LAKSHANA. 
The three styles and their characteristic features (92-105) are given 
under МАСАВА, DRAVIDA and VESARA. 

The description of the towers and domes (106-197; see under Sturt). 

The building materials are stone, brick, timber and iron (138). 

I. Three classes of buildings—Suddha or pure, made of one material 
(lines 139, 140); Misra or mixed, made of two materials (lines 139, 140) 
and Sarhkirna or amalgamated, made of three materials, namely stone, 
brick and timber (lines 139, 141) : one material alone is especially recom- 
mended (line 142). 

` Description of the Stüpi-kila which comprises all the parts above the 
Stüpi or dome is given in detail (lines 145-417). 

Chap. xix (named Eka-bhümi) : 

Тһе classifications : 

II. Referring to measurement, in accordance with the various cubits— 
Jati (lines 2, 3), Chhanda (lines 2, 4), Vikalpa (lines 2, 4), апа Abhasa 
(lines 2, 5). 

III. Sthanaka referring to height (line 7), Asana referring to breadth 
(line 8), and Sayana referring to width or length (line 9). 

IV. Тһе same are otherwise called Sarhchita (line 10), Asarnchita 
(line ro) and Apasarhchita (line 11) respectively. These classes of build. 
ings also refer to the postures of the idols, namely erect, sitting and 
recumbent respectively. But the details of these postures are reserved for 
a subsequent chapter. 

V. Masculine buildings are equiangular (line 14) and have male deities 
in them (line 16), feminine buildings are rectangular (line 18) and house 


344 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


543.) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


female deities (line 16); but in the feminine class of buildings the male 
deities also can be installed (line 17). 

The details of the component parts of the ground floor are common for 
various types which are described below (lines 18-164). 

VI. The eight kinds of the single-storeyed buildings with their charac- 

teristic features (Chap. хтх, 1-264) : 

(1) Vaijayantika is furnished with round spire (Sirsha), pinnacle 
(Sirah) and neck (griva) (line 166) ; (2) Bhoga has similar wings 
(line 167); (3) Srivisàla has the bhadra or front porch in it (line 
168); (4) Svasti-bandha has the octangular finial (line 169) : (5) 
Srikara has a quadrangular stecple (line 170); (6) Hasti-prishtha has 
an oval steeple (line 171); (7) Skandatàra has a hexagonal spire 
and neck (line 172); апа (8) Kesara has the front porch, the side- 
towers at the corners of the roof, and its nose, head and neck аге 
round or quadrangular (lines 173-175). For further details, see 
Ека-внбмі. 

VII. The eight kinds of the two-storeyed buildings (Chap. хх, 1-114) : 

(The generl features are similar in all the eight kinds, the distinction lying 
in the different proportions given to the component parts from above the 
ground floor to the top.) 

(9) Srikara (lines 94, 2-9); (10) Vijaya (lines 94, 10-15); (11) 
Siddha (lines 94, 16-18); (12) Parshnika or Paushtika (lines 94, 
19-25) ; (13) Antika (lines 94, 26-27) ; (14) Adbhuta (lines 94, 28-92); 
(15) Svastika (lines 95, 35-41) ; and (16) Pushkala (lines 94, 42-43). 

The projection, general features, and carvings on the doors when these 
buildings are used as temples are described (lines 44-93, 96-116). 

For further details, see Dvr-TALA. 

VIII. The eight kinds of the three-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxr, 
1-74): 

(The general features and the characteristic marks are similar to those 
of the two-storeyed buildings.) 

(17) Srikanta (lines 2-11) ; (18) Asana (lines 12-21); (19) Sukhalaya 
(lines 22-30) ; (20) Kesara (lines 31-32) ; (21) Kamalanga (lines 
33-38); (22) Brahma-kànta (lines 39-40); (23) Meru-kanta (lines 
41-49); and (24) KailaSa (lines 50-52). For further details, see 
TRI-TALA. 

The general features, characteristic marks and concluding details of the 
following kinds are similar, except the number of storeys, to those of the two- 
and three-storeyed buildings. 

IX. The eight kinds of the four-storeyed buildings (Chap. ххп, 1-106) : 

(25) Vishnu-kanta (lines 3-12) ; (26) Chatur-mukha (lines 13-24) ; 


345 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


PRASADA AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


(27) Sadà-siva (lines 25-33) ; (28) Rudra-kànta (lines 34743) ; (29) 
Igvara-kanta (lines 44-46); (30) Maficha-kanta (lines 47-57); (31) 
Vedi-kanta (lines 58-59) ; and (32) Indra-künta (lines 60-88). For 
further details, see CIRATUS-TALA. 

X. The eight kinds of the five-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxu, 1-50) : 

(33) Airavata (lines 4-12); (34) Bhiita-kanta (lines 13-15) ; (35) 
Visva-kànta (lines 16-18) ; (36) Mürti-kànta (lines 19-24) ; (37) Yama- 
kanta (lines 25-29) ; (38) Griha-kanta (lines 30-32) ; (39) Yajfia-kanta 
(lines 33-40); and (до) Brahma-kànta (lines 41-42). For further details, 
see PANGHA-TALA. 

XI. The thirteen kinds of the six-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxiv, 
1-48.) : 

(ат) Padma-kanta (lines 3-12) ; (42) Kàntàra (lines 13-14): (43) 
Sundara (line 15); (44) Upa-kanta (line 16); (45) Kamala (lines 
17-18); (46) Ratna-kanta (line 19) ; (47) Vipulàüka (line 20); (48) 
Jyoti(sh)-kanta (line 50) ; (49) Saroruha (line 50) ; (50) Vipulakritika 
(line 52) ; (51) Svasti-kanta (line 53) ; (52) Nandyavarta (line 54); 
and (53) Ikshu-kànta (line 55). For further details, see SHAT-TALA. 

XII. The eight kinds of the seven-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxv, 1-40) : 

(54) Pundarika (lines 3-23) ; (55) Sri-kanta (line 24) : (56) Sri-bhoga 
(line 25) ; (57) Dharana (line 26); (58) Pafijara (line 97); (59) 
Ašramagara (line 28); (бо) Harmya-kànta (line 29); and (бі) 
Hima-kanta (line 30). For further details, see SAPTA-TALA. 

XIII. The eight kinds of the cight-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxvi, 
1-76.) : 

(62) Bhü-kànta (lines 3-21) ; (63) Bhüpa-kanta (lines 22-28) ; (64) 
Svarga-kanta (lines 29-34); (65) Maha-kanta (lines 35-39); (66) 
Jana-kanta (line 40) ; (67) Tapa(s)-kanta (lines 41-42); (68) Satya- 
kanta (lines 43-45) ; and (69) Deva- kanta (lines46-47). Гог further 
details, see ASHTA-TALA. 

XIV. Тһе seven kinds of the Md buildings (Chap. xxvi, 
1-48.) : 
(70) Saura-kanta (lines 5-9) ; (71) Raurava (line 10) ; (72) Chandita 
(lines 11-12); (73) Bhüshana (lines 13-14); (74) Vivrita (lines 
7 20-22); (75) Suprati-kanta (lines 23-26); and (76) Viéva-kànta 
(lines 27-33). For further details, see NAVA-TALA. 
XV. The six kinds of the ten-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxvi, 1-40.) : 

(77) Bhu-kanta (lines 6-8) ; (78) Chandra-kanta (lines 6-8); (79) 
Bhavana-kanta (lines 9-13) ; (80) Antariksha-kanta (lines 14-15); (81) 
Megha-kanta (lines 16-17); and (82) Abja-kanta (line 18). For 

further details, see DASA-TALA. 


346 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


XVI. The six kinds of the cleven-storceyed buildings ( Chap. xxix, 1-50.) : 
(83) Sambhu-kanta (lines 3-7) ; (84) Iga-kanta (lines 8-9) ; (85) 
Chakra-kanta (lines 10-14); (86) Yama-kànta (lines 15-17) ; (87) 
Vajra-kanta (lines 18-24) ; and (88) Akra-kanta (lines 24-33). For 
further details, see EKADASA-TALA. 

XVII. The ten kinds of twelve-storeyed buildings (Chap. xxx, 1-194.) : 

(89) Pafichala (lines 8-10) ; (go) Dravida (lines 8-10) ; (91) Madhya- 
Каша (lines 11-14); (92) Kalinga-kanta (lines 14-16) ; (93) Varata 
(? Virata) (lines 17-27) ; (94) Kerala (lines 28-30) ; (95) VarnSa-kanta 
(lines 31-32) ; (96) Magadha-kanta (lines 33-34) ; (97) Jana-kanta 
(lines 35-36) ; and (98) Sphürjaka (lines 7, 37-84, description of the 
twelfth storey). 

These ten kinds are named, it should be noticed, after the historic places 
well marked in the ancient geography of India, which cover the whole length 
and breadth of the Indian Continent. Of these, the Páfichala and the 
Dravida are stated to be of the smallest type (linc 10), next in size and 

‚ importance are respectively the Madhya-kanta, the Kalinga-kanta, the 
Varata ( ? Viráta), the Kerala, and the Varhśa-kānta. The largest and the 
most important are the Magadha (connected with the capital of. King 
Asoka and of the early Gupta Emperors) and the Jana-kànta, and also 
perhaps the Sphürjaka, which, however, is not specified in detail (11). 

The architectural details of these buildings will be found under these 
ten terms. The description of the twelfth storey is given under DvApA$a- 
TALA. 

(2) Agni-Purdna, Chap. xim, vv. 1-9 (general plan), 10-25 (plan with 
reference to the idol), Chap. crv, vv. 1-11, 22-34 (further general plan), 
11-21 (names, classes, shapes and description of forty-five kinds of 
temples) : 

Prasadam sampravakshyami sarva-sadharanar érinu 11 

Sarva-sàdharanam chaitat prasadasya cha lakshanar | 

Мапепа pratimàyà và prasadarh aparar $rinu 11 

(Chap. хш, vv. T, 9.) 
Vakshye pràásada-samanya-lakshanarmn te Sikhidhvaja | 
(Chap. civ, v. 1.) 


Five divisions depending on five shapes or plans, and each including nine 
kinds of temples (Chap., crv, vv. 11-13): 
I. Vairaja—quadrangular or square—includes : 
(1) Meru, (2) Mandara, (3) Vimàna, (4) Bhadra, (5) Sarvato-bhadra, 
(6) Charuka (Ruchaka, in the Kamikagama, xxxv, 87, 91), (7) Nandika, 
(8) Nandi-vardhana, and (9) Srivatsa.— (Chap. civ, vv. 14, 15.) 


347 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


II. Pushpaka—rectangular—includes : 

(10) Ba(Va)labhi, (тт) Griha-raja, (12) Sala-griha ог Sala-mandira, 
(13) Visala, (14) Sama, (15) Brahma-mandira, (16) Bhavana or Bhu- 
vana, (17) Prabhava, and (18) Sivika-veSma.—(Chap. civ, vv. 16, 17.) 

III. Kaila$a—round—includes : 

(19) Ba(Va)laya, (20) Dundubhi, (21) Padma, (22) Maha-padmaka, 
(23) Varddhani, (24) Ushnishi, (25) Sankha, (26) Kalaga, and (27) 
Sva-vriksha.—(Chap. crv, vv. 17, 18.) 

IV. Manika—oval (vrittayata)—includes : 

(28) Gaja, (29) Vrishabha, (зо) Harhsa, (31) Garutman, (32) 
Riksha-nayaka, (33) Bhüshana, (34) Bhü-dhara, (35) Srijaya, and (46) 
Prithivi-dhara.—(Chap. ctv, vv. 19, 20.) 

V. Tri-vishtapa—octangular—includes : 

(37) Vajra, (38) Chakra, (39) Svastika, (40) Vajra-svastika, (41) 
Chitra, (42) Svastika-khadga, (43) Gada, (44) Srikantha, and (45) 
Vijaya.—(Chap. crv, vv, 20, 21.) 

(3) Garuda-Purana (Chap. xtvm) has exactly the same general plan (уу, 
1-20, 32-47), five shapes, five classes (vv. 21-22), and 45 kinds of buildings 
(vv. 24-32); but the wording is not identical. The fourth class is called 
Malika (у. 21) in the general description but the other reading, Manika, 
(v. 30) is given later on: 

I. Vairaja—square (vv. 21-22)—includes the same nine kinds, but 
(7) Nandika is called Nandana, and (6) Charuka is correctly read as 
Ruchaka (vv. 24-25). 

II. Pushpaka—rectangular (vv. 21-22)—includes nine kinds, of which 
(то) Valabhi is correctly spelt, (13) ViSala is read as Vimana, which is ap- 
parently a mistake іп the Garuda-Purüga because (3) Vimana is a kind of 
building included in the square (I) Vairàja class. But the reading of the 
Pushpaka class (II) seems better in the Garuda-Purána, which may be quot- 
ed here: 

(то) Valabhi, (rr) Griha-raja, (12) Sala-griha, (13) Mandira, 
(14) Visala (text has Vimana), (15) Brahma-mandira, (16) Bhavana, 
(17) Uttambha, and (18) Sibi(-vi)ka-ve$ma.—(Chap. хілп, vv. 26-27.) 

III. Kailaga—round (vv. 21, 23)—includes nine kinds which also seem 
to have better reading : 

(19) Valaya, (20) Dundubhi, (21) Padma, (22) Mahà-padma, 
(23) Mukuli (in place of Vardhani), (24) Ushnishi, (25) Sankha, 
(26) Kala$a, and (27) Guva-vriksha.—(Chap. хімп, vv. 28-29.) 

IV. Manika—oval (v. go)—includes the same nine kinds of which, 
however, (31), (32), and (33) are read as Garuda, Simha, and Bhümukha | 
respectively (vv. 29, 30). 


348 


` СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


V. Tri-vishtapa—octangular (vv. 21, 23)—includes nine kinds which 
scem to be better read here : 
(37) Vajra, (98) Chakra, (39) Mushtika (preceded by Babhru, v. 31). 
] (40) Vakra, (41) Svastika, (42) Khadga, (43) Gada, (44) Sri-vriksha, 
| and (45) Vijaya.—(Chap. хіуп, vv. 31-32.) ү 
(4) Matsya-Purdpa (Chap. ccrxix, vv. 1-7, 8-14, 15-20, 21-97): 
(а) The general plan : 
Evarh vastu-baliri kritvà bhajet shodasa-bhagikam | 
Tasya madhye chaturbhis tu bhagair garbharn tu karayet 11 (1) 
Bhaga-dva-daSaka-sardharh tatas tu parikalpayet 1 
Chatur-dikshu tatha jfieyarn nirgamar tu tato budhaih 1! (2) 
Chatur-bhagena bhittinam uchchhrayah syat pramāņatah | 
Dvi-gunah Sikharochchhrayo ^ bhitty-uchchhraya-pramàna- 
tah 11 (3) 
Sikharardhasya chardhena vidheya tu pradakshina 1 
Garbha-siittra-dvayarh chagre vistàro mandalasya tu 11 (4) 
Ayatah syat tribhir bhagair bhadra-yuktah susobhanah 1 
Paiicha-bhagena sarnbhajya garbha-manarh vichakshanah tt (5) 
Bhagam eka grihitva tu prag-grivarh kalpayed budhah | 
Garbha-siitra-sama-bhagad agrato mukha-mandapah 11 (6) 
ч Etat samanyam uddishtarh prasadasya cha lakshnam | (7) 
| : This description of the general plan is followed by that of some 
| special plans (see уу. 8-14, 15-20). 
| Samanyam apararh tad-vat prasadarn śriņuta dvijah 1 
| Tri-bhagarh karayet kshetrarn yatra tishthanti devatah 11 (21) 
| Rathankas tena manena bahya-bhaga-vinirgatah 1 
| Nemi padena vistirna prasadasya samantatah 11 (22): 
Garbhar tu dvi-gunam kuryat tasya manarh bhaved iha | 
Sa суа bhitter utsedho dvi-gunah $ikharo matah I1 (23) 
Prag-grivah райсһа-рһарепа nishkasas tasya chochyate | 
Karayet sushirarn tad-vat prakarasya tri-bhagatah 1! (24) 
Prag-grivarh paficha-bhagena nishkashena viSeshatah | 
Kuryad và paficha-bhagena prag-grivath karna-mülatah 11 (25) 
Sthapayet kanakamr tatra garbhante dvara-milatah | 
Evam tu tri-vidhath kuryaj jyeshtha-madhya-kaniyasam 11 (26) 
Linga-mananubhedena rüpa-bhedena và punah | 
Ete samasatah prokta namatah $rinutadhuna 11 (27) 
(b) The names (vv. 28-30), description of architectural details (vv. 
31-46), measures (vv. 47-51), and division (vv. 53-54), of twenty kinds 
| of buildings (temples) : 


p. (1) Meru has тоо cupolas (Фгїйрһа), 16 storeys (bhümika), many 
ү variegated spires (Sikharas), and is 50 cubits broad (уу. 28, 31, 53). 
| : 349 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Mandara has 12 storeys, many spires and faces, and is 43 cubits 
broad (vv. 28, 37, 47, 53). : 

(3) Kailà$a has nine storeys, many spires and faces, and is 40 
cubits broad (vv. 32, 47, 53). 

(4) Vimàna-chchhanda has eight storeys, many spires and faces, and 
is 34 cubits broad (vv. 25, 32, 33, 47, 53)- 

(5) Nandi-vardhana has seven storeys, and is 32 cubits broad 
(vv. 29, 33, 48, 53). 

(6) Nandana has seven storeys, and is furnished 
(vishana) and is 30 cubits broad (vv. 29, 33, 48, 53). 

(7) Sarvato-bhadra has five storeys, 16 corners with various 
shapes, furnished with art-galleries (chitra-Sala), and is зо cubits 
broad (vv. 29, 34, 35, 48, 53). 

(8) Vallabhi-chchhandaka has five storeys, many spires and faces, 
and is 16 cubits broad (vv. 35, 50, 53). 

(9) Vrisha should resemble the height and length of the bull, should 
be round and without corners; it should have five cupolas and 
two storeys, and it should be 4 cubits at the central hall (vv. 30, 
36, 44, 45» 53). 

(то) Sirnha resembles the lion and is 16 cubits broad, is adorned with 
prominent top-rooms, and should be at the front neck six storeys high 


(vv. 29, 36, 40, 49, 53). 

(11) Gaja resembles the clephant and is 16 cubits broad, and has 
many top-rooms (vv. 36, 41, 49, 53). 

(12) Kumbha resembles the water-jar, has nine storcys, five cupolas 
and a cavity (anguli-puta-sarhsthina), and is 16 cubits broad (vv. 

37» 49, 53). 

(13) Samudraka has 16 sides around, two top-rooms (? gable win- 
dows) at the two sides, and two storcys (vv. 38, 53). 

(14) Padma has three storeys, 16 corners, а variegated auspicious 
spire and is 20 cubits broad (vv. 30, 39, 49, 53). 

(15) Garuda has the bird-shape around, seven storeys and three 
top-rooms, is 8 cubits broad, and there should be 86 storeys ог 
compartments (bhümika) (v. 42) all around the outside (vv. 41, 43, 

51). There is a similar Garuda-building with ten storeys and a second | 
Padmaka building with two storeys more (i. e., twelve storeys, v. 43). | 
(16) Hamsa (goose)-shaped is ro cubits broad (VV. go, 51). | 

(17) Vartula (ball or round)-shaped is 20 cubits broad (vv. 29, 49, 


53). 


with horns 


350 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


No special description is given of the remaining kinds : 
(18) Chatur-agra (four-cornered, vv. 28, 53). 
(19) Ashtagra (сірһі-согпегей, vv. 29, 52). 

(20) Shodagaéra (sixteen-cornered, vv. 29, 53). 

The three divisions of these buildings according to three sizes : 
Tathà mervadayah sapta jyestha-linge $ubhavahah | 
Srivrikshaka(-valabhi-à)daya$ chashtau madhyamasya pra-kirtitah 11 I a 

® 

Tatha harnsa(Simha)dayah pañcha kanyase Subhada matah 11 (54) 
| om Similar kinds of prasádas (temples) are described almost in the same 
manner in both the Bhavishya-Purana and the Brihat-Samhita. 
(5) Bhavishya-Purdna, Chap. cxxx, names (vv 23-26), description of the A 
architectural details and measures (vv. 27-35), and the twenty kinds of : 
buildings (almost same as in the Brihat-Samhitd, see below) 2: Б. 
(1) Меги is 39 cubits high and 32 cubits broad, has twelve storeys, 
various windows (kuhara).and four gateways (v. 27). (2) Mandara 
is go cubits broad and has ten storeys (v. 28). (3) Kailasa is 28 ? 
cubits broad, has spires and finials, and eight storeys (v. 28). Р 
The description of the following is clearer in the Brihat-Samhita, quoted 
) below. Тһе names аге given here : 
(4) Vimàna with latticed windows (v. 29); (5) Nandana (v. 29) , 
(6) Samudga (v. 30), but Samudra (v. 24) as in the Brihat-Samhita 
(ілі, 28-53); (7) Padma (v. 30); (8) Garuda (v. 31); (9) Nandi- 
vardhana (v. 29, but Nandi, v. 31) ; (ro) Kuñjara (v. 92); (11) Griha- 
raja (v. 32) : Brihat-Samhitd (LVI, 25) reads Guha-raja ; (12) Vrisha 

| (v. 33) ; (13) Harnsa (v. 33) ; (14) Ghata (v. 33) ; (15) Sarvato-bhadra ‚ 

| (у. 34) ; (16) Simha (v. 35); ; (17) Vritta (as in the Brihat-Samhita, LVI 

29, 49) but here (v. 33) it is read Vrisha like (12), which is apparently 

a mistake (see v. 30). 

b. No special description is given of the remaining kinds : 

(18) Chatush-kona (four-cornered, v. 25) : Matsya-Purana (Chap. z 

B CCLXIX, уу. 28, 53) reads Chatur-asra, and Brihat-Samhita (LVI, 28) 
has Chatur-ara; (19) Ashtasra (octangular, v. 25) ; (20) Shodašašra 

I (sixteen-cornered, v. 25). * 

| (6) Brihat-Samhita (LVI, 1-10): 

| The religious merits acquired by building temples (vv. 1-2). 

j5 The suitable sites are stated to be gardens, woods, banks of rivers, seas or | i 

F tanks (vv. 3-8); ground (v. 9); general plan (v. 10); situation of doors (a Hi 

4 то); comparative measures of the length, breadth, and height (v. п); 


351 М E ae 


SENS балқи gri University 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


adytum (garbha, v. 12), of the doors and their different parts (vv. xn 
carvings on doors (v. 15); comparative measures of the idol, pedestal, an 
door (v. 16); the heights of storeys (vv. 29-30). Жа | 
This is followed by the classification (уу. 17-19) and the description of 
the architectural details (vv. 20-28) of the same twenty kinds of temples 
(ргаѕада) as are given in the Matsya-Purdpa and the Bhavishya-P. urang 
The names of these buildings are given below : their details which are 
almost same as in the Puranas, will be found described under these terms ; 
(1) Meru (v. 20); (2) Mandara (v. 21); (3) Kailaša (v. 21); 
(4) Vimāna-(chchhanda) (уу. 17, 22); (5) Nandana (v. 22) ; (6) 
Samudga (v. 23) ; (7) Padma (v. 23) ; (8) Garuda (v. 24) ; (9) Nandi- 
vardhana (v. 24); (то) Kufijara (v. 25); (11) Guha-raja (v. 25); 
(12) Vrisha (v. 26); (13) Harhsa (у. 26); (14) Ghata (v. 26) ; (15) 
Sarvato-bhadra (v. 27) ; (16) Siiha (v. 28) ; (17) Vritta (vv. 18, 28); 
(18) Chatush-kona (vv. 18, 28); (19) Ashtaéra (vv. 18, 28); (20) 
Shodašašra (vv. 18, 28). 
(7) Kamikagama : 
No distinction is made between PRAsADA and VIMANA (cf. also the 
Manasára, L, 40, etc.) : ј 
Jatyadi-bhedakair yuktarh vimanam sarhpadaim(-s)-padam | 
(Lv, 131, this chapter is named Prasada-bhüshana.) 
Buildings in general (Lv, 1-210) ; 
Their component parts : 
Prasada-bhüshana(m) vakshye $rüyatàrn dvijasattamah | 
Syat pada-prastararh-griva-varge müle tu vedika 11 (1) 
Shapes and kinds of Prasada (buildings in general ) : 
Yanain và Sayanath vapi gopurakritir eva và | 
Pithakritir và mervadi-parvatakritir eva và 11 (194) 
Nandyakritir va dhàma vidheyarh chesta-desake | 
Mandape gopure уарге parivaralayadishu 11 
Evam evarh vidheyar syat (алһа bhuvi visishyate 11 (195) 
Тһе synonyms : 
Vimanarn bhavanam harmyam saudham dhàma niketanam | 
Ргаѕадаһ sadanam sadma geham avasatharn griham 11 (208) 
Alayarh nilayarh vaso'py-àlayo vastu-vastukam | 
Kshetram ayatanarh ve$ma mandirarh dhishnakarh padam |! (129) 
Layar kshayam agaram cha tathodavasitarh punah t 
Sthanam ity-evam uktani paryaya-vachanani hi 11 (210) 
Тһе four classes : А 
Jati (v. 128), Chhanda (129), Vikalpa (130), and Abhasa (130). 


352 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


-' HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


The Chapter tv refers to the description of a single building and its 
component parts. 
So also does the Chapter xiv (see under MALIKA) ; it is named Malika- 
(lakshana), but it does not mean anything but Ргазада : Prasada-vyasa- 
dirghochcha proktaé prasada-malika 11 (4) 
Further classifications (Chapter xv) : 
I. Sarnchita, Apasarnchita, and Upasarchita (v. 6). 
II. Nagara (vv. 6, 12, 13), Dravida (vv. 6, 14, 15), and Vesara 
(vv. 7, 16-18). 
III. Jati (vv. 7, 19), Chhanda (vv. 7, 20,) and Vikalpa (vv. 7, 20). 
IV. Suddha (vv. 7, 21), Misra (vv. 7, 22), and Sarnkirna (vv. 7, 22). 
V. Purhlinga or masculine also called Sarnchita (vv. 8, 9), Stri- 
Пара or feminine (vv. 9, 10), and Napurnsaka or neuter (v. 11). ` 
This class (V) does not refer (like the Manasara) to the sexes of the M 
deities installed in temples. Here they appear like residential build- j 
ings. Their characteristic features are determined by some architectural 
details (see under these terms—PuMLINGA, ctc.). а 
The distinguishing marks of the other four classes (I to IV) are | 
Í similar to those of the Manasára noticed above (see the details under 
| those terms, Sarhchita, Nagara, etc.). 

1 VI. The.technical names of Prasada : E. 
(т) Sindhuka (Chap. хгу, уу. 29-20); (2) Sampürna (vv. E 
29-90); (3) Meru-küta (v. 31) ; (4) Kshema (vv. 32-34) ; (5) š 
Siva (vv. 35-38) ; (6) Harmya (уу. 39-40) ; (7) Saumya (v. 40) ; à 
(8) Viśāla (v. 41) ; (9) Sarva-kalyana (vv. 42-49) ; (10) Vijaya 
(v. 50) ; (11) Bhadra (v. 51) ; (12) Raüga-mukha (v. 52) ; (13) 
1 Alpa (vv. 53-54); (14) Kona (vv. 55-58); (15) Geya (vv. 
OS 584-59) ; (16) Sāra (v. бо); (17) Pushkara (vv. 61-63) ; (18) 
Е Adbhuta (v. бта); (19) Sarnkirna (у. 62) ; (20) алда (у. 64). 

See details under МАІЛКА and these terms. 
In Chapter xxxv, $4145, in almost the same sense as of Prasada, are 
divided into five classes, namely, Sarvato-bhadra (vv. 87-88), Vardhamana 
; (уу. 87, 88), Svastika (уу. 87, 89), Nandyavarta (vv. 87, 90), and Charuka 
À (vv. 87, 91). ] 
f Their characteristic features will be found under these terms. 
(8) Suprabhedägama, Chap. хххі (named Prāsāda=temple) : E 
The nine kinds of width (vv. 1-3) ; the comparative measurements 
of the temple and adytum (vv. 4-6), of the inner and outer walls 
(vv. 6-8), of the linga or phallus and the pitha or pedestal (vv. 9- 
The description of the four types of bases, namely, Padma-band! 
Charu-bandha, Pada-bandha, and Pratikrama (vy. 16-20). 


353 


Z^ me TE 


. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri U 
Asa E 7 š е < 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОР 


The description of the ground floor consisting in the comparative 
measurement of the base, column, entablature, finial, dome, corner-tower, 
dove-cot, and spire (vv. 28-31). 

All the twelve storeys are stated to be built in the same way : 

Adva-daga-talad evarh bhümau bhümau prakalpayet 1 
Evam uktam ihotsedharh dvara-bhedarh tatah $rinu 11 (33) 

Тһе doors are then described (vv. 34-37)- 

Three styles of temples, namely, Nagara, Dravida and Vesara, are 
mentioned (v. 38). 

Their essential features (vv. 38-39, see under those terms). 

Ten types of temples : 

(1) Kailasa, (2) Mandara, (3) Meru, (4) Himavat, (5) Nishadha 
(also called Nila-parvata, and Mahendra), (6) Nalinaka, (7) Pralinaka, 
(8) Nandyavarta, (9) Srivarta (also Sripada), and (10) Parvata. 

(See vv. 40-45.) 

The comparative measurements of the storeys : 

Evam tale tale karyarh nünam ekaika-bhagikam 1! (53) 

The five kinds of columns—Srikara, Chandra-kanta, Saumukhya (also 

Sumukha), Priya-dar$ana, and Subharhkari(-ra) (v. 65) ; their shapes—four- 

- sided, eight-sided, sixteen-sided, cylindrical, and of the combination of the 
first two (v. 67). They may be with or without a kumbha or pitcher (v. 
54). Тһе general features of the component parts (vv. 55-64) and the 
special features of the five orders are described (vv. 66-67). 

Тһе description of the arches is given (vv. 68-71). 

Some ornaments, like nàsikà (vestibule), vedika (platform), sikhara 
(spire), stūpi (dome), ctc., are also described (vv. 72-93). 

Here closes the description of the temples : 

Prasada-lakshanarh proktarh mandapanàrm vidhirh $rinu 11 (94) 

This leads to the description of the detached buildings such as the pavilions, 
quarters for the attendant deities, gate-houses, and the enclosure, tanks, 
guest-houses, etc., which form parts of the temple in its wider sense. 

The mandapas or pavilions are first divided into four classes, namely, 
Deva(god)-mandapa, snapana(bath)-mandapa, Vrisha (the bull, Nandin)- 
mandapa, and Nritta (music)-mandapa (vv. 96-97, 98-99). . 

They are further classified under the names Nanda-Vritta, Ѕгіуӣ- 
vritta, Virasana, Jaya-bhadra, Nandyavarta, Mani-bhadra, and Visala 
(vv. 100-104). 

These pavilions are distinguished by the number of columns they are 
furnished with : 

Stambhanarm tu éatair yuktarh visalam iti sarnjñitam | 

Prasad-vat samakhyatarn prastarantarn pramanatah 11 (104) 


354 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


The columns of the prāsādas and those of the mandapas are stated 
to be differently measured : 
Prasada-stambha-manasya etat stambharn visishyate 11 (105) 
These latter columns have also other characteristic features (уу. 106-114). 
The description of the pavilions closes with that of the flights of steps : 
Sopànam cha yathayuktya hasti-hastarn tathaiva cha | 
Evarn samasatah proktarh mandaparn vidhi-pürvakam 11 (114). 

The prakaras or enclosures are then described (vv. 115-128). They are 
strikingly similar to those described in the Manasara. 

This Agama like the Mdnasara divides the whole compound into five 
enclosed quadrangular courts. In both the treatises, each of the courts 
is stated to be furnished with a separate gate-house. Morcover these 
gate-houses are given the same technical names in both the works, viz. 
Dvaàra-$obha (in the first court), Dvāra-śālā (in the second), Dvara-prasada 
(in the third), Dvara-harmya (in the fourth), and the Dvara-gopura (in the 
fifth or the extreme boundary, maha-maryada ; cf. Manasara under Сорока.) 

The Parivaralayas (temples of attendant deities), which are made in 
some of these five courts, are described (129 f.), and are also similar in both 
the treatises. 

In the remaining portion of the chapter some objects like the façades of 
the temples, etc., are described. 

From the abstracts given above, it will be clear that this chapter 
of the Suprabhedágama deals with all the essential parts of a temple, 
which in the Manasára, including the residential buildings, occupy a space 
of twenty-eight chapters (хш to xxxix, xLVI). The description of this 
Agama, though brief, is very explicit and to the point. The language 
also of the Suprabhedágama is much better than most of the architectural 
treatises I have consulted. 

Тһе attention of readers is invited to the lists of the buildings described 
in the eight works under observation. 

The list in the Manasára contains under twelve classes (or storeys) 98 types 
of buildings ; the Agni-Purága has under five classes 45 types, the Garuda- 
Purana also has under the same five classes 45 types; the Mastya-Purana 
has under three classes 20 types; the Bhavishya-Purdna has left out the 
broader divisions and contains 20 types ; the Brihat-Samhita in the very same 
way contains 20 types; the Kamikdgama has under three divisions (of 
various kinds) 20 types; and the Suprabhedagama has left out all the minor 
divisions but has preserved the most important divisions, namely, the three 
styles (Nagara, Vesara, and Dravida) which comprise ten types of buildings. 

The various broader divisions, such as the Suddha, Samchita, Sthanaka, 
Jati, Pumlinga, etc., we have seen in the Manasara, are repeated in the 


355 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


same terms and same sense in the Agamas. The most important division, 
namely, the styles—Nagara, Vesara end Dravida—is also preserved intact 
in the latter works. These are purely architectural divisions, consequently 
they are not taken into consideration in the non-architectural treatises ` 
like the Puranas and the Brihat-Samhitd. Even the broadest division into 
storeys under which the /Мйпауйға describes the buildings in twelve or 
thirtcen chapters has lost its prominence in the latter works. 


Thus the Manasára has the largest number of the types, namely, 98. 

The Agni-Purdna and the Garuda-Purápa have 45 types each. 

The Matsya-Purdpa, the Bhavishya-Purdna, the Brihat-Samhitd, and the 
Kamikagama have 20 types each. 

The Suprabhedágama has the smallest number of types, namely, то. 


The technical names of the types of buildings are common in many cases. 
In some instances the architectural details are identical. The lists of the 
Agni-Purana and the Garuda-Purüána on the one hand, and the Matsya- 
Purana, the Bhavishya-Purüna and the Brihat-Samhita on the other, are 

Я strikingly similar. Of the works containing the lists of 20 types, the 
Brihat-Samhita has the most improved description. But in respect of 
brevity, explicitness and precision, the Suprabhedágama, which contains 
the smallest number of types, surpasses all others. 

Тһе common names of the types, the identity of their details and the 
similarity in their description do not seem to be accidental. "The grades 
of the linguistic style and the explicitness and precision of the description 
are not perhaps unconnected. And the variation in the number of types 
described in these works does not also seem to be meaningless. 

Тізе mutual relation and the historical connexion of these cight works 
have been discussed in great detail in the chapter on the date of the 
Manasára in the writer's Silpa-fastra and the Hindu Architecture іп India and 
Abroad. 

The object of this article is, however, to show by illustrations the 
denotation of the term * Prásáda^ And before drawing any conclusion, we 
shall examine briefly a few more literary quotations from works which are 
not architectural and where the term occurs quite incidentally, as well as 
from the archaeological records and the Buddhist. canonical texts, where 
too the term is used casually. 

(9) Sankhyayana-Srauta-sütra, хут, 18, 13 (Pet. Dict.): 

Samsthite madhyame’ hany-aàhavaniyam -abhito dikshu prasidan 
viminvanti | 

(10) Adbhuta-Brahmana, in Indische Studien, 1, 40 (2а): 

Harmya-prasada-samkula | 


356 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ي ——— —— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


(тт) ‘ Prakara in the Saikhydyana-Srauta-siitra (хут, 18, 14) denotes 
a walled mound supporting a raised platform (ргазада) for spectators.’ 
(Professors Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, 11, 44.) 

Cf. the text: Тап uparishtat samvyadhaih prakaraih parighnanti 1 

* Prásada in the sense of palace does not occur until the late Adbhuta- 
Brahmana’ (see above, по. 10).—(Indische Studien, r, 40, Vedic Index, 
п, 51.) 

(12) Ramayana (Cock) : 

II. 7, I: Prasadam chandra-samkagam агигоһа 11 

Ayodhyàm manthara tasmat prasadad anvavaikshata | 

П. 7, 12: Kailasa-Sikharakarat prasadad avarohata | 

Il. 3, 27: Pràasadastho da$arathah . . .1 

(Here ‘ Prasada' must mean a palace.) 

П. 3, 31: Sa tam kailasa-Sringabharh prāsādam . . . ragu- 

nandanah .. . aruroha . .| 

П. 16, 42: Prasaida-Sringeshu | 

VI. 26, 5: Áruroha . . prasadam hima-panduram | 

Bahu-tala-samutsedham | 

VI. 42, 2: Ruddhàm tu nagarim бгиіуа ... prasadam. . 

arohata | 

П. 33, 3: Tatah prasaida-harmyani vimana-sikharani cha | 

Abhiruhya janah $riman udasino vyalokayata 11 

II. 33, 4: Aruhya tasmat prasadad dinah pa$yanti raghavam | 

V. 43, 4: Aruhya giri-sarnkašarn prasidam . . . | 

IV. 26, ді: Tato hema-pratishthàne varastarana-sarnvrite 1 

Prasada-sikhare гатуе chitra-malyopa$obhite 11 
Pran-mukharh vidhivan mantraih styapayitva varasane | 
П. r7, 17: Megha-sarnghopamaih $ubhaih .. . | 
Prásada-éringair vividhaih kailaSa-Sikharopamaih 1 
IV. 33, 15: Vànarenda-griham : . . $ukla-prasada-Sikharaih kailasa- 
Sikharopamaih | 

VI 41, 88: Prasada-Sikharam $aila-$ringam ivonnatam | 

VI. 41, 90: Prasada-sikhareshu 1 

II. gr, 91: Harmya-prasada-sarnpannamh ... raja-dhanim | 

II. roo, 42: Ргаѕадаіг vividhakarair vritàm . . . ayodhyam | 

V. 2, 49: Prasáda-mala-vitatam . . . maha-purim | 

VI. 39, 21: Ргаѕадаі& cha . . . lanka parama-bhüshità 1 


VI. 39, 27: Prasada-malabhir alankritam . . . purim | 
III. 55, 7: GrihamÀ deva-grihopamam ... harmya-prasada-sarh- 
badham | 
357 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


PRASADA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


ПІ. 55, ro: Hema-jala-vritas chasams tatra prasada-panktayah | 
V. 6, 44: Prásáda-samgháta-yutam . . . maha-griham | 
V. o, 2: Bhavanath rákshasendrasya bahu-pràsada-samkulam | 
IV. 33, 8: Vindhya-meru-prakhyaih prasadair naika-bhumibhih l 
II. 65, 3: Rajanam stuvatam tesham . . . prāsādāghoga-vistīrņas 
tu $abdo hy-avartatal 
(Gf. also П, 27, 9; 57, 18; 57, 20.) 
I. 80, 19: Prasada-mala-sarhyuktah . . . nive$ah | 
П. 88, 5: Prasadagra-vimàncshu valabhisu cha sarvada | 
Haima rajata-bhaumeshu varastarnaéalishu 11 
II. 88, 7: Prasida-vara-varyeshu Sitàvatsu sugandhishu | 
Ushitva meru-kalpeshu krita-kafichana-bhittishu 1! 
П. gı, 32: Harmya-pràsada-saryukta-toranani | 
IV. 33, 5: Mahatim guhàm . . . .harmya-prásada-sambadhàm 1 
IV. 42, 44: Bhavanam . . . pràsadangana-sambàdham 1 
VI. ді, 86: Prasadarn Saila-sarnkasam | 
(Cf. also v, 6, 16; 57, 7.) 
УІ. 75, 7: Ргазадаһ parvatakarah | (çf. also vr, 75, 6.) 
VI. 75, 12: Mukta-mani-vichitràmé cha prāsādāmś cha . .. agnir 
dahati tatra vai 1 
V. 5, 9: Harmya-prasada-sambadham | 
L 5, 5: Prasadair anta-vikritaih parvatair iva $obhitàm | 
(13) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
V. 91, 3: Tasya (Duryodhana-grihasya) kakshàrn vyatikramya 
tisro dvah-sthair avaritah | 
Tato abhra-ghana-sarnkašarn griha-kütam ivochchhri- 
tam 11 
Sriyaivalambantarh prasadam агигоћа mahagayah 1 
I. 3,133: Naga-lokam. . . . aneka vidha-prasada-harmya- 
valabhi-niryiha-Sata-sarnkulam 1 
I. 109, 9: Марага. . . . prdsdda-Sata-sarnbadham, 1 
П. ro, 3: Sabha. . . . divyà hemamayair uchchaih prasadair 
upagobhita | 
V. 88, 20: Etad (DuhSasanasya griharn)dhi ruchirakaraih рга- 
sadair upasobhitam | 
V. 89, 11: Griharh (Dhritarashtrasya). . . . ргаѕадаіг upa$obh'- 
tam | 
ХІ. 44, 6: Duryodhana-griharh prasadair ‘upasobhitam | 
ХП. 44, 8: Prasada-mala-sarnyuktarn (Duhéasanasya griham) | 


358 


“ 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 1 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


Т. 185, 19, 20,22: Sarvatah ^ sarmvritab  (samajavatah) ^ Subhraih 
prasadaih sukritochchhrayaih 1 
Suvarna-jala-sarhvritair mani-kuttima-bhüshanaih | 
Sukharohana-sopanair mahasana-parichchhadaih 11 
Asarnbidha-Sata-dvaraih $ayanasana-$obhitaih 1 
Bahu-dhatu-pinaddhangair himavach chhikarair 


iva 11 
V. (80, 3418 УӘ o ьо prásadagreshv-abodhyantaraüka-vajina- 
бауіпаһ (Pandavah) | 
XV. 16, 1: Prásada-harmyeshu vasudhàyam cha. . . . 1 
Nàrinàm cha narànàm cha nihsvanah sumahan 
abhüt I 
XIV. 25,22 : Seya bhümau pariśrāntā Sete prasada-Sayini | 


ü Prasada-šala-sarnbadharn manj-pravara-kuttimam | 
Karayamasa vidhivad-dhema-ratna-vibhüshitam | 
(14) Manu-Samhita (vu, 147, etc): 
Giri-prishtharh samaruhya prasadarh và raho gatah | 
Aranye nihgalake và mantraycd avibhavitah 11 
(15) Pafchatantra (Bombay, т, р. 98, etc.) : 
Rajakanyàn. . . . sapta-bhümika-prásada-pranta-gatam | _ 
(16) Hitopadesa (Bohtlingk, р. 157, 1, 30; etc.) : 
Raja . . . prásada-garbharn gatva. og. € 
Prásáda-prishthe-sukhopavishtanam raja-putranam | 
(17) Megha-düta (ed. Stenzler, 64, etc.) : Abhrarh-lihagraih prasadaih | 
(18) Raghu-vamía (14, 29, etc.) : Prasadam abhrarn-liham aruroha | 
(19) Mrichchha-katika (ed. Stenzler, Cock) : 
p. 79: Arama-prasada-vedikayam | 
р. 84: Vidyut-kafichana-dipikeva rachità prasada-sarhcharini 1 
р. 21, 132, 162, 164 : Prasada-balagram | 
(ғо) Rajatarangini (Pet. Dict.,4, 102, etc.) : Prasadanganam | 
(21) Ekas tayor amum akarayad indu-mauleh prasadam adri-tanaya 
bhavanarn tathanya— the one of them built this temple of the god who 
wears the moon on his head, and the other that of the Daughter of the 
Mountain.’ —(Dewal Praéasti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 27, Ep. Ind, VOL. r, 
рр. 80, 84.) қ E EL. ар 
(22) Ishtapartta-prachura-sukritarambha-nityadritena prasado yam XR 
. nirmapyate—‘ he caused this edifice to be erected . . . in 
it there is here the god Narayana.’—(Mau-chandella inscrip. of Madana- 


varman, v. 46, Ер. Ind., Vol 1, рр. 202, 206.) ; аға 
(29) ‘Prasadena tavamunaiva haritam adhva niruddho mudhabhano’- 


| dyàpi krito'sti dakshinadi$ah konantavasi munihi—(Deopara inscrip. of me 
1 Vijaya Sena, v. 27, ЕР. Ind., Vol. r, рр. 310, 314-) 


359 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Four 
3 хх ха 


T 


PRASADA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


(24) Akarayat svayrh Sambhu-prasádali-dvayam | nijah—* She too made 
s her people construct that hall of study (and) lay out that long line of 
gardens in two ranges (adjoining Sambhu's temple).—(Bhera-ghat inscrip, 
of Alhanadevi, v. 38, Ep. Ind., Vol. u, pp. 13, 16.) 

(25) Ancka-prasadaih parivritamati pram$ukala$am giri$aprasadam vya- 
rachayat |—(Chitorgadh inscrip. of Mokala of Mewad, Part п, v. 2, Ep. 
Ind., Vol. u, p. 421.) 

(26) Vapi-küpa-tadaga-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayan | 

(Sridhara’s Devapattana Praáasti, V, Io, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. п, p. 440.) 

(27) Maha-Saila-prasida—great stone temple.—(Pattadakal inscrip. of 
Kirtivarman II, lines 7, 11, 14, Ef. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 4, 5.) 

(28) Ghanam prasadarh nava-hema-kumbha-kalitarh ramyath maha- 

marhtapam | 

‘(He presented) a solid temple (prásàda) adorned with nine golden 
pinnacles (kumbha) and a beautiful large hall (to the temple of Hari, 
the lord of Mangalasaila).—(Mangalagiri Pillar inscrip., v. 51, Ер. Ind., Vol. 
VI, pp. 195, 115.) 

(29) Ргава4о rachitas sudha-chchhavi-hasat-kailisa-failesvarasya, (v. 22), 
prasidam Īśasya (v. 32), prasada-kirttih (v. 34).—(Two Bhuvanegvara 
inscrip. no. A of Svapne$vara, Ep. Ind., Vol. ут, p. 202.) 

(30) Prasidarh ^ navabhi$ cha hema-kalagair aty-unnatam gopura- 
prakarotsava-marhtapair upachitam $ri-rama-bhadraya cha—‘an ecx- 
ceedingly high temple furnished with nine gilt domes, a gate tower, a 
wall and festive hall, to the holy Ràmabhadra.—(Kondavidu inscrip. of 
Krishnaraya, v. 27, Ep. Ind., Vol. мі, рр. 237, 231.) i 

(31) Khanda-sphutita-prasada-punah-sarhskaranartharn pratipaditah— 
* he granted for defraying the expenses of the repairs of the temple broken 
in parts.’—(Plates of Dantivarman of Gujarat, line 67, Ер. Ind., Vol. ут, 
рр. 293, 286.) 

(32) Tena bhratri-yugena уа prati-pura-gramadhva-éaila-sthalarh vapi- 

küpa-nipanakà sarah prasada-satradika | 
Dharmma-sthana-pararhpara nava-tara chakre’tha jirnnoddhrita-tat- 
sarhkhyapi na budhyate yadi param tad-vedini medini 1 


(Mount Abu inscrip. no. 1, v. 66, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vm, p. 213.) 


(33) Tirthe deva-hrade tena kritarh prasada-pafichakam | 
Sviyam tatra dvayam jatarh yatra garnkara-kegavau I1 


(Sihawa stone inscrip. of Karnaraja, 
V. 9, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 186.) 


960 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA z 


PRASADA | 


- 


Ent 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


(34) Sri-nemi$varasya nirakrita-jagad-vishadah prasadah samuddadhre 
—Erected the temple of Nemi$vara which (temple) has removed the 
sorrows of the world.’—(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. xxv, Nadlai stone 
inscrip. of Ranaviradeva, line 15 f., Ep., Ind., Vol. хі, p. 64.) 

(35) Esha bhagavato varaha mürtter jagat-parayanasya narayanasya 
&la-prasadah sva-vishaye’sminn Airikine karitah | 

* This stone temple of the divine (god) Narayana, who has the form 
of a boar (and) who is entirely devoted to (the welfare of) the universe, 
has been caused to be made in this in his own vishaya of Airikina.’— 
(Eran stone Boar Inscrip. of Toramana, line 7, C. J. І, Vo. m, Е. б. L, 
по. 36, рр. 160, 161.) a 

(36) Nana-dhatu vichitre gopahvaya-namni bhü-dhare ramye kari- 

tavàn §aila-mayarh bhanoh prasada-vara-mukhyam 1 E 

“Наз caused to be made, on the delightful mountain which is feckled 
with various metals and has the appellation of Gopa, a stone temple, the т 
chief among the best of temples of the Sun.’ 

Tàvad giri-mürdhni tishthati $ilà-prasada-mukhyo ramye— so long 33 
(this) chief of (stonc)-temples shall stand upon the delightful summit of = 
the hill2—-(Gwalior stone inscrip. of Mihirakula, lines 6, 8, 9 ; C. I. I., Vol. ur, Ee 
F. С. I., no. 37, рр. 162, 163, 164.) 

(37) Tenochchair bodhimande $a&i-kara-dhavalah sarvvato mandapena 1 ; ‹ 

Kantah ргазайа esha smara-bala-jayinah karito loka-Sastuh t! E 

«By him this beautiful mansion of the Teacher of mankind, who over- 
came the power of (the god) Smara, dazzling white as the rays of the moon 
with an open pavilion on all sides, has been caused to be made at the | ғ 
| exalted Bodhimanda.’ 24 
i Bodhimanda is also called Vajrasana, the throne under the Bodhi-tree 
| at Bodh-Gaya, on which Buddha sat when attaining Bodhi or perfect wis- 
| dom. The word ‘Kanta’ here might have a technical architectural 
| meaning. In (һе Mánasára, the names of the buildings of various storeys 
\ generally end with “kanta, е. g., meru-kanta, hima-kanta, etc. ; so also 
\ ; the names of the columns, e.g, Brahma-kanta, Vishnu-kanta, ctc.— 
| к (Bodh-Gaya inscrip. of Mahanaman, lines 10, 11, C. J. L, Vol. ur, F. G. I., 

m. no. 71, pp. 276, 278, 275, and Sanskrit and Old Kanarese inscrip. no. 166, 
| "Bodh-Gaya inscrip. of Mahanaman, line ro f£, of A. D. 588, 589, Ind. Ant., Vol. í 
> ху, рр. 358, 359, 357, с. 1, para. 2.) ; M 
(38) Adbhutah sirhha-paniya-nagare yena karitah 1 f E c 
Kirtti-starnbha ivabhati prasadah párvvati-pateh | 

* In the town of Simhapàniya he caused to be built a wonderful temple | 

of the Lord of Parvati, which shines like a column of fame.—(Sasbahu | E 


incrip. of Mahipala, v. 11, Ind. Ant., Vol. ху, рр. 37, 42.) A "Ж = 
61 EIC 
= B Жа 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri Universit 


PRASADA | AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(39) Sa prasadam achikarad divishadarh kedara-devasya cha | 

‘He caused to be built a temple of the inhabitants of heaven and of the 
god Kedàra.'—(Gaya inscrip. of Yakshapala, v. 12, Ind. Ant., Vol. XVI, pp. 
65, 66.) 

(40) Vejarhto pasade (prāsāda)—‘ Vaijayanta, the palace (of Indra)?— 
(Bharaut inscrip. no. 79, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxt, p. 233.) 

(41) Nayaka-Sri-hari-raja-devo Ha(ha)take$varasya pràásadam kritam— 
‘The temple of Hatake$vara (Siva) was founded by Мауака (leader) 
the illustrious Hariraja.’—-(Nagpur Museum stone inscrip. of Brahmadeva of 
Rayapura, lines 9-12, Ind. Ant., Vol. ххп, p. 83.) 

(42) Maha-lakshmi-deviya prásadavam geyada Visvakarmma-nirmmita- 
subhasitan— built the temple of the goddess Mahalakshmi, as if a crea- 
tion of Vi$vakarmma.'—(Ey. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Hasan Taluq, no. 149, 
Roman Text, p. 86.) 

The above-mentioned inscription (dated conjecturally a. р. 1114) 
ends with the following passage apparently quoted from a book for sculptors 
and architects (griha-vastu) : 

‹ Vimana-sarwvato-bhadra-vrishabha-nalinika-uttunga-viraja-garuda- 
varddhamana-Sankha-vritta-pushpaka-griha-raja-svasti.’ 
(Jbid., Text, p. © 9, last 3 lines.) 

(43) Prasada-malabhir alarnkritarh dharath vidaryyaiva samutthitam 1 

Vimana-mala-sadrišarh yattra griham pürnnendu-karàmalam 11 

*Here cleaning as under the earth, there rise up houses which are 
decorated with succession of storeys; which are like rows of aerial chariots 
(and) which are as pure (white) as the rays of the full moon.'—(Man- 
dasor stone inscrip. of Kumaragupta, line 7, C. J. I., Vol. ш, Е. G. L, no, 
18, pp. 81, 85.) 

(44) Svargartharn kritavàn pratapa-nripatih sadyoshito-retayoh prasa- 

dam  vasu-patra-padma-sadriam éringashtakaih &obhitam | 

The inscription is *on a slab in the wall near the southern door of a 
temple of Vishnu close to the royal palace in Katmandu. This temple 
is apparently the building mentioned in the inscription (quoted above). 
It is an octagon, and has three storeys,’ 

The plan of the temple is like a lotus of eight leaves (Vasu-patra-padma- 
sadrisa).—(Inscrip. from Nepal, по. 18, inscrip. of Pratapamalla, v. 10, Ind. 
Ant., Vol. тх, pp. 188, 187, 189, c. 2, para 2.) 

(45) Dig-bhagantara-sannivesita-chatur dvarah sukharohanah рабсһаа 

ramya-suvarna-ketana-tala-nyasta-tri-&ülo'ntarah 11 
Sauvarnojjvala-kumbha-patra-patala-prodbhasitasa-mukhah ргаѕаао. 
di$atad abhipsita-sadavasa-prasakto mudah I1 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, р. 194.) 


362 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PRASADA 


(46) Grama-nagara-kheda-kharvada - madamba-dronamukha-pattanarn- 
galimdam ancka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatanarhgali-dam oppuva- 
agrahara-pattanarhgalirndam atisayavappa . . .! 

* At Teridala, a merchant town situated in the centre and the first 
in importance among the twelve (towns) in the glorious Kundi Three 
Thousand, adorned with—villages, towns, hamlets, villages surrounded 
by hills, groups of villages, sea-girt towns and chief cities, with elegant 
mansions, palaces and temples, and with shining agrahara towns in the 
country of Kuntala.’—-(Old Canarese inscrip. at Terdal, line 58, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xiv, pp. 19, 25.) 

(47) ° Prasadarh KeSavasya sphuta-ruchi-kalagenafichayat kafichanena 


1900” 

‘Prasadarh Кебауазуа sthira-kalaša-yutam karayamasa divyarn 
1659’ | 

‘Prasidarn Kegavasya sthira-kalaSa-yutarh Najfiayaryo vyatanit 
160771 


Mr. Rice has translated * ргазада” in all these three instances by * tower’, 
although the term means primarily temple һеге.--(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v. 
Part I; Belur Taluq, nos. 63, 64, 65 ; Roman Text, pp. 135, 136; Transl., 
p. 59.) 

(48) * Causing a tower (ргазада), decorated with carvings and figures 
(chitra-vichitra-patra-nütamam ргазадатпата), to be erected of stone, 
and a golden kalaa to be made for the pinnacle of the temple (devala- 
yagrake), he in many ways increased his fame in the world.’—(Ep. 
Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 242; Transl., p. 139, para. 6; Roman 
Text, p. 247, last four lines,) 

(49) Ka$yàm vigveévara-dvari hima-disi kharopamam | 

Padmeévarasya devasya prasadam akarot sudhih | 

* On the north side of the entrance to the VisveSvara temple at Ka$i 
built a solid and lofty temple of the god Padmeévara (Vishnu) ” on A. p. 
15th May, 1296.—(Shargi Arch. of Jaunpur, inscrip. no. XXVI, У. 3, Arch. Surv., 
New Imp. Series, Vol 1, p. 51.) _ 

(50) Vàpi-küpa-tadága-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayan l 
Sauvarna-dhvaja-toranapana-pura-grama-prapa-mandapan 1 
Vyadhapayad ayam chaulukya-chidamanih | 

(Sridhara’s Devapattana Prafasti, v. ro, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. u, p. 440-441.) 

(51) In the Buddhist literature buildings are divided into five classes 
(paficha-lenani)—vihara (monastery), ardha-yoga (stated by the com- 
mentator Buddhaghosa to imply ‘ suvàrna-vanga-griha, а type of two- 
roofed buildings, partly religious and partly residential), prasada (wholly 


363 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
1 73 


PRASADA-TALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


residential storeyed buildings), harmya (larger type of storeyed buildings), 
and guha (underground buildings).—(Vinaya Texts, Mahavagga 1, 30, 4, 
р. 73-74 : Chullavagga, VI, 1, 2, p. 158.) 

The commentator Buddhaghosa docs not explain * prásáda quoted 
above from the Vinaya Texts; he simply says ‹ prásado iti digha-pásádo.' 
According to Rhys Davids * prāsāda ° is ‘a long-storcyed mansion, or the 
whole of an upper storey, or the storeyed buildings? (cf. his transl. of Maha- 
vagga, p. 173; Chullavagga, p. 151, note 2). Sir M. William scems to 


explain (in his dictionary) this ‘prasida’ by ‘the monks’ hall for. 


assembly and confession.’ 
Gf. satta-bhūmika-prāsāda— buildings of seven storeys in height.’ 
(Jataka, 1, pp. 227, 346 ; v, рр. 52, 426; VL p. 577.) 
From the illustrations given above, it is clear that the term ‘ prasada ° 
mplies both religious and residential buildings. It denotes the gorgeous 
temples as well as small pavilions (mandapa) where a deity or the emblc- 
matical phallus of Siva is installed. It includes magnificent palaces and 
smaller residences. It implies a succession of storeys, and a tower, * a 
lofty seat or platform for spectators, a building erected on high founda- 
tions and approached by means of steps, a building consecrated to a 
deity or inhabited by a prince, a temple, a palace, and the assembly 
room and confessional hall of the Buddhist priesthood.* 


PRASADA-TALA —Floor, roof. 
° (Buddhist Suttas, by Rhys Davids, p. 262.) 


PRASADA-MALIKA—A class of buildings. 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 4; see under MALIKA.) 
PRIYA-DARSANA—One of the five Indian orders. 
(Suprabhedagama, хххт, 65, 67; see under STAMBHA.) 
PREKSHAGARA—An amphitheatre. 
Sata-kumbhamayar divyarn prekshagàram upagatam | 
(Mbh. Adiparvan, see under Ranca and compare 
Bharata Natya-sastra, 11, 7, 13, 25). 
PREKSHA-GRIHA(-MANDAPA)—Auditorium in а theatre, the 
front room or pavilion facing a shrine wherefrom the deity is seen. 
(Jbid., п, 7, 13.) 
In theatre proper it should be semi-circular, quadrangular and tri- 
angular : 
Preksha-grihanam) вагуевһага tri-prakaro vidhih smritah | 
Vikrishta$-chaturaéra$-cha trya$ra$-chaiva prayukribhih ıı 
(Ibid., п, 25.) 


` 964 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


- 


_ — 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


In large theatres, attached to temples it should be semi-circular, in m 
middle-sized ones attached to palaces it should be quadrangular, and іп 
ordinary small theatres for the general public it should Бе triangular.— 
(Bharata Nalya-Sastra, п, 26.) - 

Ша preksha-griharh drishtva dhimatà vi$vakarmana | 

Trividhah sannive$a$cha Sastratah parikalpitah 1! 

Vikrishtaé-chaturasra-chaiva tu mandapah 1—(/И@., п, 7-8.) 
PREKSHA-NIVESANA—The auditorium of a playhouse (Bha- 
rata Nalya-Sastra). See details under NATYAGRIHA. | 
PROSHTHA—A high and broad bench with moulded and turned 
legs (R.-V., УП, 55, 8; A.-V., IV, 5,33 Тай. Bra., п, 7, 17, 1), long 
timber seats fixed against walls, combinations of a settee and a 
coffer. 
PLAKSHA-DVARA—A back-door, а side-door, a private entrance. 


(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLXIV, v. 15 ; see under UDUMPARA.) 


PH 


PHANA—A hood in connexion with the joinery. 
(М., хуп, 1345 see SANDHI-KARMAN.) 


PHALAKA—A plank, a moulding, an architectural member, the 


abacus, a leaning board. 
(Малдарға, v, 10, 2.) zi 


(1) A plank : cf. pralamba-phalaka (М., хп, 125). 
A member of the column (M., xv, 50, 51, 83, 185, etc.). 
In connexion with the arch (torana) : 
Nàtikà phalakà mushti-bandhanam patra-vallikam 1 
(M., XLVI, 65.) 
(2) See also M., L, 66, 74; LXV, 161, 162 ; LXVII, 16, etc. 
Padashtarnša-shad-arnšaika-phalakaiš chhadayet paritah 11 
Kaya-padantararn chhadyarn phalakaih sara-darujaih I1 
: (Kamikagama, xav, 24, 30.) _ 
(3) A part of a column (Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 58 5 see under STAMBHA). d 
PHALAKASANA—A synonym of the bedstead. 


(M., ш, 11 ; see under PARYANKA 


PHALA-PATTA—Front plate, a plough-share-like moulding. E 
(M. 3 


oo а ЧР маареге 
, 


PHELA (cf. СннегА)--Гһе vault of the foundation pit. 
à (Катікавата, XXXI, 74-75 5 


. 365 


ВАМОНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


B 


BANDHA— Joining or folding together, а band, the foundation. 
Dvàv-aratnim tri-padith và райе bandham karayet— Foundation 
shall be 2 aratnis by 9 padas.’—(Kautiliya-Artha- Sastra, Chap. LXV, p. 166.) ` 


-BA(VA)LANAKA-—A raised platform or seat along the wall of the 
council hall of a temple. 
Tejah-pala iti kshitirndu-sachivah §arnkhojjvalabhih sila-Srenibhih 
sphurad-imdu-ruchiram nemi-prabhor marndiram 1 
Uchchair mamdapam  agrato jina-(vara)-vàsa-dviparn chasatam 
tat-pàr$veshu balanakam cha purato nishpadayamasivan | 
It * apparently is identical with Marathi balàm which according to the 
Dictionary of Molesworth and Candy means a raised seat along the walls 
of the gabhara or Sabhà-mandapa of a temple.’ Dr. Lüders.— (Mount 
Abu inscrip. no. 1, v. 61, Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 212, 200.) 


BALI(-I)KA(-A)—A moulding of the entablature, the edge of a roof. 
Maha-bhara-tula-karya balikordhve viSeshatah |1 
Tula-balikayor madhye dvi-dandam athava punah 11 
Harnsa-bhüta-balir vatha nidra và danda-manatah | 
Tri-padodaya-yukta va vidheya vajanopari 11 
(Kamikdgama, LIV, 13, 16, 20.) 
BALI-PITHA-(KA)—The seat of sacrifice, an altar for offerings. 
(r) Brishabhasyopari-bhage tu kalpayed bali-pithakam | 
Gopurasya bahir vapi sthapayed antar vapi bali-pithakam | 
Antar mandala-dese tu pürvavat bali-pithakam 1 
(M., xxxi, 99, 100, 133.) 
(2) Srimat-saundara-paficha-rátra-vidhiyirn nirmanamarh madisi | 
У Srimantam bali-pithamarn pramudadim viprarggalam madisi 11 
< Caused а bali-pitha to be erected according to the rule of the (Silpa- 
fastra) Райсһагаіга.—(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Belur Taluq, no. 8; 
a А 2 
š Roman Text, p. 105; Transl., p. 46.) 
E (3) * There he enlarged the Kalideva-mantapa, and re-established the 
E. E bali-pitha.’—(Zp. Carnat., ‘Vol. v, Part I, Arsikere Taluq, no. 92; Transl., 
~ p. 119, largest para., last line.) 

(4) * There are also fragments (of inscriptions) belonging to the time 
of Rajaraja I, and Rajendra-Chola I, on а mandapa to the west of the 
bali-pitha.'—(Notes on Tiruvellarai inscrip., Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxiv, p. 264, 
para. 5, line ro £.) 


366 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


BAHALA j BALI PIZHA. 


BAHULA. 


BAHULA. 


Paye 208 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BASADI 


(5) *Haridasa-Raüta, . . . set up in front of the god Prasanna- 
Madhava of Belur, a festival (utsava) mantapa, a pillar for lights (dipa- 
maleya-kambha), and an altar for offerings (balli-pitha, i.e., bali-pitha).’— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. 1v, Nagamangala Taluq, no. 42 ; Transl., p. 124; Roman 
Text, p. 219.) 

BASADI (see Vasati)—A Jain temple, a shrine, a monastery, 
modern Basti or slum quarters. 


(1) Kadalalaya-basadi—Jaina temple of the Jaina goddess Kadala- 
làya.—(Anmakonda inscrip. of Prola, v. 9, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, рр. 262, 257.) 

(2) * And on the top of the rock to the south of the Badra tank of that 
mountain, Ganeyana Māra had the Parsva-Jina vasati erected. This 
Jogavattige basadi, may it endure as long as sun and moon, protected by 
the райсһа-таһа-барда (five words for Jain obeisance), and by unnum- 
bered others.’ 

* Basadi’ in the sense of Jaina temple is of frequent use in the volumes of 
Ep. Garnat. Its Sanskrit form is, of course, ‘ vasati? an instance of which 
should be noticed in the passage quoted above.—(Ep. Carnat, Vol. хп, 
Pavugada Taluq, no. 52 ; Transl., p. 125, line 2 ; Roman Text, p. 206 f.) 

(3) *Being actuated by veneration, gave to the basadi of the Bhalarar 
. . . five mattars (of land)” 

*Basadi (means) a Jain temple; the word is a Tadbhava corruption 
of the Sanskrit <“ vasati, abode, dwelling, a Jain monastery ; the modern 
form is “ Basti. Dr. Fleet.—(Sanskrit and Old Kanarese inscrip., Ind. Ant., 
Vol. 1v, р. 181, с. 1, line 10, and footnote.) 

(4) Purigereyalu madisid-Anesejjeya-basadige . . . 

‘In the lands of Gudigere, which . . . were under the control of the Jain 
temple called Ane sejjeya. . . . built at Purigere.’—(Gudigere Jain inscrip.» 
line 21, Ind. Ant, Vol. хуш, рр. 39, 37.) 

See Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, inscriptions (1) on Chandra-giri, nos. 1-74, (ii) 
on Vindhya-giri, nos. 75-123; and (iii) in the town, nos. 124-144. 

(5) ‘Caused basadis and màna-stambhas to be erected in numerous 
places.—(No. 38, Roman Text, p. 7, line 17; Transl., p. 121, line 5.) 

(6) ‘The basadi of his guru $11-гӣра-пагауапа of Kollapura.’---(No. 
39; Roman Text, p. 7-8; Transl., p. 122, line 18.) 

(7) ‘The basadis of Ganga-vadi, however, many there were, he 
restored.'—(No. 45 ; Roman Text, p. 21; Transl., p. 126, line 12.) 

(8) * This Lakshmi, wife of Ganga sena-pati, the abode of all good 
qualities, had this new Jina temple (vasati) made.’—(No. 63 ; Roman Text, 
p. 59; Transl, p. 149.) 

(9) “Тһе Dandanayaka Сайра had this basadi made for his mother 
Pochavue.—(No. 64; Roman, Text, р. 59; Transl., p. 149.) 


367 


CC-0. Gurukul Kàngri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


pi- 


BASADI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОР 


(то) ‘The bastis (basadinal) of Ganga- e however many there Were, 
һе had renewed.'—(No. 90; Roman Text, p. 72, line ro from bottom up- 
wards; Transl., p. 158, para. 5.) 

(11) ‘He had these images of Bharata апа Bahubali Kevali, the basa- 
dis, and the side-doors of that tirtha made for beauty; . . , having 
erected cighty virgin (? new) basadis, and repaired two hundred . (that 
were in ruins), he obtained glory, the general Bharata.'—(No. 115 ; Roman 
Text, p. 87; Transl, p. 171.) 

(12) ‘He built a. small basti on the lower hill; repaired three bastis 
at the north gate, (and) the Mangayi basti, repaired the Hagalaya 
(a village to the south of Sravana Belgola)-basti, and made gifts for supply- 
ing food in one.’—(No. 134; Roman Text, p. 100; Transl., p. 179.) 

(13) ‘And in Kellangere he (also) made five large bastis and five beau- 
tiful ponds.’ 

‘The money obtained from this place will be used for repairing the 
Archari’s and other dwelling and the basadis, for the worship and deco- 
ration of the god, and for gifts, of food to the people visiting the basadi 
and to the assembly of Rishis.’—(No. 137a ; Roman Text, p. 104, lines 6, 9; 
Transl., p. 182, paras. 5, 11.) 

(14) * Keep whatever you have obtained from the paddy lands and dry 
fields, together with. the waste land, the firewood, leaves, decay of the 
basadi house and so forth, belonging to the endowments of Gommata deva, 
Kamatha Ратбуа deva, Sri-vallabha deva of Bhandaraiya’s basadi, and 
principal basadis.’—(No. 137с.;. Transl., p. 183.) 

(15) “Апа for the basadi which he had made... a small tank cast 
of the basadi . . ."—(No. 144 ; Transl., p. 187, line 9 from bottom upwards.) 

(16) * He made a grant of lands for the basadis of the Tri-küta-basadi 
which he had caused to be erected in Arakottàra in the Enne-nàd.'— 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rv, Chamarajnagara Taluq., no. 83 ; Transl., p. ro.) 

(17) *He caused a basadi to be erected in Muguli in Sige-nad, and 
setting up therein the god Paráva, presented the basadi and land for the god 
to their guru.’ 

In this instance, it should be noted, the meaning of * basadi? as a Jaina 
temple is unquestionable.—(Zp. Carnal., Vol. v, Part I, Hasan Taluk, 

р по. 129; Transl, р. 46.) - 

(18) * Hoysala-Gavunda, son of . . . in memory of his mother's death, 
erected a basadi, and in the presence of all the residents and farmers of 
the town, divided certain land (specified) equally to the basadi and the 

"temple (basadigam devalyakkam bhümi samana-vàgi База ре . . . ), 
washing the feet of Ahobala-Parndita.’ 


= 368 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


2 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BASADI 


The distinction made here between the basadi and the temple (devalaya) 
should be noted.—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. ту, Kadur Taluq, no 69; Transl., p. 13 
para. 5 ; Roman Text, p. 45, last para., line 4 f.) 4 

(19) * Thus celebrated, Barmma-Deva, the Bhujabala-Ganga Permmadi- 
Deva, made the basadi, which Dadiga and Madhava had formerly 
established on the hill of Mandali, and for which the kings of his Ganga 
line had continued to provide the offerings, and which they had after- 
wards caused to be built of wood, the chief of all the basadis hitherto 
existing or in future to be established in the Edadore-seventy of the Mandali- 
Thousand, giving it the name of Pattada-basadi (the Crown-basadi), and 
endowed it with certain lands (specified). —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shimoga 
Taluq, no. 4; Transl., p. 8, para. 4.) 

(20) “Тһе great minister, . . . , enlarged a tank, formed paddy fields 
erected a temple, and established places for distribution of water and 
food. And the basadi he built shone with big tank of Tattekere surround- 
ing it. 

* And for those two basadis of Nellavatti and Tattikere, on the death of 
Jinadasa as a reward of perggade Nokkayya’s boldness and liberality, 
Ganga-Permmadi-Deva granted the royal insignia of two horns, a canopy, 
chàmaras, and big drums.’ 

* And Ganga-permmadi-deva granted for the basadi the shop-tax and 
customs of Tattikere.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shimoga Taluq, no. то; Tr ans 
p. 11, last two paras., p. 12, paras. 2, 3.) ) 

(21) ‘For the mathàdhipati of Bandanike was erected a mantapa in 
front of the Santi-Jina basadi'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikarpur Taluq, 
no. 228 ; Transl., p. 133 ; Roman Text, p. 232.) 

(22) See both < basti? and *basadi* (in Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Seringa- 


- patam Taluq, nos. 144, 146, etc; Transl., p. 34 and also in other 


volumes of Ер. Carnat. referred to above) and the sketches of bastis 
between pp. 50, 51 (Introduction, Ер. Carnat., Vol. п), and pp. 150, 151 
(Translation), and compare the following from Fergusson : 

‘The principal group of the bastis of the Jains at present known at 
least above the gháts, is that of Sravana Belgola. There are there 
wo hills—the Indragiri, on a shoulder of the other, called Chandragiri, 
stand the bastis, fifteen in number. As might be expected from the 
situation, they are all of the Dravidian style of architecture, and are conse- 
quently built in gradually receding storeys, each of which is ornamented. 
with small simulated cells. . . . No instance occurs among them 
of the curvilinear sikra (Sikhara) or spire, which is universal with the 
northern Jains, except in the instance of Ellora.’ Е 


369 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri Universi 
M Dar, 
E و کے‎ 


a 


BA(VA)SUNDHARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


‘The following wood-cut (photo no. 149) conveys, however, an idea 
of the general external appearance, which is more ornamental than that 
of northern Jain temples. The outer wall of those in the north is almost 
always quite plain. The southern ones are as generally ornamented 
with pilasters and crowned with a row of ornamental cells. Inside is a 
court probably square and surrounded by cloisters, at the back of which 
rises the vimana over the cell, which contains the principal image of the 
Tirthankar. It always is surmounted'by a small dome, as is universally 
the case with every vimana in Dravidian architecture, instead of with the 
mysterious amalaka ornament of northern sikras (sikharas).’ 

‘It may be a vain speculation, but it seems impossible to look at this 


wood-cut (по. 149), and not to be struck with its resemblance to the temples : 


of southern Babylonia. Тһе same division into storeys with their cells; 
the backward position of the temple itself; the panelled or pilastered 
basement, all these points of resemblance, it seems difficult to regard as 
purely accidental.’—(Fergusson : Ind. and East. Arch., pp. 269-270.) 
BA(VA)SUNDHARA—The earth, a type of pent-roof. 


(М., хуш, 177; see under LUPA.) 


BAHALA (see ВАногхА)--Ап extension, a projection, a sugar- 
cane-like moulding. 

(т) Dvàra-tàre chatush-paficha-shat-saptashta-vibhajite 11 
Ekarnša(rn) sütra-pattih syat samam và bahalam bhavet | 
Ardham và pàda-hinam va bahalam parikirtitam 11 (2) 
Silaya cha mridà py-athava tarunà rachayed atha kudyam ativa-| 

dridham | { 
Tad ihottara-vistaratah sadri$am bahalarh kathitarh talipadi-yutam J 


2 : (Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, xiv, 1, 2; xv, 1.)| 


(2) In connexion with a pillar : 


Ashtarnšarn yoga-vistararh tad-ardharn bahalarn bhavet | | 


(M., xxxix, 59.) |! 
(3) Stambha-vyasa-samo(-mam) va tad-ardharn bahalam (? bahu ` 


lam) bhavet 11 
Kavata-bahulam proktarh dandardharh va ghanarh bhavet 11 
| (Kamikagama, LV, 35, 38.) 
It is clear from v. 38 that ghana or thickness is not to be confused with 
bahala or bahula. ; 
BAHIR-ANGA—The outer court, the external side of a building. 
Athava bahir-ahge tu cheshta-dig-vishnor alayam | 
Anyesharn sarva-linganarh nagarat bahir-angatah | 
d (M., 1х, 257, 402.) 
370 


. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 
| 


| 


\ 
| 
| 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BAHULYA 

; BAHIR-JANMAN—The outer plinth (see M., LxIx, 16, 17, under 

ANTARJANMAN). 

BAHIR-BHITTI—The outer wall, an outside partition. 
Antar-vapram bahir-bhittih $reshtharn dirgarn cha chülika(-am) 1 


(M., тх, 361, etc.) 
Gf. ANTARBHITTI.— (See M., XL, 51, 52.) 


BAHIR-MUKHA—With face towards the outside, projecting out- 
ward. 
In connexion with foundations : 
Griha-garbham antar-mukham syad grama-garbharh bahir-mukham 
(M., xu, 216.) 
BAHU-MANDAPA (c. MuKHA-MANDAPA)—A kind of group 
pavilion. 
| Devalayeshu sarveshu sarnmukhe bahu-mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 33 
Тһе pavilion in front of a temple is generally called Mukha-mandapa. 
BAHU-LINGA —A kind of phallus, phalli in group. 
| (М., тл, 75, 77, 79, etc. ; see under LINGA.) 
BAHULA—An architectural member of the balance, the extended 
part of the scales outside the holes through which the scales arc 
joined with the beam by strings. 


Tad(jihvagra)-ardham bahulam kuryat tan-müle chhidra-samyutam | 
(M., т, 184.) 


BALA-PARYANKA (see PARYANKA)—A. small bedstead, a couch. 
BAHYA-SALA—Outer rooms, external portion of mansions (see 
under ANTAH-SALA). 

BAHYA-SALA—Outer walls, external wall (see under АмтАН- 
SALA). 

„ BAHULYA (perhaps for BaHALYA, see BAHALA) —Abundance 
superfluity, extension, hence projection. 


(1) Stambha-samam bahulyam—bahulya is equal to the column. *i 
(Brihat-Samhita, Lu, 30. ) 


. Vistara-pada-pratimarh Баһшуата sakhayoh smritam—the projection 


a the two door-frames is equal to nearly баео of the. breadth 756 Ta > 


(of the door). 


ВІМВА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Kern translates *bühulya? by thickness, which does not suit at least 


to the first instance (see 7.R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, pp- 285, 318.) 
(о) Vistéra-pada-pratimarh bahulyam &akhayoh smritam 1 
( Matsya-Purüna, Chap. CCLXX, v. 20, same as 
no. 2 above.) 
(3) Vistararddhena bahulyam sarvesham eya kirtitam | 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. civ, V. 29.) 
BIMBA—An idol, an image. 
(M., LI, 22 ; LXVIII, 1, etc.) 

Nirmmitam $àmti-nàthasya bimbakarm—* image of Santi-natha was 

made.’—(Honwad inscrip. of Some$vara 1, line 30, Ind. Ant., Vol. xix, p. 273.) 
BI(VI)RA-GALA (also BIRAGAL or BiRAKAL, see VIRA-ÉASANA)— 
Monuments set up in memory of a hero at first, and this honour 
is next extended to any one who dies after having done some good 
work ; lastly, it implies a simple memorial monument, resembling 
perhaps the pagoda-shaped mathas, constructed by the relatives 
and admirers of the departed; a monumental stone erected in 
memory of a warrior. 

(r) * But her son Pilleya-Nayaka, (after her death) performing the further 
cer^monies, set up this biragal in the presence of the god Ноппебуага, and 
made a grant of land (specified) for the offerings to the god Honne$vara 
and for carrying on the worship of the biragal washing the feet of Janneya- 
guru. That Janneyaguru and his successors will carry on the worship 
of that biragal we most firmly believe.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vir, Shimoga 
"Taluq, no. 62, last four lines; Roman Text, p. 42; Transl., nos. 61-62, p. 24, 
line 4 f.) 

E (2) * His younger brother Channappa put up this bira-kallu for him.’ 

* Her junior uncle Chenna put up this biragal)—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu, P 
Shikarpur Taluq, nos. 1, 2; Transl., p. 39.) I 

(8) “А grant of land (specified) was made for maintaining the worship | 
and ceremonies of this biragal)— (Ef. Carnat., Vol. vu, Honnati Talug, | 
по. 117; Transl, p. 178.) | I 

(4) * And killing many who opposed him, he did his duty to his lord! ~ 
and gained the world of gods. His brother-in-law with his son and daughter, 
set up this vira-Sasana for him.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. vu, Shikarpur Taluq, 
по. 144; Transl., р. 107; Roman Text, p. 191.) 


BUDDHA— A being who by his own force has attained to posses- 
sion of the highest knowledge. He is neither man nor god. He is 
able to perform certain wonders in accord with the laws of nature. 
In an endless series of existences the Buddha prepares himself for his 


372 


ee 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | BODHIKA-(A) 


state of Buddhahood. During the whole of this time he is called 
a Budhisattva till in his last existence as a man һе attains to knowl- 
edge (bodhi).’ 

: (Mahavamsa, W. Geiger, pp. 292-293.) | 4 
BUDDHA-PADA—The sacred footprint of Buddha, found іп тапу m 
. places in Northern India, Indo-China, Siam and other places: 
analogous to the Ratna-pàda of Samantakuta of Ceylon; but the 
Buddhapada of Sukhodaya in Siam is more elaborate and artistic ; 4 
on the centre of the footprints are engraved two wheels (chakra), Ж 
each containing six circles wherein are marked 108 signs. These | 
signs are stated to represent the past, present, and future universe. a 
Ф (See Plate тхуш, p. 242, Le Siam Ancien, 1, by 

M. Fournereau, quoted by P. N. Bose in 
his Indian Colony of Siam, pp. 64—65.) 


The footprint of Buddha, otherwise called Sripada and Ratna-pada. 3 
It is seen іп many places іп Northern India, Ceylon, Indo-China, and P. 
4 Indian Archipelago. Тһе one іп Siam at Sukhodaya is described іп ^ 


| detail in a Pali inscription of A.D. 1427 (vide Plate тхуш, Fournereau, 1, 
ji p.242) It was carved after the pattern of the Sripada at Samanta- 
т küta іп Ceylon, and bears the same measurement, but more artistic іп 
t look and workmanship. On these footprints are marked two discs (chakra) 


bh each containing six circles within which are marked 108 signs. Below р z 
ji the footprints are represented 80 monks standing in a procession with o 
|? folded hands and inclined heads in the pose of worshipping. x 
Mi D pping б 2 


|! BUDDHI-SAMKIRNA—A pavilion with fifty pillars. 


( Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. 9; see under MANDAPA.) 


i BRIHATI—The part of the body between the breast and backbone. 

(2 In connexion with the da$a-tala measure : 

b Brihati saptàm$akam  kaksha-taram samayatam | 

К Впһай stana-simantam sardha-dvir-ashta mātrakam | 

" (M., LXV, 162-163. 
| BERA—An idol or image. š 

|. (M., тл, 17, 25 ; LXVI, 3, ею.) - 
| ‘Created the temple of Chamaraješvara together with new images ы 5 

(vera).’—-(Ep. Сатай., Vol. ту, Chamarajnagar Тапа, по. 86; Roman Text, | (| 

р. 18, line 9 Ё; Transl., p. rr.) 

BODHIKA(-A) (also VoputKa, see Manpr)—The capital of the 

column (M., xv, 40, 44, etc.), the crowning member of the capital ; 


373 


BODHI-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


this is placed upon the abacus (рһајака) and under the table of 
cornices. It may be identified with the carbel which in European 
architecture is a block of stone projecting from a wall and supporting 
the beams of a roof or any weight. 

(See Dravidian Arch. Jouveau Dubreuil, ed. Aiyangar, p. 26.) 

(See Suprabhedagama xxxi, 107, 57 under STAMBHA.) 

Cf. Bodhikarn mushti-bandham cha phalakà tatika ghatam | 

(M., XLVI, 18, ctc.) 


See the photographic views of the Corinthian capitals from  Jamalgiri 
(Fergusson : Hist. of Ind. and East. Arch., р. 173, figs. 94, 95). 

See Buddhist Cave Temples (fig. no. 21, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, 
Vol. ту, p. 62 ; Vol. xur, figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). 


BODHI-GRIHA—A temple for the Bodhi-tree. 
(W. Geiger, Mahavamsa, р. 296.) 


BODHI-MANDA —A raised terrace near а temple, the miraculous 
throne under the Bodhi-tree at Gaya also called Vajrasana or dia- 
mond throne. 


Tenochchair Bodhi-mande SaSi-kara-dhavalah багууаіо mandapena 
kantah ргаѕада esha smare-bala-jayinah kàrito loka-sastuh | 
“Ву him this beautiful mansion of the Teacher of mankind, who over- 
came the power of (the god) Smara, dazzling white as the rays of the moon, 
with an open pavilion on all sides has been caused to be made at the exalted 
Bodhi-manda.’ | 
* Bodhi-manda is the name of the miraculous throne under the Bodhi- 
tree at Bodh-Gaya, also called the vajrasana or diamond throne, on which 
Buddha and his predecessors sat, when attaining bodhi or perfect wisdom. 
And Professor Childers, in his Pali Dictionary, added that he inferred that 
the term was also applied to the raised terrace built under the Bodhi-tree 
within the precincts of any Buddhist temple, in imitation, presumably, 
of Buddha’s throne. This, rather than the throne itself, seems to be its | 
meaning in the present inscription.’—(Sanskrit and Old Kanarese inscrip. 
no. 166, Bodh Gaya inscrip. of Mahanaman, line ro f., Ind. Ant., Vol. ху, 
РР. 358, 359; 357, с. 1, 2.) 
BETTA—One of the two classes of the southern Jain architecture, 
the other is known as Basadi or Vasati. Bettas are courtyards usually 
on a hill or rising ground, open to the sky and containing images of 
Gomata or Gomategvara. 


374 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


A x ра» 
w 23» 


ғ 
4 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BRAHMA-PADA 


BAUDDHA—Bcelonging to the Buddhists or Buddha, the Buddhist 
images. 
Manasara (Chap. туі, named Buddha, 1-18): 
Like all other images, the Buddhist images also are made of wood, 
stone or iron (line 14). Their pedestals are made of the three kinds 
of abhasa (marble or glass), of carth and of gravel, etc. (lines r 5-16). 
They are also both stationary and movable (line 14). They are made 
in the erect or sitting posture and placed on the throne (lines 3-4), and 
are furnished with the peepul tree and the wonder-tree (Kalpavriksha). 
They have two arms, two legs, and two eyes (that is, one face) (line 10). 
They are measured in the large type of the da$a-tàla system (line 17). 
They are pure white in colour (line 5). Their garment is yellow 
(line 12), face large (line 5), ears long (line 6), eyes smiling at the 
corner (line 6), chest gracefully broad, arms long (line 10), belly large 
and round, and the body fleshy (line 8). They are furnished with 
shining top-knots (ushnishojj-vala-maulika) (line 10). | 
BRAHMA-KANTA—A class of pillars, a type of storeyed buildings 
a class of gate-houses. 
The square columns with four minor pillars : 
Chatur-agrarn brahma-kantarh syat 1—(M., xv, 20.) 
Vedopapada-sarhyuktarh brahma-kantam iritam |—(Ibid., 244.) 
A class of the three-storeyed buildings.—(M., xxr, 39-40; see under 
PRASADA.) 
A class of the five-storeyed buildings.— (M., xxm, 41-42 ; see under 
PRASADA.) 
A class of gate-houses.—(M., ххх, 558 ; see under Сорока.) 
BRAHMA-GARBHA —The foundations of temples (of Brahma). 


(М., хп, 142-152; see under GARBHA-NYASA.) 
BRAHMA-DVARA—The door in the middle or central part of an 


object. 
Brahma-dvara-patakadyair angair yuktam vimanakam | 
(Kamikagama, L, 93.) 


Brahma-dvaram iti proktarn vimananam sanatanam | 


Brahma-dvararh tato madye mandaparh koshthake matam | 
(Ibid., Lv, 197.) 


BRAHMA-PADA—The central part, the plot at the centre of a 


design.. 


(bid, Lv, 155) . 


P TS TE. Kn 


BRAHMA-BHITTI AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


BRAHMA-BHITTI—The middle wall. 


Athavà brahma-bhittau và garbhadhanarh vidhiyate | 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, 46.) 


BRAHMA-MANDALA—The central part of a village or town. 


(M., Ix, 198; see under GRAMA.) 


BRAHMA-MANDIRA—A type of rectangular building. 
(1) Agni-Purána (Chap. civ, vv. 16-17; see under PRASADA). че 
(2) Garuda-Purüna (Chap. XLVI, уу. 21-22, 26-27 ; 5 under PRASADA.) 


BRAHMA-MASTAKA—A kind of joinery. 


(М., хуп, 149; see under SANDHI-KARMAN.) 


BRAHMA-VAHANA—The riding animal of Brahma, the goose. 
The measures and description of the goose (M., ux, 4-46 ; see under 
VAHANA.) 


BRAHMA-STHANA—The central part of a village or town, where 
a public hall is built for the assemblage of the inhabitants. 
(M., хп, 142 ; see under GRAMA.) 


(1) Brahma-sthàne sabhadini kalpayed vidhina budhah 11 
Brahma(-me) và madhyame bhage pitham parikalpayet 11 
(Kamikagama, ххуш, 15, 18.) 

(2) “Senai . . . assigned (one) patti of land in the neighbourhood, to 
last as long as the moon and the sun, for his own merit (and) for the 
meritorious purpose of supplying to the Brahma-sthàna in this village 
water during six months and firepans (agnishthà) during six months 
and of constructing a water-lever in front of the mandapa.’—(Inscrip. of 
Aditya II, no. 14, lines 1-2, H. S. I. I., Vol. ш, pp. 21-22.) 

. (3) ‘We the great assembly of Manimangalam ... being assembled 
without a vacancy in the assembly, in the Brahma-sthana in our village.’ — 
(Inscrip. of Rajadhiraja, no. 28, line 7, H.S.I.I., Vol. ш, p. 57.) 

(4) * We the great assembly of Manimangalam . . . being assembled, 
without a vacancy in the assembly, in the large mandapa (of) the Brahma- 
sthana of our village.'— (Inscrip. of Virarajendra I, no. 30, line 36, H. S. I. I. 
Vol. m, p. 70.) ^ 

BRAHMANGANA —The central courtyard. 


Е (See Kamikagama, under ANGANA.) 
BRAHMAMSA (see BRAHMA-STHANA)— The central part of a 
village or town, where a public hall is generally built, 


376 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BHANGA 
BH 


ВНАКТА--А devotee, a faithful worshipper, a class of sages. 

Description of their images (M., Chap. rix, 1-100 named Bhakta) : 

The devotees are divided into four classes, namely Salokya, Samipya, 
багаруа, and Sàyujya (lines 3-4). Тһе Salokyas are those who 
specialize in devotion, knowledge and renunciation (vairagya) (line 5), 
The Sàmipyas specialize in knowledge and renunciatian (line 6). The 
Sárüpyas are distinguished as those who are devoted to the medita- 
tion of God (line 7). And the Sayujyas are those who have acquired 
the true knowledge (of God) and are aware of the final beatitude 
(paramartha) (line 8). 

The limbs of the Salokya class of great men are measured in the largest 
type of the nava-tàla system (line 9). The Samipyas are measured in the 
smallest type of the daga-tala system (line 10). Тһе Sariipyas are 
measured in the intermediate type of the da$a-tala system (line 11). 
And the Sayujyas are measured in the largest type of the daSa-tala system 
(line 12).—(For details of these measures, see TALA-MANA.) 


BHANGA~—A pose in which an image is carved. 

There are four bhangas or poses, namely, sama-bhanga, abhanga, ati- 
bhanga (M., гуп, 98), and tri-bhanga (ibid., 125). 

‘In this (sama-bhanga) type the right and left of the figure are disposed 
symmetrically, the sütra or plumb-line passing through the naval, from the 
crown of the head to a point midway between the heels. In other words, 

- the figure whether seated or standing, is poised firmly on both legs without 
inclining in any way to right or left. Images of Buddha, Sürya (sun) and 
Vishnu are generally made to follow this scheme of rigid, vertical symmetry. 
Тһе dispositions or attitudes of the limbs and organs on either side are 
made exactly similar, except that the mudra or symbolical posing of the 
fingers is different.’ : 

‘In such a (abhaüga) figure the plumb-line or the centre line, from 
the crown of the head to a point midway between the heels, passes slightly 
to the right of the naval. In other words, the upper half of the figure i 
made to incline slightly towards its right side, without inclining in any 
way towards either of the attendant deities. The Saktis or attendant deities 
are two male and two female, in tri-bhañgas, placed on either side with 
their heads inclined inwards towards the principal figure. The figures on 
either side are exactly similar in poise, except that one is a reverse or reflex 
ofthe other. This is a necessary condition as otherwise one of the figures 


377 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


BHADRA 
would lean away from the central figure, and spoil the balance and 
É of the whole group.’ А n 
. EU ud its head and hips displaced about one аша 
to the right or left of the centre line.’ р š : 

* This p is really an emphasized form of i "uris um 
sweep of the tri-bhanga curve being considerably enhan dam ор, 
portion of the body above the hips, or the limbs below, are Fa E 
or left, backwards or forwards, like a tree caught in a pu ° — 
usually seen in such representations as Siva's dance of 5 Mab vs P. Ы 
fighting gods and demons, апа is specially adapted to sin 
violent action, of the impetus of the Tàndava dancing, etc. 
by S. Ray, Modern Review, March, 1914, p. 1 f.) 

BHADRA (cf. SanvATO-BHADRA and MUKHA-BHADRA)—À e 
ing, a type of portico, the general epithet of chariots, a уре | 

building, site plan of one-hundred and ninety-six square plots (cf. 
PADAVINYASA; M. үп, 17-18.) ` | 

(1) А moulding of the base (M., XIV, 345 ; see the lists of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA). 

A kind ‘of portico : 

In connexion with buildings of one to twelve storeys : 
Ekam va dvi-tri-dandena nirgamam bhadram eva và | 
` (M., XIX, 56.) 
Cf. MapHya-BHADRA (M., хіх, 177): 
Toranair nida-bhadrádi-müle chordhve cha bhüshitam | 
(M., xx, 64.) 
In connexion with pavilions (mandapas) : 
Chatur-dig-bhadra-vistaram eka-bhagena nirgamar | 
(M., xxxiv, 76.) 
In connexion with mansions (Salas) : 
Salayah parito'lindam prishthato bhadra-samyutam 1 
(M., xxxv, 40.) 
Dvi-chatur-bhaga-vistararh parsvayor bhadra-sarhyutam | 
Prishthe cha dvyaika-bhagena bhadrarh kuryad vichakshanah | 
Ibid., 322-329, 
In connexion with chariots: Be 
Chatur-dikshu chatur-bhadrarn syat | 
Bhadra-madhye tu bhadram syat | 
. Yuktyà bhadrarh sarvesharh nàsika-yuktam eva và | 


(М., XLIII, 107—1 09.) 
378 


Kon 


ersity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


E ° 
2 
"тж 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE š BHADRA- PITHA 


Bhadra is the general name for chariot (ratha) : * 
Nivata-bhadra, Pavana-bhadra, Prabhaíijana-bhadra, Nabhasvan- 
bhadra, etc. 
(M., хли, 111-115.) 
Іп connexion with dola (palanquin or hammock) : 
Purato prishthato madhye parva (darpa)nam bhadrasarnyutam | 
I (М., т„ 165.) 
Chatur-dikshu sa-bhadrarn và chaika-dvyarn$ena nimnakam | 
(Ibid., 284.) 
(2) Ayatah syat tribhir bhagair bhadra-yukta-susobhanah 1 
(Matsya-Purána, Chap. ccrxix, v. 5.) 
(3) Mandapasya chaturthàmad bhadrah karyyo vijanata 11 
Mandapas tasya karttavyà bhadrais tribhir alankritah 11 
(Сатийа-Ритапа, Chap. XLVI, vv. 35, 39.) 
A type of quadrangular building : 
(4) Agni-Purána (Chap. ctv, vv. 14-15 ; see under PRASADA). 
(5) Garuda-Purana (Chap. хіуп, vv. 24-25; see under PRASADA). 
(6) Vi-bhadrà và sa-bhadrà và Кагіаууа malika budhaih 11 
Sa-bhadra và vi-bhadra và khalüri syad yatheshtatah 11 
(Kümikagama., xxxv, 100, 106.) 
Salananarn prakartavyam eka-dvyarnéa-vinirmitam 1 
Tad-tad-agre prakartavyarn уйге bhadrasya pa$chime 11 
(Ibid., XLV, 35-) 


Chatur-dig-bhadra-sarnyuktarh dvara-jalaka-Sobhitam 11 
(Ibid., x11, 26.) 


A class of buildings (Ibid., xv, 41; see under MALIKA.) 
BHADRAKA—The general name for chariots. 


(M., хілп, 112-116; see under RATHA.) 


BHADRA-PATTA—A moulding of the base. 
(M., x 945 ; see the lists of mouldings 

under ADHISHTHÀNA.) | 

BHADRA-PITHA—A type of pedestal of the phallus or an image. B 
(M., LIM, 94; See under Pina.) 

The pedestal of an image.—(M., шу, 129, 173.) = 


A state chair.—(Mahavagga, v. 10, 2.) 


BHADRA-MANDAPA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


BHADRA-MANDAPA—A type of pavilion. | 
Cf. Mandapam bhadram ity-uktarn bahya(dhanya)-nikshepa-yogya- 


kam | (M., xxxiv, 190.) 


See Bilvan athegvara inscrip. of Vira-champa (Vv. 1, 2, 3, Ер. Ind., Vol. ш, 
Рр. 70, 71 ; see under Manpapa.) 


BHADRA-SALA—A type of hall, a front room, a drawing-room. 


In conneixon with the eight-storeyed buildings : 
Netra-Salardha-Sala cha bhadra-saladi-bhishitam 1 
(М., xxvi, 67, etc.) 


BHADRASANA~—A kind of throne, a chair of state, a great scat. 
(М., XLV, 14, etc.) 


ВНАУАМА--Ап abode, a residence, а dwelling, a site, a building, 
a mansion. 
А kind of rectangular building : 
(1) Agni-Purdpa (Chap. oiv, vv. 16-17 ; see under PRASADA.) 
(2) Garuda-Purana (Chap. хімп, vv. 21-22, 26-27 ; see under PRASADA.) 
(3) Mandaparh nava-talarn kuryad bhavanam anya-rangam vadhi- 
mandapakaram | 
- (М., хі, 144.) 
(4) Tenedam Рагатебуатвуа Бһауапата dharmmatmana kartam . . . 
kanvasrame | 
“Не, the pious minded, had his dwelling (temple) of the supreme Lord 
made, ... in the hermitage of Kanva.’—(Kanaswa inscrip. of Sivagana, 
line u f., Ind. Ant., Vol. XIX, pp. 58, 61.) 
(5) Subhrabrabham idari Bhavasya bhavanarh karapitarh bhütale | 
* This temple of Bhava (Siva), resembling the white cloud (or mountain, 
snowy Himalayas) was caused to be built on the earth. —(Dhanop inscrip. 
of Chachcha, v. 2, Ind. Ani., Vol. xr, р. 175.) 
BHAVANA-KANTA —A class of the ten-storeyed buildings; 
(M., XXVII, 9—13; see under PRASADA. 
BHAGA-PANCHA—A pavilion with thirty-two pillars, 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. COLXX, V. 12; see Manpapa.) 
BHAGA-MANA (cf, Ganya-MANA)—Proportional measurement, 


(М., ХШ, 43; хуш, 84; XXXII, 216, 
247, etc. ; see Мама.) 


380 


` CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


- 


Жы. 
db АА 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ВНІТТІ 
BHARA (see BHARA and SrAMBHA)—Beams, cross-beams. 
Probably same as Һага or harika, a chain, an ornament (? bead, astragal, 
baguette, see Gwilt. Encycl., fig. 873) below the neck of the column. 
Stambha-samarn bahulyarh bhara-tulanam upary-upary-asám 1 
Bhavati tulopatulanam ünam padena pādena 11 
| (Brihat-Samhita., тли, 30.) 
Dr. Kern translates ‘bhara’ by cross-beams (7.R.A.S., М. S., Vol. 
VI, p. 285). 
BHARAKA—A support, a synonym of the column. 


(M., xv, 5; see under STAMBHA.) 
See Suprabhedágama (XXXI, 121) under BHARA. 


BHARA (see BHARA and HARA)—A support, a beam. 
(1) In connexion with buildings of one to twelve storeys : 
Chatuh-sala chatush-kütam chashta-bhara sa-pafijaram 1 
(M., xx, 72, etc.) 
(2) Eka-dandantar-bhara tu madhya-bhara dvi-dandatah | 
Chatur-danda-pramanena kritva maryyada-bhittikam 11 
Mandale dvarake vatha dvàra-$alam tu bharake 11 
Prásádam madhya-bhàràyam maryyadau harmyam eva cha 11 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 117, 121 ; for full 
context 546 vv. 115-122, under PRAKARA.) 
BHITTI—A wall, a partition, a support. 
(1) Bhittih stri kudyam 1 
Bhittih kudye prabhede cha 1 
(Amarakésha, 2, 2, 4.) 
(ә) Purato’lindam ckàrn$am bhittim kuryat samantatah 1 
(M., xxxv, 118; compare also ху, 231; 
хххуш,6; XL, 57; LVI, 16; etc.) 
(3) Vistiràrdham bhaved garbho bhittayo'nyah samantatah | 
‘The adytum measures half the extent (of the whole) and has its 


separate walls all around.'—(Brihat-Samhità, ілі, 12; /7.Е.А.8., N. S., 
Vol. vi, p. 318 ; see also Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссі/хіх, vv. 8, 9, 12.) 
(4) Tri-hastantarh tu vistaro bhittinam parikirtitah 11 
Müla-bhitter idam manam ürdhve padardha-hinakam | 
Anyo'nyam adhika vapi nyünà уа bhittayah samah 11 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, 32, 33.) 
381 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


BHITTI-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Tri-bhagena bhaved garbharh samantad bhittir ishyate "I 

Dvy-adhikena bahir-bhittih Sesharh pragvat prakirtitam " 

Linge $ilánta(-te) cha krodhe bhitti(h) paficha-(th)Sa-varjitah | 

Kirhchin nyünam alinda và Sesharh kudyeshu yojayct 11 
(Kamikagama, 1, 82, 86, 87.) 


The synonyms of bhitti : 
. . . dvari kudyarh cha kuttimam 11 
Bhitter akhyeyam akhyatam... Il 
(Ibid., LV, 199-200.) 


(5) Navarhgarh garbha-geharh tu bhitti-manarh tu shodaga 11 
Shodasam bhitti-manarh tu bhittim abhyantaram viduh 1 
Tad-bahyaikarh tu salilarh tad-bahyaikam tu bhittikam 11 
Bahya-bhittau chatur-dvaram athava dvaram ckatah | 
Anyat sarvam samam proktarh stüpy-antam karayed budhah 11 
Yad ийаш bhitti-vistararn bahyabhyantarayoh samam | 
Bahye vabhyantare vapi tri-vidham bhitti-manakam 11 
Pithasya tri-gunarn garbharh ta-(t)-tri-bhagaika-bhittikam 11 

(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12.) 


(6) Prasada-vara-varyeshu $ilàvatsu sugandhishu | 
Ushitva meru-kalpeshu krita-kafichana-bhittishu 11 
(Ramayana, п, 88, 7, etc.) 
(7) Atyuchchair bhitti-bhagair divi divasa-pati-syandanarh và vigrih- 
nan yenakari kotah | 
* By whom the fort (in this place) was built, which perhaps may arrest 
the chariot of the sun in the sky by its (very) high walls.—(An Abu inscrip. 
of the reign of Bhimadeva II, v. 9, Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, pp. 221, 222.) 
(8) Suttalayada bhittiya màdisi chavvisa-tirttha-kararh madisidaru 1 
° Sri Basavi Setti . . . had the wall round the cloisters and the 
twenty-four Tirtha-karas made.'— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 78; Roman Text 
р. 62; Transl., p. 151.) 
(9) *Koneri, son of . . . erected a nava-raf f ? і 
secure foundation апа ll i itti Ux Pigs Бақалар pun 
z walls (vajra-bhitti-gode) for the god Tirumala of 
the central street of Malalavadi.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. iv, Hunsur Talu 
по. 1; Transl., p. 83; Roman Text, p. 134.) a 


BHITTI-GRIHA—A wall-house, 


а small cl insi 
resembling a cupboard. all closet inside the wal 


(М., XL, 63, etc. 
382 ) 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BHU-PARIKSHA 


pe poe ene kind of surrounding steps made through a 
wall, 


(See Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra under SopAna.) 
BHINDA-SALA—A kind of detached building with a balcony in 
front, pandi-sala with a verandah in front (see PANDI-SALA). 
(M., xxxv, 98 ; see under Sara.) 
BHU-KANTA—A class of storeyed buildings. 
` A class of eight-storeyed buildings.—(M., xxv1, 9-90; see under PRASADA.) 
A class of the ten-storeyed buildings.—(M., ххуш, 6-8; see under 
PRASADA.) ; 
ВНОТА-КАМТА--А class of the five-storeyed buildings. 
: (M., xxi, 13-15 ; see under PRASADA.) 
BHU-DHARA—A type of oval building. 
(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. crv, vv. 19-20; see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. XLVI, vv. 29-30 ; see under PRASADA). 


BHUPA-KANTA—A class of the eight-storeyed buildings. 


(М., XXVI, 22-28; see under PRASADA.) 


BHU-PARIKSHA—Testing the site and soil where a village, town 
or building is constructed. 

АП the Vástu-füstras have elaborate descriptions on the subject. The 
principles and details are similar in the treatises examined below. 

(1) The soil of the plot, where a village, town, fort, palace, temple or 
house is to be built, is examined with regard to its shape, colour, odour, 
feature, taste and touch (M., ш, 16-32). The elevation of the ground as 
well as the luxuriant growth of certain plants, trees and grasses on the 
ground are also examined (M., гу, 4-38). If a plot of land is found to be 
satisfactory on all or most of these examinations, it should be selected for 
а village, town, fort, or house, as the case may be. But even after this 
selection, it would be wise to test the ground by some other ways. 

A square hole of one cubit deep should be dug on the selected site and 
be filled up with water. After 24 hours the chief architect should mark 


the condition of the water in the hole. If all the water be dried up by this | 


. time, the earth is taken to be very bad. But if, on the other hand, there 
remains some water in the hole, the selected plot of land would be fit for 
any building—(M., v. 20-30). 


Another final test is that a similar hole is dug оп the plot and filled | 3 
up with the earth taken out of it. If this earth be not quite enough to fill 


383 


4. 


d^ 


M 
p- 
s 


BHU-PARIKSHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
und is taken to be very bad, but if this earth overfills 
very good for any building.—(.M., v. 34-37.) 
that in the former case, the very 
loose or sandy land is said to 


up the hole, the gro 
the hole, the soil is stated to be 
The general import of the last two tests 
dry land is avoided, while in the latter, very 
be unfit for the construction of a building. 
(2) Brihat-Sanhita, Chap. Lim, VV. 96, 97 (ed. Kern, Bibliotheca Ind. 
A. S. Bengal, New Series, nos. 51, 54» 59» 63; 68, 72 and 73). 
Sita-rakta-pita-krishnà vipradinam pragasyate bhümih | 
Сапаһа& cha bhavati yasya ghrita-rudhirannadya-madyasamah | 
Kuéa-yuktà sara-bahula darvakasavrita kramena mahi | 
Anuvarnam vriddhi-kari madhura-kashayamla-katuka cha 11 
See also уу. 85-94 and then compare the last line of the verse 95 : 
Tat tasya bhavati &ubhadam yasya cha yasmin mano ramate | 
* In general the soil (ground) will be suitable to any one whose mind is 
pleased with it.” 
Compare also the eleven lines quoted fiom : 
(3) Garga by the commentary of Brihat-Samhitd, which are again quoted 
by Dr. Kern. 
(4) “Тһе Visvak (1, бі, sqq.) contains the same rules, but in other 


words. : 
(5) Part of the corresponding passage from Kašyapa is quot à 
c (4 t 
К E Es yap quoted by Ràm 
(J-R.A.S., №. S., Vol. vr, p. 295, note 2.) 
Vastu-Ratanavali (a compilation, ed. Jivanatha Jyotishi, 1883, pp. 8, 10) : 
(6) On colour of ground, quotation from Vasishtha-samhitd : : | 
Sveta-Sastà dvijendranarh rakta bhümir mahi-bhüjam 1 
Visàm pita cha $üdranam krishnanyesham vimiérità 11 
(7) From the Vastu-pradipa : 
Sukla-mritsna cha ya bhümir brahmani sa prakirtità | 
Kshatriya rakta-mritsna cha harid-vaiyà prakirtità | 
Krishna bhümir bhavech chhüdrà chaturddhà parikirtità 
(8) On taste, from JVarada : ыман 
Madhuram katukam tiktarn kashayart 
t 2 am cha rashà rams 
(9) On smell, from the Griha-kariká : 7 елдш, 
Ghritasrig-anna-madyanam ó 
ritasr gandhas cha Кгата 
(то) On declivity, from Bhrigu : Dees hayaq 
Udag-adi plavam ishtarh vipradinar 
í ; t pràdinàm pradakshi : 
: | Viprah Sarvvatra vascd anuvarnam a анан à 
(11) Silpa-dipaka (cd. Gangadhara, 1, 22-23) : š шшр 
Ѕуеіа bramhana-bhümika d m 
у П ıa ghritavad-gandha а 
Ratka Sonita-gandhini nripati-bl iii Suec dint 
I -bhüh svà sasha ` 
p uh svade kashàye cha sa || 


384 


———€ — 


CC-0. i Universi i 
0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Зе 


e I Е 
HINDU ARCHITECTURE ВНОМІ-(КА) 


Svade’mla tila-taila-gandhir udita pita cha vai$ya-mahi 1 
Krishna matsya-sugandhini cha katuka $udreti bhü-lakshanam 1! 
(12) Bhavishya-Puràna (Chap. CXXX, vv. 42-44): 
Ishta-gandha-rasopetà nimnà bhimih  pra$asyate | 
Sarkar4-tiisha-kesasthi-ksharangara-vivarjita 11 
Megha-durndubhi-nirghosha sarva-vija-prarohini 1 
бала raktà tatha pita krishna kathita kshitih 11 
Dvija-rájanya-vai$yànàm  $üdranàrn cha yathà-kramat | 
Then follows the examination proper of the soil (vv. 44-45). A pit is dug 
in the ground and filled up with: the sand which is taken out exactly 
in the same way as in the Manasára. Тһе quality of the soil varies from 
best to worst as the sand is in excess, equal and less in filling up the pit. 


BHUMA (see Tata)—A storey, a floor. 
Eka-bhümarn dvi-bhümam va kshudranam bhavanam nrinàm | 
(Silpa-sastra-sara-sargraha, уш, 29.) 
ВНОМІ-(КА) (see TArLA)—Earth, ground, soil, a place, a region 
a Spot, a site, a situation, a storey, the floor of a house. 
(r) In the Manasára а chapter (xr) is named Bhümi-lamba which des- 
cribes the dimensions of different storeys : 
Bhümi-lamba-vidhim vakshye Sastre sarnkshepatah kramat | 
Окай hi bhimi-lambarh уай ekanta-bhimikam | 
Etad dva-daša- may aman janmádi-stüpikantam syat 1 
(M., хі, 1, 5, 125, etc.) 
(о) Kshatriyàdeh pafücha-bhümir dvijanàm raga-bhimikam | 
(Silpa-fastra-sara-samgraha, уш, 30.) 
(3) Vimano’stri deva-yàne sapta-bhümau cha sadmani | 
(Nigantu ; see Ramayana under VIMANA.) 
(4) Sapta-bhaumashta-bhaumas cha sa dadar$a mahapurim | 
(Ramayana, v. 2, 50; see also vx, 33, 8.) 
(5) Ekaiva cha bhümikà tasya syad eka tasya cha bhümika | 
(Brihat-Samhitd, LVI, 23 ; see Ka$yapa, quoted by 
Kern, 7.R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 320.) 
.(6) Sata-$ringa$ chatur-dvaro bhiimika-shodasochchhritah 1 
(Matsya-Purana., Chap. CCLXIX, V. 41; 
see also VV. 37, 38,39, 40, 42; 49,44, etc.) _ 
(7) Ràja-kanyàm . . . sapta-bhiimika-prasada-pranta-gatam | 1 
(Paüchatan:ra, ed. Bombay, r, p. : $5 7" 
(8) A floor (Bheragha inscrip of Alhanadevi, v. 27, Ep. Ind., Vo NAE: 


pp. 12, 16.) : сн 


BHÜMI-LAMBA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 
ey ; according to the Kami- ‹ 


BHUMI-LAMBA—The height of a stor 
е term implies the dimen- 


kagama (see below) and the Manasára th 
sions of storcys. ë ; 
(ғ) The five series of breadth in the smallest type of one-storeyed build- 
ings are 2, 4, 6, 8 and ro cubits ; and the five series of length are 3, 5, 7» 9, 
and rr cubits. In the intermediate type the five series of breadth are 5, 
79:11 and 14 cubits and the five series of length 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14 
cubits. In the largest type the five series of breadth are 6, 8, 10, 12 and 


14 cubits and the five series of length are 7, 9, 11, 13 and 15 cubits. 
(М., хі, 6-12.) 4 


rately. | 
(М., хі, 19-125.) 
These are stated to be the dimensions іп the Jati class of buildings. 
Three-fourths, half and one-fourth of these dimensions are prescribed, 
for the Chhanda, Vikalpa and Abhisa classes respectively. 
(2) Chatur-arnsadi-sarhsthanarh bhimi-lambam iti smritam | 
(Kamikagama, L, I.) 


All the twelve storeys are in this way measured sepa 


Then follow the dimensions of the storeys from one to twelve апа six- 
teen (ibid., vv. 2-34). The five proportions of the height of storeys, as 
< bhumi-lamba? means, are given under the same five technical names as 4 
in the Münasüra, viz., Santika, Pushta, ауада, Adbhuta, and Sarva- 
kamika (vv. 24, 25-28). Тһе Jati, Chhanda, Vikalpa and Abhisa classes 
of buildings are also distinguished (vv. 9-19). 
(3) Varahamihira describes the height, etc. of the buildings of the 
Brahmans, kings, ministers and others (Brihat-Samhita, um, 4-26). But the 
general rule about the height of the storey (bhümikà) is also given (Brihat- 
Samhita, LVI, 29-30) : 
Bhümikangula-mànena  mayasyashtottaram šatam | 
Sardharh hasta-trayarn chaiva kathitam visvakarmana 11 
Prahuh sthapataya$ chatra matam ека vipaschitah | ) 
Kapota-pali-sarmyuktà nyüna gachchhanti tulyatàm 11 
«A storey's altitude is of 108 digits according to Maya, but Visvakarman 
pronounces it to be of three cubits and a half (i.e. 84 digits). As to this, 
however, able architects have declared that (in reality) there is no discre- 
pancy of opinion, for, if you add the height of the crown-work (kapota- 
раі) the smaller number will equal (the greater).’—Dr. Kern. | 


ВНО-МОКНА—А type of oval building. 
-  (Garuda-Purana, Chap. хуп, vv. 20-90; 
7 see under PRASADA.) 


386 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BHÜSHANA 


BHÜSHANA—A class of storeyed buildings, a moulding, a type of 
pavilion, articles of furniture, ornaments. 
А type of oval building—(Agni-Purána., Chap. сту, vv. 19-20; see under 
PRASADA.) 
A class of the nine-storeyed buildings—(M., ххуп, 19-14; see under 
PRASADA.) 
A moulding of the column—(M., xv, 93, etc.) 
A type of pavilion : 
Devànàm cha maunàrtham bhüshanakhyam tu mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 349.) 
Ménasara (Chap. т, 1-309) named Bhishana : 

The ordinary ornaments for the body are called * anga-bhüshana* 
(lines 1-44, 288-309) and the articles of house-furniture * bahir-bhü- 
shana, (44-288). i 

Ornaments are here divided broadly into four classes, namely, 
Patra-kalpa, Chitra-kalpa, Ratna-kalpa and Mi$rita or Mišra-kalpa 
(lines 3-4). All these are suited to the deities. The emperor or Chakra- 
vartin can put on all these except the Patra-kalpa. The kings called 
Adhiraja and Narenda can wear both Ratna-kalpa and Misrita. The 
Miéra-kalpa is prescribed for all other kings. 

Patra-kalpa is so called because it is made of leaves and creepers. 
Chitra-kalpa is made of flowers, leaves, paintings, all precious stones 
and other decorations. The Ratna-kalpa is made of flowers and 
jewels. And the Miéra-kalpa is made of leaves, jewels and the 
mixture of all others. "These four kinds are specially made for the 
images of Gods and Kings only (line 1). 4 

The ordinary ornaments of the body include among others Padanü- 
pura (anklet), Kirita (diadem), Mallika (a jasmine-like ornament), 
Kundala (ear-ring), Valaya (bracelet), Mekhala (belt), Hara (chain), 
Kankana (bracelet for the wrist), Siro-vibhüshana (head-gear), Kinkini 
(little-bells), Karna-bhüshana (ear-rings, (etc.), Кеуйга (armlet), 
Tatanka (large ear-ring), Karna (ear ornament), Chida-mani (crest- 
jewel), Bala-patta (little tiara), Nakshatra-mala (necklace of 27 pearls). 
Ardha-hàra (half chain of 64 strings), Svarna-sitra (gold chain worn 
round the breast), Ratna-màlikà (garland of jewels), Chira (a pearl 
necklace of four strings), Svarna-kafichuka (gold armour), Hiranya- 
malika (gold chain), Lamba-hara (long suspended chain), etc. The 
ornaments like crown, etc. are described elsewhere. : 

The articles of house furniture include among others Dipa-danda 
(lamp-post), Vyajana (fan), Darpana (mirror), Mafijisha (basket, 
wardrobe, almirah,etc.), Dola (swing, hammock, palanquin, etc.), Tula 


387 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collec 


^w. 


- t 3 % Y _ 
=a e mon s B i 
- ae Jc жазы ЕГУ. “ = 
Ж қ 2 


ВНОСА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


and Tulà-bhàra (balance), Pafijara (cage), and Nida (nest), etc., for the 
domestic animals (except cows, horses, elephants, described elsewhere) 
and birds (lines 45-288). The articles of furniture like car, chariot, 
throne, bedstead, etc., are described elsewhere. 
BHOGA—A class of the single-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xix, 167; see under PRAsADA.) 
BHOGA-MANDAPA (ç Manpapa)—The refectory, ап appur- 
enance of the temple. 
(M., XXXII, 55, etc. ; see under МАМРАРА.) 
BHOJ ANA-MATHA—A refectory, a dining-hall. 

‘The meritorious gift of a refectory (bhojana-matha) for the community 
(Sangha) by the Yavana Chita (Chaitra) of the gates (or of the Gata 
country.) —(Junnar inscrip. по. 8, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. rv, 
р. 94.) 

BHAUMA (see Вном) —А storey, the floor of a house. 
Dvadasa-bhauma, daga-bhauma, shad-bhauma, sapta-bhauma | 
(Brihat-Samhitd, LVI, 20, 21, 22, 24, 27.) 
BHRAMA—tThe enclosing cloisters, a covered arcade, an enclosed 
place of religious retirement, a monastic establishment. 

* The temple itself, with its enclosing cloisters (bhrama) measures . 
The court is surrounded by cloisters (bharnti-bhrama) in which, besides 
three small temples on the north, south and west sides each in line with 
the centre of the principal mandapa, there are the orthodox number of 
fifty-two small shrines (cf. Prakàra and Parivaralaya) each crowned by a 
$ikhara or spire.’ 

* The inner façade of the cloister or bharti (Skr. bhrama) is interrupted 
only by the three small temples mentioned above, by the large entrance 
porch on the east, and by smaller entrances on the north and south near 
the east end. The corridor (alinda) is about nine feet wide all round and is 
raised by four steps above the level of the court.’ 

«Тһе entrance porch on the east projects considerably and 15 isa 
inside by stairs, in line with the bharnti (bhrama) on each BCS o oo = 
(Ahmadabad Arch. Burgess, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. ххх, 
pp- 87, 88.) с 4 

BHRAMANA (see PRADAKSHINA)—A. surrounding terrace, an en- 
closing verandah, a circular path. = Sa S 
: a . 

Sikharasya tu turyyena роса “ШБЕК n 


388 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


ШЕ 


OUT LINE PLAN BHADRA 


BHADRA. 


BHRAMA DANDA. 


ELEVATION 


BRAHMA MASTAKA 


BHRAMA. 


Page 258 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANGALA 


BHRAMA-DANDA—A kind of post for a large fan. 


(M., L, 104 ; see under VvAJANA.) 


BHRAMALINDA—A surrounding balcony or terrace. 


(M., XXXIV, 304, 497, etc. ; see under ALINDA.) 


M 


MAKARA-KUNDALA—A crocodile-shaped ornament for the ear 
of an image. 
(M., LI, 53; see under BHÜsHANA.) 


MAKARA-TORANA (see ToRANA)—An arch marked with такага 
(an animal-like shark or crocodile). 
Dvayor makarayor vakraih $aktam madhyama-püritam | 
Nana-vidha-lata-yuktam etan makara-toranam 11 


(Kamikagama, ту, 65.) 
For the details of such an arch, see Annual Report of Arch. Survey of India 
(1903-04, p. 227 Ё), Mdanasara (Chaps. хіі, xnvur) and Suprabhedagama 
(xxix, 68-72) under Toraya. 
MAKARA-BHUSHANA~—An ear-ornament. 
(М., L, 26; see under BHUSHANA.) 
MAKARAPATRA—An ornament of an arch generally above the 
column. 
Tad-ürdhve toranasyante makarapatra-samyutam | 
(М., xv, 133.) 
MAKARALA—An architectural member of a hall. 


(М., xxxv, 373 ; see under Sara.) 


MAKARI-VAKTRA—The face of a female shark, employed as an 
ornament for an arch above a column. 
(M., xv, 136.) 
MAKUTA—A head-gear, a diadem, a crown. 
(М., vu,.164 ; хп, 120; XLIX, 15; LIV 23, etc.) 

MANGALA—A kind of throne, a village, a type of pavilion. 

A throne.—(M., XLV, 4; see under SIMHASANA.) 

A village (Kamikagama, хх, 3 ; see under AGRAHARA). 

A type of pavillion—(M., xxxiv, 481-448 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


889 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


MANGALA- 
LA-VITHI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MANGALA-VITHI: 
А- — А broad road surrounding a vi [t 
also called Raja-vithi and Ratha-vithi. po cu n 


(See Kamikagama, under RAJA-VITHI.) 
MZ سن‎ 
\JJANALAYA—A detached building for bath or washing. 
Š 5 (M., XL, 109.) 
ЛАХ GHA-—A bedst 
ead, couch, bed, sofa, a chair, tl i 
form, a pulpit, a loft. Š ; : : ar a 
Ss synonym of the bedstead (M., їп, 11), of the entablature—(M., xvi, 
Maficha-paryanka-palyankah katvya-samah | 
Palyanko maficha-paryanka-vrishi-paryastikasu cha 1 Iti Medinî | 
(Amarakésha, 2, 3, 138.) 
In connexion with buildings of one to twelve storeys : 
Adhishthana-samarn mafichardhe’rdhena vapra-yuk 1 
(М.,ххі, 14, etc.) 
A component part of the bedstead (M., xxiv, 86). 
A platform : 
Dafa-bhàgau dvau pratimafichau—' two-tenths of it for the forma- 


tion of two platforms, opposite to each other." —(Kauliliya-Artha-sastra, 
Chap. ххіу, p. 53.) 


MANCHA-KANTA—A class of the four-storeyed buildings. 


(М., ххп, 47-57 5 see under PRASADA.) 
MANCHA-BANDHA—A class of bases comprising four types which 
differ from one another in height and in the addition or omission of 


some mouldings. 
(M., хіУ, 127-149 ; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA.) 


МАЎСНА-ВНАРКА—Опе of the three classes of pedestals, - the 
other two being Vedi-bhadra and Prati-bhadra. It has four types 


differing from one another in height and in the addition or omission 


e mouldings. 
of som 8 (М., хш, 93-127 ; see the lists of 


mouldings under UPAPITHA.) 


MANCHALI—A synonym of the bedstead. 


(M., ш, тт; 5 under PARYANKA.) 


290 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


. 


=== S 
— 


1 TSS = 
irrena are с 

Өре کک‎ 
С = 


» 
АС 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE MATHA 


MAN JARI(I)—A flower-bud, a shoot, sprout, stalk, a parallel line 
Or row. 

(т) Prāsādau nirgatau karyau kapotau garbha-manatah 1 
Urdhvarh bhitty-uchchhrayat tasya mafijarim tu prakalpayet 11 
Mafijaryà$ chardha-bhàgena $uka-nasam  prakalpayet | 
Urdhvarh tathardha-bhagena vedi-bandho bhaved, iha 11 

(Visvak, 6, 767, quoted by Kern, 7. В. A. S., 
М. S., Vol. vr, p. 321, note 2 of p. 320.) 
(2) Prásádau-nirgatau kàryau kapolau garbha-manatah 1 
The remaining three lines are same as іп Vi$vak. 
(Matsya-Purana., Chap. ccrxix, v. II ; 
see also vv. 19, 18-19.) 
(3) Janghayámam(-yah) dvi-gunochchhrayam mafijaryyah kalpayed 
budhah I1 
Turya-bhàgena mafijaryyah Кагууаһ samyak-pradakshinah | 
Tan-mana-nirgamarn karyyam ubhayah pár$vayoh samam 11 
(Agni-Purana., Chap. хіп, vv. 3-4.) 
(4) Prásade mafijari Кагууа chitra vishama-bhümikà 11 
| (Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, V. 37.) 
| MANJU-DANDA—A kind of lamp-post also called dipa-danda. 
| $ i (M., L, 99.) 
MANJUSHA—A box, casket, receptacle, a wardrobe, a foundation- 
pit, a vault, an arched roof to receive a foundation. 
Pitakah petakah peta mañjūshā 1 
Pitakas trishu visphote mafijishayarh punah puman | Iti Medini і 
(Amarakósha, 2, то, 29.) 

The vault of the foundation-pit (M., хп, 21). 

A wardrobe (/М., L, 148, 151). 

A casket (the Bhattiprolu inscrip. nos. 1, Vr, уш; Ej. Ind., Vol. u 

N pp. 326, 327, 328, 329). 
| МАТНА--А building inhabited by a devotee, a college, a rest-house 
(see ЗАТТЕА), a cloister, convent, monastery, а temple. 

(1) Agantukanarh sarvesharh naishthikanam nivasa-bhih 1 
Anna-paniya-sarnyukta(h) kevalo và matho matah 11 
Vidya-sthanam tu tad-vat syat . . . ا1‎ 

(Kamikagama, XX, 13, 14.) 


391 


CC-0,Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


МАТНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(2) Matha chhatradi-nilayah | 
Commentary : chhatradi-nilayah $ishyadinàrh griha matha ity-uchyate 
chhàtro'ntevasy-adir yesharh parivrajakakshapanakadinarn teshüm nilaya) 
11 và айша kapalikadi батпртаһаһ! Bauddhànàm tu vihàro'stri | 
(Amarakósha, 2, 2, 8. 
(3) Kinchid(a) düratah karya mathas tatropajivinàm 1 
At a little distance (from the temple) the matha should be built for those 


who reside there.—(Garuda-Purana, Chap. хіуп, v. 45 ; see also Chap, хімі. 
o 9) 


(4) See Manasara (Ix, 138, etc.). 


(5) Monastery (Dewal Pragasti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 20; Ep. Ind., 
Vol. т, pp. 79, 83). 

(6) Cloister (Bheraghat inscrip. of Alhanadevi, v. 27, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, 
PP. 12, 16). 

(7) Gf. Kodiya-matha—which is a college and a place of various kind 
of charity, a hospital, etc. It would look like the famous Nalanda University. 
A singular description of it is given.—(Ef. Ind., Vol. v, р. 222.) 

(8) A college or place of learning : 

Bhaktiyir sakala-kala-sarasvatiye mādisidarn mathamarh samasta- 
sabdika-kavi-tarkkikagamika-vaidika-sakshara-sajjanaérayam | 

* Constructed a monastery in piety to Sarasvati of all arts, represented 

ry in piety 
by literature, Vedas, mystic formulae, (and) the holy Akshara.’—(Inscrip. 
at Ittagi, A. of A. D. 112, v. 71, Ер. Ind., Vol. xui, pp. 47, 56.) 
(9) ‘ Gryjari Vi$vanatha had the dharmasala mathas built (in the year 
вресіНеа).?--(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ix, Bangalore Taluq, no. 2; Transl., p. 1.) 
(то) Kadachid ^ etena'mahonnatena mathah kritah kopi ghanair 
anekah | 
Sri-bala-gopála-viràma-bhümir vikurvatà martya-dhara jagatyàm 11 

Here ‘ matha ’ is the ‘temple’ of Bala-Gopala (Krishna).—(Inscrip. 
from Nepal, no. 17; inscrip. of Siddhinrisimha of Lalta-pattana, v. 15, Ind. 
Ant., Vol. 1x, pp. 185, 187, c. 1.) 

(rr) ‹ Todakināra used to call her “ sister” but the year after festival 
he said to. her—if we live together in one matham the people may scoff, 
so you had better have this one to yourself and I will make the eight tenants 
of the land build a separate one for me in the West.’ j 

In this passage * matha ^ apparently means an ordinary “ dwelling 
house.'—(Todakinara Paddana, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxm, p. 99, para. 14; see gis 


paras. 3, 7» 8, 13, 15; and РР. 96-97.) 
392 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MATHA 


n m matha built (matha kattisi) for Siva-Basappa-Svami of 
3 tha. —(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ш, Mysore Taluq, no. 24 ; Transl., p. 3 ; 

oman Text, p. 7.) 

(13) “Оп my king (i.e, husband) going to Svarga, having caused to 
be erected a matha in Kalale and attached it to the great palace, Kurah- 
atti and Sambhupura are granted as an endowment for it, as an offering 
to Siva.’ The peculiarities of this matha should be noted.—(Ep. Carnat 
Vol. m, Nanjangüd Taluq, no. 81 ; Transl., p. rog ; Roman Text, p. 196.) ny 

(14) * Having erected a matha (Sattra or alms-house) for the distribution 
of food to those who come to the car-festival of the god. . . , caused his 
guru to take up his residence in the king’s matha (a detached residential 
building which belongs to a house and is intended for receiving and 
accommodating the guests) to conduct the worship of Chandrasekhara 
(who might be installed in а matha or temple which, however, does not 
occur in the present inscription) and to minister to the Jangamas, and give 
shelter and food to mendicants and pilgrims, . . . in order to meet all the 
expenses of the same made a grant of Haranahalli” —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, 
Hunsür Taluq, no. 104 ; Transl, p. 93 ; Roman Text, 15.) 

Тһе different. meanings of the term * matha' noted within brackets 
in the above passage should be noted. 

(15) * He had the stone-fort built, together with the matha, mantapa, 
pond, well...’ 

‘In the evening-matha (sandhya-matha) he set up the image of the god 
and built the pond.’ 

‘He caused the stone-fort to be built, and set up the matha, mantapa, 
evening-matha (sàndhya-matha), pond, well, Basava pillar, swing and 
images of gods.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1, Channarayapatna Taluq, nos. 
158, 160, 165; Transl., рр. 195, 196, 198; Roman Text, pp. 450, 451, 454-) 

(16) Sri-Sankaracharya-vinirmite lasat-sihasane dharmamaye mathe 

subhah .. . ` 

‘He made petition at the feet of Vidyaranya Sri-pada, representing 
that in Sringapura, in (connexion with) the dharmapitha (or religious 
throne) established by Sankaracharyya, there must be a matha and 
agrahara.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vr, Sringeri Jagir, no. ТЇ; Roman Text, p. 195, 
line 12 f. ; Transl., p. 95, last para.) Р 

This matha is mentioned іп по. 13 and is called Sri-matha in nos. 25, 
26 and 41. Of this matha, Mr. Rice gives а history and says that *the 
head of the Sringeri matha is styled the jagad-guru or the guru of the world 
and is possessed of extensive authority and influence. He wears оп cere- 
monial occasions a tiara like the Pope's, covered with pearls and precious 
stones . . . , and a handsome necklace of pearls, with an emerald centre 
piece.’ (Introd., p. 24, para. 2.) But no architectural details are given. | 


398. 


АМ ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


MANIKA 


(17) ° This temple is а Brahma-chari-matha.—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. vm, 


Shikarpur Taluq, no. 242; Transl., р. 140, line 7; Roman Text, p. 248, 


lines 20-21.) SA 
(18) ViniteSvara-matha-samaveSarn matham etat karitam Sri-Narayana- 


devakulasya— built this matha of the deva-kula of Narayana, near the 
temple of ViniteSvara.’—(MundeSvari inscrip. of Udayascna, lines 5, 6; 
Ер. Ind., Vol. Ix, pp. 219-290.) 
MANIKA—A water-jar, a class of buildings. 
A class of buildings which are oval in plan and sub-divided under the 
following names : г 
(1) Саја, (2) Vrishabha, (3) Harsa, (4) Garutman, (5) Riksha- 
nayaka, (6) Bhüshana, (7) Bhü-dhara, (8) Srijaya, and (9) Prithivi- 
dhara : 

(т) Agni-Purága (Chap. crv, v. rr, 19-20 ; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Garuda-Puràna (Chap. XLVI, vv, 29-30 ; see under PRASADA). 

Gf. Rock inscriptions at Mulbe (no. rv, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxv, рр. 79, 80). 
МАМІ-СКАМА—А trading corporation. (Note on Tamil Inscrip- 
tion in Siam, E. Hultzsch, 7. В. A. 5., 1913, pp. 337-339.) 
MANI-DVARA—A kind of top door or window. 

Uparishtat trayarnšarn tu chatvarárdharnéam dvi-parávayoh | 
Тевһага madhye tu yad dvàram mani-dvaram ihochyate 11 
(Kamikagama, Lv, 43.) 
MANI-BANDHA —An ornament for the wrist, a string of pearls, the 
collet. 7 


Prakoshthe valayarn chaiva mani-bandha-kalapakam | 
(М., 1, 16.) 


Mani-bandha-katakam và mauktika-chüdam eva cha | 
(М., шу, 14.) 

Prakoshtha-valayarh chaiva valayair mani-bandhakaih 
(Jbid., 99, etc.) 


MANI-BHADRA (se MANDAPA)—A pavilion with 64 columns. 
(Suprabhedagama, ххх, тот, 103 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
MANI-BHITTI—The residence of the great serpent (Sesha-nàga). 
MANI-BHU-(MI)—A floor inlaid with jewels. 
MANI-MANDAPA—A jewelled pavilion, the residence of the great 
serpent (безһа-пара). 
MANI-HARMYA—An upper storey, a crystal palace, a jewelled 
mansion. (See Artha-Sastra under GRIHA-VINYASA.) 


394 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


E 


MANIKA. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


мн ЕНЕСІ —— he sss o -- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDAPA 


MANDAPA—A detached building, a pavilion, an open hall, an 
arbour, a corridor ( M., XXXIV, 406, 409, 414, сіс.), a tower, a temple, 
the auditorium іп a theatre (Bharata-Natya-Sastra, п, 7-8, 22; 
see details under NATYA-GRIHA(VEÉMA). е 

Atha mandapo'stri janasrayah |\—(Amarakésha, 2, 2, 0.) 

* Mandapas are not furnished with walls ; the roofing is formed of large 
slabs of granite supported by monolithic pillars.’—(D. A. Iyengar, p. 20.) 

‘ The resting place where the gods are every year (occasionally) carried. 
The most celebrated part of the temple of Madura is the Pudu mantapam 
which is only a vast corridor.’—(Jbid., p. 38.) 

Difference between Mandapa and Sabha (M. xxxiv, 559-562): 
the former having а pent-roof, and the latter pinnacled (i.e. spherical roof). 

(1) Manasara (Chap. xxxiv, 1-578, named Mandapa) : 

Mandapa generally means a temple, bower, shed or hall. But the 
term has been used in three technical senses in this chapter. 

It implies in the first place a house in the village, etc., or built on the 
bank of a sea, river, tank or lake; secondly, the detached buildings in a 
compound which is generally divided into five courts (see PRAKARA). But in 
the most general sense, it implies various sorts of rooms in a temple or resi- 
dential buildings. The most part of this long chapter is devoted to a des- 
cription of these rooms. i 

Mandapas are both temples and residential buildings : 

Taita(-ti)lanàm dvi-jatinarh varnanam vasa-yogyakam | 

The general comparative measurement of the mandapas is discussed at 
the beginning. This is followed by the measurement and other descrip- 
tions of (ii) the bhitti (wall), (iii) balcony (alinda), (iv) prapa (alms-house), 
and (v) the form of the mandapas (lines 3-4). 

Seven mandapas are, as stated, built in front of the prasada or the main 
edifice (line 157). They are technically called Himaja, Nishadaja, Vijaya, 
Malyaja, Pariyatra, Gandhamadana and Hema-küta (lines 163-156). 
Various parts of these, such as walls, roofs, floors, balconies, courtyards, 
doors, windows, ‘pillars, etc., are described in detail (lines 166—175). 
Besides these seven, various other mandapas are also described in accord- 
ance with their architectural details and the various purposes for which 
they are built. - 

Meruja mandapa is for the library-room (line 161), Vijaya for wedding 
ceremonies (line 163), Padmaka for refectory or kitchen of gods (line 174), 
Sicha for ordinary kitchen (line 175), Padma for collecting flowers (line 


181), Bhadra for water reservoir, store-house, etc. (line 185), Siva for Р 
unhusking paddy corn (line 197), Veda for assembly-hall (line 209), 


Kula-dharana for keeping perfumes (line 262), Sukhanga for guest-hous 


(sattra,) (Ene 272), Darva for elephant’s stable, and Kausika for horses’ 


395 


MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


stable, Saukhyaka and others built on the bank of a sca, river, lake, etc., 
are for the pilgrimage of gods (line 281), Jayala and others for summer 
residence (line 294). Some mandapas are made for banishment (see below), 
some for bedrooms of queens and others. Dhanada (line 328), Bhüshana 
(lines 349, 366), Kharvata (lines 455, 472), Drona (lines 423-434), Sri- 
rüpa (line 480), Mangala (line 488), etc., are described under these terms. 

The plan, ornaments, etc., of mandapas are described in detail. A 
description of the forms of mandapas is given (lines 549-557). The mandapas 
(rooms) of temples and of the houses of the Brahmanas should have the 
ай shape; the Chhanda shape is given to the mandapas of the Kshattri- 
yas, the Vikalpa shape to those of the Vai$yas, and the Ābhāsa shape to 
those of the Südras. But according to some, these four classes are also 
based on the form of the Bhadra (portico). 

The mandapas of two faces are called dandaka, of three faces svastika, 
the latter one' having also the plough shape; the mandapas of four faces 
are known as chatur-mukha, of six faces maulika, and of five faces sarvato- 
bhadra (lines 554-556). 

A short description of the mandapas in a village or town is also given 
(lines 558-572). Their principal members are stated to be the lupà (pent- 
roof), prastara (entablature), prachchhadana (roof), sabha (council hall), 
and kita (dome), etc. Mandapas are also built on the roadside and at 
other places. 

All the mandapas mentioned above are separately described as they 
belong to a temple or to the houses of the Brahmanis, the Kshattriyas, the 
Vaiśyas, and the Südras respectively (cf. lines 571-578). 

Cf. the following : | 

The detached buildings or attached halls for various purposes : 
Some bhallata-mukhye cha kalpayet koSa-mandapam | 
` Pushpa-dante sükarau cha Sastra-mandapa-sarnyutam | 
Varune vasure vapi vastu-nikshepa-mandapam 1 
Nage vapi mrige vapi deva-bhüshana-mandapam 1 
A (a)ditau choditau vapi бауапагіһата cha mandapam | 
Asthana-mandaparh chaiva chatur-dikshu vidikshu cha | 
Snàpanartham mandapam snana-mandapam eva cha | 
Griha-kshate yame vapi vahana-sthana-mandapam | 
Maryadi-bhittikasyantam mandapam pavanalayam 
(M., xxxi, 68-76.) 
Dakshine nairriti vapi bhojanartharh tu mandapam | 
Vayavyena dhanangarhée pushpa-mandapa-(rh) yojayet | 
Tat-tad-bahya-pradege tu kaya-Suddhyartha-mandapam | 
Уауаууе nairrite vapi sütika-mandapam bhavet | 
(M., xL, 98, 102, I04, 105.) 


396 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


обо 20044 VdVONVIN 


Lum rei er n————— rs ETL n ccn SOS алса, 
[ome s ra e атага 


Н (ӘН ДО Woo DVIS V SV 435 3801) 
| (51394 ХИ) БЕТ vinaaw 


(awns Sluvd p nlla) 


МОТИЛУЗ МҮМІН 


— EESTI 


(544155 sIuvd 2 НАМ) 
NOWMIAvd VfYOVHSIN 


Q3NOILH3M SI 
PUL SNWOTOD 310d!W dO NOISSIWO JHL 


t 


мозу ONIHLON 34А} NTVWIH МІ 


321-143 NIWWV4OLNOUS NI 11109 аз GINOHS 
MFVAHQNIA SrfVOVHSIN ЧТУЙІН SNOVIIAYd AWA 


—d10N 


SNOITIAYd АНА 


< 
0% 
=) 
с 
© 
= 
© 
o 
c 
= 
о 
ш 
со 
n» 
> 
5 
© 
Ф 
N 
= 
o 
a 
= 
9 
9 
2 
© 
o 
_ 
© 
= 
5 
= 
© 
au 
2 
ғ 
D 
2 
o 
a 
Е 
2 
de 
© 
= 
© 
S 
i3 
< 
= 
= 
5 
© 
© 
о 
о 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDAPA 


The height : 
Mandapam nava-talam kuryád . . . 1 
(M., хі, 144.) 
Is4nadi-chatush-karne matharh và mandapam tu vài 
(M., тх, 138.) 
Mandapadi cha bhüpánàm уста kuryàt tu pürvavat | 


A 2 (Ibid. ; 
In connexion with columns: 222) 


Pràásade mandape vapi prákare gopure tatha | 
: (М., xv, 439.) 
Gf. Ayuda-mandapa ( M., XXXVI, 34), v(b)alalokana-mandapa (ibid., line 
48), vivaha-mandapa (line 49), vastráchchhádana-mandapa (line 50), 
vidyabhyasartha-mandapa (line 53), tailabhyangartha-mandapa (line 54), 
asthana-mandapa (line 55), vilasartha-mandapa (line 56), dhanya-karshana- 
mandapa (line 69), pushpa-mandapa (line 71), nritya-yogya-mandapa (line 
74), nityarchana-mandapa (line 79), etc. 
Some mandapas are stated to be furnished with roo or 1,000 columns : 
Sata-pada-yutarh vatha sahsranghrika-mandapam | 
(М., хххіу, 240.) 
(2) Bandha-sthànam bahih kuryàt snàna-mandapam eva cha | 
; (Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLVI, v. 95.) 
Prasadasyottare vapi pürve уа mandapo bhavet 1! 
Chaturbhis toranair yukto mandapa-(h) syach chatur-mukhah 11 
(Ibid., Chap. corxiv, vv. 13, 15.) 
*'The mandapa should be built to the north or east of the temple. 
It should have four faces (fagades) and be furnished with four arched 
gateways (Jit. arches).’ 
Athatah sampravakshyàmi mandapanarm tu lakshanam | 
Mandapa-pravaran vakshye prasadasyanurupatah 11 (т) 
Vividhà mandapah karya jyeshtha-madhya-kaniyasah 1 
Namas tàn pravakshyami Srinudhvam rishi-sattamah ıı (2) 
Then follow the names of twenty-seven mandapas. They are divided 


according to the number of columns they are furnished with, the largest - 


one having 64 pillars, the next 62, one following 60, and so оп: 

(r) Pushpaka, (2) Pusha-bhadra, (3) Suvrata, (4) Amritanan- 
dana, (5) Kaugalya, (6) Buddhi-samkirna, (7) Gajabhadra, (8) 
Jayabaha, (9) Srivatsa, (10) Vijaya, (тт) Vástu-kirti, (12) Srutirnjaya, 
(13) Yajiia-bhadra, (14) Visala, (15) Su$lishta, (16) Satru-mardana, 
(17) Bhaga-paficha, (18) Nandana, (19) Мапауа, (20) Mana-bhadraka, 
(21) Sugriva, (22) Harita, (23) Karni-kara, (24) Satardhika, (25) 
Simha, (26) Syama-bhadra, and (27) Subhadra. 


397 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The plans of mandapas are given next : 
Tri-konam vrittam ardhendum ashta-konarh dvir-ashtakam | 
Chatush-konarn tu kartavyarh sarhsthanarn mandapasya tu II 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. cCLxx, 
уу. I, 2, 3-6, 7-15, 16.) 
(3) Bhitter dvaigunyato vapi karttavya mandapah kvachit | 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, v. 37.) 
Prasadasyagratah kuryàn mandapam daša-hastakam 11 
Kuryad dva-daga-hastarh và stambhaih shodašabhir yutam 1 
Dhvajashtakaiš chatur-hastàm madhye vedim cha karayet 11 
(Ibid., Chap. XLVII, VV. 4—5.) 
(4) Ahüya vi$va-karmmánam karayamasa sadaram 1 
Mandapam cha suvistirnam vedikabhir manoramam 11 (2) 
Description of its carving hand paintings : 
Jalam kirh nu sthalam tatra na vidus tattvato janah | 
Kvachit simhàh kvachid-dharhsah sárasa$ cha maha-prabhah 11 (6) 
Kvachich chhikharhdinas tatra kritrimà sumanoharah | 
Tathà nagah kritrimá$ cha hayāś chaiva tatha mrigàh 11 (7) 
Ke ваһуаһ ke asatya$ cha sarhskrita visva-karmana | 
Taithaiva chaivarn vidhinà dvàra-pada-bhütah кар 11 (8) 
Ratha rathi-yutà hy-àsan kritrima hy-akritopamah | 
Sarveshài mohanarthaya tatha cha sarnsadah kritah | (13), etc. 
Evambhütah kritas tena mandapo divya-riipavan |! (20) 
(Skanda-Purana, Màhe$vara-khanda-prathama, 
Chap. xxiv, vv. 2, 6, 7, 8, 13, 20 ; for 
further description 546 vv. 96-67.) 
Rathasye$ana-dig-bhage $alàm kritva sus$obhanam | 
Tan-madhye mandapam kritvà vedim atra sunirmalam 11 
(Ibid., Vaishnava-khanda-dvitiya, Chap. xxv, v. 26.) 
(5) Eka-dvi-tri-talopetam chatush-paficha-talam tu va 11 
Mandaparh tu vidhatavyarh salanam agra-deSake 11 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 96, 96a.) 


(6) Mandapas implying the detatched buildings and forming part of a ' 


temple—(Suprabhedagama, xxxv, 94-104). L 
Measurement as compared with the temple: 
Prasada-lakshanarh proktarh mandapanarh vidhim ӛгіпш 11 (94) 
Prasadardham mukhayamarh vistararn samam uchyate | 
Тгі-радатп va mukhayamam sardham mandapam uchyate 11 


398 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE |. MANDAPA 


Classification : 
Devata-mandaparn pürvarh dvitiyarm snapanarthakam | 
Vrishartharhn mandapari paschach chaturtharn nritta-manda- 
pam і (96) 
Description of these four classes of mandapas : 
Devatà-pratima-rüpà(-am) sthápitam deva-mandapam | e 
Kalasa-sthapanarh yatra proktarh snapana-mandapam i (97) 
Vrishabha-sthapitarn yatra vrishabha-mandaparh tathà 1 - 
Nrittam yatra kritam tat tu nritta-mandapam eva tu 11 (98) 
Сориге Һа vayavye’pi vayavye vikritam tatha 1 
Evar chatur-vidheshy-anya-mandaparh chagrato bahih 11 (99) ЕЕ ‘ 
Their names : 


Tesharh nàmàni vakshyami $rinu vatsa samahitah 1 3 
Nanda-vrittarn $riya-vrittarn virasanarn cha vrittakam II (тоо) 
` Nandyavartam mani-bhadrarn visalarn cheti kirttitam 1 
Their characteristic features : Ç ж 


Nanda-vrittarn chatush-padarh shodašarn  $ripratishthitam 11 
Vim$ati-stambha-samyuktar viràsanam iti smritam | 
Dvàatrim$ad-gatra-samyuktam jaya-bhadram iti kathyate 1) 
Shat-trimáad-gàtra-samyuktam nandyavartam iti smritam | 
Chatuh-shashti-samayuktarh stambhànàm mani-bhadrakam 11 
Stambhànam tu $atair yuktarh visalam iti sarhjfiitam | “ae 
Prasada-vat samakhyatath prastarantarh pramanatah 11 (104) 2 
А (Suprabhedagama, xxxv, 94-104.) 


Then follows an account of these columns (274., уу. 105-108 ; see under 
STAMBHA). 


Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (Chap. xxi, p. 46, footnote): 
(7) Ardha-gavyüta(-ti)-tritiyan ar-gramantara-rahitarh mandapam 1 
(Rayapaseni-sütra-uyakhyane, p. 206.) 


(8) Mandapàni düra-sthala-simantarani | 
(Prasna-uyakarana-sütra-zyakhyane, р. 306.) 


(9) See the first Pra$asti of Baijnath (v. 29, Ер. Ind., Vol. r, p. 106), 
also the second Pra$asti (v. 25, pp. 114, 117). 


(то) Someévaràya tan-mandapam uttarena—' to the north of the hall 
of the temple of Somegvara.’—(Chintra Prašasti of the reign of Sarangadeva, 
у. 40, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 284, 276.) 

(11) A hall for the supply of water (inscrip. оҒ Chandella Viravarmanl 
v. I9, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 328, 330). ха 


399 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MANDAPA 


(12) A chapel (Harsha stone inscrip., VV. 12, 44, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, 
pp- 121, 124, 126, 128). i 

(13) Narayanasyayatanam . . . saha mandapena—the temple of Nara- 
yana together with the hall.—(Khalari Stone inscrip. of Haribrahmadeva, 
v. то, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, p. 231.) "ë 4 

(14) Somesvara-marhdapa—the temple of Somanath.—(Sridhara's Deva- 
pattana Prašasti, v. 23, Ef. Ind., Vol. u, p. 442 ; see also v. 10, p. 440.) 

(15) Mantapa (the Kanarese form)—a hall.—(Satymangalam Plates of 
Devaraya II, v. 8, Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 37, 40.) 

(16) Sri-valladhipate$ $ivasya sukhadarh bhadrahvayarn mandapam 

. akarod bhadrahvyarn mandapam . . . Il 
Bhadrakhya-mandapam(murh) virachyya Sambhor пійгауаѕапа- 
vijayiti cha nama kritva | 
Chakre cha Nayaka-sivalayam asya pārśve $ri-jfiana-mirttir atisam- 
padi-valla-puryyam 11 
(Bilvanathe$vara inscrip. of Virachampa, 
уу. I, 2, 3, Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 70, 71.) 

(17) Dhàma, Marndira, Ргазада and Bhavana are used indiscriminately 
for temple or mandapa.—(Ganapesvaram inscrip. of Ganpati, vv. 23-25, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. m, pp. 86-87). 

(18) Abhyavahara-mandapa—a dining hall.—(Ranganath inscrip. of 
Sundarapandya, v. 23, Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 13, 16.) 

(19) * The immediate purpose of the Ranganatha inscription of Sundara- 
pandya is a description of his building operations at, and gifts to, the temple. 
He built a shrine of Narasimha (уу. 2 and 10) and another of Vishnu’s 
attendant Vishvaksena (v. 8), both of which were covered with gold, and a 
gilt tower which contained an image of Narasimha (v. 7). Further he covered 
the (original or central) shrine of the temple with gold—an achievement of 
which he must have been specially proud, as he assumed, with reference 
to it, the surname Hema-chchhadana-raja, i.e., the king who has covered 
(the temple) with gold, and as he placed in the shrine a golden image of 
Vishnu, which he called after his own surname (v. 3). He also covered the 
inner wall of the (central) shrine with gold (v. 22) and built, in front of it, 
a dining-hall, which he equipped with golden vessels (v. 23) . . . 

. . = In the month of Chaitra he celebrated the procession-festival of 
the god (v. 20). For the festival of the gods sporting with Lakshmi, he built 
a golden ship (v. 21). The last verse (v. 30) of the inscription states that the 
king built three golden domes over the image of Hema-chchhadana-raja 
Hari, over that of Garuda (v. 16) and over the hall which contained the 
couch of Vishnu (v. 6).’ Е 


400 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDAPA 


‘The following miscellancous gifts (for articles of furniture) to Ranga- 
natha are enumerated in the inscription :—A garland of emeralds (v. 4), 
a crown of jewels (v. 5), a golden image of Sesha (у. б), a golden arch 
(у. 9), a pearl garland (v. 11), a canopy of pearls (v. 12), different kinds of 
golden fruits (v. 13), a golden car (v. 14), a golden trough (у. 15), а 
golden image of Garuda (v. 16), a golden under-garment (у. 17), a golden 
aurcola (v. 18), a golden pedestal (v. 19), ornaments of Jewels (v. 24), a 
golden armour (v. e5), golden vessels (v. 28), and a golden throne 
(v. 29).’—(Ranganatha inscrip. of Sundarapandya, Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, p. rr.) 

(20) Krishnalayarh mandapam—an abode of Krishna, an open hall.— 
(Three inscrip. from Travancore, no. B, line 4; Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, p. 203.) 

(21) Asthana-éila-mandapa (not translated by Hultzsch).—(First Draksha- 
rama pillar inscrip., line 9, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1v, рр. 329, 330.) 

(22) Ghana-mantapa-vapra-saudha-ramyalayam (v. 39)—‘a temple 
(Шауа) adorned with a solid hall, а wall and a plastered mansion? (pp. 
123, 114). 

Sudha-liptarh $ilà-marhtapam (v. 43)— а plastered hall of stone, 
(рр. 123, 114). 

Vipulai ramyarn mahá-mamtapam (v. 44)—‘a fine large hall, 
(pp. 123, 114). 

`. maha-marntapam (v. 47)— а beautiful large hall’ (рр. 124, 
II5). 

Ghana prásádam nava-hema-kumbha-kalitarh ramyam maha-marta- 
pam (v. 51)— he presented a solid temple (prasada), adorned with nine 
golden pinnacles (kumbha), and a beautiful large hall, to the temple of 
Hari* (pp. 125, 115).—-(Mangalagiri pillar inscrip., Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 114, 
II5, 194, 125.) 

(23) Anandaika-niketanarn nayanayoh s($jasvan ^ manah-kairava- 

jyotsnaughah khalu visvakarmma-nipuna-vyapara-vaidaghdya- 
bhüh 1 
Grishma-grasa-bhayatibhita-janata-sautirya-durggalayo marggah 
kirttivijrimbhanasya jayinà prottambhito mandapah 11 
(Two Bhuvane$vara inscrip., no. r, of Svapnes- 
vara, v. 29, Ep. Ind., Vol. у, p. 202.) 

(24) * This inscription (Bhimavaram inscrip. of Kulottunga 1) 15 en- 
graved on a pillar in the mandapa in front of the Narayanasvamin temple 
at Bhimavaram in the Cocanada division of the Godavari District.’ — 
(Ер. Ind., Vol. у, p. 219.) 

(25) Utsava-marhtapa—a festive hall.—(Kondavidu inscrip. of Krishna- 
raya, v. 27, Ef. Ind., Vol. vi, pp. 237, 231.) ч 2 

(26) < The village of Sivamangalam of the North Arcot District contains 
a Siva temple named Stambhe$vara, which consists of a rock-cut shrine, 
two mandapas in front of it, and a stone enclosure. The two rock-cut 


401 


2 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


pillars of the gate by which the shrine is entered bears the two subjoined 
inscriptions. Besides, there аге several Chola inscriptions on the walls of 
the enclosure.’ —(Dr. Hultzsch. Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, p. 319.) 

(27) Madapo nava-gabha—a nine-celled hall. 

Patho madapo—a study.—(Kalre Cave inscrip. no. 20, Ef. Ind., 

Vol. уп, pp. 71, 72,.73.) 
(28) Sri-Kafichi-Jina-Vardhamàna-nilayasyàgre mahá-mandaparh éarn- 
gitarttham achikarach cha $ilayà baddharn $amantàt sthalam 11 

* Caused to be built, in front of the temple of the Jina-Vardhamàna 
at the prosperous Кайсы, a great hall for concerts and (caused to be) 
paved with stones the space all round.'—(Two Jaina inscrip. of Irugappa, 
no. B, line 2, Ep. Ind., Vol. vu, p. 116.) 

(29) * Two buildings to be erected in the temple of Arulalanatha (аге) 
a mandapa of one thousand pillars, a canopy of gems for (the image of) 
Mudivalanginan. . .—(Arulala-Perumal inscrip. of Prataparudra, line 8, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vu, pp. 131, 132.) 

(30) Sri-nara-sirhha-varma-nripatih Sri-kovalüre bhajan vasarh viśva- 

jagan-nivasa-vapushah Sri-vamanasyakarot | 
Sailarh Sumbhita-gata-kumbha-vilasat-kumbharh maha-mandapam 
prakararh para-malika-vilasitarh muktámayim cha prapa(-bha)m 1 

* The glorious prince Nara-sirhha-varman, residing in $rikovalüra made 
for the god Vamana, in whose body the whole world abides, a great 
mandapa of stone, resplendent with pitchers (kalasa or kumbha) of shining 
gold, a surrounding wall, adorned with excellent buildings, and a canopy of 
pearls.—(Fourteen inscrip. at Tirukkovalur, по. K, of Rajendradeva, lines 
1-2, Ef. Ind., Vol. уп, pp. 145, 146.) 

(31) Dharà-giri-garbha-marakata-marhdape—in an emerald pavilion 
on the Dharagiri hill.—(Dhara PraSasti of Arjunavarman, line 12, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. уш, pp. 103, 100.) 

(32) Tejahpala iti kshitirhdu-sachivah samjjvalabhih &ila-renibhih 

sphurad irndu-kurhda-ruchirarn Nemi-prabhor marndiram 1 
Uchchair marhdapam agrato Jina-(varà)-vàsa-dvi-parhcha-satarh 
tatparsveshu balànakam cha purato nishpadayamasivàn 11 

‘The minister Tejahpala, a moon on earth, erected the temple of the 
Lord Nemi, which shines by lines of stones as white as conch shells (and) 
is resplendent like the moon and jasmine flowers, a lofty hall (mandapa) 
in front (of it), fifty-two shrines for the best of the Jinas on the sides of it 
and a seat (balanaka) in the front/— (Mount Abu inscrip. no. r, v. бі, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 212, 218.) 

(33) . . . Kamakshi-dharma-mandape i 

Pratyabdan dvija-bhukty-arttham bhagam ekam akalpayat ıı 


402 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


о —— . l ____ — _.. M 
l ———À' 500 0 4 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE MANDAPA 


* Set apart onc share for the yearly feeding of Brahmanas іп the Ка- 
màkshi-dharma-mandapa.'— (Madras Museum plates of Srigiribhüpala, vv. 
21, 22, Ef. Ind., Vol. уш, PP: 311, 316.) 

(34) ° Marangari . . . the prime minister of king Магайјадајуап, 
made this stone temple and ascended heaven (i.e, died) without con- 
secrating it. Subsequently his brother Maran, Eyinan . . . who 
attained to the dignity of prime minister, made the mukha-mandapa 
(muga-mandapan) and consecrated (the shrine). —(Two Anaimalai inscrip., 
no. п, Ep. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 320, 321.) 

(35) Gf. Mandapika (lit., a small pavilion) : 

Sri-Naddüla-maha-sthàne Sri-Sarderaka-gachchhe Sri-Mahàvira- 
devaya Sri-Naddilla-talapada-Sulka-mamdapikayarh másanuma- 
sam dhiipa-ve(tai)lartham 1 

‘Granted to the Jaina temple of  Mahàviradeva in the Sanderak 
gachchha, at the holy place (Mahasthana) of Naddüla, a monthly (sum of 
fivc drammas), (to be paid) from the custom-house inthe grounds (talapada- 
svatala) of Naddula.’ 

For passages in which the term Mandapika occurs, compare, c. g., 
Ер. Ind., vol. r, pp, 114, 1-27 р. 173, 1-6, (Siyadoni-Satka-mandapika), 
P- 175, 1, 193 p. 177, I, 29 and 1, 30 ; p. 179, 1, 45; р. 262, 1, 3 (pattana- 
mandapika) ; Ind. Ant., vol. xiv. p. 10, col. 2 (Sripathastha-mandapika) ; 
Journ. As. Soc. Beng., vols. Lv, part r, P- 47; IV, p. 48, and v. ; Bhavnagar 
inscrip, p. 205, I, 7. Sulka-mandapikà occurs, e. 6» in Bhavnagar 
inscrip., p. 158 Ғ., 11, 10, 15 and 18. 

‘The meaning of mandapika is suggested by the Marathi marndavi, a 
custum-house.’ Prof. Kielhorn.—(The Chahamanas of Naddula, no. A, Nadol 
plates of Alhanadeva, lines 22-22, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 66, 63, and note 8.) 

(36) . . . Vidadhe sya marhdire marmdapam 11 

Chakre*(a)kshaya-tritiyayárh pratishtha marhdape dvijaih 11 
(Chahamanas of Naddula, no. C., Sundha Hill inscrip. of 
Chachigadeva, vv. 56, 57, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1х, p. 79-) 
(37) Deva-Sri-Sagi-bhushanasya kritinà devalayarh kāritarh yugmarh 
maihdapa-Sobhitar cha purato-bhadrarn pratolya saha | 
Kshetresasya tathà suralaya-vararh sphitam (абарата tatha bandharn 
Kaudika-sarjjfiakam bahu-jalarn dirgham tathà khanitam | 


(Kanker inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 7, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 127.) 
. (38) Kamaniya-sila-stambha-kadarhbottarhbitarhvaram 1! 
ViSamkata-vitarkali-viràjad ramga-mamtapam | 


403 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


MANDAPA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


* Tt is a large rangamandapa raised on a collection of beautiful stone 
pillars and adorned with rows of spouts.'—(Krishnapuram plates of Sada- 
Яуатауа, уу. 55, 56, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, рр. 336, 341.) 

(39) Pahini marndapa karaniyah Akshasamalapaniyah дата karttavya 

pashana-itakayam ghatitah . . . | 

*Pahini (the architect) constructed the тардара, aksha-sáma (2), 
and dama (2) with stones and bricks.’—(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. 
хш, Sanderava stone inscrip. of Kelhanadeva, line 2 f., Ep. Ind., Vol. хі, p. 48.) 

(до) * This inscription (the Chahamanas of Marwar, no. xvm) . . 
is incised on a pillar in the Sabhà-mandapa of the temple of Mahavjra.’— 
(Ер. Ind., Vol. xt, p. 51.) 

(41) Abhinava-nishpanna-preksha-madhya-mamdape . . . | | 

Suvarnnamaya-kalasaropana-pratishtha krità | | 

* The ceremony of placing a golden cupola on the newly made central 
hall, intended for dramatic performances was carried out.—(The Chaha- 
manas of Marwar, по. xix, Jalar stone inscrip., lines 5, 6, Ep. Ind., Vol. хі, 
р. 55.) 

(42) Tenochchair bbodhi-mande éa$i-kara-dhavalah sarvvato manda- 
pena kantah ргаѕада esha smara-bala-jayinah kàrito loka-sastuh 11 

* By him this beautiful mansion of the Teacher of mankind, who over- 
came the power of (the god) Smara, dazzling white as the rays of the moon d 
with an open pavilion on all sides, has been caused to be made at the exalt- / 
са Bodhi-manda’ (also called Vajrasana, the miraculous throne under | 
the Bodhi-tree at Bodh-Gaya, on which Buddha sat, when attaining Bodh: | 
or perfect wisdom.)—(Bodh-Gaya inscrip. of Mahanaman, lines 10-11 | 
C. I. I, Vol. ш, F. G. I., по. 71, pp. 276, 278, 275 ; also Sanskrit and Old» | 
Canarese inscrip. по. 166, Bodh-Gaya inscrip. of Mahanaman, line то f.» E i 
Ind. Ant., Vol. xv, рр. 358, 359.) i 

(43) ‘ There are several other inscriptions in the outer parts of the (Velur) | 
temple, viz., two on the pedestals of the two dvara-palakas in front of the ij 
борша, one on the left outer wall of the inner prakara, and five on the | 
floor of the alarnkaramandapa.' —(H.S.I.I., Vol. I, p. 127, first para.) f 

(44) * We the great assembly of Manimangalam, . . . being assembled, 
without a vacancy in the assembly, in the large mandapa (of) the Brahma- | | 
sthana in our уШаре... "—(Inscrip. of Virarajendra I, no. 30, line 36, ү 
H.S.LI., Vol. ш, p. 70.) | 

(45) ‘Brahmapriyan . . . caused to be made the stone work of а | 
flight of steps, with tiger's head at the bottom, for the abhisheka-mandapa | 
| 


5 


іп the temple of Vanduvarapati Emberuman at Manimangalam ... . -- 
(Inscrip. of Rajaraja III, no. 39, H.S.LL, Vol. ш, p. 86.) 
(46) Sri-kusala-mandapadi-yukta-rajaka-mala karakhya-padma-karabhi- 
rama-nutana-omkaresvara-deva-sthanam | 


aon 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ! MANDAPA 


“А beautiful new Ornkaresvara temple, a lotus ornament to the earth, 
which with its skilfully designed mantapas, etcetera, might be called a royal 
lotus— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. т, рр. 38, £, Gr.) 

(47) * This is the sacred marriage hall (Kalyana-mandapa) built (on 
the date specified) by Tirukkanam Аууа Mudeliyar’s son Vedagiri Mudeliyar 
for the god Sri-Subharaya Subhamiyar of Alagur,’ 

* This inscription is at Halasur, on the basement of the Kalyana-mandapa 
in the prakàra of the Subrahmanya temple.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. Ix, Banga- 
lore Taluq, no. 14 ; Roman Text, p. 8 ; Transl., p. 7.) 

(48) * This is the outer mandapa ( ? Churru-mandapam) called Śri- 
Rajendra-Sola-devar after the name of (the king) Sri-Rajendra-Sola- 
devar, caused to be erected by Jakkiyappai, daughter of Tirbhuvanaiyam 
of Ittakirai, at the foot of Sulkal-malai, otherwise called Kanaka-parvvatam 
(the golden mountain) in the Kadambanákkai-nàdu.'— (Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, 
Kolar Taluq, no. 115 ; Roman Text, p. 49; Transl., P- 44-) 

(49) * Agrahara village, mantapas, mantapas for alms (bhiksha-man- 
tapa), and all other religious provisions’. . .—(Ibid., Vol. x, Mulbagal 
Taluq, no. 2; Roman Text, p. 82; Transl., р. 71.) 

(50) * Caused to be built in the temple of Jayambu-nàyakar the danc- 
ing hall (nirutta, i.e., nritta-mandapam), the vestibule (nadai-maligai), 
the surrounding hall and the tower.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Bowringpet 
Taluq, no. 382; Roman Text, p.175; Transl., p. 146.) : 

(51) Varadaraja-devara-mukha-mantapada-sannidhiyalu Rajagambhi- 

ran emba kottalavanu.’ 

‘ In proximity to the mantapa facing the god Varadaraja having erected 
the bastion named Rajagambhira.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Malur Taluq, no. 1; 
Roman Text, p. 186 ; Transl., p. 155-) 

(52) ‘ That Singa-Raja had the two lines of fortification, round this 
city built, and holding the office of pattana-svami by order of the god 
Nayinar, so that all the people could see, for the god's tirumana had шап- 
tapas made before and behind the temple (hindana-mundana-bhagada 
mantapa), had a pond constructed called after Gopa Raja the Gopa- 
samudra, had a palace built for Gopa Raja to the west of that pond, and 
to the right of the god, Singa-Raja’s palace; and that he might at sunrise 
and at evening twilight bathe at both times, and have a room for domestic 
sacrifice, from the threshold of which he might look to the spire of Varada 
Raja’s temple . . . and at the eastern gopura which Kundapa- 
dannayaka had built in front of the mantapa facing the god (mukha- 
mantapa).’—(Ibid., по. 4; Roman Text, p. 187; Transl., р. 156.) 

(53) “беңі Devan built a beautiful stone temple with a mantapa in 
front of it.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Chintamani ТаШша, по. 83; Transl., 
Р- 258, para. 2.) 

495 


МАМПАРА AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(54) * That the king Praudha-Raya (on the date specified, A.D.) 1426 
being in the dina-mantapa, in the presence of the god Virüpaksha on the 
bank of the Tungabhadra, for the purpose of making the great Kalpalata 
gift. . . .?—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. хп, Tumkur Taluq, no. 11 ; Transl., р. 5, 
para. 2.) 

(55) ‘Caused to be made the Honna-devi-mantapa.’ 

This expression is like those, as Vishnu-mandapa, where mandapa is a 
detached shrine or temple.—(Jbid., no. 26; Transl., p. 8.) 

(56) ‘ His wife (with various praises) Kallarasiyamma, had the shrine 
of the god Sidda-Mallikarjuna renewed, and having the whole (temple) 
strengthened, had the two domes built, and the plastering done, had a 
portico made to the front of the temple, erected a bhoga-mandapa. . 
and building a tower and a hall for the god, made agrant of land to 
provide for the offerings (specified).’—(Jbid., Gubbi Taluq, no. 20; Roman 
Text, p. 41, middle ; Transl., p. 23, line 6.) 

(57) ° Presented at the feet of the god Chandra-$ckhara the processional 
form of the god Ѕаћкагеќуага, a dipamile pillar, and a _patala-mantapa.’ 
--(Ер. Carnat., Vol. хп; Tiptur Talug, no. 70; Transl., p; 57.) 

(58) * At the time of the eclipse of the sun, in the presence of the god 
Virüpàáksha on the bank of the Tungabhadra, in the mukti-mantapa to 


the sacrificer Naganatha (descent, etc., stated), he granted the Timaduga ` 


village.’ —(Ер. Carmat, Pavugada Taluq, no. 4, Transl., p. 117; Roman 
Text, p. 193, Ғ) 

(59) ‘In the antarala (interior) they erected a most beautiful тайра- 
mantapa, and а fine chandra-Sale (upper storey) according to the direc- 
tions given by the king Timmendra,’—(Jbid., Vol. хп, Pavugada Taluq, 
no. 46; Transl., p. 122, line 14; Roman Text, p. 203, V. 9.) 

(бо) * Kailaadres svatulyarh kalita-Suchi-gunarh írimati sri-Suchindre 

Vafichi-bhii-pala-chuda-manir  akrita puro-mandape сһапага- 
mauleh 1! 

“ Катауагтӣ, the crowning gem of the Vafichi sovereigns, constructed 
the front mandapa of the moon-crested (Siva) at Suchindram, equalling 
KailaSa in splendour, and full of the purest qualities.— (Inscrip. in the 
Pagodas of T'irükurungudi, іп Tinnevelly and of Suchindram, in south Travan- 
core, Ind. Ant., Vol. п, p. 361 ; c. 2, v. 2, р. 862; с. r, рага, 2.) 

(61) * In the centre, fronting the single doorway, is a shrine or mandapa 
covering a slab, on which is carved in relief а sitting figure with the right 
foot on an elephant, the left оп а bullock.’—(Ind. Ant, Vol. уп I 
с. 1, last four lines.) ; mu 

(62) Rambha-patra-phala-prasüna-lalite sat-toranàchchhàdane nānā- 

varna-pataka-ketana-lasat-prante maha-mandape l : 


406 


907 20007 


IVS SIVA b 'ewurr]o» ool Jo 
TWH ATSW3SSV 


VdVdNVIN 


Q3 vA-1:s002 


‘Sluvd 8 SINISA daN 


NOIS(ASd бина HOW 
ЧУЛА VR Jydavanx Nive 


лау sla 


—— a .F,Y. 


SNOlTIANd AHL 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


\a + HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDAPA 


i Td Kundanath navakarn vidhàyya vidhivad-viprair vidhana-kshamaih 
Nu Катта4сһатуа-Катата samapayad idarn Sri-Ranganatho guruh и 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, inscrip. of Queen Lalitatripura 
Sundari, v. 3, Ind. Ant., Vol. IX, p. 194.) 
(63) * On the east side of this great Stübi or Vimana stands the Veli- 
mandapam or < outer hall,” а plain rectangular building 160 feet long 
by 83 feet wide, with a flat roof supported by four rows of plain stone 
pillars . „. . ° 
* Between the Veli-mandapam or outer court and the great Vimana, 
there is a three-storeyed building joining them together, called Mele- 
mandapam, coyering the transverse aisle between the north and south 
entrances by which the shrine is approached. This portico or transept 
is designed and completed in keeping with the grand scale and style of the 
Vimana.’—(Gangai-Kondapuram Saiva temple, Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, p. 118, c. r.) 
(64) Sri-Brahma-Devara-mantapavanu— presented the Brahma Deva 
mantapa.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 121; Roman Text, р. 88 ; Transl., p. 172.) 
(65) * Tupada-Vengatapa made a stone mantapa and a well for the god 
Prasanna-Vengataramana to the north-west of the precincts of the temple 
of the god Paschima-Ranganatha.—(Ey. Carnat., Vol. m, Seringapatam Taluq, 
по. 9 ; Transl., p. 8 ; Roman Text, p. 17.) 
e. (66) * Also land for the god Hanumanta newly set up in the mantapa 
in the middle of the village, to which the god Rama pays a visit at the 
Ramanavami (festival), i.e., the idol of Rama is brought there on that 
| occasion.'—(Ibid., no. 13 ; Transl., p. g ; Roman Text, p. 21.) 
IE It should be noticed that this mandapa does not belong, as an attached 
| 
I 
| 


or detached building, to any temple. It is by itself а temple. Such 
mandapas or temples are named after the gods whose idols are consecrated 
in them, such as Vishnu-mandapa, Kali-mandapa, and so forth. 

(67) * His awful wife Rangamma, . . . had erected a mantapa, with 
a large pond, and presented a palanquin set with jewels and all other 
kinds of gifts, a bank having grown up and being unsightly, he bought the 
Ф ground and established there а matha, also endowing it so that 24 chief 
І : Vaidika Vaishnava Brahmans of the Ramanuja sect might be fed in the 
| | ranga-mantapa.’—(Ep. Garnat., Vol. ш, Seringapatam Taluq, по. 89; Transl., 

| pp. 26-27 ; Roman Text, p. 57.) | 1 eS ER 
(68) Sri-Timma-dandanayaka mahisi Sri-Ranga-nayaki-rachita Я 
Sampat-kumara-mahisi puratah pratibhati rahga-mantapika II 

‘ Timma-dandanayaka’s wife (Queen Consort) Ranga-nàyaki erected 
a ranga-mantapa in front of (the temple of) the goddess of Sampat- 
kumara.’—(Jbid., no. 97 ; Roman Text, p. 59; Transl., p. 28.) E 

In this sense mandapa is most generally understood. This is what is 
called nat (1.е., nritya or ranga)-mandira, as stated above, 


407 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Р 
ШЕЛ ia 


2 
< 
E 
3 


MANDAPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(69) * Caused to be erected the ranga-mantapa of the god Kefava, 
also the ranga-mantapa of the god Ranganatha to the sonin- 
east of that village and a sabha-mantapa for the village. — 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. xr, Tirumakidlu-Narasipur Taluq, no. 58 5 Transl., р. 78.) 

(70) “Тһе accountant Lingana, son of with devotion crestea 
(a mantapa of) 12 ankanas near the big aśvattha tree, an DEADLY to 
the Matsya-tirtha, on the bank of the Arkapushkarini.’—(Zp. Carnat., 
Vol. rv, Yedatore Taluq, no. 3; Transl., p. 52; Roman Text, p. 84.) 

(71) * The manager of his (Krishna-Deva-maharaya’s) palace, 
made for the god Virabhadra . . . , a gandhagodi-mantapa, in front 
ofthe ranga-mantapa.’—(Ep. Carnat., Nagamangala Taluq, no. 4; Transl., 
p. 1145; Roman Text, p. 188.) 

(72) ‘ Haridasa-Ràüta, son of . . . set up in front of the god 
Prasanna-Madhava of Bellür a festival (utsava) mantapa, a pillar for lights 
(dipa-maleya-kambha) and an altar for offerings (Бай-риһа).-(Ер. Carnat., 
Vol. ту, Nagamangala Taluq, no. 42; Transl., p. 124; Roman Text, p. 219.) 

(73) * Caused a uyyale-mantapa to be erected for the spring festival of 
the god.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 12; Transl., p. 46 ; 
Roman ‘Text, p. 106.) 

(74) * Newly built the Kalyana-mandapa (Kattisi samarpisida Kalyana- 
mantapa ankana) as an offering at the lotus-feet of the god Chenna- 
KeSaya.’—(&p, Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 21; Transl, p. 52 ; 
Roman Text, p. 119.) 

(75) The grant was made : that a pond and mantapa may be con- 
structed-in front of the temple upper storey for the spring water-festival 
(vasanta-kaladalli abage-seve nadeve-bagge) for the god.’—(Ibid., no. 29; 
Transl., p. 54; Roman Text, р. 122, line 15 f.) 

(76) * He constructed a pond for a raft and a Vasanta-mantapa ; and 
in order to provide for ten-days? raft festivalin Phalguna, for the oblation 
and feeding of Brahmans during the festival . . . Һе made а grant.’— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 78 ; Transl, p. 64-65 ; Roman 
Text, p. 150.) ` 

(77) * Built а brick enclosure for the temple, erected a kalaša to it, 
and a wooden ranga-mantapa, in front, had the whole plastered,’ . ; 
--(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Arsikere Taluq, no. 8; Transl., p. 115, line 6 
f. ; Roman Text, p. 263, line 9.) 

(78) * Seated оп the diamond throne in the mantapa in front of the 
Basave$vara temple іп the square in the middle of the street of the sun 
and moon in the Kanthiraya-pete of Banavara situated to the south о 
Srifaila.’—(Ibid., no. 94; Transl., р. 150, line 2 f.) 

(79) “(Оп the date specified), all the Brahmanas of the immemorial 
артаһага Brahma-samudra, agreeing among themselves, and going to 
the prabhu-mantapa (pabu-mantapadalli) and seating themselves, Damoja, 


408 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDAPA 


RC d REL Ue worshipped their feet and pre- 
Carnat., Vn P che 2 e ^ URN Ro as Та 
uy b 0 q - 57; Transl., р. 12; Roman Text, p. 

(80) * Caused a bhoga-mantapa to be erected in front of the temple 
of the god Janarddana.’ 
orien ad that the bhoga-mantapas are generally built on 

he ront, of the temple.—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. vi Kadir 
Taluq, no. 91; Transl., p. 16 ; Roman Text, p. 52.) 
ne pus the Чапшар to be erected.’ —(Tbid., Chikmagalur 
» по. 76; Transl., p. 44; Roman Text, p- 111, line 7.) 

(82) ‹ Outside, it (the temple of Sambhava-nātha) is very plain and 
unpretentious, whilst inside it consists of three apartments—a mandapa 
or porch, the Sabhā-maņdapa, or assembly hall, and -the nij(a) mandira 
or shrine. The floors are laid with coloured marbles and the roof support- 
ed on pillars.’ 

‘The mandapa or hall is roofed by an octagonal dome supported, as 
usual, on twelve pillars) . . .—(Ahmadabad Architecture, Burgess, Arch. 
Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxxi, рр. 87, 90.) 

(83) See Mukha-mandapa, of ботебуага temple at Kolar.— (Mysore 
Arch. Reporls, 1913-14, Plate уп, fig. 3, p. 20.) 

(84) ‘Its (Kandariya Mahadeo temple’s) general plan is similar to 
that of most of the larger mediaeval temples of Northern India (see its 
plan, Plate xcvi). It has the usual ardha-mandapa or portico, the manda- 
ра or nave, ће mahà-mandapa or transept, the antarala or ante-chamber, 
and the garbhagriha or sanctum, each of which has its separate pinnacled 
roof rising in regular gradation from the low pyramid of the entrance to the 
lofty spire of the sanctum.’—(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. п, p. 419, 
no. 3.) 

. ‘There are eighteen carved pillars, each of 9’ 9" high, supporting the 
dome of the outer hall or the ardha-mandapa, which affords an area of 
16” 3" inside for loungers and devotees to rest it.’—(Jbid., Vol. xxm, р. 135.) 

(85) * Mandapa—any open or enclosed building in connexion with 
a temple. If used for any purpose, the distinctive name is prefixed.’— 
Rea. (Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxi, p. 39.) 

(86) Madhya-mandapa—second hall of a temple. 

Maha-mandapa—central hall of a temple, the nave. 
Mandapa—the porch of a temple.—(Vincent Smith, Gloss. to Gun- 


ningham's Arch. Surv. Reports.) 
It should be noticed that the architectural treatises, general literature, 


and epigraphical records corroborate one another as regards the various 
types of this class of buildings. 
499 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


See 


MANDAPIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MANDAPIKA (see MANDAPA)—A small pavilion, a custom house. = 
(1) Sri-Naddüla-maha-sthane śrī-Sarhderaka-gachchhe $ri- Maha-virade- 
vaya éri-Naddüla-talapada-Sulka-marhdapikayam тпазапатпазатп- 
dhüpa-tailarthar | 
(Granted to the Jaina temple of) ‘ Mahaviradeva in the Sanderaka 
gachchha, at the holy place (Mahisthina).of Naddüla, a monthly (sum of 
five drammas) (to be paid) from the custom house in the grounds (talapada- 
svatala) of Naddila.’ 
* For passages in which the term mandapikà occurs, compare Ep. Ind., 
Vol. т, p. 114, line 27; p. 173, line 6 (Siyadoni-Satka-mandapika) ; p. 175, 
ling 19; p. 177, lines 29 and 30; p. 179, line 45; p. 262, line 3 (pattana- 
mandapika) ; Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, p. то, col. 2 (Sri-pathastha-mandapika) ; 
Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vols. Lv, Part r, p. 47; IV, p. 48, and v., Bhavnagar 
inscrip., p. 205, line 7. Sulka-mandapika occurs, e.g., in Bhavnagar in- | 
scrip., p. 158 f, lines то, 15 and 18. Тһе meaning of mandapikà is sug- | 
gested by the Marathi mamdavi, a custom house.’ Prof, Kielhorn.— 
(The Chahamanas of Naddüla, no. A, Nadol plates of Alhanadeva, lines 22-23; 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 66, 63, and note 8.) 
(2) Cf. Mandapika-dayat &reshthi-nara-simha-go-vrisha-dhiradi-tyaih | 
(Shergadh stone inscrip., lines 1-2, Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, p. 176.) 
(3) Mandapika—evidently means some public or official building of 
the town.— (Ind. Ant, Vol. xiv, р. 10, second col., line 5 ; and Journ. Beng. 
As. Soc., Vol. xxx, p. 332, last line; Siyadoni inscrip., lines 6, 19, 29, 30, 45, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. r, p. 166, 173 f.) 
(4) Sri-Timma-dandanàyaka mahisi Sri-Ranga-nayaki rachità | 
Sampat-kumara-mahisi-puratah pratibhati ranga-mantapikà 11 


° Timma-dandanayaka's wife (Queen Consort) Raüga-nàyaki erected a | 
rañga-mantapa in front of (the temple of) the goddess of Sampat-kumara.’— 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. nr, Seringapatam Taluq, no. 97; Roman Text, p. 59 ; 

Transl., p. 28.) ¿ l 
MANDI (see ВорнікА)--Тһе crowning part of the capital of a | 
column, а market-place, a market. [ 

(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 57, 107; see under ӚТАМВНА.) 
МАТТА-УАҺАМА--Ап elephant іп rut, а kind of entablature. 
(M., хут, 19, also L, 279 ; see under PRASTARA.) 
MADIRA-GRIHA (SALA)—A drinking house, a tavern, an ale- 
house. 
Siva-vaisravanasvi-$rimadira-griharn cha pura-madhye kàrayet | 
(Kautiliya-Artha-fastra, Chap. xxv, p. 55-56.) 
410 


— 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MADHÜCHCHHISHTA 


e Dn (see VALABHI)—A synonym of valabhi or a sloping 
rool. 


f ' (М., хут, 51; see under (BA)VALABHT.) 
MADHÜCHCHHISHTA—Wax, the casting of an image in wax. 


Manasara (Chap. хуш, 1-56, named Madhüchchhishta) : 

The chapter opens with an enumeration of phalli and ascetics as 
well as architects whose: images are to be cast in wax (lines 2-10). 
The architects, called sthapati and sthapaka, make the can for pre- 
paring the wax therein, but the actual preparation is not explicitly 
described. АП kinds of images, temporary or permanent, stationary or 
movable, have to be cast in wax. Тһе process seems to be this (lines 
20-44) : Some part of the image is covered with a thin copper-leaf, 
and the wax is laid on two or three angulas deep. Mulika(?) is 
spread above the part covered with wax. The idol is heated after 
it has been besmeared with wax. If the master likes, the process of 
smearing may be done with melted iron too. The half of the image, 
not covered with earth, is washed in water. This process is repeated 
several times. If any of the minor limbs be lost through this process, 
the image should be furnished with it again after having been heated. 
But if the head or the middle of the body be damaged, the whole 
image should be changed. If the master does not like the image, 
it should be recast. 

The whole process has to be performed through many ritualistic 
ceremonies in different stages. 

In other texts the process of casting an image in wax is much more clear- 
ly described : 

‘If images have to be cast in metal, the wax must first be melted 
and poured (out of the mould) and all defects removed with cloth.'— 
(Karanagama, п, 41.) 

* If the images be required to be made of earth, rods (of metal or wood) 

- must be (inserted in them) ; if of metal it must first be prepared well in 
wax.’ —(Suprabhedāgama, XXXIV, 21.) : 

* If an image is to be made of metal, it must be first made of wax, and then 
coated with earth ; gold and other metals are purified and cast into (the 
mould) and a complete image is thus obtained by capable workmen.’— 
(Vishnu-samhita, Patala XIV.) 

«Та regard to bronze images" says Mr. Rao “it is believed. by some 
that India could not have known the Cire perdue method of making metal 
images earlier than about the tenth century A.D. and that India must 
have, therefore, borrowed it from Europe. That the art of casting metals 


411 


ng 


uc T 


MADHYA-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


one. In support of his assertion, Mr. Rao gives the three above-mentioned 
quotations.—(Hlements of Hindu Iconography.) 
MADHYA-KANTA—A class of the twelve-storeyed buildings once 
prevailing in the central country (see details under PRAsADA). 
Madhyamalaya-vistàre-trayas-trirnéad-vibhajite | 
Tri-bhagam küta-vistàáram madhya-bhadraika-bhagikam | 
Maha-éalà navarhSarh syat Scsharh pürvavad acharet | 
Madhya-kantam iti proktam | 


е Я к 
іп wax moulds is much carlier in India сап be shewn in more ways than | 


(М., ххх, 11-14.) 


MADHYA-KOSHTHA—The middle compartment, the central hall. 
(M., XXXIII, 305, etc.) 

MADHYA-NASI (see NAst)—The middle vestibule. 
(M., xv, 119, 124, ctc.) 
MADHYA-BHADRA (se Внлрка)--Гһе middle tabernacle, the 
central porch or hall. 
(M., xv, 110 ; xix, 177; xxxii, 380, сіс.) 


MADHYA-BHUVANGA—A moulding of the door. 
(M., xxxix, 72.) 
MADHYA-RANGA (see MUKHTA-PRAPARGA)—The central theatre, 
the enclosed courtyard, the quadrangle surrounded by buildings 
on four sides and open at the top. 
Manasára (Chap. хіп, 1-36 named Madhya-ranga,) refers in this con- 
nection to the open quadrangle, stone column and grain-column (mukta- 
ргарайра, Silà-stambha and dhanya-stambha). The Madhya-raüga is 
provided with dwarf pillars, entablatures, platforms, daises, pedestals, 
tabernacles, vestibules, pent-roofs, top-rooms, etc. The upper portion is 
adorned with figures of leographs and crocodiles. 
The meaning ofthe term is clear from the contents of this chapter and also 
from the quotations given below : 
Madhya-rangarh tad-uddi$ya chordhve’lankara(rh) vakshyate | | 
Evar tu chordhvalañkararh madhya-range tu vinyaset | | 


(M., хут, 155, 169 ; see also lines 156-168.) | | 

In connexion with mandapas or pavilions. ё , 
(M., xxxiv, 128, 210, 234, 324, 456, etc. ) | 
Grihe và madhya-range và раг$уе và chaisa-konake (айкогаграпат | 
D 1 


kuryat) 1 
(М., xxxvii, 13.) | 


Тһе сепіга! part of the coronation hall.—(M., хых, 183.) 


412 
e * i | Р 
Es - CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA > 
UP ep Y . " & 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANDIRA 


MADHYA-SALA (у. SALA)—The middle hall, a special interior 
chamber, a kind of council hall. 
Kshudra-salashtadha proktarn koshtha-$ala-chatushtayam 1 
Madhya-Sala-tri-bhagena bhadra-s4la cha madhyame | 
(M., XXVI, 12-13; see also M., xx, 56, etc.) 


MANDARAC—A type of building which is go cubits wide, has ten 
Storeys and turrets. 
(1) TrithSad-dhastayamo daga-bhaumo mandarah Sikhara-yuktah 1 
(Compare this with Кабуара quoted by the commentary and given 
below) : 
Mandarah $ikharair yuktah shad-aérir dasa-bhümikah | 
Trirnšad-dhastarnš cha vistirnah prasádo'yam dvitiyakah 11 
(Brihat-samhita, LVI, 21, 7. В. А. S. 
N. S., Vol. vr, p. 319.) 
(2) Bhavishya-Puràna (Chap. сххх, v. 28; see under PRASADA). 
(3) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ccrxix, vv. 28, 32, 47, 53; see under PRASADA). 
(4) Agni-Purdna (Chap. civ, vv. 14, 15 ; see under PRASADA). 
(5) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21-22, 24-25; see under PRASADA), 
(6) A building with four $alàs (compartments) and eight kütas (towers 
or domes) : 
Mand(h)ara-nàma ity-ukta$ chatuh-salashta-kitakam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 43.) 


2 


MANDIRA—A type of building, a hall, a room, a temple, a shrine. 
“(1) A type of rectangular building (Garuda-Purüpa, Chap. XLVI, 
vv. 21-22, 26-27: sec under PRASADA). 
(2) Three kinds of mandira (Vastu-vidya, cd. Ganapati Sastri, VI, 15-18) : 
(3) Shodaga-mandira-chakra (Vástu-tattva, 1853, p. 1 Ё, see under GRIHA- 
VINYASA). 

(4) Paritah pranavakara-prakara-valayamchitam 1 
Kamaniya-éala-stambha-kadambottambitarnvaram 11 
Visamkata-vitam kalr-virajad-ramga-mamtapam | 
Vidhaya vipulotturnga-gopurarn deva-marhdiram |! 

Vigalarh ratha-vithirh cha syarndanarh marhdaropamam | 
Tatra pratishthitarya-Sri-Taraka-brahma-ripine I! : Р 
‘Built a temple (ас Krishnapura) which was encircled by a wall of the 
shape of the pranava and a broad and lofty tower. It has a large ranga- 
- mandapa raised on a collection of beautiful stone pillars and: adorned with 
rows of spouts. Не built a car like the Mandara mountain and also broad 


413 


MASI-(ST)TI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


roads round the temple and for the propitiation of the god Vishnu, set up 
there (i.e. in the temple). 

(Krishnapuram plates of Sadasivardya, VV. 55, 56. 
` 57, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, рр. 336, 341.) 

^i (5) Tenedarh karitarh tungar dhürjjater mandira-griham | 
! * He caused to be made this lofty dwelling of Dhürjjati (Siva) "— (Inscrip, 
at the Ganeša temple, Mamallapuram, v. 10, R. S. I. I, Vol. 1, no. 18, рр. 4» 5 
ibid. no. 18, inscrip. at the Dharmaraja тардара, Mamallapuram, v. 10, p. 6.) 
(6) * Koga-varddhana-girer anupirvvarn so’yam unmishita-dhih suga- 


tasya 1 
"Vyastam àrani-karaika-garimnyo mandiram sma vidadhati yathàr- 
tham 11 5 
К “То the east of mount Коба-уагаһала, this man of open intellect 


established in a manner suitable to the purpose a temple of that Sugata 
(Buddha), the dignity of whom alone sufficed to defeat hosts of Магав.-- 
(Buddhist Sanskrit inscript., from Kota, v. 17; Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, рр. 46, 48.) 
(7). . . Tenedam mamdiram Kama-vidvishah | 
Karitam muktaye bhaktya kirttayecha kritatmanarh 11 

(Inscrip. of the Kings of Chedi, no. А, Tewar stone inscrip. 
of Gaya Karnadeva, line 17, Ind. Ant., Vol. хуш, p. 211.) 

(8) Jainam mandiram indira-kula-griharh sad-bhaktito’ chikarat | 
í * Out of pure faith, he made this Jaina temple a home for Lakshmi.’ — 

(Ер. Сатаі., Vol. 11, no. 65; Roman Text, p. бо; Transl., p. 149.) 


b. MASI(-SI)TI—A mosque, a Muhammadan place of worship. 

* Rangai-Nàyakayya, in order to endow the stone masiti (mosque) 
(kalla-masitiya-deva-sthanakke), which Babu Setti had erected in the 
inner street of Sindaghatta, made a grant for it of the village of Sivapura 
and Habiba's house.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. 1v, Krishnarajapet Taluq, no. 72 ; 
Transl., p. 111, Roman Text, p. 183.) 

МАЅОКАКА—А lintel, i.e., thin piece of timber or stone that 
covers an opening and supports a weight above it. It implies the 
cornice of the entablature. It is sometimes used in the sense of 
adhishthana or base. 

(1) Adhishthana-vidhirh vakshye Sastre sarhkshipyate’dhuni 1 

Harmya-tunga-vasat proktarh tasya maàsürakonnatam | 
қ I (M., хіу, 1, 8.) 
Tasman masürcna sahaiva sarvarh kritan vimaneshu cha bhū- 
shananii 


(Ibid., 409-410.) 


414 


MASÜRAKA. 
YUPA STAMBHA, : 4 


MUKULA. 


E 
E 
Е 
| 


Evam chatuh-shashti-masürakáni $ástrokta-mànena vibhajitani | 
(Ibid. 393-394.) 
Ahatya(m) ashtadhà harmyarh ganya-manam ihochyate | 
. Utsedhe chashta-bhage tu ekarhSena masürakam | 
Dvi-bhagarh chànghri-tugam. . . .1 
(M., хіх, 20-22 ; see also хімп, 5; XXXIV, 266, etc.) 
(2) Tad-varddhitopapithar và tad-varddhita-masürakám | 
Pádayama-samottünga-masüraka-yutàri tu và 1 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 115.) 
Masüra implies the cornice of the entablature. 
(Ibid., xv, 47; see under PRASTARA.) 
Masüra, a synonym, as stated, but apparently a component part, of. 
adhishthana or base : 22 | 
Masürakam adhishthanam vastvàdhàram dharatalam 1 
Talarn kuttimàdy-aügam adhishthanasya kirtitam 11 
(Ibid., ту, 202.) 
MAHA-KANTA—A class of eight-storeyed buildings. 
(М., XXVI, 35-39 ; see under PRAsADA.) 
MAHA-GOPURA—The gate-house of the fifth court or at the 
extreme boundary of a compound. ) 
(M., хххш, 10; see under GoPuRA and PRAKARA.) 
МАНА-СКАМА--А large village. 

: (M., x, 79; 5% details under GRAMA.) 
MAHA-TAULI—A synonym of prachchhadana or roof, the top- 
floor. 

(M., xvi, 57.) 
MAHA-DVARA—The great door, the chief or outer gate ofa village, 
town or house. 
(M., 1x, 290, 315 ; see under Рудка.) 
Maha-dvarath tu sarvesharh langalakara-sannibham | 
. Kapata-dvaya-sarnyuktarh dvaranarh tat prithak prithak | Р 
7 (M., rx, 360-361; see also XXXI, 79.) 
MAHA-NASI (see NAst)—A large vestibule. és 
(Nasika-sikharanvitam) tad-ardharh stüpikottunge tan-maha паѕіка- | 
Sraye | еі 
2 (M., Xv, 91.) 
Dvi-lalate mahā-nāsī ekādaśa-śikhānvitam | : 


415 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE | МАНАМА ° 


* 4 


MAHA-PADMA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MAHA-PADMA—A type of round building. 

(1) Agmi-Purana (Chap. civ, vv. 17-18; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Garuda-Pzrána (Chap. XLVI, уу. 21, 23, 28-20; see under PRASADA). 
МАНА-РАТТА--А moulding of the base, a large fillet. 


(М., xiv, 301; see the lists of mouldings 
under ADHISHTANA.) 


MAHA-PITHA—The pedestal, a site plan, the lower part of the 
phallus : 
A site plan in which the whole area is divided into sixteen equal 
squares.—(4M., уп, 5, 61; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
Cf. Mahà-pitha-pade rathyà dikshu dikshu trayam tatha | 
, (M., 1х, 429, etc.) 
The pedestal of an image : 
Padma-pitham шаһа-р аш tri-mürtinàm cha yojayet | 
(M., 1л, 86, etc.) 


MAHA-MANDAPA (se under MANDAPA)—The great hall of 
entrance to the main shrine of temples. 

(Chalukyàn Architecture, Arch. Surv., New 

Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, p. 39.) 


See under MANDAPA : 

Mangalagiri pillar inscrip. (vv. 44, 47, 51, Ер. Ind., Vol. vr, pp. 114, 
II5, 123, 124, 125). 

Two Jain inscrip. of Irugappa. (no. В, line 2, ibid., Vol. уп, p. 116). 

Inscrip. from Nepal (no. 23, inscrip. of Queen Lalita-Tripura Sundari, 
v. 3, Ind. Ant. Vol. х, p. 94). 

‘ This building (maha-mandapa) stands in the east central portion of 
the large court. ` . . it originally stood detached from the central 
vimana.’ | 

“Тһе plan is a rectangle with the greater length from north to south. 
The four sides are open in the centre, and on cach facade, a portion of the 
wall is returned along the several elevations from the four corners. The 
east front has the entrance divided into three bays by two square piers 
with a responding pilaster on the return wall at each side.’ : 

* The west side or back is similarly divided, but the piers are octagonal 
for a portion of their length.’ 

“Тһе north and south entrances are simple openings, with pilasters on 
the sides, undivided by piers.’ 

416 


) СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE а MÁNI-BHADRA 


‘Two yãlis on the back responding pilasters are abutted against and 
partly covered by the cast wall of the modern ardha-mandapam. Тһе 
forated window in the east wall of the ardha-mandapam opens in to the 
maha-mandapam.’—(Pallava Architecture, Arch. Surv., New. Imp. Series, 
Vol. xxxiv, p. 36, paras. I, 2, 3, 4, 8 and то; see also Plate L.) 

“Тһе таһа-тардара was roofed also by overlapping courses of stones : 
the square corners were gradually rounded off by successive small por- 
tions, till it formed an octagon, over which the circular roof proper rested.’ 
—(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. Уш, p. 171, para. 2.) 

MAHA-MARYADA—The fifth enclosure (ргакага) at the extreme 
boundary of a compound, the gate-house thereof is called maha- 
gopura or dvara-gopura. 1 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxt, 118, 125; see under PRAKARA.) 
MAHA-VAJANA—A large fillet, a moulding of the entablature. 
(M., ху, 69 ; see the lists of mouldings under PRASTARA.) 
MAHA-VRITA—A kind of phallus. 
Š (М., Lu, 2; see under LINGA.) 


MAHA-VRITTA—A kind of joinery. 


(M., хуп, 102 ; see under SANDHI-KARMAN.) 


-MAHA-SALA—A large hall. 


Cf. of the sixteen parts width of a building the mahā-śālā is seven parts 
broad.—(M., XXVI, ro, etc.). 


MAHASANA—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 225 equal squares. ` 
(M., уп, 18-20; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
MAHAMBUJA—A large суша, a moulding of the pedestal. 
(M., xut, 91 ; see the lists of mouldings under ОрАРЇТНА.) - 


MAGADHA(-KANTA)—A class of twelve-storeyed buildings once 


. prevailing in the country of Magadha. 


Tad evam anu-sala madhye bhadra-éalaika-bhagikam | 
Evam  màágadha-kantam syat karna-küta-sabhadrakam 1 
(M., xxx, 33-34; see also 31-32 under VAMSA-KANTA.) 
MANI-BHADRA (see MANI-BHADRA)—A pavilion with sixty-four 
columns. ; 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 103 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


417 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MATRANGULA 


MATRANGULA (see under ANGULA)—A measure equal to une 
middle digit of the middle finger in the right hand of the architect 
or priest, employed in measuring the sacrificial objects like the kusa- 
grass or seat, the spout of a ladle, and the ladle, etc. 

(Suprabheda@gama, XXX, 4-5; 7-8 ; see under ANGULA.) 


MANA—A house well measured (A.-V., 1x, 3 3 Ш, 12). The measure- 
ment of height or length. 


(1) The linear measurement is divided into six kinds—Mana (Ayama, 
Ауаға, Dirgha), Ргатапа, Parimana (Vistara, Тага, Striti Vistriti, Vis- 
trita, Vyasa, Visàrita, Уірша, Tata, Vishkambha, Visala), Lamba-mana 
(Sūtra, Unmita), Unmana (Bahala, Ghana, Miti, Uchchhraya, Tunga, 
Unnata, Udaya, Utsedha, Uchcha, Nishkrama, Nishkriti, Nirgama, 
Nirgati, Udgama), апа Upamana (Nivra, Vivara, Antara). 

The measurement from the foot to the top of the head is called Mana 
which is in fact nothing but height. Pramana is the measurement of 
breadth (vistrita). Рагітапа is the measurement of width ог circum- 
ference (paritah). Lamba-màna is the measurement along the plumb 
lines or the lines drawn perpendicularly through different parts of the 
body, Mana, or the measurement of height being determined by the sur- 
face of the body. Unmaàna is the measurement of thickness (nimna) ог 
diameter. And Upamana is the measurement of interspace (antara), 
such as the distance between the two feet of an image; this measurement is 
apparently taken from one plumb line to another : 

Manam chapi pramánpam cha parimànam lamba-manakam | 
Unmanam upamanarm cha manam padmam samiritam | 
Padangushthi-sasimantam $iro'ntam manarh chapi prakathyate 1 
Pramanam vistritam proktam paritah parimanakam | 

Tat-sütral lamba-manarh syan nimnam unmanam uchyate | 
Avantaropamanam syad bimbodaydadi-sarvaégah | 

Manam evam tu shad-bhedam manenangani manayet | 


(M., Ly, 3-9.) 


The primary measurement (adi-mana) is but the comparative measure- 
ment and is divided into the following nine kinds: 


The height of an image is determined by comparing it with (i) the 
breadth (tara) of the main temple (harmya), (ii) the height of the sanc- 
tuary or central hall (garbha-griha), (iii) the length of the door (dvara- 
mana), (iv) the measurement of the basement (adhishthana), (v) cubit, 

. (vi) tala (a span), (vii) angula (finger's breadth), (viii) the height of 
418 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE МАМА 


the worshipper, and (ix) the height of the riding animal (vahana) of the 
principal idol : 
Adimana-vidhirn samyak(-g) lakshanarn cha ihochyate 1 
Harmya-tara-va$àn тайпала garbha-geha-vasodayam 1 А 
Dvara-mana-vagat tuñgam adhishthana-va$odayam | 
Hasta-màána-va$àn manam tala-màna-va$odayam | 
Angulenapi chottungarn yajamana-vosodayam 1 
Müla-bera-va$àn manam uttamadi trayam trayam | 
(M., Lv, IO-I5.) 
Each of these nine measures is again divided into nine kinds : 
Tasmad ckar tu pratyekarh nava-manam ihochyate | 
(Jbid., 22.) 

Under (i) (ii), (iii), (iv), the proportions naturally vary on various 
occasions ; no specific rules are, therefore, prescribed. 

The details of (v) cubit or hasta and (vii) angula will be found under 
the term < Angula’ and the details of (vi) tala are given under * TĀLA- 
MANA. , 

Of the division under (viii) the details of the height of an image as 
compared with the height of the worshipper are given here. Тһе height 
of the image may be equal to the full height of the worshipper, may extend 
up to his hair-limit (on the forehead), or, as sometimes stated, to the eye- 
line, nose-tip, chin, arm-limit (to the shoulder), breast, heart, navel, and 
Sex organ : 

Kanyasad uttamāntarn уай yajamanodayarh param | 
KeSantath nasikagrantarh hanvantarh bahu-simakam | 
Stanantarh hridaydntarh cha nàvyantam medhra-simakam | 
Navadha kanyasantarh syat sthavararn jangamodayam 1 
(Idid., 30-33.) 

And of the division under (ix) the height of the riding animal (vahana) 
as compared with the height of the principal idol (müla-bera) admits of 
similar nine kinds as under (viii) (see details under Ursava and KAUTUKA). 

Hasta (v) and añgula (vii) are the real units, employed equally in measur- 
ing both architectural and sculptural objects. 

The rest are exclusively sculptural and comparative measures. The 
similar measures have also been prescribed for architectural objects. Тһе 
architectural * Ganya-màna ° or the comparative heights of the component 
members of a structure corresponds to the sculptural * Tala-mana ° or the 
comparative heights of the component limbs of a statue (see details under 
GANYA-MANA and TALA-MANA). 

Five proportions of the height, as compared with the breadth of an 
architectural object, are given under five technical terms, namely, Santika, 


419 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


E 


у 


e Растет ИИ 


MANA-BHADRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF š 


Paushtika, Jayada, Sarva-kamika or Dhanada, and Adbhuta (see details 
under Отѕерна). 

The ‘ Ghana-mana’ or the measurement by the exterior and the 
* Aghana-màna ° or the measurement by the interior are exclusively archi- 
tectural (see details under these terms). 

Like the sculptural terms Mana, Pramàna, Parimana, Lamba-màna, 
Unmana and Upamana, there are architectural terms also to express 
length, breadth and width, e.g. dirgha (Юг dairghya), tara, vistara, visala, 
vistriti, vistrita, vishkambha, etc. Mana as stated above is the tech- 
nical name for sculptural height; but to express the same idea the general 
terms for height, such as unnati, unnata, utsedha, etc., are also used, 
Mana is also used in its general sense of measurement, area, etc. Pramàna 
and Parimana are also used in their general senses of length, breadth, 
width, etc. (Further details will be found under these terms.) 


tma ت‎ = шш... 


(2) Atah-pararh pravakshyàmi manonmanarh viseshatah 1 
* After this I shall speak about the Mana and Unmina measurements 
in particular. 
This is followed by an account of various measures. (Note the different 
tala measurements employed in statues.) 
j (Matsya-Purána, Chap. ссімш, v. 16.) 
(3) Manarh tad-vistàraÍ proktam unmanarh nàham eva cha | 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxiv, 35.) 
(4) Parimanonmana-manarnh dhāryarh raja-vimudritam 1 
Guna-sadhana-sathdaksha bhavarhtu nikhilà Јапаһ и 
Prof. Benoy Kumar Sarkar's translation of * Parimàna? by ‘standard 
of measurement for lands, * Unmàna" by ‘unit of measurement for 
liquids,’ and “Мапа” by © unit of measurement for grains’ is untenable. 


سس == 
---- 


(Sukranitisara, ed. Oppert, r, 310.) 
MANA-BHADRA—A pavilion with twenty-six pillars. 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ссіхх, v. 12 3 see under Маурара.) 
MANA-MANDIRA (see MANDIRA)—The observatory. 
Cf. The observatories at Benares, Delhi, Ujjain, Mathura, and Jaipur. 
(See Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxv, р. 234.) 
MANAVA—Relating to Manu or human being, a pavilion with 
twenty-eight pillars. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. 12 ; see under Maypapa.) 
MANANGULA (see under ANcuLA)—The standard measure (equal 
to $ inch), the unit of length. 


420 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE MALIKA(-KA) 


The smallest measure is the atom or paramanu, i.e., the particle of dust 
visible in the sunshine through a lattice—(Brihat-samhita, гуш, I). 
8 atoms=1 car-dust. { 
8 car-dusts=1 hair's end. 
8 hair's ends— 1 nit. 
8 nits=r louse. 
8 lice=1 barley corn. 
8 barley corns=1 manangula. 
This standard angula measure is stated to be used in measuring the archi- 
tectural objects like the villages, lands, and buildings, etc. 


(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 2-3, 6-7; see under ANGULA.) 


: MANUSHA—Relating to the human being, a kind of phallus. 


(Kamikagama, L, 35, 38 ; see under LiNGa.) 
МАКСА--А road, a street, a way, a path, a lane, а passage, a canal, 
а course. 
Chandalànàm ргауебауа nirgamàya malasya cha | 
Jalasya nirgamartham tu kshudra-margah prašarnsitah 11 
i (Kamikagama, хххуш, 8.) 
MALIKA(-KA)—A class of buildings, а type of pavilion. 
(т) Kudyasyanta-prade$e tu yuktyà chavrita-màlikam 1 
Malikopari vapra(mÀ) syàd adhishthanam samodayam l- 
: (M., хххі, бо, 64.) 
А type of pavilion. (mandapa) : . 
Evam tu malikakararh $esham prag-uktavan nayet | 
(M., хххгу, 315 ; see for description 297-314.) 
Mandape chordhva-kütam syàn méalikakriti(m) vinyaset | 
(M., xxxiv, 291.) 
(2) Kechid vai malikakara kechid vai gopurakritih и 
(Suprabhedagama, xxx, 123 : see for full 
context 115-122, under PRAKARA.) 
Tad-bahye’bhyantare vapi malika-mandapar hi vā 11 


(Jbid., хххі, 128.) . 


(3) Та (Sala) eva malikah proktà malavat kriyate yatah Il 
Paficha-daga-karantamn tu kuryad avrita-mandapam I! 
Mandapena vina vapi tena manena pithikal _ 

Vibhadrà và sabhadra và karatavya malika budhaih i! 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 6, 99, 100.) 


421 


MALIKA(-KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 2 


Kamikagama (Chap. хіл, named Malika-lakshana) : 
Classification : 
Chaturdhà malika 5414 sabha-mundaja-saudhaje 11 (1) 
Definitions (vv. 2-5) : 
Salayam api $ilangà nishkrantanana-Sobhita 1 
Sa sala malika jfieya Sastre’ smin Kamikagame 11 
Sabhavad vihita bahye ргаѕадауаа alankrità 1 
Üha-pratyüha-samyukta уа sabha sā cha така 11 
Yatheshta-di$i sarhyukta bhoga-bhimi-samanvita | 
Prasada-vyasa-dirghochchà prokta prasada-malika 11 
Mandapasyokta-vistarayama-tunga-vibhishini | 
Sarvatra mundakaratvat kathità munda-malika 11 
Further classifications (vv. 6-7) : 
(i) Samchita, Asarnchita, and Upa(also Apa)samchita. 
(ii) Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara. 
(iii) Jati, Chhanda, and Vikalpa. 
(iv) Suddha, Misra, and Sarmkirna. 
(v) Vija, Mila, and Ankura (this class is not specified). 
(Excepting the last one, all the other classes occur in the Manasara also ; 
see under Vimana-lakshana.) | 
Тһе details of these classes аге given (vv. 8-22). \ 
Still further classifications are given under the following names: | 
Sindhuka (vv. 23-28), Sampürna (уу. 20-30), Meru-küta (v. 31), 4 
Kshema (vv. 32-34), Siva (уу. 35-38), Harmya (vv. 39-40), | 
Saumya (v. 40), Visala (v. 41), Sarva-kalyána (vv. 42-49) 
> 


Vijaya (v. 50), Bhadra (v. 51), Rangamukha (v. 52), Alpa 
(vv. 53-54), Kona (vv. 55-58), Geya (vv. 58-59), Sara (v. бо), 
Pushkara (vv. 61-63), Adbhuta (v. бта), Sarhkirna (v. 62), and 
Danda (v. 64). i 
Aneka-bhimi-yuktaé tu malakara tu malikà I1 
(Ibid, 1, 89.) 
Malika-yukta-$a(? sa)larn chet kona-stambhe dvitiyake 1 
Prathamavarane vapi dvitiyavarane nyaset | 
(Ibid., ххх, 96.) 
(4) Sailan $u(m)bhita-Sata-kumbha-vilasat-kumbharn maha-mandaparm 
pràkaram  paramálika-vilasita() ^ mukta-mayim cha ргара 
(-bha)m. 

* Made for the god Vamana a great mandapa of stone, resplendent with 
pitchers (domes) of shining gold, surrounding wall, adorned with ex- 
cellent buildings, and a canopy of pearls.’—(Fourteen incrip. at Tiruk- 
kovalur, no. K, of Rajendradeva, lines 1-2, Ep. Ind., Vol. vu, pp. 145, 140.) 


422 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MUKHA 
MALIKA-MANDAPA—A pavilion of the Malika class of build- 
ings. 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 128 ; see under MALIKA.) 
MALYAJA—A class of buildings, a type of pavilion. 
(M., xxxiv, 153 ; see under Maypapa.) 
MALYAHUTA—A class of buildings, a type of pavilion. 
(M., xxxiv, 316; see under Maypapa.) 
MISRA—A building made of any two materials out of wood, brick, 
stone, iron, etc. 
Eka-dravyar tu Suddath ѕуаа dvi-dravyarn misra-harmyakam 1 
(M., хуш, 138, etc.) 
'Dravya-dvaya-yutam mišrarn samkirnam bahubhir ушат! 
(Кат арата, хим, 22.) 
MISRITA—A kind of ornament prescribed for idols and kings. 
(М., L, 1-3; see under BHÜsHANA.) 
MUKULA—A bud-like crowning ornament of a pillar. 
(M., xv, 32 ; see lists of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA, UPAPITHA and PRASTARA.) 
MUKULI—A type of round building. 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLU, vv. 21, 23, 28 
29; see under PRASADA.) 
MUKTA-PRAPANGA (see MADHYA-RANGA)— Ihe open court- 
yard connected with a tank (‘mukta’ meaning open, and “рга- 
panga’ the body part or bank of a tank). It is built inside the 
court. 
(M., хіт, 2 f.) 
Tt is stated to be made of wood, stone, brick, etc., and also of jewels and 
iron especially : 
Mukta-prapangam арі daru-Sileshtakadyaih | 
Ratnair aneka-bahu-loha-viseshakaih | 


(М., XLVI, 31-32; see also хуш, 68.) ` 


` MUKHA—The face, frontispiece, the front side of a building, the 
` facade. 


Svakiyanguli-manena mukharh syad dva-dasangulam | 
Mukha-manena karttavya sarvayava-kalpana 11 
* The face (of one's statue in length) should be 12 angulas (—9 inches), 
being measured with one’s own finger. The whole body should be made 
symmetrical to the face.’—(Matsya-Purana, Chap. согуп, v. 19.) 


423 


MUKHA-BHADRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The front side of a building (see Kamikégama and Brihat-samhita , 
under ОуАка). 
MUKHA-BHADRA (see BHADRA)—A portico, a porch, the front 
tabernacle, the middle niche, the front room corresponding to 
modern drawing-room or reception hall, staircase room. 
Sarveshath mukha-bhadrarn syal lakshanarn vakshyate’dhuna | 
(М., хуш, 275; see also 246 f.) 
Sarvesharn mukha-bhadranam parsve sopana-sarhyutam | 
(M., ххх, 93.) 
Parito’linda-bhagena vàranarn (=door) mukha-bhadrakam | 
(M., xxxiv, 251.) 
‘The temple (at Amarnath) itself faces the west but the mandapa or 
antarala—the hall of the shrine—has also doors to the north and south. 
Each of the three doors has a porch (mukha-bhadra), approached by four 
or five steps, and supported by four nearly square pillars, two of them 


attached to the wall.’—(The temple of Amarnath, Ind. Ant., Vol. ш, р. 817, 
с. 1, last para.) 


Deva-Sri-$ai-bhüshanasya kritinà devàlayam káritam yugmarh 
marhdapa-Sobbitam cha purato-bhadrarn pratolya saha 1 
Kshetresasya tathà suràlaya-vararn sphitarn tadagam tatha band- 
ham Kaudika-sarhjfiakarh bahu-jalarh dirgharh tathà khanitam | 
(Kanker inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 7, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 127.) 
MUKHA-MANDAPA—The pavilion in front of a temple. 
š (М., xIx, 198-190, etc.; see under MANDAPA.) 
Garbha-siitra-sama-bhagad agrato mukha-mandapam 11 


Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLXIX, V. 6; see also 
y, р 5 
V. II; also Garuda-Purëna, Chap. xrvir, v. ro.) 


Prasada-garbha-manam và kurvvita-mukha-mandapam n 
Sikharasya chaturthena agrato mukha-mandapam 11 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. хіп, vv. 7, 12.) 
* Made the mukha-mandapa (muga-mandaman) and consecrated (the 
shrine).'—(Two Anaimalai inscrip. no. II, Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 320-321). ` 
MUKHA-VARANA—The entrance door. 
(M., xxxv, 395 ; see Юудва.) 
MUKHYA-HARMYA—The main building, the chief temple. 
(M., xm, 14.) 


424 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE - MUSHTI-BANDHA 


MUNDA-MALIKA—A class of buildings, the top room. 
(Kamikagama, хіл, 5 ; see under MALIKA.) 
MUNDA-HARMY A —The top room. 
(See Kautiliya-Artha-fastra under CHULIHARMYA. ) 
MUNDAKA- DVARA—A kind of upper door. 
(See Kaiitiliya-Artha-Sastra under DvARA.) 
MUDRiKA—A small seal, a stamped coin, an impression, a mould- 
ing of the column. 
(Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 108, 105-177, 
109 ; see under STAMBHA.) 
MUDDHA-VEDI-—The so-called Buddhist fee, railings in relief are 
frequently added to it, balustrade, railing. 
(Mahavamsa, 35, 2, ed. М. Geiger, p. 297.) 
MUNI—An ascetic. An account of the images of the seven 
patriarchs is given in detail in the Mdnasara. Agastya is measured 
according to the seven tala, Ka$yapa and Bhrigu according to the 
eight tàla, and Vashishtha, Bhargava, Visvamitra and Bharadvaja 
according to the nine tala. (Details of these measures will be found 
under TALA-MANA.) 
(M., туп, 2-6.) 
The characteristic features of the patriarchs are also described. 
(Jbid., 7-17.) 
MUSHTI-BANDHA—A moulding of the entablature and of the 
column, a kind of roof, the topmost part of a building, a part of 
the rampart and of the arch. 
The third moulding from the top (downwards) of the entablature (Kami- 
kagama, LIV, 1, see under PRASTARA). 
A member of the column (M., xv, 185, see under STAMBHA). 
A kind of roof (M., xvi, 51; see under VALABHI). 
A (crowning) part of a building (M., хуш, 202). 
А part of the rampart : 
Vajrakritié cha vaprangam chhatrakaram айы va | 
Uttararn vajanam chaiva mushti-bandhar tridhanvitam | 
(M., XXXI, KEN 
A part of an arch (М., хім, 65 ; see under 'TORANA.) 


-425 


MÜRTI AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


MURTI—An image, a statue, an idol. 
(1) An image, a statue (M., Lı, 26, etc.). 
(2) Amgulai$ cha tathà mürti$ chatur-aéiti-sarmmitaih | 
. (Bhavishya-Puraga, Chap. схххп, v. 7.) 
(3) DeSanurüpa-bhüshana-veshàlankàra-mürtibhih kàryà 1 
(Brihat-saihilà, туш, 29.) ` 

(4) Silakharena janita satya-sandhyasya bhautiki | 

Mürtih kirtimayi сһаѕуа krità tenaiva śāśvatī 11 

‘By the stone-chisel a material body of Satyasandha was executed, 
and by the same an eternal body of his fame was produced.’ 

‘ The two inscriptions (nos. 33, 34, H. S. I. T, Vol. r.) record that a f 
king Gunabhara . . . constructed a temple of Siva on the top of the 
mountain and placed in it a liga and a statue of himself. —(Trisirapalli | 
Cave inscrip., no. 33, v. 4, H. S. I. I., Vol. 1, рр. 29, 30.) | 

(5) Uttara-bhagada  Kaisaleyalli paficha-virnéati-Iilà-mürtigalarn pra- 

tishtheyam 1 

* Set up on the colonnade to the north twenty-five pleasing (Ша--а | 
particular attitude, like dhyàna-mürti) statues.’ —[Ep. Carnat, Vol. ту, | 
Chamarajnagar Taluq, по. 86 ; Roman Text, p. 18, lines I5, 10 (bera), 14 
(vigraba) ; Transl., p. 11. | 

In this inscription, the expressions бета, vigraha, and mūrti occur ; they \ 
аге to be distinguished : фета or bimba is ап idol of а god, vigraha (or image) 
expresses almost the same idea, mirti implies the statue of both gods and 
men, and so also does pratima. 


МГЕТІ-КАХТА--А type of storeyed building. 

А class of five-storeyed buildings (M., xxm, 19-24 ; see under PRASADA.) 
MULA-DANDA—The regulating column of a building, the founda- 
tion pillar. 

The main column (M., xv, 236; see also L, 104, etc., under ЅТАМВНА). 
MULA-BERA—The chief deity in a shrine, the principal idol of a 
temple. | 


x 


(M., Lv, 34; LXI, 21; LIV, 3, etc.) 
MULA-STAMBHA—The foundation pillar, the regulating column 
of a building. 


(M., xv, 234, etc.; see under STAMBHA.) 
MULA-STHANA—The foundation, the base, a temple in the centre 
of a village or town. 

‘One perpetual lamp was given to Mahadeva, the lord of the Sri- 
Mila-sthana at Tirukkalukkunram.’—(Inscrip. at "Tirukka]ukkunram, 
line 34, H. S. I. I., Vol. ur, p. 148.) 

426 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


- 


! 
È 
| 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MERU 


MULA-HARMYA—The chief of the buildings forming a group, 
the principal shrine, the main temple. 
(M., хш, 19; XXXIX, 195, ctc.) 
MRIGA-VANA—Deer-forest, a place of sport or recreation of kings. 
Tavan-matram cka-dvàram khata-guptam svadu-phala-gulmaguchcham 
akantaki-drumam uttàna-toya$ayam danta-mrigachatush-padarh bhagna- 
nakha-darhshtra-vyala-margayuka-hasti-hastini-kalabha-mriga-vanam viha- 
ràrtham rajñah karayet 1 
Sarva-tithi-mrigarn pratyante chanyan mriga-vanarn bhümivasena và 
nivešayct | 
(Kaütilzya-Arthü-fastra, Chap. xxm, p. 49.) 
MRINALAKA—A lotus stalk or fibre, a moulding of the entablature, 
base, or pedestal, etc., shaped like the lotus stalk or fibre. 
A moulding of the lintel (M., xix, 145, etc.). 
The fourth moulding from the top (downwards) of an entablature. 
(Kamikagama, xiv, 1; see under PRASTARA.) 
A moulding of the entablature (M., xvi, 63; see the list of mouldings 
under PRASTARA.) 
MEGHA-KANTA—A type of storeyed building. 
A class of ten-storeyed buildings (M., xxvm, 16-17; see under 
PRASADA.) 
MERU-—A class of buildings mostly storeyed. 
(1) A type of buildings which are hexagonal (in plan), have twelve 
storeys, variegated windows and four entrances, and are 32 cubits wide. 
(Brihat-samhita, LVI, 20; see 7. В. A. S. 
N. S., Vol. vr, p. 318.) 
Paficha-chatvarimSan-meru-lakshanadhyayah—the chapter on the des- 
cription of forty-five kinds of Meru buildings ; they are described by the 
following authorities : 
(ә) Prasada-mandana-Vastu-Sastra of Sütradhara Mandana (Chap. vr, 
Ms. Egg. 3146, 2253, fol. 26 0). 
(3) Matsya-Purána (Chap. согхіх, vv. 28, 31, 53, see under PRASADA). 
(4) Bhavishya-Purüna (Chap. оххх, v. 27; see under PRASADA.) 
(5) Agni-Purapa (Chap. civ, vv. 14-15; see under PRASADA.) 
(6) Garuda-Purána also describes the same kind of Meru temple as the 
Agni-Puràna : f 
Sata-áringa-samayukto meruh prasada-uttamah | 
Mandapas tasya karttavya bhadrais tribhir alankritah 11 
(Chap. хгуп, у. 24, cf. also v. 39; see under PRAsADA.) 


427 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ч Mm 


MERU AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(7) A building with eight Salas (compartments) and eight kütas (towers Ж 
ог domes) : 
Merur nàma iti Khyatas tv-ashta-Saláshta-kütakam(-h) 1! 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 43.) 


(8) ‹ Меги denotes a particular kind of temple (hexagonal with twelve 
stories, variegated windows, and four entrances, Brihat-samhità, тут, 
20.)’—(Jabbalpur copperplate of Yasahkarnadeva, v. 13, Ef. Ind., Vol. п, 
рр. 4, 6, note 42.) 

(9) See Bheraghat inscrip. of the Queen Alhana Devi (v. 9, Ep» 
Ind.. Vol. п, pp. 11, 15). 

(10) Kanaka-si-(6i)glapita-gagana-khelat-khechari-chakra-khedah l 

Kim aparam iha Кав(6)уагі уаѕуа dughdhabdhi-vichi-valaya- 
bahalakirtteh kirttanam karnna-meruh 1 

* Of him whose fame is like the circle of waves of the milky ocean, need 
we say more than that here at Кай there is a temple (erected by him), 
Karna-meru (so lofty), that the wind of the flags which wave from its 
golden spires lessens the fatigue of the damsels of heaven, when playing in 
the sky.’—(Khairha plates of Yasahkarnadeva, v. 1 3» Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, рр. 211; 
212, 216.) 

(11) * Meru is primarily the name of the fabulous golden mountain 
(hemadri), the centre of Jambu dvipa on which the gods dwell (suralaya), 
and it is figuratively applied in geographical names to any hill covered 
with splendid temples and palaces.’ 

‘Another figurative meaning of Meru, derived from the notion that 
mount Meru is the home of the gods, a large temple with six towers, twelve 
stories and wonderful vaults (Brihat-samhita, LVI, 20). 

‘According to Prabandha-chinta-mani (р. 134, see also p. 175 f) 
King Karna of Gujarat constructed a building of this kind, called Karna- 
meruh Prasadah, in Anhilvad.’ 

‘Similarly the Prabhavaka-charitra (хп, 402) mentions a Siva temple 
called Siddha-meru.? 

“As regards the name Ajaya-meru, its meaning is no doubt (as the 
Prithoi-rüja-vijaya, v. тоо, suggests), the Meru made by Ajaya-ràja. 

‘Thus we have in Ràjputàna Jesala-meru (this form is still used by 
Pandits and Yatis, and occurs regularly in the colophons of the palm-leaf 
manuscripts in the inscriptions and the Jaina books), * the Meru made by 
Jesala,’ which primarily denotes the hill-fort, rising with its temples and 
palace above the town of Jesalmer or Jesalmir in Marvad, Komalmer, 
properly Kumbhala-meru, * the meru built by Kumbhala or Kumbha- 
karna, which is the well-known hill-fort in Mevad. (In the Rajputana 
Gazetteer, Vol. ш, P- 52,-the fort is called Komalgarh, while Col. Tod 


428 


b 


ITS ERE 


ағаны rou 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAULI 


gives Komalmer). The name Kumbhala-meru occurs in the Jaina Patta- 
valis (see the description of the Kharatara, no. 56, Sripuj-Jina-samudra, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. x1, p. 249), and Balmer or Barmer, properly Bahada-meru, 
the Meru made by Bahada, a hill-fort in Mallani (Rajputana Gazetteer, 
Vol. п, p. 271). The form Bahada-meru is used by the Jainas (see the 
description of the Kharatara, no. 58, Sripuj-Jina-samudra, Ind. Ant., Vol. 
хі, p. 249). In Kathiavad, there is Jhanjmer, (Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. 
уш, p. 459) properly Jhafijha-meru, the Meru made by Jhafijha, and in 
the Central Provinces there is another Ajmir-garh, properly Ajaya-meru- 
gadha, the fort, i.c., the Meru made by Ajaya.—(Origin of the town 
of Ajmer and of its name, Dr. Bühler, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxv1, p. 164, last para., 
notes 11—15.) 
(12) ‘ There are other temples in honour of the holy mount Girnar 
in the south wing being Sameta Sikhara and the other Su-meru 
or a personified mount Meru.’—(Ahmadabad Jaina temples, Arch. Suro., New 
Imp. Series, Vol. хххш, p. 85.) 

(13) ‘ Mandiram had the surname Jaya-meru-Sri-Karana-mangalam 
(lines 11 and 15 f.), which seems to be derived from Jaya-meru, one of the 
surnames of the Bana king Vikramaditya.’—(Inscrip. of Rajaraja I, no. 50, 
H.S.I.J., Vol. їп, p. 103, para. 2.) 

MERU-KANTA-—A type of storeyed building. 

(т) A class of three-storeyed buildings (M., xxr, 41-49, see under 
PRASADA). 

(2) A type of building (Kamikagama, Lxv, 91; see under MALIKA). 

MERUJA—A type of building, a class of pavilions. 
> (M., xxxiv, 160 ; see under MANDAPA.) 
MESHA-YUDDHA—A kind of joinery. 
(M., хуп, 93, 112-119; see under SANDHI-KARMAN.) 
MAULI—A head-gear, a crown. 

Мапазата (Chap. хіх, 1-232, named Mauli-lakshana) : 

Various crowns and head-dresses are described : Jata, Mauli, 
Kirita, Karanda,  Sirastraka, Kundala(Kuntala), KeSa-bandha, 
Dhammilla, Alaka, Chüda, Makuta, and Patta (lines 13-15). 

Of these, the Pattas are sub-divided into three kinds, namely, Patra- 
patta, Ratna-patta, and Pushpa-patta (line 16). Kuntala, Ke$a-bandha, 
Dhammila, Alaka and Chüda are apparently various fancy modes of hair- 
dressing. Таға (clotted hair) and Makuta (lif. diadem) are stated to 
suit Brahma and Siva (Rudra); Kirita and Makuta are prescribed for 
Vishnu in his different forms, such as, Магауапа and others (lines 
17-18). 


я 429 


сіз СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Dic 3 Fo 


ox > UE ч” E ae ee 
sit cs ee с 


MAULIKA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


Other petty gods wear Karanda and Makuta (line 19). The love god- 
dess Rati (Manonmani) wears Jata, Mauli, Mandala or Kundala. Sarasvati 
and Savitri put on Kefa-bandha and Kundala. All the female deities 
may wear Karanda or Makuta. The kings Chakra-vartin (Sarva-bhauma) 
and Adhiraja wear Kirita, Narendra puts on Karanda, Parshnika uses 
Sirastraka, or the Chakra-vartin and other kings may, as stated, wear 


Karanda or Makuta.  Patra-patta is stated to be suitable for the king | 
Patta-dhara, Ratna-patta for Parshnika, Pushpa-patta for Patta-bhaj, ! 
and Pushpa-mãlya (flower wreath) for Astra-graha (lines 20-28). | 
Kundala (Kudmala) and Makuta are prescribed for the queen of Chakra- | 
vartin, Kcsa-bandha for the queens of Adhiraja and Narendra, Dhammilla ш 


ала Kumuda for the queens of Parshnika, Patta-dhara, Mandalesa and 
Patta-bhaj, and Alaka and Chüda for the queens of Astra-graha (lines 
29-33). 

Тһе height, сіс., of a crown is determined іп comparison with the width 
of the face of the wearer. Different proportions are suggested in different 
cases (lines 34-63). 

Next is described in detail the number of gold pieces and precious jewels 
in the crowns of the kings of various ranks and of their consorts (lines 
64-88, 89-92). i 

Forms of these crowns are then described : 

Jata, Makuta, Keša-bandha and Dhavala (? Dhammilla) are stated 
to be shaped like tri-purusha (Ził. three ancestors or the length of 
three men) Kirita like venu-karna (bamboo-ear), Karanda like the 
beak of a peacock, Sirastra like budbuda (water bubble), and 
Dhammilla like vallika (creeper) (lines 93-95). 

Then follows the description of the plan and the various parts of these 
crowns, as well as of their measurement (lines 96-168). 


MAULIKA—A type of pavilion, a class of halls, a type of build- 
ing. 
A type of pavilion with six faces ( M., xxxiv, 554; see under MANDAPA.) 
A class of halls (.M., xxxv, 3, 10; see under Sara.) 
MAULI-BANDHA—A head-gear. 
(M., XLIX, 109; see under BnüsHAwWA.) 
MAULI-MUNDA-—The top part of a branch of the ornamental 
tree (kalpavriksha). 
Sakhà-mülasya parve tu mauli-mundam cha yojayet 1 
; (М., хуш, 66.) 


430 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RAKTA-PATTA 


М 


| YAKSHA—A class of demi-gods, the attendants of Kubera or the 
god of wealth, who guard his treasures ; they are also the chowry- 
bearers of other gods. They are stated to be measured according 
to the nine tala ; they assume a purely human appearance, possess 
two arms and two eyes, dark blue and yellow complexion, and 
benevolent disposition. 
à (M., туш, 9-5; see TALA-MANA.) 
YAJNA-KANTA—A type of five-storeyed building. 
(M., ххіп, 94-41; see under PRASADA.) 
YAJNA-BHADRA—A type of building, a pavilion with four 
illars. 
р (Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ссіхх, v. тї; see under Mawnpapa.) 
YANTRAKA-—An architectural member of the bedstead, a band, 
a machinery or whecl at the legs to move a couch easily. 
Pādāgre chantaralarn syat kuryāt tiryak cha yantrakam 1 
(M., XLIV, 13.) 
YAMA-SURYA—A type of building, a house with a western and 
northern hall. 
(Brihat-samhilà, таш, 99.) 
ҮАМА-КАМТА--А type of storeyed building. 
A class of five-storeyed and eleven-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxu, 25-29, xxix, 16-18; see under РвАзАра.) 
YAGA-MANDAPAC—A sacrificial pavilion. 
(M., xxxiv, 87; xxxi, 65, etc.) 
YAGA-SALA—A sacrificial hall. 
(M., хххп, 55, etc.) 
YANA—A conveyance, a car, one of the four kinds of Vastu con- 
sisting of Adika, Syandana, Sibika, and Ratha. | Y 
(М., ш, 3, 9-10.) E 
YUPA-STAMBHA—The sacrificial pillar (see under STAMBHA). | 


R 


КАКТА-КАМРА--А moulding of the base, a fillet. 

(M., xiv, 287 ; see the list of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) 
RAKTA-PATTA (c. RATNA-PATTA)—A moulding of the base, a < 
band. AS 

(М., xiv, 289 ; sce the list of mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) p 


431 


2. 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ae). 1 MTM m 


RAKTA-BANDHA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


RAKTA-BANDHA—A class of bases. | 
(М., xiv, 281-296 ; see the list of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA ; see also Xv, 223.) 
RAKTA-VAPRA—A moulding of the base, the cavetto. 
(М., xiv, 284 ; see the list of mouldings under АрніѕнтнАмА.) 
RANGA—A pavilion, a theatre, an amphitheatre, a stage, an arena, 
an assembly-hall, a court, a courtyard. 
(1) A pavilion within another pavilion is called Ranga : 
Mandape mandaparh yat tu rangam ity-abhidhiyate 1 
(Kamikagama, L, 94.) 
(2) Courtyard : f 
Tasya madhye cha range tu mauktikena prapanvitam 1 
š (М., хххіу, 218.) 
Mukha-éalà visala cha chatur-bhagarh tathayatam | I 
Purato'lindam ekarnšarn bhittirn kuryàt samantatah | 
Mulagre dvi-dvi-bhagena vasa-rangarh cha karayet | 
(M., xxxv, 117-119; see also XXII, 50 ; XXXVII, 44, ctc.) 
(3) Uttare гайрат ity-uktam tad-grihinya griham bhavet 11 
Eka-sala pra$astà syat вігіпдіп rangopajivinam 11 
Pradhana-sala yatraiva raüga-sthanam vidhiyate !! 
Ranga-bhitti-samàyuktam dhama-sopana-samyutam |1 
(Kāmikāgama, xxxv, 47, 60, 62, 64.) 
RANGA-PITHA—The stage proper. 
- (Bharata’s JVatya-süstra, п, 66, 771, 102.) 
See details under -NATYA-GRIHA. 
RANGA-BHUMI—The stage, the playhouse (see details under 
NATYA-GRIHA). 


RANGA-MANDAPA—A pavilion, an assembly-hall, a council 
chamber, the stage proper (Bharata's JVatya-sástra, п, 68, 96), the 
whole playhouse including auditorium also (ibid., п, 91). Music 
hall as defined іп the Bhdvaprakasana (x, 518), implying singing, 
playing upon musical instruments, dancing and acting jointly or 
separately. See details under NATYA-GRIHA (УЕӨМА). с 
Cf. Nat (nritta) mandira implying the detached-mandapa or hall in 
front of a temple, where the visitors assemble and indulge in religious 
music. 
(1) An assembly-hall (Hampe inscrip. of Krishnaraya, lines 24, 32, north 
face). 


432 


k= = 


fy t 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RATNA-KANTA 


‘In the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen (Bd. гуш, s. 455) 
Dr. Bloch makes some remarks respecting a cave in Ramgarh hill in 
Sargüjà, which from its arrangement and inscriptions appears to have 
been evidently intended for dramatic performances.’ 

* The so-called queen's cave and that of Ganeša cave in Udayagiri are 
further undoubted examples, to the reliefs of which Jacobi has directed my 
attention : they represent the doings of these ladies and gentlemen (actresses 
and actors) in a highly realistic way. The cave-theatre discovered Бу 
Bloch has, however, a special interest: it is arranged after the Greek 
pattern. 

Prof. Lüders refers to Kalidasa (r) dari-griha (Kumara-sambhava, 1, 
10, 14); (2) Silà-ve$man (Megha-dita, т, 25). 

(Indian Caves as Pleasure-resorts, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxiv, p. 199, para. 3 ; p. 200, 
para. 1.) 

(2) Irangada happaligeyuman ітаһа-ѕорапа pantiyumam rachisidarn 
Sri-Gommata-devara suttalu raügama-happaligeym bigiyisidan— had this 
rangada happalige (? painted hall or hall of assembly) and the flight of 
grand stairs laid out; had the rangama happalige set up around Sri- 
Gommata Deva.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 115 ; Roman Text, р. 87; Transl., 
p. 171.) 

(3) Karite vira-Ballala-pattana-svaminamuna | 

Nàgena Pārśva-devāgre nritya-rangasma-kuttime | 

* By Маса, the Vira-Ballala, pattana-svami, were built the dancing hall 
and terrace of Parsva Deva.’ 

Nritya-rangamumath madisida—‘ and in front of the basadi of Kama~ 
tha Pārśva Deva stone pillars and a dancing hall’ were made.— 
(Ep. Garnat., Vol. 11, no. 130; Roman Text, p. 99, lines 1-4; Transl., p. 178, 
para. 1.) Š 


RANGA-MUKHA—A class of buildings, the forepart of a theatre or 
stage. 

G (Kamikagama, XLV, 52; see under MALIKA.) 
RANGA-SINSHA—The forepart of the stage, the platform made of 


wood (Bharata's Ndtya-Sdstra п, 71). See details under NATYA-GRIHA 
(-VESMA). 
RATNA-KALPA—A kind of ornament prescribed for idols and 
kings. 

(М., L, 3; see under BHUsHANA.) 
RATNA-KANTA—A class of six-storeyed buildings. 

(M., XXIV, 19 ; see under PRASADA.) 


433 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


RATNA-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


RATNA-GRIHA—The jewel-house, the adytum of a Buddhist 
temple, а stüpa or tope. 
Ratna-grihecha dipako jvalatu! mama chapararddhat pafichaiva 
bhikshavo bhurhjatirh ratna-grihe cha dipaka iti II 
* From the interest of the діпагаѕ given by him. . . let a lamp 
burn in the jewel-house . . · and with the other half . . . let 
the same number of five Bhikshus be fed and a lamp burn in the jewel- 


house. 
t Tt seems to denote the stüpa itself, as the abode of the three ratnas or 


jewels or precious stones, viz. (1) Buddha, (2) Dharma, the law or truth, 
and (3) Samgha, the community or congregation." 

This rendering of the term by the whole ' stüpa ? seems unsuitable to 
the contest : a lamp was provided to light up the ratna-griha which must 
imply a room or a particular part thereof, and not the whole ' stüpa.'— 
(Sanchi stone inscrip. of Chandragupta II, lines 9-10, C. I. 1., Vol. m, F. G. L, 
no. 5, PP: 32, 33-34, note 5 on p. 33.) 

RATNA-PATTA—A moulding, a jewelled band, a jewelled turban. 

A moulding of the pedestal (M., хш, 84; see the list of mouldings, 
under ОрАРІТНА.) 

А head-gear (M., XLIX, 16; see under BHUSHANA). 
RATNA-PADA—Otherwise called Sripada, the footprint of Buddha, 
on Adam's Peak in Ceylon. For details see BUDDHA-PADA. 
RATNA-PUSHPA—A diamond flower, an ornament. 

(Deopara inscrip. of Vijayasena, v. 11, Ef. Ind., 


Vol. 1, pp 308, 313.) 
RATNA-BANDHA (see RakTa-BANDHA)—A class of bases. 


(М., xiv, 281-296 ; see the list of mouldings 
c under ADHISHTHANA.) 
RATNA-MANDAPA—A kind of pavilion. 

КН (М., хххп, 48; see MANDAPA.) 
RATNA-RANJAKA—One of the three library buildings in the 
University of Nalanda (see under DRARMAGANJA). 
RATNA-SAGARA—One of the three library buildings in the 
University of Nalanda (see under DHARMAGANJA). 


RATNI (df. ARATNI)—A measure of 21 angulas or about 16 inches. 


Ratnir aüngula-parvam sarhkhyaya tv-eka-virnáatih | ы 
(Brahmanda-Purana, Part І, 2nd anushamgapáda- 

Chap. уп, v. 98,) 

434 д 


puc tuper AT 


KE 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RATHA 


A measure equal to the cubit with closed or clenched fist (Suprabhed- 
agama, Xxx, 24). : 
RATNODADHI—One of the three library buildings in the Uni- 
versity of Nalanda. It was nine-storey high and stocked the sacred 
scriptures, Prajia-paramita-siitra, and the Tantric works such as 
Samajaguhya, etc. (See under DHARMAGANJA). 


RATHA—A chariot, a carriage, а car, a vehicle, a tank, а war 
chariot, the body, a limb, a shrine. 

(1) Manasára (Chap. хп, 1-107, named Ratha) : 

Rathas are constructed for ceremonial and ordinary drives of 
idols, Brahmans and kings; as well as for fighting, mock-fighting 
and other purposes (lines 1, 131-133). 

Wheels and other parts of Rathas, their shapes, measurement, and orna- 
ments and mouldings are described (lines 2-3 f.). Other architectural 
details are also given (lines 3-11). 

With regard to shape, Rathas are divided into seven classes, namely, 
Nabhasvan-bhadraka, Prabhafijana-bhadraka, Nivàta-bhadraka, Pavana- 
bhadraka, Prishada-bhadraka, Indraka-bhadraka, and Anila-bhadraka 
(lines 112-115). The first of these is square, the second hexagonal; the 
third should have two bhadras or porticoes (? storeys) and the fourth 
three porticoes, the fifth and the sixth should have ten porticoes, and the 
last one should have twelve porticoes (lines 117-120). But according to 
some, the seven shapes proper are respectively semi-circular, circular, 
elliptical, rectangular, octagonal, hexagonal, and oval (lines 121-123). 

Rathas are further divided into four types, namely, Nagara, Dravida 
Andhra, and Vesara. The square Rathas are called Nagara, the octagonal 
ones Dravida, the hexagonal ones Andhra, and the round ones Vesara 
(lines 124—125). 

In accordance with various purposes, Rathas are furnished with differ- 
ent kinds of wheels and other parts. Thus a war chariot or tank has three 
wheels, the chariot for mock-fighting has four wheels, one for ordinary 
festival is furnished with five wheels, one for special festival may have six, 
seven, eight, nine or ten wheels (lines 131-37). 

The number of vedis or platforms, storeys, etc., of these Rathas as well 
as the Rathas of the Bauddhas and of the Jinakas are described (lines 
138-171, 3-111). 

(2) Svarnaih sughatitarh sidhu-ratha-trayam alarhkritam | 

Dukila-ratna-maladyair bahu-mülyair dridharh mahat 11 
(Skanda-Purdna, Vaishnava-khanda-dvitiya, 
Chap. xxv, v. 8.) 


435 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


RATHAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(3) * On the east elevation of the temple . . . eight small shrines 
(known as Ratha) stand in a row from north to south on cach side of the 
eastern entrance, six on the left.’ 

‘The Ratha, on the extreme left, stands completely detached. It 
is a square shrine, with carved panels on the back of the chamber.’ 

© A small platform is in front, with уай piers (block uncarved), each 
having its capital complete.’ 

©The basement is a square granite plinth, and square free stone course 
with semi-octagonal moulding over; the upper base is a square granite 
course on which the superstructure rests ; on the wall head over the pilas- 
ters are brackets which carry the cornice.’ 

* As these shrines are very similar to the monoliths at Mamallapuram, 
known by the name of Rathas, the term is here used advisedly.’ — 
(Pallava Architecture, Arch, Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxxiv, p. 22, paras. 3, 
4, 5, 6 : note 06; see Plate xxv.) 


RATHAKA—A type of building, a shrine, a temple. 
Ashtamarhéena garbhasya rathakanarh tu nirgamah | 
Paridher-guna-bhagena rathakarhs tatra kalpayet 11 
Tat-tritiyena và kuryàd rathakanarh tu nirgamah 1 
Vàma-trayam sthapaniyarn rathaka-tritaye sada 11 

(Agni-Purāņa, Chap. кіл, vv. 13-14.) 
Nemih pàdona-vistirpà prásadasya samantatab | 
Paridhes trayàm$ako madhye rathakarhs tatra karayet 1! 
| (Ibid., Chap. с, v. 7.) 

RATHA-KUMBHA—A pitcher-like part of the column. 

(M., xv, 68; see under SrAMBHA.) 

RATHA-VITHI—The broad road fit for driving chariot and other 

vehicles, the highway, the main street. 

А (See Kamikagama, under КАЈА-УЇТНІ.) 
RAHASYAVASA-MANDAPA—A pavilion where kings reside in 
secret, a bed-room, a private chamber. 

(M., XL, 147 ; see under MANDAPA.) 

RAJA-GRIHA—The royal palace. 

= (See details under RAJA-HARMYA.) 

RAJA-DHANI (see under Nacara)—The king’s residence, the 

capital city where the king usually resides, the seat of Government, 

the metropolis. 


436 


n. Digitized Бу S3 Foundation USA 
SS ae ыса 22. h 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RAJA-HARMYA 


Definition : 


Vidya-sthanarh tu tadvat syat bahu-sená-samanvitam | 
Raja-vesma-samayukta raja-dhaniti kathyate 11 


(Kamikagama, хх, 14.) 
Cf. * With myriads of people, practices of virtue, agreeable occupations, 
streams of the (nine) sentiments, pleasure-gardens, separated lovers, 
splendid tanks, full lotus beds, gilded boats for spring-festivals, ghatika- 
sthanas (religious centres), the supports of dharmma and mines of enjoy- 
ment, moats which were as if the sea being overcome had returned here 
; on account of the collection of gems, groups of the lotus-faces of beautiful 
| women fair as the moon (grama-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madarhba- 
drona-mukha-pura-pattana-ràja-dhàni), on whatever side one looked, in 
these nine forms did the Kuntala-dega shine.— (E. Carnat., Vol. 
Shikarpur Taluq, no. 197; Transl., p. 124, para. r, 
Text, p. 214, line 27 f.) 


RAJA-PATHA—The broad street, the big road, the highway. 
Dhanürishi daga-vistirnah ériman raja-pathah kritah 1 
Nri-vaji-ratha-naganim asambàdhas tu samcharah |1 
Dhanümshi chapi chatvari Sakha-rathya$ cha tair mita | 
Trika rathyoparathyáh syur dvikaš chapy-uparathyakah 11 
Jangha-pathas chatush-pádas tri-pàdar cha grihantaram | 
Dhriti-margas türddhva-shashtharn kramagah padikah smritah 11 

(Brahmanda-Purána, Part 1, 2nd annushamga-pada, 
Chap. уп, vv. 113, 114, 115.) 

RAJA-VITHI— The public road, the broad street, a road which runs 

round a village or town, also called Mangala-vithi and Rathavithi. 
Raja-vithiti vikhyatà gramader bahir-avrita | 
Saiva mangala-vithiti ratha-vithiti kathita H 


VII, 
last seven lines ; Roman 


(Kamikagama, xxt, 2.) 
RAJA-HARMYA- The palace of a king. 

Mánasára (Chap. xr, 1-160, named Raja-griha) : 
Palaces are divided into nine classes with regard to their size and 
as they belong to the nine classes of kings, namely, Sarvabhüpa (or 
Sarva-bhauma, otherwise called Chakra-vartin) (lines 32, 1-9), 
Maha-raja (lines 10-15), Narendra (lines 16-19), Parshnika (lines 
19-22), Patta-dhara (lines 23-25), MandaleSa (lines 26-28), Patta-bhaj 
(lines 29-31), Práharaka (lines 32-36), and Astragraha (line 37)- 

Each palace admits of three sizes, namely, the largest, the intermediate AH 
and the smallest, both as regards the measurement of dimensions (lines 


437 


А 4 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


; = ^P. 
£ wel ee 
E L) 3 a UA. cac ете, ERSTES 


AP < 


RAJA-HARMYA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


4, 10, I5, 36) and the number of walls, storeys, rooms, ditches, gardens, 
etc. (lines 38-69). Thus three kinds of breadth are given to each palace. 
The length and height are determined in comparison with the breadth. 
Тһе former (length) may vary from being equal to the breadth to being 
2] times of it. Height is determined mostly by the number of storeys, 
rules for which have been discussed in another place (see under TALA 
and Вндмі-глмва). The number of storeys a palace should possess, has 
also been discussed in the same place. The enclosure, surrounding moat, 
etc., of each palace are briefly described in the present chapter. But the 
main object of the chapter is to give an account of inner and outer build- 
ings belonging to royal palaces (lines 71-111, 112-159). 

'The Brahma-pitha or royal chapel is installed in the Bramasthana or 
central part (lines 156-159). The main palace is built in the best of the 
remaining parts called Indra, Varuna, Yama, Pushpadanta, сіс. Round 
the palace proper are arranged all other houses, such as the houses for the 
queen and the princesses, for private council hall, drawing-room, dressing- 
` room, bathroom, dining hall, kitchen, bed-chambers, quarters for attend- 
ants, places for tanks and inner gardens, etc. (cf. Shodasa-mandira-chakra). 

Beyond the royal harem, the charm and luxuries of which are so well- 
known, are placed the official quarters, including residences of the crown 
prince, family priest, ministers, and others. Е 

The royal council and other offices are suitably accommodated : e.g., 
the palace of peace and war office are directed to be built at the fourth | 
compound in the southern side of the palace (line 148). Pleasure gardens, 
flower gardens, groves, tanks, etc., are gracefully laid out. Compare the 
following : 

Yamye cha soma-dig vapi уауаууе vàtha nairrite | 

Asthana-mandapam kuryat pushkarinyàm cha vayave | 

Nagasya vàmake yamye kuryàd arama-desakam | 

Pushpodyanarh tatah kuryat mukhya-bhallatake’pi cha | 

Nrittagararh tatah kuryan nana-nrittanganani cha | 

(М., XL, 117-121.) 

Tritiye vithis tasyarnše rahasyavasa-mandapam 1 
à š (Ibid., 147.) 
(Ibid., 152.) 

Stables, cow-sheds, etc., where domestic animals are kept, are generally . 
built near the main gate : 

Dyauvarika-pade chaiva mayüralayam eva cha | 
Dvarasya dakshine parsve vyagrakalayam eva cha | 


(Jbid., 144-145.) 


Ше và vitathe chaiva ranga-mandapam eva cha | 


438 


n. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA . 


| тена 
FIRST FLOOR. 
GROUND FLOOR. 
TYPE— 2. 


| VER. эм. 
bn of и 


- | GROUND FI ООН. GROUND 
EDU DOR / | w GROUND FLOOR. FIRST FLOOR. TYPE 4. йе ТҮРЕ-8 А 


LL TYPE—2. 
ТҮРЕ 1. |J 


GROUND FLOOR. FIRST FLOOR. 
ТҮРЕ— 8. 


ABBREVIATIONS 
B. Bed D.& S. Dining & Store Н. Hall M. Maternity MS  Maid-servant 
BT: Bath ES Enjoyment HK Husking P. Passage HW. House-wife 
CY. Court Yard F.G. . Family God KIT. Kitchen 5. Store LOB. Lobby 
OY. Open Yard F.P. Flower Pavilion К.& S. Kitand Store ST. Study VER. Verandah 
D. Dining G. Granary L. Living 5. Sitting TER. Terrace- 
DR. Dress Gl. Girl Lav. Lavoratory SV. Sitting Verandah LO Ladies 


, Privy 


RAJA-HARM YA š Page 43, 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection: Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
{ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RUCHIRA 


Pargvake mesha-$alà cha satyake vanaralayam | 
ботай ig4na-paryantarh vaji-Salàr prakalpayet | 
Yamyadi-pavakantath syad gaja-Salarn prakalpayet 1 
Tasmāt tu nairrityántam kukkutalayam eva cha | 
Vayu-konadi-mukyantarh mriganam harinalayam 1 

(Ibid., 198-192.) 

The elevated platforms to see the mock-fight from are also placed near 
the door (lines 148-150). The iron-pike (Süla-kampa) for capital punish- 
ment is placed in a prominent place near the gate (line 135). But the jail 
(karagara) is built in a rather out-of-the-way place, such as the Bhrisa, or 
the Antariksha part. 

All these are given by way of illustrations, the most part of the arrange- 
ment being left, as stated here, to the discretion of the artists, and the choice 
of the king (line 155). 

RAJANGA—The royal court, persons forming the king’s suite or 
council, anything related to the king, the royal palace. 

In a chapter (хіл), named Rajanga, of the Mánasára are described the 
nine classes of kings, their courts, kingdoms, royalties and some special 
characteristics. 

* Had a palace (Rajanga) built for Goparaja to the west of that pond.— 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Malur 'Taluq, no. 4 ; Roman Text, p. 187; Transl., p. 156.) 

RUCHAKA—A type of building, a class of columns. 
(1) Prak-paschimavalindav-anta-gatau tad-avadhi-sthitau Seshau 1 
Ruchake dvararn na $ubhadam uttarato'nyàni Sastani 11 

* The (building called) Ruchaka has a western and eastern terrace run- 
ning to the end, and between their extremities two others. А northern 
door in it brings evil, doors on any other side are auspicious.'— (Brihat- 
samhitd, wm, 35, J. R. A. S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 286.) . 

Sama-chaturagro ruchakah—a column with four rectangular sides is 
(called) ruchaka (ibid., v. 28). 

A kind of quadrangular building : JP 

(ә) Agni-Puràma (Chap. civ, vv. 14-15 has ‘ Charuka, see under 

PRASADA). 

(8) Garuda-Pu: ana (Chap. хіп, vv. 24-25; $€ under PRASADA). 
RUCHIRA—A kind of pedestal or platform at the bottom of a 
column, a portico. 

Garbha-mana-pramanena prasadam Srinuta dvijah | 

Vibhajya navadha garbham madhye syal linga-pithika 11 

Padashtakarn tu ruchirarh рагбуабаһ parikalpayet | 

Manena tena vistaro bhittinam tu vidhiyate 11 : 

i (Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссихтх, VV. I 5-10.) 


439 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Z 


RUDRA-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


RUDRA-KANTA—A type of building, a class of columns. 
` The sixteen-sided or circular pillars (M., xv, 21; 5 under STAMBHA). 
А class of four-storeyed buildings (M., xxu, 34-43 + $e under PRAsADA). 


RUDRA-BANDHA—A kind of band, an ornament. 
(М., LI, 69; see under BHÜSHANA.) 
RUPOTTARA—A type of entablature (see PRASTARA). 
Cf. Athochcham рада-уіз(агатп rüpottaram ihoditam | 
(Kamikagama, LIV, 6, etc.) 
RAURAVA—A type of storeyed building. 


A class of nine-storeyed buildings (M., xxvi, 10; see under PRASADA). 
L 


LAKSHMI-SK(-ST)AMBHA (see 5тамвна)--А type of column : 
the main pillar of a house, which is believed to be the abode of the 
guardian angel of the house. 


LAMBANA—A pendant, a moulding of the front portico, same as 


alambana or plinth (M., xix, 28). 
(M., хуш, 285; see MuxHA-BHADRA.) 


Sikharalambanantam cha vedi-tara-samanvitam | 
(М., хіх, 27.) 
Lambanordhve dalam badhyà . . . . 1 š 
(Jbid., 39.) 
Utsedhe cha tri-bhagaikarh tasyadho chagra-lambanam | 
(Ibid., 170.) 
Tr(i)yaméam chagra-vistararn lambanarh paficha-bhagikam | 
(Ibid., 172.) 
See also M., xx, 25, etc. 
A pendant (M., L, 15, etc.). 
LAMBA-PATRA—An ornament shaped like a leaf. 


(M., LI, 73 ; see BHÜSHANA.) 


ІАМВА-МАМА--Тһе measurement along the plumb lines. 

(M., Lv, 3-6 ; see under МАМА.) 
LAMBA-HARA—A kind of long necklace, a pendant. 

(М., L, 801; see BHÜSHANA.) 
LALATA(-MANDAPA)—Same as munda-harmya, and chüli- 
harmya, a tower, a top-room. 

(M., XXXIV, 400, 406, 409, 414, 429, 454, 505, 568.) 
Same as VAKTRA and Netra (/М., xxxv, 257-260). 


440 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE LINGA 


LANGALA—The plough. 
For its architectural details see Manasára (Chap. v, 55-77). 


LANGALAKARA—Anything shaped like the plough, a pavilion with 
three faces, a type of hall. 
(M.,xxxiv, 553 ; see under MANDAPA ; 
н Е XXXV, 67 ;see under Sara.) 
LANGALA-BHITTI—A kind of round corner wall, Shaped like 
the plough. 
Karne langala-bhittih syad bhramaravrita-bahyake | 
(M., xxxiv, 333.) 
Prapagraika-dvi-bhagarh уа karne langala-bhittikam | 
(Ibid., 225.) 
LINGA—A distinguishing mark, a badge, a symbol, an emblem» 
the genital organ, the image of a god, an idol, the emblematical 
phallus of Siva. 
(1) Manasara (Chap. іл, 1-376, named Liga): 

Various classifications of phalli have been given (line 2 £). They 
are classified firstly into six heads: (1) Saiva, Pa$upata, Kala-mukha, 
Mahavrata, Vàma and Bhairava ; secondly, into four : (2) Sama-karna, 
Vardhamàna, Sivanka and Svastika ; thirdly, into four with regard to 
height : (3) Jati, Chhanda, Vikalpa and Abhasa ; fourthly, into three 
types with regard to breadth or width: (4) Nagara, Dravida and Vesara 
(line 99) ; fifthly, into five: (5) Svayambhu or Udbhita, Daivika, 
Manusha, Ganava and Ársha ; sixthly, into two: (6) Athmartha (for 
one’s personal worship), and Parartha (for others, for public worship) ; 
again into two: (7) Eka (single) lihga, and Bahu-linga (phalli in 
group) ; then into many kinds: such as (8) Vajra, Svarna, etc., with 
regard to materials of which they are made; and lastly into two: 
(9) Kshanika (for temporary worship) as contrasted with the (10) 
Sthira or permanent linga. All these kinds of phalli are described 
at great length. Various alternative measures are prescribed for each 
of them (lines 13-376). In some cases as many as 36 alternative 
heights have been suggested. But in most cases their number is 9. 
The 9 alternative heights of a phallus are determined in some cases 
by a comparison to different parts of the body of the worshipper 
(yajamana). The height of the phallus may reach the worshipper’s 
sex-organ, navel, heart, breast, arm-joint, chin, nose, eye, or be equal 
to his full height. Another comparative measurement is given with 
regard to the Garbha-griha or adytum. Various absolute measures 
are also given in some cases. The set of the nine alternatives 


441 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


LINGA ; АМ ENCYGLOPAEDIA ОЕ A | 


prescribed for height may begin with one cubit and end with four 

cubits and а half, the increment being by half а cubit, The breadth 

or width of the phallus is in like manner discussed at great length. ; 
-lakshanam uttamam | 


(2) Athatah sampravakshyami linga ) 
lingarh kuryad vichakshanah і! 


Susnigdham cha suvarpam cha 

Prásadasya pramanena linga-mànam vidhiyate ! 

Linga-mànena và vidyat prasadam $ubha-lakshanam 11 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхш, v, 1-2.) 


Etat sàmànyam uddishtarh prasadasyeha lakshanam | 
pravakshyami prasadam linga-manatah |! 
(Ibid., Chap., ccrxix, v. 7.) 


= 


Tathanyam tu 


Evarh ratna-mayarh kuryat sphatikarh parthivarh {айа | 
Subharh dàru-mayam сһарі yad và manasi rochate 11 
(Ibid., Chap. ссіхш, v. 25.) 
(3) In the Brihat-samhità (туш, 59-55) where Varahamihira seems to 
have condensed the details from the Matsya-Purápa, are given especially | 
the architectural characteristics : 
` Lingasya vritta-paridhim dairghyenasütrya tat tridha vibhajet | 
Mile tach chaturaéram madhye tv-ashtaéri vrittam atah 11 
Chaturagram avani-khate madhyarh karyarh tu pindika$v-abhre 1 
Drigyochchhrayena sama samantatah pindika Svabhrat ıı 
* (For the construction of an emblem of Siva) set out in the length the 
(measure of the) circumference of the round part and divide the whole 
phallus into three portions, of which the part at the bottom must be quad- 
rangular, that in the midst octangular, and the rest round. (The same 
shapes are prescribed in the Мйпаҙйға). Sink the quadrangular portion 
into a pit in the earth and put the middle member into the cavity of the 
pedestal. The pedestal is visible upwards to its cavity, in all directions 
over an extent equal to its height.’—(Bryihat-samhita, туш, 53, 54, 
J-R.A.S., М. S., Vol. vi, p. 329, notes r, 2.) 

(4) Sarvesham eva linganarh lakshanarh śriņu sarhpratam 11 
Madhya-sütram samasadya brahma-rudrantika budhah | 
Shodasangula-lingasya shad-bhagair bhajito yatha 11 
Tad vaiyamana-sütrabhyàm manam antaram uchyate | 
Yavashtam uttare karyyarh seshanam yava-hanitah 11 
Adho-bhagarn tridha kritva tv-ardham ekam parityajet | 
Ashtadha tad-dvayam kritvà urddha-bhaga-trayam tyajet !! 

. Urddhvarh cha райсһатаа bhagad bhramya-rekham pralambayet | 
Bhagam ekam parityajya samgamam karayet tayoh II 
Etam sadharanam proktarh linganam lakshanarn maya |! 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. rur, vv. 8-13.) 


442 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
' c ж 


4 


NOTE:— Here each unit is one-eighth 
of the height of Sikhara., 


IND 


AMBARA VIYAT. 


5 
x EN Балы. үке p 
| a GAGANA. МІЯАҮАЗ, ANANTA. ANTARIKSMA. PUSHKALA. 
| 
j 
| 

J 


PENT ROOF. PROPORTIONS OF LUPA. 
LUPA. 


+ 


LAKSHMI STAMBHA 


VEDIKA. 


IKA \- 


SECTION. ELEVATION. 


VEDI. 


Page із? 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


Ç > 


—IOÑI 


vA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE LU(-0)PA 


(5) Svayambhuvarh vana-lingarh daivikath charshakarh tu iti | 
BEE Балан manusharn lingam shat prakaram prakirtitam 11 
(Kamikagama, 1, 35.) 
Details of these Lingas (see ibid., 36-43) are the same as given in the 
Manasara. 
The pitha (pedestal) of the Linga (phallus) is described.— (Ibid., 44-52.) 
Twelve Jyotir-lingas : 
(т) Somanatha (at Verawal, Junagadh State, Guzrat). 
(2) Trimbake$vara (at source of the Godavari, Nasik). 
(3) Mummale$vara (at Onkar, Mandhata, district Nimar, С. Р.). 
(4) Mahakale$vara (at Ujjain). 
(5) Kedarnatha (at Kedar, Garhwal District). 
(6) Visvanath (at Benares). Б 
(7) Vaidyanatha (in Santal Pargana, district Birbhum, Bihar), 
or 
Vaijnatha (at Parli, Hyderabad State, Deccan). 
(8) Катпебуага (at Ramnad District, Madras). 
(9) Mallikarjuna (at Srisaila, Carnool District, Madras). 
(10) Nàganàtha (near Dwaraka, Guzrat, or at Oundh, Hyderabad, 
Deccan). 
(11) GhrishneSvara (Pürna-jyotish, near Ellora Caves, Hyderabad, 
Deccan). 
(12) Bhima-Sankara (30 miles from Poona). 
JV.B.— These do not include three other famous lingas, namely : 

(A) Pašupatinatha (at Katmundu, Nepal). 

(B) Amarnatha (in Kasmir). 

(C) Kailasanatha (on the Manas-sarovara, in the Himalayas). 
LINGA(-MUDRA)-STAMBHAC—A pillar marked with the lings 
or emblem of Siva (see under STAMBHA). 

LU(-U)PA—A sloping and projecting member of the entablature, 
etc., representing a continued pent-roof ; it is made below the cupola, 
and its ends are placed as it were suspended from the architrave 
and reaching the stalk of the lotus below. Slope or breadth (AL, 
XXX, 135.) 
(See Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind., p. 52.) 
(1) Atha sarhkshipya vakshyamo lupanam lakshanarh vayam | 
Uttarasyanurüpena tasam taram udiritam | 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, x, r, f.) 
(2) Lüparoha-kriyà-yuktam anyat pürvokta-vartmana | 
Athava-sarva-Salayam liparohanam eva va |! 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 69.) 


443 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


LOGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(3) In connexion with the entablature : 
Lupàkàrar tu tat kuryad dalasyakritir eva và | 
(M., XVI, 139 ; see also 20, 195.) 


An account is given in great detail (M., хуш, 168-278, ххх; 132, etc.). 


Тһе lupàs (inner roof or the ceiling) prescribed for temples are techni- , 


cally called ambara, vyaya, jyotis, gagana, vihayas, ananta, antariksha, 
and pushkala; and those for residential buildings are called mahi, jyà, 
кабуарі, kshoni, ürvi, gotra, vasurh-dharà, and vasudha. 
(М., хуш, 177-184.) 
ТОСА — Probably same as thüna (posts, pillar), clod, pole, memorial 
pillar erected after the earth is piled up from about the grave (see 
further details under Tutwa-and SANKU). 


LOSHTA (see KArASA)—A lump of earth, а clod, an architectural 
object resembling partly the finial. 

The Vastu-vidhyd (ed. Sastri) has a chapter (ху) named Mrit-loshta- 
lakshana (description of the lump of earth). In it loshta is directed to be 
built on the stüpi (top, dome, vv. 27, 37). At the top of a building the 
kalaša (water-jar, finial) is generally built. It is variously named in this 
last chapter of the work : loshtani (vv. 28-30, 32), nivra-loshtàni (v. 34), 
krüra-loshtàni (v. 95), kona-loshtani, puta-loshtani, ürdhva-loshtàni 
(v. 36), and svarnadi-loshta (v. 39). 

LOHA (see under ABHAsA)—Iron used both as an architectural and 
sculptural material. 

One of the metals of which idols are made : 

(1) Mrinmayam yadi kuryach chech chhülarh tatra prakalpayet 1 
Lohajam tv-avi$eshena madhüchchhishtena nirmitam 11 
(Suprabheddgama, XXXIV, 21.) 
(2) Evam dvi-tryangulam vapi lohajaih pratimodayam | 
(М., xit, 119.) 
Lohajair mrit-sudha chaiva . . . | 
Uttamam lohajarh bimbarn pithabhasarh tu chottamam | 
(M., 1л, 6, то.) 
See further illustrations under АвназА. 


V 
VAKTRA—The face, a moulding. 


A moulding of the column (M., xv, 212-219). 
Тһе face (/М., гуп, 20, etc.). 
See the lists of mouldings under ADHIsHTHANA and UPaAPiTHA. 


444 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


cuneum 


0 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VAJRA-BANDHA 


VAKRA—Bent, winding, curved, curled, a type of octagonal build- 
ing. 

Е (Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVII, vv. 21, 23, 31-32 ; see under PRASADA.) 
VAJRA—Adamantine, forked, zigzag, a diamond, the thunderbolt 
of Indra, a type of column, a paste, plaster or cement, a type of 
building. 

A column with eight rectangular sides (Brihat-samhitd, um, 28). 
A paste, plaster or cement : Kalkah krito dvitiyo’yarn vajrakhyah | 
(Brihat-samhita, туп, 6, J. В. A. S., N. S., Vol. VI, p. 322.) 
A type of octangular building : 
(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. civ, vv. 20-21, see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purdpa (Chap. xxxvi, vv. 21, 23, 81-92; see under 
PRASADA). i 
VAJRA-KĀNTA—A type of storeyed building. 
A class of eleven-storeyed buildings (AM, xxxiv, I9-25; see under 

PRASADA). D i 
VAJRA-KUMBHA—A moulding of the base and the pedestal, 
generally placed between a cyma and petal, it is so called, as it 
resembles an elongated pitcher. 

A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 253; see the list of mouldings under 

ADHISHTHANA). 

A moulding of the pedestal (M., xm, 74 ; see the list of mouldings under 

UPAPĪTHA). 

VAJRATARA—A paste, plaster, cement. 
Vajrataro nàma kalko'nyah 1 
я (Brihat-sarhità, туп, 7, J.R.A.S., N. S., Vol. vr, р: 322.) 
VAJRADHATU-MANDALA—The top floor of five-storeyed 
Nepalese temples. 
(For details see DHARMADHATU-MANDALA.) 


VAJRA-PATTA—A moulding, a diamond band, a fillet. 


A moulding of the base (M., xiv, 258; see the list of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA). 


VAJRA-PADA—A diamond pillar, a type of small pillar. 
A pillar of the bedstead (M., хиту, 61). 
VAJRA-BANDHA-—-A diamond band, a type of base. 
A class of bases (M., xiv, 259-271; see the list of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA). 


445 


|... CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University H 
` s (с> ж r ы 


Қым ЗА 


VAJRA-LEPA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VAJRA-LEPA—A paste, plaster, cement. 
Kalko'yari vajra-lepakshah 1 ; 
(Brihat-samhita, туп, 3 5 see J.R.A.S., М. S., VI, p. 321.) 
VAJRA-LINGA (see Lrvca)—A kind of phallus. 


(M., LI, 330 ; see under LINGA.) 


VAJRA-SAMGHATA—A paste, plaster, cement. 
Maya-kathito yogo'yamn vijfieyo vajra-samghatah | 
(Brihat-samhita, туп, 8; see 7.В.4.8., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 322.) 
VAJRA-SVASTIKA—A type of building. 

А kind of octangular building (Agni-Purana, Chap. CIV, vv. 20-21; see 
under PRASADA). 

VAJRASANA (see BopHr-MANDA)—A diamond throne, the mira- 
culous throne under the Bodhi-tree at Gaya, on which Buddha and 
his predecessors sat when attaining perfect wisdom. 

(1) * Bodhimanda is the name of the miraculous throne under the Bodhi- 
tree at Bodh Gaya, also called the Vajrásana or diamond-throne, on 
which Buddha and his predecessors sat, when attaining bodhi or perfect 
wisdom.’—(Ind. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 957, с. 1-2.) 

(2) Tenaitad atra kritam àtma-manovad uchchair vajrasanasya bhava- 

nam bhuvanottamasya | 

“Не erected here for the diamond throne, the best thing in the 
world, this habitation, lofty like his own mind.'—(Ghosrawa Buddhist 
inscrip., lines 14-15, Ind. Ant., Vol. хуп, PP. 310, 311, 308, note 5.) 


VADHU-NATAKA—A theatre for females, a gallery, a balcony. 


Vadhü-nàtaka-sarhghai$ cha sarhyuktarh sarvatah purim | 
Commentary : vadhinarh nataka-sala | 
(Ramayana, 1, 5, 12.) 


VANA-DURGA (cf. Nacara)—A forest-fori. 
(See details under Durca.) 
VAPRA—A rampart, a wall, a moulding of the base (plinth), 
cavetto, an architectural member at the upper part of a building, 
(parapet), a summit, a bank, a mound, a ditch, the foundation of 

a building, the gate of a town. 
(1) Chatur-dandavakrishtam parikhayah shad-dandochchhritam avarud- 
dharh tad-dvi-guna-vishkambharh khatad vaprarh kárayet | 
Vaprasyopari prákàaram . . . . |^ 

(Kautilzya- Artha-sastra, Chap. xxiv, pp. 51, 52.) 


446 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


оос 


zoe 


| 


Wapa q DES 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VAPRA-BANDHA 
(2) The surrounding wall of a village : 
Grāmasya parito bāhye rakshartharn vapra-samyutam 1 
` Bahye vapram suvrittakam . . . | 


(М., уш, 11, 37.) 
‘Evam grama(rh)-prasararn cha bahir vapra-sarnyutam 1 


Paritah parikhà bàhye vapra-yuktam tu karayet 1 
In connexion with towers: 
Etat pattanam akhyatam vapráyata-samanvitam | 
Sarveshàm api durganarh vaprai§ cha parikhair vritam 1 
(M., x, 66, 106.) 
etc.; see the list of mouldings 


(M., тх, 61, 107; see also 147.) 


A moulding of the base ( M., xtv, 20, 24, 
under ADHISHTHANA). 
In connexion with buildings of one to twelve storeys (parapet) : 
Adhishthàna-samarn maficharn mafichordhve’rdhena vaprayuk | 
d (M., XXI, 14, etc.) 
Malikopari vaprarh syàd adhishthanarn samodayam | 
4 (M., xxx1, 64.) 
(3) Wall (Dabhoi inscrip. v. 111, Ер. Ind., Vol. I, p. 31). 
(4) Rampart (Badnagar Praíasti of the rei 
Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 300, 303). 
(5) Yasyotturhga-turarhga-tarndava-bhavah prarhSitkarah sainikah svah- 
simasu marud-ganabhaya-maha-vapra-prakaro’bhavat | 
(Sridhara’s Devapattana Pra$asti, v. 13, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. п, p. 441.) 
a-ramyalayarh samatanot 


gn of Kumarapala, v. 23 


(6) Rameévaraya ghana-marhtapa-vapra-saudh 
samata rasajfiah | 
‘He erected a temple (alaya), adorned with a solid hall (mantapa), 
a wall and a plastered mansion (saudha) to RameSvara.’—(Mangalag 
pillar inscrip., v. 39; see also vv. 29, 38, 48, Ер. Ind., Vol. vr, 
122, 124, 112, 113,114,115.) 
(7) Vapra-gopura-yutair nava-harmyaih | 
(Kondavidu inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v. 26, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vr, рр. 237, 231.) 
(8) ` Не, the emperor of the south, caused to be made of stone for 
Vijaya-Narayana (temple), latticed window, secure door-frame (kavata), 
door-lintel, kitchen, ramparts (udagra-vapra), pavilion, and a pond named 
the Vasudeva-tirtha.'—(Ep. Сатаі., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 72 ; 
Transl., p. 61 ; Roman Text, p. 142, line 8.) 
VAPRA-BANDHAC-—A type of base. 


A class of bases (M., xiv, 250, 259; see the list of mouldings under 
ADHISHTHANA). 


iri 
рр. 123, I2I, 


447 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VAHYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VAHYA—Lit. that which can be carried, a couch used by women 
(R.-V., уп, 55, 8, 4.-V., 5, 3 women sitting on it, A.-V., 20, 3 weary 
bride mounting it, A.-V. xiv, 2, 30), canopied reclining arm-chair 
with poles or handles for carriers, bearing all forms, a bed on which 
the bride mounts and lies with her groom in the marriage ritual 
(4.-V., XIV, 2, 20). 
VI(VAI)RATA—A type of storeyed building, a class of twelve- 
storeyed buildings once prevailing in the country of Virata (Jai- 
pur). 
Chatur-adhika-tri-dasa-bhagarn harmya-visalake | 
Ashtarhgena maha-sala parSve sala $ivam$akam | 
DvyarhSarh pafijara-$ala tad-ardharn chantaralakam | 
Anu$ala tri-bhagarh syad ekam$am antaralakam | 
Dvi(dvya)rnáam pafijara-$alà cha par$ve bha(ha)rah sivarh-Sakam 1 
Kütà-nava(-nàm cha) dvi-bhagam syat sarvam  yuktyam sa- 
bhadrakam = 
Maha-sala yugarhSena madhyam atra (bhadrarn) prakarayet | 
Tale tale vimàne tu $ala-pafijàra-shoda$am | 4 
Kshudra-éala ауі-Һага cha tan-madhye chashtakam bhavet | 
Chatur-dikshu maha-$alà chatush-kütarh tale tale 1 
Evam vairata-kantarn syach chhesham bhagam tu püravat | 
(M., xxx, 17-27.) 
VARDHAKI—An architect, the designer, the painter. 
(See details under STHAPATI.) 
VARDHANI(I)—A type of building. 
A class of round buildings (Agni-Purdpa, Chap. civ, vv. 17-18 ; see under 
PRASADA). | 
VARDHAMANA—A class of buildings, а type of storeyed mansion, 
a kind of phallus, a joinery, an entablature, 
(1) A class of Salas or mansions (M., xxxv, 4 ; see also 303, under SALA). 
A kind of phallus (М., ілі, 4; see under LINGA). 
A kind of joinery (M., хуп, 84, see under SANDHI-KARMAN). 
An entablature (see under PRASTARA). 
(=) Dvaralindo'nta-gatah pradakshino’ nyah Subhas tatas сһапуаһ | 
Tad-vach cha vardhamane dvàram tu na dakshinarh karyam 11 
*'The Vardhamana has a terrace before the (chief) entrance, extending 
totheend ; then, when you proceed in a direction from left to right, another 
beautiful terrace and thereon again, another in the aforesaid direction. 
No southern door should be made in it.’—(Brihat-samhita, tm, 33, 7.В.А.5., 
N. S., Vol. уі, pp. 285-286.) 


448 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


1 
| HINDU ARCHITECTURE VA(BA)LABHI(-1) 
w 


(3) Vedasyarn vardhamanakam—the Vardhamana house (42112) has 
four faces.—(Kamikagama, xxxv, 88.) 
An -entablature—(Kamikagama, LIV, 7). 


| VA(BA)LABHI(-I)—The roof, the frame of a thatch, the topmost 

е part of a house, a class of storeyed buildings, а type of entablature, 

a class of rectangular buildings, a top-room, a turret, a balcony, an 
| awning, a tent, any temporary erection on the flat roof of a house. 

| (1) Tri-chandra-sala bhaved valabhi 1 

| ‘The roof must have three dormer-windows.’ 
e Dr. Kern adds the following : 

‘Comm. valabhi vàtàyana ; vatayana in general means “ апу place 
whither one goes to take an airing ;” sometimes “а window ” is intended 
by it, other times the flat “© roof ” of an Indian house. In the latter accepta- 
tion it is here used by Utpala, and frequently elsewhere ; e.g. Katha- 
saril-sagara (95, 18) : sva-grihottunga-vatayana-gatah ; (тоз, 162): har- 
mya-vatayanarudhah, etc.’—(Brihat-samhitd, LVI, 25, LVH, 4, J.R.A.S., N. S., 
Vol. уі, рр. 319, 322, note.) 

(2) A class of five-storeyed buildings (Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 
35, 50, 53 ; see under PRAsADA). 

A type of rectangular building : 

(3) Agni-Purdna (Chap. cciv, vv. 16-17; see under PRASADA). 

(4) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. хіп, vv. 21-22, 26-27 ; see under РкАѕАра). 

(5) Prasádagravimàneshu valabhishu cha sarvada | 


| (Ramayana, п, 88, 5, see further context under PRAsApA.) 


і (6) Naga-lokam . . . aneka-vidha-prasada-harmya-valabhi-nirühya- 
! §ata-samkulam | 4 

| (Mahabharata, 1, 3, 133.) 
| (7) А synonym of the entablature (M., xvi, 19; see under PRASTARA). 
| A moulding of the entablature (M., xvi, 79; see the list of mouldings 
! ` under PRASTARA). 


In connexion with four-storeyed buildings : 

| ! Nanadhishthana-padais cha valabhibhi$ cha bahu-bidhaih 1 
| ` (M., xxi, 94.) 

| (8) Kailasa-tunga-sikahra-pratimani сһапуапу-арһапа dirggha-vala- 

| bhini sa-vedikani | 

Gandharvva-Sabda-mukharani nivishta chitra-karmmani lolakadali- 
vanagobhitani 11 

* And other long buildings on the roofs of the houses, with arbours in 
them, are beautiful, being like the lofty summits of (the mountain) 
Kailaga ; being vocal with songs (like those of the Gandharvas ; having 


449 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


: VALAYA AN ENCY CLOPAEDIA OF 
(in them) ; (and) being adorned with 


pictured representations arranged 
(Mandasor stone inscrip. of Kumaragupta, | 


groves of waving plantain trees.’— 
lines 6-7, С. I. I, Vol. ш, F. G. L, no. 18, рр. 81, 85.) 
@) o o о punyabhivriddhy-artharh vad (-l)abhim kara(ya)yitva 
ananta-svàmi-padam pratishthapya . - - 1 
* Having caused (а temple having) a flat roof to be made, for the sake 
of increasing the religious merit of . . . (and) having installed. the 
fcet of (the god) Anantasvàmin.' 


* Vadabhi (also called valabhi, see above) is explained as meaning 


the wooden frame of a roof; a flat roof, house-top, top-room, turret, 
top-floor, balcony ; any temporary erection on the top of a palace: an 
awning, a tent ; but it seems to refer to a building here, and to denote 
a flat-roofed temple.'—(Gadhwa stone inscrip., line 2, С. 1. І, Vol. ш, 


F. G. I., no. 66, p. 268, note 9.) 
(то) * Whose arms like jewelled pillars supporting the roof (valabhi) 


of the three worlds)—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Channarayapatna Taluq, 
no. 179, line 2 ; Roman Text, p. 462, Transl., p. 202.) 
VALAYA—An ornament, a type of building, a moulding. 
(1) A bracelet (M., xu, 138; 1, 33, Cic. ; 5 BuüsHANA ; Deopara 
inscrip. of Vijayasen, v. 11, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, pp- 303; 313.) 
А class of round buildings : 
(ә) Agni-Purána (Chap. crv, vv. 12-18, see under PRASADA.) 
(3) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 29, 28, 29 ; sce under PRAsADA). 
E. (4) The sixth moulding from the top of an entablature (Kamikagama, 
É LIV, 9; 5% under PRASTARA). 


VALLI (cf. VATAYANA)—A type of window. 


3 (М., xxxm 483; see under VATAYANA.) 


وو ے۔ 


z З‏ س 
(n 22‏ — € — — 


i 

р VASATI (see Basap1)—A mart, а trading settlement, a quarter 
Е of a town (Markandeya-Purána, Chap. хих, 49-50), à residence, à 
E shrine, а Jain monastery or temple containing the image of a 
E Tirthankara. à 


(Jaina Rock inscrip. at Vallimalai, no. А, 
v. 2, Ер. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 141, note 7, and 
refer to Mr. Kittel’s Dictionary, p. 1989.) 


VASUDHA—The earth, a kind of pent-roof. 
Р | (М., хуш, 178; see under LuPA.) 
VASTRA-NIP(Y)A—A jar-shaped ornament of the column. 


' Kumbha-madhye rakta(ratna)-bandhain vastra-nip(y)arn cha vinya- 


set | 
(M., ху, 223.) 


450 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VAMÉA 


УА(УА)-НА-(КА, LA)—Bearing, carrying, supporting, a way, a 
road, a vehicle, a conveyance, a river, a channel. 
(1) * Given the village with . . . its hills and water-courses (vahala). 
(Plate of Deva Varmadeva, line 8 f., Ind., Ant., 
Vol. xvi, pp. 206, 207, note 33.), 
(2) ‘ Vahaka—a water-channel in the Gwalior inscrip. of Sarhvat 
933 ; Hultzsch in J. D. Morg Ges., Vol. xL, p. 37 (vaha, a watercourse, 
Elliot, Suppl. Glossary, Vol. m, p. 225); Grierson, Bihar Pseaant Life 
| SS. 054). 
| (3)  V(b)allala-devakasya vahah | 
* Water-channel constructed by Ballaladeva.’ 
(Lala-Pahad Rock inscrip. of Narasirhhadeva, line 6, 
Ind. Anl., Vol. хуш, pp. 212, 213, note 2.) 


VAHANA (see under SrTAMBHA)—Conveying, carrying, supporting, 
flowing, а boat, a raft, a conveyance, part of a column. 

Stambharm vibhajya navadha vahanam bhago ghato'sya bhago’nyah | 

(Brihat-samhita, їли, 29, 7. В. А. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 285.) 

VAMSA—‘ A bamboo, a shaft, a flute, a reed-pipe, а cross-beam, а 

oint, the backbone, a term for the rafters and laths fastened to the 

beams of a house (as generally made of split bamboos), or laths run- 


3 à ka 
UH 


— a. з= 


— 


w — лл 


ning across a roof.’ 
(т) Bhojanarh nanuvarnšarn syach chhayanam cha tathaiva cha | 


Anuvarhga-griha-dvararn naiva karyarh $ubharthibhih 11 
Dvija-gehasya varnšarn tu pürvagram parikalpayet 11 
Yàmyagram kshatripanam tu paschimagrarh visath bhavet | 
Südranàm uttarasyam syad esha varhsagrako vidhih 11 

(Kamikagama, XXXV, 147, 149, 150.) 


Prag-vaméayor anya-varhśaiś cha nalikera-daladibhih | 
Achchhaditah prapà пата prastaram chatra mandapah 11 
Varnšadir asrnša-sahita $ikhara-stüpikanvitah | 
Nasika-mukha-pattarnša šaleti parikirtita 11—(Jbid., 1, 88, go.) 
Jayanti varnšaka jñeya tulā-vad anumargakam II 


(Ibid., LIV, 15.) 


Dandika-vara-sarnyuktarn shan-netra-sama-varnšakam | 

Vamáopari gatah 54185 chatasro' shtanananvitah ti 
(Jbid., хі, 19.) 

(2) The backbone (M., уп, 264; see also LXV, 158; LXVI, 82). 

In connexion with the entablature : 


Yatha-balarn yathà-bhararn tatha vamšadi(m) yojayet 1 
(M., хут, 198.) 


451 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VAMSA-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


In connexion with the pillar : 
Kutya-varhga-prati(r)-varhsarh tungam yat tu samam bhavet | 
Tungasyadhika-hinarh ched dvi-panktirh nityam avahet | 
(М., хуп, 120-121.) 
Іп connexion with the pavilion (тардара): 
Adhishthanath vina kuryaj janmadi-prastarantakam | 
Athava pada-varhgam cha samyuktar tat prapangakam | 
(М., хххіу, 14-15.) 
Vam£a-mülagrayoh sarve karkarikrita-netrakam | 
(Ibid., 399.) 
In connexion with the hall (5218): 
Vamáa-mülàgrayor vāsarh var$a-mülaika-vasakam 1 
(M. xxxv, 128) 
Harmya-tàra-va$àd dvaram vamsadhishthana-paduke | 
(М., LXIV, 5.) 
VAMSA-KANTA—A class of twelve-storeyed buildings once pre- 
vailing in Varhéa-(ka), the capital of Kausambi. 
Tad eva haram(-ra) tan-madhye chaika-bhagena saushtikam | 
Vaméáa-kantam iti proktam $esham pürvavad acharet 11 
(M., xxx, 31-32, see also 28-30, under KERALA-KANTA.) 


VAJANA-—A square or rectangular moulding resembling a fillet, i.e. 
a small band which is placed between mouldings and as the upper- 
most member of a cornice. (For its synonyms, 546 M., xvr, 46-47.) 
Urdhva-vajanam ekarnšam arnšarh tat pattika bhavet 1 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Sastri, 1х, 24.) 
The moulding at the top and bottom of the entablature (Kamikagama, 
LIV, I ; see under PRASTARA). 
A crowning moulding of a column (Suprabhedagama, xxxi 108; see 
under STAMBHA). 
A moulding of the pedestal (4M., хш, 46, 51; see the list of mouldings 
under UPAPITHA). 
А crowning moulding of the base ( M., xiv, 9; see the list of mouldings 
under ADHISHTHANA). 
A moulding of dolā (swing, hammock). 
Vajane cha dvi-valayarn syad ayasena balabalam 1 
(M., L, 106.) 
VAJI-SALA—A horse stable. 


(M., хі, 362; see under SALA.) 


452 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation, USA 


E p 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VATAYANA 


VATA—A road, a fence, an enclosure, courtyard. 
Cf. Vata-bhümi (Kaámikagama, xxt, з). 
Corrupted to Bada, ‘ enclosure of a town or village, fence, wall, hedge.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. 1v, p. 211, footnote under KAMPANA.) 
VATAKA—A hamlet. 
Tamara-cheru-gramo nama | 
Chikhali-vatakena samam ekikritya . . . 1 

‘The village named Tamara-cheru combined with the Chikhali ham- 
lct/—(The Madras Museum Plates of Vajrahasta III, lines 43-44, Ep. Ind. 
Vol. 1x, pp. 94-95.) 

VATIKA-—A small house, a garden house, a pleasure pavilion, an 
orchard. 
` Vàme bhage dakshine và nripanam tredha karya vatika kridanar, 
tham I 
* At the left or right side a threc-fold pavilion should be built for the 
sport of the kings^— (Silpa-sastra-fara-samgraha, тх, 29.) 
Uttare saralais talaih Subha syat pushpa-vatika | 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ссіхх, v. 29.) 
Bhaktyà vidhàpitam chabhyam amralohita-marndiram (ma)tri-ha 
(rmye)na (sarhyu)ktarn уаруа vatikayapi hi ! 

* Out of devotion he caused to be erected a temple of red colour and 
surrounded it with shrine of some mātā ( ? three shrines), a step-well and 
an orchard.’—(Dhanop inscrip. of Chachcha, v. 6, Ind. Ant., Vol. xr, 
pp. 175» 174-) 

VATA—A type of building, a house with an eastern and southern 


hall. 


(Brihat-samhita, um, 39; see under РвАѕАра.) 


VATA-KSHETRA (see VATAYANA)—A place for airing, a roof. 
Kutumba-bhimi-manamh tu vata-kshetra-vivarjitam | 
(Kamikagama, ххі, 3.) 
VANA-LINGA—A kid nof phallus. 
i (Kamikagama, L, 35, 36; see under LiNGa.) 
VĀTĀYANA—A window, a porch, a portico. 


(1) Description of windows (M., xxxur, 568-597) : 
Windows are constructed in all kinds of buildings (ibid., 569-572). 


Тһе latticed windows are also prescribed : 
Naranarh jàlakarh sarvarn devanam api yogyakam і (572). 
The measures, etc., are left to the discretion of the architects (573). 
The general plan of windows is also given (574-581). 


453 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VAPI(-PT)-(KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Their shapes are represented by the following designs 3 nàga-bandha 
(snake's band), valli (creeper), gavaksha (cow’s eye), kuñjaraksha (cle- 
phant’s or deer’s сус), svastika (cross figure), sarvato-bhadra (a figure 
with four facades), nandyavarta (a figure with openings on the sides), 
and pushpa-bandha (flower-band) (ibid., 582-584). 

Their architectural details are given (ibid., 585-600). 
(2) Udag-àérayam cha varunyam vatayana-samanvitam | 
š (Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, v. 16.) 
(3) Praka$artham alpam trdhvam vàtàyanam karayet | 


Pratiloma-dvara-vatayana-badhayam cha anyatra ràja-màrga- 


rathyabhyah | 
(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. LXV, р. 167.) 
VAPI(-PI)-(KA)—A tank, a well, a reservoir of water. 

(1) А tank (Dewal Pragasti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 20, Ep. Ind., Vol. 
1, рр. 79, 83). 

(2) * A well with a flight of stairs, while küpa denotes an ordinary 
well)—(Mahesvara's Commentary on the A4marakósha, Ep. Ind., Vol vm, 
p. 46, note 2; p. 41, line 58.) 

3 (3) Dakshina-di$abhage karapita vapi tatha prapeyam cha | 

* In the southern part there has been made an irrigation well and also 
a watering-trough.'—(Grant of Bhimadeva п, V. S. 1266, line 26-27, Ind. Ant, 
Vol. хуш, pp. 113, 115.) 

(4) Vapi-putake bhümi-hala-vàhà | 

* In the hollow ground below an irrigation well.'—(Grant of Bhimadeva II, 
Simba-sarhvat 93, line 7, Ind. Ant, Vol. хуш, p. 110.) 

(5) * During the reign of Ganapati, the son of the prince Gopala, the 
thakkura Vamana built a public tank (vapika).'—(Sarwaya stone inscrip. 


< of Ganapati of Nalapura, vv. 23-28, Ind. Ant., Vol. ххп, p. 82.) 
(6) Dharmmarthe svayam eva vapi karapita | 
А * For charitable purpose the step-well was caused to be constructed а 
E. his own cost.—(Manglan stone inscrip., line 6, Ind. Ant., Vol. xur, p. 87.) 
5 VAMA—A kind of phallus. 


(М., тл, 9; see under LINGA.) 
38 VARA—A day of the week, a door, a gate, a formula of architectural 
measurement, a verandah. 
(М., xxxiv, 170, 394, 529, 538, see 
` details under SHAD-VARGA.) 
VARA-(KA, NA)—A covering, an enclosure, a door, a gate. 
Kamikagama, ххх: 
Alindasya samantat tu bhagenaikena varakam | 
Ратбуауог ubhayos chaiva chagra-$alànusaratah 11 (77) 


494 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


=s > 


ocn ver enr ع‎ E AN 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VASA-RANGA 
Kamikagama, XXXV : 
Etat sapta-talarn proktarn rajñam avasa-yogyakam ІІ (84) 
° Tad-adhastat samantat tu bhāgenaikena vārakamıı (85) 


Sala-bhàge tu alinde và prithu-vararnšake api | 

Vinyásas tv-ishta ākhyāto mandapa ukta-bhümike 11 (93) 
Vinirgamasya сһауато tad-vriddhya tasya vistarah | 
Dvi-gunanto vidheyah syad evam syàn madhya-varanam | (102) 
Madhye-varana-yuktam và tad-vihiar tu va dvijah 1 
Evambhütasya vasasya samantat syat khalürika и (тоз) 


Ibid., XLV : н 
Bahu-varga-yutam vapi dandika-vara-Sobhitam || (16) 
Parito vàram ekàméarn $ala-vyaso dvi-bhagatah 11 (23) 
Bahir-vàra-samáyuktam vyasa-parsva-dvayor арі ІІ (26) 


Sarnšlishta-vara-sarnyuktarn shatsu chardha-sabha-mukham 11 (28) 

Pürvokta-sindukam (building) vara-vriksha-sthala-samanvitam I! 
(31) 

Agre cha pár$vayo$ chaiva kuryad ekarhsa-varakam ıı (38) 

Tad-bahir varam ckáméam tad-bahye tu vrisha-sthalam i 

Tad-bahis cha chatur-dikshu dvyarh$arhSarh vara-nishkramah 11 (43) 

See also vv. 44, 45, 46, 55; 56, etc. 

Ibid., xuu : 

Utkrishte tu ankanarh dvyamšarn margas tu parito'máatah 1 
Antar-vàram athaikena §ala-vyaso dvi-bhagatah ıı (23) 

See M., тх, 300, 519; XXXII, 383 ; XXXIV, 119, 190, 200, 394, 408, 514 
521, 526, 529 ; xxxv, 100, 120, 123, 238, 243, 265; XXXIX, 128, etc. 
VASA (-KUTI, SALA, SABHA)—Residence, synonym of an 

assembly-hall (Amarakdsha, тут, 2, 3, 604), hall terrace. 
(М., xxxv, 43-46, 82-84, 127-128, 138, 142, 155-156 
221, 227, 241, 250, 282, 286, 288, 383., 
VASANIKA—A dwelling for use in spring, a house for the spring 
festival. 

Tathà vanik-Mahallakena satkà vasanika pradatta— by the Mahallaka 
the satka (7) hamlet ( ? house) was given.’ 

Pagchimatah thakkura-kurhdanakasya vasanika maryada—‘ to the west 
the boundary is the dwelling of the Brahman Kundana.’—(Shergadh 
stone inscrip., lines 12, 13, 14; see also 9, 10, 11, Ind. Ant., Vol. xr, p. 176.) 

VASA-RANGA (see Касл) —Тће open or closed quadrangular 
enclosure, the courtyard of a residential building. 
Purato'lindam ekarnšarn bhittirn kuryat samantatah I 
Milagre dvi-dvi-bhagena vasa-rangath cha kalpayet 1 
(М., ххху, 118-119.) 


499 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


VASTU AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VASTU—Atrchitecture in the broadest sense implying the ‘earth 
(dhara), building (harmya), conveyance (yana), and bedstead 
(paryanka) (M., ш, 2-3). The building or harmya includes prasada, 
тапара, sabha, sala, ргара, and (a)ranga. The conveyance or 
yàna includes adika, syandana, Sibika, and ratha. The bedstead or 
paryanka includes pafijara, mafichali, maficha, kakashta, phala- 
Каѕапа апа bàla-paryanka (ibid., 7-12). The term denotes also 
villages, towns, forts, commercial cities, etc., a dwelling house, a 
group of houses (cf. РАЅТҮХ), a site (R. ту 87, 1.2, 4. Vy ит, 
12, т, etc.). Sculpture is the handmaid of architecture and is 
secondarily implied by the term Vastu. 
(2) Nagaradika-vasturh cha vakshye rajyadi-vriddhaye | 
(Agni-Purana, Chap. cvi, v. 1.) 
(3) Prasadaráma-durga-devàlaya-mathadi-vastu-màna -lakshana - nirüpa- 
nam 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. xrvi, colophon.) 
Gf. Avasa-vasa-veSmadau pure grime vanik-pathe 11 
Prasadarama-durgeshu devalaya-matheshu cha | 
(Ibid., Chap. хім, vv. 2-3.) 
(4) Samgraha-firomani by Sarayü Prasad (xx, 1) quotes from one 
Vasishtha without further reference : 
Vàstu-jfianam pravakshyami yad uktam brahmanà pura 1 
Grama-sadma-puradinarh nirmanarh vakshyate’ dhunà 11 
(5) Griham kshetram aramas setu-bandhas tatakam adharo và vastuh— 
Houses, fields, gardens, buildings of any kind (see Seru), lakes and tanks 
are each called Vastu.—(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. Lxv, р. 166.) 
(6) The heavenly architect Vi$vakarman, the mythical originator of 
Vastu, is stated to be the father of nine artisans—goldsmith (svarna-kara), 
blacksmith (karma-kara), brazier or utensil-maker (kdrhsya-kara), maker 


of shell ornaments (ankha-kara), carpenter (siitra-dhara), potter (kumbha- ` 


kara), weaver (kuvindaka), painter (chitra-kara), and florist, gardener 


or garland-maker (màlà-kàra).—(Bralmavaivarta-Purápa, Brahma-khanda, 
Chap. x, vv. 19-21.) 


(7) On the different branches of architecture, Vitruvius agrees with the 
Manasara (1) : 
It might be pointed out that Vitruvius deals with similar objects, 


in the same manner as in the Manasüra. Не describes the subject 
in three chapters : 


‘Of those things on which architecture depends." 


456 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


E- 


VY 


T 


Í€—————— eei ranu o a — 
ein et tr - 


ч 
аш 


PEs 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VASTU 


* Of the different branches of architecture.’ 
* Of the choice of healthy situations.’ 
On the first of these topics Vitruvius says that * Architecture depends 
on fitness and arrangement ; it also depends on proportion, uniformity, 
consistency and economy.’ 


‘Titness is the adjustment of size of the several parts to their several 
uses and requires due regard to the general proportions of the fabric; it 
arises out of dimensions. Dimension regulates the general scale of the 
work, so that the parts may all tell and be effective.’ 

‘Proportion is that agreeable harmony between the several parts of a 
building, which is the result of a just and regular agreement of them with 
each other ; the height to the width, this to the length, and each of these 
to the whole. Uniformity is the parity of the parts to one another ; each 
corresponding to its opposite, as in the human figure. The arms, fect, 
hands, fingers are similar to and symmetrical with one another; so 
should the respective parts of a building correspond.’ 

* Arrangement is the disposition in their just and proper places of all 
the parts of the building and the pleasing effect of the same, keeping in 
view its appropriate character. It is divisible into three heads, which соп- 
sidered together, constitute design : these by the Greeks, are named ideals : 
they are called ichnography, arthography, and scinography. The first 
is the representation on a plane of the site plan of the work, drawn 
by rule and compasses. The second is the elevation of the front, slightly 
shadowed, and shewing the forms of the intended building. The last 
exhibits the front and a receding side properly shadowed, the lines being 
drawn to their proper vanishing points.’ (Book I, Chap. п.) 

* Architecture consists of three branches, namely, building, dialling 
and mechanics. Building is divided into two parts (in the Manasara 
buildings are divided into six classes as we have seen above). The first 
regulates the general plan of the walls of a city and its public buildings ; 
the other relates to private buildings. Public buildings are for three pur- 
poses : defence, religion and the security of the public’ (compare M., 
XXXI, I-2, under PRAKARA).—(Ibid., Book I, Chap. ш.) 

On the choice of healthy situation, that is, on the selection of site and 
the examination of soil, directions of Vitruvius are not so elaborate as 
those of the Manasára (see BHÜüPARIKSHA), and differ so far as two 
different climates would necessarily require. 

* The choice of a healthy situation is of the first importance : it should 
be on high ground, neither subject to fogs nor rains : its aspects should 
be neither violently hot nor intensely cold, but temperate in both respects. - 
'The neighbourhood of marshy place must be avoided.’ —(Ibid., Book І, 
Chap. ту.) 


457 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VASTU-KARMAN AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ‘on 


VASTU-KARMAN (of. VAstu-vipyA)—The_building-work ; the 
actual work of constructing temples, palaces, houses, villages, towns 

А Т z . . . 2 
forts, tanks, canals, roads, bridges, gates, drains, moats, sewers, 
thrones, couches, bedsteads, conveyances, ornaments and dresses 
images of gods and sages. ; 


The building-work (vastu-karman) is distinguished ffom the science of 
building (vàastu-vidya) : 


Vatthu-vijja ghara-vatthu-arama-vatthadinam guna-dosa-sallak- 
khana vija! Vathu-kammanti akata-vatthumhi geha-patittha 
pana | 


(Digha-nikaya, 1, pp. 9, 12. 
Gf. Sukra-niti (гу, 3, 115, 116, 169). 


See the Preface to this Encyclopaedia. 

VASTU-KIRTI—A type of pavilion, а pavilion with forty-four 
pillars. = | 

(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. 10 ; see MANDAPA.) 
VASTU-VIDYA (see VAsru-KARMAN)—The science dealing with 
the rules of construction of all kinds of architectural and sculptural 
objects, the science of architecture. 

According to Buddhaghosha’s definition, Vastu-vidya is ‘a science, 
the object of which is to ascertain whether a site selected for a building is 
lucky or not.’—(Dialogues of Buddha, Part I, p. 18.) 

According to Sukracharya, Vastu-vidyd or Silpa-Sastra is ‘the science 
which deals with the rules for the construction of palaces, images, parks, 
houses, canals and other good works.’—(Sukra-niti, гу, 3, 115, 116). 

"Se the Harsha stone inscrip. (v. 43, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, pp. 123, 128.) . 


VAHANA—Carrying, conveying, a vehicle, a conveyance, an animal 


for riding or draught. 
The riding animals of gods (M., Lx, r), their images are described (M., 
LX, 2-46; LXI, 2-151; LXI, 2-73; LXII, 9-46; see under HAMSA, 
GARUDA, VRISHABHA, and SIMHA. 
"VAHINI-MUKHA-—A fort, fortified city. 
(M., х, 40; see under NAGARA and DURGA.) 
VIKATA-—Formidable, a hall, а courtyard. 


(Harsha stone inscrip., vv. 12, 33, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, 
рр. 121, 126, notes 64, 123, 128.) 


VIKALPA—A class of buildings, a kind of door, pent-roofs, a type 
of chamber, a kind of phallus. 


458 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


a  -— CAS 
ж PL 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


А class of buildings (M., хі, 104-107 ; XIX, 1-5; XXX, 175-177 ; XXXIV, 
549-552, 542 under Авнаба). 

A type of door (M., xxxix, 28-35 ; see under АвнАва). 

Rows of pent-roofs (M. хуш, 206-220). 

A kind of phallus (М., іл, 49 ; see under АвнАвА). w 
Karne śālā sabhā madhye chhandarh syāch chhandam суа tat 1 E 
Tat-tad-madhyarhSake koshthe yasya syat tad vikalpakam ıı 

(Kamikagama, XLV, 20; see also XLV, 7 ; L, 13 ; 

A class of top-chambers (Jbid., Lv, 130, 123-127). 

VIGRAHA—An idol, an image, a figure, a form, a shape. 
(M., тлу, 180, etc.) 

Dakshina-bhagada-kisaleyalli puratana-vigrahagala pratishtheyam— set 

up on the colonnade to the south the ancient imagcs.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol: 
- 1v, Chamarajnagar Talug, no. 86; Roman Text, p. 18, line 13; Transl., 
р. тт.) - 
VIJAYA—A class of storeyed buildings, а type of pavilion, a hall, 
a kind of throne. 

A class of two-storeyed buildings (M., xx, 93, 10-15; see under PRASADA). 

A class of pavilions (M., XXXIV, 15%; see under MANDAPA). 

A pavilion with forty-six pillars (Matsya-Puraga, Chap. cctxx, v. 10; 

see under MANDAPA.) 

A type of throne (M., xiv, 6; see under SIMHASANA). 

A class of octagonal buildings : 
(1) Agni-Purāņa (Chap. crv, vv. 20-21; see under PRASADA). 
(ә) Garuda-Purána (Chap. XLVI, vv. 21, 23, 31-32 ; ste under PRASADA) 
А type of building (Kamikagama, XLV, 50, see under MALIKA). 
VITANKA (see KAPOTA-PALIKA)—A. dovecot,a moulding of that 
shape. : 
< Vitañka is exactly the English “ fillet” in its different acceptations : 
it denotes more generally also gable-edge, battlement.’ Kern.—(7.R.4.S.. 
Д N. S., Vol. vi, pp. 321, 320, note 2.) d : з £ B^ 
Жа See further references under КАРОТА and KAPOTA-PALIKA. =. 
СЕ VITASTI (se under ANcuLa)—A measure, the span, the distance 
|, between the tips of the fully-stretched thumb and the little finger. 
| (1) Kanishthaya vitastis tu dva-dašangula uchyate 1 et 
(Brahmanda-Purana, Part I, and anusharga- | 
pada, Chap. vu, v. 9 
(2) Three kinds of span (Suprabhedagama, xxx, 20-29; 546 
ANGULA). : 


ым 


` 


CC-0. Curang 


VITANA-(KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЁ 


VITANA-(KA)—A cushion, a canopy. 
A canopy of pearls (Ranganath inscrip. of Sundarapandya, v. 12, Ep. 
Ind., Vol. тп, pp. 12, 15). 

Gf. *'Torana-vitàna—a canopy (in the shape) of an arch.’—(Cochin 
plates of Bhaskara Ravivarman, lines 10-11, Ef. Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 68, 69.) 
VIDATHA—A house, a holding, an asylum, a smaller or secular 
assembly, a rich or royal establishment like palaces, audience hall 

for women, барһа being foi men's assembly. 


(R.-V., x, 85, 26,27, A.-V., уп, 38, 4, Maitra. Sam. 
ІУ, 7, 45 of. R.-V., П, I, 4; 27, I2, 17, Ш, 38, 5 6, 
v, 63, 2, уп, 66, то, уш, 39, 1, x, 12, 7, A.-V., 
I, 13, 4, XVII, I, I5.) 
VIDYADHARA—A class of demi-gods, a kind of fairy. 
Their images are measured according to the nine-tala (see details under 
TALA-MANA).—(M., гуш, 6, other details : 7-14.) 
VIDHANA—An entablature. 

(M., xvi, 20, 43, 203 ; see under PRASTARA.) 
VINIYOGA-MANDAPA—A refectory, а type of pavilion built in 
the third, fourth or fifth court of the compound of a temple, where 
refections or meals are prepared. 

(M., хххп, 8; see under МАМРАРА.) 

VIPULANKA—A type of storeyed building, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings. 

(M., XXIV, 19 ; see under РвАѕАрА.) 
VIPULAKRITIKA—A type of storeyed building, a class of six- 
storeyed buildings. 

(M., xxiv, 52 ; see under PRASADA.) 
VIPULA-BHOGA—A site plan of 676 square plots. 


(M., уп, 37-38; see PADA-VINYASA.) 


VIPRA-KANTAC-—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 729 equal squares. ; 

(M., уш, 39-40 ; see under PaDA-VINYASA.) 
VIPRA-GARBHAC—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 576 equal squares. 

(M., уп, 33-34 ; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
VIPRA-BHAKTI—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 841 equal squares. 

(M., уп, 43-44 ; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 


460 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


s 


кенен а 


HÍNDU ARCHITECTURE VIMANA 


VIMANA—Etymologically an object measured (from root та) 
or prepared or made in various ways ; hence a well-measured convey- 
ance, a balloon, a heavenly car, a temple, building in general, the 
palace of an emperor, a tower surmounting the sanctuary (garbha- 


- griha) which is made in the centre of the temple. 


* A car or chariot (of the gods) sometimes serving as scat or throne, 
sometimes self-moving and carrying its occupants through the skies ; other 
descriptions make the Vimana more like a house or palace and one kind 
is said to be seven storeys high; that of Ravana was called Pushpaka- 
(vimàna); any car or vehicle; a horse; a palace, the palace of an 
emperor or supreme monarch.’ 

Cf. Rajato-vimanarm  sapta-chakram ratham1 (Pet. Dict.) 

(1) Manasara (Chap. хуш, 1-422), named Vimana : 

Vimaànas are buildings of one to twelve storeys and are used as 
residences of gods and men, i.e., the term implies both temples 
and residential buildings : 

Eka-bhümi-vimanàdi ravi-bhümy avasanakam | 

i (Ibid., 2, 3.) 

That the term ‘ vimana’ implies not temples alone but buildings in 
general, is clear from the expression ‘ vimana-ve$man,' ‹ vimana-sadman,’ 
‹ deva-vimana’ (god's buildings), etc., which are frequently mentioned 
(e.g., M., хп, 214). 

Further, the general features of all kinds of buildings are described in 
the chapter (хуш) which is named Vimana : 

The general comparative measures of different storeys are given 
(ibid., 12-91). 

The three styles, namely, Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara are described 
(lines 92-113). 

These styles are distinguished generally by the shapes of the stüpis 
(domes), which are next described (lines 114-171). 

A special account of the lüpàs (pent-roofs) which are apparently very 
characteristic features of all buildings is given (lines 171-278). 

Mukha-bhadras (front porticoes or tabernacles) are also characteristic 
features of all buildings, large or small, and they are described in detail 
(279 f.). 

Spires (stüpi-kilas) are also described (lines 144-171, 354-417). 

Vimanasya tu sarvesham prajapatyena manayet | 
(М., п, 55; see also ш, 5-6; xiv, 426, etc.) 
461 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


" e» 5 
VIMANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Vimane tri-grihe vapi mandapadini vastuke | 
Gramadinam cha sarveshàn manayen màna-sütrakam | 
. OK, м, 101-102.) 
Purushath deva-vimanasya sthapayet purusheshtakam | | 
(M., хп, 2 14.) - 


À towcr : 
'Tad-ürdhve cha vimànarm cha vedika-vedikantak am 1 - 
(M., XXI 57.) 


Mandape dve vimanam syad ekam và dvi-talam tu val 
(M., XXXIV, 221.) 
(2) Kechid vadanti devanam manushanath vimanake 1 
Vistare sapta-shat-paficha-chatus-trymse’dhikath tribhih 11 
(Mayamata, Chap. XX; У. 8.) 
(3) Ramayana, 1, 5; 16: 
Sarva-ratna-samakirnam vimina-griha-Sobhitam 1 
Commentary : Vimana-griham sapta bhümi-griham (a seven-storeyed 
building), and quotes the following from Nighantu : 
; 7 Vimano’stri deva-yane (god's conveyance) sapta-bhumau cha 
sadmani (seven-storeyed building). 
See also the following : 
II, 88, 5: Prasadagra-vimaneshu valabhishu cha sarvada 1. 
(See further context under PRASADA). 
TL, 2, 16; п, 15, 48; I5 33, 35 1b 57 18 ; п, 59, 123 15.88, 5; 
ш, 32, 4; IV, 50, 30; V, 2, 535 % 4 27; V, 6, r; V, 10, 34; V, 
12, 14; V, 12, 25; V, 13, 13 V 5» 19; У, 54, 233 Vb 24, 10; VD 
39, 21; VL 67, 82; VL 75, 233 УІ» 75» 40; VI, 101, 14. 
(4) Mahabharata, 1, 185,232, 
Nana-prakareshu vimaneshu 1 
(5) Commentary quotes Medini (М. i21): Vimanam vyoma-yane 
sapta-bhümi-grihe'pi chet 1 
See the following K. oshas also : š 
(6) Hema-chandra (Abhidhana-chintamani, 80, 190; 3, 417). 
(7) Halayudha (1, 83, сіс.). 
(8) Amarakosha (I, r, 1, 4, 3 36, Pet. Dict.). 
The essential parts : 
(9) Shad-varga-sahitam yat tu garbha-griha-samanvitam 1 
Е Andharandhari-harokta-khanda-harmya viseshitam 11 
Kita-salanvitam yat tu pafijarais cha samanvitam | 
Tilaka-kshudra-nasi-yukta-toranais cha samanvitam | 
Brahma-dvara-patakadyair angair yuktarh vimanakam 1! 
+ (Kamikagama, L, 91—93.) 


462 . 


е 


* 225. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VIMÁNA 


А type of quadrangular building : 

(то) Agni-Purdna, (Chap. civ, vv. 14-15; see under PRAsADA). 

(11) Garuda-Purána (Chap. xLvu, vv. 24-25; see under PRASADA). 

(12) * There is one other peculiarity common to both Jain and Hindu 
architecture in the north of India that requires notice. It is the form of 
the towers or spires called sikras or vimanas which invariably surmount 
the cell in which the images are placed. Fergusson.—(Hist. of Ind. and 
East. Architecture, p. 221.) 

(13) А car of the gods (A$oka's Rock Edicts, no. rv, Ef. Ind., Vol. п, pp. 
451, 467). 

(14) A shrine and dome (Ranganatha inscrip. of Sundarapandya. 
уу. 3, 8, то, 22, 30, Ер. Ind., Vol. ш, рр. 11-17). 

(15) А shrine (Yenamadala inscrip. of Ganapamba, v. 17, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. ur, pp. 99, 102). { 

(16) * Having perceived that the central shrine of the god of the 
Tiruvidaikali (temple) . . . which formerly consisted of layers of bricks, 
had become old and cracked,—the lord of Miladu . . . pulled down 
the temple, rebuilt the central shrine and the mandapa of granite, placed 
on the shrine fine solid pitchers (dome) of gold, built a surrounding 
wall and а тардара, in front, and gave a canopy of pearls.— (Fourteen 
inscrip. at Tirukkovalur, no. K, lines 5-7, Ef. Ind., Vol. vit, pp. 145, 146, 147.) 

(17) Prasada-malabhir alarnkritarn dharam vidaryyaiva samutthitam 1 

Vimana-mala-sadrigani yattra grihani pürnnendu-karamalani 11 

* Here, cleaving asunder the earth, there rise up houses which are 
decorated with successions of storeys, which arc like rows of acrial chariots 
(and) which are as pure as the rays of the full moon.—(Mandasor stone 
inscrip. of Kumaragupta, line 7, С. I. Z, Vol. ш, F. С. I., по. 18, pp. 81, 85.) 

(18) *. . . а copy of a stone inscription which existed before the 
sacred vimana (i.e. the central shrine) had been pulled down.’—(Inscrip, 
of Vanavidyadhara, no. 47, line r, H. S. I. I., Vol. ur, p. тоо.) 

(19) * Vimarasa-nayakkan caused to be built vimanas with all the 
necessary characteristics for the god and goddesses at Ponnudukki.— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. хи, Tumkur Taluq, no. 19; Transl., p. 6, para. 2.) 

(20) ‘The Vimana (of the temple of Paramesvara at Gudimallam) 
has the so-called gaja-prishthakriti shape (i.e., like the back of an elephant, 
see plate c-b, facing page 104, Ind. Ant., Vol. xr); but a close study of 
the plan and sections, given in the accompanying plate (referred to above), 
warrant the conclusion that the architect had distinctly in view the shape 
of the linga (phallus of Siva) ; and hence the vimana might better be styled 
а lingadkriti-vimana.’ 

‘The gajaprishthakriti-vimana is found only іп Saiva temples, c.g. 
the DharmeSvara temple at Manimangalam, the Saiva temples at Suman- 


463 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


VIMÁNA-CHCHHANDAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


galam, Pennagaram, Bhira-dvajasrama near Arcot, Tiruppulivanam 
Konnür (ncar Madras), vada Tirumullaivayil, etc.’ — (Five Bana inscrip. 
at Gudimallam, Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, p. 104, line 6, note 2.) 
(от) Nirmisi prakara-svarna-kalasa-yukta-gopura-vimana-sahitam I 
© Created the Chaámaraješvara temple together with its precincts, gopura 
adorned with golden kala$as, and tower.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. 1v, Chàma- 
гајпаваг Taluq, no. 86 ; Roman Text, p. 18, lines 8-9 f; Transl., p. 11.) 
(22) * Vimana—The tower of a shrine.” Rea.—(Chalukyan Architecture, 
Arch. Surv., New. Imp. Series, Vol. xxl, p. 40.) 
VIMANA-CHCHHANDAKA—A class of buildings. 
A type of building which is 21 cubits wide, has seven storeys and 
latticed windows : 
(r) Brihat-samhità (Chap. rvr, 22, GRASS М. Бы, Vol vi; 
р. 319; see under PRAsADA). 
(ә) Matsya-Purána (Chap. ссгхіх, vv. 28, 32, 33, 47, 535 5 under 
PRASADA). А 
(3) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. оххх, v. 29 ; see under PnAsADA). 
VIVAHA-MANDAPA (see MANDpAPA)—A pavilion erected for the 
wedding ceremonies. 
(Skanda-Purana, Mahegvara-khanda- 
prathama, Chap. xxiv, vv. 1-67.) 
VIVRITA—A type of storeyed building, a class of the nine-storeyed 
buildings. 
(M., XXVII, 20-22 ; see under PRASADA.) 
VIVESA—A site plan of 625 square plots. 
(M., уп, 35-36 ; see PADA-VINYASA.) 
VIS—A fixed abode. 
(R.-V., x, 91, 2.) 
VISALA-(KA)—Breadth, an architect, a type of building, a class 
of pavilions, a type of hall, a site plan of 529 square plots. 
Compare Manasara (Chapter vm, 31-32; XV, 14; LXVII, 13; see 
PADA-VINYASA.) 
А type of rectangular building : 
(r) Agni-Purága (Chap. civ, vv. 16-17; see under PRAsADA). 
(ә) Сатийа-Ритапа (Chap. XLVI vv. 21-22, 26-27; see under 
PRASADA). 
A pavilion with 100 columns (Suprabheddgama, xxxi, 104; see under 
MANDAPA). 
A class of buildings (Kamikágama, хім, 41; see under MALIKA). 
A hall with thirty-eight pillars (Matsya-Puraga, Chap. corxx, v. rr: 
see under MANDAPA). 


464 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VISHKA МВНА 


VISALAKSHA—A site plan of 784 square plots. 
, (M., уп, 41-42, see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
VISVA-KANTA—A type of storeyed building. 
A class of five-storeyed buildings (M., xxxn, 16-18; see under PRA- 
SADA). 

А class of nine-storeyed buildings (M., XXVI, 27-33; see under PRASADA). 
VISVA-VIDYALAYA—A university, a place of learning of univer- 
sal subjects in Arts and Sciences, comprising various college build- 
ings, prayer halls, residences, etc. 

The famous universities were at Taxila, Valabhi, Vikramašila, Odan- 

tapuri, Jagaddala, Somapuri, Vikramapuri, and Nalanda. Compare 
| big colleges at Bodh-Gaya, Sanchi, Barhut, Sravasti, Kausambi, Sarnath, 
Mathura, Nàsika, Amaravati, Nagarjunikunda, Jagayyapeta, Kanchipura, 
| Kannipattana апа Madura. For structural details, see NALANDA.— 
Writer’s articles on Universities during Hindu Period (University Studies, 
Allahabad, 1936, the Twentieth Century, July, 1935, the Science and Culture, 
December, 1935, Modern Review, August, 1995.) x 
^| VISVESA-SARA—A site plan in which the whole area is divided 
into 900 equal squares. 


(M., уп, 45-46, see under PADA-VINYASA.) 
VISHANA-(KA)—The horn, the tusk, the wing of a building. 
Vishanaka-samayukto nandanah sa udahritah | 
* That (prasada) is called nandana which is furnished with a vishanaka 
(wing).’—(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ccrxix, v. 33.) 
VISHKAMBHA—The diameter of a circle, the length or width of 
an object, a post, a pillar, the prop or beam, the bolt or bar of a 
door. 1 
(т) Harmya-padasya vishkambharh samar mafijüsha-vistritih | 
‘The length of the vault is equal to the width at the foot of the man- 
sion.’—(M., хи, 29.) 
(2) Dvarasyardhena vishkambhah— half of the door gives the width °. 
(Brihat-samhita, Lm, 24.) 
Sashtarnšo vishkambho dvarasya dvi-guna uchhrayah 1 
(Ibid., v. 25 ; see J. В. A. S., N. S., Vol. v1, p. 284, note 3.) 
(3) Tehsim àyàma-vishkambhah sannivesamtarani cha | 
Kritrimánàm cha durganarh vishkambhayamam eva chat 
Yojanad arddha-vishkambham ashta-bhagadhikayatam Il 
(Втаһталаа-Ригапа, Part 1, 2nd anusharnga- 
pada, Chap. уп, vv. 94 106.) 


465 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VISHNU-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(4) Chatur-dandavakrishtarh parikhayah shad-dandochchhritam avar- 
uddharh tad-dvi-guna-vishkambharh khatad vaprarh karayet | 
Vaprasyopari prakararh vishkambha-dvi-gunotsedham і 
Antareshu — dvi-hasta-vishkambham pārśve chaturgunayamam 
anupràkaram ashta-hastayatam deva-patharh karayet | 
(Kaujiliya-Artha-Sastra,-Chap. xxiv, 
paras. 3, 5,10, рр. 51-52.) 
VISHNU-KANTA—A class of storeyed buildings, a type of column, 
a type of gate-house, a kind of phallus, a jewel. 
A class of four-storyed buildings (M., xxi, 3-12 ; see under PRAsApA). 
A. jewel (M., хп, 9o, etc.). 
An octagonal column with eight minor pillars (M., xv, 20, 245, see under 
STAMBHA). 
A gate-house with sixteen towers ( M., хххіп, 557; see under Сорова). 
A kind of phallus (/М., іл, 154; see under LINGA). 


VISHNU-GARBHA —(Sec under GARBHA-NYASA)—A kind of founda- 
tion prescribed for the Vishnu temples. 

(M., хп, 141.) 
VISTARA—Breadth, length (see under MANA). 


VIHARA—Originally monasteries for Buddhist monks and nuns; 
later at the time of Nalanda University, the residential quarters for 
the professors (compare Sangarama), a dwelling, a habitation for 
gods and for monks, a temple, a convent (W. Geiger, Mahdvarhsa, 
p. 297); a group of apartments for a community of monks, a 
баһрагата or monastery in Ceylon and Nepal used to designate ‘ not 
only a cell but also any monastic establishment (Fergusson, 
Ind. and East. Arch., 1910, 1, p. 170). A Buddhist monastery, a 
convent, a temple. With the Buddhists and Jains was ‘a hall where 
the monks met and walked about; afterwards these halls came to 
be used as temples and sometimes became the centres of monastic 
establishments.’ 


(т) Prag-Gange$vara-sannidhau . . . chakre-darumayam viharam 
amalarh Sri-Lokanathaspadam | 
* Made a spotless vihara"of wood, an abode for the Lord of the World, 
in the vicinity of the GangeSvara (temple).’—(Arigom Sarada inscrip., v. 
2, Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, p. 302.) 
(2) Viharo nava-khanda-mandala-mahi-harah krito’yarh (ауа tarinya 
yasudharaya папи vapur vibhranyalamkritah | 


466 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VIHARA 


Yarn drishtva pratichitra-Silpa-rachana-chaturyya-simaérayarh girvanaih 

sudrigarh cha vismayam арай viśvakarmāpi sah ıı 

‘This vihara, an ornament to the earth, the round of which consists 
of nine segments, was made by her, and decorated as it were by Vasudhara 
herself in the shape of Tarini, and even the Creator himself was taken with 
wonder when he saw it accomplished with the highest skill in the applying 
of wonderful arts and looking handsome (with the images of) gods.’ 

(Sarnath inscrip. of Kumaradevi, v. 21, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 325, 327.) 

(3) ° Throughout this work the term vihara is applied only to monas- 
teries, the abodes of monks or hermits. It was not, however, used in that 
restricted sense only, in former times, though it has been so by all modern 
writers. Hiouen Thsang, for instance, calls the great tower at Buddh- 
Gaya a vihàra, and describes similar towers at Nalanda, 200 and 300 feet 
high, as vihdras. Тһе Mahawanso also applies the term indiscriminately 
to temples of a certain class, and to residences. My impression is that all 
buildings designed in storeys were called viharas (2), whether used for the 
abode of priests or to enshrine relics or images. Тһе name was used to 
distinguish them from stupas or towers, which were relic shrines, or erected 
as memorials of places or events, and never were residences or simulated 
to be such, or contained images, till the last gasp of the style, as at Kholvi 
At present this is only a theory.’ J 

(This is a false impression ; it is not substantiated by literary ог archaeo- 
logical evidences.) 

Like the chaityas, ‘ these (viharas or monasteries) resemble very closely 
corresponding institutions among Christians. In the earlier ages they 
accompanied, but were detached from the chaityas or churches. In later 
times they were furnished with chapels and altars in which the service 
could be performed independently of the chaitya halls, which may or may 
not be found in their proximity.) Fergusson.—(Hist. of Ind. and East. Arch., 
рр. 130, note 1, 51.) 

For the photographic views and architectural details of the existing 
viharas, see Fergusson : 

Diagram explanatory of the arrangement of a Buddhsit vihara of four 
storeys in height (p. 134, fig. 67, 66). 

Ajunta-Viharas (p. 154-155, fig. 83, 84, 85). 

Plan of the great Vihàra at Bagh (p. 160, fig. 87). 

Plan of Dehrwarra at Ellora (p. 163, fig. 88). 

Plan of Monastery at Jamalgiri (p. 171, fig. 92). 

Plan of Monastery at Takht-i-Bahi (p. 171, fig. 93). 

Plan of Ionic Monastery at Sha Dehri (p. 176, fig. 96). 


467 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


VIHRITA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(4) See Buddhist Cave Temples (Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. IV, 
Plate xxvii). 


VIHRITA—An architectural ornament, a moulding, a moulding of 
the upper part of a column. 
(M., ху, 78 ; see the list of mouldings under STAMBHA.) 


VINA—A flute, a lute, a carving on the chariot. 
(М., xum, 163, etc.) 


VITHI(-I)—A road, a way, a street, a market place, a stall, a shop, 
a terrace. 
Madhya-rathyavrita vithi samam evam vidhiyate | 
Mukhyà vithi dvi-paksha syad griha-taram tri-dandakam | 
Evarh bahya-vithi syad antar-vithir ihochyate | 
Paksha-yuktà tu vithi syat paksha hinam tu margakam | 
Tri-chatush-paficha-dandarh và vithinam vistritir bhavet | 
Shat-saptashta-dandam và nanda-pankti$a-bhànum va | 
Evar tu svastika-vithi langalakaravad bhavet | 
Antar-vithi chaika-pakshà bahya-vithi dvi-pakshakà 1 
Paritas tu mahà-vithir vither esha dvi-pakshayuk | 
Vithinarh ратбуауог defe vithikadyair alankritam | 
(М., х, 101, 104, 191, 196, 199, 200, 338, 396, 477, 529 ; 5 
also 99, 136, 184-187, 197, 201, 203; 206, 324, 339; 
345, 347» 352, 426, 431, 463, 519.) 
Pàda-dandam samarabhya páda-páda-vivardhitam | 
буаа eka-dasa-dandantarn vithi-manam ihagame 11 
Márga-manam tu tavat syan na dvararn vithikagrake | 
(Kamikagama, XXV, 4, 5.) 
VITHIKA—A gallery, a picture gallery, а road, a narrow street; 
a lane. 
(1) Salato yas tritiyárnšas tena karya tu vithikà 1 
(Kiranakhya-Tanira ; see Brihat-samhita below.) 
(о) Sala-tri-bhaga-tulya cha kartavya vithika bahih 1 
қ; (Višvaka ; see Brihat-samhita, below.) 
(3) Sala-tri-bhaga-tulya kartavya vithika bahir-bhavanat | 
ç Outside the dwelling one should make a gallery, being in width a 
third part of the hall.?—(Brihat-samhita, um, 20, J.R.A.S., М. S., Vol vr, 
p. 283, note 2.) 
(4) Asmat tu chati-rathyagrad ауга vithika tatah 1. 
Tat-paisacha-pade dee vavrita vithikà bhavet 1 
468 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VIRA-SASANA 


Anta$-chatush-padarh madhye vithikagrarh chatur-digi 1 
.Vithinàr рагќуауог dese vithikadyair alankritam | 
(M., rx, 337, 434, 478, 529 ; see also 323, 334-336.) 
VIRA-KANTHA (see VIRA-GALA)—A warrior's neck, a part of the 
column, a monument. 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 59 ; see under STAMBHA.) 


VIRA-KARNAC-—A warrior's ear, a part of the column, a monument. 
(M., xv, 49, 81, 142.) 
VIRA-KANDA—An upper part of the column. 
Tri-bhàgo maulikotsedhah vira-kandad upary-adhah |1 
Vira-kandavadhi kshepya tad-ürdhve nakra-pattika 11 
(Kamikagama, тм, 62, 111.) 
VIRA-GALA (see Brra-GaLa)—A warrior's neck, а monument, а 
memorial. 


A monumental stone (Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, p. 96, c. 2, line 10). 
A stone erected in memory of a fallen warrior (Chalukyan Architecture, 
Arch. Surv., New. Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, р. 40). 


VIRA-PATTA—The front plate, the diadem, of heroes forming part 
of a crown. 


(1) * (These pearls) were strung on two strings (vadam) on both sides 
of the front plate (vira-patta), literally the diadem of heroes, “ this ornament 
forms part of a crown,” Vol. u, P- 242, note 1.)’—(Inscrip. of Rajendra 
Chola, no. 8, para. 25, H. S. I. I., Vol. п, p. до.) 

(2) ‘Given to the image of Ardha-nari$vara) one front plate (vira- 
patta), weighing, —inclusive of sixteen пегийјі (a kind of thistle), flowers 
made of gold,—four karanju and three mafijadi, and worth three kagu.’ 

“Оп (it) were strung one hundred and eleven pearls, viz., old pearls, 
round pearls, roundish pearls, polished pearls, small pearls, ambumudut 
crude pearls, Sappatti and Sakkattu.’—(Inscrip. of Rajraja, no. 39, para. 9, 
Н.8.1.1., Vol. u, p. 166.) 

(3) ° One front plate (vira-patta), laid (round the head of tHe image 
of Kshetrapala and consisting of) seven mañjadi of gold.'—(Inscrip. of 
Rajendra Chola, no. 43, para. 5, H. S. I. I., Vol. п, р. 173.) 

(4) “Оле diadem (vira-patta), made for the lord of the Sri-Raja- 
rajeSvara temple . . . ’—(Inscrip. of Rajraja, по. 59, para. 22, H. S. I. I. 
Vol. п, p. 242.) 


VIRA-SASANA (see BiRA-GALA and ViRA-GALA)—À monument, 
a memorial. 


469 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VIRASANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VIRASANA—A throne, a type of pavilion. 
A kind of coronation throne (M., XLV, 41; see under SIMHASANA). 
A pavilion with twenty columns (Suprabhedágama, XXXI, 102; see 
under Manpapa). 
VRITA(-TTA)—A circular object, a kind of mound column, a type 
of building, a class of pavilions. 
Dva-trirnfata tu madhye pralinako vritta iti vrittah 1 
(Brihat-samhita, тап, 28 ; see under STAMBHA.) 
A type of building which is circular in shape, fas one storey and one 
cupola. According to Kern’s interpretation it is dark in the interior 
(añjanarüpa, Varaha-mihira ; sandhyakara, Ka$yapa) : 
(1) Brihat-samhità (Chap. ілі, 28, J. В. А. S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 320, 
note 1, see under PRASADA.) 
(2) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ccrxix, vv. 29, 49, 53 ; see under РкАѕАра.) 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. сххх, v. 30, see under PRAsADA.) 
A type of pavilion (mandapa) : 
(4) Suprabhedágama (Chap. xxx, 100, 102 where it is called Jaya- 
bhadra ; see under JAYA-BHADRA). 
(5) Gf. < Within this and rising from а ledging of cut stone 4 feet 
high and 3 broad, stand the walls of the temple, a perfect circle about 
20 feet high and 2 thick, with a handsome cornice of brick encircling 
the top. The whole appears to have been coated with five pilaster 
small parts of which stil adhere. I examined closely but could not 
discover the smallest appearance of its ever having had a roof? Lieut. 
Fagan.—(An Account of the Ruins of Topary, Ceylon Govt. Gazette, Aug., r. 
1820, Ind. Ant., Vol. хххуш, p. 110, C. r, para 1, line 24.) 


VRIDDHA—A finial, a spire, the top-part of a building. 
(М., хуп, 126 ; see under бікнА.) 
VRISHA-(BHA)—The bull, the riding animal of a god, a type of 
building. 
The riding animal of Siva, description of his image (M., ixu, 2-7) 
see under VAHANA.) 
A type of building which has one storey, one turret (Sringa), is round 
everywhere and twelve cubits wide : 
(1) Brihat-samhità (Chap. 1м, 26, 7. В. A. S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 
319 ; see under PRASADA). 
(2) Matsya-Purdna (Chap. ссіхіх, vv. 30, 36, 44, 45, 53 ; see under 
` PRASADA). 
470 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


y 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VEDI- (KĀ) 


(3) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. cxxx, v. 33; see under PRASADA). 
А type of oval building : 


(1) Agni-Purana (Chap. civ, vv. 19-20 ; see under PRASADA.) 

(2) Garuda-Purana (Chap. xrvm, vv. 29-30 ; 546 under PRASADA.) 
VRISHABHALAYA—A detached building near the gate of a 
temple where the bull (nandin) is installed. 

Prakara-dvara-sarvesharh kalpayed vrishabhalayam | 

Vrishabhasyopari-bhage tu kalpayed bali-pithakam | 

(M., хххп, 98-99.) 
VRISHA-MANDAPAC-—A pavilion where the nandin or bull is in- 
stalled. 
Suprabhedagama (xxxi, 96, 98 ; see under MANDAPA) and compare : 
Vrishasya mandapam tatra chatur-dvara-samayutam I 
(Ibid., xxxi, 133. 
VETRA—The cane, a stick, an architectural ornament, a moulding. 
A moulding of the diadem (makuta) (M., хих, 99-100). 
A moulding of the bedstead ( M., хілу, 41.) 
An ornament of the throne (M., xiv, 162, 188 ; see also M., vu, 241.) 


VEDI-(KA)—Originally a hall for reading the Vedas in, an altar, 
a stand, a basis, a pedestal, a bench, a kind of covered verandah or 
balcony in a courtyard, a moulding, ‘ bands or string-courses carved 
with rail-pattern.' The platform of a stage (Bharata’s Natya-sastra 
П, 102, see details under NATYA-GRIHA(VISMA), terrace, altar, rail, 
terrace with balustrade (Difavamía m, p. 181-183, Oldenburg). 
Compare Pashdnavedi and Silavedi ( Mahagam £a, 36, 52, 103), Muddha- 
vedi and Pdda-vedi (ibid., 35, 2.) (W. Geiger, Mahdvamsa, рр. 296-297.) 
(1) Salantarh vedikordhve tu yuddhàrtham kalpayet sudhih 1 
(М., тх, 461.) 
А moulding of the column : 
Griva-tuhgam tridha bhajyam ekarnše vedikonnatam | 
(M., xv, 105.) 
‘The quadrangular spot in the courtyard of a temple or palace 
(Apte). That portion of а building which is covered by the walls (M., 
XIX, 25). 
Ürdhve padodaye bandharh bhàgam ekarnéa-vedikam | 
(М., хіх, 99.) 
The portion above the neck-part of a building (/М., ххп, 50, 54, 57, 
etc). š 


471 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VEDI-(KA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The altar or dais (/М., LXX, 29, 35, etc.). 
Kuryat sarvarh vedikam bhadra-yuktam | 
(M., хіх, 180.) 
(2) Tri-chüli vaigya-Sidranarh paficha-sapta mahi-bhritàm | 
Brahmananam tathaiva syur екадаба tu vedikah 11 
It should be noticed that ‘vedika’ and ‘chili’ refer to the same 
object.—(Kamikagama, xxxv, 60.) 
The basement : 
Prásada-bhüshanarh vakshye é$rüyatárn dvija-sattamah 1 
Syat pada-prastararh grīvā varge mile tu vedika 11 
(Ibid, 1v, I.) 
` (3) Vedikeyarh tu sāmānyā kuttimanarn prakirtità 1 
Pratikramasya chotsedhe chatur-viméati bhajite 11 
Vedikà-prastara-samarn shad-arnšikritya bhaga$ah | 
Ekarhgarh prati-pattarh syad arn$abhyàm antaribhavet 11 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Sastri, rx, ro, 23.) 
(4) Kafichanair bahubhih stambhair vedikabhi$ cha Sobhitah 1 
(Ramayana, VI, 3, 18, etc.) 
(5) (Nalinim) . . . mahà-mari-$ila-patta-baddha-paryanta-vedikàm 1 
| (Mahabharata, u, 3, 32, etc.) 
(6) Athatah sampravakshyàmi pratishtha-vidhim uttamam | 
Kunda-mandapa-vedinàm pramanarm cha yatha-kramam 11 
Prasadasyottare vapi pürve và mandapo bhavet 1 
Hastan shodaša kurvita da$a dvà-da$a và punah 11 
Madhye-vedikaya yuktah parikshiptah samantatah | 
Paficha-saptapi chaturah karan kurvita vedikam 11 
(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrxiv, vv. I, 19, 14 5 
see also Chap. ccrxix, vv. 13, 18.) 
From the position and measures given here to the vedi or vedika, it 
appears to imply some platform other than the pedestal or throne of 
the idol. 
(7) Tad-ürdhvarh tu bhaved vedi sakantha manasarakam 11 
Urddhvarn cha vedika-manat kala$arn parikalpayet 11 
(Agni-Purána, Chap. xim, vv. 17, 18.) 
(8) Модар cha su-vistirnarn vedikabhir manoramam II 
Tan-madhye mandapam kritvà vedim tatra su-nirmalàm |1 
(Skanda-Purána, Mahe$vara-khanda-prathama, 
Chap. xxiv, v. 2, Vaishnava-khanda- 
dvitiya, Chap. xxv, v. 26.) 


(9) See specimens of Jaina sculptures from Mathura (Plate ш, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. п, p. 319, last para.). 
472 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


в 


ааа раш” V 


ин —— 


RT шшш 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VEDI-(KA) 


i (то) Hathi cha puvado hathinarh cha uparima hethima cha veyika— 
‘the elephants and, before the elephants, the rail-mouldings above and 
below.’—(Karle inscrip. nos. 3, 17, 18, Ep. Ind., Vol. vit, pp. 51, 63-64.) 
(11) Chanyany abhanti dirggha-valabhirh sa-vedikám | 
* And other long buildings on the roofs of the houses, with arbours in 
them, are beautiful. —(Mandasor stone inscrip. of Kumaragupta, lines 6-7, 
C. I. I., Vol. ur, F. G. I., no. 18, рр. 81, 85.) 
(12) Esha bhati kulachalaih parivrità praleya-sammarggibhir vvedi 
meru-Sileva kafichana-mayi devasya viéráma-bhüh | 
Subhraih pranta-vikasi-pankaja-dalair ity-akalayya svayarn rau- 
pyar padrham achikarat pasupateh püjartham aty-ujjvalam 11 
| * Thinking that this throne on which the deity rests, golden-like mouns 
| meru, was surrounded by the imperishable (seven) primeval mountains 
( 
| 


covered Бу snow, (the king) himself caused ап exceedingly resplendent 
silver lotus with brilliant wide opened petals to be made for the worship of 
Pasupati.’ 

“(Тһе poet tries to prove that the lotus resembles the shrine of Pagu- 
pati. As the latter is of gold, so the centre also of the lotus is golden, and 
| as the temple is surrounded Бу snowy mountains, so the petals of the lotus 
| are made of silver).'—(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 15, of Yaya-deva, у. 25, Ind. 
ñ Ant., Vol. 1x, pp. 179, 182). 
| (13) ‘ Vedi (bedi)—Hall for reading the Vedas in.’—(Vincent-Smith, 
| Gloss. to General Cunningham’s Arch. Surv. Reports.) 

(14) See Cunningham, Arch. Suro. Reports (Vol. хуп, Plate xxxr, Buddhist 
railings). : 

(15) * Veyika, which, as well as Vedikà and vetika in other Buddhist 
inscriptions, stands for Sanskrit vedika, does not mean altar, dais, etc., 
but hands or string-courses carved with rail-pattern : compare Mahavaméa, 
228. Dr. Burgess.—(Karle inscrip. по. 3, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, 
Vol. IV, p. 9o, note 3 ; see also nos. 15, 16 : Kshatrapa inscrip. no. 2.) 

i (16) * These (rails, ? vedi) have recently been discovered to be one of 
ір the most important features of Buddhist architecture. Generally they are 
| found surrounding topes, but they are also represented аз enclosing sacred 
trees, temples and pillars, and other objects.’ Fergusson.—(Hist. of Ind. 
ani (ast. Arch., p. 50.) 

М See the photographic views and architectural details of the following 
i Rails in Fergusson : 

Buddh Gaya Rail (p. 86, figs. 25, 26). 

Rail at Bharhut (p. 88, fig. 27). 

Rail at Sanchi (p. 92-93, figs. 29, 30, 31). 

Rail in Gautamiputra Cave (p. 94, fig. 32). 


473 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ы 


VEDIKA-VATAPANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VEDIKA-VATAPANA—A balustrade. 
(S. B. E., xx, p. 104, 4, 3 ; р. 162, 4, 4; 
W. Geiger, Mahàvaria, р. 297.) 
VEDI-KANTA-(KA)—A type of storeyed building, a class of 
four-storeyed buildings. 
( M., ххп, 58-59 ; see under PRAsADA.) 
VEDI-BANDHA—The pedestal, the base, the basement. 
Prasadau nirgatau karyau kapotau garbha-manatah | 
Ürdhvarh bhitty-uchchhrayat tasya mafijarim tu prakalpayet I1 
Maíijarya$ chardha-bhagena $uka-nasar prakalpayet | 
Ürdhvar e зы vedi-bandho bhaved iha |) 
(Visvak 6, 767, J. В. А. S., М. S., 
Vol. vr, pp. 421, 320, note 2. ) 
These lines are identical in the Matsya-Puréna (Chap. corxix, vv. 
11-13.) 
VEDI-BHADRA —One of Ше three classes of pedestals, the other 
two being Prati-bhadra and Maficha-bhadra. It has four types 
differing from one another in the addition or omission of some 
mouldings and in height. 
(M., хш, 27-53 ; see the list of mouldings under UPAPITHA.) 


VESANA—An entrance, a gate, а gateway, a band, an architec- 
tural moulding. 
Eka-dvi-tri-dandam và chantaralasya vesanam syat | 
Harmya-vasad upa-ve$anam yuktam | 
(M., хіх, 191, 187.) 
A band in connexion with joinery (M., хуп, 139). 
Cf. Urdhva-kiita-vesanam 1 
É (M., xx, 72.) 
bhitti-vistaram eva cha | 
Sesharn tad-garbha-geharh tu madhya-bhage tu vesanam | 
(М., ххх, 333-334 ; see also 488.) 


In connexion with chariots : Kukshasya уебапатп | 
(M., хп, 4) 
In connexion with the phallus : 

Linga-tunga-vi$esham syad ve$anam tan nayet budhah i 


(M., um, 313.) 
VESMAN—A * house as the place where one is settled. ° 
(R.-V., x, 107, 10; 146, 3; A.-V., v, 17, 13 ; 1x, 6, 30 ; Ай. Bra. vin, 24, 6.) 


474 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VYAGHRA-NIDA 


VESARA-—A style of architecture, once prevailing in the ancient 
Vesara or Telugu country, ‘ India between the Vindhyas and the 
Krishna corresponding to Tamil India’ (S. K. Aiyangar, 27.1.5.0.4., 
Vol. п, no. 1, p. 23-27.) 


(See details under NAGAna.) 


VAIJAYANTIKA—A type of building, a class of single-storeyed 
buildings. 

(M., хіх, 166; see under РвАзАра.) 
VAIRAJA—A class of buildings, square in plan and named as 
follows : (1) Meru, (2) Mandara, (3) Vimana, (4) Bhadra, (5) 
Sarvato-bhadra, (6) Ruchaka, (7) Nandika, (8) Nandi-varddhana 
and (9) Srivatsa. 

(1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. crv, vv. 11, 14-15; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. xLvu, vv. 21-22, 24-25; see under PRASADA) 
VAISYA-GARBHA (see GarBHA-NYASA)—A kind of foundation 
prescribed for the buildings of the Vaisyas. 

(M., хп, 162; see under GARBHA-NYASA.) 


VYAJANA—A fan, an account of its architectural details. 
(M., L, 46, 97-110; see BHUSHANA.) 
VYAYA—One of the six Varga-formulas, an architectural measure, 
the name of a year. 
(See details under SHAD-VARGA.) 

(1) Srimach-chhali-sakabdake cha galite nàgabhra-banemdubhi$ chabde 

sad-vyaya-namni-chaitra-sita-shashthyàm saumya-vare vrishe | 

* And in the excellent year named Yyaya . . .’ 

(Karkala inscrip. of Bhairava п, v. 6, line 7, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, pp. 141, 134, 124.) 
Sali-vahana-Saka-varsha (1508) пеуа vyaya-samvatsarada) 1 

‘In the Salivahana saka year which corresponded to the Vyaya sarn- 
vatsara . . . '—(Ibid., line 9.) 

(2) * When the year of glorious era called Sali$aka, having the excel- 
lent name of Vyaya and to be expressed in words by the elephants, the 
sky, the arrows, and the moon, had expired . . . ? 

‘‘ The month Chaitra of the Vyaya ѕагпуаіѕага, which was the year 
of the Sri-Salivahana Saka 1508.— (Sasana of the Jaina Temple at Karkala, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. v, p. 43, c. 1, lines, 23, 92.) 


VYAGHRA-NIDA—The cage for a domesticated tiger, included in 


the articles of furniture. 
(М., L, 55, 251-269 ; see under BHUSHANA.) 


475 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ЕТІ) 


VYALA-TORANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VYALA-TORANA (see Toraya)—An arch marked with the leo- 
graph: 
Tatah samabhyunnata-pürvva-kayas tenadhiridhah sa naradhipena | 
Samutpatann uttama-sattva-vegah khe  torana-vyàla(ka)-vaddha 
bhase 11 
(Jatakamala, Sarabha-jataka, XXV, 22; V. 19, ed. Kern, p. 165.) 


S 


SAKTI-—Power, energy, capacity, strength, female divinity, the 
female deities in general. : 

Manasara (Chap. тлу, 1-195), named Sakti: 

Sarasvati or goddess of learning, Lakshmi ог goddess of wealth and 
fortune, Mahi or the earth goddess, Manonmani (Manah-unmadini) : 
or goddess of love, Sapta-matri or the seven goddesses collectively 
so called, and Durga are the different phases of Sakti (lines 2-4). 

Of these, Lakémi is distinguished into Maha or the great Lakshmi and 
Samanya or the ordinary Lakshmi, the latter being installed in all family 
chapels (lines 63-64). The seven goddesses consist of Varahi, Kaumari, 
Chamundi, Bhairavi, Mahendri, Vaishnavi, апа Brahmani (lines 
126-127). 

"These seven goddesses are measured in the nine-tala system (line 128) ; 
all other female deities are measured in the ten-tala system (lines 34-38). 
Details of these measures will be found under TALA-MANA. 

The sculptural details include the measures of the limbs, and the poses , 
and the ornaments and features of each of these female deities are des- 
cribed in detail (lines 4-128, 132-195). ` : 

Gf. Matri-ganah kartavyah sva-nama-devanurupakrita-chihnah | 


(Brihai-samhita, туш, 56.) 


À ŚAKTI-DHVAJA—A moulding of the column. 

Р (М. xv, 77 ; ste lists of mouldings under STAMBHA.) 
SANKU—A stake, а peg, a post, a pole, a measuring rod, the 
gnomon by means of which the cardinal points are ascertained for 
the orientation of buildings (see details under DvARA). 

See THUNA: 
e Тһе memorial pillar set up at the four corners of $ma$àna (grave 
| s and cemetery) (Sat. Bra, хш, 8, 4, 15 IV, 2, 5 15; Ка. аша 
| Sūtra, xxi, 3, 31) upon which Yama makes seats for the departed 
F (R-V., x, 18, 3; 4.-V., хуш, 3, 52). 
476 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Page 476 


С ININ 1S3M 1SV3 1038409 


INI AOQYHS DNINUON 


'NQWOND 40 ЕРЕ) 


INI MOQYHS DNIN3A3 


VAVHiiO-Vd¥ ONILO:1030 
40 GOHLSW JHL BNIMOHS WYH9VIG 1 


AN3WD3S INN нв!3 
“LNIOd 031938809 
اا‎ "ININ 183M 15ҮЗ 
‘SINIT MOGVHS 


INIT HLn0S HLYON 


“LNIOd 031034809 


"азіопаза за OL 
SLHUYd 30 H38WüN 


NOWOND ae 


30 з4уне 


Ф 


дио Syed g oq ріпоце eAuu«o 
«ray 40) иоцопрәр оці иоцм 
Aıleuouo3 оҷашпу jo yjuow 
OU} оз 0190211800 5! o¿n8!) VUL 


9 


ая '"NOHOND ЧО ПЯМУ5 JHL 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


тере dic Mn ең 


ERG 73 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


(1) Мапазйта (Chap. ут, 1-120, named Sanku) : 

Rules are laid down on the Principles of dialling and for ascertaining the 
cardinal points by means of а gnomon. The gnomon is made of some 
particular wood (lines 10-12, 106-108). It may be 24, 18, or 12 angulas 
in length and the width at the base should be Tespectively 6, 5, and 4 
angulas (lines 19-22). It tapers from bottom towards the top (line 14). 
The rules are described (lines 23-88) ; but they are more explicit in the 
quotations given below. As regards the principles of dialling, each of the 
twelve months is divided into groups of ten days each, and the increase 
and decrease of shadow (or days, as stated by Vitruvius, see below) are 
calculated in these several parts of the different months. 


Pegs (khata-Sanku) are stated to be posted in the foundations (lines 110- 
118). ç 


(2) Surya-siddhànta (Chap. ш, vv. 1-51, 2, 3, 4) : 

Construction of the dial and description of its parts (vv. 1-6) ; the 
Measure of amplitude (v. 7), of the gnomon, hypotenuse and shadow, 
any two being given to find out the third (у. 8); precession of the 
equinoxes (уу. 9-12); the equinoctial shadow (vv. 12-13); to find, 

` from the equinoctial shadow the latitude апа co-latitude (vv. 13-14) ; 
the sun’s declination being known, to find from a given shadow at 
noon, his zenith-distance, the latitude, and its sine and cosine (vv. 
14-17) ; latitude being given to find the equinoctial shadow (v. 17) ; 
to find, from the latitude and the sun's zenith, distance at noon, 
his declination, and his true and mean longitude (vv. 17-30) ; latitude 
and declination being given, to find the noon-shadow and hypotenuse 
(vv. 21-22) ; from the sun's declination and the equinoctial shadow to- 
find the measure of the amplitude (vv. 22-23) ; to find from the equin- 
octial shadow and the measure of amplitude at any given time the base 
ofthe shadow (vv. 23-25); to find the hypotenuse of the shadow when 
the sun is upon the prime-vertical (vv. 25-27); the sun's declination 
and the latitude being given, to find the sine and the measure of 
amplitude (vv. 27-28); to find the sine of the altitude and zenith- 
distance ofthe sun, when upon the south-east and south-west vertical 
circles (vv. 28-33); to find the corresponding shadow and hypotenuse 


. (vv. 33-34) ; the sun's ascensional difference and the hour-angle being 


given, to find the sines of his altitude and zenith-distance, and the 
corresponding shadow and hypotenuse (vv. 34-36); to find, by a con- 
trary process, from the shadow of the given time, the sun's alütude à 
and zenith-distance and the hour-angle (vv. 37-39) ; the latitude and 
the sun's amplitude being known to find his declination and true 
longitude (vv.40-41); to draw the path described by the extremity of 


477 


SANKU AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


the shadow (vv. 41-42) ; to find arcs ofthe right and oblique ascension 
corresponding to the several signs of the ecliptic (vv. 42-45) ; the sun's 
longitude and the time being known, to find the point of the ecliptic 
which is upon the horizon (vv. 46-48); the sun's longitude and the 
hour-angle being known to find the point of the ecliptic which is 
upon the meridian (v. 49); and the determination of time by means 
of these data (vv. 50-51). 

* On the surface of a stone levelled with water or on the levelled floor 
of the chunam work, describe a circle with a radius of a certain number of 
digits. Place the vertical gnomon of 12 digits as its centre and mark the 
two points where the shadow (of the gnomon) before and after noon meets 
the circumference of the circle ; these two points are called the east and 
the west points (respectively). Then draw a line through the timi (fish) 
formed between the (said) cast and west points and it will be the north and 
south line or the meridian line.’ 

(To draw a line perpendicular to and bisecting the line joining two 
given points, it is usual to describe two arcs from the two given points as 
centres with a common radius, intersecting each other in two points ; the 
line passing through the intersecting points is the line required. In this 
construction the space contained by the intersecting arcs is called * Timi Б 
а fish, on account of its form). 

* And thus, draw a line through the timi formed between the north 
and the south points of the meridian line ; this line would be the east and 
west line.’ 

* In the same manner, determine the intermediate directions through 
the timis formed between the points of the determined directions (east, 
south, etc.).’ 

(3) The Siddhànta-firomani (Chap. vu, vv. 36-39) refers to the ‘ rules for 
resolving the questions on directions’ by means of a gnomon. But it 
does not apparently deal with the cardinal points we are discussing here. 

(4) The Lildvatt (хі 1-10, part 2, Chap. m, section 4) lays down a few 
rules for ascertaining the shadow of the gnomon of 12 digits as well as the 
height of the lamp by which the shadow is caused in this case instead of by 
the sun. But it has no specific reference to the cardinal points. 

(5) See Ram Raz (Ess. Arch. of Hind., pp. 19-20). 

(6) Rev. Kearns gives some extracts from Myen (Maya) (Ind. Ant., 
Vol. v, p. 231): 

Rule I— 

* Stand with the sun to your right, join your hands horizontally— 
reject the thumbs—erect the index-finger from the middle. Ifthe 
shadow of the erect finger extends to the outer edge of the finger next 


478 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SANKU 


adjacent—to the index-finger of the left hand—it denotes 48 minutes 

past sunrise, and so on.’ 

` When the sun has passed the meridian, the position must be altered 

accordingly. 

Rule II— 
‘Take a straw eleven fingers in length, place it on the ground, bend 
| it, raising one part to serve asa gnomon, the gnomon being erected 
К against the sun, east or west of the meridian. The height of the 
4 gnomon is found by raising the end of the bent portion no higher 
than suffices exactly to throw its shadow to the extreme point of the 
recumbent portion of the remainder of the straw. Тһе gnomon 
so found gives the time of day.  Ascertain how many fingers it 
contains ; the sum is the time in Indian hours. 
| (7) The details given above may be compared for further knowledge 
i of the subject with those quoted below from Vitruvius : 
b ‘Thus are expressed the number and names of the winds and the 
д points whence they blow. То find and lay down their situation we 
| proceed as follows : 
|| 'Leta marble slab be fixed levelin the centre of the Space enclosed 
| by the walls, or let the ground be smoothed or levelled, so that the 
е slab may not be necessary. Іп the centre of this plane, for the purpose 
of marking the shadow correctly, a brazen gnomon must be erected. 
i The Greeks call this gnomon skiatheras. 
| ‘The shadow cast by the gnomon is to be marked about the fifth 
|| anti-meridional hour and the extreme point of the shadow accurately 
| determined. From the central point of the space whereon the 
| gnomon stands, аз а. centre, with a distance equal to the length of 
the shadow just observed, describe a circle. After the sun has passed 
the meridian, watch the shadow which the gnomon continues to 
cast till the moment when its extremity again touches the circle 
which has been described. From the two points, thus obtained in 
the circumference of the circle, describe two arcs intersecting each 
other and through their intersection and the centre of the circle first 
described draw a line to its extremity ; this line will indicate the 
north and south points. 

° One-sixteenth part of the circumference of the whole circle is to be set 
out to the right and left of the north and south points and drawing lines 
from the points thus obtained to the centre of the circle, we have one- 
eighth part of the circumference for the region of the north, and another 
eighth part for the region of the south. Divide the remainders of the 
circumference on each side into three equal parts and the divisions or 


479 


\ СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


SANKU AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


regions of the eight winds will be then obtained ; then let the directions 
of the streets and lanes be determined by the tendency of the lines which 
separate the different regions of the winds. і 

* Inasmuch as the brevity with which the foregoing rules are laid down 
may prevent their being clearly understood, I have thought it right to add 
for the clearer undertsanding thereof two figures. . . . The first shows 
the precise regions whence the different winds blow, the second, the method 
of disposing the streets in such a manner as to dissipate the violence of the 
winds and render them innoxious. ' 

‘Let А be the centre of a perfectly level and plane tablet whereon 
a gnomon is erected. Тһе ante-meridional shadow of the gnomon being 
marked at B, from A, as a centre with the distance AB, describe a com- 
plete circle. Then replacing the gnomon correctly, watch its increasing 
shadow, which after the sun has passed his meridian, will gradually leng- 
then till it become exactly equal to the shadow made in the forenoon, then 
again touching the circle at the point C, from the points B and C, as centres, 
describe two arcs cutting each other in D. From the point D, through the 
centre of the circle, draw the line EF, which will give the north and south 
points. Divide the whole circle into sixteen parts. From the point E, 
at which the southern end of the meridian line touches the circle, set off 
at G and H to the right and left a distance, equal to one of the said six- 
teenth parts, and in the same manner on the north side, placing one foot 
of the compasses оп the point F, mark on each side the points J and K, 
and with lines drawn through the centre of the circle, join the points GK 
and HI, so that the space from G to H will be given to the south wind and 
its region ; that from J to К to the north wind.. The remaining spaces 
on the right and left are each to be divided into three equal parts ; the ex- 
treme points of the dividing lines on the east sides, to be designated by the 
letters L and М: those on the west by the letters WO: from М to О and 
from L to N draw lines crossing each other: and thus the whole circum- 
ference will be divided into eight equal spaces for the winds. The figure 
thus- described will be furnished with a letter at each angle of the 
octagon ?.—(Vitruvius, Book I, Chap. v1). » 

‘Jt is clearly by a divine and surprising arrangement, that the equinoc- 
tial gnomons are of different lengths in Athens, Alexandria, Rome, 
Placenza and in other parts of the earth. Hence the construction of dials 
varies according to the places in which they are to be erected : for from 
the size of the equinoctial shadow, are formed analemmata, by means of 
which the shadows of gnomons are adjusted to the situation of the place 
and the lines which mark the hours. By an analemma is meant a rule 
deduced from the sun's course and founded on observation of the increase 


480 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


m 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE SANKU 


LÀ of the shadow from the winter Solstice, by means of which, with mechanical 
| operations and the use of compasses, we arrive at an accurate knowledge 
i of the true shape of the world.'—(Book rx, Chap. IV.) 

| * From the doctrines of the philosophers above mentioned, are сх- 

tracted the principles of dialling and the explanation of the increase and 

| decrease of the days (shadows in the Manasára) in the different months. 

| The sun at the times of the equinoxes, that is, when he is in Aries of Libra, 

| casts а shadow іп the latitude of Rome equal to eight-ninths of the length 

id of the gnomon. Ас Athens thc length of the shadows is three-fourths of 

2 that of the gnomon ; at Rhodes five-sevenths ; at Tarentum nine-clevenths s 

| at Alexandria three-fifths ; and thus at all other places the shadows of the 

| gnomon at the equinoxes naturally differ. Hence in whatever place a 

dial is to be erected, we must first obtain the equinoctial shadow. If, as 

at Rome, the shadow be eight-ninths of the gnomon, let a line be drawn 

on a plane surface, in the centre whercof is raised a perpendicular thereto ; 

this is called the gnomon, and from the line on the plane in the direction of 

the gnomon let nine equal parts be measured. Let the end of the ninth 

part А, be considered as a centre, and extending the compasses from that 

centre to the extremity В of the said line, let a circle be described. This 

is called the meridian. Then of those nine parts between the plane and 

the point of the gnomon, let eight be allotted to the line on the plane, 

whose extremity is marked C. This will be the equinoctial shadow of 

the gnomon. From the point C through the centre 4, let a line be drawn, 

and it will represent a ray of the sun at the equinoxes. Extend the com- 

passes from the centre to the line on the plane, and mark on the left 

an equidistant point E, and on the right another, lettered J, and join - 
them by a line through the centre which will divide the circle into two 
semi-circles. This line by the mathematicians is called the horizon. 
A fifteenth part of the whole circumference is to be then taken, and 
placing the point of the compasses in that point of the circumference F, 
where the equinoctial ray is cut, mark with it to the right and left the 
points Gand H. From these, through the centre, draw lines to the plane 
where the letters T and R are placed, thus one ray of the sun is obtained 
for the winter and the other for the summer. Opposite the point Е, will 
be found the point Z, in which a line drawn through the centre, cuts the 
circumference ; and opposite to G and H the points K and L, and opposite 
to С, F, and А, will be the point №. Diameters are then to be drawn from 
G to L, and from H to K. The lower one will determine the summer and 
the upper the winter portion. These diameters are to be equally divided 253 
1n the middle at the points M and О, and the points being thus marked, 


481 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SANKHA AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


through them and the centre A а line must be drawn to the circumference, 
where the letters Р апа 0, are placed. This line will be perpendicular 
to the equinoctial ray and is called in mathematical language the Axon. 
From the last obtained points as centres (M and 0) extending the com- 
passes to the extremity of the diameter, two semi-circles are to be described, 
one of which will be for summer, the other for winter. In respect of those 
points where the two parallels cut that line which is called the horizon ; 
on the right hand is placed the letter S, and on the left the letter V, and at 
the extremity of the semi-circle, lettered G, a line parallel to the Axon is 
drawn to the extremity on the left, lettered H. This parallel line is called 
Lacotomus. Finally, let the point of the compasses be placed in that 
point where this line is cut by the equinoctial ray, and letter the point 
X, and let the other point be extended to that where the summer ray cuts 
the circumference, and be lettered H. Then with a distance equal to that 
from the summer interval on the equinoctial point, as a centre, describe 
the circle of the months, which is called Manacus. Thus will the 
analemma will be completed . . . ° 
‘In all the figures and diagrams the effect will be the same, that is to 
say, the equinoctial as well as the solstitial days, will always be divided 
into twelve equal parts.'—(Book тх, Chap. уш.) 
(8) Brahma-siddhanta-sphuta of Brahmagupta (хіх, 1-20). 
(9) Paücha-sidhantikà of Varahamihira (п, 10-13; XIV, 1-11, 14-22.) 
(10) Mayamata (v1, 1-28). 
(11) Silparatna of Srikumara (xr, 1-22). 
| (12) Kasyapa-silpa (1, 60-70). 
(13) Vastu-vidya (ш, 7-10). 
(14) Manushyálaya-chandrikà (п, 1-4). 
SANKHA-—A type of round building. 
E (1) Agni-Purdna (Chap. civ, vv. 17-18 ; see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purana, (Chap. XLVII vv. 21, 23, 28-29 ; see under PRASADA). 
SANKHA-KUNDALA—An ornament, an ear-ring of conch-shell. 
(M., LVI, 167, 170; see BHUSHANA.) 
SANKHA-PATRA—An ornament of leaf pattern, made of conch- 
shell. 


E (М., LIV, 170 ; see BHÜSHANA." 
| SATARDHIKA-—A pavilion with cighteen pillars. 

(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. corxx, v. 13; 

see under MANDAPA.) 


482 


Y "иг: ITT 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SASTRA-MANDAPA 


SATANGA—A car, а carriage, а war-chariot, ап arm-chair, а 
sofa. 

y (Ranganath inscrip. of Sundara-pandya, v. 14, 

Ep. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. 12, 15.) 

See Chullavagga (vt, 2,4; also VI, 20, 2; уш, І, 3) which reads Sattan- 
go. There seems to be another expression, Apasayam, to mean a sofa or 
arm-chair (see Buddhaghosa's note on ibid., vr, 2, 4). 

SATRU-MARDANA—A pavilion with thirty-four pillars. 
(Matsya-Purána, Chap. ссіхх, v. rr; see under 
MANDAPA.) 

SAMBHU-KANTA—A class of eleven-storeyed buildings. 
(М., xxix, 2-8; see under PRAsADA.) 
SAYANA—Lying down, a bed, a couch, the recumbent posture, 
the roof of a house, a building material, a class of buildings in which 
the width (at the bottom) is the unit of measurement, the temples 

in which the idol is in the recumbent posture. 

Compare Asandi, Talpa, Proshtha, and Vahya, the Rig-Veda (vit, 55, 8) 
refers to ‘ married woman occupying their commodious ““ talpas," the new 
bride on the fashionable ** vahya ? and other single women of the house- 
hold on the “ proshthas " within the family home (harmya).’ 

A bedstead ( M., ш, 10, 11, 12; XLIV, 74, and colophon). 

Тһе recumbent posture (M., LXU, 15; хш, 47, etc.). 

A synonym of the roof of a house (M., хут, 56, 58; see PRAcHCHHA- 
DANA). 

The wood used in constructing a bedstead (M., xLIV, 74). 

A temple (M., xix, 7-11, See under APA-SAMCHITA.) 

SAYANA-MANDAPA—A bed-chamber, sleeping apartments. 

22 (М., xxxu, 72, etc.) 
SARKARA—Sugar, a small stone, a pebble, a gravel, sand, any 
hard particle. 

A material of which idols are made (M., тл, 6, etc.; see under АвназА). 

Gf. Müsalena tu sarnpidya Sarkaradi-samanvitam | 

2 Е (Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 110.) 

SARMA—A house (R.-V., уп, 82, 1). 3 

SASTRAAMANDAPA—An arsenal, a detached building for the 
storage of arms. 

(M., хххп, 69, etc.) 

483 | 


һа Sond 


ç 


v t 


2 


| Sluvd i 9 T 2 n 10 ¥ 
H 
! 


чула ноолу 15014 


r 
| 
= 
H 


(vaivdNvad) үлүѕ 


——— 


N 


“HYONVUSA 


NVId HOO'4 15014 в 


ВЕН са 


= ааа Ec TR 1 


meas 


“HVONYYERA 


m | 


PUDOR 


|. 
ü 
L 


TYH 


Gu ЄЛ 


'HYONVH3A 


А0015 ONY 


‘QUYA 176005 


CASE “ONILLIS TVH l 
НУОМҮНЗА 
ы д м x иы ж кщ м 


"HYGNYu3 
x z 


м 


чул 60014 GNNOYD 


ЕС Ww 124 | == LIE SL. 
é "HYONVHA 
Hmmm 


GUYA LUNOD 


m H = 


H 
'HVONYU3A 
= "тті 
EM 
= = 
ag E 


YNIA 


И 
| 


ONIMSOH 


AN3WAOFCT3 


"NOLLVA3 13 


i 


"'HYONYE3A 


"HVONVH3A 


"HYONYH3A 


озул 19002 


"HVONYU3A: 


x ж 
“HVONVYSA 


| 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation; USA 


SAKHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SAKHA—A branch, an arm, part of work, a wing, the door- 
frame, the door-post, the jamb. 

(1) Sakha-dvaye'pi karyarh sardharh tat syad udumbarayoh 11 
Uchchhrayat pada-vistirna śākhā tadvad udumbarah 1 
Vistara-pada-pratimarh bahulyarn $akhayoh smritam 11 
Tri-paficha-sapta-navabhih $akhabhis tat praSasyate | 
Adhah-sakha-chatur-bhage pratiharau niveSayet 1! 

(Brihat-samhitd, їлп, 24 ; LVI, 13, 14.) 

(2) The third and fourth lines of the Brihat-samhità quoted above 

are identical with those in the Matsya-Purana (see Chap. ccrxx, vv. 20-21). 

(3) Uchchhrayat páda-vistirnà $akhás tadvad udumbare 11 
Vistararddhena Баһшауатп sarveshàm eva kirtitam 1 
Tri-paficha-sapta-navabhih $akhabhir dvaram ishtadam 11 
Adhah-Sakha-chaturtharhge pratiharau niveSayet 1 
Mithunaih pada-varnabhih sakha-Sesharn vibhüshayet 11 

(Agni-Purána, Chap. crv, vv. 28-30.) 

(4) А wing (Dabhoi inscrip. v. ш, Ef. Ind., Vol. 1, p. 31). 

SANTIKA (see UrsEpHA)—A measure, the height which is equal 
to the breadth. 5 
(See M., xxxv, 22—28, and cf. Kamikagama, 
L. 24-28, under ADBHUTA.) 
SALA— Primarily a thatch of straw (chàla) for shelter of men or 
their cattle and stores, then the homestead inclusive of such stalls and 
sheds (A. V. ш, 12, т; У,91,5; УІ, 106, 33 уш, 6, 105; Ix, 3,1; 
xiv, 1,63; Тай. Brad. 1, 9,9,1; Sat. Bra. m, 1, 1, 6) ; then houses 
generally as in Salapati or householder (A.-V., 1x, 3, 12) ; finally a 
section or a single room of a house as in patni-$ala, agni-sala. It 
came quite early to be used of flourishing and wealthy residences as 
in prachiéa-Sala (Sat. Bra. x, 3, 3, 1 56, 1, 1; Chhand. Upanishd, v, 11, 
т; Mund. Upanishad т, т, 3) and in the Silpa-éastra notably in the 
Manasara it is used for а storeyed mansion, a hall, a room, ап apart- 
ment, a house, a stable, a stall. Тһе three terms, $alà, mandapa, 
and griha, are sometimes indiscriminately used to imply houses 
in general. GoSala (cow-shed) (М., хххп, 87), patha-$alà (college 
or school); vāji-śālā, gaja-$ala, and mesha-$ala (M., xr, 127-128, 
etc.) generally indicate a separate house for domestic animals ; while 
pàka-éalà (kitchen), etc., may imply a hall or room inside a small 
building also. But there is a clear distinction between mandapa 
and 4218. ‘Trees are stated (Matsya-Purana, Vu, 89-120) to have 
supplied to the primitive man the model of his future house. Sala 
(house) is stated (vv, 117-120) to have been derived from Sakha 


494 


2 


Wu 
| 

] 

| 

| 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE SALA 


(branch), because originally branches were arranged lengthwise, 


breadthwise, crosswise, up and down, and thatch them to make the 
first house.’ 


Mandapas are detached single-storeyed pavilions (M., xxxiv) апа 
Salas are storeyed mansions furnished with pavilions (M., xxxv) 

(1) Manasára (Chap. xxxv, 1-404), named Sala : 

In this chapter ‘ sala’ is used mostly in the sense of a house. Salas 
imply both temples and residential buildings for the Brahmans, the Kshat- 
riyas, the Vai$yas and the Südras (lines 1-2). 

Their characteristic features as single buildings : 

Salayah parito’lindath prishthato bhadra-sarhyutam | (40) 
Purato mandapopetam . . . 1 (41) 
Ekàncka-talàntam syat chüli-harmyadi-manditam i (47) 

Like villages, Salas are divded into six classes, namely. dandaka, svastika, 
maulika, chatur-mukha, sarvato-bhadra, and vardhamana (lines 3-4). 
Some of these with a certain number of halls are stated to be temples while 
others varying in the number of rooms are meant for the residences of differ- 
ent castes (lines 32-37). А distinction is made with regard to the number 
of storeys they should be furnished with (lines 78, 359-373, etc.). 

The maximum number of storeys а Sala has is twelve as usual. АП the 
storeys of all these 52185 are described in detail (lines 5-401). 


(2) Kamikagama (Chap. xxxv, 1-1934) : 
Salas are meant to be the dwellings of the Brahmans and others 
(vv. 1-2) : + 
Eka-dvi-tri-chatuh-sapta-da$a-$ala prakirtitah 1 
Tad-trdhvam tri-tri-vridhya tu yavad ishtam pragrihyatam I1 
Ta eva malikah prokta mala-vat kriyate yatah 11 
Then follow the measurement (vv. 3-12), and the ayadi-shadvarga 
(vv. 13-20). 
The different component parts of the Sala : 
Adhishthanar cha padam cha prastaram karnam eva cha | 
Sikharam stüpika chaiva $alangam iti kathyate | (21) 
The measurement of the base, pillar, entablature, tower, finial, and dome 
is given next (уу. 22-32). 
Тһе wall is also described (vv. 32, 33) : 
Tri-hastantarh tu vistaro bhittinarh parikirtitah 11 
Müla-bhitter idan manam ürdhve padardha-hinakam | 
Anyonyam adhika уарі nyüna và bhittayah samah 11 
The groups of Salas are described (vv. 34-36). 


485 


CC-0..Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


. 


а A 


SALA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


The verandahs (alinda) are also described (vv. 36-38) : 


Asam agre tu alindah syuh 


pradhane va viseshatah | А 


Eka-dvi-tri-chatush-paficha-shat-saptalinda-sarhyuta(-4) hu 
Prishthe par$ve tathaiva syuh ishta-dese athava punah | 
The courtyard (prankana or prangana) is described (see vv. 39-42). 
The adytum, the open quadrangle, and the upper storey, etc., are also 
described (уу. 45-57). This section is closed with the statement that the 
description of 52145 given above is but general characteristics (v. 58). 
This is followed by a brief reference to the uses of Salas : 
Taitilanam dvi-jatinam pashandasraminam api | 
Hasty-a$va-ratha-yodhanarm yaga-homadi-karmasu | 
Devanath bhü-patinam cha nritta-gitadi-karmasu |І (58) 


Then follow the architectural 


and other details of the storeys which 


number as many as sixteen (уу. 59-86): 
Evam eva prakarena kuryad ashodaga-kshmakam 11 (86) 


The 42125 are, like the villages and towns, classified (vv. 87-88): 
Adyam tu sarvato-bhadram dvitiyarn vardhamanakam | 
Tritiyarh svastikam proktam nandyavartarn chaturthakam 11 


` Gharukarh (for Ruchakam) 
К (abhi)dhanakam 11 
Details of these Salas are given 


paficham-(ath) vidyach chhalanam api- 


next (vv. 89-96). 


Mandapas and 54145 are distinguished from each other : 
Mandapam tu vidhatavyam éalanam agra-deSake || (96a) 
The remaining portion of the chapter deals with some constituent mem- 
bers of 52185, such as the pithika, bhadra, khalürikà (vv. 103, 117-118), 


gopura (v. 124a), chüli-harmya 


(v. 195), ankana (v. 191), parigha 


(v. 1322); varnsa (vv. 147, 149), pinda (v. 158), etc. 
The stone-pillars and stone-walls are stated not to be built in residential 


-$alàs or buildings (v. 161): 


Sila-stambharh &là-kudyarh пагауаѕе па karayet | 
Тһе drains (jala-dvàra), etc., are next described. 
'The chapter closes with an account of the rules regarding the situation 
of halls like the drawing-room (asthana-mandapa, v. 191), kitchen (vv. 


176-178), bedroom (v. 179), etc. 


Sarvada bhinna-éalasu sandhi-karma па karayet 11 (1572) 
Devata-sthapanam pindam $alasu na vidhiyate 11 (158) 


Ibid., 1, 90 (definition) : 


s Varéadir arnša-rahitá &ikhara-stüpikanvita(b) 1 
Nasika-mukha-pattarnša Saleti parikirtita 11 


(3) Dhana-dhanyam cha v 
©The treasury and granary 8 


that should be the office. —( Matsya 


āyavye karmma-šalam tato bahih | 
hould be built at the north-west, outside 


-Purüna, Chap. сагу}, v. 35.) 


486 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SALA 


(4) батарадауа padma-nidhe(h) Salam svarna-mayim kuru 11 
_ RathasyeSana-dig-bhage Salam kritva susobhanam | 
Tan-madhye mandapam kritva vedim tatra sunirmalam 11 
(Skanda-Purana, Vaishanava-khanda, u, Chap. xxv, 
vv. 3, 26.) 
(5) Manavanam grihà prokta vasavas te kakub-gatah | 
Sarhsthana-bhedena te jücyah pafichadha syuh pramanatah 11 
Svayoni-vyasa-gatayo dig-vidikshu cha sarhsthitah | 
Bhinna-śālā cha sā proktà manujanarh $ubha-pradah 11 
Dig-vidikshv-cka-yonistha paryastena tathaiva cha | 
Jüeyà chatur-Saleti Silpa-Sastra-nidarsibhih 11 
: (Vastu-vidyà, ed. Sastri, уш, 1-3.) 
(6) Pirva-dakshinarh bhagarh mahanašam hasti-salarn koshthagaram 
cha | 
Pagchimottarath bhagarh yana-ratha-sala 1 
(Kau filiya-Artha-Satra, Chap. xxv, р. 55.) 

(7) Sala-tri-bhaga-tulya kartavya vithika bahir bhavanat | 

‘Outside the dwelling one should make a gallery, being in width a 
third of the hall.’—(Brihat-samhitd, тап, 20, see F.R.A.S. N. S., Vol. vr, p. 283.) 

(8) Vyakhyana-$ala—hall of study.—(Bheraghat inscrip. of Alhanadevi, 
v. 28, Ep. Ind., Vol. u, pp. 13, 16.) 

(9) Teneyarn karita $ala Srivisala monorama | 

Dhatreva svechchhayà srishtih sthapitadisura-trayah 11 
Sala Manovativaishà Brahma-yuktà virajate | 
Atra vidyarthinah santi nana-janapadodbhavah 11 

‘He got this school made here, magnificent in its splendour and hand- 
some, as it were, made by the Creator after his own will, in which he 
placed the.three principal gods. This school shines forth like Manovati 
(a mythical town on mount Meru) joined by Brahman; here there are 
scholars born in various lands.’ 

* To judge by the description of it, the sala must have been an establish- 
ment of some importance.’—(Salotgi pillar inscrip. no. A, vv. 16, 17, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 60, 61, 63, 58, note 5.) 

(то) Go-sala—cow-shed (three inscrip. from Travancore, no. В, line 
3, Ep. Ind., Vol. rv, p. 203). 

(11) Nāțya-śālā-—a hall for religious music (dancing) built in front of 
the Durgà temple.—(Dirghasi inscrip. of Vanapati, line 15, Ef. Ind., Vol. 1v, 
pp- 316, 318.) : 

(12) Bhakta-salà—an almshouse or place for the distribution of food.— 
(Assam Plates of Vallabhadeva, v. 13, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 184, 183, 187.) 


497 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitize 


SALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(13) Chakre-$ri-Aparajitega-bhavane 5218 tathasyarn rathah Kaila$a- 

pratimas triloka-kamalalamkaàra-ratnochchayah | ‹ 

‘For the temple of Aparajitesa he provided a hall with a car richly 
decked with precious stoncs.—(The Chahamanas of Naddula, no. C, 
Sundha hill inscrip. of Chachigadeva, v. 52, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 78, 74-) 

(14) Chatu(h)-Salavasadha-pratiéraya-pradena arama-tadaga-udapana- 

karena 1 

* Who has given the shelter of quadrangular rest-houses and made wells, 
tanks, and gardens.'— (Nasik Cave inscrip. no. ro, line 2 f., Zp. Ind., Vol. уш, 
рр. 78, 79.) 

(15) * Caused to be built in stone on the summit japa-Sale, satra, and а 
fort with bastion.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Bagepalli Taluq, no. 68; Transl., 
p. 240.) 

(16) * In the antarala (or interior) they erected a most beautiful ranga- 
mantapa, and a fine chandra-sale (or upper storey) according to the direc- 
tions given by the King Timendra/—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. хи, Pavugada Taluq, 
no. 46 ; Transl., р. 46, line 14 f. ; Roman Text, р. 203, v. 9.) 

(17) “Ву him this college ($ala) has been caused to be constructed 
(established), rich, spacious and beautiful . . . and this college full 
of the intelligence is resplendent with Brahmanas. Неге there are scholars 
born in various districts. For their subsistence is (hereby) provided.’ 
(cf. по. 9 above).—(Salotgi inscrip., Ind. Ant., Vol. r, p. 210, c. 2. para. 1.) 

(18) Saleyarn vividha-pravasi-manuja-prajyopakara-kshama rathyà chat- 

vara-ramya-koshta-vilasad-vatayana $lakshna-bhüh | 
Nana-deSa-samagatan pathi рагіќгапіап asangrahino nityam bho- 
jana-vasa-dana-vidhina kamanugan toshayct 11 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, inscrip. of Queen 
Lalita-tri-pura-Sundari, v. 4, Second Series, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, p. 194.) 

(19) ‘ The building, represented in the plate as adjoining the temple, 
is a dharma-sala, or house of rest, where pilgrims of good caste receive 
board and lodging gratis for a fixed period.’—(Ind. Ant., Vol. хм, p. 11, с. 2 
line 1 f.) : 

(20) ‘ Erected a stone hall for gifts (dana-$ala) in Jinanathapura (a 
suburb of Sravana-Belgola).’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, inscrip. on Chandragiri, 

© no. 40; Transl., р. 122, line 20, Roman Text, p. 10, line 4 from bottom upwards.) 
. (21) ‘His mother . . . and his sister . . . erected a paddi- 
śālā in his memory.'—(£p. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 51 ; Transl., p. 120, last para. ; 
Roman Text, p. 34, last three lines ; Introduction, p. 51. para. 3.) 
(22) Майда pada$ale (pada or pada-sala)—Mr. Rice translates it by 
verandah.—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. ur, Mysore 'Taluq, no. 59; Roman Text, p. 13 ; 
Transl., p. 6). 


488 


—— 5 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SALANGA 


(23) “Не was pleased to set with precious stones the Kandalur hall 
(Salai).’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ur, Tirumaküdlu-Narasipur Taluq, no. 35; Roman 
Text, p. 147, line 1; Transl. p. 74, line 1 f.) 

(24) Endowed it (basadia or Jaina temple) with Arhanahalli (a village 
or town), together with a fine tank, a strect with a hall for gifts (dana- 
Sala) in the middle, two oil-mills and two gardens.—(Ef. Carnat., Vol. Iv, 


Krishnarajapet Taluq, no. 3; Transl., p. 99; Roman Text, p. 159, last three 
lines.) 


(25) Out of love for (the god) Chennigaraya, erected the yaga-sale.— 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part I, Belur Talug, по. 13; Transl., p. 147; Roman 
Text, p. 107.) 

(26) ‘ Sri - Gopala - svamiyavara - nava-ranga - patta-éale prákára-vanu 

kattisi.’ 

For the god Сораја . . . he erected the nava-ranga, the patta- 
gala, and the enclosure wall. 

Nava-ranga prakara-patta-sale-samasta-dharmma—‘ this пауа-гайра, 
enclosure wall and patta-$alà and all other work of merits were carried 
out by . . . .-(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Channarayapatna Taluq, 
no. 185 ; Roman Text, p. 467; Transl, p. 205.) 

(27) ‘ The virüpàksha-$ala was erected to the temple.’ 

Тһе inscription is * on the floor of the mantapa in front of the Virabhadra 
temple. $414 apparently means here а mandapa or detached building 
(pavilion) where the god Viripaksha is installed.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уі, 
Koppa Taluq, no. 4; Transl, p. 76; Roman Text, p. 166.) 

(28) ‘ To the thousand of Gautamagrama were given three Salas (halls 
or public rooms) to continue as long as moon and stars.’ 

Sale or 5214 in the sense of a hall or house has been used in this inscrip- 
tion more than twenty-five times.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уш, Shikarpur Тапа, 
no. 45 (bis), Transl., pp. 49, 50; Roman Text, pp. 97-98). 

SALA-GRIHA-—A dwelling house, a type of building. 
А type of rectangular building : 
(1) Agni-Purána (Chap. civ, vv. 16-17; see under РвА5АрА). 
(2) Garuda-Purana (Chap. rxvm, vv. 21-22, 26-27; see under 
PRASADA). 
SALANGA—The limbs of the 5218 (hall or house), the essential parts 
of a house comprising the basement, pillar, entablature, tower, dome, 
and finial. 
Adhisthànar cha padarh cha prastaram karnam eva cha | 
Sikhararn stüpika chaiva $alamgam iti kathyate 11 
; (Kamikagama, xxv, 21.) 


489 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


we M PRA 
LOST ТУРЗА 


SALA-BHANJIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SALA-BHANJIKA—A wooden middled image. 
(Bharata-Nalya-Sastra, , П, 79-) 


SALA-MALIKA—A class of buildings, a type of hall. 


(Kamikdgama, xxxv, 6 ; see under MALIKA.) 


$ASANA—An architectural member, a plate, а part of an enclosing 
wall. 
Tad (mukha-bhadra)-agre vàtha parsve cha kuryat sopána-bhüsha | 
nam | ( : 
Тавуа (mandapasya) madhye cha range tu mauktikena prapanvitam | 
Tan-madhye 5азапайпата toranam kalpa-vrikshakam | 
(М., хххіу, 217-219.) 


SASTRA (see Tantra)—Science (of Architecture). 
SIKHARA-—The top, an apex, a spire, a cupola, the lower part of 
the finial, a spherical roof rising like an inverted cup (Latin cupa) 
over a circular, square or multangular building, a small tower or 
turret. Above the dome (stüpi) are built in order Кага, Sikha, ikhanta, 
and śikhāmaņi. i 
(1) Small towers or turrets (Brihat-samhitd, LVI, 21, J.R.A.S., М. S., 
Vol. vi, p. 319). 
(2) See M., хуш, 276, хіх, 51, etc. 
(3) Padoktam sarva-manam tu Sikharo'pi vidhiyate 11 
Dhruva-vidhana-ritya và $ikharam parikalpayet I1 
(Kamikagama, ххху, 29, 30). 
The synonyms : 
Sikhararn Sirah mirdha cha $ikha mauli$ cha mundakam | 
Sirsharh kam ій vijfieyarh Siro-vargasya panditah 11 
š (Ibid., 1, 206.) 
(4) Vanarendra-griham . . . $ukla-prásada-Skharaih kaila$a-Sikha- 
ropamaih | 
(Ramayana, ту, 33, 15 ; see also 1v, 26, 31; 
vi, 41, 88, under PRAsADA.) 
(5) Spire: 
Devuniki ikharamu gattimchi $ikhara-marntapa-gopuralu | 
(Kondavidu inscrip. of Krishnaraya, v. 27, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. v1, pp. 237, 232.) 
(6) Müla-Sikhare cha kanaka-maya-dhvaja-darhdasya dhvajaropana- 
pratishthayam kritayam— also of the hoisting of the flag on the golden 
flag-staff on the original spire.'—(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. хіх, 
Jalor stone inscrip. of Samarasimhadeva, line 4 f., Ep. Ind., Vol. xr, p. 55.) 


490 


Em. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SIKHARA 


(7) Idu-rajatadri hema-Sikhara-pratipattiyan-Téaniye pettudu Harahása- 
kalpa-taru kerndalirindesev-agra-bhagadol-pudidud Umadhinatha- 
sita-gatra-sapirhga-suturhga-jutadondo-davenipa Svayarmbhü-áiva- 
gehada porngalasarn sa-marhgalam 11 

“Тһе golden spire, with its auspicious ornament of this house of Sva- 
yaribhü-Siva is such that it may be said that this is the silver mountain 
which has obtained, by the gift of Iga, the possession of a golden summit ; 
it is a tree of desire on the (white pile of) Hara's laughter (namely, the 
mountain Каада), crowned by a summit radiant with young red spouts, 
in it there is combined the unique substance of the white body and the 
tawny towering matted hair of the Lord of Uma.’—(Inscrip. from Yewur, 
B. of a. D. 1017, v. 98, Ef. Ind., Vol. хп, pp. 282, 289.) 

(8) Prasadam ürddhva-áikhara-sthira-hema-kumbham | 

* (Into) the temple (which by the stately display of) firm golden capitals 

` upon lofty spires. . . . ’—(Bhivaneéwar inscrip. v, 15, line 11, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. хш, pp. 152, 154.) 

(9) Vistirnna-tunga-sikharam—‘ (a temple having) broad and lofty 
spire.’  Manoharaib-Sikharaih—with (its) charming spires. 

(Mandasor stone inscrip. of Kumaragupta, lines 17, 20, 
C. I. I, Vol. ur, F. G. I., no. 18, pp. 83, 86, 87). 

(то) ‘For this god Prasanna-Viripaksha, a temple, enclosing wall, 

gopura, finial (Sikhara) covered with gold, a Manmatha tank, decoration, 
'andilluminations . . . .’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. x, Mulbagal Taluq, no. 2 ; 
Roman Text, p. 82 ; Transl, p. 71.) 

The same word in a similar sentence is translated by ‘tower’ in the 
following inscriptions : Ç 

(11) ‘For the god Prasanna-Someévara having restored the temple, 
enclosure, tower (Sikhara), Manmatha tank, the endowed villages, the 
mantapas for alms, and all other religious provisions.’ —(Ibid., по. 18; 
Roman Text, p. 87; Transl, p. 75.) 

(12) Varadaraja-devara sikhara (śikhara)— the spire of Varadaraja's 
temple.’—(Jbid., Malur Taluq, no. 4 ; Roman Text, p. 187; Transl., p. 156. 

(13) “Апа erecting a stone pillar, according to the rules set up the spire 
or tower (Sikhara).'—(Ibid., Vol. хп, Pavugada Taluq, no. 46 ; Transl., p. 122, 
line 16; Roman Text, p. 203, v. ro.) 

(14) Garbha-griha-sthita-mantapa-Sikharam—' the ruined tower over 
the shrine (of the god Arkanatha).’—(Jbid., Vol. ш, Malavalli Taluq, no. 64; 
Roman Text, p. 127, line 3 ; Transl, p. 63.) 

(15) ° Sik(h)ara—applied to the summit of a tower. Rea.—(Chalakyan 
architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, p. 39.) 


491 


5 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Fo 


a = i ee a ee ОЕ. e 
я ee ee ae к ж” ATL 


SIKHA š AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(16) “Тһе platform on which this temple stands is approached by 
twelve steps, and six more lead to the sanctum, over which rises a tall dome 
or truncated sikri (Sikhara).'—(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. xxu, 
р. 135.) 

(17) * Sikhara (sikar, sikri)—Steeple of temple’.—(Vincent Smith, Gloss., 
loc. cit., to Cunningham's Arch. Surv. Reports.) 

(18) In the temples of Champa three distinct types of sikhara are noticed. 
The common type consists of a series of four storeys, diminishing as they 
rise, a curvilinear stone slab being as the crowning moulding. Another 
type comprises two storeys; the upper is ridge-shaped looking like an 
elongated arched vault with ogival ends at two sides with a slightly 
concave curve at the top. Тһе third type ‘ consists of a curvilinear pyra- 
midal dome springing directly from the walls of the sanctuary, and sur- 
mounted by a massive circular member of corrugated form’ resembling 
Amalaka of Indian temples. 

(For details see Inventaire Descriptif des Monuments Chams D. L. 
Annam by Parmentier, as summarized by R. C. Mazumdar, Champa, 1, 
Chap. x, pp. 236, 237.) 

SIKHA The lower part of the finial, pinnacle or small turret-like 
termination. 

Sikha is the upper part, and $ikhara, the lower : 

_ Sikharordhva-Sikhottungar stüpi-traya-samam eva cha | 
Prastarádi-Skhàntam syad ganya-mànam pravakshyate | 
(M., XXXII, 141, 144, etc.) | 
SIKHANTA—The finial (Latin finis), the top or finishing portion of 
a pinnacle. 
(М., хі, 110, etc.) 
SIKHA-MANI— The crest-jewel, the top end of the finial, the apex. 
(M., XLIX, 85, хуп, 31, etc.) 
Gf. Siro-ratna—crest-jewel.—(Deopara inscrip. of Vijayasena, v. 14, Ep. 
Ind., Vol. 1, рр. 308, 313.) 


SIBIKA—A synonym of yàna or conveyance, а litter, a palanquin. 
(М., ш, 9, etc.) 


SIBIKA-GARBHA—A square hall. 
Sibika-gabbho ti chaturassa-gabbho.—(Buddhaghosha, Chullavagga, 
Vr, 3 3.) : 
The interpretati 
shaped is not supported by 
above. 


М 492 


on of Oldenberg and Rhys Davids as “ quart-measure 
the Commentator Buddhaghosha as quoted 


go 


ion. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA à Ë re 3 
"E i ee Se ты; 5: 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SILA-PATTA-VA MSA 


SIBIKA-VESMA~—A type of rectangular building. 
(1), Agni-Purana (Chap. оту, vv. 16-17, see udder PRAsADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. XLVII, vv. 21-22, 26-27, see under PRASADA). 
SIBIRA—A camp, a royal residence, a fortified city. 
(M., x, 40, etc.) 
Samàa(sáma)ntànàm samriddhanam yat sthànarn sibirarh smritam | 
Gaja-vaji-samayuktarh sena-sthanarh tad eva hill 
(Kamikagama, хх, 11.) 
S$IRAS-— The head, the finial, the top, the summit, the pinnacle. 
(М., xv, 231, etc. ; гуп, 54, etc.) 
SIRASTRAKA(-STRANA)—A head-gear, a helmet. 
(М., XLIX, 13, ctc. ; see BHDSHANA.) 
S$IRALAMBA-—A crowning ornament of а column. 
(М., Xv, 101 ; see STAMBHA.) 
SILA-KARMA —Masonry, the art of building in stone, the stone-work 
Sugana-raje-Dhanabhütana karitam toranam šilakarnmarnto cha 
uparmno (sila-karmanta$-chotpannah) 1 

‘ During the reign of the Sungas (this) gateway was erected and the 
masonry finished by Dhanabhuti.—(Sunga inscrip. of the Bharhut Stupa, 
line 9 f., Ind. Ant., Vol. xiv, рр. 138, 139 ; no. 1, Vol. xxt, pp. 227.) 

S$ILADHIVASANA —Preparation of stones for building, the worship 
of stones for building. 

Silàdhivasana(h)-karmma yathavidhi sampadya tasminn-eva Sake 

phadra-krishna-navamyam Sukle &ila-pravesam vidhaya К 

‘The worship of the stones for the building) Dr. Bühler and Bhag- 
vanlal Indraji. 

This interpretation of Siladhivasana does not seem to be appropriate. 
The term may refer to some processes or ceremonies similar to those in 
connexion with Sila-sarhgraha or collecting and selecting stones for build- 
ings.—(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23 ; Inscrip. of Queen Lalita-tri-pura-sundari, 
line 14, Ind. Ant., Vol. rx, рр. 193, 194, ©. 2.) 

SILA-PATTA-VAMSA— Now known as Silawat caste, who are 
masons and found in the neighbourhood of Damoh. Rai Bahadur 
Hiralal. 
(Ер. Ind., Vol. xu, p. 44 note I.) 
S(§)ila-patta-Subhe varn$e sütradhárà vichakshanah 1 
Bhojukah Kamadevas cha karmanistha Hala sudhih t! 
(Batihagarh stone inscrip., У. 12, ibid., p. 46.) 


493 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


SILA-PRAVESA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SILA-PRAVESA—Laying the corner-stone or foundation. 
Siladhivasana(h)-karmma yathavidhi ѕатрадуа tasminn eva Sake 
Sila-praveSarh vidhaya— the corner stone was laid.’ Dr. Bühler 
and Bhagvanlal Indraji.—(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, , inscrip. of Queen 
Lalita-tri-pura-sundart, line 14, Ind. Ant., Vol. х, pp. 193, 194, с. 2.) 
SILA-MARDDAKA (SILE-MUDDAS)—A guild of stone masons, 
the stone-cutters. 
* Sile is the Canarese form of the Sanskrit &14, а stone, and Mudda is 
а jamgam or Lihgayat name. Sile-mudda must be the name of some par- . 
ticular guild of stone-masons.’ Dr. Fleet.—(Sanskrit and Old Canarese 
inscrip., по. 114, line 1, Ind. Ant., Vol. x, рр. 170, 117, note 58.) 
SILAVEDI—The stone terrace on which sacred trees usually 
stand. 
. Gf. Mahavamia, 36, 103, І. 
SILA-VES MA—Stone-houses, cave-houses. 
Gf. Megha-düta, 1, 25 (quoted by Prof. Lüders, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxxiv, 
P- 199.) 
SILA-STAMBHA—The stone column, a kind of column, the 
monolith. 
Shat-saptashtangulam vapi sila-stambha(r)-visalakam 1 
Vrittam và chatur-aé$ram va ashta$ram shodasasrakam | 
Pada-tunge’shta-bhage tu tri(trya)m$enordhvam alankritam | 
Bodhikarh mushti-bandharh cha phalaka tatika ghatam | 
Sarvalankara-sarnyuktarh mile padmasananvitam | 
Chatur-dikshu chatur-bhadram kechid bhadram tu karayet 1 
Kuttimarn chopapitharh và sopapitha-masürakam | 
Athava chihna-vedih syat prapalankaram uchyate | ; 
(M., LVI, 15-22.) 


SILPA-SASTRA—The science of architecture and other cognate 


arts. 
See details under VAstu, VAsTU-VIDYA and VASTU-KARMAN. 
See also the Preface of this Encyclopaedia and the Preface of Indian 


` Architecture by the writer. 
SILPI-LAKSHANA—The description of the artists: their quali- 
fications, rank, caste, etc. (see under ЅТНАРАТІ). 


494 


tS 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE ` §UKA-NASA(-SIKA) 


| SILPI-SALA—A school or workshop of architecture. 
; (М., тхуш, 50.) 
SIVA-—A class of buildings. 
(Катікавата, XLV, 35-38; see under MALIKA.) 
SIVA-KANTA—The pentagonal or five-sided pillar furnished with 
five minor pillars. 
(М., ху, 22, 245 ; see under STAMBHA.) 
SIVA-MANDAPA—The Siva temple, a type of pavilion. 
(M., XXXIV, 196.) 
SISHTA-MANDAPA—A type of pavilion. 


(See Kamikagama, under ARDHA-MANDAPA.) 


SIRSHA—The top end of a building, almost same as sikhanta. 
Sirsharh cha gikha-grivarh vrittarh syad vaijayantikam | 
(М., хіх, 181, etc.) 


SUKA-NASA(-SIKA)—The parrot’s nose, an object having an 
acquiline nose, the part of the finial looking Jike the parrot’s nose. 
The lower half part of a tower. 3 
(т) Chaturdhā Sikhararn bhajya ardha-bāga-dvayasya tu | 
Suka-naásarn prakurvita tritiye vedika matā ll 
(Matsya-Purāņa, Chap. CCLXIX, V. 18., 
(2) Sikharartharh (?-dharh) hi sütrani chatvari vinipatayet | 
Suka-nago(-sa)rddhatah |sütrarh tiryyag-bhitarh nipatayet | 
Sikharasyardha-bhagastharh simham tatra tu karayet | 
Suka-nàsarh sthirikritya madhya-sandhau nidhapayet і! 
Apare cha tatha pàr$ve tadvat sütram nidhapayet | 
Tad-ürddhvam tu bhaved vedi sakantha manasarakam 11 
= (Agni-Purana, Chap. XLU, VV. I 5-17.) 
Chaturdha éikharam kritva Suka-nasa dvi-bhagika 11 
(Ibid., Chap. civ, v. IO.) 
(3) Prasadau nirgatau karyau kapotau garbha-manatah 1 
Отаһуата bhitty-uchchhrayat tasya maijarm tu prakalpayet Il 
Майјагуа& chardha-bhagena &uka-nasarn prakalpayet | 
Urdhvarn tathardha-bhagena vedi-bandho bhaved iha 11 
(Vi$vak, 6, 767; quoted by Kern, 7. R. A. S., - 
N. S., Vol. vr, p. 321, note 2 of p. 320.) 
The above lines are identical in the Matsya-Purana (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 
II-I9). 
495 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SUKANGHRI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(4) Vrittàkaram samam chet tu torananghrivad àyatam | 
Sakandharam tad-trdhve tu $uka-nàsya vibhüshitam 11 
Garbha-dvyi-tri-kara-vyasa-$uka-nisa mukhe mukhe | 
Na kartavyà vimaneshu nàsikordhve па nàsikà 11 

(Kaümikagama, LV, 120, 157.) 
SUKANGHRI—A type of pillar. ) 
Ürddhva-kshetra-samà janghà jangharddha-dvi-gunarh bhavet | 
Garbha-vistara-vistirnah $ukanghri$ cha vidhiyate I 
"Tat-tri-bhàgena karttavyah paficha-bhagena và punah | 
Nirgamar tu $ukànghre$ cha uchchhrayah sikhararddhagah 11 
(Garuda-Purána, Chap. xvi, vv. 3-4 ; see also vv. 13, 17.) 
SUDDHA—A house built (generally) of one material, namely, wood, 
brick, or stone, ctc. 
Drumeneshtakayà vapi dri$adadyair athapi va 1 
Etena sahitam gcham $uddham ity-abhidhiyate 11 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 21.) 

See also Manasara, etc. under PRASADA. 

SUMBHAMKARI—The fifth or composite type of the five Indian 
orders. 

(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 65, 67; ‘see under STAMBHA.) 
SULA—A pike; a dart, a lance, the trident of Siva, the finial. 

A dart (M., уп, 223, 236 ; LIV, 142). 

A synonym of šikha or finial (M., хуп, 126). 

A pike as a component part of the cage for the tiger.—( M., L, 262.) 

SOLA-KAMPA (see SürA)—A pike. 


` Paritah $ila-kamparh уай dvaram tad dakshinottaram | 
(М., XL, 136.) 


SRIN KHALA—A chain. 
In connexion with the bedstead : " 
Chaturbhih érinkhala-yuktam andolam chaikatopari | 
(M., XLIV. 70). 


$RINGA-—The top, the turret, elevation, height, the spire, a horn. 
(M., LXU, 25, etc.) 

Sringenaikena phavet—furnished with one spire. 
(Brihat-samhita, LVI, 23, 26, 7. В. А. 8., 
М. 5., Vol. vi, p. 319.) 


496 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SRI-KARA 


SRINGARA-MANDAPA—A bed-chamber, the pavilion or room 
where-the deity of a temple is made to retire at night. 
Devanar cha vilasartharn Sringarakhyarh tu mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 398, etc.) 
SMASANA (see Cuaitya)—Funeral and memorial structures, tombs 
of various shapes, round and dome-shaped (parimandala, Sat. Brå., 
хш, 8, 1), hemispherical bowl-shaped (chamū) resembling a vault, 
cnclosed by an indefinite number of enclosing stones (ibid., хш, 8, 
2, 2) or bricks (A.-V., хуш, 4, 55), Square or quadrilateral (Sat. Bra., 
хш, 8, 1, 1), as also pyramidal as in later temples and gikharas, 
Compare Buddhist stüpas. The three main types described in the 
Satapatha Brahmana and referred to in R.-V., and A.-V., Vastu 
(reliquary of bones, etc.) or tumulous, round or square ; Grihàn or 
house with many chambers probably dedicated to some religious or 
philanthropic use and ‘erected over or beside the grave in memory 
of the deceased or built underground as rock-cut caves ; and 
Ргајйапат or a memorial monument ог pillar four of which were 
set up in four corners of the grave out of which Buddhist memorial 
pillars might have grown up’. (For further details, compare 
Sarkar, ibid.) 
SYAMA-BHADRA—A type of pavilion with fourteen pillars. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ccrxx, v. 14; see MANDAPA.) 
SRANTA—An architectural ornament, a shed. 
In connexion with single-storeyed buildings : 
Evam proktarh harmyake madhya-bhadram 1 
Salà-koshtharh dig-vidike küta-yuktà 1 
Hara-Sranta-nasika-paiijaradhyam | 
(M., xix, 192-194.) 
SRI-KANTHA—Anything possessing ~ beautiful neck, a class of 
buildings. 
A type of octagonal buildings (Agni-Purána, Chap. crv, vv. 20-21, see 
under PRAsApDA). 
SRI-KARA—An order, a class of columns, a type of storeyed build- 
ings, a sect of people, a sub-caste of the Kayasthas, originally those 
who used to write the legal documents (Karana), hence the clerical 
community, clerks. 
(1) One of the five orders (Suprabhedagama, хххі, 65, 66; see under 
STAMBHA). 


497 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation шз 


- 


SRI-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF- 


(2) A class of single-storeyed buildings (M., xix, 170 
PRASADA). 

(3) A class of two-storeyed buildings ; the measurement of the com- 
ponent parts (see under SALANGA), etc. (М., xx, 93, 2-9; see under 
PRASADA). 

(4) А sect of people (M., тх, 152, 226, etc.). 

SRI-KANTA—A type of storeyed building, a class of bases сотргіѕ- 

ing four types which differ from one another іп the addition or 
omission of some mouldings and also in height. 

(M., xiv, 371—387 ; see the list of mouldings 

under ADHISHTHANA.) 

A class of three-storeyed buildings (M., xxt, 2-11 ; see under PRAsADA). 

. À class of seven-storeyed buildings (M., xxv, 24; see under PRASADA). 

—А type ot oval building. 

SRI-JAYA—A type of oval building 
(1) Agni-Purdna, (Chap. civ, vv. 19-20, see under PRASADA). 
(ә) Garuda-Purdna (Chap. хуп, vv. 29-30, see under Css 
SS S U e class of buildings. 
DEC Sri-padam cha tatah śriņu 1 
Koshthakastv-iha chatvara$ chatush-koneshu chaiva hill 
Chatur-nasi-samayuktam anu-nasi-dasashtakam 1 
Evam lakshana-samyuktam 6гі-радата tv-iti kirtitam 11 
(Suprabhedagama, хххі, 50, 51), 
SRI-PADA-—The footprint of Buddha on Adam's Peak in Ceylon, 
otherwise called Ratnapada. For details, see. BUDDHA-PADA. 
SRI-BANDHA—A class of bases comprising four types which differ 


from one another in the addition or omission of some mouldings. 
(M., xiv, 100-199; see the list of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) 


SRI-BANDHA- KUTATA Te flat га of the Sri-bandha type 
. of bases. 


» see under 


(M., XLIV, 43) 
SRI-BHADRA—A kind of throne, a type of pedestal. 


A class of thrones (M., XLV, 13, étc.). 
A kind of pitha or the pedestal of the phallus (M., тїп, 36, etc.) 
<РІ-ВНОСА-А type of storeyed buildings, a class of bases compris- 
ing two types which differ from each other in the addition or omis- 


ion of some mouldings. Е о 
sion o 6 (M., xiv, 260-280, see the list of 


mouldings under ADHISHTHANA,) 


498 


ڪر 


So 


SRI-RUPA—A type of pavilion. 


‘HINDU ARCHI TECTURE SRENITA-DVARA 


A class of seven-storeyed buildings (M., XXV, 25; see under PRASAD 


SRI-MUKHA—A beautiful face, a kind of throne. 


(M., хім, I4, etc., see under SIMHASANA.) 


А). 


(M., xxxiv, 478, etc.; see under MANDAPA.) 
SRI-VATSA—A class of buildings, а type of 
mark on the breast of the image of Vishnu. 


А pavilion with 48 pillars (Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. 9; see under 
MANDAPA). 


pavilion, a special 


A type of quadrangular buildings : 
(1) Адт-Ритйпа, (Chap. civ, vv. 14-15; see under PRASADA). 
(2) Garuda-Purána (Chap. хуп, vv. 24-25; see under PRASADA). 
А particular mark on the breast of Vishnu or Krishna < represented in 


pictures by a symbol resembling a cruciform flower.'—(M., XLIX, 150; 
LV, 92; XVII, 375, etc.) 


SRI-VISALA—A type of gate-houses, a class of storeyed buildings, 
а kind of throne, a type of pedestals. 

A class of gopuras or gate-houses (М., xxxm, 555). 

А class of single-storeyed buildings, (M., хіх, 168; see under PRAsADA). 

А kind of throne (M., xrv, 19; 546 SIMHASANA). 

A type of the pitha or pedestal of the phallus (M., Lur, 39). 
SRI-VRIKSHA (see KALPA-VRIKSHA)—An ornamental tree em- 
ployed as a carving. 

Sesharn mangalya-vihagaih éri-vriksha-svastikair ghataih | 
Mithunaih patra-vallibhih pramathais chopagobhayet 11 
* Let the remaining part (of the door) be ornamented with sculptured 
birds of good augury Sri-vriksha-figures, crosses (svastika), jars, cupolas, 
foliage (leaves and creepers), tendrils and goblins.’ —(Brihat-samhita, LVI, 15, 
J. R. A. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 318.) 
SRUTIMJAYA—A pavilion with forty-eight pillars. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссіхх, v. ro, see under MANDAPA.) 
SRENITA-DVARA—A kind of door, doors or gates in a row. 
Madhye dvaram tu kuryad madhya-sutrat tu vamake | 
Kuryaj jala-dvararn tu Srenita-dyararh kalpayet 1 


(M., хххуш, 39-40.) 
499 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


SRENI(-NI)-BANDHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


" SRENI(-NI)-BANDHA—A class of bases comprising four types 
which differ from one another in height and in the addition or. omis- 
5 sion of some mouldings. 
= (M., xiv, 149-175; see the list of 
mouldings under ADHISHTHANA.) 
SRONI (-NI)—The buttocks (cf an image), the hip or loins, a waist- 
band, a string worn round the loins ; figuratively used for building 
also, compare КАТІ. 


SVETA-MANDA—The white part of the eye of an image. 
(M., Lxv, 68. 


SH 


SHAT-TALA—The sixth storey, the six-storeyed buildings. 
Their general features (М., xxiv; 27-46). 
Thirteen types (ibid., 2-26; see under PRASADA.) 
SHODASA-TALA (see Gopura)—The sixteenth storey, the sixteen- 
storeyed gate-houses. 
Evam eva prakarena kuryad ashoda$a-kshmakam | 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 86.) 


. SHAD-VARGA—A group of six, six formulas, ‘with which the 
perimeter of a structure should conform,' six proportions, six main 
` component parts of a building comprising adhishthana (base), 
рада or stambha (column), prastara (entablature), karna (ear, wings) 

d Sikhara (roof), and stüpi (dome). 

(1) According to the Manasara the Ayadi-Shad-varga represents a set 
of six formulas with which any particular measurement must conform 
before it can be accepted. Mention of the Shad-varga is found also in the 
Bimba-mana and the Agamas. The formulas in each case, however, axe 
not the same and differ in these several works (see below). 

Тһе formulas according to the Manasara : 


Aya is the remainder of X? ( for length). 


Vyaya , > А = (b for breadth). 

Riksha ,, % UE | 
E 

Yoni x: 9 oe 2х3 


5с0 


- 


со Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Mee е. x = x 
Балды ы аге, si s 
фа 


` 
1] 


‘HINDU ARCHITECTURE SHAD-VARGA 
Vara is the remainder of = (¢ for circumference, thickness or 
height). 
Tithi ,, ^ » 29 
30 
Атаба 4 


2 ›› 33 


9 
Etesharh grāma-rūpāņām ayadi-lakshanarn tathā | 
Nandāyāma-samūhe vā chāyate vātha vistare 1 
Pariņāhe pade vapi āyādi-śuddhirh cha kārayet ı 
Kechit tv-àyatane chaivam ayar cha tad-dine (nakshatre) bhavet | 
Рагіпаһе tithir vararh ууауа-уопі($) cha vistare | 
Vasubhir gunitarh bhanur(-nuna) hanyayamam ashta-Sishtakam | 
Ashtabhir vardhite riksharn(-shena) hritva §esharn ksham ishyate | 
Navabhir vardhayet panktih(-tya) hritva Seshath vyayarh bhavet 1 
Guna-nagarh cha yoni(h) syad vriddhi-hanya4-yatha-kramam | 
Nava-vriddhya rishim(-shina) hritvà tach-chhesharh vàram eva cha | 
Navabhir gunite trirnéat-(a) kshapech chhesharn tithir bhavet | 


(M., ІХ, 63-73.) 


The six formulas include * amśa 7 in the Sarhchita and Asarnchita build- 
ings, while in the Apasarnchita ‘ tithi’ is included : 


Vakshye’harh jati-harmyanam ayadi-lakshanarh kramāt | 
Pirvoktanam vimananam vistaradi-vasadibhih 1 
Aya-vyayar cha yonim cha nakshatrarn vàram arnšakam | 
Tithir vatha shad etàni tathayadi-vido viduh | 
Sarhchitasarhchitanarh cha arhgair ayadibhir yutam | 
Apasarhchita-harmyanar tithy -antàni shad grahishyate | 

(M., ххх, 160-174. 


(It should Бе noticed, that the divisor in each case is the same in all the 
works under observation). 


The names of all the different classes of formulas, such as Ауа, Vyaya, 
Vara, etc. represent well-known groups of objects that always follow a 
certain serial order. Aya represents the group of twelve beginning with 
Siddhi. Vyaya represents the group of ten beginning with &ikhara. 
Riksha represents the well-known group of twenty-seven planets. Yoni 
represents the group of eight animals, namely, Dhvaja, Dhüma, Simha, 
Süna, Vrisha, Gardhava, Dantin, and Kaka. Vara represents the group 
of seven days of the week. Tithi represents the group of thirty lunar days 
comprising fourteen of the dark half, fourteen of the light half, new moon 


"Also Rasi, Gana, Nayana (M., х, 88, 89, 90-93). 
501 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SHAD-VARGA : AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ. 


day and the full moon day. Апа Аҳа represents the group of nine þe- 
ginning with Taskara : 
Siddhadi-dva-daSayah syach chhikharadi vyayàm dafa | 
Dhvajàdim ashta yoni(h) syat taskaradi navam$akam | 
Prathamadi-tithir ity-cvarn choktavad ganayet sudhih | 
(M., xxx, 188-190.) 
Dhvaja-dhüma-simha-Sünaka-vrisha-gardabha$ cha | 
Danti cha kaka$ cha vasu-yoni(h) yatha-kramena |. 
E (M., іл, 357-358.) 
Tach-chhesham chapi nakshatrarn ganayed a$vini-kramàt | 
Seshath tad vàram ity-uktam arka-varadi-vara-yuk | 
(М., ххх, 183, 185; see context below.) 

It should be noticed that the measurement of length is tested by the 
formulas under Aya and Riksha, of breadth under Vyaya and Yoni, and 
of circumference or height under Vara and Tithi. 

It will be noted that the formula in each case consists of the product 
of the measurement to be considered and a certain other number divided 
by a figure which corresponds to the number constituting the group or 
series under which it is placed. 

In each case, therefore, by resolving the formula, the remainder that may 
be left can be referred to that particular number in the series represents 
by that class, and if this happens to be one that under the conditions pre- 
vailing would be considered auspicious then the particular measurement 
would be acceptable, if not it would have to be rejected. For example, 
if in a particular instance тез coming under the class Yoni, the 
remainder left is two, it will point to the second Yoni Dhüma. If this 
Yoni is stated to be inauspicious, then the particular measurement of 
breadth cannot be approved. If again in the formula 2X9 the remainder 


happens to be 4, it will indicate the 4th day (Wednesday) of the 
week, and if it be stated to be auspicious, the circumference (c) selected 
satisfies the test. | 

Тһе auspicious and inauspicious remainders : 

* When there is no remainder left in the formula of * Aya’ it increases 
religious merits, and when there is no remainder left in the formula of 
<“ Vyaya? it is auspicious. There is no defect if the “Ауа” be equal to 
сс Ууауа 339 : 

Ayarh sarva-hararh punyam vyayarh śarva-harar šubham | 
Ayadhikyarn vyayam hinarh sarva-sampat-karam sada |, 
Yat-phalarh $ubha-yuktam ched aya-hinam tu dishanam | 
 Püjyar: vyayarn samam evar tatra dosho na vidyate | 
А (М., тхіу, 69-72.) 


502 


.HINDU ARCHITECTURE SHAD-VARGA 


Ayam sarva-hararh pürnam ( ? punyarh) vyayarn sarva-gatena hi 1 
Ayadhikyarh vyayarh hinam Sarva-sampat-kararh tatha | 
Aya-hinarh vyayadhikyarh sarva-dosha-kararn bhavet 1 
(М., тх, 75-77.) 
Subhadarh pürna-nakshatram ašubharn karna-rikshakam 1 
Yugmayugmadya-turyam shad-ashta-nanda-Subharksha-yuk | 
Dvitiya-paryayasyardhe gananai$ cha $ubhàvaham! 
Sita-guru-Sasi-budha-varam evarn $ubharh bhavet 1 
(M., Ix, 78-81.) 
Dhvaja-Sirha-vrisha-hasti syát tesharh $ubha yonayah | 
Janma-dvayarm chatuh-shashtibhir ashta-nanda-§ubha-ksham | 
Nàma-janmadi-nandam cha gananais tu vidhiyate 1 
(Kartri-rà$yadi-na$yam cha sena-dvitiyantakam | 
Trittye mana-j(y)akshadau pürva-vad gananais tu và 1) 
Tasmat tritiya-paryantath rikshaih sarva-Subhavaham | 
Guru-Sukra-budha$ chandra-mukhya-varam ргаќаѕуаќе | 
Taskaro dhana-shandas cha preshtanyan §ubharhgakam | 
Varjyam shashtashtamarh rasim anyat sarvarh šubharn bhavet | 
Gajah sarva-$ubharn proktarh manushasura(rm) varjayet | 
А (M., Lxiv, 73-82.) 
Gaja-yonirn vina kuryat sirnhasananyatha $ubham | 
Ayadhikyarn vyayarh hinarn sarva-sarhpach-chhubhavaham | 
Aya-hinam vyayadhikyamh sarva-sarnpad vinaáanam | 
(M., ту, 81-83.) 
Dhüma-yoni$ cha kakas cha gardhavan Suro varjayet | 
Anya-yoni-subharn sarve Subhayan iha vojayet | 
(M., Lv, 81, 84-85.) 
Dhvaja-sirha-hasti-vrisha-yoni(h) subharn praéastam | 
Anyeshu yonir a$ubham uditam puránaih | 
= (M., үл, 359-360.) 
There are other rules as well, e.g. where Aya, etc. are considered with 
regard to height in the Jati class, and with regard to length in the other 
classes of buildings. ; 
Again Ауа, etc. are considered with regard to breadth : 
Jati-dvarodaye sarve chayadi-sarngraham bhavet 1 
Chhandadinam tu sarvesham tare chayadi-samgraham 1 
Vriddhi-hànyadi-sarvesham prasadasyoktavad bhavet 1 
(М., xxxi, 39-41.) 
Vistàre chatur-ange và shat-Subhayadi karayet | 
(M., rv, 72.) 


593 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SHAD-VARGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF. 


Тһе formulas also vary on different occasions : 
Tri-chatuh-paficha-shat-vridhya chashta-hàni$ cha yonayah | 
Shat-saptashtaka-vriddhya tu dvàda$a kshapayet budhah 1° 
Sesham ayam iti proktam saptashta-nava-vardhanat | 
Da$abhih kshapayech chhesham evam vyayam udiritam 1 
Ashta-nanda-da$e vriddhya sapta-vimée kshayo bhavet 1 
Sesharn dinam iti proktam vriddhashta-nandanadhika 1 
Saptaika-chandrage $esham varam evam udiritam | 
Tri-chatush-paficha-vriddhya tu kshapayet tu navam$akam | 

(M., ту, 73-80.) 
Etat tad eva sarnyuktath harmyanarh mana-kalpanam | 
Shat-saptashtaka-vriddhih syad dva-dasantarn kshayam nyayet 1 
Sesham tad ayam ity-uktarh sarhchitadi-yatha-kramam | 
Saptashta-nava-vriddhya tu haret panktya vyayarh bhavet | 
Eka-dvi-traya-vriddhya tu kshapayet tv-ashtà cha yonikam | 
Shat-saptashta-vriddhyà tu sapta-virhSa-kshayo bhavet | 
Tach-chhesharh chapi nakshatram ganayed a$vini-kramat | 
Shashta-nanda-vriddhya tu saptabhih kshapayet tatah | 
Sesharn tad vàram ity-uktam arka-vàrádi-vàra-yuk | 
Tribhir vedas tu vriddhih syan nanda-hani-navarmsakam | 
Tithi-randhroshna-vriddhih syat trim$atà tu kshayo bhavet | 
(M., xxx, 177-187. 
Daighye lingasyayadi-shad-varga-$uddhim kuryat sarvathoktavat 1 
Manalinge chanya-svayambhuvadi-manam cha yuktam thata- 
yadini sarvam na kuryat | 4 
Bandhashta-nanda-vasu-nanda-yugena vriddhya | 
Chashtarka-pankti-turagair munibhir nanda-hanyat | 
Үопауа5 cha vriddhir vyayarn cha tu varam arhgam | 
Lingaikena kuryàt tu parartha-linge | 
(M., іп, 349-354.) 

Application of the rules : 

*'They are applied in measuring both the arcbitectural and the 
sculptural objects.’ 
These rules are considered in connexion with the measurement of 
villages and towns (M., тх, 67-74), of the twelve-storeyed buildings (xxx, 

164-174), and of the phallus (іл, 350-356). 

Cf. also : ( 

Ayadi-shad-varga-(h) surair (=suranarh) vimāne l, 
Chayadhikarh kshina-vyayath Subharh syat | 
504. 


M 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SHAD-VARGA 


Gràmadi-kartri-nripatika-kriyanam 1 
Sarvam $ubham tat kurute tu vidvãn | 


(M., ххх, 192-195.) 
The necessity of these Shad-varga formulas seems due to the fact that 
in most instances where the measurement of any object is concerned, 
the Agamas, the Bimbamana, the Manasára and the other works on archi- 
tecture quote more dimensions than one. Thus for the length that an 
object is to be of, they instead of giving a single figure would quote, say, 
nine different measures. The Manasàra in fact invariably gives nine differ- 
ent lengths, nine different breadths, and five heights concerning a building 
or image. Ош of these different and varying measures which is to be 
selected would be determined by the application of the six formulas. 
Any of the different measures prescribed is open to be accepted only when 
it satisfies the tests of the Shad-varga. By a verification of the measure- 
ments with the respective formula it would eliminate the risk of dimensions 
being selected that would be disproportionate among themselves and 
improper. This might have been the purpose that the authorities had 
in contemplation in prescribing the rules of the Ayadi Shad-varga in all 
the architectural treatises. The testing of measurements by the Shad- 
varga thus formed one of the most important points to be followed in 
architecture and sculpture, and we find a reference to it in these ancient 
works so many times and almost without exception wherever there are 
any specifications prescribed. 
(2) Bimbamdna (British Museum, MS. по. 558, 5292, vv. 10, 11-13) 
Manarh tu yoni-nakshatra-sarnyuktam 11 
Ayamashta-gunite cha dvà-da$amée'ti Seshata | 
Nandamée tu gunite'pi dharmàmée'ti vyayarn bhavet 11 
Yonir gunibhir gunitau(-ta) chashtarnše ’pi tathaiva cha | 
Rikshakam ashta-gunitam cha sapta-virnSati-Seshatah 11 
Vàrakam nava-gunitam cha saptam$e tu hritam bhavet 1 
Am$akam chabdhi-gunite’pi nava-bhaga-hritam matam |1 
(3) Kamikagama (xxxvi, 13-20, 169-172) : 
Ayàdi-sampad-artham tu vistare chayatau tatha 1 
Utsedhe chaiva hastanam samyak sampürnatam nayet 11 (13) 
Vistarat kevalarh vatha vayamad unnates tatha 1 
Vistarayama-sarhsargad ayadyam parigrihyatam 11 (14) 
Ashta-tri-tri-ashtabhir hritvashta-manvarka-bhair bhajet | 
Ayo vyaya$ cha yoni§ cha nakshatrarn Seshato bhavet 11 (15) 
TrirhSad арпша paryantam tithir vanarh tu saptabhih | 
Athavanya-prakarena chayadyath parigrihyatam | 


505 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


SHAD-VARGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Dvayor bhyàm dvayardhasya vistüram dvayàrdham naharbtu 
nahakam 11 (16) 
Ashta-nandagni-vasubhir ganayen nanda-nanda-naha | 
Arka-dig-vasu-bhah-sapta-navabhi§ cha kramad bhajet I (17) 
Ayadhyam pürva-vat proktam ayadhikarh $ubha-pradam 1 
Yajamanasya yanmarkshe nanukülam yathà bhavet |! (18) 
Tatha parikshya kartavyarh nama nakshatrakarh tu va | 
Parikshya bahudha kuryad ubhayarh va parikshayet 11 (19) 
Sarvanukilyarh sarvatra vastu yasman na labhyate | 
Tasmad gunadhikarh grahyam alpa-dosharh yathà bhavet I! (20) 
Eka-tri-paficha-saptarn$e dhvaja-sirnha-vrisha-dvipah | 
Pürvad yàsu Subha hy-ete ayadyas tv-anulobhatah 11 (169) 
Dvi-chatuh-shad-vasu-sthanarn dhüma-$va-kbara-vayasáh | 
Agneyadi vidikshy-ete varjaniya bubhukshubhih 11 (170) 
and so on. 
See also Kamikagama., Chap. 1 : 
Evam àdau parikshyaiva prasadam parikalpayet | 
Etesham api sarvesham Ayadi-vidhir uchyate II (57) 
Various rules are again given : 
Vistarath dvi-gunarh kritva vasubhir bhàjite sati | 
` Sishtarn yonir iha prokta tad-abhave tu gaudhakah 11 (58) 
Udaye vasubhih-sapta-virhSadbhir bham ihoditam | 
Paridhau nanda-gunite sapta-bhur dvaram uchyate 11 (59) 
Sakalarh tri-gunam kritva triméadbhir bhajitva 1 
Tithi-udayam vasubhir bhaktva süryayas(-yais) tu Seshatah 11 (60) 
Punar ару udayarh nanda-vasubhir vyayah uchyate | 
Padadhikam tu yat $ishtarn tat sarvarh sakalam bhavet 11 (61) 
Pürva-vad gunitam kritva bhagarn(2) bharam samarn kritvà | 
Tenaiva vibhajed yal-labhad adhikam bhavet 11 (62) 
Yugma-hastaih svarodbhütaih $ikhibhir yonir uchyate 1 
Athavanya-prakarena ayadi-vidhir uchyate 11 (63) 
Nage sütrágni-randhra-bhuvana-da$a-vasvabdhi-$ishtas tu! 
Tat syad ayo na yonir varam vasu-hatarh udubhir (7) bhaktva 11 (64) 
Sishtarn tu riksharh hatvà bhaktvatha sütrair bhuvanam 1 
Atha phalarh sishtam алдат vasughnam trirhgad bhaktam || (65) 
Tithih syad graha-dina-tithi-yogadayo yoni-bhedah 1 
Athavanya-prakarena chayadin parikalpayet 11 (66) 
Naga-nanda-guna-naga-nanda-drik-bhanu-nadi-vasu-bharh munir 
val 
Ayam anyatra yoni 
(67) 


-rikshakam varam ar$aka-guna-kshayakramat 11 


506 


gri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Vv 


FS i LL eec 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SHAD-VARGA 


Application of the rules : 

Idam linge cha sakale dvare stambhadike matam 1 

` Idam ayadikarn chardha-mandape Sishta-mandape || (68) 

Parivaralaye tunga-harmye anyasmin prakalpayet | 

Evam parikshya bahudha prasadarh parikalpayet || (69) 

Kamikdgama, ім, 28-30 : 

Manam labdhodayarm yat syat bhaktva matrayor vi$eshatah | 

Parihrityanguli-chchhedyam ауайуаћ parikalpayet 11 (28) 

Ashta-nandágnibhi$ chaiva vasu-nanda cha chatushtayair hi 1 

Gunatvara-vidhi-mürti-riksha-sapta-navam$akair hi || (29) 

Hrityam ауага vyayarn chaiva yonis tàras tu varakah | 

Атпбака chavašishtas tu kalpaniyas tu desikaih 11 (30) 

Ibid., xxxv, 21 (refers to six component parts of a building) : 
Adhishthanam cha padarn cha prastaram karnam eva cha | 
Sikhararh stüpikà chaiva $alangam iti kathyate || (21) 

These are called Shad-varga : cf. ху, v. 8 (under Purlinga), v. 15, 

(under Dravida), у. 10 (under Strilinga), and v. 11 (under Napurnsaka). 

(4) Laghu-šilpa-jyotih-sara (ed. Ѕіуагата, 1, 4-5): 

Ayo rà$i$ cha nakshatrarn vyayas tàrám$akas tathà | 

Graha-maitri ragi-maitri nadi-vedha-ganendavah 11 

Adhipatyarh vara-lagne tithy-utpattis tathaiva cha | 

Adhipatyam varga-vairam tathaiva yoni-vairakam 11 

Riksha-vairarh sthitir našo lakshanany-eka-virnSatih 1 

Kathitàni muni-éreshthaih Silpa-bi(vi)dbhir grihadishu 11 

(5) Manushyalaya-chandrika (Chap. ш, 33.) : 

The same formulas are described in various ways. See Six Canons 
of Indian Architecture, by У. K. В. Menon, referred to elsewhere 
in this article. 

These Shad-varga formulas are rules which are not easily grasped in 

the abstract form. They, however, need not be neglected if we are 

1 incapable of interpreting them correctly. While quoting a few extracts 
on this subject from a Tamil version of the Муеп (? Mayamata) Rev. 
J. F. Kearns, Missionary, Tanjore, lost his temper and priestly patience 
and has recorded the following : 

‘Strange as all this appears to us Europeans, natives regard these things 

as matters of great importance.’—(Jnd. Ant., Vol. v, р. 296, c. 1, last 4/6 


рага.). E 
I fear whether the learned missionary understood the importance of 

the matters correctly. We may, however, compare in the absence of the ó 
` Tamil text his translation (¿Bid., p. 295-296) : - ig 
1 
E 507 
1 

СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 4 b 


! 
SHAD-VARGA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


< Ascertain the length of the house, square it, multiply the sum by 8, 
and divide the product by 12, the remainder is the Adayam or profit (Aya). 
Again, take the square number and multiply it by 9, divide the prodnct 
by то, the remainder is the Selavu or loss (i.c., Vyaya). Again, take the 
square number and multiply it by 27, and divide the product by roo, 
the remainder is the age or durability of the house. Again, take the square 
number, multiply it by 8, and divide the product by 27, the remainder is 
the star (ie. Riksha). Again, multiply the square number by 9, and 
divide the product by 8, the remainder is the Yoni. Multiply the square 
number by 9, and divide the product by 7, the remainder is the day (i.e. 
Vara). Multiply the square number by 9, and divide the product by 4, 
the remainder is the caste. Multiply the square number by 4, and divide 
the product by 9, the remainder is the Améam. Multiply the square num- 
ber by 9, and divide the product by 30, the remainder is the Tithi.’ 

* If this falls within 15, it belongs to the crescent moon, but if above 
15 to the decrescent moon. Again, multiply the square number by 4, 
and divide the product by 12, the remainder is the constellation. Multi- 
ply the square number by 8, and divide the product by 5, the remainder 
gives the Sūtra. The following are the Yonis: Garuda (Punai!), 
Simha, Хоу, Pambu, Eli, Ani, Musl; of these (Punai ?) (cat), Eli (rat), 
and Ми (hare) are bad. The following are the Am$ams: Агат, 
Soram, Putthi, Satthi, Thanium, Rasium, Kalibam, Varuttham, Rokam, 
and Subam. The following are the Sütras: Balan, Kumaran, Rajan, 
Kilavan, Marnan.’ 

The following examples are given to illustrate the foregoing : 

‘Given the length of the house 11 cubits, and the width 5 cubits, to 
find the age,—that is to say, how many years such a house will stand. 
Ву the rule 11—5—55, and 55—27—1485, 1485—100—14, the remainder 
being 85,—which remainder indicated the number of years the house will 
stand.’ 

* Given the length of a house 15 cubits, and the width 7 cubits, to find 
the caste for whom it is suitable, 15—7— 105, 105—9— 945, and 945—4— 

i 236, remainder r. The remainder і indicates the first caste, 1.е. Brah- 


mans.’ 
Š * Given the length of the house 17 cubits, and the width 7, to ascertain 
Ç the caste for whom it is suitable, 17—7— 119, 119—9—1071, and 1071—4 


—267, remainder 3. The remainder 3 denotes the third or Vai$ya caste.’ 

‘The next example exhibits the entire series. Given the length of the 

59 house 9 cubits, width 3 cubits, to find the (Айауат) and Selavu, etc., etc. 
| Ву the rule 9—3—27, 27—8—216, and 216—12—18,—12—(Айауап) 
27--9--243, апа 243--10--24, remainder 3,—which is the Selavu or loss, 


3 508 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SHAD-VARGA 


| and so on according to the rule. Тһе Yoni is Garuda, the star Revati 
the part of the lunar month the third day, the day of the week Thursday, 
the constellation Pisces, and the caste Vaisya.’ š 
Mr. V. K. R. Menon, m.sc. (London), intended to give a more rational 
and scientific explanation of these formulas in a pamphlet < Six Canons of 
Indian Architecture) But his endeavour has more or less failed owing to 
too many assumptions. Тһе * Architectural Significance" can hardly 
be explained by a reference to Astrological importance : an unknown 
matter cannot be understood by referring to an equally unknown thing. 
‘Some at least of these formulae,’ says Mr. Menon, “һауе а very great 
architectural significance’ and he ‘hopes’ to show that “all of them can 
be explained in a simple manner with reference to Astrology. * When 
we realize,’ continues Mr. Menon, “that in the symbolic language of 
the Silpa-Sastras the newly-erected edifice represents not only a human 
being, but also a bridegroom, joined in holy wedlock to the plot of 
earth on which it is erected, we can sympathize with the strict injunctions 
to avoid the fifth (of life, death) at all costs, and to choose the second 
(youth) whenever possible. This picturesque identification of the structure 
with a human being must have given rise to the last five formulae of the 
Ауада Shad-varga’ (pp. 5-6). It is true, however, * that they (the applica- 
tion of these formulae) occasionally prove troublesome’ when planning 
small houses and villas ; but they do put a stop to the addition of dispro- 
portionately large verandahs to puny structure.’ But he gives up curious- 
ly this architectural ground when he says that the * satisfaction of conform- 
ing to the religion of one’s motherland, should amply recompensate for 
such minor restrictions’ (p. 7). He further imagines that these for- 
mulae have something to do with the orientation of buildings (which 
subject has been treated under Sanxu in the Manasara) and emphatically 
says that ‘this formula (on Yoni)—if my deductions are correct—is a 
purely architectural device compelling the sthapati (architect) to orient 
his structures properly.’ Не illustrates his doubtful assumption with 
an inaccurate reference when he says that ‘ All the temples, palaces, cities, 
villages and important roads of ancient India exactly faced the four 
primary points of the compass (М., S., E., and W.) He comments thus : 
* This is as it should be, for it places the Indian ideal in tune with the ideals 
of every other ancient nations.’ His reference to examples of other coun- 
tries are more accurate: ‘The Egyptian pyramids faced exactly north. 
The Theban obelisks faced the rising sun.’ The Palace of Sennacherib, 
the Tabernacle of the Jews, the temple of Solomon, the church at Bethle- 
hem, the Holy Sepulchre of Christ at Jerusalem : all these satisfy the first 
formula (on Yoni) of Ayadi Shad-varga? (р. 9). The Indian monuments 
face other than these four cardinal points also. 


5°9 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


SHODASA-PRATIMA 


SHODASA-PRATIMA—The sixteen images, a group of sixteen 
deities. s 
Gf. Purato'sya shodasanarh vara-ganikanam dvi-bhümikagrihani 4li- 
dvayena—- in front of the temple he erected two rows of double-storeyed 
houses for sixteen female attendants.’ 
(Chebrolu inscrip. of Jaya, v. 46, Ер. Ind., Vol. хі, 
pP- 40, 93-) (See under Raja-harmya.) 
SHODASAS(-S)RA—A type of building which has sixteen-angular 
shape, one storey and one cupola. 
(1) Brihat-samhità (LVI, 28, J. К. A. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 320, note 1 ; 
see under PRASADA). 
(2) Matsya-Purapa (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 29, 59; see under PRASADA). 
(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. CXXX, v. 25; see under PRASADA). 


S 


SAKALA-—A site plan, ап idol, a group: of images of four deities 
including І5уага. 

(1) А site plan (M., уп, 2, 51, 73 ; XT, 64 ; see PADA-VINYASA). 

(2) An image or idol (M., LXIV, 48). 

(9) Suprabhedagama (xxxiv, named Sakala-lakshana-vidhi, 1, 2) : 
Athatah sarnpravakshyami sakalanarh tu lakshanam | 
Sarvavayava-drisyatvat pratima tv-iti chochyate It 
lévarádi-chatur mürttih pathyate sakalarh tv-iti ıı 

SAKALIKARANA—The ceremony of making a joint offering of 
all things (with which a deity is worshipped), which generally consist 
of eight kinds of grains such as sesamum, barley, rice, etc., sandal 
paste, clarified butter, sugar and honey, etc. 
SATI-MANDAPA-—A kind of pavilion where perhaps certain cere- 
monies used to be performed in connexion with the obsolete practice 
of burning alive a devoted wife with her dead husband, the temple 
of the goddess Sati who was the wife of Siva and a daughter of 
Daksha. 

Arbhakanarh mukhaàlokarn mandapam sati-mandapam | 

. (M., XXXIV, 41.) 
SATYA-KANTA—A class of eight-storeyed buildings. 
` (М., XLVI, 43-45 ; see under PRASADA.) 


DIO 


D 


/ 
АМ ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОҒ 


SATRA(-TTRA) 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 
SATRA(-TTRA) (d. CHHATRA, Сннатві)--Ап alms-house, the 
modern dharma-éalà, а rest-house, a residence. 

(1) Alms-house (Dewal Pragasti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 20, Ep. Ind., 

Vol. 1, pp. 79, 83). : 

(2) Hall of charity (stone inscrip.. at Vaghli in Kandesh, no. C, lines 4, 
12, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1t, p. 226, 227). 
(3) See Sridhara’s Devapattana Prafasti (verse ro, Ep. Ind., Vol. m, 


(4) Rest-house (Nilgund inscrip. of Taila II, line 30, Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, 


р. 440). 
pp. 207, 208). 
(5) Chitrais satralyair yyasya prithivyarh prathitha-yasasah | 
Bubhukshu-bhikshu-sarhghata-prabhita-priti-hetubhih 11 
(Two pillar inscrip. at Amaravati,’no. A, of Keta, II, 
у. 40, Ep. Ind., Vol.Zvt, р. 152.) 


(6) A feeding establishment : 
Deva-bhogartharn cha deva-kulebhyah khanda-sphutitadi-nimittam 
gandha-dhüpa-pushpa-dipa-naivedady-upacharartharn tapovana- 
.1 


sattrottarasanga-dànady-artham cha . . 
(Cambay plates of Govinda IV, line 48, 
Ер. Ind. Vol. уп, рр. 40-45.) 


(7) Bilvapadrake — parikalpita-sattra-bhoktrinam = yatha-prapta-brah- 
manadi-jananarh triméatah pratyaham upabhogaya - ‘In order to 
feed daily thirty Brahmanas or other men who Һһарреп о arrive (and) 
who use the rest-house established at Bilvapadraka.’—(Baloda plates of 
Tivaradeva, lines 26-27, Ep. Ind., Vol. vu, pp. 105, 107.) 

(8) A charitable dining-hall of a temple : 
Sri-sarvva-lokasraya-jina-bhavana-khyata-satrarttham — for the 
purpose of the renowned dining-hall of the holy and famous Jain 
temple called Sarvaloka$raya-Jina-bhavana.'—(Kaluchumbarru Grant 
of Amma II, line бо, Ep. Ind., Vol. уп, pp. 188, 191, 179.) 


(9) Khanda-shputa-vava-krityopili-prapüjadi-sattra-siddhyartham | 
* For the cost of repairs of breaks and cracks, offerings, worship, 


- etc., and of an alm-house.’—(Maliyapundi Grant of Ammaraja 
II, line 54, Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, pp. 54, 56.) 

(ro) Draksharame рауапе punya-bhajà punya-kshetre Pithapuryyàrh 

cha yena 1 


Bhoktur prityà pratyaham bramhananam akalparttamk alpitarn 


sattra-yugmam 11 
‘At holy-Draksharama and at the sacred place of Pithapuri, this 
charitable one joyfully founded two sattras for Bramhanas, in 


511 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized ру S3 Foundation USA 


| SATTANGA `: AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


| order that they might daily enjoy their meals (there) till the 
end of the Kalpa.'—(Eastern Chalukya Grants, no. 39, a Grant of 
Vira-Choda, v. 33, H. S. I. I., Vol. 1, pp. 56, бі; see also quotation 
no. 16 below.) 
| (11) * The hiranya-garbha, brahmanda, and all the other great gifts 
prescribed in the Sastras had he made,—wells, ponds, tanks, with satras 
from road to road, had he established—and temples of the gods he had 
made.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. xu, Kunigal Talug, no. 37; 'Transl, p. 38, 
para. 3.) 
(12) ‘ Having allotted to the avasara-satra of the god $ri-hari-haradeva 
two shares of the village . . ." 
* Satra—oblation, charity, asylum ог alms-house, charitable dining 
hall; * avasara-satra? seems to mean an occasional satra. Dr. Fleet. 
But ‘rest-house’ as opposed to both resting and dining-hall would 
perhaps give better meaning. 
(Sanskrit and Old Canarese inscrip. no. vr, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. 1v, p. 329, c. r, line 3 f., and footnote.) 
(19) Sa prasadam achikarad divishadarh Kedara-devasya cha khya- 
tasyottara-manasasya khananarm sattrarh tatha chakshaye! 
* He caused to be built a temple of the inhabitants of heaven 
1 called . > . and of the god Kedara; he likewise had the famous 
ç Uttara-manasa (tank) dug, and (established) а hall of charity, š 
to last for ever2—(Gaya inscrip. of Yakshapala, v. 12, Ind. Ant. 
Vol. xvr, pp. 65, 66.) 
(14) <А grant of land for a satra for feeding twelve Brahmans in front 
of the matha on the bank of the Tungabhadra.'—(E. Carnat., Vol. vi, 
Koppa Taluq, no. 32; Transl, p. 81; Roman Text, p. 176-177.) 
(15) He halting at Marasinga's Behür, constructed there the Biruda- 
34 sarvvajiia-gatta and other tanks; and to provide a satra for food for the 
: students in the matha of the god Mallikarjuna there . . . made a 
grant of land.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уп, Shikarpur Taluq, по. 19; Transl., 
P- 43; Roman Text, p. 98.) 
(16) Draksharame pavane punya-bhaja punya-kshetre Pithapuryyam 
cha yena . . . kalpitarh sattra-yugam (cf. no. то above). 
* At the pure Draksharama and at Pithapuri, a place of sanctity, 
he established two sattras.’—(Chellur Grant of Vira-Choladeva, 
lines 97-98, Ind. Ant., Vol. xix, рр. 432, 436.) 
SATTANGA (same as SArANGA)—An arm-chair, sofa, sofa with 


arm to it.) 


(Mahavagga, v. 10, 2.) 
512 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


дд 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


SANDHI 
SATRA-MANDAPA—A type of pavilion, 


` Марі-пігватапе yena pürvatah satra-mandapam 1 
(Garuda-Puraga, Chap. хімі, v. 14.) 
SATRAVASA-MATHA—A monastery, a free rest-house. 
Chatushkone tapasvinàrn satràvasa-matharm bhavet | 
(M., xxxi, 89.) 
SADANA—A temple, a seat, a sacrificial hall, а house, 
a palace, the abode of the god of death (Yama). 
(1) A temple (Dabhoi inscrip. v. ш, Ep. Ind., Vol. r, p. 31). 
(2) Sura-sadana (Dewal Ргаќазіі of Lalla, v. 20, Ep. Ind., Vol. r, P. 79). 
(3) Sadanarh atula-nathasyoddhritath yena jirnnam | 
‘By whom the (old) temple of Atula-natha was repaired.’ 
(An Abu inscrip. of the reign of Bhimadeva II, v. 10, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, pp. 221, 222.) 
(4) Sarasvatarn kridà-ketanam etad atra vidadhe 1 
Sarasvatarh sadanam akshayam etad astu 1 


a mansion, 


(Sanskrit Grants and inscrip. no. 1, vv. 33, 34, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, pp. 103, 106.) 


SADAS—A seat probably raised for sadasya or councillors at a 
sacrifice. 
(Sat. Brà., x, 4, 2, 9.) 
SADASIVA—A class of four-storeyed buildings. 
(М., xxii, 25-33 ; see under PRASADA.) 
SADMAN—A temple, a seat, an altar, an abode, a dwelling, a 
house. 

Chakre nava-nivida-visale sadmani Sülapàneh— built a new solid large 
temple of Sila-pani.’ 

Sambhoh sadamani stambha-malam . . . vyatatana—‘ erected a row 
of pillars in the temple of Sambhu/—(An Abu inscrip. of the reign of 
Bhimadeva If, vv. 10, 12, Ind. Ant., Vol. xr, pp. 221, 222.) 

SANDHI—A joint, a connexion, a combination, a junction. 
Eka-Salanu-sandhi§ cha dvi-śālā chaika-sandhikam | 
Tri-Salà cha dvi-sandhih syach chatuh-sandhis chatur-mukham | 
Shat-sandhih sapta-sala cha bahu-sandhi(r) dasalayam 1 
(M., xxxv, 73-74.) 
513 j 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


the alms-house ofa temple. 


SANDHI-KARMAN AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF, 


SANDHI-KARMAN—The joinery, the framing or joining of wood 
for the internal and external finishings of houses ; thus the covering 
and lining of rough walls, the covering of rough timbers, the manu- 
facture of doors, shutters, sashes, stairs, and the like, are classed under 


the head of joinery. 


T: 


(See Gwilt, Encycl. of Arch., p. 1214.) 
2-225), named Sandhi-karman : 


42 US 


Manasara (Chap. хуп, 
Тһе definition : 
Harmyanam dàru-samyogam sandhi-karma (m)udiritam ! (2). 
Various kinds of joinery are described under the following names : 
Malla made with two pieces of wood, Brahma-raja with three or 
four pieces, Venu-parvan with five pieces, Püga-parvan with six 
pieces, Deva with seven pieces, Parvan with eight pieces, and Danda 
with more than eight pieces of wood and other materials (line 18 f.). 
Forms of the joinery are described under the titles Nandyavarta 
and Svastika (lines 59-60), etc. 5% details (lines 18-58, 61-225). 


SANDHI-BANDHA—A bond of union, à material that makes two 
bodies stick together, cement, mortar. 

Sarnsthapyapi na tasya tushtir abhavad, yavad Bhavani 

mala-sandhi-bandha-ghatitam ghanta-ninadojjvalam \ 

‘Not satisfied with the erection (of this image only, the pious man) 
caused to be built a shrine of Bhavani, which was joined with a very 
adhesive and bright cement, resplendent with the sounds of pells., 

(Benares inscrip. of Pantha, v. 5, Eb. Ind., Vol. 1x, pP: 61-62.) 


-griharn suglishta- 


SAPTA-TALA (see Tara)— The seventh storey, seven-storeyed 


buildings. 


Etat sapta-talam proktam rajiiam avasa-jogyaklam | 


(Kamikagama, XXXV, 84.) 
parate chapter in the 


The seven-storeyed buildings are described in a se 


Manasara. 
Description of the seventh storey (M., XXV. 2-23, 32-39), the eight 
classes (ibid., 3-31), 5 under PRASADA. 


SAPTA-TALA (е TALA-MANA)—A system of measurement in 
accordance with which the whole body is seven times the face 


inclusive of head. 
sect. 1v, ed. Jivananda 


(Sukraniti, Chap. TY» 
see details under 'TALA.) 


Vidyasagara, р. 3595 
514 


—— 


.HINDU ARCHITECTURE SABHA 


5АРТА-ВНОМІ-(КА) (see SAPTA-TALA)—The seventh storey, seven- 
storeyed buildings. 
Ràja-kanyam ... sapta-bhürhika-prasada-pránta-gatàm | 
(Pafichatantra, ed. Bombay, 1, p. 38.) 
SAPTA-SALA—A seven-fold wall. 
Madhya-sütrarn tu vàme tu harmya-dvàrarn prakalpayet 1 
Tad-bahih parito-de$e sapta-salarn prakalpayet | 
Naravasartha-rathya cha prakara-dvaya-manditam | 
(M., xxxi, 81-83.) 
SABHA—A type of building, an edifice, a public hall, an assembly 
room, a council chamber, a society room in a private dwelling housc. 
(A.-V., xix, 55,6; Таш. Sam., ш, 4, 8, 6 , Тай, Вга 1, I, 10, 9 ; 
Chhand-Upanishad, уш, 14). Тһе special features in Vedic times 
were their pillars and fire-altars. "There must have been suitable 
structural arrangements for the transaction of judicial, commercial 
and political business, and for the reception of “ courtly ^ well-born 
wealthy persons and kings, and for the performance of gambling, 
merriment, social intercourse, debates and contests (Vedic India, 
Vol. п, p. 426-427). ; 
(1) A class of buildings : 
Prasada-mandapam chaiva sabhā-śālā-prapārh tathà 1 
(А) гайрат iti chaitani harmyam uktarh puratanaih | 
(M., ш, 7-8.) 
Sikhare chavrite’pare sabhà-mandapa-gopure 1 
(М., хуш, 200.) 
А public hall: 
Mandapam sabhàm vapi grama-yogyam yatha-diéi | 
Nagare cha yathakàram dvi-gunatyarthakayatam | 
à (M., xxxiv, 562—563.) 
Bhüdhare chasure vapi sabha-sthanarh prakalpayet | 
(M., уш, 34.) 
(2) A council chamber : 
Tato vichintya manasa loka-nathah Prajapatih 1 
Chodayamasa tvam krishnah sabha vai kriyatàm iti 11 - 
Yadi tvam kartukamo’si priyam éilpa-vatam vara | 
Dharmma-rajasya daiteya yadrisim iha manyase 1! 
Yam kritàrn nanukurvanti manavah prekshyadhisthitah 1 
Manushya-loke sakale tadrisirn kuru vai sabham И 


515 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SABHA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF . 


Yatra divyan abhiprayan pa$yema hi kritàms tvayà | 
Asuran mànushámé chaiva sabharh tarh kuru vai Maya M - 
Pratigrihya tu tad vakyam samprahrishto Mayas tada | 
| Vimana-pratimam chakre Pandavasya Subham sabham 1! 
| Тһе penultimate verse is explained by the commentator Nilakantha : 
Asuran manushin ity upalakshanam deva-garhdharvadinam apy 
abhiprayan lepa-chitre lekhya-chitre cha chaturdaga-bhuvanath- 
tarastha-tat-taj-jatiya-svabhavika-nand-vidha-lild-pradarsanena 
manovrittih pasyema yad-darsanena brahmarhdarhtara-varti- 
sarvarh vastu-játarn drishta-prayam bhavatity arthah 1 
(Mahabharata, Sabha-parvan, Chap. 1, vv. 9-13.) 

See also the description of the Indra-sabha (ibid., Chap. Vm), Yama- 
барһа (Chap. уш), Varuna-sabha (Chap. 1x), Kubera-sabhà (Chap. x), 
and Brahma-sabha (Chap. xi). 

Sabhà . . . divyà hema-mayair uchchaih prasadair upaśobhitā 1 
(Ibid., п, то, 3.) 
(3) Chatur-bhàga-dvi-bhagena prishthavasa-sabham nayet 1! 
Agra küta-dvayor madhye salah prishtha-sabha-yatha u 
Prishthavasa-sabha tad-vad anyat sarvam adhas-tale 11 
(Kamikagama, XXXV, 73» 74 76.) 
Definition : 
Müla-küta -samayukta vàna-küta -samanvità 11 
Kachchha (=keSa)-griha-samakukta sabheti parikirtita 11 
(Ibid., XXXV, 4, 95.) 
-  Brahma-sthane sabhadini kalpayed vidhina budhah I1 
(Ibid., xxvm, 15.) 

(4) ° Martanda-varma, the king of Kerala, desirous of extensive pros- 
perity, fame and long life, built the sabhà of Sambhu (Siva) a 
Suchindram.’ 

Sthane mani-Suchindre samakuruta sabham Kerala-kshma-patindrah 1— 
(Inscrip. in the Pagodas of Tirukurungudi, in Tinnevelly, and of Suchindram 
in South Travancore, Ind. Ant., Vol. 1, р. 361, с. 2; V. 1, р. 362, рага 1.) 

(5) ‘ The word (Sabha) denotes also (i.e. other than a regular assembly 
or meeting) а ‘hall’ or a‘ house.’ Dr. Bhandarkar.—(Jnd. Ant., Vol. xit, 
р. 145 €. 2, line 9 £) 

(6) &ri-rarhga-kafichana-sabhá yatha-puram abhasayat | 

«The regilded (central shrine of the temple at) Srirangam and the 
golden hall (at Chidambaram). —(Ariyur Plates of Virupaksha, lines 21-22, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хххуш, pp. 14, !2 3 рага 4, line 6). 

516 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


‘ f 


. HINDU ARCHITECTURE SARVATO-BHADRA 


SABHA-MALIKA—A class of buildings. 
2 , (Kamikagama, XLV ; see under MALIKA.) 
SAMA (see SAMUDGA) A type of rectangular building. 

(Agni-Purana, Chap. xiv, vv. 16-17; see under PRASADA.) 
SAMA-BHANGA (see BHANGA)—A pose, in this type the right and 
left of the figure are disposed symmetrically, the figure seated or 
standing being poised firmly on both legs without inclining to right 
or left. 


SAMITI—Assembly houses; see SABHA in which senses it is used in 
Atharoa-veda (xv, 9, 2, 3). 
SAMUDGAC-—A type of round buildings. 

Cf. Vrittah Samudga-nàmà 1 


(1) Brihat-samhità (Chap. тм, 23, 7. В. А. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 319; 
see under PRAsADA). 


(2) Matsya-Purána. (Chap. ccrxrx, vv. 38, 53; see under PRAsApA). 

(3) Bhavishya-Purdna (Chap. cxxx, vv. 30, 24; see under PRASADA). 
SAMUDRA—A type of building. 

(1) Майзуа-Риғата (Chap. ccrxmx, vv. 38, 53; see under PRASADA). 

(2) Bhavishya-Purána (Chap. сххх, v. 24; see under PRASADA). 
SARORUHA—A type of building, a moulding. 

A moulding of the pedestal (M., ххш, 76, сіс.). 


See PADMA and compare the lists of mouldings under UPAPITHA 
and ADHISHTHANA. 


A class of six-storeyed buildings (М., xxiv, 47 ; see under PRASADA). 
SARVA-KALYANA-—A class of buildings. 1 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 42-49; see under MALIKA.) 
SARVA-KAMIKA (see UrsEpHA)—Also called ‘ dhanada’, a height 
which is 12 of the breadth. 
(See M., xxxv, 22-26, and cf. Kamikagama, 
L, 24-28, under Арвнота.) 
SARVATO-BHADRA—A type of building, pavilion, hall, entab- 
lature, window, phallus ; a joinery, a four-fold image one on each 
side of a four-faced column ; a village, a town, having a surrounding 
road and entrances on four sides; a house furnished with uninter- 
rupted and surrounding terraces on every side. 


517 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA a 


1 
ха 


„в E a 


SARVATO-BHADRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF . 


(1) Apratishiddhalindam samantato vastu sarvato-bhadram 1 
Nripa-vibudha-samühànam karyath dvarais chaturbhir арі 11 
* An edifice with uninterrupted terraces on every side is termed 
Sarvato-bhadra (i.e., goodly on every side) ; such a one is fit for kings 
and gods, and ought to have four entrances. 
(Brihat-samhita, тап, 31, 7. R. A. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 285.) 
tSarvato-bhadra is the name of a kind of building which has four 
8 trances, many spires or turrets (Sikhara), many beautiful dormer 
windows and five storeys, and is 26 cubits broad.’ 
(Ibid., LVI, 27, J. R. A. S., М. S., Vol. vr, p. 320.) 


(2) Matsya-Purana (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 29» 34, 35» 48, 533 3 under 
PRASADA). i 

(3) Bhavishya-Purana (Chap. оххх, v. 34: 5 under PRASADA). 

A. type of quadrangular building : 

(4) Agni-Purana (Chap. СІУ, vv. 14-15; 5% under PRASADA). 

(5) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVI, vv. 24-25; see under PRASADA). 

(6) Sarvato-bhadram ashtasyam—the Sarvato-bhadra house (gala) has 
eight faces.—(Kamikagama, xxxv, 88.) 

An entablature (ibid., LIV, 8). 

(7) A class of villages (M., 1x, 2, 126 Ё). 

A type of prastara or entablature (M., хуп, 185). 

A kind of joinery (M., XVI, 53): 

А class of mandapa ог pavilions (M., xxxiv, 555)- 
A type of Sala or mansion (M., xxxv, 4). 

A class of windows (М., ххх, 583)- 

A kind of phallus (M., ru, 114). : 

(8) Sarvato-bhadra-devalaya—' according to Varahamihira (Brihat- + 
samhild, LVI, 27) it means а temple with four doors and many spires, 1.6. 
such a one which looks equally pleasing from all sides.—Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, 
p. 382, note 50.) 

е (9) Sarvato-bhadra-chatur-mukha ratna-traya-rüpa-tri-bhuvana-tilaka- 
Jina-chaityalaya vanu | 
‘The Tribhuvana Jina chaityalaya temple .. · (which is) auspicious 
on every side, has four faces (and) is the embodiment of the three jewels 
y (of the Jainas).’—(Karkala inscrip. of Bhairava II, line 17, Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, 
pp: 132; 195.) : r 
(10) Nayana-mano-harah Sarvvato-bhadrah ! 
* Apparently the name of a hall in the first storey of the cave temple. 


(The Pallava inscrip. of the seven Pagodas, no. 13; Ep. Ind., Vol. X, P- 7.) 
518 


СС-0. б i Universi id | 
a Surukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Ж 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE SAMCHARA 


(11) Sarvato-bhadra-pratima— literally an image lovely on all sides, 
is apparently a technical term for a “four-fold image," one being carved 
on each side of a four-faced column.’—(Jaina Inscrip. from Mathura, no. 11, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, p. 382, footnotes 50, 51.) 

SAHAYA-DURGA—A kind of fort. 


(See details under Ровса.) 

SAHASRA-LINGA—A thousand-phalli, a group of phalli of Siva. 

‘Set up on the colonnade to the west a row of lingas forming the 

thousand lingas.’— (Ер. Carnat., Vol. rv, Chamrajnagar Taluq, no. 86 ; Transl., 
p. rr, line 9; Roman Text, p. 18, line 14.) 


SAMKIRNA—A type of building, houses built with a certain number 
of materials, a joinery. 
Buildings made of more than two materials (M., хуш, 139, etc.. see 
under ViMANA and PnasapA). 
A class of buildings (Kamikdgama, хіу, 62; see under MALIKA). 
A kind of joinery (M., хуп, 140, 146). 
SAMGAVINI—A cattle-shed, an open shed for milking cows. 


SAMGRAHA—A combination of mouldings at the bottom of а 
column. 
Ekàáméam padukarh kuryat paficha-bhagarh tu samgraham | 
(M., xv, 179, etc.) 
For its synonyms see M., xvi, 51-52. 
SAMGRAHANA—A fortress to defend a group of ten villages. 
Da$a-gràmi-samgrahena sarhgrahanam sthapayet | 
(Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, Chap. ххп, р. 46.) 
SAMGHARAMA (see VriàRA)—Originally the assembly place of 
the Sangha or Buddhist monks, later in the time of the Nalanda 
University, a college comprising lecture halls, students’ hostel and 
chapel, while the g¿hara or original monastery implied the residential 
quarters of the monks or professors, residences of monks or hermits, 
the monastery. 

(Vide Taxila plate of Patika, line 3, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 55, 56. 
SAMCHARA—An entrance, a door, a gate, an outlet, a military 
post, a tower or circuit on the top of the surrounding wall of a village 
or town. 

(M., x, 109, etc.) 


519 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
- - — „сс ET 


(Алса млр та. 


SAMCHITA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SAMCHITA—A class of buildings in which the breadth is the 
unit of measurement, the temples in which the idol is in the sitting 


posture. 
(М., хіх, 7-11; XXX, 103-174; 5 under APASAMCHITA.) 
Pratyekarh tri-vidharh proktam samchitam сһару-азатасһ бата 1 


Upa-samchitam ity-cevam 2... | 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 6-7.) 


SAMPURNA—A class of buildings. ~ 


(Катікавата, XLV, 29-30; 3 under МАШКА.) 


SAMVIDDHA—A fortified city. 


(M., X, 41; 5% under NAGARA.) 


nagaras, khetas, kharvatas, madarhbas, 
s—the cities of the elephants 
Shikarpur Taluq, no. 118 ; 


Cf. Visiting ‘the gramas, 
pattanas, dronamukhas and sarnbahana: 
at the cardinal points.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vu, 
Transl., p. 86, last para., line 14.) 

SAMSAD—An assembly hall (built 

Gf. Ratha-rathi-yuta hy азап kritrima hy akritopamah | 

Sarveshàm mohanarthaya tatha cha samsadah kritah 1! 
(Skanda-Purana, Mahesvara-khanda-prathma, Chap. XXIV; V. 19.) 
laying-out, plans of buildings 


within a wedding pavilion). 


SAMSTHANA-—Ihe arrangement, 
and other objects. 
(1) Tri-konarh vrittam ardhendum ashta 
Chatush-konam tu kartavyam sarnsthanarn mandapasya tu Т 
Тһе plan ofa mandapa should be made triangular, quadrangular, 


octagonal, sixteen-angular, half moon-shaped, and circular. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLXX, VV. I 5-16.) 


dhendurh chatush-konam dvir-ashtakaml 
asya tu ll 


-konarh dvir-ashtakam | 


(2) Tri-konam padmam ard 
Yatra tatra vidhatavyam sarnsthanarh mandap 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, VV. 42-92.) 


SARA—A class of buildings. 
(Kamikagama, XLV» бо; see under MALIKA.) 


artment, a house. 


a-mekhalam 1 
sala-vanam va | 
(Ramayana, 1, 5-12.) 


SALA(-LA)—A wall, a rampart, an ap 
(1) Udyanamra-vanopetam mahatu sal 
Commentary : salah prakarah (enclosure wall), 


520 


. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE SIDDHARTHA 


(2) Antare Sesha-bhagarhs tu hitva madhye tu salakam 11 
Sàla-gopurayos tuügastv-adhika$ chapi mülatah 11 
Agrato’lindakopetam attalarn salakantare 11 

, (Kamikagama, XXXV, 112A, 124, 126., 

(3) Salantarh vedikordhve tu yuddhartharn kalpayet sudhih 1 

(M., тх, 364. 

See also M., xxxi, 36, 37 (pañcha-sala), 39 (Jāti-sālā), 40, 41, 44, 48, 
52, etc. 

Sala(-a)-Janma-samarn chaiva dhàmna-janma-samam tu và 1 
Salangadhikarn hinam chech chorair artharh vinaśyate | 
(M., LXIX, 42, 45.) 

(4) Kanakojvala-sala-ra$mi-jalaih parikhāmbhu . . . prati-bhimbitaih 1 

‘Through the mass of the rays which issue from its golden walls and 
which are reflected in the water of its (Vijayanagara's) moat.'—(Vijaya- 
парага inscrip. of Devaraja II, lines 7-8, Н. S. I. I, Vol. 1, no. 153, pp. 162, 
164.) š 

(5) Antararh sadma-salam— the inner wall of the shrine.’ —(Ranganatha 
inscrip. of Sundara-pandya, v. 22, Ep. Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 13, 16.) 

(6) Sphatika-sála-nibhamm babandha— like а wall of crystal.'—(Two 
inscrip. of Tammusiddhi, no. A, Tiruvalangadu inscrip., v. 16, Ef. Ind. 
Vol. vu, pp. 124, 125.) 

(7) Durllamgha-dushkara-vibheda-visala-sala-durggadha-dustara-brihat- 

parikha-parita | 

“(Тһе city of Кайсы) whose large rampart was insurmountable and 
hard to be breached (and) which was surrounded by a great moat, 
unfathomable and hard to be crossed.’—(Gadval Plates of Vikramaditya І, 
v. 6, line 21, Ep. Ind., Vol. x, pp. 103, 105.) 

(7) Sriman esho’rkka-kirttir nnripa iva vilasat sala-sopanakadyaih 1 

‘That honourable one like a king of sun-like glory (erected) splendid 
walls and stairs.'—(Ef. Carnat., Vol. п, по. 105 ; Roman Text, p. 97, line 14; 
Transl., p. 164, para. 6.) | 

SIDDHA—A type of storeyed building, a class of divine beings. 

A class of two-storeyed buildings (M., xx, 94, 16-18; see under 
PRASADA). 

Semi-divine beings, their images are described (M., rv, 88 f.). 

‘SIDDHARTHA—A type of building furnished with two halls. 
Siddhartham apara-yamye yama-süryarn paschimottare Sale 1 
* A house with only a western and southern hall is termed Siddhartha.’ 
(Brihat-samhita, тш, 39, J. В. A. S., N. S., Vol. vr, p. 286." 
521 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


” ` 
» LT 


SINDHUKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SINDHUKA—A class of buildings. 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 23-28 ; see under MALIKA.) 
SI(SI)LA-VATA-—A stone mason. 

< Südradhára-Asalena barhdhita tatha silàvata-jáhadena ghatità | 

‘The step-well was constructed by the architect Asala and (the 
stones were) worked and shaped by the mason Jahada.—(Manglan stone 
inscrip., lines 13-14, Ind. Ant., Vol. хи, p. 88.) 

SIMHA—A type of pavilion, a class of oval buildings, a riding animal 
(lion) of gods. 

A mandapa or pavilion with sixteen pillars · (Matsya-Purapa, Chap. 
CCLXX, V. 13 ; see under MANDAPA). 

Simha is the name of a kind of one-storeyed building which is 
dudecagonal in plan, covered by lions (7  sirnhakranta) and eight 
cubits wide : 

(1) Brihat-samhita (Chap. XLV, 28, J. R. A. S., N. S., Vol. vr, р. 329). 

(2) See quotation of the commentary from Kàšyapa, which is more 
explicit. 

Simhah simhaih samakrantah konair dva-dagabhir ушар | 
Vishkambhad ashta-hastah уай ека tasya cha bhümikà 11 
(3) Matsya-Purána (Chap. CCLXIX, vv. 29, 46, 40, 49, 53; see under 
PRASADA). 

(4) Bhavishya-Purápa (Chap. CXXX, v. 35; 5% under PRASADA). 

* A kind of oval building : 

(5) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVII, v. 29-30 ; 3 under PRASADA). 

(6) The lion, a riding animal of gods. - 

Devanam vahanam simham (M., хш, 1), the sculptural description of 
his image (ibid., 2-46). 

SIMHASANA (cf. Asana)—A throne or seat, marked with a lion. 

(1) Simha-mudrita-manoharasanam | 

Kesari-lafichhitam tv-atha manoharasanam | 
š (М., XLV, 204, 206.) 
Manasara (Chap. XLV, 1-112, named Simhasana): 

The lion seat or throne is made for the use of deities and kings 
(line 1). These thrones are first divided into four classes (lines 4-8) — 
the Prathama (first) throne is stated to be fit for the first corona- 
tion, the Mangala throne for the Mangala-coronation, the Vira 
throne for the Vira-coronation, and the Vijaya throne for the 

It should be noted that these four thrones are 


Vijaya-coronation. 
n of the same king.—(M., XLIX, 


used for the four stages of coronatio 


166, etc.) 
522 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


£ 


.HINDU ARCHITECTURE SIMHÁSANA 


Concerning deities, the Nityarchana throne is used for daily worship, 
ViSesha-throne on some special occasions; the Nityotsava-throne, and 
the Viseshotsava-throne are used for ordinary and special festivals respec- 
tively (lines 9-11). 

But the thrones for both deities and kings, for all purposes, are divided 
into ten kinds (se below). An account of the general plan as well as of 
the measurement of the various parts of them is given in detail (lines 17- 
213). They are technically called—Padmasana, Padma-keSara, Padma- 
bhadra, Sri-bhadra, Śrī-viśāla, Sri-mukha, Bhadrasana, Padma-bandha, 
and Pada-bandha (lines 12-16). 

Of the ten kinds, the first, Райтаѕапа, is used as the throne for 
Siva or Vishnu (121) ; the Padma-bhadra for the king Adhiraja (i.e., 
Chakravartin or emperor) (line 143) ; the Sri-bhadra is fit for the kings 
Adhiraja and Narendra for all purposes (line 153) ; the Sri-visala is fit for 
the kings Parshnika and Narendra (171) ; the Sri-bandha is for the kings 
Parshnika and Patta-dhara (line 174); the $ri-mukha for the king 
Mandaleía (line 177); the Bhadrasana for the king Patta-bhaj (line 
179); the Padma-bandha for the king Ргаһагака (line 182) ; and the 
Pada-bandha throne is fit for the king Astra-graha (line roo). 

Thelion-legs are, however, not attached to the throne of Astra-graha 
(line 191). Thrones of all other petty kings of the Vaisya and the Südra 
castes are stated to be furnished with pedestals instead, and are made four- 
cornered square (lines 192-193). But thrones of all other kings are 
marked with lions and furnished with six legs (line 196). These thrones 
are stated to be made facing the east (pranmukha) (line 197). 

Of the thrones of deities, the Nirikshana(eyes, windows) is made on 
the four sides (line 198). 

Various kinds of thrones are thus described but the most beautiful one 
according to one’s choice should be used : 

Evarh cha vividharh proktath уап manoramya(m) manayet | (200) 

(2) ‘ This is the mighty lion-throne (Sirhhasana) on which sat the 
glorious powerful king, in whose arm is strength, the Lord Emperor 
Kalinga NisSanka KankeSwara.’ 

* Sithhasanaya—on the lion 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 (pillars). Lion throne, 
royal throne, throne . . . In this case there was actually a large lion, 
whose fine proportions remind one of the Assyrian bulls and which formed 


‘the support, or one of the supports of the royal seat. A freize of lions 


runs round the building.’ Rhys Davids. v 
(Inscrip. at the Audience Hall of Parakrama 


Bahu, Pulastipur, Ceylon, Ind. Ant., Vol. п, 
р. 247, с. 2, para. 4; р. 249; C- 2.) 


523 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


B 


^N 


SUKA(KHA)-NÀSIKA АМ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF. 


(3) * The other shrine contains a fine large figure of Buddha, seated 
on a simhasana or throne with recumbent lions at the base, and elephants 
and other carved accessories at the sides.’ —(Monumental Antiquities, 
N.-W. Provinces and Oudh, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. п, Agra 
Division, p. 95, no. 23, line 6.) 

- (4) Seats are referred to under various names in Buddhist literature : 
Asandi (large couches, Chullavagga, VI, 14, 13 Mahdvagga, V. 10, 3)? 
couches covered with canopy (Chullavagga, VI, 14-1 5 Mahavagga, V. 10-3) ; 
Asandaka (rectangular chairs), sattahgo (arm-chair, sofa) ; bhaddapitham 
(state-chair), pithika (cushioned chair) same on а pedestal (etaka- 
padaka-pitham), same with many legs (Amalaka-vantika-pitham), cane- 
bottomed chair (kochhom), leaning board (phalakam). 

SUKA(-KHA)-NASIKA—A small room in front of the idol in a 
temple. 

(1) * The great minister Kampanna for the repair of the roof stones in 
the Sukanasike (a small room in front of the idol) of the god Chenna- 


| kegava set up four pillars with capitals and repaired them.’—(Ep. Carnat., 
Vol. v, Part I, Belur Taluq, no. 52; Transl., p. 55, note 1; Roman Text, 


р. 126.) 
| (2) * It (Mallesvara temple at Hulikal) faces north and consists 
% of a garbha-griha, an open sukhanási, а navaranga, and a porch. The 


garbha-griha, sukhanási, and porch аге all of the same dimensions, being 
about 42 feet square, while the navaranga measures 16 feet by 14 feet.’ 
` «The Sukhanasi doorway has on its lintel a figure @ o oc 
The garbha-griha and sukhanasi have likewise ceilings of the same kind, 
but that of the porch is the largest and the best of all.’ 
(Mysore Arch. Report, 1915-16, p. 4, para. IO ; see also 
р. 5 para. 12 5 Р. 7, para. 13 ; р. 15, para. I9.) 
(3) “Тһе outer walls of the garbha-griha and sukhanási have besides 
pilasters and turrets . + - »_(Ibid., p. 21, para. 27). 
SUKSHETRA—An edifice, a type of building. 
Prak-$alaya viyuktara Sukshetram vriddhidam vastu | 
An edifice ' without an eastern hall is named Sukshetra and brings 
prosperity. —(Brikat sarki in, 37 ; see J. В. А. S., М. S., Vol. у, p. 286.) 


SUKHANGA—A type of pavilion, a rest-house. 
A kind of pavilion used as a rest-house : 
Sukhangakhyam iti proktam satra-yogyar tu mandapam | 
(M., xxxiv, 272 5 56 under MANDAPA.) 


524 


CC-0. G i Uni i i 
| urukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


, HINDU ARCHITECTURE SUBHÜSHANA 


SUKHALAYAC-—A pleasure-house, a type of storeyed buildings. 
А: class of three-storeyed buildings (M., xxr, 22-30; see under 
PRASADA). 
SUGRIVA—An object having a beautiful neck, a type of pavilion. 
A pavilion with twenty-four pillars—(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. ccrxx, 
V. 19; see under MANDAPA). 


SUCHIYA—Cross-bar in a Buddhist rail. 
(Mahdsudassana-sutla, 1, 5, 9 ; compare 
Chullavagga, V1, 3, 9.) 
SUDHA —Stucco, one of the building materials, also used for plaster, 
mortar, whitewash. 
(т) See Ratnapura inscrip., А.р., 1114 of Jajalladeva, v. 16, Ep. Ind., 


Vol. r, pp. 35-38. 
(2) See Dewal Pra$asti of Lalla the Chhinda, v. 28, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, 


pp. 80, 84. 
(3) See Münasára under ÃBHASA. 
SUNDARA—A beautiful object, a type of storeyed buildings. 


A class of six-storeyed buildings. (M., xxiv, 15; see under PRASADA.' 


SUPRATI(-I)JKANTA—A type of building а kind of site- 
plan. 
А kind of ргакага or enclosure buildings—(M., XXXI, 24; see PARIVARA 
and PRAKARA.) 
A class of nine-storeyed buildingsC-(M., xxvi 23-36; see under 
PRASADA). қ 
А site plan іп which the whole area is divided into 484 equal 
squares.—(M., vit, 30-31; see under PADA-VINYASA.) 


SUBHADRA—A type of pavilion, buildings furnished with a beauti- 
ful front porch. : 
A pavilion with twelve pillars—(Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLXX, v. 14 ; see 
under MANDAPA.) 
SUBHUSHANA—A well decorated house for the use of a married 
couple, a type of pavilion where a ceremony is performed on a 
wife’s perceiving the first signs of conception. 
Subhishanakhyarh vipranarh yogyarh purhsavanarthakam | 
(M., XXXIV, 354 ; see under MANDAPA.) 


525 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


"VN 


SUMANGALI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SUMANGALI—A kind of ornament. 
An ornament for the images of female deities.—(M., LIV, 49, 95; see 
under BHÜSHANA.) ; 


E. SURATA—A type of pavilion. 
Зы А pavilion with sixty-pillars.—(Matsya-Purana, 
-under МАМРАРА.) 
SUSLISHTA—A type of pavilion. 
A pavilion with thirty-six pillars.—(Matsya-Purana, Chap. COLXX, V. II j 
see under MANDAPA.) 
SUSHIRA—A hole, a hollow, an aperture, а cavity. 
(1) Prag-grivah-paficha-bhagena nishkasa($a)s tasya chochyate | 


Karayet sushirarn tad-vat prakarasya tri-bhagatah 11 А 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ccLxix, V. 24.) 


Chap. COLXX, V. 7; see 


(а) Sushirarn bhaga-vistirnarn bhittayed bhag-vistarat 1 
(Agni-Purána, Chap. civ, v. 9.) 
(3) Dvara-vat pitha-madhye tu $esharn sushirakarh bhavet | 
(Garuda-Purana, Chap. XLVI, v. 16.) 


(4) See M., тух, 83, LXVII, 15, etc. 


 SUSAMHITA-A site plan in which 


into 400 equal squares. 
Ë (M., уп, 28-29, also xxxi, 18, etc.; 


SÜ (-SU)-(TJALAY A—An enclosure, a cloister, a covered arcade 
forming part of a monastic or collegiate establishment, an enclosed 
place of religious retirement, a Jain monastery. 
Gf. Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, nos. 59, 75, 76, 78, 85; Introduction, p. 37, last 
para., line 3 ; Roman text, p. 57, line 27, рр. 62, 70; Transl., рр. 147, 


I51, 150: Р 
0) БЕС RTE Suttãle karaviyale (no. 75, Roman text, p. бо). 
(2) Sri-Ganga-Raja Suttalayavarh madisidam (no. 76, Roman text, 
. 62). 
р с) Suttalayada bhittiya mádisi— had the wall round the cloisters 
and the twenty-four Tirthankaras made’ (no. 78, line 1). 
(4) Gommata devara Suttalayadolu (no. 86, line 1). 
: (5) Gangavadiya gommata-devargge suttalayamam eyde madisi- 
cs 2 ` dam—- for Gommatadeva of Gangavadi he had the cloisters around 
te 2 made.’—(No. go ; Roman text, p. 72, line 9 from bottom upwards ; Transl., 

| p. 158, para. 5 ; see also no. 59 ; Roman text, p. 57» line 27-) : 


526 š 


the whole area is divided 


see under PADA-VINYASA.) 


ERE фр ос =< 


SOUTH INDIAN: 


SIMPLE CENTRAL INDIAN 


SIKHARA 


SRI BATSA 


| 
„= == 
D 

SRI VATSA 


: HINDU ARCHITECTURE SETU 


(6) * Inside (the bastis or Jaina temples) is а court probably square 
and surrounded by cloisters (see photo no. 149 of Jaina basti at Sravana 
Belgola, Fergusson p. 270), at the back of which rises the vimana over the 
cell, which contains the principal image of the Tirthankara.’—(Fergusson, 
Ind. and East. Arch., p. 269, last para., photo no. 149, p. 270.) 

SUTRA-GRAHIN (see under Sruapatt)—The draftsman, an 
architect. 


SÜTRA-DHARA (see under 5тнарАТІ)--А carpenter, an archi- 
tect. 


` SUTRA-DHARIN (se under SrHAPATI)— The thread-holder, the 


manager, an architect. 
SUTRA-PATTI (see PATTA and PATTIKA)—A part of a door. 


Dvara-tare chatush-paficha-shat-saptashta vibhajite 11 
Ekarnšarn sütra-pattih syat samarh уа bahalarn bhavet 11 
(Vastu-vidyà, ed. Ganapati Sastri, xv, 1, 2.) 
SORYA-VISALAKA-—A site plan of 400 square plots. 
(M., vit, 26-27, see PADA-VINYASA.) 
SETU—A bridge in general, a barrier, a boundary, a limit, a land- 
mark, a bridge of earth, a cause-way, narrow pass or mountain-road, 
a mound, a bank, a dam. 

(1) Karna-kilàya-sambandho'nugriham setuh— the fastening of the 
roof of a house to the transverse beam by means of iron bolts is called 
setu.’—(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, Chap. Lxv, p. 166, para. r.) 

(2) Matha vedadinarh dvija-pura-viharah prati-disam virajante satryany 

api cha paritas setu-nivabhah 11 


(Two BhuvaneSvara inscrip. по. A, of Svapne$vara, v. 30, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, p. 202.) 


(3) Sa khalu Bhagirathi-patha-pravarttamana-nana-vidha-nauvata- 
sampàdita-setu-vandha-nihita-aila-Sikhara-$reni-vibhramat | 
‘From the illustrious camp of victory at Sri-Mudgagiri, where the 
bridge, which is produced by the wall of boats of various kinds pro- 
ceeding on the path of the Bhagirathi, surpasses the beauty of a chain 
of mountain tops." 
Dr. Hultzsch seems to think that *the broad line of boats floating on 
the river resembled the famous bridge of Rama.’ 
Dr. Rajendralal Mitra, however, concludes from this passage, that 
‘ Narayanapala had made a bridge of boats across the Ganges." 
(Bhagalpur Plates of Narayanapala, lines 24-25, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xv, рр. 306, 308-9, and note 29.) 


527 


SENA-MUKHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SENA-MUKHA—A division of an army, а mound in front of the 
gate of a city, a prosperous royal city (see under NAGARA). - 
(х) Nana-janais cha sampürnam bhüpa-harmyena samyutam 1 
Bahu-raksha-samopetam etat senà-mukharm bhavet 1 
i (М., х, 70-71.) 
(2) Raja-ve$mà-samayuktam sarva-jati-samanvitam | 
Guhya-pradeSa-sarhyuktarh sena-mukham ihochyate 11 
š ) (Kamikagama, хх, 12.) 
SE(-SI)LA-RUPAKA—A statue, а rock-sculpture. 


Gf. ‘The rock sculpture or statues, gift of his (Sivama's) wife Vijaya.’ | 
(Kuda Inscrip. no. 6, line 7, Arch. Surv., new Imp. Series, Vol. 1v, p. 85.) 


SAINYA-DURGA—A fort (see details under DURGA). 
SOPANA—Stairs, steps, a stair-case, а ladder. 
(1) Mánasüra, Chap. ххх: 

Flights of steps are constructed for ascending up and descend- 
ing from temples, residential buildings, pavilions, enclosure (prakara), 
gate-houses, hilly tracts (parvata-de$a), step-wells, wells, ponds, 
villages, and towns (lines 85-89). 

Their situation : 
They are stated to be constructed on the front, back and sides 
of a residential building or temple : 

Sarvesham mukha-bhadranam páráve sopana-sarhyutam 1 (93) 

Ратбуауог dvara-deSe tu mukha-sopanam eva va 1 (94) 

Guhyanta-dvara-dese tu vàme sopana-sarhyutam 1 (97) 

Pramukhe mukha-sopanam kuryach chhilpa-vit-tamah | (102) 

Prapange pramukhe bhadre sopanam purva-parsvayoh | ( 105) 

Рагбуауоһ prishtha-de$e tu tat-pürve paksha-parsvayoh | (100) 

Yatra dee tu sopanarn tatra dosho na vidyate | (101) 

Alinda-yuktarn tad-dvare vàme sopana-sathyutam 1 (1 13) 

Vinálinda-pradese tu pramukhe sopanam eva cha 1 (114) 

Their situation in other places : 
Gopuranam tu tat-paréve sopanarh lakshananvitam | (117) 

t Adri-dege samarohya yatra tatraiva Кагауеї | (118) 
е Vapi-kipa-tatake va paritah sopana-samyutam | (119) 
; Chatur-dikshu chatush-kone chantarale’thava punah | (120) 

Evam eva yatha-deše bhadra-sopánarh eva va | (121) 
Their plan : 

'Trayo-virnšach chhatantarn syad devanam iti kathyate 1 (141) 


M. Pattadri-marga-paryantam tiryak chordhvordhva-choktavat | (142) 
i 28 
Ë 5 
' 
b. k des MEL LL LL us шул Collection: Digltized by S3 Foundation USA 
КЗ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SOPANA 


Manushanarh tu sopanarn pattika-yugma-sarhyutam | (143) 
Sopana-pargvayor 4ебе hasti-hasta-vibhishitam | (155) 
Hasta-mila-visale tu choktaüguliri na manayet | (156) 
Milena tat (mile chágra)-tri-bhagaikàm hastagrantarh kshayarn 
kramat 1 (157) 
Hasti-hasta-vad akararh raga-yuktarn manoharam | (150) 
Tri-chatush-paficha-vaktrarh va milena sirhhananair yutam | (159) 
Agradho-dharapattarh syat pattika chokta-manakam | (160) 
Adhàra(agradhàra)m palikakararh pattika vedikakritih 1 (161) 
Adri-sopana-pargve tu na kuryat parsvayo’nghrikam | (163) 
Adri-Sopana-deée tu dirgha-mànarn yatheshtakam | (136) 
Sarvalañkara-sarnyuktarn sopanarh lakshananvitam | (162) 
Measures of the other flights of Steps are given in detail (lines 125- 
132, 134-136). 

The two kinds of steps (and the materials of which thcy are constructed) : 
Achalam cha chalarn chaiva dvidha sopanam iritam|! (90) 
Silàbhi$ cheshtakair vapi darubhih sachalarh matam | (91) 
Sarvai$ chaivàchalam proktam kshudra-sopana-sarhyutam | (92) 

The account given above is that of the stationary steps, that of the mov- 

able ( ? moving) steps is also given : 
Achalam cheti proktarh chalarn sthapyarn yatheshtakam| ( 124) 
Tri-chatush-paficha-shan-matramh chalarn sopana-padake! (144) 
Tad-ghanarh cha уі5 е tu samath và padam àdhikam| (145) 
Ardhadhikath tu padona-dvi-gunam tri-gunath tatah! (146) 
Danda-dvaya-samayuktarh chitra (? chhidra)-yuktam tu pattika | 
(147) 
Eka-dvi-try-aigularh vapi pattika-ghanam eva cha! (148) 
Dvi-tri-veda-sarangulyarh shat-saptangulam eva và! (149) 
Ashta-nanda-dasangulyarn pattika-vistritarn bhavet | (150) 
Evam tu chala-sopanarn achalarh tat pravakshyate| (151) 
(2) Vishkambha-chatur-aéram attalakam utsedha-samavakshepa-sopa- 
nam karayet 1 
Ishtakàvabandha-pàrévam vamatah pradakshina-sopánam gidha- 
bhitti-sopanarh itaratah 1 
(Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, Chap. XXIV, рр. 52, 53.) 
(3) Sopanarh cha yathà-yuktyà hasti-hastarh tathaiva cha ıı 
(Suprabhedagama, xxxi, 114.) 

Ibid, wv: 

. Tale tale tu sopanam 4rohartharh prakalpayet || (167) 

Compare Ѕайкһа-ѕорапа (v. 170), hasti-sopana and laja-sopana 

(v. 174), pradakshina-sopana (v. 176). 


529 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


$ P 


SOPANA 


The general plan : 
Sopànam parsvayor agr 
Tan-mülam syad adhishthanam pada. SD. 
Абуа-радорагі sthitvarohanam dakshinaighrinê | 178) 
Idrig-lakshana-samyuktam sopanarh sarnpadaspadam I! (17 

(4) Mahabharata, x, 185, 20: 

Prāsādaih sukritochchhrayaih . . · ! s 
Sukhārohaņa-sopānaih mahásana-parichchhadaih ! 

(5) Flights of steps (Vanapalli Plates of Anna-vema, v. 10, 
ur, pp. 61, 59.) В 

(6) Meru-mardara-kailasan ürurukshur mahamatih | 
Sopana-panktim gri-Saile vyatanod vema-bhü-patih 11 я 

* Desirous of ascending Меги, Mandara and Kailãéa, i.c. to gain heaven 
through charity) the high-minded king Vema constructed a flight of steps 
at Sri-faila.—(Nadupuru Grant of Anna-vema, v. 6, Ep. Ind., Vol. ur, 
pp. 288, 291.) 

The sopàna is a kind of religious architecture peculiar to India, cf. eg., 
the flight of steps in Chandra-sekhara peak, Sità-kunda, Chittagong, Ben- 
gal. . 

(7) Patala-ganga-tate Sri-saile . . . sopana vithim $ubhàm—' a 
beautiful flight of steps in the bank of the Patala-ganga at the fort of the 
Sri-éaila hill.’ —(Tottaramudi Plates of Kataya-vema, v. 8, Ef. Ind., Vol. 1v, 
р. 322.) 

(8) Sri-Sailagrat prabhavati pathi prapta-patala-gange | 

Sopanani pramatha-padavim arurukshu$ chakara 11 

* Constructed the flight of steps from Patalaganga to the summit of the 
Sri-sdila as if to climb up to the abode of Siva.’—(Inscrip. of the Reddis 
of Kondavidu, no. A, v. 6, Ер. Ind., Vol. xt, pp. 320, 314.) 

(9) ‘Brahmapryan . . . caused to be made the stone work of a 
flight of steps, with tiger’s head at the bottom for the abhisheka-mandapa 
in the temple of Vanduvarapati-Emberuman at Manimangalam . . . 

- (Inscrip. of Rajaraja ІП, no. 39, H. S. J. I., Vol. шш, p. 86.) 

(10) Sri-Vagmati-jalàvatara-sopanarama-ghanta-dharmma-$alà-pratish- 

tha-karmma ѕатарауап | d 
Sopānālir iyam vidagdha-rachanā-suślishța-chitropalā ramyà vayu- 
sutadhivasa-vihita-proddama-vighnavalih | 
Sampādyānhika-sakta-loka-vihita-svechchhāvakāśa-sthalā snāna- 
dhyāna-hitā sudhā-dhavalita-prāntā chira ràjatar 11 
(Inscrip. from Nepal, no. 23, Inscrip. of Queen 
Lalita-tri-pura-sundari, v. 1, Second 
Series, Ind. Ant., Vol, 1x. p. 194.) 


tan-mülasya prayojayet ! 
қ -prastára-varga-yuk n 07D 


Ep. Ind., Vol. 


530 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SAUDHA 


(11) Sriman esho’rkka-kirttir nnripa iva vilasat sala-sopanakadyaih 1 
š. That honourable one, like a king of sun-like glory (erected) splendid 
walls and stairs.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, по. 105; Roman text, p. 79, line 14; 
Transl., p. 164, para. 6.) 
(12) Maha-sopana-panktiyumam rachisidam— had the flight of grand 
stairs laid out.'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. u, по. 115; Roman text, p. 87; Transl., 
р. 171. 
qe For the new Jina temple in the place of his government, in order 
that long life might be to Permmanadi, caused steps to be cut to the deep 
tank of Balora-katta, had the embankment built, provided a sluice, 
` and . . . —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Mandya Taluq, no. 78; Transl., p. 47; 
Roman text, рр. 101-102.) 

(14) The Chullavagga (vv. 11, 6; vt, 3, 3) and the Mahasudassana-sutta 
(n 59) have referred to stairs of three kinds, namely, brick stairs, stone 
stairs, and wooden stairs. All these are furnished with balustrades (alarn- 
bana-bahu). Each of these had posts or banisters (thamba), cross-bars 
(süchiyo) let into these banisters, and a head-line (unhisam) running along 
the top of the banisters.—(Compare Rhys Davids’ Buddhist Suttas, p. 262, 
and the writer's Indian Architecture, p. 19.) 


SOMA-SUTRA—A drain, a channel for conveying holy water from 


C—O —À ا‎ 


1 a Phallus of Siva or any other deity of a shrine. 

Í * The drainage channel from the shrine, an ornamental feature of these 
temples.’—(Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxt, 
р. 39.) 


See also Champa by Mazumdar, p. 237. 

SETU—A bridge; a dam, а causeway (R.-V. тх, 41, 2; Таш. Sam., 
| ш, 2, 2, 13 VL 1, 4» 9 5» 9» 3; УП, 5 8,5; Kath. Sam., ххуп, 
| 4; Ай. Bra., ш, 45; Тай. Bra., I, 4, 2, 6; Sat. Втй., хш, 2, 10, 
| г; Brihad-Upanished, 1у, 4, 45 Chhand-Upa., уш, 4, 1, 2). 

SAUKHYAKA—A pleasure-house, a type of pavilion. 
| (M., xxxiv, 279 ; see under Maypapa.) 
| SAUDHA—A plastered, ` stuccoed or whitewashed house, а large 
| house, a great mansion, а palatial building, a palace. 

(1) KailaSa-Saila-vilasinas samutturhgga-Sikharasya saudhasyasthana- 

| уо, (Teki Plates of Rajaraja-chodaganga, line 82, 

il Ep. Ind., Vol. vt, p. 342.) 

(2) Kshetre prabháse sukritadhivase svakarita-brahma-puri-griheshu ' 

Prakshālya padau pradadau sa saudham Nanaka-namne kavi-pandi- 
тауа Il 


531 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


SAUDHA-MALIKA AN ENGY CLOPAEDIA OF 


the habitation of good actions, gave to 
hed his fect, a palace among the 


* (He) in the sacred Prabhasa, 
(Sanskrit Grants "апа 


Малака, the Росі and Pandit, having was 
mansions of thc Brahma-puri founded by himself. — 


o. 11, V. 8, Ind. Ant., Vol. xr, рр. 106, 107.) 
)—A class of buildings, 


Inscrip., n 
SAUDHA-MALIKA (se PRASADA-MALIKA 
an edifice of the: Malika class. 
SAUMUKHYA—An object having a beautiful face, a type 


one of the five Indian orders. 
(Suprabhedagama, Ххх, 


of column, 


65, 67; see under STAMBHA.) 


SAUMYA—A class of buildings. 
(Kümikagama, XLV, 40 5 5% under MALIKA.) 


SAUMYA-KANTA—A іруе of gate-house. 
(М., XXXII, 563 ; see under GoPURA.) 
SAURA-KANTA —A type of storeyed buildings. 
A class of nine-storeyed buildings. 
(М., ххуп, 5-9; Ste under PRASADA.) 
SAUSHTHIKA—An architectural object or moulding added for 
the sake of elegance or beauty. | 
Tad-eva śālā-pārśve chaikarh dvyaikena shausthika-harah | 
(М., xxvur, 16.) 
Tad-eva-Salà-pránte tu parsve chaikena saushthikam 1 
(М., xxix, 26 ; see for context, 24-33 ; see under AKRA-KANTA.) 
SKAND-(H)A-KANTA—A ype of column, a type of gate-house. 

Теово or six-sided pillars with six upa-padas ог minor pillars— 
(M., xv, 246, 23-245). 

A type of gate-house—(M., ххх; see under борова). 
BÉ ARA—A type of building extending like the shoulders. 
5 E. Mw s 7 XIX, 172 ; see under PRASADA). 

KAN —A division of an army, a cam ү resi 
a capital city, a fortified town. E poe re 
a (M., x, 42, f. ; see under М. 

Gf. Sri-Venu-grama-skarhdhava uf E 
ШЕ are sukhena samrajya-lakshmim anu- 

_ ' While he is enjoying the good fortune of uni ; 

famous camp of Venu-grama.’—(Bhoj ean со, n IR atthe 

DW Att pp. 247, 248.) virya, 1v, lines 96-97, 


М э 5 


1 
| 
| 
| 
i 
) 
J 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


STAMBHA—Fixedness, a support, a stem, a trunk, a post, a pillar, 
a column, banisters (Mahdasuddassana-sutta, 1, 50, see Buddhist- 
sultas by Rhys Davids, p. 262, compare Chullavagga, VL, 9, 9.) 


For references to Vedic pillars, vide 107 below. 


The column is generally four times the base (M., хш, 2-3, see under 
ADHISTHANA), and the pedestal is stated to be twice or three times the base 
(see Mayamata, under ADHISHTHANA) and the entablature is directed to be 
3 of, equal to, or greater by 4, 4, 2, or twice of, the base (M., XVI, 2-4, see 
under PRASTARA). 

(1) Мапаѕӣта (Chap. xv, 1-448), named Stambha : 


Columns are called jangha, charana, (s)tali, stambha, angrika, 
sthanu, thüna, pada, skambha, arani, bharaka, апа dharana (lines 
4-6). The height or length of a column is measured from above 
the base to below the Uttara, or above the pedestal from Janman 
to the Uttara (lines 7-9). Тһе height of a column is, in other words, 
* measured from the plinth (of the former) up to the lowest part of 
the entablature, that is, from the base to the capital inclusive.’ The 
length of а column is twice, 1% or 1$ times of its base (lines 8-10) ; 
or the heights of the column begin with 2} cubits and end at 8 cubits, 
the increment being by 6 angulas or } cubit (lines 11-12). But accord- 
ing to Кабуара (see Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. of Hind., p. 29), the height 
of the pillar may be 3 times that of the base ; or 6 or 8 times that of 
the pedestal. The diameter of a pillar may be $th, +, sth, or 4th 
of its height, if it be made of wood or stone, ігі, 3th, or ith, of the 
height, if it be a pilaster joined to a wall (kudya-stambha). In other 
words, the column is from three to ten times the diameter. The 
width of the pilaster, according to the Manasara, is 3, 4, 5, or 6 
matras (parts), and twice, thrice, or four times of these should be 
the diameter of the pillar (M., xv, 14-15). The height of a pillar 
being divided into 12, 11, 10, 9, or 8 parts, one of these parts is the 

` diameter of the pillar, and at the top itis diminished by one-fourth 
(lines 16-18). 

Columns admit almost of all shapes (lines 20-23). A quadran- 
gular (four-sided) pillar is called Brahma-kanta; ап octangular one 
is called Vishnu-kànta ; a sixteen-sided or circular one is known as 
Rudra-kanta ; a pentagonal one is called Siva-kanta ; and a hexa- 
gonal column is called Skanda-kanta. These columns are stated to 
be uniform from bottom to top; but the bases of these may be 
quadrangular (lines 24-25). 

533 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
s AT г * 
2 


THE COLUMNS 


THE PADMA-KANTA AND CHITRA-SKAMBHA | 
CLASSES | 
GENERAL PROPORTION ——- WHOLE ORDER = 6 PARTS 


PEDESTAL ~ I PAR DIAMETER OF PADMA-KANTA ç 
Wists жеш КОЕ 


— FOR E 


aum E 5 Е = Yo m HEIGHT OF COL: 
SH = a ae SOCOM: 
CAP =e DIAMETER OF CHITRA-SKAMBHA 
ENTABLATURE -] = = horn HEIGHT OF COL: 


THEY ARE RESPECTIVELY SIMILAR | 
TO IONIC AND CORINTHIAN 


IN PROPORTION. 


PLAN AT Б.Б 
LOOKING UP, 


PLAN AT АА. 
an LOOKING UP 


PLAN AT CC 
LOOKING DOWN, 


PEDESTALS IN ALL 
CASES SHOULD BE. 
SOUARE IN PLAN 


OCTAGONAL 
VISHNU-KANTA 


x 
| 


*—FOR E NTABLATURE —; 


PLAN AT D.D 
LOOKING DP, 


PLAN AT EE 
LOOKING DOWN, 


HEXAGONAL ` 


SKANDA-KANTA 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized, 
ud EES EA 


—— 


by S3 Foundation USA - 


re 


THIS PART нол 
ALWAYS BE SQUARE 


AL ENTABLATURE 


NEM 


ЗІП 


PLAN AT GG 
LOOKING DOWN 


THISPART SHOULD 4 
ALWAYS BE SQUARE 


om 
SQUARE CIR ЖАУ 5 


TYDE Í 


PENTAGONAL 
SIVA-KANTA 


із 


V 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


Тһе shapes of the five orders, the fifth being composite of two : 
Jati-bhedarh samakhyatam pàdànam adhunochyate 11 (53) 
Chatur-aéram atháshtaéram shodaśāśram tu vrittakam | 
Kumbha-yuktas tathà kechit kechit kumbha-vihinakah и (54) 

The five names and characteristic features of the five orders : 
Sri-karam chandra-kàntam cha saumukhyam ргіуа-агќапат |! 

(65) 
Subharhkari cha nàmàni kartavyani viseshatah | 
Sri-kararh vritta-pàdanàrh shodagaére tu kantakam 11 (66) 
Saumukhyar hi tathashtaére turyagre priya-darganam | 
Chatur-asrashta-misre cha pada karya Subharhkari || (67) 

This last one is the Indian Composite order. 

The. common features and mouldings of the five orders : 

Pada nama iti prokto tesharh lakshanam uchyate ıı (55) 

Vistarasya chatur-virnSat(d)-bhagaikarh pada-vistaram 1 

Tad-eva dandam akhyatarh padalarhkara-karmani || (56) 

Mila-padasya vistarat saptaikarnSena màrgatah | 

Dvi-dandarh mandir utsedharh danda-padarh tu vistaram I (57) 

Ashtam$am kantham utsedharh dvi-dandarh kumbha-vistaram | 

Utsedharh tu tri-padarh hi padona phalaka bhavet 11 (58) 

Tri-dandam vistarar proktam tad-ardharh nirgatarh smritam | 

Vira-kantham tu dandena vistararn tat-samarh bhavet 11 (59) 

Tad-ardhve potikayamarn tat-tri-padam tad-uchchhritam | 

Tri-dandam adhamayamam chatur-dandarh tu madhyamam 11 (60) 

Uttamarh paficha-dandam tu potikayamam uchyate | 

Chitra-patra-taramhgai§ cha bhüshayitvà tu potikam | (61) 

Kumbha-padam idam proktarn kumbha-nimnam prachakshmahe | 

Padarh potikaya yuktarn šesharn karma na karayet || (62) 

Kumbha-hinàs tv-ime prokta lata-kumbharn tad uchchyate | 

Kumbhakararh tu tan-müle tad-ürdhvarn padmam eva tu ıı (63) 

Phalakordhve latarn kuryat tach-chhesharn kumbha-pada-vat | 

Padantare tu kartavyam аба аб chet tu varjayet || (64) 

Sarveshàm eva padanarh tat-padarh nirgamarh Бһауе(!! (65) , 

(Of all orders, the projection is 1). 

The columns of the main ргазада (edifice) and of the subordinate manda- 
pas (pavilions) are distinguished : 
Prasada-stambha-manasya etat stambharh viishyate | 
Padadhikam athadhyardham padona-dvi-gunarh bhavet 1! (105) 
` Stambhayamashta-bhagaikarmn stambhasyaiva tu vistaram | ET 

о | Vrittam уа chatur-aśrarn và chatur-ashtasra-misrakam 11 (106) : Е 
Shodaśāśra-yutarn vapi Silpaih sarvaih sušobhitam | 


UE 


STAMBHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Stambhiach cha bodhikadhikyà bodher apy uttaradhika и (107) 
Uttarād vājanādhikyā tasyordhve mudrikàm Dod Y 
Mudrikach cha tuladhikya jayanti tu talopari!! (108) 
Chhadayed ishtakabhis tu tasyordhve kalakan kshipet II (109) 

Тһе above passage refers to only a part of the order. Тһе pedestal, 
base, and entablature are described elsewhere. (See Suprabhedagama , 
sudes Pirma and UPAPiTHA, ADHISTHANA and PRASTARA.) 

The mouldings of the part between the entablature and base, t 
the capital and the shafts, are, as described above, called Danda (v. 56) , 
Mandi (v. 57), Kantha, (v. 58), Kumbha (v. 58), Phalakà (v. 58), Vira- 
kantha (v. 59), and Potika (v. 60). 

The same are otherwise called Bodhika, Uttara (v. 
Mudrika, Tula, Jayanti, and Tala (v. 108). 

(4) Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra (chap. xxiv, p. 53) : 

Stambhasya parikshepash shad-a4yama dvi-guno nikhatah chülikaya$ 
chatur-bhagah— in fixing a pillar, 6 parts are to form its height on the 
floor, twice as much (12 parts) to be entered into the ground, and one- 
fourth for its capital." 

(5) Ramayana (18, VI, 3, etc.) : 

Kafüchanair bahubhih stambhair vedikabhi§ cha $obhitah | 
(6) Mahabharata (хту, 2523, etc.) : 
Stambhan kanaka-chitràmé cha toranàni vrihanti cha 1 

(7) Matsya-Purapa (Chap. соту, v. 1-6): 
Athatah sampravakshàmi stambha-mana-vinirnayam | 
Kritva sva-bhavanochchhrayarh sada sapta-gunarh budhaih 11 
ASity-arhSah prithutve syad agre nava-gune sati | 
Ruchaka$ chatur-aérah syat tu ashtagro vajra uchyate || (2) 
Dvi-vajrah shodasastras tu dvā-trimśāśrah pralinakah 1 
Madhya-pradese yah stambho vritto vritta iti smritah П (3) 
Ete paficha-maha-stambhah prasastah sarva-vastushu 1 
Padma-valli-lata-kumbha-patra-darpana-ropitah u (4) 
Stambhasya nayamaméena padma-kumbhástaràm tul 
Stambha-tulya tula prokta hina chopatulà tatah ıı (5) 
Tri-bhageneha sarvatra chatur-bhagena va punah | 

24 Hinam hinam chaturtharméat tatha sarvasu bhümishu u (6) 
N- meee are almost identical in the Brihat-samhita (шш, 27-30) 
I, a ко (um, 27-30, J. R. А. S., М. S., vol. vr, р. 285, notes 

Uchchhrayat sapta-gunàd agiti-bha i 5 
OPEM ee to Бі Шур рат 
D asya daSarna-hino'gre 11 (27) 


536 


hat is, 


107), Vajana, 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE T NM STAMBHA 


* The eightieth part of nine times the altitude (of the storey) gives the 
Width of a column at the bottom ; this diminished by one-tenth is the width 
of the column at the top.’ Kern. 

Sama-chatur'aéro ruchako vajro’shtasrir dvi-vajrako dvi-gunah | 
Dva-trimsagras tu madhye pralinako vritta iti vrittah 11 (28) 

A column with four sides equally rectangular (Jit. of four equal corners) 
is called Ruchaka (=beautiful) ; one with such eight sides is called Vajra ; 
one with such sixteen sides is called Dvi-Vajra : one with such thirty-two 
sides at the middle (i.c., by the shaft) is called Pralinaka; and a round 
one is called Vritta. 

Stambharh vibhajya navadhà уаһапата bhago ghato'sya bhago’ 
nyah | 
Padmarh tathottaroshtharn kuryad bhagena bhagena 11 (29) 

Gf. Commentary quotes Kirana-Tantra ( ? Kirandgama) : 

Vibhajya navadhà stambharh kuryad udvahanarh ghatam | 
Kamalarh chottaroshtharn tu bhage bhage prakalpayet ıı 

* When you divide the whole column into nine parts, one part would 
be the pedestal (?); the second, the base (?). The capital(?) and also 
the upper lip(?) must be made so as to form one part, each of them.’ (S22 
below.) 

* All this exceedingly vague.’ Kern. 

Stambha-samarh bahulyarn bhāra-tulānām upary upary āsām | 
Bhavati tulopatulanàm ünam padena padena 11 (30) 

* Equal to the thickness of the column is that of the architraves; the 
` thickness of the superior cross-beams and upper rafters is lessened by one- 
quarter, again and again. Kern. 

The eight component parts of the column (order) mentioned in the 
Matsya-Purüna, Brihat-samhitá, and Kirana-tanira axe (1) vahana, (2) 
ghata, (4) padma, (4) uttaroshtha, (5) bahulya, (6) bhara (? hara), (7) 
tula, and (8) upatula. 

Dr. Kern's conjectural rendering of these terms does not seem tenable. 
Nothing can, however, be stated with certainty about their identification , 
But there is a very striking similarity between the number (eight) of the 
mouldings, of which the Indian and the Greco-Roman orders are composed. 
(See below). 2 З 2 

(9) Sarngraha-Siromani by Sarayü  Prasada (xx, 132-134), cites the 
same. three verses from Varaha-mihira (B. S. гш, 28-30) as quoted above, 

(то) “Тһе subservient parts of z en called mouldings, and common 

rders, are eight in number. ey are— f 
to all E E MIS ЕТ or quarter round (Fig. 867). It is formed 
by a quadrant, or sometimes more of a circle, but in Grecian 


537 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


` 


5ТАМВНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ 


examples its section is obtained by portions of an ellipse or some 
other conic section. This latter observation 15 applicable to all 
mouldings of Greek examples, and we shall not repeat 1t in enumer- 
ating the rest of them. It is commonly found under the abacus of 
capitals. The ovolo is also almost always placed between the corona 
and dentils in the Corinthian cornice ; its form gives it the appear- 
ance of seeming fitted to support another member. It should be used 
only in situations above the level of the eye. 

(ii) The talon, ogee, or reversed cyma (Fig. 868) seems also, like 
the ovolo, a moulding fit for the support of another. 

(iii) The cyma, cyma recta, or cymatium (Fig. 869) seems well con- 
trived for a covering and to shelter other members. The cyma recta 
is only used properly for crowning members, though in Palladio’s 
Doric, and in other examples, it is found occasionally in the bed 
mouldings under the corona. 

(iv) The torus (Fig. 870), like the astragal presently to be men- 
tioned, is shaped like a rope, and seems intended to bind and streng- 
then the parts to which it is applied; while, 

(v) The scotia or trochilos (Fig. 871), placed between the fillets 
which always accompany the tori, is usually below the eye; its use 
being to separate the tori, and to contrast and strengthen the effect 
A other mouldings as well as to impart variety to the profile of the 

ase. 

(vi) The cavetto, mouth or hollow (Fig. 872) is chiefly used as a 
crowning moulding like the cyma recta. In bases and capitals it is 
never used. By workmen it is frequently called a casement. 

: (vii) The astragal (Fig. 873) is nothing more than a small torus, and, 
like it, seems applied for the purpose of binding and strengthening. 

The astragal is also known by the names of bead and baguette. 
на ЕС. 
ings from one another. Mascus eA mould 
(Gwilt, Encycl. of Arch., art., 2532; see also Gloss, 
(Attention of the reader should ae ORT ма i 

ou TE Б 
between the Indian and the (же ел im ын affinity 
тру five in number : see details below.) à od) 
atever be the reasons of iti : 

of the чы mouldings of RUN E EC eec 
amount of certainty with the corresponding mouldi f th ba 
Roman order. Padma means lotus and it is e as ga тозсо 
literally lower lip, and cavetto, mouth or hollow, are RN е 


538 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


Bhara is read as hàra (in the Manasára) meaning a chain, and the latter 
expression implies the torus, bead or astragal. Ghata might correspond 
to conge, Vahana to abacus, and Tulà and Upatula (also called vajana and 
uttara) to fillet or listel. 

(11) Pillar with Garuda bird on the top (Badal Pillar inscrip., у. 27, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. xt, рр. 164, 167). 

(12) Thambhani (Pillar Edicts of A$oka, no. vu, Ep. Ind., Vol. I, 
p. 270). 

(13) Stambhatvarm . . . Sri-failam evanayat— Converted the Sri- 
Saila into a pillar.'—(Vanapalli Plates of Anna-vema, v. ro, Ef. Ind., Vol. ur, 
рр. 61, 64.) 

(14) Pillar (Deogadh Pillar inscrip. of Bhojadeva of Kanauj, lines 6, 9, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. ту, p. 310). 

(15) Tri-Sila-mudrarhkah svakiyayatana-dvare maha-Saila-stambhah | 

‘The pillar is (now) called the Lakshmi Kambha, or the pillar of (the 
(goddess) Lakshmi. 

‘The upper part of the pillar is ocatgonal (and this part contains the 
inscription). Immediately below the inscription, the pillar is square. 
It is stamped with the mark of the tri-éüla or trident, which is the weapon 
of Siva, was set up in the middle of the three shrines by a sculptor named 
Subhadeva.’—(Pattadakal inscrip. of Kirtivarman II, line 18, Ep. Ind., Vol. 
п, pp. 1, 3,5,7.) 

(16) A four-faced pillar made of stone (А. p. 1250) now “ lying in the 
temple of Venugopala іп the Kistna District."—(Yenamadal inscrip. of 
Ganapamba, Ер. Ind., Vol. nr, pp. 94, 96.) 

(17) ‘ This inscription (Srávana-Belgola Epitaph of Mallisena, Saka, 
1050) is on four faces of pillar on a hill at Sravana-Belgola in Mysore.’ 

; (ЕР. Ind., Vol. їп, p. 184.) 

(18) Silà-stambha—stone pillar, (2) solid. 

(Sravana-Belgola Epitaph of МаШвепа, v. 9, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. ur, pp. 190, 186.) 
(19) Used in the sense of danda (a measure) : 
TrimSat-stambha-pramana-pushpa-vatika | 
(Bamani inscrip. of Silhara Vijayaditya, 
line 22, Ep. Ind., Vol. m, p. 213.) 

(20) ‘ At the eastern entrance of this temple (named Kunti-Madhava 
at Pithapuram, in the Godavari District) in front of the shrine itself, 
stands (still) a quadrangular stone рШаг.?--(Ер. Ind., Vol. гу, p. 32.) 

(21) “Тһе (Salotgi) pillar is inscribed on all its four faces : on the front 
or the first face, above the writing, are some sculptures, towards the top a 
linga, and below it a cow and a calf and something else which has been 
defaced.’—(Ep. Ind., Vol. ту, p. 57.) 


539 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


5ТАМВНА 


(22) Sila-thabe cha usapüpite—' he caused a stone pillar to be erect- 
ed.’ —(The Asoka Edicts of Paderna, line 9, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, р. 4-) 

(23) “Тһе Vishnu temple of Kürmesvara at Srikürman near Chicalcole 
; in the Ganjam District contains many inscribed pillars of hard black stone 
M which have successfully withstood the influence of the climate. —(Ep. Ind. 

Vol. v, p. 31.) 
(24) Chakre . . . Vijaya-stambham ambhodhi-tire 11 

E Punye sahyadri-srimge tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham 11 
Р (Four inscrip. of Kulottunga-Chola, no. А 
vv. 1, 2, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, p. 104). 
(25) ° This inscription (Sravana-Belgola Epitaph of Marasimha II) 


d was engraved on the four faces of the base of a pillar, which is known as 
the Kuge-Brahma-deva-Kambha, at the entrance to the arca, occupied by 
E - the temples оп the Chandragiri hill at Sravana-Belgola.’ 
j (Ep. Ind., Vol. v, p. 151.) 
(26) Mana-stambha (Sravana-Belgola Epitaph of Marasimha II, line 
` 109). 


(Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp.178, 171, note 5.) 

*'The word “ Mana-stambha ”, which means literally “а column of 
honour ”, is explained by Mr. Rice (Inscrip. at Sravana-Belgola, Introduc- 
tion, p. r9, note 2) as denoting technically “ the elegant tall pillars, with 


Eastern Architecture, p. 276.’ Dr. Fleet (see below). 

(27) Mana-sthambha—Jaina pillar (Krishna Sastri refers also to Ep. 
Ind., Vol. v, p. 171, note 5). 

“Тһе Manastambhas, which are generall raceful, high and i i 
have to be distinguished from other Jaina pillars neither ae acne 
nor bearing any mandapas on their tops. These latter are called Brah 
deva-pillars (cf. Brahma-kanta, in the Manasára) and appear to be "s 
set up in front of colossal statues. Тһе De NS 0 

Е (figured on plate facing p. 33 of the Introduction to Mr. Rice's а Бі 
y eee prions) > g pp opposite to the collosal statue on the Dodda. 
P bett at 5ravana-Belgola ; the Ка - i 428 
к into the bastis on the Сы hil Ew puma E 
ZA haps the existence of the unfurnished colossus on that hil 
| note 1), and the colossi at Karkala and Venür have simil 
: front of them, bearing an image of Brahma-deva on th um 
ы: ы Токын» Annual Report for 1000-1001 d pen EY 
У тув 7. % 2 D > 
; > 23 E un ee similar Pillar at Venür is given in Ind. Ant., VS 
icing p. 39. (Karkala inscrip. of Bhairava II, Eb. Ind., Vol, vi " 
QU = š j 


indicates per- 
(ibid., p. 29, 
ar pillars in 


540 


by S3 Foundation USA 


Ха: 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 


a small pinnacled mantapa at the top, erected in front of the Jain temples ” - 
and he refers us to a discussion regarding them in Fergusson’s Indian and - 


aptent 


EES rares P 
F ET d айы 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


(28) Trai-lokya-nagaráraribha-müla-stambhaya sambhave | 
* He is the foundation-pillar for the erection of the city of the three 
worlds.’—(Inscrip. at Ablur, no. E, line 1, Ep. Ind., Vol. v, pp. 245, 252.) 
(29) ‘It (Srikirmam inscrip. of Nara-hari-tirtha) is inscribed on the 
cast and north faces of one of the black granite pillars, which support the 
hall enclosing the temple.’—(H. Krishna Sastri, Ep. Ind., Vol. v1, p. 260.) 
(30) Siha-thabo—lion -pillar (no. 1). 
Sihadhayana-thambho (no. 7). 
Sasariro thabo—pillar containing rclics (Senart).—(Karle Cave 
inscrip. nos. 1, 7, 9, also 8, 11, Ep. Ind., Vol. VII, рр. 49, 53, 54, 55, 56.) 
(31) Chafchat-kirtti-patàkaya tilakita-stambhah pratishthapitah 1 
Yasyagre Garuda . . . < All erected the famous pillar adorned 
with a waving banner of fame . . . the Garuda at the top.’ 
(Two inscrip. of Tammusiddhi, no. A, Tiruvalabgadu -inscrip., У. 12; 
Ep. Ind., Vol. уп, pp. 123, 125.) 
(32) ‘ The inscription (Sravana-Belgola inscription of Trugapa) is 
engraved on three faces of a quadrangular pillar behind the image of the 
Küshmaàndini Yakshi which is set up in the Brahma-deva-mandapa in front 
of the Gummata temple on the Vindhyagiri at Sravana-Belgola.’ 
: (Dr. Lüders, Ер. Ind., Vol. VIII, p. 15.) 
(33) “ According to Mr. Rice, the inscription (Talagunda pillar inscrip- 
tion of Kakusthavarman) is engraved on a pillar of very hard grey granite, 
which stands in front of the ruined Prabhavesvara temple at Talagunda, 
in the Shikarpur Taluk of the Shimoga District of the Mysore State. The 
pedestal of the pillar is 5 feet. 4 inches high and 1 foot 4 inches at the top, 
a little more at the base. Тһе shaft is ocatgonal, 6 feet 4 inches high 
(*judging by the length of the lines, the shaft must really be slightly 
higher"). Each face being 7 inches wide, but tapering slightly towards 
the top.’ 


(E 


(Prof. Kielhorn, Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII, p. 24.) 
(34) “ Alupa inscriptions nos. т-уш are engraved on ocatognal pillars 
in front and in the courtyard of the Sambhukallu temple at Udiyavara.’ 
(Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 17 f.) 
(35) Stambho'yam nagarasya— this is the city pillar.’ 
(Kanker inscrip. of Bhanudeva, v. 6, 
- Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, p. 126.) 
(36) In 1848 Captain J. D. Cunningham (in. 7. В. A. S., Bengal, Vol, 
хуп. part I, p. 305 ff) proceeds thus : ‘near to the western edge of the 
similar lake stands the wand or pillar (in the town of Pithari in the Bhopal 
Agency of Central India) now called Bheem Sen. It is composed of a 
single block about go feet. in height and 21 thick. The shaft is square 
in section, for a height of 8 feet, and it then becomes circular.’ 


541 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


5ТАМВНА 


ж 
x ir A. Cunningham (in his Archaeological Survey of 
In 1880 General Sir unning Mae e top he 


India, Vol. x, p. 70), noticed thus : * Inside t ( o 
ien there is a tall monolith with a bell-shaped capital. The shaft is 
Š circular, rising from a base 8 feet 3 inches high and 2 feet 9 inches square 
E . . . and from their (of the letters of the inscription. on the pillar) 


shapes I would assign the monument to somewhere about A.D. 600. 


3 . . ` . 

к Close by this pillar there is а small temple with Vishnu sitting on Garuda 
| over the door-way.’ š : 

М Тһе main object of the inscription is to record the erection of the pillar 
š of which a vivid description is given, 

P. (Pathari Pillar inscrip. of Parabala, vv. 24—28, 
= Ep. Ind., Vol. Ix, pp. 254, 248, 249, 250.) 
E (37) * In front of the temple is an inscribed quadrangular pillar of black 


granite bearing in relief within a countersunk square at the top of each of 
its four faces, the figure of a squatting Jaina ascetic with his arms folded 
over his lap crosswise.’ 

‘The thousand-pillared temple іп the middle of the village of Anma- 
konda was built by Prola’s son Rudra in or about А. D. 1162-1163 
(Ind. Int., vol. xt, p. 9 f.).’ 

(Anmakonda inscrip. of Prola, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. Ix, pp. 257, 256, note 8.) 

(38) ` The first verse (quoted below) invokes the blessings of Vinayaka 
(Ganapati) who, we are told, was placed on the column to ensure prosperity 
at the top by a quadruple image of Ganapati, facing the cardinal direc- 
tions. 

Siddhirh karotu sarvvattra stambha-dhama-Vinayakah 1 
атан D of Kakkuka, no. Ht Wb Ho 
ip. Ind., Vol. тх, pp. 280, 278-270. 
(39) Kamantya-Silà-stambha-kadambottamvitárivarasa 1 man 

Visamkatavitamkali-virajad ramga-martapam |! 

4 i ne mpi trs е gnat таш п a cleion of 
ne rned with rows of spouts.'—(Krishnapuram 

Plates of Sadasivaraya, v. 55-56, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, pp. 336, 341.) 
Е zu Bed (Nalamba inscriptions from Dharamapuri of the ninth 
о 3B) engraved on the four faces of a pillar, which was re- 


moved in 1904 from Dhar li istri 
Mem 904 mapuri in the Salem District to the Madras 


they meet the margins of the pillar... 
floor of a mandapa, in front of the Mallika 
pura. —(H. Krishna Sastri, Ep. Ind., Vol. x 


542 


ity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


HINDU ARGHI TECTURE STAMBHA 


(41) Matri-pada-éri-nimitte stathbhakah pradattah—‘the pillar was 
presented in memory of (their) mother.'—(The Chahamanas of Marwar 
no. у” Sanderav stone inscrip. of Kelhanadeva, line I, Ef. Ind., Vol. x, 
P- 52. 

(42) Tenànena Sri-ganapati-deva-maha-rajena sakala-dviparnta-ripa- 
desarhtara-pattaneshu gatàgatam kurvvanebhyah samya-kritebhya evam 
abhayaśāsanarh dattam | 


all continents, islands, foreign countries, and cities , . . Ganapati- 


(Motupalli pillar inscrip. of Ganapati-deva, 
lines 135-140, v. 28, Ер. Ind., Vol. XII, 
РР. 195, 196, 197.) 
(43) Agrya-dhama-éreyaso veda-vidyavallikandah svah sravantyah kirī- 
tam! 
Vra(bra)hma-stambho yena karnnavatiti pratyashthapi kshma- 
tala-brahma-lokah 1! 
“Не set up the pillar of piety, called Кагпауан, the foremost abode of 
| bliss, the root of the creeping plant, knowledge of the Vedas, the diadem 
) of the stream of heaven, the world of Brahman on the surface of the earth." 
(Khairha plates of Yasahkarnadeva, v. 14, Ep. Ind., Vol. хп, рр. 212, 216.) 
(44) Kirti-stambharn (pillar of victory) nikhàya tri-bhuvana-bhavana- 
stiyamanapadanah | 


— 


(Conjeeveram plates of Krishnadeva-Raya, 
Saka 1444, V. 9, Ер. Ind., Vol. хш, 
р- 127.) 
(45) Sthapayitva dharani-dharamayàn sannikhatas tato'yarn šaila-stam- 
bhah su-chàrur giri-vara-sikharagropamah kirtti-kartta 11 
° There was then planted in the ground this most beautiful pillar of stone, 
which resembles the tip of the summit of the best of mountains, (and) 
which confers fame (upon him). 
(Kahaum stone pillar inscrip. of Skandagupta, 
lines 11-12, С. 1. I, Vol. m, Е G. I. 
по. I5, pp. 67, 68.) 
(46) Dhvaja-stambha, also called simply ‘ dhvaja ° : 
Matri-(ta)pittroh punya-pyayanartham esha bhagavatah punnya- 
Јапагадапаѕуа Јапагадапаѕуа dhvaja-stambho'bhyuchchhritah lI 
* This flag-staff of the divine (god) Janardana, the troubler of the de- 
mons, has been erected, for the purpose of increasing the religious merit 
of (their) parents.’ 
Vishnu-pada girau bhagavato vishnor dhvajoh sthapithah 1 
‘ This lofty standard of the divine Vishnu was set up on the hill (called) 
Vishnupada.’—(Eran stone pillar inscrip. of Budhagupta, lines 8-9; 


543 


> 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


5ТАМВНА АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ 


Mcharauli posthumous iron pillar inscrip. of Chandra, line 6, C. Z. Z., Vol. ш, 
; 141, 142.) 


F. G. I., nos. 19, 32, p. 89 and note 1,90 

(47) : The original lower part of the pillar (at Eran) is now broken 
away and lost ; the remnant of it is about 3’ 11” high and 1' 6" in diameter. 
cription (Eran posthumous 


The hollow part is octagonal ; and the ins 
stone pillar inscription of Goparaja, no. 20) is at the top of this octagonal 


part, on three of the eight faces, cach of which is about 7" broad 
Above this the pillar is sixteen-sided. Above this, it is again octagonal ; 
(and the faces here have sculpture of men and women, who are probably 
intended for the Goparaja of the inscription and his wife and friends ; the 
compartment immediately above the centre of the inscription represents 
a man and a woman, sitting, who must be Goparaja and his wife). Above 
this, the pillar is again sixteen-sided. Above this, it is once more octagonal 
Above this the pillar curves over in sixteen flutes or ribs, into a 
round top’. 
* As noted by Cunnigham, there are several other Sati-pillars (in com- 
memoration of a Sati), but of much later date than at Eran.'—(C. I. L, 
Vol. ш, no. 20, pp. 91, 92, note 2.) i 


(48) The boundary-pillar : 
Siva-dasena vala-yashti uchchhritah—(this) ° boundary-pillar has 


been set up by Sivadasa.’—(Bhumara stone pillar inscrip. of the 
Maharajas Hastin and Sarvanatha, lines 6-7, C. I. І. Vol. ш, 
F. G. I., no. 24, pp. 111, 112.) 

(49) ' The inscription (Meharauli posthumous iron pillar inscription 
of Chandra, no. 32) is on the west side of a tapering iron column, sixteen 
inches in diameter at the base and twelve at the top, and twenty-three feet 
eight inches high, standing near the well known Kutb Minar in the ancient 
fort of Ray Pithara.’—(C. Г. I., Vol. m, F. G. I., no. 32, p. 140.) 

(50) Tenakalpanta-kalavadhir avani-bhuja Sri-Yasodharmmanayarh 
sthambhah ШЕТЕН SA 
nayito’ttra 11. ) 

This is one of the two Rana-stambhas or columns of victory in war at 

Mandasor. Their architectural characteristics are given by Dr. Fleet : 

Of the first one he says * The base of it is rectangular, about 
3/ 4” square by 4 5' high . . . From this base there rises a 
sixteen-sided shaft, each of which is about 8}” broad, where it starts 
from the base. . . The total length of which (the shaft) was 
thus about 39’ 3” or 34’ ro" above the base . . . The next 
part of this column, the lower part of the capital T 
а fluted bell, about 2 6” high and 3' 2” in diameter almost identi 1 
in design with the corresponding part of a small Pillar fr ae 
Gupta temple at Sanchi, drawn by General Cun an 
ningham (in the 


544 


rukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


== 


HINDU АРСНІТЕС TURE STAMBHA 


Arch. Surv. Ind., Vol. X. plate xxm по... ). The total 
.length of this column, up to the top of the lion-capital, is about 44^ 5”, 
Or forty feet above the ground, if it stood with the entire base 
buried. Тһе square lion-capital must have surmounted by a statue 
ог statues, of the same kind as that Which stands on the summit 
of the column at Eran.’—(See above and Arch. Surv. Ind., Vol. x. 
р. 81 and plate XXVI.) 

* The base (of the other column about 20 yards north) is rectangular, 
about 3’ 3” square by 3' 11" high. Differing from the first column, the 
base is followed by а concave circular part, about 1” o" high ; 
From this there rises a sixteen-sided shaft, cach face of which is about 8" 
broad, where it starts from the Базе соон also tapers 
slightly from bottom to top . . . the fluted bell part of the 
capital, about 3” o" high and 3' 3” in diameter (is) similar in design to the 
same part of the capital of the other pile د‎ . , qd top has 
one circular and eight rectangular socket-holes, just as in the top of the lion- 
capital of the first column.’ 

* The two inscribed columns were evidently intended as a pair, though 
the full view of the second cannot be taken. (From the distance between 
them, from the difference in the detailed measures, and from the analogous 
instance of the Eran column, as shewing the way in which they must have 
been finished off at the top, they can hardly have been connected by a 
beam, after the fashion of a torana or arched gateway ; and there are no 
traces of any temple to which they can have belonged). They are evidently 
an actual instance of two Rana-stambhas or “ columns of victory in war," 
such as the Kauthem grant of Vikramaditya V (Ind. Ant., Vol. хут, р. 18) 

speaks of as having been set up by the Rashttraküta king 


(51) * The inscription (Pahladpur stone pillar inscription, Е. G. I, 
по. 57) is оп a sandstone monolith column about 4 feet in diameter, 
polished and rounded for a length of 27 feet; with a rough base of 9 
feet, the total length Pays 220 B3 o o o ña о about 1853 removed 
to Benares and set up in the grounds of the Sanskrit College there.’ 

я (С. І І, Vol. ш, F. С. L, по. 57, p. 249 f.) 

(52) Kritau pundarike yüpo'yam pratishthapitas . . . Varikena | 

* On the ceremony of the Pundarika sacrifice (having been performed), 
this sacrificial post has been caused to be set up by the Varika.? 

The architectural characteristics of this (sacrificial) column are given 
by Dr. Fleet: * The pillar (Bijayagadh stone pillar inscrip. of Vishnu- 
vardhana of A.D. 372) stands on a rubble masonry platform (which is 


545 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= E 


STAMBHA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


plainly of much more recent construction than the pillar itself), which is у> 
about 13’ 6" high and 9' 2" square at the top. The height of the. pillar | 
above the plinth is 26’ 3”. The base is square, to the height of 3’ 8", 


each face measuring 1’ 6”. Above this, the pillar is octagonal, for a length 
of 22’ 7”, andit then tapers off to a point. The extreme top is however 
broken ; and a metal spike, which projects from it, indicates that it was 
- originally surmounted by а capital on the south side of the pillar, towards 
the top of the square base there is engraved а Sriyogi Vra(Bra)hma- 
« ságara (the holy ascetic, Brahma-sagara).’ 
31 _ This may be compared with the Brahma-kanta column of the Мапазйта, 
(Bijayagadh stone pillar inscrip. of Vishnu, 
Ў vardhana, line 3, С. I. Г, Vol. п, F. G. I. 
/ по. 59, pp. 253, 252.) 
(53) Sphara küpára-tiràvali-nihita-jaya-stambha-vinyasta-kirttih l 
‘Who has deposited his fame in pillars of victory, which he erected 
in an uninterrupted line on the shore of the great ocean.’ 
Уй (Vijayanagara inscrip. of Devaraja п, V. 5, 
H.S.I.I., Vol. 1, no. 153, рр. 163, 165.) 
(54) Sakra-pratapas tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham ambhodhi-tire 11 
Punye sahyadri-Sringe tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham ambhodhi- 
pare | 


Ll 


(Tiruvallam inscrip. of Rajaraja, v. 1, 2, 
° H.S.L.I., Vol. 1, по. 155, p. 168.) 

(55) Trailokya-nagararambha-müla-stambhaya Sambhave 11 

* Adored be Siva, the original foundation-pillar of the city of the three 
worlds.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. 1, no. 11, pp. 35, 57 first para.) | 

(56) Hire-chavutiya-Ramesvara-devara-gudiya-kallu-kelasa madisi dipa- ii | 
māle-kambada— had the temple of Rāmeśvara in Hire-Chavuti built of | 
stone and erected а dipa-male pillar.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part r, Sorab 
ТаШша, no. 238; Roman text, p. 77; Transl., p. 97.) 

(57) * When Sivappa-Nayaka was protecting the kingdom in righteous- | 
ness (on а date specified), through the agency of Siddha-Basappayya 
L^ | of the treasury, this dhvaja-stambha (or flag-staff) was set up.’ 

(Ep. E Vol. үш, Part 1, Sagar | 
aluq, no. 38 ; Transl., p. 97. 
Š (58) ‘In order that they both might acquire merit (the Saas 2 
AN the e that they would erect а mana-stambha in front of the 
E к ШЕШІ ага с шн ш ыш» Yojana Sreshthi, had 
4 built. . . . itious day they carried out thei ni 
: p. Я gr of P E made. Meanwhile, to корш с 
twin daughters, Padmarasi апа Devarasi, and taking th ici 
omen, they had the bell-metal pillar. whic h had S ices E 
‘the chaityalaya. And и › which had been made, set up in front 
he ch Be pon the pillar they fixed a gold Š 
Біте ; ) golden kalaśa of t 
me height as that of the twins, Padmarasi and Devarasi. EE 


- 


TOME | 546 — 


” 
ү 


--- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


“То describe the mana-stambha :—In dimension like a mast of the 
great ship of dharma and in the midst of the group (of temples) the mana- 
stambha (towered up) as if gathering the constellations in the sky like 
flowers with which to worship the feet of the four Jaina images. 

“In front of Nemišvara Jina’s temple, a màána-stambha of polished 
bell-metal, with a golden kalaša, on the instruction of Abhinava-Saman- 
tabhadra-Nagappa-Sreshthi’s son, Ambvana-Sreshthi caused to be mads 
a rod for the umbrella of dharmma. Thus did they have the māna. 
stambha made.’ 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. уш, Part 1, Sagar Taluq, no. 55; 
Roman text, p. 192 Ё; Transl., p. 102, last 
two paras.) 

(59) * When the Mahamandalegvara Saluvendra-maharaja, without 
any enemies, was ruling the kindgom in peace :— with beautiful lofty 
chaityalayas, with groups of mandapas, with màána-stambhas of bell-metal 
with pleasure-groves for the town, with many images of metal and stone. 

(Jbid., по. 163; Roman text, p. 234, line 27 ; 
Transl., p. 124.) 

(60) * Glorious with a mana-stambha, a lotus pond and a moat.’ 

(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vm, Part I, Tirthahalli Taluq, 
по. 166; Transl., p. 196, second para.). 

(61) Dipa-maleya-kambha—lamp-stand-pillar.—(Jbid,, Sagar Taluq, no. 
60; Roman text, p. I94, third line from the bottom upwards, and p. 103 ; 
Transl., p. 109, second para.) 

(62) * Bommanna-setti's son Machirü$a-setti had this dipamale pillar 
(dipa-maleya-kambhakke) made.’ 

This inscription is * at the base of Garuda-kambha in front of the Gopala- 
Krishna temple in the fort.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rx, Bangalore Taluq, no. 16, 
Transl., p. 7; Roman text, р. 9.) 

(63) ° Heggunda Baira-Dàsa's son Mara-Dasa, for the god Siva- 
gangenatha, on the rock in front of the Machagale set up this dipamale 
pillar? (Kambha).—(Ibid., Vol. IX, Nelamangala Taluq, no. 37; Roman 
text p. 59; Transl., p. 49.) 

(64) ° Chika-Ankiya-Nàyaka, from love to the god Tirumalenatha, 
set up in front of it this dipamale pillar’ (Kambha).—(Ibid., Vol. IX, 
Devanhalli Taluq, no. 40 ; Roman text, Р. 97; Transl., p. 79.) 

(65) ° Chandalir-Deva-ravutta had this dipamale pillar made for the 
god of Varadaraja of Vogatta.’—(Ibid., Vol. Ix, Hoskote taluq, no. 131; 
Roman text, p. 128; Transl., p. 104.) 

(66) * Who (Sri-Rajendradeva), having conquered the Trattapadi seven 
and a half lakh (country), set up a pillar of victory (jaya-stambha) at 
Kollapuram.’—(£p. Carnat., Vol. x, Kolar Тапа, no. 107 ; Roman text, P- 35; 
Transl., p. 35.) 


547 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


p um vn 


STAMBHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
iV. 4 


(67) * Had this mana-stambha made.'—(Pid., Mulbagal Taluq, no. 59; 


Transl., p. 91.) А T à 
(68) E Set up the yüpa-stambha for the Sarvaprishtha and Aptoryama 


(sacrifices)."—(Ibid., Vol. x, Bagehalli Taluq, no. 17 ; Transl., p. 233.) 
(69) * Those who did the work (Devambudhi tank) : s 
Gantemadana Basavana made the pillars (kambha), Komaraiya the 
ornamental work, and the stone-vedda Chenne-Boyi built the stones of the 
embankment.—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. xu, Tumkur taluq, no. 24 ; Transl., p. 8, 
para. 2.) > 1 
(уо) Harmya-müla-stambhanum—' foundation pillar of the palace. 


(Ibid., Gubbi Taluq, no. 13 ; Roman text, 
p. 36, second line of the first prose 


portion; Transl., p. 19, para. 3.) 
(71) Linga-mudre-stambha—' pillar marked with the linga." 
(Ibid., Vol. xu, Tiptur Taluq, no. 108; 
Roman text, p. 102 ; Transl., p. 64.) 
(72) * We have had the village built, set up (the god) Sanjivaraya, 
erected this Garuda-Kambha, and had this tank and well constructed.’ 
(Ibid., Sira Taluq, no. 92; 
Transl., p. 101, line 2 f.) 
(73) ‘ The roof of this hall is supported by four very elaborately carved 
columns, nearly square at the base, changing into octagons at a little above 
one-third their height. The capitals are circular under square abaci. 
These again are surmounted by square dwarf columns terminating in the 
usual bracket capitals of the older Hindu works.* 
(Тһе temple of Amarnath, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. ш, p. 317, с. 2, para. 1, middle.) 
(74) Malakaraya Mugu (palitasya de)yadharmah stambhah ti 
* This pillar is the benefaction of the gardener Mugupilita.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. vu,'Kuda inscrip., 
"É по. 9, рр. 256-257.) 
(75) ‘ This inscription (Inscriptions from Nepal, по. 1, dated Samvat 
386) is incised on the lower part of the broken pillar placed to the left of the 
door of the temple of Changu-Narayana, about five miles to the north-east 
of Katmandu. The pillar about 20 feet high is without the capital. 
Its lower half is square, half of the upper part is octagonal, higher up it 
becomes sixteen-cornered and finally round. Originally it was crowned 
by a lotus-capital surmounted by a Garuda, about 4 feet high, shaped 
like a winged man kneeling on one knee. The workmanship is very good, 
and the figure shews the flowing locks, which occur frequently on 
the sculptures of the Gupta period.’ Pandit Bhagwanlal Indraji and 
Dr. С. Bühler.— (Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, p. 163, c. 1, para. 2.) 
pe) х ак outside the south-west gate of the village there is a modern 
е god Hanumanta, with a stone dhvaja-stambha standing in 
548 


` 


HINDU ARCHI TECTURE STAMBHA 


front of it. Into the pedestal of this dhvaja-stambha there has been built 
а virgal on monumental stone.’ Dr. Fleet.—(Sanskrit and Old Canarese 
Inscrip., no. LXIX, Ind. Ant., Vol. Ix, p. 96.) 

(77) * There stands а monolith pillar (on which the inscription referred 
to below is engraved) apparently of red sandstone. The pillar is called 
Lakshmi-Kambha or the “pillar of the goddess Lakshmi," and is worshipped 
as a god,’ 

* The upper part of the pillar is octagonal. Below the octagonal part 
of the pillar is a square four-sided division.’ 

(Zbid., no. схі, Ind. Ant., Vol. X, pp. 168, 169.) 

(In villages of eastern Bengal there is a custom to call one of the pillars 
in the house of each family, the Lakshmi pillar and to worship it as a god.) 

(78) “Тһе central tower or compartment of each face is ornamented 
simply by sixteen-sided pilasters at the angles . . . the pilasters are 
octagonal, whilst the outer compartments or towers at the four corners 
of the temple have plain Square pillars and pilasters.’—(Gangai-Konda- 
puram Saiva Temple, Ind. Ant., Vol. IX, р. 117, с. 2.) 

(79) Bhagvato Budhasa puva-dare áyakakam 5 sava niyute apano 

deyadharima savatana hata-sukhaya patithàpitati (no. 1, line 5-6). 
Bhagavato Budhasa maha-chetiya (puva) dare aya(ka)-kharhbhe 
parhcha 5 savamyute арапо deyadharhmam (по. п, line 6.) 
Bhagavato Budhasa maha-chetiya puva-dare ayaka-khambhe 
Save niyute apano deyadharnma Sava-satanamh hita-sukhaya 
patithavitati 11 

‘ Erected near the eastern gate of divine Buddha, five (5) Ayaka-pillars 
which were dedicated for the good and the welfare of all living beings. 

* I am unable to say at present what is meant by the epithet ayaka or 
ayaka. It is possible to connect it either with aryaka “ venerable" or 
with ayas “iron, metal" But I think it more likely that the word has 
some technical meaning. Dr. Bühler. 

‘I would suggest “ lofty ? or “ frontal >; they were pillars about 16 feet 
high, erected on the east front of the Stüpa, exactly as represented on 
the Amaravati slabs bearing representations of stüpas) Dr. Burgess. 

(Inscrip. from Jaggayyapetta, nos. ТП; ІШ; 
Ind. Ant., Vol. x1, рр. 258, note 5:259.) 
(80) Prathama-vihita-kirtti-praudha-yajiia-kriyasu pratikritim iva nay- 
yam mathdape yüpa-rüpàm | 
Iha Kanakhala-Sambhoh sadmani stambha-màlam amala-kashana- 
pashanasya sa vyatatana I! š 

‘He erected in the mandapa of this temple of Kanakhala-Sambhu 

a row of pillars made of pure black stone and shaped like sacrificial posts, 


549 


` 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
STAMBHA 
modern imitation, as it were (of those which were used) for the high 
a © > 


; و‎ 
famed sacrifices of yore. š | 
| (An Abu inscrip. of the reign of Bhimadeva п, v. 12, 


Ind. Ant., Vol. хі, p. 221, с. 2 ; p. 222, C. 2.) 
thambha, thambha (pillar, pillars, stambha or 
persons.—(Bharaut inscrip., nos. 22, 25, 
81, 88, 90, 94, 96, 97, Ind. Ant., Vol. xxt, 


(81) Thabha, thabha, 
sthambhah) gift of some person or 
26, 35, 37, 64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 75» 
p. 227 Ё) í 

(82) * In one of the inscriptions (the one entitled I, A. of Bhagavanlal 
and Buhler), the interpretation of which, it is true, 15 very doubtful, it would 
seem that reference is made to an army, to war and victory ; and if so, the 
pillar would have been both a dharma-stambha and a jaya-stambha, a 
monument of devotion and a trophy of victory.—(The inscrip. P. on the 
Mathura lion-capital, Ind. Ant., Vol. хххуп, p. 245, para. 3, last sentence.) 

(83) ‘ Caused basadis and mana-stambhas to be erected in numerous 


laces. 

j © Mana-stambha is the name given to the elegant tall pillars with а 
small pinnacled mantapa at the top erected in front of the Jaina temples.'— 
(See photographs nos. 149, 155, Fergusson, Jnd. and East. Arch., pp. 270, 
276, and his description quoted below).—(Ef. Carnat., Vol. п, inscrip. on 
Chandragiri, Srávana Belgola, no. 38; Transl., р. 121, line 5; Roman text, 
р. 7, line 16 ; Introduction, p. 19, note 2.) 

(84) ‘The sub-base (of these mana-stambhas, photo nos. 149, 155) 
is square and spreading ; the base itself is square, changing into an octagon 
and thence into a polygonal figure approaching a circle ; and above a wide- 
spreading capital of most elaborate design. То many this may at first 
appear top-heavy, but it is not so in reality. If you erect a pillar at all, it 
ought to have something to carry. Those we erect are coped from pillars 
meant to support architraves and are absurd solicisms when merely sup- 
porting statues; we have, however, not accustomed to them and our cye 
is offended if anything better proportioned to the work to be done is 
proposed ; but looking at the breadth of the base and the strength of the 
scm anything less than here exhibited would be found disproportionately 
small." 


“Оп the tower or square part of these (màna)-stambhas we find that 
curious interlaced basket-pattern, which is so familiar to us from Irish 
manuscripts or the ornaments on the Irish crosses . . . itis equally 
common in Armenia and can be traced up the valley of the Danube into 
central Europe , but how it got to the west coast of India we do not know, 


nor have we, so far as I know, any indication on which we can rely for its 
introduction.’ 


55° 


_ CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


-m 


| 
ess 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


(Under the circumstances, is it not easy and reasonable to give the credit 
of the invention to the Indian architects 2). 


(Fergusson, Ind. and East. Arch., pp. 276, 277.) 

(85) Silà-stambharn sthapayati sma— caused a stone pillar to be 
erected.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 46 ; Roman text, p. 22, line 5, from bottom 
upwards ; Transl., p. 127, line 6.) 

(86) Tasya Jayastambha-nibhath śilayā stambharh vyavasthapayati 
sma Lakshmih—- a stone pillar (for her) as ifa pillar of victory, did Lak- 
shmi ercct.’—(Ibid., no. 49, last verse ; Roman text, p. 28 ; Transl., p. 128.) 

(87) Sri-Gommata-Jina-padagrada chhagada Kambakke: yakshanarn 
madisidam— For the pillar of gifts in front of Sri-Gommata Jinapa, he 
had a Yaksha made.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, no. 110 ; Roman text, p. 86; 
Transl., p. 170.) 

(88) * Bachappa, son of Kirtti of Aruhanahalli, on the death of his 
elder brother Tammarappa, in conjunction with that deva’s queen Bayi- 
chakka, had his form engraved on a pillar (kambha) and set it up.’— 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ш, Malavalli Taluq, no. 13; Transl., p 56; Roman text, 
р- 116.) 

(89) ‘The royal karanika Devarasa set up in the name of his father 

a Dipa-stambha.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. ту, Chamarajnagar Taluq, 
по. 156, Transl., р. 20.) 

(90) * Made a grant of a Dipa-mila pillar (kambha) for the god Lak- 
shmi-kanta." —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. іу, Heggadadevankote Taluq, no. 21; Transl., 
р. 70; Roman text, р. 117.) 

(91) “Не made a brass ornament for the Dhvaja-stambha (flagstaff) 
of the goddess Mahalakshmi and the goddess Sarasvati of Kannam- 
badi.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, Krishnarajapet Taluq, no. 23; Transl., P. 103.) 

(92) * The great minister caused to be erected a dipti-stambha for the 
Krittika festival of lights (Krittika-dipotsavake dipti-stambha) and a 
swing for the swinging cradle festival of the god Сһеппа-Кебауа of Vela- 
pura.’—(Zp. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Belur Taluq, no. 14; Transl., р. 47, 
Roman text, p. 107.) 

(93) * While thus all the world was praising him as the founder of the 
greatness and increase of king Ballala and the cause of his prosperity—the 
dandisa Lakshma, together with his wife, mounted up on the splendid stone 
pillar (Silà-stambha) covered with the poetical Vira-$asana, proclaiming 
his devotion to his master. And оп the pillar they became united ( ) with 
Lakshmi and with Garuda.’ —(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Belur Taluq, 
по. 112; Transl., p. 74, last para.; Roman text, pp. 173, 174.) 

(94) ‘ He erected temples, raised pillars for lights ( Dipa-male), granted 
lands to Brahmans till they were satisfied, constructed five forts and large 


551 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ad келер 
Es А ~ qis sq k =Й О 


5ТАМВНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


tanks.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part r, Ariskere Taluq, no. 109; Transl., p. 159, 
para. 1; Roman text, p. 365.) 

(95) * Dipa-màlà-kambha ° and 
patna Taluq, nos. 155, 165 ; Transl., pp. 195; 198.) 

(96) * The unshaken pillar (Tolagada kambha).'—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v1, 
Tarikere Taluq, по. 12; Transl., р. 105.) : 

(97) * Taking that to mind and desirous of performing а work of merit, 
the king Lakshma built of stone that abode of Jina, as if erected by Indra 
to endure in permanence, and afterwards set up a stone pillar (Sila-stam- 
bha) at the great gateway of the temple, on which was inscribed a 5азапа 
containing all his names and titles, to continue as long as sun, moon and 
stars.’—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. vm, Shikarpur Taluq, no. 136; Transl., p. 103, 
para. 3, last sentence ; Roman text, p. 184, line 10, from bottom upwards.) 

(98) * Several persons (named) set up this vira-stambha in his name.’— 
(Ep. Carnai., Vol. xı, Challakere Taluq, no. 42; Transl., p. 102; Roman text, 
р. 176.) 

(99) “Тһе mahà-mandaleévara Chamunda-Rayarasa (on the date 
specified) erected a Ganda-bherunda pillar (stambha) in front of the (temple 
of the) god Jagad-eka-mallesvara.’—(Jbid., no. 151; Transl., p. 109, para. 2; 
Roman text, p. 193, last para.) 

(100) * The most striking object standing іп the village is perhaps the 
Bherunde$vara pillar, now called the Garuda-kambha. It is a lofty and 
elegant monolith, with a figure of the Ganda Bherunda at the top. It was 
erected, according to the inscription on its base (quoted above, Shikarpur 
Talug, no. 151) by Chamunda-Raya in 1047, and probably fixed the 
length of the Bherunda pole used in measuring length (refers to inscrip. 
по. 120 of the Shikarpur Taluq). 


$ Its dimensions are as follows : The shaft, to the top of the cornice of the 
capital, 30 feet 6 inches high the Bherunde$vara at top, about 4 feet high, 
the bottom of the pillar is 1 foot 6 inches square to 8 feet from the ground, 


< Basava-pillar.’—(Jbid., Channaraya- 


The Bherundda is a double-headed eagle with human body.’ 


| ы (Ер. Carnat., Vol. п, Introduct., p. 47, note 1.) 
(1002) The dimensions of the Talagunda pillar, on which the inscrip. 


pu аг, which is of a very hard dark grey granite, is standing in front of the 

E. ише Pranavesvara temple. Its pedestal is 5 feet 4 inches high and 1 foot 

сера at the top, a little more at the base. The shaft is octagonal, 

E a high, each face being 7 inches wide, but tapering slightly 

ards the top, The finial is a pear-shaped ornament, 1 foot 11 incheg 
up. Carnat., Vol. уп, Introduct., p. 47, para. 2.) 


552 


шш: by S3 Foundation USA 


above that it is circular, of the same diameter, with decorative bands. : 


| Bo. 176 of the Shikarpur Taluq is incised, are given by Mr. Rice: “Тһе | 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


(101) Maha-rathisa Goti-putrasa Agni-mitranakasa siha-thabho dánam— 
“Тһе gift of a lion-pillar (Simha-stambha) by the Maha-rathi Agni-mitra- 
naka, the son of Goti.’—(Karle inscrip. no. 2, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, 
Vol. 1v, p. 9o.) 


- 


(102) * On the east side, steps lead up to a platform on which stands a 
fine Kirtti-stambha or Torana arch. It consists of two highly carved 
pillars, 4 feet broad at the plinth, and rising to a height of 13 feet 10 inches 
including a broad cruciform capital, whose inner arms support the orna- 
mental torana or cusped arch, over this capital a prolongation of the shaft 
Supports a sur-capital, 3 feet above the first, over which again lies the 
architrave in two fasciae richly carved. . . . This supports the 
projecting cornice with its decorative guttae, surmounted by a plinth and on 
this stands the pediment in which Siva or Bhairava is the central figure.’ 

(Ahmadabad Architecture, Burgess, Arch. Surv., New 
Imp. Series, Vol. хххш, p. 94, Plate LXXXII.) 

(103) “Не set up Rama in the Копдагата temple. Subsequently 
Janmejaya performed the serpent sacrifice here, a stone pillar, about 9 feet 
high, with the top fashioned like a trident or spear . . . being pointed 
out as the Yüpa-stambha or sacrificial post used by him.’—(Mysore Arch. 
Report, 1915-16, p. 21, Plate x, Fig. 1, on page 22.) 

(104) See Buddhist cave temples (Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 
IV, Plates хуш, nos. 1-2 ; XXII, nos. 1-3 ; XXIX, no. 3). 

See Sharqi Architecture of Jaunpur (Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xr, 
Plates xxxix, Figs. r, 2, 3, 4; xL, Fig. 2; and read the inscrip. no. xxvi, 
р. 51, under SILPIN and STHAPATI). 

СУ. Moghul Architecture of Fatehpur-Sikri (Smith, Arch. Surv., New Imp. 
Series, Vol. хуш, Part 1, Plates rur to LXXI). 

See Ram Raz, Essay on Arch. of Hind., Plates ту to хуш. 

See Lion-pillar (Mysore Arch. Report, 1915-16, Plate vu, Fig. r, p. 14). 

See Elephant pillars, Brahma-deva-pillar (zbid., 1914-15, Plates тх, Fig. 
3 ; хш, Fig. r, pp. 18, 26). 

See pillars of Mukha-mantapa with a stone umbrella in front.— (15id., 
1913-14, Plate v, Fig. r, p. 14.) 

(105) See Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. 1, Plate ххп (Bakhra 
and Lauriya Lion pillars), p. 58 ; xxix (Kahaon and Bhitari pillars), p. 92 ; 
XLVI (capital of Ašoka Elephant pillar), p. 274. 

Ibid., Vol. ш, Plate xxxiv (Gaya granite pillars). 

Ibid., Vol. ту, Plate v, the so-called Kutb-Minar, which is in reality a 
Hindu structure. 

Cf. its details Total length of outer enclosure is 228 feet D The 
law of geometrical proportion is thus seen to govern the entire Hindu 


553 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


т dun a ET 


STABHAM AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


‚ from the size and the disposition of the inclosures which 
er ei. spacing of the ornamental bands that adorn te gates, 
3 every important feature is subject to the great law. But where is the law 

that governs the Muhammadan structures ? They (the diseno etim) 

designed like giants, and their Hindu workmen * finished like jewellers 2 

but from the giant killed by jack, right through the whole genus, giants 

have hitherto been noted only for supreme stupidity, combined with im- 
mense strength. "—(Cunningham's Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. 1v, pp. 56-67.) 

Ibid., Vol. v, Plates ххуп (Mallot temple pillar) ; xtv, xLvı (Indo-Per- 

sian, pillars) ; хіуп to L (Indo-Corinthian pillars). 

Ihid., Vol. vr, Plate xx (Viéala-deva temple pillar). | 

Ibid, Vol. уп, Plates хуш (Sati pillar from Simga; the details of its 
mouldings); 1X (section of interior of garbha-griha shewing a pillar in 
elevation) ; x (elevation of a pillar of the Maha-mandapa). 

Ibid., Vol. уш, Plates хі, хп (brick pillar, Balrampur). 

Ibid., Vol. тх, Plates xiv, XXIV, xxix. | 

Ibid., Vol. x, Plates xiv (Besnagar Crocodile and Fan-palm pillars, р. 42); 
xxi (pillar of Swami-Gosura); xxi, Figs. 1, 2 (Sanchi pillars), з (Eran 
pillar), 4, 5 (Udayagiri pillars) ; xxvu (Eran pillar) ; ххуш (Toran-pillar) ; 
ххх (Eran pillar of Narasinha temple). 

Ibid., Vol. xiv, Pates xxix, xxx (Sati pillars). 

Ibid., Vol. хут, Plates xxx, хххі (Bhagalpur pillar). 

Ibid., Vol. xix, Plate x (Baijnath pillar). 

Ibid, Vol. xx, p. 149, Plate xxxiv (Thieves pillars). 

Ibid, Vol. xxu, Plate уп (Section of Asoka pillar, Rampurwa). 

Ibid., Vol. ххш, Plate xxi (pillar of victory or Jaya-stambha). 

(106) * These pillars are common to all the styles of Indian architecture. 
With the Buddhists they were employed to bear inscriptions on their shafts, 
with emblems or animals on their capitals. With the Jains they were 
generally Deepadans (Dipa-stambhas) or lamp-bearing pillars; with the 
Vaishnavas they as generally bore statues of Garuda or Hanümàn (Garuda- 
stambhas); with the Saivas they were flagstaffs (Dhvaja-stambhas) ; 
but whatever their destination they were always the most original, and 
frequently the most elegant productions of Indian art.'—(Fergusson, Hist. 
of Ind. and East. Arch., p. 50.) 

*Ifany one wished to select one feature of Indian architecture which 
would illustrate its rise and progress, as well as its perfection and weakness, 
there are probably no objects more suited for this purpose than these stam- 
. bhas or free-standing pillars. They are found of all ages, from the simple 
2 and monolithic lats which Agoka set up to bear inscriptions or emblems, some 
250 years в.о. down to the seventeenth or perhaps even eighteenth century 
Of our era. During these 2,000 years they were erected first by the Buddhists 


554 


then by the Jains, and occasionally by the other sects in all parts of India ; 
and notwithstanding their inherent frailty, some fifty—it may be a hundred 
—are known to be still standing. After the first and most simple, erected 
by Ašoka, it may be safely asserted that no two are alike though all bear 
strongly the impress of the age in which they were erected, and all are 
thoroughly original and Indian in design.’—(Fergusson, Hist. of .Ind. and 
East. Ach., p. 277, para.2.) 

(107) The following references will give a glimpse of the pillars of the 
pre-Buddhistic periods (especially of the early Vedic period), when, it 
should be noticed, they were employed both as free-pillars (compare the 
єз yupas) and as forming the essential members of а building. 

i “Тһе column or pillar in Indian architecture is indeed very ancient. 

The word Sthüna which is a synonym of pillar in the Manasára is used 

in the Rig-Veda and the later literature? in the same sense. The word 

Stambha ° is not perhaps so old but Skamba ĉis used in the Rig-Veda 

in the same sensc.'—(Macdonall and Keith, Vedic Index, п, рр. 488, 483.) 

| | The word * upa-mit,’ not used іп the Manasára, occurs in the Rig-Veda” 
I 


| HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 
> 
x 


and the Atharua-VedaŠ in the sense of pillar. 

According to Professors Macdonall and Keith, in the Rig-Veda the word 
1 *Upa-mit' is used in the sense of an upright pillar. In the Atharva-Veda, the 
9 word, coupled with Parimit and Pratimit, denotes the beams supporting the 

Upamit. Parimit denotes the beams connecting the Upamit horizontally.” 

* Concerning the proportions of columns, the second sort of column 
in the Hindu architecture (as depicted in the Manasara) may be compared 
with the Tuscan, the third with the Doric, the fourth with the Ionic, and the 
fifth with the Corinthian or composite pillar.’ (Ram Raz, ibid., p. 38.) 

The following details of the Indian and Greco-Roman orders may be 
compared here for a clear knowledge of the subject. 

Ram Ках describes the Indian Orders on the authority of the Kasyapa 
and the Manasára and * partly from the models found in the temples and 
porticoes of a pure Hindu style.’ And the details of the five Greco- 
Roman orders are quoted below from Vitruvius, Palladio and others as 
given by Gwilt. 


1 R.-V. r, 59, 1; V. 45, 2; 62, 7; уш, 17, 14; X, 18, 13 (of the grave). 
2 A.-V. ш, 12, 6 (of the varnga, beam, being placed on the pillar) ; xv. r, 63 
Sata-patha-Brahmana, xiv, 1, 3, 7; 3, 1, 22, etc. 
Sthiina-raja—main pillar, ш, І, I, 11; 5, I, I. 
3 Kathaka-Samhita, хххі, 1 ; and often Sütras. 
4 R.-V. 1. 34 9; IV, 13, 5, etc. 
5 R.-V. 1. 59 13 IV. 5, I. 
6 A.-V. Іх. 3. I. 
Cf. Zimmer, Altindishches Leben, 153. 
7 Vedic Index. 1, р. 98. 


555 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


^ 


с-ш та ae ОРГ MES M 
pun NE Ri vtt 


D - He gives to the base and capital each one module in height. 


STAMBHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


f column is seven diameters in height ; it is placed.in 
a base and pedestal ; the base is two diameters high ; 
es called Kumbha-bandha. The pedestal is equal 
in height to three-fourths of the base and is of the kind EM Vedi-bhadra. 
The column is also placed only оп а ре estal iun is 

al to half the height of the pillar, and which is one of the sorts called 
Ба dra, The capital given to the first design of this pillar is taken 
fon a model found at Tiruvottiyur, near Madras ; шз the same which 
Manasára and others call Tarahga-Bodhika (2), and is опе diameter high 
and projects equal to its height. Speaking of this sort of capital, Manasára 
says “it should be decorated with Tarangas (projecting moulding employed 
in capitals, terminating by a number of undulating lines) and other appro- 
priate ornaments ; the height of the capital being divided into twelve parts, 
let the form of Tarafgas occupy three of them, let the Bodhika (capital), 
which should resemble the cobra de capello, occupy six, and adorned with 
flowers and the like, and let one part above this be given to ane 
one to the cyma, and one to the listel. The projecting part of the Bodhika 
should be fashioned like the stalk of a plantain flower. At the upper 
extremity are the Tarangas of equal height or something more. The lower 
part of the head of the Bodhika is one-third on the upper in breadth, and a 
third of the former being divided into five parts, one of them is given to the 
cavetto, one to the fillet, two to the cyma and one to the listel; and the 
whole should be decorated with foliages, rows of gems, and the like.” In 
another place the same author says “ let the capital (Bodhika) be made to 
consist of опе, two, three, four, five, six faces, according to the situation 
in which it is placed 2. | 

< The other form of capital given to the column is taken from а mandapa 
at Mayalapur. It is to be met with in many other ancient buildings and 
is what the artists call in Tamil surub-bodhika, roll capital. I cannot find 
any particular description of it, except a passage in the Manasara, which 
says: “ Тһе projecting ornaments on the sides of the capital are made 
either in the form of an inverted apex or of a wheel (chakra) or circle. It is 
one diameter in height and projects but three-quarters of the diameter ”.’— 
(Ram Raz, pp. 31-32.) I . 

This is compared with the Tuscan order, the details whereof are given 
below from Vitruvius and Vignola as quoted by Gwilt. 

I. "Tuscan order : 
E .' Vitruvius (Book rv, Chap. уп) in this order forms the columns six 
diameter high, and makes their diminution one-quarter of the diameter. 
No pedestal 
he architrave of timber in 
led dowels. Не, however, 


‹ The second sort o 
most examples upon а 
it belongs to the speci 


556 


4. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


leaves the height unsettled, merely saying that their height should be such 
as may be suitable to the grandeur of the work where they are used. Не 
directs no frieze, but places over the architrave cantilevers or mutuli 
projecting one-fourth of the height of the column, including the base and 
capital. Не fixes no measure for the cornice, neither does he give any 
directions respecting the inter-columniations of this order. Тһе instructions 
аге not so specific as those which he lays down for other orders, and there 
have been various interpretations of the text, which unfortunately. cannot 
in any of the suppositions be tested on ancient remains.’ (Gwilt., Encycl., 
art. 2556.) 

In the following table of the parts of the Tuscan order (Gwilt., Encycl. 
art. 2555) the whole height according to the measuring unit of Vignola 
is 16 modules and 3 parts : 


Mouldings whereof the parts are composed 


Heights of Projections 
mouldings from the 
in parts of axis of 
a module column in 


parts of a 
module 
ENTABLATURE 
f Саа Í uu round 4 27% 
stragal I 
end инъ [| туты aIv 231 
[ Congé, or cavetto I 221 
А. Cornice, Corona 5 224 
16 parts. | | Drip -. І 213 
-. Sinking from corona, 
| | or hollow i 193 
| | Fillet x i 14 
( L Bed moulding ogee 4 191 
B. Frieze, Б oo 14 91 
14. parts. 
ІІ оо Fillet, or listel 2 11} 
С. Archi- Congé or small 
trave, 12 Fascia | сауейо Жа 2 93 
parts. L Fascia oc 8 9% 


The height of the drip under the corona is taken оп that member, and 
that of the hollow in the height of the fillet. 


COLUMN 
я Fillet so ^ o 14% 
D. Capital, | Abacus J Congé, or cavetto I 131 
12 parts. L Band SS 18% 
557 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


STAMBHA 
Heights of Projections 
mouldings from the 
in parts of axis `of 
a module Column in 
parts of a 
module 
CoLuMN 
( r Ovolo 3 131 
. 1, 
D. Gapital, Cymatium Fillet I 10% 
12 parts— 4 Congé, or cavetto I 2 
(concld.). ( Neck or  Hypotrachelin .. 3 94 
Astragal, С Bead I II 
[ or Fillet i 104 
Shaft, necking Congé, or cavetto I gt 
12 modules. | Shaft ..II mod. 8 parts 9} 
( Shaft — .. Congé, or apo- 
phyge. > 1$ 12 
E. Base f Fillet I 131 
12 parts. | oU Torus 6 5 161 
( Plinth pedestal .. 6 16} 
б. Согпісе, | Cymatium f Listel ў. 2 202 
6 parts. l Ogee od 4 20 
Е Die | | Die, or dado . .. 3 mod. 4 parts 164 
; Congé,or аро- 
arts, › 
КЕР phyge бо 2 16% 
Base, { { Fillet M I 184 
6 parts. Plinth бо 5 202 


The third sort of column, with its base and capital, is eight diameters 
high, with a diminution of the shaft at the top of the cighth part of the 
thickness at its bottom. The base occupies half a diameter and this height 
is to be divided into ten parts. Two to be given to the plinth, one to the 
fillet, three to the cymatia and its fillet, one and a half to the cavetto, the 
same to the torus, and one to the cymbia. The whole projection of the 
base is half of its height. The following passage from the Manasára refers 
to this kind of base : ‹ let a base ornamented with the lotus be made 
under the foot to the pillars one or two diameters in height, and let 
it be adorned with figures of demons, lions, and the like.’ 

* The height of the capital, which is made after the manner of the Pha- 
laka, is three-quarters of the lower diameter of the column, and is divided 
into thirteen parts ; two are given to the abacus, one to the fillet, two to 
the mandana, seven to the cymarecta, and one to the cymbia. The upper 
part of the shaft, about one and a half diameters below the capital, being. 


558 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


$9 
| 
| 


projection of the capital is one diameter, or about an eighth part beyond 
| that of the lowest part of the base, the fillet projects the full, and the torus 
three-quarters of their respective heights.’ 

‘The height of the entablature is one-fourth of that of the column. It 
is to be divided into twenty-one parts : eight are given to the architrave, 
seven to the cornice, and six to the vyalam (frieze). Of the eight parts 
of the architrave, one is to be given to the cavetto, three to the tema ог 
benda (uttara) with its listels, two to the cymarecta and to the upper 
fascia (vajana). Of the seven parts of cornice, one occupies the fillet, and 
the remainder the ovolo (prastara) ; and of the six parts of the cornice (or 
frieze, vyala) three to be given to the cavetto (or fillet, vyajana), two to 
the prati-vajana (cavetto), and one to the fillet. The projection of the 
vajana (fillet) of the architrave is equal to that of the capital, that of the 
prastara (ovolo) is twice as much, and that of the cornice equal to its own 
height. After making a similar division of the entablature, our author 
(Manasara) lays down the following rule respecting the projection of the 
members. The height of the architrave being divided into four, five, six, 
seven or eight parts, one should be given to its projection beyond the pillars, 
The kapota (corona) projects equal to its height, or to three-fourths of it, 
and the vajana (fillet) one-fourth. The 4linga (fillet) recedes about one 
diameter, and the antarita (fillet) projects equal to its own height, and the 
same may be said of the prati.’—(Ram Raz, Ess. Arch. Hind., pp. 32, 33.) 

This third sort of Ram Raz’s column is apparently without a pedestal, 
Its base too does not exactly correspond with any of the bases mentioned 
in the Mandsara (Chap. xiv). None of the Mandsara’s eight entablatures 
consists of twenty-one parts like the one prescribed above for the column 
under description. 

Ram Raz (p. 38) identifies this column with the doric order, the details 
whereof are given below from the texts of both Virtuvius, and Vignola, 
as quoted by Gwilt. 

II. Doric order : š 

Vitruvius (Book rv, Chap. ш) describes the Doric order more clearly than 
others. ‘In order to set out its proportions, he tells us, though not giving 
a direct rule, that its pedestal is composed of three parts, the cymatium or 
cornice, the die and the base : and that the base and the cymatium are 
composed of many mouldings, whose individual proportions, however, he 
v does not give. Не assigns no particular base to the Doric order : but 
nevertheless, places under half a diameter in height the Attic base, whose 


559 


| 

| HINDU ARCHITEGTURE STAMBHA 

б divided into twenty-four parts, three are given to the collarino with its 
2: fillet, three to the ovolo, three to the lower collarino, five to the lower torus 
| with its cymatia, and ten below to the strings of pearls (muktadama). The 


СС-0. бигикш Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized b 


Y Е 


STAMBHA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


ll fillet, scotia, and the upper torus with its 


jor and inferior fillets, together with the apophyge of the column. 
He E d projection of the base а fifth part of the diameter of the 
column. The height of the shaft he makes of six dane, and its dimi- 
nution a sixth part of the diameter. The capital’s height he makes equal 
to half a diameter, and divides it into three parts, one for the abacus and 
its cymatium, another for the echinus and its fillet, the third for the hy- 
potrachelium. To the architrave he assigns the height of one half diame- 
ter of the column and to the frieze fifty parts of the module (semi- 
diameter divided into thirty parts), including the fascia, forming the 
capital of the triglyphs. His cornice consists of thirty parts of the module 
and its projection forty. The whole height which he gives to the order is 
(in the measurement here adopted) seventeen modules and twenty parts.'— 
(Gwilt, Encycl., art. 2 566.) 
In the following table all the details of the Doric order are given (Gwilt, 


Encyd., art. 2566). 


members are the plinth, sma 


Members composing the orders 


Heights of Projections 
mouldings from the 
inpartsof. axis of 
a module column in 

parts of a 
module 


ENTABLATURE 
Fillet of corona оо T 34 
Cavetto .. T T 31 
Па | оо oo оо i 26 
Cyma reversa оо oo 3 30 
Corona .. бо o0 284 
Drip s оо oo 1 27% 
Filet | .. ae 
Gutta under the coron 
Dentil 
Fillet 
Cyma reversa 
_ Capital of triglyph 
B. Frieze, f Triglyph .. 
18 parts. Metope 
ae 7 Г Listel 
ES С. Archi- 1 Capital of guttae 
trave, 10 ¦ Guttae 


EP. ( Fascia .. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 
Heights of Projections 
mouldings from the 
in parts of axis of 
a module colurnn іп 
= parts ofa 
module 
COLUMN 
[ Listel i 154 
, Cyma reversa I 151 
| Band f 2] 14 
D. Capital, | Echinus or quarter round 2] 132 
I2 parts. 1 Three annulets 14 114 
Neck of capital 4 10 
f Ovolo I 12 
Astragal .. Fillet + 11d 
Congé I} IO 
Shaft of the column, 14 modules. 
f Apophyge or congé 2 12 
. Fillet š I4 
E. Base, 12 | Astragal at Ж 
parts: | Torus 4 17 
L Plinth 6 17 
PEDESTAL 
[ Listel 4 23 
F. Cornice, à Echinus .. I 224 
6 parts. 5 Fillet i 212 
| Corona 21 2I 
L Сута reversa : 11 181 
Die of the pedestal, 4 modules. 
f Congé I 17 
| Fillet i 18 
С. Base, 10 | Astragal .. I 182 
` parts. | Inverted cyma 2 I9 
Second plinth се 21. 2I 
L First plinth E 4 214 


‘The fourth sort of column is nine diameters high. Тһе base is one 
of those called Prati-bhadra (see under ADHISHTHANA), and is one diameter 
in height. It is without a pedestal. 

*'The base is to be divided into eighteen equal parts, two to be given 
to the plinth, one to its fillet, three to the cyma recta, three to the cavetto 
with its listel, three to the torus, three to the upper cavetto, two to the 
plat-band (pàda-bandha), and one to the cimbra (? cymbia). Тһе 

561 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


т ұза аавв НЕС Кос ОЕ оиы лыпа а йы 
^ ` 


STAMBHA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


-third of the height of the whole base, the 


t equal to their respective heights." 
Тһе upper ornaments (? entablature): of this column occupy two 
diameters, and the capital takes three-quarters of the diameter, which is 
to be divided into ten parts : two to be given to the abacus, which projects 
half a diameter, one to the strings of pearls, one to the fillet, four to the 
cymatia, and one to the circular cymbia. The ornaments under the 
capital аге to be divided into sixteen parts : of which give two to the cavetto 
four to the torus, which projects 


or collarino, one and a half to the cyma, í > 
perpendicular to the plinth or three-quarters part of its height, one and a 
half to the lower cyma, three to the lower collarino, two to the astragal, 


which projects equal to its own height, and two to the third cyma and its 
fillet, below which a space equal to three diameters is taken up by strings 
of: pearls, but which аге omitted in some columns of a similar descrip- 
tion. —(Ram Raz, p. 34.) 
The sources of the details giv 
of the entablature, capital and s 
Ram Raz (p. 38) identifies thi 
whereof are given below for comparison, 
III. Ionic order: 
Vitruvius’s description of this order (Book іш, Chap. ш) is not clear. 
According to his commentator Daniel Barbaro (Gwilt, Encycl., art. 2 577) 
° the height of the pedestal is made nearly a third part (including its base 
and cymatium) of the height of the column. To the base of the column 


he assigns half a diameter, and to the shaft itself nearly eight diameters, 
its surface being cut into twenty-four flutes separated by fillets from each 
other. His method of describing the volute is not thoroughly understood : 
it is, perhaps, of little importance to trouble ourselves to decipher his direc- 
tions, seeing that the mode of forming it is derived from mathematical 
principles, as well understood-now as in the days of the author.’ 

‘The architrave he leaves without any fixed dimensions, merely saying 
that it must be larger or smaller according to the height of the columns. 
He prescribes, however, that the architrave, frieze, and cornice should 
together be somewhat less than a sixth part of the height of the column 
with its base and capital. The total height he makes for the order, воа 
ing to our measures, is twenty-five modules and nearly nine parts.’ 

< Of the Ionic order there are many extant examples, both Grecian and 
Roman, and except the debased later examples of the latter there is not 
that wide difference between them that exists between the Grecian and 


Roman Doric.’ 


projection of the plinth is one 
torus and the plat-band projec 


en above are not specified. Тһе account 


haft is also not quite clear. 
s column with the Ionic order, the details 
from Vitruvius and Gwilt : 


562 


HINDU ARCHITEC TURE 


Gwilt (Encycl, art. 2574) gives in the 
projections of the parts of the order : 


Members composing the orders 


А. Cornice, 
34 parts. 


B. 


C. Archi- 
trave, 221 
parts. 


"E. Сара], 
17 parts. 


( 
4 
| 


| 


| 


C 
f 


r 


چ — ——— 


ENTABLATURE 
Fillet of cyma 
Сута recta.. 
Fillet 
Cyma reversa 
Corona 
Fillet of the drip 
Ovolo 
Astragal .. 
Fillet 
Dentel fillet 
Dentals 
Fillet 
Cyma reversa 
Freize 
Listel 


Cyma reversa 
First fascia .. 
Second fascia 
Third fascia 


Capital on the side að 
Capital on the coussinet, or 
cushion 
COLUMN 

Tillet 
Cyma reversa 
Listel 50 
Channel of the volute 
Ovolo 
Astragal .. ( Bead 

4 Fillet 


( Congé, or cavetto .. 


( Above .. 


Shaftofthe? 16 mod. 6 parts, | 


column. Below .. 


563 


STAMBHA 


Heights of 
mouldings 
in parts of 
a module 


Ne 


PH сую HO m 


C) ы we n 
in oh on ik C 


- mb OO = N 
aD CO ын Ne А 


DEEDES HD үз 


following table the heights and 


Projections 
from the 
axis of 
column in 
Parts ofa 
module 


46 - 
41 

404 
385 


291 
281 


19% 


STAMBHA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Heights of Projections 


mouldings 
in parts of 
a module 


COLUMN 


= № 
vH 


( Apophyge 
Fillet 
| | Torus 
; Fillet 
5 T DCUM | d 
: 198 pa š 'Two beads 
Fillet 
| Scotia 
| Fillet 
L Plinth 
2 š PEDESTAL 
Filet .. 20 2% % 
Gyma reversa : I 
Согопа 56 ao 3 
Fillet of the drip оо - $ 
5o ac 3 
I 
I 


Oe M ж OM AE ND PHO 


1 
З 


G. Cornice, 


iij parts. Ovolo 


Bead 
Fillet 


Congé с 1 
Die, 4 modules ag 5% 122 
Congé 2 
Fillet I 
Bead 11 
Cyma reversa E д; 3 
Fillet 2 
L Plinth 


Н. Base, 
- 10 parts. 


————— TT س‎ --А.------ 


ны 


ought to be three-quarters of the diameter. 


the cymbia. 
pective heights. 
which is about a third part of the height of the column.’ 


564 


from axis 
of column 
in parts of 
a module 


18 
20 
22% 
204 
20 
22 
22h 
22 
21 
24 
25 


35 
944 
33% 
30 
29% 
27 
264 

: 25 

т mod.7 
25 
27 
28 
275 
31$ 
33 


* The fifth sort of column is ten diameters high, including the base which 
It should be divided into 
twelve parts : two for the plinth whose projection is a fourth part of the 
diameter, one for the fillet, four for the cyma, and one and a half for the ` 
cavetto, one for the lesser cyma, one and a half for the torus, and one for 
The projection of the cyma and torus is equal to their res- 
This column is sometimes erected on a high pedestal, 


‘The height of the capital, which is called Pushpa-bandha, is equal 
to the upper diameter of the column : its projection on the side is equal 


Ф: – 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


to its height, and the middlemost square 15 ornamented with the petals 
ofa lotus. “ The altitude of the capital,” says Kasyapa, “ may be equal 
to the higher, lower, or the middle diameter of the column. Its breadth 
may be equal to its height, or four or five diameters.” A capital, the height 
of which is from one to two diameters, and the breadth twice its height, 
is of the superior sort ; and that which in height is half the diameter, and in 
breadth from one to three diameters, is of the inferior sort.’ 

* In colonnades of porticoes, the inter-columniations are found to be 
from one diameter and a half to two diameters.'—(Ràm Raz, pp. 34-35.) 

In this order the description of the entablature is not given. Ràm 
Raz (p. 38) identifies this ‘with the Corinthian or Composite pillar,’ 
the details of both of which are given below for comparison from Vitruvius 
and Palladio as quoted by Gwilt. 

IV. Corinthian order : 

<“ Vitruvius (Book rv, Chap. 1)'is scanty in the information he gives on 
the Corinthian order, and what he says respecting it relates more to the 
origin of the capital and the like than to the proportion of the detail. Не 
makes the capital only one diameter high, and then forms upon the plan a 
diagonal two diameters long by means whereof the four faces are equal 
according to the length of the arc, whose curve will be the ninth part in 
length and its height the seventh part of the capital. He forms the order 
with a pedestal, with base and cornice (as Daniel Barbaro would have it). 
The whole height given to it in our measures is about 27 modules and 2 
parts.—(Gwilt., Encycl., art. 2587.) 

In the following table Gwilt (Encycl., art. 2583) gives, on the authority 
of Vignola, measurements of the mouldings of the Corinthian order : 

Members composing the order 
Heights of Projections 
mouldings from axis 


in parts of of column 
a module in parts of 


Š a module 
ENTABLATURE 

( Fillet of cornice I 53 

Cyma recta 5 58 

- Fillet i 48 
Cyma reversa Ії 45} 

A. Cornice, Corona 5 46 
38 parts. Cyma reversa 1} 453 
Modillion oc оо 6 443 

Fillet (remainder of  modillion 

band) T со i 284 

ІС. ae EE oc 4 28 

565 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


e 
y 


STAMBHA 
ENTABLATURE 

( Bead 
| Fillet 

A. Cornice, 1 Dentils 

quo Fillet 

L Hollow or congé 

B Frieze, 1 mod. 74 parts high 


f Fillet 


Cyma reversa 


с Вега 
С, Агсһі- First fascia 
Cyma reversa 
| 
| 


trave, 27 
parts Second fascia 
Bead E a 
( Third fascia ae E 
COLUMN 


Inverted echinus of the bell 
Large volutes T 
Upper small leaves 

Large leaves 


Fillet оо O 
D. Capital, Lower member of abacus 
| 
| Lower leaves 


( Astragal 
Fillet 
Shaft, 17 | Congé ae 
modules 1$ 4 shaft upper part 
parts. `` Uower part 
Apophyge 
L Fillet E 
566 


Heights 
mouldings 
in parts of 
a module 


OO nm Oww m 


лн со юм mb н 


1} 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Projections 
from axis 
of column 
in parts of 
a module 


diagon- 
ally 36, 
on plane 


33% 


22% 
31% 
at top, 
244 
аї їор, 
204 
18 


ae 
15 


18 
20 


215 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— 


ee — — 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


Heights of Projections 
mouldings from axis 
in parts of of column 


a module in parts of 
a module 
CoLuMN 
f Torus 3 22 
Fillet 2 205 
| Scotia 14 20 
Fillet 2 20% 
E. Base, 141 4 Two beads I 22 
parts. Fillet i 2T 5 
| Scotia 14 212 
Fillet i 29 
Torus 4 25 
( Plinth 22 6 25 
PEDESTAL 
( Fillet 3 33$ 
Cyma reversa 14 331 
- Corona 3 32 
F. Cornice, 4 Throat 1i 302 
144 parts. Bead I 264 
Fillet i 251 
Frieze 5 2 25 
( Bead 1} 26% 
( Fillet i 261 
| Congé 1} 25 
Die, gı 4 Die 874 25 
parts. | Fillet 13 25 
L Congé i 261 
( Bead A 1} 27] 
| Inverted cyma reversa 3 265 
С. Base, 142 J Fillet I 302 
parts. | Тогив on .. 3 32% 
L Plinth .. 6 323 


V. Composite order (compound of Corinthian and Ionic) : 

Vitruvius has not given any instructions on this order. Сул (Encyd., 
art. 2596) gives Palladio's details of this order. ‘ To the pedestal's height 
this master assigns 3 diameters and three-eighths of the column adding 
to it a lower plinth of the height of half a diameter. Не makes the base 
of the column half a diameter in height and assigns to the shaft eight dia- 
meters and a little more than one-fourth, and cuts it into twenty-four 
flutes. Тһе height of this capital is one diameter and a sixth . . . 
'The architrave, frieze and cornice he makes a little less than a fifth part 
of the height of the column. The whole height of his profile in our 
measures is thirteen modules and twelve parts.’ 


567 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


5ТАМВНА AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


In the following table Gwilt (Encycl., art. 2592) gives, on the authority 
of Vignola, measurements of the mouldings of the Composite order : 
ers composing the order : 
Memb posing Heights of Projections 
mouldings from axis 
in partsof of column 


a module in parts of 
a module 
ENTABLATURE 
Fillet of cornice 1} 5I 
| Сутпа recta 5 51 
Fillet 1 46 
à Cyma reversa ° 2 45% 
Bead .. * 1 431 
А. Comice, ; Corona .. oo 5 43 
36 parts. Cyma under the corona 1$ 41 
Fillet I 33 
| Cyma reversa 4 323 
Fillet of the dentils 2 28 
| Dentils 7% 29 
| Fillet 1 23 
L Ovolo 5 22 
( Bead B 17 
: | Fillet B us 
B. Frieze, } Congé ic 15 
27 parts. | Upright face 17} 15 
( Apophyge 7 22 
f Fillet I 22 
Cavetto .. 2 20% 
Ovolo 3 20 
С. Archi- + Bead E I 172 
trave, 27 | First fascia оо oc IO 17 š 
parts, | Cyma reversa A Be 2 162 E 
L Second fascia оо 15 d 
COLUMN 
Echinus and fillet .. С 2 201 
| Lower member of abacus .. 4 dia- 323 
' 3 E | gonally · 
Y ^ D Ca, Volute .. oo oo pr 30% 
БЕ Ор: | Band of upper leaves.. 5 3 24 
- Upper leaves со оо 9 221 
| Band of lower leaves..  — бс 3 20% 
SI Lower leaves 55 бо 9 _ 10 


~ + % UN 
|| . HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 
«ғ Heights оҒ Projections 
4 mouldings from axis 
in parts of of column 
a module in parts of 
a module 
| COLUMN 
Astragal .. 2 174 
Fillet Hc oc So I 16} 
ily : Congé .. - T 2 152 
7 Column, 16 [one ос se T 2 
mod. 12 Shaft .. 16 mod. 12 parts. 
š parts. below .. 22 x 18 
Apophyge on 58 2 20 
L Fillet 2; v 52 14 20 
( Congé .. ae T 2 20 
Fillet a" S E 13 20 
| Torus 3 22 
Fillet i 204 
| Scotia 14 20 
E. Base of Fillet 1 21j 
column, 18 ў Bead i 21% 
parts. Fillet i 212 
| Scotia 2 20% 
ri | Fillet 1 23 
М. "Тогив 4 25 
US Y L Plinth us 6 25 
PEDESTAL 
| ( Fillet 3 33 
N Сутпа reversa 1$ 321 
Corona 3 31$ 
1 Е. Cornice, | Сута recta 1} 281 
( 14. parts. Fillet i 264 
j Cavetto I 254 
' |, Frieze 5 25 
di ( Bead I 27 
f Fillet I 274 
Congé If 25 
Die, 94 parts | Die. 881 25 
| Apophyge 2 27 
L Fillet I 20 
( Bead be I 274 
, | Inverted сута reversa 3 30 
G. Base, 12 Fillet I 31i 
š arts. Torus e 3 33 
B к | Plinth .. E 4 33 


569 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


<ТАМВНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


‘The orders and their several characters and qualities do not merely 
appear in the five species of columns into which they have been sub-divided, 
but are distributed throughout the edifices to which they are applied, the 
column itself being the regulator of the whole composition. It is on this 
account that the name of orders has been applied to the differently formed 
and ornamented supports, as columns, which have received the names or 
Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, Tuscan, and Composite orders, whereof the 
three first are of Grecian origin, and the two last, it is supposed, of Italian 
or Roman origin. Each of these, by the nature of its proportions and the 
character resulting from them, produces a leading quality, to which its 
dimensions, form and ornaments correspond. But neither of the order is 
so limited as to be confined within the expression of any single quality, 
Thus the strength indicated in the Doric order is capable of being modified 
into many shades and degrees of that quality. —(Gwilt., Encyl., art. 2538.) 

(Further accounts of the origin of orders will be found under NAGARA.) 

‘There are other columns,’ says Кат Raz (p. 38), ‘in the Indian 
architecture, not only one diameter lower than the Tuscan, but from one 
to two diameters higher than the Composite.’ ‘The first sort is a 
column six diameters high; it is rarely made but upon a high base and 
pedestal. The entablature is more than half the altitude of the column, 
and the inter-columniation generally four diameters. The pedestal is of 
the Prati-bandha kind (see under UPAPiTHA, and there it is called Prati- 
bhadra) : and its height is equal to that of the base which is one-third of 
that of the column itself, or two diameters. The base is called Maficha- 
bandha (see under ADHISHTHANA) and is divisible into thirty parts. The 
capital is equal in height to upper diameter of the shaft, and its projection 
is equal to its height. The form of the capital is called Pushpa-bandha.’ 
‘The height of the capital says Manasdra, ‘ may be either equal to the 
breadth of the shaft, or one-half or three-quarters of it, according as it may 
appear proportionate to the size of the column. Let the breadth of it be 
either one, one and a quarter, half, or three-quarters of the diameter.’ The 
entablature placed on this column does not differ from that placed on other 
pillars, except perhaps in the height. On this subject Manasara observes 
generally: *' The whole height of the entablature may be either three- 
quarters, one, one and a quarter, one and a half, one and three-quarters, 
or twice that of the base. Тһе height of the entablature may be a half, 
one-fourth, or three-quarters of that of the shaft, or the height of the pillar, 
being divided into eight parts, six, five, three or two may be given to that 
of the entablature. Тһе height of the entablature is measured from the 
architrave up to the corona.'—(Ram Raz, p. 30.) 

* The sixth sort of pillar is eleven diameters high. Тһе design made to 
illustrate this is selected from among the pillars found at Conjéveram : it 


570 


de 


ү: 


| 


` 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


represents a square pillar of the same height, exclusive of the base, which 
is composed of a plinth, a cyma recta and torus, with their fillets, and is 
one diameter high. "Тһе same pillar, including the base, may be taken 
as an example also of the seventh sort, which ought to be twelve diameters 
in height.’ 

(° When the pillar,’ says Кабуара, ‘is measured in height from the 
upper fillet of the base, it is called Nigata-stambha, but when it is measured 
from the plinth below it, is termed Nichata-stambha.’) 

* At the foot of the shaft a space equal in height to the hypotenuse of the 
lower diameter is made quadrangular, around which are sculptured images 
of the deities, and the like, in bas-relief. In: about half a diameter above 
this, is made the ornament called Naga-bandha (a serpent-shape mould- 
ing). The remainder of the shaft, about three diameters and a half, is 
made to consist of eight sides, including the strings of pearls, which occupy 
three-quarters of a diameter, and appear to be suspended from the fillet 
of the upper ornament called Padma-bandha (a lotus-shape moulding), 
which takes up half a diameter. Next above this is the kalaga or water- 
pot, above three-quarters of a diameter, and above this are made, with the 
same height given to them, three other mouldings, Harika, Asya, and 
Tatika, which last projects a fourth part of the diameter. Above this 
again is the lower collarino, in height about a quarter of a diameter, then 
the ornament called Kumbha (pitcher) which is half a diameter high and 
projects as much; next the upper collarino, a little less than the lower 
one; next the moulding called Phalakà (abacus) which is one diameter 
high and projects equal to its height ; next the third collarino, about three- 
fourths of a diameter ; and last of all the capital of the kind called Pushpa- 
bandha.’—(Ram Raz, pp. 35-36.) 

* This pillar may, according to the definition of its form, be called Vishnu- 
kanta and appears in most of the ornaments, though not in their propor- 
tions, to agree with the description given in the Manasára of that which 
he calls Palika-stambha. Не says ‘ the height of the collarino should be 
one diameter of the column; that of the Phalaka (abacus) one, three- 
quarters, or, two or three diameters, and its projection one-fourth of its 
height. The height of the Kumbha (pitcher) below the collarino may be 
half, one and a half, or two diameters and its breadth equal to the upper 
or lower collarino. The height of the Tatikasya is half or three-quarters 
of the diameters. Let the lower cyma be equal to its height and let its 
breadth be one and a quarter diameter. Below that comes the Harika of 
half that height. The height and breadth of the Tatika are equally one 
diameter. Below that let а Kala$a (pitcher) be made about two diameters 
in breadth and let the upper part of it be shaped in the form of a durdhura- 


571 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


р 
<ТАМВНА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОЕ 


and in such a manner as may appear graceful. Below this, about 
ameters should be decorated with strings of pearls.’ 
ensions of his seventh sort of column, Ram Raz 
which are quoted below : 


flower, 
three-quarters of the di 

Concerning the dim А 
gives accounts of a few more specimens v | | 

“Тһе pillars at Tiruvannamalai are estimated to be about 30 feet high, 
with proportionate thickness, diminished at the top by a twelfth part of the 
lower diameter. There are three kinds of them. The first is placed on a 
high pedestal and base ; the whole shaft is divided into ten compartments, 
each being equal in height to the hypotenuse of the diameter of the pillar : 
and on all the four sides of these compartments are sculptured, in relief, 
four small pillars or pilasters supporting an entablature. The second 
pillar differs from the first in having two, instead of four, small ornamental 
pilasters in relief, on each side of the ten compartments, into which the 
shaft is divided, with an ornamented niche in the middle, which in the 
third specimen is flanked by two small pafijaras or ornamented cages on 
both sides.of it. The second sort of pillar is placed on a base without a 
pedestal, and the third on a pedestal without a base.'—(Ràm Ках, p. 37.) 

* The difference in the Indian orders, consists chiefly in the proportion 
between the thickness and the height of pillars, while that of the Grecian 
and the Roman orders, not only on the dimensions of columns, but also 
on the form of the other parts belonging to them. 

‘The Egyptian columns appear to have no fixed proportion in regard 
to thickness and height. In some of the specimen of the ruins of upper 
Egypt, the height of the columns consists of from four to six times the lower 
diameter, which last proportion coincides with that of the first sort of the 
Indian pillar.’ : 

*'The orders of India, and of Greece and Rome, are remarkable for 
beautiful effect of their proportions, a circumstance to which little regard 
has been paid by the Egyptians. Both the Indian and Grecian columns 
are diminished gradually in their diameter from the base to the summit of 
the shaft, a practice which has never been observed in the Egyptian ; on 
the contrary, a diametrically opposite rule has been observed in their 
shafts, which are made narrower at the bottom than at the top, and placed 
upon a square or round plinth. The proportion in which the diminution 
at the top of the columns of the two former is made, seems to have been 
regulated by the same principle, though not by the same rule. Тһе general 
rule adopted by the Hindu architects in this respect is that the thickness 
at the bottom, being divided into as many parts as there are diameters 
in the whole height of the column, one of these parts is invariably 
diminished at the top; but in the Grecian and Roman architecture, the 
diameter of the upper part of the shaft, in a column of 15 feet in height, 


572 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STAMBHA 


is made one-sixth less than its thickness at the base; and in a column of 
50 feet, the diminution is one-eighth. The higher the columns are, the less 
they diminish, because the apparent diminution of the diameter in columns 
of the same proportion, is always greater according to their height, and this 
principle supposed to have been discovered with greater scientific skill; 
and is adduced as one of the proofs of the highly refined taste of the Greeks ? 
but we observe that precepts derived from the same principle have been 
taught and practised in India from time immemorial.’ 

* The plan of the Grecian columns is always round ; but the plan of the 
Hindu columns admits of every shape, and is frequently found in the quad- 
rangular and octangular form, and richly adorned with sculptured orna- 
ments. The form of the Egyptian pillars too, is circular, and their shafts 
are often fluted like the Corinthian, but the fluting of the Indian columns 
resembles neither the one nor the other. Тһе decorations of the Egyptian 
columns often consist in representations “ of the bundle of reeds " tied up 
with a cord on the top, having a square stone placed over it; in some 
specimens are also found bindings or fillets in various parts of the shaft, 
and in the interval between them, reeds and hieroglyphics are represented. 
But there is nothing like these ornaments in the Indian orders, except in 
the columns found in the excavated temple of Elephanta, and some other 
places, and which differ materially from those employed in other situations 
in Hindustan.’ 

* There are no fixed, as we saw before, inter-columniations in the Hindu 
architecture, as are found in the Grecian, but the spaces allowed between 
pillar and pillar in different Hindu buildings, are found nearly to coincide 
with the Grecian mode of inter-columniations, though in too many instances, 
they differ widely from it, and the same may perhaps be said of the Egyp- 
tian colonnades.’ I 

* The capital of the Grecian columns invariably marks the distinction 
of the several orders ; those of the Indian are varied at pleasure, though 
not without regard to the diameter and length of the shaft ; and the forms 
of the plainest of them, though they have in reality nothing in common 
with the Grecian order, are found at a distant view, to bear some resem- 
blance to the Doric and Ionic capitals; but those of a more elaborate kind 
are sometimes so overloaded with a sort of filligree ornaments, as to destroy 
the effect of the beautiful proportions of the whole. Тһе Egyptian capitals, 
on the other hand, are formed into elegant vase shapes, decorated with the 
stalks, leaves, and blossoms of the lotus, and occasionally with palm leaves, 
which latter ornaments are supposed to have given the first idea of the 
Corinthian capitals. And in some specimens, the Egyptian capital is 
composed of the representation of the head of the goddess Isis.’ 


573 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ТОРА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
5 


In view of the classification and number (5) of the orders, their principal - 
composing mouldings (8), and other details of similarity pointed out above, 
the ‘ affinity,’ says Ram Raz truly (p. 38), ° between the заз of n 
and of Rome and Greece is so striking, that one would be apt to ascribe i 


: A 
to something more than mere chance. 


STOPA—Name of edifices, which serve as receptacle ДЕ а n Or 
as monument. They are hemispherical or bell-shape Я ар rest 
upon a base of three concentric storeys which form RD 
round the tope; they sustain а cubical erection, the so-called fee 
from which rises the spire (chhatra) which crowns the whole. The 
relic-chamber (dhatugarbha, whence the name ‘ Dagoba, used in 
Ceylon for the whole edifice) is in the interior below the 422. Rope 
a sort of roof or temple was built over the tope ( Mahávariía, 91, 
29). Chaitya (sanctuary) is often used as a synonym (W. Geiger, 
Mahavamsa, р. 295). A heap, a mound, a funeral pile, a tope, 
a Buddhist monument, known as chaitya in Nepal and as dagoba 


in Ceylon. 
(1) “Тһе Buddhist dome-shaped tower built over relics, or as a memo- 
rial. -The earliest stupas were tombs.’—(Vincent Smith, Gloss. to Cunnin- 
gham's Arch. Surv. Reports.) 


1* Considerable interest is attached to the recent discovery (in Japan) beneath 
the corner stones of the Double-Bridge (main entrance to the Imperial Palace) 
of eight human skeletons. Most of the skeletons were found upright about twelve 
feet below the bed of the Palace moat which is at present undergoing repair work 
necessitated by the earthquake of 1923.’ 

* The theory of some Japanese scientists is that the skeletons аге the remains 
of persons who, several centuries past, offered themselves as “ human pillars " for 
the immortalization of the corner-stones used in constructing Edo Castle. The 
tradition of the “ human pillars” is an old one in Japan. Іп a past age it was 
believed that if human beings were buried alive beneath the corner-stones of 
great structures, the gods would accord permanent strength and solidity to the 
foundations, and in addition, those who thus sacrificed themselves, would become 
immortal. It was considered that those chosen as “human pillars” were 
greatly honoured. They were buried alive in a standing position.’ 

* The first traditional instance of the “ human pillars " recorded in Japan dates 
back to the reign of Emperor Nintoku, more than a thousand years ago. The Yodo 
river at Osaka, where the Emperor had his palace, used to overflow each year, 
drowning many people and causing much damage. Every dike built by the best 
engineers was unable to withstand the floods. One night, it is said, the Emperor 
dreamed that the gods had advised him if he would use human bodies as pillars for 
the construction of the embankments, there would be no more flood trouble. Тһе 
story has it that the Emperor immediately caused human beings to be buried alive 


beneath the foundation stone of the dike, and since then the embankment has 


withstood all floods.’ (Associated Press of America Dispatch, "Tokio, July 11, 1925.) 
574 


urukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 
Pa ұр = te . 
Oe: 


-Ё 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STÜPA 


(2) *Stüpas or Topes—These, again, may be divided into two classes, 
according to their destination ; first, the true Stüpas or towers erected to 
commemorate some event or mark some sacred spot dear to the followers 
of the religion of Buddha; secondly, Dagobas or monuments containing 
relics of Buddha, or of some Buddhist saint. If it were possible these two 
ought always to be kept separate, but no external signs have yet been dis- 
covered by which they can be distinguished from one another, and till this 
is so, they must be considered, architecturally at least, as one.’ 

“Іп Nepal, according to Hodgson, and, I believe, in Tibet, the monu- 
ments, which are called stüpas in India, are there called Chaityas. Ety- 
mologically, this is no doubt the correct designation, as chaitya-like stüpa, 
means primarily a heap or tumulus.’—(Fergusson, Hist. of Ind. and 
East. Arch., p. 50, note 2.) 

For the photographic views and the architectural details of the following 
stüpas, see Fergusson : 

The great Tope at Sanchi (p. 63, Figs. 1o, II, I2). 

The cut in the rock on a Dagoba at Ajanta (p. 64, Fig. 13). 
Tope at Sarnath (p. 66, Fig. 14). 

Temple at Buddh-Gaya (p. 70, Fig. 16). 

The great Tope at Amravati (p. 72, Fig. 17). 

Gandhara Topes (description, pp. 72-76). 

Jelalabad Topes (p. 78, Figs. 18, 19). 

Manikyala Tope (pp. 80-82, Figs. 21, 22, 20, 23). 

(3) ‘ A diversity of opinion exists as to the propriety or otherwise of call- 
ing such monuments as the high stüpa of Takkal Bala ‘Tope’; and it 
must be said that this monument is a striking illustration of the inaccuracy 
of much that has been written on the subject. The following is one of the 
many instances where a conclusion has been somewhat hastily arrived аё: 

the term now. used is ^ Thüp? . . . it is, therefore, much 
to be regretted that we should have adopted the word © Tope," which 
preserves neither the spelling nor the pronunciation of the true name.'— 
(В.4.5.7., Vol. ш, p. 313.) 

(4) ‘Again, Mr. Fergusson, writing on this subject, complains bitterly 
of the Bhilsa, and the Sarnath, and the Sanchi `“ Topes.” То make the 
confusion worse he laments—': Tope is also the common Anglo-Indian 
word for a clump of trees." Very true, but that hardly justifies the follow- 
ing—''In neither sense is the word ever used by natives, who associate 
*tope' with something very different, that is, with cannon or artillery. 


That the natives do use the word freely in designating such monuments, 


I will now endeavour to show. While they called all lower mounds in this 
neighbourhood dehiri, the peasantry denied the existence of а Тһарі, 


575 | 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


STÜPA-GRIHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF if 


Тһара, Thüva, or even the common dih ; and in my inquiries being, i 
compelled to paraphrase the word for their comprehension, after trying ж 
buland-tila and other expression in vain, I accidentally mentioned 'the 7 
much abused ‘tope, and was much surprised to find that they under- 
stood my meaning instantly, and helped me to a minute description of the | 
monument and its surroundings. They did not call it thüpa nor thüpi, 
but simply ‘tope?’ ог, more correctly, ‘top.’” Now, it would appear 
from the above that the word is no mere “ adoption of ours,” and that it 
is used by the natives of India (unless we allow the breadth of the Indus 
to make a fine distinction), moreover, by the commonest of ‘those natives 
far and wide.’—(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Reports, Vol. xix, рр. 134, 135.) 
(5) Takshagilae ayam thuvo pratithavito sava-budhana puyea | 
* This stüpa was erected at Takhasila (Takshailà) in honour of all the 
Buddhas.’—(Taxila Vase inscrip. Ер. Ind., Vol. уш, p. 297.) 
(6) Thūva cha sarhgharama cha | 
(Inscrip. on the Mathura Lion Capital, no. A, п» 
line 14; Ef. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 141.) 


STUPA-GRIHA—House of the tope, a sort of dome, supported by 
rows of pillars (as in Thiparama Dagoba in Anurudhapur, Cey- ` 


lon). 
(W. Geiger, Mahàvamía, р. 295.) 


STUPI—A dome, а cupola, a spherical roof rising like an inverted 
cup over a circular, square or multangular building, a pinnacle, a 
steeple-tower. 
(1) M., хі, 13; XV, 91 ; ХУШ, 4, 413; XXII, IO, etc. 
(2) Kona-paravatarh kuryat stüpy-àchchhádanakani cha 1! 
Su-muhürte su-nakshatre stüpy-achchhadanakarn nyaset 11 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati-Sastri, хут, 27, 37-) 
(3) Kanthoktam sarva-mànam tu stüpy-utsedhah prakirtitah 11 
(Kamikagama, xxxv, 30.) 
(4) Ravi-varma-maha-raja alias the Lord Kula-$ekhara-deva was pleased 
to bathe up to the pinnacle (stüpi-paryyanta) the Vanakaiyilaya-Tiru- 
malai (name of the central shrine) іп the temple of the Lord of Tiruvirattà- 
nam, the Lord of Tiruvadigai, and to fix the stones which were bulging out 
(? stüpi-kila).'—(Tiruvadi inscrip. of Ravivarman, line 3 f., Ep. Ind., Vol. vin, 


х. Е NN 

E (5) Ç This inscription (V. 8. I. I., Vol. п, no. 90) records the gifts, b 

к the priest Iana Siva Pandita, of eight gilt copper-pots. . . A ed 
А pot was presented by Pavana-Pidaran. . . . The gilt TET 8 
b were all intended to be used as pinnacles (Stüpikkudam, para. 9) 


E 576 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHA 


Nine of them were presented, of which one is said to have been for the 
temple of the Lord (para. 9) and another for the temple of the Lord Śri- 
Кајагајеќуага Mudaiyar (para. rr). Тһе other seven appear to have been 
intended as pinnacles for the shrines of the regents of the eight quarters. 
The regents are eight in number, viz., Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirriti, Varuna, 
Vayu, Soma, and Тайпа. . . . The shrine of Indra, who is the 
regent of the East, seems to have been in the second gopura for which five 
pinnacles had apparently been provided by the king himself. —(V. S. 1.1, 
Vol. it, no. go, paras. 1, 2, p. 413 Ё) 

(6) * The Gangai-konda-puram temple . . . consists of a nine- 
storeyed stübi (steeple-tower) or vimàna over the shrine or sanctuary, 
99 feet square at the base, and about 165 feet high.'—(Ind. Ant., Vol. Ix, 
P. 117, C. 2, para. 1.) 

(7) See Chalukyan Architecture, Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. xxr, 
Plates Lxxxu, Figs. 1, 2; LXXXIV, Figs. 1, о; ха. 

See Cunnigham, Arch. Suro. Reports, Vol. ш, Plates xrvr, Fig. 4 (Birdaban 
Stüpa), хгуп, Fig. 9 (Nongarh Stüpa); Vol. xr, Plate xxvi (plan and 
section of Mediaeval Stipa); Vol. хуш, Plates v, VI (Nirvana-Stipa) ; 
Vol. xix, Plate ш (Mahadeopur pinnacle). 


STUPI-KILA (se Stūra and Srop1)—The spire, the nail above the 


dome. 


(M., хуш, 144.) 

Cf. “Тһе Lord Sri-Rajarajadeva gave one copper waterpot (kita), 

to be placed on the copper pinnacle stüpittari ; according to Winslow, a 

synonym of Sikhara, or the upper pinnacle of a temple of the sacred shrine 

(Sri-Vimana) of the Lord of the Sri-Rajarajesvara (temple), weighing 

three thousand and cighty-three pala.’—(Inscrip. of Rajaraja, no. 1, line 18, 
Н.8.1.1., Vol. m, p. 9.) 


STRI-LINGA—A class of buildings, a feminine type of architectural 
object. 


See definition and other details under PnásapA. 
Gf. Sarvatra bhoga-bhümy-aügam alinda-parisobhitam | 
Sarva ( ? shad)-varga-samayuktarh manah-priti-samanvitam I! 
Chaturpàm anta (m)-lomasam (lokanam)  yogyam  stri-lingam 
ishyate 11 
(Kamikagama, XLV, 10, XXXV, 21; see 
under SALANGA and SHAD-VARGA.) 


5ТНА--А fixed abode as in Goshtha and Pratishtha (see under these 
terms). 
577 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


STHANDILA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


STHANDILA—A site plan in which the whole area is divided ° 


into forty-nine equal squares. š 
(М., уп, 8, уш, 39 ; ІХ, 129, etc., cf. 
LXX, 30; see PADA-VINYASA.) 


STHAPATI—Lit. chief (pati) of fixed abode (stha as іп goshtha, 
pratishtha, German stadt), the chief architect, the master builder. 
(1) Manasara (Chap. п, named Silpi-lakshana or ranks and qualifications 
of architects) : 

From the four faces of Brahman are stated to have originated the 
four heavenly architects, namely, Vi$va-karman, Maya, Tvashtri and 
Manu. And their sons are called respectively Sthapati, Sitragrahin, 
Vardhaki and Takshaka. These latter four evidently represent the 
four classes of terrestrial artists : 

Pürvanane visvakarma jayate dakshine mayah 1 

Uttarasya mukhe tvashta paschime tu manuh smritah 1 

Visvakarmakhya-namno’sya putrah sthapatir uchyate | 

Mayasya tanayah sütragrahiti parikirtitah 1 

Tvashtur devarsheh putrah varddhakir iti prakathyate | 

Manoh putras takshakah syat sthapatyadi-chatushtayam 1 

- (M., п, 11-12, 17-20.) 
Cf. One Manu is stated to be the architect who built the city of Ayodhya : 
Ayodhya-nama-nagari tatrasil loka-visruta | 
Manuna manavendrena уа puri nirmita svayam | 
(Ramayana, 1, 5, 6.) 
Their ranks : 
Sthapatyadi$ chatur varnah silpibhih parikirtitah | 
(М., п, 29.) 
The Sthapati is in rank the director general and the consulting architect 
(M., u, line 21). Тһе Sütragrahin is the guide (guru) of Vardhaki and 
Takshaka (line 22), while the Vardhaki is the instructor of Takshaka (line 
23). Тһе Sthapati must be well versed in all sciences (line 24). He 
must know the Vedas (line 26). He must have all’ the qualifications 
of a supreme director (acharya) (line 31). 
Gf. Sthapatih sthapanayarhah veda-vich chhastra-paragah | 
Sthapanadhipatir yasmat tasmat sthapatir uchyate | 
Sthapate$ сһа)йауа sarve sütragrahyàdayah sada | 
Kurvanti Sastra-drishtena vastu-vastu prayatnatah | 
Acharya-lakshanair yuktah sthapatir ity-abhidhiyate | 
Sthapatis tu sva-turyebhyas tribhyo gurur iti smritah 1 
(М., п, 26-20, 31, эт.) 


578 


2 


Sthapatih sarva-Sastrajfiah—the chief architect knows all Sciences. 
(M., п, line 24.) 
See also M., XXXVI, 14, 15, 16, 17, 58, 73-74, 83, 85. 
These passages refer to the Sthapati as the master of the opening 
ceremonies of a dwelling housc. 
The Sütragráhin also should have the general knowledge of all the 
Sciences and the Vedas. But he must be an expert in measuring accurate- 
ly and must make a special study in drawing (M., п, 32, 34, 22, 25, 33, 23, 
25, : 
| s et sütragráhi cha rekhajñah Sastra-vit-tamah | (32) 
al^ Sütra-grahiti sütra-dhrit | (24) 
| Sūtra-grāhī gurur dvyàbhyàrn turyebhyo'dya iti smritah 1 (22) 
| The Vardhaki, too, should have the general knowledge of the Vedas 
| and practical sciences. But the object of his special study is painting. 
He must also be able to design (vicharajfia) architectural and sculptural 
objects from his own ideas. Like the Sütragrahin, the Vardhaki too 
should have an idea of accurate measurement. 
Cf. Vardhakir mana-karmjfiah | (25) 
Vicharajfiah érutajfiag cha chitra-karmajfio vardhakih 1! (33) 
Takshakasya gurur nama vardhakir iti prakirtitah 11 (23) 
The Takshaka must be expert in his own work, i.e., carpentry. He 
should be obedient to his superiors and aspire to rise in the rank. 
Cf. Takshanat takshakah smritah 11 (25). 
Takshakah karma-vidyus cha bala-bandhüdaya-parah 1 (34) 
(2) Sthapatih sthapanarhah syat sarva-Sastra-vi$aradah I1 
Na hinango’tiriktango dhàrmikas tu dayaparah 1 
Amaàtsaryo'nasüyaé cha tantrikasty-abhijatavan 11 
Ganitajfiah puranajfiah anandatmà py-alubdhakah 1 
Chitrajfiah sarva-deSajfiah satya-vadi jitendriyah 11 
Arogi chapramadi cha Sapta-vyasana-varjitah | 
Sunama dridha-vandhué cha vastu-vidyabdhi-paragah |1 
(Vastu-vidya, ed. Ganapati Sastri, т, 12-15.) 
‘The Sthapati or master builder must be able to design (lit. placing, 
sthapana). He must be proficient in all sciences (Sastras, see below) , 
He must not be deformed by lacking in or possessing too many limbs. He 
must be pious and compassionate. He must not be malicious or Spite- 
ful. He must be trained in music (tantra=a stringed musical instru- 
ment, see Vitruvius below). Не must be of noble descent. Не must be 
a mathematician and historian. He must be happy in mind and free 
from greed. He must be proficient in painting. He must know all 
countries, i.e., he must be a geographist. He must be truthful, and 
possess self-control. He must not have any disease, and must be 


579 


| . HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATI 


[ СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


STHAPATI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


above committing errors. He must be free from the seven vices (hunting, 


gambling, day-dreaming, blackmailing, addiction to women, etc., see Manu- 
samhita, уп, 47-48). He must have a good name and be faithful to friends. 
He must be deep in (lit. cross) the ocean of the science of architecture." 
Compare these qualifications of the master builder with those of the 
Greco-Roman architects quoted below from Vitruvius. 
The classification of the architects and the account of their qualifica- 
tions are almost identical to those given in the Manasara : 
Sthapates tasya Sishyo và sütra-grahi süto'thava | 
Sthapaty-ajüánusári cha sarva-karma-visaradah 11 
Sütra-danda-pramanajtio manonmana-pramanavit | 
Takshitanarn takshakenapy upary-upari yuktitah 1! 
Vriddhikrit vardhakih proktah sütragrahy-anugah sada 11 
(Vastu-vidya, ibid., 1, 16-18.) 
Takshanat sthila-sikshmanam takshakah sa tu kirtitah 11 
Mrit-karmajfio guni Saktah sarva-karma-sva-tantrakah | 
Guru-bhaktah sada hrishtah sthapaty-ady-anugah sada 11 
(ibid., 1, 18-19.) 
(3) Susila($) chaturo daksha-Sastrajfia-lobha-varjita(-tah) 1 
Kshamavan asya (syad) dvija$ chaiva sütradhara(h) sa uchyate 1! 
‘ One who is of good behaviour, clever, skilful, learned, free from lust 
(excessive desire of gain), can forgive (rivals), and belongs to the twice- 
born class, is called Sütra-dhàra.^ 
(Si lpa-dipaka, ed. Gaxhgadhara; 1, 3.) 
(4) Vastu-vidhanajiio laghu-hasto jita-sramah 
Dirgha-darsi cha $üra$ cha sthapatih parikirdtah 11 
* One who is conversant with the architectural design (vidhàna, the act 
of arranging, disposing, etc.), skilful (lt. swift at hand), industrious (or 
patient labourer), and foresees-(everything), and is a champion (in archi- 
tectural matters), is described as a sthapati.’—(Matsya-Purdna, P. Dict.). 
(5) Mahabharata (xu, 3243-3244) : 
Sat-krita$ cha prayatnena Acharyyartvik-purohitah | 
Maheshyasah sthapatayah sarhvatsara-chikitsakah i 
Prajna medhavino danta dakshah sara bahu-érutàh | 
Kulinah sattva-sampanna yuktah saryveshu karmmasu ti 
Sthapatis, meaning apparently architects, are stated here to be very 
learned, meritorious, patient, dexterous, champion, of large experience, 
of high birth, full of resources, and capable of application to all works. 
Tbid., хш, 5073-5074 : 
Brahmana-sthapatibh yam cha nirmmitam yan niveśanam |! 
Tad avaset sada prajño bhavarthi manujesvara | 


580 


! 
) : HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATI 
Here, a house built by a Вгаһтапа and a Sthapati is specially recom- 
a. mended. Sthapati implies an architect but his caste is not clear from this 
| passage. 
Mahabharata, xiv, 2520-2524 : 
¢ Tato yayau bhimasenah prajñah sthapatibhih saha | 


Вгаһтпапап agratah kritva kugalan yajfia-karmmani 11 
Tarh sa $ala-chayarn $rimat sampratoli-sughattitam | 
Mapayàmasa kaurdvyo yajfia-vatarn yatha-vidhi 11 
Pràsáda-$ata-sambadharn mani-pravara-kuttimam | 
Кагауатаѕа vidhivad-dhema-ratna-vibhüshitam | 


houses. 
Ibid.. v. 255: 
Tato’atibhito rūpāt tu бақта Aste vichárayan | 
Athajagama para$urh skandhenadaya varddhakih ıı 
Vardhaki is called here Takshan (see verses 256-266) 
of carpenter but to imply an executioner. 
т (6) Varttika of Katyayana on Panini, 2 (Pet. Dict) : 
Sütra-graha—yah sütrar grihnati na tu dharayati | 
Sütra-graha—yah sütrarh grihnati dharayati cha | 
This subtle distinction is not quite clear. 
(7) Chaurapafüchaéika (ed. Bohlen, 7-3) : 
Surata-tandava-sütra-dhàri | 
(8) Ramayana, (п, 80, 2, etc.) : 
Karmantikah sthapatayah purusha yantra-kovidah 1 
Tathà vardhakaya$ chaiva margino vriksha-takshakah ıı 
| (9) Sakala-guna-ganalarhkrita - kritottamangaru Parama-Brahmanis 3 
pu chala-svarüpar upadeSa-p(r)arakaramaru Manu-Maya-Mandabye- 
i Višvakarmma-nirmmitam appa Hem-migadeya mane enisida 
stotakacheru | 
* Of the Visvamitra-gotra, supreme Lord of Lanka-dvipa-pura, possessed 
mn. of property and vehicles, versed in all Sastras, sought after to construct 
| ornamental buildings and upper storeys, adorned with all good qualities 
his head sprinkled with sandal water from Siva, in the unchanging form 
| of Parama Brahma, distinguished in giving advice, of the Hemmigade 
| house created by Manu, Maya, Mandabya, and Visvakarma, was Sto- 
4. takachari."—(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, Part т, Channarayapatna Taluq, no. 265 ; 
| 


not in the sense 


Roman text, p. 530, line 23 ; Transl., p. 237, para. 2.) 


581 


| CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


: STHAPATI 


м.) 


АУ ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(то) This Pra$asti was written by Skandasadhu, the son of Sri-kantha 


a descendant of a family of architects (sthapati-kula). 
(Sholingur Inscrip. of Parantaka I, line 21- 


Ep. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 224, 225.) 
(11) Sthapati-Kalisuta-Sirngali-kargi Navagrama-dranga vra(? lu)-dha- 
jana 1 
* The Sthapati (architect of the tank was) Simgali Kargi, the son of Kali, 
a Pandit (? vulha) from the Navagrama-dranga (compare Raja Татайа- 
ini, Translation by Dr. Stein, Vol. п, р. 201, watch-station near moun- 
tain passes).’ 3 
(Dr. Stein Konow (Peshawar Museum 
inscrip. of Vanhadaka, line 6, Ep. Ind.,, 
Vol. x, p. 80, note 3 ; p. 81.) 
(12) Visadru-sütah Kamau Silpi— Visadru’s son, Kamau, the archi- 
tect (of the fifth octagonal pillar, middle row, of the north-west cloister). 
This simple record of the architect or head mason Kamau is the most 
valuable inscription of the Lal Darwaza, as it is another proof of the truth 
of Fergusson's remark that the cause of the admixture of Hindu and Mu- 
hammadan styles in the Jaunpur was the employment of Hindu masons.’ 
(Dr. A. Führer, Sharqi Arch. of Jaunpur 
inscrip. xxvir Arch. Surv., New Imp. 
Series, Vol. 1, p. 51.) 
(13) Rajapalasya putrena palhanena éilpinà | 
Utkirnna-varnna-ghatana vaidagdhi-vi$vakarmana 11 
“(Тһе document) is engraved by the artist Palhana, son of Rajapala 
who is a master of the art and craft.’ 
(Pachar Plate of Paramardideva, line 22; 
Ep. Ind., Vol. x, pp. 49, 45-) 
(14) Tvashtri, a recognized architect, connected with (the ancestor of) 
both Sütradhàra and Sthapati : ; 
Tad-vad Vatakhyam nagaram vane'smin 'Туазһ{иһ prasadat 
kritavan Vasishthah 1 
Prakara-vapropavanais tadagaih prasada-vesmaih su-ghanarh su- 
tumgaih |1 
Bhanor griharn daiva-vasad vibhagnarh Vasishtha-pauraih sukritarn 
yad asit | 
Asich cha Nagat sthapates tu Durggah 11 
Durggarkkato Deuka Sittra-dharah 11 
Asyapi sünuh Sivapala nama ıı 
Yenotkrite'yam susubha prašastih 11 
(Vasantgadh inscrip. of Purnapala, A. D. 1042, 
VV. 21, 27, 34, Ер. Ind., Vol. rx, pp. 12, 
13, 14, 15.) 
582 


| 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATI 
д 
(15) Sadasivamaharaya-sasanad Viranatmajah 1 
T ; Tvashtā śrī-vīranāchāryo vyalikhat tāmra-śāsanam |! 
| (Krishnapuram Plates of ба4абуагауа, 
| V. 107, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 339.) 
IN 


(16) Sila-&ilpi—stone mason—(Govindapur stone inscrip. of the poet 
Carngadhara, v. 39, Ер. Ind., Vol. п, pp. 383, 342). 


- (17) Silpin—engraver—(Vilapaka Grant of Venkata I, v. 62, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. 1v, pp. 277, 272). 


(18) Cf. inscrip. from Dabhoi—(verse 112, Ep. Ind., Vol. r, p. 31.) 
(19) Vardhaki—carpenter, sculptor (Senart) : 
Vadhakinà sámina venuvásaput(e)na gharasa mugha kata | 


| (Karle Cave inscrip. по. 6, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. vit, p. 53.) 
(20) Sütradhàra—architect, artizan—(Bheraghat inscrip. of Alhanadevi, 
уу. 36, 37, Ер. Ind., Vol. u, pp. 13, 17). 
(21) Mason—(inscrip. from Dabhoi, v. 112, Ef. Ind., Vol. r, p. 31). 
(22) Cf. the first Prasasti of Baijnath—(verse 36, Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 107, 
III). ы 
„> (23) Sütra-dhrit—artizan—(Kudarkot inscrip., v. 17, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, 
| рр. 182-183). 
(24) Sütradhàra—sculptor—(Verawal image inscrip. line 5, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. ш, 303, 304). 
(25) Si(S)là-patta-$ubhe varnše sütra-dhárà vichakshanah | 
Bhojükah Kamadevas cha karmmanishtha Hala sudhih 11 
* (Born) in the auspicious family of Silpapatta, the conspicuous architects 
| (were) Bhojüka, Kamadeva, and the wise Hala, (who) were perfect in their 
work. 
* A Muhammadan ruler Jallala Khoja, son of I$aka, appointed these 
- architects to build а Gomath(a) (? cow-shelter), a garden, and step-well 
in the town of Batithadim.’ 
(Bhatihagarh stone inscrip., v. 12, Ep. Ind., 
| Vol. хп, pp. 46, 47, 44-) 
(26) * Gokarna-svami—who is set upon the pure peak of the Mahendra 
mountain, master (guru) of things movable and immovable, the sole archi- 
| tect (siitra-dhara) for the creation of all the world (sakala-bhuvana-nir- 
manaika-sütra-dharasya)." - 
| (Ер. Carnat., Vol. 1x, Bangalore Taluq, no. 
* 140 ; Roman text, p. 33, Transl., p. 26.) 
И . ` 


583 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


5ТНАРАТІ AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(27) Krishna-suto-gunadhyas cha süttra-dharo'tra Nannakah | 
Etat kaņvāśramarh jňātvā sarvva-pàpa-haram $ubham | 
Kritam hi mandiram $ambhoh dharmma-kirtti-vivarddhanam 11 
Here, Sütra-dhára is the architect who built the temple of Siva. 
(Inscription from the Mahadeva temple, 
vv. 29, 30, Ind. Ant., Vol. хш, p. 165.) 
(28) Sütradhàro'sya Haridasanama— the architect (employed оп the 
repair of the temple of Dakshinaditya) was Haridasa. 
(Gaya inscrip. of Vikrama Samvat 1429, line 
9, Ind. Ant., Vol. хх, pp. 315, 313.) 
(29) Gf. ` When the house is finished Brahmans and the friends of the 
family are feasted. The mistri (master-builder) attends the dinner and 
receives. from the owner complimentary gifts, such as shawls, turban, 
clothes and money, as his merits and the generosity of his employer 
dictate.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. xxiv, р. 303, с. 2, last para.) 
(30) ‘The royal draughtsman (raya or гаја sütra-dhari) Gopoja’s 
younger brother Suroja engraved it.’ 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, Part 1, Arsikere 'Taluq, 
no. I23 ; Transl., p. 168, line 2.) 


(31) Svasti samadhigata-paficha-maha-éabda . . . svaradhipati-ma- 
\ hanayaka-vibudha-vara-dayakan animitta Malla-vijaya-Sütra-dhari 
svamidrohi . . . biruda, etc. 


“Be it well (with various epithets, including), Ma!la-vijaya-sütradhàri, 
the dandanayaka Lachimayya’s son, of the ministry for peace and war, 
Hodimaiya and others (named) enlarging the town; Rajimaiya the 
BRUN of the town, desiring to make a feast granted certain land (speci- 

ed). 
(Ibid., no. 194, Roman Text, p. 433 ; 
Transl, p. 187.) 

(32) “Born in the family of Visvakarma, the architect of the three 
worlds Visvanatha—the son of Basavachariya. who was the son of Vode- 
уаррауа considered to be the jagad-guru—engraved it.’ 


(Ibid, Vol. v, Part 1, Channarayapatna Taluq, 

no. 187; Transl., p. 207.) 

(33) “То Damoja, son of the carpenter Madiyoja granted a rent-free 
estate.’ 

(Ibid, Vol. уі, Kadur Taluq, no. 573 

aoe { Transl., p. 12.) 

Е DE 55 X d is no excommunication (balligavarte— bahish- 

, Mr. t Kango Katti) of the skilful people (binna-nigala, those 


584 


è am 


=) 


) 
4 


Е) 


— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATI 


who are conversant with painting or architecture, Sanderson's Canarese 
Dictionary) of the world who have attained the favour (of the god), having 
given the patta, (a patent, royal grant or order), called müme- perjerepu 
(and) the name of Tribhuvanacharya to Sri- Gunda, whose (observance 
of the) established rules of conduct was unimpeded, ‘the Sütra-dhàri, who 
made the temple of the queen of Vikramaditya (II, of the Western Chalu- 
kyas), the favourite of the world; (and there is) immunity (parihara) 
to the others who united themselves with the guilty man (doshika).’ 
š (Saaskrit and Old Canarese inscrip. no. 99, 
lines 1-7, Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 164, 
notes 6-10.) 

(35) *Hail! Letit be known that these are the the names (not given) 
of the Acharya who averted the excommunication (villiga-vàrte —bahish- 
kara) of the skilful people (better perhaps '* those who are conversant with 
painting or architecture ") of this district, after that they had given the 
müme-perjerepu to the Sütra-dhári who made this. temple of І.оКебуага 
(still exists under the name of god Virüpaksha, Ante p. 163, c. r, paras. 
8, 1, 2) of Lokamahadevi (the queen) of Vikramaditya, the worshipful one, 
who three times conquered Kanchi.’ 

‘Hail! Sri-Sarvasiddhiacharya, the asylum of all virtuous qualities, 
the Pitamaha (Вгаһћа, i.e., the Creator! the maker of many cities and 
houses ; he whose conversation is entirely perfect and refined, he who has 
for a jewelled diadem and creast-jewel the houses and palaces and vehicles 
and seats and couches (that he has constructed), the (most eminent) sütra- 
dhaii, of the southern country.’ 

Svasti-Sri-sarva-siddhi-achari sakala-guna$raya-ancka-pura vastu-Pita- 
mahan sakala-nishkala-sikshmatibhashitau vastu-prasada-yanasana- 
§ayana-mani-makuta-ratnachidamani-te(m)kana-diseya-sitra-dhari. 

(Sanskrit and Old Canarese inscrip. 
по. 100, Ante р. 165.) 

(36) Hail! The grant that was given of Sri-Vijayaditya and Vikrama- 
ditya . . . the grant that was given to the temple of (the architect 
Avanta-guna—(was) a stone seat (pare) and a bracelet (‘) to the temple 
of (the god) Sri-Lokapalesvara, after having given the office (sthana, see 
below) of the holy Айјапасһагуа to the holy Devacharya (datti Айјапа- 
сһагуа bhagavantargge kottu Sri-Lopapale$varakam раге balli) 

*Sthàna may mean the office of the priest of the temple, or the locality, 
i.e., allotment of land, belonging to the holder of that office.’ 

Gf. Manasára, п, 25-26, above. (The first meaning suits the context 
better.) 


(Ibid., по. ror, pp. 165, 166, and note 18.) , 


585 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


LAC хы” 


STHAPATI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(37) “Най! Chattara-Revadi-Ovajja (Ojha, see below) of the Sarva’ 


siddhi-Acharyas, who was acquainted with the secrets of Sri-silemuddas 
(Sila-mudda, the name of some particular guild of stone masons), made 

the southern country.’ : ; 
< (Old Canarese) Ovajja is perhaps the (modern) Canarese ojja, a priest, 
preceptor ° (exactly the same meaning as асһагуа etymologically indicates). 
(Ibid., no. 114, pp. 170-171, 172, notes 57, 58.) 


«Та addition to recording . . . the re-admission into caste of the 
artisans of the locality, this inscription (по. 100) gives several titles of 
the builder of the temple. Among them is that of Sarva-siddhi-Acharya. 
The Sarva-siddhi-Acharyas are mentioned again in no. схіу below, and 
seem to have been some celebrated guild of architects or builders.’ 

(Dr. Fleet, Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 164, с. 2, para. 2.) 


‘In addition to recording the name of Gunda as the builder of the temple, 
this inscription (no. 99), as also the next (no. 100) seems to be intended 
to record the re-admission into caste of the artisans of the locality, who had 
been outcasted for some act which is not stated. The purport of this por- 
tion hinges entirely upon the meaning to be given to the word balligavarte 
(in nos. 99 and roo) ` 

Dr. Fleet is not quite certain whether he should agree with Mr. Katti 
who says that * it sounds to him like the Dravidian equivalent of the Sans- 
krit bahishkara,’—(Jbid., pp. 163-164, last para.) 

“Тһе Sütra-dhari or Sütra-grahi, ‘‘the holder of the thread?” was the 
assistant of the sthapati, * the master-carpenter or master-mason," the 
architect.'—(Dr. Fleet, Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 163, note 3.) 

(38) It should be noted that Chari, Achariya, Acharya (with different 
prefixes), Ojha, and Sütra-dhàri are the surnames or titles of the Sthapati 
(master-builder) who is also called Acharya in the Manasára. (See above.) 


(The titles in another form—Acharya or Acharyya—are the surnames 
of the Jain teachers, of the famous philosopher Sankara, and the distinguished 
astronomer Bhaskara.) 


Here in these inscriptions we have seen that the architects have many 
such titles, namely, Achari (по. 99, line 4, no. roo, line 8); Achariya (no. 
100, line 7); Sarva-siddhi-Achari (no. roo, line 8); Sarva-siddhi-Acharjiya 
(-yya) (no. 114, line 2 f); Tri-bhuvanachari (no. 99, line 5); Afijanacharya 
(по. ror, line 5); Devacharya (no. ror, line 6); Ovajja (=Ojha, по. 114 
line 4); Sile-mudda (?—&ilà-marddaka or modaka, no. 114, line 1). The 
very same architects are again given the titles of Sütra-dhàri (no. 99, line 
3; no. 100, lines 4, 12). 


586 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATI 


The titles, Chari and Achari, are frequently met with as the surnames 
of stone masons or engravers of Copper-plates or other Sasanas in the Epi- 
graphia Carnatica of Mr. Rice and also in the South Indian Inscriptions 
edited by Prof. Hultzsch and Venkkayya ; compare the following : 

(39) “Тһе naga (1.е., the cobra on the slab on which the inscription is 
incised) has been made by Nataka (Nartaka), the pupil of the Achariya 
(i.e., Acharya) Idomora (Indramayüra) of the town of Sarhjayanti.’ 
* Acharya—probably means master(-mason), i.e., sthapati.’ 

УС) р 
(Banawasi Prakrit inscrip., line 2 f., Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xiv, p. 334, notes, 20, 23.) 

(40) Badhüvallabha-Mallasya vachanenaiva $asanam tvashta Nandi- 
varmacharyya-danasyasya likhàmy-aham | 

* By order of Badhuvallabha-Malla I, the carpenter Nandi-varmacharya 
inscribe the charter of this grant. 

(Bana Grant of Saka 261, lines 50-51, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. ху, pp. 176, 177.) 

(41) ‘ The carpenter Virana, son of Muddanacharya, was the engraver 
of the $asana, for which he received one share in the village.’ 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ш, Seringapatam Taluq, 
no. 11; Transl., p. 9, line 3.) 

(41a) ‘It was engraved by the carpenter Varadapacharya.’ 

(Ibid., по. 15 ; Transl., p. rr.) 

(42) ‘The Sasana was engraved by Srigiri, the son of the carpenter 
Varadapacharya.’ 

ek И (Jbid., no. 15 ; Transl., p. 32.) 

(43) ‘ And it is engraved by the carpenter Viranacharya, son of Malla.’ 

: (Ibid. Mandya Taluq, no. 55; 
Transl., p. 45, last para.) 

(44) ° For the carpenter Mallana, son of Viranacharya, who engraved 

the grant, one share was given.' (A.D. 1474.) | 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ш, Malavalli 
Taluq, no. 121; Transl., p. 68.) 

(45) ‘It was engraved by Mallanacharya, son of Viranacharya. (A. D. 
1513) ; (bid., Nanjangud Taluq, 

no. 16; Transl., p. 97.) 

(46) ° Kontāchāri, son of Konguni-acharya, blacksmith of Bai... of 
Baguli, fighting in the war along with the ruler of the nad, went to Svarga 


led). Р 
CX (Ibid., Vol. rv, Chamarajnagar 
Taluq, no. 20; Transl., p. 3.) 


587 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


STHAPATI AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(47) ‘Engraved by the carpenter Viranacharya, son of Mallana.’ 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. 1v, Transl., p. 41, no. 30.) 
(48) ‘And it was engraved by the carpenter Viranáchàrya, son of 
Угара.’ (A.D. 1545.) 
(Ibid., Nagamangala Taluq, 
no. 58 ; Transl., p. 128.) 
(48a) “Апа this copper 5азапа was engraved by the carpenter Malla- 
nacharya, son of Viranachàrya. (А.р. 1515.) 
(Jbid., Vol. v, Husan Taluq, no. 16 
Transl., p. 5, para. 2.); 
(49) pes by the carpenter Уігапасһагуа, son of Virana.’ 
(A.D. 1561.) 
(Jbid., no. 7 ; Transl., p. 6.) 
(50) ‘Engraved by Аррапасћагуа, son of Viranacharya.” (A. p. 1 524.) 
(Jbid., по. 94 ; Transl., p. 29.) 
(51) “ МаПапасћагуа, son of Уігапасһагуа, enjoys one share as the 
engraver. (А. р. 1512.) 
(Jbid., Belur Тапа, no. 79; Transl., р. 65.) 
(52) ‘Engraved by Viranacharya, son of Mallanatha.’ (A.D. 1539.) 
(2014. Part т, Belur Taluq,: 
по. 197; Transl., p. 108.) 
(53) “Ву Mallana's son, the carpenter Viranacharya, was it written. ? 
A.D. 1535.) 
(Jbid., Ariskere Taluq, no. 126, Roman 
text, last line; Transl., p. 169.) 
(54) * Mallana's son carpenter Viranacharya wrote (or engraved) it.’ 
(Ibid. Channaraypattana Taluq 
| no. 167; Transl., p. 199.) 
^ р by the Senabova Kalajachariya’s son [évara.’ 
(Ibid. Vol. ут, Mudgere Taluq 
; ; no. 72 ; Transl., p. 72.) 
(56) ‘The carpenter Viranàchàrya, son of Mallana, engraved it.' 
(A.D. 1513.) Engraved by Viranacharya, son of Ganapaya.’ (A.p. 1 587.) 
(Ibid., Vol. уп, Shimoga Taluq, 
по. 83 ; Transl., p. 33. 
(57) * Engraved by Viranacharya, son of Mallanatha ^ Pe Pere 
M he (Ibid., no. 85 ; Transl., p. 33. 
(58) Acharya, distinctly mentioned as an <“ aqua 9 B 
Pu Le һы madhyamanguli-madhyame 11 (4) 
m mátrangulam jüeyam . . . | (5) 
Г а Ebera pagyeshu manangula-vidhanatah | 
charya-dakskangulibhir mite vyàsa-mithadhikaih (?) 11 (7) 
e A (Suprabhedagama, xxx, 4» 5» 7.) 
5 


_ HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


STHAPATI 


Cf. Acharya-lakshnair yuktarh sthapatir ity abhidhiyate | 
“(50) Vàstu-jfianam athatah kamalabhavanam muni-paramparayatarn 
kriyate'dhunaà mayedarh vidagdha-sárhvatsara-prityai 11 
(Brihat-sarhita, LIT, 1.) 

* The knowledge of the science of architecture has come down from Вгаһ- 
man through an unbroken series of seers (sages). I am now dealing with 
this (science of architecture) for the pleasure (i.e., benefit) of the learned 
(educated, experienced, hence professional) astrologers (sthapatis, profes- 
sional architects) ^ 

Samvatsara—astrologer (see Sir М. W. Dict. p.1102). Kern translates 
the last рада as *'to gratify clever astrologers" but he attempts no explana- 
tion as to why the astrologers in particular are to be gratified оп “а work 
on the art of building" (Kern’s translation of Vastu-jfiana), which in fact 
forms по part of astrology proper. It is apparent that in Varahamihira’s 
time the astrologers were intimately connected with the work of profes- 
sional architects (sthapati), as also the astronomers like Bhaskaracharya 
and others; Sankaraacharya is, however, a philosopher. 

Concerning the qulifications of architects it will be noticed that the 
sciences (Sastras) mentioned in the Manasara and other records examined 
above are not enumerated. But by *Sastra" is generally meant (cf. М. W. 
Dict. loc. cit.) < any instrument of teaching, any manual or compendium of 
rules, any religious book or scientific treatise, any sacred book or composi- 
tion of divine or temporal authority." It is sometimes known as Vidya, 
meaning knowledge, science, learning, scholarship or philosophy. It also 
means practical arts, such as agriculture, commerce, medicine, architecture, 
sculpture, painting (cf. Silpa-Sastra, Vastu-Sastra, еіс.). Sastra or Vidya 
has fourteen divisions, viz., the four Vedas, the six Vedangas, the Puranas, 
the Mimarnsa, the Муауа, and the Dharma or law; or with the four 
Upa-Vedas, 18 divisions ; others reckon 33 and even 64 sciences, generally 
known as Kalas or arts (see under Kala). 

But the expression “versed in all éástras" need not be taken in too 
literal а sense. What architects are expected to know can be inferred from 
the details given occasionally in many places in the Manasara and other 
works. The chapters on the selection of site and the minute examination 
of soil (see Bhü-parikshà) will indicate an intimate knowledge of practical 
geology, which is essentially necessary for architectural purposes. The 
chapters on gnoman (see Sanku) and site plan (see Pada-vinyasa) demand 
proficiency in mathematics (see also Jala). The frequent references to the 
minute examination of trees and wood show a fair amount of knowledge 
in timber work (Botany). The examination of stones and bricks for 


building purposes, the preparation of different colours and mixtures of 


589 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


STHAPATI 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


different materials for painting, and the testing of jewels, etc., for decorative 
purposes, point to an acquaintance with chemistry and other allied scienees. 

Тһе chapter on the joining of wood (see Sandhikarman) will indicate 
a knowledge of everything architectural, however insignificant it may 
appear to a layman. Тһе chapter on ornaments (see Bhüshana) and 

mouldings (cf. Stambha) will show a high sense of esthetics. A knowl- 
edge of the climate and weather of the locality where a house is to be 
built is essential to their work. The astrological and astronomical 
calculation is also frequently referred to. (Cf. Manasara, u, 40, quoted above, 
and Brihat-samhitd, іші, 1.) 

All these branches of knowledge are necessary for architects. Three 
out of the four architects forming a guild must be qualified generally in all 
of these. But each of the four must be expert in his own special subject. 
Takshaka must be an expert carpenter and joiner. Vardhaki must be 
expert in designing and painting. Siitragrahin must be an expert іп draw- 
ing. The chief architect, Sthapati, should, in addition to all these qualifica- 
tions, have an intuitive foresight so as to be able to calculate and decide 
everything quickly. This wise division of labour is necessary for success- 
fully carrying out a big design in architecture or sculpture. From this it 
may be inferred that the architects of ancient India were once a well organized 
guild. It should be noticed that from the epigraphical records quoted 
above Dr. Fleet has come to the same conclusion. 

It is very interesting to note that Vitruvius describes the qualification of 
architects in exactly the same way as given in the Manasára (and the other 
records quoted above). In both the treatises this topic is discussed at the 
beginning and in fact in the same place, the second chapter, which is 
preceded by a table of contents in the Mánasára, and an introduction in 
Vitruvius. : 

“Ап architect,' says Vitruvius (Book I, chap. 1), “should be ingenious, 
and adept in the acquisition of knowledge. Deficient in either of these 
qualities, he cannot bea perfect master. He should be a good writer, a 
skilful draughtsman, versed in geometry and optics, expert at figures, 
acquainted with history, informed on the principles of natural and moral 
philosophy, somewhat of a musician, not ignorant of the sciences of both 
law and physic, nor of the motions, laws, and relations to each other, of 
the heavenly bodies.’ 

“Бу means of the first-named acquirement, he is to commit to writing 
his observations and experience, in order to assist his memory. Drawing 
is employed in representing the forms of his designs. Geometry affords 
much aid to the architect: to it he owes the use of the right line and circle, 


7 the level and the square, whereby his delineations of buildings on plane sur- 


faces are greatly facilitated. The science of optics enables him to introduce 


590 


Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


( | _ HINDU ARCHITECTURE STHAPATYA 


many ornaments which he may have occasion to introduce, . . . Many 
other matters of history have a connexion with architecture, and prove 
the necessity of its professors being well versed in it.’ 

* Moral philosophy will teach the architect to be above meanness in his 
dealings, and to avoid arrogance ; and will make him just, compliant and 
faithful to his employer. . . . That branch of philosophy which the 
Greeks call the doctrine of physics is necessary to him in the solution of 
various problems ; as for instance, in the conduct of water. . . . Music 
assists him in the use of harmonic and mathematical proportion. It is, 
moreover, absolutely necessary in adjusting the force of the balistae, 
catapultae and scorpions. . . . Skill in physic enables him to ascertain 
the salubrity of different tracts of country, and to determine the veriation 
of climates. . . . Law should be an object of his study, especially those 
parts of it which relate to party-walls, to the free course and discharge of the 
eaves’ waters, the regulations of cesspools and sewage, and those relating 
to window lights. . . . 

‘ Astronomy instructs him in the points of the heavens, the laws of the 
celestial bodies, the equinoxes, soltices, and courses of the stars ; all of 
which should be well understood, in the construction and proportions of 
clocks.’ 

It is important to notice that Vitruvius denies the necessity of an archi- 
tect’s being completely trained in ‘all the sciences and arts? as suggested 
in the Manasara : 

“Оп this account Pythius, one of the ancient architects of the noble 
temple of Minerva at Priene, says in his ‘commentaries, that an architect 
should have that perfect knowledge of each art and science, which is not even 
acquired by the professors of any one in particular, who have every oppor- 
tunity of improving themselves in it. This, however, cannot be necessary ; 
for how can it be expected that an architect should equal Aristarchus as a 
grammarian, yet should he not (?) be ignorant of Grammar.’— (Vitruvius, 
Book I, chap. r, translated by Gwilt.) 

The social position of architects is not quite clear from the literary or 
epigraphical records examined above. But from the functions assigned 
to each of the four architects, it would appear that the first three, namely, 
Sthapati, Sütragráhin and Vardhaki, belong to the higher classes. Further 
from the liberal presents and rewards given on each occasion equally to the 
Guru (preceptor) and the Sthapati, which are so frequently mentioned, 


591 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


STHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
it seems probable that the Sthapati had an enviable position. This latter 1 
point might account for his excommunication mentioned in the epigraphical 
records quoted above. 

STHANA—The place of standing or staying, any place, spot, locality, 

the abode, dwelling house, room, shrine, a monastic establishment. 

(1) * We, Kausika-Nagama-Bhattana, a Siva-Brahmana, in charge of 
the shrine (sthana) of the temple of Tiruvallam-udaiyar at Tiruvallam.’ 


(Inscrip. of Rajendra, no. 55, line 4, H. ө. 25 16; 
Vol. ur, p. 119.) 


(2) “List of shrines to which allotments were made :—Virabhadra-deva 

(1, 12), Brahmani, I$vari (1, 13), Vaishnavi (1, 14), Indrani (1, 15)., 
Ganapati (1, 16), Chamundesvari of the chief shrine (mila-sthana)’ 
(Inscrip. at Kolar, по. 66, H. S. 1. I, Vol. ш, 

pp. 136-137.) 

STHANAKA—A class of buildings in which the height is the unit 
of measurement, the temples in which the idols are placed in the erect 


posture. 
(М., xix, 7-11, see under APASAMCHITA ; cf. also 


XLVI, 30, XLVI, I, LVIU, II, etc.) 
STHANIYA—A city, a fortress, a site plan in which the whole 
area is divided into 121 equal squares. 
(M., уп, 13 ; cf. also 1x, 365, 368, 478.) 
A fortified city (М., x, 41). 
A fortress to defend 800 villages : 

Ashta-Sata-gramya madhye sthàniyam, chatu$-$ata-gramya drona- 
mukharn,dvi-$ata-gramyà kharvatikam, da$a-grami-samgrahena samgra- 
nam sthapayet I 4 

(Kautilzya-Artha-fastra, Chap. xxm, p. 64, para. 4.) 
Jana-pada-madhye samudaya-sthanam sthaniyam піуебауес | 
(Ibid, Chap. xxiv, p. 51, para. 2.) 
STHANU—A synonym of Stambha or column. | 
(M., xv, 5, see under STAMBHA.) 
STHAPAKA—One who installs, actual worker, perhaps the principal 
assistant to the chief architect (sthapati), not the master who is 
called Karta. 
(M. xxxvi, in particular, cf. lines 7 and 34, 
70-71.) 
STHAPATYA—A house relating to architects or architecture, 
architectural or sculptural workshop. 


Analanila-kone và sthapatyalayam eva cha 1 : 
(M., хххп, 78, of. also 66.) 
592 


T HINDU ARCHITECTURE SYANDANA 


STHAPANA-MANDAPA—A room or pavilion where the idol is 
ж ' installed after it is washed and dressed, the sanctuary. 
| Prasadabhimukhe sapta-maņdaparh kalpayet kramat | 
Adau cha snapanartharh cha dvitiyam adhyayana-mandapam | 
Visesharh snapanartharh cha mandaparh cha tritiyakarn | 
Chaturtharh pratimagararh pafichamarh sthàpana-mandapam 1 
(М., xxxiv. 45-48.) 
STHAVARA-BERAC-—A stationary idol. 
(M., тл, 17, etc.) 
STHIRA-VASTU—A permanent building. 
Sthira-vàstu-kukshi-de$e tu chara-vastu tathàpi chal. 
. . . garbha-švabhrarn prakalpayet | 
; (М., хп, 170-171, see also 43.) 
STHUNA—The civic and sacrificial posts used as memorial pillars, 
symbolising royal and divine power to which offenders and sacrificial 
victims were tied, ‘maintained by the Fathers’, upon which 
° Yama makes seats for the departed.’ (R.V. x, 18, 3; A.V. хуш, 
3, 52), made of copper, bronze or iron (ауаз, R.V. v, 62, 7, 8), а 
synonym of Stambha or column.—( M., xv, 5; see under ЅтАМВНА.) 


SNAPANA-MANDAPA-—A class of pavilions used for bathing, a 
washing room. 
(M., xxxiv, 43-48, etc.; Suprabhedagama 
XXXI, 96, 97 ; see under Manpapa.) 
SNANA-DRONI—Bathroom for a deity. 
(Champa, by Mazumdar, p. 237.) 
SNANA-MANDAPA-—A pavilion for bath, a bathroom. 
(M., хххп, 74, etc. ; see MANDAPA.) 
SNAPANA-MANDAPA—A washing room, a pavilion where idols 
are washed. 
Snapanartha-mandapam chapi snana-mandapam eva cha | 
(ML, xxxu, 74; f. XXXIV, 46, 47, etc.) 
SPHURJAKA—A class of twelve-storeyed buildings once prevail- 
ing in the country of Sphürjaka (?). 
Pafichalam dravidam chaiva madhya-kantarn kalingakam | 
Viratarn keralam chaiva varn$akam magadham tatha | 
Janakam sphürjakarn chaiva da$a-kantarn prakirtitam 1 
Е (M., ххх, 5-7 ; see under PRASADA.) 
SYANDANA—A synonym of yana or conveyance, a chariot. 
(М., ш, 9, 10 ; хіх, 145.) 


593 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SVAYAMBHU AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF “7 


ата mandaropamam | 
and also broad roads (round 
ауа, V. 57, Ер. Ind., Vol. 1x, 


Gf. Visüla-ratha-vithir cha syandan 
: Built a car like the Mandara mountain 
the temple).’—(Krishnapuram Plates of Sadasivar: 


р рр. 336, 341-) 
т SVAYAMBHU—Self-revealed, а kind of phallus. 
к (Kamikagama, 1, 35; M., Lu, 227; see under LiNGA.) | 
2% SVAMIKARA—Svadhyayaka, reader of sacred literature. | 


(M., xL, 124.) 
SVARGA-KANTA—A class of eight-storeyed buildings. 


(M., xxvi, 28-33 5 ste under PRASADA.) 

SVARNA-LINGA—A kind of phallus, a phallus made of gold. 
(М., 11, 333, ctc.) | 
SVA-VRIKSHA—A type of round temple. | 


(Agni-Purana, Chap. CIV, vv. 17-18; see under PRASADA.) i 


SVASTIKA—An auspicious mark, the Omkára symbol, the fire 
cross, the sun symbol, a symbol for Buddha and Siddha, the crossing 
of the arms, the mecting of four roads, a type of village, a joinery, 
a window, a type of pavilion, a kind of phallus, a class of halls, a type 
of building, a sitting posture. 
A class of two-storeyed buildings—(M., хх, 94, 94-41; see under 
PRASADA). 
A class of villages (M., 1x, 3, 330; see GRAMA ; compare M., хп, 76, 77 
146; XLIX, 152; LIV, 120; LVII, 12). 4 
A kind of joinery—(M., хуп, бо). 
А kind of window— (M., хххш, 583; see under VATAYANA). 
А pavilion with three faces : 
! . Dvi-vaktram dandakam proktarn tri-vaktrarh svastikarh tatha | 
A class of mansions or halls (M., xxxv, 3, 80). шасы 
А kind of phallus—(M., Lu, 4, 120). 
(2) Aparo'nta-gato' lindah pranta-gatau tad-utthitau chanyau | 
Tad-avadhi-vivritas chanyah prag-dvaram svastike Subhadam 11 
*' The Svastika (building) is auspicious if it have the entrance on the 
east side, and one continual terrace along the west side, at the ends 
whereof begin two other terraces going from west to cast ТІН bet 
the extremities of the latter lies a fourth terrrace.’ 3 pe 
Commentary quotes Garga: 
Paschimo’ntagato’lindah prag-antau dva -utthi 
Anyas tan-madhye vidhitah E dvaram ES 11 
(Byihat-samhita, тап, 34, Z. В. A. S., N. S. 
Vol. vr, p. 286, note 1.) 


594 


| HINDU ARCHI TECTURE SVASTIKA 
| 1 м А kind of octagonal building : 
тұ? - (3) Agni-Purána (chap. civ. vv. 20, 21 ; see under PRASADA). 
(4) Garuda-Purana (chap. хуп, vv. 21, 23, 31-33; see under 
PRAsADA). 


(5) Kamikagama (xxxv, 89) refers to a mansion (sala) : . 
Dakshine chottare chaiva shan-netrarm svastikarn matam | 
Рагбуауоһ purata§ chaiva chatur-netra-samayutam|| 
An entablature (ibid., шу, 7). 
Ibid., хып (named Svastika-vidhi) divides buildings into four classes 
namely, Jàti, Chhanda, Vikalpa, and Abhasa (vv. 3-4), which are 
p described in detail (vv. 5-30). 
| (6) See the figure ЫҢ (specimens of Jaina sculpture from Mathura, Ер. 
| Ind., Vol. п, p. 311). 
| (7) * The capacity of the well, well accounts for the time taken in its 
construction. There are four entrances leading into the well, and they are 
so constructed as to give it the shape of the svastika symbol LE. (This 
should be compared with the village named Svastika.) From each of the 
entrances, a flight of steps leads to the interior of the well.'—(Ep. Td. 
Vol. xr, p. 155, para. 2, note 1.) 
! (8) “Та the inscriptions from the cave temples of Western India, 
Bombay, 1881, are given a quantity of clearly Buddhist Square Pali Ins- 
! criptions from Kuda, Karle, Sailawadi, Junnar, etc. Many of these contain 
| буаз Баз at the beginning and end. Kuda no. 27 has at the end rd; but at 
|| the end of 29 is “A which occurs again at the beginning and end of Karle 
| inscriptions, and beginning and end of Junnar 30, at the beginning of 
|! Junnar 5, 20, 28, 32 and 34, and at the end of Junnar 32; while rH occurs 
|| ° at the beginning of Kuda go and of Junnar 6 and 27, and the end of 33. 
| The form | is found at the end of the Sailawadi inscription, and ІҢ at the 
|| end of Karle 2. "Thus cave temple disproves the theory that the Chris- 
| tian Svastikas point to the left or westwards, whereas the Indian 
including Buddhist and Jain Svastikas, point to the right or eastwards.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 96.) 
wu (9) * The Svastika is called by the Jains Sathis, who give it the first place 
| among the eight chief auspicious marks of their faith. It would be well to 
repeat here, in view of what follows, the Jain version of this symbol as given 
by Pandit Bhagwanlal Indraji (the Hathigumpha inscriptions, Udayagiri 
\Сауеѕ, p. 7), who was told by a learned Yati that the Jains believe it 
to be the figure of Siddha. "They believe that, according to a man's karma, 
he is subject to one of the following four conditions in the next lifc—he either 
becomes a god or deva, or goes to hell (naraka), or is born again as a man, 
or is born as a lower animal. But a Siddha in his next life attains to nirvana 
and is, therefore, beyond the pale of these four conditions. The Svastika 


595 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SVASTIKA АУ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


represents such a Siddha in the following way. . The point or bindu in the 
centre from which the four paths branch out is jiva or life, and the four 
paths symbolise the four conditions of life. But asa Siddha is free from all 


these, the end of each line is turned to show that the four states are closed 
> 


for him.’ ) е: 
‘The Buddhist doctrines mostly resemble those of the Jains, it is just 


possible that the former might have held the Svastika in the same light as 
the latter. In the Nasik inscription, no. 10, of Ushavadata, the symbol is 
placed immediately after the word “ Siddham ” a juxtaposition which cor- 
roborates the above Jain interpretation. We find the Svastika either at 
the beginning or end or at both ends of an inscription and it might mean 


Svasti ог Siddham. Mr. Y. S. Vavikar.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. ххуп, p. 196.) 


(то) * The usual Indian symbols are of frequent occurrence, e.g., the 
Svastika in various forms on most of the Plates and specimens of the familiar 
circular Sun-symbols.’ 


Mr. Fawcett quotes 32 sun and fire symbols of Plate I of Mr. Murray 


Ansley’s papers on Asiatic Symbolism (Jnd. Ant. Vol xv, p. 66) and says 
that ‘the whole of these may be taken to be developments in various 
directions of the cross, and for Indian investigations of the Svastika.’ 

(Jbid., Vol. ххх, pp. 413-414.) 

(11) ‘ This emblem (the ancient mystic emblem of the Bon Religion 
Tungdrung L} ) in my view was invented to represent the Sun as the creator 
of East, South, West, and North, the little mark at the end of each line in- 
dicating the inclination of the sun to proceed from one point to the other.' 

‘Rev. А. W. Heyde of Ghüm tells me that Yungdrung as a monogram 
is said to be composed of the two syllables, H su and ql ti, suti = Svasti.’ 
Mr. A. H. Francke. 

(Ladakhi pre-Buddhist marriage Ritual, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. xxx, p. 132, paras. 1, 4.) 

(12) * Plate іу (facing p. 400), Fig. 2 (Ж, ПІ) contains two reversed 
forms of the Svastika (yungdrung).’ 

Mr. Francke refers to the above quotation ‘ for an explanation of this 
orm of Svastika in Ladakh,’ and repeats that ‘it is the emblem of the Bon 
Religion. 

(Notes on Rock-Carvings from lower Ladakh 
Ind. Ant., Vol. хххі, p. 400, para. 3) 

(13) * M. Burnouf holds that this mysterious and much debated symbo 
(Svastika H, LA ) is intended to denote the invention of the fire-drill, and 
preserve the sacred remembrance of the discovery of fire by rotating a peg 
іп dry wood. It represents according to him, the two pieces of wood laid 
crosswise, one upon another, before the sacrificial altar, in order to produca 


596 


. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA - 


— "ы 


oOo 


q 


e ж 
> 


тк 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SVASTIKA 


Wooden peg or lance (pramantha, whence the myth of Promotheus, the 
fire-bearer) Was rotated by a cord of cow-hair and hemp till the sacred 
Spark was produced. Тһе invention of the fire-drill would mark an 


in all countries of Europe, Asia and Africa, < Its first appearance (in 
Europe) is on the pottery of archaic Greece, as on that in the British 
Museum ascribed to between the years 700 and 500 B.C" About India, 
he says that “а character nearly resembling the runic G, occurs in a 
Pali inscription, and reversed rb ina rock-inscription at Salsette” 
(F. В. А. S., Vol. XX, p. 250, сіс.). He has also shewn that it is both 
a Buddhist, Jaina, and Christian emblem. ‹ In our own day,” says he, 
“it has become a favourite ornamental device,” we may be sure with no 
thought of symbolism,—and archacologist returning from India may 
observe it covering ceilings, cornices, fenders, and other ironworks.’ 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. уп, P: 177, с. 2, para. 2 f.) 
(14) “In describing coin no. 3 Of this series (Numismatic Chronicle, N.S., 
Vol. xx, pp. 18-48, p. 62) I pointed out that the place of the more definite 
place of the Sun, in its rayed wheel form, was taken up by the emblematic 
cross of the Svastika.’ E 
* Under the advanced interpretation of the design and purpose of Svastika, 
from an Indian point of view, now put forward . . . the figure, as repre- 
senting one of the received attributes of the Sun, was used conventionally, 
to typify the solar orb itself? Е. Thomas. 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. 1x, p. 65, c. 1, 
para. 2 ; p. 66, c. 1, para. 2.) 
(15) * I come now to show that the figure called the Svastika symbolizes 
the idea of circumambulation, derived from the apparent movement of the 
sun from left to right round the earth. The idea is this, that ifa person faces 
the east at sun-rising and follows its movement southward and westward 
he will turn with his right hand fixed towards an object supposed to be placed 
like the earth in relation to the sun, in the centre of a circle. 


‘The argument, therefore, amounts to this: that as the figure or the - 


Svastika is found scattered through countries reaching from Japan to 
England, so also the custom of turning sunways, or with the sun, is equally 
widespread ; and secondly, that as the Svastika is a sign of good luck, signi- 
fied by its etymology, so also the practice of turning with the sun is considered 


a lucky or fortunate proceeding and turning in the contrary way, especially š 


997 


2 a ыы т 


"rz 


алата гай 


SVASTIKA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


s dreaded as entailing a curse . . .; the 
we argue are co-related.’ Rev. S. Beal. 


(Ind. Ant., Vol. Ix, p. 67, c. 2, 
para. 5 ; p. 68, c. 2, para. 2.) 


among northern people, i 
custom and the symbol, therefore, 


(16) Mr. Sewel after quoting a number of theories on the origin of the 
symbol, namely, of General Cunningham (Edinburg. Review, January, 
1870), Rev. Haslam (Zhe Cross and the Serpent, 1849), Mr. Brinton (Myths 
of the New World), Dr. J. G. Miller (Geschichte der Amerikanischen 
Urreligionen, p. 497), and of Mr. Baldwin (Ancient America, New York, 1879, 
p. 186), says ‘for myself, I boldly range myself under Mr. Thomas’s 
Sun-standard.’—(Ind. Ant, Vol. x, p. 202, с. 1, line 6.) 

(17) Mr. Murray-Ansley seems to agree with the theory that the Svastika 
has originally been an emblem of the sun. He correctly adds that ‘in 
India Hindus belonging to certain sects are in the habit of tracing one or 
more figures of the Svastika on the outer walls of their houses.’ Не also 
mentions its use in connexion with the marriage presents in India and 
Spain.—(Ind. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 93, с. I, para. г; с. 2, para. 2.) 

(18) ‘ The svastika or fylfot is one of the most ancient symbols mankind 


has. Much is heard of it nowadays, and іп one country much is seen of it, 


where it is presumed to be especially connected with the mysterious con- 
ception called Aryan}, and with the Christian Faith as a national possession 
and discrimination. ** Rise of a benign power ” or * lucky time " is the 
meaning attached to itin Germany where it is supposed to have a German 
origin and an anti-Semitic signification.’ 

* Wherever the sign came from, it did not come from Germany. It is 
not a natural symbol of the Aryan race, which is not a race but a myth or 
scientific abstraction. It was not invented by European peoples. Fifteen 
centuries before India knew anything of Europe the sign was used by the 
people of the Indus valley, as is shewn by the great excavations on sites 
along that river, and those peoples were not Aryans or Europeans or Indo- 
Europeans, nor in any sense the direct anscestors of the Germans. Europe, 
it seems, knew nothing of the sign untila thousand years later than the date 
of the specimens found in large numbers in that part of India. When early 
Christians used it, as they often did, they were using something borrowed 
from older religions or civilizations. A good claim can be made out 

` 


. . “Adolf Hitler has, however, explained the significance of Svastika which 
is included in the new German flag—Red with a white disc in the centre 
bearing the black Svastika—as follows : 
“Тһе red expressed the social though underlying the movement (of the 
National socialists) ; white, the National dies dd the Svastikà Қазы 
T mission allotted to us—the Struggle for the Victory of the Aryan Mankind 
and at the same time the triumph of the ideal of the Creative Work which is in 
itself and always will be anti-semitic."—(Mein Kampf, 1939, РР- 409 note, 411.) 


598 


Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHI TECTURE К SVASTIKA 


for Egypt as its inventor, where the symbol for created life was a cross with 


a circle on top or resting on the left arm, and that combined with the symbol 


for Divinity in the hieroglyphics (something like a. small flag) might easily 
have developed into the svastika we know. From Egypt it could have 
spread over the Mediterranean world and the Near East, for there was much 
trade and travel in early days. SGHLIEMANN found both forms of it, the right 
and left handed, in the ruins of Troy, and it has been discovered also on 
Chaldaean bricks, in Egyptian temples, on vases of Cyprus, Hittite carvings, 
Etruscan pottery, in India's cave temples, on Roman altars and British 
runic monuments, in Tibet, China, Korea, Mexico, Peru, and in the pre- 
historic burial ground of North America. Germany's sole right to it is far 
from established.’ 

“Тһе origin of its name is less disputed. Sanskrit has the credit—su (well) 
asti (is) ka (a noun ending) Svasti (it is well), India has said at the beginning 
of any auspicious act, and “ it is well ” is the meaning of the sign through- 
out the ages. “Life is beneficent.” It indicates—we quote from a woman 
writer on symbolism—* That the maze of life may bewilder, but a path of 
life runs through it: It is well is the name of the path, and the key of life 
eternal is in the strange labyrinth for those whom God leadeth.” A rival 
interpretation finds in the word another Sanskrit element, the swa (self) 
of swaraj and similar words, relating the svastika to the good that comes 
from one’s own efforts, but that view has found little acceptance. In 
general man has seen in the sign an assurance that somewhere in this fluid 
difficult chaotic life there is stability and benevolence, and he reads it as 
an assurance that he should struggle on in hope.’ 

* For this reason some have sought its origin not in the religious symbolism 
of Egypt, but in the pattern of the heavens. In the sky only the Pole Star 
isstable and constant. All else moves roundit. So the fixed, the reliable, 
the dhruva of the old Indian astronomers, became an assurance that there was 
the seat of a power kindly to man. Anyhow we must believe that India 
has given the larger part of the associations that have always gone with the 
Svastika, though it might come as a shock to some good Germans to be told 
that they are in the same line of thought as Hindus and Buddhists who begin 
an important piece of work with ‘‘svasti’? and welcome a guest with 
“ svastu ” “ be it well 2, 

(Statesman, October 14, 1934.) 

The extensive literature dealing with this most ancient and popular 
symbol in its all aspects (viz. etymology, antiquity, various countries and 
peoples who employed it, and the four main theories of its significance) as 
summarized by the writer may be quoted (from the Indian Review, Decem- 
ber, 1940, pp. 754-761) below : 

Тһе term *Svastika is etymologically composed of three parts “su ? 
(good, auspicious), “asti? (*as* to be, ‘ti’ affix for third person singular 


599 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SVASTIKA AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


or the suffix ‘ti’ added to verbal root to form verbal or rant noun, 
like “рай” going ; “гай”, love or love goddess, etc., pee mey S 
equivalent to “sthiti’, stay or settlement) and md a ax “Ка S 
possession of, as in Bāla (=hair) ka (possessing) Ў hich Erud a boy a g 
his hair grown. This derivation of the term from Sans it is corrobor- 
ated by the monogram Yungdrung which as quoted above is Б ог 
two syllables, su ( Н) and ti ( ПЕ) and is the mystic emblem ( LẸ ) of the 
Bon religion Tungdrung. Mr. A. H. Francke (Ind. Ant. ххх, 132) 
took this symbol to represent the sun as the Creator of East, South, West, 
and North, the little mark at the end of each line indicating the inclina- 
tion of the sun to proceed from one point to the other. Thus the Sanskrit 
° svastika ? should imply any object possessing, indicating, or ending at an 
auspicious omen. This etymological meaning of the classic emblem has 
retained its original sense everywhere probably excluding Germany of 
Hilter’s day. But there are various theories to explain its design and 
purpose. 

According to some (see above M. Burnouf, Mr. Tylor, Mr. Walhouse, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. vu, р. 177) the svastika symbol (ЫҢ рЫ) is intended to 
denote the “invention of the fire-drill, and ‘preserve the sacred remem- 
brance of the discovery of fire (at the neolithic age) by rotating peg in 
dry wood. The symbol represents the two pieces of wood laid crosswise, 
one upon another, before the sacrificial altar, in order to produce the holy 
fire. The ends of the cross were fixed down by arms, and at the point 
where the two pieces are joined there was a small hole in which a wooden 
peg or lance was rotated by a chord of cow-hair and hemp till the sacred 
spark was produced.’ 

The myth of Promotheus appears to have originated from Pramantha 
or lance. The invention of fire-drill marks an epoch in human history, 
Till then there was hardly much difference between men and beasts. For 
in the palzolithic or old stone age, men could use for defence and offence 
only the implements of wood, bone or stone, rude in form and entirely 
devoid of skilled workmanship. In the new stone age, however, higher 
type of implements came into use. Men then developed the intelligence 
and skill to grind and polish the rude instruments of earlier age in order 
to make more effective use of them. "The neolithic men were not, like 
their Paleolithic fore-fathers, ignorant of the use of fire and the potter’s art. 
They could then cook meat and fish. They could make with hand 
pottery which was later turned on wheel. They honoured their dead 
parents and relations by elaborate tombs frequently built of massive stones. 
This sort of ancestral worship was the beginning of the belief and faith 
in a Creator or the God, who is the ultimate father of all beings. Thus 


699 : 


University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SVASTIKA 


„if the svastika symbol be ascribed to the period when the production 


and use of fire became known to humanity it would claim a very great 
antiquity so far as India is concerned. For the discoveries at? Mahenjo- 
Daro show unmistakably that at gooo B. c. Indians not only knew the 
use of all metals including gold but culturally made an all-round progress, 
and this Mahenjo-Daro period must be at least 2000 years later than the 
new stonc age when the production and. use of fire became known to 
them. 

It, however, should be noted that the fire-origin of svastika will mili- 
tate against its root meaning. Because however useful firc may be, its 
main function is to burn or destroy whatever comes in contact with it. 
Thus it would be an emblem of destruction like cross with which Christ 
was crucified or murdered. But ctymologically svastika must mean 
“the good settlement’ or an auspicious emblem as its later use will clearly 
show. 

According to another school of thought as represented by Rev. S. Beal 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, p. 67 f£), Mr. Sewel (Ind. Ant., Vol. X, p. 202) and 
Mr. Murray-Ansley (Ind. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 93 ff.) the svastika figure 
*symbolizes the idea of circumambulation, derived from the apparent 
movement of the sun from left to right round the earth? The idea appears 
to be this that if a person faces the east at sun-rising and follows its move- 
ment southward and westward, he will turn with his.right hand fixed 
towards an object supposed to be placed like the earth in relation to the 
sun, in the centre of a circle. | 

This theory is corroborated Бу the world-wide use of the svastika symbol, 
so also the custom of turning sunways or with the sun, which is equally 
widespread. The further support to the sun theory is lent by the argu- 
ment that ‘ the svastika is a sign of good luck, signified by its. etymology, 
so also the practice of turning with the sun is considered a lucky or fortu- 
nate proceeding and turning in the contrary way is dreaded as entailing a 
curse. Thus the custom and the symbol аге co-related. The exponents of 
the cross-symbol theory of the svastika figure like Mr. Fawcett (Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xxx, рр. 413-414) hold that the 92 sun and fire Syene E 
together by Murray-Ansley (Und. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 55) By 21 Б T. 
to be developments in various. direction of the cross. E 55 T 
thought fail, however, to explain the appearance of SESE is a 
thousand years before the birth of Christ in connexion with whom the 


mbolic significance. 
. deadly weapon, cross, assumed a sy g 


i sral А. Cunningham 
ther theories adumbraded by Genera 
M c 1870), Rev. Halsam (the Cross and the Serpent, 
a Ж Brinton (Myths of the New World), Dr. J. G. Miler (Geschichte 
; ; 


601 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ر 


ES 


* yc “асы 


қас 


SVASTIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF . 2 (* 


der Amerikanischen Urreligionen, p. 497), Mr. Baldwin (Ancient America, 
New York, 1879, p. 186), and many others associate the svastika figure 
with the fire, sun, or cross symbol and do not advocate an entirely 


separate origin. 

The fourth group of theories as elaborated by Mr. H. K. Deb (7. A. КА; Ж 
Vol. хуп, p. 220 ff.) and others associate the svastika symbol with the | 
mystic syllable ‘Om’. This syllable in Sanskrit consists of three letters | 


Н > which are variously connected with the gods of Crea- | 


а ^um? and im 
tion, Preservation, and Destruction, as well as with the three Vedas, the 


Rig, Saman, and Yajus. But the sound “о” of the mystic syllable is re- ж” 
presented by a single letter which in the Brahmi script looks exactly like f 
one arm ( Ñ, Z ) of the svastika figure ( L} ) and the nasal sound, “т” is i) 

М. 


represented in Brahmi by a small circle or dot with two ear-like projections 
( M ), which later оп is shown by the dot only, with or without a crescent i 
line below (>). ‘О? in grammar is stated to be a long vowel and it ү 
is held that in pronouncing the mystic syllable the “о "-sound is lengthened 
by repetition and that the repetition is indicated in writing by two o's | 
like а conjointed letter by placing them crosswise. And the nasal sound 
“т”, which is necessary in order to have a pause after a vowel sound, is | 
indicated by a dot-like mark at the ends of the Brahmi ‘o’-symbol. Such 2 
dot-ending svastika figure is seen in numerous instances in Cunningham's 
Coins of India and in Rapson's Coins of Andhras, and D’Alviella’s Migra- | 
tion of Symbols (p. 71), and in other places. In fact, this dot mark 4 
or a slight projection from the ends makes the svastika figure more | j 
ornamental. "W" 
If this identification of svastika with the * Om ° syllable, or the develop- | | 
ment of the former out of the latter, be accepted, three points would be | 
further clarified. First, the auspicious character of the svastika figure I 
will get support because the ‘Om’ syllable like the svastika figure is used | 
at the commencement of something auspicious. Тһе prefacing of ‘Om’ 
in pronouncing anything is followed down to this day by * Svasti? (good 
luck) and it is also the practice to add ‘ Svasti ° immediately after * Om ° 
in order probably to clarify or emphasize the meaning of the mystic 
І syllable, Secondly, if the formation of the svastika figure from the joining 
of two Brahmi o's in a crosswise manner be accepted a very great anti- 
quity can safely be attached to this classic symbol, because the title ‘ Brah- 


E ті” implies its origin from Brahma or the Creator Himself and the Brahmi 
2 alphabet may be associated with the writings discovered at Mahenjo-Daro 
б dating бот 3000 в. c. Despite various other theories the indegenous 


origin of the Brahmi can hardly be questioned although the history of its 
origin has yet to be written. Thus, thirdly, the Indian origin of the 


602 


iversity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— aus е 


өс 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SVASTIKA 


svastika is further vouchsafed by the ctymology of the term, which is un- 
` questionably Sanskrit and Indian. 


Before examining the very widely spread use of the svastika figure in 
Indian life and culture, it is desirable to notice briefly its antiquity and 
use in other countries, without, however, committing oneself about its 
migration from India, or its independent growth in other countries all 
over the world. Thomas Wilson in his book Suastika (Report of the 
Smithsonian Institution, 1894) has largely referred to the various objects 
of different countries whereupon the svastika mark has been found. ‘The 
earliest undoubted reference of the svastika’, as held by Mr. Н. К. Deb, 
“is said to be in connection with the Third city on the site of Hissarlik, 
identified with ancient Troy.’ It is common also in the Fourth and Fifth 
cities on the same site, and is principally found there on spindle whorls, 
dating approximately from fourteenth or thirteenth century в. с. It is, 
however, a remarkable fact that this svastika was not found in the First 
and Second cities but emerged in a variety of forms in the Third or the 
burnt city. This fact clearly indicates that the svastika was foreign to Troy 
and that it was imported and introduced there about the middle of the 
second millenium B. c. Its importation from Vedic India is indicated by 
Professor Winckler's discoveries at Boghaz Kuei. It has been established 
by С.Н. W. Johns (Ancient Assyria, 1912, p. 54) that about 1400 В. c. 
kings with Indo-Aryan names and worshipping vedic gods were ruling 
the region of Mitanni. ‘The names Sutarna, Dushratta, etc., have а 
distinctly Indo-Aryan appearance. It is instructive to compare the name 
Gilukhipa, borne by a daughter of Sutarna I, who was also queen of Amer- 
nophis III of Egypt (c. 1400 В. С.) with the name Gurukshepa (Pargiter, 
Dynasties of the Kali Age, p. g) borne by the third successor of Brihadbala 
of Kosala who had fallen in the Bharata War.’ Ample evidence has been 
secured which goes to show that there was intimate inter-communication 
at that period among the different peoples inhabiting Asia. Minor, Egypt 
and the Aegean Island, so that the Vedic religion obtaining. in Mittani 
had many opportunities for circulation abroad. Earlier still, Mittani 
had been the centre of an extensive empire, and the migration of the 
svastika symbol to Troy in those days is intelligible enough (7. R. A. S., 
Vol. хуп, p. 242). 

In Greece the svastika appears on the archaic poney ascribed to bet- 
ween the years 700 and 500 B. с. In the Thomas Wilson’s list the Fig. 140 
shows the Grecian geometric vase of Smyrna, Fig. 153 shows the geometric 
Grecian vase of Thesa., Fig. 155 shows another Grecian vase (оіпосВое), 
and Fig. 130 shows the Naukratis vase of Greece. In the same list Fig. 186 
shows the Gervetri-Italian cinerary Urn, and Fig. 171 shows the detail of 


603 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


SVASTIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Rhodian vase. The Figs. 59 and 63 of the same list show the spindle whorl 
ЕЕ оын composed of four small squares (B a 
cross type ( pH ) are found on old Greek coins and as an огпашеца device 
on early Greek pottery in Samos, Cyprus, and Hissarlik. It is also to be 
found on early Latin, Etruscan, and Sicilian ornaments, coins, and pottery, 
as well as in Asia Minor and North Africa, especially where there had 
been Phoenician colonies. It is hardly to be found on Egyptian, Baby- 
lonian or Assyrian remains. 

In the Museums of Sweden and Denmark there are several hundred 


B) and the archaic 


gold bracteates which appear to have been worn as amulets or medals, 


frequently bear the svastika mark drawn both ways. 

In the Roman Catacombs the svastika occurs not frequently, as a Chris- 
tian symbol in Roman mosaic work in England, France, Spain and Algeria. 
It is abundant on pottery, ornaments, and weapons of Roman-British 
and Anglo-Saxon times, and of corresponding periods in Scotland, Ger- 
many, Switzerland, and Denmark. А sepulchre was found in Norfolk and 
another preserved at Cambridge, bear the svastika in continuous lines. 
A whole row of svastika surrounds the pulpit of St. Ambrose at Milan ; 
it is seen also on wall paintings at Pompeii, on ancient Athenian and Corin- 
thian vases and in the large Mosaic in the royal garden at Athens. It is 
also found in Hungary, China and Japan where it is frequently used as a 
potters’ marks (Ind. Ant., Vols. уп and xiv). Clothes used in Spain 
for covering the trays, were bordered with the svastika only for ornamenta- 
tion. Professor Max Müller found it in Bishop's Island near Konigswalde 
on the right bank of the Oder, near Guiben. It is seen also on a celtic 
Urn found at Shropham in Norfolk and now in the British Museum. The 
form of it (50) known as the double sun snake of Scandinavia has 
been found on pottery in the Island of Cyprus, specimen of which is in 


the Museum of St. Germain in France. Svastika has also been found on ` 


a Christian tomb with a Latin inscription, discovered in 1879 at Rome. 
It 3s most rare and common in Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. А stock 
bearing the date 1809 in the Norwegian Museum in Stockholm is covered 
with svastikas of the double sun snake type (Ж). 

Profesor Max Müller concludes that the svastika has been found in 
nearly every country of Europe (Ind. Ant., Vol. XV, p. 94). In his Early 
History of Mankind, Mr. Tylor has shown the extensive use of the 
> svastika symbol at some period in every quarter of globe as exemplified 
above. And Mr. Walhouse (Ind. Ant., Vol. vo, p. 177) has identified 
both the right-handed and left-handed forms in all countries of Asia 
E шоре, and Africa. i 


6o4 


190 


1 130—Grecian vase NAUKRATIS —Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 130. 4 D 

| 140—Grecian geometric vase of Smyrna— Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 140. j 2 
153—Grecian gcometric vase of Thesa—Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 153. x 
155—Grecian vase OINOCHOE—Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 155. 3 
171—Rhodian vase—Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 171. г 


186—Cervetri-Italian Сіпегагу urn —Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 186. 
Page 604 à 


2” 


Fig. 63—The spindle whorl of Troy with ogee Svastila— Wilson, The Sa ро 


Fig. 59— Biconical spindle whorl of Troy—Wilson, The Svastika, Fig. 59- 


Fig. 20—Indian coin, Eran, Fig. 20, Plate XI, іп Cunningham's ** Coins of 
Ancient India ”, containing snake pattern of Svastika. 
Fig. 7—Indian coin, Ujjain, Fig. 7, Piate X, іп Cunningham’s <“ Coins o 


Ancient India ". (Reproduced through the courtesy of Smithsonian Institution.) 


Page 605 


Sree 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SVASTIKA 


In the land of its origin the svastika symbol, whether identified with the 


€ - 
. ‘Omkara’ or not, has been popular, both as an auspicious emblem as well 


as an ornamental device, with the followers of Brahmanism, Jainism and 
Due A n referred to de: all pronouncement in Sanskrit com- 
m AN Г d D. ‚ Буаз! . Several epigraphical records open with 
e um DE ol. Coins also bear this symbol. For instance, in Cun- 

Coins of Ancient India, Fig. 20 of plate хі shows a unique specimen 
of eran coin, and Fig. 7 of plate x represents another interesting specimen 
of svastika with the Brahmi “о” and * m? actually depicted. 

The svastika is called by the Jains ‘Sathis’. They give it the first place 
among the eight chief auspicious marks of their faith. Bhagwanlal Indraji 
(Hathigumpha Inscriptions, Udayagiri Caves, p. 7) testifies on the autho- 
rity of Yatis that * the Jains believe it to be the figure of Siddha, who is 
beyond the four conditions of life, viz. to become, after death according 
to one’s action in life, a god or to go to hell or to be born again as ‘aman 
or a lower animal.’ The Siddha is represented by the svastika in this 
way. The point (bindu) in the centre from which the four paths branch 
out is Jiva or life, and the four paths symbolise the four conditions of life. 
But as a Siddha is free from all these, the end of each life is turned to show 
that the four states are closed for him (Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, 
рр. 734-35). Specimens of Jain sculptures from Mathura (Ep. Ind., 
Vol. п, p. 311) contain this symbol. 

The Buddhists appear to hold the svastika in the same light as the Jains. 
In the Nasik Inscription (no. ro) of Ushavadata, the symbol is placed 
immediately after the word *'Siddham', a juxtaposition which corro- 
borates the Jain interpretation. The svastika appears at the beginning 
or end or at both ends of an inscription and it might mean the Brahmanical 
© буаз? or Jain ‘Siddham’. The Buddhist square Pali Inscriptions 
from Kuda, Karle, Sailawadi, Junar, etc., among the Inscriptions from 
the Cave Temples of Western India contain svastika at the beginning and 
end ( r A th Һ ind. Ant., Vol. xv, p. 96). 

In modern times it-is a favourite ornamental device. It is found in 
buildings, covering ccilings, cornices, fenders and other iron, silver, gold 
and wooden works. It is used not only as “ап auspices mark and a symbol 
for Buddha and Siddha, but also as a sign for the crossing of the arms and 
as the meeting of the four roads. It has been translated into a sitting 
posture. In the Silba-fastra it has been elaborately worked out in the town- 
planning, and village schemes, in designing screens, lattice, joinery work, 
windows, pavilions, halls, and storeyed mansions, іп digging wells, and 
carving the phallus or the emblem of Siva (Dictionary of Hindu Architec- 
ture, p. 732 fF). The Manasira-Vastu-Sastra contain elaborate details of 


605 


SVASTIKA 


svastika plan, of villages (Chap. IX, 3, 330; XI, (Ne ES 5 ex 
152; LIV, 120; іліп, 12), of Joinery work (ws P 0), с ушао 
(Сһар. хххш, 583), of РауШопѕ (Chap. xxxiv, 552) апа о К т 
and Storeyed Mansions (Chap. xxv, 3; 80). These references ERE m 160 
elaborated in the general literature. For instance the aa 
(Chap. rur, 34 ff.) contains a technical description of а svastika house: 
“The svasüka (house) is auspicious if it have the entrance on the east 
side, and one continual terrace along the west side, at the end whercof 
begin two other terraces going from west to cast, while between the extre- 
mitics of the latter lies a fourth terrace” (Chap. п, 34 апа 7. В. A. S., 
Vol. vr, р. 286). 

The octagonal buildings of the svastika plan are described in the Agni- 
Purana (Chap. civ, уу 20-21), and the Garuda-Purdna (Chap. хілп, vv. 
21, 23, 31-33). 

According to the Kamikagama (xxxv, 80 ff.) the distinguishing 
features of the svastika house аге the six eyes (псіга) in right and left, and 
the four eyes on the two sides and in front. Further details have been 
elaborated in the Manasdra-Vastu-sastra where (Chap. xxxiv, 552) the 
characteristic features are stated to be the plough-shape and the three 
faces. This design has been followed in a structure erected at Allahabad 
near the Bharadwaj Ashrama of which several photographic views, measured 
drawings and a graphic description are included in the writer’s Hindu 
Architecture in India and Abroad. The plough-shaped threc-face design will 
not at the first sight disclose the usual svastika plan, which has various 
forms. The standard authorities on architecture have developed the plan 
of the svastika house in three different forms as described in the Manasara, 
the Brihat-samhila, and Agni-Purdna, and Garuda-Purana. Тһе structure 
referred to above is in conformity with the Manasara’s rules and satisfies 
all the essential requirements. 


Thus there is some truth in the conclusion of Thomas Wilson (ibid. 
рр. 951-952) when he says that since ° we find the svastika used on small 
and comparatively insignificant objects, those in common use such as 
vases, pots, juds, implements, tools, houschold goods and utensils objects 
of the toilet, ornaments, сіс., and infrequently on statues, altars eni the 
like, the holy or sacred character of the svastika should bc given up, and 
it should still with these exceptions be considered as a charm inm 
token of good luck or good fortune, or as an ornament ог dredan 3 

Whichever theory of its origin be accepted— Om, Sun, Fire, or Cx 
the etymology of the term, Svastika, justifies its ТАТ кн 3 EE 
origin. And according to its derivative meaning its auspicious si "s 
сапсе cannot be denied as long as the Sanskrit civilization and Hindu 


606 


o —————————S OE 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ~ | i 


E 


—— apa 


T ` HINDU ARCHITECTURE HARITA 


> culture will survive in this world. In India this classic symbol has taken 
: .& corporal body and the Hindus have been building their roads, towns, 
villages, images, various articles, and houses according to this plan. Thus 
in India, the place of its origin, it is not merely an auspicious figure but it 
has been developed into a more tangible sculptural and architectural 
object. 
(Indian Review, December, 1940, pp. 754-761.) 
SVASTIKA-KHADGA—A type of octagonal buildings. 
(Авлі-Ригапа, Chap. crv, vv, 20, 21 ; see under PRASADA.) 
SVASTI-KANTA—A class of six-storeyed buildings. 
p" (M., ххіу, 52; see under PRASADA.) 
SVASTI-BANDHA—A class of single-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xix, 169 ; see under PRAsADA.) 


| 
| SVARASANA—The lintel, the top of а door. 


* The Svarasana of the gateway was made.’ 
(This inscription is on the top of the door of the Bhimesvara temple.) 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. x, Goribidnur Taluq, по. 2, 


e Roman text, p. 260, Transl., p. 212 f., 
Т H 
í | HATTA—A market, a market-place, a fair. 
L (т) Saumya-dvararh saumya-pade karya hattas tu vistarah 11 
+ (Agni-Purana, Chap. см, v. 3.) 
ft 


| (2) Attra hattah таһа-јапа$ cha sthapitah—here the market-place 
| and the shopkeeper (lit. big folk) were established. 
| ; Vichittra-vithi-sampürnnam hattarh kritva grihani cha—having cons- 
| tructed a markct-place full of variegated (various) streets and houses 
(shops). ; 
(Ghatiyala Inscrip. of Kakkuka, no. 1, v. 6; 
no. II, V. 9; Ef. Ind., Vol. 1x, p. 280.) 
(9) Nisranikshepa-hattam ekarh narapatina dattam | 
© A bazar building or ware-house for storing goods to be exported 
was granted by the king.’ —(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. ххш, Jalor 
stone Inscrip. of Samantasirhhadeva, lines 22, 23, Ep. Ind., Vol. хі, p. 62.) 


HARIKA-KARNA—A kind of leg for the bedstead. 
(M., ху, бо.) 


HARITA—A pavilion with twenty two-pillars. 
(Matsya-Purana, Chap. ссихх, v. 13.) 
НАРІТА--А moulding, an architectural ornament (se under 
MANDAPA). 
A moulding of the column (M., xv, 160, cf. 1. 106). 
An ornament of the pedestal (M., xxr, 31). 
607 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA  « 


Е HARMIKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


HARMIKA-—The kiosk, the altar-like structure that rises onthe . 
summit of the cupola of a stüpa. The Nepalese stüpas “decorate the °. = 
Harmiké with painted human eyes, thus suggesting a human figure, 
in the posture of meditation hidden in the stüpa : the crossed legs : 
in the base, the body up to the shoulders in the hemisphere, the head 
in the Ната. It was crowned by опе or more umbrellas of stone 
and served as a receptacle of relics. “ The resemblance of the Harmika 
to a sacrificial altar is perhaps not unintentional, because the Holy 
one (Buddha), instead of sacrificing other beings, sacrifices himself 
: to the world.” Railing on the top of stüpa, Tee, Burmese Hti; the 
3 lower partis called Gala (neck) and the whole chüdàmani. Тһе 
umbrellas grouped over it are chhatravali and the shaft on which they 
are supported is Yashti. (Foucher, L'Art Greco-Buddhique, tome i, 
E р. 97; Fergusson, Vol. r, p. 70, note 2.) ' 
E HARMYA (cf. RAJA-HARMYA)—An edifice, an upper room, a turret, 
ап apartment, buildings in general, a palace. А rich man's house. 
(Amarakosha, see under PRASADA) including stables, etc. (R.V. т, 166, 
45 УШ, 56, 16; ІХ, 71, 45 X, 43, 3). 
Ek (1) One of the four divisions of the architectural objects : 
x. : Dhara harmyadi-yanam cha paryankadi-chatur-vidham 1 
4% (M., ur, 3.) 
Buildings in general including prasada (big buildings), mandapa (pavi- 
lion), sabha (hall), Sala (mansion), ргара (alms-house), (a)rañga (theatre, | 
= play-house with quadrangular court-yards) (ibid., 7-8). i 
Pürva-hastena samyuktam harmyarh jātir iti smritam | y 
2% (М., xix, 3.) | 
4 А palace : | 
Bhipatinam cha harmyanam lakshanam vakshyate'dhuna | 
(M., XL, 1, etc.) 
Р. Harmya-janma-samarabhya sala-janma-pradesakam | à 
> (M., LXIX, 37.) i 
í Kudya-stambhe griha-stambhe harmya-garbharh vinikshipet 1 | 
(M., хп, 132.) 
(2) Prasada-harmya-valabhi-linga-pratimasu kudya-kupeshu | 
“Та the temple, mansion, roof, phallus, idol, wall and well.’ 
(Brthat-samhita, J. В. A. S., М. S., Vol. vi, p. 332.) 
(3) Harmyar prasada-manditam—the edifice furnished with a temple. 
(Vayu-Purana, part 1, Chap. xxxix, v. 57.) 
608 


ection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE HARMYA 


Jirnam harmyam ; harmyasthah striyah | 
(о) Raghuvamsa, vx, 47, etc. : 
Harmyagra-sarrüdha-trinàmkureshu . . . ripu-mandireshu | 
| (10) Jatakamala (у, ed. Kern, р. 80,1. 20): 
І | Vidyud-iva ghana-sikhararh harmya-talam avabhasanti vyatish - 


< 


x 
Y (4) Prabhüta-éikharopetarh harmyam пата  prakirtitam—that is 
named harmya (edifice) which is furnished with a large tower or dome 
(Sikhara). 
(Kamikagama, 1, 89.) 
A class of buildings (Zbid., XXXV, 39, 40; see under MALIKA). 
(5) Ramayana (u, 91, 32; 1v, 2235): 
Harmya-prásáda-sarnyukta-toranani | 
Mahatim guhàm . . : harmya-prásáda-sarnbádhàm | 
See also ц, 51, 21; П, 91,32; Ш, 55, 7 ; ІУ, 33, 5; V, 15, 9, 19; УІ, 75, 
3 26, etc. 
ТТ (6) Mahabharata (Cock) : 
4 i І. 3, 133; Nága-okam. . . ancka-vidha-prásáda-harmya-valabhi- 
f niryüha-$ata-samkulam | 
] ПІ. 207, 7; Нагтуа-ргакага-5оЬћапат . . . парагіт 1 
| See also 1, 3, 33; xv, 16, r; v, 118, I9, etc. 
! (7) Vikramorvast (Cock), p. 48: Manihamma-alam (mani-harmya- 
MS talam.) 
i (8) Mrichchhakatika. (ibid.), рр. 47, 158: 
«d 


f thata ı 
! (11) Katha-sarit-sagara (Cock), 14, I9: 
| Harmyàgra-samsthah . . . paura-naryah | 


(12) Vapra-gopuramayair-nava-harmaih | 
“Бу erecting new buildings adorned with a wall and a gate-tower.’ 
(Mangalagiri Pillar Inscrip., v. 29, Ep. Ind., Vol. v1, pp. 121, 131.) 
(13) Navina-ratnojjvala-harmya-srirngam—the top of the royal palace, 
the scene of the first act)—(Dhar Pragasti of Arjunavarman, v. 8, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. уш, pp. 103, 99.) . 
(14) Madana-dahana-harmyath karayamasa tungam sa guna-gana- 
nidhana-Ssrirhdrarajabhidhanah | 
‘Then that store of all virtues, the illustrious Indraraja, ordered to be 
built this lofty temple of the destroyer of Cupid (Siva.).’—(An Incrip. of 
Govinda ur, v. 17; Ind. Ant., Vol. уш, pp. 41, 42.) 
(15) Gommata-pura-bhüshanam idu | 
Gommatam ayat ene samasta-parikara-sahitam | 
2 Sammadadim Hulla chamü 1 
| Pam madisidarn Jinottamalayaman idam и 


609 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


LOT АЗ” LT = us 


E 
-Х- ee 
НЕР ЕУ 


HARMYA-KANTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Parisiitrarn nritya-geham pravipula-vilasat-paksha-deSastha-Saila- 
sthira-Jainavasa-yugmam vividha-suvidha-patrollasad bhava- 
rüpotkara-raja-dvàra harmmyarh beras atula-chatur-vvirh$a- 
tirtthesa-gehana | 

Paripürhnam punya-pufija-pratim 

nindam 1 

Abstract :— He also built an abode (or temple) for the Tirthankaras 
in this chief Tirtha of Belgula. And he built a large Jina temple, which, 
like Gommata, was an ornament to Gommatapura. Together with its 
cloisters, a dancing hall, a Jina house of stone on either side, a palace with 
royalgates adorned with all manner of carving, and an abode for the 24 


Tirthankaras.’ 


am esudud iyandadim Hulla- 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. п, по. 137A., Roman text, 
p- 104, lines 21-28 ; Transl., p. 182, line 16f.) 


HARMYA-KANTA—A class of seven-storeyed buildings. 


(M., xxv, 29; see under PRASADA.) 


HARMYA-GARBHA—A top-room built at the topmost part ofa 
building, a dining hall. 
Hammiya-gabbho ti kutagara-gabbho mudanuchchhadana-gabbha va, 
(Buddha-ghosha, Chullavagya, vi, 3, 3.) 
Compare the translation by Oldenberg and Rhys Davids. 


HARMYA-TALA—The flat roof of a house. 
Chandrarnsu-harmya-tala-chandana-tala-vrinta-haropabhoga-rahite 
hima-dagdha-padme | 2 
* Which (on account of the cold) is destitute of the enjoyment of the beams 
of the moon, and (sitting in the open air on) the flat roofs of houses and, 
sandalwood perfumes, and palm-leaffans, and necklaces.’ 


(Mandasor stone Inscrip. of Kumaragupta, lines 17-18, 
C. I. L, Vol. m, F. С. L, no. 18, pp. 83, 87.) 


HASTA (see ÀNGULA)—AÀ cubit, a measure generally equal to 24 
angulas or 18 inches. 
(1) Chatyari-virnSatis chaiva hastah syad angulanàrn tu 1 
(Brahmanda-Purana, part I, second anusharnga- 
pàda, Chap. vir, v. 99.) 
(2) Vastu-sarani (ed. Matri Prasada Pande, Benares) quotes the follow- 
ing without giving reference—Visvakarmokta-hasta-pramanam : 
Anamikantam hastah syad ürdhva-vahau savaméakah | 
Kanishthika-madhyama-pramanenaiva karayet 11 і 
Svami-hasta-pramanena jyeshtha-patni-karena cha 1 
Jyeshtha-putra-karenapi karma-kara-karena cha 11 
610 


ollection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Е? m - s 
| П 
| ¢ 


A 
£ 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE HASTI-PRISHTHA 


“According to this passage, the cubit is the measure of distance from the 
. end of the forearm (? elbow) to the tip of the ring-finger, the little finger or 
the middle finger; and this cubit may be determined in accordance with 
the measure of the arm of the master of the house, his eldest wife, his eldest 
son, or of the architect who is employed to build the house.’ 
(3) DvadaSa-hasta-pramana-griha-niveganam | 
(Barmani Inscrip. of Vijayaditya, lines 22-23, 
у Ep. Ind., Vol. m, p. 213.) 
(4) Parame£variya-hasta—the ‘ royal yards.’ 
(Second Inscrip. of Villabhattasvàmin temple 
at Gwalior, line 4, Ep. Ind., Vol. r, p. 159 ; 
see also p. 155.) 
(5) Áy&mato hasta-gatarh samagram vistaratah shashtir athàpi chash- 
tau Il 
Utsedhato'nyat purushani sapta . . . hasta-Sata-dvayasya 11 
* (Built an embankment) a hundred cubits in all in length, and sixty and 
eight in breadth, and seven men’s height in elevation . . . of two 
hundred cubits.’ 
(Junagadh Rock Inscrip. of Skandgupta, lines 
20-21. C. IL L, Vol m., Е. G. I., no. 14, 
рр. 61, 64.) 
HASTI-NAKHA—The elephant's nail, a turret. 
(Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra, see under Gg1HA-VINYASA. ) 
HASTI-PARIGHA (see PARIGHA)—AÀ beam to shut the door against 
elephants. 
(Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, see under GRIHA-VINYASA.) 
HASTI-PRISHTHA (cf. GAJA)—A class of single-storeyed build- 
ings, a part of a building. 
(M., хіх, 171, see under PRAsADA.) 

A part of a building (Kamikagama, L. 92, see under VIMANA). 

‘The present structure (of the temple of Parame$vara, where from 
the five Van inscriptions at Gudimallam are copied) is not after the common 
model of the period to which it belongs: the Vimana has the so-called gaja- 
prishthakriti shape : but a close study of the plan and sections . . . 
warrant the conclusion that the architect had distinctly in view the linga.’ 

* The gaja-prishthakriti-vimana is found only in Saiva temples, e.g., the 
DharmeSvara temple at Manimangalam, the Saiva temples at Sumangalam, 
Pennagaram, Bharadvajasrama near Arcot, Tiruppulivanam, Konnür 


near Madras, Vada Tirumullaivayil, etc. etc.’ 
(Ind Ant., Vol. хі, p. 104, note 2.) 


See the plan and sections of the Parame$vara temple at Gudimallam 
(Ibid., plate between рр. 104, 105). 


See the Pallava Antiquities (Vol. п, pp. 19-20, plate ш, the Pallava 
temple at Tiruttani ; plate r, the Virattane$vara temple at Tiruttani and 


Sahadeva Ratha at Mahabali-puram). 
611 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HASTI-HASTA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Sce Fergusson, Hist. of Ind. and East. Arch., Vol. r, p. 127 (Fig. 51, 
elevation of Chezrala Chaity temple), p. 336 (Fig. 192, plan of Sahadeva's 
Ratha), p. 337 (Fig. 199, view of the same Ratha). 

HASTI-HASTA—The trunk of an elephant, employed as an archi. 
tectural member generally of the stair-cases. 
Dvàra-mukha-sopanam hasti-hastena bhüshitam | 
(M., xix, 211.) 
Sopana-parsvayor dese hasti-hasta-vibhüshitam 1 
(М., xxx, 155, €f. also хуш, 209.) 
HAMSA—A type of building which is shaped like the swan, a class 
of oval buildings. ` 

(1) Brihat-samhita (Chap. LVI, 26, 7. В. ASSN S., Vol. v, p. 319, see 
under PRASADA). 

(2) Matsya-Purana (Chap. CGLXIX, vv. 30, 51, see under PRASADA). 

- (3) Bhavishya-Purana (Chap. CXXX, vv. 33, 5 under PRASADA). 
А class of oval buildings : 

(4) Agni-Purana (Chap. civ, vv. 19-20, see under PR3sADA). 

(5) Garuda-Purana (Chap. XLVI vv. 29-30; See under PRASADA). 

(6) The vehicle (riding animal) of Brahma. 

(M., Lx, 1, 4; the sculptural description 
of its image, ibid., 5-46.) 
--А chain, a chain of 108 strings of pearls worn 


HARA round the neck (Brihat-samhità, LXXXII, 32), ап 
HARA architectural ornament employed below the 


HARIKA(-A) neck of the column, bead, astragal or baguette 
(see Gwilt, Encycl., Fig. 873). 
(1) A moulding (bead) of the column : 
Tat-(padma)-tungardhar tu harikam | 
(M., xv, 58.) 
Hara-éranta-pafijaradhyam . . . (vimanam)| 
(М., хіх, 194, 546 also хх, 56, 1 12.) 
Adhisthanarh cha padarn cha prastararh cha tri-vargikam | 
Sala-kütarh cha haram cha yuktya tatraiva yojayet | 
(M., XXII; 73-74-) 
Kütanàm eka-bhagena $esham haram sapafjaram | 
(Ibid., 86.) 
Haram ѕарайјагаш | 
| (М., xx, 58.) 
Chatush-kone chatush-kütam koshthe haradir ashtadha | 
Anu-sala tri-bhaga уа harantara(m)-dvi-bhagikam | 
(M., xxvi, 11, 23.) 
612 


MT 20520; Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 


HASTI NAKHA. 


HASTI HASTA 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Page 612 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE HOMA 


In connexion with the gopura or gatehouse : 
Нагазуа madhya-dese tu anu-éala-visalakam | 
Tat-páráva-dva(ya)yo(r) hàram nasika-pafijaranvitam | 
(M., хххш, 449-450.) 
Ekarnšarn karna-kütarn cha hara-taraika-bhagikam 1 
(M., хххіп, 416 ; see also 431.) 
Küte cha bles or madhye hararhfarn madhyamena tu 1 


M., xxxv, 349.) 
А chain : 


Haropagriva-kcyüra-katakai$ cha supüritam 1 
(M., L, 14.) 
(2) Alindandharikandhara-hara bhagena kalpitah 11 
Bahir andharikandhara-hara(-4) bhagena vistritah 1 
Нага-ргатапатћ bahye tu rachanartharn prakalpayet | 
Bhitty-antastharh pramanarn syad bhitti-bahye tv-abahyatah 11 
Andharandhari-harokto (=hara-yukto) khanda-harmya-vise-shitam 
(vimanam) 11 

(Kamikagama, L, 74, 76, 77» 99-) 

(3) Pearl-strings (Deopara Inscrip. of Vijayasena, v. іт, Ef. Ind., Vol. 
1, рр. 308, 313). 

HIKKA-SUTRA The line over the glottis or along the larynx, 
upper part of the windpipe. (See under TALAMANA.) 
HIMA-KANTA (cf. Німауат)--А class of seven-storeyed buildings. 
(M., xxv, 31, see under PRASADA.) 
HIMAJA—A class of pavilions. 
(M., хххту, 152, see under MANDAPA.) 
HIMAVAT —A class of buildings, with sixteen pafijaras (compart- 
ments), eight sala$ (halls), and eight kütas (towers). 
Himavan iti vikhyato yukta-shodasa-pafijarah 1 
Ashta-Saláshta-kütas tu prasado lakshananvitah 11 
es (Suprabhedagama, хххі, 44.) 
HIRANYA-NABHA—A type of edifice. 

Uttara-&ala-hinam Hiranya-nabharn tri-Salakarhn dhanyam— Ап edi- 
fice with three halls, wanting as it does a northern hall, is styled Hiranya- 
nabha, and insures luck.’ 

(Brihat-samhita, um, 37, J- R. A. S., N. S., 
Vol. vt, p. 286.) 
HEMA-KUTA—A class of pavilions. 


(M., xxxiv, 155, see under MANDAPA.) 
HOMA An offering, a crowning moulding of the cages for domesti- 
cated animals. 
Mriga-nabhi-vidalasya pañjarasya . . | 


Homat prastarantarn va mastakántam-Sikhántakam 1 
(M., xxxiv, 17.) 


613 


APPENDIX I 
A SKETCH OF SANSKRIT TREATISES ON ARCHITECTURE ! 


A 
AGNI-PURANA—See under PURANAs. 


ANKA-SASTRA—On architecture. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS. in Private Libraries 
of South India, Vol. 1, no. 2499, p. 228.) 
APARAJITA-PRICHCHHA—by  Bhuvana-deva, ‘quoted Бу 
Hemadri in the Parisesha-khanda, 2, 660-662, 819.” 

(Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum, part п, р. 4.) 
APARAJITA-VASTU-SASTRA—attributed to Vi$vakarman, in pos- 
session of Mani Sankara Bhatta, Surat. 

(Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. contained in Private 


Libraries іп Gujarat, Kathiavad, Kachchh 
Sindh, and Khandesh, 1872, p. 276, no. 1.) 


ABHILASHITARTHA-CHINTAMANI—by Malla 5отпебуага, on 
architecture. М 
(Taylor's Catalogue Raisoneé, Y. 478.) 
ARTHA-SASTRA—(KAUTILIYA)—ed. R. Shama Sastri, B.A., 
Mysore, 1919. 
Chapters : 
22. Janapada-nive$a. 
23. Bhümichchhidra-vidhàna. 
24. Durga-vidhana. 
25. Durga-nive$a. 
65. Vastuka, Griha-vastuka. 
66. Vastu-vikraya ; 
Sima-vivada ; 
Maryada-sthapana ; 
Badha-badhika. 
67. Vastuke vivite kshetra-patha-hirsa. 
1 Compare, Vartta—The Ancient Hindu Economic by Narendra Nath Law 
M.A., B.L., PH.D. (Ind Ant., vol. XLVII, p. 256). 


615 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i 


AMSUMAT-(KASYAPIYA) AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


AMSUMAT-(KASYAPIYA)—On architecture and sculpture. s 
l (Taylor’s Catalogue Raisonée, І. 314.) + % 
AMSUMAD-BHEDAGAMA—See under Acamas. 


AMSUMANA-KALPA—On architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part I, p. 1.) 


A 
AGAMAS—Of the 28 Maha-agamas?, the following have special 
reference to architecture and cognate arts: 4 


I. Arüfumad-bhedagama (patala or chapter) : 
28. Uttama-da£a-tala-vidhi. 
(There is another Arngumad-bheda by Кабуара, account of which is 
- given elsewhere.) | 
II. Kàmikagama (patala or chapters): | 
11. Bhü-pariksha-vidhi. : 
12. Prave§a-bali-vidhi. 
13. Bhü-parigraha-vidhi. 
14. Bhü-karshana-vidhi. 
15. Sanku-sthapana-vidhi. 
16. Manopakarana-vidhi. 
17. Pada-vinyasa. 
18. Sütra-nirmàna. 
19. Vastu-deva-bali. 
20. Gràmadi-lakshana. 
21. Vistarayama-lakskana. 
22. Ayàdi-lakshana. 


11. Kamikagama. 16. Rauravagama, 
2. Yogajagama. 17. Makutagama. 
3. Chintyagama. 18. Vimalagama. 
4. Karanagama. I9. Chandra-jñanagama. 
5. Ajitagama. 20. Bimbagama. 
6. Diptagama. 21. Prodgitagama. 
7. Sukshmagama. 22. Lalitagama. 
8. Sahasragama. 23. Siddhagama, also called Vaikha- 
x 9. managama. nasagama. 
x. 10. Suprabhedagama. 24. Santvanagama. 
f Ir. Vijayagama. 25. Sarvoktagama. 
= 12. Ni$vasagama. 26. Parmeávaragama. 
P. 14. Anilagama. 27. Kiranagama. 
: .I5. Viragama. ` 28. Vatulagama. 


(See Sikshmagama, British Museum, 14033, aa, 26.) — 
616 | 


` HINDU ARCHITECTURE AGAMAS 
Tdi 24. Dandika-vidhi (dealing with doors and gateways). 
. چ‎ 5 25. Vithi-dvaradi-mana. 


26. Gramadi-devata-sthapana. 
28. Gramadi-vinyasa. 
29. Brahma-deva-padati. 
go. Gramadi-anga-sthana-nirmana. 
31. Garbha-nyàsa. 
92. Bala-sthapana-vidhi. 
33. Gràma-griha-vinyasa. 
34. Vastu-Santi-vidhi. 
т 95. Sala-lakshana-vidhi. 
| 36. Visesha-lakskana-vidhi. 
| 97. Dvi-Sala-lakskana-vidhi. 
48. Chatuh-sala-lakshana-vidhi. 
40. Varta(?dha)mana-$ala-lakshana. 
41. Nandyàvarta-vidhi. 
42. Svastika-vidhi. 
49. Paksha-$àladi-vidhi. 
44. (H)asti-Sala-vidhi. 
45. Malikà-lakshana vidhi. 
46. Langala-malika-vidhi. 
47. Maulika-malika-vidhi. 
48. Padma-malikà-vidhi. 2 
49. Nagaradi-vibheda. 
50. Bhümi-lakba-vidhi. 
51. Adyesktakà-vidhàna-vidhi. 
о. Upapitha-vidhi. 
59. Pada-mana-vidhi. 
54. Prastara-vidhi. 
55. Prásada-bhüshana-vidhi. 
56. Kantha-lakshana-vidhi. 
57. Sikhara-lakshana-vidhi. 
58. Stüpika-lakshana-vidhi. 
59. Naladi-sthapana-vidhi. 
бо. Eka-bhumyadi-vidhi. 
бі. Mardhni-sthapana-vidhi. 
62. Linga-lakshana-vidhi. 
63. Ankurarpana-vidhi. 
64. Linga-pratishtha-vidhi. 
65. Pratima-lakshana-vidhi. 
67. Devatà-sthapana-vidhi. 
617 


B - CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF- 


68. Pratima-pratishtha-vidhi. 
69. Vimina-sthapana-vidhi. 
go. Mandapa-sthápana-vidhi. 
71. Prākāra-lakskaņa-vidhi. 
72. Parivāra-sthāpana-vidhi. 

It should be noticed that out of 75 chapters of the Kamikagama, more 
than 60 deal with architecture and sculpture. This Agama is in fact another 
Vastu-Sastra under a different name. 

ІП. Karanagama : 

Part I (patala or chapters) : 
Vastu-vinyasa. 
Adyeshtaka-vidhi. 
Adhishthana-vidhi. 
Garbha-nyasa-vidhi. 
Prasada-lakshana-vidhi. 
Prakara-lakshana-vidhi. 
Linga-lakshana. 
Mardhnishtaka-lakshana. 
Pratimà-lakshana. 
Stri-màna-daé£a-tala-lakshana. 
Kanishtha-da$a-tàla-lakshana. 
Nava-talottama-lakshana. | 
Bali-karma-vidhi. 
Mrit-samgrahana-vidhi. 
Ankurarpana-vidhi. 
Mahabhisheka-vidhi. 
Vastu-homa-vidhi. 
Linga-sthapana-vidhi. 
Parivara-sthapana-vidhi. 
Bali-pitha-pratishtha-vidhi. 
Ratna-linga-sthapana-vidhi. 
Parivara-bali. 
Vimaàna-sthapana-vidhi. 
Bhakta-sthapana-vidhi. 
Mrit-samgrahana (ef. 19). 

Part II, chapters : 

Kila-pariksha. 
Gopura-lakskana. 
. Mandapa-lakshana. 
- Pitha-lakshana. 
Sakti-lakskana. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE AGASTYA-SAKALADHIKARA 
-— C 9. Grama-éanti-vidhi. 
m % . то. Vāstu-śānti-vidhi. 
/ II. Mrit-sarngrahana. 


I2. Ankurarpana. 

I3. Bimba-Suddhi. 

I4. Kautuka-bandhana. 

15. Nayanonmilana. 

18. Bimba-$uddhi (cf. II. 13). 

IO. Sayanaropana. 

21. Siva-linga-sthapana. 

98. Matha-pratishtha. 

IV. Vaikhdnasdgama (patala or chapters) : 
22. Pratimà-lakshana. 
43. Uttama-daga-tala. 
V. Suprabhedagama (patala or chapters): 

22. Karanadhikara-lakshana, deals with Ushnisha (crowns, head- 
gears), Asana (chair, seats), Paryanka (bedsteads, couches, etc.) 
Sirnhasana (thrones), Ranga (court-yards, theatres), Stambha 
(columns, pillars), etc. 

29. Gramadi-lakshana-vidhi. 

96. Tarunàlaya-vidhi. 

27. Prasada-vastu-vidhi. 

28. Adyeshtaka-vidhi. 

29. Garbha-nyàsa-vidhi. 

go. Anguli-lakshana-vidhi. 

gr. Pràsada-lakshana-vidhi. 

32. Mürdhnishtaka-vidhi. 

93. Linga-lakshana. 

34. Sakala-lakshana-vidhi. 

45. Ankurarpana-vidhi. 

96. Linga-pratishtha-vidhi. 

97. Sakala(image, idol)-pratishtha. 

48. Sakti-pratishtha-vidhi. 

39. Parivara-vidhi. 

40. Vrishabha-sthapana-vidhi. 


AGASTYA-SAKALADHIKARA (manuscript)— 
(Aufrecht, part I, p. 683, see Taylor, 1, 72.) 


Chapters : 

т. Mana-sarngraha. 
45 2. Uttama-daga-tala. 
E 3. Madhyama-dasa-tala. 


619 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AGARA-VINODA АУ ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Adhama-daéa-tala. 
Pratima-lakshana. 
Vrishabha-vahana-lakshana. 
Natesvara-vidhi. 
Shodaga-pratima-lakshana. 
Daru-samgraha. 
Mrit-samskara. 

ir. Varna-samskara. 

There are three other MSS. іп the Government MSS. Library, Madras, 
attributed to Agastya. See Catalogue, Vol. xxu, nos. 13046, 13047, 13058. 
Nos. 13046, 13047 are incomplete and deal with astrological matters bear- 
ing upon architecture. No. 13058 is a portion of a large manuscript (see 
under SILPA-SAMGRAHA) which is an anonymous compilation. The follow- 
ing chapters of it are ascribed to Agastya : f 

1. Mana-samgraha-višesha. 
Uttama-daśa-tāla. 
Madhyama-daśa-tāla. 
Somàskanda-lakshana. 
Chandra-Sekhara-lakshana. 

. Vrisha-vahana-lakshana. 

It is not quite clear whether the following 7-14 (which are not numbered 
as such in the compilation) should be attributed to Agastya : 

Tripurantaka-lakshana. 
Kalyana-sundara-lakshana. 
Ardha-narisvara-lakshana. 
Pasupata-lakshana. 
Bhikshatana-lakshana. 

.. ChandeSanugraha-lakshana. 

13. Dakshina-mürti-lakshana. 

14. Kala-dahana-lakshana. 

15-18. Apparently missing. 

10. Pratima-lakshana. 

The following found in another portion of the compilation are indifferently 
numbered as shown on the right parallel column : 

20. (3) Upapitha-vidhana. 

21. (о) Süla-mana-vidhana. 

22. (10) Rajju-bandha-sarnskara-vidhi. 

23. (II) Varna-sarnskara. x 
> 24. (21) Akshi-mokshana. 
š AGARA-VINODA—On the construction of houses. 

(Aufrecht. ibid., part 1, p. 2.) 

620 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE KASYAPIYA 


AYA-TATTVA—by Mandana Sütradhara. 
` (See Vastu-fastra, by Rajavallabha Manddana.) 
AYADI-LAKSHANA—On architectural and sculptural measure- 


ment. 
(Aufrecht, part 1, 62.) 


ARAMADI-PRATISHTHA-PADDHATI—On the construction of 
gardens, сіс. 
(Aufrecht, part 1, р. 52.) 
K 


KAMIKAGA MA—See under ÁcAMAs. 
KARANAGAMA—See under Acamas. 


KASYAPIYA—(Manuscript), deals with architecture and cognate 
arts. (Govt. MSS. Library, Madras, Catalogue of MSS., Vol. xxu, 
р. 8755, f., nos. 13032, 13033. See also Oppert’s List of Sanskrit 
MSS. in Private Libraries of South India, Vol. u, p. 395, no. 6336.) 
“This work has attained universal authority amongst all the sculptors 
of South India up to the present time, and the young pupils are even now 
taught to learn by heart the verses given in this book regarding the rules 
of constructions and measurements of images. Каќуара is said to have 
learnt this science from Siva (patala 1, verses 1—5). 
The contents are divided into eighty-three patalas which are classified in 
an overlapping manner into the following headings : 
r. Karshana. 
о. Prasada-vastu. 
9. Vastu-homa. 
4. Prathameshtaka-vidhi. 
5. Upapitha-vidhana. 
6. Adhishthàna-vidhi. 
7. Nala-lakshana. 
8. Stambha-lakshana. 
о. Phalaka-lakshana. 
то. Vedika-lakshana. 
11. Jalaka-lakshana. 
12. Ta(o)rana-lakshana. 
13. Vritta-sphutita-lakshana. 
14. Stambha-torana-vidhi. 


1 South Indian Bronzes, by Gangooli. 
621 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA - 


KASYAPIYA 


15. 
16. 
I7. 
18. 
10. 
20. 


Kumbha-tala-lakshana. 
Vritta-sphutita-lakshana, cf. 13. 
Dvaàra-lakshana. 
Kampa-dvara-lakshana. 
Prastara-lakshana. 
Gala-vidhana. 
Sikhara-lakshana. 
Nasika-lakshana. 
Manopakarana. 
Mana-sütradi-lakshana. 
Nagaradi-vidhi. 
Garbha-nyasa-vidhi. 
Eka-tala-vidhana. 
Dvi-trayodasa-tala-vidhana. 
Shodasa-bhimi-vidhana. 
Murdhanishtaka-vidhana. 


` Prakàra-lakshana. 


Manta(-da)pa-lakshana. 
Gopura-lakshana. 
Sapta-matrika-lakshana. 
Vinayaka-lakshana. 
Parivara-vidhi. 
Linga-lakshanoddhara. 
Uttama-da£a-tala-purusha-màna. 


Madhyama-dasa-tala-purusha-mana. 


Uttama-nava-tala. 
Madhyama-nava-tàla. 
Adhama-nava-tala. 

Ashta-tala. 

Sapta-tàla. 
Pitha-lakshanoddhara. 
Sakala-sthapana-vidhi. 
Sukhasana. 
Chandra-$ekhara-mürti-lakshana. 
Vrisha-vahana-mürti-lakshana. 
Nritta-mürti-lakshana. 
Gangadhara-mirti-lakshana. 


Tri-pura-mürti-lakshana. 


Kalyana-sundara-lakshana. 


Ardha-narisvara-lakshana. 


Gajaha-mirti-lakshana. 
| 622 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


нек n mer асасы ынаны ы асады 
p 


| Я ` HINDU ARCHITECTURE KSHETRA-NIRMANA-VIDHI 


69. Pasupati-mirti-lakshana. 

то. Kankala-mirti-lakshana. 

| 71. Hary-ardha-hara-lakshana. 

И 72. Bhikshatana-mirti-lakshana. 
| 79. ChandeSanugraha. 

74. Dakshina-mürti-lakshana. 
75. Kalaha-mirti-lakshana. 

76. Lingodbhava-lakshana. 

77. Vriksha-sarngrahana. 

78. Süla-lakshana. 

79. Süla-pàáni-lakshana. 

8o. Rajju-bandha-lakshana. 

8r. Mrit-sarhskara-lakshana. 

82. Kalka-samskara-lakshana. 
89. Varna-sarnskara-lakshana. 
84. Varna-lepana-medhya-lakshana. 
85. Grámadi-lakshana. 

86. Gràma-lakshana. 


TS KUPADI-JALA-STHANA-LAKSHANA—On the construction of 
"wells, etc. 


(In possession of the Maharaja of Travancore; Oppert's 
List of Sanskrit MSS. in Private Libraries of 
South India, Vol. 1, p. 467.) 

KAUTUKA-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., 
Vol. п, p. 258.) 
KRIVA-SAMGRAHA-PANJIKA—A catalogue of rituals by Kula- 
datta. It contains among other things instructions for the selec- 
tion of site for the construction of a Nihara and also rules for building 


a dwelling house. 
(The Sanskrit and Buddhist Literature of Nepal, by 


Rajendra Lal Mitra, 1882, p. 105.) 
KSHIRARNAVA—Attributed to Vi$vakarman, on architecture» 


etc. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part II, pp. 26, 138.) 
KSHETRA-NIRMANA-VIDHI—On the preparation of ground 
with a view to construction of buildings thereupon. 

(In possession of the Raja of Cochin ; Oppert’s 
nl š List of Sanskrit MSS. іп Private Librartes 
? of South India, Vol. І, р. 354.) 


623 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


GARUDA-PURANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


G 
GARUDA-PURANA—See under. PURANAS. ° ү | 
GARGYA-SAMHITA—(MSS. R. 15. 96, in Trinity College, Cam- | 
Р bridge; it contains 108 leaves, in oblong folio; Indian paper; 


Devanagari character ; copied in 1814). It deals with the follow- | 


ing architectural subjects : 
Dvara-nirdega | (fol. 512, chap. 3). 
Dvara-pramana-vidhi | (fol. 570). E E 
Gargiyayam vastu-vidyayam chatuh-sala-dvi-tri-Salaika-sala-vidbt | | 


- (fol. 58а). m r 
Vastu-vidyayam chatur-bhaga-tri-bhaga-prati-bhaga, etc. (fol. Goa). 1 
Dvara-stambhochchraya-vidhi. 1 (fol. бой). | | 

Š Vastu-vidyayarn prathamo'dyayah | (fol. 67a). 
E! m 53 dvitiyo'dhyayah 1 (fol. 670). 


25 55 dvara-pramana nirdegam | (fol. 68a). j 
E Griha-pravesam | (fol. 680). | 
TERN GRIHA-NIRÜPANA-SAMKSHEPA—A summary-work on housc- 
building. di; М 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 157.) 4 * 
GRIHA-NIRMANA-VIDHI—On rules for the erection of houses, 


temples, and other edifices. | 
(Wilson's Mackenzie Collection, р. 304-) 


E GRIHA-PITHIKA—On the construction of houses. 
4 (Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS. in Private | 
Libraries of South India, Vol.1, р. 545.) 
GRIHA-VASTU-PRADIPA—(Lucknow, 1901)—Contains 87 pages 
deals mostly with astronomical and ritualistic matters in connec- 
tion with the building of houses. 


GRIHARAMBHA—by Sripati. | 
(Cf. Vastu-sarani.) ] 

GOPURA-VIMANADI-LAKSHANA—On gate-houses and tem- i | 

ples, etc. | E 


ть (Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. п, 
ч E de p. 259, no. 4009.) 
ER _ GRAMA-NIRNAYA-—by Narayana: 

ER c j (Gf. Vastu-sarani.) 


624 


|; 

4 

f 

ЕЕ. 

| К HINDU ARGHITEGTURE JNANA-RATNA-KOSHA 


L GH 
GHATTOTSARGA-SŪCHANIKĀ—On the erection of steps on 
the bank of a river. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part ш, p. 37.) 
CH 
CHAKRA-SASTRA—On architecture and cognate arts. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. п, p. 200.) 
CHITRA-KAR MA-SILPA-SASTRA—On painting. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 187.) 
CHITRA-PATA—On painting. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. 1, p. 440.) 
« CHITRA-LAKSHANA —(ed. Laufer)—Treats largely with the sculp- 
tural measurement of images and painting ; translated into German 
from Tibetan, the original Sanskrit version is apparently missing. 
UHITRA-SUTRA—On painting (mentioned in Kattani-mata, 22). 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 187.) 


J 
JAYA-MADHAVA-MANASOLLASA—Attributed to опе Јауа- 


simhadeva—On architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 201.) 


JALARGALA—Attributed to Varahamihira—On door-bars and 
latticed windows. | 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. п, 
no. 3146, p. 217.) 
JALARGALA-YAN 1RA—On the architectural instruments and 
machines. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. п, 
по. 3147, р. 217.) 
JNANA-RATNA-KOSHA—Attributed to Visvakarman—On archi- 
tecture. 


(Aufrecht, part 1, p. 210, in possession of Acha- 
ratalal Vaidya, Ahmedabad, Catalogue of 
Sanskrit MSS. contained in the Private Libra- 
ries of Gujarat, etc. 1872, p. 276.) 


625 


TACHCHU-SASTRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ` 


ЛГ 


TACHCHU-SASTRA—Same ав  Manushyálaya-chandrikà (see 
below). 


TARA-LAKSHANA—On sculpture (image of the goddess Tara). 
(Aufrecht, part 1, p. 229.) 


D 


DASA-TALA-NYAGRODHA-PARIMANDALA-BUDDHA-PRA- 
TIMA-LAKSHANA—On the ten-tala measure of Buddha images, 
exists in Tibetan translation ; the original Sanskrit version is appa- 
rently missing. 
DASA-PRAKARA—Attributed to  Vasishtha—On architectural 
defects. 
(See Vastu-sarani, by Matri-prasada-Pande, Benares, 1909.) 

DIK-SADHANA-—Attributed to Bhaskara—On architecture. 

(See Vasiu-sarani.) 
DIRGHA-VISTARA-PRAKARA—Attributed to — Nàrada—On 
architectural measurement. š 

(See Vastu-sarani.) 
DEVATA-SILPA—On sculpture, dealing specially with the images 


of deities. 
(A classified catalogue of Sanskrit works in 
the Sarasvati Bhandaram Library of 
His Highness the Maharaja of Mysore, 
class хіх, по. 535.) 


DEVALAYA-LAKSHANA—On the construction of temples. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS. in Private 
Libraries of South India, Vol. 1, p. 470.) 


DVARA-LAKSHANA-PATALA—On the construction of doors. 
(Ibid., no. 6003, p. 470.) 


DH 


DHRUVADI-SHODASA-GEHANI—Attributed to Ganapati—On 


the architectural arrangement of buildings. 
р | (See Vastu-sarant.) 


626 


i ки! Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE PITHA-LAKSHANA 


N 
NARADA-PURANA—See under PuRANAs. 
NARADA-SAMHITA—deals with the following subjects : 


(1) Sura-pratishtha (20 verses). 

(2) Vàstu-vidhàna (62 verses, describing briefly Bhüpariksha, Dvàra- 
sthàna, Sanku-sthapana, Pada-nyàsa, and Стіһа-пуаѕа). 

(3) Vastu-lakshana—describes ceremonies of Griha-praveéga. 


NAVA-SASTRA— On ship-building and navigation.’ But the 

work is chiefly astrological. Some directions are, however, given 
respecting the materials and dimensions of vessels. 

(Taylor's Catalogue Raisonée, Vol. ш, p. б.) 

In Taylor's Catalogue Raisonée, there is mentioned another Manuscript 

of which the title is lost. Itis ‘on the art of constructing forts, houses, fanes, 

of settling a village ; navigation and variety of other similar things enum- 

erated as taught in 36 works, the names of which are given.’ (Ibid., Vol. ur, 


P- 350.) 
P 


PAKSHI-MANUSHYALAYA-LAKSHANA—On the construction 
of human dwellings and aviaries. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. 1, p. 471.) 


PANCHA-RATRA-(PRA)DIPIKA—(also called Mantra-dipika)— 
It professes to form a part of the Padma-tantra of the Narada-Paficha- 
ràtra. It has а Telugu commentary by Peddanàchàrya. It deals 
with images and consists of the following five chapters : 

I. Silà-samgraha-lakshana. 

2. Daru-samgrahana. 

8. Pratima-lakshana. 

4. . . + nàma-tritiyo'dhyàya. 

5. Pratima-sarhgrahe jaladhivasana-ashtamo’dhyaya. 

(See Egg. MSS., 3150, 2579, п, Mackenzie Collection.) 
PINDA-PRAKARA—Attributed to Gopiraja—On architectural 
subjects. 

(See Vastu-sarani.) 
PITHA-LAKSHANA—On pedestals. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. I, p. 472.) 
627 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


PURANAS 


PURANAS—(Bombay editions) —Of the 18 ог 10 Maha-puranas,} 
the following have special reference to Architecture and Sculpture : 


I. 


Agni-Purdna : 
Chapters : 
42. Prasada-lakshana-kathana. 
43. Prasada-devata-sthapana. 
44. Wasudevadi-pratima-lakshana-vidhi. 
45. Pindika-lakskana. 
46. Salagràmádi-mürti-lakshana-kathana. 
49. Matsyadi-daSavatara-kathana. 
50. Devi-pratima-lakshana-kathana. 
51. Süryadi-pratimà-lakshana. 
52. Devi-pratima-lakshana (cf. 50). 
59. Linga-lakshana. 
54. Linga-manadi-kathana. 
55. Pindika-lakshana-kathana (cf. 45). 
бо. Wasudeva-pratishtha-vidhi (cf. 44). 
62. Lakshmi-pratishtha-vidhi. 
104. Ргаѕада-Јакѕһапа (cf. 42). 
105. Grihadi-vastu-kathana. 
тоб. Nagaradi-vastu. 


II. Garuda-Puràna : 


ПІ. 


IV. 


н 
ж 


Ф оч Topo م‎ 


Chapters : 
45. Salagrama-mirti-lakshana. 
46. Prasaida-arama-durga-devalaya-mathadi-vastu-mana-lak- 
shana-nirüpana. 
47. Prásada-linga-mandapadi-$ubha$ubha-lakshana-nirüpana. 
48. Пеуапата pratishtha-vidhi. 


Narada-Purana : 
Part I, chapter : 

13. Devatàyana-vapi-küpa-tadagadi-nirmana. 
Brahmanda-Purana : 
Chapter : 

7. Grihadi-nirmana. 
Brahma. 10. Brahma-vaivarta. 
Padma. 11. Linga. 
Vishnu. 12. Varaha. 
iva. 13. Skanda (also called Kumara). 
Bhagavata. 14. Vàmana. 
Narada. 15. Matsya. 
Markandeya. 16. Garuda. 
Agni. 17. Brahmanda. 
Bhavishya. 18. Vayu. 


Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA. 


TE aei “Жол 1.2 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ` 


ы. SIT SEO San желет не. o BE асам 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE PURANAS 


У. Bhavishya-Purana : 
Chapters : 
I2.  Madhya-parvani, Pratidevata-pratima-lakshana-varnana. 
130. Brahma-parvani, Prasada-lakshana-varnana. 
121. Miarti-sthana, deals with the materials, etc., of which 
images are made. 
132. Pratima-màna, deals with the measurement of images. 
VI. Matsya-Puràna : 
Chapters : 
l 252. Deals with the introduction of cighteen ancient architects— 
- Bhrigu, Atri, Vasistha, Visvakarma, Maya, Narada, Nagnajit, 
| Visalaksha, Purandara, Brahma, Kumara, Nandiga, Saunaka, 
li Garga, Vasudeva, Aniruddha, Sukra, and Brihaspati. 
|| 255. Stambha-māna-vinirņaya. 
| 257. Darvaharana. 
| 258. Nava-tala-màna. 
it W 262. Pithika-lakshana. 
| 263. Linga-lakshana. 
|! 260. Pràsada-varnana. 
f 270. Mandapa-lakshana. 
ets VII. Liga-Purána : 
| Part II, chapter : : 
48. Yaga-kunda-vinyasa-kathana-pürvakarh sarvasarh devatànàm 
| sthapana-vidhi-nirüpanam, Prasadarchani-niripanam. 
| VIII. Vayu-Purana : 
| Part I, Chapter : 
| 39. Saila-sthita-vividha-devalaya-kirtana. 
| IX. Skanda-Puràna : 
| 


tm n сс 


Chapters : 
| 24. Mahe$vara-khande-prathamc—Himalayena sva-sutaya vivà- 
РЕ hàrtham | Gargachárya-purohitam puraskritya Visvakarma-dvara 
purva-mandapa-nirmanadi-varnanam, Naradad Visvakarma- 
krita-vivaha-mandaparh ^ chàturyena sarva-deva-pratikriti-chitra- 
vinyasath $rutvà sarveshàm devanam Sanka-praptih. 
Mahe$vara-khande dvitiye—svayarn ViSvakarma-dvara-nirmàpite 
Mahinagare sthapana-varnana. 
25. Vaishnava-khande dvitiye—Narada-likhita-sahitya-sambhava- 
sarmgraha-patram $rutva Indradumnàjfiaya Padmanidhina svarna- 


| Sala-nirmanam, Naradajfiaya Vi$vakarmana syandana-traya-nirma- 2 
| nam, tasya rathasya Narada-karena ѕіһарапатӣ, tat-prasamgena 
ratha-sthapana-prakara-vidhi-varnanam. X 

629 

) ` 

i 

im 
47. 


34 СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ea 


PRATIMA-DRAVYADI АМ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF | 
VACHANA 


PRATIMA-DRAVYADI-VACHANA—On the materials of which 
idols are made. 


(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. 1, p. 490.) 


PRATIMA-MANA-LAKSHANA—On the tàla-measures of images, 
exists in Tibetan Translation ; Sylvian Levi reports that he has 
traced its original Sanskrit version in the Palace Library of Tibet, 


PRATISHTHA-TATTVA—Also called Maya-sAMGRAHA—On 


architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part ш, p. 74.) 


PRATISHTHA-TANTRA—On architecture in a dialogue form 
between Siva and Parvati. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part m, p. 74.) 
PRASADA-KALPA—On the construction of buildings. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. u, p. 522. 


PRASADA-KIRTANA—On architecture. 
(Author not known ; in possession of Gopal Rao, 
Malegamva, Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in 
Private Libraries of Gujarat, etc., 1872, p. 276.) 


PRASADA-DIPIKA—On architecture, quoted in Madana-Parijata 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 364.) 
PRASADA-MANDANA-VASTU-SASTRA—Attributed to Sūtra- 
dhara Maņdana— (Egg. MSS. 3147, 2253). It is written in Sanskrit, 
but is largely mixed with Bhasha forms. It contains the following 
eight chapters : 
Miéra-kala$a. 
Jagati-drishsi-dosho ayatanadhikara. 
Bhitti-pitha-mandovara-garbha-grihaudumbara-pramana. 
Pramana-drishti-pada-sthana-Sikhara-kala$a-lakshana. 
Rajyadi-prasadadhikara. 
KeSaryadi-prasada-jati-lakshana, paficha-kshetra-paficha-chat- 
RAR meru-lakshanadhyaya. 
7. Mandapa-balanaka-sambaranadhikara. 
8. Jirnoddhara-bhinna-dosha-sthavara-pratishtha,  Siitra-dhara- 
puja, Jina-pratishtha, Vastu-purusha-vinyasa. 
PRASADA-LAKSHANA—Attributed ,to Varahamihira—On archi- 
tecture. 


ILLI 


p. 208.) 


(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. rr, 
630 


University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


vt. 


| -  HINDU ARCHITECTURE BRAHMANDA-PURANA 


+ PRASADA-LAKSHANA—On buildings. 
> (Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. I, P. 473.) 
PRASADALANKARA-LAKSHANA—On the decoration (articles 
of furniture) of buildings. 
(In possession of the Maharaja of Travancore ; Oppert’s 
List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. m, p. 473.) 
J B 
“ә BIMBAMANA—(MSS. British Museum, nos. 1. 559, 5291, foll. 33. 7 
| lines to a page ; п, 558, 5292, foll. 27, 9 lines to a page ; written іп 
Sirnhalese character, has а Sirnhalese commentary)—This is а 
treatise on religious sculpture, stated to be extracted from a Gautamtya 
ascribed to Sariputra. The last colophon runs thus : Iti Gautamiye 
Sari-putra-srute Bimba-manam samaptam. The commentator explains 
this Bimbamàna-vidhi as the Sarvajfia-pratima-pramana-vidhi. 
BRIHAT-SAMHITA—Of Varahamihira—On architectural and 
sculptural matters. 


+ Chapters : 
59. Vāstu-vidyā. 


56. Prasada-lakshana. 

57. Vajra-lepa. 

58. Pratima-lakshana. 

79. Sayyasaná-lakshana. 
BUDDHA-PRATIMA-LAKSHANA—On the tala measure of Bud- 
dha-images ; exists in Tibetan Translation; the original Sanskrit 
p. version is apparently missing. 

% BUDDHA-LAKSHANA—in Siamese, dealing with “the more 
orthodox peculiarities of the characteristics of the body. (М. G. 
Coede, G. E. F. E. 1915), King Phra Nangklao thought of it as 
‘a work of merit to shorten the fingers of the statue of Sakyamuni’ 
in Wat (temple) Sudas at Bangkok (capital of Siam). ‘A paper 
about the attitudes of Buddha images in the Siamese monasteries 
was written Бу һе Somtej Phra Paramanujit, the son of the King 
Phra Buddha Yot Fa (died in A.D. 1854).’ 
BRAHMANDA-PURANA—See under Puranas. 

631 


| 
! 
] 
| 
Í 
| I CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


BHAVISHYA-PURANA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


BH 
BHAVISHYA-PURANA—See under PURANAS. 

M 

MATHA-PRATISHTHA-TATTVA—Attributed to Raghunandana 
—Contains quotations from the Devi-purana and the Deva-pratish- 
tha-tativa, both of which deal with architectural and sculptura 
matters. ) Ў 
MATSYA-PURANA—See under Puranas. 
MANUSHYALAY. A-CHANDRIKA—(Also called T'ACHCHU-$ASTRA) 
— deals with measurement, etc., concerning private dwelling houses 
as distinguished from religious temples, and military forts, etc. It 
contains 65 stanzas and a Malayalam translation. There is a 
manuscript also bearing the same title. 

(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid, Vol. I, p- 475.) 
MANUSHYALAYA-LAKSHANA-— On the building of human 
dwellings. 

(In possession of the Maharaja of Travancore; 

Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid, Vol. I, P. 475.) 
MANJU-SRI-MULA-KALPA—A Tantra work (g. Trivandrum 
Sanskrit Series), translated in Tibetan, deals with some architectural 
matters. 

MANTRA-DIPIKA (see PANcHA-RATRA-PRADIPIKA)—On__ archi- 
tecture. 

MAYAMATA—An oft quoted and well-known authority on architec- 
ture. There are several treatises attributed to Maya : 

І. Mayamata, edited by Ganapati Sastri, 1919, from three fragmen- 
tary and one incomplete (with a Tamil translation) manuscripts ; it con- 
tains 34 chapters, and four more chapters are missing (see below). 

There are some other manuscripts bearing the same title (Egg. 3150, 
2575) ; one of them (in the Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras), written 
in modern Telugu, on rough paper, contains five chapters with а short 
commentary by Gannamacharya. 

IL Mayamata-Silpa-Sastra-vidhina (Egg. 3150, 2575, 3151, 2630, with 
Gannamacharya's Telugu commentary as noted above). 

III. Maya-Silpa-Satika (another manuscript). 

IV. Maya-Silpa, a few extracts from this have been translated into 
English by Rev. J. E. Kearns (see Indian Ant., Vol. v, pp. 230, 293). 

There is also another English translation of Mayamata in the Mackenzie 
Collection. (Translation, class x, Sanskrit, 2-6). 

632 


i University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


ІБ. HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAYAMATA 


V. Maya-vastu—text, РР. 33, published by Rama Svami Sastralu & 
bd ` Sons, Madras, 1016. 
| VI. Maya-vistu-Sastram—text, PP- 40, published by K. Lakshman 
i Mudali, Madras, 1017. 
VII. А Sinhalese version of Máyàmataya manuscripts is referred to by 
A. K. Coomarswamy (Mediaeval Simhalese Art., pp. 194-128). It also 
deals with a few architectural objects and is meant for * learned and skilful 
і architects.’ 
І УШ. Mayamata-vàstu-fastra —Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, 
Catalogue, Vol. xxm, nos. 19034 (with a Tamil commentary), 13035 
=> (with а "Telugu commentary), 13036, 13037, 13038, 13039 (with a Telugu 
commentary). 
Of these manuscripts no. 13034. is the largest, containing 390 pages of 
191” X9" paper of 22 lines to a page. Тһе subjects and the method of 
description are strikingly similar to those of the Manasüra. It is divided 
into the following 46 chapters : 
І. Samgrahádhyaya. 
2. Vastu-prakara. 
3. Bhi-pariksha. 
4. Bhü-parigraha. 
% 1 5. Manopakarana. 
| 6. Dik-parichchhedana. 
7. Pada-devata-vinyasa. 
8. Deva-bali-karma-vidhana (incomeplete). 
9. Grama-garbha-vinyasa (incomplete). 
то. Nagara-vinyasa. / 
11. Bhü-lamb(h)a-vidhàna. 
12. Garbha-nyàsa-vidhàna. 
19. Upapitha-vidhana. 
I4. Adhisthàna-vidhàna. 
A 15. Páda-pramàna-dravya-parigraha. 
е 16. Prastara-karana. 
17. Sandhi-karma-vidhana. 
18. Skhara-karana-bhavana-samapti-vidhana. 
Ig. Eka-bhimi-vidhana. 
20. Dvi-bhümi-vidhàna. 
21. Tri-bhiimi-vidhana. 
22. Bahu-bhümi-vidhàna. 
99. Prakara-parivara (elsewhere, Sandhi-karma-vidhàna). 
24. Gopura-vidhana. 
25. Sabha(mandapa)-vidhana. 
xc ; 26. Sala-vidhana. 


633 


5j СС-0: Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. раа оу 


МАҮАМАТА АУ ENGYCLOPAEDIA ОР 


27. Griha-minadhikara (elsewhere Chatur-griha-vidhana). 
28. Griha-pravesa. 

29. Ràja-ves$ma-vidhàna. 

go. Dvara-vidhina. 

31. Yanadhikara. 

32. Yana-$ayanàdhikàra. 

33. Linga-lakshana. 

34. Pitha-lakshana (incomplete). 


35. Anukarma-vidhàna. 
36. Pratima-lakshana. 
Compare no. I, which contains the first 34 out of 36 chapters given in 
the above list. the variations are noted within brackets. 
No. 13035 contains in 74 pages the chapters 1-32. 
No. 13036 is same as no. 13035. 
No. 13037 contains only two incomplete chapters in six pages. 
No. 13038 contains in 94 pages the following twelve chapters : 
. Pratima-vidhana. 
. Aya-lakshana. 
. Linga-lakshana. 
. Da§a-tala-vidhana. 
. Kufichita-vidhàna. 
Nava-tala-vidhana. 
Hasta-karma-vidhana. 
. Upapitha-vidhàna. 
9. Eka-bhümi-vidhana. 
ro. Dyi-tala-vidhana. 
іі. Tri-tala-vidhana. 
12. Gopura-vidhana. 


OX Oct uo nn 


Its colophon runs thus— iti Gannacharya-virachitayath Mayamate 
Silpa-fastre . . . ^" : 

No. 13039 containsin 36 pages the first four chaptersofno. 13038. “Тһегс 
is in Tamil a treatise on Silpa-Sastra, said to have been originally 
composed in Sanskrit by Myen (i.e., Maya) who, according to mythology, 
was a son of Brahma and architect of the gods. Тһе original work appears 
to have been disseminated far and wide, and to have suffered by omissions 
as well as by additions. Тһе work under consideration seems to have been 
formed from selections of existing editions of the original work under the 
superintendence and guidance of persons having a practical knowledge 
of Silpa-Sastra or at least of persons professing to have such knowledge. 

(Ind. Ant., Vol. v., p. 230, c. 1, para. 1 ; see also 
M., п, 11-12, 17-20, under STHAPATI.) 


634 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAYAMATA 


In regard to Maya the following note is of great interest : 
4 2 “That the Maya culture of Central America was derived from Asia is 
demonstrated by Mr. J. Leslie Mitchell in his book The Conquest of the 

j Maya. In reviewing the publication Mr. H. J. Massingham writes that the 

| evidence for a succession of cultural waves from Asia is so overwhelming that 

| “ the impartial reader must wonder why the issue was ever a controversial 
| опе.” It appears that it was India which contributed most to the develop- 
| ment of Maya culture. Among the Maya. sculptures are to be found 
ү representations of Hanuman, of Ganeáa, and of Indra and the pictorial 
i and ritualistic reminiscences of Buddhism. “АШ this suggests,” says Mr. 
L Massingham, * that the ancient mariners reached the American coast from 
| А. D. 700 onwards not once but many times." Тһе Hindu culture could 
І not have been. transported to Central America unless the Hindus had been 
a great sea-faring people. i 
| Exploration of the sites of a lost civilization is the fascinating pursuit 
i of Dr. Gann, who has discovered a hitherto unknown monolith and a once- 
| populous site in the forests of Yucatan. He is exploring for traces of the 
н Mayas, and his progress is recorded in a series of articles published in the 
Morning Post : 

‘I discovered the ruins of the great city of Coba, he writes, ‘ through 
information found in a recent translation of the ancient Maya manuscript 
book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel. This describes the migration of the 
Itzas from Chichenitza to Coba, which is about fifty miles to the east of 
Chichenitza. 

* The books of Chilan Balam are the old traditions of the Mayas, which 
survived the Spanish conquest of Yucatan. They record the migrations 
of Maya clans, and were reduced to writing in the sixteenth century. 
I was informed by a wandering Maya Indian that in the Mexican 
territory of Quintana Roo he had come across a great slab of stones lying 
buried in the bush upon which were inscribed : “Ubalob uxben uincoob,” 
or things belonging to the ancient people. He said he had found it 
not many miles north of the British Honduras frontier. г 

* As guide I took the Indian who had told me of the stone. Не, like 
most of his race, had nothing to say to strangers, and he said it most efficiently. 

‘Thad no difficulty in obtaining my permit to visit the shores of Chetumal 
Bay, where the Maya monolith was reported to be. 

*So we set out on our journey up the Bay, which runs almost due north 
for about thirty miles into the south of the Yucatan Peninsula. This is 
surely one of the most desolate stretches of water in the world. It is 
| shallow, yellow, forbidding. On the east separating it from the Caribbean 
` Sea, is an unexplored, uninhabited peninsula, covered. with virgin bush. 


R 635 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USE 


ж 


МАҮАМАТА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


On the west, between the Bay and the great Bacalar Lagoon, the land is 


equally desolate, being traversed at rare intervals only by a few Indian - 


Chicle bleeders, who roam in search of the sapodilla trees, from which 
they get the latex that forms the raw material of chewing gum. 


* About thirteen miles from Payo Obispo I lighted on my great find 
We came to a spot on the west coast of the bay where an Indian had cut down 
the bush to make a small maize plantation. My Indian guide directed 
us to land here, and then led us to the stone we were seeking. 


“Тһе full importance of the discovery was not apparent at first. It 
was a block of greyish schist, twelve feet long, eighteen inches wide, and 
twelve inches thick. It had at one time stood upright, but now lay flat 
and embedded in the ground. Upon one edge faint traces of sculpture 
were visible, but the greater part of the exposed surfaces had been worn 
quite smooth by the tropical downpours of an unknown number of rainy 
seasons. ‘This has been the fate of many Maya inscriptions. 


* I then brushed the soil from the stone, and there—glorious surprise— 
I saw the Maya Initial Series Date—g. 8. o. о. o. 5 Aban 3 Chen. or 26 
October, А. D. 333! Тһе sculpture preserved by its burial in the earth, 
was almost as clear and plain as on the day when it was cut in the stone, 
nearly sixteen centuries ago. 

* Amid all the Maya ruins in Yucatan only four such Initial Series dates 
have been found, and the date carved on the monolith which lay before me 
was more than three hundred years earlier than that appearing on the oldest 
of the stelae previously found. Now, one of the most baffling mysteries 
connected with the Mayas is their abandonment of their old empire and 
foundation of the new one; for, at a certain period in their history, they left 
their cities, built with ап enormous expenditure of labour, and migrated 
from the fertile lands in which they stood to found new settlements in what 
were, apparently, uninhabited regions. 

“Earthquakes, pestilence, and foreign invasion have been suggested as 
possible causes of this migration. The cities the Mayas left bear no traces 
of violence haying been wrought by man or the forces of Nature, and the 
buildings of their new settlements were obviously erected by a people with 
unimpaired vigour. It is therefore important to fix the date when they 
first established themselves in Yucatan ; and this discovery may, in fact, 
cause a complete reversion of the ideas generally held as to their first immi- 
gration into this peninsula and their foundation of what is known as the 
New Empire. It may, indeed, affect our views of the whole history of 
the earliest and most advanced aboriginal civilization of America, which 
Was in many respects the highest civilization of ancient, if not of any time. 


636 


-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
^ % ^ << ә ate = t e 
1 е ыс гэ: =: _ = —— —— 


— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAYAMATA 


‘The carving on this stela begins with the initial glyph and in column 
below this come the glyphs meaning— 

9 Bactuns (periods of 400 years, each of 360 days). 

8 Katuns (periods of twenty years), O Tuns (years). 

о Unials (Maya months of twenty days). 

o Kins (days). It thus records the lapse of 3,760 years from the 
beginning of the Maya chronology. The Mayas did not count any 
period of time until it was completed, that is to say, their sign for the 
first day of a month was o. So if written in our style these glyphs would 
read I. т. 3761. 


* It is generally assumed that the date from which the Mayas reckoned 
their chronology is mythological rather than historical. But for the present 
purposes consideration of such a question is immaterial. The point is that 
all the dates on such monoliths are reckoned from the same day, and there- 
fore, according to Spinden’s correlation of their system with ours, this date 
corresponds to our 26 October, A.D. 333. 


‘This would, apparently, place the beginning of the Maya chronology 
in 3381. The British Museum Guide to the Maudsley collection of 
Maya Sculptures gives this Maya date о. 8. о. о. о. 5 Ahan, 3 Chen as 
A.D. 64. But it mentions that Professor Morley has worked out another 
correlation which places this and all other Maya dates some 270 years later. 


* Beneath this date on the stela was a great sheet of hieroglyphics, which 
were perfectly clearly defined, but they are in our present state of knowledge 
indecipherable. I have no doubt though that if we could read them we 
should find that they recorded events which had occurred during the 
preceding Katun or period of twenty Maya years, as such stelae were put 
up by the Mayas to commemorate the ends of each of those periods. 


* The monolith had been erected just in front of a great terraced pyramid 
which stood between two others. All these pyramids were faced, in the 
usual Maya style, with blocks of cut limestone. The central one had 
three terraces and was 32 feet high. Its flat top, upon which there no 
doubt stood a wooden temple, long since perished, was 135 feet long and 
64 feet across. 

“ Further investigation showed that these pyramids were at one end of 
a great enclosure, which was surrounded by a massive stone wall. This 
wall is from 12 to 15 feet thick at the base, and in the places where it has 
remained intact, it is 12 feet high ; but for the most part the growth of luxur- 
ious vegetation has thrown the stones down and the ruins are only 3 or 4 
feet above ground. The wall isa mile and a half long and forms a semi-circle 
with the two ends running down to the shore. 


637 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


МАҮАМАТА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


“І think there can hardly be any doubt that this was intended as a forti- 


fication, and therefore a particular interest is attached to it. For, judging. 


by all their sculptures, the ancient Mayas knew nothing of war. Their 
sculptors have left no records of battles or triumphs, such as those of Greece, 
Egypt, or Babylon. One assumed that all the Maya clans dwelt in amity 
and that until quite late in their history they had no ехрсгіепе of fighting, 
either among themselves or with alien races. ` 

* Yet here we have what is obviously a defensive work, and it scems signi- 
ficant that the only two walls of this kind which have hitherto been dis- 
covered are also in Yucatan, one being at Tuluum, on the east coast, and 
the other at Chicken Itza, in the northern interior. Against whom were 
these defences erected ? Judging by the date on the stela, they were built 
centuries before the Mayas came in contact with the Tolecs, on the north. 
It has been assumed that Yucatan was uninhabited when the Mayas first 
took possession of it, and they were not in the habit of building such walls 
in the earlier cities to the south. Why this innovation ? 

‘The space enclosed by this wall had evidently been densely populated 


in bygone times. Forin the places where the Indians have cleared the ; 


undergrowth away, one could see that the ground is literally covered with 
potsherds, flint and obsidian chips, clay beads, spindle whorls, small human 
and animal heads, and other surviving evidences of human habitation- 

‘A great concourse of people must have lived there for many genera- 
tions. 

‘ The discovery of these ruins was, more or less, incidental. During this 
season my primary objective is Northern Yucatan, where Professor Morley, 
of the Carnegie Institute, and I propose to test the truth of some wonderful 
Indian legends. Тһе Indians have told me of a vast subterrancan cavern 
some twenty miles long, and of the ruins of a great city which no white man 
has seen. 

* Along the east coast of Yucatan live the Santa Cruz Indians, presumably 
the direct descendants of the ancient Mayas who erected magnificent temples 
and palaces, most of which now lie buried in the tropical forests. Some 
have been discovered, but there is no doubt that a great number of them 
yet remain to be discovered. x 

‘The Santa Cruz Indians have never been subdued, and for five centuries 
they have successfully resisted all the efforts, first of the Spaniards and later 
of the Mexicans to conquer their country. These Indians so far as is known 
lead the lives of their ancestors of a thousand years ago. They worship the 
same gods and perform the ancient religious ceremonies. But we know little 
about them, because their villages are buried in the dense forests of the hills 
and they permit no stangers to intrude. 

638 


.. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


| 
| 
+ 


! 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAYAMATA 


‘ The danger of penetrating into this Santa Cruz country arises from the 
fact that the suspicious Indians may fire from the bush without inquiry 
whether the strangers are friends or foes.’ 

About the vast cave of Loltun, which is possibly the largest cavern in the 
world he adds that * this cave is entered by great well-like holes in the earth 
through which one descends by ladders from ledge to ledge arriving in 
immense rocky chambers whose floors are covered with stalagmites and cave 
earth, and from whose lofty roofs depend vast stalactities. Two of these 
holes are a mile apart, and the intervening space has never been traversed 
by a European. From the great chambers unexplored passages branch 
out in every direction. On the floors of the chambers, buried in the cave 
earth, innumerable potsherds have already been found, also human and 
animal bones, flint and stone weapons and implements, and many other 
relics of the ancient inhabitants. It is possible that: the deeper layers of 
earth and the remote galleries and passages may contain relics of the pre- 
Maya inhabitants of Yucatan, of whom nothing whatever is known at present. 

‘It is said by the Indians that subterranean passages from this cavern 
reach to the ruined city of Chicken Itza 20 miles away. There is a tradition 
handed down amongst the modern Indians that during one of the innumer- 
able internecine wars amongst the Maya which followed the breaking up 
of the central authority, after the Conquest of Mayapan, the inhabitants of 
a neighbouring village were driven to take refuge in this cave by a band of 
their enemies, who pursued them even into this last refuge, and that of neither 
pursued nor pursuers was any trace ever again seen. 

‘Some believe that in the dark all fell over a precipice into some vast 
chasm in the limestone, others that all lost their way in the intricate maze 
of endless galleries, and others again that all were suffocated by poisonous 
gases. Whatever their fate, the possibility of coming suddenly at any 
turn upon groups of rag clad skeletons shrouded in the impalpable dust 
of ages does not detract from the eerie feeling induced by traversing these 
vast catacombs, where silence is almost palpable. One’s feet make no noise 
on the soft cave earth, and one is almost afraid to raise one’s voice, which 
reverberates round the Great Stone chambers and is thrown back in a 
thousand mocking echoes from the rocky walls. Upon the walls of the 
lighted chamber many crude drawings have been left by the former inha- 
bitants, and in one case is inscribed a late Maya date A.D. 1379.” 

* Whatever Dr. Gann's conclusions may be his actual discoveries are of 
stupendous interest. The causeway that he has found is of supreme import- 
ance. He regards it as having been built for the purposes of human sacrifice. 
I disagree. Му reason for disagreeing is that there are similar causeways in 
Cambodia, which were designed purely for ceremonial purposes. 


639 


МАҮАМАТА AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОГ 


“The whole Maya remains as discovered show the closest 
with the-civilization as it existed in Jav 
been found in Yucatan. There is nothing to my mind that suggests that the 
form of civilization is indigenous, and I should be inclined to hold that the 
temples at Java were the proto-types of what has been found in Yucatan. 

* Unquestionably in the early days perishable wood structures were built, 
but when stone supplanted wood, you find pyramids being built precisely 
on the same lines that they were being built in South-East Asia. They were, 
so far as the staircases were concerned, a copy of what the Babylonians were 
building 2,000 years before the era of Christ. It is necessary to remember 
that as Indian civilization spread eastwards the type of pyramids estab- 
lished by them became fashionable and was built in stone. 


possible relation 
a and South-East Asia to what has. 


* While the great causeway was of outstanding interest, it had to be 
remembered that it could be paralleled with the remains of Indian 
civilization. Further there was no question but that Maya carvings 
represented Indian elephants and Indians with typical head-dresses. 


* Indian navigators, it was known, had combed out the islands in the 
Pacific, such as Easter Island and many others, and it was unthinkable 
that they should not have discovered a continent that stretched from pole 
to pole. 

“То the archaeologist the issue now raised was of supreme importance. 
Until fifty years ago the orthodox held that the Maya civilization was of 
Indian origin. Тһе dating derived from the hieroglyphs was so vague as 
to give little help, and interpretation varies by as much as three or six 
centuries. 

* What supremely interests the archaeologists,” Professor Elliot Smith 
continues, ‘is that we find a civilization starting full-blown in Central 
America. Under Asiatic influence, it rose to great heights, but had already 
collapsed before the advent of the Spaniards who may have given it the 

coup de grace. То know the real secret of Maya culture affects our whole 
interpretation of civilization. 

“Сап different communities, such as the Indian, the Chinese and the 
American, build up a civilization independent of each other, or is it possible 
for a certain civilization to be spread about the world in the same way 
that a steam engine can be distributed ? 

“ This is the great problem of ethnology today, and the issue now centres 
in the problem as to how civilization started in Central America. There is 
a large gap between Asia and America, but if diffusion means anything it 
means that that gap must have been bridged as I have shown it could have 
been. 


640 


rukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


2 er = 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MANAVA-VASTU-LAKSHANA 


* The Maya civilization rose and fell. It fell so soon as the energy of the 
driving force that inspired it declined. This is our view, and we do not 
believe in an indigenous culture that rose through its own impetus, and that 
fell as a result of foreign invasion.’ 

No one now questions Dr. Gann’s facts, but many competent archaeolo- 
gists dispute the conclusions at which he arrived. An archacological issue 
has now been fairly raised. Did the Maya civilization arise from native 
American civilization, or was it the result of peaceful penetration by the 
Asiatic ? 

Professor Grafton Elliot Smith, of University College, London, discus- 
sing the subject with a Morning Post representative disagreed absolutely 
with the views put forward by the American school, and supported by Dr. 
Gann. 

* At University College,’ he said, * we are absolutely convinced that the 
Maya civilization was directly derived from India. We regard it as certain 
that between the Fourth and the Twelfth Century there was a penetration 
from the South-East of Asia. The question of dating is admittedly difficult, 
but from the facts we have in our possession I should be inclined to think 
that Dr. Gann's dates may err by as much as three centuries.’ : 

š (Central News, quoted from Morning Post, by Statesman, 
March 21, April 9, 17, 15, 1926.) 
MAHA-NIRVANA-TANTRA—Deals with both architectural and 
sculptural matters, such as temples, idols, phallus, ponds, and tanks, 
as well as with the directions concerning broken limbs of images, 
especially the materials of which buildings and idols should be made 
the Vastu god, and so on (Chapter хш, verses 22—286, see also chapters 
XIV and ул). 


MAHABHARATA—(F. irst Bombay edition ; 2nd Calcutta edition 
Gild. Bibl. 93)—Sabhà-parvan, chapters : 

Maya built a council hall (sabha) for the Pandavas. 
Indra-sabha-varnana. 

Yama-sabhà-varnana. 

Varuna-sabhà-varnana. 

Kubera-sabhà-varnana. 

. Brahma-sabha-varnana. 


© от н 


І 
1 


МАМА-КАТНАМА--Оп the system of measurement. 
(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS , ibid., Vol. u, p. 473.) 
MANAVA-VASTU-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 
(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. I, p. 476.) 
641 


“= о 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


MANASA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MANASA—(Same as MANASARA). See below. 

(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit Myy., ibid., Vol. 11, p.518.) 
MANASARA—(edited and translated into English for the first 
time by the writer)— The standard treatise and a complete text on 
architecture and sculpture. It comprises 7o chapters in more than 
10,000 lines. There are eleven manuscripts of it. See the details 
given under the Preface of its first edition by the writer and compare 
the writer's Summary of Manasara, Leiden, 1917, in the Indian Architecture 
according Manasára-Silpa-sastra, 1927, and in Hindu Architecture in India 
and Abroad. 
MANASOLLASA—(R. L. Mitra’s Notices of Sanskrit Manuscripts, 
Vol. ш, р. 182)—Attributed to the Chalukya king Somegvara. In 
two chapters, it deals with the following subjects : 
Mandirarambha-muhirta-kathana. 
2 Shoda£a-prakara-griha-lakshana. 
3. Raja-griha-lakshana. 
4. WVastu-deva-pija-vidhi. 
5. Griha-pravesa-kathana. 
6 
7 
8 


- 


Griha-varnana. 
Griha-chitra-varna-lakshana. 
. Wajra-lepa-lakshana. 
9. Lekhani-akshana. 
Io. Tambula-bhoga-kathana. 
ir. Vilepanopabhoga-kathana. 
12. Vastropabhoga-kathana. 
19. Malyopabhoga-kathana. 
I4. Bhüshabhoga-kathana. 
15. Asana-bhoga-kathana. 
16. Putradi-bhoga-kathana. 
17. Anna-bhoga-kathana. 
18. Paniya-bhoga-kathana. 
10. Abhyanga-bhoga-kathana. 
20. Yana-bhoga-kathana. 
21. Chhatra-bhoga-kathana. 
22. Sayya-bhoga-kathana. 
23. Dhüpa-bhoga-kathana. 
24. Stri-bhoga-kathana. a 
This work should not be confounded with that of the same name In 
Taylor's Catalogue Raisonée (Vol. r, р. 1) and its commentary, Manasollasa- 
yrittanta-prakasa (іп Weber's Berlin Catalogue, p. 179.) 
642° 


war Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE RASI-PRAKARA 


MANASOLLASA-VRITTANTA-PRAKASA—On architecture (cf. 


' Gaekwad Sanskrit Series). 


(In possession of Vimana-Acharya, Benares, 
Weber’s Berlin Catalogue, Р. 179.) 
MÜRTTI-DHYANA—On sculpture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., Part I, p. 464.) 
MURTTI-LAKSHANA—On idol-making. 
(Ibid p. 464.) 
There is another manuscript bearing the same title which is stated to 
have been taken from the Garuda-samhita. : 
MULA-STAMBHA-N IRNAYA—On architectural description of the 
main pillar of a house. 
(Jbid., p. 464, Oppert's List of. Sanskrit MSS., 
ibid., Vol. п, p. 202.) 
R 
RATNA-DIPIKA—(Attributed to Chandesvara)—On architecture, 
(Aufrecht, ibid., Part п, рр. 36, 114.) 
RATNA-MALA—of Sripati—Deals with astrological matters in con- 
nexion with the construction of houses and idols of deities under the 
following chapters : 
17. Vastu-prakarana (28 verses). 
18. Griha-pravesa (тт verses). 
20. Deva-pratishtha (1g verses). 
RAJA-GRIHA-NIRMANA—On the building of royal palaces. 
(Burnell's Classified Index to the Sanskrit. MSS. in 
the Palace Library of Tanjore, 1880.) 
RAJA-VALLABHA-TIKA—A commentary on Rajavallabha-Man 
dana. | 
(Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in Private Libra- 
ries of Gujarat, etc., 1872, р. 276.) 
RAMAYANA—(First Calcutta edition, ed. Schlegel Gild. Bibl. 84, 
ed. Gorrens, Gild, Bibl. 85, опа Bombay edition)—Devotes large 
portions of the following chapters on architecture : 
Adikanda, 5th Sarga, the description of the city of Ayodhya. 
Lankakanda, 3rd Sarga, the description of the fort of Lanka. 
(There are also numerous casual references to architectural and sculp- 
tural matters in the Epics, the Puranas and the Agamas.) 


RASI-PRAKARA—(Attributed to Garga)—Deals with astrological 


matters concerning architecture. 
(See Vastu-Sarani.) 


643 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


RÜPA-MANDANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


RUPA-MANDANA—(Attributed to Mandana Sütradhàra)—On 


architecture. 
(Gf. Rajavallabha Mandana.) 


L 


LAKSHANA-SAMUCHCHAYA—On the features in images of 
deities, quoted by Hemadri in Danakhanda (р. 823), in Muhirta- 
dipaka, and Parasurama-prakasa. $ 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 535.) 
LAGHU-SILPA-JYOTISHA—On architecture. 

(British Museum Catalogue, 20, E. 32.) 


LAGHU-SILPA-JYOTIH-SARA—By Sivarama, with a Gujarati 
commentary—This pamphlet deals mostly with astrological matters 
concerning architecture. The contents are indicated in the following 
verses : š 

-  Aya-rasi§ cha nakshatrarn vyayas tārārhśakas tatha | 
Graha-maitri raSi-maitri nativedha-ganendavah 11 (3) 
Adhipatyarn vara-lagne tithy-utpattis tathaiva cha | 
Adhipatyarn varga-vairarn tathaiva yoni-vairakam 11 (4) 
Riksha-vairarn sthitir našo lakshanany eka-vimšatih | 
Kathitàni muni-éreshthaih Silpa-vidvadbhir grihadishu 11 (5) 
LINGA-PURANA—See under PURANAS. 

V 


VALI-PITHA-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 
(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. 1, p. 473-) 
VAYU-PURANA—See under PuRANAS. 


VASTU-CHAKRA—On architecture. 
(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., p. 538.) 


VASTU-TATTVA—(By Ganapati Sishya, Lahore, 1853)—Consists of 
four chapters and deals largely with astrological matters concerning 
architecture. 


VASTU-NIRNAYA—On architecture, dealing specially with the 


classes of vastu (see under V AsTU). 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part x, p. 568.) 


644 


kul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by $3 Foundation USA 


Ё a и eee 


ج 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


VASTU-RATNAVALI 


VASTU-PURUSHA-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 


(Taylor's Catalogue Raisoneé of Oriental. MSS. in 

the Library of the late College of Fort 

St. George, Vol. 1, p. 313.) 

VASTU-PRAKASA—(Attributed to Visvakarman)—On architecture. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., Part r., р. 568, in possession of Balabhari 

Sapre, Benares, Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in 

X. W. P., 1885, Part x, по. 2, р. 56.) 

VASTU-PRADIPA (gf. VASTU-SARANI)—By Vasudeva, оп archi- 

tecture. : 

(In possession of Umiasarhkara-Sastri, Azamgarh, 

Catalogue af Sanskrit MSS. in N. W. P., 

1885, Part x, no. 1, p. 56.) 

VASTU-PRAVANDHA— (By Lala Rajakigora Varma, Lucknow, 

1904)—It deals largely with astrological matters in connexion with 

architecture, and contains extracts from the Brihat-samhità, Visva- 

karma-prakasa, Muhirta-chintémani, Samgraha-Siromani, Vastu-vidya- 
prakasa, Vastu-pradipa, and Jpotis-sara-muhitrta-chakra-dipika. 


VASTU-MANJARI—(Attributed to Mandana Sütradhàra)—On 


-architecture. 


(Cf. Ràjavallabha-Mandana.) 


VASTU-MANDANA—(Attributed to Mandana Sütradhara)—On 
architecture. 
(Gf. Rajavallabha-Mandana.) 
VASTU-YOGA-TATTVA --(Attributed to Raghunandana)— Treats 
largely of offerings to Vastu deity, and contains extracts from the 
Matsya-Paráma, Devi-Purdéna, Rudra-yàmala, and Vasishtha-samhité. 
VASTU-RATNA-PRADIPA—On architecture. 
(Gf. Vastu-sarani.) 
VASTU-RATNAVALI—(Compiled by Pandit Jivanath Jyotishi, 
Benares, 1883)—This compilation contains extracts from the Bhavi- 
shya-Purána, Jyotth-sagara, Griha-karika, Vastu-pradipa, Bhuja-bala-bhima, 
Vasishtha-samhita, Sri-bhoja-raja, — Raja-uallabha, Vastu-ratna-pradipa- 
Siddhénta-Siromani, of Bhaskaracharya, Mandana-siitra-dhara, Brihat- 
samhita of Varahamihira, and Ratna-mala. 
(Burnell's Classified Index to the Sanskrit MSS. in the 
Palace Library of Tanjore, p. 154.) 


645 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


B z - E — Z ee йи 


VASTU-RAJA-VALLABHA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


VASTU-RAJA-VALLABHA—(Attributed to Mandana Sütradhara, 


probably same as Vasiu-fástra, otherwise called Silpa-sastra)—On ° 


architecture. 
' (Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in N.W.P., ibid., р- 56.) 
VASTU-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 

(Oppert's List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. 1, p. 480.) 
VASTU-VICHARA—(Attributed to Visvakarman)—A treatise on 
architecture, apparently old. 

(In possession of Gaurinath Ѕаѕігі, Benares, 

Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in N.W.P., 1885, 

ibid., p. 56, Aufrecht, part r, p. 568.) 

VASTU-VIDYA—(a manuscript, see Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., 

ibid., Vol. 1, p. 480; Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 578; also a text 

edited by T. Ganapati Sastri, 1913)—Deals with materials, etc. for 
house building in the following sixteen chapters : 

Sadhana-kathana. 


I. 
о. Wasudha-lakshana. 
9. Vastu-devata-kathana. 
4. Wastu-purusha-kathana. 
5. Wedi-sarhsthana. 
6. Vastu-marma-sarsthana. 
7. Каја-піуата. 
8. Sala-vidhana. 
9. Pada-mana-kathana. 
го. Lupa-lakshana. 
ir. Іліра-Кагапа. 
12. Dhüli-nirodhana. 
19. Dvara-vinyasa. 
14. Kavata-dvara-vinyasa. 
15. Bhavana-parigraha. 
16. Mril-loshta-lakshana. 


VASTU-VIDHI—(Attributed to Visvakarman)—On architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 568.) 

VASTU-SASTRA (see under SANAT-KUMARA)—On architecture. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid, Vol. т, p. 580.) 
VASTU-SASTRA—(also called Silpa-sastra)—Attributed to Rajavalla- 
bha Mandana and Bhüpati-vallabha (noticed in Egg. 3142, 1291): 
one of these manuscripts is published in Samvat 1947, at Anahila- 

646 


angri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VASTU-SASTRA-SAMARAR- 
GANA-SÜTRADHARA 


pura in Patana, by Narayana Bharati and Yagavanta Bharati—It has 


k d “а Gujarati commentary and some illustrative diagrams. (Noticed in 
the Catalogue of printed books and manuscripts in Sanskrit belonging 


| to the Oriental Library of the Asiatic Society, Bengal, p. 173) 


It has four more copies—Egg. 3143, 3144, 3145, 3146, p. 1136. 
| This is а work on architectural disposition of houses, palaces, temples, 


сіс., and the rite to be performed at their inauguration, by Mandana, an 
l architect in the employ of king Kumbhakarna of Medapati (and the husband 
of Marabai). According to Tod, ‘ the king Kumbha, who had a taste for 


arts and built many temples and strongholds, ruled over the country of 
Mewara from А. D. 1419 to 1469. (Bhandarkai’s Report, 1882-84, p. 37.) 


| It contains the following fourteen chapters : 


I. 
2% 
| M Be 


Misraka-lakshana. 
Vastu-lakshana. 
Ayadi-lakshana. 


4. Prakàra-yantra-vàpi-küpa-tadaga-lakshana. 


5. 


Raja-griha-nivesadi-lakshana (verse 28 of this chapter men- 


tions the Maisya-Purána as an authority). 
| 6. Eka-$ala-dvi-$ala-griha-lakshana. 
2 À 7. Dvi-sala-tri-sala-chatuh-sala-griha-lakshana. 
8. Sayana-sithhasana-chhatra-gavaksha-sabhashtaka-vedika- 
chatushtaya-dipa-lakshana. 
9. Raja-grihadi-lakshana. 


10. 


(Марна) kshetrádbhüta-lakshana. 


гі. Dina-Suddhi-griha-nivesa-griha-pravesa-vivaha-muhirta- 
lakshana. 

12. Gochara-dina-ratri-mana-svarodaya-kota-chakra-mátrika- 
lakshana. 

19. Jyotisha-lakshana. 

14. Sakuna-lakshana. 


ma L 
II. 

‘ III. 
S VI. 
3 V. 
| VI. 


Six other works are ascribed to Mandana : 


Rüpa-mandana. 


" Vàstu-mandana. 


Prasada-mandana. 
Aya-tattva. 
Vastu-mafijari. 
Vastu-sara. 


VASTU-SASTRA-SAMARANGANA-SUTRADHARA—(Attributed 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


to Bhojadeva)—On architecture. 


(Aufrecht, ibid., part т, р. 568. 
647 


55» 
ed * 
ғ. 


кеше; 


ЕНЕ ЯЗ ada 


^ 


еч. , Тай 


VASTU-SIROMANI 


AN ENGYCLOPAEDIA OF 


'"VASTU-SIROMANI-—On architecture. 


(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 568.) - 


There is another manuscript of the same title, attributed to Maharaja 
Syamasaha Sankara. 
VASTU-SAMUCHCHAYA—On architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 568.) 
VASTU-SAMKHYA—On architecture, “ап extract of Todara- 
nanda, very rare, complete and incorrect.’ 
(Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in М. W. Р., 1885, part Ix, p. 56.) 


VASTU-SAMGRAHA—(Attributed to Vi$vakarman)—On  archi- 
tecture. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 568.) 
VASTU-SAMGRAHAMU —Contains 100 pages, written in Telugu 
character, and deals largely with astrological matters concerning 
architecture. 

(Mackenzie Collection, by Wilson, p. 171.) 
VASTU-SARVASVA—On architecture, comprises 16 pages. 
(By Nanjunda Dikshita, published by V. Rama- 
svami Sàstralu and Sons, Madras, 1916.; 
VASTU-SARA—(Attributed to Sütradhàra Mandana)—With a Guja- 
rati commentary (Ahmedabad, 1878), it deals largely with astrolo- 
gical matters concerning architecture. There is also another manus- 
cript of same title. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 569.) 
VASTU-SARANI—(by Matri Ргазайа Pande, Benares,1909)— This 
15 а manual of astrological details in connexion with the construction 
of a house, compiled from the following treatises : 
I. Grama-nirnaya, of Narayana. 
II. Rasi-prakara, of Garga. 
III. Dasa-prakara, of Vasishtha. 
IV. Dik-sadhana, of Bhaskara. 
V. Sthala-$ubhaSubha-kathana, of Narayana. 
VI. Vastu-pradipa. 
VII. Ràhu-mukha, by Rama. 
VIII. Visvakarma. 
IX. Pinda-prakara, by Gopiraja: 
X. Narada. 


648 


il Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Eae i 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VISVAKARMA-MATA 


XI. Dhruvádi-shodafa-gehàni, by Ganapati. 
XII. Griharambha, by Sripati. 
ХПІ. Vastu-ratna-pradipa. 
XIV. Dikshu-vriksháropana, by Ganapati. 


VASTU-SARA-SARVASVA-SAMGRAHA—(Bangalore, 1884, with 


a Canarese commentary)—A compilation on architecture. 


VIMANA-LAKSHANA—On architecture. 


(In possession of Archaka Yogananda Bhatta 
of Melkota ; Oppert’s List of Sanskrit 
MSS., ibid., Vol. п, p. 266.) 


VISVAKARMA-MATA—Quoted Бу Hemadri іп Parisesha-khanda 
(2, 817, 825, 827, 828). 


(Aufrecht, ibid., part 11, p. 138.) 
There is another treatise ascribed to Vi$vakarman (Ràjendralala Mitra, 


Notices of Sanskrit MSS., Calcutta, 1871, Vol. п, no. 731, р. 142), fol. 63, 
English paper gf” X71", copied 1872. 


“None of the manuscripts examined by Mr. Burnell is perfect or even 


tolerably correct.’ 


It is a treatise on the manual arts attributed to Visvakarma, the divine’ 


architect, but apparently а compilation ; it is written in the Тапігіс 
style, having Siva for its narrator. The manuscript has been copied for 
Dr. Mitra from old codex in the Halakanada character in the Library of the 
Raja of Tanjore. The contents are classified under the following seventeen 
chapters : 


1. Vi$vakarmotpattih, karma-visesha-bhedena vyavahrita-takshaka 
varddhakyadi-$abda-vyutpatti. 

2. Satyádi-yuga-jata-narochchatà-pramanam,  yajíiiya-kashthena- 
prastarena và deva-pratimà nirmane manadi. 

з. Takshakasya garbhadhanadi-samskara-kathanam, garbhotpatti- 
kathanadi. 

4. Siva-lingadi-pratishthartharn sabha-nirmanadi. 

5. Graha-pratima-nirmana-pramanam, - linga-pitha-nirmana- 
pramanadi. 

6. Ratha-nirmana-vidhi-kathanam. 

7. Ratha-pratishtha-vidhi. 

8. Brahmi-MaheSvaryadinam sva-rüpadi-varnadi. 

9. Yajfiopavita-lakshana. 4 

10. Suvarna-rajata-maufijyadi-nirmita-yajnopavita-kathanam, dig- 
bhedena deva-sthapana-prakaradi,  meru-dakshina-sthita-hema-sila- 


kathanadi. 


649 


VISVAKARMA-JNANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


II. Lakshmi-Brahmi-Mahesvaryadi-devindradi-dik-pala-grahadi- 
mürti-nirmàna-prakaàra. 

12-13. Mukuta-kirita-jata-mukutadi-nirmana-prakaradi. 

14. Sthavarasthavara-sithhasana-nirmana-prakaradi, punar уіќе- 
shena kirita-lalata-pattikadi-nirmana-prakara, Devataya mandirasya 
jirnoddhara-prakara. 

15. Linga-mirti-mandira-dvaradi-kathana. 

16. Pratimà-mürti-mandira-dvàradi-kathana. 

17. Vighne$a-mürti-mandiràdi-nirmànadi-vidhi. 
VISVAKARMA-JNANA-— (edited by Krishna Sankara Sastri, the 
real author is not known)— This pamphlet treats largely of ritualistic 
matters, such as the sacrifices, etc., to Visvakarman. 
VISVAKARMA-PURANA—The title here adopted is that given to 
the volume on the fly-leaf. No colophon of any kind is met with 
on the manuscript. It is very incorrect and illegible. It has a Telugu 
commentary equally unintelligible. It deals with architectural 


matters. : 
(Egg. MSS., 3153, 2614; Oppert's List of 
Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. т, p. 480.) 
VISVAKARMA-PRAKASA—(Egg. MSS., p. 112a) also called 
Vastu-Sastra—It gives a course of directions in thirteen chapters, on 
the building of houses, the making of roads, tanks, ctc. and the rites 
observed on such occasions, purporting to be founded on the revela- 
tion of Vi$vakarman, still further traced back successively to Brihad- 
ratha, Ратабага, and Sambhu. 
Тһе following editions of it are published : 
I. This is published іп the Srivenkategvara Press, Bombay, by 
Khemraja Sri Krishnadasa, in Samvat 1952, Saka 1817. 
II. This is published without any commentary at Benares, іп 
1888. 
ІП. This is a translation of Palaramavilasa into Bhasha, by 
Mukula Saktidhara Sarma, Lucknow, 1806. 
The topics treated of in the thirteen chapters are the following : 

1. Mangalacharana. 
Vastu-purushotpatti-varnana-purvakam-pujanadika. 
Bhümi-lakshanam phalam cha. 

Griha-praveSa-samaye Sakuna-phala. 
Khanana-vidhi. 
Svapna-vidhi. 


PARE 


- 650 


Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


VISVAKARMIYA-SILPA- 
SASTRA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


7. Bhümi-phala. 
8. Griharambhe samaya-Sudhi. 
9. Dhvajadyaya-phalani. 
10. Aya-vyayarnsadinarh phalani. 
11. Griha-madhye devadinarh sthapana-nirnaya. 
12. Dhruvadi-griha-bheda. 
I3. Dvara-manani. 
14. Stambha-pramanani. 
15. Grihanarh éala-nirnaya. 
16. Grihárambha-kala-nirnaya. 
17. Griharambhe lagna-kundalishtha-graha-phalani. 
18. Sayya-mandira-bhuvana-Sudhàradi-grihànam lakshanani. 
10. Paduka-upanaha-mafchadinarh mana-lakshana. 
го. Sanku-$ilà-nyasa-nirnaya. 
21. Vastu-deha-lakshanarn püjanarn bali-danarh cha. 
22. Sila-nyàsa (cf. 20 above). 
29. Prasáda-vidhana. 
24. Silpa-nyàsa. 
25. Pràásáda-nirnaya. 
26. Pithika-lakshana. 
27. Mandapa-lakshana. 
28. Dvara-lakshana. 
29. Wapi-kipa-tadagodyana-kriya. 
go. Daru-chhedana-vidhi. 
91. Griha-praveSa-nirnaya. 
2. Griha-pravesa-kala-suddhi. 
33. Sayyasana-dolikadinarn -lakshana. 
34. Prave$a-kala$a-chakradi-vastu-éanti. 
35. Durga-nirnaya. 
52 Salya-jfianarn śalyoddhāra. 
Nágara-sambandhi-ràja-grihadinam nirnaya. 
SHIN RUND SAMPRADAYA—On architecture, dealing spe- 
cially with a mythological account of the race of architects descended 
from Visvakarman. 
(Egg. MSS. гу, 3151, 2680.) 
VISVAKARMIYA-SILPA-SASTRA—On architecture and cognate 
rts. 
Š (Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, Catalogue, Vol. ххп, no. 13057, 
p. 8775, written on 100 pages of palm-leaf 11” x 15”; copied by one 
Nitla Sūrappa on Saturday, the 5th day of the bright fortnight of the A$vija 
month in the year Jaya). 


651 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | 


VISVA-VIDYABH ARANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


В author acknowledges his debt to Brahma, Indra, Maya, Bhargava, 
girasa, Dhruva, Gautama, Gargeya, Manu, Vyasa and Bhrigu. He 
also cites from Agastya. 

The colophon runs thus—Viévakarma-éastre Visvakarma-mate, etc. 
VISVA-VIDYABHARANA- (Attributed to Basavàchàrya)— This is 
a treatise on the duties of artisans, especially members of carpenter 
(Rathakàra) caste. Its Scope is limited to the religious duties of the 
Rathakara, who claims Visvakarma, Vi$varüpa, and Tvashtri, as 
his divine guardians. It consists largely of quotations from the 
Puranas, the Epics, the Sütras, and other works. Of other author- 
ities may be mentioned Rudradatta’s commentary on the Apastamba 
Sütra, the Shad-guru Bhàshya on the Asvalàyana-Samànukrama- 
manika, the Vidyaranya, and the Sarasvati-vilasa with the commen- 
tary of Vijriane$vara. А 
(Egg. MSS., v, 3151, 2680 ; Aufrecht, ibid, part r, р. 138.) 
VEDANTA-SARA—by Garlapata Lakshanacharya—It contains 79 
pages, has a Telugu commentary, and treats of the size of images, 
the proper time for commencing to build, and similar subjects. 

(Есе. MSS., п, 3151, 2680.) 
VAIKHANASA—On architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p- 610.) 
VAIKHANASAGA MA—See under Agamas. 


5 


SASTRA-JALADHI-RATNA—by Hari Prasida—On architecture. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part т, р. 644.) 
SILPA-KALA-DIPAKA—On architecture. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 647.) 
SILPA-GRANTHA—by Bhuvanadeva Acharya (Egg. MSS., 3152, 
1603 5, written in modern Deva-nagari)—A short history of the 
work is given at the beginning. It is stated that God at the request 
of Aparajita reveals the theory of constructive art, from the creation 
of mundane egg to the erection of a town gate, and the measurements 
of banners, water pots, and bells in sanctuaries. 

It is almost identical to (1) Aparajita-prichchha by Bhava ( ? Bhuvana) 
deva, mentioned in Dr. Bhandarkar’s Report (1883-1884, p. 276), and to 
(2) Aparájita-vastu-sastra ascribed to Visvakarman, mentioned in Dr. 
Bühler's Catalogue of Gujarat MSS. (Iv. p. 276). 

5 652 


В, 16)—On architecture, printed by Mahadeo Ramchandra ; 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SILPA-SASTRA 


SILPA-DIPAKA— by Gangadhara (B. H. Catalogue, 15, С. 14, 14, 
second edition in 1908, with diagrams of instruments and houses, etc, 
SILPA-NIGHANTU—by Aghore Sastri—On architecture. 
(Classified Catalogue of Sanskrit Works in the Sarasvati ` 
Bhandara Library of Mysore, class хіх, no. 533.) 
SILPA-RAT NA—by  Srikumara (Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 
no. LXXV) under instructions from king Devanarayana of Ambala- 
puzha in Travancore)—Deals with several architectural matters and 
painting in 46 chapters, compiled from AMnasara and other treatises 
(see details in the writer's Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad, 
рр. 176-177). 
SILPA-LEKHA—On architecture, according to Raya-mukuta quot- 
ed by Sarvadhara. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, 647.) 
SILPA-SASTRA—(Egg. MSS., 3148, 3012), ascribed to both Ka$yapa 
and Ágastya— Contains 276 foll. of which 1-72 marked at the top 
© бра базта”; 73-150, 251-276, ‘ Silpa-Sastram Каќуареуат, and 
151-250 ‘ Silpa-Sastram Agastyam.’ This is apparently a com- 
bination of two separate works, of Kasyapa and Agastya. 

One copy was transcribed (for C. P. Brown) from a Telugu manuscript 
at Masulipatam in 1832. It consists of extracts from various works on 
idols, shrines, etc. as stated in the following chapters : 

i. Arngumana-bhede ka$yape parivara-lakshana-patala. 
о. Umaskanda-sahita-lakshana-patala. 
9. Chandra-Sekhara-mürti-patala. 
4. Dakshina-mirti-lakshana. 
5. Kala-mürti. 
6. Lingodbhava-lakshana. 
7. Nritta-mürti. 
8. Gangadhara-mirti. 
9. ‘Tri-purantaka-mirti. 
то. Kalyana-mirti. 
гі. Ardha-narisvara-murti. 
19. Gaja-bhara-mirti. 
13. Pàsupata-mürti. 
14. Bhakta-lakshana. 
15. Bhü-mana-patala. 
16, Gramadi-lakshana. 


653 


SILPA-SASTRA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Foll. 

151. lty-agastye-sakaladhikare  manasa- rahya-viseshanart 

Dogg S i Roe esum Б; 

18і. Iti райсһа-уітізбаН-гара-Бһеда. 

251. Ity-arnšumana-bhede ka$yape tala-bheda-patala. 

266. Ка5уара uttama-dasatala-patala. 

274. J(G)auri-lakshana-patala, adhama-daéa-tala-pramana, 

This chapter is incomplete : the work terminates abruptly at the end of 
the 14th verse. 

In the Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, there are more thana 
dozen manuscripts bearing the title of* Silpa-éastra ° (Catalogue, Vol. ххп 
nos. 13046, 13047, 13048-13056, 13057). Of these two (nos. 13046; 
13047) are attributed to Agastya, and one (no. 13057) to Visvakarman, 
The rest of them are apparently compilations, as they are not ascribed 
to any author and contain frequent quotations from authorities like Kag- 
уара, Mayamata, Visvakarman, and Agastya. 

There is another manuscript bearing a slightly different title, * Silpa? 
attributed to Vi$vakarman. The details of this will be found under 
Vi$vakarman. . 

There are four other manuscripts bearing the title of <“ Silpa-sastra ° 
but containing no information regarding their authors. They аге 
mentioned in the descriptive Catalogue of the Mackenzie Collection by 
Н.Н. Wilson (nos. 4-7): 

No. 4—deals with the construction of temples and images. 

No. 5—deals with the construction of ornamental gateways. 

No. 6—deals with the construction of images. 

No. 7—deals with the construction of images and ornamental work 
in gold and silver. 

There is yet another manuscript bearing the title < Silpa-sastra. It 
is attributed to Ka$yapa. It deals with the structure of Saiva temples. 
(See the Catalogué Raisoneé of Oriental Manuscripts in the Library of the late 
College of Fort St. George by Taylor, Vol. т, по. 1585, p. 314.) 

Another work bears a slightly different title, < Silpa-sastra-bhüshalaya." 
(See the Classified Catalogue of Sanskrit Works in the Sarasvati Bhandara Library 


of Mysore, class хіх, по. 533.) 
A Silpa-Sastra’ by Myen (Maya) is also extant. (See Ind. Ant., Vol. v, 


рр. 230-293.) 
Another * Silpa-Sastra ? containing no information regarding its author is 
mentioned. (Sze the List of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Private Libraries of 


South India, by Oppert, Vol. п, no. 4187, p. 267.) 
654 


` 


.. CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE SUKRA-NITI 


SILPA-SASTRA-SARA-SAMGRAHA—(Compiled by a son of one 
Sivanarayana)—Consists of extracts from unspecified ancient (pra- 
china) works on architecture, and was compiled in the Saka era 
1820. 

The verses describing the Bhü-lakshana (examination of soil) are same 
as those given in the Silpa-dipuka by Gangadhara with a Gujarati trans- 
lation by Kalyanadasa. 

SILPA-SARVASVA-SAMGRAHA—A compilation on architecture. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 647.) 
SILPA-SAMGRAHA—(a large manuscript covering 429 pages of 
25 lines to a page of paper 131" x 8")—It deals with the construction 
of temples and images. It is a compilation from various sources 
notably Мапаѕата, Mayamata, Visvakarman, Agaslya, Kasyapa, 
Paulastya, Narada, Bhrigu, Sarasvata, Diptisára, Visvasara, Chitrasara, 
Chitrajñana, Capifjjala-samhità,  Brahma-yamala, Chandrajnana, 
Manohalya, Kaumudi, Narayana and others. 
SILPA-SARA—(An incomplete manuscript in the Oriental Manus- 
cripts Library, Madras, Catalogue, Vol. xxi, no. 13059, p. 877), 
containing no information regarding its author—(Comprises 76 pages 
and deals with the descriptive features (dhyana) of gods and god- 
desses, apparently intended to guide the artist in making images. 
SILPARTHA-SASTRA—On architecture. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS. in Private Libraries 
of South India, ibid, Vol. 1, no. 248, p. 26.) 
SILPI-SASTRA—(Egg. MSS. 3149, 2578b)—covers 71 pages; the 
title is written on the fly-leaf in Telugu and Marathi, with 
* Vaustoo' (Vastu-Sdstra) added underneath. It is a treatise on 
architecture, with a Telugu commentary. 

This manuscript is preceded in the same volume by two sections of the 
Nagara-khanda of the Skanda-Purdna, viz. Visvakarmopakhyana, and 
Visvakarma-varhSanuvarnana. 

SUKRA-NITI—(ed. Jivananda Vidyasagara)—Deals with architec- 
ture, and sculpture (in chapter rv, sections 4, 6) and refers to the fol- 
lowing matters : 

r. Deva-mandiradi-nirmana-vyavastha. 

2. Pratima-nirmana-vyavastha. 

9. Mürtinam vàhana-vyavastha. 

4. Ganapati-mirti-vyavastha. 


655 


'CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Pone TT 


SULVA-SUTRAS AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


5. Sati (Sakti)-mürti-vyavastha. 
б. Bala-mürti-vyavastha. 
7. Sapta-taladi-mirti-bhavasya nirmana-vyayastha, 
8. Paisachi-miirti-vyavastha. 
9 Bhagna-pratima-sthapana-vyavastha. 
10 Utsava-vyapara-vyavastha. 
Section 6: 
іі. Durga-nirmana (construction of forts, etc.). 

There are frequent casual references to both architecture and sculpture 

in other portions of the treatise also. 
SULVA-SUTRAS—Refers to very important architectural] matters. 
The rules for the size of the various Vedis, the shape and the varia- 
tions of the Agni, etc. are given in the Brahmanas long before they 
are embodied in the Kalpa-sütras of which the Sulva-sütras are 
but portions. But the explanations of the manner in which the 
manifold measurements and transformation had to be managed are 
not clear in the Brahmanas. 
` Sulva-sütra is the name given to those portions or supplements of the 
Kalpa-sütras, which treat of the measurement and construction of the 
different vedis or altars, the word * sütra? referring to the cords which 
were employed for those measurements. But in the Sütras themselves 
the word * rajju* is used to express a chord and not the <“ sütra2 А Sulva 
Adhyaya or Pragna or Sulva-pariáishta belongs to all Kalpa-sütras. 

Among the treatises dealing with the measurement, etc., of the Vedis, 
the two most important are the Sulva-sütras of Baudhayana and of 
Apastamba. Two smaller treatises, a Manava Sulva-sütra and a Maitra- 
yaniya Sulva-sütra bear the stamp of later times, compared with the works 
of Baudhayana and Apastamba, which are entitled to the first place by a 
clearer and more extensive treatment of the topics in question. Тһе 
literature of the white Yajur-veda possesses a Sulva-parigishta, ascribed 
to Katyayana, and Dr. Thibaut rightly thinks that there is not a sufficient 
reason for doubting that it was really composed by the author of the Kalpa- 
sutra. 

* The Sulva-sütras begin with general rules for measuring. In the next 
place they describe how to fix the right places for the sacred fires, and how 
to measure out the Vedis of the different sacrifices, the Samiki-vedi, the 
Paitriki-vedi, and so on. Тһе remainder of the Sütras contains the de- 
tailed description of the construction of the Agni, the large altar built 
of bricks, which was required at the great Soma sacrifices." 

The construction of altars, wherefrom seems to have developed the Chait- 
yas, Dagobas, Temples, etc., was probably the beginning of ecclesiastica] 


656 


= ikul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


» - 


Mieux 2 MON Ue acie 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE SULVA-SOTRAS 


architecture in India. The architectural details of these altars are in- 
teresting. 


* The altar could be constructed in different shapes, the carliest enumera- 
tion of which is found in the Lailliriya-samhita (v. 4-11). Following 
this enumcration Baudhàyana and Apastambha furnish us with full 
particulars about the shape of all these different chitis and the bricks 
which were employed for their construction.* 


‘Everyone of these altars! was constructed out of five layers of bricks, 
which reached together to the height of the knee ; for some cases 10 Or I5 
layers and a correspondingly increased height of the altar were prescribed. 
Every layer in its turn was to consist of two hundred bricks, so that the 
whole Agni (altar) contained a thousand ; the first, third and fifth layers 
were divided into two hundred parts in exactly the same manner; 
a different division was adopted for the second and the fourth, so that one 
brick was never lying upon another brick of the same size and form. 

‹ The first altar covered an area of 7% purushas, that means, 7% square, 
the side of which was equal to a purusha, 1.е., the height of a man with 
uplifted arms. On each subsequent occasion, the area-was increased by 
one square purusha. Thus at the second construction of the altar one 
square purusha was added to the 74 constituting the first chiti, and at the 
third construction two square purushas were added, and so on? 


But the shape of the whole, the relative proportions of the single parts, 
had to remain unchanged. The area of every chiti whatever its shape might 
be, falcon, wheel, tortoise, сіс., had to be equal to 73 square purushas. 
Thus squares had to be found which would equal to two or more given 


1(1) Chatur-asra-$yena-chit—so called because it resembles the form of a falcon 
and because the bricks out of which it is composed are all of a square shape. 

(2) Kanka-chit—in the form of a heron (cf. Burnell, Cat. 29, of a Carrion 
Kite), is the same as Syena-chit except the two additional feet. 

(9) Alaja-chit—is the same as (о) except the additional wings. 

(4) Prauga-chit—is an equilateral acute angular triangle ; and the Ubhayatah 
Prauga-chit is made up of two such triangles joined with their bases. 

(5) Ratha-chakra-chit—is in the form of a wheel, (а) а massive wheel 
without spokes, and (5) a wheel with sixteen spokes. 

(6) Drona-chit—is like a vessel or tube, square or circular. 

(7) Parichayya-chit—has a circular outline and is equal to the Ratha-chakra- 
chit, differing in the arrangement of bricks which are to be placed in six concentric 
circles. 

(8) Samuhya-chit—is circular in shape and made of loose earth and bricks. 

(о) Kürma-chit—resembles a tortoise and is of an angular or circular shape. 


(Су. Z. A. S. B. 1875, part I, * Sulva Sütras ° by G. Thibaut.) 
657 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA < 


Mu 


SHAD-VIDIK-SAMDHANA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


squares, or equal to the difference of two given squares, oblongs were turned 
into squares and squares into oblongs. Triangles were constructed equal. 
to given squares or oblongs and so оп. А circle had to be constructed, the 
area-of which might equal as closely as possible that of a given square. 

Diagrams of these altars are given in the Pandit (New Series, June, 1876, 
no. 1, Vols. 1 and rv, 1882 ; Old Series, June, 1874, по. 97, Vols. rx and x, 
May, 1876. See also Silva Sutra by С. Thibaut, PH.D., 7. А. 5. B., part 
т, 1875) and in the writer's Hindu Architecture іп India and Abroad (Plates 
xx, а, b). 


SH 
SHAD-VIDIK-SAMDHANA—On architecture, chiefly deals with 


the finding out ofthe cardinal points which are necessary for the orien- 


tation of buildings. 
(Oppert’s List of Sanskrit MSS., ibid., Vol. п, p. 200.) 


S 
SAKALADHIKARA—IAttributed to Agastya)—On sculpture, deals 


with image-making. 
(Aufrecht, ibid., part r, p. 683 ; Taylor, Vol. r, p. 72.) 


SANAT-KUMARA-VASTU-SASTRA-— Contains a brief Telugu 
commentary. The last colophon runs thus : iti Sanatkumara-vastu- 
£astre sarvadhikaras samaptah. It deals with a few architectural 
topics in eight chapters. 
(See details in the writer’s Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad, p. 172.) 
(Egg. MSS., ш. 3151, 2680 ; see also the List of Sanskri 
MSS. in Private Libraries of South India, by 
Oppert, Vol. 1, no. 8239, p. 580.) 
In the Oriental Manuscripis Library, Madras, there are nine incomplete 
manuscripts of this work (see Vol. xxi, no. 13060-13068, p. 8780 Ё). 
They deal with the following subjects : 
Griha-sarbpsthapana. 
Nakshatra-graha-yoga-vidhi. 
Graha-lagna-vidhi. 
Taru-tantra-vidhi. 
Bhi-pariksha-vidhi. 
Nakshatra-tithi-vara-Suddhi. 
Nakshatra-lagna-phala-dvara-bandha-subha-sthana-nirnaya. 
Griha-pravesa. 


SOS GAG ES CO YF 


658 - 


4 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE HASTA-PRAMANA 


Sanat-kumira acknowledges his debt to Brahman, Sakra, Yama, Bhar- 
gava, Angirasa, Maya, Gautama, Garga, Manu, Vyasa, Bhrigu, Viíva- 
karman, and others (see по. 13060, р. 8781). 

The same list is a little differently given in no. 13064, where’ Sakra 
is replaced by Chandra, and Maya is omitted. But in nos. 13062 and 13068 
Sakra is not replaced by Chandra although Maya is omitted. 


SARV A-VIHARTYA-YANTRA—by Narayana Dikshita—On archi- 
tectural instruments, and machines. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 702.) 
SAMGRAHA-SIROMANI-—by Saryu Prasad—As the title implies 
itis a compilation on architecture and sculpture largely from Vasishtha, 
Narada, Уатаһа, Vastu-pradipa, Vi$vakarman, Mandavya, Maya- 
Sàstra, Samarangana-Sütradhàra, Sarngadhara and others. 
SARASVATIYA-SILPA-SASTRA—On architecture. 

(Aufrecht, ibid., part 1, p. 714.) 
SUPRABHEDAGAMA —See under ÁcAMas. 
SKANDA-PURANA—See under PURANAS. 
STHALA-SUBHASUBHA-KATHANA—by Narayana—On archi- 
tecture. It deals with auspicious and inauspicious sites for building. 

(Cf. Vastu-sarani.) 


H 


HASTA-PRAMANA—Attributed to Vi$vakarman—On architectural 


measures. 
(Cf. Vasiu-sarami.) 


659 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


APPENDIX II 


A LIST OF HISTORICAL ARCHITECTS WITH SHORT NOTES ON 
THEIR WORKS 1 


A 
ACHYUTA—An architect of A.D. 882-917. 


‘A man of Kamboja descent, the son. of Rama, whose famous name 
is Achyuta, was here the overseer, he who is an image of Dhanvatri, an 
incarnation of the quintessence of learning, a friend of the virtuous, and a 
bee on the lotus of the heart of his master.’ 

‘As Dhanvatari adds Dr. Bühler, ‘is the Indian Asklepios, the 
statement that Achyuta was his image, may mean that he was a Vaidya 
by caste, or that he was a doctor as well as architect? 


(Pehoa Praśasti of the reign of Mahendrapala, 

v. 23, Ep., Ind., Vol. r, p. 250, footnote до.) 

According to Vitruvius (Book 1, chap. 1, Transl, by Gwilt, pp. 3, 4) the 

architect * should be a good writer, а skilful draughtsman, versed in geo- 

metry and optics, expert at figures, acquainted with history, informed on 

the principles of natural and moral philosophy, somewhat of a musician, 

not ignorant of the sciences both of law and physic, nor of the motions, 

laws and relations of each other of heavenly bodies? But these do not 
include medicine. 


ANAKOJA—Son of the brazier Marala, of A.D. 1395. 
Mindoja of Patana made, together with his brother Kaloja, a pillar, 
(kambha) of bell-metal (weight specified) for a lamp. * 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, 
no. 61, Transl., p. 61, Roman text, p.195.) 


А 


ASALA—An architect (A.D. 1215, V. S. 1272) who constructed the 
step-well. 

(Manglana Stone Inscrip., line 13, Ind. Ant., 

Vol. хы, pp. 11; 86, line 9.) 


1 This list does not include the mere Stone Masons or Engravers of Inscriptions, 
nor those architects who are mentioned in treatises like the Puranas, Epics, 
Kavyas, etc., which are less historical than the Epigraphical records, 


661 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA E 7 


ж 


T^ PP 


AHUKA AN ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


AHUKA—An architect who built the Siva temple (A. p. 804). 


(The first Pra$asti of Baijnath, v. 35, ` 


Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, p. 107.) 
I 


IDAMORAKA (INDRAMAYURA)-ACHARYA—Sthapati or archi- 
tect, the guru of the sculptor Nataka (Nartaka) who made the image 
of the cobra on the slab on which the inscription is incised. 
(Banawasi Prakrit Inscrip., line 2 f., Ind. Ant., 
: Vol. xiv, p. 334, notes 20, 23.) 
IMDARAKA—Sitradhara or the carpenter who assisted the chief 
architect Pahini, the builder of the Mandapa, Akshasama, and Dama 
of the temple of Bhime$vara built with stones and bricks. 


(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. xur, Sànderàv Stone Inscrip. 
of Kelhanadeva, line 2 f., Ep. Ind., Vol. xr, p. 48.) 


О 


ODEYAPPA—An architect (A.D. 1386). 
‘This pillar (dipamale kambha) was made by Achari Ponna-pille's 


son Odeyappa.’ 
Y (Ep. Carnat., Vol. Ix, Devanhalli Taluq, 
no. 40, Transl., p. 78.) 


K 


KALLAYYA—An architect, сва of Kalloja of Bànür, by whom * the 
work of the (bhoga-)mantapa and the writing of this базапа were 


done.’ A.D, I 21.) 
5 
(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v1, Kadur Taluq, 


по. gr, Transl, p. 16.) 

KAMAU- The architect (éilpi), son of Visadru, who built * the fifth 
octagonal pillar’ on the face of which the inscription is recorded. 
(Sharqi Arch. of Jaunpur, Inscrip., no. XXVI 

Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 1, р. 51.) 

KAMA-DEVA—Of  Silapatta-varhsa (Silawat caste, masons), an 
architect, appointed by a Muhammadan ruler АП а as one of the 
three architects to build a gomatha, a garden, and a step-well in the 
town of Batihadim. 


Ep. Ind., Vol. xu, P- 46.) 


dwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


(Batihagarh Stone Inscrip., V. I2; 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE GANTEMADANA-BASAVANA 


KALI-DASI—A sculptor (A.D. 1140). 

‘For Pratapa-Hosala-Narasimha-Deva's sculptor Кедагоја, the sculptor 
Kalidàsi, champion over the proud, a thunderbolt to the rock (giri), titled 
(1.е., very eminent) sculptor, made the makaratorana (or carved head- 
piece for the lintel).’ 


(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, part t; Supplement, 
Belur Taluq, no. 239, Transl., p.275.) 
See also reference under BALLANNA. 
KALAKOJA—Son of the brazier Marala-Mindoja of Patana, made 
together with his brother Anakoja a pillar (kambha) of bell-metal 
(weight specified) for a lamp (A.D. 1395). 
(Ibid., Belur Taluq, no. 61, Transl., p. 59, 
Roman text, p. 135.) 
KENCHA-MALLIVANNA—The sculptor of the image по. 32, 
Belur temple (А.р. 1120). 
(Ibid., Belur ТаШша, no. 47, Roman text, 
р. 125, Transl., p.55.) 
KETANA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA.) 


KEDAROJA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 


KEDAROJA—A sculptor of Hoysala Narasimha Deva (А.р. 1140). 
(Jbid., Supplement, Belur Taluq, no. 239, 
Transl., p. 275.) 
KUMARAM-ACHARI—The sculptor of the image no. 12, Belur 

temple (A.D. 1120). 
(Ibid., Belur Taluq, no. 40, Roman text, 
Р- 124, Transl., p. 55.) 

G 


GANGACHARI—An architect (A.D. 966). 
«Тһе work of this temple was done by Gangachari.’ 
(Ibid., Vol. rx, Magadi Talugq, по. 75, Roman 
text, p. 74, Transl., p. 60.) 
GANTEMADANA-BASAVANA—An architect (A.D. 1539). 
‘Those who did the work (Devambudhi tank): Gantemadana-Basa- 
уапа made the pillars, Komaraiya the ornamental work, the stone-Vedda 
Chenne-Royi built the stones of the embankment.’ 
(Ibid., Vol. хп, Tumkur Taluq, no. 24, 
Transl., p. 8, para. 2.) 


663 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | 


жы‏ ا 


(SRI)GUNDAN AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(SRI)GUNDAN—An architect, who built the temple of the (pre- 


sent) god Virüpaksha, originally of Loke$vara, as mentioned in the . 


inscription for Loka-mahadevi, the Queen-consort of the Western 
Chalukya king Vikramaditya, the second. 

He is called * Sütradhari? (one who supports the cause is the sütradhàra 
or carpenter, and the sütradhàri is the guru or priest of the carpenter). 
He is again called the Tribhuvanacharya and also the Sarva-siddhi- 
Acharya. Не is stated to be the ‘creator of many cities and houses; 
perfect and refined in conversation; houses, palaces, vehicles, seats, 
couches, his jewelled crown and crest-jewel. ° 

(Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscrip., no. 99, also 
nos. 100, 101, and 115, Int. Ant., Vol. x, 
рр. 164, 163, 165, 166, 170-171.) 


CH 


CHANDI-SIVA—- The architect of the Harsha temple, ‘ the famed 
son of Virabhadra, omniscient, like Vi$vakarman, in the art (or 
science) of building houses (Vastuvidya) . . . He built this delight- 
ful house of Sarnkara with its chapels (mandapa), the beautiful porch 
(torana) which contains all the gods, like a portion of heaven made 
by the Creator himself.’ 

* In his account of the ruins of this temple, Mr. Dean speaks of a door- 
way relieved by an architrave of the most elaborate sculpture, divided into 
twelve compartments, in each of which a group from the Hindu Pantheon 
occupies a place.’ 

(Harsha Stone Inscrip., уу. 43, 44. Ep. Ind., 
Vol. п, pp. 123, 124, 128, note 72.) 
Chahadadevapala son’s grandson—Architect of the Qutb Minar. 


(An historical memoir on Qutb, by J. A. Page, 
p. 43, Inscription no. 28.) 


CHAVANA—A son of Dasoja, sculptor of the images, nos. 6, 11, 27, 


Belur temple (A.D. 1120). 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, nos. 35, 


39, 45, Roman text, pp. 124, 125, Transl., p. 55.) 
CHIKA-HAMPA—The sculptor of the image no. 3, Belur temple 


(A.D. 1120). : 
(Jbid., no. 33, Roman text, p. 123; Transl., p. 55-) 


664. 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE JAHADA 


(SRI)-CHENGAMMA—A sculptor who ‘made this image’ (pra- 


- tima). 


(Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscrip., no. cix, 

Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 168, c. 1.) 

CHOLAJANA—The sculptor of the image no. 17, Belur temple 
(A.D. 1120). 

(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, 

по. 42, Roman text, p. 124, Transl., p. 55.) 


CHOUGA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 
CHAUDEVA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 


CHH 


CHHICHCHHA—An architect who built Ше temple of Pramatha- 
natha, is called the Vijfiáàna-vi$va-karttri-dharmadhara-Sutradhara 
(A.D. 1116). 


(Khajuraho Inscrip., no. 1v, v. 60, 
Ер. Ind., Vol. r, p. 146.) 


J 


JAKANACHARYA—The architect of the temple at Halibid and 
Somanathpura. 

Cf. * Jakanacharya is the reputed architect of this magnificent building 
(Kait Isvara temple), but he is also credited with having built all the 
temples, similar in style, throughout the district . . . A man of the - 
same name is said to have built the temples at Madura. Jakanacharya 
was a prince who, having accidentally killed a Brahman, employed twenty 
years of life, with the hope of washing away this great sin, in rebuilding 
temples between Kasi and RameSvara (Cape Comorin)—so says tradi- 
tion.’ 

(Ind. Ат., Vol. 1, p. 44, с. 2, para. 2.) 
JANGAMAYA—An architect (A.D. 1538). 

* Ghennema-Nayaka-aya had the Yelayür gate built with proper pillars 
by the hand of Muta-Nayaka’s disciple Jangamaya.’ 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. xu, Kumgal Тапа, 
по. 20, Transl, p. 35.) 


JAHADA—The mason (Silavata) who worked and shaped the stones 


for the step-well built by the architect Asala (A.D. 1215). 
(Manglana Stone Inscrip., lines 13-14, Ind. Ant., 
Vol. хы, рр. 88, 86, lines 9-10.) 


665 


СС-0. бигикш Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA А 


THODHUKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


TH 
THODHUKA—tThe son of Sammana, was one of the architects ° 


who fashioned the very lofty temple of Siva with the chisel, as well as 
the Mandapa (A.D. 804). 

(The first Pra£asti of Baijnath, vv. 36, 37, 

Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 107, 111.) 


N 


NATAKA (NARTAKA)—An architect and sculptor, who made the 
° cobra (naga) on the slab on which the inscription is incised, a pupil of 
Acharya (Sthapati) Idamoraka (Indramayüra). 
(Banawasi Prakrit Inscrip., line 2 f., Ind. Ant., 
Vol. xiv, p. 334, notes 20, 23.) 
NANNAKA—A son of Krishna, most qualified architect of the tem- 
ple of Siva (Malava era 795, A.D. 738). 


(Inscription from the Mahadeva temple, vv. 29, 
30, 161, Ind. Ant., Vol. хш, pp. 165, 163.) 


T 
TURAVASARI-KALIYUGA-MEYYAN—An architect (A.D. 1331). 


‘Another grant, by the same man, of lands (specified) to Turavasari- 
Kaliyuga-meyyan, who built the temple.’ 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rx, Hoskote Taluq, 
по. 96, Transl, p. 99.) 
TH 
THALU—An architect of the temple, an account of which is given 
in the Behal inscription of Singhana (А.р. 1222-23). 
(Ep. Ind., Vol. m, рр. 111, 113.) 
D : 
DASOJA—Of ВаШртатпа, sculptor of the images nos. 5, 7, 9 of the 
Belur temple (А.р. 1120). 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part 1, Belur Taluq, nos. 24, 
36, 37, Roman text, p. 124, Transl, p. 55.) 


DIVAKARA—The master architect of the famous Vishnu temple, 
Angar Vat, constructed by King Parama Vishnuloka of Camboj. 
DEMOJA—An architect who * made the frame of the eastern door ° 
of the structure referred to in the inscription (A.D. 1240). 

(Ibid., Supplement, Belur Taluq, no. 241, Transl., p. 275.) 


666 


kul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


—€—— | 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE МАСОУА 


DEVANAGA— Crest-jewel of sculptors, built the temple of Siva,’ 


(Ratnapura Inscrip. of Prithvideva, v. 29, 

Ep. Ind., Vol. x, рр. 49, 52.) 

DEVADITYA— The son of Ahladana-(who became) the firm (? pro- 

fessional, permanent, sthira) architect of the V aidyeSa, is famous 
among the first rank of masons.’ 

(Inscrip. from Dabhoi, уу. 111, 112, Ep. Ind., 

Vol. т, pp. 31, 24.) 


. DEVOJA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 


DHARMA-VANANA—Architect of the Qutb Minar. 
(An historical memoir on Qutb, by J. A. Page, 
P- 43, Inscription no. 29.) 
N 
NANJAYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
NANA-SALHA—Architect of the Qutb Minar. 
(An historical memoir on Qutb, by J. A. Page, 
P- 43, Inscription no. 28.) 
NARA-SOBHA—An architect (of A.D. seventh or eighth century). 
Jambu-dvipantare kaSchit vastu-prasada-tadgatah | 
Nara-Sobha-samo vidvan па bhüto na bhavishyati II 
‘There has not been, and there shall not be, in Jambu-dvipa (India) 
any wise man, proficient in (the art of) building houses and temples, 
equal to Nara-Sobha.’ 
(Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscrip., no. LXI, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. тх, p. 74.) 
NAMDIKA—An architect. 
Cf. “Уеуіка (Narn)dikena katam—the rail (the gift of . . . Koti) 
was made by Narndika. 
(Karle Cave Inscrip., no. 18, Ер. Ind., Vol. уп, p. 64.) 


NAGI-DEVA—A sculptor. 


Gf. ‘ This Sasana of King Harihar was engraved by his orders by the 
carpenter Sasanacharya Nagideva, the sculptor.’ 

(Ер. Carnat.,, Vol. vm, part 1, Tirthahalli 

Taluq, по. 201, Transl., p. 208, last para.) 

NAGOJA—of Gadugu, the sculptor of the image no. 37 of the Belur 


temple (A.D. 1120). 
(Ibid., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, no. 51, 


Roman text, p. 125, Transl., p. 55.) 
667 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | 


= r. Ç ыо т АЕ УЕ с. ып 


NAYAKA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


NAYAKA—The high-minded son of Asika, who is at the head of 
the masons, came from Sugarman’s town, was one of the architects: 
who ‘fashioned the very lofty temple of Siva, with the chisel, as 
well as Ше Mandapa’ (A.D. 804). 


(The first Prasasti of Raijnath, vv. 36, 37 
Ep. Ind., Vol. r, pp. 107, 111.) 


P 


PATUMAN—Carpenter (Sütradhara), son of Visaihva, probably 

the builder of the gate where ‘ on a stone near the first niche on the 
south side’ the inscription is found. : 

(Shargi Arch. of Jaunpur, Inscrip. no. хш, Arch. 

Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. 1, p. 39.) 

PADARI-MALLOJA—The sculptor of the image no. 21 of the Belur 

temple (A.D. 1120). 
(Ep. Carmat, Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, 
no. 43, Roman text, p. 125, Transl., p. 55.) 


PADU-MANNA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
PADUMAYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 


PADUMAVI—An architect (Sütradhara), son of Sai-Sutradhara, 

who constructed the door, ‘ of the right jamb’ on which the inscrip-. 
tion is written (A.D. 1407). 

(Sharqi Arch. of Jaunpur, Inscrip., no. xv, 

Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series, Vol. r, p. 40.) 


PAKA—An architect. 

‘Hail! The house of the temple of (the god) Sri-Vijayesvara. Paka 
(was) the fashioner of the ornamentation (alamkara-nirmmana-kara) 
of these two pillars of Matibhodamma.’ 

(Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscrip., по. схп, 
Ind. Ant., Vol. x, p. 170, с. 1.) 


PAHINI—Son of the Siitradhara Mahadüa and his wife Jasadevi, 
the architect who constructed the Mandapa, Akshasama, and Dama 
of the temple of BhimeSvara with stones and bricks. |, : 
He was assisted by the Sütradhàra Mahidara and Irhdaraka. 
(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. хш, Sanderav 
Stone Inscrip. of Kelhanadeva, line 
2, Ep. Ind., Vol. xr, p. 48.) 


668 


HINDU. ARCHITECTURE BOCHANA 


PITHE—‘ The architect who knows the rules of Vi$vakarman (the 
architect of the gods, also means one who knows how to execute 
every kind of work), planned, designed and executed all the build- 
ings, the temple of Siva together with that cloister (matha) with 
wonderful floors (bhümika), the hall of study (vyakhyàna-éala), 
and laid out that long line of gardens in two rows (adjoining) Sam- 
bhu's temple’ (A.D. 1155-56). 
(Bheraghat Inscrip. of Alhanadevi, vv. 36, 27, 
18, Ep. Ind., Vol. п, pp. 13, 17, 9.) 
PAISSANANARA-BJRA—The sculptor of the image no. 16, of the 
Belur temple (A.D. 1120). 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, 
no. 41, Roman text, p. 124, Transl., p. 35.) 


B 
BAMAYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA) 


BALUGA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
BALEYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
BALLANNA—The inscription (Belur ТаШша, no. 98, Roman text, 
p. 165, Transl., p. 71) informs us that a shrine of the goddess Nimbaja 
was set up in the temple in 1261. The sculptors who executed the mar- 
vellous statues and figures on the outer walls of this temple especially 
on the western side, have not given their names, except here and 
there, the following are the only ones :—Ballanna, Bochana, Chauga, 
Devoja, Harisha of Odeyagiri, Harisha of Tanagundur, Kalidasi, 
Kedàroja, Ketàna, Mabalaki, Масһаппа, Manibalaki, Masa, son 
of Kanimoja, and Revoja. 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. v, part 1, Introduction, p. хххуш.) 
BIKKAHAPPA—The sculptor of the image no. 36, of the Belur 
temple (A.D. II20). 


(Jbid., Belur Taluq, no. 50, Roman text, p. 125, 
Transl., p. 55.) 
BIRANAVA—The sculptor of the image no. 22, of the Belur temple 
(A.D. 1120). 
(Ibid., по. 44, Roman text, p. 125, 
Transl., p. 55.) 
ВОСНАМА--А sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 
669 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA. 


BHÜTA-PALA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


BH 
BHUTA-PALA—An architect. 


Cf. This ‘rock-mansion (selaghara), the most excellent one іп Jambu- 
dvipa, has been completed by the setthi Bhitapala from Vaijayanti.’ 

(Karle Cave Inscrip., no. 1, Ep. Ind., 

Vol. vu, pp. 48, 49.) 

BHOJUKA—Of Silapatta-varnga (Silawat caste, who are masons 

and found in the neighbourhood of Damoh), a Sutradhara (carpen- 

ter) appointed by а Muhammadan ruler Jallala as one of the three 

architects to build a Gomatha, a garden, and a step-well in the 


town of Batihadim. 
(Batihagarh Stone Inscrip., v. 12, Ep. Ind., 


Vol. xu, p. 46.) 
M 
MANI-BALAKI—A sculptor (see under BALLAnNa). 
MADANA-— A scion of (the race of) Vi$vakarman (? of the Brah- 
mana caste, vipra), the builder of the wall of (glorious) Vaidyc$a, 
of the extensive temple, of the gates, of the wings, of the founda- 


tions.’ 
(Inscrip. from Dabhoi, vv. 111, 112, Ep. Ind., 


Vol. r, pp. 31, 24.) 
MANA—An architect, son of Vijala and grandson of Visala ; he is 
stated to have built, being assisted by his followers, the famous temple 
of Siva together with many palatial buildings having prominent 
towers (A.D. 1428-29). 
Aneka-prasadaih parivritamati prarmu-kala$am ^ giri$a-prasadam 
vyarachayad anünair anucharaih | 
Manakhyo vikhyatah sakala-gunavan Vijala-sutah sutah Silpi jato 
guna-gana-yuto Visala iti 1! 
Vijalasya sutah Silpi Manakhyah sütra-dharakah | 
(Chitragadh Inscrip. of Mokala of Mewad, second 
part, vv. 2, 3, Ep. Ind., Vol. u, p. 421.) 
MANYUKA—An architect who built the Siva temple (A.D. 804). 
(The first Prašasti of Baijnath, v. 35, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. 1, p. 107.) 
MAYINA—The sculptor of the image по. 31, of the Belur temple 


A.D. 1120). 
) (Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, no. 46, 


Roman text, p. 125, Transl., p. 55-) 
670 


Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE MAHI-DHARA 


MALAYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
` MALI—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
MALLI-TAMMA—An architect (A.D. 1196). 


* A newly discovered inscription on a rock at Sravana-Belgola, mentions 
a sculptor named Bidigoja, with the honorary prefix Srimart, somewhere 
about A.D. goo (Mysore Archaeological Report, 1908-9, p. 15, para. 
60) ; and two other records at the same place, of the date unspecified, 
mention Chandraditya and Naga-varma as having carved Jinas, animals, 
and other figures for the Jains’ (ibid.. Report, 1912-3, р. 32). 

‘The earliest records of the Hoysala sculptors seem to be those on the 
Amrite$vara temple at Amritapura, built in A.D. 1106. The 15 signatures 
comprise Mallitamma or Malitama, and Mali, each four times; and 
Padumanna, Baluga, Majaya, Subujaga, Padumaya and Muhana, each 
once. The last named signs in Nagari character, an indication that he 
came from the north.’ 

‘Report for 1913-1914, Plate п, contains illustrations of the work of 
seven sculptors: Masanitamma, ай)ауа, Chau-deya, Baleya, Lohita, 
Yalamasaya, and Bamaya, all from Somnathpur.’ 

(V. A. Smith, Architecture and Sculpture in Mysore, Ind. 
Ani., Vol. хыу, p. 94, paras. 3, 4 ; p. 95, para. 1.) 


MALLIYANA—The sculptor of the image no. 10, Belur temple 
(A.D. 1120). 

(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part 1, Belur Taluq, no. 38, 

Roman text, p. 124, Transl, p. 55.) 

MALLOJA—An architect who built the central shrine (garbha- 
griha) of the temple described in the inscription (A.D. 1167). 

4 (Ibid., Vol. vu, Shimoga Taluq, no. 55, 

Transl., p. 21, line 3.) 


MASA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 


МАЅАРА— Тһе sculptor of the image по. 33, of the Belur temple 
(A.D. 1120). г 


(Ibid., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, по. 48, 
Roman text, p. 125, Transl., p. 55.) 


МАЗАМІ-ТАММА--А sculptor (see under МАІЛЛТАММА). 
MAHI-DHARA—An architect, son of the chief of artisans (Sütra- 
арага). 


(Bheraghat Inscrip. of Alhanadevi, v. 37, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. n, pp. 13, 17.) 


671 


n 


MAHID(H)ARA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


MAHID(H)ARA—An architect (Sütradhàra), who assisted Pahini, 


the chief architect of the Mandapa, Akshasima, and Dama of the - 


temple of Bhime$vara which was constructed with stones and bricks. 


(The Chahamanas of Marwar, no. хш, 
Sanderav Stone Insctip. of Kelhanadeva, 
line 2, Ер. Ind., Vol. хі, p. 48.) 


MACHANNA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 
MACHOJA—A sculptor and architect (A.D. 1142). 
‘ The sculptor Machoja, the Acharya of Kalukuni-nad, the "Visvakar- 
man of the Kali-yuga, built it’ (Jinalaya). 


(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ту, Nagamangala Taluq, 
no. 95, Transl., p. 138, Roman text, p. 239.) 


MABALAKI—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 


MAMARIYANCHI-TAMMA—A son of the goldsmith Bandiyoja ; 

“he repaired and roofed a bira-gal, which was made by Alibhanu- 
Achari (А.р. 1242). 

(Ibid., Vol. nr, Mandya Taluq, 

no. 85, Transl, p. 48.) 


MUDDOJA—A son of Tipaji a stone mason, ‘who built these 
(described in the inscription) temples (A.D. 1408). A 

(Ibid., Vol. x, Garibidnur Taluq, no. 59, 

Transl., p. 226, last para.) 


MULANA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
MODHAKIN—(also called Podhakin)—An architect, son of Vara 


(of the seventh or eighth century). 


(Further Pabhosa Inscrip. по. 1, Ер. Ind., 
Vol. 11, pp. 480-481.) 


Y 


YAYYA-— (otherwise called Jajja)—An architect. 
(Further Pabhosa Inscrip. no. r, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. п, рр. 480-481.) 


YALAMASAYA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
672 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE VIRANACHARYA 


R 

RAGHAVA—An artizan (sculptor), son of artizan (sculptor) Virn- 

jhadeva, who carved the Verawal image (Valabhi Sarhvat, 927). 
| (Verawal Image Inscrip., line 5, Ef. Ind., 
Vol. ш, pp. 303, 304.) 
RAMA-DEVA—Silpin (artist), son of Rüpa-kara (sculptor), the 
engraver of the famous Dhar pragasti (panegyric) of Arjuna- 

varman. 

(Dhara Prafasti of Arjuna-varman, у. 76 
Ep. Ind., Vol. vm, pp. 117, 98.) 
REVADI-OVAJJA—Of the Sarvasiddhi Acharyas, versed in the 
secrets of Kanarese stone masons, probably the builder of the 
. Papanatha temple. 
: (Inscription on Papanath Temple.) 


REVOJA—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 
L 


LAKSHMI-DHARA—An architect ( A.D. 1104). 
(Nagpur Stone Inscrip., v. 56, Ep. Ind., 


Vol. r, pp. 188, 194.) 
LASE—The sculptor of the image no. 35, of the Belur temple 


(A.D. 1120). 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. v, part r, Belur Taluq, no. 49, 
Roman text, p. 125, Transl., p. 55.) 


LOHITA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 
V 


VAMA-DEVA— Famous for having built the temple of the Sun 


called Mula-sthana.’ 
(Inscrip. from Dabhoi, vv. 111, 112, Ep. Ind., 


Vol. 1, рр. 31, 29.) 
VIRANACHARYA(1)—A carpenter (see under SrHAPATI) (A.D. 
1558). ; Й 
‘This copper Ѕаѕапа was composed by Sabhapati Svayambhu, and 
engraved by Virana’s son, the carpenter Viranacharya.’ 


(Ep. Carnat., Vol. rx, Channapatna Talug, 
no. 186, Transl., p. 170, last para.) 


673 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 
^ N ы bite -- 


(SRI) VIRANACHARYA AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


(SRI) VIRANACHARYA(2)—The architect. (tvashta), who engraved 
the copper plate. : 
(Krishnapuram Plates of Sadasivaraya, v. 107, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. rx, p. 339, see more details of 
this architect under Sthapati.) 


VISVAKARMMACHARYA(1)—An artist and painter (A.D. 776). 


* By the abode of all arts, skilled in painting pictures (sarvva-kaladhara- 
bhita-chitra-kalabhijfiena), was this Ѕаѕапа written ?' 
(Ep. Carnat., Vol. ту, Nagamangala 'Taluq, no. 86, 
Transl., p. 136, last para., Roman text, 
p. 235, last two lines.) 
VISVAKARMMACHARYA(2)—A painter (A.D. 749). 
‘Skilled in all arts including painting (sarvva-kalantarpati-chitra- 
kalàbhijüena) wrote the Sasana.’ 
(Ibid., Vol. уі, Mudgere Taluq, no. 36, last 
para., Transl., p. 67, Roman text, р. 153.) 
VISVA-NATHA—An architect (A.D. 1530). 
‘Born in the family of Višvakarma, the architect of the three worlds; 
Vigvanatha, the son of Basavachariya, who was the son of Vodeyappayya, 


considered to be the Jagad-guru, engraved it.’ 
(Ibid., Vol. v, part 1, Channarayapatna 
Taluq, по. 187, Transl., p. 207.) 
$ 


SA MU— This must be the name of some writer on architecture.’ 
Samu-drishtim anusritya nirmita—‘ constructed (the lofty temple of 
Siva, by two architects, Nayaka and Thodhuka) in accordance with the 


opinion of Samu’ (A.D. 804): 
(The first ргабаві of Baijnath, v. 37, Ep. 


Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 111, 107, footnote 72.) 
SIVA-PALA—A mason, one of whose ancestor is a Sütradhara 
(carpenter, named Deuka) but another of the same family is Sthapati 
(architect, named Хара). 

(From this it would appear that both Sūtradhāra and Sthapati belong 
to the same caste and that these are professional titles and not caste- 
names.! 

Gf. Asichcha Naga-sthapates tu Durggah | 

Durggarkkato Deuka-sitra-dharah | 
Asyapi sünuh Siva-pala-nama | 
Yenotkriteyarh su$ubha pra$astih | 
| (Vasantgadh Inscrip. of Purnapala, v. 34; 
Ep. Ind., Vol. 1x, р. 15.) 


674 


iversity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


+ 


a 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE SAMI(NA) 


SUBHA-DEVA—(a.D. 754)—Of Sandilya-gotra, sculptor or architect 


* (rüpakàra), *son's son of the sculptor Siva-vardhamana, son of the 


sculptor Siva ; or rather (bhüyah) the Acharya Jñāna-śiva, who is 
the disciple of the disciple's disciple at the fect of him, the venerable 
and worshipful Payo-bhakshin, who had the appellation of Siva- 
$азала, (and) who has come here (Pattadakal, a village in the Bijapur 
district, Bombay Presidency) from the Mrigathanika-hara-vishaya 
on the north bank of the (river) Gangá—there has been set up in 
the (?) gateway (dvàra) of his own particular (? style of) shrine, this 
great stone pillar, which bears the mark of the seal of the trident,’ 
and is octagonal at the upper part and square immediately below. 
(Pattadakal Inscrip. of Kirtivarman II, lines 15, 
16, 17, Ер. Ind., Vol. ш, pp. r, 3, 5, 7-) 


(RANAKA) SOLA-PANI—The crest-jewel of the guild of Varendra 

artists (Varendraka-Silpi-goshthi-chiida-mani), the son of Brihaspati, 

grandson of Manadasa, and great-grandson of Dharma (end of the 
eleventh century). š 

(Deopara Inscrip. of Vijayasen, v. 36; 

Ер. Ind., Vol. 1, рр. 311, 315:) 


S 


SATYA-DEVA—A son of Pitàmaha, a merchant by birth, who was 
the Karapaka (persons appointed to look after the construction of 
the temple, Kielhorn, Ind. Ant., Vol. xix, p. 62, note 53), selected 
by the goshthi to sec this work (the erection of the temple of the 
goddess Kshemaryà). 
(Vasantagadh Inscrip. of Varmalata, vv. 9, 8, 
Ep. Ind., Vol. тх, рр. 192, 189.) 
SADEVA—An architect. 
(Inscrip. from Dabhoi, vv. 111, 112, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. 1, рр. 31, 24-) 
SAMI(NA)—otherwise called Syamila, Svamin-Vadhaki, (ie., 
Vardhaki), carpenter or sculptor (Senart). 
Samina . - - Vadhakinà . . - gharasa mugha kata—the open- 
ing (or door) was made by Sami, the Vardhakin. 


(Karle Cave Inscrip. no. 6, Ep. Ind., 
Vol. vit, p. 59.) 


675 


SAMILA> AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


SAMILA—also called $yamila—A carpenter. 


“боп of Venuvasa, a carpenter, a native of Dhenukàkata, made the - 


doorway.’ 
(Karle Cave Inscrip. no. 6, Arch. Surv. 
New Imp. Series, Vol. іу, р. 90.) 


SAMPULA— The intelligent artisan,’ engraver of the Ratnapura 

inscription of Prithvideva, the ‘ crest-jewel of sculptors,’ built the 
temple of Siva (A.D. 1189). 

(Ratnapura Inscrip. of Prithvideva, vv. 28, 

29, Ер. Ind., Vol. т, pp. 49, 52.) 

SIGGOJA—The sculptor, who made the sculpture mentioned in 

the inscription no. 525. 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. үш, part 1, Sorab Taluq, 

no. 525, Roman text, p. 168, Transl., p. 86.) 

SINGANAHEBARUVA—The architect, who built ‘the stone gate- 

way of Santi-grama, ornamented with the tiger-face' (A.D. 


1573). 
(Ubid., Vol. v, part 1, Hassan Taluq, 


no. 117, Transl, p. 34.) 


SINGAYA-BHATTA—Rudraya’s son, hydraulic engineer. (jala- 
sütrada), master of ten sciences (dasa-vidya-chakravartti), made 
(іп A.D. 1388), at the order of the Governor Bukka-Raya, a channel 
of ten miles from  Kallüdi to the Siravera tank. Ап interesting 
account of his accomplishments is given : 
Jala-sütra-svara-$astre rasa-vaidye satya-bhashayam | 
Rudraya-sihgari bhavatah sadri$ah ko và mahi-tale surah I1 
* In the science of hydraulics, in divination or telling omens from sounds, 
in medical treatment with mercury ( ? perhaps alchemy), in speaking the 
truth,—Rudraya's (son) бійрагі, what learned man is there in the world 
equal to you ? ° 
(Jbid., Vol. x, Goribidnur Taluq, no. 6, Transl., 
p. 212, Roman text, p. 259, Preface, p. 2.) 


SINGALI-KARGI—The son of Kali, a pandita from the Nava- 
grama-dranga (watch-station near mountain passes, ¿ Т ranslation, 
Raja-Tarangini, v. m, p. 291), the sthapati (architect of the tank 
specified). 
(Shawar Museum Inscrip. of Vanhadaka, line 

6, Ep. Ind., Vol. x, p- 80.) 


676 


laridwar Collection. 


n Es 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE i HALA 


SUBUJAGA—A sculptor (see under MALLITAMMA). 


SKANDA-SADHU-—The son of Sri-kantha, a descendant of a 
family of architects (sthapati-kula). 

(Sholinghur Inscrip. of Parantaka I, line 2r, 

Ер. Ind., Vol. 1v, pp. 224, 225.) 


H 


HARIDASA—An architect (Sütradhàra), employed to repair the 
temple of Dakshinaditya (A.D. 1373). 
(Gaya Inscrip. of Vikrama Samvat 1429, 
line о, Ind. Ant., Vol. xx, pp. 315, 313. 
HARISHA(1)—(of Тапа Gundur)—A sculptor (see under 
BALLANNA). 


HARISHA (2)—(of Odcyagiri)—A sculptor (see under BALLANNA). 
HAROJA—A sculptor (A.D. 1243). 


* Haroja, son of Honnacharyya, son of Botakacharyya, the equal of Manu, 
Maya, and Vi$vakarmma, beloved by all the people and farmers, set up an 
image of the sun. 

(Ер. Carnat., Vol. ту, Nagamangala Taluq, по. 55, 

Transl., p. 127, Roman text, р. 219.) 

HALA—Of Silapatta-varhsa (Silawat caste, masons), an architect, 

appointed by a Muhammadan ruler Jallàla as one of the three 

architects to build a Gomatha, a garden, and a step-well in the town 
of Batihadim. 

(Batihagarh Stone Inscrip., v. 12, 

Ер. Ind.. Vol. xu, p. 46.) 


677 


E 4 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[References to the quotations are given in full in all cases. No full list of works and authors 
is, therefore, appended. Certain series and a few authors more frequently relerred 
to are mentioned below. Тһе order is that of the English alphabet, as the names in 

| «the following list are all English.] 


Abbreviated titles as referred to Authors and other particulars 
| Ancient Colonies in the Far East Ву R. C. Mazumdar. 
Ancient Khotan (Vols. I, П) .. Ву Sir Aurel Stein. 
e Architectural Remains: Anura- By Smitters. 
dhapur. 
Arch. Surv., New Imp. Series .. Archaeological Survey, New Imperial Series. 


Asiatic Researches (Vols. I—XIV). 
Bijdragen tot-de taal-land en volken- 
Kunde van Nederlandsche 
Indie (1918), of M. Finot, Kern, 


Vogel. . 

B. E. F. (Vols. I—XIV) .. By M. Auroussean. 

Buddhist Cave Temples .. Archaeological Survey of Western India, 
New Imperial Series, Vol. IV, ‘Reports 
on the Buddhist Cave Temples and 
their Inscriptions," by Jas Burgess, 
LL.D., Е.В.С.5. 

Buddhist India 2% .. By Rhys Davids. 

Buddhist Records ss .. Translated by Bill. 

Cambodge (Vols. I, II, II) .. By E. Aymonier. 

Champa (Vol. I.) 

(CD се có .. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. ПІ, 


‘Inscription of the Early Gupta 
Kings,’ by Dr. Fleet. (Corpus Inscrip- 
tionum Indicarum, Vol. I, ‘ Inscriptions 
of Asoka,’ by General Sir A. Cunning- 
ham, has not been referred to, neither 
| М. Senarts editions of the same 
55 inscriptions in different volumes of 
the Indian Antiquary, as well as in 2 
his French volumes. Тһе only re- 
ference to these inscriptions is given 
from Dr. Bühlers edition in the 
Epigraphia Indica; the difference in 


679 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Abbreviated titles as referred to Authors and other particulars 


reading, if any, among the editors ^ 


has been noted by their names Cun- 
ningham, Senart, Bühler.) 

GUUS F.G.I. Em .. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, ° Fleets 
Gupta Inscriptions.’ 

Chàlukyàn Architecture, Arch. Archaeological Survey of India, New Im- 


Surv., New Imp. Series (fol- репа] Series, Vol. xxr * Chalukyan 
lowed by volume, page, etc.). ` Architecture, by Alexr. Rea, M.R.A.s. 
Cock .. Bo .. Еспе Oud-indische stad Volgens het Epos, by 


Dr. J. K. de Cock, Gróningen, 1899. 
Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Re- Archaeological Survey of India Reports, by 
ports. General Sir Alexander Cunningham. 
De Sutrantraasche Periode der By Krom. 
Javansche Geschiedenis (1922). 


Ер. Carnat. о .. Epigraphia Carnatica, by Lewis Rice.* 
Ep. Ind. oc .. Epigraphia Indica. 


1'The most arbitrary abbreviations of the names of the Talugs, approximately 
100 in the 12 volumes, have not been followed, first because it seems impossible, 
at least for me, to read, from his abbreviation, Cn., Channarayapattana (in the 
Introduction, and the table of contents, but indifferently spelt ‘ Channaraya- 
patna’ in the title at the top of each page), from Mj., Manjarabad, etc. (see 
Introduction, Vol. v, part I, p. 1) ; secondly, 100 such abbreviations will be too 
tedious for any patient reader to remember. These names have, therefore, been 
written hundreds of times in full. 

Again there are as many as 12 kinds of paging sometimes in each part of 
each volume. Compare, for instance, Vol. ш, < Contents" after one folio of the 
fly-leaf, one of the names of the Taluqs, and one of a plate : 

(1) Preface (page number is not given). 
(2) List of illustrations (page number is not given). 


(3) Introduction T J: a 1-36 
(4) List of the Inscriptions classified in chronological order .. 1-х 
(5) Text of the Inscriptions in Roman characters .. 1-218 
(6) Translations of the Inscriptions .. v оо І-ІІ 

Text of the Inscriptions : | 5 
(7) Іп Kannada characters T X .. 1-381 
(8) in Grantha and Tamil characters J; (2 DESY 
(9) in Arabic and Persian characters ss x 1-4 

(10) Addenda et Corrigenda Mcr an xs 1-2. 
(11) Alphabetical list of towns and villages where the ins- 

4 criptions were found оо 2% " 1-4 
I-II 


(12) Index to Introduction 


680 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abbreviated tilles as referred to Authors and other particulars 

Etudes Iraniennes, tom II .. Ву Darmesteter. 

Fa-hien's Travels .. ` .. By Legge: 

Dro d es .. Dr. Fleet's Gupta Inscriplions. 

Fergusson, Hist. of Dd. and East. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 
Arch. by James Fergusson, D.G.L., F.R.S., 

M.R.A.S., 1801. 
Gloss. Grecian Arch. .. .. A Glossary of Terms used in Grecian» 


Roman, Italian and Gothic Architecture, 
Anonymous, London, 1838. 
Gwilt, Encycl. (generally fol- Ап Encyclopaedia of Architecture, by Joseph 


lowed by the cardinal number Gwilt, F.S.A., F.R.A.S., 1867. 
of articles and occasionally by 
page). 
Н.8.1.1. a: .. Soulh Indian Incriptions, by Dr. Hultzsch. 
History of Ancient Java (Vols. 1, 11) Ву Lassen. 
Hist. of Arch., Fletcher .. A History of Architecture, by Fletcher, 
1908. - 


This is not а solitary instance ; compare also Vol. v, part I, which bears nine 
kinds of paging exclusive of the fiy-leaf, names of Taluqs, and a plate; Vol. уп 
has ten kinds of paging. І 

There is yet another difficulty, perhaps the most irritating опе, of consulting 
and referring to this extensive work comprising approxinmtely 12,000 pages. Many 
of the readers for whose service this encyclopaedia is made are not expected to be 
familiar with the various South Indian scripts. It is for this reason, and also for 
sparing readers the trouble of confusing pagings, that I have referred to the Roman 
text only. But neither the Roman text nor the translation, even of the largest inscrip- 
tions covering sometimes 10 pages of 40 lines to a page (cf. Vol. v, part I, pp. 362, 
464, 530, ctc.), has been numbered by verses, lines, or paragraphs. Consequently, 
no one convenient method' could be followed in referring to a particular passage 
in the Roman text and in the corresponding translation. I might have counted 
from the beginning of the inscription the lines in both the places (which I have 
actually done in referring to the smaller inscriptions), but that would not save 
trouble to readers, as they would themselves be required to count, say, 400 lines 


twice, once in the text and secondly in the translation. In such cases my references 
? 


^to а particular passage has been given thus : Ef. Carnat., Vol. v, part I,—Chan- 


naraga-pattana Таша по...., Roman text or Translation, Pe, 
line . . . (of that particular page, and not from the beginning of the inscription), 
sometimes from the bottom upwards, stated distinctly inso many words (e.g. line 
2 from bottom upwards, instead of saying line 43, i.e. from the top downwards) ; 
occasionally it appeared more convenient to say p. 49, para. 7, line 9, instead о 
counting all the lines from the top or bottom of the page. 


681 


. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Abbreviated titles as referred to Authors and other particulars 
History of Art in Persia .. By Perrot and Chipiez. 
History of Burma .. Ву Phayre. 

History of China .. By Demetrius Boulger. 
History of Siam (1933) .. By W. A. R. Wood. 
Ind. Ant. .. The Indian Antiquary.+ 
Indische Alterthumskunde . By Lassen. 


Inventaire Descriptif des monuments Ву М.Н. Parmentier. 
Chams de І? Annam (Vols. I, II). 

Indian Colony of Siam .. By P. N. Bose. 

India and Java (Vol. I) .. By В. К. Chatterjee. 

JA.S.B. (followed by volume, Bengal Asiatic Society's Journal. 
page, etc.). 


Java and Her Neighbours .. By A. S. Walcott. 

Javaansche Greschiedenis .. of Kern, Brandes, Krom, Hindoc. 

JAS. Bom. Br. (followed by Bombay Branch, Asiatic  Society's 
volume, page, etc., and N. S. Journal. 


added to indicate new series). 
J.A.0.S. (followed Бу part, page, The Journal of ihe American Oriental 
сіс.). Society. 


1 In the earlier volumes of this series, pages are divided, not invariably how- 
ever, into two columns, which are abbreviated thus : Ind. Ant., Vol. v (preceded 
by the name of the article or the inscription), p. 320, C. т or 2 (=column Ist or 
' end), para. 1 or 2 (where there is more than one), line, say, 7 (of the para., when it 
is followed by any, or simply lines to be counted from the top ; in cases where it 
appeared more convenient, it is stated thus: line 7 from bottom upwards). In 
the earlier volumes the footnotes are not marked by the numerical -figures, 1, 2, 3 
and so forth ; they are indicated by some inconvenient signs, e.g. Тр Cie IG 
was not possible to refer to these notes by any particular name. Some of the 
inscriptions published in this series have been given three different titles in three 
places of reference, namely, one in the table of contents, a different one as the 
heading of the inscription in the body of the volume, and a third one on the top of 
the pages wherein it is described. Compare, for example, the following : 

(1) ‘Two Pragastis of Nanaka, a court poet of Visaladeva of Gujarata ° 

(Ind. Ant., Vol. x1, contents, at the end of the volume). 

(2) ‘Sanskrit Grants and Inscriptions of Gujrat Kings, nos. m and iv, Pra- 
£astis of Nanaka, a court poet of King Visaladeva of Gujrat’ (in the heading 

of the article, p. 98). 

(3) Sanskrit Grants and Inscriptions (on the top of pages 99, 101; 103, 105, 

107). I have generally referred to the last-named title, i.e. the one occurring 

on the top of the pages. 


682 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE BIBLIOGRAPHY 


=” - Abbreviated titles as referred io Authors and other particulars 
J-R.A.S., М. S. (followed by The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
т volume, page, ctc.). Great Britain and Ireland, New Series. 
CS. I.I. 


South Indian Inscriptions, by Rao Sahib 
H. Krishnashastri. 

Lajonquiere Inventaire Descriptif, 
Tome II. 

Le Royaume Actual Tome I, 
par Etienne Aymonier. 


"^ Le Cambodge % .. By M. L. Delaporte. 
| L'Art de Gandhara (Vols. I) .. Ву M. Foucher. 
Lé Siam Ancient (Part I) .. By Fournereau. 
| M. x 


Тһе Manasára, edited and translated by 
Р. K. Acharya, 1.Е8., М.А, PH.D., 
D.LIT. 

Marco Polo (Vols. I, IT) .. By Үше. 

Mission to the Court of Ava. 

Monumental Antiquities and Archaeological Survey of India, New Im- 
Inscriptions, | North-Western perial Series, Vol. хп, ‘The Monu- 


! Provinces, Arch. Surv., New mental Antiquities and Inscriptions 
e» Imp. Series (folowed by in the North-Western Provinces and 
volume, page, сіс.). Oudh,’ by A. Führer, PH.D. 
Muhammadan Architecture of Archaeological Survey of India, New Im- 

Bharoch, etc., Burgess, Arch. perial Series, Vol. хх (Western India, 

Surv., New Imp. Series (fol- ^ Vol. vi, on ‘The Muhammadan 

lowed by volume, page, etc.). Architecture of Bharoch, Cambay, 


Dholka, Champanir, and Mahmud- 
abad in Gujrat, by Jas Burgess. 
C.I.E., LL.D., F.R.S.E. 


_ Mysore Arch. Surv. Report, Annual Report of the Mysore Archaeological 
Narasimhachar (followed by Department, by R. Narasimhachar. 
vig year, page, ctc.). 
М. W. Dict. 2 .. А Sanskrit-English Dictionary, by Sir 
| Monier Williams, M.A., 1872. 
j Notes Chinoise L’ Inde | .. By M. S. Levi. 
"= Nouveaux Melanges Asiatiques Translated by Abel Remusat. 
(Vol. П). Жы 2 
Pallava Architecture, Rea, Arch. Archaeological Survey of India, New lm- 
Suro., New Imp. Series (fol- perial Series, Vol. xxiv, “Pallava 
(р lowed by volume, page, etc.). ` Architecture,’ by Alexander Rea, 
5 F.S.A, (Scot.), M.R.A.S. 
683 1 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abbreviated titles as referred to 
Pet. Dict. 


Кат Raz, Ess. Arch. (of) Hind. 


Report on Archacological Tour 
with Bunar Field Force. 

Scritores rerum Alexandri Magni 

Serindia (Vols. I, IT, III) 

Sharqi Arch. of Jaunpur, Führer, 
Arch. Surv, New Imp. Series 
(followed by volume, page, 
etc.). 


Source of Oxus 5% 
Vedic Index, Macdonell and 
Keith. 


Ville de Khotan 
V.S.I.I. 


Vitruvius (followed by book and 
chapter). 


Kend Avesta 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 
HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


Authors and other particulars 
Sanskrit-Worterbuch, von Béhtlingk and 
Rudolf Roth, 1855. 
Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus, by 
Ram Raz, London, 1834. 
By Sir Aurel Stein (Ind. Ant. 1901.) 


By С. Miiller. 

By Sir Aurel Stein. 

Archaeological Survey of India, New Im- 
perial Series, Vol. хі, “Тһе Sharqi 
Architecture of Jaunpur,’ by A. 
Führer, рн.р., with drawings and 
architectural descriptions by Ed. W. 
Smith. 

By Wood. 

Vedic Index of names and subjects, by 
Arthur Anthony Macdonell, w.A.; 
PH.D., and Arthur Derriedale Keith, 
M.A., D.G.L., 1912. 

By Remuset. 

South Indian Inscriptións, by Rai Bahadur 
V. Venkayya. 

The ten books of Vitruvius, translated 
from Latin, by Joseph Gwilt, r.s.a., 
1880. А 

"Translated by James Dasmesteta. 


INDIAN ARCHITECTURE ACCORDING TO 
MANASARA-SILPA-SASTRA 


AND 


A DICTIONARY OF HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


' Published 1927 


OPINIONS AND REVIEWS. 
EXTRACTS 


Professor A. В. Keith, D.C.L., D.LITT.—Of auxiliary sciences architecture 
has at last received expert treatment from Professor Prasanna, Kumar Acharya 
in his Dictionary of Hindu. Architecture and Indian Architecture based оп a new text 
and rendering of the Manasara, for which the period of A.D. 500—700 is suggested. 
Striking similarities between the prescriptions of the Мапаѕага and Vitruvius 
аге unquestionably established. , 

- (History of Gane Literature, 1928, Preface, p. 29 
mi 1 

E. B. Havell, Esq.—-* Let me congratulate you on the results of your monu- 
mental. researches by which you have contributed so much valuable data to the 
study of this great subject. All students of Indian Architecture are deeply 
indebted to, you. . . . . I have. read. enough to appreciate your very 
thor pugh treatment of the subject.” ; i 
I 

dus Аййй Nath Tagore, D.LITT., C.LE. о ¢ аге people who assume 
the role of; critics of Art without having previously read а single treatise on Art. 
Morcover, they: consider themselves to be authorities on the subject of Art although 
шу may not have acquired the least practical skill in it. 

“There are enough of such people who talk a good deal on matters connected 
wath Indian Art. They have continued to disseminate both within as well as 
outside India, a thoroughly inaccurate account оЁош Indian Art being influenced 
by their own: individual notions. 

There are others who are keenly anxious to acquire a true knowledge of Art 
апа pursue their subject with a heart full of enthusiasm, by making a study of 
paintings, images, treatises on Art and the history, of the land. Our young friend 
Professor Prasanna Kumar Acharya belongs to the latter category. The two 
big volumes which he has published after infinite pains are іп the nature of an 
encyclopaedia embracing all the existing treatises on Indian Art. Не has herein 
presented before us all the information that. so: long lay hidden ex scattered 
all over the world. ` -. E t : 


IA 


ns 
sne АЕР 


АМ ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF “| 


There is a proverb * What is not contained in the Mahabharata is not to be 
found anywhere) These two books may, on that analogy, be appropriately 
called the Mahabharata of the literature on Indian Art, for, in them we find all 
that there is to know about Indian Art. 

I may safely assert that these two volumes are just those that are fit to give a 
correct account of Indian Art to the world at large. Moreover, this much is | 
certain that no two books of such magnitude and such merit as these, namely, d 
Indian Architecture and Dictionary of Hindu Architecture have ever been published either 
in India or elsewhere’ on the subject of Indian Art, after such intensive study 
and infinite pains. As they are written in English it can be expected that a true 
knowledge of our Indian Art will now be conveyed to the four corners of the 
world. < 

Before one can acquire a thorough knowledge of Indian Art it is essential to 1 
make an acquaintance with the ancient books on the subject. Hitherto it has | di 
been extremely difficult to be able to read all the connected literature that is 4 
to be found in libraries whether in India or outside. Everyone of us does not | 
know the language іп which the treatises arc written. Moreover, most of the 
original texts are preserved in distant lands. In the circumstances, a volume 
of this nature, written in English and containing as perfect a compendium as is 
possible, of all the existing treatises on Art, came to be a necessity, not only for 
us but for foreign artists as well. It really makes me feel proud that this stupend- 
ous task has been accomplished by our young friend, the author. 3. 

I cannot adequately express the extent (о which I shall be able to make use a= 
of these two books and the profit which my pupils will derive from them. It ; 
is on all these grounds that I fecl thankful to the author and wish an extensive 


nat қы 


circulation of his books. | 
We аге expecting a few more such comprehensive volumes from the author 


on the subject of Indian Art written in the same beautiful style and including 

E sketches of temples and other buildings, etc. in various parts.. May the God- 
dess of Art be his guide in this great venture. Ë | 
(Translated from Pravasi, April, 1928, | 
by В. М. Lahiri, Esq., M.A., LP.) ES | 


Mahamahopadhyaya Pandit Ganganatha Jha, M.A., D.LITT., LL.D., Vice- 
Chancellor, Allahabad University.— Гһезе two books are the fruit of Dr. = 
Acharya's labour extending over several years and the learned Doctor deserves 
congratulations on having completed and—what is more—sceeing through the ul 
Press, this monument of his industry and scholarship. "The ideal that he set 
before himself is neatly expressed by the sentence appearing as a motto on the à 
opening page— What the learned world demand of us in India is to be quite | 
certain of our data, to place the monumental record before them exactly as it 
Е now exists, and to interpret it faithfully and literally. The Doctor has acted up 
to this ideal There are many of us who have collected and presented before 
the scholars important data, but very few of us have succeeded in retaining the 
balance of mind needed for interpreting the data ‘faithfully and literally *; 


р 

E and Dr. Acharya appears to have been one of these few. 

E 2A 

2. 

x ? T 
S; :] 
m ‚ 

TTS 


кз СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


The Dictionary is а book which is so well done that it appears to be no 


. Cxaggeration to say that for many decades, it cannot be improved upon, unless, 


of course, the South reveals to us more hidden treasures. If there is anything 
to object to, it is the title of the book, which does less than justice to it ; * Ency- 
clopedia? would be a fitter title. The term ‘ Dictionary’ is associated in our 
minds with word-meanings ; while Dr. Acharya’s work is very much more than 
word-meaning. Each term is followed by its meanings, mostly technical, 
an exhaustive account of the subject, and references to standard works of a wide 
range of literature. Thus, it will be scen, the work deserves a better title than 
‘Dictionary.’ In fact, Dr. Acharya himself suggested to the London Univer- 
sity the compiling of “Ап Encyclopedia of Hindu Architecture, and it appears 
to have been a merc frcak of fortune that when the University decided to entrust 
the lcarned Doctor with the work of compiling, they chose the term ‘ Dictionary ?; 
they appear to have been led to do this by the nature of the usual run of work 
done by modern scholars who in many cases have the unhappy knack of shirk- 
ing work ; but in being led away by this prejudice, the University were unfair 
to their alumnus, who has, by this work, morc than justified the title that he had 
himself suggested. 

The Dictionary is based mainly upon the second work mentioned above. I 
have had occasion to deal with the Mü¿nasara myself on one or two occasions, 
and I know how hopelessly corrupt the available manuscripts of the work are ; 
and on morc than onc occasion, I have had to give up the task as hopeless. As 
Dr. Acharya remarks, it is a text which is written in five different scripts, possesses 
eleven badly preserved manuscripts, has undergone five recensions, and comprises 
more than 10,000 lines of a language rightly remarked by Dr. Bühler as the 
“most barbarous Sanskrit. To the ‘barbarism’ of the Sanskrit of Manasara, 
I can bear personal testimony. І remember that when, about fifteen years ago, 
I was asked to make sense out of a few extracts from the work, I had to give up 
the task in disgust. Dr. Acharya deserves to be congratulated, therefore, for 
having succeeded not only in making some sort of sense out of the “ barbarous 
Sanskrit,’ but evolving out of it a readable text and thereby undertaking and 
completing a work that deserves to be accepted as a standard treatise on Ancient 
Indian Architecture and to be placed on the shelves of every decent library in 
the country. 

The general reader will be specially thankful for the second smaller volume 
which supplies full information on the main principles of Hindu Architecture. 
It is complete in itself, and should be useful to all such students as may not have 
the time or the inclination to take up the more voluminous Dictionary. 

It is a matter of special gratification to us of the Allahabad University that 
we have at the head of our Sanskrit Department a scholar capable of doing work 
which, as a monument of industry and patience, compares favourably with 
the best of that class of scholarly work which has hitherto been regarded as 


* German.’ 
(Indian Review, March, 1928.) 


3A 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ОҒ 


Professor F. W. Thomas, c.l... M.A., PH.D.—' The immense labour which 
you have undergone and your devotion to a literatüre sé obscure and difficult 
will receive their due recognition. І admire your courage and perseverance and 
your independence in working in a field wherc you could not expect much assis- 
tance from others (except in so far as the! materials exist in published books). 
You are now certainly better acquainted with the subject of Indian architecture 
in the literary side than any other scholar, and no doubt you will often be 
consulted as an authority on the subject. I hope that the Dictionary will become 


a recognized work of reference as it deserves to do." 


Sir Claude de la Fosse, C.LE., M.A., D.LITT., once D. P. I. and the first 
Vice-Chancellor of reconstructed Allahabad University.—“ The patience, the 
Jabour and the scholarship which you have devoted to these studies through so 
many years of your life aré at length rewarded "Бу the publication of works of 
permanent value to scholars and archeologists: 


K. N. Dikshit, Esq., Mi^. Deputy. Director Génerál oí Arehaeology.— 
** Your recent publication, the Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, is really a monu- 
mental work, the value of which can hardly be exaggerated. .I have no doubt 
that indologists all over the world will acknowledge their indebtedness to you for 
placing in their hands such a comprehensive study of the elements of Hindu 
architecture.” - 


Professor Dr. Sten Konow, Editor, * Acta Orientalia,’ Oslo, Norway.— 
* Many thanks for kindly sending те your two volumes. You аге opening 
up a new branch of research, and the world of scholars will be thankful to you." 


О. C. Gangoly, Esq. Editor, XRupam.—' We have received your two 
books for review and I hasten to congratulate you on your remarkable and 
scholarly treatises which will remove one of the crying needs of the study of 


Indian Art." 


Dr. Prasanna Kumar p who is Professor of Sanskrit at Allahabad 
University, has followed up his publication of the Sanskrit text and English 
translation of the Manasara by these two works on the same subject ; and students 
of Indian architecture should be grateful to him for accomplishing with such 
thor oughness a task which has been long overdue, and which must have entailed 
a tremendous amount of patient and often uninteresting Work, in a number of 
different languages. The Dictionary of Hindu Architecture contains all the atchi- 
tectural terms used in the Manasára and in the known Vastu- fasiras, published 
inscriptions, and other archaeological records, with full references and: explana- 
tions and Indian Architecture is, for the most part, an introduction to the text Gn 
the Manasara. 

The Manasara is universally recognized as the standard Hindu 
architecture, and is-the:most complete and probably the oldest one exta 


4A 5‏ م 


nt, though 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


treatise оп” 


с 


w. 


HINDU ARCHITEGTURE 


no doubt it had many predecessors... This being so, it is rather surprising that no 
serious attempt has hitherto been made by modern scholars to edit and еШшсі- 
date it. It has never before been translated into English, and most writers on 
Indian architecture disregard it or scarcely mention it. Eighty years ago indeed 
Ram Raz examined a portion of it in his .excellent Essay on the Architecture 
of the Hindus; ibut it has never hitherto, received comprchensive , treatment. 
Scholars, were no doubt shy of its technical terms or discouraged by its ‘ bar- 
barous ? Sanskrit, while it must be admitted. that the Hindu tradition of pre- 
senting aesthetic principles as religious precepts and of embedding scientific 
matter іп astrological formulas and, mystic, ritual is puzzling and disturbing 
to the non-Hindu. Nevertheless, the work deserves far more serious study than 
it has hitherto received, and not only from antiquaries, for Indian craftsmen 
of today still use the formulas of fifteen hundred years ago and the precepts of the 
Silpa-sástras are still the everpresent, guides of the architect and the sculptor. 

' For the Manasara i is, apart from its astrology, a practical craftman's handbook, 
none the less so because its directions are regarded as ritual rules and its classifi- 
cations seem often arbitrary and fantastic. In it, as always in India, art is a 
practical affair, a means to,a definite end, never unrelated to life and worship. 
Manasara means < the essence, of measurement '; and what would now be consi- 
dered the ,practical part of the work consists A explicit directions regarding 
town-planning and the selection of sites, and more especially of minute statements 
of the mathematical proportions of every kind of building and i image. This 1s 
not the place to examine the principles on which these proportions are worked 
out, nor are they always easy to follow without plans. ‘The Essay of Ram Raz 
was illustrated, and it would have been a great help if Dr. Acharya could have 
rounded off his work with the addition of a series of well-executed plates. These 
would һауе been of especial, value in examining what is perhaps the most 
interesting chapter of Indian Architecture, that in which the treatise of Vitruvius 
and the Manasára are compared. АП that need be said here is that the two 
works, with all their essential differences, have so many striking affinities (in 
their classification, for instance, of the orders and mouldings) that we can hardly 


doubt that the standard Indian, treatise was somehow or other, influenced by 


the Roman ‘architect who lived five hundred, years or more earlier. Exactly 
how is another question, the solutian of which would establish some important 
‘conclusions i іп, architectur, al history. , ? | 


ипо bad Anut ot (The! Times? Litérary Supplement, May 31, en 


These two volumes are a valuable addition to the few ‘English books dealing 
with the little’ understood principles of Indian architecture ‘and’ achitecturai 
terms as ‘practised and used by the salafs who built the fine old shrines whose 
ruins тема to’ display their skill in construction and taste in details. Professor 


Acharya: is to, he congratulated upon, the; «result of his labours in the very great 
amount of careful and painstaking, search and the digging. out of so much useful 


material from, the; vast amount, ofi Indian literature he has consulted. The 
printers, . however; have not; turned out the books, so „well as. the, subject, matter 


5А 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA , 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


deserves. The numerous and lengthy quotations in the Dictionary would h 
been better in smaller type ; and that of the Manasára is by no means clean, ТС 
paper is poor. 

The author may not be averse to a few suggestions in the event of a second 
edition being produced. Ав ancient Hindu architecture, in its modes of A 
struction, designs, and details, is more or iess strange compared with Any 
would-be student has been familiar with, it would be a very great help if the D 
tionary were well illustrated with small vignette insertions, showing, for instance, 
the different types of pillars, mouldings, etc. 2 

The Manasára, or ** essence of measurement” probably written between А 5 
500 and 700, which is one of the Silpa-sasiras dealing with architecture does ane 
confine itself wholly to that art, but, like the others, busies itself with many other 
things, such as the planning of towns, villages, and forts, the orientation of 
buildings, the classification of kings and their ceremonial rites, the manufacture 
of couches, cars and chariots, ornaments, jewels, etc. 

The title would have been better ‘Hindu Architecture,’ since ‘ Indian? 
as now used, includes Muhammadan. Measurements are iaid down for every 
detail both in architecture and sculpture so it is not to be wondered at that we 
find such sameness, stiffness and oft-repeated conventional forms in the old 
temples which are still standing, especially in mediaeval work. The advance 
of Islam gradually influenced later work and brought into it much that is not 
Hindu. Of civil buildings very few now remain, and it is on the ancient temples, 
with a few tanks and wells, that the student has to depend for his practical 
acquaintance with Hindu architecture. The ‘essence of measurement’ 
is brought out in all its scrupulous exactitude where every measurement іп a 
building must be regulated upon one measure—that of the side of the shrine 
and nothing is left to the salat to express his own individuality. And the measure 
of the side of the shrine depended upon the length of the blocks that could be 
obtained from the quarry, for the shaft of every pillar was always a single stone 
from the top of the base to the neck of the capital : it was never built, as а rule, 
of more than one stone. 

Professor Acharya does not confine himself to a description and summary 
of the contents of the Manasara, but gives us references to architecture in the 
ancient epics, the Puranas and other works and a résumé of the contents of many 
other Silpa-Sastras. Не also ventures upon a long discussion about the similarity 
between the Manasara and Vitruvius, which he appears to think had some con- 
nexion the one with the other. 


The index, which is practically a glossary, is good and full. 
H. C. 


(J. R. A. S., October, 1928.) 


Dr. Acharya in this book (Indian Architecture) gives us а compact and interest- 
ing, though somewhat technical, treatise upon Indian Architecture in the litera- 
ture of India. The standard work upon the subject is the Manasara, and a des- 
cription of that work forms the kernel, so to speak, of Dr, Acharya’s book, 


бА 


о 


| 
| 
| 
| 


E 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


The author begins with a general survey of the references to architecture ‘in 
literature, dealing first with Vedic and Buddhist works, then with the Puranas, 
Agamas, and other works. In his second section he summarizes the Mdanasara 
and gives shorter accounts in turn of the following works: the Mayamata, the 
Атіштаа-ВЛейа оГ Kasyapa, the Vifvakarmiyasilpa, the Agastya, the Samgraha, and 
one or two others. Section ПІ deals with the Position of the Manasara іп Litera- 
ture. Here, types of buildings are discussed, measurements, the five orders 
and the three styles. 

"In Section IV, Dr. Acharya discusses the possible relationship between the 
Manasara and the well-known treatise of Vitruvius. Не deals at length with the 
similarities not only in contents and treatment, but also in style, between the two 
works, and declines “to attribute all these affinities to mere chance. “his is 
a particularly interesting chapter. 

Section V, Age of the Manasara, deals with various indications by which the 
date of the Manasára may be approximately fixed, and decides that it must have 
been written somewhere between A.D. 500 and 700. Ап appendix treats of 
certain features characteristic of the language of AManasara. 

Тһе book has an excellent index. 

-A work like this (A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture) which treats of ‘Sanskrit 
architectural terms, with illustrative quotations from Silpa-Sastras, general litera- 
ture and archaeological records? will appeal probably to a comparatively small 
circle of students, but to them its value will be very great. Hitherto, there have 
been no dictionaries, even in Sanskrit, which have fully treated architectural 
terms, so that the present work, which has entailed enormous labour—the author 
tells us that he has gone through 50,000 pages of archacological material— 
breaks entirely new ground. Dr. Acharya’s work has been the greater since, 
for his purposes, the term, ‘architecture > must include everthing built or cons- 
tructed, from a royal palace to a sewer, or a garden to а bird's nest. 

The work is based primarily on the Manasara, but its sources include all the 
architectural treatises of the Vastu-fastras, and those portions of the Agamas and 
Puranas, etc., which deal with architecture. In addition, all the inscriptions 
published in such collections as Epigraphia Indica, the Indian Antiquary, апа Epi- 
graphia Carnatica, ctc. have been taken into account. 

Dr. Acharya has arranged his dictionary according to the Sanskrit alphabet. 
He gives, in English, a concise explanation of each term, followed by quotations 
sufficiently long to make clear the exact connotation of that term in its various 
uses. Not only are precise references given to passages in such works as the Indian 
Antiquary, when they have a bearing on the subject, but long and adequate quota- 
tions are given. The work is tremendously detailed : the entry Stambha, for 
example, occupying sixty pages. There are two appendices, the first of ШЫСЫ 
gives а sketch of Sanskrit treatises on Architecture, and the second, a list of ar chi- 
tects. Finally there is an index arranged according to the English meanings 


of the Sanskrit terms. 
(Asiatica, June-July, 1929.) 


ТА 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized bAS3 Foundation USA 
Ni 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA. OF 


A number of Sanskrit works have recently, been published, ‘and ‘it had now 
become necessary to explain the expressions and terms to Europeans who: have 
of late taken an interest in Hindu architecture. A number of European’ works 
have appeared but none has existed so far which elucidates these difficult terms. 
The work (4 Dictionary of Hindu Architecture) is conscientiously carried out, as is 
shown by the fact that the author is not satisfied with merely giving the English 
terms, but quotes from the Sanskrit contexts in which the words occur, 

As regards the second work—Jndian Architecture according to the Manasara-Silpa- 
sastra—the author inténded to issue it as. an Introdüction: to his edition of “һе 
Sanskrit test and English translation which are in preparation. . But in studying 
his:subject he found the material increased considerably, and һе has now Ipro- 
duced a volume in crown 4to size of 268 pages. Іі is most gratilying that Indian 
scholars adopt the great care generally exhibited by European professors, and Mr. 
P. K, Acharya is one оГ them. The work is well divided ; it gives a general 
survey of architecture from the most ancient times onward ; it provides a summary 
of the.various treatises on.architecture, and finally subjects the Afanasara to exa- 
mination. Full references ‘are, also provided, апа the index alone, 


beginning 
on page 215, is a most painstaking performance. 


Both volumes will be welcomed by the increasing number of workers іп and 
lovers of Indian art. : 


(Asiatic Review, April; 1928.) 
The ‘indigenous Indian literature on architecture “Һа not «received: much 
attention so far. Кат. Каз has. published ап Essay on the Architecture of the Hinds 
(London; 1834), which I am afraid, is very difficult of access, and some works 
were edited by Ganapati. Sastri іп Trivandrum Sanskrit: Series. Besides that, 
we knew the portions dealing with architecture: in the: Puranas. І 
Now Prof. Acharya ‘has’ been working ‘on the subject ‘foi several years and 
has paid ‘special attention to the principal work, the ‘Manasara: Тп” 1918, he 
graduated at Leyden: with a thesis on this work whereafter He published ‘in’ the 
Allahabad: University Journal, a paper оп its’ relation to "Vitruvius. Now’ there 
comes a comprehensive treatise together with'a: Dictionary of the architectural 
terms and a survey of the literature, and an edition and translation of the Mana- 
sara are promised for a near future. гізі id Dont шаі ығыр ad 


' 


These works ате іо be greatly welcomed, making'às they ido; accessible for 
research a new province of Indian literature. : ee ABEL E A e 

The author tries to prove that the Manasara in many réspects is similar to the 
classical science of architecture as we know it from Vitruvius. Though" his de- 
monstration cannot yet be said to be definitive} yêt he’ has’ succeeded to show so 
many coincidences that а connexion can hardly be doubted any longer. "How 
this connexion has соте about, the author has not tried to show, ‘and perhaps, 
too, he has not thought it necessary. ` For; it is well known long since thàt classi- 
cal architecture and fine arts have exercised a lasting influetice on ‘the develop- 
ment іп North-West India. In that corner, Greeks and their half-breeds had 


8A 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU “ARCHITECTURE 


settled for ‘centuries, and it seems that in an Indian inscription of the second 
century: there is even mentioned an architect (Navakarmika) witha Greek 
пате; viz. the * dasa-Agisala? of the relic casket of the Kaniska Stupa near 
Peshawar. i 

On the whole; it is only the edition that will enable us to form an opinion 
about these many questions raised by the author. , But even now' we are very 
much indebted to-him, and particularly his Dictionary will be very welcome. It 
gives not only, a copious list of technical terms of architecture more especially 
those to be found inthe Manasara, but. also circumstantial references to the litera- 
turc: aswell as a survey ‘of.the indigenous Indian literature relative to the matter, 
which isi for the greatest part only available: in MSS. 

Yet with pioneer work completeness ‘miust not ‘be insisted upon, ‘and what is 
being given: to us' we shall accept with sincere gratitude. ` 
! (Deulihe Literatunzeitung, 1928 14 Heft 66o— Extracts translated from the original 
German' by Dr. Ludwig Alsdorf, PH.D.) = 4 5 

Dr. А. К: Coomaraswamy.— These two volumes, the latter’ (Dictionary) 
especially, are monumental works, and will be indisperisable to every student 
of Indian architecture and realia. Only those who work along these lines will 
realize thé great labour involved in the preparation of such books, espécially when 
they are almost the first of their kind ; the serious study of the Indian Silpa-Sastra 
has ‘been‘'too'léng ‘delayed, and a warm welcome may be extended to the Pro- 
fessor's' undertaking. 

The following notes, however, are meant to be a further contribution to the 
subject ad'an "àcknowledgment of the value of what the Professor has already 
accomplished, rather than further criticism." 


"(Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 48, no.,3, рр. 250 fol. 
“This dictionary owes its name to the University of London. А glossary 
of the architectural terms used in the Manasara, the standard work on Hindu 
Architecture, was prepared for the author's private use when he found it indis- 
pensable after struggling for two and a half years to cdit for the first time and 
translate into English a text which is written in five different scripts, possesses 
éleven’ badly’ preserved manuscripts, has undergone five recensions and com- 
prises more than 10,000 lines of a language rightly remarked by Dr. Bühler as 
the ‘most barbarous Sanskrit.’ Іп this connexion there arose an occasion 
forthe author to:express to the University the opinion that an Encyclopaedia 
of. Hindu architecture was badly needed. Architectural expressions appear 
throughout the whole: field of general: Sanskrit literature and the сая 
гесогӣв, аз well las inthe extensive special branch of literature known = E 
fastras, more» familiarly called: Gilpa-Sastras. ' Existing dictionaries, in Sanskrit, 


- English, or any other language, ‘do not! elucidate’ architectural expressions ; and 
> 


the texts!of thé Vastu-fastras: һауе been: waiting for hundreds of years to be un- 
earthed’ from manuscripts which’are quite inaccessible without the guidance of a 


9A 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


special dictionary that would also be instrumental in bringing to light many 
new things hitherto left unexplained in inscriptions and general literature, 
The University selected the author as the person most immediately concerned 
and entrusted him with the task suggesting that he should * make a full dictionary 
of all achitectural terms used in the Manasara with explanations in English, and 
illustrative quotations from cognate literature where available for the purpose.’ 
Thus the terms included in this dictionary are primarily those found in the Ména- 
sara. But all the new architectural terms of any importance discovered in all the 
known architectural treatises, epigraphical documents, and general literature 
have also been added. То form even a faint idea of the herculean labour in- 
volved in bringing out this colossal work a perusal of the preface is necessary. 
This the first volume published embraces 882 pages, one more volume dian 
Architecture according to Мапазата Silpa-sastras has been published and two other 
volumes to complete the dictionary are in the Press. "This dictionary is a verit- 
able Encyclopaedia of Hindu architecture. It deals with some 3,000 terms, 
relating to architecture, sculpture and cognate arts, and covers a vast number 
of topics. Under each term is brought together useful information in the form 
of a short article, illustrated, with quotations from Silpa-sastras, general literature 
and archaeological records. It is a pioneer work. It is hoped that it may be 
instrumental in explaining many things hitherto left obscure in inscriptions and 
general literature. Two appendices enhance the utility of the work : in one 
appendix is given a sketch of the literature on the subject, while the other contains 
histories of ancient Indian architects, together with a short description of their 
works. Great has been the labour of the erudite author and he is to be congra- 
tulated on its successful issue, so also the publishers for the volume as regards its 
printing and general get-up is all that can be desired. 

It (Indian Architecture) is а handbook of Indian architecture, sculpture and 
cognate arts. "Гһе author, Dr. Prasanna Kumar Acharya, i.r.s., is an Indian 
Sanskrit scholar who has been trained in Europe in scientific methods of criticism 
and who has given the substance of a number of printed works and manuscripts, 
belonging to libraries in India and Europe which have been visited by him. 
Тһе book gives an account of the architecture of the Vedic, the Buddhist and the 
classical periods of India up to the Muhammadan age. An interesting feature 
is the comparison drawn between the Indian standard work Manasara and the 
European standard work of the Roman architect, Vitruvius. Striking similari- 
ties are shown to exist between Greco-Roman and Indian architecture. 


(Indian Engineering, January 21 and 28, I 928.) 


Dr. Kalidas Мар, M.A., D.LITT.—While Hindu Painting and Decorative art 
were hovering between hope and despair as to the chance of gaining occiden- 
fal recognition (the only recognition that carried weight !) Hindu architecture 
attracted the notice of all experts by its undeniable grandeur and originality. 
Ever since the publication of the Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus by Ram Raz, 
published in London (1834), there was a steady increase in (һе appreciation of 


IOA 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


the Hindu style and of the stone epics of India. Тһе monurnental studies of 
Rajendralal Mitra on Orissan architecture, followed by the work of Manomohan 
Ganguli, have demonstrated that the interest in the subject was growing. The 
enormous documentation of Cunningham, Burgess, and others of the Archaeological 
survey challenged the attention of artists and archaeologists all over the world. 
But the indigenous tradition of India with regard to the science and art of Archi- 
tecture did not receive the serious examination long overdue, before Dr. Acharya 
came forward to devote years of his academic studies to the elucidation of the 
problems of the Hindu Silpa-fastras. Accidentally coming across a copy of Māna- 
sara he plunged deeper and deeper into the intricacies of Hindu constructional 
science : the more baffling were the problems of the texts preserved іп the * most 
barbarous Sanskrit, the more intense became his zeal which ultimately led to 
the development of this splendid Dictionary—the first of its kind—of Hindu archi- 
tecture. Thanks to the comprehensiveness of Hindu masters of the science, 
Architecture in the work has been treated in its broadcast sense, implying practi- 
cally everything that is constructed,—from buildings religious and secular to town- 
planning, laying out of gardens, making of roads, bridges, tanks, drains, moats, 
etc., as well as the furniture and conveyances. "Thus the Dictionary of Dr. Acharya 
gives us for the first time in a handy volume a rich vocabulary hitherto unknown 
or only vaguely known. Dr. Acharya has earned the permanent gratitude 
of all Indologists by collating and collecting not only manuscripts (largely un- 
published) but also the epigraphic data scattered in the bewildering documents 
of Indian inscriptions which have given a sureness of touch and a precision of 
connotation that are admirable. Dr. Acharya has spared no pains to put the 
meaning of the terms as much beyond doubt as possible, for he has placed the 
terms invariably in their organic context by quoting iz extenso from the generally 
inaccessible texts. Thus the Dictionary will not only react in a wholesome way on 
our accepted notions of Hindu art and archacology but also on the future 
compilation of a comparative lexicon of the Hindu technical terms—our future 
Paribhashendu-Sekhara. 


As a pioneer work, it will hold its place high amongst the recent publications 
of Indology. Аза pioneer work again the author, let us hope, will take constant 
note of friendly suggestions with a view to enhance the scientific value of this 
lexicon. While comparisons with European treatises on Architecture (e.g. Vitru- 
vius) are interesting it is more useful to make each term shine indubitably ош 
of a comprehensive juxtaposition of pertinent texts found, published or noticed 
anywhere in India, with a special eye on local peculiarities and their correlation 
with regional style. Rich materials are still lying idle in the latest publications 
of the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (e.g. Maijusri-müla-kalpa ог Tantra, translated 
into Tibetan) and in the Gaekwad Sanskrit Series (e.g. Samarangana-Sütradhara and 
Manasollasa, etc.). So. Laufer’s Monograph on Chitralakshana seems not to have 
been utilized. But the more serious omission is perceptible in another field which 
has furnished some of the noblest specimen of Indian architecture. I mean 

- the field of Greater India where we meet even today Borobudur proclaiming 


IIA 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


P 


AN ENGYGLOPAEDIA OF 


the titantic architechtonic genius of the Sailendra sovereign. : of Srivijaya 
(Sumatra, Java) and Angkor Vat, the soaring Vimàna of Vishnu constructed by 
King Paramavishnuloka of Camboj and designed by the master Architect Diva- 
kara. Let us hope that in his next edition Dr. Acharya will enrich his lexicon by 
incorporating the data imbedded in the epigraphic and monumental documents 
_of Greater India. 


Two appendices containing enumerations of the important Sanskrit treatises 
on Architecture and of historical architects, enhance the value of the book. May 
we request the learned lexicographer to add a special “appendix of the techni- 
cal terms and names scattered in the various living vernaculars of India where 
we find, as in Orissa (cf. Nirmal Bose’: Konarak), native architects still constructing 
according to their-vernacular Vastu-Sastras or even conserving a rich tradition in 
bhas@ vocabulary (oral or textual). і 


This volume (Indian Architecture) incorporates the general problems, historical 
as well as textual, that form the introduction to Dr. Acharya’s Dictionary. In the 
first 50 pages the author gives a tantalising survey of the popularity of Architecture 
evinced by the Vedic, the Buddhist and the ‘classical literature. : We hope that 
i the author will make the'treatment more exhaustive. " The next hundred pages 
are devoted to а very useful summarizing of the contents of the outstanding Silpa- 
Sastras, e.g." Manasara, ‘Mayamata, ‘and ‘stich manuals ascribed to Visvakarma, 
Agastya, Кабуара, ‘Mandana ‘and’ others. The comparison instituted between 
Manasara and Vitruvius шау: or may not lead to'a discovery of the order of that 
ofa Romaka Siddhanta and Hora-sastra, ‘yet the similarities are’ striking. But 
the most important ‘sections are the/author’s discussions, relating to the three 
styles or orders of architecture—Nagara, Vesara and Dravida—representing the 
three geographical divisions" of | India.’ Ме ‘recommend’ the ‘books’. of Dr. 
Acharya to all Indologists and expect eagerly the publication of the two supple- 
mentary volumes now in Press! PATE: Fir у HT „о 


sitt 


“(The Modern Review, February, 1928.) 
кэй n Ші (олдоп Correspondent): si peo чөзісі Г! 
Те two books recently written: under /instrüctions-from the.Government of 
India on Hindu architecture: апа. published iby the Oxford. University Press, 
ought to be valuable not only to the student of architecture, but also:to the student 
of peoples of the world, for architecture expresses almost more than anything else 
i the ideals and. ideas ai people;holdiat any given time. For the scholar these two 
n books should; be invaluable, ‘as they help. to: elucidate in architectural terms details 
-Of thei distant past,.thatihave hitherto been clothed in mystery.’ ‘The texts of the 
Î Kastu-fastra have, as the author states in his preface, been:waiting for hundreds of 
i years to Бе unearthed from manuscripts, which are quite inaccessible without the 
: guidance of a special dictionary. . This is the task to. which the author set himself, 
гапа those who. are..competent.to/express\.an: opinion: agree: that he has amply 
fulfilled his, mission and has; brought. to light many. new things hitherto 
unexplained,.in inscriptions and. general literature...) 22,22. 


ISA 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


Тһе second book is a handbook of Indian architecture and’ deals with the 
Vedic, Buddhist and classical periods up to the Muhammadan times. 


š Today there is in Great Britain an ever-increasing number of people to whom 
such books appeal, probably because of the work of the India Society and kindred 
bodies who have stimulated thought in this direction by persistent effort. .It is, 


therefore, likely that the present books will find a considerable reading public 
here as well as in the East. 


„ 


(The Leader, February 24, 1928.) 


Dr. Beni Prasad, M.A., PH.D., D.sc. — Dr. P. К. Acharya attempts to offer 
the results of his twelve ycars' study of Hindu architecture in four volumes, 
two of which have just been published while the other two may soon be expected to 
see the light. They are based on Manasdra, the standard authority, on a number 
of minor works and a host of chapters or references, legal, religious, and general 
literature, as well as inscriptions. Тһе Dictionary, in particular, a pioneer work, 
is a monument of diligent research and systematic arrangement. In words 
quoted in the preface, “по опе but those who have taken part in similar labours, 
can at all realize the amount of tedious toil, I might almost say drudgery, involved 
in doing everything single-handed, collecting the quotations and verifying references 
and meanings, making indices and lists of words, sorting and sifting an ever- 
increasing store of materials, revising old work, arranging and re-arranging new, 
correcting and re-correcting, writing and re-writing, and interlineating copy, till 
reams upon reams of paper have been filled, putting the eyesight, patience and 
temper to a severe trial! The series is addressed to scholars and advanced 
students but ‘all interested in the scientific study of Hindu culture or in that of 
fine arts in general will find it instructive. š 
s The Hindu Silpa-sastra or Vastu-sastra is а comprehensive but by no means 
unsystematic study. It deals with all kinds of buildings, town-planning, gardens, 
and market-places, ports and harbours, roads, bridges, gateways, сіс, wells, 
tanks, trenches, drains, sewers, moats, walls, embankments, dams, railings, ctc., 
furniture like bedsteads, couches, tables, chairs, baskets, cages, nests, mills, 
conveyances, lamps, ctc., and even dresses and ornaments such as chains, crowns, 

headgear and foot- and arm-wear. The dominant topic, however, is architecture— 

the plan and erection of religious, residential and military edifices and their 
auxiliary members and component mouldings. The science which like | the 
Dharma-sastra, Artha-sastra and Kama-Sastra, professes to derive its first origins from 
Brahma himself, developed in the course of centuries and reached its culmination 
atout the sixth century А.р. in the great treatise called Manasara probably after 
the name of its author. i | ; ; 

Неге 26 elsewhere in the domain of Hindu history it is difficult to dpi 
how far the theoretical descriptions in literature correspond with the «practical 

А close comparison of architectural precepts with the details of 


ІЗА 


realities of life. 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ! 


archaeological finds and the narratives of foreign visitors like Yuan Chaun | 
(seventh century A.D.) suggests that the former, while not literally true to cts. 
are largely based on practice. It is interesting to infer that in ancient India m 
spite of all the other worldliness of philosophers and spiritualists, those who could 
afford maintained a high standard of living. Thus from a passage in the | 
Buddhist work Chullavagga, VI, 4, ro, we learn that houses comprised dwelling- | 
rooms, retiring-rooms, store-rooms, service-halls, halls with fire-places, closets and | 
cloisters, halls for exercise, wells and ponds, sheds for wells and open-roofed | 
sheds, bath-rooms and halls attached to them. Of hot-air baths the followigg 

description was given by the late T. W. Rhys Davids on the basis of the Vase 

Texts ІП, 105-110, 297. ‘They were built оп an elevated basement faced with | 
brick or stone with stone stairs leading up to it, and a railing round the verandah. эы: i 
The roof and walls were of wood, covered first with skins and then with plaster, | 
the lower part only of the wall being faced with bricks. There was an ante- | 
chamber and a hot-room and a pool to bathe іп. Seats were arranged round a | 
fire-place in the middle of the hot-room and to induce perspiration hot water was | 


poured from the leathers.’ Again, as we learn from the Digha Nikaya, there were {| 
open air bathing tanks, with flights of steps leading to the water, faced entirely | | 
with stone and ornamented with flowers and carvings. It is needless here to | 

enter into the details of domestic furniture but it is interesting to note, inter alia, | | 
that benches were made long enough to accommodate three persons, that couches Ë 


were covered with canopies, and that there were several types of Asandis, such as 
sofas, armed chairs апа cushioned chairs. 


The plan of a village, outlined in the ninth chapter of Manasara, is theoretical 
for its details do not tally with any of the realistic descriptions by Greek, Chinese 


or Arab visitors. None the less, it is instructive. A village, we are told, should | | 

` be surrounded by a wall or stone pierced by four main gates which should be | 
connected by roads. Тһе villages should thus be divided say into four principal | | 

blocks. A highway should also run round the village and public buildings be і 

$ 


located on it. The whole inhabited arca should be well-supplied Бу ponds and 
tanks. Caste which influenced all life and thought in ancient India did not leave i 
town-planning untouched. It is proposed that the best quarters should be reserved ! 
for the Brahmans and that the Chandalas should live outside the limits of the 3 | 
village. | 

In the interests of sanitation and decency it is laid down that the temples of 
fearful deities and places for cremation should be situated outside the walls. 
Everywhere drains should follow the slope. The tenth chapter of Manasara | 
s&etches, plans for towns on similar lines, making special mention of parks, common 
shops, exchanges, temples, guest-houses, colleges, etc. and giving elaborate 
direction for their construction. It is impossible even barely to touch the fringe 
of the vast subject in the course of a short review. Those interested in this highly EN Ж 
important aspect of ancient Indian culture will do well to consult Dr. Acharya's -— - 
detailed, well-documented and scholarly productions. 


(The Leader, December 4, 1927.) 
I4A 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


= Р 


HINDU ARGHITECTURE 


Notable publications by the United Provinces Government 


All students of Indian Art in England, and a good many in India, shouid be 
grateful to the U. P. Government for these excellent books. "They contain the 
fruits of the labour of an Indian Educational Service officer, who has spent about 12 
years on these works which, to say the least, arc stupendous. 

Except for an essay on the Architecture of the Hindus by Ram Raz published 
in 1834, no attempt till now was made to present the Ancient Indian Architecture 
in a scientific, clear, and methodic way. To Professor Acharya, therefore, goes the 
credit of exploring this field of knowledge like a pioneer worker, and of bringing 
to light a branch of ancient Indian culture which contains interesting, even rather 
fascinating, materials. 

A Wise Term 

Silpa-sastra or Váslu-sastra, which is conveyed by the term ’ ‘architecture,’ is 
much wider than the English term. * It denotes all sorts of buildings, religious, 
residential, and military, and their auxiliary members and component mouldings. 
Secondly, it implies town-planning ; laying out gardens; constructing market- 
places ; making roads, bridges, gates ; digging wells, tanks, trenches, drains, sewers, 
moats; building enclosure-walls, embankments, dams, railings, ghats, flights 
of steps for hills, ladders, ctc. Thirdly, it denotes articles of house-furniture, 
such as bedsteads, couches, tables, chairs, thrones, fans, wardrobes, clocks, baskets. 
conveyances, cages, nests, mills, etc. Architecture also implies sculpture and deals 
with the making of phalli, idols of deities, statues of sages, images of animals and 
birds. It includes the making of garments and ornaments, ctc." 

Professor Acharya has divided his Indian Architecture into five parts which give us a 
very clear idea of the subject, its authorities and all that is generally required for a 
quick apprehension of the subject. 

General Survey 

In Part I Professor Acharya gives a general survey of the whole range of ancient 
Indian literature and bears out ‘that the authors of the Vedic literature were not 
ignorant of stone-forts, walled cities, stonc-houses, carved stones, and brick edifices.’ 
The relics of Mahenjo-daro and Harappa unearthed by the Archaeological De- 
partment under the able guidance of Sir John Marshall give the same evidence 
of a time much earlier than the earliest Veda. The Buddhist and Jain literature 
is replete with reference to buildings, furniture and sculpture of a very high ordei, 
"The classical Sanskrit literature bears the testimony of a very well-developed 
art in all these respects ; several Puranas have an elaborate description of Silpa 
and some of the Agamas whose main objects is » to inculcate the mystical worship 
of Siva and Sakti? devote considerable attention to architecture. 


The Manasara 
In Part II he gives a very detailed summary of the Manasara which is his main 
study as also brief accounts of several other works of well-known authorities 
but which lie buried still in manuscript form. The Manasara contains seventy 
chapters, * the first eight are introductory, the next OX deal with archi- 
tectural matter, and the last twenty are devoted to sculpture. 


15A 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


б; 
АУ ENCYGLOPAEDIA OF 


Here we have what claims to have taken the whole manifestation of architectural 
art as its subject. .. It is up to the present. moment, perhaps. the. most'ambitious 
effort of the kind, and the author has spared no pains to make his work. as complete 
and as illustrative as possible. 

Part III described. the position. of Manasara i in Ee literature апа gives 
certain interesting facts. “The styles are fully described and discussed. . Ме are 
told that, according to Manasára there are three of them,; Nagara, Уазага-апа 
Dravida, and.that.they. apply both to architecture and Dd 

Comparison 

Part IV. compares. Manasara with the well-known treatise of Vitr uvius on. anui. 
tecture which belongs to the first century before Christ.:. Professor. Acharya 
has been trained in scientific methods of criticism in Europe and in this part of the 
work we find a considerable scope for this training. "Тһе comparison is thought- 
ful, reasoned and balanced. Тһе conclusions are cautious and well-supported. 
The author has clearly shown ‘ that there are undeniable similarities between 
the two standard works and that their affinities do not seem ќо be accidental.’ 
He has wisely left the question of the debt, of one author-to the other or of both to 
some common source, quite;open. In the present resources of our knowledge 
it is impossible to arrive at a more definite conclusion. А 

In Part V һе collaborates in а scholarly way both the internal and external 
evidence for arriving at correct age of Manasára., Here we have ample evidence 
of Professor Acharya's unrivalled grasp of the subject, his critical acumen and of his 
indefatigable industry and enthusiasm. іп, having ransacked the`whole of, the 
ancient Indian literature covering thousands of pages in print and in manuscript. 
“The evidence submitted. above would: warrant the extent of the period, of the 

` Manasara from А.р. 500 to 700 '—by no means an unwarranted. conclusion. | 
Defective Language 

It is regrettable that the language in which this important work has bcen 
found is very defective | and’ faulty and has been termed’ ‘ barbarous ‘Sanskrit’ 
Бу authorities like Dr. Bühler and Dr. Sir Ram Krishna Bhandarkar.’ Itis all the 
more ‘creditable for Professor Acharya to have taken’ pains and construed the text 
correctly. In the appendix the learned author’ has given us some ‘idea "o the 
defective language by collecting together the irregularities. d 

"Professor Acharya's Dictionary of Hindu Architecture is a ‘monumental work, the 
first of its kind. It deals with three thousand words relating to architecture and 
sculpture and cognate arts. Under cach term is brought together all the necessary 
informations ` in the form of a "short article illustrated with copious quotations 

from the ancient printed books as well manuscripts, ‘the gencral literature and 
the archaeological records. And this has been done with a thoroughness’ and 
accuracy which are the author's own. ` Füll'quotations for bringing out each and 
every shade’ of the mcanihg'of a word are given; in effect the Dictionary becomes 
more“ of ап Encyclopaedia ` rather ап ‘a Dictionary. The learned author 
has Jaid the 'scholars:and the general” public gaden the deep debt of - opie nion 


by‘ removing а Мемар. еза I EIU rerums 
sus aot Save (The СЕК AM 135 omy ) 


16A. 


‘ 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


TSN REDDER ERS 
= 


ғ ر پد‎ т re > 
E ——— 


—————— ت‎ o 


ts 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


(London correspondent) 

Dr. Prasanna Kumar Acharya, т.к.5., Professor of Sanskrit in the University of 
Allahabad, is now recognized as one of the leading Indian authorities on his special 
subject, particularly in its relation to ancient architecture. Не has recently 
written, under instructions from the Government of the United Provinces, two 
books that should be of considerable value to students, namely A Dictionary 
of Hindu Architecture and Indian Architecture according to Мапазата Silpa-fastra—both 
published by the Oxford University Press. Тһе U. P. Government have borne 
the-expenses of both publications, which will be regarded by scholars as a con- 
tribution of permanent importance in the elucidation of the subjects discussed. 

This is not the place in which to give a lengthy review of these two volumes 
the first of which runs to 861 pages. This book is a monument of erudition and 
patient industry. А man who can produce works of this order must be wholly 
immersed in his subjects. Existing dictionaries, in Sanskrit, English, or any 
other language, do not clucidate the architectural terms of a long distant past, 
and without such a survey as Dr. Acharya has undertaken there could be no 
proper appreciation of the ancient genius. The texts of the Vastu-fastra have, as 
the author stated in his preface, been waiting for hundreds of years to be unearthed 
from manuscripts which are quite inaccessible without the guidance of a special 
dictionary. This is the task to which the author has addressed himself, and those 
who are competent to express an opinion will agree that he has brought to light 
new things hitherto left unexplained in inscriptions and general literature. 

Тһе other work which is somewhat less voluminous, is a Handbook of Indian 
Architecture, Sculpture and cognate Arts. It gives an account of the architecture 
of the Vedic, the Buddhist, and the classical periods of India up to thc Muhamma- 
dan age. Such a work should be of great interest to those in this country, as well 
as in the East whose attention has been drawn to these subjects by the publication 
of the India Society and kindred bodies. There is quite a large constituency 
nowadays to which works of this character, dealing with the ancient arts of India, 
afford a real attraction. An interesting feature of Dr. Acharya’s present 
study is the comparison which he draws between the Indian standard work, 
Manasara, and the European standard work of the Roman architect, Vitruvius. 
The book might have made a more popular appeal if the text had been interspersed 
with a few illustrative re-constructions in plans or drawings, of the architectural 
features described. "This, however, was not the purpose of the author. Rather 
it was to provide a fount of information from which future seckers may gain 
knowledge of an art which can never entirely lose its place in human records. 
What the learned world demands from India is certainty of data in these 
matters, and this has been undoubtedly supplied by Dr. Acharya’s researches. 
In these volumes, and in others that are still in the press, he has illumined a 
comparatively unknown branch of Sanskrit study, and the fruit of his long and 
arduous labours will assuredly be of abiding value to scholars everywhere. 

(The Hindu, Madras, February 23, 1928; 
The Tribune, Lahore, February, 28, 1928 ; 
The Hindustan Review, April, 1928.) 


ІТА 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridw: 


ar Collection. Digitized by S3 


Foundation USA 


AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF 


Extract from the Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, 1928, 


р- бі. 
150. *[Dr. Prasanna Kumar A A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture. 
Oxford University Press: 1927.] See Ал. Bibl. I.A., 1927, no. 124. 

Reviewed : Rüpam, nos. 35—36, July- -Oct. 1928, pp. 39—44, by Akhay 
Kumar Marra. FRAS, 1928, pp. 9436, by H.C.: “ a valuable 
addition . . . careful and painstaking search . . . The printers, however, 
have not turned out the books so well as the E matter deserves." 

The Asiatic Review, 1928, p. 349: “Тһе work is conscientiously carried out 

» Ind. Art. © L., vol. II, рр. 96f., by E. B. Наум: “ „а 
monument of patient —5" which will be оГ invaluable help ut the 


student." 
Dische Lit. Ztg., 1928, columns 659—661, by Sten Konow : “Bei Pionier- 
Arbeiten draff man . . . auf Vollstindigkeit nicht Anspruch machen, 


und was uns gegeben wird, werden wir mit aufrichtiger Dankbarkeit 

entegennehmen." 

РАА, 1928, pp. 566, by Jean Вонот: “ . . . ouvrage teis digne 
d'eloges : en mame temps il n'est pas douteux qu'une edition ulterieure ne 
Pamdilore." 

Asiatica, vol. I, pp. 225f. 

Тһе Pioneer, Allahabad, 13th Febr. 1928. Cp. below CoomaraswaAmy, 
no. 162. 

151. *[ Dr. Р.К. ACHARYA, I.E.S. M.A., D. LITT. :—Indian Architecture according 
to Manasara-Silpa-sastra. Oxford University Press: 1927.] See An. Ай. TRAS 
1927, ПО. 125. 

Reviewed : Rüpam, nos. 35—36, July-Oct. 1928, рр. 33—44, by Akhay 
Kumar Martra. The reviewer offers some criticisms while аспас аше 
the great merits of the work. PIRAS 1928, рр. 943—945; Бу H. C. : 

a valuable addition 

The Asiatic Review, 1928, p. 349: “It is most gratifying that Indian scholars 
adopt the great care generally exhibited by European professors, and Mr. 
P. K. АснавуА is one of them." 

Ind. Art. and L., М. S., vol. II, pp. 96f., by E. B. Науша: . . . a safe 
foundation for future historians of Indian architecture." 

КАА, 1928, p. 57, by Jean Вонот: “ . . . ouvrage tres conscien- 
cieux.” 


18A 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


5 М VE E u 
uec ес Аб. راا حط م ی‎ 


INDEX 


A 


ABODE (àyatana), 50; (āvasatha), 63; 
(pratishtha), 9321 ; (bhavana), 380 ; 
(vis), 464; (stha), 577. 

ApvfuM (garbha), 145; 
(-ri)ha], 146. 

Arms house (ваша), 511. 

ALTAR (chaitya), 176 ; (bali-pitha), 466; 
(vedi), 471. 

AMPHITHEATRE (prekshagira), 364. 

ANTE-CHAMBER (anuóala), 38. 

ANTE-CHAMBER OF A SHRINE (antarita- 
mandapa), 40. 

ANTE-CHAMBER 


[garbha-ge 


WITH ONE OR MORE 
CLOSED sIDES (ardha-Sala), 46. 

APARTMENT (iivaraka), 92. 

APARTMENT ON THE коок (attàlaka), 
12. 


APEX (Sikhara), 490. 

ARBOUR (mandapa), 395. 

ARCH (chitra-torana), 174 ; (jana-chapa- 
kriti), 183; (torana), 216; (patra- 
torana), 294; (makara-torana), 489; 
(vyala-torana), 476. : 

ARCHED ROOF (tunga), 215. 

АванітеСТ (tvashtri), 223 ; (vardhaki), 
448. 

ARCHITECTURE (vastu), 456. 

ARCHITECTURAL MEMBER (makarala), 389. 

ARCHITECTURAL OFFICE (AveSana), 64. 


ARCHITRAVE (pada), 303; (padanga), 
304. 
ARENA (kumari-pura), 125. 


AnM-cHAIR (балапва), 483; (Sattanga), 
512. 

ARMLET (keyüra), 130. 

ARMPIT OF AN IMAGE (kaksha), 05. 

ARRANGEMENT (samsthana), 520. 

ARSENAL ($astra-mandapa), 483. 

Artists (éilpi-lakshana), 494. 

Ascetic (arsha), 62; (muni), 425. 

AssEMBLY (ргайбгауа); 320. 


ASSEMBLY HALL (ауаќапа), 59; (ranga- 
mandapa), 432; (sarnsad), 520. 

ASSEMBLY HOUSE (samiti), 517. 

ASSEMBLY ROOM (asthána-mandapa), 67. 

ASTRAGAL (hàra), 612. 

Аттіс (karna-küta), 105. 

ATTIC ROOM (kitta-Sala), 129; (chüli- 
harmya), 175. 

AUDIENCE HALL (asthana-mandapa), 67. 

AUDITORIUM — (prcksha-griha), 
(-mandapa), 395. 

AUsPICIOUS CEREMONY (griha-mangala), 
I51. 

Aviary (kapota-palika), roo. | 


B 


Back poor (plaksha-dvara), 365. 

Влсметте (hara), 612. 

BALANCE (tula), 216. 

Batcony [alinda(ka)], 46; (andhara), 
53; (nishkasa), 284 ; (vadhü-nataka), 
446, [va(ba)labhij, 449; (bhrama- 
linda), 389. 

BALUSTRADE (alambana), 62 ; (alambana- 
bahu), 62 ; (pada-vedi), 904; (vedika- 
vatapana), 474. 

Вамр (anghrika-vari), 12 ; (bandha), 466; 
(yantraka), 431; (rakta-patta), 431. 

BANNER (jayanti), 184. 

BaR ATTACHED TO THE THRONE (kokil- 
argala), 131. 

Base (ов А COLUMN) (aksha), т; (alam- 


364; 


bana), 62;  (uraga-bandha), 9o; 
(kaksha-bandha), 95;  (kampa-ban- 
dha), 102; (kalaSa-bandha), 110; 


(kukshi-bandha), 120 ; (kuttima), 121 ; 
(kumuda-bandha), 126 ; (kumbhaka), 
127; (kumbha-bandha), 127; (kum- 
bhalankara), 197; (charu-bandha), 
173 ; (janman), 183 ; (patta-bandha), 
291; (padma-keSara), 297 ; (padma- 
bandha), 298; (paduka),- 304; 
(pada-bandha), 304; (ріп), 506; 
(pushpa-pushkala), 313; (prati- 
krama), 317; (prati-mukha), 319; 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


(maficha-bandha) 390 ; (müla-sthana), 
426; (rakta-bandha), 432; (ratna- 
bandha), 434; (vajra-bandha), 445; 
(vapra-bandha), 447;  ($ri-bandha), 
498; (Sri-bandha-kuttima), 498; 
(Sreni-bandha), 500. 

BASEBORN (ugra-jati), 69. 

BASEMENT (adhisthana), 15; (adhara), 
52; (griha-pindi), 150; (janman), 
183 ; (janma-nirgama), 183. 

BAsE MOULDINGS (maha-patta), 
(rakta-kampa), 431. 

Basin (karoti), 103. 

Basket (karanda), 103; (parna-maiijü- 
sha), 302. 

Влтнкоом (majjanalaya), 390 ; (snana- 
droni), 593- 

Bean (hara), 612. 

BEAM (gopana), 157; (tula), 216; (tula- 
danda), 216 ; (parigha), 300 ; (bhara), 
381; (bhara), 38r; (hasti-parigha), 
Orr. 

Вер [talpa(ka)], 194. 

Вер-снамвев (Sayana-mandapa), 483 ; 
(Sringara-mandapa), 497. 

Bep-room (kama-koshta), 115 ; (rahasya- 
vasa-mandapa), 436. 

BED-ROOM or DEITIES (kamya), 115. 


416; 


Brp-srEAD (asana), 64 ; (kakashta), 115; 
(kumbha-pàda), 127 ; [khattaka(-tta)], 
196; (khatva), 136 ; (nishadya), 284 ; 
(pallanka), 303 ; (phalakasana), 365 ; 
(bala-paryanka), 371 ; (mancha), 390 ; 
(matichali), 390. 

BEEHIVE LIKE ORNAMENT (karanda), 103. 

BELLY OF A WHEEL (kukshi), 119. 

Вемсн (proshtha), 365. 

BLIND scREEN (andhara), 53. 

BruE Lorus (pushkara), 312. 

Boar (vahana), 451. 

Borr (indra-kila), 67; 
191; (ghatana), 170. 

Вогт FOR FASTENING роок (argala), 
44. 

ВоврЕв OF A CLOTH (nipya), 286. 

Bounpary (antima), 42. 

BouNDARY MARK (kadanga), 98. 

Box (manjusha), 391. 


(kokilargala), 


INDEX 


BRACELET, (kataka), 05; (pushpaka), 313. 

BRACELET LIKE ARCHITECTURAL ORNA- 
MENT, (katakakara), 96. $ 

BRACKET (паѕіка), 280; (pranala), 316. 

BRAHMAN-VILLAGE (agrahara), 2. 

BRAIDED HAIR (kalapaka), 112. 

BRANCH (śākhā), 484. 

BREADTH (vistara), 466. 

BREAST ORNAMENT (kucha-bandhana), 
120. : 

Brick (ishtaka), 68. 

ВатрбЕ (setu), 527, 531. 

Broan PATH (prapatha), 323. 

Воррніѕт maces (bauddha), 375. 

BUDDHIST RAILING (muddha-vedi), 425. 

BUDDHIST TEMPLE [gandha-kuti (-i)], 143. + 


Buitpine (iśvara-kānta), 69; (upasatha- 
gàra), 89 ; (kàmya), 115; (kuñjara), 
120 ; (kešara), 130; [kailas(s)a], 131; | 
(kona), 131 ; (khadga), 136 ; (kshema), IN 
196; (gaja), 141; (бада), 143; 
(garutman), 145 ; (guva-vriksha), 149 ; | 
(guha-raja), 149; (griha), 150 ; (griha- 

Каша), 150; (griha-chulli), 150; 

(griha-raja), 156 ; [gopurakara (-kriti) ], 

161; (geya), 162; (ghata), 167; 

(chatur-aéra), 170; (chatur-mukha), 

170; (chakra), 170; (chakra-kànta), |! 

170 ; (chandita), 170 ; (charuka), 173; 

(chulli), 175; [chauchala (-vadi)], 

180 ; (chhanda), 181; [jagata, (-ti)], 

182 ; (janaka) 183; (jajna-kanta), 183; 

(jati), 187; (jati-harmya), 188; (jyotish- І 

kanta), 191; (tapash-kauta), 193; 

(tauli), 222 ; (tri-vishtapa), 223 ; (tri- 


bhümi), 223; [danda (màna)], 223; | 
(dandita), 224; (da$a-kanta), 225; i 
(dharana), 246;  (nandana), 255; } \ 
(nandyavarta), 256 ; (пап Ка), 257; EZ S 
(nandi-vardhana), 257;  (paksha- UAM. 
ghana), 287; (panjara-Sala), 298; EM 
(pandi-éàla), 292; (padma), 296; ЗІН 
(parvata), 303; (pafichala), 303; ЕЗ); 
(pundarika), 310; (prithivi-dhara), ІН 


310; (puri), 312; (pushpaka), 313; i 
(prapa), 323;  (prabhava) 325; - Lj 
(pralinaka), 327; (prasada-malika), yy 
364 ; (brahma-kanta), 375 ; (bhadra), И, 
978; (bhavana-kanta), 380; (bhu- | 
kanta), 383; (bhu-dhara), 383; 
(bhtipa-kanta), 383; (bhoga), 388 ; 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


INDEX 


(maficha-kanta), 390 ; (manika), 394 ; 
(malika), дот ; (теги), 427 ; (meruja), 
429 ; (yama-siitra), 431; (ranga- 
mukha), 433; (rathaka), 436; 
ruchaka), 439; (rudra-kànta), 440; 
vajra), 445 ; (vajra-svastika), 446; 
(vardhamàna) 448 ; (vardhani), 448 ; 


virata), 448;  (valabhi), 449 ; 
valaya), 450; (vata), 453; (vasa- 
nikà), 455 5 (vikalpa), 458 ; 
(vijàya), 458; (vipulanka), 460; 


vipulakritika), 460; (vivrita), 464; 
(vimana-chchhandaka), 464; (visala), 


464;  (visva-kanta), 465; (vishnu- 
kanta), 466; (vrisha), 470; (vrita), 
470; (vrishabhalaya), 471; (vedi- 


kanta), 474: (vairaja), 475 ; (vaijayan- 
tika), 475 ; (Sankha), 482; (Sambhu- 
kanta), 483;  (sala-malika), 490; 
.(Sibika-ve$ma), 493; (ауа), 495; 
($ri-kantha), 497; (Sri-bhoga), 498; 
(Sri-kanta), 498;  (srijaya), 498; 
($ri-pada), 498;  ($ri-vatsa) 499; 
(Shat-tala), 500; (shodasagra), 510; 
(satya-kanta), 510;  (sabha-malika), 
517 ; (sarvato-bhadra), 517 ; (sarvakal- 
yana), 517; (sama), 517; (saroruha), 


517; (samudra), 517; (samudga), 
517;  (samchita),520 ; — (sarnpurna), 
520; (sara), 520; (siddha), 521; 


(siddhartha), 521; (sindhuka), 522; 

` (sundara), 525 ; (suprati-kanta), 525 ; 
(subhüshana), 525; (saura-kanta), 
542; (бала һа-таШса), 532 ; (saumya), 
532 ; (skandha-tara), 592; (sthanaka), 
509; (sthira-vastu), 593 ; (sphürjaka), 
593; (svarga-kanta), 594; (svastika), 
594.; (svastika-khadga), 607 ; (svasti- 
kanta), 607; (svasti-bandha), 607 ; 
(harmya-kanta), 610;  (hasti-prish- 
tha), біг; (harisa), 612; (hema- 
Каба), 619; (himavat), 613. 

BUILDING FOR PRESERVING WATER (jala- 
purita-mandapa), 185. 

BUILDING FOR THE WATER 
(ghatikalaya), 168. 

BUILDING MATERIAL (ishtaka, etc.), 68; 
(kolaka), 132. 

BUILDING WIDTH AS MEASUREMENT (apa- 
sarnchita), 42. ; 

BuILDING WITH HEIGHT AS STANDARD 
ов MEASURE (asarhchita), 50. 


CLOCK 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


Kex] 


BUILDING WORK (vastu-karman), 458. 
Воттоскѕ (śroņi), 500. 


C 


Сасе (vyàghra-nida), 475- 

Carvx [kulikanghri(ka)], 198. 

Camp (kataka), 95 ; (skandhayara), 532. 

CaNAL (nàla) 278; (nalika), 279; 
(marga), 421. 

CANAL-HOUSE (nàla-gcha), 279. 

CANE-BOTTOM CHAIR (kochchha), 131. 

Canopy (torana), 216; (prabha), 325 ; 
(vitana), 460. 

CAPITAL (kataka), 05; (kumbha), 126 ; 
(chülika), 175;  (pushpa-bodhaka), 
313; [bodhik(a)], 373; (raja-dhani), 
436. 

CaPrrAL city (cherika), 180; (павага), 
247. 5 

CARPENTER (takshaka), 102; (sūtra- 
dhara), 527. 

CARVING ON THE DOOR (ghata), 167. 

CaskET (mafüjüsha), 401. 

CarrLE-suED (sarhgavini), 519. 

CavE-HOUSE (kandara-griha), 98; (dari- 
griha), 225. 

Сауетто (prati-vajana), 920; (rakta- 
vapra), 432. 

Caviry (nimna), 282; (sushira), 526. 

CAVITY OF A WHEEL (kukshi), 119. 

CıELING (tauli), 222. 

CELL (agara), 51. 

Cement (kalaka), 112 ; (vajra-sarhghata) , 
446; (vajra-lepa), 446; (sandhi- 
bandha), 514. 

CENTRAL COURT-YARD  (brahmangana), 
376. 

CENTRAL HALL [garbha-ge (-ri)ha], 146 ; 
(madhya-koshtha), 412. 

CENTRAL LINE OF A FOUNDATION (garbha- 
sutra), 148. 

CENTRAL PART (brahma-pada), 
(brahmarhga), 376. 

CENTRAL PART OF A TOWN (brahma- 
sthana), 376. 

CENTRAL PART OF A VILLAGE (brahma- 
mandala), 376. 


375; 


же 
Fd 


— 


ы INDEX 


CENTRAL THEATRE (madhya-ranga), 412. 
CHAIN  (érinkhalà), 406; (hûra), 612. 
CHAIN-ORNAMENT (eka-hara), 94. 
Cuar (maiicha), 390. 

CHAIR RAISED ON A PEDESTAL (ctaka- 
padaka-pitha), 94. 

CHAIR WITH MANY LEGS (àmalaka-vantika- 
pitha), 58. 

CHAMBER (koshtha), 133. 

CHANNEL (jala-sütra), 186; (tilamaka), 
214. 

CHAPEL (deva-kula), 229. 

CHARIOT (anila-bhadraka), 38 ; (nabhas- 
van), 957; (nivata-bhadraka), 284 3 
(pavana), 303 ; (pushpa-ratha), 419; 
(prabhanjana) 325 ; (bhadraka), 379; 
(ratha), 435 ; (syandana), 593. 

CHEEK (kapola), ror. 

CHIEF-ARCHITECT (sthapati), 578. 

CHISELLING THE EYE (nayanonmilana), 
258. 

quc (nirvyüha), 284. 

CIRCULAR GOURT IN THE INNER COM- 
POUND (antar-mandala), 4o. 

CIRCULAR FILLET (kampa-vritta), 102. 

CIRCULAR PATH (bhramana), 388. 

CIRCUMFERENCE (nemi), 287. 

Сіту [khalüraka (-rika), 148; 
viddha), 520; (sthaniya)], 592. 

CLASS or BUILDING (abhasa), 54; (stri- 
linga), 577. Š 

CLASS or PEOPLE (karnikara), 108. 

CLASS ОЕ TWO-STOREYED BUILDINGS (ad- 
bhuta), 14. 

CLOSED VERANDAH (апаһага), 53. 

CLosED WALL (koshtha-$ala), 133. 

CruB House [goshthi(-ka)], 162. 

CoFFER WITH A PILLOW (Коба), 132. 

COGWHEEL MEMBER OF THE DOME (amala- 
sara), 43. 

COLLEGE (matha), 391. 

Correr (mani-bandha), 394. 

COLONIAL SETTLEMENT (піуебапа), 284. 

COLUMN (chitra-skambha), 174; (jangha), 
182; (jayanti), 184; (dvi-vajraka), 
244; (pota), 315; (lakshmi-stham- 
bha), 440; (vajra), 445; (saumukh- 
ya) 532; (skanda-kanta), 532; 
(sthanu), 592. 


(ѕатћ- 


LOTUS-SHAPED BASE 


COLUMN HAVING A 
(evarnkanta), 94. 

COLUMN OF THE WALL (kudya-stambha), 
124. 

COLUMN WITH ONE MINOR PILLAR (evarh- 
kanta), 94. š 

COLUMN WITH TWO OR THREE MINOR 
PILLARS (evamkanta), 94. 

COLUMNS OF A PAVILION (gitra), 149. 

COMFORTABLE COMPARTMENT (kâma- 
koshta), 115. 

COMMITTEE [goshthi-(ka)], 162. 

COMPARATIVE HEIGHT (ganya-mana), 141, 

CONSIDERATION OF FORMULAS FOR CORRECT 
DIMENSIONS (ayadi-karman), бо. 

CONSIDERATION OF FORMULAS FOR RIGHT 
PROPORTIONS (ayadi-bhüshana), бо. 

CONVEYANCE (уйпа), 431. 

Corner LEAF (karna-patra), 106. 

CORNER TOWER (karna), 104; 
küta), 286. 

Cornice (kuti), 120. 

CORONATION HALL (abhisheka-mandapa), 
43. 

Corrwor [alinda(ka)], 46 ; (mandapa), 
395. 

CorrAGE (kuti), 120. 

Соосн (anvanta), 42 ; (kakashta), 115; 
(khatva), 136; [talpa (ka)], 194; 
(paryanka), 303 ; (bala-paryanka), 371; 
(mañcha), 390; (vahya), 448. 

COUNCIL CHAMBER (sabha), 515. 

Councm HALL [ba(va) lànaka], 366; 
(madhya-sala), 413. 

Course (màrga), 421. 

CounT (ardha-mandapa), 
gana), 343. 

Court [anka(ga)na], 3. 

COURTYARD [anka (ga) na], 3 ; (nihara), 
286 ; (vasa-ranga), 455 ; (vikata), 458. 

COURTYARDS WITH JAIN IMAGES ОЕ 
GoMATA (betta), 374. 

Cover (anghrika-vari), 12. 

COVERED ARCADE (bhrama), 388. 

CovERLET (upavasana), 88. 

CowsTALL (gotra), 157; 
161 ; (go-matha), 161. 


(netra- 


45; (pran- 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


(goshtha), 


im 


т?” 


INDEX 


m 104; (kuli(i)ra], 128. 

Ж Е IKE ORNAMENT (karnika), 108. 
RENELLE (indra-kosa), 68. 

CREST-JEWEL (Sikhà-mani), 492. 

CROCODILE (kihbara), 117; (graha), 167. 

CROCODILE-SHAPED ORNAMENT (makara- 
kundala), 480. 

CROOKED (kubjaka), 125. 

CROSS-BAR (suchiya), 525. 

Cross-BEAMS (bhàra), 381. 

‘Rown (kirita), 117; (patta-bandha), 
29r; (mauli), 429. 

CRoWNET (ushnisha), 90. 


awas OF THE ENTABLATURE (karnika) 
Io8. 


CROWNING FILLET (uddhrita), 75. 


CROWNING PART OF THE HINDU ŚIKHARA 
(amalašila), 43. 


CRYSTAL PALACE (mani-harmya), 394. 

Cuprr (hasta), біо. 

Curota (anda) 13; 
(kumbha), 126. 

Cusnions (asanda, asandi), 66; 
ka$pu), 115. 

Cusrom House (mandapika), 410. 

Сума (abja), 42 ; (ambuja), 44; (kshe- 
pana), 195. 


(kalasa), 108 ; 


(аба, 


D 


Dapo (Капаһага), 98; (gala), 148. 
(griva), 167. 

DEER FOREST (mriga-vana), 427. 

DzrEGTS OF THE LIMBS (anga-dishana), 


4. | 
DEFENSIVE WALL (dehi), 233. 
Dzrrv-cHAMBER (garbha), 145. 
Dzwr-cops (gandharva), 144; (yaksha), 

421: Е Ў 
Пертн (nimna), 282. m 
DEPTH OF FOUNDATIONS (purushaiijali), 

12. 
Desicner (vardhaki), 448. 
CHED PAVILION OF A TEMPLE WHERE 
2 IDOLS ARE DRESSESD (alankara-man- 
dapa), 46. 
DEVOTEE (bhakta), 377- 


Dravem (ushnisha), go; (kirita), 117; 
(vira-patta), 469. 

DIAMOND BAND (vajra-patta), 445. 

DIAMOND THRONE (vajrasana), 446. 

Dim LICHT (avachchhaya), 48. 

DINNING HALL (abhyavahara-mandapa), 
43; (bhojana matha), 388 ; (harmya- 
garbha), 610. 

Disc ов VisuNu (chakra), 170. 

Dircon (kadaüga), 98; (parikha), 208. 
Dome (kalaśa), 108; (gala-küta), 148 ; 
(stüpa-griha), 576; (stüpi), 576. 
DOoME-LIKE ^ CONSTRUCTION (chaitya- 

griha), 179. 

Door (abhasa), 54; (udumbara), 74 ; 
(Карага), 98; (kavata), 114; (griha- 
mukha), 156; (chhanda), 181 ; (jati), 
187; (dvara), 235; (Srenita-dvara), 
499; (sütra-patti), 527. 

Doon-rRAME (kshepana), 135; (dvara- 
Sakha), 243. 

Doon-rmNrEL (dvàára-$akha), 243. 

Door-moutpiInc  (chatur-varga), 
(madhya-bhuvanga), 412. 

Боов-ровт (durya), 229. 

Dormer wINDOWS (chandra-$ala), 172, 

DouBLE-STOREYED PAVILION (adhiman- 
dapa), 15. 

Dovr-cor (kona-paravata), 132. 

Dove-rmce (kona-paravata), 132. 

DRAFTSMAN (sütra-grahin), 527. 

Drain (jala-dvara), 185 ; (danta-nàla), 
225; (pranala), 316; (soma-sütra), 
541. 

DnawiNG-ROOM (alankara-mandapa) 46; 
[khalüraka (-rika)], 138 ; (bhadra-sala), 
380. 

DmiNKING-HOUSE (madira-griha), 410. 

Drip (nimna), 282. 

Drip-MOULDING (kshepana), 135. 

DRUM OF THE EAR OF AN IMAGE (karott), 
103. 

DwarF PILLAR (upapada), 76. 

Dwe ine (avasatha), 63 ; (a$rama), 64 ; 
(Asana), 64; (durya), 229; (bha- 
vana), 380. 

DwELLING-HOUSE (ауаѕа), 63; (sthana). 


592. 


171; 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


INDEX 


E 


EAR OF THE ELEPHANT (kari-karna), тоз. 

EAR Or AN IMAGE (karna), 104. 

EaR-ORNAMENT (karna-püraka), I07 ; 
(karna-bandha), I07 ; (makara-bhü- 
shana), 389. 

EaR-RING (graha-kundala), 167; (parsva- 
purita), 905. 

Ence (arhéru), 50. 

Eprrice (sukshetra), 524; (stüpa), 574; 
(harmya), 608 ; (hiranya-nàbha), 613. 

EIGHT PARTS OF A BUILDING (ashta- 
varga), 50. 

EIGHTH sTOREY (ashta-tala), 49. 

EIGHT-sTOREYED BUILDING (deva-kanta), 
229; (maha-kanta), 415, ctc. 

ELEVEN-STOREYED BUILDING (arka-kanta), 
44: (isa-kanta), 69; (ckadaga-tala), 
94, etc. 

ELEVENTH sTOREY (ekadasa-tala), 94. 

ENCLOSED SETTLEMENT (ayatana), 59. 

ENCLOSURE (ayatana), 59 ; (avrita), 64; 
(chhanda-prakara), 181; (jati-prakara), 
187; (prakara), 337; (vara), 454; 
(sütalaya), 526. 

ENCLOsURE-BUILDING [khalüraka (-rika)], 
198. 

E WALL (paficha-sala), 988. 

ENLIGHTENED ONE (Buddha), 373. 

ENTABLATURE (alaksha), 46 ; (kuti), 120 ; 
(kuttima), 121; (kumbhalankara), тоу; 
(khandottara), 136; (сорапа), 157; 
(patra-bandha), 294; (prachchhadana), 
315; (prastara), 328; (prastirya), 
337 ; (matta-vàrana), 410; sae 
440 ; (vardhamana), 448 ; (vidhàna), 
460. 

ENTRANCE (dvàra), 235 ; (ргауеќа), 337 ; 
(vesana), 474; (samchara), 519. 
ENTRANCE DOOR (mukha-varana), 424. 
EXGAVATION (garbha-bhajana), 147; 

(garbhavata), 148. 
EXTENSION (bahala), 370. 
EXTERIOR (griha-mukha), 156. 
EXTERNAL SIDE OF A BUILDING (bahir- 
anga), 370. 
Eye (aksha), 1. 
EYE LINES (akshi-rekha), 2. 


F 


FACADE (griha-mukha), 156; (mukha), 
423. 

Face (vaktra), 444- 

Гас OF A BUILDING (griha-mukha), 156. 

FACE OF A SHARK (makari-vaktra), 380. 

Баста (Asya), 67. 

Fam (hatta), 607. 

Farry (vidyadhara), 460. 

FAMILY (parivara), gor. 

FAMILY HOME (griha), 150. 

FAN (vyajana), 475. 

FAN POST (bhrama-danda), 389. 

ГА8Т CONVEYANCE (adika), 52. 

FEMALE APARTMENT (antah-pura), 40 ; 
(garbhagara), 144. 

Ferry [ghat (-ta)], 169. 

FESTIVE HALL (utsava-mandapa), 73: 

FIFTH ENCLOSURE (таһа-тагуааа), 417. 

FIFTH STOREY (pañcha-tala), 288. 

FIGURE HEAD (unhisa), 7o. 

FILLET (antarita), 39:  (alinga), 63 ; 
(uttara), 70 ; (прапа), 89; (kampa), 
102; (kampana), 102 ; (kshepana), 
135; (patta), 289; (rakta-kampa), 
431; (vàjana), 452. 

FINGER (angula), 4. 

FiNGER-BREADTH (angula), 4. 

Fintan (kalasa), 108 ; (salanga), 489; 
(sikhanta), 492. 

FIVE-STOREYED BUILDING (Ка1уапа), 114; 
(paficha-bhümi), 288 ; (yajfia-kanta), 
431, etc. 

Frac (jayanti), 184. 

FLAG STAFF (danda), ооз. 

FLIGHT OF STEPS (achala-sopana), TON 
(kati), 96; (ghatta), 168. 

FLIGHT OF STEPS FOR A HILL (adri-sopana), 
14. 

Егоов (kuttima), 121; (bhauma), 488. 

FLOOR INLAID WITH JEWELS (mani-bhü), 
394. 

FLOWER-BUD (mafijari), 391. 

FLUTE (karuna-vinà), 103 ; (уагһба), 451 ; 
(vina), 468, >= 


«> 


> 


INDEX 


Foor (anghri) 11 ; (charana), 172. 

Еоот-рлтн jangha-pathz Әә. he 
shaka), s E E, ESS (pelk 

FOOT-PRINTS (Sri-pada), 498. 

Foot-prints оғ BUDDIIA (buddha-pàda), 
373- 

Fonrsr (Капага), 115. 

FOREST rorr (vana-durga), 446. 

FORMULA or HEIGHT (utsedha), тера 

FonT (kota), 131; (kolaka), 132; 
(kharvata), 147; (khalüraka (-гіка)], 
198 ; (giri-durga), 149 ; (durga), 226 ; 
(dhanva-durga), 245; (parikha- 
durga), 300; (vahint-mukha), 458 ; 
(sahiya-durga), 519; (sainya-durga), 
28. 

Fortirmp crry (kharvata), 137 ; (durga), 
226. ` 

[FOoRTIFIED TOWN (khetaka), 199. 

Fortress (drona-mukha), 234 ; (sarügra- 
hana), 519; (sthaniya), 592. 

Founnation — (adhi), 53; (garbha), 
145; (garbha-nyāsa), 147; (garbha- 
vinyāsa), 148; (griha-garbha), 150 ; 
(jalanta), 186 ; (deva-garbha), 299 ; 
(bandha), 466; (miila-sthana), 426; 
(vai$ya-garbha), 475; (Silapravesa), 
494. Ы 

FOUNDATION OF A VILLAGE (grāma- 
garbha), 166. 

FOUNDATION PILLAR (müla-danda), 426 ; 
(müla-stambha), 426. 

FouNDATION-PIT (garbha-bhajana), 147; 
(garbhavata), 148; (phela), 465. 

FOUNDATIONS OF TEMPLES  (brahma- 
garbha), 375. 

Еоув-ғасер (chatur-mukha), 170. 

FOUR-STOREYED BUILDING (indra-kanta), 
67; (sadasiva), 513. 

Free Quarters [chhat (-t)ra (-1)], 180. 

FRIEZE OF THE ENTABLATURE (gala), 148. 

Front poor (kulambha-dvara), 128. 

Front room (bhadra-$ala), 380. 

FULL RELIEF (chitra), 173. 

FURNITURE (upadhana), 76; (paravata- 
nida), 305, etc. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


G 
GALLERY [alinda(ka)], 46 ; (deva-kula), 
220. 


GARDEN (pushpa-vatika), 313. 

GARDEN HOUSE (агата), 6r. 

GARRET (chüli-harmya), 175. 

GATE (dvara), 235 ; (vàra), 454. 

GATE-CHAMBER (dvara-koshtha), 243. 

GATE-HOUSE (indra-kanta), 67; (gopura), 
157; (dvaraka); 243; (dvara-sobha), 
243 ; (dvara-harmya), 244; (brahma- 
kanta), 375; (mahà-gopura), 415; 
(Sri-visala), 499; (shoda£a-tala), 500 - 
(saumya-kànta), 532. 

GATEWAY (torana), 216; (pratolt), 321. 

GABLE wiNDOW (netra), 986. 

GIRDLE (kati-sütra), 97. 

Grass (chitra), 173 ; (chitrabhasa), 174. 

Сор% RESIDENCE (devalaya), 231. 

GOLDEN SEAT (Каа, Кабри), 115. 

Granary (koshtha), 192; (koshthaka), 
133; (tandula-mandapa), 193. 

GREAT DOOR (maha-dvara), 415. 

GREAT ELEPHANT (airavata), 95. 

GREAT HALL (maha-mandapa), 416. 

GREEN ROOM (nepathya-griha), 287. 

GROUND FOR HOUSES (kutumba-bhümi), 
I2I. 

GROUND FLOOR [eka-tala(-bhiimi)], 9o. 

GROUP PAVILION (bahu-mandapa), 371. 

GuILD HALL (nigama-sabha), 281. 

GurrER (jala-dvara), 185; (nali), 279. 

Gymnasium  (kumárl-pura), 125. 


H 


HABITATION [geha (-ka)], 156. 

HALF CHAIN OF 64 sTRINGs (ardha-hara), 
46. 

HALF PAVILION (ardha-mandapa), 45. 

Harr-RELIEF (chitrardha), 175. 

Harr (kuti), 120; (griha), 150; [geha 
C m (chatur-mukha), 170 ; 
(danda-kanta), 224 ; (dandaka), 224 ; 
(prakoshtha), 915;  (vikata), 458; 
(vijaya), 459; (sabha), 515. 


a... 


Lx ow" 


at 


ë 


"É. 


INDEX 


HALL BEHIND THE MAIN HALL (anu-£alà), 
38. 

HALL or AUDIENCE (upasthàna-bhümi), 
89. 

HALL-MANSION (kolhi-vesmika), 132. 

Намівт (vataka), 453. 

Hammock (andola), 53 ; (dolà), 192, 233. 

HANGING BALANCE (tula-bhara), 216. 

Heap (kita), 128; (Siras), 493. 

Heap GEAR (karanda), тоз; (kuntala), 
125; (kesa-bandha), 140; (chitra- 
kalpa), 174; (такша), 389; (mauli- 
bandha), 430. 

HriGHT (kautukodaya), 144; (jayada), 
184; (tunga), 915; (dhanada), 244; 
(paushtika), 315 ; (sarva-kàmika), 517. 


HEIGHT оғ A sroREY (bhümi-lamba), ` 


386. 

HEADLINE RUNNING ALONG THE TOP OF 
THE BANISTERS (unhisa), 7o. 

HEAD ORNAMENT (chülika), 175. 

HELMET (Sirastraka), 493. 

Hermirace (arama), 64; 
sthana), 168. 

HIGH RELIEF (chitra), 173. 

Нісн way (raja-patha), 437. 

Нп.-ғовт (giri-durga), 149. 

Hip ов AN IMAGE (kati), 96. 

Нір-РАВТ OF A BUILDING (kati), 96. 

HorLow wMourpmG (aghana), 2. 

Hoy Fic TREE (aévattha-vriksha), 49. 

Horse sTABLE (vaji-$alà), 452. 

Hosprrar (jvara-devalaya), 191. 

House (avastha), 48; (авага), 51; 
(ayatana), 59; (alaya), 63; (kacha), 
115; (kshudra-S4la), 145; (griha), 
150; [geha-(ka)], 156;  [dam(a)], 
225; (dhaman), 246; (pastya), 303 ; 
(Sarma), 483; (Sala), 484; (аЇа- 
griha), 489 ; (Suddha), 496. 

HOUSE WITH FOUR HALLS (chatuh-$ala), 
171. 

HOUSE-ENTERING 
ргауеба), 150. 

Нов or THE WHEEL (kukshi), 110. 

Номр-васкер (kubjaka), 125. 

Hur (kota), 141. 


(ghatika- 


CEREMONEY  (griha- 


HYDRAULIC ENGINEER [jala-sütra (-sütra- 
da)], 1:86. 


I 


Ipor (vigraha), 459; (sakala), 510; 
(sthavara-bera), 593. 

IDOL, PosEs or (ati-bhanga), 13, etc. 

IMAGE (chitra), 173 ; (chitrabhasa), 174 ; 
(bimba), 372 ; (bera), 373; (mūrti), 
426 ; (shodaśa-pratimā), 510. 

IMAGE FOR PROCESSIONS (utsava-vigraha), 
73. 

IMAGE WITH THE RIGHT HALF REPRESENT- 
ING SIVA AND THE LEFT HALF OF HIS 
CONSORT Dorca (ardha-nàrisvara), 45- 

INDIAN ORDERS ($umbharhkari), 496. 

INNER PARTITION (antah-Sala), 41. 

INNER PLINTH (antar-janman), 40. 

INNER ROOM (iivaraka), 92. 

INNER WALL (antah-sala), ді; (antar- 
bhitti), 40. 

INSTITUTION (RELIGIOUS CENTRE) (ghatika- 
sthana), 168. 

INTERIOR CORRIDOR (antaralaka), 38. 

INTERIOR winDows (kuhara), 128. 

INTERIOR OF A WHEEL (kukshi), 110. 

INTERMEDIATE SPACE [antarála (ka)], 38. 

INTERNAL ENCLOSURE IN A TEMPLE (antah 
hàrà), 41. 

INTERNAL PORTIONS OF A MANSION (antah- 
Sala), 41. 

INTERNAL RAMPART (antar-vapra), 40. 

IRIS ОЕ THE EYE (krishna-mandala), 
130. 

Tron (loha), 444. 


J 


JAIN-SAINT (tirthankara), 215. 

JAIN TEMPLE (basadi), 467. 

JAMB (dvara-Sakha), 243; (Sakha), 484. 
Jar (ghata), 167. 

JEWELLED MANSION (mani-harmya), 394. 
JEWELLED PAVILION (mani-mandapa), 394. 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


| 
| 


INDEX 


Joinery (karkata), ro4; [kuli(1)ra], 
128; (tri-karna), 222 ; (danta-kila) 
225; (brahma-mastaka), 376 ; (mahá- 
vritta), 417; (mesha-yuddha), 429; 
(vardhamana), 448 ; (sandhi-karman), 
514; (sarhkirna), 519; (svastika), 594. 

JOINERY RESEMBLING THE SHAPE OF A 
BISECTED HEART (ardha-prana), 45. 

JoiNr (phana), 465; (sandhi), 513. 


K 
Kiosk  (harmika), 608. 


Кітснвм (pachanálaya), 288. 
Kwon (kabandhana), ror. 


L 


LADDER (chala-sopana), 173. 

Larr (nīda), 286. 

LAMP-PILLAR (dīpa-dāna), 226. 

Lamp-posr (dipa-danda), 226 ; (mañju- 
danda), 391. 


.LAMP-POST MOULDING IN THE SHAPE OF 


A WATER-POT (anghrika-vari), 12. 
Lanpwwe [ghat (-ta)], 169. 
Lane (antar-vithi), 40; (janghà-patha), 
183. 


` Larce coucn (asanda, àsandi), 66. 


LancE cyMA (maha-patta), 416; (ma- 
hàmbuja), 417; (maha-vajana), 417. 
LARGE FILLET (maha-patta) 416; (maha- 

vajana), 417. 
LARGE HALL (maha-§ala), 417. 
LARGE VESTIBULE (maha-nasi), 415. 
LARGE VILLAGE (maha-grama), 415. 
Laron (kokilargala), 131. 
Larricep WINDOW (jala-gavaksha), 190. 


LAYING-OUT OF THE VILLAGE (grama- 
vinyasa), 166. 
LAYING THE FOUNDATIONS (garbha- 


nyasa), 147. 
Lear (dala), 225. 
Lear оғ А DOOR (kavata), 114. 
Lec or AN IMAGE (jangha), 182. 
Ілвклвү (dharma-gañja), 245. 
Ілснт SHADOW (apachchhaya), 
(avachchhaya), 48. 


42; 


Тлмїт (antima), 42. 

LINE OF THE EYES (akshi-sütra), 2. 

Lines (karya-satra), 116. 

LINTEL (masüraka), 414; (вуагазапа), 
607. 

Lion’s MANE (Кебага), 130 

Liquor ѕнорз (арапа), 54. 

Lirrer (dola), 192. 

Locariry [griha (-rnana-sthána)-vin- 
yasa], 151 ; (sthana), 501. 

Lock or HAIR (kuntala), 125. 

Lorry HOUSE (attalika), 12. 

LooktNG-GLAss (darpana), 225. 

Lotus (abja), 42 ; (kamala), тоз. 

Lorus FILAMEN rs (keóara), 130. 

Lorus srALK (nala), 278. 

LOWER PART OF AN 
OBJECT (kanya), 98. 

LOWER PART OF A CHARIOT (aksha- 
bhara), 1. 


ARCHITECTUR AL 


Lower PILLARS [kshudra-nàsa(i)], 135. 
LYING-IN-CHAMBER (garbhāgāra), 144. 


M 


MAIN 
MAIN 
MAIN 


BUILDING (mukhya-harmya), 424. 

COLUMN (griha-stambba), 156. 

PILLAR [kulikanghri(ka)], 128. 

MAN STREET (ratha-vithi), 496. 

Матч TEMPLE (miila-harmya), 427. 

Mansion (jati-Sala), 187. 

MANSION WITH ONE ROW OF BUILDING 
(eka-śālā), 94. 

MARBLE (chitra), 
174. 

Mark ON THE FOREHEAD (tilaka), 214. 

Marker (nigama), 281 ; (hatta), 607. 

MARKET PLACE (apana), 53; (mandi), 
410. 

Marr (vasati), 450. 

Masons (Sila-patta-varnóa), 493. 

Masonry (Sila-karma), 493. 

Мат (kasa, ka$pu), 115. 

Мат or sPLIT BAMBOO (kata), 95. 


173. (chitrabhasa), 


Mar or sPLIT CANE (kata), 95. 


9 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


INDEX 


Measure (aratni), 44 ; (kishku) ; 117; 
(gokarna), 156 ; (jati), 187 ; [danda 
(-màna)], 223; (daga-tala), 226; 
(dvi-tala), 244 ; (dhanur-graha), 245; 
(dhanur-mushti), 245 ; (dhanus), 245 ; 
(ratni), — 434; (vitas), 459; 
(ууауа), 475: (Santika), 484. 

MEASUREMENT (aghana-mana), 8 
(ghana), 160; (ghana-mana), 169; 
(lamba-mana), 440. 

MEASUREMENT OF BREADTH (pramana), 
325. 

E ad OF THICKNESS (unmana), 
76. 

MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT OR LENGTH 
(mana), 418. 

MEASUREMENT OF THE INTERSPACE (upa- 
mana), 88. 

MEMORIAL (vira-gala), 460; (vira- 
§asana), 469. 

MEMORIAL PILLAR (kirti-stamha), 119. 

METAL BOLTS [parigha(-gha)], 300. 

MEZZANINE ROOM (koshtha), 133. 

Міррік-роов (brahma-dvara) 375. 

MIDDLE MEMBER (galaüga), 148. ` 

MIDDLE PART OF A WHEEL (kukshi), 
119. 

MIDDLE RELIEF (ardha-chitra), 45. 

MIDDLE TABERNACLE (madhya-bhadra), 
412. 

MIDDLE VESTIBULE (madhya-nàsi), 412. 

MIDDLE WALL (brahma-bhitti), 376. 


MiLrrARY-POST (attalaka), 12. 

MiNARET (karna-harmya), 107. 

Міхов DEITIES (avarana), 63. 

Monastery (ауабапа), 59;  (basadi), 
467; (уіҺага), 466; (satravasa- 
matha), 513. 

MONASTIC ESTABLISHMENT (sthana), 592. 

Monk’s CELL (pari-vena), 302. 

Monts (Капуа), 98; (tula), 216. 

MONUMENT  (dharma-rajika), 245 3 
(nishidhi), 284 ; (vira-kantha), 469 ; 
(vira-karna) 469. 

MONUMENTAL FACE (kirti-vaktra), 118. 

Mosque (masi(-si)ti), 414. 

MOUNTAIN pass [(ghat-(ta)], 169. 


10 


MourpiNG (achchhadana), 52 ; (dsana), 
64; (karika) 103; (karna), 104; 
(karkata), 104; (kumbha), i26; 
(kesara), 190; (kona-loshta), 132; 
(kshepana), 195; (kshdurabja), 135 ; 
[kshudra-nasa(-1)], 195; (баја), 141 ; 
(gavakshakara), 149; (gopana), 157; 
(chitra-patta), 174 ; [jagata (-ti)], 182 ; 
[jayanti(-i)], 1845 _ (tala), 193; 
(taranga), 193; (tatika), 195; (tula), 
216; (tri-patta), 222; (tri-vargaka), 
223; (dandaka), 224; (dandika), 
224; (dala) 225; (dhara-kumbha), 
246; (nataka), 272; (пайка), 273; 
(nidra), 281;  [nib(-v)ida], 282; 
(nirgala), 283 ; (panka), 288 ; (patra), 
293;  (patra-patta), 293; [patra- 
valli-(ka)], 294 ; [padma-(ka)], 296 ; 
(pirna-kamba), 314; (potra), 315; 
[pratika(-i)], 317; (pratima), 317; 
(ргай-рапаћа), 317; (prati-patta), 
319; (ргай-гӣра), 319; (ргай- 
vaktra), 319; (prati), 321;  (prat- 
yanga), 322; (pratyüha),322 ; 
(phalaka), 365; (phala-patta), 465; 
[Bali (-i)ka(-a)], 366; [bali-pitha-(ka) | ; 
366; (bhadra), 878; (bhadra-patta), 
379 ; (bhüshana), 387 ; (mahambuja), 
417; (mudrika), 495; (mushti-ban- 
dha), 425 ; (mrinalaka), 427; (ratna- 
рана), 494; (lambana), 440 ; (vaktra), 
444; (vajra-patta), 445: (valaya), 
450; (vitanka), 459; (vihrita), 468; 
(vetra), 471; (уебапа),474; (бака- 
dhvaja) 476;  (saroruha), 517; 
(sarhgraha), 510; (saushthika), 532 ; 
(harita), 607 ; (homa), 612. 

MOULDING OF THE BASE (antara), 48; 
(antarita), 39 ; (argala), 44. 

MOULDING OF THE ENTABLATURE 
(antarita), 39 ; (kshudra-gopàna), 134. 

MOULDING OF THE PEDESTAL (antara), 38 ; 
(antarita), 39 ; (kumbhalankara), 127. 

MOULDING or THE THRONE (kokila), 131, 

MOUNTAIN pass [ghat (-ta)], 169. 

MOVABLE IDOL [jangama-(bera)], 182. 

MOVABLE LAMP-POST (chala-danda), 173. 


MOVABLE STAIRCASE (chala-sopana), 173. . 


MOVABLE STRUCTURE (chara-vastu), 173. 
Music HALL [natta (natya)-éala], 278; 
[nritta(-tya)-mandapa], 286, = 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


М 


Nau [indra-kila(-ka)], 67; (kila), 119. 
NATURAL FORT (deva-durga), 229. 
Меск (kantha), 97; (kandhara), 98; 
(gala), 148; (galanga), 148; (grīva), 
167. 7 
NECKLACE (graiveyaka), 167. 
NECK-ORNAMENT (griva-bhüshana), 167. 
NEPALESE GHAITYAS (koshthakara), 133. 
NERIUM ODORUM FLOWER (karavira), 103. 
Мевт (nīda), 286. 
Nicue (kumbha-pafijara), 127 ; (gokhla), 
156 ; (goshtha-pafijara), 162. 
NINE GEMS (nava-ratna), 259. 
NINE-STOREYED BUILDING (nava-tala), 258. 
Nose (goji), 157; (паза), 279. 


(0) 


OBSERVATORY (māna-mandira), 420. 
OCTANGULAR BUILDING [ashtaš(s)ra], 50. 
OFFERING (homa), 613. 

Оц-рот (taila-mafijtishika), 216. 

ONE OF THE FIVE PROPORTIONS OF THE 
MEASUREMENT (adbhuta), 14. 

ONE OF THE NINE MATERIALS FOR SCULP- 

TURE (abhása), 54. 

` ONE OF THE SIX FORMULAS FOR ASCERTAIN- 
ING THE RIGHT PROPORTION (arnša), so. 

ONE OF THE SIX FORMULAS FOR THE 
RIGHT PROPORTIONS (aya), 58. 

OPEN HALL (mandapa), 395. 

OPEN. PAVILION (avrita-mandapa), 64. 

OPENING FOR SHOOTING THROUGH IN A 

-PARAPET (indra-kosa), 68. 

OncHARD (vatika), 453. 

ORDER AND ORNAMENTS (ardha-hara), 
46 ; (karavira), 103 ; (kari-karna), тоз; 
(karna-patra), 100 ; (kumbhalankara), 

1127; [kulikanghri(ka)], 128; (kona- 
loshta), 192; (graha), 167; (chitra- . 
Каіра), 174;  [jàla-(ka, ka)], 188; 
[tat(-d) añka], r95; (darpana), 225; 
(nakshatra-mala), 247;  (pada-jala), 
304; (par$va-puli), 305 ; [palika(-i) J, 
305 ; (bhüshana), 387 ; (makarapatra), 


389; (misrita), 423 ; (mukula), 423 ; 
(ratna-kalpa), 433;  (ratna-pushpa), 


II 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


434: (rudra-bandha), 440; (lamba- 
patra), 440 ; (valaya), 450; [vastra- 
nip(y)a], 450 ; (Sankha-kundala), 482 
(Sankha-patra), 482 ; 
(Sri-kara), 497; 
(harita), 607. 
ORNAMENT AT THE BASE (kataka), 95. 
ORNAMENTAL BAND (chitra-patta), 174. 
ORNAMENTAL TREE (kalpa-druma, kalpa- 
vriksha), 112; (Sri-vriksha), 499. 
ORNAMENTED HAIR (dhammilla), 245. 
OUTER COURT (bahir-anga), 370. 
OUTER PLINTH (bahir-janman), 271 
OUTER ROOMS (bahya-sala), 371. 
OUTER WALL (bahir-bhitti), 371. 
OUTSIDE PARTITION (bahir-bhitti), 371. 
OVAL BUILDING (саја), 141 ; (dvyasra- 
vritta), 244 ; (bhü-mukha), 386. 
Ovoro (uttaroshtha), 71. 


P 


Paintinc (chitra), 173. 

PAINTER (vardhaki), 448. 

PALACE (prasada), 343 ; (raja-harmya), 
437: (saudha), 531. 

PALANQUIN (Sibika), 492. 

Раім (tala), 193. 

PANEL OF A DOOR (kapata), 98; (kavata), 


(Siralamba), 493 ; 
(sumangali), 526 ; 


114. 
PARAS [khalūraka (-rika)], 158. 
Parapet [danda(-mana]), 223 ; (para- 
ta), 298. 
Parapet starr [jayantika(-ka)], 184. 
Partour [khalüraka (-гіка)], 148. 
PART ОЕ A TOWER [suka-nasa(-sika)], 495. 
PART OF COLUMN (upatula), 76. 


‘PART OF THE BODY BETWEEN THE BREAST 
AND BACKBONE (brihati), 472. 


PART OF THE EYE ($veta-manda), 500. 

PART OF THE PILLAR (koshthaka), r33. 

PARTITION (bhitti), 381. 

PARTITION WALL (antar-bhitti), 40. 

ParH-MAKER- (tirthankara), 215. 

PAVED WITH SMALL PIECES OF STONE 
(karkari-krita), 104. 

PAVEMENT (uttanapatta), 71; (kutti- 
ma), 121. 


5 (karna-küta), | PAVILION WITH T 


Mn s 


kara), 108. 
PEAK (küta), 198. 
PEARL-sTRING (mani-bandha), 394. 


INDEX 
PAVILION (abbasa), 54 
105; (kanta), 115;  (kàmàkshi- 
dharma-mandapa), 115; (kula- 
dhàrana), 128; (kau$ika), 134; 
(kausalya), 134; (gandha-madana), 
144; (jaya-bhadra), 184; (jayala), 
184; (dandaka), 204; (dandita), 
224;  (darbha), 255; (devata- 


татара), 920; (dhanada), 244; 


(nandana), 255 ; (nandi-mandapa), 
255; (nava-raüga), 258 ; (nirvasa- 
mandapa), 283 ; [nisha-daja (-dha)], 
284;  [padma(-ka)], 206; (рагі- 
yatra), 505; (pushpaka), 313 ; 
(pushpa-bhadra), 313;  (pratima- 
mandapa), 319; (pragata), 944; 
(buddhi-sankirna), 373; (bhadra- 
mandapa), 380; (bhaga-paficha), 380; 
(bhüshana), 497; (mangala), 389; 


(mani-bhadra), 394, 417; (man- 
Чара), 395; (mana-bhadra), 420 ; 
(manava), 420; (malika), 421; 


(malika-mandapa), 423 ; (malyaja), 
423;  (malyàhuta), 423; (mukha- 
mandapa), 424;  (meruja), 429; 
(maulika), 430; (yajia-bhadra), 
431 ; (yaga-mandapa), 431 ; (тайда), 
432; (ratna-maandapa), 434. 5 
(vastu-kirti), 458; (viniyoga-man- 
Чара), 460 ; (уігавапа), 470; [vrita 
(-tta)], 470 ; (vrisha:mandapa), 471 ; 
(Satardhika), 482; (Satru-mardana), 
483 ; (Sishta-mandapa), 495 ; (буата- 
bhadra), 497; (Srutim-jaya), 499; 
($rirüpa), 499; (sati-mandapa), 510 ; 
(satra-mandapa), 519; (sirhha), 522; 
(sukhanga), 524; (sugriva), 525; 
(subhadra), 525; (suratt » 526; 
(suSlishta), 526 ; (snapana-mandapa), 


599; (snana-mandapa), 593; 
(snapana-mandapa), 593; (sthapana- 
mandapa), 593;  (svastika), 594; 
(harita), 607; (himaja), 612; 


(hema-küta), 613. 


PAVILION FOR DRESSING OF IDOLS (deva- 
bhüshana-mandapa), 230. 


PAVILION FOR MARRIAGE CEREMONY (viva- 
ha-mandapa), 464. 


PAVILION WITH FIFTY PILLARS ( jayavaha), 
184. 


PAVILION WITH FIFTY-EIGHT PILLARS 
(amrita-nandana), 43. 


12 


4 


WENTY PILLARS eal 


PEDESTAL (upapitha), 76; [khattaka | 
(-tta)] 196 ; (ghrita-vari), 170 ; 
(chatuh-sila), 17%: (padma-pitha), 


297; (pindika), 306 ; 
317; (bhadra-pitha), 
bhadra), 390 ; (maha-pitha), 
(ruchira), 439 ; (vedi-bandha 
(vedi-bhadra), 474; ($ri-bhadra), 498 

PEDESTAL MOULDING (arnsuka), 

Рес (torana), 216. 

PENDENT (avalambana), 48 ; 
hàra), 440. 

PENTROOF (ambara), 49; 
103 ; (kshoni), 146; ( 
(іуа), 191 ; (jyotih), 191 ; (pushkala), 
312; [ba(va)sundhara], 370; 
(vasudhà), 450; (vikalpa), 458. 

PETAL (kshepana), 135 ; (dala), 225. 

PHALLI (aneka-linga), 48; (sahasra- 
linga), 519. 

PHALLUS [a(r)dra-püshákriti], 


50. 


(karavira), 
gagana), 141 ; 


52 


(prati-bhadraj, 
379 ; (maücha- 
416; 
), 474; 


(lamba-) 


` 


(arsha), 62 ; (udbhüta), 75; (ürdhva` 


dhàrana), 92; (kala-mukha), 116, 
(сапауа), 149; (chhanda), 181; 
187; [daivika(-linga)], 233; 
linga), 281; (pafichayatana), 288 ; 
(paràrtha-linga), 909; (pasupata), 
305; (bahu-linga), 371 ; (manusha), 
421; (уата), 454; (vikalpa), 458 ; 
(svayambhü), 504; 
594- i 

Рістовв GALLERY (chitràgara), 174. 

Ртввом (kapota), 98. 

PIGEON-HOUSE [kapota-pàlikà (-pali)], 
100. 

Ріке ($üla), 496; ($ula-kampa), 496. 

PILASTER (anghri), 11; (antima), 42; 
(kudya-stambha), 124 ; (koshtha- 
stambha), 133. 

PrLLAR (aghana), 2; (ayika-pàda), 61 
(uchchhraya), 69 ; (kumbha-stambha) 
127; (koshtha-stambha), 133; [ganda? 
bheranda (-stambha)], 143 ; [garuda 
sk(-t)ambha], 145 ; (charana), 172 - 
(chitra-karna), 174; (jangha), 182 3 
[danda(-mana)], 223; (dandaka), 2245 
(dharma-stambha), ` 245 ; (dhanya; 

stambha), 246; (аһагапа), 246; 


, 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


4. 


(svarna-linga), | 


(ja): | 
(паһа- | 


———— MÀ 


INDEX 


(padma-kanta), 297; (pada), 303; 
(palika-stambha), 305;  (brahma- 
kanta), 375 ;; (yüpa-stambha), 431; 
(Salanga), 489; ($iva-kanta), 495; 
(Sukanghri), 496 ; (stambha), 592. 

PILLAR or уістову (uchchhraya), 69; 
(jaya-stambha), 184. 

Рплоуу (upadhàna), 76. 

Pin [indra-kila(-ka)], 67; (kila), 119. 

Ріммасі.в [kala§(s)a], 108 ; (Sikha), 492. 

Pin-point (kila-bhajana), 119; (kila- 
§ilaka), 119. 

Pire (tilamaka), 214. 

Рітснек [kalaé$(s)a], 108; 
126 ; (ghata), 167. 

PLANT (karavira), 103. 

PLANTED FOREST (upavana), 88. 

PrasrER (kalaka), 112 ; (vajratara), 445: 

PLASTERING (upalepana), 88; (kudya)? 
123. 

PUE (prati-mukha), 319. 

PLATFORM (chara), 173 ; (ргавайа), 343; 
[ba(va)lanaka], 366. 

ЫА ОМ OVER А WELL [jagata (-t1)], 
182. 


(kumbha), 


PLAYHOUSE [nàtya-griha (-mandapa,- 
veáma,-$alà)], 273. 

PLEASURE GARDEN (arama), бі; 
(udyana), 75; (upavana), 88. 

PrEASURE-HOUSE  (krida-ketana), 134; 


(sukhalaya), 525; (saukhyaka), 531. 

Printu (adhara), 52; (kumbha), 126; 
(kshudra-gopana), 134 ; (janman), 183; 
(tunga), 215. 

PLINTH OF A RAILING (àlambana), 62. 

PLOT or THE біте plan (pada), 294. 

ProucH (laügala), 441. 

Ргоосн-ике (langalakara), 441. 

Pruwn LINES — (prishtha-sütra), 
(pralamba), 325. 

PLUMB LINE BY THE HIPS (kati-sütra), 97. 

Poison (kala-küta), 116. 

Poot (udapana), 74; (tadaga), 192. 

Porcu (ardha-mandapa), 45; (Яеһага), 
299. . 

БООЗ СО (nishkasa), 284; (netra), 986; 
(netra-bhadra), 286 ; (purato-bhadra), 
311 ; (mukha-bhadra), 424 ; (ruchira), 
439; (vatayana), 453. 


314; 


I3 


Pose (tri-bhanga), 222 ; (bhanga), 977; 
(sama-bhanga), 517. 

Posr (kila), 119; (vishkambha), 465; 
(stambha), 533. 

PosrURE (padmasana), 298. 

Por (ghata), 167. 

Power (Sakti), 476. 

PRIVATE ENTRANCE (kampa-dvara), 102. 

PRIVATE ROOM (garbhagara), 144. 

PRIVATE scHooL (kula), 127. 

Projectinc (bahir-mukha), 371. 

Projection (kshepana), 135 ; (nirgama), 
282; [nimna(-ka)] 282; (bahala), 
370 ; (bahulya), 371. 

PROPORTIONAL MEASUREMENTS (bhaga- 
mana), 380. 

Purrrr (тайсһа), 390. 

PuBLIC ROAD (rAja-vithi), 437. 


Q 


QUADRANGULAR BUILDING (chatush-kona), 
171. 
QUARTER (antariksha), 39. 


R 


RAISED PLATFORM (avasána), 49. 
RAISED TERRACE  [dehari(-li)], 
(bodhimanda), 374. 
Rampart (уарга), 446 ; [sala(-la)], 520. 
RECEPTACLE (шай)йвһа), 901. 
RECEPTION-HALL [khalüraka (-гіка)], 138 
RECEPTION-ROOM (upasthana), 89. 
Recess IN A WALL (gokhla), 156. 
RECTANGULAR BUILDING (uttambha), 70 ; 
(brahma-mandira), 376. 
RECTANGULAR MOULDING 
(upana), 89. 
Rerecrory (bhoga-mandapa), 388. 
RELIGIOUS CENTRE (ghatika-sthana), 168. 
RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENT (a$rama), 64; 
(patta-Sala), 292. 
REFUGE-OFFERING POSE OF THE HAND OF 
AN IMAGE (abhaya), 43. 
RESERVOIR OF WATER (jala-sthala), 185, 
RrstpENCE (ауаза), 63; (kula), 127; 
(vasati), 450; [vasa(-kuti, Sala, 
sabha)], 455 ; [satra(-ttra)], 511. 


233; 


(uttara), 70; 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


INDEX 


RESIDENTIAL QUARTERS FOR THE ANCIENT 
PROFESSORS AND THEIR PUPIL (асһагуа- 
kula), 51. 

REST-HOUSE (avasatha), 48; (avasatha), 
63 ; (dharma-sala), 245; (dharma- 
aya), 245 ; [satra(-ttra)], 5rr. 

RIDING ANIMAL OF THE GOD ІЗ (airà- 
vata), 95. 

Кім (arhgaru), 50. 

RIVER va(va)-ha-(ka,la), 451. 

Roan (Капага), 


115; (charya), 173; 
(jarigha-patha), 183 ; (пагасћа), 278 ; 
(nabhi-vithi), 278; (patha), 294; 


(parirathya), 300; (mangala-vithi), 
390; (marga), 421 ; (vàta), 453. 

ROAD HAVING THE FOOT-PATH ON ONE 
SIDE ONLY (cka-paksha), 93. 

Roap-smE HUTS (арапа), 54. 

Кор or A BALANCE (tula-danda), 216. 

Roor (achchhadana), 52; [garbha- 
тайјаѕһа (-ika)], 147; (tauli), 222 ; 
(dharana), 246 ; (prachchhadana), 315; 
(prasada-tala), 394 ; [va(ba)labhi(-1)], 
449; (vata-kshetra), 453; (harmya-tala), 
10. 

Roor or A-HOUSE (anu-griha), 27: 

Коом (agara), 51; (Uvaraka), 92; 
(kshudra-sala), 1353 (griha), 150; 
[suka(-kha)-nasika]; 524. 

КОРЕ (anghrika-vari), 12. 

ROUND BUILDING (ushnishi), до ; (riksha- 
nayaka), g2 ; [kala$(s)a]; 108; (dun- 
dubhi), 296; (maha-padma), 416 ; 
(mukuli), 429. 

Round CORNER WALL (langala-bhitti), 
441. 

ROUND TEMPLE (sva-vriksha), 594. 

Rovar сіту (sena-mukha), 528. 

Rovar courr (rajanga), 439. 

RovAL PALACE (raja-griha), 436. 

ROYAL RESIDENCE (Sibira), 493. 


S 


SACRIFICIAL HALL (yāga-śālā), 431. 

SACRIFICIAL POST (drupada), 
(sthüna), 593. 

SANCTUARY (vimana), 461. 

SCHOOL FOR HIGHER STUDIES (kumari- 
pura), 125. 


234; 


SCHOOL or ARCHI 
HITECTURE ЇЇрї-&з15 
ma (Silpi Sala), 
Sctence (Sastra), 490. 
SCIENCE oF ARCHITEC à 
Е OF geet URE (тазу ууз 
458 ; (Silpa-sastra), 494. n 


SCREEN WORK (alaksha), 46. 
SCREEN WORK IN ARCHES (indra-k 
Scriptures (agama), 5I. 
SCULPTURAL MEASUREMENT 
50, etc. ; (uttama-daga-tala E 
(uttama-nava-tala), 70; (tala-mána), 
195. J 
SCULPTURAL ORNAMENT 
10%; (chhanna-vira), 18r. 
SEA-SIDE TOWN (dronaka), 2934. 
SEAT (sana), 64; (upavedi), 
[khattaka (-tta)], 136; 
307 ; (sadas), 513; (sadana), 513. 
SECOND counr (anya гайра), 42. 
SECOND FLOOR (tri-tala), 229. 
SECTARIAN MARK (kalapaka), 119. 
SECTIONAL TOWER (khanda-harmya), 136. 
SET ОҒ FOUR ARCHITECTURAL MEMBERS 
(chatur-varga-kantaka), ТИЛ? 
бетте (asanda, asandi), 66. 
SEVEN-FOLD WALL (sapta-salà), 515. 
SEVEN-STOREYED BUILDING (aSramagara), 
64, etc. 
SEVENTH STOREY (sapta-tala), 
[sapta-bhümi-(ka)], 515. 
SHADOWLESS SPOT (avachchhaya), 48. 
SHARK [kimbara(-ri)], 117; (graha), 167. 
SHED (kota), 131; (ргав-уатаба), 343; 
(Sranta), 497. 
Suoor [majijari(i)], 391. 
Snor (Арапа), 53; (nishadya), 284. 
SHRINE (kirtana), 117; (ига), 215; 
[deva-kula(ika)], 229 ; (basadi), 367. 
SIDE-DOOR (kampa-dvara), 102. 
SIDE-HALL (netra-$alà), 286 ; 
sala), 287. 
SipE-NICHE (karna-küta), 105. 
5ІрЕ-ОВЈЕСТ (karna), 104. 1 
SıDE-TOWER (karna-harmya), 107 ; (gala- 
kita), 148. 
CORAM (netra-bhitti), 286. 
SIKH TEMPLE (guru-dvara), 149. 


оба), 68, | 


88 ; 


514; 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


— 


(ashta-tala), | 


(karuna-vina), 


[pitha(-thika) 


(paksha- j 


| 


INDEX 


% SINGLE PHALLUS (cka-liriga), 94. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


SINGLE-STOREYED BUILDING — [cka-tala 
(-bhümi)], 92. 

SITE FOR THE Houses (kutumba-bhümi), 
I2I. 

SirE-PLAN (аѕапа), 64; (i$vara kanta), 
69; (ugra-pitha), 69; (upa-pitha), 
76—88 ;  (ubhaya-chandita), одо; 
(karnashtaka), 105; (ganita), 143; 
(chandita), 170; 
172; (tadbhadra), 193; (ігі-уша), 
223; (de$ya), 233; (nishkala), 284, 
etc.; (pada-vinyása), 205; (padma- 
garbha), 297; [parama-Sadhi(-yi)ka], 
298; (pechaka), 315; (paisacha), 315 ; 
bhadra), 378; (mahà-pitha), 416; 
vipra-bhakti), 460 ; (vipra-garbha), 
460 ;. (vipra-kanta), 460; (vipula- 
bhoga), 460; (vive$a), 464; (visal- 
aksha), 465;  (vi$vesa-sara), 465; 
(sakala), 510;  (susamhita), 526; 
(sürya-visalaka), 527 ; (sthandila), 578. 

SITTING POSTURE (sana), 64.- 

Six-FonMULAS (ayadi-shad-varga), 
(shad-varga), 500. 

Six-sroREYvED BUILDING — (ikshu-kánta); 
67; (upakanta), 76; (kamala), 102; 
(kantara), 115; (ratna-kanta), 433, etc. 

Srxty-rour arts (kala), III. 

Sky (ambara), 43. 

Sky-LicuTs [chandra-sala(-lika)], 172. 

SLIGHTLY BENT POSE (abhanga), 54. 

Stopinc ROOF (maddala), 411. 

SLOPING AND PROJECTING MEMBER OF 
THE ENTABLATURE REPRESENTING A 
CONTINUED PENT-ROOF (ananta), 37. 


білім QUARTER (basadi), 367. 

SMALL BEAM (kshudra-gopana), 134. 

SMALL сума (kshudrabja), 135. 

SMALL DOOR (upadvara), 76. 

SMALL HALL (kshudra-éalà), 195. 

SMALL Lotus (kshudrabja), 135. 

SMALL NOSE (alpa-nasika), 48 ; [kshudra- 
nasa(-i)], 135. 

SMALL PILLAR (aüghri), I1. 

SMALL sEAL (mudrika), 425. 

SMALL VESTIBULE (аЇра-паѕіка), 48. 

SMALLER BUILDINGS (dandita), 224. 


бі; 


(chandra-kanta), | 


SMALLER PEDESTAL (upa-vedi), 88. 

Sora [talpa(-ka)], 194; (maficha), 390. 

боп. [bhümi-(ka)], 385. 

Sore (tala), 193. 

Sou (ghana), 169. 

Sprre (vriddha), 470 ; (stüpi-kila), 577. 

SPORTS GROUND (kumári-pura), 125. 

Sprout [mafjari(1)], 391. 

SQUARE HALL (Sibika-garbha), 492. 

SQUARE PLANK (pralamba-phalaka), 327. 

STABLE FOR ELEPHANTS (darbha), 995. 

STADIUM (Китагі-рига), 125. 

STAGE (nàtya-mandapa), 278. 

STAGE PROPER (ranga-pitha), 422. 

STAIRCASE коом (mukha-bhadra), 424. 

STAIRS (sopana), 528. 

Stake (kila), 119; (Sanku), 476. 

5татив (pratima), 318;  [se(-si)la- 
rüpaka], 528. 

Steps (pradakshina-sopana), 323. 

STONE-BULWARKS (pashya), 305. 

STONE COLUMN (Sila-stambha), 494. 

STONE Mason (śilā-marddaka), 
(si(-Si)la-vata], 522. 

STONE TERRACE (pashana-vedi), 305. 

Store-House (koshthagara), 133. 

StorE-Room  (üvaraka), 92; (koSa- 
mandapa), 132;  (koshtha), 133; 
(tandula-mandapa), 193; (nidhana), 
981. 

SToREY (tala), 193; 
[bhümi-(ka)], 385. 

STOREYED BUILDING (mürti-kànta), 426 ; 
(megha-kanta), 427; (meru-kanta), 429; 
(yama-kanta), 431; (raurava), 440 ; 
(vajra-kanta), 445. 

STOREYED MANSION (danda-kanta), 224. 

STREET (jangha-patha), 183 ; (vithika), 
468. 

STRING 
NECK 


49%; 


(bhüma), 385; 


OF PEARLS WORN ROUND THE 
(ardha-hara), 46. 

Srucco (sudha), 525. 

Srupio (Ауебапа), 64. 


- STYLE OF ARCHITECTURE (dravida) ; 233 ; 
(nagara), 260; (vesara), 475. 

SuB-TEMPLE (upabhavana), 88. 

Sucar (Sarkara), 483. 


15 


СС-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by 53 Foundation USA 


MS 


INDEX 


SUGARCANE-LIKE MOULDING (b 
Summir (küta), 128. 
SUN-EAGLE (garuda), 144. 
SUPERNATURAL BEINGS (nàga), 259 
SuPERVISORS OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF 
А TEMPLE (КагараКа), 116. 
SuPPORT (bhàraka), 381. 
SURROUNDING sTEPS (bhitti-sopana), 383. 
SURROUNDING WALL (koshthaka), 133. 
SWING (andola), 53 ; (dola), 192 and 
233; (nirgala), 283. 
Ѕумвог. (linga), 441 ; (svastika), 594. 


T 


TANK (tadaga), 192 ; (pushkarini), 312 ; 
“[vapi(-pi)-(ka)], 454. 

TAVERN (арапа), 54; (madira-griha), 
410. 

TEMPLE (ayatana), 59; (laya), 63; 
(asana), 64; (kirtana), 117; (ghatika- 
sthàna), 168; (devayatana), 230; 
(deva-niketa-mandala), 230 ; [dehari 
(-h)], 233;  (bodhigriha) 374; 
(mandapa), 395; (mandira), 413; 
(Siva-mandapa), 495 ; (sadana), 513; 
(sadman), 513. 

TEMPLE OF THE GOD OF FEVER (jvara- 
devalaya), 191. 

TEMPLE OF THE Jains [jina-(ka)], тоо. 

TEMPLE WITH IDOL IN THE ERECT POSTURE 
(asarnchita), 50. 

TEMPLE WITH THE IDOL IN THE RECUM- 
BENT POSTURE (apasamchita), 42. 
TEMPORARY BUILDING (chara-vastu), 173. 
TEMPORARY IDOL (kshanika-bera), 134. 
"TEMPORARY TEMPLE (kshanikalaya), 134. 

Темп (tatika), 195. 

'TEN-STOREYED BUILDING  (antariksha- 
kanta), 39; (abja-kanta), 43 ; (man- 
dara), 413, etc. - 

TENTH-sTOREY (da$a-tala), 225 ; (daga- 
bhümi), 226. 

"TERRACE [alinda (ka)], 46; (dehara) ; 
292; (pradakshina), 322 ; [vithi(-1)], 
468, (&lavedi), 494. 

TESTICLE (pinda), 306. 

TESTING THE боп. (bhü-pariksha), 383. 

THE Goose (brahma-vahana), 376. 


ahala), 370, 


THE HEIGHT ов ANIMAL I 


T : X | 
Oma IDOL OF WHoy Tug PORTION f | “Т 
t VEHICLE (ауа), 7j FORMER 5 | {Т 
тыш" (па{аКа), 272; (г) [Т 
EN 5 пса ; 
rua (ghana), 169. ^ Ea), 432. | іш 
HIRD STOREY (tri-tala) | 
bhümi), 223. Ыз (oi 
Тыңту-конт MYSTIC MARK | 
trirhšat-kala), 50. CARS (йш 
TunEE-EA 
“EAR-PATTERN (tri-kay 
THREE-F (tri-karna), aon | a 
E OLD BAND (tri-patta), ооо | 
HREE-FOLD WALL [tri-bhitti-(ika ; 2 
THREE-FOURTH OF AN INCH ( еі ee | 
AN INCH (айша) 
Tunzz-sro ени. 
-STOREYED BUILDING (kamal. t 
p NG  (kamalanga), | WT 
у озне (kulambha-dvara), 128 | i| E: 
HRESHOLD OF A DOOR [dehari(-11)], ә | m 
THRESHOLD ов А un | 
š J HOUS | Ts 
ғ; Е (udumbara), | 1 Ts 
Е А | “TR 
THREAD-HOLDER (sütra-dhàrin), 527. | | 
Turoar (kantha), 97. | Ts 
Š 
THRONE (sana), 64; [khattaka(-tta),] | | Tr 


136; (padma-bhadra), 298. (рааа- 
bandhaka), 304 ; (bhadrasana), 380; | f] "TR 


(vijaya) 459; (Sri-mukha S. |. 
(вітаћаѕапа), 522, etc. ^ 499; 5; 
THRONE-LIKE SEAT (àsanda, asandi), 66. | ii TR 
TIARA (kirita), 117. ' | ory 
Тір or THE HAIR (keSa-kiitaka), 130. i Ty 
Toms (nisaddhi), 284; ($ma$àna), 497. | PI 
TOOTH-LIKE JOINERY (danta-kila), 225. | 1 2 
Тор or ORNAMENTAL TREE  (mauli- ЕЕ 
munda), 430. | | ( 
Тор or A BUILDING (ushnisha), 90; 21 ( 
(каға), 128. ; 4 4 
Тор-роов (mani-dvara), 394. k 
Top-END (Sirsha), 495. | | Tw 
Tw 


Тор-ғгоов (maha-tauli), 415. 

Тор-кхот (keša-kütaka), 130. M (c 

Top-KNoT ON THE BUDDHAS HEAD | 
(ushnisha), 9o. 


'Тормозт room (upatalpa), 76; (küta- 
/ 


gara), 129. ue Ом 
Top-ROOM [chandra-sala (-lika)], 172 о 
(munda-malika), 25; їндє | Urr 
harmya), 425; [lalata (-mandapa)], 44 “4 | О 
‘Top winpow (mani-dvara), 394 | i 
16 | | 
л 


сете 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


i “Торв (dharma-rájika), 245. 

i TonromE (pashana-kürma), 305. 

‚| Torus (ghata), 167. 

| Tower (attalaka), 12; 
kita), 105; (karna-harmya), 
[kala$(s)a], 108;  (chülika), 
(chüli-harmya), 175; 
104; (пігууйһа), 284; 
395. 


TOWER WITH OPEN VERANDAHS (khanda- 


harmya), 196. . 


Town (kubjaka), 125 ; (jayanta-pura), 


184 ; (nigama), 281 ; [pattana(-na) |, 
ig | 201, etc. 
" TowmwsurP (pur), 310. 
^| "TRADERS ASSEMBLY (nigama-sabha), 281. 
^ | TRADING CORPORATION (mani-grãma), 
i 394. 
| Trap (aüghrika-vari), 12. 

| Treasury  (koSa-mandapa), 
(nidhana), 281. 

1| Tree (karnikara), 108; (dharana), 246. 
| TnELLIO WINDOW (jali), rgo. 
{Таман (кадалса), 99; (dehi), 233. 

¿| Trian (tri-mürti), 223. 

` TRUNK OF AN ELEPHANT (hasti-hasta), 

612. 

, Trustees [goshthi-(ka)], 162. 

‘TURBAN (pushpa-patta), 313. 

‘Turret (anghri), rr ; (karna-harmya), 
107; [talpa(ka)], 194 ; (niryüha), 
283 ; [va(ba)labhi(-i)], 449 ; ($riüga); 
496 ; (hasti-nakha), 611. 

TWELVE-STOREYED BUILDING  |kalinga- 
(kanta)], 116 ;. [kerala- (kànta)], 190; 

| (dva-daása-tala), 235 ; (madhya-kanta), 

' 412; (magadha-kanta), 417 ; (varnša- 
kanta), 452, etc. 

| Two stipes (dvi-paksha), 244. 
| Two-sToREYED BUILDING (antika), 42 ; 
22 (dvi-tala), 244 


132 ; 


" U 
] 


VUNDER-GROUND SHRINE (gabhara), 144. 
“University (vi$va-vidyálaya), 465. 

| UPPER HALL (urdhva-éala), 92. 

| UPPER DOOR (mundaka-dvara), 425. 


E E 


(karna- 
107; 
175; 

[talpa (ka)], 

(mandapa), 


in “INDEX 


UPPER GARMENT (upavasana), 88. 
UPPER LIP (uttaroshtha), 71, 


UPPER PART OF A BUILDING (kapola), ror. 
. UPPER PIECE OF 


^ DOOR (nasa), 279. 
UPPER ROOM (ürdhva-$ala), go. 
U JER STOREY (attalaka), 12; (upa- 


Alpa), 76; [talpa (ka B 
PURO pa (ka)], 194 ; 
UPPER WALL [k(h)a-bhitti], ror. 


(mani- 


V 


VAULT (tunga), 
VAULT OF THE 
181. 
VEHICLE (vahana), 458. E 
VERANDAH (nishkasa), 284 ; (vara), 454. 
VESTIBULE (ardha-mandapa), 45; 
[kshudra-nasa(i-)], 135; (nasa), 279. 
ViLLAGE (karmuka), 116 ; (kutika), тот; 
(kolaka), 192; (kharvata), 137; 
[khalüraka (-rika], 138; (khetaka), 199, 
(gràma), 162 ; (chatur-mukha), 170; 
(jayanta-pura), 184; (dandaka), 224; 
(pattana), 292; [padma-(ka) ], 296 ; 
(svastika), 594, etc. 
VILLAGE DESCRIBED 
166. 
VILLAGE-ROAD (grama-marga), 
VIRGIN (Капуа), 98. 


215; (mafijisha), 391. 
FOUNDATION-PIT (chhela), 


a 


( grama-lakshana), 


166. 


w 


Warr (kuttima), rar; 
(koshtha), 133 ; (bhitti), 
490. 

WALL HAVING FOOT-PATH ON 
ONLY (eka-paksha), 93. 

WALL-HOUSE (bhitti-griha), 382. 

WARDROBE (mañjūshā), 391. 

WATERCOURSE (tilamaka), 214. 

WATER-DOOR (jala-dvāra), 185. 

WATER-FORT (jala-durga), 185. 

WATER-FOUNDATION (jala-garbha), 185. 

WATER-LILY (kumuda), 126. 

WATER-POT (kundika), 125; (ghrita-vari), 
170. 

WATER-JAR (manika), 394. 


(kudya), 123 ; 
381 ; (зазапа), 


ONE SIDE 


17 


` CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digiti a 


INDEX 


WATER WHEELS FOR WELLS (küchakra) 
129. 

WATERING STATION (арапа), 54. 

Waves (taranga), 193. 

Wax (madhüchchhishta), 411. 

WEDDING PAVILION (kalyána-mandapa), 
114. 

WEDGE (Ша), 119. 
WELL (udapana), 
(pürta), 314. 
Wixpow (kufjaraksha), 120; (kuhara), 
128 ; (gavaksha), 148; [chandra-Sala 
(-lika)], 172; [jala-(ka, ka)]. 199; 


74; (Кара), 129; 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University-Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


(nàza-bandha), 260; (райјага), 288 ; 
(pushpa-bandha), 313 ; (valli), 450 ; 


(svastika), 594. 
WiNDOW-CHAMBERS (kütagara), 129. 
Хүштн (parimàna), 300. 
WING оғ A BUILDING !vishana-(ka) |, 465. 
Wome (garbha), 145. 
Woop-cerTER (takshaka), 192., 
WOODEN IMAGE (5218 bhaijika), 490. ^ 
Worker (sthapaka), 592. 
WonxsHoP (sthapatya), 591. 
WRIST ORNAMENT (mani-bandha), 394. 


18 


- 


CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation 


ngri Jniversity Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA ` 


4 2 © wae a Wee 5 
| F i. cc с 
! CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by Š 


= тот M == 


л... 


Фега Ñ 


THE COLUMNS 


— ÁN 


? 
я 
THE PADMA-KANTA AND CRITRA-SKAMBHA | 
En E A SISANVDHA —— eaae — — 
CLASSES Í | Í 
GENERAL PROPORTION—— WHOLE ORDER = c PARTS “ = 
PEDESTAL рат OLE ORDER = 6 PARTS 
PEDESTAL - | PAR DIAMETER OF PADMA-KANTA g E E 
Shoe Ll = Yo m HEIGHT OF COL: 2 z ей 
а DIAMETER OF CHITRA-SKAMBHA E > 
re! = E Б Е ш ul 
ENTABLATURE =] - Sho mHEIGHT OF COL: { & = 
ua a —— THEY ARE RESPECTIVELY SIMILAR о о 
TO IONIC AND CORINTHIAN 1 T 
( ІМ PROPORTION, lea eee 


نو 


THIS PART NOUS 
ALWAYS BE SQUARE 


J 


қ E | Uu ENTABLATURE 
H 
—— | ER EN RET 1 


Ul. 


`| 
pol 


PALIKA 
ays 


| 


| 
i 


WHEN CIRCULAR, 


| WHEN SQUARE. 


i 
5 PLAN AT B.B PLAN AT D.D 

PLAN AT AA, LOOKING UP. prs 
E LOOKING UP 


LOOKING UP, 


LOOKIN 


PLAN АТ СС. 
LOOKING DOWN, 


PLAN AT EE 
LOCKING DOWN, 


` 


PEDESTALS IN ALL 3 M АА 
CASES SHOULD BE р ТҮРЕ 1 
SOUARE IN PLAN 


HEXAGONAL 
SKANDA-KANTA 


THE COLUMNS 
THE CHITRA-KANTHA CLAS 


—— See — 
GENERAL PROPORTION — WHOLE ORDER = S PAPTS | | 
PEDESTAL —1PART.. DIAMETER OF COL: = атн HEIGHT & & 3 
BASE — 1^ OR Ja PART P: Я z 
SHAFI — >" NOTE—— z 2 а 
GAP THIS ORDER IS SIMILAR TO % % Е Ex 
E.NTABLATURE-] > ROMAN DORK IN PROPORTION A A Ы ; 
[2] [9] о 
| | | 
$ — == 


-H9 РАМКА 


WHEN SQUARE j WHEN CIRCULAR 


PLAN AT АА PLAN AT BB 4 PLAN AT DD PLAN AT FF 
LOOKING DP LCOKING ор LOOKING UP Loo KING DP š i 


c 
m 
4 SSS 
ee a PLAN AT CC = PLANATEE ninaa 
"a LOOKING DOWN: LOOKING роу LOOKING DOWN ЖЕ 
PEDESTALS IN ALL NI — 
CASES SHOULD БЕ. =) r— = 
еі 5 ра lk. Е ы илы KE] a | жЕ, еда 
! 7 CERO WEE ee = = Y s 
4 , m == Жүзе ia © 
% VED} BRADRA 
PEDESTAL TYPE 3 | 
SS 


| SQUARE OP CIRCULAR OCTAGONAL HEXAGONAL PENTAGONAL 
-BRAHMA-KANTA OR RUDRA-KANTA VISHNU-KANTA 25 KANDASKANTAT SIVA:KANTA 


rukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA 


к ku ERE 


—— — SHOUD RE DO away yer 


THE COLUMNS 


THE PALIKA-STAMBHA CLASS 


7 


GENERAL PROPORTION —— WHOLE ORDER = 6 PARTS 


PEDESTAL — PART DIAMETER OF COL! = Ji ra HEIGH 


SHAFT — 2 + | 
| 
| 


FOR E NTABLATURE 
FOR ENTABLATÜRt—-— 


° 


2 
THIS PART IS 


OCTAGONAL IN ! 
AV АА THE CASE OF PLAN AT CC} PLAN AT DD BEAN AT FE 
SQUARE COLUMNS 4 —— mE 
FOR SQUARE. COLUMNS ү LOOKING Ue 3 LOOKING UP iei fat Dp. 


LOOKING UP 


PLAN AT AA 
(LOOKING ор) 
FOR CIRCULAR COLUMNS 


IF THE COLUMN IS SQUARE 
THE BASE SHOULD BE SQUARE 
AND IF CIRCULAR THE BASE 
SHOULD ALSO BE CIRCULAR 
THE FACE ORNAMENTS 


pt 
CEREN 

O, 2 

ТГ СОРЫ EYE PADMA-BANDA 


Bast TYPE 2. 


— --- ` -- کے‎ — — — be Z 
LAM AT BB P . 
CONFORMITY WITH THE d Se EAR ATER PLAN AT GG. 
SHAPES OF THE BASE қ H LOOKING DOWN 
PEDESTALS: IN ALL Tt zr 
CASES SHOULD BE 


SQUARE IN PLN 1 _ 


| 
5. SQUARE OP CIRCULAR ! OCTAGONAL HEXAGONAL | PENTAGONAL 
NG BRAHMA-KANTA OR RUDRA-KANTA _ NISHNU-KANTA SKANDA-KANTA, | SIVA-KANTA 
X x KK ee 
NS 
` ' 
E 
D E | 
EN | 


N | | 


| j 
ЫР | | 
S | CC-0. Gurukul Kangri University Haridwar Collection. Digitized by S3 Foundation USA | 


| 
| 


