SPANDA-KARIKAS
SPANDA-KARIKAS
 The Divine Creative Pulsation




    The Karikas and the Spanda-nirnaya
        Translated into English by

           JAIDEVA S I N G H




 MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
     PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI
      Reprint .Delhi, 1991, 1994, 2000, 2001, 2005, 2007
                    First Edition: Delhi, 1980




© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED
                All Rights Reserved



              ISBN: 978-81-208-0816-4 (Cloth)
              ISBN: 978-81-208-0821-8 (Paper)




        MOTILAL             BANARSIDASS
 41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Munibai 400 026
   203 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
    236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
        Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
               8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017
                Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
                   Chowk, Varanasi 221 001




                        Printed in India
     BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS,
           A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
       AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
     MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
                BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007
              DEDICATED

With profound respects to Svamt Laksmana   Jooy
             the doyen of Saivagama
                           PREFACE

   The Spandakarikas are a number of verses that serve as a
sort of commentary on the Siva-sutras. According to
Saivagama, the Divine Consciousness is not simply cold, inert
intellection. It is rather spanda, active, dynamic, throbbing with
life, creative pulsation.
   In Siva-sutras, it is the prakasa aspect of the Divine that is
emphasized; in Spandakarikas, it is the vimarsa aspect that is
emphasized. Together, these two books give an integral view of
Saiva philosophy.
   Ksemaraja has written a commentary on Spandakarikas, titled
Spanda-nirnaya. He is fond of sesquipedalian compounds, long
and windy sentences, but he is very profound in the
comprehension of the subject and so cannot be ignored.
   I have tried to provide a readable translation of both the
karikas and the Spanda-nirpaya commentary.
   Each karika (verse) is given both in Devanagari and Roman
script, followed by its translation in English. This is followed
by Ksemaraja's commentary in Sanskrit. Then follows an
English translation of the commentary. After this, copious notes
are added on important and technical words. Finally, I have
given a running exposition of each karika in my own words.
   The text and commentary published in the Kashmir Series
of Texts and Studies have been adopted. A few misprints that
occurred in the above edition have been corrected with the
assistance of Svami Laksmana Joo. I am deeply indebted to him
for his luminous exposition of this important text.
   A long Introduction has been given in the beginning of the
book, and a glossary of technical terms and an Index have been
appended at the end.
Varanasi                                      JAIDEVA SINGH
12.4.1980
                          BLESSINGS

   Spanda Karikas is one of the important works of Kashmir
Saivism. The doctrine of Spanda is scientific. Modern scien-
tists have discovered that the world was created from the
vibration of the first explosion and that the universe is still
expanding. Yet so far they have not been able to find out how
the first explosion occurred. However, the ancient scriptures of
the Spanda doctrine have always contained the knowledge that
this vibration is the Spanda or throb of the Absolute Reality,
the Universal Consciousness which is also called Siva. The
world came into existence with the throb of His opening eye.
Jnanesvara Maharaja has described Lord Siva as having the
mudra of expanding universe.
   It is a matter of great satisfaction to know that the work which
reveals this truth is now available in English. Modern scientists
will definitely make use of it to enhance their knowledge. In
America when I meet with scientists, I always refer to the
doctrine of Spanda. They express interest and desire to read
about it.
   I welcome Jaideva Singh, who helps to spread this supreme
wisdom of Kashmir. In the company of great beings he has
acquired the knowledge of the truth. He has also translated
and explained in English such great works of Kashmir Saivism
as Siva Sutras, Pratyabhijnahrdayam,         and Vijnana Bhairava.
In this way, he has helped the people of English speaking
countries who desired to know this doctrine. I hope his work
in this direction continues for a long time.
  Let the humanity of the world benefit by the          knowledge
contained in this work.

Miami, USA                                — Swami Muktananda
15-4-1980
                          CONTENTS
Introduction
                                                          Pages
The Importance of the book                                  xiii
The author of the Spandakarikas                             xiii
Commentaries                                                xiv
What is Spanda ?                                            xvi
Summary of the Sections
I Section                                                  xviii
II Section                                                   xxi
III Section                                                 xxii
IV Section                                                 xxiii
Text and Commentaries
Ksemaraja's Propitiatory Verses and the General Purpose
  of his Commentary together with Translation               1-2
Ksemaraja's Introductory Portion of the Commentary
  with Translation                                          2-5
Section I—Svarupaspanda
VERSE
 1         together with the Commentary, Trans. Notes      5-23
 2            "                      "                    24-33
 3            "                      "                    34-39
 4            "                      "                    40-44
                                     M
 5            "                                           45-50
 6 and 7      "                       "                   51-56
 8            "                      "                    57-60
 9             "                      "                   60-64
10            "                      "                    64-66
11                                   "                    66-70
12 and 13     "                      "                    70-79
14,15 and 1 6 "                      "                    79-85
17                                   "                    85-89
18            "                      "                    90-92
19                                   "                    92-94
xviii                                            Spanda-Karikas

VERSE
20       together with the Commentary, Trans., Notes       95-98
21                                                        99-101
22            "                         "                101-104
23,24 and 25 "                                           105-108
                Section II—Sahaja Vidyodaya
VERSE     Summary of the Section with Translation etc.   108-109
  1 and 2 together with Commentary, Translation
           and Notes                                     110-114
  3 and 4                                                115-118
  5           "                                          119-120
  6 and 7                                                121-126
                   Section Ul—Vibhuti   Spanda

 VERSE       Summary of the Section with Trans., Notes 127-128
  1 and 2     together with Commentary, Trans., Notes 129-133
  3                                                    133-135
  4 and 5                                              135-137
  6                                                    137-138
  7                                                    139-140
   8                                                   140-142
  9                                                    142-145
 10                                                    146-147
 11                                                    148-149
 12                                                    150-151
 13                                                    152-159
 14                                                    160-162
 15                                                    162-164
 16                                                    164-166
 19                                                    170-171
                     Section IV—Conclusion
 VERSE
   1 together with Commentary, Translation, and Notes 172-173
   2            "                         "              174-177
   Glossary of Technical Terms                           178-201
   Subject Index                                             202
   Index to important Sanskrit Words                     203-209
   An Alphabetical Index to the first pada of each verse     210
                      INTRODUCTION
          Spandakarikas—The importance of the book

  Spandakarikas are a sort of commentary on the Siva-sutras.
The word karika means 4a collection of verses on grammatical,
philosophical or scientific subjects.' The word spanda literally
means a 'throb.' It connotes dynamism or the dynamic aspect
of the Divine, the Divine creative pulsation.
  The Self, according to Spandakarikas, is not simply a
witnessing consciousness, but is characterized by both cognition
and activity. He who is in communion with this active Self can
alone rise to the status of his highest being.

The author of Spandakarikas
  The opinion regarding the authorship of Spandakarikas is
divided. According to Bhaskara and Utpala Vaisijava or Bhatta
Utpala, both of whom flourished in the second and third
quarters of the 10th century A.D., the author of these karikas
was Kallata who was the chief disciple of Vasugupta.
  Bhaskara says in his Siva-sutra-varttika that Kallata wrote a
commentary, called Spanda-sutras on the three sections of the
Siva-sutras, and a commentary, called Tattvartha-cintamani on
the fourth section of the Siva-sutras.1
  Bhatta Utpala, in his commentary, on the Spandakarikas,
entitled Spandapradipika, says in the 53rd verse that Bhatta
Kallata duly versified the secret doctrine after receiving it from
his guru (spiritual guide) Vasugupta who had clear insight into
Reality.2
   Ksemaraja and Mahesvarananda attribute the authorship of
the karikas to Vasugupta. Both refer to the following verse :


                               ^s^rfon?* n S. S. V. pp. 2-3.
xviii                                            Spanda-Karikas

        ^ c S ^ n s f f i T * I ^ ^ T ^ T ^ I

  "As on the attainment of this treasure of knowledge
which is difficult of attainment, and on its being well
preserved in the cave of the heart, it has been for the good of
Vasugupta, so also on the attainment and on its being well
preserved in the cave of the heart, it would always be for the
good of all."
  This verse is, however, not found in the recension of Bhatta
Utpala, Kallata and Ramakantha.
   In his commentary on Spandakarikas, called vrtti, Kallata
makes the following concluding remark :



   On the basis of this verse, some writers have concluded that
Kallata was the author of the Spandakarikas. But Kallata
specifically says Yat Spandamrtam Vasuguptapadaih drbdham,
i.e. 'the Spandakarikas which were composed by Vasugupta.
spandamrtam is only another name for Spandakarikas. The
word drbdhaifi only means 'strung together, arranged,
composed' and Vasuguptapadaih only means 'by revered
Vasugupta.' Regarding himself, Kallata only claims to have
brought it to the notice of the people. "Vasugupta-padaih
drbdhaiji" clearly shows that the Karikas were composed
by Vasugupta.
   The truth, therefore, seems to be that Vasugupta actually
composed the Karikas, taught them to Kallata, and Kallata
only publicized them.
Commentaries
   Four commentaries are available on these Karikas, viz.,
(1) the vrtti by Kallata, (2) the Vivrti of Ramakantha, (3) the
Spandapradipika of Bhatta Utpala and (4) the Spandasandoha
and Spanda-nirnaya of K$emaraja.
  Kallata flourished in the second and third quarter of the 9th
century A.D. On these karikas, he has written a commentary,
called vrtti. It gives a simple meaning of these verses. He has
divided the karikas into three nih$yandas or sections. The first
Introduction                                                     xvii

nih$yanda contains twentyfive verses, and is designated by him
as svarupa-spanda. It gives the essential nature of spanda. The
second section is named by him sahaja-vidyodaya i.e. the
emergence of Sahaja-vidya. It contains seven Karikas (verses)
from 26 to 32. The third section is named vibhuti-spanda or
supranormal powers acquired through spanda. It contains
twenty verses from 33 to 52.
   Ramakantha wrote a commentary, called Vivrti. He calls
himself a pupil of Utpaladeva,            the grand teacher of
 Abhinavagupta. He, therefore, flourished in the second and
third quarters of the 10th century A.D. He closely followed
the Vrtti of Kallata in his interpretation of the karikas. He
 himself says so in the colophon of his commentary Sampurna
 iyaifi vrtyanusarini spandavivrtih. 'This Spanda-vivrti closely
 following the vrtti (of Kallata) is finished." His division,
 however, of the sections of the Karikas is different. His first
 section includes sixteen verses and he names it vyatirekopapatti-
 nirdesah i.e. the section that points out the proved distinction of
 the knower from the known.
  His second section includes eleven verses and is named
vyatirikta-svabhavopalabdhih i.e. the acquisition of distinct
nature.
   His third section includes only three verses and is named
Visva-svasvabhava-saktyupapattih i.e. the universe is only a
manifestation of one's own essential nature.
   His fourth section includes twenty-one verses and is named,
abhedopalabdhih i.e. realization of identity with the Divine.
He adds one more verse to this section expressive of the
obeisance of the writer to his guru.
   Bhatta Utpala or Utpala Vaisnava wrote a commentary
entitled Spandapradipika. He flourished in the second and third
quarters of the 10th century A.D. He says in his commentary that
he was born in a place called Narayana in Kashmir and that his
father's name was Trivikrama. His commentary consists mostly
of parallel quotations from other sources.
   Ksemaraja first of all wrote a commentary, called
Spandasandoha only on the first verse of Spandakarika. Later
 on, at the persistent request of his pupil, Sura he wrote
xviii                                               Spanda-Karikas

 Spandanirnaya, a commentary on the whole book. He
flourished in the last quarter of the 10th and first quarter of
the 11th century. He was Abhinavagupta's cousin and pupil.
 His commentary on Spandakarika is exceedingly scholarly and
bears the stamp of his teacher's profundity. According to him,
Bhatta Lollata had also written a commentary on these karikas,
but that is not available now.
   He has divided the karikas into four sections. The first
section consists of twenty-five verses. Like Kallata he has
named this section as svarupa-spanda. His second section
consists of seven verses, and like Kallata, he names it Sahaja-
vidyodaya.
   His third section consists of nineteen verses, and like Kallata,
he names it Vibhutispanda. Kallata has added one more verse in
this section which is only expressive of homage to the guru, and
cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be included in Vibhuti
(supernormal powers). Ksemaraja has thrown this laudatory
verse and one more verse descriptive of the fruit of this
knowledge in a separate fourth section.

What is Spanda ?
    Spanda is a very technical word of this system. Literally, it is
some sort of movement or throb. But as applied to the Divine,
it cannot mean movement.
   Abhinavagupta makes this point luminously clear in these
lines :
    ''^RFT^ faPsr^PW I f ^ T P S ^ zrfk                  d,TMHi|c|,
5T fofrfr^T I ^ft^cf,        T        I              ^ ^FrrforfT-
frrt^T                ^W^dl                        I (TOofaofao,

   "Spandana means some sort of movement. If there is
movement from the essential nature of the Divine towards
another object, it is definite movement, not some sort,
otherwise, movement itself would be nothing. Therefore, Spanda
is only a throb, a heaving of spiritual rapture in the essential
nature of the Divine which excludes all succession. This is the
significance of the word Kincit in kincit calanam which is to
be interpreted as "movement as it were."
Introduction                                                  xvii

   Movement or motion occurs only in a spatio-temporal
framework. The Supreme transcends all notions of space and
time. Spanda, therefore, in the case of the Supreme is neither
physical motion, nor psychological activity like pain and pleasure,
nor pranic activity like hunger or thirst. It is the throb of the
ecstasy of the Divine I-consciousness (vimarsa). The Divine
I-consciousness is spiritual dynamism. It is the Divine creative
pulsation. It is the throb of Siva's svatantrya or absolute
Freedom.
   If Spanda is not any kind of movement, how can the
application of this word be justified to the activity
of the Supreme, for the word Spanda means 'a somewhat of
motion ?' This is the explanation offered by Abhinavagupta.

   "win    ^    frPWcf     I trfo ^ f + f ^ i M d l

          anwRnff^TfiiR ^ snrfa        r
                                       (I. Pr. V. I. 5, 14, p. 208)
  "Spandana means a somewhat of                 movement. The
characteristic of 'somewhat' consists in the fact that even the
immovable appears 'as if moving,' because though the light of
consciousness does not change in the least, yet it appears to be
changing as it were. The immovable appears as if having a
variety of manifestation."
   Spanda is, therefore, spiritual dynamism without any
movement in itself but serving as the causa sine qua non of all
movements.
   The Infinite Perfect Divine Consciousness always has vimaria
or Self-awareness. This Self-awareness is a ' subtle activity which
is spiritual dynamism, not any physical, psychological or pranic
activity. As Utpaladeva puts it in ISvarapratyabhijna :
          fpr fan^Y^n fH^H          I
              ^ ^TFT                   n               (1,8.11)
   The Divine is termed the great Lord (MaheSvara) because of
 His ever-present, immutable Self-awareness (vimaria). That Self
 awareness in its absolute Freedom constitutes Divine (suddha—
 pure) knowledge and activity." Spanda is only another name of
 Self-awareness or Vimarsa. As Ksemaraja puts it, Spanda also
xviii                                              Spanda-Karikas

connotes the svatantrya or absolute Freedom of the Divine
(.Bhagavatah svatantrya-saktih). Vimarsa, parasakti, svatantrya,
aisvarya, kartrtva, sphuratta, sara, hrdaya, and spanda are
synonymous in Saivagama.

Sections of Spandakarikas
  While the verses of the text are practically the same in all
the editions available, they have been divided under different
sections somewhat differently by each editor and commentator.
The topics under each section are given in this book as described
by Ksemaraja.



                          I. SECTION

Svariipaspandah or Spanda as the Essential Nature of Siva
1.     The first verse of this section describes Spanda-sahti
represented by the unmesa (emergence) and nime$a (submergence)
of the Sakti (primal energy) of Siva. As Ksemaraja puts it, it is
the essential nature of Siva and also that of the empirical
individual (sphurattasara-spandasaktimaya-svasvabhava).
    Unme$a and nime$a are only figuratively spoken of as
occurring one after the other. As a matter of fact, they occur
simultaneously (yugapadevonme$a-nimesobhayarupam pratibham
bhagavatim vicinvantu mahadhiyah).
   In activity, there is no depletion of Spanda-sakti as there is of
physical energy. Lelihana sada devi sada puma ca bhdsate
i. e. This goddess is always engaged in exercising her energy in
 withdrawal and yet always appears as replete."



                (Commentary on the first Karika)
  In reality, nothing arises, and nothing subsides. It is only the
divine Spanda&akti which, though free of succession, appears in
different aspects as if flashing in view and as if subsiding."
   Ksemaraja believes that there is close correlation between the
spanda system and the krama system. In his Spandanirnaya
Introduction                                                   xvii

commentary, Ksemaraja interprets the phrase sakti-cakra-vibhava-
prabhavam as representing the Mahartha or Krama ideal of five-
fold functioning through the agency of the deities Sr$ti, Rakta
Kali, etc. In explaining vibhava—he uses the very technical
terms of Krama Sastra. Vibhava             udyogavabhasana-carvana-
 vilapanatma kridadambarah—udyoga meaning creative activity,
avabhasana, meaning maintenance, carvana (absorption), and
vilapana, meaning the assumption of the indefinable state
(anakhya).
2. The second verse says that the world is contained in the
spanda principle, and comes out of it. The world being contained
in spanda and coming out of it does not mean that the world is
anything different from Siva as a walnut is different from the
bag in which it is contained. Being contained in and coming
out of, are only limitations of the human language. The world
is Siva as reflections in a mirror are the mirror itself. The world
consisting of the subject, object and means of knowledge
cannot really conceal Siva, because without the light of Siva,
they themselves cannot appear. The world is inherent in Spanda
just as a banyan tree exists as potency in the seed.
3. The third verse maintains that even in the differing states
viz., waking, dream, and deep sleep, the spanda principle
remains the same, viz., as the invariable of Experient of all the
states.
4.    While states of experience like pleasure, pain, etc. differ,
the Experient cannot change; for it is the Experient that
connects the differing states as the experience of the identical
Experient.
5.    Reality is neither psychological subject nor the psycho-
physical experience, nor is it mere void. Reality or Spanda is
the underlying basis of the psychological subject, it is the
eternal Experient that can never be reduced to an object.
6 & 7.      It is from the Spanda principle that the group of
senses acquires its power of going forth towards the objects,
maintaining them in perception for a while and then
withdrawing them towards the centre.
8.    It is not the will or desire of the empirical individual that
moves the senses towards their objects. He derives this power
from the spanda principle—the dynamism of Siva.
xviii
                                                  Spanda-Karikas

9.    It is on account of anava, maylya and karma mala that
the empirical individual is unable to realize the spanda principle.
10.     When the limited ego or anava mala of the individual
is dissolved, he acquires the true characteristic of the spanda
principle, viz., innate knowledge and activity.
 11.    When the yogi realizes the spanda principle, he knows
that this is his essential Self, and not his empirical self.
 12 & 13.     The experience of void does not prove that there is
 no Experient, for without the Experient, even the experience
of void would not be possible. This Experient is the spanda
 principle.
 14, 15 & 16.     Spanda or the Divine principle appears in two
aspects, subject and object. It is only the object that changes and
disapp<*Qrs, never the Subject. Spanda constitutes the eternal
subject.
17. The fully awakened yogi or suprabuddha has an integral
experience of the Spanda principle in all the three states of
waking, dream and deep sleep, but the partially awakened
individual has an experience of it only in the beginning and
end of waking, dream, and deep sleep, not in the middle of
these states.
18.    To the fully enlightened yogi, the spanda principle
appears as knowledge (jnana) and objects of knowledge (jheya)
in the middle of the two states of waking and dream, fully
integrated to the I-consciousness just as they appear to
SadaSiva aiid Isvara. In the deep sleep, since there is no object,
the spanda principle appears as sheer consciousness (cinmaya).
19. There are two aspects of spanda-samanya and vise$a.
Samanya is the general principle of consciousness, vise$a is the
manifestation of Spanda in constitutive aspects like sattva,
rajas and tamas or objective experiences like blue, pleasure etc.
Ordinary people consider the vise$a spanda, i.e. the particular
manifestations as something entirely different from consciousness,
but the fully enlightened yogi considers them only as forms of
Spanda.
20. The particular forms of spanda appear as entirely different
from consciousness to all those who are not awakened to their
divine source. So they are doomed to a life of worldly existence.
Introduction                                                   xvii

21. One should, therefore, have constant awareness of the
spanda principle even in the common work-a-day world.
22. In intense emotional state or a state of mental impasse,
all the mental activities come to a dead stop. That is the time
when one can have an experience of the spanda principle if one
is properly oriented towards it.
23. 24, 25. When the yogi lays his grip firmly on the spanda
principle, his prarta and apana get merged in the su$umna\ they
mount up to Brahmarandhra and finally get dissolved in the
ether of consciousness beyond it.
   Thus by means of twenty five verses the essential nature of
spanda together with the means for attaining it has been des-
cribed from various points of view.


                          II. SECTION

Sahaja Vidyodaya
   The first section describes spanda principally as Siva's dynamic
aspect which is identical with the essential Self of each.
In the first section, there is the stress on nimtlana samadhi
(introvertive meditation,) for the realization of the spanda
principle.
   The second section describes spanda not only as identical with
the essential Self but also with the whole universe. In order to
realize this aspect of spanda, (there is the stress on unmllana
samadhi (extrovertive meditation). This is posoible by the rise of
Sahaja vidya by which one experiences unity in the midst of
diversity.
   Verses 1 and 2 say that mantras whether taken in the sense of
Mantra, Mantresvara, and Mantramahesvara or in the sense of
sacred formulae derive their power from the spanda principle
and are finally dissolved in it.
   Verses 3 and 4 tell us that the individual through his knowl-
 edge of all objects feels his identity with all. Hence there is no
 state which is not Siva to him.
   Verse 5 tells us that one who has this realization views the
entire world as the play of the Self identical with Siva.
xviii                                             Spanda-Karikas

   In verses 6 and 7, it is said that if one realizes his identity
with the deity who is the object of his meditation, one becomes
ultimately identified with Siva and acquires immortality.


                         III. SECTION

 Vibhuti Spanda
   This section describes mostly the supernormal powers gained
by the realization of spanda.
   Verses 1 and 2 tell us that as Siva fulfils the desires of the
embodied yogi in the waking condition, so also does He
reveal his desired objects even in dream by appearing in
Susumna.
   Verse 3 tells us that if the yogi is not alert, he will have the
same common experience in waking condition and particular,
personal experiences in dream as other ordinary people of the
world have.
   Verses 4 and 5 say that if the self of the yogi becomes identi-
fied with the essential nature of Siva* he is endowed with the
power of knowing everything in its essential form.
   Verse 6 says that such a yogi can acquire full control over
his hunger.
   Verse 7 says that he can also acquire the power of
omniscience.
   Verse 8. Depression proceeds from spiritual ignorance. Depres-
sion can no longer remain when ignorance disappears.
   Verse 9 describes the rise of unme$a. It occurs at the
junction-point of two thoughts. It is that metempirical Self
that relates all thoughts and runs through all as the underlying
subject.
   Verse 10. From the realization of unme$a, one experiences
supernormal light in the middle of the two eye-brows, unstruck,
spontaneous sound in the susumna, rupa i.e., a glow shining
even in darkness and supernormal taste experienced on the tip
of the tongue. They are, however, a disturbing factor in the
realization of the Spanda principle.
   11.   When the yogi is established     in the essential Self, he
Introduction                                                xxiii

can experience all objective reality right from earth upto
Siva.
   Verse 12. One who is identified with the essential Self per-
ceives all phenomena only as the form of Siva.
   Verse 13. The empirical individual is deprived of the real
spiritual power of will, knowledge and activity and coming
under the suzerainty of powers derived from the multitude of
words, he is reduced to the status of pasu—a limited, bound
soul.
   Verse 14. The bound soul loses his independence on account
of the rise of ideas which have their sphere in sense-objects.
   Verse 15. The empirical individual becomes bound on account
of ideas, and ideas are due to the power of words. So words
have a tremendous influence on the empirical individual.
   Verse 16. The power of ideation and verbalization is deriv-
ed from kriya sakti. When the empirical individual realizes
that the kriya sakti is only an aspect of parasakti or spanda, he
is liberated.
    Verse 17 & 18. All our motivated desires and ideas remain
 in the form of residual traces in the subtle body or purya$taka
consisting of the five tanmatras, manas, buddhi and aharfikara.
 The transmigratory existence can be stopped only by the exter-
 mination of the impurities of the puryaftaka.
    Verse 19. When the empirical individual is firmly rooted in
the spanda principle, he brings the emergence and dissolution
 of the purya$taka under his control and can become the lord of
 the entire group of saktis.

                         IV SECTION
   In this section, there are only two verses. The first one,
by means of double entendre, lauds both the power of the
spanda state and the power of the word of the guru.
   The second one only points out the good that would accrue
to all who carefully betake themselves to the spanda principle,
 and realize it.
                                            JAIDEVA SINGH
KSEMARAJA'S PROPITIATORY VERSES AND THE
GENERAL PURPOSE OF HIS COMMENTARY, SPANDA*
                 NIRTFAYA
                               TEXT


                           ^mffT y<«Hd: OtMM            UTT I

                       *ttrfflT        HT       fH^^frR: Mill


        ^Uci^jqi^qt^TT                *rmfacr: wrw

        H^r^prHT^T TpCTfcT rfft 'TTfWTTt

        5TTcT m&QW          fcfltM'^MtdCT            rf-
               fa* fjTsrcT gRior: w s f a c r sn^cr II^II

 Sarvaip svatmasvarupam mukuranagaravat
 svasvarupatsvatantra-
 svacchasvatmasvabhittau kalayati
 dharanitah sivantam sada ya //
 Drgdevi mantraviryaip satatasamudita
 sabdarasyatmapurnahantanantasphuratta
 jayati jagati sa saipkari spandasaktih /j 1
 Spandamrte carvite'pi spandasandohato manak /
 Purijastaccarvanabhogodyoga esa mayasritah. // 2
  Samyaksutrasamanvayaip parigatiip tattve parasminparaip
 Tiksnaip yuktikathamupayaghatanaip spastarthasadvyakrtim /
  Jnatum vanchatha cecchivopanisadarp Srispandasastrasya tad-
  vrttavatra dhiyam nidhatta sudhyiyah spandasriyam prapnuta// a

        T050 ^ f t r       1          370^0^050 fafeftr qrra: i
xviii
                                                   Spanda-Karikas

                        TRANSLATION

    She, who is ever conscious of the vitality of mantra, 1 who is
the endless flash of the perfect and complete I-consciousness
whose essence consists in a multitude of letters,2 who is the
goddess embodying jfiana3 (knowledge), ever knows the totality
 of categories from the earth upto Siva, which is one in substance
with Her own Self and is portrayed out of Her own nature on
the canvas of Her own free, clear Self just as a city is reflected
 in a mirror (from which it is non-distinct). Hail to that Energy of
creative pulsation (spandasakti) of Siva (Saipkari) that exults in
 glory all over the world.
    Though the ambrosia of spanda has been relished in a small
 degree from my work Spandasandoha, 4 I am now making an
effort for providing complete enjoyment of that (spanda).
    If you want to know the exact inter-connexion of the sutras
(i.e. of the karikas or verses of this text), the most excellent
ascertainment of the highest Reality, pointed and subtle state-
ment of reasoning, the right application of means, exquisite
exposition through clear sense and the secret doctrine of
 Saivagama, then, O intelligent people, apply your mind to this
gloss of the Spandasastra and obtain the wealth of spanda.

                              NOTES

   1. The mantra referred to is the I-consciousness or ahani
paramarsa of the Absolute.
   2. This I-consciousness or aham contains all the letters of
the Sanskrit alphabet from 'a' (ar) to <ha' (|)
   3. Dfgdevi as the goddess embodying jfiana or knowledge.
   Actually there is only one Sakti, viz., Svatantrya sakti, the
Absolute Freedom of the Divine. The initial appearance of
svatantrya is known as Iccha-sakti or the power of Will. Its final
appearance is known as Kriya-sakti or the power of action. Its
expansion is known as jnana-sakti or power of knowledge. As
Spandasakti refers to the svatantrya or Freedom of Siva in the
form of the expansion of the universe, she is referred to as
drgdevl. Drk means insight, vision, divine vision. Here it means
jfiana. By the rule of Sandhi, drk has become drg.
Section 1                                                        3

  4. Spandasandoha is the earlier work of Ksemaraja in which
he has expounded only the first verse of Spandakarika at great
length.

                            INTRODUCTORY

                               TEXT

(TRADITION)




^ t a r c sr^ftRnr^taRH i

                         TRANSLATION

  In this world, the excessive greatness of Self was revealed
(unmilitamahima) to the exalted preceptor Vasugupta by Siva's
inspiration who is intent on conferring His grace on all. He
(Vasugupta) received instruction in dream and thus, in Maha-
deva mountain, he obtained through divine will the most
esoteric Siva-sutras which were engraved on the surface of the
great rock. He, by demonstrating the agreement of revelation,
experience and       reasoning, put    together   the import
of the sutras in an abridged form by means of fifty-one verses
which were deep in sense but were expressed in a lucid form.

(Synopsis of the Book)

                               TEXT


         ftmfcTR^
            C\    ^ T K : , — f a fa: fag* f H ^ l l f d H
                                                         NI

                         TRANSLATION

    In this book, the first twentyfive verses describe the spanda
 or creative pulsation which is the essential nature of Siva
(.svarupaspanda), the next seven refer to the spanda pertaining to
the emergence of Sahaja-vidya, the last nineteen give a glimpse
xviii
                                                              Spanda-Karikas

of the spanda pertaining to supernormal powers (vibhuti). Thus
this spanda-sastra is arranged in three sections.

(Contents of the first Section)
                                     TEXT

    TO                       F F F I T F S W > W 4 : VH^QFRQFTRER: \   TO^GFA:
     H^Rf^J                            I TO: W t a l ^ t SlP^jrfRcTcSTT-
m w m ^rR: i               m M H f n H 1 1                ^cfWfroiR^n-
^QRV^NTQTDRO: I                TO      D^MKMM'      M ^ Q W      F^R    CR§Q*-
falTO I      TO^TO^mTI^hVRTifR:               ^ft%rftxT>: I    gVTTRTcRTf^ci
           RFFSTCTO F T ^ T T ^ T T R C T I    FF^HLFADHJ         VPTCT SFFA-
     TOOTRTFTTCTITO I                         WW131^14414 tJ^fajfTO: I
TO      gsr^SFT         tftrocsnfar:,     3 ^f^vtCTtfkcm^fero i
              sTcft^f^nrf^TnT STG: 1 TOtsyiN g s r ^ ^ y N
af^B^rf^cTT I                    ^r^TcT^^^TfiT I TO
dHmiq ^ d d H ^ ' d ^ f M ^ H I          md^KfrWMI \ TOfarrrfTOT-
H^T^ftTW^TT SSftlW                 fowl:       I TOtsfa STf^cfST^tER

—5%                             'STfJ: WI4H1TO' fcqFcT^T TOTO* I WT
OTWf      WIWMWcl I

                              TRANSLATION

   Now in the first section of the book, the first verse begins
with the laudation of !§iva and suggests the main purport of
the treatise. By the next four verses, the true nature of spanda is
established with valid reasoning: next by two verses, the means
for attaining it with proper recognition is described. The eighth
verse refutes the objection raised against the means, the ninth one
supports the means referred toby describing its perfect suitability
for attaining the goal. The tenth verse shows the real nature of the
goal which is attainable by that means. The eleventh verse says
that by close adherence to that goal, the delusion of the world as
a thing separate from Siva ceases. The twelfth and thirteenth, by
discarding the view of the Nihilists bring into prominence the
striking difference of the S/ww/a-principle from their doctrine.
Section 1                                                         5

The fourteenth establishes the indestructibility of the spanda
principle as such, though the world of objects brought about by
it is subject to destruction. The fifteenth and sixteenth so
 thoroughly expound this idea that Nihilism stands completely
eradicated. The seventeenth declares that while the fully awaken-
ed always has the realization of the spanda-principle, the parti-
ally awakened has it only in the initial and final stages (of wak-
ing, dream and dreamless sleep). The eighteenth describes
the sphere of objects experienced by the fully awakened. Then
the nineteenth hints at the means for the removal of the veils in
the case of the fully awakened. The twentieth says how the real
nature of Self is veiled in the case of the unawakened one. The
twentyfirst exhorts that one should always exert oneself in
acquiring the state of the fully awakened. The twenty-second
declares that there are certain states of the individual in prac-
tical life which by bringing about the total cessation of all other
states than that {spanda) provide the occasion for the realization
of Spanda. The last three (23rd to 25th) verses urge that one who
has experienced enlightenment in order to maintain the state of
complete enlightenment, should be (always) on the alert in tear-
ing asunder in a manner befitting a yogi the sleep-like veil of
(spiritual) darkness. This is the sum and substance of the first
section, beginning with 'Whose opening and shutting of the eye-
lids, and ending with, 'The awakened one is unveiled.'
   Now the purport of the book is being expounded.

                                 TEXT


             cT a f t N T ^ T O S P n r          II ? |l

  Yasyonmesanimesabhyaip jagatah pralayodayau/
  Tam Sakticakravibhavaprabhavani Sankaraip stumah//l
               TRANSLATION OF THE TEXT
  We laud that Sankara by whose mere opening and shutting of
the eye-lids there is the appearance and dissolution of the world
and who is the source of the glorious powers of the collective
whole of the saktis (the divine energy in various forms).
xviii
                                                             Spanda-Karikas

                             COMMENTARY

                                     TEXT




crfnr^l           fTiHTTT^Tr^RpT S^fqRT cT?5TzmfcT UfitcJJSR' I

TtJrt^r: sr^mTrm             re^Tifim       riyifyw           IM       m i      la

^ f^^T^T^m^^r^nPr ^WSTcT: ^Irl'cslf^lf^RTf^lTfn^^TWT^T-
                                                   >3


               * c^fM^: I         TOTg:     '3TFF5 qT XrZ*' i f a I

^SrFcTMKHHM        TOfa^T^faOTH              ^nn^fafTOSFt I qcTv*
H^Wcft^f^^fcT I m W t M ^ l f a M f r d H H W I ^ I T W H l ^ d I tWC+1-
                               HH^q^iyt^fe^THT^I                      TOfqfTOf-
qTT^TT WM^^fc^fallNHM) I cT^T f ^ — f a c ^ d W l f l M H l cTr^f-



f ^ ^ r ^ ^ q x I TOT<to:
             '^rfrr^Rr           ^ft             ^      wract I
             s f a ^ r r fro^niS:                       sr^rt: if



wifri fafrWddm
           c\  fPTrrnq^cT: f^qicj-o^wH^^m                           fa^zre^^nTfa




^                        I       ^            TO                     cT^^TlferT-
U+Nmdd        TOrfdqfcft*         Ug^vHiq^cll ^q^ST                    cflc(5dcl I
                             ^ fifclrf
Section 1                                                                      7




fiTR^TVOTfiTr^cTr'T^ f ^ f ^ r f t                  'U^cMHldUl'




                                                                       I   e
N^m^TT froT                            i t^r^r TO^ f r o ^ ^ n r : i


                   ^ n ^ c p ^ r r t f c r q- ^ ^HT^TT^T: II'   (^nv)



   fcTOTpT ^ftWRTlTTciTT              qTT^RGf^T             fa^fa^cl           I




w ^ w t s f q * STHIT^T f fir ^ r c s i m \ ^gcTfg * faf^ar^fa
set,                  ^T^c^P^rPr TOTcromTH^qrof F s ^ ^ f t a

rWT^rrfimfqfk                                                 Hn^tcf*? I
     ^Msrnf     sreflr^irrarfontf                 i TO ^ r o ^ m ^ n
w^nfi&TOTfa^w       fafaarr       sMMtam: HTT^P^ rrcspqrTOf^
                   —cr ^ f o w ^ f a ^ r a w f a f k i sirotai s f e r -
              ^             H R ^ c t f t sft few ^ n r t a n w T O ^ f o -
           ^T^rr^r^r                i irm
 ^WT^TfcT^XT         ^TOTiffWshrt xqvs&tftw^m:                i sr* *




       To 50 ^r^TfT^f qr^: I
            50 ^ snf*r% TO: I V To Jo ^rHfd TO: I
xviii
                                                                       Spanda-Karikas


               ST^cf ^ fc^ ^ T T f ^ P T O :                        ll' (fo5To?iyj?o)
    ffa f ^ f o f a f i ^ f t c m    u    s                   i      *    w   w      w
 ff^rT     tf^a^fac**^            M<H(HW                                        y cTFT




 f       i   l         I                           I



        'nixtiMiw ^FT^c^T'T r

        ^ H N ^ M L V D I ^ T ^ T ^ T T T TT FIRA: L' ( ^ - V )



                  CS                              "V




        'icT: +                              l'        (V^)

        'cRT^T ^ f T^T:                 \'


                              viRhci^                  i'

             feci?* fawfaFT Vlfan*l»frM                fspR^ft         tt     MYWdlfd

  ^T^t                        fecHqtdd:                           ^g^r^ll^M^dc^^M-
  fd^MHkq^H                        TORT^r*:                          I fa^T TOT fsRTT-

  ffcT                 3TTcT: Vl<U»Mm d^HN^l ^TfgFTTfq fedW SMifljlfl
        <). To 50 d^dPifd TO: I                        To 50   TO:    I
            To 50    TO:    I                          To 50 n ^ ^ f d TO: I
Section 1                                                        9


snw                 ref*                > TOT g^ncro:




                         TRANSLATION
   Saipkara is one who does sarjt {sam karoti iti sawkarah). By
 sam is meant the grace (anugraha) which consists in enabling the
aspirant to recognize the vast expanse of His (diva's) Conscious-
ness (sva-caitanya-sphara) (which, in essence, is one's own con-
sciousness) which is non-dualistic and is the Highest Bliss inas-
much as it calms the heat of all the afflictions (of the aspirant).
 Such Saipkara who is our own essential nature do we laud.
 Here the sense of lauding is that by considering Him as excelling
 the entire cosmos we enter into His being by obliterating the
state of assumed agency. (kalpita-pramatr-pada) brought about
 by Himself (tatklrpta). This treatise is going to teach that
entrance in Him i.e. identification with Him is the (real) reward
of liberation in life, (jivan-mukti). The plural in stumah (we
 laud) is meant to convey the idea of our identity with all those
who are worthy of His grace and who are regarded by Him with
favourable glance.
   The word 'tam' (Him) fully establishes His uniqueness which
is suggested by the first half of the verse, viz., 'By whose mere
opening of the eye-lids, etc'.
   Now the great lord who is the great God of the nature of Light,
xviii
                                                   Spanda-Karikas

has absolute Freedom (svatantrya), of the nature of Parasakti
(the Highest Power) that displays Herself in the two poles of
arani (I) and visarga (creation or idam i.e. the objective world)
and is always full of the flash of a compact mass of bliss and
whose essence consists in Full I-consciousness which is the
supreme import of the multitude of letters.1
   Therefore the Svatantrya Sakti (the Power of Absolute Free-
dom) of the Lord is called spanda. This power though non-
distinct from the Lord goes on presenting the entire cycle of
manifestation and withdrawal on its own background like the
reflection of a city in a mirror. It will be shown by apt arguments,
further (in the book) that though she is not anything extra
 (<anadhikamapi) she goes on showing herself as if supernumerary
 (adhikamiva). This sakti of the lord who is non-moving, being
of the nature of consciousness (Citsvabhavyad acalasyapi bhaga-
vatali) is known as spanda in accordance with the rootmeaning
of the word signifying slight movement {kincit calattaf. Thus
the essential nature of the Lord is perpetual spanda (creative
pulsation). He is never without spanda. Some3 hold that the
Highest Reality is without any activity whatsoever. But in such
a case the Highest Reality being devoid of activity, all this (i.e.
the universe) will be without a lord or Creative Power. The great
teacher has written this sastra (sacred book) in order to explain
the fact that our nature is identical with that of Sahkara who is
full of spanda sakti, the essence of which consists in quivering
light. Thus this sastra has been appropriately named spanda.
   This will be made clear later.
   This spanda-sakti consists of the compact bliss of I-conscious-
ness which holds in its bosom endless cycles of creation and
dissolution, which is of the nature of the entire world of the pure
 and the impure, which is of the nature of exhibiting limitation
and expansion of Subjects and Objects, which is worthy of
adoration of all esoteric knowledge, which is simultaneously of
the nature of emanation and absorption.
   The same principle constitutes the stage of absorption {nimesa)x
 from the point of view of the withdrawal of the previously
 manifested aggregate of categories from Siva down to the earth
and from the point of view of those that are about to come into
being, it is, in its aspect of manifestation, the stage of appearance
 Section 1                                                        11

 or expansion (unme$a). Thus the stage of the submergence
 (inime$a) of the universe constitutes the emergence (unmesa) of
 the compactness of consciousness, so also the stage of the
 submergence of the compactness of consciousness constitutes
 the stage of the emergence of the universe. As the traditional
 scripture puts it.
    "The goddess (i.e., the creative power) is always engaged in
 exercising her energy in manifestation (lit., in enjoying the taste
 of manifestation), and yet always appears as replete (i.e. her
 energy is never depleted). She is the wave of the ocean of
 consciousness, the volitional power of the LORD."
    The glorious great Lord by His power of absolute Freedom
assuming the Subjective ioles of Siva, Mantramahesvara, Man-
tresvara, Mantra, Vijnanakala, Pralayakala, and Sakala and the
the role of sphere of objects appropriate for each subject, in the
process of gradual descent, displays by way of the play of
concealing His inner nature, the succeeding aspects by suppress-
ing the preceding ones, though they serve as the substratum for
the succeeding aspects. In the gradual process of ascent He
displays the preceding aspects by eliminating the succeeding
ones in the case of Jhana-yogis (the gnostic yogis). Thus He
shows the succeeding ones in a developed form in the preceding*
ones by making them give up their limitation, and the preced-
ing ones in a limited form by suppressing their higher state (in
the order of descent). So He shows everything as of the nature
of everything else. The usual perception of difference is due only
to limitation caused to appear by Him. The teaching of this
sastra is meant to destroy this perception of difference. Enough
of this expatiation.
   The goddess Consciousness is simultaneously of the nature
of display (unme$a) and suppression (nime$a). Even while she
displays external perception like blue or internal perception
like pleasure, she suppresses the (real) nature of her identity with
the perceiver and also brings about the suppression of yellow
etc. which was previously perceived. In order to put an end
to transmigratory existence, let people of great intelligence closely
understand the goddess Consciousness (pratibha) 5 who is simul-
taneously of the nature of both revelation (unmesa) and conceal-
ment (nime$a) as is evident from one's own experience. That is
xviii
                                                     Spanda-Karikas

why the exalted Kallata in his gloss explained unme$a and nime$a
together (not separately) by one word, viz., "by the power of
mere will."
    The writer6 who prepared this conspectus also says in the fol-
lowing verse that the cessation of the previous idea which is the
cause of the rise of the next is said to be unme^a, for without
the cessation of the previous idea, the rise of the next one is
 impossible.
    "That is to be known as Unmesa whence another thought
arises in one who is already occupied with one thought. One
can observe this for oneself. This will be explained at length
 in its proper place.
    In the following verse also, the real implication of the rise of
thought-constructs is the simultaneous disappearance of the bliss of
 immortality. This will be elucidated later. "Of the limited empirical
 being, the rise of the empirical thought-constructs (pratyayo-
 dbhavah) betokens at the same time the disappearance of the bliss
  of Supreme immortality. By that i.e. the rise of empirical thought-
 constructs), the empirical being loses his independence. The
 rise of the empirical concepts brings about only the experience
 of the sphere of the tanmatras (i.e. of sound, form and colour,
 taste, smell and touch)."
     In the following line also,
   "When the agitation ceases, then is the highest state experi-
 enced," it will be clarified that nime$a (disappearance) in the
  form of the cessation of agitation implies at the same time
  unmesa (appearance) of the Supreme state.
     Hence the same Power which is of double aspect is some-
 times employed predominantly in the aspect of unme$a (appear-
 ance) and sometimes predominantly in the aspect of nime?a
 (disappearance).
     Thus the first half of the verse should be interpreted in the
  following manner.
     "Whose 2§akti (divine power) predominant in displaying
  creation, karyonme§a-pradhanayah) instinct with the concealment
  (inimesa) of His (Siva's) essential nature, (svariipanimesatmanah)
  is the cause of the manifestation of the universe i.e. the manifesta-
  tion from Siva down to earth consisting of diversity which has
  a wealth of manifold distinctions and which submerges the
Section 1                                                      13

essential unity (of the Divine). The same Sakti (divine power),
predominant in submerging externality (bahyatanime$apra-
dhanayah) and instinct with the revelation (iunme$a) of His
(Siva's) essential nature brings about the dissolution of the uni-
verse which consists in the emergence of unity and submergence
of multi-faceted diversity'. Thus the interpretation of the text
should point out the fact that submergence (from one point of
view) is also emergence (from another point of view), and
similarly emergence (from one point of view) is also submergence
(from another point of view). In reality, however, nothing
arises and nothing subsides. We shall show that it is only the
divine spandaSakti (the divine creative pulsation) which, though
free of succession, appears in different aspects as if flashing in
 view and as if subsiding. Sthiti (maintenance of the world-pro-
 cess) Vilaya (concealment of the essential nature) and amugraha
 (grace) are not anything other than particular forms of absorp-
 tion and manifestation, therefore the five -fold divine acts have
 been included only in pralaya (absorption) and udaya (manifesta-
 tion). This point has been conclusively discussed by me in this
 very way in my gloss on the first sutra only in Spanda-sandoha.
    An objection may be raised here. "From the point of view of
 Mahanaya Sastra7 the different acts of absorption and mani-
 festation of the universe are brought about by the goddesses
 Srfti etc., then how is it that in this text it has been said (in
 singular number) He whose etc.? In order to clear this doubt,
 the verse says, "Him who is the source of the glorious powers
 of the group of the saktis
(First interpretation of Sakticakra—vibhava-prabhava)
   By sakti-cakra is meant the aggregate of twelve8 divinities such
as Srfti, Rakta, etc. By its vibhava is meant the play of that
aggregate in the form of creative activity (udyoga)9 maintenance
(avabhasana), absorption (.carvana), and assumption of indefin-
able state (anakhya), by prabhava is meant cause. So the whole
phrase Sakti-cakra- Vibhava-prabhavam means the cause of the
creative activity, etc. of the twelve divinities, such as Srtfh
Rakta, etc.
   These divinities embracing the exalted Manthan-Bhairava 9 who
is the lord of the aggregate (of these divinities) bring about the
xviii
                                                  Spanda-Karikas

play of the manifestation etc. of the universe. This is what the
 sacred tradition (amnaya) says.
   A doubt may arise viz.,
Wherefore does the Lord become the cause of the manifestation,
-withdrawal etc. of the universe? Its solution is contained in the
following(Second interpretation of Sakti-cakra-vibhava-prabhavaw)
   The objective world exists only as being manifest (prakasama-
natvena) and being manifest means that it is of the nature of
prakasa or Light which is Consciousness. It has been said by
the wise (Utpaladeva): "The entire gamut of entities appears
(outside), because it already exists in the Lord's Self. Without
its existing in Him there would be no desire for manifestation."
(l.P.V 1.5. 10). Sakti-cakra is described as the aggregate of
powers, because it (already) exists as identical with the internal
 Light of the Supreme. It is because of this that in the
revealed Scriptures it is proclaimed that the Supreme has infinite
powers, Prabhava means cause, Vibhava means the infinite
variety of junction and disjunction of the group of Saktis
whose highest raison d'etre consists in manifestation. So,
 Sakti-cakra-vibhava-prabhavam means the cause of the infinite
variety of junction and disjunction of the aggregate of powers
(Saktis) Thus the Lord by mutually joining and disjoining in
various ways all the objective phenomena which are of the
nature of consciousness and exist in Him as identical with Him
is the cause of the manifestation and absorption of the universe.
The same thing has been said by exalted, Kallata.
   "(Who is) the cause of the appearance of the glorious powers
of the aggregate of the Saktis which powers are of the nature
of consciousness,". The two interpretations given by me are in
conformity with the wording of his gloss.

(Third interpretation of Sakti-cakra)
   Also according to the standpoint of revealed traditional scrip-
ture (agama drstya) which avers "His powers constitute the
whole world, "and also from the standpoint of this book itself
(ihatya sthitya) which maintains that" whether in matter of
word, or object or thought, there is no state which is not Siva,"
the group of saktis represents the world.
Section 1                                                        15

{Fourth interpretation of Sakti Cakra)
  According to the esoteric teaching, viz., "The void that exists
in the upper course of khecari is the sphere of Vamesi," the
phrase also implies the group of such saktis as Vamesvari,10
Khecari, Gocarl, Dikcari and Bhucari which has been thoroughly
explained by me in Spanda-sandoha, and which will be decisively
pointed out in this book also in such a statement as, "They are
intent on concealing their real nature to unawakened beings."
   So as described in these two explanations, 4 Sakti-cakra' here
 means the group of manifold saktis          (Sakti-cakra-prapafica-
bhutay

(Fifth interpretation of   Sakti-Cakra)
  According to 'whence the group of senses', Sakti means 'the
multitude of senses.'

(Sixth   interpretation)
   According to 'Relying on that strength, the mantras\
Sakti    means    'the    eternal mantras11  (nitya    mantra)'
 (Seventh interpretation)
   According to 'of the group of powers arising from the multi-
tude of words', sakti stands for the 'nature of the deities like
Brahmi 12 etc.'
   In these ways, I have given in detail many decisive inter-
pretations of Sakti cakra in Spanda-Sandoha.        The word
prabhava means 'one who is Free' (in accordance with the root-
meaning prabhavati i.e, one who prevails, one who is power-
ful), and not dependent on others like the animals.

 (Another interpretation of   Sakti-cakra-vibhava-prabhava):
   This may be interpreted as a Bahuvrihi compound, meaning
 'One whose prabhava i.e. udaya or appearance or manifestation
 (abhivyakti) comes about from the vibhava i.e. the inner unfold-
 ment of the mass of light i,e, the divinities of the senses (rasmi-
 punja13) (i.e. Sankara who is manifested by an inner develop-
 ment of the senses). The sense is that the recognition of the
 highest Lord is brought about effortlessly by the practice of
 perception of the inner nature.
xviii                                                Spanda-Karikas

 (Another interpretation of the whole verse):
    Moreover, we laud that Sahkara who is a mass of conscious-
 ness identical with the Self) cidanandaghanasyatmanah) and by
 whose opening of the eye lids and closing them i.e. by whose
 revelation and veiling of His essential nature there ensue according
 to the view that what is within is also without the disappearance
 and appearance, in other words the sub mergence and emergence
 successively (yathasahkhyam) of the world i.e. the body and
 through its association of the external universe also, and who to
 His devotee), is the revealer (prabhava-prakasaka) of the nature
 (etat svarupa) of the Sakticakravibhava i.e. of the glory of the
 greatness of the divinity in the form of the highest consciousness.
    So far as possible the verse may be construed in this way
also. We laud Sahkara who is the cause of the greatness of
goddess Consciousness identical with unme$a and nime$a in
bringing about the manifestation etc. of the universe, that
Sahkara who is the Self, and by whose unme$a i.e. expansion
in the form of externality there is the manifestation of the world,
and by whose nime$a i.e. withdrawal in the form of internality,
there is the disappearance of the world. The Highest Lord even
by entering the body etc. brings about the manifestation and
disappearance of the world by the opening and closing of the
senses. This has been described in the following lines by
Utpaladeva who knew the essence of the esoteric doctrine.
    "Therefore, even in practical life, the Lord, because of His
 free will in the form of Maya Sakti enters the body, and by
 His will manifests externally the multitude of objects which
 shine within Him."                                   (I,P.I,6,7)
    In order that people may take the sense (of the verse) in the
 above way, the teacher has rejected the use of "By whose
 power of Absolute Freedom," and adopted that of "By whose
 revelation and veiling."
    Herein the laudation of Sankara implies samavesa or pene-
 tration in Him. As this is what is to be obtained, it is both the
subject-matter and the goal. By taking the phrase Sakti-cakra-
 vibhava-prabhavam as a Bahuvrihi compound and interpreting it
in the sense "Whose manifestation is due to the inner unfoldment
of the group of saktis", the unfoldment of the group of Saktis
Section 1                                                       17

has been said to be the means for the attainment of the goal.
By taking the same phrase as a Tatpurusa compound and inter-
preting it as "the revealer of the glory of the goddess of the
Highest Consciousness" to the devotees, the fruit has been
referred to. As the author 14 (of the book) will say (later).
"Then h e will become the lord of the group of          saktis".
Hence the connexion of the subject-matter (of the book) and
the means (upaya) is that of the end (upeya) and means (upaya).
Thus this Sutra (Karika) gives briefly the subject-matter, the
means, the connexion of the two and the fruit of the study of
this subject."

                             NOTES

   1. 'Aham'which in Sanskrit is the word for T consists of
all the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet from 'a' to 'ha'.
   2. The root-meaning of the word 'spanda' is 'having slight
movement.' The Lord is acala, non-moving. Therefore, move-
ment cannot be ascribed to Him. The word 'spanda' in the
case of the Lord i.e. Siva has to be taken in a figurative sense
of creative pulsation, divine activity, throbbing with life,
dynamism.
   3. The Vedantists who maintain that Brahman is sheer
calm Consciousness without any activity.
   4. The teacher referred to is Vasugupta who, according to
Ksemaraja, composed the Spandakarika.
   5. 'Pratibha' is para samvit, the highest Divine Conscious-
ness which holds within itself all sound, letters, etc. and the
endless variety of subject and object as identical with itself.
   6. This refers to Vasugupta
   7. 'Mahartha' which is also known as 'Mahanaya' system
refers to the Krama school which arose in Kashmir towards the
close of the 7th and beginning of the 8th century A.D.
   8. These twelve divinities or Kalis are a special feature of the
'Mahartha or 'Krama' system. They are:
   (i) Srsti: when the will to create or manifest arises in Kali
and the would-be creation shines in outline in her, she is known
as Srsti Kali. This is the conception of creative power in rela-
tion to the object (prameya).
xviii
                                                   Spanda-Karikas

   (ii) Rakta Kali is the conception of the power of maintenance
(sthiti) of the objective world through the five senses.
   (iii) Sthitinasa Kali. This is the conception of the power of
saiphara or'withdrawal of the objective world i.e. when her
extrovert form is terminated and she rests within herself.
   (iv) Yama Kali manifests herself as beyond the extrovert and
the introvert aspect. She represents the anakhya or indefinable
power in relation to objective experience.
   The first four represent the four powers (srsti, sthiti, saiphara
and anakhya) in relation to object (prameya).
   (v) Saiphara Kali. When Parasamvid brings about the
disappearance of the externality of objects as related to pramanas
or means of knowledge and grasps them within as identical
with herself, she is known as Sarphara kali. This is srtfi in the
stage of pramana. In the stage of Sthitinasakali, the experience is
"I have known the object." In the stage of Sarpharakali, the
experience is, "The object is non-different from me."
   (vi) Mrtyukali engulfs even the Saiphara Kali; she swallows
up even the residual traces of the idea of the withdrawal of the
objective world. This is sthiti in the stage of pramana.
   (vii) Bhadrakali. The letter bha in Bhadrakali indicates
bhedana or afflorescence of different objects and the letter dra
indicates dravana or dissolving those different forms again in
her essential nature. This is the aspect of saiphara in the stage
of pramana. She is also called Rudrakali.
   (viii) Martanda Kali. Martanda means *sun.' The group of
twelve indriyas is referred to as 'sun' inasmuch as it illumines
or brings to light the objects like the 'sun'. The twelve indriyas
are the five senses of perception, the five organs of action,
manas and buddhi. All the indriyas function only when related
to aharpkara or the 'ego feeling'. 4Martanda KalV is so called be-
cause she brings about the dissolution of the twelve senses in
the Ego-feeling. She represents the anakhya power in relation to
pramana, because ii brings the dissolution of the twelve senses in
the ego-feeling to such an extent that they become un-namable.
   The four stages 5 to 8 represent the four powers of kali in
relation to means of knowledge (pramana).
   The next four stages of kali represent her four powers in
relation to the limited Subject (pramata).
Section 1                                                         19

    (ix) Paramarkakali. She represents her power of srsti in relation
to the limited subject. She brings about the emergence of the
limited subject by merging Ahatpkara, the previously described
ego-feeling in her creative power. It should be borne in mind
that the limited subject in this context does not mean the com-
mon limited subject. This limited subject is one in whom the
limitations of objects and senses have been obliterated but who
 still retains the limitation of pasu or anava mala.
    (x) Kalagnirudrakali. When Parasamvid brings about the
identification of the limited subject with the Universal Self, she
is known as KalagnirudrakalL This Kali represents the power of
maintenance (sthiti) in relation to the limited subject as she
makes the limited subject rest in the Universal Self.
    She is called KalagnirudrakalU because she dissolves the limited
subject Kalagnirudra in Her Universal self.
    The experience at the level of Kalagnirudrakali is "I am all
this". She is also known as Mahakali, because she holds within
Herself everything including Kala or Time.
    (xi) Mahakalakall. She brings about the dissolution of the
T which is posited in opposition to this in the 'perfect I' which
is free from all relation to objectivity. This represents the power
of sarfihara or withdrawal in relation to the limited subject.
    (xii) Mahabhairava-ghora-candakali or Mahabhairavacand
ograghorakali.
    This represents the state of anakhya in relation to the limited
subject. This refers to that state of Parasamvid which transcends
all description in words. Hence it is the stage of anakhya. This
is the Akula stage. In it the subject, the object, the means of
knowledge and knowledge (pramata, pramana and prameya) are
all dissolved in I-consciousness. This is also called Para or the
Highest, because all the previous states are Her manifestation.
    As she dissolves all the states of prameya (object), pramana
(means of knowledge and knowledge), and pramata (subject), she
is called Mahabhairava ghora-candakali. The word canda refers
to the sphere of prameya (object), ghora implies pramana
(knowledge and means of knowledge), and mahabhairava
suggests pramata (subject).
    9. Manthana Bhairava is the ultimate resting place of all
and is also called Kulesvara by Mahesvarananda.
xviii
                                                  Spanda-Karikas

    10. VameSvari is the presiding deity of the whole group of
these Saktis, The word vama is connected with the verb vam
which means to spit out, emit, eject. The Sakti is called Vamesvari,
because she emits or projects the universe out of the Absolute.
The word vama also means left, reverse, contrary, opposite.
This Sakti is called Vamesvari also because while in the Siva-
state there is unity-consciousness, in the state of saqisara, the
contrary or opposite condition happens, viz. there is difference-
consciousness.
    Khecari—Khecari saktis are explained by Ksemaraja in the
following way in Spandasandoha (p. 20) The bodhagagane caranti
iti khecaryah pramatrbhumisthitah        Khecaris are those saktis
that move (caranti) in Kha i.e. consciousness (bodhagagana).
     These reside in the pramata or the subject, the experient. They
 lead those experients who have become purified to liberation, to
 the Divine, and bind those who are under the influence of
 Maya.
     GocarL The word go symbolizes buddhi-aharpkaramanobhumi
 i.e. antahkararta. Antahkarana or the psychic apparatus is the
 sphere of gocari saktis.
     Dikcari—Dik$u diSasu bahyabhumUu caranti iti dikcaryah.
 Those Saktis that function in dik or outer space are known as
 dikcari. The external senses have to do with the consciousness
  of space. Hence they are the sphere of dikcari saktis.
     Bhucari—Bhuh rupadi pancatmakam meyapadam tatra caranti
  iti bhucaryah. Those Saktis that have to do with the external
 objects, with the objective phenomena having colour, form,
  etc. are known as bhucari.
     The empirical individual experients, their psychic apparatus,
  their organs of sense and action, and the objective world are the
  expressions of these Saktis.
      11. Nityamantra or the eternal mantra is the mantra of
  purnahanta, the ever-present perfect I-consciousness of the
  Divine.
    12. The presiding deities of the multitude of words are the
 following:
   (1.) Yogisvari or Mahalaksmi of a-varga i.e. of the class of
 vowels.
Section 1                                                       21

  (2) Brahmi of ka-varga, (3) Mahesvari of ca-varga, (4) Kau-
m<5rf of ta-varga, (5) Vaisnavi of ta-varga, (6) vdrahi of pa-varga
(7) Aindri or Indrani of ya-varga, (8) Camunda of sa-varga.
   13. Rasmi-punja. 'Mass of light' here means the Karanesvarl
devis i.e. the divinities of the senses. The senses when extrovert-
ed are known as indriyas, when introverted and resting in the
self, they are known as Karanesvarl devis
   14. This refers to Vasugupta who, according to Ksemaraja, is
the author of Spandakarika.

                          EXPOSITION

   The Sanskrit words unmesa and nimesa are very rich in con-
notation. They cannot be expressed in one word in any other
language. So they have been translated by different words in
different contexts.
   The first question to be considered is that this entire text of
Spandakarika is meant to prove that Siva is changeless and one.
How then two aspects of His, viz. unmesa and nimesa (appear-
ance-disappearance, manifestation-absorption) which are mutually
contradictory have been mentioned in the first verse?
   The answer is that it is only Svatantrya—Freedom or Iccha
Will i.e. of Siva which brings about both manifestation and
absorption. Unmesa and nimesa denote succession. Succession
 means Time, but Siva is above Time. Therefore, unmesa and
nimesa have not to be taken in the order of succession. They are
 simply two expressions of Iccha sakti of the Divine. In Spanda-
 sandoha, Ksemaraja says that there are many names of this
 Iccha Sakti (power of will) in this system. Spanda, sphuratta
 Crmi, Bala, Udyoga, Hrdaya, sara, MalinU Para etc. are
 synonyms of this Iccha sakti. In Spanda-nir^aya also he says :
 It is only spanda-sakti which is simultaneously unmesa and
 nimesa.
    Both unmesa and nimesa, i.e. manifestation and absorption
 simultaneously denote the Iccha of the Divine. They are not
 two mutually opposed principles. What from one point of view is
 nimesa is at the same time unmesa from another point of view.
  For instance, the disappearance (inimesa) of the world i.e. the
  disappearance of the idea that the world is something different
xviii
                                                   Spanda-Karikas

toto caelo from Siva set over against Him as another con-
stitutes at the same time the unmesa or appearance of the essential
nature of Siva. Similarly, the nimesa or the concealment of the
essential nature of Siva is at the time the unmesa or appearance of
the world as something different from Siva. Ksemaraja gives
many examples in his commentary to show that what is unmesa
from one point of view is simultaneously (yugapat) nimesa from
another point of view and vice versa. He concludes by saying:

TOT wrwTcTTT F•oR ^ o^ f t c f o^nrsr ^   ^ i
   "In reality nothing arises, and nothing subsides, only the
divine Spanda-sakti which, though free of succession, appears in
different aspects as if arising, and as if subsiding."
   Ksemaraja has pointed out that nimesa and unmesa refer to
another significant concept of Saiva philosophy. This is a philoso-
phy of Evolution. Evolution has two aspects—the arc of descent or
avarohakrama (nimesa) from the Divine upto the empirical
individual, from Consciousness upto the matter and the arc
of ascent or aroha-krama (unmesa) from the empirical individual
upto Siva-pramata and from inconscient matter upto samvid or
the divine consciousness. The purpose of all the scriptures inclu-
ding Spandakarika is to show how the empirical individual can
mount to the stage of Siva-pramata. Siva-consciousness is the
upeya or the goal, the methods recommended in the book are the
means (upayas) for reaching the goal (upeya).
   Ksemaraja has given many interpretations of Sakti-cakra-
vibhava-prabhava from various points of view in his commentary
which should be carefully studied.
   Both Ramakantha and Utpala Bhatta warn that pralaya and
udaya are not to be taken as corresponding to unmesa and
nimesa exactly in the order in which they are given in the text
but rather in a different order i.e. udaya with unmesa, and
pralaya with nimesa. "When there is the unmesa i.e. aunmukhya
or inclination towards manifestation, there is the udaya or
emergence of the world. When there is nimesa or retraction of
that inclination, there is submergence of the world."
   Ksemaraja takes pralaya and udaya both ways i.e. in a
different order (bhinnakrama) as advocated by Ramakantha and
Utpalabhatta, and also in the order as they appear in the text.
Section 1                                                        23

   When taken in a different order, the meaning would be as
given above. When taken in the order in which they appear in
the text, the meaning would be as given below:
   "When there is unmesa or revelation of the essential nature of
the Divine, there is the pralaya or disappearance of the world.
When there is nimesa or concealment of the essential nature of
the Divine, there is the udaya or appearance of the world."
    Both these interpretations are correct. In the first interpreta-
tion, the words unmesa and nimesa are construed with reference
to Sakti of Siva. In the second interpretation, they are construed
with reference to the svarupa or essential nature of Siva.
    The text is neither a book of poetry, nor of mere academic
philosophy. It is philosophy for the practical purpose of sanc-
 tifying and divinising human nature. What then is the justifica-
 tion of sankaraip stumah—we laud Sankara? All the commen-
 tators are unanimously of the view that stumah here suggests
 samavisamah i.e. 'we have to enter or identify ourselves with
 His essential nature'. As Ksemaraja puts it beautifully Kalpi-
 tapramatrpada-nimajjanena samavisamah, tatsamavesa eva hi
jivanmuktiphala iha prakarana upadesyah. "We are united with
 Him by obliterating our state of assumed agency. This treatise is
 going to teach that identification with Him is the real reward of
 liberation in life."

Introduction to the Second Verse:

                               TEXT

                         fo          grilMlMMMlft^cf f^RTT
       dtlUiVlMMcj            ^ ^ s m r n f d O U H faafa, fdOf^dl-
fdOf^ddmi xT WfcT: ^ ^ T R ^ : FTTcT, yHVUwti          ^
3 F T * frTST^ f c^cTT: W^T q^UglViimgdmg—

                        TRANSLATION

  Here a doubt may be raised. What is the proof of the existence
of such real nature as Samkara? How can He create the world
without any means such as material etc.? If He Himself is assumed
to be the material cause, then His disappearance would be
xviii
                                                        Spanda-Karikas

brought about by the world (after creation,) just as the disappear-
ance of a lump of clay is brought about after the production
of a jar.
   If it be said that there can be both appearance and disappear-
ance of the Lord, then this would give rise to difference in His
nature, and also some cause has to be thought out for His
re-emergence after disappearance, and on the creation of the
world, there would be the contingency of duality. To remove all
such doubts with one stroke, the author says:

                                      Verse 2

                   forafa?       wf wtf s w r s *     fro?^ i
            flgMHI^d^MccMH              f^ftsftcT f ^ f ^   II ^ II

   Yatra sthitam idam sarvam karyaip yasmacca nirgataip/
   Tasyanavrtarupatvan na nirodho' sti kutracit// 2

                              TRANSLATION

  Inasmuch as nothing can veil His nature, there cannot be His
obstruction anywhere in whom all this world rests and from
whom it has come forth ?

                   TEXT OF THE COMMENTARY




        fkrtER?        3T ftflnHM? I qaf^r cTC^TOfgWTC q ^ l ^ H l M m -
TOfa I            TO         ^HcMIH       HRf^MiUUcH* TO ^HR^TO ftTO
UdW>WM SH»WHM f i f ^ f d                            fTOta:


    'cRTcTTO cfFT FTT^T STTTO TTOT l' (3T5f¥5To

Ji=T              fawfatd          I                                  fTO:

    1       50     foPH^Ilftrd    TO:    I
Section 1                                                              25

WR^WftW
   »            o
                      3T5TOTTqnfRqq*
                               o
                                      ^
T dc+cMfad*
         O  O
              I             C^rT   ^T:
                                     «
                                        faaRT f ^ q r a feX
v m ^ * g ^^KUiHH^lF^       ^KUMMMMtK fWTOcHfasft-
                           s



fcTO I ^ I ^ M W M l f a n ^ W qKTMfddH
                                 O     N
                                         I ?T ^ qrpf t m f a            «

             ^Tf^^T                             I     Td^fd^ff^dfM
d ^ d ^ ^ M c , fcqtf, TRT^r fwrn? srfq 5                         f^TrVft-
          fNdfafd I 3TRr*IT ^RT^ft^T I 3R1TO:               f^TcTfa
S T O T ^ T * ^ t H C ^ ^ M K M i f e f c c T c T ^feTTcT I qETCf
   'q^rr                w^wft                 1

   cTTT f ^ R t ^ T                   lT (qo cfto ^Y)

   'HlfodiHk^WFT I1 ( f o 5To
ffir ^ j f a w t d i i ^r ddd<**fed ^FjrfcWrT cf?fts4 femrm ^wiRiti-
THTWRcTT^q ^nr^H^qdlfd trnti \ TT^ ^ i^t faraJta Hwnftnhr-
        lft*RT ^TTcTT I ^ qWTO               I    irf? dfHkMWVM^
^nrftnrfcf cf^r sr^ta T f^ SPTRT^T ^ srar^         ^dfHWivi^M HFnfcr-
*Rfk ^ sr&cPFrferrerteif? cr^mf^nhmfq                    WMH^WM^I-
   fdf<4dIHmfdr<4dIf*R ^IriMdi     c\
                                         *<HpMrfl                   I

^NM^n^^i WTfi: fi^Pyrm ^      ^cTf^rrkfhr^, ^f^   wfi«n
tllgthOhMkHI     ^Owfe^ M       <                 tisnaq
^cmcWrfq         ^Hkfl^KMf^Wi                    RFTRT:
           Slk^l^MfdW ^WTTTOWc^T WTCT faf^RET fcMMMq^Pl-
cSW I tnfaET sfUct-cy^Vlltd
       C\   C\    O   CN

   ^HTR:          tf         ^TTcIT: ll' (VRS.^)
ffir 1 (Tor      q?R iicsh»WMC<         ^ d M f a ^r
frT^fk *T rTPT ^RTFTRnrofe        fefo-df^OnqT               oOTPR? far*
   1   10 50 ^ d c ^ m f t P d qT5: I
       ^ro 50 ri||A||d      qT3: I
xviii
                                                             Spanda-Karikas




    'srm^n^rfa ^rg^rt 41 fad m f c cT^ir I
    ^mrfq - TTT     ^ t^            II' (cfo           s^o ** ^ f t o )
SFA I IR^MFWTIRFHR          FARO           TOPFTCR   ^ I P I H   TOROROFA    TO
fiFTO                ITORTRTfr^f; ITO f ^ T ^OTTCTOFT TOfa * rTOT-
^HIDM     FEF^TO     I TO TO FFROFTONROT^            FE^QN   I     ^    ^TOTO-




     sttttPTd"          "^nTcrr^Trf^f WATTOT         11' (^o ^fto <^130)
f f a l TO ^TTTOHim ^ ^ ^ l ^ ^ l N l ^ d c c t l ^ m d i r d U ^ d * fofesT-
^TcftrTO: I           feo^            TO        STRTTTO fTOcrfafa TOT*^
*TcftSFT * f?RtSRFTOt fdHlHHl^lHH^lfag^sfq iftpHI WfrWWWI-
            iTfTO5TO I
     'q^T efHT: ^ft^cT cRT             T^T l' (<Jl£)
f f k I TOT
     'd^l^^T^FcTT^          *TOWT ^T *TT f^T: l' (^IV)
^cMfM ^ I                          TOTcrfr                        ^TSRnfTO^
5TRFT Hf?T ^ cTFT faffa: 5rfTOSftsfer,         TOt      5rfTOSRjt UTO
jrfrou^ TOFT TOfe ftr^rf^rffi^rrTf^TO faf^rraro w r e r ^ f f k

TTOT
 <o
     I srf^jfcT TOcT

fcTOTO^ I ^         -dl^H         fasjcfld'W  f^TOTO^TTTfe^lfr
                                      TO*T MK^W^U        cffecT:




fcTO?fa ^T^TT STfrTMlfed*? I               ^ H                         I ^W^TT -
            <Jo ^TfFTT f f a      TO   I
        cfTo T^o To S P f f ^ T   TO   I
Section 1                                                         27


       ftffTO^nftwr^ tofhtittort fef^roj


                 Translation of the Commentary

   Of that i.e. of Sarpkara who is a compact mass of Light and
Bliss and who is everyone's own being, there is no where i.e. in
no space, time or form any obstruction i.e. any impediment in
His free advance, because nothing can veil His nature. This is
the purport. In this world, whatever, e.g. prana (life-force),
puryatfaka (the subtle body)' pleasure, the blue colour, etc. that
may possibly be conceived to have the capacity of veiling the
Light of Consciousness is nothing if it does not come into light
(na prakasate) and if it does come into light (prakasamanarp tu),
then it is only the nature of Sarpkara whose very form is Light
(of Consciousness). Then what is that which can obstruct or
what is the meaning of obstruction? The author proves this
very fact by adding the qualifying clause 'in whom all this objective
world rests'1 (yatra ityadina) etc. to the noun clause'His obstruc-
tion is nowhere possible etc.' (tasya na nirodho' sti kutracit etc.)
    Yatra means 'in that consciousness which is one's own Self'.
Idatp sarvarp karyam means 'the entire world consisting of
subject or knower (matr), means of knowledge or knowledge
(imana). and object or the known (meya)\
   Yatra sthitam idarp sarvarp karyatp, therefore, means, 'In
which Consciousness this world consisting of subject, object
and means of knowledge etc. rests'. By 'rests' (sthitam) is meant
by whose light, it comes into light and thus obtains stance.
How can there be an obstruction of His by that world? Because
by His obstruction that which is considered the obstructor it-
self can by no means appear. This is what is to be supplied to
complete the sense. As has been said in Aja^apramatrsiddhi (21).
"How can there be any restraint of His by prana (life-force)
which is identical with Himself?"
   (An objection). A question may be raised—"That alone
can have the light of stance which is produced, but to what
does it owe its very production"? In reply, it is said, 'From
xviii
                                                   Spanda-Karikas

whom it has come forth.' Discarding the Consciousness as the
cause of the world which is verified from one's own experience
from the standpoint of memory, dream, ideation, creation by
yogis, it is not proper to suppose pradhana, atom etc. to be the
cause of the world, for such a cause has neither proof nor
reasoning in its support.
    By the word karya (effect, product), this is what is implied,
"That is said to be a product which is produced by the action
of an agent, not that which is the outcome of another insentient
cause. According to what has been said in Isvarapratyabhijna,
causality in the case of the insentient cannot be proved. This
will be made clear in the following line in this book. "The pair
of states is said to be the doer and the deed. (I, 14)." The word
'all' (sarvam) in the verse implies that the agent is independent
of material, etc. It is never witnessed that the produced product
such as the jar can conceal the nature of the agent such as the
 potter, etc.
    (Another objection). The process of coming out can occur
 only in the case of that which is already contained in something.
Then is this world contained in something in the very
 beginning?
    (Reply) No, it is not contained in anything else, but in the
 self-same Consciousness. That is why it is said in the verse, "in
 whom it rests". The phrase, 'in whom it rests' should be used
 twice by repetition This is the sense "If the world did not exist
 in Consciousness, undifferentiated from the light of I-ness, how
 could it arise from it without the need of material, etc? Since
 according to the sacred tradition as expressed in the following
  lines:
     "As the great banyan tree lies only in the form of potency
 in the seed, even so the entire universe with all the mobile and
 immobile beings lies as a potency in the heart-seed1 of the
 Supreme/' (P. Tri 24) and according to the reasoning afore-
 mentioned in "Because it already exists in the Lord's Self."
 (I.P.I. 5,10), this world already rests in Him, gleaming as identi-
 cal with Him. Therefore, it is perfectly valid to say that the
 Lord whose nature is consciousness brings about the emergence
 of the world in the form of congealment of His essence
 (i.e., He materializes His essence in the form of the world).
Section 1                                                         29

  Thus the syntactical construction must be made differently.
The particle 'ca' should be interpreted in the sense of eva
and should be put in a different order. So now the line would stand
as Yatra sthitam eva (yad) idam sarvatfi karyam yasmad nirgatam,
meaning 'only as resting in Him is all this world come forth."
   (A third objection) "Well, if this world has come out (i.e.
separated) from that Exquisite Mass of Light, then how can it
be manifest, for nothing can be manifest outside Light? It
would be inconsistent to say that something is separate from
 Light and is yet manifest.
   (Reply). To answer this question, the clause 'from whom it
has come forth' should also be repeated twice and should be
construed in this way, Yasmad nirgatamapi (sad) yatra sthitam,
i.e. from whom even when it has come forth, it is still resting
there. The particle 'ca' has to be taken in a different order and has
to be interpreted as meaning 'even' 'This is what is meant to be
said—"That (the world) has not come out from him as does a
walnut from a bag. Rather the self-same Lord through His abso-
lute Freedom manifesting, on His own background like a city
in a mirror, the world as if different from Him though non-
different, abides in Himself."
   (Fourth objection). Well, it may be granted that there is no
obstruction to Him by the world in the states of manifestation
(creation) and maintenance, how can He avoid being concealed
in the state of the world's dissolution which is of the nature of
naught, akin to sound sleep? Without the perceptible world,
the perceiver, viz., the perceiving consciousness is nothing (i.e. a
subject without an object is meaningless.)
   (Reply). The question can be answered by a repetition of the
clause yasmat nirgatam api sad yatraiva sthitam i.e. from whom
even while come forth it abides in Him i.e. even the created
world in the state of dissolution abides in Him as identical
with Himself. There is no other annihilation of it in the
 form of a void. In accordance with what is said in the
verse given below, the void cannot be reasonably conceived
without Light serving as its support. As has been said in
Svacchandasastra "It is (really) nonvoid (aiunyam) which is said
to be void (sunyam), for sunya only means abhdva or absence
xviii
                                                 Spanda-Karikas

of objects. O goddess, that is to be known as abhava (absence
of objects) in which all objective existents have dissolved."
   Therefore nothing whether space, time or form can be said
with propriety to obstruct Him whose work is this whole world,
by whose Light it is manifested, and even when dissolved it
abides as identical with that Light.
   Hence this principle is all-pervading, eternal, full of all
powers, self-luminous, and eternally existent. In order to prove
its existence, no poor means of proof which can reveal only an
unknown thing can ever be appropriately applicable or possible.
On the contrary, the means of proof and all other things them-
selves depend on the truth of this principle. This has been said
by my venerable teacher in Tantraloka:
   "He the great God is the utmost life of even those proofs
which constitute the life of all things." (T.I. 55)
   The phrase Yatra sthitam (in whom it rests) should be
applied twice by repetition, and so the whole thing would mean
"This world even when it comes out from Him rests in Him 9
by whose light, it being manifest rests in Him as that light
itself, with whose light it is identical, whose light alone consi-
dered in its entirety is sufficient for its (the world's) proof."
The world is nothing else than this principle.
   Thus there can never and nowhere be any obstruction, as is
proved by one's own experience, to this Spanda principle which
reveals that where manifestation, maintenance and withdrawal
 all meet-and which brings about things most difficult to be
accomplished. As has been said by Utpaladeva:
         Ruler of all, glory to thy unprecedented rulership which
has indeed nothing to be ruled (for there is nothing different
from thyself over which thou couldst rule). Thy other ruler-
ship (in the form of Sadasiva, ISvara) is also exactly like thy
 own by which this world does not appear to thy devotees in the
 same way as it appears to others" (Utpala stotra XVI, 301).
The sense of this verse is that nothing appears as different from
 the Light of manifestation, since the manifest world is one with
 the Light of manifestation.
(Means for mystic Union) :
  Moreover, since there is no obstruction        to this (spanda)
Section 1                                                      31

principle whether in the state of cessation as indicated by the
 phrase Yatra sthitam (in whom resting) or in the state of ex-
 pansion as indicated by the phrase Yasmac ca nirgatam (from
whom came forth), therefore the yogi should be intent on en-
trance in his essential nature in both nimilana and unmilana
samadhi.2 As will be said (in this book). 4 'When agitation
ceases, then occurs the highest state 3 '(1,9) Similarly, "Whether
it is a word or object or thought, there is no state which is not
 Siva.4" (II, 4). There cannot be an obstruction to or negation
of one's real nature in any case even though there may be exist-
ing somewhere an experient like the Buddhist who maintains
that there is no Self or there may be somewhere a proof which
is considered to be its annulment. Because if he that is the
denier of that (essential nature) is not (already) existent as a
reality, then his denial becomes a picture without a canvas.
Similarly, the proof which is its negation also becomes ground-
less without the existence of the denier. This in itself is the
proof of the reality of the spanda tattva that it is manifest
(prakasate iti) in the form of that very denier. The reality of
the experient (pramata) which is thus proved goes to show that the
Lord who is an eternally established reality (adi-siddhaf and
who is identical with the reality of one's own Self does exist.
Thus the reality of the Spanda principle has been tacitly affirmed
without using any words, even by him who had come forward
to deny it. This point will be clarified later in this book in
"There can be no disappearance of that inner nature." (I, 16).

   Thus this book describes the fact that the principle of Sah-
kara which is both transcendent to and immanent in the world,
which brings about manifestation, maintenance and with-
drawal of the world is one's own essential nature. That which
is the object of meditation in all the theistic schools is not
anything different from the spanda principle. The diversity of
meditation appears entirely owing to the absolute Freedom of
this Spanda principle. In fact, the entire universe is only the
manifestation of the essence of the activity of this principle.
This has been explained by way of suggestion in the line. "By
relying on that strength, the mantras become endowed with the
strength of the omniscient" (11,1).
xviii
                                                    63 Spanda-Karikas

  Thus there is no room for the aforesaid objection. Let intelli-
gent people who are unprejudiced and are not haughty examine
for themselves the difference between my commentary and the
commentaries of others on the Spandakarikas which are like
desire-granting gem. I have not openly shown that difference in
the case of every word for fear of the increase of the volume of
the book.
                             NOTES

   1. Hrdaya-bija (heart-Seed) is also known as Samhara-bija
symbolized by the mantra Sauh or ma-ha-a. Sfftibija is aham.
It is also known as pindanatha-bijasymbolized     by the mantra
'r-ks-kh-eip.'
   2. Nimilana and unmilana samadhi; Nimilana samadhi is the
inward meditative condition with closed eyes, in which the indi-
vidual consciousness gets absorbed into the Universal Conscious-
ness. Unmilana samadhi is that state of the mind in which, even
when the eyes are open, the external world appears as Uni-
versal Consciousness or Siva.
   3. This refers to the state of nimilana samadhi.
   4. This refers to the state of unmilana samadhi.
   5. Adi-siddha means that it is an eternally established reality,
it already stands proved before any denial or negation tries to
disprove it.
                          EXPOSITION

   This karika expresses the fact that the world consisting of
pramata (subject), prameya (object) and pramana (means of know-
ledge) exists in Siva or the spanda principle, even as the reflection
of a city may be said to exist in a mirror. It is nothing but the
mirror and the various objects in the city which appear different
from one another and also from the mirror are nothing but
the mirror itself. Thus the world is nothing but Siva, though
it appears different from Him, even as the various objects
reflected in a mirror appear different but really speaking are not
anything different from the mirror.
   The first point that is made out is that when we say that the
world rests in Siva or that it has come forth from Siva, we are
speaking only from the popular, empirical point of view, not
Section 1                                                       33

from the metaphysical point of view. The world is not contained
in Him as a walnut in a bag where the walnut has its own in-
dependent existence and the bag for ihc time being contains it.
The world has no separate existence from Siva as the walnut
has from the bag. So also when we say that the world has
come out from Him, it is not meant that the world has come
out from Him as a walnut comes out from a bag where both
the walnut and the bag are separate from each other. The world
and Siva are not two separate entities. Siva is the world from
the point of view of appearance, and the world is Siva from
the point of view of Reality. Siva is both transcendent to and
immanent in the world—both Visvottirna and visvamaya
   The second point that is made out is that since the world
owes its existence to Him, it cannot conceal Him even as a pot
cannot conceal the potter, nor can it serve as an impediment in
 His free Self-expression and Self-expansion. That is to say He
cannot be limited by space, time, figure, etc. This has another
 very important implication. Since the real or metaphysical Self of
 each individual is essentially Siva, the world cannot throw a
 pall over it. Only the individual has to recognise his Self. As
 Kallata puts it:
           ti'flUHWUJIHftTOROTfeTCTOlTOcSTO^ =tqpqa ftTtSj:
   ''Nothing can obstruct Him even in the state of the world, for
the Self as Siva has the nature which cannot be veiled."
   This Karika has also a mystic implication. Ksemaraja has
clearly pointed that out in the following words:
    ^^HVnlHH^HiRjgtsfq- JJIPHI            TOWntsnr^hr       wfa-
       I
  "Both in introverted and extroverted state of meditation the
yogi should be intent on entering his essential nature which is
Siva."

Introduction to the third verse:

                              TEXT


 frHfafawfl   TO    ^HKKM^Ifl froSfa        PrftTOrt,—*TfTcT
                     srfTOfejTOqforfk—
34                                                   Spanda-Karikas

                         TRANSLATION

   An objection may be raised, "Such nature (of Sivo) is not
experienced in the state of waking, etc. According to the argu-
ments you have advanced, that nature is not restrained by any-
thing or any one, but in the state of waking, etc, it is concealed
by itself (because in these states such reality is not experienced)."
On account of this doubt, the author explains to the uncom-
prehending in the following verse what has already been said.

                                  VERSE

               smreTfefaSr^sfq              sroqfa i
               fora^           w r o n j r a w w r : it 3 u

         Jagradadivibhede'pi tadabhinne prasarpati/
         Nivartate nijannaiva svabhavadupalabdhrtah//3.

                          TRANSLATION

  Even though differing states like waking etc. occur in which,
however, that Spanda principle remains identically the same, that
Spanda principle never departs from its own nature as the identi-
cal Experient (in all the differing states).

                TEXT OF THE COMMENTARY



 gtiMMi ^      sftfroftrtsfa ^T i m ^ w m ^ n n f e r ^ srcnrfir—aniM^
 SROFA
   >»
          nfo arofa>         PMWHHIPH:           ICH»M
                                                     CN       O
                                                                  H   C
                                                                          1       -
 (MVIMItH P h ^ I          ff? fa^RT      d^ifHMWlft dcSW>HtlpMlftd
 T fvf^csnmRT i               -Md<iUn           SWHI              1
     «                                           c        «                   ^   '

 ^MH«ud t^r ^r ^nmRRT          farar^,       r^pnfe d^kunfcHddi
 iflTR ^FTO srfk: I tr^rrTtsn^qf f w ^ ^ r R W R S f q ?T fd«kid I

                              I      q f o k q * cTc^ dfaeMMdRwa I
Section 1                                                           35

OffT dHtfri ^ J T ^ R I 3rfTO        §             vrfMKli: ftnsnftwta I
                            Hf?T MflMfd MU<fd        fl^N"       WHMl-
                     i fif^rpT srnrerfinfa: qforrot froHf ^fk SCOT^T-
                              >   «       «

MM^xflsfq qfa f^HMkMP^IWdqi ^dHI^Pdr^d f t t ^T dcM^ld)
HHHl(df<'oiidt 5T5T
   'HftuilHl^ddHI       q*     l'

                       iHjdi f r o n fc^ftr T fr^pnr i       Mifdjyd-




                      t ^ f t R ^f^^MN MPnlWW't HOM^          H


                         TRANSLATION

   The word yag/tf/ is synonym of jagara, for it has been used
as such by the cultured ones. 1 Though differences in the states of
waking, dream, and deep sleep well-known among common
people or in the corresponding states of dharana (concentration)
dhyana (meditation) and intense absorption (samadhi), well
known among the yogins continue as different from one another,
yet as a matter of fact, that spanda principle never departs from
its own invariable nature as the Self of all and as the Experient
of every state. If that principle were to depart, the states of
waking etc. being devoid of its light would not appear at all.
Its nature as Experient in the state of waking and dream, is
proved from Self-experience in the case of every one. Though
in the case of deep sleep, its nature as Experient is not similarly
known directly, yet it is proved from subsequent memory of it
(the deep sleep) which could not otherwise justifiably occur
unless there was a previous experience of that deep sleep. It
 (the Spanda principle) never departs or deviates from its nature

   <J. sfTo i\o 50 r<Tt>fafd TO: I
   -v. tto 30           TO:           I
36                                                Spanda-Karikas

as the Experient. Its objects of experience, such as state of deep
sleep etc. may through its greatness, deviate with pleasure.
Where is the harm in this?
   The word 'eva' is to be taken differently from the textual order
in the sense of api (also). The meaning would then be 'Even
in the absence of the states of waking and dream i.e. even in
the state of deep sleep the spanda principle does not depart
from its nature'.

(First explanation of tadabhinne):
  The phrase tadabhinne (not separate from that) besides
qualifying the phrase jagaradi-vibheda (differing states of wak-
ing etc.) serves as a reason. 2 It means 'Because different states
of waking etc. appear as non-different from the nature of Siva
(who is prakasa), therefore, these are of the form of light. How
can that which is identical with the other remain if the other
departs? i.e. Since waking etc. are identical with Siva, how
can they exist, if Siva or the spanda principle with which they
are identical departs (from its nature as Experient). 3

(Second Explanation)
   Or tat (that) may be taken as subject of prasarpati, and
abhinne (not separate) may be interpreted as the identity of
waking, etc. with reference to Siva. Now the construction would
be tat jagradadi-vibhed'pi (sati) prasarpati, and the meaning
would be that 44Spanda principle even while there are differing
states like waking, etc. flows on i.e. assumes diversity. It never
departs from its nature." 4
   Moreover, do the different states of walking, etc constitute
parinama (transformation or evolute) as the followers of Samkhya
and Pancaratra believe or vivarta (illusory appearance) as gram-
marians, etc.5 believe? The phrase tadabhinne has also been
used by the author to refute their theory.

(Rejection of the theory of parirtama)
   If the manifold states being transformation of consciousness
were even slightly different from pure consciousness, then on
their transformation, consciousness would also be slightly
transformed. On the transformation of consciousness itself,
Section 1                                                        37

nothing would appear (lit. would come to light).6 Therefore, the
theory of transformation cannot hold good. As has been said
in Srikirana.7
   "There can be transformation only of the insentient. It can-
not be rightly applied to the sentient.''

(Rejection of the theory of vivarta):
   That which is perceived cannot be unreal, for if it be unreal,
there would be the predicament of the Brahman principle also
becoming unreal. Therefore, the theory of vivarta is also incon-
sistent inasmuch as it connotes unreality, separation and the
assumption of another form. 8
   From tadabhinne follows God's power of accomplishing even
what is not within the range of possibility. Inasmuch as the
Lord manifests the differing states of waking, etc, in the mani-
festation of that difference itself He manifests His identity.1
Thus He flashes forth in difference by His power of apara, in
identity by His power of para, in the form of identity in diver-
sity by His power of parapara. Thus it is God Himself who is
manifest in the unparalleled Trika principle10 (the principle
of triad).
    From the mystic point of view this verse teaches that He is
 Saipkara Himself who even when remaining in the different
 states of waking, etc. constantly contemplates this identical
 nature of himself and thus experiences himself as the (ever-
 present) Experient.
                              NOTES
     1. Strictly speaking, the noun form of the verb jagr is
jagara, but 'jagrat' has also been used as a noun even by well-
 cultured writers. Hence the use of 'jagrat' in place of jagara'
 is justified.
    2. This is known as hetugarbha vise$ana i.e. an adjective
 which does not only qualify the noun but contains implicitly a
 reason also. The reason which is implicit in this adjective clause
 is that 'because the states of waking, dream, etc are non-different
 from (i.e. identical with) the nature of Siva which is light, there-
  fore. they are also of the form of light'.
38                                                  Spanda-Karikas

   3. The idea is that since waking, etc. are identical with the
spanda principle, they cannot remain i.e. they cannot appear
or be manifest if the spanda principle as Experient departs. In
the absence of the Experient, they will also vanish.
   4. The nature of Siva is not only permanent experiencing
principle, but while         remaining permanent experient, He
assumes various kinds of differing forms
   5. Et cetera refers to the Vedantins.
   6. Just as when milk is transformed into curd, the milk has
disappeared. It is no longer milk. It is now curd. Even so if
consciousness is transformed into the manifold states, it can no
longer remain consciousness. On the disappearance of conscious-
ness, the manifold states will also vanish, for there can be no
experience without the experient.
   7. Srikirana is the title of a book on tantra which is not
available now.
   8. There are three characteristics of vivarta, viz.
   (1) it connotes illusory appearance (2) separation and
(3) assumption of a different form. Since the world is not
unreal, nor separate from, no^ of a form different from Siva or
Consciousness, the theory of Vivarta cannot be accepted.
   9. Without the Experient's continuing as identical in the
different states, their differences themselves cannot be experienced.
Therefore the experience of difference itself reveals the non-differ-
ent i.e. the identical nature of the Experient.
   10. Sadardha or half of six means three. This refers to the
Trika philosophy of Kashmir which maintains that in manifesta-
tion there are three saktis (powers) of Siva that function, viz
 (1) para the highest stage in which difference from Siva has
 not yet started, (2) para-para, the intermediate stage in which
 in spite of difference the sense of identity persists, (3) apara in
 which there is complete difference.

                             EXPOSITION

  Two important points have been made out in this karika.
Firstly, states of experience may differ, but the Experient does
not deviate from his nature as Experient. He remains identical.
As Kallata puts it:
Section 1 70


    f^WfTTf^ ^               ^ o t I
  "Since the Experient remains the same in all the three states
of waking, dream, and deep sleep, there is no deviation in his
nature, just as the lotus remains the same in all its five parts.
The following verse quoted by Utpala Bhatta beautifully
expresses the same idea:
               ^ftST HM^Id,: 4WNH I
   TOT F M W T S F U ^ C T ^ P T F ^ FAVRTT I
   "This difference is of the states not of the Experient who holds
them i.e. who experiences those states just as there is difference
in the sprouts etc. of the lotus, but not in the sakti (power) of
the lotus."
   The differences themselves point to one common identical
Reality which acts as anusandhata i.e. which joins those differ-
ing states into the unity of the experience of one individual in
the form 'I who was awake, had a dream in sleep and then
enjoyed sound sleep/
   Secondly, the different states of experience are nothing but an
expression of Consciousness itself. They are not different from
 Consciousness.
   These differing states can neither be explained as parinama
 or transformation of consciousness nor as vivarta or illusory
 appearance. They are simply a display of the Svatantrya (abso-
 lute freedom) of Siva.
   There is a practical aspect of this philosophical truth in Sadhana.
 One who contemplates zealously over the identity of the
 Experient in the midst of the changing states of experience
 becomes identified with Siva.

 Introduction to the 4th verse:
                                  TEXT

   TO $ 'q^JfTO tffasri ^fTORT^^TRfTOcf 1 TOTf' fcTOTO
 5TOTOTO Trzr drclfafd #TOT TOF^; * ^TOtfTOcTO: HTO
 QRFGRFDUTD        FLKFRFD        *RFTO5TTOT%%TO

     <| ^O <JO fTORTftrfa TT3. I
40                                                          Spanda-Karikas

                          TRANSLATION

   The followers of Buddha say that we see that joy, Depression,
etc, are only different altered forms of one single consciousness.
On the strength of this argument they hold that the continuum
of jfiana ox knowledge alone is Reality, (i.e. there is no jfiata-
knower or experient apart from jfiana or knowledge). The
Mimarpsakas hold that, that which is known in the consciousness
ofT eclipsed by the conditions of pleasure etc is the Self. Both
are refuted by a single verse (which follows)

                       TEXT OF THE VERSE

                 p f t * f ^ * Tw^tanfWfiw: I
              gVTOOTTfFg^ W ^ s s q * cTT: H                      II

     Ahaip sukhl ca duhkhi ca raktasca ityadisamvidah/
     sukhadyavasthanusyute vartante 'nyatra tah sphutaip//4.
                           TRANSLATION

   I am happy, I am miserable, I am attached—these and other
cognitions have their being evidently in another in which the
states of happiness, misery etc. are strung together-4.

                 TEXT OF THE COMMENTARY


       <IM M K f e ^ ^ ^ l ^ : H f ^ t *1Mlfd cTT ^ d f d
^f^               f^lUifH             HtilfeTO       I          ^fuitalMMi




fa
              ^TOf^^cT^t 5 MHIdfr flfa ^          ^^TcT f f a          —
        ^To g-o 50 S^fd TT5: I
Section 1                                                                   4*1

            K    tft            4       <i Ifad!fa< I fa: ^ n f a : I fJcT^fafa:
SRIT^OTT          I                           qfacTTT^fkcTT cfcftSFTlfiT:

cqi^HcM^ |                                mScTT                       MMldfc



   I3M tftjfd          J|     ifa 5 f^FTO: I         § f d ^ l ^ ^ l WWMUNI

T fdflUfd:    I U f y < t d i * 4 fd * crf^FfcftStT * 4 l f t 4 f t I 3ff[
f^fts^ ^   frmfesnftfdMr^l^l 315          gKslVllfc 44dbWWq:—



vmrrm                       wfo i m i

         TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY
   The same I who am happy, am miserable, am attached, being
connected with affection which rests in pleasure, am full of
hatred, being connected with dislike which is associated with
pain—these cognitions or experiences abide in another which is
the possessor of these states (avasthatari), which, in other words,
is the permanent principle of Self. They rest inwardly in that
evidently i.e. with one's Self as witness. Otherwise the inter-
connection (anusandhana) of the ephemeral cognitions and the
ideas born of their residual traces will not be possible, for
those cognitions disappear as soon as they arise and cannot
leave behind any traces. Thus the vikalpas (ideas) supposed to
arise out of them cannot actually arise. Not being perceived in
experience, they cannot lead to any activity.1
   The particles 'ca' used with equal fitness (with all the three)
express their inter-connexion. Anyatra means in another. Of
what kind is this other ? Sukhadyavasthanusyuta qualifies anyatra
(the other) and means that other in which states of pleasure,
pain, etc. which arise and subside are interwoven i.e. are strung
together i.e. that in which pleasure, pain, etc. stay inwardly as
flowers are strung together in the form of a wreath in a string.
      To 50 rr^fcftf qjz: I
42                                                Spanda-Karikas

   Tab. i.e. the previously experienced states when set in a
congruous connection refer to their recollection. According to
the view of the philosophers who believe in the momentariness
of cognitions, memory is born of the residual traces of the previ-
ous experience, and is, as such, only a form tinged with the
previous experience. Thus it can only be similar to the previous
experience. It cannot bring back to consciousness the thing as
it was actually experienced in the past.2 (Let such philosophers
please themselves with such a view of memory. It cannot be
accepted by others).
   The author suggests that when there is a permanent experient
who abides inwardly in the consciousness of all, every thing is
set aright. Enough of these subtleties which will only prove to
be unpleasant to students of tender heart. Seekers after such
 subtleties may look into Pratyabhijna.3 Since the author has
referred to this reasoning, I have tried to explain it briefly. Let
 intelligent people not blame me for this brevity.

(Second explanation of the text)
   In order to refute the Mimaifisaka, this H.e. the word Atman
or Self) should be interpreted in this way.
   Those experiences such as 41 am happy.' I am miserable
exist anyatra i.e. in another. 'In another' in this case should
be interpreted as 'in the puryasfaka Experient'. So the experien-
ces of pleasure, pain, etc. exist in the puryatfaka experient who
is suffused with these experiences. Sphutam or 'evidently' means
'to which popular belief bears witness.' Anyatra in their case
does not mean 'in Saipkara' who is compact mass of light and
bliss and who is our own essential nature as is accepted by us.
Therefore, this Self is not always tarnished by the conditions of
pleasure, pain, etc, but is rather of the nature of consciousness.
 When He by His own impurity to be described later conceals his
essential nature and appears in that state, then He is in the
Purya$taka state, and has the experience of happiness, etc. It
has already been said that even in that state, pleasure etc.
cannot obstruct His real nature. He is never concealed by
 pleasure, etc.
    The real purport in saying 'I am happy; I am miserable' etc.
by abandoning such beliefs as I am thin; I am fat etc is this.
Section 1                                                       43

One recognises one's essential nature as Siva by submerging his
Purytfaka state which is full of experiences like pleasure, etc.
in the inner essential Self and also by dissolving along with it
the external aspect consisting of the body, jar, etc. Thus one
should always make an earnest effort for allaying the Purya$(aka.

                            NOTES

   1. The idea is that when jnana (perception or cognition)
disappears as soon as it arises, it cannot leave behind any traces.
Thus on this theory of the momentariness of perception, memory,
will not be possible.
  2. This means to say that similarity of the past experience
which is all that the Buddhists can maintain on the basis of
their theory of the momentariness of cognitions cannot lead to
the belief that it is the same thing which was actually experienc-
ed in the past. Similarity is not sameness. Without the belief in
the sameness of the past experience, memory is not possible. And
without an identical pramata or experient who can connect the
past experience with the present, there cannot be any sameness of
experience. Thus without an identical pramata or experient,
memory would be impossible.
 3. This refers to Isvara-pratyabhijna of Utpaladeva.

                         EXPOSITION

   The first point to be borne in mind is the significance of the
use of plural in sarpvid. Sarpvid in plural (sarpvidah) means
perception, cognitions, experiences. They are not the same
sarpvid which is one identical, uniform consciousness underlying
all other sarpvids. As Ramakantha puts it:




  "Sarpvit or Consciousness in its highest sense is really one, the
Experient of all, flashing forth as T . On account of the absence
of that awareness brought about by maya-faktU it becomes the
cognizer of such impermanent incidental experience as 'I am happy,
44                                                 Spanda-Karikas

I am miserable, etc., Really speaking these are the states of buddhi
(inner determinative consciousness which assumes the role of the
self or the Experient, and the real Experient on account of its
co-relation with buddhi etc. misconceives these states as his own.
It is because of this that the word samvid has been used in plural.
They really belong to the pseudo-experient buddhi, not to the
underlying Satyivit, the Self, the unchanging, identical Experient.
   The other important point to be borne in mind is that though
these states are not of the Self, though they do not belong to the
essential nature of the Self, they are held together into the unity
of one experience by that unchanging identical Experient that
runs like a thread through them all. This is what is meant by
 saying qgraqWHCTfr ^ ^ an: 'Those states have their ratio
 essendio in another Experient that runs like a thread through
 them all. Ramakantha explains the status of this experient
 beautifully in the following words:

      t^ciG^q^iy^cii: srT^cTFF^r Wr, fac^r

     t4
    He (the Experient) pervades all the preceding and the succeed-
ing states throughout which is well-known even to all empirical
selves :he provides that synthetic unity which serves as the founda-
tion of all pragmatic life, which being unchanging, permanent
Experient ever shines as one and the same."
   It is this important truth which the great German philosopher
Kant expressed after nearly one thousand years, in his famous
concept of the 'synthetic unity of apperception'.
   Lastly, this philosophic truth must lead to yogic practice which
 Ksemaraja describes in the last section of his commentary.
   Knowing that changing states like pleasure, pain belong to the
purya$taka i,e, the psychological or the empirical self, one
should establish oneself in his essential Self which is the real
 Experient, which is the nature of Siva.
Introduction to the 5th Verse:
                             TEXT
    ^cftqqfrrfW                                         tMnMr^l-
 frftfk SlfddHHltd J W H ^ H m d l <gWWI4<:
Section 1                                                         45

                            TRANSLATION
  After re-asserting the untenability of all other theories by
means of the aforesaid reasoning, the best1 of the teachers of the
secret doctrine, who. knew the revealed traditional teaching, the
reasoning on which the truth was based and who had also per-
sonal experience, firmly declares that ihe spanda principle
established by reasoning is decidedly the truth.

                       TEXT OF THE VERSE

            * f    f            *        VIQB   * * i
            * ^Tftrf ^ C H I ^ s f q TOfef TOPW: II * II
Na duhkham na sukham yatra na grahyani grahakam na ca/
Na casti mudhabhavo' pi tadasti paramarthatah// 5
                            TRANSLATION

  Wherein neither pain, nor pleasure, nor object, nor subject,
exists, nor wherein does even insentiency exist—that, in the
highest sense, is that Spanda principle-5.
                            COMMENTARY
   f j j SfNtfTOS^gOTSTTOT dlHMldlHi*     3TfJT tfTfj *4"«"id<iill$4>
jW^KW^lfc                                             HKdlfd
WHT I TOlfir 5              TOT                  ^dW^H^h^d^-
frcllfdWqWkMI I TOTg:
   'M^iyikHi snPT9xfts«ff      faszrfa    r ( f o sro 11*13)


5TRTO I f^TpT ^ i f t —

fcTOt             HIHifc TO*T^ ^ TO ^TTftrT HcSI»llik*H drcWfcd I
5FTO TO^n^nTT^ft^t SJFTOTO CTT^TOTTOT, ^CMI^ T ^iffd TO-
^=TOtsfg ^fcT I TOTTcft TOc^ JJFTOTOTfa TO HI ltd fftsfa f^ T TO^
^FTOfttT, TO^ TOTcTOTOT^mft ^f^rSTTOTfer, H ^ TOTOT:
             TOfk TOiTO S H m w q i m f a y I ^famfd #TO
   'T 5 ^rts^cTWt *TO:' I ( 1 H * )
46                                                          Spanda-Karikas

ScTO I Sift                      TOTO                V^mtsfq q *
dlftd q W ^ F a f a q : HfdMNi: 'fasrfM qfjr'  cTPHpT t q i a ^ i c ^ -
FTTOpRT f^TT            Id I q ^ d SCcqfanrnqm

   M^lMn^lM<4d1sfir ^ f c ^ l f c ^ M H : ll? ($e qo <1IKI<J<1)
      I ^gdiqWrfiasfM
    'wwffai            qr s^r ^R+Aid i
    ^ d H f l fk^mt           P T T r ^ ^ f ^ ^ f t iT
sfir i ^ r ^ ^ R-'MdH*              jr^jfk q ^ r q f ^ n f c r ni^ifer, ami-
*?qq               lI'Ml^clHlHfajH              M<Hmd           tU^kM^d y f a
^ u n f f d T § HNlf^sicVf^T^T I qqfatf Hejiq^fa:
    'l^HkH^Uc+cMl:                           I
    ^TT: M+I^I t^Tfef HkHH:                        II* (df5r^o       )
       I dd^^djlPwfa
    'qST^t ^ q ^ T ^ qTqrq            ^TWT I
    •T q^nm?r           Scqcq          % ll'
        I                     faqfcq:                          I irqq^T
     Id Ifr 1         M 41fodi ^(sl                    Iddr44 ifed i M l^lil IffMT-
d k n i f e d i wfalH^Hqifedi fd^WIMfrWa^MlfcHl* * HdMdMMtt-
c q W ^ d l d q q n m f W FT^TftrT^tq dr^Hfrftfaf MfortldH I 3T*
* qfeltrffR^           f f l M ^ W K I U S ^ t T T S T *
           gi^rg^Rn^rqT^v^inqTfqvfq? nqfa q fapfi-xi^ ^q^n-oxi-



             ^ ^ N R T QW TFT:        9TTF,T: LL ^ O *7RTO|-O|<P )



                             TRANSLATION

  It can be said that here whatever inner object there like
pain, pleasure, etc., or whatever external object there is like blue
or yellow and whatever subject there is like the puryasfaka,
body and senses have evidently no existence like the stage of

     <1     «Jo                       <TT3: 1
Section 1                                                        47

deep sleep as long as they are not experienced. When they are
experienced, then being experienced, they are of the nature of
consciousness. They are simply consciousness, this is what it
comes to. As has been said in ISvarapratyabhijna by my great
grand teacher, revered Utpaladeva who knew the essence of the
secret doctrine.
   "The object that is made manifest is of the nature of the light
of consciousness. What is not light cannot be said to exist."
(I.pr.I,5,3). In this book also, it will be said
   "Because of being of the form of His cognition, and owing to
the acquisition of identity with Him." (11,3).
   Thus that is the real principle of the compact mass of light in
which there is neither an object like pain, pleasure, blue etc. nor.
their experient.
(objection)
 Well, if all subjects and objects are disposed of as non-existent,
Reality is then mere Void. This is what it comes to.
(Reply)
   No, there is also not mere insentiency. This means that there
is not mere vacuity also. Insentiency is either manifest or non-
manifest. If it is non-manifest, how can it be said to exist at all.
If it is manifest, then because of its being manifest, it is nothing
else but light. There can never be absence of light. In its absence,
even the absence of light cannot be proved. This will find its
place in 'not that internal nature'. (1,16) in this book.
(Another explanation of mutfha-bhava).
   Further, in these where is no insentiency, insentiency as under-
stood by the vedantists, viz. as 'Brahman', i.e. mere light devoid
of the supreme power of vimarsa is also not there. The Vedantists
say 'Knowledge is Brahman', but such Brahman without the power
of Spanda in the form of absolute Freedom would be mere lifeless,
insentient, inert matter. As has been said in Isvara-pratyabhijna.
   "People know vimarsa as the very nature of the light of con-
sciousness, Otherwise light even if reflecting things would be
insentient like a crystal". (I.pr.I.5.11).
   In the following verse of Bhatta Nayaka also, it is said:
  "O Lord, how much fruit can this great Brahman being
48                                                  Spanda-Karikas

enuch bear if thy beautiful Sakti were not there to stimulate
thy masculine power ?*'
   Thus that principle alone has real existence which has been
discussed in 'where all this rests' (verse 2) and further on. That and
that alone exists in the highest sense as is proved by reasoning,
experience, and revealed traditional scripture. That exists in the
natural, perfect form, not in the artificial form like blue, etc.
As has been said by the great teacher: 1
   "The insentient things are in themselves as good as non-exis-
tent. They have their existence only when connected with light.
The light of oneself alone exists both in one's own form and
in the form of others i.e. both as Subject (pramata) and object
(prameya) (Aja^a pr,13)
   Revered Bhartrhari 2 also says:
   "That which exists in the beginning, in the end, and also in
the middle alone has reality. That which simply appears has no
reality, it is real only as long as it appears."
   As the sentences of the text convey a determinate, limited
sense in each case, the word eva should be joined thrice3. Thus
by this karika the author has declared that ultimate Reality is
only of the form of Spanda-Sakti by repeatedly pointing out the
nonreality, on account of untenability of the views of the
 Bauddhas who maintain that Reality is a continuum of conscious-
ness in the form of pleasure, etc., of the Carvakas who maintain
that reality is only the subject affected by pleasure, etc., of the
followers of Samkhya who maintain the plurality of the subject
and the object, of the nihilists who maintain the absence of
everything, of the Vedantists who maintain that Brahman is only
prakasa (light) without any activity.
    Moreover, when in that noble person who attentively pursues
 the teaching, the Spanda principle, whose quintessence is flashing,
throbbing consciousness, becomes manifest, then even when
 experiences of pain, pleasure, object, subject or their absence
 occur, they are considered by him as naught, because to him
 everything appears only as the quintessence of the delight of
 Spanda.
    It has been taught that this is what is spanda. The venerable
 teacher refers to this truth in the following verse.
Section 1                                                       49

  ' T h a t is the path pertaining to Sahkara in which pains become
pleasure, poison becomes nectar, and the world that binds the
soul becomes liberation."( U. Stotra 20,12).
   The path pertaining to Sahkara means the preeminent ex-
pansion of the Highest Sakti who becomes a means to the
attainment of the nature of Sahkara.

                             NOTES

  1. This refers to Utpaladeva.
  2. This refers to the grammarian Bhartrhari who wrote the
philosophy of Grammar known as Vakyapadiya.
  3. Ksemaraja means that with the addition of eva the
sentence would read as follows:

TORfT" I
 4. This again refers to Utpaladeva.

                          EXPOSITION

  The main point that has been stressed in this verse is that
neither the experience of internal states like pleasure and pain,
nor of external states like blue and yellow are the highest reality.
Even the subject who experiences these states is not the highest
reality. What the author means to say is that neither the
psychological experiences, nor the psychological subject is the
Highest Reality.,
  Kallata, in his vrtti, expresses the nature of the Highest Reality
in the following words:

qWr4sTtsfer     faWc^TRT      JT:      PTtcSTT:

  This is the nature of Siva (or the Spand principle) that He is
untouched, unaffected by the experiences of pleasure, pain, etc;
for Siva or the Essential Self is the eternal experient. Pleasure,
pain cannot be His nature, for two reasons. Firstly, they are
passing phases of experience, perishing in an instant (k$anabhah-
gura). The Self is eternal. Therefore, they are external to the
 50                                                    Spanda-Karikas

   nature of the Self like sound, form and other objects (atmasvarupa
  bahyah sabdadi-vifayatulyah). Secondly, they arise from thought
  constructs (sankalpotthah), whereas the Self is nirvikalpa i.e. it
  transcends the sphere of thought-constructs. For this reason also,
  pleasure, pain etc. cannot constitute the nature of Self.
     Why are pleasure, pain etc. rejected as not forming a part of
  the nature of the Self? Ramakantha answers the question in the
  following words in his vivrti.
  "By the rejection of pleasure, etc, it is the objectivity of Self that
  is rejected". The Self can never be reduced to an object, it is the
 eternal Subject.
     A pertinent question that arises here is this:
     In verse three, it has been said, "He (6iva) never departs from
  His nature as the Experient." In verse five, it is said, "He is
 neither the subject i.e. experient nor the object." Are these two
 statements not inconsistent? How can they be reconciled?
    Ramakantha anticipates this objection and answers it in the
 following way:
      iH^+lsfa         SPTRTT TO fTOfSTcT:, d!fr«<+
 tfW <Tcf             MrdMI^Hccjld I ITcf WFfcft ^ra^FTCTOt tfTpft-
 sfa TO Hlffd
    "By subject here, what is intended to be said is the mayiya
pramata i.e. the empirical subject, not the real, metempirical
 Self, for he has been explained only as the Eternal Experient.
Thus the psychosomatic subject is not that Reality."
    Finally, another question that arises is this. If he has nothing
 to do with the subject or object, if he is neither object, nor sub-
ject, then is he mere negation, mere void, insentient like a stone?
     Ksemaraja has in his commentary controverted all these
 views with merciless logic, and concludes by saying
TO qTWfror                       dr^ftd
        "It is metempirical reality whose essential form is
Spanda-sakti."
    Ramakantha also says:
     TO      TWTO: srf^f,                     TOTO                   I
(p.34) "He is the highest Reality whose nature it is to be
an eternal Subject (never an object)."
   The mystic application of this teaching consists in the fact
Section 1                                                                 51

that he who realizes this truth is never affected by the misfor-
tunes of life.
            Introduction to the sixth and seventh verse

                                    TEXT

   ^HMMfaMRMrdddrci^r^lHiq HTf^M^MN                             fawifa—

                           TRANSLATION
   Now the author describes the means with hint for the recogni-
tion of that principle which has been.logically demonstrated.

                            VERSES 6 and 7

                                   TEXT

             scT: m q r a m f s * f ^ g s t s ^ s ^ ^ i
                          ^sF^J s r a f a f t q f a ^ c f t : II ^ II


             Set: S5RT3RTT cfPT                            II V9 H

    Yatah karana-vargo 'yam vimudho 'mudhavat svayam/
    Sahantarena cakrena pravrtti-sthiti-saiphrtih//6
    Labhate tatprayatnena pariksyam tattvam adarat/
    Yatah svatantrata tasya sarvatreyam akrtrima//7
                            TRANSLATION

  That principle should be examined with great care and rever-
ence by which this group of senses, though insentient, acts as
a sentient force by itself, and along with the inner group of
senses, goes towards objects, takes pleasure in their maintenance,
and withdraws into itself, because this natural freedom of it
prevails everywhere. 6 and 7.

                             COMMENTARY
                                    TEXT


   '^nft           (11*)
52                                                          Spanda-Karikas

f f k ftldtydUfcWlfc^T ^ U l M ^ K k H d l
                                                                    TcT fqfqfk




fHcMMO^r^HWfHfd fMfrllWdld,                                           fo^T

                                       cT^r T ^ f dd*M fdddd              I ^T



cFTWTt ^                                           srf?T OT^kydTrillfe+d'ct-
                                   o                            e            c


^ikdWMId; dfHI^d^lMHdH^d I rdH^SH^dfecH^d                                        trq

mqPTOFmrq:, irrr m ^ i c m       nrelsfd^at-ifor: ^iid^Mi^iM^
HMtI^K ^                  ^ m i H ^ T ^ + <U|d4iHd4d fd'H^Md

          cHTT «r>vwif snftsfa a w O q      I <4 sift T ^ T ^ f t q ^fscq-
                     arfqg frdld^Si: <M<i|JM4 trq fcspFF^ cT^T^

^      ^n^ttiifaw^im^isiciTnir^m
                        e                              c
                                                                 rdvHHor^


cRtm^f^TT                         Old:    WlfecH^ddlTb                I d5d3«f



^q^ftq^TRHT^T STU-d+Wdl I                      T^FFT^fa:
    'fc^srfasprO q^rC Mdf^Hi:            6
                                                          m i
    ^ ^ w l ^ r H<1 Ml fa #qr ^ r ^ f ^ W ^ ^ R n ^ T F T ll' (^"O ^fto
ffcT i Trterfacqf w r yim+Hdwi                    ^r ^m    \ sr^r ^

^d^dlfexUdf+vidH^q cq<*ddld 1IV9II

     1. ^ o 50 ^qcr^rr s w i r ^ f o q73: I
Section 1                                                       53

                 Translation of the Commentary

   That principle which has been finally ascertained with the
exposition of'Udyamo Bhairavah' given in Siva-sutras (5,6)
should be examined with great care and reverence. That
principle should be examined as the cessation of all differences1
(in the state of dissolution), as the expansion of one's own
power (in the state of manifestation) as cherishing of the per-
fect inner nature (in the state of maintenance) and in the form
of the emergence of the nature of Bhairava.
   That innate Freedom in the form of Spanda principle known
to every one through Self-experience being one's own essential
nature, identical with Siva is manifest everywhere both with
reference to the sentient and the insentient.2
   Sphuranti sthita i.e. 'abides flashing' is to be supplied to
complete the sense.
   What is that principle? The author describes it from 'Yatah
upto the end of iabhate.'
   Ayam karanavargah means 'this group of senses.' This
group of senses refers to the sense-organs well known to people,
not to karanesvari-varga (the group of the divinities of the
senses) which is described in the sastras, for being always
 imperceptible, it cannot be referred to as 'this'. By group of
senses is meant the thirteen senses (5 organs of sense+5 organs
 of action +manas, buddhi and aharrikara i.e. the ego-sense).
 The adjective vimudha (insentient) applied to 'the group of
 senses' means 'distinctly insentient' i.e. appearing as insentient
 owing to the influence of Maya.' This group of senses, though
 insentient to a great degree in a limited empirical being,
 acquires, like the non-insentient i. e. the sentient, the pow£r of
 going forth, staying, and withdrawing (pravrtti (sthiti-samhrtih).
Pravrtti means going forth i.e. being directed towards the
 objects of sense1; sthiti means 'feeling attached to them'
 and 'samhrtV means 'withdrawing from them'.
  How do they go forth? They do so along with the inner
group. One view is that here the inner group means the
karanesvarisz, (the sense-divinities), and not antah-karana i.e.
the inner senses, for the inner senses are already included in
karana-varga (the group of senses). Nor does the antara-cakra
54                                                 Spanda-Karikas

i.e. the inner group of saktis refer to purya$taka (the group of
eight i.e. the five tanmatras, and manas, buddhi and ahatfikara)
to be described later, for the triad of the inner senses (i.e.
manas, buddhi and ahamkara) residing in purya$taka is already
included in karana varga (the group of the senses).
   The triad of manas, buddhi and ahamkara may not be included
in (antara cakra, what about the five tanmatras? Ksemaraja
takes up the question of the tanmatras now).
   The five tanmatras are also not to be included in the antara
cakra, for they are like mere seminal impressions and are not
known as directly functioning in pravrtti, etc. in the case of
beginners who are mere pupils and are not yogis. So far as yogf
is concerned, he has directly experienced the tanmatras, and is
himself intent on realizing the supreme principle. So he needs
no instruction. Therefore, this partisan view is wrong.4
   Vimutfho amu<j}\avat—Though insentient like a sentient
being—'this phrase also refers to the group of senses,' not to
the inner group of sense-divinities) for that (i.e., the group of
sense-divinities) is of the nature of Consciousness-bliss.
   The sense of what is said in the first four lines is this:
   "This Sahkara who is one's own essential nature through His
Freedom which accomplishes impossible things manifests simul-
taneously as one the group of sense-divinities (Karanesvarl-
cakra) which is the quintessence of consciousness and the group
of senses (karanavarga) which is apparently insentient and
makes them perform such acts as moving towards objects,
staying there (for a short while) and then withdrawing. Thus
whatever the sense-divinities do, as for instance, bringing about
the manifestation of different objects etc. that the group of
senses, though insentient, also appears to be doing.
  Though from the esoteric point of view there is no such thing
as insentient group of senses—rather it is the sense-divinities
which are of the nature of consciousness that expand in that
way, still in this world a pupil has to be taught at first according
to well-known beliefs and then gradually he has to be led to the
teaching of esoteric matters.
  Thus one should, by watching carefully the group of one's
own sense divinities, presiding over the functions of forth-
Section 1                                                         55

  going etc. of the sense-organs, etc. carefully examine one's essen-
  tial Self identical with Sahkara who impels both the group of
  senses and the group of sense-divinities. This is also implied by
 the above teaching that the yogin, in acquiring his essential
 nature, will also acquire its natural Freedom. 5
     Hence, this being the highest aim is worthy of being examined.
 This alone can be examined, because by the aforseaid reasoning,
 it is easy means (for the attainment of the aim). Therefore, it
 should be examined with respect and great consideration, for it
 leads to the unhindered enjoyment of one's desired object. Such
 an examination according to the teaching contained in this book
 is done at the fit time. As has been said by the teacher who6
 knew the secret doctrine:
    "These sense-activities of mine may, in their joy, have full
play in their objects. But, O Lord, grant that I may not have
the temerity of losing even for a moment and even slightly the
enjoyment of the bliss of identity with thee" (U.Sto.VIII,5).
    The krtya suffix in parik$yam ('should be examined')
denotes arha or worthiness, sakyata or practicability, praptaka-
lata or timeliness, prai$a or command, etc.7
    By maintaining that the insentient group of senses acquires
its power from the Spanda principle and acts like a sentient
being in nfoving towards the objects, etc. a fact to which the
self-experience of every one bears witness, the author has inci-
dentally refuted the view of Carvakas who attribute conscious-
ness to the senses.8

                             NOTES

   1. Sarvabhedopasamhara indicates the power of dissolution
(santhara), nijauja-vrtti-spharana-rupena indicates the power of
manifestation (sr$ti); paripurnantarmukhasvarupa-sevanatmana
indicates the power of maintenance (sthiti).
   2. Jada (insentient) refers to karana-varga or the group of
senses, and ajada (sentient) refers to Karanesvari-varga, the
inner senses-divinities.
   3. Karanesvaris means the group of the . inner divinities
that preside over the senses and make them function properly.
56                                                  Spanda-Karikas

    4. The view that antara-cakra refers to the inner karane-
svaris the inner sense-divinities, and not to antah-karana, the
inner group of senses (manas, buddhi and ahamkara) is, accord-
ing to Ksemaraja, wrong.
    5. This svatantrata or Freedom is called akrtrima i.e.
natural or innate, because as Ramakantha puts it, it is
akrtrima sahajaiva, na tu upadana-sahakaryadi-karanatarapekfini
svecchamatradhina-sakala-karya-kartrtvarupa (p. 33) i.e. it is not
dependent on any material cause or any other auxiliary cause
(in achieving its object), because it is self-sufficient to accomplish
every thing by its mere Will.
    6. This refers to Utpaladeva.
    7. There is krtya suffix in pariksyam. According to Panini,
 krtya suffix denotes arha or worthiness, sakyata or practica-
 bility, praptakalata or fitness of time, prai$a or command. All
 these apply to pariksyam. One's essential nature or Spanda
 principle should be examined, because nothing can be so worthy
 of examination as one's own essential nature. This is arhata or
 worthiness of examination. It can be examined. It is practic-
  able, it is not impossible. This shows sakyata or practicability of
 examination. When the senses are functioning and are engaged
  in their objects, that is the exact time when one should examine
  the power behind the senses that makes them function in that
 way. This shows praptakalata or fitness of time for the exami-
  nation.
     Finally,pariksyam i.e. 'should be examined' denotes prai$a
  or command of the teacher who knows the secret doctrine.
     8. Carvakas believe that the senses have consciousness. By
  showing that the senses do not have consciousness per se but
  derive it from the spanda principle, the author has refuted the
  theory of the Carvakas.

                           EXPOSITION

    People in general and the materialists in particular think that
 it is the senses which carry out the function of pravrtti, sthiti
 and sarrihrti i.e. it is the senses which actively go out towards
 the objects of perception (pravrtti) maintain them in perception
 for a while (sthiti) and finally return to themselves (sarphfti).
Section 1                                                         57

   This verse teaches that the senses do not have the power of these
functions in themselves; they derive this power from something
else. That something else should be reverentially examined. That
is the Spanda principle, that is Siva; that is one's own essential
Self.
   It is because this Self is not perceptible as an object, therefore
we are unaware of it. This has to be known inwardly as the
Seer of all the seen. Utpala Bhatta in his Spanda-pradipika
quotes a beautiful verse to re-enforce this truth:
                ^r                      i

  "Like the eye, Brahma is not the seen, like the eye, it is only
the seer. Its ascertainment is only within One's own Self; it is
not an object of sight like a jar."

                   Introduction to the 8th Sutra.

                               TEXT

   gTO wqtm      ddtdTcji^dddifcMwiar^ifri            srarenfe s w a
ff?T> <4lqcil«4^q ill^b               VTonfk 5H*jfd I i K ^ d CTTTT^
SR^T TdWT               TOP?     OcftS^TT^fi^T yf^tMUWfd T §
 d ^ q O O T n SNfdgHcUgd              —

                          TRANSLATION
   Now, how is it said that the senses having obtained conscious-
ness from that Spanda-principle move towards objects, etc. when
it is known that the experient himself, by his own will directs
the senses like scythe, etc? How is this also said that that princi-
ple should be examined with great care, because our desire
 moves only towards outside and does not exert itself in
marching towards the examination of that reality. In reply to
this objection, the author says:

                     TEXT OF THE VERSE
58                                                  Spanda-Karikas

     Na hicchanodanasyayam prerakatvena vartate/
     Api tvatmabalasparsat purusastatsamo bhavet//8.

                         TRANSLATION

  The empirical individual cannot drive the goad of desire. But
by coming in contact with the power of the Self, he becomes
equal to that principle.8

                      Text of the Commentary

     3TO        g^q        qtqq MdUfdHI Qofccdd        *   t     >   K
mk«IIM q ^ m r Uddci, 3?fq 5 3n?qqfiR2qsq qgH
dc^^ctdirc+AI^WWNVlWc^Ml            TO,       I^fd^
cTTtsfq                 I ddtdrlrd q %q*T +<"11 fd qidrkik+cdd
SLFFCT VFNCMFQ MHLDK               ?QQ YDT^LHIMI^              MIIWIM-
qfaqRtS^ +<u||fn Q<q|ififd I fM^drdMW Pddlfa | ^        T
f ^ d ^ r d 4><uildi i l l ^ f n TT          ^ddl'MldlMK*
cTrq qfteqfafa qcH^d ( qfq ^ d R ^ i ^ d MdU^ui

^ftrqddfqT ^TTcT I qrT^m ' ^ l ^ f ^ t e H q      M d r d j ^ ^ ' ffa
ddimKl                  qT ^tROTTT q t ^ m I          qiq gWrTrq-
qfhTTqfq^T Uddfad« mdlPd Sfa^qT cTrq fqqqhFcfo ^ R ^ q i f q ^ F q -
cqrqfq 5 rdqqHdfcMd*d1fa^i                           q^T rdHH^HI-
                                                rTc^FftW dcUHId-
V I M ^ d d ^T^rmmnqqcqq, qFTltq df^Mrq mO^PHc^: I
Vlfad^:
      tN                            O    N
                                           lldl

                  Translation of the commentary

   Ayam means this empirical individual. Icchaiva nodanam
pratodah tasya means 'of the goad of desire'. The whole of the
first line of the verse means <he does not set out to move the
senses (towards their objects)'.
But he becomes equal to it (tatsamo bhavet) by the contact i.e.
by the entrance into him, to some extent, of the power of the
Self which is Consciousness and which is of the nature of Spanda.
The sense is that the sense-group, even though insentient acqui-
Section 1                                                         59

 res sentiency by the consecration of the drops of blissful sap of
 I-consciousness. Thence that Spanda principle not only moves
the senses but rather by infusing consciousness into the supposed
experient makes him capable of effecting the movement, etc. of
 the senses by virtue of which he is full of the erroneous concep-
tion, "I am directing the senses". He himself is nothing without
 the infusion of the Spanda principle into him. Therefore, it is
 perfectly right to say that one should examine that principle
which provides consciousness to both the senses and the perceiver
by the impenetration of the forth-going rays of its own light.
    If it is maintained that one directs the senses by an internal
sense which uses a goad called desire, then that sense called
desire being itself of the nature of the directed would require
another sense for setting it in motion, and that in its turn
would require another and so on. Thus there would be regressus
ad infinitum.
    As regards the objection that is raised, viz., 'Our desire does
not exert itself in moving towards that' in that case also, the
first half of the verse should be used as an admission of this
position, and the latter half as a reply.
   True this empirical individual cannot move his desire to
examine the Spanda-principle, nor is he capable of experiencing
that reality by desire, because it is beyond the range of thought,
even then when, calming down his desire which is in pursuit of
objects of pleasure by at first allowing it to have its enjoyment, he
contacts the Spanda-principle which is the power of the inner Self
and which endows his senses with consciousness, then he
becomes equal to that Spanda-principle i.e. by being immersed
in that reality, he acquires freedom everyv/here like that/ Since
such is the case, that principle should be examined. This is the
sense. The expression <by the touch of the power of Self' has
been used, because the quality of touch is predominant in the
stage of Sakti.

                          EXPOSITION

  The gist of the verse is that man falsely imagines that he
moves his senses to perform their respective functions by the
power of his will or desire. His so-called desire has no power
60                                                  Spanda-Karikas

of its own. It derives its power of both knowing and doing
from Siva or S/w/wfa-principle whose very nature is knowledge
and activity. One has, therefore, to acquire the power of Spanda
which is our own essential Self, neither by weaving intellectual
cobwebs, nor by maiming desire, but by surrendering all desires,
the entire personal will to the Divine. As Tennyson puts it:
   "Our wills are ours, we know not how to make them
thine."
   When the personal citta or mind completely empties itself,
then is it truly filled.
  Ksemaraja brings out in his commentary a very important
principle of this system. It believes that while Sakti, the Divine
Creative Power rejects all the perceptual qualities liksrupa,
rasa, gandha, etc. she retains sparsa or touch. How is that Real-
ity to be touched? Ksemaraja says: "Tatsamavesat" 'i.e. by
penetration, by diving mentally into its innermost depth.
This is the mystic union.

                  Introduction to the ninth verse

                               TEXT




                        TRANSLATION

  A question arises here "Why does this embodied Self not
shine in all its perfection, even though it is of the nature of the
greatest lord? why does it require the touch of the force of the
inner Self, the Experient par excellence? In reply to this
question, the author says:

                         Text of the verse

                                   ^c^^f^^TTfcRjr: I
                 w h r : srerfta     w n r o i re* u t n
     Nijasuddhyasamarthasya kartavyesv abhilasinah/
     Yada ksobhah praliyeta tada syat paramam padam//9
Section 1                                                              61

                          TRANSLATION
      When the perturbation of that empirical individual who
is incapacitated by his own impurity and is attached to actions
disappears, then the highest state appears.

                        COMMENTARY
                           TEXT

   fq*n hichUii wwkwiWHifiwi qq ^ w f ^ m ^ T R T f ^ T -

Wa+irdHcdld, *Ud3lpM: T&frl wt

                    c            c               eh   S   CS    ^
 f*ra?ri SITOT   ffwwHMUMnq          qraq^mfgr: i m m m C T
 ^cdfd+HfM <TcT qq            ^Ifo^ll^lqid^^Mf^Hlftun^Vl
 dd l ^ f a c ^ f*HINoM     cRT qq ^uwm^Mfd^Mrd^l^: I q*T
 vHddlHIH i^flMMr^d ^Md MtdHMcflsfiH mtdd^m IjfolHUH Id IcH 1 sftq:
 SFftqcT
           vftqq rRT     *<WdTdlc*l«*>     WUW ^cqpHdlfd^di
 q n n f e q q : I q § cfqq qqfq TOT fdcqcdH I ^ f q                 tfa I
         Mtl                        q^qq |
     q^T fqq qfrsffrr        c T g ^ q^: ll' (^rfo
 fo^mfe^d           q^f qrq j s q q ^ d H t d l f d q MfdM^N^       flmcdd
 qrarfSTcTT: lieil
                              TRANSLATION
     Nija means one's own. (Now asuddhi or impurity is ex-
  plained). First of all there is the mala1 or limitation pertaining to
  the am or jiva, the empirical being which consists in the con-
  sciousness of imperfection. This anava mala is the first asuddhi.
  This occurs when Iccha-sakti (Will power of Siva) becomes
  limited owing to non-contemplation of His essential nature
  which is brought into play by the absolute Freedom of Siva
   Himself.
      Jnanasakti (the power of knowledge) being polluted by the
   five kaficukas or coverings (of Maya) arisen from that (anava-
   mala) gradually acquires limitation in the sphere of difference so
   that its omniscience becomes reduced to limited knowledge
62                                                Spanda-Karikas

 and at last it acquires utmost limitation in the formation of the
 psychic apparatus (antahkarana) and the organs of sense
(buddhindriya). This is maylya limitation (i.e. limitation brought
about by Maya) which brings about consciousness of difference
 among objects. This mayiya mala is the second asuddhi.
   Kriya sakti (the power of activity) gets limited gradually in
the sphere of difference when omnipotence is reduced to
 limited activity till at last by the formation of the organs
 of action, the empirical individual gets limited to the utmost
extent. He thus performs good and bad acts. This is the
Karma mala or limitation due to action. This is the third kind
of impurity.2
   Thus by such impurity, the individual becomes devoid of
omniscience and omnipotence.
   (Now Ksemaraja explains the phrase Kartavye$u abhila$inah
of the text.)
   Being thus incapacitated he is attached to all kinds of
actions—worldly and those prescribed by the scriptures. On ac-
count of the non-attainment of all his desired objects, he is dis-
tracted by his desires and is unable to find rest in his essential
nature even for a moment.
   (Now Ksemaraja explains the remaining half of the verse from
 Yada . . . upto padam).
   When by a firm support of the reasoning already mentioned
and also to be mentioned later on and of self-experience, his
perturbation 3 appearing in the form of an experient who is help-
lessly dominated by desires, thoroughly dissolves (praliyeta =
prakanena liyeta) through the vanishing of the misconception
of the not-Self as the Self and of the Self as the not-self, then
the highest state, viz. the spanda-principle will emerge i.e. will
come within the range of recognition of that experient. Not
that the S/?a/wfa-principle is something that comes into
existence only at that time, for it is eternal (i.e. the Spanda-
principle is always there; only its recognition is new).
   It has been rightly said in Vijnanabhairava: "O dear one,
when the ideating mind (manas), the ascertaining intellect
(buddhi), the vital energy (prana sakti) and the limited
experient, I—this set of four dissolves, then the previously des-
cribed (tat) state of Bhairava appears", (verse, 138).
Section 1                                                          63

   Those who by the phrase 'one's own impurity' think that there
is a separate substance called mala (dross) have been indirectly
criticized in the above commentary.

                              NOTES

    1 Asuddhi or impurity simply means mala. Mala does not
mean an impure substance but only limiting condition.
   2. The experient becomes limited by three kinds of mala-
anava, Mayiya and Karma. Anava mala is the primal limiting
condition which reduces the universal consciousness to an anu,
a small, limited entity. It is owing to this that the jiva (indivi-
dual soul) considers himself apurna, imperfect, cut off from the
universal consciousness. In this condition, the individual
forgets his essential divine nature.
   mayiya mala is the limiting condition brought about by maya
that gives to the soul its gross and subtle body. It is bhinna
vedya pratha—that which brings about the consciousness of
difference owing to the differing limiting adjuncts of the
bodies.
   Karmamala arises on account of the limitation of the organs
of action and is due to the residual impressions of good and
bad actions.
   Anava mala is the innate ignorance of one's essential nature.
Mayiya mala arises on account of the limitation of jnana-sakti
(the power of knowledge), and Karma mala arises on account of
 the limitation of Kriyasakti.
   3. Kfobha or perturbation is due to primal ignorance owing
to which the limited individual considers the not-Self, as Self
and the Self as the not-Self.

                          EXPOSITION

   If man is really divine, why is he so imperfect and stands in
need of the power of the inner Self? The ninth verse contains
the answer to this question.
   The divine plan of evolution contains two movements. There
is first of all gradual descent of the Self in inconscient matter. Two
things happen in this process of descent. The empirical being
forgets his essential divine nature. This is ariava mala. Secondly,
64                                                  Spanda-Karikas

he gets confined to subtle and gross bodies. This is mayiya
mala. As he is engaged in all sorts of good and bad acts, these
leave behind their impressions in his mind which act as a
a strong force dragging him down to material existence of
further experiences. This is Karma mala. These limiting condi-
tions are called asuddhi (impurity, limitation) in the verse.
   It is only at the human level that ascent to the divine status
can start. The main obstacle in his ascent is his pseudo-self
that arrogates to itself the status of the main actor in the drama.
This pseudo-self has been called k$obha in the verse, for it is
this that is responsible for all the fret and fever of life. When
this is dissolved, then Self-forgetfulness is replaced by Self-
recollection and man's evolution is complete.

                  Introduction to the tenth verse

                              TEXT




                        TRANSLATION
   Well, if the perturbation in the form of I-consciousness of the
limited, empirical individual is dissolved, then reality will be
devoid of activity and will become like a waveless ocean. To
allay this doubt, the author says :

                     Text of the 10th Verse

           creremffsrct trof m&mtiC&msHs:           \


       Tadasyakrtrimo dharmo jnatvakartrtvalaksanah/
       Yatas tadepsitaqi sarvam janati ca karoti ca//10

                        TRANSLATION

   Then will flash forth his innate nature characterized by cogni-
tion and activity, by which he (the experient) then knows and
does all that is desired (by him). 10
Section 1                                                          65

                        COMMENTARY

                                TEXT




•dlRH^M ^TPT          ff^T ^fhrtTO^SFT J^IFT ^TT^fHc^^d              I
fcT 4d<rHoq>jl|d f c ^ , iTmRRT TCWtt&mW         ^ H l N d f a r d TO-
fvr^^lRid                 cTcSrfsrf^nWTWT d ^ ^ H l f d ^T *Ofd ^ I
^ K N d iftwmr^g:, * g            TH>Kiwri dHPwiU«McMi ^ d l f d ,

fwrftrfNcnr M^OU

                         TRANSLATION
   The word tada meaning 'then' is used with reference to
the pupil who is to be instructed. Akrtrimo dharmah means
innate nature, which has been previously explained as Freedom,
which is the nature of the highest Lord. Jnatva and Kartrtva
mean 'cognition' 'activity' of the nature of light and bliss blend-
ed harmoniously. Lak$ana means everpresent characteristic.
The whole compound word Jnatva-kartrtva-lak?ana, therefore,
means that whose everpresent characteristic is Jnana (knowledge)
and kriya (activity) of the nature of light and bliss which are
harmoniously blended. Tada means that this characteristic
becomes manifest in the limited empirical individual at the time
of the cessation of perturbation.
    Wherefore does it become manifest in him ? The author
answers this query in the following way.
   At the time of entrance in the supreme state, all that he (the
limited experient) desired to know or to do at the time of the
 desire to enter that state, he is able to know and do.
    The particle ca repeated twice (attached to janati and karoti)
 suggests simultaneity, not as some think, identity of knowledge
 and activity. It (i.e. the identity of knowledge and activity) is
 already implied by the adjectival phrase 'characterized by
 knowledge and activity' qualifying dharma or nature, and
 by pointing out that with which it is connected, it becomes
 descriptive of its real nature.
66                                                        Spanda-Karikas

                              EXPOSITION

   The knowledge and activity of the empirical individual are
krtrima (artificial) because firstly they are limited, secondly
 they are borrowed, i.e. derived from another source, viz.,
 the Spanda-principle or the higher Self.
   When the limited ego of the individual is dissolved and his
perturbation ceases, then he does not become inert like stone;
then he requires the real, innate nature of jfiana and kriya
which is characteristic of the existential Self. Then his inability
to know and do whatever he wants to know and do ceases and
 he is now able to know and do whatever he desires to know
or do.

Ramakantha adds                    fs^TFT ^ftFVKQ^WWW S T m
            I (p. 42)
   "Really speaking there is one sakti of the Divine, viz. the
consciousness of his essential nature as I. The same Sakti in the
form of perceiving or feeling, js known as jfiana or knowledge;
in the form of its volitional activity, it is known as kriya or
activity."
               Introduction to the eleventh Karika

                                  TEXT
     3TO m: 4><uird           ft^ljUd         flriMfdMmHUUK


                          TRANSLATION
   Now the author is going to explain that the world of life and
death ceases to him who makes even the normal consciousness
after trance (vyutthana) similar to (samadhi) (meditation) by a
firm grip of the Spanda-principle which is realized by unme$a
samadhi which is explained in the verses 6-7 (yatah karana, etc)
and 9 (nijasudhya, etc).

                        Text of the 11th verse


            vmrara      re*    TCaeitf   f p a f o : f t i : 11 ?? n
Section 1                                                              67

  Tam adhisthatrbhavena svabhavam avalokayan/
  Smayamana ivaste yastasyeyam kusrtih kutah// 11

                          TRANSLATION

   How can this accursed way of life and death be his (any
longer) who stands struck with amazement as he observes that
nature (viz. Spanda) which presides over all the activities of
of life (as I) ?

                          COMMENTARY

                                 TEXT




             f w s ^ f w q w n fa+iRki i
   ftfr+^l            cPTT WT^WJ^ ll' (fao ^O



                  q k q ^ r f^pfr I




       Jr ^ r t                 Tfrfq^TT n'

 q>gM*MgM quKifti f ^ r r v m qcflfedHrq          EMUWH TOR SRT-



           qt q h f t e firofir q c q q ^ ^ n f ^ f q r f t ^ q f k , toto-
 fafa H+H^k+H+lP^H $fc«ai *MdtKU|lf<UI«KI<$>m frfk:


    <) ^ o 50 fcxidlfd qT3: I
68                                                   Spanda-Karikas

     'cfft P i ^ g t h T l ^ ^T^fpft faw^Tfa I
                       ^ftf: H^H^P^cii^wr II
     P w i M f l f c ^ i f i w w d ^OTvrfq- i
     fax* W^ft ^T ditfl^n ^^IHld: II1 (*TTo fao T ^ n ^ o )
       II11II
                         TRANSLATION

    A Yogi who closely observes his own (inmost) nature which
 is the S/rawtffa-principle recognized by means of the reasoning
 (already) mentioned, apprehends knowledge and activity as the
 presiding principle 1 of life as the ' F pervading the normal
consciousness even after meditation has ceased. His middle state
(madhya dasa) develops as described in Vijiianabhairava in the
following words :
    "When the middle state develops by means of the dissolution
of all dichotomising thought-constructs (inirvikalpataya), the
prana sakti in the form of exhalation (prarta) does not go out
from the centre (of the body) to dvadasanta2, nor does that
sakti in the form of inhalation {apana) enter into the centre
from dvadasanta. In this way, by means of Bhairavi who
expresses herself in the form of the cessation of prana
(exhalation) and apana (inhalation), one acquires the form of
Bhairava. "(V. B. verse 26), or as described in Kaksyastotra in
the following words :
   "Throwing by will all the powers like seeing, etc.
simultaneously on all sides into their respective objects and
remaining (unmoved) in the middle like a gold pillar, you (O
Siva) alone appear as the form of the entire cosmos."
   Thus all his thought-constructs vanish (vigalita-sakalavikalpo)
by means of the traditional teaching, by nimilana and unmilana
samadhi by the firm hold of the middle state 3 which
pervades simultaneously both nimilana (Visarga) and unmilana
samadhi (arani). As taught in the sacred tradition, he enters the
Bhairavamudra in which all his senses are widely open
simultaneously but the attention is turned within as described in
the following verse :
    "Attention should be turned inwards; the gaze should be
Section 1                                                      69

 turned outwards, without the twinkling of the eyes. This is the
 mudra4 pertaining to Bhairava, kept secret in all the Tantras."
     He sees the totality of objects appearing and disappearing in
 the ether of his consciousness like a series of reflections
 appearing and disappearing in a mirror. Instantly all his
 thought-constructs are split asunder by the recognition, after a
 thousand lives, of his essential nature surpassing common
 experience and full of unprecedented bliss. He is struck with
 amazement, as though entering the mudra of amazement.5 As
 he obtains the experience of vast expansion, suddenly his
 proper, essential nature comes to the fore.
   The word aste in the verse denotes the idea that he does not
 relax his firm hold (of the Spanda-principle).
    lyarp kusrtih means this wandering (srtih) consisting in the
wretched succession of life and death which causes tremor in all
people of the world does not occur in his case, because of the
absence of its cause consisting in innate impurity. As has been
said in Sri Purva Sastra :6
    'One' whose mind is fixed on reality, even though enjoying
sense-objects, cannot be touched by vice, even as a lotus-leaf
cannot be touched by water.
   As one who is equipped with mantra, etc. that removes the
effect of poison, does not, even after devouring poison, become
unconscious under its influence, similarly a yogi of great wisdom
(is not affected by the enjoyment of sense-objects)'' (M. V.
XVIII, 120).

                            NOTES

   1. Presiding principle means the principle that is the
permanent Experient of all experiences.
  2. Dvadasanta—a distance of twelve fingers from the tip of
the nose.
   3. The middle state is cidananda-consciousness-bliss.
   4. Mudra means the disposition and control of certain organs
of the body as help in concentration.
  5. This refers to vismaya-mudra in which the mouth is wide
open, and the tongue lolls out.
  6. Purva-sastra is another name of Malini-vijaya-tantra.
70                                                     Spanda-Karikas

                         EXPOSITION

  When the yogi realizes the spanda principle, then he knows
that this is his essential Self, and not the empirical, psycho-
somatic creature whom he had so long considered to be his
Self. He has now broken his shackles and is truly free.

             Introduction to the 12th and 13th Verse

                              TEXT



                        f r ^ T l f e R dl*Mtd«flfclfad^ d ^ l d d ^ l f d -


                        TRANSLATION

    The Vedantists, the Naiyayikas the Madhyamikas have taught
that after the dissolution of agitation, there remains only the
principle of naught i. e. universal destruction. In order to awaken
them (from their ignorance), the author, in opposition to the
reality as understood by them, elucidates the extra-ordinary
characteristic of the 5/rawrftf-principle which is the subject-matter
of this treatise.

                        Verses 12 and 13

                               TEXT

                     w^rrr^fcT * ^                         \


                          5T*     rig******!          I
             * cN                cTTO                  w       n

     Nabhavo bhavyatameti na ca tatrasty amudhata/
     Yato 'bhiyoga-sainsparsat tadasid iti niscayah// 12
     Atastatkrtrimani jneyaip sausupta-padavat sada/
     Na tvevam smaryamanatvaiyi tat tattvam pratipadyate// 13.
Section 1                                                                 71

                               TRANSLATION

   Mere non-existence cannot be an object of contemplation, nor
can it be said there is no stupefaction in that state, because on
account of the application of backward reference, it is certain
that it (i.e. the experience of stupefaction) was there (in that
state).
   Hence that artificial object of knowledge is always like sound
sleep. It is not in this manner i.e. as a state of recollection that
the Spanda-principle is known.

                                   COMMENTARY

                                     TEXT

   'mkfom        arrcfar i'

                                            WTrTt        <MI«Mim H M d t j -

fa^q *llc|<H4llfM ^dWId: H fdJMlx^:                  WcmUj: qrq^TWTT^ §

V^Tcftsq ^TT^t                         fd+cM^HH* 'HNMH ^TqqTqfrf^Trft

dIHddl q ^                           5 qt^ IJdlffd
   ' d f H I C^N d ^C\d 3T W ^ l f c n T r ^ I

gfrT Wjinir^dl^dlcH^^TR               ^Icqufl    q   ^irTtcMiHl^Pdddfd    I



   ifi&imm:       CN          C\
                                    TW^CT: ll'
ffrT qRTOqteqqtf*? d ^ ^ f a f d I      qfe f^FT^FTT fdd'dl
m<HfafcTRTjcTT                 qqT fd^M^UdKl MK^dif

        MK<llfe*l fafdUdi
                        C\
                           rxWHpUWmm
                             N C\
                                          HMIUkWtodl
                                          «\
                                                       I 3^qqT
q SPqfqfq              'qS^qTfcTqFq^ f f o MPdMlHidcdld^ I q r j
                          qra-srr w^rcfNr^ 1
72                                                      Spanda-Karikas

                tfcTrTSR'i, 14 ifl mfttHI I             Itf 4g4N|4HkU'clld I*
SJW^fa 5 fcT:, 3M4dl(M ^ H M ^ w S                   fa^r                 I
   ^ c«(K4li HT             ART                  klpHdtKWjUMMf ^ r f ,

IcSFR I 3TO Jcft 5TTcT cT^ H<SdIfdlcMdI^HITI*ICT          I
UHlUldlfc^dHl            mfafd                UH VlTrH iHhH IM*dc«i-
Frerfa d^viwdifd^wlHifd ^cft PHMm ' w H d b ^ w H ' f f a ncftsfei
UfdMfri: STcft          m Zffottn     fHjirmiccllcTi HT tH^VJIIHM-

IMKWIIKi fWCT^wf^cT^ ^q fd^ddlfd HIHUJWMl ^ P d ^ d
^TTOT fc^cT SRjfo I STO fdfiMd H^TTfe  ^ VF^cfPT

         I      43WII              M Pt4«d1UI<fi<4*d*41 UMcWIIdl
               * PdOHd cTT^T
94r$fcd1su<4li%fd4>lg»dW<J1W            cTFT fdkHfd
dRuMUM^            — ^ f c U j ^ d r^T
    fdWSltdHlpMl^l             K^tH^M WTcT f f a * ^FTfa^frafa*-

    ' d f H i ^ d H ^ r 3T ^ ^ i f d ^ M c T i
ifrT                      S T ^ ^ R ^ f t ^ n f ^ mfrwVUd sdM*iVwro
ii^MaMi cTOT ^TfHcTftr^T: I ^ f *Hd«M                   tT    g<*<><iq(<tfa

WRI^HIMifcfld |W4d STO* fctf, aq^lUHtjcdlfaflMlferd I STO-
^Tfi^T ^  p r f ^ ^ H - f l ^ M ^ ^4MpMMMI4«i<W*fl<ldifaWI
            | fM^dTdfWlfafo^liqfa * ftlfWtydMMcdMi

     ^       d f U ^ M W i (IRK)



     I STrT          SRHIW                       HCT^ I cTOT        ^IdUd
crf^rflmfq jprcfq f d «
              snr^fr m - •m' ( i m )
     1 ^ o T^O j o i^feftr qT3: i
Section 1                                                                 73


isilfd'HMd'cW+wf: I                                       ^fadl
rdl^fd               \ dfolMl M^dfrd ^                   TO     drd*>dfafd
 «N
         tHMHIUkd MfdM^i^,
                         '
                                    TOT
                                  « C\
                                                                ^ i f d ^ d«-

     T«MldK*A         RMIdlqid' I (*<> srro ^o
i f k I irafq ^              cqPc^d
                              «
                                      SI|U|ir4flM»K«IKIId4l4d cPnfq q
dld^d fM^drdH I Sffa § ^ d f d W d l d d r ^ ^ y + l ^ H ^ K M ^ H I d ^ d
TO I
   ' ^ q r ^ ^ r p r f w r g q h t c f t t q *rr ftnr:' i (^r*)
f f k i gnfts^iddr^^-d^c+K^M^ q ^ n g f ^ w n ^ N      m i
       drirdfHd)^ d ^ ^ H l f H f ^ T :     H
     'Hld^l^ThHIcHId                ' I (fo
ifrT sfoRqfin iP^ThdlcM I 4>PrMd*4d IMI           T 5 TOTCT:
MKHlfiH>fq I                    gcM^U^—3TFT TOTR tHWIUMH
MdlPd^d dl4d)fd II1VI9II

                             TRANSLATION
   Non-existence as understood by the Vedantist according to
the statement, 'Verily, in the beginning, all this was not' cannot
be an object of contemplation, for contemplation is (always) of
an object that can be existent. Abhava or non-existence is simply
nothing.
  If the existential conception be ascribed to it, it will have to
be treated as something, and thus there will be the negation of
non-existence, (i.e. in that case there will be the non-existence
of non-existence itself, for something implies existence).
  Moreover, how can that universal extinction be conceived or
contemplated where the conceiver or contemplator himself
disappears? If the conceiver or contemplator is accepted (as
existing), then universal extinction is an impossible conception,
for in that case the conceiver remains (as the witness of the
extinction, and even if one conceiver is there, then the adjective

      ST© 50 Pd4>M^fd TO: I
74                                                  Spanda-Karikas

'universal' will not apply to extinction). Hence universal extinction
or negation does not constitute Reality.

(Elucidation of the position of the Madhyamika)
  This is the position of the Madhyamika (iti pak$ah\
  The so-called (imaginary) conceiver or the contemplator
contemplating universal negation by imagination becomes, on
the perfection of contemplation, himself non-existent, being
identified with his object of contemplation which is abhava or
non-existence.

(The author's reply):
   It is said in reply—For the contemplation of total negation or
void, there is no non-insentiency, but rather there is insentiency
or stupefaction.
   "Therefore whether existent or non-existent, whatever is
imagined later, on the perfection of the contemplation, is
evidently only a product of imagination."
   According to the above principle, by the contemplation of
negation in the form of universal extinction there can never be
the attainment of the highest Reality, the ultimate object of life.
   If it is said that sunya or void is like this as stated by Nagar-
juna in the following lines:
   "That which is devoid of all supports (whether external or
internal), that which is devoid of all tattvas (constitutive princi-
ples), that which is devoid of the residual traces of all the klesas,
that is Sunya or void. In the highest sense, it is not sunya or
void as such," then our reply is, "True, if the absolutely free,
and ultimate state consisting of Consciousness-bliss be admitted
as the substratum (of all), as has been described in Vijnanabhai-
rava, that contemplation of the void should be made by making
the divine, supreme reality of consciousness as the substratum,
as declared in the verse "The Highest is that which is free of all
notions pertaining to direction (dik), time (kala) etc. (V. Bh.
Verse 14), otherwise, the statement, "there is no void as such"
would be devoid of all sense, as has been explained in the verse
 Yad yad eva atibhavyate above.
  The statement that is made in Alokamala, viz., "That state is
called void which is something unknown to people like our-
Section 1                                                       75

selves, not that which, according to the popular belief, is the
sense assigned to it by the atheists."
   This is true, but if it is unknown to people like yourselves, it
should be said that on account of its unknowability, it is impossi-
ble to express it. Why call it void? But even void, so long as it
is conceived, is verily knowable, because of its being delineated
in thought.
    If people like you are unable to realize that state, then you
should serve reverentially the real spiritual guide who is profici-
ent in the realization of that state, and not, by using a term like
void, according to your own judgement, throw yourself and
others, in the unfathomable abyss of immense delusion. Enough
of this.
    How is it known that there is insentiency in that state? In
reply to this, it is said, "Because etc." Abhiyoga means declara-
tion of the nature of reflection concerning that state made by
the person who has risen from samadhi or trance in the form,
"In what condition was I?" Because of the experience, Tadasit
iti niscayah i.e. "I was exceedingly in an insentieni state."
Hence that state of insentiency is artificial i.e. imagined one
because of its being recollected in that way. On the contrary,
that state (i.e. the state of insentiency) being experienced only
declares the existence of the experient, the knower who had
that experience, not non-existence or void. In the state of so-
called universal negation, the undivided state of cit or conscious-
ness that is the knower decidedly abides. It is never possible to
speak of its non-existence. This is what is meant to be said.

(Another objection):
   Well, memory is possible only of that which has been already
observed and determined, as for instance, blue etc. There can
be no determination of that which is void, in which the function
of the buddhi (determinative faculty) is suppressed. Then how is
it said, 'on the basis of subsequent ascertainment in the form 'it
was' that this denotes insentieney ?

(Reply)
  In reply, it is said that such is the condition only of the
known or the object. So long as, through the impression
76                                                 Spanda-Karikas

retained in the Self, the known or the object is not determined
by thisness, it cannot be remembered. Though limited in the
imaginary states of void, etc, the knower or the subject, however,
abides as the real (lit. unconventional), ultimate Reality. He
cannot be separate from himself. Therefore, there is a thought
determinative of him only. Thus in that state there is a knower
as I. This is evident from self-experience. It is this experiencer
 of the void who is recollected subsequently in memory as
exceedingly limited in opposition to the universe.
   Hence there is no inconsistency here. As this is the exact
 position, therefore the state of the void is only artificial. In
 accordance with the declaration made in the line "therefore,
when whether existent or non-existent, if it is only contemplated
afterwards, it is only a product of imagination," the state of
 void is brought into being only by an imaginary conception
 of the non-existent. The Supreme Lord himself, in order to
 conceal the real knowledge, shows to the fools void as a reality
 so that they may accept it as the goal to be achieved.
   The word jheyam (knowable) in the verse, which means the
 form of the knowable is used as an example to show that it is
 always like sound sleep.

(Summary)
   This is the sense. Every one without any effort has the experience
of sleep which is like insentiency. Then what is the use of
another void which can be acquired only by the effort of medita-
tion. Both are similar in point of unreality. Many philosophers
like the Vedantists, the Naiyayikas, the followers of Samkhyaand
Buddhists and others have fallen into this great uncrossable
ocean of immense insentiency in the form of the void. Sunya has
proved to be an obstacle even to those who were desirous of
 entering the Spanda principle when their efforts slackened. This
will be described in the verse, beginning with, "Then, in that
great ether," and ending with, "insentient like sound sleep"
 (I, 25). Therefore, the author's great effort is noticed in demoli-
 shing this theory. Even though he has definitely established here
 that it is a position to be abandoned, he will further establish it
 in "The effort directed towards action" (I, 15) Hence I have made
an effort to expose its defects. The worthy students, who have
Section 1                                                          77

lent their ears to this teaching for practising it, should, therefore,
not be annoyed with me.
   When the defects of the Buddhists have been exposed, the
defects of the Vedantists also stand exposed, for their reasoning
is similar. Therefore, nothing further is said.
   Now let us turn to the subject under discussion. The Spanda-
principle cannot be recollected like the void. That can never be
said, with propriety, to be absent, for it is involved uniformally
as the Experient in all the experiences. It has been rightly said,
"Ah, by what means can one know the knower?" (B. A. U. IV,
5, 15).
  Though the state of entry into Reality is remembered on
account of the impression of prana, etc., when one comes back to
normal consciousness after meditation, the Spanda-principle is
not similarly remembered. It is rather the highest Experient, the
quintessence of uninterrupted light and bliss involved in all
experiences.
  As the author will say later, "Whether it is word, or thought,
or object, there is no state which is- not Siva." (11,4). Hence this
principle which is uninterrupted bliss of consciousness <*an never
be an object of memory or a state of insentiency.
   Regarding the question that this principle has been referred
to by the word 'that', it must be understood that according to
the statement made in Isvarapratyabhijna, viz., "The Self not
deprived of Freedom," the word 'that' refers to the so-called
experient who is not the ultimate Reality, not to the Experient
who is the Absolute, Ultimate Reality. By the phrase na prati-
padyate, it is said that that principle cannot be known as an
object of memory.

                           EXPOSITION

  These two verses are very important. The Madhyamikas
maintained that the Ultimate Reality is Sunya or void in which
there is neither knower, nor knowledge, nor known, i.e. neither
subject nor object nor the means of knowing. That state cannot
be characterized by any other term than void. How is it known
that the ultimate state is only void? The Madhyamika says, "We
have an experience of it in samadhi in which there is neither con-
78                                                Spanda-Karikas

sciousness of T nor of this, nor of any link between the two."
How is it known that there was such a state? The only reply that
can be given to this question is that after the samadhi, in subse-
quent memory we know that there was such a state.
   Three important points have been made against the Madhya-
mika by the author.
   Firstly, the experience of abhava or sunya or total absence of
objectivity is mudhata i.e. insentiency or stupefaction like sleep.
How is this known? This is known by abhiyoga, i.e. by a back-
ward reference in memory. But firstly, like sleep this is only a
particular state of the manas. It is only a passing phase, not
something eternal. It cannot be the characteristic of Reality or
the Spanda-principle as such.
   Secondly, since this experience is a matter of memory, there-
fore, also, it cannot be a characteristic of Reality or the Spanda-
principle or Siva or the Experient, the Atma or the Essential Self
whichever way one may like to put it. For memory is a matter
of recollection, and recollection is not possible without a re-
collector. The Spanda-principle is the recollector, not something
recollected. This is what the 13th verse says
   The Spanda principle is not an object to be recollected."
   As Kallata puts it in his vrtti
u
 m srarrewT stftaT          ffa       T ^ snc^nrnr              to
        C\    C\       «\                    <o   c    O

feRsrra" T
"That state of void is remembered after samadhi (trance or
absorbing meditation) as a past experience. This cannot be the
characteristic of the Atma or the S/?a«<fe-principle, for firstly
Atma or Spanda is of the nature of consciousness, and to say
that consciousness is remembered as insentiency would be con-
tradiction in terms. Secondly, it is always the experient, the
knower, the cogniser."
   Thirdly, the main point at issue, however, is not that the
Madhyamika maintains that there is an experience of void: that
even the follower of Trika philosophy admits, for he believes
there is a sunya pramata, the experient of the void. The crucial
point is that the Madhyamika maintains that sunya or void is the
Section 1                                                          79

characteristic of Reality, that there is no such thing even as a
pramata or the Experient.
    Against this, the author of the spandakarika has been at
pains to prove two things. Firstly that the Experient is the
ever-present subject; it can never be reduced to an object. It is
always the vedaka (subject), not vedya (object). Secondly, that
it runs like a thread through all experience; even the experience
of void would not be possible without that experient. The denier
even in the very denial affirms it. In the words of Samkara,
 "The denier simply affirms the existence of 4 Atma\
    The Experient never takes a holiday, for without Him, no
experience is possible. In the words of Kathopanisad "It is the
 light that makes all appearance possible."

            Introduction to the \4th, 15//z, and \6th Verse

                                  TEXT

     o




                          TRANSLATION
   The objector says, "You yourself have said in verse 2 that all
this universe, all this objectivity remains in it and comes forth
from it which means that consciousness itself assumes the form
of universal objectivity. In other words, consciousness has itself,
by relinquishing its nature, assumed an artificial form of nega-
tion or void. In the face of this, how do you maintain that it is
uninterrupted bliss and is never insentient?
In reply to this the author says:

                           Verses 14, 15, 16




              fiTirfrgtr. sw?**           ato       i
              cfft^^                        STfrHaR* II       II
80                                                 Spanda-Karikas


              TOT                                   !f II ^   II
  Avasthayugalani catra karyakartrtva-sabditam/
  Karyata ksayini tatra kartrtvam punaraksayaip//14
  Karyonmukhah prayatno yah kevalarp so'tra lupyate,/
  Tasmin lupte vilupto'smityabudhah pratipadyate//15
  Na tu yo'antarmukho bhavah sarvajnatva-gunaspadam/
  Tasya lopah kadacitsyad anyasyanupalambhanat//16

                          TRANSLATION

   Of this Spanda principle, two states are spoken about, viz., of
the doer or the subject and the deed or the object. Of these
two, the deed or the object is subject to decay but the doer or the
subject is imperishable. 14
   In the samadhi of void, only the effort which is directed
towards objectivity disappears. It is only a fool who, on the
disappearance of that effort, thinks <1 have ceased to be'. 15
   There can never be the disappearance of that inner nature
which is the abode of the attribute of omniscience in the event
of the non-perception of anything objective. 16

                          COMMENTARY

                                TEXT




OQRDPUDM SH>FFLLC*HI F^TOT               OTTWTH        TONTDDMV-
                                                         <3




           5 H m w f a : HtTT JRW:        I
     ^c<*>H<:ddrdd       TO:       ll' ( f o sr®



     <\. ^ o 50 d4"Md     TO:    I
Section 1                                                                     81



         ^^JT STOnN, g T * T f r d i H l ^ d I ^ M d i l H H ,
3TcT qq ^ T ^ r f ^ c q *Tt qSTTCT: H ^ *Wddl     ^T q r^cTT-
H+WlcH* ^TO^T TOT ^ K i w l s f a                             3TcRTO TOt:

MNUiUfa TOT W I M M x i H H I d I           § «Hlg4<IIMNII«lfM q ^ f ^ a r -
^IHddlfard                                                         I        TOT-


         I                    TOT,                        *T: 51TOT:


RdkH^              f d ^ S f H l F d TOR* I *T: ^ d ^ d ^ n ^ l M ^ ! ^ :
^WT^tSrT ITQ
          •
             Uddcd^IfWfMcW
                  \s       >
                             3TOWT -ddcUdfrd ecdlS<f<T,* TOT ^ f t

              «>                                                       >S     o



TTOT^ ^      *TT H>W!ll*d1fd f c f t f q ^ T : I a m 'TOq: •fiWdgglW
TH^SFQG H          SMNMRO TOFRO TOTWRT: I TRSF D I ^ H H D M H ^ D I L V
                                      | ar*T ^ HDMI«R *T*TT Mdrdfd4d-




fifTCTrfir i xrfe ^                     o                                     -o

                                  STOC^T^: I 3TpT ^TFTOT^f^JTOT
STCTcTOT                        q^FTOo
                                       ^ r cTrTOT qifrosffa STT^T-



ffcft,                fc              I 3T*T ^FTOT ^ l U t ^ M U H ^ I d -




faq ^TecTOT                         d t j d t j ^ T O ^ H dWWMIdcd^d I
                                TRANSLATION
ar^ro^r f f q a r o r ^ i ^ d k H *  ^ s t r TOifk qt^xm m ^ n

  Atra   in avasthayugalani catra means jptfwrfa-principle
Karyatvam kartrtvam ca sabditam spoken of as the doer and
the deed implies that the two states are differentiated only by
82                                                Spanda-Karikas
the use of words i.e. only in speech. In reality, the two states
are but one, viz. the principle of Siva who is absolutely free
and mass of light. This principle which is not in any way differ-
ent from the existence of the subject or the agent being pervaded
 by activity or spanda in the form of light, and appearing as
identical with it., assuming the form of tattva (constitutive
principles), bhuvana (world) and body or their absence, etc. is
called the object, because any other principle than that cannot
have causality. As has been said in Isvarapratyabhijna:
   "It is not in the power of the insentient (e.g. the seed) to
bring forth anything into existence (e.g. the sprout) whether it
(the sprout) be considered to be already existent in the cause or
 not existent in it. Therefore, the causal relation (i.e. the rela-
tion between cause and effect) is really the relation between the
doer or creator and the deed or the object of creation" 1
(I. Pr. II, 4,2).
   The creativity of the creator consists in the fact that by the
process of uniting and separating various manifestations such
 as space, time, etc. he manifests innumerable things like body,
blue, etc. which, though non-di'fferent from the essential nature
 of consciousness appear as different like reflections in a
mirror (which though non-different from the mirror appear
as different).
   All that which He manifests is perishable as regards its
external form. Its perishableness is, however, nothing
else than its submergence of thisness (i.e. objectivity) and
abiding as the I. Therefore, it is only the objective aspect of
the subject such as the body, etc. which is manifested and with-
drawn by the Lord, not the Subjective aspect which is identical
with the light of the Supreme I, for even though the subject (the
individual Self) has entered the body, it is identical with the
Lord. Hence of the two, viz. of the objective and the subjective,
the objective is perishable, the doer or the Subject who is
identical with the Freedom of Consciousness is, however,
imperishable, for even at the manifestation and withdrawal
of the world, he does not deviate from his nature of the
imperishable Subject and Creator. If he were to do so, even
the manifestation and withdrawal of the world would not
be perceptible. Hence, even in the state of insentiency; the Spanda
Section 1                                                        83

principle is only Sentiency with the essence of uninterrupted
bliss.

(An objection)
    On the consummation of meditation on the void and in deep
sleep, we do not notice its creativity, for its activity is nowhere
seen in that state (How is it then that it is said to be the eternal
actor or creator?) (Commentary on the author's reply contained
in the 15th and 16th verse).
    True, on the cessation of all work of the nature of objective
perception, only the effort consisting in directing the senses, etc.
towards the objects disappears. On its disappearance, only a
fool, whose sense of Self or Subject is eclipsed owing to medita-
tion on the void, thinks "1 have ceased to be".
    The cessation, however, of him can never be possible whose
nature consists in the inner light of I-consciousness and who is,
therefore, the abode of omniscience. Omniscience also implies
omnipotence. No one can be found as the perceiver of the
cessation of that inward nature. If any such person is found, it
 is just he who is the inner consciousness (that was supposed to
 have ceased). If no such person is found, how then can it be
decided that there was ever such a state of cessation?
        (Commentary on the last line of the 16th Verse) :
   Moreover, nobody else feels the cessation of the subject,
excepting he himself, whose nature is the light of consciousness.
Then how can his cessation be asserted? Thus the phrase 'on
account of the non-perception' means 'on account of the
absence of the perception of another subject.'
   Further, it may be said that just as the absence of jar is
ascertained from the observation of the ground without the jar,
even so the absence of Self may be ascertained from the
observation of some one without the Self. But the existence of
the perceiver of the absence of Self is unavoidable in this case.
Therefore the non-existence of the perceiver of the absence of
the Self cannot be established.
   If on account of the cessation of the effort directed towards
 some object or action, the agent or director himself were to
cease, then at the subsequent time there will be no perception
84                                                  Spanda-Karikas
 of any body. Hence there would arise the contingency of the
 non-perception of any being.
    Further, on account of the non-perception of another i.e.
 external effort during deep sleep, etc., how can the cessation of
 the internal principle be suspected even by blockheads, for how
 can the disappearance of one thing affect another. Therefore
 from the non-perception of another, viz., of the effect towards
 an object, there can never be the disappearance of the inner
 perceiver who is of the nature of light i.e. consciousness, for
 this inner nature 2 which is the abode of omniscience knows
 that state of absence also, otherwise the very state of absence
cannot be proved.
   The genitive case 'of another' used here conveys the sense of
the nominative and the accusative.3
   By the use of the expression 'in the inner,' the possible state
of the subject in opposition to the object has been mentioned.
In fact by the afore-said reasoning, the state of the knowership
of the Subject has been stated. The expression antarmukha
should be construed thus :
'Antah=perfect I-ness, and mukham = chief, the whole phrase
meaning, Spanda-tattva, the main characteristic of which is
perfect I-ness.'
                             NOTES

   1. Karya-karanabhava or causality in this system actually
 means the kartr-karmatva-bhava i.e. the relation between the
creator and his object of creation, for in the final analysis, all
the so-called causes derive their power from the Ultimate Agent,
the Divine.
  2. Ramakantha clarifies the antarmukha-bhava or the inner
nature of the self in the following words :
   "3TR*Rt a u r ^ i ^ H firfwr *TT    : *TT ^ ^ n ^ F T R i q SRT:-
+ <UM    <UM IHI <IM <J|
H M f ^ ; ^T                  ^jtdh I
  "The Self has two main powers, viz. of knowledge and activity.
When during deep sleep, etc., the activity of the inner and outer
senses ceases, only the knowledge aspect which is turned
Section 1                                                       85

towards the Self is prominent. That is why the expression
antarmukhabhava has been used."
  3. The nominative case would stand as 'There is no other
seer.' The accusative case would stand as * 3*T*pRt'"There is
nothing other to be seen."

                         EXPOSITION

   Two main arguments have been brought out in these three
verses. Firstly, the Spanda-principle or the Divine appears in two
aspects, viz. the subject and the object. The object is subject to
decay and change; the subject is never subject to these. The
Madhyamika avers that it is not only the object that in the
ultimate analysis disappears but the subject also. It is maintained
by the author that the subject can never be absent, for by nature
he is not subject to decay or change.
   Secondly, in the meditation on the void, it is only the effort
towards external objectivity that has ceased to be and therefore,
it is only the object that has ceased to be. That does not prove
that the subject also has ceased to be. As Ramakantha puts it :

^rfcrfrfr"
 "In the meditation on the void, since there is the absence of
objectivity, to conclude, on account of the cessation of the
activities of the instruments (inner and outer) that there is the
cessation of the Self is sheer delusion. "

                 Introduction to the 17th verse

                              TEXT


TO      nfdMKI                               fo^MMfd

                       TRANSLATION
  Having discussed how on the cessation of external activities
the unenlightened decides about the unjustifiable cessation of the
experient or the self, the author now describes how the fully
enlightened and the partially enlightened consider the Self.
86                                                        Spanda-Karikas

                        Text of the \lth Verse

               TOTfa^fe*: HcTcf faq^TS^fvRTfTTTft I
               froi smcgap**            q ^ w 5 n ?V9 u
     Tasyopalabdhih satatam tripadavyabhicarini/
     Nityam syat suprabuddhasya tadadyante parasya tu//l7

                             TRANSLATION
  The fully enlightened has, always and incessantly, the
undeviating knowledge of the Self in all the three states; the
other one (viz. the partially enlightened) has it only at the
beginning and end of each state.

                             COMMENTARY

                                   TEXT

      TOT             iflMrlte: 3H4Petty: 5RTOT:, HT SJfacmw-
         M4*4IU44dl«t<MVj||fM 5PTOT, HTOfeP^rfq
flWdM^J fdc^fafd 3TT^         (cUpHd iP^fi-^ dmfl|rfV l.£dc£d-



•T 5 HlfrWI^Id'HIUIdR^fd^                       I Tf^rf

     FTQ^           HT 5              ^R N' (far® F° ^IK)
f f a I ^ V H d d l f M cRT^RT ^cfldfrd OMI<M|(M ^rddrfl I ^ 0 + c H d -
 c
                               c       «




      '3TcT:       TOcPT^Trf):
                S3 -O
                                            I
                                           n' ( T R l )
 frEnfe
          O       CS    <0
                             HiKHNcT:
                                  C
                                      l' N( i R * )'
ffe
Section 1                                                       87



    ' s r ^ : ^ T fcTW         (^n^)
IrETTf? ^ I         f^ vfHKlfcfeW T^T aU^H+lfdd^WJH^fdUWk^*
vi g^bfiTmt ^ f ST^^T g s r ^ r m ^ m t q ^ T : ^tT:, fk^mr: i
cT^TT ^ fsiMfldH
    ^likHM^d^"                         T (ftfo ^o
ffcT I
    'f^r         ^ r ^ T ^ n r r (ftr©    3R0)
ffir
    f ^ T ^ T f f i j r . l' (ftro
ffir invdii

                       TRANSLATION

          means 'of the real nature which is the topic of this
treatise; upalabdhi means 'uninterrupted knowledge.' The fully
enlightened has, by the firm grip of the process, described that
awareness in all the three states of waking, dream, and deep
sleep. The fully enlightened is one who is completely free from
even the residual traces of unenlightenment. Nityam (always)
means "at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end."
   Avyabhicarini means invariable, undeviating, unfailing. The
meaning is "The fully enlightened is one whose inner nature
always shines as identical with Siva."
   Of the three states characterized by specific knowledge
appropriate to them, the partially awakened one has awareness
(of Spanda) only at the beginning or at the end of each state. At
the beginning means 'just when that state is about to start;' 'at
the end* means 'at its cessation when the perceiver's mind is
withdrawn within.' He does not have this awareness in the
middle of each of these states which is characterised by specific
knowledge
             appropriate to itself. It has been rightly said in
 Sivadrsti2 "The awareness of Sivata or real state of the Experient
is observed at the beginning of all knowledge, or it is observed
at the end because of the cessation of that knowledge (when
the mind is withdrawn within)."
   Bhatta Lollata3 has also similarly explained in his commentary
that that awareness exists only at the beginning and the end of
88                                                Spanda-Karikas

each state of waking, dream, and deep sleep in the case of the
partially awakened. We have not been taught to give far-fetched
explanation of the clear meaning of these karikas (verses) in
accordance with the wording of the gloss of Bhatta Sri Kallata. 4
   Since the partially awakened has this awareness (of the
Spanda principle) at the beginning and at the end of each state,
therefore, he is fit to be fully awakened by the instruction,
regarding Spanda. The author will speak about it in the verse,
beginning with "Therefore, one should be on the alert for the
discernment of the Spanda principle while waking (I, 21) and
in "The un-enlightened one remained stupefied as one is (stupefied)
in deep sleep while he who is not enveloped by (spiritual) darkness
abides as the enlightened one" (1,25), similarly in the passage,
beginning with, 'even in dream,' and also in 'one should always
remain awakened.'
   Here, for the purpose of enlightening fully the partially
enlightened yogi, the instruction is given to fill even the middle
state consisting of the determination of objects, with the
rapturous experience of the fourth state, just as he fills with
that bliss the initial and the final phases of the three states of
waking, etc. This will be explained later on.
   A similar view is expressed in the following in the Siva-sutra
also :
   "Even during the three different states of consciousness in
waking, dreaming and profound sleep, the rapturous experience
of the I-consciousness of the fourth state abides''. (I, 7)
   "The fourth state of Atmic consciousness should be poured
like (uninterrupted flow of) oil in the three states" (III, 20)
"Being an enjoyer of the rapture of I-consciousness in the three
states, he is verily the master of his senses." (1,7).

                            NOTES
   1. The specific knowledge appropriate to waking is the
knowledge of each object (pot, flower, etc.) which is common
to all people, the knowledge dream is specific or particular
only to the particular dreamer; the specific characteristic
of deep sleep is only the residual traces (saipskara) of every
one's experiences.
Section 1                                                      89

  2. $iva-dr$ti is written by Somananda who was the great
grand teacher of Abhinavagupta.
  3. Bhatta Lollata was a poet, a critic and a philosopher. He
was a younger contemporary of Bhatta Kallata. He lived in the
second and third quarter of the 9th century A.D. His gloss on
Spandakarika referred to as Vivrti by Ksemaraja is not available.
  4. Kallata was a pupil of Vasugupta and flourished in 855
A.D. He wrote a gloss on Spandakarika, called Vrtti, which is
published in the Kashmir Series of Text and Studies.

                         EXPOSITION

    There are three categories of experients in the world: (1) the
 common empirical individual of the world who is completely
 ignorant of spiritual Reality, referred to as aprabuddha, the
unawakened. He has absolutely no interest in yoga and is not
yet qualified to appreciate its teaching. (2) The partially
enlightened yogi who has some experience of the essential Self
or Spanda tattva. He has an awareness of it in the beginning and
end of waking, dreaming and profound sleep but not in the
middle of any of these states; the experience of Spanda or the
divine state is not perpetually present in his case. He is
called prabuddha or partially enlightened. In comparison to
 Suprabuddha, he is also referred to as aprabuddha. He is the fit
candidate for yoga, and the teachings are given for his
improvement.
   (3> Suprabuddha, sometimes referred to simply as prabuddha
is the experient who has an integral awareness of spanda i.e.
he has an uninterrupted awareness of it in all the three states,
viz., waking, dreaming, and profound sleep. He needs no
teaching of yoga. He has, in the evolutionary scheme, already
attained the highest experience that is open to man.
   The 17th verse gives a description of the second and third
categories of yogis.

                 Introduction to the 18th Karika

                             TEXT
90                                                Spanda-Karikas

                      TRANSLATION
  The author now shows separately what kind of experience
the fully enlightened one has in each of the three states.

                   Text of the 18th verse


                 finpffrT a r ^ ^ r § ^ F T O n      n
  Jnanajneya-svarupinya Saktya paramaya yutah/
  padadvaye vibhurbhati tadanyatra tu cinmayah// 18

                       TRANSLATION
  The all-pervading lord, possessed of the supreme power in the
form of knowledge and knowable (object of knowledge),
appears in the two states of waking and dream as knowledge
and objects of knowledge, and in the other than these two only
as consciousness.


                   Text of the Commentary


fM^drdkHHI         q^ft f ^ j : fl^lcHl tdHldl «(HKltdM<^
Q^Q     R I TO F^FAWUFL^^IFAJM^H-DI^RM^PD, ERRORS 3-

y^Jdcdld             ^ jq^Mtdld,                    qTO^T



^HktdHUUft ferHUcdld I qTOfa ^ Mj>dHMa«ftkdldN I frT:

MOwcii fdM^d, ferorfm? f r o m : ll<|c;n

                       TRANSLATION

  The all-pervading Satfikara who is one's own essential nature,
possessed of the supreme powe r, appears predominantly to the
fully enlightened in the two states of waking and dreaming in
the form of knowledge and knowable in the middle of these two
Section 1                                                        91

states and in his own essential form of Spanda principle at the
initial and final stages of the knowledge. Therein (i.e. in the
middle of the waking and dream states) he sees the universe, like
Sadasiva and Kvara, as his own body. In the other than these
two, i.e. in sound sleep, this all-pervading principle (i.e. spanda)
appears to him only as consciousness on acqount of the cessation
of the entire gamut of objects. 'In the other than these two*
(tadanyatra) refers only to sound sleep (su$upti), not to both
sound sleep and the fourth state, as others have interpreted,
because the previously mentioned phrase 'unfailing in the three
states' (in verse 17) makes the fourth state irrelevant, and also
because the realization of that (spanda principle) is itself the
fourth state.
   The above state relates only to the fully enlightened yogi. It
has not been mentioned with reference to the actual state of the
common people, for in this case, the statement 'in the state other
than the two, it is only pure consciousness' would get involved
in inconsistency, because the deep sleep of the common folk is
only of the nature of stupefaction and with reference to Siva
even waking and dream states are pure consciousness.
Besides, it is out of point so far as the topic under discussion
is concerned.
   Henceforward upto the end of the first section, the book has
to do only with the perfect enlightenment of the partially
enlightened. Other commentators have not understood this
fact. Readers may examine this for themselves. How far can
I go on pointing this out with regard to every word?

                         EXPOSITION

   This verse is important inasmuch as it throws brilliant light
on the realization of the fully enlightened yogi.
    In his case, the Spanda principle appears as knowledge
(jfiana) and objects of knowledge (jneya) in the middle of the
two states of waking and dream. Even here, the knowledge and
the objects of knowledge do not appear as completely external
from him but as his own body, fully integrated to his I-con-
sciousness, just as they appear to SadaSiva and Isvara.
   Then again, at the initial and final stages of jfiana in these
92                                                           Spanda-Karikas

two stages also, it is in its own essential nature that the
S/?aw/a-principle appears. In the deep sleep state, since there is
complete absence of all knowables or objects, it appears, only
as sheer consciousness (cinmaya).

                   Introduction to the 19 th verse

                                    TEXT

                                    * H ^ M l f a d*flMM Wltd—

                             TRANSLATION
  Now the author proves how even the middle state of waking
and dream does not hamper the perfect realization of the fully
enlightened.

                        Text of the 19th Verse

              g ^ l l f a w s f a t t j a j T : ftTflTOFTCTtatTTft I
                                ScTci s ^ r o i q f t q f ^ : M H II
     GuQadispandanisyandah samanyaspandasaipsrayat/
     Labdhatmalabhah satataip syur jnasyaparipanthinah// 19

                              TRANSLATION
  The particular emanations of Spanda which begin with the
gupas and which acquire their existence by having recourse to
generic Spanda can never stand in the way of the one who has
realized his essential nature.

                            COMMENTARY

                                    TEXT




                    ^ tttj' wti M^RTTO I

       I rT 3TT5tft W    SRTRhrt     farU'dMi    *M«*wi                       $
Section 1                                                     93




                     WtOfcf      fa*^:,

cnnf^
   'HLTF^N W         T C ^ N F W ^ 2TT I
   m^TTcTcfti" cT t ^ qreft: flrT WcPT: ll' ( f o 5To




firf^n^r^mf^?^            ^^HTdNvwq ^           men

                          TRANSLATION

  GUQOS1    i.e. sattva (harmony), ra/ay (motion) and tamas
(inertia) which are the outcome of Prakrti are here to be under-
stood as having their abode in Maya. As has been said in
Svacchanda-tantra regarding the arrangement of the pillow of
Maya. "One should consider its (i.e. the pillow's) lower cover
as red (symbolic of rajas), the upper cover as white (symbolic
of sattva), and the middle one i.e. the pillow itself as black
(symbolic of tamas). These gurias are thus arranged." (Sv-T.
II, 65). They begin with kala and end with earth which are
particular ramifications of Spanda, and their proliferations
are bodies, senses and worlds and experiences like blue, pleasure
etc. or in the case of yogis, they may be considered to be
bindu (light) and nada (sound), etc. These can never stand in
the way of the fully enlightened Yogi who has no future
birth i.e. it is certain that they can never veil his essential
nature. Because these acquire their own existence by resorting
to the aforesaid generic spanda in accordance with the ascer-
tained principle of Spanda described in the words "in which
abide all objects and from which they come forth." (Sp. K.
Verse 2) i.e. because they are born out of and are identical
with Spanda.
   As has been described in Isvarapratyabhijna 2 "Those powers
which are jnana, kriya, and maya as the third in the case of the
94                                                  Spanda-Karika s

 Lord (Siva) in respect of the objective realities which are His
 own limbs appear in the case of the limited, empirical individual
 as sattva, rajas and tamas."
    According to this, it is the Divine Consciousness-power
 itself which displaying itself in the triad of powers, viz., jfiana,
kriya and maya in the stages of Sadasiva,3 Isvara, etc. appears
 owing to excess of limitation, as the body of the Lord's sport
 in the form of sattva, rajas and tamas. Because of this, the fully
enlightened yogi, always knowing all the states of waking,
 dream and deep sleep as presided over by the cit-sakti which
is identical with the diffusion of his own Consciousness-power,
 never puts himself in opposition to the particular Spanda-forms
such as the gunas, etc. and only feels himself immersed in the
 generic Spanda-principle.

                              NOTES

   1. Gunas are constitutive principles. They are sattva
rajas and tamas. Sattva is the aspect of harmony, goodness,
enlightenment and sukha or pleasure. Rajas is the aspect of move-
ment, activity and duhkha or commotion. Tamas is the aspect
of inertia and moha or dulness.
   2. Isvarapratyabhijna was written by Utpaladeva, the great
grand teacher of Ksemaraja.
   3. According to this statement, jnana is the predominant
sakti of Sadasiva, kriya of Isvara and maya of Suddha or
Sahaja Vidya. In Pratyabhijnahrdayam, Ksemaraja has men-
tioned ichha as the predominant sakti of Sadasiva, jfiana of
Isvara and kriya of Suddha Vidya.

                          EXPOSITION

   There are two aspects of Spanda viz., samanyay and visesa.
Samanya is the general principle or power of cit or Conscious-
ness; Vise$a is the manifestation of Spanda in particular consti-
tutive aspects like sattva, rajas, tamas etc. or objective
experiences like blue, pleasure, etc.
  Ordinary people considering these particular manifestations of
Spanda as something entirely different from Consciousness get
entangled in them, but the fully enlightened yogi or Supra-
buddha, considering them only as forms of Spanda, the ultimate
Section 1                                                                   95

Consciousness-Power is not befuddled.

                   Introduction to the 20th verse

                                   TEXT

  mi                      dcMrdMKHtd

                           TRANSLATION

  Now the author describes how the particular forms of spanda
prove a shackle for the unawakened ones.

                                   Verse


            ITcraftT PtTT^                              II ^ o II
          Aprabudhadhiyas tvete svasthitisthaganodyatah/
          Patayanti duruttare ghore saipsara-vartmani// 20

                           TRANSLATION

  These (the gurtas etc), however, intent on veiling their real
nature push the people of unawakened intellect into the terrible
ocean of transmigratory existence from which it is difficult
to pull them out.

                         COMMENTARY
                                 TEXT

   aropftro:   am:    UdfdMcqf»M MM I                             lcM<t>rd»KM*4-
drdl^lcH^irHHl   yflfofr UM m 13 ipH HIfodlM                        fadiflPlH^j^



             flfK^WHl Mld<lPd I m t t i       sfanfoftf^TO
   f c R ^ c fflVOdldSftsST:Hld^^^H I
             tWlfcl^nr W l < d ^ H < l : ^ T T : ll' (*Tr<> fao
ffif I cRJT f^ ^ MldMlfdrll TO t ^ ^ a r q i w i ITT 31! fad: fdVdfUWd-
       dMdWiflI<d\H W k c d I vd                    I dgc^lfrdlfd § d N x t -
 96                                                  Spanda-Karika s

 j f i ^ d 0 O ^ M l P n TOTTfr
 auw4Mi §                       i TOT f^ m ^                  5ft

 lid|4^4                    ^Jf^TTOT           fcTOT: ^H^nHdcd-
 for^ddifor^^diPMM^rdM^^dd:       i               d ^ f a c n g TO^T-

   HIlfil*lld«4>cMl~dd*4pd, ITORTT §                I fej ^ i g
vjft*           f ^ n f : ^ST«l4fMUi|SI«IVflKl: arqqt d ^ M ^ d d : I
                  iUlM*                TO                ^IVMIdl^ldd^l



^Md4d cTTfa dcdlft ^FTftr
rd^dKlfau^llHM^m^                              HHT^ MldllPd IRoll

                          TRANSLATION

    Aprabuddadhiyah means all those worldly people who have
 not recognised their spanda principle which is divine sakti (power),
 and who consider their bodies as the Self and also all those
partially awakened yogis who consider prana, etc. as their Self.
   The word 'etc' i.e. 'these' of the verse refers to the particular
emanations of Spanda beginning with gunas' (of the previous
verse).
   Svasthitisthaganodyatah means always intent on veiling their
real nature which is spanda principle. Duruttare ghore saipsara-
vartmani patayanti91 means they push the whole lot of creatures
into the miserable transmigratory existence from which it is
difficult for their directors to pull them out.
   As has been said in Sri MalinI Vijaya Tantra:
   "The non supreme ones (aparah) are called ghoratari saktis
who while they embrace the Rudra souls, push down and down
those jivas (empirical souls) who cling to objects of sense."
 (M.V. 111,31).
   Thus that very supreme power (para-sakti) which has been
previously described as of the nature of Spanda is called Vame-
svari2 sakti because she manifests both internally and externally
and because she has to do with the contrary course of the
world.3 By her are brought into being four groups of divinities
Section 1                                                       97

 known as Khecari, Gocari, Dikcari, and Bhucari who lead the
 fully awake.:.! soul to the highest stage, but drive the un-
 awakened ones to lower and lower paths.
    Thus those very Khecari saktis, moving in the ether of knowl-
 edge become, in the case of the fully enlightened ones, means of
 non-difference, omnipotence, omniscience, perfection and all-
 pervasiveness because of their being beyond the influence of
 time, while in the case of the unawakened ones, they make them
 move in the stage of the experient of the void and remaining
 there as cloaks become the means of the limitation of time,
 limited efficacy, limited knowledge, attachment, and limitation
 in respect of space and cause (i. e. niyama or niyati). So far as
 Gocari is concerned, the word 'go' means speech. This implies
those stages which make use of speech, viz., buddhi, the determina-
 tive faculty, ahamkara, the ego-sense, and manas, the ideating
faculty. They move in these stages (caranti), and bring about in
the case of the fully enlightened ones, such determination, ego
sense and ideation as bring about the sense of non-difference
 with the essential Self, while in the case of the unawakened
ones, they bring about determination, etc. only of difference.
Dikcari are those saktis which move about in the sphere of the
ten external senses. In the case of the fully enlightened ones,
they are sources of the manifestation of non-duality, while in the
case of the unenlightened ones, they are the causes of duality.
    The word bhu denotes the stage of knowables (objects), viz.
the pentad of form, etc. Moving about in this sphere, and
being their fully developed forms, they became congealed and
thus identical with them. They reveal themselves to the fully
enlightened in the form of the light of consciousness, while in
the case of others, they appear in the form of limitedness all
round.
    Thus these four groups of Saktis, viz., Khecari in the form of
experients, Gocari in the form of the psychic apparatus, Dikcari
in the form of the external senses, and Bhucari in the form of
objects which are full of particular forms of Spanda in the form
ofgunas, etc. throw the worldly people of unenlightened intellect
and the partially enlightened yogis who are satisfied only with
the experience of light (bindu), and sound (nadaj into the world
which is only an expansion of those particular elements.
98                                               Spanda-Karika s

                            NOTES

   1. Malini Vijaya Tantra mentions three saktis that operate
in individual souls: (1) ghoratari who help the Rudra souls who
are not attached to objects of sense, and pu^h down and down
those souls that are attached to objects of sense. They are known
as apara (non-supreme), (2) ghora those who bring about attach-
ment to fruits of karma and are thus an obstacle in the path of
liberation. They are known as parapara, (3) Aghora- who lead to
the state of Siva. They are known as para (supreme).
   2. Internally she brings about the sense of abheda or non-
difference; externally, she brings about the sense otbhedaox
difference.
   3. Vamesvari. There are two explanations of the word
 VameSvari. The word vama means (1) left, reverse, contrary and
(2) beautiful. According to the first meaning, she is called
 Vamesvari, because she has to do with the contrary course of
sanxsara which is full of bheda or difference. According to the
 second meaning, she is called VameSvari, because she manifests
 the world which is beautiful expression of Siva.
    In Spandasandoha, Ksemaraja gives the following explanation
 of VameSvari:

   TOW         ^ srnmUT s n w r f t r    qqKcUHHKl: ^TRT: wm:
   ott    fsztt ^ n f k f t i
   Khecari, Dikcari, etc. are Vama Saktis pertaining to the world,
because they project the world full of difference and identity in
differences, declare it as full of difference, and in the case of
yogis bring about this world full of both difference and identity
to a state of pure identity. The presiding deity of these Vama
Saktis is called VameSvari.

                         EXPOSITION

   The particular forms of Spanda attract those people who are
not awakened to their divine source. There are various Saktis
(powers) who preside as divinities over the particular forms of
Spanda. They push down those who deny any divine origin of
life and obstinately cling to sensuous pleasure, while they help
Section 1                                                              99

those in their spiritual journey in whom a higher sense of values
has dawned.
  The Saktis push them down to mundane existence, because
they always think of their Self as some thing material and not as
pure Consciousness. So material existence is their proper
place.

                   Introduction to the 21 st verse

                                 TEXT

                                 TO tJTO

                          TRANSLATION

                           Since, it is thus

                       Text of the 21 st verse

            WT: STTOgarB:                              I
            STTOt* f W ^ T ^ q f ^ ^ T T f T O ^ f c T ll     H

  Atah satatam udyuktah spanda-tattva-viviktaye/
  Jagradeva nijam bhavam acirenadhigacchati// 21

                          TRANSLATION

   Therefore, one should be always on the alert for the discern-
ment of the Spanda principle. Such a person attains his essential
state (as spanda) even in the waking condition in short time.

                          COMMENTARY
                                 TEXT

  ^TO^TOFT^ror FFTOtTOT f^RTO-f^nmTOT TOTOSTTO:
                                         « o




   ' W W     Tfift q- Tit fTOPTrPT ^        T (*To *fto




TOT ^faTTcHT 3fRTT:                    TO             I N 4 ) froftfTOTOT—
100                                               Spanda-Karika s

                       TRANSLATION
  He, who is always on the alert for the discernment of the
Spanda principle which has been already described and which
will be described further, attains, in short time, his essential
nature which is the same as Satfikara even in the state of wak-
ing,1 if, as has been said in the Gita, "Those who merging their
mind in me, always united with me, wait upon me" (Bh. Gita,
XII, 2), he is always intent on the close observation of the inner
(divine) nature. 2
  Thus his inner nature, which is Samkara, itself emerges
before him by which the awakened one, by the attainment of
ever-present absorption in it, becomes fully enlightened (supra-
buddha), and becomes liberated while living.

                            NOTES

   1. Not only in the state of meditation but also when he is
actively engaged in the hum-drum routine of life in the waking
condition.
  2. This means the constant awareness of the divine.

                           EXPOSITION

   The mind of those who have constant awareness of the Divine
is transformed by the mysterious alchemic force present within
and thus they acquire Integral Divine Consciousness. Utpala-
bhatta adds that the discernment referred to should be practised
in the following way:

  4<
  I am only pure Consciousness: this world is only a glorious
manifestation of myself".

                Introduction to the 22nd Verse

                              TEXT


fdHdl<J m ^ ^ n g                                   cTT IJcTT: 5RTO-
Section 1                                                                101

                         TRANSLATION

  As the Spanda treasure opens up before the awakened one in
those particular states in which all the states of mind other than
the awareness of Spanda have ceased—Spanda which has appeared
with ease on account of the firm grip of it by one intent on its
discernment, the author teaches that these particular states
should, first of all, be the sphere of effort on the part of the
partially awakened yogis.

                     Text of the 22nd verse


            srrar«*T w r e         ^ F ? : a f a f t s a : II       n
  Atikruddhah prahrsto va kiip karomi iti va mrsan/
  Dhavan va yatpadam gacchettatra spandah pratisthitah//22
                       TRANSLATION

  In that state is the Spanda-principle firmly established to
which a person is reduced when he is greatly exasperated or
overjoyed, or is in impasse reflecting what to do, or is running
for life.

                         COMMENTARY

                              TEXT




                ^           dkMW i TOTfj? HH H *d       < [ ^i) M md-
liqiflH W WMRMTI JNH (^U|d a\ sr^^^dir^M^T^^MftddidHl^dH-
^ d ^ r ^ d ^ l s f d ^ : , fa <M ifadM w D d ^ ^ H l3d     cTcST^-
                                                                ST^art   cfT,


d^d4lddlfad^d     HTOt ^rTcTO^Tf^ft^:            4>04lfd q^lP-d^cM-

<M4-dd1$ddPdy«<l ^T, HTidKU||^ddW(Hld1 OTTO SRkftT^ST^sr
102                                               Spanda-Karikas




      c                                                  O   C\

facsfk i;
5T9TTOI R^^TOSmfRT^TO cfT
•MnMll^faHIIMdl tftfTOT TOTO I WtTO «ftfTOTTOT#
                                I
   ^ f e frferfTOT f^TTTOrTO^rftrGTO'II (fao t o <\o\<\)

              ^TR^T ^RTTORT            II (fao t o

   fg^r           ^TTOT           n (fao t o
ffk n ^ n

                        TRANSLATION

   In all the ways of approach to the Divine, the yogis are estab-
lished in one-pointed concentration after having allayed all the
other mental activities. But in these states of vehement anger
etc. all the other activities of the mind cease by themselves with-
out any effort on the part of the yogis, and (in such crucial
moments) if the yogis who are always on the alert (for grasp-
ing the Spanda principle) instantly become introverted, they
attain their desired object (viz., Spanda principle) instantane-
ously. The purport is that those who are not yogis remain only
stupefied (in these states).
  Atikruddhah, or the greatly exasperated suggests the group
of energies becoming introverted under the influence of the
goddess 'wishing to destroy' appearing at once after seeing an
enemy who has inflicted a terrible wound only a short while
before or hearing various heart-rending words of the enemy.
Prahr$ta (overjoyed) betokens, after the sight of the beloved
with moon-like face longed for since long, the entire group of
the senses stimulated and running after her, under the influence
of the 'goddess of intense longing' emerging at that very
Section 1                                                     103

moment. Kiqi karomi—'what am 1 to do' implies a person, en-
compassed all round by a force of strong desparadoes intent
on murder, reflecting-'in which direction may I turn', 'what am
I to do'?, thrust in a state of uncertainty, with his mental acti-
vities suspended on account of rising uncertainty because of
all hopes of help being shattered. Dhavan 'Running for life'
denotes one who is attacked by a furious elephant in rut and
runs without any regard for his body, and is engaged in a
very hasty flight under the influence of 'the goddess of exer-
tion' in full activity, with all other mental activities withdrawn
within himself. In this way in all other similar conditions such
as great fear generated by the sight of a lion or python, when
the yogi being always on the alert for discerning the Spanda
 principle, is reduced to any such state in which his other
 mental activities come to a dead stop, then in that state in
 which all other mental activities cease, Spanda is established,
 that is the Spand principle is turned towards him.
   Therefore, considering carefully the cessation of all other
mental activities, instantly allaying the states of anger, uncer-
tainty within him, by the device of the tortoise contracting
all its limbs within (On the occasion of fear) or by expanding
his state of joy, running etc. he should contemplate on the
Spanda energy which has manifested itself before him. As
has been said in Vijnanabhairava:

    "If one succeeds in immobilizing his mind (in making it one-
 pointed) when he is under the sway of desire, anger, greed,
 infatuation, arrogance and envy, then the Reality underlying
 these states alone subsists" (Verse 101). "On the occasion of a
 great delight being obtained, or on the occasion of delight
 arising from seeing a friend or relative after a long time, one
 should meditate on the delight itself and become absorbed in
 it, then his mind will become identified with it." (verse 71).
    "At the commencement and end of sneeze, in terror, in sorrow,
 in the condition of a deep sigh or on the occasion of flight
 from (the attack of) an elephant, during (keen) curiosity, at
 the commencement or end of hunger, the state of brahman
 approaches near" (Verse 118).
104                                               Spanda-Karika s

                          EXPOSITION

   In tense emotional experience, whether of anger, joy, fear or
acute mental impasse, all the extroverted mental activities come
to a dead stop. We are unable to grasp the inner Reality because
of the whirligig of imagination and thought. It is only when this
whirligig stops, when the mind is stilled that we are in a fit
condition to have an experience of Reality or the Spanda prin-
ciple, if we are properly oriented towards it. Yogis9 mystics
practise meditation in order to put a stop to all restless mental
activities, but intense emotional experiences, of themselves,
bring the squirrel-like activities of the mind to a dead halt.
That is the psychological moment for catching the vibration of
the inner Reality, the Divine Spanda, if one is properly intro-
verted to be blessed with its vision. This opportunity is not
open to all; it is open only to those who are eagerly waiting
for its reception. That is why Ksemaraja gives the following:
warning : ^ 1 3 q t ^ T g




"In all these intense emotional states of vehement anger, etc.
all other mental activities cease of themselves. If the yogis
who are always on the alert for the discernment of the Spanda
principle instantly become introverted at that psychological
moment, they will achieve their desired object instantane-
ously; the non-jwgfr even in these states will remain stupefied
and bewildered."
   Ramakantha in his vivrti makes the position clear by the
folowing significant remark:


  5 3RWTOT: I HT f? arcTCSTT gOTftTONr I (p. 74)
   "These emotional states serve, to the awakened one, as a
means for realizing the abiding Spanda if they throw him into
a reflective recollection of his essential I-consciousness, not if
they involve him in their own experience. The experience of
these states is only one of pleasure or pain."
Section 1                                                          105

         Introduction to the 23rd, 24th and 25th Verses

                                  TEXT

                              5TTO             TfnrftvET TOT
                                                           o
                                                             TOfaTTO^-
                                                                  «



Tferfk

                            TRANSLATION

   The author now teaches that one, who is always on the alert
first of all, closely observes the Spanda energy in all these states
by the technique already described, and afterwards by con-
stant awareness of that in all the states obtains liberation in
life which, in other words, is the realization of its permanent
presence(lit., impenetration into its firmness).

                             Verses 23, 24, 25




              TOT cTfiFR^T^Tcrftft^ s F f t r o f ^ r m ^ v t i


  Yam avastharp samalambya yadayam mama vaksyati/
  Tadavasyaip karisye'ham iti samkalpya tisthati// 23
  Tam asrityordhvamargena candrasuryavubhavapi/
  Sausumne' dhvanyastamito hitva brahmandagocaram// 24
  Tada tasmin mahavyomni prallnasasibhaskare/
  Sausupta-padavan mudhah prabuddhah syadanavrtah// 25

                            TRANSLATION

  Taking firm hold of that (i.e. spanda) the awakened Yogi
remains firm with the resolution "I will surely carry out whatever
   <1       JSO 5 0 3{|<L^IFCFD <TT3: I
106                                                                Spanda-Karika s
it will tell me". Resting on the experience of that Spanda, both
prana (siirya) and apana (candra) get merged in the susumna and
by the upward path of Su$umna they rise up to the great ether
of universal consciousness by abandoning the sphere of the
body together with the Brahmarandhra and are completely dis-
solved in it. There the unenlightened      by considering that state
a kind of deep sleep remains stupefied, while the one who is not
covered with the darkness of infatuation is established in that
ether of universal consciousness and abides as fully enlightened.
23, 24, 25.

                                 COMMENTARY

                                         TEXT

               wl                                            "S



sra^f                     fiwvifawifd                     df^wsidi             demm

d^Mdi                                                                Pd^frt

mfa?* -drrf^T mw.               snm^t^Rfq                M H ^ I ym^d
               f^cd l-d ^ fdtfIfaW d *     I fa ftacl
^oinfqT ?4J<MI rTCT                Hgn 5       i P-ci ScT t ^ SHP^m v f b n ^ c T ^ ^
jlfiWIHiO 3P5T, rTffH-H^lc^fH f ^ l M ^ W ^ THTT^m
u: M ^ w i w ^NmferxcTTT                       cm^flf^drdid
                     T,           ^T ^ d H ^ M H f a c i , ^ T ^   W-H^^cTcRT

 CN       SN                                                          CN   ^   O




       'j-flPM:' I



         PTRf T

      <J HfTo *To Jo       TPS: I
      ^ ITO Jo ^TT^n^^frr TO': I
Section 1                                                                107



HHURfWdWIcf fTUWI^IH^tdHdMftqri:                          TO        TOcft-
d ^ H d d iftpMI ^ f a d ^ M , — I c U l f o d   TOfa:,   f*TTO 113*11


s m t farcir?*: it

                              TRANSLATION

    <Ayam' ('this') means 'my essential Self which is of the nature
of Saipkara'. Whatever the previously experienced nature, viz.,
consciousness-bliss i.e. my essential Self will tell me, i.e. will
admonish, that will I surely carry out. i.e. leaving extroverted
attitude I will be devoted to it. Sarpkalpya means 'having resolved
thus'. Yant samalambya means 'holding on to that spanda state
which was previously experienced as consciousness bliss in the
 state of vehement anger, etc.' Samalambya also implies 'having
 decided that it is a goal worth achieving'- Titfhati (lit., stands
 remains) implies that Maying to rest all thought-constructs, he
 resorts to a state of the absence of thought-constructs («avikal-
paw) firmly'. The surya and candra i.e. prana and apana meeting
 in the stage of hrdaya (centre of the body) and being merged
 together in the channel of Susumna which is otherwise called
 BrahmanatfU journeying by the upper i.e. the udana route, get
 dissolved in the great ether of consciousness, abandoning the
sphere of the body presided over by Brahma who specially
presides over Brahmarandhra. They leave the entire range of the
body right up to the gate high up. Thus they get perfectly
dissolved in the great ether of consciousness which transcends the
entire range of the body and in which the entire objective reality
is completely dissolved. The yogi who has even attained to the
 stage of the great ether of consciousness, if he is slack in his
efforts, being deluded by the particular emanations of Spanda such
as gunas, etc. in the form of Khecari and other iaktis, experiences
 it like deep sleep, and thus remains stupefied, because his essen-
tial nature is not fully expressed. Therefore, he is called muiha
or the deluded one. The word saufupta (deep sleep) implies
dream also, so this yogi experiences only the state of void, etc. as
one does in dream or deep sleep.
108                                              Spanda-Karika s

  As has been said by §ri Bhatta Kallata (in his Vrtti)
   "Resorting to which state of Spanda" and, "That unawaken-
ed yogi who has not fully realized his essential nature, being
deluded by dream etc. is held back (from the state of the great
ether of consciousness)".
   He, however, who by the intensity of effort and the force
of exertion, does not become slack even for a moment, is called
prabuddha i.e. suprabuddha- fully enlightened, and as he is not
overcome by the darkness of delusion, he abides as identical
with the ether of consciousness.
   Therefore, the revered teacher has enjoined that the yogi
should always make strenuous endeavour. May there be good
for all.
   Thus ends the first section of the commentary, Spandanirnaya,
dealing with Spanda which is one's essential nature written by
Acarya Ksemarajanaka, devotee of the great Lord.

                        EXPOSITION
   When the yogi catches hold of the Spanda principle, his prana
and apana get merged in Susumna, they mount up by the path
of susumna even beyond Brahmarandhra and get dissolved in the
great ether of consciousness. At such an occasion, the yogi who
is not fully awakened and is not on the alert is simply stupefied,
while the yogi who is fully awakened is not covered with infatua-
tion by that wonderful experience.


                          II SECTION

           SUMMARY OF THE SECOND SECTION:

                             TEXT

      TO
       »
                    ^FTOTTcTO M
                              «
                                ^cM«MM^i HTfTOTH fTO^TOTOTfsr-
 TOTfaro    FTTOT^ yfHMhU TOT STTO d e ^ M a m m ^ H      gro^T
 SH^fTOT TOfk TOT i<IHt        TON"      kWJTOT)?HUH ifijTOrfVfTO


 'TOT^T' irmfror 'ftMu^icKifiHY ^ F ^ T VHI^M^H            i
 TO                 %STT I TO ST5 ^TOTfTO^TTOlieflcM^TOT4TO3"
Section 1                                                       109




   'TO P ^ d R ^ TO ^Hl^d McPT I'
ffir, to STS mTOTOifro^, to*TT to tjsffcro to%to M^I^IHM TOW
           TOT^^^toPT^Pto^^M^stc          Pd^mjPd

                         TRANSLATION

   Thus, in the first section, the author has first described with
significant hint the Spanda principle which is one's own essential
Self which is conformable to reasoning, and which can be re-
cognized by nimilana samadhi and as he has indicated before
how complete enlightenment can come by being constantly united
with that essential Self, so now he is going to describe the
universality of the same spanda principle recognizable by
unmilana-samadhi and ascertainable by reasoning. In the
second section       consisting of seven verses,          beginning
with 'having recourse to it' and ending with 'bringing about
identity with Siva\ and entitled 'the rise of innate knowledge'
which reveals identity with consciousness everywhere.
   The universe is twofold—pure and impure. 1 The first two
verses of this section tell us that the pure ones emanate from
that Spanda principle, are identical with it and finally get merged
in it. The next two verses say that the impure ones are also of
the same stuff. Another verse says that one who is firmly esta-
blished in the experience of that principle is liberated in life. The
next two verses say that by the realization of this principle alone
the practisers of yoga achieve their desired object. This is the
 summary of this section.

                               NOTES

  1. The Suddha universe consists of 1. Mantra.. 2. Mantresvara,
3. Mantra-Mahesvara, 4. Siva, and 5. Sakti. The asuddha
universe consists of Maya down to Prthvi tattva.
110                                                 Spanda-Karika s

              Introduction to the b/ and 2nd verse
   Now the subject is being explained. In 1,2, it has be^n said,
"in whom this universe rests and from whom it has come forth."
The pure aspect of the universe consisting of Mantra and others
arises from that principle only, is manifest by its force, and is
merged in that only. The author describes this fact by means of
an example which has already been explained in the first section.

                    Text of the first two verses


           TOS^sfoFTTT*       VT^HHC ^ W T 11 ? n
            rfTO            5TT?TO<TT faT^TOT: I
                                  ftTTOfaT?: ll 3 "
        Tadakramya balam mantrah sarvajnabalaSalinah/
        Pravartante 'dhikaraya karananiva dehinam//l
        Tatraiva sampraliyante santarupa niranjanah/
        Saharadhaka-cittena tenaite Sivadharmiriah//2

                        TRANSLATION

  Resorting to that power (of Spanda-tattva), the divinities,
Mantra etc. together with the sacred formulae which serve as
their indicators, being endowed with the power of omniscience
proceed to carry out their assigned functions towards the
embodied ones just as the senses of the embodied
ones by resorting to the power of Spanda proceed to carry
out their (specific) functions. 1.
   Freed of all limitations of office after having performed their
assigned duties, (niranjanah),their denotation as particular deities
having ceased (santarupah) they get dissolved together with the
mind of their devotees in that very Spanda principle. Hence
they are of the nature of Siva. 2.

                        COMMENTARY
                              TEXT
      TO FFTOrTOTO TO-MI^M      ^WtoFW             3TOSTOT
Section 1                                                                 111

                                TOTT: flddd^d TOSTOTfcTOT^TO W I M H H I -
3J*TOmT                    ^ T T S T T O ^ — < P d <IUM Id Uglfc f T O f t -
cTO: I    TOTO^t        ?TTTOETO: TO^TOr^raTOOT^T I I TOT t f ^ T t
TRTTOTf^TO^TT d d H H W m r d ^ M ^ I V l u l       Mdd^                I TOT
fr^TOT:     frTg^difadTilfa^K^Hl: TOcrfkftnTOTTOTOVTOTOTOW
               TOTTOSPTrWT M^liadOdrMI

    ^^^rmTOT^t mcTT: H^HHIH^H l'                fao        ^lY^)
      I TOTO TO t i ^ f T O T O ^ F T f T O ^ T O T O f f o ^ ^    TOFFTOTTT-
TO:      ftTTOT     TOFEft       TO:     *TOTWt fTO^ TOt ^ TOT TOTOT-
FFTOnT 5?TO: I TO VTTOTt TOTOt ^T TO

        Mto^,   fTOTTOWT                 cdl^lVllMrdfa^dN^M^m^KVl-
TOTOT i WTTOTO totft^SPT

   H^lfrKkiid WRt ^ fcddnMI ll'

frcdHfdTd TOcT*tTOT Added Ifc i qcTTO
        ^TOv^- ^                        T (l^RI^)
s f a ^rof^iobir^idlchiqi           fsrror ?6TTO I ^           fTOTTOTwftro-
                                                I     TOT    <0*HlfdHdTlMIHI-
Ttm^ldi            TO^T:           TO                              TO^PWTO
                                                                    o

3TTOTWT 3tMm?<0dli)d ^TOfHRTTTOTrfTOT                       ITtTO^TOTTOraftr-
TOTPT STTO5%, TOW VI M d l c H 4 > V I 0 I TO TJW ^                  fd<»«Ml:
SpfT: TOTV TOhT^-fTOTOfNr I TO TO^TFf '^TTT^RjfTOT'
^ r f l i d iffaqTT { I T ^                MdTildft fafa-
U r t M d arfVrf^TO I       xTTOTSSTTOTfTO^Tf T O TO *TOFTT          fM^drd-
mTOTOTTO                 IRII


                                TRANSLATION
  Tad balant means 'that power or energy or vitality of
Spanda.' 4Akramyameans         laying hold o f . i t as support'
because of their being identical with it, Mantrah means gods
Anantabhat(arakay Vyomavyapins, etc. Sarvajnabala-salinah means
112                                               Spanda-Karika s

'having full play by the power of omniscience.' Adhikaraya
dehinam pravartante means 'proceed to carry out their assigned
functions of manifestation, withdrawal, veiling, grace, etc. in
respect of the limited souls (jivas).' The word 'omniscient'
(sarvajna) has been used in the sense of abstract noun, i.e. in
the sense of 'omniscience' (sarvajnatva) and implies also
omnipotence, etc (sarvakartrtva, etc). 'As the senses operate in
manifesting objects by obtaining the power of that Spanda in the
manner (already) described' (in 1.6). This is the example (given).
   Freed of all limitations of office, after having done their
duties, (niraiijanah).1 and their denotation as particular deities
having ceased (Santa rupa) or in the case of sacred formulae
the specific words which were used to indicate them having
come to an end, they are dissolved in the strength of that very
spanda principle.
    In Sampraliyante the affix 'sam' means samyagabhedapattya
i.e. by attaining complete identity, the affix pra means
prakar$enapunaravrtya i.e. 'intensely'     or    in other words
'without ever returning to their previous state,' liyante means
'are freed of the limitations of their office, Saha aradhaka-
cittena means 'with the knowledge of the people who were
devoted to them.' 2
   As has been said in Malinivijaya tantra :
   "After conferring grace on the aggregate of jivas (limited
experients), they are gone to the state in which there is no
longer any trouble." (M. V. I. 41).
   As Mantras, MantreSvaras, etc., emanate from that only (i. e.
the Spafida principle), have come forth from that, and are
dissolved only in that, therefore, they have the nature of Siva
i.e. they are one in essence with the generic spanda principle.
(An objection)
   Well, the senses and Mantras equally arise from that (the
Spanda principle), how is it that the senses do not have the
power of omniscience, etc.?
(Reply) :
   The Lord forms by His Mayasakti the bodies and the senses
which are full of difference. By His Sakti of Suddha Vidya, He
Section 1                                                       113

forms mantras out of wonderful expressive saktis (vacah) which
are of the nature of the ether of consciousness add thus non-
different from the Lord.
    The words used as mantras do not transgress the stage of
the experient (pramatr) even at the Mayic stage and have no
limitation in knowledge like the body, purya$taka, etc. Therefore
their omniscience is perfectly justifiable. This is in accordance
with what has been said in Isvarapratyabhijna in the following
verse :—
    "The ascertainment (adhyavasa) expressed in the form 'this
is a jar' is the power of the Highest Lord beyond name and
form. It always shines as one with ' P (Self) and never as this
 (I, 5, 20). This matter has been explained at length in the
commentary on the following verse of Isvarapratyabhijna "The
power of Maya shows itself in manifesting undiluted diversity
etc." (III. 1. 8)
    Thus this should be explained in the above manner with
reference to Anantabhattaraka, etc. who abiding in the stage of
suddha vidya bring about manifestation etc. (Another inter-
pretation of the above verses) :
    All the mantras serving as means of the acaryas (teachers)
who are occupied with initiation 3 resorting to the power of the
 Spanda principle i.e. laying hold of it as their life-giver proceed
with the mind of the devotees for performing the function of
 liberation and enjoyment, and after their bodies of articulate
 sound cease to exist, and are hence purified, they are completely
 dissolved i.e. they rest (in that Spanda principle). In this
 explanation the phrase 'with the mind of the devotees' should
 be joined with the previous stanza.
  Thus it is meant to be said that the spanda principle is the
substratum of the mantras not only in their stages of
manifestation and dissolution but also as regards their
functioning. Thus in all the ten, eighteen divisions4 of the Saiva
sastras, the Spanda principle has been declared to be the
quintessence of the mantras.
                             NOTES

  1. According to Abhinavagupta,           niranjanah     means
*na anjyante prakaflkriyante (prameyarupena) iti niranjanah' i.e.
114                                               Spanda-Karika s

those which can never be known as objects are niranjanah
The mantras are full of I-consciousness; therefore they are
always as subjects and can never be reduced to the category
of objects.
   2. Saharadhaka-cittena        : Ramakantha explains this as
 follows: 'cTFJT         HfTO^^fST-faTfTO CTTOlfa+HldMiW TO
             fa ^ I (P- 83). In that state, the mind of the devotee
is in its original state, as the purpose for which he resorted to
the mantra has already been fulfilled. It is with such a mind of
 the devotee that the mantra gets dissolved in Spanda.
   But a deeper meaning is that the limited knowledge of the
devotee is dissolved; it is now transformed into higher
consciousness.
   3. There are four kinds of initiation in the Saiva system, viz.,
(1) Samayika dlk$a in which the guru initiates the disciple into
the traditional rules of conduct which he has to observe, (2)
putraka dik$a in which the disciple is adopted as the successor
of the guru after his death, (3),Sadhaka dik$a in which the guru
initiates the disciple into the mysteries of yoga, (4) Acarya dik§a
in which the disciple is initiated for becoming a guru.
  4. There are three main schools of Saiva thought, viz, (1)
Siva tantra, (2) Rudra tantra and (3) Bhairava tantra. (1) Siva
tantra has ten divisions. They all teach bheda or duality
(difference). (2) Rudra tantra has eighteen divisions. They teach
bhedabheda, unity in diversity. (3) Bhairava tantra has sixty-
four divisions. They teach flWzerfa-non-duality or non-difference.

                          EXPOSITION

   Ksemaraja has explained the word mantrah occurring in verse
1 in two ways, viz., the deities Mantra, Mantresvara and
Mantramahesvara and also mantras as sacred formulae to be
recited by devotees. Both derive their power from the Spanda
principle in its generic sense, and both are dissolved finally in
the generic Spanda.
  Ramakantha and Utpalabhatta have taken the word mantrah
only in the sense of sacred formulae to be recited by devotees.
Section 1                                                     115

                   Introduction to verses 3 and 4

                                TEXT




                          TRANSLATION

   Thus having described that the manifestation consisting of
Mantra, Mantresvara, etc. considered as pure is of the nature of
      the author is now going to explain that the manifestation
considered as impure ^lso consisting of the form of Maya, etc.
is of the nature of Siva Himself. Thus he suggests the esoteric
view of Srimatasastra, etc.

                            Verse 3 and 4

                                TEXT

             c T c f f ^ T ^ ^ r r cnWTOSrfoqfTRT: M 3 ••

             ^HT^wrefanTTg *                   * m fro:1
             tftrN       S5T                 HfNcT: ll ^ ll

            Yasmat sarvamayo jivah sarvabhava-samudbhavat/
            Tatsamvedanarupena tadatmya-pratipattitah//3

            Tasmacchabdarthacintasu na savastha na ya sivah/
            Bhoktaiva bhogyabhavena sada sarvatra samsthitah//4.

                          TRANSLATION

  Since the limited individual Self is identical with the whole
universe, inasmuch as all entities arise from him, and because
of the knowledge of all subjects, he has the feeling of identity
with them all, hence whether in the word, object or thought,
there is no state which is not Siva. It is the experient himself
who, always and everywhere, abides in the form of the
experienced i.e. it is the Divine Himself who is the essential
116                                                            Spanda-Karika s
Experient, and it is He who abides in the form of the universe
as His field of experience.

                           COMMENTARY

                                  TEXT

  *Tcft sftcft      ftr^rfg^r^r:,         ^f        MM^^, STW
^TS^J, f^Rng f ^ ^ r r n f e ^ T r g ^iHiMwiw^m HT^TT difed *TT

^T^Ft                                H5T fac* ^ T                   ftff^Tr^^nfe^

            ftrar ^cqmigrtm gfidftid^Mtddl * ^tsfq
^ng       *                      hhc^I, srfq § f ^ r f w ^ n ^ t t f i r

3HHpd xr ct fttdUJpd tldlfoMjft ^nf^fdfdK^ MIKlPd 3WJpd
^   ^sqtfk dlfc^d fdd!<i:' f f k MUkMftldldtaKJIH               I   ^Hg^ldlH^dl-
wr^nr
 «  N



    dfHIcUTdRd Udfafa tff^nft w            >
                                                II'
       I VFTIcT sfta:                          Ud'HIdldi f l H ^ d l ^ f r ^ c d 14




      r^K      l^crt ^nrqrmfir q w r ^ P r i
   fdcMfaddl
     c    c
              ^ f ^ r R W ^ r ^ f l<©M
      ^ T JTTt^T^* sprfa ^lldj^k^df^d ll'
ffir                       uTd^d SHTcTOTT ^TcT:
g^cf          I <4dJH >»fldl^d >d<*ijfd (d^HdlSlf Adrift             fd^lPdAld
qnRcT I         -dddfedl^^ddril I                              ^cfWd'gcgOT' I
5TPT S^FT d l H ^ l ^ c ^ d c i d M+IVI^d ^ J T *d**ldd d K M ^ P d M r i :




fM^drd^        fd^M^li:     4*0 $ d I:   II *         ||
Section 1                                                      117

                        TRANSLATION
   Since the experient constitutes the whole universe like Siva,
therefore there is no state whether it is the beginning or the
middle or the end and whether it is word, or object, or ideation
i.e. thought etc. which is not Siva. The sense is that every thing
is Siva. Since it is thus, therefore the experient himself who is
of the form of consciousness that abides wholly i.e. neither less
nor more in the form of the experienced, such as the body, blue
etc. always and everywhere, i.e. in all the diverse stages of
tattva (categories), bhuvana (worlds) etc. The experienced is
nothing different from the experient.
    Since this teaching begins with jiva (experient), and ends with
 Siva, it teaches by way of suggestion that there is no essential
difference between jiva and Siva, that is to say, one should not
regard oneself as imperfect in any state like body, etc., rather he
should consider himself as of the nature of Siva who is a
compact mass of consciousness.
  As has been said in Sri Pratyabhijfia-tika1
  "Even those who perceive the body consisting of thirtysix
categories in the form of Siva and treat it with respect acquire
spiritual perfection and also those, who investing even jar, etc.
with the form of Siva perceive it in that light and honour it
(will acquire spiritual perfection). There is no difference of
opinoin on this point."
  Bhatta Sri Vamana 2 has also said,
  4
    «As all objects are known only when they rest on
Consciousness, as support, not by themselves, therefore all
things exist only as known. So one should identify himself
with Consciousness."
   How is it known that the experient is identical with the
whole ? In reply to this query, it is said that the reason is
because he is the origin or cause of the production of all
entities.3 The ablative case samudbhavat has been used in an
abstract sense i.e. in the sense of sumudbhavatvat i.e. in the
sense of 'being the cause of all productions.
   Thy sport becomes in this world the cause of the diversity
of the knower, knowing, knowledge and the knowable. Since on
118                                                Spanda-Karika s
thy play being over, that diversity disappears somewhere,3 thou
art seldom seen in that light and only by some."4 In accordance
with the view expressed in the above hymn of Sri Jnanagarbha,&
the jiva is the source of all entities, because the existence of the
world comes about only on the prevalence of consciousness.
Since the universe emanates only from the jiva, therefore, he
constitutes the whole and has all powers. This has been
conclusively discussed in my commentary on the second verse.
Another reason for the jiva being declared as identical with the
whole is given in the second half of the first verse above in the
phrase "because of the knowledge of all" i.e. the jiva is known
as identical with all, because he is identical with the knowledge
of the whole in the form of blue, pleasure, etc.
   Since by means of these two verses, the secret practices and
the teachings of wisdom brought about by reasoning which
serves to uproot the tree of all differences have been suggested,
by the first and the last verses, of I Section mahartha tattva*
the great Reality, by the verse Jagradadivibhedepi (I, 3) the
highest truth of the Trika system and by the verse tadakramya
the quintessence of all worship has been suggested, therefore,
all instructions are acknowledged to be imparted by Spanda
principle only.

                              NOTES

1. This fika was written by Utpaladeva himself. It is not
available now.
2. There have been many writers in Kashmir by this name.
It is not known to whom Ksemaraja is referring here.
3. Somewhere i.e. in thyself in the state of satphara or
withdrawal.
4. By some i.e. by those who have received thy grace.
5.    The writer of this has not yet been traced.
6. Mahartha tattva refers to the krama system.
                          EXPOSITION

   Two important points have been stressed in these two verses.
Firstly, the individual is identical with total reality. The reason
is that through knowledge (saipvedana) he knows every thing.
Section 1                                                             119

Therefore through knowledge he feels his identity with the all-
of-reality. As he becomes identified with the whole of Reality,
he becomes in the words of Ksemaraja visvasakti 'universal
power,' and thus all objects are said to arise from him.
  Secondly, as he feels his identity with all, there is no state
which is not Siva to him. Therefore, the difference between the
experient and the experienced disappears for him.

                    Introduction to the 5th verse

                                  TEXT



                              TRANSLATION

  The author now points out that it is the quintessence of the
realization of one's identity with the whole universe that
constitutes liberation (mok$a).

                     Text of the 5th Verse

                  SfT z r v           tittrl:     TO         I
            H                 frfft             * S5PT: II * ll

        Iti va yasya saipvittih kridatvenakhilani jagat/
        Sa pasyan satatam yukto jivanmukto na sanisayah//5

                         TRANSLATION

   Or he, who has this realization (viz. identity of his Self with
the whole universe), being constantly united with the Divine,
views the entire world as the play (of the Self identical with
Siva), and is liberated while alive. There is no doubt about
this.

                              COMMENTARY

                                  TEXT

                                                f d + H A H 3TOT: UHlMrW-
ST^t ScTTOfcT I                       dldcflfdfri: gTOT TOT STOfa^TOT-
120                                                  Spanda-Karika s

fsnrsFFRt ijcrfa        tftsfTO        <TCTO f r o m f ^ W N i t i T O n


     'toto^TTOt $ m f r o n r ^ T T       ifto
f f a fpTOT flddamfdMl ugufrfl s f N r o smmffsrorfq f r o r o f r r -
                                              w 5 ^rfHrcfaTO:I
% TOW:' TO &ddi|fd, ^tenfTOT             TOSTOTOt            5TRT-
cTORTWT fdMcMMd            II * II

                         TRANSLATION

   By the use of the word va (or), the author means to suggest
that the means of nimilana-samadhi described in the first
section is optional, but this realization (of identity with the
universe) is essential and difficult to acquire. Hence the
sense of the verse is as follows.
   Such realization is difficult to acquire and is attained by some
such person as has no future birth. He views the whole world
as play and by evolution (unmesa) and involution (nimesa)
manifests or withdraws it. As has been said in the Bhagavadgita,
 "Having mentally entered in me, those who are always united
 with me and wait upon me" (Bh-Gita XII.2) the great yogi
 has his consciousness always absorbed in the Universal Con-
 sciousness, and even while he is living i.e. even while he is exer-
cising the act of maintaining prana, his entire bondage is burnt
 to ashes. by the fire of spiritual knowledge and after the fall
 of the body, he abides as Siva Himself. Even while living, such
 a person is indeed liberated and can never suffer bondage.
   By the phrase 'there is no doubt,' the author suggests that by
initiation, liberation comes about by faith in the guru (the
spiritual guide), but by such knowledge and conduct, it comes
about by one's own experience.

              Introduction to the 6th and 1th verse

                               TEXT


JaTOTe?—
Section 1                                                        121

                       TRANSLATION

   This great realization is the means of the attainment of the
desired object of all the sadhakas (aspirants) and the acaryas
(teachers).

                        Verse 6th and 1th

            sroSNtestaw         anfr%<ifir i
            TOTcTOTTOWfrlft^cr: HTTOTO ^IT II ^ II


            vi   f^^T^T ^       ftra^^TTOlfo^ft       II Vd II
  Ayamevodayas tasya dhyeyasya dhyayi-cetasi/
  Tadatmata-Samapattir icchatah sadhakasya ya//6.
  Iyamevamrtapraptir ayamev atmano grahah/
  Iyam nirvana-diksa ca siva-sadbhavadayin!//7.

                      TRANSLATION
   This only is the manifestation of the object of meditation
in the meditator's mind that the aspirant with resolute will has
the realization of his identity with that (object of meditation).
   This alone is the acquisition of ambrosia leading to immorta-
lity; this alone
                   is the realization of Self: this alone is the
initiation of liberation leading to identity with Siva.
                       COMMENTARY

                             TEXT
      'FTRWT ^CWT FRO WTO' ?F?R WPRTER^ TO WNFRO^CTFTT TOW%
TOifa %TOTF2TTW m fro: 1        MrdqifcdOHdfcWIcHq STOW TOTO



   'd^l^^mTd^l^ W                WT fere: l'
    srfTOTfTO^n                                «T §
<HIH>KHJ WTO, W 5 tHWmnJm TOTcTOTTOTqf^r: § f^rotsfw-
122                                                               Spanda-Karika s


d m q q n ^ u i cTTCTTOSffTOfTOt fwWRtrf^WrFWTO: f r o f f k
                                    TOT STO*TO%TOTfe ft? «T TOT 3TpH*i<a%
TOfiT A d ^ d ^ M ^ H H r d M         I TOtrTOFTOTJrffeOTTt:

   fr ^ ^PrbHdi f M W :      ^      ll' (^o ^fto
ffir i f ^ r ^ TOiqf^T: qrorgTOTOTOTOT snfcr:,


                *                                        «\   e    c

   ' t o ^ t t 6t o W R      C <0
                                     ^TO-V r


   ' w r M<drdW Ud+Md                           ll' ( v s i W )


   '           TO            filTOf^TO              I'
       *TETO
   s f t a r o fwTOrfts^ft q r r o m r o r TOT I
     ftrw ^TTOf^T             ^FTOTT  •o
                                         TO*» I
   qWr ^ ^ r o t r o H ^ ^ i f d d i r ^ i i i



IRTR^RT ^ S F T O T O            TOTO             I TO^TOTOT TFFT TOT MJ^CL
'STTOT 5TITOT ' f f o d d ^ d                     *dd*dO*ld*d^Md*U TOTfTOFT-
TOTOt      5TR, *T 3

      ' j w t r ^ TO^r r            So


      % 3lk*flMKHl:                       qr q^T r ( ^ o i v i ^ q c ; )
                    I                     TOT                     FTOTTCTOTSTO^: F

TOT^      TOTT^T        f d £ l d M l 4 : fTOTTOR fTO ^TTOTTOff TOcfoTO: I
^ T TDMCMMFADL JTOTL: FTTTOTO: A^LDHI TTTTTFTOSTOTOT *TFTO*
f r o f q ^ n I TOtrTO

       1 TTfrot%                    TO:                  I
Section 1                                                          123

   i^f *ft TO CTTTO CTO f r o t r o r f r o t i
   s t a r TOcTOf^rm- f d ^ l ^ l g f d d f a d l ll' (<T<> efto
FFIR I              TO               M    TOFTOFAROPSRO
   f?cT: ^ I W I d W d ftlTO II



                          TRANSLATION
    It is declared here that 'one should worship Siva by becom-
 ing Siva9. That alone constitutes the manifestation of the
 object of meditation in the mind of the meditator which leads
 to the realization of identity with the object of meditation.
Dhyayinascetasi means in the mind of the meditator, Tasya
 means 'of the object of meditation' i.e. 'of the nature of Siva'
as described in 'there is no state which is not Siva? or 'of the
particular deity of mantra who is the cause of the attainment
of some object.' Ayameva udayah means 'this is its manifes-
tation,' which brings about identity of the meditator whether he
 is a sadhaka or acarya1 with that (i.e. with the object of medita-
tion) in accordance with what is described in 'in word, object
or thought, there is no state which is not Sivav (II 4) Tadatmata
samapattih means 'identity with Siva9, not the perception
of some separate form such as the five-headed deity. Icchatah
means 'not simply by determination, but rather by one who is
steeped in the will—which is not an idea—of becoming one
with Siva who is the Self of all'.
    This is what is meant to be said. "Because everything is
associated with this non-dual light (i.e. the Spanda principle),
which is the deity of the mantra contemplated that will not
appear before him whose resolute will is *l am Siva, of compact
mass of consciousness and bliss, and the whole universe is
my body', which arises from the realization of identity with the
awareness of that and which is the result of non-ideation 2 alone."
    As has been said by my great grand teacher 3 "O Lord, in this
whole world which is thy own manifest form, what is that
spot which is not a holy place to thy devotees and where the
mantras of these devotees will not bear fruit"? (U.Sto 1,4).
   This alone is his great accomplishment that he acquires the
ambrosia of the highest non-duality. The implication of the
124                                                 Spanda-Karika s
word 'eva' (alone, only) is that with any other kind of ambro-
sia, though it may provide stability to the body for some
time, the death of the aspirant is inevitable (ultimately). Thus
from this point of view, everywhere in Svacchanda tantra in
the chapter dealing with the acquisition of ambrosia from a gross
point of view, it begins with the statement, "Never by acquisi-
tion of ambrosia can there be victory over death which
is brought about by time," and in the relevant context based
on the experience of Sahaja (sahaja sandarbhena) with the mode
 of acquisition of the real ambrosia in terms of praise in the
following words:
  "Or one established in the supreme principle is not harassed
by all forms of Time."
   In the middle, it says:
   "One should regard everything as of the form of Siva and
Sakti and finally it says 'One who has always this conviction
is liberated while living. Time can never throttle him who always
contemplates on Siva. The yogi functioning freely by means of
Svacchanda yoga* is united with the status of Svacchanda5 and
acquires equality with Svacchanda. He becoming Svacchanda
moves about freely, and enjoys full Freedom" (Svacch.
(VII, 258)
   This, indeed, is the realization of Self. In the statement.
"The Self should be realized," what is meant is the recognition
of the Self as Siva who is omniscient, omnipotent and fully free,
and not the Self mentioned by the Vedantist in the line, "All
this is verily Purusa" 6 (Svet. I l l 15) The sacred text also
says, "All those votaries of Self 7 do not reach the highest stage"
(Sv. IV, 388).
   On the occasion of initiation for the purpose of uniting (the
 Self of the disciple with the universal consciousness), the imparta-
tion of this knowledge is the favour conferred on the disciple.
 The acarya (teacher) having a knowledge of this attainment
justifies his title of acarya by uniting the Self of the disciple to
 Siva. This is the initiation for liberation confirmed by one's
 personal realization which gives to putrakas etc. the knowledge
 of the highest nature of Siva. As has been said:
  "He who thus knows in reality has his certain initiation
Section 1                                                       125

which bestows liberation without the oblation with sesamum
and ghee (clarified butter)", (P.Tri, 25)
   Sacerdotal initiation is also initiation. In order that any one
may not lose faith in sacerdotal initiation, the chief great
teacher 9 has not used the word eva (alone) here (i.e. in the
description of Nirvana—dlkfa).     May there be good to all.
   Here ends the second section entitled Sahajavidyodayaspanda
of Spanda-nirnaya written by Ksemarajanaka, the devotee of the
 great Lord.

                              NOTES

   1. Vide Note No. 2 on the first two verses of this section.
   2. The author means to say that this realization does
 not come by way of ideation, but of will.
   3. This refers to Utpaladeva.
   4. Svacchanda yoga—This means union with Svatantrya, the
 Divine I-consciousness which is the quintessential nature of
 Siva.
    5. Svacchanda—the absolute Free Will of Bhairava.
    6. By purUfa in the above quotation, the Vedantist does
 not mean the 25th Puru$a tattva as Ksemaraja thinks, but
 Atma, the Divine Consciousness.
    7. According to Trika philosophy, 'atma-vyapti' or rea-
 lization of Self is not the highest ideal. It is SivavyaptU viz.,
 the realization of both the Self and the universe as Siva
 which is the highest ideal.
    8. Vide note No. 2 on the first two verses of this section.
    9. Ths refers to Vasugupta, the author of Spandakarika.

                            EXPOSITION

     The second section has been rightly entitled Sahajavidyodaya
  i.e., the rise of Sahaja vidya. Sahaja or Suddha vidya is that state
  in which in spite of the seeming difference of all that is earth,
  earthy, there is a running sense of unity, identity, of the Supreme
  I-consciousness fused with the all-of-reality. As. Vasugupta puts
  it,
 126                                                 Spanda-Karika s

"Whether it is word or thought or object there is no state
which is not Siva."
   In the first section, the emphasis is on the Self-realization or
in the technical language of this system on atmavyapti on the
realization of Self as Siva. In the second section, the emphasis
is on the realization of the universe as Siva or in the technical
language of this system on Siva-vyapti.
   From the point of view of yoga, the emphasis in the first
 section is on nimilana-samadhi, on introversive meditation, on
taking a plunge mentally in the innermost Self and realizing it as
Siva. In the second section, the emphasis is on unmilana samadhi
or extroversive meditation in which in spite of the senses being
open to the onset of external sensation, the world appears as
the materialization of the bliss of Siva. Ksemaraja rightly calls
it mahasamapatti, the coup of supreme realization.
   In the two concluding verses of the section, the author depicts,
in beautiful words, the mystic significance of the spiritual praxis
of the seeker in the light of the rise of Sahaja vidya.
   The aspirant meditates over mantra in order that the deity
embodied in the mantra may manifest himself or herself to
him. The author says that the realization on the part
of the seeker, of his identity with Siva is alone the manifestation
of the deity for which he has been spending days and nights of
vigil.
   Man has been in search of ambrosia that will make him
immortal. The author says that the realization of one's identity
with Siva is alone the real ambrosia, for it sets one free from
the whirligig of birth and death.
   The aspirant subjects himself to a tedious ceremony of initia-
tion (dik$a) for liberation (nirvana). The author says that which
gives the realization of identity with Siva is alone the real initia-
tion for liberation. Utpalabhatta quotes the following verse as
a definition of dtk$a\




  Dlk?a is that which gives realization and destroys all impuri-
Section 1                                                    127

ties. Because it imparts that realization which awakens one
from the sleep of ignorance, therefore is it called dik$a. It has
the characteristic of both giving (di) and destroying (k$a)".


                            Ill SECTION

                   Summary of the 3rd Section




            fa&mtzm*       d d W d : * * ^ i era        ^mrfNr^-

           WM^OHT W H W I d ^ ^ I         cffSRWTf^TOm SRTcft-
^*tddl»Witiltd       dlcM^flThH
^ t r o n f o g f c ^mf^simf^ i I fedfldmVdtjdMltd^flfc
                                    ujddimfrd: i           I
                                                        isnfcnmr-
^ c W f r fr^Md^ I rfcT: W41c*M sHtowhd                         I



      I         MVjMNlfduUi: I
^ild^^di i a f l d ^ & M d ^ ^ T O j f e n r i
                                       RUJr^-JJ ||

   Thus by the two sections the absorption into Spanda principle
for the manifestation of the state of the fully illuminated yogi
has been conclusively explained which to be brought about by
both introversive (nimilana) and extroversive (unmilana) medita-
tion both of which are to be interpenetrative (ubhaya-visargara-
nibhutah) i.e., the inner experience of the Divine has to be
experienced externally also and the external experience of the
Divine has to be experienced internally also.
   Now in the third section of nineteen verses of entitled
 Vibhuti Spanda, beginning with the verse Yatheccha (according
to the desire) and ending with Cakresvaro bhavet (he becomes
the lord of the group), he (the author) having said that the
128                                                Spanda-Karika s

higher and the lower supernormal powers arise by laying hold
of the Spanda principle, and having briefly delineated the nature
of bondage and liberation, concludes what has begun in the first
section.
   In this section, by the first two verses, the author mentions the
freedom in dream on the analogy of the well-known freedom in
the waking state. By the third while talking about its opposite
i.e. when he does not have freedom of experience in the waking
and dream state, he implicitly states that the yogi should main-
tain strenuous and constant endeavour. The next two verses deal
with the manifestation of the knowledge of the desired object.
By another verse, he describes the power of effecting things and
the control of hunger, etc. By yet another verse, he describes the
achievement of omniscience. By the eighth verse, he describes
the disappearance of the depression of mind. After that, he
defines the nature of unmesa or the unfoldment of spiritual
consciousness which is of the nature of spanda. Another
verse describes the necessity of rejecting those powers which are
 an obstacle in the way of the highest meditation. By another
verse, the nature of identity with the entire universe as described
in the second section has been mentioned for achieving absorp-
 tion in the divine consciousness.1 After that the means for
 achieving that absorption has been described by another verse.
 The next triad of verses describes the bondage of the limited
 individual. . Another verse says that the Spanda principle pre-
 vails both in bondage and liberation. By two verses the nature
 of bondage has again been repeated for the sake of its being
destroyed. The last one while describing the means of cutting
 asunder the bond emphasizes the sense of the first verse (i.e. 1.1)
 in conclusion. This is the summary of this section.


                              NOTES


  1. Samavesa uktah has to be read as samavese uktah i.e.
samavesa is here in the locative case. The locative case has here
to be treated as naimittiki saptami i.e. fisamavese'here means
for achieving samavesa (absorption).
Section 1                                                            129

               Introduction to the 1st and 2nd verse

                                   Text

TO TOft ©HTCTOT^ I            'gTOroi     HTO FT^TOr^TOfer:'      ff?T   I
TO 'TO:          ««       ^T^T
                          ^    ^HKUll        dcM^ll^H ftTSTT TO3CT
                                                              <9


sftfagrororTOff ^ro: i
   TO^ff    Hlfa^ldHflMHfadH^H            ^Md^dfld    TOlfTO   STOTtfTOT
f r o f r o w dnifiigmg

                            TRANSLATION

             Now begins the commentary on the book.
   In 1,17, it has been said, "The fully enlightened has always
the experience of Spanda tattvaIn          the same section, it has
been said, in I, 21, "One should always be on the alert for the
discernment of the spanda principle." By this an exhortation
has been imparted to the partially enlightened for its constant
practice in the waking state in order to attain the status of the
fully enlightened one. In I, 23, 24, 25, beginning with 'which
state etc'., the yogi has been advised to tear the veil of deep sleep
 by constant, intensive, skilful practice of the means.
   Now in order to prove the perfect enlightenment of the yogi
 by his power to rend asunder the condition of ordinary (normal)
 dream and deep sleep, the author is going to show his super-
 normal power in relation to dream.

                          Text of the verse 1 and 2

                      TOTT              f fe ftTOR I
                   SWT H*qTTOfrT           n ? u
       TOT                    srcrrsrsgRfaawcT i
       fTOT FgTOT                              II ^ II
   Yathecchabhyarthito dhata jagrato'rthan hrdi sthitan
   Somasuryodayam kftva sampadayati dehinah// 1
   Tatha svapne 'pyabhistarthan pranayasyanatikramat/
   Nityam sphutataram madhye sthito' vasyam prakasayet// 2
130                                                   Spanda-Karika s
                         TRANSLATION
  As the sustainer of this universe (i.e. Siva) when eagerly
entreated with desire accomplishes all the desires abiding in the
heart of the embodied yogi who is awake after causing the rise
of the moon and the sun. 1
  So also in dream, by appearing in the central nadi (madhye),
does He surely reveal always and more vividly his desired
objects to him who never desists from his zealous prayer. 2

                        COMMENTARY

                              TEXT

    TO UdHkHdlfd OTrTMFf^W ^TT^: I            *T*TT




a M m t w ^I^HIH     f^ w ^ m ^ i t ^ ^ ^       \         ^m^nr^Nrsitd-

im ^im^H^uU          WMWjfo                                       \ inn

    3RFRTFTT fdsIWi fdd^d ^T^T^ft^ I
           Trim *P3TT TU ^ f t M + I^lrl II (fao ^o
&
          ^ f^TT wfef mr^J &\<mN< I
   ^ r f w f ^ - WT^r H H H I d r c ^ N ^ l d II (fao ^O i ^ )
ffir                 dHHiim^^dd^rd^lUruir^rHVir^dMilH^IHiaiH

feTTOTT    JTWT^IqMEIWfr f^Tcft OTcTT
STTWUM Id^l     H                       fa                    Pddlfadl-
        y^dl+OfrT, 5TTW        Hid: f d M ^ - d ^ M W l ^ l ^ddlcM'4: I
           >s   o        >                            e
Section 1                                                      131


FTOT        ^ q W u ^ W W I IRII

                        TRANSLATION

    Dhata is one who holds everything within Himself i.e. Siva's
own being. Jagratah means 'of one who is waking' i.e. to
whom his freedom has manifested itself in the waking state.
Dehinah means of the embodied yogi or 'of the yogi who has
knowledge in the waking condition, 1 Icchabhyarthitah means
'pleased on account of his discernment of the inner nature'. He
brings about the objects abiding in the heart of the yogi e.g. by
means of jnana (vindu) and kriya (nada) 2 , the yogi produces
agitation (ksobha) of the mind in others, the scattering of
other's knowledge hither and thither, (pratibhacalanena),
immobilising another's knowledge (bodhastobha), and trans-
mission of knowledge into another (jnanasancara) etc.
    How does He do so? By causing the rise of the moon and
the sun 3 i.e. of jhanasakti, the power of knowledge, and
kriyaSakti, the power of action. All that is thought about by
 the cognitive power (jhanasakti) is actualized by the operative
 power (kriyasakti).    The great Lord entering the body of the
yogi brings about various sorts of powers, e.g., transference
through penetration etc. by the expansion of his apana and prana
 Sakti of which the quintessence is the expansion of jnana and
 kriyasakti which are brought about by laying hold of the root
 (i.e. the spanda principle) intuitive knowledge of which is
 unfolded by his compenetrative meditation (samavesa).
    According to the tradition expressed in the following verse.
    "When sleep has not yet fully appeared, i.e. when one is
 about to fall asleep, and all the external objects (though
 present) have faded out of sight, then the state (between sleep
 and waking) is one on which one should concentrate. In that
 state, the Supreme Goddess will reveal Herself."
     "If pranasakti which is gross and thick i.e., which is express-
 ed with sound; is made frail and subtle i.e., is expressed slowly
 and if a yogi meditates on such sakti in dvadasanta,4 then by
 entering mentally in between waking and dream condition, he
 gains freedom of having dream experiences i.e., the dream is
 132                                              Spanda-Karikas

entirely under his control. He will have only that dream which
he wants to experience" (V. Bh. 55). Thus in accordance with
tradition, the sustainer (Siva) appears in the region of the
Su$umna of the yogi who is always intent on praying to God
with the awareness of citi sakti which is present in both the
practice of prana (visarga) and apana (arani) which are connect-
ed with exhalation (vamana) and inhalation (grasa) and who is
enjoying the sleep in which yoga is being carried on (Yoganidra).
He abiding in the susumna region even in dream surely reveals
the objects desired such as anava, sakta, or sambhava samavesa
(absorption) or other desired objects, in the mirror of his mind
polished by the sap of compenetrative meditation. This yogi
never suffers from infatuation in dream and deep sleep. The
word dream implies deep sleep also.
   In the matter of revelation of desired objects by repetition,5
this is the reason. The Lord never neglects to confer the grace
which is the outcome of the cessation of the turbidity of Maya
and a result of his prayer which, in other words, is only the
devout practice of the inner (divine) nature.
   The great Lord who is of the nature of consciousness surely
brings about all those things for which one prays with real
inner sincerity. The word jagratah should be treated as having
double meaning and should be interpreted both in the sense of
4
 one who is in the waking state and one who is alert about the
highest principle'.

                            NOTES

   1. Pirjdasthajnanasya—One who has knowledge during the
waking condition. The word for waking condition for the
common man is jagrat, the word of the yogi for the waking
condition is pindastha, the word of the jnani for the same condi-
tion is sarvatobhadra.
   2. Vindu and nada are symbolic terms of the system.
From the point of view of anava upaya, vindu and nada
symbolize prana and apana; from the point of view of Sakta
upaya, they symbolize pramana and prameya, from the point
of view of Sambhava upaya, they symbolize jnana and kriya, and
from the point of view of anupaya, they symbolize prakaSa and
Section 1                                                   133

vimarsa. Here they symbolize jnana and kriya.
   3. Somasuryodayam krtva—Lit. by causing the rise of the
moon and the sun. Soma and Surya, the (the moon and sun)
are symbolic terms. Soma or moon symbolizes the apana sakti
which is expressed in us in the form of inhalation and surya or
sun symbolizes the prana sakti which is expressed in us in the
form of exhalation. This symbolism holds good in anavopaya.
In connexion with Saktopaya, soma or moon symbolizes jnana
sakti, (the power of knowledge) and surya or sun symbolizes
kriyasakti (the power of action). In the present context soma
and surya mean jnana-sakti and kriyasakti.
   In connexion with Sambhavopaya, soma, symbolizes Vimarsa
and surya symbolizes prakasa.
   4. This dvadasanta (distance of 12 fingers) refers to
antaradvadasanta i.e. inner dvadasanta. This has three stages,
viz. hrdaya or centre of the body, Kanfhakupa or the small
depression below the throat, and bhrumadhya or the middle of
the eye-brows.
   5. -By repetition' means Saupupt epyabhisfarthan prakasayet
i.e. *in deep sleep also He reveals the desired objects'.

                 Introduction to the 3rd verse

                            TEXT

   trf?     UMUMl 5T srarfk rTTT TRT tftpT^n^

                     TRANSLATION

  Now the author says that if a person is not thus concentrated,
then he is not fit to be a yogi.
                        Text of verse 3


       HcTcf ^ P S F * * *              H ^ II
  Anyatha tu svatantra syat srstis taddharmakatvatah/
  Satatam Laukikasyeva jagratsvapnapadadvaye//3
                       TRANSLATION
  Otherwise, the Creative power of the Divine according to its
134                                                 Spanda-Karikas

characteristics, is free in manifesting always all kinds of things
(usual and unusual) (to the yogi also) both in waking and dream
states as in the case of the common people of the world.
                        COMMENTARY

   tWtcUIWM factf TTCTWfc ETTHT 5T3TF
t f l f a ^ d ^TPT xftpRtsfq vHHKmi      * flml<U| 1 4 1 I U I I -
                              6                N'
fifiKWd t ^ m t TTcmfcw: i infNrm
    ' sr^rfw
        C
             w
             CN
                nrrfcjft i'



                        TRANSLATION

   If the yogi does not always pray to the sustainer of the
universe according to the method described, then, in the absence
of his remaining in his essential nature, the Divine Creative
Power whose nature is to manifest (an object), to determine, etc.
things of the usual and unusual kinds1 is quite free to show
always to yogi also similar things both in the waking and dream
states, as in the case of the common people of the world. The
sense is that this throws the yogi also into the pit of transmi-
gratory existence like the common people. As is said, "The
outgoing tendency of creatures is determined by the Lord's
Will."
   According to its characteristics this means that the Divine
Creative Power is quite free to manifest things as it likes both
in the waking and dream states.

                              NOTES
   Usual and unusual—In the waking state the experience of all
people is common, it is an objective experience which is
common to all. In dreams the experience of each, being subjec-
tive, is unusual i.e. is not common to all.

                         EXPOSITION
  The yogi by his prayerful attitude towards the Divine which
Section 1                                                      135

really means by being established in his divine nature sees both
in the waking and dream states what he wills to see. This is
not possible for the common people. The experiences of both
these states are not under their control. But if the yogi becomes
unmindful and trips, he becomes subject to the same conditions
both in the waking and dream states as the common people.
              Introduction to the 4th and 5th verse

                              TEXT

       f^FTOfa Mfn4HH!M (4       flfTTST         tM^ci T^H M    14

ftsrfir—
                        TRANSLATION

  Thus having established the means for cleaving asunder the
conditions of dream and deep sleep in order to attain the state
of the fully enlightened one, the author now elucidates with
example and reason the means of absorption in the Spanda
principle for the fully enlightened one and exhorts that the
knowledge of the object desired to be known is also possible in
this way.

                    Text of the Verse 4 and 5


       W-       rcf^t w f a                     II    IK

              aRRTJFWT *      faTTcSTW^    M * II
  Yatha hi artho'sphuto drstah savadhane' pi cetasi/
  Bhuyah sphutataro bhati svabalodyogabhavitah//4
  Tatha yatparamarthena yena yatra yatha sthitam/
  Tattatha balam akramya na cirat sampravartate//5
                         TRANSLATION
  Indeed just as a thing which, in spite of all the attentiveness
of the mind, is perceived indistinctly at first, appears more
136                                                             Spanda-Karika s

distinctly, later, when observed with the strenuous exercise of
one's power.
   So when the yogi resorts to the power (of Spandc), then
whatever thing (yat) actually (Jparmarthena) exists in whichever
form (yena), in whichever place or time (yatra) in whichever
state (yatha) that thing (tat) becomes at once (na cirat) manifest
in that very way (tatha).

                             COMMENTARY

                                       TEXT

              fasrerssro \ HFrsrftsfa %crf?r f r ^ n f c d w n P M i q k * ^
         MlftsEU^fdOtH^IIrHdI
                         ^TfrT, cT^T *Tc<rH^drdlcH+         ^dld^Mddk+Hl
          f                     TOfo-Vl^ikHfd                        cT^fa-

d<cdd             srftRetr^T^ i       ^ I ^ M K I H ^ vfNcT^ifom^^fir
f d l c H ^ d f d H H I frSTT, 3TTO                            Pf^dHI
                               HT^PT       iftPldl q f w M l f t d '   fauidlfe   ^


IIV.LL

                              TRANSLATION
   The word /?/ is used in the sense of 'indeed, verily'. Indeed
just as, in spite of the attentiveness of mind, on account of the
drawback of distance, etc. a thing appears indistinctly at first,
but later when observed again minutely with the full application
of one's visual power not only appears clearly but even more
clearly, even so whatever power of spanda principle (yat),
exists (sthitam) in its highest form in the nature of a mass
of consciousness-bliss        (yena-anandaghanatatmana parama-
rthena), in one's own essential nature which is identical
with Siva (yatra), in a nondifferent way (yatha) that (tat)
appears instantly (na cirat) more distinctly in that very way
(tatheti), when observed with the strenuous exercise of one's
power i.e. with the strenuous practice of identity with that inner
nature. Tat i.e. the word 'that' is used in the nominative case.
Section 1                                                      137

How? By the votary merging his so-called stage of the experient
in the form of the psycho-somatic organism in his inner essential
Self.
(Another interpretation of the 5th verse)
   To the yogi who resorts to the power of spanda and who
stimulates his so-called state of the experient consisting of the
body, buddhi, etc. over and over again to the pitch of the highest,
essential experient, whatever (yat) he desires to know for ins-
tance, treasure wherever {yatra) i.e. in whichever region, in
whichever state (yena) e.g. in the state of actual gold, in which-
ever form (yatha), that at once appears.

                   Introduction to the 6th verse.

                                TEXT



                         TRANSLATION
  Now the author says that his power of action also appears
on account of that power (i.e. the power of spanda).

                        Text of the 6th verse

       f ^ f c f q CRISP** TO: TO* 5TTO^ I
       m ^ T S T f e ^ g ^ f * 5TST iftsfafgfacT: II ^ II
  Durbalo 'pi tadakramya yatah karye pravartate/
  Acchadayed bubhuksaip ca tatha yo'ti bubhuksitah//6

                          TRANSLATION
  Just as a feeble person also by resorting to that power (of
Spanda) succeeds in doing what has to be done, even so one
who is exceedingly hungry overcomes his hunger.

                          COMMENTARY
                                TEXT
    TOT ^NmpfftrmFor:                   tffcfa         ftototto^T
s n w n r o f r o s f f T O T wq^vq^cfcu       TO^,   <M*IWH(M
138                                                         Spanda-Karika s

TOTOFTOTO        VThftcTO:    I         TOT       tftsfa            ridHI^K^I
WfcMmfHf^ ^IHilfd I ^ few" qrfroTOfec?FT ipgrfsTTO: ^ftTOTT-
mUv*       TOT«nTOTTOm%5         PWHNId ll^ll

                             TRANSLATION

  Just as one, whose essential ingredients of the body have
decayed i.e. who is as emaciated as an abstemious sage, also by
resorting to the power of Spanda i.e. by absorption into
spanda and by stimulating his state of the experient of prana
succeeds in doing that which has necessarily to be done i.e. by
resorting to that power he does that which was beyond his
power to do. So even he who is excessively hungry overcomes
hunger, thirst 1 etc. by resorting to that power.
  For one who has entered the state of the mass of spiritual
consciousness, there can be no subjection to the pairs of op-
posites (like heat, cold, etc), for the pairs of opposites function
only in the stage of prana, and this in the case of the yogi.
gets merged in the stage of the spiritual consciousness.

                                   NOTES

   1 Utpala Bhatta adds                                         I   fa
                                  « «                       >            >» c
                                                    ie     the word
j f t a t f ^ 3TCTTOT         TOTOtstfl      -  M        hunger
has been used here elliptically in a generic sense implying the
six waves of existence, hunger and thirst (of prana), sorrow
and delusion (of mind), old age and death (of body)."

                        Introduction to the 1th verse

                                   TEXT

    TO

                              TRANSLATION

  Since by means of the rational method described in the above
verse, he gains a number of supernormal perceptual powers
by resorting to the power of Spanda, therefore.
Section 1                                                      139

                             VERSE 7

                               TEXT



       cT^T ^ q a r f t T O H T H r f * V ^f^sqfcT Ii Vd II
  Anenadhisthite dehe yatha sarvajnatadayah/
  Tatha svatmany adhisthanat sarvatraivam bhavisyati//7
                       TRANSLATION

  Just as all knowability, etc., in respect of the body occurs
when it is pervaded by that spanda principle, even so when the
yogi is established in his essential Self1, he will have
omniscience, etc. everywhere.

                         COMMENTARY

                               TEXT

      t4t4tH4k*MI fM^dTddlPuP^         ^           d44f*Tt-
P4dwfd'Hw VMife w i : U4*(dW44>d e dEHTf 3?lf4,H4Pd

^ P d       3Tftns5FT ^rtfkOTOTflMMUcMfrilldcT^T UHldVlPfjTd
^S^lfa CRT UddPd        ftr^   t^rftrfk *l^<d£p4d«4ddW4+de-
dlP^M) ^PdWlPd MVdM

                         TRANSLATION
   When the body is pervaded by this i.e. by the spanda prin-
ciple which is one's own essential Self, then as experiences of
things suited to that state (i.e. the bodily state), such as states
of all-knowability, all-doership (associated with the body)
manifest themselves to the embodied being, so, if the yogi
gets established in his imperishable Self, viz., the spiritual
Consciousness recognized as such by the afore-said token, if
he is steadily absorbed in that state, either by withdrawing
his sense, etc. within himself (sahkoca) as a tortoise withdraws
its limbs within itself or by the device of the expansion of all-
140                                                      Spanda-Karika s

embracing consciousness (vikasa)2, then he acquires omni-
science, and omnipotence—powers appropriate to Siva everywhere
i.e. from the category of Siva down to earth.

                                NOTES

    1. Svatmani means, as Ksemaraja puts it, in his imperishable
Self. Ramakantha explains it as                        ^f^fdPwd-fasTST
g q f c ' m d d ^ f r i.e. in his essential nature which is pure, spiritual,
consciousness distinct from the body.
   2. Sankoca and vikasa- Sankoca connotes the practice
of withdrawing the attention from the activity of the senses
and turning it towards the inner reality which is the source and
background of all activity.
   Vikasa means concentration on the inner reality even while
the sense -organs are quite open to the external objects.

                   Introduction to the %th verse

                                  TEXT



                            TRANSLATION

   The author says that he will have this experience also through
its grace (i.e. through the grace of the Spanda principle)

                                VERSE 8


         c f f ^ s f e ^ %c$?T:                    II 5 II
   Glanir vilurithika dehe tasyascajnanatah srtih/
   Tadunmesa-viluptairi cet kutah sa syad ahetuka//8
                            TRANSLATION
  Just as a plunderer carries away the valuables of the house,
even so depression saps away the vitality of the body. This
depression proceeds from ignorance. If that ignorance dis-
appears by unmesa, how can that depression last in the absence
of its cause? 8.
 Section 1                                                                     141

                              COMMENTARY

                                     TEXT

    ^      m    Hifn:        TOff^Tfrorfro:        ift ^JwftsHt          frofararr
 TT^fsrwfTON^T^T           Mlfrfac^fcqMdl          dWVd          Hl^UdlddOH-


                                     TOTCft Hlfd<dldMHl
 %dU*HldM f r f : WTO TOftcTO: I MHWld ^ ^STOT*TTfTOTt
                         3rf<T TOT TOT d t f T O t s q ^ l ^    TOT      TOT
                                   STOTOT ^ft^TO t ^           I ^    ^T
 t^dtmPM HTOT H H ^ N               M<iflp|«ft f r o f k : I TO*TO M<UlflPl»m
 *I4MWH dMdKfrH
        NO
           wtTOFT fTOSfor-
               TOcTT 3TTOT: I

               ^rf^r:               f r o i : ii (mo 30 ^        i <JY)
        fadfa^PHHifaml       *tfro: ^Hidvnmm ^ d ^              frorot     toWh-
d i r ^ l f a r o t ^Mddlc^tM ^ H ^ l ^ d HPdMlfcdH 11*11
                              TRANSLATION

    Dehe ya glanih means that disappearance of (essential) delight1
 of the person who considers his body to be the self. The plunde-
 rer(yilunthika) is that which steals away the wealth of the highest
 consciousness, and brings about poverty in the form of limita-
 tion. It i.e. the depression owes its origin and continuance to
 (spiritual) ignorance 2 i.e. non-recognition of one's essential
 nature which is a compact mass of consciousness-bliss. If that
ignorance is destroyed by unme$a, the nature of which will be
described later, then how can this depression last in the absence
 of its cause which is ignorance? That is to say it will disappear.
    In the absence of depression, the states of inevitable sufferings
 to the body, such as illness, etc. will be removed. To the extent to
which they are removed to that extent his real nature will shine
just as excessively heated gold shines when the dross is removed.
Thus constant absence of depression even while he remains in the
body is the glory of the great yog!.
142                                                Spanda-Karika s
  As has been said by the great yogini Madalasa,while teaching
her children:
  «Ye child, do not commit the folly of regarding the body as
the self,—the body which is like a decaying covering and deserves
to be rejected. This body of thine is tied to thee like a covering
on account of thy good and evil deeds, and infatuation in the
form of self-conceit (Ma. pu.25,14).
  This also is hinted in this verse that the yogi who is desirous
of limited powers when his body is permeated with the elixir of
compenetrative meditation, is free from diseases like wrinkles,
grey hair etc.

                                NOTES

   1. Glani or depression in this context means the disappear-
ance of the essential delight (tattvikahar$asya k$ayah). It is, as
Ramakantha puts it, sahajananda-hanirupa (p. 114) the loss of
innate bliss. Every body who considers his psychosomatic organ-
ism as his Self suffers from this loss. It is only when the
empirical self is tianscended and one is united to the met-
empirical Self that he can have real happiness.
   2. Ignorance here means, as Ksemaraja puts it, cidanandagha-
nasva-svarupa-apratyabhijnana i.e. non-recognition of one's essen-
tial nature which is a compact mass of consciousness-bliss. It
does not mean 'want of education'.
                   Introduction to the 9th verse
                                TEXT

      3TO ghWrilq: H   fafd^:   fewlUH^K^cHIWMWIHM—
                         TRANSLATION

   In reply to the query "What is the nature of this unmesa and
 by what means is it available?" the author says:
                       Text of the 9th verse

         qvfEPcrm^T^tr m                       i
         s^t*:    5    fafTU:     cTgqsrcftcT II & II
Section 1                                                    143

  Ekacintaprasaktasya yatah syadaparodayah/
  Unmesah sa tu vijneyah svayam tam upalaksayet// 9

                       TRANSLATION
  That should be known as unme$a whence the rise of another
thought takes place in the mind of a man who is already enga-
ged in one thought, one should experience it introspectively
for oneself. 9

                      COMMENTARY

                            TEXT

               fa^T fa^ STPTRR ^cT I
   cRT cf^TS^nTT^T P r n K ^ N - l l II (fao t o
ffa         t r ^ q t ^if^xl^H^HrdVmrH^drd^KirrH^mi fan HI 1



                                rrz ^ t r T T ^ m : FTTrT H
Hc+lO^+cdlWl^Nl                                  iflPlHI 5TTH TO:
rTrT^T fdnfaHT       ir^^l^MMHNUI^HIfrdAdttc^I-
                 I      x|Hc4>KkHHI STr^ffiTHhTTcT I ^
                                                   «         >

             ^rtsr:' ^Tr^ nen

                       TRANSLATION
   When the mind of the aspirant that is to quit one object is
firmly restrained (nirudd/ta) and does not move towards any
other object, it comes to rest in a middle position between the
two and through it (i.e. the middle position) is unfolded the
realization of pure consciousness which transcends all
contemplation." (V.Bh.62)
   In accordance with this view, there is the rise of 'another'
(aparodayah)1 i.e. there is the manifestation of another superb,
transcendental awareness which is full of the bliss of conscious-
ness (ciccamatkaratmanya eva lokottara ullasah syat).
   (In whom does it arise?) it arises in the yogi who is deeply
engrossed i.e. deeply concentrated in one thought (ekasyaip
144                                                  Spanda-Karika s

cintaya/fi prasaktasya ekagribhutasya) (What kind of thought?).
Thought of a particular object or matter in which all tht fluctua-
tions of the mind are stilled (kasyancid alambana-Visesa-nibhrta-
nkaratmikayarri cintayam).
    (From where does that transcendental awareness arise?). It
arises from the Spanda-principle in which the difference of knowl-
edge and its object has disappeared, (agnisomavibhedatmanah)2
in which the entire multitude of thought-constructs has been
suddenly swallowed up (jhatiti grastasamastacintasantateh) on
account of the cessation of the object of thought which is due to
the swell of deeper consciousness radiating from excessive con-
centration on that thought.
    Since it is an efflorescence of that bliss of consciousness, it is
 known as unmesa. This has to be realized, this has to be sought,
 this can be known thus by the yogi. Svayam tamupalak$ayet—
 This is the meaning of this sentence—Since unmesa cannot be
grasped objectively as 'this', one has to observe it within oneself
 by approaching it in the form of I-consciousness with an aware-
 ness completely free of all artificial effort. It has to be recognized
 in the form of extraordinary bliss.
     Others interpret this verse in this way: In the mind of a person
 who is deeply engrossed in thinking of one object, that from
 which another thought arises and which pervades both the
  thoughts is unmesa

                                NOTES

   1. Aparodayah may mean the rise of another awareness
or the rise of another thought. These two meanings have led to two
interpretations of the verse. Ksemaraja has taken in the former
sense: others have taken it in the latter sense.
   2. Agni symbolizes pramata or pramana — knower or know-
ledge. Here it symbolizes knowledge pramana; soma symbo-
lizes prameya or object.
   3. Vijneyah—has to be interpreted in two ways, viz. arhartha,
and Sakyartha. In the first case it means it deserves to be known
or recognized, it should be known or recognized. In the latter
case, it means, it can be known or recognized. Ksemaraja has
interpreted it in both the senses.
Section 1                                                                   145

                            EXPOSITION
   This is a very important yoga of this system. There are three
important points in this verse which have to be borne in mind.
Firstly, aparodayah may mean the rise of another awareness or
the rise of another thought. Ksemaraja has taken it in the first
sense. In this sense, it means parapramatrbhava, or the awareness
of the met-empirical, the metaphysical Self. Ksemaraja means to
say that when the mind is deeply engrossed in one thought, it is
completely stilled, it is restricted from indulging in another
thought. It is at such a moment that the met-empirical Self reveals
itself. Mind is the slayer of the Real. When the slayer is slain,
then the Real reveals itself.
   Secondly, one has to be on one's guard in grasping the Real. If
he wants to know it as an object, he will fail miserably, for it is
the Eternal Subject which can never be reduced to an object.
That is why the text says svayarp tarnupalaksayet. Ksemaraja
rightly interprets it as idanta-visayatvabhavad akrtakaprayatnat-
mnavadhanenahantayaivopetyatmani laksayet. Since the meta-
physical Self cannot be objectified, there has to be an effortless
awareness of it as I-consciousness shorn of all its external
trappings. Similarly, Ramakantha says:
   < T T O c f t             fafarfi:     <TWc*TT
srfroTO i T ff[ zw srssiftro          ^^T^T^erfacT WPT' i
   "This experience has to be regarded subjectively as 'It is I, the
Highest Self, the fount and source of every thing, distinct from
everything else. Its nature cannot be grasped objectively as 'this',
like sound etc."
   Thirdly, a very important point has been stressed by Rama-
kantha in this connexion. He deserves to be quoted in full:
   "qTcTO        — q W f^cTFTT                                 m fa^TO fTOTT-
^ R ^ p ^ i HkcKi^fa' ^ r o t f        ^ f ^ ^ r s ^ R ^ q c z r f c f ^ T toto-
                                Ffa,        SFA ^T^T^TTO 3TOSTTTO             ^
srfTOcFR j ^ m f a R r o f r o n ? ^ ^ ^ r ^ s f t *ftrc^fa,TOTOJTCTR
defter
 e
       f ^ r i CN TO % w r ^ ^TOTOT        ts
                                                 fTOTT        *ftsro?TO,
                                                                  o



       TO^R^T^TTcTOt^T f c ^ : I
146                                                               Spanda-Karika s

   "Some think that the first thought is the cause of the rise of
the next, there is nothing intervening between the twc which
apart from the two thoughts may be the cause of the second
thought. (Ramakantha has the Buddhists in mind.)
   In reply, it is said that there can be no relation of cause and
effect between the first and the second without a third to relate the
two as cause and effect. That which relates the previous and the
latter as cause and effect, that which is the undeniable relater of
the two experiences, that is the pure consciousness that pervades
both the thoughts, the fount and origin of every thing, that is
the Self. That Self has been called unmesa.

                        Introduction to the 10th verse

                                        TEXT

      i<\H\   fad   P M d H M ^ f l l ^ l I fd Tm CTT^ cTT^   faf^^tqqfoft^FTT^t-
fcng M<*flPldl ^cdfrd Hrdcufaemfemfd -

                                 TRANSLATION
  Now the author exhorts that a great yogi should regard those
various supernormal powers as rejectable which arise from the
practice of unmesa and which even inferior yogis can acquire
with effort.

                               Text of the 10 th verse


          SR^sf^jte                             tffpf: II ^o II
   Ato vindur ato nado rupam asmad ato rasah/
   Pravartante'cirenaiva ksobhakatvena dehinah// 10

                                 TRANSLATION
  From this (unmesa) appear (supernormal) light, (supernormal)
sound, (supernormal) form, (supernormal) taste, in a short time,
to the yogi who has not yet done away with the identification of
the Self with the body, which, however, are only a disturbing
factor (in the full realization of the Spanda principle).
Section 1                                                       147

                         COMMENTARY

                             TEXT

   3KT                                                     *4>0HV




'^r ^Tim^qWr        firer:   i ' ( w o g;o ^ i ^ )
     I l ^ d q fd M d l \ ( M ^MWlPMl UIPHI               fo^HHIW
^TOT WtflcHfrWO   V
                    Mloll
                        TRANSLATION

   From it, i.e. from unmesa which is being practised appear in a
short time experience like the light of a star in the middle of
the two eye-brows which is a generic light expressive of the en-
tire objective world, sound which is unstruck (spontaneous) which
is generic sound representing all undifferentiated words, (super-
normal) form which is a glow shining even in darkness,
transcendental taste experienced on the tip of the tongue. All
these appear to the yogi whose identification of T or the Self
with gross, subtle body, etc.1 has not yet dissolved. They only
give him temporary satisfaction, but are a disturbing factor,
indeed positive obstacle in the realization of the Spanda principle.2
   As they (the ancient sages) say:
  "These are obstacles in the way of meditation and are regarded
as occult powers in vyutthana (during normal consciousness after
 meditative absorption)." (P.Su 111,37).
    This verse says that supernormal light, sound, etc. are only
 disturbing factors to the yogi who identifies the Self with the
 body even though he may be intent on the introspection of
 unmesa.
                            NOTES
   1. Et cetera refers to the causal body.
   2. These powers are a source of attraction to the yogi who
 has not risen above the level of the psychosomatic organism.
148                                                     Spanda- Karik as

But they are an obstacle in the way of spiritual progress,
for this yogi gets stuck up in these powers, and misses the real
aim of yoga, viz., realization of the essential Self or the Spanda
principle.

                  Introduction to the 11 th verse

                                 TEXT

  ^MlHdlri^lc^rn S^STO ^MHldcTf fon^ntd, d<*H>KH4fM
TOETcTt HTO

                          TRANSLATION
   Now the author says that the yogi, who sinks his psychophy-
sical self in the real nature which is unmesa, experiences the
state of the highest experient in the form of that unmesa.

                       Text of the 11 th verse

       feroita tratafaror a j r o r a f a * ^ \
       cRT fo Vg^fecta p r a ^ r o n f t c r a c t u \ \ u

  Didrksayeva sarvarthan yada vyapyavatisthate/
  Tada kim bahunoktena svayameva avabhotsyate//l I

                          TRANSLATION

  When the yogi wishing to see all objects abides in that state
pervading them all, i.e. infusing them all with the light of his
consciousness, then what is the use of saying much, he will
experience for himself (the splendour of that vision).

                          COMMENTARY
                                TEXT




           TOTsrfcT<s3?tTOTT:TOUTTOfronfcT,
Section 1                                                       149



^ ^ ^ R ^ f ^ r f c T , forST STgpTT MfdMir^H m m

                         TRANSLATION

  Just as at the time of the desire to see by means of indeterminate
perception in the case of pasyanti, the object desired to be seen
gleams internally in an identical form, even so, when the yogi
abides (avatifthate ), pervading all the objects from the earth
right up to Siva as described in Svacchhanda and other works
in the chapter dealing with the way of worlds (bhuvanadhva), that
is to say infusing every thing with I -consciousness like Sadasiva,
with the thought of I to begin with, relating everything, and
finally with thought-free awareness embracing everything with-
 in himself, then he will experience that for himself which is the
 result of the bliss of absorption into the state of the highest
(divine) Experient that swallows up all objective phenomena by
 the consciousness that blossoms out of the unification of all
objectivity. Yada avatUthate means *when he does not swerve
from the perfect accomplishment of meditation.' Svayamevava-
bhotsyate means he will experience it in his own consciousness.
 What is the use of expatiation in this matter ?

                          EXPOSITION

  When the yogi sees every object as an expression of the inner
divine Self, then the delusion of diversity disappears and he
has the bliss of unity consciousness. He finds Siva both within
and without.
                  Introduction to the 12th verse

                              TEXT


HrTcf                            MddTd d^dHMfrqflO^cdl^M^q-


                         TRANSLATION
   Having declared that the fully enlightened has the knowledge
150                                                               Spanda-Karika s

of Spanda principle always and incessantly (in I, 17), the author
says that the fully enlightened yogi who practises the means
that have been explained afterwards always has absorption in
Spanda principle. As it (Spanda) is mixed up with innumer-
able objects, the author reminds the pupil of it and by way of
conclusion describes the means for entrance into it.

                               Text of the Verse 12

                   TO3T        fas&jSn^T^ftea         ^HR*! I
          q*MI<lMfrcTO cratoita * q t a r i t II                  h

   Prabuddhah sarvada tisthej jnanenalokya gocaram/
   Ekatraropayet sarvam tato anyena na pidyate//! 2
                                  TRANSLATION

   Observing all objective phenomena by knowledge i.e. by exter-
nal perception, one should always remain awake, and should
deposit everything in one place i.e. see everything as identical
with Spanda which is our own essential Self. Thus, he is never
troubled by another.
                                COMMENTARY

                                         TEXT

  TOST *m                      MqTddifcntqmm^ TO^fcdw? TOftfaroro-
drdld^l^fco^fal:                 TOcr     I
TO i f t z i H l H ^ i r ^ M f k r o r o f t r o
    dfHI^fe^mfVdl^ ^ STcRqT ^ JTT ftl^: ( ^ I V )
f c w n f r o ^ n f r o ^ r q ^ r - ^ w U TO^rofa ?TOFT TO^rrdTOcT-frot-
Hdl^Hd^lUUdd^fed                TOftTOT,      fa   < * | d d td4-STTOSlfaT   ^Hfa
f^TOTOTO^TOTO TTOfecTO: I       T            cilfdP^d d*<Jdl
       TO^TO FTOTO: *d1»dcdM I TOtTO
     msfd+^MPH^H ^w^t   ^PTOhr    fafro      1
   ^TTTTTOMf^r^ W^TFT fd^RsId: fcTT W T II
                                        PfTo     |   )
ffir iii^H
Section 1                                                       151

                        TRANSLATION

  Sarvadd 'always' means <one should keep awake in the begin-
ning, middle, and end of awareness in all the states of waking,
dreaming and deep sleep, 'keeping awake' means 'one should
have full awareness, with divine vision which becomes manifest by
getting hold of the Spanda principle which has been unfolded/
How? By observing all phenomena, such as blue, pleasure etc.
by external perception, one should offer it to the creator,
Sahkara i.e. one's essential nature in the light of the belief
expressed in the line, therefore, whether in word, or thing or
thought, there is no state which is not Siva.' 'One should offer
or deposit everything' means 'one should regard it as identical
with that Spanda principle whether in introversive or extrovers-
ive state, one should, by the firm grip of the initial and the final
state, regard the middle state also as the congealment of the sap
of consciousness'. Thus, he is not troubled by anything separate,
because in everything, he acknowledges his own Self. As has
been said by the author of Sri Pratynbhijhd " O Lord, whence
can there be any fear to the eternally happy one, in this
world filled with his own Self, who, in thought-free state, sees
entire objective phenomena as thy own form. 2 " (Utpala sto.
XIII.16).

                           NOTES
  1. This refers to Utpaladeva who wrote Isvarapratyabhijna.
  2. Utpaladeva also wrote a number of hymns which have
been collected in a book named Utpala Stotravali.
                          EXPOSITION

  Two points have been emphasized in this verse—firstly, the
awakened one should be en rapport with the Spanda principle
which is his essential Self in all the states of waking, dream
and deep sleep and in all conditions—the initial, the middle and
the end of those states. Secondly, he should view all objective
phenomena only as a manifestation of the inward Light of Con-
sciousness and thus identical with it. Since now there is nothing
which is different from his Self, he will have no trouble on any
account.
152                                                  Spanda-Karika s

                 Introduction to the 13th verse

                              TEXT

  'cTcftS^ZR         ^fcT      era vtsm^T: MW+: ^HR qtesj:,
                                minimi qsft^r ^ ^ f f n ^ H i ^

                        TRANSLATION

   It has been said (in the previous verse), "Thus, he is never
troubled by another.*' "Since the whole universe i$ said to be
the form of Siva, who is it that gives trouble, and who is it that
is troubled? In order to remove this doubt, the author, in order
to ascertain the nature of the bonds and the bound, says:

                    Text of the 13 th Verse

       sTssTiftrag?^                  ^ftmcrra i
       q^Tfa^dfe^                    qg:          II ^    II
  Sabdarasi-samutthasya saktivargasya bhogyatam/
  Kalavilupta-vibhavo gatah san sa pasuh smrtah//13

                       TRANSLATION

  Being deprived of his glory by kaia, he (the individual)
becomes a victim of the group of Powers arising from the
multitude of words, and thus he is known as the bound one
(pasu).
                        COMMENTARY

                               TEXT

      iftsq          ^T^WR:            ^rf:, smT*

   ^jfe        ^ ^TT f^yid'Hdi^H II
ffir                  f ^ m ^ m f e ^ : h^t

5'dl^MI qrr TcfMkO ^THTTT                   HTT f ^ T ^ w t t ^ t fWT
IrTTfef^TH^q: W R f c r a   cT^T fdWIc^ |                "dlHIIdrKMI^d-
Section 1                                                                153


S I p T O f l J s t a T T ^ ^ T P W i I t W U J 1 TO TrE( *dlt>dM«-ddhe4ldM+-

fro^roro
TOTO fMfe^dPd^-dHTHfad              STSTOft F T ^ IrTOl^TOTcT
^FS      f^teiT^ I ^ ^qfgJRrnfTO^fcTOTTOP^cT^STTO STOTO:
                                   fa^rfro totot iroferoWfk
DLDWDLPTOIUUFL        TO^M    FTOSTCLFOCRFR^TO SLFTOSR
fPTOT             fefiTT                ^Jc^TT TO^T cfc^TOT^
         a
* TOOT <TSnTOgT ^ fJT^ft rrfk** « l t^rt^^^ftcTC: ^f^f^TOT-
RFFVR:      TOTOTT    TOTO:     Q^TOFTCTOLFTOT FTO^FK I TO^TO SFT-


   m m w f ^ T O ^ : ^fTOT *TTOTMt I
   JyGTvi       *TT ^ f t fTO$ft:       II (3I
   t^Tfr TOT^F^T TOT T^fif         c o
                                        I
   l^dP^Pd          ^n^T^fir ^PdpHdH II
   m w c f t ^PTcTO                 I
                 UdT^Pd       TOT      II
    ^TRTT               JD^D     FWT^RT I
    ^r^im fg^TTpT ^ T ^ f ^ d d l H 11
    ^HTPfcWll^lPd r^'-cim^iRq^Tt I
    TO cfFRTOlWT ^Id'HId ftrf^RT II
         ^ TO2TT TO ^ TTlf^ft I
    ^d^V^kH+I^K/jHJT               ^ITT TOT: 11
    ^T^ra- ^TcTT ^fTOTOT TO^cT: I




            ^Td+cdd ^Pcnai T ^ f o m - I

 SROFE I TOT
154                                                            Spanda-Karika s

      T^RTT: ^TRTpT^T ^fhxPTfST^TFg cTT: II
                                       ITT: I
                               F n f k r : TORT: II
     ^^nF^jTTcTRT n*MyiH<+HM<il: I
     TO: W f ^ d l ^ i ^ O l U l : ftr^T^nr: II (3133)
f f a \ t^f               ^TRf^Tcft d<ldd4>^Ml      dl^-dlfdiddld'i:       ftR-

    cPThRT: I    ^T                           STTO:, ?cJJI Jl^Utl KM
f^RTOTTgT^T t l ^ eMlfd<rtl-dfd'Hd ^fk I ^H^Td-^f^:
qfrf^drTlId     ^TT HIMIVlOrl:, cTOT fer^ffa^: Wlium ^ d * d 4 :
fPTcT f c ^ : I       tT ^ n n                        IcHd I
                                          rdHmfd^Md: PJpld^kd+d.c«nfe-
m: \ ^Hdcdd, WteTCTT § ^ W f f t         glfedd^        ^ddWlTKH I



sfiw, s ^ f f s f t r , <Mdifti   fofc-dnwjMwi,    sr^nfir ^ l U r d ^ d f d ^ -

f^Mdi ^dUwid w^r OTPRfq ^ f ^ q f N f k * srect ^SHT^T^T:
VlPtdd^l W
         >3
            n T : O
                        I  ^ R  T    3^k*4kMdmd  fsRTCtfwr:
                                                   <0

« $ f d d fW, «T § drdd: ftldkHl W H N ^ H I <*dl(M TcT:, rT^^TT^ f^ H tr^




                                  TRANSLATION

    That which is said to be one's real nature which is, in essence,
 Sahkara, of the nature of Light, is proclaimed in the tradi-
 tional treatises by such words as Spanda, Lalita, Isvara etc.
     In accordance with the view expressed in the follownig
 lines in Svacchanda Sastra, being embraced by His Sakti, He
  is absolutely free in carrying out five (creative) acts.
     "The Lord, who is the cause of the universe, endowed with
 His Sakti carries out the acts of m a n i f e s t a t i o n ^ / / ) , maintenance
  (sthiti), withdrawal (sarphara), concealment (tirodhana), and
  grace (anugraha).
Section 1                                                      155

   The Power of Absolute Freedom of the Lord which is eternal
and of the form of perfect I-consciousness is, in different scrip-
tures, called in various, innumberable ways, such as, Para (the
Highest), Matsyodari (fish-bellied i.e. full of creative throb),
Mahasatta (the Highest Being), Sphuratta (the glimmer of
Light), Ormi (wave, the great Manifestation), Sara (the Quin-
tessence of existence), Hrdaya (the Heart, the Creative Centre),
Bhairavi (the Sakti of Bhairava), Devi (Goddess), Sikha (the
Flame). The perfect 1-consciousness of the Lord (Aham) consist-
ing of the Highest <A' Power and the innate 'ha* Power encloses
within itself as in a bowl all the venerable letters from a
to k$a. That (aham) constitutes the sakti-Para Vak, the Highest
Sound which is ever risen, i.e. eternal but unutterable, the
great Mantra, the Life of all, which is successionless awareness
that contains within itself uninterrupted series of manifestation
and dissolution, which encloses within its embrace all the
groups of saktis consisting of the course of the six ($a4adhva),x
the outcome of innumerable words and their referents.
    The same supreme I-consciousness of the Lord manifesting
within itself this universe of diverse objects as if moving is here
 referred to as Spanda, according to the etymological derivation-
spandate iti spandah—'that which throbs (with life) is spanda
 Thus when the Lord, veiling by way of sport the real nature
of His Self adorned with the Highest Power (paraiakti) endowed
with universal energy, desires to display manifestation in
different forms, on the screen of His own Self, then His Power
of Absolute Freedom (which is the Power of His I-conscious-
ness) becomes Will which assumes the power of cognition and
action. As such that Power of Absolute Freedom becomes two
in the form of seed (vowel) and matrix (consonant) which
respectively indicate Siva and Sakti. It also appears as ninefold
according to the division of letter-groups (vargabhedena), and
fiftyfold according to the division of letters of these groups.
Appearing in the form of the goddesses Aghora, Ghora,
and Ghoratari who comprehend those letters, it brings about
the fivefold act of the Lord. As has been said in the Malinivija-
yottara. "That Sakti (in the form of I-consciousness) of the
Creator of the world who is said to be constantly co-inhering in
Him (Siva) becomes Iccha (Will power) when He wants to
156                                                  Spanda-Karika s

create. Listen, how She, though one, becomes many. 'This
object is like this (as I have willed), not otherwise'—announcing
this with perfect definiteness, she is said to be jhanaSakti (the
power of knowledge) in this world. When she is oriented to-
wards action, and decides 'let all this become like this', then
creating that thing then and there, she is said to be kriyasakti
(the power of execution). Thus, though of two forms, she
becomes innumerable, according to the conditions of the objects
to be created. Indeed, this goddess is like a thought-gem
(cintamani). Then when she assumes the aspect of mother, she
is divided in two ways, nine ways, and becomes a wearer of a
garland of fifty letters.
   With the division of bija (vowels) and yoni (consonants), she is
of two kinds. The vowels are considered to be the bija (seed). 'Ka'
and other letters are considered to be yoni (consonants; lit.
matrix). According to the division of the groups of the letters,
she is of nine kinds. According to the division of letters, separately
she shines with the rays of fifty (letters). In this context, bija
(the vowel) is called Siva, and yoni (the consonant) is called
Sakti.
   The eight groups of letters are to be known as Aghora, etc. in
succession. The same eight groups of letters have eight
goddesses, such as Mahesvari and others, from the standpoint
of the division of saktis.2
   O beautiful-faced one, the greatest lord has made her fifty-
fold as descriptive of the Rudras 3 of that number as well as the
Saktis of that number in succession (M.V. Ill, 5-13).
   Further,
       'The Ghoratari Saktis are those who, while they embrace
Rudras, the elevated souls, push down and down those souls
who are engrossed in the pleasure of sense-objects. They are
known as apara Saktis.
   The Ghora iaktis are those who cause, as before, attachment
to the fruit of actions of mixed character and who block the
path to liberation. They are known as para-para saktis.
   The Aghora are those powers of Siva who are aptly called
para by those who know the reality. They grant to the creatures
the boon of £m*-stateas before. "(M.V. Ill, 33). Thus be-
coming a victim to the groups of goddesses such as Brahmi, etc.
Section 1                                                        157

 along with Siva who are represented by the nine groups 4 of
 letters that have arisen from the mass of sound, he, though of
 the nature of Siva is regarded as bound (paiu) in the traditional
 texts.
    A question arises here. "How is it that the Experient who is
 the great Lord is reduced to this state ?" In order to remove
 this doubt, the author mentions the reason by means of an
 adjectival phrase, 'because he is deprived of his glory by kala.'
    Etymologically kala (from the root 'kalcC—to throw out)
 means 'one that throws out, that circumscribes to definite limits
 i.e. the power of Maya'. The Lord thus continues in a state in
 which His glory is veiled by His own Maya. This is the
 meaning of the phrase kalaviluptavibhavah.
    (Second Interpretation of Kalaviluptavibhavah)
    Moreover, the word Kala also means the power of limited
 activity. So by kala would mean 'by the power supported by
 limited activity'. This power implies also kala, vidya, kala, niyati
 and raga. So, the adjectival phrase kalaviluptavibhavah would
 ultimately mean one whose characteristics of perfection,
 unrestrained activity, etc. are veiled by the coverings of kala,
 vidya, kala, niyati and raga.Q
    This may be granted. The question is 'How does he become
a victim to the group of powers ?' This is the reply to this
 question.
    (Third Interpretation of Kalaviluptavibhavah)
   Because, he does not rest in his real nature even for a
 moment, being exploited by the group of powers, therefore is he
called a bound soul. He is deprived of his glory by the goddesses
Brahmi and others presiding over the groups of letters, such
as vowel-group, etc. or by the goddesses presiding over indivi-
dual letters, such as 'a' (ar) etc., as indicated in Malinlvijaya.
As such, he is tormented by gross and subtle words which
penetrate within all kinds of definite and indefinite ideas, and he
feels "I am limited. I am imperfect; I may do something; this
I take, this I reject, etc.," and he is thus led to joy or sorrow.
   Thus he, as described above, being exploited by the group of
saktis is called pasu or bound soul.
   (Fourth Interpretation of Kalaviluptavibhavah)
   Kala may be taken in the sense of a part. Being deprived of
158                                                Spanda-Karika s

his glory by a part, i.e. the innate ignorance of his real nature,
he becomes limited as it were. In fact, his real nature in the
form of Siva has not gone anywhere. In absence of that, his
manifestation itself would not be possible.
  Being deprived of his glory by words and ideas which are
narrowed down by kalas appearing in those ways, he is unable
to consider himself in his real nature. This is the gist of the
verse.

                             NOTES
   1. The Satfadhva (the course of the six) referred to consists
of three aspects on the subjective or vacaka (word) side and three
on the objective or vacya (referent) side. They are the
following :
Vacaka or Sabda.                      Vacya or Artha (Referent)
The Subjective order; the             The objective order; the
temporal order; the phone-            spatial order; the cosmogonic
matic manifestation.                  manifestation.
Para or abheda level                   Varna                   Kala
Parapara or bhedabheda
or Suk^ma (subtle) level.              Mantra                 Tattva
Apara or bheda or
sthiila (gross) level.                 Pada                 Bhuvana
   2. The presiding deities over the groups of letters are the
following :
     Group of letters :                      Presiding deities
 1. < A' varga (the group of vowels)         Yogisvari or Maha-
                                              laksmi
2. <Ka' varga (ka, kha, ga, gha, na)          Brahmi
 3. 'Ca' varga (ca, cha, ja, jha, na)         Mahesvari
4. 'Ta' varga (ta, tha, da. dha, na)           Kaumari
 5. 'Ta' varga (ta, tha, da, dha, na)          Vaisnavi
 6. 'Pa' varga (pa, pha, ba, bha, ma)          Varahi
 7. 'Ya' varga (ya, ra, la, va)                Aindri or Indrani
8. 'Sa' varga (sa, sa, sa, ha, ksa)            Camunda
   3. The fifty Rudras are the following :
    1. Amrta, 2. Amrtapuriia, 3. Amrtabha, 4. Amrtadrava,
 5. Amrtaugha, 6. Amrtormi, 7. Amrtasyandana, 8. Amrtanga,
Section 1                                                     159

9. Amrtavapu, 10. Amrtodgara, 11. Amrtasya, 12. Amrtatanu,
13. Amrtasecana, 14. Amrtamurti, 15. Amrtesa, 16. Sarvamra-
dhara. All these arise from bija or vowel. The remaining
thirtyfour arise from yoni or constant. They are the following :
  1. Jaya, 2. Vijaya, 3. Jayanta, 4. Aparajita, 5. Sujaya, 6.
Jayarudra,   7. Jayakirti,  8. Jayavaha, 9. Jayamurti, 10.
Jayotsaha,   11. Jayada,   12. Jayavardhana, 13. Bala, 14.
Atibala, 15. Balabhadra, 16. Balaprada, 17. Balavaha, 18.
Balavan, 19. Baladata, 20. Balesvara, 21. Nandana, 22.
Sarvatobhadra, 23. Bhadramurti, 24. Sivaprada, 25. Sumanah,
26. Sprhana, 27. Durga, 28. Bhadrakala, 29. Manonuga, 30.
KauSika, 31. Kala, 32. Visvesa, 33. Susiva, 34. Kopa (Total
16-|-34=50). The Rudranis are the same in number and their
names are the feminine gender of the above names, e.g. Amrta,
Amrtapurna, etc.
  4. According to the nine groups of letters, the goddesses
are as given below. The goddess of (A9 varga (i.e. vowels, is
Siva-Sakti; the goddess of *K$a9 varga is yogisvari. The other
goddesses are the same as given under Note No. 2.
   5. Such an adjective as gives the reason is known as
hetugarbha viSesana. So 'Kalavilupta-vibhavah' is to be under-
stood as Kalavilupta-Vibhavatvat (because of his glory being
deprived by kala).
   6. These are the five kancukas or coverings of Maya.
   (i) Kala reduces Sarvakartrtva or omnipotence of Siva to
kihcitkartrtva or limited efficacy in the case of the pasu or the
empirical individual.
   (ii) Vidya reduces the sarvajfiatva or omniscience of Siva to
limited knowledge.
  (iii) Raga reduces the purnatva       or fulness of Siva      to
desire for particular things.
  (iv) Kala reduces the nityatva or eternity of Siva to limitation
in respect of time.
   (v) Niyati reduces the vyapakatva (all-pervasiveness) or
Svatantrya (absolute Freedom of Siva) to limitation in respect
of space and cause.
160                                                      Spanda-Karika s

                   Introduction to the 14th verse

                                TEXT

  3TERT TO:!

                         TRANSLATION
  Now the author shows in detail how the bound soul is bound
and trapped by limited knowledge.

                         Text of the verse 14

         irnTcTCSTTqmfcT** m     s r i
         ^TT^rcT^rrn^frT ST ^ a^TI^mta*: II               II

  Paramrtarasapayas tasya yah pratyayodbhavah/
  Tenasvatantratam eti sa ca tanmatragocarah// 14

                          TRANSLATION

  The rise, in the bound soul, of all sorts of ideas marks the
disappearance of the bliss of supreme immortality. On account
of this, he loses his independence. The appearance of the ideas
has its sphere in sense-objects.

                          COMMENTARY

                                 TEXT

      rTFJTOtaJ    H i-Hlfaxfc VI U-dtofcl+cM Id i   cTSfsRTftldMi   f^THT-
dldldi fd+eMHIR^^^T: fddlVIIWId          ^cMK: AT      M W d
tmd^muHimml fwJiTTON i                       fcrc^rfa:
                                                >3     N9 N C\
                                                               former-
                              rTH             \ ^ xT McHlfi^dd I W d d -
^rrrftfiT-rTg^T: m-M^ I          ^ I d f l d N '5TFT             ffrT I
          KJHfddifa 'HldlfadHMl ^TF^ f f k I

      s^tfir M^^f^TfcT f + r ^ d I

              S^JT *TT        II (irro 50
Section 1                                                                     161

FFA    I   MC^^^D^HLDLFCT             D1DLD1D£D«IMH4DTI*FL                 TOT
TOTTOt f r o r o f r o *          i S ^ T O T ^ — T O r f r o TTOTOTOT m r o r o
TR^,               TOT               FRTDLM^IWJI                  SRFTO^ TOT
^FTTOTRR        I TO^TO 'FFA ^T TOT tfTdfd:' ( ^ I * ) ITOFE I L^T ^
SC^TOTO '       TOrr^ESRFRONG         T STOFJT ?T m f r o : i'      ( ^ i *     )
ITOFE, *                   '*UHJD<MMQ*DHI *T: M C ^ J L ^ D : '    ( ? I        )
fcTOT TO**T fof^TO II V* II

                               TRANSLATION

    The rise in that bound soul of ideas whether pertaining to
this world or the scriptures and of the knowledge of different
objects associated with them leads to ruination. That marks the
disappearance or subsidence of the bliss of supreme immortality
i.e. of the flow of the bliss of the mass of consciousness. Though
the state of supreme consciousness is present even when the
ideas conveying the sense of different objects arise yet because
it is not noticed, it appears to be absent. Hence it has been
 said that the bliss of supreme immortality disappears. By the rise
 of those ideas, he (the bound soul), loses his independence i.e.
 comes under their clutches. As has been said in Siva-sutra, 'Limited
 knowledge is the cause of bondage". (I, 2) The sage Vyasa also
 says, "In childhood, he is dependent on his parents."
     Madalasa also has said, ''Do not indulge frequently in your
 association with material assemblage, by prating sometimes with
 'O father', sometimes with 'O daughter', sometimes with 'O
 mother' sometimes with 'O beloved', sometimes with 'mine',
 sometimes with'not mine'. (Ma. Pu. 25-15).
     The rise of ideas is said to be 'tanmatragocarah', because
 the sphere of these ideas is tanmatras which are the generic
  features either intense or moderate of all objects. So the phrase
  means 'which have different objects as their sphere'.
     By this the author says: As long as there is the appearance of
  different objects, so long the individual is surely bound. When
  by means of the teaching imparted before, he has the unswerving
  knowledge that every thing is identical with Self, then he is
  liberated while alive, as has been said before, 'One who has this
  knowledge' etc. (II, 5).
162                                                 Spanda-Karika s

  Thus there is no inconsistency whatsoever between what has
been said before, viz., "Therefore, whether it is word or object
or thought, there is no state which is not Siva and "The rise, in
the bound soul, of all sorts of ideas marks the disappearance of
the bliss of supreme immortality."

                         EXPOSITION
   As the empirical individual becomes subject to words and
ideas that are the product of sensori-motor experiences, he
becomes their prisoner and loses the power of creative thinking
and is thus banished from the realm of immortal bliss, for that
is the reality of a different dimension which is not within the
province of thought-constructs. He thus becomes a bound
soul.
                 Introduction to the 15th verse

                             TEXT
  TO     ITcTOtlg^ts^TOT M<H}d<tUMU4: a c ^ ^ r i
TO: ,-fcTOFfr q f ^ r f a
                      TRANSLATION
  A doubt arises here 'If the rise of ideas in the bound soul
means the disappearance of the bliss of immortality then how
has it been said that he falls a victim to the group of Powers?"
The author removes this doubt in the following verse :
                        Text of verse 15

       sTOqFrajt     SRCT: a c R f t f t a n : \
          5T55T5^T * fTOT SRTOfcg^r: ll             »
  Svarupavarane easy a §aktayah satatotthitah/
  Yatah Sabdanuvedhena na vina pratyayodbhavah//15
                       TRANSLATION
   Brahmi and other Powers are ever in readiness to conceal his
real nature, for without the association of words, ideas cannot
arise.
Section 1                                                                163

                      Text of the Commentary

      SFgJT sftfnT^T dcMft^K^M SlitalfK H ^ f ^ f t f k I
ftldkHdl ^M^ld^l-fafd^dcdd STMHId^lfa                             cTfafarT,

^MHfM       ^rf cT^cTr:    ^ ^ R T ^ n f t ^ i ^ r ^ I Tcfts^T if: ST^nft^oft
                           H sfiwitER                               fc^rf^TT




fd^NMkdW I WdVWMdSWMf^ fd^cM:                                      H

                          TRANSLATION

   The particle 'ca* expressing a doubt adds another conclusive
statement to remove it. The Powers which have been delineated
before are ever in readiness to conceal the real nature of this
bound soul, that nature which is identical with Siva. They (the
powers) are instrumental in not allowing him to discern that
nature properly, though it serves as the basis of his life. As long
as he is unable to recognize his real nature which is the same as
the bliss of supreme immortality, so long they are definitely
active in concealing it. (It is these Powers presiding over words
that conceal his real nature), because the ideas that arise in him,
that lead to the diffusion of knowledge, whether definite or
indefinite, are not possible without the association of words,
such as 'I know this.' These ideas may be either tinged with
subtle internal words or may be expressed in gross speech. Even
lower creatures have a hang of ideas involved in sound (serving
as natural words), which is non-conventional indicative sign,
something like the nod of head, in oneself indicative of inward
approval. Otherwise the child cannot catch the first conventional
sign being devoid of the power of inwardly thinking out the
pros and cons of a matter. Ideas associated with gross words
are a matter of selfexperience for all.

                            EXPOSITION
  Verses 13, 14 and 15 describe how the empirical individual
164                                                    Spanda-Karika s

becomes bound and forgets his essential nature. The individual
becomes a tool of ideas. His ideas are oriented towards sense-
objects and the pleasure derived from them. The ideas are
entirely governed by words. Words have a tremendous power
over his life.
    Thought-constructs and verbalization become the governing
influences of his life. He becomes totally oblivious of the
essential Self, for that can never be known as an object.
The ideas and words toss him about and do not allow him to
 introspect within and have an awareness of the inward haven of
 his life. Ideas and words are all conditioned. The essential Self
 is unconditioned. The life of the empirical individual is confined
within the prison of the conditioned. The unconditioned cannot
 be known by the conditioned. It is only when the individual
 frees himself from the shackle of ideas and words that he is free
 to have an immediate, direct awareness of Self.

                    Introduction to the 16th Verse

                                 TEXT

                       5TTOFT flWHI^rddrdldf^Mdi STTrfH-
TTOSTO dcMc^fadMWcAlfydMHift d'UHlsft,     STCWfa

                           TRANSLATION

   Concluding what has been said in the previous three verses and
strengthening the previously described identity of this extensive
objectivity with the generic Spanda principle, the author defines in
the following verse liberation as identical with the recognition of
that (Spanda) and bondage as identical with its non-recognition.

                        Text of the 16th Verse

          tt   fiRnrfrnn    Tm feres* <TfFfcrct i
          TOifasft S C R I P T 5TTCTT f ^ s g q q T f e F T u ^ M

      Seyaip kriyatmika saktih Sivasya paiuvartini/
      Bandhayitri svamargastha jnata siddhyupapadika// 16
Section 1                                                                 165

                             TRANSLATION
  That afore-mentioned operative power of Siva existing in the
bound soul is a source of bondage; the same when realized as
residing in him as the way of approach to one's own essential
reality brings about success (i.e. the achievement of liberation).

                            COMMENTARY

                                    TEXT


^TOT fcdlcHd: ftlTOT U H P U d l fM'ddrdlfc^+l H < m g l f < * d f r o r t -
rd^Nr^rd+ir^did                        snatdtffld^ii f r o ^ ^ m w f a f t
ddHldl S T O f f e i T O T O * *TOdk*HlfrdirdMMl sftfacT Jdfall        TOT^-
UHlMfTOflT               Id 1 <«t>cd 14id M M i f e M p ^ ^ c d        TOjfTOt
TOfo I TOT §       ftldkHdl       TOFT      *Tt TOT:
              s r f ^ F T fcfrorTO TOT I
   TORft fifldWl HH-c&Tl ^ r ^ ^ l r l lT (Ro)
i f a ^Orddld^K+lThdlcm 5TOTOPT: qTTCTfoTOTOTOTOft fTOTCTfar
Sffact ^ftfTOT, TOT ^T                   fifT^TOTOT               fdlc^dlfsST-



                              TRANSLATION

   'That'-this has been defined by the previous three verses.
Iyam—This one, the operative power which is one's own real
nature i.e. of the nature of consciousness identical with Siva.
She has been called 'this,' because she manifests herself in the
form of objectivity. She is the venerable Spanda principle. She is
known as operative power (kriya Sakti), because she brings
about the state of variety of the universe. As described before,
she exists in Siva who has assumed the role of a bound soul. She
besprinkles this bound soul who is identified with prana and
puryatfaka with a drop of I-consciousness which makes him
an agent or doer. Reduced to this state, he does not recognize
his real nature which is veiled by her and gets involved in the
misery of seizing and relinquishing. Thus she becomes a source
166                                                 Spanda-Karika s

of bondage. When the yogi recognizes this operative power as
the Supreme power, (para sakti), the means of approach to his
real nature which is Siva, then according to the view of
 Vijhanabhattaraka expressed in the following lines, she brings
about the highest achievement full of supreme bliss :
   "When in one who enters the state of Sakti (i.e. who is
identified with Sakti), there ensues the feeling of non-distinction 1
(between Sakti and Siva), then he acquires the state of Siva,
(for) in the agamas (iha), she (sakti) is declared as the door
of entrance (into Siva) (V. Bh. 20)" or when he, in spite of the
dispersion of definite and indefinite ideas, regards the entire
objectivity as an aspect of his own Self 2 which in its nature is
 Siva, then also she (sakti) brings about the same achievement.

                              NOTES

1. The non-distinction between Siva and Sakti referred to in
the verse quoted from Vijiianabhairava means in yogic terms
the meeting point or junction between two polarities. In anava-
upaya, the meeting point is 'between prana and apana in the
centre or hrdaya as it is called in this yoga. This centre in the
body is the depression a little above the diaphragm. It is here
that prana and apana meet. At this point, sakti becomes the door
of entrance to Siva.
   In Saktopaya5 the central point between pramana and prameya
and in Sambhava upaya, the central point between jnana and
kriya constitute the nirvibhaga or non-distinction of Siva and
Sakti.
2. This is the Sambhava form of realization.

                           EXPOSITION

   The power of ideation and verbalization is an aspect of the
kriya sakti of Siva. When the empirical individual considers
kriyasakti as a power of his psycho-somatic organism, he is
bound by its limitations and suffers. When he regards this
kriyasakti only as an aspect of parasakti, the meeting point of
prana and apana, pramana and prameya, jnana and kriya,
human and divine, then he is liberated.
Section 1                                                                     167

              Introduction to the 16th and 11 th verses.

                                    TEXT

   frsNnr MVKd ^qr^ ,                                    ^ Wvtfc , ffcT srfk-


                        TRANSLATION
  Thus explaining how the individual is bound and is liberated
by pursuing the means to be described, the author again
describes the nature of bondage for its extirpation.
                              Verse 17 and 18
        wm^m^nj              q^ffesfcRT i
                    H ^ c T f N R c S ^ ^ R * II                 II
                           *ft*T cT^T^TcHST^rr: I
        HqfcTST^TO^TT^ WTTS                         II      II
  Tanmatrodaya-rupena manoham-buddhivartina/
  Puryastakena samruddhastaduttham pratyayodbhavam//17
  Bhunkte paravaso bhogam tadbhavat samsared atah/
  Samsrti-pralayasyasya karanam sampracaksmahe// 18

                            TRANSLATION
   Besieged by puryatfaka which rises from tanmatras and
exists in mind, I-feeling, and the determinative faculty, he (the
bound soul) becomes subservient and undergoes the experiences
that arise from it in the form of ideas about certain objects and
the pleasure or pain that accrues from them. Owing to the
continuance of the puryaftaka, he (the bound soul) leads
transmigratory existence. We are 'therefore' going to explain
what causes the extirpation of this transmigratory existence. 17-18

                            COMMENTARY
                                    TEXT
  g f e s f t f ^ ifW srs*^ i *icr q^c s r ^ ^ - g ^ i f e w f t p ^ : , sTcr qsrm*
               TO: TTTO:                                  ^ I f a <I

    *        ^ft^T            jftT^Syr I
168                                                            Spanda-Karika s

         ^ 5 g s r ^ r o STO^: \           TOTgw^ro              g^igrorolfTO-

^ t r T O f k ^ | TOTTOTOtSFT j q ^ F T O ^ F T       OT      TOfTOTOT       TO:
gq^NCTOTOHSD^r           f r o m : TOT ^ T ^ T - T O T ^ G^ftror      TOW^    H-
iTTORim
             TO:,     cRTT                JPFTTsftTrr       ^TO" SlfTOTfTOTOT: I
'TOTOTTOFH^         TOTTTOGT'     (<TTO           ? [ 3 |       )   FFA   TOTOT-
snrtn: II ^      II          TRANSLATION
    He undergoes the experiences arising from the puryastaka.
Since there arises the experience of pleasure, etc. through the
ideas, therefore, on account of the emergence of these
ideas, the bound soul becomes subservient i.e. through the
association of words, he is, at every step, driven hither and
thither by Brahmi and other goddesses. He is not independent
like the fully awakened yogi.
    Owing to the continuance of that puryastaka, the residual
 traces of cravings and desires lying submerged in it are
 awakened again and again and thus he transmigrates from one
 form of life to another, getting bodies suited for the appropriate
 experiences of those lives. Thus he assumes and gives up body
 after body (i.e. at each birth he assumes a body and at each
 death, he gives it up).
     As it is so, therefore we are going to explain immediately the
  cause i.e.-the easy means of the extirpation of the transmigratory
  tendency of this individual besieged by the puryasfaka through
  the total extermination of the impurities inherent in it. The
  author has himself described the means in this treatise. The use
  of the present tense here conveys the sense of both 'past' and
  'future' according to the siitra of panini, "The present tense is
  optionally used to indicate the near (immediate) past or future."

                                EXPOSITION

   These two verses are very important inasmuch as they give
 the rationale of the transmigratory life of the bound soul. The
 previous verses say that on account of the play of Maya sakti,
 the soul loses its pristine jnana and kriya sakti and comes to
Section 1                                                         169

have only limited knowledge and limited power of action.
Secondly, he falls a prey to the veiled powers that arise from
the multitude of words. In his present life, he acquires ideas
through his experience of sense-objects, and education, but these
ideas are not possible without words. So ultimately words come
to acquire tremendous influence over his life.
   Now verses 17 and 18 tell us how the future destiny of the
individual is determined. In this the puryatfaka plays the most
important role. Man is a very complex being. He has not only
a. physical body but also a subtle one known as purya$taka
which consists of the five tanmatras or the subtle aspects of the
gross physical objects and buddhi, manas and ahamkara. The
impressions of our desires and thoughts are deposited in this
puryasfaka. When a man dies, it is only his physical body that
is dissolved. The puryaftaka remains as the subtle vehicle of the
soul after his death. As has already been said, it contains the
residual traces of the desires, etc. of the previous life. The desires
and ideas deposited in the puryatfaka are not inert elements but
tremendous psychic forces seeking expression. So in the next life,
man gets a body suited for the expression of the desires, etc.,
deposited in the purya$\aka and is born in an environment
suited for that expression.
   The puryastaka plays a double role. In the present life, our
ideas are formed according to our interests, and desires. The
puryaftaka is the repository of our interests and desires. As
verse 17 says, taduttham pratyayodbhavam, i.e. our ideas are
largely determined in the present life by the constitution of our
puryatfaka, and our future life is wholly determined by our
puryastaka. That is why Ksemaraja says, Purya$takatmakama-
locchedanena tasya (samsrteh) vinasah i.e. 'The transmigratory
existence can be stopped by the extermination of the impurities
of the puryatfakar

                   Introduction to the 19th Verse

                               TEXT

             tJcTcT ufdMMUH STIST ^JItMW          fawifa—
170                                                        Spanda-Karika s

                                TRANSLATION
  While substantiating the above, the author sums up the sense
of what has been said in the first verse :

                                   Verse 19
         TOT                         cTFT STzfteeft |
         fTO^^TOrnSrfcT                          ^ ^ II       II
    Yada tvekatra samrudhas tada tasya layodayau/
    Niyacchan bhoktrtam eti tatascakresvaro bhavet// 19

                                TRANSLATION
  When, however, he is firmly rooted in that supreme Spanda
principle, then bringing the emergence and dissolution of the
puryastaka entirely under his control, he becomes the real
enjoyer and thenceforth the lord of the collective whole of
the Saktis.

                                COMMENTARY
                                     TEXT

    TOT ^ H ^ T f r l :   M i r i ^ m q f t s f t a T O            l^TO   yirf-
eTOTOfa           TOPTf^TTOcTO           TOTf^FTOPTt        TOfa,         TOT
TOffo frifldlHfcfrWI ^qUHitq TO5KTO f ^ F T fTO^ft^ftTOTOT-

STTTOT H^TT TO ^ ^TO sffaTOT^fk
TTTOTOTcTt TOtTO TOTf^H^uiNHM^                    I TO^"




7TMM|if: ; f f a fifTTO II
«                         N
      ff?T
      ^
                              fTOfTOT^Tcftit
                                «\    c
                                                 TOTO:       I
                                TRANSLATION
  When, however, he, by constant practice of the means that
have been taught of entering into the highest principle, becomes
Section 1                                                      171

fully and unswervingly established in the Spanda principle, which
is the perfect I-consciousness i.e. when he becomes identical
with it, then he can bring under his control the emergence and
the dissolution of the puryatfaka referred to in the previous
verse and through it also of the universe by means of the
introversive and extroversive meditation, and in accordance
with the principle established in the first verse, he, by bringing
about the manifestation and dissolution of the universe by
means of the one essential nature which is Sahkara becomes
the Supreme Enjoyer, and thus by assimilating to himself all
the objective categories from the earth upto Siva by the process
of recognition rises to the status of the Supreme Experient that
he was already (satim eva). Thenceforward he becomes the lord
of the saktis referred to in the first verse i.e. of the collective
whole of the rays of his essential Self. In other words, he attains
to the highest lordship in this very body.
   Thus the glorious Vasugupta, showing the sameness of the
great reality both in the beginning and end of the book, brings
out the importance of this Sastra as the essence and crown of
the entire secret doctrine of Saivism. May there be good to all.*
   In this Spandanirnaya, this is the third section entitled
 Vibhiitispanda.

                          EXPOSITION
   This verse describes the end of the journey. A spark of the
Divine flame descends into matter and forgets its divine origin.
Like an exile it wanders into distant lands and in different forms.
At the human stage, it acquires the gift of speech and mentation.
It has now reached a definite station in the evolutionary march.
The human being as now known sows his wild oats, reaps the
consequences and learns the inexorable laws of life in the bitter
school of experience. A time comes when he is filled with
nostalgia, and now begins his journey homeward. He has not to
go far. He has only to throw off the mask of the pseudo-I and
enter his essential, real I, which is the Spanda, the heart-beat of
Siva. He now becomes what he always was. The universe is no
longer a foreign land. The I and the This, the Subject and the
object become one. That is an experience for which there is no
word in the human language.
172                                                Spanda-Karika s

                               Section IV

                          INTRODUCTION

                     <\    «




                          TRANSLATION

  In the end of the book, the author, by means of a double
entendre lauds the Spanda state as well as the power of the
word of his guru (teacher).

                               Verse 1



         ^   fefa^wref    fasrf     ertgrorcrita n ? n
  AgadhasaipSayambhodhi-samuttaranatarinim/
  Vande vicitrarthapadaip citrarn tarp gurubharatim// 1

                          TRANSLATION

   I pay my homage to that wonderful speech of my guru which
is like a boat for crossing the fathomless ocean of doubt and is
full of words which yield wonderful meaning (in the case of the
guru).
   I offer my reverential prayer to Spanda in the form of para vak,
 the Supreme divine I-consciousness which is full of wonderful
transcendental bliss, and which acts like a boat in crossing the
fathomless ocean of doubt regarding my essential nature (in the
case of Spanda in the form of paravak).

                          COMMENTARY

                                  TEXT

      dwuiHwi wickff       'srat wafaefMJT (feo ^ o ^ o ) ffir IW<«n

 M\<<fi qrt DHH, CRT *T0<MI4*JI ^^PmlHMiwI PIT f^n-tit^t-
Section 1                                                      173



«wsiVt>flfa i                fror* m m m — i f n m i < H N M I I
fafTO: ^ T f R ^ T f : S ^ rdddcddlUHlftlfdW TOFTtR*T *T dlfcuft
      dlfik^WdlfH             I TOT rdfediqffd dldNHc^KM^dird
TOifa froFTOt TOT! <tc?f*TT       m     frfaufii T^rrTOTTOf^rf^
TOTOTfr dMdH»>rd TOTT *TTOTfa TOT II 1 II

                        TRANSLATION

  'Tam' (that) means that uncommon goddess who, in accord-
ance with the view that "Sakti is the door of entrance into
Siva?9 acts as an acarya (teacher), inasmuch as she is the means
of entry into the state of Siva. Moreover 'gurum' means
mahatim or supreme, mahatitfi bharatlm therefore, means
para vak, the Supreme Power of Sound (of the Divine). She is
called •supreme' inasmuch as she encloses within her embrace
paSyanti etc.
   Gurubharatl also means 'the exhortative speech of the
teacher'. *Citram9 means 'wonderful' in the case of the teacher,
and 'of the form of transcendental bliss' in the case of paravak.
'Vande' means 'I pay homage* in the case of the teacher, and 'I
enter it, because it is the Supreme' in the case of paravak. And
I make my reverential salutation to her with all eagerness who,
because of her gleaming presence in all states (i.e. pasyantl,
madhyama and vaikharl) throws a hint of essential reality and I
make her favourably disposed towards me in order that I
may enter into her who is always immersed in the awareness of
the essential nature.
    How is that Bharati ? Who is like a boat for crossing
 successfully the fathomless, uncrossable ocean of stains of doubt
 viz. 'the absence of certainty regarding the Supreme F. This
 doubt is called ocean because of its expansiveness.             She
 is like a boat because she enables one to cross this
 ocean in the right manner. This simile is applicable in both
 cases.
    Vicitra-arthapadam in the case of paravak means 'one
 whose stages of rest (in the form of Samadhi) display wonder-
 ful states of bliss'; in the case of the teacher's speech, it means
174                                              Spanda-Karika s

"that which has wonderful words and meanings arranged
in a pleasant order".

                 Introduction to the 2nd Verse

                             TEXT

          \H\fi\<u| Icqm (dd IMcM^d I^R:
^WHdWfH HUWV* Pd^M^d VlHrdfrK:

                       TRANSLATION

   By mentioning his name celebrated owing to his greatness,
encouraging the seekers (of knowledge) by their respectful
regard for him, the author describes the great reward which this
sastra yields when it is kept secret.

                            Verse 2


       ^yfrefcsiwr         vr^fcT H9T trfertaecr n ^ n

  Labdhvapy alabhyam etaj jnanadhanaiphrdguhantakrtanihitefi/
  Vasuguptavac chivaya hi bhavati sada sarvalokasya// 2
                       TRANSLATION

   As on the attainment of this treasure of knowledge which is
difficult of attainment, and on its being well preserved in the
cave of the heart, it has been for the good of Vasugupta, so
also on the attainment of this treasure of knowledge difficult of
attainment and on its being well preserved in the cave .of the
heart, it would always be for the good of all.
                       COMMENTARY

                             TEXT


                     I < OlMldHKdim     MfrWPdMglfc^         fjftqfrd
rd^M^dVlld^lMclcdl^l        dWIH^-f^^T       fcfT ftffgfd:
Section 1                                                                              175

TO TOfrTCTO dldfcHHl, TOT *dlftld:                      fcfld^-dinHUIdfM            MtVi^d
d^dlM       3TO, frj^fa* iPtfaqMa^-d W N kUdHl4>*q ifo                              f^^TO-
^ r f k f ^ T O n T O R f W R qtTOcT: 53SrfTOr*TT ^ *dlc4l$dd: TOT fifTTOT
TOfk                          TOTTO                             ?f?T fifTTO II ^ II
                 fad/d^ld!  fTO^ TO STTO
                       TOPt ^ f r o n r wuflxiHdfa: i
   3TTTO^      TOpT         JVWI^^^ctrdVIM
         ^ f a d i K i l ^ i r H a m i ^ d H K N ^ l : II <1 II
   3TTOTFTT£fan?TOS*T fN^TRTOTO I
            fTOcT                    TOTO                      § II ^          II
   fTO^vRT:                 dfild:             3    I
                                           ftld^fMul: II 3 II
   STTOTO:     tdOiimfM        STTTOTfTO^T         TO     I
            frofcf                   ^RrfkroThfrt:            11 *   11
   TO!       fyTOhr^rf^TOT u^OticMftidi
            M ^ t t H - ^ d V I I U d W d q d l TOT ?T        TOft         I
       TTOTfro^frot i f f T O : stftarofrorTO
         ^ TOnfefRTT: <rt: *Jd(<d y^hriwoTOW II ^ ll
   froifefecTOft       fdddfdddl          ifts&dfdTO:


   ^Mf^Vd TOT TO^pfnr^Rft
                                                 II ^ II
                             TOTOtsq ^ftFT^froq: I

q^TFT               ftrro            11

                                TRANSLATION

   This knowledge described by the sastra is a treasure inasmuch
 as it is the means for the attainment of the highest aim of
 human existence. Though it is difficult of attainment, Vasugupta
 obtained it on the surface of a rock as the essence of SahkaraJs
 instruction in a dream.
   The meaning of hrdguhantakrtanihiteh is the following: Hrt
 or heart is of the nature of prakasa (light) or consciousness and
176                                                 Spanda-Karika s

vimarsa or awareness of the consciousness. This heart or prckasa-
vimarsa is like a cave, for like a cave it provides room for entry
into the all-of-reality. The whole phrase means <of him who has
established himself with certainty in this cave of the heart' i.e. of
 Vasugupta. Just as this treasure of knowledge was for the good
of the teacher, named Vasugupta, so it will be for the good of
all, for there is no restriction of rules governing the recipient of
this knowledge. When they preserve it carefully in the cave of
their heart and guarding it against those who have not got the
same faivh, assimilate it fully by firm realization, then it would
always be for their good. 'For their good' means 'for the
acquisition of the competence of entry into their real nature
which is always Sahkara\ May there be good to all!

               Concluding Remarks by Ksemaraja

    Though there is no end to the number of commentaries on
 this Sastra, and though there are intelligent people, yet they are
mostly superficial by nature, but they who are competent, who
are intelligent swans and are skilled in grasping the essence,
know the special merit of my commentary. My teacher could
not put up with being bracketed with the numerous other
ordinary run of commentators, so he did not write any com-
mentary on Spanda-sastra. I have previously expressed a bit of
my special point of view in Spanda-sandoha. Today, owing to
the fervent entreaty of my pupil named Sura who has
experienced entry into the power of Rudra, who is Siva Him-
self, I, Khemaraja, have given conclusive explanation with the
help of the splendid detailed exposition of my teacher.
   They are not qualified for the study of this sastra whose
intelligence is not purified by the teaching of right sort of
teachers, whose doubt has not been shattered by the esoteric
teaching of Saiva discipline, and who, being of tender intellect,
have not tasted previously the nectar of Pratyabhijha. This may,
however, be enjoyed by the other high-souled ones. 5
  All glory to this Supreme Creative Pulsation (Spanda) of
consciousness which is the abode of flashing, unparalleled delight,
whose majesty of path extends to far-reaching areas from the earth
Section 1                                                    177

up to Siva, which is variegated by the display of various states
of creation, maintenance and withdrawal and of whose exten-
sion this universe is just a minute particle. 6
   This is the work of Ksemaraja who has received instruction
from Abhinavagupta, the great devotee of the great Lord, the
grand pupil of the author of Isvarapratyabhijna.
            GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
                             A (*)
A (3T) : Symbol of Siva, short form of anuttara (the Supreme)
       the one letter that pervades all the other letters of the
       alphabet.
Akula ; Siva or sr
Akrama : Successionless manifestation of the essential nature.
Akrtrima : Natural; inartificial.
^\khyati : Primal Ignorance.
Agni (Symbolic) : Pramata-knower or subject.
Agnisomamayam : The universe which is of the nature of
     pramana (knowledge) and prameya (object).
Ajnanam : The primal limitation (mala). Being inherent in
      Purusa, it is known as Paurusa Ajiiana, on account of
      which he considers himself as of limited knowledge and
      activity.
      Being in Buddhi, it is known as Bauddha Ajnana on
      account of which one forms all kinds of asuddha vikalpas
      —thought-constructs devoid of essential Reality.
Aghora : The merciful Siva.
Aghora saktis : The saktis that lead the conditioned experient
      to the realization of Siva.
Adhikara : Office, prerogative, right.
Adhisthana : Substratum, support, base.
Adhisthatr : The superintending, governing, presiding principle.
      Anu-One that breathes i.e. the limited, conditioned
     experient.
Adhva : Course or path. Suddha Adhva is the intrinsic course,
     the supramundane manifestation. ASuddha Adhva is the
     course of mundane manifestation.
AnaSrita-Siva : The state of Siva in which there is no objective
     content yet, in which the universe is negated from Him.
Anantabhattaraka : The presiding deity of the Mantra experients
Antarmukhibhava : Introversion of consciousness.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                  179

Anupaya : Spontaneous realization of Self without any special
     effort.
Anugraha : Grace.
Anuttara : (1) The Highest; the Supreme, the Absolute.
     (2) The vowel 'a' (*r).
Anusandhana : Repeated intensive awareness of the source or
     essential Reality; joining the succeeding experience to the
     previous one; synthetic unity of apperception,
Anusandhata : One who joins the succeeding experience into a
     unity.
Anusyuta : Strung together; connected uninterruptedly.
Apana : Inhalation.
Apavarga : Liberation.
Abuddha (Aprabuddha) : Unawakened one, one who is in
     spiritual ignorance.
Abhava : Non-ens; void.
Abhinna : Non-different, identical.
Abhiyoga : Backward reference of awareness.
Amayiya : Beyond the scope of Maya.
Amudha : Sentient.
Avadhana : Constant awareness.
Avikalpa (Nirvikalpa) jnana : Direct realization of Reality with-
     out any mental activity.
Avikalpa (Nirvikalpa) pratyaksa : Sensuous awareness without
     any perceptual judgement, unparticularised awareness.
Aviveka : Non-awareness of the Real.
Avyakta : Non-manifest.
Asuddha vidya : Knowledge of a few particulars, empirical
     knowledge.
Avastha : State.
Asat : Non-being.
Asuddhi : Impurity, limitation.
Ahamkara : I-making principle, I-feeling of the empirical self.
Ahanta : I-consciousness.
                              A   i)
Anava upaya : The yoga whereby the individual utilizes his
     senses, prana and manas for Self-realization. It is also
180                                               Spanda-Karika s

      known as Anava yoga, Bhedopaya and Kriyayoga or
      Kriyopaya.
Ariava samaveSa : Identification with the Divine by the above
      means.
Anava mala : Primal limiting condition which reduces universal
     consciousness to a jiva (an empirical experient).
Atma-labha : Realization of Self.
Atma-viSranti : Resting in the Self.
Atma-vyapti : Realization of the Self without the realization of
      the all-inclusive Siva-nature.'
Ananda : Bliss; the letter 'a', symbolizing sakti.
Ananda upaya : Realization of Siva-nature without any yogic
     discipline. Also known as Ananda yoga or Anupaya.
Abhoga : Expansion; camatkara or spiritual delight.

                              / 00
Iccha : Will; Representing the letter     (i).
Ichhopaya : Sambhava upaya, also known as Iccha yoga.
Ichha-gakti : The inseparable innate Power of Parama Siva
      intent on manifestation; that inward state of Parama Siva
      in which jfiana and kriya are unified; the predominant
      aspect of Sadasiva.
Idanta : This-consciousness; objective consciousness.
Indu : Prameya or object; apana; kriya Sakti.
I§vara-tattva : The fourth tattva, counting from Siva. The con-
      sciousness of this tattva is 'This am I'. Jfiana is predomi-
      nant in this tattva.
ISvara-bhattaraka : The presiding deity of the MantreSvaras
      residing in Uvara tattva.

                             U (*)
Uccara : A particular technique of concentration on Prapa
     Sakti under Anava Upaya.
Ucchalatta : The creative movement of the Divine ananda
     bringing about manifestation and withdrawal.
Udaya : Rise, appearance, creation.
Udana : The vital vayu that moves upwards. The Sakti that
     moves up in Susumna at spiritual awakening.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                     181

Udyama : The sudden spontaneous emergence of the Supreme
     I-consciousness.
Unmesa : Lit. Opening of the eye.
     (1) From the point of view of svabhava or the essential
         nature of the Divine, it means the emergence of the
         Divine I-consciousness.
     (2) From the point of view of manifestation, it means the
         externalizing of Iccha sakti, the start of the world
         process.
     (3) From the point of view of Saiva yoga, it means the
         emergence of the spiritual consciousness which is the
         background of the rise of ideas.
     (4) Representing the letter *u\
Upalabdhr : The Experient, knower or subject.
Upalabdhi : Cognition, awareness.

                         Ofr)
Ordhva marga : Upward path; susumna.

                               Ka (v)
Kancuka : The coverings of Maya, throwing a pall over pure
     consciousness and converting Siva into jiva. They are
     (1) Kala, (2) (aSuddha) Vidya, (3) Raga, (4) Niyati and,
      (5) Kala.
Karana : The means of jnana and kriya—
      Antahkarana, the inner psychic apparatus and bahiskarana,
      the external senses.
Karanesvari : Khecari, gocari, dikcari and bhucari cakra.
Kartrtva : The state of being the subject.
Karmendriya : The five powers and organs of action—speaking
      (vale), handling (hasta), locomotion (pada), excreting
      (payu), sexual action (upastha).
Kala : (1) The sakti of consciousness by which all the thirty six
      principles are evolved, (2) Part, particle, aspect, (3)
      Limitation in respect of activity (kincitkartrtva) (4) The
      subtlest aspect of objectivity, viz; Santyatita, Santa, Vidya,
      Pratistha, and Nivrtti.
Kalacakra ; Matrcakra, Sakticakra, Devicakra, the group of
      letters from 'a' to 'ksa'.
182                                              Spanda-Karika s

Kala sarira : That of which the essential nature is activity;
     Karma mala.
                            Ka(m)
Karana : Cause.
Karya : Effect; objectivity.
Karma mala : Mala or limitation due to karma.
Kala adhva : Temporal course of manifestation, viz., Varna9
     mantra, pada.
Kala tattva ; Time-past, present and future, determined by the
     sense of succession.                   *
Kala Sakti : The power of the Divine that determines succes-
     sion.
                             Ku ( j )
Kundali or Kundalini : The creative power of Siva; a distinct
     sakti that lies folded up in three and a half folds in
     Muladhara.
Kumbhaka : Retention of prana.
Kula : All-transcending light of consciousness; Sakti manifesting
     herself in 36 tattvas.
Kulamnaya : The Sakta system or doctrine of realizing the
     Supreme by means of all letters from (a) to (ksa).
Kulamarga : The discipline for attaining to the all-transcending
     light of consciousness; Sambhava upaya.

                            Kra (?p)
Krama : Realization of the Supreme by means of purification
     of vikalpas (determinate ideas) through successive stages
     (Krama). Krama employs saktopaya. It is also known as
     Mahanaya or Mahartha darSana.
Krtrima : Constructed by vikalpa or determinate idea; pseudo-
     reality.
Kriya yoga : Anava upaya, also known as kriyopaya.
Kriya Sakti : The power of assuming any and every form
     (Sarvakarayogitvam kriyasaktih).
Krida : Play or sport of the Divine.

                            K$a (ST)
Ksetrajna : The empirical subject.
 Glossary of Technical Terms                                  183

 Ksobha : Identification of the Self with the gross or the subtle
     body.
                            Kha (*)
Khecari : Sub-species of Vamesvari sakti, connected with the
     pramata, the empirical self. Khecari is one that moves in
     kha or the vast expanse of consciousness.
Khecari cakra ^ The cakra or group of the saktis that move in
     the expanse of consciousness of the empirical subject.
Khecari Mudra : The bliss of the vast expanse of spiritual
     consciousness, also known as divya mudra or Sivavastha
     (the state of Self).
Khyati : Jnana; knowledge; wisdom.
                             Ga (*r)
Gaganangana : Cit sakti, consciousness power.
Garbha : Akhyati, primal ignorance, Mahamaya.
Gunatraya : The three genetic constituents Sattva, rajas, tamas.
Gocari : Sub-species of Vamesvari, connected with antahkarana
     of the experient. 'Go' means 'sense'. Antahkarana is the
     seat of the senses; hence Gocari is connected with
     antahkarana.
Granthi : Psychic tangle; psychic complex.
Grahaka : Knower, Subject; Experient.
Grahya : Knowable; object of experience.
                            Gha (*)
Ghora saktis : The Saktis or deities that draw the jivas towards
     worldly pleasures.
Ghoratari saktis : The saktis or deities that push the jivas
     towards a downward path in saipsara.


Cakra : The group or Collective whole of saktis.
Cakresvara : The master or lord of the group of saktis.
Candra : Prameya or object of knowledge, the apana prana or
     nadi (channel or nerve).
Camatkara : Bliss of the pure I-consciousness; wondrous delight
     of artistic experience.
184                                            Spanda-Karika s

Caramakala : The highest phase of manifestation known as
     Santyatita or Santatita kala.
                            a (f^)
Cit : The Absolute; foundational consciousness; the conscious-
      ness that is the unchanging principle of all changes.
Citta : The limitation of the Universal Consciousness manifest-
      ed in the individual mind, the mind of the empirical
      individual.
Citi : The consciousness-power of the Absolute that brings
      about the world-process.
Cidananda : (1) The nature of ultimate Reality consisting of
      consciousness and bliss (2) The sixth stratum of ananda
      in uccara yoga of anava upaya.


Cetana : Parama Siva, Self, Conscious individual.
Cetya : Knowable, object of consciousness.
                            Cai (3)
Caitanya : The foundational Consciousness which has absolute
      freedom of knowing and doing, of jfiana and kriya sakti.
                           Cha (B)
Cheda : Cessation of prana and apana by sounding of anacka
     (vowel-less) sounds.
                                   Ja (*)
J a g a t : The world process.
Jagadananda : The bliss of the Self or the Divine appearing as
          the universe, the bliss of the Divine made visible.
                            Ja (3TT)
Jagrat avastha : The waking condition.
Jagrat jnana : Objective knowledge common to all people in
      waking condition.
Jagrat : Esoteric meaning—Enlightenment, undeluded awakening
      of consciousness at all levels.
                            Ji (sft)
Jiva : The individual soul, the empirical self whose conscious-
Glossary of Technical Terms                                   185

     ness is conditioned by the santskaras of his experience and
     who is identified with the limitations of his subtle and
     gross constitution.
Jivanmukta : The liberated individual who, while living in the
     physical body, is not conditioned by the limitation of his
     subtle and gross constitution and believes the entire
     universe to be an expression of Siva or his highest Self.
Jivanmukti : Experience of liberation while still living in the
     body.
                           Jna (STT)
Jnana : Spiritual wisdom; limited knowledge (which is the
     source of bondage).
Jnana yoga : Sakta upaya.
                          Ta (*)
Tattva : Thatness; principle; reality, the very being of a thing.
Tattva-traya : The three tattvas, viz; Nara, Sakti and Siva or
      Atma, Vidya, and Siva.
Tatpurusa : One of the five aspects of Siva.
Tanmatra : Lit., that only; the primary elements of perception;
      the general elements of the particulars of sense-perception,
      viz., sabda, sparsa. rupa, rasa, gandha.
Tamas : One of the constituents of Prakrti, the principle of
      Inertia and delusion.
Tarka sastra : Logic and Dialectics.


Turiya or Turya : The fourth state of consciousness beyond the
      states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep and stringing
     together all the states; the Metaphysical Consciousness
      distinct from the psychological or empirical consciousness;
     the saksi or witnessing consciousness; the transcendental
     Self.
Turiyatita or Turyatita : The state of consciousness transcend-
     ing the turiya, the state in which the distinction of the
     three, viz., waking, dreaming and deep sleep states is
     annulled; that pure blissful consciousness in which there
     is no sense of difference, in which the entire universe
     appears as the Self.
186                                                Spanda-Karika s

                            Tri (fir)
Trika : The system of philosophy of the triad—Nara, Sakti and
      Siva or (1) para, the highest, concerned with identity, (2)
     parapara, identity in difference, and (3) apara, difference
     and sense of difference.
Trika (Para): PrakaSa, VimarSa and their Samarasya.
Trika (Parapara): Iccha, Jnana and Kriya.

                             Da (<y)
DarSana : Seeing, insight; system of philosophy.
                             Di (fe)
Dik : Space.
Dikcari : Sub-species of Vamesvari, connected with bahi$karanas
     or outer senses.
Divya Mudra : Khecarf mudra.
                             Dl (<?t)
Diksa : (1) The gift of spiritual knowledge (2) The initiation
     ceremony pertaining to a disciple by which spiritual
     knowledge is imparted and the residual traces of his evil
     deeds are purified.
                             De (*)
DeSa : Space.
DeSa adhva : Spatial course of manifestation, viz., Kala, tattva,
     bhuvana.
                            Dha (9)
Dharana : (1) Meditation,    (2) The letters, ya, ra, la, va    t,

Dhruva : (1) Anuttara stage, (2) The letter <a' (sr).
Dhyana yoga : The highest dharana of anava upaya in which
     pramana (knowledge), prameya (object of knowledge) and
     pramata (knower) are realized as aspects of Satfivid or
     foundational consciousness.
Dhvani yoga : A dharana of anava upaya consisting of concen-
     tration on anahata nada (unstruck sound) arising within
     through prana sakti, This is also known as Varna yoga.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                    187

                          Na (TT)
Nada : (1) Metaphysical—The first movement of Siva-§akti
    towards manifestation, (2) In yoga—The unstruck sound
    experienced in susumna.
                              Ni (fir)
Nigraha krtya : Siva's act of Self-veiling.
Nibhalana : Perception; mental practice.
Nimesa : Lit., closing of the eye-lids, dissolution of the world;
       (1) the inner activity of spanda by which the object is
      merged into the subject; (2) the dissolution of the
      Sakticakra in the Self; (4) the involution of Siva in
      matter.
Nimilana Samadhi : The inward meditative condition in which
      the individual consciousness gets absorbed into the univer-
      sal consciousness.
Niyati : Limitation by cause-effect relation; spatial limitation,
      limitation of what ought to be done and what ought not to
      be done.
Nirvana : Dissolution in Sunya; liberation.
Nirvikalpa : Devoid of all thought-construct or ideation.
Nirvyutthana Samadhi : Samadhi (absorption into the Univer-
      sal consciousness) which continues even when one is not
      engaged in formal meditation.
                              Pa (q)
Pancakrtya : The ceaseless five-fold act of Siva, viz. manifesta-
      tion (srtfi), maintenance of manifestation (sthiti), withdra-
      wal of manifestation (samhara), veiling of Self (vilaya or
      pidhana), Grace (anugraha), or the five-fold act of
      abhasana, rakti, vimarsana, bljavasthapana and vilapana
      (See Pratyabhijnahrdayaip, sutra 11).
Pancamantra : I§ana, Tatpurusa, Sadyojata, Vamadeva, and
      Aghora.
Pancavaktra—Do—
PancaSakti : The five fundamental saktis of Siva, viz., Cit,
      Ananda, Iccha, Jnana, and Kriyd.
Pati : The experient of Suddha adhva; the liberated individual.
Pati da§a : The state of liberation.
Para : The Highest, the Absolute.
188                                               Spanda-Karika s

Para pramatr : The highest experient; Parama Siva.
Parama Siva : The Highest Reality, the Absolute.
Parapara : The intermediate stage, both identical and different,
      unity in diversity.
Paramartha : The highest reality, essential truth; the highest
      goal.
Paramarsa : Seizing mentally; experience; contemplation,
      remembrance.
Paravak : The vibratory pulsation of the Divine Mind that
      brings about manifestation, Logos; Cosmic Ideation;
       Spanda.
Parasakti : The Highest Sakti of the Divine, Citi.
Parinama : Transformation.
Pasu : The empirical individual bound by avidya or spiritual
      nescience.
PaSu matarah : MaheSvari and other associated Saktis—active in
      the various letters, controlling the life of the empirical
      selves.
Pasyanti : The Divine view in undifferntiated form; Vak-Sakti,
      going forth as seeing, ready to create in which there is no
     difference between vacya (object) and vacaka (word).
PaSa : Bondage.
Pidhana Krtya : The act of Self-veiling, same as vilaya.
Puipstattva or Purusa tattva : PaSu pramata; jiva; the empiri-
      cal self.
Puryastaka : Lit; the city of the group of eight i.e. the five
      tanmatraSy buddhi, ahahkara and manas; the suk$ma
      sarira (subtle body).
Purnatva : Perfection.
Purnahanta : The perfect I-consciousness; non-relational
      I-consciousness.
PrakaSa : Lit., Light, the principle of Self-revelation; conscious-
   ness; the principle by which every thing is known.
Prakrti or Pradhana : The source of objectivity from buddhi
      down to earth.
Prama : Exact knowledge.
Pramana : Knowledge, means of knowledge.
Pramatr : Knower; Subject: Experient.
Prameya : Knowable; object of knowledge, object.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                   189

Pratha : To expand; unfold; appear; shine.
Pratha : The mode of appearance.
Pratibha : (1) Ever creative activity of consciousness; (2) The
      spontaneous Supreme I-consciousness, (3) Para Sakti.
Pratimilana : Both nimilana and unmilana samadhi i.e. turning
      of the consciousness both within i.e. into Siva and outside
      i.e. the Sakti of Siva, experience of divinity both within
      and outside.
Pratyabhijna : Recognition.
Pratyahara : (1) Comprehension of several letters into one
      syllable effected by combining the first letter of a sutra
      with its final indicatory letter. (2) In yoga, withdrawal of
      the senses from their objects.
PratyavamarSa : Self-recognition.
Pralaya : Dissolution of manifestation.
Pralayakala or Pralayakevali : One resting in Mayatattva, not
      cognizant of anything; congizant of Sunya or void only.
Prasara : Expansion; manifestation of Siva in the form of the
      universe through His Sakti.
Praga : Generic name for vital power; vital energy; specifically
      it is the vital vayu in expiration.
Prapa-Pramata : The subject considering prana to be his Self.
Prana-bija : The letter ha (£).
Pranayama : Breath control.
Prasada : The mantra sauh (*ft:).
Prthivi : The earth tattva. Pau ( t f )
Paurusa ajnana : The innate ignorance of Purusa regarding his
       real Self.
Paurusa jnana : Knowledge of one's Siva nature after the
       ignorance of one's real Self has been eliminated.
                              Ba (*)
Bandha : (1) Bondage, (2) Limited knowledge, (3) Knowledge
     founded on primal ignorance; (4) Yogic practice in which
     certain organs of the body are contracted and locked.
Bala : Cid-bala, power of Universal Consciousness or true Self.
Bindu or Vindu ; (1) A point, a metaphysical point, (2) Un-
      divided Light of Consciousness, (3) The compact mass of
      Sakti gathered into an undifferentiated point ready to create
190                                               Spanda-Karika s

     (4) Parah pramata, the Highest Self or Consciousness, (5)
     Anusvara or nasal sound in «Tf[ indicated by a dot on the
     letter 5, suggesting the fact that Siva in spite of the mani-
     festation of the universe is undivided: (6) A specific teja
     or light appearing in the centre of the eye-brow by the
     intensity of meditation, (7) A drop of semen.
Bahirmukhata : Externalization, extroversion.
Brahma :In Sankara Vedanta—Pure foundational consciousness
     without activity; unlimited knowledge without activity. In
     Saiva Philosophy—Pure foundational consciousness full of
     svatantrya Sakti, i.e. unimpeded power to know and do
     any and every thing, parama Siva.
Brahma na^i : Susumna or the central praijic channel or nerve.
Brahmanirvaoa : Resting in pure jnana tattva9 devoid of acti-
      vity; the state of Vijiianakala.
Brahmarandhra : The Sahasrara cakra.
Brahmavada : Sankara Vedanta.
Bija : (1) The active Light of the highest Sakti which is the
      root cause of the universe (2) Vowel (3) The mystical
      letter forming the essential part of the mantra of a deity.
      (4) The first syllable of a mantra.
Buddha : One awakened to the light of consciousness.
Buddhi : The ascertaining intelligence; the intuitive aspect of
      consciousness by which the essential Self awakens to
      truth.
Buddhindriya : The five powers of sense-perception, viz.,
      smelling, tasting, seeing, feeling by touch, hearing, also
      known as jnanendriya.
Baindavi kala : Baindavi—pertaining to Bindu or the knower,
     kala—will power. Baindavi kala is that freedom of Parama
      Siva by which the knower always remains as the knower
     and is never reduced to the known, svatantrya Sakti.
Bauddha ajnana : The ignorance inherent in Buddhi by which
     one considers his subtle or gross body as the Self on
     account of aSuddha vikalpas.
Bauddha jnana : Considering oneself as Siva by means of
     Suddha vikalpas.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                 191

                            Bha (IT)
Bhakti (apara): Devotion; intense feeling and will for being
     united with Siva.
Bhakti (para) the constant feeling of being united with Siva and
     the supreme bliss of that consciousness.
Bhava : Transmigratory existence.
                           Bha (*r)
Bhava : Existence both internal and external; object.
Bhavana : The practice of contemplating or viewing mentally
     oneself and everything else as Siva; jfiana yoga; Sakta
     upaya; creative contemplation, apprehension of an inner,
     emergent divine consciousness.
                              Bhu(*J
Bhuvana : Becoming; place of existence; abode.    There are 108
     bhuvanas.
                          Bhu (%Q
Bhuta : Gross physical element.
Bhucari : Sub-species of VameSvari, connected with the bhavas
     or existent objects.
Bhumika : Role.
                           Bhai (*)
Bhairava (apara) : Siddhas who have unity-consciousness and
     consider the whole world as identical with Self.
Bhairava (para) : Parama Siva; the Highest Reality; This is an
      anacrostic word, bha, indicating bharana, maintenance of
      the world, ra, ravana or withdrawal of the world, and
      va, vamana or projection of the world.
Bhairava or Bhairavi mudra : This is a kind of physical condi-
      tion brought about by the following practice :
      "Attention should be turned inwards; the gaze should be
      turned outwards, without the twinkling of eyes."
Bhairava samapatti : Identity with Parama Siva.
                            Bho Oft)
Bhoga : Experience, sometimes used in the narrow sense of
     enjoyment.
Bhokta : Experient.
192                                             Spanda-Karika s

                            Ma (*)
Madhya : (1) The Central Consciousness, the pure I-conscious-
     ness, (2) The susumna or the central pranic nadi.
Madhya dhama : The central nadi, also known as brahmanaiji
     or su$umna.
Madhyama : Sabda or sound in its subtle form as existing in
     the antah-karana, prior to its gross manifestation.
Madhyagakti : Saipvit-sakti, the Central Consciousness-power.
Manas : That aspect of the mind which co-operates with the
     senses in building perceptions, and which builds up images
     and concepts, intention and thought-constructs.
Mantra : (1) Sacred word or formula to be chanted (2) In
     Saktopaya, that sacred word or formula by which the
     nature of the Supreme is reflected on as identical with the
     Self. It is called mantra, because it induces manana or
     reflection on the Supreme and because it provides trana
     or protection from the whirligig of transmigratory life. In
     Saktopaya, the Citta itself assumes the form of mantra.
     (3) The experient who has realized the suddha vidya tattva.
Mantra-maheSvara : The experient who has realized Sadasiva-
     tattva.
Mantra-virya : The perfect and full I-consciousness; Siva-
     consciousness; the experience of paravak, the energy of the
     mantra of I-consciousness.
Mantresvara : The experient who has realized Isvara tattva.
Manthana Bhairava : Bhairava that churns i.e. dissolves all
     objects into Self-consciousness; Svacchanda Bhairavah.
Marici : Sakti.
Mahartha : The greatest end; the highest value; the pure-
     I-consciousness, the Krama and Kaula discipline.
Mahamantra : The great mantra of pure consciousness, of
     supreme I-consciousness.
Mahamaya (apara) : The state below suddha vidya and above
     Maya in which resides the vijnanakala.
Mahamaya (para) : The lower stratum of suddha vidya in which
     reside the vidyesvaras who, though considering themselves
     as of the nature of pure consciousness, take the world to
     be different from the Self.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                    193

Mahanaya : Krama discipline.
Mahahrada : The highest, purest I-consciousness. It is called
    mahahrada or the great lake because of its limpidity and
    depth.
                         Ma (*TT)
Matfka : (1) The little unknown mother, the letter and word-
     power which is the basis of all knowledge. (2) The
     paravak sakti that generates the world.
Matrka-cakra : The group of saktis pertaining to Matrka.
Madhyamika : The follower of the Buddhist Madhyamaka
      Philosophy.
Maya tattva : The principle that throws a veil over pure con-
     sciousness and is the material cause of physical manifesta-
     tion, the source of the five kancukas.
Maya : In Sankara Vedanta : The beginningless cause that
  brings about the illusion of the world.
Maya Sakti : The sakti of Siva that displays difference in
     identity and gives rise to maya tattva; the finitising power
      of the Infinite.
Maya-pramata : The empirical self, governed by Maya.
Mayiya mala : The limitation due to Maya which gives to the
     soul its gross and subtle body, and brings about a sense
     of difference.
Malini : Sakti of letters which holds the entire universe within
     itself and in which the letters are arranged in an irregular
     way from 4 na' to 4 pha\
MaheSvarya : The power of MaheSvara, the supreme lord.
Mahesvaryadayah : MaheSvari and other deities presiding over
     the group of letters.
Mukti : Liberation from bondage; acquisition of Siva-conscious-
     ness, Jivan Mukti—Liberation     while living i.e. acquisition
     of Siva-consciousness while the physical, biological and
     psychic life are still going on.   Videha-mukti-estdb\ishment
     in Siva-consciousness after the mortal body has been
     dissolved.
                               Mu (*)
Mudra : (1) Mud (joy), ra (to give); it is called mudra, because
     it gives the bliss of spiritual consciousness or because it
194                                             Spanda-Karika s

    seals up (mudranat) the universe into the being of turiya-
    consciousness, (2) Yogic control of certain organs as help
    in concentration.
Mudra-Krama or Krama-mudra : The condition in which the
    mind by the force of samavesa swings alternately between
    the internal (Self or Siva) and the external (the world
    which now appears as the form of Siva).
Mudra-virya : The power by which there is emergence of the
    Supreme I-consciousness; mantra-virya; khecari state.
                            Me (*)
Meya (prameya) : Object.
                            Mo (*ft)
Moha : Delusion by which one regards the body as the self;
    Maya.
Moksa : Same as mukti.
                             7o(<ft)
Yoga : (I) Acquisition of what is not yet acquired. (2) Commu-
     nion. Communion of the individual soul with the Supreme;
     discipline leading to this communion, (3) (In Patanjali)—
     Samadhi, cessation of mental fluctuation (yuji samadhau).
Yoginyah : The saktis — Khecari, Gocari, Dikcari, Bhucari, etc.
Yoni : (1) Womb, source, (2) The nine classes of consonants;
     in the. context of letters, Sakti is yoni, and Siva is bija,
     (3) The four Saktis, viz. Amba, Jyestha, Raudri, Vama,
     (4) Maya Sakti.
Yonivarga : Maya and its progeny; mayiya mala.
                             Ra (T)
Rajas : The principle of motion, activity and disharmony—a
     constituent of Prakrti.
Ravi : Lit., Sun, in esoteric philosophy and yoga, pramana
     (knowledge), prana.
                             Ra (TT)
 Raga : One of the kancukas of Maya on account of which there
      is limitation by desire, passionate desire.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                 195

                              Ru(i)
Rudra (Kalagni) : Rudra residing in the lowest plane of Nivrtti
     kala.
                           La (?r)
Laya : Interiorization of consciousness; dissolution.
                              Lo
Loka : Plane of existence.


Varga : Classes of letters like kavarga, cavarga, etc.
Varna : (1) Letter (2) Object of concentration known as dhvani
     in anavopaya; anahata nada (unstruck sound experienced
     in susumna).
                              Va (?rr)
Vacaka : Word, Varna mantra and pada.
Vacya : Object, referent, Kala,, tattva, bhuvana.
Vama or Vamesvari : The divine Sakti that emits (from 4vam'
     to emit) or projects the universe out of the Absolute and
     produces the reverse (vama) consciousness of difference
     (whereas there is non-difference in the Divine).
Vasana : Residual traces of actions and impressions retained in
     the mind; habit energy.
Vaha : Flow, channel, the prana flowing in the i$a nadi on the
     left, and apana flowing in the pihgala nadi on the right of
     su$umna are together known as vaha.
                              Vi (ft)
Vikalpa : Difference of perception; distinction; option; an idea
      as differentiated from another idea; fancy: imagination;
      thought-construct.
Vikalpa-ksaya : The dissolution of all vikalpas.
Vikalpanam : The differentiation-making activity of the mind.
Vikalpa (suddha) : The fixed idea that I am Siva.
Vikasa : Unfoldment; development; expansion.
Vigraha : Individual form or shape; body.
Vigrahl : The embodied one.
Vijnanakala : Experient below Suddha Vidya but above Maya
  196                                             Spanda-Karika s

       who has pure awareness but no agency. He is free of
       Karma and mayiya mala but not free of anava mala.
 Vidya : (1) Suddha vidya tattva; (2) Unmana sakti, Sahaja Vidya
       (3) Limited knowledge, a kancuka of Maya.
 Vimarsa : Self-consciousness or awareness of Parama Siva full
       of jnana and kriya which brings about world-process.
 Visva : The universe; the all; all (adjective).
 Visvamaya, Visvatmaka : Immanent.
 Visarga : Emanation, creation.
 Visargabhumi : Two dots, simultaneously representing sakti's
      external manifestation of the universe and the internal
      assimilation of the same into Siva.
                              Ve (*)
Vedak : Experient.
Vedya : Object.
                              Vai (*)
Vaikhari : Sakti as gross physical word.
                             Vya (S*T)
Vyapakatva : All-pervasiveness.
Vyamohitata : Delusion.
Vyutthana : Lit; rising, coming to normal consciousness after
     samadhi or meditative absorption.
                             Sa (*r)
Sakti : (1) The power of Siva to manifest, to maintain the mani-
       festation and to withdraw it. (2) The spanda or creative
      pulsation of Siva or foundational consciousness.
Sakti-cakra : The group of twelve mahakalis, the goddesses
      responsible for creation, etc; the group o£ Saktis of
      the senses; group of mantras; the group of khecari, etc.
Sakti-tattva : The second of the 36 tattvas.
Sakti-paiicaka : The five foundational saktis of Siva, viz., Cit,
      ananda, iccha, jnana, and kriya.
Sakti-pata : Descent of sakti; Divine grace by which the
      empirical individual turns to and realizes his essential
      Divine nature.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                 197

Saktiman : Mahesvara; Siva.
Sabda : Sound, word.
Sabda-brahma ; Ultimate Reality in the form of c/f-vibration in
     which state thought and word are identical.
Sabda-rasi : The group of letters from a to k$a.
                              SA (*IT)

Sakta-upaya : The ever-recurring contemplation of the pure
     thought-construct of oneself being essentially Siva or the
     Supreme I-consciousness.
Sambhava upaya : Sudden emergence of Siva-consciousness
     without any thought-construct (vikalpa) by a mere hint
     that one's essential Self is Siva; also known as Sambhava
     yoga or Icchopaya or Iccha-yoga.
                              Si (ftr)
Siva ; The good; the name of the Divine in general; the founda-
      tional prakasa or divine light.
Siva (parama) : The Absolute; the transcendent divine principle.
Siva Tattva : The first of the 36 tattvas, the primal manifesta-
      tion.
                              Su (*r)
Suddha Adhva : The course of extra-mundane manifestation
     from Siva upto Suddha vidya.
Suddha Vikalpa : The thought of one's self being essentially
     Siva.
Suddha Vidya : The fifth tattva, counting from Siva. In this
     tattva the consciousness of both T and 'This' is equally
     prominent.
                              Su (sr)
Sunya (Bauddha) : A state in which there is no distinct con-
     sciousness of knower, knowledge and known; an indefin-
     able state of Reality.
Sunya (Saiva) : A state in which no object Is experienced.
Sunya-pramata : The experient who is identified with the void,
     praiayakaia.
198                                               Spanda-Karika s

                              Sai («)
Saiva agama : The ten dualistic sastras, eighteen sastras which
      teach identity in difference, and sixty-four non-dualistic
      sastras expounded by Siva.


§adadhva : The six forms of manifestation—three on the subjec-
      tive or temporal side, viz., mantra, vama, and pada, and
      three on the spatial or objective side, viz; Kala tattva, and
      bhuvana.
§andha-bija : The four lettets              —which are unable to
      give rise to any other letter.
§astha-vaktra : Lit., the sixth organ or meghra-kendra, near the
      root of the rectum.
                              Sa (*)
Sankoca : Contraction, limitation.
Sandhana : Lit., joining, union, union of the individual con-
      sciousness with the Universal consciousness through
      intensive awareness.
Samghatta : Meeting; mental union; concentration.
Saipvit : Consciousness; Supreme consciousness in which there
      is complete fusion of prakasa and vimarsa; jnana sakti;
      svatantrya sakti.
Saipvit-devata : From the macrocosmic point of view, Saijivit-
      devatas are Khecari, gocari, dikcari, and bhucari. From
      the microcosmic point of view, the internal and external
      senses are said to be sairivit-devata.
Saipsara or saipsrti : Transmigratory existence, the world-
      process.
Saiphara krtya : The withdrawal or reabsorption of the universe
      into Siva.
Satpsarin : Transmigratory being.
Sakala : All limited experients from gods down to the worm.
Sat : Existence which is consciousness.
Sattva : The principle of being; light and harmony, a consti-
      tuent of Prakrti.
Sadvidya : Suddha vidya.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                 199

Sadasiva (Sadakhya tattva) : The third tattva, counting from
      Siva. At this stage, the 'I-experience' is more prominent
      than 'this'-experience.
Samana : When the unmana sakti begins to display herself in
     the form of the universe beginning with sunya and ending
      with earth, then descending from the highest state of
      Pramata (knowing Self), she is known as Samana inasmuch
      as she has started the mentation of all phenomena (<ase$a-
      manana-matra-riipatvat samana).
Samarasa : One having the same feeling or consciousness.
Samadhi : Collectness of mind in which there is cessation of
      the fluctuations of the mind; mental absorption.
Samana : The vital vayu that helps in the assimilation of food
      etc., and brings about equilibrium between prana and
     apana.
Samapatti : Sometimes a synonym of samadhi; consummation;
      attainment of psychic at-one-ment.
Samavesa : Being possessed by the Divine, absorption of the
      individual consciousness in the Divine.
Sarvakartrtva : Omnipotence.
Sarvajnatva : Omniscience.
Savikalpa jnana : Knowledge which is acquired by the manas.
Sahaja : Innate essential nature.
Sahaja vidya : Knowledge of the innate essential nature, some-
     times used in the sense of unmana-pure divine conscious-
      ness in which mental consciousness ceases, pervasion in
      Siva-consciousness.
                              Sa ( S T )
Samarasya : Unison of Siva and Sakti; identity of Conscious-
     ness; identical state in which all differentiation has
     disappeared.
Saksad upaya : Sambhava upaya.
Saksatkara : Direct intuitive experience of the essential Self.
                            Sw (?)
Sugata : The Buddha.
Suprabuddha : One who has awakened to the transcendental
     state of consciousness and in whom that consciousness is
     constantly present.
200                                               Spanda-Karika s

Susupti : Sound, dreamless sleep.
Susupti (savedya) : Sound sleep in which there remains slight
     trace of the sense of pleasure, lightness, etc.
Susupti (apavedya) : Very deep sleep in which there is complete
        absence of all objective consciousness.
Suksma Sarira : The inner subtle body, puryatfaka.
                            Su (*)
Surya (symbolic) : Prana, pramana (knowledge), jfiana sakti.
Surya nadi : The Ida nadi carrying prana.
                             So (st)
Soma (symbolic) : Prameya or object, apana.
Soma n a d i : The Pingala nadi carrying apana.
                          Sau
Saugata : Follower of Buddha, a Buddhist.
                            Stha (**)
Sthana-kalpana : A mode of anava upaya concerned with con-
       centration on external things.
Sthiti krtya : Maintenance of manifestation.
Sthula bhutam : Gross elements—ether, air, fire, water and
       earth.
Sthula Sarira : Gross physical body.
                            Spa ( F T )
Spanda : Throb in the motionless Siva which brings about the
     manifestation, maintenance, and withdrawal of the uni-
     verse; svatantrya sakti, creative pulsation.
                            Spha (*q>)
Sphuratta : Gleam; a throb-like gleam of the absolute Freedom
     of the Divine bringing about the world-process; spanda,
     the light of the spirit.
                             Sva (**)
Svatantra : The Absolute of unimpeded will.
Svacchanda : The absolutely Free Being, Siva, Bhairava.
Svapna : Dream, dreaming condition, vikalpas or fancies limit-
     ed to particular individuals.
Glossary of Technical Terms                                   201

Svarupa : Essential nature.
Svarupapatti : Attaining one's essential nature or true Self.
Svalaksana : An object limited in its particular space and time.
Svasaipvedana : An intuitive apprehension of Self.
                            Sva (^rr)
Svacchandya ; Absolute Freedom of the Supreme.
Svatantrya : Absolute Freedom of Will; Vimarsa Sakti.
Svatma-satkr : To assimilate to oneself; to integrate to oneself.
                           Sve
Sveccha : Siva's     or Sakti's   own will, synonymous with
     svatantrya.
                             Ha 00
Ha : Symbol of Sakti or divine power.
Hathapaka : Persistent process of assimilating experience to the
     central consciousness of the experient.
                            Hr (f)
Hrdaya : Lit., heart; the central consciousness which is the
     substratum of all manifestation, citprakasa.
                            He( |)
Hetu : Cause.
Hetumat : Effect.
                          Hra (*)
Hrada : Lit; Lake; the supreme spiritual awareness. It is
     called a lake, because it is clear, uncovered by anything,
     deep, and infinite.
                            Ham (i)
Hamsa : The jiva, the soul.
Hamsajapa : The consciousness of nada-kala.
                        SUBJECT INDEX

Essential nature of Spanda—as Realization of Spanda by the fully
  unmesa and nimesa, as the           enlightened, pp. 86, 90.
  source of all the saktis, pp. 6,64 Samanya Spanda and the gunas,
Spanda as the source of all            p. 92.
  manifestation—p. 24.               Realization of Spanda in intense
Spanda as identical in all the         emotional states, p. 101.
  differing states of waking, Spanda as all-pervasive, p. 115.
  dream, etc., p. 34, in pleasure, Spanda as source of power for
  pain, etc., p. 40.                   Mantra, Mantresvara        etc.
Spanda as above pleasure, pain,        p. 110.
  subject, object, etc, p. 45.       Supernormal powers derived
Spanda as the source of energy         from Spanda, pp. 129, 135,
  for all the senses, pp. 51, 57.       137, 139, 146.
The reasons for the non-recogni- Spanda realizable by unmesa,
  tion of Spanda, pp. 60-61,152,       p. 142.
   160, 162, 167.
Spanda as the Eternal Principle,
   pp. 79-80.
       INDEX TO IMPORTANT SANSKRIT WORDS

                         arfV^rmt 60
          46                    6,7
MtbiH 51,52              3PT3 52
       7                 sn^TT 70,71
W T R 70,71              ^ n r r f e r 121
WW 4                     srefJT 6,67,130
       25                3^ 8,26,115,116 129,135,148
       6                 SfTOTCPT 7
        58                             6
SFTO 52
          100                        79,80
              137,138             72
^rfij^Tcrc 66,67
             '
                         Sifd+eM 148
                         TOTf^TpTWt 86
m m 61                   TOfe
                            O   60,61
                                  »
SRTcTOTcft 26            3T7RT 25
W W 24                   3TTO 71,80
smr^rs^Pr 147            STH^T 35
        6                3TOTO 60,61
^     6,7,14                    6
smrr^r 6                        136
3FWT 40                  STfTOsRTT 7,160
          52,61          ST^cTT 6,81
       8,52,58,101,130   ^STcftfcT 39
^cnf^TT 9                ST^Ps 167
^nxf^f^mqr 80                            3TT
         67              3TRTR 24
3 m 35                   3HTO 3,8
smteqr 142                        61
W f f f 4,86,95,96               57,58
sm^fsnr: 8               W]CH\ 61
VWZ 25,70,81,106         ^IcHlPTOR 61
wmvwz 4                  STO^WT 6
           46                   7,8
srfatftT 70,72           STT^TTO 9
204                                                 Spanda-Karika s

srnrtir l                                     53
                                 ^rsq- 60,61
snTt^fnr 6                       ^ f 79,81
3TT9PT 70                        ^ c ^ 79,80,81
triWMdT 25                       ^T? 25
                !                ^TT 152
^ S J 58                         ^f^TcT 46
            8                    m ^ Z 86
          57                             61
S^rcrfor 61                           24,25,79,81
^ c m r m 81                     ^Fpfer 80
ffezr 45                         WcfT 79
                    I            4>l4+K«ldl 80

ffsTcT^ 26                           24

         24                             66   139
 && 5,7,8,9,121                  fW 7
 vJ^PRT 52
 S^frr 1,4,7                     ^ m 70
 ytflT^dl 102                        25,93,130
 ^r^nr 9                         fiwwPw 130
 SfTO 4,5,6,7,9,67,140,142,143   ^ T 119,120
          146,147
 ^nft^T 8,9,26,67,107,127                8,95,96,106
 ^WtiT^T 52 .                                     T
          58                            25,45,46,81,116
 sq^rfssr 86,149                 qT^T 25,45,46
           34                    ^nf^T 140,141
 UMKId 23,25                     W i f e 92
 OTPT 4                          fet     8,95,96
       4                         •fta* 52
                   3;                            *
       6                             51,52
                61               TOTT 7,127,170
 ^if 9                           ^ p r f 105,106
 +         51,52                         6
• «iWjfrl 52                     ^ridUHd 52
 +           52                  r^T 24
Index to Important Sanskrit   Words 236

           24                       fafteR   111
       M<?q 81
r^rdUlftcf 93,130                           87
Pd^d 6                              f ^ R 86
f d ^ T 35,58
           67,107                                 25
U<\sH\ 25,130                       f ^ f t 8,95,96
P d < l d ^ d 8,41,70,106,122,141   Star 122,123
f ^ T O 90                                 45,46
fTOTO 35                            y s f t 40,41
fTOTT 8,26,115,116                  f f o 137
fd^dlM^Tt) 142                      f^ft 1
^dcfddl 58                          ^T 24
%cRT 61                             ^TpsPTFft 141
^tror 6                                               ET
                  3T                         7
*PT<r 7,9,23,24 25,26,119,120       ept 64,65
     25,46,52,80                    STT^T 129,134
            52                                34
TOTO 33,34,35,87,99,130,131,        S^TPT 34
      134,150                       STFft 121,122
           130                      STO 121,122
5fT?Rf 99,129,130,131,133                             5f
sfte U5,116                                93,130,146,147
             119,160                PdH^ld 6,7,81
vjild^^ddl 105                      ftiftTO 8,9,26,69,108,127
              6                     faifr 5,6,9,67
                5f                  Pd<~ld 110,111
skd+d'c^ 65                         fdld+cH 67
                                    fd'dfuldlSTT 121
5TTrT 90,93,130                     frrte 24,26,41
siN^T 4                             fTOtsnp 25
glld^^dld 39                               6,24,45,46,71
5TMVI Rd 61,130                             58
m 69,71,90                          ^fftasfrsf 25
                cT                                    q
d'HId 167                           <TT 35
      92,93                                   52
cTRrVTOfirrf^ 122                   MOIMd 7,9,60,61,65
206                                              Spanda-Karika s

<n?rfipr 3                   SRfar 105
<rr*n*r 25                   SprfrT 51,52
qTTTT^ 6,45,46               5TCR 19
            7                         25
q r ^ T 6,8,130                      100
T^^Txfr 26                   STTW 106
                 65          smrrf^r^R 73
q n ^ f t 130                5mir5r«TRfT 137
          35                           57,58
TTFT9T 6
           160,161,162,167
M<md uuqra 7                 SRT 127
•KUlfa 6,35,90                     58,110,111
qf^JTm 35                    5TT|r 45
qftyiT 52                              81
TO 152                                   9,106
        ft 148                      93
qio^TT^ 35                             61
       7                     % 35,46
J^T 57,58,65                 d^ldlst 106
^c\ 46                       4gMI<il 46
yrf 6                        ^ r f ^ T 106
y j r f ^ T 2,6,152          sTT^fl" 8
gptOT 24,41,45,52,167
s r ^ r 8,24,25,26,46        WFT 25
SM^IM^d' 24 .                STT^RT 70,71
srfam 7                      WcRT 71
SRfte 58                     w m t e 71
sr^f^rpr 8,41                ^TT^TT 70
SM^-frd 7,160,161,162,167    ^Mdldlcm 70
5HTT 25                      srnrsrcsr 8
TOFT 25                             7
raj 4 86,87,99,105,107,150   WFTR 35
         6,8,9               ^ T t 8,95,96
STTTTcTT 40,41,58,71                 7
snmr 6,46                    ^52,61,67
smcrre 6                     VT^toZT 67
5P?PTC 7.8,9
SRimFT 6           , ,.      sffaT 115
Index to Important Sanskrit Words 238


      9                         Wft^ft 170
             152
HWrHHS 90                              3,172
WW 167                                116,147
W 6 , 2 6 , l 10,111,115        ^T^T 116
              6,111             ^rJrfw 8
H^cfl4 4                        dl*^dfl 8
          6,111,115
^ ^ T ^ 7                       f ^ q - 41
Jretfa 7,130                    fd+IU 6
             52                 fornr^     52
          71                    fdJrtld^l^ToF 8
T^TseffT 106                     fd?lldl+H 6
*T^ld< 6                               130,146,147
                                 f^T 6
TO? 24                           fd'H d 8
^TTSZTfTOT 70                    finr 90
TPRT 61                          faffr 127,129
TTO7 52                                     3
HNIdrd 92
immr^T) 93                             52
^TFfhTR^T 61                     fcHfidd 8
ftcT*ftift 95,146                f k m 7,67
iTtTRT^ 41                       fepFTFR 7
     52,81,101,105,106           f d ^ + r 140,141
         45,46                   fa^T 46
iftr 6,24                              7,8,9,26
iftw 127                                  26
^     70                         fd¥d*H 116
                 IT              fd¥dl+IT 67
 ifhrf^T 130                     fdVdWId 70
 qfWt 122,130,134,141,143        fq^Tf^ 26
 ^HPd+r 122                      f d ^ S * 69,70
                  T              f ^ s f t r M 26
 Trfi 2,40                       f^RT 52,58
 W 92,93                         fcpTTcT 39
 T f W ^ i 58                    f^PT 6,67,130
 TjwO  nr 8                      f^WTST     o   67
 208                                              Spanda-Karika s
           137                  OTPTfa 121,122
 W
 TOT 71                         ^nt^T 6,9,70,127,139
 t ^ d f a d 71                 *PT 6,7,9,25,26
      6                         sNhfiter 111
 tattf 81                       aTO^cU 139
 c ^ T R 67                     tf^T    139
            73                  UdWlMdOT 72
 afar 8                         Hfsr 52,65
                      ST        SfsrfTOT 108
 STfacT 6,7,25,61,67            ^srfosrtoi 3
               5,8                     121
 ^ P ^ n r e 9                                92,93
 ^P^^rsrsrsmsr 7                 ott^     65
 srfa^nr 152                    mw* 35
ST*? 8,26,115,116                     6,24,40,41,45,46,93
 ^ n r t y 162                  igit 40,41
 ^ f d f f t r 1,6,8,152         ^ETtaR 52
 STTtT 45                                4,86,87,90,93,95,96,99,
                  105,106            149
 WZT 5,6,9,23,24,35,41,52,139              4 107,127,129,135
               52,99,106         ^Sf^TT 105
 STFcf^q- 110                   gqccf 34,71,81,90,129,150
 ^IRT^^T 6                             7,26,111,131
 m ^ ^ W ^ T 130                wtmfi 130
fa? 6,7,8,41,115,116,122,139                 129
                 110 .          ^ R T 26 39,73
ftMU^R 121                      tfV^T 45,70,86,90,105,135
fa^          3,52               Htq^TT^ 69
i m 25,70,71,86,106                      106
           71                           24
fl^TSTmcTT 71,96                shfrfa 6,71,93
^q^cnrre 73                                  102
                70              ^frspT 8
                      a         tffacT 6,39,93
^r^r 6                          tffafa 119
SRT50
        92,93                   tfFTST 69
H^TOFT 72                            4,7
w f t r 34,67,81                     9,25,26
Index to Important Sanskrit Words                            209

tfffa 51,52                         HdridF 51,52,65
fofcf 24,26                         ^ T 24,34,86,129,130,133,134
forfa 7,24,25,26,51,52                     135,150
        1,6,34                      RSR7TW 26
^ q ^ f r ^ 4,6,26,46,52,58,61,67   WiTR. 33,34,66,67
      69,71,80,90,95,99,101,102,    WWM+IVW 9
      108,111,127,136,139,147,      H^rd^ldd 8
      149                           fd^MfdW 61
            136,137                           7
fMr^fd^l^ 92                        4-dfd^l? 6,24,52
F T ^ m m r 137                              1
P T R ^ 27,44                       HkHfd^M 1
           8                        fqm^T 6,25,46,52,61,130
         1,6,7,46,105               W l ^ l f e 6,9,152
STO 57,58                                         *
FEZ 135,136
                                    ^ R h r 25
P ^ R 135,136
FfCrTT 6,46                         5*39
                                                  QT
W W R 67                                       40
     24                             fafir 6,139
F^BFCThi 122                        tfta 7,26,60,61,65,130
S5RRT 1,133                         rfhTOvR 70
                     AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX
                     To the first pada of each verse

                                      cmTrs^T^f^crrg 115
smnj^mrT^ftftr 172                    d^Hdfiu:            86
Weft foFf^ft TRt 146                  m m f y & t e w i m 105
                 70
STcT:          99                     feffigcT f^cffalH 148
wfopr:        ^T 101                  5**ftsfq          137
^rifefe^       139
W      * Hd'ddl FTT^T 133             T        T        W 45
OTd^fy^^d^ 95
                                           t iTMmirfcr 70
STd^WTST ^ T 79 4 0                  f ^ R m ^ n m ^ 60
^      ^      ^
                                                    q
                      ?                    H^nr fcn^T 150
      3TT        S ^ f a : 119       qxnpRmqnr 160
^ d l ^ d s n f ^ r : 121                           *
                      <?
                                      i j s ^ r q r ^ f t i f f r ^ 167

^f^RTTSRT^mr 142
                                      TO: qr^JicpffsznT 51
                                      ^      ft^crf^     24
                                      *T«ft                 135
                   «T
 o                      92                           UMT 129
Mlfdrd^fe^T             140                 ct^        70
                  3T                                     115
                    34
                    90               w r e ^ t f m w w i iu5
                                                           &
                  a
OTT JTcTnTWT 135                     ^EeTMvf^V 174
^rm ^ s ^ f t e r o f a 129              cTcSRc^T 51
^nrTWt^TWT 167
^TFTTfrf^ft          64              ^ T T f t r H ^ F T 152
d<*l*t>«J ^ f TOT: 110
cT^T          ^Tafrf^T 105
                 lio                  W W < f | ^TW 162
crJTftrar^HTtT 66                       f^mfhm         164
