/ 


cunt READS 


eS ARTHUR AVALON @&s 


The Serpent Power 


The Serpent Power 


i 


wee 


@ 


The Serpent Power 


i 


wee 


@ 


THE SERPENT POWER 


BEING THE 


SHAT-CHAKRA-NIRUPANA AND 


PADUKA-PANCHAKA 


TWO WORKS ON TANTRIK YOGA, TRANSLATED FROM THE 
SANSKRIT, WITH INTRODUCTION AND COMMENTARY 


By ARTHUR AVALON 


The Serpent Power 


By Arthur Avalon (Sir John George Woodroffe) 


Print ISBN 13: 978-1-4209-7109-5 


eBook ISBN 13: 978-1-4209-7110-1 


This edition copyright © 2020. Digireads.com Publishing. 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including 
photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other 
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. 


Cover Image: a detail of an illustration from the original edition, Luzac & 
Co, London, c. 1919. 


Please visit www.digireads.com 


CONTENTS 


Preface 


The Six Centers and the Serpent Power 


I. Introduction 
Il. Consciousness and Its Power (Shiva-Shakti) 


Ill. Embodied Consciousness (Jivatma) 


IV. The Garland of Letters (Varnamala) 


V. The Centers or Lotuses (Chakra, Padma), 


VIL Theoretical Bases of This Yoga 


Description of the Six Centers 


Preliminary Verse. 


Verse 1. 
Verse 2. 


Verse 3. 


Verse 4, 


Verse 8. 


Verse 9. 

Verses 10 and 11. 
Verse 12. 

Verse 13. 

Verse 14. 

Verse 15. 

Verse 16. 


Verse 17. 


Verse 18. 
Verse 20. 


Verse 24. 


Verse 26. 


Verse 30. 


Verse 31. 
Verse 31a. 
Verse 32. 
Verse 34. 
Verse 35. 
Verse 36. 


Verse 37. 


Verse 38. 
Verse 39. 
Verse 40. 
Verse 41. 
Verse 42. 
Verse 43. 


Verse 44. 


Verse 45. 
Verse 46. 
Verse 48. 
Summary of Verses 41 to 49. 
Verse 51. 


Verse 55. 


The Fivefold Footstool (Paduka-Panchaka) 


Introductory Verse. 
Verse 1. 
Verse 2. 
Verse 3. 


Verse 4. 


Verse _5. 
Verse 6. 


Verse _7, 


Preface 


In my work “Shakti and Shakta” I outlined for the first time the principles 
of “Kundali- Yoga” so much discussed in some quarters, but of which so 
little was known. 


This work is a description and explanation in fuller detail of the Serpent 
Power (Kundali Shakti), and the Yoga effected through it, a subject 
occupying a preeminent place in the Tantra Shastra. It consists of a 
translation of two Sanskrit works published some years ago in the second 
volume of my series of Tantrik Texts, but hitherto untranslated. The first, 
entitled “Shatchakranirupana” (“Description of and Investigation into the 
Six Bodily Centers”), has as its author the celebrated Tantrik Purnananda 
Svami, a short note of whose life is given later. It forms the sixth chapter of 
his extensive and unpublished work on Tantrik Ritual entitled 
“Shritattvachintamani.” This has been the subject of commentaries by 
Shangkara and Vishvanatha cited in Volume II. of the Tantrik Texts, and 
used in the making of the present translation. 


The second text, called “Paduka-Panchaka” (“Fivefold Footstool of the 
Guru”), deals with one of the Lotuses described in the larger work. To the 
translation of both works I have added some further explanatory notes of 
my own. As the works translated are of a highly recondite character, and by 
themselves unintelligible to the English reader, I have prefaced the 
translation by a general Introduction in which I have endeavored to give 
(within the limits both of a work of this kind and my knowledge) a 
description and explanation of this form of Yoga. I have also included some 
plates of the Centers, which have been drawn and painted according to the 
description of them as given in the first of these Sanskrit Texts. 


It has not been possible in the Introduction to do more than give a general 
and summary statement of the principles upon which Yoga, and this 
particular form of it, rests. Those who wish to pursue the subject in greater 
detail are referred to my other published books on the Tantra Shastra. In 


“Principles of Tantra” will be found general Introductions to the Shastra and 
(in connection with the present subject) valuable chapters on Shakti and 
Mantras. In my recent work, “Shakti and Shakta” (the second edition of 
which is as I write reprinting), I have shortly summarized the teaching of 
the Shakta Tantras and their rituals. In my “Studies in the Mantra Shastra,” 
the first three parts of which have been reprinted from the “Vedanta 
Kesari,” in which they first appeared, will be found more detailed 
descriptions of such technical terms as Tattva, Causal Shaktis, Kala, Nada, 
Bindu, and so forth, which are referred to in the present book. Other works 
published by me on the Tantra, including the “Wave of Bliss,” will be found 
in the page of advertisements. 


The following account of Pirnananda, the celebrated Tantrika Sadhaka of 
Bengal, and author of the “Shatchakraniriipana,” has been collected from 
the descendants of his eldest son, two of whom are connected with the work 
of the Varendra Research Society, Rajshahi, to whose Director, Sj. Akshaya 
Kumara Maitra, and Secretary, Sj. Radha Govinda Baisak, I am indebted for 
the following details: 


Purnananda was a Rahri Brahmana of the Kashyapa Gotra, whose ancestors 
belonged to the village of Pakrashi, which has not as yet been identified. 
His seventh ancestor Anantacharya is said to have migrated from 
Baranagara, in the district of Murshidabad, to Kaitali, in the district of 
Mymensingh. In his family were born two celebrated Tantrika Sadhakas— 
namely, Sarvananda and Purnananda. The descendants of Sarvananda reside 
at Mehar, while those of Pirnananda reside mostly in the district of 
Mymensingh. Little is known about the worldly life of Pirmananda, except 
that he bore the name of Jagadananda, and copied a manuscript of the 
Vishnupuranam in the Shaka year A.D. 1448-1526. This manuscript, now in 
the possession of one of his descendants named Pandit Hari Kishore 
Bhattacharya, of Kaitali, is still in a fair state of preservation. It was brought 
for inspection by Pandit Satis Chandra Siddhantabhishana of the Varendra 
Research Society. The colophon states that Jagadananda Sharma wrote the 
Purana in the Shaka year 1448. 


This Jagadananda assumed the name of Pirnananda when he obtained his 
Diksha (Initiation) from Brahmananda and went to Kamariipa (Assam), in 
which province he is believed to have obtained his “Siddhi” or state of 
spiritual perfection in the Ashrama, which still goes by the name of 
Vashishthashrama, situated at a distance of about seven miles from the town 
of Gauhati (Assam). Pirnananda never returned home, but led the life of a 
Paramahangsa and compiled several Tantrika works, of which the 
Shritattvachintamani, composed in the Shaka year A.D. 1499-1577, 
Shyamarahasya, Shaktakrama, Tattvanandatarangini, and Yogasara are 
known. His commentary on the Kali-kakarakitta hymn is well known. The 
Shatchakranirupana, here translated, is not, however, an independent work, 
but a part of the sixth Patala of the Shritattvachintamani. According to a 
genealogical table of the family of this Tantrika Acharya and Virachara 
Sadhaka, given by one of his descendants, Pirnananda is removed from his 
present descendants by about ten generations. 


This work has been on hand some five years, but both the difficulties of the 
subject and those created by the war have delayed its publication. I had 
hoped to include some other plates of original paintings and drawings in my 
possession bearing on the subject, but present conditions do not allow of 
this, and I have therefore thought it better to publish the book as it stands 
rather than risk further delay. 


ARTHUR AVALON. 


RANCHI, 


September 20, 1918. 


“We pray to the Paradevata united with Shiva, whose substance is the 
unmixed nectar of bliss, red like unto vermilion, the young flower of the 


hibiscus, and the sunset sky; who, having cleft Her way through the mass of 
sound issuing from the clashing and the dashing of the two winds in the 
midst of Sushumna, rises to that brilliant Energy which glitters with the 
luster of ten million lightnings. May She, Kundalini, who quickly goes to 
and returns from Shiva, grant us the fruit of Yoga! She being awakened is 
the Cow of Plenty to Kaulas, and the Kalpa Creeper of all things desired for 
those who worship Her.”—Sharada Tilaka, xxv. 70. 


The Six Centers and the Serpent Power 


I. INTRODUCTION 


The present works, Shatchakranirtipana (“Description of the Six Centers, or 
Chakras”) and Paduka Panchaka (“Fivefold Footstool”), deal with a 
particular form of Tantrik Yoga named Kundali Yoga, or, as some works 
call it, Bhtittashuddhi. These names refer to the Kundalini Shakti, or Static 
Power in the human body by the arousing of which the Yoga is achieved, 
and to the purification of the elements of the body (Bhitashuddhi) which 
takes place upon that event. This Yoga is effected by a process technically 
known as Shatchakrabheda, or piercing of the six Centers or Regions 
(Chakra) or Lotuses (Padma) of the body (which the work describes) by the 
agency of Kundalini Shakti, which in order to give it an English name I 
have here called the Serpent Power.{1} Kundala means coiled. This Power 
is the Goddess (Devi) Kundalini, or that which is coiled; for Her form is 
that of a coiled and sleeping serpent in the lowest bodily center, at the base 
of the spinal column, until by the means described She is aroused in that 
Yoga which is named after Her. Kundalini is the Shabdabrahman—that is, 
Divine Cosmic Energy—in bodies (v. post). The Saptabhimi, or seven 
regions (Loka), {2} are, as popularly understood, an exoteric presentment of 
the inner Tantrik teaching regarding the seven centers. {3} 


The Yoga is called Tantrik for a twofold reason. It will be found mentioned 
in the Yoga Upanishads which refer to the Centers, or Chakras, and in some 
of the Puranas. The treatises on Hathayoga also deal with the subject. We 
find even similar notions in systems other than the Indian, from which 
possibly in some cases they have been borrowed. Thus, in the Risala-i-haq- 
numa, by Prince Mahomed Dara Shikoh, {4} a description is given of the 
three centers “Mother of Brain,” or “Spherical heart” (Dil-i-muddawar); the 
“Cedar heart” (Dil-i-sanowbari); and the Dil-i-nilofari, or “Lily heart.” {5} 
Other references may be found in the works of the Mahomedan Sufis. So 
some of the Sufi fraternities (as the Naqshbandi) are said{6} to have 
devised, or rather borrowed, from the Indian Yogis{7} the Kundalini 
method as a means to realization.{8} I am told that correspondences are 


discoverable between the Indian (Asiatic) Shastra and the American-Indian 
Maya scripture of the Zunis called the Popul Vuh. {9} My informant tells 
me that their “air-tube” is the Sushumna; their “twofold air-tube” the Nadis 
Ida and Pinggala. “Hurakan,” or lightning, is Kundalini, and the centers are 
depicted by animal glyphs. Similar notions have been reported to me as 
being held in the secret teaching of other communities. That the doctrine 
and practice should be widespread we might expect if it has a foundation on 
fact. This form of Yoga is, however, in particular associated with the 
Tantras or Agamas, firstly, because these Scriptures are largely concerned 
therewith. In fact, such orderly descriptions in practical full detail as have 
been written are to be found chiefly in the Hathayoga works and Tantras 
which are the manuals, not only of Hindu worship, but of its occultism. 
Next, Yoga through action on the lower static center seems characteristic of 
the Tantrik system, the adepts of which are the custodians of the practical 
knowledge whereby the general directions in the books may be practically 
applied. The system is of a Tantrik character also in respect of its selection 
of the chief center of consciousness. Various people have in antiquity 
assigned to various parts of the body the seat of the “soul” or life, such as 
the blood,{10} the heart, and the breath. Generally the brain was not so 
regarded. The Vaidik system posits the heart as the chief center of 
Consciousness—a relic of which notion we also still preserve in such 
phrases as “take it to heart” and to “learn by heart.” Sadhaka, which is one 
of the five functions of Pitta,{11} and which is situated in the heart, 
indirectly assists in the performance of cognitive functions by keeping up 
the rhythmic cardiac contractions, and it has been suggested{12} that it was 
perhaps this view of the heart’s construction which predisposed Indian 
physiologists to hold it to be the seat of cognition. According to the Tantras, 
however, the chief centers of consciousness are to be found in the Chakras 
of the cerebro-spinal system and in the upper brain (Sahasrara), which they 
describe, though the heart is also recognized as a seat of the Jivatma, or 
embodied spirit, in its aspect as Prana.{13} It is for the reasons mentioned 
that the first verse of the Shatchakraniriipana here translated speaks of the 
Yoga which is to be achieved “according to the Tantras” (Tantranusarena)— 
that is, as Kalicharana its Commentator says, “following the authority of the 
Tantras.” 


This Yoga has been widely affirmed. The following review does not profess 
to be exhaustive, for the literature relating to Kundali and Layayoga is very 
great, but includes merely a short reference to some of the Upanishads and 
Puranas which have come under my notice, and of which I kept a note, 
whilst engaged in this work.{14} It will, however, clearly establish that this 
doctrine concerning the Chakras, or portions of it, is to be found in other 
Shastras than the Tantras, though the references in some cases are so curt 
that it is not always possible to say whether they are dealing with the matter 
in the same Yoga-sense as the work here translated or as forms of worship 
(Upasana). It is to be noted in this connection that Bhutashuddhi is a rite 
which is considered as a necessary preliminary to the worship of a Deva. 
{15} It is obvious that if we understand the Bhitashuddhi to here mean the 
Yoga practice described, then, with the exception of the Yogi expert in this 
Yoga, no one would be competent for worship at all. For it is only the 
accomplished (Siddha) Yogi who can really take Kundalini to the Sahasrara. 
In the ordinary daily Bhuitashuddhi, therefore, the process is purely a mental 
or imaginary one, and therefore forms part of Upasana, and not Yoga. 
Further, as a form of worship the Sadhaka may, and does, adore his 
Ishtadevata in various parts of his body. This, again, is a part of Upasana. 
Some of the Shastras however, next mentioned, clearly refer to the Yoga 
process, and others appear to do so. 


In what are called the earliest Upanishads,{16} mention is made of certain 
matters which are more explicitly described in such as are said by Western 
orientalists to be of later date. Thus, we find reference to the four states of 
consciousness, waking, and so forth; the four sheaths; and to the cavity of 
the heart as a “soul” center. 


As already stated, in the Indian schools the heart was considered to be the 
seat of the waking consciousness. The heart expands during waking, and 
contracts in sleep. Into it during dreaming sleep (Svapna) the external 
senses are withdrawn, though the representative faculty is awake; until in 
dreamless sleep (Sushupti) it also is withdrawn. Reference is also made to 
the 72,000 Nadis; the entry and exit of the Prana through the 
Brahmarandhra (above the foramen of Monro and the middle commissure); 
and “up-breathing” through one of these Nadis. These to some extent 


probably involve the acceptance of other elements of doctrine not expressly 
stated. Thus, the reference to the Brahmarandhra and the “one nerve” imply 
the cerebro-spinal axis with its Sushumna, through which alone the Prana 
passes to the Brahmarandhra; for which reason, apparently, the Sushumna 
itself is referred to in the Shivasanghita as the Brahmarandhra. Liberation is 
finally affected by “knowledge,” which, as the ancient Aitareya Aranyaka 
says,{17} “is Brahman.” “He, Vamadeva, by his knowing self having left 
the world and having attained all delights in the world of heaven, became 
immortal.” 


The Hangsa Upanishad{18} opens with the statement that the knowledge 
therein contained should be communicated only to the Brahmachari of 
peaceful mind (Shanta), self-controlled (Danta), and devoted to the Guru 
(Gurubhakta). Narayana the Commentator, who cites amongst other works 
the Tantrik Compendium the Sharada Tilaka, describes himself as “one 
whose sole support is Shruti” {19} (Narayanena shrutimatropajivina). The 
Upanishad (8 4) mentions by their names the six Chakras, as also the 
method of raising of Vayu from the Muladhara—that is, the Kundalini 
Yoga. The Hangsa (that is, Jiva) is stated to be in the eight-petalled lotus 
below Anahata{20} (8 7) where the Ishtadevata is worshipped. There are 
eight petals, with which are associated certain Vrittis. With the Eastern petal 
is associated virtuous inclination (Punye mati); with the South-Eastern, 
sleep (Nidra) and laziness (Alasya); with the Southern, badness or cruelty 
(Krura mati); with the South-Western, sinful inclination (Pape manisha); 
with the Western, various inferior or bad qualities (Krida); with the North- 
Western, intention in movement or action (Gamanadau buddhi); with the 
Northern, attachment and pleasurable contentment (Rati and Priti); and with 
the North-Eastern petal, manual appropriation of things (Dravyagrahana). 
{21} In the center of this lotus is dispassion (Vairagya). In the filaments is 
the waking state (Jagrad-avastha); in the pericarp the sleeping state 
(Svapna); in the stalk the state of dreamless slumber (Sushupti). Above the 
lotus is “the place without support” (Niralamba pradesha), which is the 
Turlya state. The Commentator Narayana says that the Vritti of the petals 
are given in the Adhyatmaviveka which assigns them to the various lotuses. 
In the passage cited from the Hangsopanishad, they, or a number of these, 
appear to be collected in the center of meditation upon the Ishtadevata. In § 


9 ten kinds of sound (Nada) are mentioned which have definite physical 
effects, such as perspiration, shaking, and the like, and by the practice of the 
tenth kind of Nada the Brahmapada is said to be attained. 


The Brahma Upanishad{22} mentions in v. 2 the navel (Nabhi), heart 
(Hridayam), throat (Kantham), and head (Murdha), as places (Sthana) 
“where the four quarters of the Brahman shine.” The Commentator 
Narayana says that the Brahmopanishad, by the mention of these four, 
indicates that they are the centers from which the Brahman may (according 
to the method there prescribed) be attained.{23} Reference is made to the 
lotuses at these four places, and the mind is spoken of as the “tenth door,” 
the other nine apertures being the eyes, ears, nostrils, and so forth. 


The Dhyanabindu Upanishad{24} refers to the hearing of the Anahata 
sounds by the Yog! (v. 3). The Upanishad directs that with Puraka 
meditation should be done in the navel on the Great Powerful One 
(Mahavira) with four arms and of the color of the hemp flower (i.e., 
Vishnu); with Kumbhaka meditate in the heart on the red Brahma seated on 
a lotus; and with Rechaka think of the three-eyed one (Rudra) in the 
forehead. The lowest of these lotuses has eight petals; the second has its 
head downwards; and the third, which is compounded of all the Devatas 
(Sarvadevamaya), is like a plantain flower (vv. 9-12). In v. 13, meditation is 
directed on a hundred lotuses with a hundred petals each, and then on Sun, 
Moon, and Fire. It is Atma which rouses the lotus, and, taking the Bija from 
it, goes to Moon, Fire, and Sun. 


The Amritanada Upanishad{25} refers to the five elements, and above them 
Arddhamatra—that is, Ajna (vv. 30, 31). The elements here are those in the 
Chakras, for v. 26 speaks of the heart entrance as the aerial entrance (for the 
Vayu Tattva is here). Above this, it is said, is the gate of liberation 
(Mokshadvara). It is stated in v. 25 that Prana and Manas go along the way 
the Yogi sees (Pashyati), which the Commentator says refers to the way 
Prana enters (and departs from) Muladhara, and so forth. He also gives 
some Hatha processes. 


The Kshurika Upanishad{26} speaks of the 72,000 Nadis, of Ida and 
Pingala, and Sushumna (vv. 14, 15). All these, with the exception of 
Sushumna, can “be severed by Dhyana Yoga” (ib.). Verse 8 directs the 
Sadhaka “to get into the white and very subtle Nada (Quere Nad1) and to 
drive Prana Vayu through it”; and Puraka, Rechaka, Kumbhaka, and Hatha 
processes are referred to. The Commentator Narayana, on v. 8, remarks that 
Kundali should be heated by the internal fire and then placed inside the 
Brahmanadi, for which purpose the Jalandhara Bandha should be employed. 


The Nrisinghaptrvvatapaniya Upanishad{27} in Ch. V., v. 2, speaks of the 
Sudarshana (which is apparently here the Muladhara) changing into lotuses 
of six, eight, twelve, sixteen, and thirty-two petals respectively. This 
corresponds with the number of petals as given in this work except as to the 
second. For, taking this to be the Svadhishthana, the second lotus should be 
one of ten petals. Apparently this divergence is due to the fact that this is 
the number of letters in the Mantra assigned to this lotus. For in the six- 
petalled lotus is the six-lettered Mantra of Sudarshana; in the eight-petalled 
lotus the eight-lettered Mantra of Narayana; and in the twelve-petalled lotus 
the twelve-lettered Mantra of Vasudeva. As is the case ordinarily, in the 
sixteen-petalled lotus are the sixteen Kalas (here vowels) sounded with 
Bindu or Anusvara. The thirty-two-petalled lotus (Ajna) is really two- 
petalled because there are two Mantras here (each of sixteen letters) of 
Nrisingha and His Shakti. 


The sixth chapter of the Maitri Upanishad{28} speaks of the Nadis; and in 
particular of the Sushumna; the piercing of the Mandalas Sun, Moon, and 
Fire (each of these being within the other, Sattva in Fire, and in Sattva 
Achyuta); and of Amana, which is another name for Unmanti. 


Both the Yogatattva Upanishad{29} and Yogashikha Upanishad{30} refer 
to Hathayoga, and the latter speaks of the closing of the “inner door,” the 
opening of the gateway of Sushumna (that is, by Kundalt entering the 
Brahmadvara), and the piercing of the Sun. The Ramatapani 
Upanishad{31} refers to various Yoga and Tantrik processes, such as 
Asana, Dvarapiija, Pithapiija, and expressly mentions Bhiitashuddhi, which, 


as above explained, is the purification of the elements in the Chakras, either 
as an imaginative, or real process by the aid of Kundalini. 


I have already cited in the Notes numerous passages on this Yoga from the 
Shandilya Upanishad of the Atharvaveda, the Varaha and Yogakundali 
Upanishads of the Krishna Yajurveda, the Mandalabrahmana Upanishad of 
the Shukla Yajurveda, and the Nadabindu Upanishad of the Rigveda. {32} 


The great Devibhagavata Purana (VII. 35, XI. 8) mentions in a full account 
the six Chakras or Lotuses; the rousing of Kundali (who is called the 
Paradevata) in the Muladhara by the manner here described, uniting Jiva 
therewith by the Hangsa Mantra; Bhiitashuddhi; the dissolution of the gross 
Tattvas into the subtle Tattvas, ending with Mahat in Prakriti, Maya in 
Atma. The Dharamandala is mentioned, and it and the other Mandalas are 
described in the manner here stated. The Bijas of Prithivi and other Tattvas 
are given. Allusion is also made to the destruction of the “man of sin” 
(Papapurusha), in terms similar to those to be found in the Mahanirvana and 
other Tantras. A remarkable Dhyana of Pranashakti is to be found in this 
chapter, which reads very much like another which is given in the 
Prapanchasara Tantra. {33} 


Lingga Purana, Part I., Ch. LXXV., mentions the Chakras with their 
different petals, the names of which are given by the Commentator. Shiva is 
Nirguna, it says, but for the benefit of men He resides in the body with 
Uma, and Yogis meditate upon Him in the different lotuses. 


Chapter XXIII. of the Agni Purana, which is replete with Tantrik rituals, 
magic, and Mantras, also refers to the Bhttashuddhi rite wherein, after 
meditation with the respective Bija Mantras on the navel, heart, and Ajna 
centers, the body of the Sadhaka is refreshed by the flow of nectar. 


Finally, an adverse critic of this Yoga whom I cite later invokes the 
authority of the great Shangkara, though in fact, if tradition be correct, it is 
against him. Shangkara, in whose Maths may be found the great Tantrik 
Yantra called the Shrichakra, says in his Commentary on vv. 9 and 10 of 
Ch. VIII. of the Bhagavadgita: “First the heart lotus (Anahata) is brought 


under control. Then, by conquering Bhumi (Muladhara, etc.) and by the 
upward going Nadi (Sushumna), after having placed Prana between the two 
eyebrows (see v. 38, Shatchakranirupana), the Yogi reaches the lustrous 
light-giving Purusha.” On this the Tika of Anandagiri runs: “By the 
Sushumna Nadi between Ida and Pinggala. The throat is reached by the 
Same way—the space between the eyebrows. By conquering earth (Bhumi) 
is meant the process by which the five Bhitas are controlled.” Shridhara 
Svami says: “By the power of Yoga (Yogabala) Prana must be led along the 
Sushumna.” And Madhustdana Sarasvati says: “The upward-going Nadi is 
Sushumna, and the conquest of Bhimi and the rest is done by following the 
path indicated by the Guru; and by the space between the eyebrows is 
meant the Ajna chakra. By placing Prana there, it passes out by the 
Brahmarandhra, and the Jiva becomes one with the Purusha.” The famous 
hymn called Anandalahari (“Wave of Bliss”), which is universally ascribed 
to Shangkara, deals with this Yoga (Shatchakrabheda); and in the thirteenth 
chapter of Vidyaranya’s Shangkaravijaya the six lotuses are mentioned, as 
also the fruit to be gained by worshipping the Devata in each Chakra.{34} 


Pandit R. Ananta Shastri says:{35} 


“Many a great man has successfully worked the Kundalini to the Sahasrara, 
and effected her union with the Sat and Chit. Of these stands foremost the 
great and far-famed Shangkaracharya, a humble pupil of one of the students 
of Gaudapadacharya, the author of the well-known ‘Subhagodaya’ (52 
slokas). Having well acquainted himself with the principles contained in 
this work, Shri Shangkaracharya received special instructions based upon 
the personal experience of his Guru. And adding his own personal 
experience to the above advantages, he composed his famous work on the 
Mantra-shastra, consisting of 100 slokas; the first forty-one of these 
forming the ‘Ananda-Lahari,’ and the rest forming the ‘Saundarya-Lahar’’; 
the latter apostrophizes the Devi as a being who is beauteous from head to 
foot. 


“* Ananda-Lahari’ may be said to contain the quintessence of the 
Samayachara. The work is all the more valuable because the author teaches 
it from personal experience. Lengthy commentaries are written on almost 


every syllable of the text. The value attached to the work may be adequately 
understood by the following theory. Some hold that Shiva is the real author 
of ‘Ananda-Lahari,’ and not Shangkaracharya, who was but a Mantra- 
drashta or Rishi—i.e., one who realized the process and gave it to the 
world. No less than thirty-and-six commentaries on this work are now 
extant. Among them we find one written by our great Appaya Dikshita. The 
commentaries are not entirely different, but each has its own peculiar views 
and theories. 


“As for the text of ‘Ananda-Lahani,’ it contains forty-and-one shlokas. 
According to some commentators, the shlokas are 35 in number; some 
recognize only 30, and according to Suddhavidyotini and others only the 
following shlokas constitute the text of ‘Ananda-Lahari’: 1-2, 8-9, 10-11, 
14-21, 26-27, 31-41. In my opinion, also, the last statement seems to be 
correct, as the other shlokas treat only of Prayogas (applications of 
Mantras) for worldly purposes.{36} Only a few of these Prayogas are 
recognized by all the commentators; while the rest are passed over as being 
entirely Karmic. 


“As has been remarked already, ‘Ananda-Lahari’ is but an enlargement of 
the work called Subhagodaya by Gaudapada, who is the Guru of the 
author’s Guru. That work gives only the main points, without any of the 
characteristic admixture of illustrations, etc., above noticed. 


“Of all the commentaries on ‘Ananda-Lahart’ Lakshmidhara’s seems to be 
the most recent; yet in spite of this it is the most popular, and with reason, 
too. Other commentaries advocate this or that aspect of the various 
philosophical schools; but Lakshmidhara collates some of the views of 
others, and records them side by side with his own. His commentary is in 
this way the most elaborate. He sides with no party;{37} his views are 
broad and liberal. All schools of philosophers are represented in his 
commentaries. Lakshmidhara has also commented on many other works on 
Mantrashastra, and is consequently of much high repute. So his 
commentaries are as valuable to both ‘Ananda-Lahari’ and ‘Saundarya- 
Laharl’ as Sayana’s are to the Vedas. 


“Lakshmidhara seems to have been an inhabitant of Southern India; the 
observances and customs he describes all point to this conclusion; the 
illustrations he adduces smack invariably of the South, and even to this day 
his views are more followed in the South than in the North. He has also 
written an elaborate commentary on Gaudapada’s Subhagodaya. The 
references to that in the commentary to this work, and the commentator’s 
apology here and there for repeating what he has written on the former 
occasion, lead to the inference that the author had for his life-work the 
commentary on the original book. 


“Achyutananda’s commentaries are in Bengali characters, and are followed 
as authority in Bengal even to this day.{38} Various commentaries are 
followed in various places, but few have risen to be universally accepted. 


“There are only three or four works treating of Prayoga (application); I have 
had access to all of them. But here I have followed only one of them, as 
being the most prominent and important. It comes from an ancient family in 
Conjeeveram. It contains 100 slokas. The Yantras (figures) for the Mantras 
contained in the shlokas, the different postures of the worshipper, and 
similar prescriptions, are clearly described in it to the minutest detail. 


“There seems to be some mystical connection between each shloka and its 
Bijakshara.{39} But it is not intelligible, nor has any of the Prayoga 
Kartas{40} explained the same. 


“The following is a list of commentaries written upon ‘Ananda-Lahart’; 
some of them include ‘Saundarya-Lahari’ also: 


“1. ‘Manorama,’ a Commentary. 2. A Commentary by Appaya Dikshita 
(Tanjore Palace Library). 3. “Vishnupakshi.’ Perhaps this may be the same 
as No. 14 given below. 4. By Kavirajasharman—about 3,000 granthas 
(Deccan College Library). 5. ‘Manjubhushant,’ by Krishnacharya, the son 
of Vallabhacharya—shlokas about 1,700. He says in his Introduction that 
Shri Shankaracharya praised the Brahmashakti called Kundalini when he 
was meditating on the banks of the Ganges. He gives the purport of this 
work in his first shloka: ‘T praise constantly the Kundalini, who creates 


innumerable worlds continuously, though She is like a filament of the lotus, 
and who resides at the root of the tree (Miladhara) to be roused and led (to 
Sahasrara).’ This is popular in the Bengal Presidency. 6. Another 
Commentary, called ‘Saubhagyavardhani,’ by Kaivalyasharma. The Adyar 
Library has a copy of it. This is popular throughout India, so we can get as 
many MSS. of the same as we require from different places. It contains 
about 2,000 granthas. 7. By Keshavabhatta. 8. ‘Tattvadipika,’ by Gangahari, 
a small commentary based on Tantrashastra. 9. By Gangadhara. 10. By 
Gopiramanatarka-pravachana—granthas about 1,400. Seems to be of recent 
origin. 11. Gaurtkantasarvabhaumabhattacharya—granthas about 1,300. Of 
recent origin. 12. By Jagadisha. 13. By Jagannatha Panchanana. 14. By 
Narasimha—granthas 1,500. The chief peculiarity of this commentary is 
that it explains the text in two different ways, each shloka being applicable 
to Devi and Vishnu at the same time. Though some commentators have 
given different meanings to some of the verses, yet all of them apply to the 
different aspects of Devi alone, and not to the different Devatas. 15. 
‘Bhavarthadipa,’ by Brahmananda{41}—-granthas about 1,700. 16. By 
Mallabhatta. 17. By Mahadevavidyavagisha. 18. By Madhavavaidya 
(Deccan College Library). 19. By Ramachandra—granthas about 3,000 
(Deccan College Library). 20. By Ramanandatirtha. 21. Lakshmidhara’s; 
which is well known to the public, and needs no comment. This has been 
brought out excellently in Deva Nagara type by the Mysore Government 
lately. 22. By Vishvambhara. 23. By Shrikanthabhatta. 24. By Rama Suri. 
25. By Dindima (Adyar Library). 26. By Ramachandra Misra—granthas 
about 1,000 (Deccan College Library). 27. By Achyutananda (printed in 
Bengali characters). 28. Sadashiva (Government Oriental Library, Madras). 
29. Another nameless Commentary (Government Oriental Library, 
Madras). 30. By Shrirangadasa. 31. By Govinda Tarkavagisha Bhattacharya 
—granthas 600. He seems to give the Yantra also for each verse. Further, he 
says that the god Mahadeva specially incarnated as Shangkaracharya to 
promulgate the science of Shrividya. 32. Sudhavidyotint, by the son of 
Pravarasena. This commentator says that the author of this famous hymn 
was his father, Pravarasena, Prince of the Dramidas. He tells us a story in 
connection with Pravarasena’s birth which is very peculiar. As he was born 
in an inauspicious hour, Dramida, the father of Pravarasena, in consultation 
with his wise Minister, by name Suka, threw him out in the forest, lest he 


(the father) should lose his kingdom. . . . The child praised Devi by this 
hymn, and, pleased with it, the Devi fostered and took care of him in the 
forest. The story ends by saying that the boy returned to his father’s 
dominion and became King. By his command, his son, the present 
commentator, wrote Sudhavidyotini, after being fully initiated into this 
mystic Shastra, Shrividya. The account, however, appears to be rather 
fantastic. This MS. I got from South Malabar with much difficulty. It gives 
the esoteric meaning of the verses in ‘Ananda-Lahari,’ and seems to be a 
valuable relic of occult literature. 33. The book of Yantras with Prayoga. 
This is very rare and important. 


“Besides the above commentaries, we do not know how many more 
commentaries there are upon this hymn.” 


The celebrity of “Anandalahari” and the great number of commentaries 
upon it are proof of the widespread and authoritative character of the Yoga 
here described. 


To conclude with the words of the Commentator on the Trishati: “It is well 
known in Yoga-Shastras that nectar (Amrita) is in the head of all breathing 
creatures (Prani), and that on Kundali going there by the Yoga-path which is 
moistened by the current of that nectar Yogins become like Ishvara.” {42} 


The Chakras, however, mentioned are not always those of the body above 
stated, as would appear from the following account, which, it will be 
observed, is peculiar, and which is taken from the Shatchakra Upanishad of 
the Atharvaveda.{43} Apparently reference is here made to cosmic centers 
in the worship of the Vishnu Avatara called Nrisingha. 


“Om. The Devas, coming to Satyaloka, thus spoke to Prajapati, saying, ‘Tell 
us of the Narasingha{44} Chakra’ (to which he replied). There are six 
Narasingha Chakras. The first and second have each four spokes; the third, 
five; the fourth, six; the fifth, seven; and the sixth, eight spokes. These six 
are the Narasingha Chakras. Now, what are their names (that is what you 
ask). They are Achakra, {45} Suchakra,{46} Mahachakra, {47} Sakalaloka- 


rakshanachakra, {48} Dyuchakra, {49} Asurantaka-chakra.{50} These are 
their respective names, [1] 


“Now, what are the three circles (Balaya)? These are inner, middle, and 
outer.{51} The first is Bija;{52} the second, Narasingha-gayatri; {53} and 
the third, or outer, is Mantra. Now, what is the inner circle? There are six 
such (for each Chakra has one); these are the Narasingha, Mahalakshmya, 
Sarasvata, Kamadeva, Pranava, Krodhadaivata (Bijas), respectively. {54} 
These are the six interior circles of the six Narasingha Chakras. [2] 


“Now, what is the middle circle? There are six such. To each of these 
belong Narasinghaya, Vidmahe, Vajranakhaya, Dhimahi, Tannah, 
Singhahprachodayat, respectively.{55} These are the six circles of the six 
Narasingha Chakras. Now, what are the six outer circles? The first is 
Anandatma or Achakra; the second is Priyatma or Suchakra; the third is 
Jyotiratma or Mahachakra; the fourth is Mayatma or Sakala-loka-rakshana 
Chakra; the fifth is Yogatma or Dyuchakra; and the sixth is Samaptatma or 
Asurantakachakra. These are the six outer circles of the six Narasingha 
Chakras. {56} [3] 


“Now, where should these be placed?{57} Let the first be placed in the 
heart; {58} the second in the head;{59} the third at the site of the crown- 
lock{60} (Shikhayam); the fourth all over the body;{61} the fifth in all the 
eyes{62} (Sarveshu netreshu); and the sixth in all the regions{63} 
(Sarveshu desheshu). [4] 


“He who does Nyasa of these Narasingha Chakras on two limbs becomes 
skilled in Anushtubh, {64} attains the favor of Lord Nrisingha, success in all 
regions and amongst all beings, and (at the end) liberation (Kaivalya). 
Therefore should this Nyasa be done. This Nyasa purifies. By this one is 
made perfect in worship, is pious, and pleases Narasingha. By the omission 
thereof, on the other hand, the favor of Nrisingha is not gained nor is 
strength, worship, nor piety generated. [5] 


“He who reads this becomes versed in all Vedas, gains capacity to officiate 
as priest at all sacrifices, becomes like one who has bathed in all places of 


pilgrimage, an adept in all Mantras, and pure both within and without. He 
becomes the destroyer of all Rakshasas, Bhiitas, Pishachas, Shakinis, 
Pretas, and Vetalas.{65} He becomes freed of all fear; therefore should it 
not be spoken of to an unbeliever.” {66} [6] 


Notwithstanding the universal acceptance of this Yoga, it has not escaped 
some modern criticism. The following passage in inverted commas is a 
summary{67} of that passed by an English-educated Hindu, {68} formerly a 
lawyer and now a Guru, from one of whose disciples I received it. It was 
elicited by the gift of the Sanskrit text of the works here translated: 


“Yoga as a means to liberation is attained by entry through the doors of 
Jnana (Knowledge) and Karma (Action). Yoga is doubtless bliss, for it is 
the union of the Jivatma with the Brahman who is Bliss (Ananda). But there 
are various forms of Bliss. There is, for instance, physical bliss, gross or 
subtle as it may be. It is a mistake to suppose that because a method of Yoga 
procures bliss it therefore secures liberation. In order that we be liberated 
we must secure that particular Bliss which is the Brahman. Some centuries 
ago, however, a band of Atheists (i.e., the Buddhists) discovered the 
doctrine of the Void (Shinyavada), and by a false display of a new kind of 
Nirvana Mukti locked up these two doors which gave entry to liberation. 
To-day these doors are secured by three padlocks. The first is the doctrine 
that by faith one attains Krishna, but where there is argument (Tarka) He is 
far away. The second is the error of the Brahmos, who in Western fashion 
think that they can control the formless, changeless Brahman by shutting 
their eyes in church and repeating that He is the merciful, loving Father 
who is ever occupied with our good, and that if He be flattered He will be 
pleased; for worship (Upasana) is flattery. The third is the opinion of those 
to whom all religious acts are nothing but superstition; to whom self- 
interest is the only good, and whose pleasure it is to throw dust into the eyes 
of others and secure the praise of those whom they have thus blinded. 
Vishnu, in order to cause the disappearance of the Vedas in the Kali age, 
manifested as the atheist Buddha, and allowed various false doctrines, such 
as that of the Arhatas, to be proclaimed. Rudra was affected by the sin of 
destroying the head of Brahma. Then he began to dance, and a number of 
Uchchhishta (or low maglinant) Rudras whose deeds are never good issued 


from His body. Vishnu and Shiva asked each other, ‘Can we do these people 
any good?’ Their partial manifestations then promulgated Shastras opposed 
to the Vedas, fitted for the atheistic bent of their minds, that they might 
haply thereby rise through them to higher things. God fools the wicked with 
such Scriptures. We must now, however, discriminate between Shastras. It 
is not because it is said in Sanskrit ‘Shiva says’ (Shiva uvacha) that we 
should accept all which follows this announcement. All that is opposed to 
Veda and Smriti must be rejected. Of the enemies of the Vedas{69} for 
whom such Shastras were designed, some became Vaishnavas, and other 
Shaivas. One of such Scriptures was the Tantra with a materialistic Yoga 
system called Shatchakra-Sadhana, which is nothing but a trickery on the 
part of the professional Gurus, who have not hesitated also to promulgate 
forged scriptures. ‘The very mention of Tantrik Shastra fills us with shame.’ 
The Shatchakra Sadhana is a mere obstruction to spiritual advancement. 
The bliss which is said to be attained by leading Kundali to the Sahasrara is 
not denied, since it is affirmed by those who say they have experienced it. 
But this Bliss (Ananda) is merely a momentary superior kind of physical 
Bliss which disappears with the body, and not the Bliss which is Brahman 
and liberation. Moksha is not to be got by entering the Sahasrara, but in 
leaving it by piercing the Brahmarandhra and becoming bodiless. {70} 


“The Tantrik seeks to remain in the body, and thus to obtain liberation 
cheaply, just as the Brahmos and Members of the Arya Samaja have 
become Brahmajnanis (knowers of the Brahman) at a cheap price. Nectar, 
too, is cheap with the Tantriks. But what is cheap is always worthless, and 
this shows itself when one attempts to earn some fruit from one’s 
endeavors. ‘And yet all men are attracted when they hear of Shatchakra.’ 
‘Many are so steeped in Tantrik faith that they can find nothing wrong with 
its Shastras.” And the Hindu nowadays has been put in such a maze by his 
Tantrik Gurus that he does not know what he wants. For centuries he has 
been accustomed to the Tantrik Dharma, {71} and his eyes are therefore not 
clear enough to see that it is as truly unacceptable to a Hindu as it is toa 
Mussalman. In fact, these persons (for whose benefit the Guru makes these 
remarks) are full of Mlechchhata,{72} though, after all, it must be admitted 
to be some advance for such a creature as a Mlechha to adhere even to 
Tantrik doctrine. For bad as it is it is better than nothing at all. All the same, 


the Gurus delude them with their fascinating talk about Shatchakra. Like a 
lot of the present-day advertisers, they offer to show their so-called 
‘Lotuses’ to those who will join them. Men are sent to collect people to 
bring them to a Dikshaguru (initiator). In this respect the Tantriks act just 
like coolie recruiters for the tea-gardens.{73} The Tantrik says there are 
really ‘Lotuses’ there; but if the Lotuses are really there, why are we not 
told how we may see them?{74} And there also are supposed to be 
Devatas, Dakinis, Yoginis, ‘all ready at every moment for inspection.’ {75} 
And, then, how material it all is! They speak of a Parashiva above Shiva, as 
if there was more than one Brahman. And, then, the nectar is said to be of 
the color of lac. Well, if so, it is a gross (Sthula) and perceptible thing; and 
as a doctor can then squeeze it out there is no need for a Guru.{76} In short, 
the Tantrik Shatchakra is nothing but ‘a sweet in the hands of a child.’ A 
child who is wayward is given a sweet to keep him quiet. But if he has 
sense enough to know that the sweet is given to distract him, he throws it 
away, and finds the key to the locked doors of Yoga, called Karma and 
Jnana. This process of Yoga was expelled from Hindu society centuries ago. 
For nearly 2,500 years ago Shangkara, {77} when destroying atheism, 
exterminated also Shatchakrayoga. (When Shangkara disputed with the 
Kapalika Krakacha, the latter invoked to his aid the fierce form of Shiva 
called Bhairava. But on Shangkara’s worshipping the God, the latter said to 
Krakacha, ‘Thy time has come,’ and absorbed His devotee into Himself.) 
{78} Shangkara then showed the worthlessness of the Tantras. They are 
again to-day attempting to enter Hindu society, and must be again 
destroyed.” 


The writer of the note thus summarized omitted to notice that the Chakras 
are mentioned in the Upanishads, but endeavored to meet the fact that they 
are also described in the Puranas by the allegation that the Pauranik 
Chakras are in conformity with the Vedas, whereas the Tantrik Chakras are 
not. It is admitted that in the Shiva Purana there is an account of the six 
centers, but it is said that they are not there alleged to actually exist, nor is 
anything mentioned of any Sadhana in connection with them. They are, it is 
contended, to be imagined only for the purpose of worship. In external 
worship Devas and Devis are worshipped in similar Lotuses. The Puranas, 
in fact, according to this view, convert what is external worship into internal 


worship. If, according to the Purana, one worships an interior lotus, it is not 
to be supposed that there is anything there. One is worshipping merely a 
figment of one’s imagination, though it is curious to note that it is said that 
this figment secures certain advantages to the worshipper, and the latter 
must commence, according to this critic, with the Chakra which he is 
qualified to worship. It is not obvious how any question of such 
competency arises when each of the Chakras is imagined only. Attention is 
drawn to the fact that in the Linga Purana there is nothing about the rousing 
of Kundali, the piercing of the six centers, the drinking of nectar, and so 
forth. The Purana merely says, “Meditate on Shiva and Devi in the different 
lotuses.” There is, it is thus contended, a radical difference between the two 
systems. “In the Pauranik description of the Chakras everything is stated 
clearly; but with the Tantriks all is mystery, or else how indeed, except by 
such mystification, could they dishonestly carry on their profession as 
Gurus?” 


Buddhists may dispute this critic’s understanding of their Shiinyavada, as 
Tantriks will contest his account of the origin of their Shastra. The Historian 
will call in question the statement that Shangkara{79} abolished the Tantra. 
For, according to the Shangkaravijaya, his action was not to abolish any of 
the sects existing at his time, but to reform and establish bonds of unity 
between them, and to induce them all through their differing methods to 
follow a common ideal. Thus, even though Krakacha was absorbed into his 
God, the extreme Tantrik sect of Kapalikas which he represented is said to 
have continued to exist with Shangkara’s approval, though possibly in a 
modified form, under its leader Vatukanatha. The Brahmos, Aryasamaj, 
Vaishnavas, and Shaivas, may resent this critic’s remarks so far as they 
touch themselves. I am not here concerned with this religious faction, but 
will limit the following observations in reply to the subject in hand: 


The criticism, notwithstanding its “pious” acerbity against forms of doctrine 
of which the writer disapproved, contains some just observations. I am not 
here concerned to establish the reality or value of this Yoga method, nor is 
proof on either of these points available except through actual experiment 
and experience. De experientia non est disputandum. From a doctrinal and 
historical point of view, however, it seems that this critic did not have a 


sufficient knowledge {80} of the subject which he has thus so vigorously 
condemned, or of the wide acceptance which this Yoga has received in 
India. It is true that Karma with Jnana are means for the attainment of 
Moksha. These and Bhakti (devotion) which may partake of the character 
of the first or the second, according to the nature of its display,{81} are all 
contained in the eight processes of Yoga. Thus, they include Tapas, a form 
of Karma yoga, {82} and Dhyana, a process of Jnana yoga. As will be later 
pointed out, the “eight-limbed” yoga (Ashtangayoga) includes Hatha 
processes, such as Asana and Pranayama. What Hathayogis have done is to 
develop the physical or Hatha processes and aspect. The true view of 
Hathavidya recognizes that it is an auxiliary of Jnana whereby Moksha is 
obtained. It is also obviously true that all Bliss is not Moksha. Ananda 
(Bliss) of a kind may be secured through drink or drugs, but no one 
supposes that this is liberating Bliss. Similarly, Hathayoga processes may 
secure various forms of gross or subtle bodily Bliss which are not The 
Bliss. There is, however, a misunderstanding of the system here described 
when it is described as merely materialistic. It has, like other forms of Yoga, 
a material side or Hatha aspect, since man is gross, subtle, and spiritual; but 
it has a Jnana aspect also. As the Jiva is both material and spiritual, 
discipline and progress in both the aspects is needed. Kundali is aroused by 
Mantra, which is Consciousness (Chaitanya) embodied in sound. “It is he 
whose being is immersed in the Brahman,” who arouses the Devi Kundali 
by the Mantra Hungkara (v. 50). The Devi is Herself Shuddha Sattva{83} 
(v. 51). “The wise and excellent Yogi, wrapt in Samadhi and devoted to the 
Lotus Feet of his Guru, should lead Kulakundali along with Jiva to Her 
Lord the Parashiva in the abode of liberation within the pure Lotus, and 
meditate upon Her who grants all desires as the Chaitanyarupa Bhagavati 
(that is, the Devi whose substance is Consciousness itself); and as he leads 
Kulakundali he should make all things absorb in Her.” Meditation is made 
on every center in which She operates. In the Ajna center Manas can only 
unite with and be absorbed into Kundali by becoming one with the 
Jnanashakti which She is, for She is all Shaktis. The Layayoga is therefore a 
combination of Karma and Jnana. The former mediately and the latter 
directly achieves Moksha. In the Ajna is Manas and Om, and on this the 
Sadhaka meditates (v. 33). The Sddhaka’s Atma must be transformed into a 
meditation on this lotus (v. 34). His Atma is the Dhyana of Om, which is 


the inner Atma of those whose Buddhi is pure. He realizes that he and the 
Brahman are one, and that Brahman is alone real (Sat) and all else unreal 
(Asat). He thus becomes an Advaitavadi, or one who realizes the identity of 
the individual and universal Self (ib.). The mind (Chetas) by repeated 
practice (Abhyasa) is here dissolved, and such practice is mental operation 
itself (v. 36). For the Yogi meditating on the Mantra whereby he realizes the 
unity of Prana and Manas closes the “house which hangs without support.” 
That is, he disengages the Manas from all contact with the objective world 
(v. 36), in order to attain the Unmani Avastha. Here is Paramashiva. The 
Tantrik does not suppose that there are several Shivas in the sense of several 
distinct Deities. The Brahman is one. Rudra, Shiva, Paramashiva, and so 
forth, are but names for different manifestations of the One. When it is said 
that any Devata is in any Chakra, it is meant that that is the seat of the 
operation of the Brahman, which operation in its Daiva aspect is known as 
Devata. As these operations vary, so do the Devatas. The Hangsah of the 
Sahasrara contains in Himself all Devatas (v. 44). It is here in the Ajna that 
the Yogi places at the time of death his Prana and enters the supreme 
Purusha, “who was before the three worlds, and who is known by the 
Vedanta” (v. 38). It is true that this action, like others, is accompanied by 
Hatha processes. But these are associated with meditation. This meditation 
unites Kundali and Jivatma with the Bindu which is Shiva and Shakti 
(Shivashaktimaya), and the Yogi after such union, piercing the 
Brahmarandhra, is freed from the body at death and becomes one with 
Brahman (ib.). The secondary causal body (Karanavantara Sharira) above 
Ajna and below Sahasrara is to be seen only through meditation (v. 39), 
when perfection has been obtained in Yoga practice. V. 40 refers to 
Samadhi Yoga. 


Passing to the Sahasrara, it is said, “well concealed and attainable only by 
great effort, is that subtle ‘Void’ (Shinya) which is the chief root of 
liberation” (v. 42). In Paramashiva are united two forms of Bliss (v. 42)— 
namely, Rasa or Paramananda Rasa (that is, the bliss of Moksha) and Virasa 
(or the bliss which is the product of the union of Shiva and Shakti). It is 
from the latter union that there arise the universe and the nectar which 
floods the lesser world (Kshudrabrahmanda), or the body. The ascetic (Yati) 
of pure mind is instructed in the knowledge by which he realizes the unity 


of the Jivatma and Paramatma (v. 43). It is “that most excellent of men who 
has controlled his mind (Niyata-nija-chitta)—that is, concentrated the inner 
faculties (Antahkarana) on the Sahasrara, and has known it—who is freed 
from rebirth,” and thus attains Moksha (v. 45). He becomes Jivanmukta, 
remaining only so long in the body as is necessary to work out the Karma, 
the activity of which has already commenced—just as a revolving wheel 
will yet run a little time after the cause of its revolving has ceased. It is the 
Bhagavati Nirvana-Kala which grants divine liberating knowledge—that is, 
Tattvajnana, or knowledge of the Brahman (v. 47). Within Her is 
Nityananda, which is “pure Consciousness itself” (v. 49), and “is attainable 
only by Yogis through pure Jnana” (ib.). It is this Jnana which secures 
liberation (ib.). The Maya Tantra says: “Those who are learned in Yoga say 
that it is the unity of Jiva and Atma (in Samadhi). According to the 
experience of others, it is the knowledge (Jnana) of the identity of Shiva 
and Atma. The Agamavadis say that knowledge (Jnana) of Shakti is Yoga. 
Other wise men say that the knowledge (Jnana) of the Purana Purusha is 
Yoga; and others again, the Prakritivadis, declare that the knowledge of the 
union of Shiva and Shakti is Yoga” (v. 57). “The Devi, by dissolving 
Kundalini in the Parabindu, effects the liberation of some Sadhakas through 
their meditation upon the identity of Shiva and Atma in the Bindu. She does 
so in the case of others by a similar process and by meditation (Chintana) 
on Shakti. In other cases this is done by concentration of thought on the 
Paramapurusha, and in others cases by the meditation of the Sadhaka on the 
union of Shiva and Shakti” (ib.). In fact, the worshipper of any particular 
Devata should realize that he is one with the object of his worship. In 
Pranava worship, for instance, the worshipper realizes his identity with the 
Ongkara. In other forms of worship he realizes his identity with Kundalini, 
who is embodied by the different Mantras worshipped by different 
worshippers. In short, Jnana is Kriyajnana and Svartpajnana. The latter is 
direct spiritual experience. The former are the meditative processes leading 
to it. There is here Kriyajnana, and when Kundalini unites with Shiva She 
gives Jnana (Svarupa), for Her nature (Svariipa), as also His, is that. 


After union with Shiva, Kundali makes Her return journey. After She has 
repeatedly{84} gone to him, She makes a journey from which, at the will of 
the YogI, there is no return. Then the Sadhaka is Jivanmukta. His body is 


preserved until such time as the active Karma is exhausted, when he can 
achieve bodiless (Videha) or Kaivalya Mukti (supreme liberation). “The 
revered Lord Preceptor”—that is, Shangkaracharyya—in his celebrated 

Ananda-Lahari thus hymns Her return (v. 53): 


“Kuharini, Thou sprinklest all things with the stream of nectar which flows 
from the tips of Thy two feet; and as Thou returneth to Thine own place, 
Thou vivifieth and maketh visible all things that were aforetime invisible; 
and on reaching Thy abode Thou resumeth Thy snake-like coil and 
sleepeth.” That is, as Her passage upward was Layakrama (dissolution of 
the Tattvas), so Her return is Srishtikrama (re-creation of the Tattvas). V. 54 
says that the Yogi who has practiced Yama and Niyama and the like (that is, 
the other processes of Ashtangayoga, including Dhyana with its resulting 
Samadhi), and whose mind has been thus controlled, is never again reborn. 
Gladdened by the constant realization of the Brahman, he is at peace. 


Whether the method above described be or be not effectual or desirable, it 
must be obvious upon a perusal of the text, which gives an explanation of it, 
that the Yoga which the author affirms to be the cause of liberation is not 
merely material, but that it is the arousing of the static vital force 
(Jivashakti) and world consciousness (Jagachchaitanya) which makes man 
what he is. The Yogi thus does claim to secure the Bliss of liberation by 
making entry thereto through the doors of Karma and Jnanayoga. 


A Brahmo Author{85} who is so little favorable to the Tantra as to describe 
the difference between it and the Veda as being “as great as that which 
exists between the Netherworld (Patala) and Heaven (Svarga)” {86} does 
not deny the efficiency of the Tantrik Shatchakra Sadhana, but contrasts it 
with the Vaidika-Gayatri-Sadhana in an account of the two methods which I 
here summarize in inverted commas. 


“The Chakras (the existence of which is not disputed) are placed where the 
nerves and muscles unite.{87} The Ajna is the place of the Command. This 
manifests in the operation of Buddhi. If the command is followed, the 
Sadhaka becomes pure of disposition (Bhava) and speech. Speech displays 
itself in the throat, the region of the Vishuddha. The next lower Chakra is 


called Anahata because of its connection with Nada, which is self-produced 
in the heart. The Vayu in Anahata is Pranashakti. Here when free from sin 
one can see the Atma. Here the Yogi realizes ‘I am He.’ Fire is at the navel. 
The seat of desire is at the root of the Svadhishthana. In the lowest lotus the 
Miuladhara are the three Shaktis of JIlVva—namely, Ichchha, Kriya, and Jnana 
—in an unconscious unenlivened state. The Sadhaka by the aid of the 
Paratma as fire (Agni) and air (Vayu){88} awakens these three forces 
(Shaktis), and ultimately by the grace of the Paratma he is united with the 
Turlya Brahman.” 


“In days of old Sadhana commenced at the Miladhara Chakra; that is, those 
who were not Sadhakas of the Gayatri-Mantra commenced from below at 
the lowest center. There was a good reason for this, for thereby the senses 
(Indriya) were controlled. Without such control purity of disposition 
(Bhava) cannot be attained. If such purity be not gained, then the mind 
(Chitta) cannot find its place in the heart; and if the Chitta be not in the 
heart there can be no union with the Paratma. The first thing, therefore, 
which a Sadhaka has to do is to control the senses. Those who achieved this 
without fixing their minds on the Lord (Ishvara){89} had to go through 
many difficult and painful practices (such as the Mudras, Bandhas, etc., 
mentioned later) which were necessary for the control of the Indriyas and of 
the action of the Gunas. All this is unnecessary in the Gayatri Sadhana or 
method. It is true that the senses should be controlled in the three lower 
centers (Chakras )—that is, cupidity (Lobha) in the Muladhara, lust (Kama) 
in the Svadhishthana at the root of the genitals, and anger (Krodha) at the 
navel. These three passions are the chief to set the senses in motion, and are 
the main doors to Hell. The way, however, in which control should be 
effected is to place the Chitta (mind) on Satta (existence) of Paramatma in 
these Chakras. The Chitta should be taken to each of these three lowest 
centers and controlled, whereby these passions which have their respective 
places at those centers are controlled. Whenever, therefore, the senses 
(Indriya) get out of control, fix the Chitta (mind) on the Paramatma in the 
particular Chakra.” 


[To give the above an English turn of thought: if, say, anger is to be 
controlled, carry the mind to the navel, and there meditate upon the 


existence of the Supreme One (Paramatma) in this center, not merely as the 
Supreme without the body and within the body, but as embodied in that 
particular part of it; for that is Its manifestation. The result is that the 
passionate activity of this center is subdued; for its functioning is attuned to 
the state of the Atma which informs it, and both the body and mind attain 
the peace of the Atma on which the self is centered. {90}] 


“Having thus controlled the senses, the Gayatri! Sadhana commences, not at 
the lowest, but at the highest, of the six centers—namely, the Ajnd between 
the eyebrows. There is no necessity for the difficult and painful process of 
piercing the Chakras from below.{91} Fix the mind on the Lord (Ishvara) in 
the highest center. For the ether (Akasha) there is the existence (Satta) of 
the Supreme Atma. There and in the two lower centers (Vishuddha and 
Anahata) enjoyment is had with Ishvara. The union between Jiva and 
Prakriti is called Honey (Madhu) in the Upanishads. By Sadhana of the 
Ajna center (Chakra) purity of being (Bhavashuddhi) is attained, and purity 
of speech follows on the attainment of such Bhava. Yoga with the Supreme 
Devata who is all-knowing is had here. He who is freed from all disturbing 
conditions of body and mind reaches the state which is beyond the Gunas 
(Gunatita), which is that of the Supreme Brahman.” 


We may conclude these two criticisms with the true Indian saying 
somewhat inconsistently quoted in the first: “To dispute the religion 
(Dharma) of another is the mark of a narrow mind. O Lord! O Great 
Magician! with whatsoever faith or feeling we call on Thee Thou art 
pleased.” 


Whatsoever difference there has been, or may be, as to forms and methods, 
whether in Upasana or Yoga, yet all Indian worshippers of the ancient type 
seek a common end in unity with Light of Consciousness, which is beyond 
the regions of Sun, Moon, and Fire. 


Recently some attention has been given to the subject in Western literature 
of an occult kind. Generally its authors and others have purported to give 
what they understood to be the Hindu theory of the matter, but with 
considerable inaccuracies. These are not limited to works of the character 


mentioned. Thus, to take but two instances of these respective classes, we 
find in a well-known Sanskrit dictionary{92} that the Chakras are defined 
to be “circles or depressions (sic) of the body for mystical or chiromantic 
purposes,” and their location has in almost every particular been wrongly 
given. The Muladhara is inaccurately described as being “above the pubis.” 
Nor is the Svadhishthana the umbilical region. Anahata is not the root of the 
nose, but is the spinal center in the region of the heart; Vishuddha is not 
“the hollow between the frontal sinuses,” but is the spinal center in the 
region of the throat. Ajna is not the fontanelle or union of the coronal and 
Sagittal sutures, which are said to be the Brahmarandhra, {93} but is in the 
position allotted to the third eye, or Jnanachakshu. Others, avoiding such 
gross errors, are not free from lesser inaccuracies. Thus, an author who, I 
am informed, had considerable knowledge of things occult, speaks of the 
Sushumna as a “force” which “cannot be energized until Ida and Pinggala 
have preceded it,” which “passes to the accompaniment of violent shock 
through each section of the spinal marrow,” and which on the awakening of 
the sacral plexus passes along the spinal cord and impinges on the brain, 
with the result that the neophyte finds “himself to be an unembodied soul 
alone in the black abyss of empty space, struggling against dread and terror 
unutterable.” He also writes that the “current” of Kundalini is called Nadi; 
that the Sushumna extends as a nerve to the Brahmarandhra; that the Tattvas 
are seven in number; and other matters which are inaccurate. The 
Sushumna is not a “force,”{94} and does not pass and impinge upon 
anything, but is the outer of the three Nadis, which form the conduit for the 
force which is the arousing of the Devi called Kundalini, which force is not 
itself a Nadi, but passes through the innermost, or Chitrint Nadi, which 
terminates at the twelve-petalled lotus below the Sahasrara, from which 
ascent is made to the Brahmarandhra. It would be easy to point out other 
mistakes in writers who have referred to the subject. It will be more 
profitable if I make as correct a statement as my knowledge admits of this 
mode of Yoga. But I desire to add that some modern Indian writers have 
also helped to diffuse erroneous notions about the Chakras by describing 
them from what is merely a materialistic or physiological standpoint. To do 
so is not merely to misrepresent the case, but to give it away; for physiology 
does not know the Chakras as they exist in themselves—that is, as centers 
of consciousness—and of its activity as Pranavayu Stkshma or subtle vital 


force; though it does deal with the gross body which is related to them. 
Those who appeal to physiology only are like to return non-suited. 


We may here notice the account of a well-known “Theosophical” 
author{95} regarding what he calls the “Force centers” and the “Serpent 
Fire,” of which he writes that he has had personal experience. Though Mr. 
Leadbeater also refers to the Yoga Shastra, it may perhaps exclude error if 
we here point out that his account does not profess to be a representation of 
the teaching of the Indian Yogis (whose competence for their own Yoga the 
author somewhat disparages), but that it is the Author’s own original 
explanation (fortified, as he conceives, by certain portions of Indian 
teaching) of the personal experience which (he writes) he himself has had. 
This experience appears to consist in the conscious arousing of the “Serpent 
Fire,” with the enhanced “astral” and mental vision which he believes has 
shown him what he tells us. The centers, or Chakras, of the human body are 
by Mr. Leadbeater described to be vortices of “etheric” matter{96} into 
which rush from the “astral” {97} world, and at right angles to the plane of 
the whirling disc, the sevenfold force of the Logos bringing “divine life” 
into the physical body. Though all these seven forces operate on all the 
centers, in each of them one form of the force is greatly predominant. These 
inrushing forces are alleged to set up on the surface of the “etheric 
double”®> secondary forces at right angles to themselves. The primary force 
on entrance into the vortex radiates again in straight lines, but at right 
angles. The number of these radiations of the primal force is said to 
determine the number of “petals”’%4 (as the Hindus call them) which the 
“Lotus” or vortex exhibits. The secondary force rushing round the vortex 
produces the appearance of the petals of a flower, or, “perhaps more 
accurately, saucers or shallow vases of wavy iridescent glass.” In this way 
—that is, by the supposition of an etheric vortex subject to an incoming 
force of the Logos—both the “Lotuses” described in the Hindu books and 
the number of their petals is accounted for by the author, who substitutes for 
the Svadhishthana center a six-petalled lotus at the spleen,{98} and corrects 
the number of petals of the lotus in the head, which he says is not a 
thousand, as the books of this Yoga say, “but exactly 960.”{99} The 
“etheric” center which keeps alive the physical vehicle is said to correspond 
with an “astral” center of four dimensions, but between them is a closely 


woven sheath or web composed of a single compressed layer of physical 
atoms, which prevents a premature opening up of communication between 
the planes. There is a way, it is said, in which these may be properly opened 
or developed so as to bring more through this channel from the higher 
planes than ordinarily passes thereby. Each of these “astral” centers has 
certain functions: At the navel, a simple power of feeling; at the spleen, 
“conscious travel” in the astral body; at the heart, “a power to comprehend 
and sympathize with the vibrations of other astral entities”; at the throat, 
power of hearing on the astral plane; between the eyebrows, “astral sight”; 
at the “top of the head,” perfection of all faculties of the astral life.{100} 
These centers are therefore said to take the place to some extent of sense 
organs for the astral body. In the first center, “at the base of the spine,” is 
the “serpent fire,” or Kundalini, which exists in seven layers or seven 
degrees of force.{101} This is the manifestation in etheric matter, on the 
physical plane, of one of the great world forces, one of the powers of the 
Logos of which vitality and electricity are examples. It is not, it is said, the 
same as Prana, or vitality.{102} The “etheric centers” when fully aroused 
by the “Serpent Fire” bring down, it is alleged, into physical consciousness 
whatever may be the quality inherent in the astral center which corresponds 
to it. When vivified by the “Serpent Fire” they become gates of connection 
between the physical and “astral” bodies. When the astral awakening of 
these centers first took place, this was not known to the physical 
consciousness. But the sense body can now “be brought to share all these 
advantages by repeating that process of awakening with the etheric 
centers.” This is done by the arousing through will-force of the “Serpent 
Fire,” which exists clothed in “etheric matter in the physical plane, and 
Sleeps{103} in the corresponding etheric center—that at the base of the 
spine.” When this is done it vivifies the higher centers, with the effect that it 
brings into the physical consciousness the powers which were aroused by 
the development of their corresponding astral centers. In short, one begins 
to live on the astral plane, which is not altogether an advantage, were it not 
that entry into the heaven world is said to be achieved at the close of life on 
this plane.{104} Thus, at the second center one is conscious in the physical 
body “of all kinds of astral influences, vaguely feeling that some of them 
are friendly and some hostile without in the least knowing why.” At the 
third center one is enabled to remember “only partially” vague astral 


journeys, with sometimes half-remembrance of a blissful sensation of flying 
through the air. At the fourth center man is instinctly aware of the joys and 
sorrows of others, sometimes reproducing in himself their physical aches 
and pains. At the arousing of the fifth center he hears voices “which make 
all kinds of suggestions to him.” Sometimes he hears music “or other less 
pleasant sounds.” {105} Full development secures clairaudience in the 
“astral” plane. The arousing of the sixth center secures results which are at 
first of a trivial character, such as “half seeing landscapes and clouds of 
color,” but subsequently amount to clairvoyance. Here it is said there is a 
power of magnification by means of an “etheric” flexible tube which 
resembles “the microscopic snake on the headdress of the Pharaohs.” The 
power to expand or control the eye of this “microscopic snake” is stated to 
be the meaning of the statement, in ancient books, of the capacity to make 
oneself large or small at will.{106} When the pituitary body is brought into 
working order, it forms a link with the astral vehicle, and when the Fire 
reaches the sixth center, and fully vivifies it, the voice of the “Master” 
(which in this case means the higher self in its various stages) is heard. 
{107} The awakening of the seventh center enables one to leave the body in 
full consciousness. “When the fire has thus passed through all these centers 
in a certain order (which varies for different types of people), the 
consciousness becomes continuous up to the entry into the heaven 
world{108} at the end of the life on the astral plane.” 


As has been seen from the account hereinbefore given, there are some 
resemblances between this account and the teaching of the Yoga Shastra, 
with which in a general way the author cited appears to have some 
acquaintance, and which may have suggested to him some features of his 
account. There are firstly seven centers, which with one exception 
correspond with the Chakras described. The author says that there are three 
other lower centers, but that concentration on them is full of danger. What 
these are is not stated. There is no center lower, that I am aware of, than the 
Muladhara, and the only center near to it which is excluded, in the above- 
mentioned account, is the Apas Tattva center, or Svadhishthana. Next there 
is the Force “the Serpent Fire,” which the Hindus call Kundalini, in the 
lowest center, the Muladhara. Lastly, the effect of the rousing of this force, 
which is accomplished by will power (Yogabala), is said to exalt the 


physical consciousness through the ascending planes to the “heaven world.” 
To use the Hindu expression, the object and aim of Shatchakrabheda is 
Yoga. This is ultimately union with the Paramatma; but it is obvious that, as 
the body in its natural state is already, though unconsciously, in Yoga, 
otherwise it would not exist, each conscious step upwards is Yoga, and 
there are many stages of such before complete or Kaivalya Mukti is 
attained. This and, indeed, many of the preceding stages are far beyond the 
“heaven world” of which the author speaks. Yogis are not concerned with 
the “heaven world,” but seek to surpass it; otherwise they are not Yogis at 
all. What, according to this theory, manifested force apparently does is this: 
it enhances the mental and moral qualities of the self operator as they 
existed at the time of its discovery. But if this be so, such enhancement may 
be as little desirable as the original state. Apart from the necessity for the 
possession of health and strength, the thought, will, and morality, which it is 
proposed to subject to its influence must be first purified and strengthened 
before they are intensified by the vivifying influence of the aroused force. 
Further, as I have elsewhere pointed out,{109} the Yogis say that the 
piercing of the Brahmagranthi sometimes involves considerable pain, 
physical disorder, and even disease, as is not unlikely to follow from 
concentration on such a center as the navel (Nabhipadma). 


To use Hindu terms, the Sadhaka must be competent (Adhikar1), a matter to 
be determined by his Guru, from whom alone the actual method of Yoga 
can be learned. The incidental dangers, however, stated by Mr. Leadbeater 
go beyond any mentioned to me by Indians themselves, who seems to be in 
general unaware of the subject of “phallic sorcery,” to which reference is 
made by Mr. Leadbeater, who speaks of Schools of (apparently Western) 
“Black Magic” which are said to use Kundalini for the purpose of 
stimulating the sexual center.{110} It is possible that perverse or misguided 
concentration on sexual and connected centers may have the effect alluded 
to. I have, however, never heard Indians refer to this matter, probably 
because, by reason of the antecedent discipline required of those who would 
undertake this Yoga, the nature of their practice, and the aim they have in 
view, such a possibility does not come under consideration. The Indian who 
practices this or any other kind of spiritual Yoga ordinarily does so not on 
account of a curious interest in occultism or with a desire to gain “astral” or 


similar experiences. {111} His attitude in this as in all other matters is 
essentially a religious one, based on a firm faith in Brahman (Sthiranishtha), 
and inspired by a desire for union with It which is liberation. What is 
competency for Tantra (Tantrashastradhikara) is described in the second 
chapter of the Gandharva Tantra as follows: The aspirant must be intelligent 
(Daksha), with senses controlled (Jitendriyah), abstaining from injury to all 
beings (Sarvahingsavinirmuktah), ever doing good to all (Sarvapranihite 
ratah), pure (Shuchi); a believer in Veda (Astika), whose faith and refuge is 
in Brahman (Brahmishthah, Brahmavadi, Brahmi, Brahmaparayana), and 
who is a non-dualist (Dvaitahina). “Such a one is competent in this 
Scripture, otherwise he is no Sadhaka” (So’smin Shastredhikarisyat 
tadanyatra na sadhakah). With such an attitude it is possible that, as pointed 
out by an Indian writer (p. 28 ante), concentration on the lower centers 
associated with the passions may, so far from rousing, quiet them. It is quite 
possible, on the other hand, that another attitude, practice, and purpose, may 
produce another result. To speak, however, of concentration on the sexual 
center is itself misleading, for the Chakras are not in the gross body, and 
concentration is done upon the subtle center, with its presiding 
consciousness, even though such centers may have ultimate relation with 
gross physical function. Doubtless, also, there is a relationship and 
correspondence between the Shaktis of the mental and sexual centers, and 
the force of the latter, if directed upwards, extraordinarily heightens all 
mental and physical functioning. In fact, those who are “centered” know 
how to make all their forces converge upon the object of their will, and train 
and then use all such forces and neglect none. The experienced followers of 
this method, however, as I have stated, allow that this method is liable to be 
accompanied by certain inconveniences or dangers, and it is therefore 
considered inadvisable except for the fully competent (Adhikari). 


There are, on the other hand, many substantial points of difference between 
the account which has been summarized and the theory which underlies the 
form of Yoga with which this work deals. The terminology and 
classification adopted by that account may be termed “Theosophical;” {112} 
and though it may be possible for those who are familiar both with this and 
the Indian terminology to establish points of correspondence between the 
two systems, it must by no means be assumed that the connotation even in 


such cases is always exactly the same. For though “Theosophical” teaching 
is largely inspired by Indian ideas, the meaning which it attributes to the 
Indian terms which it employs is not always that given to these terms by 
Indians themselves. This is sometimes confusing and misleading, a result 
which would have been avoided had the writers of this school adopted in all 
cases their own nomenclature and definitions.{113} Though for the 
visualization of our conceptions the term “planes” is a convenient one, and I 
here employ it, the division by “principles” more nearly adumbrates the 
truth. It is not easy to correlate with complete accuracy the Indian and 
Theosophical theories as to man’s principles. It has, however, been 
stated{114} that the physical body has two divisions, the “dense” and 
“etheric” body; that these correspond to the Annamaya and 
Pranamayakoshas, and that the “astral” body corresponds to the Kamik side 
of the Manomayakosha. Assuming for argument the alleged 
correspondence, then the “etheric centers” or Chakra of Mr. Leadbeater’s 
account appear to be centers of energy of the Prana vayu. The lotuses are 
also this and centers of the universal consciousness. Kundalini is the static 
form of the creative energy in bodies which is the source of all energies, 
including Prana. According to Mr. Leadbeater’s theory, Kundalini is some 
force which is distinct from Prana, understanding this term to mean vitality 
or the life principle, which on entrance into the body shows itself in various 
manifestations of life which are the minor Pranas, of which inspiration is 
called by the general name of the force itself (Prana). Verses 10 and 11 say 
of Kundalini: “It is She who maintains all the beings (that is, Jiva-jivatman) 
of the world by means of inspiration and expiration.” She is thus the Prana 
Devata, but, as She is (Comm., vv. 10 and 11) Srishti-sthitilayatmika, all 
forces therefore are in Her. She is, in fact, the Shabdabrahman or “Logos” 
in bodies. The theory discussed appears to diverge from that of the Yogis 
when we consider the nature of the Chakras and the question of their 
vivification. According to Mr. Leadbeater’s account, the Chakras are all 
vortices of “etheric matter,” apparently of the same kind and subject to the 
same external influence of the inrushing sevenfold force of the “Logos,” but 
differing in this, that in each of the Chakras one or other of their sevenfold 
forces is predominant. Again, if, as has been stated, the astral body 
corresponds with the Manomayakosha, then the vivification of the Chakras 
appears to be, according to Mr. Leadbeater, a rousing of the Kamik side of 


the mental sheath. According to the Hindu doctrine, these Chakras are 
differing centers of consciousness, vitality, and Tattvik energy. Each of the 
five lower Chakras is the center of energy of a gross Tattva—that is, of that 
form of Tattvik activity or Tanmatra which manifests the Mahabhitta or 
sensible matter. The sixth is the center of the subtle mental Tattva, and the 
Sahasrara is not called a Chakra at all. Nor, as stated, is the splenic center 
included among the six Chakras which are dealt with in this account. 


In the Indian system the total number of the petals corresponds with the 
number of the letters of the Sanskrit Alphabet; and the number of the petals 
of any specific lotus is determined by the disposition of the Nadis around it. 
These petals, further, bear subtle sound-powers, and are fifty in number, as 
are the letters of the Sanskrit Alphabet, which as representing all words and 
language is that by which all the ideation which creates the world manifests 
itself. 


This work also describes certain things which are gained by contemplation 
on each of the Chakras. Some of them are of a general character, such as 
long life, freedom from desire and sin, control of the senses, knowledge, 
power of speech, and fame. Some of these and other qualities are results 
common to concentration on more than one Chakra. Others are stated in 
connection with the contemplation upon one center only. But all such 
statements seem to be made, not with the intention of accurately recording 
the specific result, if any, which follows upon concentration upon a 
particular center, but by way of praise for increased self-control, or Stuti- 
vada; as where it is said in v. 21 that contemplation on the Nabhi-padma 
gains for the Yogi power to destroy and create the world. 


It is also said that mastery of the centers may produce various Siddhis or 
powers in respect of the predominating elements there. And this is, in fact, 
alleged.{115} Pandit Ananta Shastri says:{116} “We can meet with several 
persons every day elbowing us in the streets or bazaars who in all sincerity 
attempted to reach the highest plane of bliss, but fell victims on the way to 
the illusions of the psychic world, and stopped at one or the other of the six 
Chakras. They are of varying degrees of attainment, and are seen to possess 
some power which is not found even in the best intellectual of the ordinary 


run of mankind. That this school of practical psychology was working very 
well in India at one time is evident from these living instances (not to speak 
of the numberless treatises on the subject) of men roaming about in all parts 
of the country.” The mere rousing of the Serpent power does not, from the 
spiritual Yoga standpoint, amount to much. Nothing, however, of real 
moment, from the higher Yogis’ point of view, is achieved until the Ajna 
Chakra is reached. Here, again, it is said that the Sadhaka whose Atma is 
nothing but a meditation on this lotus “becomes the creator, preserver, and 
destroyer, of the three worlds”; and yet, as the commentator points out (v. 
34), “This is but the highest Prashangsa-vada or Stutivada—that is, 
compliment—which in Sanskrit literature is as often void of reality as it is 
in our ordinary life. Though much is here gained, it is not until the Tattvas 
of this center are also absorbed, and complete knowledge{117} of the 
Sahasrara is gained, that the Yogi attains that which is both his aim and the 
motive of his labor, cessation from rebirth which follows on the control and 
concentration of the Chitta on the Shivasthanam, the Abode of Bliss. It is 
not to be supposed that simply because the Serpent Fire has been aroused 
that one has thereby become a Yog! or achieved the end of Yoga. There are 
other points of difference which the reader will discover for himself, but 
into which I do not enter, as my object in comparing the two accounts has 
been to establish a general contrast between this modern account and that of 
the Indian schools. I may, however, add that the differences are not only as 
to details. The style of thought differs in a way not easy shortly to describe, 
but which will be quickly recognized by those who have some familiarity 
with the Indian Scriptures and mode of thought. The latter is ever disposed 
to interpret all processes and their results from a subjective or idealistic 
standpoint, though for the purposes of Sadhana the objective aspect is not 
ignored. The Indian theory is highly philosophical. Thus, to take but one 
instance, whilst Mr. Leadbeater attributes the power of becoming large or 
small at will (Anima and Mahima Siddhi) to a flexible tube or “microscopic 
snake” in the forehead, the Hindu says that all powers (Siddhi) are the 
attribute (Aishvaryya) of the Lord Ishvara, or creative consciousness, and 
that in the degree that the Jiva realizes that consciousness{118} he shares 
the powers inherent in the degree of his attainment. 


That which is the general characteristic of the Indian systems, and that 
which constitutes their real profundity, is the paramount importance 
attached to consciousness and its states. It is these states which create, 
sustain, and destroy, the worlds. Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, are the names 
for functions of the one Universal Consciousness operating in ourselves. 
And whatever be the means employed, it is the transformation of the 
“lower” into “higher” states of consciousness which is the process and fruit 
of Yoga and the cause of all its experiences. In this and other matters, 
however, we must distinguish both practice and experience from theory. A 
similar experience may possibly be gained by various modes of practice, 
and an experience may be in fact a true one, though the theory which may 
be given to account for it is incorrect. 


The following sections will enable the reader to pursue the comparison for 
himself. 


As regards practice, I am told that Kundalini cannot be roused except in the 
Muladhara and by the means here indicated, though this may take place by 
accident when by chance a person has hit upon the necessary positions and 
conditions, but not otherwise. Thus the story is told of a man being found 
whose body was as cold as a corpse, though the top of the head was slightly 
warm. (This is the state in Kundali Yoga Samadhi.) He was massaged with 
ghee (clarified butter), when the head got gradually warmer. The warmth 
descended to the neck, when the whole body regained its heat with a rush. 
The man came to consciousness, and then told the story of his condition. He 
said he had been going through some antics, imitating the posture of a Yogi, 
when suddenly “sleep” had come over him. It was surmised that his breath 
must have stopped, and that, being in the right position and conditions, he 
had unwittingly roused Kundali, who had ascended to Her cerebral center. 
Not, however, being a Yog!, he could not bring her down again. This, 
further, can only be done when the Nadis (v. post) are pure. I told the Pandit 
(who gave me this story), who was learned in this Yoga, and whose brother 
practiced it, of the case of a European friend of mine who was not 
acquainted with the Yoga processes here described, though he had read 
something about Kundali in translations of Sanskrit works, and who, 
nevertheless, believed he had roused Kundali by meditative processes 


alone. In fact, as he wrote me, it was useless for him as a European to go 
into the minutia of Eastern Yoga. He, however, saw Ida and Pinggala (v. 
post), and the “central fire” with a trembling aura of rosy light, and blue or 
azure light, and a white fire which rose up into the brain and flamed out in a 
winged radiance on either side of the head. Fire was seen flashing from 
center to center with such rapidity that he could see little of the vision, and 
movements of forces were seen in the bodies of others. The radiance or aura 
round Ida was seen as moonlike—that is, palest azure—and Pinggala red or 
rather pale rosy opalescence. Kundali appeared in vision as of intense 
golden-like white fire rather curled spirally. Taking the centers, Sushumna, 
Ida, and Pinggala, to be symbolized by the Caduceus of Mercury, {119} the 
little ball at the top of the rod was identified with the Sahasrara or pineal 
gland, {120} and the wings as the flaming of auras on each side of the center 
when the fire strikes it. One night, being abnormally free from the infection 
of bodily desires, he felt the serpent uncoil, and it ran up, and he was “ina 
fountain of fire,” and felt, as he said, “the flames spreading wing-wise about 
my head, and there was a musical clashing as of cymbals, whilst some of 
these flames, like emanations, seemed to expand and meet like gathered 
wings over my head. I felt a rocking motion. I really felt frightened, as the 
Power seemed something which could consume me.” My friend wrote me 
that in his agitation he forgot to fix his mind on the Supreme, and so missed 
a divine adventure. Perhaps it was on this account that he said he did not 
regard the awakening of this power as a very high spiritual experience or on 
a level with other states of consciousness he experienced. The experience, 
however, convinced him that there was a real science and magic in the 
Indian books which treat of occult physiology. 


The Pandit’s observations on this experience were as follows: If the breath 
is stopped and the mind is carried downwards heat is felt. It is possible to 
“see” Kundalini with the mental eye, and in this way to experience Her 
without actually arousing Her and bringing Her up, which can only be 
effected by the Yoga methods prescribed. Kundalini may have thus been 
seen as Light in the basal center (Miladhara). It was the Buddhi (v. post) 
which perceived Her, but as the experiencer had not been taught the practice 
he got confused. There is one simple test whether the Shakti is actually 
aroused. When she leaves a particular center the part so left becomes as 


cold and apparently lifeless as a corpse. The progress upwards may thus be 
externally verified by others. When the Shakti (Power) has reached the 
upper brain (Sahasrara) the whole body is cold and corpse-like, except the 
top of the skull, where some warmth is felt, this being the place where the 
static and kinetic aspects of Consciousness unite. 


The present work is issued, not with the object of establishing the truth or 
expediency of the principles and methods of this form of Yoga (a matter 
which each will determine for himself), but as a first endeavor to supply, 
more particularly for those interested in occultism and mysticism, a fuller, 
more accurate, and rational presentation of the subject. 


An understanding of the recondite matters in the treatise here translated is, 
however, only possible if we first shortly summarize some of the 
philosophical and religious doctrines which underlie this work, and a 
knowledge of which in his reader is assumed by its author. 


The following sections, therefore, of this Introduction will deal firstly with 
the concepts of Consciousness{121} and Unconsciousness, and their 
association in the Embodied Spirit or Jivatma. Nextly the kinetic aspect of 
Spirit, or Shakti, is considered; its creative ideation and manifestation in the 
evolved macrocosm and in the human body or microcosm 
(Kshudrabrahmanda), which is a replica on small scale of the greater world. 
After an account of the Logos and the letters of speech, I conclude with the 
method of involution, or Yoga. The latter will not be understood unless the 
subject of the preceding sections has been mastered. 


It is necessary to explain and understand the theory of world evolution even 
in the practical matters with which this work is concerned. For as the 
Commentator says in v. 39, when dealing with the practice of Yoga, the rule 
is that things dissolve into that from which they originate, and the Yoga 
process here described is such dissolution (Laya). This return or dissolution 
process (Nivritti) in Yoga will not be understood unless the forward or 
creative (Pravritti) process is understood. Similar considerations apply to 
other matters here dealt with. 


Il. CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAKTI) 


The bases of this Yoga are of a highly metaphysical and scientific character. 
For its understanding there is required a full acquaintance with Indian 
philosophy, religious doctrine, and ritual in general, and in particular with 
that presentment of these three matters which is given in the Shakta and 
Monistic (Advaita){122} Shaiva Tantras. It would need more than a bulky 
volume to describe and explain in any detail the nature and meaning of this 
Yoga, and the bases on which it rests. I must therefore assume in the reader 
either this general knowledge or a desire to acquire it, and confine myself to 
such an exposition of general principles and leading facts as will supply the 
key by which the doors leading to a theoretical knowledge of the subject 
may be opened by those desirous of passing through and beyond them, and 
as will thus facilitate the understanding of the difficult texts here translated. 
For on the practical side I can merely reproduce the directions given in the 
books, together with such explanations of them as I have received orally. 
Those who wish to go farther, and to put into actual process this Yoga, must 
learn directly of a Guru who has himself been through it (Siddha). His 
experience alone will say whether the aspirant is capable of success. It is 
said that of those who attempt it one out of a thousand may have success. If 
the latter enters upon the path, the Guru alone can save him from attendant 
risks, molding and guiding the practice as he will according to the particular 
capacities and needs of his disciples. Whilst, therefore, on this heading it is 
possible to explain some general principles, their application is dependent 
on the circumstances of each particular case. 


Veda says: “All this (that is, the manifold world) is (the one) Brahman” 
(Sarvvam khalvidam Brahma).{123} How the many can be the one{124} is 
variously explained by the different schools. The interpretation here given 
is that of the grand doctrine underlying and contained in the Shakta Tantras 
or Agamas. In the first place, what is the one Reality which appears as 
many? What is the nature of Brahman as it is in itself (Svaripa)? The 
answer is Sat-Chit-Ananda—that is, being-feeling-consciousness-bliss. 


Consciousness or feeling, as such (Chit, or Chaitanya, or Samvit), is 
identical with being as such. Though in ordinary experience the two are 
essentially bound up together, they still seem to diverge from each other. 
Man by his constitution inveterately believes in an objective existence 
beyond and independent of himself. And this is so as long as, being 
embodied spirit (Jivatma), his consciousness is veiled by Maya. But in the 
ultimate basis of experience, which is the Supreme Spirit (Paramatma), the 
divergence has gone, for in it lie in undifferentiated mass experiencer, 
experience, and the experienced. When, however, we speak of Chit as 
feeling-consciousness we must remember that what we know and observe 
as such is only a limited changing manifestation of Chit, which is in itself 
the infinite changeless principle which is the background of all experience. 
This being-consciousness is absolute bliss (Ananda), which is defined as 
“resting in the self” (Svariipa-vishranti). It is bliss because, being the 
infinite all (Purna), it can be in want of nothing. This blissful consciousness 
is the ultimate and real nature or Svaritipa, as it is called, of the one reality, 
the own form or the propria forma of the scholastics. Svariipa is the nature 
of anything as it is in itself, as distinguished from what it may appear to be. 
This supreme consciousness is the Supreme Shiva (Parashiva). It never 
changes, but eternally endures the same throughout all change. 


But if this be so, how is it that everything we see is associated with apparent 
unconsciousness? Our mind is evidently not a pure, but a limited 
consciousness. What limits it must be something either in itself unconscious 
or, if conscious, capable of producing the appearance of unconsciousness. 
{125} In the phenomenal world there is nothing absolutely conscious nor 
absolutely unconscious. Consciousness and unconsciousness are always 
intermingled. Some things, however, appear to be more conscious, and 
some more unconscious than others. This is due to the fact that Chit, which 
is never absent in anything, yet manifests itself in various ways and 
degrees. The degree of this manifestation is determined by the nature and 
development of the body in which it is enshrined. Spirit remains the same; 
the body changes. The manifestation of consciousness is more or less 
limited as ascent is made from the mineral to man. In the mineral world 
Chit manifests as the lowest form of sentiency evidenced by reflex response 
to stimuli, and that physical consciousness which is called in the West 


atomic memory. The sentiency of plants is more developed, though it is, as 
Chakrapani says, in the Bhanumati a dormant consciousness. This is further 
manifested in those micro-organisms which are intermediate stages between 
the vegetable and animal worlds, and have a psychic life of their own. In 
the animal world consciousness becomes more centralized and complex, 
reaching its fullest development in man, who possesses all the psychic 
functions, such as cognition, perception, feeling, and will. Behind all these 
particular changing forms of sentiency or consciousness is the one formless, 
changeless Chit as it is in itself (Svariipa), and as distinguished from the 
particular forms of its manifestation. 


As Chit throughout all these stages of life remains the same it is not really 
developed. The appearance of development is due to the fact that is now 
more and now less veiled by mind and matter. It is this veiling and 
projection by the cosmic consciousness (Shakti) which creates the world. 
What is it, then, which veils consciousness and projects the world-show? 


The answer is Shakti as Maya. Is Shakti the same as or different from Shiva 
or Chit? It must be the same, for otherwise all could not be one Brahman. 
But if it is the same it must be also Chit or Consciousness. Therefore it is 
Sachchidanandamayi{126} and Chidrupin1. {127} 


And yet there is, at least in appearance, some distinction. Shakti, which 
comes from the root Shak, “to have power,” “to be able,” means power. As 
She is one with Shiva, She as such power is the power of Shiva or 
Consciousness. There is no difference between Shiva as the possessor of 
power (Shaktiman) and power itself. The power of consciousness is 
consciousness in its active aspect. Whilst, therefore, both Shiva and Shakti 
are consciousness, the former is the changeless static aspect of 
consciousness, and Shakti is the kinetic active aspect of the same 
consciousness. The particular power whereby the dualistic world is brought 
into being is Maya-Shakti, which is both a veiling (Avarana) and projecting 
(Vikshepa) Shakti. Consciousness veils itself to itself, and projects from the 
store of its previous experiences (Sangskara) the notion of a world in which 
it suffers and enjoys. The universe is thus the creative imagination 
(Srishtikalpana, as it is called) of the Supreme World-thinker (Ishvara). 


Maya is that power by which things are “measured”—that is, formed and 
made known (Miyate anena iti maya). It is the sense of difference 
(Bhedabuddhi), or that which makes man see the world, and all things and 
persons therein, as different from himself, when in truth he and it and they 
are the one self. It is that which establishes a dichotomy in what would 
otherwise be a unitary experience, and is the cause of the dualism inherent 
in all phenomenal experience. Shakti veils consciousness by negating in 
various degrees Herself as consciousness. 


Before the manifestation of the universe, Being-Consciousness-Bliss alone 
was—that is, Shiva-Shakti as Chit and Chidrupini respectively. 
Consciousness not exercising its power, Consciousness alone changelessly 
was. In this the quiescent state of the Atma or Self, Shakti being latent, is 
one with it. The Devi in the Kulachudamani Nigama{128} says: “I, though 
Prakriti, lie hidden in Consciousness-Bliss.” Raghava Bhatta says:{129} 
“She who is eternal (Anadiriipa) existed in a subtle state, as it were 
Consciousness, during the great dissolution.” 


This is Parashiva, who in the scheme of the thirty-six Tattvas is known as 
Parasamvit. This is the perfect experience and perfect universe. By this 
latter term is not meant any heaven in the sense of a perfected world of 
forms. The perfect universe is Shakti herself in Her own nature as 
consciousness experienced by Shiva as consciousness. As the Upanishad 
says, “The self knows and loves the self.” It is this love which is bliss or 
“resting in the self,” for, as it is elsewhere said, “Supreme love is bliss” 
(Niratishaya-premaspadatvamanandatvam). If, however, there be one 
Changeless Consciousness there is no manifestation. If, again, we assume 
some other than Consciousness as cause of the universe, then the Monistic 
(Advaita) truth is destroyed, as in the dualistic Sangkhya, which assumes, in 
addition to and independent of the Purusha consciousness, the Prakritiun 
consciousness as the material cause (Upadanakarana) of the world. All 
Indian Monism, therefore, posits a dual aspect of the single consciousness 
—one the transcendental changeless aspect (Parasamvit),{130} and the 
other the creative changing aspect, which is called Shiva-Shakti Tattva. 
{131} In Parasamvit the “I” (Aham) and the “This” (Idam), or universe of 
objects, are indistinguishably mingled in the supreme unitary experience. 


{132} In Shiva-Shakti Tattva Shakti, which is the negative aspect of the 
former, Her function being negation (Nishedha-vyapara-riipa Shaktih), 
negates herself as the Idam of experience, leaving the Shiva consciousness 
as amere “I,” “not looking towards another” (Ananyonmukhah aham 
pratyayah). This is a state of mere subjective illumination (Prakasha matra) 
{133} to which Shakti, who is called Vimarsha, {134} again presents 
Herself, but now with a distinction of “I” and “This” as yet held together as 
part of one self. 


At this point, the first incipient stage of dualism, there is the first emanation 
of consciousness, known as Sadashiva or Sadakhya Tattva, which is 
followed by the second or Ishvara Tattva, the Lord. Some worship 
predominantly the masculine or right side of the conjoint male and female 
figure (Ardhanarishvara). Some, the Shaktas, predominantly worship the 
left, and call Her Mother, for She is the great Mother (Magna Mater), the 
Mahadevi who conceives, bears, and nourishes the universe sprung from 
Her womb (Yoni). This is so because She is the active aspect{135} of 
consciousness, imagining (Srishtikalpana){136} the world to be, according 
to the impressions (Sangskara) derived from enjoyment and suffering in 
former worlds. It is natural to worship Her as Mother. The first Mantra into 
which all men are initiated is the word Ma (Mother). It is their first word 
and generally their last. The father is a mere helper (Sahakari-matra) of the 
Mother.{137} The whole world of the five elements also springs from the 
Active Consciousness or Shakti, and is Her manifestation (Piirna vikasha). 
Therefore men worship the Mother, {138} than whom is none more tender, 
{139} saluting Her smiling beauty as the Rosy Tripurasundari, the source of 
the universe, and Her awe-inspiring grandeur as Kali, who takes it back into 
Herself. 


In the Mantra side of the Tantra Shastra, dealing with Mantra and its origin, 
these two Tattvas emanating from Shakti are known as Nada and Bindu. 
Parashiva and Parashakti are motionless (Nihspanda) and soundless 
(Nihshabda). 


Nada is the first produced movement in the ideating cosmic consciousness 
leading up to the Sound-Brahman (Shabdabrahman), whence all ideas, the 


language in which they are expressed (Shabda), and the objects (Artha) 
which they denote, are derived. 


Bindu literally means a point and the dot (Anusvara), which denotes in 
Sanskrit the nasal breathing (°). It is in the Chandrabindu nasal breathing 
placed above Nada ( ). In its technical Mantra sense it denotes that state of 
active consciousness or Shakti in which the “IT” or illuminating aspect of 
consciousness identifies itself with the total “This” as the yet dualistically 
unmanifest state of the universe.{140} It subjectifies the “This,” thereby 
becoming a point (Bindu) of consciousness with it. When consciousness 
apprehends an object as different from itself it sees that object as extended 
in space. But when that object is completely subjectified (such as to 
ourselves our own mind) it is experienced as an unextended point. This is 
the universe experience of the Lord experiencer as Bindu. {141} 


Where does the universe go at dissolution? It is withdrawn into that Shakti 
which projected it. It collapses, so to speak, into a mathematical point 
without any magnitude whatever.{142} This is the Shivabindu, which again 
is withdrawn into the Shiva-Shakti-Tattva which produced it. It is conceived 
that round the Shiva Bindu there is coiled Shakti, just as in the earth center 
called Muladhara Chakra in the human body a serpent clings round the self- 
produced Phallus (Svayambhulinga). This coiled Shakti may be conceived 
as a mathematical line, also without magnitude, which, being everywhere in 
contact with the point round which it is coiled, is compressed together with 
it, and forms therefore also one and the same point. There is one indivisible 
unity of dual aspect which is figured also in the Tantras{143} as a grain of 
gram (Chanaka), which has two seeds so closely joined as to look as one 
surrounded by an outer sheath. {144} 


To revert to the former simile, the Shakti coiled round Shiva, making one 
point (Bindu) with it, is Kundalini Shakti. This word comes from the 
adjective Kundali or “coiled.” She is spoken of as coiled because She is 
likened to a serpent (Bhujangg1), which, when resting and sleeping, lies 
coiled; and because the nature of Her power is spiraline, manifesting itself 
as such in the worlds—the spheroids or “eggs of Brahma” (Brahmanda), 
and in their circular or revolving orbits and in other ways. Thus the Tantras 


speak of the development of the straight line (Rijurekha) from the point 
which, when it has gone its length as a point, is turned (Vakrarekha 
angkushakara) by the force of the spiraline sack of Maya in which it works 
so as to form a figure of two dimensions, which again is turned upon itself, 
ascending as a straight line into the plane of the third dimension, thus 
forming the triangular or pyramidal figure called Shringataka.{145} In 
other words, this Kundali Shakti is that which, when it moves to manifest 
itself, appears as the universe. To say that it is “coiled” is to say that it is at 
rest—that is, in the form of static potential energy. This Shakti coiled round 
the Supreme Shiva is called Mahakundali (“The great coiled power”), to 
distinguish it from the same power which exists in individual bodies, and 
which is called Kundali or Kundalini. {146} It is with and through the last 
power that this Yoga is affected. When it is accomplished the individual 
Shakti (Kundali) is united with the great cosmic Shakti (Maha-kundall), and 
She with Shiva, with whom in truth She is one. Kundalini is an aspect of the 
eternal Brahman (Brahmartpa Sanatani) and is both Nirguna and Saguna. 
In Her Nirguna aspect She is pure consciousness (Chaitanyarupini) and 
bliss itself (Anandaripini, and in creation Brahmanandaprakashini). As 
Saguna She it is by whose power all creatures are displayed 
(Sarvabhutaprakashini). {147} Kundali Shakti in individual bodies is power 
at rest, or the static center round which every form of existence as moving 
power revolves. In the universe there is always in and behind every form of 
activity a static background. This is one of the profound truths of the Shakta 
Tantras, which, as later explained, is borne out by recent discoveries of 
modern science. The one consciousness is polarized into static and kinetic 
aspects of conscious energy for the purpose of creation. This Yoga is the 
resolution of this duality into unity again. 


The Indian Scriptures say, in the words of Herbert Spencer in his “First 
Principles,” that the universe is an unfoldment (Srishti) from the 
homogeneous (Mulaprakriti) to the heterogeneous (Vikriti), and back to the 
homogeneous again (Pralaya or dissolution). There are thus alternate states 
of evolution and dissolution, manifestation taking place after a period of 
rest. So also Professor Huxley, in his “Evolution and Ethics,” speaks of the 
manifestation of cosmic energy (Maya Shakti) alternating between phases 
of potentiality (Pralaya) and phases of explication (Srishti). “It may be,” he 


says, “as Kant suggests, every cosmic magma predestined to evolve into a 
new world has been the no less predestined end of a vanished predecessor.” 
This the Indian Shastra affirms in its doctrine that there is no such thing as 
an absolutely first creation, the present universe being but one of a series of 
worlds which are past and are yet to be. 


At the time of dissolution (Pralaya) there is in consciousness as 
Mahakundali, though undistinguishable from its general mass, the 
potentiality or seed of the universe to be. Maya potentially exists as 
Mahakundali, who is Herself one with Consciousness or Shiva. This Maya 
contains, and is in fact constituted by, the collective Sangskara or Vasana— 
that is, the mental impressions produced by Karma accomplished in 
previously existing worlds. These constitute the mass of the potential 
ignorance (Avidya) by which Consciousness veils itself. They were 
produced by desire for worldly enjoyment, and themselves produce such 
desire. The worlds exist because they in their totality will to exist. Each 
individual exists because his will desires worldly life. This seed is therefore 
the collective or cosmic will towards manifested life—that is, the life of 
form and enjoyment. At the end of the period of rest, which is dissolution, 
this seed ripens in Consciousness. Consciousness has thus a twin aspect: its 
liberation (Mukti) or formless aspect, in which it is as mere Consciousness- 
Bliss; and a universe or form aspect, in which it becomes the worlds of 
enjoyment (Bhukti). One of the cardinal principles of the Shakta Tantra is to 
secure by its Sadhana both liberation (Mukti) and enjoyment (Bhukti). 
{148} This is possible by the identification of the self when in enjoyment 
with the soul of the world. When this seed ripens Shiva is said to put forth 
His Shakti. As this Shakti is Himself, it is He in his Shiva-Shakti aspect 
who comes forth (Prasarati) and endows Himself with all the forms of 
worldly life. In the pure, perfect, formless Consciousness there springs up 
the desire to manifest in the world of forms—the desire for enjoyment of 
and as form. This takes place as a limited stress in the unlimited unmoving 
surface of pure Consciousness, which is Nishkala Shiva, but without 
affecting the latter. There is thus change in changelessness and 
changelessness in change. Shiva in His transcendent aspect does not 
change, but Shiva (Sakala) in His immanent aspect as Shakti does. As 
creative will arises Shakti thrills as Nada,{149} and assumes the form of 


Bindu, which is Ishvara Tattva, whence all the worlds derive. It is for their 
creation that Kundali uncoils. When Karma ripens, the Devi, in the words 
of the Nigama,{150} “becomes desirous of creation, and covers Herself 
with Her own Maya.” Again, “the Devi, joyful in the mad delight of Her 
union with the Supreme Akula,{151} becomes Vikarini” {152 }—that is, the 
Vikaras or Tattvas of mind and matter which constitute the universe appear. 


The Shastras have dealt with the stages of creation in great detail both from 
the subjective and objective viewpoints as changes in the limited 
consciousness or as movement (Spanda), form, “sound” (Shabda). Both 
Shaivas and Shaktas equally accept the thirty-six categories or Tattvas, the 
Kalas, the Shaktis Unmani, and the rest in the Tattvas, the Shadadhva, the 
Mantra concepts of Nada, Bindu, Kamakala, and so forth.{153} Authors of 
the Northern Shaiva school, of which a leading Shastra is the Malinivijaya 
Tantra, have described with great profundity these Tattvas. General 
conclusions only are, however, here summarized. These thirty-six Tattvas 
are in the Tantras divided into three groups, called Atma. Vidya, and Shiva 
Tattvas. The first group includes all the Tattvas, from the lowest Prithivi 
(“earth”) to Prakriti, which are known as the impure categories 
(Ashuddhatattva); the second includes Maya, the Kanchuka, {154} and 
Purusha, called the pure-impure categories (Shuddhaashuddha Tattva); and 
the third includes the five highest Tattvas, called the pure Tattvas (Shuddha 
Tattva), from Shiva Tattva to Shuddhavidya. As already stated, the supreme 
changeless state (Parasamvit){155} is a unitary experience in which the “I” 
and “This” coalesce into a unity in which neither are perceived as such. 


In the kinetic or Shakti aspect, as presented by the pure categories, 
experience recognizes an “I” and “This,” but the latter is regarded, not as 
something opposed to and outside the “I,” but as part of a one self which 
has two sides—an “I” (Aham) and “This” (Idam). The emphasis varies 
from insistence on the “I” to insistence on the “This,” and then to equality 
of emphasis on the “I” and “This as a preparation for the dichotomy in 
consciousness which follows. 


The pure-impure categories are intermediate between the pure and the 
impure. The essential characteristic of experience constituted by the impure 


categories is its dualism effected through Maya—and its limitations—the 
result of the operation of the Kanchukas. Here the “This” is not seen as part 
of the self, but as opposed to and without it as an object seen outside. Each 
consciousness thus became mutually exclusive the one of the other. The 
states thus described are threefold: a transcendent mingled “I” and “This,” 
in which these elements of experience are as such not perceived; a pure 
form of experience intermediate between the first and last, in which both 
the “I” and the “This” are experienced as part of the one self; and, thirdly, 
the state of manifestation proper, when there is a complete cleavage 
between the “I” and the “This,” in which an outer object is presented to the 
consciousness of a knower. This last stage is itself twofold. In the first the 
Purusha experiences a homogeneous universe, though different from 
himself as Prakriti; in the second Prakriti is split up into its effects (Vikriti), 
which are mind and matter, and the multitudinous beings of the universe 
which these compose. Shakti as Prakriti first evolves mind (Buddhi, 
Ahangkara, Manas) and senses (Indriya), and then sensible matter (Bhita) 
of fivefold form (“ether,” “air,” “fire,” “water,” “earth”){156} derived from 
the supersensible generals of the sense particulars called Tanmatra. When 
Shakti has entered the last and grossest Tattva (“earth”)—that is, solid 
matter—there is nothing further for Her to do. Her creative activity then 
ceases, and She rests. She rests in Her last emanation, the “earth” principle. 
She is again coiled and sleeps. She is now Kundali Shakti, whose abode in 
the human body is the earth center or Miladhara Chakra. As in the supreme 
state She lay coiled as the Mahakundali round the Supreme Shiva, so here 
She coils round the Svayambhu Lingga in the Miladhara. 


The Mantra evolution is set forth with great clarity in the Sharada Tilaka, 
wherein it is said that from the Sakala Shiva (Shiva Tattva), who is Sat- 
Chit-Ananda, issued Shakti (Shakti Tattva); from the latter Nada (Sadakhya 
Tattva); and from Nada evolved Bindu (Ishvara Tattva), {157} which, to 
distinguish it from the Bindu which follows, is called the Supreme Bindu 
(Para-Bindu). Nada and Bindu are, like all else, aspects of Shakti, being 
those states of Her which are the proper conditions for (Upayogavastha) and 
in which She is prone to (Uchchhanavastha) creation. In those Tattvas the 
germ of action (Kriya Shakti) sprouts towards its full manifestation. 


The Tantras, in so far as they are Mantra Shastras, are concerned with 
Shabda or “sound,” a term later explained. Mantra is manifested Shabda. 
Nada, which also literally means sound, is the first of the produced 
intermediate causal bodies of Shabda. Bindu, which has previously been 
explained, is described as the state of the letter Ma before manifestation, 
consisting of the Shiva-Shakti Tattva enveloped by Maya or Parama 
Kundallt. It implies both the void (Shtinya)—that is, the Brahman state 
(Brahmapada)—in the empty space within the circle of the Bindu; as also 
the Gunas which are implicitly contained in it, since it is in indissoluble 
union with Shakti, in whom the Gunas or factors constituting the material 
source of all things are contained.{158} The Parabindu is called the 
Ghanavastha state of Shakti. It is Chidghana or massive consciousness— 
that is, Chit associated with undifferentiated (that is, Chidrupini) Shakti, in 
which lie potentially in a mass (Ghana), though undistinguishable the one 
from the other, all the worlds and beings to be created. This is Parama 
Shiva, in whom are all the Devatas. It is this Bindu who is the Lord 
(Ishvara) whom some Pauranikas call Mahavishnu and others the 
Brahmapurusha.{159} As the Commentator says, it does not matter what 
He is called. He is the Lord (Ishvara) who is worshipped in secret by all 
Devas, {160} and is pointed to in different phases of the Chandrabindu, or 
Nada, Bindu, Shakti, and Shanta of the Om and other Bija Mantras. Its 
abode is Satyaloka, which within the human body exists in the pericarp of 
the thousand-petalled lotus (Sahasrara) in the highest cerebral center. The 
Sharada{161} then says that this Parabindu, whose substance is Supreme 
Shakti, divides itself into three—that is, appears under a threefold aspect. 
There are thus three Bindus, the first of which is called Bindu,{162} and the 
others Nada and Bija. Bindu is in the nature of Shiva and Bija of Shakti. 
Nada is Shiva-Shakti—that is, their mutual relation or interaction (Mithah 
samavayah){163} or Yoga (union), as the Prayogasara calls it.{164} The 
threefold Bindu (Tribindu) is supreme (Para), subtle (Stikshma), and gross 
(Sthila).{165} Nada is thus the union of these two in creation. As the text 
says (v. 40), it is by this division of Shiva and Shakti that there arises 
creative ideation (Srishti-Kalpana). The causal Bindu is from the Shakti 
aspect undifferentiated Shakti (Abhedartpa Shakti) with all powers 
(Sarvashaktimaya); from the Prakriti aspect Trigunamayi Mulaprakriti; 
from the Devata aspect the unmanifest (Avyakta); from the Devi aspect 


Shanta. The three Bindus separately indicate the operations of the three 
powers of will (Ichchha), knowledge (Jnana), and action (Kriya), and the 
three Gunas (Rajas, Sattva, Tamas); also the manifestation of the three 
Devis (Vama, Jyeshtha, Raudri) and the three Devatas (Brahma, Vishnu, 
Rudra) who spring from them.{166} It is said in the Prayogasara and 
Sharada that Raudri issued from Bindu, Jyestha from Nada, and Vama from 
Bija. From these came Rudra, Vishnu, Brahma, which are in the nature of 
Jnana, Kriya, Ichchha, and Moon, Sun, and Fire.{167} The three Bindus are 
known as Sun (Ravi), Moon (Chandra), and Fire (Agni), terms constantly 
appearing in the works here translated. 


In Sun there are Fire and Moon.{168} It is known as Mishra Bindu, and in 
the form of such is not different from Paramashiva, and is Kamakala.{169} 
Kamakala is the triangle of divine desire formed by the three Bindus—that 
is, their collectivity (Samashtiripa).{170} This Kamakala is the root (Mula) 
of all Mantra. Moon (Soma, Chandra) is Shiva Bindu, and white (Sita 
Bindu); Fire (Agni) is Shaktibindu, and red (Shonabindu); Sun is a mixture 
of the two. Fire, Moon, and Sun are the Ichchha, Jnana, Kriya Shaktis (will, 
knowledge, action) manifesting in the Muladhara (head and heart). On the 
material plane the white Bindu assumes the form of semen (Shukra), and 
the red Bindu of menstrual fluid (Rajasphala, Shonita). Mahabindu is the 
state before the manifestation of Prakriti.{171} All three Bindus—that is, 
the Kamakala—are Shakti, though one may indicate predominantly the 
Shiva, the other the Shakti aspect. Sometimes Mishra Bindu is called Shakti 
Tattva, to denote the supremacy of Shakti, and sometimes Shiva Tattva, to 
denote the supremacy of the possessor of power (Shaktiman). It is of 
coupled form (Yamalartipa). There is no Shiva without Shakti, nor Shakti 
without Shiva.{172} To separate{173} them is as impossible as to separate 
the moving wind from the steadfast ether in which it blows. In the one 
Shiva-Shakti there is a union (Maithuna), {174} the thrill of which is Nada, 
whence Mahabindu is born, which itself becomes threefold (Tribindu), 
which is Kamakala.{175} It is said in the Sharada-Tilaka that on the 
“bursting” or differentiation of the Supreme Bindu there was unmanifested 
“sound” (Shabda).{176} This manifested Shabda is through action (Kriya 
Shakti) the source of the manifested Shabda and Artha described later. 
{177} The Brahman as the source of language (Shabda) and ideas on one 


hand, and the objects (Artha) they denote on the other, is called 
Shabdabrahman, or the Logos.{178} From this differentiating Bindu in the 
form of Prakriti are evolved the Tattvas of mind and matter in all their 
various forms, as also the Lords of the Tattvas (Tattvesha)—that is, their 
directing intelligences—Shambhu, {179} the presiding Devata over the 
Ajna Chakra, the center of the mental faculties; and Sadashiva, Isha, Rudra, 
Vishnu, Brahma, the Devatas of the five forms of matter, concluding with 
Prithivi (“earth”) in the Muladhara center, wherein the creative Shakti, 
having finished Her work, again rests, and is called Kundalint. 


Just as the atom consists of a static center round which moving forces 
revolve, so in the human body Kundali in the earth Chakra is the static 
center (Kendra) round which She in kinetic aspect as the forces of the body 
works. The whole body as Shakti is in ceaseless movement. Kundali Shakti 
is the immobile support of all these operations. When She is aroused and 
Herself moves upwards, She withdraws with and into Herself these moving 
Shaktis, and then unites with Shiva in the Sahasrara lotus. The process 
upward (evolution) is the reverse of the involution above described. 


Before proceeding to a description of the Chakras it is, firstly, necessary to 
describe more fully the constituents of the body—that is, the Tattvas— 
mentioned, extending from Prakriti to Prithivi. It is of these Tattvas that the 
Chakras are centers. Secondly, an explanation is required of the doctrine of 
“sound” (Shabda), which exists in the body in the three inner states (Para, 
Pashyanti, Madhyama), and is expressed in uttered speech (Vaikhar1) This 
will help the reader to an understanding of the meaning of Mantra or 
manifested Shabda, and of the “Garland of Letters” which is distributed 
throughout the six bodily centers. 


III. EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (JIVATMA) 


The transcendental consciousness is called the Supreme Atma. The 
consciousness which is either in fact embodied or liable to be embodied is 
the Jivatma. These are but names for differing aspects of the same Self or 
Atma. In the first case consciousness is liberated from, and in the second it 
is with, form. As Consciousness is in itself formless, form is derivable from 
its power (Shakti). This power evolves itself into Prakriti Shakti—that is, 
the immediate source and the constituent of mind and matter. The 
corresponding consciousness aspect of the same power is called Purusha. 
This term is sometimes applied to the Supreme, as in the name 
Brahmapurusha. {180} Here is meant a limited consciousness—limited by 
the associated Prakriti and Her products of mind and matter. In this sense 
the term Purusha does not mean merely a human being, or indeed any 
animal, but all beings and things which are centers of expressed or hidden 
consciousness. In this sense an atom of sand is a Purusha—that is, a 
consciousness identifying itself with that particular form of solid matter 
faintly showing its existence in atomic memory and in its response to 
stimuli. For with that with which we identify ourselves, that we become. 
This is from the philosophical aspect. More popularly by Purusha, as by 
Jiva, is meant sentient being with body and senses—that is, organic life. 
{181} Man is a microcosm (Kshudrabrahmanda).{182} The world is the 
macrocosm (Brahmanda). There are numberless worlds and universes, each 
of which is governed by its own Lords, though there is but one great Mother 
of all whom these Lords themselves worship, placing on their heads the 
dust of Her feet. In everything there is all that is in anything else. There is 
thus nothing in the universe which is not in the human body. There is no 
need to throw one’s eyes into the heavens to find God. He is within, being 
known as the “Ruler within” (Antaryamin) or “Inner self” (Antaratma). 
{183} All else is His power as mind and matter. Whatever of mind or 
matter exists in the universe exists in some form or manner in the human 
body. So it is said in the Vishvasara Tantra: “What is here is there. What is 
not here is nowhere.” {184} In the body there are the Supreme Shiva-Shakti 


who pervade all things. In the body is Prakriti Shakti and all Her products. 
In fact, the body is a vast magazine of power (Shakti). The object of the 
Tantric rituals is to raise these various forms of power to their full 
expression. This is the work of Sadhana. The Tantras say that it is in the 
power of man to accomplish all he wishes if he centers his will thereon. 
And this must be so, for man is in his essence one with the Supreme Lord 
(Ishvara), and the more he manifests spirit the greater is he endowed with 
its powers. The center and root of all his powers is Kundali Shakti. The 
center in which the quiescent consciousness is realized is the upper brain or 
Sahasrara, whence in the case of the Yogi the Prana escapes through the 
Brahmarandhra at death. (See Plate VIII.) The mind and body are 
constituted of the products of Prakriti. Both having the same origin, each, 
whether mind or matter, are “material” things—that is, they are of the 
nature of forces,{185} and limited instruments through which 
Consciousness functions, and thus, though itself unlimited, appears to be 
limited. The light in a lantern is unaffected, but its manifestation to those 
without is affected by the material through which the light shines. Prakriti is 
not scientific matter. The latter is only its grossest product, and has no 
lasting existence. Prakriti is the ultimate “material” or substantive cause of 
both mind and matter, and the whole universe which they compose. It is the 
mysterious fructescent womb (Yoni) whence all is born.{186} What She is 
in Herself cannot be realized. She is only known by Her effects.{187} Mila 
Prakriti is the noumenal cause of the phenomenal world from which 
creation arises.{188} Ultimately, as it is in itself (Svartpa), Prakriti Shakti, 
like all else, is Consciousness.{189} Consciousness, however, assumes the 
form of Prakriti—that is, creative power—when evolving the universe. That 
form consists of the Gunas or modes of this natural principle which are 
called Sattva, Rajas, Tamas.{190} The general action of Shakti is to veil 
consciousness. Prakriti, in fact, like the materia prima of the Thomistic 
philosophy, is a finitising principle. To all seeming, it finitises and makes 
form in the infinite formless Consciousness.{191} So do all the Gunas. But 
one does it less and another more. The first is Sattvaguna, the function of 
which, relative to the other Gunas, is to reveal consciousness. The greater 
the presence or power of Sattvaguna, the greater the approach to the 
condition of pure consciousness. Similarly, the function of Tamas Guna is 
to suppress or veil consciousness. The function of Rajasguna is to make 


active—that is, it works on Tamas to suppress Sattva, or on Sattva to 
suppress Tamas.{192} The object and the effect of evolution, as it is of all 
Sadhana, is to develop Sattvaguna. The Gunas always coexist in everything, 
but variously predominate. The lower descent is made in the scale of nature 
the more Tamasguna prevails, as in so-called “brute substance,” which has 
been supposed to be altogether inert. The higher ascent is made the more 
Sattva prevails. The truly Sattvik man is a divine man, his temperament 
being called in the Tantra Divyabhava.{193} From pure Sattva passage is 
made to Sat, which is Chit or pure Consciousness, by the Siddhayogi, who 
is identified with Pure Spirit. 


Prakriti exists in two states, in one of which (so far as any effect is 
concerned){194} She is quiescent. The Gunas are then in stable 
equilibrium, and not affecting one another. There is no manifestation. This 
is the unmanifest (Avyakta), the potentiality of natural power (natura 
naturans).{195} When, however, owing to the ripening of Karma, the time 
for creation takes place, there is a stirring of the Gunas (Gunakshobha) and 
an initial vibration (Spandana), known in the Tantras as Cosmic Sound 
(Shabdabrahman). The Gunas affect one another, and the universe made of 
these three Gunas is created. The products of Prakriti thus evolved are 
called Vikara or Vikriti.{196} Vikriti is manifest (Vyakta) Prakriti (natura 
naturata). In the infinite and formless Prakriti there appears a strain or stress 
appearing as form. On the relaxation of this strain in dissolution forms 
disappear in formless Prakriti, who as power (Shakti) re-enters the 
Brahman-Consciousness. These Vikritis are the Tattvas issuing from 
Prakriti,{197} the Avidya Shakti—namely, the different categories of mind, 
senses, and matter. 


The bodies are threefold: causal (Karanasharira, or Parasharira, as the 
Shaivas call it), subtle (Sukshmasharira), and gross (Sthilasharira). These 
bodies in which the Atma is enshrined are evolved from Prakriti Shakti, and 
are constituted of its various productions. They form the tabernacle of the 
Spirit (Atma), which as the Lord is “in all beings, and who from within all 
beings controls them.” {198} The body of the Lord (Ishvara) is pure 
Sattvaguna (Shuddhasattvagunapradhana).{199} This is the aggregate 
Prakriti or Maya of Him or Her as the Creator-Creatrix of all things. Jiva, as 


the Kularmava Tantra{200} says, is bound by the bonds (Pasha); Sadashiva 
is free of them.{201} The former is Pashu, and the latter Pashupati, or Lord 
of Pashus (Jivas). That is, Ishvart{202} is not affected by Her own Maya. 
She is all-seeing, all-knowing, all-powerful. Ishvara thus rules Maya. Jiva is 
ruled by it. The body of the Mother and Her child the Jiva are not, thus, the 
same. For the latter is a limited consciousness subject to error, and governed 
by that Mayashakti of Hers which makes the world seem to be different 
from what it in its essence is. The body of Jiva is therefore known as the 
individual Prakriti or Avidya, in which there is impure Sattva, and Rajas 
and Tamas (Malinasattvagunapradhana). But in the Mother are all creatures. 
And so in the Trishati{203} the Devi is called “in the form of one and many 
letters” (Ekanekaksharakritih). As Eka She is the Ajnana which is pure 
Sattva and attribute (Upadhi) of Ishvara; as Aneka She is Upadhi or vehicle 
of Jiva. Whilst Ishvara is one, Jivas are many, according to the diversity in 
the nature of the individual Prakriti caused by the appearance of Rajas and 
Tamas in it in differing proportions. The Atma appears as Jiva in the various 
forms of the vegetable, animal, and human worlds. 


The first or causal body of any particular Jiva, therefore, is that Prakriti 
(Avidya Shakti) which is the cause of the subtle and gross bodies of this 
Jiva which are evolved from it. This body lasts until liberation, when the 
Jivatma ceases to be such and is the Paramatma or bodiless Spirit (Videha 
Mukti). The Jiva exists in this body during dreamless sleep (Sushupti). 


The second and third bodies are the differentiations through evolution of the 
causal body, from which first proceeds the subtle body, and from the latter 
is produced the gross body. 


The subtle body, which is also called Linga Sharira or Puryashtaka, is 
constituted of the first evolutes (Vikriti) from the causal Prakritic body— 
namely, the Mind (Antahkarana), the internal instrument, together with the 
external instruments (Bahyakarana), or the Senses (Indriya), and their 
supersensible objects (Tanmatra). The third or gross body is the body of 
“matter” which is the gross particular object of the senses{204} derived 
from the supersensibles. 


Shortly, this subtle body may be described as the mental body, as that which 
succeeds is called the gross body, of matter. Mind, which is called the 
“working within” or “internal instrument” (Antahkarana), is one only, but is 
given different names to denote the diversity of its functions.{205} The 
Sangkhya thus speaks of Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas, to which the Vedanta 
adds Chitta, being different aspects or attributes (Dharma) of mind as 
displayed in the psychical processes by which the Jiva knows, feels, and 
wills. 


These may be considered from the point of view of evolution—that is, 
according to the sequence in which the limited experience of the Jiva is 
evolved—or from that in which they are regarded after creation, when the 
experience of concrete sense objects has been had. According to the former 
aspect, Buddhi or Mahat Tattva is the state of mere presentation; 
consciousness of being only, without thought of “I” (Ahangkara), and 
unaffected by sensations of particular objects (Manas and Indriyas). It is 
thus the impersonal Jiva Consciousness, a state of impersonal experience 
which, at least in some of its aspects, may be that which is spoken of as the 
subliminal consciousness. {206} Ahangkara, of which Buddhi is the basis, is 
the personal consciousness which realizes itself as a particular “I,” the 
experiencer. The Jiva, in the order of creation, first experiences in a vague 
general way without consciousness of the self, like the experience which is 
had immediately on waking after sleep. It then refers this experience to the 
limited self, and has the consciousness “lam So-and-so.” 


Manas is the desire which follows on such experience, and the senses and 
their objects are the means whereby that enjoyment is had which is the end 
of all will to life. Whilst, however, in the order of evolution Buddhi is the 
first principle, in the actual working of the Antahkarana after creation has 
taken place it comes last. 


It is more convenient, therefore, to commence with the sense-objects and 
the sensations they evoke. Matter as the objective cause of perception is not 
in its character as such under the cognizance of the senses. All that can be 
predicated of it is its effect upon these senses, which is realized by the 
instrumentality of mind in its capacity as Manas. The experiencer is 


affected in five different ways, giving rise in him to the sensations of 
hearing, touch and feel, {207} color and form{208} and sight, taste, and 
smell.{209} But sensible perception exists only in respect of particular 
objects. Thus, sound as the gross object of the sense (Indriya) of hearing is 
either high, low, harsh, sweet, and so forth. Sound is thus perceived in its 
variations only. But there exist also general elements of the particulars of 
sense perception. That general ideas may be formed of particular sense 
objects indicates, it is said,{210} their existence in some parts of the Jiva’s 
nature as facts of experience; otherwise the generals could not be formed 
from the particulars given by the senses as the physical facts of experience. 
There is therefore an abstract quality by which sensible matter (Mahabhita) 
is perceived. This abstract quality is called a Tanmatra, which means the 
“mere thatness,” or abstract quality, of an object. Thus, the Tanmatra of 
sound (Shabdatanmatra) is not any particular sensible form of it, but the 
“thatness” of sound—that is, sound as such apart from any of its particular 
variations stated. The Tanmatras have, therefore, aptly been called the 
“generals of the sense particulars” {211 }—that is, the general elements of 
sense perception. These necessarily come into existence when the senses 
(Indriya) are produced; for a sense necessitates something which can be the 
object of sensation. These Sukshma (subtle) Bhita, as they are also called, 
are not ordinarily themselves perceived, for they are supersensible 
(Atindriya). Their existence is only mediately perceived through the gross 
particular objects of which they are the generals, and which proceed from 
them. They can be the objects of immediate (Pratyaksha) perception only to 
Yogis.{212} They are, like the gross sense objects derived from them, five 
in number—namely, sound as such (Shabdatanmatra), touch and feel as 
such{213} (Sparshatanmatra), color and form as such (Riipatanmatra), 
flavor as such (Rasatanmatra), and odor as such (Gandhatanmatra). Each of 
these evolves from that which precedes it.{214} 


Sensations aroused by sense objects are experienced by means of the outer 
instruments (Bahyakarana) of the Lord of the body, or senses (Indriya), 
which are the gateways through which the Jiva receives worldly experience. 
These are ten in number, and are of two classes: viz., the five organs of 
sensation or perception (Jnanendriya), or ear (hearing), skin (feeling by 
touch), eye (sight), tongue (taste), and nose (smell); and the five organs of 


action (Karmendriya), which are the reactive response which the self makes 
to sensation—namely, mouth, hands, legs, anus, and genitals, whereby 
sneaking, grasping, walking, excretion, and procreation, are performed, and 
through which effect is given to the Jiva’s desires. These are afferent and 
efferent impulses respectively. 


The Indriya, or sense, is not the physical organ, but the faculty of mind 
operating through that organ as its instrument. The outward sense organs 
are the usual means whereby on the physical plane the functions of hearing 
and so forth are accomplished. But, as they are mere instruments and their 
power is derived from the mind, a Yogi may accomplish by the mind only 
all that may be done by means of these physical organs without the use of 
the latter. 


With reference to their physical manifestations, but not as they are in 
themselves, the classes into which the Indriyas are divided may be 
described as the sensory and motor nervous systems. As the Indriyas are not 
the physical organs, such as ear, eye, and so forth, but faculties of the Jiva 
desiring to know and act by their aid, the Yogi claims to accomplish without 
the use of the latter all that is ordinarily done by their means. So a 
hypnotized subject can perceive things, even when no use of the special 
physical organs ordinarily necessary for the purpose is made.{215} The fact 
of there being a variety of actions does not necessarily involve the same 
number of Indriyas. An act of “going” done by means of the hand (as by a 
cripple) is to be regarded really as an operation of the Indriya of feet 
(Padendriya), even though the hand is the seat of the Indriya for handling. 
{216} By the instrumentality of these Indriyas things are perceived and 
action is taken with reference to them. The Indriyas are not, however, 
sufficient in themselves for this purpose. In the first place, unless attention 
co-operates there is no sensation (Alochana) at all. To be “absent-minded” 
is not to know what is happening.{217} Attention must therefore co-operate 
with the senses before the latter can “give” the experiencer anything at all. 
{218} Nextly, at one and the same moment the experiencer is subject to 
receive a countless number of sensations which come to and press upon him 
from all sides. If any of these is to be brought into the field of 
consciousness, it must be selected to the exclusion of others. The process of 


experience is the selection of a special section from out of a general whole, 
and then being engaged on it, so as to make it one’s own, either as a 
particular object of thought or a particular field of operation.{219} Lastly, 
as Western psychology holds, the senses give not a completed whole, but a 
manifold—the manifold of sense. These “points of sensation” must be 
gathered together and made into a whole. These three functions of attention, 
selection, and synthesizing the discrete manifold of the senses, are those 
belonging to that aspect of the mental body, the internal agent 
(Antahkarana), called Manas.{220} Just as Manas is necessary to the senses 
(Indriya), the latter are necessary for Manas. For the latter is the seat of 
desire, and cannot exist by itself. It is the desire to perceive or act, and 
therefore exists in association with the Indriyas. 


Manas is thus the leading Indriya, of which the senses are powers. For 
without the aid and attention of Manas the other Indriyas are incapable of 
performing their respective offices; and as these Indriyas are those of 
perception and action, Manas, which co-operates with both, is said to 
partake of the character of both cognition and action. 


Manas, through association with the eye or other sense, becomes manifold, 
being particularized or differentiated by its co-operation with that particular 
instrument, which cannot fulfill its functions except in conjunction with 
Manas. 


Its function is said to be Sangkalpa-Vikalpa. That is, selection and rejection 
from the material provided by the Jnanendriya. When, after having been 
brought into contact with the sense objects, it selects the sensation which is 
to be presented to the other faculties of the mind, there is Sangkalpa. The 
activity of Manas, however, is itself neither intelligent result nor moving 
feelings of pleasure or pain. It has not an independent power to reveal itself 
to the experiencer. Before things can be so revealed and realized as objects 
of perception, they must be made subject to the operation of Ahangkara and 
Buddhi, without whose intelligent light they would be dark forms unseen 
and unknown by the experiencer, and the efforts of Manas but blind 
gropings in the dark. Nor can the images built up by Manas affect of 
themselves the experiencer so as to move him in any way until and unless 


the experiencer identifies himself with them by Ahangkara—that is, by 
making them his own in feeling and experience. Manas, being thus an 
experience of activity in the dark, unseen and unrevealed by the light of 
Buddhi, and not moving the experiencer until he identifies himself with it in 
feeling, is one in which the dark veiling quality (Tamasguna) of Shakti 
Prakriti is the most manifest.{221} This Guna also prevails in the Indriyas 
and the subtle objects of their operation (Tanmatra). 


Ahangkara the “I-maker” is self-arrogation {222 }— that is, the realization of 
oneself as the personal “I” or self-consciousness of worldly experience, in 
which the Jiva thinks of himself as a particular person who is in relation 
with the objects of his experience. It is the power of self-arrogation 
whereby all that constitutes man is welded into one Ego, and the percept or 
concept is referred to that particular thinking subject and becomes part of its 
experience. When, therefore, a sensation is perceived by Manas and 
determined by Buddhi, Ahangkara says: “It is I who perceive it.” 


This is the “I” of phenomenal consciousness as distinguished from “this” 
the known. Buddhi functions with its support.{223} Buddhi considered 
with relation to the other faculties of experience is that aspect of the 
Antahkarana which determines (Adhyavasayatmika buddhih).{224} “A 
man is said to determine (Adhyavasyati) who, having perceived (Manas), 
and thought, ‘I am concerned in this matter’ (Ahangkara), and thus having 
self-arrogated, comes to the determination, ‘This must be done by me’ 
(Kartavyam etat maya).”{225} “Must be done” here does not refer to 
exterior action only, but to mental action (Manasikriya) also, such as any 
determination by way of the forming of concepts and percepts (“It is so”) 
and resolutions (“It must be done”). Buddhi pervades all effects whatever 
other than itself. It is the principal Tattva because it pervades all the 
instruments (Indriya), is the receptacle of all the Sangskaras or Karmic 
tendencies, and is in Sangkhya the seat of memory.{226} It is the thinking 
principle which forms concepts or general ideas acting through the 
instrumentality of Ahangkara, Manas, and the Indriyas. In the operations of 
the senses Manas is the principal; in the operation of Manas Ahangkara is 
the principal; and in the operation of Ahangkara Buddhi is the principal. 
With the instrumentality of all of these Buddhi acts, modifications taking 


place in Buddhi through the instrumentality of the sense functions. {227} It 
is Buddhi which is the basis of all cognition, sensation, and resolves, and 
makes over objects to Purusha—that is, consciousness. And so it is said that 
Buddhi, whose characteristic is determination, is the charioteer; Manas, 
whose characteristic is Sangkalpavikalpa, is the reins; and the Senses are 
the horses. Jiva is the Enjoyer (Bhokta)—that is, Atma conjoined with 
body, senses, Manas, and Buddhi.{228} In Buddhi Sattvaguna 
predominates; in Ahangkara, Rajas; in Manas and the Indriyas and their 
objects, Tamas. 


Chitta{229} in its special sense is that faculty (Vritti) by which the mind 
first recalls to memory (Smaranam) that of which there has been previously 
Anubhava or Pratyaksha Jnana—that is, immediate cognition. This 
Smaranam exists only to the extent of actual Anubhava. For remembrance 
is the equivalent of, and neither more than less than, what has been 
previously known;{230} remembrance being the calling up of that. Chinta, 
again, is that faculty whereby the current of thought dwells, thinks, and 
contemplates upon (Chinta){231} the subject so recalled by Smaranam, and 
previously known and determined by Buddhi. For such meditation 
(Dhyana) is done through the recall and fixing the mind upon past percepts 
and concepts. According to Vedanta, Buddhi determines but once only, and 
the further recall and thought upon the mental object so determined is the 
faculty of the separate mental category called Chitta. Sangkhya, on the 
principle of economy of categories, regards Smaranam and Chinta to be 
functions of Buddhi.{232} In the works here translated and elsewhere 
Chitta is, however, currently used as a general term for the working mind— 
that is, as a synonym for the Antahkarana. {233} 


To sum up the functions of the subtle body: the sense-objects (Bhita, 
derived from Tanmatra) affect the senses (Indriya) and are perceived by 
Manas, are referred to the self by Ahangkara, and are determined by 
Buddhi. The latter in its turn is illumined by the light of consciousness 
(Chit), which is the Purusha; all the Principles (Tattva) up to and including 
Buddhi being modifications of apparently unconscious Prakriti. Thus all the 
Tattvas work for the enjoyment of the Self, or Purusha. They are not to be 
regarded as things existing independently by themselves, but as 


endowments of the Spirit (Atma). They do not work arbitrarily as they will, 
but represent an organized co-operative effort in the service of the Enjoyer, 
the Experiencer, or Purusha. 


The subtle body is thus composed of what are called the “17,” viz., Buddhi 
(in which Ahangkara is included), Manas, the ten senses (Indriya), and the 
five Tanmatra. No special mention is made of Prana by the Sangkhya, by 
which it is regarded as a modification of the Antahkarana, and as such is 
implicitly included. The Mayavadins insert the Prana pentad instead of the 
Tanmatra. {234} 


The Jiva lives in his subtle or mental body alone when in the dreaming 
(Svapna) state. For the outside world of objects (Mahabhita) is then shut 
out, and the consciousness wanders in the world of ideas. The subtle body 
or soul is imperishable until liberation is attained, when the Jivatma, or 
seemingly conditioned consciousness, ceases to be such, and is the Supreme 
Consciousness or Paramatma Nirguna Shiva. The subtle body thus survives 
the dissolution of the gross body of matter, from which it goes forth 
(utkraman), and reincarnates{235} until liberation (Mukti). The 
Lingasharira is not all-pervading (Vibhu), for in that case it would be 
eternal (Nitya), and could not act (Kriya). But it moves and goes (gati). 
Since it is not Vibhu, it must be limited (parichinna) and of atomic 
dimension (anuparimanam). It is indirectly dependent on food. For though 
the material body is the food-body (annamaya), mind is dependent on it 
when associated with the gross body. Mind in the subtle body bears the 
Sangskaras which are the result of past actions. This subtle body is the 
cause of the third or gross body. 


The whole process of evolution is due to the presence of the will to life and 
enjoyment, which is a result of Vasana, or world-desire, carried from life to 
life in the Sangskaras, or impressions made on the subtle body by Karma, 
which is guided by Ishvara. In its reaching forth to the world, the Self is not 
only endowed with the faculties of the subtle body, but with the gross 
objects of enjoyment on which those faculties feed. There therefore comes 
into being, as a projection of the Power (Shakti) of Consciousness, the gross 
body of matter called Sthila Sharira. 


The word Sharira comes from the root “Shri,” to decay; for the gross body 
is at every moment undergoing molecular birth and death until Prana, or 
vitality, leaves, the organism, which as such is dissolved. The soul (Jivatma) 
is, when it leaves the body, no longer concerned therewith. There is no such 
thing as the resurrection of the body. It returns to dust, and the Jiva when it 
reincarnates does so in a new body, which is nevertheless, like the last, 
suited to give effect to its Karma. 


The Sthila Sharira, with its three Doshas, six Koshas, seven Dhatus, ten 
Fires, and so forth, {236} is the perishable body composed of compounds of 
five forms of gross sensible matter (Mahabhita), which is ever decaying, 
and is at the end dissolved into its constituents at death.{237} This is the 
Vedantik body of food (Annamaya Kosha), so called because it is 
maintained by food which is converted into chyle (Rasa), blood, and the 
other material components of the gross organism. The Jiva lives in this 
body when in the waking (Jagrat) state. 


The human, physical, or gross body is, according to Western science, 
composed of certain compounds, of which the chief are water, gelatin, fat, 
phosphate of lime, albumen, and fibrin, and of these water constitutes some 
two-thirds of the total weight. These substances are composed of simpler 
non-metallic and metallic elements, of which the chief are oxygen (to the 
extent of about two-thirds), hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, calcium, and 
phosphorus. Again, to go one step farther back, though the alleged 
indestructibility of the elements and their atoms is still said by some to 
present the character of a “practical truth,” well-known recent experiments 
go to re-establish the ancient hypothesis of a single primordial substance to 
which these various forms of matter may be reduced, with the resultant of 
the possible and hitherto derided transmutation of one element into another; 
since each is but one of the plural manifestations of the same underlying 
unity. 


Recent scientific research has shown that this original substance cannot be 
scientific “matter”—that is, that which has mass, weight, and inertia. Matter 
has been dematerialized and reduced, according to current hypotheses, to 
something which differs profoundly from “matter” as known by the senses. 


This ultimate substance is stated to be Ether in a state of motion. The 
present scientific hypothesis would appear to be as follows: There is no 
such thing as scientific “Matter.” If there seems to be such, this is due to the 
action of Shakti as Maya. The ultimate and simplest physical factor from 
which the universe has arisen is motion of and in a substance called “ether,” 
which is not scientific “matter.” The motions of this substance give rise 
from the realistic point of view to the notion of “matter.” Matter is thus at 
base one, notwithstanding the diversity of its forms. Its ultimate element is 
on the final analysis of one kind, and the differences in the various kinds of 
matter depend on the various movements of the ultimate particle and its 
succeeding combinations. Given such unity of base, it is possible that one 
form of matter may pass into another. 


The Indian theory here described agrees with the Western speculations to 
which we have referred, that what the latter calls “scientific matter” does 
not really—that is, permanently—exist, but says that there are certain 
motions or forces (five in number) which produce the appearance of 
“matter,” and which are ultimately reducible to ether (Akasha). Akasha, 
however, and scientific “ether” are not in all respects the same. The latter is 
an ultimate physical substance, not “matter,” having vibratory movements 
and affording the medium for the transmission of light. Akasha is one of the 
gross forces into which the Primordial Power (Prakriti Shakti) differentiates 
itself. Objectively considered it is a vibration{238} which produces the 
psychical experience of space in which the other forces are observed to be 
operating. Lastly, Akasha is not an ultimate, but is itself derived from the 
supersensible Tanmatra, with its quality (Guna) whereby Akasha affects the 
senses; and this Tanmatra is itself derived from the mental I-making 
principle (Ahangkara), or personal consciousness produced from the super- 
personal Jiva-consciousness as such (Buddhi), emanating from the root- 
energy, or Prakriti, the cause and basis of all forms of “material” force or 
substance. At the back of “matter” there is mind, and at the back of mind 
the creative energy (Shakti) of the Supreme who is the cause of the universe 
and Consciousness itself. 


Matter affects the Jiva in five different ways, giving rise in him to the 
sensations of smell, taste, sight, touch and feel, and hearing. 


As already explained, the Tanmatra are supersensible, being abstract 
qualities, whilst the senses perceive their variations in particular objects 
only. These sense-particulars are produced from the generals. 


From the Shabda Tanmatra and from the combinations of the latter with the 
other Tanmatras are produced the gross Bhutas (Mahabhita), which as 
things of physical magnitude perceivable by the senses approach the 
Western definition of discrete sensible “matter.” These five Mahabhita are 
Akasha (Ether), Vayu (Air), Tejas (Fire), Apas (Water), and Prithivi (Earth). 
Their development takes place from the Tanmatra, from one unit of that 
which is known in sensible matter as mass (Tamas), charged with energy 
(Rajas) by the gradual accretion of mass and redistribution of energy. The 
result of this is that each Bhiita is more gross than that which precedes it 
until “Earth” is reached. These five Bhiitas have no connection with the 
English “elements” so called, nor, indeed, are they elements at all, being 
derived from the Tanmatra. Dynamically and objectively considered they 
are (proceeding from Akasha) said to be five forms of motion, into which 
Prakriti differentiates itself: viz., non-obstructive, all-directed motion 
radiating lines of force in all directions, symbolized as the “Hairs of 
Shiva,” {239} affording the space (Akasha) in which the other forces 
operate; transverse motion{240} and locomotion in space (Vayu); upward 
motion giving rise to expansion (Tejas); downward motion giving rise to 
contraction (Apas); and that motion which produces cohesion, its 
characteristic of obstruction being the opposite of the non-obstructive ether 
in which it exists and from which it and the other Tattvas spring. The first is 
sensed by hearing through its quality (Guna) of sound (Shabda);{241} the 
second by touch through resistance and feeling; {242} the third by sight as 
color;{243} the fourth by taste through flavor; and the fifth by the sense of 
smell through its odor, which is produced by matter only in so far as it 
partakes of the solid state.{244} 


The hard and stable obstructive “earth” is that which is smelt, tasted, seen, 
and touched, and which exists in space which is known by hearing—that is, 
the sounds in it. The smooth “water” is that which is tasted, seen, and 
touched, in space. “Fire” is what is seen and touched—that is, felt as 
temperature—in space. “Air” is what is so felt in space. And sound which is 


heard is that by which the existence of the “Ether” is known. These Bhitas 
when compounded make up the material universe. Each thing therein being 
thus made of all the Bhitas, we find in the Tantra that form, color, and 
sound, are related, a truth which is of deep ritual significance. Thus, each of 
the sounds of speech or music has a corresponding form, which have now 
been made visible to the eye by the Phonoscope.{245} Thus the deaf may 
perceive sounds by the eye, just as, by the Optophone, the blind may read 
by means of the ear. 


In the same Shastra various colors and figures (Mandalas) are assigned to 
the Tattvas to denote them. Akasha is represented by a transparent white 
circular diagram in which, according to some accounts there are dots 
(Chhidra), thus displaying the interstices which Akasha produces; for 
Akasha, which is all-pervading, intervenes between each of the Tattvas 
which are evolved from it. 


Vayu is denoted by a smoky grey, six-cornered diagram;{246} Tejas, red, 
triangular diagram; Apas, white, crescent-shaped diagram; and Prithivi, 
yellow, by the quadrangular diagram which as the superficial presentation 
of the cube well denotes the notion of solidity. 


Similarly, to each Devata also there is assigned a Yantra, or diagram, which 
is a suggestion of the form assumed by the evolving Prakriti or body of that 
particular Consciousness. 


The gross body is, then, a combination of the compounds of these 
Mahabhitas, derivable from the Akasha (“Ether”) Tattva. 


The Bhiitas and the Tanmatra, as parts of these compounds, pervade the 
body, but particular Bhiitas are said to have centers of force in particular 
regions. Thus the centers (Chakra) of “earth” and “water” are the two lower 
ones in the trunk of the body. “Fire” predominates in the central abdominal 
region, and “air” and “ether” in the two higher centers in the heart and 
throat. These five Tanmatras, five Bhitas, and the ten senses (Indriyas) 
which perceive them, are known as the twenty gross Tattvas which are 
absorbed in Yoga in the centers of the bodily trunk. The remaining four 


subtle mental Tattvas (Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas) and Prakriti have their 
special center of activity in the head. Again, the Bhitas may be specially 
displayed in other portions of the bodily organism. Thus, Prithivi displays 
itself as bone or muscle; Apas as urine and saliva; Tejas as hunger and 
thirst; Vayu in grasping and walking. Fire is manifold, its great mystery 
being saluted by many names. So Tejas manifests both as light and heat, for, 
as Helmholtz says, the same object may affect the senses in different ways. 
The same ray of sunshine, which is called light when it falls on the eyes, is 
called heat when it falls on the skin. Agni manifests in the household and 
umbilical fires; as Kamagni in the Muladhara center; Vadava or submarine 
fire and in the “Lightning” of the Sushumna in the spinal column. 


Matter thus exists in the five states etheric,{247} aerial,{248} fiery,{249} 
fluid, {250} and solid.{251} Prithivi does not denote merely what is 
popularly called Earth. All solid (Parthiva) odorous substance is in the 
Prithivi state. All substance in the fluid (Apya) state is in the Apas state, as 
everything which has cohesive resistance is in that of Prithivi. This latter, 
therefore, is the cohesive vibration the cause of solidity of which the 
common earth is a gross compounded form. All matter in the aerial 
(Vayava) condition is in the Vayu state. These are all primary 
differentiations of cosmic matter into a universe of subtly fine motion. The 
Tattvas regarded objectively evoke in the Indriyas smell, taste, sight, touch, 
and hearing. 


The gross body is thus a combination of the compounds of these 
Mahabhita, derivable ultimately from ether (Akasha), itself evolved in 
manner described. 


The gross and subtle bodies above described are vitalized and held together 
as an organism by Prana, which is evolved from the active energy (Kriya 
Shakti) of the Linga Sharira. Prana, or the vital principle, is the special 
relation of the Atma with a certain form of matter which by this relation the 
Atma organizes and builds up as a means of having experience.{252} This 
special relation constitutes the individual Prana in the individual body. The 
cosmic all-pervading Prana is not Prana in this gross sense, but is a name 
for the Brahman as the author of the individual Prana. The individual Prana 


is limited to the particular body which it vitalizes, and is a manifestation in 
all breathing creatures (Prani) of the creative and sustaining activity of the 
Brahman, who is represented in individual bodies by the Devi Kundalini. 


All beings, whether Devatas, men, or animals, exist only so long as the 
Prana is within the body. It is the life duration of all.{253} What life is has 
been the subject of dispute in India as elsewhere. The materialists of the 
Lokayata school considered life to be the result of the chemical 
combinations of the elements, in the same manner as the intoxicating 
property of spirituous liquors results from the fermentation of 
unintoxicating rice and molasses, or aS spontaneous generation was 
supposed to occur under the influence of gentle warmth. This is denied by 
the Sangkhya. Though Prana and its fivefold functions are called Vayu, life, 
according to this school, is not a Vayu in the sense of a mere biomechanical 
force, nor any mere mechanical motion resulting from the impulsion of 
such Vayu. 


According to the view of this school, Prana, or vitality, is the common 
function of the mind and all the senses, both sensory Jnanendriya and motor 
(Karmendriya), which result in the bodily motion. Just as several birds 
when confined in one cage cause that cage to move, by themselves moving, 
so the mind and senses cause the body to move while they are engaged in 
their respective activities. Life is, then, a resultant of the various concurrent 
activities of other principles or forces in the organism. 


The Vedantists agree in the view that the Prana is neither Vayu nor its 
operation, but deny that it is the mere resultant of the concomitant activities 
of the organism, and hold that it is a separate independent principle and 
“material” form assumed by the universal Consciousness. Life is therefore a 
subtle principle pervading the whole organism which is not gross Vayu, but 
is all the same a subtle kind of apparently unconscious force, since 
everything which is not the Atma or Purusha is, according to Mayavada 
Vedanta and Sangkhya, unconscious or, in Western parlance, “material” 
(Jada).{254} The gross outer body is heterogeneous (Parachchhinna) or 
made up of distinct or well-defined parts. On the other hand, the Pranamaya 
self which lies within the Annamaya self is a homogeneous undivided 


whole (Sadharana) permeating the whole physical body 
(Sarvapindavyapin). It is not cut off into distinct regions (Asadharana) as is 
the Pinda, or microcosmic physical body. Unlike the latter, it has no 
specialized organs each discharging a specific function. It is a homogeneous 
unity (Sadharana) present in every part of the body, which it ensouls as its 
inner self. Vayu{255} which courses through the body is the manifestation, 
self-begotten, the subtle, invisible, all-pervading, divine energy of eternal 
life. It is so called from the fact of its coursing throughout the universe. 
Invisible in itself, yet its operations are manifest. For it determines the birth, 
growth, and decay, of all animated organisms, and as such it receives the 
homage of all created being. As vital Vayu it is instantaneous in action, 
radiating as nerve force through the organism in constant currents. In its 
normal condition it maintains a state of equilibrium between the different 
Doshas{256} and Dhatus,?°° or root principles of the body. The bodily 
Vayu is divided, as are the principles called Pitta25* and Kapha,?°° into five 
chief divisions according to the differences in location and function. Vayu, 
known in its bodily aspect as Prana, the universal force of vital activity, on 
entry into each individual is divided into tenfold functions (Vritti), of which 
the five chief are: Breathing, bearing the same name (Prana) as that given to 
the force considered in its totality—the function whereby atmospheric air 
with its pervading vitality, which has been first drawn from without into the 
bodily system, is expired. {257 } 


On the physical plane Prana manifests in the animal body as breath through 
inspiration (Sa), or Shakti, and expiration (Ha), or Shiva. The male 
principle of Prana throws out, and the female principle draws in, in 
accordance with the nature of Shakti as Shabdabrahman (Kulakundalin’). 
Breathing is itself a Mantra, known as the Mantra which is not recited 
(Ajapamantra), for it is said without volition. {258} 


The divine current is Hang and Sa or the motion of Ha and Sa. This motion, 
which exists on all the planes of life, is for the earth plane (Bhirloka) 
created and sustained by the Sun, the solar breath of which is the cause of 
human breath with its centrifugal and centripetal movements, the 
counterpart in man of the cosmic movement of the Hangsah or Shiva-shakti 
Tattvas, which are the soul of the Universe. The Sun is not only the center 


and upholder of the solar system, {259} but the source of all available 
energy and of all physical life on earth. Accompanying the sunshine there 
proceeds from the orb a vast invisible radiation, the prerequisite of all 
vegetable and animal life. It is these invisible rays which, according to 
science, sustain the mystery of all physical life. The Sun whose body is the 
great luminary is in itself the Solar God, a great manifestation of the inner 
Spiritual Sun. {260} 


Apana, the downward “breath” which pulls against Prana, governs the 
excretory functions; Samana kindles the bodily fire and governs the 
processes of digestion and assimilation; Vyana, or diffused “breathing,” is 
present throughout the body, effecting division and diffusion, resisting 
disintegration, and holding the body together in all its parts; and Udana, the 
ascending Vayu, is the so-called “upward breathing.” Prana is in the heart; 
Apana in the anus; Samana in the navel; Udana in the throat; and Vyana 
pervades the whole body.{261} The five minor Vayu are Naga, Kirmma, 
Krikara, Devadatta, and Dhananjaya, which manifest in hiccup, closing and 
opening the eyes, digestion,{262} yawning, and in that Vayu “which leaves 
not even the corpse.” {263} The functions of Prana may be scientifically 
defined as follows: Appropriation (Prana), Rejection (Apana), Assimilation 
(Samana), Distribution (Vyana), and that vital function whereby the relation 
between the subtle and the gross body is maintained (Udana). The Prana 
represents the involuntary reflex action of the organism, and the Indriyas 
one aspect of its voluntary activity. 


In the case of the individualized Prana, or principle which vitalizes the 
animal organism during its earth life, it may be said, when regarded as an 
independent principle, to be a force more subtle than that which manifests 
as terrestrial matter which it vitalizes. In other words, according to this 
theory, the Atma gives life to the earth organisms through the medium of 
terrestrial Prana, which is one of the manifestations of that Energy which 
issues from and is at base the all-pervading Atma, as Shakti. 


Atma as such has no states, but in worldly parlance we speak of such. So 
the Mandukya Upanishad{264} speaks of the four aspects (Pada) of the 
Brahman. 


Chaitanya, or consciousness in bodies, is immanent in the individual and 
collective gross, subtle, and causal bodies, and as Chit transcends them. 
One and the same Chit pervades and transcends all things, but is given 
different names to mark its different aspects in the Jiva. Chit, being 
immutable, has itself no states; for states can only exist in the products of 
the changing Prakriti Shakti. From, however, the aspect of Jiva several 
States exist, which, though informed by the same Chit, may from this aspect 
be called states of consciousness. {265} 


In the manifested world, Consciousness appears in three states (Avastha): 
{266} waking (Jagrat), dreaming (Svapna), and dreamless slumber 
(Sushupti). In the waking state the Jiva is conscious of external objects 
(Bahishprajna), and is the gross enjoyer of these objects through the senses 
(Sthulabhuk).{267} The Jiva in this state is called Jagari—that is, he who 
takes upon himself the gross body called Vishva. Here the Jiva 
consciousness is in the gross body. 


In dreaming (Svapna) the Jiva is conscious of inner objects (Antahprajna), 
and the enjoyer of what is subtle (Praviviktabhuk)—that is, impressions left 
on the mind by objects sensed in the waking state. The objects of dreams 
have only an external reality for the dreamer, whereas the objects perceived 
when awake have such reality for all who are in that state. The mind ceases 
to record fresh impressions, and works on that which has been registered in 
the waking state. 


The first (Jagrat) state is that of sense perception. Here the ego lives in a 
mental world of ideas, and the Jiva consciousness is in the subtle body. 
Both these states are states of duality in which multiplicity is experienced. 
{268} 


The third state, or that of dreamless sleep (Sushupti), is defined as that 
which is neither waking nor dreaming, and in which the varied experiences 
of the two former states are merged into a simple experience (Ekibhuta), as 
the variety of the day is lost in night without extinction of such variety. 
Consciousness is not objective (Bahishprajna) nor subjective (Antahprajna), 
but a simple undifferenced consciousness without an object 


(Prajnanaghana). In waking the Jiva consciousness is associated with mind 
and senses; in dreaming the senses are withdrawn; in dreamless slumber 
mind also is withdrawn. The Jiva called Prajna is for the time being merged 
in his causal body—that is, Prakriti inseparably associated with 
Consciousness—that is, with that state of Consciousness which is the seed 
from which the subtle and gross bodies grow. The state is one of bliss. The 
Jiva is not conscious of anything, {269} but on awakening preserves only 
the notion, “Happy I slept; I was not conscious of anything.” {270} This 
state is accordingly that which has as its object the sense of nothingness. 
{271} Whilst the two former states enjoy the gross and subtle objects 
respectively, this is the enjoyer of bliss only (Anandabhuk)—that is, simple 
bliss without an object. The Lord is always the enjoyer of bliss, but in the 
first two states he enjoys bliss through objects. Here he enjoys bliss itself 
free from both subject and object. In this way the Sushupti state approaches 
the Brahman consciousness. But it is not that in its purity, because it, as the 
other two states, are both associated with ignorance (Avidya)—the first two 
with Vikriti, and the last with Prakriti. Beyond, therefore, this state there is 
the “fourth” (Turlya). Here the pure experience called Shuddhavidya is 
acquired through Samadhi-yoga. Jiva in the Sushupti state is said to be in 
the causal (Karana) body, and Jiva in the Tur'ya state is said to be in the 
great causal (Mahakarana) body.{272} 


Beyond this there is a fifth state, “beyond the fourth” (Turlyatita), which is 
attained through firmness in the fourth. Here the Ishvara Tattva is attained. 
This is the Unmesha{273} state of consciousness, of which the Sadakhya 
Tattva is the Nimesha.?73 Passing beyond “the spotless one attains the 
highest equality,” and is merged in the Supreme Shiva. 


The above divisions—Vishva, Taijasa, and Prajna—are those of the 
individual Jiva. But there is also the collective or cosmic Jiva, which is the 
aggregate of the individual Jivas of each particular state.{274} In the 
macrocosm these collective{275} Jivas are called Vaishvanara 
(corresponding to the individual Vishva body), Hiranyagarbha, and 
Siitratma {276} (corresponding to the individual Taijasa body); and Ishvara 
is the name of the collective form of the Jivas described as Prajna. 


Cosmically, these are the conscious Lords of the objective, subjective, and 
causal worlds, beyond which there is the Supreme Consciousness. 


Yoga experience and liberation is attained by passing beyond the first three 
states of ordinary experience. 


IV. THE GARLAND OF LETTERS (VARNAMALA) 


Reference is made in the Text and in this Introduction to Shabda, Varna, 
Mantra. It is said that the letters (Varna) of the alphabet are distributed 
throughout the bodily centers on the petals of the lotuses, as is shown on 
Plates II.-VII. In each of the lotuses there is also a seed Mantra (Bija) of the 
Tattva of the center. Kundalini is both light (Jyotirmayi) and Mantra 
(Mantramayi),{277} and Mantra is used in the process of rousing Her. 


There is perhaps no subject in the Indian Shastra which is less understood 
than Mantra and Shabda, of which it is a manifestation. The subject is so 
important a part of the Tantra-Shastra that its other title is Mantra-Shastra. 
Commonly Orientalists and others describe Mantra as “prayer,” “formulae 
or worship,” “mystic syllables,” and so forth. These are the superficialities 
of those who do not know their subject. Whilst I am not aware of any work 
in any European language which shows a knowledge of Mantra and its 
science, yet there is perhaps no subject which has been so ridiculed—a not 
unusual attitude of ignorance. Mantra science may be well founded or not, 
but even in the latter case it is not the absurdity which some suppose it to 
be. Those who think so might except Mantras which are prayers, and the 
meaning of which they understand, for with prayer they are familiar. But 
such appreciation itself shows a lack of understanding. There is nothing 
necessarily holy or prayerful about a Mantra. Mantra is a power 
(Mantrashakti) which lends itself impartially to any use. A man may be 
injured or killed by Mantra;{278} by Mantra a kind of union with the 
physical Shakti is by some said to be effected;{279} by Mantra in the 
initiation called Vedhadiksha there is such a transference of power from the 
Guru to the disciple that the latter swoons under the impulse of it;{280} by 
Mantra the Homa fire may and, according to ideal conditions, should be 
lighted; {281} by Mantra man is saved, and so forth. Mantra, in short, is a 
power (Shakti) which is thought-movement vehicled by and expressed in 
speech. The root “man” means “to think.” 


The creative power of thought is now receiving increasing acceptance in the 
West. Thought-reading, thought-transference, hypnotic suggestion, magical 
projections (Mokshana), and shields (Grahana), {282} are becoming known 
and practiced, not always with good results. The doctrine is ancient in India, 
and underlies the practices to be found in the Tantras, some of which are 
kept in general concealed to prevent misuse.{283} What, however, is not 
understood in the West is the particular form of thought-science which is 
Mantravidya. Those familiar with the Western presentment of similar 
subjects will more readily understand {284} when I say that, according to 
the Indian doctrine here described, thought (like mind, of which it is the 
operation) is a power or Shakti. It is, therefore, not only as real, but in a 
sense more real than outer material objects, which are themselves but the 
projections of the creative thought of the World-thinker. The thought- 
movement vehicled by and expressed in speech is Mantra.{285} Mantra is 
the manifested Shabdabrahman. 


But what is Shabda or “sound”? Here the Shakta-Tantra Shastra follows the 
Mimangsa doctrine of Shabda, with such modifications as are necessary to 
adapt it to its doctrine of Shakti. Sound (Shabda), which is a quality (Guna) 
of ether (Akasha), and is sensed by hearing, is twofold—namely, lettered 
(Varnatmaka shabda) and unlettered, or Dhvani (Dhvanyatmaka shabda). 
{286} The latter is caused by the striking of two things together, and is 
meaningless. Shabda, on the contrary, which is Anahata (a term applied to 
the Heart Lotus), is that Brahman sound which is not caused by the striking 
of two things together. Lettered sound is composed of sentences (Vakya), 
words (Pada), and letters (Varna). Such sound has a meaning. {287} Shabda 
manifesting as speech is said to be eternal.{288} This the Naiyayikas deny, 
saying that it is transitory. A word is uttered, and it is gone. This opinion the 
Mimangsa denies, saying that the perception of lettered sound must be 
distinguished from lettered sound itself.{289} Perception is due to Dhvani 
caused by the striking of the air in contact with the vocal organs—namely, 
the throat, palate, and tongue. Before there is Dhvani there must be the 
striking of one thing against another. It is not the mere striking which is the 
lettered Shabda. This manifests it. The lettered sound is produced by the 
formation of the vocal organs in contact with air, which formation is in 
response to the mental movement or idea, which by the will thus seeks 


outward expression in audible sound.{290} It is this perception which is 
transitory, for the Dhavni which manifests ideas in language is such. But 
lettered sound, as it is in itself—that is, as the Consciousness manifesting as 
idea expressed in speech—is eternal. It was not produced at the moment it 
was perceived. It was only manifested by the Dhvani. It existed before, as it 
exists after, such manifestation, just as a jar in a dark room which is 
revealed by a flash of lightning is not then produced, nor does it cease to 
exist on its ceasing to be perceived through the disappearance of its 
manifester, the lightning. The air in contact with the voice organs reveals 
sound in the form of the letters of the alphabet, and their combinations in 
words and sentences. The letters are produced for hearing by the effort of 
the person desiring to speak, and become audible to the ear of others 
through the operation of unlettered sound or Dhvani. The latter being a 
manifester only, lettered Shabda is something other than its manifester. 


Before describing the nature of Shabda in its different forms of 
development it is necessary to understand the Indian psychology of 
perception. At each moment the Jiva is subject to innumerable influences 
which from all quarters of the universe pour upon him. Only those reach his 
Consciousness which attract his attention, and are thus selected by his 
Manas. The latter attends to one or other of these sense impressions, and 
conveys it to the Buddhi. When an object (Artha) is presented to the mind 
and perceived, the latter is formed into the shape of the object perceived. 
This is called a mental Vritti (modification), which it is the object of Yoga 
to suppress. The mind as a Vritti is thus a representation of the outer object. 
But in so far as it is such representation the mind is as much an object as the 
outer one. The latter—that is, the physical object—is called the gross object 
(Sthila artha), and the former or mental impression is called the subtle 
object (Sukshma artha). But besides the object there is the mind which 
perceives it. It follows that the mind has two aspects, in one of which it is 
the perceiver and in the other the perceived in the form of the mental 
formation (Vritti) which in creation precedes its outer projection, and after 
the creation follows as the impression produced in the mind by the sensing 
of a gross physical object. The mental impression and the physical object 
exactly correspond, for the physical object is, in fact, but a projection of the 
cosmic imagination, though it has the same reality as the mind has; no more 


and no less. The mind is thus both cognizer (Grahaka) and cognized 
(Grahya), revealer (Prakashaka) and revealed (Prakashya), denoter 
(Vachaka) and denoted (Vachya). When the mind perceives an object it is 
transformed into the shape of that object. So the mind which thinks of the 
Divinity which it worships (Ishtadevata) is at length, through continued 
devotion, transformed into the likeness of that Devata. By allowing the 
Devata thus to occupy the mind for long it becomes as pure as the Devata. 
This is a fundamental principle of Tantrik Sadhana or religious practice. 
The object perceived is called Artha, a term which comes from the root 
“Ri,” which means to get to know, to enjoy. Artha is that which is known, 
and which therefore is an object of enjoyment. The mind as Artha—that is, 
in the form of the mental impression—is an exact reflection of the outer 
object or gross Artha. As the outer object is Artha, so is the interior subtle 
mental form which corresponds to it. That aspect of the mind which 
cognizes is called Shabda or Nama (name), and that aspect in which it is its 
own object or cognized is called Artha or Rupa (form). The outer physical 
object of which the latter is, in the individual, an impression is also Artha or 
Ripa, and spoken speech is the outer Shabda. Subject and object are thus 
from the Mantra aspect Shabda and Artha—terms corresponding to the 
Vedantic Nama and Ripa, or concepts and concepts objectified. As the 
Vedanta says, the whole creation is Nama and Rupa. Mind is the power 
(Shakti), the function of which is to distinguish and identify 
(Bhedasangsargavritti Shakti). 


Just as the body is causal, subtle, and gross, so is Shabda, of which there are 
four states (Bhava), called Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari— 
terms further explained in Section V. of this Introduction. Para sound is that 
which exists on the differentiation of the Mahabindu before actual 
manifestation. This is motionless causal Shabda in Kundalini in the 
Miuladhara center of the body. That aspect of it in which it commences to 
move with a general—that is, non-particularized—motion (Samanya 
spanda) is Pashyanti, whose place is from the Muladhara to the Manipira 
Chakra, the next center. It is here associated with Manas. These represent 
the motionless and first moving Ishvara aspect of Shabda. Madhyama sound 
is associated with Buddhi. It is Hiranyagarbha Shabda (Hiranyagarbharupa) 
extending from Pashyanti to the heart. Both Madhyama sound, which is the 


inner “naming” by the cognitive aspect of mental movement, as also its 
Artha or subtle (Sukshma) object (Artha), belong to the mental or subtle 
body (Sukshma or Linga sharira). Perception is dependent on distinguishing 
and identification. In the perception of an object that part of the mind which 
identifies and distinguishes, or the cognizing part, is subtle Shabda, and that 
part of it which takes the shape of the object (a shape which corresponds 
with the outer thing) is subtle Artha. The perception of an object is thus 
consequent on the simultaneous functioning of the mind in its twofold 
aspect as Shabda and Artha, which are in indissoluble relation with one 
another as cognizer (Grahaka) and cognized (Grahya). Both belong to the 
subtle body. In creation Madhyama Shabda first appeared. At that moment 
there was no outer Artha. Then the cosmic mind projected this inner 
Madhyama Artha into the world of sensual experience, and named it in 
spoken speech (Vaikhart Shabda). The last or Vaikhari Shabda is uttered 
speech developed in the throat issuing from the mouth. This is Virat 
Shabda. Vaikhari Shabda is therefore language or gross lettered sound. Its 
corresponding Artha is the physical or gross object which language denotes. 
This belongs to the gross body (Sthula sharira). Madhyama Shabda is 
mental movement or ideation in its cognitive aspect, and Madhyama Artha 
is the mental impression of the gross object. The inner thought-movement 
in its aspect as Shabdartha, and considered both in its knowing aspect 
(Shabda) and as the subtle known object (Artha), belong to the subtle body 
(Stikshma sharira). The cause of these two is the first general movement 
towards particular ideation (Pashyanti) from the motionless cause, 
Parashabda, or Supreme Speech. Two forms of inner or hidden speech, 
causal and subtle, accompanying mind movement thus precede and lead up 
to spoken language. The inner forms of ideating movement constitute the 
subtle, and the uttered sound the gross, aspect of Mantra, which is the 
manifested Shabdabrahman. 


The gross Shabda, called Vaikhari or uttered speech, and the gross Artha, or 
the physical object denoted by that speech, are the projection of the subtle 
Shabda and Artha through the initial activity of the Shabdabrahman into the 
world of gross sensual perception. Therefore in the gross physical world 
Shabda means language—that is, sentences, words, and letters, which are 
the expression of ideas and are Mantra. In the subtle or mental world 


Madhyama Shabda is the mind which “names” in its aspect as cognizer, and 
Artha is the same mind in its aspect as the mental object of its cognition. It 
is defined to be the outer in the form of the mind. It is thus similar to the 
state of dreams (Svapna): as Parashabda is the causal dreamless (Sushupti) 
and Vaikhari the waking (Jagrat) state. Mental Artha is a Sangskara, an 
impression left on the subtle body by previous experience, which is recalled 
when the Jiva reawakes to world experience and recollects the experience 
temporarily lost in the cosmic dreamless state (Sushupti) which is 
dissolution (Mahapralaya). What is it which arouses this Sangskara? As an 
effect (Karya) it must have a cause (Karaka). This Karaka is the Shabda or 
name (Nama), subtle or gross, corresponding to that particular Artha. When 
the word “Ghata” is uttered this evokes in the mind the image of an object 
—a jar—just as the presentation of that object does. In the Hiranyagarbha 
state Shabda as Sangskara worked to evoke mental images. The whole 
world is thus Shabda and Artha—that is, name and form (Nama riipa). 
These two are inseparably associated. There is no Shabda without Artha or 
Artha without Shabda. The Greek word Logos also means thought and 
word combined. There is thus a double line of creation, Shabda and Artha, 
ideas and language together with their objects. Speech, as that which is 
heard, or the outer manifestation of Shabda, stands for the Shabda creation. 
The Artha creation are the inner and outer objects seen by the mental or 
physical vision. From the cosmic creative standpoint the mind comes first, 
and from it is evolved the physical world according to the ripened 
Sangskaras, which led to the existence of the particular existing universe. 
Therefore the mental Artha precedes the physical Artha, which is an 
evolution in gross matter of the former. This mental state corresponds to 
that of dreams (Svapna) when man lives in the mental world only. After 
creation, which is the waking (Jagrat) state, there is for the individual an 
already existing parallelism of names and objects. 


Uttered speech is a manifestation of the inner naming or thought. This 
thought-movement is similar in men of all races. When an Englishman or 
an Indian thinks of an object, the image is to both the same, whether evoked 
by the object itself or by the utterance of its name. Perhaps for this reason a 
thought-reader whose cerebral center is en rapport with that of another may 
read the hidden “speech”—that is, the thought of one whose spoken speech 


he cannot understand. Thus, whilst the thought-movement is similar in all 
men, the expression of it as Vaikhari Shabda differs. According to tradition, 
there was once a universal language. According to the Biblical account, this 
was So before the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel. Similarly in 
the Rigveda a mysterious passage{291} speaks of the “three fathers and 
three mothers” by whose action, like that of the Elohim, “all 
comprehending speech” was made into that which was not so. Nor is this 
unlikely when we consider that difference in gross speech is due to 
difference of races evolved in the course of time. If the instruments by, and 
conditions under, which thought is revealed in speech were the same for all 
men, then there would be but one language. But now this is not so. Racial 
characteristics and physical conditions, such as the nature of the vocal 
organs, climate, inherited impressions, and so forth, differ. Therefore, so 
also does language. But for each particular man speaking any particular 
language the uttered name of any object is the gross expression of his inner 
thought-movement. It evokes that movement and again expresses it. It 
evokes the idea, and the idea is consciousness as mental operation. That 
operation can be so intensified as to be itself creative. This is 
Mantrachaitanya. 


From the above account it will be understood that, when it is said that the 
“letters” are in the six bodily Chakras, it is not to be supposed that it is 
intended to absurdly affirm that the letters as written shapes, or as the 
uttered sounds which are heard by the ear, are there. The letters in this sense 
—that is, as gross things—are manifested only in speech and writing. This 
much is clear. But the precise significance of this statement is a matter of 
great difficulty. There is, in fact, no subject which presents more difficulties 
than Mantravidya, whether considered generally or in relation to the 
particular matter in hand. In the first place, one must be constantly on guard 
against falling into a possible trap—namely, the taking of prescribed 
methods of realization for actualities in the common sense of that term. The 
former are conventional, the latter are real. Doubts on this matter are 
increased by some variations in the descriptive accounts. Thus in some 
Ganesha is the Devata of the Muladhara. In the text here translated it is 
Brahma. Similarly this Text gives Dakini in the Miladhara as the Devata of 
the Asthi Dhatu (bony substance). When sitting in the prescribed Asana 


(posture), the bones are gathered up around this Chakra, and, moreover, 
from it as the center of the body the bones run up and downwards. Another 
account, however, given to me places Devi Shakin? here.{292} Mistakes 
have also to be reckoned with, and can only be ascertained and rectified by 
a comparison of several MSS.{293} Again, four letters are said to be on the 
petals of the Miladhara Lotus—namely, Va, Sha, Sha, and Sa. Why are 
these said to be there? Various statements have been made to me. As there 
are certain letters which are ascribed to each form of sensible matter 
(Bhita), it seems obvious to suggest that the earth letters (Parthiva varna) 
are in the earth center. But an examination on this basis does not bear the 
suggestion out. Next, it is said that the letters have colours, and the letters of 
a particular color are allocated to the lotuses of the same color. The Text 
does not support this theory. It has been said that certain letters derive from 
certain Devata. But the letters produce the Devata, for these are the Artha of 
the Mantra as Shabda. I have been also told that the letters are placed 
according to their seat of pronunciation (Uchcharana). But it is replied that 
the Muladhara is the common source of this (Uchcharanasthana) for all. 
{294} Again, it is said that the letters on the petals are Bijas of all activities 
(Kriya) connected with the Tattva of the center, each letter undergoing 
variations according to the vowels.{295} All beings in Prithivi (earth) 
Tattva should be meditated upon in the Miiladhara. Here are, therefore (as 
we might expect), the organs of feet (Padendriya), the action of walking 
(Gamanakriya), smell (Gandha), the quality of Prithivi, the sense of smell 
(Ghrana), Nivritti kala,{296} and Brahma (Lord of the Tattva). But we are 
also told that the letters Va, Sha, Sha, and Sa are the Atma and Bijas of the 
four Vedas, {297} of the four Yugas,{298} of the four oceans, {299} which 
are therefore called Chaturvarnatmaka, or in the self of the four letters. It is 
true that the four Vedas are in, and issue from, Parashabda, the seat of 
which is the Muladhara. For Veda in its primary sense is the world as idea 
in the mind of the creative Brahman, portions of which have been revealed 
to the Rishis (seers) and embodied in the four Vedas. But why should Va be 
the seed of the Rigveda, Sha of the Yajurveda, and so forth? The ritual 
explanation, as given in the Rudrayamala (xiv. 73, xv. 2, xvi. 1, 2), is that 
the petal Va is Brahma (Rajoguna), and is the Bija of Rik; Sha is Vishnu 
(Sattvaguna), and Sha, being Pundarikatma, is the Bija of Yajus; Sha is 
Rudra (Tamoguna), and is the Bija of Sama. Sa is the Bija of Atharva, as it 


is the Bija of Shakti.{300} These four are in Parashabda in Muladchara. It 
seems to me (so far as my studies in the Shastra have yet carried me) that 
the details of the descriptions of the centers are of two kinds. There are, 
firstly, certain facts of objective and universal reality. Thus, for example, 
there are certain centers (Chakra) in the spinal column. The principle of 
solidity (Prithivi Tattva) is in the lowest of such centers, which as the center 
of the body contains the static or potential energy called Kundali Shakti. 
The center as a lotus is said to have four petals, because of the formation 
and distribution of the Yoga-nerves {301} (Nadi) at that particular point. 
Solidity is denoted aptly by a cube, which is the diagram (Yantra) of that 
center. The consciousness of that center as Devata is also aptly borne on an 
elephant, the massive solidity of which is emblematical of the solid earth 
principle (Prithivi). The forces which go to the making of solid matter may 
by the Yogi be seen as yellow. It may be that particular substances (Dhatu) 
of the body and particular Vritti (qualities) are connected with particular 
Chakras, and so forth. 


There are, however, another class of details which have possibly only 
symbolical reality, and which are placed before the Sadhaka for the 
purposes of instruction and meditation only.{302} The letters as we know 
them—that is, as outer speech—are manifested only after passing through 
the throat. They cannot therefore exist as such in the Chakras. But they are 
said to be there. They are there, not in their gross, but in their subtle and 
causal forms. It is these subtle forms which are called Matrika. But as such 
forms they are Shabda of and as ideating movements, or are the cause 
thereof. Consciousness, which is itself (Svaripa) soundless (Nihshabda), in 
its supreme form (Parashabda) assumes a general undifferentiated 
movement (Samanya spanda), then a differentiated movement (Vishesha 
spanda), issuing in clearly articulate speech (Spashtatara spanda). The inner 
movement has outer correspondence in that issuing from the lips by the aid 
of Dhvani. This is but the Mantra way of saying that the homogeneous 
Consciousness moves as Shakti, and appears as subject (Shabda) and object 
(Artha) at first in the subtle form of mind and its contents generated by the 
Sangskaras, and then in the gross form of language as the expression of 
ideas and of physical objects (Artha), which the creative or cosmic mind 
projects into the world of sensual experience to be the source of 


impressions to the individual experiencer therein. It is true that in this sense 
the letters, as hidden speech or the seed of outer speech, are in the Chakras, 
but the allocation of particular letters to particular Chakras is a matter 
which, if it has a real and not merely symbolical significance, is explained 
in my “Shakti and Shakta.” 


In each of the Chakras there is also a Bija (seed) Mantra of each of the 
Tattvas therein. They are the seed of the Tattva, for the latter springs from 
and re-enters the former. The natural name of anything is the sound which 
is produced by the action of the moving forces which constitute it. He 
therefore, it is said, who mentally and vocally utters with creative force the 
natural name of anything brings into being the thing which bears that name. 
Thus “Ram” is the Bija of fire in the Maniptra chakra. This Mantra “Ram” 
is said to be the expression in gross sound (Vaikhari Shabda) of the subtle 
sound produced by the activity of, and which is, the subtle “fire” force. The 
same explanation is given as regards “Lam” in the Muladhara, and the other 
Bijas in the other Chakras. The mere utterance, {303} however, of “Ram” or 
any other Mantra is nothing but a movement of the lips. When, however, 
the Mantra is “awakened” {304} (Prabuddha)—that is, when there is Mantra 
—chaitanya (Mantra-consciousness)—then the Sadhaka can make the 
Mantra work. Thus in the case cited the Vaikhari Shabda, through its 
vehicle Dhvani, is the body of a power of consciousness which enables the 
Mantrin to become the Lord of Fire.{305} However this may be, in all 
cases it is the creative thought which ensouls the uttered sound which works 
now in man’s small magic, just as it first worked in the grand magical 
display of the World-creator. His thought was the aggregate, with creative 
power, of all thought. Each man is Shiva, and can attain His power to the 
degree of his ability to consciously realize himself as such. For various 
purposes the Devatas are invoked. Mantra and Devata are one and the same. 
A Mantra-Devata is Shabda and Artha, the former being the name, and the 
latter the Devata whose name it is. By practice with the Mantra (Japa) the 
presence of the Devata is invoked. Japa or repetition of Mantra is compared 
to the action of a man shaking a sleeper to wake him up. The two lips are 
Shiva and Shakti. Their movement is the coition (Maithuna) of the two. 
Shabda which issues thereform is in the nature of Bindu. The Devata thus 
produced is, as it were, the “son” of the Sadhaka. It is not the Supreme 


Devata (for it is actionless) who appears, but in all cases an emanation 
produced by the Sadhaka for his benefit only.{306} In the case of 
worshippers of Shiva a Boy-Shiva (Bala Shiva) appears, who is then made 
strong by the nurture which the Sadhaka gives to his creation. The occultist 
will understand all such symbolism to mean that the Devata is a form of the 
consciousness of the pure Sadhaka which the latter arouses and strengthens, 
and gains good thereby. It is his consciousness which becomes the boy 
Shiva, and which when strengthened the full-grown Divine power itself. All 
Mantras are in the body as forms of consciousness (Vijnana ripa). When 
the Mantra is fully practiced it enlivens the Sangskara, and the Artha 
appears to the mind. Mantras are thus a form of the Sangskara of Jivas, the 
Artha of which manifest to the consciousness which is pure. The essence of 
all this is—concentrate and vitalize thought and will power. But for such a 
purpose a method is necessary—namely, language and determined varieties 
of practice according to the end sought. These Mantravidya, which explains 
what Mantra is, also enjoins. For thought, words (gross or subtle) are 
necessary. Mantravidya is the science of thought and of its expression in 
language. 


The causal state of Shabda is called Shabdabrahman—that is, the Brahman 
as the cause of Shabda and Artha. The unmanifest (Avyakta) power or 
Shabda, which is the cause of manifested Shabda and Artha, uprises on the 
differentiation of the Supreme Bindu from Prakriti in the form of Bindu 
through the prevalence of Kriya shakti.{307} Avyakta Rava or Shabda 
(unmanifest sound) is the principle of sound as such (Nada matra)—that is, 
undifferentiated sound not specialized in the form of letters, but which is, 
through creative activity, the cause of manifested Shabda and Artha. {308} 
It is the Brahman considered as all-pervading Shabda, undivided, 
unmanifested, whose substance is Nada and Bindu, the proximate creative 
impulse in Parashiva and proximate cause of manifested Shabda and Artha. 
{309} It is the eternal partless Sphota{310} which is not distinguished into 
Shabda and Artha, but is the Power by which both exist and are known. 
Shabdabrahman is thus the kinetic ideating aspect of the undifferentiated 
Supreme Consciousness of philosophy, and the Sagunabrahma of religion. 
It is Chit-shakti vehicled by undifferentiated Prakriti-shakti—that is, the 
creative aspect of the one Brahman who is both transcendent and formless 


(Nirguna), and immanent and with form (Saguna).{311} As the 
Hathayogapradipika says:{312} “Whatever is heard in the form of sound is 
Shakti. The absorbed state (Laya) of the Tattvas (evolutes of Prakriti) is that 
in which no form exists.{313} So long as there is the notion of ether, so 
long is sound heard. The soundless is called Parabrahman or 

Paramatma.” {314} Shabdabrahman thus projects itself for the purpose of 
creation into two sets of movement—namely, firstly, the Shabda (with 
mental vibrations of cognition) which, passing through the vocal organs, 
become articulate sound; and, secondly, Artha movements denoted by 
Shabda in the form of all things constituting the content of mind and the 
objective world. These two are emanations from the same conscious 
activity (Shakti) which is the Word (Logos), and are in consequence 
essentially the same. Hence the connection between the two are permanent. 
It is in the above sense that the universe is said to be composed of the 
letters. It is the fifty{315} letters of the Sanskrit alphabet which are denoted 
by the garland of severed human heads which the naked{316} mother, Kali, 
dark like a threatening rain-cloud, wears as She stands amidst bones and 
carrion beasts and birds in the burning-ground on the white corpse-like 
(Shavarupa) body of Shiva. For it is She who “slaughters”—that is, 
withdraws all speech and its objects into Herself at the time of the 
dissolution of all things (Mahapralaya).{317} Shabdabrahman is the 
consciousness (Chaitanya) in all creatures. It assumes the form of Kundal1, 
and abides in the body of all breathing creatures (Prani), manifesting itself 
by letters in the form of prose and verse.{318} In the sexual symbolism of 
the Shakta Tantras, seed (Bindu){319} issued upon the reversed 
union{320} of Mahakala and Mahakali, which seed, ripening in the womb 
of Prakriti, issued as Kundali in the form of the letters (Akshara). Kundali 
as Mahamatrikadsundari has fifty-one coils, which are the Matrikas or subtle 
forms of the gross letters or Varna which is the Vaikhari form of the Shabda 
at the centers. Kundali when with one coil is Bindu; with two, Prakriti- 
Purusha; with three, the three Shaktis (Ichchha, Jnana, Kriya) and three 
Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas); with the three and a half She is then actually 
creative with Vikriti; with four She is the Devi Ekajata, and so on to 
Shrimatrikotpattisundari with fifty-one coils.{321} In the body, 
unmanifested Parashabda is in Kundali Shakti. That which first issues from 
it is in the lowest Chakra, and extends upwards through the rest as 


Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari Shabda. When Shakti first “sees” {322} 
She is Paramakala{323} in the mother form (Ambikarupa), which is 
supreme speech (Paravak) and supreme peace (Parama shanta). She “sees” 
the manifested Shabda from Pashyanti to Vaikhari. The Pashyanti{324} 
state of Shabda is that in which Ichchha Shakti (will) in the form of a 
goad{325} (Angkushakara) is about to display the universe, then in seed 
(Bija) form. This is the Shakti Vama. {326} Madhyama Vak, which is Jnana 
(knowledge), and in form of a straight line (Rijurekha), is Jyeshtha Shakti. 
Here there is the first assumption of form as the Matrika (Matrikatvam 
upapanna), for here is particular motion (Vishesha Spanda). The Vaikhari 
state is that of Kriya Shakti, who is the Devi Raudri, whose form is 
triangular{327} and that of the universe. As the former Shakti produces the 
subtle letters or Matrika which are the Vasana, {328} so this last is the 
Shakti of the gross letters of words and their objects. {329} These letters are 
the garland of the Mother issuing from Her in Her form as Kundali Shakti, 
and absorbed by Her in the Kundali-yoga here described. 


V. THE CENTERS OR LOTUSES (CHAKRA, PADMA) 


At this stage we are in a position to pass to a consideration of the Chakras, 
which may shortly be described as subtle centers of operation in the body of 
the Shaktis of the various Tattvas or Principles which constitute the bodily 
Sheaths. Thus the five lower Chakra from Miladhara to Vishuddha are 
centers of the Bhita, or five forms of sensible matter. The Ajna and other 
Chakras in the region between it and the Sahasrara are centers of the Tattvas 
constituting the mental sheaths, whilst the Sahasrara, or thousand-petalled 
lotus at the top of the brain, is the blissful abode of Parama Shiva-Shakti. 


A description of the Chakras involves, in the first place, an account of the 
Western anatomy and physiology of the central and sympathetic nervous 
systems; secondly, an account of the Tantrik nervous system and Chakras; 
and, lastly, the correlation, so far as that is possible, of the two systems on 
the anatomical and physiological side, for the rest is in general peculiar to 
Tantrik occultism. 


The Tantrik theory regarding the Chakras and Sahasrara is concerned on the 
physiological side, or Bhogayatana aspect, with the central spinal system, 
comprising the brain or encephalon, contained within the skull, and the 
spinal cord, contained within the vertebral column (Merudanda). It is to be 
noted that, just as there are five centers (Chakras) hereinafter described, the 
vertebral column itself is divided into five regions, which, commencing from 
the lowest, are the coccygeal, consisting of four imperfect vertebrae, often 
united together into one bone called the coccyx; the sacral region, consisting 
of five vertebrae united together to form a single bone, the sacrum; the 
lumbar region, or region of the loins, consisting of five vertebrae; the dorsal 
region, or region of the back, consisting of twelve vertebrae; and the cervical 
region, or region of the neck, consisting of seven vertebrae. As exhibited by 
segments, the cord shows different characteristics in different regions. 
Roughly speaking, these correspond to the regions which are assigned to the 
governing control of the Miladhara, Svadhishthana, Maniptira, Anahata, and 
Vishuddha centers, or Chakras. The central system has relation with the 


periphery through the thirty-one spinal and twelve cranial nerves, which are 
both afferent and efferent or sensory and motor, arousing sensation or 
stimulating action. Of the cranial nerves, the last six arise from the spinal 
bulb (medulla), and the other six, except the olfactory and optic nerves, from 
the parts of the brain just in front of the bulb. Writers of the Yoga and Tantra 
schools use the term Nadi, by preference, for nerves. They also, it has been 
said, mean cranial nerves when they speak of Shiras, never using the latter 
for arteries, as is done in the medical literature. {330} It must, however, be 
noted that the Yoga Nadis are not the ordinary material nerves, but subtler 
lines of direction along which the vital forces go. The spinal nerves, after 
their exit from the intervertebral foramina, enter into communication with 
the gangliated cords of the sympathetic nervous system, which lie on each 
side of the vertebral column. The spinal cord extends in the case of man 
from the upper border of the atlas, below the cerebellum, passing into the 
medulla, and finally opening into the fourth ventricle of the brain, and 
descends to the second lumbar vertebra, where it tapers to a point, called the 
filum terminale. I am told that recent microscopic investigations by Dr. 
Cunningham have disclosed the existence of highly sensitive grey matter in 
the filum terminale which was hitherto thought to be mere fibrous cord. This 
is of importance, having regard to the position assigned to the Muladhara 
and the Serpent Power. It is continued in this for a variable distance, and 
there ends blindly. Within the bony covering is the cord, which is a 
compound of grey and white brain matter, the grey being the inner of the 
two, the reverse of the position in the encephalon. The cord is divided into 
two symmetrical halves, which are connected together by a commissure in 
the center of which there is a minute canal called the central spinal canal 
(wherein is the Brahmanadt), which is said to be the remnant of the hollow 
tube from which the cord and brain were developed. {331} This canal 
contains cerebro-spinal fluid. The grey matter viewed longitudinally forms a 
column extending through the whole length of the cord, but the width is not 
uniform. There are special enlargements in the lumbar and cervical regions 
which are due mainly to the greater amount of grey matter in these 
situations. But throughout the whole cord the grey matter is specially 
abundant at the junctions of the spinal nerves, so that a necklace 
arrangement is visible, which is more apparent in the lower vertebrates, 
corresponding to the ventral ganglionic chain of the invertebrates. {332} The 


white matter consists of tracts or columns of nerve fibers. At the upper 
border of the atlas, or first cervical vertebra, the spinal cord passes into the 
medulla oblongata below the cerebellum. The center canal opens into the 
fourth ventricle of the brain. The cerebellum is a development of the 
posterior wall of the hindermost of the three primary dilatations of the 
embryonic cerebro-spinal tube, the fourth ventricle constituting the remnant 
of the original cavity. Above this is the cerebrum, which with the parts 
below it is an enlarged and greatly modified upper part of the cerebrospinal 
nervous axis. The spinal cord is not merely a conductor between the 
periphery and the centers of sensation and volition, but is also an 
independent center or group of centers. There are various centers in the 
spinal cord which, though to a considerable extent autonomous, is connected 
together with the higher centers by the associating and longitudinal tracts of 
the spinal cord.{333} All the functions which are ascribed primarily to the 
spinal centers belong also to the cerebral centers. Similarly, all the “Letters” 
which exist distributed on the petals of the lotuses exist in the Sahasrara. 
This statement, however, does not seem to refer to the collective functions of 
any particular Jiva, but to the fact that the Sahasrara is the seat of the Shiva- 
Shakti. Parabindu is also the seat of the aggregate Jivas and Kundalis. For 
the Hangsa or Jiva, or individual Kundali, is but an infinitesimal part of the 
Parabindu. It may nevertheless be the fact that the functions ascribed 
primarily to the lower Chakra belong also to the cerebral centers of the Jiva 
as contrasted with the highest Ishvara body, which is their ultimate aggregate 
and undifferentiated cause. The centers influence not only the muscular 
combinations concermed in volitional movements, but also the functions of 
vascular innervation, secretion, and the like, which have their proximate 
centers in the spinal cord. The cerebral centers are said, however, to control 
these functions only in relation with the manifestations of volition, feeling, 
and emotion; whereas the spinal centers with the subordinate sympathetic 
system are said to constitute the mechanism of unconscious adaptation, in 
accordance with the varying conditions of stimuli which are essential to the 
continued existence of the organism. The Medulla, again, is also both a path 
of communication between the higher centers and the periphery and an 
independent center regulating functions of the greatest importance in the 
system. It is to be noted that the nerve fibers which carry motor impulses 
descending from the brain to the spinal cord cross over rather suddenly from 


one side to the other on their way through the spinal bulb (medulla), a fact 
which has been noted in the Tantras in the description of the Mukta Triveni. 
The latter is connected by numerous afferent and efferent tracts with the 
cerebellum and cerebral ganglia. Above the cerebellum is the cerebrum, the 
activity of which is ordinarily associated with conscious volition and 
ideation and the origination of voluntary movements. The notion of 
Consciousness, which is the introspective subject-matter of psychology, 
must not, however, be confused with that of physiological function. There is 
therefore no organ of consciousness, simply because “Consciousness” is not 
an organic conception, and has nothing to do with the physiological 
conception of energy, whose inner introspective side it presents. {334} 
Consciousness in itself is the Atma. Both mind and body, of which latter the 
brain is a part, are imperfect or veiled expressions of Consciousness, which 
in the case of body is so veiled that it has the appearance of 
unconsciousness. The living brain is constituted of gross sensible matter 
(Mahabhita) infused by Prana. Its material has been worked up so as to 
constitute a suitable vehicle for the expression of consciousness in the form 
of mind (Antahkarana). As consciousness is not a property of the body, 
neither is it a mere function of the brain. The fact that mental consciousness 
is affected or disappears with disorder of the brain proves the necessity of 
the latter for the expression of such consciousness, and not that 
consciousness is inherent alone in brain or that it is the property of the same. 
On each side of the vertebral column there is a chain of ganglia connected 
with nerve fiber, called the sympathetic cord (Ida and Pinggala), extending 
all the way from the base of the skull to the coccyx. This is in 
communication with the spinal cord. It is noteworthy that there is in the 
thoracic and lumbar regions a ganglion of each chain corresponding with 
great regularity to each spinal nerve, though in the cervical region many of 
them appear to be missing; and that extra large clusters of nervous structure 
are to be found in the region of the heart, stomach, and lungs, the regions 
governed by the Anahata, Manipura, and Vishuddha, respectively, the three 
upper of the five Chakras hereinafter described. From the sympathetic chain 
on each side nerve fibers pass to the viscera of the abdomen and thorax. 
From these, nerves are also given off which pass back into the spinal nerves, 
and others which pass into some of the cranial nerves; these are thus 
distributed to the blood vessels of the limbs, trunk, and other parts to which 


the spinal or cranial nerves go. The sympathetic nerves chiefly carry 
impulses which govern the muscular tissue of the viscera and the muscular 
coat of the small arteries of the various tissues. It is through the sympathetic 
that the tone of the blood vessels is kept up by the action of the vaso-motor 
center in the spinal bulb. The sympathetic, however, derives the impulses 
which it distributes from the central nervous system; these do not arise in the 
sympathetic itself. The impulses issue from the spinal cord by the anterior 
roots of the spinal nerves, and pass through short branches into the 
sympathetic chains. The work of the sympathetic systems controls and 
influences the circulation, digestion, and respiration. {335} 


The anatomical arrangement of the central nervous system is excessively 
intricate, and the events which take place in that tangle of fiber, cell, and 
fibril, are, on the other hand, even now almost unknown.{336} And so it has 
been admitted that in the description of the physiology of the central nervous 
system we can as yet do little more than trace the paths by which impulses 
may pass between one portion of the system and another, and from the 
anatomical connections deduce, with more or less probability, the nature of 
the physiological nexus which its parts form with each other and the rest of 
the body.{337} In a general way, however, there may (it is said) be reasons 
to suppose that there are nervous centers in the central system related in a 
special way to special mechanisms, sensory, secretory, or motor, and that 
centers, such as the alleged genito-spinal center, for a given physiological 
action exist in a definite portion of the spinal cord. It is the subtle aspect of 
such centers as expressions of consciousness (Chaitanya) embodied in 
various forms of Maya Shakti which is here called Chakra. These are related 
through intermediate conductors with the gross organs of generation, 
micturition, digestion, cardiac action, and respiration in ultimate relation 
with the Muladhara Svadhishthana, Maniptira, Anahata, and Vishuddha 
Chakras respectively, just as tracts have been assigned in the higher centers 
as being in special, even if not exclusive, relation with various perceptive, 
volitional, and ideative processes. 


With this short preliminary in terms of modern Western physiology and 
anatomy, I pass to a description of the Chakras and Nadis (nerves), and will 
then endeavor to correlate the two systems. 


The conduits of Pranik force are the nerves called Nadi, which are reckoned 
to exist in thousands in the body. “As in the leaf of the Ashvattha tree (Ficus 
religiosa) there are minute fibers, so is the body permeated by Nadis.” {338} 
Nadi is said in v. 2 to be derived from the root nad, or motion. For here the 
Prana moves. The Bhitashuddhi Tantra speaks of 72,000, the Prapanchasara 
Tantra of 300,000, and the Shiva Sanghita of 350,000; but of these, whatever 
be their total extent, only a limited number are of importance. Some are 
gross Nadis, such as the physical nerves, veins, and arteries, known to 
medical science. But they are not all of this gross or physical and visible 
character. They exist, like all else, in subtle forms, and are known as Yoga 
Nadis. The latter may be described as subtle channels (Vivara) of Pranik 
energy. The Nadis are, as stated, the conduits of Prana. Through them its 
solar and lunar currents run. Could we see them, the body would present the 
appearance of those maps which delineate the various ocean currents. They 
are the paths along which Pranashakti goes. They therefore belong to the 
vital science as life-element, and not to the medical Shastra (Vaidyashastra). 
Hence the importance of the Sadhana, which consists of the physical 
purification of the body and its Nadis. Purity of body is necessary if purity of 
mind is to be gained in its extended Hindu sense. Purification of the Nadis is 
perhaps the chief factor in the preliminary stages of this Yoga; for just as 
their impurity impedes the ascent of Kundali Shakti, their purity facilitates it. 
This is the work of Pranayama (v. post). 


Of these Nadis, the principal are fourteen, and of these fourteen Ida, 
Pinggala, and Sushumna, are the chief. Of these three, again, Sushumna is 
the greatest, and to it all others are subordinate; for by the power of Yoga 
(Yogabala) Prana is made to go through it, and, passing the Chakras, leave 
the body through the Brahmarandhra. It is situate in the interior of the 
cerebro-spinal axis, the Merudanda, or spinal column, in the position 
assigned to its interior canal, and extends from the basic plexus, the Tattvika 
center called the Muladhara, to the twelve-petalled lotus in the pericarp of 
the Sahasrara Padma, or thousand-petalled lotus. Within the fiery red 
Tamasika Sushumna is the lustrous Rajasika Vajra or Vajrini Nadi, and 
within the latter the pale nectar-dropping Sattvik Chitra or Chitrini. The 
interior of the latter is called the Brahma Nadi. The first is said to be fire-like 
(Vahnisvarupa), the second sun-like (Siryyasvaripa), and the third moon- 


like (Chandrasvartipa).{339} These are the threefold aspect of the 
Shabdabrahman. The opening at the end of the Chitrini Nadi is called the 
door of Brahman (Brahmadvara), for through it the Devi Kundali enters to 
ascend. {340} It is along this last-mentioned Nadi, known as the Kula Marga 
and the “Royal Road,” that the Shakti Kundalini is led in the process 
hereafter described. 


Outside this nerve are the two Nadis, the pale Ida or Shashi (Moon) and the 
red Pinggala or Mihira (Sun), which are connected with the alternate 
breathing from the right to the left nostril and vice versa. The first, which is 
“feminine” (Shaktirtipa) and the embodiment of nectar (Amritavigraha), is 
on the left; and the second, which is “masculine,” as being in the nature of 
Rudra (Raudratmika), is on the right. They both indicate Kala, and 
Sushumna devours Kala. For on that path entry is made into timelessness. 
The three are also known as Ganga (Ida), Yamuna (Pinggala), and Sarasvati 
(Sushumna), after the names of the three sacred rivers of India. The 
Miuladhara is the meeting-place of the three “rivers,” and hence is called 
Yuktatrivent. Proceeding from the Adhara lotus, they alternate from right to 
left and left to right, thus going round the lotuses. According to another 
account, their position is that of two bows on either side of the spinal cord. 
An Indian medical friend tells me that these are not discrepant accounts, but 
represent different positions according as Ida and Pinggala exist inside or 
outside the spinal cord. When they reach the space between the eyebrows 
known as the Ajna Chakra, they enter the Sushumna, making a plaited knot 
of three called Muktatriveni. The three “rivers,” which are again united at 
this point, flow separately therefrom, and for this reason the Ajna Chakra is 
called Muktatriveni. After separation, the Nadi which proceeded from the 
right testicle goes to the left nostril, and that from the left testicle to the right 
nostril. It has been said that the distinction made between the heating “sun” 
and cooling “moon” is that which exists between the positive and negative 
phases of the same subject-matter, positive and negative forces being present 
in every form of activity. Pinggala is thus, according to this view, the conduit 
of the positive solar current, and Ida of the negative lunar current. There are 
also, as we have seen, interior solar and lunar Nadis in the fiery Sushumna 
where the two currents meet. Similarly, there are three Nadis which in 
Latasadhana are worshipped in the Madanagara—viz., Chandri, Sauri, 


Agneyl, representing the sun, moon, and fire. These are all but microsmic 
instances of the vaster system of cosmic matter, every portion of which is 
composed of the three Gunas (Trigunatmaka) and the threefold Bindus, 
which are Sun, Moon, and Fire. 


As regards nerve cords and fibers, cranial and spinal nerves, and the 
connected sympathetic nerves, Dr. Brojendranath Seal says: “With the 
writers on the Yoga, all the Shiras, and such of the Dhamanis as are not 
vehicles of vital current, metabolic fluid, lymph, chyle, or blood, are cranial 
nerves, and proceed from the heart through the spinal cord to the cranium. 
These cranial nerves include pairs for the larynx and the tongue, for the 
understanding and use of speech, for the raising and lowering of the eyelids, 
for weeping, for the sensations of the special senses, etc., a confused and 
unintelligent reproduction of Sushruta’s classification. But the enumeration 
of the spinal nerves with the connected sympathetic chain and ganglia is a 
distinct improvement on the old anatomists.” {341 } 


He then continues: “The Sushumna is the central cord in the vertebral 
column (Brahmadanda or Meru). The two chains of sympathetic ganglia on 
the left and right are named Ida and Pinggala respectively. The sympathetic 
nerves have their main connection with Sushumna at the solar plexus (Nabhi 
chakra). Of the seven hundred nerve cords of the sympathetic spinal system 
(see Sangitaratnakara), the fourteen most important are: {342} 


“1. Sushumna, in the central channel of the spinal cord. 2. Ida, the left 
sympathetic chain, stretching from under the left nostril to below the left 
kidney in the form of a bent bow. 3. Pinggala, the corresponding chain on 
the right. 4. Kuhi, the pudic nerve of the sacral plexus, to the left of the 
spinal cord. 5. Gandhari, to the back of the left sympathetic chain, supposed 
to stretch from below the corner of the left eye to the left leg. It was 
evidently supposed that some nerves of the cervical plexus came down 
through the spinal cord and joined on to the great sciatic nerve of the sacral 
plexus. 6. Hastijihva, to the front of the left sympathetic chain, stretching 
from below the corner of the left eye to the great toe of the left foot, on the 
same supposition as before. Pathological facts were believed to point to a 
special nerve connection between the eyes and the toes. 7. Sarasvati, to the 


right of Sushumna, stretching up to the tongue (the hypoglossal nerves of the 
cervical plexus). 8. Pusha, to the back of the right sympathetic chain, 
stretching from below the corner of the right eye to the abdomen (a 
connected chain of cervical and lumbar nerves). 9. Payasvini, between Pusa 
and Sarasvati, auricular branch of the cervical plexus on the left. 10. 
Shankhini, between Gandhari and Sarasvati, auricular branch of the cervical 
plexus on the left. 11. Yashasvini, to the front of the right sympathetic chain, 
stretching from the right thumb to the left leg (the radial nerve of the 
brachial plexus continued on to certain branches of the great sciatic). 12. 
Varuna, the nerves of the sacral plexus, between Kuhu and Yashasvini, 
ramifying over the lower trunk and limbs. 13. Visvodara, the nerves of the 
lumbar plexus, between Kuhu and Hastijihva, ramifying over the lower trunk 
and limbs. 14. Alambusha, the coccygeal nerves, proceeding from the sacral 
vertebre to the urino-genitary organs.” {343} 


The Tattvas in the body pervaded by Prana have certain special centers of 
predominance and influence therein, which are the Chakras (centers or 
circles or regions) or Padmas (lotuses) of which this work is a description. 


Inside the Meru, or spinal column, are the six main centers of Tattvik 
operation, called Chakras or Padmas, which are the seats of Shakti, as the 
Sahasrara above is the abode of Shiva.{344} These are the Muladhara, 
Svadhishthana, Manipiira, Anahata, Vishuddha, and Ajna, which in the 
physical body are said to have their correspondences in the principal nerve 
plexuses and organs, commencing from what is possibly the sacro-coccygeal 
plexus to the “space between the eyebrows,” which some identify with the 
pineal gland, the center of the third or spiritual eye, and others with the 
cerebellum. The Chakras{345} themselves are, however, as explained later, 
centers of Consciousness (Chaitanya) as extremely subtle force (Shakti); but 
the gross regions which are built up by their coarsened vibrations, which are 
subject to their influence, and with which loosely and inaccurately they are 
sometimes identified, have been said to be various plexuses in the trunk of 
the body and the lower cerebral centers mentioned. In the portion of the 
body below the Muladhara are the seven lower worlds, Patala and others, 
together with the Shaktis which support all in the universe. 


The first center, or Miladhara Chakra, which is so called from its being the 
root of Sushumna where Kundali rests, {346} is at the place of meeting of 
the Kanda (root of all the Nadis) and the Sushumna Nadi, and is in the 
region midway between the genitals and the anus. It is thus the center of the 
body for men.{347} By this and similar statements made as regards the other 
lotuses, it is not meant that the Chakra proper is in the region of the gross 
body described, but that it is the subtle center of that gross region, such 
center existing in the spinal column which forms its axis. The reader must 
bear this observation in mind in the descriptions of the Chakras, or an 
erroneous notion will be formed of them. This crimson Muladhara 
lotus{348} is described as one of four petals, the Vrittis of which are the four 
forms of bliss known as Paramananda, Sahajananda, Yogananda, and 
Virananda. {349} On these four petals are the golden letters Vang ( ), Shang ( 
), Shang ( ), and Sang ( ).{350} Each letter in its Vaikhari form is a gross 
manifestation of inner or subtle Shabda. On the petals are figured the letters, 
which are each a Mantra, and as such a Devata. The petals are configurations 
made by the position of the Nadis at any particular center, and are in 
themselves Pranashakti manifested by Pranavayu in the living body. When 
that Vayu departs they cease to be manifest. Each letter is thus a particular 
Shabda or Shakti and a surrounding (Avarana) Devata of the Principal 
Devata and its Shakti of the particular Chakra. As Shakti they are 
manifestations of Kundali, and in their totality constitute Her Mantra body, 
for Kundali is both light (Jyotirmayi) and Mantra (Mantramayi). The latter is 
the Sthila aspect of which Japa is done. The former is the Sukshma aspect 
which is led up to in Yoga. Their specific enumeration and allocation denote 
the differentiation in the body of the total Shabda. This lotus is the center of 
the yellow Prithivi, or “earth” Tattva, with its quadrangular Mandala, the 
Bija or Mantra of which Tattva is Lang ( ).{351} 


At this center is the Prithivi Tattva, the Bija of which is “La,” with Bindu or 
the Brahma-consciousness presiding over this center or “Lang,” which is the 
expression in gross (Vaikhari) sound of the subtle sound made by the 
vibration of the forces of this center. So, again, the subtle Tejas Tattva and its 
Bija Rang is in the Manipiira Chakra, and the gross fire known as 
Vaishvanara is in the physical belly, which the subtle center governs. This 
Bija represents in terms of Mantra the Tattva regnant at this center, and its 


essential activity. With the symbolism used throughout this work, Bija is said 
to be seated on the elephant Airavata, which is here located. This and the 
other animals figured in the Chakras are intended to denote the qualities of 
the Tattvas there regnant. Thus, the elephant is emblematic of the strength, 
firmness, and solidity, of this Tattva of “Earth.” They are, further, the 
vehicles (Vahana) of the Devatas there. Thus in this Chakra there is the seed- 
mantra (Bija) of Indra, whose vehicle is the elephant Airavata. The Devata 
of this center is, according to the Text, the creative Brahma, whose Shakti is 
Savitri.{352} There also is the Shakti known as Dakini, {353} who, as also 
the other Shaktis, Lakini and the rest, which follow, are the Shaktis of the 
Dhatus or bodily substances assigned to this and the other centers. Here is 
the “female” triangle or Yoni known as Traipura, which is the Shaktipitha, in 
which is set the “male” Shivalingga known as Svayambhu, of the shape and 
color of a young leaf, representing, as do all Devis and Devas, the Maya- 
Shakti and Chit-Shakti, aspects of the Brahman as manifested in the 
particular centers (vv. 4-14). The Linggas are four—Svayambhu, Bana, Itara, 
Para. According to the Yoginthridaya{354} (Ch. I.), they are so called 
because they lead to Chit. They are the Pithas, Kamarupa, and the rest 
because they reflect Chit (Chitsphurattadharatvat). They are Vritti of Manas, 
Ahangkara, Buddhi, Chitta. To the first three are assigned certain forms and 
colors—namely, yellow, red, white, triangular, circular; as also certain letters 
—namely, the sixteen vowels, Ka to Ta (soft), Tha to Sa. Para is formless, 
colorless, and letterless, being the collectivity (Samashti) of all letters in the 
form of bliss. The Traipura is the counterpart in the Jiva of the Kamakala of 
the Sahasrara. The Devi Kundalini, luminous as lightning, shining in the 
hollow of this lotus like a chain of brilliant lights, the World-bewilderer who 
maintains all breathing creatures,{355} lies asleep coiled three and a half 
times{356} round the Linga, covering with Her head the Brahmadvara. 
{357} 


The Svadisthana Chakra is the second lotus proceeding upwards, and is, 
according to the commentary, so called after Sva or the Parang Lingam. 
{358} It is a vermilion lotus of six petals placed in the spinal center of the 
region at the root of the genitals. On these petals are the letters like 
lightning: Bang ( ), Bhang ( ), Mang ( ), Yang ( ), Rang ( ), Lang ( ). “Water” 
(Ap) is the Tattva of this Chakra, which is known as the white region of 


Varuna. The Tattvik Mandala is in the shape of a crescent moon{359} 
(Ardhenduripalasitam). The Bija of water (Varuna) is “Vang.” This, the 
Varuna Bija, is seated on a white Makara{360} with a noose in his hand. 
Hari (Vishnu) and Rakini Shakti of furious aspect, showing Her teeth 
fiercely, are here (vv. 14-18). 


Above it, at the center of the region of the navel, is the lotus Manipiira 
(Nabhipadma), so called, according to the Gautamiya Tantra, because, owing 
to the presence of the fiery Tejas, it is lustrous as a gem (Mani).{361} It is a 
lotus of ten petals on which are the letters Dang ( ), Dhang (), Nang (), 
Tang ( ), Thang ( ), Dang ( ), Dhang ( ), Nang ( ), Pang ( ), Phang ( ). This is 
the triangular region of the Tejas Tattva. The triangle has three Svastika. The 
red Bija of fire, “Rang,” is seated on a ram, the carrier of Agni, the Lord of 
Fire. Here is the old red Rudra smeared with white ashes, and the Shakti 
Lakini who as the Devata of this digestive center is said to be “fond of 
animal food, and whose breasts are ruddy with the blood and fat which drop 
from Her mouth.” Lakini and the other special Shaktis of the centers here 
named are the Shaktis of the Yogi himself—that is, Shaktis of the Dhatus 
assigned to each of his bodily centers, and concentration on this center may 
involve the satisfaction of the appetites of this Devata. The Shaktis of the 
higher centers are not meat-eaters. From these three centers the gross Virat, 
waking body, is evolved (vv. 19-21). 


Next above the navel lotus (Nabhipadma) is the Anahata, in the region of the 
heart, which is red like a Bandhuka flower, and is so called because it is in 
this place that Munis hear that “sound (Anahata shabda) which comes 
without the striking of any two things together,” or the “sound” of the 
Shabdabrahman, which is here the Pulse of Life. For it is here that the 
Purusha (Jivatma) dwells. This lotus is to be distinguished from the Heart 
Lotus of eight petals, which is represented in the place below it, where in 
mental worship the Patron Deity (Ishtadevata) is meditated upon. (See Plate 
V.) Here is the Tree which grants all desires (Kalpataru) and the jeweled altar 
(Manipitha) beneath it. As the Vishvasara Tantra cited in the Pranatoshini 
says: “Shabdabrahman is said to be Deva Sadashiva. That Shabda is said to 
be in the Anahatachakra. Anahata is the great Chakra in the heart of all 
beings. Ongkara is said to be there in association with the three 


Gunas.” {362} The Mahasvachchhanda Tantra says:{363} “The great ones 
declare that Thy blissful form, O Queen, manifests in Anahata, and is 
experienced by the mind inward-turned of the Blessed Ones, whose hairs 
stand on end and whose eyes weep with joy.” This is a lotus of ten petals 
with the vermilion letters Kang ( ), Khang ( ), Gang ( ), Ghang ( ), Ngang (), 
Chang ( ), Chhang ( ), Jang ( ), Jhang ( ), Nyang ( ), Tang ( ), Thang ( ). This 
is the center of the Vayu Tattva. According to v. 22, the region of Vayu is 
six-comered (that is, formed by two triangles, of which one is inverted), and 
its color that of smoke by reason of its being surrounded by masses of vapor. 
{364} Its Bija “Yang” is seated on a black antelope which is noted for its 
fleetness, and is the Vahana of “Air” (Vayu), with its property of motion. 
Here are Isha, the Overlord of the first three Chakras; the Shakti Kakini 
garlanded with human bones, whose “heart is softened by the drinking of 
nectar”; and the Shakti in the form of an inverted triangle (Trikona), wherein 
is the golden Bana Linga, “joyous with a rush of desire” 
(Kamodgamollasita), and the Hangsa as Jivatma, like “the steady flame of a 
lamp in a windless place” (vv. 22-27). The Atma is so described because just 
as the flame is undisturbed by the wind, so the Atma is in itself unaffected 
by the motions of the world.{365} 


The seventeenth verse of the Ananda-Lahari mentions that the Devatas 
Vashini and others are to be worshipped in the two last-mentioned Chakras. 
Vashini and others are eight in number: {366} 


(1) Vashini, (2) Kameshvari, (3) Modini, (4) Vimala, (5) Aruna, (6) Jayini, 
(7) Sarveshvari, and (8) Kali or Kaulini. These are respectively the Presiding 
Deities of the following eight groups of letters: (1) to , 16 letters; (2) to, 5 
letters; (3) to , 5 letters; (4) to , 5 letters; (5) to , 5 letters; (6) to , 5 letters; (7) 
to , 4 letters; (8) to or, 5 letters. 


The other beings in v. 17 of Ananda-Lahari refer to the twelve Yoginis, who 
are (1) Vidyayogint, (2) Rechika, (3) Mochika, (4) Amrita, (5) Dipika, (6) 
Jnana, (7) Apyayani, (8) Vyapini, (9) Medha, (10) Vyomaripa, (11) 
Siddhirtpa, and (12) Lakshmiyogint. 


These twenty Deities (eight Vashinis and twelve Yoginis) are to be 
worshipped in Maniptra and Anahata centers. In respect of this, the 


Commentator quotes a verse from the Taittarlyaranyaka, and gives a 
description of these Deities, their respective colors, place, etc. 


At the spinal center of the region at the base of the throat (Kantha-mila) is 
the Vishuddha Chakra or Bharatisthana, {367} with sixteen petals of a smoky 
purple hue, on which are the sixteen vowels with Bindu thereon—that is, 
Ang (), Ang (), Ing (), Ing (), Ung (), Ung (), Ring (), Ring (), Lring (), 
Lring ( ). Eng (), Aing ( ), Ong (), Aung ( ), and the two breathings Ang (), 
Ah ( ). According to the Devibhagavata (VII. 35), the Chakra is so called 
because the Jiva is made pure (Vishuddha) by seeing the Hangsah. Here is 
the center of the white circular Akasha or Ether Tattva, the Bija of which is 
“Hang.” Akasha is dressed in white and mounted on a white elephant. Its 
Mandala is in the form of a circle.{368} Here is Sadashiva in his androgyne 
or Arddhanarishvara Murti, in which half the body is white and the other 
half gold. Here also is the white Shakti Shakini, whose form is light 
(Jyotihsvartipa). Here, too, is the lunar region, “the gateway of the great 
liberation.” It is at this place that the Jnani “sees the three forms of time” 
(Tri-kaladarshi). As all things are in the Atma, the Jnani who has realized the 
Atma has seen them (vv. 28-31). Above the Vishuddha, at the root of the 
palate, is a minor Chakra called Lalana, or in some Tantras Kalachakra, 
which is not mentioned in the works here translated. It is a red lotus with 
twelve petals bearing the following Vritti or qualities: Shraddha (faith), 
Santosha (contentment), Aparadha (sense of error), Dama (self-command), 
Mana (anger),{369} Sneha (affection), {370} Shuddhata (purity), Arati 
(detachment), Sambhrama (agitation), {371} Urmmi (appetite).{372} (V. 


post.) 


Before summarizing the previous description, it is to be here observed that 
the Commentator Kalicharana states the principle of this Yoga to be that that 
which is grosser is merged into that which is more subtle (Sthulanam 
sukshme layah). The grosser are lower in the body than the more subtle. The 
gross which are in and below the Mualadhara or connected with it are—(1) 
the Prithivi Tanmatra; (2) the Prithivt Mahabhita; (3) the nostrils with their 
sense of smell, which is the grossest of the senses of knowledge 
(Jnanendriya), and which is the quality (Guna) of the Prithivi Tanmatra; and 
(4) the feet, which are the grossest of the senses of action (Karmendriya), 


and “which have Prithivi (earth) for their support.” Here the nostrils are 
classified as the grossest of the Jnanendriya, because therein is the sense 
which perceives the quality (Guna) of smell of the grossest Tanmatra 
(Gandha), from which is derived the Prithivi Sthila Bhita. Thus the 
Jnanendriya have a relation with the Tanmatra through their Gunas 
(qualities), for the perception of which these senses exist. In the case, 
however, of the senses of action (Karmendriya), no such relation appears to 
exist between them and the Tanmatras. In the order of successive merging or 
Laya, the feet occur in the same grade as earth, hands in the same grade as 
water, anus in the same grade as fire, penis in the same grade as air, and 
mouth in the same grade as ether; not, apparently, because there is any direct 
relation between earth and feet, water and hands, fire and anus, and so forth, 
but because these organs are in the same order of comparative subtlety as 
earth, water, and fire, and so forth. Hands are supposed to be subtler agents 
than feet; the anus{373} a subtler agent than the hands; the penis a subtler 
agent than the anus; and the mouth a subtler agent than the penis. This is also 
the order in which these agents are situated in the body, the hands coming 
second because they find their place between the feet and the anus when the 
arms are given their natural vertical position. It is to be remembered is this 
connection that the Tantras here follow the Sangkhya, and state the scheme 
of creation as it occurs also in the Puranas, according to which the 
Jnanendriya and Karmendriya and the Tanmatras issue from different aspects 
of the threefold Ahangkara. There is a relation between the senses and the 
Tanmatra in the created Jiva, according to the Vedanta, for the senses are 
related to the Tanmatra, but the order, in that case, in which the senses occur 
is different from that given in this work. For, according to the Vedantik 
scheme, earth is related to the sense of smell and penis; water to the sense of 
taste and anus; fire to the sense of sight and feet; air to the sense of touch 
and hands; and ether to the sense of hearing and mouth. Another explanation 
seemingly artificial, however, which has been given, is as follows: The feet 
are associated with “earth” because the latter alone has the power of support, 
and the feet rest on it. “Water” is associated with the hands because in 
drinking water the hand is used. The word Pani, which means hand, is 
derived from the root Pa, to drink (Piyate anena iti pani). Fire is associated 
with the anus because what is eaten is consumed by fire in the stomach, and 
the residue is passed out through the anus, whereby the body becomes pure. 


“Air” is associated with the penis because in procreation the Jivatma as 
Prana Vayu throws itself out through the penis. And so the Shruti says; 
“Atma itself is reborn in the son” (Atma vai jayate putrah). “Ether” is 
associated with the mouth because by the mouth sound is uttered, which is 
the Guna (quality) of ether (Akasha). 


Hitherto we have dealt with the comparatively gross Tattvas. According to 
this work, the twenty grosser Tattvas are associated (4 x 5) as in the 
following table: 


Centre in which 
dissolved, 


1. Miladhéra - Gandha (smell) Tanmatra; Prithivi Tattva 
(earth); the Jnanendriya of smell;* the Kar- 
mendriya of feet. 

2. Svadhishthana- Rasa (taste) Tanmatra; Ap Tattva (water); 
the Jnanendriya of taste; the Karmendriya of 
hands. 

3. Manipira - Ripa (sight) Tanmatra; Tejas Tattva (fire); the 
Jnanendriya of sight; the Karmendriya of anus. 

4, Anahata - Sparsha (touch) Tanmatra; Vayu Tattva (air); 
the Jnanendriya of touch; the Karmendriya of 
penis. 

5. Vishuddha + Shabda (sound) Tanmatra; Akasha Tattva (ether) ; 
the Jnanendriya of hearing; the Karmendriya 
of mouth. 


Grossey Tattvas. 


{374}. 


It will be observed that with each of the elements is associated an organ of 
sensation (Jnanendriya) and action (Karmendriya). In Chapter IT. of the 
Prapanchasara Tantra it is said: “Ether is in the ears, air in the skin, fire in 
the eye, water in the tongue, and earth in the nostrils.” The Karmendriya are 
possibly so arranged because the Tattvas of the respective centers in which 
they are placed are, as above stated, of similar grades of subtlety and 
grossness. As explained below, each class of Tattvas is dissolved in the next 
higher class, commencing from the lowest and grossest center, the 
Miuladhara. So far the Tattvas have been those of the “matter” side of 
creation. 


Progress is next made to the last or Ajnd Chakra, in which are the subtle 
Tattvas of Mind and Prakriti. The Chakra is so called because it is here that 
the command (Ajna) of the Guru is received from above. It is a lotus of two 
white petals between the eyebrows, on which are the white letters Hang ( ), 
and Kshang ( ). This exhausts the fifty letters. It will have been observed that 
there are fifty petals and fifty letters in the six Chakras. In the pericarp is the 
great Mantra “Om.” Each Lotus has either two or four more petals than the 
one immediately below it, and the number of the petals in the Vishuddha 
Chakra is the sum of the preceding differences. Here are Paramashiva in the 
form of Hangsa (Hangsartipa), Siddhakali, the white Hakini Shakti “elated 
by draughts of ambrosia,” the inverted triangle or Yoni (Trikona), and the 
Itara Linga, shining like lightning, which is set in it. The three Lingas are 
thus in the Miladhara, Anahata, and Ajna Chakras respectively; for here at 
these three Brahmagranthis the force of Maya Shakti is in great strength. 
And this is the point at which each of the three groups of Tattva associated 
with fire, sun, and moon, converge.{375} The phrase “opening the doors” 
refers to passage through these Granthi. Here in the Ajna is the seat of the 
subtle Tattvas, Mahat and Prakriti. The former is the Antahkarana with 
Gunas—namely, Buddhi, Chitta, Ahangkara and its product Manas 
(Sangkalpavikalpaka). Commonly and shortly it is said that Manas is the 
Tattva of the Ajna Chakra. As, however, it is the mental center, it includes all 
the aspects of mind above stated, and the Prakriti whence they derive, as also 
the Atma in the form of the Pranava (Om) its Bija. Here the Atma 
(Antaratma) shines lustrous like a flame. The light of this region makes 
visible all which is between the Mila and the Brahmarandhra. The Yogi by 


contemplation of this lotus gains further powers (Siddhi), and becomes 
Advaitacharavadi (monist). In connection with this Padma, the text (S.N., v. 
36) explains how detachment is gained through the Yoni Mudra. It is here 
that the Yogi at time of death places his Prana, and then enters the supreme 
primordial Deva, the Purana (ancient) Purusha, “who was before the three 
worlds, and is known by the Vedanta.” The same verse describes the method 
(Pranaropanaprakara). From the last center and the causal Prakriti is evolved 
the subtle body which individually is known as Taijasa, and collectively (that 
is, the Ishvara aspect) as Hiranyagarbha. The latter term is applied to the 
manifestation of the Paramatma in the Antahkarana; as displayed in Prana it 
is Sutratma; and when manifested through these two vehicles without 
differentiation it is known as the Antaryamin. The Chakras are the bodily 
centers of the world of differentiated manifestation, with its gross and subtle 
bodies arising from their causal body, and its threefold planes of 
consciousness in waking, sleeping, and dreamless slumber. 


Above the Ajna-chakra (vv. 32-39) there are the minor Chakras called 
Manas and Soma, not mentioned in the texts here translated. The Manas 
Chakra is a lotus of six petals, on the petals of which are (that is, which is 
the seat of) the sensations of hearing, touch, sight, smell, taste, and centrally 
initiated sensations in dream and hallucination. Above this, again, is the 
Soma Chakra, a lotus of sixteen petals, with certain Vritti which are detailed 
later.{376} In this region are “the house without support” (Niralambapury), 
“where Yogis see the radiant Ishvara,” the seven causal bodies (v. 39) which 
are intermediate aspects of Adya Shakti, the white twelve-petalled lotus by 
the pericarp of the Sahasrara (vv. 32-39), in which twelve-petalled lotus is 
the A-ka-tha triangle, which surrounds the jeweled altar (Manipitha) on the 
isle of gems (Manidvipa), set in the Ocean of Nectar, {377} with Bindu 
above and Nada below, and the Kamakala triangle and the Guru of all, or 
Paramashiva. Above this, again, in the pericarp, are the Stiryya and Chandra 
Mandalas, the Parabindu surrounded by the sixteenth and seventeenth digits 
of the moon circle. In the Chandra Mandala there is a triangle. Above the 
Moon is Mahavayu, and then the Brahmarandhra with Mahashangkhini. 


The twelve-petalled lotus and that which is connected with it is the special 
subject of the short book Padukapanchaka Stotra here translated, which is a 


hymn by Shiva in praise of the “Fivefold Footstool,” with a commentary by 
Shri Kalicharana. The footstools are variously classified as follows: 
According to the first classification they are—(1) The white twelve-petalled 
lotus in the pericarp of the Sahasrara lotus. Here there is (2) the inverted 
Triangle, the abode of Shakti called “A-ka-tha.” (3) The region of the altar 
(Manipitha), on each side of which are Nada and Bindu. The eternal Guru, 
“white like a mountain of silver,” should be meditated upon, as on the 
Jeweled Altar (Manipitha). (4) The fourth Paduka is the Hangsa below the 
Antaratma; and (5) the Triangle on the Pitha. The differences between this 
and the second classification are explained in the notes to v. 7 of the Paduka. 
According to this latter classification they are counted as follows: (1) The 
twelve-petalled lotus; (2) the triangle called A-ka-tha; (3) Nada-Bindu; (4) 
the Manipitha-Mandala; and (5) the Hangsa, which makes the triangular 
Kamakala. This Triangle, the Supreme Tattva, is formed by the three Bindus 
which the text calls Chandra (Moon), Siryya (Sun), and Vahni (Fire) Bindus, 
which are also known as Prakasha, Vimarsha, and Mishra Bindu. This is the 
Hangsa known as the triangular Kamakala, the embodiment of Purusha- 
Prakriti. The former is the Bindu Hangkara at the apex of the triangle, and 
the two other Bindus called Visargah or Sa are Prakriti. This Kamakala is the 
Mila (root) of Mantra. 


The Shabdabrahman with its threefold aspect and energies is represented in 
the Tantras by this Kamakala, which is the abode of Shakti (Abalalayam). 
This is the Supreme Triangle, which, like all Yonipithas, is inverted. It may 
be here noted that Shakti is denoted by a triangle because of its threefold 
manifestation as will, action, and knowledge (Ichchha, Kriya, Jnana). So, on 
the material plane, if there are three forces, there is no other way in which 
they can be brought to interact except in the form of a triangle in which, 
while they are each separate and distinct from one another, they are yet 
related to each other and form part of one whole. At the corners of the 
Triangle there are two Bindus, and at the apex a single Bindu. These are the 
Bindus of Fire (Vahnibindu), Moon (Chandrabindu), and Sun (Siiryyabindu). 
{378} Three Shaktis emanate from these Bindus, denoted by the lines 
joining the Bindus and thus forming a triangle. These lines are the line of the 
Shakti Vama, the line of the Shakti Jyeshtha, and the line of the Shakti 
Raudri. These Shaktis are volition (Ichchha), action (Kriya), and cognition 


(Jnana). With them are Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, associated with the 
Gunas Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas. 


The lines of the triangle emanating from the three Bindus or Hangsah are 
formed by forty-eight letters of the alphabet. The sixteen vowels beginning 
with A form one line; the sixteen consonants beginning with Ka form the 
second line; and the following sixteen letters beginning with Tha form the 
third line. Hence the triangle is known as the A-ka-tha triangle. In the inner 
three corners of the triangle are the remaining letters Ha, Lla, Ksha. The 
Yamala thus speaks of this abode, “I now speak of Kamakala,” and, 
proceeding, says: “She is the eternal One who is the three Bindus, the three 
Shaktis, and the three Forms (Trimurtih).” The Brihat-Shri-krama, in dealing 
with Kamakala, says: “From the Bindu (that is, the Parabindu) She has 
assumed the form of letters (Varnavayavartpini).” The Kali Urddhvamnaya 
says: “The threefold Bindu (Tribindu) is the supreme Tattva, and embodies 
in itself Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva.”{379} The triangle which is composed 
of the letters has emanated from the Bindu. These letters are known as the 
Matrika Varna. These form the body of Kulakundalini{380} the 
Shabdabrahman, being in their Vaikhari state various manifestations of the 
primal unmanifested “sound” (Avyaktanada). 


They appear as manifested Shabda on the self-division of the Parabindu; for 
this self-division marks the appearance of the differentiated Prakriti. 


The commentary on the Padukapanchaka (v. 3) says that the Bindu is 
Parashakti itself, and its variations are called Bindu, Nada, and Bija, or Sun, 
Moon, and Fire; Bindu, the sun, being red, and Nada, the moon, being white. 
{381} These form the Chinmaya or Anandamayakosha (Padukapanchaka, v. 
3). The two Bindus making the base of the triangle are the Visargah (ib., v. 
4). In the Agamakalpadruma it is said: “Hangkara is Bindu or Purusha, and 
Visarga is Sah or Prakriti. Hangsah is the union of the male and female, and 
the universe is Hangsah.” The triangular Kamakala is thus formed by 
Hangsah (ib.). The Hangsa-pitha is composed of Mantras (ib., v. 6). 


As this subject is of great importance, some further authorities than those 
referred to in the work here translated are given. In his commentary to v. 73 
of the Lalita, in which the Devi is addressed as being in the form of 


Kamakala (Kamakalaripa), Bhaskararaya says: “There are three Bindus and 
the Hardhakala.{382} Of these the Bindus are called Kama, and the 
Hakarardha is named Kala.” {383} He adds that the nature of Kamakala is 
set forth in the Kamakalavilasa in the verses commencing “Supreme Shakti 
(Para Shakti) is the manifested union of Shiva and Shakti in the form of seed 
and sprout,” and ending with the lines “Kama (means) desirableness, and the 
Kala the same. The two Bindus are said to be the Fire and Moon.” {384} 
Kama, or creative will, is both Shiva and Devi, and Kala is their 
manifestation. Hence it is called Kamakala. This is explained in the 
Tripurasiddhanta: “O Parvati, Kala is the manifestation of Kameshvara and 
Kameshvari. Hence She is known as Kamakala.” {385} Or She is the 
manifestation (Kala) of desire (Kama) {386}—that is, of Ichchha. The Kalika 
Purana says: “Devi is called Kama because She came to the secret place on 
the blue peak of the great mountain (Kailasa) along with Me for the sake of 
desire (Kama): thus Devi is called Kama. As She is also the giver or fulfiller 
of desire, desiring, desirable, beautiful, restoring the body of Kama 
(Manmatha) and destroying the body of Kama, hence She is called 

Kama.” {387} After Shiva (with whom She is one) had destroyed Kama, 
when he sought by the instilment of passion to destroy His yoga; so She 
(with whom He is one) afterwards gave a new body to the “Bodiless One” 
(Ananga). They destroy the worlds and take them to themselves through the 
cosmic yoga path, and again by Their desire and will (Ichchha) recreate 
them. These Bindus and Kala are referred to in the celebrated Hymn “Waves 
of Bliss” (Anandalahari), attributed to the great Shangkaracharyya. {388} 


This Devi is the great Tripurasundari. Bhaskararaya’s Guru 
Nrisinghanandanatha wrote the following verse, on which the disciple 
commentates: “I hymn Tripura, the treasure of Kula,{389} who is red of 
beauty; Her limbs like unto those of Kamaraja, who is adored by the three 
Devatas{390} of the three Gunas; who is the desire (or will) of Shiva; {391} 
who dwells in the Bindu and who manifests the universe.” She is called 
(says the commentator cited){392} Tripura, as She has three (Tri) Puras (lit., 
cities), but, here meaning Bindus, angles, lines, syllables, etc. The Kalika 
Purana says: “She has three angles (in the triangular Yoni) as well as three 
circles (the three Bindus), and her Bhipura{393} has three lines. Her Mantra 
is said to be of three syllables, {394} and She has three aspects. The 


Kundalini energy is also threefold, in order that She may create the three 
Gods (Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra). Thus, since She the supreme energy is 
everywhere triple, She is called Tripurasundari.” {395} These syllables are 
said by the commentator last cited{396} to be the three Bijas of the three 
divisions (of the Panchadashi)—viz., Vagbhava, Kamaraja, and Shakti, 
which according to the Vamakeshvara Tantra are the Jnanashakti which 


confers salvation, and the Kriya and Ichchha Shaktis. 


Three “Pada” are also spoken of as Tripura—white, red, and mixed. {397} 
Elsewhere, as in the Varaha Purana, the Devi is said to have assumed three 
forms—white, red, and black: that is, the Supreme energy endowed with the 
Sattvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik qualities.{398} The one Shakti becomes three 
to produce effects. 


In the Kamakala meditation (Dhyana) the three Bindus and Hardhakala are 
thought of as being in the body of the Devi Tripurasundari. The 
Commentator on the verse of the Ananda-Lahari cited says:{399} “In the 
fifth sacrifice (Yajna) let the Sadhaka think of his Atma as in no wise 
different from, but as the one only Shiva; and of the subtle thread-like 
Kundalini which is all Shaktis, extending from the Adhara lotus to 
Paramashiva. Let him think of the three Bindus as being in Her body 
(Tripurasundari), which Bindus indicate Ichchha, Kriya, Jnana—Moon, Fire, 
and Sun; Rajas, Tamas, Sattva; Brahma, Rudra, Vishnu; and then let him 
meditate on the Chitkala who is Shakti below it.” {400} 


The Bindu which is the “face” indicates Virinchi{401} (Brahma) associated 
with the Rajas Guna. The two Bindus which are the “breasts,” and upon 
which meditation should be done in the heart, indicate Hari{402} (Vishnu) 
and Hara{403} (Rudra) associated with the Sattva and Tamas Gunas. Below 
them meditate in the Yoni upon the subtle Chitkala, which indicates all three 
Gunas, and which is all these three Devatas. {404} The meditation given in 
the Yogini Tantra is as follows: “Think of three Bindus above Kala, and then 
that from these a young girl sixteen years old springs forth, shining with the 
light of millions of rising suns, illuminating every quarter of the firmament. 
Think of Her body from crown to throat as springing from the upper Bindu, 
and that her body from throat to middle, with its two breasts and three belly 


lines of beauty (trivali), arise from the two lower Bindus. Then imagine that 
the rest of Her body from genitals to feet is born from Kama. Thus formed, 
She is adorned with all manner of ornaments and dress, and is adored by 
Brahma, Isha, and Vishnu. Then let the Sadhaka think of his own body as 
such Kamakala.”{405} The Shritattvamava says: “The glorious men who 
worship in that body in Samarasya{406} are freed from the waves of poison 
in the untraversable sea of the world (Sangsara).’”4°5 


To the same effect are the Tantrik works the Shrikrama{407} and 
Bhavachiidamani {408} cited in the Commentary to the Ananda-Lahari. The 
first says: “Of the three Bindus, O Mistress of the Devas, let him 
contemplate the first as the mouth and in the heart the two Bindus as the two 
breasts. Then let him meditate upon the subtle Kala Hakarardha in the Yoni.” 
And the second says: “The face in the form of Bindu, and below twin 
breasts, and below them the beauteous form of the Hakaradha.” The three 
Devatas Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, with their Shaktis, are said to take birth 
from the letters A, U, M, of the Ongkara or Pranava.{409} Ma, as the 
Prapanchasara Tantra{410} says, is the Sun or Atma among the letters, for it 
is Bindu. From each of these ten Kalas arise. 


Verse 8 of the first work translated says that in the Muladhara center there is 
the Triangle (Trikona) known as Traipura, which is an adjective of Tripura. 
It is so called because of the presence of the Devi Tripura within the Ka 
inside the triangle. This Ka is the chief letter of the Kama Bija, and 
Kang{411} is the Bija of Kamini, the aspect of Tripurasundari in the 
Muladhara. Here also, as the same verse says, there are the three lines Vama, 
Jyeshtha, and Raudri, and, as the Shatchakra-vivriti adds, Ichchha, Jnana, 
and Kriya.{412} Thus the Traipura Trikona is the gross or Sthila aspect of 
that subtle (Sukshma) Shakti which is below the Sahasrara, and is called 
Kamakala. It is to this Kamini that in worship the essence of Japa 
(Tejorupajapa) is offered, the external Japa being offered to the Devata 
worshipped in order that the Sadhaka may retain the fruits of his worship. 
{413} There are also two other Lingas and Trikonas at the Anahata and Ajna 
centers, which are two of the Knots or Granthis, and which are so called 
because Maya is strong at these points of obstruction, at which each of the 
three groups converge. The Traipura Trikona is that, however, in the 


Miuladhara which is the grosser correspondence of the Kamakala, which is 
the root (Mila) of all Mantra below the Sahasrara, and which, again, is the 
correspondence in Jiva of the Tribindu of Ishvara. 


Before, however, dealing in detail with the Sahasrara, the reader will find it 
convenient to refer to the tables on pp. 114 and 115, which summarizes some 
of the details above given up to and including the Sahasrara. 


(uorse Jo 
uesi0) snue | 
{(woresues jo | 
ue3i0) 4YSIs 
seA}VL (1YSIS Tinq 
‘inojoo pur ev uo ulvl & | 
wi0oy) edny _ UIyeIT | vapnyy uo Bury | opsueny 
(uon | 
-098 jo uvS.0) 
:pury ‘(uones 
-uos Jo ue3.10) epnieyy | 
94Se} 1 PAWL uo VIVYALIN 
(93se}) esey = u1yey | nuystA uo Suva }WI0SeID! 9zIY A\ 
(uory 
-9e Jo uesi0) | euOyIL 
yooy ‘S(uores § | eandrery queydaya 
-uas JO UeSIO) pue essuvyT eyeALITY 
jjours {eA}}e] nyqui uo | oy} 
(jours) eypuey| -eAeas | lured | eUYyeig | UO SULT arenbs 
a ——_ ae: mene ane = 
*panjossip uo x | “nwpyq ~~ A ny “DIDPUY AT" ABIY_T. 
aay puv ay} fo puv pi fo 
svayvy 40Yy10 | vsurT | HYYS vynaaq, | pun vlig aqvys 


Woy 
pue Inojoo 
JO 9SUaS- YSIS 
Ssurzepnwnys 
pur yeoy Sur 
-onpoid ‘uors 


-uedxo ‘svlay 


93Sv} JO 
asues Suynry] 
-nwijs ‘wor 
-9B1}U0D 


[fous jo 
esues SUT}L] 
“nwWIys ‘UOIS 
-9yoo SATU 


‘sayyono 
sje pun 


vayy T juDusay 


| 


eyd ‘ed | 

‘eyp ‘eu | 

‘ey ‘ep | 
| “el. ‘en 
| ‘eyp ‘ep ol 


ey ‘vi 
‘eA “ul 


‘ dy | ‘eyq ‘eq 9 


| 


Jearu oy 
yO uolsel jo 
oajzueo yeuids 


s[eyues 
| oy} oA0qe 
uOISsOI jo 
aijzueod yeulds 


| syeziues MOT 
-oq UOIZ0I JO 
oijquso «yeulds 


| eS ‘eys 
“eys ‘tA v 
‘awUyS | ‘SIDIIT 
wo 8 6|—Clofo 
SOIT = 4OQUIN | 


‘uoywngts 


(z¢ -a) ey 
-qiese sued py 
peeo Ly 
~eId CulYysyNs 
ou, = ‘FeyeW 


(wore Jo 
ue3i0) y}Nour 
{(uor1zesues 
jo wesi0) But 
yes ‘eAWeL 


(punos) epqeys 


(uo 
-9e8 JO uvZIO) 
stuod ‘(aoryes 
-uos JO uPSIO) 
Yono} VAL L 
({995 pue 
yono}) eysreds 


*‘panjossip 
. aAay 
svayvy 42410 


| 


euoyliy 
pue 
eieyy | ue 
—  wryeys 
eUuOyIIL 
pue 
rue = TUyey 
suo | -nqvyC 
pun = ay fo 
vsurT = yvys 


"eATYSeIvg npurg 


sMoiqodd oy} 


euleidns sy} JO apoge Y} ST UIeIEM ‘s19}30] 9y3 [Te WTA ‘speed puesnoy} & JO snjo'T 94} pue UWOrsex pesneo oy} st euly oy} sAOGY 


nyq (soryynoey eysy us9A\}0q UOT 
-weys uO _ — (yeyuoul) seueyy| pue ey zt -01 jo oijueg 6euly 
|_ 
ye ‘sue 
‘ne ‘o ‘te 
i) ‘Hy tl 
Surrey yo |r‘ 11'g' ' 
qyueydoye asues Sule, | ‘i'r ‘e = ip 7yeo14Y OY} 
eATYS | OUTYM B | -NUWT]S ‘BUTAIS SJOMOA | yO uoIsor1 JO eyppn 
-eprS (UO SURFY, OfIIQ oz1y A, -90eds ‘eyseyy) oF | OT aijueo yeurdc -YStIA 
= == a | at 
ey “e7 
‘eu ‘eyf) 
yonozjyoosuas | ‘el ‘eqyo| 
| adojoqzur | uosexoy BUIZe[NUNZS ‘eyo ‘e3su yAvoy oy} 
| ue uo | poyurod quowosaow | ‘eys ‘v3 JO uolser Jo eyey 
ys] suv -xXIG_- Ayoulss perouos {nAva | ‘eyy ‘ey I amus9 «=yeurds -veuy 
| | 
= ; | eee | eee eter a = =| _— 
hie ae | (aeeateo) “DIVpUYT -YA})0_L "$a1g1qvNOC) ‘aus sal *SpD)IT 
cb oa | fo fo st pun uo fo "UOUVKILS = “DAY DYD 
vivaeq | pun ofig| adVYS ANOJOD vANY TL yuvusay | saayaT | saquinn 


In the description of the Chakras given in this work, no mention is made of 
the moral and other qualities and things (Vritti) which are associated with the 
Lotuses in other books, such as the Adhyatmaviveka, {414} commencing 
with the root-lotus and ending with the Somachakra. Thus, the Vrittis, 
Prashraya, Avishvasa, Avajna, Murchha, Sarvanasha, Krirata,{415} are 
assigned to Svadhishthana; Lajja, Pishunata, Irsha, Trishna, Sushupti, 
Vishada, Kashaya, Moha, Ghrina, Bhaya,{416} to the Manipiira; Asha, 
Chinta, Cheshta, Mamata, Dambha, Vikalata, Ahangkara, Viveka, Lolata, 
Kapatata, Vitarka, Anutapa,{417} Kripa, Mriduta, Dhairyya, Vairagya, 
Dhriti, Sampat, Hasya, Romancha, Vinaya, Dhyana, Susthirata, Gambhiryya, 
Udyama, Akshobha, Audarya, Ekagrata, {418} to the secret Somachakra; 
and so forth. In the Muladhara, which has been described as the “source of a 
massive pleasurable esthesia,” there are the four forms of bliss already 
mentioned; in the Vishuddha the seven subtle “tones,” Nishada, Rishabha, 
Gandhara, Shadja, Madhyama, Dhaivata, Panchama; certain Bijas, Hing, 
Phat, Vaushat, Vashat, Svadha, Svaha, Namah; in the eighth petal “venom,” 
and in the sixteenth “nectar”;{419} and in the petals and pericarp of the Ajna 
the three Gunas, and in the former the Bijas Hang and Kshang; and in the 
six-petalled Manaschakra above the Ajna are Shabdajnana, Sparshajnana, 
Ripajnana, Aghranopalabdhi, Rasopabhoga, and Svapna, with their 
opposites, denoting the sensations of the sensorium—hearing, touch, sight, 
smell, taste, and centrally initiated sensations in dream and hallucination. It 
is stated that particular Vrittis are assigned to a particular lotus, because of a 
connection between such Vritti and the operation of the Shaktis of the Tattva 
at the center to which it is assigned. That they exist at any particular Chakra 
is said to be shown by their disappearance when Kundali ascends through 
the Chakra. Thus the bad Vritti of the lower Chakras pass away in the Yogi 
who raises Kundali above them. 


Moral qualities (Vritti) appear in some of the lower Chakras and in the secret 
twelve-petalled lotus called the Lalana (and in some Tantras Kalachakra), 
situate above the Vishuddha, at the root of the palate (Talumila), as also in 
the sixteen-petalled lotus above the Manashchakra, and known as the 
Somachakra. It is noteworthy that the Vritti of the two lower Chakras 
(Svadhishthana and Manipira) are all bad; those of the Anahata centers are 


mixed,{420} those of the Lalana Chakra are predominantly good, and those 
of the Somachakra wholly so; thus indicative of an advance as we proceed 
from the lower to the higher centers, and this must be so as the Jiva 
approaches or lives in his higher principles. In the twelve-petalled white 
lotus in the pericarp of the Sahasrara is the abode of Shakti, called the 
Kamakala, already described. 


Between Ajna and Sahasrara, at the seat of the Karana Sharira of Jiva, are 
the Varnavaliripa Viloma Shaktis, descending from Unmani to Bindu. Just 
as in the Ishvara or cosmic creation there are seven creative Shaktis from 
Sakala Parameshvara to Bindu; and in the micro-cosmic or Jiva creation 
seven creative Shaktis from Kundalini, who is in the Muladhara, to Bindu, 
both of which belong to what is called the Anuloma order:{421} so in the 
region between the Ajna Chakra and Sahasrara, which is the seat of the 
causal body (Karana Sharira) of Jiva, there are seven Shaktis, {422} which, 
commencing with the lowest, are Bindu (which is in Ishvara Tattva), 
Bodhini, Nada, Mahanada or Nadanta (in Sadakhya Tattva), Vyapika, 
Samani (in Shakti Tattva), and Unmani (in Shiva Tattva). Though these latter 
Shaktis have a cosmic creative aspect, they are not here co-extensive with 
and present a different aspect from the latter. They are not co-extensive, 
because the last-mentioned Shaktis are, as here mentioned, Shaktis of the 
Jiva. Hangsa Jiva or Kundali is but an infinitesimal part of the Parabindu. 
The latter is in the Sahasrara, or thousand-petalled lotus, the abode of 
Ishvara, who is Shiva-Shakti and is the seat of the aggregate Kundalis or 
Jiva. And hence it is said that all the letters are here twentyfold (50 x 20 = 
1,000). In the Sahasrara are Parabindu, the supreme Nirvana Shakti, Nirvana 
Kala, Amakala, {423} and the fire of Nibodhika. In the Parabindu is the 
empty void (Shunya) which is the supreme Nirguna Shiva. 


Another difference is to be found in the aspect of the Shaktis. Whilst the 
cosmic creative Shaktis are looking outwards and forwards (Unmukhi), the 
Shaktis above the Ajna are, in Yoga, looking backwards towards dissolution. 
The Ishvara of the Sahasrara is not then the creative aspect of Ishvara. There 
He is in the Nirvana mood, and the Shaktis leading up to Nirvana Shakti are 
“upward moving”—that is, liberating Shaktis of the Jiva. 


These seven states or aspects of Bindumayaparashakti (S.N., v. 40) leading 
up to Unmani, which are described in this and other Tantrik books, are called 
causal forms (Karanartipa). The commentary to the Lalita{424} apparently 
enumerates eight, but this seems to be due to a mistake, Shakti and Vyapika 
being regarded as distinct Shaktis instead of differing names for the third of 
this series of Shaktis. 


Below Visargah (which is the upper part of the Brahmarandhra, in the 
situation of the fontenelle) and the exit of Shangkini Nadi is the Supreme 
White (or, as some call it, variegated) Lotus of a thousand petals (S.N., 
vv.40-49), known as the Sahasrara, on which are all the letters of the 
Sanskrit alphabet, omitting according to some the Vaidik Lakara, and 
according to others Ksha. These are repeated twenty times to make the 
1,000, and are read from beginning to end (Anuloma), going round the Lotus 
from right to left. Here is Mahavayu and the Chandramandala, in which is 
the Supreme Bindu (O), “which is served in secret by all the Devas.” Bindu 
as such implies Guna, but it also means the void of space, and in its 
application to the Supreme Light, which is formless, is symbolical of its 
decaylessness. This subtle Shinya (Void), which is the Atma of all being 
(Sarvvatma), is spoken of in S.N., vv. 42-49. Here in the region of the 
Supreme Lotus is the Guru, the Supreme Shiva Himself. Hence the Shaivas 
call it Shivasthanam, free of all illusion, and the abode of bliss where the 
Atma is realized. Here, too, is the Supreme Nirvana Shakti, the Shakti in the 
Parabindu, and the Mother of all the three worlds. He who has truly and fully 
known the Sahasrara is not reborn in the Sangsara, for he has by such 
knowledge broken all the bonds which held him to it. His earthly stay is 
limited to the working out of the Karma already commenced and not 
exhausted. He is the possessor of all Siddhi, is liberated though living 
(Jivanmukta), and attains bodiless liberation (Moksha), or Videha Kaivalya, 
on the dissolution of his physical body. 


In the fourteenth verse and commentary thereon of the Anandalahari the 
Deity in the Sahasrara is described. {425} 


“She is above all the Tattvas. Every one of the six centers represents a 
Tattva. Every Tattva has a definite number of rays. The six centers, or 


Chakras, are divided into three groups. Each of these groups has a knot or 
apex where converge the Chakras that constitute that group. The names of 
the groups are derived from those of the Presiding Deities. The following 
table clearly puts the above: 


Name of | 
at Chakva. 
| 
1 | Maladhara 
2 | Svadhish- 
thana 
3 | Manipira 
4 | Andhata — 
5 | Vishuddhi 
6 | Ajna 


ewe ee 


Name 


of 


Tattva. 


Bhi 
Agni 


Apas 
Vayu 


| Akisha 
Manas | 


No. of 
Rays | Name of of Con- 
of | Group. | verging 


| Name 


Tattva. _ Pout. 
isonet ccs 
| 56) | Agni- -Rudra- 
—62f | Khanda | granthi 
| 521 | on, | Vishnu- 
54) sity -granthi 
72\ | Chan- Brahma- 
64) | dra — granthi 
| 360 


| Remarks. 
| 


on 


In Sahasrara the 
rays are num- 
berless, eternal 
and unlimited 
by space. 

There is another 
Chandra here 
whose rays are 
countless and 
ever-shining. 


“Lakshmidhara quotes the Taittirtyaranyaka in support of his commentary, 
from which we have taken the notes above given. The extracts which he 
makes from ‘Bhairava Yamala’ are very valuable. In discoursing about 


Chandra, Shiva addresses (vv. 1-17, Chandrajnanavidyaprakarana) Parvati, 
his consort, thus: 


““Welcome, O Beauty of the three worlds, welcome is Thy question. This 
knowledge (which I am about to disclose) is the secret of secrets, and I have 
not imparted it to anyone till now. (But I shall now tell thee the grand secret. 
Listen, then, with attention:) 


“¢Shrichakra (in the Sahasrara) is the form of Parashakti. In the middle of 
this Chakra is a place called Baindava, where She, who is above all Tattvas, 
rests united with Her Lord Sadashiva. O Supreme One, the whole Cosmos is 
a Shrichakra formed of the twenty-five Tattvas—5 elements + 5 Tanmatras + 
10 Indriyas + Mind + Maya, Shuddhavidya, Mahesha, and Sadashiva. {426} 
Just as it is in Sahasrara, so cosmically, also, Baindava is above all Tattvas. 
Devi, the cause of the creation, protection, and destruction, of the universe, 
rests there ever united with Sadashiva, who as well is above all Tattvas and 
ever-shining. Uncountable are the rays that issue forth from Her body; O 
good one, they emanate in thousands, lacs—nay, crores. But for this light 
there would be no light at all in the universe . . . 360 of these rays illumine 
the world in the form of Fire, Sun, and Moon. These 360 rays are made up as 
follows: Agni (Fire) 118, Sun 106, Moon 136. O Shankari, these three 
luminaries enlighten the macrocosm as well as the microcosm, and give rise 
to the calculation of time—the Sun for the day, the Moon for the night, Agni 
(Fire) occupying a mean position between the two.’ {427} 


“Hence they constitute (or are called) Kala (time), and the 360 days (rays) 
make a year. The Veda says: “The year itself is a form of the Lord. The Lord 
of time, the Maker of the world, first created Marichi (rays), etc., the Munis, 
the protectors of the world. Everything has come to exist by the command of 
Parameshvari.’ 


“Dindima takes a quite different view of this verse. He interprets it as 
meaning that, having already described the Antaryaga (inner worship), the 
author recommends here the worship of the Avarana Devataés—i.e., Deities 
residing in each of the Chakras or centers—without propitiating whom it is 
impossible for the practitioner to lead the Kundalini through these Chakras. 


He enumerates all the 360 Deities and describes the mode of worshipping 
each of them. 


“There are other commentators who understand the 360 rays esoterically, 
and connect the same with the 360 days of the year, and also with the human 
body. Every commentator quotes the Taittarlyaranyaka, first chapter, to 
support his views. Thus it seems that Taittarlyaranyaka contains much 
esoteric matter for the mystic to digest. The first chapter of the Aranyaka 
referred to is chanted in worshipping the Sun. It is called Arunam because it 
treats of Aruna (red-colored Devi).” {428} 


An Indian physician and Sanskritist has expressed the opinion that better 
anatomy is given in the Tantras than in the purely medical works of the 
Hindus. {429} It is easier, however, to give a statement of the present and 
ancient physiology than to correlate them. Indeed, this is for the present a 
difficult matter. In the first place, the material as regards the latter is 
insufficiently available and known to us, and those native scholars and 
Sadhakas (nowadays, probably, not numerous) who are acquainted with the 
subject are not conversant with Western physiology, with which it is to be 
compared. It is, further, possible to be practically acquainted with this Yoga 
without knowing its physiological relations, a knowledge of which is not so 
important as is sometimes supposed. Working in what is an unexplored field, 
I can only here put forward, on the lines of the Text and such information as 
I have gathered, explanations and suggestions which must in some cases be 
of a tentative character, in the hope that they may be followed up and tested 
by others. 


It is clear that the Merudanda is the vertebral column, which as the axis of 
the body is supposed to bear the same relation to it as does Mount Meru to 
the earth. It extends from the Mula (root) or Muladhara to the neck. It and 
the connected upper tracts, spinal bulb, cerebellum, and the like, contain 
what has been described as the central system of spinal nerves (Nadi) and 
cranial nerves (Shiro-nad1). The Sushumma, which is undoubtedly a Nadi 
within the vertebral column, and as such is well described by the books as 
the principal of all the Nadis, runs along the length of the Merudanda, as 
does the spinal cord of Western physiology, if we include therewith the filum 


terminale. If we include the filum, and take the Kanda to be between the 
anus and penis, it starts from practically the same (sacro-coccygeal) region, 
the Muladhara, and is spoken of as extending to the region of the 
Brahmarandhra, {430} or to a point below the twelve-petalled lotus (v. 1)— 
that is, at a spot below but close to the Sahasrara, or cerebellum, where the 
nerve Chitrini also ends. The position of the Kanda is that stated in this work 
(v. 1). It is to be noted, however, that according to the Hathayogapradipika 
the Kanda is higher up, between the penis and the navel.{431} The place of 
the union of Sushumma and Kanda is known as the “Knot” 
(Granthisthanam), and the petals of the Mula lotus are on four sides of this 
(v. 4). It is in this Sushumma (whatever for the moment we take it to be) that 
there are the centers of Prana Shakti which are called Chakras or Lotuses. 
The spinal cord ends blindly in the filum terminale, and is apparently closed 
there. The Sushumma is said to be closed at its base, called the “gate of 
Brahman” (Brahmadvara), until, by Yoga, Kundali makes its way through it. 
The highest of the six centers called Chakra in the Sushumma is the Ajna, a 
position which corresponds front ally with the space between the eyebrows 
(Bhrimadhye), and at the back with the pineal gland, the pituitary body, and 
the top of the cerebellum. Close by it is the Chakra called Lalana, and in 
some Tantras Kalachakra, which is situate at the root of—that is, just above 
—the palate (Talumila). Its position as well as the nature of the Ajna would 
indicate that it is slightly below the latter.{432} The Sushumma passes into 
the ventricles of the brain, as does the spinal cord, which enters the fourth 
ventricle. 


Above the Lalana are the Ajnad Chakra with its two lobes and the 
Manashchakra with its six lobes, which it has been suggested are represented 
in the physical body by the Cerebellum and Sensorium respectively. The 
Somachakra above this, with its sixteen “petals,” has been said to comprise 
the centers in the middle of the Cerebrum above the Sensorium. Lastly, the 
thousand-petalled lotus Sahasrara corresponds to the upper Cerebrum of the 
physical body, with its cortical convolutions, which will be suggested to the 
reader on an examination of the Plate VIII., here given of that center. Just as 
all powers exist in the seat of voluntary action, so it is said that all the fifty 
“letters” which are distributed throughout the spinal centers of the Sushumna 
exist here in multiplied form—that is, 50 x 20. The nectar rayed moon{433} 


is possibly the underpart of the brain, the convolutions or lobes of which, 
resembling half-moons, are called Chandrakala, and the mystic mount 
Kailasa is undoubtedly the upper brain. The ventricle connected with the 
spinal cord is also semi-lunar in shape. 


As above stated, there is no doubt that the Sushumna is situated in the spinal 
column, and it has been said that it represents the central canal. It is probable 
that its general position is that of the central canal. But a query may be raised 
if it is meant that the canal alone is the Sushumna. For the latter Nadi, 
according to this work, contains within it two others—namely, Vajrini and 
Chitrini. There is thus a threefold division. It has been suggested that the 
Sushumna when not considered with its inner Nadis as a collective unit, but 
as distinguished from them, is the white nervous matter of the spinal cord, 
Vajrini the grey matter, and Chitrini the central canal, the inner Nadi of 
which is known as the Brahmanadi, and, in the Shivasanghita, 
Brahmarandhra. {434} But as against such suggestion it is to be noted that v. 
2 of this work describes Chitrini as being as fine as a spider’s thread (liita- 
tantupameya), and the grey matter cannot be so described, but is a gross 
thing. We must therefore discard this suggestion, and hold to the opinion 
either that the central canal is the Sushumna or that the latter is in the canal, 
and that within or part of it are two still more subtle and imperceptible 
channels of energy, called Vajrini and Chitrini. I incline to the latter view. 
The true nature of the Chitrini Nadi is said in v. 3 to be pure intelligence 
(Shuddha-bodha-svabhava) as a force of Consciousness. As v. 1 says, the 
three form one, but considered separately they are distinct. They are 
threefold in the sense that Sushumna, “who is tremulous like a woman in 
passion,” is as a whole composed of “Sun,” “Moon,” and “Fire,” and the 
three Gunas. It is noteworthy in this connection that the Kshurika 
Upanishad, {435} which speaks of the Sushumna, directs the Sadhaka “to get 
into the white and very subtle Nada (? Nadi), and to drive Pranavayu through 
it.” These three, Sushumna. Vajrini, and Chitrini, and the central canal, or 
Brahmanadi, through which, in the Yoga here described. Kundalini passes, 
are all, in any case, part of the spinal cord. And, as the Shivasanghita and all 
other Yoga works say, the rest of the body is dependent on Sushumna, as 
being the chief spinal representative of the central nervous system. There 
seems also to be some ground to hold that the Nadis, Ida and Pinggala, or 


“moon” and “sun,” are the left and right Sympathetic cords respectively on 
each side of the “fiery” Sushumna. It is to be noted that, according to one 
and a common notion reproduced in this work, these Nadis, which are 
described as being pale and ruddy respectively (v. 1), do not he merely on 
one side of the cord, but cross it alternating from one side to the other (see v. 
1), thus forming with the Sushumna and the two petals of the Ajnd Chakra 
the figure of the Caduceus of Mercury, which according to some represents 
them. Elsewhere (v. 1), however, it is said that they are shaped like bows. 
That is, one is united with Sushumna and connected with the left scrotum. It 
goes up to a position near the left shoulder, bending as it passes the heart, 
crosses over to the right shoulder, and then proceeds to the right nostril. 
Similarly, the other Nadi connected with the right scrotum passes to the left 
nostril. It has been suggested to me that Ida and Pinggala are blood vessels 
representing the inferior Vena Cava and Aorta. But the works and the Yoga 
process itself indicate not arteries, but nerves. Ida and Pinggala when they 
reach the space between the eyebrows make with the Sushumna a plaited 
threefold knot called Triveni, and proceed to the nostrils. This, it has been 
said, is the spot in the medulla where the sympathetic cords join together or 
whence they take their origin. 


There remains to be considered the position of the Chakras. Though this 
work speaks of six, there are, according to some, others. This is stated by 
Vishvanatha in his Shatchakra-Vivriti. Thus we have mentioned Lalana, 
Manas, and Soma Chakras. The six here given are the principal ones. Indeed, 
a very long list exists of Chakras or Adharas, as some call them. In a modern 
Sanskrit work called “Advaitamartanda” the author{436} gives twenty, 
numbering them as follows: (1) Adhara, (2) Kuladipa, (3) Vajra or Yagna, 
(4) Svadishthana, (5) Raudra, (6) Karala, (7) Ghvara, (8) Vidyaprada, (9) 
Trimukha, (10) Tripada, (11) Kaladandaka, (12) Udara, (13) Kaladvara, (14) 
Karankaka, (15) Dipaka, (16) Anandalalita, (17) Manipiiraka, (18) Nakula, 
(19) Kalabhedana, (20) Mahotsaha. Then for no apparent reason, many 
others are given without numbers, a circumstance, as well as defective 
printing, which makes it difficult in some cases to say whether the Sanskrit 
should be read as one word or two.{437} They are apparently Parama, 
Padukam, Padam (or Padakampadam), Kalpajala, Paushaka, Lolama, 
Nadavartta, Triputa, Kangkalaka, Putabhedana, Mahagranthivikara, 


Bandhajvalana (printed as Bandhejvalana), Anahata, Yantraputa (printed 
Yatra), Vyomachakra, Bodhana, Dhruva, Kalakandalaka, 
Kraunchabherundavibhava, Damara, Kulapithaka, Kulakolahala, Halavarta, 
Mahadbhaya, Ghorabhairava, Vishuddhi, Kantham, Uttamam (quere 
Vishuddhikantham or Kanthamuttamam), Pirnakam, Ajna, Kakaputtam, 
Shringatam, Kamartipa, Pirnagiri, Mahavyoma, Shaktirtpa. But, as the 
author says, in the Vedas (that is, Yogachudamani, Yogashikha Upanishads, 
and others) we read of only six Chakras—namely, those underlined in the 
above list, and described in the works here translated—and so it is said: 
“How can there be any Siddhi for him who knows not the six Chakras, the 
sixteen Adharas, the five Ethers, and three Lakshas, in his own body?” 


I have already pointed out that the positions of the Chakras generally 
correspond to spinal centers of the anatomical divisions of the vertebre into 
five regions, and it has been stated that the Padmas or Chakras correspond 
with various plexuses which exist in the body surrounding those regions. 
Various suggestions have been here made. The Author of a recent 
work{438} identifies (commencing with the Miladhara and going upwards) 
the Chakras with the sacral, prostatic, epigastric, cardiac, laryngeal (or 
pharyngeal), and cavernous plexuses, and the Sahasrara with the Medulla. In 
passing it may be noted that the last suggestion cannot in any event be 
correct. It is apparently based on verse 120 of chapter v. of the Shiva 
Sanghita.{439} But this work does not in my opinion support the suggestion. 
Elsewhere the Author cited rightly identifies Mount Kailasa With the 
Sahasrara, which is undoubtedly the upper cerebrum. The anatomical 
position of the Medulla is below that assigned to the Ajna Chakra. Professor 
Sarkar’s work contains some valuable appendices by Dr. Brojendranath Seal 
on, amongst others, Hindu ideas concerning plant and animal life, 
physiology, and biology, including accounts of the nervous system in 
Charaka and in the Tantras.{440} After pointing out that the cerebrospinal 
axis with the connected sympathetic system contains a number of ganglionic 
centers and plexuses (Chakras, Padmas), from which nerves (Nadi, Shira, 
and Dhamani) radiate over the head, trunk, and limbs, the latter says, as 
regards the ganglionic centers and plexuses constituting the sympathetic 
spinal system: 


“Beginning with the lower extremity, the centers and plexuses of the 
connected spinal and sympathetic systems may be described as follows: 


“(1) The Adhara Chakra, the sacro-coccygeal plexus, with four branches, 
nine Angulis (about six inches and a half) below the solar plexus (Kanda, 
Brahmagranthi); the source of a massive pleasurable esthesia; voluminous 
organic sensations of repose. An inch and a half above it, and the same 
distance below the membrum virile (Mehana), is a minor center called the 
Agni-sikha. (2) The Svadhishthana Chakra, the sacral plexus, with six 
branches (Dalani—petals) concerned in the excitation of sexual feelings, 
with the accompaniments of lassitude, stupor, cruelty, suspicion, contempt. 
{441} (3) The Nabhikanda (corresponding to the solar plexus, 
Bhanubhavanam), which forms the great junction of the right and left 
sympathetic chains (Pinggala and Ida) with the cerebrospinal axis. 
Connected with this is the Maniptraka, the lumbar plexus, with connected 
sympathetic nerves, the ten branches{442} of which are concerned in the 
production of sleep and thirst, and the expressions of passions like jealousy, 
shame, fear, stupefaction. (4) The Anahata Chakra, possibly the cardiac 
plexus of the sympathetic chain, with twelve branches, connected with the 
heart, the seat of the egoistic sentiments, hope, anxiety, doubt, remorse, 
conceit, egoism, etc. (5) The Bharatisthana, {443} the junction of the spinal 
cord with the medulla oblongata, which, by means of nerves like the 
pneumogastric, etc., regulate the larynx and other organs of articulation. (6) 
The Lalana Chakra, opposite the uvula, which has twelve leaves (or lobes), 
supposed to be the tract affected in the production of ego-altruistic 
sentiments and affections, like self-regard, pride, affection, grief, regret, 
respect, reverence, contentment, etc. (7) The sensori-motor tract, comprising 
two Chakras: (a) the Ajna Chakra—lit., the circle of command (over 
movements )—with its two lobes (the cerebellum); and (b) the Manas 
Chakra, the sensorium, with its six lobes (five special sensory for 
peripherally initiated sensations, and one common sensory for centrally 
initiated sensations, as in dreams and hallucinations). The Ajna-vaha Nadis, 
efferent or motor nerves, communicate motor impulses to the periphery from 
this Ajna Chakra, this center of command over movements; and the afferent 
or sensory nerves of the special senses, in pairs, the Gandhavaha Nadi 
(olfactory sensory), the Ripavaha Nadi (optic), the Shabdavaha Nadi 


(auditory), the Rasavaha Nadi (gustatory), and the Sparshavaha Nadi 
(tactile), come from the periphery (the peripheral organs of the special 
senses) to this Manaschakra, the sensory tract at the base of the brain. The 
Manaschakra also receives the Manovaha Nadi, a generic name for the 
channels along which centrally initiated presentations (as in dreaming or 
hallucination) come to the sixth lobe of the Manaschakra. (8) The 
Somachakra, a sixteen-lobed ganglion, comprising the centers in the middle 
of the cerebrum, above the sensorium; the seat of the altruistic sentiments 
and volitional control—e.g., compassion, gentleness, patience, renunciation, 
meditativeness, gravity, earnestness, resolution, determination, magnanimity, 
etc. And lastly (9) the Sahasrara Chakra, thousand-lobed, the upper 
cerebrum with its lobes and convolutions, the special and highest seat of the 
Jiva, the soul.” {444} 


Then, dealing with the cerebro-spinal axis and the heart, and their respective 
relations to the conscious life, the Author cited says: 


“Vijnanabhikshu, in the passage just quoted, identifies the Manovaha Nadi 
(vehicle of consciousness) with the cerebro-spinal axis and its ramifications, 
and compares the figure to an inverted gourd with a thousand-branched stem 
hanging down. The Sushumna, the central passage of the spinal cord, is the 
stem of this gourd (or a single branch). The writers on the Yoga (including 
the authors of the various Tantrik systems) use the term somewhat 
differently. On this view, the Manovaha Nadi is the channel of the 
communication of the Jiva (soul) with the Manaschakra (sensorium) at the 
base of the brain. The sensory currents are brought to the sensory ganglia 
along afferent nerves of the special senses. But this is not sufficient for them 
to rise to the level of discriminative consciousness. A communication must 
now be established between the Jiva (in the Sahasrara Chakra, upper 
cerebrum) and the sensory currents received at the sensorium, and this is 
done by means of the Manovaha Nadi. When sensations are centrally 
initiated, as in dreams and hallucinations, a special Nadi (Svapnavaha Nadq1), 
which appears to be only a branch of the Manovaha Nadi, serves as the 
channel of communication from the Jiva (soul) to the sensorium. In the same 
way, the Ajnavaha Nadi brings down the messages of the Soul from the 
Sahasrara (upper cerebrum) to the Ajna Chakra (motor tract at the base of 


the brain), messages which are thence carried farther down, along efferent 
nerves, to various parts of the periphery. I may add that the special sensory 
nerves, together with the Manovaha Nadi, are sometimes generally termed 
Jnanavaha Nadi—lit., channel of presentative knowledge. There is no 
difficulty so far. The Manovaha Nadi and the Ajnavaha Nadi connect the 
sensori-motor tract at the base of the brain (Manaschakra and Ajnachakra) 
with the highest (and special) seat of the soul (Jiva) in the upper cerebrum 
(Sahasrara), the one being the channel for carrying up the sensory, and the 
other for bringing down the motor messages. But efforts of the will (Ajna, 
Prayatna) are conscious presentations, and the Manovaha Nadi must 
therefore co-operate with the Ajnavaha in producing the consciousness of 
effort. Indeed, attention, the characteristic function of Manas, by which it 
raises sense-presentations to the level of discriminative consciousness, 
implies effort (Prayatna) on the part of the soul (Atma, Jiva), an effort of 
which we are conscious through the channel of the Manovaha Nadi. But how 
to explain the presentation of effort in the motor nerves? Shangkara Mishra 
the author of the Upaskara on Kanada’s Sitras, argues that the Nadis (even 
the volitional or motor nerves) are themselves sensitive, and their affections 
are conveyed to the sensorium by means of the nerves of the (inner) sense of 
touch (which are interspersed in minute fibrilla among them). The 
consciousness of effort, then, in any motor nerve, whether Ajnavaha 
(volitional motor) or Pranavaha (automatic-motor), depends on the tactile 
nerves (or nerves, of organic sensation) mixed up with it. Thus the 
assimilation of food and drink by the automatic activity of the Pranas implies 
an (automatic) effort (Prayatna) accompanied by a vague organic 
consciousness, which is due to the fact that minute fibers of the inner touch- 
sense are interspersed with the machinery of the automatic nerves (the 
Pranavaha Nadis).” 


To a certain extent the localizations here made must be tentative. It must, for 
instance, be a matter of opinion whether the throat center corresponds with 
the carotid, laryngeal, or pharyngeal, or all three; whether the navel center 
corresponds with the epigastric, solar, or lumbar, the Ajna with the 
cavernous plexus, pineal gland, pituitary body, cerebellum, and so forth. For 
all that is known to the contrary each center may have more than one of such 
correspondences. All that can be said with any degree of certainty is that the 


four centers, above the Muladhara, which is the seat of the presiding energy, 
have relation to the genito-excretory, digestive, cardiac, and respiratory 
functions, and that the two upper centers (Ajna and Sahasrara) denote 
various forms of cerebral activity, ending in the repose of pure 
Consciousness. The uncertainty which prevails as regards some of those 
matters is indicated in the Text itself, which shows that on various of the 
subjects here debated differing opinions have been expressed as individual 
constructions of statements to be found in the Tantras and other Shastras. 


There are, however, if I read them correctly, statements in the above-cited 
accounts with which, though not uncommonly accepted, I disagree. It is said, 
for instance, that the Adhara Chakra is the sacro-coccygeal plexus, and that 
the Svadhishthana is the sacral plexus, and so forth. This work, however, not 
to mention others, makes it plain that the Chakras are in the Sushumna. 
Verse 1 speaks of the “Lotuses inside the Meru (spinal column); and as the 
Sushumna supports these (that is, the lotuses) She must needs be within the 
Meru.” This is said in answer to those who, on the strength of a passage in 
the Tantrachtidamani, erroneously suppose that Sushumna is outside the 
Meru. In the same way the Commentator refutes the error of those who, 
relying on the Nigamatattvasara, suppose that not only Sushumna, but Ida 
and Pinggala, are inside the Meru. Verse 2 says that inside Vajra (which is 
itself within Sushumna) is Chitrini, on which the lotuses are strung as it were 
gems, and who like a spider’s thread pierces all the lotuses which are within 
the backbone. The Author in the same place combats the view, based on the 
Kalpa Sutra, that the lotuses are within Chitrint. These lotuses are in the 
Sushumna; and as Chitrini is within the latter, she pierces but does not 
contain them. Some confusion is raised by the statement in v. 51, that the 
lotuses are in or on the Brahmanadi. But by this is meant appertaining to this 
Nadi, for they are in Sushumna, of which the Brahmanadi is the central 
channel. The commentator Vishvanatha, quoting from the Maya Tantra, says 
that all the six lotuses are attached to the Chitrini Nadi (Chitrini-grathitam). 
One conclusion emerges clearly from all this—namely, that the Lotuses are 
in the vertebral column in Sushumna, and not in the nerve plexuses which 
surround it. There in the spinal column they exist as extremely, subtle vital 
centers of Pranashakti and centers of consciousness. In this connection I may 
cite an extract from an article on the “Physical Errors of Hinduism,” {445} 


for which I am indebted to Professor Sarkar’s work: “It would indeed excite 
the surprise of our readers to hear that the Hindus, who would not even 
touch a dead body, much less dissect it, should possess any anatomical 
knowledge at all... . It is the Tantras that furnish us with some extraordinary 
pieces of information concerning the human body. . . . But of all the Hindu 
Shastras extant, the Tantras lie in the greatest obscurity. .. . The Tantrik 
theory, on which the well-known Yoga called ‘Shatchakrabheda’ is founded, 
supposes the existence of six main internal organs, called Chakras or 
Padmas, all bearing a special resemblance to that famous flower, the lotus. 
These are placed one above the other, and connected by three imaginary 
chains, the emblems of the Ganges, the Yamuna, and the Saraswati... . Such 
is the obstinacy with which the Hindus adhere to these erroneous notions, 
that, even when we show them by actual dissection the non-existence of the 
imaginary Chakras in the human body, they will rather have recourse to 
excuses revolting to common sense than acknowledge the evidence of their 
own eyes. They say, with a shamelessness unparalleled, that these Padmas 
exist as long as a man lives, but disappear the moment he dies.” {446} This, 
however, is nevertheless quite correct, for conscious and vital centers cannot 
exist in a body when the organism which they hold together dies. A contrary 
conclusion might indeed be described as “shameless” stupidity. {447 } 


The Author of the work from which this citation is made says that, though 
these Chakras cannot be satisfactorily identified, the Tantriks must 
nevertheless have obtained their knowledge of them by dissection. By this he 
must refer to the physical regions which correspond on the gross plane to, 
and are governed by, the Chakras proper, which as subtle, vital, and 
conscious centers in the spinal cord are invisible to any but a Yogi’s vision, 
{448} existing when the body is alive and disappearing when vitality (Prana) 
leaves the body as part of the Lingasharira. 


It is a mistake, therefore, in my opinion, to identify the Chakras with the 
physical plexuses mentioned. These latter are things of the gross body, 
whereas the Chakras are extremely subtle vital centers of various Tattvik 
operations. In a sense we can connect with these subtle centers the gross 
bodily parts visible to the eyes as plexuses and ganglia. But to connect or 
correlate and to identify are different things. Indian thought and the Sanskrit 


language, which is its expression, have a peculiarly penetrative and 
comprehensive quality which enables one to explain many ideas for which, 
except by paraphrase, there is no equivalent meaning in English. It is by the 
Shakti of the Atma that the body exists. It is the collective Prana which holds 
it together as an individual human unit, just as it supports the different 
Principles and Elements (Tattva) of which it is composed. These Tattvas, 
though they pervade the body, have yet various special centers of operation. 
These centers, as one might otherwise suppose, lie along the axis, and are the 
Siikshma Ripa, or subtle forms of that which exists in gross form (Sthila 
Rupa) in the physical body which is gathered around it. They are 
manifestations of Pranashakti. In other words, from an objective standpoint 
the subtle centers, or Chakras, vitalize and control the gross bodily tracts 
which are indicated by the various regions of the vertebral column and the 
ganglia, plexuses, nerves, arteries, and organs, situate in these respective 
regions. It is only therefore (if at all) in the sense of being the gross outer 
representatives of the spinal centers that we can connect the plexuses and so 
forth with the Chakras spoken of in the Yoga books. In this sense only the 
whole tract, which extends from the subtle center to the periphery, with its 
corresponding bodily elements, may be regarded as the Chakra. As the gross 
and subtle are thus connected, mental operation on the one will affect the 
other. Certain forces are concentrated in these Chakras, and therefore and by 
reference to their function they are regarded as separate and independent 
centers. There are thus six subtle centers in the cord with grosser 
embodiments within the cord itself, with still grosser sheaths in the region 
pervaded by the sympathetics Ida and Pinggala, and other Nadis. Out of all 
this and the gross compounded elements of the body are fashioned the 
organs of life, the vital heart of which is the subtle Chakra by which they are 
vivified and controlled. The spiritual aspects of the six centers according to 
Tantrik doctrine must not be overlooked whilst attention is paid to the gross 
or physiological aspect of the body. As previously and in the Commentary to 
the thirty-fifth verse of the Anandalahari explained, there are six Devas— 
viz., Shambhu, Sadashiva, Ishvara, Vishnu, Rudra, Brahma—whose abodes 
are the six Lokas or regions: viz., Maharloka, Tapoloka, Janaloka, Svarloka, 
Bhuvoloka, and Bhirloka (the Earth). It is these Divinities who are the forms 
of consciousness presiding over the Shatchakra. In other words, 
Consciousness-feeling (Chit), as the ultimate experiencing principle, 


pervades and is at base all being. Every cell of the body has a consciousness 
of its own. The various organic parts of the body which the cells build have 
not only particular cell-consciousness, but the consciousness of the particular 
organic part which is other than the mere collectivity of the consciousness of 
its units. Thus there may be an abdominal consciousness. And the 
consciousness of such bodily region is its Devata—that is, that aspect of Chit 
which is associated with and informs that region. Lastly, the organism as a 
whole has its consciousness, which is the individual Jiva. Then there is the 
subtle form or body of these Devatas, in the shape of Mind—supersensible 
“matter” (Tanmatra); and sensible “matter”—namely, ether, air, fire, water, 
earth, with their centers at the Ajna, Vishuddha, Anahata, Manipira, 
Svadhishthana, and Muladhara. Of these six Tattvas, not only the gross 
human body, but the vast macrocosm, is composed. The six Chakras are 
therefore the divine subtle centers of the corresponding physical sheath. The 
seventh or supreme center is Paramashiva, whose abode is Satyaloka, the 
Cosmic aspect of the Sahasrara in the human body. The Supreme, therefore, 
descends through its manifestations from the subtle to the gross as the six 
Devas and Shaktis in their six abodes in the world-axis, and as the six 
centers in the body-axis or spinal column. The special operation of each of 
the Tattvas is located at its individual center in the microcosm. But, 
notwithstanding all such subtle and gross transformations of and by Kula- 
Kundalini, She ever remains in Her Brahman or Svarupa aspect the One, Sat, 
Chit, and Ananda, as is realized by the Yogi when drawing the Devi from 
Her world-abode in the earth center (Muladhara) he unites Her with 
Paramashiva in the Sahasrara in that blissful union which is the Supreme 
Love (Ananda). 


In a similar manner other statements as regards these Chakras should be 
dealt with, as, for instance, those connected with the existence of the 
“Petals,” the number of which in each case has been said to be determined 
by characteristics of the gross region which the particular Chakra governs. 
The centers are said to be composed of petals designated by certain letters. 
Professor Sarkar{449} expresses the opinion that these petals point to either 
the nerves which go to form a ganglion or plexus, or the nerves distributed 
from such ganglion or plexus. I have been told that the disposition of the 
Nadis at the particular Chakra in question determines the number of its 


petals.{450} In the five lower Chakras their characteristics are displayed in 
the number and position of the Nadis or by the lobes and sensory and motor 
tracts of the higher portions of the cerebro-spinal system. As I have already 
explained, the Chakra is not to be identified with the physical ganglia and 
plexuses, though it is connected with, and in a gross sense represented by, 
them. The lotuses with these petals are within the Sushumna, and they are 
there represented as blooming upon the passage through them of Kundali. 
The letters are on the petals. 


The letters in the six Chakras are fifty in number—namely, the letters of the 
Sanskrit alphabet less Ksha, according to the Kangkalamalini Tantra cited in 
v. 40, or the second La (ib.). All these letters multiplied by 20 exist 
potentially in the Sahasrara, where they therefore number 1,000, giving that 
Lotus its name. There are, on the other hand, 72,000 Nadis which rise from 
the Kanda. Further, that these letters in the Chakras are not gross things is 
shown by wv. 28 and 29, which say that the vowels of the Vishuddha are 
visible to the enlightened mind (Dipta-buddhi) only—that is, the Buddhi 
which is free of impurity resulting from worldly pursuits, as the effect of the 
constant practice of Yoga. Verse 19 and other verses speak of the letters 
there mentioned as being colored. Each object of perception, whether gross 
or subtle, has an aspect which corresponds to each of the senses. It is for this 
reason that the Tantra correlates sound, form, and color. Sound produces 
form, and form is associated with color. Kundali is a form of the Supreme 
Shakti who maintains all breathing creatures. She is the source from which 
all sound or energy, whether as ideas or speech, manifests. That sound 
Matrika when uttered in human speech assumes the form of letters and prose 
and verse, which is made of their combinations. And sound (Shabda) has its 
meaning—that is, the objects denoted by the ideas which are expressed by 
sound or words. By the impulse of Ichchha Shakti acting through the 
Pranavayu (vital force) of the Atma is produced in the Miladhara the sound 
power called Para, which in its ascending movement through other Chakras 
takes on other characteristics and names (Pashyanti and Madhyama), and 
when uttered by the mouth appears as Vaikhari in the form of the spoken 
letters which are the gross aspect of the sound in the Chakras themselves 
(see vv. 10 and 11). Letters when spoken are, then, the manifested aspect in 
gross speech of the subtle energy of the Shabdabrahman as Kundali. The 


same energy which produces these letters manifesting as Mantras produces 
the gross universe. In the Chakras is subtle Shabda in its states as Para, 
Pashyanti, or Madhyama Shakti, which when translated to the vocal organ 
assumes the audible sound form (Dhvani) which is any particular letter. 
Particular forms of energy of Kundali are said to be resident at particular 
Chakras, all such energies existing in magnified form in the Sahasrara. Each 
manifested letter is a Mantra, and a Mantra is the body of a Devata. There 
are therefore as many Devatas in a Chakra as there are petals which are 
surrounding (Avarana) Devatas or Shaktis of the Devata of the Chakra and 
the subtle element of which He is the presiding Consciousness. Thus, 
Brahma is the presiding Consciousness of the Miladhara lotus, indicated by 
the Bindu of the Bija La (Lang), which is the body of the earth Devata; and 
around and associated with these are the subtle forms of the Mantras, which 
constitute the petals and the bodies of associated energies. The whole human 
body is in fact a Mantra, and is composed of Mantras. 


These sound powers vitalize, regulate, and control, the corresponding gross 
manifestations in the regions surrounding them. Why, however, particular 
letters are assigned to particular Chakras is the next question. Why, for 
instance, should Ha be in the Ajna and Sa in the Maladhara? It is true that in 
some places in the Tantras certain letters are assigned to particular elements. 
Thus, there are certain letters which are called Vayava Varna, or letters 
pertaining to the Vayu Tattva; but an examination of the case on this basis 
fails to account for the position of the letters, as letters which are assigned to 
one element may be found in a Chakra the predominant Tattva of which is 
some other element. It has been said that in the utterance of particular letters 
the centers at which they are situated are brought into play, and that this is 
the solution of the question why those particular letters were at their 
particular center. A probable solution is that given by me in my “Shakti and 
Shakta.” Apart from this one can only say that, it is either Svabhava or the 
nature of the thing, which in that case is as little susceptible of ultimate 
explanation as the disposition in the body of the gross organs themselves; or 
the arrangement may be an artificial one for the purpose of meditation, in 
which case no further explanation is necessary. 


The four Bhavas, or states of sound, in the human body are so called as 
being states in which sound or movement is produced or becomes, evolving 
from Para Shakti in the body of Ishvara to the gross Vaikhari Shakti in the 
body of Jiva. As already stated, in the bodily aspect (Adhyatma) the Karana 
Bindu resides in the Muladhara center, and is there known as the Shakti 
Pinda{451} or Kundalini. {452} Kundali is a name for Shabdabrahman in 
human bodies. The Acharyya, speaking of Kundalini, says: “There is a 
Shakti called Kundalini who is ever engaged in the work of creating the 
universe. He who has known Her never again enters the mother’s womb as a 
child or suffers old age.” That is, he no longer enters the Sangsara or world 
of transmigration.{453} This Karana Bindu exists in a non-differentiated 
condition. {454} 


The body of Kundali is composed of the fifty letters or sound-powers. Just as 
there is an apparent evolution{455} in the cosmic body of Ishvara, 
represented in the seven states preceding from Sakala Parameshvara to 
Bindu, so there is a similar development in the human body in Kundali, who 
is the Ishvari therein. There are evolved by this form the following states, 
corresponding with the cosmic development—viz., Shakti, Dhvani, Nada, 
Nirodhika, Ardhendu, Bindu. These are all states of Kundali Herself in the 
Miuladhara, and are known as Para sound. Each one of the letters composing 
the body of Kundali exists in four states as Para Shakti, or in the succeeding 
states of sound, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari, to which reference is 
later made. The first is a state of undifferentiated sound, which exists in the 
body of Ishvara; the second and third as existing in the body of Jiva are 
Stages towards that complete manifestation of differentiated sound in human 
speech which is called Vaikharl Bhava. In the cosmic aspect these four states 
are Avyakta, Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha, and Virat. The Arthasrishti (object 
creation) of Kundalini are the Kalas, which arise from the letters such as the 
Rudra and Vishnu Mirtis and their Shaktis, the Kamas and Ganeshas and 
their Shaktis, and the like. In the Sakala Parameshvara or Shabdabrahman in 
bodies—that is, Kundalini Shakti—the latter is called Chit Shakti or Shakti 
simply, “when Sattva enters”—a state known as the Paramakashavastha. 
When She into whom Sattva has entered is next “pierced” by Rajas, She is 
called Dhvani, which is the Aksharavastha. When She is again “pierced” by 
Tamas, she is called Nada. This is the Avyaktavastha, the Avyakta Nada 


which is the Parabindu. Again, She in whom Tamas abounds is, as Raghava 
Bhatta says, called Nirodhika; She in whom Sattva abounds is called 
Arddhendu; and the combination of the two (Ichchha and Jnana) in which 
Rajas as Kriya Shakti works is called Bindu. Thus it has been said: “Drawn 
by the force of Ichchha Shakti (will), illumined by Jnana Shakti 
(knowledge), Shakti the Lord appearing as male creates (Kriya Shakti, or 
action).” 


When the Karana Bindu “sprouts” in order to create the three (Bindu, Nada, 
and Bija) there arises that unmanifested Brahman-word or Sound called the 
Shabdabrahman (Sound Brahman).{456} It is said: “From the differentiation 
of the Karana Bindu arises the unmanifested “Sound” which is called 
Shabdabrahman by those learned in Shruti.” {457} It is this Shabdabrahman 
which is the immediate cause of the universe, which is sound and movement 
manifesting as idea and language. This sound, which is one with the Karana 
Bindu, and is therefore all-pervading, yet first appears in man’s body in the 
Muladhara. “It is said in the Muiladhara in the body the ‘air’ (Pranavayu) 
first appears. That ‘air’ acted upon by the effort of a person desiring to 
speak, manifests the all-pervading Shabdabrahman.” {458} The 
Shabdabrahman which’ is in the form of the Karana Bindu when it remains 
motionless (Nihspanda) in its own place (that is, in Kundali, who is Herself 
in the Muladhara) is called Para Shakti or speech. The same Shabdabrahman 
manifested by the same air proceeding as far as the navel, united with the 
Manas, possessing the nature of the manifested Karyya Bindu with general 
(Samanyaspanda) motion, is named Pashyanti speech.{459} Pashyanti, 
which is described as Jnanatmaka and Bindvatmaka (in the nature of Chit 
and Bindu), extends from the Miladhara to the navel, or, according to some 
accounts, the Svadishthana. 


Next, the Shabdabrahman manifested by the same air proceeding as far as 
the heart, united with the Buddhi, possessing the nature of the manifested 
Nada and endowed with special (Visheshaspanda) motion, is called 
Madhyama speech. {460} This is Hiranyagarbha sound, extending from the 
region of Pashyanti to the heart. Next, {461} the same Shabdabrahman 
manifested by the same air proceeding as far as the mouth, developed in the 
throat, etc., articulated and capable of being heard by the ears of others, 


possessing the nature of the manifested Bija with quite distinct articulate 
motion (Spashtatara), is called Vaikhari speech. {462} This is the Virat state 
of sound, so called because it “comes out.” 


This matter is thus explained by the Acharyya: “That sound which first 
arises in the Muladhara is called Para; next Pashyanti; next, when it goes as 
far as the heart and is joined to the Buddhi, it is called ‘Madhyama.’” This 
name is derived from the fact that She abides “in the midst.” She is neither 
like Pashyanti nor does She proceed outward like Vaikhari, with articulation 
fully developed. But She is in the middle between these two. 


The full manifestation is Vaikhari of the man wishing to cry out. In this way 
articulated sound is produced by air.{463} The Nitya Tantra also says: “The 
Para form rises in the Miladhara produced by ‘air’; the same ‘air’ rising 
upwards, manifested in the Svadishthana, attains the Pashyanti{464} state. 
The same slowly rising upwards, and manifested in the Anahata united with 
the understanding (Buddhi), is Madhyama. Again rising upwards, and 
appearing in the Vishuddha, it issues from the throat as Vaikhari.” {465} As 
the Yoga Kundali Upanishad{466} says: “That Vak (power of speech) which 
sprouts in Para gives forth leaves in Pashyanti, buds forth in Madhyama, and 
blossoms in Vaikhari. By reversing the above order sound is absorbed. 
Whosoever realizes the great Lord of Vak the undifferentiated illuminating 
Self is unaffected by any word, be it what it may.” 


Thus, though there are four kinds of speech, gross-minded men (Manushyah 
sthiladrishah){467} who do not understand the first three (Para, etc.) think 
speech to be Vaikhari alone,{468} just as they take the gross body to be the 
Self, in ignorance of its subtler principles. Shruti says: “Hence men think 
that alone to be speech which is imperfect”—that is, imperfect in so far as it 
does not possess the first three forms.{469} Another Shruti also says:{470} 
“Four are the grades of speech—those Brahmanas who are wise know them: 
three are hidden and motionless; men speak the fourth.” The Sita Sanghita 
also says: “Apada (the motionless Brahman) becomes Pada (the four forms 
of speech), and Pada may become Apada. He who knows the distinction 
between Pada{471} and Apada, he really sees (i.e., himself becomes 
Brahman).” {472} 


Thus, the conclusions of Shruti and Smriti are that the “That” (Tat) in the 
human body has four divisions (Para, etc.). But even in the Para form the 
word Tat only denotes the Avyakta with three Gunas, the cause of Para, and 
not the unconditioned Brahman who is above Avyakta. The word “Tat” 
which occurs in the transcendental sayings means the Shabdabrahman, or 
Ishvara endowed with the work of creation, maintenance, and “destruction,” 
of the Universe. The same word also indicates indirectly (Lakshana) the 
unconditioned or supreme Brahman who is without attributes. The relation 
between the two Brahmans is that of sameness (Tadatmya). Thus, the Devi 
or Shakti is the one essence of consciousness (Chidekarasartipini)—that is, 
She is ever inseparate from Chit. The relation of the two Brahmans is 
possible, as the two are one and the same. Though they appear as different 
(by attributes), yet at the same time they are one. 


The commentator cited then asks, How can the word Tat in the Vaikhari 
form indicate Brahman? and replies that it only does so indirectly. For sound 
in the physical form of speech (Vaikhar1) only expresses or is identified with 
the physical form of Brahman (the Virat), and not the pure Supreme 
Brahman. 


The following will serve as a summary of correspondences noted in this and 
the previous Chapter. There is first the Nirguna Brahman, which in its 
creative aspect is Saguna Shabda Brahman, and assumes the form of 
Parabindu, and then of the threefold (Tribindu); the four who are represented 
in the sense above stated by the four forms of speech, sound or state 
(Bhava). 


The causal (Karana) or Supreme Bindu (Parabindu) is unmanifest (Avyakta), 
undifferentiated Shiva-Shakti, whose powers are not yet displayed, but are 
about to be displayed from out the then undifferentiated state of 
Milaprakriti. This is the state of Supreme Speech (Paravak), the Supreme 
Word or Logos, the seat of which in the individual body is the Muladhara 
Chakra. So much is clear. There is, however, some difficulty in coordinating 
the accounts of the threefold powers manifesting upon the differentiation of 
the Great Bindu (Mahabindu). This is due in part to the fact that the verses in 
which the accounts appear are not always to be read in the order of the 


words (Pratishabdam), but according to the actual order in fact, whatever 
that may be (Yatha sambhavam).{473} Nextly, there is some apparent 
variance in the commentaries. Apart from names and technical details, the 
gist of the matter is simple and in accordance with other systems. There is 
first the unmanifested point (Bindu), as to which symbol St. Clement of 
Alexandria says{474} that if from a body abstraction be made of its 
properties, depth, breadth, and length, that which remains is a point having 
position, from which, if abstraction be made of position,{475} there is the 
state of primordial unity. There is one Spirit, which appears threefold as a 
Trinity of Manifested Power (Shakti). As so manifesting, the one (Shiva- 
shakti) becomes twofold, Shiva and Shakti, and the relation (Nada) of these 
two (Tayormithasamavaya) makes the threefold Trinity common to so many 
religions. The One first moves as the Great Will (Ichchha), then as the 
Knowledge or Wisdom (Jnana) according to which Will acts, and then as 
action (Kriya). This is the order of Shaktis in Ishvara. So, according to the 
Pauranik account, at the commencement of creation Brahma wakes. The 
Sangskaras then arise in His mind. There arises the desire to create (Ichchha 
Shakti); then the knowledge (Jnana Shakti) of what He is about to create; 
and, lastly, the action (Kriya) of creation. In the case of Jiva the order is 
Jnana, Ichchha, Kriya. For He first considers or knows something. Informed 
by such knowledge, He wills and then acts. The three powers are, though 
counted and spoken of as arising separately, inseparable and indivisible 
aspects of the One. Wherever there is one there is the other, though men 
think of each separately and as coming into being—that is, manifested in 
time—separately. 


According to one nomenclature the Supreme Bindu becomes threefold as 
Bindu (Karyya), Bija, Nada. Though Shiva is never separate from Shakti, 
nor Shakti from Shiva, a manifestation may predominantly signify one or 
another. So it is said that Bindu is in the nature of Shiva (Shivatmaka) and 
Bija of Shakti (Shaktyatmaka), and Nada is the combination of the two 
(Tayormithahsamavayah). These are also called Mahabindu (Parabindu), 
Sitabindu (White Bindu), Shonabindu (Red Bindu), and Mishrabindu (Mixed 
Bindu). These are supreme (Para), subtle (Sikshma), gross (Sthila). There is 
another nomenclature—viz., Sun, Fire, and Moon. There is no question but 
that Bija is Moon, that from Bija issues the Shakti Vama, from whom comes 


Brahma, who are in the nature of the Moon and Will-Power (Ichchha 
Shakti).{476} Ichchha Shakti in terms of the Gunas of Prakriti is Rajas 
Guna, which impels Sattva to self-display. This is Pashyanti Shabda, the seat 
of which is in the Svadishthana Chakra. From Nada similarly issue Jyeshtha 
Shakti and Vishnu, and from Bindu Raudri and Rudra, which are Madhyama 
and Vaikhari Shabda, the seats of which are the Anahata and Vishuddha 
Chakras respectively. According to one account{477} Bindu is “Fire” and 
Kriya Shakti (action), and Nada is “Sun” and Jnana Shakti, which in terms 
of the Gunas are Tamas and Sattva respectively. {478} Raghavabhatta, 
however, in his Commentary on the Sharada, says that the Sun is Kriya 
because, like that luminary, it makes all things visible, and Jnana is Fire 
because knowledge burns up all creation. When Jiva through Jnana knows 
itself to be Brahman it ceases to act, so as to accumulate Karma, and attains 
liberation (Moksha). It may be that this refers to the Jiva, as the former 
represents the creation of Ishvara. 


In the Yoginthridaya Tantra it is said that Vama and Ichchha Shakti are in the 
Pashyanti body; Jnana and Jyestha are called Madhyama; Kriya Shakti is 
Raudri; and Vaikhari is in the form of the universe. {479} The evolution of 
the Bhavas is given in the Sharada Tilaka{480} as follows: the all-pervading 
Shabdabrahman or Kundali emanates Shakti, and then follow Dhvani, Nada, 
Nirodhika, Arddhendu, Bindu. Shakti is Chit with Sattva 
(Paramakashavastha); Dhvani is Chit with Sattva and Rajas (Aksharavastha); 
Nada is Chit with Sattva, Rajas, Tamas (Avyaktavastha); Nirodhika is the 
same with abundance of Tamas (Tamah prachuryat); Arddhendu the same 
with abundance of Sattva; and Bindu the combination of the two. This Bindu 
is called by the different names of Para and the rest, according as it is in the 
different centers, Muladhara and the rest. In this way Kundali, who is 
Ichchha, Jnana, Kriya, who is both in the form of consciousness (Tejortipa) 
and composed of the Gunas (Gunatmika), creates the Garland of Letters 
(Varnamala). 


The four Bhavas have been dealt with as coming under Nada, itself one of 
the following nine manifestations of Devi. 


Pandit Ananta Shastri, referring to Lakshmidhara’s commentary on v. 34 of 
Anandalahari, says:{481 } 


““Bhagavati is the word used in the text to denote Devi. One that possesses 
Bhaga is called a Bhagavati (feminine). Bhaga signifies the knowledge of (1) 
the creation, (2) destruction of the universe, (3) the origin of beings, (4) the 
end of beings, (5) real knowledge or divine truth, and (6) Avidya, or 
ignorance. He that knows all these six items is qualified for the title 
Bhagavan. Again, Bha = 9. “Bhagavati” refers to the nine-angled Yantra 
(figure) which is used in the Chandrakalavidya.’ 


“According to the Agamas, Devi has nine manifestations, which are: 


“1, Kala group—lasting from the twinkling of an eye to the Pralaya time. 
The sun and moon are included in this group. TIME. 


“2. Kula group—consists of things which have form and color. FORM. 
“3. Nama group—consists of things which have names. NAME. 


“4, Jnana group—Intelligence. It is divided into two branches: Savikalpa 
(mixed and subject to change) and Nirvikalpa (pure and unchanging). CHIT. 


“5. Chitta group—consists of (1) Ahangkara (egoism), (2) Chitta, (3) 
Buddhi, (4) Manas, and (5) Unmanas. MIND. 


“6. Nada group—consists of (1) Raga (desire), {482} (2) Ichchha (desire4®? 
strengthened, or developed desire), (3) Kriti (action, or active form of 
desire), and (4) Prayatna (attempt made to achieve the object desired). These 
correspond, in order, to (1) Para (the first stage of sound, emanating from 
Muladhara), (2) Pashyanti (the second stage), (3) Madhyama (the third 
stage), and (4) Vaikhari (the fourth stage of sound as coming out of the 
mouth). SOUND. 


“7, Bindu group—consists of the six Chakras from Miladhara to Ajna. 
PSYCHIC ESSENCE, THE SPIRITUAL GERM. {483} 


“8, Kala group—consists of fifty letters from Muiladhara to Ajna. 
KEYNOTES. {484} 


“9, Jiva group—consists of souls in the bondage of matter. 


“The Presiding Deities or Tattvas of the four constituent parts of Nada are 
Maya, Shuddhavidya, Mahesha, and Sadashiva. The Commentator deals 
with this subject fully, quoting extracts from occult works. The following is 
a translation of a few lines from Namakalavidya, {485} a work on phonetics, 
which will be of interest to the reader: 


“*Para is Eka (without duality); its opposite is the next one (Pashyanti); 
Madhyama is divided into two, gross and subtle forms: the gross form 
consists of the nine groups of letters; and the subtle form is the sound which 
differentiates the nine letters. . . . One is the cause, and the other the effect; 
and so there is no material difference between the sound and its gross 
forms.’ 


“Com. ‘Eka’: When the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, are in a state 
of equilibrium (Samya), that state is called Para. Pashyanti is the state when 
the three Gunas become unequal (and consequently produce sound). The 
next stage is called Madhyama; the subtle form of this is called 
Sukshmamadhyama, and the second and gross form is called 
Sthiilamadhyama, which produces nine distinct forms of sound represented 
by nine groups of letters: viz., (and all the other vowels), (Kavarga, 5 in 
number), (Chavarga, 5), (Tavarga, 5), (Tavarga, 5), (Pavarga, 5), (Ya, Ra, La 
and Va), (Sha, Sa and Ha), and (Ksha). These letters do not in reality exist, 
but represent only the ideas of men. Thus all the forms and letters originate 
from Para, and Para is nothing but Chaitanya (Consciousness). 


“The nine groups or Vythas (manifestations of Devi) above enumerated are, 
again, classed under the following three heads: (1) Bhokta (enjoyer)— 
comprises No. 9, Jiva-vyiiha. (2) Bhogya (objects of enjoyment)— 
Comprises groups Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8. (3) Bhoga (enjoyment)— 
comprises No. 4, Jnanavytha. 


“The above is the substance of the philosophy of the Kaulas as expounded 
by Shri Shankaracharya in this shloka of Ananda Lahart (No. 34). In 
commenting on this, Lakshmidhara quotes several verses from the Kaula 
Agamas, of which the following is one: 


“‘The blissful Lord is of nine forms. This God is called Bhairava. It is he 
that confers enjoyment (bliss) and liberates the souls (from bondage). His 
consort is Anandabhairavi, the ever-blissful, the Chaitanya. When these two 
become equal (unite in harmony), the universe comes into existence.’ 


“The Commentator remarks here that the power of Devi predominates in 
creation, and that of Shiva in destruction.” 


VI. PRACTICE (YOGA: LAYA-KRAMA) 


Yoga is sometimes understood as meaning the result and not the process 
which leads to it. According to this meaning of the term, and from the 
standpoint of natural dualism, Yoga has been described to be the union of 
the individual spirit with God. 


But if Jiva and Paramatma are really one, there can be no such thing as 
union, which term is strictly applicable to the case of the coming together of 
two distinct beings. Samadhi (ecstasy) consists in the realization that the 
Jivatma is Paramatma; and Yoga means, not this realization, but the means 
by which it is attained. Yoga is thus a term for those physical and psychical 
processes which are used to discover man’s inner essence, which is the 
Supreme. 


It is thus not a result, but the process, method, or practice, by which this 
result is attained. This result is possible, according to Advaita Vedanta, 
because Chit, as the true being of every Jiva, is not really fettered, but only 
appears to be so. Were Atma not truly free, liberation (Moksha) would not 
be possible. Moksha therefore is potentially in the possession of every Jiva. 
His identity with Paramatma exists now as then, but is not realized owing to 
the veil of Maya, through which Jivatma and Paramatma appear as separate. 
As ignorance of the identity of the Jivatma and Paramatma is due to Avidya, 
the realization of such identity is attained by Vidya or Jnana. 


The latter alone can immediately produce liberation (Sadyomukti). Jnana is 
used in a twofold sense—namely, Svariipa Jnana and Kriya Jnana. The first 
is Pure Consciousness, which is the end and aim of Yoga; the second is 
those intellective processes which are the means taken to acquire the first. 
Jnana considered as means or mental action (Manasi Kriya) is an 
intellective process that is the discrimination between what is and what is 
not Brahman; the right understanding of what is meant by Brahman, and the 
fixing of the mind on what is thus understood until the Brahman wholly and 
permanently occupies the mind to the displacement of all else. Mind is then 


absorbed into Brahman or Consciousness, which alone remains; this is 
realization or the attainment of the state of pure consciousness, which is 
Jnana in its true (Svariipa) sense. Liberating Yoga short of perfect Jnana 
effects what is called Kramamukti—that is, the Yogi attains Sayujya with 
Brahman in Satya-loka, which is thence perfected into complete Mukti 
through the Devata with whom he is thus united. What the Siddha 
(complete) Jnanayogi or Jivanmukta himself accomplishes in this life is 
thereafter attained as the sequel to Brahmasayujya. But man is not only 
intellect. He has feeling and devotion. He is not only these, but has a body. 
Other processes (Yogas) are therefore associated with and in aid of it, such 
as those belonging to worship (Upasana) and the gross (Sthila Kriya) and 
subtle processes (Sukshma Kriya) of Hathayoga. 


Mind and body are the instruments whereby the ordinary separative worldly 
experience is had. As long, however, as they are so used they, are 
impediments in the way of attainment of the state of pure consciousness 
(Chit). For such attainment all screenings (Avarana) of Chit must be cleared 
away. Yoga therefore is the method whereby mental intellection and feeling 
(Chittavritti) and Prana are first controlled and then stayed.{486} When the 
Chitta, Vritti, and Prana, are stilled, then Chit or Paramatma stands 
revealed. It supervenes without further effort on the absorption of matter 
and mind into the primordial Power (Shakti) whence they sprang, of whom 
they are manifested forms, and who is Herself as Shiva one with Him who 
is Shiva or Consciousness. Yoga thus works towards a positive state of pure 
consciousness by the negation of the operation of the principle of 
unconsciousness which stands in the way of its uprising. This pruning 
action is well illustrated by the names of a Shakti which in this work is 
variously described as Nibodika and Nirodhika. The first means the Giver 
of Knowledge, and the second That which obstructs—that is, obstructs the 
affectation of the mind by the objective world through the senses. It is by 
the prohibition of such impressions that the state of pure consciousness 
arises. The arising of such state is called Samadhi—that is, the ecstatic 
condition in which the “equality” that is identity of Jivatma and Paramatma 
is realized. This experience is achieved after the absorption (Laya) of Prana 
and Manas and the cessation of all ideation (Sangkalpa). An unmodified 
state (Samarasatvam) is thus produced which is the natural state 


(Sahajavastha) of the Atma. Until then there is that fluctuation and 
modification (Vritti) which is the mark of the conditioned consciousness, 
with its self-diremption of “I” and “Thou.” The state of Samadhi is “like 
that of a grain of salt, which mingled in water becomes one with it.” {487 } 
It is, in the words of the Kularnava Tantra, “that form of contemplation 
(Dhyana) in which there is neither ‘here’ nor ‘not here,’ in which there is 
illumination and stillness as of some great ocean, and which is the Void 
Itself.” {488 } 


The all-knowing and venerable Teacher has said, “One who has attained 
complete knowledge of the Atma reposes like the still waters of the deep” 
(v. 31). The Maya Tantra defines Yoga as the unity of Jiva and Paramatma 
(v. 51); that by which oneness is attained with the Supreme (Paramatma), 
and Samadhi, or ecstasy, is this unity of Jiva and Atma (ib.).{489} Others 
define it as the knowledge of the identity of Shiva and Atma. The 
Agamavadis proclaim that the knowledge of Shakti (Jnanashaktyatmaka) is 
Yoga. Other wise men say that the knowledge of the “Ancient of Days” (the 
Purana Purusha) is Yoga, and others, again, the Prakritivadis, declare that 
the knowledge of the union of Shiva and Shakti is Yoga (ib.). All such 
definitions refer to one and the same thing—the realization by the human 
spirit that it is the Great Spirit, the Brahman, who as the Ruler of the worlds 
is known as God. As the Hathayogapradipika says:{490} “Rajayoga, 
Samadhi, Unmani,{491} Manonmani,‘®! Amaratvam (Immortality), 
Shinyashtnya (void yet non-void),{492} Paramapada{493} (the Supreme 
State), Amanaska (without Manas—suspended operation of mental 
functioning), {494} Advaita (non-dual), Niralamba (without support—i.e., 
detachment of the Manas from the external world),{495} Niranjana 
(stainless),{496} Jivanmukti (liberation in the body), Sahajavastha (natural 
state of the Atma), and Turiya (Fourth State), all mean one and the same 
thing—that is, the cessation of both mental functioning (Chitta) and action 
(Karma), on which there arises freedom from joy and sorrow and a 
changeless (Nirvikara) state. This on the dissolution of the body is followed 
by bodiless (Videhakaivalya) or supreme liberation (Paramamukti), which 
is the permanent existence of the real state (Svaripavasthanam). Whilst the 
aim and the end of all Yoga is the same, the methods by which it is attained 
vary. 


There are, it is commonly said, four forms of Yoga, called Mantrayoga, 
Hathayoga, Layayoga, and Rajayoga.{497} In this classification Hathayoga 
is used as a description of the processes passing under that title other than 
the Laya or Kundali Yoga. But in a more general sense Hathayoga includes 
the latter. The distinction, however, is not without value, because 
Hathayoga in its more limited sense includes some of such practices as are 
used as auxiliaries in other Yogas. He who is expert in Kundali Layayoga 
needs no other. These are all various modes of practice (Sadhana) whereby 
the feelings and intellectual activities of the mind (Chittavritti) are brought 
into control and the Brahman is in various ways realized 
(Brahmasakshatkara). Each of these forms has the same eight subservients, 
which are called the “eight limbs” (Ashtangga). Each of these has the same 
aim—namely, spiritual experience or realization of Brahman; they differ, 
however, as to the means employed and, it is said, in degree of result. The 
Samadhi of the first has been described as Mahabhava, of the second as 
Mahabodha, of the third as Mahalaya, and by Rajayoga and Jnanayoga, it is 
said, the liberation called Kaivalyamukti is obtained. 


It is to be noted, however, that in the estimation of the practitioners of 
Kundali Yoga it is the highest Yoga in which a perfect Samadhi is gained by 
the union with Shiva of both mind and body, as hereafter described. In Raja 
and Jnana Yoga intellective processes are the predominant where they are 
not the sole means employed. In Mantra Yoga worship and devotion 
predominate. In Hathayoga there is more stress on physical methods, such 
as breathing. Each, however, of these Yogas employs some methods of the 
others. Thus, in Hatha Layayoga there is Kriyajnana. But whereas the Jnana 
Yogi attains Svariipa Jnana by his mental efforts without rousing Kundali, 
the Hathayog! gets this Jnana through Kundalini Herself. For Her union 
with Shiva in the Sahasrara brings, and in fact is, Svartipa Jnana. 


It will be convenient, therefore, to deal with the general subservients 
(Ashtangga) which are common to all forms of Yoga, and then follow with 
an account of Mantra and the lower Hatha Yogas as a preliminary to that 
form of Layayoga which is the subject of this work, and includes within 
itself elements to be found both in Mantra and such Hathayogas. 


The prerequisites of all Yoga are the eight limbs or parts, Yama, Niyama, 
and others. Morality, religious disposition and practice, and discipline 
(Sadhana), are essential prerequisites of all Yoga which has as its aim the 
attainment of the Supreme Experience. {498} Morality (Dharma) is the 
expression of the true nature of being. The word Dharma, which includes 
both ethic and religion, but has also a wider context, comes from the root 
dhri, to sustain, and is therefore both the sustainer and the act of sustaining. 
The Universe is sustained (Dharyate) by Dharma, and the Lord who is its 
Supreme Sustainer is embodied in the eternal law and is the Bliss which its 
fulfillment secures. Dharma is thus the law governing the universal 
involution, or the path of outgoing (Pravritti), and evolution, or the path of 
return (Nivritti).{499} And only those can attain the liberation to which the 
latter path leads who by adherence to Dharma co-operate in the carrying out 
of the universal scheme. For this reason it is finely said, “Doing good to 
others is the Supreme Duty” (Paropakaro hi paramo dharmah). 


In this scheme the Jiva passes from Shabdavidya, with its Tapas involving 
egoism and fruit attained through the “Path of the Gods,” its Karma (rites), 
which are either Sakama (with desire for fruit) or Nishkama (disinterested), 
to Brahmavidya (knowledge of the Brahman) or Theosophy as taught by the 
Upanishads. This transition is made through Nishkama Karma. By Sakama 
Karma is attained the “Path of the Fathers” (Pitri), Dharma, Artha (wealth), 
Kama (desire and its fulfillment). But Nishkama Karma produces that 
purity of mind (Chittashuddhi) which makes man competent for 
Brahmavidya, or Theosophy, which leads to, and in its completest sense is, 
liberation (Moksha). 


It is obvious that before the pure blissful state of the Atma can be attained 
the Jiva must first live that ordered life which is its proper expression on 
this plane. 


To use theological language, only those who follow Dharma can go to its 
Lord. The disorder of an immoral life is not a foundation on which such a 
Yoga can be based. I do not use the term immorality in the absurdly limited 
meaning which ordinary English parlance gives it, but as the infringement 
of all forms of moral law. All such infringements are founded on 


selfishness. As the object of Yoga is the destruction of the limited self even 
in its more ordered manifestation, its doctrines clearly presuppose the 
absence of a state disordered by the selfishness which is the grossest 
obstacle to its attainment. The aim of Yoga is the achievement of complete 
detachment from the world. In a life governed by Dharma, there is that 
natural attachment to worldly objects and sense of separateness even in acts 
of merit which must exist until by the destruction of Manas the Unmani 
State is attained. Where, however, there is unrighteousness (Adharma), 
attachment exists in its worst and most injurious form, and the sense of 
separateness which Yoga seeks to overcome is predominantly present in sin. 
The body is poisoned by the secretion of passions’ poisons, and vitality or 
Prana is lessened and injured. The mind under the influence of anger, {500} 
lust, malice, and other passions, is first distracted, and then, on the principle 
“what a man thinks that he becomes,” is centered on, and is permanently 
molded into and becomes, the expression of Adharma (unrighteousness) 
itself. In such a case the Jiva is not merely bound to the world by the Maya 
which affects both him and the virtuous Sakama Sadhaka, but suffers Hell 
(Naraka), and “goes down” in the scale of Being. 


Dharma in its devotional aspect is also necessary. Desire to achieve the 
highest aim of Yoga can only spring from a religious disposition, and such a 
disposition and practice (Sadhana) furthers the acquisition of those qualities 
which Yoga requires. Indeed, by persevering devotion to the Mother, 
Samadhi may be achieved. 


Therefore is it that the Commentator in v. 50 of the first of these works 
says: 


“He alone whose nature has been purified by the practice of Yama and 
Niyama and the like (referring to the Sadhana hereinafter described) will 
learn from the mouth of the Guru the means whereby the way to the great 
liberation is discovered.” 


He adds, however, that the practice of Yama and the like is only necessary 
for those whose minds are disturbed by anger, lust, and other evil 
propensities. If, however, a man through merit acquired in previous births is 


by good-fortune of a nature which is free of these and other vices, then he is 
competent for Yoga without this preliminary preparation. 


All forms of Yoga, whether Mantra, Hatha, or Raja, have the same eight 
limbs (Ashtangga) or preparatory subservients: Yama, Niyama, Asana, 
Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi.{501} Yama is of 
ten kinds: Avoidance of injury to all living creatures (Ahingsa); truthfulness 
(Satyam); restraint from taking what belongs to another, or covetousness 
(Asteyam); sexual continence in mind, speech, or body (Brahmacharyya); 
{502} forbearance, the bearing patiently of all things pleasant or unpleasant 
(Kshama); fortitude in happiness or unhappiness (Dhriti); mercy, kindliness 
(Daya); simplicity (Arjavam); moderation{503} in and regulation{504} of 
diet (Mitahara), suited to the development of the Sattvaguna; and purity of 
body and mind (Shaucham). The first form of purity is the external 
cleansing of the body, particularly dealt with by Hathayoga (v. post); and 
the second is gained through the science of self (Adhyatmavidya). {505} 


Niyama is also of ten kinds: Austerities, such as fasts and the like, in the 
nature of purificatory actions (Tapah); contentment with that which one has 
unasked (Santosha); belief in Veda (Astikyam) charity (Danam)—that is 
gifts to the deserving of what one has lawfully acquired; worship of the 
Lord or Mother (Ishvarapiijanam) according to His or Her various forms; 
hearing of Shastric conclusions, as by study of the Vedanta 
(Siddhantavakyashravanam); modesty and shame felt in the doing of wrong 
actions (Hr1); a mind rightly directed towards knowledge revealed and 
practice enjoined by the Shastra (Mati); recitation of Mantra (Japa);{506} 
and Homa sacrifice (Hutam) {507 }—that is, religious observances in 
general (Vrata). The Patanjala Sutra mentions only five Yamas—the first 
four and freedom from covetousness (Parigraha). Ahingsa is the root of 
those which follows. Shaucham, or cleanliness, is included among the 
Niyama. Five of the latter are stated—namely, cleanliness (Shaucham), 
contentment (Santosha), purificatory action (Tapah), study of the Scriptures 
leading to liberation (Svadhyaya), and devotion to the Lord 
(Ishvarapranidhana). {508} 


The statement of such obvious truths would hardly be necessary were it not 
that there are still some who see in Yoga mere “Shamanism,” feats of 
breathing, “acrobatic posturing,” and so forth. On the contrary, no country 
since the Middle Ages and until our own has laid greater stress on the 
necessity of the association of morality and religion with all forms of 
human activity, than India has done. {509} 


The practice of Yama and Niyama leads to renunciation of, and detachment 
from, the things of this world and of the next,{510} arising from the 
knowledge of the permanent and impermanent, and intense desire for and 
incessant striving after emancipation, which characterizes him who is 
Mumukshu, or longs for liberation. 


Yama and Niyama are the first two of the eight accessories of Yoga 
(Ashtangayoga). These accessories or limbs may be divided into five 
exterior methods{511} (Bahiranga), chiefly concerned with the subjugation 
of the body, and three inner methods{512} (Antarangga), or states affecting 
the development of the mind. 


Attention is paid to the physical body, which is the vehicle of the Jiva’s 
existence and activity. Purity of mind is not possible without purity of the 
body in which it functions and by which it is affected. Purity of mind is here 
used in the Hindu sense. According to English parlance, such purity merely 
connotes absence of irregular sexual imaginations. This, though creditable, 
particularly in a civilization which almost seems designed to fan every 
desire, is yet obviously insufficient for the purpose in hand. Proper thought 
and conduct in all its forms is but the alphabet of a school in which they are 
merely the first step to the conquest of greater difficulties to follow. What is 
here meant is that state of the mind or approach thereto which is the result 
of good functioning, clear thinking, detachment, and concentration. By 
these the Manas is freed of all those modifications (Vritti) which enshroud 
by their illusions the Atma from Itself. It is turned inward on the Buddhi 
which becomes Laya in Prakriti, and the Atmatattva or Brahman. 


Provision therefore is made in respect both of Asana (posture) and 
Pranayama, or breath development, both of which are shortly dealt with 


later in connection with Hathayoga, of which they are particular processes. 
Pratyahara is the restraint of and subjection of the senses to the mind, which 
is thereby steadied.{513} The mind is withdrawn from the objects of the 
senses. The mind is by nature unsteady, for it is at every moment being 
affected by the sight, sounds, and so forth, of external objects which Manas 
through the agency of the senses (Indriyas) perceives. It must therefore be 
detached from the object of the senses, withdrawn from whatsoever 
direction it may happen to tend, freed from all distraction, and kept under 
the control of the dominant self. Steadiness (Dhairya) therefore is the aim 
and result of Pratyahara.{514} The three processes known as the “inner 
limbs” (Antaranga)—namely, Dharana, Dhyana, and Savikalpa Samadhi— 
complete the psychic and mental discipline. These are concentration of the 
mind on an object; unity of the mind by contemplation with its object; 
resulting in the last or consciousness of the object only. The first is the 
“holding by”—that is, fixing the Chitta, or thinking principle, on—a 
particular object of thought or concentration (Dharana). The mind, having 
been drawn away from the objects of the senses by Pratyahara, is fixed on 
one object, such as the Devatas of the Bhiitas, alone. Uniform 
contemplation on the subject which the Chitta holds in Dharana is Dhyana 
(meditation). Dhyana has been defined to be the state of the Antahkarana 
(mind) of those whose Chaitanya holds to and is occupied by the thought of 
one object, having first cast away thought of all other objects.{515} 
Through Dhyana is acquired the quality of mental realization (Pratyaksha). 
It is of two kinds: Saguna, or meditation of a form (Murti); and Nirguna, in 
which the self is its own object.{516} 


Samadhi has been defined to be the identification of Manas and Atma as 
salt in water, {517} that state in which all is known as one (equal){518} and 
the “nectar of equality” (oneness).{519} Complete Samadhi is thus the state 
of Pardsamvit. Of Samadhi there are two degrees, in the first of which 
(Savikalpa) the mind in a lesser degree, and in the second (Nirvikalpa) in a 
complete degree, continuously and to the exclusion of all other objects, 
assumes the nature and becomes one with the subject of its contemplation. 


There are in Advaita Vedanta three states (Bhumika) of Samprajnata 
(Savikalpa) Samadhi—namely, Ritambhara, Prajnaloka, Prashantavahita. 


{520} In the first the content of the mental Vritti is Sachchidananda. There 
is still a separate knower. The second is that in which every kind of Avarana 
(screening) is cast away, and there is Sakshatkara Brahmajnana passing into 
the third state of Peace in which the mind is void of all Vritti and the self 
exists as the Brahman alone:{521} “On which being known everything is 
known” (Yasmin vijnate sarvvam idam vijnatam bhavati). Entrance is here 
made into Nirvikalpa Samadhi by Rajayoga. 


These three—Dharana, Dhyana, Savikalpa Samadhi—called Sangyama, are 
merely stages in the mental effort of concentration, though, as later stated, 
according to the Hathayoga aspect, they are progressions in Pranayama, 
each stage being a longer period of retention of Prana.{522} Thus by Yama, 
Niyama, Asana, the body is controlled; by these and Pranayama the Prana is 
controlled; by these and Pratyahara the senses (Indriyas) are brought under 
subjection. Then through the operation of Dharana, Dhyana, and the lesser 
Samadhi (Savikalpa or Samprajnata), the modifications (Vritti) of the 
Manas cease and Buddhi alone functions. By the further and long practice 
of dispassion or indifference to both joy and sorrow (Vairagya) Buddhi 
itself becomes Laya, and the Yog! attains the true unmodified state of the 
Atma, in which the Jiva who is then pure Buddhi is merged in Prakriti, and 
the Brahman as salt in the waters of ocean and as camphor in the flame. 


Passing then to the processes{523} peculiar to the different Yogas, 
Mantrayoga comprises all those forms of Sadhana in which the mind is 
controlled by the means of its own object—that is, the manifold objects of 
the world of name and form (Namartpa). The whole universe is made up of 
names and forms (Namartipatmaka) which are the objects (Vishaya) of the 
mind. The mind is itself modified into the form of that which it perceives. 
These modifications are called its Vritti, and the mind is not for one 
moment devoid of ideas and feelings. It is the feeling or intention (that is, 
Bhava) with which an act is done which determines its moral worth. It is on 
this Bhava that both character and the whole outlook on life depend. It is 
sought therefore to render the Bhava pure. As a man who falls on the 
ground raises himself by means of the same ground, so to break worldly 
bonds the first and easiest method is to use those bonds as the means of 
their own undoing.{524} The mind is distracted by Namarupa, but this 


Namartipa may be utilized as the first means of escape therefrom. In 
Mantrayoga, therefore, a particular form of Namartpa, productive of pure 
Bhava, is given as the object of contemplation. This is called Sthila or 
Saguna Dhyana of the five Devatas, devised to, meet the requirements of 
different natures. Besides the ordinary “eight limbs” (Ashtanga){525} 
common to all forms of Yoga, certain modes of training and worship are 
prescribed. In the latter material media are utilized as the first steps 
whereby the formless One is by Jnanayoga attained—such as images 
(Murti), {526} emblems (Linga, Shalagrama), pictures (Chitra), mural 
markings (Bhittirekha), Mandalas and Yantras (diagrams),{527} Mudras, 
{528} Nyasa.{529} With this the prescribed Mantra is said (Japa) either 
aloud or softly only. The source of all Bija-Mantra (Seed-Mantra), the 
Pranava (Om), or Brahman, is the articulate equivalent of that primal 
“Sound” which issued from the first vibration of the Gunas of Mulaprakriti, 
and the other Bija-Mantras are the same equivalents of the various Saguna 
forms, Devas and Devis, which thereafter appeared when Prakriti entered 
the Vaishamyavastha state. In Mantrayoga the state of Samadhi is called 
Mahabhava. This is the simplest form of Yoga practice, suited for those 
whose powers and capacities are not such as to qualify them for either of 
the other methods. 


Hathayoga comprises those Sadhanas, or prescribed methods of exercise 
and practice, which are concerned primarily with the gross or physical body 
(Sthula Sharira). As the latter is connected with the super-physical or subtle 
body (Stikshma Sharira), of which it is the outer sheath, control of the gross 
body affects the subtle body with its intellection, feelings, and passions. In 
fact, the Sthiila Sharira is expressly designed to enable the Sikshma Sharira 
to work out the Karma it has incurred. As the former is constructed 
according to the nature of the latter, and both are united and interdependent, 
it follows that operation in and upon the gross body affects the subtle body; 
the physical processes of this Yoga have been prescribed for particular 
temperaments, in order that, the physical body being first mastered, the 
subtle body with its mental functioning maybe brought under control. {530} 
These merely physical processes are auxiliary to others. As the Kularnava 
Tantra says:{531} “Neither the lotus-seat nor fixing the gaze on the tip of 
the nose are Yoga. It is the identity of Jivatma and Paramatma, which is 


Yoga.” The special features of this Yoga may be first contrasted with 
Mantra Yoga. In the latter there is concern with things outside the physical 
body, and special attention is given to outward observances of ceremonials. 
Due regard must be paid to the laws of the caste and stages of life 
(Varnashrama Dharma), and the respective duties of men and women (Kula 
Dharma). So the mantra which is given to the male initiate may not be 
given to a woman. Nor is the mantra given to a Brahmana suitable for a 
Shiidra. The objects of contemplation are Devas and Devis in their various 
manifestations and concrete symbols, and the Samadhi called Mahabhava is 
attained by contemplation of and by means of Namaripa. In Hathayoga, on 
the other hand, the question of the fitness or otherwise of a novice is 
determined from the physical point of view, and rules are prescribed to 
procure and increase health and to free the body of disease. In Hathayoga 
contemplation is on the “Light,” and the Samadhi called Mahabodha is 
attained by the aid of control of breath and other vital Vayus (Pranayama), 
whereby the mind is also controlled. As already observed, Asana and 
Pranayama, which are parts of Hathayoga, are also parts of Mantrayoga. 
Those who practice the latter will derive benefit from taking advantage of 
some of the other exercises of Hathayoga, just as the followers of the latter 
system will be helped by the exercises of Mantrayoga. 


The word Hatha is composed of the syllables Ha and Tha, which mean the 
“sun” and “moon”—that is, the Prana and Apana Vayus. In v. 8 of the 
Shatchakranirupana it is said that the Prana (which dwells in the heart) 
draws Apana (which dwells in the Muladhara), and Apana draws Prana, just 
as a falcon attached by a string is drawn back again when he attempts to fly 
away. These two by their disagreement prevent each other from leaving the 
body, but when they are in accord they leave it. Both their union or Yoga in 
the Sushumna and the process leading thereto is called Pranayama. 
Hathayoga or Hathavidya is therefore the science of the Life-Principle, 
using that word in the sense of the various forms of vital Vayu into which 
Prana is divided. Prana in the body of the individual is a part of the 
Universal Breath (Prana), or the “Great Breath.” An attempt, therefore, is 
first made to harmonize the individual breath, known as Pinda or Vyashti 
Prana, with the cosmic or collective breath, or the Brahmanda or Samashti 
Prana. Strength and health are thereby attained. The regulation of the 


harmonized breath helps to the regulation and steadiness of mind, and 
therefore concentration. 


In correspondence with the threefold division Adhyatma, Adhidaiva, 
Adhibhita, Mind (Manas), Prana (vitality), and Viryya (semen), are one. 
Therefore the subjection of Manas causes the subjection of Prana or Vayu 
and Viryya. Similarly, by controlling Prana, Manas and Viryya are 
automatically controlled. Again, if the Viryya is controlled, and the force 
which under the influence of sexual desire develops into gross seed{532} is 
made to flow upwards (Urddhvaretas), control is had over both Manas and 
Prana. With Pranayama the semen (Shukra) dries up. The seminal force 
ascends and comes back as the nectar (Amrita) of Shiva-Shakti. 


Pranayama is recognized as one of the “limbs” of all the (Ashtangga) forms 
of Yoga. But whereas it is used in Mantra, Laya, and Rajayoga, as an 
auxiliary, the Hathayog! as such regards this regulation and Yoga of breath 
as the chief means productive of that result (Moksha), which is the common 
end of all schools of Yoga. This school, proceeding on the basis that the 
Vritti or modification of the mind always follows Prana,{533} and of the 
sufficiency of that fact, held that by the aid of the union of Ha and Tha in 
the Sushumna, and the leading of the combined Pranas therein to the 
Brahmarandhra, Samadhi was attained. Though the reciprocal action of 
matter and mind is common knowledge, and bodily states influence psychic 
or mental states as the latter the former, the Hathayoga method is 
preponderantly a physical one, though the gross physical acts of the 
preparatory stages of this Yoga are succeeded by Kriyajnana and subtle vital 
processes which have Prana as their subject. 


Under the heading of gross physical training come provisions as to the 
place of residence, mode of life as regards eating, drinking, sexual function, 
exercise, and so forth. 


The practice and exercises connected with Hathayoga are divided into 
seven parts or stages—namely, cleansing (Shodhana) by the six processes 
(Shatkarma); the attainment of strength or firmness (Dridhata) by bodily 
postures (Asana); of fortitude (Sthirata) by bodily positions (Mudra); of 


steadiness (Dhairya) by restraint of the senses (Pratyahara); of lightness 
(Laghava) by Pranayama; of realization (Pratyaksha) by meditation 
(Dhyana); and of detachment (Nirliptatva) in Samadhi. 


Those who suffer from inequality of the three “humors” {534} are required 
to practice the “six acts” (Shatkarma) which purify the body and facilitate 
Pranayama. For others who are free from these defects they are not 
necessary in such case, and according to some teachers the practice of 
Pranayama alone is sufficient. These form the first steps in the Hathayoga. 
On this cleansing (Shodhana) of the body and Nadis, health is gained, the 
internal fire is rendered more active, and restraint of breath (Kumbhaka) is 
facilitated. Recourse is also had, if necessary, to Oshadhiyoga, in which 
herbal preparations are administered to cure defective health. 


Cleansing (Shodhana) is effected by the six processes known as the 
Shatkarmma. Of these, the first is Dhauti, or washing, which is fourfold, or 
inward washing (Antardhauti), cleansing of the teeth, etc. (Dantadhauti), of 
the “heart” (Hriddhauti), and of the anus (Miladhauti). Antardhauti is also 
fourfold—namely, Vatasara, by which air is drawn into the belly and then 
expelled; Varisara, by which the body is filled with water, which is then 
evacuated by the anus; Vahnisara, in which the Nabhigranthi is made to 
touch the spinal column (Meru); and Vahishkrita, in which the belly is by 
Kakinimudra{535} filled with air, which is retained half a Yama, {536} and 
then sent downward. Dantadhauti is fourfold, consisting in the cleansing of 
the root of the teeth and tongue, the ears, and the “hollow of the skull” 
(Kapalarandhra). By Hriddhauti phlegm and bile are removed. This is done 
by a stick (Dandadhauti) or cloth (Vasodhauti) pushed into the throat, or 
swallowed, or by vomiting (Vamanadhauti). Muladhauti is done to cleanse 
the exit of the Apanavayu, either with the middle finger and water or the 
stalk of a turmeric plant. 


Vasti, the second of the Shatkarmma, is twofold, and is either of the dry 
(Shuska) or watery (Jala) kind. In the second form the Yogi sits in the 
Utkatasana{537} posture in water up to the navel, and the anus is 
contracted and expanded by Ashvini Mudra; or the same is done in the 
Pashchimottanasana, {538} and the abdomen below the navel is gently 


moved. In Neti the nostrils are cleansed with a piece of string. Lauliki is the 
whirling of the belly from side to side. In Trataka the Yogi, without 
winking, gazes at some minute object until the tears start from his eyes. By 
this the “celestial vision” (Divya Drishti) so often referred to in the Tantrika 
Upasana is acquired. Kapalabhati is a process for the removal of phlegm, 
and is threefold: Vatakrama, by inhalation and exhalation; Vyutkrama, by 
water drawn through the nostrils and ejected through the mouth; and 
Shitkrama, the reverse process. 


These are the various processes by which the body is cleansed and made 
pure for the Yoga practice to follow. 


Asana, or posture, is the next, and when the Shatkarma are dispensed with, 
is the first stage of Hathayoga. 


Dridhata, or strength or firmness, the acquisition of which is the second of 
the above-mentioned processes, is attained by Asana. 


The Asanas are postures of the body. The term is generally described as 
modes of seating the body. But the posture is not necessarily a sitting one; 
for some Asanas are done on the belly, back, hands, etc. It is said{539} that 
the Asana are as numerous as living beings, and that there are 8,400,000 of 
these; 1,600 are declared to be excellent, and out of these thirty-two are 
auspicious for men, which are described in detail. Two of the commonest of 
these are Muktapadmasana{540} (the loosened lotus seat), the ordinary 
position for worship, and Baddhapadmasana. {541} Kundaliyoga is 
ordinarily done in an Asana, in which the feet close both the genital and 
anal apertures, the hands closing the others—nostrils, eyes, ears, mouth 
(Yonimudra). The right heel is pressed against the anus and the left against 
the genitals to close the aperture of the penis. 


There are certain other Asana which are peculiar to the Tantras, such as 
Mundasana, Chitasana, and Shavasana, in which skulls, the funeral pyre, 
and a corpse,{542} respectively, form the seat of the Sadhaka. These, 
though they have other ritual and magical objects, also form part of the 
discipline for the conquest of fear and the attainment of indifference, which 


is the quality of a Yogi. And so the Tantras prescribe as the scene of such 
rites the solitary mountain-top, the lonely empty house and riverside, and 
the cremation ground. The interior cremation ground is there where the 
Kamik body and its passions are consumed in the fire of knowledge. {543} 


Patanjali, on the subject of Asana, merely points out what are good 
conditions, leaving each one to settle the details for himself according to his 
own requirements. 


Asana is an aid to clear and collect the thought. The test of suitability of 
Asana is that which is steady and pleasant, a matter which each will settle 
for himself. Posture becomes perfect when effort to that end ceases, so that 
there is no more movement of the body.{544} The Rajas Guna, the action 
of which produces fickleness of mind, is restrained. A suitable steady Asana 
produces mental equilibrium. Hathayoga, however, prescribes a very large 
number of Asanas, to each of which a peculiar effect is described. These are 
more in the nature of a gymnastic than an Asana in its sense of a seated 
posture. Some forms of this gymnastic are done seated, but others are not 
so, but standing upright, bending, lying down, and standing on the head. 
This latter is Vrikshasana. Thus, again, in Chakrasana the Yogi stands and 
bends and touches his feet with his hand, a familiar exercise, as is also 
Vamadakshinapadasana, a kind of goose step, in which, however, the legs 
are brought up to right angles with the body. These exercises secure a fine 
physical condition and freedom from disease. {545} They are also said to 
assist in Pranayama, and to help to effect its object, including the rousing of 
Kundalini. The author of the work last cited says{546} that as among the 
Niyamas the most important is Ahingsa, and among Yamas Mitahara, or a 
moderate diet (a significant choice), so is Siddhasana (in which the 
Miuladhara is firmly pressed by the heel) among the Asanas. Mastery of this 
helps to secure the Unmani Avastha, and the three Bandhas (v. post) are 
achieved without difficulty. 


Sthirata, Or fortitude, is acquired by the practice of the Mudra.{547} The 
Mudra dealt with in works of Hathayoga are positions of the body. {548} 
They are gymnastic, health-giving, and destructive of disease and of death, 
such as the Jalandhara{549} and other Mudras. They also preserve from 


injury by fire, Water, or air. Bodily action and the health resulting therefrom 
react upon the mind, and by the union of a perfect mind and body Siddhi is 
by their means attained. The Gheranda Sanghita describes a number of 
Mudra, of which those of importance may be selected. In the celebrated 
Yonimudra, the Yogi in Siddhasana stops with his fingers the ears, eyes, 
nostrils, and mouth, so as to shut out all external impressions. He inhales 
Pranavayu by Kakinimudra, {550} and unites it with Apanavayu. 
Meditating in their order upon the six Chakra, he arouses the sleeping 
Kulakundalini by the Mantra “Hing Hangsah.” {551} By “Hang,” or the 
Sun, heat is produced (for Mantra can produce fire), and this heat is made to 
play on Kundali Shakti. By “Sah” the Kama or will (Ichchha) is made 
active. The vital air (Vayu) in the Muladhara is in the form of both Moon 
and Sun (Somasiuryyarup!1). With “Hangsa” She is roused, Hang rousing 
Her with his heat, and Sah lifting Her upwards. He raises Her to the 
Sahasrara; then deeming himself pervaded with the Shakti, and in blissful 
union (Sanggama) with Shiva, he meditates upon himself as, by reason of 
that union, Bliss itself and the Brahman. {552} Ashvinimudra consists of the 
repeated contraction and expansion of the anus for the purpose of 
Shodhana, or of contraction to restrain the Apana in Shatchakrabheda. 
Shaktichalana employs the latter Mudra, which is repeated until Vayu 
manifests in the Sushumna. The process is accompanied by inhalation and 
the union of Prana and Apana whilst in Siddhasana. {553} 


Yoni Mudra is employed in the rousing of Kundalini accompanied by 
Shaktichalana Mudra, {554} which should be well practiced first before the 
Yoni Mudra is done. The rectal muscle is contracted by Ashvini Mudra until 
the Vayu enters the Sushumna, a fact which is indicated by a peculiar sound 
which is heard there.{555} And with the Kumbhaka the Serpent goes 
upwards to the Sahasrara roused by the Mantra “Hung Hangsah.” The Yogi 
should then think himself to be pervaded with Shakti and in a state of 
blissful union (Sanggama) with Shiva. He then contemplates: “I am the 
Bliss Itself,” “I am the Brahman.” {556} Mahamudra{557} and Mahavedha 
are done in conjunction with Mahabandha, already described. In the first the 
Yogi presses the Yoni (Muladhara) with the left heel, and, stretching out the 
right leg, takes hold of the two feet with both hands. Jalandhara Bandha is 
then done. When Kundalini is awakened, the Prana enters the Sushumna, 


and Ida and Pinggala, now that Prana has left them, become lifeless. 
Expiration should be done slowly, and the Mudra should be practiced an 
equal number of times on the left and right side of the body. This Mudra, 
like other Hathayoga Mudras, is said to ward off death and disease. In 
Mahavedha{558} the Yogi assumes the Mahabandha posture, and, 
concentrating his mind, stops by methods already described the upward and 
downward course of the Prana. Then, placing the palms of his hands on the 
ground, he taps the ground softly with his buttocks (Sphichau), and the 
“Moon,” “Sun,” and “Fire”—that is, Ida, Pinggala, and Sushumna— 
become united upon the entry of the Prana into the latter Nadi. Then the 
body assumes a death-like aspect, which disappears with the slow 
expiration which follows. According to another mode of rousing Kundalini, 
the Yogi seated in Vajrasana takes firm hold of his feet a little above the 
ankles, and slowly taps the Kanda (v. post) with them. Bhastra Kumbhaka is 
done and the abdomen is contracted.{559} 


The Khechart Mudra, {560} which, as well as the Yoni Mudra, is referred to 
in the text translated, is the cutting of the frenum of the tongue and the 
lengthening of it until it reaches the eyebrows. It is then turned back in the 
throat, and closes the exit of the breath previously inspired. The mind is 
fixed in the Ajna{561} until with Siddhi this “path of the upward Kundalt” 
(Urddhvakundalini) conquers the whole universe, which is realized in the 
Yogt’s body as not different from Atma.{562} 


The term Mudra also includes{563} what are called Bandha (bindings), 
certain physical methods of controlling Prana. Three important ones which 
are referred to in the texts here translated are Uddiyana, Mila, and 
Jalandhara.5® In the first it is said the lungs are emptied by a strong 
expiration, and drawn against the upper part of the thorax, carrying the 
diaphragm along with them, and the intestines are taken up and fill the 
vacant space.{564} This causes the Prana to rise and enter the Sushumna. 
Through Mulabandha the Prana and Apana unite{565} and go into the 
Sushumna. Then the inner “sounds” are heard—that is, a vibration is felt— 
and Prana and Apana, uniting with Nada of the cardiac Anahata Chakra, go 
to the heart, and are thereafter united with Bindu in the Ajna. In 
Milabandha the perineal region (Yoni) is pressed with the foot, the rectal 


muscle contracted (by Ashvini Mudra), and the Apana drawn up.{566} The 
natural course of the Apana is downwards, but by contraction at the 
Muladhara it is made to go upwards through the Sushumna when it meets 
Prana. When the latter Vayu reaches the region of fire below the navel, 
{567} the fire becomes bright and strong, being fanned by Apana. The heat 
in the body then becomes very powerful, and Kundalini, feeling it, awakes 
from Her sleep “just as a serpent struck by a stick hisses and straightens 
itself.” Then it enters the Sushumna. Jalandhara Bandha is done by deep 
inspiration and then contraction of the thoracic region (wherein is situated 
the Vishuddha Chakra), the chin being held firmly pressed against the 
breasts at the distance of four fingers (Anguli) from the heart. This is said to 
bind the sixteen Adharas, {568} or vital centers, and the nectar Satravi 
which flows from the cavity above the palate,{569} and is also used to 
cause the breath to become Laya in the Sushumna. If the thoracic and 
perineal regions are simultaneously contracted, and Prana is forced 
downward and Apana upward, the Vayu enters the Sushumna.{570} This 
union of the three Nadis, Ida, Pinggala, and Sushumna, may be also affected 
by the Mahabandha, {571} which also aids the fixation of the mind in the 
Ajna. Pressure is done on the perineal region between the anus and penis 
with the left ankle, the right foot being placed on the left thigh. Breath is 
inspired and the chin placed firmly on the breast as in Jalandhara, or 
alternatively the tongue is pressed firmly against the base of the front teeth; 
and while the mind is centered on the Sushumna the Vayu is contracted. 
After the breath has been restrained as long as possible, it should be expired 
slowly. The breath exercise should be done first on the left and then on the 
right side. The effect of this Bandha is to stop the upward course of the 
breath through all the Nadis except the Sushumna. 


As the Dhyanabindu Upanishad says, the Jiva oscillates up and down under 
the influence of Prana and Apana and is never at rest, just as a ball which is 
hit to the earth with the palm of the hand uprises again, or like a bird which, 
tied to its perch by a string, flies away and is drawn back again. These 
movements, like all other dualities, are stayed by Yoga, which unites the 
Pranas. 


When the physical body has been purified and controlled, there follows 
Pratyahara to secure steadiness (Dhairya), as already described. With this 
the Yogi passes from the physical plane, and seeks to acquire the equipoise 
of, and control over, the subtle body. 


From the fifth or Pranayama arises lightness (Laghava)—that is, the 
levitation or lightening of the body. 


The air which is breathed through the mouth and nostrils is material air 
(Sthila Vayu). The breathing is a manifestation of a vitalizing force called 
Prana Vayu. By control over the Sthtla Vayu the Prana Vayu (Sukshma 
Vayu or subtle air) is controlled; the process concerned with this is called 
Pranayama. 


Pranayama is frequently translated “breath control.” Having regard to the 
processes employed, the term is not altogether inappropriate if it is 
understood that “breath” means not only the Sthula but the Sukshma Vayu. 
But the word does not come from Prana (breath) and Yama (control), but 
from Prana and Ayama, which latter term, according to the Amarakosha, 
means length, rising, extensity, expansion; {572} in other words, it is the 
process whereby the ordinary and comparatively slight manifestation of 
Prana is lengthened and strengthened and developed. This takes place firstly 
in the Prana as it courses in Ida and Pinggala, and then by its transference to 
the Sushumna, when it is said to bloom (Sphurati){573} or to display itself 
in its fullness. When the body has been purified by constant practice, Prana 
forces its way with ease through Sushumna in their middle.{574} From 
being the small path of daily experience, it becomes the “Royal 

Road” {575} which is the Sushumna. Thus, Suryabheda Kumbhaka is 
practiced until Prana is felt to pervade the whole of the body from head to 
toe; Ujjayi until the breath fills the body from throat to heart; and in Bhasra 
the breath is inhaled and exhaled again and again rapidly, as the blacksmith 
works his bellows. The breath is controlled only in the sense that it is made 
the subject of certain initial processes. These processes, however, do not 
control in the sense of confine, but expand. The most appropriate term, 
therefore, for Pranayama is. “breath control and development,” leading to 
the union of Prana and Apana. Pranayama is first practiced with a view to 


control and develop the Prana. The latter is then moved into Sushumna by 
the stirring of Kundalini, who blocks the entry (Brahmadvara) thereto. With 
the disappearance of Prana therefrom, Ida and Pinggala “die,” {576} and the 
Prana in Sushumna by means of the Shakti Kundalini pierces the six 
Chakras which block the passage in the Brahmanadi, and eventually 
becomes Laya in the Great Breath which is the final end and aim of this 
process. 


Pranayama{577} should be practiced according to the instructions laid 
down by the Guru, the Sadhaka living on a nutritious but moderate diet, 
with his senses under control. As already stated, mind and breath react upon 
one another, and when the latter is regulated so is the mind, and therefore 
rhythmic breathing is sought. This. Pranayama is said to be successful only 
when the Nadis are purified, for unless this is so the Prana does not enter 
the Sushumna.{578} The Yogi, assuming the Padmasana posture, inhales 
(Puraka) and exhales (Rechaka) alternately through the left (Ida) and right 
(Pinggala) nostrils, retaining the breath meanwhile (Kumbhaka) for 
gradually increasing periods. The Devatas of these elements of Pranayama 
are Brahma, Rudra, and Vishnu.{579} The Prana enters Sushumna, and if 
retained sufficiently long goes, after the piercing of the Chakras, to the 
Brahmarandhra. The Yoga manuals speak of various forms of Pranayama 
according as commencement is made with Rechaka or Puraka, and 
according as the breath is suddenly stopped without Puraka and Rechaka. 
There are also various forms of Kumbhaka, such as Sahita Kumbhaka, 
which resembles the first two above mentioned, and which should be 
practiced until the Prana enters the Sushumna; and Kevala, in which the 
breath is restrained without Puraka and Rechaka. {580} Then there are 
others which cure excess of Vata, Pitta, and Kapha,{581} and the diseases 
arising therefrom; and Bhasra, which is an important Kumbhaka, as it 
operates in the case of all three Doshas,5#! and aids the Prana to break 
through the three Grant his, which are firmly placed in the Sushumna. {582} 


It will be observed that all the methods previously and subsequently 
described practically subserve one object, the making of the Prana enter 
Sushumna, and then become Laya in the Sahasrara after the Prana Devata 
Kundalini has pierced the intervening Chakras; for when Prana flows 


through the Sushumna the mind becomes steady. When Chit is absorbed in 
Sushumna, Prana is motionless.{583} This object colors also the methods 
Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi; for whereas in the Rajayoga 
aspect they are various mental processes and states, from the Hathayoga 
point of view, which is concerned with “breathing,” they are progressions in 
Pranayama. Therefore it is that some works describe them differently to 
harmonize them with the Hatha theory and practice, and explain them as 
degrees of Kumbhaka varying according to the length of its duration. {584} 
Thus, if the Prana is retained for a particular time it is called Pratyahara, if 
for a longer time it is called Dharana, and so on until Samadhi is attained, 
which is equivalent to its retention for the longest period. {585} 


All beings say the Ajapa Gayatri, {586} which is the expulsion of the breath 
by Hangkara, and its inspiration by Sahkara, 21,600 times a day. Ordinarily 
the breath goes forth a distance of 12 fingers’ breadth, but in singing, 
eating, walking, sleeping, coition, the distances are 16, 20, 24, 30, and 36 
breadths, respectively. In violent exercise these distances are exceeded, the 
greatest distance being 96 breadths. Where the breathing is under the 
normal distance, life is prolonged. Where it is above that, it is shortened. 
Puraka is inspiration, and Rechaka expiration. Kumbhaka is the retention of 
breath between these two movements. Kumbhaka is, according to the 
Gheranda Sanghita, of eight kinds: Sahita, Suryyabheda, Ujjayi, Shitali, 
Bhastrika, Bhramari, Murchchha, and Kevali. Pranayama similarly varies. 
Pranayama awakens Shakti, frees from disease, produces detachment from 
the world, and bliss. It is of varying values, being the best (Uttama) where 
the measure is 20; middling (Madhyama) when at 16 it produces spinal 
tremor; and inferior (Adhama) when at 12 it induces perspiration. It is 
necessary that the Nadi should be cleansed, for air does not enter those 
which are impure. Months or years may be spent in the preliminary process 
of cleansing the Nadis. The cleansing of the Nadi (Nadishuddhi) is either 
Samanu or Nirmanu—that is, with or without the use of Bija. According to 
the first form, the Yogi in Padmasana does Gurunyasa according to the 
directions of the Guru. Meditating on “Yang,” he does Japa through Ida of 
the Bija 16 times, Kumbhaka with Japa of Bija 64 times, and then 
exhalation through the solar Nadi and Japa of Bija 32 times. Fire is raised 
from Manipira and united with Prithivi. Then follows inhalation by the 


solar Nadi with the Vahni Bija 16 times, Kumbhaka with 64 Japa of the 
Bija, followed by exhalation through the lunar Nadi and Japa of the Bija 32 
times. He then meditates on the lunar brilliance, gazing at the tip of the 
nose, and inhales by Ida with Japa of the Bija “Thang” 16 times. Kumbhaka 
is done with the Bija Vang 64 times. He then thinks of himself as flooded 
by nectar, and considers that the Nadi have been washed. He exhales by 
Pinggala with 32 Japa of the Bija Lang, and considers himself thereby as 
strengthened. He then takes his seat on a mat of Kusha grass, a deerskin, 
etc., and, facing east or north, does Pranayama. For its exercise there must 
be, in addition to Nadi Shuddhi (purification of “nerves”), consideration of 
proper place, time, and food. Thus, the place should not be so distant as to 
induce anxiety, nor in an unprotected place, such as a forest, nor in a city or 
crowded locality, which induces distraction. The food should be pure and of 
a vegetarian character. It should not be too hot or too cold, pungent, sour, 
salt, or bitter. Fasting, the taking of one meal a day and the like are 
prohibited. On the contrary, the Yogi should not remain without food for 
more than one Yama (three hours). The food taken should be light and 
strengthening. Long walks and other violent exercise should be avoided, as 
also—certainly in the case of beginners—sexual intercourse. The stomach 
should only be half filled. Yoga should be commenced, it is said, in spring 
or autumn. As stated, the forms of Pranayama vary. Thus, Sahita, which is 
either with (Sagarbha) or without (Nirgarbha) Bija, is, according to the 
former form, as follows: The Sadhaka meditates on Vidhi (Brahma), who is 
full of Rajoguna, red in color, and the image of Akara. He inhales by Ida, in 
six measures (Matra). Before Kumbhaka he does the Uddiyanabandha 
Mudra. Meditating on Hari (Vishnu) as Sattvamaya and the black Bija 
Ukara, he does Kumbhaka with 64 Japa of the Bija; then, meditating on 
Shiva as Tamomaya and his white Bija Makara, he exhales through 
Pinggala with 32 Japa of the Bija; then, inhaling by Pinggala, he does 
Kumbhaka, and exhales by Ida with the same Bija. The process is repeated 
in the normal and reversed order. 


Dhyana, or meditation, is, according to the Gheranda Sanghita, of three 
kinds: (1) Sthila, or gross; (2) Jyotih; (3) Sukshma, or subtle.{587} In the 
first the form of the Devata is brought before the mind. One form of 
Dhyana for this purpose is as follows: Let the Sadhaka think of the great 


Ocean of Nectar in his heart. In the middle of that ocean is the island of 
gems, the shores of which are made of powdered gems. The island is 
clothed with a Kadamba forest in yellow blossom. This forest is surrounded 
by Malati, Champaka, Parijata, and other fragrant trees. In the midst of the 
Kadamba forest there rises the beautiful Kalpa tree, laden with fresh 
blossom and fruit. Amidst its leaves the black bees hum and the Koel birds 
make love. Its four branches are the four Vedas. Under the tree there is a 
great Mandapa of precious stones, and within it a beautiful couch, on which 
let him picture to himself his Ishtadevata. The Guru will direct him as to the 
form, raiment, Vahana, and the title of the Devata. 


Jyotirdhyana is the infusion of fire and life (Tejas) into the form so 
imagined. In the Muladhara lies the snakelike Kundalini. There the Jivatma, 
as it were the tapering flame of a candle, dwells. The Sadhaka then 
meditates upon the Tejomaya (Light) Brahman, or, alternatively, between 
the eyebrows on the Pranavatmaka flame (the light which is Om) emitting 
its luster. 


Sukshmadhyana is meditation on Kundalini with Shambhavi Mudra after 
She has been roused. By this Yoga (vide post) the Atma is revealed 
(Atmasakshatkara). 


Lastly, through Samadhi the quality of Nirliptatva, or detachment, and 
thereafter Mukti (liberation) is attained. 


This Samadhi Yoga is, according to the Gheranda Sanghita, of six kinds: 
{588} (1) Dhyanayogasamadhi, attained by Shambhavi Mudra, {589} in 
which, after meditation on the Bindu-Brahman and realization of the Atma 
(Atmapratyaksha), the latter is resolved into the Mahakasha or the Great 
Ether. (2) Nadayoga, attained by Khechart Mudra, {590} in which the 
frenum of the tongue is cut, and the latter is lengthened until it reaches the 
space between the eyebrows, and is then introduced in a reversed position 
into the mouth. (3) Rasanandayoga, attained by Kumbhaka,{591} in which 
the Sadhaka in a silent place closes both ears and does Puraka and 
Kumbhaka until he hears Nada in sounds varying in strength from that of 
the cricket’s chirp to that of the large kettledrum. By daily practice the 


Anahata sound is heard, and the Light (Jyotih) with the Manas therein is 
seen, which is ultimately dissolved in the supreme Vishnu. (4) 
Layasiddhiyoga accomplished by the celebrated Yonimudra already 
described. {592} The Sadhaka, thinking of himself as Shakti and the 
Paramatma as Purusha, feels himself in union (Sanggama) with Shiva, and 
enjoys with Him the bliss which is Shringararasa, {593} and becomes Bliss 
itself, or the Brahman. (5) Bhakti Yoga, in which meditation is made on the 
Ishtadevata with devotion (Bhakti) until, with tears flowing from the excess 
of bliss, the ecstatic condition is attained. (6) Rajayoga, accomplished by 
aid of the Manomirchchha Kumbhaka. {594} Here the Manas, detached 
from all worldly objects, is fixed between the eyebrows in the Ajnachakra, 
and Kumbhaka is done. By the union of the Manas with the Atma, in which 
the Jnani sees all things, Rajayogasamadhi is attained. 


The Hathayogapradipika says that on perfection being attained in Hatha the 
body becomes lean and healthy, the eyes are bright, the semen is 
concentrated, the Nadis are purified, the internal fire is increased, and the 
Nada sounds above-mentioned are heard.{595} These sounds (Nada) issue 
from Anahata Chakra in the cardiac region, for it is here that the 
Shabdabrahman manifested by Vayu and in association with Buddhi, and of 
the nature of manifested Nada endowed with a special motion (Vishesha 
Spanda), exists as Madhyama speech. Though sound (Shabda) is not 
distinct and heard by the gross senses until it issues in the form of Vaikhari 
speech, the Yog! is said to hear this subtle Nada when, through the various 
Bandhas and Mudras described, Prana and Apana have united in the 
Sushumna. This combined Prana and Nada proceed upwards and unite with 
Bindu. 


There is a particular method by which Laya (absorption) is said to be 
attained by hearing the various bodily sounds.{596} The Yogi in Muktasana 
and with Shambhavimudra concentrates on the sounds heard in the right 
ear; then after closing the sense apertures by Shanmukhi Mudra and after 
Pranayama a sound is heard in the Sushumna. In this Yoga there are four 
stages. When the Brahmagranthi has been pierced, the sweet tinkling sound 
of ornaments is heard in the ethereal void (Shinya) of the heart; in the 
second stage the Prana united with Nada pierces the Vishnugranthi. In this 


the further void (Atishiinya) of the thoracic region, sounds are heard like 
those of a kettle-drum. In the third stage a drum-like sound (Mardala) is 
heard in the Ajna or Mahashinya, the seat of all powers (Siddhis). Then the 
Prana, having forced the Rudragranthi or Ajna, goes to the abode of 
Ishvara. On the insetting of the fourth stage, when the Prana goes to 
Brahmarandhra, the fourth or Nishpatti state occurs. During the initial 
stages the sounds are loud, and gradually become very subtle. The mind is 
kept oft all external objects, and is centered first on the loud and then on the 
subtle sounds. The mind thus becomes one with Nada, on which it is fixed. 
Nada is thus like a snare for catching a deer, for like a hunter it kills the 
mind. It first attracts it and then slays it. The mind absorbed in Nada is freed 
from Vrittis. {597} The Antahkarana, like a deer, is attracted to the sound of 
the bells, and, remaining immovable, the Yogi like a skilful archer kills it by 
directing his breath to the Brahmarandhra through the Sushumna, which 
becomes one with that at which it is aimed. Chit exists within these sounds, 
which are its Shaktis, and by union with Nada the self-effulgent Chaitanya 
(Consciousness) is said to be attained. As long as sound is heard the Atma 
is with Shakti. The Laya state is soundless.{598} There are also other 
methods{599} by which Laya is achieved, such as Mantrayoga, or the 
recitation of Mantras according to a particular method. 


Layayoga is the third and higher form of Hathayoga, which, in connection 
with other auxiliary Hatha processes, is in its Tantrik form the subject- 
matter of the works here translated. Both Sachchidananda or Shiva and 
Sachchidananda or Shakti are present in the body, and Layayoga consists in 
the control of Chittavritti by merging the Prakriti Shakti in the Purusha 
Shakti according to the laws which govern the Pinda (individual—Vyashti) 
and Brahmanda (cosmic—Samashti) bodies, and thereby gaining liberation 
(Moksha). 


As in the case of the preceding systems, Layayoga has special features of its 
own.{600} Speaking in a general way, ordinary Hathayoga is specially, 
though not exclusively concerned, with the physical body, its power and 
functions; and affects the subtle body through the gross body. Mantra Yoga 
is specially, though not exclusively, concerned with the forces and powers 
at work outside, though affecting the body. Layayoga deals with the 


supersensible Pithas (seats or centers) and the supersensible forces and 
functions of the inner world of the body. These Pithas, or seats of the 
Devatas, are the Chakras already described, ranging from the Sahasrara, the 
abode of the unattached (Nirlipta) Sachchidanandamaya Paramatma, to the 
Miuladhara, the seat of Prakriti-Shakti, called Kulakundalini in the Yoga 
Shastras. The object of this Yoga is therefore to take and merge this Shakti 
in Purusha when Samadhi is attained. In Hathayoga the contemplation of 
“Light” is in particular prescribed, though, as already stated, its Dhyana is 
threefold. In Mantrayoga the material forms in which Spirit clothes Itself 
are contemplated. After Prakriti-Shakti in the form of Kulakundalini has 
according to this method of Layayoga been roused by constant practice, its 
reflection is manifested as a Light between the eyebrows, which when it is 
fixed by practice and contemplation becomes the subject of Bindudhyana. 
Kundali is aroused by various Hatha and other processes hereafter 
described. Methods are followed which are common to all the systems, such 
as Yama, Niyama, Asana, though only a limited number of these and of the 
Mudra of Hathayoga are used. These belong to the physical processes 
(Sthila Kriya), and are followed by Pranayama, {601} Pratyahara, Dharana, 
Dhyana (on Bindu), which are super-physical exercises (Sukshma Kriya). 
In addition to these are certain features peculiar to this Yoga. There are, 
besides those already noted, Svarodaya, or the science relating to the Nadis; 
Panchatattva Chakra, Sikshmaprana, and the like inner forces of nature; 
and the Layakriya, leading through Nada and Bindu to the Samadhi, which 
is called Mahalaya. 


The hearing of the Nada sounds is included under Pratyahara, and under 
Dharana the rousing of Kundali. As Japa, or recitation of Mantra, is the 
chief element in Mantrayoga, and Pranayama in the ordinary Hathayoga, so 
Dharana is, with the last as a preliminary, the most important part of 
Layayoga. It is to be observed, however, that Pranayama is only a 
preliminary method to secure mastery of the breath. It is the lower door at 
which the already perfect in this matter need not enter. Some processes 
described are for practice (Sadhana) only. An expert (Siddha) can raise and 
lower Kundali Shakti within an hour. 


It is said that as Ananta, the Lord of Serpents, supports the whole universe, 
so is Kundalini, “by whom the body is supported,” {602} the support of all 
Yoga practice; {603} and that “as one forces open a door with a key,” so the 
Yogi should force open the door of liberation (Moksha) by the aid of 
Kundalini{604} (the coiled one), who is known by various names, such as 
the Shakti, Ishvari (Sovereign Lady), Kutilangi (the crooked one), 
Bhujanggi (serpent), Arundhati (unstayable helper to good action.){605} 
This Shakti is the Supreme Shakti (Parashakti) in the human body, 
embodying all powers and assuming all forms. Thus the sexual force is one 
of such powers and is utilized. Instead, however, of descending into gross 
seminal fluid, it is conserved as a form of subtle energy, and rises to Shiva 
along with Prana. It is thus made a source of spiritual life instead of one of 
the causes of physical death. With the extinction of sexual desire, mind is 
released of its most powerful bond. {606} 


She the “Serpent Power” sleeps coiled up in the Muladhara, closing with 
Her mouth the entry to the Sushumna called the “door of Brahman” 
(Brahmadvara). She sleeps above what is called the Kanda or Kandayoni, 
which is four fingers in length and breadth, and is covered by a “soft white 
cloth”—that is, membrane like the egg of a bird. It is generally described as 
being two fingers (Anguli) above the anus (Guda) and two fingers below 
the penis (Medhra).{607} From this Kanda spring the 72,000 Nadis which 
here both unite and separate. Kulakundalini is the Shabdabrahman, and all 
Mantras are Her manifestation (Svartipavibhiti). For this reason one of the 
names of this, the Mantradevata, whose substance is “letters,” is Matrika— 
that is, the Genetrix of all the universes. She is Matrika, for She is the 
Mother of all and not the child of any. She is the world-consciousness 
(Jagachchaitanya), the Virata consciousness of the world as a whole. {608} 
Just as in space sound is produced by movements of air, so also in the ether 
within the Jiva’s body currents flow, owing to the movements of the vital 
air (Pranavayu), and its inward and outward passage as inhalation and 
exhalation. Verse 12 describes Kundalini as the revered supreme 
Parameshvari (Sovereign Lady), the Omnipotent Kala in the form of 
Nadashakti. She, the subtlest of the subtle, holds within Herself the mystery 
of creation, {609} and the stream of Ambrosia which flows from the 
attributeless Brahman. By Her radiance the universe is illumined, and by it 


eternal knowledge is awakened{610}—that is, She both binds as Creatrix 
(Avidya Shakti) and is the means as Vidya Shakti whereby liberation may 
be attained. For this reason it is said in the Hathayogapradipika that She 
gives liberation to Yogis and bondage to the ignorant. For he who knows 
Her knows Yoga, and those who are ignorant of Yoga are kept in the 
bondage of this worldly life. As vv. 10 and 11 of the Shatchakranirtpana 
says, She the World-bewilderer is lustrous as lightning; “Her sweet murmur 
is like the indistinct hum of swarms of love-mad bees{611} and the soft 
cadence of sweet harmonious music. It is She who maintains all the beings 
of the world by means of inspiration and expiration,{612} and shines in the 
hollow of the Mila lotus like a chain of brilliant lights.” Mantras are in all 
cases manifestations (Vibhiiti) of Kulakundalini Herself, for She is all 
letters and Dhvani{613} and the Paramatma Itself. Hence Mantras are used 
in the rousing of Kundalini. The substance of Mantras is the Eternal Shabda 
or Consciousness, though their appearance and expression is in words. 
Words in themselves seem lifeless (Jada), but the Mantra power which they 
embody is Siddha—that is, the truth and capable of teaching it, because it is 
a manifestation of Chaitanya, which is Satya itself. So Veda, which is the 
formless (Amirti) Brahman in Veda-form (Vedamirti), is the self-illumined 
Principle of Experience{614} (Chit) itself, and is displayed in words 
(Siddhashabda) which are without human authorship (Apaurusheya), {615} 
incessantly revealing knowledge{616} of the nature of Brahman, or Pure 
Being, and of Dharmma, {617} or those principles and laws, physical and 
psychical and spiritual, by which the universe is sustained (Dharyate). And 
so the Divine Mother is said to be Brahman-knowledge (Brahmavidya) in 
the form of that immediate experience{618} which is the fruit of the 
realization of the great Vedantic sayings (Mahavakya).{619} As, 
notwithstanding the existence of feeling-consciousness in all things, it does 
not manifest without particular processes, so, although the substance of 
Mantras is feeling-consciousness, that feeling-consciousness is not 
perceptible without the union of the Sadhaka’s Shakti (derived from 
Sadhana) with Mantrashakti. Hence it has been said in the Sharada Tilaka: 
“Although Kulakundalini, whose substance is Mantras, shines brilliant as 
lightning in the Miladhara of every Jiva, yet it is only in the lotuses of the 
hearts of Yogis that She reveals Herself and dances in Her own joy. (In 
other cases, though existing in subtle form,) She does not reveal Herself. 


Her substance is all Vedas, all Mantras, and all Tattvas. She is the Mother of 
the three forms of energy, ‘Sun,’ ‘Moon,’ and ‘Fire,’ and Shabdabrahman 
Itself.” Kundalini is therefore the mightiest manifestation of creative power 
in the human body. Kundalt is the Shabdabrahman—that is, Atma as 
manifested Shakti—in bodies, and in every power, person, and thing. The 
Six Centers and all evolved therefrom are Her manifestation. Shiva 
“dwells” in the Sahasrara. The latter is the upper Shrichakra, as the six 
centers are the lower. Yet Shakti and Shiva are one. Therefore the body of 
Kundalini Shakti consists of eight parts (Angas)—namely, the six centers of 
psychic and physical force, Shakti, and Sadashiva Her Lord.{620} In the 
Sahasrara Kundali is merged in the Supreme Atma-Shakti. Kundalini is the 
great Pranadevata which is Nadatma, and if Prana is to be drawn up through 
the “middle path,” the Sushumna towards the Brahmarandha, it must of 
necessity pierce the lotuses or Chakras which bar the way therein. 
Kundalini being Pranashakti, if She is moved Prana is moved. 


The Asanas, Kumbhakas, Bandhas, and Mudras, are used to rouse 
Kundalini, so that the Prana withdrawn from Ida and Pinggala may by the 
power of its Shakti, after entry into the Sushumna or void (Shinya), go 
upwards towards the Brahmarandhra.{621} The Yog! is then said to be free 
of the active Karma, and attains the natural state.{622} The object, then, is 
to devitalize the rest of the body by getting the Prana from Ida and Pinggala 
into Sushumna, which is for this reason regarded as the most important of 
all the Nadis and “the delight of the Yogi,” and then to make it ascend 
through the lotuses which “bloom” on its approach. The body on each side 
of the spinal column is devitalized, and the whole current of Prana thrown 
into that column. The Manonmani state is said to arise with the Laya of 
Prana, for on this ensues Laya of Manas. By daily practicing restraint of 
Prana in Sushumna, the natural effort of the Prana along its ordinary 
channels is weakened and the mind is steadied. For when there is movement 
(Parispanda) of Prana there is movement of mind; that is, it feeds upon the 
objects (Vishaya) of the objective world. 


But when Prana is in Sushumna “there is neither day nor night,” for 
“Sushumna devours time.” {623} When there is movement of Prana 
(Pranaspanda), there is no cessation of Vritti (mind functioning). And, as 


the Yogavashishtha says, so long as Prana does not cease to exist there is 
neither Tattvajnana nor destruction of Vasana, the subtle cause of the will 
towards life which is the cause of rebirth. For Tattvajnana, or supreme 
knowledge, is the destruction of both Chitta and Vasana. {624} Restraint of 
breath also renders the semen firm. For the semen fluctuates as long as 
Prana does so. And when the semen is not steady the mind is not steady. 
{625} The mind thus trained detaches itself from the world. These various 
results are said to be achieved by rousing Kundalini, and by the subsequent 
processes for which She is the “key.” “As one forces open a door with a 
key, so the Yogi should force open the door of liberation by 

Kundalini.” {626} For it is She who sleeps in the Muladhara, closing with 
Her mouth the channel (Sushumna) by which ascent may be made to the 
Brahmarandhra. This must be opened when the Prana naturally enters into 
it. “She, the young widow, is to be despoiled forcibly.” It is prescribed that 
there shall be daily practice, with a view to acquire power to manipulate 
this Shakti. {627 } 


It generally takes years from the commencement of the practice to lead the 
Shakti to the Sahasrara. At first She can only be led to a certain point, and 
then gradually higher. He who has led her to a particular center can reach 
the same center more easily at the next attempt. But to go higher requires 
further effort. At each center a particular kind of bliss (Ananda) is 
experienced, and particular powers, such as the conquest of the elementary 
forms of sensible matter (Bhiita) are gained, until at the Ajna center the 
whole universe is experienced. In the earlier stages, moreover, there is a 
natural tendency of the Shakti to return. In the continued practice facility 
and greater control are gained. Where the Nadis are pure it is easy to lead 
Her down even from the Sahasrara. In the perfection of practice the Yogi 
can stay as long as he will in the Sahasrara, where the bliss is the same as 
that experienced in liberation (subject in this case to return), or he may 
transfer himself into another body, a practice known to both the Indian and 
Tibetan Tantras, in the latter of which it is called Phowa. 


The principle of all the methods to attain Samadhi is to get the Prana out of 
Ida and Pinggala. When this is achieved these Nadis become “dead,” 
because vitality has gone out of them. The Prana then enters the Sushumna, 


and, after piercing by the aid of Kundalini, the six Chakras in the Sushumna 
becomes Laya or absorbed in the Sahasrara. The means to this end, when 
operating from the Miladhara, seem to vary in detail, but embody a 
common principle—namely, the forcing of Prana downward and Apana 
upwards {628} (that is, the reverse of their natural directions) by the 
Jalandhara and Mulabandha, or otherwise, when by their union the intemal 
fire is increased. The position is thus similar to a hollow tube in which a 
piston is working at both ends without escape of the central air, which thus 
becomes heated. Then the serpent force Kundalini, aroused by the heat thus 
generated, is aroused from Her potential state called “sleep,” in which She 
lies curled up; She then hisses and straightens Herself, and enters the 
Brahmadvara, or entry into the Sushumna, when by further repeated efforts 
the Chakras in the Sushumna are pierced. This is a gradual process which is 
accompanied by special difficulties at the three knots (Granthis) where 
Mayashakti is powerful, particularly the abdominal knot, the piercing of 
which may, it is admitted, involve considerable pain, physical disorder, and 
even disease. As already explained, these “knots” are the points at which 
converge the Chakras of each of the three groups. Some of the above- 
mentioned processes are described in the present work, to which we now 
proceed, and which on this matter may be summarized as follows:— 


The preliminary verse (and in the reference to the verses I conclude the 
Commentary) says that only those who are acquainted with the Six Lotuses 
can deal with them; and the first verse says that Yoga by means of the 
method here described cannot be achieved without knowledge of the 
Chakras and Nadis. The first verse says that the Brahman will be realized. 
The next question is, How is this effected? The Commentator in the 
preliminary verse says that the very merciful Pirnananda Svami, being 
wishful to rescue the world sunk in the mire of misery, has undertaken the 
task firstly of instructing it as regards the union of the Shakti Kundalini 
with the vital centers, or Chakras, and secondly of imparting that 
knowledge of Brahman (Tattvajana) which leads to liberation. The former 
—that is, knowledge concerning the Chakras, and so forth—is the “first 
shoot” of the Yoga plant. Brahman, as the Commentator says, is the 
Supreme Consciousness which arises upon the acquisition of knowledge. 
The first cause of such knowledge is an acquaintance with and practice of 


the Tantrik Yoga Sadhana, which is concerned with the Chakras, Nadis, and 
Kundalini; the next cause is the realization of that Sadhana by the rousing 
of Kundalini; and the final result is the experiential realization of the 
Brahman, which is the effect of the action of Kundalini, who is the Shakti 
or power of will (Ichchha), action (Kriya), and knowledge (Jnana), and 
exists in forms both subtle and gross. Mind is as much one of the forms of 
Kundali as is that which is called “matter.” Both are equally products of 
Prakritishakti, which is a grosser form of the Nadamaya Shakti. Kundali 
takes the form of the eight Prakritis. {629} It is necessary to bear this well in 
mind, or there is likely to be uninstructed criticism of the system on the 
ground of its supposed “materialism,” and so forth. The Power which is 
aroused is in itself (Svartipa) Consciousness, and when aroused and taken to 
the upper cerebral center is the giver of true knowledge (Svartipa Jnana), 
which is the Supreme Consciousness. 


The arousing of this force is achieved both by will and mind power 
(Yogabala), accompanied by suitable physical action. The Sadhaka{630} 
sits himself in the prescribed Asana and steadies his mind by the Khechart 
Mudra, in which concentration is between the eyebrows. Air is inhaled 
(Piiraka) and then retained (Kumbhaka). The upper part of the body is then 
contracted by Jalandharabandha, {631} so that the upward breath (Prana) is 
checked. By this contraction the air so inhaled is prevented from escape. 
The air so checked tends downwards. When the Yogi feels that the air 
within him, from the throat to the belly, is tending downwards through the 
channels in the Nadis, the escape of Vayu as Apana is again checked by the 
Miulabandha and Ashvini Mudra, in which the anal muscle is contracted. 
The air (Vayu) thus stored becomes an instrument by which, under the 
direction of mind and will, the potentialities of the vital force in the 
Miuladhara may be forced to realization. The process of mental 
concentration on this center is described as follows: With mental Japa of the 
Mantra prescribed, and acquisition thereby of Mantrashakti, the Jivatma 
(individual Consciousness), which is thought of as being in the shape of the 
tapering flame of a lamp, is brought from the region of the heart to the 
Miuladhara. The Jivatma here spoken of is the Atma of the subtle body— 
that is, the Antahkarana or mind as Buddhi (including therein Ahangkara) 
and Manas, the faculties of sense (Indriya) or mind operating to receive 


sense impression through the sense organs, and Prana; {632} the 
constituents of the second, third, and fourth bodily sheaths. Following such 
concentration and impact of the retained Vayu on this center, the Vayu is 
again raised with the Bija “Yang.” A revolution from left to right is given to 
the “air of Kama” or Kandarpa (Kamavayu). This is a form of Ichchha 
Shakti. This, the pressure of the Prana and Apana held in Kumbhaka, the 
natural heat arising therefrom, and the Vahni Bija (Fire Mantra) “Rang,” 
kindle the fire of Kama (Kamagni). The fire encircles and arouses the 
slumbering serpent Kundalini, who is then, in the language of the Shastra, 
seized with the passion of “desire” for Her Spouse, the Parahangsah or 
Paramashiva. Shakti thus rendered active is drawn to Shiva, as in the case 
of ordinary positive and negative electric charges, which are themselves but 
other manifestations of the universal polarity which affects the manifested 
world. 


The Yogakundali Upanishad {633} states the following methods and others 
mentioned: When Prana is passing through Ida, assume Padmasana and 
lengthen the Akasha of 12 points by 4—that is, as in exhalation Prana goes 
out 16 measures, and in inhalation comes in 12, inhale for 16 and thus gain 
power. Then, holding the sides by each hand, stir up Kundalini with all 
one’s strength from right to left fearlessly for 48 minutes. Draw the body up 
a little to let Kundali enter Sushumna. The Yogi does a drawing-up 
movement in which the shoulders are raised and dropped. Prana enters of 
itself with Her. Compressing above and expanding below, and vice versa, 
Prana rises. 


In the commentary {634} on verse 32 of the Anandalahari it is said: “The 
sun and the moon, as they move always in Devayana and Pitriyana 
(northern and southern orbs) in the Macrocosm, are travelling (incessantly 
in the Microcosm) by Ida and Pinggala day and night. The moon, ever 
travelling by the left Nadi (Ida), bedews the whole system with her nectar. 
The sun, travelling by the right Nadi (Pinggala), dries the system (thus 
moistened by nectar). When the sun and the moon meet at Muladhara, that 
day is called Amavasya (new moon day). .. . The Kundali also sleeps in 
Adharakunda. .. . When a Yogi whose mind is under control is able to 
confine the moon in her own place, as also the sun, then the moon and sun 


become confined, and consequently the moon cannot shed its nectar nor the 
sun dry it. Next, when the place of nectar becomes dried by the fire with the 
help of Vayu, then the Kundali wakes up for want of food and hisses like a 
serpent. Afterwards, breaking through the three knots, She runs to Sahasrara 
and bites the Chandra (moon), which is in the middle of the same. Then the 
nectar begins to flow, and wets the (other) Chandra Mandala in Ajnachakra. 
From the latter the whole body becomes bedewed with nectar. Afterwards 
the fifteen eternal Kalas (parts) of Chandra (moon) in Ajna go to Vishuddhi 
and move thereon. The Chandra Mandala in Sahasrara is also called 
Baindava. One Kala remains there always. That Kala is nothing but Chit 
Itself, which is also called Atman. We call Her Tripurasundari. It is 
understood by this that, in order to rouse the Kundali, one should practice in 
the lunar fortnight alone, and not in the solar one.” 


Kundalini is led upwards “as a rider guides a trained mare by the reins,” 
through the aperture hitherto closed by Her own coils, but now open, within 
the entrance of the Chitrint Nadi. She then pierces in that Nadi each of the 
lotuses, which turn their heads upwards as She passes through them. As 
Kundalini united with the subtle Jivatma passes through each of these 
lotuses, She absorbs into Herself the regnant Tattvas of each of these 
centers, and all that has been above described to be in them. As the ascent is 
made, each of the grosser Tattvas enters into the Laya state, and is replaced 
by the energy of Kundalini, which after the passage of the Vishuddha 
Chakra replaces them all. The senses which operate in association with 
these grosser Tattvas are merged in Her, who then absorbs into Herself the 
subtle Tattvas of the Ajna. Kundalini Herself takes on a different aspect as 
She ascends the three planes, and unites with each of the Lingas in that 
form of Hers which is appropriate to such union. For whereas in the 
Miuladhara She is the Shakti of all in their gross or physical manifested state 
(Virat), at the stage of Ajna She is the Shakti of the mental and psychic or 
subtle body (Hiranyagarbha), and in the region of the Sahasrara She is the 
Shakti of the spiritual plane (Ishvara), which, though itself in its Brahman 
aspect undifferentiated, contains in its Power-aspect all lower planes in a 
concealed potential state. The Maya Tantra (see v. 51, post) says that the 
four sound-producing Shaktis—namely, Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and 
Vaikhari—are Kundali Herself (Kundalinyabhedaripa). Hence, when 


Kundali starts to go to Sahasrara, She in Her form as Vaikhari bewitches 
Svayambhu Linga; She then similarly bewitches Bana Linga in the heart as 
Madhyama and Itara Linga in the eyebrows as Pashyanti. Then, when She 
reaches the stage of Parabindu, She attains the state of Para (Parabhava). 


The upward movement is from the gross to the more subtle, and the order of 
dissolution of the Tattvas is as follows: Prithivi with the Indriyas (smell and 
feet), the latter of which have Prithivi (the earth as ground) as their support, 
is dissolved into Gandha Tattva, or Tanmatra of smell, which is in the 
Miuladhara; Gandha Tattva is then taken to the Svadishthana, and it, Ap, and 
its connected Indriyas (taste and hands), are dissolved in Rasa (Taste) 
Tanmatra; the latter is taken to the Manipura and there Rasa Tattva, Tejas, 
and its connected Indriyas (sight and anus), are dissolved into Rupa (Sight) 
Tanmatra; then the latter is taken into the Anahata, and it, Vayu, and the 
connected Indriyas (touch and penis), are dissolved in Sparsha (Touch) 
Tanmatra; the latter is taken to the Vishuddha, and there it, Akasha, and 
associated Indriyas (hearing and mouth), are dissolved in the Shabda 
(Sound) Tanmiatra; the latter is then taken to the Ajna, and, there and 
beyond, it and Manas are dissolved in Mahat, Mahat in Sukshma Prakriti, 
and the latter is united with Parabindu in the Sahasrara. In the case of the 
latter merger there are various stages which are mentioned in the text (v. 
52), as of Nada into Nadanta, Nadanta into Vyapika, Vyapika into Samani, 
Samant in Unmani, and the latter into Vishnuvaktra or Pungbindu, which is 
also Paramashiva. When all the letters have been thus dissolved, all the six 
Chakras are dissolved as the petals of the lotuses bear the letters. 


On this upward movement, Brahma, Savitri, Dakini, the Devas, Matrikas, 
and Vrittis, of the Muladhara, are absorbed in Kundalini, as is also the 
Mahimandala or Prithivi, and the Prithivi Bija “Lang” into which it passes. 
For these Bijas, or sound powers, express the subtle Mantra aspect of that 
which is dissolved in them. Thus “earth” springs from and is dissolved in its 
seed (Bija), which is that particular aspect of the creative consciousness 
which propelled it. The uttered Mantra (Vaikharil Shabda) or “Lang” is the 
expression in gross sound of that. 


When the Devi leaves the Muladhara, that lotus, which by reason of the 
awakening of Kundalini and the vivifying intensity of the Pranik current 
had opened and turned its flower upwards, again closes and hangs its head 
downwards. As Kundalini reaches the Svadishthana, that lotus opens out 
and lifts its flower upwards. Upon Her entrance, Vishnu, Lakshmi, 
Sarasvati, Rakini, Matrikas and Vritti, Vaikunthadhama, Golaka, and the 
Deva and Devi residing therein, are dissolved in the body of Kundalini. The 
Prithivi or Earth Bija “Lang” is dissolved in the Tattva water, and water 
converted into its Bija “Vang” remains in the body of Kundalini. When the 
Devi reaches the Manipira Chakra or Brahmagranthi, all that is in that 
Chakra merges in Her. The Varuna Bija “Vang” is dissolved in fire, which 
remains in Her body as the Bija “Rang.” The Shakti next reaches the 
Anahata Chakra, which is known as the Knot of Vishnu (Vishnugranthi), 
where also all which is therein is merged in Her. The Bija of Fire “Rang” is 
sublimed in air, and air converted into its Bija “Yang” is absorbed in 
Kundalini. She then ascends to the abode of Bharati or Sarasvati, the 
Vishuddha Chakra. Upon Her entrance, Arddhanarishvara, Shiva, Shakini, 
the 16 vowels, Mantra, etc., are dissolved in Her. The Bija of Air “Yang” is 
dissolved in ether, which, itself being transformed into the Bija “Hang,” is 
merged in the body of Kundalini. Piercing the concealed Lalana Chakra, the 
Devi reaches the Ajna known as the “Knot of Rudra” (Rudragranthi), where 
Paramashiva, Siddhakali, the Devas, and all else therein, are dissolved in 
Her. At length the Bija of Vyoma (ether) or “Hang” is absorbed into the 
subtle Tattvas of the Ajna, and then into the Devi. After passing through the 
Rudragranthi, Kundalini unites with Paramashiva. As She proceeds 
upwards from the two-petalled lotus, the Niralambapuri, Pranava, Nada, 
etc., are merged in the Devi. She has thus in Her progress upwards absorbed 
in Herself the twenty-three Tattvas, commencing with the gross elements, 
and then remaining Herself Shakti, the cause of all Shaktis, unites with 
Paramashiva. 


By this method of mental concentration, aided by the physical and other 
processes described, the gross is absorbed into the subtle, each dissolving 
into its immediate cause and all into the Chidatma or the Atma which is 
Chit. In language borrowed from the world of human passion, which is 
itself but a gross reflection on our physical plane of corresponding, though 


more subtle, super-sensual activities and bliss, the Shakti Kundalini who 
has been seized by desire for Her Lord is said to make swift way to him, 
and, kissing the Lotus mouth of Shiva, enjoys him (S.N., v. 51). By the term 
Samarasya is meant the sense of enjoyment arising from the union 
(Samarasya) of male and female. This the most intense form of physical 
delight symbolizes the Supreme Bliss arising from the union of Shiva and 
Shakti in the spiritual plane upon which it is enacted. So Daksha 
Dharmashastrakara says: “The Brahman is to be known by itself alone, and 
to know It is as the bliss of knowing a virgin.” {635} Similarly, the Sadhaka 
in Layasiddhiyoga, thinking of himself as Shakti and the Paramatma as 
Purusha, feels himself in union (Sanggama) with Shiva, and enjoys with 
him the bliss which is Shringararasa, the first of the nine Rasa, or the love 
sentiment and bliss. This Adirasa (Shringara) which is aroused by 
Sattvaguna{636} is impartite (Akhanda), self-illuminating (Svaprakasha) 
bliss (Ananda) whose substance is Chit (Chinmaya). {637} It is so intense 
and all-exclusive as to render the lover unconscious of all other objects of 
knowledge (Vedyantara-sparsha-shtinyah), and the own brother{638} of 
Brahma-bliss (Brahmasvadasahodara). {639} But as the Brahma-bliss is 
known only to the Yogi, so, as the Alangkara Shastra last cited observes, 
even the true love-bliss of the mortal world “is known to a few knowers 
only” (jneyah kashchit pramatribhih), such as poets and others. Sexual as 
well as other forms of love are reflections or fragments of the Brahman- 
bliss. 


This union of the Shakti Kundalini with Shiva in the body of the Sadhaka is 
that coition (Maithuna) of the Sattvika Panchatattva which the Yogini 
Tantra says is “the best of all unions for those who have already controlled 
their passions,” and are thus Yati.{640} Of this the Brihat Shrikrama (vide 
S.N., v. 51, post) says: “They with the eye of knowledge see the stainless 
Kala, united with Chidananda on Nada. He is the Mahadeva, white like a 
pure crystal, and is the effulgent cause (Vimbartipa-nidana), and She is the 
lovely woman of beauteous limbs which are listless by reason of Her great 
passion.” On their union nectar (Amrita) flows, which in ambrosial stream 
runs from the Brahmarandhra to the Muladhara, flooding the 
Kshudrabrahmanda, or microcosm, and satisfying the Devatas of its 
Chakras. It is then that the Sadhaka, forgetful of all in this world, is 


immersed in ineffable bliss. Refreshment, increased power and enjoyment, 
follows upon each visit to the Well of Life. 


In the Chintamanistava, attributed to Shri Shangkaracharyya, it is said: 
“This family woman (i.e., Kundalini), entering the royal road (i.e., 
Sushumna), taking rest at intervals in the sacred places (i.e., Chakra), 
embraces the Supreme Husband (Parashiva) and makes nectar to flow (i.e., 
from the Sahasrara).” 


The Guru’s instructions are to go above the Ajna Chakra, but no special 
directions are given: for after this Chakra has been pierced, the Sadhaka 
can, and indeed must, reach the Brahmasthana, or abode of Brahman, 
unaided by his own effort. Above the Ajna the relationship of Guru and 
Shishya (Master and disciple) ceases. Kundalini having pierced the fourteen 
“Knots” (Granthis)—viz., three Lingas, six Chakras, and the five Shivas 
which they contain, and then Herself drunk of the nectar which issues from 
Parashiva, returns along the path whence She came to Her own abode 
(Miiladhara).{641} As She returns She pours from Herself into the Chakras 
all that She had previously absorbed therefrom. In other words, as Her 
passage upwards was Layakrama, causing all things in the Chakras to pass 
into the Laya state (dissolution), so Her return is Srishtikrama, as She 
“recreates” or makes them manifest. In this manner She again reaches the 
Muladhara, when all that has been already described to be in the Chakras 
appears in the positions which they occupied before Her awakening. In fact, 
the descending Jivatma makes for Himself the idea of that separated 
multiple and individualized world which passed from him as he ascended to 
and became one with its Cause. She as Consciousness absorbs what She as 
conscious Power projected. In short, the return of Kundalini is the setting 
again of the Jivatma in the phenomenal world of the lowest plane of being 
after it had been raised therefrom in a state of ecstasis, or Samadhi. The 
Yogi thus knows (because he experiences) the nature and state of Spirit and 
its pathway to and from the Mayik and embodied world. In this Yoga there 
is a gradual process of involution of the gross world and its elements into its 
cause. Each gross element (Mahabhita), together with the subtle element 
(Tanmatra) from which it proceeds and the connected organ of sense 
(Indriya), is dissolved into the next above it until the last element, ether, 


with the Tanmatra sound and Manas, are dissolved in egoism (Ahangkara), 
of which they are Vikritis. Ahangkara is merged in Mahat, the first 
manifestation of creative ideation, and the latter into Bindu, which is the 
Supreme Being, Consciousness, and Bliss of the Brahman. As Kundalini 
ascends, the lower limbs become as inert and cold as a corpse; so also does 
every part of the body when She has passed through and leaves it. This is 
due to the fact that She as the Power which supports the body is leaving Her 
center. On the contrary, the upper part of the head becomes “lustrous,” by 
which is not meant any external luster (Prabha), but brightness, warmth, 
and animation. When the Yoga is complete, the Yog! sits rigid in the posture 
selected, and the only trace of warmth to be found in the whole body is at 
the crown of the head, where the Shakti is united with Shiva. Those, 
therefore, who are sceptical can easily verify the facts should they be 
fortunate enough to find a successful Yogi who will let them see him at 
work. They may observe his ecstasis and the coldness of the body, which is 
not present in the case of what is called the Dhyana Yogi, or a Yogi 
operating by meditation only, and not rousing Kundalint. This cold is an 
external and easily perceptible sign. Its progression may be seen, obviously 
denoting the passing away of something which supplied the previous heat. 
The body seems lifeless, indicating that its supporting power has (though 
not entirely) left it. The downward return of the Shakti thus moved is, on 
the other hand, indicated by the reappearance of warmth, vitality, and the 
normal consciousness. The return process is one of evolution from the 
highest state of attainment to the point of departure. 


Though not dealt with in this work, reference may here be made to the 
Sadhana accompanying the return of Kundalini to Her resting-place in the 
ritual practice called Bhitashuddhi, where the ascent and descent are 
imagined only. 


The Sadhaka, thinking of the Vayu Bija “Yang” as being in the left nostril, 
inhales through Ida, making Japa of the Bija sixteen times. Then, closing 
both nostrils, he makes Japa of the Bija sixty-four times. He then thinks of 
the “black man of sin” (Papapurusha{642}) in the left{643} cavity of the 
abdomen as being dried up (by the air), and so thinking he exhales through 
the right nostril Pinggala, making Japa of the Bija thirty-two times. The 


Sadhaka then, meditating upon the red-colored Bija “Rang” in the 
Manipira, inhales, making sixteen Japa of the Bija, and then closes the 
nostrils, making sixteen Japa. Whilst making Japa he thinks that the body of 
the “man of sin” is being burnt and reduced to ashes (by the fire). He then 
inhales through the right nostril with thirty-two Japa, and then meditates 
upon the white Chandrabija “Thang.” He next inhales though Ida, making 
Japa of the Bija sixteen times, closes both nostrils with Japa done sixty-four 
times, and exhales through Pinggala with thirty-two Japa. During 
inhalation, holding of breath, and exhalation, he should consider that a new 
celestial body is being formed by the nectar (composed of all the Matrika- 
varna, or sound-powers, embodied in their Vaikhari form as lettered sound) 
dropping from the “Moon.” In a similar way with the Bija of water “Vang” 
the formation of the body is continued, and with the Bija “Lang” of the 
cohesive Prithivi Tattva it is completed and strengthened. Lastly, with the 
Mantra “So’ham” (“He I am”) the Sadhaka leads the Jivatma into its place 
in the heart. Some forms of meditation are given in v. 51. 


Kundali does not at first stay long in Sahasrara. The length of stay depends 
on the strength of the Yogi’s practice. There is then a natural tendency on 
the part of Kundali to return. The Yogi will use all effort at his disposal to 
retain Her above, for the longer this is done the nearer approach is made to 
the time when She can be in a permanent manner retained there. {644} For 
it is to be observed that liberation is not gained by merely leading Kundali 
to the Sahasrara, and of course still less is it gained by stirring it up in the 
Miuladhara or fixing it in any of the lower centers. Liberation is gained only 
when Kundali takes up Her permanent abode in the Sahasrara, so that She 
only returns by the will of the Sadhaka. It is said that after staying in 
Sahasrara for a time, some Yogins lead the Kundalini back to Hridaya 
(heart), and worship her there. This is done by those who are unable to stay 
long in Sahasrara. If they take the Kundalini lower than Hridaya—i.e., 
worship her in the three Chakras below Anahata—they no longer, it is said, 
belong to the Samaya group.{645} 


Thus, when by the preliminary Sadhana purity of physical and mental 
function is gained, the Sadhaka learns how to open the entrance of the 
Sushumna, which is ordinarily closed at the base. This is the meaning of the 


statement that the Serpent with its coil closes the gate of Brahma. At the 
base of the Sushumna Nadi and in the Adhara lotus the Shakti Kundalini 
lies slumbering coiled round the Linga, the Shiva or Purusha aspect in that 
center of the Shabdabrahman, of which She is the Prakriti aspect. Kundali 
in the form of Her creative emanations as mind and matter is the whole 
moving body, but She Herself exists at the Muladhara or earth center as a 
gross aspect of Shakti in its sleeping form. This is the normal abode of the 
Shakti who is the Shabdabrahman Itself. For having so completely 
manifested Herself She rests or sleeps in what is her grossest and 
concluding manifestation. The residual vital force in this center there exists 
in a latent and potential state. If its aid towards Yoga is sought, the first 
process must be that by which the Serpent is aroused from its slumber. In 
other words, this force is raised from its latent potential state to one of 
activity, and there reunited with Itself in its other aspect as the Spiritual 
Light which shines{646} in the cerebral center. 


Kundali Shakti is Chit, or Consciousness, in its creative aspect as Power. As 
Shakti it is through Her activity that the world and all human beings therein 
exist. Prakriti Shakti is in the Miladhara in a state of sleep (Prasupta)—that 
is, latent activity looking outwards (Vahirmukhi). It is because She is in this 
state of latent activity that through Her all the outer material world 
functions of life are being performed by men. And it is for this reason that 
man is engrossed in the world, and under the lure of Maya takes his body 
and egoism to be the real self, and thus goes round the wheel of life in its 
unending cycle of birth and death. When the Jiva thinks the world to be 
different from Himself and the Brahman, it is through the influence of 
Kundalini who dwells within Him. Her sleep in the Muladhara is, therefore, 
for the bondage of the ignorant.{647} As long as She remains in the 
Miuladhara lotus—namely, in that state of Hers which is the concomitant of 
the cosmic appearance—so long must that appearance endure. In short, 
when She is asleep man is in the waking state (Jagrat). Hence it is 
said{648} that the Shakti of the initiate is awake, that of the Pashu asleep. 
She is therefore aroused from sleep, and when awake returns to Her Lord, 
who is but Herself in another aspect; Her return is, in fact, the withdrawal 
of that activity of Hers which produces the world of appearances, and which 
with such withdrawal disappears. For on Her upward Path She absorbs into 


Herself all the Tattvas which had emanated from Her. The individual 
consciousness of the Yogi, the Jivatma, being united with the world- 
consciousness in Her, or Kundali, then becomes the universal 
consciousness, or Paramatma, from which it appeared to be different only 
by reason of the world-creating and bewildering activity of Kundali which 
is thus withdrawn. The establishment through Her of the pure state of 
Being-Consciousness Bliss is Samadhi. 


In short, Kundali is the individual bodily representative of the great Cosmic 
Power (Shakti) which creates and sustains the universe. When this 
individual Shakti manifesting as the individual consciousness (Jiva) is 
merged in the consciousness of the Supreme Shiva, the world is for such 
Jiva destroyed, and liberation (Mukti) is obtained. Under, however, the 
influence of the Cosmic Shakti, the universe continues for those who are 
not liberated until the great dissolution (Mahapralaya), at the close of which 
the universe again evolves into those Jivas whose Karma has not been 
exhausted, and who have therefore not been liberated. The rousing and 
stirring up of Kundali or Kundali Yoga is thus a form of that merger of the 
individual into the universal consciousness which is the end of every system 
of Indian Yoga. 


Pandit R. Ananta Shastri says{649} that “The Samaya method of 
worshipping Shakti, called the Samayachara, {650} is dealt with in five 
treatises whose reputed authors are the great sages Sanaka, Sananda, 
Sanatkumara, Vashishtha, and Shuka. The following is a summary of the 
teachings contained in these Samaya Agamas, each of which goes after the 
name of its author: 


“The Shakti or energy, the development of which is the subject of these 
treatises, is called the Kundalini. The place where it resides is called the 
Miuladhara (original abode). By a successful development and working of 
this Shakti, the liberation of the soul is attained. In the ordinary condition 
Kundalini sleeps quietly at the Miladhara. The first purpose of the 
practitioners is to awaken this sleeping snake, and this is effected in two 
ways: 


“(1) By Tapas. Here Tapas refers to the process of Pranayama, which means 
the regulation of the breath and holding it for stated periods of time. This is 
also the course advocated by the Yoga Shastras. 


“(2) By Mantras. The pupil is initiated in the chanting of certain Mantras 
which he has to repeat a fixed number of times at particular hours of the 
day, all the while having before his mind’s eye the figure of the Murti or 
God connoted by the Mantra he chants. The most important of these 
Mantras is said to be the Panchadasht. 


“When it is thus roused up, the Kundalini ascends from (i) Muladhara, 
where it was sleeping, to the next higher center, called the (2) 
Svadhishthana (own place). Thence with great effort this Shakti is carried to 
the following centers in regular ascending order: (3) Maniptra (full of 
rays); (4) Anahata (sound, not emanating from the collision of bodies)—the 
Shakti here is transformed into sound; (5) Vishuddhi (place of purity)—here 
it becomes a pure Sattvic element; and (6) Ajna (a-jna, a little knowledge). 
At this stage the practitioner may be said to have so far been successful in 
securing a command over this Shakti, which now appears to him, though 
only for a moment, in the form of a sharp flash of lightning. 


“The passage of the Kundalini from the Miladhara through the above 
centers of energy up to Ajna constitutes the first part of the ascent. The 
disciple who takes to this practice has to undergo a course of Upasana 
(contemplation and worship of the prescribed Deity) and Mantra Japa 
(chanting of incantations), {651} into which he will be initiated by his Guru 
(teacher and guide). The six centers of energy above enumerated from 
Muladhara to Ajna, joined together by imaginary straight lines, form a 
double-faced triangle—a hexagon, the six-pointed star—which in called the 
Shrichakra in Sanskrit. The Anahata center (the heart) is the critical point in 
the course of this ascent, and hence much is found written in the Agamas 
about this center. 


“These centers in the body of man (Pindanda) have their correspondence in 
the cosmic planes, and each of these has its own quality, or Guna, and a 
Presiding Deity. When the disciple ascends center by center, he passes 


through the corresponding Lokas, or cosmic planes. The following table 
gives the correspondences, Guna, and Presiding Deity: 


No Psychic Centre | Loka, or Cosmic | Guna, or | Presiding 
‘| im Man's Body. | —- Plane. Quality. |  Detty. 
ee Ce Le ee eee 

1 | Maladhara at the | Bhuvarloka 
stage when 


Shakti is roused 


Tamas Agni (Fire) 


3 | Manipira | Maharloka — 
4 | Anahata Janaloka 


| Rajas Sun 


| 


Vishuddhi Tapoloka Sattva | Moon 


up 
2 |Svadhishthana | Svarloka 
| \ 
Ajna Satyaloka f 


Ow 


“Tf one should die after attaining any of these stages, he is born again having 
all the advantages of the stages gained; thus, a man dies after leading the 
Shakti to the Anahata: in his next birth he begins where he has last left, and 
leads the Shakti onwards from the Anahata. 


“This aspiration to unify one’s soul with the Eternal One has been held by 
some to be an attempt of a Tamasa origin to rid itself of all Tamas and Rajas 
in it. Therefore the aspirant in the first and second stages is said to have 
more Tamas than in the succeeding stages, and to be therefore in the 
Tamasic stage, which is presided over by Agni. In the next two stages he is 
similarly said to be in the Rajasic stage, presided over by the Sun. In the next 
two he is in the Sattvic stage, presided over by the Moon, the Deity which is 
assigned a higher plane than the Sun and Agni. But it is to be noticed that the 
aspirant does not get at pure Sattva until he passes on to the Sahasrara, and 


that Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva, referred to in the above table, are but relative, 
and bear no comparison with their common acceptation. 


“Kundalini is the grossest form of the Chit, the twenty-fourth Tattva, which 
lives in the Mualadhara; later on we shall have to speak of it in detail in our 
treatment of the second part of the aspirant’s ascent. This Kundalini, as soon 
as it is awakened, is in the Kumari (girl) stage. On reaching the Anahata, it 
attains the Yoshit stage (womanhood). Hence the indication that it is the 
most difficult and important step in the ascent. The next stage is in the 
Sahasrara, of which we shall speak hereafter, and the Shakti in that stage is 
called Pativrata (devoted to husband). See Taittirlyaranyaka, 1-27-12. 


“The second part of the ascent of Kundalini consists of only one step; the 
Shakti should be taken into the Sahasrara from the Ajna, where we left her. 
The Sahasrara (lit., a thousand-petalled lotus) forms in itself a Shrichakra. 
The description of this place in Sanskrit is too difficult to be rendered 
satisfactorily into English. In the Sahasrara there is a certain place of luster 
known as Chandra Loka (a world of nectar). In this place live in union the 
Sat (Sadashiva) and the Chit, the twenty-fifth and the twenty-fourth Tattvas. 
The Chit, or Shuddha Vidya, is also called Sadakhya, the 16th Kala of the 
moon. These two Tattvas are always in union, and this union itself is taken to 
be the twenty-sixth Tattva. It is this union of Sat and Chit that is the goal of 
the aspirant. The Kundalini which has been led all the way to the Sahasrara 
should be merged into this union; this is the end of the aspirant’s journey; he 
now enjoys beatitude itself (Paramananda). 


“But this Kundalini does not stay in the Sahasrara for a long time. It always 
tends to return, and does return to its original position. The process should 
again and again be repeated by the aspirant several times, until the Shakti 
makes a permanent stay with her Pati (husband)—namely, Sadashiva—or 
until the union of Sadashiva and Chit is complete, and becomes Pativrata, as 
already mentioned. The aspirant is then a Jivan-mukta, or pure Sattva. He is 
not conscious of this material limitation of the soul. He is all joy, and is the 
Eternal itself. See vv. 9 and 10. So much of Samayachara. 


“Now to the other methods of Shakta worship; the Kaulas worship the 
Kundalini without rousing her from her sleep{652} in the Muladhara, which 


is called Kula; and hence Kaulas (Sans. Ku = earth, Prithivi; so Muladhara). 
Beyond the Miladhara they do not rise; they follow the Vamachara, or black 
magic, {653} and gain their temporal objects and enjoy; they are not 
liberated from birth and death; they do not go beyond this earth. Nay, more, 
the Kaulas are now so far degraded that they have left off altogether the 
worship of the Kundalini in the Maladhara, and have betaken themselves to 
practices most inhuman, which are far from being divine. {654} The Mishras 
are far above the Kaulas. They perform all Karmas, worship the Devi or 
Shakti in the elements, such as the sun, air, etc., and do Upasana with 
Yantras made of gold or other metals. They worship the Kundalini, awake 
her, and attempt to lead her on. Some of the Mishra worshippers rise even as 
far as the Anahata. 


“We learn from the Commentators that this whole subject of Shakti-worship 
is treated of in detail in the ‘Taittartya Aranyaka’ (1st chapter). Some of 
them even quote from that ‘Aranyaka’ in support of their explanations. This 
subject is vast and a very difficult one. It is not possible for one to go into 
the intricacies of the subject unless one be a great Guru of vast learning and 
much personal experience;{655} great works have been written on even 
single points in the ascent of the aspirant up the psychic centers.” {656} 


“The followers of the Samaya group are prohibited from worshipping Devi 
in the Macrocosm. They should worship Her in any of the Chakras in the 
human body, choosing that center which their practice and ability permits 
them to reach. They should contemplate on Devi and Her Lord Shiva as (i) 
having the same abode (Adhishthanasamya), (2) occupying the same 
position (Avasthanasamya), (3) performing the same functions 
(Anushthanasamya), (4) having the same form (Ripa), and (5) as having the 
same name (Nama). Thus, in worshipping Devi in the Adharachakra, Shiva 
and Shakti (1) have Muladhara for their seat, (2) both of them occupy the 
position of dancers, (3) both together perform the function of creating the 
universe, (4) both are red in color, (5) Shiva is called Bhairava, and Shakti 
Bhairavi. 


“Similarly for the other Chakras mentioned in the preceding Shlokas. This is 
the way how beginners have to practice. Advanced students worship Devi in 


the Sahasrara, and not in the lower centers. How is the worship to be carried 
on in Sahasrara? 


“The worshipper should fix his attention on Baindava, which is the locality 
where the ever-existing 26th Tattva—the union of Shiva and Shakti— 
resides. It lies’ above all the 25 Tatvas, and is situated in Chandramandala 
(the sphere of the moon) in Sahasrara. He should contemplate on the said 
union and identify himself with it. This shows that those who carry on Bahya 
Puja, or worship in the external world, do not belong to the Samaya school. 
As regards the identification of oneself with the union of Shiva and Shakti at 
Baindava just spoken of, there are two ways of realizing it; one is known as 
the fourfold path, and the other the six-fold path. These should be learnt 
from the Guru. 


“A novitiate in the Samaya school has to go through the following course: 


(1) He should cherish the utmost regard for and confidence in his Guru. (2) 
He should receive the Panchadashi Mantra from his Guru, and chant the 
same according to instructions, with a knowledge of its seer (Rishi), metre 
(Chhandas), and the Deity (Devata).{657} (3) On the eighth day in the 
bright fortnight of Ashvayuja month, Mahanavami, he should at midnight 
prostrate himself at his Guru’s feet, when the latter will be pleased to initiate 
him in some Mantra and the real nature of the six Chakras and of the six-fold 
path of identification. 


“After he is thus qualified, Lord Mahadeva{658} gives him the knowledge 
or Capacity to see his inner soul. . . . Then the Kundalini awakes, and, going 
up suddenly to Manipiira, becomes visible to the devotee-practitioner. 
Thence he has to take Her slowly to the higher Chakras one after another, 
and there performs the prescribed worship, and She will appear to him more 
and more clearly. When the Ajnachakra is crossed, the Kundalini quickly 
darts away like a flash of lightning to Sahasrara, and enters the Island of 
Gems surrounded by the Kalpa trees in the Ocean of Nectar, unites with 
Sadashiva there, and enjoys with Him. 


“The practitioner should now wait outside the veil{659} until Kundalini 
returns to Her own place, and on Her return continue the process until She is 


joined for ever with Sadashiva in the Sahasrara, and never returns. 


“The process heretofore described and others of a similar nature are always 
kept secret; yet the commentator says he has out of compassion towards his 
disciples given here an outline of the method. 


“Even in the mere expectation of the return of Kundalini from Sahasrara, the 
aspirant feels Brahmananda (Brahma bliss). He who has once taken 
Kundalini to Sahasrara is led to desire nothing but Moksha (liberation), if he 
has no other expectation. Even if any of the Samaya practitioners have some 
worldly expectations, they must still worship in the microcosm only. 


“¢Subhagodaya’ and other famous works on Shrividya say that the 
practitioner should concentrate his mind on Devi who resides in 
Suryamandala (the sun’s disc), and so on. This statement is not at variance 
with the teaching contained in this book, for the Siryamandala referred to 
applies to the Pindanda (microcosm), and not to Brahmanda (macrocosm). 
Similarly, all the verses advocating outer worship are to be applied to the 
corresponding objects in the Pindanda.” {660} 


VI. THEORETICAL BASES OF THIS YOGA 


It will now be asked what are the general principles which underlie the 
Yoga practice above described. How is it that the rousing of Kundalini 
Shakti and Her union with Shiva effects the state of ecstatic union 
(Samadhi) and spiritual experience which is alleged? The reader who has 
understood the general principles recorded in the previous sections should, 
if he have not already divined it, readily appreciate the answer here given. 


In the first place, the preceding section will have indicated that there are 
two main lines of Yoga—namely, Dhyana or Bhavana Yoga, and Kundali 
Yoga, the subject of this work—and that there is a marked difference 
between the two. The first class of Yoga is that in which ecstasy (Samadhi) 
is attained by intellective processes (Kriya jnana) of meditation and the like 
with the aid, it may be, of auxiliary processes of Mantra or Hathayoga{661} 
(other than the rousing of Kundali Shakti) and by detachment from the 
world; the second stands apart as that portion of Hathayoga in which, 
though intellective processes are not neglected, the creative and sustaining 
Shakti of the whole body is actually and truly united with the Lord 
Consciousness. The Yogi makes Her introduce Him to Her Lord, and enjoys 
the bliss of union through Her. Though it is He who arouses Her, it is She 
who gives Jnana, for She is Herself that. The Dhyana Yogi gains what 
acquaintance with the supreme state his own meditative powers can give 
him, and knows not the enjoyment of union with Shiva in and through his 
fundamental body-power. The two forms of Yoga diner both as to method 
and result. The Hathayogi regards his Yoga and its fruit as the highest. 
Perhaps the Jnanayogi may think similarly of his own. Kundalint is so 
renowned that many seek to know Her. Having studied the theory of this 
Yoga, I have often been asked “whether one can get on without it.” The 
answer is: “It depends upon what you are looking for.” If you want to rouse 
Kundali Shakti to enjoy the bliss of union of Shiva and Shakti through Her, 
and to gain the accompanying powers (Siddhi),{662} it is obvious that this 
end can only be achieved by the Yoga here described. But if liberation is 


sought without desire for union through Kundali, then such Yoga is not 
necessary, for liberation may be obtained by pure Jnanayoga through 
detachment, the exercise, and then the stilling, of the mind without any 
reference to the central bodily power at all. Instead of setting out in, and 
from the world, to unite with Shiva, the Jnanayogi, to attain this result, 
detaches himself from the world. The one is the path of enjoyment{663} 
and the other of asceticism. Samadhi may also be attained on the path of 
devotion (Bhakti), as on that of knowledge. Indeed, the highest devotion 
(Parabhakti) is not different from knowledge. Both are realization. But 
whilst liberation (Mukti) is attainable by either method, there are other 
marked differences between the two. A Dhyana Yogi should not neglect his 
body, knowing that, as he is both mind and matter, each reacts the one upon 
the other. Neglect or mere mortification of the body is more apt to produce 
disordered imagination than a true spiritual experience. He is not 
concerned, however, with the body in the sense that the Hathayog? is. It is 
possible to be a successful Dhyanayogi and yet to be weak in body and 
health, sick, and short-lived. His body, and not he himself, determines when 
he shall die. He cannot die at will. When he is in Samadhi, Kundali Shakti 
is still sleeping in the Miladhara; and none of the physical symptoms, 
psychical bliss, or powers (Siddhi) already described as accompanying Her 
rousing, are observed in his case. The ecstasis, which he calls “Liberation 
while yet living” (Jivanmukta), is not a state like that of real liberation. He 
may be still subject to a suffering body, from which he escapes only at 
death, when, if at all, he is liberated. His ecstasy is in the nature of a 
meditation which passes into the Void (Bhavana samadhi) effected through 
negation of thought (Chittavritti) and detachment from the world—a 
negative process in which the positive act of raising the central power of the 
body takes no part. By his effort the mind, which is a product of Kundalini 
as Prakriti Shakti, together with its worldly desires, is stilled, so that the veil 
produced by mental functioning is removed from Consciousness. In 
Layayoga Kundalini Herself, when roused by the Yogi (for such rousing is 
his act and part), achieves for him this illumination. But why, it may be 
asked, should one trouble over the body and its central power, the more 
particularly that there are unusual risks and difficulties involved? The 
answer has been already given—alleged completeness and certainty of 
realization through the agency of the power which is Knowledge itself 


(Jnanariipa shakti); an intermediate acquisition of powers (Siddhi); and 
intermediate and final enjoyment. This answer may, however, usefully be 
developed, as a fundamental principle of the Shakta Tantra is involved. 


The Shakta Tantra claims to give both enjoyment{664} (Bhukti) in this and 
the next world, and liberation (Mukti) from all worlds. This claim is based 
on a profoundly true principle.{665} If the ultimate reality is the one which 
exists in two aspects of quiescent enjoyment of the Self in liberation from 
all form and of active enjoyment of objects—that is, as pure Spirit and 
Spirit in matter—then a complete union with Reality demands such unity in 
both of its aspects. It must be known both “here” (Iha) and “there” 
(Amutra). When rightly apprehended and practiced, there is truth in the 
doctrine which teaches that man should make the best of both worlds. {666} 
There is no real incompatibility between the two, provided action is taken in 
conformity with the universal law of manifestation. It is held to be false 
teaching that happiness hereafter can only be had by neglect to seek it now, 
or in deliberately sought for suffering and mortification. It is the one Shiva 
who is the supreme blissful experience, and who appears in the form of man 
with a life of mingled pleasure and pain. Both happiness here and the bliss 
of liberation here and hereafter may be attained if the identity of these 
Shivas be realized in every human act. This will be achieved by making 
every human function, without exception, a religious act of sacrifice and 
worship (Yajna). In the ancient Vaidik ritual enjoyment by way of food and 
drink was preceded, and accompanied by, ceremonial sacrifice and ritual. 
Such enjoyment was the fruit of the sacrifice and the gift of the Gods. At a 
higher stage in the life of a Sadhaka it is offered to the One from whom all 
gifts come and of whom the Devatas are inferior limited forms. But this 
offering also involves a dualism from which the highest Monistic (Advaita) 
Sadhana of the Shakta-Tantra is free. Here the individual life and the world- 
life are known as one. And so the Tantrik Sadhaka, when eating or drinking, 
{667} or fulfilling any other of the natural functions of the body, does so, 
saying and believing, Shivo’ham (“I am Shiva”), Bhairavo’ham (“I am 
Bhairava”), {668} Saham (“I am She”).{669} It is not merely the separate 
individual who thus acts and enjoys. It is Shiva who does so in and through 
him. Such a one recognizes, as has been well said, {670} that his life and the 
play of all its activities are not a thing apart, to be held and pursued 


egotistically for its and his own separate sake, as though enjoyment was 
something to be seized from life by his own unaided strength and with a 
sense of separatedness; but his life and all its activities are conceived as part 
of the divine action in nature (Shakti) manifesting and operating in the form 
of man. He realizes in the pulsing beat of his heart the rhythm which throbs 
through, and is the sign of, the universal life. To neglect or to deny the 
needs of the body, to think of it as something not divine, is to neglect and 
deny that greater life of which it is a part, and to falsify the great doctrine of 
the unity of all and of the ultimate identity of Matter and Spirit. Governed 
by such a concept, even the lowliest physical needs take on a cosmic 
significance. The body is Shakti. Its needs are Shakti’s needs; when man 
enjoys, it is Shakti who enjoys through him. In all he sees and does it is the 
Mother who looks and acts. His eyes and hands are Hers. The whole body 
and all its functions are Her manifestation. To fully realize Her as such is to 
perfect this particular manifestation of Hers which is himself. Man, when 
seeking to be the master of himself, so seeks on all the planes, physical, 
mental; and spiritual; nor can they be severed, for they are all related, being 
but differing aspects of the one all-pervading Consciousness. Who is the 
more divine, he who neglects and spurns the body or mind that he may 
attain some fancied spiritual superiority, or he who rightly cherishes both as 
forms of the one Spirit which they clothe? Realization is more speedily and 
truly attained by discerning Spirit in, and as, all being and its activities, than 
by fleeing from and casting these aside as being either unspiritual or 
illusory and impediments in the path.{671} If not rightly conceived, they 
may be impediments and the cause of fall, otherwise they become 
instruments of attainments; and what others are there to hand? And so the 
Kularnava Tantra says: “By what men fall, by that they rise.” When acts are 
done in the right feeling and frame of mind (Bhava), those acts give 
enjoyment (Bhukti); and the repeated and prolonged Bhava produces at 
length that divine experience (Tattvajnana) which is liberation. When the 
Mother is seen in all things, She is at length realized as She is when beyond 
them all. 


These general principles have their more frequent application in the life of 
the world before entrance on the path of Yoga proper. The Yoga here 
described is, however, also an application of these same principles in so far 


as it is claimed that thereby both Bhukti and Mukti are attained. Ordinarily 
it is said that where there is Yoga there is no Bhoga (enjoyment), but in 
Kaula teaching Yoga is Bhoga and Bhoga is Yoga, and the world itself 
becomes the seat of liberation (““Yogo bhogayate, mokshayate sangsarah”). 
{672} 


By the lower processes of Hathayoga it is sought to attain a perfect physical 
body which will also be a wholly fit instrument by which the mind may 
function. A perfect mind again approaches, and in Samadhi passes into, 
pure Consciousness itself. The Hathayogi thus seeks a body which shall be 
as strong as steel, healthy, free from suffering, and therefore long-lived. 
Master of the body, he is master of both life and death. His lustrous form 
enjoys the vitality of youth. He lives as long as he has the will to live and 
enjoy in the world of forms. His death is the “death at will,” when making 
the great and wonderfully expressive gesture of dissolution{673} he 
grandly departs. But it may be said the Hathayogis do get sick and die. In 
the first place, the full discipline is one of difficulty and risk, and can only 
be pursued under the guidance of a skilled Guru. As the Goraksha Sanghita 
says, unaided and unsuccessful practice may lead not only to disease, but 
death. He who seeks to conquer the Lord of Death incurs the risk on failure 
of a more speedy conquest by Him. All who attempt this Yoga do not, of 
course, succeed, or meet with the same measure of success. Those who fail 
not only incur the infirmities of ordinary men, but others brought on by 
practices which have been ill pursued, or for which they are not fit. Those, 
again, who do succeed, do so in varying degree. One may prolong his life to 
the sacred age of 84, others to 100, others yet further. In theory, at least, 
those who are perfected (Siddha) go from this plane when they will. All 
have not the same capacity or opportunity through want of will, bodily 
strength, or circumstance. All may not be willing or able to follow the strict 
rules necessary for success. Nor does modern life offer in general the 
opportunities for so complete a physical culture. All men may not desire 
such a life, or may think the attainment of it not worth the trouble involved. 
Some may wish to be rid of their body, and that as speedily as possible. It is 
therefore said that it is easier to gain liberation than deathlessness. The 
former may be had by unselfishness, detachment from the world, moral and 
mental discipline. But to conquer death is harder than this; for these 


qualities and acts will not alone avail. He who does so conquer holds life in 
the hollow of one hand, and if he be a successful (Siddha) Yogi, liberation 
in the other. He has enjoyment and liberation. He is the Emperor who is 
master of the world and the possessor of the bliss which is beyond all 
worlds. Therefore it is claimed by the Hathayogi! that every Sadhana is 
inferior to Hathayoga. 


The Hathayogi who works for liberation does so through the Yoga Sadhana 
here described, which gives both enjoyment and liberation. At every center 
to which he rouses Kundalini he experiences a special form of bliss 
(Ananda) and gains special powers (Siddhi). Carrying Her to the Shiva of 
his cerebral center, he enjoys the Supreme Bliss, which in its nature is that 
of liberation, and which, when established in permanence, is liberation itself 
on the loosening of the spirit and body. She who “shines like a chain of 
lights”—a lightning-flash—in the center of his body is the “Inner Woman” 
to whom reference was made when it was said, “What need have I of any 
outer woman? I have an Inner Woman within myself.” The Vira (“heroic”) 
{674} Sadhaka, knowing himself as the embodiment of Shiva (Shivo’ham), 
unites with woman as the embodiment of Shakti on the physical plane. 
{675} The Divya (“divine”) Sadhaka or Yogi unites within himself his own 
principles, female and male, which are the “Heart of the Lord” 
(Hridayamparameshituh){676} or Shakti, and Her Lord Consciousness or 
Shiva. It is their union which is the mystic coition (Maithuna) of the 
Tantras.{677} There are two forms of union (Samarasya){678 }—namely, 
the first, which is the gross (Sthila), or the union of the physical 
embodiments of the Supreme Consciousness; and the second, which is the 
subtle (Stikshma), or the union of the quiescent and active principles in 
Consciousness itself. It is the latter which is liberation. 


Lastly, what in a philosophical sense is the nature of the process here 
described? Shortly stated, energy (Shakti) polarises itself into two forms— 
namely, static or potential (Kundalini), and dynamic (the working forces of 
the body as Prana). Behind all activity there is a static background. This 
static center in the human body is the central Serpent Power in the 
Miuladhara (root support). It is the power which is the static support 
(Adhara) of the whole body, and all its moving Pranik forces. This center 


(Kendra) of power is a gross form of Chit or Consciousness—that is, in 
itself (Svariipa) it is Consciousness, and by appearance it is a power which, 
as the highest form of force, is a manifestation of it. Just as there is a 
distinction (though identity at base) between the supreme quiescent 
Consciousness and its active power (Shakti), so, when Consciousness 
manifests as energy (Shakti), it possesses the twin aspects of potential and 
kinetic energy. There can be no partition, in fact, of reality. To the perfect 
eye of the Siddha the process of becoming is an ascription (Adhyasa).{679} 
To the imperfect eye of the Sadhaka—that is, the aspirant for Siddhi 
(perfected accomplishment)—to the spirit which is still toiling through the 
lower planes and variously identifying itself with them, becoming is tending 
to appear, and appearance is real. The Shakta Tantra is a rendering of 
Vedantic truth from this practical point of view, and represents the world- 
process as a polarization in Consciousness itself. This polarity as it exists 
in, and as, the body, is destroyed by Yoga, which disturbs the equilibrium of 
bodily consciousness which is the result of the maintenance of these two 
poles. In the human body the potential pole of energy, which is the supreme 
power, is stirred to action, on which the moving forces (dynamic Shakti) 
supported by it are drawn thereto, and the whole dynamism{680} thus 
engendered moves upward to unite with the quiescent Consciousness in the 
highest lotus. {681} This matter has been so well put by my friend Professor 
Pramathanatha Mukhyopadhyaya that I cannot improve on his account, 
{682} and therefore cite it in lieu of giving a further description of my own: 


“When you say that Kundali Shakti is the primordial Shakti at rest, I am led 
to think of an analogy (and it may be more than an analogy) in modern 
science. Cosmic energy in its physical aspect may be considered either as 
static or as dynamic, the former being a condition of equilibrium, the latter 
a condition of motion or change of relative position. Thus a material thing 
apparently at rest (there being no absolute rest except in pure Consciousness 
or Chit) should be regarded as energy or Shakti equilibrated, the various 
elements of it holding one another in check (or, as the mathematicians will 
say, the algebraic sum of the forces being zero). Of course, in any given 
case the equilibrium is relative rather than absolute. The important thing to 
note is this polarization of Shakti into two forms—static and dynamic. 


“Tn the tissues of a living body, again, the operative energy (whatever the 
nature of that may be, whether we believe in a special ‘vital force’ or not) 
polarizes itself into two similar forms—anabolic and katabolic—one 
tending to change and the other to conserve the tissues, the actual condition 
of the tissues being simply the resultant of these two coexistent or 
concurrent activities. 


“In the mind or experience also this polarization or polarity is patent to 
reflection. In my own writings{683} I have constantly urged this polarity 
between pure Chit and the stress which is involved in it: there is a stress or 
Shakti developing the mind through an infinity of forms and changes; but 
all these forms and changes are known as involved in the pure and 
unbounded ether of awareness (Chidakasha). This analysis therefore 
exhibits the primordial Shakti in the same two polar forms as before—static 
and dynamic—and here the polarity is most fundamental and approaches 
absoluteness. 


“Lastly, let us consider for one moment the atom of modern science. The 
chemical atom has ceased to be an atom (indivisible unit of matter). We 
have instead the electron theory. According to this, the so-called atom is a 
miniature universe very much like our own solar system. At the center of 
this atomic system we have a charge of positive electricity round which a 
cloud of negative charges (called electrons) is supposed to revolve, just as 
myriads of planets and smaller bodies revolve round the sun. The positive 
and the negative charges hold each other in check, so that the atom is a 
condition of equilibrated energy, and does not therefore ordinarily break up, 
though it may possibly break up and set free its equilibrated store of energy, 
as probably it does in the emanations of the radium. What do we notice 
here? The same polarity of Shakti into a static and a dynamic partner—viz., 
the positive charge at rest at the center, and the negative charges in motion 
round about the center: a most suggestive analogy or illustration, perhaps, 
of the cosmic fact. The illustration may be carried into other domains of 
science and philosophy, but I may as well forbear going into details. For the 
present we may, I think, draw this important conclusion: 


“Shakti, as manifesting itself in the universe, divides itself into two polar 
aspects—static and dynamic—which implies that you cannot have it ina 
dynamic form without at the same time having it in a corresponding static 
form, much like the poles of a magnet. In any given sphere of activity of 
force we must have, according to this cosmic principle, a static background 
—Shakti at rest or ‘coiled,’ as the Tantras say. 


“Before I proceed, let me point out what I conceive to be the fundamental 
significance of our Tantric and Pauranic Kali. This figure or Murti is both 
real and symbolic, as indeed every Murti in the so-called Hindu mythology 
is. Now, the Divine Mother Kali is a symbol of the cosmic truth just 
explained. Sadashiva, on whose breast She dances, nude and dark, is the 
static background of pure Chit, white and inert (Shavaripa), because pure 
Chit is in itself Svaprakasha (self-manifest) and Nishkriya (actionless). At 
the same time, apart from and beyond Consciousness there can be nothing 
—no power or Shakti—hence the Divine Mother stands on the bosom of 
the Divine Father. The Mother Herself is all activity and Gunamayi (in Her 
aspect as Prakriti composed of the Gunas). Her nakedness means that, 
though She encompasses all, there is nothing to encompass Herself; her 
darkness means that She is inscrutable, avangmanasagochara (beyond the 
reach of thought and speech). Of course, this is no partition of reality into 
two (there lies the imperfection of the Sangkhya doctrine of Purusha and 
Prakriti, which is otherwise all right), but merely polarization in our 
experience of an indivisible fact which is the primordial (Adya) Shakti 
itself. Thus Chit is also Shakti. Shiva is Shakti and Shakti is Shiva, as the 
Tantras say. It is Gunashraya (support of Gunas) as well as Gunamaya 
(whose substance is Gunas); Nirguna (attributeless) as well as Saguna (with 
attribute), as said in a well-known passage of the Chand. 


“Your suggestive hint{684} makes the nature of the Kundali Shakti rather 
clear to me. You are quite right, perhaps, in saying that the cosmic Shakti is 
the Samashti (collectivity) in relation to which the Kundali in the bodies is 
only the Vyashti (individual): it is an illustration, a reproduction on a 
miniature scale, a microcosmic plan, of the whole. The law or principle of 
the whole—that of macrocosmic Shakti—should therefore be found in the 
Kundali. That law we have seen to be the law of polarization into static- 


dynamic or potential-kinetic aspects. In the living body, therefore, there 
must be such polarization. Now, the Kundali coiled three times and a half at 
the Miladhara is the indispensable and unfailing static background of the 
dynamic Shakti operative in the whole body, carrying on processes and 
working out changes. The body, therefore, may be compared to a magnet 
with two poles. The Miuladhara is the static pole in relation to the rest of the 
body, which is dynamic; the working, the body, necessarily presupposes and 
finds such a static support, hence perhaps{685} the name Miuladhara, the 
fundamental support. In one sense, the static Shakti at the Muladhara is 
necessarily coexistent with the creating and evolving Shakti of the body, 
because the dynamic aspect or pole can never be without its static 
counterpart. In another sense, it is the Shakti left over (you have yourself 
pointed this out, and the italics are yours) after the Prithivi—the last of the 
Bhutas—has been created, a magazine of power to be drawn upon and 
utilized for further activity, if there should arise any need for such. Taking 
the two senses together (yours as well as mine), Shakti at the Muladhara is 
both coexistent with every act of creation or manifestation and is the 
residual effect of such act—both cause and effect, in fact—an idea which, 
deeply looked into, shows no real contradiction. There is, in fact, what the 
physicist will describe as a cycle or circuit in action. Let us take the 
impregnated ovum—the earliest embryological stage of the living body. In 
it the Kundali Shakti is already presented in its two polar aspects: the ovum, 
which the mother-element represents, one pole (possibly the static), and the 
spermatazoon, which is the father-element, represents the other (possibly 
the dynamic).{686} From their fusion proceed those processes which the 
biologist calls differentiation and integration; but in all this process of 
creation the cycle can be fairly easily traced. Shakti flows out of the 
germinal cell (fertilized ovum), seizes upon foreign matter, and assimilates 
it, and thereby grows in bulk; divides and subdivides itself, and then again 
co-ordinates all its divided parts into one organic whole. Now in all this we 
have the cycle. Seizing upon foreign matter is an outwardly directed 
activity, assimilation is an inwardly directed activity or return current; cell 
division and multiplication is an outwardly directed operation, coordination 
is inwardly directed;{687} and so on. The force in the germ-cell is 
overflowing, but also continuously it is flowing back into itself, the two 
operations presupposing and sustaining each other, as in every circuit. The 


given stock of force in the germ-cell, which is static so long as the fusion of 
the male and female elements does not take place in the womb; is the 
necessary starting-point of all creative activity; it is the primordial cause, 
therefore, in relation to the body—primordial as well as constantly given, 
unceasing. On the other hand, the reaction of every creative action, the 
return current or flowing back of every unfolding overflow, constantly 
renews this starting force, changes it without changing its general condition 
of relative equilibrium (and this is quite possible, as in the case of any 
material system); the force in the germ-cell may therefore be also regarded 
as a perpetual effect, something left over and set against the working forces 
of the body. Many apparently inconsistent ideas enter into this conception, 
and they have to be reconciled. 


“1. We start with a force in the germ-cell which is statical at first (though, 
like a dicotyledon seed, or even a modern atom, it involves within itself 
both a statical and a dynamical pole; otherwise, from pure rest, involving no 
possibility of motion, no motion could ever arise). Let this be the Kundali 
coiled. 


“2. Then there is creative impulse arising out of it; this is motion out of rest. 
By this, the Kundali becomes partly static and partly dynamic, or ejects, so 
to say, a dynamic pole out of it in order to evolve the body, but remaining a 
static pole or background itself all along. In no part of the process has the 
Kundali really uncoiled itself altogether, or even curtailed its three coils and 
a half. Without this Miladhara Shakti remaining intact no evolution could 
be possible at all. It is the hinge upon which everything else turns. 


“3. Each creative act again reacts on the Muladhara Shakti, so that such 
reaction, without disturbing the relative rest of the coiled Shakti, changes its 
volume or intensity, but does not curtail or add to the number of coils. For 
instance, every natural act of respiration reacts on the coiled Shakti at the 
Miuladhara, but it does not commonly make much difference. But 
Pranayama powerfully reacts on it, so much so that it awakes the dormant 
power and sends it piercing through the centers. Now, the common 
description that the Kundali uncoils Herself then and goes up the 
Sushumna, leaving the Muladhara, should, I think, be admitted with caution 


That static background can never be absolutely dispensed with. As you 
have yourself rightly observed, ‘Shakti can never be depleted, but this is 
how to look at it.’ Precisely; the Kundali, when powerfully worked upon by 
Yoga, sends forth an emanation or ejection in the likeness of Her own self 
(like the ‘ethereal double’ of the Theosophists and Spiritualists) which 
pierces through the various centers until it becomes blended, as you point 
out, with the Mahakundali of Shiva at the highest or seventh center. Thus, 
while this ‘ethereal double’ or self-ejection of the coiled power at the 
Miuladhara ascends the Sushumna, the coiled power itself does not and need 
not stir from its place. It is like a spark given from an over-saturated{688} 
electro-magnetic machine; or, rather, it is like the emanations of radium 
which do not sensibly detract from the energy contained in it. This last, 
perhaps, is the closest physical parallel of the case that we are trying to 
understand. As a well-known passage in the Upanishad has it, “The whole 
(Purna) is subtracted from the whole, and yet the whole remains.’ I think 
our present case comes very near to this. The Kundali at the Muladhara is 
the whole primordial Shakti in monad or germ or latency: that is why it is 
coiled. The Kundali that mounts up the Nadi is also the whole Shakti in a 
specially dynamic form—an eject likeness of the Eternal Serpent. The result 
of the last fusion (there are successive fusions in the various centers also) in 
the Sahasrara is also the whole, or Purna. This is how I look at it. In this 
conception the permanent static background is not really depleted, much 
less is it dispensed with. 


“4, When again I say that the volume or intensity of the coiled power can be 
affected (though not its configuration and relative equilibrium), I do not 
mean to throw up the principle of conservation of energy in relation to the 
Kundali, which is the embodiment of all energy. It is merely the conversion 
of static (potential) energy into dynamic (kinetic) energy in part, the sum 
remaining constant. As we have to deal with infinities here, an exact 
physical rendering of this principle is not to be expected. The Yogi therefore 
simply ‘awakens,’ and never creates Shakti. By the way, the germ-cell 
which evolves the body does not, according to modern biology, cease to be 
a germ-cell in any stage of the complicated process. The original germ-cell 
splits up into two: one half gradually develops itself into the body of a plant 
or animal—this is the somatic cell; the other half remains encased within 


the body practically unchanged, and is transmitted in the process of 
reproduction to the offspring—that is, the germ-plasm. Now, this germ- 
plasm is unbroken through the whole line of propagation. This is 
Weismann’s doctrine of ‘continuity of the germ-plasm,’ which has been 
widely accepted, though it is but an hypothesis.” 


In a subsequent postscript the Professor wrote: 


“1. Shakti being either static or dynamic, every dynamic form necessarily 
presupposes a static background. A purely dynamic activity (which is 
motion in its physical aspect) is impossible without a static support or 
ground (Adhara). Hence the philosophical doctrine of absolute motion or 
change, as taught by old Heraclitus and the Buddhists and by modern 
Bergson, is wrong; it is based neither upon correct logic nor upon clear 
intuition. The constitution of an atom reveals the static-dynamic 
polarization of Shakti; other and more complex forms of existence also do 
the same. In the living body this necessary static background is Muladhara, 
where Shakti is Kundali coiled. All the functional activity of the body, 
starting from the development of the germ-cell, is correlated to, and 
sustained by the Shakti concentrated at, the Muladhara. Cosmic creation, 
too, ending with the evolution of Prithivi Tattva (it is, however, an unending 
process in a different sense, and there perhaps Henri Bergson, who claims 
that the creative impulse is ever original and resourceful, is right), also 
presupposes a cosmic static background (over and above Chidakasha— 
ether of Consciousness), which is the Mahakundali Shakti in the 
Chinmayadeha (body of Consciousness) of Parameshvara or Parameshvari 
(the Supreme Lord in male and female aspect). In the earliest stage of 
creation, when the world arises only as a mist in Divine Consciousness, it 
requires, as the principle or pole of Tat (That), the correlate principle or 
pole of Aham (I); in the development of the former, the latter serves as the 
static background. In our own experiences, too, ‘apperception’ or 
consciousness of self is the sustaining background—a string, so to say, 
which holds together all the loose beads of our elements of feeling. The 
sustaining ground or Adhara, as the seat of static force, therefore is found, 
in one form or other, in every phase and stage of creative evolution. The 
absolute or ultimate form is, of course, Chit-Shakti (Consciousness as 


power) itself, the unfailing light of awareness about which our Gayatri 
(Mantra) says: ‘Which sustains and impels all the activities of Buddhi.’ 
This fact is symbolized by the Kali-miurti: not a mere symbol, however. 


“2. My remarks about the rising or awakening of the Serpent Power at the 
Miuladhara have been, perhaps, almost of the nature of a paradox. The 
coiled power, though awakened, uncoiled, and rising, never really stirs from 
its place; only a sort of ‘ethereal double’ or ‘eject’ is unloosed and sent up 
through the system of centers. Now, in plain language, this ethereal double 
or eject means the dynamic equivalent of the static power concentrated at 
the Mila, or root. Whenever by Pranayama of Bijamantra, or any other 
suitable means, the Miladhara becomes, like an electro-magnetic machine, 
over-saturated (though the Kundali Shakti at the Mila is infinite and 
exhaustless, yet the capacity of a given finite organism to contain it in a 
static form is limited, and therefore there may be over-saturation), a 
dynamic or operative equivalent of the static power is set up, possibly by a 
law similar to Nature’s law of induction, by which the static power itself is 
not depleted or rendered other than static. It is not that static energy at the 
Mila wholly passes over into a dynamic form—the coiled Kundali leaving 
the Mula, thus making it a void; that cannot be, and, were it so, all dynamic 
operation in the body would cease directly for want of a background. The 
coiled power remains coiled or static, and yet something apparently passes 
out of the Mtila—viz., the dynamic equivalent. This paradox can perhaps be 
explained in two ways: 


“(a) One explanation was suggested in my main letter. The potential 
Kundali Shakti becomes partly converted into kinetic Shakti, and yet, since 
Shakti, even as given in the Miila-center, is an infinitude, it is not depleted: 
the potential store always remains unexhausted. I referred to a passage in 
the Upanishad about Purna. In this case, the dynamic equivalent is a partial 
conversion of one mode of energy into another. In Layayoga (here 
described) it is ordinarily so. When, however, the infinite potential becomes 
an infinite kinetic—when, that is to say, the coiled power at the Mila 
becomes absolutely uncoiled—we have necessarily the dissolution of the 
three bodies (Sthila, Linga, and Karana—gross, subtle, causal), and 
consequently Videhamukti (bodiless liberation), because the static 


background in relation to a particular form of existence has now wholly 
given way, according to our hypothesis. But Mahakundali remains; hence 
individual Mukti (liberation) need not mean dissolution of Samsara 
(transmigrating worlds) itself. Commonly, however, as the Tantra says, 
‘Pitva pitva punah pitva,’ etc.{689} 


“(b) The other explanation is suggested by the law of induction. Take an 
electro-magnetic machine; {690} if a suitable substance be placed near it, it 
will induce in it an equivalent and opposite kind of electro-magnetism®*” 
without losing its own stock of energy. In conduction, energy flows over 
into another thing, so that the source loses and the other thing gains what it 
has lost, and its gain is similar in kind to the loss. Not so induction. There 
the source does not lose, and the induced energy is equivalent and opposite 
in kind to the inducing energy. Thus a positive charge will induce an 
equivalent negative charge in a neighboring object. Now, shall we suppose 
that the Muladhara, when it becomes over-saturated, induces in the 
neighboring center (say, Svadhishthana) a dynamic (not static) equivalent? 
{691} Is this what the rise of the Serpent Power really means? The 
explanation, I am tempted to think, is not perhaps altogether fantastic.” 


In reply to this highly interesting and illustrative account of my friend, I 
wrote suggesting some difficulties in the way of the acceptance of his 
statement that Kundali-Shakti did not, in fact, Herself uncoil and ascend, 
but projected upwards an emanation in the likeness of Her own self. The 
difficulty I felt was this: In the first place, the Yoga books, to which full 
credence must be given in this matter, unequivocally affirm that Kundali 
Herself does, in fact, ascend. This is borne out by some inquiries made of a 
Tantrik Pandit very familiar with his Shastra{692} after the receipt of the 
letter quoted. As the body of the Yogt still lives, though in an inert corpse- 
like condition, when consciousness of it is lost, I asked him how the body 
was sustained when Kundali left Her central abode. His answer was that it 
was maintained by the nectar which flows from the union of Shiva and 
Shakti in the Sahasrara. This nectar is an ejection of power generated by 
their union. If Kundali does not ascend, but a mere emanative spark of Her, 
how (he further asked) is it that the body becomes cold and corpselike? 
Would this follow if the power still remained at its center, and merely sent 


forth a dynamic equivalent of itself? There were further difficulties in the 
theory put forward by my friend, though it may be that there are also 
difficulties in the acceptance of the statement that the Muladhara is entirely 
depleted of the great power. I suggested that Kundali was the static center 
of the whole body as a complete conscious organism, and that each of the 
parts of the body and their constituent cells must have their own static 
centers, which would uphold such parts and cells; and that the life of the 
body, as a collection of material particles (from which the general organic 
consciousness as a whole was withdrawn), was sustained by the nectar 
which flowed from Kundali Shakti when in union with Shiva in the 
Sahasrara. In reply, Professor P. Mukhopadhyaya dealt with the matter as 
follows: 


“According to my presentation of the case, something—viz., a dynamic 
equivalent or ‘operative double’—is certainly sent forth from the 
Miuladhara, but this basic center or seat is not depleted or rendered void of 
static energy in consequence of that operation. The Mula (root), as the seat 
of static or coiled power, can never be dispensed with. It is the sine qua non 
of all functions of the triple body (gross, subtle, causal). It is, so to say, the 
buffer or base against which any activity of the Jiva (embodied 
consciousness) must react or recoil, like a naval or any other kind of heavy 
gun against its base or emplacement. Thus, while the dynamic or uncoiled 
Shakti ascends the axis, the static or coiled Shakti retains its place at the 
Mila, and remains as the very possibility of the dynamic upheaval. The 
ascending power is simply the dynamic counterpart of the static ground. To 
say that Kundali leaves its place and ascends is only to say that it ceases to 
be Kundali and becomes dynamic. The ascending power is therefore 
uncoiled or non-Kundali power; it is the dynamic expression of the Kundalt 
power. So far all can agree. But the question is: Is the Mila depleted or 
deprived of all power (especially coiled power) when that dynamical 
expression leaves it and ascends the axis? Is the dynamic expression wholly 
at the expense of the static ground? Should the latter cease in order that the 
former may commence? 


“Here, I think, I must answer in the negative. It is a case of power leaving 
as well as remaining—leaving as dynamic and remaining as Static; it is the 


case of the Kundali being uncoiled in one aspect or pole and remaining still 
coiled in another aspect or pole. A paradox, perhaps, but, like most 
paradoxes, it is likely to be true. 


“Ts scriptural authority, which, by-the-by, I hold in utmost reverence, really 
challenged by this interpretation? The nature of the dynamic equivalent and 
its relation to the static background have been indicated in the previous two 
communications, and I need not dilate on them. I have claimed throughout 
that the Miuiladhara, as the seat of static (i.e., coiled) power, can never be 
rendered a vacuum in relation to such power except in the circumstances of 
Videhamukti (bodiless liberation), when the triple body (gross, subtle, 
causal) must dissolve. I think, also, that the point of view which you have 
taken can be reconciled with this interpretation of the matter. The Kundali 
Shakti is the static aspect of the life of the whole organized body, as you say 
rightly. The relation between the lives of the individual cells and that of the 
whole organism is not clearly understood in science. Is the common life a 
merely mechanical resultant of the lives of the individual cells, or are the 
lives of the individual cells only detailed manifestations of the common 
life? In other words, is the common life-cause and the cell-lives effects or 
vice versa? Science is not yet settled on this point. As a subscriber to the 
Shaktivada (doctrine of Shakti) I am inclined, however, to give primacy to 
the common life; in the germ-cell itself the common life is given in 
substance, and the whole development of the Jivadeha (Jiva body) is only 
the detailed carrying out in particulars of what has been already given in 
substance, according to the principle of Adrishta (Karma). Nevertheless, I 
am quite willing to concede to the individual cells lives of semi- 
independence. ‘Semi,’ because they require to be sustained to a 
considerable degree by the life of the whole. Benefit or injury to the life of 
the whole reacts on the condition of the cells; the death of the whole life is 
followed by the death of the cells, and so on. 


“Now, in every cell there is, of course, static-dynamic polarity; in the whole 
organism, also, there is such polarity or correlation. In the whole organism 
the static pole or correlate is the coiled power at the Miladhara, and the 
dynamic correlate is the operative power (the five Pranas—viz., Prana, 
Apana, Samana, Udana, and Vyana), which actually carries on the various 


functions of the body. Ordinarily, therefore, this dynamic power is 
distributed over the whole body, vitalizing not merely the larger tissues, but 
the microscopic cells. Now, the devitalization (as you say) of the body in 
Kundaliyoga or Shatchakrabheda is due, I venture to think, not to the 
depletion or privation of the static power at the Muladhara, but to the 
concentration or convergence of the dynamic power ordinarily diffused over 
the whole body, so that the dynamic equivalent which is set up against the 
static background or Kundali Shakti is only the diffused fivefold Prana 
gathered home—withdrawn from the other tissues of the body—and 
concentrated in a line along the axis. Thus ordinarily the dynamic 
equivalent is the Prana diffused over all the tissues; in Yoga it is converged 
along the axis, the static equivalent or Kundali Shakti enduring in both 
cases. Thus also the polarity or correlation is maintained: in the former case 
between Shakti at Muladhara and the diffused Prana; in the latter case 
between Shakti at Mula and the converged Prana along the axis. This will 
perhaps adequately explain coldness, increased inertia, insensibility, etc., of 
the rest of the body in Kundali Yoga of which you write. Commonly in 
Yoga this withdrawal and convergence of Prana is incomplete; the residual 
Prana, together with the lives of the cells, keeps the body alive, though inert 
or corpselike. In the case of complete withdrawal and focusing, the cells 
will die and the body disintegrate. 


“On the other hand, if the coiled power were simply and wholly uncoiled 
(i.e., dynamized) in Kundali Yoga, then there should be an excess rather 
than a defect of vitality all over the body; nothing would be subtracted from 
the already available dynamic energy of the body, but something would be 
added to it on account of the static power at the Mila being rendered 
kinetic, and going up the axis and influencing neighboring tissues. 


“Hence I should venture to conclude that the static power at the base of the 
axis, without itself being depleted or rendered other than static, induces or 
produces a dynamic equivalent which is the diffused Prana of the body 
gathered and converged along the axis. The states in the process may thus 
be summarily indicated: 


“1. To begin with, there is coiled power at the base of the axis and its 
necessary correlate, the dynamic Prana, diffused all over the body in the 
five forms. 


“2. In Kundali Yoga some part of the already available dynamic Prana is 
made to act at the base of the axis in a suitable manner, by which means the 
base—or particularly the four-petalled Padma (lotus) which represents this 
center—becomes over-saturated, and reacts on the whole diffused dynamic 
power (or Prana) of the body by withdrawing it from the tissues and 
converging it along the line of the axis. In this way the diffused dynamic 
equivalent becomes the converged dynamic equivalent along the axis. This 
is what the rising of the serpent perhaps means. 


“(a) In thus reacting, the coiled power has not lost its general equilibrium or 
static condition. 


(b) The modus operandi of this reaction is difficult to indicate, but it is 
probably (as suggested in my previous communications) either (i.) a partial 
conversion of the infinite coiled power into the sort of influence that can 
thus gather the diffused Prana, and converge it in its own resultant line 
along the axis, or (ii.) an inductive action, analogous to electro-magnetic 
action, by which the Pranas are collected and converged. In this latter case 
there is no need for conversion of the static energy. We shall have perhaps 
to choose between, or rather coordinate, these two explanations in 
understanding the modus operandi. In mathematical language, the diffused 
Prana is a scalar quantity (having magnitude, but no direction), while the 
converged Prana is a vector quantity (having both magnitude and definite 
direction). 


“Suppose, lastly, we are witnessing with a Divyachakshu (inner eye) the 
progress of Kundali Yoga. There something like condensed lightning 
(Tadit) is rising from the Muladhara, and gathering momentum in going up 
from Chakra to Chakra, till the consummation is reached at the 
Paramshivasthana (abode of the Supreme Shiva). But look back, and behold 
the Kulakundalini is also there at the Mila coiled three times and a half 
round the Svayambhu Linga. She has left and yet remained or stayed, and is 


again coming back to Herself. Is not this vision supported by scriptural 
authority and the experience of the Yogi?” 


Putting aside detail, the main principle appears to be that, when “wakened,” 
Kundali Shakti either Herself (or as my friend suggests in Her eject) ceases 
to be a static power which sustains the world-consciousness, the content of 
which is held only so long as She “sleeps,” and, when once set in 
movement, is drawn to that other static center in the thousand-petalled lotus 
(Sahasrara), which is Herself in union with the Shiva-consciousness, or the 
consciousness of ecstasy beyond the world of forms. When Kundali 
“sleeps” man is awake to this world. When She “awakes” he sleeps—that 
is, loses all consciousness of the world and enters his causal body. In Yoga 
he passes beyond to formless Consciousness. 


I have only to add, without further discussion of the point, that practitioners 
of this Yoga claim that it is higher than any other, {693} and that the 
Samadhi (ecstasy) attained thereby is more perfect. The reason which they 
allege is this: In Dhyanayoga ecstasy takes place through detachment from 
the world and mental concentration, leading to vacuity of mental operation 
(Vritti), or the uprising of pure Consciousness unhindered by the limitations 
of the mind.{694} The degree to which this unveiling of consciousness is 
effected depends upon the meditative powers (Jnanashakti) of the Sadhaka 
and the extent of his detachment from the world. On the other hand 
Kundali, who is all Shaktis, and who is therefore Jnanashakti itself, 
produces, when awakened by the Yogi, full Jnana for him. Secondly, in the 
Samadhi of Dhyanayoga there is no rousing and union of Kundali Shakti, 
with the accompanying bliss and acquisition of special powers (Siddhi). 
Further, in Kundalt Yoga there is not merely a Samadhi through meditation, 
but through the central power of the Jiva, a power which carries with it the 
forces of both body and mind. The union in that sense is claimed to be more 
complete than that enacted through mental methods only. Though in both 
cases bodily consciousness is lost, in Kundali Yoga not only the mind, but 
the body in so far as it is represented by its central power (or, may be, its 
eject), is actually united with Shiva. This union produces an enjoyment 
(Bhukti) which the Dhyanayog! does not possess. Whilst both the Divya 
Yogi and the Vira Sadhaka have enjoyment (Bhukti), that of the former is 


infinitely more intense, being an experience of Bliss itself. The enjoyment 
of the Vira Sadhaka is but a reflection of it on the physical plane, a welling 
up of the true bliss through the deadening coverings and trammels of matter. 
Again, whilst it is said that both have liberation (Mukti), this word is used 
in Vira Sadhana in a figurative sense only, indicating a bliss which is the 
nearest approach on the physical plane to that of Mukti, and a Bhava or 
feeling of momentary union of Shiva and Shakti which ripens in the higher 
Yoga Sadhana into the literal liberation of the Yog!. He, in its fullest and 
literal sense, has both enjoyment (Bhukti) and liberation (Mukti). Hence its 
claim to be the Emperor of all Yogas. 


However this may be, I leave at this point the subject, with the hope that 
others will continue the inquiry I have here initiated. It, and other matters in 
the Tantra Shastra, seem to me (whatever be their inherent value) worthy of 
an investigation which they have not yet received. 


Description of the Six Centers 


(SHATCHAKRA NIRUPANA.) 


PRELIMINARY VERSE. 


Now I speak of the first sprouting shoot (of the Yoga plant) of complete 
realization of the Brahman, which is to be achieved, according to the 
Tantras, by means of the six Chakras and so forth in their proper order. 


COMMENTARY. 


He alone who has become acquainted with the wealth{695} of the six 
Lotuses{696} by Maha-yoga is able to explain the inner principles {697 } 
thereof. Not even the most excellent among the wise, nor the oldest (in 
experience), is able, without the mercy of the Guru, {698} to explain the 
inner principles®*” relating to the six Lotuses, replete as they are with the 
greatness of Sha, Sa, and Ha.{699} Now, the very merciful Purnananda 
Svami, wishful to rescue the world sunk in the mire of misery, takes that 
task upon himself. He does so to guide Sadhakas {700}; to impart Tattva- 
jnana,{701} which leads to liberation; and also with the desire of speaking 
of the union of Kundalini{702} with the six Chakras. {703} 


“Now” (Atha).—The force of this particle is to show the connection of this 
book with the Author’s work entitled Shri-tattva-chintamani, the first five 
chapters of which deal with the rites and practices preliminary to Shat- 
chakra-nirtipana. {704} In this book he speaks of the first shoot of the 
realization of the Brahman. 


Paramananda (Supreme Bliss) means Brahman, who, says the Shruti, is 
Eternal (Nityam), and is knowledge (Vijnanam and Bliss (Anandam). 


“Following the Tantras” (Tantranusarena)—i.e., following the authority of 
the Tantras.{705} 


“First sprouting shoot” (Prathamangkura)—.e., the first steps which lead to 
realization of the Brahman. The first cause of such realization is achieved 
by knowledge of the six Chakras, the Nadis, {706} and so forth, which is the 
Tantrika Yoga Sadhana. 


“Complete realization” (Nirvaha).—The Sanskrit word means 
“accomplishment” here; it is “the accomplishment of the immediate 
experiential realization of the Brahman.” {707} 


“Achieved by means of the six Chakras and other things” (Shat-chakradi- 
kramodgata)—1.e., attained by{708} meditating on the six Chakras, viz.: 
Muladhara, Svadhishthana, Manipira, Anahata, Vishuddha, and Ajna and 
other things, {709} viz.: on the Nadis, {710} the Linggas, {711} the five 
Elements, {712} Shiva, Shakti, etc., connected with the six Chakras, in their 
order. 


The order (Krama) is, first, meditation on them, next awakening of 
Kundalini, and Her passage to the Brahmalotus and then Her return 
therefrom; the union of Shiva and Shakti, etc., and so forth. 


“Order” (Krama) by which it is attained, and this is the same as Yoga 
practice. 


The Author in substance says: “I speak of the first step (Angkura) of the 
practice which is the First Cause of the immediate or experiential 
realization{713} of the Brahman, brought about by a knowledge of the six 
Chakras, as is laid down in the Tantras.” 


VERSE 1. 


In the space outside the Meru, {714} placed on the left and the right, are the 
two Shiras,{715} Shashi{716} and Mihira.{717} The Nadi Sushumna, 
whose substance is the threefold Gunas, {718} is in the middle. She is the 
form of Moon, Sun, and Fire;{719} Her body, a string of blooming 
Dhiustira{720} flowers, extends from the middle of the Kanda{721} to the 
Head, and the Vajra inside Her extends, shining, from the Medhra{722} to 
the Head. 


COMMENTARY. 


Now, Yoga like that which is about to be spoken of cannot be achieved 
without a knowledge of the six Chakras and the Nadis; the Author therefore 
describes the relative Nadis in this and the following two verses. 


“In the space outside” (Vahya-pradesha) the two Nadis. Shashi and Mihira 
(Shashi-mihira-shire = the two Nadis or Shiras, Shashi and Mihira). Shashi 
= Chandra (Moon); Mihira = Stryya (Sun). These two Nadis, which are in 
the nature of the Moon and Sun,{723} are the Nadis, Ida and Pinggala. 


“Meru.”—This is the Meru-danda, the backbone or spinal column, 
extending from the Mula (root) or Muladhara to the neck. This will be 
explained later. 


“Placed on the left and the right” (Savya-dakshe-nishanne). 


“These two Nadis.—“The Ida is placed on the left, and the Pinggala on the 
right” of the Meru (Bhiita-shuddhi Tantra). The Sammohana Tantra{724} 
speaks of their likeness to the Sun and Moon as follows: 


“The Ida Nadi on the left is pale, and is in the nature of the Moon{725} 
(Chandrasvarupini). She is the Shakti-rupa Devi,{726} and the very 
embodiment of nectar (Amrita-vigraha). On the right is the masculine 
Pinggala, in the nature of the Sun. She, the great Devi, is Rudratmika, {727} 
and is lustrous red like the filaments of the pomegranate flower.” {728} 


These two Nadis go upward singly from the Mila (i.e., Muladhara), and, 
having reached the Ajna Chakra, proceed to the nostrils. 


The Yamala says: “On its (i.e., the Meru’s) left and right are Ida and 
Pinggala. These two go straight up, alternating from left to right and right to 
left, and, having thus gone round all the Lotuses, these auspicious ones 
proceed to the nostrils.” 


The above passage shows the twofold and differing positions of the two 
Nadis. They go upward alternating from left to right and right to left, and 
going round the Lotuses Padma) they form a plait and go to the nostrils. 


Elsewhere they are described as being placed like bows: “Know that the 
two Nadis Ida and Pinggala are shaped like bows.” 


Also: “She who is connected with the left scrotum is united with the 
Sushumna, and, passing near by the right shoulder-joint, remains bent like a 
bow by the heart, and having reached the left shoulder-joint passes on to the 
nose. Similarly, She that comes from the right scrotum passes on to the left 
nostril.” 


These two Nadis which come from the left and right scrotum, when they 
reach the space between the eyebrows, make with the Sushumna a plaited 
knot of three (Trivent) and proceed to the nostrils. 


They are also thus described: “In the Ida is the Devi Yamuna, and in 
Pinggala is Sarasvati, and in Sushumna dwells Ganga.{729} They form a 
threefold plait{730} united at the root of the Dhvaja, {731} they separate at 
the eyebrows, and hence it is called Triveni-yoga, and bathing there{732} 
yields abundant fruit.” 


“Whose substance is the threefold Gunas” (Tritaya-guna-mayl1).—The 
compound word here used is capable of different interpretations. Reading 
Guna to mean “a string,” it would mean “made up of three strings”—-viz., 
Sushumna, Vajra, and Chitrini. {733} These three form one, but considered 
separately they are distinct. If Guna be read to mean “quality,” then it would 
mean “possessed of the qualities Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.” Now, the 
substance of Chitrini is Sattva (Sattvagunamayi), of Vajra Rajas, and of 
Sushumna Tamas. 


“Ts in the middle” (Madhye)—.e., in the middle or inside the Meru. 


“She who is inside the Meru from the Mila to the region of the Brahma- 
randhra,” {734} etc. 


Tripura-sara-samuchchaya says: “She who is within the hollow of the 
Danda., extending from the head to the Adhara,” etc. (i.e., Mialadhara). 


Some persons rely on the following passage of the Tantrachtidamani, and 
urge that it shows that the Sushumna is outside the Meru: “O Shiva, on the 
left of Meru is placed the Nadi Ida, the Moon-nectar, and on its right the 
Sun-like Pinggala. Outside it (tad-vahye){735} and between these two is 
the fiery Sushumna.” 


But this is merely the opinion of these persons. Our Author speaks (in the 
following verse) of the Lotuses inside the Meru; and as the Sushumna 
supports these she must needs be within the Meru. 


“Form of Moon, Sun, and Fire” (Chandra-stiryyagni-riipa).—Chitrin1 is 
pale, and is the form of the Moon, Vajrini, {736} is Sun-like, and hence has 
the luster of the filaments of the pomegranate flower; Sushumna is fiery, 
and hence red. The Bhitashuddhi Tantra, in describing the Sushumna, 
supports these three descriptions. Sushumna is the outermost and Chitrini 
the innermost. 


“Inside it, at a height of two fingers’ breadth, is Vajra, and so is Chitrini; 
hence it is that Sushumna is Triguna; she is tremulous like a passionate 


woman; she is the receptacle of the three Gunas, Sattva, etc., and the very 
form of Moon, Sun, and Fire.” 


“From the middle of the Kanda to the Head” (Kanda- 
madhyachchhirahstha).—Kanda is the root of all the Nadis. It is spoken of 
as follows: “Two fingers above the anus and two fingers below the 
medhra{737} is the Kanda-mila, in shape like a bird’s egg, and four 
fingers’ breadth in extent. The Nadis, 72,000 in number, emanate from it.” 
The Nadis come out of this Kanda. 


Shirahstha (placed in the head): By this is to be understood that she ends in 
the middle of the Lotus of twelve petals which is near the pericarp of the 
Sahasrara, hanging downwards in the head. See the opening verse of 
Paduka-panchaka: “TI adore the twelve-petalled Lotus that is at the top of the 
Nad, along the channel (Randhra){738} within which the Kundali passes.” 


As the Chitrini ends here, her Container, Sushumna, also ends here. If it be 
taken to mean that she exists above the Sahasrara, then there will be a 
contradiction to the description in the fortieth verse, where the Sahasrara is 
spoken of as “showing in vacant space” (Shunyadeshe prakasham). If 
Sushumna passes over it, there can be no vacant space. 


There are some who contend that all the three Nadis—Ida, Pinggala, and 
Sushumna—are inside the Meru, and quote the following as their authority 
from the Nigama-tattva-sara: “The three Nadis are said to be inside the 
Meru, in the middle of the back.” But this cannot be; all the Tantras say that 
the Ida and Pinggala are outside the Meru, and on the authority of these our 
Author speaks of their being outside the Meru. Further, if they were inside 
the Meru they could not be bow-shaped and touch the hip and shoulder 
joints. The Nigama-tattva-sara by the “three Nadis” apparently means 
Sushumna, Vajra, and Chitrini, and not Ida, Pinggala, and Sushumna. 


The position of the Sushumna from the Muladhara to the head is thus 
described: “Sushumna goes forward, clinging like a Chavya-creeper{739} 
to the Meru, and reaching the end of the neck, O Beauteous One, she 


emerges and deflects, and, supporting herself on the stalk of the Shangkhini, 
{740} goes towards the region of Brahman (Brahma-sadana).” 


Also cf.: “The other two are placed like bows. Sushumna is the embodiment 
of Pranava; {741} emerging from the backbone, she goes to the forehead. 
Passing between the eyebrows and united with Kundali,{742} she with her 
mouth{743} approaches the Brahma-randhra.” 


By this it becomes apparent that the backbone extends to the end of the 
back of the neck. 


Supporting herself on Shangkhini (Shangkhini-nalama-lambya). Shangkhini 
is thus described: 


Ishvara said: “Sarasvati and Kuhu are on either side of Sushumna; Gandhari 
and Hastijihva again are on the right and left of Ida.” 


And again: “Between Gandhari and Sarasvati is Shangkhini. The Nadi 
named Shangkhini goes to the left ear.” 


And also again: “Shangkhini, emerging from the hollow of the throat, goes 
obliquely to the forehead, and then, O Ambika, {744} united with and 
twisted round Chitrini, she thereafter passes to the head.” 


Hence she (Shangkhin1) starts from Kanda-mila, proceeds between 
Sarasvati and Gandhari and reaches the throat, and then one of her branches 
proceeds obliquely to the left ear and the other goes to the top of the head. 


“Vajra inside Her” (Madhyame)—.e., inside Sushumna. 


There are some who contend that the Meru-danda extends from the feet to 
the Brahma-randhra, and quote in support the following passage from 
Nigama-tattva-sara: “The bony staff which goes from the feet{745} to the 
Brahma-randhra is called the Meru-danda of the fourteen Lokas.” 


But the backbone is the spinal bone (Meru-danda). It extends from the 
Miula-kanda to the end of the back of the neck. This is self-evident, and no 


authority can alter things which are patent. Moreover, it is impossible for 
one piece of bone to go to the end of the feet, for then the legs could not be 
bent or stretched. The Meru therefore does not go below the Miia 
(Miladhara). The meaning of the passage from the Nigama-tattva-sara 
becomes clear if we read Pada to mean “leg,” and not “foot.” “Beginning of 
the pada” (Padadi) would then mean “where the legs begin.” The sense 
would then be that the bone which controls the whole body from the feet 
right up to the head is the Meru-danda, which is like a stick, and begins 
from the penis two fingers breadth above the Mula-kanda. The 
Bhutashuddhi Tantra says: “Within it and two fingers’ breadth above it are 
Vajra and Chitrint.” 


VERSE 2. 


Inside her{746} is Chitrini, who is lustrous with the luster of the 
Pranava{747} and attainable in Yoga by Yogis. She (Chitrin1) is subtle as a 
spider’s thread, and pierces all the Lotuses which are placed within the 
backbone, and is pure intelligence. {748} She (Chitrini) is beautiful by 
reason of these (Lotuses) which are strung on her. Inside her (Chitrint) is 
the Brahma-nadi, {749} which extends from the orifice of the mouth of 
Hara{750} to the place beyond where Adideva{751} is. 


COMMENTARY. 


“Inside Her” (Tanmadhye)—.e., inside Vajra. 


“Lustrous with the luster of the Pranava” (Pranava-vilasita).—She absorbs 
the luminous character of the Pranava in Ajna-chakra when she passes 
through it. Cf. v. 37, post. 


“Like a spider’s thread” (Luta-tanttipameya).—She is fine like the spider’s 
thread. 


“She pierces all the Lotuses,” etc. (Sakala-sarasijan meru-madhyantara- 
sthan bhittva dedipyate)—She pierces the pericarp of the six Lotuses, and 
shines like a thread strung with gems. 


There is a passage quoted as from the fourth Kanda, of the Kalpa-Sitra, and 
explained to mean: “In the hollow channel within Chitrini are six Lotuses, 
and on the petals of these the Mahadevi Bhujangi move about (viharanti).” 


But this text, as it has given a plural verb to Bhujang-gi1{752} in the 
singular, seems to be incorrect. But if it be said that it is the word of Shiva, 


and that the plural is used as singular, it would then have to be understood 
that the locative in the phrase “in the channel within Chitrin?” is used as an 
instrumental, and the correct meaning of the passage would in that case be 
“that Bhujang-gi goes along the channel within Chitrint. And as She passes 
in her upward movement She pierces the Chakras, and moves about on the 
petals of the Chakras.” Or it may also mean “that Bhujang-gi goes along the 
hollow of the Chitrini, and moves about on the petals of the six Lotuses 
within Sushumna, and at length goes to Sahasrara.” 


From the above authority it is not to be concluded that the six Lotuses are in 
the hollow of Chitrini. {753} 


“Inside her” (Tan-madhye).—Within Chitrini is Brahmanadi. The word 
Nadi here means a channel (vivara). It is derived from the root Nad, motion. 
The word Brahmanadi expresses the channel by which Kundalini goes from 
the Miladhara to the place of Parama-shiva. Kundalini is a form of the 
Shabda-Brahman. {754} From this it is certain that the inside of Chitrini is 
hollow, and there is no other Nadi inside her. 


“The orifice of the mouth of Hara” (Hara-mukha-kuhara).—The orifice at 
the top of the Svayambhu-lingga in the Muladhara. Adideva is the supreme 
Bindu in the pericarp of the thousand-petalled Lotus. 


The rest of the verse requires no explanation.{755} 


VERSE 3. 


She{756} is beautiful like a chain of lightning and fine like a (lotus) fiber, 
and shines in the minds of the sages. She is extremely subtle; the awakener 
of pure knowledge; the embodiment of all bliss, whose true nature is pure 
consciousness.{757} The Brahma-dvara{758} shines in her mouth. This 
place is the entrance to the region sprinkled by ambrosia, and is called the 
Knot, as also the mouth of Sushumna. 


COMMENTARY. 


By this Shloka she is further described: 


“Fine like a (lotus) fiber and shines” (Lasat-tantu-ripa)—i.e., She is 
luminous, albeit fine like the fiber in the lotus-stalk; she shines because of 
the presence of Kundalini. 


“Embodiment of all bliss” (Sakala-sukha-mayi).—Sukha is here used as the 
equivalent of Ananda, which means Spiritual Bliss. She is the source of all 
bliss. {759} 


“Whose true nature is pure consciousness” (Shuddha-bodha-svabhava).— 
Shuddha-bodha is Tattva-jnana, She whose Nature{760} is pure 
consciousness. 


“Brahma-dvara” {761} is the entrance and exit of Kundalini in her passage 
to and from Shiva. 


“Her mouth” (Tadasye)—the mouth of Brahmanadi, the orifice in the mouth 
of Hara. 


“This place” (Tadetat)—i.e., the place near the entrance. 


“The entrance to the region sprinkled by ambrosia” (Sudha-dhara-gamya- 
pradesha).—The region which is sprinkled by the ambrosia (sudha) which 
flows from the union{762} of Parama Shiva and Shakti, and which is 
attained by the help of Shiva and Shakti dwelling in the Muiladhara. 


“Knot” (Granthi-sthanam).—The place of the union{763} of Sushumna and 
Kanda. {764} 


“Ts called”—that is, by those versed in the Agamas. 


VERSE 4. 


Now we come to the Adhara Lotus.{765} It is attached to the mouth of the 
Sushumna, and is placed below the genitals and above the anus. It has four 
petals of crimson hue. Its head (mouth) hangs downwards. On its petals are 
the four letters from Va to Sa, of the shining color of gold. 


COMMENTARY. 


After having described the Nadis, the Author describes the Miladhara 
Chakra in detail in nine verses beginning with the present. 


“Tt is attached to the mouth of Sushumna” (Sushumnasya-lagnam).—The 
petals{766} are on four sides of the place where the Kanda{767} and 
Sushumna meet. 


“Below the genitals and above the anus” (Dhvajadho gudorddhvam).— 
From below the root of the genitals to Sushumna. 


“Four petals of crimson hue” (Chatuh shonapatram).—The four petals are 
red in color. Shona is the crimson color of the red lotus. 


“On its petals are the four letters from Va to Sa” (Vakaradisantaih 
veda{768}-varnaih).—The four letters are Va, Sha (palatal), Sha. (cerebral), 
and Sa.{769} On each of the petals of the six Lotuses the letters of the 
alphabet are to be meditated upon, going round in a circle from the right 
(dakshina-vartena). Cf. Vishva-sara Tantra: “The petals of the Lotuses are 
known to contain the letters of the alphabet, and should be meditated upon 
as written in a circle from the right to the left.” 


VERSE 5. 


In this (Lotus) is the square region (Chakra) of Prithivi,{770} surrounded 
by eight shining spears.{771} It is of a shining yellow color{772} and 
beautiful like lightning, as is also the Bija of Dhara{773} which is within. 


COMMENTARY. 


In the pericarp of this Lotus is the square region of Prithivi, which is 
described in detail. On the eight sides of the square are eight shining spears. 
The region is of yellow color. 


Cf. “O Thou of dulcet speech, in the Miladhara is the four-cornered region 
of Dhara, yellow in color and surrounded by eight spears (shila) like 
Kulachalas.” 


Kulachala is by some interpreted to mean the breast of a woman. According 
to this view, the tips of these spears are shaped like a woman’s breasts. 
Others understand by the expression the seven Kula Mountains.{774} 


Cf. Nirvana Tantra: “O Devi, the seven Kula Mountains—viz., Nilachala, 
Mandara, Chandra-shekhara, Himalaya, Suvela, Malaya, and Suparvata— 
dwell in the four corners.” According to this notion, the eight spears are 
likened to the seven Kula Mountains on Earth. 


“Within it” (Tad-angke).—Inside the region of Prithivi (Dhara-mandala) is 
the Bija of Earth—viz., “Lang.” This Bija is also of a yellow color. The 
phrase “shining yellow color” (Lasat-pita-varna) is descriptive of the Bija 
also. 


“Inside it is the Aindra Vija (Bija of Indra), {775} of a yellow color, 
possessed of four arms, holding the thunder in one hand, mighty{776} and 
seated on the elephant Airavata.” {777} 


VERSE 6. 


Ornamented with four arms{778} and mounted on the King of Elephants, 
{779} He carries on his lap{780} the child Creator, resplendent like the 
young Sun, who has four lustrous arms, and the wealth of whose lotus-face 
is fourfold. {781} 


COMMENTARY. 


This is the Dhyana of the Dhara Bija. The Bija of Dhara or Prithivi is 
identical with that of Indra. 


“On his lap” (Tad-angke)—.e., in the lap of Dhara Bija. The sense of this 
verse is that the Creator Brahma dwells in the lap of Dhara Bija. By 
“angka” (lap) is to be understood the space within the Bindu of Dhara Bija. 
Cf. “In the Muladhara is the Dhara Bija, and in its Bindu dwells Brahma, 
the image of a Child, and the King of the Immortals{782} is mounted on an 
Elephant.” 


Some read the above passage to mean “the King of the Immortals is in the 
lap of Dhara Bija.” But according to our view the description of the Dhara 
Bija and Indra Bija is the same, as the two are identical; and it is also said 
“the letters of the Mantra are the Devata; the Devata is in the form of the 
Mantra (Mantra-rupini).” Hence both are there. 


Also cf. Nirvana Tantra: “O beautiful one, the Indra Bija is near by the 
genitals. The very perfect and beautiful dwelling of Brahma is above Nada, 
and there dwells Brahma the Creator, {783} the Lord Protector of 

Being.” {784} 


By “above Nada” in this passage, we must understand that the abode of 
Brahma is within the Bindu which is above Nada. Some read “below the 
genitals,” and thus there is a difference of opinion. The Sharada says that 
the Adharas are various according to different views. 


“Four lustrous arms” (Lasad-veda{785 }-bahu).—Some interpret the 
Sanskrit compound word to mean “in whose arms shine the four Vedas 
Sama and others,” thus thinking of Brahma as being possessed of two arms 
only. But Brahma is nowhere described as holding the Vedas in his hands, 
and that he should be meditated upon as having four arms is clear from the 
following passage in Bhita-shuddhi Tantra: 


“Know, O Shiva, that in its lap is the four-armed, red-colored child{786} 
Brahma, who has four faces and is seated on the back of a swan.” {787} 


“The wealth of whose lotus-face is fourfold” (Mukhambhoja-lakshmih 
chatur-bhaga-bheda).—By this is to be understood that Brahma has four 
faces. 


Some read the passage as “chatur-bhagaveda”; thus read the meaning 
practically is the same. If the Sanskrit text is read “mukhambhoja-lakshmi- 
chatur-bhagaveda,” the meaning would be, “the four different Vedas 
enhance the beauty of his lotus-faces.” {788} 


As opposed to the opinion that Brahma holds the four Vedas in his arms, the 
Vishva-sara Tantra in the Brahmi-dhyana says: “Meditate on Brahmi 
(Shakti) as red in color and garbed in the skin of the black antelope, and as 
holding the staff,{789} gourd,{790} rosary of Rudraksha beads, {791} and 
making the gesture dispelling fear.” {792} And in the Sapta-shati 
Stotra{793} it has been said that Shiva and Shakti are to be meditated upon 
as having the same weapons. 


Also cf. Yamala: “The Adi-Mirti{794} should be meditated upon as 
making the gestures of dispelling fear and granting boons, {795} as also 
holding the Kundika{796} and rosary of Rudraksha beads, and adorned 
with fine ornament.” 


This is how She should be meditated upon. The rest requires no 
explanation. 


VERSE 7. 


Here dwells the Devi Dakini{797} by name; her four arms shine with 
beauty, and her eyes are brilliant red. She is resplendent like the luster of 
many Suns rising at one and the same time.{798} She is the Carrier of the 
revelation of the Ever-pure Intelligence. {799} 


COMMENTARY. 


In this Shloka the Author speaks of the presence of Dakini Shakti in the 
Adhara-padma. The sense of this verse is that in this Lotus the Devi Dakini 
dwells. 


“She is the Carrier of the revelation of the ever-pure-Intelligence” {800} 
(Prakasham vahanti sada-shuddha-buddheh)—tthat is, She, Dakini Shakti, 
enables the Yogi to acquire knowledge of the Tattva (tattva-jnana). By 
meditating on her, which is part of Yoga-practice, one acquires Tattva- 
jnana. This Devi is the presiding Divinity of this region. 


Cf. “The mouth (the lotus) has the letters Va, Sha (palatal), Sha (lingual), 
and Sa, and is presided over by Dakint.” 


“Dakini, Rakini, Lakint, Kakini, as also Shakini and Hakini, are the queens 
of the six respective Lotuses.” {801} Elsewhere is given the Dhyana of 
Dakini: “Meditate on her, the red, the red-eyed Dakini, in the Muladhara, 
who strikes terror into the hearts of Pashus,{802} who holds in her two 
right hands the Spear{803} and the Khatvanga,{804} and in her two left 
hands the Sword{805} and a drinking-cup filled with wine. She is fierce of 
temper and shows her fierce teeth. She crushes the whole host of enemies. 
She is plump of body, and is fond of Payasanna. {806} It is thus that she 
should be meditated upon by those who desire immortality.” Elsewhere she 


is described as “bright with a Tilaka{807} of vermilion, her eyes 
ornamented with collyrium, clad in black (antelope’s skin) and decked with 
varied jewels,” etc. 


On the authority of the above passage, which occurs in a Dhyana of Dakini, 
she should be meditated upon as clad in black (antelope skin). 


The Devas Brahma and others are to be meditated upon as having their 
faces down or up according to the frame of mind (bhava) of the Sadhaka. 


The Shaktananda-taranggini{808} quotes the following from the Maya 
Tantra: 


“Parvati asked: How can they be in the Lotuses which have their heads 
downward bent? 


“Mahadeva said: The Lotuses, O Devi, have their heads in different 
directions. In the life of action{809} they should be thought of as having 
their heads downward, but in the path of renunciation{810} they are always 
meditated upon as having their heads upward turned.” 


The rest is clear. 


VERSE 8. 


Near the mouth of the Nadi called Vajra, and in the pericarp (of the Adhara 
Lotus), there constantly shines the beautifully luminous and soft, lightning- 
like Kamarupa, {811} which is the triangle known as Tripura. {812} There is 
always and everywhere the Vayu called Kandarpa, {813} who is of a deeper 
red than the Bandhujiva flower, {814} and is the Lord of Beings and 
resplendent like ten million suns. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this Shloka is described the triangle in the pericarp of the Miila-Chakra. 


“Near the mouth of the Nadi called Vajra” (Vajrakhyavaktradeshe).—The 
mouth of the Vajra is two fingers above that of the Sushumna and below the 
base of the genitals. 


“The triangle known as Traipura” (Trikonam traipurakhyam).—The triangle 
is so called because of the presence of the Devi Tripura within the Ka inside 
the triangle, and the letter Ka is the chief letter of the Kamavija.{815} 


Cf. Shaktananda-taranggini{816}: “Inside dwells the Devi Sundari,{817} 
the Paradevata.” 


“Soft” (Komala)—i.e., oily and smooth. 


“Kama-rupa” {818}: that by which Kama is caused to be felt—i.e., it is 
Madanagaratmaka. {819} 


Cf. “Therefore the triangle should be known as the charming Shaktipitha. ” 


This triangle is above the Dhara-vija. Cf. Sammohana Tantra, speaking of 
Dhara-vija: “Above it (Dhara-vija) are three lines—Vama, Jyeshtha, and 
Raudri.” 


“Kandarpa.”—Next the presence of the Kandarpa Vayu is spoken of. It is 
everywhere (Samantat) extended through the triangle. 


“Lord of Beings” (Jivesha).—He is so called because the continuance of 
life depends on him. 


It is said that “In the Kanda (heart) region dwells Prana; and Apana dwells 
in the region of the anus. The air in the region of the anus is therefore 
Apana, and Kandarpa Vayu accordingly is a part of Apana Vayu.” {820} It 
is also said that{821} “Apana draws Prana, and Prana draws Apana—just 
as a falcon attached by a string is drawn back again when he flies away; 
these two by their disagreement prevent each other from leaving the body, 
but when in accord they leave it.” 


The two Vayus Prana and Apana go different ways, pulling at one another; 
and neither of them, therefore, can leave the body, but when the two are in 
accord—that is, go in the same direction—they leave the body. Kandarpa 
Vayu, being a part of Apana, also pulls at Prana Vayu, and prevents the 
latter from escaping from the body; hence Kandarpa Vayu is the Lord of 
Life. 


In v. 10 the Author describes Kundalini as “She who maintains all the 
beings of the world by Inhalation and Exhalation.” He himself has thus said 
that Prana and Apana are the maintainers of animate being. 


VERSE 9. 


Inside it (the triangle) is the Svayambhu{822} in his Linggaform, {823} 
beautiful like molten gold, with his head downwards. He is revealed by 
Knowledge{824} and Meditation, {825} and is of the shape and color of a 
new leaf. As the lightning-like cool rays of the moon charm, so does His 
beauty. The Deva who resides happily here as in Kashi is in form like a 
whirlpool. {826} 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse he speaks of the presence of the svayambhulinga in the 
triangle. 


“Svayambhu in his Lingga-form” (Lingga-riipl svayambhu)—i.e., here 
dwells the Shivalingga whose name is Svayambhu. 


“Beautiful like molten gold” (Druta-kanaka-kala-komala).—His body has 
the soft luster of molten gold. 


“His head downwards” (Pashchimasya).—Cf. Kali-kula-mrita: “There is 
placed the great Lingga Svayambhu, who is ever blissful, his head 
downward, active when moved by Kama-Bija.” 


“Revealed by Knowledge and Meditation.” (Jnana-dhyana-prakasha).— 
Whose existence is apprehended by us by Knowledge (Jnana) and 
Meditation (Dhyana). By Jnana we realize the attributelessness, and by 
Dhyana the attributefullness (of the Brahman). Such is Svayambhu. 


“The shape and color of new leaves” (Prathama-kisha layakarartipa).—By 
this is conveyed the idea that the shape of the Svayambhu Lingga is 


tapering like a new unopened leaf-bud. Like the pistil inside the Champaka 
flower, it is broad at the bottom and tapers to a point at the end; this also 
shows that the Svayambhu-lingga is of a blue-green color (shyama). 


Cf. Shaktananda-tarangini: “O Maheshani, meditate inside it (the triangle) 
upon the Svayambhu-lingga, who holds his head with an aperture therein 
downward—the beautiful and blue-green Shiva (Shivang shyamala- 
sundaram).” 


In the Yamala occurs the following passage: “Meditate upon the very 
beautiful celestial triangle (trikona) in the Miladhara; within its three lines 
is Kundali, charming like ten million lightning flashes in the dark 
blue{827} clouds.” 


This passage, which describes Kundali as lightning in the dark blue clouds, 
goes to show that the Svayambhu-Lingga is also blue; but nila (blue) and 
shyama (dark green) belong to the same category, and hence there is no 
contradiction. 


“As do the lightning-like cool rays of the moon, his beauty charms” 
(Vidyut-purnéndu-bimba-prakarakara- {828 } chaya-snigdha-santana-has1).— 
As the light of the moon even when bright as lightning emits no heat, so is 
the light which emanates from the Svayambhu linga cool and pleasing, 
bringing gladness into the hearts of men. 


“The Deva who resides happily here as in Kashi” {829} (Kashivasi vilasi). 
—Kash?i is the place sacred to Shiva, his favorite abode. By these two 
adjectives it is implied that the Svayambhu in the Adhara Lotus is happy as 
he is in his image of Vishveshvara in Kashi, and he is as pleased to live here 
as at Kasht. “Vilasi” may also mean amorous because it has been said 
above, “moved by Kama Vayu.” 


“Like a whirlpool” (Sarid-avarta-rupa-prakara).—The water on its outer 
edge creates a depression in the middle like the shape of a conch. {830} 


This Svayambhu is placed on the Kama-bija. Cf. Kali-Kulamrita: “There 
with a cavity in his head, surrounded by the filaments of the lotus, exists the 


beautiful Maha-lingga Svayambhu, ever happy, holding his head 
downwards, and active when moved by the Kama-bija.” 


Elsewhere the following occurs: “There in the pericarp is the above- 
mentioned Dakini, and the triangle (trikona) within which is the subtle 
space and the red Kama-bija. There is also the Svayambhu Lingga, his head 
downward and of a ruddy hue.” This is, however, a different conception. 


VERSES 10 AND 11.{831} 


Over it{832} shines the sleeping Kundalini, fine as the fiber of the lotus- 
stalk. She is the world-bewilderer, {833} gently covering the mouth of 
Brahma-dvara{834} by Her own. Like the spiral of the conch-shell, Her 
shining snake-like form goes three and a half times round Shiva, {835} and 
her luster is as that of a strong flash of young strong lightning. Her sweet 
murmur is like the indistinct hum of swarms of love-mad bees{836} and the 
soft cadence of sweet harmonious music. It is She who maintains all the 
beings of the world by means of inspiration and expiration, {837} and 
shines in the cavity of the root (Mula) Lotus like a chain of brilliant lights. 


COMMENTARY. 


In these two verses the author speaks of the presence of Kundalini Shakti in 
the Svayambhu Lingga. It is the Devi Kundalini who maintains the 
existence of individual beings (Jiva Jivatma) by the functions of inspiration 
and expiration. She places them in individual bodies; She produces the 
humming sound resembling that of a swarm of bees, and She, as described 
below, dwells in the triangular hollow in the pericarp of the Muladhara 
Lotus resting upon the Svayambhu Lingga. 


“Shines fine as the fibers of the Lotus-stalk” (Bisa-tantu-sodara-lasat- 
sukshma)—i.e., She is fine like the fiber of the Lotus-stalk. 


“World-bewilderer” (Jagan-mohini)—i.e., who is Maya in this world. 
“Gently.” {838 }—Madhuram. 


“The mouth of Brahma-dvara” (Brahma-dvara-mukha)—the hollow on the 
head of Svayambhu Linga. 


Lit., “possessed of the wealth of a strong flash of young lightning.” In youth 
every thing and person shows the characteristic qualities in a state of 
vigorous perfection. Hence a “young flash of lightning” means a strong 
flash. 


“The soft cadence of sweet harmonious music” (Komalakavya-bandha- 
rachana-bhedatibheda-krama).—This shows the mode in which words are 
produced. The soft music produced by a combination of soft and melodious 
words descriptive of beauty, virtue, etc., in all its modulations, resulting 
from perfection of composition and regularity in the disposition of words. 
By Bandha is here meant descriptive poetical composition in prose or verse; 
and by Atibheda the author alludes to all the words in Sangskrita and 
Prakrita. By using the word “order, sequence,” the author emphasizes the 
fact that these compositions and words come out in the order laid down in 
the Shastras. Kundalini produces, not at random, but in set forms. Kundalini 
produces words, Sangskrita and Prakrita, distinct and indistinct. She is the 
source from which all sound emanates. 


Cf. Sharada{839}: “Upon the bursting (unfolding) of the supreme Bindu 
arose unmanifested Sound{840} (Avyakta-rava). It assumed the form of 
Kundali in the animal body, and manifested itself in prose and verse by the 
aid of the letters of the Alphabet (lit., the essence of the letters).” 


It has distinctly been said in Kadimata{841}: “By the motion of the 
Ichchha-Shakti acting through Prana-vayu of the Atma is produced in the 
Miuladhara the excellent Nada Sound called Para.{842} In its ascending 
movement it is thrown up from the Svadhishthana, {843} receiving the 
name of Pashyanti; and again gently led up as before-mentioned, it becomes 
united in the Anahata with Buddhi-tattva, and is named Madhyama. Going 
upward again, it reaches the Vishuddha in the throat, where it is called 
Vaikhari; and from there it goes on towards the head, (upper part) of the 
throat, the palate, the lips, the teeth. It also spreads over the tongue from 
root to tip, and the tip of the nose; and remaining in the throat, the palate, 
and the lips, produces by the throat and the lips the letters of the Alphabet 
from A to Ksha.” 


It is needless to quote more. 


Elsewhere has Kundalini been thus described: “Meditate upon Devi 
Kundalini, who surrounds the Svayambhu-Lingga, who is Shyama{844} 
and subtle, who is Creation itself, {845} in whom are creation, existence, 
and destruction, {846} who is beyond the universe{847} and is 
consciousness{848} itself. Think of Her as the One who goes 

upwards.” {849} 


Also: “Meditate upon the Devi Kundalini as your Ishta-devata, {850} as 
being ever in the form of a damsel of sixteen in the full bloom of her first 
youth, with large and beautifully formed breasts, decked with all the varied 
kinds of jewels, lustrous as the full moon, rosy in color, with ever restless 
eyes.” {851} 


“Rosy” (Rakta), says the Author of the Shakta-nandatarangini, is an 
attribute applicable to all beautiful women. Kundalini as a matter of fact 
should always be meditated upon as rosy (Rakta) in color. {852} 


Shyama (which ordinarily denotes “color”) is here meant to signify 
something different. In all Tantras and all Tantrika collections Kundalini is 
described to be like lightning. “Shyama is the name given to a woman who 
is warm in winter and cool in summer, and has the luster of molten 

gold.” {853} Thus the apparent discrepancy is removed. 


The Kangkala-malini Tantra describes Kundalini in the Brahma-dvara, and 
before the piercing of the Chakras, thus: “She, the Brahman Itself, 
resplendent like millions of moons rising at the same time, has four arms 
and three eyes. Her hands make the gestures{854} of granting boons and 
dispelling fear, and hold a book and a Vina.{855} She is seated on a lion, 
and as She passes to her own abode{856} the Awe-inspiring One (Bhima) 
assumes different forms.” 


VERSE 12. 


Within it{857} reigns dominant Para,{858} the Shri Parameshvari, the 
Awakener of eternal knowledge. She is the Omnipotent, Kala{859} who is 
wonderfully skilful to create, and is subtler than the subtlest. She is the 
receptacle of that continuous stream of ambrosia which flows from the 
Eternal Bliss. By Her radiance it is that the whole of this Universe and this 
Cauldron{860} is illumined. 


COMMENTARY. 


He is now speaking of the Staff-like Para Shakti, who is like a straight 
thread above Kundalini, who is coiled round Svayambhu-Lingga. The Shri 
Parameshvari, whose radiance illumines this Universe{861} and its 
cauldron, dwells in the Svayambhu Lingga above where Kundalini is coiled 
and holds supreme sway. 


“Omnipotent” (Parama).—She is the Maya who is able to do that which is 
impossible. {862 } 


“Kala” is in the form of Nada Shakti (Kala is Nada-shaktirupa); by this Her 
identity with Kundalint is implied. {863} 


The Shaktananda-taranggini says: “Kala is Kundalini, and She, Shiva has 
said, is Nada-shakti.” {864} 


And it has also been elsewhere said: “Above it, meditate in your mind on 
Chitkala united with Lakshmi, who is tapering of shape like the flame of a 
lamp, and who is one with Kundali.” This is what has been said by author 
of this Lalitarahasya. 


Cf. Kalika-Shruti: “Man becomes freed of all sins by meditating upon 
Kundalini as within, above, and below the flame, as Brahma, as Shiva, as 
Shura,{865} and as Parameshvara Himself; as Vishnu, as Prana, as 
Kalagni,{866} and as Chandra.” {867} 


By “within the flame” is meant the excellent Kala ( = Nadariipa) above 
Kundalint’s coil. 


“She (para) is wonderfully skilful to create” (Ati-kushala)—i.e., She it is 
who possesses the wonderful skill and power of creation. 


“She is the receptacle of that continuous stream of ambrosia flowing from 
Eternal Bliss (Brahman)” (Nityananda-paramparati-vigalat-plyusha-dhara- 
dhara).—By Eternal Bliss (Nityananda) is meant the Nirguna or 
Attributeless Brahman. Parampara means “connected step by step.” From 
Nityananda, which is Nirguna Brahman, there arises (in Its aspect as) 
Saguna Brahman; Shakti; from Shakti, Nada; from Nada, Bindu; and from 
Bindu, Kundalini. {868} Chit-kala is another form of Kundalini. It is thus 
that the ambrosia comes step by step to Parameshvari, the Chit-kala. She is 
Nityanandaparampara—that is, She belongs to the chain of emanation from 
Nityananda downwards; and She is Ativigalat-pryusha-dharadhara —that is, 
She is the receptacle of the stream of ambrosia which flows copiously from 
Nityananda. {869 } 


This compound word may be interpreted to mean that She holds the copious 
flow of ambrosia caused by her union with the Brahman. From Nityananda 
this nectar comes to Para-Bindu, and passes through the Ajna Chakra, 
Vishuddha Chakra, etc., till it reaches the Muladhara, and this is what She is 
the receptacle of. To interpret it to mean this, the entire word is read as one. 


VERSE 13. 


By meditating thus on Her who shines within the Mula Chakra, with the 
luster of ten million Suns, a man becomes Lord of speech and King among 
men, and an Adept in all kinds of learning. He becomes ever free from all 
diseases, and his inmost Spirit becomes full of great gladness. Pure of 
disposition by his deep and musical words, he serves the foremost of the 
Devas. {870} 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse the Author speaks of the benefit to be derived from meditating 
on Kundalini. By Mula Chakra is meant the Muladhara. “It is the root of the 
six Chakras—hence its name.” 


“Within” (Mula-chakrantara-vivara-lasat-koti-stryya-prakasham). —She 
shines in the Miladhara Chakra like ten million suns shining at one and the 
same time. 


“His deep and musical words” (Vakyaih kavya-prabandhaih).—His speech 
is musical and full of meanings, as in a poetical composition. 


“He serves” (Sevate).—He uses his words in hymns of praise and for 
purposes of a like nature. He pleases them by words of adoration. 


“All the foremost of the Devas” (Sakala-sura-gurtin).—The word Guru here 
means excellent, and the Author means Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, the 
principal Devas. Amara says that “adding the words Singha (lion), Shardila 
(tiger), Naga (serpent), etc., to a male name implies excellence.” 


SUMMARY. 


The Miuladhara is a Lotus of four petals. The petals are red, and have the 
letters Va, Sha (palatal), Sha. (cerebral), Sa, in colors of gold. In the 
pericarp is the square Dhara-mandala surrounded by eight spears, and 
within it and in the lower part is the Dhara-bija, {871} who has four arms 
and is seated on the elephant Airavata. He is yellow of color, and holds the 
thunderbolt{872} in his hands. Inside the Bindu of the Dhara-bija is the 
Child Brahma, who is red in color, and has four hands with which he holds 
the staff,{873} the gourd, {874} the Rudraksha rosary, and makes the 
gesture which dispels fear.{875} He has four faces. In the pericarp there is a 
red lotus on which is the presiding Divinity of the Chakra 
(Chakradhishthatri), the Shakti Dakini. She is red and has four arms, and in 
her hands are Shila, {876} Khatvangga, {877} Khadga, {878} and Chashaka. 
{879} In the pericarp there is also the lightning-like triangle, inside which 
are Kama-vayu and Kama-bija, {880} both of which are red. Above this is 
the Svayambhu Lingga which is Shyama-varna, {881} and above and round 
this Lingga is Kundalini coiled three and a half times, and above this last 
upstands, on the top of the Lingga, Chit-kala. {882} 


(This is the end of the first section.) {883} 


VERSE 14. 


There is another Lotus{884} placed inside the Sushumna at the root of the 
genitals, of a beautiful vermilion color. On its six petals are the letters from 
Ba to Purandara, {885} with the Bindu{886} superposed, of the shining 
color of lightning. 


COMMENTARY. 


Having described the Muladhara, he describes the Svadhishthana, Chakra in 
five verses beginning with the present one. This verse says that at the root 
of the genitals there is, distinct from the Muladhara, another Lotus, of a 
beautiful vermilion color. 


“Placed inside the Sushumna” (Saushumna{887 }-madhyaghatitam).—The 
place of this Chakra or Padma is within Sushumna. 


“At the root of the genitals” (Dhvaja-miladeshe). 


“Of a beautiful vermilion color” (Sindiira-piira-ruchiraruna).—This Lotus is 
of the charming red color of vermilion. 


“On its six petals” (Angga-chhadaih).—It is surrounded by its six petals. 
{888} 


“The letters” (Badyaih savindu-lasitaih Purandarantaih).—By Purandara is 
meant the letter La, it being the Bija of Purandara or Indra. Each of these 
letters from Ba to La is on each petal of the lotus. They have the Bindu over 
them, and are of the shining color of lightning. The above may also mean 
that the luster of the letter is caused by their union with the Bindus placed 
over them. 


VERSE 15. 


Within it{889} is the white, shining, watery region of Varuna, of the shape 
of a half-moon, {890} and therein, seated on a Makara, {891} is the Bija 
Vang, stainless and white as the autumnal moon. 


COMMENTARY. 


Here the Author speaks of the presence of the watery region of Varuna in 
the pericarp of the Svadhishthana. This watery region (Ambhoja- 
mandalam) is in shape like the half-moon (Ardhendurtpalasitam), and is 
luminously white (Vishadaprakasham). 


The Sharada says: “The Lotus of the region of water is four-cornered, {892 } 
and has the thunderbolt (Vajra) and so forth.” Raghava-bhatta,{893} in 
describing it, says: “Draw a half-moon, and draw two Lotuses on its two 
sides.” The Great Teacher{894} speaks of it as “the ray of the Lotus-united 
Half-Moon.” 


Then he speaks of the Varuna-bija. This Bija is also white, and is seated on 
a Makara, which is the Carrier{895} of Varuna. He has also the noose in his 
hand. 


Cf. “(Meditate) upon the white Bija of Varuna (within the Lotus). Varuna is 
seated on a Makara, and carries the noose (Pasha). And above him{896} 
(that is, in the Bindu) meditate on Hari,{897} who is blue of color (Shyama) 
and four-armed.” 


The Va in Varuna Bija belongs to the Ya class—i.e., to Ya, Ra, La, Va. This 
becomes clear from the arrangement of the letters in Kulakula Chakra and 
in Bhutalipi Mantra. 


The rest is clear. 


VERSE 16. 


May Hari, who is within it, {898} who is in the pride of early youth, whose 
body is of a luminous blue beautiful to behold, who is dressed in yellow 
raiment, is four-armed, and wears the Shri-vatsa{899} and the Kaustubha, 
{900} protect us! 


COMMENTARY. 


The Author here speaks of the presence of Vishnu in the Varuna Bija. 


“Within it” (Angke)—.e., in the Bindu above Varuna Bija, in the same way 
as Brahma is in the lap of Dhara Bija. The same explanation applies by 
analogy to the description of the other Lotuses. 


“Whose body” (Nila-prakasha-ruchira-shriyam).—Lit., He possesses the 
enchanting beauty of blue effulgence; i.e., his body is of a luminous blue 
beautiful to behold. 


“Wears Shrivatsa and Kaustubha.”—The following is his Dhyana in the 
Gautamiya Tantra: “On his heart is the gem Kaustubha, lustrous as ten 
thousand Suns shining at the same time, and below it is the garland{901 } 
with the luster of ten thousand moons. Above Kaustubha is Shri-vatsa, 
which also is luminous like ten thousand moons.” 


The Tantrantara speaks of the weapons in the hands of Hari: “(Meditate on) 
Him who has the noose in his hand, and Hari who is in his lap, and has four 
arms, and holds the Conch, {902} Discus, {903} Mace,{904} and Lotus, 
{905} is dark blue (Shyama) and dressed in yellow raiment.” 


By “who has the noose in his hand” is meant Varuna as he has been 
described in the preceding verses. 


Elsewhere he (Hari) is spoken of as “clad in yellow raiment, benign of 
aspect, and decked with a garland.” {906} 


We have seen that, in the Muladhara, Brahma is seated on the Hangsa, and 
we should therefore think of Vishnu as seated on Garuda. {907} 


VERSE 17. 


It is here that Rakini always dwells.{908} She is of the color of a blue lotus. 
{909} The beauty of Her body is enhanced by Her uplifted arms holding 
various weapons. She is dressed in celestial raiments and ornaments, and 
Her mind is exalted{910} with the drinking of ambrosia. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this Shloka the Author speaks of the presence of Rakini in the 
Svadhishthana. 


Cf. Rakini-dhyana elsewhere: “Meditate on Rakini, who is blue of color 
(Shyama). In Her hands are a spear,{911} a lotus, a drum{912} and a sharp 
battle-axe.{913} She is of furious aspect. Her three eyes are red, and her 
teeth{914} show fiercely. She, the Shining Devi of Devas, is seated on a 
double lotus, and from one of her nostrils there flows a streak of blood. She 
is fond of white rice,{915} and grants the wished-for boon.” 


As Rakini is within another lotus{916} in this Lotus, therefore should the 
six Shaktis everywhere be understood to be in a red lotus as in the 
Muladhara. 


VERSE 18. 


He who meditates upon this stainless Lotus, which is named Svadhishthana, 
is freed immediately from all his enemies, {917} such as the fault of 
Ahangkara{918} and so forth. He becomes a Lord among Yogis, and is like 
the Sun illumining the dense darkness of ignorance.{919} The wealth of his 
nectar-like words flow in prose and verse in well-reasoned discourse. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse is described the benefit derived from the contemplation of the 
Svadhishthana Lotus. 


“Svadhishthana.”—“By Sva is meant the Para-Linga (Supreme Linga), and 
hence the Lotus is called Svadhishthana.” {920} 


“Fault of Ahangkara and so forth” (Ahang-kara-doshadi).—By this is 
implied the six evil inclinations: Kama (lust), Krodha (anger), etc. These 
six,{921} which are the six enemies of Man, are destroyed by 
contemplation on the Svadhishthana Lotus. By contemplation upon it are 
also destroyed the darkness of Maya, and Moha,{922} and the Sun of 
knowledge (Jnana) is acquired. The rest is clear. 


SUMMARY OF VERSES 14 TO 18. 


The Svadhishthana Chakra is of the color of vermilion, and has six petals. 
On its six petals are the six letters Ba, Bha, Ma, Ya, Ra, and La, with the 
Bindu placed thereon. They are of the color of lightning. In the pericarp of 


this Lotus is the region of water in the form of an eight-petalled Lotus, with 
a half-moon in its center. This region is white. Inside this latter is the 
Varuna Bija “Vang,” seated on a Makara, with a noose in his hand. In the 
lap of the latter (i.e., in the hollow of the Bindu) is Vishnu seated on 
Garuda. He has four hands, and is carrying the Shangkha (conch shell), 
Chakra (discus), Gada (mace), and Padma (lotus). He is dressed in yellow 
raiment, wears a long garland (Vana-mala) round his neck, the mark 
Shrivatsa and the gem Kaustubha on his breast, and is youthful in 
appearance. On a red lotus in the pericarp is the Shakti Rakin. She is 
Shyama-varna, {923} and in her four hands she holds the Shila (spear or 
trident), Abja (lotus), Damaru (drum), and Tangka (battle-axe). She is three- 
eyed and has fierce projecting fangs, {924} and is terrible to behold. She is 
fond of white rice, {925} and a stream of blood runs from Her nostril. 


(Here ends the second section.) 


VERSE 19. 


Above it,{926} and at the root of the navel, is the shining Lotus of ten 
petals, {927} of the color of heavy-laden rain-clouds. Within it are the 
letters Da to Pha, of the color of the blue lotus with the Bindu above them. 
Meditate there on the region of Fire, triangular in form and shining like the 
rising sun. Outside it are three Svastika marks, {928} and within, the Bija of 
Vahni himself.{929} 


COMMENTARY. 


The Manipura Chakra is described in this and the two following verses. 


“Shining lotus of ten petals” (Dashadala-lashite) {930}—i.e., the Lotus 
which shines by reason of its ten petals. 


“Of the color of heavy rain-clouds” (Purnamegha-prakashe)—.e., of a dark 
hue. 


“Within it are the letters,” etc. (Nilambhoja-prakashaih upahitajathare dadi- 
phantaih sachandraih). 


The ten letters from Da (cerebral) to Pha, with the Bindu placed above 
them, are of the color of the blue lotus, and are each of them on the ten 
several petals. The letters are Da, Dha, Na, Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, Pha. 


“Like the rising Sun” (Aruna-mihira-samam)—.e., like the young sun. 


“Svastika Marks. {931 }—These three marks or signs are on three sides of 
the triangle. 


Raghava-bhatta says{932}: “A Svastika sign is one made by two straight 
lines going in four different directions.”9?1 


VERSE 20. 


Meditate upon Him (Fire) seated on a ram, four-armed, radiant like the 
rising Sun. In His lap ever dwells Rudra, who is of the hue of vermilion. He 
(Rudra) is white with the ashes with which He is smeared; of an ancient 
aspect and three-eyed, His hands are placed in the attitude of granting boons 
and of dispelling fear.{933} He is the destroyer of creation. 


COMMENTARY. 


Cf. the Dhyana of Vahni elsewhere: “Seated on a ram, a Rudraksha rosary 
in one hand, and the Shakti{934} in the other.” 


From this it is to be inferred that the other two hands are in the attitude of 
granting boons and of dispelling fear; that is how He is described to be in 
other Dhyanas of Him. 


Rudra should here be meditated upon as seated on a bull. 


“He is white . . . smeared” (Bhasmaliptangga-bhusha-bharana-sita-vapu).— 
The ashes with which his body is smeared and the ornaments he is wearing 
make him look white (though his hue is red). 


VERSE 21. 


Here abides Lakini, the benefactress of all. She is four-armed, of radiant 
body, is dark{935} (of complexion), clothed in yellow raiment and decked 
with various ornaments, and exalted with the drinking of ambrosia. {936} 
By meditating on this{937} Navel lotus{938} the power to destroy and 
create (the world) is acquired. Vani{939} with all the wealth of knowledge 
ever abides in the lotus of his face. 


COMMENTARY. 


“Decked with various ornaments” (Vividha-virachan-alangkrita)—She who 
is decorated with gems and pearls arranged in varied and beautiful designs. 


Cf. Lakini-dhyana elsewhere: “Let the excellent worshipper meditate upon 
the Devi Lakini, who is blue and has three faces, and three eyes (to each 
face), fierce of aspect, and with Her teeth protruding.{940} In Her right 
hand She holds the thunderbolt and the Shakti,{941} and in the left She 
makes the gestures{942} of dispelling fear and of granting boons. She is in 
the pericarp of the navel lotus, which has ten petals. She is fond of meat 
(Mangsashi), and her breast is ruddy with the blood and fat which drop 
from Her mouth.” 


The navel lotus is called Mani-ptra. The Gautamiya Tantra says: “This 
Lotus is called Manipura because it is lustrous like a gem.” {943} 


SUMMARY OF VERSES 19 TO 21. 


The Nabhi-padma (Navel Lotus) is of the color of the rain-cloud, and has 
ten petals; on each of its petals are each of the ten letters Da, Dha, Na., Ta, 
Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, and Pha, of a lustrous blue color, with the Bindu 
above each of them. In the pericarp of this Lotus is the red Region of Fire, 
which is triangular in shape, and outside it, on its three sides, are three 
Svastika signs. Within the triangle is the Bija of Fire—“Rang.” He is red in 
color and is seated on a ram, is four-armed, and holds in his hands the Vajra 
(thunderbolt) and the Shakti weapon, and makes the signs of Vara and of 
Abhaya.{944} In the lap of Vahni Bija is Rudra, red of color, seated on the 
bull, who, however, appears to be white on account of the ashes which He 
smears on his body. He is old in appearance. On a red lotus in the pericarp 
of this Lotus is the Shakti Lakini. She is blue, has three faces with three 
eyes in each, is four-armed, and with Her hands holds the Vajra and the 
Shakti weapon, and makes the signs of dispelling fear and granting boons. 
She has fierce projecting teeth, and is fond of eating rice and dhal, cooked 
and mixed with meat and blood. {945} 


(Here ends the third section.) 


VERSE 22. 


Above that, in the heart, is the charming Lotus, {946} of the shining color of 
the Bandhika flower, {947} with the twelve letters beginning with Ka, of 
the color of vermilion, placed therein. It is known by its name of Anahata, 
and is like the celestial wishing-tree,{948} bestowing even more than (the 
supplicant’s) desire. The Region of Vayu, beautiful and with six comers, 
{949} which is like unto the smoke in color, is here. 


COMMENTARY. 


The Anahata Lotus is described in the six verses beginning with this one. 


This Lotus should be meditated upon in the heart; the verb dhyayet is in the 
next verse. The twelve letters beginning with Ka and the letters Ka to Tha 
are on the petals. 


“Tt is known by its name Anahata” (Namnanahata-sangjnakam).—It is so 
called by the Munis because it is here that the sound of Shabdabrahman is 
heard, that Shabda or sound which issues without the striking of any two 
things together. {950} 


“Wishing-tree” {951} is the tree in Heaven which grants all one asks; as it is 
like the Kalpataru, so it bestows more than is desired. 


“Region of Vayu” (Vayor Mandalam).—In the pericarp of this Lotus is the 
Vayu Mandala. 


VERSE 23. 


Meditate within it on the sweet and excellent Pavana Bija,{952} grey asa 
mass of smoke,{953} with four arms, and seated on a black antelope. And 
within it also (meditate) upon the Abode of Mercy, {954} the Stainless Lord 
who is lustrous like the Sun, {955} and whose two hands{956} make the 
gestures which grant boons and dispel the fears of the three worlds. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse the Author speaks of the presence of the Vayu Bija in the 
Anahata Chakra. 


“Pavana Bija” (Pavanakshara)—i.e., the Bija Yang. 


“Grey as a mass of smoke” (Dhiimavali-dhisara).—It has the greyish color 
of smoke by reason of its being surrounded by masses of vapor. 


“A black antelope,” which is noted for its fleetness, is the Vahana (carrier) 
of Vayu. Vayu carries his weapon, “Angkusha,” {957} in the same way that 
Varuna carries his weapon, “Pasha.” {958} 


He next speaks of the presence of Isha in the Vayu Bija. Everywhere Shiva 
is spoken of as having three eyes, {959} hence Isha also has three eyes. 


Elsewhere it is said: “Meditate upon him as wearing a jeweled necklet and 
chain of gems round his neck, and bells on his toes, and also clad in silken 
raiment.” “The beautiful One possessed of the soft radiance of ten million 
moons, and shining with the radiance of his matted hair.” 


Isha should therefore be thought of as clad in silken raiment, etc. 


VERSE 24. 


Here dwells Kakini, who in color is yellow like unto new lightning, {960} 
exhilarated and auspicious; three-eyed and the benefactress of all. She 
wears all kinds of ornaments, and in Her four hands She carries the noose 
and the skull, and makes the sign of blessing and that which dispels fear. 
Her heart is softened with the drinking of nectar. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse the Author speaks of the presence of the Shakti Kakin1. 


“Exhilarated” {961} (Matta)—that is, She is not in an ordinary, but in a 
happy, excited mood. 


“With the drinking of nectar,” etc. (Purana-sudha-rasardrahridaya).—Her 
heart is softened to benevolence by the drinking of nectar; or it may be 
interpreted to mean that Her heart is softened by the supreme bliss caused 
by drinking the excellent nectar which drops from the Sahasrara. Her heart 
expands with the supreme bliss. Kakini should be thought of as wearing the 
skin of a black antelope. 


Compare the following Dhyana of Kakini where She is so described: “If 
thou desirest that the practice of thy Mantra be crowned with success, 
meditate on the moon-faced, ever-existent{962} Shakti Kakini, wearing the 
skin of a black antelope, adorned with all ornaments.” {963} 


VERSE 25. 


In the pericarp of this Lotus is the Shakti in the form of a triangle (Trikona), 
whose tender body is like ten million flashes of lightning. Inside the triangle 
is the Shiva-lingga known by the name of Vana. This Lingga is like shining 
gold, and on his head is an orifice minute as that in a gem. He is the 
resplendent abode of Lakshmi. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this Shloka is described the triangle Trikona which is in the pericarp of 
this Lotus. 


“Shakti in the form of a triangle” (Trikonabhidha Shaktih).—By this we are 
to understand that the mouth or head of the Trikona is downward.{964} 


This Trikona is below the Vayu Bija, as has been said elsewhere. “In its lap 
is Isha. Below it, within the Trikona is Vana-Lingga.” 


“On his head,” etc. (Maulau Sikshma-vibheda-yuk manih).—This is a 
description of Vana-Lingga. The orifice is the little space within the Bindu 
which is within the half-moon which is on the head of the Lingga. 


Cf. the following description: “The Vana-Lingga within the triangle, decked 
in jewels made of gold—the Deva with the half-moon on his head; in the 
middle is an excellent red lotus.” 


The red lotus in this quotation is one below the pericarp of the heart lotus; it 
has its head turned upwards, and has eight petals. It is in this that mental 
worship (Manasapija) should be made.{965} Compare the following: 
“Inside is the red eight-petalled lotus, there is the Kalpa-tree and the seat of 


the Ishta-deva under an awning (Chandratapa), surrounded by trees laden 
with flowers and fruits and sweet-voiced birds. There meditate on the Ishta- 
deva according to the ritual{966} of the worshipper.” 


“Orifice minute as.”—He here speaks of the Bindu which manifests on the 
head of the Vana Lingga. As a gem has a minute orifice in it (when pierced 
to be threaded), so has this Lingga.{967} By this is meant that the Bindu is 
on the head of the Shiva Lingga. 


“The resplendent abode of Lakshmi.” {968}—By this one must know the 
great beauty of the Lingga, due to a rush of desire.{969} 


VERSE 26. 


He who meditates on this Heart Lotus becomes (like) the Lord of Speech, 
and (like) Ishvara he is able to protect and destroy the worlds. This Lotus is 
like the celestial wishing-tree, {970} the abode and seat of Sharva.{971} It 
is beautified by the Hangsa, {972} which is like unto the steady flame of a 
lamp in a windless place.{973} The filaments which surround its pericarp, 
illumined by the solar region, charm. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this and the following verse he speaks of the good to be gained by 
meditating on the Heart Lotus. 


“He who meditates on this Lotus in the Heart becomes like the Lord of 
Speech”—.e., Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas—and able like Ishvara the 
Creator to protect and destroy the worlds. Briefly, he becomes the Creator, 
Protector, and Destroyer, of the Worlds. 


He speaks of the presence of the Jivatma in the pericarp of this Lotus by 
speaking of the Hangsa, {974} which is like the steady flame of a lamp ina 
windless place, and enhances the beauty of this Lotus (Anila-hina-dipa- 
kahka-hangsena sangshobhitam). Hangsa is the Jivatma. He also speaks of 
the presence of the Siryya-mandala in the pericarp of this Lotus. 


“The filaments which surround its pericarp, illumined by the solar region, 
charm” (Bhanormandala-manditantara-lasatkinjalka-shobhadharam).—It is 
beautified by reason of the filaments which surround the pericarp being 
tinged by the rays of the Sun. The rays of the Sun should be read to qualify 
the filaments, and not the space within the pericarp. The filaments of the 
other Lotuses are not so tinged, and it is the distinctive feature of this Lotus. 


By the expression “the Mandala of Strya (Bhanu)” the reader is to 
understand that all the filaments in the pericarp are beauteous with the rays 
of the Sun, and not a portion of them. 


All over the pericarp is spread the region of Vayu. Round it is the Region of 
Suryya; and above these the Vayu Bija and Trikona. etc., should be 
meditated upon. This is quite consistent. In mental worship the mantra is 
“Mang{975}—salutation to the Region of Fire with his ten Kalas,” {976} 
etc. And we therefore see from this{977} that the regions of Vahni (Fire), 


Arka (Sun), and Chandra (Moon), are placed one above the other. 
“Ishvara”—i.e., Creator. 


“Able to protect, and destroy the world” (Raksha-vinashe kshamah)—.e., it 
is he who protects and destroys. The idea meant to be conveyed by these 
three attributes is that he becomes possessed of the power of creating, 
maintaining, and destroying, the Universe.{978} 


VERSE 27. 


Foremost among Yogis, he becomes dearer than the dearest to women. 
{979} He is pre-eminently wise and full of noble deeds. His senses are 
completely under control. His mind in its intense concentration is engrossed 
in thoughts of the Brahman. His inspired speech flows like a stream of 
(clear) water. He is like Vishnu Himself,{980} and he is able at will to enter 
another’s body. {981 } 


COMMENTARY. 


“Dearer than the dearest to women” (Priyat priyatamah kantakulasya)—i.e., 
because he is skilful to please them. {982} 


“His senses are completely under control” (Jitendriyaganah)—.e., he is one 
who should be counted among those that have completely subjugated their 
senses. 


“His mind... Brahman” (Dhyanavadhana-kshamah).—Dhyana is Brahma- 
chintana, and Avadhana means steady and intense concentration of the 
mind. The Yog! is capable of both. 


“His inspired speech flows like a stream of (clear) water” (Kavyambu- 
dhara-vaha).—The flow of his speech is compared to an uninterrupted flow 
of water, and it is he from whom it flows. 


“He is like Vishnu” (Lakshmi-ranggana-daivatah).—He becomes like the 
Deva who is the beloved of Lakshmi. Lakshmi, the Devi of Prosperity, is 
the spouse of Vishnu. This compound word is capable of another meaning. 
It may mean: One who has enjoyed all prosperity (Lakshm1) and bliss 
(Ranggana) in this world goes along the path of liberation. It has therefore 


been said: “Having enjoyed in this world the best of pleasures, he in the end 
goes to the abode of Liberation.” {983 } 


“Another’s body” (Para-pura).—He is able at will to enter the enemy’s fort 
or citadel (Durga), even though guarded and rendered difficult of access. 
And he gains power by which he may render himself invisible, fly across 
the sky, and other similar powers. It may also mean “another man’s 

body.” {984} 


SUMMARY OF VERSES 22 TO 27. 


The Heart Lotus is of the color of the Bandhika{985} flower, and on its 
twelve petals are the letters Ka to Tha., with the Bindu above them, of the 
color of vermilion. In its pericarp is the hexagonal{986} Vayu-Mandala, of 
a smoky color, and above it Suryya-Mandala, with the Trikona lustrous as 
ten million flashes of lightning within it. Above it the Vayu Bija, of a 
smoky hue, is seated on a black antelope, four-armed and carrying the goad 
(angkusha). In his (Vayu-bija’s) lap is three-eyed Isha. Like Hangsa 
(Hangsabha), His two arms extended in the gestures of granting boons and 
dispelling fear. In the pericarp of this Lotus, seated on a red lotus, is the 
Shakti Kakini. She is four-armed, and carries the noose (Pasha), the skull 
(Kapala), and makes the boon (Vara) and fear-dispelling (Abhaya) signs. 
She is of a golden hue, is dressed in yellow raiment, and wears every 
variety of jewel and a garland of bones. Her heart is softened by nectar. In 
the middle of the Trikona is Shiva in the form of a Vana-Lingga, with the 
crescent moon and Bindu on his head. He is of a golden color. He looks 
joyous with a rush of desire.{987} Below him is the Jivatma like Hangsa. It 
is like the steady flame of a lamp.{988} Below the pericarp of this Lotus is 
the red lotus of eight petals, with its head upturned. It is in this (red) lotus 
that there are the Kalpa Tree, the jeweled altar surmounted by an awning 
and decorated by flags, which is the place of mental worship. {989} 


(Here ends the fourth section.) 


VERSES 28 AND 29. 


In the throat is the Lotus called Vishuddha, which is pure and of a smoky 
purple hue. All the (sixteen) shining vowels on the sixteen petals, of a 
crimson hue, are distinctly visible to him whose mind (Buddhi) is 
illumined. In its pericarp there is the Ethereal Region, circular in shape, and 
resembling the full Moon. {990} On an elephant white as snow is seated the 
Bija{991} of Ambara, {992} who is white of color. 


Of His four arms, two hold the noose{993} and goad, {994} and the other 
two make the gestures{995} of granting boons and dispelling fear. These 
add to His beauty. In His lap{996} there ever dwells the snow-white Deva, 
three-eyed and five-faced, with ten beautiful arms, and clothed in a tiger’s 
skin. His body is united with that of Girija,{997} and he is known by what 
his name, Sada-shiva, {998} signifies. 


COMMENTARY. 


The Vishuddha Chakra is described in four verses beginning with these. 


“Because by the sight of the Hangsa the Jiva attains purity, this Padma 
(Lotus) is therefore called Vishuddha (pure)—Ethereal, Great, and 
Excellent.” {999 } 


“Tn the region of the throat is the Lotus called Vishuddha.”—Pure (amala, 
without impurity) by reason of its being tejo-maya{1000} (its substance is 
tejas), and hence free from impurity. 


“All the vowels” (Svaraih sarvaih)—i.e., all the vowels beginning with a- 
kara and ending with visarga—altogether sixteen in number. 


“Shining on the petals” (Dala-parilasitaih)—The vowels being sixteen in 
number, the number of petals which this lotus possesses is shown by 
implication to be sixteen also. 


Elsewhere this has been clearly stated: “Above it is the Lotus of sixteen 
petals, of asmoky purple color; its petals bear the sixteen vowels, red in 
color, with the Bindu above them. Its filaments are ruddy, and it is 
surrounded by Vyoma-mandala.” {1001} 


“Distinctly visible” (Dipitam).—These letters are lighted up, as it were, for 
the enlightened mind (Dipta-buddhi). 


“Whose mind (buddhi) is illumined”. refers to the person whose buddhi, or 
intellect, has become free from the impurity of worldly pursuits as the result 
of the constant practice of Yoga. 


“The Ethereal Region circular in shape, and resembling the full Moon” 
(Purnendu-prathita-tama-nabhomandalam vritta-rupam).—The Ethereal 
Region is circular in shape (Vritta-rupa), and its roundness resembles that of 
the full Moon, and like the Moon it is also white. The Sharada says: “The 
wise know that the Mandalas participate in the luster of their peculiar 
elements.” {1002} The Mandalas are of the color of their respective Devatas 
and elements: Ether is white, hence its Mandala is also white. 


“In this pericarp is the circular Ethereal Region” (Nabhomandalam vrita- 
rupam).—lIn the lap of this white Ambara (or Ethereal Region) ever dwells 
Sada-shiva, who is spoken of in the second of these two verses. 


“On an elephant white as snow is seated” (Hima-chchhaya nagopari lasit- 
tanu).—This qualifies Ambara. 


Naga here means an Elephant, and not a serpent. The Bhuta-shuddhi clearly 
says: “Inside it is the white Bija of Vyoma on a snow-white elephant.” 
Literally, “His body shows resplendent on an elephant,” because He is 
seated thereon. 


“The Bija of Ambara” (Tasya manoh).—Tasya manoh means literally “His 
mantra,” which is the Bija of Ether or Hang.{1003} 


“His four arms, (two of) which hold the pasha (noose), angkusha (goad), 
and (the other two) are in the gesture granting boons and dispelling fear, 
add to his beauty” (Bhujaih pasha bhayang-kusha-vara-lasitaih 
shobhitanggasya).—The meaning, in short, is that in His hands He is 
carrying the pasha and angkusha, and making the gestures of dispelling fear 
and granting boons. 


“Tn the lap of his Bija” (Tasya manorangke).—He is here in His Bija form 
—in the form of Hang which is Akasha-Bija. This shows the presence of 
the Bija of Ether in the pericarp of this Lotus, and we are to meditate upon 
it as such. 


“The snow-white Deva whose body is united with (or inseparable from) that 
of Giri-ja” (Girijabhinna-deha).—By this is meant the Arddha-narishvara. 
{1004} The Deva Arddha-narishvara is of a golden color on the left, and 
snow white on the right. He dwells in the lap of Nabho-bija. He is described 
as “the Deva Sada-shiva garbed in white raiment. His half-body inseparate 
from that of Giri-ja is both silvern and golden.” He is also spoken of as 
“possessed of the down-turned digit (Kala) of the Moon which constantly 
drops nectar.” {1005} 


The Nirvana Tantra, {1006} in dealing with the Vishuddha Chakra, says: 
“Within the Yantra is the Bull, and on his back the great lion-seat 
(Singhasana). On this is the eternal Gauri, and on Her right is Sada-Shiva. 
He has five faces, and three eyes to each face; His body is smeared with 
ashes, and He is like a mountain of silver. The Deva is wearing the skin of a 
tiger, and garlands of snakes are His ornaments.” 


The Eternal Gauri (Sada Gauri) is there as half of Shiva’s body. She is in 
the same place spoken of as “the Gauri, the Mother of the Universe, who is 
half the body of Shiva.” 


“With ten beautiful arms” (Lalita-dasha-bhuja).—The Author here has said 
nothing of what the Deva has in His hands. In a Dhyana elsewhere He is 


spoken of as carrying in His hands the Shila (trident), the Tangka (battle- 
axe), the Kripana (sword), the Vajra (thunderbolt), Dahana, the Nagendra 
(snake-king), the Ghanta (bell), the Angkusha (goad), Pasha (noose), and 
making the gesture dispelling fear (Bhitihara). In meditating on Him, 
therefore, He should be thought of as carrying these implements and 
substances and making these gestures in and by His ten arms. The rest can 
be easily understood. 


VERSE 30. 


Purer than the Ocean of Nectar is the Shakti Shakin who dwells in this 
Lotus. Her raiment is yellow, and in Her four lotus-hands She carries the 
bow, the arrow, the noose, and the goad. The whole region of the Moon 
without the mark of the hare{1007} is in the pericarp of this Lotus. This 
(region) is the gateway of great Liberation for him who desires the wealth 
of Yoga and whose senses are pure and controlled. 


COMMENTARY. 


Here the Author speaks of the presence of Shakin in the pericarp of the 
Vishuddha Lotus. 


“Purer than the Ocean of Nectar” (Sudhasindhoh{1008} Shuddha).—The 
Ocean of Nectar is white and cool. Shakini, who is the form of light itself 
(Jyotih-svarupa), is white and heatless. 


In the following Dhyana of Shakini She is described in detail: “Let the 
excellent Sadhaka meditate in the throat lotus on the Devi Shakini. She is 
light itself (Jyotih-svariipa); each of Her five beautiful faces is shining with 
three eyes. In Her lotus hands She carries the noose, the elephant hook, the 
book, and makes the Jnana-mudra. {1009} She maddens (or distracts) all the 
mass of Pashus,{1010} and She is seated on bones.{1011} She is fond of 
milk food, and elated with the nectar which She has drunk.” 


By the expression “She is light itself” in the above Dhyana, it is meant that 
She is white, whiteness being characteristic of light. The two Dhyanas 
differ as regards the weapons the Devi has in her hands. This is due to 
differences in the nature of the Sadhaka’s aim.{1012} 


The Devi is in the lunar region (Chandramandala) within the pericarp. The 
Prema-yoga Taranggin! says: “Here dwells the Shakti Shakint in the 
auspicious region of the Moon.” 


“In this Lotus” (Kamale)—i.e., in the pericarp of the Vishuddha Chakra. 


“Tn this pericarp is the spotless region of the Moon, without the mark of a 
hare” (Shasha-parirahita), conveys the same meaning. The spots on the 
moon are called “the sign of the hare,” “the stain on the moon.” She is 
likened to the Stainless Moon. 


“The gateway of great liberation” (Maha-moksha-dvara).—This is 
attributive of Mandala, the lunar region, and is used in praise of the 
Mandala. It is the gateway of Liberation, of Nirvana-mukti, for those who 
have purified and conquered their senses, among other practices; by 
meditating on this in the path of Yoga they attain liberation (Mukti). 


“Who desires the wealth of Yoga” (Shriyam-abhimata-shilasya).—By Shri 
is meant “the wealth of Yoga.” For him who by his very nature desires the 
wealth of Yoga, that is the gateway of Liberation. This clearly explains the 
meaning of Shuddhendriya, whose senses are pure and controlled. 


In the pericarp of this Lotus is the Nabho-mandala (ethereal region): inside 
the latter is the triangle (trikona); inside the triangle is the Chandra- 
mandala; and inside it is the Nabhovija{1013}; and so forth. Cf. “Think of 
the full moon in the triangle within the pericarp; there think of the snowy 
Akasha seated on an elephant, and whose raiment is white. There is the 
Deva Sada-Shiva.” “Whose raiment is white” qualifies Akasha. 


VERSE 31. 


The Sadhaka who has attained complete knowledge of the Atma (Brahman) 
becomes by constantly concentrating his mind (Chitta) on this Lotus a great 
Sage,{1014} eloquent and wise, and enjoys uninterrupted peace of mind. 
{1015} He sees the three periods,{1016} and becomes the benefactor of all, 
free from disease and sorrow and long-lived, and, like Hangsa, the 
destroyer of endless dangers. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse he speaks of the good gained by meditating on the Vishuddha 
Chakra. 


“Who has attained,” etc. (Atma-sampiirna-yoga).{1017}—-He whose 
knowledge of the Atman is complete by realization of the fact that it is all- 
pervading. 


According to another reading (Atta-sampiirna-yoga), the meaning would be 
“one who has obtained perfection in Yoga.” Hence the all-knowing and 
venerable Teacher has said: “One who has attained complete knowledge of 
the Atma reposes like the still waters of the deep.” The Sadhaka who fixes 
his Chitta on this Lotus, and thereby acquires a full knowledge of the 
Brahman, becomes a knower (Jnani)—i.e., becomes possessed of the 
knowledge of all the Shastras without instruction therein. His Chitta 
becomes peaceful; “he becomes merciful towards all, not looking for any 
return therefore. He is constant, gentle, steady, modest, courageous, 
forgiving, self-controlled, pure, and free from malice and pride.” {1018} 


“He sees the three periods” (Tri-kala-darshi)—i.e., by the knowledge 
acquired by Yoga he sees everything in the past, present, and future. Some 


say that the meaning of this is that the Yogi has seen the Self (Atma), and, 
as all things are therein, they become visible to him. 


“Free from disease and sorrow”—i.e., by having attained Siddhi in his 
mantra he becomes free from diseases and long-lived, and by reason of his 
having freed himself from the bonds of Maya he feels no sorrow. 


“Like Hangsa, the destroyer of endless dangers” (Niravadhivipadang 
dhvangsa-hangsa-prakashah).—From acts good and evil various dangers 
(Vipat) arise. The Sadhaka becomes like the Hangsa which is the Antaratma 
that dwelleth by the pericarp of the Sahasrara,{1019} for he can destroy all 
such dangers and open the gate of liberation” (Moksha). Hangsa is the form 
of the Antaratma. The rest is clear. 


SUMMARY OF THE VISHUDDHA CHAKRA. 


At the base of the throat{1020} is the Vishuddha Chakra, with sixteen 
petals of smoky purple hue. Its filaments are ruddy, and the sixteen vowels, 
which are red and have the Bindu above them, are on the petals. In its 
pericarp is the ethereal region (Nabho-mandala), circular and white. Inside 
it is the Chandra-mandala, and above it is the Bija Hang. This Bija is white 
and garmented in white, seated on an elephant, and is four-armed. In his 
four hands he holds the Pasha (noose) and the Angkusha (goad), and makes 
the Vara-mudra and the Abhaya-mudra. In his lap is Sada-shiva, seated on a 
great lion-seat which is placed on the back of a bull. He is in his form of 
Ardhanarishvara, and as such half his body is the color of snow, and the 
other half the color of gold. He has five faces and ten arms, and in his hands 
he holds the Shila (trident), the Tangka (battle-axe), the Khadga (sacrificial 
sword), the Vajra (thunderbolt), Dahana, {1021} the Nagendra (great snake), 
the Ghanta (bell), the Angkusha (goad), the Pasha (noose), and makes the 
Abhaya-mudra. He wears a tiger’s skin, his whole body is smeared with 
ashes, and he has a garland of snakes round his neck. The nectar dropping 
from the down-turned digit of the Moon is on his forehead. Within the 


pericarp, and in the Lunar Region and seated on bones, is the Shakti 
Shakini, white in color, four-armed, five-faced and three-eyed, clothed in 
yellow, and carrying in Her hand a bow, an arrow, a noose, and a goad. 


VERSE 31A.{1022} 


The Yogi, his mind constantly fixed on this Lotus, his breath controlled by 
Kumbhaka, {1023} is in his wrath{1024} able to move all the three worlds. 
Neither Brahma nor Vishnu, neither Hari-Hara{1025} nor Suryya{1026} 
nor Ganapa, {1027} is able to control his power (resist him). 


COMMENTARY. 


“His breath controlled by Kumbhaka” (Atta-pavana).—Literally it means, 
who has taken the air in, which is done by Kumbhaka. 


“Hari-Hara.”—The Yugala (coupled) form, consisting of Vishnu and Shiva 
combined. 


“Stryya” (Kha-mani).—This word means the jewel of the sky, or Stryya. 


(Here ends the fifth section.) 


VERSE 32. 


The Lotus named Ajna{1028} is like the Moon, beautifully white. On its 
two petals are the letters Ha and Ksha, which are also white and enhance its 
beauty. It shines with the glory of Dhyana. {1029} Inside it is the Shakti 
Hakini, whose six faces are like so many moons. She has six arms, in one of 
which She holds a book; two others are lifted up in the gestures of 
dispelling fear and granting boons, and with the rest She holds a skull, a 
small drum, {1030} and a rosary.{1031} Her mind is pure (Shuddha-chitta). 


COMMENTARY. 


The Author now describes the Ajna Chakra between the eyebrows in the 
seven verses beginning with this present one. 


“Lotus named Ajna” (Ajna-nama).—‘“Ajna is communicated there between 
the eyebrows, hence it is called Ajna.” Here between the eyebrows is the 
Ajna (Command), which is communicated from above, hence it is called 
Ajna. This Lotus which is well known is here. {1032} 


This Lotus is between the eyebrows, as the following shows: “Going 
upwards after entering the throat and palate, the white and auspicious Lotus 
between the eyebrows is reached by Kundali. It has two petals on which are 
the letters Ha and Ksha., and it is the place of mind (Manas).” 


The following are descriptions of the Lotus: 


“Like the Moon, beautifully white” (Hima-kara-sadrishang).—This 
comparison with Chandra (Himakara) may also mean that this Lotus is cool 
like the moonbeams (the moon being the receptacle of Amrita, or Nectar, 
whose characteristic is coolness), and that it is also beautifully white. 


It has been said in “Ishvara-kartikeya-sangvada” {1033}: “Ajna Chakra is 
above it; it is white and has two petals; the letters Ha and Ksha., variegated 
in color, also enhance its beauty. It is the seat of mind (Manas).” 


“Two petals” (Netra-patra).—The petals of the lotus. 


“The letters Ha and Ksha, which are also white” (Ha-ksha-bhyang 
kalabhyam parilasatavapuh su-shubhram).—These two letters are by their 
very nature white, and by their being on the white petals the whiteness 
thereof is made more charming by this very excess of whiteness. The letters 
are called Kalas because they are Bijas of Kalas.{1034} 


“Tt shines with the glory of Dhyana” (Dhyana-dhama-pramasham)—that is, 
its body shines like the glory of Dhyana Shakti. 


“Hakini.”—He next speaks of the presence of the Shakti Hakini here. The 
force of the pronoun Sa (she) in addition to Her name is that She is the 
well-known Hakini. 


“The gestures of dispelling fear and granting boons” (Mudra).—This word 
stands for both. There should be six weapons in Her hands, as She has six 
hands. There are some who read Vidya and Mudra as one word, Vidya- 
mudra, and interpret it to mean “the gesture of explanation”—the gesture 
that conveys learning or knowledge—and speak of Her as possessed of four 
arms. Different manuscripts give different readings. Various manuscripts 
read these as two words. The wise reader should judge for himself. 


In a Dhyana in another place She is thus described: “Meditate upon Her, the 
divine Hakini. She is placed within the Chakra and is white. In Her hands 
are the Damaru, the Rudraksha rosary, the skull, the Vidya (book), the 
Mudra (gesture of granting boons and dispelling fear). She is placed in the 
yellow filaments round the pericarp, and is elated by drinking ambrosia. 
She is well seated on a white Lotus, and Her mind is exalted by the drink of 
the King of the Devas gathered from the Ocean.” 


The rest is clear. 


VERSE 33. 


Within this Lotus dwells the subtle mind (Manas). It is well known. Inside 
the Yoni in the pericarp is the Shiva called Itara,{1035} in His phallic form. 
He there shines like a chain of lightning flashes. The first Bija of the Vedas, 
{1036} which is the abode of the most excellent Shakti, and which by its 
luster makes visible the Brahma-sitra, {1037} is also there. The Sadhaka 
with steady mind should meditate upon these according to the order 
(prescribed). 


COMMENTARY. 


He speaks of the presence of Manas in this Lotus. 


“Subtle” (Sikshma-ruiipa).—The Manas is beyond the scope of the senses; 
that being so, it may be asked, What is the proof of its existence? The 
answer is, It is well known or universally accepted (Prasiddha) from 
eternity by generation after generation as a thing realized, and is hence well 
known. The evidence of the Shastras, also, is that this Manas selects and 
rejects. {1038} Here is the place of the Manas. The presence of Manas is 
above the first Bija of the Vedas as will appear from what is about to be 
spoken of. 


“Phallic form.”—He next speaks of the presence of the Shiva-lingga{1039} 
in the Yoni which is within the pericarp. The Itara-Shiva who is there is in 
His phallic form, and within the Yoni. Within the triangle in the pericarp 
dwells Itara-shiva-pada{1040}—.e., the corpse-like form known by the 
name of Itara. This Lingga is in the phallic form and white. As has been 
said in the Bhuta-shuddhi Tantra: “Inside it is the Lingga Itara, crystalline 
and with three eyes.” This Lingga resembles continuous streaks of lightning 
flashes (Vidyun-malavila-sam). 


“First Bija of the Vedas” (Vedanam adivijam).—He then speaks of the 
presence of the Pranava{1041} in the pericarp of this Lotus. In the pericarp 
there is also the first Bija—i.e., Pranava.!041 


“Which is the abode of the most excellent Shakti” (Parama kula-pada).— 
Kula = shakti. Parama means most excellent, by reason of its resembling 
lightning; and Pada means place—i.e., the triangular space. Hence this Bija 
—namely, the Pranava—we perceive is within the triangle. This is clearly 
stated in the following text: 


“Within the pericarp, and placed in the triangle, is Atma in the form of the 
Pranava, and above it, like the flame of a lamp, is the charming Nada, and 
Bindu which is Makara, {1042} and above it is the abode of Manas.” 


Now, if the Paramakulapada{1043} be the container (Adh§ara) of the 
Pranava, how is it that it is not mentioned as one of the sixteen Adharas 
spoken of in the following passage? For it has been said that “the sixteen 
Adharas hard of attainment by the Yogi are Miladhara, Svadhishthana, 
Mani-pura, Anahata, Vishuddha, Ajna-chakra, Bindu, Kalapada, Nibodhika, 
Addhendu, Nada, Nadanta, Unmani, Vishnu-vaktra Dhruvamandala, { 1044} 
and Shiva.” 


The answer is that the second Kalapada is not the one in the Ajna Chakra, 
but is placed in the vacant space above Mahanada which is spoken of later. 
This will become clear when dealing with the subject of Mahanada. 


“Which makes manifest the Brahma-siitra” (Brahma-sitra-prabodha).— 
Brahma-sitra = Chitrini-nadi. This Nadi is made visible by the luster of the 
Pranava. In v. 3 this Nadi has been described as “lustrous with the luster of 
the Pranava.” 


The Sadhaka should with a steady mind meditate upon all these—viz., 
Hakini, Manas, Itara Lingga, and Pranava—in the order prescribed. This is 
different to the order in which they are placed in the text by the Author. But 
the arrangement of words according to their import is to be preferred to 
their positions in the text. The order as shown here should prevail. Thus, 
first Hakini in the pericarp, in the triangle; above her Itara Lingga; in the 


triangle above him another; and above the last the Pranava; and last of all, 
above the Pranava itself, Manas, should be meditated upon. 


VERSE 34. 


The excellent Sadhaka, whose Atma is nothing but a meditation on this 
Lotus, is able quickly to enter another’s body{1045} at will, and becomes 
the most excellent among saints and sages, and all-knowing and all-seeing. 
He becomes the benefactor of all, and is versed in all the Shastras. He 
realizes his unity with the Brahman and acquires excellent and unknown 
powers.{1046} Full of fame and long-lived, he ever becomes the Creator, 
Destroyer, and Preserver, of the three worlds. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse he speaks of the good to be gained by the Dhyana of this 
Lotus. 


“Most excellent among saints and sages” (Munindra).—A Muni is one who 
is possessed of the wealth of Dhyana and Yoga and other excellent 
acquirements. The suffix Indra means King or Chieftain, and is added to 
names to signify excellence. 


“Versed in all the Shastras” (Sarva-shastrarthavetta)—Such an one 
becomes proficient in the Shastras and in Divine knowledge, and thus he 
becomes all-seeing (Sarva-darshi)—i.e., able to look at things from all 
points by reason of his being possessed of wisdom and knowledge which 
harmonizes with Shastras, manners, and customs. 


“He realizes,” etc. (Advaitachara-vadi).—He knows that this Universe and 
all material existence is the Brahman, from such sayings of Shruti as, “The 
worlds are Its feet: all that exists is the Brahman”{1047}; and, “I am the 
Deva, and no one else; I am the very Brahman, and sorrow is not my 
share.” {1048} He knows that the Brahman alone is the Real (Sat), and 


everything else is unreal (Asat), and that they all shine by the light of the 
Brahman. {1049} The man who by such knowledge is able to realize the 
identity of the Individual with the Supreme Spirit{1050} (Jivatma and 
Paramatma), and preaches it, is an Advaitavadi. 


“Excellent and unknown powers” (Paramaptrva-siddhi)—that is, most 
exalted and excellent powers. 


“Full of fame” (Prasiddha)—i.e., famous by reason of his excellence. 


“He ever becomes,” etc. (So ’pi karta tri-bhuvana-bhavane sanghritau 
palane cha).—This is the highest Prashangsavada{1051}; or it may mean 
that such Sadhaka becomes absorbed in the Supreme on the dissolution of 
the body, and thus becomes the source of Creation, Preservation, and 
Destruction. 


VERSE 35. 


Within the triangle in this Chakra ever dwells the combination of 
letters{1052} which form the Pranava. It is the inner Atma as pure mind 
(Buddhi), and resembles a flame in its radiance. Above it is the half 
(crescent) moon, and above this, again, is Ma-kara,{1053} shining in its 
form of Bindu. Above this is Nada, whose whiteness equals that of Bala- 
rama{1054} and diffuses the rays of the Moon.1°54 


COMMENTARY. 


The author desires to speak of the presence of the Pranava in the Ajna 
Chakra and says that in this Chakra, and within the triangle which has 
already been spoken of, ever dwells the combination of letters which by the 
rules of Sandhi makes the thirteenth vowel O. This combination of letters is 
Shuddha-buddhyantaratma—i.e., the innermost Spirit manifesting as pure 
intelligence (Buddhi). 


He next gives its attributes: 


“Resembles the flame in its radiance” (Pradipabhajyotih).—But how can 
this thirteenth vowel by itself be Shuddha-buddhyantaratma? He therefore 
says: 


“Above it is the crescent moon” (Tadirdhve chandrardha). 


“And above this, again, is Ma-kara, shining in its bindu form” (Tad-upari 
vilasad Bindu-ripi Ma-karah).—It is thus shown that by the placing of the 
crescent moon and the Bindu{1055} over the thirteenth vowel the Prarnava 
is completely formed. 


“Above this is Nada” (Tadurdhve nado’sau)—.e., above the Pranava is the 
Avantara (secondary) Nada, which challenges as it were the whiteness of 
Baladeva and the Moon (Baladhavala-sudhadhara-santana-has1). By this he 
means to say that it is extremely white, excelling in whiteness both 
Baladeva and the Moon. 


Some read Tadadye nado’sau (in the place of Tadiirdhve nado’sau), and 
interpret it as, “Below Bindu-ripi Ma-kara is Nada.” But that is incorrect. 
The text says, “Above this, again, is Ma-kara, shining in its form of Bindu,” 
and there is Nada below it; that being so, it is useless to repeat that Nada is 
below. 


Besides, this Nada is beyond the Nada which forms part of the Prarnava, 
and is part of the differentiating Bhidyamana Parabindu placed above the 
Pranava. If, however, it be urged that it is necessary to state the details in 
describing the special Pranava (Vishishta-Pranava), and it is asked, “Why 
do you say a second Nada is inappropriate?” then the reading Tadadye 
nado’sau may be accepted. 


But read thus it should be interpreted in the manner following: “This Nada 
shown below the Bindu-rupi Ma-kara is Bala-dhavala-sudhadhara-santana- 
hasi (v. ante), and the Nada first spoken of is also so described. Such 
repetition is free from blame on the authority of the maxim that “the great 
are subject to no limitations.” 


VERSE 36. 


When the Yogi closes the house which hangs without support, {1056} the 
knowledge whereof he has gained by the service of Parama-guru, and when 
the Chetas{1057} by repeated practice becomes dissolved in this place 
which is the abode of uninterrupted bliss, he then sees within the middle of 
and in the space above (the triangle) sparks of fire distinctly shining. 


COMMENTARY. 


Having described the Pranava, he now speaks of its union (with chetas). 


The Yogi should close the house (Pur)—i.e., he should, with his mind set on 
the act, close the inner house; or, in other words, he should make Yoni- 
mudra{1058} in the manner prescribed, and thus effectually close the inner 
house. The word Pur here used shows that the Yoni-mudra is meant. Then, 
when his Chetas by repeated practice (Abhyasa) or meditation on the 
Pranava becomes dissolved (Lina) in this place (the Ajna-chakra), he sees 
within and in the space above the triangle sparks of Fire{1059} (Pavana- 
suhridang kanan), or, to put it plainly, sparks of light resembling sparks of 
fire appear before his mental vision above the triangle on which the Pranava 
rests. It is by Yoni-mudra that the inner self (Antah-pur) is restrained and 
detached from the outside world, the region of material sense. The Manas 
cannot be purified and steadied unless it is completely detached from the 
material sphere. It is therefore that the mind (Manas) should be completely 
detached by Yoni-mudra. 


Yoni-mudra, which detaches the Manas from the outside world, is thus 
defined: “Place the left heel against the anus, and the right heel on the left 
foot, and sit erect with your body and neck and head in a straight line. Then, 
with your lips formed to resemble a crow’s beak,{1060} draw in air and fill 


therewith your belly. Next{1061} close tightly your ear-holes with the 
thumbs, with your index-fingers the eyes, the nostrils by your middle 
fingers, and your mouth by the remaining fingers. Restrain the air{ 1062} 
within you, and with the senses controlled meditate on the Mantra whereby 
you realize the unity (Ekatvam) of Prana and Manas.{1063} This is Yoga, 
the favorite of Yogis.” 


“That steadiness of mind is produced by restraint of breath through the help 
of Mudra,” has been said by Shruti. The mind under the influence of 
Hangsa{1064} moves to and fro, over different subjects; by restraining 
Hangsa the mind is restrained. 


“Closes the house” (Purang baddhva).—This may also mean Khechari 
Mudra. {1065} This latter also produces steadiness of mind. 


As has been said, “As by this the Chitta roams in the Brahman (Kha), 
{1066} and as the sound of uttered word{1067} also roams the Ether (Kha), 
therefore is Khechari Mudra honored by all the Siddhis.” 


The Chitta is Khe-chara{1068} when, disunited from Manas and devoid of 
all attachment to all worldly things, it becomes Unmant. {1069} 


As has been said,{1070} “the Yogt is united with Unmanti; without Unmani 
there is no Yogi.” Niralamba means that which has no support—namely, 
that from which the mind’s connection with the world has been removed. 


“The knowledge whereof he has gained by the service of his Parama-guru” 
(Parama-guru-seva-suviditam).—Parama is excellent in the sense that he 
has attained excellence in Yoga practice (by instructions) handed down 
along a series of spiritual preceptors (Gurus), and not the result of book 
learning.{1071} 


“Serving the Guru.”—Such knowledge is obtained from the Guru by 
pleasing him by personal services (Seva). Cf. “It can be attained by the 
instructions of the Guru, and not by ten million of Shastras.” 


“The abode of uninterrupted bliss” (Su-sukha-sadana)—.e., this is the place 
where one enjoys happiness that nothing can interrupt. This word qualifies 
place (Iha-sthane—i.e., Ajna-chakre). 


“Sparks of fire distinctly shining” (Pavana-suhridam pravilasita-ripan 
kanan).—These sparks of Fire shine quite distinctly. 


Elsewhere it is clearly stated that the Pranava is surrounded by sparks of 
light: “Above it is the flame-like Atma, auspicious and in shape like the 
Pranava, on all sides surrounded by sparks of light.” 


VERSE 37. 


He then also sees the Light{1072} which is in the form of a flaming lamp. 
It is lustrous like the clearly shining morning sun, and glows between the 
Sky and the Earth.{1073} It is here that the Bhagavan manifests Himself in 
the fullness of His might.{1074} He knows no decay, and witnesseth all, 
and is here as He is in the region of Fire, Moon, and Sun.{1075} 


COMMENTARY. 


Yogis such as these see other visions beside the sparks of light. After seeing 
the fiery sparks they see the light. 


“Then” (Tadanu)—i.e., after seeing the sparks spoken of in the preceding 
Shloka. 


He then describes this Light (Jyotih). 


“Glows between the Sky and the Earth” (Gagana-dharani-madhyamilita).— 
This compound adjective qualifies Jyotih or Light. 


Gagana (sky) is the sky or empty space above Shangkhini Nadi (see Shloka 
40, post), and Dharani is the Dhara-mandala in the Muladhara. This light 
extends from the Muladhara to the Sahasrara.{ 1076} 


He next speaks of the presence of Parama-Shiva in the Ajna-Chakra. 


“Tt is here” (Iha sthane)—i.e., in the Ajna Chakra; Parama-Shiva is here, as 
in the Sahasrara. Bhagavan is Parama-Shiva. 


“Manifests Himself” (Sakshad bhavati)—i.e., He is here.{1077} 


“In the fullness of His might” (Pirna-vibhava).—This compound word 
which qualifies Bhagavan is capable of various interpretations. 


Purna-vibhava may also be interpreted in the following different ways: 


(a) Pirna may mean complete in Himself, and vibhava infinite powers, such 
as the power of creation, etc. In that case the word would mean: “One who 
has in Him such powers, who is the absolute Creator, Destroyer, and 
Supporter, of the Universe.” 


(b) Vibhava, again, may mean “the diversified and limitless creation,” and 
purna “all-spreading.” In this sense Pirna-vibhava means “He from whom 
this all-spreading and endless (vast) creation has emanated.” Cf. “From 
whom all these originated, and in whom having originated they live, to 
whom they go and into whom they enter” (Shruti). 


(c) Vibhava, again, may mean “omnipresence,” and Purna{1078} “all- 
spreading.” It would then mean: “He who in His omnipresence pervades all 
things.” 


(d) Piirna may also mean the quality of one whose wish is not moved by the 
result and is not attached to any object. Purna-vibhava would then mean one 
who is possessed of that quality. 


All things except Atma pass away. The ethereal region, etc., though 
omnipresent, are not ever-existent. The Nirvana Tantra (Ch. IX.) speaks of 
the presence of Parama-Shiva in the Ajna Chakra in detail. 


“Above this (i.e., Vishuddha) Lotus is Jnana Lotus, which is very difficult 
to achieve; it is the region{1079} of the full Moon, and has two petals.” 
Again: “Inside it, in the form of Hangsah, is the Bija of Shambhu”; and 
again: “Thus is Hangsah in Mani-dvipa, {1080} and in its lap is Parama- 
Shiva, with Siddha-kali{1081} on his left. She is the very self of eternal 
bliss.” By lap is meant the space within the Bindus which form the Visargah 
at the end of Hangsah.{1082} 


Cf. what has been said in describing the Sahasrara: “There are the two 
Bindus which make the imperishable Visarga.{ 1083} In the space within is 
Parama-shiva.” As It is in the Sahasrara so It is represented here.{ 1084} 


We are to understand that these two, Shiva and Shakti, are here united 
(Bandhana) in the form of Parabindu, as the letter Ma (Makaratma), and 
that they are surrounded (Achchhadana) by Maya.{1085} Cf. “She the 
Eternal One stays here (Ajna-chakra) in the form of a grain of gram,{1086} 
and creates beings (Bhutas).” Here the Paramashiva in the form of gram 
dwells, and according to the Utkaladimata{ 1087} also creates. 


“The region of Fire, Moon, and Sun.”—As the presence of Bhagavan in 
these regions is well known, so is He here. Or it may be that the Author 
means that as He in the shape of a grain of gram dwells in the regions of 
Fire, Moon, and Sun, in the Sahasrara, so does He dwell here also. We shall 
describe the Arka, Indu, and Agni Mandala in the Sahasrara later. Pitha- 
puja and Puja of Paramatma and Jnanatma should be performed on the 
Mandalas of Sun (Arka), Moon (Indu), and Fire (Agni). By Paramatma 
Paramashiva is meant, and by Jnanatma Jnana-Shakti. The Bindu should be 
meditated upon as like the grain of gram, consisting of the inseparable 
couple{1088}—namely, Shiva and Shakti. 


VERSE 38. 


This is the incomparable and delightful abode of Vishnu. The excellent 
Yogi at the time of death joyfully places his vital breath (Prana) {1089} 
here, and enters (after death) that Supreme, Eternal, Birthless, Primeval 
Deva, the Purusha, who was before the three worlds, and who is known by 
the Vedanta. 


COMMENTARY. 


He now speaks of the good to be gained by giving up the Prana by Yoga in 
the Ajna Chakra. 


This verse means: The excellent Yogi (Yogindra) at the time of death 
(Prana-nidhane) joyfully (Pramuditamanah) places his Prana (Pranang 
samaropya) in the abode of Vishnu in the Ajna Chakra (Iha sthane Vishnoh 
—i.e., in the abode of Bhagavan in the Bindu already described), and passes 
away, and then enters the Supreme Purusha. 


“At the time of death” (Prana-nidhane)—i.e., feeling the approach of death. 


“Joyfully” (Pramudita-manah).—Glad in the enjoyment of the blissful 
frame of his own mind. 


“Vishnu” = Bhagavan = Paramashiva (see previous Shloka). 
“Here” (Iha sthane)—i.e., Bindu spoken of above. 


“Places the prana here” (Iha sthane pranang samaropya)—1.e., he places it 
on the Bindu already spoken of. He describes Purusha as Eternal, etc. 


“Eternal” (Nitya).—Indestructible. 

“Birthless” (Aja). 

“Primeval” (Purana).—He is the one known as the Purana Purusha. {1090} 
“Deva” means he whose play is creation, existence, and destruction. 


“Who was before the three worlds” (Tri-jagatam adyam).{1091}—By this 
the implication is that He is the Cause of all. 


“Known by the Vedanta” (Vedanta-vidita). {1092 }—-Vedanta are sacred 
texts dealing with the inquiry concerning the Brahman. 


The way the Prana is placed (Pranaropana-prakara) in the place of Vishnu is 
described below: Knowing that the time for the Prana to depart is 
approaching, and glad that he is about to be absorbed into the Brahman, the 
Yog!I sits in Yoga-sana and restrains his breath by Kumbhaka. He then leads 
the Jivatma in the heart to the Muladhara, and by contracting the 
anus{1093} and following other prescribed processes rouses the Kundalini. 
He next meditates upon the lightning-like, blissful Nada, which is thread- 
like and whose substance is Kundali (Kundalini-maya). He then merges the 
Hangsa which is the Paramatma in the form of Prana{1094} in the Nada, 
and leads it along with the Jiva through the different Chakras according to 
the rules of Chakra-bheda to Ajna-Chakra. He there dissolves all the diverse 
elements from the gross to the subtle, beginning with Prithivi, in Kundalini. 
Last of all he unifies Her and the Jivatma with the Bindu whose substance 
is Shiva and Shakti (Shiva-shakti-maya); which having done, he pierces the 
Brahma-randhra and leaves the body, and becomes merged in the Brahman. 


SUMMARY OF THE AJNA CHAKRA, VERSES 32 TO 38. 


The Ajna Chakra has two petals and is white. The letters Ha and Ksha, 
which are white, {1095} are on the two petals. The presiding Shakti of the 


Chakra, Hakini, is in the pericarp. She is white, has six faces each with 
three eyes, and six arms, and is seated on a white lotus. With Her hands She 
displays Vara-mudra and Abhaya-mudra, {1096} and holds a Rudraksha 
rosary, a human skull, a small drum, and a book. Above Her, within a 
Trikona, is Itara-Lingga, which is lightning-like, and above this, again, 
within another Trikona, is the inner Atma (Antaratma), lustrous like a 
flame. On its four sides, floating in air, are sparks surrounding a light which 
by its own luster makes visible all between Mula and the Brahma-randhra. 
Above this, again, is Manas, and above Manas, in the region of the Moon, is 
Hangsah, within whom is Paramashiva with His Shakti. 


(Here ends the sixth section.) 


[Vishvanatha, {1097} in the Commentary to the Shatchakra, gives under this 
verse a description, taken from the Svachchhandasanggraha, of the region 
beyond the Ajna—that is, beyond the Samashti or collective Ajna: “Within 
the Bindu is a space a hundred million Yojanas{1098} in expanse, and 
bright with the brightness of ten million suns. Here is the Lord of the State 
beyond Shanti (Shantyatiteshvara), with five heads and ten arms and 
lustrous as a mass of lightning flashes. On His left is Shantyatita 
Manonmani. Surrounding them are Nivritti, Pratishtha, Vidya, and Shanti. 
{1099} Each of these is adorned with a moon and has five heads and ten 
arms. This is Bindu Tattva. Above Bindu is Arddhachandra, with the Kalas 
of the latter—namely, Jyotsna, Jyotsnavati, Kanti, Suprabha, Vimala. Above 
Arddhachandra is Nibhodika, with the Kalas of the latter—Bandhati, 
Bodhini, Bodha, Jnanabodha, Tamopaha. Above Nibhodika is Nada and its 
five Kalas—Indhika, Rechika, Urddhvaga, Trasa, and Parama. On the lotus 
above this last is Ishvara, in extent a hundred million Yojanas, and lustrous 
as ten thousand moons. He is five-headed, and each head has three eyes. 
His hair is matted, and he holds the trident (Shula). He is the one who goeth 
upwards (Urddhvagami), and in His embrace (Utsangga) is the Kala 
Urddhvagamini.”’] 


VERSE 39. 


When the actions of the Yogi are through the service of the Lotus feet of his 
Guru in all respects good, then he will see above it (i.e., Ajna-chakra) the 
form of the Mahanada, and will even hold in the Lotus of his hand the 
Siddhi of Speech. {1100} The Mahanada which is the place of dissolution of 
Vayu{1101} is the half of Shiva, and like the plough in shape, {1102} is 
tranquil and grants boons and dispels fear, and makes manifest pure 
intelligence (Buddhi).{1103} 


COMMENTARY. 


He now wishes to describe the intermediate causal body (Karanavantara- 
sharira){1104} situate above Ajna Chakra and below Sahasrara, and says: 
When the actions of the Yogi are, through the service of the Lotus feet of 
his Guru, in all respects good—that is, when he excels by intense 
concentration of the mind in Yoga practice—he then sees the image of 
Mahanada above it (above Ajna-chakra), and he becomes accomplished in 
speech (Vaksiddha). 


“Actions in all respects good” (Sushila).—The good inclination for Yoga 
practice rendered admirable by strong and undivided application thereto. 
This result is obtained by serving the Guru. 


The Author then qualifies Nada, and says it is the place of dissolution of 
Vayu (Vayor laya-sthanam). The Rule is “things dissolve into what they 
originate from.” Hence, although in Bhuta-shuddhi and other practices it 
has been seen that Vayu dissolves into Sparsha-tattva, {1105} and the latter 
in Vyoma,{1106} Vayu dissolves in Nada also. We have the authority of 
revelation (Shruti) for this: 


“Prithivi the possessor of Rasa (Rasa-vati) originated from I-kara. {1107} 
From Ka-kara,!!°” who is Rasa, the waters and Tirthas{1108} issued; from 
Repha (Ra-kara)""”” originated Vahnitattva{ 1109}; from Nada!!°” came 
Vayu,{1110} which pervades all life (Sarva-pranamaya). From Bindu!!%” 
originated the Void{1111} (that which is empty of all things), and is the 
Sound-container. And from all these{1112} issued the twenty-five Tattvas 
which are Guna-maya. All this Universe (Vishva), which is the mundane 
eggs of Brahma, is pervaded by Kalika.” 


We should therefore realize in our mind that at the time the letters of the 
Kali-mantra{1113} are merged into that which is subtle, Vayu is absorbed 
in Nada. 


“Half of Shiva” (Shivarddha).—By this is meant that here Shiva is in the 
form of Addha-narishvara. Half is Shakti which is Nada. 


“Like a plough” (Sirakara)—The word Sira is spelt here with a short i, and 
in Amara-Kosha it is spelt with a long i; but it is clearly the same word, as it 
begins with a dental s. 


Cf. “Above it is Mahandda, in form like a plough, and lustrous” (Ishvara- 
karttikeya-Sangvada).{ 1114} 


If the text is read as “Shivakara instead of Sirakara,” then the meaning 
would be that the Nada is Shiva-Shaktimaya. {1115} 


Cf. Prapancha-sara: “That Shakti which tends towards the seat of 
Lliberation{ 1116} is called male (Pungrupa—that is, Bindu) when, 
quickened by Nada, She turns towards Shivaf{ 1117} (Shivonmukhi). It is 
therefore that Raghava-Bhatta has said that the Nada and Bindu are the 
two conditions under which She creates.” {1118} 


It has elsewhere been said: “She is eternal{ 1119} existing as Chit 
(Chinmatra) {1120}: when being near the light She is desirous of change 
She becomes massive (Ghani-bhuya) and Bindu.” 


So in the word of the great (Shrimat) Acharyya: “Nada becomes massive 
and the Bindu.” Now, taking all these into consideration, the conclusion is 
that Shakti manifests herself as Nada-bindu, like gold in ear-rings made of 
gold.{1121} 


Nada and Bindu again are one—that is the deduction. 


VERSE 40. 


Above all these, in the vacant space{1122} wherein is Shangkhini Nadi, 
and below Visarga is the Lotus of a thousand petals. {1123} This Lotus, 
lustrous and whiter than the full Moon, has its head turned downward. It 
charms. Its clustered filaments are tinged with the color of the young Sun. 
Its body is luminous with the letters beginning with A, and it is the absolute 
bliss.{1124} 


COMMENTARY. 


The Acharyya enjoins that Sadhakas who wish to practice Samadhi Yoga 
should before such time with every effort dissolve all things in their order 
from the gross to the subtle in Chidatma.{1125} All things, both gross and 
subtle, which make up creation should first be meditated upon. As the 
knowledge thereof is necessary, they are here described in detail. 


The five gross elements—Prithivi{ 1126} and so forth—have been spoken 
of in the five Chakras from Muladhara to Vishuddha. In the 
Bhimandala{1127} in the Muladhara there are the following—viz., feet, 
sense of smell, and Gandha-tattva, {1128} for this is their place. In the Jala- 
mandala,{1129} similarly, are the hands, sense of taste, and Rasa-tattva. 
{1130} In the Vahni-mandala{1131} are the anus, the sense of sight, and 
Rupa-tattva.{1132} In the Vayumandala, {1133} the penis, sense of touch, 
and Sparsha-tattva.{1134} In the Nabho-mandala{1135} are speech, the 
sense of hearing, and Shabda-tattva.{1136} These make fifteen tattvas. 
Adding these fifteen to Prithivi and so forth, we get twenty gross tattvas. 


We next proceed to the subtle forms. In the Ajna Chakra the subtle Manas 
has been spoken of. Others have been spoken of in the Kangkala-malini 
Tantra when dealing with the Ajna Chakra: “Here constantly shines the 


excellent Manas, made beautiful by the presence of the Shakti Hakini. It is 
lustrous, and has Buddhi{1137}, Prakriti,{1138} and Ahang-kara, {1139} 
for its adornment.” 


From the above the presence of the three subtle forms—viz., Buddhi, 
Prakriti, and Ahang-kara—in this place becomes clear. We must, however, 
know that Ahang-kara is not placed in the order shown in the above 
quotation. We have seen that from the Miladhara upwards the generated is 
below the generator; that which is dissolved is below what it is dissolved 
into, and we also know that the Shabdakrama is stronger than Pathakrama. 
{1140} We must remember that Vyoma is dissolved in Ahang-kara, and 
hence the latter is next above Vyoma. Cf. “In Ahang-kara, Vyoma with 
sound should be dissolved, and Ahangkara again in Mahat.” Ahangkara, 
being the place of dissolution, comes first above Vyoma, and above it are 
Buddhi and Prakriti. 


The Sharadatilaka speaks of their connection as Janya (effect, generated) 
and Janaka (cause, generator). 


“From the unmanifested (Avyakta) Root-Being (Milabhita), when Vikrita, 
of the Supreme (Paravastu){1141} originated Mahat-tattva,!!4! which 
consists of the Gunas and Antahkarana. From this (Mahat-tattva) originated 
Ahangkara, which is of three kinds according to its source of 

generation” {1142 }—-Variation (Vikrita). By this is meant reflection or 
image (Prativimba){1143} of the Paravastu, and as such reflection it is 
Vikriti; but as it (Vikriti) is the Prakriti of Mahat-tattva, etc., it is also called 
Prakriti.{1144} Cf. “Prakriti is the Parama (Supreme) Shakti, and Vikriti is 
the product thereof.” {1145} It has also been shown before that “the Prakriti 
of the Para Brahman is but another aspect of Him” (Prativimbasvariipini). 


According to Sharadatilaka, Mahat-tattva is the same as Buddhi.{1146} 
Ishana Shiva says: “The objective Prakriti, {1147} which is evolved by 
Shakti and which is associated with the Sattva-guna, is the manifested 
Buddhi-tattva. It is this Buddhi that is spoken of as Mahat in Sankhya 
Philosophy.” 


Mahat-tattva consists of the Gunas and the Antah-karana. The Gunas are 
Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. The Sharadatilaka says: “Antah-karana is the 
Manas, Buddhi, Ahangkara, and Chitta, of the Atma. {1148} All these are 
comprised in the term Mahat-tattva. 


Now, a question may be raised—namely, If Manas be within Mahat-tattva, 
what of that which has been said in v. 33, where Manas has been spoken of 
as having an independent existence? But the answer to that is, that that 
Manas is the product of Ahangkara, and Raghava-Bhatta says: “In so much 
as the other Manas is the one which selects and rejects (Sa- 
sangkalpavikalpaka), {1149} it is known to be the product of Tejas.” {1150} 
Thus it is that, as Manas and other Tattvas in the Ajna Chakra are placed in 
their order, Ahang-kara and others should be known as being placed above 
them. In the Ajna Chakra are Hakini, Itara-lingga, Prarnava, Manas, Ahang- 
kara, Buddhi, and Prakriti, placed consecutively one above the other, no 
place being assigned to Chandra-mandala, which has been spoken of 
before. It should be taken to be placed above all these. If it be asked, Why is 
it not below all these? then the reply is that it has been said in the 
Sammohana Tantra: “Moon (Indu) is in the forehead, and above it is 
Bodhini Herself.” From this it would appear that Indu and Bodhini are 
above Ajna Chakra, placed one above the other without anything 
intervening between them. Bodhini is above all the rest. 


The Sammohana Tantra speaks of the Cause (Karanariipa) as above Ajna 
Chakra: “Indu (the Moon, here—Bindu) is in the region of the forehead, 
and above it is Bodhini Herself. Above Bodhini shines the excellent Nada, 
in form like the half (crescent) moon; above this is the lustrous Mahanada, 
in shape like a plough; above this is the Kala called Anji, the beloved of 
Yogis. Above this last is Unmant, {1151} which having reached one does 
not return.” 


In the above passage, in the words “above it is Bodhint,” the word “it” 
stands for the forehead or Ajna-chakra. 


The Bhiita-shuddhi Tantra speaks of the existence of the Bindu below 
Bodhint: “Devi, above Vindu and Matrardha is Nada, and above this, again, 


is Mahanada, which is the place of the dissolution of Vayu.” Matrarddha is 
Matrarddha Shakti. {1152} 


The following passage from Brihat-tri-vikrama-sanghita proves that the 
Ardha-matra means Shakti: “Lustrous like the young Sun is Akshara, which 
is Bindumat (Bindu itself); above it is Ardhamatra, associated with the 
Gandhararaga.” {1153} 


As both the above passages point to the same thing, we must take it that 
Arddha-matra and Bodhini are identical. Bindu, Bodhini, and Nada, are but 
different aspects of the Bindu-maya-para-shakti. 


The Sharada-tilaka says: “From the Sakala Paraméshvara, {1154} who is 
Sat, Chit, and Ananda, Shakti emanated; from Shakti, again, emanated 
Nada; and Bindu has its origin from Nada. He who is Para-shakti-maya 
manifests Himself in three different ways. Bindu and Nada and Bija are but 
His different aspects. Bindu is Nadatmaka, {1155} Bija is Shakti, and Nada, 
again, is the union or relation of the one to the other.{1156} This is spoken 
of by all who are versed in the Agamas.” {1157} 


“Para-shakti-maya”: Para = Shiva; hence Shiva-shaktimaya = Bindu. The 
Bindu who is above the forehead is Nadatmaka—that is, Shivatmaka. 
{1158} Bija is Shakti as Bodhini (Bodhini-rupam). Nada is the connection 
between the two whereby the one acts upon the other; hence it is 
Kriyashakti. Above these three is Mahanada. This has already been shown. 


“Above it is Kala,” etc.: Kala = a line. Anji = crooked, awry, bent. This is in 
shape like a bent or crooked line. This Shakti appeared in the beginning of 
creation. Cf. Pancha-ratra: “Having thus seen, the Supreme Male in the 
beginning of creation makes manifest the eternal Prakriti who is the 
embodiment of Sat, Chit, and Ananda, in whom are the Tattvas, and who is 
the presiding (Adhishthatri) Devi of creation.” 


Also elsewhere: “From the unmanifested (Avyakta) Parameshvara, the 
united Shiva and Shakti, emanated the Adya (first) Devi Bhagavati, who is 
Tripura-sundari, the Shakti from whom came Nada, and thence came 
Bindu.” 


“Above it is Unmani,” etc.: Cf. “By going where ‘Manas-ness’ (Manastva) 
of Manas ceases to be, is called Unmani, the attainment of which is the 
secret teaching of the Tantras.” {1159} 


It is the Tattva which means the dispelling of that attachment prompted by 
Manas towards worldly objects. 


Unmani, again, is of two kinds: (1) Nirvana-kala-riipa, which also has its 
place in the Sahasrara{1160}; (2) Varnavali-ripa, which also has its place in 
the region (here dealt with). Cf. Kangkala-malini: “In the pericarp of the 
Sahasrara, placed within the circle of the moon, is the seventeenth Kala, 
devoid of attachment.{1161} The name of this is Unmani, which cuts the 
bond of attachment to the world.” 


Cf. also: “By mental recitation of the Mala-varna (rosary of letters) is 
Unmani the granter of liberation (attained).” Mala-varna = Varnavali-rupa. 


The Bhita-shuddhi speaks of the Samani below Unmani. “Next is the 
Vyapika Shakti (Diffusive Energy) which people know as Anji. 
Samani{1162} is over this, and Unmani is above all.” This (Samani) also is 
an intermediate aspect (Avantarartipa) of Parashakti. 


We now get the following: 


Above Ajna Chakra is the second Bindu—which is Shiva (Shiva-svaripa). 
Above Bindu is Bodhint in shape like an Arddha-matra; next is Nada which 
is the union of Shiva and Shakti, in shape like a half (crescent) moon; next 
(above this) is Mahanada, shaped like a plough; above Mahanada is the 
Vyapika Shakti, crooked (Anjr) in shape; above this last is Samani and 
highest of these all is Unmani. This is the order in which the seven causal 
forms (Karana-riipa) are placed. 


There is no need to go into further detail. Let us then follow the text. 


Wishing to describe the Sahasrara he speaks of it in ten more verses. 


“Above all these” (Tadtrddhve).—Above every other that has been 
described or spoken before. 


“Over the head of the Shangkhini Nadi”—a sight of which has been given 
to the disciple. 


“Vacant space” (Shunya-desha)—that is, the place where there are no 
Nadis; the implication is that it is above where Sushumna ends. 


“Below visarga is the lotus of a thousand petals.”—This is the purport of 
the Shloka. Visarga is in the upper part of the Brahma-randhra. Cf. 
“Meditate in that aperture on Visaragh the ever blissful and stainless.” 
There are other similar passages. 


“Its body is luminous with,” etc. (Lalatadyaih varnaih pravilasitavapu).— 
The word Lalata stands for the first vowel, A. By this we are to understand 
that the second Lakara (L) is to be left out in counting the letters of the 
Alphabet. In counting the fifty letters, the second Lakara{1163} is always 
left out. 


If the text is read as “Lakaradyaih varnaih,” as is done by some, we must 
leave Ksha-kara out in counting the letters. The fifty-one letters cannot be 
taken to be in the petals of the Sahasrara. {1164} With fifty-one letters 
repeated twenty times, the number is 1,020, and repeated nineteen times is 
969. By leaving out Ksha-kara we are freed of this difficulty. By 
“Lakaradyaih” it is not meant that the letters are to be read Viloma.{1165} 
The Kangkala-malini in the following passage distinctly says that it is to be 
read Anuloma{1166}: “The Great Lotus Sahasrara is white, and has its head 
downward, and the lustrous letters from Akara (A), ending with the last 
letter before Kshakara (Ksha), decorate it.” Here it is distinctly stated that 
the letter Ksha is left out. 


Akaradi-ksha-karantaih: This compound, Ksha-karanta, if formed by Bahu- 
vrihi samasa, {1167} would mean that Kshakara is left out of calculation. 


There is nothing said of the color of the letters, and, as the Matrika (letters) 
are white, they are to be taken as being white on the Sahasrara petals. These 


letters go round the Sahasrara from right to left.{1168} 


Some read Pravilasita-tanuh in place of pravilasita-vapuh, and say that, as 
the word padma alternatively becomes masculine in gender (va pungsi 
padmam), therefore the word Tanu, which qualifies a word in the masculine 
gender, is itself masculine. That cannot be. The verb Nivasati ( = is, dwells) 
has for its nominative Padmam, and, as it ends with the Bindu (m), it is in 
the neuter gender and not masculine. For in that case it would have ended 
with visarga (i.e., h), and its adjective, tanu, would also end with a visarga. 
The word tanu (if their reading is accepted) would be in the neuter; 
therefore it cannot end with a Bindu. And if there is no Bindu the metre 
becomes defective. Therefore the correct reading is vapuh. 


The rest is clear. 


VERSE 41. 


Within it (Sahasrara) is the full Moon, without the mark of the hare,{1169} 
resplendent as in a clear sky. It sheds its rays in profusion, and is moist and 
cool like nectar. Inside it (Chandra-mandala), constantly shining like 
lightning, is the Triangle, {1170} and inside this, again, shines the Great 
Void{1171} which is served in secret by all the Suras.{1172} 


COMMENTARY. 


He here speaks of the existence of the Chandra-mandala in the pericarp of 
the Sahasrara. 


“Resplendent as in a clear sky” (Shuddha)—seen in a cloudless sky. 


“Is moist and cool,” etc. (Parama-rasa-chaya-snigdha-santanahas1).— 
Snigdha implies the moisture of the nectar. Parama-rasa (Amrita) is free 
from heat. Hence the meaning of this compound word: Its rays are cool and 
moist, and produce a feeling of smiling gladness. 


The Kangkala-malini speaks of the presence of Antaratma, etc., in the upper 
portion of the space below Chandra-mandala. In dealing with the Sahasrara, 
it says: “In its pericarp, O Deveshi, is the Antaratma. Above it is the Guru. 
The Mandalas of Siiryya and Chandra are also there. Above this is 
Mahavayu, and then the Brahma-randhra. In this aperture (Randhra) is 
Visarga, the ever blissful and stainless. Above this (Tadiirddhve) last is the 
Devi Shangkhini, who creates, maintains, and destroys.” 


“Within Chandra-mandala constantly shines, like lightning, the triangle” 
(Trikona). 


“Great Void” (Tadantah shinyam).—That is, the body of the Parabindu 
(Paravindushariram). Within the triangle the excellent Bindu (Shtnya) 
shines, or within the triangle the Shinya which is the excellent Bindu 
shines. 


Cf. Todala Tantra, 6th Ullasa: “The Supreme Light is formless (Nirakara), 
and Bindu is imperishable.” Bindu means the void (Shunya), and implies 
Guna also.{1173} 


“Served in secret” (Sevitang chatiguptam).—The rule is, “Eating (Ahara), 
evacuation (Nirhara), sexual intercourse (Vihara), and Yoga, should be done 
in secret by him who knows the Dharma.” Hence Suras (Devas) serve or 
worship It in secret. 


VERSE 42. 


Well concealed, and attainable only by great effort, is that subtle Bindu 
(Shinya) which is the chief root of Liberation, and which manifests the 
pure Nirvana Kala with Ama Kala.{1174} Here is the Deva who is known 
to all as Paramashiva. He is the Brahman and the Atma of all beings. In 
Him are united both Rasa and Virasa,{1175} and He is the Sun which 
destroys the darkness of nescience{1176} and delusion. {1177} 


COMMENTARY. 


The sense is that the void (Shtuya) is very secret and subtle, being, as 
described later, like the ten millionth part of the end of a hair. It is attainable 
only by great effort consisting of long and incessant performance of Dhyana 
and like practices. It makes manifest the purity of the sixteenth Kala of the 
moon along with Nirvana Kala—i.e., the void (Antah shunya) along with 
the Ama Kala and Nirvana Kala within the triangle is realized (prakasham 
bhavati) by meditation (Dhyana). It is the source of all the mass of great 
Bliss, which is Liberation. If Sugopya be read in place of Suguptam, then 
the word yatnat would qualify it. Some, however, read Sakala-shashi-kala- 
shuddha-rupa-prakasham as qualifying the great Void within the triangle, 
and read sakala to mean with all the sixteen kalas and say that the Para 
Bindu manifests the moon with such kalas. This requires consideration. 
When it was said that the Trikona (triangle) is within the full moon, the 
repetition of it is useless. Furthermore, in the previous verse we have got 
“served by the Suras.” The term “service” as applied to a void is 
inappropriate. The object of service is the Bindu within the triangle. If it be 
said that the Void should be worshipped by reason of the presence of the 
Para Bindu, then the Para Bindu being there present there is no void. 


“Well concealed” (Sugupta).—By reason of its being like the ten millionth 
part of a hair. 


“By great effort” (Yatnat)—i.e., by long-continued practice of meditation 
(Dhyana) and so forth. 


“Chief root” (Parang kandam.{1178})—Para usually means supreme, 
excellent; here chief, principal. Kanda = mila. 


“Liberation,” etc. (Atishaya-paramamodasantana-rashi).—The compound 
word means literally combination of all the mass of great and supreme bliss, 
and this is Liberation (Moksha). 


“Manifests” (Sakala-shashi-kala-shuddha-riipa-prakasha).—This compound 
word is to be broken up as follows: 


Sakala = with the Kala, Kala here meaning Nirvana Kala. In the word 
Shashi-kala the Kala means Amakald, the sixteenth Kala, or digit, of the 
moon. Shuddha = pure; the luster is not obscured by anything. 


The sense is that the Parabindu, though subtle and otherwise imperceptible, 
is seen by meditation (Dhyana) with the Amakala and Nirvana Kala in the 
Trikona. If Sugopyam be read in place of Suguptam, then it would be 
qualified by Yatnat. 


Some read Sakala-shashi-kala-shuddha-rupa-prakasha to qualify Shinya in 
the previous verse, and say Shinya means “vacant space,” but that is 
absurd.{ 1179} 


Next he speaks of the presence of Paramashiva in the pericarp of the 
Sahasrara. 


“Paramashiva” {1180} (Paramashiva-samakhyana-siddha). He who is 
known by the name Paramashiva. 


“The Brahman” (Svarup1).—Sva = Atma, the spirit. 


“The Atma of all beings” (Sarvatma).—Sarva = all (beings). He is the 
Jivatma, but in fact there is no distinction between Jivatma and Paramatma. 
The Atma is the Jiva. The Adhyatma-Ramayana says: “The Jivatma is 
merely another name for (Paryyaya) the Paramatma. When by the 
instructions of the Acharyya and the Shastras their oneness is known, then 
the disciple possesses Mulavidya (essential knowledge) concerning Jivatma 
and Paramatma.” 


The Shruti also, when it says Tat tvam asi,{1181} identifies the Tvam with 
the Tat. 


“Rasa and Virasa” (Rasa-virasamita).—Rasa is Paramananda-rasa—i.e., the 
essence of supreme bliss.{1182} Virasa is the bliss which is the product of 
the union of Shiva and Shakti. He has both these in Him. Or Rasa may 
mean the attachment to worldly enjoyment, and Virasa detachment from it. 
The meaning would then be: in Him is detachment from worldly 
enjoyment. {1183} 


“The Sun” = Hangsa. As the sun dispels darkness, so does he dispel 
nescience (Ajnana) and delusion (Moha). 


VERSE 43. 


By shedding a constant and profuse stream of nectar-like essence, {1184} 
the Bhagavan{1185} instructs the Yati{1186} of pure mind in the 
knowledge by which he realizes the oneness of the Jivatma and the 
Paramatma. He pervades all things as their Lord, who is the ever-flowing 
and spreading current of all manner of bliss known by the name of Hangsah 
Parama (Parama-hangsah). 


COMMENTARY. 


“Constant and profuse” (Niravadhi atitaram). 


“Stream of nectar” (Sudha-dharasaram).—The compound word can be 
made up and interpreted in four different ways: 


1. Shedding a constant and profuse stream of nectar-like essence. 


2. The Adhara (receptacle) of Sudha (nectar) is Sudhadhara, by which is 
meant the Moon; Asara is what flows therefrom a stream. Now, what flows 
from the Moon is Nectar, which is silvery; hence the whole word means 
“the silvery beams of the moon.” This adjective proves that the qualified 
noun is white or transparent like the moon. Shedding = Vimunchan. 


3. Asara may, again, mean “what is uttered,” “word.” Sudhadhara = 
receptacle of sweetness, which is a quality of nectar; hence 
Sudhadharasaram = nectar-like or ambrosial word. The meaning of 
Niravadhi would then be “at all times,” and Atitara would mean “powerful 
in destroying the darkness of ignorance or delusion.” Vimunchan should 
then mean “uttering.” 


4. Sudha, again, may mean “nectar of mercy,” and Sara is “essence”—i.e., 
the essence of Brahma-mantra; and Dhara is a stream (continuous 
repetition) of the merciful word containing the essence of the Brahma- 
mantra. 


“Instructs the Yati,” etc. (Bhagavan nirmala-materyateh svatma-jnanam 
dishati). 


“Yati.”—He whose mind intently rests upon the Devata of his worship. 


Svatma-jnana: Svam = Jivatma and Atma = Paramatma; and Jnana{1187} 
that by which one knows—namely, the Taraka-brahma-mantra, which leads 
to a knowledge of the Paramatma, and thereby helps the worshipper to 
realize the oneness of the Jivatma and Paramatma. Dishati = upadishati 
(instructs). The above qualifying expressions imply that the qualified noun 
is the Guru, as instructions regarding Taraka-brahma Mantra proceed from 
Him. So it qualifies “Parama-shiva” in the preceding verse, as He is the 
Guru. Cf. Guru-tattvaniriipana in Lalita-rahasya. 


After describing Guru as “the well-known and excellent Purusha who is 
ever fond{1188} of enjoyment with the Self (Atmarati-priya),” it goes on to 
say: “His beloved is the lustrous One who may be gained with difficulty by 
the Brahma-vartma (Brahma road). The Parama Brahma is but the 
effulgence of Her lotus feet.” {1189} 


By the above passage is meant that the great beauty of Her lotus feet 
overspreads the heart-lotus of the Guru. The fit place for the feet of the 
lustrous (Tejo-rupa) Beloved (Shakti) of the Guru is on the breast of the 
Guru, {1190} and not on that of any other Purusha. Hence Parama-shiva and 
the Guru are one and the same. 


The Nirvana Tantra also says{1191}: “In the Lotus in the head is Mahadeva 
—the Parama Guru: there is in the three worlds no one, O Deveshi, who is 
so deserving of worship as He. O Devi, meditate on His form, {1192} which 
includes all the four Gurus.” {1193} 


This Parama-shiva is outside and below the triangle in the pericarp, and 
above the Hangsah of which we are speaking. 


The Kangkala-malini Tantra{1194} says: “In the pericarp of this Lotus, O 
Deveshi, is the Antaratma, and above it the Guru. The Mandalas of Sun and 
Moon are also there.” And after having spoken of the presence of different 
things in their order up to Maha-shangkhint, it then proceeds: “Below it, O 
Deveshi, is the Trikona (triangle), placed in the Mandala of Moon; and 
having meditated there on the undecaying Kala, (one should meditate) 
within it upon the seventeenth Kala, by name Nirvana, which is like a 
crescent” (Kutita).{1195} 


The above passage speaks of the presence of Ama-kala, and so forth, within 
the triangle in the Chandra-Mandala. The Guru therefore is below them and 
above Antaratma. Now, if it be asked how it is that, the Kangkala-malini 
having placed the Guru over the Antaratma, the Guru is spoken of as placed 
above Hangsah? the answer is that the Antaratma and the Hangsah are one 
and the same. 


Cf. Guru-dhyana in Kangkala-malini{ 1196}: “Meditate on your Guru 
seated on a shining throne (Singhasana) placed on the excellent Antaratma 
between Nada and Bindu,” etc. Also elsewhere: “Meditate on your Guru, 
who is the image of Shiva Himself, as seated on the Hangsa-pitha which is 
Mantramaya.” Also cf. the Annada-kalpa Tantra{ 1197}: “Meditate on your 
Guru in the white Lotus of a thousand petals in the head; He is Parama 
Shiva seated on the Hangsa among the filaments.” 


On a careful consideration of the above authorities, the identity of Hangsah 
with Antaratma becomes clear. By the expression “one’s own Guru, who is 
Parama Shiva,” it is to be understood that Parama Shiva Himself is the 
Guru. 


The following passage, which relates to the Sahasrara, shows that Parama 
Shiva is in the triangle: “Within (or near) it (Sahasrara) is the lightning-like 
Triangle, and within the triangle are the two Bindus which make the 
imperishable Visarga. There in the empty void is Parama Shiva.” 


These conflicting views lead to the conclusion that the Guru is within the 
triangle in the pericarp of the upturned Lotus of twelve petals, below the 
pericarp of the Sahasrara and inseparable from it. This has been made clear 
in the Paduka-panchaka Stotra.{1198} From these passages it is not to be 
inferred that the Guru is within the triangle in the pericarp of the Sahasrara. 
The triangular Hangsa is below the middle triangle; otherwise it would 
conflict with the authority of the Kangkala-malini Tantra. 


“He pervades all things as their Lord” (Samaste sarveshah)—1.e., in this 
pericarp dwells He who is the Lord of All. Now, by saying that Parama 
Shiva is there it has been said that Ishvara (Lord) is there; then why this 
repetition? But there is an object in so doing, as the following qualifying 
expressions will show. The Sarvesha (Lord of All) is the Hangsah—i.e., He 
is the Mantra “Hang-sah.” 


Cf. Prapancha-sara: “She whose name is Tattva is Chinmatra{ 1199}: when 
by proximity to the Light she wishes to create,{1200} She becomes massive 
(Ghanibhiya) and assumes the form of Bindu. Then in time She divides 
Herself in two: the one on the right is Bindu, and that on the left side is 
Visarga. The right and left are respectively distinguished as male and 
female. Hang is the Bindu, and Sah is the Visarga; Bindu is Purusha, and 
Visarga is Prakriti; Hangsah is the union of Prakriti and Purusha, who 
pervades the Universe.” 


The Mahakali Tantra speaks clearly on the subject (Patala I.): “In the empty 
space{1201} in the Chandra-Mandala{1202} which is within the Sahasrara, 
adorned with a celestial gateway, are the letters Hang and Sah, over which 
meditate on Him who is pure like rock crystal and dressed in silken raiment, 
and so forth.” Here the letters Hang and Sah are explicitly spoken of. 


Or if Hangsa and Parama be read separately as Hangsa and Parama, it 
would mean “He who is known as Hangsa and Parama.” The Author 
himself speaks of Him as Hangsah in the forty-ninth verse. Or if the two 
words be read together, then the meaning would be “He who is known by 
the name of Parama-hangsah, or by one of the exceptional rules of 
Karmadharaya Samasa this word has been formed, the word antah being 


omitted. Cf. Agama-kalpa-druma: “He is called Parama-hangsah, pervading 
all that is moving and motionless.” 


“Who is the ever flowing,” etc. (Sakala-sukha-santanalahari-parivaha)— 
i.e., in Him becomes manifest in every possible way all kinds of 
imperishable and increasing happiness; that is, He is, as it were, an 
interminable chain of happiness. 


VERSE 44. 


The Shaivas call it the abode of Shiva{1203}; the Vaishnavas call it Parama 
Purusha{1204}; others, again, call it the place of Hari-Hara.{1205} Those 
who are filled with a passion for the Lotus feet of the Devi{1206} call it the 
excellent abode of the Devi; and other great sages (Munis) call it the pure 
place of Prakriti-Purusha. {1207} 


COMMENTARY. 


As Hangsah, who has in Him all the Devatas (Sarvadevatamaya), and 
others, are in this pericarp, it is the place of the Devatas of worship of all 
classes of worshippers, such as Shaivas, Shaktas, etc. 


“The Shaivas”—i.e., the worshippers of Shiva—call it the place of Shiva. 


“The Vaishnavas{1208} call it Parama Purusha”—.e., the place of the 
Parama Purusha, or Vishnu. 


“Others, again” (Kechidapare)—i.e., others who are worshippers of Hari- 
Hara, or, in other words, United Vishnu and Shiva in coupled (Yugala) 
form, call it the place of Hari-Hara. They do not call it either the place of 
Hari (Vishnu) or of Shiva (Hara), but the place of their united selves. 


“Other great sages” (Munindra apyanye).—By “the Munis” the author here 
means the worshippers of “the Hangsah” Mantra, who call it the pure place 
of Prakriti-Purusha. Hangsah is the union of Prakriti and Purusha,{1209} 
hence it is the place of Prakriti and Purusha. 


The above shows that, as this Lotus is the dwelling-place of the Para Bindu, 
in which are all the Devatas, each worshipper calls it the place of the 


Devata of his own separate worship. 


VERSE 45. 


That most excellent of men who has controlled his mind{1210} and known 
this place is never again born in the Wandering, {1211} as there is nothing 
in the three worlds which binds him. His mind being controlled and his aim 
achieved, he possesses complete power to do all which he wishes, and to 
prevent that which is contrary to his will. He ever moves towards the 
Brahman. {1212} His speech, whether in prose or verse, is ever pure and 
Sweet. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse he speaks of the fruit of a complete knowledge of the 
Sahasrara. The idea sought to be conveyed is that a knowledge of this place 
should be gained as a whole and in detail. 


“Who has controlled his mind” (Niyata-nija-chitta)—i.e., he who has 
controlled and concentrated the inner faculties on this place. Such an one 
becomes free from Sangsara, or, in other words, he is released from 
bondage, as there is nothing to bind or attract him in these worlds. By 
bondage is meant the Mayik bonds of virtue (Punya) and sin (Papa). 


The Bhagavata says: “If the action which is the product of the operation of 
the Gunas is attributed to the self, then such (false) attribution is bondage 
and Sangsara and servitude.” Also cf. Bhagavad Gita: “O Son of Kuntt, 
Man is bound by action which is the product of his own nature (Sva- 
bhava).” {1213} 


To inhabit this body for the purpose of undergoing Papa (sin) and Punya 
(virtue) is bondage. In heaven one enjoys (the fruit of) Punya, and in the 
nether world (Patala) one suffers sorrow, and on earth man is subject to both 


Papa and Punya. For the Tattva-jnani (him who knows the truth) there is 
neither Punya nor Papa, which are the causes of bondage; his accumulated 
(Sanchita) Karma of merit (Punya) and demerit (Papa) is also destroyed. He 
is in consequence under no bondage whether in heaven (Svarga), earth 
(Martya), or nether world (Patala), and he is not truly embodied.{1214} 
Such a one stays on earth so long only as he has not worked out what he has 
begun. He is liberated though living (Jivanmukta), and attains complete 
liberation on the dissolution of the body. 


The Kularmmava Tantra says: “Those who have the Brahman in the heart can 
acquire neither merit by performing a hundred horse sacrifices, nor demerit 
by killing a hundred Brahmanas.” The Gita also says: “In this world there is 
nothing that should or should not be done. For such a one there is no 
dependence on any being” (III. 18).{1215} 


The Subodhini{1216} interprets this verse to mean that the “knower” 
(Tattvajnani) acquires no merit by the performances of actions nor demerit 
by the omission thereof. 


Shruti speaks of the destruction of accumulated (sanchita) Punya and Papa: 
“When Manas, which is now selecting and now rejecting, is dissolved in 
That; when Papa and Punya are destroyed (lit., burnt), Sadashiva, who is 
Shakti and Atma (cf. Hangsah, ante), is Shanta.”{1217} Cf. Bhagavadgita: 
“And so the fire of knowledge destroys all actions.” {1218} 


“Complete power” (Samagra shakti)—i.e., power which enables him to do 
everything. By power, or Shakti, is meant ability to do all he desires to 
do{1219} and counteract all harm, to fly across the air,{1220} and to 
become possessed of great powers of speech. 


VERSE 46. 


Here is the excellent (supreme) sixteenth Kala of the Moon. She is pure, 
and resembles (in color) the young Sun. She is as thin as the hundredth part 
of a fiber in the stalk of a lotus. She is lustrous{1221} and soft like ten 
million lightning flashes, and is down-turned. From Her, whose source is 
the Brahman, flows copiously the stream of nectar{1222} (or, She is the 
receptacle of the stream of excellent nectar which comes from the blissful 
union of Para and Para).{1223} 


COMMENTARY. 


Shlokas 41 and 42 speak of the presence of Amakala, Nirvana-kala, and 
Para Bindu, within the triangle in the pericarp of the Sahasrara. He now 
desires to describe them by their distinctive attributes, and speaks in this 
verse of the distinctive features of Amakala. 


“Excellent or supreme” (Para)—i.e., She is Chit Shakti. In the Prabhasa- 
khanda occurs the following passage: “The excellent Maya who maintains 
the body of all that have bodies.” This is attributive of Ama. 


“The sixteenth Kala of the Moon” (Chandrasya shodashi).—By this we are 
to understand that he is speaking of Amakala.{1224} 


“Pure” (Shuddha)—.e., stainless. 


“She resembles,” etc. (Shishu-siiryya-sodara-kala).—By this the redness of 
this Kala is indicated. 


“Thin as the hundredth part of a fiber in the stalk of the lotus” (Niraja- 
sukshma-tantu-shatadha-bhagaika-riipa).—Thin like a hundredth part of the 


fiber in the lotus-stalk split lengthwise. 


“Whose source is the Brahman” (Purnananda-parampara).—Pumananda = 
Brahman. 


“Flows,” etc. (Ativigalat-plyiisha-dhara-dhara).—If the last two compound 
words be read as one long compound word, as follows, Piirnananda-param- 
para-ativigalat-pryusha-dhara-dhara, the meaning of it will be as given 
within brackets at the end of the verse. Ananda will then mean the joys of 
union, and Param-para will then mean Shiva and Shakti. 


Para = Binduripa, Shiva. Para = Prakriti, Shakti. Ananda is the joy which 
arises from the union of the two, and from such union flows the nectar of 
which Amakala is the receptacle. 


VERSE 47. 


Inside it (Amakala) is Nirvana-kala, more excellent than the excellent. She 
is as subtle as the thousandth part of the end of a hair, and of the shape of 
the crescent moon. She is the ever-existent Bhagavati, who is the Devata 
who pervades all beings. She grants divine knowledge, and is as lustrous as 
the light of all the suns shining at one and the same time. 


COMMENTARY. 


In this verse the Nirvana Kala is described. 


“Inside it” (Tadantargata)—i.e., placed in the lap{1225} of Amakala. This 
Kala has already been described{1226} as the “crescent seventeenth Kala 
placed within Ama, and known by the name of Nirvana-kala.” 


“More excellent than the excellent” (Para paratara)—The Amakala is 
excellent; this is more excellent than Ama. If Paratparatara be accepted for 
Para paratara, then the meaning will be that She is the most excellent. 


“She is as subtle . . . hair” (Keshagrasya sahasradha vibhajit-asyaikangsha- 
rupa).—She is equal in dimension to the thousandth part of the end of a 
hair, so very subtle is She. 


“That Devata who pervades all beings” (Bhutanam adhidai-vatam).—Adhi- 
daivatam = Harddha-chaitanyam, {1227} and this Kala is Hardda-chaitanya- 
svarupa of all beings. 


“She grants divine knowledge” (Nitya-prabodhodaya)—i.e., She who grants 
Tattva-jnana, or knowledge of the Brahman. 


“And is lustrous” (Sarvarka-tulya-prabha).—There are twelve suns 
(Dvadashaditya). “When all the twelve suns are shining”—such is Her 
luster. This adjective also implies that She is red. 


VERSE 48. 


Within its middle space (i.e., middle of the Nirvana-kala) shines the 
Supreme and Primordial Nirvana Shakti{1228}; She is lustrous like ten 
million suns, and is the Mother of the three worlds. She is extremely subtle, 
and like unto the ten-millionth part of the end of a hair. She contains within 
Her the constantly flowing stream of gladness, {1229} and is the life of all 
beings. She graciously carries the knowledge of the Truth (Tattva){1230} to 
the mind of the sages. 


COMMENTARY. 


He now speaks of the Para Bindu. 
“Tts”—.e., the Nirvana Kala. 
“Middle” (Madhya-deshe).—Within the lap.{1231} 


“The Supreme and Primordial Nirvana Shakti” (Parama-purva-nirvana- 
shakti = parama apUrva-nirvana-shakti).—Parama{1232}—.e., the 
Supreme Brahman as Shakti. Aptirva—i.e., She before whom there was 
nothing, She having come into being at the beginning of creation. 


“Shines” (Vilasati)—i.e., dwells resplendent. 


“Mother of the three worlds” (Tri-bhuvana-janani)—i.e., She is the origin 
of the Universe which comprises Svarga, Martya, and Patala. {1233} 


“She is extremely subtle, like unto the ten-millionth part of the end of a 
hair” (Keshagrasya koti-bhagaikarupa ’tisukshma).—As She is like the ten- 
millionth part of the end of a hair, She is extremely subtle. 


“She contains within Her the constantly flowing stream of gladness” 
(Niravadhi-vigalat-prema-dhara-dhara).—Prema is the tenderness of mind 
produced by the feeling of gladness; that is, She holds within Her the 
stream of excellent nectar which has its origin in the blissful union of Shiva 
and Shakti, and which flows incessantly. 


“Ts the life” (Sarveshang jiva-bhiita)—i.e., animated being is but a part of 
Her. 


Cf. “O Devi, as sparks fly forth from a flame, so does the Parabindu (as 
Jiva) issue from Her (Nirvana Shakti), and becomes knowing{ 1234} when it 
touches the Earth.” {1235} 


By “Her” is meant the Shakti who is in the Parabindu, who is both Shiva 
and Shakti; and from Her emanates the Jiva (embodied being). 


Nirvana-Shakti is situated below Nirvana-kala, and over Nibodhika, {1236} 
which is Nada-riipa.{1237} Cf. “Placed within Nirvana (Kala) is the fiery 
(Vahnirupa) Nibodhika, who is the unmanifested Nada{1238}; above it is 
the supreme Nirvana-Shakti, who is the cause of all and is possessed of the 
luster of ten million suns. It is in Her that there is Shiva who is 
stainless{1239} and without change{1240}; it is here that Kundali Shakti 
enjoys with Paramatma.” 


Nibodhika is a phase of Avyakta-nada (Avyakta-nadatmika), and is fire-like. 
Raghava-bhatta says: “Nada exists in three states. When Tamo-guna is 
dominant, it is merely sound unmanifest (Avyakta-nada){1241} in the 
nature of Dhvani; when Rajo-guna is more dominant, there is sound in 
which there is somewhat of a placing of the letters{1242}; when the 
Sattvaguna preponderates, Nada assumes the form of Bindu.” {1243} Hence 
Nada, Bindu, and Nibodhika, are respectively the Sun, the Moon, and Fire, 
{1244} and their activities are Jnana, Ichchha, and Kriya. Jnana, again, is 
like Fire, Ichchha like the Moon, and Kriya like the Sun. This has been said 
in the Sharada. Therefore, insomuch as it has been said that Nirvana Shakti 
is above the fiery (Vahniripa) Nibodhika, the wise should conclude that 


Nirvana-Shakti is placed above the Mandalas of the Sun, the Moon, and 
Fire. 


This has been clearly stated in the Kularnava Tantra, in the Para-Brahma- 
dhyana, which begins, “The Bindurupa Para Brahma in the Sahasrara,” and 
ends, “Beautified by the three Mandalas within the triangle in the pericarp.” 
By three Mandalas are meant the Mandalas of Sun, Moon, and Fire. We 
shall show that the Nirvana-Shakti is in the form of Para-bindu 
(Parabindurupa). 


VERSE 49. 


Within Her is the everlasting place called the abode of Shiva,{1245} which 
is free from Maya, attainable only by Yogis, and known by the name of 
Nityananda. It is replete with every form of bliss, {1246} and is Pure 
Knowledge itself.{1247} Some call it the place of Brahman; others call it 
the Hangsa. Wise men describe it as the abode of Vishnu, and righteous 
men{1248} speak of it as the ineffable place of knowledge of the Atma, or 
the place of liberation. 


COMMENTARY. 


He speaks of the Para-Brahma-sthana (place of Para Brahma) in the Void 
within Nirvana Shakti. 


“Within Her” (Tasyah madhyantarale)—i.e., within Nirvana{1249} Shakti, 
or the empty space (within the Bindu). 


“Abode of Shiva” (Shivapadam).—This is the place of the Brahman. 
“Free from Maya” (Amala)—.e., free from the impurity of Maya. 
“Called”—i.e., called by those who know the Tattva. 


“Attainable only by Yogis” (Yogi-gamyam).—On account of its extreme 
subtlety, it is beyond the scope of word and mind, is attainable by Yogis by 
pure Jnana{1250} only. 


“Some call it”—i.e., the Vedantists (Vaidantikas) call it. 


“Ineffable” (Kimapi)—i.e., wonder-inspiring. 


“Place of the knowledge of the Atma” (Atma-prabodham).—The place 
where the Atma is seen or realized. 


“Liberation” (Moksha)—i.e., where one is liberated from Maya by which 
one is surrounded. Now be good enough to mark the following: the 
Parabindu which is Prakriti and Purusha is surrounded{1251} by Maya, and 
is within the triangle in the pericarp of the Lotus of a thousand petals. 


Also cf. “In the Satya-loka is the formless and lustrous One; She has 
surrounded Herself by Maya, and is like a grain of gram; devoid of hands, 
feet, and the like. She is Moon, Sun, and Fire. When casting off (Utsrijya) 
the covering (Bandhana) of Maya, She becomes of two-fold aspect (Dvidha 
bhitva) and Unmukhi{1252}; then on the division or separation of Shiva 
and Shakti{1253} arises creative ideation.” {1254} The word “Satya-loka” 
in the above passage means Sahasrara. 


Also cf. “The attributeless Bindu is without doubt the Cause (of the 
attainment) of Siddhis. Some say that the Devata who is in the form of a 
grain of gram{1255} is Brahma, and by some, again, He is called Vishnu; 
by others, again, He is called the One Mahapurna, {1256} Niranjana{1257 } 
Deva Rudra. Others call Him the Primordial Shakti.” 


The luminous empty space within the Nirvana Shakti (i.e., the outer circle 
of the Parabindu), which is more minute than the ten-millionth part of the 
end of a hair, is, according to the author, the abode of Brahman 
(Brahmapada). Cf. “Within it{1258} is Parabindu, whose nature it is to 
create, maintain, and destroy. The space within is Shiva Himself and 
Bindu{1259} is Parama-kundalt.” 


Also: “The circumference (Vritta) is the Kundalini-Shakti, and She 
possesses the three Gunas. The space within, O Beloved Maheshani, is both 
Shiva and Shakti.”{1260} This Bindu is, according to some, Ishvara, the 
Cause of All. Some Pauranikas call Him Maha-Vishnu; others call Him 
Brahma-Purusha. 


Cf. “There was neither day nor night, neither the firmament nor the earth, 
neither darkness nor light; there was That the Brahma-Male,{1261} 


imperceptible to hearing, and the other sources of knowledge united with 
Pradhana. ”{1262} 


The Sharada{1263} says: “The eternal Shiva should be known both as 
Nirguna (attributeless) and Saguna (possessed of attributes). He is Nirguna 
when (considered as) disassociated from the workings of Prakriti, but when 
Sakala (i.e., so associated with Prakriti) He is Saguna.” {1264} This shows 
that the Bindu is Saguna Brahman. We should know that Saguna Brahma is 
in reality but one, though He is called by different names according to the 
inclinations of men. There is no need to go into further details. 


SUMMARY OF VERSES 41 TO 49. 


Above (the end) of the Sushumna Nadi is the Lotus of a thousand petals; it 
is white and has its head downward turned; its filaments are red. The fifty 
letters of the Alphabet from A to La, which are also white, go round and 
round its thousand petals twenty times. On its pericarp is Hangsah, and 
above it is the Guru who is Parama-Shiva Himself. Above the Guru are the 
Suryya and Chandra Mandalas, and above them Mahavayu. Over the latter 
is placed Brahmarandhra, and above it Mahashangkhini. In the Mandala of 
the Moon is the lightning-like triangle within which is the sixteenth 
Kala{1265} of the Moon, which is as fine as the hundredth part of the 
lotus-fiber, and of a red color, with its mouth downward turned. In the lap 
of this Kala is the Nirvana-Kala, subtle like the thousandth part of the end 
of a hair, also red and with the mouth downward turned. Below Nirvana- 
Kala is the Fire called Nibodhika, which is a form of Avyaktanada. {1266} 
Above it (Nibodhika), and within Nirvanakala, is Para-Bindu, which is both 
Shiva and Shakti. The Shakti of this Parabindu is the Nirvana Shakti, who is 
Light (Tejas) and exists in the form of Hangsa (Hangsariipa), and is subtle 
like the ten-millionth part of the end of a hair. That Hangsah is Jiva. Within 
the Bindu is the void (Shinya) which is the Brahmapada (place of the 
Brahman). 


According to the view expressed in the fifth chapter of the Agama-kalpa- 
druma and other works, the triangle A-ka-tha{1267} is in the pericarp of the 
Sahasrara. At its three corners are three Bindus: the lower Bindu at the apex 
of the triangle is Ha-kara, {1268} and is male (Purusha); and the two Bindus 
at the corners constitute the Visarga in the form Sa{1269} and represent 
Prakriti. Hangsah which is Purusha and Prakriti thus shows itself in the 
form of three Bindus. In its middle is Amakala, and in Her lap is Nirvana- 
Shakti, and the vacant space within Nirvana-Shakti is Parabrahman. And 
the authority in support of the above is: “Within the White Lotus of a 
thousand petals shines like lightning the triangle A-ka-tha united with Ha- 
la-ksha.{1270} Within it is the excellent (Para) Bindu (Shinya), placed 


below Visarga. In this region is the downward-turned sixteenth Kala, of the 
color of the rising Sun, in shape like the crescent moon who discharges a 
stream of nectar, and within Her is Para-shakti, possessing the effulgence of 
ten million suns. She is as subtle as the thousandth part of the Lotus fiber, 
and is Chidatmika.{1271} Within Her is Bindu who is the Niranjana 
Purusha, who is beyond mind and speech and is Sachchidananda, and 
Visarga (who is also there) is Prakriti. Hangsa who is both Pung{1272} and 
Prakriti shines by His own effulgence.” 


Those who follow this view, place Sa-kara over the Bindu, and place the 
Guru above Visarga{1273} and Bindu which together make Hangsah. But 
this cannot be right. The Nirvana Tantra speaks of the Guru as worshipping 
the Para Bindurtipa-Shakti, and as being close to Her and in the act of 
worshipping Her. The worshipper should always sit at a level lower than, 
and facing, the object of worship, and never at a higher level than, and with 
his back towards, the object of worship. Cf. Nirvana: “Meditate upon the 
Niranjana Devi within the Satya-loka in the Chintamanigriha{1274} as 
placed on the jeweled lion-throne (Singhasana), and on your Guru as being 
near Her and worshipping Her.” 


The Mahakali Tantra, moreover, speaks explicitly of the presence of the 
Guru over the two letters Hang and Sah.{1275} It is to be understood that if 
there be any texts which differ from, or add to those here adopted, then they 
must be taken to refer to different methods and opinions. 


This is the end of seventh section. 


VERSE 50. 


He whose nature is purified by the practice of Yama, Niyama, and the like, 
{1276} learns from the mouth of his Guru the process which opens the way 
to the discovery of the liberation. He whose whole being is immersed in the 
Brahman then (rouses) the Devi by Hiing-kara, pierces the center of the 
Lingga, the mouth of which is closed, and is therefore invisible, and by 
means of the Air and Fire (within him) places Her within the Brahmadvara. 
{1277} 


COMMENTARY. 


Having described the Chakras ending with the Sahasrara, he now wishes to 
speak of the union of Kundalini, and preliminary to that he refers to the 
mode of rousing Kundalini. {1278} 


The sense conveyed by this verse is that the man who has attained success 
in Yoga learns from his Guru the process, which consists of contracting the 
heart, rousing Kundalini by the power of the air and fire, and so 
forth{1279}; and having learned it from the mouth of his Guru, he rouses 
Kundalini, attacking Her with air and fire, and by uttering the Kirchcha 
“Hung” and piercing the mouth of the Svayambhu Linga places Kundalini 
within Brahmadvara, or, in other words, within the mouth of the Nadi- 
Chitrint. 

“He whose nature is purified” (Sushila)—i.e., the man who regularly 


practices Yama and so forth, and has trained himself. 


“By practicing Yama, Niyama,” etc. (Yama-niyama-sama-bhyasa-shila).—It 
must be observed that it is not merely by the practice of Yama and Niyama 
that perfection in the preliminary Yoga practices{1280} is attained. But the 


Sadhaka has by practice to destroy such inclinations as lust, anger, and the 
like, which interfere with Yoga, and cultivate others, such as controlling the 
inner air, steadiness of mind, and so forth, which are helpful in Yoga 
practice. It is because of this that in v. 54 the Author has used the word 
“Yamadyaih” in the plural. Practicing Yama and the like is necessary, 
however, for those whose minds are disturbed by lust and other 
propensities. If, however, a man by reason of merit and good fortune 
acquired in a previous birth, or by his nature, is free from anger, lust, and 
other passions, then he is capable of real Yoga without the preliminary 
practices. This must be well understood. 


“From the mouth of his Guru” (Shri-natha-vaktrat)—The process cannot be 
learnt without the instructions of the Guru. Hence it has been said: “It can 
be learnt from the Guru alone, and not from ten million Shastras.” 


“Process” (Krama).—Steps, order. 


“Which opens the way to the discovery of the great liberation” (Maha- 
moksha-vartma-prakasha).—By this is meant the process by which the 
entrance into the channel of the Nadi Chitrini is opened out. 


“He” (Sah)—.e., the man who has distinguished himself by his success in 
Yoga practices. 


“Whose whole being is immersed in the Brahman” (Shuddha-buddhi- 
svabhava).{1281}—-Shuddha-buddhi means the Brahman, and he whose 
Svabhava (own being) is in Him. This compound word may also mean “He 
whose being (Bhava) by reason of the purity of his mind (Shuddha-buddhi) 
is immersed in the Spirit (sva-atma).” 


“Rouses the Devi by Hiing-kara” (Hung-karenaiva Devim).—The Agama- 
kalpa-druma says: “Then having mentally recited Hangsa, gently contract 
the secret part.” {1282} It therefore follows that in moving Kundalini the 
Hangsa Mantra should be uttered. The Author of the Lalitarahasya, 
following this, says that in moving Kundalini the mantra “Hung Hangsah” 
should be employed. But, from the fact that the part is to be contracted after 
the Hangsa Mantra is recited, the intention appears to be that the Jivatma, 


which is of the shape of the flame of a lamp, should by the recitation of the 
Hangsa Mantra be brought from the heart to the Muladhara, and then 
moved along with Kundalint. 


The Agama-kalpa-druma in a subsequent passage says: “Raising and again 
raising the Shakti with the Atma from the abode of Brahma, {1283} the 
excellent Sadhaka should (and so forth).” This shows that She should be led 
away along with Atma or Jivatma. The Kali-Kulamrita has: “Having led 
Jiva from the heart by the Hangsa Mantra to the Mula Lotus, {1284} and 
having roused the Paradevata Kundalini by Huing-kara.” The Kangkala- 
malini says: “O daughter of the King of Mountains, having drawn the 
Jivatma by the Pranava, let the Sadhaka move Prana and Gandha{1285} 
with Kundalini by the aid of the ‘So ’>ham’ Mantra, and make the Devi enter 
the Svadhishthana.” 


The wise should, from the above texts, understand that the Jivatma should 
be brought from the heart by the aid of either the Prarnava or Hangsa 
Mantra, and then Kundalini should be roused by the Kurchcha-bija alone. 


“The mouth of which is closed,” etc. (Guptam).—This word may be read 
either as an adjective qualifying Lingga, and mean unmanifested by reason 
of its mouth being closed, {1286} or may be read as an adverb qualifying 
“places,” and then the word would mean “imperceptibly.” 


In the Agama-kalpa-druma, Panchamashakha, the mode of rousing the 
Kundalini, is described in detail thus: “Having seated oneself in the 
Padmasana posture, the two hands should be placed in the lap. Thereafter, 
having mentally recited the Hangsa Mantra, the anus should be gently 
contracted. One should then repeatedly raise the air by the same way, 
{1287} and having raised it let him pierce the Chakra. I now speak of its 
process. In the Muladhara Lotus is a very beautiful triangle. Inside it is 
Kama, {1288} (lustrous) like ten million young suns; above Him (Kama), 
and surrounding Svayambhu-Lingga, is Kundali Shakti.” Also cf. “As the 
result of excitation by the Kamagni and the action of the Kirchcha-mantra 
on Her, She is seized with desire for Para-Hangsa.” {1289} 


The Bhuta-shuddhi{ 1290} also says: “O Shiva, the Sadhaka should contract 
the chest (lit., heart), letting his breath remain there,{1291} and he should 
control the base of the throat and other parts of the body,{1292} and then 
suddenly opening the door by means of a key-like motion (Kunchika) 
{1293} the fire should be kindled, O Parameshvari, by means of the air 
(Pavana).” “Then the Serpent, {1294} who is sleeping on the Lingga in the 
Miladhara and who is stung by the heat of the fire, should be awakened in 
the Lingga at the mouth of the Yoni and be led forcibly upwards. {1295} 
Move the air into the Nadi according to the rules of Kumbhaka (retention of 
breath) and the method shown by the Guru. Let the Jiva thus controlled be 
led by the concealed passage, and by the upward breath make all the 
Lotuses turn their heads upwards. Having fully awakened Her, let the wise 
one lead Her to Bhanu (the Sun) at the summit of the Meru (the Spine).” 


Now pay attention to the procedure established by a careful consideration of 
the above texts{1296}: The Yogi should sit in the proper posture and place 
his two hands with palms upwards in his lap, and steady his mind (Chitta) 
by the Khechari Mudra. He should next fill the interior of his body with air 
and hold it in by Kumbhaka, {1297} and contract the heart.{1298} By so 
doing the escape of the upward breath is stopped. Then, when he feels that 
the air within him from the belly to the throat is tending downward through 
the channels in the Nadis, he should contract the anus and stop the 
downward air (Apana); then, again having raised the air, let him give the 
Kama{1299} within the triangle in the pericarp of the Miladhara Lotus a 
turn from the left to the right (Vamavartena); by so doing the fire of Kama 
there is kindled, and Kundalini gets heated (excited) thereby. He should 
then pierce the mouth of the Svayambhu Lingga, and through its aperture 
lead Her with the aid of the “Hiing” Bija, who desires union{1300} with 
Parama-Shiva, within the mouth of the Chitrini-Nadi. This is the clear sense 
of the text. 


VERSE 51. 


The Devi who is Shuddha-sattva{1301} pierces the three Linggas, and, 
having reached all the lotuses which are known as the Brahma-nadi lotuses, 
shines therein in the fullness of Her luster. Thereafter in Her subtle state, 
lustrous like lightning and fine like the lotus fiber, She goes to the gleaming 
flame-like Shiva, the supreme bliss, and of a sudden produces the bliss of 
Liberation. 


COMMENTARY. 


Now he speaks of the mode of the Union of Kundalini (with Shiva). The 
meaning of this verse, in brief, is that the Devi Kundalini pierces the three 
Linggas—viz., Svayambhi, Bana, and Itara{ 1302 }—and by so doing 
makes a passage for herself; and when she reaches the lotuses in (or 
appertaining to) the Nadi called Brahma-nadi she shines in the fullness of 
her luster in these lotuses. Then, when in Her subtle form, fine like the lotus 
fiber, She approaches Shiva, who is Supreme Bliss itself, and who is in His 
Bindu form in the pericarp of the Sahasrara, She brings to the Sadhaka the 
Bliss of eternal Liberation when that is least expected. 


“Pierces” (Bheda) means making a passage through that which is 
obstructed. 


“Shuddha-sattva.”—Sattva, Ati-sattva, Parama-sattva, Shuddha-sattva, and 
Vishuddha-sattva, are the five different degrees of Chaitanya pervading the 
body.{1303} Shuddha-sattva is therefore the fourth (Turlya) stage. By 
Brahmanadi is meant Chitrini. The Lotuses are the six Lotuses which are 
strung upon Chitrint. 


“The three Linggas” (Lingga-trayam).—By this we are to understand that 
the six Chakras and five Shivas are included. She pierces all these, which 
altogether make fourteen knots (Granthi). 


The Shaktananda-taranggini speaks of “Her who goes along the Channel of 
Brahman{1304} having pierced the fourteen knots.” {1305} 


The Svatantra Tantra speaks of the distinctive features of Lingga and Shiva. 


“The Devi goes to Brahman (Nishkala){1306} after having pierced the 
Shivas placed in the six Chakras. As She reaches each of the different 
Chakras, She acquires the beauty and characteristic of each and bewitches 
Maheshana{1307}; and having there repeatedly enjoyed Him who is filled 
with joy, She reaches the Eternal One (Shashvata). He is called Bhinna, or 
the Transpierced, as He is bewitched by Para.” 


The Maya Tantra says: “The Devi goes along the Shakti-marga, piercing the 
three Linggas in the Chakras in each of Her different forms{1308} 
(Tattadrupena), and having attained union (in the Sahasrara) with Nishkala 
(Brahman) She is satisfied.” Tat-tadripena—i.e., in the forms Vaikhari, 
Madhyama, and Pashyantt. 


It has been said that{1309} “The first state (Bhava) is Vaikhari, and 
Madhyama is placed in the heart; between the eyebrows is the Pashyantt 
state, and the Para state is in the Bindu.” {1310} The meaning of the above 
quotation is that the four sound-producing (Shabdotpadika) Shaktis—viz., 
Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari—are identical with Kundalini 
(Kundalinyabheda-ripa). Hence at the time when Kundalini starts to go to 
Sahasrara She in Her form of Vaikhari bewitches Svayambhii Lingga; She 
then similarly bewitches Vana-Lingga in the heart as Madhyama, and Itara 
Lingga between the eyebrows as Pashyantt, and then when she reaches Para 
Bindu She attains the stage of Para (Para-bhava). 


The Method of Chakra-bheda is thus described: “O Parameshvari, let the 
Sadhaka carry along with Her the Lotuses which are on the Chitrini, and 
which have their origin in the mud of blood and fat.{1311} Let him{1312} 
enter the channel (Nala){1313} on the left, from below, and in this way 


Chakra-bheda (piercing the Chakra) is affected. After having thus pierced 
the six Chakras, She along with Jiva should be led as the rider guides a 
trained mare by the reins.” 


Also cf. “The Devi should be led by the Hangsa Mantra to the Sahasrara 
through the points of union of the six Chakras (with the Nadi) along the 
road of Sushumna.” 


“Gleaming flame-like” (Sukshma-dhamni pradipe).—The gleam is the 
Hangsa, which is the luminous energy (tejas) of the Para Bindu, in its aspect 
as Nirvana Shakti (Nirvana-shaktyatmaka). The Parama Shiva shines with 
it. 


We now describe how the joy of Liberation is brought about. 


The Devi by dissolving Kundalini in the Para Bindu effects the liberation of 
some Sadhakas through their meditation upon the identity of Shiva and 
Atma in the Bindu. She does so in the case of others by a similar process, 
and by meditation on Shakti.{1314} In other cases, again, this is done by 
the concentration of thought on the Parama Purusha, and in other cases by 
the meditation of the Sadhaka on the union of Shiva and Shakti. 


The Maya Tantra says{1315}: “Those who are learned in Yoga say that it is 
the union of Jiva and Atma. According to the experience of others it is the 
knowledge of the identity of Shiva and Atma. The Agama-vadis proclaim 
that Yoga{1316} is the knowledge (Jnana) relating to or of Shakti. Other 
wise men say that the knowledge of the Purana Purusha is Yoga, and others, 
again, the Prakriti-vadis, declare that the union of Shiva and Shakti is 
Yoga.” {1317} By “union of Jiva and Atma” is meant Samadhi. By Yoga is 
meant that by which oneness is attained with the Paramatma. Having 
spoken of Samadhi, he then deals with the different kinds of Yoga in 
Dhyana. By “union (Samarasya) of Shiva and Shakti” is meant the sense of 
enjoyment arising from the union of male and female.{1318} 


The Brihat Shrikrama speaks of the manner in which this is to be meditated 
upon: “They with the eye of knowledge{1319} see the stainless Kala, who 
is longing to be united with Chidananda{1320} on Nada. He is the 


Mahadeva, white like a pure crystal, and is the effulgent first cause (Vimba- 
rupanidana),{1321} and She is the lovely woman of beauteous body{1322} 
whose limbs are listless by reason of Her great passion.” {1323} 


By Kala in the above is meant Kundalini. Vimba-riipanidana qualifies Para- 
shiva or Chidananda. Chidananda is the Bindu-rupa-shiva or Para-shiva. 


It has also been said elsewhere: “Having united Kundali with the Shunya- 
rupa{1324} Parashiva, and having caused the Devi to drink the excellent 
nectar from their union, she by the same way should be brought back to the 
Kula cavity.” {1325} 


“Having brought them together and meditated upon Their union, {1326} let 
the Deha-devata{ 1327} be satisfied with the nectar which flows from such 
a union.” 


The Gandharva-malika speaks of a different process: “The Sahasrara is the 
beautiful and auspicious place of Sadashiva. It is free from sorrow and 
divinely beautiful with trees bearing and adorned by flowers and fruits. The 
Kalpa Tree{1328} adds to its beauty. This tree contains all the five 
“elements,” and is possessed of the three gunas. The four Vedas are its four 
branches. It is laden with beautiful unfading flowers which are yellow, 
white, black, red, green, and of variegated color. Having meditated on the 
Kalpa Tree in this manner, then meditate upon the jeweled altar below it. O 
Beauteous One, on it is a beautiful bed adorned with various kinds of cloth 
and Mandara flowers, and scented with many kinds of scents. It is there that 
Mahadeva constantly stays. Meditate upon Sadashiva, who is like the purest 
crystal, adorned with all kinds of gems, long-armed, {1329} and of 
enchanting beauty. He is ever gracious and smiling. In His ears are ear- 
rings, and a chain of gems goes round His neck. A garland of a thousand 
lotuses resting on his neck adorns His body. He has eight arms and three 
eyes like the petals of the lotus. On His two feet He wears a tinkling toe- 
ornament, and His body is Shabda-Brahma (Shabda-Brahma-maya). O 
Lotus-eyed One, meditate thus on His Great Body (Sthtla-vapuh). He is the 
quiescent, corpse-like{1330} Deva within the Lotus who is void of all 
action.” 


Also: “Meditate upon the Devi Kundalini who encircles the Svayambhu 
Lingga. Lead the Devi with the aid of the Hangsa Mantra to the Sahasrara, 
where, O Parameshvarl, is the great Deva Sadashiva, who is gladdened by 
the scent of Her Lotus-like mouth. And then place there the beautiful 
Kundalini, who is excited by Her desire. Kundalini, O Beloved, then kisses 
the lotus-mouth of Shiva, and, O Deveshi, She enjoys Sadashiva but a very 
little while when immediately, O Devi, O Parameshvari, there issues nectar. 
This nectar issuing from their union is of the color of lac.{1331} With this 
nectar, O Deveshi, should the Para-Devata{ 1332} be satisfied. Having thus 
satisfied the Devatas in the six Chakras with that ambrosial stream, the wise 
one should by the same way bring Her back to Muladhara. The mind should 
in this process of going and coming be dissolved there. {1333} O Parvati, he 
who practices this Yoga day by day is freed from decay and death, and is 
liberated from the bondage of this world.” 


Other similar processes should be looked for in other Tantras. 


VERSE 52. 


The wise and excellent Yogi rapt in ecstasy, {1334} and devoted to the 
Lotus feet of his Guru, should lead Kula-kundali along with Jiva to Her 
Lord the Parashiva in the abode of liberation within the pure Lotus, and 
meditate upon Her who grants all desires as the Chaitanyarupa Bhagavatt. 
{1335} When he thus leads Kula-Kundalini, he should make all things 
absorb into Her. 


COMMENTARY. 


Having spoken of the Dhyana-yoga of Kundalini, he now speaks of the 
Samadhiyoga of Kundalini. The substance of this verse is that the wise 
(Sudhi) and excellent Yogi (Yogindra) should for the attainment of Samadhi 
first of all lead Her who has been roused, who then, taking with Her Jiva, 
reaches the Brahmadvara, causing the absorption into Herself of everything 
as She moves along. When She who is the Ishtadevata and the giver of all 
good fruits is led up to Her Lord and is united with Him, the Para Bindu, 
she should be meditated upon as supreme (Para) Para Bindu (Para bindu 
Svarupam). When She has been led to Her Lord Shiva, the Para-Bindu, and 
has been united with Him, She should be meditated upon as the Ishtadevata 
who grants good fruit. 


He should there (in the Sahasrara) dissolve the Para-Bindu in the Chidatma, 
{1336} which is in the void within the Bindu, and should meditate upon 
Her (Kundalini) as Shuddhachaitanyarupa. {1337} He thus realizes the 
identity of Jiva and Atma, being conscious within himself that “I am He” 
(So ’ham); and having dissolved the Chitta he remains unmoved, by reason 
of his full and all-pervading Knowledge. 


The Revered Preceptor (Shrimat Acharyya){1338} has said: “The wise one 
should absorb the Karana{1339} of Ma-kara into the Chidatma, and realize: 
‘I am Chidatma, I am eternal, pure (Shuddha), enlightened (Buddha), 
liberated (Mukta); I am That which alone exists (Sat), without a second 
(Advaya); I am Supreme Bliss wherein is all bliss, and Vasudeva’s very self 
I am—Om.’ {1340} Having realized that the mind (Chitta) is the 
discriminator, he absorbs it into its witness.{1341} Let not the mind 
(Chitta) be distracted when it is absorbed into Chidatma. Let the Sadhaka 
rest in the fullness of his illumination like a deep and motionless ocean.” 


“Ma-kara.” {1342}: This is said for those who are Sadhakas of the Pranava. 
By Karana is here meant Para-Bindu. By “I am Vasudeva” (Vasudevo’ ham) 
the Vaishnavas are alluded to (vide ante, vv. 44, 49). 


We thus see that the worshipper of any particular Devata should realize that 
he is one with the object of his worship. In Pranava worship, for instance, 
the worshipper realizes his identity with the Ongkara; in other forms of 
worship he realizes his identity with Kundalini, who is embodied by all the 
Mantras of different worshippers. 


The Tantrantara says: “The King among Yogis becomes full of Brahma- 
bliss by making his mind the abode of the great void which is set in the 
light of the Sun, Moon, and Fire.” {1343} 


“Lead Kundali along with Jiva” (Jivena sarddhang nitva).—The Jivatma 
which is the Hangsa, in form like the tapering flame of a light, should be 
brought to the Muladhara from its place in the heart, and then led along 
with Kundalini. 


“Abode of liberation” (Mokshe dhamani).—This qualifies Pure Lotus 
(Shuddhapadma). {1344} It is here that liberation is attained. 


“Devoted to the two Lotus feet of his Guru” (Guru-pada-padma- 
yugalalambi).—This qualifies Yogindra (excellent yogi). The Author means 
that Siddhi can only be attained by the instructions of the Guru. The 
Sadhaka should therefore seek shelter at his feet. 


“Rapt in Samadhi” (Samadhau yatah).—The Kularnava Tantra (ix. 9) 
defines Samadhi thus: “Samadhi is that kind of contemplation{1345} in 
which there is neither ‘here’ nor ‘not here,’ which is illumination and is still 
like the ocean, and which is the Void Itself.” {1346} 


Also elsewhere: “The Munis declare that the constant realization of the 
identity of the Jivatma (with the Paramatma) is Samadhi, which is one of 
the eight limbs (Angga) of Yoga.”{1347} Patanjali defines “Yoga to be the 
control of the modifications (or functions) of Chitta (Yogashchitta vrittini- 
rodhah).” 


Rapt (Yatah)—i.e., he who constantly and with undivided attention 
practices it. 


“When he leads Kula-Kundali, he should make all things absorb into her” 
(Laya-vashat nitva).{1348} Below is shown the process of absorption: 


“O Deveshi, the Lang-kara{1349} should next be meditated upon in the 
triangle; there should also Brahma and Kama-deva be contemplated. 
Having fixed Jiva there with the utterance of the Pranava, let him lead the 
Woman, who is longing for the satisfaction of Her passion, {1350} to the 
place of Her husband, {1351} O Queen of the Devas. O Great Queen, O 
beloved of my life, let him think of Ghrarna (Prithivi), and meditate on the 
adorable Shakti Dakini. O Daughter of the Mountain, O Queen of the 
Ganas, {1352} O Mother, all these should be led into Prithivi.” 


Also: “Then, O Great Queen, the blessed Prithivi should be absorbed into 
Gandha, and then, O Daughter of the Mountain King, the Jivatma should be 
drawn (from the heart) with the Pranava (Mantra), and the Sadhaka should 
lead Prana, {1353} Gandha, {1354} and Kundalini, into Svadhishthana with 
the Mantra So’ham.” 


And also: “In its pericarp (Svadishthana) should Varuna and Hari{1355} be 
meditated upon. And, O Beauteous One, after meditating on Rakini{1356} 
all these and Gandha (smell) should be absorbed into Rasa (taste), and 
Jivatma, Kundalini, and Rasa, should be moved into Maniptra.” 


And again: “O thou of beautiful hips{1357} (Sushroni), in its{1358} 
pericarp the Sadhaka should meditate upon Fire, and also on Rudra, who is 
the destroyer of all, as being in company with the Shakti Lakin? and 
beautiful to behold. And, O Shiva, let him next meditate on lustrous vision, 
and absorb all these and Rasa (taste) into Rupa (sight), and thereafter lead 
Jivatma, Kundalini, and Rupa, into Anahata.” 


And again: “Let him meditate in its pericarp{1359} on Vayu, who dwells in 
the region of Jiva, as also on the Yoni-Mandala, which is made beauteous 
by the presence of the Bana-Lingga and Kakint. {1360} Let him there also 
meditate on Vayu and touch (Tvagindriya or Sparsha), and there, O Thou 
who purifiest, Jiva, Kundalini, and Ripa, should be placed in Sparsha 
(touch), and then Jiva, Kundalini, and Sparsha, should be placed in the 
Vishuddha.” 


And again: “Let him meditate in its{1361} pericarp on the Ethereal region, 
{1362} and on Shiva accompanied by Shakin; and having placed speech 
(Vak), and hearing (Shrotra), in Ether, let him, O daughter of the Mountain, 
place all these and Sparsha in Shabda (sound), and place Jiva, Kundalint, 
and Shabda, in the Ajna Chakra.” 


The above passages are from Kangkalamalini Tantra. 


“Triangle” in the above is the triangle in the Muladhara, from which the 
commencement is made. Lang-kara should be meditated upon as within this 
triangle. Leading of Jiva with the use of the Pranava is a variant practice. 
“Visarga-nashakamin?”: By Visarga is meant the agitation caused by an 
access of Kama (desire). The compound word means She who is striving to 
satisfy Her desire (Kama). The bringing of Jiva by the Hangsa Mantra is 
according to the teaching of some. “Place of her husband” (Patyau pade): 
This is the Bindu, the Shiva in the Lotus of a thousand petals. Sadhaka 
should lead Her there. 


The Bija Lang, Brahma, Kamadeva, Dakini-Shakti, and the sense of smell 
(Ghranendriya)—all these are absorbed into Prithivi, and Prithivi is 
absorbed into the Gandha-tattva. Jivatma, Kundalini, and Gandha-tattva, are 


drawn upward by the Pranava, and brought into the Svadhishthana by the 
So’ham Mantra. This is the process to be applied right through. After 
leading Jiva, Kundalini, and Shabda-tattva, into Ajna Chakra, Shabda-tattva 
should be absorbed into Ahangkara which is there, and Ahangkara into 
Mahat-tattva, and Mahat-tattva into Sukshma-prakriti, whose name is 
Hiranya-garbha, and Prakriti again into Para-bindu. 


The Mantra-tantra-prakasha says: “Let Vyoma (Ether) be absorbed into 
Ahangkara, and the latter with Shabda into Mahat, and Mahat, again, into 
the unmanifest (Avyakta) supreme (Para) Cause (Karana) of all the Shaktis. 
Let the Sadhaka think attentively that all things beginning with Prithivi are 
absorbed into Vishnu, {1363} the cause who is Sat, Chit, and Ananda.” 


That is, Mahat, which is all Shaktis (Sarvashakti), should be absorbed into 
Sukshma-prakriti, who is known by the name of Hiranya-garbha, and that 
Prakriti should be absorbed into Para, by which is meant the Cause in the 
form of Parabindu. In this connection the Acharyya has laid down the rule 
that the gross should be dissolved into the subtle.{1364} Cf.: “It should be 
attentively considered and practiced that the gross is absorbed into the 
subtle, and all into Chidatma.” The absorption of all things, beginning with 
Prithivi and ending with Anahata, {1365} takes place in the aforesaid 
manner; that being so, the feet and the sense of smell (Ghranendriya) and 
all pertaining to Prithivi are dissolved in the place of Prithivi, as they inhere 
in Prithivi. 


Similarly, the hands, the sense of taste (Rasanendriya), and all that pertains 
to water, are dissolved in the region of Water. In the region of Fire (Vahni- 
sthana) are dissolved the anus, the sense of vision (Chakshurindriya), and 
all that pertains to fire. In the region of Air (Vayu-sthana) the genitals, the 
sense of touch (Tvagindriya), and all that pertains to Vayi, are dissolved. In 
the place of Akasha are dissolved the sense of speech (Vak) and hearing 
(Shrotendriya) and all that pertains to Akasha (Ether). 


In the Ajna Chakra the dissolution of Ahangkara, Mahat, Sikshmaprakriti, 
and so forth, takes place, each dissolving into its own immediate cause. The 
letters of the alphabet should then be absorbed in the reverse order 


(Viloma), beginning with Ksha-kara and ending with A-kara. By “all 
things” it is meant that “Bindu,” “Bodhini,” and so forth, which have been 
shown above to be causal bodies (Karana-Sharira), should be dissolved in a 
reversed order (Vilomena) into the Primordial Cause (Adikarana)—the 
Para-bindu. Thus the Brahman alone remains. 


The process is thus described: “The Sadhaka, having thus made his 
determination (Sangkalpa), should dissolve{1366} the letters of the 
Alphabet in the Nyasa-sthana. {1367} The dissolution of Ksha is in La, and 
La in Ha; Ha, again, is dissolved into Sa, and Sa into Sha, and thus it goes 
on till A is reached. This should be very carefully done.” 


Also{1368}: “Dissolve the two letters into Bindu, and dissolve Bindu into 
Kala. Dissolve Kala in Nada, and dissolve Nada in Nadanta, {1369} and this 
into Unmani, and Unmani into Vishnuvaktra{ 1370}; Vishnuvaktra should 
be dissolved into Guruvaktra. {1371} Let the excellent Sadhaka then realize 
that all the letters are dissolved in Parama Shiva.” 


By Vishnuvaktra is meant Pung-bindu. “The Suryya-bindu is called the 
Mouth, and below are Moon and Fire.” “Bindu is said to be the Male, and 
Visarga is Prakriti.” {1372} 


All these authorities imply the same thing, and go to prove that it is the 
“mouth of Vishnu” (Vishnu-vaktra) where dissolution should take place. 
The following from Keshavacharyya also leads to the same conclusion: 
“Lead Her (Unmant) into the Male, which is the Bindu; lead Bindu into 
Paratma, and Paratma into Kalatattva, and this latter into Shakti, and Shakti 
into Chidatma, which is the Supreme (Kevala), the tranquil (Shanta), and 
effulgent.” 


We have seen that each dissolves into its own immediate cause. Nadanta is 
therefore dissolved in Vyapika Shakti, the Vyapika Shakti in Unmani, and 
Unmani in Samani, {1373} and Samani in Vishnuvaktra. When the letters 
have been thus dissolved, all the six Chakras are dissolved, as the petals of 
the Lotuses consist of letters. {1374} 


The Vishvasara Tantra says: “The petals of the Lotuses are the letters of the 
Alphabet, beginning with A.”{1375} The Sammohana Tantra{ 1376} 
describes the dissolution{1377} of the Lotuses and the petals thus: 
“Dissolve the letters Va to Sa of the petals in Brahma,{1378} and dissolve 
Brahma in the Lotus of six petals which contains the letters Ba to La, and 
which is called Svadhishthana. Do this as the Guru directs.” And so forth. 
And ending with:— 


“The wise one should then dissolve it (Vishuddha) in the Lotus of two 
petals which contains the two letters Ha and Ksha, and dissolve the two 
letters which are in the latter lotus into Bindu, and dissolve Bindu into 
Kala.” {1379} 


We thus see that the four letters in the Muladhara are dissolved and 
Muladhara is dissolved in Svadhishthana. Proceeding in this way till the 
Ajna Chakra is reached, the letters Ha and Ksha which are there are also 
dissolved at this place. Then the Lotus itself is dissolved into Bindu, Bindu 
into Bodhini, and proceeding in this way as already shown everything is 
dissolved into Parabindu. When the Ajna-chakra is dissolved all that it 
contains in its pericarp—Hakini, Itara lingga, Pranava—are unable to exist 
without support, and therefore after the dissolution into Prakriti these also 
are dissolved into Para Bindu. 


VERSE 53. 


The beautiful Kundali drinks the excellent red{1380} nectar issuing from 
Parashiva, and returns from there where shines Eternal Bliss{1381} in all 
its glory along the path of Kula,{1382} and again enters the Muladhara. 
The Yogi who has gained steadiness of mind makes offering (Tarpana) to 
the Ishta-devata and to the Devatas in the six centers (Chakra), Dakini and 
others, with that stream of celestial nectar which is in the vessel{1383} of 
Brahmanda, the knowledge whereof he has gained through the tradition of 
the Gurus. 


COMMENTARY. 


He now speaks of what should be done after all the different kinds of Yoga 
have been understood. The meaning of this verse is that the beautiful 
Kundali drinks the excellent nectar issuing from Parashiva, and having 
emerged from the place of Eternal and Transcendental Bliss, She passes 
along the path of Kula and re-enters Muladhara. The Yog!, after having 
understood the different matters mentioned (Tat-tad-dhyana-nantaram), 
should think of the union{1384} of Shiva and Shakti, and with the excellent 
nectar produced from the bliss of such union with Parashiva make offering 
(Tarpana) to Kundalint. 


“Path of Kula” (Kula-patha)—The path of Brahman, the channel in 
Chitrini. 


Kundali drinks the nectar with which Tarpana is made to her. The following 
authority says: “Having effected their union and having made (Her drink),” 
etc. It follows, therefore, that She is made to drink. 


“From there where shines Eternal and Transcendent Bliss” (Nityananda- 
mahodayat)—that is, She returns from the place where eternal and 
transcendental Bliss is enjoyed—i.e., where the Brahman is clearly realized. 


“Again enters Muladhara” (Mile vishet).—She has to be brought back in 
the same way as She was led upward. As She passed through the different 
Chakras in their order (Chakra-bheda-kramena) when going upward, so 
does She when returning to the Muladhara. 


The Revered Great Preceptor says: “Kuharini, {1385} Thou sprinklest all 
things with the stream of Nectar which flows from the tips of Thy two feet; 
and as Thou returneth to Thy own place Thou vivifieth and maketh visible 
all things that were aforetime invisible, and on reaching Thy abode Thou 
dost resume Thy snake-like coil and sleep.” {1386} 


“As Thou returneth Thou vivifieth and maketh visible.” This describes the 
return of Kundali to Her own place. As She returns She infuses Rasa{ 1387} 
into the various things She had previously absorbed into Herself when 
going upward, and by the infusion of Rasa She makes them all visible and 
manifest. Her passage was Layakrama, {1388} and Her return 
Srishti{ 1389 }-krama. Hence it has been said: “Kundali, who is Bliss, 
{1390} the Queen of the Suras, {1391} goes back in the same way to the 
Adhara{1392} Lotus.” 


The Bhita-shuddhi-prakarana has the following: “Let the Tattvas Prithivi, 
etc., in their order, as also Jiva and Kundalini, be led back from Paramatma 
and each placed in its respective position.” She is then particularly 
described: “She is lustrous when first She goes, and She is ambrosial{1393} 
when She returns.” 


“Stream of celestial nectar” (Divyamritadhara).—This is the excellent 
nectar which, as has already been shown, is produced by the union{1394} 
of Shiva and Shakti, and runs in a stream from the Brahmarandhra to the 
Miuladhara. It is for this reason that the Author says in v. 3 that “the 
Brahmadvara which shines in Her mouth is the entrance to the place 
sprinkled by ambrosia.” 


“Knowledge whereof he has gained through the tradition of the Gurus” 
(Yoga-parampara-viditaya).—This qualifies “Stream of Nectar.” It means 
that the knowledge is gained from instructions handed down traditionally 
through the succession of Gurus. 


“Which is in the vessel of Brahmanda” (Brahmanda-bhanda-sthitam).— 
This qualifies Amrita (nectar).{1395} The vessel or support (Bhanda) on 
which the Brahmanda (universe) rests is Kundalini. Kundalini is the Bhanda 
as She is the Source (Yoni) of all. 


Daivatam{ 1396} is the Ishtadevata and Dakini and others in the six 
Chakras. It has been said: “O Deveshi, with this nectar should offering 
(Tarpana) be made to the Paradevata, and then having done Tarpana to the 
Devatas in the six Chakras,” and so forth. 


VERSE 54. 


The Yogi who has, after practice of Yama, Niyama, and the like, {1397} 
learnt this excellent method from the two lotus feet of the auspicious 
Diksha-guru, {1398} which are the source of uninterrupted joy, and whose 
mind (Manas) is controlled, is never born again in this world (Sangsara). 
For him there is no dissolution even at the time of Final Dissolution. {1399} 
Gladdened by constant (realization of) that which is the source of Eternal 
Bliss, {1400} (he becomes) full of peace and foremost among all Yogis. 
{1401} 


COMMENTARY. 


He here speaks of the good to be gained by knowing the method of Yoga 
practice. 


“From the lotus feet of his auspicious Diksha-guru, which are the source of 
uninterrupted joy” (Shri-diksha-guru-pada-padma-yugalamoda- 
pravahodayat).—Amoda means joy or bliss; and by Pravaha is meant 
uninterrupted and continuous connection. Amoda-pravaha therefore means 
Nityananda, or “Eternal Bliss.” Bliss such as this comes from the Lotus feet 
of the Guru, which also lead to a knowledge of Yoga practice. 


The Diksha-guru is here spoken of as he is the first to initiate, and also by 
reason of his pre-eminence. But in his absence refuge may be sought with 
other Gurus. It has therefore been said: “As a bee desirous of honey goes 
from one flower to another, so does the disciple desirous of knowledge 
(Jnana) go from one Guru to another.” {1402} 


“Gladdened by constant (realization) (of that which is the source of) Eternal 
Bliss” (Nityananda-parampara-pramudita)—i.e., who is united with the 


Stream of Eternal Bliss. 


“Foremost among the good” (Satam agrani)—.e., he is counted to be 
among the good who are the Yogis. 


VERSE 55. 


If the Yogi who is devoted to the Lotus feet of his Guru, with heart 
unperturbed and concentrated mind, reads this work which is the supreme 
source of the knowledge of liberation, and which is faultless, pure, and most 
secret, then of a very surety his mind{1403} dances at the Feet of his Ishta- 
devata. 


COMMENTARY. 


He here speaks of the good to be gained by the study of the verses relating 
to the six Chakras. 


“Heart unperturbed” (Svabhava-sthita)—i.e., engrossed in his own true 
spiritual being. 


“Concentrated mind” (Yatantarmanah)—i.e., he who by practice of Yoga 
has steadied and concentrated his mind on the inner spirit (Antaratma). 


The rest is clear. 


Here ends the Eighth Section of the Explanation of the Verses descriptive of 
the Six Chakras, forming part of the Shritattvachintamani, composed by 
Shri-Purnanandayati. 


The Fivefold Footstool{ 1404} (Paduka-Panchaka) 


INTRODUCTORY VERSE. {1405} 


I meditate on the Guru in the Lotus of a thousand petals, who is radiant like 
the cool rays of the full moon, whose lotus hands make the gestures which 

grant blessing and dispel fear. His raiment, garland, and perfumes, are ever 
fresh and pure. His countenance is benign. He is in the Hangsa in the head. 

He is the Hangsa Himself. 


VERSE 1. 


I adore the wonderful White Lotus of twelve letters{1406} which is within 
the womb (Udare) of, and inseparable from, the pericarp of the Lotus in 
which is the Brahmarandhra, and which covers the top of the channel of 
Kundali. {1407 } 


COMMENTARY. 


The hymn Paduka-panchakam, composed by Him of the Five Faces, {1408} 
destroys all demerit. {1409} Kali-charana by his Tika called Amala 
(Stainless) makes patent its beauty. 


Sadashiva, the Liberator of the three Worlds, being desirous of speaking of 
Gurudhyana-yoga{1410} in the form of a hymn (Stotra), first of all 
describes the place of the Guru. 


The verb Bhaje is First Person Singular, Atmanepada, showing that Shiva 
Himself adores or worships. He says, “I adore or worship.” By saying so He 
expresses the necessity that all worshippers (Upasakas) of the Mantras 
revealed by Him should adore this wonderful twelve-petalled Lotus. He 
thus shows the necessity of His worship. 


The meaning of this verse in brief is this: I adore the twelve-petalled Lotus 
which is within the pericarp of the Sahasrara. 


“Wonderful” (Adbhuta).—It excites our wonder by reason of its being 
pervaded by the luster (tejas) of Brahman, and for other reasons. 


“Lotus of twelve letters” (Dvadasharna-sarasiruha)—i.e., the Lotus which 
contains twelve letters. The twelve letters, according to those learned in the 


Tantras, are the twelve letters which make the Gurumantra; they are Sa, ha, 
kha, phreng, ha, sa, ksha, ma, la, va, ra, yang. Some say that by 
Dvadasharna is meant the twelfth vowel, which is the Vagbhava-bija. 
{1411} But that cannot be. If it were so, the authority quoted below would 
be tautologous: “(Meditate on) your Guru who is Shiva as being on the 
lustrous Hangsapitha, the substance of which is Mantra (Mantramaya), 
which is in the pericarp of the Lotus of twelve letters, near the region of the 
Moon{1412} in the pericarp, and which is adorned by the letters ha, la, and 
ksha, which are within the triangle A-ka-tha.” 


The above passage speaks of the Mantramayapitha. The Mantra substance 
of this Pitha is the Gurumantra in the form of Vagbhava-bija.{1413} There 
would therefore be a repetition of the same Mantra.{1414} Dvadasharna is 
made up by Bahuvrthi Samasa—that in which there are Dvadasha (twelve) 
Arnas (letters). This lotus has therefore twelve petals, on which are the 
twelve letters. 


It is true that the letters are not here specified, and there has been nothing 
said as to where they are placed; but the Gurugita says{1415} that “the 
letters Hang and Sa surround (that is, as petals) the Lotus,” wherein the 
Guru should be meditated. This leads us to the conclusion that the letters 
Hang and Sah are repeated six times, thus making twelve, and so the 
number of petals becomes clearly twelve, as each petal contains one letter. 
This is fit subject of meditation for the wise. 


“Inseparable from” (Nitya-lagnam).—That is, it is connected with the 
Sahasrara in such a way that the one cannot be thought of without thinking 
of the other. 


“The pericarp of the Lotus in which is the Brahmarandhra” 
(Brahmarandhra-sarasiruhodara).—That is, the Sahasrara. The thousand- 
petalled lotus in which is the Brahmarandhra; within its womb; that is to 
say, within it (Tanmadhye); that is to say, within its pericarp (Tat 
karnikayam). 


The Kangkala-Malini, in describing the Lotus of a thousand petals, thus 
speaks of the place of the Brahmarandhra: “In its (Sahasrara) pericarp, O 
Deveshi, is Antaratma, and above it is the Guru; above him is the Stryya 
Mandala and Chandra Mandala and Mahavayu, and above it is Brahma- 
randhra.” 


Some say that by Udara (belly or interior) is meant within the triangle in the 
pericarp. The word Udara here means “interior” or “center.” The interior of 
the Lotus contains its pericarp, but the text does not mean the interior of the 
triangle in the pericarp, because the triangle is not here mentioned. The 
Shyama-saparyya quotes the following: 


“The Lotus of twelve petals (or Letters) is within the pericarp of the White 
Lotus of a thousand petals, which has its head turned downward, and the 
filaments of which are of the color of the rising sun, and which is adorned 
by all the letters of the alphabet.” 


“Covers the top of the channel of Kundali” (Kundali-vivara-kanda- 
manditam).—The Vivara (Channel) is that by which Kundalini goes to 
Shiva in the Sahasrara. The Chitrini contains within it this passage or 
channel. Chitrini is the tube (stalk), as it were, through which the passage 
runs, and Chitrini is adorned by this Lotus. As a Lotus rests on its stalk, so 
does the twelve-petalled Lotus rest on Chitrini, and is made beautiful by its 
stalk, the Chitrini. 


VERSE 2. 


I adore the abode of Shakti in the place where the two pericarps come 
together. It is formed by the lines{1416} A, Ka, and Tha; and the letters Ha, 
La, and Ksha, which are visible in each of its corners, give it the character 
of a Mandala.{1417} 


COMMENTARY. 


The Guru should be meditated upon as in the triangle within the pericarp of 
the Lotus before-mentioned. He now wishes to describe the triangle so that 
an adequate conception of it may be formed. 


“The abode of Shakti” (Abalalayam).—By Abala is meant Shakti. Here She 
is Kamakala (triangular) in form, and the three Shaktis, Vama, Jyeshtha, 
and Raudri, are the lines (of the triangle). These three Shaktis emanate from 
the three Bindus.{1418} Kamakala is the abode of Shakti. 


The Yamala speaks of the identity of Kamakala with this abode. The 
passage begins, “I now speak of Kama-kala,” and proceeding says{1419}: 
“She is the three Bindus. She is the three Shaktis. She is the threefold 
Manifestation. She is everlasting.” That is, Kamakala is composed of the 
three Shaktis spoken of (Trishaktiriipa). He next speaks of the attributes of 
Abalalaya (abode of Shakti). 


“Come together” (Kandalita)—Kandala ordinarily means a quarrel in 
which one attacks the other with words. Here its significance is merely that 
one (the twelve-petalled lotus) is included within the other (Sahasrara). 


“Formed by the lines A, Ka, and Tha” (Klipta-rekham-akathadirekhaya).— 
The sixteen vowels beginning with A form the line Vama, the sixteen letters 


beginning with Ka form the line Jyeshtha, and the sixteen letters beginning 
with Tha form the line Raudri. The Abode of Shakti is formed by these 
three lines. 


The Brihat Shrikrama, in dealing with Kamakala, says: “From the Bindu as 
the sprouting root (Angkura) She has assumed the form of letters.” {1420} 


“The letters ha, la, and ksha, which are visible in its corners, give it the 
character of a Mandala” (Kona-lakshita-ha-la-ksha-mandali-bhava- 
lakshyam).—In its corners—i.e., in the inner corners of the aforesaid 
triangle. The three corners of the triangle are at the apex, {1421} the right, 
and the left. The letters ha, la, and ksha, which are visible there, give the 
place the character of a Mandala. 


One cannot form an adequate conception (Dhyana) of this triangle without 
knowing it in all its particulars, and that is why other authorities are quoted. 
This triangle should be so drawn that if one were to walk round it would 
always be on one’s left.{1422} 


The Shaktananda-taranggini says: “Write the triangle A-ka-tha so that 
walking outside it is always on one’s left.” 


Kali Urddhvamnaya: “The Tri-bindu{1423} is the Supreme Tattva, and 
embodies within itself Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva 
(Brahmavishnushivatmakam). The triangle composed of the letters has 
emanated from the Bindu.” Also: “The letters A to Visarga make the line 
Brahma, which is the line of Prajapati; the letters Ka to Ta make the most 
supreme (Paratpara) line of Vishnu. The letters Tha to Sa make the line of 
Shiva. The three lines emanate from the three Bindus.” 


The Tantra-jivana: “The lines Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas, surround the Yoni- 
Mandala.” Also: “Above is the line of Sattva; the line of Rajas is on its left, 
and the line of Tamas is on its right.” {1424} 


By a careful consideration of the above authority, the conclusion is 
irresistible that the letters A-ka-tha go in the direction above-mentioned. 


The Svatantra Tantra says: “The lines A-ka-tha surround the letters Ha, La, 
and Ksha.” It therefore places them within the triangle. 


It is needless to discuss the matter at greater length. 


VERSE 3. 


In my heart I meditate on the Jeweled Altar (Manipitha), and on Nada and 
Bindu as within the triangle afore-spoken. The pale red{1425} glory of the 
gems in this altar shames the brilliance of the lightning flash. Its substance 
is Chit. 


COMMENTARY. 


The place of the Guru is on the jeweled altar within the triangle. He 
therefore describes the jeweled altar (Manipitha). 


“On the Jeweled Altar and on Nada and Bindu” (Nada-bindu- 
manipithamandalam).—The compound word may be formed in two ways: 
Manipithamandalam along with Nada and Bindu (Nada-bindubhyang saha), 
or Nada and Bindu and Manipithamandalam—..e., all these three. Some 
interpret this to mean that Nada and Bindu are the Manipitha. But that 
cannot be. Nada is white, and Bindu is red; and the pale red glory whereby 
the Manipitha shames the luster of the lightning flash is neither red nor 
white. 


The Sharadatilaka says: “This Bindu is Shiva and Shakti, {1426} and 
divides itself in three different ways; its divisions are called Bindu, Nada, 
and Bija.” If this be interpreted to mean, as it ought to be, that Bindu is 
Parashaktimaya, and Bija, Nada, and Bindu, are respectively Fire, Moon, 
and Sun, then Nada being the Moon is white, and Bindu being the Sun is 
red. Pirnananda also speaks{1427} of Nada as being white like Baladeva, 
etc. 


The Brihat Shrikrama also says: “There was the imperishable Bindu, 
lustrous like the young Sun.” 


Now, as one is white and the other red, they can never be the pale red gem. 
The meaning given by us is therefore correct. The solution is that Nada is 
below, and Bindu above, and Manipitha in between the two—thus should 
one meditate. This has been clearly shown in the Gurudhyana in 
Kangkalamalini Tantra: “Meditate on the excellent Antaratma{1428} in the 
(region of the) Lotus of a thousand petals, and above it (Antaratma) 
meditate on the resplendent throne{1429} between Nada and Bindu, and on 
this throne (meditate) upon the eternal Guru, white like a mountain of 
silver.” 


“The pale red glory of the gems in this altar shames the brilliance of 
lightning” (Patu-tadit-kadarima-sparddhamana-manipatala-prabham).— 
This qualifies Manipitha-mandalam. To be “patu” is to be able to fully do 
one’s work. Now, lightning wants to display itself. Here the idea is that the 
pale red luster of the Pitha shames the uninterrupted brilliance of the 
reddish-yellow lightning flash, inasmuch as the Manipitha is covered all 
over with gems. 


“Its substance is Chit” (Chinmayang vapuh).—The Chinmaya or 
Jnanamaya body. The body of Nada, Bindu, and Manipitha, is Chinmaya or 
Jnana-maya.{ 1430} Others interpret it to mean, “I meditate on the 
Chinmaya body of the twelfth vowel,{1431} the Bija of Sarasvati, which is 
the Gurumantra.” But that is wrong. The Guru is white, and his Bija is also 
white; to attribute to it a pale red luster would be incongruous. 


VERSE 4. 


I intently meditate on the three lines above it (Manipitha), beginning with 
the line of Fire, and on the brilliance of Manipitha, which is heightened by 
the luster of those lines. I also meditate on the Hangsa, {1432} which is the 
all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe is absorbed. {1433} 


COMMENTARY. 


On Hangsa-pitha, which is within the triangle on Manipitha, between Nada 
and Bindu, is the place of the Guru. He now wishes to describe Hangsa and 
the triangle in order that a clear conception of these two may be gained. 


The meaning of this verse is, shortly, this: I meditate on the primordial 
Hangsa, {1434} I meditate on the three lines, beginning with the line of 
Fire, above the place of Manipitha. The verb “I meditate” occurs once in 
this verse, and governs three nouns in the objective case. 


“T intently meditate” (Vyamrishami).—That is, I think with mind 
undisturbed, excluding all subjects likely to interfere with my thoughts. 


“Above it” (Urddhvam asya)—that is, above Manipitha. 


“The three lines (beginning with the line of Fire)” (Hutabhtk-shikha- 
trayam).—This compound word is made up according to the rule known as 
Shaka-parthiva, by which the word Adi which comes in between two words 
is dropped. Adi means “and others.” The Line of Fire, {1435} which is 
called the Line Vama, emanates from Vahni Bindu in the South, and goes to 
the North-East Corner; and the Line of Moon emanates from Chandra 
Bindu in the North-East Corner, and goes towards the North-West Corner: 
this is the line Jyeshtha. The Line of Sun emanates from Stryya Bindu in 


the North-East Corner, and reaches Vahni Bindu: this is the Line Raudri. 
The triangle which is formed by the three lines uniting the three Bindus is 
Kamakala (Kamakalaripam). 


The Brihat Shrikrama says: “She whose form is letters is coiled up in the 
Bindu and comes out thereof as a sprouting seed from the South. From 
there{1436} She goes to the Ishana corner (N.E.). She who thus goes is the 
Shakti Vama. This is Chitkala Para and the line of Fire. The Shakti which 
has thus gone to the Ishana corner then goes in a straight line (that is, to the 
N.W.). This line, O Parameshvari, is the line of Jyeshtha, who is Tripura, 
the Sovereign Mistress. Again turning left{1437} She returns to the place of 
sprouting. She is Raudri, who by Her union with Ichchha and Nada makes 
the Shringata.” {1438} 


The Maheshvari-sanghita says: “Suryya, Chandra, and Vahni, are the three 
Bindus, and Brahma, Vishnu, and Shambhi, are the three lines.” 


The Prema-yoga-taranggin1, in describing the Sahasrara, quotes an authority 
which is here cited, clearly showing that the place of the Guru is within this 
triangle. “Within it is the excellent lightning-like triangle. Within the 
triangle are two imperishable Bindus in the form of Visarga. Within it, in 
the void, is Shiva,{1439} known by the name of Parama.” 
Shangkaracharyya also has shown this clearly in his Anandalahari. The 
Author of the Lalita-rahasya also speaks of the Guru as seated on Visarga. 
Visarga is the two Bindus Chandra and Siryya at the upper angles of the 
(down-turned) triangle. 


“On Hangsa” (Adihangsayor yugam).—Literally interpreted it would mean 
the union of {1440} the primordial Hang and Sah. By Adi (first) is implied 
the Parama-hangsa, which is also known as Antaratma, and not the Jivatma, 
which resembles the flame of a lamp. The Hangsa here is the combination 
of Prakriti and Purusha. 


In Agama-kalpadruma it is said: “Hangkara is Bindu, and Visarga is Sah. 
Bindu is Purusha, and Visarga is Prakriti. Hangsa is the union of Pung 
(male) and Prakriti (female). The world is pervaded by this Hangsa.” 


Some interpret Asya trddhvam to mean “above Manipitha,” and say that 
the verse means: “I meditate on the union of the two who constitute the 
primordial Hangsa above Manipitha.” This is wrong. The Kangkala-Malini 
speaks of the Manipitha as above Hangsa and between Nada and Bindu. So 
how can these be below Hangsa? This is impossible. This also shows the 
impossibility of the reading adopted by some—namely, Huta-bhuk-shikha- 
sakham{1441} in place of Huta-bhuk-shikha-trayam. If this reading were 
accepted, then the words Urddhvam asya (above it) have no meaning. The 
interpretation “I meditate on the union of,” as given above, may, however, 
be understood in the following sense. We have seen that the Kangkalamalini 
speaks of the Hangsa as below the Manipitha, which is between Nada and 
Bindu. The interpretation mentioned is in great conflict with the view of 
Kangkala-Malini. But if Huta-bhuk-shikha-trayam be read as qualifying 
Hangsa, then the difficulty may be removed. Then the meaning would be: 
“Below Manipitha is Hangsa, and above it is the triangular Kamakala which 
is formed by the Hangsa.” {1442} 


“Which is the all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe is absorbed” 
(Vishva-ghasmara-mahochchidotkatam).—“Bhaksh” and “Ghas” mean the 
same thing. The root “Ghas” means “to devour,” and the roots “Chid,” 
“Hlad,” and “Dip,” all mean “to shine.” The Great Light (Mahochchit) 
which is the Devourer (Ghasmara) of the Universes: By that is meant that it 
is all-powerful (Utkata). Utkata, which literally means very high, here 
means very powerful. 


VERSE 5. 


The mind there contemplates the two Lotuses which are the Feet of the 
Guru, and of which the ruby-colored nectar is the honey. These two Feet are 
cool like the nectar of the Moon, and are the place of all auspiciousness. 


COMMENTARY. 


Having described the place where the two Lotus Feet of the Guru should be 
meditated upon, he now speaks of the union by meditation (Dhyana) on 
them, in this and the following verse. 


“There” (Tatra)—i.e., in the triangle on the Manipitha. The meaning of this 
verse, in short, is: “The mind there, within the triangle on the Manipitha, 
contemplates upon the Lotus Feet of the Guru.” 


“Of which the ruby-colored nectar is the honey” (Kungkumasavapari- 
marandayoh).—This qualifies “the lotuses.” Kungkuma means red, the 
color of lac. The excellent nectar which is of the color of lac is the honey of 
the Lotus Feet of the Guru. Some read “Jhart” for “Pan”; the meaning 
would then be: “from which flows like honey the ruby-colored nectar.” 


“Cool like the nectar of the Moon” (Indu-makaranda-shitalam)—.e., they 
are cool as the nectar-like beams of the Moon. As the beams of the Moon 
counteract heat, so does devotion at the Feet of the Guru overcome sorrow 
and suffering. 


“Place of all auspiciousness” (Manggalaspadam).—It is the place where 
one gets all one desires. The sense is that by devout concentration on the 
feet of the Guru all success is attained. 


VERSE 6. 


I adore in my head the two Lotus Feet of the Guru. The jeweled footstool 
on which they rest removes sin. They are red like young leaves. Their nails 
resemble the moon shining in all her glory. Theirs is the beautiful luster of 
lotuses growing in a lake of nectar. 


COMMENTARY. 


He says here: “I adore the two Lotus Feet of the Guru, resting on the 
footstool already described in my head.” 


“The jeweled footstool on which they rest removes all sin” (Nishakta-mani- 
paduka-niyamitagha-kolahalam).—That is, all the multitude of sins are 
removed by devotion to the jeweled footstool which serves as the resting- 
place of His Feet. Or it may be interpreted thus: “The footstool which is 
studded with gems—that is, the Manipitha-mandala which is the footstool 
—removes all the multitude of sins. By meditating on the Feet of the Guru 
as resting on this stool all sins are destroyed.” Or it may be thus interpreted: 
“The five footstools with which are inseparably connected the gems (by 
which are meant the Chintamani-like feet of the Guru) destroy all the 
multitude of sins.” By meditating first on the fivefold footstool, and then on 
the feet of the Guru as resting thereon, sin is removed. As the removal of 
sins is effected by meditation on the fivefold footstools, it is the cause 
which effects such removal. 


“They are like young leaves” (Sphurat-kishalayarunam).—That is, the feet 
of the Guru possess the red color of newly opened leaves. The leaves of the 
Mango and Kenduka{1443} tree when newly opened are of a red color, and 
comparison is made with them. 


“Their nails resemble the moon shining in all her glory” (Nakha- 
samullasachchandrakam)—i.e., the toe-nails are like so many beautifully 
shining moons. 


“Theirs is the beautiful luster of lotuses growing in a lake of nectar” 
(Paramrita-sarovarodita-saroja-sadrochisham).—That is, they have the clear 
luster of lotuses growing in a lake of nectar. He means to say that the 
excellent nectar drops constantly from the Lotus Feet of the Guru. 
Purnananda has said the same thing in v. 43 of the Shat-chakra-nirtipanam. 
The excellent nectar is the lake on which the Feet show like lotuses. It has 
been said that the place of the Guru is in the pericarps of both the Lotuses 
afore-mentioned. Now, a question may be raised as to whether it is in the 
pericarp of the twelve-petalled lotus below, or in that of the Sahasrara 
above. To solve this the following passages are quoted: 


Brihat Shrikrama: “Then meditate upon the Lotus which with its head 
downward is above all, and which drops nectar on the Shakti of the Guru in 
the Lotus.” 


Yamala: “The Lotus of a thousand petals is like a canopy{1444}; it is above 
all, and drops red nectar.” 


Gurugita: “In your own Guru meditate according to your powers on the 
(divine) Guru as having two arms in the Lotus whose petals have the letters 
Hang and Sah. Although He is Himself the cause of the Universe, He is 
without and beyond the Universe. On His will there are no limitations. 
{1445} From Him emanates the Light of knowledge. The Devata is the 
Guru. The letters of the mantra{1446} are Devata.” 


The Shyama-saparyya quotes the following: “The Lotus Sahasrara 
downward turned, in the head, is white. Its filaments are of the color of the 
rising sun; all the letters of the Alphabet are on its petals. In the pericarp of 
the Sahasrara is Chandra-Mandala, and below the pericarp is the lustrous 
lotus of twelve petals which contains the triangle A-ka-tha, marked out by 
the letters Ha, La, and Ksha. Meditate there on your Guru who is Shiva, 
seated on the Hangsa-pitha which is composed of Mantras.” 


The above and similar passages indicate that the place of the Guru is in the 
pericarp of the Lotus of twelve petals. 


The Kangkala-Malini says: “Meditate on the excellent Antaratma in the 
Lotus{1447} of a thousand petals, and on the shining throne which is 
between Nada and Bindu, and on it (the throne) meditate constantly upon 
your own Guru, who is like a Mountain of Silver,” etc. 


The Yamala says{1448}: “Meditate (on your Guru) in the Lotus of a 
thousand petals. His cool beauty is like that of the full moon, and His Lotus 
hands are lifted up to grant boons and to dispel fear.” 


The Purashcharana-rasollasa has the following dialogue: “Shri Mahadeva 
said: ‘There in the pericarp of the wonderful everlasting Lotus of a 
thousand petals meditate always on your own Guru.’ Shri-Parvatt said: ‘The 
head of the Great Lotus of a thousand petals, O Lord, is always downward 
turned; then say, O Deva, how can the Guru constantly dwell there?’ Shri 
Mahadeva said: ‘Well hast thou asked, O Beloved. Now listen whilst I 
speak to Thee. The great Lotus Sahasrara has a thousand petals, and is the 
abode of Sadashiva and is full of eternal bliss. It is full of all kinds of 
delightful fragrance, and is the place of spontaneous bliss.{1449} The head 
of this Lotus is always downward, but its pericarp is always upward, {1450} 
and united with Him is Kundalini in the form of a triangle.’” 


The Bala-vilasa Tantra has the following: “Shri Dakshinamirti said: ‘As 
you awake in the morning remember your Guru in the White Lotus of a 
thousand petals, the head of which great Lotus is downward turned, and 
which is decorated with all the letters of the Alphabet. Within it is the 
triangle known by the name of A-ka-tha, which is decked by the letters Ha, 
La, and Ksha. He of the smiling countenance is on the Hangsa-pitha, {1451} 
which is in the region of the Chandra Mandala within it (the Sahasrara).’ 
Shri Devi said: ‘O Lord, how does the Guru stay there when its head is 
turned downwards?’ Shri Dakshinamirti said: “The Chandra Mandala in the 
pericarp of the Lotus of a thousand petals is turned upward; the Hangsa is 
there, and there is the Guru’s place.’” 


These and similar passages speak of the place of the Guru as in the pericarp 
of the Lotus of a thousand petals. 


As there are two distinct methods, one should follow the instruction of the 
Guru and adopt one of the two in his Sadhana (Anushthana). For it has been 
laid down in the Kularnava Tantra, Ch. XI.: “Beloved, Vedas and Tantras 
handed down to us by tradition, as also Mantras and usages, become fruitful 
if communicated to us by the Guru, and not otherwise.” 


VERSE 7. 


This hymn of praise of the Fivefold Footstool was uttered by Him of Five 
Faces. By (the hearing of) it is attained that good which is gained by (the 
hearing of) all the hymns in praise of Shiva. Such fruit is only attainable by 
great labor in the Wandering (Sangsara). 


COMMENTARY. 


He now speaks of the good gained by listening to this Stotra. 


“Hymn of praise of the Fivefold Footstool” (Paduka-panchaka-stotram).— 
Paduka means a footstool (Padarakshanadhara). The five of these are: (1) 
The (twelve-petalled) Lotus; (2) the triangle A-ka-tha in its pericarp; (3) the 
region of the Nada, Bindu, and Manipitha in it; (4) the Hangsa below, and 
(5) the triangle on, the Manipitha. Or they may be counted thus: (1) The 
Lotus (i.e., twelve-petalled); (2) the triangle (A-ka-tha); (3) Nada-Bindu; 
(4) the Manipitha Mandala; (5) the Hangsa—which taken collectively form 
the triangular Kamakala. {1452} Stotra is a hymn of praise. This hymn, 
including the verse which speaks of the benefit to be gained by listening to 
it, is one of seven verses. 


“Uttered by Him of Five Faces” (Pancha-vaktradvinirgatam).—The Five 
Faces of Shiva as given in the Linggarchana Tantra are: “On the 
West{1453} (i.e., back) is Sadyojata; on the North (i.e., left) is Vamadeva; 
on the South (right) is Aghora; and on the East (front) is Tat-purusha. 
Ishana should be known as being in the middle. They should thus be 
meditated upon in a devout spirit. Vinirgata means uttered—that is, uttered 
by these Five Faces. 


“By listening to it is attained that good” (Shadamnayaphala-praptam).— 
This literally means: “by it is obtained the fruit of what has been spoken by 
the Six Mouths.” The Six Faces are the five given above and a sixth 
concealed one which is below, called Tamasa. This is alluded to in 
Shadvaktranyasa in the Shiva Tantra thus: “Ong Hang Hring Aung Hring 
tamasaya svaha”; as also in the meditation (Dhyana) there given, thus: “The 
lower face, Nilakantha, is of the color caused by poison.” 


Shadamnaya is what has been spoken by these Faces—that is, all the hymns 
of praise to Shiva. By the fruit of this is meant the benefit gained by reciting 
or listening to all these Mantras, and practicing the appropriate Sadhana. 
This is what is gained through this hymn. 


“Tt is attainable by great labor in this Wandering” (Prapanche 
chatidurlabham).—By Prapancha is meant this Sangsara (Wandering or 
World), comprising the Universe from all effects up to Brahma, and which 
is shown by Maya. It is difficult of attainment (Durlabha), as it is the result 
of manifold merit acquired by the practice of laborious endeavor (Tapas) in 
previous births. 


End of the Commentary (Tippani) of the Name of Amala (Stainless), 
written by Shrikalicharana on the Padukapanchaka Stotra. 


THE END 


Plates 


PLATE 1, 


PLATE 2. 


PLATE 3. 


PLATE 5. 


me 4 


PLATE 6, 


‘1 3LVW1d 


PLATE 8. 


First published in 1918, The Serpent Power is an important and 
influential text for the modern practice of Kundalini yoga in the 
West. Written by Sir John George Woodroffe, under his pseudonym 
Arthur Avalon, it is a scholarly and insightful study of both ancient 
texts and the philosophies of Kundalini, Shakti, meditation, and 
yogic practice. Woodroffe was born in Calcutta, India and followed 
in his father’s footsteps in a successful legal career that included 
many years serving as the Chief Justice on the High Court of India. 
In addition to his professional judicial duties he also extensively 
studied Hindu philosophy and translated many Sanskrit texts. He 
wrote many books on Tantrism and yoga under his pseudonym and 
was a noted speaker and expert on Indian philosophy. The Serpent 
Power is his most popular and enduring work and is notable for its 
accurate and nuanced translations of two important ancient Tantric 


texts: “The Description of the Six Chakras” and “Five-fold 


Footstool”. This classic text remains an important guide for all of 


those who are interested in Kundalini yoga as well as ancient Hindu 


philosophy and meditative practices. 
www.digireads.com 


Cover image: s ISBN 978-1-4209-7109-5 


detail of an 90000 
illustration from 
the original 
edition, Luzac & 
Co, London, c 
9 "781420"971095 


1919 


{1} One of the names of this Devi is Bhujangt, or the Serpent. 


{3}That is, the six Chakras and the upper cerebral center, or Sahasrara. See 
as to Upanishads and Puranas, post, p. 39. 


{4}_“The Compass of Truth.” The author was the eldest son of the Emperor 
Shah-i-Jehan,_and died in A.D. 1659. Its teaching is alleged to be that of the 
secret doctrine of the “Apostle of God.” 


lite sare 


James Pryse in Lucifer, the old Theosophical journal, which I have not seen. 


{11} See p. 11 of the Introduction to thi - Tantrik Texts 


(Prapanchasara Tantra). 


C4900 Wet ry ate es a et tt a 


Xd \ uaa Aun atate Sie In DiS edivion OF te Susnruta 


now howe er, maybe be gi ven—aamely, that ane 


ered 


{13}_According to some Indian views, the brain is the center of the mind and 
senses, _and the heart that of life. Charaka says that the heart is the root from 
whi ich swhich spring 2 all other oe a — ees on is the. cent ats some ae the 


sensations. 


{14} 1 i ae are Ll. others. Some oS Ainlysu aft thse tome b Bey 


Chakra in the spinal column; the eight-peta 
heart (Hrid)_in the body. 


(AR Ho eh We, Sab Ssce2 hl Bee alles fo ce Vee ces PMStss 2 oP ie Sacetause, Bebe eed We case 


425} IL WI De ODServed Mal ine two 1Ower Lamasic centers are not nere 
mentioned. 


{24} Ib.,.p. 262. 


{25} Op. cit., 43. The Amritabindu Upanishad at p. 71 deals generally with 


{26} Ib., Vol. XXIX,, p. 145. 


{28} Vol. XXIX. of same edition, p. 345; see pp. 441, 450, 451, 458, and 


> |S 
— 


| Ib.,_p. 483;_and as to the passage of Kundali through the Brahmadvara, 


{32} These Yoga Upanishads have been recently translated as part of “Thirty 
Minor Upanishads,” by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar (Theosophical Society of 


Madras, 1914), 


{33} See Ch. XXXV., Vol. IL, of my “Tantrik Texts.” 


{34} See also Anandagiri’s Shangkaravijaya and Madhava’s 


{36} Thus, vv. 13,18, 19 are said to treat of Madana-prayoga—that is, 
application for the third purushartha or Kama (desire). 


CSP TPs 2 oases we Vhs seeds saliccwe & ae 2 WR ecsln Meo ee Eee eo seg 


AS/j He seems to De very adverse tO the Kalla SCNOO!, and If N1IS VIEWS are 


}. This is the celebrated Bengali Paramahangsa_ 
Svami, author of the Shatchakranirupana. Brahmanan 
celebrated Shaktananda tarangin 


puru of Pu 
| 


da was aut 


mai 1e tatratya tatpravahaplutena yoginam Ishvarasamyam jayate 
jog treshu prasiddham (Comm. v. 1). 


{43} Bibliotheca Indica, ed. Asiatic Society (1871). The notes are from the 
Commentary of Narayana. 


{44} The man-lion incarnation of Vishnu. 


\nandatmaka; in the self of Ananda (bliss), 


{46} Good, perfect. 


{47} Lustrous (Tejomaya). 


{48} The Chakra which by the Shaktis of Jnana and Kriya protects all 
regions (Loka). 


{49} The Chakra of the path reached by Yoga. 


{50} The Chakra which is the death of all Asuras, or liars. 


Bija, Narasingha Gayatri, Mantra. 


PAR IL 2. ss 28 cee ceeds = Jabale Ga hte eaas geese Ghose. afeccie See Qa ce geek ste Leask 


joZ jibe root Mantra, wWnicn 1n this Case are ose given in tne next Note Dut 


{53} That is, the Mantra;_Narasinghaya vidmahe vajranakhaya dhimahi 
tannah singhah prachodayat. (May _we contemplate on Narasingha, may we 


meditate on his Vajra-like claws. May that Man-lion direct us.) 


(in Suchakra);_Aing (in Mahachakra); Kling (in Sakalalokarakshana chakra); 
Om (in Dyuchakra); and Hiing (in Asurantakachakra). 


{55} That is, to each of them is assigned the several parts of the Narasingha- 
gayatri above mentioned. 


{56} The Atma as bliss, love, light or energy, Maya, Yoga, and the 
concluding Chakra which is the destruction of all Asuras. 


following notes where the Nyasa is given. 


namah, 


i Narasinghaya achakraya anandatmane svaha hridayaya 


{64} That is, he becomes capable of speech—a poet. He knows the 
beginning and end of all things and able to explain all things. 


{0D} Various Iorms OT territying ana Maugnant spirits. 


{68} It is always important to record such a fact, for it generally influences 
the outlook on things. | In some cases the mind is so Westernized that it is 
unable to correctly appreciate ancient Indian ideas. 


{69} This no Tantrik would admit. He would say that it is ignorance 
(Avidya) which sees any differences between Veda and Agama. The critic 
re-echoes some Western criticisms. 


{71} This, at any rate, attests its wide pervasiveness. 


i221 This i isa SaL Eee Rene term which has descended en the pe a 


3 | ee ee ee 
i) 7 credit of the Shakta Tantra that it does not encourage 


AZo s_Lnese Walder dDOUt WNG1ld Persuddins Wie Villasers tO. 


the tea-gardens, to whict ee are then con’ ets by means w sich 3 
least, are not always admirable. 


” Sé ae 


{74} The books and the Gurus claim to do so. 


{75} It is not a peep-show open to any. Only those see who have mastered 


the great difficulties in this path. 


Pea INS oe! SNe eee eS DP Saas, ee Be Dees oes Ie ok oP Le eee eS Se De 2ilee. Oak 


{20 }_Lnese opservations display misunderstanaing OF tne subject dealt WItN. 
s iticism. I limit my present observations to the 


{77} This is the Indian tradition as to the philosopher’s date. 


nine. See also Madhava’s Shangkaravijaya, Ch. x 


{78} The parenthesis is 


{79} See ante, p. 22. 


{80} An English education, s s the Author of this criticism re: 
infrequently has the effect of aaa hese ne ree not only from a 
knowledge of Indian Shastra, but from the possibility of understanding it. 


{81} Thus, the offering of flowers and the like to the Divinity partakes of the 


nature of Karma; whilst Bhakti in its transcendental aspect, in which by love 


of the Lord the devotee is merged in Him, is a form of Samadhi. 


the act Gestuigs sane ae its ai in the ghd hecmaee Ty 


4 Beh i vim lake Shatchakrer vyakhyana O Sadhana (Mangala Ganga 


ue should allow the Tantra,” ’ asks, in ae with hie views on 


the fata “abla, ta can those scl are a ae dia “as aget bids Hi in 


tne contrary, aS_vedatmaka. UI Course It1Ss One quesuon to Claim to De Dasea 
on Veda an another whether. a pa cular st ra is in fact i in Laccordan ice 


to ere Bible nich all claim as Hiei . a 


apn This = definition is inaccurate. 2 As explained later, the Stout ganglia 


less d jess deayee? 


{90} The paragraph in brackets is mine.—A. A. 


{91} This observation shows 3 an ee al the ei character = 
the Yoga. If | sired to rouse Kundal op ~( 


the lowest cr 
is not arou: 


ter. There ae Treen eet forms 0 at Youa in hich Kundall 


{92} Professor Monier Williams, Sanskrit Dictionary, sub voc. “Chakra.” 


{93}_A term which is also employed to denote the Brahmanad 
latter is the passage whereby the Brahmarandhra in the cerebrum is attained. 


{94} Except in the sense that everything is a manifestation of power. 


{95} “The Inner Life,” by C. W. Leadbeater, pp. 443-478, First Series. 


{97} This is a Western term. 


OWE NG 8 nee Sed oe SD Oe ES ae eeoesse es Mae ahesces A A 


{95} INOL Menuoned in the account nere given. 


{29} So little attention seems to be given to exactitude in this matter that one 
of the letters is dropped in order to make 1,000 petals—that is, 50 x 20. 
, 1 think, here only symbolic of magnitude —A. A. 


{100} Certain Siddhis are said to be gained at each center. But the top of the 
head is far beyond the “astral” life. There Samadhi, or union with the 
Supreme Consciousness, is had.—A. A. 


{101} Parashabda has seven aspects from Kundali to Bindu.—A. A. 


{102} Kundali is Shabdabrahman or the “Logos” in bodies, and is in Her 
own form (Svartipa) Consciousness, and is all Powers (Sarva shaktimaya).— 


As to what she is 


is, see last note. 


{104} The end of Kundali Yoga is beyond all Heaven worlds. 


{105} According to the text translated, the sound of the Shabda Brahman is 
heard at the Anahata, or fourth center—A. A. 


= contend of om oe ny es oe x? ry 


ar t 


{108} See note {104}, ante. 


{109} In my edition of Mahanirvana Tantra, CXXIV. 


{110} Another author says: “The mere dabbler in the pseudo-occult will 
only degrade his intellect with the puerilities of psychism, become the prey 


of the evil influence of the phantasmal world, or ruin his soul by the foul 


see ee ees I ee Be ee es ee 22 De asisicen ale oi eee Pe cee De Deke ee Ws. eeee Qo Beece 


Practlces OL PNalliC SOrcery—ds Wousands OL misguiged people are GOInZ 


even in this age” (“The Apocalypse Unsealed,” p. 62). Is this so? 


ae oa has oe to ai ‘with acl Giecks ae 


{112} Lam aware that the Theosophical Society_has no official doctrine. 


ame I <all oe are t he e theories putt eer oS its serena 


{113} Thus, the Theosophical Sanskritist Srisha Cha: 


ndra Vasu, in his 
“Introduction to Yoga Philosophy,” calls the Linga Sharira “the etherial 
duplicate” (p..35). Accorc ding to the ordinary Indian use of that term this is 

, for the Linga Sh the subtle body—that is, the Antahkarana and 
Indriyas—vehicled by the Tanmatras, or, _according to another account, the 
five Pranas. Elsewhere (p. 51) it is c 


| e “Astral” body, and some 
statements are made as to the Chakras which are not in accordance with the 
texts with which Iam acquainted. 


{114} “Ancient \ 


‘isdom,” p. 176, by Mrs. A. 


{115} See Yogatattva Upanishad, where contem 


secures Wai: over earth, etc, At the same time it p aainis out | iat these 
“powers” are obstacles to liberation. 


ae eraeentes oe an ae to > Indiat n icoeuee success 
(Siddhi) in Yoga is the fruit of experiences of many preceding lives. 


vi’s grace, She is called “the giver of the eight 
Siddhis i” 7 shitvad vashiasiddhica, See Trishati, I]. 47. She gives aishvaryya. 


(AON, Wee. A oN MN a Oe, dA ee eed Dh ee A cles: 4a cB ole a 


Adty sib which te rod 18 me central Channel (susnumna 


in oe the ae ms eee os eee ae section being 
at the centers. The two wings 


at the top are the two lobes or petals of the 
Ajna Chakra. 


{120} Here I differ. The Sahasrara is at the top of the skull or upper brain. 
The pineal gland is much lower in the region of the Ajna Chakra. 


{121} For the meaning of this term as here used, see my “Shakti anp 
Shakta.” 


{122} _Kularnava Tantra speaks of that “Monism of which Shiva speaks” 


rare Sha L. —_ See also Mahanirvana Tantra, Ch. II., vv. 
tantra, IL, IK, els 


Pianan ch Ch. XIX.; for the identity of J | mat 
is aa Sve said the Vedanta deans to ie Tivabialitianas 
aikyam. See Mahanirvana Tantra, where they are given (VIII. 264, 265, V. 
105). See also Prapanchasara Tantra, II., where Hring is identified wit 

Kundali and Hangsah, and then with “So’ hang.” See also ib., ( 
“That which is subtle I am” (Ya 


Yah Sukshmah So’ hang); and na amava 
Tantra, XXL. 10. As to Brahmasmi, see Kularnava Tantra, 1X. 32, and ib., 41: 


So’ ham bhavena pijayet. The Shakta disciple (Sadhaka) should not be a 
dualist. Maharudrayamala, I. Khanda, Ch. 15; U. Khanda, Ch. 2, Similarly, 


the ( mdharva Jantra a, eu 2, _ to hen mas pe sn d of dualism 


Dvaitahina). See Pranatoshini, 108. In fact, that particular form of worship 


ah i. aed the Kaula shea their Tee isa Sey a] 
of Advaitavads a. .-Kaulachara i is said to properly, {allow a full Horie of 


‘vatma or emb | SI s the Paramatma or r supreme s anit 
ai meee of fis is the root of all wisdom (Mulavidya). 


Hes Lue This, as is the Mahanirvana Jantra says one sel is ue ‘nd and. aim Wot 


calls the fifth or supreme state ( (Ch, XIX. XIX, Vol. IL. “eTantik Texts”), 


{124} Thus it is = of — that Shes is in the form of one and many 


_ajnanam or — Anekani = a 


Se aceaeed eee a Mea Se Aas wes 2 Wek 2 Pe SR 2 Febkicosegs cand Fevce 


several ajNnanaS—tnat 1S, AVIGYa. She 1S DOU dS Upddnl OF iSNVara and J1lVa 


(Trishati, II. 23). 


{125}_The alternative is given to meet the differing views of Mayavada and 
Shaktivada. 


{126} That is, its substance is Sat, Chit, Ananda. The suffixes Mayi anc 
Rupini indicate a subtle distinction—namely, that She i is eee sil ner by 
appearance something different from it. 


{127} In the form or nature of! 
Kala is both Chit (Chidrapa) 


{128} Ahang prakritirupa chet chidananda-parayana (Ch. I., vv. 16-24, Vol. 
IV.,_“Tantrik Texts”), 


t Chit. As the Kubjika Tantra says, the Parama 
and Nada (Nadartipa). 


{129} Ya anadirtpa chaitanyadhyasena mahapralaye suikshma sthita 
(Comm. on Sharada th Ae i. Lhe is, ws Adhyasa 6 or Cattribution i is 


J ete a te, "eee J ee 


given from the worl 
(Svartipa). 


iis” and oT Phat” of ay” and “This.” >In 


Vikalpa-jnana there j is subject and object. 


{133} Paramashiva has two atiects—Prsiesha and Vimarsha, or 


Kam ari or Para qutasphutikara, or 
rare of what is not mate, 


{134} This word comes from the root mrish = to touch, to affect. The 


Kularnava Samhita defines it as bridayangamibhava, or “the state or feeling 


BD se BSS wey Oe dees, Gel 1 2 ee. Oe ER Mea Sc eer lcs = Seed. OIL Be eo Be Bees 


OL going into tne 
transformed into 


lealt.” ViMarspinl SNakul = GraVanaM, She 1S meited Or 


{135} The quiescent Shiva aspect is by its definition inert. It is because of 
this that the Devi is in Tantra symbolically represented as being above the 
body_of Shiva, who lies under Her like a corpse (Shava). As the Kubjika 
Tantra, aul, L, Stat it is not Brahma. V ee and Hudlra, =e create, 

1,2 or. See 

int 9. ‘Ac ity: is es nature ol Prakriti (eiuglivat ae an 

Sutra, TIL. Il. 66). For the same reason the fe ale form J is le sented i union 
with but above (Vi darita), the male. When the Devi st : 
symbolism also denotes | cued in ie case of Kali) 
aspect of the Mother. See “Principles of Tantra,” I. 323, 


{136} The world is called an imagination ana), | 

ideation. As the Yoginihridaya Tantra says, “the picture of the world is 

designed by Her own will” (Svechc ishvamayollekhakhachitam), 
ad.” 


“seeing wh which Bhagavan was very_pleased.” 


{137} The Supreme Father gives His illumination (Prakasha). She, the 
Vimarshashakti, creates, but not alone. (Vimarshashaktih prakashatmana 
Paramashivena samarasya-vishvam srijati na tu kevala—Yoginthridaya.), 


{138} In Matri-bhava, according to the Sanskrit term. Philosophically_also 
this is sound, for all that we can know (outside ecstasy_or Samadhi) is the 
Mother in Her form as the world. The Supreme Shakti, who is not different 
from Shiva (Parashaktishivabhinna), is embodied in every order of thing 
(sarvakramasharirini— Yoginthridaya). 


{139} It is said that “there is nothing more tender than fa ” who serves 
Purusha in every way, finally giving Mukti by retiring from 


ee TEESE 1 ul a re ata Jat r stage the “This” is still 
experienced as part of the “ Thi -e there is oe cit 


Boccia AP oe las cee kas hes Me Demet Gs ae Mo, Cee, cole, oe Bt cased, 


lmmedildtely_ precedes the Durgeoning TOF (Spnurdanda)_ OF the universe, 


point, though it has no magnitude, is assumed to have a position. Here there 
is none, for we are in spacelessness. 


are two seeds, but Shiva and Shakti are the One with dual aspect. 


{145} The shape of the Singara water-nut, which grows in the lakes of 
Kashmir. Here I may observe that Yantras, though drawn on the flat, must be 


conceived of in the solid mass. The flat drawing is a mere suggestion of the 
three dimensional figure which the Yantra is. 


{148} Bhogena moksham apnoti bhogena kulasadhanam 


Tasmat yatnat bhogayukto bhavet viravarah sudhih. 


(Kularnava Sanghita, v. 219.) 


meyamanamatrilakshanam kaulastat samashtih. These three are Knower, 
Knowing, Known, for that is consciousness as Shakti. 


Ca NN | ee i ee, ee oe NS. eee Ses Fe: CGM een cE ae. Ses, el, Te =e bee IS See, 8 


j{iosjy_see aS to tnese terms the autnor s ~studles 1N the IVMlaNntraSNnastfd.— 


limited. Thus, from all-knowing it becomes little-knowing; from being 
almighty, it becomes a little doer, etc. 


The term Samkocha (contraction) expresses the same idea. The Devi is 
Samkuchadriipa through Matri, Mana, Meya, and therefore so also is Shiva 
as jiva (tatha shivo, pi samkuchadripa).—Yoginthridaya Tantra. 


{155} This is not counted as a Tattva. 


{156} These terms have not the ordinary English meaning, but denote the 


(flower), ether: Dhiipa (incense), air; Dipa | (agni), fire; Naivedya. (food 7 
offering), water; Chandana (sandal), earth. 


{157} Sachchidananda-vibhavat sakalat parameshvarat 


Asichchhaktistato nado, nadad bindu-samudbhavah 


(Ch. 1). 


Kangkalamalini Tantra, cited in v. 43. 
{159} S.N., v.49. 
{160} Ib.,v. 41. 


1161} Ch, I. 


Bindurnado bijam iti tasya bhedah samiritah 
Binduhshivatmako bijang shaktirnadastayormithah 


Samavayah samakhyatah sarvvagamavisharadaih (Ch. I.). 


The first word of the third line reads better as Binduhshivatmako than as 
Bindurnadatmako, as in some MSS., such as in that from which I quoted in 
Introduction to the Mahanirvana. The Commentary to v. 40, post, also 
speaks of Bindu as being Nadatmaka, but explains that that means 
Shivatmaka. See also to same effect Kriyasara. 


{164} See Raghava Bhatta’s Comm. on Ch. L. v. 8 of Sharada. 


Nirgunah sagunashcheti shivo jneyah sanatanah 
Nirgunachchaiva sangjata bindavastraya eva cha 


Brahmavindurvishnubindu rudrabindur maheshvari. 


The verse as cited in Pranatoshini (p. 13) reads in second line 
Nirgunashchaiva; but this must be a mistake for Nirgunachchhaiva, for the 
Bindus themselves are not nirguna, but spring from it. 


These represent the Chit, Chidachit, Achit aspects of nature. Chidangshah 
chidachinmishrah achidangshashcha teshang ripani (Bhaskararaya; Comm. 
Lalita). Kalena bhidyamanastu sa bindurbhavati tridha, 


Sthulasikshmaparatvena tasya traividhyamishyate. Sa 
bindunadabijatvabhedena cha nigadyate (Pra. sara I. 42). Ete cha 
Karanabindvadayashchatvara 
adhidaivatamavyakteshvarahiranyagarbhaviratsvaripah 
shantavamajyestharaudrirupa ambikechchhajnanakriyarupashcha (ib.). 
Adhibhiitantukamaripapirnagirijalandharaudhyanapitharapah. Pithariipa iti 
tu nityahridaye spashtam (ib.). Citing Rahasyagama. 


Jnana, Sattva, Jyeshtha, Vishnu, Madhyamashabda, 


Kriya, Tamas, Raudri, Rudra, Vaikharishabda. 


See Comm. 22, Shloka Kamakalavilasa, Sangketa 1, Yoginihridaya Tantra, 
and Saubhagya Sudhodaya, cited in Sangketa 2 of the last Tantra. As the 
Rudra Yamala says (II. 22), the three Devas are aspects of the One. 


Eka mirtistrayo deva brahmavishnumaheshvarah 


Mama vigrahasangklipta srijatyavati hanticha. 


But see next note. 


Raudribindostato nadat jyeshtha bijadajayata 
Vama tabhyah samutpannah rudra-brahma-ramadipah 


Te jnanechchha-kriyatmano vahnindvarka-svarupinah. 


Ichchha kriya tatha jnanang gauri brahmitu vaishnavi 


Tridha shaktih sthita yatra tatparang jyotiromiti. 


As the author of the Pranatoshini (p. 9) says, the names are not to be read in 
the order of words (Pratishabdam), otherwise Jnana would be associated 
with Vaishnavi, but according to the facts (Yatha sambhavam) as stated in 
the text. According to this account it would seem that Jnana Sattva and Kriya 
Tamas in note 1 should be transposed. 


manifestation). 


Mahabindu = Paramashiva = Mishrabindu = Ravi = Kamakala. 


Ravi-paramashivabhinna mishrabinduripa Kamakala. 


the other two Bindus, it is the Samashtiripa of them, and is thus called 
Kamakala. 


{172} Tayoryad yamalang ripang sa sanghatta iti smritah 


Anandashaktih saivokta yato vishvang visrijyati 
Na Shivah Shaktirahito na Shaktih Shivavarjita. 


(Tantraloka-Ahnika, 3.) 


The coupled form of these two (Shiva-Shakti) is called junction. That is 
called the blissful Shakti from which creation arises. There is no Shiva 
without Shakti, nor Shakti without Shiva. 


{173}_1b.,.3 Ahn. 


{175} In the Shrichakra this is in the region of Baindava Chakra, the highest, 
followed by the triangular Chakra, which is Kameshvari, Bhagamalini, and 
Vajreshvari. See further as to Kamakala, post. 


Shabdabrahmeti tang prahuh sarvvagamavisharadah. 


(Sharada Tilaka, Ch. I.) 


See Introduction to my Mahanirvana Tantra, p. XXII. It will be observed that 
in this verse the first Bindu is called Para, and to make this clear the author 
of the Pranatoshini adds the following note: 


Paradvindorityanena shaktyavastharupo yah prathamo bindustasmat (By 
Parabindu is meant the first Bindu, which is a state of Shakti). 


Kriyashaktipradhanayah shabdashabdarthakaranam 


Prakriterbindurupinyah shabdabrahma bhavat param. 


CAPA, Was Ei a Boe IL, a. TNS eee ele Sas ae AY. alee OMe cece hese Oe ghee Mens Shakes 2k 


time” (Kalabandhu), because Kala in the form of Nada assists in giving birth 
to Him and the other Devatas. 


As the Kularnava Tantra (Khanda 5, Ullasa I.) says, the one Brahman has 
twofold aspect as Paramabrahman (transcendent) and Shabdabrahman 
(immanent). Shabdabrahmaparambrahmabhedena brahmanor dvaividhyam 
uktam. And see also Shrimad Bhagavata, 6 Khanda, 16 Ch. Tena 
shabdarthariipavishishtasya shabdabrahmatvam avadharitam (Pranatoshini, 
13). 


{179} Atha bindvatmanah shambhoh kalabandhoh kalatmanah 


Ajayata jagat-sakshi sarvvavyap! sadashivah 
Sadashivat bhaved Isha stato Rudrasamudbhavah 
Tato Vishnu stato Brahma tesham evam samudbhavah. 


(Ch. L, wv. 15, 16.) 


Here they are mentioned in connection with the form creation (Arthasrishti). 
The Pranatoshini says: Atra Arthasrishtau punah rudradinamutpattistu 
artharupena. Pirvvamtesham utpattih shabdartipena, ato na paunaruktyam iti 
kalamaya tadatmanastadutpannatvat. 


{180} So it is said Purushat na parang kinchit sa kashtha sa paragatih. 


describes the Jivas as parts of Shiva enveloped in Maya (which gives them 


the false notion of separation from Him), like sparks issuing from fire—an 


with upadhi—that is, body, etc. Philosophically, all Atma with upadhi 
(attribute) is Jiva. 


EAQP) CF S24l.. 2 Fences s ? oN. 28 Pilesekhcss => 9S 


{162} “Lite egg (Spneroid) Or branma.” 


sucha as the = shiv, Brahma, etc.: for she i is 


> en 9 


ee oa ‘(itishat, IL 4D. 


{184} Yadihasti tadanyatra yannehasti natat kvachit—an Indian version of 
the Hermetic maxim, “As above, so below.” 


{185} So Herbert Spencer holds, in conformity with Indian doctrine, that the 
U ron whether physical or psychical, is a play_of force which in the case 
f matter we as the self or mind experience as object. 


{186} The word has been said to be derived from Kri and the affix Ktin, 
which is added to express bhava, or the abstract idea, and sometimes the 
Karn, _or object of the action, corresponding with the Greek affix sis. Ktin 
inflected in the nominative becomes tis. Prakritis therefore has been said to 
correspond with @voic (nature) of the Greeks (Banerjee, “Dialog' yn 
Hindu Philosophy,” 24). It is also called Pradhana. Pra + dha + anat = 
Pradhatte sarvvam atmani, or that which contains all things in itself; the 
source and receptacle of all matter and form. Pradhana also literally means 
“chief” (substance), for according to Sangkhya it is the real creator. 


- EE 
ae 
ee 
=~ I 
Fe 
> 
i 
2) 


‘2 > What can b io seen antes he, eyes ( can 77 defined, rae not ae 
“Tt cannot i en by Lae es . ene a 1- =6: ~Yat chakshusha na 


Aan Pee Ae se ee Da eM: Ses. ey Bs Bes oe ee Eee cee Woe Fes PS Se Pees. cee 


maintenance See oer | ca ArT (La ane are ere ae 


karyyadikam anaya). 


Comm. or of Isha Up. “The changeless 
Brahman which is consciousness 5 appears in creation as Maya which is 
Brahman ( — consciousness nee neeeeae in Herself 


prs Sanaa) Js 


. same mee in ee a es mere <i 


{191} See an article of mine in the Indian Philosophical Review, “Shakti and 


{192} In the words of Professor P. Mukhyopadhyaya, dealing with the 
matter monistically, these are the three elements of the Life-Stress on the 
surface of pure Consciousness—namely, presentation (Sattva), movement 
(Rajas),_and veiling (Tamas), which are the three elements of creative 
evolution (“The Patent Wonder,” p. 19). 


{193} Those in whom Rajas Guna is predominant, and who work that Guna 
to suppress ‘Tamas, are Vira (hero), and the man in whom the Tamasguna 
prevails is a Pashu (animal). 


{194} The three gunas are essentially changeful. 
ena ene Tarn avatishthante em a unas do not remain fora 
| 1 JANE AEBAEE Kaumudi, 
inama_ or Sadrisha 


SAY FIL. Sic Wen, Meee) He. DataBase aU Tice? ee 2a 6 oe Dae PRI: 


Sangkhya Pravachana, I. 61. 


{196} Vikara or Vikriti is something which is really changed, as curd from 
milk. The former is a Vikriti of the latter. Vivartta is apparent but unreal 


Vedantasara thus musically defines the two terms: 


Satattvato nyathapratha vikara ityudiritah 


Atattvato nyathapratha vivarta ityudiritah. 


V. 40 of the Shatchakra speaks of Vikriti as a reflection (Pratibimba) of 
Prakriti. It is Prakriti modified. 


Prakriti Tattvas. Etymologically Tattva is an abstract derivation from the 
pronoun “Tat” (That), or Thatness, and may, it has been pointed out, be 
compared with the Hecceitas of Duns Scotus. The Tattva in a general sense 
is Truth or Brahman. But in the Sankhya it has a technical sense, being 


and its effects, mind and body, _and which is Abhimanin, or attributor to 
itself, of the waking, etc., states. 


6). 


AMAT 42 Titec, Se F 


A ZUUF_1 KNan Gao. 


Nn. 


approachable, excitable (that which is within the genitals), and excretable. 
“Each sense is suited to a particular class of influences—touch to solid 


See Sangkhya Pravachana Sitra, II. 26-28, 40; Sangkhya Tattva Kaumudi, 
27 Karika. 


EAE es Sa Se ae See de eke 2 Pees See SF eee eee eels. 2.8 eset? Sal 2k Sa 


4{Z1Z} 50 It 1s Sald_1Lani vastuni tanmatraaini pratyaksna-\ 
to Yogis). 


isnhayanl (thd ls, 


{213} Whereby the thermal quality of things is perceived. 


aivaism,” by_J. C. Chatterji,p.120. TI 
s the case of a woman who, being blind blind, read with the tip of 


ith her toes. 


hese ear, a me her knees, and smelt w 


{216} Tantrasara Ahnika, 8. 
{217} See “Kashmir Shaivaism,” p. 112. 


{218} So in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, I. 3-27, it is said: “My Manas 
(mind) was diverted elsewhere. Therefore I did not hear.” 


{219} So, in the Text here translated post, Manas is spoken of as a 
doorkeeper who lets some enter, and keeps others outside. 


ee definition, eee a a V Vaishesh hika, | gives 
knowledge of pleasure, _pain,_and Jivatma (1am So-and-s a. 


{223} Tang ahangkaram upajivya hi buddhiradhyavasyati (Sangkh 
Kaumudi, supra). 


{224} Sangkhya Pravachana, II. 13. The Siitra has Adhyavasayo buddhih; 
but, as the Commentator points out, Buddhi is not to be identified with its 


5 
' 


Rese ale oon. “TVs SSL alesse, Sas DRESS 2 oon eet? 


Tuncuons. BUGGNI IS ThUS Called INISNCNaYVakKaliNl. 


{225} Sangkhya Tattva Kaumudi, 23rd Karika: Sarvvo vyavahartta alochya 


mattva aham atradhikrita ityabhimatya kartavyam etat maya iti adhyavasyati. 


— 
a: 
Ip 


{226} Sangkhya Pravachana, II. 40-44. 


{227} Sangkhya Pravachana, II. 45, 39. 


{228} Shangkara’s Commentary on Kathopanishad, 3rd Valli, 4th Mantra: 


1g bhoktetyahurmanishinah; and see Sangkhya 


Atmendriyamanoyukta 
Pravachana, II. 47. 


{229} Chetati anena iti chittam. 


a eers is =r away 7 the ae ect p es 


2a) mik na-Vvrittih iti vedantah (It is the faculty 
of ihe Antahkarana which | eis in the Vedanta). 


{232} Sangkhyashastrecha chintavrittikasya chittasya 
buddhvavevantarbhavah (In the Sangkhya Shastra, Chitta, the function of 
which is Chinta, is included in Buddhi, I. 64). 


eee ? Saari aes "Bhashya, 


{234} Sangkhya Pravachana Sutra, III. 9. 


$2355} aoe is Sar ruENneEeaS or p cere which means =e earising 


final sfanieinati oa stich is “Moksha, or Fees ane as sale ame 


calls it. 


URIS Ws 2 Benes io ee! ace Be. opece. a Dewees 2 Tite, cee se 2 See. ies, ETL TEE 


4250} Dee IntoOGUCtION to My eaiuon OF Frapancnasara Lantra, VOL. LIL, 
“Tantrik Texts.” 


{237} Decay_and death are two of the six Urmis which, with hunger and 
thirst, grief and ignorance, are characteristics of the body (Dehadharma): 
Prapanchasara Tantra, I. 


— It is a a SE rane roe — to oo “or Woe 


aneereny This is not an neff act and is Vibhu, therefore it cannot vibrate 
(Gatikriya). The Commentators argue that, as it is a Dravya,_or thing, it must 


possess the aa pare (Dharma) of Dravya or Kriya—that is, action. 


—ee/ ee | S/S) 


the he mamnaiie field a are eee wii he lines of Dik a as oe ce 
of ethereal energy. 


{241} According to Western notions, it is the air which is the cause of 
sound. According to Indian notions, ether is the Substratum of (Ashraya)_of 


sound, and air (Vayu) is a helper (Sahakari) in its 


aoe nae ae Serer of ds 


{243} Fire is the name for that action which builds and destroys shapes. 


{244} All matter in the solid state (Parthiva) giving rise to smell is in the 
state of earth—e.g., metals, flowers, etc. 


(A, Ra Te cee: eee le ics ee Slee. 224 eee oe Bee eed, os Gee oe eas SI SD ae, NL 


{245 }_wnen words are spoken or sung into a smau trumpet attached to te 
instrument, a revolving disk appears to break up into a number of patterns, 
which vary _with ae 


the variations in sound. 


{246} See as to this and the other diagrams the colored plates of the 
Chakras. 


{247} ys ea Garvvavyan. though Abate, so in Sangkhya, and 


ENTE UI). LAD LO VIDIAUULI, Ve Gite, YP. U0. 


{248} With movements which are not straight (Tiryyaggamanashila). 


{249} Illuminating (Prakasha)_and heating (Tapa). 


{250} Liquid (Tarala), moving (Chalanashila), It has the quality of Sneha, 
whereby things can be rolled up into a lump (Pinda),_as moistened flour or 
earth. Some solid SEE aE ae REE RTE hea andl others 
become 


{251} Without hollow, dense (Ghana 
and hard (Kathina). 


a), firm (Dridha), combined (Sanghata), 


{252} “Hindu Realism,” p. 84. 


a See) ee 


{253} Kaushitaki Upanishad, 3-2. 


{254} See Commentary on Taittirlya Upanishad, edited by Mahadeva 
astri, anc — — _by_Dr. he ra ath seul to eee B. K. 
r t ackground of Hindu Sociology,” where some 


O 


Samhae srafaiies are given. 


{255} In the sense of Prana. The Sanskrit root va = to move. See Sushruta, 
Vol. IL, p. 2, edition by Kaviraj Kunja Lala Bhishagratna. 


{256} See Introduction to third volume of “Tantrik Texts,” where these 
terms are explained. The Devatas of these Dhatu are Dakini and the other 


Shaktis in the Chakras. 


Peery  HMis = ESS =. eee. Sollee: Bien acces. Meee HE Se een esta cD AML <2 seco ste 


iZo/j_ ine Vayus Ndve omer TUNCUONS Tidn those Menuoned, 1Nne Matter 1s 


not the physical breath, which is a gross thing, but that function of vital force 
which exhibits itself in respiration. 


Hangkarena vahiryati sakarena vishetpunah 


Hangseti paramangmantrang jivo japati sarvvada. 


(By Hangkara it goes out, and by Sakara it comes in again. A Jiva always 
recites the Supreme Mantra Hangsa). See also Dhyanabindu Up. 


{259} The Sun is said to hold the vast bulk of the total matter of the solar 


spiritual moon which is shown on the cover of this book, embraced by the 
Serpent Kundalini. 


Prapanchasara Tantra. It is also said that Prana is at the tip of the nostrils 
(Nasagravartti), and others are also said to be elsewhere. These localities 
denote special seats of function. 


planes, and should be studied in connection with Gaudapada’s Karika on the 


Spits es, pices ee oe ee Ne - IS ook, Sl See er OO eee ese, See eee. eee, ele Mae ces 


Manomatrapathedhyaksha vishayatvena vishramat 
Srishtavabhashabhavanang srishtih svapnapadang matam. 


(Cited in Lalita, loc. cit.). 


Prapanchasara Tantra: Sangjnarahitairapi tairasyanubhavo bhavet punah 
Svapnah. 


{270} See Patanjala yoga-stitra: Sukhamahamasvapsang na 
kinchidavedisham iti smaranat. 


mahakaranashariratvena vyavaharah. 


COPY Cie ee eee BE eS ete: 2 hs Seema (fae ea cce et ose sess ae ILS. Wee eS. es 


iZ/5j_ Upening and Closing OF tine eyes (Or CONSCLOUSNeESS). 1Ne latter 1S te 
last stage before the perfect Shiva-consciousness is gained. 


mies Accounts vary_in detail according as a as a greater or less number = 


organized whole. Thus | iaicuvaeaiial is le who has the consciousness s of 


being all the Jivas in the dreaming state: Jivasamashtyabhimant 
Hiranyagarbhatmakah (Bhaskararaya, op. cit., v.61). He is the aggregat 
these Jivas. 


e of 


ai dee is said to be this distir ction between the two that the the 


as Tr collective Prana it is called Siiraima. Wien manifest cee ae. 
two vehicles without differentiation it is Antaryamin. See Bhaskararaya, loc. 


{277} The first is the subtle, the second the gross form. 


{278} As in Maranam and other of the Shatkarma or abhichara. To quote an 
example which I recently read in an account of an author nowise “suspect” 


as.an Occulist Theosophist ec, General | T. Haris noticed ascorpion 
Close to the oot a a — —Don. tmove,.” = ” he said; “the COI 


{279} An extraordinary use to which it is put, Iam informed by some 
worshippers of the Bhairava Mantra. The man projects the Mantra on to the 


t, cable tes, elles gi ce) tomes ot ee Eo i eee eee, 50 ee Be ee eee ee, I SE See 


n riences tne sensauon OF a pnysical union. ine visnnu 
Purana fon of generation by will power. 


{280} As the Kularmava Tantra says, and as may be readily understood, such 
a Guru is hard to get. The disciple who receives this initiation gets all the 
powers of his initiator. It is said that there are Gurus who can at once make 
their disciples fit for the highest aims. 


{281} As actually happened lately in the house of a friend of a collaborator 
of mine. A man lit the fuel in Kushandika Homa simply by Mantra and the 
Bija of fire (“Ram”) without recourse to light or match. 


iets is aut a a ee of ae aman may “catch?” a ca 


projected at him. 


one must ee Fe on a men n] a say it must not es 5 D ie of” 
vaktavyam na vaktavyam na vaktavyam punah punah), 


(Na 


occultism, and regard it as superstition, that their ae of Indian 
teaching is so often ignorant and absurd. 


hich = to think, is also the root of the Sanskrit word 
on man, iwi — 2 of all creation is properly_a thinker. 


{286} This Dhvani is the gross body _of the Mantra. 


{287} When the word “Ghata” is uttered, then there arises in the mind the 
idea of a jar. 


CAAA Rieke ce ese cP. 2ocse de SPesse eh. VWecee ce tee = Sa Bi. Bo 252 Dees 


expression in audible sounds. The sensible expressions are transient. Behind 
them is the Eternal Logos (Shabdabrahman), whose manifestation they are. 


writing gives visual expression, and to the blind perforated dots give tactual 
expression. 


{291} On report of an Indian friend who has forgotten to give me the 
reference. 


follows: 


Bone (Asthidhatu): Miladhara chakra; Devi Shakini. 
Fat (Medadhatu): Svadhishthana chakra; Devi Kakini. 
Flesh (Mangsadhatu): Maniptira chakra; Devi Lakin. 
Blood (Raktadhatu): Anahata chakra; Devi Rakini. 
Skin (Tvakdhatu): Vishuddha chakra; Devi Dakint. 


Marrow (Majjadhatu): Ajna chakra; Devi Hakini. 


In the Sahasrara Padma are all Dhatus beginning with Shukra (semen). 


Muladhara are given as Va, Sha, Sha, and La. The latter should, according to 
other accounts, be undoubtedly Sa. 


Cr AY. CM eis wees, eae on connec acs ghoeeke cea ceo =o Seo etal! Sees 2 E 


( : S en =e carpatom tile this 
cies it may_be soit that the vowel outs are placed in the throat 


center, and Ha and Ksha above. 


{295} 1 am informed that the subject is dealt with in detail in the 
Kundalinikalpataru,_and in particular in the Adhyatmasagara, neither of 
which MSS. have I yet seen. 


Samana 3 Vayu i is eulss fee fee, 


{297} Va of Rik, Sha of Yajus, Sha of Sama, and Sa of Atharva Veda. 


{298} The four ages—Satya, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali. 


{299} Of sugar-cane juice, wine, ghee (Ghrita), milk. 


{300} See Rudrayamala XVII., where priority is given to Atharva as dealing 
with the Achara of Shakti. From Atharva arose Sama, from Sama, Yajus,_and 


ined for the purposes of method only. Ai the 
main point is concentr tion and creative will, which ma‘ 

varying forms of practice. See the Demchog a, now ‘nies eudltahed asa 
volume of “Tantrik Texts.” 


os 3} is mind must Lin scene a form a: be centered on the 


without ae its eum swill Se aed some b aos 


i Oi OY OID 2s ate ES. oe ce eee ae Wee. See Hk. 2. Seem wo Wks sie. Wesdes Pe eee es elec ale See 


{5U4} Lnougnt Is NOt tnen Only in tne OUTer NUSK, DUT IS VilalIZed tnrougn Its 
conscious center. 


12,000 Japa,_is given in Shavaratantra. A higher state of development 
dispenses with all outer agents. 


then goes back to the sun. 


{307} See v. 12 Sharada. 


Kriyashaktipradhanayah shabdashabdartha-karanam 


Prakriterbinduripinyah shabdabrahmabhavat param. 


In plain English this means, in effect, that increasing activity in the 
Consciousness about to create (Bindu) produces that state in which it is the 
cause of subject and object, as mind and matter. 


Sharada. 


Srishtyunmukha-paramashiva-prathamollasamatram akhando vyakto 
nadabindumaya eva vyapako brahmatmakah shabdah. 


therefore also in combination, are non-significant. A word is not the thing, 
but that through which, when uttered, there is cognition of the thing thereby 


ieee ake 4) Www oe It ed Dee ee es ah a eee & eee a Re Qe = 22s lille sees CO ee eee). 2 eh ss 


Genoted. 1 Nat wnicn Genotes the thing Genoted Js a disclosure (>pnota) otner 
than these letters. This Sphota is eternal Shabda. 


Buddhist Demchog Tantra. 


{318} Raghava Bhatta, Comm. Chaitanyam sarvabhitanang shabdabrahmeti 


ried ee a Wt ee ee ee ey, PI a (PScom TTS EB Tees ceetlek ccs, De, Watle cxce..e sfak, wece 


A321; SNnakusanggama Lantra, St Ullasa Utpatuknanda, vw nen with ten 


coils She is Dashamahavidya. 


{322} The first movement in creation, called Ikshana (“seeing”) in Veda. To 
see is to ideate. 


{323} Parama = supreme or first. Kala = Vimarsha-Shakti of Atma. She is, 
as such, the first cause of all the letters. 


{325} Here the crooked line (Vakrarekha) comes first, and the straight 
second, Possibly this may be the line rising to form the triangular pyramid. 


{326} So called because she “vomits forth” the universe (Vamanat iti vama). 


dimensions. 


gataka—that is,_a triangular pyramidal figure of three 


{328} That is, Sangskara or revived impression, which is the seed of the 
ideating Cosmic Consciousness. 


{329} Yoginihridaya Tantra, Sangketa 1. 


{330} Dr. Brojendranath Seal, _p. 337, Appendix to Professor Benoy Kumar 
Sarkar’s “Positive Background of Hindu Sociology.” ‘The word Dhamani is 
! v= for nerve. ia is to abe noted, aoe, that the present work uses 


in v. 1 it calls Ida and Pinggala Nadis 


POET Wiss Wis stecs gee DM 20353 CMe ads oa SATE CA 


A339 7_5ee Foster and SNore S$ ~PNYSLOLOSY,_— 2U0,_2U/. 


{336} “Manual of Physiology,” by G. N. Stewart, 5th edition, p. 657 (1906). 


spoken of; D 


{339} Hence She is called in the Lalita-sahasranama (v. 106) 
Miuladharambujaridha. Fire, Sun, and Moon are aspects of the differentiated 


Parabindu or Kamakala (vy. ante). 


{340} The sun generally represents poison, and the moon nectar (Shandilya 
Up.,_Ch. I.). Both were obtained at the churning of the ocean, _and represent 
the upbuilding and destructive forces of Nature. 


Hindu Sociology.” The author annexes a plan which attempts to give a rough 
idea of the relative position of the principal nerves of the sympathetic spinal 
system. 


{342} Some of these are referred to in the present work; see v. 1. 


arava 


ngita-ratnakara, Shlokas 144-156; also the Yog. 
has in parts been adversely criticized by a 


Jdlts VC OUVELsclyeil by. 
me that it is in those parts 


medical friend, influence 
Western physiology. 


Kundali Up. 


ee | Se / ee | eee fan | ees / oe 


‘when bes tie turn Uf pwards. 


Kundali Kundali passes ear an: 


{349} These vrittis or qualities (see post) denoting four forms of bliss are 
not given in the text here translated, but in Tarkalangkara’s Commentary to 


{350} In this and other cases meditation is done from the right 
(dakshinavartena), See v. 4, Shat-chakranirtpana cited as S.N. 


{351} The Dhyanabindu Up. associates the Bijas with the five Pranas. Thus 
“Lang” is associated with Vyana. 


{352} The Creator is called Savita because He creates. 


{353} Who, according to Sammohana Tantra, 
door. See, however, ante, note {292}. 


{354} Yoginthridaya Tantra, Ch. 1. 


{355} See v. 49, S.N. 


{359} The diagrams or mandala 
he 


aie in 7 stk euaniece of the Lala akan and in nie Vishvasit 


no 


gC RE alhens ose PMScdss Dee NM eee ee 2. 2 estiees Se sade wmce wesds Thats.2cP ale 


to ne visnvasara Lantra, tne IViandala OF water 1S NOL a Crescent, DUI elgnt- 
cornered (Ashtasra). 


{360} An animal like an alligator. See Plate 3. 


Commentary on the Lalita-Sahasranama, vv. 37, 38. 


{362}_P. 14. 


Shabdabrahmeti tang praha sakshad devah sadashivah 
Anahateshu chakreshu sa shabdah parikirttyate 
Anahatang mahachakrang hridaye sarvvajantushu 


Tatra ongkara ityukto gunatraya-samanvitah. 


se iS obi ees acento es. ee Ba a, ey EY oes. eerie I, o's a I SM cs See ie 


{505 f_1NIS 1S SOMeumMes | angen = d sles = da HUT = lk In it, 
for, as the Prapanchasa a 
uu is, oe thidra 


rae are eT e o one ee as man a ae 


oneself, 


ae aie: sorrow, y ignorance | aaa rer on. 


- AL list are this — appear not to ones SO, but the rapa al te 


Consciousness, Fl an at Ne 
As to the causal bodies, see my ‘ 


{378} The Kamakalavila ie yamay 
ae and three fires), “Tri pivasincarl sits in the Cl akra which i is 
composed of Bi ayachakre), Her abode being the lap of 


indus (Bindum 
ea whose forehead is adored by the crescent moon. She has three 
eyes, which are Sun, Moon, and Fire.” 


OMAN Y CIM. 2 h St 2 lees oe eee SLE Sees COS: PU set dos see DEP! gee ae 


Tasyakameshvarakhyasya kameshvaryashcha Parvvati 


Kalakhya salila sa cha khyata kamakaleti sa. 


{386} Kamashchasau kalartipa cheti va. 


Kamarthamagata yasmanmaya sardhang mahagirau 
Kamakhya prochyate devi nilakttarahogata 
Kamada kamini kamya kanta kamanggadayini 
Kamangganashini yasmat kamakhya tena kathyate 


Iti shadaksharamidamnama (ib.). 


{388} Mukhang bindung kritva kuchayugamadhastasya tadadho 


Hakarardhang dhyayet Haramahishi te manmathakalam (v. 19). 


(Let him contemplate on the first Bindu as the face of the Devi, and on the 
other two Bindus as Her two breasts, and below that on the half Ha.) Ha is 
the yoni, the womb, and origin of all. See Lalita, v. 155. 


respectively. 


{391} This is the Commentator’s meaning of Ekam tam. Eka—a + i=e. 


Shivakama, the desire or will of Shiva. 
{392} Introduction to Lalita. 


{393} The portion of the Yantra which is of common form and which 
encloses the particular design in its center. Reference may, however, also be 
here made to the three outer lines of the Shrichakra. 


{394} V. post. The Kama bija is Kling, Klingkara is Shivakama. Here Ing 
means the Kamakala in the Turlya state through which Moksha is gained, 
and hence the meaning of the saying (ib., v. 125) that he who hears the Bija 
without Ka and La does not reach the place of good actions—that is, he does 
knowledge alone (see ib., v. 138, citing Yoginihridaya and Vamakeshvara 
Tantra). 


FAA) TT ANS 


i500; ¥, 126, 


{397} According to a note of R. Ananta He uel Shastri, editor of the wall 
p.213, the three “feet” are exp! f Bhas| 
follows: White, the pure Samvit 


pur Wit (Consci ae untainted by. y any_U Upadhis: 
red, the Parahanta ane Individuality), the first Vritti (modification) 
from the Samvit; and the mixed—the above-mentioned as one inseparable 
modification (the Vritti) of “I.” These are known as the “three feet” (Charana 


tritaya), or Indu (white), Agni (red), Ravi (mixed). 


{398} So also the Devi Bhagavata Pr. says: “The Shambhavi is white; 
s ata coal: and a ma, black.” The Yantra of Shrividya is the 


Shastri. The edit rs notes are aaa on TS Commentary_of Ach ‘Aelia 
Sharma. 


{400} Atha panchamayage abhedabhudhya atmanang 
shivarupamekatmanang vibhavya adharat paramashivantang sutrarupang 
sukshmang kundalining sarvashaktiripang vibhavya 

nogunasuichakang brahmavishnushivashaktyatmakang 
siiryagnichandraripang bindutrayang tasya angge vibhavya adhaschitkalang 
dhyayet (Comm. to v. 19). 


{401} That is, He who creates, from Vi + rich. 


{402} He who takes away (harati) or destroys all grief and sin. 


{403} The same. 


fukhang bindung kritva rajogunastichakang virinchyatmakang 
bindung kritva, tasyadho hridayasthane sattvatamogunastichakang 
hariharatmakang bindudvayang kuchayugang kritva, tasyadhah 
yonigunatrayasuchikang hariharavirinchyatmikang sukshmang chitkalang 
hakarardhang kritva yonyantargata-trikonakriting kritva dhyayet (ib.). 


(i AA Ws ees AN Ne ee, Be a Bee Ws ee ee, cM ee 


Tarkalangkara. 


{406} That is, equal feeling; or being one with; homogeneity;_union of Shiva 
and Shakti. 


{408} Taduktang Bhavachiidamanau: 


Mukhang binduvadakarang 
Tadadhah kuchayugmakam 
Tadadhashcha hakarardhang 


Supariskritamandalam. 


The third verse is printed Tadadhah Saparardhangcha. But this means the 
same thing. Sapara is Hakara, as Ha follows Sa. For further Dhyanas and 
mode of meditation, see p. 199 of the Nityaptijapaddhati of Jaganmohana 
Tarkalangkara. 


{409} Phetkarini Tantra, Ch. LL: 


Tebhya eva samutpanna varnah ye vishnu-shilinoh 


Murtayah shaktisangyukta uchyante tah kramena tu. 


And so also Vishvasara Tantra (see Pranatoshini, 14): 


Shivo brahma tatha vishnurongkare cha pratishthitah 
Akarashcha bhaved brahma ukarah sachchidatmakah 


Makaro rudra ityukta iti tasyarthakalpana. 


{410} Ch. II. 


knowledge (lit., destruction of everything which false knowledge leads to), 
pitilessness. 


magnanimity, concentration. 


6 Cae Tol: obese, coaches hed) a Hye. otbecee Bens, atl]. seeces «fest ae ee eae elise 


{420} E.g,,_with Dambha (arrogance), Lolata (covetousness), Kapatata 
(duplicity), we find Asha (hope), Cheshta (endeavor), _Viveka 
(discrimination), 


to read the alphabet as A to Z is anuloma; to read it backwards, Z to A, is 


1 a Fp Fe 


viloma. In the above matter, therefore anuloma is creation (srishti) or the 


{422} See my “Studies in Mantra Shastra”: “Causal Shaktis of the Pranava.” 


{423} See my “Studies in Mantra Shastra”: “Kalas of the Shaktis.” 


{424} V. 70, Lalita-Sahasaranama. 
{425} See Pandit R. Ananta Shastri’s Anandalahari. p. 42, et seq. The 


passage within quotation marks is taken from that work. 


See “Wave of Bliss,” by A. Avalon. 

{426} Maya to Sadashiva are the Shaiva Tattvas described in the 
Introduction.—A. A. 

{427} See “Wave of Bliss,” ed. A. Avalon. 


{428} Pp. 42-45 of Pandit Ananta Shastri’s Anandalahari. 


the Hindu System of Medicine, published in the Guy’s Hospital Gazette 
(1889), cited in Vol. XVI, “Sacred Books of the Hindus,” by Professor 
Benoy_Kumar Sarkar. 


Tripurasarasamuchchaya, cited in v. 1, from the head to the Adhara. 


AA OR ee 


{451} V. POST. 


lxii, above it. On further consideration. I think the position as stated in the 
text is correct, though in any case the two are very close together. 


late Guru of H.H. the Maharaja of Kashmir. The work is printed at Jummoo. 


{437} I am not sure that the author himself was aware of this in all cases. He 
may have been quoting himself from some lists without other knowledge on 


quotation he makes draws a distinction between the Chakras and Adharas. 


{438} “The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology,” by Professor Benoy 
Kumar Sarkar. 


{439} P. 54 of the translation of Srisha Chandra Vasu, to which I refer 
because the author cited does so. The rendering, however, does not do justice 


been omitted without word or warning, and at p. 14 it is said that Kundalini 
is “of the form of electricity.” There is no warrant for this in the text, and 


I cannot too strongly protest against attempts to represent Indian Shastra, not 
as it actually is, but what some who are concerned with it would like it to be. 
State accurately what is in the Shastra, and then disapprove of it if you will. 


Ff AAT Tica, ales eset 2 Wiese Baenbess Qables 22s BD aks OR eee es Boe 2 Phe OY 221 2en2 


444U}_botn the work OF Proressor Sarkar and ine Appenaices OF wr. Seal are 
a interest and value, and g ee together a considerable number of facts of 
y, Zoology, Botany, 


cae Hindu F Pk ee Net gedic. aa Ae a a. 


{441} These and other Vritti, as they_are called, are enumerated in the 
Introduction to my edition of the Mahanirvana Tantra. 


{442} That is, petals. 


{443} This is a name for the Vishuddha Chakri 
Speech (Bharatt). 


{444} The author cited refers to the Jnana Sankalini Tantra, 
Sanghitaratnakara, and for functions of Ajna-vaha Nadi and Manovaha Nadi 
to Shangkara Mishra’s Upaskara. 


{445} Published in Vol. XI., pp. 436-440, of the Calcutta Review. 


{446} “Physical Errors of Hinduism,” Calcutta Review, Vol. XI.,_py 


440. 


ee This pemiinas & one al ie story. of a Cereus doctor) in Calcutta who 


id: Tani vastiini tanmatradini pratyakshavishayani (Such 
things as the Tanmatra ‘id inane are ia alsiuet of immediate perception by. 
Yogins only). A Yogi “sees” the Chakras with his mental eye (Ajna). In the 


case of others they are the matter of inference (anumana). 


{450} See my Mahanirvana Tantra, p. lvii. My_reference there to the lotus as 
a plexus of nadis is to the gross sheath of the subtle center, which gross 
sheath is said to contain the determinant, though in another sense it is the 


effect, of the characteristics of the subtle center. 


i AP ae ee, 2. ee ee eh 2 eee 2 ah eM ke. ee, ee Wi Se De OSs Ted Pee 


{4D1} Dne IS SO Called DecauSe all tne Snakus are Couected Or “rowed nto 
one mass” in Her. Here is the Kendra (center) of all the Shaktis. The 
Svachchhanda as also the Sharada say: 


Pindang Kundalini-Shaktih 
Padang hangsah prakirtitah 
Rupang binduriti khyatang 


Rupatitastu chinmayah. 


(Kundalini Shakti is Pinda, Hangsah is Pada; Bindu is Ripa, but Chinmaya 
(Chit) is formless.) The first, as potentiality of all manifested power, is in the 
Muladhara Chakra; the second, as Jivatma, is in Anahata, where the heart 
beats, the life-pulse. Bindu, the causal form body, as Supreme Shakti, is in 
Ajna, and the formless Consciousness passing through Bindu Tattva 
manifesting as Hangsa, and again resting as Kundalini, is in the 
Brahmarandhra (see Tika of first Sangketa of Yoginithridaya Tantra). 


{455} Vikara or Vikriti is something which is really changed, as curd from 
milk. The former is a Vikriti of the latter. Vivartta is apparent but unreal 


Vedantasara thus musically defines the two terms: 


Satattvato, nyathapratha vikara ityudiritah 


Atattvato, nyathapratha vivarta ityudahritah. 


vyanjakayatnasangskritapavanavashat praninang muladhara eva 
abhivyajyate. Taduktang, Dehepi muladharesmin samudeti samiranah, 


(ib.). 


{460} Atha tadeva shabdabrahma tenaiva vayuna 


kanthadisthaneshvabhivyaj yamanamakaradivarnarupang parashrotra- 
grahanayogyang spashtataraprakashariipabijatmakang sat vaikhari 


{402} Inat 1s, Snapaa 1n its pnysical lorm. bnasKararaya, 1N Dis 
Commentary to the same verse (81) of the Lalita, gives the following 
derivations: Vi = much; khara = hard. According to the Saubhagya 
Sudhodaya, Vai = certainly; kha = cavity _(of the ear); va = to go or enter. But 
according to the Yoga Shastras, the Devi who is in the form of Vaikhari 
(Vaikharirtipa)_is so called because she was produced by the Prana called 
Vikhara. 


{463}, ee RET Ser : Muladharat prathamamudito yashcha 


{465} Nityatantrepi: Miladharat samutpannah parakhyo nadasangbhavah. 
Sa ocd) =e nitah Su ae _ ri _ it ah, 


{467} That is, men who see and accept only the gross aspect of things. 


{468} Itthang chaturvidhasu matrikasu paraditrayang ajananto pananyes 
sthtladrisho vaikharim eva vachang manvate (Bhaskararaya, 


cee J oe 


{469} Tatha cha shrutih: Tasmad yadvacho naptang tanmanushya upa 


jlvantiiti anaptam apurnang tisribhirvirahitam ityartha iti vedabhashye. 


i MORAN GON ek lee ces be cee eee coe fee es Dees ae Oe ee ee ee ae 


verse from the Goraksha Sanghita: 


Ichchha kriya tatha jnanang gauri brahmitu vaishnavi 


Tridha shaktih sthita yatra tatparang jyotirom iti. 


According to this account of the Devas of different Adharas of Pranashakti 
upasana the order is (according to sequence of words): Ichchha = Gauri; 
Kriya = Brahmi; Vaishnavi = Jnana. 


“Ante omnia punctum exstitit; non mathematicum sed diffusivum.” 


{475} See my “Studies in the Mantra shastra.” 


Vama tabhyah samutpannah rudrabrahmaramadhipah 
Sangjnanechchhakriyatmano vahnindvarka-svarupinah. 


(Sharada Tilaka, Ch. I.) 


6 MEY Ss ee Sh Bees s. Wiese dese a OY a eedees ec. alesse Bee che oD eee Pee ee ss dee 


Saubhagyasudhodaya and Tattvasandoha. See also Tantraloka, Ch. VI. 


{478} The following shows the correspondences according to the texts cited: 


Bija = Moon, Vama, Brahma, Bharati, Ichchha, Rajas, 
Shonabindu | Pashyanti, Svadishthana. 
Nada ea Sun, Jyeshtha, Vishnu, Vishvambhara, 
Mishrabindu| Jnana, Sattva, Madhyama, Andhata. 
Bindu << Fire, Raudri, Rudra, Rudrani, Kriya, Tamas, 
Sitabindu Vaikhari, Vishuddha. 


Jnanashaktistatha Jyeshtha madhyama vagudirita 
Kriyashaktistu Raudriyam vaikhari vishvavigraha. 


(Cited under v. 22, Comm. Kamakalavilasa.) 


{480} Chap. I. 


= ete estes IMS ost oem ae bie Dee ee Se Dad cee ele Wee ades TWeeess eee ss ORs ce 


scnolars. 1ne Make-secrel Policy Nas spoued all SUCN DOOKS. Even NOW 
find any MS. dealing with occult matters in the houses of any ancient 
Pandits, we will not be allowed even to see the book; _and actually these 
works have for a long time become food for worms and white ants” (Ananta 
Shastri). 


{486} The Tattva (Reality) is revealed when all thought is gone (Kular nava 


{487} Hathayogapradipika, IV. 5-7. The same simile is used in the Buddhist 
Demchog ‘Tantra. 


{488} IX. 9. 


{489} As water poured into water the two are undistinguishable (Kularnava 
Tantra, IX. 15). 


{490} Ch. IV., vv. 3,4. 


{491} State of mindlessness. See Nadabindu Up. 


{492} See Hathayogapradipika, IV., v. 37. The Yogi, like the Consciousness 


with which he is one, is beyond both. 


nana Up., IL, IIL. 


{495} This is the Niralambapuri referred to in the Text. 


{496} Anjana = Mayopadhi (the Upadhi,. or Stapparently limiting condition 
produced by Maya, or appear therefore Niranje destitute of tha 
(T aidan) or satis Pea tha is, the ct a an. 


{497} Varaha Upanishad, Ch. V. 


V.,.1L; Yogatattva Up. A useful analysis 0 of 
Yoga will be found in Raj iia Chose! s “Shangkara and Ramanuja.” 


€ AOC FIM cos, eos Pewee 2 Ws ee. acock a2 Geet eo fil 2s 2laccsceste Gti a 


A496 f_L here are TOrMS OF YOSa, SUCN dS Wdt W1It the elements giving 


which religion is but one) which hold the universe together. It is the inherent 
law of all manifested being. As pain follows wrong-doing, the Vaisheshika 
Darshana describes Dharma as “that by which happiness is attained in this 
and the next world, and birth and suffering are brought to an end 
(Mokshadharma), 


{500} According to Indian notions, anger is the worst of sins. 


preserve his semen. For the expenditure of the latter tends to death, but there 
is life for him who preserves it.” 


Evang sangrakshayet bindung mrityung jayati yogavit 


Maranang bindupatena jivanang bindudharanat. 


See also Yogatattva Up., which says that Hathayoga secures such personal 
beauty to the Yogi that all women will desire him, but they must be resisted. 
And see also v. 90, which shows the connection between semen, mind, and 
life. In the early stages of Hathayoga Sadhana the heat goes upwards, the 
penis shrinks, and sexual powers are largely lost. Coition with emission of 
semen at this stage is like to prove fatal. But a Siddha regains his sexual 
power and can exercise it. For if fire and the other elements cannot hurt him, 


what can a woman do? Presumably, however, the dictum cited applies, for 
continence must in all cases tend to strength and longevity. It may, however, 
be that the physical perfection assumed negatives the ill effects observed in 
ordinary men. 


for a forest recluse, and 8 for a Muni.” 


{504} For foods detrimental to Yoga, see Yogatattva Up., Yogakundali Up. 


last, which is described as the observance of actions enjoined and refraining 
from actions prohibited. See also Ch. V., Varaha Up. 


{509} So,_as was the case in our medieval guilds, religion inspires Indian 
Art;_and Indian speculation is associated with religion as was the scholastic 


the one case and intelligence in the other being usually thought to be 
sufficient. 


practiced by giving up what one wants, but renunciation or abandonment 
(Tyaga) here means the want of desire of enjoyment (Tyagah = 


Paes? WwWhle.sS_..2 Wl Stesee SS Pacers SL =] SL Polk ae Sle fee eee Vie ke FO Se Bee ee e. Sees 


— »WNaldand, Sdilddadnl, WHICN 15 DOU INCOMpPlete (SaViKalpa OF 


Ree ey an ee te or ae, 


pone See uli a th TEE — UR eget L; 


speaks of five kind: of | Paty ahara, the last of which i is anda U on ace 
paporagt points of the body. 


1 chait anyang, as siriehiang chittam eit wane 
f the Trishati, on the title of the Devi as 


{516} Shandilya Up., Ch. I; Mandalabrahmana Up., First Brahmana. 


a 


{517} Varaha Up., Ch. I. 


{518} Amritanada Up. 


{519} Yogakundali Up.,_Ch. III. 
{520} Comm. v. 28 of Trishati. 


{521} Comm., Abe ean nce brahmakaratayasthiti. The mind has 
tti( s,_Guna. If the Jiva’s mind is freed of 


these, he is ag 


{522} See Yogatattva Upanishad. 


Shri Bharatadharmmamahamandala— 
hara Series. The latter in a short 
compass explain the main essentials of each of the four systems. 


ma AY CLs. €s ecu ce decee als FP cee 21s ete Se Da. Pas TRE DeSes eee es NN. EF 


Speer eee mT ae ! 


i224} _1Mis 1S an essenuially_ lantrikK principle. 5ee Kularmmavad, UN. LU. 


ee Ser rrr = tra, — aT ce Chose who kn na in 
Kailasa, Men or Mandara, do I dwell. I am there where the knowers of 
Kula doctrine are” (ib., v.94). 


{527} See Introduction, Mahanirvana Tantra. 


{528} Ib. These ritual Mudras are not to be confused with the Yoga Mudras 
later described. 


{529} Sec Introduction, Mahanirvana Tantra. 


{530} See the short summary of the Hathayoga Sanghita given in the 
Dharma Prachara Series (Shri Bharatadharmamahamandala, Benares). 


{532} The retention of gross seed—that is, seed already formed—effects 
little compared with the sexual power which has not been allowed to 
materialize. Semen is the projec 


ion into matter of the individual sexual will. 


{533} _Chitta has two causes—Vasana and Prana. If one is controlled, then 
both are controlled (Yoga Kundali Up.,_Ch. L.). 


Hat ean: TL 21- 38. 


{536} A Yama is three hours. 


PAY ge cose De es SS a ee IPT ee De chs fos FON eee See oe ee eee ce 


4{25/} sneranga Sangnita 
resting on We toes 
Hathayogi can. 
it up throu " 
suction esta jhe. 


_>econda Upadesna (Vv. 23). Lnat is, squatting 
is-oft thet scjaast and , cks res ing < on heels. a 


Sa 


{538} Ibid., 


{539} Gheranda Sanghita, Second Upadesha. In the Shiva Sanghita (Ch. IIL, 


vv. a ae ee na are m entioned, of utile —_ are 


om Sa erie Ch. wa Vv. 52). 


—- the same, except we he hands are passed 1 behind the back,_and the 
1olds th : id the left hand the left toe. By this, increased 
ressure is is laced on the Maladhara. and the nerves are braced with the 


nort cr on eer ~ rene a oo — a does Tat apa ae ae saith, 
Shodhanyasa and Puja on its head. A corpse is selected as being a pure form 
of organized matter, since the Devata which is invoked into it is the 
ahavidya whose Svariipa is Nirgunabrahman, and by such invocation 
becor 1eS s Saga The corpse is free from sin or desire. The only Vayu in it 


»—which| eaves not even a aaa —the 2 Deva 


ee ees BE SS eS ee eee 


(Vira), for it afd carne are ere PET a may: terrors. 


i AY OAs ah BP. celts Dale Tr ts eet. Dagecs. SRM, PEP. ole 2ectiiees Vhedewes Beery Be. cs. & 


42435} AS INe yogakundall Upanisnad says (UN. LLL), Ine Outer Durning 1s no 
burning at all. 


vy. 19- 


-on the rape ier re (Ch. IV.,_v. 


{548} Gheranda Sanghita, Third Upadesha. 


So. alle Saw D 
in n that —- ins Ww shicht th eat | 


So’ham (He Tan Lam) in aang Ht -_ a wn. 
= 7 (Indu), _whick 


(PEAY gs cose De Poon SIS TEE Seo A 4 


{204} Gneranda Dangnita, 1. VV. 49-01. 


{555} Hathayogapradipika, Commentary _to Ch. Il., v.72. 


{556} The Mantra Hangsah is the breath held in Kumbhaka. 


{559} Gheranda Sanghita, Ch. IIL. 


—<— 


{560} So called, according to the Dhyanabindu Up., because Chitta moves 


in Kha (Akasha), and the tongue through this Mudra enters Kha. 


McGregor and Liew A. H. Boileau ied in N.C, Paul's “Treatise on the 
K , Se ea geen near 80, on the Hath pre 


B a at the aa of ae aa ae of Rechaka, Sua oo 
Yogakundalt Up.,_Ch. IL. 


{364} _Ib., Ch. IIL., v.57; -Yogatattva U Up., Dhyanabindu Up. The Varaha Up., 
ys that as ys flying up (Udyana), so this Bandha, by 

which its flight is arrested, is called Ude iyanabandha. Yogakundali Up.,_Ch. 

L,_says, because Prana uddiyate (goes up) the Sushumna in this Bandha, it is 


called Uddiyana. 


feet. cL. (MLS. Dens PF Tis ort BaPSen a2 WegSs. SheSae se &e Les gee eset f eee 2 


{p05 f_1ne Shanduvya Up., Ub. 1., demnes Pranayama to De the UNLON OF 


Dee eee ee oS 


Prana and Apana. Nada and Bindu are thus united. 


i icininieininiael 3 


e downward 


{566} See Agamakalpadruma, cited in notes to S.N., v. 50, post, Comm 
and Dhyanabindu Up. The Yogakundali Up., Ch. L, says that th 
tendency of Apana is forced up by bending down. 


{569} The “Moon” is situate in the palatal region near the Ajna. Here is the 


Hie eo the mie and from the es comes a stream of 


a 


{570} Hathayogapradipika, IL... a 
Yogakundali Up. (Ch. L.)_sa savetiabiie > contraction of the u 
body is an impediment to the passage of the Vay upwards. 


vv. 46, _47; —— a 1 Up., Dhya inabindu Up 


v. 19, done in conjunction with 
Mabamuda a Mahavedha, ee post; ib., v. 25, and Yogatattva 
Upanishad. 


AQ/1 ys VNyanadindu Up 


{572} Dairghyamayama aroha parinaho vishalata (Amarakosha Dictionary). 


YUSdpidUlpiKd, 111, 


{575} Pranasya shiinyapadavi tatha rajapathayate (ib., vv. 2,3). 


COS om. MLS DWless FT MS OE oe CCR = Whee GWhettinweie ee. “ee a oe ees” ese 


4{2//}_Lne Snanauya Up., Un. L, Says: “AS Wlons, elepnants, and ugers, are 
gradually tamed, so also the breath when rightly managed comes under 
control; else it kills the practitioner.” It should not, therefore, be attempted 
without instruction. Many_have injured themselves and some have died 
through mistakes made in the processes, which must be adapted to the needs 
of each person. Hence the necessity for an experienced Guru. 


{578} Hathayogapradipika, Ch. Il., vv. 1-6 (see p. cxxviii. of my 


Introduction to the Mahanirvana Tantra). 


{579} Dhyanabindu Up.,.and see Amritanada Up.,_Varaha Up., 
Mandalabrahmana Up. 


cy. 


A Apana i ‘must be er or thie Youa 
fails. As to Te Bhedas aes wits Sahita, see Ch. I., Yogakundali 
Upanishad. 


{581} See Introduction to Prapanchasara Tantra, Tantrik Texts, Vol. III., p. 
11 et seq. 


{583} Yogakundali Up., Ch. L. 
{584} See Yoga Siitra, ed. Manual Nabhubhai Dvivedi, Ap. VI. 
{585} See Comm. to Hathayogapradipika, Ch. IL, v. 12. 


{586} This is the Mantra Hangsah manifested by Prana. See Dhyanabindu 
tens Hangsaht is Jivatma, and Paramahangsa is Paramatma. See Hangsa 


a ae Prakash ai Vimarsha: aspects—viz, ce egies) = nae oa ae 


elas PASI 2 2cee8 ) aes cess a CIR So3S > PIL Siibjese Sane Ws cee. WS. Aes os 


SUDTIE sage nonsense cy an a ine — torm nas panos, 


divides anys into aa hila a aK hma (X.3 3, | 


{588} Seventh Upadesha. 


{589} Ibid., Third Upadesha, v. 65 et seq. 


{590} Ibid., v.25 et seq. 


{591} Ibid., Fifth Upadesha, v. 77 et seq. 


{592} In the Lalita (v. 142) the Devi is addressed as Layakari—the cause of 
Laya or absorptio i” 


{594} Thid., Fifth Upadesha, v. 82. 


in the pleasure-garden of the senses. 


pomies ae om Ap sHethals ae Says aero = the eAkshaa 


IPO OA ase Bee Se De ee tek sD PMS TEP. 2h sesso Gee Oe tess Ves a8eekee 2hsk = 


ue is ae 7 ne (2.00 aaa i 


{600} See Dharma Prachara Series, 9. 


{601} Of the several forms of Pranayama given in Hathayoga, it is said that 
only two are employed in Layayoga. 


{602} _Varaha Upanishad, Ch. V. 


{603} Hathayogapradipika, Ch. IIL, v. 1: Sarveshang yogatantranang 
tathadharohi Kundalt. 


{604} Hathayogapradipika, Ch. IIL, v. 105: Udghatayet kapatantu yatha 
kunchikaya hathat Kundalinya tana tatha yogi mokshadvarang vibhedayet. The 


same verse occurs in Ch. III., v. 5, of the Gheranda Sanghita. 


a saying that it 


—— the e Yogakundall ms mn Ch.J calls Sarasvath Aru T 


{608} See Vol. II., “Principles of Tantra,” Ch. XI., XII. et seq. It is because 


9 aLSLL?», 


She is Vantratlevatt that She is roused by Mantra. 


{609} She is creation itself (Srishtiripa), vv. 10, 11, post, in whom, are 


sr 


creation, maintenance, and dissolution (Srishtisthitilayatmi a), ib. 


(PA, Wes OE a se Shee ME eee BP ah, cert oe es PE Bek aes). 2a De SE Bee, 2h 


{611} Vishvanatha the Commentator says that She makes this sound when 
wakened. According to the Commentator Shangkara, this indicates the 
Vaikhari state of Kundalini. 


{612} Thus, Prana and Apana are declared to be the maintainers of animate 
being (v. 8, post). 


{613} See “Principles of Tantra,” Vol. U., Ch. XI. and XII. 


{614} Veda is one with Chaitanya. As Shangkara says (Comm. Trishati, v. 
19), dealing with the Panchadashi Mantra: Sarve veda yatra ekam bhavanti, 
etc. Shrutya vedasya atmabhedena svaprakashataya. 


ee tells. of a ate oe fanny ‘Diaermabraiayraicaaican 
apaurusheya vakyam. 


—. Sen peare nares is, _act al a Exp erience rrr jnana) 


{619} Vedanta-mahavakya janya-sakshatkararupa-brahmavidya 


(Shangkara’s Comm. on Trishati, v. 8). The Vedanta here means Upanishad, 
and not any_particular ae so called. 


ib. ib., says that the eight f Prati are the six (Mind to “Farth”), the Sun = 
Moon. 


AA YN Whew 232 ees Deel PM TEP 22. Ae 


{041} Hatnayogapragipika, UN. LV.,_V._LU. 


V.,_ib., passim. 


=) eee 


{623} Ib., vv. 16 and 17, Commentary thereto. 


{624} Ib., vv. 19-21, and Commentary (Tattvajnanang manonasho 
vasanakshaya eva cha). 


{625} See ante, and Varaha Up., Ch. V. 
{626} Ib., Ch. IIL, v. 106. See Bhitashuddhi Tantra cited in v. 50, post. 
{627} Ib., Ch. IIL, v. 112 et seg. 


{628} See Varaha Upanishad, Ch. III. 


{629} Shandilya Upanishad, Ch. 1; Yogakundali Up.,.Ch. 1. 


{630} The account here given follows and amplifies the text. See 
Commentary to v. 50, post. 


{635}_Svasangvedyam etad brahma kumari-stri-sukhang yatha, cited in 
Commentary to v. 15 of Ch. I. of the Hathayogapradipika. 


{636} So all the eight Bhavas commencing with Stambha, including the 
well-known Romancha or thrill in which the hair stands on end (pulaka), the 
choking voice (svarabhanga), pallor (vaivarnya), and so forth, are all Sattvik. 


POO es ee as Se ee a es ee I ee OP AND oo A eo, See eel De ee, Se 


ine opjecuon OF an indian Irieng, that tnese bNavas COUIG NOt De daltVIK 
inasmuch as Sattva was “spiritual,” is an apt instance of the disassociation 
from Indian thought effected by English education. 


{640} Ch. VL: 


Sahasraropari bindau kundalya melanam shive. 


Maithunang paramang dravyang yatinam parikirtitam. 


means is more than I can say, as I am not familiar with the views of the 
school which Lakshmidhara (cited also post) quotes. 


{646} For this reason the Sahasrara is also called Bhaloka (from the root 
bha, “to shine”). 


{045} Kulamava Lantra, Un. Vv. IViandalabranmana Up. Lamas 1s destroyed 
there. 


ae Anandalaha, te B. a e passage ts is elven) by_wa sah ol Citation . 


Hiceehit in some niGh I do not ae. 


{650} This term is apparently of varying significance. It seems to be used 
here in a sense opposed to Kulachara, and is yet used in the Kaula Shastras 


to denote their worship with the Panchatattva. 


{651} In this and other citations from the Pandit the English equivalents of 
Sanskrit terms are incorrect, as might be expected in one to whom English is 
not aes own Hee i ape is not ‘ ‘chanting,” In ntact. in in Lpan sha J a nothing 


than ee it ai its 
| ores have attained their object, and sal 
there they stop. In their own words, the Kaulas have Nirvana always near at 
hand.” I have not come across the worship here referred to. 


{653} Vamachara is not “black magic,” the nearest Sanskrit equivalent for 
which is Abhichara. There may have been,_as the Mahakala Samhita says 
(Ullasa Il.), some Kaulas who, like the Vaidikas, sought enjoyment in this 
and the next world, and not liberation (Aihikartham kamayanti amrite ratim 
na kurvvanti), But to state baldly that Kaulas do not rouse Kundalini and 

lead her to the Sahasrara is wholly incorrect. Purnananda Svami, the author 
ab. the had (S.N.) here translated, was himself a Kaula, and ne vhole object 


orks is to secure | | ibe 


fiw Be eeee es eles BS eo ibe so Oe a ees eo ee cee ce oONe eee Se. Os Bee cet 


(as ase) “Innuman™ 1s tne Panait's pnraseoiog DL. 
ete es s appa 2 ly referred to—namely, the worship, $0 lite 

understood, with wine, 
ancient Vaidik usages in differing forms (see my “Shakti and Shakta”), It 


meat, woman—is, in part, a continuance of the most 


may_be admitted that some forms of Sadhana are dangerous, and that some 
details of the ritual will be generally considered repellent, as will also be (I 
may_add by way of example) the Vaidik “horse-sacrifice” (ashvamedha)—at 
apy tate rate, as nee ane Weta Smee it. The worst Lee which can 


referrer to is = ck magic proper, ae ee use Q of the Shatkam 1a. AS 
Shiva in the Kularnava Samhita (not the generally known Tantra) says, “In 
Kali all men are lustful for money, and will even destroy_beings to gain it. 
But I will destroy all such as does fire dry grass.” The abuses of some of the 
followers are not to be laid to the charge of the true Shastra. 


{655} Here I wholeheartedly agree with my friend the Pandit. 
{656} See his edition, ed. Anandalahari, pp. 8-13. 


{657} The Rishi of the Mantra is he to whom it was first revealed; the metre 
is that j in which it was first uttered by_Shiva; and the Devata i is the Artha of 


aes Se Mantradhidevata, 


{658} Shiva initiates him in the knowledge of Brahman. Thus, Shiva is 
considered the teacher of all spiritual Gurus (Adinatha), 


{659} This, as well as some other details of this description, I do not follow. 


Who i oO is <LLLIS bull the veil? The Jiva is, on the case stated within, if 


{661} Such as Pranayama, Asana. 


{662} Thus, by raising Kundali Shakti to the Manipura center, power may 
be acquired over fire. 


{663} Subject to Dharma, Yama, Niyama, etc. 


= = there are 2 ReIsOns ¥ ale cee associate sat the seul 


ee or it may - aare ensues. Here — on ae ae or 
intellectual enjoyment is intended. All life in the world of form is 
enjoyment. 


{665} Which it is possible to adopt without approval of any particular 
application to which it mé be be Ae There are some dangelous I ractices 
on) in the hands a infer rio! sons have led to results which hav 


{666} “Worlds,” because that is the English phrase. Here, however, the 
antithesis is between the world (whether as earth or heaven) and liberation 
from all worlds. 


frees mM. So. ale 2 SL Ste. 2895 Pe ee 8. I ee se, Ss ee ee 


the wine as a libation into the mouth of Kundali Shakti, the Shakti 7 
appearing in the form of himself. 


{668} A name of Shiva. 


{672} Yogo bhogayate sakshat dushkritam sukritayate 


Mokshayate hi sangsarah kauladharme kuleshvari. 


(Kularnava Tantra.) 


{673} Sangharamudra, the gesture which signifies dissolution, “Now Iam 
about to die.” 


{674} See my “Shakti and Shakta.” 


mere Stuti—that is, praise in the Indian fashion of the subject in hand, 
which goes beyond the actual fact. The European reader who takes such 
statements au pied de la lettre and ridicules them makes himself (to the 
knowing) ridiculous. What actually happens in such case is a fugitive bliss, 
of it which nowise, in itself, secures immunity from future rebirth. It is the 
bliss of this lower Sadhana, as the union of Kundalini Shakti with Shiva is 
that of the higher. 


ferry A= wl 2 We oe ee ER SIS es ace, 2s PP ER, 2 PL a 


{680} The projecting power of consciousness withdraws its projections into 
the sensual world, and the power of Consciousness merges in 


eo ‘ona Sey of a sateibet philosophically a 
ee in the life of a Hindu,” which I reproduce in fed text, The 


bracketed translations of the Sanskrit words are mine. 


4683} “Approaches to Truth,” “The Patent Wonder,” valuable | 


in easy terms a the ancient Veleuiie ana 


{684} That Kundalini is the static Shakti. 


{688} Overcharged. 


eat crunk, ev oper anit pra eran en —a pass ssage in the 


{690} We may say “Take a magnet” and “magnetism.” 


{691} Here is the seat of the first moving, or Pashyanti Shabda. 


{692} Though not practicing himself, his brother, from whom he had learnt, 
was an adept in this Yoga. His statements [ha vs ar 


value, ia ; meee ber remem 


PETS cael ica -ations a his d pre oe ey 


{693} I do not say either that this is admitted or that it is a fact. Only_he 
who has had both true spiritual experience and has been ahr td this Yoga 
can say. I merely here state the facts. § icism ante at ae: 
is aera Suggests by. the dis tinction made in the 


Indian re nein ay isa. al aad limit manifesta 
unlimited eternal Consciousness. As the states are ee two ae are 
better than one. 


{695} Parichita-shadambhoja-vibhava. 


i.e., relating to the shat-chakra. 


{698} Kripa-natha, Lord of Mercy—i.e., the Guru. 


COMAYD OL _ Ol. TEs. Uh. — mt. 2) Pk eee OS ros eK Be De OTT 


( \ S ae as “She <a maintains all Teer in the 
world by i inhala mn_and exhalation. Unmanifested “sound” assumed the 
form of Kundali in the animal body (vv. 10, 11). 


3} Miiladhara, etc. 
{704} Shat-chakra-nirupana. Niruipana = investigation, ascertainment into, 
ttva-chintamani. 


{706} The “nerves,” or channels of energy (see v. 2). Nadi is derived from 
the root nad, “motion,” and means a channel (Vivara). 


{Z07}_Brahma-sakshatkara-ripa-nishpattih. 


{Z08}_“Attained by.” This is Udgata, which literally means “sprung out of” 
or “sprouted out of.” 


{Z09} According to Shangkara, by “other things” are meant the Saha 3 
ete, This Shangkara here and hereafter referred to is a commentator on this 


work, _and not the philosopher Shangkaracharyya. 


“strings,” 
Chitrini ahi 7 i tter. 


{719} That is, as Chitrini, Vajrini and Sushumna. 


{720} Dhatura fastuosa,_a white flower. 


AZéL s_ Lhe TOOt OF dll ME NACIS (V. POST). 


{722} Penis. 


— 


{723} Chandrasvaripini and Siiryyarupa. 


{724} The seventh verse, which is not quoted by the Commentator, runs: 


-Inside the ail. she who extends from the | le to the place of eatin 


{727} Rudratmika—that is, of the nature of Rudra or “male.” 


{728} Ch. Il.,5 and 6. 


Pri we. DW a Mc ee es ee es i | es ec) en 


i229} Dammonana Lanta, UN. 11.,_15, Uus: “10 te 
and Yamuna is in Pinggala, and Saracvati 


Indian sacred rivers. 


tires ae See ee i oe 


{731} The penis. 


{734} Sammohana Tantra, II. 7;_also occurs in Ch. XX VIL, v. 52, of 
Rudrayamala. 


{738} This channel or passage within Chitrini is Brahmanadi. 


{739} Tetranthera Apetala (Colebrooke’s Amarakosha). 


{740}_Nadi of that name; v. post. 


the Sushumna. 


Oo ant We. rr. ae SK. 2 eee 


Ndalini; V. ante. 


{743} Her mouth has neared the Brahmarandhra. The locative here is 
Samipy. 1i—that is, locative in | of proxi . Sushumna does 
not actually reach Brahmarandhra, but goes near it, ending near the twelve- 


petalled lotus. Cf. v. 1, Padukapanchaka. 


her,”’ a title of the Devi. 


{745} _Lit., beginning of the pada; v. post. 


{746} That is, inside Vajra, which is, again, within Sushumna. 


{747} The mantra “Om.” 


{751} The Parama Bindu; v. ib. The Brahmanadi reaches the proximity of, 
but not the Adi-deva Himself. 


}_Shabda-Brahma-rupa Kundalini. The Shabdabrahman (see 


Introduction) is the Chaitanya in all beings. 


meaning is practically the same, the modifications being of a verbal 


character only. 


{756} That is, Chitriny, the interior of which is called the B 


Poem wi. 1. bh. BL. 2 kk eS 


4/9/} Snudagna-poana-svapnava. 


{759} Because, according to Vishvanatha, She drops nectar, and therefore 
contain eal kinds of bliss. pepe ras says it is also capable of the 


{760} Sva-bhava is interpreted by Kalicharana to mean one’s nature. 
Shangkara interprets the word to mean the Jnana which is the Paramatma, 
or, in other words, divine or spiritual Jnana. According to Shangkara, the 
reading is Shuddha-bhava-svabhava. 


{761} Door of Brahman. 


{762} Samarasya,_a term which is ordinarily applied to sexual union 
(Stripungyogat yat saukhyang tat samarasyam)—here and elsewhere, of 
course, used symbolically. 


{763} Vide ante, note {735}. 


{770} Earth element, which is that of this Chakra. The form of this tattva is 
as ae 


fre741) m1, &S Mita) cess =e 2M eS ce ae 


AZALf Lhe aSNta Vajra are SNOWN us: 


{772} The color of the earth element which presides in this Chakra. Each 
Tattva manifests the form, color, and action, of its particular vibration. 


Vindhyashcha Paripatrashcha Saptaite Kulaparvatah 


(quoted in Shabdastomamahanidhi). Some read Pariputrashcha in place of 
Paripatrah. Shangkara says that the spears are here because the Chakra is 
inhabited by Dakin, who is one of the great Bhairavis. 


denote both qualities of the Tattva and the Vehicles (Vahana) of the Devata 
therein. See Introduction. 


post. 
{781} Brahma is represented with four heads. 


{782} I.e., Indra Deva. 


PrP? ov! 22.78). Lae 


{255 }_DTisnuKarta. 


{784} Praja-pati. 


{787} Hangsa, or, as some say, goose or flamingo. 


{788} The allusion is to the belief that the four Vedas 
mouths of Brahma. 


came out of the four 


{789} Danda. 


{790} Kamandalu. 
{791} _Aksha-siitra. 
{792} That is, the Abhaya-mudra. The hand is uplifted, the palm being 


shown to the spectator. The four fingers are close together,_and the thumb 


{793} Markandeya Chandi. 


{794} Brahmi Shakti. 


{796} Kamandalu: a peculiar vessel with a gourd-shaped body, and handle 


at the top, used for carrying water, generally by ascetics. 


ktis of this class are in some Tantras called 


{797} _Dakini and the other Shal i I 
the Queens of the Chakras, and in others the door-keepers thereof. 


{798} That is, accordin 


eee I SD ee 


g to Vishvanatha She is very red. 


fe 


CmMAAD AOL__1t411_ L__ 141s: Se x GP = (Sree ee 


., LAV. d-jNand. 


{8 Oh i the word a is red <aey Wit “he ae aa 


{802}_The unillumed. See Introduction to Author’s Mahanirvana. 
{803} Shila. 
{804}_A staff surmounted by a human skull. 


{805}_Khadga,_a kind of sword used in the sacrifice of animals. 


{806}_A kind of milk pudding made of rice boiled in milk with ghee and 
sugar. 


{807} Here the mark borne by woman between the eyebrows showing that 
her husband is living: 


{808} Fourth chapter; Prasanna Kumara Shastri’s edition, pp. 78,_79. 


{809} Pravritti-marga: the out Leal ing, pata as annua from the Nivritti- 
marga,_or path of return to the Parabr: 


{810} Nivritti-marga. 


mentary, post. 


action. Sun geod 


{813}_A form of the Apana vayu. 


Pia OY So ne eee I a 


{G14 j_ Pentapetes PHoeniCced, 


{815} That is, the Mantra “Kling”; Tantraraja says, “letter Ka is in my 
form.” The Nityapiijjapaddhati, p. 80, mentions in this connection “Kang, 


the Vija of Kamini. See Introduction. 


by 


— 


{816} When dealing with the Kakara- 


Shastri’s edition. 


{818} Shangkara 
(Bhaktabhilasha-svartipam). 


{819} Chamber of Madana (Deva of Love)—the yoni. 


ee \ Se / es | 


ina, the five most 
amana, Vyana, 


important of such manifestations being Pran 


Udana. See Introduction. 


{821} This is an oft-repeated passage (Shaktananda, _p. 5). 


{822} “Self-originated,” “self-existent,” the Shiva Linga of that name. 


{823} As the human phallus. 


{825} Dhyana. 


{826} This refers to a depression 


{828} _Vishvanatha for Kara ( 


from the Moon. 


ray) reads Rasa—that is, the nectar flowing 


{829} Benares. 


PAAAY OMe... Shea eeces a -a Des OS ae Aha ac 2 «2 225-3) aH Be ase edn ee ee 2 2 


{831} Shangkara, unlike Kalicharana, has annotated the two verses 
separately. 


— a Lingga—that is, round It with Her body_and over It with 


bewildered,” a a5 in ie Lalita is called * eon 17” (all- 
bev \ 1s 


{835} Shivopari. 


{836} Vishvanatha says She makes this sound when awakened. According 
to Shangkara, this indicates the Vaikhari state of Kundalini. 

{837} Vishvanatha quotes Dakshinamirti as stating that during day_and 
night man breathes in and out 21,600 times, taking both expiration and 
inspiration as the unit. See Introduction. 


1829) au — tine =f Vv. Li and v. 14, the Saeenen ae verses are 


S). ine _Inmy.o rns Crest is +e cree of al beings. : The 
ain the text is Shruti; Raghava quotes Shangkara y 
a, which speaks of men versed in Shruti. Chait 


Wes Etec es Se ee ee 2 eh ee RS ee a) I eo a 2a aS 25, eM 2 Pe 


{840} That is, the Principle or Cause of Sound. See Introduction. 
The 


a 


(841) 


lat p 


ma 
that Vi 


ta in which the Devata is Kali; also a name for Tantraraja in 


dealing with this mata. 


{842} _At pp. 120-122, Vol. IL, Tantrik Texts, Vishvanatha speaks of Para 
Pashyanti, and the others Shaktis. 


{843} Pashyanti is sometimes associated with Manipira. See Introduction. 
{BSA} Vide post. 


{849} Urddhvavahint, f 


{850} _Ishta-deva-svartpini. The Ishtadevata is the particular Devata of the 


{851} These in women indicate a passionate nature, 


{852} The Shaktanandatarangini says She is only to be meditated upon as 
i. The text may also be read as 


red when the object of worship is a Devi 
meaning that “rosy” is an attribute applicable to Shri Sundari—that is 


{853} This is a quotation from the Alangkara (rhetorical) Shastra. 


{854} That is, the Mudras Abhaya and Vara; v. ante, p. 219. 


ee Fee ) ee ) | a J oe | 


CARRY me. 222528257 Soo 2a se 2 ei eh ew ot 2s 


{3595 7_1ne MusiCal NStrumMent OF that Name, 


{856} The Mualadhara. 


Kundali is the Para state of Shabda. 


{859 }_Vide post. 


cauldron-shaped. 
{861} Brahmanda—egg of Brahma. 


{862} So the Devi Purana (Ch. XLV.), speaking of this power of the 
Supreme, says: 


Vichitra-karyyakarana chintitaphalaprada 


Svapnendrajalavalloke maya tena prakirtita. 


Parama may also mean Parang miyate anaya iti Parama—i.e., She by whom 
the Supreme “measured,” in the sense (for the Supreme is immeasurable) 
that She who is one with the Supreme, is formative activity. See 
Introduction. Vishvanatha, quoting an unnamed Tantra, says that this Maya 
is within Kundalini, and this Parama is Paramatmasvarupa. 


{863} Kundalinyabheda-sharirini. 


{864} Nada-shakti = Shakti as Nada. See Introduction. 


PA Yel Se ee alia lO SS a 


{$09} Snura = Suryya, or 5un. 


{866} The fire which destroys all things at the time of dissolution (Pralaya). 


{868} See Introduction. 


ara nD ra, ; nd then se] arate y, Ati Pa & 


{869} That is, 
aa Ar hadharadhara. The 


if the tions—viz., Nityananda- 


{877} Skull-mounted staff. 


{878} Sword. Khadga is a heavy sacrificial sword. 
{879}_Drinking-cup. 


{880} “Kling.” 


{881} Its color, 


{882} Described in v. 12 as another form of Kundalini. 


PAA Wi... OF ee ee 2 a a I TM Ba I ae 


sections. 


{884} That is, the Svadhishthana Chakra. See Introduction. 


{885} The letter La; v. post. 


{886} The anusvara. 


which i is ial Sienna, and says rie the suffix * “in” by eran the 
change is affected is used in the sense of “relating to,” and not “placing 
within.” 


{890} Water is the element of this Chakra, which is represented by the 


{894} Apparently Shangkaracharyya, vol. iii. 3,3. Prapanchasara, i. 24. 


{895} Vahana. 


{896} Tadirddhvam. See Comm. to next verse. 


{897} Vishnu. 


{898} Le., Vishnu, is within “the lap” of the Bindu of Vang, 


Vishnu Purana I., 22. 


{900} A great gem worn by Vishnu, which is said to symbolically signify 
the souls (see authorities in last note), These are said to be united with the 
Kaustabha of the Lord (Vishnutilaka II., 100). 


defined as follows: 


Ajanulambini mala sarvartu-kusumojjvaia 


Madhye sthtlakadambadya vanamaleti kirtita. 


(That is said to be Vanamala which extends down to the knee, beauteous 
with flowers of all seasons, with big Kadamba flowers and the like in the 
middle.) This garland is celestial because in it the flowers of all the seasons 
are contained. 


{902} _Shangkha. 
{203 }_Chakra. 
{204} Gada. 


{905} Padma. 


Sattvika Ahangkara; the bow, Tamasika Ahangkara; the sword, knowledge; 
its sheath, ignorance; _discus the mind and the arrows the senses. See 
authorities cited at p. 233, ante. 


iyu/}_ine bird King, vanana OF Visi 


{908} _Dwells (Bhati): the Sanskrit word literally means “shines”—that is, 
in the Svadhishthana. 


lue ee 


ASH jth de dh da obvbha 


{910} Matta-chitta; for she drinks the nectar which drops from Sahasrara. 
She is exalted with the divine energy which infuses Her. 


{912} Damaru. 


{916} There is another smaller Lotus in each of the main lotuses on which 


the Shakti sits. 


{917} That is, his enemies the six passions. 


{918} Egoism. See Introduction. 


{919} Moha. 


{920} This is from v. 58 of Ch. XX VII. of the R 


udra-yamala. 


{921}_Viz., Kama (lust), Krodha (anger), Lobha (greed), Moha (delusion) 
Mada (pride), Matsaryya (envy). 


{922} Ignorance, illusion, infatuation. 


{923} See note to v. 11. 


POAT Er eae8W De oe Wea 


iyzZ4} Kutla-cangsntra. 


{925} Shuklanna. 


{926} Svadhishthana. 


{927} The Manipiira Chakra, the seat of the Element of Fire the sign of 
which is a triangle. See Introduction. 


{928}_An auspicious mark; _v. post. 


{929} That is, “Rang,” the Seed-mantra of Fire. 


arpa oo reads it as dasha-dala-lalite—i.e., the charming lotus of 


{932} In the note to v. 23 of Ch. I. of the Sharada Tilaka. 


{933} That is, making Vara and Abhaya Mudras; v. ante, p. 219. 


{937} Etat: a variant reading is evam, “in this manner.” 


{938} _Nabhi-Padma. 


{939} That is, the Devi of Speech, Sarasvati. 


{940} Vishvanatha quotes a dhyana in which She is described as 
humpbacked (kubjini)_and as carrying a staff. 


{941} The weapon of Vahni (Fire). 


CINANDY RNA 1S 


4942} Iviuara, 


Manipira is the Region of Fire. See also Rudrayamala, Ch. XXVIL., v. 60. 


F 


{943} Mani-vad-bhinnang, Bhinna here means “disti 


{944} Vara and Abhaya—i.e., the Mudras dispelling fear and granting 
boons. 


{945} Khecharanna—that is, meat mixed with rice and dhal, such as 
Khecharanna (Khichri), Pilau, etc. 


ie Anahata, or heart Lotus, seat of the air element, the sign of 
aie is er as hexagonal, is here. See Introduction. 


~ lla 32 


Vijais “Yang.” 


{953} This smoke, Shangkara says, emanates from the Jivatma which is in 
the form of a flame. 


{954} Shangkara reads ocean of mercy. 


AO co ol a A i 2 452.254 2¥ee 2 ekh. Mince. CE wees. os ake 


iyop }_Hangsa, ine 5un—a name also OF Ine Supreme. UL “Hing the 
Supreme Hangsa dwells in the brilliant heaven.” See the Hangsavati Rik of 
Bot in Mahanirvana Tantra, vv. 196, 197, Ch. V. Hangsa is from Han = 

motion. It is called Aditya because it is in perpetual motion 
ae is also the form of the Antaratma; see v. 31, post. 


{956} This shows that the Bija has hands and feet (Shangkara), 


{957} Goad. 


{958} Noose. 


Serer ce inal — er ee . Pita is ead Kakint is e a oa 
yellow color. 


{961}_Shangkara gives unmatta (maddened or exalted) as equivalent of 
Matta. 


{962} Nityam. If this is not stuti, possibly the word is nityam, “always.” 


{963} Vishvanatha, in his com mentary. on ne shatchalkra, -Sives the 
following Dhyana of Kakini: “Meditate on Kakini as se a clouc 
holding in Her hands Pasha (ao), Shilla Shia ident ‘Kapila ul, Damatu 
(drum), She is yellow in color, fond of eating and rice (Dadhyanna), 
Her beautiful body_is ina ea Pe pose, uae eer 
heart is made joyous by the draught of rice wine (Varuni).”” 


{964} As it is a Trikona Shakti, it must have its apex downwards as in the 
case of the Yoni. 


CACY 7 _1 


jyoo j_Kaipa. 


{967} The Lingga itself is not pierced, but it carries the Bindu, which has 
an empty_space (Shinya) _within its circle. 


{968} That is, here, beauty. 


{969}_Kamodgama. 


{971} Maha-deva, Shiva. 


{972} Here the Jivatma. 


{973} See Introduction. 


{974} Vishvanatha 
Purusha. 


quotes a verse in which this Hangsa is spoken of as 


{975} Sic in the text, which is possibly a mistake for “Rang.” 


{976} Kala = digits or portions of Shakti. 


from previous experience” (drishtaparikalpana-nyaya). 


{978} By reason of his unification with the Brahma-substance. 


{979} Priyat priyatamah—more beloved than those that are dear to them. 


{980} According 
Devata—that is, his fam 


” 


than their husbands’ 


PACA: Wi Wee Soe ees Wk a ee cee 2 et Dee Bee Swe 


{955 f_ina DNUKIVa varan DNOgan ante MuUKU-pagamM Drajel. 


| et Cee eT 


{985} Pentapztes Pheenicea, 


16 }_See Introduction. 


{987} _Kamodgamollasita. 


Ee eee alan a tall Ch. V.,_vv. 129, 130,.p. 85, where the 


being a circle (Vritta-riipa), See Introduction. 


{992} Ambara = = the Ethereal Region; the word also means 

‘appa “Vyomni, vasasi” (Amara-kosha). On an elephant of the color 
ow is seated Ambara, white in color in his Bija form. The Sanskrit is 

capable of another meaning: “On an elephant is seated the Bija whose 

raiment is white.” 


SAATIY 68 @ pct ete8ee Lae WH 2 afl 2h al. Tec 2 ah Wace Bienes 20 Oe 2 W Meck hs fe 


Shakti form. Sex Commentary. 
{998} Sada = ever. Shiva = the Beneficent One. 


ala, Ch. XXV 


{999} See Rudrayam 


re purifies. 


{1002} That is 
the characterist 


each Mandala (i.e., square, circle, triangle, etc.) takes after 
ics of its elements. 


{1003} The Bija of a thing is that thing in essence. 


{1004} Hara-Gauri-mirti (Shangkara). 


{1009} Made by touching the thumb with the first finger. 


fanaa A. 2 Pica BLL ae ee. ee OW AK Vo Se, a ee ee Ne oe ee 


A LULV f_See InToOaducton To A. AValOn’s Viananirvana Lantta. APparenuy 


the sense is that She makes it very difficult for the Sadhaka to pierce this 


sadhaka oy = his au. 


{1013} The Bija of Ether—Hang,. 


| Shanta-chetah. Shama, says Shangkaracharyya, in his 


Atmanatmaviveka, is 
sense. 


Antarindriya-nigraha—i.e., subjection of the inner 


{1016} Past, present, and future. 


{1017} The word Yoga is here used as equivalent of Jnana. 


{1019} That is, the Hangsa is in the twelve-petalled Lotus below the 
Sahasrara. 


{1022} This verse has not been taken into account either by Kalicharana or 
Shangkara. It is given by Bala-deva in his text, and his Commentary is also 
here given. 


{1023} Retention of breath in Pranayama is Kumbhaka. 


TAG AL TRE. 8 ee PR oe DN PS. ee et ee le ae Smee, Wa nie. 


A 1024 j_1LDIS 1S praise (StuuVvadda) Of NiS great powers——tMNat 18, _ were Ni 


get an angry_he could move the three worlds. 


{1025} See Commentary. 
{1026} Sun. See Commentary. 
{1027} Ganesha. 


{1028} Ajna—command. See Commentary. The Tantrantara 
this Chakra the house of Shiva (Shivageha), 


{1029} The state of mind which is acquired by meditation (Dhyana). 


{1030} Damaru. 


{1031} Rosary with which “recitation” (japa)_of mantra is done. 


are Iti is here that the Ajna of the Guru is communicated ( (Gautamitya 
Vishvanatha), See Rudrayamala, Ch. XXVIL,_v. 68, which 
\jna_is communicated (gurorajneti), The text has 


| Le. ammohana Tantra. 


{1034} See Introduction, Prapanchasara Tantra, Vol. IIl., Tantrik Texts, ed. 
A. Avalon. 


{1035} Ing—i.e., Kalang tarati iti Itara (Vishvanatha), “Itara” is that which 
enables one to cross Kala. Ing is, J | 


{1036} Om. 


{1037} The Nadi Chitrini. 


nT to in re eee tov.4 40, ey As to the meta 
Introduction. 


FAA WL Ms 22 bd 2 Pe 


A1U39 f_PNallic emD1lem OT SHiva, 


= According to Vishvanatha, this is an Angsha (part) of the Nirguna 


{1043} Shangkara says that Paramakula = Maladhara Padma,_and 
Paramakulapada = He who has his pre in the Miladhara, 


{1044} See Sharada Tilaka, Ch. 
Tautra, Ch. IV., and Introduction. 


V., 135, Ch. XII, v. 117 et seq.;_Kular nava 


{1045} _Para-pura—another’s body_or house. See p. 244, ante. 


{1048} Ahang devo na chanyo’smi Brahmaivasmi na shokabhak. 


{1049} Brahmaivaikang sad-vastu tadanyadasat prapancha samudayastu 
Brahma-bhasataya bhasate. 


{1050} _Jivatma-paramatmanoraikyachintana. 


{1052} That is, a and u, which by Sandhi becomes O, and with anusvara 
(m) thus form the Pranava, or mantra Om. 


{1053} The letter M in its bindu form in Chandra-vindu. 


fanr ar’ ev. 2. 21. = ie Ba 2 I ee ee OY ee I a ee 2 a a, a 


4{1u24 ti SnangKara ree 
like water.” The last portion mi 
of the Moon.” 


ay_also_ mean | Aaniling wens equals that 


{1055} That is, Anusvara. 


support—viz.t he ec tht 
een removed. ae whose flesh or substance is A 
(Rajanirghanta Dict.). 


{1057} See next page and Introduction. 


{1059} Pavana-suhrid—“He whose friend is air” = Fire. When the wind 
blows fire spreads. 


{1060} That is, by Kaki-mudra. Shruti says that when Vayu is stopped by 
this Mudra steadiness of mind is produced. 


{1061} These and following verses occur in Sharada Tilaka, Ch. XXV.,_vv. 
45,46. The first portion of this passage describes Siddhasana. 


{1062} That is, by Kumbhaka. 


{1063} That is, recite the Hangsa or Ajapamantra, or breathing in 


Kumbhaka, 


{1064} The Jivatma manifesting as Prana. 


{1065} One of the Mudras of Hatha-yoga. See Introduction. 


‘ther, P Brahman, and space between 


{1Ub/} LIL, tongue. 


oman What moves about in the sky or eilich It is Manas which d deprives 


{1070} This is from Jnanarnava Tantra, Ch. XXIV., v. 37. 


{1071} Which is well recognized to be insufficient in these matters. 


{1072} Jyotih. 


eC cs J 


May _ de interpreted 1M VallOusS Ways. ACCOraln to Vishvanatha, the second 


eas of the ee Kalik 
presence of the all-pervading Lis Tern F Hi 
realize the presence of Rahu b by his action on the sun and moon. 


that it is in the center of the Ocean of nectar outside and beyond the 


Se,.025al See. eee Ss ae, 2 oe I Saceme sete 2 I ok eat eo. Se. a a cee ee, SE ae, at 


countless Myriads Of WOrlda Systems 1s tne Supreme abode OF 


Shrividya. 


{1081} A form of Shakti, 


ots which form the aspirate breathing at the end of 


e Ajna by the Bindu of the 


{1085} Bindu is the nasal sound of Ma, which is a male letter. Bindu is here 
the unmanifest Ma. 


{1089} Compare Bhagavadgita, Ch. VIII, vv. 9 and 10, and the 
commentary of Shangkaracharyya and Madhustidana Sarasvati on those 


verses. 


{1090} According to Shangkara, it is an adjective, and means “He who is 
the cause o af resin 1,”_and the like. 


{1091 aa That is, the three spheres Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah the Vyahriti of the 


{1 A Sat Shape th lia bl. and explains the expression to 
nean “th | «ha teachi a : JIC SOI 


AAO AY Wee se 2 oe No eS ee, PS Te aes Le I ee 


4{1uy4} Pranarupasnvasaparamatmakam. dee Jnanamava Lantra, Un. AAL. 


{1095} Karbura = white, and also means variegated, 


e ee eve a: Pree to <i ie: a reer in Te 
Mantrashastra,” by_A. Avalon. 


{1100}_That is, all powers of speech. 


{1101} Vayoh layasthanam. Shangkara defines it by saying: Etat sthanam 
vayoh virama-bhiitam—this is the place where vayu ceases to be. 


{1103} Shuddha-buddhi-prakasha. 


{1104} Karanavantara sharira. Karana = cause; Avantara = = ack or 


Sharira aout cine mean “the intermedi Sharira of the cause.” The 
puimaryc cause is the | Great Cause, Its effects are oe ae diate causes of 


that which it paeeas aid all ae ie 


{1105} The “touch principle,” also called Tvak-tattva. As to Bhittashuddhi, 
see the same described in Author’s Introduction to the Mahanirvana Tantra. 


PFAAANMY ial. —-. 


Uo f_Etner, 


a an ra ae aR ET a eer 
ih na as, fire: kara = _M is 


[1} Gagana, or Ether. 


{1112} That is, from Kring as composed of Ka + Ra 


{1113} Kring, 


{1115} That is, its substance is Shiva and Shakti. 


{1116} Niramaya-padonmukhi = she who is turned to the place of 


ALLL s_Lenalie , LOW ards, Intent ON, OF With Tace UPlUTted tO, ohivd, that 1S 


eation. "That is, the first State is 5 Chit, 1 Nada is — Mithah 


— Saar toc 
samavaya of Shakti and Bindu. The establishment of this relation quickens 


Her to turn to Shiva for the purpose of creation when She appears as male 
or Bindu. 


eet ae is cay Te or J se inane fan enema if, 
however, it be read_as Prishatyupayogyartipau, then the translation would 
be: “That the Nada and Bindu aspects of Shakti are both feminine (prishati) 
and masculine (upayogya)—fit comp anion of that or male.” 


TAA WOE. Be Ie os ee 2s ek ee = ES oe IL ee aR Bee ese MOM 2 = Mee Be ad 2 


{LLL f_ According TO anotner reading This Part would Mean “She who 1s © 
Tattva.” The passage is from Prapanchasara Tantra. 


{1120} She is there, existing as Chit, with whom she is completely unified. 
She “measures Chit”—that is, coexists with and as Chit, and is also 
formative activity. The above translation is that of the text, but tl 


) e verse has 
been quoted elsewhere as if it were Chinmatra jyotishah, and not Chinmatra 
jyotishah, in which case the translation would be: “She who when near 
Jyotih, which is mere consciousness, becomes desirous of change, becomes 
massive and assumes the form of Bindu.” 


{1121} That is, they _are both gold in the form of an ear- 


ring, 


{1122} This place is called the Supreme Ether (Parang-vyoma) in the 


— 


given in the Panc 


Ahirbudhnya, 49. 


{1124} Kevalananda-ripam. 


{1126} Earth, water, fire, air, ether. 


eS 


{1127} Region of the Earth Element, or Miladhara Chakra. 


{1128} Smell principle or Tanmatra. 


{1129} Svadhishthana, which is the region of water (Jala). 


{1130} Principle of taste. 


{1132} Principle of sight. 


CAA AS ae BC IES Bae al 2 ues Poe 2 ak, PES. Ss 


{1155 jANaNnata, WHICN 1S the region OF alr | Vayu). 


{1134} Principle of touch. 


{1135} Vishuddha, which is the region of ether (Nabhas). 


| post, Commentary. 
{1139} Egoism—self-consciousness. 


{1140} That is, the actual arrangement of things as compared with the order 
in which they are stated. 


{1141} Mahat-tattva is a Vikriti of Prakriti. The Milabhita avyakta 
— Jol Pel) anne sell the =o = 


a | 7,18 Yr Sharada), 


— 2Leabibed ba is, one enn is the ae of the 


rakriti is a) 
ee to feels 


{1144} That is, as regarded from the point of view of the Paravastu it is an 
effect, but regarded in relation to that which it produces it is a cause. 


a 


{1146} Raghavabhatta says that this is so according to Shaiva doctrine. 


(4A AT) Te. 2. TILL S Me Ge Ee! GM a I I, 8 ee I De ee 


148} See Introduction. 


149} _As to Sa-sangkalpa-vikalpa, see Introduction. 


{1150} That is, Taijasa ahangkara, which is the source of the Indriyas. 


Arddha-matra (which is a name for Nada) in 4. 7 an III. By v.29 , and 


ethan be defines it to mean Parampadam = the su eme e state, or aa 


ae Devibh Suna L 
eal ik hou art Lhe. a of Pranave. Gay ats and 


Tattva, a ‘See Chandi “Tvamudegtth e ais (rasi,” 


ts Ti ae = or 
eye. The Bhirlok a ‘the Bhu ae on its 
knees; the Svarloka is in its middle, the Maharloka in its navel; Janaloka is 
in the heart, Tapoloka in its throat, and Satyaloka between the eyebrows.” 


See also Brahmavidya Up.,_v. 10. 


{1153} The third of the seven primary subtle tones. 


{1154} eer ou L, WV. t 2. esis as ac opposed to d to | nae or Nirguna, 


7S IA FHI 8 Ae ae oF ok 2 a TIS Es OL De ee LL 


{1155} Another text has Shivatmaka—that is, Vindu is the Shiva aspect. 


{1156} Samavaya = kshobhya-kshobhaka-sambandha— lit., connection 
which is the connection of reciprocity. 


{1157} See Introduction. 


LY. Tt. vr pure ap sweet ninth af eI Ch 
Vrittihinam aa in the Shiva Sanghita, V., 219. 


a) 


{1160} Sahasraradhara. See Introduction. 


{1161} Sarva-sangkalpa-rahita—i.e., who is free from all attachment, not 
prompted by anything in any_action. 


V peaks of it as Sa nd says that She is 
shida aidievaiins: hat is is, Cc nit ond Ananda), and the cause of all causes 
(Sa rvakaranakaranam.) 


{1163} Vaidika Lakara (La). 


From beginning to end. 


{1167} _A form of Sanskrit verbal compound. 


fa ok Th 7_ 2S GM, te See, oI ye a. OE a I ee a Me. a PS 


{L106 f_Vaksninavarta—itne Opposite way tO Wat in whicn tne nands OL a 
clock work. 


{1169} The man in the moon. 


{1170} The akathadi triangle according to Vishvanatha. 


are ee - the Text, 


{1172} = Devas. 


{1173} When it assumes the form of Bindu, It is with the operating Gunas, 
for then It is Sakala. 


{1175} The Bliss of liberation and that arising from the union of Shiva and 
Shakti; vide post. 


is the subtle Parananda eee or the root el bliss in 
Bindu form (Vishvanatha),. 


circle O; i Part is ae Tee or space eit 


i Aare eee 1 ea ee NE ee I a A en I 


Some of the ae aEesT - ee 


{1188} Le., who is engrossed in. 


seems to ane sacepaiies eee t 
word. The Edition cited in Text reads_ Ww 
as aus come in ithe main er lot 1s | bears ; the imp 


ea may. 7 at to a SO. 


{1190} This is in praise of Shakti, who is made to appear superior. 


TAA VAD WLS. 2 ew eee es 2 2 eccces BL eh es PE a Te, 2 Bok 2 ORT oe a, PPS 2S 


Rare LOIS. wren occurs 1n the 5rd Patdala OF the INITVand Lantrda (kd SLs 


Ws 0 oe Bae Pe 
ers eee = 


Je Here eee as Amakala, 
e C. ithin it, again, is the 
naar h dit. pense as Nirvai na | Kala. ‘Within Nirvana Kala is the fiery 
eee Apes is unmanifested — et as ten million suns. It 
iV 2 Cal hakti should be 
free a ilusion.” 


{1196} Patala III. 


{1198} See notes to v. 7 of the Paduka Panchaka. 


TAAOOD ET! De 2 ee 8 OI 


{1202} The locative is to be read Samipye saptami—that is, the space is not 
in, but near, the Chandramandala; otherwise there appears to be a 
contradiction. 

{1203} Shiva-sthanam. 


{1204} Le., the place of Parama Purusha—Vishnu. 


{1208} Worshippers of Vishnu. 


{1209} Hangsasya_prakriti-purushobhaya-rupa-t 
and Sah is Prakriti. 


{1211} Sangsara, the world of birth and rebirth 
by_their Karma. 


in. As the term also m« 


which Kha = Brahr ne 
“He is able to roam the sky.” 


is capable of translation as 


{1213} Ch. XVIII. v. 60. 


aria abv AT. 12 ee LW AS ac, Nh oo Me, 2 ee Wh Se, ee ee 


41214; INA SNarirl DNavallk—tho' 


igo Ne nas a DOGY, Ne 1s NOt OT IL 


{1215} _Telang’s Translation: “He has no interest at all in what is done, and 


none whatever in what is not done, in this world; nor is any interest of his 


{1219} Such an one may have such a power but will not wrongly exercise 


o Vishvanatha, see 


{1221} Kalicharana reads “Vidyotita,” but Shangkara reads “Nityodita,” 
constantly shining, 


4 ator: Pirmananda- 
Parampar alat isha-dhara-dhara. Parampara may mean 
continuous course,” or Param may mean Shiva and Para, Shakti. This 
difference in meaning is due to the different ways in which these words 
may_be read. 


Shiva and Shakti. 


{1224} Vishvanatha says that this Amakala is Urddhvashaktiriipa,_or the 


upward (towards the Brahman) moving Shakti. 


{1225} That is, within the curve of Amakala. Vishvanatha says, not within 
Amakala, but within the Chandramandala,_of which the Amakala is one of 


gs 2 J 82. We. Te eee OT eee OE er a ae 


me digits. Nirvanakala 1s, ne says,_vyapinitattva. 


{1226} See p. 274, ante. 


{1227} Hardda-chaitanyam. Amara defines Hardda to mean prema, sneha 
—i.e., affection, love. That is the Ishtadevata worshipped ; the 
Shakti who is Herself the heart of the Lord. The word is de hrid 


Shakti. This state is not altogether free from the multitude of bonds 
(Pashajala). 


{1229} Prema. See notes, post. 


{1230} This word “Tattva” has by Vishvanatha been said to be Shiva- 


bhedajnanam—i.e., the non-distinction between Shiva and Shiva. 


{1231} That is, within the crescent. According to Vishvanatha the locative 
indicates proximity and means near the middle but slightly above it. 


{1232} This word has been defined by Shangkara to mean “She who is as 
great as the Para, or Supreme.” Vishvanatha says it means “She who 
measures futurity” 


{1234} Le., Jiva-consciousness. 


{1235} Yada bhiimau patati tada sangjnayukto bhavati. T 
is here spoken of. 


{1236} See Introduction, and note to v. 40, particularly the portion dealing 
with Nada, Bodhini, and Bindu. 


{1237} That is, Shakti as Nada. 


FANNAD A____ La. 22 aL fda oo ene es, OP Se 


A 1256 j_AVYdKtd-Nadd—uUnMdnirested SOUN. 


{1244} Tatashcha nada-vindu-nibodhika arkendu-vahni-rupah. Jnana is 
Fire, because it burns up all action. When the result of action is realized, 
action ceases (see note to v. 45), Ichchha is the Moon, because Ichchha is 
the precursor of creation and is eternal. The Moon contains the Ama-kala, 
which knows neither increase nor decay. Kriya is the Sun, because like the 
Sun it makes everything visible. Unless there is striving there cannot be 
realization and manifestation. Cf. “As one Sun makes manifest all the 
Lokas” (Gita). 


The Text will be made clearer if an arrangement be made in the following 
groups: (1) Nada, Sun, Kriya; (2) Bindu, Moon, Ichchha; (3) Nibodhika, 
Fire, Jnana. But see Introduction. 


{1247} Shuddha-bodha-svartipam. 


thos B} Sulit HD qualifications are without ee Apparently this this 


{1249} Vishvanatha says Samana. 


= Spiritual knowledge, as it is said: Mokshe dhirjnanam anyatra 
vijnanang shilpashastrayoh. The knowledge which gains Moksh 
(liberation) i is called Jnana,_other forms of knowledge, such as fine arts, _etc., 


being Vijnana. 


{1251} Mayabandhanachchhadita-prakriti-purushatmaka-para-vinduh. 


{1253} Shiva-shaktivibhag 


ena. By division or separation is not meant that 
Shiva is really divided or separated from Shakti—for the two are ever one 
and the same—but that Shakti, which exist latently as one within the 
Brahman in dissolution, appears to issue from It on creation as the 
manifested universe. 


\ Sris 


hti-kalpana. That is, the subject knows itself as object. 


{1255} Chanaka, which under its outward sheath contains two undivided 
halves. 


All-embracing, 
{1257} Stainless—that is, free from Maya. 


{1258} Apparently Nirvana-Kala. 


{1259} That is, the circumference as opposed to the inner space. 


(arg We IM ea EE 


{1261} Pradhanikang Brahma-puman. 


1262} 


{1262} Kalika Purana, XXIV.,_v. 125. 


{1263} Ch. 1. 


iia mae $0, also also, abe e Shaktanandataraneeut st L) says of the Devi 


{1265} That is, Amakala. 


Tejas become Tejah, Re Rajah. | 


{1270} These Varnas are inside the triangle A-ka-tha. 


{1271} Of the nature of Chit. Cf. definition of Maya-Shakti in Tattva 
Sandoha 14. 


{1272} The male, Purusha. 


{1273} Lit., Generator of Visargah (see note {1269}, ante), for from Sa 
Visarga comes. 


{1274} The room made of Chintamani stone which grants all desires, 
described in the Rudrayamala and. Salli Purana, ub he Lalita sefers | to it 
as being the place of origin of allt itras stow ¢ sire 
objects (Chintita), 


farirer) we. al. eee IRL eae 24 “aU te 8. 2 oe eer Te ee ee 


{1276} See Introduction. 


{1277} That is, within Chitrini Nadi. 


oe 


{1278} In the Yoga-process known as Shatchakrabheda, generally 
described in the Introduction, but which practically must be learned of the 


ir makes the tes sou aqewards am the fire awakens Kun a: 
goes upwards. 


{1280} Angga-yoga. See Introduction, and Vishvanatha citing Gautamiya 


{1282} Shanaih sangkochayedgudam—that is, by Ashvini-mudra. 


I 


{1284} Mukhambhuja. 


{1286} On the top of the Lingga is Nadabindu—i.e., Chandra Bindu. The 
mouth is the Bindu which Kundalini pierces. 


87} Tena vartmana—that by which Kundalini is to go. 


{1288} The Kamagni, or fire of Kama. 


TAWA Wh. We ESL LT SS ee ss a =.2e8eecs Me 2622884 ae Pale. 222 Be Se 


i1z5y }_varang Hangsapnuasnini— e., passion 1s excited in Her, and >ne 1s 
impelled by the fire of Kama towards the Parang Hangsa in the Sahasrara. 


oe This passage. iso obscure, -and cannot be traced | in the only | ublished 


process of Bha hadi ‘The aed tator fae tee more eves 


described the process in his own words. 


{1291} He thus closes the passage of the upward breath. 


{1292} That is, the chest and the anus, thus closing the passage of the 


upward and downward airs. 


{1293} That is, the motion of the Kama vayu spoken of post. 


{1294} Nagini, one of the names of Kundali. 


{1295} That is, the Trikona in the Muladhara which surrounds the 
Svayambhii Linga. 


{1296} The passages in quotation marks are here cited from different books 
on Hathayoga. 


{12 


297} Retention of breat 


| in Pranayama. 


{1298} Hridayamakunchayet—that is, by Jalandhara Bandha, etc. See 
Introduction. 


{1299} Kama-vayu. 


{1300} _Sama-rasya,_a term used on the material plane to denote sexual 
union. 


{1301} A form of embodied Chaitanya. See Commentary, post. 


{1302} In the Miladhara, Anahata and Ajna Chakras respectively. 


a runra he 2 ee SET TI a 


{1308} That is, She unites, in Her passage along the Nadi, with each of the 
Linggas in that form of Hers which is appropriate to such union. 


{1309} See Commentary on v. 11, ante. 


a According to v. 11, Para is in Miladhara, Pashyanti in 
Svadhishthana, “Madhyama i in Anahata, and Vaikhari in the mouth. What is, 
however, here described is Layakrama. 


{1311} Lotuses grow in the mud,_and these Lotuses grow in the blood and 
fat of the body. The process described is Kundalini-yoga, or, as it is called 
in the Tippani of Shangkara, Bhita-shuddhi. 


{1312} As the Sadhaka, who has taken the Jivatma from the heart to the 
Miuladhara, and thus identifies himself with Kundalini, it is he who enters. 


(hat is, the Nadi. 


{1314} Shaktyatmakachintana;_or it may mean meditation on the union of 
Shiva and Shakti. 


., vv. 1, 2, of Sharada Tilaka. 


{1316} Shaktyatmakajnana. 


Carian) (le... t= eco on ee I ee ak ae We ee Be ae 


Dhyana of a Kulayogt. 


{1318} Stripungyogat yat saukyhang, 


Samarasyang prakirtitam. In other words, the bliss of Union of Shiva and 
Shakti, of which sexual union is the material type. 


{1319} Jnana-chakshuh., 


{1320} Chidananda is Consciousness and Bliss. 


Bindu form. 


{1322} Vamoru—lit., beautiful thighs, the part being selected as an 
example of the whole. 


{1323} Madalasa-vapu. 


{1328}_A celestial wishing-tree which grants all fruit. 


{1329} Associated with the idea of strength. 


fara?) wr. 2 i= 


41332 }_Kunaaun. 
{1333} In the Shivasthanam. 

{1335} The Devi who is the Chit in all bodies. 

{1336} The Brahman as Chit. 


{1337} Pure Chit. 


nirgunashcha. 


{1342} The Bindu is the Ma-kara. 


{1348} Vishvanatha reads it as Naya-vashat. 


{1349} Bija of Prithivi 


: 
Laarn) |e. 2821. Tee. 


55U }_Vvisarga-nasna-Kamin1. 


{1351} That is, the Bindu in Sahasrara. 


352} Attendant (Upadevatas) on Shiva, of whom Ganesha is the Lord. 


{1353} Sic in text Quaere ghrarna or Prana in sense of Hangsa. 


{1354} Le., Gandha Tanmatra. 


{1357} Le., one who has a beautiful figure, the part being selected for the 
whole. 


{1358} “Its”—i.e., of Manipiira padma. 


{1359} “Its”—i.e., of Anahatapadma. 


{1360} The text has Rakini, but this is an error. 


{1361} Vishuddhapadma. 


{1363} Vishnu is specified by this particular Tantra, but it may be any other 


Devata who is the Ishtadevata of the Sadhaka (see p. 299). 


| | Vide v. 40 and Commentary under it. 


{1365} This seems an error, for the last Mahabhiita Akasha is dissolved in 
Vishuddha. 


{1506 f_Here 18 snOWN The ANULOMa Process. 


{1369} Le., that which is beyond Nada. See Introduction. 


{1370} Pung-Vindu; v. post. 


{1371} That is, the mouth of the Supreme Bindu (cited from Sharada 
Tilaka, Ch. V., vv. 134-136). Also cf. Sharada, Ch. XII., 123, and Kularnava 


ews 


{1373} Sic. This is in conflict with other passages, according to which 
Unmani is above Samani. 


2}_Cf. Sharada, Ch. XXV., _v. 51. 


{1374} Padmadalanaing varna mayatvat. 


} Adivarnatmakam patram padmanam parikirtitam. 


{1381} Brahman is Eternity and Bliss. 


{1382} The Channel in the Chitrinmadi. 


{1383} 


“The vessel is Kundalini, 


FAO AY OVS... ao 


413564} Damarasya. 


{1385}_Kuhara is a cavity; Kuharini would then be She whose abode is a 
wladhara. 


cavity—the cavity of the V 


{1388} See v. 52 and next note. 


{1389} That is, She recreates or revives as She returns to her own abode; 


{1391} Sura = Deva. 


e., Miiladhara. 


{1393} Because ambrosia (Amrita) gives life. 


{1394} Samarasya. 


{1395} Vishvanatha reads this as an adjective qualifying Daivatam, and this 
seems more in consonance with the text. The Brahmanda is compared to a 
Bhanda, and the Dev. e in that. The offering is then m. ith that 
stream of nectar to the Devatas who are in the Universe. Or, ¢ ding to 
Kalicharana, offering is made to the Devatas of the Amrita eich Kundalt 
has drunk. 


{1396} Daivatam is the collective form of Devatas. 


{1397} See Introduction. 


(aan?) rR. ei = Bese Bae Sloe Dts 8.2 Sa® ae. K 


398 }_Lne Guru wno nas given nim imitation. 
{1399} Sangkshaya = Pralaya. 
{1400} Nityananda = Brahman. 


{1401} Satam—lit., “of the Good.” 


{1402} This is from Ch. XII. of Niruttara Tantra. 


{1405} This verse is inserted as it was found in a manuscript belonging to 
the late Achalananda Svami, now in the possession of the Varendra 
Anusandhana Samiti. 


{1408}, wessioh ti hat is, seelke twelve petals. The petals of the lotus are not 
ir dep r the letters thereo 


Tantra, v. 7 7, post. There j is a, a neren re ih fee ‘lil 
by_deadly_ poison,” known as Nilakantha. 


Samipye sa saptami). 


{1413} Aing, 


4a 4 AW CPHL wa 8. SA oe cee De eee es Dad wa I hs Be OL cat ah. Trek. 2. Dak 2 


41414} Lnat is, 10 we unaerstana tnat the pogy OF potn tne Fitna ana tne 
petals is Aing, The Vagbhava Bija Aing is the Guru Bija also. 


{1415} This verse is quoted in full under v. 6, post. 


114161, Akathadi- —i.e. Le Ae ee — the hobo oii a Ka to Ta 
ind Tha to Sa. These letters placed as three lines form the three sides of the 


iastple, 


{1417} Le., the diagram where the Divinity is summoned and worshipped. 


{1418} Vindutrayangkurabhita 
sprouting shoot. 


{1419} Trivinduh sa trishaktih sa trimirtih sa sanatani. 


a asa sprout. The letters are sprouts from Bradue ¥ car is, ‘the 


Universe is evolved from Bindu 


{1421} The triangle, it should be remembered, has its apex downward. 


orale Vamiavartena. ilikhet, the ots is made in the direction which 


{1423} Le., the three Bindus considered as one and also separately. 


{1424} That is, on the left and right of the Yoni or the right and left of the 
spectator. 


{1425} Patala. 


{1426} Sakshatparashaktimaya. 


poate 2s Bie GS ee ae, NS eae I en ee IL a me oe a Be Bee. = 


{1431} The Bija of Sarasvati or Vagbhava Bija is Aing, Ai is the twelfth 


vowel. 


{1432} That is, the Paramahangsa which is both Prakriti and Purusha. 


{1433} Lit., “Light which devours the Universe.” 


= 


{1434} Le. 


, the union of Hang and Sah whereby the Hangsa is formed. 


! ted penn . Aah ihe nm ee of oe 
a for the ae suns (Aditya) which rise to burn the world at 


{1437} Reading vakribhita punarvame for vyaktibhiya punarvame. 


{1438} According to another reading, “By_the union of Ichchha and Jnana 


Raudn akes an aren Seamer = the p sieves above aul shows sh the 


{1439} Shiva is Guru. 
{1440} Le., Hang and Sah. The union of the two makes Hangsah. 


Ca 420247 Tees Let SS 2a me 2 PS. Da Pak 2 Menu se LR Wes Ten ets fe 


ee ee SakNa—tne Iriena OF tne Tlame OF Fire. BY_UIs 1S 
neant Vayu (air), As there is no Vayu in this region, therefore Vayu cannot 
i above the triangle or above Manipitha. 


{1442} Tasya parinatasya. Apparently the sense is that the three Bindus, or 
Hangsa,_are below, but that the triangle which they collectively form, or the 
Kamakala, is above, and in this sense the Hangsa is both above and below 
Manipitha. 


{1443}_Diospyros glutinosa. 


{1446} Cf. Mantrarna devatah prokta Devataguru-riipini. 


{1448} The Commentator does not say from which of the different 


Yamalas he has quoted this and the passage in the first group. 


{1449} _Sahajananda— 
Svabhava. 


—that is, the bliss springs up itself. This bliss is 


{1450} That is, apparently, if we regard that portion of the pericarp which is 
attached to the lotus as its head. 


remains ‘hens to ae consi Bats ve ee ‘of Hangs sa and the Kan or 
which they form. Both are one and the same, the first being the three 
Bindus,_and the second the triangle they make (Kamakala), from which 


emanates (and in this sense forms part of it) the lower A-ka-tha triangle (for 


eM ae Ate Ss se eo I, ee ae, a he Ss gees ae oe ate ee oN , IL Se Se RP eles 


tangle wl hich he iat are t ti fea sepa ae 


{1453} Shiva is seated facing the East. 


fie First being anes =e 7 


This file was downloaded from Z-Library project 


Z\ibrar 


Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. 


z-library.sk z-lib.gs zZ-lib.fm go-to-library.sk 


Official Telegram channel 


Z-Access 


W 


https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library 


