





Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 














Anecdota Oxoniengin dy ses 


A (ta rey AAW VY A Ko. 


wy 
THE Uttht 6 AD 


B AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


EDITED FROM THE MANUSCRIPTS 
IN THE INDIA OFFICE AND THE LIBRARY OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY 
WITH INTRODUCTION, TRANSLATION, NOTES, INDEXES 
AND AN APPENDIX CONTAINING THE PORTION HITHERTO UNPUBLISHED 
OF THE SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 





j 
7 
BY 


ARTHUR BERRIEDALE KEITH 


OF THE COLONIAL OFFICE 





Oxford 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


1909 





2 2 ee 


HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 


PREEALE 


THIS book owes its existence to the Boden Professor of Sanskrit, 
Dr. A. A. Macdonell, who suggested to me the writing of it, and who 
secured its acceptance for publication by the Delegates of the Clarendon 
Press. Professor Macdonell was also so good as to read the proofs 
of the first three sheets before he left England in 1907 for his tour in 
India, and for this and all the other help he has given me in the course 
of my Sanskrit studies I desire to express my most sincere thanks. 

The editing of the text has been rendered possible for me by the 
liberality of the India Office and of the Royal Asiatic Society, which 
lent to me the manuscripts on which the text is based. To the Secretary 
of the Society, Miss Hughes, and to the Librarian of the India Office, 
Mr. F. W. Thomas, I owe grateful acknowledgements of the assistance 
afforded me in this and other ways. . 

I have tried by the translation and commentary to extract as much 
as possible from the Aitareya Aranyaka, as I recognize that a text 
of this class should as far as practicable be made by its editor to yield 
all that can be derived from it for the knowledge of the period when 
it was produced. With this end in view I have added a series of Indexes 
which contain in great fullness the lexical material of the work, while the 
material will also serve for grammatical purposes, as in each case the 
precise form which occurs is specified. I need make no apology for the 
distinction made between the Mantra, the Aranyaka, and Siitra forms ; 
not to distinguish the different strata of the text would be merely 
misleading. 

In the commentary I have tried to avoid repeating what can easily 
be found in such standard works as the Sz. Petersburg Dictionaries, 
Colonel Jacob’s Concordance to the Upanisads, and Deussen’s treatise 
on the Philosophy of the Upanishads. Nor have I thought it worth while 
to note in detail the verbal coincidences between the Aitareya Brahmana 
and the Aranyaka. As might be expected they are constant and show 
unmistakeably the connexion of the two works. Some other points 
arising out of the book I hope to deal with elsewhere. 


th) 
nO 
Ch 
pia 
CO 


iv PREFACE 


I had not originally any intention of including in the book the text 
of a portion of the Saakhayana Aranyaka which now forms the 
appendix. I hoped that Dr. Friedlander would complete his pro- 
jected edition of that text, and it was only after a considerable portion 
of the book was in type that I learned that there was little or no 
prospect of the appearance of an edition at any early date. I then 
obtained the permission of the Delegates to print so much of the text 
of the Sankhadyana as was unpublished, and the Royal Asiatic Society 
were so good as to include a translation of the whole Aranyaka in their 
series of Oriental Translations, and to publish an article of mine on the 
Sahkhayana Aranyaka in the Journal of the Society for 1908. The 
translation and the article will be found to supplement in some important 
points the information as to the Sahkhayana contained in this book. 

The printing of the work has occupied over two years, and has 
entailed a good deal of trouble on all those concerned with it. I desire 
to express my thanks to Mr. R. W. Chapman, of the Clarendon Press, 
for the interest which he has taken in it and for valuable suggestions 
which he has made from time to time on points of form. It gives me 
also much pleasure to acknowledge the great pains taken by the Oriental 
Reader of the Clarendon Press, Mr. J.C. Pembrey, Hon. M.A. of Oxford, 
in dealing with the proofs. For such errors as remain I must accept 
responsibility. This is the fourth book of mine which has had the 
advantage of Mr. Pembrey’s care and skill, and I feel that it would 
be difficult to exaggerate the value of his assistance. 


A. BERRIEDALE KEITH. 


Lonpon, 
June 11, 1909. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 
I. The Text 
II, The Commentaries : 
III. Divisions of the Aranyaka aa ee date 


IV. The Mahavrata ceremony, and the relation of ee rea 
I and V to the Sankhayana Aranyaka 


V. The Upanisads of the Aitareya Aranyaka 
VI. Style and Grammar 


TEXT AND CRITICAL, NOTES 
TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


APPENDIX: SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA VII-XV 


INDEXES 


I. Quotations from Rgveda 
II. Quotations from other sources, &c. 
III. Proper Names, excluding those of Deities 
IV. Words in Verses other than Revedic, &c. . 
V. Words in Aranyakas I-III, other than words in quotations 


VI. Words in Aranyaka V, and in the parallel passages of dette 
Aranyaka I and II, other than words in quotations : . 


VII. Beginnings of Khandas of Aranyakas 
VIII. Introduction and Notes 


PAGE 


II 


15 


26 


39 
52 


15 


395 


329 
329 
334 
342 
344 
354 


378 
385 
388 


ei.) am 


ei oe ioe ous 


ris 


a 





THE AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


INTRODUCTION 


I. The Text. 


WHEY, in June, 1905, I commenced preparations for the production of 
an edition of the Aitareya Aranyaka, I was mainly influenced by the 
expectation, raised in part by the reference in Prof. Biihler’s Report? on 
his Kashmir journey to differences in the text in a birch-bark MS., that 
it might be possible to amend considerably the text of Rajendralala 
Mitra’s edition. Rajendralala used only two complete MSS. of the text, 
and three of Sayana’s commentary, besides three other MSS. of parts of 
the text or commentary, and it seemed reasonable to suppose that the 
employment of additional MS. material would add to the correctness 
of the text. This expectation has not been justified. The use of 
additional MSS. enables me to correct a good many slips and one or 
two serious omissions in Rajendralala’s text, but it establishes the fact 
that the tradition as to the text seems unbroken. Variant readings 
occur here and there, but none of sufficient importance to justify the 
idea that any different recensions of the text ever existed, and it is 
hardly ever possible to feel serious doubt as to the correct reading. 
What is especially important is that MSS. from both the extreme north— 
as Biihler’s MS. from Kashmir—and the south agree in presenting the 
same text. Further, the commentary of Sayana presents the same text 
as the commentaries of Sankara on Books II and III, and of Ananda- 
tirtha and Visvesvara on the same books. 


The MS, Material. 


The MSS. which directly or indirectly have been used for this edition 
are as follows :— 

1. A. This MS. is dated samvat 1854 (= A.D. 1797), and contains the 
text of the Aranyaka complete. It belonged to Colebrooke, who 


1 Journal Bombay Branch Royal Asiatic Society, 1877, Extra No., p. 34. 
\ KEITH B 


2 INTRODUCTION 


annotated it, and used it when writing his Essays. The substance of 
his note on the authorship, Essays, I, 46, occurs on fol. 60" of the MS. 
The MS. is No. 78 in Eggeling’s Catalogue of the Sanskrit MSS. in the 
Library of the India Office, Part I. Written on paper in Devanagari. 

2. B. This MS. is on birch-bark and in Sarada characters. It con- 
tains the Rgveda Samhita, the Khilakanda, and on ff. 188%-191, the 
Aitareya Aranyaka, Book III, only. It was discovered by Prof. Biihler, 
and the information it offers regarding the Khilas is discussed by Prof. 
Macdonell, Brhaddevata, I, xxxi. See also Max Miiller, S.B.£., I, 
ixxviii, Ixxix, who used it in preparing his translation of the Upanisad, 
and Dr. Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, pp. 32 sq., 167, 168. 
It probably dates about A.D. 1575.) 

The variants of this MS. have been referred to as important, both by 
Biihler and Dr. Scheftelowitz. This view appears to me erroneous. 
Whatever may be the value of the MS. for the criticism of the text of the 
Reveda,? it contributes, in my opinion, not a single correction to the text 
of Aranyaka III. It contains many errors, e.g. prajaya, prajayah for 
prajaya; samhitiya for samhitaya; sandhiny for sandhin ; abhydsam for 
abhyasam, &c. Most of its variants can be proved incorrect from the 
context. In III, 1, 4, cez is omitted in the first clause, but in the second 
cen occurs and it is most improbable that the word should be omitted in 
the first of two precisely parallel clauses. Then also chaknuvantam is 
read without the negative, which reduces the passage to nonsense. In 
III, 1, 5, parva is omitted before ripam, but the context urgently requires 
its presence; the words putra aha are also omitted, but leave madhyamah 
unintelligible, and ekikurvan for anekikurvan is contradicted by the next 
clause. In III, 1, 6, a whole clause is omitted because it begins and 
ends with the same words as the preceding clause; Zam is omitted 
in a Revedic quotation, while by diplography sa saisa@ditiz stands for 
saisaditih. Xn III, 2,1,an unnecessary 77 is inserted before eta¢ proktam, 
presumably because an 7#z is expected with the form proktam, and the 
whole phrase trayam tv eva na ity etat proktam is repeated in III, 2, 2, 
where it is not in place. In III, 2, 1, it is required because it contra- 
dicts a view of Hrasva Mandikeya that there was a fourth class. In 
III, 2, 2, the threefold division is accepted. The same tendency to 


1 See my note, J.R.A.S., 1907, p. * Cf. Oldenberg, Gétt. gel. Anz., 1907, 
225. PP. 235 sq. 


THE TEXT 3 


diplography is seen in the double ahar in the same section, In ITI, 2, a 
the obvious drahmanam appears for brahmanam, but just before we hae 
brahma rasah. In the list in III, 2, 2, manomayah is wanting, but it 
appears in the precisely similar list in III, 2, 3. Another omission is seen 
in nasyaniikte, III, 2, 4, for xa tasyanikte, and’mato has fallen out between 
‘gato and ’nato. The defective askandati is balanced by jivavisyati. 

Other alterations are inferior in sense. In III, 2, 4, vasariram for 
vasirasam after jihmasirasam postulates the possibility of perceiving 
a disembodied spirit, which is difficult ; candrama evadityo, ibid., is inferior 
to zvadityo; apagirati is required rather than avagirati, &c. 

The only passage in which B offers at first sight a better text is 
Ill, 2,6: Prajapatih prajth srstva vyasramsad & samvatsaram, where 
it may be suggested to take @ samvatsaram as = over a year. This 
is not quite impossible, but it is not likely, and then the proper form is 
undoubtedly the middle, cf. visramsata, Aitareya Brahmana, III, 27, &c. 
Further, it is very difficult to see how the standard text could ever have 
been altered from this reading. But palaeographically the corruption 
found here is quite easy. d and ¢/are not very different in Sarada MSS., 
and ¢ actually appears for dz in III, 2, 3, axuvitan for ane 
a much less easy mistake. Then a and 4 are often interchanged, as in 
anuvitan just cited, and in @nyani, III, 2, 3, for anyani; anusamhitam, 
III, 2, 6, for anusamhitam. samvatsaram may have followed when 
a became @, or have been an independent attempt at an easier reading. 

Other errors are the interchange of a and 2, “samhitah, III, 1, 1, for 
*samhatah ; batirakani, II, 2, 4, for datarakani; of a and e, the charac- 
teristic stroke for the latter being omitted, aguar and ratrisiktana, III, 
2,4. # is treated like vz and so written in rz¢e, III, 2, 2; so in the 
Khilas, V, 3, vajrin rijase is written for vajrinn; cf. Scheftelowitz, 
p. 175. zand 7Z are also confused. 

In some points the MS. is accurate. Before gutturals and labials the 
appropriate sign for # is used. For / s or 4s, S$ or ss always occur, and 
anusvara is practically never misused. After ~ and m duplication of 
consonants is regular, and for d “a is always written d dha. 

But on the whole, I consider the MS., though in many ways valuable, 
yet to contain many corruptions due in part to the errors inevitable in 
transcription and copying of Sdrada MSS. and in part to attempted cor- 
rection of the text. The result of the comparison with the text of the 

B 2 


4 INTRODUCTION 


Aranyaka and with the Sankhayana Aranyaka leads me to look with 
doubt on the readings of the MS. where they differ from other sources, 

3. C. This MS. was written in sake 1585 (= A. D. 1663), Sobha asadhavadt 
7 bhrgau by Saradanandavamgodbhava Mahadeva. The first sixteen 
leaves, however, are in a different hand and originally formed part of 
another MS. They contain part of Book II, while the rest of the MS. 
contains part of Book III (ff. 17-103) and the last Khanda of the third 
Adhyaya of Book V, in each case with Sayana’s commentary. See 
Eggeling, No. 83. Written on paper in Devanagari. 

4. D. This MS. is one of the Whish collection in the Library of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. It is on palm-leaves and in Grantha characters, 
legible and not very incorrect. See Thomas in Winternitz, Catalogue of 
South Indian Sanskrit Manuscripts, No. 191. It contains the Aranyaka 
complete. Its probable date is A.D. 1700, 

5. E. This MS. was presented by Dr. Burnell to the India Office. 
It is fairly well written in Grantha characters on palm-leaves. It is No. 
84 of Dr. Burnell’s collection, see Catalogue of a Collection of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts, Part 1, Vedic Manuscripts. It contains the Aranyaka 
complete. It probably dates from the eighteenth century. 

6. F. This MS. belonged to Colonel Claud Martin, and like G 
appears to have been presented to the India Office by Colebrooke. It 
forms part of a corpus, consisting of the Asvalayana Srauta Siitra, 
Pirvasatka (ff. 1-20), Uttarasatka (ff. 1-11), Grhya Sitra (ff. 1-17), 
Sarvanukramani (ff. 17.24), and Aranyaka (ff. 25-35). It contains the 
Aranyaka complete. See Eggeling, No. 80. Written on paper in 
Devanagari about the end of the eighteenth century. 

7. G. Like F this MS. belonged to Col. Claud Martin, and was presented 
to the India Office by Colebrooke. It also contains a corpus, consisting 
of Agvalayana Srauta Siitra, Pirvasatka (ff. 1-64), Uttarasatka (ff. 1-40), 
Grhya Sitra (ff. 1-26), Sarvanukramant (ff. 1-28), and Aranyaka (ff. I-45), 
complete. See Eggeling, No. 79. Written on paper in Devanagari about 
the end of the eighteenth century. This MS. is closely connected with F. 

8. H. This MS. contains the commentary of Vigvegvaratirtha on 
a commentary by Anandatirtha on Books II and III of the Aranyaka. 
The text is not cited in full, but the commentary shows that it was 
identical with the text of Sdyana. See Eggeling, No. 84. Written on 
paper in Devanagari in the seventeenth century. 


THE TEXT 5 


9. I. This MS. contains Sayana’s commentary on Book IT, 4-7. It is 
dated sake 1685 (= A.D. 1763). See Eggeling, No. 88. Written on 
paper in Devanagari. It formerly belonged to Colebrooke. Very 
inaccurate. 

10. J. This symbol denotes two copies of Sankara’s commentary on 
Book II, 4-6, dated Sake 1665 (= A.D. 1743) and samvat 1848 
(=A.D. 1791). See Eggeling, Nos. 85 and 86. Written on paper in 
Devanagari. Only pratikas are cited, but the commentary shows the 
usual text. They formerly belonged to Colebrooke. 

11. K. This MS. contains the Aranyaka complete. It was written by 
Devagovinda Raya at Benares in sam 1827, Sake 1692 (= A.D. 1770), and 
was presented by Colebrooke to the India Office. See Eggeling, No. 81. 
Written on paper in Devanagari. 

12. L. This MS. contains the Aranyaka complete. It was written in 
Sake 1684, samvat 1819 (= A.D. 1762). See Eggeling, No. 82.* Written 
on paper in Devanagari. This MS. is closely connected with K. 

13. M. This MS. contains the text of the Upanisad together with 
Sankara’s commentary and Anandatirtha’s super-commentary. Ananda- 
tirtha here is styled Abhinavanarayanendra as in several other MSS. ‘This 
is one of the MSS. in the Bodleian, and is described in Winternitz and 
Keith’s Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, 
No. 977. Written on paper in Devanagari in A.D. 1819. 

14. N. This MS. has the same contents as M, and Anandatirtha is 
here also styled Abhinavanarayanendra. It is one of the Wilson collec- 
tion in the Bodleian ; see the Catalogue, No. 1010 (5). Written on paper 
in Devanagari about A.D. 1801. 

15. O. This MS. contains, like H, Visvesvaratirtha’s commentary on 
Anandatirtha’s commentary on Books II and III of the Aranyaka. It is 
one of the Wilson MSS. in the Bodleian, see the Catalogue, No. 1011 (3). 
Written on paper in Devanagari about the end of the sixteenth century. 

16. P. This MS. contains Sankara’s commentary on Book II of the 
Aranyaka, but is imperfect, extending only to Adhyayas 1-3 and a small 
partof 4. It is one of the Mill collection in the Bodleian and is described 
in the Catalogue, No. 1014 (1). Written on paper in Devanagari in the 
eighteenth century. 

17. Q. This MS. contains the Upanisad with Saikara’s commentary 
and Anandatirtha’s (called Abhinavanarayanendra) super-commentary. 


6 INTRODUCTION 


See Eggeling, No. 87. Written on paper in Devanagari in sayvat 1853 
(= A.D. 1796). ; 

18-25. R*~® are the MSS. used by Rajendralala Mitra for his 
edition, Aztareya Aranyaka with the Commentary of Sayana Acarya, 
Bibl. Ind., Nos. 325, 329, 335, 337, and 345, Calcutta, 1875-1876. Their 
description is (Introd., pp. 20, 21) as follows :— 

Ka (= RB), lent by Pandit Vamana, of the Benares Sanskrit College, 
dated samvat 1816 (=A.D.1759), virodhisamvatsare karttikasukla- 
saptamyam Visvesvararajadhanyam. It contained the commentary of 
Sayana on the whole Aranyaka. 

Kha(=R8?), from the Sanskrit College at Calcutta, containing 
Sayana’s commentary on Books I and II. Apparently old. 

Ga (= B*), from Dr. G. Bihler, of Bombay, dated sra@vanavadi 30 
Sanivare Sake 1788 (= A.D. 1866) ksayandmasamwatsare, containing the 
commentary complete. 

Gha (= R*), copied for Rajendralala under the superintendence of 
Babu Amrtalala of Benares and collated with two different codices, the 
codex copied being dated samvat 1828 (= A.D. 1771) Ssravanavadi 2 
It contained the commentary complete. 

Ka (= BR’), copied for Rajendralala under Amrtalala’s superintendence 
and collated with a MS. dated samvat 1775 (= A.D. 1718) kilakanama- 
samvatsare daksinayane varsa rtau bhadrapade masi krsnapakse bhrguva- 
sare taddine pustakam samaptam. It contained the text complete. 

Kha (= RB*), copied for Dr. Burnell, of Mangalore, and lent to Rajen- 
dralala. The original belonged to a pandit in Tanjore. It contained 
the text complete. Cf E. 

' Ga (= BR’), from the Library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, con- 
taining Book II only of the text, written in the Saka year named Vyaya 
by Narayana, of Candrapira, for his master Sivarama. 

Gha (= R*), from the Library of the Sanskrit College, Calcutta, 
containing Book IV, with Sdyana’s commentary, 

Of these ka and kha (presumably R® and R°) are said to belong to 
the same class. But it is clear that Rajendralala merely compiled an 
eclectic text from the various MSS., and that he did not contemplate 
a critical text. R denotes the reading of the edition wh 
rest on all the MSS. available. 


26-34. S*~° are the MSS. used in the edition in the Anandagrama 


en it appears to 


THE TEXT j 


series, 1898, No. 38, with Sayana’s commentary by Babasastri Phadake. 
They are as follows :-— 

_ Ka (=$*), containing text and commentary complete, belonging to 
Srimat Gurumaharaja, of Karavirapura. 

Kha (= $*), containing text and commentary complete, belonging to 
Gangadhara Sastri Datara, of Punyapattana. 

Ga(= $°) and Gha (= $*), containing text and commentary complete, 
from the Anandasrama library. 

Na (= $°), containing text and commentary of Books II-IV, belong- 
ing to Bhatsaheba Balasaheba Kibe, of Indurapura. 

Ca (= $°) and Cha (=87), containing text only, from the Ananda- 
Srama library. 

Fa (= $®), containing text only, belonging to Bhatisaheba Balasaheba 
Kibe, of Indirapura. 

Fha (= 8°), containing text only, belonging to Sankararava Bhagavata, 
of Thane. 

There is no doubt that some care has been taken in giving the variant 
readings which are practically confined to the commentary. Where the 
MSS. appear to agree, S is used to denote the reading of the edition. 
The text of the Aranyaka in this edition contains some errors and 
omissions, but is superior to that of Rajendralala. 

35. T. This is the version found in the collection of 108 Upanisads 
published in Telugu character at Madras in 1883. It contains no 
important variants, and seems conclusively to prove that the South had 
no separate recension. See Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad’s des Veda, 
p- 534. In view of Sankara’s influence in Southern India, this was only 
to be expected. 

36. U. This symbol is used to denote the text of the Upanisad with 
Sankara’s commentary, Anandatirtha’s super-commentary, and with 
Vidyaranya’s (Sayana’s) Dipika, published in the Anandasrama series, 
1889, No. 11. For this edition were used five MSS. (ka, kha, ga, gha, 
ma) of the text, commentary, and super-commentary ; six MSS. (ca, cha, 
ja, jha, tha, da) of the commentary, two MSS. (ka, kha) of the text 
alone, and four MSS. (ha, kha, ga, gha) of the Dipika, besides two editions 
(fia, ta). The variants are, however, almost confined to the commentary. 

37. W. This MS. contains Sayana’s commentary on Book I of the 
Aranyaka. It is on palm-leaves and in Malayalam characters, and is very 


8 INTRODUCTION 


inaccurate. It is one of the Whish MSS. in the Library of the Royal 
Asiatic Society. See Winternitz, No. 1 (b), who assigns it to the 
eighteenth or nineteenth century. 

38. X. This MS. contains Sankara’s commentary on Books II and III 
of the Aranyaka. It is written on palm-leaves in Malayalam characters. 
The MS. is much damaged. It is No. 158 in Winternitz’s Catalogue, 
and may be assigned to the seventeenth century. 

Of these MSS. I have collated all save R1-8, S'~°, and those used in 
U. There are many other MSS. and editions of the Upanisad in 
existence and several MSS. of the Aranyaka (see Aufrecht, Catalogus 
Catalogorum, s. vv.), but there is no reason to suppose that any of them 
would add anything new to the text. Max Miiller used (cf. S.B.£., 
I, xcvii) a MS. of the text with Sankara and Anandatirtha’s com- 
mentaries, and also a commentary by Sankara! on Book III, Adhyaya 1, 
but he states that the MSS. he used gave little aid. It appears from 
Weber’s Catalogue that the Berlin MSS. have no independent value. 

The MSS. used are on the whole decidedly inferior. They are modern 
copies and contain many clerical errors. No useful purpose would be 
served by recording all the blunders of the scribes. I have therefore 
printed only those which seemed of more importance, either textually 
or palaeographically, save in the case of B, in view of the special—if 
somewhat artificial—interest of that MS. 

In Rajendralala’s edition, and in Max Miiller’s translation of the first 
three books of the Aranyaka (S.B.£Z., 1), the text, besides the division 
into Adhyayas and Khandas shown in all the MSS., is divided into short 
sections which are numbered. These numbers seem to be attributable to 
Rajendralala himself, as there is no trace of them in any of the MSS. 
I have used or in the Anandagrama edition. The divisions follow the 
treatment by Sayana of the text in his commentary, but they cannot be 
said to bealways satisfactory, consistent, or convenient, and I have not felt 
bound to adopt them. None of the MSS. show any satisfactory or 
consistent punctuation—such a punctuation being practically unknown 
in Sanskrit MSS. of prose works—and I have therefore adopted what 
seemed to me the most convenient punctuation. 


} That this is the correct description of author (Wickremasinghe, 7. 2. A.S., 1902, 
the work follows from a comparison with _ p. 632). 
X, though the MS. does not name the 


HE TEXT. 9 


In the Upanisad (II, 4-6), within the Khandas there is a division into 
sections in accordance with Sankara’s commentary which differs greatly 
from that of Sayana, and which has been adopted in the editions of the 
Upanisad. This enumeration might have been retained for convenience 
of reference, but for the sake of consistency I have preferred to 
omit it. 

With regard to the text of Sayana’s commentary it may be observed 
that neither Rajendralala nor the Anandasrama edition gives a very 
correct version. It is clear that Rajendralala freely corrected his 
MSS., and that even the numerous variants given in the Anandasrama 
do not exhaust the variations of reading. Curiously enough the editors 
of the latter cannot have consulted the former. For example the com- 
mentary on madhumati in V, 2, 2, reads: saraso (casau is suggested as 
a correction) madhvadimadhuryarasopetatvan madhuman. Rajendralala 
has: sa ca somajyadimadhuryarasopetatvan madhuman, which, as the 
noun is (wpa) prakse glossed as yagapradese, is neat and convincing. Or 
again V, 2, 1, where Rajendralala has the obvious savah vairinam balam, 
while the Anandagrama has [vairi] 2am [Savo?] balam, while just after 
im ativyathir is rendered according to Rajendralala exam: Ssatrum 
atisayena calitavan,and according to the Anandasrama zmam satium &c. 
One MS., S*, has saztwm, and of course there is no easier mistake in 
MSS. than that of ¢r, ¢t, and uz, while interchange of sibilants is constant. 
Or again in the quotations at the end of V, 1, 5, both editions present 
bad texts, but Rajendralala has efac carma while the Anandasrama has 
etac ca karma, which in view of the context is absurd. Many other 
instances could be quoted, and undoubtedly either in many places 
Rajendralala’s MSS. were superior or his critical judgement was better, 
probably the former. Further, there are repeated,—sometimes very 
serious, e. g. I, 5, 2,—omissions in the Anandaégrama text, and in places, 
e.g. I, 5, 1, the text has been badly confused. 

On the other hand, there are many instances where the Anandaérama 
text is superior to that of Rajendralala. For example the note in the 
latter edition on II, 3, 4, p. 226, line 3 from foot, adhyanajapyan* 
anenaikapaksah is meaningless, but a perfectly good sense is given by 
the Anandagrama reading (see note on p. 135) Dhananyayyam. 


1 Cf. the absurd reading in the ed. of Latyayana Srauta Siitra, III, 12, 11, 
Dhanamjapyak. 


10 INTRODUCTION 


The comparison of the two editions would give a satisfactory text 
in all respects save in quotations from unknown works. In these 
Rajendralala is usually superior to the Anandasrama, but neither is very 
accurate, and further MS. authority would be requisite. 

From a comparison of the recorded readings the MSS. of the com- 
mentary appear to be divisible into the following classes, (1) R', and 
R3, with which may be classed C, and so far as it goes I; (2) S14, S?, 
S4, S®, which approach closely to class (1),—in this class St and S?, and 
S* and S® are closely related; (3) S* which falls into a distinct class of 
its own; (4) R? and R* which again form a distinct class, and (5) W. 

The MS. material available would not suffice to form a text either of 
Saikara’s commentary on the Aranyakas II and III, or of Vigvegvara’s 
super-commentary on Anandatirtha’s commentary on those Aranyakas, 
the more so in the latter case that no MSS. of the commentary itself 
have yet come to light. 

In the edition of Rajendralala and in the MSS. A and E only are 
accents used. These accents are clearly confined to those verses not 
occurring in the Reveda Samhita which are quoted in full in the Ara- 
nyaka V. Unfortunately in the edition the accents are often obviously 
incorrect, one word having two accents, or a series of words being incor- 
rectly accented so as to show that an error in printing must have taken 
place. The MSS. also, as often, are carelessly and inaccurately accented, 
and it is therefore not possible to lay stress on the accentuation of any 
rare words, especially compounds. The matter is of little consequence, 
however, as the total number of accented words is small, and nearly all, 
save a few compound words, are recorded in well-accented texts. 

It may here be mentioned that I have, wherever necessary, restored 
correct spellings, e.g. pattram, not patram, and have, in accordance with 
the normal practice of the MSS.} omitted visarga before a sibilant 
followed by a hard consonant. In the case of ch I have never inserted 
the c,? but in deference to the ordinary practice I have always written 
tad ahi, not tad ht, and, of course, uddhrtya for ud-hrtya. On the other 


* Cf. Macdonell, Brhaddevata, 1, xxvi, 
n. 4. Allowed by Varttika on Panini, 
VAS 230. 

2 Cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 227. In Lanman’s edition of Whitney’s 
translation of the Atharvaveda ch is 


written everywhere, even when cch repre- 
sents an assimilated letter +ch, e.g. 
brhachaniz, in which case cch is used in 
this edition. Cf., however, Wackernagel, 
Altindische Grammatth, 1,154 sq.; Mac- 


donell, Vedic Grammar, p. 31. 


THE TEAT 11 


hand, duplication after has been omitted, though it is usual in all the 
MSS., while the avagraha is inserted wherever it is properly required 
despite its omission in the MSS. The nasal in Pluti is represented by the 
ardhacandra mark. In R the ordinary anusvara is used as is done in 
the MSS., but not in S. 


II. The Commentaries. 


The commentaries on the Aranyaka which I have used are the 
following :— 

1. Sankara’s commentary on the Upanisad (II, 4-6). Satkara’s date 
has now, through the evidence of the Aryavidyasudhakara and Pathak’s 
researches (¥ournal Bombay Branch Royal Asiatic Society, XVIII, 88, 
218 sq.), been definitely fixed from A.D. 788 to.the middle of the ninth 
century. The date A.D. 820, formerly assigned to his death, must refer 
to the commencement of his labours. This commentary has been 
repeatedly printed, best in the Anandagrama series, Poona, 1889. 

2. Sankara’s commentary on Book II, the first part of the Mahaita- 
reyopanisad. This is only available in the MSS. P and X, neither of 
which presents an accurate text. In the Adhyayas 4-6, it is, of course, 
identical with (1). Fortunately the analogy of Sayana’s commentary on 
Adhyayas 4-6 and comparison of the two commentaries on Adhyayas 1-3 
establish the fact that Sayana followed Sankara with considerable fidelity. 

3. Sankara’s commentary on Book III, the Samhitopanisad. This is 
only available in the MS. X, but is followed by Sayana. 

4. Anandatirtha’s super-commentary on Safkara’s commentary on 
the Upanisad. Anandatirtha is said to have died in A.D. 1198, and to 
have been a pontiff of the Madhva sect (Bhandarkar, Report on the 
Search for Sanskrit Manuscripts, 1882, 1883, pp. 18, 103). The date has 
recently been questioned by Harikrsna Sastrin (Epier. Ind., V1, 261), who 
prefers to date him from A.D, 1238-1317, on epigraphic evidence of 
considerable weight. This commentary has frequently been printed, best 
in the Anandagrama series. As has been mentioned above, in several 
MSS. the commentary is attributed to Abhinavanarayanendra, who in 

‘one of the MSS. in the Bodleian Library (Catalogue, No. 977) is thus 
described : iti srimatkaivalyemdrasarasvatipijyapadasisyasrimathanem- 
drasarasvatipijyapadasisyasrimadabhinavanarayanendrasarasvativira- 
citayam Aitareyabhasyatikayam \ There can be little doubt but that we 


12 INTRODUCTION 


must assume Anandatirtha’s real name to have been Abhinavanaraya- 
nendra Sarasvati, especially as he is indifferently called Anandatirtha, 
Anandagiri, or Anandajfiana, the name he probably took as pontiff.t 
Cf. also No. 1010 (3) in the Catalogue, where he is called Narayanendra 
Sarasvati. 

5. Vigveévaratirtha’s super-commentary on Anandatirtha’s com- 
mentary on Books II and III. This is only available in the MSS. 
H and O, and no MSS. of the commentary itself appear to be extant. 
Anandatirtha, who is called dhagavatpadacarya, must, I think, be 
identical with the Anandatirtha above mentioned, and must have 
written two different works in connexion with the Aranyaka, first the 
super-commentary on Sankara’s commentary,and second an independent 
commentary on the Aranyaka, in which he interprets it in a Vaisnava 
sense. Max Miiller(.S.2. £., I, xcviii) appears to doubt this identity, but 
it must be remembered that Anandatirtha was a Madhva and so not 
unlikely to be disposed to adopt a Vaisnava interpretation, and that 
there is nothing rare in Indian literary history in finding an author 
ready to comment on both sides of a question. Compare the case of 
Vacaspatimisra,’ who wrote commentaries on the works of all the philoso- 
phical schools save one. Further the interpretation of Sankara had 
always to contend against that of Ramanuja,? and it was by no means 
unnatural for a scholar like Anandatirtha to set forth both views, the 
Vaisnava interpretation representing his own. 

Visvesvaratirtha appears to have been the pupil of Anandatirtha, and 
to have written this work in the lifetime of his master, as is indicated 
by verse 3 of the introduction: Aztareyopanisado vyakurmo bhasyam 
uttamam \ Ssrimadanamdatirtharyan natva tatpritikamukah W3W It is 
worth noting that Jayatirtha, the successor of Anandatirtha, similarly 
wrote a super-commentary on Anandatirtha’s commentary on the Pragna 
Upanisad, and that that commentary is distinct from Anandatirtha’s 
super-commentary on the commentary of Sankara on that Upanisad.* 
The same remark 5 applies to Anandatirtha’s commentary on the Isavasya 
Upanisad and to his super-commentary on the commentary of Sankara 

* So Jayatirtha’s original name was * See Thibaut,: S.2.2,, XLVIIEe 


Raghunatha, Bhandarkar, 1. c. J.R.A.S., 1906, pp. 490 sq. 
* See Cowell and Gough, Translation * See the Bodleian Catalogue, No. 
of Sarvadarsanasamgraha, Preface, p.vii, 1013 (2). 


vil ig ® Ibid., No. 1013 (3). 


THE COMMENTARIES ig 


on that Upanisad. Visvesvara was evidently closely connected with 
Anandatirtha, as a MS. of Anandatirtha’s super-commentary on Sankara’s 
commentary on the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad of the seventeenth century 
is described by a later hand as Visvesvardnandatirthamathastham 
(Bendall, Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the British “Museum, 
p. 15). Bendall, l.c., refers to a commentary by Visvesvaratirtha on 
the super-commentary of Anandatirtha on the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
but the evidence cited above leaves little doubt but that the commentary 
of Vigvegvaratirtha is on an independent commentary by Anandatirtha 
and not on his super-commentary. The exact locality of this Math is 
unknown, but Jayatirtha, it may be noted, was a native of Mangalavedhem 
near Pandharpur. { 

6, Sayana’s commentary on the whole Aranyaka. Besides the edi- 
tion of Rajendralala Mitra and that in the Anandagrama series, I have 
used MSS. C,I, and W. There are many minor variants in the text, 
but there is no trace of any double recension. In the Anandasrama 
edition of the Upanisad the commentary is attributed to srimatpara- 
mahamsaparivrajakacaryavidyaranyamuni. This, as Klemm has shown 
in the Gurupijakaumudi, is the title of Madhava, the brother of Sayana, 
and not of Sayana. This attribution to Madhava is an error; Sayana, 
in the preface, tells us distinctly that the work is his: tatkataksena 
tadriipam dadhad Bukkamahipatih \ adzsat Sayanacaryam vedarthasya 
prakasane\3\\ In all probability it was genuinely composed by Sayana 
himself; it agrees with his Rgveda commentary in general, and was 
written after the commentary on the Aitareya Brahmana. It was written 
probably under Bukka I, who was certainly reigning in A.D.1354. That 
Sayana died in A.D. 1387 is probably an error, though that may be the 
year of Madhava’s death. His commentary throughout is dependent on 
that of Sankara on Books II and III, as he admits in the introduction 
to Book II. 

Sankara, Anandatirtha in his super-commentary, and Sayana all inter- 
pret the Upanisads in II and III in the light of the Vedanta. On the 
other hand, Vigvesvara in the super-commentary follows Anandatirtha in 
giving a Vaisnava interpretation. I have not followed either view. The 
Upanisads can only be satisfactorily explained by regarding them as 
what they are, early attempts at philosophy, and by refraining from 
reading later ideas into them. The interpretations given by the com- 


14 INTRODUCTION 


mentators have, however, a value as showing the development of 
philosophical ideas, and I have therefore whenever desirable referred to 
them. In several cases too they afford great assistance in the inter- 
pretation of the text. 

It may here be mentioned! that most of Book II, that is, Adhyayas 
I-3, 4, and Adhyayas 4-6, are translated by the author of the Persian 
translation which was made for Dara Shukoh between A.D. 1656-1657, 
and retranslated into Latin in 1801, 1802, by Anquetil Duperron. This 
translation, besides being much less intelligible than the original, adds, 
as far as I can see, nothing substantial to our knowledge. 

The commentary of Sankara establishes for the ninth century the text 
of the second and third books of the Aranyaka as we now have them. 
Whether there were variants in his time we cannot determine with 
certainty, as his text has clearly alone formed the subject of study. The 
other commentators all depend to some degree on him. Anandatirtha, 
in his own work, uses him, and Sayana uses both him and Anandatirtha. 
The evidence for the time before Sankara is wanting. The later 
Upanisads borrowed their doctrines and phrases from works which were 
more developed and displayed more literary pretensions than the Aitareya, 
while the secular literature makes no direct quotations. All we can say 
is that the Moksadharma of the Mahabharata and Badarayana in his 
Brahma Sutra (III, 3, 16,17) probably used the Aitareya Upanisad,? 
but the next evidence is again Sankara’s commentary on those Sitras. 

Though strict proof beyond Saikara cannot be attempted, there is no 
reason to doubt the integrity of the text of these books. They are not, 
in subject-matter, open to easy interpolation, and in all probability in 
their present form they fairly represent their original shape in the time 
of Saunaka. 

Nor is there any special reason to assume alteration in the verses which 
make up Book IV, for which there is considerable independent evidence. 

For Books I and V we have no earlier authority than Sayana. But 
he appears to have had before him a fixed text, and the various readings 
which he gives are practically limited to the last chapter of V, 3, the 
contents of which certainly lay it open to interpolation: yet Sayana of 


Cf eMax — Miller, SB. Z., <1, lvii * Cf. Deussen, Philosophie der Upani- 
sq-; Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad’s, pp. shad’s, p. 28; English Translation, Dacor 
535 sq. and, for the Moksadharma, note on II, 5. 


THE COMMENTARIES 15 


course was not the first to write a commentary on the Aranyaka. He 
expressly refers, on V, 1, 1, to differences of interpretation, as to whether 
tivrasyabhivayasah (RV., X, 160, 1) meant four verses or one only 
according to rule, and on V, 3, 3, he refers to differences both of reading 
and of opinion. We are therefore justified in regarding the text he 
gives as practically a textus receptus by the fourteenth century A.D. 

Whether or not it is original cannot be answered with certainty. 
Amongst others, Hillebrandt (Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, pp. x-xv) 
considers that the text of the Siitras is much altered from the original, 
but in the case of the Aranyaka I, or V, it would be difficult to prove 
this doctrine, inasmuch as the Aranyaka seldom presents the truly 
remarkable variety of rules and exceptions shown by the present text 
of Sankhayana. Further the text of the first book assists in checking 
the fifth book, and appears throughout to agree with it. Again in the 
former case, where the work is a true Aranyaka, the idea of later altera- 
tion is less probable than in a formless work like the fifth book, which is 
practically a Siitra itself. Moreover, although a certain fluidity of text 
may be admitted in the Siitras, the extent of such fluidity appears to be 
greatly exaggerated by ‘Hillebrandt. 


III. The divisions of the Aranyaka and their date. 


There is some uncertainty as to the exact meaning of the word 
Aranyaka. Sayana gives two somewhat different interpretations of it. 
In the preface to the Aitareya Brahmana (Aufrecht’s edition, p. ili) he 
describes it as Aranyavrataripam brihmanam; in the preface to the 
Aranyaka itself he says: Aittareyabrahmane ’sti kandam Aranyaka- 
bhidham \ aranya eva pathyatvad aranyakam itiryate \5\\ and: sattra- 
prakarane’nuktir aranyidhyayanaya hi \ mahavratasya tasyatra hautram 
karma vivicyate \8\ The latter view is energetically supported by 
Oldenberg,! and is adopted by Macdonell.2. The former has the support 
of Weber, and Deussen ‘ argues in favour of it on the ground that the 
aim of the Aranyakas was to supply a substitute for the sacrificial rites 
to be used by Vanaprasthas. This view, however, is rather far-fetched. 
The Aranyaka seems originally to have existed to give secret explana- 
tions of the ritual, and to have presupposed that the ritual was still in 
use and was known. No doubt the tendency was for the secret explana- 


1 Prolegomena, p. 291. 3 Indian Literature, p. 48. 
2 Sanskrit Literature, p. 34. 4 Philosophie der Upanishad’s, p. 3. 


16 INTRODUCTION 


tion to grow independent of the ritual until the stage is reached where _ 
the Aranyaka passes into the Upanisad, and contemporaneously the life 
of the Hindu is differentiated into the four Asramas. But originally an 
Aranyaka must have merely meant a book of instruction to be given 
in the forest. 

It is not now possible to decide exactly why the Aitareya Brahmana 
does not deal with the Mahavrata rite. In Sayana’s time it was already 
held that the author of the Aitareya Brahmana was also the author 
of the Aitareya Aranyaka, Books I-III,’ and Sankara may con- 
ceivably have held the same view, as he calls the Upanisad the 
Bahvrcabrahmana Upanisad.? It is, however, impossible to accept this 
version as correct. It is probable enough that Mahidasa Aitareya is 
the editor or arranger of the Aitareya Brahmana, as Aufrecht thought. 
It is true that the Aitareya Brahmana is not in all probability the 
work of one hand or period,? but it must have been at some early 
date welded into one work, and tradition may fairly be considered 
to have given us the name of the man who did it. We know from 
Panini, V, 1, 62, that in his day Brahmanas of thirty and forty 
Adhyayas existed, and Weber’s* conjecture that the reference is to the 
Sankhayana and Aitareya Brahmanas is almost certainly correct. But 
though we can fairly ascribe to Mahidasa the arrangement of the 
Brahmana, it would be incorrect to ascribe to him even the first three 
books of the Aranyaka, since in them he is cited as a teacher. He is 
named expressly in II, 1, 8 and 3, 7, and is clearly referred to in I, 1, 1. 
This must be taken as decisive*® against his authorship of these books 
of the Aitareya Aranyaka, though it is clear that some of his views are 
expressed in them. We may perhaps suppose that Mahidasa, besides 
editing the Brahmana, was a philosopher of some distinction, since 
otherwise his name would hardly have come down to us. . Of his life 
we know nothing. Sayana tells us a legend of his being the son of 


1 See Aufrecht’s edition of the Brah- 
mana, p. ili; Max Miiller, S.2.Z., 1, civ. 

2 Max Miller, l.c., p. xcii. 

* See Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 
p- 205. 

* Indian Literature, p. 45. 

° So Rajendralala, Introduction, p. 8; 
Weber, /udian Literature, p. 48 ; and cf, 


Macdonell, Brhaddevata, 1, xxiii, for a 
similar case. See also, however, Weber, 
ind, Stud., XIII, 322 sq., according to 
whom Patajijali appears to allude to him- 
self in the third person. This, however, is 
less likely to be the case at so early a date 
as that of Mahidasa, though later, it is not 
rare. 


THE DIVISIONS OF THE ARANYAKA Uy, 


Itara; Anandatirtha, in his original commentary, describes him as the 
son of Visala and an incarnation of Narayana. Perhaps there is some 
truth in the reference to him in the Chandogya Upanisad, III, 16, 7, 
and the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, IV, 2, where he is said to have 
lived for 116 years; at any rate it shows that he was a famous sage and 
probably a real person. 

The three books attributed to him can on internal evidence be divided 
into four parts. The first book consists of an explanation of the 
Mahavrata from a ritualistic and allegorical point of view. It describes 
the different Sastras of the morning, midday and evening libations of the 
Mahavrata day of the Gavamayana, a theme touched on in the Aitareya 
Brahmana, III, 1-38, IV, 14, but indulges in further allegorical play 
of ideas. On the whole it bears a close resemblance in contents and 
style to the Brahmana, but it is doubtless more recent in date, or it 
would have been included in the Brahmana. Sayana in his introduction 
to Book V calls it an apauruseyam brahmanam, and Sankara calls the 
Upanisad similarly Bahvrcabrahmana Upanisad. 

The second book consists of two distinct parts. The first, comprising 
Adhyayas 1-3, deals with the allegorical signification of the Uktha, that 
is the Niskevalya Sastra, three sets of eighty verses, which was the 
midday Sastra of the Mahavrata, as being Prana or Purusa. It is not 
directly connected with Book I, and it is doubtless later than it. The. 
second part comprises Adhyayas 4-6, and is the Upanisad par excellence. 
It is probably later than part one. 

The third book treats of the mystic meaning of the various forms 
of the text of the Samhita, the nirbhuja, pratrnna and ubhayamantarena, 
and of the vowels, semivowels and consonants. It quotes Mandikeya 
and Sakalya among others, and makes use of the above terms to describe 
the samhita, pada, and krama pathas of the Samhita. These are so far 
signs of late origin, but at the same time the treatment of the subject- 
matter is at a much earlier stage than that reached by Yaska or the 
authors of the Pratisakhyas. It will be seen later that its philosophical 
view is more advanced than that of the Upanisad proper, and it can 
probably be dated about the sixth cent. B.c. This result is important, 


1 The references to Aitareya and Ma- III, 4, 4, throw no light on him, and are 
haitareya in Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, probably late; cf. Hopkins, Great Epic 
IV, 10, 3, and Asvalayana Grhya Sitra, of Jndia, p. 390. 

& 


KEITH 


18 INTRODUCTION 


as it gives us a lower date for the.rest of the earlier books of the 
Upanisad. 

The fourth book consists solely of the Mahanamni verses. The presence 
of these verses is explained by Sayana on the ground that they must be 
studied in the forest. Their use is set forth by Asvalayana in his Srauta 
Siitra, VII, 12, 10, where he says that on the fifth day of the six day 
Prsthya rite after the Marutvatiya Sastra, when the Niskevalya Sastra 
is being performed, ‘if the Udgatrs make the Sakvarasiman the Prstha 
Stotra, then the nine verses called the Mahanamnis and certain purisa- 
padas, to fill up the lines, are to be used.’ Tradition ascribes this 
Aranyaka to Aégvalayana. Sadgurusisya, in his account of the works 
of Agvalayana, says!: dvadasadhpayakam sittram catuskam grhyam eva 
ca caturtharanyakam ceti hy Asvalayanasitrakam\ This view, however, 
has been questioned in connexion with the authorship of the fifth book. 

The fifth book consists mainly of a description in a Satra style of 
the Niskevalya Sastra, the great Sastra of the midday libation of the 
Mahavrata. It forms a sort of complement to Book I, which is 
the Brahmana as contrasted with the Sttra. The natural conclusion 
is, therefore, that ASvalayana wrote Book V. The arguments? in favour 
of this view are: (1) Book IV contains merely a collection of Mahanamni 
verses; it is not a Sutra at all, and therefore Aévalayana cannot have 
been its author. The reply is perhaps that the verses may have been 
collected by Agvalayana and put into the Aranyaka in order that they 
might be available for being commented on in the Sitra, and that it 
would therefore be natural to ascribe the Aranyaka to Aégvalayana. 
It is a sort of Agvalayana Samhita like the Sakala Samhita. (2) It is 
argued® that Sayana in the introduction to Aranyaka V, where he 
expressly ascribes that Aranyaka as contrasted with I to a Rsi, uses the 
words: tasmdad athattasya* samamnayasyetyadidvadasadhyayavan maha- 
vratasya pancavimsatim ityadi pahcamaranyakam sitram eva \ This 
would no doubt be quite natural if Aégvalayana were the author of the 
Aranyaka, but it is at least equally natural if Saunaka was. (3) Cole- 
brooke (£ssays, I, 307) says, with reference to a Siitra of the Pirva 


? Max Miller, Ancient Sanskrit Litera~ XXI1X,154sq. Onp.155 the words ‘fifth 
ture, p. 238 ; Macdonell, Sarvanukra- and fourth’ should be transposed. 
mani, P. XIX. * Cf. Rajendralala, Introduction, p. 10. 
2 See especially Oldenberg, S. B. £., 4 ive. Srauta Sutra, 1, 1, 


THE DIVISIONS OF THE ARANYAKA 19 


Mimamsa : ‘It is, however, acknowledged that a mistake may be made, 
and the work of a human author may be erroneously received as a part 
of the sacred book by those who are unacquainted with its true origin. 
An instance occurs among those who use the Bahurich, a sékhd of the 
Rigveda, by whom a ritual of Agwaldyana has been admitted, under the 
title of a fifth Avanyaka, as a part of the Rigveda.’ Rejendralsia was 
unable to discover the source of this statement, and it seems probably to 
be a confusion of Agvalayana with Saunaka; or it may rather confirm 
the view of SadgurusSisya, since IV could be confused with the Rgveda, 
but not V. (4) The MSS. F and G end, iti ASsvalayanoktam Aranyakam 
samaptam \ This, however, is a matter of no moment, and probably does 
not even preserve a tradition of Agvalayana’s authorship of Aranyaka IV. 
These two MSS., which are recent and inaccurate copies, and are pro- 
bably ultimately derived from one original, contain collections of works 
attributed to Aégvalayana, and there is nothing surprising in the fact 
that they attribute the authorship of the Aranyaka to him. (5) Much 
more important is the fact, which forms Oldenberg’s second argument, 
that in his commentary on the Sdmaveda Sayana refers (I, p. 19) the 
authorship to Agvalayana. But against this solitary reference} must be 
set the facts noted below. (6) There is undoubtedly great similarity 
between the two works, Aranyaka V, and the Srauta Siitra. I think 
it certain that the author of the Aranyaka knew the Sitra. For 
example, in V, 2, 2, esa brahmeti tisrah stands without explanation, but 
as Sayana points out the verses referred to are given in Aégvalayana 
Srauta Siitra, VI, 2,6. Again in V, 3, 2, occurs wktam vasatkaranuman- 
tranam, which is not only a phrase used by eae. himself, but is 
a clear reference to Agvalayana Srauta Sitra, I, 5, 17.2 + Further the 
vocabulary and syntax of the works is identical; e.g. the use of xa va 
in Aranyaka, V, 3, I, as often in the Sitra, e.g. VI, 5, 22; or the phrase 
api nidarsaniyodaharisyamah, or the word ekapatinyah. These facts, 
however, which were not known to Oldenberg, merely prove that 


1 But I do not feel sure as to the clearly some confusion between the Siitra 
reference. The words are: bahvrcam and Aranyaka, which discredits the evi- 
adhyapaka mahavratayogapratipadakam dence. 

Asvalayananirmitam kalpasiitram ara- 2 Cf. also V, 1, 5, wkthaviryani is not 
nye ’dhiyamanah paticamam dranyakam explained, but is in the Sitra. 
iti vedatvena vyavaharantt, and there is 

C2 


20 INTRODUCTION 


Saunaka knew and used Agvalayara’s work, which indeed was only 
natural, since the Siitra deals with the Agnistoma, the prakri of the 
Mahavrata. It will be seen that this agrees perfectly with the native 
tradition handed down by Sadgurusisya. 

There is therefore no sound evidence to ascribe the fifth Aranyaka to 
Aévalayana, and Sadgurusisya’s attribution to him of the fourth Aranyaka 
remains the most probable! For Saunaka’s authorship of the fifth 
Aranyaka we have the distinct and repeated authority of Sayana. Cole- 
brooke (Zssays, I, 46) first pointed out that Aranyaka V, 2, 5, is cited 
by Sayana on the Rgveda, I, 8, 1, as Saunaka’s, and Max Miiller (S.B.£., 
I, xcv) says that ‘Sayaza wien quoting in his commentary on the 
Rae veda from the last books, constantly calls it a Sitra of Saunaka.’ 
Further, in his commentary on the Aitareya Aranyaka he repeatedly 
refers to Saunaka as the author of the fifth book. E.g. on I, 4, 1, he 
says: ata eva pancame Saunakenodalrtah \ and again: 1a ca pategne 
Saunakena sakhantaram asritya pathitah \ See also Sayana® on I, 4, 2 
(ter); 3 (bis); I, 5,2 (quater); 3 (bis). These references beyond question 
show that to Sdyana Saunaka was the author of the fifth Aranyaka. 
There is no conceivable reason why this work should have been ascribed 
to him unless it was his. Similar as the book is in language to the 
Srauta Sitra, yet it is in style less compressed and more intelligible than 
that work. We have certain evidence that Saunaka did compose similar 
works, for, in the introduction to his commentary on the Sarvanukramani 

of Katyayana, Sadgurusisya expressly records that he composed a Srauta 
Stitra which he destroyed when his pupil Asvalayana had written his 
Siitra. This tradition would explain the close knowledge of Agvalayana’s 
Srauta Sitra, which, as we have seen above, the writer of this book 
undoubtedly possessed. No doubt it is possible that he may eventually 
have been credited with the authorship of one of the works of his pupil, 


} With reference to Oldenberg’s remark the Samaveda commentary is probably 
(p. 157) that ASsvalayanasitrakam cannot not the work of Sayana. His pupils no 
refer to the Mahanamnis, I would observe doubt did much of his so-called work. 
that the expression refers to the Srauta Cf. the case of the Atharvaveda, Whitney, 
and Grhya Sitras with the Aranyaka IV p. Ixviii. The fact that passages in the 
thrown in. G Samaveda commentary are identical with 

* Book must be meant. Aranyaka lV those in the Rgveda commentary is of 


cannot be quoted. course quite consistent with this view. 
5 It may be noted that the reference in 


Pere wre olONS OF THE ARANYAKA 


as has been shown to be the case by Professor Macdonell in the 
matter of the Brhaddevata, but that is a mere possibility against which 
tradition is certainly strong. It is impossible to argue that in Sadguru- 
Sisya’s eyes the term caturtharanyakam covered the fifth book~also, for 
the two are quite distinct and cannot ever have been combined into one 
book. Moreover it must be remembered that a Grhya Siitra by Saunaka 
is referred to by Sadgurusisya, and appears to have been known to 
Hemadri in the thirteenth century.1 So there is nothing at all 
improbable in the ascription of the Aranyaka V to Saunaka. 

Now it is possible to throw some light on Saunaka’s date. The 
Brhaddevata, which is attributed to him, but is certainly not his but 
the work of a pupil—probably not far removed in date—is posterior to 
Yaska and anterior to the Sarvanukramani of Katyayana. Katyayana, 
who is in all probability the author of the Srauta Siitra and the Vajasaneyi 
Anukramani, is most probably anterior to Panini, since the Sarvanu- 
kramani shows forms earlier than Panini’s grammar approves (see 
Macdonell, Sarvanukramani, p. viii, Brhaddevata, I, xxii, xxiii). The 
argument from the use of Vedic forms is no doubt not certain, but the 
balance of probability is in its favour, and it has been maintained by 
Buhler (S.2.£., Il, «xl, Z. D.M.G., XL, 527 sq.) and Winternitz 
(Hochzeitsrituell, pp. 13 sq.) against the objections of Bohtlingk 
(Z. D. M. G., XXXIX, 517, XLI, 669, XLITI, 598 sq.).? Thus it appears 
that Saunaka® must be considerably older than Panini. On the other 
hand, we must not push him too far back, or else it would be difficult to 
explain how Saunaka is not cited in Panini. Further, B. Liebich in his 
Panini, ch. iii, has shown grounds for the belief that the Agvalayana and 
Sankhayana Grhya Sitras are in point of language closely connected in 
time with Panini. It does not, therefore, seem necessary to allow more 
than 100-150 years between Panini and Saunaka, and the time may 
perhaps be shorter. 

Panini’s date unfortunately is not yet certainly fixed. There lie between 


21 


him and Patafjali not only the 


1 Caland, Afhnenkult, p. 143; Hille- 
brandt, Az/wal-Litteratur, p. 26. 

2 Biihler’s results are accepted by Hille- 
brandt (2itual-Litteratur, p. 24), Jolly 
(Recht und Sitte, p. 3), and Macdonell 


(Sanskrit Literature, p. 259). 


Varttikas of Katyayana, but also 


3 It may also be noted that the anu- 
stubhs of Saunaka are of an early type, the 
first pada sometimes ending inu—v ¥; 
cf. Oldenberg, S. 82. £., XXX, xxxv. So 
in the Brhaddevata (Keith, 7, 2.4.S., 
1906, p. 6). 


22 INTRODUCTION 


emendations of those Varttikas by the Bharadvajiyas, Saunagas, and 
others and perhaps a Slokavarttika, which certainly presupposes a con- 
siderable interval of time. Bhandarkar? has further adduced evidence 
of changes in the language and extension of geographical knowledge 
especially as regards the peoples and places of the south between Panini, 
Katyayana, and Patafijali. Goldstiicker ? and Bhandarkar * have adduced 
evidence to prove that Patafijali was a contemporary of Pusyamitra 
(B.C. 178-142) and Menander (B.C. 144-120) and wrote his Mahabhasya 
in or about B.C. 144-142. This result is by no means certain, because 
even accepting as fixed Pusyamitra and Menander’s dates,‘ still, in the 
first place the MSS. of the Mahabhasya do not all contain the passages 
in which the statements relied on occur, and in the second place it is 
always possible that the examples occurred in the Slokavarttika or in 
some other earlier source whence they were taken over bodily ® by Patanjali. 
It may even be argued that Patafijali is not earlier than the second 
century A.D. inasmuch as he seems to know the 7 vowel-sign, and 
according to Chinese tradition this vowel-sign was a discovery of 
Nagarjuna’s, and Nagarjuna’s date is possibly in the second century A.D. 
under Kaniska.® The latter, however, is probably to be referred to the 
first century B.C., and it would be a mistake to lay much stress on this 
argument. The 7 vowel-sign may have existed in grammatical circles 
long ere Sanskrit inscriptions become usual. Further the Rajatarangini, 
I, 174, is an authority for the existence of the Mahabhasya in the 
reign of Abhimanyu of Kashmir, whose date is however now quite 
uncertain. But whatever be Patafijali’s date, there seems little doubt 
that the examples which point to the time of Pusyamitra and 
Menander must be genuine and that they prove the existence of some 
commentary on Panini in the middle of the second century B.C. 
Katyayana is assigned by Hiuen Tsang to 300 years after the death 
of Buddha, which taking the Chinese reckoning of the Nirvana gives the 


1 Journal Bombay Branch Royal 5 Cf. Weber, /zdian Literature, p. 224. 


Asiatic Society, XVI, 269 sq. V. Smith, l.c., ignores the force of this 
2 Panini, p. 228. argument. Cf. Lévi, 7hédtre indien, p. 314. 
Snide Ant. 1,209); 11; (59. 5 Kaniska’s date is most doubtful, but 


* Cf. Duff, Chronol. of India, pp.14-17; see V. Smith, 7. &. A.S., 1903, pp. 1-64; 
Hoernle and Stark, Hist. of India, pp. 39 = Fleet, /. R.A.S., 1906, p. 979; 1907, 
sq. Vincent Smith (//ist. of India, pp. pp. 171, 1034 sq.; Hoernle, Osteology, 
192, 193) arrives at a slightly earlier date. pp. 8 


THE DIVISIONS OF THE ARANYAKA 23 


middle of the third century B.c. as his date. This evidence is not ot 
great weight, but it is not improbably nearly correct.’ Panini cannot 
therefore be less than fifty years older than Katyayana and must at 
latest belong to about B.C. 300. The question arises whether this 
date cannot be put further back. The chief argument against doing so 
is the use of the word VYavandani in Panini, I1V,1, 49. Doubtless this 
means Greek (Ionian) writing, but it does not necessarily follow that the 
word dates from after the invasion of Alexander.’ Indeed the probability 
seems to me against this being the case. For it is certainly remarkable 
that Ionian should be the name given to the Greeks if first made known 
to India through the invasion of Alexander, whose army was certainly 
in no conceivable sense Ionian. On the other hand, the Ionian name‘ 
was evidently the great name in the ears of Persians, and of those subjects 
who were led into Greece on the expedition of Xerxes, and® it must be 
remembered that the Gandarians were part of Dareios’ empire and 
a contingent from Gandhara, accompanied Xerxes on the Grecian 
expedition. If it is borne in mind that Panini was a native of Gandhara 
according to Hiuen Tsang, a view confirmed by the references in his 
grammar,® it will not seem far fetched to consider that it was most 
probably from the older tradition that the name Yavandni was derived. 
In this connexion reference may be made to the theory of Burnell 7 that 
the word /i~i which occurs in Panini, III, 2, 21, is borrowed from the 
Achaemenidean difi, meaning an edict, a view not at all improbable, and 
one which supports the view here maintained that it was through the 
Persian conquest of Gandhara that the word Yavanani became familiar 
to India. Goldstiicker® argued, indeed, that Yavanani referred to 


1 Cf, Wackernagel, Altindische Gram- 
matik, 1,\x; Pischel, Prakrit Grammar, 
p. 34; Liebich, op. cit., ch. ii, Vienna 
Oriental Journal, X11, 312, where he 
ascribes him to 150 B.C., taking the re- 
ferences to Menander and Pusyamitra to 
be his. 

2 This view is held by Benfey, Ge- 
schichte d. Sprachwissenschaft, p. 48,0. 1; 
Burnell, Aindra Grammarians, p. 44; 
Weber, l.c., p. 221; Wackernagel, l.c., 
p. lix. 

8 So in Arrian Ionia appears merely 


as a province and Ionians as residents 
therein. 

4 We have for this the contemporary 
evidence of the Athenian Aeschylus and 
of Herodotus. Cf. also Busolt, Griech. 
Ges., II, 515- 

5 See Herodotus, iii, 91; vii, 66. 

® Cf. Weber, Jzdian Literature, p. 218. 

7 South Indian Palaeography, p. 6. 
Cf. Bartholomae, Judog. Forsch., 111, 176 ; 
Wackernagel, Aléindische Grammaitik, I, 
222, 

® Panini, p. 16. 


Vib 
m= 2°? oa 


24 INTRODUCTION 


Persian writing, but this view cannot be maintained. But Weber himself 
admits? that perhaps the name Yavana may have become known before 
Alexander’s time through the Persian war in which the Indians served as 
auxiliaries. There is also a striking piece of evidence that Greek writing 
was known in North India before Alexander’s time; coins have been 
found with Greek inscriptions of pre-Alexandrian date.2_ Greek engraved 
gems, of a pattern much earlier than Macedonian times, have been found in 
the Punjab, and the caduceus was known in India by B.c. 325 at latest. 

I do not therefore consider that the evidence of Vavandni is conclusive 
as to Panini’s date, though it certainly shows that he cannot be earlier 
than the fifth century. Weber* also argues that his use of letters as 
numerals is a proof of Greek influence, but it may be equally well a proof 
of Semitic influence or a mere independent invention, as indeed seems 
most likely from the fact that the use remains isolated. Weber’s other 
arguments, e.g. that from the date of Apigali,= rest on too slight a basis 
to bear serious examination. On the other hand, it is not possible to 
follow Goldstiicker * in referring Panini to a date before Buddha on the 
strength of wirvano’vate, VIII, 2, 50, because Panini probably deliberately 
ignored Buddhism” or perhaps lived when the influence of Buddhism had 
yet to become great. Bhandarkar ® refers Panini to the beginning of the 
seventh century B.C., dating Katyayana in accordance with the legend of 
the Kathasaritsagara in the fourth century B.C., but he does not meet 
the difficulty as to Vavanani, though his proposed date would in some 
ways suit the history of Sanskrit literature. On the whole I incline to 
fix Panini’s date at about 400-350 B.C. Bohtlingk, in the introduction 
to his edition, fixed the date at about 35° B.C., and Lassen ® assigned 
Panini to 330 B.C, 


' See Ind. Stud., 1V, 89; Berlin AZo- 
natsbericht, 1871, p. 616, n. 

? Head, quoted in Bihler, Padlaeo- 
graphic, p. 3. 

® Vienna Ortental Journal, XIII, 307 ; 
Ficet JAAS, 1907, p. 531. 

* Indian Literature, p. 222, n.; Gold- 
sticker, Paninz, pp. 50 sq. 

° Ind. Stud, XIII, 375, n. On the 
other side, Bhandarkar’s argument from 
Samkala is equally unconvincing, cf. 


Weber, p. 302, n. 

® Panint, pp. 225-227. 

" Weber, Jnd. Stud., V, 139, brings 
evidence that Panini knew Buddhism. 
It is not quite conclusive, but is very 
probable. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, I, ii, 140 sq. The 
legend cannot be relied upon in any par- 
ticular, though accepted by V. Smith, 
fTist. of India, p. 337, n. 2. 

* Ind. Alt. 11,477. Rapson Oi Scere 


DATE OF THE ARANYAKA 25 


If this date is accepted for Panini it is necessary to throw the older 
Katyayana, and therefore Saunaka, a little further back. Saunaka 
may perhaps be assigned to about 450 B.C. or possibly even to 500 B.C., 
which would then represent the probable date of Book V of the Aranyaka, 
while the collection of Book IV would be a product of the same period, 
since the evidence goes to show that Agvalayana and he worked con- 
temporaneously. 

Now it will hardly be doubted that Books I-III are decidedly older 
than Books IV, V. This is clearly reflected in the native tradition pre- 
served in Sayana’s distinction between the apauruseyam character of the 
first three books and their attribution to the author of the Brahmana. 
It is not possible to say how much this means. But it is at least 
probable that the latest part of the first three books, Aranyaka III, 
belongs to not later than 550 B.C. and the earlier parts may be dated 
between 700 B.C. and 550 B.C. It will be seen that there is probably 
a considerable difference in time between the first book, and the two 
sections of the second, so that 700 B.C. is not too early a date for 
Book I. 

I do not think that these results need be regarded as in any way 
surprising. The Brahmana period, according to Max Miiller, probably 
extended from about 800-600 B.C., and this view has the weighty 
support of Prof. Macdonell.' The Aitareya Brahmana cannot be far 
removed in date from the first book of the Aranyaka, but the Gopatha 
Brahmana, which contains many borrowings from it, is in the opinion of 
Aufrecht2 known to Yaska. Now Y4ska is certainly anterior to Saunaka 
and Panini, for he is cited in the Rgvedapratisakhya,® the Brhaddevata, 
and is apparently known to the Astadhyayi. His date cannot, therefore, 
be reasonably placed later than 500 B.C. and it may go back to 550 B.C. 
This date is confirmed by the character of the Nirukta which certainly 
is anterior to either the Pratigakhyas or Panini. If, therefore, the Gopatha 
Brahmana was known to him,‘ even that late work must be dated about 


1904, p. 442) adopts 350 B.c. If a late 1 Sanskrit Literature, pp. 12, 202 sq. 


date is adopted, then the question of find- 2 Aitareya Brahmana, p. vi. 
ing a place for the Bhasa becomes more 5 Weber, /udian Literature, p. 41. 
and more difficult, cf. 7. R. A. S., 1904, pp. 4 The argument is not certain. It is 


435 S8q., 457 sq., and (for the date of the based on the fact that Yaska, Nirukta, 
Epic) ibid., 1906, p. 2; 1607, p. 682. VIII, 22, quotes Aitareya Brahmana, III, 


26 INTRODUCTION 


600 B.C., and the Aitareya Brahmana must be earlier, even apparently 
including the last ten chapters which are later than the earliest portions 
of the Brahmana. Thus the Brahmana cannot well be placed later than 
8co-700 B.C. and the Aranyaka I is not to be dated much later. 

Further the early date of even the Upanisad portions in Books II and 
III appears to be only what is to be expected from the history of 
philosophy. The Upanisad doctrines there set forth are essentially earlier 
than the doctrines of the earliest Buddhism, which belong to the fifth 
century B.C., and we shall see that the Upanisads probably belong to 
the earliest of the extant works (Sect. V). Moreover, Biihler (S. B. £., 
II, xxvii) has pointed out that Apastamba (? 300 B. C.) knows the Vedanta 
school, which presupposes the full development of the Upanisad, while 
Gautama (before 400 B.C.) knows even the Atharvasiras Upanisad, which 
is cited also in the Moksadharma (MBh., XII, 12864). 


IV. The Mahavrata ceremony, and the relation of Aitareya 
Aranyaka I and V to the Saikhayana Aranyaka. 


Sayana in his commentary on V, I, 1, tells us that there ‘are three 
forms of the Mahavrata ceremony, according as it is a one day rite, or 
a part of an ahina, or the second last day of a Sattra1 But he says that 
the Sattra form is the original or prakréi of the others which are vzkrtis. 
The Sattra differs from the ahinva in that it requires that all engaged 


8, as: yasyat devatayai havir grhitam 
syat tam manasa dhyayed vasatkarisyan. 
Now the manasa here does not appear in 
the original, but only in Gopatha Brah- 
mana, VIII, 4: tam manasa dhyayan 
vasatkuryad. tis hardly open to doubt 
that the form found in the Gopatha pas- 
sage must have been before Yaska’s mind. 
For though it is not unnatural for the 
author of the Gopatha, or some other 
Brahmana, who borrowed the main body 
of his work from other sources, to alter 
his original by inserting sanasa, yet it is 
improbable that Yaska would have made 
the quotation incorrectly, but for the 
existence of the alternative version. The 
instance does not amount to proof, and on 


the other hand, it may be argued, with 
Bloomfield (7.4. O.S., XI, 375 sq.; XIX, 
ii, I-11), that the Gopatha borrows from 
the Vaitana Sutra and so is very late. 
But even assuming that the borrowing 
from the Vaitana is real, yet it is more 
than possible that the text of the Gopatha, 
a very unimportant work, has suffered 
interpolation, or perhaps the Gopatha 
Brahmana as we now have it is a working 
over of an earlier Brahmana which itself 
borrowed from the Aitareya. But in any 
case the Aitareya Brahmana is unques- 
tionably much older than Yaska. 

1 For the characteristics of Sattras see 
Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 1543 
Weber, Jud. Stud. X, 17,622 35s: 


THE MAHAVRATA CEREMONY 2) 


should be dzksita, the Hotr being also the yayamana, and in that it extends 
even to a year. In the ahina the Mahavrata is the tenth day of the 
Paundarika ceremony, but neither the efaha or akhina form is of 
importance. ; 

In the Sattra form the Mahavrata is the last day but one of the 
Gavamayana Sattra which lasts the whole year, and no doubt represents 
in some way the year. Hillebrandt,! who has most carefully examined 
this question, concludes that considerable alterations in course of time 
took place in this ceremony. As it stood later and as it is represented 
in most of our texts, the two important days were the middle day, the 
Visuvat, and the last day but one, the Mahavrata, corresponding to the 
Summer and Winter solstices respectively. But the Tandya Brahmana,? 
certainly an old work, refers to a view, which it disputes, that the 
Mahavrata belongs to the middle of the year, and it is clear that Indra 
is the god par excellence of the Mahavrata. It may be argued with 
some plausibility that Indra belongs to the beginning of the rainy season, 
or the middle of June, and certainly the rites of the Mahavrata show 
traces of a popular origin, like the celebrations of the Johannistag in 
Germany.’ It is not impossible that at one time the Mahavrata was 
the first day of the year, when, as the Aitareya Aranyaka, I, 1, 1, has it, 
Indra slew Vrtra and became great, and Hillebrandt adduces as evidence 
of this the month Tisya as compared with the Avestan Tistrya, Sirius. 

Once then, in any case, the Mahavrata may well have been a day 
of popular festival and worship. The Visuvat day receives scant treat- 
ment in the texts; possibly, as Dr. Friedlander * suggests, because the 
ceremonies connected with that day were transferred ° to the Mahavrata 
to help to wipe out the popular character of that rite. It is, however, 
simple to suppose that in the usual manner the Brahmanas seized upon 


1 Die Sonnwendfeste in Alt-Indien, 
Erlangen, 1889. Cf. also Weber, Die 
vedischen Nachrichten von den Naksatra, 
Berlin, 1882, II, 282 sq. 

At IV 10; 35 

8 Many examples of such ceremonies 
are collected in Frazer, Golden Bough, 
and ed. Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, 
p. 444, n. 1, does not accept this part of 
Hillebrandt’s theory, and it may be 


pointed out that the Winter solstice is 
more naturally the time for rites intended 
in part to increase the sun’s heat, cf. 
Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, pp. 196, 
241 sq. 

4 Der Mahavrata-Abschnitt des San- 
khayana Aranyaka, p. 2, 0. 5. 

> Liturgically the Visuvat is the prakrti 
of the Mahavrata. 


28 INTRODUCTION 


the popular Mahavrata and made it their own by an accumulation of 
purely technical ritual. At any rate they have left clear traces of the 
original nature of the ceremony. Warriors, fully armed, pierce with 
arrows the outstretched skin of a barren cow, which is probably a rain 
spell An Arya anda Siidra strive on a round hide, the Aryan proving 
victorious, which may be interpreted as a spell to produce sunshine. 
Servant maids encircle the Marjaliya fire with jugs of water on their 
heads either thrice or until the Mahavrata Stotra is finished, evidently as 
a magic rite to procure sunlight and rain for the crops. Sympathetic 
magic is shown in the effort to produce fertility by maithuna. Music is 
played and obscene language used, both possibly with the same object 
to terrify away hostile demons, especially as the form of music affected 
is drumming. u 

But from the point of view of the Aranyaka these old customs are 
meaningless survivals. The importance of the sacrifice is purely in the 
ritual as regards the use of the hymns. The Mahavrata is one of the 
forms of the Agnistoma,? and is therefore divided into three parts, 
the morning, midday, and evening pressing of the Soma. Each pressing 
has an equal number of Stotras and Sastras. The morning pressing has 
the Bahispavamana and four Ajya Stotras, and the Ajya and Praiiga 
Sastras of the Hotr and three Ajya Sastras of the Hotrakas. The midday 
pressing has the Madhyandinapavamana and four Prstha Stotras, and 
the Marutvatiya and Niskevalya Sastras of the Hotr and three Niskevalya 
Sastras of the Hotrakas. The evening pressing has the Arbhavapava- 
mana Stotra and the Agnistoma Saman, together with the Vaisvadeva 
and Agnimaruta Sastras of the Hotr.2 But in the Mahavrata the 
morning and evening ritual is mainly derived* from the prakrti, that is 
ultimately the Agnistoma, and it is the Prstha Stotra called the Mahavrata 
Saman and the corresponding Niskevalaya Sastra or Mahaduktha which 
form the important part of the liturgy 


* Cf. the account in Oldenberg, Religdon 
des Veda, pp. 444, 445, 506, whose ex- 
planations are slightly different, and my 
note on V, I, 5. 

* See for it Hillebrandt, op. cit., pp. 
124 sq. It is a frakrti of all the more 
elaborate forms, and these again are re- 
lated as prakrti and vikyti in order. So 


the Visuvat is a Arakrtz of the Mahavrata 
as is the Visvajit. 

* Eggeling, S. B. £., XXVI, 325, gives 
a comparative table; cf. Weber, Jud. 
Stud., X, 535. 

* This is the explanation of such pas- 
sages as I, 1, 3 ad fin.: tad vathahikam 
riupasamrddham | 


RELATION OF THE AITAREYA AND SANKHAYANA 29 


The most characteristic of the features of the Mahavrata Saman and 
the Mahaduktha is their division according to the form of a bird. The 
origin of the idea appears to be the theory which appears in the 
Satapatha Brahmana! of the bird-like shape of the fire-altar. Similarly, 
the Mahavrata Saman has five parts corresponding to the body, head, 
right wing, left wing, and tail. The Mahaduktha is not so simple, the 
parts correspond to the body, neck, head, vertebrae, wings, tail, and 
stomach, but there is a general correspondence with the Saman, the first 
verses of each part appearing in the Sadman. Besides these parts there 
are also three groups each of eighty “cas, one in gayatr7, one in usnih, 
and one in drhazi metre, which form the food of the bird. 

These collections of verses make up a very considerable body of 
hymns, and it appears from the Sankhayana Grhya Siitra? that to 
a certain extent the collection came to be regarded as a new Samhita 
through the rearrangement of the verses, much as the Samaveda differs 
mainly in arrangement from the Rgveda, so that the study of the 
Aranyaka verses (not the Aranyaka itself) was taken up immediately 
after that of the Samhita. This is at least the view of Oldenberg,® 
and it is far from improbable. This new Samhita was regarded as 
extremely sacred ; perhaps the reason was that the likeness of the fire-altar 
to the shape of a bird was the discovery of some theologian who, in the 
true spirit later seen in the Upanisads, was most anxious not to permit 
his mystic discovery to become common property. This at least 
seems to me a legitimate inference from the fact that the Satapatha 
Brahmana expressly enjoins secrecy for the three samudrah, the Agni- 
cayana, the Mahavrata Saman, and the Mahaduktha ; and the Aitareya 
Aranyaka * and the Sankhayana Aranyaka® devote chapters to declara- 
tions of the secret nature of their subject-matter. Thus a rite originally 
popular became, through theological speculation, one of the most secret 
doctrines of the Brahmanas. 

As a result of this secrecy the description of the activity of the Hotr 
in the Mahavrata rite is not recorded in the Aitareya Brahmana or in 
the Sankhayana Brahmana, but in the Aitareya Aranyaka® and the 


Sel Nios L525 5, Ss 5 1,1. The desire for secrecy reflects 
BUCS yan ee probably the magic-worker’s fear of his 
5 Prolegomena, pp. 291 sq. magic being stolen and used against him. 


: Vs 3, 3- ® Book I. 


30 INTRODUCTION 


Sankhayana Aranyaka.1 When as time went on there was felt the need 
of a formal exposition of the rite as a whole, since in neither the Aitareya 
nor the Sankhayana Aranyaka is the account of the rite intelligible as it 
stands, in the case of the Aitareya, as we have seen, a Sitra-like book ? 
was added by Saunaka, but in that very book ® the secret nature of the 
doctrine is reiterated with the greatest force. The case of the San- 
khayana Aranyaka is different. No addition was made to the Aranyaka, 
so far as we now know it,’ but two books, XVII and XVIII, were added 
to the Sankhayana Srauta Siitra. These books were not commented 
on by Anartiya, but by Govinda, and they cannot be regarded as 
forming part of the Sitra at his date. In fact, we have conclusive proof 
that to Anartiya the eighteenth, and doubtless also the seventeenth 
book, was an Aranyaka. For in commenting on Srauta Sitra, XIII, 
14, 7, he quotes XVIII, 24, 30, as an Aranyaka. This fact, the full 
significance of which does not seem to have been realized by Hillebrandt, 
supports his view, which was based on other considerations, that the two 
books are not more recent ® than the rest of the Siitra. On the contrary 
it is at least as probable that they are older,® but the important con- 
sideration is that the Siitra treatment of the material was still considered 
too secret for insertion in the Siitra. We must therefore recognize that 
at one time the Sankhayana Aranyaka, in addition to the Brahmana 
treatment in Books I and II, contained a Siitra treatment like Book V 
of the Aitareya. As Books III-VI of the Sankhayana contain the 
Kausitaki Upanisad, and correspond to Book II of the Aitareya, and 
Books VII and VIII of the Sankhayana correspond in some measure to 
Book III” of the Aitareya, it is not surprising that the Srauta Siitra 
treatment of the so-called Books XVII and XVIII should have formed 
part of the Aranyaka. 

On the other hand it was not felt that any special sanctity or mystery 
attached to the Udgatr or Adhvaryu’s functions. These are described 


? Books I and II. ® Hillebrandt, Ritwal-Litteratur, p. 25. 


2 Book V. LENE, SR Gy 

* Our acquaintance with the exact form 
of the Aranyaka is comparatively limited. 
Few MSS. are extant. Cf. Weber, /zdtan 
Literature, pp. 50, 132; Cowell, Kazsi- 
taki Upanisad, Preface, p. vii; Bodleian 
Catalogue, No. 976. 


° Or of the same date, see my note, 
J.R.A.S., 1907, pp. 410 sq. 

‘ Wines Verzeichnis der Sanskrit- 
Handschriften der Kéniglichen Bibliothek 
zu Berlin, 11, 5; Friedlander, op. cit., 
p. 14. Book VII=III, 1; Book VIII= 
LT 2. 


~ RELATION OF THE AITAREYA AND SANKHAYANA SY 


in the Samhitas and Brahmanas of the other schools!’ (see the Tandya 
Brahmana, IV, 10, V, 1-6; Latyayana Srauta Sutra, III, 9-12, IV, 1-3, 
for the Udgatr; and for the Adhvaryu, Taittiriya Samhita, VII, 5, 8-12; 
Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 2, 6, 1-7; Kathaka Samhita, XXXIV, 5; 
Satapatha Brahmana, IV, 6, 4, 1, VIII, 6, 2, 3, X, 1, 2,1; Katyayana 
Srauta Siitra, XIII, 2, 17-4, 2, and scattered. notices in Apastamba 
Srauta Sitra, XXII, XXIII). It is worthy of note that in his explana- 
tion of the ritual Sayana freely quotes and follows Apastamba, as he 
does sometimes in his commentary on the Aitareya Brahmana. 

The date of the Sankhayana Aranyaka, like that of the Aitareya, 
presents considerable difficulty. As the Aitareya Aranyaka with the 
Aitareya Brahmana, the Sankhadyana is closely connected with the 
Kausitaki Brahmana. Vinayaka, the commentator on the Brahmana, 
actually, in one place,” reckons the Books I and II as XX XI and XXXII 
of the Brahmana, and there are clear references to the Brahmana in the 
Aranyaka, while several passages agree even verbally.2 But though 
these signs are so far clear evidence that the connexion is close, they 
tend also to show that the Aranyaka is dependent on the Brahmana, 
and this conclusion is strengthened by the fact that, at the time of 
Panini (about 350 B.C.), there seems to have been known to him* 
a Brahmana of thirty chapters, which Weber® must be right in con- 
sidering to be the Kausitaki. Therefore the Aranyaka must stand to 
the Kausitaki in precisely the same relation as the Aitareya Aranyaka 
to its Brahmana. 

Now the relation in time of the Aitareya and Kausitaki Brahmanas ° 
is still open to discussion. The evidence seems to me, however, decidedly 
in favour of the priority of the Aitareya, though that priority is not in 
all probability a great one. (1) The Sankhayana is a more elaborate 
work than the Aitareya ; it is completed by treating of the Haviryajiia 
as well as of the Soma sacrifice proper, giving the Agnyadhana, the 
Dargapirnamasa, and the Caturmasyani. It is more probable that the 
less systematic Aitareya is the earlier. (2) The Sankhayana seems, 


1 Friedlander, p. 6, n. 3. 4V,1,62. ° Indian Literature, p. 45. 

2 On Kausitaki Brahmana, V, 5. 6 Cf, Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 

= Compare Aranyaka, I, 2, with Brah- pp. 203, 206; W ackernagel, A/tindische 
mana, II, 1; XIX, 4; XXV, 3; I, 4, Grammatik, 1, xxx, with whose views I do 
with V, 9; I, 5, with II, 1, &c. not agree, 


32 INTRODUCTION 


as Weber! points out, to represent a fusion of the views of Paingya and 
Kausitaki, whereas these names are unknown to the Aitareya,? which 
appears to represent a less dependent point of view and to show more 
originality. (3) In point of view of style the Sankhayana is much more 
condensed than the Aitareya. This fact is open to various interpretations, 
but on the whole the most probable theory is that the older a work, 
the less condensed its style, though later again the style becomes freer. 
This argument, which is applied to the Sarvanukramani and Katyayana 
Srauta Siitra by Prof. Macdonell,? appears to me to hold equally well 
in the case of the Brahmanas. (4) The use of unaugmented tenses is 
more frequent in the Aitareya than in the Sankhayana.* In favour 
of the priority of the Sankhayana the only prima facie piece of evidence ® 
appears to be the argument from the use of the perfect as a narrative 
tense. Now I do not dispute the value of this criterion, as the evidence 
appears to me adequate that, so far as Vedic is concerned, the history 
of the perfect is that of an originally present force, such as persisted in 
words like aha or veda, to a narrative use. The perfect in narrative 
is indeed known to the oldest language, but the growth of the narrative 
use is decidedly a mark of lateness, and is accepted as such by Wacker- 
nagel.® But the facts of the case are that in the first thirty Adhyayas 
of the Aitareya the use of the perfect is usually that of a present, and 
that it is only in the last ten that the perfect is used for narrative, 
whereas in the Kausitaki Brahmana there are nearly three perfects 
for every five imperfects. The narrative of Sunahégepa i in Book XXXIII 
is carried on in perfects, but it is universally admitted that the last ten 
Adhyayas are a later addition, since (1) they have no corresponding 


1 Indian Literature, p. 46. 

* According to Aufrecht’s Index. Cf. 
Weber, |. c. 

3 Brhaddevata, 1, xxii. This is borne 
out by the fact that Panini, who is prob- 
ably later than Katyayana, reaches a 
further degree of unintelligibility. 

* Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, De 
429. The omission in the late Jaiminiya 
Brahmana is merely a MS. error, Whitney, 

PA. O.S., May, 1883, p. xi. 
~ © On the use of avam, *yita, asa, in the 


late Book VII with periphrastic perfect, 
&c., cf. Whitney, lc. The Jaiminiya 
Brahmana has no claim to be deemed 
early, cf. Oertel, 7. A.0..S., XVII, i, 25, 
XIX, ny 103. 

° Altindische Grammatik, I, xxx. Cf. 
Whitney, Zransactions Am. Phil. Ass., 
1892, pp. 5-34, Grammar, p. 2096, 
P.A.O.S., May, 1891, pp. Ixxxv-xciv. 
Wackernagel is wrong in thinking that 
Whitney does not accept the use as a 
chronological criterion. 


RELATION OF THE AITAREYA AND SANKHAYANA 33 


matter in the Sankhayana, while the Sankhayana Srauta Siitra has 
a version of the Sunahsepa legend, and (2) their subject-matter is quite 
unconnected ! with the functions of the Hotr at the Jyotistoma rite, which 
is the main topic of the Aitareya. Deductions from the style of the 
Aitareya Brahmana taken as a whole are therefore very risky, and 
Aufrecht 2 has, conclusively it seems to me, shown that the Taittiriya 
Samhita in Book VI, which deals with the Soma sacrifice, follows the 
Aitareya Brahmana, which has thus a just claim to rank as one of 
the earliest Brahmanas, as it is of course indisputably older than the 
Satapatha Brahmana and the Taittiriya Brahmana, the latter being 
admittedly later than the Samhita, which it was clearly composed in 
order to complete. It is worth noticing that that Brahmana contains in 
Book III the description of the new and full moon sacrifices which 
is omitted in the Samhita,?. and it may be considered that this helps to 
show that the Saakhayana Brahmana in which these rites are treated 
is later than the Aitareya. 

On the other hand no argument either way can be drawn from the 
prominence of Siva in the Sankhayana,! since Aufrecht has proved 
that even the Aitareya Siva is the great god in his form of Rudra, 
just as he is in the Satapatha, the later books of the Vajasaneyi Samhita, 
and portions of the Atharvaveda. It must be recognized that the deity 
later known as Siva came at an early period to be the most prominent 
member of the Hindu pantheon, and to represent that striving at 
pantheistic monotheism which in one or other of its forms is so charac- 
teristic of all the developments of Indian religious thought. It is 
probable that several conceptions have merged in the idea of the later 
Siva. Originally a god of the storm which destroys,’ he later amal- 
gamated with a god of the forest or wood,® or rather perhaps with the 
vegetation spirit which has been rendered so familiar by the studies 
of Frazer following Mannhardt. Possibly, too, traits of his character are 
derived from the idea of the evil powers of the spirits of the dead, as 


1 cf, Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, * Cf. Weber, /ndian Literature, p. 45. 
pp. iv, v. 5 Cf, Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, p. 

2 Op. cit., p. vi, and in the Notes. Wht 

3 Cf. Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 6 Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, pp. 
p. 180. 216-224. 


_ KEITH D 


34 INTRODUCTION 


suggested by v. Schroeder,! who regards him as chief of the spirits of the 
dead. But at any rate he cannot be regarded as a late deity, just as 
Visnu also belongs to an early period. Another sign of the fact that 
no very great distance in time separates the two Brahmanas may be 
seen in the fact that both employ in essentials the same style and 
language. It is worthy of note that in both the base enad occurs in the 
nominative.” 

It seems, therefore, practically certain that at least the first thirty 
Adhyayas of the Aitareya are earlier than the Kausitaki, and the 
temptation is strong to assume that the fact that the Kausitaki has 
precisely thirty Adhyayas is due to an imitation of the Aitareya. If this 
is so, then we would be sure that the last ten Adhydyas were later than 
the Kausitaki, a view itself extremely probable on the ground of 
contents and of the use of the perfect as a narrative tense. But even 
so the Brahmana as a whole of forty Adhyayas is older than Panini.® 
Further the Paingya, who is cited as an authority in the Kausitaki, is, 
according to the Kasgika on Panini, IV, 3, 105, a cirantana, so that the 
Kausitaki, like the Aitareya, can claim considerable antiquity.* 

If the Aitareya Brahmana is older than the Sankhayana, it is not 
unreasonable to expect the same relation to exist in the case of the 
Aranyakas. This certainly is borne out by comparison of the ritual 
described. It at least appears to have been deliberately modified to 
differentiate it from the ritual of the Aitareya. It is not of course 
conclusive that the Aranyaka itself is necessarily later, since the descrip- 
tion of the earlier ritual may be the later, but there i is nothing to suggest 
that this is the case, and the condensed style of the Saikhayana appears 
more modern than that of the Aitareya. 

Even in the Brahmanas the ritual differences begin to appear. The 
Praiiga Sastra at the Pratahsavana of the Agnistoma and of the Visuvat, 
following the model of the Agnistoma, consists of Rgveda, I, 2 and 3, in 
Sayatrt metre.2 In the Visuvat, according to the Kausitaki Brahmana,® 
the Sastra is in trzstubh metre, though the other form is mentioned as 


1 Vienna Oriental Journal, 1X, 248. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1074 d. 

® Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, p. SVE Loz: 
429. As the Aitareya example occurs in * Cf. Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 455. 
VII, 22, it is possible that it is a case of 5 Bergaigne, Journal Asiatique, VII, 


imitation. In VII, 17, the periphrastic 13; Aitareya Brahmana,IV,29; Kausitaki 
perfect with asa occurs, a very late form, Brahmana, XIV, 5. INS 


RELATION OF THE AITAREYA AND SANKHAYANA 45 


more correct, and consists of verses from different hymns on the model 
of the Aitareya form. But most of the differences! occur in connexion 
with the most important part of the Aranyaka, the Mahaduktha. 
Govinda, the commentator on the Sankhayana Srauta Sttra,tells us? 
that the parts of the Mahaduktha are the parts of the human form and 
not of the bird form. This is borne out by the words used, aksa, bahiz, 
prahastakam, and the omission of the vzyavah and pucham. The bird 
form is the older; it is that of the fire-altar and of the Mahavrata 
Saman, and probably it is to the change of form that the confusion in the 
eaaPhayaria Aranyaka is due. 

In the Aitareya the Mahaduktha is divided into parts corresponding 
to the body, neck, head, vertebrae, wings, stomach, then comes the 
food of the bird in the Sst of the three aszzzs, the vasa hymn, and ten 
miscellaneous hymns called the #r# The Sankhayana divides the 
Uktha into the body, head with neck, the two sides, divided into shoulder, 
arm, and hand, the back, consisting of the caturuttardmi, the food in the 
form of the three asztis, together with the wdara. Then, as the beginning 
of the end, come the dvipadas, which in the Aitareya form the tail, the 
Aindragna sikta, the beginning of the #7a# in the Aitareya, and a collec- 
tion of disconnected groups of verses, avapana, tristupchata, &c. The 
explanation of this confusion seems to be* that the human form had no 
pucha and required fewer verses for the aksa, and so the verses necessary 
to make up the total of 1,000 drhati verses, required by the rite, were 
appended at the end. To the alteration in form is probably to be 
attributed the fact that the sides are composed of equal numbers of 
verses, whereas in the corresponding Saman one side has the Paficadasa, 
the other the Saptadaga Stoma, and in the Aitareya one side has 1o1, 
the other 102 verses, probably, as Dr. Friedlander suggests, because 
in flight one wing of a bird appears longer than the other. 

A similar complication is made in the case of the three as7tis.2 Inthe 
Aitareya the gayatri and usnih asitis are composed of eighty gayatrt 
and (with a slight exception) «sii tycas respectively, while the drhai 
asiti contains eighty satobrhati verses. In the Sankhayana the drhati 
asiti consists of eighty drhatis and eighty pragathas (brhati and sato- 


1 Friedlander, op. cit., pp. 10 sq. very carefully this question. 
aX VILIG 2S 15 SA ia 4, 
3 Friedlander, p. 11, who has discussed 5 For the details see notes on V, 2, 3-5. 


DZ 


36 INTRODUCTION 


brhati). The additional syllables are added to the wsuih asiti which 
is composed of gayatris, brhatis, and pragathas The priority of the 
Aitareya is quite clear. Again in the Aitareya, the hymns corresponding 
to the Brhat and Rathantara Samans stand on the right and left wings 
of the bird, in the Sankhayana they no longer correspond to the Samans 
in position, but are grouped at the end.’ 

The apparently deliberate divergence from the Aitareya appears also 
in the treatment of the verses from the Rgveda used in the litanies. 
For example, the wsuzh astt in the Aitareya commences with Rgveda 
Vill, 12 and 19; inthe Sankhayana the order is simply reversed. 
Again in the vasa hymn, VIII, 46, in the Aitareya only vv. I-20 are 
prescribed, since they alone are addressed to Indra, in the Sankhayana 3 
the whole hymn, though vv. 21-24 are a @dnastuti, and vv. 25-28, 
and 32 are addressed to Vayu. Similarly at the evening Soma pressing 
the Aitareya used the Visvedeva verses, 1-41, of Rgveda, I, 164, only, 
while the Sankhayana improperly uses all the verses. 

There is yet another sign of the earlier character of the Aitareya, 
so far as its Sutra part at least is concerned. The Sitra part of the 
Saakhayana, the so-called Srauta Siitra, when mentioning * the various 
improper rites, says tad efat purdnam utsannam na karyam\ There can 
be no doubt that this is a clear sign of a more reflective and refined age. 

Further, the language of the Sankhayana suggests a close relation 
with the Aitareya, which must either be due to a common source, or 
perhaps more probably to borrowing. For example, in the Aitareya® 
occurs: brahmaitad ahar brahmanaiva tad brahma pratipadyate ; in 
the Sankhayana,® brahmaitad ahar brahmanaiva tad brahma samar- 
dhayati. On the whole the priority probably lies with the Aitareya. 

If, as seems clearly the case, the ritual of the Saiikhayana is more 
recent than that of the Aitareya, an interesting question arises as to the 
relation of the Aitareya I to the Satapatha Brahmana VIII and IX, in 
which the Mahavrata is treated. The evidence’ available on this point 
is not decisive. (1) In IX, 3, 3, 19, occurs the expression yany astacatva- 
rimsat tau caturvimsau paksau, which certainly points to the equality 
of the paksas, and, possibly, to the human form as the object of 


= TOS Step fT 06: consecutively. 
S11, £15) Vv; 29; 31,033" are also ad- SUX VILENG ie: o 1, 2,32: el 2. 
dressed to Indra, but they do not run ” Friedlander, op. cit., p. 14, 


RELATION OF THE AITAREYA AND SANKHAYANA 97 


comparison as contrasted with the unequal and longer wings of the 
bird. (2) In the same passage it is said yaui trayastrimsat sa vasah, 
and, as we have seen above, the thirty-three verses of Rgveda, VIII, 
64, are employed in the Saikhayana only, the Aitareya using but 
twenty. (3) In the third verse of Rgveda, X, 120, corresponding to 
the body, the Aitareya, V, 1, 6,! omits the sxcond half and fills up 
the gap with a pada from the verses for the right and left wings. 
The Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 14, 7, omits the half-verse, and 
puts nothing in its place, but puts the half-verse together with the 
second half of the verse called xada, Rgveda, VIII, 69, 2, before the 
dvipadas. Now the Satapatha, VIII, 6, 2, 3, refers to ardharcau, which 
name fits better the case of the Shae: with its two half-verses 
existing independently, than that of the Aitareya, where two separate 
padas (not half-verses) are interpolated to make up one missing half- 
verse. Dr. Friedlander holds that the other points? in the account of 
the Satapatha, which is far from being a clear one, seem to throw little 
_ or no further light on the matter; and it is quite possible that the 
Satapatha represents a version pide than the Sankhayana. But he 
appears to have overlooked one or two indications which tell strongly 
against this theory. It is clear from ‘Satapatha Brahmana, VIII, 6, 2, 3, 
that the general arrangement of the Sastra in the Mahavrata was Safes 
to that of the Saikhayana, the vasa hymn being followed by the 
dvipadas, the Aindragna sikta, and the advapana. What is still more 
significant is that the aszés are clearly composed in the same way as in 
the Sankhayana, for the direction in Saikhayana Aranyaka, II, 10, to 
take twenty-four sets of four syllables from the kakubh pragathas Hee 
a parallel in VIII, 6, 2, 3. Finally, the priority of the Saikhayana 
appears definitely established by the fact that in X, 4, 2, 19, the Satapatha 
distinctly condemns the use of seventeen priests, JERS, as Eggeling 
(S.B. £., XLIII, 348, n. 1) points out, is laid down by the Sankhayana. 
Book X is undoubtedly of the same period as or at least not earlier than 
Books VIII and IX, and to argue from it to the date of these Books 
is perfectly fair. It would probably therefore be best to regard the 
Satapatha as exhibiting a version which is later than, but which does not 


1 Not, however, in I. the only source then available, but save 
2 Eggeling, in his translation, S.4,Z., in the points above noted, the Sankhayana 
XLIII, naturally followed the Aitareya, does not help. 


38 INTRODUCTION. 


necessarily follow throughout the Sankhayana version; I do not think 
even that version would satisfactorily explain all the details of the 
Satapatha. 

It does not of course necessarily follow that the Satapatha is later 
than the Aitareya Aranyaka I, but on the other hand this result is by no 
means impossible. For by common consent? the Satapatha is one of 
the youngest of the great Brahmanas. It is no doubt anterior to Panini, 
and as far as the controversy? over the Sitra, IV, 3, 105, yields any 
results it is that Katyayana considered that Yajnavalkya was a purana, 
as opposed to a recent author, though therein it seems he disagreed with 
Panini. It is abundantly oe that the name Satapatha was well 
known to Katyayana. But there is nothing inconsistent in this with the 
view that the Satapatha in its present form may be younger than the 
Aitareya AranyakaI. It will be seen in Section VI that grammatically 
the Aranyaka I-III is older than Satapatha Brahmana, I-V, X, 
XII-XIV. 

It is perhaps well here to mention a theory recently put forward by 
Dr. Hoernle.4 He points out that in Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 4, 10, 
the word grivah, which occurs in Aitareya Aranyaka, I, 3, 4, is used to 
denote the seven cervical vertebrae, whereas in the Rgveda and 
Atharvaveda it seems to denote the throat or windpipe. This view 
must, he argues, have been derived from the medical school of Yajfia- 
valkya’s day, that of Atreya, and he refers to the fact that Indian 
tradition assigns both Yajiiavalkya and Atreya to the time of Buddha, 
the sixth century B.c.° Clearly much stress cannot be laid on this 
argument as far as it might be applied to fixing the date of either the 
Aitareya Aranyaka or the Satapatha Brahmana XII. For though 


1 Cf. Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 
pp. 203, 217. The Jaiminiya may be 
younger, cf. its use of d@dz, Whitney, 
P.A.O.S., May, 1883, p. xii. 

2 Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 443, 444, 
Indian Literature, p. 130; Bihler, 
aes Jeaoge bere Sobeu een DCN sie car «ll 
seems usually to be considered that 
Katyayana was right. But the evidence 
seems rather the other way, as Apastamba 
calls Yajnavalkya’s contemporary Sveta- 
ketu an avara, and this agrees well with 


the theory here maintained. 

3 Varttika on IV, 2, 60. 

* 7. R. A.S., 1906, pp. 918, 919. It is 
hardly accurate to regard Yajfiavalkya as 
the author of the Brahmana. His opinions 
are represented—with what fidelity we 
know not—in part only of it, and even that 
part must have been written by his pupils, 
cf. Weber, /udian Literature, pp. 120 sq. 

5 For Buddha’s date see Duff, Chronol. 
of India, p. 6; and especially Fleet, 
J. R.A. S., 1904, pp. I 8q-, 355. 


THE UPANISADS OF THE AITAREYA ARANYAKA 39 


grivah in the former work no doubt refers to cervical vertebrae, as the 
context shows, yet the passage shows none of the detailed knowledge 
of the Satapatha (grivah patcadasa\ caturdasa va etasam karikaraui 
viryam pancadasam), to which it is certainly prior, as we have scen on 
other grounds. But the tradition connecting Yajniavalkya with Buddha’s 
date is probably inaccurate, for the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad must, 
I think, be counted as earlier than Buddha, and yet it is later than the 
mass of the Brahmana, and YAajfiavalkya is to it a figure of ancient fame, 
while we are hardly yet in a position to decide the date or opinions 
of Atreya, since we can scarcely assume that Caraka represents him, 
through Agnivega, with much accuracy. But it may be noted that the 
later date of the Satapatha is distinctly indicated by the fact that 
Apastamba! calls Svetaketu, a contemporary of Yajiavalkya, modern, 
while the Kausitaki Brahmana, which also? cites ‘Svetaketu, shows again 
a connexion with the Satapatha which denotes its posteriority to the 
Aitareya. 


V. The three Upanisads of the Aitareya Aranyaka. 


There is some doubt as to the exact designations borne in early days 
by the Upanisads contained in the Aranyaka. According to Max 
Miiller,? the distinction is between the Aitareya Upanisad properly so- 
called, which fills the fourth, fifth, and sixth Adhyayas of the second 
Aranyaka, and the Mahaitareya Upanisad, also called by a more general 
name Bahvrca Upanisad, which comprises the whole of the second and 
third Aranyakas. There is no doubt that the term Aitareya Upanisad 
especially belongs to II, 4-6; but the term Mahaitareya or Bahvrca- 
brahmana Upanisad, though it sometimes* applies to both Aranyaka 
II and III, sometimes ® is confined to Aranyaka II. Further the form, 
Bahvreabrahmana Upanisad, is in the Anandasrama edition given to 
the Upanisad itself, while on the other hand, in one of the MSS. in the 
Bodleian,* the second book is described simply as Aitareya Upanisad. 
Clearly the nomenclature was not definitely fixed. Book III bore the 


1 Biihler, S. B. £., 11, xxxviii. 5 Winternitz, Royal Asiatic Society 
2 XXVI, 4. Catalogue, p. 216. 
SB. Ey 1, XEVi ® Catalogue, No.1014. Deussen, Sech- 


4 e.g. in Winternitz and Keith, Cafa- zig Upanishaa’s, p. 13, is incorrect as to 
logue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Sankara’s view. 
Bodleian Library, No. to1l. 


40 INTRODUCTION 


special title of Samhita Upanisad, which is given to it in Satkara’s 
commentary and which it claims for itself by its opening words. The 
term Mahaitareya may have been applied at an early date since it 
appears to have given rise to the fiction of a Rsi, Mahaitareya, by the 
date of the composition of Agvalayana Grhya Sitra, III, 4, but the text 
of these Sutras is not very certain. 

It must be recognized that the interpretation of these Upanisads is far 
from certain or easy. They were no doubt originally accompanied in the 
Vedic schools by explanations which might, had they been preserved, 
have shown how much we now misinterpret them. But it is impossible 
to regard Sankara’s explanations as traditional. There must have been 
somewhere a gap in the tradition. This is shown clearly by the fact 
that Sankara explains all the Upanisads as exhibiting one doctrine, an 
impossible view, and that Badarayana,! who in his Brahmasitra does 
precisely the same thing, adopted a different doctrine as the fundamental 
key to the system. All that can now be done is to take the Upanisads 
and endeavour to extract what seems the most natural meaning from the 
actual words. ; 

In the eyes of Sankara and Sayana there is no difference in time nor 
in essential doctrines between the three Upanisads, which they regard as 
one. There are three classes of men, says Sayana? in the Introduction 
to Book III, those who desire immediate freedom through the knowledge 
of Brahman, and accordingly find it by aid of Book II, 4-6; those who 
desire to become free gradually by attaining to the world of Hiranya- 
garbha, for whom II, 1-3, is intended; and those who care only for 
prosperity, for whom the third Aranyaka serves. In the Introduction to 
II, 1, 2, he adds that it lays down aids to the concentration of thought 
in the shape of the performance of certain updsanas or meditations. 
Such meditation may be of two kinds, Brahmopasana, or Pratikopasana ; 
the former consists in contemplation of Brahman as endowed with 
qualities, the latter in considering worldly objects as Brahman, whether, 
as in the second Book, they are sacrificial objects or non-sacrificial. 

It is undoubtedly the case that the Upanisad, II, 1-3, is intended in 
some degree to supersede sacrifice, or rather while assuming sacrifice to 


? See Thibaut, S. B. Z., XLVIII; Keith, S$. B.£., 1, 200. It is true he follows 


J. R. A. S., 1906, pp. 490 sq. Sankara, but they are not Sankara’s actual 
? Sankara, according to Max Miiller, words. 


THE UPANISADS OF THE AITAREYA ARANYAKA 41 


explain it mystically, the mystic meaning being the essential part. The 
path par excellence is knowledge of the real meaning of the Uktha. Uktha 
is earth, sky, and heaven; its objects are Agni, Vayu, and Aditya, its 
asitis are food, whereby all is obtained. It is also the body, mouth, 
nostrils, and forehead of Prajapati. The breath is Uktha, and saztya,and 
as drhati supports all things. Purusa, II, 1, 7, again, creates the earth, 
fire, the sky, the air, heaven, and the sun. 

In Adhyaya 2, Prana is identified with the authors of the hymns of the 
Reveda, the 7es, the arvdharcas, and Indra declares himself to be Prana, 
and, II, 2, 4, the worshipper is identified with the sun. 

In Adhyaya 3 the identity of the individual and the Uktha or Prana is 
insisted upon. The growth of self is traced from the sap of herbs and 
trees through animals, which show hunger and thirst, to knowledge in man, 
and after the identification of Uktha and Prana-the Adhyaya ends with 
some obscure verses alleged to treat of the winning of Hiranyagarbha. 

The precise meaning of the doctrine is hard to decide. It appears, 
however, to amount to a vague pantheism, which recognizes the unity of 
all existence physical or otherwise, and at the same time tends, as 
pantheistic views naturally do tend, to become a cosmogonism, especially 
in the account of the powers of Purusa (II, 1, 7). It is too early yet to 
speak of a clear differentiation of mind and body, though distinct signs 
appear in II, 3, 2, where men, animals, and trees are regarded as showing 
in inverse order the growth of intelligence. But the Prana or Purusa 
does not consist in mind as opposed to body: all things exist in him, and 
both mind and body ‘seem equally essential elements. 

Deussen, in Die Philosophie der Upanishad’s, argues that the oldest 
Upanisads are dominated by a doctrine derived from Yajfiavalkya which 
may be styled ‘Idealism’ and which may be summed up in the pro- 
positions: (1) the Atman is the knowing subject within us; (2) the 
Atman is itself as subject unknown; (3) the Atman is the sole reality. 
These propositions undoubtedly are found in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
I-IV, and I agree with Deussen in thinking that they were taken over 
and partly misunderstood by the Chandogya Upanisad, and that the 
Taittiriya and Kausitaki Upanisads are probably later still. Nor as 

1 Pp. 209 sq., 357; E. T., pp. 231 sq., stands in no organic relation to the Kausi- 
397 sq. taki Brahmana, unlike the Aitareya Upa- 


2 Jbid., pp. 23, 24; E. T., pp. 23, 24. nisad, see Lindner, Kausitaki Brahmana, 
The Kausitaki Upanisad, it may be noted, p. ix. This goes to prove its later date. 


42 INTRODUCTION 


regards the first two of these propositions can there be much dispute as 
to their meaning. But the third proposition is more difficult. Deussen 
interprets it, it appears, to mean only that there is no reality outside the 
one Atman, and that what seems to be knowledge of reality is really only 
an illusory knowledge of things as they appear, not as they are in them- 
selves. That is he discerns in the Advaita doctrine the same principle 
as appears in Kant, a separation between things in themselves and 
empirical reality. It is probable that those who held the doctrine of 
Maya were less subtile thinkers than this, as is shown by the naive manner 
in which knowledge is made the characteristic of the Atman, while at the 
same time all empirical knowledge is declared illusory. For such know- 
ledge as is not empirical is meaningless to us and should not be described 
as knowledge. They rather resembled the early Atomists, like Democritus, 
who denied the reality of anything save atoms and the void. Dissatisfied 
with the changing nature of life and appearances, they thought that they 
reached finality and truth by denying the reality of phenomena, and 
they carried that metaphysical doctrine into ethics by regarding the acts 
of the ordinary life as fundamentally indifferent and unreal. The result 
of this metaphysical theory has had a considerable influence in Hindu 
life and thought, and it has undoubtedly retarded natural development 
and to some extent moral progress, though the facts of life have been too 
strong for it. But whatever the exact significance of the doctrine, it is 
clear that Yajfiavalkya, and those who followed him, did in some sense or 
other, hold that the world was unreal, a view which is not in any true 
sense Kantian. 

To these three doctrines characteristic of the Yajiiavalkya belief, may be 
added (4) the allied doctrines of the transmigration of souls,! of Moksa, and 
the reward in a future birth of good and evil. This doctrine is certainly 
not older than the Upanisads, and it is intimately connected with views 
of moral retribution,” which are hardly logically to be reconciled with the 


+ Deussen, 0p. Cit.) porzozestesie aie 
pp. 315 sq.; Garbe, Phzlosophy of Ancient 
India, pp. 4-6; Macdonell, Vedic Myth- 
ology, p. 168, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 223, 
224, 386-389; Hopkins, Religions of India, 
p- 145. Aboriginal influence (Gough, 
Philosophy of the Upanishads, pp. 24, 25) 
is most probable in view of the scanty 


traces in Vedic religion (Oldenberg, 
keligion des Veda, pp. 562-564) of the 
belief of the passing of souls into trees and 
animals. 

* On the confusion in the Karma doc- 
trine see Hopkins, /. 2. .A.S., 1906, pp. 
581-594; 1907, pp. 665-672. 


THE UPANISADS OF THE AITAREYA ARANYAKA 43 


other three doctrines, which naturally lead to the recognition that no such 
thing as transmigration can exist, and that mere knowledge is freedom 
and there is no consciousness after death. 

The question arises how far these doctrines have any counterpart in 
II, 1-3. The answer seems that the Upanisad stands in regard to them 
all on an earlier plane of development. (1) The Atman is not yet 
recognized as the unity. That is designated as Prana or Purusa, and in 
II, 3, 2, the Purusa has an Atman which is developed in various degrees 
in the Purusa according to the diverse forms which Purusa adopts 
as man, beast, plant, &c. There is a pantheistic conception, but it is not 
one of consciousness as the sole reality. (2) There is naturally no trace 
of the doctrine of the unknowableness of the Atman. (3) What is more 
important, there is no trace of the doctrine of the unreality of things. 
Purusa exists in them all, but either he is identical with, or creates 
(II, 1, 7) them, and he does not exist outside them. The nearest 
approach to a hint of the later idea is found in II, 1, 5, where it is said 
that if one knows what is Sattya, then even if falsehood is spoken by him, 
yet he says what is true. But it is only a vague hint. (4) The doctrine 
of transmigration cannot be proved to be known to this Upanisad. 
Sankara and Sayana of course assume its existence, but the passages 
can be explained otherwise. They are II, 1, 3, tad tday karma krtam 
ayam purusah, which most probably means that action is the man, 
aman is what he does, not a man is what he did in a former birth, which 
is not really suitable in the context, and 3, 2, yathaprajnam hi sambhavah, 
which I take to signify: ‘for their experiences are according to their 
intelligence,’ a meaning which avoids dragging in a doctrine by no means 
needed or even intelligible in the context. The doctrine of the Upanisad 
is immortality in another world with the gods, II, 2, 4, &c. 

There appears therefore no legitimate room for doubt that the Upanisad, 
II, 1-3, is anterior to the spread of the Yajfiavalkya doctrine and to 
all subsequent Upanisads which contain that doctrine. Parts of the 
Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya Upanisads may be equally early, for 
some of their texts contain no reference to transmigration, but it would 
seem that Aitareya Aranyaka II, 1-3, which forms a unity, is the 
oldest long Upanisad extant. 

In the Upanisad proper, II, 4-6, there is clear evidence of a further 
development of doctrine. In Adhyaya 4 the idea is that the Atman 


44 INTRODUCTION 


produces everything, cosmogonism in fact. In Adhyaya 6 we reach the 
identifications of Prajfiana with Brahman and these two with Atman. 
We thus have clearly the doctrine that the Atman is consciousness, for it 
is intended evidently not to identify reality with the Atman, but, as in 
Adhyaya 4,in a rough way, to show that all things, the gods, the elements, 
men, animals, &c., are dependent on knowledge, that is the Atman. But 
there is still no statement that the self is unknowable; that is, the 
conception of subject as contrasted with object is not yet clear. On the 
other hand the sole existence of the Atman appears in II, 4, 3, where it 
is asserted that there is no other self. But this view carries with it no 
denial of the reality of things which depend on Atman. The Maya con- 
ception is not even implicit. Nor is the doctrine of transmigration 
apparently present. It is true that Sankara and Sayana found it in II, 5: 
athasyayam itara atma krtakrtyo vayogatah praiti sa itah prayann eva 
punar gayate tad asya trttyam janma\ But ztak must mean ‘hence’ and 
the third birth must be in the heaven, an idea of course familiar to the 
Brahmanas* which know nothing of transmigration. 

There is not, therefore, anything in my opinion in this Upanisad to 
justify us in assigning it to a later date than the period anterior to the 
main doctrines of the Brhadaranyaka. 

In the third Upanisad, ITI, 1-2, there is little of philosophical interest. 
There is a repeated identification of the incorporeal conscious self and 
the sun, and there is a distinct assertion that the self is that which hears, 
thinks, sees, &c., but is not heard or thought, and which is within all 
beings. This gives us (1) the conscious Atman, which (2) is not knowable 
and (3) probably is all that is real. But there is no sign of the 
doctrine of Maya, nor of transmigration, nor of freedom in knowledge. 
On the contrary the fate of the good is repeatedly stated to be prosperity 
in this world and Svarga in the next. So even this Upanisad may be 
earlier than the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. 

External evidence for the dates of the Upanisads is not forthcoming. 
It is true that the first Upanisad presupposes that the Rgveda was 
already arranged as we have it at the time when the Upanisad was com- 
posed, but Oldenberg * has shown that the Rgveda assumed its present 


1 Deussen, op. cit., pp. 294, 295; E. “ilies ? In his Prolegomena, and cf. his review 
pp. 326, 327 ; Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, of Scheftelowitz’s Die A pokryphen des 
p. 169. ksgveda in Gott. Gel. Anzeig., 1907, pp. 


DATE OF THE AITAREYA UPANISAD an 


form at a date before the composition of the Samaveda, the oldest form 
of the Yajurveda, and the Atharvaveda. The Samhita Upanisad 
shows a knowledge of the samhita, pada, and krama pathas of the Re- 
veda, and of the doctrines of #zatva and satva. But all that this shows 
is that it belongs to a period relatively later than that of the Brahmanas,! 
a view which of course is undisputed. It is probably older than Yaska, 
who evidently was much more advanced in grammatical studies than the 
author of this Upanisad, and it may be dated in the sixth century B.C., 
perhaps earlier, since the transmigration doctrine had by the time when 
Buddha preached apparently obtained a complete grasp of the Indian 
sage’s mind, though of course it is quite possible and almost probable 
that the doctrine spread first in some definite locality, perhaps in the 
East, which may not have been that of the home of the Aitareya. It 
may be noted that the Aitareya Brahmana had its origin among the 
Kuru-Paficalas, and the Satapatha among the Kosala-Videhas, in so far 
at least as the books attributed to Yajiiavalkya are concerned.” 
Deussen ? is of opinion that the Aitareya Upanisad is later than the 
Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya and also than the Taittiriya. It is 
hardly possible, for the reasons already given, to accept this view. He 
points out that in Chandogya Upanisad, VI, 3, 1, there are three kinds 
of organic beings, in Aitareya Upanisad, II, 6, there are four, svedaya being 
added. This argument is of no real weight, in view of the fact that enumera- 
tions of classes in these Upanisads are always careless and often incomplete, 
indeed the assertion in the Chandogya is so couched as to appear to be 
deliberately directed against an assertion that the number was other than 
three, and may be a reference to the Aitareya. The substantial argu- 
ments on the other side are those from the contents. The same argument 
applies to the Taittiriya. The Anandavalli* contains an elaborately 
developed doctrine which certainly regards the Atman as conscious, as 
unknowable, and as unique, besides treating of the nature of transmigra- 
tion in a very subtle manner. The argument of Deussen from the fact 
of the less elaborate description of the entrance of the Atman into creation 


211-240. Cf. Macdonell, Sanskrit Liter- 207, 214; Weber, Jzdian Literature, pp. 


ature, p. 46. 45, 120 sq. 
1 Cf, Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 8 Op. cit., pp. 23, 24; E. T., pp. 23, 24. 
pp. 265 sq. 4 Deussen, Sechzig Upanishads, pp. 


2 Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 224-228. 


46 INTRODUCTION 


in II, 6, in comparison with the Aitareya account in II, 4, 3, is quite incon- 
clusive. Further, the Taittirlya Upanisad! sets a high value on asceti- 
cism, and thus differs from the Aitareya and even the Brhadaranyaka and 
Chandogya. Historically the earliest view appears to have been opposed 
to asceticism, which only later was regarded as an aid to knowledge. 
Again in the Siksavalli the knowledge of grammar shown is at least as 
great as that of the Samhita Upanisad. Another sign of the comparative 
lateness of the Taittiriya? is the addition of mahas to the triad, dhir, 
bhuvah, svar. 

There can, in any case, be no question of the priority of the Aitareya 
to the Kausitaki Upanisad. The Kausitaki is decidedly late.* Adhyaya 1 
is a variant of the transmigration legend found in Chandogya, V, 
3-10, and Brhadaranyaka, VI, 2, which are both late passages in 
their Upanisads.* The twelve explanations of Balaki Gargya in the 
Brhadaranyaka, II, 1, are expanded to sixteen in Kausitaki, IV. The 
pranasamvada of the Aitareya, II, 4, is certainly older than either that 
of the Brhadaranyaka, VI, 11-14, or the Chandogya, V, 1, or the Kausi- 
taki, II, 12-14, III, 3. The name, zzdriya, for the organs of sense first 
occurs in Kausitaki, IT, 15,° and in Aitareya, III, 2, 1,and the word manas 
occurs in the sense of an organ, like speech, sight, hearing, instead of the 
old sense ‘ consciousness,’ in Kausitaki, III.” 

Further it may be noted that in the Aitareya, even in III, 2, 3, there 
is no hint of the recognition of the Atharva as a fourth Veda. Such 
hints occur in the Brhadaranyaka, V, 13, and VI, 4, 13, and Athar- 
vana occurs in Chandogya, VII, 1, 2, while the Atharvans and Angirases 
are mentioned in the early text, Brhadaranyaka, II, 4, 10. 

Other Upanisads, including the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, may 
fairly be left out of account. None of them can claim to be older than 
the Aitareya and many must be much more modern. They are marked 
by a greater formalism of doctrine, accompanied by attempts to graft 
popular doctrines on to the philosophical conceptions of the Upanisads, - 
which were apparently soon found too abstruse for the comprehension 
of their successors. 


causa PP: 334 sq. 
* Op. cit., pp. 64, 65; E. T., pp. 67-69. © Itid., p. 80; ExT. p. 87. 
® Gfstinray p40, na: ° Ibid. p. 244; E. T., p. 270. 


* Deussen, op. cit., pp. 296 sq.; E. T., " Ibid. p. 2453; E. T., p. 272. 


DATE OF THE AITAREYA UPANISAD 47 


It may therefore be concluded that the first two Upanisads certainly, 
and probably also the third, precede the Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya 
Upanisads in their main portions, especially the Yajflavalkya section of 
the former, that they are pre-Buddhistic, as is proved both by the-con- 
tents and the language,’ and that they date from about 700-500 B.C. 

In connexion with the relation of the Upanisads to Buddhism it may 
be well to trace the history of the Atman doctrine. The derivation of 
the word is in dispute? and throws no clear light on the meaning. But at 
any rate, it is certain that the Indians obtained gradually, doubtless 
through the phenomena of dreams and swoons and death, the conception 
of the body being animated by a soul. This conception naturally 
reacted on their views of religion. It is impossible to suppose, as is now 
so often done, that the earliest or even an early form of religion was the 
belief in spirits which take up their abode from time to time in various 
forms. It cannot have been until after long experience that the idea of 
a disembodied spirit can have been intelligible. Primitive man must 
long have regarded body and mind as one. So his earliest worship must 
have been addressed to things which seemed to him to be able to help or 
hurt him. We cannot believe with Rhys Davids* that the early worship 
of trees was really dryad worship. The early believer regarded certain 
trees as divine, just as he regarded certain animals, like the cow or the 
snake, as divine because of their beneficent or maleficent powers, and it 
was only later that the idea of the spirit as separable from the tree or animal 
appears. Once the idea of a separate spirit is arrived at of course the 
nature of the deity changes, anthropomorphism arises, or other animals 
or things than that which the deity originally was become his place of 
abode.t Further, other abstract deities can arise, and we pass from 
worship of natural objects to worship of spirits embodied from time to 
time in natural forms. It was not unnatural that the thinker should 
endeavour to find some common explanation of the vast world of souls, 
and still less unnatural that he should decide that all souls were identical ; 


1 Liebich, Paninz, ch. iii, concludes that 8 Buddhist India, p. 226. Cf. Olden- 
the language of the Brhadaranyaka is pre- berg’s view of early religion, Redzgion des 
Paninean. This incidentally supports the Veda, p. 37. 
theory of the date of the Aitareya. * Hence the fetishism described in Far- 

2 Cf Deussen, Philosophie des Veda, nell, Evolution of Religion, pp. 44-47 ; 
p. 285; Geldner, Vedische Studien, MI, and cf. my article, J. X. A. S., 1907, 
116. pp. 929-949, on theriomorphic deities. 


48 INTRODUCTION 


for the soul being merely a spirit had when separated from its body no 
characteristic or distinguishing features. 

But the merit of the Upanisads does not rest on this mere identification.! 
It rests on the attempt to discover the nature of the soul. At first the 
conception may no doubt have been that it was material,? and traces of 
that view persist late, but at any rate the author of the Aitareya 
Upanisad was well aware that the essential characteristic of soul was 
consciousness, and I think we must admit that the Upanisad fully 
recognizes that all existence whatever is dependent on consciousness. 
It is true that the Upanisad does not clearly analyse or realize what that 
means, but the idea is there. The Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya supply 
a further account, and at the same time they develop the theme that 
recognition of the true facts as to the Atman means freedom, whereas 
failure to recognize means transmigration. Buddhism is certainly later 


than these doctrines, from which it is an illogical and_unsatisfactor z 
derivative so far as metaphysics? go. It is significant of its later origin 
that it arose at a time when Tapas was laid great stress upon even in the 


philosophic schools, whereas Tapas is not recognized as a factor in know- 
ledge until the Taittiriya Upanisad, and becomes prominent only in the 
Kena and Svetagvatara Upanisads. Its derivative nature is plainly seen 
in the fundamental doctrine of the rejection of the Atman, and the illogical 
substitution of a Karman which performs the functions of an Atman for 
purposes of transmigration, and in the consequent doctrine of Nirvana, 
which is nonentity, as all content has been rendered impossible by the 
rejection of the theory of Atman as conscious. It is true that the theory 
was inevitable, inasmuch as the Upanisads came to insist on emptying 
the Atman of all meaning by rejecting the objective side of consciousness, 
so that the Atman ceased to be anything but a subject without an object, 
a view that is not that of the Aitareya Upanisad. But to accept the 
doctrine that there existed no Atman at all was to adopt a view which, 
strictly speaking, rendered all knowledge meaningless, for there must be 


* As Rhys Davids appears to think, rests on a metaphysical basis which is 


Op. cit., p. 256. thoroughly unsound, and, as empirical 
ee a Wid. +) Pp» 251, 252. Cf. Macdonell, psychology, is hopelessly confused and 
(a j hum lpe ee Mythology, p. 166. self-contradictory. Cf. the significant ad- 


rep hyp? * No doubt Buddhism is not in the missions by Mrs. Rhys Davids, 7. 2..4.S., 
main a metaphysical system (cf. Lovejoy, 1903, pp. 687-691. 
D/A Sy ely BEL G2) SGe), Ut sit 


DATE OF THE AITAREYA UPANISADS 49 


a subject, and it is no answer that there need be no permanent individual 
self. 

The doctrine of avzazta therefore destroys all the basis of samsara, and_ 
is complete proof that Buddhism is entirely dependent on the Upanisads 
which first clearly develop that view. There are numerous other signs 
Gfdependence. The dialogue form is copied from the dialogues of the 
Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya, and even the style of the Aitareya 
Upanisad, II, 6: yad etad hrdayam manas caitat samjhanam ajhanam 
vijnanam prajnanam medha drstir dhrtir matir manisa jitih smrtih sam- 
kalpah kratur asuh kaimo vasa iti sarvany evaitant prajhanasya nama- 
adheyani, is a forecast of those intolerable lists of practically meaningless 
synonyms which disfigure the pages of the Pali Suttas. In estimating 
the causes of the fall of Buddhism,! it must, I think, be recognized how 
great a part was played by the unphilosophical and uncritical nature of 
the metaphysical doctrine, and by the elaborate mass of inaccurate and 
fanciful psychology,? which the school endeavoured to set up as its 
contribution to the knowledge of truth. The Upanisads contain much 
that is foolish and meaningless, but they are the first books of a new faith 
Raia Gases he sthtces of a system of philosophy whose 
influence in India is still paramount. 

It follows with certainty that the Aitareya Upanisads are considerably 
older than Buddha, whose date of death is certainly about 487 or 477 B.C.3 
We must therefore probably fix 600 B.C. as the lowest limit for their com- 
position, or put 550 B.C. at the very latest, thus modifying slightly the 
results above reached. It is not possible to estimate how quickly thought 
then worked, but about 50 to 100 years will be required for the develop- 
ment from the earliest to the latest Upanisad, and I incline to fix approxi- 
mately the dates at from about 700-600 B.c. for Aranyaka II, and 550 
for Aranyaka III. Aranyaka I may be somewhat earlier, but not 
necessarily much earlier, while, as seen above, the Aranyakas IV and V 
belong to about 450 B. C., thus explaining the dictum of Sayana which 
distinguishes so sharply between the two parts. The upper date may 


1 Cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, pp. of the labour bestowed on it. Cf. Hopkins, 
319, 320. SottsA Sse) 1900,.). 5803 Louis’ de la 
* Mrs. Rhys Davids in her Buddhist Vallée Poussin, 7. 2. A.S., 1906, p. 944. 
_Psychology has done much for the study, PACE: Do 345 Te 5 
but the fact remains that it is not worthy 


KEITH E 


50 INTRODUCTION 


perhaps be pushed farther back, but this involves the pushing back of 
the date of the Rgveda, for which, at least at present, no satisfactory 
evidence has been adduced.1 Among recent writers Rhys Davids? and 
Garbe ® ascribe to the eighth and seventh centuries the older Upanisads. 

The position of the Aitareya gives some light with regard to the 
question how far the Brahmins were the authors of the change in 
philosophy shown in the Upanisads. Of late it has been more and more 
the practice to ascribe to the Ksatriyas this step in philosophic progress. 
This view has recently been pressed by Garbe* and Deussen.? But it 
seems to me to rest on no substantial evidence and to be @ priorz 
improbable. The Aitareya shows a legitimate development from the 
Brahmana to the Upanisad, and no reason appears why the Brahmins 
should be considered unable to develop further the ideas which Deussen 
himself has shown were latent in the Brahmanas. Doubtless, as the 
history of Jiiataputra and Gautama show, the Ksatriyas in the eighth to 
the sixth centuries B. Cc. took an interest in the intellectual life of the day, 
but that is not to say that the Ksatriyas developed new views as opposed 
to the Brahmins. The fact is that society had not yet attained that 
artificial character of separation of classes which is seen in the Manava 
Dharmasastra. The literary activities of the Ksatriyas were mainly spent 
at this time on the development of the epic ® which was soon to produce 
the Ramayana, a development shared by the Brahmins but mainly 
directed by the Ksatriyas, just as the latter shared the philosophic 
researches which were the main task of the former. 

It is not unimportant to observe that there is as yet no trace in the 
Aranyaka of the doctrine of the misery of existence which characterizes 
both the Jaina and Buddhist creeds. It is I think correct to assume that 
these doctrines are descended from a Samkhya’™ view of existence which 
fell into pessimism by its unsatisfactory dualistic metaphysics. However 
open to criticism Jacobi’s detailed derivation of the doctrines of Buddhism 


* Cf. Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, 
p- 12; Winternitz, Gesch. der ind. Vittl., 
I, 348 sq. * Buddhist India, p. 162. 

* Philosophy of Ancient India, p. 60. 
Cf. Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, p.226. 


Ee ato: 

° See Jacobi, Das Ramayana; Mac- 
donell, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 302 sq. 

" Cf. Deussen, Philosophie der Upani- 
shad’s, chap. x; Jacobi, Z.D.M.G., LII, 


* Op. cit., pp. 73 sq.; Betitriige (1903), 
pp. I sq. 
° Philosophie der Upanishad’s, p. 17; 


I sq.; Garbe, Phzlosophy of Ancient 
India, p.11; Macdonell, Sanskrit Litera- 
ture, p. 397; Oldenberg, Buddha, ed. 3. 


Wate OF THE? AITAREYA UPANISADS 51 


from the Samkhya may be, yet it is clear that it was from the Samkhya 
that Buddhism derived its theory of the soulless entity which yet goes 
through transmigration. For this is precisely the itgasarira which alone 
migrates, purusa being a truth utterly dissociated from matters From 
this point of view also is reached the result that the Aitareya is consider- 
ably anterior to Buddhism. 

Aranyaka I contains, in comparison with the Upanisads, little of 
philosophic interest. It is important, however, to observe that in it 
brahman appears already as a principle of unity. In I, 1, 3, gayatri is 
identified with drahman and the Mahavrata day is also identified, because 
it leads to dbrahman. Similarly Vasukra is brahman and so is identified 
with the Mahavrata day. There can be no doubt that the drahman 
conception is older than that of the Atman, and that it originally meant 
‘the power of prayer, which even in the Rgveda is treated as a spell to 
bend the gods by its own force to grant what is craved, instead of being 
considered an appeal to the lovingkindness of the gods. That eventually 
this doctrine was amalgamated with a younger rival, the Atman doctrine, 
as Oldenberg suggests, seems to me undoubted. The assimilation is 
seen complete in the Upanisad II, 6, which indicates the length of time 
which we must assume between the first book and the Upanisad proper. 

It remains to consider whether any explanation can be given of the 
connexion with the doctrines of the Upanisad of the Mahavrata rite. 
Some light on this matter is thrown by Prof. Eggeling in the introduc- 
tion to Part IV? of his translation of the Satapatha Brahmana. He 
there points out that the Agnicayana and the Mahavrata appear to have 
been developed in connexion with a doctrine of the production of the 
world from the sacrifice of Purusa (cf. Rgveda, X, 90), which eventually 
yields the equation of Prajapati at once to the sacrifice and the sacrificer 
(cf. Aitareya Aranyaka, II, 1, 2). But the sacrifice lasts a year, and so 
Prajapati becomes time, and death, and eventually mind. Thus the 
Mahavrata rite is treated in the Aranyaka as specially secret, and finds 
a natural development in the more purely philosophic Upanisads. 

In conclusion, a few words may be said as to the relation of Aranyaka 
III to the other Vedic texts of similar content. It is of course very 
closely related to the Sankhayana Aranyaka VII, VIII, with which 
it agrees verbally in some parts, showing that both versions go back to 


1S. B. L., SLU, xiti-xxvii. 
E 2 


52 _ INTRODUCTION 


a not very distant common ancestor. But on the whole the version 
of the Saakhayana seems the more. modern in several respects.1 

The Samhitopanisad Brahmana is certainly a much more recent work. 
Burnell, in the preface to his edition, has urged general considerations for 
its comparatively late date. It shows a considerable advance of phonetic 
science, and mentions such points as lopa, atihara, rephasandhi, and 
visargopagraha, while it deals with the svaras. Three sorts of Samhita 
are distinguished, the deva, asura, and rsz, an artificial conception. The 
Samhita is also considered as suddha, aduhsprsta, and anirbhija. In 
the last section philosophy has degenerated into meaningless formulae, 
and the demand for gifts in Section IV is beneath the dignity of the 
older Aranyakas and Upanisads. Nor is it without significance that in 
so short a text are found sukhibhavati and gulmibhitd, forms rare 
indeed in the older texts,? while the only narrative tense found is the 
perfect ? (in III), and the language is classical. 

The Aranyaka III is also in all probability older than Taittiriya 
Upanisad, I, 3, which appears, as will be seen from the note on III, 1, 2, 
to be an enlarged version of the older Samhita doctrine, although it 
seems likely that the Upanisad is much older than the Samhitopanisad 
Brahmana. 


VI. Style and Grammar. 


In this connexion it will be sufficient to consider the first three 
Aranyakas as forming one whole, as distinct from the fifth Aranyaka, 
and to disregard the differences in date among their parts. The quota- 
tions contained in the fourth Aranyaka, and also scattered throughout 
the rest of the work, may be left out of consideration until later (p. 74). 

The prose of the Aranyaka is of considerable historic interest. The 
history of Sanskrit prose is one of continual degradation so far as the 
grammatical structure of the language is concerned. Classical rose, 
whatever the subject-matter, whether romance, as in Subandhu and Bana, 


* I have had available for comparison from quotation from the text. 
the MS. Sansk. e, 2 of the Bodleian * Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 1093, 
Library, described in Winternitz and 1094. : 
Keith’s Catalogue, pp. 59, 60, and, as I 5 Cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Gram- 
fear Dr, Friedlander will not carry out mattk, 1, xxxi, n. 2. 
his projected edition, I have not refrained 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 53 
fable, as in the Paficatantra, or philosophy, is composed in a style which 


combines all the disadvantages of an inflected with those of an uninflected 
Tanguage. It is characterized by the use of enormous compounds which, 
in addition to rendering comprehension of the meaning intended difficult 
and slow, make all precision impossible, and by the consequent paucity 
of verbal forms. The proportion of finite verbs to other forms of speech 
steadily decreases, and among finite forms the present indicative and the 
imperfect are predominant. Sentences are constantly cast in the passive, 
and the past participle passive becomes extremely frequent. A further 
economy in the use of finite verbs is effected by the employment of the 
gerund, which can conveniently convey a large variety of meanings, 
and take the place of subordinate clauses denoting time, cause, con- 
cession, &c. The past tenses, imperfect, aorist, and perfect, when the 
two latter occur, are used without discrimination of meaning. All 
clearness, precision, and accuracy are lost, and_in_addition to the dis- 
appearance of much that was merely superfluous in the older style the 
new prose loses the chance of variation by giving up the use of all but 
a few particles,and by diminishing the number of its prepositions. 

The prose of the first three Aranyakas is free from many of these 
faults. The use of compounds is, as in the Brahmanas, generally 
restricted to combinations of two members for the most part, with a few 
exceptions easily explained, like manovakpranasamhatah (Il, 1, 1), and 
the two members stand in natural relations. The use of finite verbal 
forms is in no way restricted, and both aorist and perfect are used 
normally with correctness. Passive forms are comparatively rare, and 
the gerund is quite infrequent. The subjunctive is still occasionally 
used in persons other than the first, while the use of particles is com- 
paratively varied. The style is essentially simple and natural in 
grammatical structure in comparison with the artifice of the later prose, 
while it possesses a considerable number of variant forms which reveal 
the poverty of the classical style. But beyond simplicity it has little 
to commend it. Prof. Macdonell! has described the style of the 
Aitareya Brahmana in words which also apply well to the Aitareya 
Aranyaka, as ‘crude, clumsy, abrupt, and elliptical’. The art of con- 
structing sentences is entirely wanting; a long series of co-ordinate 








1 Sanskrit Literature, p. 207. Cf. also Wackernagel, Adtindische Grammatik, 1, 
xxix sq. 


Style 4 ALM /¢ 


I/f 


54 INTRODUCTION 


clauses takes the place of due subordination, and an inordinate love for 
parallelism of structure is the chief sign of conscious literary effort 
(cf. II, 1, 4; 4, 3). There is no power of transition from thought to 
thought, and in other cases it is difficult to tell whether it is the thought 
which is defective or the language which has failed to express it 
(cf.e.g. II, 1,2: 2a tasyese yan nadyad yad vainam nadyuh; V1, 1, 5: 
na tasyese yan mahyam na dadyuh). Some defects it shares with all 
Sanskrit prose. Although it has at command a considerable range of 
particles, it fails to use them with any clear discrimination of sense, thus 
contrasting with the analogous phenomena in Greek literature where 
a delicate discrimination in the use of particles runs on from Homeric 
into classical Greek. Again, although it commands a wide range of 
pronominal forms, they are not used with any clear difference of sense, 
and indeed a characteristic of the Aitareya, as of all Brahmana prose, 
is the use of double pronouns, like sa esa, without the slightest real 
difference of sense from the single pronouns. The same result, lack of 
precision, arises from the free use of the cases of the noun and the 
absence of prepositions to define exactly the sense intended. 

But utterly lacking as is the style in precision, balance, and elegance, 
and although the Aranyaka is destitute of any attempt at ornament, 
it has nevertheless a certain fitness to its subject-matter. The naive 
speculations, the vague guessings after truth, the confusion of thought, 
which make up the matter, are not inadequately mirrored in the harsh 
abruptness and elliptic brevity of the style, and a certain variety is 
introduced in the frequent quotations of verses intended to bear out 
the argument. 

The historical position of the prose is not open to serious doubt. It 
cannot be contemporary with the classical prose of the Kavya type, and 
it is clearly anterior to the prose of the Siitras. This is shown not 
merely by the disuse in the Sitras of various grammatical forms still 
found in the Aranyaka, but still more by the form of the Sitras. The 
Aranyaka is written in prose as a literary composition; other Siitras 
consist merely of strings of rules, and though, as Dr. Knauer in his 
edition of the Gobhiliya Grhya Sotra, and Hillebrandt in his edition 
of the Sankhayana Srauta Siitra have chown they can be construed as 
texts written continuously, still such compositions must be later than 
original prose works. On the other hand, not only does the Aranyaka 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 55 


contain fewer grammatical antiquities than the Aitareya Brahmana, but 
it is written in a more developed style and with a greater approach to 
a command over the language. 

The style shows also interesting affinities with that of the Buddhist 
Pali Sitras. It is impossible not to recognize in both the same long lists 
(e.g. II, 6) of names of mental phenomena, in which thought is hidden 
under meaningless verbal distinctions. Similar in both is the affection 
for parallelism of structure and the remorseless love of completeness 
which insists on repeating in every detail ideas applicable to more than 
one subject in every instance in which they apply, while the set formulae 
with which the Pali Sitras open and close have close parallels in the 

ranyaka. Ye 

On the whole the vocabulary of the Aranyaka shows little that is 
remarkable; a few Rgvedic words are used with direct reference to the 
passages in the Samhita in which they occur. Visva is found only in 
the phrase vifve devah and twice in etymologies, I, 2, 2; II, 2, 1. 
Vatha tu katha ca occurs twice, III, 1,3; 4. Other interesting words 
are ayatiah, III, 1, 2, from V/yat, to stretch; andam, III, 1, 2; addha- 
tamau, 1,2,3; bidale, 111, 1,2; batarakani, Il, 2,4; manjistha, UI, 2,43 
sambalhatamah from Vv bamh, 1, 4,1; bisani, III, 2, 4, and orszh, I, 2, 4, 
where the dental s is remarkable; dutah, 1, 4, 1, which is taken by 
Sayana from /du gatau; ulbanisnu, Il, 3, 8; avayat, II, 4, 3, which is 
usually derived from / av, meaning ‘devour’; santant, I, 2, 2; vistapam, 
II,1,2; wiksudram, 1, 5,13 vijavah, of doubtful number, I,4,1; sattyam 
for satyam, 11, 1, 53; samanodarkam, I, 5, 3; stomatisamsanayat, I, 4,1; 
antastyam, 1, 5,15 ksudramisréni, U1, 6; udbhijani, 11, 6, &c. 

Throughout between vowels d and dh are written / and lh. This is 
carefully observed in the best MSS. and has been followed consistently. 
In II, 4, 3, saiso is supported by the MSS.; and in III, 2, 4, mayura- 
grivameghe seems to stand for mayiragriva(h) ameghe, and cf. acyostha- 
varabhyam, III, 1, 3. Namo astu is the form in the MSS. in III, 1, 3; 
4, and they read in III, 1, 2: tasmin ha smin. Irregular lengthening 
of vowels appears in 7/7 nu, III, 1,2, and wyaya, II, 3, 8, in the latter 
case ina verse. The sandhi of aw is peculiar; it becomes av before all 
vowels except # or #, when it becomes 4. The same rule is usually 
followed in the Aitareya and other Brahmanas (Aufrecht’s ed., p. 427)- 

In noun and adjective declension there are few irregularities. Azman, 











56 INTRODUCTION 


I, 5, 2, occurs besides a@tmani, II, 5; Sirsan, I, 5, 2, also is found. 
Aksibhyam, Il, 4, 1 (cf. Rgveda, X, 163), shows irregular lengthening 
of the vowel. Agak, II, 4, 1, appears to be an accusative as not seldom 
elsewhere. Azkyd, III, 2, 3, is perhaps a neuter instrumental. The 
genitive singular of nouns and adjectives and pronouns which show a@% 
in the Rgveda and in the later language have az as usual in the 
Brahmanas. The only exceptions appear to be frthivyah, II, 1, 7; 
III, 1,2; asyah, and amusydh, III, 1,2; 2,5. Inthe ablative is found 
brhatyai, II, 3, 6; asyat pratisthayai, 1, 2, 4; of superlatives, drahma- 
tatamam, II, 4, 3, for brahmatatatamam, and annatamam pratyacyante, 
I, 4, 1, are remarkable. Catuspadah and catuspatsu occur in I, 1, 2, with 
a v.1. catuspadah. Navasrakti in II, 3, 6, anomalously appears to 
stand for xavasraktih. Enat in II, 4, 3, is apparently a nominative as 
in Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 22, and if so pard# is used as a neuter. 
Nabhyai with the longer form occurs in II, 4, 1, in the ablative. Enam 
is used almost as an adjective, III, 1, 3. Jmasmai occurs in II, cee 

The numerals show certain interesting forms. Ehkaya na trimsat occurs 
in I, 1, 2, Besides sapta satani vimésati$ ca, III, 2, 1, appears sapia 
vimsatisatani, III, 2,1; so also trimi sastisatani (= 360), Ill, 2, 73 and 
paca catvarimsatsatani (= 540), III, 2, 2, as usual in the Brahmanas. 
The form sattrinssatam sahasrani, 11, 2, 4; 3, 8, denotes 36,000, and 
may be considered, perhaps, like sattrimsatam chkapadah, Aitareya 
Brahmana, VII, 1, as an irregular use of accusative for nominative ; 
cf. paticavimsatim simidhenyah, V, I, 1. 

Among verbal forms may be noted the Vedic forms, duhe, I, 3, 2, 
and zse, II, 1, 2, 5, as third persons; both these forms occur in the 
Aitareya Brahmana. As in that Brahmana unaugmented forms occur 
in zksata, II, 4,1; 3; and padi, Il, 1, 2. Upanisasasada in El, 
is supported by all the MSS. Adhivyaikhyat in I, 4, 3, appears, if the 
reading is correct, to be the aorist of abhivikhya with the vi augmented. 
Atrapsyat and the irregular agrahaisyat, II, 4, 3, are examples of the 
rare conditional. The perfects dadhara, I, 5, 2; II, 1,7; and Jdibhaya, 
I, 3, 4, occur also in the Brahmana. Dadrse, 11, 1, 3; 8; and mene, 
ITI, 1, 1, are, the former certainly, the latter probably, passive. The Ay 
alone is used as an auxiliary in the periphrastic perfect, viz. upasim 
cakrire, I1,1,8,and vedayam cakre, I11,1,1. The following desiderative 


forms occur: dsati, II, 3, 2; ipsantah, I, 1, 1; vecckitset, III, 2, 6; 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 57 


ajighrksat, Il, 4, 3; atyajighamsat, I, 4, 3; abhititrisati, 1, 3, 1; 
bibhatseta, 11, 3,7; mimamsante, Il, 2, 3; viruruciseta, III, 2, 5; and 
the rare aorist samadhitsisam, III, 2, 5, which is a distinct sign of 
antiquity. The only intensives are fopliyante, sarisrpyante, I, 3, 5, and 
probably the form vdavadisat, II, 4, 3, which I take as an aorist sub- 
junctive, also an old form. The denominative fadiyasz occurs in I, 3, 5. 
For the infinitive and subjunctive forms see below. There are no 
irregularities in the use of °¢v@ and “ya, such irregularities being charac- 
teristic especially in the case of °ya of epic style, not of the Vedic style. 
The gerund in am appears in pranadvam and chandaskaram,1, 5,1. It 
may be noted that in II, 1, 4, smah is substituted for smast of the 
quotation. Attam, Il, 3, 6, and apihita, III, 2, 5, may also be mentioned. 

Very characteristic of the early date of the Aranyaka is the separation 
of prefixes and their verbs. It is not normal; the great majority of 
prefixes are placed immediately before the verb, and I have accordingly 
printed them as forming compounds. But the older tradition survives 
in the following cases: ati-manyeta, II, 3,3; anu-yuyate, UH, 3, 8 (in 
a verse); abhi-samvahanti, ibid. ; a-gachati, gachatah, gachanti, 1,1, 43 
@-jayate, II, 3,1; abhi-trnatit, I, 3, 13 para-bhavati, II, 1, 4, &c.; adhi- 
caranti, bhavati, jayate, 11, 3, 1. 

Pluti and the consequent lengthening of the vowels concerned occurs 
sporadically. The MSS. differ considerably, like the editions, in noting 
the Pluti, and it has as a rule been considered proper to insert it in the 
text only where Sayana mentions its presence. 

In regard to syntax it may be noted that the rules of concord are 
usually carefully followed as in all old works. In II, 1, 7, examples will 
be found of a masculine and a feminine singular, and a masculine and 
a neuter singular, being accompanied by a verb in the dual, and a plural 
masculine accompanies a feminine plural and a masculine singular. 
Andam in Ill, 1, 2, is unusual, as a@udah would be expected, but cf. 
sarvam asani,\, 5,2; samanam asitayah, II,1,2. In III, 2, 4, etesam kimecid 
occurs, although svapuanam is to be understood. The usual attraction 
to the number and gender of the predicate occurs in I, 4, 1: athato 
vijavas ta virajo bhavant ; II, 6,1, &c. The plural in adyuh, II, 1, 2, 
and dadyuh, II, 1, 5, offers difficulties. 

In the use of the pronouns there is little of note. The forms of the 
base exad occur frequently, but as in all the Brahmanas the pronouns 


58 INTRODUCTION 


are used in a very confusing and inaccurate way. Double pronouns are 
very common: e.g. sa esah, II, 1, 5 83 3,95 63 4, oppel ine 2, 4; Ser 
saisa, I, 3,63 4,33 I11,1,6; tad etad, II,1,2; 3, Onscay 3 tasyailasya, 
(neut.) II, 2, 4; III, 2, 1; (masc.) III, 2, 13 3; tasya etasyaz, (gen.) 
Ill, 2, 6; #2 eta@h, I], 1, 43 2, 23 3, 3; 4, 23 etat tad Lig 583.55 cade 
imam, 1,1, 23; tad idam, II, 1,2; t@ imah, 11, 1,1; tantmani, II,1,1; 
so’yam, II, 5,1; seyam, II, 1,2; casya me, II, 2; 9; ve esad, ll, aie 
'yam, III, 2, 3, &c. Ya forms numerous indefinite combinations which are 
given in the Index, s.v. The usual correlations are ya and sa; e.g. ye-te, 
II, 1, 1, &c.; yad-tad, II, 3, 6, &c. More unusual are tad etad-yad etad, 
Il, 1, 2; yad etad-tad etad, 1, 5,1; etad-yad etad, Il, 3,6; yad etad-tad, 
II, 3,7. In one case it is uncertain whether a relative is not omitted, 
viz. Il, 5: ko’yam atmeti vayam upaismahe, where yam may be read. 

In case construction there is the usual freedom. The accusative 
denotes duration of time in satam varsaui, II, 2, 1; samvatsaram ga 
raksayate, II, 1, 6, where the use of the historic present is to be noted ; 
ahoratre varsati, III, 1, 2, where the meaning is ‘day and night con- 
tinuously’. The cognate accusative appears in atyayam dayan, Il, I, 1, 
and kakakulayagandhikam vayati, IlI, 2, 4. Other uses are: sarvam 
madhyato dadhe, Il, 2, 1; enam atiksaranti, Il, 2,2; jyotth prakasam 
karoti, 1, 1,8; ahah Samset, III, 2, 4. More unusual is the use of the 
accusative as if in apposition to the main sentence, as in wyatam 
cabhyutthanam ca, I, 5, 1. The instrumental is used with VW stu: 
mahavratena stuvita, 1II,2,4. The dative is used with /arc: sarvebhyo 
bhiitebhyo ’rcata, II, 2,2, and sarvebhyo 'rdhebhyo ’rcata, ibid., which is pro- 
bably an extension of the usual dazivus commodi found in the same passage 
with ksaratit. The date of ‘work contemplated’ appears in punyebhyah 
karmabhyah pratidhiyate, II, 5. Other datives used predicatively are 
practically equivalent to infinitives, see below. In sarvebhyo bhitebhyo 
dadrse, II, 1, 3; 8, the case may be dative or ablative. The ablative 
follows anyat in anyat kusalad brahmanam briyat, III, 1, 3 (cf. I, 1, 2), 
when the double accusative is interesting. In III, 2, 4, @tmana evasya 
tat krtam bhavati, dtmana may stand for dtmanah, a predicative genitive, 
or for aimane, a dativus commodi; the former view is supported by 
V, 3, 3, dtmano haivasya tac chastam bhavati, In either case asya is to 
be taken probably directly with Aytam and sastam; cf. nah proktam, 
III, 2,15 asya-uditam, II, 1, 5. Worthy of note is the construction in 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 59 


III, 2, 1, tasyaitasya trayasyasthnam mayham parvanam itt. Itc cannot 
here mean ‘et cetera’, and the most probable explanation is that the 
preceding genitive attracted the subsequent nouns. Compare the not 
infrequent use of 7/i with the accusative for 7/ with the nominative 
found several times in as early a work as the Brhaddevata. For the 
locative there is the rare sense ‘for the sake of’ in e¢asyam smopanisad1, 
III, 1,6. The use of the accusative and dative with “adr may be 
noted, I, 1,1. In the verses in II, 3, 8, astripuman is used instead of 
the accusative with druvan. 

With regard to prepositions, @ is separated from the ablative by several 
words in aham mam devebhyo veda omad devan veda, Ul, 1, 8. The 
phrase wbhayam antarena in III, 1, 3, is used as an undeclinable noun 
in the accusative and locative. See also Index V, s. vv. adhi, abhi, 4, 
parastad, part. 

With reference to the use of the numbers, za in III, 2, 1, may denote 
the school of the teacher, Sakalya, and may be contrasted with the 
singular of the Buddhist style, evaye me sutam. Compare 7¢i nah Srutih, 
Brhaddevata, VI, 148. The same plural, which is the source of the 
plural of authorship, appears passim in Aranyaka III, in the verb. 

The use of the tenses of the indicative is of special importance, as it 
enables us to confirm the views already arrived at as to the date of the 
Aranyaka. The case of the aorist is the simplest, and may be taken 
first. In the whole Aranyaka I-III, the aorist has its true use in the 
Brahmanas, viz. that of a proximate past. The examples are: udagat, 
I, 3, 4; samagat, II, 1, 5; samagat, III, 1,1; upagah, Il, 2,3; adarsam, 
II, 4, 3; acyosthah, Ul, I, 3; arah, \11, 1, 3; samadham, Il, 1, 4; 
samadhitsisam, III, 2, 5; agamat, III, 1, 6; avocéma, Ill, 2, 25; 3; 
avocata, II, 2, 2; asarz, II, 1, 4; pratayi, 11,1, 5. The exceptions are: 
abhipragat, which occurs twice in II, 2, 21, and padi, which also occurs 
twice in that passage. In these cases the sense perhaps rather is 
equivalent to a present than to a narrative imperfect. Adbhivyaikhyat, 
II, 4, 3, must be as narrative aorist, but the form is so extraordinary 
that it is almost certain that abhivyaiksat? should be read, for the 
Parasmaipada of ¥7ks is found though sporadically. The regularity of 
the use of the aorist is conclusive for a relatively early date. 


1 See note ad /oc. cf. Hillebrandt, Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, 
2 For similar confusions of 4s and A#y I, p. 249, and note ad /oc. 


60 INTRODUCTION 


Whitney? has shown that the use of the imperfect and perfect as 
narrative tenses varies greatly in the several Brahmanas, and it is now? 
usually considered fair to regard the increasing use of the perfect as an 
indication of relatively late date. The facts of the case are as follows. 
In Aranyaka I there are seven occurrences of the imperfect from five 
roots (abhavat (3),° udayachat, samajanata, apahata, vyaharat). Of 
perfects, omitting @za and veda which are used frequently, as throughout 
the literature, as presents, there occur dzbhaya, I, 3, 4; dadhara, I, 5, 23 
vivyaca, I, 5, 2, used in a present sense. This is probably a sign of early 
date, since in the Rgveda the present sense of the perfect is decidedly fre- 
quent. Of narrative perfects @sa occurs twice for a special reason, I, 2, 2, 
and wvydca once in I, 2, 2, the latter in connexion with wdayachat. It 
may, however, have a present sense. In Aranyaka II, 1-3, there are sixty- 
seven occurrences * from twenty-three forms of nineteen roots (ayan (3), 
apadyata (3), abhavat (7), abhavatim, abhavan, abravit (3), abruvan (6), 
asarpat (2), asrayata (2), ahimsanta (2), udakramat (5), asta (5), anayanta, 
atayata, arcat (4), arcata (4), asit (2), atrayata (2), apavayata (2), asiryata, 
avisat (5), asayat (4), atisthat). There are also in the Slokas in Ilss3) 
the forms avindan and atrpyan (2). On the other hand the only 
perfects used in narrative are (except in II, 2, 3 and 4), dabhivuh, II, 1, 8, 
and parababhuvuh, ibid., and II, 1, 1, three occurrences of one root 
(cf. the use of dasa twice in Aranyaka I). In II, 2, 3 and 4, however, no 
imperfects occur, but seventeen instances from seven forms of six roots 
of perfects occur in narrative (in II, 2, 3, upanisasasada, Sasamsa (3), 
upeyaya (3), uvaca (6); in II, 2, 4, babhava, lebhe, provaca (2)). It is 
impossible to assume that this can be accidental, and the only fair 
conclusion is that these sections are not by the same hand as the rest 
of II, 2, a conclusion which runs in no way counter to their contents, 
which stand in no organic relation to II, 2, 1 or 2. The latter fact 
would, in so incoherent a work as II, 2, be quite insufficient as an 
argument for difference of authorship, but the argument from syntax 
seems irresistible, It may also be pointed out that in the parallel 
passage to II, 2, 3, the dialogue of Vigvamitra and Indra, in Sankhayana 


1 Transactions Am. Phil. Ass., 1892, * The numbers in brackets denote the 
Pp. 5-34; above, p. 32, n. 6. times of occurrence. For reff. see Index. 
* See e.g. Macdonell, Sanskrit Litera- * The prefixes are omitted. 
turve, Pp. 205. 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 61 


Aranyaka I, 6, there occur—as usually in the rest of the Aranyaka— 
perfects, upajagama (cf. upeyaya), uvadca, and ace. There must be 
a common source for the two narratives despite the difference of their 
present forms, and it must have used perfects in narrative. Besides 
these narrative perfects, perfects in the present sense occur in dadhara, 
II, 1, 7; dadrse, II, 1, 3; 8, both of which are conjoined with present tenses. 

In Aranyaka IT, 4-6, occur sixty-one examples of the imperfect from 
twenty-three forms of nineteen roots (asi, asrjata, iksata (5), amurchayat, 
atapat (2), abhidyata (5), abhidyetam (3), apatan, arjat, abravit (2), 
abriitam, abruvan (4), anayat (3), avisat (5), avisan (3), wayata (2), 
ajighamsat, ajighrksat (8), asaknot (7), avayat, apadyata, apasyat, 
abhavat (2). The only narrative perfect is wvaca, II, 5, and there is 
one present perfect, dadhe, II, 2, 1. | 

In Aranyaka III occur asramsata and adadhat (2), III, 1, 6, and the 
present perfects, mene, III, 1, 1; viduh, III, 2, 5. 

The two periphrastic perfects, wpasam cakrire, II, 1, 8, and vedayam 
cakre, 11], 1,1, may both be narrative perfects, but the latter may be 
a present perfect. 

The results may be tabulated as follows, omitting periphrastic forms ; 
the Slokas in II, 3, 8, are not taken into account. The numbers in 
brackets denote the number of roots. 


Aranyaka. Imperfects. Present Perfects. Narrative Perfects. 


I, 7 (5) 3 (3) 3 (2, asa and viryaca (?)) 
II, 1; 2,1-2; 3 67 (19) 2, (2) 3 (1, babhivuh) 

II, 2, 3-4 None None 17 (6) 

II, 4-6 61 (19) I (1) None 


The fair conclusion is that the Aranyaka is older than the later books, 
VI-VIII, of the Aitareya Brahmana, as is indeed probable in view of the 
much more developed narrative style of the Sunahégepa legend. It is prob- 
ably older than parts (if not the whole) of the Satapatha Brahmana, viz. 
I-V, X, XII-XIV, including the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, which uses the 
narrative perfect throughout. In view of the copious and rich style of 
that Upanisad, with its wealth of metaphor, ease of motion, and dignity, 
it seems impossible to doubt that it belongs to a much later period than 
the Aitareya, just as we have seen that its philosophic content goes far 
beyond that of the Aitareya. Bearing in mind that the Brhadaranyaka 
shows considerable evidence of the activity of the Ksatriyas, and that 


62 INTRODUCTION 


the perfect as a narrative tense is common in the Epic, it may be 
suggested that the origin of the narrative use in the Brahmanas is to 
be found in a borrowing from the style of the old Itihasa literature. 
It is perhaps not without significance that such legends as that of 
Sunahégepa, Puriravas and Urvasi ( Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 5,1), Cyavana 
(ibid., IV, 1, 5), and, in the Aitareya Aranyaka itself, that of Visvamitra, 
II, 2, 3, should be told in perfects. It may be noted that in the 
Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, XV, 17 sq., the Sunahgepa legend is also 
set out in perfects. The Brahmana use of the perfect is as a present, 
while both usages are found in the earlier language of the Rgveda 
Samhita. The older is undoubtedly the Brahmana use, as it corresponds 
most closely with the use of the Greek perfect as a completed action or 
state (cf. Monro, Homeric Grammar, p. 31). 

The future indicative is used in its ordinary way as denoting future 
time in assertions or questions, but the so-called second future never 
occurs, as it does, e.g. in the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana. 

The optative is of comparatively very frequent occurrence. (1) Its use 
as denoting wish is infrequent, the subjunctive usually being preferred, but 
(2) its use in directions as a mild imperative occurs passim. (3) It is also 
used in questions to express doubt, precisely as is used the subjunctive 
with which it alternates in II, 4,3: katham nv idam mad rte syat katarena 
prapadyai. (4) Its most characteristic use in the Aranyaka is in the 
protasis and apodosis of conditional sentences. In the apodosis it may 
denote either direction or the potential. In all cases the condition is 
one referring to the future, and is of the type, ‘If A happens, then B will 
happen, or should be done.’ Examples of two potentials are yaat- 
asnuvita-manyeta, I, 3,3; solll, 1,6; (with yad= if) II, 3,6 (lero 
(with yatha) III, 1, 3; 4. Examples of a potential protasis and 
imperative apodosis are: (with yadz) I, 1,1; III, 1, 336; 2,436; (with 
relatives) I, 2,2; III, 2,4; 5, and without any particle, pasyet-dr $yeyatam- 
vidyat, III, 2,4; with double protasis, upasynuyat-yada Srnuyat-vidyat, 
III, 2, 4. (5) Arising from this potential use the optative appears as an 
indefinite, like the Greek subjunctive and optative or the Latin subjunc- 
tive. This is possibly the explanation of the difficult phrases in II, 1, 2: 
na tasyese yan nadyad yad vainam nadyuh; Il, 1, 5: na tasyese yan 
mahyane na dadyuh, though the meaning might be merely a future. 
Definitely indefinite is III, 2, 1, yatha sdlavanise sarve nya vamsah 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 63 


samahitah syuh, since the apodosis is an assertion of fact. (6) An 
optative of characteristic, that is of result, is found in, III,: 2) 29, 
brahmanam-kurvita yo-pasyet. It will be seen that none of these usages 
offer any difficulty of explanation on the now generally accepted theory * 
that the optative is originally a weak future in sense. 

As in other languages the indicative can be used modally, and in 
conditional sentences this use is well developed in the Aranyaka. In 
II, 3, 3, vady antariksalokam asnute ty enam manyate is clearly modal, 
and is followed by yad?-asnuvita-manyeta. So yatra vihiyete-vidyat 
in III, 2,4. Hence indicatives are sometimes combined with optatives 
in protases of conditional sentences; the following occur in III, 2, 4: 
yatra-drsyate-pasyet-na pasyet-pasyeta, vidyat; yatra-drsyate-abhikhya- 
yeta-pasyet, vidyat; upekseta-tad yatha-drsyante-yada na pasyet, vidyat ; 
III, 1, 4, ya-upavadet-cen manyeta-aha, briyat. The indicative also 
occurs in conditions where the fact is asserted in the apodosis (with 
yadi), e.g. II, 4, 3, or when the protasis and apodosis refer to the future, 
e.g. yasmin patsyati-bhavisyati, I, 1, 4. 

The only case of a condition in the past which was not fulfilled occurs 
in II, 4, 3, yad hainad vacagrahaisyad abhivyahrtya haivannam atrapsyat, 
&c., where the conditional is correctly employed. This accuracy in 
the use of the conditional and generally in the use of the optative 
is characteristic of an early date. 

The subjunctive is of comparatively frequent occurrence, usually in 
the first person. It denotes (a) resolve : pravisama, utkramama, Il, 1,43 
syjai, 11, 4,1; 3; adama (in a relative clause), II, 4,25 (0) desire : asant, 
6 a; i, 3, 45°% 4; a7, I, 4, 33 5» 13 Gnavani, I, 4, 35 5; 95 
avarunadhai, 1, 4, 3; asnavai, I, 4, 3; (c) doubt in questions : bravanti, 
Ill, 2, 6; prapadya, Ul, 4, 3; vavadisat, 11, 4, 3, if this is so taken ; 
(d@) with ned: ucchidyai, 1, 2,4; asat, I, 5, 2 

The imperative occurs several times, but there is no instance of the 
use of ma, except in II, 7, 1, which is not genuine, where ma prahasih 
(or prahasit) is found. The Sankhayana Aranyaka, XI, 6, has ma with 
the future. 

The infinitive in 77 occurs only twice, in both cases with the verb 


1 Cf, Goodwin, Greek Moods and Tenses, Teutonic, and Balto- Slavic (Lindsay, 
App. A. This would account for the dis- Latin Language, pp. 511-516). 
appearance of one of the tenses in Latin, 


64 INTRODUCTION 


sak, samdhatum nasakah, Wl, 1, 4; asaknot-grahitum, 1, 4, 3. This 
is consistent with the early date of the Aranyaka. On the other hand, 
as in the Aitareya Brahmana, zfvara is construed with the infinitive in 
“toh, bhavitoh, 11, 3, 5; 6; caritoh, I, 1, 1; prattoh, Il, 3, 5. Mention 
should also be made of a series of datives formed from verbal roots by 
the affix °tyaz which serve as predicative datives signifying that to which 
an active tends, viz. k/ptyai, 1, 3,8; abhiityai, 1,1,%; prajatyai, I, 2, 4; 
3,15 4; 4,1; samiatyai, Il, 5; aptyat,1,1,33 2,13 3; 3, 8; abkyaptyat, 
I, 4,2; upaptyai, 1, 3,7; avaruddhyai, I, 1,2, &c.; apahatyai (probably), 
I, 2,2. The use of these forms is not precisely that of infinitives, but 
it is analogous and forms a distinct feature of the style of the Aranyaka. 
Similar forms occur in the Aitareya Brahmana. 

The injunctive, except in the form of the second person plural 
imperative, occurs only in arjayan, I, 5, 2. 

In the use of participles the most characteristic feature is their use in 
place of finite verbs, a use arising from their employment as predicative 
adjectives. In the following cases the substantive verb is expressed : 
uktam bhavati, 1, 3, 8; 11,1, 5; 8; II], 2, 4; uditam bhavatt, Il, 1, 53 
visto ’smi, II, 2, 3; vyaptam bhavati, III, 1, 3; samahlitah syuh, III, 2,1; 
krtam bhavati, Ill, 2, 4; apihita bhavati, Il, 2, 53 anusakt@ asat, I, 5, 2. 
In all these cases the expression means more than the corresponding 
form of the finite verb would have conveyed, and denotes a completed 
action whose results persist in the present. The accurate use of these 
forms is a distinct sign of early style. The same remark applies to most 
of the cases of the use without the copula: sthitam, 1,1, 1; pratisthitam, 
I, 1, 23 pratisthitah, 1, 2, 2; 4, 2; pratisthita, 1, 3, 4; vistah, vistah, 
I, 3, 8; avistah, nivistah, I, 4, 13 S7itak, I, 5, 3; II, 3, 4 channah, 
Ist, 03 s7stag, srstah, 11. 1 7; attam, Il, 3, 6; avrtam, Il, 1, 6; 
vistabdhah, vistabdhani, Il, 1, 6; sitam, II, 1, 6; nivistak, II, a. 43% 
samahitah, III, 2,1; vyastah, III, 2, 4; samparetah, II, 2, 4; in these 
instances the effect persists into the present, and no examples of a use 
like dysta =‘she was seen’, occur. In Il, 4, 3, yadi vacabhivyahrtam, &c., 
the sense approximates very closely to a mere present passive indicative. 

There is no instance of the participle in vat formed from the past 
participle passive, which is so common later. That participle occurs also 


combined with the participle of Vas: dutah satyah, 1, 4,1; siktam sat, 
T4392: 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 65 


In one case the present participle is combined with the /as: tapann 
asmi, II, 2, 3, expressing a continuing present. It is used with /man in 
Saknuvan manyeta-asSaknuvantam manyeta, III, 1, 4, where the change 
of case is remarkable. Note also aniidgrhnan samdadhad varsati, 
Hy 2; %. 

The gerund appears equivalent to a present participle in himkrtya 
pratipadyate, 1, 3, 1, where the action of the verb and participle are 
simultaneous (cf. my note on the gerund, ¥. R. A. S., 1907, p. 164). 

The gerundive karaniyam is used with /man in III, 2,4. Here may 
be noted the strange form abhivyaharsan, III, 1, 6, which has the sense 
of a future participle and the form.of a participle of the s aorist. No 
correction seems probable as °arsyan (cf. Whitney, Translation of 
Atharvaveda, p. 846) is impossible. 

The use of conjunctive particles is marked by the number of com- 
binations allowed as contrasted with the comparatively barren character 
of the later language. In most of them 4a plays some part. Examples 
are: ha vai, I, 2, 1, &e.; II, 1, 2, &c.; III, 1, 2, &c.; ma ha vai, 1, 2, 13 
5, 2; III, 2, 2; « haiva, I, 3, 8; Il, 2, 4; evam u haiva, 1,3, 43 8; 
atho-ha vai, I, 4, 2; haiva, I, 5,2; 11,1,43; 8; 3,73 4,33 ha sma, 
I, 1,1, &c.; evam u ha sma, Il, 1,2; ha sma vat, I, 1, 3; Thr i aen: 
2,4; III, 2,5; 6; Aa sma, Il, 3,53 73 IIE, 1;-33 2, 33 4@ tu, I,y-3, 53 
atha ha, Wl, 1, 13 5; « ha-u, 1, 3, 3; athapi, Il, 2, 4; atha khalu, 
III, 1, 5; 2, 53;.athatah, I, 4,1, &c.; atho, 1,1, 2, &c.; khalu, III, 1,6; 
u% eva, Il,.1,1; 2,1; III, 1, 3; ¢v eva, 1, 1,1; 5; 2; II, 1, 4; tasmad 
hapy etarhi, 11, 1, 8; utapz, II, 1, 2; ahaiva (?), Il, 1, 2. 

Of single conjunctions the use of ca is most important. The regular 
use is ca-ca,a formalism distinctly indicative of age; see I, 1,45 2, 3; 
3,1; 234; 53 73 5,23 11,1,25 6; Ve 8; 2,2; 6,03 Hie; 6; 25335 
and in I, 1, 2, chandah is in apposition to brhatim ca virajam ca, 
A single ca is practically restricted to numerals, e.g. vinesatis ca, II, 3, 6. 
In I, 2, 2, is found ca-ca-ca; and in II, 6; III, 1, 6, ca-ca-ca-ca. In the 
Slokas in II, 3, 8, appears yad-yac ca-yac ca-yad u ca. These facts 
render the usual division of vayamsi vangavagadhas cerapadah, II, 1, 1, 
into ca irapadah excessively improbable. /va is used frequently (see 
reff. in Index V) in a sense hardly differing from eva, as is also the case 
in the Aitareya Brahmana, though it can always be translated ‘as it 
were’, merely modifying the literal sense of the wero.@ ci. 1, 7, 4: 

F 


KEITH 


66 INTRODUCTION 


cirataram iva va-agachanti. Va has the sense ‘indeed’ as well as that 
of ‘or’, but a single v@ is more common than a double va, unlike the 
case of ca. Hanta is used with the subjunctive, II, 1, 4, as in the 
Aitareya Brahmana. J¢i has as usual a large variety of uses, and is never 
misplaced. Cana in III, 4, 3; 4, following ~a appears to have the force 
of ‘even’. Kamam, 1, 1,1; Ill, 2, 4; vata, Il, 2,2; 4,2; and vava, 
I, 3, 4, &c., also occur. Aka is contrasted with ~ in II, 3, 7. 

The same relative wealth is seen in the case of correlative particles. 
The most common form is yad-tad, denoting time or cause, or comparison, 
I,1,1; 3,1; 11,1,43 2,23 5,1; Il, 1, 3; variants are yat-tena, III, 2,6 ; 
yat-tasmat, II,1, 6; 2,1; 23 3,6; III, 2, 6, more definitely signifying 
cause. So yad hi-tasmat, 11,1, 3. A characteristic and frequent type 
of sentence is I, 1, 3, tad yan madhuchandasam Samsati sarvesant 
kamanam avaruddhyai; cf. I,.2,%, &c. Yatha is usually balanced by 
evam, I1,1,6; 3,5; III, 1,2; 2,13 53 it stands alone in yathaindam, 
II, 4, 1; yatha svam angam, Il, 5,1. It is balanced by zatha in yatha 
prthivi tatha, &c., in I1,1,2. In I, 3,1, is yatha vai-evam. Yaira either 
has no correlative, as in III, 2, 4, or is balanced by ¢ad, II, 1,83; tad 
uta@pi, I11,1,2; tada,11I,1,6. Yada is balanced by atha, Il, 5; yadi ha 
va api by haiva, Il, 1, 5; yad ha by haiva, II, 4,3. In III, 1, 3; 4, 
occurs the phrase yatha tu katha ca-briyad-abhyasam eva yat tatha sydt, 
where the words abhyasam eva yat tatha practically form a compound 
adverb. 

Finally it may be mentioned that the grammatical terms yosaz and 
vrsan are used for feminine and masculine, I, 2, 4, as in Aitareya 
Brahmana, VI, 2. 

A comparison of the forms and usages cited above with the valuable 
list of similar forms in the Aitareya Brahmana given by Aufrecht? shows 
conclusively that the Aranyaka stands on nearly the same footing as the 
first five books of the Brahmana. Itis not so old, e.g. it has fewer forms of 
the subjunctive, no infinitives in -e or -a% or -¢avai, and none in Zok after 
@ or pura, but it is not much younger. The use of the narrative tenses 
is some argument for its being older than Books VI-VIII, to which 
otherwise it stands close in point of language, though it is much less 
developed in style. 


} Attareya Brahmana, pp. 427-431. 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 67 


The conclusion arrived at above on grounds of doctrine that the San- 
khayana Aranyaka I, II, is later than the Aitareya Aranyaka I-III, is 
confirmed by the linguistic tests. Generally the two works correspond 
most closely in vocabulary, and confirm the view that they must be 
derived ultimately from a common source. For example, Dr. Friedlander 
well explains atiaran in Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 7, as ‘laying across’, 
as it means in Aitareya Aranyaka, V, 1, 4, and not, as explained by 
the commentator on the Srauta Sitra, in the sense ‘ withdrawing’. 
Probably the common source of the two Aranyakas had the word which 
has survived only in the Sitra part of the Aitareya, but in both the 
Siitra and Aranyaka of the Sankhayanas. With the forms quoted above 
may be compared the irregular sandhi 7s. tad, 1, 8; the noun and adjec- 
tive forms, dtman, I, 8; II, 1; etasyai devatayai (gen.), 1, 8; adhitaram, 
I, 7; udyatatarah,1,7; the datives of end served, bhogyaya,1,8; santyat, 
I, 4; dhkisajyayai, 1, 4; avaptyai, dptyai, I, 2; II, 6; the constructions 
isvarah-naparajetoh,1,8; gamisyanti bhavati, 1,8; upapta asan, I, 6; 
Samsisyate, 1, 5 (cf. Samsisyantam, Aitareya, II, 2, 3) ; yatha-parivyayet- 
dhatte, 11,16; 1 ad fin.; the use of the particles w vai, 1,1; 3; a ha 
vai,1,8; ha vai, 1, 5; 7; tatha ha, Il, 1; « ha, I, 6; II, 10; the 
construction of the sentence with zad yad, II, 10; the irregular numeral 
sapta vimSsatisatani, 11,10. As has been seen above the narrative perfect 
occurs in II, 6, the parallel passage to Aitareya, II, 2, 3, and it occurs 
also in II, 17 (provaca, jijiva), which may be compared with II, 2, 4, as 
far as the provaca is concerned. Whereas, however, the perfects in the 
Aitareya are marked exceptions, there is no other narrative tense in 
Sankhayana. Further, the language of the Sankhayana Aranyaka is 
much more accurate and modern than that of the Aitareya. Instead of 
sattrimsatam sahasvani the correct sattrinesat is found, II, 17 ; there are 
no subjunctives other than those of the first person, which occur with 
ned, I, 3, as in the Aitareya; there are no irregular forms either of 
nouns, pronouns, or verbs, save those mentioned above ; the aorist is 
only represented by avocam in I, 6. Ca is used in Sastrena ca vratacar- 
yaya, 1, 6, in a way not paralleled in the Aitareya, and in that chapter 
occurs the form visijiasam eva cakre, a periphrastic perfect of the 
desiderative, a form elsewhere practically confined to the Satapatha 
Brahmana. After making full allowance for the difference of length, the 
posteriority of the Sankhayana is almost certain. If, as seems probable, 

F 2 


68 INTRODUCTION 


brahma* and brahmani in 1,5; 6, refer to Brahman and his wife, who per- 
haps owes her origin to these passages, then a strong argument is added 
for the later date of the Sankhayana, since the Aitareya does not even 
certainly know Brahman, since the passages in which brahma certainly 
appears refer to the Brahman priest, and in all the others drahma may 
equally well be read. Brahman, however, appears in Aitareya Brahmana, 
V, 33, 1. Books VII-XIII of the Saikhayana are still later. 

Aranyaka V is written in the regular Sutra style. It is practically 
impossible to understand it without a commentary, for as usual the rules 
are condensed into unintelligibility, Characteristic is the weight thrown 
on single words and phrases, e.g. aapaya vria, V, 1,4; asvahikaraih, 
V, 1, I, and the frequent use of gerunds, besides the piling up of 
adjectives and adverbial phrases. 

In Sandhi it appears that aw before « becomes @, although here, as in 
Aranyaka I-III, the MSS. and the Anandagrama edition vary. Unusual 
forms are dtman, V, 1, 6; uttare (loc.), V, 1,23 vadatyah, without z, 
V,1,1; ardharcyah, V, % 5, meaning ‘to be recited by half-verses ’ ; 
brhatikaram, V, 1,6; gayatrikaram, V, 3,13 trtiyavarjam, V, 1,63 sa- 
mutah, V1, 3. Of desideratives occur jyzviset, V, 3,1; Jigamiset, V,1, 4; 
and, as amended, a desiderative causal cikirtayzset, V, 3,3. The impera- 
tive prabriitat occurs, in a direction, in V, 1,5. The feminine genitive 
form is Zh, not az. 

More characteristic is the pregnant use of case constructions, when 
for the sake of brevity everything is made to depend on the mere case 
relation, e. g., (accusative) avabrtham prenkham hareyuh, Il, 3,2; apra- 
kampi, V, 1, 3, in quasi-apposition to the sentence ; (dative) miskevalyaya 
stuvate,V,1, 53; avasyakarmane jigamiset, V,1, 45 (abl.) Aotras catur- 
vimsat, V, 1,13 (gen.) mahavratasya pancavimsatim samidhenyah, V, 1, 
1, where the irregular paficavimesatim is also noteworthy ; (abl. and gen.) 
caturvimsan marutvatiyasyatanah, V, 1,1; (loc.) diksite yajamanasabdah, 
V, 1,53 na vatse ca na trttye (‘in the case of’), V, 3, 3; (loc. and instr.) 
anyasu cet samamnatasu rajanena samna stuviran, V, 1,6; cf. bhuyasisu 
cet stuviran, V, 3,2; other uses are the dative after dhatte with sam, sam 
paksayoh patanaya, V,1,6; an apposition of whole and part sakhaya 
miladesena, V, 1, 4; and abuddham-asya, V, 3, 2. Very strange is 


1 The form drahmani is curious, and and his wife’. Cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad 
the passage may mean ‘the Brahman  Brahmana, IJ], 4, 9. 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 69 


Sriyam gor asvam atman dhatte, V, 1, 6, where gok may be a possessive 
genitive or a genitive of description. 

In the verb occur two subjunctives in directions put in the mouth of the 
sacrificer, parivrajatha, V, 1,13; ninayatha, V,1,2. In V, 3, 2, purpose 
is expressed by yatha na with hanisyasiti, a curious but not rare (e.g. 
in the Satapatha Brahmana) use. The optative occurs in directions 
frequently, and in both protasis and apodosis of conditions, (a) with 
potential force in both, e.g. yavatir-avaperan tavanti-jijiviset, V, 3, 1; 
(2) with imperative force in the apodosis (with yatra-tatra, and yatra tu- 
kamam-tatra), V, 3,3; (with yadi), V,1, 43; 3, 33; (with ced), V, 1, 6; 
(with a relative), V,1,5. In V,1,4, yada Sramyet is probably indefinite ; 
in V, 3, 3, yady api-adhiyat-na snatako bhavati, the indicative in the 
apodosis probably expresses the certainty of the result; in V, 3, 2, the 
apodosis to cyaveta ced is curtailed ; so also in V, 2, I. 

With regard to participles jagarito bhavati, V, 1, 1, and upakipto 
bhavati, V, 1, 3, both denote a past action resulting in a present state. 
Upalambhaniyah, V, 1, 1, is a sign of comparatively late date, the earlier 
form being upalambhyah, cf. Saikhayana Aranyaka, 1,1. No infinitives 
occur, but many gerunds, e.g. V, 3, 3, and in all about 36 instances are 
found. In place of an infinitive there is in V, 3, 2, 7yayat sampresitah. 
The past participle passive in yathetam, V, 1, 2; 3, is simply the 
equivalent of a past indicative. 

The use of particles is comparatively restricted. There occur the 
following combinations: atha ha, V, 2, 4; thaiva, tho eva,V,1,6; ha 
sma, V, 3,3; haiva, V, 3,3; no eva, V, 3,3; tva is equal to eva in 
V, 3,2; aha occurs in V,1,6; khalu in V,1,6; kamam in V, 3, 3; 
punar api in V,1,4. In the case of ca the single use is the more 
common, as compared with Aranyaka I-III; in xa vatse ca na trtiye, 
V, 3, 3, the ca may connect with the previous sentence, or be like 
Sastrena ca brahmacaryaya in Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 6.° In V, 1, 1, 
etais caivasvahakarair (mantrair) ehy-madhu iti ca occurs. In V, 3, 3, 
is 2a-canda. 

Among other signs of late date may be reckoned the frequency of the 
locative absolute, the use of adverbial expressions like antarvedi,V, 1, 1; 
anuparikramanam, V, 1,4; viharanaprabhyti, V,1, 1; ananvycam, V, 
1,1; the plural of authorship as found in nidarsandyodaharisyamah, 
V, 3; 3; and the use of gerunds like napitena karayitva, V, 3, 3- 


70 INTRODUCTION 


The same style and diction are fourid in Agvalayana’s Srauta Sitra, 
which, like Aranyaka V, consists of a disconnected string of sentences, 
which, when consisting of more than a few words, are constructed by 
heaping adjectives on adjectives, adding adverbial phrases, using gerunds, 
and piling up cases in different senses. There is no independent evidence 
to show that there is any great difference in time between the Aranyaka 
V and the Srauta Sitra. 

There seems no reason to suppose that the Aranyaka V is not more 
ancient than the Sankhayana Srauta Sitra XVII, XVIII. Hillebrandt 
has, indeed, suggested that the Sankhayana Srauta Siitra is older than 
Aévalayana, and although the last two Adhyayas may be of different date 
from the first sixteen, still they are hardly likely to be later, so that, if 
Hillebrandt’s conclusions are sound, the Sitra XVII, XVIII, will be 
older than the Aranyaka V. But Hillebrandt’s reasons are not 
convincing.!. He points out that, as Weber has said, parts of the Sutra 
are written in the Brahmana style. This refers mainly to Adhyayas XV, 
XVI, which contain inzer alia the Sunahgepa legend. But even assuming 
that these books are part of the original Sutra, it cannot be denied that 
the version of the legend is in no way original; it is merely the same as 
that in the Aitareya Brahmana, and differs so little from it that both 
versions must be descended from a common source. The part of the 
Aitareya where it occurs is decidedly later than the first five books. The 
Brahmana-like style is therefore not to be attributed to Suyajfia, the 
author of the Sitra. Secondly, he refers to the description of the 
Asvamedha and of the Purusamedha as signs of early age. But this 
argument depends greatly for its force on acceptance of the theory that 
Regveda, X, 18, 8, can be explained from Srauta Sitra, XVI, 13, and 
this view is not now usually accepted. Thirdly, he points out that the 
Siitra is not written with the full brevity of the latest Sitra style. This 
is true, but the argument is really in favour of the priority of Aranyaka 
V. For that work is written in a style less condensed than that of 
Suyajfia, and certainly less condensed than that of Books XVII, 
XVIII. Further, it must be admitted that as a Sutra these books are 
much superior to the Aranyaka V. The ritual directions are far more 


7 Cf. my note, J.R..A.S., 1907, pp. vwaveda, p. 848; Oldenberg, Gott. Gel, 
410-413. Anz., 1907, p. 218, n. 13 see, however, 
? Cf. Whitney, Translation of Athar- Lanman, Sanskrit Reader, p. 385. 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 71 


precise and detailed, contrasting with the brevity of the directions in the 
Aranyaka, which mainly concerns itself with a description of the litanies. 
In the Sitra the whole process is gone through methodically while the 
Aranyaka covers only a part of the field. The style is of the usual Sitra 
type; it is not in any marked manner more recent than that of the 
Aranyaka, but it contains practically no irregular forms. With the forms 
_ quoted above from the Aranyaka the following facts may be compared. 
The Sandhi of a+7 is ar, XVII, 5,9; 7,83 of au+u is 4, XVII, 10, 5; 
16, 5; while ¢asya@h occurs in XVII, 3, 2, as always in Aitareya Aranyaka 
V, tasyai is found XVIII, 2, 4; 19, and prathamayat, dvitiyayai, uttamayat, 
XVIII, 20. In XVII, 3, 12; 15, occur ghatarih and ghatakarkarih, 
nominatives with the s preserved. The locative is used with /s¢w in 
XVIII, 2,2; 22,7, and extended to Wr in atichandahsu kuryuh, XVIII, 
22,9. Adverbial phrases besides antarvedi are prasalavi, XVII, 14, 16; 
15, 4; antahsadah, XVII, 4, 3; nana badhnanti, XVII, 3, 8; while 
Jaghanena is used with the accusative, XVII, 5, 8. 

Of verbal forms may be noted pratyagruitat, XVII, 14, 3; prabritat, 
XVII, 14, 4; vénintsamanah,1,7,3; paryesyanto bhavanti, XVII, 4, 8; 
bhoksyamana(h) bhavanti, dhaksyanto (havanti), XVIII, 24,145 153 the 
gerundives prayaniyah, udayaniyah, XVIII, 24, 2; karyam, XVII, 6, 2; 
deyam, XVIII, 24, 32; the gerunds in am, punaradayam, RVI 4S 4; 
5, 33.4; kakupkaram, Vill 4, 93-43 5,33 4; panktisamsam, XVIII,9, 4; 
14,43 17, 53 gayatrisamsam, XVIII, 16, 1; and the late simple form 
gamsam, XVIII, 16,2. Of the uses of the optative that in clauses of 
purpose with za is very frequent; in XVII, 10, 8, yadi-syat-mimite, it is 
purely indefinite; in yadi-na vidyeta ya etam dhiyam kuryat sa etat kuryat, 
XVII, 5, 4, the second optative is one of characteristic, ‘one who can do.’ 
In XVIII, 24, 15, yadi dhaksyanto (dhavanti)-syat, the protasis is future 
in fact and the apodosis is equivalent to a mild future. In XVIII, 23, 4, 
yadt yajhayajniyam-kuryus-tasyoktau stotriyanuripau, the real apodosis 
is suppressed. Of particles may be noticed the use of afi va, XVIII, 3, 4, 
and of yady u vat, XVIII, 7,173 23, 5: It may be noted as a sign of 
more recent date that very few particles occur, ha only in XVII, 13, 8; 
w ha tn XVI, 2; 3; 5. In XVII, 9,7; XVIII, 22, 10, is found the 
remarkable phrase iti nv a u Marutvatiyam, Vaisvavedam; in XVII,1, 5, 
athapi; in XVIII, 20, 6, atho. 

The results arrived at may be supported by a comparison with a work 


72 INTRODUCTION 


of date somewhat later than the Aranyaka V, the Brhaddevata, which 
shows a style much more modern, even despite poetic licences, than the 
Aranyaka I-III, but which is still in vocabulary an archaic work, coeval 
in date with the early epic. An interesting list of its irregularities is 
given by Prof. Macdonell,! but they are rather of the epic type, e.g. use 
of °ya for °tva in the gerund, nominative for accusative, unaugmented 
pasts, &c. It is significant that (1) no genitives or ablatives for @, 2, 7, 
stems in az occur; (2) there are no subjunctive forms other than first 
person forms; (3) the infinitive in °¢m is common and no other form is 
found, while in VI, 37, even saptukamah occurs. Significant also is the 
use of the narrative tenses. The aorist occurs only in the later narrative 
use and is rare, being formed only from the roots ga@, bhi, vac, vadh. 
The perfect surpasses the imperfect in frequency as a narrative tense, for 
in some 340 lines of narrative? there occur 202 perfects to 150 imper- 
fects, and the proportion elsewhere is not materially different. Further, 
the periphrastic perfect with dsa is frequent, kamayam asa, VI, 76; 
utsadayam asa, VU, 53; siksayam asa, III, 84; bodhayam asa, V1, 37 ; 
varayam asa, V1, 38; chandayam asuh, V1I,157; prasadayam asa, VIII, 
3; kirtayam asa, VI, 24; prasvapayaim asa, V1, 13; darsayam asa, V, 63; 
while the use of &y is very rare, wpamantrayam cakre, V,20. Further, 
the past participles passive are freely used to denote action either past or 
present in place of finite verbs, and use is made of the new participial 
form in vat, kytavat occurring in VI, 41; VII, 58; VIII, 18; drstavan, 
V, 58; drstavati, VIII, 33; prstavan, V, 71; labdhavan, V, 66; hatavan, 
VI, 152, &c. Prefixes are not separated from the verbs with which they 
are connected. Particles are much restricted in number, and combinations 
are limited. Mention may also be made of the great development in 
grammatical doctrine seen not only in the discussion in I as to nouns, &c., 
and in IT, 93, as to particles, but in the use of such forms as @v2, locative 
of au, the case termination, ayok from e, the sign of the dual, zd, the root 
7d, and so on. Indeed it is hard to resist the conclusion that the bulk of 
the Aranyaka I-III must lie before the more systematic treatment of 
grammatical questions in Yaska’s Nirukta, and a new support is derived 
for the giving an early date to these books, since Yaska cannot well be 
later than 500 B.C. 


1 Brhaddevata, 1, xxvii. 
* See the fourth Index to Prof. Macdonell’s Brhaddevata. 


STYLE AND GRAMMAR 73 


It has been noted that Book III presupposes the Padapatha of the 
Rgveda! and also the Kramapatha, It is therefore later than Sakalya, 
the author of the Padapatha. This, however, leaves the date undeter- 
mined, since Sakalya’s date is still uncertain. Geldner* has recently 
argued that he dates from the later Vajasaneya period, and not as 
supposed by Oldenberg from the end of the Brahmana period, and that 
he was a contemporary of the Aruni and Yajiiavalkya known from the 
Brahmanas. But it is extremely hard to reconcile this with the facts 
that the Padapatha presupposes the Samhita, that the Samhita exhibits 
a text which cannot be reconciled with the statements of the Brahmana 
texts ° as to the number of syllables in word groups, in consequence of 
the Sandhi carried out in the Samhita. The evidence, therefore, is 
certainly in favour of Oldenberg’s hypothesis, but it leaves the lower 
date of Sakalya vague. He is, however, cited by Yaska and older than 
Saunaka, so that in all probability he must date not later than 600 B.C. 
The Aranyaka III need not be much later than Sakalya ; and if it is, as 
seems most probable, earlier than Yaska, it may be dated from about 
600-550 B.C. It may be added that it must be older than the Taittiriya 
Upanisad and the Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, VIII (see note on 
III, x, 2). 

These chronological results are admittedly uncertain. They are based 
on the views that (1) the Aranyaka I-III is older than Buddhism by 
reason of the undeveloped character of its philosophic content ; (2) that 
these books are older than the Brhaddevata and Saunaka, who may be 
dated about 450-400 B.C., and probably older than Yaska, who can 
hardly be brought down lower than 550-500 B.C.; (3) that they are 
older than the developed systems of philosophy whose beginnings are at 
any rate known to Apastamba, whom Biihler dates in the fourth or 
fifth centuries B. C., and who cannot well, on any view, be later than 300 
B.C., and that they are older than the Atharvasiras Upanisad, known, it 
seems, to Gautama, who is older than Apastamba by some generations ; 
(4) that they are older than Panini, Katyayana, and Patafijali, who cannot 
well be dated later than 300, 200, and 100 B.C. respectively ; (5) that 


1 Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 380. this view; Wackernagel, <Adtindische 
2 Vedische Studien, 111, 144-146. See Grammaitzik, I, \xv, n. 7. 
Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des 3 Cf. Macdonell, Sauskrzt Literature, 
Rgveda, pp. 4, 5, who also supports pp. 49, 59, and note on III, 1, 2. 


74 INTRODUCTION 


Books I and II date from the later Brahmana! period, but are probably 
older than the Satapatha Brahmana, parts of the Jaiminiya Brahmana 
and Upanisad, the Gopatha Brahmana, and the Chandogya Upanisad, 
and so belong to a comparatively early date. 

The verses and sentences quoted contain, despite their brevity, 
a remarkable set of old forms. The Slokas in II, 3, 8, and the prose 
directions in Aranyaka V, are more properly treated as above as part of 
the main-work, with which the latter no doubt coincide in time, while 
the former are not very much older. Of these forms may be mentioned 
taniim, tanvam (loc.), but zanvah (gen.) in I, 3, 5; sarvasyai (gen.) in the 
verse in III, 2, 5, which is a sign of more recent origin; the compounds 
Vdrunavayvitamam, prthivyupardm, brahmandbhartrkam, varsdpavi- 
tram,V, 3,23; the forms ardjak (?), tijah, dti vydthih, rdntyam, vanam (?), 
ddhrsah, in V, 2,1. Among verbal forms are the third person singulars 
ise, vide, IV, 1; the first person stusé, 1V, 1. The curious forms 77dse, 
sdmnyase, bhivah, 1V,1; duham,V, 3, 2; the subjunctives duusamsisah, 
parsat, IV, 13; jujosat, V, 2, 2; vibhajatha, V, 1, 1; the injunctives 
vidah(?), IV,1; sprsat(?), V, 2,2; Rartana, V, 2,2; and perhaps aviz, 
V, 1, 1; the precatives, apyadsam, V, 3,2; bhityasam, V,1,1. Of noun 
constructions may be noted, yaya somanam, V, 3,25 svar yajham va- 
ksyantim, V,1, 5; vasan anu, 1V,1; pratt vam rjist, V, 2,1. In V, 2,2, 
kartana seems used instead of a dual; in IV, 1, dravavahat needs 
explanation, In V, 1, 1, occur antariksam tvanapyam-bhiyasam, &c., 
where the predicate adjective follows the gender and number of the 
nearest noun, the object of comparison. The uses of svam in that 
passage, of maricayah, and of zadhk and sdémajah in V, 2, I, are all 
unusual, The question of the date of the verses in IV, 1, has been 
dealt with in the note on that passage, and cf. ¥.R.A.S., 1907, 
pp. 224. sq.; Oldenberg, Gott. Gel. Anz., 1907, pp. 215 sq. 


1 The Brahmana parts of the Taittirlya vimsa Brahmana, the Aitareya Brahmana, 
Samhita and Brahmana, Maitrayaniya I-XXX, and possibly the Kausitaki Brah- 
Samhita, Kathaka Samhita, the Pafica- mana are earlier. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA. 


Ts kt WAATTT AA ll 
Apuyaya 1. 


ST MI ARAMA | VSl A FA AAT HeTMa- 
RAMA ARAAAAATHAIATS ARTAATAA |S UeA- 


1 In R there precede Adhyaya I the following Wife verses, incorrectly accented, 
taken from R!: yfaquyiet TEI wa TsT aa safari aaa aaufaeat 
wat at wey Bae: fret a Weta wa Gata Tleala aT A aa Tea 
ug aU: van Wa TATA WH Na | aa Bq van wat Afaa are 
faa: Sarat yfaat ZG ll In B the Wifed verses appear as Adhyaya 3 in 
Aranyaka III, at fol. 191 a: ai vaferara | Si sizainaes ageat- 
afa 2a aq aafated afe Dafa aT: | eae MTT SHAETAY 
at atefaeay at aq Zant: | aceragfefrcraral sitters RN 
AS ar at fest: | waQeafed FaRaTA | VA WeEwTasaa UCM 
aq | BA Cet aM cet aa wf Aaa Aafia AAT aT AY 
Sau: | AT TATA AS quasar aceta at & ataargia | aa: 
SH WA CRT SH | FA TAH AL TT APTA: HEAT TAT ATA 
wait J ur: Brat BUA aT aE Tha WifersmtfrTfer | TEA SfEATTA 
Tava s ATa: | This Adhyaya is not accented at all in B, as would appear from 
Scheftelowitz’s reproduction, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, p. 167, the accents being 
wholly omitted from Khila V, 17, 2, onwards, as is correctly stated at p. 163. In 
E occur the same verses as in R and B, but in different order. First come the 
verses which are found in R}, the Rgvedic verses, (ag) 1505 5.2 (xt a) VI,.35. &s 
(a) VL 49, 1; (aat, HEAT, Bat g) IV, 31, 1-3; (tat) I, 22, 15, being 
quoted in full. Then follow the words sfeaa down to Wa and ag ay afa 


76 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 1- 


aig sist qarfefa a sgiafata mq fara 0 at 
cararay sta ufsara: | fast fart ay afafatata 


aTas AA 1 St Uff: Vf: BWA! Instead of AA E, S, and the 
other MSS. have aa: q, ofaq for ofaz, and @# for aq. A begins like R', but adds 
WFY° WF after mu fat: and yaa after WH. It ends ufafa awa aretfaurare 
Wa: | afa qat | At the end of the fifth Aranyaka it has sfzqaq— feat: as 
inB; then @Wyedted WH | AAA aAaUT wa | ATS] aafa— qarca 
(as in Aranyaka II, 7) | ag at ata aaa aa | Wife: wif: wif: Iqa- 
Tutte: Wl K has, at the end of the fifth Aranyaka, at — arefy as in Rl. 
Then We BUA: PYITA Sat: 9 wv A TAT waaradfa: 9 qa at 
gaa waettat: 9 wat afaa an yafeta fra: Ser ufedt wa 9 aageated 
FAFATL 1 BAA aaa afar ag aT ale aaa aa 1 ai wifs: wifa: 
Wifa: |S ae] AAPA (Ke. as in UW, 7) 14 BE Wife: Wife: wife: 1 efa 
Wifaats: | T has before II, 4 (the beginning of the Aitareya Upanisad) ai aTSy 
AaAfa (&. as in I, 7, with WeTata) ending Bt wrferwrfeasarfea: | Then 
follows At Ba Tal AA TAT (&e, as in R down to Wat y T:) ending ag ar afta 
ae a Aq: | sir wifearswatfearsariaa: | The verses are given in full. In U, at 
the end of II, 7, are added verses as in A from sfea: to aaa Wt: Ta 
followed by WAM FAUT AS Sq aA ASAT S TRAST: | Hi Wier: wile: 
Wifer: | In § the text is as in R with the addition of STVTfTATAT AGM sat: 
ufegat ufa: | eae ate Karat are arfee areafata ara: u sit wh: 
wifet: aft: WW Cf IIT, 2,5. $3, however, has as in R; then follows Biza:— 
Wa as in B; then BAN FEU alfa @q wT AIST Ss Hat 1 wT aT 
faa: wt TEM: HTT ATTSAT | at TAT TEMA: wt at faereeaA: | are] 
aafa (&. as in II, 7) | S at the end of the fifth Aranyaka hat a Stza:— 
eT: as in 8°; then WAS WHA ugarag quarts: qafa fafafs Ti 
agrasafe waftier gegen fagd qdtc: 1 weuteqeradtaand 
frafad feat santa Bfes wet fetteTe a Cee fay eae 
Then comes 4T§] &c. as in II, 7, ending FW Wife: wif: wif: In one MS. 
(afaa aia) the verse WAATTA follows II, 7, instead of preceding it. Both 


-I, 1,2 ARANYAKA I 77 


gfeata:: 1 gfed fax: gfearmrarifa i sfafafafa 
a¢ wafa Anmafemedudsfafara afon: | ag 
@ Tle Galea | At A Hala a: AwaTaga a at afa- 
fatafa i a at aamatirearateaar | WETS FTAA- 
angi | a WaaHQIerra qaewafaa 7a 
DUA FAI | VAST Metta: WTacaiad 7 W7- 
Sia | A UASAEUMTaTMMAIAe a Vata ga A MAT 
arrqugaaa dard denfe 1 saat: afr 
Saratata afta: | etastfae Sarat eft waTTy- 
AA UG 


af aa dfufafanutfcaaraara: 1 afrat 
sale: | faratfaa at sntesafrareadie qua 
Varad FAMNSAATAAA FAA: UAAAIAT | 
VAY HATA AACA Wet ATATAT ara 
aerataad | wif wart sxifa wah waster 4 


here and at the beginning the verses in S are accented with one or two exceptions in 
the case of the verses not in the Rgveda. There can be no doubt that these verses 
form no integral part of the Aitareya Aranyaka. Neither R?, D, F, G, nor L contains the 
verses. For f34T A see Atharvaveda, VII, 68, 3, with Whitney’s note. WaFe 
is Rgveda, VII, 66, 16. See also Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 1, and Grhya Sutra, VI, 4, 


with Oldenberg’s note. Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 30, has : qaaatatra | Gatry: 


qa: | 
2 bis in F, G. 5 SSAA F, G. 4 sraare LL. 
5 gq BqAHPAla om. G. ® FIAT 6. 1 HAT F. 


1 omtaeta F, G. 


78 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 2- 


aNd: UTATAaeel | atta Sie weifa wafat Vat at 
za fagat ola waTaa clararafafael 1° Ss weet 
waa: Ufa wa fans A yeraqerer: ovat 
amaraaa afenfas aqurg agg ufmeraate | at: 
aradaad Uataniasata wafanisa geal en 
TM RFS CN WT a Be’ sf AE wea 
wafivefaaamad wafsy depen | eat aeafay’ 
al Uaee: UfaN UASIg MAMA aA UATE 
Tete wa wafinintata’ | ara: wea freaAa- 
an a fiyegnac fag i wa 4 ta: faa aa 
MU’ wWisara ofafeTaAet WaAATHaRS | Wal- 
TATATTARY Y UF Ae lat Bhagat geal a faust 
YT Fel WANE: AIAN AqAwAqeTadaa aAT- 
SAT WAU 

mat ust FifenanN A aad matt 
nae Tease vraritia | anf wat Harfeae- 
Tye sugared | aE Ast Harferate: 


2 SAAT L. 3 om. F, G. 4 wafa FG. 5 SEL. 
° ayrata A. 7 qafaaq L. 8 oF Wlaa D, E, F, G, L, here 
and usually. The evidence of the MSS. for the dropping of visarga before s and 
a hard consonant is so strong that the practice has been followed throughout after 
the example of Prof. Macdonell’s Brhaddevata, I, xxvi; see above, p.10. Rand S 
retain visarga. ° wafa F, G. 10 WTUT K. Of. I, 3, 7, n. 2. 


oh 3, 4 ARANYAKA I "4 
Ba A MALAITA sft | Met Ast Rarferns: 
wie gedit stararantia i arg wet qarfeneta 3 
afscaartadiia | ga ast garfeenedta = fre- 
aaareradtia aed wet Fafeneartat 4 awa: 
ayarrarifa | ag MaTAa Farge Ft mast Fee- 
HAUG Tea UfAded | AE ABCA | AY TA Al 
Shen aseract THYRCa AUST | AT 
wa 9 ay ad’? 3 ay’ aa 4 aa AY AUTUETa 
Vafa Bayi AAMATAAS | VAPHATAASN FWA 
Aq i wasted RNAS ag at Unferaata fara Fare’ 
acu fraa wren wa wifad ufavare: waa AM- 
fagraraata: ufafasfa i afafrefa’ a wa ae aut 
aq faaramatat watt 13 


aaa aife etaa AAT Bega Fata Be 
QAATATA A CTA! AC el Vaewtait a va 
ae Bui Va faarnsiat waa i eearTa <A AAT A 
maqy faepafafa ae frog aera | aT eTeT- 


1 grat L. 2 bis in F, 8 OTaF. 4 oe] is the 
regular form in R, S, and the MSS., and so is followed, cf, Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 231. On the other hand e@ WY, which is always read in R and which occurs 
sporadically in the MSS., is simply an example of the constant tendency of MSS. to 
reduce consonant groups, and is incorrect. S has ost throughout. See also Wacker- 
nagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 269. 5 om. F. 6 corr, from fasted A. 


80 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 4- 
aq da aan a vd ae det Va faararEta 
waft i fat ga gee fd gare? arrnia’ ave 
Wart 1 aaaseenfa awd ae Fat wa 
fastaasiat waa i safaat asatifwa saa ar sat 
SATAAS | M Ald Lead seat Tahaat as 
TSA avd ae Jet Va faataasiat wala i set 
afe frarafes afe frafaa eq are qq 
sqaaiaetta wafa i MI eel aa nafa a va 
ae Fai Va faaramarn waft | arrawiatym 
fay eqia ot ada ae faa tat ea nal a Ud 
ae’ qui Va’ fagtanata wafa i erate aye: 
qafata gets aga cee: anfama cere i eefa’ 
SIH it AA Cal aeala UAsafa a va Ae Ani Vq 
faaraaaiat tata | Ua A: Areat as ae fyat- 
agfea ava frarag: |. aTaaatieiaeurit a vad Fe 
asi 3q faaranaiat dafa i aa afgia ae as 
aefadta Wee al: Wadanafanfasaratatis a 
Feat SN SAM WHA CT Ure seafawaaaar- 
maa aT CHER | aATha: WIAA freaAa aeafs- 


> garst A.  auedfa EB; areata a. * ahaa F. 
5 om. F. ° Sut G. " aafa kK. ® wafa L. 


-I, 2,1 - ARANYAKA I 81 


aintaha wsafin’ sa uafda: wsarafien Ze 
WAFS CT UT a HS at TE waa wale 
fanaa wafat dee 0 aa" wafdst a 
Uae: wafay wAUIE WawNMAA ad ufaaaa 
awe Usa cafaniratar wafer sit 
N SAMA WAT SeaTA: 1 
ADHYAYA 2,. 

MM AT TH aalaa se aa GaAs efa Aeadtaey 
nfraeqatt | wafeat aoaqEt ae at unfraela 
farsa’ farsa ara feat ataat wa fas Ufaware:aT- 
waTaa aafasarana: ufafaeta i ufafefa a wd 
ae asi Va fasaweim wafa i eq Ada vfefe a 
q fra wiifad a sie aed? at unereqaag- 
WaAqeAadaiet aA ig TaUafara dtefafa aiz- 
quaySAnaet KAA | View Tae’ qatdfaa 

° wafanfa afa A. 10 qafas A. 11 After this P repeats 
wafaqra— dered. ? Text, A, R; Tht ATATCRA WaATCATA: L ; 
Tia WIA SIT WATTS: wan K; Bl WaAlcura: F; wWralswra: 
DG; ef StH; Tadtareqarcwans wears wears aq: 
GUS: U8 Tt THAATAUTTTATWS AVATCUR ATATSUTA: wai s. 
R has been followed in the text. It is of course certain that the divisions and 
colophons have no claim to be regarded as contemporaneous with the composition of 
the work, in which the only divisions were probably the Adhyayas and Aranyakas. 

1 fa FT to Wag is represented by ° in A, and this is regularly done when 
a passage is repeated or words are repeated. The several instances are not noted 


separately hereafter. Z Sry F, é eq F, 4 FAUNA — q qi 


KEITH G 


82 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 1- 
AAagQUaySAASMTET GIA TA aaueaiaad ae- 
arafaaad I UACTRFUAUAHSATSTET SAA | 
afqum a Alea asafaQancAaneeMalgl 
aq ae qh: aapied ga qaahrafeta 
qual sew SA TAMecTag EIA | fora 
saa fae fa aafa afaafata afaaat em au- 
FAA SAA | WA sea gefat WaaATA- 
faafafa Waaal FEM GUATAACETATET EAA | 
Wa sea Jen eft We JeMMeeaqVayaAnaigl 
eam 1 yefesa Manft ae qraMeTteaquaqEa- 
aaet Bue t afa:’ Germ ca waa a Ueafafa 
Tama rAgUaqaAtaig SIA | eaPITATSSahA 
VATARTATS HAMA AAA FETA’ AAA WAaTat 
Vag SNA Aaa AAATATA WAU’ 


sam A sft: atta: aagaafa watt an 


Al UAE: AAACIASAAATE] HAF | AE ATA AR 
A AGA AaAEAaANs AGA Aft | AalETA BAT- 


om. FI, G, because of TauUafa: following. 2 TTY bis G; ATH A. 
6 gareui F, G. 1 far G. © Maat YSTAT vis F. ° This Khanda 
is numbered 5 in A, D, H, F, G, K, L; 5 at the end of the commentary in R, and 
1 at the end of the text. In S both numbers are given throughout. I have kept 
the lower number for the sake of convenience, as references to the Aitareya have in 
the past been based on R. Cf Z.D.M.G., XLII, 171. 


of, 2,:2 ARANYAKA I 83 


argadameanta fica sft A © at UAE a_- 
wIHeaaqes faait ACHTSAR sass 
ufiuad i defaes oso waafrent 3 warafa: 
WATAAUS | aged fae AAT waraA | feat 
waa aqa ae’ sft waft wa aa afe qu 
Suit AREIAASATSTT VIA | WE ATES ALATA 
@ a Whiwaqian deasifarawufaa wa 
a Ua Gaa UAAATEA ATAEs Wate ara 
SURAT BAVA tasitat TawEralia ACATRITETS 
Watt | Fat WAT aawa: aelesr sft waft | at waa 
vin eaFAqTY A UnereqqaqMAyTTAnaiay 
weUq ae aageiaads dard antl qa aary- 
MWAAAA Z Al SISTA Ae AAMAA TAMIT- 
Wty waa AAI Us | Taga aase faa: Wrg- 
teary HT Ay | AeA SE TNT carafa watt | 
we gu sft qawa em euAeAneeMaTET 
euq ine wafad faa 2 4 fad famnfaa ma 
fay ate fad wafa a vad Fe aut V4 famanar 
daft i sfaet sa: aga quafa fafasranarfea 


 agmtat G; TGA ATE; aye R. =? ATQATL EE. = * TY" 
AUST EF; aqMWaa «. * a2 kK. ° fq RIT FG. The 
omission occurs sporadically in the MSS., but has no sufficient authority to justify its 
adoption. 
G2 


84. AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 2- 


quays ag a Uaferagia’ fase fa aia faa 
Waa Va wits vasa uA AeA: 
ofafreter | ufafrefa a wa Ae Aat Aq faaraaEtat 
dafa 1 at: Ua Baahtafea at at aafate- 
aatfdfrean faustsa a: aafaatt Waar ATAT 
QUA’ AM VA i aha: waaa faeandand vata 
aR f wa crarepaiaass A aT 
aafanfa: wafamanaciu agia meaararraqn- 
qa iaaad aegfes da aN ana TaATITA 
mantea aa aufa afafer: 1 mfaguatsdceat 
Set fe aerfer: wen’ 


fee: fa Tae Reafaaa’ 4 Det Asa var 
we ay wag? Daa ef aq WANA I TA 
Tad Tifa Vary ay: warsal Saha | 
maa | te amare afeagaat at za 
fagat ora wat quai | ataIgay | Fe wa Arai 
at a sat HlaTaSAAtag qxin aT Ua BACT 


6 vafaa A. 7 WITAaTRTAT G. 8 Numbered 6 in A, D, E, F, G, K, L, 
and also in R in text, In R in commentary is 2. 

1 From Wa to afa om. F. From Wad to MAY om.G. F has Waa. 
2 Wa R (by misprint? A, D, E, K, L, S, and R in commentary have text). 


3 wyai L. 4 Baa G. 5 @ R in text. 


Bly, % ARANYAKA I 85 


AT: ASA HAMS VA TTATA | eat UAT- 
ARPA WATAYQAL Walsataqaraesl | waa TER 
aint aeamt Fa wal festa wea wa TeaTAST 
aata east | Sat tart wafer efeara wars’ 
SAU At VAT GMAT Tara: BAT Vani TACHA 
Gaal AAAAGT UTATATS | ePa:’ eat at sa- 
WATAASAATT? ATEN? TE USN’ 


staat suf ya: fe: afeenstiaram 3 
en Brat: AAA sft | TAME | WTATS AT- 
feargtaram 4 ora: dfaat efi | wearer | afe- 
Aa rentaat F aaa fead warant waAara- 
aid TATA Ta SA | We TRAfy- 
Uses EIT J Vy aula YURI wAtatarA 
mafuterdtia | waargerey | frderahuciefernaterand 
a saatideta tat aaraaramarafa | wT 
qua | waAftefeaeogey 4 araafucetar at- 
Sar ariaralt aang fa wenesanafute | Faa- 
Taga ea quaitela ay azaraaena eft 
AMIS AIHNITAA | TEUTAMsed Wat aainfh- 


6 om. F. 7 ate D, EB, F, G,K, L. 8 oRUBTATUTT F. 
® Numbered 7 in A, D, E, F, G, K, L. 


1 ya F. ? Weg DV, B, F,G, K, L. 


86 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 4- 


fafana vd gaia 3 quai dtaawa aft meratg- 
MAE RA Ue Ahsensea ofreran save 
aft 1 ae amfdeteattaratana gat a Dat 
jared afta fagaaa werage acifa wate 
waa waa Uys wd Fei waa a WE? VilT- 

aa Wa ahead wrafiaed:' | geese: wafe- 
Vela BAe: | aU al wefan: wes 
Tera’ aenfaea aie: aafitentaaa asst- 
AAPA SAMAPAAE | Taveras: | 
AAAEay | EAT St Mahara safe fry 
AAAs: | TAaATEay | BEAT A aafafrat- 
AWE sofa 1 fies NWAAtee at aafe- 
fair werk atfi aemmfnenta veatea 1 
WSaled | UVa eatad’ varTad AcIATsaUeca- 
Tea Bu" 


Nl wainwanqAaga fadtarseara: wv”? 


8 Tq D, E, &. * facie: A, D, E, F, G, K, L, S; the commentary 
shows the reading, yet R has oTlEea. 4 Teta R in ieee : 
F, G. 7 Qraqwea D, E. ° WTE RK in text. ° Sata: de () S. 
10 WTS L. 11 Numbered 8 in A, D, E, F, G, K, L. 13 Text, A, dy Be 


no colophon, E; tfa fadtatswta: D; fadtatcura: F, o; ef waa wITa 
fadrarrswra: K. 


-I, 3,2 ARANYAKA I 87 


ADHYAYA 3. 


fegritines: ufaugdare: | wa a freq aeaa- 
waa Aga ufagad a wd Aci aea fexitw 
afavamse at a freq areata faaaaa 
TeeaAR sefa usa 1 aa oa aga wa 
ae. aaa festa nfauaarss am at afta wat 
fega we feaienifqedangeaay | a are 
waad fegruraad qufa a wd ae1 aaa fegita 
vfAaEATss Tat aT WaT BTA’ yw ATTA a afE- 
Ht 1a afege ofmaad arava waratafa eat 


a Arges ua’ 


:ameng: Ufaafefa 1 aaa area BATT I 
aasmeraar:: faa: Aaa’ ArATSe | Hala 3 
aa war: faa aaat fe aaraaraata i ad 
Sera: Wat a Ud Fe aha TaraArTe AAT 
fz qaraaraefa | aareteR BTAaPEe A UA aa 
AACAACGA A AYA A AraT nfAtS TAT 


1 fa atfarfata gata K. - za G. 3 Numbered 9 in 
A, E, K, L. F and G have both 1 and g. D has rt. 
1 gat F. 2 @TaT E, and so regularly when § or s is followed by 


a semivowel or soft mute. 3 ware S. ; aii — ae repeated in F, G. 


88 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 3, 2- 


a aga a ara sarfefa i eat wa’ red: qT 
Sa oapia: eaqfeat aa arena ea Fat aat 
yfeta spat ya sfa aqae: eafeian armada: | waa 
TIAN Tar agafaEd Aa a WyT a Ara 
Ufa wan 


nfefa ufauge wafefa ar aaaaaa aefanta- 
Uda | Vat ara Uae: BAA ata BWretearaca- 
au data aia | waaAHAT: DAA aa ATeT- 
AAA anfa wef i ada radar’ arat ufa- 
Uda | AAAI | Fea We aay wufaasa 
DAA Aa NAA | WNT ATA cura efa arar A 
arTauarta uta | qe ae veftoardifeanaa APA 
ref Te west fated qerfafeiteg =e qErarA- 
fam tam ae 3 safachicanfaaraes vata un’ 


fea yaay stefain nffuaa unara yang 
WA 1 UA WY VAY ai Ge aw yas- 
aqRU 1 aN Tara fae wafaft wat ay 
Mit: UTaTTAeA | ay 4 fad Rerqar efa unfa 


5 om. 8. ° ya E. 1 @AST A. 8 Numbered ro in A, E, K, L; 


ro and 2 in F,G; 2 in D. 
1 qaq s!23; aha om. F. 2 SAT om. B in text. 3 AWaatT L. 
4 ony A. 5 Numbered 11 in A, E, G, K, L311, 3 in F; 3in D. Seol, 3;:6, 


=f 3,4 ARANYAKA I 89 
a faa ware wadquerengenfet 1 argura: 
Waar waist sft WI A aAqura: waar wats: 1 
waeaa fad anatit aa! dara | waas 
waa vain aa wifw’ qamrwafada wees a 2 
aan vy Heftaft wa wat ay iq Ade | A 
aqata gafat faa sft wdtarfa aarfa ana 
aaa aaifa aad saaisha gaat vee fader 
fata eff at a aan fagat oaraa oar" | 
aaa waa aga ws Fei areal: Eardta: Tater 
gat afafa fagd & are oat eg faqaaa ami 
agafa’ ise: q ay ayaa anit faqa a ay 
mat ay faqaaa qamahgqeta 1 cgaafaa) ai 
wad raat TIdaaAt Salas ATE 
WN Wala Wal ae AanfHae wea sa Hela- 
waa Aes | aM araeragufa at matt arate 
a fagantia aren at aaa aifs en at faugiray 
fag aecg ofafeats ges fa mata 3 facta 
wala ara” aaa scifa aaa faceqriayg 
Saa fae unee: aerarctia: ufos waht usu 


1 yq A. 2 SEATS once only in F. ° WAT RK in text. 
4 gy — qtara ow. §, clearly by an oversight. 5 yim G. ‘ qatar 
R in text. 7 WTATa D ; om. G. 8 om. G. ° wafa A. 
10 Rast E; Aga F, G. 11 ggy G. aaa 13 Numbered 12 


in A, E, K,L; 12,4in F,G; 4 in D. R has 4 in text and 12 in commentary. 


go AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 3, 5- 

a dea feet | geal 3 aewmergenl aera: 
aaanhta | Ae A Bedarra 3 Bat at Beal aT 
fearen de aagerait a seat a Gere ete 
wanaegera i ad agaitafadds samt ara 
aya wa svaftenent fe Wea eat ara atg- 
aa a: een? at fe attgered eat Ufa at srarar- 
fails wit a ae MT sassy wT at 
Sm a: framgera i taarfageadits sat ara 
wage ge ad Rraaitgedifa acre uitadiaa 
dae i frye arqga a facia gar 3 feararqer- 
faqa marefa get svat fae graacfaarena 
aaa i aha: paAa wafaniniata wafaa sar 
wafay: narahien’ EAN AAA CT UTA a 
SE at WE Tea watiwafaaarna oafas 
wea 1 At what at wree: wafia weg 
waa Ha vid ATs wa oafinfm- 
afar wan 


1 facefa 5. 2 seta A. ° Sea A.D, EF, G,K,L,S; 
Aza R. . ufaadifa D, EB, F, G. 5 The words after Sq are 
represented by © in A. 5 Numbered 13 in A, E, K,L; 13, 5 in F; 13,4 in G; 
5 in D. R has 13 in text, but 3 in commentary, 


Sf, .3.5 ARANYAKA I gr 


afefa uff wafefa at saRaaa aefmfa- 
Uda | Ut ara’ stata: waAt ara wreteareq- 
wert ante afa i adaargere: Gear} ard 
TAMA Aait aha i waa wWarrarar: arar 
Uda | AERA | Gea WTA aTat safaAi- 
Aa WTA Aral BAA | Wata ATAas cura =fa 
ara fz aratafa faa i gest ae yeforare- 

Ramat Bader | wat Aest fafed qefafz- 
fteq = qeramafam tant we & snifachieanfan- 
AAG Aaa wen’ 


afeaa yaay Sufafa ufrwad qa Se WHER 
CaS STA | at YT aft Aaa. 
fein AeaQUaSAe SA | YT seTGy ANT 
afa A Saag UA SATS BUA AUTY AT ane sAA- 
i at VACERPTAGUN SAAT euq | 

TATE TAA ue faecin WA a ca: fast yA’ wat 
Wasa ofafeaarat Bararaaeet | UA ATATTA- 
1 In A all from AT] — WaUSaAA is represented by °. E has only afefa 
nfauaa wzafa. See I, 3, 3. 2 WaAaTa only L. 5 aret <fa R in 
text; STC G and D pr. man. * azaqat F, G. 5 Numbered 14 in 


A, E, K,L; 14,6in F,G; 6in D. It is numbered 4 in R because the number 
13 of the previous section was in the commentary printed as 3! 


1 gat @ F, G. 2 A ATUT om. F; WTYTALR. Cf. I, 4, 2, n. 10, 


92 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 3 7- 


Bl A Us Fz S eMyt Aaa WATAPTMNSMNs Fa 
Gadamareatat | aereueenraufa waft afta 
Gl Aa WIN WaT EWA: Blea: defAceTaer 
VU | AA Adearaad Fw Fe ug’ 


a aed faecia i oat F aAcereama aera: 
daerta | ae a Helarfardhs sfureotaaqgart- 
eUga shwanqey i aefeargqa a a eufa 
wife: naa aafaniaata oatay set aafain: 
DaTaHeN FHI WHA CT UT at BE st TE 
ama wafareafaaamad walt daa | BUT 
aafat at wee: wafdy wae wlARMAA Ta 
Dfrradt Wate wa wataaintata | serene GTI: | 
marficary | Wa: AS AA ATENIU: Al UAT: Ta 
eam wa fae’ ged? us Fam’ eam aa fae: 
Gea: LASTS WAM: ad: as awa 
rareata yaaa Barta saat | AE 
SPA aa Waenraqaia oes fe emt wate 
aagraryfadt arafeafefa avait & erargfadt. a- 


3 Numbered 15 in A, E, K,L; 15,7 in F,G; 7 in D. R has 5 in text and 7 
and 5 in commentary. 


 fafaer cn. =? ger K. 2 33K. * wae a; ara 5. 


-I, 4,0 ARANYAKA I 93 


AAT | aa Afeara: aeatagqeqrag aequeft 
Reafa | araga fated avait ama azaa 
FA ASAT Al AlHal Aelita vata i wat at 
wal Gaal Aaa Wad aT a MTU: ort FAI 
qed waft ug! Wad Weare i wad wate’ 
aragel ufs: ufedt wanaeraea t qat vata 
aat at za Faget Blt waTaa Htararahafsaer 1 aT 
Whraivesrd Jent Betsy Casta’ BAT | Taye- 
Raq” faenaa daeqraarmaatdaata satan 
\ PaaS Pease: 


ADHYAYA 4. 


Sy Yeetet: | aM A qatar: way varia 
deufa i Ram Mat 1 at aaa Tag 
aft 1 HA Geter: 1 ITT F geelar: waa vara 
deufa 1 sara: fat: | aaraty vad F weat 
maaaqaaar far i weaadty warafrat aa | AT 


6 " : ; ; y 7 yf. 7 
WSF Rin text; WEF A,G; WAY F; text, D, E,K, L. By 
R in text; It A. 8 om. R in text. It is in R in commentary and in 
all the MSS. and in 8. 9 aq K. ao Raa K. 11 Numbered 


16 in A, E, F, K,L; 16,8 in G; no number in D. R in text has 6, in com- 
mentary 16. 12 gyacanyarcaaaa Gararswra: A; Tia Wa ATA 
(neaTCes L) qearatswra: KL; FAAS ATA: D, F, G5; nothing in E, or 


by an error in R in text. 


1 BCAA omitting the rest, F. 


94 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Fees 
ava wat wanes A feu 1 eral wafa mam’ 
waa a nai wat earfadaaa vat at faqe 
Sal? waa Wat a we Vata Wasa: AsT- 
faaq aafaé usrat afeé face use 1 aaa 
Waa uma wa Fei Wa qeeler i uray 4 
Reale: waa vara deuft i samt fava: 1 at 
faust wat acaiaqes: geante fa’ at seg 
usta atar S urcadifa erated at aat ent: wal- 
SSAA” Btisadat uraasa fe fausaq’ 
SA | WT Teele: | aI J qedler: ada varfa 
seater nau’ 


WAM ey: ayi adisd wre: atsaaty: ar 
Tat a afer aa asta wate 
aura wa aATatata after sara fs: 
BA Flat | WIM A ele: wa uadifu de- 
uti’ | RATA SAT: Va: | Stsat wra: Atsararferr- 
RAAT gee AISA Ais aay wah aaa 
wa aATAPaTa offset saa UPS: | aT SAT 


2 Sy R in text. > lat B in text, 8. * om. F. 5 wrat 


@ WatfW omitting the rest, F, G. 6 Accented in E. 7 QMSAqagT: BR: 
WAAR: A; RAAT: E; text, D, F, G, K, L, 8. 8 facts A, BR. 
9 gy K. 10 Numbered 17 in A, E, K, L; 17,1 in F,G; rin D, 


1 wy — azuria om. in S, though the commentary has it. 


=e, a ARANYAKA I 95 
fafcat vant gat S Geert worancafais 4S gat yA" 
faa weneafaftat waa: | wat waa zy WaT 
HAMA: VEN NatMaAepssat: Wat yar- 
aft | BA Geelet: 1 wat A Aeeter maa warfa 
deus | aA: Yaa | at wafanfafeaer’ war- 
afanindtenta cae quam wate vata | wat 
Vafam F wratai afer afwer yx agate ara’ 
tafe ufaeaita acd feat mamearfy azifa qe 
ufafrsiat gana ufreraimata fret fe gaia 
wa spat daabat faogmaaafdurfaceaca 
gee: afafea: | re UTE Teel HATATAATET | 
Bq aera rem fay awasararaafad 1 wa 
Aeateal: | AT UAT’ 1 AT qectar: Laat a qeetet 
TAT UTA AeHaA: Feeleat wat uferaia weAreat 
Te: faa aeanraarafa araarad anata’ fe 
FAIA: DATA WeTeATAS Wa wan” 


mat Fait waad a stat Watt qarsttfA- 
FearHats ITT THT afaga aeated aafatae- 
waa wenaa weaeud nvisafefa | wa eater: | 


2 a G. $ omTATa: KR; qualarat K. * yaa A. 

* © ° 
5 fauet — vafanfag om. F. 6 arfaat A. 7 arfamire A. 
8 Sq WTATY FSSTET: dis F. 9 SATAT K. 10 Numbered 18 in 


A, E, K,L; 18,2 in F,G; 2 in D. 


96 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 4, 3- 


DIU SF Fecal: MWA Hla aaatfa t are! Tat- 
Wifi darafasra a weit qarsifracaranteey- 
ats aN waa aaqd aad wufafiwera 
wemata weaeay nsafeta | AA TeelVwr | AUT 
a qeeter mWarafiasta daata 1 sift Tar- 
wifi weaaat Sorat aifwedl qaifaaeargfan- 
a an ana’ ahaga gene arafafa: sari 
Sq nena nema Teqeud aMsafefa | wa ge- 
aeat: | MTA A Geter: wag ata daa da- 
alfa w3u’ 
N SAAT GAT Sears: i! 


ADHYAYA 5, 
aw’ waft at a ze aanafefa im vataninia- 
waatantate at wareet fagaa: i at vata 3 
wrArat ofaer ate aT fase vata 
fagefaa at aareqauty 24 4 wala eat TI aT: 
WUT! Bet warqure wafa aarurefaa ar 
wared edly sa a area ea at Wa Aeclenr: | 


1 Tn this section the MSS. of S appear to have been defective, 4 
only A. 3 Numbered 19 in A, E, K,L; 19,3 in F,G; 3 in D. * Text, 
A,R; tft waa aCe (ayaTcUs L) wgatswra: (6 wy: only L) K, L; 
afa SAAS WTS: D; AGA sears: F,G; no colophon E. 

1 ayt D, 5, L. 2 Ware L. > uafaufatater om. F, G, but 
added by G sec. man. ‘ WIT A, E, G. 


-I, 5,2 ARANYAKA I 97 


MIU A Yeatar: wea watfa deus. aAaTAafA 
TIGA: Lea arenfaur ar za ura: aw staat 
at WM WAtsasatssy F ura wuss diag 
caeTaa | Set qi yA ser’ we 
saute’ afte iat: ager vata ufverar wa fan- 
fast 3 yRoaqerer:” amat aaaaa afenfad 
agar ayy ufaemata i fadtar asue waa ai 
mMaat aq a aut va 4 mat arrqegaia 
dard data | gaan: waft fa a frediiaa 
aaainaa wears aaaquited sai wa- 
aM TUG 


Dat Re AAAI wre fareqay’ fafae? 
eulfa weeretat mematay wa 1 atfaearay 
vata | qaeta Fehagariaty fafad euiitft i a 
Za wen wa wet fafae erm a faarafa 
Tearragaridty fafad cutis aenerhatafaca feen- 
am fafasiafaan’ fafafafaea fafacaaatata- 
fam fram sa ah aa A aT TW aula wat 

SURTATEG ° aR, 7 Aqure:F,G. § om. G; attfa . 
: ara A. 10 Numbered 20 in A, E, F, K, L; 20,1 in G; 1in D. 

lawarel * freraar.c. °fafaea. * weraragaa,c,K. 
5 aTafaeit G. 6 OBWo A; °AALG; HAT R in commentary; °A@ D, E. 


KEITH H 


98 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 5, 2- 


Hit Ua waa AAaifafa WAI AAS WAA- 
AT SAATAMASS | AAAI AA AAU ey- 
tat feast geitdoarat aradiaae aaa: 
Saga aaa stata Paraaaaguaa | si A 
andissafafa aa astdiaaquafa i art wzafa 
eed 3 art: afant aeaaaaa ager’ | 
Var WaNse VAAATAAM Wal BaaRAa- 
aifa | se fra aatgqufafa aerquarear: aargaata 
an 4 wear: Wasa” ATI aTqastia 
qa AA arquracqraratefa WATE At ATFAAT- 
aaaat Ma: aaaqear | fas: sara AB farsi 
sarrearaeal | atfava ufceutta afaetsarattr i wa 
At AE VATA ae eft aga euayqear | yit- 
FAN FT AUAAAUTA TA FT UAT TAKARA ET GAA 
ze wlaas 82 aquifaataa eaaqear | fedta 
aay a: arad" wt ft Tt ea a” AAMT Ala 
asa” atfwiafa ata faattaar ufteuta warea 
faatanaa ufceeata wen 


7 WWATACAT B in text. 8 gia F. ® q@aR_R in text. 
10 gftio ra; White 1. 1 4D, E; ate R. 2 iT om. E. 
18 qaTaR; AMGTIG; AL. 14 Numbered 21 in A, E, G, K, L; 


2y, 2\in' hs 2 in D, 


-I, 5,3 ARANYAKA I 55 


nafaqqutag sen a ta afanttfa aeae afi 
uaqatiaatem GUAySt Ie a Uaferaets fasa 
fara ar fad wie wa nifad ofvare:smaAAa 
nafaearana: ofafaeta i ofafrefa awd Fe Ai 
aq faaanetn waft i ntaer afaqara aefefa 
VAI F AREA UACEUASTGT HIF | BAT TAT 
anuauaread aay aarteh aaalieh ar 
UACKUATT ET RIA ATA HAT BahyRqey sai- 
aq | cafes aft aenfaaen 3 fraeat uae 
RAM HAA Ha’ TAS fae ages aad 
FEET FERU AT Unektaenst GAA 1 MtfaAra 
aisota AMAA | aM At Met HAA AAT 
faa sft awed fafaaranarfen RuRAe ag aT 
untae fara fara aie feat wat wa q- 
fad ofataesieaa aafrerraara: Ufafretar 
ufafaefa a wa ae Aut Va faaaarm aft 
qaraua fraurargy safaaraa ufiuent 2 
aU VARTA ET KAA | WUSTAT ASAT VTSIGeT 
fa Aled BAAR GACH TT VACATE SUA 
BIAtaee Gaara Alafaha Aaa WRIA Tala 
eed 3 aaa aafamMs SeIaAAaT AHA | 
1 ud Ss. * UAATIAA omitting the rest, F. * fama A. 


4 ATAATAT BR in text, 


H 2 


100 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 5, 3- 
ao @lanea Sadea efa AAaAcel TATA SH AATAT- 
Th AT VACSLARATET AAT GAA I 31‘ 
 SAALAMAATTAT VTA SATA: i’ 
loft DAA TATA Il 


4 Numbered 22 in A, E, K, L; 22, 3 in F, G. 5 Text, A and, 
omitting the second ofa; L; GPAs ATA: yl afa WYATT Wats | EG: 
qfa ugatcwta: ware: D; tft Wea BTA wyAlswTa: y K; 
E continues after the number UQ AQT aaa | ae faqgarae sat aT 24 
afaafcfa ia ay ae arcana <a i ay wafa 1 avast garifa 
stafa | waray cfu: ua: | we yeetet: 1 at wea faecfa arat a 
az: | afezta yaay Aefafa nfauaa ae Sex afefa wfrwaa | agtH: 
Scare: ufaufefa 1 fearttace ufwttars: 1 acfaara waft ya: 
te urfears: | acs: fa tga Dgafafa | wag a afcararfiara- 
ayatata safa | a ST Te Teas ese aa Yaa eft 41 aTaat arte 
quan drat ateat xfer Wea Fatfzets:1 wht aC Sthutafa- 
TCSATIAA: | AY ARTAAA | WA ABTad WaTflC 1 A al TH 
aarft 1 feartaTst | wer yeeleteras: | aes: | ae aera afefa 
Mal He at i cfs WaatTMA | This appears also in F and G, with the 


variants noted below, but not in the other MSS. It forms, of course, a sort of 
Anukramani of the contents, and E has similar notices at the end of each Aranyaka. 


a Before this, F, @ have at Wet faecfa qeat 9 ae: 1 afeeta yaay 
sasfafa ufauaa: wage zaay: wae | afefa ufaqea | These three were 
obviously omitted accidentally through the identity of three and six. b fearrata 
age: F, G. ¢ om. F. d aé — ufa om. F, G. e <a— <fa 
om. F, G. £ 4G; ALAA om. F. & om. F, G. 


II, 1, 2 ARANYAKA II 101 


Uwe fata i 


ApDHYAYA 1. 


UA WM UAAAEAMMA | AIA WATaaT- 
rar a aaa Asma aU: | TeRAAeAT 
ast & frat aeraigeen staf fares gee 
reat yaaa: vaAra ef a faanit ua z 
frat seraaighit at a at sar asifeat sara- 
Aaarnatta aaifa agraararaer: | RN saHA- 
fam fafa =ff at zat: aat artafin fafaer 
TAHATIAA | ARS Te yartaafiae 3 wa ARRaA- 
meaAmafes: | cart ef wm fata ata 
aaara fem’ afta anfae:! van 


veayrafat Foust ach wfeeaateafaana 
gfadiat ete aaafaeta afed fara 1 aearfaratsaa- 
Wdisaa Me aaagqa | safceaaraaaieay at 
aq Unarafiaagq waa aM argrarsaatina 
Saa de WaNAA | WAAa Meqaagqa: verarete 
adafaem fed fara nerararfeasars aaa 


1 f@@ here and below R in text, but the words are clearly quoted in their 
Rgvedic form. 4 TAT A. 5 fez R in text. * safast: F. 


102 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 1, 2- 


saa dé adage | wafieanay | sareaary | ea 
warqeanaag HerasafwMAerAeia fra | TA 
qeaaga azar glad war Aa ara s AMAA S AA 
ae adagqa i ahaa warea qaraitel wat | Wal 
MUSA SAAMI AA Saat Le AIAAA | Tega’ eg 
mrafaana faanfaa i ooTeAaraea AAT BAT | 
AY AYHSAAMATISaAaT ete VAAYA | AATA- 
Sina saa athicad aaaaraa starts vara yat- 
fa ananls aaa Oth Tas WeIRATA- 
aaa suai afer aaa | dfeenaaaefaqAs 
gradi de aagfaeta afed farsi we fade WATSE 
deat aaata ze facta: Deil's afed aaafa aafa- 
Maral | Hal Fal Be Aafa i A ARR waEM- 
gaat ATA: ue 


HAA Aa: Ale: i Varad Tat Sar Sarat Tat as 
qua TA MIG Sala Ta saaa Tat Tat War 
TH WA: Data Tal Zea Zea Tat Hal Baal Tet 
avaral tr: aa afed HA HAAG Geet TAU TT | 
a waa ataaawenfemaa: | feat = ar 
aga wraia feces: Ta ya eGR F Ta 
Az usu 


1 were G. : 2 JAM G. 
1 waa? RK. 


-II, 1, 4 ARANYAKA II 103 


@ WVEPT WGA AAA FRA aMUepat ora 
TAG GRA AATATUe AAS FTAA Wa: We 
TIA UAATA | AGAACAVaT HE WANT] | VE 
qWMrassttagewMad | aa A Hfarasastaget sar 
Set Fafa NAT’ Jara Zea AAeITTEWTat TaT- 
24 W321 BA Aaeatahatasaaa aft saad 
Thaw svaqahaa: facerq i at wat: wefsaz: 
fara: BI AA arena: | waa sfafssat 4 
wannfare: fareq Fe a afeanmieqraAeE- 
equate | at waaeMTaratigeam rata 
Sara ee Wot ureifa wera ufaardifa 1 avyent- 
ACACAAPUAATAA | WYRM ACTA ATA | 
AAAMAT~AAAaTaas | AT seas 
SATAPUAATA A | VIM TEMAS Sra SUAA | 
Tema 3 Tatars WA 
sta 2 at ae faeorat are: wae feerara4 
aga vafa a wd 3e1 at afeaaTeqTaAwER: 
qoaRifa i mt saved Ga: THE afana aaa: 
pug xe wires aaa ufaeritfa 1 areotfag- 
anaea 1 aa: wifawendea 1 AIA faMETAeT | 

1 aud G. 2 ga G. 3 Felt Ba R; cp. p. 68; J.R.A.S., 1908, 
p. 366. * qaG; Aom Kk. ° Sata R in text. 8 ayfte E. 


7 This clause is omitted in G. 


104 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Il, 1, 4- 


aa: uifamenqeq i orm: ofawamrTa nag sefae- 
AgTaAAaT | HeAgTaTS IW Tz uY seafarag 
Fam i ta saaeaqraatea afad aaa wa aq 
Raat | aeaefaaiaay | AACA a 
waifa ust 


ad eat: awa a auld: UlAtTad Tatas 
AMIMAVIaaANfedt 3 AralsAaqeeca Ta wfat- 
Wa aprtraenraferacan aa fer: at a wa 
ufent davNsarafaar taal we Bs sanfactiean- 
fadiaaca watt i ure wm a afsatate fewest 
4 7aR aaa a eaten ufeat at wea dari 
fafae dere an aeturara ¢ at we ata ais 
zit 4 Ua Aci amd afefa mea’ afamar- 
afeumentagtagiea 4 aay: Ta a atfaaier 
a afe zat ata yar aefa an earenfed wafa a 
VAAAMA Id Ae wy 


qq arataarata cerarfa' weae aret aaa 
aaah: ag fat ad fe aradl’s aa ararha- 


° AF A; VHT EF; VTS G. 

1 @ RB, 8S, with the MSS. See explanatory note. ataaaA Ga 
MaAIA D, E. 3 Aa K. 

* gata G. 


-Il, 1,7 ARANYAKA II 105 


acta i aefa ge a Ud afadaet a wd Fei weN- 
ferstarta nat freiqaqecararata st 
UAT HM Feit a odfivrsd qatirsre- 
warscdiaraaa | aeafa zat va wife ar- 
matt wat aaa aaa a waaTercai 
Berd Fei Aeaafaut : wow wofAas F arr 
wy de aa TNorafa 1 afaagqarafafa a ae aet- 
aa dfania i aoa ua 4 ufafiacnfaat a ay 
au @ ufafracia i a with a fader efit 
aida ay fagdia ae sar va fen: 1 a adafa 
qantas grata 1 aa agar 
Saatat a aahafea | ag ete wrWargaa | als aat- 
WW WU! FRA CAMAMAATAT: OUT FRAT 
fagay’ wa aarfa yarafadtieara: waa gent 
fava’ Tara ue 


Saat feats Gea 1 Ta ara get gfaat 
Sihrarararaar sas fatat: eqeartenteTear- 
ginaaamt aa fant ufvara: yfaal afar aaeq 
grat aacaireararare tat vata AT ATaTATAt 
saa araenara saat gfaararra a waaat art 


2 areagar. SF @atA. 4 MTT ARintext. © BRT A, ComR, 
1 USATETA bis FF, G. ? araay yfaat vis F. 


106 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 1, 7= 


fart ae 1 waa qeraenieel a ayant cel al WA 
SUITE Flat AAA Fs WATaeaaan 
mu fant ofcactisafcel a aga | araerafwea 
maeq aE ata vata ara aaa 
stad araenata sian’ SmaftEea 4 aaa 7 waHnt 
mre faafi Fei aaa qet drafera Ter 
gfeaare “ANASAUTRATSw Tifa: DAN Baga - 
ag: font uftarat aienfera | araeg qaraeat- 
fea SrA waa’ ATT aaetat saa ara- 
wala saa feaarferma a a waaai weet fauta 
Fei MAW yet fers weara ferat sandals 
oan feyania wear ae Taoeacaefataatia 
GWTa FAW Vaan ara fart ufcarin fewa we- 
Aral aay fant aaeq WEARS Tal Aah 
AIS aaa Maa araenat a site feat = weA- 
aa q wqaat arse frit ae Aaa AeT BT’ 
ARUAA BA AEi TAA GTA HAT aautsy”A 
Tai wa eitaaa Ba: fant afvataraa aRus | 
AACA Waey AVUATAAA stat vata ara 
Maat start araeaai a sihdAsut a aaa Fa 
waar Aaa fifi Fez v9 


5 omed 8. * wafa arat om. G. 5 qa §. 
5 4 — Bay om. F, G. 


-II, 1,8 ARANYAKA II 107 


was saa’ afi afeeary wad 4 AMACAA 
fanz AS aga WT WA afragqas at faqerat 
ganags waft | ure w A afer afeca 
VACA Mes? Al CHAT Ae Bi ASalaea Aral Aa sa: 
aan efai a we fiitag: aa AAT areoTTe FE- 
faftiwaraaa 1 fifa = 4 fart ward aA 
cue feearan agar vaft a va ae | UalsT: 
a wa: a we ufmaniaa i a afafia ear 
saat TF RaWarernfe qa wifeerq wa- 
fafa 1 smafaitaqued © WTR: | AaAMITAAT WTS 
faqarar agen vafa a wa Fei a wa Aaa 
Zi ageqraar i sasista aqua yatta sauda 
aa am: oa a ausafa | WAR AAT’ aatia- 
fiana até aa aaa anifa dara awduai'’s 
BART Vaal | aT want fagdtar fast aA fa- 
aa fa faaiafaf fafeata ea wah's 
AAA AaT Ram | AM = al waaay aaa: 
VA FA CEA a Us Aq 4 UF Fe ub 


 sacafadtareagan MAAS EAT: 


1 aq A; at the beginning STUT3: R. 2 are E. 6 ie B, G. 
4 @ UG ATU: om. F. 5 gra F. 6 waar E. " feat G, 
omitting fa. ® Text, L, R; fa Dacarcuas faniag WaT: A; 


108 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 2, I- 


ADHYAYVA 2. 


wa HH wlaMTETEdT Fwy AUhA HTT 
ala’ AVMUMIT AT a wa quia iA WA AATATAI- 
Sara aha yeagay wate A aad TANEPAT- 
WIM SAAN saya ITAA WAT Baz | 
a zd aa Real cd ufec faa a afed aq Beat 
ed ufee fag AMIRI ZITAT 
VARA VTA | WIM Ft Wasa Ae: A aa’ 
IANS Ula ACM ANFAACAA AAS IAA TAA 
aaa | awe fad fasardtafed fara ngewe fad 
fasardtafed fara’ wanfeenfaaeecifeartaa ea- 
WA VARI HAA At Cal BAA A a: VAT aA 
sfa a deal Saad Boa: aaat ara sfa Warara- 
CAMA SITY UAT waa 1 a se a 
araratssatad ufed fara a afee af uorarar 
Salad alee fart WATCATMANCAA SITGAA VAN 
AAT NAN 


afa fadta arc@ wealswra: K; fadrarce’ vedtowra: 9 FG: 
WUATSWATA: D. 


i aTag F. 4 ATATATYARTA om. F; AQaATa E. 3 AWat E, 
as in Brhaddevata, III, 116. 2 Wie Ff iD! 3 ara | Tat 3 eat G. 
5 wate E. ° az — fay om. F. * AATETASAT om. F. 


® Numbered 9 in A, E, F, G, Hy, K, Li; 3 in D. 


-II, 2, 2 ARANYAKA II 109 


Vy va fas: Wat A aster wy faafa afz- 
Vit AAISIARAIRSH FIT VATA any | 
a eat aqaaa 4 a: Vaai afae eft w azar aa- 
aad 4 a: aani afae ofa aarafarwonafay 
WIAA WANT Bay | a se Baafanrnafed fara 
a afe¢ aaafaornafed fea wareaareanm- 
TTA FTAA VARA AAA | A ze VaMqUqaA 
afeé fara a ufed aamauaaa afed fas aT 
FATA RIMIAATY TATANA UAAT HATA | ats aal- 
eefad aaaarta aa ad aa Aefefa A eT ATANa- 
ARTA AHTATM AAAS A FIAT UA 
VATA | TA ANTa anit MAHA TAM IAT ATTA 
faaraaa UAAA AAA | VA a WI Py: Fat. 
TMS AA FAT: APA yraisaa WAIGMAIs- 
farsa UAAaA BAA 1 VA al WIT Wa Aw: 
APMSMAS aA A Aa: APAMsMeaisaa ARAT- 
CUUMMCda BATMAN UAAT BATA I VT A ua 
aaa asifa ama afe a afeaia aarha yatta 
ufe AmIMme aeMefaRrTaeA TAA ATA | TE 
aT BAT a: aa aT: aria at Saafrecia 

1 @ R in text. 2 YTATUT: A, D, 5, K. ° WTATYT: D, E, K 


pr. man. Both Asyalayana Grhya Sitra, ITI, 4, 3, and Sahkhayana Grhya Sutra, IV, 
10, 3, have W°. 


IIo AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 2, 2- 


a ver: wae aa: aia a Waafreefa wen- 
VAL AMAIeAUaaagd VARA AAA | AT AT Tar: 
Bal Wa: BA Aer: Ba Atal Usa rela: IT wa 
BIW wy saa fara wen’ 


fauifad anes: tfauanfte safssare’ i a era- 
fantiaren Jentae wile AAT fa wares | 
afas sara Wa fad FA wart: a a Wa 
fadta dafa ia eafanahtieane geilaa’ wa 
Waa fad waArtaa | afas vara we fea a A 
WAIT: FAT WA Wels Weft 1 a erafararhra- 
am Jered wa AAS fra waa | afr 
vara wa fad 3A wataen at F@ cadtfaia 
ara waraa stdtafata i afar sara ura at 
BTALYTR UUed IT: Vara aaa mA Aa q vy 
aafa a waa’ Baa aar fert faetsia wa asa 
fas efaa weaifaaas qaaarenfa Nara usu’ 


Tal 2 Jedlaza daa aS af aaa wa 
Ue At ANT: A BAT A GIMITW F WU | wT wT 


* Numbered ro in A, E, F, G, H, K, L; 2 in D. 


1 suftqaate all MSS.; RB, 8. ? gedlaedtage F. 8 yaa FP. 


Coy 
4 aa faarfaaa D. ° Numbered rr in A, E, G, H, K,L; rin F; 3 in D. 


«Il, 3,1 ARANYAKA II III 


a afzarafant afaet wa aa waa GA TAG 
Sact faafaara rating Sat arama orara 
TMA AA AYA ANY Cart | Wal Fe Jeilacad dui 
TY A UA Jeriteeqa daa ufguaaquat 
aeaty vata aah wadaMteet azatfu vata 
aaa wilh tterfa | wat sé geilad 
aud A al VAS Jenlagay auqa qwamM- 
NAA CAAA AAAS yaaa: ya eaat wef a’ 
Ud Fei AaSE Aisa Asai alsza | TemaAfaar 
Ba UA WITT | Vag SAAT gn’ 


 seintatemtaraya faitarseara: a’ 


ADHYAYA 3. 
at zal Miata wafauqed ae yarfed adgq- 
fasfa a anfafad i gfadt argqcrare sat satel: 
Hay a MmMad aatayvararete aaqfawaaa- 
arafa | wad Zz A aataral vata a wa ae 1 


1 Vat A; Ua R in text, no doubt a mistake due to the MSS. as often putting 
m for an assimilated n before a nasal. Cf. II, 1, 5, @ for Ft. 2 @ om. F. 
3 a G. * Divided | &fa in R. 5 Numbered 12 in A, E, H, K, L; 
a2,4 in FF, G; 4 in D 6 Text, A, L,R; <fa fadta arce fadtar 
sumaie K; fadtarcea fadtaicwrae Gc; afa fadrasura: v; 
no colophon E. 


1 Wa om. A. 


te AITAREYA ARANYAKA Il, 3, 1- 


Afaasa Wate a Acetaatel Aaa AaIaIT- 
aq aay fast aaa aaa water satires 
AQAAcaaral Me AAAAAAATAATAT BATT 
Hd aa aAlaa | aU FA Gaara vafa a va 
421 aieais a arate a Acletferaaral War waR- 
may | aetadaaaisa oryTisarearatyaa- 
adie mrayaisefa | Ha a VAIMIeAT: FRIST 
faut’ fafgarasarea aafant camera BATT 
ata wormnita aasae vata i anita ¢ aarti 
Maa a wa ae nq: 


Tey TTA faa Aargqa erfaya: i sTafraa- 
maa aa fer cM saraarfaert ae 1 safy- 
aaming fe wat quan fad cE | oT Aatfa- 
mua wy fe cast qua a faafaaty 1 gee 
mafaauara a fe aaa daadat faa aefa 
faatt wsafa ae werd ae Blas AMATATa- 
was Aas: | HAAtat wTaTawaraaae warhafaara 
a faa qefa a fag outa a fae: wed a 
Asta A VaTaa aafet Gas? fF wrar: wan’ 


2 om R, a aqfaut S. . TACT F. 5 Numbered 13 in 
AVE, RG oui 09) ean BGs ar fini) 
1 STqay G. > Wat F. * Numbered 14 in A, E, H, K, L; 


TA ecm Delis aas, 622m 1D). 


mile 334 ARANYAKA II 113 

a Ua Yee: age: aa staan | we feargqaswA 
Aad qaoaasHAAA saa AVA aay aTaAyt- 
Maa ARAL a Ue yee: was qewi ASeA- 
fafa wie a sartisa aaifgd eter’ tae 
arat awat at yfadt a: orm: a? ag: 1 a uy 
ag: Wats: OIMISUTA Aa sera: aATAS I AT 
UAT eaat: TIMTETAaa fafseray: Bd Aa aT 
fift maa waaaaat afuata 1 a wy aTafa- 
AMAURY FIs: | a wa qa: usafansfaaa 
equa waAenfa uy: aa: 1 a wa zai 
auaTal aaa vaferam: wafan afin TAT- 
Fare: Satan stfu aaarfa geek at wae 3’ 


aE 4 Wa as AaeaVcay Cares a dafafaT 
TA 4 WN ANtseaeeay’ Val swacal aeAHeeAA | 
neamatay frgeaet anewhafdn usafantaty 
RIAA Wat Tet FeKe Usafafh atadt 7TIy- 
faurgedt freauefa sree: fact eferm: aay saz: 
UY: GSATAMSTAA | wage: Veifa wa SAT- 
afa wage: uinetfa ogi Sugafa usagi fau- 

1 gaye F. 2 STAT A, F. ° @ ATY: bis F. * SATA: vis PF. 


° Wega inserted in G; SAAT: om. F. ® Numbered 15 in A, E, H, K,L; 
15,3 in F, G; 3 in D. 


1 24 — Sag om. F, G. Waa E. 


KEITH I 


TI4 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 3, 4- 


arate mea wafa i wd aa wa faa 
aqrert Tartine: Bat faut frraeparstterat 
aed a wat i wend aaa wmf em’ ania 4 
adamant fe de en ena CUNT AMa 
ameaagq i af athe acifa naa San fated a 
SEAAANA Ula! Arewencatta usu’ 


Wal Fe Gerla daag | Hanes AlaTSeal AeA 
Ufasataa fermmeagarata \ fagaeaan aita- 
FAAS TLULAAT | aeMAAAT | AIEAAT Saat. . 
ufas fa far: watt adtafa un af a weg ora 
waaaaaaen vata | a eat wel aerwaifa- 
Vata zq guys: Unfit =z meget as 
wire wari fe nda’? AAaSMATAl STAT ary 
aati qentafrareres 3 HA VT ARNT at 
saat aan: WHE: ufegrMamaarn aaa: We: 
afega waa gent aaa: uftgat 1 awa aut- 
ASIA A Bea Fert | a Fatt wet Faw- 
wafifandad zq goss: Dafa ze ane Fret 
QI MMA Yer ATAIgeMtAataaTeaT WU 


‘ Qa om. F. 4 UT4 om. F. 5 Numbered 16 in A, E, H, K,L; 
16,4 in F,G@; 4 in D. 

1 Ua E. * See explanatory notes. ° Numbered 17 in A, E, H, K, L 
17,5 mf, Gs 5 in D. 


-II, 3, 6 ARANYAKA Ii 115 


Tal Fe qertera Wa AT A wai jataeaay 
eUASATATTTN waa water watdinfrarqe 
bill 9 yaa sala: | aeMAPAUT | aTaAETUaHefH- 
met fe sara vata aaafafafa gedt doa- 
art aaafa: | yaaa at SF avpar wer | 
OAT IEG Wi aa sft meRaageineangy eo 
waft ATRIA ge AAG aa aaa 
@ Al VT As: UTA’ Fam weaHeesa Aeneafay 
fanafad wat aarad eat were aa afi 
agfarel qararacfad ATA a: aa Tw: a: aT 
Msfata at AaIAy | AAMT Bes Aral aTaR a 
eau aet aarwatfatant: gat fe as ara: 
aed qefa tl AAAI AA Aeqd Aaa gay sufaacs: 
Tafa a Vana waagad aeafaawarar aia 
a Taft a vara | Aare A aeaaA AAA I OUaT 
Unfemaart senetsfata aaferaifaaerare afe- 
eG Taal HAMA FT WAM Alo SMT 
saad waa i a aed Afa aaranfiare 
atfasttad Aa’ AAA SAA | AHS Wa Calas AT 
career fagdiadia aaifaaarmarad yar 
afa i at a at ard ae wet wa fase: a dofafan 

1 gedtaedaea F. 2 So I read for WAMfa of the MSS. and edd. 


See explanatory notes. : Tat A. - ara FG: E ai F, 
12 


116 i‘ AITAREYA ARANYAKA W436 


DAT A Aa asAal AMAA aAasTAlal AKT AlAT- 
eat waft | aSl zeny a uraisy asad 
wearafat za fac sq anticand fe uratsa 
qs wenaafaafae witeq G0’ 


Wal SQ Jenlaea AWA AAT: a TE A yATAA- 
fuafa: | a a wqanfas vararafuatd ae faqar 
aA TAT AA gE we afeca WA: Derst 
yg slag Use nagagea eau wraahda- 
wart 3 BWA Ha RATA BrAArradl 3 | aaenfeaai 
Sifed Vad AAMT ShidaTs wenqed 
WW wafers Ad wanders shrea | tsar 
MAARMAAGA BMA AaTsaAaMnqamrafa- 
AMT Waa Aaa MaMa saa EU- 
Ug saa CIV TTaAMala w9N" 


Tat TAT: 
aeqt watay wate i gat gar af andaetar | 
WI AAAT AA yA 1 AT ear: Ba Va afar ua 


° AAA — AWA dis G. 7 Numbered 18 in A, E, H, K, L; 18, 4 
in F, G; 5 in D. 
T om. G. 2 offaAA@ S'? in text; S'45 in commentary, * Numbered 


rg in A, E, H, K,L; 19,7 in F,G; 7 in D, 


-II, 3, 8 ARANYAKA II 117 


FeRweRaia FRA | ya Bat ah adaefa 
WAM AAA FA AWA AS Ca: A Wa Vater ua 

waa sifafa aa Aft | ware: Ht Fe’ Alea- 
fam i afaqa aan wafaeq | aTATaal aAqU- 
sgasty? usu 

aera aATaAsSHA shy AA aT: AAQaT afer 
Aa UATE FAUT | Sat BrHAafa faery usn 

aa ara fad way | Aaadlgargqa | yHid 4 
aaa | ceaeta WaT wu 

SM tft aa warmAefata i war ee Jedtaed 
dua AM Al UA Jerlazam daaw siguaag- 
uu agar vata arafat qearquise? azarfa 
wafa i sftatataa sitarecrsatit sitargi sfrarec- 
fafa | BARTAAT Sa Cate aNyfa:’ ATA cet 
aq ga aa: aaa ded oratsfufretea | TeaAA- 
fami Aa ad AAM sate fataafasrataan 
walaata we’ 


> ~ 
\ seaacafartarcra qAtats era: 0’ 
1 afe 5. 2 s fa F, G. ° fa F, G. * WE DFG; 
@ K, L, 8. ° argfa A, 5, G. 6 Numbered 20 in A, E, H, K, L; 


20,8 in F,G; 8inD. 7 Text, A, L; efa facta aca qeatatswra: K; 
famttarces qalarswra: FG; Xft qalatswrs: D; no colophon E. 


118 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 4, 1- 


ADHYAYA 4. 


MIA A zeaa waa daa fat a 
Saqa | Blaly Ya eal A eAlalaAgaA | WATT 
aadtarara:' 1 wetsar: dtu fed at: ofmeraica 
adaa: yfadt Ad at AVATAT BT: 1 a fata A 
Bla BAIS Gat sft | Asa Ta Ged AAEaI- 
qs | wqaudaniaaa ae factan aE 
quraparasfa: i afaa faceeat arfearat ora: 
mIutay: | oafaut facdaraehar waaea 
sitet: 1 aut facet adrai art aratfeq: 1 
nfgcuaa ad otafa ata arefiaraaa: | 
wea farhian® gaara aaa: | afefachran 
ara Sarasa: i fwa facia fared 
WA BMT: uA : 


WT VAT Caal: Fal BhaMeaIdgy ord aaTafan- 
APMATAA | TT VARTA Aa a: Waetfe? afer. 


1 ogy: Bohtlingk. 2 afeat M, Roer and Rajarama’s edd. = fax- 
faaqa N z facfazqat corrected into facfaaa M. * In the Upanisad, in 
the MSS. and ‘edd. of text and Sahkara’s commentary, in Rajarama and Bohtlingk’s 
edd., and differently in T, the Khandas are subdivided into paragraphs.  Sdyana’s 
division of sentences is quite different, and as neither division has any authority the 
numbers are ignored. 8, T, Rajaraima’s ed., and the MSS. of Sankara end: ¥fa 
WAH, QUE; | Numbered 21 in A, E, H, K, L; 21, 1in F, G; rin D. The 
Upanisad MSS. and edd. all prefix Sta. 

 arararfaqTa , Rajarima’s ed. here and below and in Jivananda’s ed. 
(cited in U as fa). 2 warTetfa F. 


Ai ae ARANYAKA II 119 


afafent waAeafA i Aba WAMAAa HATA a 
Tisqaofata | aPaSAATAAal Bata GF aisTA- 
stain | aa: YRaAtaaal WATER ania qeat 
ara ar i aT wadtaeraad ofaafa it aframya 
qe urfawarg: oat vat afaa oifanerferrag- 
venfaat mfanfen: at wat AUt mfarsrafiraa- 
aaa alata wat ae? OfawaA AA AT’ Bea 
mifarAgaa wat ah orfawerat tat vet frst 
nifaray | qATATfaNe AAATATaPaTAhasastettr A 
Baden ai’ cameaqrsareararg arfeat acretie 
TM HA a cand efejar arraararay- 
atau waa: uu 


a faa 3 wlars ICI CIL GLE gat sft | 
asa saaacapa shana afitsarad | at Ft at 
afwaa 4 Ad | aeage GUsRfsaTiaTaratha- 


$ aq — Fat om. A, added by Colebrooke with waar. 4 eafy T; 
cata Bohtlingk. 5 at N, Roer and Rajarama’s edd. ® Numbered 22 
in A, E, H, K,L; 22,2 in F,G; 2inD; afa fade: wq@ug: S, T, and MSS. of 
Sankara; in smaller print in Rajarama’s ed. 

Q arar A. 2 agagfaee M, T, Jivananda’s ed. ; aca U (one MS. ka). 
In Saikara’s comm., Jivananda’s ed., and five MSS. of U (ka, kha, ga; cha; ja) have 
ead. Three MSS. of U in Anandatirtha’s taka here and two on p. 42, note 3, have 
ead. Rajarima and Roer read acaefaes Aa, and clearly this is what T had 
in view. The Te is not recognized in the commentaries, and seems a later addition 
to the text. Béhtlingk reads °@Aa. — * So Bohtlingk for °@T of MSS. and edd. 


120 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 4, 3- 


TAIATA A BA | A AaAaaMeUVEhraATeA 
CATS | MIATA BATA | 
a WSaMTUAeaehoy Saas | Tae 
FARA IAAT TATA | a ASTATIASAET Sa- 
FATS | THAUa IAI tga | a 
WASAUAIA PATA | Taafargee- 
ATH aataH la TETAAT ARATE wala 
aT | wHAaaAIAIaAaa Ada 1 a 
VAAAAMARGSIA SAAAATIA | nharaafagey- 
dauafaaa adiqa i a wafsaameataqe 
SATAATE | AeMAafsyeacaa | Vasa 
Wel ARAVA Ts Bary a faa aa fad waa 
cifefa 1 a Saya anita nua efaia saa afte 
arated afe maeahorfad afe Wqa ¢e ate 
aaa ai af war we afe aaa edt aaaTaaAr- 
wufad afe fraa faqeaa’ aisefafa i a uaaa 
ata faeriaar arr areae | Ger faefaata are 
CHAMeAA | A Ay MAMI: NI Wanraaar 
Samaaatsaaraay sft t a Bat aRTeae- 
frafaerd atafesfefa | a waaa ged Ha” WAAAU- 

* FRG and so infra T. Bohtlingk reads THETA throughout. > BAT, 
Roer, Benaresed. °° -FHAWL— FARA bisN. 7 B WATT, Rier, Benares ed. 
§ YT; om. Rajarama. ° fayfac rT. 10 BA T, Réer, Bohtlingk; 
AAA rest ; FAG Delbriick; ATF fZTq Bohtlingk. 1! § prints as TeTAAAa? 


against Sankara and Sayana. 


a Oe ARANYAKA II I2I 


wa | eeHeNfart 3” | wanfecet atacet = A ATA 
afadé onifas” saa UTM Waal ea fe 
eat: | atrafaat za fe tar: n3n® 


\ seincafartarma VTATSeaTa: 


ADHVAYA 5. 


yea’ zat waatfemt mat vata 1 aengawed- 
MPM sHPITas: WTA faaft ager faai 
faaaasaata | cee weet TA" 1 feast Be 
Taft Ta AAs Ai aaa a feafe i arein- 
AIMIAaa Na araafa at arafadt arafarat vata | 


am afa M, Roer and Rajarama ; oTT3SA Bohtlingk, but cf. IT, 3, 7, &c. a o- 
faa? Réoer. bi Uti F. 15 Numbered 23 in A, E, F, H, K, L; 23, 3 
inG; 3inD; &fa gata: Gu: §,T, and MSS. of Saikara. 16 So A, 
L,R; fadtarcas agaicwns: FG; cfa agatsera: D; tft At Yat 
Srafaafe Tquicwrea: SATA: WBUN; CAAT fata ww: M; no colo- 
phon BE; Feary fans wecwa wqatowrs: | safsaegq waATSVTA: | 
ait aad | T; afa fadtarca qa ews: K. Rajarama follows T, correcting 
faata into °G. 

1 Before qaa, WOATA Tt afaiwa: is inserted in A, E, F,G, K,L,N,R, Ss Pe 


But though old the words cannot be original, and are not recognized by Sayana or 


Saikara. 2 {AA om. A. 8 Azag om. I. * @airy: I. 
5 aaa T, Rajarama’s ed. 2 TTA T, Réer, Rajarama and Jivananda’s edd., 
and two MSS. (ka, kha) cited in U; oY Bohtlingk. ’ gfa nazwa: qu: T. 


This must be due to a mistaken idea that the last colophon (see n. 15) means that 
there are four Khandas in this Adhyaya, whereas it really means that this is the fourth 
Khanda of the whole Upanisad. After araafa it has 041 treating this as a new 
Khanda. 


122 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 5- 


a at 74 faafa ats’ wa Hart sass fyaTa- 
aft 1a aR SHAS AShaTaaRNIMATAAs WTA 
aff 1 wat Slarat daar wa dant aA rar 1 
dem faitd wa’ | SISMTAATA GW: BAT: 
Dfiitar | aTaafaat SAT HAHA SALA: Tf 
fA: Waa Gasset | Weel Aaa wt Weay- 
faut? iy aaaaTAaeHE Cara afaarha fara 
Wi Al Wt Mada we waar facdtafafe 
mi Vasa aaAesa Wagar” | a va faataa- 
SUVA IRAE ST AaPATATATCAT- 
Aer: ATARI 
N weaafadtaags waa seas: 


® om. Bohtlingk. ° az om. N. wen xfa facia: que: 7. 
1 yfaftdraa T. This is an obvious error, and is borrowed from Sankara’s com- 
mentary. 2 Han afa gata: que: T. a6 aa REE | I; S has -yW 
as have U, Roer, Benares, and Rajarama’s edd. 14 Qu T. al el Eee 
T continues afa au: WUE: 3 and so S, U, and MSS. of Sahkara. Numbered 
24 in A, H, H, K, L; 24,1 in F, G@;_ not numbered in D; numbered 14 in R. 
Before the number, A, S*~°, Benares ed. (samvat 1941), and U insert AIT 
J (om. U) afi. See on II, 6. The words are not recognized by Sankara 
or Sayana, and cannot be genuine. ae Text: R; afa fadrarcea 
waatswre: A; tia fadta area Gacwra: L; vf facta arc 
was: K; faders Geatowra: FG; xfa wqatewta: D; no 
colophon E; Xfa WATS Gas: Mm; cearg fade arcwa waAatswra: 
wuterreg fatteats era: | A AT; 4 only N. Rajardma has TAACITCAA 


and then as in T. 


-II, 6 ARANYAKA II "123 


ADHYAYA 6. 


AUSTAIAA ATAU BAT: AF WAT | WA aT’ 
quia wa ar adi aa at Tenatfrafa aa at 
ard area a ar ere areata a fasratie 

e > e . : A ES 
Age AAAIMAAATA fata VATA Aut’ ¢fe- 
Ursa gia: waft: eae: ATTY! AAT aT 
afi. aadanta waTaS aratatfa wafer 1 wa’ 
FAG oe UE UNUM aa cal FAA W Wd ART 
vata yfadt agra art siitdiearitaa ~< 
qefaaata atsrtrafe sacha anemia’ 4 
aesifa? a Genta atfasnfa’ ara Ta: Feat 
efaat afaaé ofa aq vw uAfa = ae wTat 
ad amas” vara ofafed waTaaT” ta FST 
Ofte UA” FAIA UA WSATHATRT ATA gE 

1 Serer GF AfsAI: is here inserted in R. It is omitted by D, E, FG, H, 
I, L, N, T, and in Sitarama’s text, and by Réer and Rajarama. See on II, 5. GA? 
Max Miiller and Bohtlingk. 2 €q inserted in T, in Roer, Jivananda and Raja- 
rima’s edd. It is clearly borrowed from Safkara’s commentary. 3 WTA 
inserted in T; Wes in Réer, Jivananda and Rajarama’s edd. 4 aur om. I. 
5 gfat F; afta: om. Benares ed. 6 @ added in T. 7 gratfaa- 
ufa I. 8 qugatfa A. 9 sitfa only F; ACTA? Bohtlingk. 
10 The spelling with two j’s is supported by I, M, T, U, Rajarama and Sitaraima’s 
edd., against Benares ed., R and 8. ae Walaa om. F, G. a3 WHA D. 
13 Wala Ag om. L wang T. 


124 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 6- 
aqferest Sh aarararara: amiaara- 


wa 
l srmcafadtarwadas TETSEATa: 


uefa fantacy 


This ends the second Aranyaka, but the majority of the MSS. of the 
text, and of Sadyana’s commentary, and of Anandatirtha’s own com- 
mentary, and his /7k@, add a seventh Adhyaya, which is :— 


ADHVAYA 7. 


agy aafa ufafeat am a af ofafeaarfaa- 
TH ue Fea A at |: wi A AT neTdaarf- 
rTTardanyd afeanta at afeerfa? aaraay 
TaMICAAAA AAA THA ARITA Il 


\ sranttafantaraga ANAISEaTa: 0° 


16 efa aqa: GUE: ull T, U, MSS. of Sahkara; numbered 25 in A, BE, H, 
K, L; not numbered in D, F, G; 5 in N. 16 Text, R; <fa factarceaay 
wBTwTa: ug A; xia fadtarqws atowne: 1; <fa fade aca 
werswTa: K; fadrarcws wetowra: FG; aff astewre: D, M; no 
colophon in E, N; afa Tara fama ATTA UST SATS: | sutra qatar 
SUITS | HT ARIAT T. L adds facttarcwmas BATH | Rajarama’s ed. begins 
TaAACaATTUT, and then as T’. 

1 ofauifaae K, see onI, 1,1, in the Santimantra; Eggeling, India ORS Catal.,p.117. 

* weTete T, and Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda. ° ATSQT A here. 
* oHT3 A D. ° This occurs in A, D, E, F, G, H, I,K, M,N,0, QR, 8, 7, U. 


In T, however, it is placed at the beginning of the Upanisad, and in S at the end of 
Aranyaka V, and see also note on I,1, 1. Tt does not occur in most MSS. of 


-Il, 7 ARANYAKA II 125 


Sankara’s commentary, and it is omitted even in L, which is a complete MS. of all 
the text. . It appears clearly not to have been known to Sahkara. It is, however, 
known to Anandatirtha in his own commentary in the MSS., H and O. In the 


edition, U, of Anandatirtha’s commentary on Sankara, it is said: QAwWwe ate 
MEGeMAaMfansasy Maca wafaaagrara va Wad | 
ag start dtfaarat s fanaa Waa 4 aqyEtat 1 M, N, Q, and apparently 
Max Miiller’s MS., S. B. E., I, 246, n. 2, have U4 WHITE Aafaat afctaaray 
aaa (oo N,Q; Bay Waafcaraararad add. M) wifaaqt aaa: ufsa: 
arg] avdienfe | aa weriareiadamfaagaats aTIATCT T- 
UTA: | FASTA STUTS STATA ATSTAA | AUTH? &e., exactly 
as in Sayana’s commentary. The end is afa stanaTaTTS Zifaat aguit M; 
ufa aAATATaS iaaat @aATAT N. The question arises whether this wholesale 


borrowing was due to Anandatirtha or not. On the whole the evidence is against 
the view that it was. (1) It compels us to date Anandatirtha after Sayana, which 
is (a) contradictory to the accepted dates of either writer, and (0) cannot be reconciled 
with the fact that Sayana sometimes follows Anandatirtha closely in his commentary, 
ef. on II, 4, 3. (2) It is of course clear from the consensus of MS. evidence that the 
explanation of the last section was added at a comparatively early date to Ananda- 
tirtha’s commentary, but this could easily have happened, and as a matter of fact the 
alteration needed to introduce the extract was very slight, as Sayana begins: qe 
aafaai ufcanra ana wifat aed asta | ATS] AAA | The addition 
was very natural, since the fact that the Adhyaya is recognized by Anandatirtha in 
his own commentary shows that it had already in his time become a recognized part 
of the Aranyaka. In Jones’ MS. (Tawney and Thomas, Catalogue of Two Collections 
of Sanskrit MSS., p. 2) we have the commentary of Sahkara without the fika, followed 
by ‘Madhava’s’ commentary as in the edition. After II, 7, E continues: etc: ait 


quraifearat sufaat 1 aay aafa ufafeat 1 atsaarafa Faq 
area 1 gee € aT aaarfedt wit Hata | a TaAa q Aas ATAITATT | 
AT UAT SAATHST: | MAT AT TAH VATA AMAA | AAA AAT: | AAT 
ee gedtage We TITS CH! | Aa TS FEMaea WH AS AT UTA | 
aat xe sedtaed dad adaas | ate a ae ae Az a UT GET 
MAT AS a Marae Fz At E aT MATA TafTayre Fz | 
aat tg gedtaed dud we aft sarah | fratfad aagentfaay | 
we o ua faerara: | Ua eS SARAATST | AUT S: Tht TT ThA | ATA 


126 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Ba) yt 


farses Gere | ae ataferata etatfa 1 a Fat ura a 
WIA Hag | AUTAT Laas: | sergaufafa 3 wat safer | UA TIT 
UAHA | UT GT BST | UT Tagenf< | Mt = at Malaast | Wat F 
WE | GMa Vat | AlSaAaT | Tey WaT | we wat fasfay grat 
4 uz 1 eft: Sil cfa fadtarcat @aTHA! — The other MSS. end as follows: 
Nagn Taarafadiarcaa waatcwra: 1 fadtarceh Wars A; wen 
tfa aaatcaTa: wou cia fattaarcas FATA F; WSN Ni (rest as in 
F)G; tf anatsura: fadtarca: p; ag n Xft feats ACG SHAT 
SATS: | HATA: K. RK ends as in text, but with MATH: added. 


-IIl, 1, 2 ARANYARKA II 127 


UA PATATITHA 
ApuyAya 1. 


sad: dfentar safaan | yfadt qaed wiee- 
Ted aq: dfeait AEA AAT: Teta AA 
Aeqraa il a efauftent AA A Asa GaN aArt- 
feft aaa 3 amftem Aa sare: aaa aawaia 
aaa’ 1 eeafieara | eae | areqaed 
Aa vated ure: dfenfa® act Angas: | Aa 
Bl FA Me AW AA WaEd APTATEd Aaa’ aT 
Sa qa aral wea AATAa wa yaad 
qryated mraera dfenfa | aaraaaara faqs 
Ta Aa Vasa: Heated AAaTeHTTTET: | 
aq vaqani deat Ae ailar aa aghrazar 
AGaaaa SUG Bla aaargifa i sfa |] ATEs- 
TATA WA 

Ha WIS | yest yaad aeated afe: fu: 
ase: AMAT | Agatha BAMA ae PR AUT 

1 afeara B. 2 @q only, R, B, &.; Afa s. ° afea A. £ oe 
ict E. 5 qagara B. ° dfea: B; afeqa: E. 7 WHE B. 


: og? R, S, &c.; corr, Béhtlingk ; cf. Saikhayana Aranyaka, Vily-s 


128 AITAREYA ARANYAKA ~ Il, 1, 2- 
auf arargfaet aautatfagareng: | ait? aafife- 
ANA | RAAT | YER zat Aa aa wre S faecs 
wad eMac yaar aufae ferent: 
TAT FAT gargantuan: | afaretfa- 
MAT UU MAal TaTgAparaAT’ FTYCIaA: | TAT- 
qf fife siitwafaafa yea dif sila 
aaa feanfea wafae’ fafa weaararanfza 
fageafaenrmafa ged aaaata: graamafeqaa 
tt | Way F MH aalaaMAaafauaecaa 
ufuan «ufae fea: 1 a 4 wanni dfeni’ Fz 
wiaa uaa wpfaaqe sada aia Baa 
aaATaeeT uz 


wat fiswaren: 1 gfrenaaa fais femraaa 
aT AAAAVAATATT 1B yaa fey TaAT- 
qracesnerawa avatars Fa | AA Wa 
DAT FAMAIACTA ET SATA ATAPATHAa TAT | 
WAAAAAAMUME A TRYAATE | ata dfa faaa- 
afa vijay ean Tee seat afrenecth am- 
qa 3 Ta AAA ITs wate | seaTEaTar 


& xfa s} 2°. ° faq A; AQF. * So I read for Afarefart D, 
G, H, K, L,S; afaarartat ie afaafaarara dale, AR FAI—ATYT lost in B. 
© HtfU—ezz lost in B. ° WafAargY lost in B. ‘ afeai B; aae Fr. 

* eat WaT B. 


=IIl, 1, 4 ARANYAKA III 129 


PT FITS: VPNAAARA BARAT | Ay 
aaa fis aaa Ut Suaerafaayt cama: yfadt ar 
cam fades aa) AA Waa UAW sant Ut B- 
acfed® Canale atest tant frat gar sa 
WAAHATAAMN AT UL Buaedaftel’ Fanaa 
Swftel at cam farsa aa | aa gy aa a 
AIA FAA A AWMVITAT Faq AIM a Aare 
MAIBSaU Fa 1 awa’ wa aad Aa 1 
aifige WA AAU AIAa’ We Arata sa z 
TAZ FCAT AWSEHA: 1131 


MAAS FAT: 1 TIA aw fa fan a a va 
WU aqquasgraAA IM? dt qAyis® Ia 
Al aN dey a ware owe a wads 
Fa | AY VeMHaAM AA WIM ay aafufad a 
AVG: AUT MUST AN MaMa FIA | wa FT 
HU AAPA AAA A AMAUTAT FAM AI a 
AUTMHTS SAU FIN Aga VI AAU AAW! 


* safe B. ° afea F, G. * SqaTact A. 
Sagop. ° Buacaeg A. 7 saftd SqaTATT om. L; Waa 
R in text. 8 See explanatory notes. i afaqa—zart om, 1, Ge 
10 oat zy B. 

1 3 om. B. > wTMay E. ® wat A, B. * ewaei B. 


5 See explanatory notes on III, 1, 3. 6 BRaTWA B, E (yet correctly in III, 1, 4). 
K 


KEITH 


130 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Ill, 1, 4- 


afta’ WA ATAU FATA wey’? Trawy sft z 
WE TAA AAGAA: 18 1 


WY WSAIATH: | YARN YARrdATgac- 
QU ASAMT YARUATEA BAT at afanias a 
q vane dfeat ae aaa asa ayaa sa- 
qdaa aii ola waargefa | awa aa sat f- 
Waal eft 2 WE Sal AlWEtA: VaRaTAT Waaag- 
ATAATEY TSTHT: YIRIATEA BatU Fa af 
faanafa aa quead’ fasratia aa aratarai faa- 
aa at dfenfaia a wanna deni ae adtaa waar 
ayaa AAAIAA ANT Hla Waagea | wa 
Wey WA’ Me AeA: oritariqarsat ahaa afa- 
RIAAAPITMATAS Wal AT qaaurawead 
maa dfufagqud aa aaafi aaa dfeat wa 
aim netaefaarar | ead a ut ara” faefcte 
ay waqani deat ae sila usar agfrawat aa- 
aaa Sy tar Taargeia wy 


Taya a. = 8 WaT |B. 


1 yaaa FF. 2 BUH only B. 5 WHA: B (with jihvamiliya as usual). 
; y 

SATA om. G. ° SUT A, K,L; SUTST B. ° Ga ATS om. B. 
7 wrataredt B. 8 Ra HTB. ° eFafa—AT lost in B. 


 aTaTG. 11 oFHTAL lost in B. 


-IIl, 1, 6 ARANYAKA III 131 


FTCUAA BAT deat alan sia wee: 1 ava 
THA BA VIA Jet VAraTe aw dfem aetaa 
aa FT Wa a VAS =F Wafaafe Gamat mM te 
Ga ATR? | VAT FW ATA Taal aM TaaA 
ATR: | Tee FAUT | CEATAT SPAT aa AT 
STs Feet wa Alea i a a waa deat ae alta 
DAA UTA TAIT VAY Htyt VsTAArhA 
arqniaa dfenit® awe: uM: WaATAa uaa 
fancafaa tar SU Saat GT BAN FAUT 
aarawaa afeati a WM earaacati afeai aed za 
a aa wpfaaga FaaWaA Sa Hla alan’ 
aaa dfeat | a afe atm saga: a araarta- 
qeeamnenad faged dfearrataeat tamaa 
afaurifa | WHAM BM a a vaaai afeat ac 
aitaa watat upfaqmear Aaae aU laa’ 
aaargia | ardfenfa Uae ANS: | aTat A ae: 
aulaad arat scifa ara fasta deufa ara 
aaa yaTaa ataé aafafa | wasAedia at Tad 

1 ate: B, D, H, 8 (but S845 has ATR). 2 aT: A (marked as 
incorrect), B, D, H, S (but not S**°), * UaSi—ag om. B; ATA A; 
ATA: D, H, L (clsewhere ATR), S (but not $2497), ‘ qa_B; waz 
om. F. & ofa B. 6 WHT: B. " aTad L. S afea B. 
9 qulqa— asa om. F, G. 10 SMW! or OH B. 1 aqTetxge B; 


areta Waa Rin text; A faaqta K; read perhaps °€TH°. 
K2 


132 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 1, 6- 


at arta aetna vat araer wm eT ay quit 
a’ wafa eafafa ar’ ora wel areata nrawer 
ard te aaa Uset ava AAT OTM: Ga: | Wee 
aefauray | wa: qua: a age faan a x fay 
yaa fa wei ad uaa RAaIMAfaAe” Ala the 
as the aacfafa u a a waa dfeai ae attr 
DAA UTitaTE HAI SIT stad aaagzeA | 
ITA: UAtadfeat | Aa Waa ufATawed gq: 
dfu: naad dud Barfefa:” afeat afefadve aa 
afed fara fam a Aral 4 Waa Wad TI Teas fa- 
ura | safefratra a fant a ga fa ua a waani 
dfent ae aad aaa” agian saadaa Ta 
alta aaArgea aaaracin us 
N aaa ATTA DATS BTA: 


ADHYAYA 2. 


TIM aq sit warau WHS | ATM WsTaT aa 
Sa ay: aatfent: Wiaasrna wa: a Aat 

2 aTa_B. 3 atom. A; Te G. 4} aR B; ata D. 0 a 
aatfee B. 16 WHET: B, which also has ddh for Uh. 17 ‘Text A (with 
Wata:), R; TAVazaearcTa BATA: B; FATATCUA WEA wTA: F; 
TA WCAA waAtswTs: G; wie qdta wTa wesw: K; xa 
AAS UTS LITA: L; WIAA S TA: D; no colophon E. 

* Vater B. 


-III, 2, 2 ARANYAKA III 133 


ainfenfu wit aa sm anlfed: | nee: 
TU BAaasif wed ANNA: wed aid 
Sienaaneraquanaeufa © Ae Gal Ar- 
Waa: 1 Ta AA A VAMTAA | WIA VaETAh 
Asai waurfafa stata: sfeuatta slailaeafa an 
faufaumfa’ vata ana a vata faufia’ dare- 
THRU: | @ VAS EAAMAAAT: AAP SAAT 
AAA ASA WAT A A VaaAASAATA Vyas 
WMaaa Balad HAAG ASYTAAWATA Aelgi args 
Eun asa Gt Tatas aaArgciA wa’ 


aq awa: 1 stfu afeuarancai sf afe- 
maT Ste sfeamia aia | aaa: 
araraifa af WAM SATA Uae AAA 
MARIA A dua safiearay | AAATAA | ATI 
AUUMeaAAAIATS A ATA | TTT 
sfieqnAaaia ABIAMSATAA | wy ze 4 aufa- 
OI wARneM Az al Wa’ uraren: fase qat 
BR? outer: fas gaat waa aritaficara- 
2 oaeleUA B and the other MSS., besides R and 8. 3 4 TB, 

ef. on III, 2, 2. 4 B inserts 3(?) after each of the three genitives and nasalizes 
5 aytfara B. ° aa faufas B, as reported by Max Miller, but 


this is wrong. 7 faufart A; AAT? B. 8 oATaA? B. ® Lost to end 
in B, except @ATGCA. 1° Numbered 7 in A,B, F, G, H, K, L; 1 in B, D. 


1 STATE (?) B. 2 gata B, 3 {<a B. * gaa B. 


134 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 2, 2—- 


arate varia aes i ene Far Asati 
aauifata wanaafinania wanwentifaaged wa- 
aMfiad at wafer Jedtectdoreatar | a wat 
SMdAaagaa: AAAS AAlAM’ aSya 
MA 1a 7 VAATAAMATA VAY AAAA wala 
AAMAY AGAR AIAUWTUT Bast aeuat Aot- 
arragqa wt aqararaia aaarger wen” 


TANT: YRUT sft aea:? Wagers: geal Ae- 
yeqr Ragen efa i wages eft qaaraa a a 
Vara’ Vea BIA AS AISA: DAA A Ta I 
HERG sid AAAAAAMAMA Ta WaT 
TH: 1 aeygey sft TAAANA Fa Gerda Wad aya 
Waa AAT Aa Ta: | AaNgaIa' afad qaia 
A ATALIW GUL! Heyes eft wats warac 
wy aaa WAT Haagen’ WeiAeITAT- 
arfert TH 1 a aaaANaT wee waarararfe 
waanfeta faa | AeATATSa Ged Defeat waft | 

5 Binserts Wa GA A LTAAMVMA, which is borrowed from III, 2, 1 above, and 
reads TAA ATATATATA. «© HFT B. " oCSTT B and auater. 


8 om. B. ®° WTA F, omitting FAT WYATA. 10 Numbered 8 in A, E, 
H, K,L; 2,8 in F,G; 2 in B,D. 


‘ afa om, and lacuna marked in A. * ATW: R in text. 3 te § ne 
* aTae B. > oateatta B. 


<Ill, 2, 4 ARANYAKA III 135 


aearefamrad | fat earTgeTets WaftTT 
RUT: | Tat arargfast sraritel qa sna F- 
ARAVA i waTAgrad dient dwar wa sf 
2 Oe WA 1 Ue Aa Tea HeqTa HAA Ta- 
AYTaaAaa Ui Aga SAT UARTAA feat arat- 
Aaa uMMaAed arafread weATT 
AQIAd Bay YATRA AAA | A UI TARTA- 
ATTA Aa: AAAPVSUAAAM AAA ASTA BAT | 
ay waad daawdaa wad Aad welAd 
HAAG aISpaarla UTA Tafa usu’ 


uae! HA Fel waft A ASR wis feat a 
32 qq wenafaia 1 aeaaghearan | afeats 
afafaé werd a re areata avi afer | et yUT- 
aaa tifa a fe wae ARIS warfatt wa 
qITA Arsh aA ae GAIT wurafaaaaen 
waft | awaied faara coe ahi? faqara ote 
Baad Watt A ULE Tree! WaT | ara faa 
Ararara al wae Vale Ard afd | a aala- 
Anat wa aaaraled wHaafeaararA | at 


6 ofqated_B. 7 ogfuy B. 8 aqaad G. ® Numbered 9 in 
A, E, H, K,L; 3,9 in F,G; 3 in B, D. 
1 wq B. - fe—afaa. all, save a few letters and the following 4 WUT, 


lost in B. 


136 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 2, 4- 


aa fadlaa wear walfeal’® gran a waa: aIgHatar 
otfedt anata aot afeer aed: ag: aTaRSTAT- 
fase fat aaa dutatsem a facfaa sifa- 
aritft’ faa a aawitd aaa nadia ela ae 
ga fa aa wuerfemmea a eal FA AAT 
qaatatd aad TARE | sata aa fixe Tar- 
feat qua warfifcarivenaa feet a arat oaa- 
eaaqaa fram | saTearen alien at frafacd at. 
fav’? ana oafsute at aaa faa a qua 
adit aewaaa fama | aarufenafeat saad 
AIM TewHiy’ aaraita® qua ata wel a WWa- 
aaa fram | aerafrana att saya wat 
sata uae Tea” get a yWATAe- 
aaq faa sata aa ate walfaemad Fat AGT 
marae at fad’ aaNet ay fag a aaaeaa 
a atdtita aaa neaaAa faa) aarfa aa yfa 
womtaa wad medaaa fag | fH oraeest- 
aft | a SAE | URE FT Gent wuafA a va 


> vatfzat B. ‘WTAE. ° sttafa (? @) wfa 8. 
c ATWO CATA A B; @t{Ta om. A, D pr. man., G; B has Teh infra. 
" afecartt sz. ® auaritat B; Waaeit Rin text; WAR A, D, ¥, 
PGS ake Ti Se ° STAT B. up TAB— om. R in text. The words 
are in all MSS, * aawata: (or at) WAR B. 12 Ff add. K. 


nS ZWATSAY and Ga: B; H hasin commentary, @ AT: saa. 


-Ill, 2,5 ARANYAKA LI 137 


afa aug" va eft Aa VARTA agi 
vagfa qaw wifearafncia” asain fratia Aea- 
Aaa mais aTaTEARAThA FUT Va FRUaTEy 
amenet efamaat atstata i a warsi fafsarrsa- 
eae wad wiser aust Ua” WS 

aaa aaUeiafaar we wa vrata a 
AS AlS AAS AAISHAT SATS RIS FAAS ATE: AAT 
AMA CET Tel AAA UATAT AAA YATATAAT- 
gaa: @ a sain fam usu” 


aq way Baa ara VafauA 1 Bal Baar: Aas 
ara sufaac' sai Aaraaa | gfser ea IAT AAT 
Rear fea: AT | HA KU ANT ATATRTATT 
SUR KAU: | WAC SW AMT AYACATTATT:? 
SAAC AT: | ATA SU TT: AAT AAT: 
AU! | WIE EG ANAT ATA AAS AT: | 
squ wfera Sat dtu vata acaginwt arqat star 
wate | mate: far waaqeE: FAT FATT Tareas 


14 acie—efed om. F, which omits also eua—araa. 15 WaqaT- 
ere fa B. 16 oafacfa B. M afagaa Bp. «7? a aaa*ay B. 
9 om. B. 20 Numbered 10 in A, E, H, K, L; 10,4 in F; 4, 10 in G; 
4 in B, D. 


lgufase pn. 7 aTeareRe FG. * ORT B. * Set B 


138 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 2, 5- 
Aa Wut qa’ fAxqaqa qed qarenwaa 
VAAGA AAS WA: AT TARGA: TT AAA 
WN VARAM UM WT aad wean wadqaar 
Weant wait wa aad slave wAurfafea va- 
Nan BANA’ waufifear i arava z ar ¥ 
waar go’ aha safaeufa ia at Sai tat” ata Fe 
ardent vata afamre aftatafa aa wm ATs arat 
wed fata TT) Waa aaM wet damiarar 
aT aTaaTat at a faeehata” Waa WU sreT- 
four’ aHet eat: ufeget ofa: 1 wae are Eorar 
ae Arfae area fa ara: wun” 


BA BAN VaAHWefeat arsraufaaaescH | 
asatafa: Wat: Gel Vda’ dat: 1 a elena 
VACA AACUARIfEAT | Tal aT 
wast dems Wat aos Vat: WIT AT 1 a at 
SM Uae Fe aawi anat dfxai 


5 QUI—Y lost in B. ° wafa—efafeat om. in K but add. pr. man. 
7 wrAaTa—qut lost in B. Here and above BR has fafear. 8 qTaNI— 
MATA om. G. ° @a iL. Baza 6. 1 fXqyZaa A, F, G, K, L, 
Rk, 8; fawafaaa B, 0, D, E, H. 12 This verse occurs also in the Santi verses, 
note on I, 1, 1, and see explanatory notes. 18 Numbered 11 in A, E, H, K, L; 


5,11 in F, G; 5 in B, D. 
+ MAAST FIRT B; WAT: E, 


Brit a. 6 ARANYARA III 139 


qaqufafa faa a ate fafafarimamat satel 3° 
wats fi aUTTAa FaravaHre Tara 3° swa- 
wuts wa aINTa aT 1 A aaanqdfenqat 
sine aa Aetanea WAAR Al WATT 
Suraifafa @ Se al AERA: | A Gaanqefen- 
Basha aa agatadend TAWA AT WAT 
gat suraifafa z= We What: Wat: | Us A 
3 afaaia sews: araaa: fHaat aaABaTHe 
fara aay qearae’ aifa fe oid yga:° Ta? AT 
ara HM’ Ba waa: A Taras: t AT Ul: Ufeat 
aamarfaad waarardareafad ATmag SaTaTaT 
Marat: wu” 


\ sarcagerarcers faritatseara: 
u sa qrlarcerat PATA 


2 The arrangement of the plutis is confirmed by the commentary. In Warats 
B omits the nasal. 3 Nasal om. B. ‘ areaya B (perhaps for oat). 
. oafealta. B. ° SUTHT B, against the rule of Sandhi of the Aranyaka. 7 qqeaqi- 
ae B. : Fela: B. ° AIWAT—aTq R in text. 10 @yK. 7 Numbered 12 
in A,B, H,K,L;6,12inF,G@;6inB,D.  ™ qaatarTaa Fata Tarra 
FaAvat s ATA: W3il afa FAtaTTaAR aaa A, where the error is worthy of note in 
view of the so-called Adhyaya in B; factratswrra: Wait qararcah GATE F, G; 
FATA SATS: WU TATATTAT: Wt D cfa qatarces fates wre: | SATA IK: 
afa qararces fadtarera: | x fa qatarcedss GAH: | St ATA: AfeaTay: 
wz i arett am: FE 1 ara: feat wa aferd eT IT; B has TAS 
afearcta facta sera: | Then follows the third Adhyaya which is given in 


140 AITAREYA ARANYAKA [lessee 


the note on I,1,1. E has @ft: Siti fazt Baal | WA STAT Varawuer- 
fra: | ay afad ate ava wufsa | grader Bea Aer wafer | TAIT: 
Feat xfs areas | ee aT: | TUT aq eft aT: Wr | FETT 
ATA QUT | AT GSTS yea: | MITA S FATT: | Waray farjaa- 
STST: 1 Ha WHA | HaTafearat wafsad | aaraeifearst 1 vray 
aq xft ve 1 weraeifearar aati fa qdtarca ward 1 eft: a 


RB has text with PATH: added. 


ARANYAKA IV 4k 


LAY ATACUTAT 


faer Huafaer Mad Afeaat few | 
faat watai ua gafat geaat ut 
sifigafafefa: wana a Aaa 

Se Tas A gn Tar’ fe WH URI 

ua arate afr: fae: afrgee’ | 
Fifty afagea om aif fra ret 131 
fae Ta: Gata gat arate wheat a 
tifde afagaa a: wise: TUT U8 
at afear aarat fafa’ ae at aa 
zat fae may Wa at fe TH vy 
AANA CATA ACA TPT’ | 

a a: wdefa faa: RPS A Far NN 


1 Accents do not appear in A, D, F, G, K, L, 8S. But the accents are undoubtedly 
old, and the fact that the other verses cited in the book are not usually accented is 
not in point, since these are non-Rgvedic verses. Similarly in Aranyaka V the non- 
Revedic verses are all accented. The motive is obvious, that the repeaters of the 


text should have guidance in repeating verses not from their own Samhita. 


2 arfaqA; in R afaEa. 3 Wq L. 4 ufas: R, dividing here the 


verse. 


6 emay F. ° arfest F; atfest G. 7 fafaat L; 


fafwar. oqaeifaaay. = * faNt 


142 AITAREYA ARANYAKA IV- 
Ie WA Aa Calas HatvadUfaAAA | 
a a: asefa faa: a a: dete fad: not 
yaw wa afea: qa an dfs wT aar 
ufa: atfae wea” St fe om: uti 
qa a wa dla wa wae gaeq | 
aaay wae AT at" arg mah at qa 
Meat: wen 
wat aaat sass” u Vat aaa sets ul Var 
aaat fe famssu var aaat fe gaa” u wat 
aaat fe cata: wae war fe wat ast fe Wat TNT3 
Sql Wa aay aa Vat waty ays VfR 
farmad” uq9u faer aaafaasA” u 
N SATA VALET AAA 
10 Waa F. 7 Stom.L. 1? After SAT F has TE 1 Vat Qaq #3 
Vat aaa fe frewtgs; G has TK 1 WaT GAA GAT GEL VaT Baar 
fe famtgy; RB has tA and so A, E,K,L: Shas €t3A; D only has 
EVR, which must clearly be right, “ Jet A, DEF, GK; yess. 
42a: A, D, E, F, G, KR. 78°90 D, BG KT, BS Aged ee 


the pluti, which is more likely to have been wrongly omitted than to have been inserted. 
“ferac. 1 fag. © TAATAIAUTTH We wT: 1 xfs 
UqUTTUa WAAR A; Waa owes: | cha gare: 1D; far waazan | 
FG: BRU Tht TqUTTa WaTAAIE; BATT SATAAL ET: aqurTceard ¥ 
(Guta in later hand), G; efa Agu ACA wets aTT: | MATA K; fa 
ATUCUA RATA | L. 


-IV ARANYAKA IV 148 


These verses occur also in the Kashmir MS. of the Rgvedic Khilas (=K), which 
(V, 4) contains Aranyaka IV; in Samaveda, Naigeyasakha, ed. Ajmere, 1901, p. 48 ; 
in Samayeda, Aranyasamhita, ed. by Fortunatov, p. 74; and in Peterson, Second 
Report, p. 97 (=P). K reads in y. 1 AWA, which saves the metre; in vy. 3, 4, 
aft before WAA, treating W as equivalent to f<; in v.4 K, P, SV. read Ta, 
probably a mere correction for the difficult Ta; in v. 5 SY. has afte tq, SV. Ar. 
afe a; in vv. 6 and 7 SV. has SU for wag; in v. 7 f&S: for faa: ; in v.38 
wafzaisyaera qa. In v.8 K, P have waa, and SY. aut for <q. In v.9 
K, P have aaa, an obvious correction, see my note, J. R. A. S., 1907, p. 224, SV. 
has Way and WEy:. The second qaraug is put third in K; the third is omitted 
in P and SV., and the last six in SY. In the second last K, P read fara. The 
variants of the SV. appear all to be in the nature of attempted corrections, and the 
Aitareya seems to have possessed the oldest form of the words known to us, though 
it cannot obviously be the original form, as Oldenberg points out. 

With regard to the accents, in v. 2 °BALis unaccented in K and P asin R; BR has a 
<u. In v.3 faq is unaccented in K, which is most probably wrong. Inv. 5 both K 
and R have fafa, ie ofaat, while K has we, and R has qe. In v.9 K has 
weefa, which cannot well be correct, and AAT, also magecented In the quta- 
uefa R has Wat, which cannot be accepted, while K has f€ unaccented, which is 


inconsistent. K has also-no pluti in the case of ae \ fe Wa | and fe at: | 


It accents agna3i\ visna 3% | of which one or both must be wrong, and it twice has 
waar. It has at aaa | The accentuation of the first five qoreuarfa is 
very remarkable, and can only be explained by taking f€ as unaccented both when 
combined and when alone, and by holding that the second U4T in vaat is unaccented, 

: 3 2 R 
In the Ajmere ed. of the Mahanamnis the qoauenrta appear as U4T Al3s3s3a 


=) ee) Bee a 39% *% 


3 49 34 t 
vat ga Ualerse | wat fe gat Cat fe zat: | In P they are very corrupt. 


144 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1,1- 


NAY USAT Il 
ApHyAya 1, 

Aaa watantt afar: | wafdaat ara: 
wut: afentatata waa: | aaa Wet surs- 
wate say | ass faafaa: 1 Fraragqhaun 1 
antag sft 4 AAU Sada aMAaA Ala- 
writaaeat se wdtia anaes 1 fragag afzar 
wartaeain aia: | we aa a: uaa wera fF 
NAN Raa W waa GaafAaats zen: | aqra- 
wWHAeMtaaatasaa A safer: aran: faa 
aaah aq Ae: HA War Aaya: aes AER 
Se GN tara afer sa: aga quafa weadta | 
fan aeaita aim fadfanddta facsarihha 
faa sIsnetiseteantgaty qau | 
ay Afra ary Al qeeriacg MAT A Pet 
aq at frsraeufaartaraq aratyfact qagnt 1 
wife AT fara May Cat: aN UTA a Sahat: 
AY: Yat Fea: aay ata: Gal welScafae At Fu 


' ATPL —AYTY om. L pr. man, ? a SAT A, > So I read 
for the ve of MSS. and edd, 


=V. 5,7 ARANYAKA V 145 
fart ar faafae a at gfaratt aed: Ga | 
ASR aR TA AT asa A Sat: Gear: WH aTAA I 
eae AIBA eM GAA VPjeit yaanacrat- 
aunisaectaura faemunyfa aafea Airatat 
anion aatt aferafiga yatfa mirait aerate at 
oryeratt’ ati afatvararyy: gfadia GACT YATTA | 
SaTlcayfaaara aiftararyet TEA | aa sarnta- 
PIAS 24 TR PAAR aa zag arafia wrari- 
waaW | Reta a UfAfta faa waaay ima ga 
qavat fagafaa adeat yaa i ao za ta 
MIWA 4 QI yaa | wafaa fay aa eq mpi- 
Way i aeta Bla AAfaa faa’ yaaa i wea Vat 
afafriatitia i art farsa alata tay 
aa frvarteaquinen Tarqa HefeUATy ee aA aAal- 
—-SaTETAaATS «Fe AUS Fé AY FA Maga faars 
aé wy’3 xe Afafa a Ger: df yaaa 
STA: UHAAT: t za fusmAe*R yw fa: vefew 
afar ‘afar: urfatsetaurqEatara waars sé 
ays ze Aftafa aera: wai’ 


* om. Rin text; it is in A, D, E, F, G, K, L, Rin commentary, S. a FATAL 
add. A. ; AY om. F (at end of a leaf). "qo GC. ® The accents are 
taken from E and R. R&R has ae AT before zeuta: and a4 ATT; also SA AT 
ATaTL and at q-. If ATa is read, with Sayana, the accent must be altered. In 
; Zar: Gea: there is probably a vocative, if not, the accent must be changed. 


KEITH LL 


By: AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 2- 

SUTRA SMA Vi Fraarayasyat aq ATSGHTA VaA- 
mada i vefauati faa 3 Roe 
favaa: fac sufmed aRe masa aa fat sft | 
aa wad we cfUAeTS: wel AAA Tas 
we cfu: ua sf i aatufaqeaiiaa oTgya 
Sat AMM FEA Wa Tau val ein | WamngzEs 
aaa Vea wa Ys a A UfaRia | cfyA: Gaa- 
Mla? AAS TAA TE MMA usu’ 


aad ae wae | ya VosRt vata | wa 
wa fay waamerer Aa nordtatardhity aft 
amt gaat ar we: aarfarwmrqata t aigaafy 
aria fam vata orasmfa fasta art sti 
RSA F A GAA Aas: | sgArs: 
Tea frafeateigen:: armapat athat aga: | 
efqurat wa fararahimt enqsed dtavaAarencat- 
wdfad ag: | ae fata tae vata wpaa- 
aqaafa efeaal efauarat: aaa ea faye 
aint aaefaa qazaraa faqu diay fa: nefaa 
aaneatry few aufa t wrerfagettra waar 


1 aa A. = Gey A. 3 D omits the number, and so reckons the 
following Khandas as nos. 2-5 instead of 3-6. 


1 WET A. i," be 8 o¥gq R in text. * om. R in text. 


~V,1,4 ARANYAKA V 147 
pata 1 aquqeaa’ fay: Te: SIARAAT aT | 
afawa Safeant: AAT ati Tears freq usu’ 


fafea DR set arTaigat waaaqpai ufvy- 
rat wailed aa dara 1 aRhrsafhiraqeas: 
RATATAT AS ATE TAT LTAAT AT BRATET- 
aifaey alii MT Teta Al USA AT FAA AT 
WMA A AURA BT Sued ATTTAT aft wral- 
WAR WAATATUHATA SATA ATTA AUTST- 
Ta Ames aa Feugfaaa may wars 
Al Gala wfaarifa | wepatsfa area: gata 
a gratia aa WA ANI Berra: asf 
Wort was SA UM ufteroaia wT 
seta mes be nwafa aMAqdigedta faaeract- 
aadizerpama ipa: eafcia sufa i ora afi 
peaa ara afa faasantara aepauTrey | aa- 
FSA MAAN BLATNT ATAU TAA GATS Hose 
stmt UfAEraata | RA Ta Bess AAT UifwaTAahaad 
qoife:? are | Aa HTHAREaray Ufa’ | 
Rent AwaA Sade mMAsMUeaifa efaa 
aquataatin | feet APIA Bae ATTA 

og tia A. © Numbered 2 in D. 


lems. *aurfea,d,E, KL; autfes; uferc °afua. 
4 efau—afa om. A. 


L 2 


148 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Vy t"4- 


Dati: wa | faa AT at GEAR’ Sealed 
wMaTaUelaa BAe ware fru afyT 
Ue Wed UfAETTAIY At Wea: WAICAAT Fence 
saat) apt fayat Fam | Rares: BActefat 
aa Weataradtyan | ate aefseaaaAa’ 
fanfaaerea ures misaca’ afi TAAAAAaTS- 
TATA SUN’ 


Talat dua wafiua wae faqedqrtar- 
eiamentg at afefwerg waa ufaeit wantfeta 
SMe Waraanfa’ AT: | aA waft 1 
qauisfa vearnat ard afemnfa ag afeaait ag 
ufaaat ae afcanit ae afreaeit aera: afcerait 
Sant wafeualt a: uffaoat a: afer a: 
afaunt cata asi aarl Gal aNAd aerail- 
fafa 1 afar anarawal aria 1 equafafa at 
seq faa: ara gq aeraitfata sam 1 serdtarfa 
Tia WM Aa Gag AAT FT WYRA AAS AAA 
d APAMmAl aAeama afa anerafa at afa 
am afa ast af apt afa wim af’ ara afa 

SmqgaaG. ° Geat KL; Wa r,G; AAC Rin test, 7 afaT 
D sec. man., F, G, K, L; °WYS. S yTeaqe F, G. ° Numbered 3 in D. 


Laraafatar.  — ? wateatl om. A. 3 wafeuatt om. D, E, St. 
ata °° afa ataitom. Fr. 


-V,1, 6 ARANYAKA V 149 


aa af amt afa safe afar yfafcia | sea 
afafa safa | aa sera: wearefafae: afcaatarar 
afm werada: aha 1 unfagta minaa 
ca | UAVaU Wa Baraat wae ora 
MENU wATAt V Aya vaafquat: anare 
Sata ala fava wad Usawifaay afi 
Gea wu’ 


afeala WaRy Se ai gq A aft AaaAfeat ya 
Zarqu atari qWY at aaa aNhegaiety fra 
BT ER SME SMa: Gea Fat VAG | Ay’ 
aati anita’ wa ue VE aETe? nae 
mM ATatae ahaa mag cwafas a far- 
MAMA Wa et faaae Mem A aeyAt:” 
Udala | ae a Mledtatfaddaata afranta aie: 
TePFEMAL AcarTaria WAATAT A YRarATTyT- 
cuifa UleraaaAaaa qAtaast a aes faecit  afa 
faetaracefcara: 1 afeera yaay SE YI ad 
q Meda’ | al AA VaRtaPU G1 Ae aT- 
qantaisa’ uaa warat fa fTarfa waa | oft at 

6 acafed F. 7 Numbered 4 in D. 

1 JaAyAt only, A. 2 o@at F, G. ° UO om. A. 4 oqnaa K, 
Rintext. °@ufsarr. ° Meda A, £, K,L, RS; 3D, FG. 


7 gaara Ks Saat ATA, E, 1; Faaratsz F, D pr. man. corrected sec, man. 
to GAMA SA; text, A, GR, S (FAATAT in text). 


150 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 6- 


SMTA’ | ay" a fara Rega: aT | Ueyerfages- 
aistafa u waant fa 3 fii Seay Wat 
Aa WAT AT FIAT: | AAATATATY “ArEq- 
Area" aTatege AT AT: aAeRT CAAT: | 
BMT VarTyeeeaaT: | Afeaaaaafe way | 
afagrara ufant: | at We qeelea eanerfe: 
Wealat: Feater: uu” 
N SAALATITATTATH AAA SAT: 1 


ADHYAYA 2. 


TAA: | ACA FA TA HE: | GET Te 
FEU ATS an cua ayaa’ oft wa: gu adtafA 
afafecer yfad ad: ua at earq wt tha ofa fam 
AGT Se: UitMaARAL AATAT eater: | fart 
maafadfantaat gefefa | BI AMAIA 
ata dwarafarsasaarataa « VRTaitia- 
AY Al THReaAt Teeter: i fawa: | qa aa 

® TATA A; WMATA E; WETS ATA D (3 add. sec. man.); WTA 
K, L, R, 8; °AT3# F, G. 9 wy A. 10. ofetquratal D, F, G, K, L, 8. 
11 qaraiaadtyt F. 12 Wee A. 13 Numbered g in D. a4 “-Toxt, 
A,R; Tfa WAIST D; GTATTUA WATTS: FG; xfa daa aca 
WAT STA: G3 afa UAaTTaR WIAA S BTA: L; nocolophon E. R accents 


quite irregularly the words of the first two sentences. Of. V, 2, 2. 


* QTYaATUT G; STHATA L. ome FG. 3 See explanatory notes. 


av, 7, 2 ARANYAKA al 151 


sd mfg at Aral He YR A Aad 1 fee TE 
fanct? Wa ua MEdgaedy wayne wa: 
a al! Aad Agata SoH SAT AGS BAA: WaTET: 
ofa atasiteht |e: wafasitga Tau ele: | se 
aad drat: fat fara: aaRTaA’ ua’ 


Tat afm: ae: | waft aT aT aTqatsh ar 
qaiiaa sfa wate wifarqedt mat are: 
aut: ager: woffa | ta a aaa ward a ze 
afaattaa wefn cen aferarygt gat a HtA 
ZN MA Aaa Uae AAW waa Az 
saismafa wa Gara on A Sat GUAT a anarfefa 
dura: | gear fe ara sae af ols: | qeeter: | sea 
sau latfafe gare a afe Aca efa gen: wifa- 
aqed Wat | are: adh agert: achat wy 
gfe a ata: qa va fafa oe ate sia 
Sepia chad wihufaaet qarfa | Ha AeTAZ- 
uae gafefa dara: 1 set wera arqu sft ats: 

4 ratt A. ©: FY Rin text and commentary, but the commentary clearly had 
aq:. 6 omyaqal F, G. 7 Numbered 7 in A, E, K, L; 1,7 in F, G; 
in D. In R, besides several omitted accents, there occur Fat, Yfed, TTY, 


qaa, fds, areqqzeay TAA. TH, TaaBt:, AA. LAT: has the pluti, 


as in V, 3, I. 
1 Wa: F. 


152 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 2, 2— 

gqeelet: 1 Ua efaw: ug: waenAia® wa 

@agniatel Wea SAU aNeweral’ fayd Avais- 

Wate: 1 ue os faa sal Fa yaa aaurar 

aifg aaa aefa Aq AAIAIAT: | WAAATATAT: | 

0a wala qaenara fant ma ata BATA 4 

sara taal: ear arab AT! Fat A Ss: UM 

sa oe ayafa’ faaean:’ geen cf ates afas u3i 

fayat cafaant a at at a ar whaeaTae si 

a gaaia ada: equate afeet asters wun 

i aa Sa Gaede sastat Gn 

fram Wo win faarqu at afe Ferd FAA v9 

28 ay fararaeu waaabt Uraa fad Gat A BE ut 

Woe aed Cagha” sara aad fearia a aiEfa: wen 
we sein fra: ST YSACAT SAAT | Teetet: | VaTq- 

alata aa | Weeter wg” 


Tat Tarstft: 1 wet Sat a sisafa fra saat 
Vatia | ytd al aia efa fire: 1 ee erat 


- SU: in both cases S; oma G. 3 See explanatory notes. s aa G, 


see explanatory notes. 5 Sun R, see explanatory notes. S afa A. 
7 Wat: G. 8 om. G. ® oRNT FG. 10 tearefa F,G, Rin 
commentary, 11 Numbered 8 in A,E,K,L; 2,8in F,G; 2in D. B has 


the following incorrect accents, besides accenting WaTat—vareg, WTA outa aT 
wiafa gat, gugta:, fare. 


~V, 2,4 ARANYAKA V 153 


VR aaa fra Saat Berit i aval area: 
Ga M Waa a a aeracfaa oae- 
Ufa | ANAT FY HG | Yket Gegatafa wa: | 
Saefe wmraafamqaargecia ta qaTysifam aq aT 
qo afafaat a qa wa qaafafa get ae- 
Sat: usw 


aaa qartifa: | at faeafa Wana a fra 
faar qaa cfaa efa fara’ ant areat atecfa 
afée orrarqefifa aged | aad a aT gata eft 
Geet 1 Aly Al aanaanam facet aracin’ 
Want VwNTA WA ate a fH: Feat Tafa 
mraqee afar at at wait wT aaaeuft | 
af au a: quuafaf ugmfaarat qari t a: 
aaret fasdfutefa Ha: 1 a A oy eae’ sft Ta 
sad yUaE a eft anal areal Tac aahaT 
facaqfamaargetta | at Ts waUtaTAaTET | a 
at eaqitaeat at farang eat a se yA MMT fe 
aa | Geeta: usu’ 
1 Numbered 9 in A, E, K, L; 2,9 in F; 3,9 in G; 3 in D. 
l fayaa TER in text; fAWAAHATL. Ina note to the commentary R gives 
UVatafawd as a variant. 2 fara L. ® afee—eacfa bis G. 


4 wag a. o aga FF. 6 Numbered ro in A, E, K, L; 4,10 in F, G; 
4 in D, 


154 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V2, ¢ 


ud qaetft: | a se ataaaa sft qe 
aah DW TagqaTagqeda | Sars ATA Waa AAT 
ot fuaradtfa faq saat vatfi i a wa sfseaa 
mm af: qt wy weet ae’ afm aaa 
May: AretUE AX AN TIT: szaetwat vata | 
afesié Ga A OW Bats Tautafata Gal Sata 
aria | ATARUITY Waa eYAATAEtia | Feugraaa 
afa dtu wgarafa dafafa gai a maa 
ofa fra vant seta tata: au efm fire: | 
qeelet: | wimfeaqastaa: war sist 1 
WAAUMAG: | Jel aU | aad: geaafafa ay: 1 
afan: qaiaafermen: | et teu efa fuer) qaa- 
WaA | AT WI Fela swine: Peeler: qe- 
alat: wun? 


AN seittaqusqareara fartarseara: 


: Fata F. : ag iK« 3 R joins afa with qeeiet, against the 
commentary and the sense. 4 at GE WS: D pr. man., corrected to 
CST. 5 Numbered 11 in A, E, K,L; §, Ir in-F, Gy fin D. 6 Taac- 


areata fadiaiowura: A; wadvarcaas wearcuas fadtetscwrs: p; 
WaaTces fadtttowrs: FG; ft daa ace fadtatoura: K; cfs 
qaatcea fadtarswra: L; xf fadta D; no colophon E. 


aa 3, 1 ARANYAKA V 155 


ADHYAYA 3. 


SE) SEE Za F A WAM TIAAT AIA 
THATUARAL APSA: | aT AE AAT 
sfa fafaeraa | aa a at at aurfa aTaen aA a 
gaat Aaaifafa FR AAMT waaEes safer fry 
ela ana aEatfaeiAaaaaa | enitaatai f- 
eaniat qedtduarat arartcradvarasargy 
qarfa fasifaanarereaauenat 7 aT! aT y 
aad tammy | wat faa fa WAMaAAIT | TS 
fam satqureaenqgyy | Ae WaATAT: YaRTS 
neq: WaRds afrasfa wre: rey 
ATEURT | HYAATAT: YHATRTARAT RT GATT AT 
aia afranfa i age Wa: | frat atafay Ag 
afa az i atfare Se es SHCA AAT: Weal aar- 
qudaararanar: uftenta | aftfed saa" TARE 
qufa | seas waa Sees: wa’ 


1 Wes KR in text and in commentary. But Sayana does not note the pluti, and 
probably it is incorrect. Neither S nor the MSS. have it, Of. on V, 2, 1s “ faanr- 
faa G. 3 aTeTAgy D pr. man., F, G; UTSTATYRA D sec. man. 
4 ouTMATaT F, G. 5 om. F, G. ® Numbered 12 in A, E, K, L; 1,12 in 
F,G; rin D. 


156 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 3, 2 
aa wraratafa aa Test: TMs AAT: 
damage: dia: ae ofter gaat wae aN 
Se aafanaad Bia yA od Pataca faaraaz 
ST ATA fay: Aa wTgaT SA UTA AAS: Tar U2 
aa areacbraraed afesed Og fafa ae: aS ore 
aadfad aay adet fed edad areaaia- 
RU Ut 
BAYA Tatas wei ghqut qaewarfheaqaAa’ | 
Aa eE UAT AAR cette UI 
Vale TIA AT Vat aay faa: | 
afta zz year fad ast yn 
naTafate sa aetat aAst TAH | 
male fauna waraabeet AeA UG I 

wa: Gea aetsfa i aed ost A wes aa: 
aed Ho wal upfast A yer fat oat A wee | 
ort Faas UTaAfe A wer efa araqaens- 
qaqe’ Fem waft sysaT aa aAaIeNT ai 
fart 43° aA ears fama asia Warearayy- 


1 The verses are divided as prose in the MSS., R and S; see explanatory notes. 
z RGA s. 3 oqeqe A, K, 8, in consequence, no doubt, of the following #, eatfeze 
being written as °qfeqe, * faqaTanrg A. ° CATS A; PHY (?) E. 
° 3 om. S, but the use in the phrase is constant, and is laid down in Asvalayana 
Srauta Sitra, I, 5, 5. 


-V, 3, 2 ARANYAKA V 157 


aggtiia | Se ANITA AUA | METIAYRTTTT- 
aqafaiaiaaara’ 1 vel after sat wsATEa- 
Vefa | Wad TE naAaTHh sa Whaat Hafa- 
ua quefaadifa 1 tee aaa snetat zat 
wuafa 1 Ranga eae wia Haat | 
aredt Was FAG) aar A UAT: Wray aaq | 
aa om: aaargesi aefefa | saaretrafaaradt- 
QHAqAMS Rea aaa AAS ufone etafeta 
afsae eanaa vasa’ FAA Ua 
tafeat Fa ufAUeTT | Waa FaarastaAA 
aa wat aa sfa vgifaarqent adtare yay 
araqatanfi a aaqfafifefr aranivges: | aaa 
Azad UfAEA TARTURIA AMAIA DE Ziq: 
deeqgea: wen” 

7 ward F. 8 oMAATaTAT S. ° onTHafga G. 
10 Numbered 13 in A, E, K,L; 2,13in F,G; 2 in D. 

E omits accents, and B has the accents in many cases obviously wrong. In the case of 
the double accent of compounds, some of these may be correct; similar instances—some 


clearly wrong—occur, however, in the Kashmir MS. of the Khilas of the Rgveda, as Schefte- 


lowitz (p. 39) points out. The chief cases are, v. 1, ala, aa dq; v.2, 0H: 
aatidarad, arat ; Vv. 35 aa; fafa, arena, eealy, ATAUTATA ; Vv. 4; 
aiufad, ufdgut, arafaaatd, AgATAH, v. 6 Aateh TEA, TATE 
faqarata BaTaTAT SET v. 7, GA and AAI» fax A and aut a 


are conceivable but improbable. 


158 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V,3;3- 

wretfam Bead Waar A uA Area 
gaa a aR qrarara ar waamal saa wae 
vafa | APWAIFANT WH AAS Wa: Para 
VAANUIIG, A MAMA | [SFINT® TH ATATAT- 
fafa 1] afeenzararmaifea oaarardaracaifad Ay 
Waaatafaa ASA aaa at war- 
WAAAY araforarad VA | A ya: UAACATART- 
Calal SAT UH UGCA HAafefa =F WIE AMT: | 
a aa wa qita dai a fuer a asad a 
TIA: WATT AMAA Baarlatarey wardlaisy 
Matas | aTawant a ufawan arfaatat ars art- 
aquapamsitata a Ald yea a ctfed gET a 
TAY AAVATHY AT ALISA Atte aaa a 
aiftra afaat 4 ata a aWeataqiou a aaA- 
fara a feaqur afer afafoer 1 Actafe- 
aefa aaroafefa g oe WAH: aaraafefa maar 
TIT PAMiey:  WaTTaeaaniWawaats qay- 
fren waaata efa i weahkia a warsedidia 
aa waettdia aafae wariia 1 Acnadlaearaat 
vat WUMeigedenaaramal wafa ) aT- 

* This sentence is of doubtful authenticity, see explanatory notes. 2 a ATS. 


* This occurs in all the MSS. of the text, but was clearly not read by Sayana, and 
occurs in none of the MSS. of Sayana. 


IMAM AATIVIAA AAAI TAT 
WMATA | HAA Waesama sft faa 
so an faa adfaefacfaer agfana we yata 
a autre! SI | WIA: STATA STS: 
SU Wud Bees Ta A aha sare 
UUs AER Atsuat ad faust afeaarenaara- 
fiaaifarant aa are wal wa faatifaer’ 
afefa al wa wed YAS aA Haft AsaAea 
ala ae aa vata aa vate usu’ 


 SAALAU AAT TAAt SATA: i" 
U sfa USAW TATA Ul’ 


£ So I conjecture: F amlaraad all MSS. and edd. 5 Numbered 14 in A, E, K, 
L; 3,14inF,G; not numberedinD. ° Text, A, R; GAAS ATT: ATATTEAS- 
area (HTaa G) GqATCTATaa | ETS SIT: 1 iT (om. @) xfa araat- 
QareaTcas Aa HATH EG; Tf Ga ATT qa SVTa: | ATH | 
K; vf dears | gatatsera: | <a GqATTUaA BATH IL; xfa qatar 
sara: | tf GeaTTM: | AaTA: 1D. E has 23 ef: Si | afaa ZarTai- 
aaat faa: WTA: (the beginning of the Aitareya Brahmana, which presumably once 
in this MS. followed the Aranyaka) | araifaat aglad Wat | at MATATATLT | 
HE THA Ba ¥ A ela | Atferet qarattfa: 1 area garsttfa: | areas 
Tarstfa: | TAA TIT: qa: | wat: wazaes: | afzata yar HG a 
q 8 afd aaaafeat | metATe SAT | fafea HE slat | Aad Az: 
naifa | Sued MA | Aerace vafeaft afate: | AETATA Ve | 
stat: AA | HS AG: | HeTATS ifort TaTET | Tf TIATCA TATAA | 
aICyyAy AAA | Sfc: Bl | Seo also-the note on I, 1, 1. K sums up 


160 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V,3)3 


the number of Khandas thus: @E 34 W 22 fe 2g J 2A 781 7 At the 
end of the Aranyaka S adds a second set of Santi Mantras, see on I,1,1. Similarly 
in the Anandasrama edition, 189, of thirty-two Upanisads, there is prefixed to the 
Kausitaki Upanisad, and also appended to it, a set of Santi Mantras, similar to those 
in Aitareya Aranyaka, II, 7, and Saikhayana Aranyaka, VII, 1. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


TRANSLATION AND NOTES 
ARANYAKA I 


Apuyaya 1. 


Now begins the Mahavrata! rite. Indra having slain Vrtra became great. 
When he became great, then there came into being the Mahavrata. Therefore 
the Mahavrata ceremony bears the name of Mahavrata. Some? say the priest 
should make two recitations with the ghee-offering for that day, but the established 
rule is one. He who desires prosperity should use the hymn, ‘ To Agni, to this 
god of yours, (I sing aloud)’ (RV., III, 13). He who desires increase should use 
the hymn, ‘ The guest of all your folk’ (RV., VIII, 74). For the folk indeed are 
increase and therefore he gains increase. Some say that one should not use that 


1 The term mahavrata is, Sayana points out, explained by the Taittiriya school in three ways, 
either sahan bhavaty anena vratena or mahato devasya vratayt or mahac ca tad vratam. ‘The 
Chandogas give the latter two explanations. See Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 2, 6,1, and Sayana, ad 
loc. For the whole, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, III, 21, 1; Taittiriya Samhita, VI, 5, 5, 33 
Satapatha Brahmana, X, 4, 1, 21; 22; Pet. Lex., SVs 

2 The two Ajyas recommended are RV., VIII, 74 and VII, 1; the reference is to the view of 
the Sankhayana Aranyaka,I, 2. The former is the prakrta because it is an Ajya Sastra in the 
Agnistoma, the latter the vazkrta because it is an Ajya Sastra in the ViSvajit (see Kausitaki 
Brahmana, XXV, 11). The Aitareya holds that only the vadkrta, VII, 1, should be employed, 
according to Sayana because the Agnistoma which is the prakytz has twelve Sastras, and if there 
were two Ajya Sastras the Mahavrata would have thirteen. VII, 1, which is the Ajya Sastra, is 
also at the same time a Aamya djyasastra used by those who desire proper food (see I, I, 2). 

8 This is the rendering adopted by Max Miiller from Sayana, who explains that VaiSyas 
making large earnings offer much taxation (Aaram api bahulam prayachanti, which Max Miiller 
takes as ‘increase their capital ’, but this is in view of prayachanti (Sayana on Aitareya Brahmana, 
VII, 29) hardly possible). Perhaps it would be possible to translate: ‘For he (Agni) is the 
increase of the folk and so he (the sacrificer) becomes prosperous,’ but it is probable that the 
commentator has preserved the correct rendering, though of course in the original the vzSo w7fo is 
in the genitive. For taxation, cf. Fick, Die sociale Gliederung, pp-79, 80; Rhys Davids, Buddhist 
India, p. 48; Apastamba Dharma Sitra, I, Io, 26,9, &c. Already in the RV., I, 65, 7 (see 
Oldenberg, S. B. Z., XLVI, 56, and Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1, xvi) the king devours the rich, 
In a series of passages (XI, 5, 7,1; XIII, 5, 4, 24; XIII, 1, 5,45 V, 4, 2, 3) in the Satapatha 
Brahmana, cited by Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch, Litt., 1, 173, 174) the king receives the people, 
save only the Brahmins, as his food, because they pay him taxes. So often in the epic the exactions 
of kings are mentioned, cf. Hopkins, India Old and New, pp. 240, 243, n. 3; Keith, Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, p. 68, 


KEITH M 


162 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Giee 


hymn because there is in it the word ‘ guest ’-and a guest is liable to go begging *. 
But (Mahidasa*) said that one should use that hymn. For he, who becomes good 
and attains excellence,® is indeed a guest. For him who is not so men do not 
deem worthy of hospitality. Therefore one may by all means use that hymn. If 
he does use it, he should place first the tristich, ‘To him, best Vrtra-slayer, are we 
come’ (RV., VIII, 74, 4-6). For eager for this day they worship the whole year, 


4 Sayana renders : ‘ He who uses that hymn becoming poor has to go begging in other people’s 
houses,’ which is clearly wrong. For the construction (II, 3, 5), cf Delbriick, Alténdesche 
Syntax, pp. 420 sq. ; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 217} Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 984. The word 7Svara in this sense becomes sometimes stereotyped in form, cf. Taittiriya 
Samhita, III, 1,1, 3 (cited by Weber, Jnd. Stud., XI, 112) with Kathaka Samhita, XII, 5; 8. 
It is a construction peculiarly common in the Brahmanas and disappears later. 

It will be seen that in the text throughout sadam bhavati and so forth have been printed, 
m being in every case when final save at the end of a sentence, altered to anusvdra, and further, in 
all cases where 72 occurs as the end of the first member of a compound (e.g. sam°) is used. 
Tt is clear that, in a text of the Brahmana period, before mutes generally the appropriate nasal 
should be used; before y, Z, v either ausvara or those semivowels nasalized ; and before 7, §, 5, 5, 2 
anusvara, with m in pausa (see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 212, 213; Wackernagel, A/t- 
indische Grammatik, J, 333, 334; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, pp. 53, 68), but this course merely 
adds to the unnecessary difficulties of the Devanagari script (the continual use of which is an 
unfortunate necessity), and I have followed most editors, including Prof. Macdonell in his 
Brhaddevata, in using anusvadra before mutes, semivowels and sibilants, as allowed by Panini, 
VIII, 4, 59, and approved by Whitney, §§ 71, 73. The practice of writing ™ before labials 
while using anusvadra before the other mutes is convenient but illogical, and has not been 
followed. Ihave also written ch for cch of the MSS. (with many exceptions) except where cch 
represents an assimilated letter +c. It is no doubt the case that c# in Sanskrit is rarely, if ever 
(Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1,155, allows puccha as representing 4h; but Dr. Scheftelo- 
witz rejects the view), a representation of any save a conjunct consonant in Indo-Germanic (either 
s+2h or (as Dr. Scheftelowitz, in his forthcoming Zur Stammbildung in den indo-germanischen 
Sprachen, tries to prove) s+&, normally), But there is no proof that cch represents this more 
properly than ch (the fact of position is of no importance), and the use of cch for the simple letter 
prevents any distinction between e.g. ¢+ch and ch alone. For this reason I follow Aufrecht (in 
his Reveda), Bloomfield, v. Schroeder, Knauer (see his Manava Grhya Sutra, pp. xxxiv, xxxv, 
with all his MSS.), Macdonell, and others, in writing ch for the simple letter. Lévi, Whitney’s 
and Lanman’s use (in the 7ranslation of the Atharvaveda) of ch even for ¢+ch (for $) is the 
opposite extreme (cf. Prof. Macdonell, 7. R. A. S., 1907, p. 1105). 

5 The text has only: ‘He said.’ Sayana explains by atithipadatatparyabhijnah siddhaniz. 
Clearly it must be Mahidasa Aitareya. Cf. II, 3, 5,n.4; III, 2, 6, n. 13. 

® It is not obvious how a/ithth is thus interpreted. Sayana interprets dhavati as sanmar- 
gavarti bhavati. Max Miiller says one would expect yo vd atati (cf. Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, 
p- 126; but see Hopkins, 4. 7. P., XIV, 12), and suggests that the obtaining of distinction is 
probably derived from ati above in afzthz?. Another explanation seems possible. 64% in the 
Brahmanas has in composition the sense ‘ obtain’ (cf. Sayana’s rendering—dhatim prapnoti—of 
Aitareya Brahmana, III, 23,3). +/af according to the lexicographers has the same sense, so that 
here yo vai bhavati is perhaps explained by yah Sresthatdm asnute. Kdamam below is already 
found in Mantra, cf. Delbriick, A/tindisxhe Syntax, pp. 184sq. For the duty of hospitality, cf. 
Taittiriya Upanisad, III, ro. 


-I, 1,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 163 


and now they draw nigh to it. The next three tristichs’ begin with anustubh 
verses. Now the gdaya/ri verse is brahman,’ the anus{ubh is Vac, and so he unites 
Vac and drahman. He who desires glory should use the hymn, ‘Agni is aroused 
by the fuel of the folk’ (RV., V, 1). He who desires children ® and cattle should 
use the hymn,” ‘ The wise sacrificer has been born’ (RV., I, 5)."" 


7 The Saakhayana Aranyaka, I, 2, ignores vv. 13-15 of RV., VIII, 74, which form a déna- 
stuti of Sratarvan Arksya. The reference here shows clearly that the Aitareya takes the same 
view of these verses. Verses 8, 9, 11, 12 are in gayatr7, 14, 15 in anustubh. 

® Sayana gives as reasons for these identifications that the farabrahma is set forth by means 
of the gayatri (RV., III, 62, 10), and that, like this anastubh, Vac has four forms (RV., I, 164, 
45; Nirukta, XII, 9, &c.; Z.D. M. G., XXXIX, 58), (para pasyanti madhyama vatkhari, later, 
see J. A. O. S., XXII, 69; Mallinatha on Kumarasambhava, II, 17). There is no reason to 
suppose that the identification of Vac and anustubh and gayatri and dvahman has any basis 
beyond mere fancy; for different identifications, cf. 7, 4. 0. S., XVI, 3 sq. The original sense of 
brakman (so throughout to contrast with Brahman, the god) must clearly have been prayer or 
spell (cf. II, 3, 8), the two ideas blending indefinitely since the prayer could be regarded as a 
spell and vice versa (Oldenberg, Redigion des Veda, p. 31 5). Deussen’s view of drahman (Alig. 
Gesch. der Phil., 1, t, 241 sq.) as ‘der zum Heiligen, Gottlichen emporstrebende Wille des 
Menschen’ is quite untenable, see Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 211, 212, That Vac is 
brahman was the doctrine of Jitvan Sailini and it is set forth by Vajnavalkya, Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, IV, 1, 2, and the identification is developed in the late Logos doctrine, Cf. also Tandya 
Mahabrahmana, XX,14,2; Chandogya Upanisad, VII, 2, 2; Hopkins, Jzdia Old and New, p.147, 
n. I, with whose view of the slight importance of the Logos doctrine in this form I agree. 

° Sayana concludes his commentary on this Khanda by explaining that, though by the 
godohananyaya (cf. for another myaya on this, Mimamsa Sitra, IV, 3, 10) the Aamyasihtas are 
intended primarily for the gaining of desired results, nevertheless they make up the sacrifice and 
do not leave it imperfect, on the principle amyena nityasidahih. This nydya arises, he explains, 
from the rule on the new and full moon sacrifice, camasenapah pranayed godohanena pasukamasya, 
where as the sacrifice can be carried out camasena, the godohanena is merely purusarthatvam (see 
Jacob, Maxims, 3rd series). 

1° Tp the references in the translation to the RV., where no line is mentioned, it is to be under- 
stood that the whole hymn as accepted by the Aranyaka is meant. When only special verses 
are meant their numbers are given. 

1 For the Santi verses and their authenticity, see Crit. Note. The verse in S fatadharam is 
RV., Ill, 26,9; @adams, Il, 43,3; tvam Agne, VIII, 11, 1; bhadram, X, 20, 1; fam no 
Mitrah, I, 9°, 9. Siv@ occurs in Tattiriya Aranyaka, I, 1, cf. I, 21; 31, as Siva nah Santama 
bhavantu\divyd apa dbsadhayah \ sumrqika Sarasvati (so accented in the Anandagrama ed.), 
and as here in that Aranyaka, IV, 42; Latyayana Srauta Sutra, V, 3, 2 (with v./. samdaSas). 
The Atharvaveda, VII, 68, 3, has in the last pada, ma te yuyoma samdysas ‘may we not be 
separated from thy sight’, which explains the origin of the quite unintelligible vyoma.* The verse 
tac caksur occurs also in Taittiriya Aranyaka, IV, 42, where will be found RV., IV, 31, 1-3. 
For osthapt’, cf. WIT, 2p By, 2 

In the Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, VI, 4 and 5, verses are given to. accompany the recitation of 


the Samhitas (Saikhayana Aranyaka, VII, VIII), and the formulae are placed at the beginning 





® Cf. also v. Schroeder, Die Tiibinger Katha-Handschriften, p. 115, and the Santi prefixed to 
the Kausitaki Upanisad in the Anandasrama ed. 
M 2 


164 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 2- 


2. He who desires proper food? should use the hymn, ‘Agni men kindle 
from the twigs with splendour’ (RV., VI, 1).2 For Agni is the eater of food. 
In the other chants accompanying the ghee-offerings men approach as it were 
more slowly to Agni, but here they come upon Agni at the very beginning ; at the 
very beginning he*® obtains proper food, at the very beginning they smite away 


of the text in the Aranyaka thus: r/ayz vadisydmi satyam vadisyami \ adabdham mana isiranr 
caksuh \ stiryo jyotisam srestho \ dikse ma ma hinsih\ Other verses are prescribed to precede 
adabdhamt, &c., in the case of the Sakvaris and ofthe Mahavrata, the Mantha (Sankhayana Aranyaka, 
IX), &c. In Khanda 5 are given the expiatory formulae: uditah Sukriyam dadhe \ tad aham 
atmani dadhe \ and then other differing formulae (see Oldenberg’s ed., pp. 163 sq-, and S. BoE ss 
XXIX, 145 sq.) Oldenberg renders wd tah, &c., as ‘ From here I take out the brightness (?)’, 
but I would much rather take wditab (and the version in the Anandasrama ed., p. 295, accents 
dditah) as ‘He, arisen, gives forth brightness. That (brightness) I appropriate to myself’, 
referring to the beneficial and purifying effects of the radiance of the sun (cf. Macdonell, 
Vedic Mythology, p. 31). Oldenberg also takes s#7yo, &c., as predicate to adabdham, &c., which 
is hardly necessary. The phrase sarvah, &c., probably means, ‘I arise whole (possibly with 
a suggestion of sa/vus, i.e. complete, perfect, healthy), with breath, with strength; may 
prosperity attend me; may the gods attend me.’ The assertion, wtt7sthamz, may be based on 
the magic principle exhibited in faith-cures. The other clauses offer no difficulty, but dhamzn, 
&c., is obscure. zd (unaccented in R) may be nom. to upaspried, namah being interjected, 
but this is very unlikely, as agne ig@ occurs alone (see Crit. Note). It may be, ‘ Honour 
(to thee), O Agni, and oblation,’ but this is merely possible. 

In the Manava Srauta Sutra, II, 1, 2, 36 (cited by Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, pp. 40*, 
484°) occurs: adabdham caksur aristam manah siiryo jyotisam Sresthah dikse ma ma hasit 
satapa, which illustrates the position here of caksuh. In Taittirlya Samhita, III, 1, 1, 2: aikse 
ma ma hasih occurs. The exact words used here are found in Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 1; 
XG: 

1 Sayana explains annddya as a compound of ana and a@dya. Max Miiller follows this view, 
cf. Monier-Williams’ Dict. s.v. adya. But it is surely preferable all through to take it as an 
abstract of anndda, an eater of food, with the sense ‘eating of food’ which passes into the 
idea ‘food’, or ‘proper food’, as anndda has the force of ‘a healthy man’. For the formation 
see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1212, Oertel, on Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, II, 11, 
Io, renders ‘ food-eating’. 

2 Sayana points out that the hymn is both a mztya and a kamya hymn. It is hardly correct 
to say, as Max Miiller does, that it is an obligatory part of the sacrifice, since, as we have 
seen in I, 1,1, the Aamyasiktani are sufficient to complete the ceremony. What Sayana 
means is that it is both the normal form and also a form for a special purpose. He compares 
the use of dadhi in the Agnihotra both as normal and where strength is desired, and the 
use of kaddira in the Agnisomiyapasu rite as normal and when might is wished, The possible 
forms then are: (1) this hymn as normal; (2) this hymn as annddyakama; (3) any of the 
other Admyasuktdni enumerated in I, 1,1. In RV., VIII, 1, vv. 1-18 are in viraj metre, the 
rest in ¢ristubh, which explains the reference to these metres below. 

8 The distinction between ‘he’ and ‘they’ is no doubt deliberate. ‘He’ corresponds to 
annadyakamah and ‘they’ to agachanti. Sayana explains the singular by yajamanasanghah, 
but this is unnecessary. Max Miiller renders ‘he’ in each case. R reads sadyah, which is 
a correction, probably of his own, for the samzdyah of most of the MSS. including S'S?S*, 
but is of course most unfortunate. Zva is almost equivalent to eva, cf Delbriick, Ad¢endische 


-I, 1,2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 165 


evil. Because of the words (RV., VII, 1, 1b), ‘with moving of the arms they 
bring to birth¢ Agni, the hymn has the word ‘birth’ in it. Verily the sacrificer 
is born from this day, and so the hymn has the word ‘birth’. There are four 
verses (in the ¢ris/ubh), cattle are four-footed, the verses serve to win cattle. 
There are three verses (in the vra/), these are the threefold worlds, the verses 
serve to gain these worlds. These two verses form a support. Man has a double 
support, cattle have four feet. The hymn places the sacrificer with his double 
support among the four-footed cattle." The verses if said straight on number 
twenty-five. Man consists of twenty-five elements. He has ten fingers, ten toes, 
two legs, two arms, and the trunk is the twenty-fifth. By this hymn he adorns 
the trunk, the twenty-fifth. Further, this day (of the sacrifice) is twenty-five, 
the s/oma hymn‘ of this day is twenty-five, like is brought about by like. So the 
two are’ twenty-five. By repeating the first thrice, and the last thrice, the verses 


Syntax, p. 477; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 230, and Scheftelowitz, Die A [pokryphen 
des Rgveda, p.'79, who calls this use late, hardly correctly. Cf. II, 2,6; I, 1,2; 6, 1; Aufrecht, 
Aitareya Brihmana, p. 430. I think that zva must originally—or at any rate quite early— 
have had a sense approaching more or less to eva. Cf. RV., I, 145, 3: ¢du tt prchanti n& 
simé vt prchati svéneva dhiro manasa ydd dgrabhit. The sense is hardly ‘by his own mind 
alone’, as Oldenberg (5.3. Z., XLVI, 164) takes it. The phrase is softened by zva, just as 
metaphorical phrases are softened by guasi, &c. in Latin (Berger, Stylistique Latine®, p. 140). 
This sense appears clearly in III, 2,6: vagbrahmanam ivopodiharati. This avoids amendment 
to eva as proposed for the RV. passage by Oldenberg. So in RV., IV, 5, 8: var iva. See 
also Eggeling, S.B.Z., XLII, 375, n. 3, on Satapatha Brahmana, X, 5, 3, I, ‘Sayavza seems 
to take “iva” here in the sense of “eva”, as indeed it often has to be taken, especially in 
negative sentences. The real sense is clearly seen in phrases like prataram iva kriyante, 
Aitareya Brabmana, III, 48,4. See also n. 5 on II,1,2. So in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 
2, 2, for the Kanva text eva, the Madhyandina has zva explained as eva by the commentator 
(Max Miiller, 5S. B.Z., XV, 159, n. 3); ibid., III, 9, 28, 5, for the Kanva zva vaz, the 
Madhyandina has w vai (S. B. E.,XV,150,n.5). This use is not found in independent passages 
of the Sankhayana Aranyaka, where in VIII, 10, eva takes the place of zva in Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 2,6. Cf. also Oldenberg, Z. D.M. G., LXI, 824 sq. 

4 Sayana is probably correct in taking janayanfa in a timeless or present sense. CE, 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 930; Avery, J. 4.0. 5S., XI, 326-361. 

5 The hymn has two metres and in one of these metres four feet; man has two and cattle 
four feet, and the union in the hymn produces union in reality. catuspdtsw occurs also in 
Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 2,7, where the whole phrase occurs with °padah. For catuspadah pasavah 
cf, Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 2, 20, and often in the Gopatha Brahmana, The whole phrase 
is also identical with Aitareya Brahmana, III, 31, 13, &c. 

6 For this see I, 1, 4; I, 3, 4; Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1. The reference is to the 
paticavimsa stoma in the Prstha Stotra corresponding to the Mahaduktha. 

7 The plural is explained by Sayana as due to the rcs being thought of and not the hymn, 
but here the ‘attraction’ of the predicate is an adequate explanation, since such examples of 
carelessness are very rare. Cf., however, RV., III, 6, 3, where Oldenberg (S. 8. Z., XLVI, 
24, 6) refers yajf#iyasah to Heaven and Earth; RV., II, 5, 6 (ibid., 204); RV., VII, 93,7: 
ydt sim agas cakyma tdl sh myla tdd aryamaditip. Si$rathantu \ where Agni and perhaps the other 


166 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 2- 


become thirty less one, that is equivalent to a vzra verse minus one syllable. 
For in the small (womb) seed is deposited,® in the small (heart) the vital spirits, 
in the small (stomach) food is placed. So (the v2ra small by one) serves for 
the obtainment of these desires. He who knows this obtains those desires. The 
verses include also the drhafi metre® and the vrdj metre, and the perfection 
of that day. They also include the anustubh metre,!° for the chants accompanying 
the ghee-offerings depend on anustubhs.™ 
3. ‘The Pratiga? should be in the ga@ya/ri metre,’ some say,” ‘for the gayatri 
is brightness and splendour and thus (the sacrificer) becomes bright and splendid,’ 
Others say, ‘The Praiiga should be in the wszh metre, for the usnzh is life 


Adityas are in the mind of the poet. Ibid., X, 85, 47 (altered in ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, 
I, 8, 9), 2rdayanz is used of a man and wife. In Maitrayaniya Samhita, I, 5, 12, syjavahai 
is used of the gods, cf. dravavahat in IV, 1, infra. Cf. too the verse cited V, 2, 2, zsam no 
Mitravaruna kartanelam and Atharvaveda, XIV, 1,39, with Whitney’s note. Cf. Delbriick, A/tin- 
dische Syntax, p.102; Speijer, Sanskrit-Syntax, § 26,n.; Oldenberg, Z.D.M. G., XXXIX, 62, n. 1. 

8 See I, 3, 7, where this recurs, 

® The verses taken together make up eighteen wzrd verses (it is not necessary to assume 
the repetition of the first ura thrice as does Max Miiller), and seven ¢ristubh verses. 
Repeating thrice the last ¢vstubh, and taking away eight syllables from each verse, we reach nine 
brhati verses plus nine sets of eight syllables which taken all together give two drhaéz verses. 
Cf. Saikhayana Aranyaka, I, 2. 

10 The first verse, though called wird in the Anukramani, is really a verse of thirty-three 
syllables, and by the doctrine that one or two syllables make no difference, it can easily be 
regarded as an amzstubh of thirty-two syllables. The acc. is due to the force of abhz, cf. 
janitudm abhi sdmbabhiitha, RV., X, 18, 8 as explained by Whitney, 4.7. /., XIII, 297, and 
Geldner, Vedische Studien, Il, 306. Later 4/dh@ governs the acc., see Hopkins, Great Epic 
of India, pp. 265, 473. For the exact sense of abhi, cf. abhi samcinuté, Satapatha Brahmana, 
X, 2, 4,1 with Eggeling’s note; Aitareya Brahmana, III, 22,6: wirdjam dasinim abhisanepadye- 
tam, and elsewhere in the Brahmana and Sitra literature. 

11 Ajya here, as above, must mean Ajya Sastra as Sayana takes it. The reference is to 
RV., III, 13, which is an avzstubh hymn and is the Ajya Sastra of the Agnistoma. 

1 After the eating of the rtwgrahas and the recitation of the Ajya Sastra comes the Vifve- 
devagraha and the Praiiga, In the prakrtz, the Agnistoma, the Praiiga consists of seven ¢rcas, 
comprising RV., I, 2, and 3, ascribed to the poet Madhuchandas; so in Kausitaki Brahmana, XV, 5. 
The Aitareya Aranyaka keeps these ¢ycas for the Pratiga; in the Sankhayana there is used a 
set apparently of seven ¢ycas (RV., VII, 91, 1-3, 4-6; VII, 61, 1-3; IV, 43, 1-3; IV, 23, 1-3; 
IV, 55, 1-3; VII, 95, 4-6), in the ¢77stubh metre, ascribed to Vamadeva chatrinnydayena, though 
only three are his (Govinda on Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVII, 8,10). The series of deities, 
Vayu, Indra-Vayu, Mitra-Varuna, ASvinau, Indra, Visvedevah, Sarasvati, is the same as in the 
original ¢vcas of RV., 1, 2; 3. There can be no doubt that the Saikhayana version is the 
later. The order of the grahas is different in Katyayana Srauta Sutra, IX, 13, 33. hor 
the metres and their relation to the savanas see Bergaigne, Journal Asiatigue, XIII, 166 sq.; 
Bloomfield, 7. 4. O..S., XVI, 4 sq.; Oldenberg, S. B. #., XLVI, 301. 

2 The ¢raistubha Praiiga is preferred in the Sakhayana, but nothing is there said as to the 
reason here given, while arguments for the gdyatra are there mentioned, which here are not 
used. This adds another reason for regarding the Sankhayana as the later version. 


-I, 1,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 167 


and so (the sacrificer) wins life.’ Others say, ‘The Pratiga should be in the 
anusiubh metre, for the anustubh is valour, and so it serves to obtain valour.’ 
Others say, ‘ The Pratiga should be in the érha/i, for the drhaiz is prosperity, and 
so (the sacrificer) becomes prosperous.’ Others say, ‘ The Praiiga should be in the 
panki’ metre, for the park’ is food and so (the sacrificer) wins food.’ Others 
say, ‘The Praiiga should be in the /ris/udh metre, for the /risfubh is strength 
and so (the sacrificer) becomes strong.’ Others say, ‘The Praiiga should be in the 
jagatt metre, for cattle® are like the jagati and so (the sacrificer) acquires cattle.’ 
But (the sacrificer) should take a gayatre hymn only. For the gayairi is brahman,s 
and that day is rahman, and so through drahman is brahman commenced.’ The 
hymn should be one by Madhuchandas. For Madhuchandas desires® honey for 
the singers and so he is called Madhuchandas. Now food truly is honey; all 
is honey; all desires are honey; therefore if one recite the hymn of Madhu- 
chandas, it serves to obtain all desires. He who knows this obtains all desires. 
Now this Pratiga in the one day form’ is perfect. Much indeed on that day is 
done that is forbidden,® and (the Praiiga) is the atonement.” Now atonement 


$ Cf,I,1,2,n.5. The point of resemblance is the number of feet. See Taittiriya Samhita, IIT, 
2,9, 4; VI, 1,6, 23 Aitareya Brahmana, I, 21,15; 28, 11. Elsewhere the gdyatvi is connected 
with astafaphah paSavah, Jaiminiya Brahmana, III, 241; Tandya Mahabrahmana, UI, 8, 2, 
or pasavah are panktah, Aitareya Brahmana, III, 23, 5. 

4 Cf. 1,1, 1 ad fin. 

5 The day is rahman because it causes men to attain Jrahman. This passage appears to be 
quoted or referred to in Sankhayana Aranyaka, 1,2: drahma vd ehaho (2) brahmaitad ahar 
brahmanaiva tad brahma samardhayati. See I, 2, 2, infra. 

6 Sayana so takes chandatz. The compound may rather have meant ‘praising honey’, as 
the Naighantuka, III, 14 gives chandati as an equivalent of arcatz and cf. also RY. Vi, 02, 3 
when chanda occurs; or possibly ‘ winning honey’, cf. Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch. Litt. I, 
146, n. 3), who takes the meaning of 4/chand as ‘ gefallen, befriedigen, oder befallen machen ‘a 
Cf. also Wackernagel, A/tindische Grammatik, I, 154; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 31, 0. 35 
Weber, Znd. Stud., VII, 4sq-, as to the connexion of chandas with skandat?, which if real 
would be natural as giving a basis for the meaning of chandas as right time (cf. pes, ‘ foot,’ 
‘scansion,’ &c.). »/chand and A chad ‘cover’ are not separated by the Indian grammarians, but 
are of very doubtful connexion (Whitney, Roots, &¢. pp. 49,50; Ryder, J 4. 0.5., XXIII, 
77; Weber, nd. Stud., XVII, 236). Madhuchandas appears in Kausitaki Brahmana, XXVIII, 2; 
Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 17; Brhaddevata, II, 126; III, 57; Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, &c. 
For tad yad, &c., cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 575- 

7 The Agnistoma, which is the prakrti of the Visvajit and that of the Mahavrata, is a one 
day sacrifice. Cf. Sabbathier, Agnistoma; Caland and Henry, L’ Agnistoma. 

8 Because, Sayana says, it can easily be performed by remembering the Agnistoma, which it 
exactly follows. This passage is repeated in I, 2, 1, &c. 

9 Max Miiller renders ‘to be hidden’. Sayana says: Sistair nivaraniyam varjaniyam. The 
reference is clearly to the dasinrtyabahubhitamaithunabrahmacaripumscalisampravadadikant 
(so R; S has what is better: dasivy (2 vi) urttabatumaithuna’); see V,1, 5, i.e. the popular 
part of the old ritual. 

10 This is perhaps better than Max Miiller’s ‘and has to be atoned for (by recitation) 2 


168 AITAREYA ARANYAKA 15, 3" 


is rest, and at the end (of the sacrifice) the sacrificers rest on the atonement 
of the one day (Pratiga)" as their rest. He rests who knows this, and they also 
rest for whom the Hotr priest, who knows this, recites this Pratiga. 

4, (There is the word ‘ready’ in the verse,) ‘Come hither, O Vayu, conspicuous; 
these Soma draughts have been made ready’ (RV.,I, 2,1); this day indeed is ready for 
the sacrificer and for the gods. Truly the day is ready for him who knows this or for 
whom a Hotr priest who knows this recites. In the verse, ‘Indra and Vayu, these 
draughts are poured forth, come to what is prepared’ (RV., I, 2, 4), by ‘ prepared’ 
(niskria) he denotes what is ‘ well prepared’ (samskria).' Indra and Vayu approach 
what has been well prepared by him who knows this or for whom a Hotr priest who 
knows this recites. In the verse, ‘Mitra of holy might I summon (and Varuna) 
who make perfect? the oil-fed rite’ (RV., I, 2, 7¢), speech is the oil-fed rite. 
Speech is his who knows this or for whom a Hotr priest who knows this recites, 
In the verse ‘ Agvins, (accept) the sacrificial offerings’ (RV., I, 3, 18), the sacrificial 
offerings are food and this serves to gain food. The ASvins go to the sacrifice of 
him who knows this or for whom a Hotr priest who knows this recites the verse, 
‘Come hither, ye whose path is red’* (RV., I, 3, 3). In the verses, ‘Indra of 
bright splendour, come hither; Indra impelled by prayer, come hither; Indra 
hastening, come hither’ (RV., I, 3, 5%; 6; 4), he recites, ‘Come hither, come 
hither.’ Indra goes to his sacrifice who knows this or for whom a Hotr priest 
who knows this recites. The All-gods come to the call of him who knows, 


It is a curious inversion of ideas by which the old popular rites retained no doubt reluctantly 
in the ritual become regarded as improper and needing atonement. 

11 Max Miiller takes pratisthackahah as separate from Santydm, but suggests that ekahah may 
go with fantyam. This certainly seems better, as it avoids the identification of ekadhkak and 
Santih. ‘At the end’ refers to the fact that the Mahavrata is the last day but one of the Sattra. 
For pratistha as a medical term, see Hoernle, J. 2. A.S., 1907, p. 14. 

? From nzskyta comes the Vedic zskrti according to Bloomfield, 7.4. 0..S., XVI, xxvi. 
For samskrta as ‘well-cooked’, see Thomas, /.R.A.S., 1904, p. 748; Kirste, S Ri ASS 
1905, p. 353- For zs and /zd, cf. Oldenberg, S. B. Z., XLVI, 2-4. For avam above, which 
as against a/am, V, 2, 3, is a sign of early date, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 
211 sq.; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, pp. 43 sq. alam already appears in the Atharvaveda. The 
syntax is normal, see Delbriick, A/éindische Syntax, pp. 146,147. Sayana, probably correctly, 
explains that the hymn has the word aram because the day is aram, not vice versa. The 
use of vaz favours this. 

* Sayana interprets sddhantd either as dual or as equivalent to sadhayantam. In the 
original, the Zada has Varunam ca risddasam (cf. Pischel, Vedische Studien, IIT, 190). 

* This is the most probable interpretation of Rudravartani, Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1, 53, 
but cf. IT, 71; Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, p-49. Others take as ‘ whose path is terrible’. Sayana 
renders ‘whose path is like that of Rudra unobstructed ’. According to R’s division, here and 
above, dha must be taken as ‘He says’ (the verse), but the position of asya is hardly possible 
and the later examples show conclusively that @ ha goes with what follows, as it is taken in S, 


-I,2,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 169 


or for whom a Hotr priest who knows recites the verse, ‘Ye All-gods, protectors, 
supporters of men, come hither’ (RV., I, 3, 7). In the verse, ‘ Ye givers, (come 
to) the libation of the giver’ (RV., I, 3, 7°), he means the libation of every giver. 
Whatever a man wishes when he recites this verse, that wish the gods fulfil, 
if this he knows or if for him a Hotr priest who knows recites. In the verse, 
‘May the holy Sarasvati accept our sacrifice, she that is rich in prayer’ (RV., 
I, 3, 10), speech is denoted by ‘rich in prayer’. Speech is his who knows this 
or for whom a Hotr priest who knows this recites. When he says, ‘May she 
accept our sacrifice,’ he means, ‘ May she bear it away. These verses if said 
straight on number twenty-one.’ Man consists of twenty-one elements. He has 
ten fingers, ten toes, and the trunk is the twenty-first. By this hymn he adorns 
the trunk, the twenty-first. By repeating the first thrice and the last thrice the 
verses become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Prajapati is the 
twenty-fifth. He has ten fingers, ten toes, two legs, two arms, and the trunk 
is the twenty-fifth. By this hymn he adorns the trunk, the twenty-fifth. Further 
the day (of the sacrifice) is twenty-five, the s/oma hymn of that day is twenty-five,® 
like is brought about by like. So the two are twenty-five. 


ApHYAYA 2. 


The two tristichs, ‘Thee like a car to aid us’ (RV., VIII, 68, 1-3), and, 
‘This juice is poured, O Vasu’ (RV., VIII, 2, 1-3) are the first and second of 
the Marutvatiya hymn.’ Both are perfect in form as belonging to the one day 
ceremony. Much indeed is done on this day that is forbidden, and (the 
Marutvatiya) is the atonement. Now atonement is rest, and so at the end (of 
the sacrifice) the sacrificers rest on the atonement of the one day (Marutvatiya) 
as their rest. He rests who knows this and they also rest for whom the Hotr 
priest, who knows this, recites this Marutvatiya. In the verse, ‘Indra, come 


4 Probably the original form was favdkd, Amold, Vedic Metre, p. 143; Wackernagel, 
Altindische Grammatik, 1, xi; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 110. 

5 Cf. I, 1, 2 ad fin. 

6 The stoma peculiar to the Mahavrata is the paftcavimsa stoma in the rajana melody in 
the Prstha Stotra corresponding to the Mahaduktha, Saikhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 7, 3; 4. 
The explanation of Prajapati as twenty-fifth is variously given, cf. Friedlander’s note on 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1, and see also below, II, 2, 4. 

1 This is the first Sastra at the midday pressing. The pragathas used are made up of two 
verses expanded (Sayana: yasminn rgdvayasamuhe pragrathanena trcah sampadyate so yam 
pragathah). The dhayyas are interpolated verses to fill up the Sastra. For the terminology, 
pratipad and anucara, see Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 103. For uktha below, see 
Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLI, xii-xv. 

2 See I, I, 3- 


170 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, I- 


nigher, with thy strengths preserve thy singers’ ® (RV., VIL, 53, 5-6), (there is * 
the word ‘singers’); this day indeed is a hymn, and being possessed of a hymn, 
the form of this day is perfect. (There is the word ‘hero’) in the verse, ‘Let 
Brahmanaspati come forth, hither the hero’ (RV., I, 40, 3°¢); the form of this 
day indeed is perfect as endowed with strength. (There is the word ‘heroic 
might’) in the verse, ‘Rise up, O Brahmanaspati; heroic might’ (RV., I, 40, 1°, 
2>); the form of this day is perfect as endowed with might. (There is the word 
‘hymn’) in the verse, ‘Now doth Brahmanaspati proclaim the hymn of praise’ 
(RV., I, 40, 5); this day indeed is a hymn and the form of this day as endowed 
with a hymn is perfect. (There is the word ‘slaying Vrtra’) in the verse, ‘ Agni, 
the slayer of Vrtra, will bear’ (RV., III, 20, 4°); the slaying® of Vrtra is a 
characteristic of Indra, this day is Indra’s, and Indra’s is the form of this day. 
(There is the word ‘ strong’) in the verse, ‘Thou art strong by insight, O Soma, 
thou art mighty in thy might and greatness’ (RV., I, g1, 22°); might indeed is 
a characteristic of Indra, this day is Indra’s, and Indra’s is the form of this day, 
(There is the word ‘strong’) in the verse, ‘They fill full the waters; they lead 
forth the strong one® like a horse for rain’ (RV., I, 64, 64); strength indeed is 
a characteristic of Indra, this day is Indra’s, and Indra’s is the form of this day. 
Further in that verse, ‘They milk the thundering never-failing spring’ (RV., I, 
64, 6), (there is the word ‘thundering’); thundering indeed is a characteristic 
of Indra, this day is Indra’s, and Indra’s is the form of this day. (There is 
the word ‘ great’) in the verse, ‘To great Indra’ (RV., VIII, 89, 3); what indeed 
is great, is large, the form of this day as endowed with largeness is perfect. 
(There is the word ‘ great’) in the verse, ‘Sing a great song to Indra’ (RV., VIII, 
89, 1); what indeed is great is large, the form of this day as endowed with 
largeness is perfect. (There are the words ‘was in the way of’ and ‘stayed 
not’) in the verse, ‘No one was in the way of,” none stayed, the chariot of 

3 Sayana takes prasdtir as a noun=anwia deya. 

* This is, I take it, the meaning. The verses contain words because the day has certain 
qualities. It is also possible to invert the relation, and derive from the epithets in the verses the 
qualities of the day, but the position of the verse in the sentence points to the former interpretation 
as slightly the more probable, and that view is supported by Saakhayana Aranyaka, I, 3 ad fin.: 
mahadvad hy etad ahah. The literal version is ‘ As to the words, &c.’ 

5 The argument seems to be (1) Vytvaha occurs in the verse, because (2) Indra is Vrtraha ; 


and (3) the day is Indra’s. Possibly it may be, because the word Vytrahé occurs, therefore, 
Indra is Vrtrahd, and this is Indra’s day. 

° vijinam means ‘having food’ according to Sayana. It clearly meant originally ‘having 
energy’, Cf. Oldenberg, S. B. Z., XLVI, 18 and Index, s. v. vaa; Pischel, Vedische Studien, I, 
TO, 45. 

" Sayana renders parydsa as svdrtham na calitavén and na rivamad as tena rathena 
ramanan api satrur na kytavén, and paryastavat as lokantaragamanaya paritascalanavat. 
It is difficult not to believe that this absurd interpretation, which is that of the Aranyaka, was 


-I, 2, 2 ' TRANSLATION AND NOTES 17t 


Sudais’ (RV., VII, 32, 10); the form of this day as endowed with the terms 
paryasta and rani is perfect. He recites all the Pragathas to obtain all the 
days, all the Ukthas,® all the ‘Prsthas,® all the Sastras, all the Praiigas, all the 
pressings of the Soma. 

2. He recites! the hymn, ‘Fair has been my effort, singer; slayer of truth’ 
(RV., X, 27). True, indeed, is this day and perfect its form as endowed with 
truth. This hymn is composed by Vasukra. Vasukra indeed is drahman, and 
this day is drahman. Thus by drahman is brahman commenced. Here they ask: 
‘Why then is the Marutvatiya Sastra commenced by Vasukra’s hymn?’ Because 
no other than Vasukra produced? a Marutvatiya Sastra nor separated it. There- 
fore by the hymn of Vasukra the Marutvatiya Sastra is commenced. This hymn 
is not addressed to any definite deity? and is therefore Prajapati’s. For 
Prajapati is undefined, and the hymn serves to win Prajapati. Once‘ he describes 
Indra, and so the hymn retains its form as Indra’s. He recites the hymn, ‘ Drink 
the Soma, for which in anger thou breakest’ (RV., VI, 17). (There is the word 
‘ mightily’) in the verse, ‘The cow stall, Indra, mightily being lauded ;’ the form 
of this day as endowed with the word mightily® is perfect. This hymn is 


deliberately chosen wrongly. The exact sense of the original is, however, open to doubt, cf, 
Ludwig and Griffith’s translations. 

’ The Ukthas here meant, Sayana says, are those for the ukthyakratus, following the 
Yajiayajaiya Saman. The Prsthas are the four Prstha Stotras of the midday pressing. The 
Sastras are those of the Ajya and other rites. The Pratigas are the Sastras of the Praiiga 
and are specially mentioned on the nyaya, brahmana agatah parivrajaka apy dgatah (so S; 
R reads abhy®, which is nonsense). 

® For these, see Eggeling, 5S. B. Z., XXVI, 339. For dftyai and the very numerous similar 
datives, cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 274; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 970. 
They differ from ordinary infinitives in not being construed clearly as verbal forms, but governing 
the genitive as here and in Sankhayana Aranyaka, Il, 5; 6, &c., and as always in Celtic 
(Lindsay, Latin Language, D. 535)- 

1 This Khanda contains the general form as well as the specifically Mahavrata part of 
the Marutyatiya. See on V, 1, 1, which gives only the special part, and cf, Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, I, 3, where Vasukra is equated to Indra. He occurs also in Brhaddevata, VII, 30, &c. 

2 i,e. brought out of the Samhita. The perf. here has a certain propriety ; it expresses a 
relation not exactly that of mere past, and approximates to a present. Cf. n. 6. For atha 
kasmat, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, III, 24, 7, &c. 

3 Cf, Macdonell, Sarvanukramani, p. 183, Brhaddevata, Il, 256; Sieg, Die Sagenstoffe des 
Rgveda, pp. 7,8. See Aitareya Brahmana, III, 30, 3: ¢e efe dhayye anirukte Prajapatye, V1, 
20, 18; Kausitaki Brahmana, XXIII, 2; Maitrayani Samhita, III, 6, 5; Nirukta, VII, 4. 
Sayana says Prajapati is anirukta as he has no mirtz. Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 1 has: ané- 
rubto vai Prajapatih. Cf. Weber, Ind. Stud., XVU, 333; Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, p. 16, 

4 In RV., X, 27, 22. The Brhaddevata and Sarvanukramani ascribe X, 27-29 generally to 
Indra, with certain exceptions (Macdonell, Brhaddevata, 1 227), 

5 Clearly the Aranyaka takes mahi as an accusative=mahad, and presumably, like Sayana, 
grndna as active. Méhi in the original is taken by Griffith in his translation as a vocative from 


172 AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


I, 2, 2- 


composed by Bharadvaja, and Bharadvaja was of seers the most learned, the 
longest lived, and the greatest practiser of austerities. By this hymn he drove 
away evil. When® therefore a man recites the hymn of Bharadvaja, it is that 


mahin against the accent. Cf. also Grassmann and Ludwig’s translations. For the passive 
sense of erudna cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, p. 362; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 264. 

6 The form afahatya may be either a dative, ‘for the driving away,’ or an ablative, more 
probably the latter, as presumably the sense is that Bharadvaja attained his length of years 
by the hymn rather than the reverse. dsa above is clearly differentiated in time from the 
narrative; cf. Saakhayana Aranyaka, VI, 1, where the imperfect avasat describes the dwelling 
from time to time of Gargya Balaki, while dsa is used to denote his permanent character, 
and uvdéca in describing his conversation with AjataSatru. This use of the perfect as a 
narrative tense is not a sign of lateness when the use is different from that of the imperfect. 
In the Tandya Mahabrahmana itself wvdca and dsa (XIII, 6, 9) are both found in such cases. 
Cf. also Aitareya Brahmana, III, 48,5: Bharadvajo ha vai kr$o dirghah palita asa \ so ’bravit\, 
and III, 48, 4. The position of the Aitareya Brahmana and Aranyaka as early appear clearly 
from the following table of the proportion of perfects to imperfects (see Whitney, P. A. 0. S., 
May, 1891, pp. lxxxv sq., slightly modified) :— 


Tandya Mahabrahmana, 1: 130, 

Taittirlya Samhita, 1: 70. 

Maitrayaniya Samhita, 1: 64. 

Taittiriya Brahmana, I: 20. 

Taittiriya Aranyaka, I: 9. 

Satapatha Brahmana, VI-VIII, 1: 20; I-V, 


Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 1: 2. 
Jaiminiya Brahmana, I: 4. 
Gopatha Brahmana, II, 1: 5. 

ne a DPE ey ys 
Kausitaki Brahmana, 3: 5. 
Chandogya Upanisad, 4: I. 


g: II. Aitareya Brahmana, I-IV, 1: 40. 
3 ay xT ss NE bs cd “5 os Vert. 
By “ IPG $48 6 SIS 3 4 35 ss Vibes 
a “4 X, 1: 3; (including “ Be Willan a. 


Brhadaranyaka Upanisad.) += » VILE SS ss: 

The earlier part of the Aitareya (I-XXVI) can thus claim to be older than anything save the 
PajicavimSa and the Samhitas, and may be as old (for in such small matters as those of the 
Aitareya the proportions are not fair) as the Samhitas (Brahmana parts, of course). Against 
this sporadic cases like sayz lokete, lajjate, saciva (Wackernagel, A/tindische Grammattk, I, xxx) 
cannot be regarded as of decisive weight. Jajjamdnd indeed as a Prakritism* would be note- 





* Fick, Bess. Beitr., VI, 270 takes fag from Ind. Germ. /oze% according to the ordinary 
and early phonetic rule; if so the Prakritism would disappear. The view of Leumann 
(Wackernagel, I, 220) is, however, more probable; cf. also Dr. Scheftelowitz’s forthcoming 
book, Zur Stammbildung in den indogermanischen Sprachen, § 10. Dr. Scheftelowitz gives 
an interesting example of the way in which the texts were corrupted (though he does not 
apply it for this purpose). In later Vedic times ¢s and 4s became frequently cchk, and such forms 
found their way into the text of old work instead of the proper forms. Later still efforts 
were made to replace correct forms instead of obvious Prakritisms with in some cases unfortunate 
results. E.g. in Samaveda, I, 3, 1, 4,9 (=I, 231) pr&su as Benfey (Glossar, p. 128) says is 
for RV., VIII, 31, 15, prtsu via prechu. So may be explained enksva, Aitareya Brahmana 
VUI, 9 (cf. Aufrecht’s ed., p. 428) for entsva (@+ WVindh). Cf. in Naighantuka, II 1% 
Prtsudhah (cf. Roth’s crit. note, p. 16) for RV. brksu, and for rksdla (K. Z. XL, oh eat 
the MSS. of Atharvaveda, X, 9, 23, offer either r/sdra or rechdra (Lanman, Album Kern, 


a ae TRANSLATION AND NOTES 173 


he may become, by the driving away of evil, learned, long-lived, and versed in 
asceticism ; for that he recites the hymn of Bharadvaja. He recites the hymn, ‘ With 
what splendour do ye who are of equal age and dwell together?’ (RV., I, 165). 
(There is the word ‘praises’) in the verse, ‘They call for me, the praises long 
for me’ (RV., I, 165, 4°); this day is praise and the form of this day as endowed 
with praise is perfect. This is the AayaSubhiya hymn,’ and it is harmony and 


worthy, but when it is considered that the form is unique (III, 22, 7), that the later language 
had always //ajj and that /ajjé@ was a common word, there can surely be no hesitation in 
restoring Jajyamand, just as the Atharvan Prakritisms, cited above, must be removed. The 
exact verbal form of the text cannot always be relied upon, and it may be noted that, as 
Sayana’s note on VII, 10; 11 shows, in his time some versions of the Aitareya Brahmana had, 
which some had not, these chapters, of which the second is a mere corruption of Kausitaki 
Brahmana, VII, 11 (see Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, pp. 236, 382, 444). The case of the 
Gopatha Brahmana may be held to contradict the deductions here accepted, since Bloomfield 
(Atharvaveda, pp. 164 sq.) has shown grounds for holding that the Parva is not later than the 
Uttara, but this objection is not of importance, since it is the case that the two parts owe most of 
their grammatical forms to these sources and the Parva borrows from the Satapatha Brahmana, 
XI and XII, in the first of which books the number of perfects is very high, while the 
Uttara exploits the Aitareya, &c. The potential in i¢a (see Aufrecht, p. 429) also urged as 
a sign of late date is merely, in all probability, an inaccurate analogical form to forms like 
ita (dadhita, &c.), and gives no criterion of date (cf. Liebich, Pamind, p. 32). amantrayam 
@sa occurs only in WII, 17 and proves nothing for the earlier part of the Brahmana. Panini, 
III, 1, 40, allows only 47 (Liebich, p. 33); but as there can be no doubt of the priority of 
the Aitareya Brahmana to Panini (cf. Liebich’s own paper, Bezz. Bertr., XI, 309), this 
clearly shows either the selective character of Panini’s work or more probably the incorrect 
transmission of the text (the Saakhayana has cakre, Liebich, pp. 80, 81). The use of avam 
(for @vam) is apparently a note of the Aitareya Brahmana’s style, not a proof of date.> 
Liebich (p. 30) holds that asa was obsolete in Panini’s day in prose and says Yaska uses only 
babhitva. 1 cannot accept this view as to Panini. 

7 The story of Indra, Agastya, and the Maruts has received full treatment from Sieg (Die 
Sagenstoffe des Rgveda, pp. 108-119). He holds that RV., I, 170, 171, and 165 make up an 
Itihasa to the effect that Agastya offered a sacrifice to the Maruts. Indra came and claimed 
it, and Agastya had to pacify Indra and the Maruts. The result is possible, but not certain. 
The Kausitaki Brahmana, XXVI, 9, has (as amended by Sieg, p. 117, n. 7): kaya Subha 





p. 302; Whitney, 77 vanslation of Atharvaveda, p. 604). So in Khila, I, 2, 9%, MSS. read 
prinayanti for prinanti and this Prakritism is found in Varttika 1 to Panini, VII, 3, 37. See 
also Wackernagel, A/tindische Grammatik, 1, 135. 

b Anfrecht’s view (Adtareya Brahmana, p. vi) of the dependence of the Brahmana parts of 
the Taittiriya Samhita seems borne out by the citations in his ‘ Anmerkungen ”, It may be 
noted that the Brahmana parts of the Samhita cannot well be separated much in point of 
time from the Brahmana itself and that Brahmana deals with the late Purusamedha (Winternitz, 
Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 167). Cf. also Taittiriya Samhita, VI, 3, 10, 5 and Taittiriya Brahmana, 
I, 5,5, 6 with Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 13, 3 (ibid., p. 184, n. 2). Noteworthy also is Winternitz’s 
remark (p. 175, 0. 1) that in Vajasaneyi Samhita, XXX, Buddhists are not mentioned, though 
that section must be later than the oldest Brahmanas. 


174 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 2— 


abiding, the Aayasubhiya hymn. For by means of it Indra, Agastya, and the 
Maruts came to harmony. So the recitation of the kayasubhiya hymn tends 
to harmony. Further the hymn tends to long life. So if the sacrificer be dear 
to the priest, let him recite for him*® the ayasubhiya hymn. He recites the 
hymn, ‘Indra, with the Maruts, powerful, for joy’ (RV., III, 47). There are 
the words ‘Indra, powerful’; power indeed is a characteristic of Indra, this 
day is Indra’s and Indra’s its form. This hymn is composed by Visvamitra. 
Now Vigvamitra was the friend of all, and all is the friend of him who knows 
this and of those for whom a Hotr priest, who knows this, recites this hymn. 
The hymn ‘Thou art born, terrible, for strength, for energy’ (RV., X, 73) is 
one containing mzv7ds,° and, as belonging to the one day ceremonial, is perfect 
in form. Much indeed is done on this day that is forbidden, and (this hymn) 
is the atonement. Now atonement is rest, and at the end (of the sacrifice) the 
sacrificers rest on the atonement of the one day (#viddidna) as their rest. 
He rests who knows this, and they also rest for whom a Hotr priest, who 
knows this, recites this mzvzddhana. If recited straight on, the verses number 
ninety-seven.!° The ninety is made up of three vray sets of thirty, and then 


savayasah sanida iti marutvatiyam \ tad etat samphanam santané siktam \ etena hendras ca 
Marutas ca samajanatam, which must go back to the same source as the Aitareya version, 
found also in Aitareya Brahmana, V, 16, which agrees verbally with this passage. For 
samjnana see also Bloomfield, Atharvaveda, pp. 72, 73- 

§ The gen. here is probably possessive and predicative (ezws faczat), cf. Speijer, Vedzsche 
und Sanskrit-Syntax, §§ 63 and 71; Liebich, Bezz. Bettr., XI, 307 sq.; Delbriick, A/tzndische 
Syntax, p. 162, while the gen. with Zrzya is adnominal and regular from RV. onwards. Not 
unnatural is the transition from such genitives to the genitive which is really a dative, e.g. 
Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 15, 7: ¢asya Satam dativa would if kytvd were put for dattvd be quite 
regular. On the other hand in ¢asya Svad dadhaiz (ibid., II, 40, 6) the gen. is practically datival. 
In Pali (Miiller, Pa/é Grammar, p. 67) and in Prakrit (Pischel, Prakrit Grammar, p. 246) the 
dative of the indirect objective is always represented by the genitive, the dative of purpose 
alone surviving. Cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 297. Note the dative with mztram below, 
and genitive in ekesdm pastéinam, I, 2, 3; and Geldner, Vedische Studien, I, 283. On the low 
morality of the Brahmanas, cf. Lévi, Za Doctrine du Sacrifice, p.g; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. 
Litt., I, 180 sq. ; Garbe, Phzlosophy of Ancient India, p. 62. 

9 In Saakhayana Aranyaka, I, 3, the #¢vdd is in RV., VI, 19 ; see Srauta Sitra, VII, 19,20. The 
prakrté is as here, ibid., 15 ; Kausitaki Brahmana, XXV, 3. JVévzds are early and apparently were 
known in Regvedic times, cf. Haug, Aztareya Brahmana, pp. 32 sq.; Weber, Jrd. Stud., 1X, 355; 
XVIII, 96; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 387, n. 2; Eggeling, S.B.£., XII, 114, n. 2; Schefte- 
lowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, pp. 136 sq. Here the zzvzd comes in after the sixth verse. 

10 Sayana explains thus: the two ¢ycas referred to in I, 2, 1 =6; six pragathas each of 
two verses made into a ¢yca=18; three dhayyds=3; asat su=24; piba somam=15; kaya 
Subhi=15; marutvan Indra=5; janistha ugrah=11; totalg7. But in I, 2,1 there ate seven 
pragathas which would give 100. Apparently the author overlooked this, although of course the 
explanations are possible. Oldenberg (Prolegomena, p. 353) thinks that some of the Jragathas 
may have been counted as two, others as three verses. 


~I, 2,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 175 


there are seven which are over. Whatever is praise of the seven is also praise 
of the ninety. If the first and last are repeated thrice the verses number ror. 
There are five four-jointed™ fingers, two pits, the arm, the collar-bone, the 
shoulder-blade ; these make up twenty-five. The other parts’? have twenty-five 
each, making a hundred, and the trunk is the one hundred and first part. 
The hundred is life,® health, strength, glory; the sacrificer is the hundred and 
first, resting on life, health, strength, glory. These verses become /risiubh.™ 
For the midday pressing is accompanied by ¢r7s/udh verses. 

3. They ask, ‘Why is a swing’ a swing?’ He who blows is the swing. He 


1 The four are, according to Sayana, agra, madhya, mila, tanmiila, and he notes that 
though the a#gustha has really only three, it is given a fourth for the sake of symmetry. 
So in the systems of Caraka and SuSruta (Hoernle, Osteology, pp. 122, 123) there are sixty 
phalanges, giving fifteen in each hand. Here the phalanges-and the metacarpus are reckoned 
as phalanges. In Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 5, each faz, on the other hand, is given three 
parvani, which is the more correct view, and perhaps later, The expression Aafsas7 is doubtful. 
It cannot mean ‘armpits’, for there is but one on each side; Max Miiller says the pits ‘in 
the elbow and the arm’; Monier-Williams, Dzct. (where the reference is inaccurate) gives 
the sense as the two depressions on the wrist ; Sayana says kaksasya parsvadvayam, and possibly 
the armpit may be conceived of as in some way double. He takes, followed by Max Miiller, 
aksah as eye, but (a) Sévas is‘a separate element and the eye belongs to it; (0) the form is 
unparalleled. Friedlander holds that afsa (Ar. afa, Lat. axilla, O.H.G. ahsala) means 
‘shoulder-blade’, but that is the meaning of amsaphalaka in the systems of Caraka (Hoernle, 
J.R. A. S. 1907, Pp. 13), perhaps of SuSruta and Vagbhata (J.2.A.S., 1906, p. 931; Osteology, 
pp- 76,91). So aksa must mean ‘collar-bone’, as I would take it in Sankhayana Aranyaka, 
Il, 4 (aks@ and aksah) and as in the Satapatha Brahmana (désa). The later form is usually 
aksaka, though aksa is found in the ‘non-medical version of Atreya’, see Hoernle, Osteology, 
pp- 55, 134, n. 1, and my review, Z.D.M.G., LXII, 135 sq. Sayana’s error is found in the 
commentators on Yajnavalkya and in the modern translations. 

12 je. the left side, and the two sides of the lower body, which have five four-jointed toes, 
a thigh, a leg, and three parvani (‘ joints’, Max Miiller, rather ‘ articulations’, Hoernle, 7.2.4. S., 
1906, p. 931) according to Sayana. 

13 Because life is one hundred years and the other things depend upon it, Sayana explains, 
probably correctly, as there is no doubt that life as one hundred years is a very early idea, see 
Lanman, Sanskrit Reader, p. 384 and reff., and Weber, Ind. Stud., XVII, 193; Festgruss an 
Roth, p. 137. Cf. Vajasaneyi Samhita Upanisad, 2. 

14 Because the last hymn is ¢ristubh (Sayana). But all the hymns in that Khanda are in 
tristubh. 

15 Cf, Aitareya Brahmana, III, 12, 3-5; Satapatha Brahmana, IV, 2, 5, 20, and other 
passages cited by Bloomfield, 7. 4.0.S., XVI, 4. For the form praiiga, cf. Wackernagel, 
Altindische Grammatik, 1, 41; Z.D.M.G., XL, 678. 

1 The use of the swing refers, in the opinion of Oldenberg (Religion des Veda, p. 444), to the 
sun, which is called ‘the golden swing in heaven’ in RV., VII, 87, 5. This is quite probable, 
as the Mahavrata rite is, at least to some extent, a sun-charm (cf. Introd., p. 28). Sayana’s 
interpretation follows the text and makes the swing Vayu, as does Saakhayana Aranyaka, 
T,7. 1, 2, 4 below is in favour of the sun; cf. Kathaka Samhita, XXXIV, 5, cited in Jnd, 
Stud, WII, 477. Compare the dolayatra of the young Krsna, clearly a vegetation rite. 


176 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 3- 


swings forward in these worlds and then is a swing a swing. ‘There should 
be one plank,’ some say, ‘for the wind blows in one way and (the swing 
should be) like the wind” But this is not to be accepted.? Others say, ‘ There 
should be three planks, for threefold are these worlds and (the swing should) 
resemble them’ But this is not to be accepted. There should be two planks, 
for these two worlds® seem most real, and the ether between them is the sky. 
So let there be two planks. Let them be of wdumbara wood.* The udumbara 
is sap and proper food, and planks of it serve to win sap and proper food. 
Let them be raised in the middle. For in the middle food delights men, and 
so he places the sacrificer in the middle of proper food, There are two kinds 
of ropes,® the right and the left. The right serves for some animals, the left 
for others. When there are both kinds, they serve to win both kinds of animals. 
The ropes should be of darbha® grass. For of all plants dardha is free of evil,’ 
and so they should be of darbha grass. 


2 This is the constant phrase of the Aitareya Brahmana. That of the Kausitaki Brahmana 
and it may be added of the Sankhayana Aranyaka, is za tad ddriyeta. Cf. Aufrecht, Aztareya 
Brahmana, p. 4323; Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 38, n. 6; 44, n. I. 

8 The ether or sky is, as Sayana points out, invisible. Addhatama (for addhd, cf. Wacker- 
nagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 178, and Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 228) is 
a curious word, which occurs also in the Satapatha Brahmana, which also has, VI, 3, 1, 24, 
anaddhapurusa, on which see Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 221, n.2; Eggeling, S. &. Z., XLI, 197; 
Hillebrandt, Rztwal-Litteratur, p. 167. 

‘ Cf, Saakhadyana Aranyaka, I, 7, where there is one plank only: fad vd audumbaram 
bhavaty arg va annadyam udumbara urjo nnadyasyopaptyat. ‘The seat of the Udgatr also is of 
udumbara wood. Tandya Mahabrahmana, V, 5, 2: audumbari bhavaty arg udumbara urjam 
evavarundhe. The Sankhayana passages look like an imitation, while the Aitareya may 
well have followed the Tandya (cf. avaruddhyai). Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 2, 6, 5, has arg va 
dnnam udumbirah. Cf. also Satapatha Brahmana, III, 2, 1, 23, and often. 

5 Sayana explains right and left as fashioned by the right and left hands respectively; perhaps 
twisted from left to right and right to left respectively. The plural vazjavah is probably due, as 
he says, to the fact that as is said in V, I, 3; Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, XVII, 2, 3, the ropes 
are each of three strands. It should be noted that Aranyaka V differs in the purpose assigned 
to the ropes, which it associates with the holding together of the swing. Similarly it recognizes 
the number of planks as three or two, while two is here prescribed. Again, I, 2, 4, the height 
of the swing is fixed at a musti, while V, 1, 3 gives as alternatives catwrangula or musti. 
These remind us that the last book must differ considerably in date from the first. 

® On darbha cf. Eggeling, S. B. #., XII, 84; Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 70. 

* The construction of the genitive with a positive is based on the analogy of the superlative, 
e.g. infra, I, 2, 4 (Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax,'§§ 65, 91 Il). Similarly the 
ablative is found dependent on a positive, e.g. RV., V, 10, 4 (Oldenberg, S. B. £., XLVI, 390), 
Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 58, Sanskrit Syntax, p. 78; Delbriick, Grundriss, III, 
I, 216; Pischel, Godt, Gel. Anz., 1884, p. 509, Vedische Studien, 1, 309; Geldner, ibid.,, TH, 
76,77; and see II, 3,1,n.6, For the word apahatapapma, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 25, 4: 
apahatapapmanah and anapahatapdpmanah ; Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 3, 21 (Max Miller, 
S. B. £., XV, 168, n. 3); Chandogya Upanisad, I, 2,9; VIII, 1,5; 4,13 7, 1 


=I, 2, 4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 177 

4. Some say, ‘The swing should be one ell above the ground, for by that 
are the heavenly worlds measured.’ But this is not to be accepted. Others 
say, ‘It should be a span, for by that are the breaths measured.’ But this is 
not to be accepted. It should be one fist’ above the ground, for by that all 
proper food is made and all proper food is taken. So let it be just one fist 
above the ground. Some say, ‘Let him mount the swing from east to west, 
like the sun here who shines, for he mounts these worlds from east to west.’ 
But this is not to be accepted. Some say, ‘Let him mount sideways,? for men 
mount a horse* sideways, thinking thereby to win all their desires.’ But this 
is not to be accepted. They say, ‘Let him mount from behind, men indeed 
mount a ship from behind and the swing is a heavenfaring‘* ship.’ Therefore 
let him mount from behind. Let him touch the swing with his chin. For 
thus does the parrot mount a tree, and the parrot eats most of all birds. 
Therefore let him touch the swing with his chin. Let him mount the swing 
with his arms.° So the hawk sweeps down on birds, and so he mounts trees, 
and he is the strongest of birds. Therefore let him mount with his arms. Let 
him not withdraw from the earth one foot, lest he lose his hold of it. The 
Hotr mounts the swing, the Udgatr the seat of udumbara wood. The swing 
is masculine, the seat feminine, and they are united. This union is made at 
the beginning of the hymn for the sake of offspring. Children and cattle 
are his who knows this. Now the swing is food, the seat prosperity. Thus 


1 The fist is a convenient measure and a fistful is a good mouthful, so Sayana explains, Cf, 
for these measures, Hopkins, 7. 4. O. S., XXIII, 141 sq. 

2 The swing is east and west; north and south is sideways, says Sayana. The accusatives 
below are quasi predicative, cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp. 78, 79; UI, 2, 4. 

3 As Max Miiller points out, this is a clear reference to horse-riding, which is not certainly 
known or referred to in the Rgveda. But it is known to the Yajurveda and the Atharvaveda, 
Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 230; Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, p. 166. Similarly in the 
Homeric age riding is only gradually coming into use in Greece. So Satapatha Brahmana, 
VII, 3, 2, 17; and cf. RV., I, 163, 9; Weber, Berl, Sttz., 1898, p. 564. 

* This and the comparison with the sun are certainly in favour of the theory of Oldenberg, 
referred to above (n.1 on I, 2, 3), and see App. to my Sankhayana Aranyaka, pp. 73 sq. 

5 Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 16,1, gives the breast. The parrot in mounting strikes the 
tree with its chin. It is kept by princes, ministers, &c., and so is well fed, says Sayana. The 
form is strange (Wackemagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 184; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, 
p- 37) and probably not Indo-European. Cf. Hoermle, Osteology, pp. 39, 40. 

6 That is the forearm from the elbow. For further details of this ceremony see V, 1, 4. 
For ned below, cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 3175 Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, §240,n. The agreement of annadatamah with Syenah is characteristic. See Taittiriya 
Samhita, V, 9, 11, 1: Syéno vat vdyasam pdtisthah; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 80. 
Speijer (Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 95 ¢) is unable to cite an example from Sanskrit, 
It is the general rule in Latin, where, however, post-Augustan exceptions occur, e. g, velocissimum: 
animalium delphinus est (Pliny, Nat. Hist., ix, 8, 20). 

KEITH N 


178 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 2, 4- 


they? mount to food and fortune. The Hotrakas ® with the Brahman sit down on 
seats of grass. Plants and trees having grown up bear fruit. So then if they 
mount all together on this day they mount on strength, on sap, on proper 
food. This serves to win sap® and proper food. Some say, ‘Let him descend” 
after saying vasat’“ But this is not to be accepted. For the honour done to 
one that sees it not’? is indeed not done. Others say, ‘Let him descend after 
taking the food.’ But this is not to be accepted. For the honour done to 
one that has approached near is indeed not done. Let him descend after seeing 
the food. For that is honour indeed which is done to one who sees it. Therefore 
only after seeing the food, let him descend. Let him descend towards the east, for 
in the east is born the seed} of the gods. Then let him descend towards the east. 


7 They, i.e. the Hotr and Udgatr. Max Miiller follows R in translating ‘ he’, but this makes 
nonsense and the commentary shows that R is wrong. 

® They are the Hotr’s assistants, viz. PraSastr, Brahmanacchamsin, Potr, Nestr, Agnidhra, 
and Acchavaka. The division is not strictly accurate, as the second, third, and fifth are really 
classed with the Brahman and the Nestr with the Adhvaryu, but it corresponds to facts better than 
the later classifications, see Weber, Jud. Stud., X, 144 sq.; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, 
pp- 383 sq-; Hillebrandt, Rztwal-Litteratur, p. 97. vrsth may perhaps be better spelt Jrszh. 
Both the v or 4 and s present difficulties, cf. Wackernagel, Aléndische Grammattk, 1, 184, 2333 
Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 36. See Geiger, Litt. und Sprache d. Stnghalesen, p. 28. The 
following sentence is quoted in the Naigeya Anukramani, Ind. Stud., XVII, 373, 374- 

® Max Miiller suggests that iso before aah is expected. If it had occurred, it would have 
been quite natural, but it is not necessary to suspect the text as the reading above is zsam eva tad 
airjam annadyam and the eva tad renders it less unnatural that 750 should not occur. The 
phrase eva tad is very common in the Aitareya Brahmana, tad being of course adverbial. For 
the usual asyndeton, cf. Delbriick, Altendische Syntax, p. 59. 

10 The descent does not of course come here in its proper order, but is inserted to complete the 
discussion of the topic of the movements of the priests. 

11 The reason for this being rejected is that it is only after the second vasaf (the azwvasat) 
that this 44a%sa comes up, so that it could not see the priest on the swing descending in its 
honour (Sayana). For the word, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik,1,172; Foy, Z.D.M.G., 
L, 139; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 343; Weber, Ind. Stud., XVIII, 269; for the form, 
Whitney, Saxskrit Grammar, § 1091. 

12 For the form afafyate, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, i, 77; Delbriick, 
Vergl. Syntax, Ul, 529 sq., Altindische Syntax, pp. 540 sq. Adhyrstaya appears clearly to 
come from #/7s in the sense ‘move’ (cf. Greek madivopoos). The separation into two roots 
(maintained in Bohtlingk and Monier-Williams’ D7ct.) seems quite needless (cf. Whitney, 2oo¢s, 
&c., p. 140), as ysté, spear, can easily be derived from Ars as trans. Cf. also Khila, IV, 5, 3 
(ed. Scheftelowitz). 

18 Max Miiller suggests, and S apparently independently also suggests, that the reading may 
be devaretah samprajdyate. But the use of samprajadyate is curious, as the say has no 
intelligible force, and on the other hand the form vefasa is not impossible, as forms from a, as, 
asa, exchange more or less freely throughout Sanskrit, see Whitney, Sazskrit Grammar, 
§§ 415, 1319, and a long list in Wackernagel, op. cit., II, i, 113, 114; in a Bahuvrihi agndretasd 
occurs in the Satapatha, ibid., 111. In Pali of course the asa form prevails, Miiller, Paz 
Grammar, p. 65. Cf. also Pischel, Prdkrit Grammar, §§ 407 sq. 


-I, 3,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 179 


ADHYAYA 8. 


They say, ‘Let him begin this day’ with saying the word Arm.’ In the 
word Arm is brahman, this day is brahman, and so he begins drahman by means 
of drahman,* who knows this. Now with regard to his beginning with the 
word 47m, the word is masculine,* and the ve feminine. They make a pair 
and so he makes a pair at the beginning of the hymn for the sake of offspring. 
Children and cattle are his who knows this. Again with regard to his beginning 
with the word Azm, the word is to drahman like a wooden shovel.* Just as 
one desires to dig up anything with a wooden shovel, so with the word one 
digs up drahman. Whatever he desires, he digs up with the word zm, who 
knows this. Again with regard to his beginning with the word zm, the word is 
the discrimination of divine and human speech.® . So he, who begins with the 
utterance of the word 4zm, discriminates divine and human speech. 


1 The time of Azmé&rtya and pratipadyate are obviously really identical. This is readily 
explained by the originally timeless force of the form Aytya (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§§ 889, 894). So the aorist participle in Greek sometimes coincides with the time of the verb, 
e.g. Monro, Homeric Grammar, p. 212. Delbriick (Altindische Syntax, pp. 405-409) holds 
that in all these cases the distinction of time between the main verb and the gerund exists, but, 
however natural the growth of this use is, it is only to be found in the examples by forcing the 
sense. Speijer (Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 223) lays stress on the ‘ aoristic’ effect of the 
weak root and appears to think that this accounts for the past force. But it should be noted that 
in Vedic we have no evidence that the forms were ever felt as other than participles either present 
or past. In striyam drstuaya kitavdm tatapa it is most probable that the writer did not feel 
drstvaya as=‘after haying seen’, but as ‘seeing’. Cf. my remarks inf, 2. A. S., 1907, p. 164. 
For beginning the Mahavrata with Aim, cf. Saakhayana Aranyaka, II, 1. For him + /ky, cf. 
Whitney, § 1079. Itis obsolete in the classical language. 

* Cf. I, 1,35 2, 2. 

3 Cf. I,2, 4. The use is found in the Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 3, and often in the Satapatha 
Brahmana. For the idea, cf. the stories of the wedlock of the saan and 7c in the Satapatha 
(IV, 6, 7, 11, &c.), and Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmanas, and Aitareya Brahmana, IL, 23, 1. 

$ Sayana explains this as a metaphor from the search of hidden treasure, a probable 
supposition in the case of India, where burial of treasure (cf. Gautama Dharma Sitra, X, 43-45; 
Vasistha Dharma Sitra, IV, 13, 14; Manu, VIII, 35-39; Yajiiavalkya, II, 34, 35) has always 
been frequent in consequence of the uncertainty of life and government. A different idea is 
found in Satapatha Brahmana, VI, 3, 2; 5, 4, &c. 

5 That is, it distinguishes ordinary conversation from divine service. The Saakhayana 
Aranyaka, II, 1, gives different reasons for the importance of Aim. In Satapatha Brahmana, 
VI, 3, 1, 34, where the same distinction occurs, Sdyana explains as Sanskrit and ApabhramSa 
(Eggeling, S.B. Z., XLI, 200, n.); daivyai must be correct, devyat cannot well be adjectival, 
and the error in the MSS. is trifling. Cf. II], 2, 5. It is noteworthy that later dazvz vac is used 
for Sanskrit, cf. Dandin, KavyadarSa, I, 33: sayiskrtam nama daivi vag anvakhyata maharsibhih. 
Franke (Pali und Sanskrit, p. 89) compares the fact that Mathura was called ‘ city of the gods’ 
because of the Kusana title devaputra, and is inclined to think that ‘secondary’ Sanskrit came 
to India from KaSmir via Mathura, a hypothesis which can hardly be regarded as probable. 


N 4% 


180 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 3, 2- 


2. They say, ‘What is the beginning of this day?’ Let him reply, ‘Mind 
and speech.’! All desires rest on the one, the other yields all desires. All 
desires rest on the mind,? for with the mind man conceives all desires. All desires 
rest on him who knows this. Speech yields all desires, for by speech man 
expresses all desires. Speech yields all desires to him who knows this. Then 
they say, ‘One should not really begin the day with a 7c, yajus, or saman verse, 
nor start from*® a 7¢, yajus, or sdman verse. So one should say the zyahrtes 
first. The vyahrt’s are bhiih, bhuvak, and svar,* and they are the three Vedas. 
Bhih is the Reveda, bhuvah the Yajurveda, and svar the Samaveda.> Therefore 


The real meaning of the discrimination is suggested by Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 18, 13: om 
ztt vat datvam tatheti manusam \ daivena caivainay tan manusena ca papad enasah pramuncatz, 
cf. Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt.,1,162,n.1. The later use of dazvi vac must be related 
to Devanagari. For the question of Prakrit, cf. I, 5, 2,n. In the Ramayana passage where 
Hanumant ponders as to addressing Sita, the possibilities he contemplates are (according to 
Jacobi) vacam manusim samskrtam, or dvijatir iva, vacam samskrtam, which appears clearly 
to discriminate between the popular and sacerdotal forms of Sanskrit. That the former 
expression means (as Dr. Grierson, Jd. Ant., XXIII, 56, holds) the Prakrit of the educated 
Ksatriyas and well-to-do persons round the court appears excessively improbable. Nor is it 
correct to say that these forms of Sanskrit were practically alike. The Epic and the Sanskrit 
of the Brahminical schools are of distinctively different style, and Sita might well have been 
surprised at being addressed not in the Ksatriya fashion but by priestly expressions, much 
as a lady of the middle ages would find a great difference between the address of a countess and 
a monk, even when both spoke the same Latin language. 

1 Sayana explains this as referring to the need for care in going through the service, 
composed as it is of mixed verses, 

? Sayana explains that the desires are phases of mind, manovrttivisesah, which is too subtle 
for the Aranyaka. Cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, Il, 2: manasa hi kaman kimayate; and 
Jacob, Concordance, p. 292; Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 2, 3. 

5 Max Miiller, following Sayana, takes the words zarco—zyad iti as giving the ground for 
the rule referred to in tad dhur. But this leaves no z¢¢ to mark the end of the rule referred to in 
tad ahur, and in view of the. usual practice of the Aranyaka, it is safer to take the quotation 
as extending to zydd@, There is no doubt that the construction of the last part of the sentence 
is not easy. For the abl., cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp. 1078q.; Speijer, Vedische und 
Sanskrit-Syntax, § 51. 

* For the later history of the triad see Deussen, Phzlosophie der Upanishads, p. 196; E. T., 
p- 217. See also Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, III, 15; IV, 28, and I, 1. Taittiriya 
Upanisad, I, 5, 6, shows clear signs of a later origin than the Aitareya by its elaboration. 

5 On the three Vedas and the Atharvaveda, see especially Bloomfield, A¢harvaveda, 
pp. 21 sq.-; Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 191 sq.; Hopkins, Great Epic of India, 
pp. 2sq. The silence of the Aranyaka is certainly in favour of its early date. It is of course true 
that the Atharvaveda contains much old material * and probable that a Samhita existed before the 
Aranyaka was written (cf. Taittitilya Samhita, VII, 5, 11, 2, where the Angirases are referred to 


® T agree with Winternitz that Oldenberg’s view (Lzteratur des alten Indien, p. 41) that prose 


magic formulae are older than ‘ poetic’ which are imitations of the poetry of the hymns of the 
Rgveda is not probable. 


=I, 3,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 181 


he does not really begin the day with a 7c, yajus, or sdman verse, nor start from 
a rc, yajus, OY saman verse. 


3. He begins with /ad,’ this. Now ‘this this’? is food, and so thus he obtains 
food. Prajapati indeed uttered this as the first word consisting of one syllable 
or of two,® viz. /a/a or fafa. So a child when it first speaks utters the word 
of one or two syllables, ¢a/a or fa/fa. So with this very word with /a/a in it! 
he begins. A Rsi says (RV., X, 71, 1), ‘O Brhaspati, the first point of speech,’ 
for this is the first point of speech. ‘ Which they have uttered making a name,’ 
for by speech are names made. ‘ That of them which was the best and flawless,’ 
for this is the best and flawless. ‘That is hidden in secret by their love and 
yet is made manifest,’ for this as regards the body is secret, merely the deities 
(who enter the body), but as regards the gods® it is made manifest. This is the 
meaning of the verse. ® 


(apparently as a fourth Samhita), and Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., I, 110), but the 
recognition is a sign of later date (Taittiriya Samhita, VII, is not probably early, but, like VI, 
is later than the Aitareya Brahmana). 

1 Tad is the first word of the first stanza of the first hymn of the Niskevalya Sastra, the 
so-called Rajana, RV., X, 120, I. 

2 It may be rendered ‘this word tad’ (= tat tad-itz), but Sayana takes it as a repetition. 
The repetition of azvam is apparently not connected with that of ad, though it may have 
been helped by it. 

’ Max Miiller seems to regard the two alternatives as ¢a¢ and éa¢a or tata. This of course 
is the usual signification of ehaksara and dvyaksara, but Sayana refers these words to the 
quantity of the first and second syllables in ¢a¢a and ‘ata respectively. The form of the 
sentences makes this seem certainly correct, however unusual it may be. We may have here 
early evidence of the omission of the final a in ordinary conversation. 

* I take fat tatavatya separately and eva fat as =‘so’. This seems also to be Sayana’s 
interpretation. Max Miiller says: ‘With this very word, consisting of ¢a¢ or fatta [cf. the 
reading of L], he begins,’ and in a note: ‘If fat is called the very same word, eva is used 
in the sense of zva. This appears rather unsatisfactory, and Sayana is probably right in 
thinking ‘at and ¢a/a similar enough for the purpose here in view. This passage, indeed, seems 
to be a deliberate and somewhat elaborate variant of the older legend (preserved in Satapatha 
Brahmana, XI, 1, 6) by which Prajapati when he first spoke uttered bhih, bhuvah, and 
suvar, which are words of one and two syllables respectively. Sayana has: ekena hrasveno- 
petaikaksara \ dvabhyam hrasvadirghabhyim upeta dvyaksara, Ekadvyaksara is apparently 
an adject. Dvandya with disjunctive force; cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, Il, i, 70 ; 
Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp. 73 sq-; Vergl. Syntax, WII, 224 sq., for early examples. The 
whole sense is little more than that fad which is equal to ¢a¢(a) or ¢at(a) is the name which, as 
brahman, is revealed in the deities and implicit in man in whose organs, &c., the deities are (as 
grr PEAT. 6's Sankhayana Aranyaka, 1X, 1, &c.). 

5 For adhidaivatam, cf. Chandogya Upanisad, I, 3, 1, &c.; Whitney, P. A. O. S., Oct., 1890, 
p- li. So often in Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, _ 

6 This stanza is very obscure. Sayana quotes ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, I, 15, 8, where it is 
Jaid down that a child’s secret name is only to be known by father and mother until the 
upanayana. That this is what is referred to here is not impossible, as Max Miiller points out, 


182 AITAREYA ARANYAKA’ I, 3, 4- 


4. He begins with,! ‘That was the oldest in the worlds’ (RV., X, 120, 1), 
for that? is indeed the oldest in the worlds. ‘Whence sprung the terrible one 
with brilliant might,’ for from it he was born who is terrible with brilliant might. 
‘Immediately on birth he destroys his foes,’ for immediately on being born he 
destroyed evil. ‘After whom all helpers rejoice,’ for all creatures are helpers, 
and they rejoice after him, saying, ‘He® has risen, he has risen. ‘Growing 
by strength, the powerful one’ (RV., X, 120, 2), for he grows by strength, the 
powerful one. ‘As foe he smites fear into the Dasa,’ for all fear him. ‘ Taking 
that which breathes and that which breathes not,’ this refers to the living and 
the lifeless. ‘What was offered in the feasts came to thee,’ this means, ‘all is 
in thy power. ‘All turn their thoughts on thee’ (RV., X, 120, 3), this means 
all beings, all minds, all thoughts, turn on thee. ‘When these two become 
three helpers,’ these two being united produce offspring. Children and cattle 
are his who knows this. ‘Join what is sweeter than sweet with the sweet,’ for 
the pair is sweet, the offspring sweet, and so with the pair he joins the offspring. 
‘He‘ conquered by the sweet that which is sweet,’ for the pair is sweet, the 
offspring is sweet, and thus through the pair he conquers offspring. A Rsi® says, 


but the interpretation adopted in n. 4 above seems to render the reference quite unnecessary. 
The last verse he explains as meaning that the form of the gods who enter the body is hidden 
from men, but the gods themselves know the name well. This is practically meaningless, and 
Max Miiller suggests that it may be that the name refers to the gods or to ¢ad, the drahman. 
The reference, however, to the deities who enter the body is clearly meant in some form, cf. IT, 
4,23 1,53 and the sense is the drahkman = tad_which is the beginning of speech and the first 
of names is revealed (as the gods) and implicit in man. This section is referred to by ‘Sayana’ 
on Atharvaveda, XVIII, 4, 77; see Lanman in Whitney’s Azharvaveda, p. 892. 

1 The ¢yca, RV., X, 120, 1-3, which begins is a stotriya, because it corresponds to the 
Rajana Saman. 

2 i.e. brahman (Siyana). ‘The explanations of this hymn in the Aranyaka must be 
deliberately perverse, so absurd are they. Cf. Wackernagel, <Altindische Grammatik, I, 
SXiXj es On 

8 The double wdagéd is, according to Sayana, because he is Aditya or heaven, and Agni or 
earth. The exact use of the aorist is characteristic of the early character of the text, cf. 
Whitney’s criticism of Delbriick (Syr¢. Forsch., II, 8-86; Altindische Syntax, pp. 280-289) in 
A.].£., XIII, 290; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 174. 

* Sayana takes adah as referring to mzthunam which is sumadhu as consisting of the son 
and daughter-in-law. J/adhund is equal to grandchildren, and adhzyodhih is ‘ provide’, i.e. 
‘provide that dear pair with dear offspring, our grandchildren’. He does not therefore 
even follow the Aranyaka, which clearly took szmadhu as accusative. Max Miiller translates : 
‘And this (the son when married) being very sweet conquered through the sweet.’ But this 
represents neither the Aranyaka nor Sayana. 

5 This verse, which is not in the Rgveda, is not by any means clearly connected with the rest. 
Sayana gives two alternatives, that it is connected with the verse suddoh suddiyah suaduna syja 
sam, or with the whole Sastra (not, as in Max Miiller, that it is connected with the hymn ¢ad zd 
dasa, or the Veda in general), In the first case ‘this body’ is the body of the sacrificer, the other 


-I, 3,5 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 183 


‘Since he raised this body in that body ;’ he means this body consisting of the 
Veda in that corporeal body. ‘Then let this body’ be the medicine of that,’ 
he means this body consisting of the Veda is to be the medicine of that corporeal 
body. Of this eight® syllables are gaya/r?, eleven are tristubh, twelve jagatz, and 
ten viraj. This consisting of ten syllables rests in the other three metres. The 
three syllable word purusa® goes into the vird. These indeed are all metres, 
the three and the viraj. To him who knows this" thus is this day completed 
with all the metres. | 

5. He extends the verses by the use of nada.1 Nada indeed is man. So 
a man speaking sounds as it were. In the words xadam va odatinam ° (RV., VIII, 
69, 2), odatyak are the waters in heaven, for they water all this; and they are 
the waters of the mouth, for they water all proper food. In nadam yoyuvatinam, 
yoyuvatyak are the waters of the sky, for they inundate as it were; and they 
are the waters of perspiration,® for they run constantly as it were. In the 
words patim vo aghnydanam, aghnyak are the waters that are born of the smoke 
of fire,t and they are the waters that spring from the organ. In dheninam 


body the body of the parents and the result is seen in svddoh, &c. The other case gives the 
interpretation of the Aranyaka, as Sayana himself admits, zad etad dvitiyant vyakhyanam asyam 
ity adina brahmanena spastikriyate. This shows how little Sayana felt bound to follow his 
authorities. The words sv@m—azrayata occur in various guises in Atharvaveda, Wales 
Taittiriya Samhita, I, 7, 12, 2; Maitrayani Samhita, I, 10, 3; Agvalayana Srauta Sitra, II, 19, 
325 Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, III, 17, I. 

® The body of the sacrificer (Sayana). 

7 The hymn fad zd asa (Sayana). 

8 The hymn, RV., X, 120, is ¢vistubh, and the desired metres are only obtained by torturing 
it. The first, second, and fourth pddas have ten syllables, the third eleven. The first eight 
of the first pada give the gayatri, the remaining two added to the ten of the second and fourth 
padas the jagatz, and the first, second, and fourth (or rather the fourth), the Vira}. 

9 Because by adding fz to the first pada, ru to the second, sak to the third, the verses all 
become ¢ristubh. See V, 1, 6. 

10 In evam vid (perhaps one word), cf. Wackermagel, Altindische Grammatik, Ul, i, 68. 
vidusa may be genitive (cf. n. 8 on I, 2, 2) or dative. 

1 The exact meaning is explained in V, 1, 6. After each pada of RV., X, 120, 1, is 
inserted (besides the syllables pw, ru, sah) one pada of the hymn, RV., VIII, 69, 2, so as to 
make a byhati. Cf. Satapatha Brahmana, VIII, 6, 2, 3, and Eggeling, S.&,£., XLIU, 113, n. 1. 

2 Sayana explains the verse with reference to juice produced at the third pressing of the 
Soma, the vjzsa (cf. Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., 1, 235 $4-), and takes adam as the sacrificer, and 
supplies raksata. For the real sense see Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1, 191 sq. 

8 svedate is clearly correct, the accusative being cognate. R's svedante is primarily attractive 
but is improbable, and as a perusal of p. 80 will show, he (like the MSS., cf. Whitney, 
P. A. O. S., Oct., 1887, p. xxv) is very uncertain about nasals. Cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 275; Speijer, Vedische und Sanshrit-Syntax, § 24; Delbriick, Vergl. Syntax, I, 366-368. 

4 Sayana gives two interpretations, either smoke (in the shape of a cloud) produced by 
fire, or from smoke and fire, quoting Kalidasa, Meghadita, 4, dhiimajyotihsalilamarutane 


184 AITAREYA ARANYAKA © I, 3, 5 


tsudhyasitt, the dhenavaf are the waters, for they stir all this, and by zsudhyast 
he means ‘thou art lord’.® He extends® a érisfubh and an anustubh. For the 
tristubh is male, the anus{ubh female, and the two are a pair. So a man having 
taken to himself a wife regards himself as it were more complete. By repeating 
the first verse thrice, the verses become twenty-five.’ The trunk is the twenty- 
fifth, Prajapati is the twenty-fifth, He has ten fingers, ten toes, two legs, two 
arms, and the trunk is the twenty-fifth, He adorns this trunk, the twenty-fifth. 
Further the day (of the sacrifice) is twenty-five, and the s/oma hymn of this day 
is twenty-five, like is brought about by like. So the two are twenty-five. 

6. He begins? with /ad, this. Now ‘this this’ is food, and so thus he obtains 
food. Prajapati indeed uttered this as the first word consisting of one syllable 
or of two, viz. /a/a or fafa. So a child when it first speaks utters the word 
of one or two syllables, ¢a/a or fafa. So with this very word with /a/a in it 
he begins. A Rsi says (RV., X, 71, 1), ‘O Brhaspati, the first point of speech,’ 
for this is the first point of speech. ‘Which they have uttered making a name,’ 
for by speech are names made. ‘That of them which was the best and flawless,’ 
for this is the best and flawless. ‘That is hidden in secret by their love and 
yet is made manifest,’ for this as regards the body is secret, namely the deities 
(who enter the body), but as regards the gods it is made manifest. This is 
the meaning of the verse. 

7. He begins with the hymn, ‘That was the oldest in the worlds’ (RV., X, 120, 1). 
What is oldest is great; the form of this day as possessing greatness! is perfect. 
(There is the word ‘ greatness’) in the verse, ‘That fame of thine, O Maghavan, 
through thy greatness’ (RV., X, 54,1); the form of this day as possessing greatness 
is perfect. (There is the word ‘strength’) in the verse, ‘He groweth more for 
strength’ (RV., VI, 30, 1); the form of this day as possessing strength is perfect. 


sayinipatah kva meghah. The waters are aghnyd, he says, because plants and trees are to be 
tended by all. Cf. also Brhaddevata, IV, 41, which explains RV., I, 164, 43: Sakamayam 
ahimam; Atharyaveda, IX, 10, 25. 

5 «Thou art food’, in Max Miiller’s translation must be a slip, fatiyasé is regular, see 
Whitney, Saxskri¢ Grammar, § 1061, and is found in the Satapatha Brahmana in this form. 

° tad id asa is in tristubh, nadam va odatiném in anustubh. The former is male because 
bigger than the latter. For the following, cf. Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, p. 157. 

” The twenty-five are made up by nine verses of RV., X, 120,13 six of X, 54; five of VI, 30, 
and three of I, 51, 4 which are mentioned in I, 3, 7 below. Cf. I, 1, 2, 4 and n. 6 on V, Berets 

1 This is a mere repetition of Khanda 3, and the insertion of it here according to Sayana 
is for the glory of the whole hymn, whereas the purpose of it as Khanda 3 was to extol the 
word ¢ad. This may be correct, but it is very obscure. 

* The difference in the first two verses, of course, is that in the first Jvestham needs to 
be equated to mahad, whereas mahitvé actually occurs in the second. For the construction, 
Gils 22) 71, Ds 4a 


-I, 3,8 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 185 


(There is the word ‘hymns’) in the verse, ‘Then, manliest of men, with songs, 
with hymns’ (RV., III, 51, 4); this day is indeed a hymn, and the form of this 
day as possessing a hymn is perfect. He extends the first two? verses, which 
are deficient, by a syllable. In the small* (womb) seed is deposited, in the small 
(heart) the vital spirits, in the small (stomach) food is placed, This serves for the 
obtainment of these desires. He obtains these desires who knows this. The 
two of ten syllables serve to obtain both kinds of proper food, that which is 
footed and that which is footless They become eighteen syllables apiece.° 
Of the ten, nine are the breaths,® one is the self. This is the perfection of the 


self. Eight syllables? remain in each. Who knows this obtains whatsoever * 
he desires. 


8. He extends the verses by means of zada.!_ Now breath is sound. Therefore 
every breath, when it sounds, sounds loud as it were. The verse madam va 
odatinam (RV., VIII, 69, 2) is by its syllables* an wsyzh, but by its feet an 
anustubh. Usnth is life, anustubh speech. Thus he places speech and life in 
him. By repeating the first verse thrice, the verses become twenty-five. The 
trunk is the twenty-fifth, Prajapati is the twenty-fifth. He has ten fingers, ten 


2 That is RV., X, 120, 1°, with ten syllables, and VII, 69, 2°, with seven. He adds fu to them, 

TCE 1. ty2 a0 bn. 

* i.e, animals and vegetables (Sayana). 

5 i.e. ten syllables in RV., X, 120, 1%, the syllable fu, and seven in} VALE. OGyp 20 
Similarly with the other three padas. 

® (trast) chidrani is the version of Sayana and it is as probable as any other, though the 
word originally meant breath and only metaphorically is transferred to its use as describing 
the organs of sense. The nine ‘ orifices’, seven in the head and two in the body, according 
to a Sruti (Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, II, 5,9; 10; 6, 8, is the reference, I think) cited 
by Sayana (sapta vai Sirsanyah prana doav avéfcau), are referred to in the Kathaka Upanisad, 
V,1 (where in all, however, there are eleven), SvetaSvatara Upanisad, III, 18, Yogasikha 
Upanisad, 4, Yogatattva Upanisad, 16, and elsewhere. They are ears, eyes, mouth, nostrils 
and organs of evacuation, with the navel when ten are counted, as in the Jaiminiya Upanisad, 
and Jaiminiya Brahmana, II, 77 (/.4.0.5., XV, 240), and drahmarandhra when eleven are 
counted. Cf. Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, p. 243; E.T., p. 265; Sechzig Upanishads, 
p- 281, n. 1, and nava vai Sirasi pranah, Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 2, which points to a different 
idea, for which see I, 4, 1, 0. 5; 5, 1,0. 65 2, n. 13. 

7 That is, after deducting the ten from the eighteen. 

® In his interesting note on relative clauses in the Veda, Edgren, P. A. O.S., May, 1883, 
pp. xii-xv, points out that unlike Greek, Vedic Sanskrit uses the indef. rel. pronoun with the 
indic. This rule is not observed in the later Vedic literature, e.g. A$Svalayana Grhya Sitra, 
I, 3,1: atha khalu yatra kva ca hosyan syat, &c. 

1 i.e. by the stanza, RV., VIII, 69, 2. 

2 It has four padas, and is therefore like an anustubh, which of course it really is. But it has 
in the Samhita form only twenty-seven syllables, or resolving the y in aghnyandm in pada 3, 
twenty-eight, which is the number of syllables in an wsxih, which, however, has three padas 
(8+8+12) only. 


186 AITAREYA ARANYAKA 3 


toes, two legs, two arms, and the trunk is the twenty-fifth. He adorns this trunk, 
the twenty-fifth. Further this day (of the sacrifice) is twenty-five, the s/oma hymn 
of this day is twenty-five, like is brought about by like. So the two are twenty- 
five. This is the twenty-fifth with regard to the body. Now with regard to the 
deities. The eye, ear, mind, speech, and vital spirits, these five deities* have 
entered into this person, and he has entered into these five deities. He is then * 
pervaded wholly in all his limbs up to his hair and nails. So all beings, down 
to ants, are born thus pervaded. A Rsi says (RV., X, 114, 8), ‘A thousandfold 
are these fifteen members,’ ® for five arises from ten. ‘As large as heaven and 
earth, so large is it, for the self is as large as heaven and earth. ‘A thousand- 
fold are the thousand mights,’® thus does the poet please and magnify the 
members. ‘As far as drahman extends so far does Vac,’ wherever there is 
brahman, there is Vac,? wherever Vac, there is Jrahman, is what is meant. The 
first® of these hymns has nine verses, for nine are the breaths, and it serves 
to win them. The second has six verses, the seasons are six, and it serves to 
win them. The third has five verses, the panki/® has five feet, and it is food, 
so it serves to win proper food. Then comes a tristich, there are three threefold 
worlds, and it serves to conquer them. These verses become Jérhaiis,° the 


Ci. Ts, graboves LL 4, 2. 

* ¢Then’ is taken by Max Miller as referring to the five deities, by Sayana as referring 
to the body in which purusa is. But the latter view seems quite sound. The senses and 
purusa are absolutely inter-connected. For sagah, cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, III, 
3, 3. For @, cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 88; J. A. O.S., XXIII, 151 sq. 

5 ukthé Sayana translates uwtkrstiny angani and, as hymns will not do, he must be 
approximately right. His view is that the fifteen are made up of the five above mentioned and 
the corresponding five elements (earth, water, fire, wind, and ether) forming the mother and 
father. But this is more than doubtful. For the ten the aman comes with its five organs 
and a complete body. 

6 Because the senses are applied to a great variety of objects (Sdyana). 

7 Brahman is in all and wherever a name is given, it is there, cf. I, 3, 3. Sayana quotes 
a Sruti, Taittiriya Aranyaka, III, 12: sarvand ripdnt vicitya dhivah \ nimani krtvabhivadan 
yad aste\\ For the very close connexion of drakman and Vac, see I, 1, 1,n. 8; Atharvayeda, 
IV, 20; Bloomfield, Atharvaveda, p. 88. 

®* RV., X, 120, has nine verses, The repetition of esd is due, says Sayana, to the com- 
parative nature of these hymns as used in the Sastra, the first esam refers to the hymns 
as they stand in the Sastra, the second to them alone as they stand in the Samhita. This 
is of course impossible. For the nine prdyas, see I, 3, 7, n.6. For the seasons, cf. Zimmer, 
Altindisches Leben, pp. 373, 374; Oldenberg, S.&, Z., XLVI, 184. 

° annam ca panktichandasa sadhyatuat ksetresu panktiriipenotpannatvad va panktiripam, 
Sayana. For the tristich and the worlds, cf. Saakhayana Aranyaka, II, 3. 

The first pada of RV., X, 120, 1, has, with fz, eleven syllables, the first pada of RV., 
VIII, 69, 2, seven verses, making eighteen. So two padas give thirty-six syllables, or a drhati. 
The twenty-three verses give forty-six dyha/is, as each is extended similarly (Sayana), 


-I, 4,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 187 


metre, the immortal, the world of the gods. This is the body. Even so he who 
knows this comes by this way near to the undying self.” 


ADHYAYA 4. 


Then comes the sidadohas verse Sidadohas is breath and by breath he 
joins together all joints. Then the neck verses.” They denote them as uszzh 
verses according to their metre. Next comes the sidadohas verse. Sidadohas is 
breath and by breath he joins together all joints. Then come the head verses. 
They are in gaya/ri, for it is the beginning of the metres, and the head is the 
beginning of the members of the body.’ They are in arkavat* verses. Arka 
is Agni. They are nine verses, the head is of nine pieces.’ He recites the tenth 
verse. It is the skin and hairs of the head. It serves for reciting more than 


M Sayana explains this obscure statement as referring to a birth as a deva. It may be 
doubted if it means more than he comprehends the immortal body (cf. dma, just above), i.e. 
he who knows these verses thus performs that part of the rite which corresponds with the body 
of the bird to which the Niskevalya Sastra is likened (cf.I,1,1). That amd above means 
body or trunk seems certain, and the second dtmdnam can hardly refer to anything else. If 
it does, it may simply mean, ‘he becomes immortal.’ The ace. is governed by adfz; cf. I, 
¥, 3,2. 150. 

1 The Sankhayana Aranyaka treats all this very briefly, II, 1, covers all Adhyaya 3 and 
the sadadohas. The firsan comes in II, 2, before the graiva, I, 3; then the paksau (aksa, 
baht, prahastaka), 11, 4-5; then the caturuttarani, II, 6; the asttis, gayatri, barhati, ausnthi, 
Il, 7-10; the vasa, II, 11; the dvipadah, Il, 12; the aindrdgna siikta, I, 13; the dvapana, 
Il, 14; the dnustubha samamnaya, U1, 15; the ¢ristupchata, Il, 16; then two miscellaneous 
chapters, II, 17; 18. Lida 

Sidadohas is interpreted as yielding milk and it represents the verse, RV., VIII, 69, 3, ¢@ asya 
siidadohasah sémam Srinanti prinayah \jdnman devinam visas trisv & rocané divdh \\ This 
is the verse immediately after the ada verse. Its use here is explained by Sayana because 
it is prdnasvariipa. Cf. Sankhayana, II, 1: imani parvani samhitani bhavanti. parvan is 
apparently used vaguely ; cf. I, 2, 3, n. 12. 

2 For them see V, 2, 1, which is expressly here ascribed to Saunaka by Sayana, Introd., 
p- 20. grivah here means ‘ cervical cartilages’, see n. 7. 

3 sisrksoh Prajapateh prathamam mukhato gayatrt samutpanna (Sayana quoting the 
Yajurbrahmana) ; see Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 18, 53- 

4 That is, RV., I, 7, 1-9; in v. 1 arkebhir occurs. 

5 Cf. Taittiriya Samhita, VI, 2, 1: ¢asman navadha Siro visyiitam \ (Sayana); nava vat 
fivasit pranah, Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 2, and I, 3, 7,n.6. The first expression of this precise 
idea seems to be in the Atharvaveda, X, 8, 43; punddrikam ndvadvaram tribhtr gsunébhir 
durtam. Whitney in his 7vans/ation, p. 601, thinks that the later gumas are already referred to, but 
as Lanman ( 7rans/ation, p.1045) points out, Garbe (Samkhyatattvakaumudi, Abh. der Bayerischen 
Ak. der Wiss., XIX, 529) renders the three coverings as skin and nails and hair (cf. n. 6). 
A different view of the praas appears in Kathaka Samhita (XXXII, 3, cited by Weber, 
Ind. Stud., XIII, 113, n. 2 for a grammatical point) : dasa vai purusa pranah stanau dvddasau 
(=11th and 12th). Cf. also Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 15. 


188 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 4, I- 


the s/oma.6 These form the ¢rivrt sfoma and the gdayatri metre, and it is after 
the production of this s/oma and this metre that there arises all that is. These 
verses serve for production. Children and cattle are his who knows this. Next 
comes the sidadohas verse. Stdadohas is breath, and by breath he joins together 
all joints. Then come the vertebrae verses.’? They are in vera metre. So one 
man says to another, ‘Thou shinest above us,’ or, ‘Thou bearest a high neck,’ 
to one who is proud.® Or, again, because they run® close” together, they 


6 In the ¢rzvyt stoma only nine verses of the hymn are used, but here the tenth verse of the 
hymn is also employed. This is not the case in Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 2. Sayana cites 
Taittirlya Brahmana, I, 2, 6: trévre chiro bhavati \ tredha vihitam hi Stras \ loma chavir astht 
paricé stuvanti\ Cf. also Sankhayana, l.c.: trini vd asya Sirsnah kapalani bhavanti ; Satapatha 
Brahmana, XIV, 3, I, I9. 

” vijavah is taken by Sadyana as a masculine singular ; he derives it from vzsesena javah, and 
calls it the part at the root of the wings, or, taking it perhaps as plural, from vzjw, the lower 
bones of the neck. It is most probably a plural. Max Miiller’s dictum that ¢d-vzrajo proves 
nothing as it must be attracted goes too far. The exact sense of vzjavah is doubtful. But as 
gvivah is plural and properly means ‘the cervical cartilages’ or windpipe, the front part of 
the neck, then most probably vzyavah is also plural and denotes the back part of the neck, 
the cervical vertebrae, which are usually denoted by skandhah (Hoemle, 7. R. A.S., 1906, 
P- 918; 1907, pp. 1, 2). This gives a perfectly good sense and seems imperatively demanded 
by the allusion below to a stiffnecked man; in the proverb griva@h is used (in a way which 
spoils the argument formally), either (a) as neck generally or (4) as cervical vertebrae, a sense 
found in the Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 4, 10 (Hoernle, p. 918). The grivah of the Aranyaka 
must, however, be different from the vzjavah. Eggeling (S.8.#., XLIII, 112, n. 1) takes 
vijavah as ‘the roots (sinews) of the wings’ (cf. Bohtlingk and Monier-Williams, Dict., s. v.) 
and Friedlander (Introd., p. 10) translates ‘ Fliigelansatz’. 

For ¢a@ virgo bhavantz, if it is, as is not likely, attracted, cf. examples in Delbriick, 
Altinidische Syntax, pp. 564-566; Chandogya Upanisad, VI, 16, 2: etad dtmyam idam sarvane 
tat satyam sa atma; infra, 11,6, 1, and for Sanskrit, Speijer, Sanskrit Syntax, § 27. Examples, 
however, on non-attraction are found when needed to make plain the sense, e. g. the Chandogya 
passage cited has fat tvam asi and so passim in the Upanisads (see Jacob’s Concordance, p. 137). 
The use is very old, being found in Greek and Latin also. Cf. below, II, 2,2: esa vd rg esa, &c.3 
esa vat padam, &c. A case or two seems to occur of the reverse attraction, e.g. Maitrayani 
Upanisad,I, 2: etad vrttam purastad duhiakyam etat pra’nam, where see, however, Max Miiller’s 
note GSuBaL, Vin2 Sout Ds 

® This is the translation adopted by Max Miiller from Sayana. This may be correct, but 
the passage would certainly run better if it were taken all as one sentence. ‘So one man 
says to another, ‘‘Thou shinest above us, thou bearest indeed a stiff neck,” that is to one 
who is proud.’ But the position of stabhamadnam vd renders this doubtful. On the other hand 
Sayana feels that it is difficult to explain the grid vai dharayasi if taken alone, and this 
seems to me to turn the balance in favour of the translation here suggested. For this meaning 
of grivah see Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 4, 10, and Hoernle, 7. 2. 4. S., 1906, pp. 916-922. 
Saakhayana Aranyaka, II, 2: ¢rini vd adsdm grivanam parvani bhavanti, 

° dutah must be from »/du gatau (Dhatupatha, XXII, 46) as Sayana says. Monier- 
Williams’ Déct. omits this form, giving davisdui, RV., X, 34, 5, as the only quotable form (see 
v. Schroeder, Vienna Oriental Journal, XIII, 119-122). v. Schroeder (ibid., 297, 298) finds the 
same root with fa +4 in the sense ‘ anlegen’ in Kathaka Samhita, VI, 2: kiksa upadiutyah, and 


~I, 4, 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 189 


are taken to be" the best food. For wird is food, and food strength. Next 
comes the s#dadohas verse. Sidadohas is breath, and by breath he joins together 
all joints. 

2. Now comes the right wing. It is this world,’ it is this Agni, it is speech, 
it is the Rathantara, it is Vasistha, it is a hundred.? These are the six powers 
of it, The sampa/a hymn serves to win desires and for firmness, The panktt 
verse serves for proper food. Next comes the si#dadohas verse. Sidadohas is 
breath, and by breath he joins together all joints. Then follows the left wing. 
It is that world, it is that sun, it is mind,® it is the Brhat, it is Bharadvaja, it 
is a hundred. These are the six powers of it. The sampa/a hymn serves to 


Kapisthala Samhita, IV, 1: kaksa upadutyah, and compares Greek S$, evdtw, éxdvw, and Latin 
induo, enuo. Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 98) still treats davisdné as if it meant 
‘I will play’, as taken by Geldner (Siebenzig Lieder, pp. 158 sq.). It cannot be from »/du 
* burn’, as suggested doubtfully in Whitney, Joos, &c., p. 75. 

1° sambalhatamah is clearly the reading, from +/Jamh (i.e. badha for bazdha). It occurs 
in the Taittirlya Aranyaka. Cf Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 954; Macdonell, Vedze 
Grammar, p. 58; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammattk, I, 44. 

1 gnnatamam pratyacyante is thus construed by Max Miiller, ‘who says the adverbial form 
is vouched for by Panini, V, 4, 11. The free use of comparatives and superlatives of this 
class is a sign of early style, but in the earliest literature (RV. and AV.) the accusative 
neuter is preferred, see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 1111 e€, and 111g. Cf. also Satapatha 
Brahmana, X, I, 2,5: dtamam khyayate; ibid., X, 5, 2, 10: anutaman gopayati, and Delbriick, 
Altindische Syntax, p.194; prataram iva kriyante, Aitareya Brahmana, III, 48,4. ze xatarane 
papmanam apdhata, Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 25, 3. But none of these or similar cases seem to 
justify annatamam, and the sense given by Sayana as prapyante would equally be obtained 
by rendering ‘they approximate towards (prati+ a/ac) that which is most truly food’ (fem. 
because vira7 is fem.). For such a use of annatama, cf. RV., Il, 41, 16 (ambitama, naditama, 
devitama), and many examples in Delbriick, l.c., p. 1935 and for the acc., cf. abhisampadyante 
with acc., I, 1, 2, n. 10. The acc. is governed by the preposition. yad may be taken with 
dutah as equivalent to a finite verb, which is not very probable, or with fratyacyanée, as giving 
the explanation of ‘ the vijavah are virag. 

1 Agni is the guardian of this world and he is also Vac, II, 4, 2, and Vac is Rathantara, 
III, 1, 6 (Sayana), while Vasistha brought the Rathantara. 

2 See V, 2, 2 for the verses. They are RV., VII, 32, 22 and 23; VIII, 3, 7 and 8 (three 
each according to the reckoning of the Aranyaka); I, 32 (15 vv.); VII, 18, 1-15; VII, 19 
(11 wy.); 20 (lO wv.) 5 23 (6 vv.); 25-29 (26 vv.) ; IV, 20 (11 vy.) ; making roo in all, and then 
the pankti, 1, 80, 1; 1V, 20, is styled the sayzpata hymn. 

$ The moon is the deity of mind, but here the identity of sun and moon is meant, says 
Sayana, and manas is Brhat, and Bharadyaja made the Brhat. 

4 See V, 2, 2 for the verses. They are RV., VI, 46, 1 and 2; VIII, 61, 7 and 8 (three each 
according to this reckoning); VI, 18 (15 vv.); 23 (f0 wv.); 24 (10 wv.); 25 (9 vv.); 31-38 
(40 vv.) ; IV, 23 (11 vv.); making 1o1 in all, and then the pawhti, 1, 81, 1. The sampata is IV, 
23; cf, Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 30, 2. The Satam is not precisely accurate, but the inaccuracy 
is deliberate. There are 100 in the right and ror in the left, and the famkti verse adds one 
to each of them. For the varying sizes of the wings see Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 2, 6, 3. 


190 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 4, 2- 


win desires and for firmness. The pawk/ verse serves for proper food. These 
two are deficient and excessive. The Brhad is male, the Rathantara is female. 
The excess is of the male, the deficiency ofthe female. Therefore are they deficient 
and excessive. Now by one feather is the left wing of the bird the better and 
therefore the left wing is the better by one verse. Next comes the szdadohas 
verse. Stdadohas is breath, and by breath he joins together all joints. Then 
follows the tail. This consists of twenty-one dvipada verses.® For twenty-one 
are the backward feathers of the bird. Again of all s/omas is the ekavimésa the 
support, and the tail the support of all birds. He recites a twenty-second verse. 
This is given the form of two supports.’ So all birds support themselves on 
their tails, and having supported themselves on their tails, they fly up. For the 
tail is a support. He (the bird) is supported by two decades of vzraj verses. He 
again, the man, is supported by these two dvzpadas, the twenty-first and twenty- 
second. That which forms the bird serves to obtain the desires of the man, 
That which forms the man serves for his prosperity, glory, proper food, and 
honour, Next comes the sidadohas verse, next an additional verse, next the 
sudadohas verse. The sidadohas is male, the additional verse female. Therefore 
he recites the szdadohas verse on either side of the additional verse. Therefore the 
seed of the two when effused obtains oneness with regard to the woman alone. 
So birth takes place in and from the woman. Therefore he recites the additional 
verse in that way.” : 

3. He recites the eighty gaya/ri tristichs The eighty ga@ya/ri tristichs are 
this world, and whatever glory, might,? wedlock, proper food, and honour there 
is in this world, may I obtain it, may I win it, may I possess it, may it be mine. 


5 These verses, RV., X, 157 (5 vv.); 172 (4 vv.), besides twelve from other Sakhas are given 
in V, 2, 2. Cf. Taittirlya Brahmana, I, 2, 6, 4: ekavimsdm pitcham \ advipadasu stuvanté 
pritisthityat \ 

° The feet, Sayana says. The idea seems to be, when there are twenty-two verses, that 
twenty represent the feet of the bird, and two those of the man. When twenty-one, it is the tail 
that is in question. See also V, 2, 2. 

" atra is rendered asmin vijavavibhage in Sayana. It seems rather to refer to the position 
of the additional verse between the s#dadohas. For abhi in the Aitareya Brahmana, cf. Liebich 
Bezz. Beitr., XI, 281; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 88. Yosatas (Whitney, Sumsieit 
Grammar, § 1098) is possible and must be so taken if aand is a noun as given in Bohtlingk 
and Monier-Williams’ Déct. But it is simpler to take it and pra? as adjectives. Cf. II, 1, 2: 
prthivitah, where ztah is probably meant. Cf. danajah in Taittirlya Upanisad, II, 8 (S.B. Z. 
XV, 61, n. 2); Ganadevah, Jacob, Concordance, p. 162. For the ehasesa, see Weber Ind, 
Stud. X, 142, n. 3; XIII, 113, n. 2; Bolling, 7. A. O.S., XXIII, 321 sq. 

* The three sets of tristichs are the food of the bird. They are set forth in detail in V, 2, 3; 
43 5, respectively. ‘ste 

* Might is interpreted by Sayana as vedasastraprayukta pijd and is opposed to apacitth as 
dhanadhanyadisamyddhariipa pia, but he gives /éfas as an alternative rendering, 


~I, 5,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES Igl 


Next comes the sidadohas verse. Sidadohas is breath, and by breath he links 
together all this world. He recites the eighty dzhav tristichs. The eighty 4rhaé 
tristichs are the sky-world, and whatever glory, might, wedlock, proper food, 
and honour there is in the sky-world, may I obtain it, may I win it, may I possess 
it, may it be mine. Next comes the si#dadohas verse. Sidadohas is breath, and 
by breath he links together all the world. He recites the eighty usyzh tristichs. 
The eighty wszzh tristichs are that world, heaven,’ and whatever glory, might, 
wedlock, proper food, and honour there is in that world, and the divinity of 
the gods,‘ may I obtain it,’ may I win it, may I possess it, may it be mine.° 
Next comes the sidadohas verse. Siidadohas is breath, and by breath he links 
together all that world. 


ApuyAya 65. 


He recites the vafa! hymn desiring all to be in his power. There are twenty- 
one? verses, for twenty-one are the parts in the stomach, Then the ehavimsa is 
the support of all sfomas and the stomach the support of proper foods. They are 
in different metres. For the intestines are larger one than the other,® some small, 


8 The insertion of dyaus is curious and Sayana notes it as being vispastartham. 

* This is taken by Sayana as being equal to drahman, the honoured of the gods, Indra, &c., 
and he quotes for it a passage intended to be Svetasvatara Upanisad, VI, 7: tam ivaranam 
paramam mahesvaram tam devanayr paramam daivam (so R, read with S devatanam (or 
daivatanam with ed.) paramam ca daivatam). But, though Max Miiller accepts this view, it is 
simpler to equate it merely to the divinity of the gods, i.e. the divine nature. 

5 Probably dmavani is suggested by the af of aéité equated to +/af, as stated by Eggeling 
(S. B. Z., XLII, 112, n. 1).~ The view that afi/z contains the »/af, eat, probably led to the 
identification of the afi#is with anna as throughout the Aranyaka and also in atapatha 
Brahmana, VIII, 5, 2,17; but when Sayana in his commentary on this passage calls the aSztis 
annariipah, he merely refers, I think, to that identification and does not base it on etymology, as 
suggested by Eggeling. 

® For the subjunctive as optative in sense, cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanshrit-Syntax, § 186, 
and for the question of subj. and opt., Goodwin, Greck Moods and Tenses, App. 1. For 
subjunctives in Aitareya Brahmana, see Aufrecht, pp. 429, 430; and a full list in Bohtlingk, 
Chrestomathie?, pp. 349, 350. See also Delbriick, 4 Itindische Syntax, pp. 306 sq., Vergl. Syntax, 
II, 365 sq. 

1 In Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 11, the sidadohas verse is repeated twenty-four times, It 
agrees in counting the vafa hymn as referring to the wdara. The hymn is RV., VIII, 46. See 
V, 2,5. Itis called a wivid in I, 5, 2 below. The name is given because the author is Vasa 
(ASvya) says Sayana, and this is probably the case, showing the early date of the traditional 
authorships. Cf. Satapatha Brahmana, VIII, 6, 2, 3, and Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLII, 112, n. 2 
See also Oldenberg, Z. D. MZ. G., XLII, 215 sq. 

2 Only twenty of RV., VIII, 46, but the sadadohas verse is counted in; see, however, on 
V, 2, 5 ad fin. 

3 Viksudram is rendered ‘confused’ by Max Miiller. The rendering in the text is that of 
Sayana and is supported by the use of viksudra iva hi pasavah in Aitareya Brahmana, V, 6, 5, 


192 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 5, I- 


some big. He recites them with the word om according to the metre and 
according to the manner of the occurrence.‘ For the intestines are as it were 
according to the manner of their occurrence, some shorter, some longer. Next 
comes the sidadohas verse. Sidadohas is breath, and by breath he joins together 
all joints. Having recited this verse twelve times,’ he leaves off. Twelvefold 
are these breaths,’ seven in the head, two in the breast, three below. There 
are they contained, there are they perfected. Therefore there’ he leaves off, 
The hymn, ‘O Indra and Agni, ye two’ (RV., VIII, 40), forms the two thighs 
which belong to Indra and Agni,’ the two supports with broad bones. The 


where see Sayana’s explanation. For the compar., see Delbriick, A/¢tindische Syntax, pp. 196 sq. 
The hrdaya is sthiila according to Sayana. The metres of RV., VIII, 46, are very various in 
the eyes of the Anukramani. For the form anfastya, cf. Whitney, Sazskrit Grammar, § 1245 c. 
The twenty transverse processes (Autapa) in the abdominal portion of the spine (wdara), 
Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 4, 12; 14 (Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLIV, 164, n. 1; Hoernle, 
J. R. A. S., 1907, pp. 8, 10) suggest a different rendering, but the tradition is quite plausible, 
The epithet used too does not suit bones. It is, however, to be noted that in Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, II, 6, the aza#ka, which can mean the lumbar portion of the spine (RV., VI, 163, 2, 
cited by Hoernle, 7, R. A. S., 1906, p. 917) as well as the thoracic portion (Satapatha Brahmana, 
XII, 2, 4, 14, cited ibid., 1907, p. 9), is said to have twenty-one Zarvanzz, and certainly this is so 
strikingly parallel to the wdara with its twenty kuntapas (Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 2, 4, 12), 
since the twenty-first may be the ava itself, that it is possible that this passage should be so 
interpreted. But to do so would only be justified by the belief that these early medical 
statements rest, as Hoernle (Osteology, pp. 101-109) holds, on acquaintance with current medical 
views, an opinion I do not share for reasons given in Z. D. AZ. G., LXII, 134 sq. 

* yathopapadam is a difficult phrase. Max Miiller, following Sayana, renders ‘ according to 
rule’. Sayana explains this with reference to the technical rule, given by ASvalayana Srauta 
Sitra, VI, 5, 11; 12, that dvzpada verses are to be recited with a pause in the middle and om at 
the end, while ekafadé verses are to have om prefixed and affixed. This is artificial and 
perhaps it only means (cf. Monier-Williams’ Dzc¢., s.v.) ‘just as it may happen’, which version 
suits the aztastyam better, and Sayana ends up with practically this version. Chandaskaram 
(for the Sandhi, cf, Wackernagel, A/tinddsche Grammatik, 1, 340; Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, 
p. 420; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 71) refers of course to the different metres of the hymn. 
Cf. V, 2, 5, and note. For the gerund, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 995; Delbriick, 
Altindische Syntax, pp. 402 sq.; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 224. 

° That is once each in the verses representing the body, neck, head, vertebrae, right side, 
left side, tail, food in three sets of eighty tristichs, and the vafa hymn. In the case of the tail 
there is a s#dadohas before and one after the additional verse, and so the number twelve is 
made up. 

6 The number twelve is clearly to suit the twelve repetitions of the s#dadohas verse. It is 
probably got by taking the seven openings in the head, I, 3, 7; 8, and adding the two in the 
breasts, and the nabhi, payu and gudz. For other fanciful enumerations cf. Deussen, Philosophie 
der Upanishads, pp. 255 sq.; E.T., pp. 283 sq., and Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana cited in 
note 6 on I, 3, 7. 

7 He does not use that verse in the ‘ thigh’ verses. 

* Indra and Agni are the strongest of gods and the thighs enable the bird to fly aloft 
(Sayana). In Saakhayana these verses form part of what represents the tail in the Aitareya, but 


-I, §,2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 193 


verses have six feet® for firmness. Man’ has a double support, cattle have four 
feet. So he places the sacrificer with his double support among the four-footed 
cattle. The second verse has seven feet, and he makes it into a gayafri and an 
anusiubh. Now the gayatri™ is brahman, the anustubh is Vac, and so he unites 
Vac and drahman. He recites® a /risfubh at the end. The /ris/udbh is strength 
and so with strength he surrounds animals. Therefore animals“ depend on 
strength for their rising and their going forth. 

2. In the Niskevalya hymn addressed to Indra,* ‘To thee, the mighty, the 
intoxicated one’ (RV., X, 50), he inserts a mzvzd.? For clearly thus does he 
place strength in himself. They are /rzstudhs and jagaiis.? They say, ‘Why 
then does he insert a mivid among /ristubhs and jagatis?’* ‘One metre only 


in Satapatha Brahmana, VIII, 6, 2, 3, they are referred to the wings, see Eggeling, S. B. Z., 
XLII, 111, 112. See also V, 3, 1, n. 1; above, p. 37. 

® They, except two and twelve, are in the so-called mahdpankti metre. For the correct 
expression wrvasthive, cf. the use of #ruphalaka for the thighs, Hoernle, Osteology, pp. 206, 215, 
perhaps wrongly read for wru°. If zrz° is read here, it means ‘ the thighs and knees are supports’, 
cf. Vajasaneyi Samhita, X VIII, 23; Apastamba Sulba Sitra, XI, 2 and 3 (Zar DIs Gea UNE, 302)5 

CCEA E. Ps By Nee 

1 Tt consists of seven padas of eight syllables, and can be made into an anustubh preceded by 
a gayatr?t. According to Sayana, following ASvalayana, in the latter case there is a pause 
after the second /dda, and om after the third. In the former the om follows the fourth, and 
there is a pause after the second Jdda. 

CET AKT, Ta 8e 

18 S3yana holds this to refer to a special mode of recitation, by which after the first pada 
there is a pause, and om follows the second, and so for the third and fourth, and which he calls 
tristupsamaya. This is from Aévalayana Srauta Sitra, VI, 15,6; RV., VIII, 40, 12, is in ¢ristubh. 

14 This must mean, as Sayana says, and as Max Miiller takes it, that animals obey a master. 
The last two accusatives are loosely connected as accusatives of point in which; such acc. 
are more frequent in Greek and Latin (e.g. Tacitus, Avm., I, 27: deserunt tribunal... manus 
intentantes, causam discordiae et initium armorum). In the Maitreya Upanisad (Max Miiller, 
S. B. E., XV, xlv): sa tatra paramam tapa adityam udiksamana ardhvas tisthati., Max 
Miiller observes that dsthdya would be expected, but it is not necessary to suspect the text. 
For the compound, cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 47 and 48. In asin parigachati the 
acc. is dependent on fari: so Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 28, 1, 2; fam etah pafca devatah 
parimriyante (correct Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 88). 

1 Forming part of the thigh verses, 

2 Sayana says the vid (cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, III, 9, 1, for a Vaisvadeva ntvia) is 
to come after the fourth verse and is to be /udro devah somani pibatu ( pinvamanah 8S), &c. 
(Saakhayana Srauta Sitra, VIII, 17,1). ‘In himself’ he renders as ‘in the bird in the shape 
of the Sastra’. It may mean ‘in himself’ only, For the mvids see Scheftelowitz, Dze 
Apokryphen des Rgveda, pp.136sq. The nivitsamsnake granthe in R is, unhappily, a myth, the 
reading (in R%, S, &c.) is sanghe. 

3 The metre is irregular. According to the Anukramani, one and seven are jaga/i, the rest 
tristubh. Sayana offers the alternative of the last two being jaga/z. 

+ The prakyti has tristubhs at the midday pressing, and so the deviation needs explanation, 
Note that the answer is repeated, and is not that of the Aranyaka itself, though it is adopted. 

KEITH O 


194 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 53 2= 


cannot support or fill the m/v/d of this day,’ so he inserts the mv:d among 
tristubhs and jagatis. Let him know that this day has three mivdds.° The 
vata hymn is a nzord, the Valakhilyas are a nzvzd, and the mivid is a nivid. So 
let him know that there are three mvzds in this day. Then come the hymns, 
‘Who in the forest as it were has been put down’ (RV., X, 29), and ‘Who 
first is born, the wise one’ (RV., II, 12). In these is the verse, ‘When the 
hopes of all are on food’ (RV., X, 29, 4), and it serves to win proper food. 
Then comes an insertion. As many decades of verses® in ¢résubh and jagat 
addressed to Indra as they insert between these two hymns, after transforming 
them into drhafis, so many years do they live beyond the normal life?’ By this 
insertion life is gained. Next he recites the sajaniya* hymn that cattle may 
come to his offspring. ‘Then he recites the Tarksya® hymn. Tarksya is 
welfare, and the hymn leads to welfare. Thus he procures welfare. He recites 


5 Sayana says the wzvid here referred to above is the mukhya nivid, and the others are 
aupacarike, and he assigns the use of several metres in the vafa and of tristubhs and jagatis in 
the Valakhilyas as the reason for their being styled z¢véds. The Valakhilyas occur in the drhatt 
tristichs, see V, 2, 4. The Valakhilyas and Nivids are printed from the KaSmir MS. by Scheftelowitz, 
Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, 1906. See also Oldenberg, Gott. gel. Anz., 1907. Scheftelowitz 
(pp. Io sq.) argues that the Valakhilyas are among the old Khilas which were accepted by some 
schools (probably the Baskala and Mandikeya) and not by others (Sikalya), who only included 
‘Nationalhymnen’ in their tradition. Oldenberg (pp. 221-235) effectually—in my opinion— 
demolishes this argument and leaves the Khilas what they have hitherto been considered, later 
additions to the Rgvedic tradition, though doubtless in themselves old. The Valakhilyas are 
mentioned by that name in Kausitaki Brahmana, XXX, 8; Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 23; Maitrayani 
Upanisad, II, 3, &c. Cf. also Macdonell on Syhaddevatd, VI, 48 ; III, 116; Max Miiller, Marut- 
Hymns, pp. xxxiii sq., who is, however, wrong in saying that they do not occur in any Khila 
collection; S¢. Petersburg Dict., V1, 954. 

6 Sayana renders dasatindm as ‘taken from the ten thousand numbered Samhita’, and 
Max Miiller takes it as ‘taken from the ten Mandalas’. Neither meaning appears certain. 
daéati elsewhere means a decade, dasatayz refers to the Samhita, and I think dafatindm must 
mean decades. They are decades of ¢ristubhs and jagatis turned into drhatis, and it may be 
noted that six ¢vzstaubhs and two jagatis give ten byrhatis. This may be the reference, or the 
reference may be to the fact that three ¢vzstwbhs and seven jagatis give thirteen drhatis. Sayana 
contents himself with explaining that of three ¢rzstudhs and four jagatis nine érhatis can be 
made, which does not seem to be of much help. V, 3,1, appears to support the view here taken. 

7 That is, no doubt, one hundred years, V, 3, 1, and I, 2, 2,n.14. For #dhvam with abl., 
cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, §§ 58, 90; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 113; 
Liebich, Bezz. Beztr., XI, 295. 3 

8 That is, RV., II, 12, called sajantyam in Aitareya Brahmana, V,2, 1. For arjayan 
cf. Speijer, l.c., § 188; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 587; Delbriick, pp. 353 sq. The form 
is given by Whitney, Roots, &c., p. 14, as only found in the Siitras and Epic. 

9 RV., X, 178, addressed, says Sdyana, to Tarksya Garuda, but cf. Macdonell, Vedic 
Mythology, p. 145. Rreads 7arkso, but the Sarvanukramani and Brhaddevata agree with the 
RV. Cf. Kausitaki Brahmana, XXX, 5, and III, 1, 6,n.5. For the form, cf. Wackernagel, 
Altindische Grammatik, 1, 233; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 43. 


-I, 5; 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 195 


the ekapada™ verse that he may at once be all and win all the metres. In 
the hymn, ‘All songs have caused Indra to grow’ (RV., I, 11), there are 
additions” to the verses. Seven verses does he make additions to. For seven 
are the breaths’* in the head, and so does he place breaths in the head. He 
makes no addition to the eighth. The eighth is speech, and (he thinks), ‘ Let 
not speech be mingled with my breaths.’ Therefore speech, though it has 
the same abode as the breaths, is not mingled with them. He recites the 
viraj verses.“ Vira verses are food, and serve to win food. He ends with 
the hymn of Vasistha,* that he may become Vasistha. (He should end) 
with the perfect verse,’ with the word ‘great’ in it, ‘This praise to the great, the 
terrible, the bearer’ (RV., VII, 24, 5). In the verse, ‘Like a steed labouring 
at the yoke, he has taken his place’ (RV., VII, 24, 5), the yoke is the end 
(of the car). This day is the end." Thus is (the verse) fit for the day. (He 
should end) with the perfect verse, with the word ‘ praise’ in it, ‘O Indra, this praise 
celebrates thee’ (RV., VII, 24, 5°). With regard to the verse, ‘As heaven over 


10 Sayana gives it as Zudro visvam virajati, see V, 3, I. 

11 Tt is the last of the metres used. 

12 The phrase occurs also in Saikhayana Aranyaka, II, 12, and is further explained in V, 3, 1, 
where Sayana is much more explicit than in his commentary here. The idea is 1%, 1», 1°, 2%, 
14, 2>; 2° 3%, 2», 35; and so on. The result is a curious intertwining, wyatisaiga, of verses. 
A similar proceeding is found in Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 3; VI, 24. For other examples of this 
process, called wiharana also, cf. Saakhayana Srauta Sitra, VII, 15, 4 (at the Apyayana of the 
Madhyandina Savana) ; IX, 5, 4 (at the Sodagin) ; XII, 11, 5, and ASvalayana Srauta Sitra, VIII, 
2, 7 (Valakhilyas, when a vyatimarsam viharana takes place); Roth, Z. D. MZ. G., XXXVII, 
109, who traces the practice even in the Rgveda, and Hillebrandt, Rztwal-Litteratur, p. 103. 

18 The openings are referred to above, I, 3, 7; 8; 4,13 5,1. The eighth as Vac refers no 
doubt to the tongue. The first reference to seven openings is not (as Deussen seems to hold) 
that in Atharvaveda X, 8, 9, which is there practically unintelligible, and which is given up by 
Whitney (Zvrans/ation, p. 597), but which appears in a more plausible form in Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, II, 2, 3, where the verse has as its last pada: vag astami brahmand samvidina, but 
that in AV., X, 2, 6, where the seven 2ianz are given as eyes, nostrils, ears and mouth (see 
Whitney, Zranslation, p. 568; Hoemle, 7. X. A. S., 1907, p. 12). In ver. 7 the tongue 
is specially mentioned. The seven, however, seem already to have included Vac, to judge 
from the explanation in that Upanisad, II, 2, 4, where, according to Deussen’s translation, 
it is intended to stand for the tongue, as indeed seems clear from its being connected with 
Atri and a#tz, though Bohtlingk, in his translation, p. 26, takes it otherwise. Sayana here 
refers to the other pranas as sihvatvagadibhih. Vac apparently then is little more than 
a duplicate. Cf. 1,3, 7,n.6. For the seven pranas, cf. also Satapatha Brahmana, IX, 5, 2, 8. 

35 Fe Vico Lintaed Os) see Vi, 3, Xe 

1 RV., VII, 24. For the word viha in ver. 5, see Oldenberg, S. B. £., XLVI, 135. 

16 The sixth verse is placed after the fourth and the fifth comes at the end, V, 3,1. ' 

17 The last day is the udayaniyatiratra. For dhuh, cf, RV., Il, 2, 1: dhithsddam 
‘charioteer’; Hopkins, 7. 4. O.S., XIII, 237 sq. 


O 2 


heaven, ® give us glory’ (RV., VII, 24, 54), wherever the speech of the Brahmin” 
is uttered, this is his glory, when he who knows ends with this verse. So let 
bim who knows this end with this verse. 


18 Sayana renders, ‘as in heaven, so in the worlds (the makarloka, &c.) above the heaven!’ 
The same maharloka is dragged in to explain II, 4, I. 

19 Sayana vaguely says vedasambandht vakyam. But I think there is a clear reference 
to the speech of the Brahmins. The opposition is probably as yet mainly to non-Aryan tongues, 
cf. Tandya Mahabrahmana, XVII, J, 2, 9. Whatever be the history of Vedic and Sanskrit, 
it is difficult to believe at this date (S00-7oo B.C.) in very much development of Prakritic 
forms so as to render contrast with them natural, though no doubt such forms existed. (Cf. the 
discussions in /. R. A. S., 1903, PP. 435 $4) See also I, 3,1, n. 53 III, 2, 53 Satapatha 
Brahmana, III, 2, 1, 23, with Eggeling’s note on the Kanva reading; Macdonell, Sanskrit 
Literature, pp. 20-24; Lanman’s notes on Whitney, At¢harvaveda, III, 12, 4; X, 9, 235 
XII, 4,4; XIX, 8, 4; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, xviii. The Atharvan passages 
point to the possibility that some of the Prakritic forms are due to the later tradition and 
are no evidence for the time of the Atharva. Similar considerations are familiar in the Homeric 
question, see especially Monro, Odyssey, XII-XXIV, Appendix, pp. 455-484. The early date of 
the Epic if adopted (cf. my notes, 7, &. A. S., 1906, pp. I sq., 1907, pp. 681-683) would 
bear out the view that Prakrit was not so early as has been claimed (cf. Franke, Pal und 
Sanskrit (1902), pp. 49 sq.) the ruling speech of the people. No doubt the Mantra literature 
represents a poetic diction (cf. Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 38 sq-), but it has not 
yet been made even plausible that contemporaneous with it were really Prakritic dialects, 
though no doubt in certain cases the tendencies which produced Prakrit were already in full force. 
The subsequent history is doubtless that of the more and more marked separation of the 
literary and the vulgar speech (cf. Delbriick’s neat summary of the history, Altindisches Verbum, 
pp. 3 §q-), and the place of the Epic must (it seems to me) be found either before the decay 
of speech had rendered the Sanskrit unintelligible to the warrior classes of the populace—and the 
Epic appears in origin to have been precisely like the Homeric Epic (see Lang, Homer and 
His Age, 1906) poetry composed by poets at the courts of princes who sang to the retainers and 
friends of their patron—not of course an epic of the lower classes or the mere cultivator, though 
he would understand it in part—or after the general revival of Sanskrit in the second and third 
centuries A.D. The latter view seems to raise more serious difficulties in our conception 
of the history of language and literature than it can pretend to solve. I still think the earliest 
epic (as distinguished from mere @khyanas or itihasas) must date from the eighth to sixth 
centuries B.C. and be contemporaneous with the Brahmanas and Aranyakas, though of course 
in the case of both Mahabharata and Ramayana extensive additions have been ‘made by priestly 
hands in the two or three centuries before the Christian era. Only thus can a real place 
be found for Panini’s dAasa, or for the custom of the Drama which must represent a real state of 
affairs when Sanskrit could be used by kings and nobles as intelligible to their inferiors. 
For what Ksatriyas spoke in the eighth to sixth centuries B.c, we have no evidence save the 
Brahmanas, where they speak Sanskrit, and the Epic, so far as we can regard it as contempor- 
aneous. In view of the fact that Patafijali knew the Drama (7d. Stud., XIII, 486 sq.), it seems 
only reasonable to assign to his period the separate use of Sanskrit and Prakrit for the different 
characters, and either then or earlier the state of affairs must have been real. Nor is it possible 
to accept the theory of Lévi, Barth, and Grierson (dnd. Ant., XXIII, 110) that an originally 
Prakrit drama was turned into Sanskrit. This theory leaves no plausible explanation open 
of the use of Prakrit for some characters, since ex Ayfothest both men and women equally 
used Prakrit in conversation, and, while it is quite intelligible that after the drama was an 


-I, 5,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 197 


3. ‘We choose that of Savitr’ (RV., V, 82, 1-3) and ‘O god, Savitr, this 
day’ (RV., V, 82, 4-6), are the strophe and antistrophe (of the Vaisvadeva 
hymn’) and are perfect in form as belonging to the one day ceremonial. Much 
indeed is done on this day that is forbidden and (the Vaisvadeva)* is the 
atonement. Now atonement is rest, and so at the end (of the sacrifice) the 
sacrificers rest on the atonement of the one day (the Vaisvadeva) as their rest. 
He rests who knows this, and they also rest for whom the Hotr priest who 
knows this recites this Vaisvadeva. Then comes the Savitr hymn, ‘Of Savitr, 
the god, this great and desirable thing’ (RV., IV, 53). Great‘ is the end. 
This day is the end. So the verse fits this day. Then comes the Dyava-Prthivi 
hymn, ‘Which is the elder, which the younger’ (RV., I, 185), in which (the 
verses) end alike.§ This day is one on which (the sacrificers) end alike. So 
the hymn fits the day. Then comes the Rbhu hymn, ‘Born not for steeds 
nor reins, worthy of praise’ (RV., IV, 36). With regard to the words, ‘The 
chariot of three wheels,’ the hymn is possessed of three (/r7va/), and what is 
possessed of three® is the end. This day is the end. So the hymn fits the day. 
The hymn, ‘Of this benignant, greyhaired, priest’ (RV., I, 164), addressed to 


established fact it could remain popular long after it had ceased to be intelligible, the 
popularity of a literary form ex zmztio unread is very strange. People in England would not 
go to Italian opera (which by the by is certainly understood by fifty per cent. of the spectators), 
but for the fact that there was once and still is a popular drama in England. 

Of course it cannot be contended—nor is it so claimed—that Sanskrit was ever the vernacular 
of the lower classes. What we have to conceive is rather a parallel series of languages 
diverging from vernaculars older than the Vedic of the earliest hymns, each current among 
certain portions of the people, but in their earlier stages intelligible to all. The Greek and 
English dialects give a fair parallel, in both cases ending in a common form of educated 
and literary speech. Cf. Jacobi, Z.D.4/.G., XLVIUI, 407 sq. 

1 Cf, Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 18, which differs in detail as usual. This section refers 
to the evening Soma pressing, when the VaiSvadeva and Agnimaruta Sastras are recited, see 
Weber, Jnd. Stud., X, 353, 354, 0-3; Eggeling, S. B. E., XXVI, 325, 361 (Vaisvadeva), 369 
(Agnimaruta) ; Caland and Henry, L’ Agnistoma, pp- 354 $4. 

2 The prakrti is here the ViSvajit, and the milaprakrti the Agnistoma, as usual. 

3 Cf,I,2,1. Sayana selects the two tristichs as the immediate point of reference. 

* Because greatness is the xe plus ultra of all things (Sayana). 

5 ydarka is equal to anta in the one case and to uttarakala eva bhavi phalam in the other, 
according to Sayana. The sacrificers obtain brahman, he adds, but this is hardly meant. 
Most of the verses end alike in this and the following cases. Cf. for the word, Aitareya 
Brahmana, V, I, 3; 12. 

6 This is not obvious. Sdayana refers it to the case where two wheels are inadequate and 
a third is found necessary. This wheel, as before the dhuh, is the end, I, 5, 2. Zimmer 
(Altindisches Leben, pp. viii, ix) points out that ¢rzcakra in the Samhitas is merely an epithet 
of the cars of the ASvins where its sense is mythological and he therefore denies the existence 
of three-wheeled cars in the Vedic period, but cf. Weber, Berl. Sitz., 1898, p. 564, n. I. 


198 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 5, 3- 


the All-gods, is multiform.? This day is multiform. So the hymn fits the day. 
(Of what he recites) the end® is, ‘Forming the waters, the buffalo hath lowed’ 
(RV., I, 164, 41). The hymn, ‘May powers auspicious come to us on every 
side’ (RV., I, 89), addressed to the All-gods, is one containing an insertion, 
and is perfect in form as belonging to the one day ceremonial. Much indeed 
is done on this day that is forbidden and (the hymn with the insertion *) is 
the atonement. Now atonement is rest, and so at the end (of the sacrifice) 
the sacrificers rest on the atonement of the one day (insertion) as their rest. 
He rests who knows this, and they also rest for whom the Hotr priest who 
knows this recites the hymn with the insertion. The verses, ‘To Vaisvanara, who 
strengthens law, our praise’ (RV., II, 2, 1 sq.), are the strophe of the Agnimaruta 
Sastra. Praise is the end. This day is the end. So the hymn fits the day. 
The hymn, ‘The Maruts, rushing onward, with gleaming lances’ (RV., V, 55), 
addresged to the Maruts, is one in which (the verses) end alike. This day is 
one in which (the sacrificers) end alike. So the hymn fits this day. He recites, 
before the next hymn, the verse, ‘To Jatavedas let us pour the Soma’ (RVG 
99, 1), addressed to Jatavedas. The Jatavedas verse is welfare and wins welfare. 
So he makes this into welfare. The hymn, ‘To Jatavedas, who deserves our 
praise’ (RV., I, 94), 1° addressed to Jatavedas, is one in which (the verses) end 
alike. This day is one in which (the sacrificers) end alike. So the hymn fits 
this day.” 

7 It is of multifarious content, as indeed is the case and is recognized in the Anukramani. 
The day is multifarious because of its collection of Vedic mantras and popular elements like 
dancing. 

8 That is, only forty-one verses are to be taken. Cf. V, 3, 2. 

9 The insertion is after the ninth verse, wifve devah somasya matsan (Scheftelowitz, Die 
Apokryphen des Rgveda, p. 137), &c. 

10 On.RV., I, 94, see Oldenberg, S. B. Z., XLVI, 108 sq. 

il At the end Sayana observes that this ends the Aarmakanda of the Aranyaka. The next 
two books are the jAanakanda or the Upanisad. This regular opposition really of course means 
very little. Both parts deal with j#da and not with the performance of the rite, but the 
first Aranyaka does of course treat the rite in some detail, explaining its mystic significance, 
while the second Aranyaka diverges to speculations less closely associated with the actual 
Mantras of the ceremonial. A more real opposition of arma and jana would be to oppose 
books V and I-III. For the relation of karma and jfana in Sankara’s view, see his commentary 
on Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 12. 

In some MSS. (see Crit. Note) a summary of the chapters of each Aranyaka is given 
at the end. For similar summaries, cf. those of the Taittiriya Upanisad, Max Miiller, S, B. £., 
XV, xxviii, xxix ; that in VIII, 3 of the Saikhayana Aranyaka, and Kausitaki Upanisad, IV, 2. 


-II, 1,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 199 


ARANYAKA II 


ApuyAya 1. 


Tuts is the path; this’ is the sacrifice; this is drahman; this 1s truth. 
Therefore let no man diverge? from it; let no man transgress it. For they 
did not transgress it; of old, those that did transgress it were overcome. A Rsi* 


1 Sayana, following, as throughout this part of his commentary, Sankara (cf. Saikara on 
Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 12, translated by S. Sitarama, Upanishads, V, 112-122), discusses the 
relation of the Aarmakanda and the Upanisad. His conclusion is that it is that of sadhana 
and sddhya, the sacrifices serving to purify the mind through the destruction of evil and the 
production of a desire for knowledge. He quotes and rejects the views: (2) that knowledge 
is unnecessary, it being sufficient to give up all works, good or evil, and to perform the various 
regular and occasional sacrifices, and to exhaust what one has begun by enjoying it, so that 
at death freedom is attained. He points ont that it is not possible to abandon good and 
eyil, such acts being endless, and that the sacrifices performed must bear fruits and the actions of 
previous births must produce many other births. (2) Others held that a union of knowledge 
and sacrifice is the cause of freedom. But knowledge is directly contradictory to sacrifice, since 
the latter involves the conception of the self as active, whereas the former recognizes that the 
self is nirvikara. (3) Others hold that sacrifice is the ladder which beginning with the 
simplest and ending with the most complicated sacrificial rites leads to knowledge as 
the cause of freedom. Sayana points out life is too short for this. (4) Others think the 
karmakénda is used in a subsidiary manner, just as in catching cranes one throws curd on 
their heads and it melting blinds them, so one should sacrifice. The reply is that this is 
surplusage: one should catch one’s crane straight off. The story is reminiscent of putting salt 
on the tail of a bird. (5) The use of sacrifice is to exhaust desire through the enjoyment of the 
desires produced by such acts, but clearly, it is replied, desire is not so quenched. Sayana 
also explains at length the visaya, prayojana, adhikarin, pramanya, and prameya of the system 
which he attributes to the Upanisad. Cf. Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 57 84.3 
E. T., pp.61sq. ‘This’ means both what is just past and what is to come, and so Sayana refers 
the efat karma to Aranyaka I, and efad brahma to Aranyaka II and III. The latter alone 
is true. 

2 Sayana thus discriminates: the divergence is due to mere laziness, the transgression to 
interest in other matters, ploughing or industry, or such forms of devotion as relic worship, &c. 
For prat »/mad, cf. Taittiriya Upanisad, II, 5; I, 11, 2; Kathaka Upanisad, IJ, 6, which 
support my emendation pramattam in Sankhayana Aranyaka, XII, 29. 

3 The verse is, of course, absurdly construed. It is impossible on any theory to make much 
sense of it. As taken in the translation, the idea is that three peoples were ruined, the others 
settled round Agni, in the sense that with Agni as their helper one people has been prosperous, 
the others not. Compare the view of the Satapatha Brahmana, I, 4, I, 10-18, that no country 
is civilized until Agni burns over it; Eggeling, S.B.£., XU, xli sq.; Macdonell, Sazskrit 
Literature, pp. 214, 215. The last two verses of the stanza of course are hopeless, save as 
indicating vaguely the connexion between Agni, the Sun, and Vayu. The Atharvaveda, X, 8, 3, 
has a different version; see Whitney, 7vams/ation, p. 596. 


200 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 1, 1- 


says (RV., VIII, ror, 14), ‘ Three peoples transgressed. Others settled round the 
sun. The great one stands in the middle of the worlds. The blowing one enters 
the dawns.’ In the verse, ‘Three peoples transgressed,’ the three peoples which 
transgressed are the Vayases,* the Vangavagadhas, and the Cerapadas. In the 


‘ Sayana and Anandatirtha agree in taking this as referring to the fates which in another 
life befell the three peoples who transgressed. The peoples are Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and Sidras, and only one set was saved. The others suffer a marakajanma (ef. for this idea 
Hopkins, 7. 2. A.S., 1906, pp. 581 sq.), as birds, &c. Only they differ as to the meaning of 
the words vayamsi vangivagadhas cerapadah. Sayana renders them as birds, trees (vanagata 
urksah), plants (avanti manusyadin and gydhyante ’bhikanksyante), and snakes (wrapadah 
sarpah). Anandatirtha prefers Pisacas, Raksases (vavga is from vay jianam and gamayantz, 
and avagadha from grdhu abhikanksayam), and Asuras. We are justified therefore in holding 
that there was no trustworthy tradition, and it is therefore possible to consider whether 
Max Miiller’s suggestion that the words are perhaps old ethnic names is correct. In its favour 
it may be noted that Sayana and Anandatirtha compel us to assume that the Aranyaka accepts 
the fullest form of the doctrine of transmigration as a punishment (e.g. Kausitaki Upanisad, I), 
which is a comparatively late view, and which I do not think is found in this Upanisad. If 
they are ethnic names, then Vaydyisz gives us a people like the Matsyas, Ajas, &c., in whose 
names we may, if we like, see totemism*, The Vangavagadhah are a composite tribe or group 
of tribes like the Kuru-Paitcalas, whose name reminds us of the later Vanga (known to Maha- 
bhasya (Weber, 7d. Stud., XIII, 386) and to Mahabharata, Dharmasitras, &c. in conjunction 
with Aga), as part of what is now Bengal. The Cerag~ddah are a third tribe, whose name 
points to the later Ceras of Southern India. It is of course possible (cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist 
India, p. 32) to argue that these verses show a later date and a wider geographical know- 
ledge than is compatible with the early pre-Buddhistic date here attributed to the Aranyaka. 
But in this respect it may be observed that Rhys Davids (cf. Biihler, S. B. Z., Il, xxxv sq. ; 
Ind. Ant., XXIII, 246-248 ; Weber, ibid., XXX, 273; Z.D.M.G., XLIX, 479) presses unduly 
the argument from the Buddhist texts. There is in addition to the grave doubts as to the age 
of the Buddhist texts the possibility that these texts show only the regions where Buddhism 
had penetrated and that there were Brahminical countries beyond these limits (cf. Biihler, 
Ind. Ant., XXIII, 245 sq.; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch, Litt., 1, 254 sq.; Mantrapatha, I, p. xv). 
It may be questioned whether Buddhism early gained a direct hold on much of Southern India ; 
at least there is no evidence that it ever did. Besides the question arises whether the Cerapadas 
must have been settled in the South at this date. Itshould be noted that the text says they 
were destroyed, and this may refer to a disaster to the old tribe, a remnant of which wandered 
south and later appear as the Ceras, who are known in the south to ASoka and to Katyayana, 
Weber, l.c., p. 371; Bhandarkar, History of Deccan, p. 143. 

The version of Sayana takes cerapadah as ca trapadah, This seems very unlikely, because 
a single ca with the second of three connected words is not elsewhere found in this Aranyaka, 
and is nowhere common. (For examples, cf. RV., I, 77, 2 (Oldenberg, S.2.#., XLVI, ror) 
and Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 475.) It is, 1 think, much more likely that three names 
of defeated tribes should not appear in the precise forms here found elsewhere than that names 
of plants and beasts should so disappear. At any rate they must all three be plants and 


* Mere animal names prove little as to totemism, which is not demonstrated for any Aryan 
stock, cf. Farnell, Czdés of the Greek States, IV, 116, 256; Macdonell, Ved. Myth., p. 153; 
Hopkins, ?, A. 0.S., 1894, p. cliv; Keith, 7. 2.4. S.,1907, pp. 929 sq.; Biihler, Za. Stud., III, 48. 


-Il, 1, 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 201 


verse, ‘Others settled round the sun,’® these people are settled round Agni here, 
as the sun, In the verse, ‘The great one stands in the middle of the worlds,’ 
that great one in the middle of the worlds means this sun. In the verse, ‘ The 
blowing one enters the dawns,’ the meaning is the purifying air enters the quaiters.° 

2. People? say, ‘Hymn, hymn.? The hymn is indeed the earth.t For from 
it all that exists springs. It praises Agni. Food are its eighty verses,* for 
by food one obtains all. The hymn is the sky. For (birds) fly along the 
sky, and along the sky men drive, It praises Vayu. Food are its eighty 
verses, for by food one obtains all. The hymn is also yonder heaven. For by 


animals or names of tribes. Monier-Williams’ Dict. takes variga as plants, avagadha and cerapada 
as names of peoples, which is quite impossible. Dr. Scheftelowitz in his forthcoming Zur 
Stammbildung in den indogermanischen Sprachen (which he has been so good as to show me 
in MS.) considers that vazga is formed from vam by the suffix ga (when g=gv). He compares 
madgu (not for *mazg, but from /mad+gu), khadga, phalgt, svargd, varga, phaligd, tunga, 
S¢nga, drbhaga, usig, vanig, sphigi, ddga (not=IG. ozgyo), &c. But even if this is the case 
the origin of the word throws no light on its being used as a tribal name, nor do I feel sure of 
the equation vanga=tree. Possibly Vanga-Magadhah may be read, cf. my Sankhayana Aranyaka, 
p- 46, n. 4; Baudhayana Dharma Sitra, I, 2, 13 and 14. 

The citation of the Rgvedic verse in full is of course natural when an explanation is being 
given. So verses are cited and explained in full at Try G (RVs 1 204, 33) sells eS 
(RV., I, 164, 38); II, 5,1 (RV., IV, 27,1); IU, 1, 6 (RV., X, 114, 4); IIL 3, 3 (RV., & 
115, 1). In the last case the verse is cited entire to indicate the sense desired to be under- 
stood. So also verses are cited in full in the Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 15,18, 20; VIII, 
4,6; IX, 1; XII, 8, 35. 

5 Anandatirtha, here and throughout, interprets in a Vaisnava sense. arkam is Visnu, Aditya 
is Visnu, and ¢asthau is upasam cakre. To Sayana, arkam is Agni aghavaniya. 

6 Sayana justifies this by pracyadidifah tattatkarmasu vihitah satyo ’nusthanavatkalyan 
haranti. 

1 Sayana explains, following the Mimamsa, III, 4; IV, 1; III, 3, that the purpose of 
Aranyaka, II, 1-3, is to enable men to attain concentration of thought by meditating on things 
connected with the sacrifice. There are five principles in such meditation. (1) The meditation 
falls to the lot not of the yajamana but of the rtvi. (2) The meditation must be on the 
pratikas of the hymns, as deities like earth, &c., and not vice versa. (3) If the dhyana is 
prescribed for a certain thing only in one Sakha, it can nevertheless be taken over by another 
Sakha, e. g. by the Kausitakins. (4) It is not obligatory in every case to go through all the 
forms of meditation which are prescribed in connexion with any part of the rite. It is sufficient 
to make the choice desired. (5) Nor is it necessary to adopt the meditation along with the 
sacrifice as an essential part. It is a matter of choice. 

The last rule shows the manner in which the Brahmins avoided the open rejection of 
sacrifice and yet justified their own speculations as a practical substitute for sacrifice. 

2 That is, not knowing its secret reference. Sayana follows the Aranyaka in deriving 
uktham from ut-tisthati. Anandatirtha, of course, explains the whole by the doctrine that 
Visnu is omnipresent and so all things can be identified with him and through him with one 
another. Cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, V, 13, 1 (where utthapayati is the derivation of wAtha) ; 
Kausitaki Upanisad, III, 3. 

3 The three sets of eighty tristichs, in gayatri, brhati, and usnih, V, 2,35 43 5+ 


202 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 1, 2- 


its gift all that exists springs. It praises the sun. Food are its eighty verses, 
for by food one obtains all. So much as regards the gods. Now as regards 
the self, The hymn is man. He is great and is Prajapati. Let him know 
that he is the hymn.‘ The hymn is his mouth, as in the case of the earth. 
It praises speech. Food are its eighty verses, for by food one obtains all. The 
hymn is the nostrils, as in the case of the sky. It praises breath. Food are 
its eighty verses, for by food one obtains all. The bend of the nose® as it 
were is the place of the brilliant one. The hymn is the forehead,® as in the 
case of the heaven. It praises the eye. Food are its eighty verses, for by food 
one obtains all. The eighty verses are food both with reference to the gods 
and with reference to the self, for by food all these beings breathe’; by food * 
he conquers this world and by food that world. Therefore the eighty verses 
are food both with reference to the gods and to the self. The food and the 
feeder are the earth, for all that exists springs from it. Whatever goes forth, 
(heaven) consumes it all... Whatever goes thence, the (earth) consumes it all. 
So earth is both food and feeder. He becomes feeder and food. He is lord of 
nothing that he eats not, or that eats him not. 


¢ Sdyana points out that this contradicts the Mimamsa, see Brahma Sitra, IV, 1, 3, 4, 
but solves the contradiction by saying the first view rests on mydyabalat, that here on vacana- 
balat, kim iva ht vacanam na kuryan nasti vacanasyatibhara iti hi sastrakaramam dindimah. 
Vidyat here means dhyayet since both knowledge and meditation are concerned with mind 
( jrdnadhyanayor manasatvasamyena). 

5 The reference is to the bend just below the brows where the nose springs out. Sayana 
cites the Jabala Upanisad, II, Aatamam vasya sthanam bhavatiti \ bhruvoh pranasya ca yah 
sandhik (sambandhah R*) sa esa dyaurlokasya parasya sandhir bhavatiti\ This refers to 
brahman; 80 Aditya, who is bradhna, is here an upadhi of brahman. Anandatirtha takes zva 
as meaning &¢mcid, while Sayana says it is equal to eva or has no meaning; cf. I, 1, 2; III, 2, 6. 

6 VisveSvaratirtha says: Jalatasabdena caksur grhyate. The word, found in the Atharvaveda, 
X, 2, 8, properly denotes ‘ brow’ or ‘ superciliary ridge’, see Hoernle, Osteology, pp. 122 sq., 177 sq- 

7 The pluti with the nasal is wktarthaprastddhyartha, says Sayana. The neut. pred. 
samdnam is noteworthy ; see Delbriick, Verg?. Syntax, III, 247, 248. 

8 By giving food to retainers and by sacrifice respectively. 

® Sayana and Anandatirtha take this as referring to the doctrine of transmigration. But 
this is hardly necessary. The earth consumes what the heaven sends, e.g. rain, not persons 
who are born again, or as Sayana says, sacrificers who having enjoyed heaven after death 
return again to earth. It is not proved that such an idea is known to this Aranyaka. Cf. 
Tp 1, 15.05.43) 3.1 85 3,735. Me Ssh 7s De 5 5.6, Me TS is) 4, 2, Me tigeds DD. O57 5894 On bnesseNOn 
prerte (for the form, cf, Oldenberg, 5S. 2.#., XLVI, 2; Bartholomae, /vanx. Grundr., I, 54, 70) 
as praiti Sayana has reference to the analogy of Jra+ +/z. The form of the dlutz is that laid 
down in Panini, VIII, 2, 107; cf. Wackernagel, Aliindische Grammatik, I, 298 sq. 

10 This is very obscure. There seems little doubt, however, that it is intended as the 
expression of a vague pantheism. Cf. Emerson’s ‘I am the doubter and the doubt, And I 
the hymn the Brahmin sings.’ The priest identifies himself with the hymn and also with 
Prajapati (see above), and so becomes, as Max Miiller says, sudject and object in one. 


-II, 1,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 203 


3. Then comes! the origin of seed. The seed of Prajapati are the gods,” 
The seed of the gods is rain. The seed of rain is herbs. The seed of herbs 
is food. The seed of food is seed. The seed of seed is creatures. The seed 
of creatures is the heart.* The seed of the heart is the mind.‘ The seed of 
the mind is speech. The seed of speech is action.® The act done is this 


Anandatirtha interprets it that Visnu consumes all worlds, and all beings enjoy him, which 
is the same idea attached to the name of Visnu. Sayana contrasts the «pasaka and the 
anupdsaka and explains the matter slightly differently in the last sentence as meaning that 
other men do not enjoy him (yad va=yasmac ca karanat). He reconciles this with the fact 
that he is @@yah because that refers to svatmabhiitasarvabhogyajataripatvam, This explanation 
is not probable, but undoubtedly the construction of the last words contains a serious difficulty 
as yad cannot correspond to adyuk. The fact perhaps is that yad is used for formal corre- 
spondence with the previous yad though it is not quite parallel in construction. It must be 
taken literally as an accusative of point in which—‘or in so much as they do not consume 
him.’ For the metaphor cf. Jaiminiya Upanigad Brahmana, Ill, 2: anadyamano yad adantam atit ; 
Taittiriya Upanisad, II, 2: adyate “ti ca bhutant; TIT 75 95) CoCes Satapatha Brahmana, X, 6, 2; 
XII, 9, 1; Maitrayani Samhita, I, 10, 13; Kausitaki Brahmana, Mie aed Je Pag ks 4405 
and the Purusa Sikta, Another possible explanation, however, is suggested by Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana, I, 5, 3: sa@ (satyam as devata) ha tasya nese yad enam apasedhet, ‘She is 
not able to drive him away, where yad is a conjunction. So here the exact sense may be, 
‘He cannot help eating them and their eating him ;’ /asya being used to introduce the dependent 
clause. Cf. II, 1, 5,n. 5. No doubt originally yad was a relative, but the pronominal quality 
is clearly minimal in such cases, The opt. in such a case is one of consequence or characteristic, 
cf. drahmanam kurvita yo pasyet, I, 2, 3, n- 3. So I would explain Ramayana, III, 19, 7: 7a 
hi pasyamy aham loke yah kuryan mama vipriyam, which Speijer (Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, § 271) explains (see § 191, 4) as merely indefinite. But the sense is slightly different 
from a mere indefinite. So Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 3, 23: dé tu tad dvitiyam asti 
tato ’nydd vibhaktam ydt pasyet; ibid., 24-30, &c. 

1 Sayana says this section is intended to explain the greatness of purusa, mentioned in II, 1, 2. 
Anandatirtha, on II, 1, 2, much more correctly says: vidyantaratuin na pirvakhandenasya 
samgatih \ uttaratrapy etad anusamdheyam\ Cf, Pischel, Vedesche Studien, 1, 88 sq. 

2 Sayana says that the element of sativa is represented in the gods, of vayas in men, and 
of famas in animals, &c., and this explains the high position here given to the gods. This 
doctrine is of course later, appearing first most clearly in the SvetaSvatara Upanisad, see 
Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 226 sq.; E.T., pp. 250 sq.; Garbe (Samkhyatattva- 
kaumudi, p. 592) has conclusively, I think, dispersed the assumption countenanced by Weber 
(Ind. Stud., 1X, 11), Muir (Zexts, V, 309), and Whitney (Translation of Atharvaveda, p. 6or) 
that Atharvaveda, X, 8, 43 refers to the gumas, see Lanman, ibid., p. 1045. 

2 Because the jzvdtman is here, says Sayana. Cf. Deussen, op. cit., p. 259; E.T., p. 287. 

¢ Anandatirtha distinguishes hydaya and manas as being samkalpatmakam antahkaranam 
and vikalpatmakam respectively. Sayana’s explanation is much more probable that manas 
denotes the knowing part of the heart, a frequent early use of the word, cf. Deussen, op. cit., 
pp. 243 sq.; E.T., pp. 27° sq. P 

5 Sayana renders speech as the Veda, and action as sacrifice. Anandatirtha evidently 
takes it as equal to adystam kriya va. He also (unlike Sadyana) construes Aarmakytam as 
one word, harmanirmitam. Rajendralala prints in the text harmakytam against the commentary. 
Sayana of course explains ky tam as done in a former birth, but this again is an unnecessary intro- 


204 AITAREYA ARANYAKA I, 1, 3- 


man, the abode of drahman. He consists of food, * and because he consists 
of food, he consists of gold. He becomes golden” in yonder world, he is 
seen as golden for all mortals, who knows this. 

4. Brahman? entered into that man by the tips of his feet. Because drahman 
entered that man by the tips of his feet, so men call them the tips of the feet 
(prapadyata-prapade), but in the case of other animals hoofs and claws. Then 
he crept higher up, and they became the thighs. Then he said, ‘Swallow? widely,’ 
and that became the stomach. Then he said, ‘Make it wide for me,’ and that 
became the chest. The Sarkaraksyas* meditate on the stomach as drahman, the 
Arunis on the heart. These two are indeed drahman. But he crept upwards 
still, and arrived at the head. Because he arrived at the head (aSrayafa) then 
it became the head (éras). So the head is the head. These delights settled 
in the head, sight, hearing, mind, speech, breath. Delights settle on him who 


duction of the transmigration theory, see II, 1, 1, n. 45 2, n. 9, and Anandatirtha does not accept 
it. The passage only means that action is the man}; the man is what he does; a perfectly 
plausible view. For the relation of speech and action see Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, MERZ 
Il, 2, 8; III, 32, 9; Mahanarayana Upanisad, IV, 7; Oertel, J. A. O..S., XVI, 231. 

6 Anandatirtha renders sa as bhagavdn and iramayah as ichanuripasukhapurnah, and 
hiranmayah as bahyanandavilaksanasukhapirnah. Sayana quotes Taittirlya Upanisad, II, 1, 
I: sa vd esa puruso annarasamayah, We explains that as man is composed of food, so he 
is gold in the shape of the egg of Brahman, Really the thing is a mere play on words. 
For the form hiran(ya)mayah, cf. Bloomfield, P. A. O. S., April, 1893, P. XXxv; Affix SNS 
418; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 279, 280; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 58. 

7 Anandatirtha explains: Narayanam janan karmajam rupam utsrjya nijanandatkaripako 
bhavati, Sayana says he appears as golden as the sun for the benefit of all creatures. Really it means, 
he appears (dadySe passive, cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp. 264 sq.) to all creatures, no doubt 
originally as the sun. The passage is like all this part of the Aranyaka, II, 1-3, pantheistic. In 
Satapatha Brahmana, X, I, 4,9, the Agnicit is promised birth in the other world as hivanmayah, 
rendered by Sayana Airanyasamanavarnah, see Eggeling, S. 8. Z., XLII, 295, n. 2. 

1 Sayana explains that this chapter shows prana, the wfadh¢ of Brahman, entering the 
subtle body. Hisentry into the gross body is seen on II, 1, 2, He compares Taittiriya Upanisad, 
II,6, 1; Maitrayaniya Upanisad, II. For prapada Lanman in Whitney, Translation of Atharvaveda, 
II, 33, 5, suggests toe as the meaning, but the dual renders that impossible here, and I believe in all 
the passages cited at p. xcviii the sense ‘front part of the foot’ as opposed to ‘ heel’ is correct. 

2 Make a large hole, says Sdyana. Max Miiller’s ‘grasp’ is a slip. The form is overlooked 
in the Dic¢. and in Whitney’s Poots, Sc. 

3 Sarkaraksyah is rendered siksmadystayah by Anandatirtha, who, however, calls the 
Arunayah Rsis. He explains «daram as locative in sense, as does Sayana, tacitly. The 
Sarkaraksyas are a subdivision of the Haridraviyas according to the Caranavytha and are 
mentioned in the Mahabhasya, IV, 1, 74; 75- Max Miiller points out that neither in Chandogya 
Upanisad, V, 11, 15, 17 nor in Satapatha Brahmana, X, 6, 1, do these views appear—at least 
in terms. Arunayah appears also in Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, II, 5, 1, wrongly amended 
by Oertel to Arwneyah, against the MSS. érahma may be meant, but the neut. is more likely. 
Cf. Weber, Znd. Stud., XVIII, 140; v. Schroeder, 7nd. Lit., p.gt,n.1. That the heart (Avdaya) 
is brahman was the view of Vidagdha Sakalya, see Vajiavalkya’s exposition in Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, IV,1,7. See also Chandogya Upanisad, III, 12, 4; VIII, 3, 3; Ind, Stud., V1, 177. 


-II, 1, 4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 205 


knows thus why the head is the head. They strove together,‘ saying, ‘I am 
the hymn, I am the hymn.’ They said, ‘Come, let us leave this body, then 
that one of us at whose departure the body falls, will be the hymn.’ Speech 
went forth, yet (the body) remained, speechless, eating and drinking. Sight 
went forth, yet (the body) remained, sightless, eating and drinking. Hearing went 
forth, yet (the body) remained, without hearing, eating and drinking. Mind 
went forth, yet (the body) remained, blinking as it were,° eating and drinking. 
Breath went forth, when breath went out, (the body) fell. It was decayed. 
(Because men) said it had decayed, it became the body. Therefore is the body 
the body. Who knows this, his enemy, the evil one, who hates him decays, 
the enemy, the evil one; who hates him is defeated. They strove together, 
saying, ‘I am the hymn, I am the hymn.’ They said, ‘Come, let us again 
enter this body; then that one of us, on whose entrance the body rises, will 
be the hymn.’ Speech entered, (the body) lay still. Sight entered, (the body) 
lay still. Hearing entered, (the body) lay still. Mind entered, (the body) lay 
still. Breath entered, (the body) arose, and (breath) became the hymn. There- 
fore breath only is the hymn. Let men know that breath is the hymn. The 
gods ® said to breath, ‘Thou art the hymn, thou art all this, we are thine, thou 
art ours.’ A Rsi says (RV., VIII, 92, 32), ‘Thou art ours, we are thine.’ 


* There are similar passages in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, VI, 2; Chandogya Upanisad, 
V, 1; Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 12-14; I, 2; Prasna Upanisad, IJ, 1. The comparative antiquity 
of the versions must be open to doubt. But this version certainly seems simpler and more original 

than those of the Brhadaranyaka, Chandogya, or Kausitaki Upanisads, which seem to embellish the 
theme with further details. The account in the Praina Upanisad is simple, but as that Upanisad 
is on other grounds late, that may be explained as merely a reference to a well-known theme, 
and indicates the danger of arguments from comparative simplicity. For anfa with subj., cf. 
Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp- 23, 433 Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, p. 430. 

5 The masculine, mi/ita, is explained by Sayana as referring to dehah understood. It is 
probable that the idea in the mind of the writer throughout was purusa as the subject ; hence 
the masculines as long as prdva remains in the Savira. A mil is Brahmana style first. Cf. 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 11 and 12 (2, 22 and 3 in the Madhyandina text) where drahma 
is followed by sa. On the other hand in Brhadaranyaka, 1V, 3, 22, the Kanva text, after a 
series of masculines, produces ananvagatam punyenda, and Sankara explains: 7#paparatvan 
napumsakalingam, The Madhyandina version (as in Weber and Bohtlingk) has the masc., 
but as Max Miiller (5.2. Z., XV, 169) points out, Dvivedaganga had ananvagatam, as he 
says: ananvagatam iti riipavisayo napumsakanirdesah. There are also difficulties in the 
genders in SvetaSvatara Upanisad, ILI, 7, see Max Miiller, S.B.Z., XV, 245, n. 4. In 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 22, hamaripi and kdmacari, according to one MS., agree with 
brahma. Such uses are not rare in Latin and Greek, e.g. pide téxvov; Vergl. Syntax, Ill, 244. 
For fz 3 m, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 22, 2, against Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1890, p. 170. 

6 The gods are those presiding over the parts of the body, see IJ, 1, 5, n. 3. For Prana 
as brahma, cf. Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 1; 2; Chandogya Upanisad, IV, 10, 5;  Taittiriya 
Upanisad, II, 3, 1; Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 33, 2. It was held by Udanka Saulbayana 
(Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 1, 2) and is refuted, ibid., V, 13, 1; Oertel, J. 4. 0. S., XVI, 230. 


206 AITAREYA ARANYAKA If, 1, 5- 


5. The gods carried him forward, Being carried forward he was stretched 
out. (Because men say) he has been carried forward, the morning came into being. 
(Because men say) he has gone to rest, the evening came into being. Day is 
breathing forth,? night is breathing down. Speech is fire,* sight yonder sun, 
mind the moon, hearing the quarters, this is the union* of those sent forth. 
These deities are such in the body, but they openly appear among the deities ; 
this is the meaning. This indeed said Hiranyadant Vaida who knew 
this; ‘Whatever they give me not,® I own not -myself. I know the union 
of those sent forth in the body which they enter. This it is.’ To him who 


1 Sdyana explains that this section treats of praa under various forms. Anandatirtha 
as usual equates prdua and Visnu. The section is composed of bad etymologies. The first 
alludes to fra + /ni ( pra-anayanta). 

2 For the meanings of pra@ma and apana see Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 249- 
251; E.T., pp. 276-279. The oldest view is that they mean expiration and inspiration 
respectively, whence apdva comes to refer to the wind of digestion. CE se yy Asal s eineaee 

% This idea originates with the Purusa Sikta, RV., X, 90, 13; 14, see Deussen, Allgemeine 
Einleitung, p. 157, and later it develops into a regular system of gods who correspond to and 
guard the several psychic faculties. Cf. Deussen, Phelosophie der Upanishads, p. 241; E.T., 
p- 267. It is developed most in II, 4,1; 2, where Agni, &c., become speech, &c., and enter 
man, while here they are merely considered as the several parts of the body. Cf. also I, 3, 33 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, X and XI; Lanman, Hindu Pantheism, p. 18. 

* The idea seems clearly to be that these four are gathered together in the body, and 
exist openly as deities, as Sayana says. But prahitam is very difficult, and the whole seems 
an explanation of what was even then obscure. Cf. the varying versions of parzam apravartt, 
amrtam satyena channam, &c., cited in Deussen, op. cit., p. 20; E. T., p. 20, n. 3. 

5 This authority occurs also in Aitareya Brahmana, III, 6. Is his name a reference to 
gold stoppings in his teeth? They were known to the XII Tables (B.C. 450?) and to very early 
Egypt. Yam is read by Rajendralala and in the AnandaSrama edition and also by Sayana. 
But it seems obvious that it stands for ya written before # carelessly as anusvara, cf. 
Max Miller, Marut Hymns, p. 1x; 11, 3, 3,n.2; II, 1, 4, n. 3; Macdonell, Vedec Grammar, 
p. 62; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 333. To Sayana yay presents no difficulty 
as he merely supplies padartham abhistam. The word dadyuh is difficult, because the plural 
is unexpected after zfe if that is a third person, when the sense would be ‘nobody owns what 
the deities give not to me’. This is rather awkward but not impossible. The rendering of I, 
I, 2 suggested in n. 10 there would give in this passage (though ya would still remain 
properly a pronoun), ‘He owns nothing that they will not give me also,’ which by an easy 
process of development would slide over into the sense, ‘He cannot help them giving me (it), 
showing the origin of such a developed construction as that in II, 1,2. This comes to an 
assertion of the fact that all that the cosmic pzrwsa has (he must be the subject of 7¥e), 
that has man. It is simpler to neglect the commentators and take ve as first person, thus 
asserting the intimate union of man and the deities. In this use yad is used with consecutive 
force; cf. the Mantra use of yad as final with subj. or opt. (Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, 
PP- 321, 341), and the classical use (Speijer, Sanskrit Syntax, § 466). The absence of such 
a use in the Brahmanas (cf. Speijer, Vedzsche und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 279 e) is improbable. 
7$e as a third person belongs to a type which occurs in all Brahmanas, and is not a mere 
imitation of Mantra forms (as held by Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, p. 429, where see other 
examples), see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 613. The form jrahkitam presents great 


-II, 1, 6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 207 


knows this all creatures unconstrained pay homage. That is saé/ya (truth). 
For sa/ is breath, #* is food, yam is yonder sun. ‘That is threefold. Threefold 
as it were is the eye, white, dark, and the pupil” Even though he speaks 
falsely,® yet speaks he truth who thus knows why truth is saé¢ya. 

6. Speech is his rope, names the knots.’ So by his speech as rope, and by’ 
names as knots, all this is bound. For all this is names, and by his speech 
he names everything. Men? bound with ropes carry him who knows this, His 
hairs are the uszzh, his skin the ga@yafr7, his flesh the /risfubh, his sinews the 
anustubh, his bones the jagaf#, his marrow the pankti, his breath® the drhaiz.. 
He is covered with the metres. Since he is covered with the metres, therefore 
they call them metres (coverings). Thus the metres cover him from illhap* in 


difficulty. To take it as Vedic for prahitinam, as Sayana does, is to introduce a very rare ®* 
form (cf. Whitney, l.c., p. 114) into the text: on the other hand the word prahit has no parallel 
(save conceivably in form (nd. Stud., III, 225) in prahitoh samyojane in the Arseya Brahmana, if 
we may take that as dual form gen. and not as in Monier- Williams’ Dict. as a gen. of frahztw) at any 
rate in sense. Whitney (Roots, €c., p. 205) gives -Az¢ as aform from »//z, I think that prahit should 
probably be taken as the ‘impeller’, i.e. the deities cause the organs to work, cf. II, 4, 1, and 2. 

© The z of # is to enable it to be pronounced (Sayana). Chandogya Upanisad, VIII, 3, 
5, gives a different version, from sat+¢i+yam, as the binding of the immortal and the 
mortal (¢ being the dual of ¢/). Cf. Deussen cited in n. 4 above. Taittirlya Upanisad, II, 6, 
derives sat-tyam from sat ‘manifest’, and ¢yat ‘not-manifest ’, Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, V, 
5,1, gives sa+¢ (so Sankara (as here), but Kanva text, ¢7) + am when sa and am are = true, 
and ¢ (fi) = untrue (for ¢ occurs in amyta and mrtyu !). Kausitaki Upanisad, I, 6, gives 
sat (what is other than the gods and the senses) + yam (the gods and the senses). 

7 Cf. Jaiminiya Brahmana, I, 254 (Raninika) ; Satapatha Brahmana, XII, 8, 2,26; 4./. P., 
XVII, 400; elsewhere purwsa is the third member, Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 26, 1; 34, 
1 and Oertel’s note. 

® This doctrine undoubtedly shows the moral disadvantages of the doctrine of salvation by 
knowledge, and it is the precursor of the later immuhity from moral censure of the jvanmukta. 
Cf. Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 1; Sadananda, Vedantasara, 235: Subhasubhayor audasinyam, 
and Jacob’s note in his 7rans/ation; Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 164-167. In asya the 
genitive is presumably possessive, cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p.153; Franke, Bess. Bertr., 
XVI, 112; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, §§ 69, 92, n.; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 296 b. Compare evam me sutam with zi nah $rutih (Introd., p. 57); J/-4.0.5.. XXV, 
116,117. For the position, cf. Z. D.M. G., LXT, 129. . 

1 Sayana explains the metaphor from a rope for tying up cattle. Anandatirtha explains 
as usual by identifying all with Visnu. ‘ His’ refers to prama of course. 

2 Like oxen who carry men. 

3 pranah here refers to the air in the strict sense, and has not the wider sense of prana 
(Sayana) ; perhaps it = ghrana, as in II, 1, 7, and often; cf. my Sankhdyana Aranyaka, p. 21. 

4 This must be the sense. Sayana, however, appears to render it ‘whatever evil he desires 
to do, the metres keep him from contact with it’. The connexion of ./chad and chandas is very 
doubtful; see I, 1, 3, 0. 6; Leumann, Et, Wort., p. 103. 





® See also RV., IV, 2,3 and 11: martam; VI, 47, 16: manusyam; Oldenberg, S. 2. E., 
XLVI, 319; Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1, 44; Bartholomae, Stedien, I, 48. 


208 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 1, 6- 


whatever quarter he desires who knows thus why metres are called metres, 
A Rsi says (RV., I, 164, 13), ‘I saw the guardian,’ for he is a guardian, for he 
guards all this. ‘Never tiring,’ for he never rests. ‘Coming and going on 
his ways,’® for he comes and goes on his ways. ‘Illuminating ® the principal 
and intermediate, for he illuminates these quarters only, the principal and 
intermediate. ‘He moves up and down in the worlds, for he moves up and 
down in the worlds: Then there is the verse’ (RV., I, 55, 8), “Covered ® like 
caves by the makers.’ For all this is covered by breath. This ether is supported 
by breath as drhaf, and one should know that, even as this ether is covered by 
breath as drha/i, so all things including ants® are covered by breath as érhai. 

7. Now come the powers of this person. By his speech are created earth 
and fire. On the earth plants grow; fire ripens them. ‘Take this, take this,’ 
thus saying do these two, earth and fire, serve their parent, speech, As far as 
the earth extends, as far as fire extends, so far extends his world, and as long 
as the world of earth and fire decays not, so long does his world decay not 
who knows thus the power of speech. By breath’ the sky and the air are 
created. People follow the sky, and hear along the sky, and the air bears 


5 The veins, says Sayana. He explains that graya is the guardian by referring to Kausitaki 
Upanisad, III, 2: yavadhy)asmit charire prano vasati tavad ayur. This passage of the 
Regveda later served as the authority for the activity of rdva even in susuptz, Prasna Upanisad, 
IV, 3; Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, p. 268; E.T., p. 297. Jaiminiya Upanisad 
Brahmana, III, 37, takes the r@ua@h and the sun’s rays as meant. 

6 The four quarters and the four intermediate quarters, SE., SW., NE., and NW. For 
the number of the quarters, at first four, later, ten, cf. Hopkins, 7.4. 0.S., XVI, 283. Prana, 
Sayana explains, is internally what Aditya is externally, see PraSna Upanisad, I, 5; ILI, 8: 
adityo ha vai bahyah prana udayati. In the original and in Jaiminiya Upanisad, lic., vaste 
means ‘ wears’. 

" Not RV., I, 55, 81 (Max Miiller following Rajendralala), nor I, 56, 8 (AnandaSrama series). 

8 Anandatirtha and Sayana both cite and explain, quite differently, the whole verse, but 
they agree in taking the caves as holes for concealing wealth. Cf. I, 3, 1, n. 4. 

® Anandatirtha renders, ‘ beginning with ants.’ 

1 In the nose, i.e. the power of smell (Sdyana). The use of the masc. sysfaz with a masc, 
and a neut. and of sys/@ below do not entirely agree with the rules of concord later accepted. 
Delbriick (A/indische Syntax, p. 88) gives only one doubtful example (RV., I, 8, 10) and Speijer 
(Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 101) thinks that in classical Sanskrit with names of things the 
neuter is a more common predicate if the genders differ and one is neuter. This is laid 
down in a Varttika (not in the Kasika Vrtti, it appears) on Panini, I, 2, 72, which runs: 
tyadaditah Sese pumnapumsakato lingavacanani \ si ta Devadattas ca tau \ tac ca Devadattas 
ca Yajnadatta ca tani \ tac ca Devadattas ca te\ So the neuter appears in Mahabharata, III, 
58,10; VI, 6, 26; Ramayana, VI, 62, 37. If only persons are concerned the masc. is regular, 
e.g. Mahabharata, XVII, 1, 29: Pandavas ca mahatmano Draupadi ca yasasvini \ krtopavasah 
Kauravya prayayuh pranmukhds tatah \\ RaghuvamSa, III, 23: tatha nrpah sé ca sutena 
Magadhi nanandatus tadsadrsena tatsamau, &c. That this is old is indicated by the rule in 
Homeric Greek, thus formulated by Monro (Homeric Grammar, p. 157), ‘ Where an adjective 


Bit 1; + TRANSLATION AND NOTES 209 


pure scent.2 Thus do sky and air serve their parent, breath. As far as the 
sky extends, as far as air extends, so far extends his world, and as long as 
the world of sky and air decays not, so long does his world decay not who 
knows thus the power of breath, By his eye are created the heaven and the 
sun. Heaven gives him rain and proper food, the sun causes his light to shine. 
Thus do heaven and sun serve their parent, the eye. As far as the heaven 
extends, as far as the sun extends, so far extends his world, and as long as 
the world of heaven and sun decays not, so long does his world decay not 
who knows thus the power of the eye. By his ear were created the quarters 
and the moon. From the quarters they come unto him, from the quarters 
he hears, the moon produces for him the bright and the dark halves for good 
deeds.* Thus the quarters and the moon‘ serve their parent, the ear. As 


refers to more than one noun, it follows the most prominent: or (if this is at all doubtful) 
the masc. is used of Jersons, the neut. of things: e. g., Z2. ii, 136 :— 
: ai 5€ mov Hperepal Tr dAoxa Kal yma Téxva 

far évt peyapos moridéypevat, 

because the wives are chiefly thought of, but Od. xiii, 434 :— 
dui 5€ pw faxos GdAo kakdv Badrev 752 xiTOVA, 
poyaréa purdwvta. 

The neut. plur. is especially used of sheep and cattle. 7. xi, 244 :— 

mpoe? éExatdy Bods Saxev, Ereta 5& xia bnéoTN, 
alyas 6pod kal dis.’ 

The first example shows that a fem. can prevail over a neut. in the case of persons, the 
second that in regard to things the nent. prevails over the masc., the third that in regard to 
things the nent. may be used of masc. and fem. animals. Here antariksam is a deity and so 
naturally the masc. prevails, cf. Manu, VIII, 86, where Aydayam is personified. In Latin the 
rule is (Allen and Greenough, Latin Grammar, p. 173), ‘generally, a predicative adjective will 
be masculine, if nouns of different genders mean “ving beings; neuter, if things without life :’ 
as Livy ii, 40 uxor deinde ac liberi amplexi, but Livy v, 4 labor voluptasque societate quadam 
inter se naturali sunt iuncta. Even if masc. nouns and fem. occur, the neut. can be used if one 
of the subjects is a thing, e.g., Livy xliv, 24 matura inimica sunt libera civitas et rex, 
or even if two fem. nouns represent things, e.g. Cicero, de Fin. iii, 11 stultitia et temeritas 
et iniustitia sunt fugienda, ‘The basis of discrimination, therefore, is rather between living 
creatures, especially persons, and things (which include sometimes the animals). 

The use of the dual and plural of the verb is regular, cf. Delbriick, pp. 83 sq.; Speijer, 
l.c., though as in Greek and Latin and Anglo-Saxon the nearest subject may determine the 
verb, as is usual in the Brhaddevata. Cf. ibid., VII, 74, for a set of mixed genders with a 
neut. plur.; VIII, 47, for a masc. plur. with a masc. sing., a fem. sing., and a masc, dual, which 
ollow. Cf. Delbriick, Vergi. Syntax, 111, 244-247, which this supplements. 

2 Sayana refers to Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 3, and Chandogya Upanisad, I, 2, for the 
reasons, interference by Asuras, for the existence of bad smells; cf. Farnell, Evolution of Religion, 
pp- 99sq. Anandatirtha takes ‘him’ throughout as meaning Visnu. 

3 Probably it refers to sacrificial acts. 

* Sayana admits the apparent inconsistency of this and II, 4, 1 where the moon is derived 
rom the mind, but explains it away that the creation here is merely an imaginary one for 


KEITH is 


210 AITAREYA ARANYAKA “TL1,4= 


far as the quarters extend, as far as the moon extends, so far extends his world, 
and as long as the world of the quarters “and the moon decays not, so long 
does his world decay not who knows thus the power of the ear. By his mind 
were created the waters and Varuna. The waters yield to him faith for good 
deeds and Varuna preserves his offspring by his law. Thus the waters and 
Varuna serve their parent, mind. As far as the waters extend, as far as Varuna 
extends, so far extends his world, and as long as the world of the waters and 
Varuna decays not, so long does his world decay not who knows thus the 
power of mind. 

g. Was it water!? Was it water? This world was water. This was the 
root, that the shoot. This the father, those the sons. Whatever there is of 
the son’s, that is the father’s; whatever of the father’s, that is the son’s. So 
it is said. Mahidasa Aitareya? who knew this said, ‘1 know myself as reaching 
to the gods, and the gods as reaching to me’? For hence are they gifted, hence 
are they supported. This is the hiding-place,* eye, ear, mind, speech, and 
breath. They call it the hiding-place of drahman. He who knows this throws 
down the enemy, the evil one, who hates him. The enemy, the evil one, who 
hates him is defeated. He is the life, the breath, being,’ and not-being. The 
gods adored him as being, and so became great. So in sleep a man breathes 
bhiir bhiikh. The demons adored him as not-being, and so were overthrown.° 
He becomes great by himself who knows this. The enemy, the evil one, who 


purposes of worship, a yathdvacanam as opposed to a yathavastu creation. Such inconsistencies 
are not very important, but this small point adds to the evidence against II, 1-3, and I, 4-6, 
being by one hand. For Varuna, cf. Lévi, Za Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 152 sq. 

1 Khanda 7 treats of pwrusa as the efficient cause, this Khanda of him as the material cause. 
Ap is to be considered as an expression of the five elements according to Sayana, an unnecessary 
idea. The p/wti indicates a question. The cause and effect are naturally identified, Ananda- 
tirtha identifies them in Visnu. The Garbha Upanisad, I, traces the five elements in the human 
body, but the idea is not necessarily contained here. ; 

2 This mention is enough to prove that Mahidasa did not write the Aranyaka. But it 
is quite probable that he was the redactor of the Brahmana, in its form of forty chapters. The 
saying here may no doubt be regarded as one of his Upanisads in the sense of secret teachings. 
Cf. Introd., p. 16. For the form, cf. Leumann, Gurupijakaumudi, p. 42. 

 Rajendralala’s commentary is wrongly printed. Ved@ is an error for veda, and omad is 
resolved wrongly. . The end of the sentence explains the dependence of deities on men for 
devotion. 4 : Se ‘ 

* It is dalldd wird, because prdnua is swallowed up and hidden by the other senses. Cf. 
the doctrine that the senses enter in sleep into the prada. The prana forms thus the basis of 
the senses. Probably the idea of the Aranyaka is something like this, and the translation 
‘mountain’ misleading. For dtah, cf. Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, p. 38, n. 1. 

5 Because the presence of prada secures the jivdtman (Sayana). 

6 Sayana solves the difficulty of the evil effects of abhatd by discriminating between ‘the 
desire of abhité for oneself, as shown in the ruin of the demons, and for one’s foe. 


-II, 2, 1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES att 


hates him, is overcome. He is death and immortality. A Rsi says (RV., I, 164, 
38), ‘Down and up he goes, grasped” by food,’ for this up-breathing restrained 
by down-breathing does not go forth. ‘The immortal dwells with the mortal,’ 
for through him all this dwells together. For these bodies are mortal, the deity 
immortal. ‘These two even go in different directions, they increase the one, 
but not the other,’ for they increase the bodies, but the deity is immortal. He 
who knows this becomes immortal in yonder world and is seen as immortal by 
all beings. 


ADHYAYA 2. 


He who shines approached this world! in the shape of man. For he is the 
breath. So he approached it. For he who shines is the breath. For a hundred 
years he approached it. Therefore a hundred are the years of the life of man. 


7 Anandatirtha renders svadhayd@ by Visnu. Sayana takes it more properly as referring 
to digestion. The end of the verse means, according to Sayana, that men nourish the body 
by food and drink, but not the raza. Anandatirtha renders, ‘at death they see the bodies 
deserted by Vayu.’ The epithet fafvantd can only be justified by the fact that one of the two 
is immortal, and on the principle chatrino gachanti. For more or less analogous cases, cf. 
usasa, dhani (Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 102), and ksapdh, RV., I, 70, 7, as interpreted 
by Oldenberg, S. B. Z., XLVI, 70. On the same chatrinnyaya Govinda on Sankhayana Srauta 
Sitra, X VII, 8, 10, explains why the Praiiga Sastra in the Mahavrata according to that school:is 
called Vamadeva’s though less than a half of it is by him (Friedlander, p. 33, n. 1); Weber (Ind. 
Stud., XIII, 113) quotes dvadasdu masau from Taittiriya Samhita, VII, 5, 2, 1; Kathaka 
Samhita, XX XIII, 1; Paficavim$a Brahmana, IV, 1, 2; stémau dvadasau, Kathaka, XXXIII, 3, 
and similar cases from Satapatha Brahmana, IV, 5, 7, 2; XI, 6, 3, 53; XIV, 6, 9, 3; XII, 
3, 2, 2; Paficavim$a Brahmana, VI, 2, 5 (cf. /nd. Stud., IX, 18). Visiécina is explained as 
having diverse functions, the breath moving the bodily senses, the body supporting the 
pranendriyas. Viyantd is referred to the fact that on death the body remains on the ground, while 
prama seeks another world. Cf. Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, pp. 5748q.; Pischel, Vedische 
Studien, Ul, 221; Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1893, p. 92; Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., I, pylons ity, We. 

® Sayana explains ‘immortal’ as united with Hiranyagarbha; Anandatirtha says ‘emanci- 
pated’. But that this Aranyaka knows emancipation, instead of immortality, as the highest 
end is not even probable. DadySe (II, 1, 5) and mene (III, 1, 1) are both clearly present 
passives in sense. The original sense of the perfect was not distinguished from the present in 
point of time but denotes a state, cf. Giles, Comp. Phil., § 549; Monro, Homeric Grammar’, 
pp. 31, 323 Delbriick, Synt. Horsch., I, 192 sq. ; Vergl. Syntax, Il, 211 sq.; Altindische 
Syntax, p. 297; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 823. The oldest sense is quite frequent in the 
Rgveda. In cases like dibhaya (I, 3, 4) and dadhara (1, 5, 2) the naturally intensive form 
of the perfect is further strengthened. 

1 This Khanda shows that the names of the seers of the Rgyeda can be deduced from 
prana’s actions. Anandatirtha explains the section as proving that Visnu is superior to all 
the gods. He takes alhyarcat as ‘he entered into ’, brahman and the other gods. He justifies 
his theory by quoting the Vac Sakta, RV., X, 125, as proving that Vac, i.e. Ramd, is superior 
to the gods, and she of course is inferior to Visnu. 

_ The sun and prana are as usual identified, the one being the adhidaivatam, the other the 
adhydtman representation. The former attracts the vision, the latter impels the body. 


i P2 


212 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 2, 1- 


Because he approached him for one hundred years, therefore they are the Satarcins. ” 
Therefore they call him who is (raza) the Satarcins. He placed himself in 
the middle of all that is. Because he placed himself in the middle of all that 
is, therefore they are the Madhyamas. Therefore they call him who is (raga) 
the Madhyamas. As up-breathing he is the swallower, as down-breathing 
delight. Because as up-breathing he is the swallower, as down-breathing delight, 
therefore he is Grtsamada. Therefore they call him who is ( prana) Grtsamada. 
All whatsoever was his friend. Because all whatsoever was his friend, therefore 
he is Viévamitra. Therefore they call him who is (praza) Visvamitra. The 
gods spake to him, ‘Let him be dear to all of us.” Because the gods spake 
to him, ‘Let him be dear to all of us,’ therefore he is Vamadeva. Therefore 
they call him who is (fra@ga) Vamadeva. He protected all this from evil. 
Because he protected all this from evil, therefore they are the Atris. Therefore 
they call him who is ( fraga) the Atris. 

9. He also is a bearer of offspring. Offspring is vaja,‘ and he supports 
offspring. Because he supports offspring, therefore he is Bharadvaja. Therefore 
they call him who is (fraya) Bharadvaja. The gods spake to him, ‘Let him 
be the richest? of us all.’ Because the gods spake to him, ‘Let him be the 
richest of us all’ therefore he is Vasistha. Therefore they call him who is 
(prana) Vasistha. He went forth® to all this whatsoever. Because he went 
forth to all this whatsoever, therefore they are the Pragathas. Therefore they 
call him who is (fraza) the Pragathas. He purified all this whatsoever. Because 
he purified all this whatsoever, then they are the Pavamanis.* Therefore they 
call him who is (raza) the Pavamanis. He said, ‘Let me be everything, 
small and great.’ They became the Ksudrasiiktas and Mahasitktas.” Therefore 


2 Really, Max Miiller points out, the name refers to their composing about Ioo verses 
each. They are the seers of RV., 1, The Madhyamas are the seers of Books Ii-IX, Grtsamada 
of II, Visvamitra of III, Vamadeva of IV, the Atris of V. For the rest see Khanda 2, The 
Madhyamas appear in Kausitaki Brahmana, XII, 3; A&valayana Grhya Sitra, III, 4, 2; 
Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 10, 3; Brhaddevata, III, 116 (Madhyamah); Sarvanukramani, 
Introd., II, 10, &c. For the plur., Aivayah, cf. Oldenberg, 2. D. M. G., XLU, 926, naa. 

1 Vajah is taken as either the body from the “/vaj in the sense of going, or as food by Sayana. 

2 Sayana translates ‘causing to dwell by his entry into us’, and Anandatirtha has ‘best of 
dwellers’. The ordinary sense seems preferable. Cf. II, 2, 4, n. 5. 

® This seems to be the sense, and it is so taken by Sayana. Anandatirtha takes it either 
as ‘he obtained’ or ‘he sang’. Sayana says the verses are called Pragathdas and also the poets. 
Probably the poets, of Book VIII, are meant. Bharadvaja and Vasistha correspond to Books VI 
and VII respectively. The same lists appear in ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, III, 4, 2, and 
Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 10, 3. 

* Presumably the poets of Book IX are so described. Cf. Arseya Brahmana (ed. Burnell), 
p. 42; Vedische Studien, III, 99. In Afvalayana pavamands and in Sankhayana pavamdnds occur. 

5 The poets of Book X are referred to. Perhaps also the hymns were called ksudrasuktah 
as Max Miiller suggests, but this is not certain. The last 2sudrasukiah no doubt implies 


-II, 2, 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 213 


they are the Ksudrasiiktas. Therefore they call him who is (prana) the 
Kgudrastktas. (He said), ‘Ye have said what is well said. These became 
ahymn.® Therefore there is a hymn. Therefore men call him who is ( prana) 
hymn. He is a verse, for he went to” all beings. Because he went to all 
these beings, therefore he is a verse. Therefore they call him who is ( prana) 
averse. He is also a half-verse, for he went to all these places.* Because he 
went to all these places, therefore he is a half-verse. Therefore they call him 
who is (frdya) a half-verse. He is a quarter-verse,® for he has entered all these 
beings. Because he has entered all these beings, he is a quarter-verse. Therefore 
they call him who is (fraza) a quarter-verse. He is a syllable, for he pours 
forth gifts to all these beings and because none can pour forth” gifts beyond 
him. Because he pours forth gifts for all these beings, and because none can 
pour forth gifts beyond him, therefore he is a syllable. Therefore they call 
him who is (frdza) a syllable. Therefore one should know that all these verses, 
all these Vedas, all sounds™ are one word, praza, and that praza is all the verses. 


mahasiiktah. See besides ASvalayana and Sankhayana, Brhaddevata, III, 116; Sarvanukramani, 
Introd., IT, 10, with Macdonell’s note. 

® The poet is also called Sikta, says Sayana, but there is no authority for this. 

7 The construction is obscure, but the rendering ‘he went’ seems best. The dat. is natural, cf. 
Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 44; Whitney, 7. A. O.S., April, 1892, p. clxiv, Sanskrit 
Grammar, § 286b. Anandatirtha renders ‘he went’. Sdayana’s version is svapravesena piijitam 
akarot, taking bhitebhyah as sarvabhitartham deham, and Max Miiller renders, ‘ he did honour to.’ 
He also adds that the poet is called Reas well as the Mantra. Cf. Geldner, Vedische Studien, II, 95. 

8 Ardha is taken as ‘ place’ (cf. ordo) by both Anandatirtha and Sayana, and is probably so 
intended, as Max Miiller takes it. 

9 Sayana renders ‘word’, but this is less likely. He adds that it means also ‘quarter- 
verse’. For the intrans. fadi—which (as afdd7) is recognized by Panini—cf. Delbriick, 4/tin- 
dische Syntax, p.266; Whitney, l.c., § 845 ; Speijer, l.c., §170. In Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, 
Ill, 9, 9, avaci seems transitive, but see Oertel’s note. The use of the aor. here is hard to 
distinguish from that of the imperfect, as with abhzpragat above. But in these cases it is possible 
that the aor. has a sense almost present, a natural derivation from the true aorist sense of the 
immediate past (cf. Monro, Homeric Grammar*, pp. 66, 67; Giles, Comp. Phil., § 552 (iii) ; 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 930, who points out that it is especially frequent in the 
Maitrayani Samhita). It is also possible that the imperfect sense may be old (despite Whitney, 
§ 929 a), for it is found in the Mantra literature. In the case of abhipragad there is the further 
possibility that after all it means ‘he sang of all this’ or ‘he sang towards all this’ 
(abhipragdyata occurs in the RV.), and is an imperfect from ga, for gati occurs in the 
Kausitaki Brahmana and the Mahabharata (cf. Whitney, § 855, and St. Petersburg Dict., s.v.), 
or even from +/ga, go. I do not therefore think these forms are signs of late date. _ 

10 ‘ Without him’ is Max Miiller’s rendering. That of the text is supported by Anandatirtha, 
the other version by Sayana. Cf. Delbriick, Al¢indische Syntax, p. 441. 

11 Sayana takes ghosah as the aspirated sonants, 7h, gh, bh, gh, dh, as in Rgveda Pratisakhya, 
714; Siddhantakaumudi (ed. Taranatha), p. 14; Max Miller, Rgveda Pratisakhya, p. cclxi. 
It can hardly here, however, have this limited sense. Cf. Chandogya Upanisad, II, 22, 5; all 
vowels are ghosavant, 

19 Oldenberg (Z. D. M. G., XLII, 199-247) has shown conclusively that few if any of the 


214 AITAREYA ARANYAKA iI,"2,3- 


3. Indra’ sat down beside Visvamitra who was about to recite the hymns 
of this day. He saying, ‘This is food,’ recited the thousand drhaiis. Thus 
he went to Indra’s dear home. Indra said to him, ‘Seer, thou hast come to 
my dear home. Do thou, seer, repeat a second? hymn. He saying, ‘ This 
is food,’ recited the thousand dyhafi verses. Thus he went to Indra’s dear home. 
Indra said to him, ‘Seer, thou hast come to my dear home. Do thou, seer, 
repeat a third hymn. He saying, ‘This is food,’ recited the thousand drhat 
verses. Thus he went to Indra’s dear home. Indra said to him, ‘Seer, thou 
hast come to my dear home. I give thee a boon. He said, ‘Let me know thee.’ 
Indra said, ‘I am breath, thou, seer, art breath, all creatures are breath, he that 
shines is breath. In this form I pervade all the quarters. This my food is my 
friend, my support? This is the food of Vigvamitra.t I am he that shines.’ 
Thus said he.° : 

4, This is produced as a thousand brhatis: The consonants” are the body, 


hymns of the Rgveda go back to their nominal composers when these composers are the heads 
of the great families, but that they were written by members of the family. The only possible 
exceptions are Vasistha and Visvamitra under Sudas (p. 236). It is possible that here 
(p. 226, n. 1) a recollection of the facts is seen in that book V is ascribed to the Atris, while 
the others to individuals, Grtsamada, Visvamitra, &c., but more probably the plural is used 
because it gives the proper play of words with atrayata. This is not, however, a sign of 
late date, for it seems likely that in RV., X, 181, the author held the same view as he attributes 
to Vasistha the rathantara (VIL, 32, 22; 23) and to Bharadvaja the drha¢ (VI, 46, 1; 2), later 
attributed to Samyu Barhaspatya (Oldenberg, pp. 225, 227, 0. I). 

1 Sayana explains that this Khanda shows the nature of the afzzs as being Indra’s food. The 
form upanisasasada is wrong and can easily be corrected, but it is as old as Sankara. 
The Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, III, 3,7, has upanisasada, 

2° The collection of verses is regarded as three aS7tis of tristichs, in gayatri, brhati, and 
usnih respectively. For them, see V, 2, 3-5 and notes. 

$ Anandatirtha explains daksinam as daksabhage sthita inah patih yasyah sa daksina 
mitravisesanatvad daksinam iti napumsakaprayogah. Sayana refers the use to abhivyddhthetutvat, 
citing Dhatupatha, XVI, 7. This sense must be somewhat as in the text. 

4 Anandatirtha explains Vazsvdmitram as Ramayabhimanyamanabrhatisahasrakhyam 
annam Visvamitrena sampaditatvad Vaisvimitram ity ucyate. Sayana has: Visvamitrena 
Samsanakale sampaditatvad idayr Vaisvamitram. ; 

5 In Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 6, there occurs a dialogue between Indra and Visvamitra. 
It seems to show clear signs of a later origin, though it verbally reproduces some of this 
dialogue. It is much more philosophical. The Jaiminiya version, l.c., is very much altered, 
but all have clearly a common source, and use the narrative perfect (cf. Introd., p. 67). The 
threefold boon may be compared with the story of Naciketas (Kathaka Upanisad). 

1 This Khanda gives the correspondence of the various aksaras of the 1000 brhatt hymn, 
which is got by the addition of the verses of the whole Niskevalya Sastra, to parts of the 
body of pr@ma (Sayana). Anandatirtha explains it as an identification of the various deities who 
preside over the sounds, &c. The number 36,000 is merely theoretical; Eggeling (S. B. Es; 
XLIII, 111) counted about 37,200, and though the number could be reduced in various ways, it 
is not worth while. 


3 What are called by Panini 4a/ (Sayana). The Kaumara schooladopt the term vyafjana 


-II, 3, 1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 215 


the vowels* the soul, the sibilants* the breath. Knowing this he became 
Vasistha.5 Thence took he the name. Indra proclaimed this to Visvamitra, 
Indra proclaimed this to Bharadvaja, so Indra is in sacrifices invoked by him 
as a friend.® This is produced as a thousand érhafis. Of this produced as 
a thousand drhafis there are thirty-six thousand syllables. So many thousands 
are the days of a hundred years. They make up the nights by the consonants, 
the days by the vowels.” This is produced as a thousand érhafs. After this 
being produced as a thousand éyhafis he who knows this becomes full of 
knowledge,® of the gods, of drahman, of the immortal, and goes to the gods. 
What I am,’ he is; what he is, Iam. A Rsi says (RV., I, 115, 1), ‘The sun 
is the self of all that goes or stands.’ Let one consider this. 


ApHyaya 3. 


He who knows himself as the fivefold hymn’ from whence all this springs, 
he is wise. Earth, air, ether, water, light, these form the self, the fivefold hymn. 
From him all arises, into him all resolves. He who knows this is a refuge 


for Zadini, as do the Sarasvata. The term corresponds with the use of the Rgveda Pratisakhya, 
see Max Miiller’s edit., pp. xiisq., and with the Srauta Sittras, St. Petersburg Dict., s.v. 

8 Sayana takes this as in II, 2, 2,n. 11, as aspirated sonants. This can hardly be accepted. 
Atma is taken by him as madhyafariram. The vowels must somewhere be alluded to, and 
ghosa can be = svara. : 

* Anandatirtha and Sayana both render fasasai. The Kaumara school also take this 
term. In the Rgveda Pratisakhya it includes anusvara, visarga, jihvimiliya, and upadh- 
maniya ; in the other Pratisakhyas it refers to fasasahap. 

5 Sdyana here ascribes the name to his causing to dwell, and his covering, cf. II, 2, 2, n. 2, 
Anandatirtha prefers ‘ best of dwellers’. 

6 Sayana refers this to the Subrahmanya rite of the Soma sacrifice, where Indra is called, 
Indra & gacha, hariva &@ gacha (SadvimSa Brahmana, I, 1, 12; Taittirlya Aranyaka, I, 12, 
3, &C.). 

7 The Kaumiara school thus defines svarah, Katantra, I, 1, s¢ddho varnasamamnayah \ 
tatra caturdasadau svarah (Sayana). See Max Miiller, op. cit., p. x. 

8 Sayana appears to take the first part of the sentence as independent, and as describing 
pranadevah. For devata apyeti, cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 1, 2; Aitareya Brahmana, 
IV, 24, 5 No doubt the acc. is mainly governed by the verb, but the prep. force of afz is too 
much ignored in Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, §§ 87, 88. 

9 This no doubt refers to the identity of the sun and the self, one of the oldest forms of 
Brahminical monism. Sayana illustrates the doctrine by a quotation from the commentary on 
the Brahma Sitras, III, 3. Sun-worship is a very early and widespread form of religion ; 
cf, Farnell, Cults of Greek States, 1V,143; Evans, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1901, pp. 108 sq.; 
Manucci, Storia do Mogor (trans. by Irvine), III, 3, for its real importance in Indra. 

1 Anandatirtha explains that there are three asites and a pirvabhaga and an uttarabhaga. 
These correspond to the five forms of Visnu, Narayana, Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha, who represent earth, ether, air, light, and water respectively. 


216 -AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 3, I- 


for his friends. To him? who knows food and feeder a feeder® is born, and 
food is his. Food is water and earth, for of them are foods compounded. Light 
and air are the feeder, for by them‘ he eats food. Ether is the bowl, for in 
the ether is all poured. He who knows this becomes the refuge (bowl) of his 
friends. To him who knows food and feeder a feeder is born, and food is 
his. Plants and trees are food, animals the feeder, for animals eat plants 
and trees. Of animals, those who have teeth above and below and are formed 
like men,® are feeders, the rest food. They overcome therefore the other animals, 
for the feeder is over his food. He becomes over his friends who knows this.’ 

2. He who knows more and more clearly the self obtains fuller being.” There 
are plants and trees and animals, and he knows the self more and more clearly 
(in them). For in plants and trees sap only is seen, in animals consciousness. 
In animals the self becomes more and more clear, because in them sap also 
is seen, while thought is not seen in others.? The self is more and more clear 


2 Tasmin may refer to the wktha as Sayana and Max Miller take it. Or it may be merely 
a precursor of asm, in accordance with the usual preference of Sanskrit for the order sa yak. 

3 i.e. a son able to eat. The second asya must, I think, refer to the father, not the son. 
The change of reference is too abrupt to be probable, and either version is good sense. 
Sayana takes it as referring to the son. For the form d-jayate, cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad 
Brahmana, I, 27, 6. 

4 They aid digestion. 

5 Zimmer (Altindisches Leben, pp. 74-76) shows the identity of the contrast between 
ubhayadant and other animals, which is found in the Samhitas, with the old Latin contrast of 
ambidens (in Festus not = didens) and dppmdovr- in Aristotle. That, however, ubhayadant 
originally included the first class of sacrificial animals with man, as he holds (p. 76), appears 
doubtful. In this passage the resemblance to man is made explicit, and this is scarcely so 
likely if man were naturally one of the wbhayddant class. Either anw vedham or the 
indeclinable anuvidham (as in III, 2, 3) is grammatically possible, but the corruption to 
anuvidham would be much easier than to anu vidham. Anu vidhahisalso possible. Vedhd occurs 
several times, zzfra, II, 3, 4; 5. Cf. vidham anuvidhiyate, Maitrayani Samhita, HI, 2, 4; 10. 

5 In adhiva caranti the acc. is governed by adhz, a use found in Mantra and Brahmana 
alike (Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, §§ 87, 88; Atharyaveda, XIX, 49, 2: adhi 
visvany aruhad gabhira; RV., VIII, 68,15”: adht tisthan navam ratham ; Vajasaneyi Samhita, 
VI, 2: adhi tva sthadsyati, &c.). I do not, however, think it can well be construed with the 
gen., so I think the gen. samandnam is a partitive one, ‘of his friends he, &c.’ For similar 
cases of the partitive gen., cf. I, 2, 3, n. 6, and HarivamSa, II, 79, 12, where Hopkins, 7.4. 0..S., 
XXII, 152, n.1, takes the gen. as local. Delbriick (A/tindische Syntax, p. 441) is, I think, 
wrong in holding that ad/z rarely has the accusative. The root s¢/d, e.g., would not naturally 
take an acc. without the aid of a preposition. Cf. II, 2, 4, n. 8. 

1 This is the most philosophical part of the whole Aranyaka and is a determined effort 
to explain the different stages of conscious life. It will be observed that the distinctive marks 
of man are all elements which make his consciousness into an ordered system and they imply 
self-consciousness, as opposed to the mere consciousness of animals, in the form of their 
receptivity of external stimuli. The theory of the soul in Aristotle, De Azzima, II, 4sq., is worth 
comparing. For the form dvistaram, cf. I, 4, 1,n. 11; Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1893, p. Il. 

4 Max Miiller renders, ‘but in others thought is not seen,’ the apparent meaning being that 


=1h 3,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 217 


in man. For he is most endowed with intelligence, he says what he has known, 
he sees what he has known, he knows to-morrow, he knows the world and 
what is not the world. By the mortal he desires the immortal, being thus endowed. 
As for the others, animals, hunger and thirst comprise their power of knowledge. 
They say not what they have known, they see not what they have known. They 
know not to-morrow, they know not the world and what is not the world. They 
go so far, for their experiences are according to the measure of their intelligence. 

3. This man is the sea,’ he is above all the world. Whatever he reaches, 
he desires to be beyond it.2 If he gains the sky world, he desires to be beyond 
it. If he were to gain yonder world, he would desire to be beyond it. Fivefold 
is this man.3 What is hot in him is fire; the apertures are the ether; blood, 
mucus, and seed are water; the body is earth; the breath is air. Fivefold is 
the air,‘ up-breathing, down-breathing, back-breathing, out-breathing, on-breathing. 


some animated beings have not thought. What must be meant is that others, i.e. plants and 
trees, have no intelligence, and so Sayana and Anandatirtha construe it. Jara frequently means, 
like GAAos and alius, others, not as opposed to a part of a species, but as another species ; 
A.J.P., VII, 101. Stones have only saééa, says Sayana, i.e. are only objective, not also 
subjective. 

8 Sayana takes the last sentence as meaning they are born according to their knowledge 
in a former birth. This, however, assumes the transmigration theory, which is not certainly 
known in this Aranyaka. The better meaning seems to be that taken above, which is more 
suited in point of fact to the context, for the idea of former birth is nowise necessary or in 
point. Sayana cites Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 4, 2 and 7, but this Upanisad is earlier, 
The word yathaprajfam does not occur in Jacob’s Concordance. Kausitaki Upanisad, I, 2, has 
yathavidyam of transmigration. See also Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 96 sq. 

1 The sea is typical of all unsatisfied desires. Sayana cites Taittiriya Brahmana, II, 2, 6: 
himam samudram avivesety aha \ samudra iva hi kimah \ naiva hi kamasyanto sti na samu- 
drasya\ The same idea appears over and again in the Greek Anthology, cf. Butcher, Gree& 
Genius, pp. 266 sq. For the-separation of the prefix and verb, cf. Introd., p.57, and examples 
from the Aitareya Brahmana in Liebich, Panini, p. 24, and from Brhadaranyaka, p. 28. 

2 nam in R and in Sayana must stand for 7 in place of an assimilated 7, as in II, 1, 5,n. 6. 
For ati-,/man, cf. Jaiminiya Brahmana, I, 42 (/. A. O. ae Ve 234) 

3 Cf. Il, 3,1,n.1. Anandatirtha here repeats the identifications with the different forms of 
Visnu. 

4 The five pranas frequently occur. No intelligible explanation of them all is possible. 
Préna and apdana, once originally the same, were first divided as expiration and inspiration, 
then as breath, and the wind of digestion, cf. II, 4, 1 and 2. Vydana ‘through-breathing or 
circulating air’ (Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLIII, 263, n. 1) is the bond between the prava and 
apana. Samana, which ‘distributes the digested pieces through the limbs’ (Eggeling, p. 264, 
n. 1), leads to union of the two first. Udana conducts the soul from the body at death. See 
Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 249-2525 E. T., pp. 276-280, and I, 3, 7,n.6. Sayana 
says that grdua is in the mouth and nose, rising from the heart, afava is in the lower parts, 
vyana in all the veins, «dana in the throat to lead forth the soul, samdna leads food and 
drink evenly through the whole body. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, II, 5, 6 adds avana 
to the number. For further variations see on I, 3, 7; 4, I. The same five as here occur 
in Satapatha Brahmana, X, 1, 4, 2-6, and Maitrayani Upanisad, II, 6, where see Cowell's 


218 AITAREYA ARANYAKA © i133, 3- 


The deities, sight, hearing, mind, and speech, are comprised in up-breathing and 
down-breathing. For they depart with ihe departure of breath. He is the 
succession® of speech and thought which is the sacrifice. The sacrifice is 
fivefold, Agnihotra, new and full moon sacrifices, the four-monthly sacrifices, 
the animal sacrifice, and the Soma sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice is the most 
perfect of the sacrifices, for these five kinds are seen in it; that which precedes 
the libations,® is one; then there are three libations, and the rest (of the sacrifice) 
is the fifth. 

4. He! who knows one sacrifice above the other, one day above the other, 
one god above the gods, is clever. This great litany is the sacrifice above the 
other, the day above the other, the god above the others. This litany is 
fivefold. Asa chorus? it is “ivrt, paficadasa, saptadasa, chavimsa, and 


notes, and Max Miiller, S. B. Z., XV, 293- With the following, cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
(Kanva), I, 4, 17, where man, animal, sacrifice, and sarvam idam are all fivefold, and 
Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 7, 1, where mind, speech, breath, sight, and hearing are man. 

5 For ultarottar®, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, Il, 1, 60. For apfi+ 2, cf. 
Caland, Altind, Zauberrit., p. 18. 

6 That is the adisa. The last is the avabhrtha udavasaniya, &c. See Hillebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, pp. 97 sq. It is worth noting that the Aitareya Brahmana does not deal 
with the new and full moon or the four-monthly sacrifices, though the Kausitaki does, cf. 
Introd., p. 32. 

1 This section is unusually foolish. Anandatirtha exercises much ingenuity in equating 

the five forms of Visnu to the several members of each of the sets of five. The parts of the 
sg@man axe also dealt with in Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, IV, 9, Io. See Hillebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 100. 
_. 2 Sayana explains these as follows: ¢rzvyr? stoma is formed by the three hymns at the 
beginning of the Samaveda Uttararcika, 1-9; RV., IX, 11, 1-3; 64, 28-30; 66, 10-12. The 
first three verses are taken from the first verse of each sw&za, the second from the second verses, 
and the third from the third. It is called wdyat?z. The fafcadasa is formed out of one hymn, 
by repeating the first verse three times, the second and third once each, then repeating the 
second three times, and so on. The saftadasa is the faftcadasa save that in the third round 
the second and third verses each are repeated thrice, i.e. (1) aaabe; (2) abbbc; (3) abbbecc. 
The ehaviméa is made by singing all verses three times, except the last first and second 
respectively in the three rounds, i.e. (1) aaabbbe ; (2) abbbcce (or aaabccc—the MSS. vary) ; 
(3) aaabcce (or abbbccc). The faftcavimsa is formed by singing in the first round the first 
verse thrice, the second four times, the third once; in the second round, the first once, the 
second thrice, the third four times; in the third round, the first five times, the second once, 
the third three times, according to Dhanamjaya, or the first four times, the second twice, the 
third thrice, according to Gautama. (This seems to be the sense; R's version is corrupt 
and Sis imperfect.) These stomas are called paftcapaftcinit (not as Max Miiller, wzstz¢z, which is 
the generic title of which these are species), dafasapta, and saptasaptini, no name for the 
last being given. Max Miiller quotes Mahidhara on Yajurveda Samhita, X, 9, for the ¢rzvrz. 
More in point is Sayana on Aitareya Brahmana, III, 42, which closely resembles this passage. 
The St. Petersburg Dict. (s.v. trivrt) gives the trivrt as consisting of one s#&ta, RV., 1X, 11 
only, see Eggeling, S. B. £., XXVI, 308, 309 ; Paficavim$a Brahmana, I, 99 sq.; II, 1, 1; 
7,13; 14,1; Hillebrandt, l.c., p. 101, and schemes in Caland and Henry’s L’Agnistoma. 


ee TRANSLATION AND NOTES 219 


‘paticavimésa. As a saman® it is gayatra, rathantara, brhat, bhadra, and réjana. 
As to metre it is gayvarri, usnth, brhaii, tristubh, and duipada. The explanation * 
is that it is the head, the right wing, the left wing, the tail, and the body (of 
the bird), He performs® the pras/ava five times, the uwdgitha five times, the 
‘pratihara five times, the upadrava five times, the édhana five times. This 
forms a thousand syllables. The verses here are recited as five orders.’ 
‘What precedes the eighty tristichs is one order; then come the three sets of 
eighty tristichs; and the fifth consists of the rest. This makes a thousand 
(verses). That is the whole ; these ten by tens are the whole. For number is 
such. Ten tens are a hundred, ten hundreds a thousand, and that is the whole. 
These are the three metres; this food indeed is threefold, eating, drinking, and 
‘chewing. He obtains this food by these. 

5. This is produced as a thousand érhafis. Some recognize a thousand 
of various metres, saying, ‘Is there another?* let us say there is.’ Some say a 
thousand /rzs‘ubhs, some a thousand jagafs, some a thousand anustubhs. A Rsi 
says (RV., X, 124, 9), ‘Sages in their wisdom discovered Indra dancing an anustubh.? 
That denotes, they discovered in speech then the breath of Indra. He can 
become famous and of splendid renown. ‘Rather® he is liable to die untimely,’ 


° The gayatra saman is formed from RV., III, 62, 10; vathantara from RV., VII, 32, 225 
the drhat from RV., VI, 46, 1; the bhadra from RV., X, 157,13 the rajana from RV., Vil, 
27, 1, according to Sayana’s note; cf. V, I, 2, n. 2. 

* See Aranyaka, I, 4, 2. 

5 The saman of the Niskevalya is the rdana, and each of its usual five parts is repeated 
five times. The ufadrava falls to the Udgatr and all join in the 2édhana (Sayana). 

6 The stobhas are meaningless syllables, added to verses sung to make up the metre. See 
Chandogya Upanisad, I, 13. These syllables are marked in Samaveda MSS., but they have not 
as yet been satisfactorily explained. Cf. Burnell, Samhitopanisad Brahmana, p. xviii; Hillebrandt, 
l.c., p. 104, n. 15; Caland and Henry, op. cit., App. IL. , 

7 The verses corresponding to the body, head, wings, &c., are the first order; the three 
afitis follow, then come the belly and chest verses. 

® There are 1000 stobhas and also in the whole Sastra a 1000 drhatis. The rest refers 
to the nature of number as being measured by tens. There are nothing but sets of ten. The 
three ‘ metres ’ mean, according to Sayana, the numbers 10, 100, 1000 which govern all numbers. 
This, however, is inadequate, as the reference is clearly to the three sets of afitis. The reference 
to food is because these afitis are the food of the bird. There is no sign that the numbers 
100 or 1000 are to be treated as specially important. Sayana’s explanation is otherwise good. 
He quotes for dafatah, Panini, V, 1, 60. Anandatirtha is very weak on this point. 

1 Sayana takes 22m anyat as the question, sad the answer. The others do not include: the 
Sankhayanas, who also recognize a thousand rhatis, Thisis rather in favour of an early date; the 
dispute had disappeared before the Sankhayana Aranyaka. Mand may be adverbial, ‘ variously.’, 

2 Sayana explains that the clouds rumbling produce a sound with an anustubh in it; cf. 
Geldner, Vedische Studien, Il, 304; Vv. Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, pp. 40, 41. 

3 Knandatirtha takes the whole as one argument and as meaning, ‘he can die when he likes.’ 
This is impossible. For the construction, cf. I, 1, 1, n. 4. 


220 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 3, 5- 


he‘ declares. For the self that is speech is imperfect, since ® a man understands 
if driven to thought by breath, not if driven by speech. Let him produce the 
brhati,s for the drhaf is the whole self. The self is on all sides surrounded 
by members, and, as the self is on all sides surrounded by members,’ so is 
the drhafi on all sides surrounded by metres, The self is the middle of the 
members, and the drhafi of metres, He can become famous and of splendid 
renown, while the other® will die untimely, so said he. For the drhaéi is the 
whole self. Therefore let him produce the dha. 

6. This is produced as a thousand dyha/is. Of this produced as a thousand 
brhatis, there are eleven hundred and twenty-five anustubhs.1 For by the larger 
the smaller is comprehended. A Rsi says (RY., VIII, 76, 12), ‘I a speech of eight 
feet,’ for there are eight feet of four syllables. ‘Of nine corners,’ for the drhaf* 


* Anandatirtha points out that ‘he’ is Aitareya Mahidasa or Mahaitareya. Sayana vaguely 
says ‘a wise man’, Cf. 1,1, 1,n. 5. 

5 This is very obscure. The version here adopted means that the activity of manas if 
evoked by speech (= anustubh) only is imperfect, but it is more perfect if evoked by breath 
(= drhati). Manas will then stand in its wider sense, not as an zdriya, as later, cf. Deussen, 
Philosophie der Upanishads, p. 245; E. T., p. 271. This is very strained, but at least it is less 
absurd than (1) Sayana’s version, ‘ If he proceeds with the Sastra with reference to the anustubh 
which is proclaimed as Vac, and not with reference to the érhatz which is proclaimed as srana, 
then being driven by his mind he does not manage the Sastra by speech alone.’ He adds that 
without breath speech merely conceived is inadequate, breath being essential for any sense 
activity. The idea is not unlike the one adopted above. (2) Anandatirtha renders, ‘ Being urged 
to objects of sense by praza, i.e. Vayu, and by mamas, i.e. Siva, he enjoys them, and not by 
voice alone.’ He read manase because he tries to account for the ¢«. Sayana must have 
read prane na and taken vdg as an accusative or locative, as Max Miiller points out. For 
the dat., which is rarely found in the local sense in the Brahmana style (Delbriick, A/tindische 
Syntax, p. 144), see Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 43, and cf, II, 2, 2, n. 7. 

® j,e. make out that the éra/z is the metre. 

7 Because it is surrounded in the Sastra (Sayana). 

8 Because metres are both bigger and smaller than the draéi. 

* Sayana ignores the difficulty of this passage. Anandatirtha of course renders it, ‘ he is able 
to die at will.’ The text follows Max Miiller’s version. The syntax yad brhati is very common in 
the Aitareya Brahmana, III, 43, &c.; Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 4, &c.; Altindische Syntax, p. 564. 

1 1000 x 36 syllables (6rhatis) = 1125 x 32 syllables (anustubhs). 

* i.e. it is nine feet of four syllables and is formed by adding one to the eight feet of the 
anustubh. Sayana says the MS. navasrakti is chandasak. Cf. Benfey, Samaveda, Glossary, p. 87. 
The correction navasraktir, though easy, is more convincing, because of 7 following. Cf, 
Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 31 ; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 68, n.15. MSS. 
frequently differ in such points, cf. Whitney's note on AV., VI, 33, 2 (wyathz(s)); cf. V, 1, 1, 
n. 18; 2,1, n. 6, Note should be taken here of the readings of the Manava Grhya Sitra, I, 2, 6: 
caturvimsati in the acc., and I, 23, 15 and 23: paticavinsaty anuvakan combined with Manava 
Srauta Sitra, VI, 2, 6: sa ekavimsaty ayam te (see Knauer, p. xli). I confess that the possible 
explanation suggested by Dr, Knauer of these cases as either contractions with omission of 
anusvara or visarga or as neuters is not attractive. In the last case, as perhaps here, the 
original may have been as Dr, Knauer also suggests ehavimsati(h) | ayam te, &c., with the loss 


-ll, 3, 6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 221 


becomes nine-cornered. ‘Touching the truth, for speech* united with verse 
is truth, ‘I made‘ the body out of Indra,’ for from this thousand drhaiis 
made into anustubhs, which is praza connected with Indra, and from the 
brhafi he makes speech, the anus{ubh, as a body. The great litany is the 
highest development of speech, and it is fivefold, measured, unmeasured, music, 
true, and untrue. A 7c verse, a gatha,® a kumbyd,° are measured; a yajus verse, 
an invocation, conversation,’ are not measured; a sdman or part of it is music; 
om is true, no is untrue. The flower and fruit of speech is what is true. He 
can become famous and of splendid renown, for he speaks the truth, the flower 
and fruit of speech. The untrue is the root of speech, and, as a tree with 
roots exposed dries up, and perishes, so a man who speaks untruth exposes 
his roots, dries up, and perishes. Therefore let a man speak not untruth, but 
guard himself against it. The syllable* om is empty and goes forward. So if 


of & (as often in MSS. 7 paisa) and subsequent erroneous contraction, So pafcavimsati(ye) 
may have been written by error in the MS. and then the 7 dropped and contraction applied. 
But in verse, of course, we find clear cases of contraction or of the use of shortened forms, especially 
va for va, e.g. Sankhayana Aranyaka, XII, 29: puspam iva must metri causa be puspeva or 
puspam va, probably the former, Oldenberg, Z. D. M@.G., LXI, 830; Roth, ibid., XLVIII, 682. 

Speech is anustubh, verse brhati, and united they touch graza. Anandatirtha explains by 
equating drhaiz with a form of Visnu and speech with Uma! 

4 «He makes,’ in Max Miiller’s translation, ignores aham. Sayana does not do this, 
but he explains the sentence by the action of the Hotr, as the Aranyaka uses the third person. 
It only means that the anwstubh is made out of the érhatz which is identified with praya, 
and prana is (see II, 2, 3) Indra. 

5 Sayana defines a gathd as sarvalokaprasiddharthapratipadtha, e.g. pratah pratar anrtam 
te vadanti (a yajfagatha from Aitareya Brahmana, V, 31, 6; the example is not very happy); 
Anandatirtha as farasparam asamani visamasamkhyaksarant svaraniyamarahitanit khanda- 
vakyani. Cf. Hopkins, Great Epic of India, pp. 365 sq.; St. Petersburg Dict., 11, 731; Aufrecht, 
Aitareya Brahmana, p. 429; Bloomfield, Religion of Veda, p. 196. 

® Sayana defines as acdrasiksaripa, e.g. brahmacary asy apo Sana karma kuru diva ma 
svapsih or ma susupthah (the MSS, vary), i.e. Aévalayana Grhya Sitra, I, 22, 2; Anandatirtha as 
yajnangavakyani. In the parallel passage, Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 5, 7, 10 (where see 
Eggeling’s trans. S. 2. £., XLIV, ror), fumuyad is read, which Weber (/ud. Stud., X, 
III, n. 1) suggests as equal to ‘refrain ’, cf. kumba, kurira. : 

7 Sayana explains brahmanagata ye 'rthavada ya ca rajasabhddau parihdsadiripenocyate sa 
sarva vrtha vak ; Anandatirtha simply has vyarthavak. Cf. Vedische Studien, 1,118,328. For 
nigada see St. Petersburg Dict., s.v.; Brhaddevata, VII, 104; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. 
Litt., 1,142, n., who describes them as a kind of Yajus to summon the other priests to perform 
their tasks. Sdyana gives as an example of a nigada: Agne mahan asi brahmana bharata 
(=Taittiriya Samhita, I, 5, 9, 15 Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 26"). For saman, cf. 
Winternitz, p. 146, n. 3, who renders it as originally ‘ Besinftigungslied’, ‘ein Mittel zur Be- 
schwichtigung von Géttern und Damonen ;’ Bloomfield, Religion of Veda, p. 38. 

® A curious piece of common sense (cf. Mr. Falconer’s advice to Pepys, Dzary, Aug. 8, 
1662) interpolated to avoid the danger of the preceding doctrine that om is truth. For om 
as fathd, see Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 18, and Chandogya Upanisad, I, 1, 8. The comparison 
with dmen is of course accidental, Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 162, n. 1. 


ee AITAREYA ARANYAKA Il, 3, & 


a man says om, then that® is taken from him; if he should say om to everything, 
he would empty himself and be unable to have delights. The syllable ‘no? is 
full®° for one’s self. If a man should say ‘no’ to everything, his fame would 
be evil and he would destroy himself. Therefore should one give at the proper 
time, and at the proper time he should refrain™ from giving. So does he 
unite the true and the untrue. From their union he grows and becomes 
greater. He who knows this speech of which (the great litany) is a modification, 
he is clever. ‘A’ is the whole of speech and being manifested’ through the 
mutes and sibilants it becomes manifold and various. If uttered in a whisper 
it is breath, if aloud it is body. Therefore it is as it were hidden, for what is 
incorporeal is as it were hidden, and breath is incorporeal. But spoken aloud it 
is body and visible, for body is visible. 

7. This is produced as a thousand érhafs. It is glory,’ it is Indra, it* 
is the lord of creatures. ‘He who knows it as Indra, as the lord of creatures, 
‘ leaves this world shaking? off all ties,’ so said Mahidasa‘ Aitareya. Having 
departed, having become Indra,® he shines in those worlds. They say, ‘If by this 
form he gains yonder world, then by what form does he experience this world?’ *® 


® Sayana construes as ‘he is emptied for that, viz. the enjoyment of house, fields, &c.’ 
This is to force the meaning of aszaz overmuch ; it is a dativus tncommodt. 

10 Ts selfish. Sayana cites Bhagavadgita, II, 34: sambhavitasya cakirtir maranad atiricyate \ 

ul Rajendralala prints in text and commentary Adlena. It should be kde ma as the 
commentary, and also Anandatirtha, shows. 

12 ¢A? with the different letters is the source of the alphabet. It may be interesting to 
speculate if this denotes that writing where the ‘a’ was not expressed was already known. 
It may be so, but it is not clear. In any case as the date of writing is very doubtful, no 
great light would be thrown on the date of the Aranyaka; cf. V, 3, 3 ad fin., where the 
reference is clear but cogent only for Saunaka’s period. For later reference to the akara, see 
Jacob, Concordance, p. 2, and cf. Tandya Mahabrahmana, XX, 14, 2. 

1 Sayana compares Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 1: ma tasyese kascana tasya néma mahad yasah \ 
For Indra, cf. II, 4, 3; Taittirlya Upanisad, I, 4; Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 6; III,1; Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad, III, 2, 2. 

' 2 This is the sense, rather than, ‘Indra is the lord’ as taken by Max Miiller. Z¢az below is 
the usual Sanskrit attraction of a pronoun to the gender of the predicate; Vergl. Syntax, 
III, 240 sq. 

® This must be the sense, and so both Sayana and Anandatirtha take it. Originally the 
word meant the decay of old age. 

* The quotation ends here, it seems. The new sentence looks like a prose version of a 
Sloka, Chap Vis suas : 

° Sayana quotes Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 1, 2: devo bhittua devin apyeti\ He refers 
also to Brahma Sitra, IV, 3, 15, and discusses whether this deification is a hindrance to real 
mukti, and decides it is really a step towards it. But of course the doctrine of muhtz is not 
clearly found in this Aranyaka; see II, 1, 2,n. 9; Hopkins, Religions of India, pp. 232, 238 sq. 

* For the nasal in pleti, cf, Wackernagel, Altindische Grammattk, I, 299, 300; Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 78. 


-Il, 3,8 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 223 


The blood in the woman? is the form of Agni, therefore one should despise 
it not. The seed in the man is the form of Aditya, therefore one should 
despise it not. This self gives itself to that self, that self gives itself to this 


self? They thus gain each other. In this form® he gains yonder world, in 
that form he experiences this world. 


8. Here there are these verses : '— 


t Anandatirtha has a wonderful explanation. This world and that world are both 
svastrirupam of Bhagavant. Sayana explains that there are six elements in the body; three, 
fat, bone, and marrow, are white and represent the man; three, skin, blood, and flesh, are red 
and represent the woman. ayam is used of the woman because she is connected with earth, 
asau of the man because he is connected with the sun and the upper world. 

8 The fact that Sayana does not comment on 7masmai shows how little he can be relied on to 
note points in the text. The reading is quite certain, and cf. Whitney, l.c., § 502 b. 

® This is taken by Sayana and by Max Miiller as referring to the words at once preceding. 
But it is perhaps rather a reference to the question ‘above. Then avena will refer to the 
knowledge of Indra, and amund to the human form produced by the union of the parents. 
Sayana seems to have been misled by the use of Agni and Aditya into misinterpreting Jokam. 
The tone of the section is noteworthy when contrasted with the pessimism which the body 
and its imperfections induces in Buddhism and the later Upanisads (Maitrayani Upanisad, I, 
2-4; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt. 1,224). Max Miiller’s view (S. B. Z., XV, 1-lii) that, 
despite its references to Nirvana (p. xlvi) and other hints at Buddhism (e.g. VII, 8), this 
Upanisad is anti-Paninean cannot be supported. The irregular Sandhi is merely a conscious 
and deliberate archaism (so perhaps also in the Manava Grhya Sitra, a piece of patchwork), 
and generally the language is quite recent in form compared to the really old Upanisads. 
Deussen recognizes the later character and style of the Upanisad, and Winternitz (p. 225) 
definitely refers it to a post-Buddhistic date. Indeed Weber (Indian Literature, pp. 96 sq-) 
and Macdonell (Sanskrit Literature, pp. 230, 231) tend to refer it to classical times, though 
its doctrine is no doubt earlier. The optimism of the Upanisads is natural: what is other 
than the dtman is miserable, but not the aman, cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, III, 5; Taittiriya 
Upanisad, II, 9; III, 6; Isa Upanisad, 7; Hopkins, Religions of India, p. 240. 

1 The verses are probably older than the prose. They are earlier than the ¢vistubhs cited 
by Pataijali (cf. Weber, 7nd. Stud., XIII, 483 sq.) and show every sign of antiquity in their 
metrical form (cf. J. R. A. S., 1906, pp. 1-10 ; Oldenberg, S. B. E., XXX, xxxv; Hopkins, Great 
Epic of India, pp. 194 sq.) which is decidedly irregular. The third verses of 1, 2, 4 are jagatis, 
the first verse of 1 has only ten syllables, the last verse of 4 only g, and even if by resolutions 
they are altered into 11 syllable verses, then the characteristic ¢ristubh ending is missing. In no 
case are the four verses assimilated, and indeed in no case are even two verses assimilated. 
The last stanza, pada 1, is in iambic-ended anustubh, a very early verse indeed. It is of course 
true, as Bloomfield (Atharvaveda, pp. 41, 42) points out, that the actual development of the 
anustubh ( padas 1 and 3) cannot possibly have been from VYYYYYYYtou—YU—Y—Yy, 
and thence to the Epic Sloka with its differentiated pddas, but that the iambic anustudh is a 
priestly as opposed to a popular verse with free fadas 1 and 3. But it is equally clear that 
the development of the iambic anustubh in the priestly circles was comparatively early and 
that the later verse-writers tended more and more to fall back (with sporadic cases of imitation 
such as in the Vimada hymns, see my criticisms * of Amold’s Vedic Metre, in J. R. A. S., 1906, 





* I may note here a small point confirmatory of my criticism of Prof. Arnold’s views. The 
term daksina (pada) occurs in RV., X, 61, 8, which is therefore naturally called one of the 


224 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 3, 8- 


That fivefold body the undying enters,’ 

That which the harnessed steeds* draw to and fro, 
In which is yoked the trueness of the true,* 

In that are all the gods in one combined rl 


Which from the undying ® the undying joins, 
That which the harnessed steeds draw to and fro, 
In which is yoked the trueness of the true, 

In that are all the gods in one combined 21 


pp. 484 sq., 720) on the popular anwstubh and its later development YY YYU-——-v, That 
development is shown in the late Mantras found in the Grhya Sitras, e.g. in thirty out of 
thirty-nine cases in the Sankhayana (Oldenberg, Z. D. M. G., XXXVI, 67 sq.; S. B. #., XXX, 
xxxv sq.); in the Rgveda Pratisakhya of Saunaka (5.8.£., l.c.); in the Brhaddevata (/.R.A.S., 
l.c.); in the Epic (Hopkins, l.c.; Jacobi, Jd. Stud., XVII, 443 sq., Das Ramayana (1893), 
and in Gurupijakaumudi (1896)). It is quite possible and even probable that Oldenberg is 
right in thinking that the iambic hymns are in the Rgveda earlier than the bulk of those 
hymns where the endings of the first pada of each hemistich is unrestricted in point of form, 
the period of the Kuru princes, Pariksit and Janamejaya* (Z. D. MZ. G., XXXVII, 65). 

It is obvious that these verses are of the same type as the yajfagathas of the Aitareya 
Brahmana and Agvalayana Grhya Sitra (I, 3, 10), i.e. they were composed to illustrate and 
sum up the doctrines which the Aranyaka supports, and here as used are older than the 
work in which they occur (cf. Oldenberg, 5.2. 2., XXX, xxxv—-xxxvii; Jud, Stud., XV, 11). 
These verses form an interesting parallel to the rise of the Akhyana, in which the verses 
perhaps denoted the chief movements in the narrative and were fixed before the prose (or 
verse later) connecting parts (Oldenberg, Z.D.M.G., XXXVII, 54 sq.; XXXIX, 52 sq.; 
Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1,89 sq.). For similar verses, see Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
I, 6, 23; Taittiriya Upanisad, II, 8, &c. In Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 4, 10, Slokas are 
mentioned after Vidya, Upanisads, and before Siitras in such a way as to suggest that such Slokas 
as here occur are denoted. Asydh is also a pre-Brahmana and Revedic form, though occasionally 
found later, e. g. III, 2, 3. 

2 This is not very clear. Anandatirtha explains that the fivefold body is that composed 
of Narayana, &c., and is male and female united, in which all the gods, Narayana, &c., are 
united. Sayana explains that the breath enters the body, and the worshipper meditates on himself 
as identical with the breath and thus with all the gods. The five are presumably the five senses. 

3 The metaphor is common, cf. Kathaka Upanisad, III, 4: zdriyani hayan ahuh\ The 
senses are meant. Cf. Max Miiller, 5. 2. Z., XV, 12, and n. 14. 

4 i.e. brahman probably. At least so it was later interpreted, and the idea may well be 
early, though it might be enough to take it merely as ‘the essence of truth’. Cf. Brhadaranyaka, 
II, 3, 6: atha namadheyam satyasya satyam itt prand vat satyam tesdm esa satyam\ For the 
position of drahman in the body with praua Sayana cites Prasna Upanisad, VI, 3: sa tksam cakre 
kasmin nv aham utkranta uthkranto bhavisyami kasmin va pratisthite pratisthasyadmiti sa 
pranam asrjata\ For the next line, cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4,7: atmety evopasitatra 
hy ete sarva ekam bhavanti ; other examples are given in Jacob, Concordance, pp. 260 sq. 

° The undying here is 6rahman, the other undying breath as in ver. 1 (Sayana). 


latest hymns by Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, p. 30. But Prof. Arnold (Vedic Metre, p. 286) 
assigns this hymn to the archaic (by which he means the oldest) period ! 
* Cf., however, Whitney in Colebrooke, Assays, I, 118, on legendary contemporaneities. 


1 358 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 225 


Of speech that which is ‘yes’ and which is ‘no’, 
That which is harsh® and that which is immense, 
Laying aside’ have poets found their quest, 

They, bound by names,* rejoiced in the revealed 11 3 1 


In which® revealed the poets did rejoice, 

In it in unity the gods exist, 

Casting aside all evil by this lore,” 

The wise one rises to the world of heaven 11 4\ 


Neither by name of woman" is he called, 

Nor yet by name of neither man nor woman, 

Nor yet by name of man may he be named 

By him who fain would tell the name of breath i's 


Brahman is called ‘a’ and the ‘I’ is there contained.!2 This is produced as a thousand 
brhaiis. Of this produced as a thousand drhafis there are thirty-six thousand 
syllables. So many are the thousands of the days of man’s life. By the syllable 
of life alone does he obtain the day of life, and by the day of life the syllable 
of life. There is a chariot of the gods which destroys desires.‘ Its seat 


* Sayana cites Taittiriya Aranyaka, IV, 27 (Anandaérama ed., p. 333): hat phad jahi 
chindhi bhindhi handhi kad iti vacah kritrani \ ulbanisnu he renders akrosadikam. Cf. also 
Apastamba Srauta Sitra, XIV, 14,1; Hillebrandt, Rztual-Litteratur, p.166; Ved. Myth., Ill, 366. 

* viyiya like mama in ver. 4 appears ‘ metrical’. 

® This merely means they rose above mere names to the unity of brahman or prana. 
Sayana renders ‘dependent on the letter “a” which is the name of grdva’. Anandatirtha 
refers to the names of Bhagavant. 

® nama is rendered by Sayana as equivalent to mamdyattah above. ‘This cannot be the 
case, nor can it well be for ~dmdni as Anandatirtha construes it. It must be for dma, the 
last @ being lengthened metri causa. For such cases, cf. Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 62; 
Aufrecht, Attareya Brahmana, p. 427; Sankhayana Srauta Stttra, XVII, 95)7); XVIII, 22;: x0, 
even in prose (cf. Introd., p. 70); 7. A.0O.5S., XXV, 98; below, III, 1, 2, n. 2. 

1 By the help of 4vahman is Sayana’s version, and so also Anandatirtha takes it. More 
probably it is ‘by aid of this doctrine’, For afahatya, cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, 
Lip ks 10,2 

u Sayana quotes SvetaSvatara Upanisad, V, 10 (the late metre is noteworthy) :— 

naiva stri na pumdn esa natva cayam napumsakah \ 

yadyac charivam adatte tena tena sa codyate \\ 
For the nominative, cf. passages like Brhaddevata, V, 39, where I would read //aspatih with 
MSS. h. d.; Rgveda Pratisakhya, XVII, 26; Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4, &c. 

12 This must be taken as a clear assertion that 67ahman includes the individual self. Sayana 
says it refers to Hiranyagarbha quoting the very late Nrsimhottaratapaniya Upanisad, V: 
sarvahammani Hiranyagarbhah \ 

18 Anandatirtha explains the afsara as the female form of Visnu, the ahas (sic) as the male. 
Asa matter of fact the sentence merely asserts he obtains drahman or prana by means of brahman 
or prana, as both are revealed in the syllable and the ritual of the Mahavrata day, as in I, 2, 2. 

14 Sayana explains this as a chariot of Hiranyagarbha, Anandatirtha renders Gnusanias 


KEITH Q 


226 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 3, 8- 


is speech, its two sides the ears, the horses the eyes, the driver the mind. 
Breath mounts upon it. A Rsi says (RV., X, 39, 1 2), ‘Come hither on what is 
quicker than mind,’ and (RV., VIII, 73, 2), ‘On what is quicker than the winking 
of an eye.’ * 


ApDHYAYA 4. 


In the beginning? the one self was this, there was nothing else blinking. 
He? thought, ‘Shall I create worlds?’ He created these worlds, water, lights, 


marah as, ‘ Prana has no desires and delights in Maya,’ i.e. Rami. Really all that is meant 
is that there is a chariot, viz. the body, where prana mounts, as contained above in the verses. 
Anandatirtha explains the wddhz as Rama in snake form, frotve as Candra and his wife, paksast as 
Candra and his wife, cakswsi as Sirya and his wife, mzanah as Rudra. The metaphor is not 
rare, e.g. n. 3; quotation in Agvalayana Srauta Satra, VI, 5, 3; §ankhayana Aranyaka, I, 8; 
RV., III, 14, 7, as interpreted by Bergaigne (Oldenberg, S.B. E., XLVI, 270) where the prayer 
is a chariot; Atharvaveda, VIII, 8, 22, where udahi and paksas also occur, and are rendered as 
above by Whitney; Maitrayani Samhita, Ill, 4, 4; Kathaka Samhita, VIII, 8. 

15 Sayana adds a long disquisition (cf. Max Miiller, 5.2. Z., I, 235, 236) on the difference of 
this pranavidya from that of the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad and the Chandogya Upanisad, in 
which prdna is not related to the Mahavrata ceremony. Following as usual Sankara he also 
discusses what is the result of this prdnavidyd, and concludes that it leads after death and 
absorption in the Javamatman to rebirth in the drahmaloka where after enjoyment of all the 
powers of a deity, he proceeds to obtain full knowledge and maktz. But Sankara ignores 
the fact that sw&¢z is not as yet known to this Aranyaka, which in its philosophic doctrine 
reaches only the unity of existence and the identity of the self and drahman, and which 
promises immortality, not liberation, to the devout. It is impossible even to say that this 
Aranyaka, IT, 1-3, realizes clearly the doctrine that all is consciousness, though it approaches 
this standpoint. It does not assert that the self is unknowable as pure subject or the unreality 
of existence, as is done by the later Upanisads and the Vedanta. To the writer of this 
Upanisad immortality meant a continuance of conscious existence, because the identity of the 
self and the world did not involve in any way the destruction of self. All that it involved 
was the destruction of what is really self from its accidents. It is of course true that this position 
is not strictly consistent, but it is no more unsatisfactory than that of Vedantism. 

1 Sankara, Anandatirtha, and Sayana all expend great efforts in explaining this short 
Upanisad, II, 4-6, but they mainly deal with difficulties which do not arise if no effort is made 
to reconcile this text with pure Vedantism or to explain logically its inconsistencies. The 
real advance on II, 1-3, consists in (1) the fact that dtman is the subject, not as before 
prana, purusa ; (2) that Giman and brahman are more explicitly recognized as intelligence, 
but both these points are foreshadowed in II, 1-3. Max Miiller (S. 2. Z., I, 236) leans to 
the view that this Upanisad rises from the conception of life to that of the self, but this is 
rather too great a distinction. This Upanisad is a little more advanced than II, 1-3, but not 
much so. Deussen (Sechzig Upanishads), of course, interprets it as a later Upanisad and reads 
into it doctrines not contained in it. Colebrooke (Zssays, 1, 47-53); Roer(Zrans., pp. 26-34) ; 
and S, Sitarama (Upanishads, V, 1-64) follow Sankara. On zdam, cf. Max Miiller, S. B. Z., XV, 
xix. Béhtlingk has rendered the Upanisad, Sachs. Ber., 1890, p. 162; cf. 1891, p. 85; 1897, 
p- 95. For Ramanuja’s interpretation, cf. S. B.#., XLVI, 71, 81, 201, 206, 391, 417, 461, &c. 

2 This is an imitation of the Purusa Stkta, RV., X, 90; cf. Taittiriya Aranyaka, III, 12, 
but, as Deussen points out, with the essential difference that the metaphysical grivs of the 
purusa is the aiman. The view of the relation of the ad#man to the world is cosmogonic, 


-II, 4,1 TRANSLATION: AND NOTES 227 


mortal, and waters. This water is above the* heaven, and heaven supports it. 
The lights are the sky. The mortal is the earth, those under the earth are 
the waters. He thought, ‘There are these worlds. Shall I create guardians of 
the world?’ He formed the person,‘ taking him out from the waters.° He 
brooded*® on him, and when he was brooded over, a mouth burst forth as an 
egg does. From the mouth came speech, from speech fire. Nostrils burst forth. 
From the nostrils came forth scent,’ from scent wind. Eyes burst forth. From 
the eyes came forth sight, from sight the sun. Ears burst forth. From the 
ears came forth hearing, from hearing the quarters.* Skin burst forth. From 
the skin came forth hairs, from hairs plants and trees. The heart burst forth. 
From the heart came forth mind, from mind the moon. The navel burst forth. 
From the navel came forth down-breathing,® from down-breathing death. The 
generative organ burst forth. From the organ came forth seed, from seed water. 


not pantheistic. Of course the orthodox view of the commentators that the dma is the 
isvara, not viraj, and the creation is adhydrofa, from II, 4,1, to II, 4, 3. This is not, it 
is admitted by Sayana, clear from the text, but he appeals to Sy vetaSvatara Upanisad, IV, Io, 
mayam tu prakrtim vidyad, and Brahma Sitra, I, 4, 23, prakrtis ca pratijiad dptantanas 
rodhat, besides other passages equally irrelevant. In Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 1, 1, 
atksata the regular form occurs. The Aitareya Brahmana often has unaugmented pasts, see 
p- 56; Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1900, p. 413. The next clause, here and II, 4, 3, may be 
interrogative or merely an expression of determination (so commentators and translators), For 
Gpas, cf. Atharvaveda, VI, 23, 2; /nd. Stud., X, 440,n.1; 7. A. O.S., XXV, Io. 

3 The translation of Max Miiller, ‘and it is heaven,’ can hardly be right, and it is not 
supported by the commentators. It is true that heaven must come in somewhere, for it is 
sufficient if it comes in as a support, and so Bohtlingk and Deussen, with Colebrooke, Sitarama, 
Rajarama, and Roer take it. Anandatirtha explains ambhas as mahas and the other worlds 
beyond the heaven where the waters were originally placed; ‘the blue firmament,’ Rajarama. 

* This is the later virdj of the Vedanta. Anandatirtha calls it Brahman, in accordance 
with the Visnu legend. Cf. Hopkins, Re/. of India, pp. 232 sq. 

5 The five elements (Sayana), Brahman, &c. (Anandatirtha). 

6 The sense of +/¢ap, to create by will, is pointed out by Sankara, who (cf. Winternitz, 
Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 87 sq., 91 sq.; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, pp. 402 sq.) cites 
Mundaka Upanisad, I, 1, 9: yasya jianamayam tapas\ ‘The translation here is borrowed 
from Max Miller (cf. also S.B.Z., XV, 28, n. 2). For yathindam below, cf. Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana, III, 14, 8; Jaiminiya Brahmana, II, 12. There are sets of three, the 
organ, the activity, and the natural phenomenon corresponding, which is later called the 
presiding deity. See e.g. the Anugita, Mbh., XIV, 1119 sq. For this systikrama, cf. 
Chandogya Upanisad, VI, 2; Taittiriya Kissy! IE} 1. 

1 Prana here means cleasly the power of sraell: Originally (1) it meant the breath in 
the widest sense, from which it came to denote (2) life or. the principle of conscious life, 
as frequently in II, 1-3. On the other hand, (3) it was narrowed down to denote one of 
five pranas, Il, 3, 3, and these prdas were contrasted with manas and the zmdriyas, though 
in death or sleep the fundamental character of the frdas came out. (4) The sense ‘smell’ 
is an independent and not very common deyelopment. (5) Another development applies it to all 
the organs of life, e.g. eyes, nose, tongue, see I, 3, 7,n.6. Cf. Sankhiyana Aranyaka, Piast, Ns Ts 

8 Anandatirtha explains them as Indra, Vans, Varuna, and Kubera. 

9 Apana here has the other meaning of down- -breathing, not. inspiration, but breathing, 


Q 2 


228 AITAREYA ARANYAKA II, 4, 2- 


2. These deities! being created fell into this great ocean.” He troubled him 
with hunger and thirst. The deities spake to him, ‘Grant us a place, where 
we can rest and eat food’ He led a cow® for them. They said, ‘This is not 
enough for us.” He led a horse for them. They said, ‘This is not enough.’ 
He led man‘ to them. They said, ‘Well done!’® Man is indeed well done. 
He said to them, ‘Enter according to your places. ® Then fire,” having become 
speech, entered the mouth. Air, having become scent, entered the nostrils. 
The sun, having become sight, entered the eyes. The quarters, having become 
hearing, entered the ears. The plants and trees, having become hairs, entered 
the skin. The moon, having become mind, entered the heart. Death, having 
become down-breathing, entered the navel. The waters, having become seed, 
entered the generative organ. Hunger and thirst said to him, ‘Grant us two 
a place’ He said to them, ‘To these deities I assign you, I make you sharers 


or wind, in the lower part of the body. Cf. on II, 3, 3, and I, 4, 3. Rajarama takes it as 
‘air inhaled by mouth, wot through nostrils’. Colebrooke has ‘the air drawn in by deglutition’, 
explaining that swallowing was considered a parallel to inhaling. Cf Z.D.M.G., LV, 261; 
LVI, 556; 7.4.0. S., XXTI, 249. 

1 This section really reverses the former section. There d¢man produced the worlds, then 
purusa and the deities. The deities now enter into purwsa. Compare the common process 
in the Brahmanas where the drahman creates the world and then enters it, but here the 
deities have no creative power, and the section only seems to show the reciprocal dependence 
(cf. Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 218, 219) of the deities and the senses, of the great 
cosmic forces and the microcosm. I take the subject of action to be the aman throughout, 
so do Sankara and Sdyana. Réer apparently takes Zurawsa as subject of all save the first 
two sentences. Colebrooke apparently read abhyaichan and so makes the atman alone 
subject and object in the sentences. 

2 This must mean the ocean of being, from which purusa is evolved. Sayana says into the 
viraj, but this seems less probable. The v./, below, asanadydpipase is the form in the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, while in Taittiriya Aranyaka, IV, 23, asanayd ca pipasd ca is found. 
Cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 15: afanaydparitah; Aufrecht, p. 431; Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 
1900, p. 418. 

3 Because it has no upper teeth, says Sayana. He is, however, right in quoting II, 3, 2, 
as showing the real reason for the preference of man, as the most intelligent. 

* The commentators Anandatirtha and Sayana, who often follows him, Colebrooke, followed 
by Roer, Max Miiller, and Deussen, explain this pvruwsqa as different from though allied to the purusa 
of II, 4,1. This hardly seems likely, and the confusion of thought is just as great on the former 
theory as on the latter. The exact parallelism with II, 4, 1, of what follows is against their 
view. For the particle sz, cf. P. A. O..S., Apr. 1893, pp. xli—xliii. 

* Sankara suggests it may mean ‘self made’ (cf. Max Miiller’s trans. (5. B. Z., XV, 58) of 
Taittirlya Upanisad, IT, 7) because man is created by his own illusion, or that he is the ‘abode 
of all good actions’, which S. Sitarama in his trans. accepts. Max Miiller (S. 8. 2., XV, 20, 
n. 4) equates sva° and swkrta as=deeds performed by oneself and believed to be good. 

6 Cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 18, 3, which may be borrowed. 

™ This means, Sayana says, that in the absence of the deity, the faculties cannot work. He 
quotes Brahma Siitra, II, 4, 14: jyotirady adhisthanam tadamanat\ Jaiminiya Upanisad 
Brahmana, IJ, 11, 12, seems reminiscent of this passage, 


-II, 4,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 229 


in them.’ Therefore to whatever deity an oblation is offered, hunger and thirst 
are partners in it.$ 

3. He thought, ‘There are these worlds and the guardians of these worlds. 
Shall I create food for them?’ He brooded over the waters.! From the waters 
brooded over form? was born. The form that was born was indeed food. The 
food when created sought to go away. He was fain to seize it. He sought 
to grasp it with speech. He could not grasp it with speech. Had he been 
able to grasp it with speech, man would have enjoyed food by uttering its name 
alone. He sought to grasp it by scent.* He could not grasp it by scent. Had 
he been able to grasp it by scent, man would have enjoyed food by scenting 
it alone. He sought to grasp it by the eye. He could not grasp it by the eye. 
Had he been able to grasp it by the eye, man would have enjoyed food by seeing 
it alone. He sought to grasp it by the ear. He could not grasp it by the ear. 
Had he been able to grasp it by the ear, man would have enjoyed food by hearing 
it alone. He sought to grasp it by the skin. He could not grasp it by the skin. 
Had he been able to grasp it by the skin, man would have enjoyed food by 
touching it only. He sought to grasp it by the mind. He could not grasp it 
by the mind. Had he been able to grasp it by the mind, man would have 
enjoyed food by thinking of it alone. He sought to grasp it by the generative 
organ. He could not grasp it by that organ. Had he been able to grasp it 


® Sayana, following Anandatirtha, explains that, as hunger is mitigated by the knowledge of 
its (i.e. food’s) proximity, or by kenny of it, so the senses all appease hunger and thirst. 
Sankara’s view is that the sensations become eaters by sharing in the deities, i.e. fire, &c., in 
the body and in the world; so they share in every offering to a deity (i.e. the deity and ‘the 
worshipper both eat). 

1 The five elements (Sankara and Sayana). 

? Form or organism, as Rajarama translates it, is natural, not something imposed on matter, 
and it plays no such part in Indian thought as in Greek. Even the Buddhist ra#am is not a 
pregnant conception. 

’ Réer reads madat, ‘ crying,’ so Rajarama, and see crit. notes. Sankara explains ‘that mice, 
&c., try to run away from cats that eat them’. He takes ajighamsat as, ‘it sought to run away,’ 
and this is followed by Sayana and Anandatirtha and by VisveSvaratirtha, besides being 
accepted by Colebrooke, Roer, S. Sitarama, and Rajarama, Max Miiller, and Deussen. But 
that this is correct seems very unlikely. Rather it may mean, ‘He sought to strike, grasp 
it,’ which idea is later developed in detail. This leaves the exact sense of param difficult. 
If it is neuter, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1117; Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 2, 
4; 6, 1; Katha Upanisad, II, 4,1; Maitrayaniya Upanisad, VI, 17; Oertel, 7. 4.0.S., XVI, 
226. But if it=to no purpose (cf. Aitareya Brahmana, III, 46, 2; Jaiminiya Upanisad 
Brahmana, I, 2, 4) a tolerable sense is made as masculine. But I prefer Bohtlingk’s atyajigdmsat ; 
ef. Roth, Z.D. M4. G., XLVIII, 106-111. If eat is nom., cf. Introd., p. 56. In Manava Grhya 
Siitra, I,12,5, occurs: athainau dadhimadhu samasnutah, which Knauer (p. xliv) defends by 
quoting the Aitareya Brahmana passage (VI, 22) and Kausitaki Brahmana, XXII, 1, and by the 
fact that 7a in Pali occurs in the nom. (cf, Miiller, Padi Grammar, p. 88). Bohtlingk, Sachs. 
Ber., 1896, p- 1553 1900, pp. 418, 428, denies the use. 

* As above in II, 4,1. Fora rather similar list, cf. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 60. 


230 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Il, 4, 3- 


by that organ, man would have enjoyed food by sending it forth alone. He 
sought to grasp it by down-breathing. ‘He obtained it. Thus it is Vayu who 
lays hold of food, and Vayu is he who lives by food. He thought, ‘How can 
this be without me?’? He thought, ‘ By which way ® shall I enter?’ He thought, 
‘If speech distinguishes, if scent smells, if the eye sees, if the ear hears, if the 
skin feels, if the mind thinks, if down-breathing digests, if the organ sends forth, 
what then am I?’ Having split open the top of the skull he entered by that 
door. That door is called vidyt, the place of happiness.’ There are three ® 
dwelling-places of him, three dreams, this dwelling-place, and this, and this. 
Born he looked through all beings, to see whether any one wished to proclaim 


5 Vayu is derived from dvayat, The use of this causal form is confined to this sense, but 
is found both in Samhita and Brahmana. The sense is perhaps ‘ consumed’ rather than ‘ seized ’. 
Possibly d@-v7 is the source (Monier-Williams’ Dzct.), but this is less likely; cf. /7.4.0.S., XVU, 
53; Lud. Stud., XVIII, 24. 

® Or he who gives life by food, as Sayana and Anandatirtha take it, quoting Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, II, 2,1; annam dima, IV, 3, 6, and Kausitaki Upanisad, ITI, 2. Sayana describes 
the passage as S¢subrahmane. For the long series of conditionals, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit 
Grammar, § 950; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 366; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, § 198. These cases are all normal: they refer to a past unreal condition, for the 
act of creation is not conceived as continuous, and correspond to the Latin pluperfect subject 
or the Greek aorist indic. in protasis with dy with aorist in apodosis. The form agrahazsyat is 
remarkable ; cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 24: paryagrahaisam ; ibid., 35: pratyajagrabhaisam, 
and see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 904b, 1068 a, for other cases of the anomaly. The 
Suparmadhyaya also contains the form agrahaisam, Wackeragel, Altindische Grammatzk, 
I, xxxii; see Mantrapatha, II, 8, 3, agrabhaisam; cf. Bohtlingk, Z.D.M.C., LIV, 511, with 
Bloomfield, ibid., XLVIII, 577; /. A. O.S., XXV, 135. 

7 Sankara illustrates by the metaphor, ‘Unless the lord the city keep, the watchers watch 
in vain.’ There must be the soul in the body. Sayana compares Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
III, 4,1. Contrast with Aristotle, De Animd, UI, 5, is interesting. 

8 i.e. by the tip of the foot, as in II, 1, 4, or the skull. Sayana connects the former with 
the armendriyas, the latter with the j#anendriyas. Anandatirtha refers to a variant in 
Sankara’s commentary avtar for ata. It obviously must have been wrong, but it is worth 
noting that Sankara’s text was not very complete or certain. It is noteworthy that here 
we have no hint of Aarman (cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, HI, 2, 13 sq.; IV, 4, 2-5). 

9 So called because connected with Hari, says Anandatirtha. The Jaiminiya Upanisad 
Brahmana knows a xdndana séman and Samaveda, II, 651, a mdndana svarga. 

10 These three are variously interpreted. Sankara gives two explanations. The first is that of 
right eye, inner mind, and ether in the heart. Anandatirtha explains the mind as in the throat, 
and identifies the heart with the ether. He thus gets, in his own commentary, the triad, right 
eye, throat, and heart, and so Colebrooke. Sayana as often follows him rather than Sankara 
and after him cites the Brahma Upanisad, III: metre jagaritam vidyat kanthe svapnam sami 
diset \ susuptam hrdayasya tu (al. hrdayastham) \ Sankara and the others explain the states as 
of waking, dreaming, and deep sleep, for all are sleep as compared with true knowledge of 
brahman (cf. Kaivalya Upanisad, XII). The other explanation is that referring to another 
birth, viz. one’s own body, and those of one’s mother and father; this is no doubt quite 
wrong, but Sayana reconciles the two theories by assigning two kinds of samsara, dinavya- 
vahara and jannantarasvikdra, to which the theories correspond. 


“4 


=II, 4,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 231 


another self.! He saw this person only as the most widely extended drahman.™ 
I have seen it, so he said. Therefore he was Idamdra by name, he was indeed 


11 Sankara does not explain this passage. Anandatirtha says that either he regarded it as 
clear or his copyists (cf. n. 8) omitted it. His own explanation gives us a chvice. (1) He 
identified himself with creatures because he did not see the true self, z¢¢ being used in the 
sense of yasmat, or simply, he identified himself with creatures: he did not see the true 
self, z#¢ marking the close of the adhyaropa section. (2) The adhydropa ends with advasatha itz, 
and with sa jaa begins the afavada. We examined the creatures separately, whether they had 
svattah satta or not, and concluded that ‘there is nothing that I can call different from the true 
self’. Vadisyami is given for vdvadisat. Sayana follows this one of Anandatirtha’s explanations, 
using some of the actual words. Colebrooke has, ‘What else (but him) can I here affirm 
(to exist)?’ S, Sitarama renders, ‘How should he speak of any other?’ and Réer has, ‘How 
could he desire to declare any other thing different from him?’ Rajarama, ‘Can any (element) 
here call (the ruler) different?’ Max Miiller and Deussen render, ‘whether anything wished to 
proclaim here another self.’ This must be right, or perhaps the subject should be ‘any person’, 
the difference is, however, slight. This version is supported by Anandatirtha in his own 
commentary, tha bhitesu anyam matio ’’nyam pravartakam vavadisat kim vadet, says Visnu. 
Vavadisat cannot refer to the subject of abhivyaikhyat and anyam must refer to atmanam. 
Vavadisat may be an intensive aor. subj., or the injunctive of a desid. from the intensive, both 
rare forms (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 1019, 1025). Nilakantha thinks this passage is 
referred to in the Moksadharma, Mbh., XII, 10060, no doubt wrongly, see Deussen’s trans., 
p- 493. For abhivyaikhyat, abhivyatksat should certainly be read. The confusion between 
khy and s is very frequent in all sorts of MSS., cf. Weber, Zud. Stud., IV, 273; Hillebrandt’s 
notes on Saakhayana Srauta Sitra, 1V, 12,10; 15,1; Gobhila Grhya Sitra, I, 3,18 (Oldenberg, 
S.B.E., XXX, 21); Knauer, Manava Grhya Sitra, p. xxxv; Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen 
des Reveda, pp. 174, 175, and at great length in his forthcoming work, Zur Stammbzldung, 
&c., on 4rcchra; Z.D.M.G., L, 42; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 136; Epigr. 
Ind., IV, 122, prakhyalitam for praksalitam. The Nirukta, IH, 20, already recognizes it and 
uses it in connecting /4hyd with rksa. On the other hand T, a South Indian MS., has the 
correct °Asat, though perhaps only by conjecture. Rajarima gives the form as Vedic for 
abhivyakhyat, and no doubt a confused remembrance of such a form may have helped to 
keep the absurdity in the text when once it had forced its way in. Vévadisat he gives as 
-let of »/vad. For atma he accepts the etymology from a/at, the ‘motor’ or ‘ vital force’. 
Geldner (Vedische Studien, III, 116, 117) adopts the etymology of Weber and Garbe (Wize 
Samkhya-Philosophie, p. 293) of dtman from »/at and so denoting (1) the wandering wind, 
(2) the samsdarin soul, whence come the other meanings, person, self, body, nature. It is 
quite possible that the soul and the wind were deemed to be closely connected—there are 
plenty of parallels—but of course in this case we cannot take samsarin in the technical sense. 
The more usual derivation is from »/az (Roth), while Deussen (Allg. Gesch. der Phil., I, 1, 
285 sq.) prefers to derive atman from two pronominal stems. No explanation as yet offered 
is satisfactory, since none explains Vedic ¢mand, &c. (Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 
I, 61). Bdhtlingk’s conj. vava diset, ‘ to see if it referred to any one save himself,’ is good, but 
not essential. ; 

12 The commentators all read rahma separately, and though the sense would be much the 
same this is better than to take brahmatatamam (with S text) as one word. The commentators 
and translators all agree it is for ‘atatamam, and Deussen compares durnisprapataram in 
Chandogya Upanisad, V, 10,6. We may also compare navamam (=navatamam according to 
Max Miiller in RV., V, 27, 3, see Oldenberg, S. 3. Z., XLVI, 422) Varunavayvitamam for 
°ztatamam in V, 3, 2, though there the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 10, 1, reads pari- 


232 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Il, 4, 3- 


Idamdra by name. Him who is Idamdra they call Indra mysteriously. For 
the gods love mystery." f 


ApHYAYA 5. 


In man? he is from the first as a germ.2 That seed is strength gathered from 
all the limbs and he thus bears a self in his self. When he connects the seed to 
the woman, then he causes it to be born. That is his first birth. The seed 
becomes the self of the woman like one of her own limbs. ‘Therefore it hurts her 
not. She nourishes the self he has given her there. She, as nourisher, is to be 
nourished. The woman bears the germ. The man before the birth of the child 
and thereafter ® supports him, When he supports the child before its birth and 


yatanam, and for a large number of somewhat similar (but often doubtful) cases, Wackernagel ; 
Altindische Grammatik,\, 280; 11, i, 128; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, pp. 58,59; Bloomfield, 
P.A.O.S., April, 1893, p. xxxv; 4. /, P., XVII, 416-418. Otherwise it might be translated 
‘just that’ in accordance with Panini, V, 3, 93, for which use Bhagavata Purana, X, 36, 28 is 
also cited; so Bohtlingk, and in Chandogya, /. c., °tana is now read. 

3 For Indra as a designation of dtman cf. II, 3, 7, n.1. For adarsam, Lévi, p. 107. 

4 The phrase here occurs in Aitareya Brahmana, III, 43,1: zy dcaksate paroksam parok- 
sakama hi devah; a similar but characteristically slightly different phrase occurs repeatedly in 
Satapatha Brahmana, VI-X, but not in I-V; Weber, /zd. Stud., XIII, 268; X, 127. Cf. also 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 2, 2, where Indra is mysteriously called Indha as the person in the 
right eye, for the same reason as here. Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 161) happily 
compares the riddles found in the Rgveda, the Atharvaveda, and the Yajurveda. The gods 
require amusement as well as reverence. So also the gods must have animals to play with 
(Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, p.148; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 74, and Keith, 7.R.A.S., 
1907, p. 936). Other examples of obscurity are Satapatha Brahmana, VI, 1, 1, 2; VII, 5, 1, 
22 (Winternitz, p. 177). Cf. also Winternitz, Mantrapatha, I, xxix, n. Sankara sums up the 
result of this chapter in an interesting and polemical discussion of the dan as eternal and 
unthinkable subject (U, pp. 50-64, trans. by S. Sitarama, pp. 39-49); but what he says bears 
rather on his system than on the Upanisad. See also Lévi, Za Doctrine du Sacrifice, p. 38, n. 6. 

* Sayana following Sankara thus sums up the result of the Upanisad in the introduction 
to this Adhyaya. There is (1) draiman undeveloped and truly real; (2) then adhydropa in 
(a) the fourteen worlds in brahman’s egg, (b) virds who regards the worlds as his body, 
(c) the ¢zdriyas arising in his body, (d) the presiding deities, (e) the subjects of the zzdriyas 
including man, (f) the food of the deities and its appropriation, (g) the three states of the self; 
(3) the afavdda, beginning with sa 7atah and ending with the end of II, 4,3. This section 
takes up as regards other births than the present the question of the three states of the soul. 
This section seems to be referred to in the Moksadharma, Mbh., XII, 10862, and 9494. Cf. 
Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 2,1,1; Lévi,p.107. For the egg, cf. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, I, 93. 

* This simple and early narrative should not, of course, be explained by the patcagnividya 
as Sayana proposes, but is much earlier in conception. Anandatirtha explains the whole as 
a question of the different manifestations of Visnu. The edd. except Sitarama and U and Rajarama 
punctuate at vefas, but the comm. and the parallelism yad efad—tad etad are in favour of the 
other punctuation. The sense is the same. Bohtlingk’s exam (= &mdanam) is not essential. 

’ The commentators here differ. Sankara and Anandatirtha in his tika take (1) janmano 
gre as ‘before birth’; (2) agra eva as jatamatram; (3) adhi as ‘after birth’, This seems 
preferable, except that agra eva must be considered as explained by janmano ’gve. Ananda- 
tirtha in his d/dsya explains (1) as above; (2) as agryah, Sarvagunagryahk; (3) adht as 


—II, 5 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 233 


thereafter, he supports in truth himself, for the continuation of these worlds.‘ 
For thus are these worlds continued. This is his second birth. This self® is 
appointed for holy deeds, The other self having done its duty and attained old 
age departs, and departing hence is born again. This is his third birth. 
A poet says (RV., IV, 27, 1), ‘ Within the womb, I learned all the races of these 
gods. A hundred brazen forts restrained me, but like a hawk I escaped swiftly 
downward.’? Vamadeva lying in the womb thus declared this. Knowing this, he 


adhikatvena, Sayana renders (1) agra eva as prasavat prag eva; (2) janmano’gre as prasavad 
uirdhvam; (3) adhi as adhikatvena, apparently borrowing this from Anandatirtha’s bhasya. The 
services before and after birth which Rajarama Ramakrsna Bhagavata alone recognizes, as 
apparently also Colebrooke, are explained as the nourishing the mother and performing the 
usual ceremonies before and after birth. It is just possible, however, that adhibhavayati is 
the verb, and the reference is only to what is done before birth. Bodhtlingk omits agra eva. 

* Contrast the late and elaborate passage in Kausitaki Upanisad, II, 15. The passage, 
Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, III, 11, is fundamentally different. 

5 That isthe son. The following passage is quoted by Sankara on Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
p- 3°7- 

® Sankara explains that as father and son are one aman (cf. V, 3, 3), the three births are 
correct. Sayana says either (1) the aman being one, it has three births, two as son, one as 
father; or (2) the two births of the son have analogies in the case of the father and that of the 
father in the case of the son, so that each has three births. The third birth is taken by the 
commentators as rebirth in heaven, hell, or in the world of men. Probably, as there is no 
proof that the Upanisad knows the doctrine of transmigration, it refers to being born in the 
next world, an idea familiar in the Brahmanas (cf. Macdonell, Vedzc Mythology, pp. 168, 169 ; 
Sanskrit Literature, pp. 223, 224) which differs essentially from transmigration, i.e. birth into 
this world again, see Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 294, 295; EK. Ty, pp: 325 sds 
Lévi, pp. 96, n. 1, 97, 2. 13 Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., Ul, 8; contra, Geldner, Vedesche Studien, 
Il, 288; Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1893, p. 92. For vayo-gata, sce Wackernagel, A/tindische 
Grammattk, U1, i, 190. 

7 This verse is very obscure in this connexion. Sankara, Anandatirtha, and Sayana all explain 
it as referring to the innumerable bodies through which Vamadeva had passed until he obtained 
mukti through knowledge. This meaning cannot be got from the passage. The context seems 
to show that it only means that Vamadeva knew the three births of a¢man, and so escaped and 
became immortal. The doctrine of mukti is not apparently known to the writer of the 
Upanisad. If it were, it would be made clear. For the meaning of the verse in the original cf. 
Bergaigne, Rel. Véd., Wl, 322; Eggeling, S.B.Z., XXVI, xx, n. 1; Roth, Z. D. 1. G., 
XXXVI, 353; Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., I, 282; and especially Bloomfield, /.4.0.S., 
XVI, 1-24, who explains the myth as referring to Agni. When the cloud is rent in 
the storm, the lightning (=Syena) breaks from the cloud and simultaneously the Soma flows 
upon the earth. Sayana in his Rgvedic commentary follows this passage. On RV), LV, 20, 5 
Sayana says that Vamadeva, who had in his mother’s womb the knowledge of Brahman, sets 
forth that knowledge of the identity of himself and Brahman, in the verses aham Manur, &c. 
(so Satapatha Brahmana, IV, 4, 2, 21 and 22). So [Sayana] on Atharvaveda, XVIII, 3, 15: sa 
khalu garbhavastha eva sann utpannatattvajhanah svasya sarvatmyam anusamdadhau. Sieg 
(Die Sagenstoffe des Rgveda, pp. 76 sq.) holds, no doubt, rightly that the idea is not found 
in the RV. passage, but no conclusion as to the priority of the Satapatha Brahmana, /. c., 
can of course be drawn from the fact that no mention is there made of the legend, which 
may quite well have been known to the Satapatha, though not referred to. His version 


234 AITAREYA ARANYAKA is 


stepped forth after the destruction® of the body, and having enjoyed all delights 
in the world of heaven he became immortal.’ 


Apuyaya 6. 


Who is he? whom we meditate on as the self?? Which is that self? That 
by which one sees, by which one hears, by which one smells scents, by which 
one forms speech, by which one discriminates sweet and sour? That which is 
the heart and the mind,® perception, injunction, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, 
vision, firmness, thinking, considering, helping, memory, resolution, will, breath, 
love, and desire?# All these are only names of knowledge.® That (self) is 


(pp. 88 sq., cf. Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1, 211 sq.) of this verse takes the last part as meaning, 
‘Then came the eagle; through the swift one (javasdé as an adj.) I escaped,’ the speaker being 
(as in IV, 18) Indra himself. Sieg reconstructs the myth as one in which Indra even before 
birth desires lordship over the gods, who therefore try first to prevent his birth and then seek 
to restrain him, until he escapes by the eagle’s aid. This is very ingenious but not proved. 

® Sarirabhandét according to Anandatirtha. After death, Sankara and Sayana. This seems 
certain and is followed by the translators including Sitarama and Rajarama. 

® The end of this section is, Sayana says, to produce disgust with the body and with 
the series of lives undergone by the unenlightened. There is no trace of this in the original. 
Rajarama Ramakrsna Bhagavata has an original view of this section (ed., Bombay, 1898, p. 7). 
He takes it as dealing with (a) the seminal soul which as transferred has its first birth, 
(b) the second birth as a human being, (c) death and rest in the indestructible heaven. 
‘The third sleep is the sleep of death beginning in this, and ending in the heavenly world.’ 
This version of the Upanisad—though coloured by Christian influences—yet seems to me to 
recognize the fact that transmigration is not referred to. Similarly he derives from II, 4, 3 
that the human brain is entered by the highest spirit and so becomes worthy of life. 

1 This Adhyaya is the final answer to the. questions proposed; wfa@smahe may also be 
translated ‘worship’ or ‘service’. Colebrooke takes it: ‘What is this soul? that we may 
worship him.’ 

4 Max Miiller and Bohtlingk read ho yam, but Sankara undoubtedly took it as 4o yam } 
and though awkward the construction is not impossible, cf. RV., VIII, 4, 6; 7. 4.0.5., XV, 
257. Aatarah no doubt refers to the two views of dtman hinted at in IL ASS aad here 
developed as a mere spirit or a central function. 

8 The idea that there is one central function is clearly here developed, and this denial 
that the senses, &c. are essentially different is creditable to the thought of the Upanisad. It 
is the idea developed in the 7heaetetus, 184 sq.; Republic, 533. sq. Cf. Kausitaki Upanisad, III; 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 5, 3, which is the famous assertion that it is by mazas man sees 
and hears. See Deussen, op. cit., p. 246; E.T., p. 273. Sayana endeavours to discriminate 
hrdayam and manas as buddhi and manas, but Sankara regards them as one. 
is clearly as taken in the translation, though RGer and Sitarama differ. 

* That these terms, which remind us of the later meaningless Buddhist repetitions, had 
ever any definite meanings is most improbable. Saikara renders them thus: Sanyhanam = 
cetanabhavah, ajnanam=ivarabhavah, vijidnam =kaladiparijnanam, prajianam = prajnaté, 
medha = granthadharanasdmarthyam, drstir = indriyadvara sarvavisayopalabdhih, dhrlir = 
dharanam, matir = mananam, manisa = svatantryam, jutis = cetaso ritjadiduhkhitvabhavah, 
smrtth = smaranam, samkalpah = Suklakysnadibhavena samkalpanam ripadinam, kratur = 
adhyavasdyah, asuh = = prananadijivanakriyanimitta vyttih, kimah = asamnihitavisayakanksa 
ty sna, vasah = strivyatikaridyabhilasah. Anandatirtha’s Selanne: are, in order, samyakjnana, 


The construction 


-Il, 6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 235 


brakman,§ Indra, Prajapati, all the gods, the five great elements,’ earth, air, ether, 
water, lights, all these and those which are mixed with small as it were,® seeds of 
various kinds, born of eggs, born from the womb, born from heat,® born from 
germs," horses, cows, men, elephants, and all that breathes, whether it walks or 


GtatajRana, vividhajiana, prakrstajiana, avisprstajnana, darsana, dharana, masu pramanesu 
tatatvan matih, brahmadinim iatvam, sarvaprerana, sarvesu desakdlesu svartipesu ca samanr 
ramate, sarvakipti, sarvakatrtvam asana, amrtinanda, svatantratva, Sayana borrows from 
both ; he refers samjAanam to samyak, medha to granthatadarthadharanam, julih to javas or 
as in Sankara, samkalpah to asamicine pi vastunt samyaktvena kalpanam ; for the rest he 
follows faithfully Saikara. Rajarama renders: ‘ consciousness, direction, sagacity, intelligence, 
retentive power, understanding, courage, power of thinking, freedom of thought, intrepidity, 
memory, will, capacity, vitality, ambition, obedience.’ Bohtlingk makes these subjects and 
prajnanetram predicate. 

5 This may fairly be construed as an assertion of the pre-eminence of knowledge. The 
parallel passage in the Kausitaki Upanisad, III, is clearly later, for. it combines elaborately 
the doctrine of fradva (see II, 1-3, above) and that of graj#a. The relations cannot be reversed. 

® Possibly masculine as Sankara, Anandatirtha, and Sayana think, followed by Colebrooke, 
Réer, Sitarama, Rajarama, Max Miller, Bohtlingk, and Deussen. “But this is not necessary nor 
likely in view of the neuter below, and Brahman (m.) is not found as a deity in the Aitareya 
Brahmana (but only as priest, p. 68). The occurrence in Maitrayani Samhita, TE29;_15 18 
interpolated, v. Schroeder, /vd. Lzt., p. 91, n. I. Muir, Sansk. Texts, V, 323, finds the masc. 
in various Satapatha passages, unnecessarily. But it occurs, e.g. Kausitaki Upanisad, I, 3. 
The masc. is natural and is helped by the following masc. 

7 This passage is relied on by Deussen (op. cit., p. 168; E.T., pp. 185, 186) in support 
of his view (accepted by Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 217 Sq., and Wintermitz, Gesch. der 
indisch. Litt., 1, 205) of the lateness of the Aitareya Upanisad. But there is nothing in the 
expression itself to demand a late date, and the fact that the version in the Upanisad of the 
creation is so detailed, instead of being a proof of lateness, may rather be considered a sign 
of early date, when the creation still was considered a real act and the doctrine of the 
omnipresence of brakman as consciousness was not so fully developed. The passages, 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 7; Chandogya Upanisad, VI, 2, 3, both contain a reference to 
name and form, a conception familiar to Buddhism but not apparently at all early. The 
Taittirlya, Il, 6, is evidently a mere résumé of a well-known doctrine. But that Upanisad 
bears conspicuous traces of lateness; indeed it already quotes Slokas very often and becomes 
quasi-metrical, while it knows the Atharvaigirases (II, 3) and has a much developed theory 
of the Aofas of dtman. For the elements (aka@fa = empty space), see Bohtlingk, Sachs, Ber., 
1900, pp. 149-151; Keith, 7. &. A. S., 1909, July. 

® Mixed with small (Safkara). Jva he calls meaningless. Cf. I, 1, 2,0. 33 TU 2, Gree ixed 
from ‘smaller portions (of the former)’ is Réer’s version, which is no doubt the sense. The 
others of various sorts are opposed to the great elements. Colebrooke has: ‘joined with minute 
objects and other seeds.’ a 

® Sankara explains as y#adini which Anandatirtha accepts. Sayana renders Arimidamsadint. 
The word does not occur in the Chandogya Upanisad, VI, 3, 1, but it is impossible to accept 
that as a valid proof of later date since such lists (cf. those of the pranas, I, 3, 7; 4, 1) 
vary enormously in the same book. In jarujani, cf. jaéru, Jaiminiya Brahmana, I, 430, 6 
(J.A. O.S., XIX, 100) ; Bohtlingk’s jardyu is not necessary. For a similar list cf. Anugita, 
Mbh., XIV, 1134. . 

10 Rendered by Sankara vrksddini, by Anandatirtha bhuvam dbhittva jatani trnddini, and 

’ by Sayana tarugulmadini. Rajarama has ‘shoot-born’, The form is normal and is not a case 


236 AITAREYA ARANYAKA ik 


flies, and what is immovable. All that is guided by knowledge, it rests on 
knowledge. The world is guided by knowledge. Knowledge is its foundation.” 
Knowledge is drahman. He by his knowing self having left this world and 
having obtained all delights in the world of heaven became immortal. 


ApHYAYA 7. 


My speech rests on mind, my mind on speech. Be thou revealed to me.’ 


of jy=dy for udbhidya (cf. Scheftelowitz, Zur Stammbildung in den indo-germanischen 
Sprachen, § 10). : 

1 The question is whether this justifies an attribution to the author of the doctrine that 
knowledge alone exists. It is quite open to argue that we only are given the doctrine that 
the world is guided by knowledge, which leaves us with a final dualism. I think probably 
the author went further and intended to assert the origin of all from knowledge, cf. I, 4. 
If so, he represents exactly the later Bhagavata view,* perhaps that of Badarayana, of the 
nature of reality. The self, or god, is conceived as creating the material world as a reality,” 
but the exact nature of the creation is left vague. The relation of Jrahman and diman is 
likewise left vague, a mere identification such as may have been meant being of little value. 
But of course none of the questions had yet clearly presented themselves. Cf. Thibaut, 5.2. 2Z., 
XXXIV, xevii sq. ; XLVIII, Introd., for Ramanuja’s view, and my reviews of Deussen’s Philosophie 
der Upanishads, J. R. A. S., 1906, pp. 590 sq., and of his Vier philosophische Texte, J.R.A.S., 
1907, pp. 462 sq.; Grierson, 7. R. A..S., 1908, p. 361. Rajarama renders prayiiana ‘source of 
intelligence’. 

% According to Sankara, this refers to Vamadeva, see II, 5. 

1 auir avir ma edhi is apparently the correct reading, but the second d@v77 is very curious. 
Sayana escapes the difficulty by equating the @vir to suvaprakasamt brahmacaitanyam and taking 
it as a vocative, the rendering dvir edhi as prakati bhava, which (though followed by Cole- 
brooke) is unfortunately quite impossible. The phrase @vzr + +/as, &c. is not at all rare, e.g. 
RV., I, 31, 3: aviv bhava Vivdsvate (where Bergaigne, Rel. Véd., 1, 55, conjectures, no 
doubt rightly, dzavah, see Oldenberg, S. 2. Z., XLVI, 25); 1, 146, 4; IV, 10,8 (=AV., XX, 
77,8); 1,16; V,1, 9: avir ydsmat carutamo babhutha; V, 2, 9g: (Agni) avir visvand krnute 
mahitva, VI1, 103, 8; AV., XII, 1, 60, and a@vir duir edhi (as read in K) would be perfectly 
natural, but could hardly have been corrupted into the traditional text. I would suggest that 
we have here in external combination an example of the working of the tendency which causes 
zs in internal combination to be lengthened where it is part of the stem (e.g. ath, sajuh, 
see Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p.10; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 42, 43; I, 
i, 126). This point may be noted in favour of the view that in @vzs the vis is part of the stem 
(cf. St. Petersburg Dictionary, s.v.). With the whole should be compared Manava Grhya Sitra, 
I, 4, 4: which has waz me manasi pratisthita mano me vaci pratisthitam avir ayur mayi dheht 
vedasya vanih (sic) sthah, and, preceding all this, after the words prak svistakrto ’tha japatt, 
the words ytay vadisyémi to the end. The reading vanih is no doubt wrong, being a 
corruption of ma ai by Sandhi, maz with / incorrectly restored (it of course would in any 
case in most MSS. disappear before s¢k). It appears from Knauer's Crit. Note (p. 6) that 





* Cf, Rajarama Ramakrsna Bhagavata’s ed., p. 7, where he finds in II, 6 the doctrine that all 
has its source in the highest spirit. 


» Cf, Windelband, History of Philosophy, pp. 252 sq. 


-Il, 7 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 237 


You are the two pins? of the Veda. May my lore forsake * me not. I join day 
and night with what I have learned. I will proclaim the real, I will proclaim the 
true.‘ May this protect me, may this protect the teacher. May it protect me, 
may it protect the teacher. 


vant is a conjecture of his: the text MSS. in I, 4, 4 have either vad or vani, while, ibid. 8, 
all save one (waénom) have vant. Only one Paddhati (cf. p. iv) has vé@iyz, obviously an error 
for v@nom (which of course (cf. V, 1, 6, n. 4) is the Sandhi of vanz om), if it is not a mere 
misreading of the MS. There is thus no real support for wank (how exactly Dr. Knauer 
would take it, I am not sure), and in the Manava Grhya Sutra the simple Sandhi mdtma 
for me + ama is actually found in I, 3, 2 (so also I, 9, 11: véstarast°; I, 11, 16: visvadi, &c., 
see Knauer, p. xxxix). Probably mdm lead to the more intelligible (to the scribe) vavz. 

For waz, &c., Knauer, who does not notice the Aitareya passage, quotes Paraskara Grhya 
Sutra, I, 3, 25; Taittiriya Samhita, V, 5, 9, 2; Taittiriya Aranyaka (Andhra text), X, 725 
Atharyayeda, XIX, 60, 1. There is also the parallel version in Saakhayana Aranyaka, VII, 1, 
where vedasdmatsarinth takes the place of vedasya, &c.. This may perhaps mean ‘hidden in’, but 
probably we haye a mere corruption; see my translation. The Mantras are no doubt old enough. 
Colebrooke, who comments on the use of Mantra as applicable to part of an Upanisad, renders, 
‘ May my speech be founded on understanding, and my mind be attentive to my utterance.’ 

2 Ananayasamarthe, Sayana. Colebrooke renders, ‘For my sake (O speech and mind !) 
approach this Veda;’ perhaps reading manu. Dr. Scheftelowitz takes it as ‘navel >. The word 
in the Rgveda, I, 35, 6, &c. (cf. Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 39), seems to refer to the pin of 
the axle of a cart, and the metaphor is natural enough; cf. Leumann, £7. Wort., p. 31. 

$ prahasih may be a second person, or a problematic third person based on a false analogy 
(cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 889 ; Weber, Berd. Sitz., 1895, p- 830), or an error for prahasit. 
Precisely the same difference of reading occurs in Khila, IV, 8, 5, Srutdm me ma pré hasth, 
where Peterson’s MS. has Adsi#, and cf. Manava Srauta Satra, II, 1, 2, 36 (Adsi#) with Taittiriya 
Samhita, III, 1, 1, 2 (Adszh), in the same phrase, dikse ma@ ma hasi(h), and in HiranyakeSi 
Grhya Sitra, I, 6, 20, 1, yathdsat for yathasah (Oldenberg, S. B. E., XXX, 189). Scheftelowitz 
renders: ‘das yon mir Gehérte mége man nicht verspotten vermittels des Erlernten,’ taking 
hasth from »/has. The long @ would be unusual,* but in any case a derivation from V ha 
seems preferable in point of sense and is supported by Atharvaveda, VI, 41, 3; Taittiriya 
Aranyaka, IV, 42 (AnandaSrama ed., pp. 352, 355). The translation will be literally: ‘O lore, 
forsake me not,’ reading fra, perhaps, as the nom, is unusual, and the neuter voc. is 


perfectly well supported (cf. Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, § 66), and the reading Sruta me | 


is easily corrupted into Srutam me, cf. Lanman’s note on Whitney, Atharva Veda, XVII, 
2, 3; Whitney, P.A.O.S., Oct., 1887, p. xxv, and my note in J. R. A.S., 1907, p- 225, 
although the nominative can stand, cf. Winternitz, Mantrapatha, 1, p. xviii.” For the sense 
ef, Atharvaveda, I, 1, 4; Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 4, I. 

4 From here to the end this is identical with the Taittiriya Upanisad, Siksavalli, I, 1, or 
Taittiriya Aranyaka, VII, 1,1. The sense of ahoraétran is no doubt, ‘I work all day and 
night,’ as Sayana takes it. Colebrooke renders, ‘Day and night may I behold this, which 
I have studied.’ In III, 1, 2, the neut. is used. 


* Compare, however, saksye which Whitney, no doubt rightly, reads in Atharvayeda, IJ, 27, 
5, although the form elsewhere is always saksye, and Ill, 1, 6, n. 5. Ahasit, given as only 
grammatical by Whitney (Roofs, &c., p. 203), is found in the DaSakumaracarita (Biihler, Zn. 
Ant., XXIII, 147). 

b See also my note in J. X. A. S., 1908, pp. 1124 sq. 


| He 


238 - AITAREYA ARANYAKA Ill, 1, 1- 


ARANYAKA III 


ApuyAya 1. 


Next comes the Upanisad of the Samhita text. The former half! is the earth, 
the latter half the heaven, their union the air, says Mandikeya. The union is the 
ether,? so proclaimed Maksavya. ‘For it is not considered independent,’ and so 
I do not agree with his (Mandika’s) son,’ he said. ‘They are alike * and it is 
considered independent, said Agastya; for the air and the ether are both alike. 
So far as regards the deities. Now as regards the self. ‘ The former half is speech, 
the latter half the mind, their union is the breath,’ so said Siravira Mandikeya. 
Then said his eldest son, ‘ The former half is mind, the latter half is speech. For 
by mind one first resolves and then utters speech. Therefore is mind the first 
half, speech the second half, and truth their union.’ It is indeed alike * with both, 
father and son. This compact of mind, speech, breath, is like a chariot ® with 
three horses. He who knows thus this union, obtains children,’ cattle, fame, 


l e.g. in Agnim ile, m is purvaripam, ¢t uttararupam, and mz Samhita (Sayana). For 
all this Aranyaka, cf. Saikhayana Aranyaka, VII, VIII, printed in Appendix, and my trans- 
lation, pp. 41-56. ; 

2 Akasa is rendered ‘void’ by Bohtlingk in his translations of Chandogya and Brhadara- 
nyaka Upanisads; see II, 6, n. 7, contra, Whitney, P. A. O.S., Oct., 1890, p. liii. 

3 This is not at all easy. ene (like dadrSe, Il, 1, 3; 8) seems to be passive, because it 
is difficult to make out a translation either as z¢fcctivdn (Sayana) or manye (Anandatirtha). 
The subject must be vdywh, and the sense must be as in Sayana (cf. Sankara on Taittiriya 
Upanisad, III, 10, 4; Max Miiller, S.2.2., XV, 68, n. 1) that vayu is included in akdfa and 
therefore is inferior to it. Anandatirtha takes pzvena as referring to the fact that dkasa is 
the father of vdyw. The subsequent identification he explains on the ground that vdyw is 
the stronger. In Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 3, 2, the earth, sky, ether (=entardksa, Sankara) and 
vayu are given as the four factors. Asya is obscure: it may be a gen.=dat. and refer to 
Mandikeya, or possibly a vague reference (cf. Rgveda Pratisakhya, I, 2) to the subject, helped 
by such genitives as that in V, I, I. 

* Samane is neut., probably because maze is understood, or perhaps it is fem. The solution 
is that the two views are equally correct, because in ufdsands it is not things but words that 
are considered (Sayana). Anandatirtha rightly takes the last words as giving the opinion of 
Mahaitareya. Otherwise they must be Agastya’s in which he concurs. Max Miiller reads, as S, 
ceti, but it is not in B or the other MSS. and it is merely a misunderstanding of the commentator. 

5 They give a similar result, and so are alike, and equally justifiable, ~a hy upasana 
vastutattvam apeksate. For manas and vac, see Lévi, La Doctrine du Sacrifice, pp. 39, 31. 

6 Visnu is made the subject by Anandatirtha. The real subject is clearly the meditation 
on the Samhita. For three horses, cf. RV., I, 39,6; 100,17; VI, 47, 24; VIII, 7, 28. The 
metaphor recurs constantly in different forms in Sanskrit Literature, e.g.°.Mbh., XIV, 1427 sq. 
The analogy with the Phaedrus, 246, is obvious. For samhatak cf. RV., Ill, 1, 7; Geldner, 
Vedische Studien, 1, 164. 


7 Anandatirtha renders the children as prajfdna, and the cattle as Vedas. Sayana with 


III, 1, 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 239 


glory, and the world of heaven. He lives all his days. So teach the Mandu- 
keyas.® 

2. Then comes (the teaching) of Sakalya.!' The first half is the earth, the 
second half the sky, their union is rain, Parjanya is the uniter. Thus it is when 
he rains strongly and continuously for day and night, then people~say, ‘ Earth 
and heaven have united.’ So far as regards the deities. Now as regards the self. 


Sankara regards this Upanisad as intended for persons who are neither fit for mukti (II, 4-6) 
nor even for union with Hiranyagarbha (II, 1-3). 

8 This section gives us the views of certain Mandikeyas.. The Mandiikeyas occur in Rgveda 
Pratisakhya, § 200, and in the Purana tradition (Weber, Zmd. Stud., II, too sq.; Il, 253). 
Scheftelowitz, Die Afokryphen des Reveda, p. 12, has revived the theory that certain of the Khilas 
represent parts of their Samhita, but cf. Oldenberg’s review, Gott. gel. Anz., 1907, pp. 218 sq., and 
my review, 7. X..4. S., 1907, pp.226sq. The word Upanisad in this section clearly means ‘ secret 
doctrine’. This is certainly the earliest sense of the word (derived, no doubt, from teaching in 
the forest, which was done for the sake of secrecy, cf. Introd., p. 15). I cannot accept Deussen’s 
view (Philosophie der Upanishads, pp. 13 sq.) that the earliest sense was ‘secret word’ (a case 
like ajjalai, &c.), then ‘ secret text’, then ‘ secret sense’ ofa ritual action. The earliest sense may 
well have been ‘secret meaning’ of a ritual action, whence it seems to me the other meanings 
are very easily derived. Deussen’s theory is bound up with his view of the Ksatriyas as 
propounders of a secret lore, as to which cf. Introd., pp. 50 sq.3 LLGa> Oyen ad tema agree 
with Deussen, however, and with Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1,208, n.) in rejecting Olden- 
berg’s view (Z. D. AZ. G., L, 458 sq.) of Upanisad as upasana. See, however, also Z.D.1Z.G., LIV, 
70 sq., and Max Miiller’s view in 1869, Rgveda Pratisakhya, p. iv; Hopkins, 4el. of India, p. 218. 

A muddled version of this section occurs in the Rgveda Pratisakhya, I, 2; 3: Mangdukeyah 
samhitam vayum aha tathakaiam cisya Maksavya eva \ samanatam anile cambare ca matva- 
gastyo vipariharam tad eva \\ 2 \\ adhyaimakiptau Saravirah suta$* ca vaimanasor vivadanty 
anupiuroye \ sandher vivartanam nirbhujam vadanti sauddhaksaroccaranam ca pratynnam \\ 3 \\ 
See Max Miiller, pp. iii-vi. The Sankhayana has, VII, 2, an attempt at an improved version, 
reading in one MS. farihvytak in both cases. Bohtlingk, in the smaller Dzc¢., I, 130, renders 
aviparihyta as ‘identic’, but this makes no sense. The reference in the Pratisakhya is of course 
valuable as giving Saunaka’s date as a ferminus ad quem for the lowest date of the Aranyaka. 

1 Tt refers to the case of zko yan aci, Panini, VI, 6, 77, i.e. where vowels like 7 become 
y before a. A fourth party is introduced, Sakalya must of course be the great grammarian 
to whom the Samhita is ascribed, and this gives us not a very ancient date for this Upanisad. 
But it need not have been written long after Sakalya. Rather it seems to be early. For 
Sakalya’s date see Introd., p. 71. He must probably go back to 700 B,C, Geldner (Vedische 
Studien, U1, 144 sq.) considers that Sakalya must be identical with Vidagdha Sakalya mentioned 
in the Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 6, 3; XIV, 6, 9 (see Weber, Jnd. Stud., 1X, 277 sq.; Indian 
Literature, p. 33) and identified with the maker of the fadapatha by the Vayu Purana, LX, 
58. He was therefore a contemporary of Aruni and Yajiavalkya in opposition to Oldenberg’s 
view (Prolegomena, pp. 371 sq.) which refers him to the end of the Brahmana period.» Weber 
(I.c.) thinks that Sakala in the Aitareya Brahmana, III, 43, 5, refers to his school, but the 


® sytas, which is wrong in fact, illustrates the inaccuracy of the reproduction. 

> Geldner evidently takes a much more respectful view of the antiquity of these sages than 
I would. I think it quite possible to hold that Sakalya and they belong alike to the end of the 
Brahmana period. On the other hand I think Hoernle’s dating (Osteology, pp. 106 sq.) wrong ; 
see Z. D. M. G., 1908, pp. 138, 139; J. &. A. S.; 1908, p. 368, 


240 AITAREYA ARANYAKA - III, 1, 2- 


Every man is egg-like,? there are two halves, they say;° this is the earth, this 
is the heaven, and between them is the etiier, just as there is the ether between 
earth and heaven. In this ether‘ the breath is fixed, as is the air in that ether. 


reference is too far-fetched to be worth consideration—indeed such comparisons hinder rather 
than aid progress. The evidence of the Vayu Purana is worthless. Identifications are easy 
and obvious, and we cannot tell that we have a piece of tradition at all. The fact that the 
Aitareya Brahmana does follow the rule of Sakalya (Panini, VI, 1, 128), that @ before 7 becomes 
a and that @ may remain, cannot prove that Sakalya is prior to it: the reverse may be the 
case. As Geldner admits, the RV.—and the Aitareya Brahmana is in the same position—do 
not follow his rule (VI, 1,127) as to 7 % before dissimilar vowels, and we are left with grave 
doubts whether Geldner’s view that Sakalya was merely to Panini the author of the padapatha 
and author of the Pratisakhya is sound. The fact therefore remains that when Aitareya 
Brahmana, III, 46, recognizes dhavasi atibhih as the pronunciation, it cannot have before it 
Sakalya’s text, unless we admit (which is too bold) that the Samhita is later than Sakalya. 
I prefer, therefore, Oldenberg’s date of Sakalya, and I would lay stress on the fact that in 
the Aranyaka he is Sthavira Sakalya,* in the Brahmana Vidagdha. These names are too 
distinct to permit of identification, The Sakalya of the Pratisakhya is likewise Sthavira and 
must be the same as the man here.? 

2 Andam (later anda, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 1713 Macdonell, Vedic 
Grammar, Pp. 33, n. 14) andasadys$am varnavikaras chandasah (Sayana). The neut. is note- 
worthy as comparatively rare in Sanskrit. Cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 13: krpanam ha du- 
hita; also II, 3, 5, madhyam atma, &c. Parallels are common in Greek and Latin (ot« dyaGov 
modveotpavin, Monro, Homeric Grammar*, p. 166; malum mihi videtur (esse) mors, Cicero, 
Tusc., 1, 5,9). The use is thus substantival rather than adjectival as is clearly felt in the case 
of madhyam. See also the striking case, Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 3: ¢dsmad tdam 
ardhabrgalém iva svah (so Bohtlingk, Chrestomathie®, p. 357; Max Miller, S.B. #., XV, 85, 
n. 3). In dz mu there is a lengthening found also in the Aitareya Brahmana in prose 
(Aufrecht, p. 427) with zé7 also. Cf. Wackernagel, Altzndische Grammatzk, 1, 312; LI, 3, 8,n.9. 

8 ¢ They say’ can hardly refer to the following words, as Max Miiller takes it, though this is 
partly supported by the last words of the section. 

4 Tasmin hasmin is certainly curious. The Sahkhayana parallel, VII, 3, is a correction and 
throws no light. The MS. evidence is strong and Anandatirtha renders it as ¢asmin ha asmin, 
Perhaps siz stands for asmin (cf. Miiller, Pali Grammar, p. 24) and ha is the particle. No root 
or base fa exists from which Aasmzn could naturally be formed. Sayana ignores the point, and 
may possibly have read ¢asminn asmin as does Rajendralala, but this is unlikely. The cor- 
rection Adsmin leaves the error unexplained. It is to be noted that in the SunahSepa legend, 
Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 13, the MSS. read: 2¢i ha sma akhyadya, which Aufrecht keeps in the 
text and gives (p. 431) as one of the grammatical errors of the Brahmana. The parallel Sankha- 
yana text has merely z¢z. Bohtlingk in his Chrestomathie?, p. 351, and Sachs. Ber., 1900, p. 418, 
amends to Adsma and claims that Sayana bears this out. But Sayana’s note while showing that he 
took sma as equivalent to asmaz is not conclusive, though it tends to show that he had dsma(z) 
before him, just as he seems to have read tasminn asmin here, but arguments from his silence 
are dangerous. He ignores zmasmaz in II, 3, 7. I do not think it impossible that this sz 
and the Aitareya Brahmana’s sd@ are parallel phenomena of an attempted simplification of 


* Tt is true Sthavira does not occur in III, 1, 2, but I do not think it is reasonable to 
take the Sakalya of that passage as different from him of III, 2, 1; 6, as does e.g. Weber, 
Indian Literature, p. 50. 

» On him see Max Miiller, Reveda Pratisakhya, pp. 7 sq. 


Eid, Bis TRANSLATION AND NOTES 241 


Just as there are those three lights in heaven, so there are these three lights 
in man. As there is in heaven the sun, so there is the eye in the head. As there 
is in the sky the lightning, so there is the heart in the body. As there is the 
fire in earth, so there is the seed in the member. Having thus represented the 
whole world as the self, he said, ‘ This is the symbol of the earth, this of the 
heaven.’ He who knows thus this union, obtains children, cattle, fame, glory, 
and the world of heaven. He lives all his days.® 

3. Then come the reciters? of the Nirbhuja. The Nirbhuja dwells on earth, 
the Pratrnna in heaven, the Ubhayamantarena in the sky. Thenif one should 
rebuke him who recites the Nirbhuja, he should reply, ‘ Thou hast fallen from 
the two lower places.’? If one should rebuke him who recites the Pratrnna, he 
should reply, ‘Thou hast fallen from the two upper places.’ But there is no 
rebuking him who repeats the Ubhayamantarena.’ For when he unites the words, 
that is the Nirbhuja form;* when he pronounces the two syllables pure, that is 
the Pratrnna form. This is the first. By the Ubhayamantarena both are fulfilled. 


the forms of the base a. Possibly the production of such forms may be due to the analogy 
of sdsmin (RV.), and cf. sasmat (Chandogya Upanisad) ; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 495 fin. 
See, however, also Bohtlingk’s remarks in his Grammat. Absonderlichkeiten im Aitareya- 
brahmana, Leipzig, 1900, where he regards the irregularities noted by Aufrecht, l. c., as due to 
misreadings of the text, and I fully recognize that undue reverence to such texts is absurd. On 
the other hand old forms do disappear, and cf. perhaps the use of md and ¢mdnam, Maitrayani 
Upanisad, VI, 7; Il, 6, and the Vedic ¢mand (Panini, VI, 4, 141; Wackernagel, Altindische 
Grammatik, I, 61). There is also the elision of a in masz, Mantrapatha, I, 13, 9 (=Hiranyakesi 
Grhya Sitra, I, 16, 3), see Winternitz’s edition, I, xxvii; Wackernagel, I, 318. 

5 These sections 1 and 2 may be compared with Taittiriya Upanisad, I, 3, which treats the 
samhita with reference to the spaces (earth, heaven, ether, wind), lights (fire, sun, water, 
lightning), knowledge (teacher, pupil, knowledge, training), generation (mother, father, child, 
begetting), and the self (lower jawbone, upper jawbone, speech, tongue). This elaborate 
system must be later than the Aranyaka. Cf. Max Miiller, Rgveda Pratisakhya, pp. iii sq. 

1 Or recitations of. The Nirbhuja is the Samhita, the Pratrnna the Pada, and Ubhayaman- 
tarena the Krama Patha. Max Miiller (see his Rgveda Pratisakhya, p. iii, and Nachtrage, 
p- ii) first pointed out the importance of this passage. Cf. also Oldenberg, S.B.Z., XXX, 
146 sq.; Prolegomena, p. 380; Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, p. 51. It is summarized in 
Pratigakhya, I, 4; see my Sankhayana Aranyaka, p. 45, n. 3; UI, 1, 2, n. 8. 

2 Acyosthantarabhyam is clearly a case of irregular Sandhi, aS Atharvaveda, IX, I, 1: 
prihivyantdriksat ; Ill, 2,4, n. 11; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatzk, I, 316, 317; Macdonell, 
Vedic Grammar, pp. 64, 65; F A. O.S., XXV, 99-102. 

’ It is the perfect form; e.g., Sayana says, in the Samhita in agnim ife the ife is 
svarita + pracita, in the Pada they are both anudatta (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 90; 
Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 78, 0. 7). 

* Sayana explains nirdistau bhujasadysau piurvottarasabdau yasmin. Max Miller thinks 
it may refer to the arms of the words being cut off, as it were, or with two arms stretched 
out, the two words forming, as it were, two arms to one body. In the following acyosthah is 
clearly the reading, though S and R in the commentary vary, reading acyostha and halo 
The Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 8, has the correct form. 


KEITH R 


242 AITAREYA ARANYAKA YI, 1, 3- 


He who desires proper food should recite the Nirbhuja, he who desires heaven 
should recite the Pratrnna, and he who désires both should recite the Ubhaya- 
mantarena. Then if another should rebuke him who recites the Nirbhuja, he 
should reply, ‘ Thou hast offended the earth, the deity. The earth, the deity, will 
strike thee.” If another should rebuke him who recites the Pratrnna, he should 
reply, ‘Thou hast offended heaven, the deity. The heaven, the deity, will strike 
thee.” If another should rebuke him who recites the Ubhayamantarena, he 
should reply, ‘Thou hast offended the sky, the deity. The sky, the deity, will 
strike thee.’ Whatever he says to him® or says in reply to him, that shall 
assuredly be fulfilled. But to a Brahmin one must not say anything save what 
is auspicious. Only in exceeding ° prosperity may one Say ill to a Brahmin. 
¢ Not even in exceeding prosperity may one say ill to a Brahmin, let Brahmins be 
honoured,’ so says Siiravira Mandikeya. 

4. Then come the imprecations.! Let him know that breath? is the beam. 
If any one rebuke him who has become breath as the beam, then if he thinks 
himself strong,’ he says, ‘I have grasped the beam, breath ; thou canst not over- 
come me who grasp the beam, breath. Let him then say, ‘ The beam, breath, 


5 byuvan va bruvantam va. This may perhaps be taken as I have taken it as equivalent 
to, ‘whether he speak to him or speak in reply.’ This is quite a simple construction. But 
it is not so taken by the commentators. Sayana renders bruvan as equivalent to bruvantam, 
and takes the second part as vd abruvantam. ‘This is followed by Max Miiller. Anandatirtha 
interprets it as bruvan va abruvan va bruvantam va abruvantam va. For similar curses, cf. 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 10, and Chandogya Upanisad, II, 22, 3. 

6 Sayana takes this as permitting a curse on a Brahmin in the case of great wealth (such 
wealth being sinful). Anandatirtha denies this, and carries on the negative. Thus Siravira’s 
dictum confirms this. This is less probable. Max Miiller accepts Sayana’s view that the man 
is to say, ‘ Let them be known to Brahmins.’ It is simpler to take it as in the text. For a-cana, cle 
V,.3, 33 Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp. 544 84: 3 Channing, /. A. O. S., XUI, xviii; Jaiminiya 
Brahmana, II, 77 (J. A. 0. S., XV, 240): na de sarirani cana grham prapsyanti, and Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana, 1V, 14, 5. The rule that za precedes seems true for the Brahmana prose. 

The two accus. with »/éra (for bra, cf. Bloomfield, ALT Ps jL8or; Wackernagel, 
Altindische Grammatik, 1, 182; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 36) are said by Delbriick 
(Altindische Syntax, p. 1745 cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, p. 8 ; Gaedicke, Der 
Accusativ im Veda, p. 265) not to be found in the Brahmana language, which this passage 
disproves. Bra is expressly mentioned as governing two accusatives in the Karika cited by 
the KaSika Vitti on Panini, I, 4, 51, where a much more marked case than that here (where the 
second ace, is merely a pronoun) is adduced, viz. mdyavakay dharmam brite. 

1 Sayana takes this as a noun of agency, like nirbhujapravadah in XII, 1, 3. Anandatirtha 
says, dtmano jnanasamarthyanusarenoktiprakara ucyanta itt Sesah. 

2 Cf, Sakalya’s view, III, 1, 2. The metaphor is from house building. The opt. below is 
clearly indefinite (like the subj. in Latin and opt. in Greek) ; see IIT, 2, 1, n. 1; and see my note 
on the Kathaka, 7. R. 4. S., 1909. For vamsa, see Zimmer, Alt. Led., p. 150. 

8 The construction is curiously changed below to the accusative, unless, as is possible, 


the other person is meant. But see S¢. Petersburg Dict. s.v. man 3. The nominative is, 


-III, 1, 5 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 243 


will forsake thee.’ But if he thinks himself weak, he should say to him, ‘ Thou 
hast not been able to overcome he who have been fain‘ to grasp the beam, 
breath. Breath, the beam, will forsake thee. Whatever he says to him or says 
in reply to him, that shall assuredly be fulfilled. But to a Brahmin one must not 
say anything except what is auspicious. Only in exceeding prosperity may one 
say ill to a Brahmin. ‘Not even in exceeding prosperity may one say ill to 
a Brahmin, let Brahmins be honoured,’ so says Siiravira Mandikeya.§ 

5. Now the reciters of the Nirbhuja say, ‘The former syllable is the former 
half, the latter the latter half. The space between the former half and the latter 
half is the union.’ He, who knows thus this union, obtains children, cattle, 
fame, glory, and the world of heaven. He lives all his days. Now Hrasva 
Mandikeya says, ‘We that recite the Nirbhuja say that the former syllable is the 
former half and the latter syllable the latter half, but that the union! is the 
space between the former and latter halves in so far as thereby one produces 
the union and distinguishes accented and unaccented and separates the mora 
and what is not.’ He, who knows thus this union, obtains children, cattle, fame, 
glory, and the world of heaven. He lives all his days. Now his son, 


however, quite regular, see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 268; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, §§ 208 and 99. Cf. also the idiom kyrsnuo (&c.) riipam kr (Taittirlya Samhita, V, 2, 
6,5; VI, 1, 3,1; 6,5; 2,4, 13,45 7,15 VII, 1, 6, 2; 3; 4; Brahmana, I, 1, 3, 3; Aitareya 
Brahmana, VI, 35, see Weber, /ud. Stud., XIII, 111). The construction with the nom. (cf. 
Delbriick, Vedische Syntax, pp. 104sq.; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 33) is no 
doubt rare in later Sanskrit, but I have found it in an independent passage in Anandatirtha, 
and the analogous use of the gerund is found in the Ramayana, &c. Cf. the curious phrase, 
Mann, VIII, 91: eho ham asmity atmanam-manyase. Chaknuvam in Rajendralala is merely an 
assimilated 2 altered into anusvdra. The error of B in reading chaknuvantam shows how little 
dependence can be put on this MS. As to dha, cf. III, 2, 4,n. 10. mam is here in apposition 
to pranam, but I agree with Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 136, that the strict 
rule (Bohtlingk, Z. D. M. G., XLI, 182) cannot be proved for Vedic or Sanskrit. 

4 Samadhitsisam is of course the aorist indic. of the desiderative of the root dkd. Max 
Miiller translates samadhitsisantam as a participle, but this is impossible. Cf. Whitney, Sanskrat 
Grammar, § 1035 a, Roots, &c., p. 249, J. A. O.S., XIII, lxx. 

5 These curses are just intelligible, but the curses in Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 8 and 9 
offer serious difficulties. As the text stands the first case is that of rebuking another, when if 
strong the rebuker (this must be the subject) says to the other, ‘ Thou hast grasped the breath or 
beam but canst not overcome me who am fain;’ if weak, he says, ‘ Thou hast sought to grasp, 
but couldst not. In the second case the sense must be (reading Jarvah or making param mean 
the subject of the main clause) the man who holds that raya is vayisa says to his rebuker, 
‘I have been fain to grasp the beam, breath, thou canst not overcome one who is fain,’ 
if the rebuker is strong. If not, he says, ‘Thou hast sought to grasp, but couldst not.’ 
Other renderings are quite possible and the text can be altered (e.g. read samadham in VII, 8), 
but it is not possible to be certain of the sense ; see my trans., pp. 44-46. 

1 i.e. this view is differentiated in one or two points from the view above. Cf. Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, VII, 11-13. 

R22 


244 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 1, 5- 


Madhyama, his son by his wife Pratibodhi,? says, ‘One pronounces these syllables by 
their letters, neither separating entirely nor uniting absolutely,* and the mora 
which is between the former and latter halves and indicates the union is the 
sliding. I consider therefore the sliding to be the union.” <A Rsi says this 
also (RV., II, 23, 16), ‘O Brhaspati, they know nought higher than the sliding.’ 
He, who knows thus this union, obtains children, cattle, fame, glory, and the 
world of heaven. He lives all his days. 

6. Taruksya’ says, ‘The union is formed by the Brhat and Rathantara Samans. 
The Rathantara is speech, the Brhat breath.’ By these two, speech and breath, the 


2 Metronymics like this were inevitable where polygamy was possible. They do not prove 
matriarchy ‘or anything similar. A similar instance is the famous Krsna Devakiputra of 
Chandogya Upanisad, III, 17 (not 7 as in Max Miiller), 6, who is the subject of an interesting 
discussion in Garbe’s translation of the Bhagavadgita, and cf. 7. R.A.S., 1907, PP- 976 sq. ; 
1908, p. 173,n. See also Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. Litt., 1, 169. A child sometimes, if 
illegitimate, was named after its mother, e. g. Satyakama Jabala, Chandogya Upanisad, IV, 4. For 
a long list of metronymics of a curious character see Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, VI, 4, 30-32. 
The reading of B is a mere error in an inaccurate MS. Max Miiller suggests Pratibodhi as the 
correct form, and this seems the form in the Sankhayana. For the 7, cf. however Macdonell, 
Vedic Grammar, p. 75. Pratibodha is a recognized name in the Gana vidadt. For other 
metronymics, cf. Fleet, 7. R. A. S., 1995, Pp- 637, 638; Hopkins, J- A. 0. Sis XIII, 105, 370, 2.5 
for a discussion of matriarchy as affecting the Aryan Hellenes, see Farnell, Avchzv f. Religions- 
wissenschaft, 1904, pp. 70 sq., and reff. 

8 The reading is clearly anehkikurvan. LEkikurvan is an easy but bad blunder. Sayana 
explains that you must not (1) pronounce /ava it as tava+it, nor (2) as ¢avat, but (3) as 
tavet, This cannot be meant. It is really intended that you should pronounce so as to give 
a sound of az together. Compare the fact that in the so-called elision of Latin both elements 
were distinctly preserved in pronunciation (cf. Lindsay, Latin Language, p.144), as in modern 
Spanish. Cf. also Deussen, Sechzag Upanishads, p. 215. This passage is of particular interest 
as confirming the notice in the Rgveda Pratisakhya, III, 8 (200) (Max Miiller’s edit., p. Ixv) 
that Mandukeya laid down the use of the circumflex in the Praglista Sandhi (e.g. @+7, &c.) 
as well as in the Abhinihita Sandhi (e or 0+@), and the exceptional cases of z+2, in which 
the circumflex is regularly laid down, and the fact that the a is not merely elided generally 
recognized by the PratiSakhyas (Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 324; Macdonell, 
Vedic Grammar, p. 104). So Panini, VIII, 2, 6, has svarito vanudatte padadau, and see 
Wackernagel, I, 292, 293; Macdonell, p. 104. The requirement of the circumflex is only 
intelligible on the axekikurvan theory. 

The form anekikurvan is interesting. 27+ /ky is found in the Satapatha Brahmana, see 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1093, and contrast III, 2, 3: atkya bhavayan ; ekibhu occurs in 
the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, IV, 4, 2 in the sense of dying, and cf. Maitreya Upanisad 
(Max Miiller, S.B.2£., XV, xlvi) tama ehibhavati parasmin; cf. also Jacob, Concordance, 
p. 268. For RV., II, 23, 16, cf. Geldner, Vedische Studien, II, 68. 

1 Taruksya is more probable than Tarksya because the alteration to Tarksya is natural, 
the word occurring above on I, 5, 2. Possibly Taruksya is merely a case of Svarabhakti, cf. 
Wackemagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 56 sq. It is clear that Sayana read Taruksya as he 
derives it from Taruksa. The AnandaSrama corrects it into Trksa without warrant. The 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 19, has Tarksya; cf. Kausitaki Brahmana, XXX, 9. 

2 These Samans are used in the Prstha Stotra of the Agnistoma. 


-III, 1, 6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 245 


union is made.’ Taruksya guards $ (his teacher’s) cows for a year for the sake of 
this Upanisad. For it alone does Taruksya guard the cows fora year. A Rsi 
says (RV.,X, 181, 1; 2), ‘Vasistha bore hither the Rathantara, Bharadvaja carried 
hither the Brhat of Agni.’* He, who thus knows this union, obtains children, 
cattle, fame, glory, and the world of heaven. He lives out all his days» Kauntha- 
ravya says, ‘ Speech is united with breath, breath with the blowing air, the air with 
the All-gods, the All-gods with the world of heaven, the world of heaven with 
brahman. This is the gradual union, He, who knows this gradual union, 
obtains children, cattle, fame, glory, and the world of heaven, just as does this 
union. If he for the sake of another or for his own sake recites (the union) 
let him know as he is about to recite, that this union has gone up to heaven, 


S This is a quaint piece of human nature. There are plenty of parallels, cf. Chandogya 
Upanisad, IV, 4. The omission of the second sentence in B is clearly a slip, showing how 
untrustworthy is the MS. when uncorroborated. For the xémittasaptami, cf. Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, I, 3, 2; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 77, 43; Delbriick, Altindische 
Syntax, p.g2; Geldner (Vedische Studien, I11, 33, n.) finds such a loc. in RV., I, 6, 9: sdm 
asminn ritjate girak. Raksayate is a hist. pres. The middle here gives clearly the idea of 
personal interest (cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 166b; Delbriick, Altindische 
Syntax, pp. 236 sq.). For the hist. pres. cf. Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, p. 502; Speijer, 
Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, §172; Sanskrit Syntax, § 327; Brugmann, Griech. Gramm.?, 
§ 156, and especially his paper, Berichte der Kéonigl. sichs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 
1883, pp. 169 sq.; Giles, Comp. Phil., § 547. The present tense essentially denotes what is 
continuous or progressive (cf. Monro, Homeric Grammar, pp. 62, 63) as opposed to the 
momentary, and that whether the verb has the sense of an action or a state. The historic use 
with a particle of time is Homeric, but not the simple historic present, though it is found 
in the earliest Latin (e.g. the epitaph of Lucius Cornelius Scipio (B.C. 298), cepzt, subigit 
omne(m) Loucanam opsidesque abdoucit) and must be Indo-European. 

The acc. of time is common, see Introd., p. 56; Delbriick, A/timdische Syntax, pp. 170, 
171; Gaedicke, Der Accusativ im Veda, pp. 175 sq.; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, § 28; Hopkins, 4.7. P., XXIV, 7. 

* These Samans are required to accompany the important Pravargya. Cf. my Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, p. 48, n. 6. 

5 abhivyaharsan is an extraordinary form. Whitney, 7. 4.0.S., XIII, Ixx, takes it as an 
aor. ind., but I cannot make sense of this. To take it as at first seems most natural as 
a mistake for a future participle (“harsyan) is faced with the difficulty that /27 gives only 
harisy- as the future in accordance with the established rule (Panini, VII, 2, 70), that roots 
in y take ‘intermediate z’ (Max Miiller, Sanskrit Grammar’, § 332), and that even if hars 
were assumed, 4ars would need explanation, though s and sy are constantly confused in MSS. 
(e. g. aratsyam and aratsam, Maitrayani Samhita, IV, p. 138°; Whitney, P. Ad. O..S., Oct., 1887, 
p. xxv; aisisyam and aisisam, Chandogya Upanisad, I, 11, 2; Whitney, P.A.0.5., Oct., 1890, 
p- lii; #ths@na and nihsydna, Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 16; Aufrecht, Aztareya Brahmana, 
p- 431, above I, 1, 5), apraksyah and apraksah, Chandogya Upanisad, Max Miiller, S. 2. Z,, 
XV, xiv, n. 1; Knauer, Manava-Grhya Sutra, p. xxxv, and occasional longs are formed, e. g. 
in saksye, Atharvayeda, II, 27, 5, for saksye, &c., asaksz (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 887). 
There remains only to take abhivydharsan as an aorist participle (without of course any past 
sense), ‘ while reciting ;’ cf. e.g. RV., II, 4,7: dhdksad urvim, But such forms are also very 


246 AITAREYA ARANYAKA In; 1776— 


and that so it will be with those who know it (and become) gods. So will it 
come to pass. He, who thus knows this union, obtains children, cattle, fame, 
glory, and the world of heaven. He lives out all his days. Paficalacanda ° says, 
‘The union is speech.’ ‘By speech are the Vedas composed, by speech the 
metres. By speech friends are united, by speech all beings, therefore is speech 
all this’ Now? when one repeats or speaks, breath is in speech, speech then 
swallows breath. When one is silent or in sleep, speech is in breath, breath 
then swallows speech, They swallow each other. Speech indeed is the mother, 
breath the son. A Rsi says (RV., X, 119, 4), ‘ There is one bird,’ he enters the 
sky; he sees this whole world ; with ripe mind I beheld him nigh at hand; the 
mother absorbs him, and he the mother.’ He, who thus knows this union, obtains 
children, cattle, fame, glory, and the world of heaven. He lives out all his days. 


rare. The form adhtharyate in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (=abhiharyati) may be explained 
perhaps by the cases of irregular lengthening above, and by the (Epic) use of middle termi- 
nations for active (J. A. O. S., XXV, 132), tather than as a causative passive as in the Dictt. In 
Atharvaveda, XVIII, 2, 58 the editions both read widhaksdn and the pseudo-Sayana apparently 
so read, though he renders by ¢cham, but the parallel passages, RV., X, 16, 7 and Taittirlya 
Aranyaka, VI, 1, 4, have both the correct vidhaksyén (Whitney, 77 vanslation of Atharvaveda, 
p. 846), and the accent proves clearly that vidhaksdz is incorrect. Macdonell (Vedic Grammar, 
Pp: 57, 0. 1) suggests that in the case of yokse, vidhaksdn, sakse, meksamt, the y has dropped 
phonetically; cf. J.4.0.5., XO aA: 

sasvat tatha syat might of course mean, ‘may it ever endure’ (as taken by Max Miller), 
but the usual use of the phrase in the Aitareya Brahmana supports the rendering above 
adopted, e.g. II, 21,2: ya enam tatra briydd vaca vajrena yasamanasya pranan vyagat prana 
enam hasyatiti Sasvat tatha syat; 22, 3; 28,3353 295 7; 1V, 7,7; VI, 23, 135 26,6; Delbriick, 
Altindische Syntax, p. 343, 0.1 (for the construction with vara there mentioned, cf. Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, I, 8). Eggeling on Satapatha Brahmana, V, 4, 3,2 (S.8.£., XLI, 98, n. 2), now 
adopts ‘wohl’ as the regular equivalent of fafvat at any rate in the Brahmanas, and see also 
Oertel’s note on Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 64, 3. Sayana takes widyat as a part of 
the protasis. In any case the sense is very much the same. 

sa or sa yadi is of course not a particle but the demonstrative. The cases in which 
Max Miiller (S.B.Z., XV, 110, n. 7, On Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 4, 7) and Delbriick 
(Altindische Syntax, pp. 215, 216), following the S¢. Petersburg Dict., find sa as a particle are 
merely instances of an ordinary anacoluthon, and do not prove that sa was ever felt as a 
particle. Precisely the same idiom is common in early English, and no one there thinks of 
‘he’ as a particle, see Kellner, English Syntax, pp- 68 sq. Correct Caland, Ueber des Rit. Sutra 
des Baudh adyana, p. 46. 

® Pajicalacanda must mean Canda (no doubt Prakrit for Candra, cf. Atharvaveda, II, 14, 
1 (Canda)) of the Paficalas, as Sayana takes it. The Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 23, knows a king, 
Durmukha Paicala. 

™ This is the proof of the nature of speech as other than and distinct from breath. Their 
activities are different. Anyo ’nyam is very interesting, as already it tends to become a separate 
word, though it still is here two words, see Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatzik, I, i, 321 sq. 

® This verse is more misconstrued even than usual, He enters the sky,.it is said, as wind ; 
the world he sees as fraua; he is seen close in the heart (Sayana). On the a rih of the RV. 
verse, cf. Hopkins, J. A. 0. S., XXVIII, 125 sq. 


~IIl, 2,1 TRANSLATION: AND NOTES 247 


Then comes the Prajapati union.’ The first half is the wife, the latter half is the 
husband. The union is the son. The act of union is the begetting. This 
union is Aditi. For Aditi is all whatever there is, father, mother, child, and 
begetting. A Rsi” says this also (RV., I, 89, ro), ‘Aditi is mother, is father, 
is son. He, who knows thus this union, obtains children, cattle, fame, glory, and 
the world of heaven."' He lives out all his days. 


ADHYAYA 2. 


Sthavira Sakalya says that breath is a beam,‘ and that as the other beams rest 
on the main beam of the house, the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the senses, 


® Proclaimed by Prajapati (Sayana), but see Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 16. Cf. Taittiriya 
Upanisad, I, 3, 5, and on III, 1, 2. Prayanana occurs in the concrete sense in RV., III, 29, 1 
(Oldenberg, S.B. Z., XLVI, 305). 

© This verse is cited and explained in full in Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 41, which 
is in fact parallel. For Aditi, cf. especially Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, pp. 203 Sq-5 
Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, pp. 120 sq. . 

4 Taittiriya Upanisad, 1. c., 7, continues after brahmavarcasena, annadyena suvargena lokena, 
where S. Sitarama renders ‘all kinds of food’. Cf. for this section Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII, 
14-16; 18; 19. 

1 This Adhyaya (cf. Sankhayana Aranyaka, VIII, 1) deals with meditations on the several 
classes of letters. The construction yatha-syu—samahitah is noteworthy. For the verb under- 
stood cannot be considered as other than an indicative, so that the optative in the first 
clause must be indefinite. The same force seems to be found in V, 1, 4: pratisthapayati— 
yada—sramyet ; Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 16: tad yatha vraje pasin avasyjyargalestke 
parivyayet evam evaitaih padinusangath sarvan haman ubhayatah parigrhyatman dhaite, 
VIL, 1, &c.; Aitareya Brahmana, V, 34, 4: 4a yady etesam trayanam ehamcid akimam abhya- 
bhavet tasyasti Vamadavasya stotre prayascittih, Manu, VIU, 3, 1; 78 (other examples in 
Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 349). So with ydtha, Delbriick, p. 350; with ydtra, &c., 
ibid., p. 351. So in krtakrtyah syuh in Sayana’s introductions to the RV., curiously 
misunderstood by Peterson (Rgveda Handbook, p. 126). The use differs distinctly from but 
is easily derived from the use of the opt. with either an opt. (potential) (cf. the use in Avestan, 
Jackson, P. A.O.S., April, 1896, p. 187; Delbriick, Vergl. Synt., 11, 372) or an opt. (imperative) 
in the apodosis, since in either of these cases the future sense is primarily present, whereas 
when an indic. forms the apodosis the sense is clearly merely indefinite. The use, especially 
as here in sentence, is common in Homer, where the subj. with primary and the opt. with 
secondary tenses have both this sense (cf. Monro, Homeric Grammar”, pp. 258 8q,, 269 $q-), 
is found in the subj. in early Latin prose as well as verse in which Greek imitation is always 
possible (e.g. Cato Maior, de Mor., ingenium prope uti ferrum est: st exerceas conteritur, 
nisi. exerceas rubiginem contrahit), in early English (Kellner, English Syntax, p. 239), &c. 

The use of the pass. part. with or without copula (Introd., pp- 64, 65) is significant. 
Delbriick (Altindische Syntax, pp- 394, 395), followed by Speijer (Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, 
§ 176), regards the use as corresponding both to imperf. and aor., but while of course it is 
dangerous to dogmatize on matters which ultimately depend on a delicate analysis of a language 
so remote as Vedic Sanskrit, it seems to me that there is a very clear distinction between 
(1) the aor., the tense of which has just happened; (2) the imperf., the tense of narration ; 


‘ 


248 AITAREYA ARANYAKA ie 


the body, the whole self, rests on this breath. ‘Of this self the truth is like the 
sibilants, the bones the mutes, the marrow the vowels, and flesh and blood, the 
fourth part,? the semi-vowels,’ so says Hrasva Mandikeya. We have,* however, 
learned that the number was three. Of those three, bones, marrow, and joints, 
there are three hundred and sixty (parts) on this side and on that side. These 
make up seven hundred and twenty. Seven hundred and twenty are the days 
and nights of the year. This self‘ then, which consists of sight, hearing, metre, 
mind, and speech, is like the days in number.? He, who knows thus this self, 
which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like the days, 
obtains union, likeness, and nearness to the days,’ becomes rich in sons and 
cattle, and lives out all his days. 

2. Then comes Kauntharavya. There are three hundred and sixty syllables,’ 
three hundred and sixty sibilants, three hundred and sixty unions. What we have 
called syllables are the days; what we have called sibilants are the nights ; what 
we have called unions are the junctions of the nights and days. So far as regards 


and (3) these forms with participles which express a completed action whose results persist 
into the present. Of course many actions can be regarded from either point of view and be 
differently described, but that is not to say that the effect is not different when different forms 
are used, To take some of Delbriick’s instances, RV., I, 81,5: dé tvavan Indra kd§ cand 
nd jaté nd janisyate, the sense is not either ‘was born’ (imperf.) or ‘has just been born’ 
(aor.), but ‘exists, having been born’, in Taittiriya Samhita, I, 6, 9, 3: té devi aviduh 
pracyuto vai parastat sémd "tha no nagachati gandharvé vai pary amosisur iti, which 
Delbriick gives as a case of the part. corresponding to an aor., the sense is clearly different 
between the continuing absence of the Soma and the one definite past act of the Gandharvas 
in stealing it. The real tendency of the Mantra and Brahmana is to assimilate the part. to 
a present, though, as is the case with a// the expressions of past time in the Mantras, 
occasionally it may have a narrative sense (e.g. RV., III, 48, 22: Prinya dugdhdm sakrt 
payah). The present sense—yet with the past action—is very clearly seen in cases like 
Brhaddevata, VIII, 47: prathamayam rei stutah\ardharce dyaus ca bhiumts ca Asvinau 
cottare tatah \\ It is not stéyante, for the actual praising is over (astawt is regularly used of 
the Rsi), and yet it does not mean ‘ were praised’. 

2 Max Miiller takes amyat as ‘the rest’, but it rather means, the other, the fourth. 

8 This view is apparently Sakalya’s (Sdyana), the first three being his, to which Mandikeya 
adds a fourth. The threefold view, with ghosa for svara, vyafijana for sparsa, is found in II, 2, 
4, where the difference of terms denotes a difference in dates. 

¢ Anandatirtha explains all this of Visnu, as usual. 

5 The symbolism of the year is common in all religions, cf., e.g., Farnell, Cults of the Greek 
States, 1V, 284, 285. 

Sach the Khila MS. (B) at end (fol. 191* = Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, 
p- 168): etasdm evd devdtandm sarstitam sayujyam salokdtam asnute yd evdm vidvin Svadhyaydm 
adhité. For the compound, cf. Wackernagel, 4/tindische Grammatz, II, i, 149, 150. 

* Syllables are vowels, sibilants consonants, and their unions the Sandhi (Sadyana). Sayana 
takes sasfi as separate, to explain how it comes to be =360, But though the construction 
is illogical it is regular in the Brahmanas (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 480b; cf. for 
Prakrit, Pischel, Prakrit Grammar, p. 409), and sastz should not be printed apart as in S. 


-III, 2, 3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 249 


the gods. Now as regards the self. The syllables which we have explained with 
reference to the gods are with reference to the self bones; the sibilants which 
we have explained with reference to the gods are with reference to the self 
marrow; the marrow is indeed the real breath, for it is seed, and without breath 
seed is not effused. Or if it is effused without breath, it will decay and will not 
produce. The unions which we have explained with reference to the gods are 
with reference to the self joints. Of these three,? bones, marrow, and joints, 
there are five hundred and forty parts on this side and on that. They make one 
thousand and eighty, and one thousand and eighty*® are the rays of the sun. 
They make the dyAa/i verses and this day. Thus the self* which consists of 
sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like the syllables in number. He, who 
knows thus this self, which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as 
like the syllables, obtains union, likeness, and nearness to the syllables, becomes 
rich in sons and cattle, and lives out all his days. ° 

3. Badhva! says, ‘There are four persons, the person of the body, the 
person of the metres, the person of the Veda, and the great person. That which 
we have called the person of the body is the corporeal self. Its essence is the 
incorporeal conscious self. That which we have called the person of the metres 
is the collection of letters. Its essence is the letter ‘a’.2 That which we have 
called the person of the Veda is that by which one knows the Vedas, Rgveda, 
Yajurveda, and Samaveda. Its essence is the Brahman priest. Therefore should 
one choose a Brahman® priest who is full of Jrahman and can discern flaws 


It is curious, as S points out, that no comment is made on the similar passage in III, 2, 1. 
For Kauntha®, cf. the Dhatupatha root kunth which Franke (Vienna Orient. Journ., VIII, 
323) compares with Greek «vAdds, Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 170. The name 
seems not to occur elsewhere, except in the parallel passage in Sankhayana Aranyaka, VIII, 2. 

2 The words inserted by B~are quite out of place here, and show how little that MS. 
can be relied upon. For majjfam, cf. Atharvaveda, II, 12, 7; Roth, Z. D. M. G., XLVIII, 102. 
For the construction, cf. Baudhayana Dharma Sitra, II, 17, 11, 37; J.R.A.S., 1909: contra 
Bohtlingk, Sachs. Ber., 1892, p. 197. t 

8 This extraordinary doctrine Sayana can only support by the Atharvana passage (Prasna 
Upanisad, I, 8= Maitri Upanisad, VI, 8; Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 1002 a) sahasra- 
rasmih $atadha vartamanah pranah prajanam udayaty esa siryah, which he explains includes 
by denotation the eighty. There are 1080 syllables in thirty 4rha/is. 

* Visnu according to Anandatirtha, who has considerable difficulty in working out the details 
of his interpretation here. 

1 Badhva is undoubtedly correct; Badhyah is merely a slip of Rajendralala’s, and did not 
deserve record in Monier-Williams’ Dict. Vats( y)ah is read in Sankhayana Aranyaka, VIII, 3. 

2 Cf, II, 3, 6. The precision in the use of the aorist is to be noted, cf. Introd., p. 60. 

8 The Brahman priest is required to guard the sacrifice and sits in the South (the place 
of the dead), Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 5, 8,7; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch, Litt., 1, 141, Nn. 2. 
He is not here in any way connected with the Atharvaveda (the later connection is probably 
due to his employment (Winternitz, p. 139, n. 2) in the household ritual which is found mainly in 


250 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III, 2, 3- 


in the sacrifice. ‘That which we have called the great person is the year which 
causes some things to fall together* and others to grow up. Its essence is the 
sun. Let one know® that the incorporeal conscious self and the sun are the same. 
Therefore the sun appears to each and every man. A Rsi says (RV., I, 115, 1); 
‘The bright face of the gods hath arisen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 


the Atharvaveda) as the Atharvan texts always try to make out (see Bloomfield, S. B. Z., XLVI, 
lviii sq.; Atharvaveda, pp. 32 sq-; Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, pp. 193 sq.). Kurvita 
yo-pasyet is quite a clear instance of a clause of characteristic, ‘such a priest as can see.’ 
In these cases the force is slightly different from two other senses of the same origin, purpose, 
and result. Delbriick (Alindische Syntax, p. 339) states that clauses of purpose cannot be 
found in prose, but quotes Atharvaveda, VIII, Io, 9: tydm evd tdd veda yad ubhdya upajivema ; 
Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 5,1, 13: dé ude sé manusyesv Agnér-yapniya tanir asti yayes|va- 
smikam ékah syad iti, which resemble in essentials this passage. The usage is perhaps more 
clearly developed in Latin®, but it is wrong to say (as do Allen and Greenough, Latix 
Grammar, p. 343) that the clause of characteristic is a development peculiar to Latin, and it 
is doubtful whether the use is to be traced to a definitely conditional origin and not rather 
derived directly from the opt. meaning as a weak future (Goodwin, Greek Moods and Tenses, 
pp- 376 sq.) or as expressing supposition (cf. Monro, Homeric Grammar’, pp. 290 sq., and 
p. 276, ‘The opt. with ey is especially common after a principal Clause of megative 
meaning (in which case the consequence is necessarily matter of mere szzffosition): as— 
Il. §, 192 immo: 8 od wapéact Kal Gppara Tov « émBainv, &c. The pure opt. occurs in J/. 22, 
348: ob« é060° ds... dwadddxou.’ To derive such a sense from an opt. of wish (Delbriick’s old 
theory, Syxt. Forsch., 1, 13, modified in Synt. Forsch., IV, 115, Altindische Syntax, p. 302) 
seems quite impossible. The use as a mild imperative is easily derived from a weak future 
or supposition, and the use as an interrogative follows naturally (cf. Introd., pp. 62, 63). For 
the indefinite use, cf. III, 2, 1, n. 1, and Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 17; IV, 3, 32, &c. 

For brahmistham (which as brdhmistha occurs already in the Taittiriya Samhita), cf. 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 468 e. The formation is of course obviously secondary. 

4 Aikya bhavayan is a strange phrase, for if aikyd is what it seems to be, an instrumental 
in -d, then this comparatively late word is found in a remarkable form, though not at all 
impossible, cf. madhyé (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 327 c), or it may be a dative in -é 
(for this cf. Latin d, Lindsay, Latin Language, p. 386, and see Aufrecht, Festeruss an Bohtlingk, 
pp- 1sq.; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 59; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 280; 
Pischel and Geldner, Vedésche Studien, I, 61; Oldenberg, S. 2. 2., XLVI, 28). Whitney 
(Sanskrit Grammar, § 1091) takes the word as parallel to formations like akkhalik¢tya (or 
akhkh®, RV.), masmasa kuru (Vajasaneyi and Taittiriya Samhitas), &c., and compares Aitareya 
Brahmana (I, 14, see Aufrecht, p. 430) axrnakartoh ; Satapatha Brahmana, bala kuryat (roast on 
a spit). Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatzk, II, i, 194, takes the same view with some doubt. 

5 This is of course the most common doctrine in the Upanisads. Sayana quotes for the 
last part the Taittirlya passage (which I have not so far traced): asa@v adttyah sarvah prajah 
pratyudann udeti tasmat sarva eva manyante maim pratyudagad itt\ On this passage of 
the RV., cf. Whitney, Zxanslation of Atharvaveda, p. 725 (on XIII, 2, 38); Deussen, Ges- 
chichte, 1, i, 213. Sayana’s commentary on it in Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 7, 6, and II, 13, 1 
differs completely from his comm. here and can hardly be by the same hand. aii) 





a . s* *, * « 
Compare, e. g., Caesar, Bell, Civ., ii, 15 wade agger comportari posset, nihil erat reliquum ; 


Cicero, ad Ham., v. 12 neque enim tu ts es, gut nescias. Cf. Sadvim$a Brahmana, II, 10; 
Maitrayani Samhita, IJ, 1, 3. : 


-IIl, 2, 4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 251 


It hath filled heaven and earth and the sky. The sun is the self of all that stands 
and moves’ ‘This I regard as the regular® Samhita as composed, thus says 
Badhva. For the Bahvrcas consider him in the great hymn, the Adhvaryus 
in the fire, the Chandogas in the Mahavrata rite. They see him in this earth, 
in heaven, in the air, in the ether, in the waters, in plants, in trees, in.the moon, 
in the constellations, in all beings. Him they call drahman. The self which 
consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, is like the year in number. 
He,’ who recites to another the self, which consists of sight, hearing, metre, 
mind, and speech, and is like the year, 

4. To him the Vedas yield no milk; he has no part in what his teacher 
has taught him. He knows not the path of virtue. A Rsi says this also 
(RV., X, 71, 6) ‘He who forsakes the friend who knows his friends,’ in 
speech he has no part, What he hears, he hears in vain, he knows not the 
path of virtue.’ This means that he has no part in what he has studied and that 
he does not know the path of virtue. So a man who knows this should not? 
lay the fire for another, nor sing the Samans of the Mahavrata for another, nor 
recite the Sastras of that day for another. Only® may he recite for a father or 
a teacher, for that is done for oneself. We have said‘ that this incorporeal 
conscious self and that sun are one and the same. Where these two are 
separated,® the sun is seen like the moon,‘ its rays do not manifest themselves, 


® All the above must be Badhva’s view, just as TII, 2, 2 gave Kauntharavya’s views. The 
following alludes to the fact that the Adhvaryu’s mystic speculations centre in the Agnicayana, 
cf. Eggeling, S. B. Z., XIII, xxiv. 

7 The section runs on in a way that cannot be early. V, 1,1 and 2 is precisely similar, 
and the present section division must remain of doubtful (though early) date. The divisions of 
the Sankhayana are similarly illogical. For the loc., ef. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 205. 

1 Sayana points out that Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 3; II, 15, reads in this verse sakhividam, 
a point overlooked in Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. zoo», Sayana’s reference does tend 
to show that he also wrote a Taittirlya Aranyaka commentary, which on other grounds 
might be deemed very doubtful (cf. III, 2, 3, n- 5). 

2 ie. act as Adhvaryu, Udgatr or Hotr priest. It is impossible to square the total pro- 
hibition here with V,1, 5, which (see n. 5) contemplates a breach of the rule, but it agrees 
with the opinion of ‘some’ (eke) in V, 3, 3, see n. I on that passage. 

3 A frequent exception. CE W535. By ie Fe 

* TII, 2,3. The relevance of this passage is not obvious. Sayana takes it as a reflexion 
induced by the idea of the attainment of brahman in the brief space of life, whence omens 
as to the duration of life are inserted. ‘The connexion of sun and self is elsewhere used to 
give omens of death. In Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, V, 5, 2, the sun appears as white only 
to the man about to die. The parallel passages in the Sankhayana are VIII, 7, and XI, 3; 4. 

5 This is not very logical, as there is no reason why the separation of the two should 
be a sign of death. The rest of the signs are clearly old folklore ideas pressed into service. 
For the extensive literature on Vedic superstitions, see Hillebrandt, Aztwal-Litteratur, 
pp- 167 sq., 183-185 ; Hatfield, Awsanasadbhutani, J. A. 0.5: XV, 208, &c.; Bloomfield, 


252 AITAREYA ARANYAKA eee 


the sky is red like madder, the wind is not retained, his head smells like 
a raven’s nest, and a man should know that his self? is gone and that he will 
not have long to live. Let him do then whatever he considers must be done, 
and recite seven verses beginning, ‘What is near, what is far’ (RV., 1X, 67, 21-27), 
the single verse, ‘Of the ancient seed’ (RV., VIII, 6, 30), six verses beginning, 
‘Where purifying Brahman’ (RV., IX, 113, 6-11), and the single verse, ‘ We 
from the darkness’ (RV., I, 50, 10). Next when the sun is seen pierced, and 
looks like the nave of a cart-wheel, or he sees his shadow pierced, let him know 
that this is so. Next when he sees himself in a mirror or in the water with 
a crooked head ® or without a head, or when his pupils are seen inverted ® or 
crooked, let him know that this is so. Next let him cover his eyes and look ; 
then threads are seen as if falling together. If he sees them not, let him 


Atharvaveda, pp. 82 sq.; Kausika Siitra, XIII, and Adbhuta Brahmana; Aufrecht’s idea 
(Z.D. M. G., XXXII, 573) that the passage is not in place is disproved by the parallel in the 
Sankhayana, VIII, 6 and 7; XI, 3 and 4. 

6 i.e. its rays are pale and cold. Kakakulayagandhikam is probably an adj. as a quasi- 
pred. For examples, cf. Delbriick, AZindische Syntax, pp. 78,79. Kwulaya is a curious word : 
in Manava Grhya Sitra, II, 14, 23, Knauer takes it (wrongly, I think) as = stall (cf. p. 55 
of his edit.). 

* Anandatirtha renders sampareto as samnikrstanigamah, Sayana as mrtah. In yat- 
manyeta the opt. is probably indef. It may also be ‘attracted’, cf. Speijer, Vedische und 
Sanskrit-Syntax, § 281. The form in aziya is rare in the Brahmanas, cf. Delbriick, Altindische 
Syntax, pp. 400, 401; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 965. The use of maz with participles 
of all sorts is curious, cf. the use with the gerund, Whitney, § 994; Speijer, Vedische und 
Sanskrit-Syntax, § 223; with the pres. part., III, 1, 4. With the past part., even in Brhaddevata, 
Ghee. NAMI, TIE 

® The reading of the text is supported by Sayana and also by Anandatirtha and is certain. 
For water divination, cf. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, 1V, 230. For ddar§a (also in 
the Brhadaranyaka and Katha Upanisads), cf. Max Miiller, S. B. Z., XV, xxiv. 

* Sayana explains a white pupil in a black eyeball. It probably means only, upside down, 
although the contrast of white and black in the eye is frequent, II, 1, 5. Sankhayana Aranyaka, 
VIII, 7, suggests reading here szhme na vd, ‘ or are not seen at all,’ and this may be right. 

*° Sayana explains the operation thus, caksusi nimilya netrasyadpangam avastabhya netra- 
samipam pasyet; Anandatirtha has, angulya aksimilam avastabhya. The batarakani (baratakan 
or varatakan in Sankhayana) are, Sayana says, vartulini siksmani Suklavarnani kesondra- 
hasabdabhidheyani, and he takes sayipatantiva as samyan netran nirgachantiva. This is hardly 
possible. For varatakan, cf. Sriharsa, Khandanakhandakhadya, p. 239, cited by Jacob, Lawhe- 
kanyayaigalt, p. 1. The construction is difficult, as the yatha is not properly in place. It may 
be that yatha goes with datarakaini and iva qualifies only sayzpatanti, and the sense is, things are 
seen like, &c., but it is also possible that zad yathad is practically = then it is that. This 
use is of course common in later Sanskrit, e. g- Bana, Kadambari (p. 337, 12, ed. Peterson; 
p: 600, ed. Nirnaya Sagara): dgamesu sarvesu eva puranaramayanabharatadisu samyag 
anekaprakarah Sapavrttah tad yatha, &c. Cf. the Pali use of seyyatha. Byhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, IV, 3, 42 sq. has a series of ad yathd; so ibid., TV 4,4, 55 Gee: 

Cases of conditional sentences without particles are of course very frequent in Vedic as 


-III, 2, 4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 253 


know that this is so. Next let him cover his ears and listen, then there is 
a sound as of a burning fire or of a chariot. If he does not hear that sound, 
let him know that this is so. Next when the fire appears blue like the neck 
of a peacock," or when he sees lightning in a cloudless sky, or no lightning in 
a cloudy sky, or in a great cloud sees bright rays as it were, let him know that 
it is so. Next when he sees the ground as though burning, let him know 
that this is so. So far as regards the visible signs. ‘Then come the dreams.” 
He sees a black man with black teeth, he kills him; a boar kills him ; a monkey 
jumps on him; the wind carries him swiftly along; having swallowed gold 
he spits it out; he eats honey; he chews stalks ; he carries a single lotus ; 


in other languages. Cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 284; Sanskrit Syntax, § 487 ; 
Aufrecht, Aitareya Brahmana, p. 431; my note, J. R. A. S., 1909. 

The Maitreya Upanisad (Max Miiller, S.B.Z., XV, xlvi) has a passage which may be 
reminiscent of this text: agnir vaifvdnaro .. . tasyaisa ghoso bhavati yam (wrong reading 
? yad) etat karnav apidhaya Srnoti sa yadotkramisyan bhavati nainam ghosam Synott, 

For ufabdi, infra, which denotes literally the noise of going and is particularly in place here, 
cf. Aitareya Brahmana, IV,9, 3; Jaiminiya Brahmana, I, 253; Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, AF 
37, 3, with Oertel’s note; RV., I, 74, 7, with Oldenberg’s note (5. B. Z., XLVI, 94) ; Schmidt, A. 
Z.,XXV, 55. Scheftelowitz (Zur Stammbildung in den indo-germanischen Sprachen, § g) compares 
RV., IX, 77, 4: wrubjd, which he considers as going back to IG. pago, cf. Greek mnyn. The con- 
struction above drfyate and abhikhyayeta in parallel uses, and below arfyate-pasyen-na pasyen- 
pagyeta, are decidedly curious (cf. Introd., p. 63). The temptation to amend to drSyeta is very 
strong, and on the whole I incline to think that it would be dangerous to insist on these examples. 
The case of upekseta—driyante differs, for the two verbs are not parallel. The first is an 
instruction, the second expresses categorically the result (and dysyante may have helped to 
bring about the incorrect drsyate). In III, 1, 4, where upavadet and aha occur, the aha is 
very strange, and one would like to take faknosity aha— hdsyatity as two sentences both 
dependent on driydt. There is, however, the real difficulty that a—vhé would be a strange 
combination, and the division of the sentences is also curious, though no more curious than 
the dha. I suspect some corruption of the text. Sayana renders differently. He takes the 
whole as one Mantra and supplies éhavdn as a subject for dha, and so in the next sentence 
he interpolates bhavdn aha in sense. In the numerous passages in the Aitareya Brahmana 
which are more or less parallel (see the reff. cited in III, 1, 6, n. §), no such dha occurs, 
and Adsyati has no prefix. But probably d—Adsyatt must go together. Aha might, of course, 
be taken as a first person and made part of the quotation (cf. Speijer, § 178), but this is not 
likely, and for the indef. opt., ef, IIT, 2, 1, n. I. 

 Mayuragrivah is perhaps intended by the reading of B, mayuragriva ameghe (but 
Sankhayana has mayuragriva when it can be °va@h); and undoubtedly gr7zvadh is the form 
alone recognized by Panini and usual in the earlier literature, 7. R. 4.5., 1906, pp. 916-919. 
Probably the reading was originally mayuragrivameghe by an incorrect Sandhi for mayura- 
grivah. For similar irregular Sandhi, cf. Biihler, S. B.E., il, xli (from Apastamba) ; Macdonell, 
Brhaddevata, 1, xxvii; and V, 3, 2, 0.9; III, 1, 3,0. 2. For the next portent, cf. Pischel, 
Vedische Studien, \, 112. 

12 The plural must be right. Cf. Markandeya Purana, XLIII, 1 sq. ; Hillebrandt, op, cit., p. 184. 

13 © Red’ in colour (Sayana) ; for red as unlucky, cf. Z..D. M. G., XL, 117. 


254 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Ill, 2, 4- 


he drives with a team of asses and" boars; wearing a wreath of red flowers, 
he drives a black cow with a black calf towards the south.” If he sees any 
of these, he should fast and cook a pot of milk, and offer it, reciting a verse 
of the Ratri hymn (RV., X, 127, 16) to each oblation, and having fed the Brahmins 
with other food," himself eat the oblation. Let him know that the person within 
all beings who is not heard,” not reached, not thought, not subdued, not seen, 
not understood, not classified, but who hears, thinks, sees, classifies, sounds, 
understands, and knows is his own self." 

5. Now comes this Upanisad of the whole speech. All these indeed are 
Upanisads of the whole speech, but this they so call. The mutes are the 
earth, the sibilants the sky, the vowels heaven. The mutes are fire, the sibilants 
air, the vowels the sun. The mutes are the Rgveda, the sibilants the Yajurveda, 
the vowels the Sdmaveda. The mutes are the eye, the sibilants the ear, the 
vowels the mind. The mutes are the up-breathing, the sibilants the down- 
breathing, the vowels the back-breathing. Then comes this divine lute." The 


4 ¢Or’ (Sayana), which may be more correct. 

18 The ten dreams are so taken by the commentator and by Max Miiller whose note (p. 262) 
is apparently wrong. Zvesam kimcid is noteworthy. The neut. of the pronoun is practically 
nominal and is to be compared with the neut. in predication, III, 1, 2, n. 4. So in Latin, 
e.g. Horace, Sat., i, 7: Lydorum quicguid. The parallel passage in the Saikhayana has corrected 
the original £zzczd of the MS., but the correspondence is conclusive. 

16 Cooked in the house (Sayana). See Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, V, 5,9, and my article, 
J. R. A.S.,1907, p. 929; for sthalipaka, see Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, VI, 4,19; Grhyasamgraha, 
I,114; Oldenberg, S. &.#., XXX, xvi, n. 4. For the causative with instr. and acc., cf. Delbriick, 
Altindische Syntax, pp. 224sq.; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 277 a, 282 b; Speijer, 
Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 21; Sanskrit-Syntax, § 49. According to Panini, I, 4, 52, 
and the examples cited in the Kasika Vrtti, ad loc., here we should have two accusatives. 

 Atah is rendered by Sayana, asmad dehendriyaddisanghatad vilaksana iti Sesah, while 
Anandatirtha suggests adhikah. 

18 This is the most advanced point in the definition of the Atman arrived at in the Aranyaka. 
The Atman is not object, but subject only—as Sayana says, dtma visayo na bhavati visayt tu 
bhavaty eva. ‘This occurs frequently later and with it the doctrine that the self cannot be 
known. Sayana cites the entarydmibrahmana, Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, III, 7, 13, the 
aksarabrahmana, ibid., III, 8, 11; the Kausitaki Upanisad, I, 8; the Prasna Upanisad, IV, 6; 
and the Nrsimhottaratapaniya Upanisad, II. See also Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, 
Pp. 133 sq. ; E.T., pp. 147 sq. Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, IV, 18, is deyoted to this topic 
(=Kena Upanisad). 

* i.e. the human body. This metaphor explains Pragna Upanisad, II, 2, where vava (V, 1, 4) 
is equated to farira, which Max Miiller (S. B. Z., XV, 274, n. 3) finds unintelligible. Connected 
with Visnu is Anandatirtha’s explanation of the word daivi. Ambhana is a curious word. 
I think it is from anmu+/bham (as in Class. Sansk. for »/dhan, Wackernagel, Altindische 
Grammatik, 1,194). Compare ambara for anu+vara and jambila for jinu + bila (ibid., 59). 
The omission before v (common) led to omission before 4 and sporadically before 54, The 
meaning would be ‘sounding-board’ (?), Cf. vy. Schroeder, Zvd. Lit., p. 755. 


Sil 2,6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 255 


human lute is an imitation of it. As there is a head of this, so there is a head 
of that; as there is a stomach of this, so there is a cavity of that; as this has 
a tongue, so that has a tongue; as this has fingers,’ so that has strings; as 
this has vowels, so that has tones; as this has consonants, so that has touches ; 
as this is endowed with sounds and firmly strung, so that is endowed with sounds 
and firmly strung; as this is covered with a hairy skin, so that is covered with 
a hairy skin. For in former times they covered lutes with a hairy skin. He, who 
knows this divine lute, is heard when he speaks, his fame fills the earth, and 
wherever they * speak Aryan tongues, there is he known. Then comes the essence 
of speech. When a man reciting‘ or speaking at an assembly gives not pleasure, 
let him recite this verse, ‘May the she-ichneumon, that rules all speech, who is 
covered as it were® by the lips, surrounded by teeth, the thunderbolt, cause me 
to speak well here.’ This is the essence of speech. 


2 The words aigulayah and tantrayah seem to have been transposed in the original; they are 

in correct order in Saikhayana Aranyaka, VIII, 7. Somewhat analogous is the transposition of 
$ana jarayu in Satapatha Brahmana, VI, 6, 2, 15, on which see Eggeling’s note (5. B. ek, 
XLVI, 255). Cf. also Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 1, 4 with Max Miiller’s note (S. 2. E.; 
XV, 122), and my Sankhayana Aranyaka, p. 55, 0. 3- 
_ ° The expression arya vacah was not understood by the commentators (and in the Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, VIII, 9, we find that it has become @ryé vag vadati), who take adrydh as nominative 
and render it vedasastraparam gataéh. This is a clear sign of considerable antiquity, and the 
expression may also be cited as an early piece of evidence for the existence of several 
dialects of the early Indian language, which we know must have existed; see I, 5, 2, n. 193 
Oertel, 4.7. P., XX, 447 on daivi, and Kathaka Samhita, XIV, 5. For the word arya, cf. 
Zimmer, A/tindisches Leben, p.214; Pischel, Z.D. M.G., XL, 125; Geldner (Vedische Studien, 
III, 96, 97) insists that avya cannot mean ‘the Aryan’ which is represented by drya, Oldenberg 
(see index to S. B. Z., XLVI) still adopts the equation Arya= Aryan. 

* Sayana distinguishes between reciting at a conclave of priests, and speaking in a prince’s 
hall. Virurucuseta is quite impossible as a form, and it is an easy error in view of the preceding 
syllables, each having x. The middle of the opt. of the desiderative is not common. Cf. 
Holtzmann, Grammatisches aus dem Mahabharata, p. 42. 

5 Sayana gives an alternative rendering, xa=not, and pavih=clear, the subject being the 
speaker's defective speech. Anandatirtha gives only the explanation as a=7va. The verse in 
B occurs among the Santi verses of the so-called third Adhyaya. For the metaphor, cf. Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana, III, 19. In the version in the Anandagrama ed., p. 2, akulz is printed 
as a separate word. But ma#u/z can only mean a female ichneumon, and xakulidantath 
is a phrase for which no parallel seems readily forthcoming. Sayana gives vajravaddhani- 
bhiatair antaralachidrarahitair which does not help. In any case to join kulidantath makes 
a curious though not unparalleled metre in an early verse such as this must be, and if a nom. 
could be found in 4u/z the run of the verse would be much improved. The rendering of 
the text by Max Miiller ‘surrounded by birth, as if by spears’ is purely conjectural, and 
I suspect the tradition. The parallel passages are of little use. The Sama Mantra Brahmana, 
I, 7, 15, has osthapidhand nakuli dantaparimitah pavik, while the Gobhila Grhya Sitra, III, 4, 
29, gives osthapidhané nakuit only. Oldenberg (.S. B. Z., XXX, 84) renders ‘the she-ichneumon, 
covered by the lips’, as does Knauer in his translation. If this is to be made into sense, it 


256 AITAREYA ARANYAKA III; 2, 6- 


6. Now Krsnaharita? proclaims this Brahmana? as it were regarding speech 
to him.’ Prajapati, the year,‘ after credting creatures, burst. He put himself 
together by the metres. Because he put himself together by means of the metres, 
therefore is it the Samhita. Of that Samhita the letter is the strength, the letter 
g the breath, the self. He who knows the verses in the Samhita and® the 
letters 2 and s, he knows the Samhita with its breath and its strength. Let him 
know that this is lifegiving.© If he is in doubt’ whether to say it with an 
or without an #, let him say it with any. If he is in doubt whether to say it 
with an s or without an s, let him say it with an s. Hrasva Mandikeya says, ‘ If 
we repeat the verses according to the Samhita, and if we say the teaching ® of 


must be taken that the she-ichneumon is a synonym for what is very piercing: the nearest 
approximation to this idea is the passage in Atharvaveda, VI, 139, 5 (cited in Zimmer, 
Altindisches Leben, p. 86), which refers to the ichneumon’s (m.) skill in chopping up and then 
restoring his work. 

1 A son of Harita, who was dark in colour (Sayana), cf. Hiranyadant Vaida, II, 1, 5. 
A Kumira Harita (so, not Harita) appears in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 6, 3; IV, 6, 3; VI, 
4, 4. Weber (Indian Literature, p. 50) reads Harita, and the lawyer is always so called (ibid., 
p. 269), even in Apastamba Dharma Sitra, I, 10, 29, 12; 16. On the other hand Varttika 8 
on Panini, I, 1, 73, recognizes Haritakata, and Panini, IV, 1, 100, Haritayana as names, where 
Hiarita appears. Weber’s Harita here is therefore probably wrong, and Saakhayana Aranyaka, 
VIII, 11, has krtsnaharita, 

? Brahmana here means secret doctrine like Upanisad. va seems to be used to indicate 
the somewhat unusual sense; the Sankhayana version has eva; cf.1,1,2,n.3; FRA.S., 
1908, p. 1193, n. 1. Sayana in his commentary repeatedly has phrases like antaryamibrah- 
mana, the secret doctrine of the antarydmin, see III, 2, 4, n. 18, and cf. the name of 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4 (purusavidhabrahmana), Max Miller, S.2.2., XV, 25, and 
the common fasyoktam brahmanam. 

5 To his pupil or son (Anandatirtha and Sayana). 

4 The reading of B, samvatsaram (see Introd., p. 3), must be a correction to improve the 
sense. But it could never have been corrupted into seyvatsarah. Prajapati as the year is a 
Brahmanic commonplace (for its deeper significance, see Eggeling, S. 2. £., XLIII, xx sq.), 
e.g. Aitareya Brahmana, II, 17, 2; VI, 19, 7; Maitrayani Samhita, I, 10, 8; Kausitaki 
Brahmana, VI, 15; Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1, &c. The phrase Prajapatih prajah srstva 
vyasramsata is frequent in Satapatha Brahmana, VI-X, not in I-V; Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 
268 ; and for a similar case cf. II, 4, 3, n.14. One might translate, ‘he is the year’ Cf, 
however, Satapatha Brahmana, X,1I,1,1and2. The confusion of vyasramsadad and °sata is 
another example of the confusion of surd and sonant so common in Sarada MSS. Cf, Lanman 
in Whitney’s Zranslation of the Atharvaveda, pp. 57, 1045; J. Hertel, Zantrakhyayiha, 
p. xvi; Roth, Z.D. M4. G., XLVIII, 106-111. 

5 This is the literal rendering. Sayana takes it, ‘Who recites the verses thinking of the 7 and s 
which accompany the Samhita.’ 

° To the Samhita (Sayana), or perhaps to the reciter, if not to both. 

” Sayana takes it, ‘If a pupil ask his teacher,’ but this is unnecessary. The question is, he 
says, whether the reflection on the Samhita is to take the differences of # and 5 into account or not. 

* Sayana refers this to Saravira’s doctrine, II, 1,1. For upaptau, cf. Kausitaki Brahmana, 
XIV, §; Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 6, where Dr. Friedlander renders ‘ hinreichend, geniigend ’, 


-III, 2, 6 TRANSLATION AND, NOTES 257 


Mandikeya, then the letters 2 and s are obtained for us.’ Sthavira Sakalya ® 


. 


says, ‘If we repeat the verses according to the Samhita, and if we say the teaching 
of Mandikeya, then the letters # and s are obtained for us. Then the seers, 
the Kavaseyas, knowing this, say, ‘To what end shall we repeat the Veda, 
to what end shall we sacrifice? For we sacrifice breath in speech," or in breath 
speech. For what is the beginning, that is the end.’ These Samhitas let no 
one ™ tell to one who is not a resident pupil, who has not been with the teacher 
for one year, and who is not himself to become a teacher. Thus say the 
teachers."* 


® The sayings are identical, and apparently this is intended to denote that the doctrine 
received universal acceptance. The passage may indicate (cf. also Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, 
IV, 10, 3, where Sakalya is younger apparently than Mandukeya) that the Mandikeya Sakha had 
its Samhita text before Sakalya produced the Pada Patha, which is quite likely. 

10 This is a clear proof that the holders of the Aranyaka doctrine rejected sacrifices or 
recitations as means of knowledge, cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad; I, 5, 23 ; Kausitaki Upanisad, 
II, 5; Chandogya Upanisad, V, 11-24; Taittiriya Upanisad, II, 5; Deussen, PAz/. d. Upanishads, 
p- 63. A Tura Kavaseya purohita of Janamejaya occurs in Khila, I, 9, 6, and in—as already 
noted by Colebrooke, Essays, 1, 72; see Oldenberg, Z.D. M.G., XLII, 239 sq.—the Aitareya 
Brahmana, IV, 27; VII, 39; VIII, 21. For the spelling cf. Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des 
Rgveda, Addenda, p. 190; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammaitzk, I, 239. Winternitz (Gesch. der 
indisch. Litt., I, 199) uses the story of Kavasa as the son of a non-Brahmin (Aitareya Brahmana, 
Il, 19) as a piece of evidence in favour of the theory of the attribution to the Ksatriyas of 
philosophic speculation over the origin of the doctrine of transmigration (cf. Introd., pp. 5°, 
51; Garbe, Bettrage zur indischen Kulturgeschichte, pp. 1 sq.). He argues that the Brahmins 
merely accepted and made these doctrines their own by adopting them along with the doctrine 
of the four ASramas. This all seems very doubtful. That among the priests none should 
rise superior to the sacrificial cultus is contrary to all religious history. That hermits, &c., 
were originally not of the priestly caste is a mere theory and not a probable one. Winternitz’ 
view leads him (p. 202, n. 1) to adopt the improbable theory of Aranyaka as a text to be 
studied by Vanaprasthas, for which he quotes the (late) Aruneya Upanisad (Deussen, Sechzig 
Upanishads, p. 693) and Ramanuja (Thibaut, S. 2. Z., XLVIII, 645). Cf. Introd., p. 16. 
It must always be remembered that the Brahmanas contain already in germ all the ideas 
which make up the fundamental doctrine of the Upanisads; even the doctrine of trans- 
migration is presaged in the doctrine of repeated deaths in the other world. It is impossible 
to explain why the Brahmins became so completely the bearers of the aman doctrine if it 
was not theirs ex initio. Professor Macdonell has told me that he concurs in this view, which 
thus gains great weight, and see my notes, J. X. A. S., 1908, pp- 838, 868, 1142. The Kavase- 
yas are cited by Sankara on Svetasvatara Upanisad (ed. Roer, p. 2 57) as opposed to works, 
Weber, Jd. Stud., il, 418. 

1 Cf, Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 2, 2, 6. 

12 Cf. V, 3,3; Weber, /udian Literature, p. 49, N. 35- 

18 Mahidasa, &c. (Anandatirtha). Cf. 1,1, 1, n. §;3 II, 3, 5, n. 4. Probably the plural is 
only mazestatis. 


KEITH S 


258 AITAREYA ARANYAKA IV- 


ARANYAKA IV 


ASVALAYANA (Srauta Siitra, VII, 12, 10) gives the following account of the 
purpose of the Mahanamni verses. On the fifth day of the prsthya six day 
ceremony, at the midday pressing of the Soma, corresponding to the Niskevalya 
Sastra, the Udgitrs sing sometimes the Sakvara Saman as one of the Prstha 
Stotras,! and then? use the Mahanamni verses as the basis of the Saman. ‘These 
number nine, but for the purposes of the Saman they are made into three, each 
consisting of three verses. These verses are recited adhyardhakaram, that is, 
first one and a half verses are recited, then comes a pause, then the remaining 
one and a half, followed by the syllable om. Then are recited the nine purzsa- 
padant, additional verses. These may either be recited simply straight on as 
they stand in the text, or the first five may be made into two sets of five syllables 
each, thus: 

Eva hi eva \ eva hi Agna3u \ the hi being taken without Sandhi, the last four 
purisapadani being repeated without a pause in the middle. See also Sankhayana 
Srauta Siitra, X, 6, 10, and comm. 

The Mahanamni verses occur in the Aranya Samhita, and in the Naigeya Sakha 
at the end of the Parvarcika of the Sdmaveda, and as one of the Khilas of the 
Reveda, see Peterson, Second Report, p. 97; Scheftelowitz, Dze Apokryphen des 
Rgveda, pp. 134-136. They are referred to in the Brhaddevata, VIII, 100, 
Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, X, 6, 10, Revidhana, IV, 25, and Sankhayana Grhya 
Siitra, Il, 11, 12, &c. From these sources, and from Baudhayana, cited in 
Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 809, n., it appears that they followed directly upon 
the verse fac cham yor, which, according to the Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 5, 9, 
is the end of the Rgveda Samhita (in the Baskala recension), and, according 
to Narayana on Aévalayana Grhya Siitra, III, 5, 9, is the end of the Baskala 
recension. It is not, however, quite clear what this means, since /ac cham yor 
occurs as the last verse of two Khilas, V, 1 and 3, in Scheftelowitz’s edition, 
viz. the samjfanam and pradhvaranim Khilas, and the three Khilas, V, 1-3, 
the second being the xazrhastyam, have 5+3+7=15 verses. The view of 


1 For these, see especially Eggeling, 5. B. #., XLI, xx sq. 

2 The Sakvara is normally based on Samaveda, II, 1151-1153 (Sayana and Mahidhara cited 
by Eggeling, p. xx, n. 2). 

3 Cf. also Oldenberg’s note on Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 5, 9, and Znd. Stud., XV, 150. 


_IV " TRANSLATION AND NOTES 259 


Oldenberg, who had not‘ the evidence of the MS. of the Khilas before him, 
was (Prolegomena, p. 502) that the Samhita ended with the first Zac cham yor, 
i.e. with Khila, V, 1, and Scheftelowitz (pp. 11, 132) holds that this is correct. 
Oldenberg, however, held (p. 509) that the Mahanamni verses followed directly 
after fac cham yor, and (p. 501) expressed the view that the following ten verses 
were some of them modern. But of the direct evidence for the immediate 
sequence of the Mahanamni verses, cited by Oldenberg, the Rgvidhana alone 
fully bears him out, for the Khila MS. has the Mahanamni verses after the 
pradhvaranam Khila, and this is probably the meaning of Brhaddevata, VIII, 94, 
as interpreted by Prof. Macdonell. It is an easy conjecture that the Rgvidhana, 
which has other coincidences with the Brhaddevata*®, followed that work, but 
misunderstood the word cafurtham, which most probably must mean ‘the fourth 
of the hymns after X, 190’. This fact weakens greatly the force of Oldenberg’s 
argument from the modern character of the last ten verses, and in point of 
fact it is difficult to deny that the verse ac. cham yor is modern in appearance, 
and that it need not be separated in time from the last seven verses. For the 
second /ac cham yor being the end of the Samhita in the Baskala recension, 
we have the clear evidence of the commentator on the Caranavytha,® who 
actually cites the verses. Dr. Scheftelowitz considers that the commentator is 
untrustworthy, and later than Sayana, but this appears very doubtful. We know, 
he argues, that the commentator explains the eight extra hymns attributed to 
the Baskala Sakha by the Anuvakanukramani as being seven of the Valakhilyas 
and the samjfdnam hymn of fifteen verses, but the number should be ten, as 
the samjfanam hymn is really composed of three hymns. But it is difficult 
to maintain that it is impossible that the fifteen verses, despite their difference 
of contents, were not regarded in early days as one hymn, for several of the 
Rgvedic hymns are notoriously patchwork, and this applies more strongly still 
to later Samhitas. 

Much more important is the question of their antiquity. Oldenberg makes 
the Mahanamni verses an exception to his general view, that the Khilas are 
on the whole of later origin, and holds that they are coeval with the Rgveda, 
and were merely omitted because of some reason of ritual teaching from the ten 
Mandalas. Dr. Scheftelowitz, who disputes Oldenberg’s general position, and 
accepts Hillebrandt’s theory of the purer ritual tradition, assigns the verses 
(p. 3) to the end of the Rgvedic period. Further, Oldenberg’ has suggested 


‘ He takes no notice of the new evidence in his review of Scheftelowitz, Gott. gel. Anz, 
1907, p- 227, for which and for other valuable papers I am indebted to his kindness. 
5 Macdonell, Brhaddevata, I, 147. 6 Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 495, 501, 502. 
1 S.B.E., XXIX, 156. 
$2 


260 AITAREYA ARANYAKA IV- 


that the verses are alluded to as the Sakvari verses in Rgveda, VII, 33, 4; X, 71, 
11, and this suggestion is at least plausible. They are apparently referred to 
as Mahanamnis in the Atharvaveda and Yajurveda (see below). It is borne out 
to some extent at least by the character of the language, which shows the rare 
forms dnusamsisah, stuse, vide, ise, rijdse, and samnyase. The metre is also 
of an archaic type in so far as resolutions are frequently necessary to restore 
it. The Khila Anukramani gives the following note: vida dasa padas ca pafica 
Visvamitra Indro va Prajapatir Aindram pavanam anustubham purisapadany 
Agneyavaisnavaindrapausnadaivant vairdjani dvifiyapaticamyav usnthau caturthe 
nyankusarini saplami purastadbrhati navamyantye pankfi, As a matter of fact, 
as both Weber® and Oldenberg recognize, the verses are not preserved in their 
primitive form, but only as modified to suit their supposed sacred character. 
In verses 2, 5, and 8, which were apparently originally anustubhs, the fourth pada 
has been omitted for the insertion of a sort of refrain. Verses 1, 3, and 6 are 
in anustubh. Verse 4 appears to be 8+12+84+48; verse 7,12+8+8+8; verse g, 
84+8+84+4+8+48. The rest is in no regular metre. Oldenberg (p. 33) considers 
that originally the metre consisted of seven and five sets of eight syllables 
respectively, but this seems hardly borne out by the facts. It should be noted 
that the Khila text manufactures the last four of the nine purisapadani into one 
verse (!), and in. this respect is certainly not old, for the purisapadant cannot 
reasonably be held to have ever made up a verse. They are referred to, however, 
as five in the Kausitaki Brdhmana, XXIII, 2, and connected with Prajapati, Agni, 
Indra, Piisan, and Devah, and in the Brhaddevata, VIII, 102, they are connected 
with the same deities, save that Visnu is substituted for the Devah (so the A 
version ; the B version omits Prajapati, while Mitra’s text includes both Prajapati 
and the Devah, see Macdonell’s note). They are also mentioned in the Pafica- 
vimga Brahmana, XIII, 4, 12, where elaborate directions are given as to their 
selection to make up the satvara séman, Latyayana Sitra, IV, 10, 18, Sankhayana 
Srauta Stitra, X, 6, 13, &c., and in the Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 4; V, 7; VI, 24; 
Atharvaveda, XI, 7, 6; Vajasaneyi Samhita, XXIII, 35: Kathaka Samhita, 
X, 10; Taittiriya Samhita, V, 2, 11, 1.° 

The verses contain several phrases reminiscent of the Rgveda, perhaps bor- 
rowed from earlier hymns; at least they tend to convey an impression of second- 
hand use: je/aram dpardjittam=RV.,1, 11, 2; sé nak parsad 4h=RV., X, 184, 1; 
Indram dhdnasya satdye is the last pada of RV., VIII, 3, 54 (this I owe to Bloom- 


8 Ind. Stud., VIII, 68. 


* For the last four reff. I am indebted to Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 696%, who 


gives other passages; cf. also Weber, Zud. Stud. XVII, 358; Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLI, xx; 
XLIV, 380, n. 2. 


-IV TRANSLATION AND NOTES 261 


field, Vedic Concordance, p. 210%); sém anyévu bravivahai= RV., I, 30, 6; sakha 
susévo ddvayah = RV., I, 187, 34; savistha varinn riijdse = RV., I, 80, 1¢ (with 
ojasa). These last two cases seem to me strongly in favour of the later date 
of these verses, for dravavahaz is not unnatural in RV., I, 30, 6, where it seems to 
refer to Indra and the speaker who are to agree in other battles, the previous 
half verse referring to a conflict, but it is distinctly awkward here where the 
first half verse has no reference to a fight or other occasion of association. This 
_ only, however, proves that the Mahanamni verses are not among the earliest parts 
of the Rgveda. 

The last four purisapadani are made out of the preceding verses, eva Af sakr6, 
from v. 2; vasi hi Sakré, from v. 5; vdsait dnu, from v. 4. The Agvalayana Srauta 
Sitra, VI, 2, 9, shows that other pddas of the verses were used independently 
in the ritual: prace/ana pracefayayahi piba matsva\ kratué chanda vlam brhat 
sumna @ dheht no vasav ity anustup \ Ibid., 12, has: ud-yad bradhnasya vistapam 
tt paridhaniya \ eva hy evaiva hindra3 \ eva hi Sakro vasi ht Sakra itt Japitva \ apak 
purvesam hartvak sutanam itt yajati \ and again the purisapadant in VI, 3, 26. 

For the question of the ‘authorship’ of this Aranyaka by Aévalayana, cf. 
Introd., pp. 18 sq. For the view that this forms a sort of Aévalayana Samhita 
may be compared the fact that there is an Apastambiya Mantrapatha, a collection 
of Grhya verses and formulae, to accompany the Apastamba Grhya Sitra. So 
too, as Oldenberg (S. 2. £., XXX, 3-11) has conclusively ® shown, the Mantra 
Brahmana was prepared to accompany Gobhila’s Grhya Sitra, though it is not 
apparently ascribed to Gobhila, just as IV is not attributed to Aévalayana in 
the Aranyaka itself. Winternitz (Gesch. der indisch. Litt., I, 232) merely repeats 
Max Miller (Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 314 8q., 339)- 


O generous one, show’ us a path, proclaim the regions, guide us, lord of 
many mights, wealthy one i110 


With these aids of thine, wise one, make us wise, for glory and for strength, 
Indra. For thine is strength n20 


For wealth, for might, thunderer, most powerful, bearer of the bolt, thou 


10 T do not consider Winternitz (MJantrapatha, I, xxxi sq.) to have refuted Oldenberg. 

1 vidd is rendered vetsi by Sayana, and S takes it as a Vedic form of vida, i.e. imper. 
of the aor. of »/vzd (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 851). Possibly this is correct (cf. vide in 
ver. 5), and it is from +/véd in the sense ‘ find’, for which see the examples in Bloomfield, 
Vedic Concordance, pp. 866”, 867*. But it may perhaps be really védah the subj. of the aor. of 
a/vid (Whitney, § 849) or an injunctive from v7++/da@. The accent would then, however, 
probably have been védaf, but exceptions are not unknown. The same question arises in RV., 
IX, 40, 3: vidah sahasrinir tsa. For the accent, parvinam, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§ 319. For Sac, cf. Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, pp. 58, 122; Pischel, Vedische Studien, Il, 
1,n.; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 239, n. 6. 


EG ae AITAREYA ARANYAKA Iv- 


movest? Thou movest, most generous, hearer of the bolt. Come hither, drink, 
and be glad 330) 

Grant us wealth with good heroes. ‘Thou art® the lord of might according 
to thy will. Thou movest, most generous, bearer of the bolt, who art the most 
powerful of heroes 4 

Most generous of givers, wise one, guide us aright. Indra finds* all. Him 
I praise. For he has will and strength 5 ll 

Him we summon to our aid, the conqueror, unconquered. May he convoy 
us* beyond our foes. He is strength, resolve, and mighty order 1) 611 

Indra we summon for the winning of wealth, the conqueror, unconquered. 
May he convoy us beyond our foes. May he convoy us beyond our enemies ° i 7 Il 


2 yftjase may be regarded as the second singular pres. indic. of a sixth class root 7%, 
as Whitney (Sanskrit Grammar, § 758 2) takes it here. The exact sense is doubtful. It may 
conceivably =‘ thou art praised’, but the sense ‘move’ is possible, if the root is akin to the 
Greek dpéyw. Cf. Delbriick, Alsindisches Verbum, p. 181; Bartholomae, Indog. Forsch., Xl, 
281; Neisser, Bezz. Beitr, XX, 59; Oldenberg, S.B.E., XLVI, 396, 436 (‘press on, strive 
forward’); Pischel (Vedische Studien, 1, 109), however, compares saraj with épéyw, and Geldner 
(ibid., III, 29 sq.) postulates a /7/=Subh: diptau, either transitive or intransitive. He does 
not, unhappily, quote or explain this passage. In RV., VIII, 9, 17 he renders vémt tva 
Pisan rtijasé as ‘1 desire to adorn thee ?, and possibly the form rajasé might be an infin.= 
an imperative (cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 412; Neisser, Bezz, Beitr., XX, 593 
Hopkins, A. 7. P., XIII, 21 sq.; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 216d). The 
accentuation péba mdtsva seems most probable, cf. tardnir tf jayati kséti pusydti in RV., 
VII, 32, 9, and other examples given in Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, pp- 36 sq.; Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 894 b; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, p. 80; Macdonell, Vedic 
Grammar, p.105. mdésva is irregularly accented, but there are many parallels, Whitney, § 628; 
Macdonell, p. 99 (foot). 

8 bhivah is according to Whitney (Sanskrit Grammar, § 83 b,c; cf. Delbriick, l.c., 
p- 144) either an injunctive of an unaugmented @ aorist, or a subjunctive of the root aorist. 
But in sense it may be an indicative. wdsa% duw may perhaps be ‘according to our will’. 
rayah suviryam is curious, but the variant vayé is merely an easy correction. Cf. rayds 
posam, RV., IV, 40, 4. The Taittiriya Samhita, III, 1, 9, 4 has: vider gaupatyan rayas posam 
suviryam. samvatsarinam svastine, where the conjunction of vayas and suviryam is different, 
but where vider supports the derivation of vda from vid. Cf. V, 1, 6, 2. 3- 

4 wide must be 3rd sing. like 7fe, and may mean ‘knows’, cf. Hopkins, 7. 4.0.5., XV, 
276, n. Sayana renders it as a 2nd sing. For stwse see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 894 4; 
Delbriick, c., p. 181. If stwsé is read, the accent is somewhat irregular. But irregular 
accents in quasi-subordinate clauses are numerous, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 595- 
598; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, Pp. 433 RV., I, 189, 33 II, 1, 1, with Oldenberg’s notes 
(S.B. Z., XLVI, 182, 223); 2.D.ILG., LX, 735 sq. 

5 Sayana takes add parsad as ‘let him destroy’, and the last pada as meaning, ‘the sacrifice, 
the metre used, the fruits of the offering, and all great.” The words are clearly not in place 
here, and make little sense. 

® syfdhah Sayana explains as those whom we should hate, although they do not hate us. 
The meaning is perhaps ‘beyond all failures’; cf. dé¢d sridhah in this sense i UV. Lk QOs giles 
9:45 10, 7- 


-IV TRANSLATION AND NOTES 263 


Place us in thy favour, ancient one, lord of the thunder, bright one. Most 
powerful, thy rewards are extolled. For the strong god bears rule 0) 8 Ul 

Lord of man, slayer of Vrtra, this new hymn? I offer now to thee. Among 
others let us two converse together. ‘The hero who fares for the cows is a 
kind and guileless friend i) 9 it 


Thus,’ thus, O Agni. Thus, thus, O Indra. Thus, thus, O Visnu. Thus, thus, 
O Piisan. Thus, thus, O Gods. For he is strong. For he has strength and will, 
according to his will. On all sides* come hither.. Show, generous one, show. 


7 This is doubtful. zdzyase, the variant of the other texts save SV., is remarkable as being 
accented, and does not help. It looks like an obvious error or correction for sdz:nyase, which 
becomes sdnnyase, SV., Naigeya Sakha, and then by haplography sdnyase, SV., Aranya Samhita, 
and then mdnyase through the frequent mistake of s for # in Sarada MSS. mdnyase makes no 
good sense, but saynyase also is very difficult (even if taken as Oldenberg (S. 8. Z., XLVI, 
404) would take it in RV., V, 17, 2, as a first person). It comes apparently from as. 
Dr. Scheftelowitz now agrees with this view (cf. my remark in J. R.A.S., 1907, p. 224). 
For fat tan (i.e. tad) can be read (supply s#étam or, with tay, mantram) but navyam may 
be from 4/7“, meaning praiseworthy. The dual dvavavahaz in the original context refers to 
the singer and Indra who are in other (contests) to be united. Here it must (cf. n. 7 on I, 
I, 2) mean something of the same sort, but amyesw has no longer any direct antecedent. 
SV. aryésu is merely a facile correction like so many SV. readings. For the loc., gést, cf. 
Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p.122; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 81b; Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 301, 304; A.J. P., XIII, 284. Sduyase as a dat. hardly makes sense. 

§ Sayana takes evd as from 4/7 and @. The sentence is practically a mere exclamation 
and cannot be translated. The words d@ yd, &c., yield no sense as they stand. Sadyana renders, 
‘He who comes to think what is to be thought of for our weal, let him come to think what 
is to be thought of.’ The variant dyo is no help, though it might mean ‘Come to the man 
who deseryes favour’, cf, Taittiriya Samhita, II, 1, 3,2. For the pluti, 23 7, see Wackemagel, 
Altindische Grammatzk, I, 298. 

° Cf, Saakhayana Srauta Sutra, XVII, 12, where the sentence runs: ehy evd hindropeht 
visvatha vida maghavan vida iti, from which it may be legitimate to assume that e/z should 
be supplied in the urisapadint. The last vidé may point to vidah being the form. wifvadhad 
in RV. means either (1) everywhere, I, 141, 6; (2) always, V, 8, 4. 

The Taittiriya Aranyaka, I, 20, has: eva hy eva \ eva hy Agne \ evd hi Vayo\ eve hindra \ eva 
hi Pusan \ eva hi devah \ when Sayana renders eva as ayanasiladitya and eva as etavyah 
praptavyah kimah, and supplies asz, ‘Thou art desires:’ hifabdenadityasya sarvakamahetutva- 
prasiddhir ucyate. \bid., 23, has: eva hy evétil. .. eva hy Agna iti\... eva hi Vayo tti\... 
eve hindreti\...evd hi Pusann tti\ eva hi déva iti \ The accents are those of the 
Anandagrama text (I, 88, 89), and may be wrong. In the Maitrayani Samhita, H, 3, 18 
(a reference which I owe to Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance, p. 305*) all the MSS. have eva 
(or evd) hy Agne. The Kausitaki Brahmana, XXIII, 2, gives two accounts of the Mahanamnis 
or Sakvaris, and gives as the five purisapadani: eva hy eva\ eva hy Agne \ eva hindra \ eva 
hi Pusan \ eva hi devah \ 

It is by no means obvious how these verses came to be considered as an especially fruitful 
rain-spell. As such they are clearly recognized in the Gobhila Grhya Sitra, III, 2, and the 
Khadira Grhya Sitra, II, 5,22 sq., where the Sakvarivrata is clearly a rite of sympathetic magic 
to produce plentiful rain (see Oldenberg, Re/zgzon des Veda, pp. 420-422, with whose remarks 
I fully concur). 


264 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1,I-. 


ARANYAKA V 


Apuyaya 1. 


In the Mahivrata ceremony there are twenty-five verses to accompany the 
kindling of the fire In the twenty-one? verses (used in the Visuvant) four 
are inserted before the second last, beginning, ‘ With fuel Agni’ (RV., VIII, 44, 1). 
A bull is to be offered to ViSvakarman*® accompanied by muttering the verses. 
The Ajya and Praiiga Sastras are taken from the Viévajit* The Sastras of 


1 Sayana explains that although the Samidheni verses are not part of the Soma sacrifice 
itself, yet they are used in the animal sacrifice which forms a part of it and so are in place 
here. He quotes Mimamda Sitra, III, 1, 18,9: @narthakyat tad aigesu. They are to be said 
after the anointing of the animal by the Adhvaryu, according to Apastamba. Cf. also his 
Vajiiaparibhasa, 2 and 3 (S. B. £., XXX, 319, 345). For the gen., cf. Caland, Altindésches 
Zauberritual, p. 18, ne 2 5 Satapatha Brahmana, X, 1, 5, 4; III, 1, 1, n. 3. 

2 There are in the Dargapirnamasesti, see Hillebrandt, Mez- und Vollmondsopfer, pp- 74 $4- 
fifteen verses beginning with RV., III, 27,1 (cf. Oldenberg, S. 2. Z., XLVI, 299; Bergaigne, 
Recherches sur Vhistotre de la liturgie védigue, p. 19); see Taittiriya Brahmana, III, 5, 2, 1. 
There are only eleven separate verses, but the first and last are each thrice repeated. In the 
Visuvant the fifteen are extended into twenty-one by the interpolation of six verses beginning with 
RV., ITI, 27, 5. These are inserted before the second last verse, RV., V, 28, 5. Then four 
more verses, beginning with RV., VIII, 44, 1, are added before this verse to make up the twenty- 
five. The Sankhayana here ignores these verses. Aitareya Brahmana, I, 1, 14, gives the 
number as 17. See a list in ASvalayana Srauta Sutra, I, 2, 7. The construction acc. for nom. is 
remarkable and is not a mark of late or careless style, for these irregularities and the use of 
numerals are found in the Mantras (e.g. sapid rsindm, Satdm pirbhth, cited by Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 486 c) and in the Aitareya Brahmana, III, 48,9: catuhsastim kavacina 
asuh, while in VII, 2, 7, parnasarah sastis tring ca satany ahrtya occurs (see Aufrecht, p. 428). 
Above, II, 2, 4; 3, 8, occurs sattrinfatam sahasrant, while Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 1 has 
sattrinsatam ekapadah, which examples all appear to be transfers of accusative for nominative, 
though the possibility of their being new stems in @ cannot be denied (especially as the 
Aitareya Brahmana actually has ¢rayastrimSatyd, a transfer to the ¢ declension). Cf. Introd., 
p- 56. The idiom has hardly been adequately noticed in Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 82. 

8 The Sankbayana Aranyaka, I, 1, prescribes a bull for Indra and a goat for Prajapati. 
The Srauta Sitra, XVII, 7, 7, mentions also a savaniya pasu, see Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, 
pp- 125, 136. Cf. also Katyayana Srauta Siitra, XIII, 2,17. Updasu means not in silence but 
so as not to be overheard, see Sayana’s quotation, karanavad asabday manahprayogam, and 
Apastamba Yajiiaparibhasa, 9, 11 and 113 (S. B.Z., XXX, 319 and 345), where the Samidhenis 
are not wpdamsu but antard (see note on II). 

* For the Ajya see I, 1,1. The Praiiga consists of seven ¢ycas, I, 1, 3-4, preceded by the 
purorucs, Vayur agrega yajhaprir, 8&c., Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, VII, 10, 9g. The peurorucs 
are also given in Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, as Khila, V, 6. 


-V,1,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 265 


the Hotrakas are taken from the Caturvimsa rite.® In the morning pressing 
‘the Brahmanacchamsin should add the verses, beginning, ‘The busy moving 
ones’ (RV., X, 153, 1), and at the midday pressing the verses, ‘Of this strong 
youthful one drink’ (RV., X, 160, 1).° The tristich which forms the strophe 
begins, ‘ The buffalo in the bowls, the barley-mixed’ (RV., II, 22, 1), the tristich 
forming the antistrophe consists of the three verses, ‘Indra, come hither to us 
from far away’ (RV., I, 130, 1), ‘For to Indra heaven, the wise one, bowed’ 
(RV., X, 127, 1), and, ‘To him a song excelling’ (RV., X, 133, 1).7. The Maru- 
tvatiya Sastra is taken over from the CaturvimSa and extended by the hymns, 
‘Fair has been my effort, singer’ (RV., X, 27, 1), ‘Drink the Soma for which 
in anger thou breakest’ (RV., VI, 17, 1), ‘With what splendour’ (RV., I, 165, 1), 
and, ‘ Indra, with the Maruts’ (RV., III, 45, 1).8 The Marutvatiya Sastra ends 
with the hymn, ‘Thou art born, terrible, for strength, for energy’ (RV., X, 53, 1). 
At the end of the Marutvatiya Sastra, the Hotr, leaving his place by the incomplete 
route,® offers three oblations in the Agnidh’s fire with a ladle of udumbara wood 
(accompanying them with the verses) :— 


5 The Hotrakas are the Maitravaruna, Brahmanacchamsin, and Achavaka. In the Agnistoma 
their Sastras begin with RV., III, 62,16; VIII, 17, 1; III, 12, 1, respectively. In the Catur- 
vima they begin with RV., V, 68, 3; I, 4,1; VIII, 72, 13, respectively. 

® The Mahavrata differs in these points even from the Caturvim$a. Sayana leaves it 
undecided whether the passages extend to five verses, or only to one verse by the favibhasa, 
ream padagrahane, for which see Aévalayana Srauta Sitra, I, 1, 17. 

7 These verses are apparently to precede the Sastra of the Brahmanacchamsin at the midday 
pressing. The word stotriya is used because the verses correspond to those used in the Saman 
corresponding to the Sastra, cf. Hillebrandt, Rifwal-Litteratur, p. 103. The Saakhayana 
Sakha ignores the Sastras of the Hotrakas. The reference to the midday pressing is out of 
order. 

8 For the Marutvatiya Sastra of the Hotr at the midday pressing, see I, 2, 1 and 2. In the 
Agnistoma it begins with RV., VIII, 68, 1-3, and VIII, 2, 1-3. The CaturvimSa contains 
alterations, and the Mahavrata adds the hymns enumerated. Atanah (found in VS., TS., &c.) 
must mean vistdérah as Sayana has it here. Cf. Aitareya Brahmana, V, 4, 12, where Sayana 
renders gastrakiptih. Friedlander, on Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 3, suggests the sense ‘scheme’ 
for it. In RV., II, 1, 10, ddénih =‘ expander’; cf. my Sankhayana Aranyaka, p. 3; n. 6. 

9 Sayana here (cf. Anartiya on Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, VI, 13, 7; VII, 7, 4; Agvalayana 
Srauta Sitra, V, 19, 8; VI, 5,1, and comm.) explains that the samsthitasamcarah is when, after 
the completion of the pressing, the Hotr departs from the sadas by the west, the wzsamsthita° 
is when, before the pressing is finished, he leaves by the eastern side. The Sankhayana 
Srauta Sutra, XVII, 12, gives eight oblations on the dguidhriya, instead of three there and 
ten in the mdrjaliya. The Mantras are quite different. See XVII, 12, 1-4. The first is a 
long prose Mantra; the second to the seventh svdhd Mantras, and the eighth consists of 
a couple of verses, the first an anustubh, the second a gayatri in strongly marked iambic 
metre of an archaic type, neither of which verses has, according to Bloomfield’s Vedzc 
Concordance, any parallel. After reciting the verses, he puts down the ladle yathayatanam, 
departs by the way he came, and in front of the sadas to the north of the srw/éz, facing the 


266 ~ AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 1-7 


‘Indra, Brhaspati, Soma, and the goddess, Vac, have aided me.!? May Mitra 
and Varuna, Heaven and Earth, aid me when first I call url 

‘May the Adityas, the all-gods, and the seven anointed Kings," Vayu, Pusan, 
Varuna, Soma, Agni, Stirya, with the constellations, may they help me 200 

‘May the fathers protect me, and all this universe, and the children of Prsni, 
the Maruts, with their splendour, ye who have Agni as your tongue and are worthy 
of sacrificé, may ye gods, hearing our cry, protect us 13 Ul ; 

He offers ten oblations on the madrjaliya altar” to the south, the last of 
which he first divides into four and deposits to the north of the fire. In the 
middle of the day, after the carrying forth of the fire, the mdarjaliya fire is made 


east, he mutters the parimadah japah, vag dyur visvdyur visvam ayur chy eva hindropeht 
vitvatha vidi maghavan vida iti (cf. above, p. 263), after which he adores the several members 
of the fire altar conceived in human form (XVII, 12, 6-13, 6). For the Parimads themselves, 
cf, my Sankhayana Aranyaka, p. 4; Eggeling, S.&.Z., XLI, 288, n. 2, and for the meaning of 
a/mad, Lanman in Whitney’s Zranslation of Atharvaveda, p. 158. The Hotr goes north to 
the Agnidh’s fire. (For Agnidh, cf. Oldenberg, S. 3B. Z., XLVI, 189, and Macdonell, Vedic 
Grammar, p. 18, n. 6.) 

10 Or ‘may they aid me’, as Sdyana takes it, He thinks parvahitau is an epithet of 
Dyavaprthivi or Mitravarunau. 

11 Sayana explains this by the list in Taittirlya Aranyaka, I, 7, drogo bhrajah patarah 
patangah \ svarnaro jyotisiman vibhasah \ te asmai sarve divam atapanti\ This may be right, 
otherwise one might expect it to mean the seven Adityas. No doubt the seven Adityas set 
the model to the later theory of seven suns, whose names are variously given (cf. seven Rsis, 
seven Hotrs, seven sounds, &c., Oldenberg, S. 2. #., XLVI, 225); see Visnu Purana, VI, 2; 
Hopkins, Great Epic of India, p. 475. Rajendralala reads in the text m@ mz, which is certainly 
wrongly accented and seems not quite as likely as manu in view of the azz elsewhere used. 
The Taittirilya Brahmana, II, 5,8, 2 has: du tvendro madatv dnu Brhaspdtih \ dnu Sémo 
dnv Agntr avit \ dnu tva vtive deva avantu \ dnu saptd rajano yd utabhtsiktah \ dnu tod 
Mitrévérunév ihévatam \ dnu dyavaprthivit visvdsambhii \ siiryo dhobhir dnu tvdvatu\ can- 
dréma ndksatrair dnu tvdvatu \ Note the different reading wd adbhisiktah. The text 
appears from Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 973°, to occur in Kathaka Samhita, XXXVII, 
9 d, which has (9c) saryo ’hobhir anu tvavatu, confirming manu against Mitra’s ma nu 
(which is followed in the Concordance, p. 1028), and (gb) anu Somo anv Agnir avit, and 
(9 a) anu tvendro madatv anu Brhaspatih, thus presenting only one line as against the two 
lines of the Aranyaka and the Brahmana, In the next verse yé aguijihuaé uté va yajatrah 
is a tag found in RV., VI, 52, 13c, and in the other Samhitas (Bloomfield, p. 795»); the 
other three padas seem as yet unparalleled. The series of prose Mantras below is also (see 
Index IJ) unique. 

Tn the middle of the sadas and the kavivdhdnas there is a space from north to south. 
The dgnidhriya altar is at the north, the marjdliya at the south. With caturgrhitam, 
wyam must be understood, see Apastamba, Yajiiaparibhasa, 195 (S.B.Z£., XXX, 341); cf. 
caturgrhitena juhoti, Taittiriya Aranyaka, V,2; caturgrhitas tisra dyahutir, Aitareya Brahmana, 
VUI, 10, 9, °grhitam, VII, 21, but the construction is very awkward. Throughout the terms 


daksina and uttara are ambiguous. For the sadas the priests’ tent, cf. Satapatha Brahmana, 
Ill, 5, 3, 5, and Eggeling’s note. 


-V,1,1 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 267 


to kindle. (The offering is made in it) when it is covered up, and either to the 
east, the north, or the north-east side. (The verses used are as follows) — 

‘May I become unassailable like fire; may I become firmly rooted like 
the earth Uru 

‘May I become unapproachable* like the sky; may I become unassailable 
like the heaven i 2 Nt 

‘May I become without a superior like the sun; may I become renewed like 
the moon ii3 Nl 

‘May I become renewed like mind; may I be multiplied like the wind” i 4 Wt 

‘May I become one’s own like the day; and dear like night 5 l\ 

‘May I become born again like kine; may I become glorious” like a pair 6 tl 

‘Mine be the flavour of water and the form of plants 007 "| 

‘May I become widespreading * like food, and lordly like the sacrifice 1 8 I 

‘May I become like the Brahmin in the world, and like the Ksatriya for 


prosperity tg Ul 
‘When, O Agni, this assembly is gathered (RV., X, 11, 8) 1oW’ 


18 The idea seems to be that the fire is kept in from the time it is lighted on the mdrjaliya 
altar but is now ‘wakened’. gradhyti in this use is first found in the Srauta Sitras, Speijer, 
Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 112. 

4 The attraction of amdpyam is curious, but is paralleled in RV., I, 65, 5: pustir na ranva 
ksitir nd prthoi girir nd bhijma (Oldenberg, S.B. £., XLVI, 56), and below, mana tvapurvam, 
annam iva vibhu, gava iva punarbhuvah, and in the case of the verb, RV., V, 25, 8: 
dyumanto arcayo gravevocyate brhat, Oldenberg, 5S. B. £., XLVI, 417. Cf also Taittiriya 
Aranyaka, VIII, 6; Weber, Ind. Stud., V1, 221, n, For a series of words with dhiydsam, cf. 
Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, III, 20 and 21. 

15 yatha mana uttarottaram abhivrddhikinksaya prayatamanam sat tattatphalapraptya 
nitanam ripam pratipadyate .. - yatha vayur asadhadimase samudratiradidese va svayam 
uttarottarabhivyrddhya sangharipo bhavati (Sayana). 

16 Sdyana renders svamt as wealth, The day gives wealth by permitting mercantile operations. 
Emendation to svar is easy but improbable. Cf. the curious svdh in RV., I, 77, 5 (Oldenberg, 
S. B.E., XLVI, 88), yaksam iva, Gobhila Grhya Sitra, IIT, 4, 28; Geldner, Vedische Studien, 
III, 140. Night gives rest to the weary (Sayana); note przyo not priya. 

17 This must be the sense though the expression maricayah, ‘ glories, is curious. Kine 
have offspring yearly, and pairs (e.g. Uma and MaheSvara, Laksmi and Narayana) are glorious 
(Sayana). S 

18 The reading vibhu is certain, but both Rajendralala and the Anandasrama edition read 
in the commentary vibhwk, and Sayana may have so read, but this is not necessary. For a 
converse case, cf. V, 2, 1, when Rajendralala reads vasu for vasuh. The next Mantra offers 
considerable difficulty. Sayana renders as the Brahmin in the world and ksatram rajyam 
gajasvadisriyam adhipatih, apparently taking friydm as a genitive (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit 
Grammar, §§ 349, 351)- But the parallelism of the sentence calls urgently for a locative 
which gives fair sense, ‘in point of wealth” The speaker desires (a) renown, (b) wealth, 
Only the exact force of the locative varies in the two cases. 

“19 The last oblation is accompanied by a RV. verse. 


268 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, I- 


(In this stanza) the three words aéra, vidhajatha, and vitha are not in accord- 
ance with the Rgveda text.” 

Standing there he worships the sun,” turning so as to keep his right side 
towards it as it turns, with these verses, omitting the cries of svdha,” and with the 
verse, ‘Come hither, this is sweet, this is sweet. Drink this bitter draught. This 
is sweet, this is sweet.’ He then instructs the maidservants,* who carry full 
pitchers, six in front, three behind, (saying), ‘ Walk three times from left to right 
round this altar and this pitcher of water, smiting your right thighs with your 
right hands, and saying, “Come hither, this is sweet, this is sweet.” ’ 


2 This must mean that in the rite the RV. verse is to be altered by reading in pada 3, ratnd 
catra vibhajatha svadhivah for ratné ca yad vibhajasi, and in pada 4, bhagam no atra 
vasumantam vitha for vitat. Sadyana adds that these alterations are improper, just as the 
alteration widheh for vrdhatu in Brhaspatir no havisa vrdhatu, Taittiriya Samhita, I, 2, 2, 1; 
VI, 1, 2, 3; Maitrayani Samhita, I, 2, 2; III, 6,4. Thev.l. isnot in Bloomfield. But this is 
not implied in the Aranyaka. The verse occurs in Atharvaveda, XVIII, 1, 26, and Maitrayani 
Samhita, IV, 14, 15, but in neither place so altered. Bloomfield (Vedic Concordance, pp. 43°, 
749") also can merely quote Sayana’s view. Perhaps the Baskala Sakha is meant. A different 
case occurs in IV: Zndram dhdnasya satdye havamahe when havamahe is added (as in 
Mahai:arayana Upanisad, 7, cited by Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 210%) to the first three 
words which are found in RV., VIII, 3,5 d. But the Mahanamni verses are not part of the 
RV. and their occurrence is not parallel to this remarkable case. 

21 This is done later in the Saakhayana Aranyaka, I, 5, where the words are almost identical, 
atraiva tisthann ddityam upatisthate. _The Mantra is quite different, see Sranta Sitra, XVII, 
13,9, 10. For the following, see my Sankhayana Aranyaka, pp. 76 sq. 

The offerings are accompanied as usual by the cry suakd. These are omitted. For the 
tule, cf. Apastamba, Yajiiaparibhasa, 87 (S. B. H., XXX, 339). 

23 Cf, Sahkhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 14, where apparently deliberately the direction is from 
right to left (apradaksinam), though the words said are alike, hai mahd 3 idam madhu idam 
madhu. The dance is clearly a rain and vegetation spell, cf. Farnell, Cuz/¢s of the Greek 
States, III, 103. These and the other ceremonies are all mentioned in the other parallel 
passages, Latyayana Srauta Sitra, III, 10-12; IV, 1-3; Tandya Brahmana, V, 5, 6; Kathaka, 
XXXIV, 5; Katyayana Srauta Sitra, XIII, 3; Taittiriya Samhita, VII, 5, 9 and 10; Taittiriya 
Brahmana, I, 2,6, 7. These versions differ in many details; the most important rite which 
is mentioned in neither of the Rgvedic works is the struggle of an Arya and a Sidra for a 
round skin, which represents the sun (cf. Oldenberg, Religcon des Veda, PP- 444, 506; Usener, 
Archiv f. Religionswissenschaft, 1904, pp. 297 sq.). It is noteworthy that in Latyayana, IV, 
3, 18, where the words repeated are like those in Sankhayana the form vadatyah also occurs. 
So Drahyayana ; Taittiriya Samhita, VII, 5, 10, has gayantyah. The direction there is also pra- 
daksinam. After the eight d/ya libations in the dgnidhriya fire, according to the Saakhayana 
Aranyaka, I, 4, come the parimads. They are twenty-five in number and are followed by 
seven stotriyas named angirasa saman, bhiitechadim siman, krosa, anukrosa, payas, arka, and 
arkapuspa. The Satapatha Brahmana, X, 1, 2, 8; 9, contains a somewhat parallel version, 
see Eggeling, S. 2. £., XLIII, 288, n. 2, and thus again (cf. Introd., p. 36) agrees with the 
Sahkhayana against the Aitareya, These sdmans are called devachandémsi, Sankhayana I, 5 
and are followed by jafas. ‘Then comes an adoration of the members of the fire (se here 
V, 1, 2), and of the sun, and the Hotr declares that the ‘great one has united with the great 


ep re: TRANSLATION AND NOTES 269 


2. ‘When the singing of the s/o/ra has been requested, then do ye cast down 
the water in three places, on the northern altar, on the mdrjaliya altar, and 
the rest within the enclosure.’* Having gone away so as to keep the marjaliya 
fire on his right,* he stands before the sacrificial post in front of the fire, with 
face to the west, and worships the head of the fire with the words, ‘Honour to 
the Gayatra which is thy head:’ then, returning by the way he came,* with 
face to the north, he worships the right side of the fire with the words, ‘ Honour 
to the Rathantara which is thy right side.’ Then passing to the west of the 
tail of the fire,t with face to the east, he worships the left side of the fire with 
the words, ‘Honour to the Brhat which is thy left side? Then on the west° 


one’, i.e. Agni with Prthivi, ‘the god with the goddess,’ i.e. Vayu with Antariksa, ‘ Brahman 
(neut.) with Brahmani’ (see Introd., p. 68, n. 1), i. e. Aditya with Dyaus. On this follows 
(I, 6) a ViSvamitra legend (cf. Aitareya, II, 2, 3) to explain these identifications. For the 
use of upa+4/sthd, cf. the famous passage in the Mahabhasya, I, 3, 25 (Weber, Jud. Stud., 
XIII, 480, 481), where an ape ufatisthati to warm himself, but a man «patisthate in reverence. 

1 For antarvedi, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 33,1; extahparidhi, Brhaddevata, VII, 98; 
Wackernagel, A/tindische Grammatik, 1, 312. This belongs of course to the end of the 
preceding Khanda, and it is difficult to see why it has been separated in Sayana’s text. w¢tare 
marjaliya means the dgnidhriya fire, which was used for the same purpose. 

2 This describes the worship of the fire altar in its simplest bird shape, head, two wings, 
tail, and body. In Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 13, the sdmans and the order differ, 
being (1) parvardha with Gayatra, (2) right side with Rathantara, (3) left side with Brhat, 
(4) madhya with Vamadevya, (5) tail with Yajnayajiiya. Cf. Satapatha Brahmana, IX, 1, 
2, 35 and 39; X, 1, 2, 8, and Eggeling’s summary (based on this passage and Sankhayana), S.B.Z., 
XLIII, 283, o.; Latyayana Srauta Sitra, III, 11, 3, where as here the body is placed last, but 
which agrees as to the samans with Sajkhayana and also with Drahyayana, and in which 
the sprinkling of water in three parts also occurs. The Samans referred to will be found as 
follows, gayatram in trivrt stoma, Samaveda, I, 146-148; 263-265; 800-802 (or II, 8, 4, see 
S. B. E., XLII, 178); vathantaram in paticadagsa stoma, ibid., II, 30, 31; brhat in saptadasa 
stoma, ibid., II, 159, 160 ; rdjanam in pafcavimsa stoma, ibid., 11, 833-835; bhadra in ehavinsa 
stoma, ibid., II, 460-462. For the Samans cf. II, 3, 4. For a drawing of the agutksetra see 
Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 235. 

2 He had gone from the mdrjaliya in the south to the east side of the cityagni and he 
now returns to the south. Xdthantara is unusual, but it is supported by all the MSS. 
Latyayana and Sankhayana have rathantaraya. 

* It is not clear why he should not go round to the north, but all that is done is to go 
to the end of the west or tail side, when looking east, along the left side, he utters the 
Mantra. ? 

5 pascat may simply mean ‘next ’, or, as Sayana takes it, refer to the place where the 
Hotr stands. Apparently the difference between this and his former position is that he stands 
directly behind the tail, instead of going past it. This account of his movements corresponds on 
the whole with that of the ceremony of the Satarudriya, which has analogies to the Mahavrata 
(Satapatha Brahmana, IX, 1, 1, 44). In it, according to the Satapatha, TX, Tye2eoois4s 
the Samans, (1) gayatram, (2) rathantaram, (3) brhat, (4) Vamadevyam, (5) yajhayajniyam, 
and (6) Prajdpatihydaya, correspond to (1) head, (2) right wing, (3) left wing, (4) body, 
(5) tail, (6) heart; according to Latyayana, I, 5, 11, which very closely follows the order of 


270 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 2- 


of the fire, with face to the east, he worships the tail with the words, ‘ Honour 
to the Bhadra which is thy tail and thy support.” Then on the south of the 
tail he worships the body with the words, ‘Honour to the Rajana which is 
thy body.’ 

3. He returns to the seat as he went The swing has already been made 
ready. Having cleansed the two posts, the ropes, and the cross-beam, and 
having taken them by the road called “rtha,’ having gone round to the left 
the Agnidh’s altar,’ (having brought them within) the seat by the east door 
(he places the implements °) to the left of all the altars. The planks of the swing 
are made of udumbara or of palaga, or of both. There should be three planks 
worked on both sides, or two, and a like number of sharp-pointed sticks, The 


movements in this Aitareya passage, the (1) gd@yatram., (2) rathantaram, (3) brhat, (4) yyfa- 
yajniyam, (5) Vimadevya, and (6) Prajapatihydaya, correspond to (1) head, (2) right side, 
(3) left side, (4) tail, (5) right arm-pit, and (6) left arm-pit. Cf. also the elaborate ceremonial 
of the pavimadah at the Mahavrata as described in Satapatha, Xa 2 OG Sankhayana Aranyaka, 
II, 4 (with Friedlinder’s note, p. 37); and the similar use after the beginning of the prstha stotra 
of the parimadah (prana, apina, vratapaksau, Pragdpater hydaya, Vasisthasya nthava, 
sattrasyaradhi, $loka and anusloka, yama, ayus, navastobha, rsyasya saéman) in the worship 
of the parts of the altar in Tandya Brahmana, V, 4, 1-13; Latyayana Srauta Sitra, III, 9, 
1 sq.; Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 2, 6,5. In the Mahavrata Saman the -parts of the bird are 
head, right wing, left wing, tail, and trunk only (Eggeling, S.B.£., XLII, xxvii). The 
whole conception is clearly borrowed (cf. Introd., p. 50) from the altar in the ge 
which gave origin to the mystic doctrines of the Adhvaryus (see especially Satapatha 
Brahmana, VI-X), and of which the Mahavrata is an adaptation by the Hotrs. In Vajasaneyi 
Samhita, XII, 4, the ¢vzvyt is the head, the gdyatram the eyes, drhat and rathantaram the 
wings, the hymn the soul, the yayams? the name, the metres the limbs, the Vamadevyam the 
body, the ya/fayajftiyam the tail. For the relation of sd@man and words, cf. Oldenberg, 
Z. D. M. G., XXXVIIL, 439 sqq., 464 sq. ; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch, Litt., I, 143 sq., and 
see Eggeling, S. B.Z., XLIII, 180, n. 2; Weber, Jud. Stud., XIII, 276 sq. The Vamadevya is 
based on Samaveda, II, 32, 33; the Yajiayajiiya on Samaveda, II, 53, 54. 

‘ He comes back to the seat near the marjaliya fire, which he left to worship the cetya 
altar. The expression occurs several times in the Srauta Sitra. For the eight altars see 
Eggeling, S.B.Z., XXVI, 148, n.4 and the plan on p. 475, followed by Caland and Henry, 
L’ Agnistoma ; Hillebrandt, Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, p. 191. 

2 By the Adhvaryus. Cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VII, 32. 

8 This is the name of the passage between the w/kara and catvdla, Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, 
V, 15, 2, &c.; Maitrayani Samhita, III, 8,10. The action is rendered intelligible by a glance 
at the plan in Eggeling. 

* The fart of parivrajya must refer to circumambulation. The meaning of the phrase is 
probably given by Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 11, 4, purvaya duaragnidhram prapa- 
dyottarendgnidhriyam dhisnyam paryetya, though the pirvaya dvara here is otherwise applied. 
The idea is, he goes round the altar from right to left, probably. Cf. also ibid., V, 14. 
The sentence is so elliptical as to be unintelligible without Sayana’s pravefya. Sankhayana, 
XVII, 7, 11, is much more simple. 

5 The verb must be gathered from atyddadhati below ; strictly speaking the next sentences 
are parenthetical and this sentence is continuous with daksinottare sthiine nikhaya. 


-V, 1,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 271 


swing should be a yard in size from east to west, its cross breadth should be 
a yard less a hand; the points of its (planks) should be to the north, and they 
should be fastened together by sticks with their points east. Having inserted the 
posts in the earth to the north and south, around the seat of the Hotr, he spreads 
the cross-beam over them so that it is on a level with the worker's face.® Holes 
are (bored) in the corners of the planks of the swing. He fastens the planks 
above by means of the ropes, the right one on the south, the left on the north.’ 
The ropes should be of dardha grass, and with three strands,® one rope to 


® In the Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, XVII, 10, 7 and 8, the height is measured by the head of 
the Hotr, or if he is small his outstretched arms. Ibid., 4, 6, shows that both the planks and 
the cross-beam have the points north. For the construction with fartuh dependent on 
asya°, ef. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1316. Speijer (Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 113) 
gives many classical examples. For adhitah with accus., cf. Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, 
p. 183. It is found in Mantra, but more often in Brahmana, Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 
Syntax, § 88. For uttarena with accus., cf. Gaedicke, Der Accusativ in Veda, pp. 207 sq. ; see 
Liebich, Bess. Beitr., XI, 284. Delbriick and Gaedicke seem right in explaining the use as 
derived from the accus. with antdér and antara. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 273, offers 
no explanation. In V, 1, 1, we find wé/arato *gneh; in V, 1, 2, daksinatah puchasya with the 
more natural adnominal genitive. But in V, 1, 2, aparena has the accus. In Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, VII, 3, amtarena has the gen.; in the Sutra, the acc. The measures are dubious, see 
Hopkins, /. A. 0. S., XXII, 141. 

7 The Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 10, 14, 15, explains that the right rope is tied to 
the north of the south post, the left to the south of the north post, i.e. inside the posts, 
just as in a modern swing. The point of view is of course facing east, with the south on 
the right and north on the left. 

® The use of ¢rigune and dvigune with different senses of guna is awkward, but appears 
clearly so meant. Sayana points out that the rope as doubled would be 24 fathoms in length, 
of which only a yard would be used by the rope passing under the plank (above isumatrah 
pran prenkhak). There would thus be plenty of rope available for the tying, as the top 
was only a man’s height or less. Sayana takes savyadaksine as ‘inclining to the left and 
right’, i.e. the ropes should not go straight up. The only obscure point in this description of 
the tying on of the seat of the swing to the cross-beam is pradaksinam, since it is not at first 
sight obvious how this applies to the act of fastening ropes. It apparently must mean that 
after the rope has been passed under the seat of the swing the one end is rolled round the 
cross-beam slanting to the right, the other (on the opposite side, of course”) also slanting to 
the right and the ends then are tied across. Provided there was sufficient friction to keep 
the ropes from slipping this would seem to give a substantial knot (cf. wéstarkya). If this 
is so, we cannot accept Sayana’s theory of savyadaksine and must fall back either on the 
view that the word means merely left (hand) rope and right (hand) rope, or take the epithet 





4 It is very unlikely that both ends of the rope should have been brought to the same 
side of the eross-beam. In that case pradaksinam would be rather less than more in point. 
Speijer (Vedische und Sanshrit-Syntax, § 106, n.) points out that adjective dvandvas are not 
unknown even in Sanskrit (cf. his Sanskrit-Syntax, § 208), and (p. 32, n. 1) argues from 
Panini, VI, 2, 38, when chadasa is given as a dvandva that the grammarians recognized such 


types. He (§ 107) gives classical examples of distributive dvandvas. 


272 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 3- 


the left, one to the right, and five fathoms long, and should be folded double. 
Then folding (each end) thrice (to the right) round the cross-beam he makes 
a knot on the top, which can only be untied by twisting. They support the 
posts so as to be steady by means of branches and brushwood.’ The swing 
should be four fingers or a hand distant from the ground.” On the right it 
may be somewhat higher or level. It should be a foot from the altar. 

4, When! the swing has been put in position, the Hotr taking a lute of 
udumbara wood, with a hundred strings, in both hands, strikes it,’ beginning 
from the lower side, as one does an ordinary lute.? The different notes of the 
lute he should produce in turn by the seven metres,* each with four (syllables) 


as applying to each rope and as meaning, ‘ with strands coiled from left to right.’ Cf. perhaps 
the equally obscure passage, Apastamba Yajiiaparibhasa, 60, 61 (S. B. Z., XXX, 331, where 
Max Miiller says, ‘The exact process here intended is not quite clear. The ropes seem to 
have been made of vegetable fibres. See Katy., I, 3, 15-17’). If savyadaksine =\eft and 
right, cf. for the use of the dvandva, Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, II, i, 160, who cites 
Atharvaveda, XII, 1, 28: padbhyim daksinasavyabhyam ; Taittiriya Brahmana, I, 5, Io, I: 
suvarnarajatabhyam husibhyam. The different order of words, savyadaksina, is in accordance 
with the usual rule as to number of syllables determining the order of the numbers of their 
compounds, Wackernagel, II, i, 166. 

® Sayana explains that they fill up the holes in which are placed the feet of the posts 
with dust, which is not thrown in by hand but by branches and éysis. This, however, is 
quite unnecessary. Brushwood would be a much better material for strengthening the hold 
of a post. He defines dysz as trnavallitalapatravenudaladibhir nirmita alpakatavisesah. ‘The 
swing was obviously shaped like this 

1 The distance according to Sahkhayana should be a grddeSa, XVII, 10, 13. Ibid., XVU, 1, 
discusses the planks; 2, the ropes and dsandi; 3, the lute; 4, the drums; 5, 6, 7, the other 
accessories and the preliminary steps, in great order and detail. Cf. Latyayana Srauta Sitra, 
III, 12. 

1 There are similar passages in the Tandya Brahmana, V, 5, 4sq., and Latyayana Srauta 
Sitra, III, 12, 8; IV, 1, besides in the Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 3; 15, Iosq. Sayana 
points out that the Hotr is now seated to the west of the swing. The exact words as to 
the lute do not occur in Sankhayana, but it is elaborately described, XVII, 3. 

2 Sayana renders merely, ‘he should hold it on his left side like a lute.’ But the idea is 
perhaps rather that he strikes one string after another, ascending in the scale, beginning 
from below and ascending, wttaratah, cf. irdhvam below and Agnisvamin on Latyayana 
Srauta Sutra, IV, 1, 4. 

3 So Sayana on RV., I, 85, 10, where he similarly explains the phrase véxamz dhamantah 
used of the Maruts, cf. III, 2, 5, n. 1; Benfey (Sadmaveda, Glossar, p. 169) takes vaya there as 
flute, and Zimmer (A/tindisches Leben, p. 289) follows him. Max Miiller (A/arut Hymns, 
pp- 120, 121) preferred to see in it merely ‘voice’. For wduhami, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische 
Grammatik, 1, 92, who considers # here an ablaut of ~. Panini restricts its use to Atmanepada, 
but Katyayana allows Parasmaipada with a prefix as here (Liebich, Payzsz, p. 84). 

* i.e. he plays notes corresponding to verses composed in these metres. The four more 
are, Sayana says, vray, dvipada, atichandas, and chando’ntaram. If this last be omitted ten 
are got. But despite its use elsewhere, e. g., Satapatha Brahmana, X, I, 2, 8, it must surely 


-V, 1,4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 273 


over, or with ten. (He should say), ‘I produce thee with the gaya/ri metre. 
I produce thee with the awustubh metre. I produce thee with the wszzh metre. 
I produce thee with the dzhafi metre. I produce thee with the panks' metre. 
I produce thee with the /rzsfuéh metre. I produce thee with the jagaf metre. 
I produce thee with the wraj metre. I produce thee with the dvzpada metre. 
I produce thee with the a/chandas metre.’ Having gone through the metres 
according to the series of notes, he strikes the lute thrice, beginning from the 
foot with a branch of uwdumbdara wood, fresh and still leafy, using the foot of 
it, (to the words), ‘For up-breathing I strike thee, for down-breathing I strike 
thee, for cross-breathing I strike thee.’ But he should not say, ‘I strike thee,’ for 
other desires.® Then he hands over to the Saman singers the lute with the 
branch. He places his two hands on the back plank (with the words), ‘ For 
creatures thee (I touch),’ and pushes the swing to the east (with the words), 
‘Swing forward like the breath,’ crosswise’ (with the words), ‘Swing crosswise 
for cross-breathing, and back to himself (with the words), ‘Swing like back- 
breathing.’ He repeats the words buh, bhuvak, and svar He then pushes 
the swing to the east® (with the words), ‘For breath I push thee,’ crosswise 
(with the words), ‘For cross-breathing I push thee,’ and back to himself (with 
the words), ‘For down-breathing I push thee.’ (With the words), ‘May the 
Vasus mount thee with the gdyafri metre, I mount after them,’ he places his 
elbows on the back plank. Then he should touch the front plank with his 


mean, each metre has four more syllables than its predecessor, viz. 24, 28, 32, &c., and so 
Sayana takes it on Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 6, 6. 

5 No doubt, as Sayana says, a reference to a practice of other Sakhas, but not to the 
Sankhayana Aranyaka or Srauta Sitra. For the words audumbaryd, &c., cf. audumbaryardraya 
fakhaya sapaldsayé in Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 13. For the construction, cf. the acc. of 
whole and part, e.g. AV., V, 8, 9 (cited by Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 20; 
Delbriick, Vergl. Synt., 1, 385): enam-marmani vidhya, when, however, according to Whitney, 
Translation of Atharvaveda, the reading should be marmanz, loc., though marmant appears 
also in the Ajmir edition, samzvat 1957. Somewhat analogous cases appear in Speijer, § 83; 
Gaedicke, Der Accusativ, p. 268. Or miladesena may refer to the lute. 

® In Sankhayana it is the Udgatr who has throughout to deal with the lute. 

7 Clearly the vydua is a breath at right angles to prdva and apana. This is an unusual 
conception of it, and is not mentioned in Deussen, Philosophie der Upanishads, p. 252; 
ESL. pe 279 

8 Sayana says that the repetition of these three words denotes a desire that the three worlds 
be established by the threefold moving of the swing. They are used in Latyayana, EVES hy 4s 1 
connexion with the playing of the lute. Cf. also Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 339; 
Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 432, n.; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch, Litt., 1, 162. 

° The eva denotes that the action is as before, only the verses being different (Sayana). 

10 In Sankhayana, XVII, 16, he touches the swing with his breast and then alternately he puts 
his right and left side over with Mantras almost identical with those here, save that arko ’s7 is 
prefixed, and each ends with a dative rajyaya, &c. He then plants his two feet to the east. 


KEITH fi 


274 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V,1,4- 


hands separately, like a serpent about to creep. He should touch the middle 
plank with his chin, or if there are two ™ the point of joining of the two. (With 
the words), ‘May the Rudras mount thee with the ¢rzstubh metre, I mount after 
them,’ he lays his right thigh* (over the seat). (With the words), ‘May the 
Adityas mount thee with the jaga/i metre, I mount after them,’ (he lays) his 
left thigh. (With the words), ‘May the All-gods mount thee with the axustubh 
metre, I mount after them, he mounts (the swing). To the west of his own 
altar he places his right foot pointing to the east, and then his left.* If the 
former is tired, then the latter; if the latter, then the former. But the two together 
must never be off the ground. The Hotrakas sit down on bundles of grass, 
and so does the Brahman priest. The Udgatr sits on a stool of udumbara wood. 
If he has to leave for any absolutely necessary action, then having set one to 
guard, he descends towards the east, and having carried out the exact business he 


Then he sits crosswise on the swing and touches the back of it with the Mantra, Prajapatis 
tuarohatu vayuh prenkhayatu. This act is preceded and followed by three expirations and three 
inspirations. The Mantras of the Udgatr in mounting his seat in Latyayana Srauta Sitra, 
III, 12, 8, are like those in Sankhayana, omitting aro ’sz, but Latyayana, II, 12, 9, permits 
them to be reduced to simply gdyatrena tud chandasarohamt, &c, In Latyadyana the verses 
are said by the Udgatr. Ibid., 10-12. Gautama adds a fifth stoma with vatrajena, Dhanam- 
jayya has four, and Sandilya only three. 

1 The Anandagrama edition reads yathd hi, which is nonsense. The reading of Rajendralala 
is that clearly of Sdyana, who takes the point of comparison to lie in the fact that he raises his 
hands as a snake about to creep raises its head. Vand must be an adverb meaning ‘ separately °. 
It might possibly be suggested that it meant here ‘without’, a sense ascribed by Panini, IT, 3, 32, 
but even then the comparison with the snake would have little point. For the use of nana, 
cf, Saakhayana Srauta Sitra, XVI, 7,8; 10; XVII, 3, 8; Latyayana Srauta Sutra, III, 3, 9 
(= Katyayana Srauta Sitra, XII, 2,8): 2dna papakrtya; Agvalayana Grhya Sitra, I, 3,10: ndnapi 
sati daivate; Manava Grhya Sitra, II, 18, and other passages in Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, 
p. 545». For a similar metaphor, cf. Aévalayana Srauta Sutra, VI, 6, 5: yathd Sakunir utpatisyan. 

12 There may be two or three, V, I, 3. They are fastened by the sacis. 

18 Tn Sahkhayana Srauta Sutra, XVII, 16,1, occurs, daksinam bhagam atmano ’tiharan, where 
Govinda explains by Ardaydt prthak kurvan, but Sayana here talks of prerkharohanam, and the 
sense requires the meaning ‘lays over’, which is probably meant also in the Sankhayana passage, 
as pointed out by Friedlander on Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 7. Cf. Introd., p. 67. 

14 The same series of gods and metres occurs in the Vajasaneyi Samhita, XI, 60, 65; Taittiriya 
Samhita, IV, 1,5; Maitrayani Samhita, II, 7,6; Tandya Mahabrahmana, VII, 6; Saakhayana 
Aranyaka, XI, 8. Cf. Satapatha Brahmana, VI, 5, 3 (aguzcayana), X, 4, 17, and see Weber, 
Ind. Stud., X1U1, 268, and cf. the Rajasiya verses, Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 6, 1-4. 

18 The exact sense of this is taken by Sayana to be that the feet are to be used alternately, 
and this seems correct, though it is not said exactly that the two cannot ever be both on the ground 
at once. They must not be both off the ground, cf. I,2, 4. For the gen. with pascd?, cf. Aitareya 
Brahmana, VIII, 10, 9: etya grhan pascad grhasyagner upavistayanvarabdhaya rtvig antatah 
hamsena caturgrhitas tisra aGjydhutir aindrih prapadam juhoti. This corrects Speijer’s remark 
( Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 83), followed by Delbriick, Vergl. Synt., 1, 743, that pascat is 
not so found before the Srauta Sitras. 


SyireE TRANSLATION AND NOTES 275 


should mount again in the manner above set forth, omitting the utterance (of 
bhi, bhuvak, and svar). 

5. He instructs the Prastotr, ‘In the paficavimsa stoma proclaim the first 
praithara when either three verses remain to be said, or two and a half! or 
twelve and a half’ Jatikarnya holds that this should be done when there remain 
twelve and a half verses. When the Prastotr has spoken, he repeats? (the verse), 
‘Thou art a bird with fair wings. I shall speak forth this word, which will 
declare much,* fare far, produce much, gain much, effect more than much, 


16 Sayana takes ajafaya vrtd as the form. It may equally be ajapaya avrtd, avrt 
being more usual in this sense, as in Manava Grhya Sitra, II, 4,2; 9, 8; Agvalayana Srauta 
Sitra, V, 11, 4; 5, &c.; cf. Weber, Jud. Stud., V, 410. If avasyakarmine is read the sense 
must be, ‘If he should go for (to serve) some one who has something he must do on hand.’ 
At first sight this seems easier, but if °Za7mzme had been original it would hardly have been changed 
to karmane, a less obvious construction, while the reverse of this process would be not unnatural. 
If °karmine is read, see for the formation which is rare in early texts, Wackernagel, A/tindische 
Grammatik, I1,i, 121,122. For the dat., cf. Gaedicke, Der Accusativ im Veda, p.135; Delbriick, 
Vergl. Synt., 1, 177, 301. 

1 So Sayana explains ardhatrtiyasu. The pratihara is repeated five times usually before 
the last pada of the verse, cf. Hillebrandt, Rztual-Litteratur, p. 100 and reff. For the impera- 
tive in “fa, signifying an action to be carried out after something else, cf. Delbriick, A/éindische 
Syntax, p. 363; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 570,571. The dictum of Whitney that the 
benedictive sense of the imperative in ¢@¢ was not exemplified, can only be supported on a very 
narrow interpretation of the word ‘ benedictive’, not merely for classical Sanskrit (where it occurs 
often in Jaina Kavya texts) but also for Vedic. E. g. in RV., III, 22,2: dgne vt pasya brhatabhi 
rayésam no neta bhavatad dénu dyin, it is surely absurd to take bhavatat as imperative, as does 
Oldenberg (.S.2.Z., XLVI, 288); similarly’in Whitney’s own example from RV.: yad ardhvas 
ustha drdvinehd dhattat, ‘mayst’ is clearly the sense, and ‘may’ he himself uses in translating 
the example from the MBh., dhavan prasadam kurutat. Probably, therefore, in denying the 
“benedictive’’ sense, Whitney refers to that word in the narrowest sense of a blessing pronounced 
by some person who in the ordinary view is entitled to bless. This is so far borne out by the 
fact that Panini, III, 1, 50 (azs¢ ca) is explained by the Siddhantakaumudi (following the 
Kasika Vitti) as asth prayokiur dharmah \ asasituh pitrader iyam uktih \ In these cases the 
benedictive is regularly used in Sanskrit, e.g. tat kim anyad asasmahe kevalam viraprasuya 
bhiyah (Vikramorvasi), or the king’s formal df7h, e. g. dkalpantam ca bhiyat samupacitasukhah 
samgamo sajjandnam (Ratnavali), or the imperative (e.g. in the verse from the Ratnavali just 
cited in fact three imperatives occur), but in the early language at any rate I can find no certain 
example of -/d¢ so used. But the distinction between a wish and a blessing is evanescent. 

2 The Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 8, and Srauta Sitra, XVII, 17, give the Mantras in reverse 
order, and omit the wkthaviryani. For suparno’si garutman see Vajasaneyi Samhita, XII, 4; 
Sankhayana identifies this with Zrdya, but see my Sankhayana Aranyaka, De faite Oe 

® Sayana interprets these epithets very inadequately, but it is most probable that they are all 
genuine including svar vadisyantim, which has least MS. authority. The Anandasrama edition 
considers Sayana’s text defective, but most probably he regarded some of the epithets as obvious, 
though perhaps he had not svar vadisyantim. Latyayana has only after vadisyami: bahu 
karisyantim bahu karisyan svar gamayisyantim svar gamayisyan mam iman yajamanan, see lV, 
2,10. So also Drahyayana. Sankhayana Aranyaka recognizes bahu karisyantim bahor bhityah 
karisyantim svar gamisyantim svar iman yajamanan vaksyantim only, which resembles 


Te, 


276 AITAREYA ARANYAKA YGs- 


which goes to heaven, which will declare heaven, fare to heaven, produce heaven, 
gain heaven, carry this sacrifice to heaven, and carry the sacrificer, me, to heaven.’ 
The word ‘sacrificer’ applies only to one who has been consecrated, not 
to one not consecratedt In the case of a friend of his,> he should say 
‘carries N. N. to heaven’, not ‘will carry’. He then repeats the ukthaviryas,° 
and, ‘ Breath (is united) with speech, may I be united with speech. Eye is united 
with mind, may I be united with mind. Hearing is united with the self, may 
I be united with the self. May I have greatness, glory, good fortune, enjoyment, 
the sfobha? and the sfoma verse, sound, renown, prosperity, fame, and fruition.’ ® 


Latyayana’s version given above. The Srauta Siitra, XVII, 17, 1, has: premdadm vacant 
vadisyami bahu karisyantim bahu karisyan bahor bhityah svar gamisyantim svar gamisyan. 
Bloomfield (Vedic Concorilance, p. 642”) gives Latyayana and Sankhayana as having svargam, &c., 
instead of svar gam®, &c., but that this is quite wrong may be proved, not only by its inherent 
improbability but also by Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 8 (the Aranyaka unluckily did not come to 
Bloomfield’s notice), where occurs svar hy esa vag gamisyanti bhavatz; see my note, 7 &. 4. S., 
1908, p. 204. 

4 ie. not to the Hotr in an efdha or ahina, but in a saiira. CE V553503) De tae: 
III, 2, 4, n. 2. 

5 This seems to be the same. If so, this passage recognizes the performance for a friend 
against Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1; the case of an enemy is specially dealt with in that 
Aranyaka, I, 8; »d@mum being said. The future is not to be used, for the present is to be 
used to signify the immediate attainment of heaven (Sayana). 

6 The six Mantras, ghosaya tud, Slokaya tua, Srnvate tod, upasynvate tua, asrutyat tua, 
Grutaya tua, says Sayana. Though Sankhayana does not mention the w&thaviryant here, 
they are frequently alluded to in the Srauta Sitra, VII, 9, 6; 10, 15; 19, 25; 20, 11, &c. See 
Sayana’s list, Agvalayana Srauta Stra, V, Q, 21; 10, 10; 14,16; 15, 23; 18, 13; 20, 8, and 
cf. Eggeling, S. 2. Z., XXVI, 327. There is one for each of the Hottr’s Sastras. 

7 Sayana explains as the fruits of these parts of the Saman. The omission of the verb 
may be compared with V, 2, 2,n.13. In Taittiriya Aranyaka, IV, 21, is mayd dhayi suviryam 
after a series of loc. Compare for the list, Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, V,1, 10: bhargayt me voco 
bhadram me voco bhitam me vocah Sriyam me voco yaso me voco mayt bhargo mayt bhadram 
mayi bhutir mayt $rir mayi yasah. Scheftelowitz, Zur Stammbildung in den indo-germanischen 
Sprachen, takes bhargas as equal to ‘beauty’, quoting RV., I, 141, 1: bd] itthé tdd vdpuse 
dhéyi darsatém devdsya bhdrgah sdhaso ydto jdni; IL, 62, 10; AV., XIX, 3%, 13 Vij Go,2% 
Satapatha Brahmana, V, 4, 5, 1, and comparing Old Slavonic d/iskatz, &c. These sentences 
it will be noted contain older forms of words and expressions than the ordinary Sitra form 
or the mere liturgical direction; cf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. viii, and V, 3, 2, n. 17. 
So vag devi somasya trpyatu and duham mahat in V, 3, 2. A precise parallel is found in 
Taittirlya Aranyaka, IV, 11: sdm ahdm ayusa\ sdm pranéna\ sdm vdrcasa \ sam pdyasa \ sdm 
gaupatyéna\ sdm rayds pbsena\ vy asau, &e. Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVII, 17,1, has : 
sam vak pranena sam aham pranena, and sam caksur, &c., as in the Aitareya, but say 
Srvotram, &c., it omits. 

After stoma, loka may well be ‘ verse’, or possibly ‘hymn of praise’. Elsewhere it means, 
however, merely ‘fame’, e.g. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 7 (Kanva), 18 (Madhyandina) : 
evdm kirtim slékam vindate, which appears to be the only Upanisadic passage with that sense 
(Jacob, Concordance, p. 940). 

8 Bhujabhuktyor bhedo bhogyabhedena drastavyah (Sayana). 


EVs i's TRANSLATION AND NOTES 277 


Having called® (to the Adhvaryu), he mutters the word ‘speech’. There are 
three calls (for the Hotr), at the beginning of the Sastra, of the m7v/d, and 
of the concluding verse. The Adhvaryus" make sounds. On this day one” 
should give much food. They cause a warrior’ to pierce a skin. They smite 
the earth drum, and women play lutes. There is intercourse of creatures,!° and 
a conversation between a student and a courtesan. The Udgatrs sing various 
Samans for the Niskevalya Sastra,!° the Hotr begins with the strophe of the 
Rajana Saman.” 


® In Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 12, 5, the anujapa is: vag ayur visvayur vifvam 
ayur ehy eva hindropehi vifvatha vidi maghavan vida iti. The call is adhvaryo somsavom, 
Aitareya Brahmana, III, 12, &c.; Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 17, 14. Garbe, Rztual- 
Litteratur, pp. 100-102; Caland and Henry, L’ Agnistoma, p. 232. 

1° Not, as in the rakr?z, also with the anuriipas and dhayyds (Sayana). 

 Karayanti is little, if any, more than a simple verb. Cf. epic examples in Holtzmann, 
on Whitney’s Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 1041, 1068; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 156; 
Sanskrit-Syntax, § 304. So in Pali and Prakrit, Miiller, Padi Grammar, p.107. This is a 
preliminary to the beginning of the Sastra. Presumably the words, like those mentioned below, 
are intended to frighten away demons, &c. Cf. Cook, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1902, p. 15 ; 
Famell, Cults of the Greek States, III, 31 ; Crooke, Morthern India, p. 196; my Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, p. 78. 

12 i.e. the yajamana. 

18 The ceremony is described at greater length in Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 15. The 
king or his representative pierces the skin with three arrows, which are not allowed to penetrate 
through. The idea is clearly a rain spell. The arrows pierce the sky and bring down the 
waters the sky imprisons. This idea may explain the archer in the myth of the descent of Soma, 
though the idea appears distorted there (Bloomfield, 7.4. 0.5., XVI, 22 sq.). For the ace. 
and instr., cf. Gaedicke, Der Accusativ im Veda, pp. 275 sq.; Liebich, Bezz. Bettr., XI, 
272 sq.; Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, pp. 225, 226; Vergl. Synt., 11,117, 118; III, 2, 4, n. 16. 

* The drumming is performed on a raw hide, stretched over a hole dug in the ground outside 
the vedi, by means of the tail of the sacrificial animal, Saakhayana, XVII, 5. There are also 
four or six ordinary drums used. The wives used various instruments, ghdtakarkarir avagha- 
tarikah kandavinah pichora iti, ibid.; XVII, 3,12. Another list, partly the same, in Latyayana, 
IV, 2, 1-8. Cf. Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., II, 190; J. A. O. S., XXIII, 309. 

For similar ceremonies to promote fertility, cf. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, III, 80, 103 ; 
Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, pp. 21sq.; my Sénkhayana Aranyaka, pp. 82 sq. 

18 Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVII, 6,1; 2: atha sadraryau stripumamsau bandakhalati ity 
upakalpayanti \ tad etat puranam utsannam na karyam\ Apastamba, cited by Sayana, says: 
uttarasyam vedisronyam pumscalyai magadhaya ca parisrayanti (al. partsarpantt) ; see XXI, 19. 
Cf. Taittiriya Samhita, VII, 5,9, 4. The conversation of the student and courtesan is given 
in Latyayana, IV, 3, 9-11; the mzthuna in17; cf. Kathaka Samhita, XXXIV, 5; Katyayana 
Srauta Sutra, XJIT, 3; v. Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, pp. 161 sq., who overlooks the force 
of the plural (cavantz) in the Kathaka; Oldenberg, Gott. gel. Anz., 1909, p. 77,n.1; my note, 

J. R. A. S.5 1909, Pp. 205, n. 2. 

16 Sayana explains that the Udgatrs sing their Samans first of all ending with the rajanam 
saman, the first tristich of which serves as the commencement of the Niskevalya Sastra of 
the Hotr. On the priests, cf. Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, pp. 383 sq.; Weber, Jnd. Stud., X, 
141 sq., 376 sq. 

17 The Latyayana Srauta Sutra, which goes into further detail, mentions also as part of the 


278 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V0 


6. ‘That was the oldest in the worlds’ (RV., X, 120),! ‘That fame of thine, 
O Maghavan, through thy greatness’ (RV., X, 54), ‘He groweth more for 
strength’ (RV., VI, 30), and the three verses beginning, ‘ Thee, manliest of men, 
with songs, with hymns’ (RV., II, 51, 4), (are the commencement of the Sastra). 
Here some say? that one should take from the body-verses the two quarter-verses, 
‘Join with the sweet what is sweeter than sweet’ (RV., X, 120, 3°), and ‘ The 
sweet with the sweet hast thou conquered’ (ibid., 34), and replace them with 
the wing quarter-verses, ‘O Maghavan, O Indra, the strong steeds’ (RV., VII, 
33, 22°), and ‘O Indra, grant a cow, a chariot horse’ (RV., VI, 46, 2°), and put 
in place of the latter those other two. He thus wins the profit of a cow® and 


ceremonies a fight between an Arya (Vaigya) and a Sidra for a skin which is compared with the 
sun, and the appointment of persons to praise and criticize the acts of the priests, IV, 3, perhaps 
in order to avert the evil eye (Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, III, 172); cf. the abuse of the 
Roman triumph. The first ceremony clearly shows the nature of the rite as a sun spell, 
which has many parallels in different parts of the world (Usener, Archiv f. Religionswessen- 
schaft, 1904, pp- 297-313), as Agnisvamin on IV, 3,7, points out. It is discussed in Taittiriya 
Brahmana, V, 2, 6,7. For ritual aicxpodoyia as stimulating vegetation or serving a piacular 
purpose, cf. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, III, 104; IV, 267; Frazer, Golden Bough, OTs 
Crooke, Morthern India, p. 193; v. Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, pp. 399 sq. 

1 See I, 3, 3-8. This Khanda deals with the body and the sadadohas verse following it. It 
corresponds to Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 1, and Srautra Sitra, XVIII, r. 

2 Sankhayana Srauta Satra, XVIII, 14, 7; Aranyaka, IJ, 1; 11, omits the last two padas 
and does not replace them, but puts them before the dvipadas. The stanza RV., VII, 33, 22°, 
occurs in the right, the stanza RV., VI, 46, 2°, in the left wing. The Satapatha Brahmana, 
VIII, 6, 2, 3, seems to agree with Sankhayana, though not precisely ; Eggeling, 5.2. £., SLL, 
113,n. Eggeling’s explanation of the ardharcau in the Satapatha as referring to RV., X, 120, 
3°4, and VIII, 20, 1°», seems to overlook the fact that in the Sankhayana the ardharca, X, 120, 
30 s carries with it the ardharca, VIII, 69, 2°, making up in all ardharcau; they are called az 
in Aranyaka, I, 1. 

8 This is practically a defining genitive. Cf. IV: rayah suviryam, and contrast Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 295; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 65. Delbriick (A/tin- 
dische Syntax, pp. 153, 154) gives examples of the genitive of material and origin, and see Verg/. 
Synt., 1, 340, 346 sq. The construction sayz paksayoh patanaya is curious. The sam is joined with 
patanaya by Sayana, and we might compare for this infra, wpa-apite, V, 3, 33 OF sam might be 
taken with dhatte (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1081). The use of the genitive * with 
patanaya (as with dptyat, Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 5; 6, &c.) disentitles it to be ranked as a 
real infinitive: cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 48; Whitney, /.¢., §§ 287, 982. 
The easy conjecture fam, though rather tempting, is unnecessary. The conjunction of cow and 
horse is truly Vedic, cf. Indra’s hymn, RV., X, 119, 1: é¢ va iti me mdno gam dsvam sanuyam 
tti; Atharvaveda, XII,1, 5: gavam aivanam, &c.; Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch, Litt., 1, 573 
Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 346%. For atman dhatte, cf. Sankhayana Srauta Siitra, XIV, 
28,9; XV, 6, 7. 


4 It is possible to think of paksayoh as a dative (cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, 
§ 12, for the confusion of °44yam and of forms), but this is not essential, 


-V, 1, 6 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 279 


a horse, and the wings are made strong to fly. He intertwines these hymns with 
the verse nadam va odatinam (RV., VIII, 69, 2), joining quarter-verse with quarter- 
verse, making them into draft verses, so that the quarter-verses of the nada 
hymn are second. He also inserts in the first stanza the syllables of the word 
purusa, one in each quarter-verse, at the end, save in the case of the third quarter- 
verse. Thus does he intertwine them. We will also set (a verse forth) as an 
example, thus : *— 

tad id asa bhuvanesu jyestham pu 

nadam va odatinam \ 

yalo jajia ugras tvesanrmno ru 

nadam yoyuvatino3m \\ 

sadyo jajfano nt rinati Satrin 

patim vo aghnyanam \ 

anu yam visve madanty uma so 

dheninam tsudhyaso3m \\ 


The verse should be thrice repeated.? Should (the Udgatrs) sing as the 
Rajana Saman other verses which occur (in the hymns enumerated), then (the — 
Hotr) recites them in their own ® place, but here (at the beginning of the Sastra) 
he recites these verses (i.e. RV., X, 120, 1-3). If the other verses do not occur 
in these hymns, he should take as many out of the hymns mentioned and recite 
the (other verses) in their place, but still recite these verses (RV., X, 120, 1-3) 
here. (The verses removed) in this case are to be those before the szdadohas 
verse. The Sastra always begins with the verses commencing, ‘That was the 


* The pluti and the om after the fourth fada are probably meant. Cf. Sankhayana, //. cc., 
and I, 5, 1. NRajendralala and the Anandasrama edition are both inconsistent. For the p/utz, 
see Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 297-300. Both zsudhyaso3m and yuva- 
tino 3,m present curious forms, which may be compared with the rule recognized in Panini, 
VI, 1, 95, that om with a preceding a vowel gives om, and this Sandhi in its turn has early 
parallels (Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p.64). So in Manava Grhya Sitra, I, 4, 4, vdzom stands, 
in my opinion, for v@ni+om (cf. IJ, 7, n.1). See also Caland and Henry, L’ Agnistoma, pp. 112, 
166, 178, 232, 237, 238, &c., for examples of this Sandhi. 

5 To make up twenty-five verses, I, 3, 5, 0. 6; Sankhayana Aranyaka, II,1: evam vihyrtam 
prathamam trih Samsati pardcir uttarah. 

6 Literally, ‘in their place.’ The Udgatrs may either adopt tad id dasa as the beginning 
or stotriya, or use other verses of the enumerated hymns, or use quite new verses, but in 
all cases the Hotr must stick to fad id dsa as a commencement, and must not follow the 
strophe of the Rajana Saman. The new verses are to be inserted before the s#dadohas verse, 
omitting a corresponding number of those in the ordinary version. If the verses occur in the 
hymns enumerated, then they are simply recited in their own original place, since the whole 
of the first three hymns is included in the Sastra, and the three verses, I, 51, 4-6, count 
presumably as a hymn for this purpose. Cf. n. 3 on V, 2,1. For the construction, cf. Aitareya 
Brahmana, V, 7, 1: mahanamnisv atra stuvate sakvarena samna. 


280 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 1, 6- 


oldest in the worlds’ (RV., X, 120, 1). The reply of the Adhvaryu is not altered.” 
(Then comes) the s#dadohas verse, beginning, ‘ Of that milk yielder’ (RV., 
VIII, 69, 3). 


7 The form used in the Jrakrti is not altered as it is in the Sodasin rite (Sayana). On 
the pratigara, see Weber, /nd. Stud., X, 36, n. 3; Eggeling, S. B. E., XXVI, 326; Sabbathier, 
Agnistoma, pp. 55, 56; Hillebrandt, Rztwal-Litteratur, p. 104, 0. 45. 

8 The verses laid down in Sankhayana are, after a casnimSamsa of three verses, RVipeks 120, 
1-33 4-9; X, 29, 1-8; X, 55, 6-8; X, 54,6; X, 55,2; X, 56,1; making 23, the first being 
twice repeated, and the whole interspersed with the padas of the ~ada hymn, Inwxc T2O2135 
however, the third and fourth pddas together with the corresponding fddas of the nada hymn 
are omitted, and placed before the dvifadas (II, 11). 

After the body-verses the order in Sankhayana and the Aitareya differs as shown below :— 


Sitra, Aranyaka, 
Head-verses Sankhayana, XVIII, 2 II, 2 
Neck-verses (with sfandha, cervical column, ” » 3 » 3 

Jj-&. A. S., 1907, pp. I, 2) 
Right side (aksa, bahu, prahastaka) ” » 4 » 435 5 
Left side (ditto) ® ” » 45 » 435 
Back (aniika, backbone, perhaps lumbar por- on a 6 5580 
tion in special, 7. R. A.S., 1907, pp. 7, 8) 

ASitis ” 9 0) fala 9» 7-10 
Vasa hymn a yy 14 yy II 
Dvipadas (with ardharcau) + aes; yy 12 
Aindragna hymn Fs 3 eG Are LE! 
Avapana ” oy GAY, yy 14 
Anustubha samamnaya x LS » 15 
Tristupchata ” of 595,20 3) 16 
Neck-verses Aitareya, V, 2, I Laat 
Head-verses 56 + 9 
Vertebrae-verses ” 9 ” 
Right wing ¥ Nyaa ea leven 
Left wing ” ” ” 
Dvipadas ” ” ” 
ASitis ” V, 2, 3-5 I, 4, 3 
Vasa hymn 5 Vira Began 
Orit, &c. 7 V55S53 sua ike (ood 


* It should be noted, however, that this division, which is that adopted by Dr. Friedlander, is 
doubtful as regards the two sides, which (Introd., p. 10) he divides into shoulder, arm, and hand. 
For the word skandha (really ‘ cervical column’, Hoernle, 7.2. A..S., 1906, p. 918) occurs in 
the section dealing with the grazva verses, and the word aksd@ (yc) or aksa, both of which are 
used in Aranyaka, II, 3, as regards the part rendered as ‘shoulder’, seems rather to denote 
‘collar-bone’. At least, so I infer from the fact that asaka has this sense in Caraka and SuSruta 
(Hoernle, 7. R. A..S., 1907, p. 13), and aksa this sense in the Satapatha Brahmana. Possibly the 
reading should be aksam in Aranyaka, /.c.: cf. aksa sthavistha (sic) just after, and cf. I, 2, 2,n.11, 
but asa rc is good sense. The exact divisions are probably (a) collar-bone, (b) arm, (c) hand. 


We asd TRANSLATION AND NOTES 281 


ApDHYAYA 2. 


(Then come)the neck-verses. ‘Of Indra,'the smiter,the powerful, the earnest, who 
has the world, are might and strength, great and delightful. The mighty ? overcomes 


1 These verses occur with many variants in the Atharvaveda, VI, 33, and also in the 
Paippalada recension, the Naigeya text of the Samaveda, I, 588, which has adrdjo yujas tujé jane 
vdnam svak, and has not the second two verses, and Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 3, where 
they run: yasyedam oja arujas tujo yujo balam sahah \ Indrasya rantyam brhat \\ anadhrstam 
vipanyaya nadhrsa adadharsaya \ dhrsinam dhrsitam Savah \\ sa no dadatu tam rayim pure 
pisangasamdriam \ Indrah patis tavastamo janesu\\ It should, however, be noted that dalam 
is merely a conjecture of Hillebrandt’s for vazam of all his MSS. It is a probable one. The 
AV. version is unintelligible, see Whitney’s Zvans/ation, p. 305. In the version given, which 
is purely conjectural, I have taken drujah as a genitive from Sankhayana (the change of # and a 
is easy, the accent is dubious), like ¢#jo and yzjo, presumably also genitives. Sayana as usual 
gives no help; he takes drvajah as either (1) nzskevalyam sarvato ranjakam, or (2) jagatpala- 
nam sarvato rafijakam. Yujo tujo is yogo vairinam himsakah. Vanam is bhaktatr vana- 
niyam. The AV. has & rdjo yujas tujé jana vdnam svah \ and nadhrsa a dadhrsate dhrsané 
dhrsitéh $dvah \ pura ydtha vyathth srdva Indrasya nadhrse sdvah. The Paippalada differs 
greatly. 

2 The translation again is purely conjectural. Whitney, by reading addh/se (infin.), dhysandm 
dhrsitdm, and ’vyathi, makes it, ‘(He is) not to be dared against ; (his) might, dared, dares daring 
against (others); as, of old, his fame (was) unwavering, Indra’s might (is) not to be dared 
against.’ Taking the Aitareya text as it stands, I think we must resolve nadharsa as nd 
adharsa(h) and take the word as an adjective meaning ‘impetuous’. I think xddh?sa, however, 
almost certainly right (cf. RV., V, 8, 5), ‘He is not to be dared against.’ The editions and 
Whitney with Sayana read the two words following as & dadharsa dadhrsandm. This is quite 
possible, though the change in quantity is remarkable, but it seems to have escaped notice that 
@ dadharsad adhysandm is quite possible, and could have the same sense while keeping the 
prefix @ in both cases and restoring the metre (a dadharsad @\ dhysandm) and explaining the 
Sankhayana text. If nddh?sa is read, I would not take the participle as a neuter nom., but 
translate, ‘ He dares against the daring; his might is dread.’ This avoids the inconvenience of 
the idea of might daring, and the rare use of the present participle as a finite verb. The second 
half of the line is very obscure. A/z vydthih occurs also in RV., X, 86, 2, and here as there 
Sayana explains it as a verbal form, which is quite impossible, ‘When Indra caused his foe to 
fall.’ It might however mean, ‘ When trembling (cf. Naigh., II, 13) passed from Indra,’ referring 
to the terrors which so often fell on Indra before he showed his might. For a different theory as 
to wydthih (=track), see RV., IV, 4, 3 (Oldenberg, S. 2. Z., XLVI, 331); AV. IV, 21,3, with 
Whitney’s note; and see Geldner, Vedische Studien, I, 29. Geldner holds that wydthih 
originally means ‘ Falschheit’ and thence ‘ Malice, Zorn, Ungnade, Arger, Hass, Feindschaft’, 
and so has the gen. of the subject or object. So he renders RV., IV, 4, 3, as, ‘no one 
approaches thee when angry,’ and in AV., VI, 33, 2, takes purd ydtha vyathth (this is the 
AV. accentuation as in AV., IV, 21, 3) §rdva Indrasya nadhyse $dvah, as ‘Like a citadel (cf. 
urja and urj, Pischel, Vedische Studien, I, 185) unapproachable, is the anger, the fame, the 


282 AITAREYA ARANYAKA VY, 2s 


not him who is exceeding strong. His vigour is dreadful. When aforetime 
trembling passed from him, Indra’s might was dreadful. May he give us that wealth, 
wealth of tawny hue. Indra is the lord, the most mighty among men.’ (Then 
comes) the s#dadohas verse. . The head-verses are in gaya/ri metre, beginning, 
‘The singers call aloud to Indra’ (RV., I, 7, 1). If (the Udgatrs) sing the Saman 
with other verses which occur {in the service), then the two sets are to be inter- 
changed in place.’ If the other verses are ones not occurring, or some occur 
and some not, (then they should be inserted in the place of verses occurring 
which should be taken out.) The last verse of the hymn (should be recited, 
the insertion being made before it), and then the szdadohas verse. Then come 


strength of Indra.” Unhappily he does not cite or discuss this passage, where of course pura 
cannot be made by any effort of the imagination to be a noun. But accepting the sense ‘wrath’, 
then AV., VI, 33, 2, would give the sense ‘ As aforetime, the anger’, &c., and this passage 
might be rendered, ‘As of old (puré ydt) his anger is excessive’ (a¢z), and on the whole 
this is perhaps the least unlikely version of a very difficult and probably corrupt text. Ct. 
vy. Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, p. 316, n. 2, whose version of RV., X, 86, 2, suggests 
‘because of anger’. 

For the form of the verse, cf. e.g. Vajasaneyi Samhita, 1,8: ahar ast dhirva dhurvantam \ 
dharva tam yo’sman durvati tam dhurva yan dharvamah, and Winternitz, Gesch. der indisch. 
Litt., 1,159. In the next verse the AV. reads tam (Ppp. 20) urém and tuvistamas (APr., III, 
96; IV, 59), while the Ppp., the comm., and one MS. have dadhatu, and the commentary on the 
AY. and two MSS. (out of three) in Sankhayana have °sadrSam. One MS. of Saakhayana has 
purum, the others puram. Te avdstama occurs in RV., I, 190, 5; Il, 33,3. For the dat. inf. in 
e, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 970. 

8 This is Sdyana’s version, The AnandaSrama reads ubhayasamstha na viparyayo with the 
opposite meaning, but this is less probable. The apodosis to the last clause is borrowed from 
the indication in V, 1, 6. As the next clause shows, the insertion of the new verses is to be made 
before the last verse preceding the sé#dadohas verse and not directly before that verse. The word 
samamnatasu refers here to verses occurring in the hymn itself. The form whayasamsthanavipar- 
ydyah, however, presents great difficulty, for the use of ubhayd in compounds is confined to cases 
like °cakra, “pani, °hasta, &c., and it is hardly likely that the second member of the compound 
is dsamsthdna, or that the fem. is kept because 7c is fem. (Wackernagel, Altindische Gram- 
matik, Il, i, 49-52). But, further, there is no special meaning in samsthana, and the conjecture 
ubhaydsim sthinaviparyayah is possible. Ubhayasan (ycam) is precisely correct for two 
sets of three verses (cf. RV., I, 26, 9; 189, 7, and regularly later, cf. Bloomfield, Vedic 
Concordance, p. 272), and Sayana’s version in no way confirms either the reading of Rajendralala 
or the Anandagrama. The form would be very rare, the ordinary feminine being wbhayz 
(common in the Aitareya Brabmana), and possibly wbhaya is the Vedic adverb. It may be 
noted that R’s version of the comm., ¢dsdm arthe (R* against R! and R®*), alone makes sense. 
S's casam madhye being nonsense. Cf. Introd., p. 9. 

The Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIU, 2, gives the head-verses thus, RV., I, 7, 1-3; I, 6, 7-9; 
I, 84, 13-15; VIII, 76, 10-12; VIII, 93, 1-3, any of those used by the Saman singers. Shes 
use I, 5, 1-9, to correspond with the Saman singers. If the latter use only I, 50, 1-3, then 
the reciter can take any two of the other ¢vcas to make up the nine verses. As in the Aitareya 
the recitation is by half-verses, and the s#dadohas verse occurs at the end, 


me VG ast TRANSLATION AND NOTES 283 


the vertebrae-verses. ‘The Soma is pressed for thee, come to the sacrifice, 
rejoice in the carouse, rich in gifts, for wealth. O Indra, thou art generous and 
young for us to sing.* He can overcome his foes in slaying Vrtras ; he is skilful 
and a plunger. We magnify our leader, Indra.° Impetuous, bright, the leader, 
the dweller on the mountains, hastening towards you, Indra, shouting aloud, with 
his eternal steeds.’* (Then comes) the si#dadohas verse. The three sets of 
verses, neck, head, and vertebrae, are all to be repeated with a pause at the 
half-verse.7 


2. The (verses of the) right wing are connected with the Rathantara Saman.' 
The Rathantara has for its strophe, ‘ We praise thee, O hero’ (RV., VII, 32, 22), 
and for its antistrophe, ‘Thee for the first drink’ (RV., VIII, 3, 7), both being 


4 These verses contain an unusual number of rare expressions, and the uncertainty as to their 
accent adds to the difficulty. The reading of vijdrah is very doubtful. R in the commentary, 
which is followed by Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, S, and the MSS. have vijarah, while 
Sayana perhaps read vidurah * (visistalokadvarani grnadhya asmadagre kathayitum atra hysto 
bhava). I have translated the vijdrah (? vijardh) of R’s text, and taken grnadhyaz as an 
infinitive practically equivalent to an imperative, ‘Let us sing of,’ cf. Delbriick, Altindzsche 
Syntax, pp- 411 sq.; Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 982d; Hopkins, 4./. P., XIII, 21 sq.; 
Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 216. 

5 Vigahdh, Sayana renders as sevitum fakyah. Cf. RV., III, 3, 5, where it is an epithet of 
Agni. The sé no netaram looks like an imitation of older verses, such as RV., II, 6, 5, without 
much regard to their construction. Possibly the reading should be (cf. on IV) sdye (which 
would become sax before 0). So Maitrayani Samhita, IV, 12, 6, has sa dasuse kiratu bhurt 
vamam, but in Taittiriya Samhita, II, 3,11: say, &c. Eséh may be from the root zs (cf. Max 
Miiller’s conjecture on RV., IV, 2, 4, S. B. Z., XLVI, 320) and meaning ‘swift’. S takes 
sasahatur as one word, but this makes nonsense of Sayana. The form is unusual, see Whitney, 
Grammar, § 1161 d. 

6 Sdmajah (for the form, cf. Wackernagel, Atindische Grammatik, I, i, 73, 74) apparently 
means the ‘ bringer-together’. jist cannot have the sense which it normally has (see Hillebrandt, 
Ved. Myth., I, 235 sq- 5 Bloomfield, 7. 4.0.S., XVI, 39) and which is here ascribed to it by 
Sayana, rjisopalaksitasomarasavan. In RV., II, 32, 1, it seems to mean impetuous, and cf. 
- jisd, ibid., I, 32, 6. Vam he explains as the husband and wife engaged in the sacrifice. 
Rajendralala reads vdsu which is quite wrong, though followed in Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, 
p. 205". It would of course be acc. with sdémajah. Sdsvadbhir evaih possibly merely means 
‘as usual’, or ‘in his eternal courses’. Cf. évadh, ‘in due way,’ RV., I, 68, 43 95,6; arydh 
évath, IV, 2,12; S.B.£., XLVI, 437. These verses are unparalleled in other texts. 

7 This means, as Sayana and Sankhayana show, that there is a pause at the end of the half- 
verse (and om at the end of the verse). The other possibilities are (1) pause at each pada, with 
om at half-verse, (2) no pause, ov at end. The ASvalayana Srauta Sitra contains examples of 
all kinds, see I, 2 sq. 

EY Ctl 45:2 





2 If so, it might be taken as two words and translate it ‘the giver is to be praised’. Cf. of 
duré grnise in RV., VI, 35; 5s and cf. Sankhayana Aranyaka, XII, 10, 


284 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Vo ee 


pragatha verses. These four drhafis he turns into six.2 (Then come the hymns), 
‘I shall proclaim the deeds of Indra’ (RV., I, 32); ‘In thee since our father, 
Indra’ (RV., VI, 18), fifteen verses only; ‘ Who is sharp-horned, terrible like a 
bull’ (RV., VII, 19); ‘ Dread is he born for strength, the mighty ’ (RV, VIE 20); 
‘Ye have uttered glorious prayers’ (RV., VII, 23); ‘For greatness, O dread 
Indra, with thine aid’ (RV., VIL, 25), five hymns; ‘From far or near may Indra 
be with us’ (RV., IV, 20) is the sampa/a hymn. ‘Thus in the Soma, in the 
carouse’ (RV., I, 80, r), is a panki’ verse. (Then comes) the s#dadohas verse. 
(The verses of the) left wing are connected with the Brhat Saman. The Brhat 
has for its strophe, ‘For thee we hail’ (RV., VI, 46, 1), and for its antistrophe, 
‘Come hither to the worship’ (RV., VII, 61, 7), both being pragafha verses. 
These four drha/is he turns into six. (Then come the hymns), ‘ Praise him who 
surpasses in strength’ (RV., VI, 18); ‘Thou art attached to the pressed Soma, 
Indra’ (RV., VI, 23), three hymns; * Thou art the only lord of riches, O lord 
of riches’ (RV., VI, 31), eight hymns; ‘What! whose sacrifice has he in- 
creased?’ (RV., IV, 23), is the sampaia hymn. ‘Indra is born for the carouse’ 
(RV., I, 81, 1). is a pankt’ verse. (Then comes) the s#dadohas verse. The right 
wing is connected with the Rathantara Saman, and so is the pancadasa stoma# 
There are one hundred and one (verses) in it, and it is called the Vasisthaprasaha. 
The left wing is connected with the Brhat Siman, and so is the sapfadasa stoma. 
There are one hundred and two verses, and it is called the Bharadvajaprasaha. 
The (verses of the) tail, as being dvzpadas, are connected with the Bhadra Saman. 
There are nine verses from the Samhita, ‘These worlds let us conquer’ (RV., 
X, 157), and ‘Come hither with thy splendour’ (RV., X, 172), and there 
are also other verses not from the Samhita.* (These are), ‘Ye priests, sing forth 
a song to Indra, who beyond all others slays the foe, that he may rejoice.’® 


2 The two pragathas give only four dyhatis. The six are made up by repeating twice the 
fourth Zada of RV., VII, 32, 22, and reading with it the first half of RV., VII, 32, 23. Then 
the fourth pada of this second dyhatz is twice repeated, and with the second half of RV., VII, 32 
23, makes the third drhatz. By V, 1, 6, for the pada, RV., VII, 32, 23°, is to be substitated 
TROVE On6n Siptoby BYR 

83 The Rathantara Siman is the basis of the faficadasa stoma, or hymn-form. The term 
Vasisthaprasahah is clearly the technical name of what is called elsewhere (see St. Petersburg 
Dict.) Vasisthaprastham. Similarly in the case of the saptadafa stoma, and cf. II, 2, 2, n. 12 
for the attributions. The syntax of RV., VI, 31, 1, is curious, see Delbriick, Anes Syediox, 
p- 106; Vergl. Synt., I, 398, and cf. in Latin, Persius, III, 29: censorem trabeate salutas. For 
prascha, cf. Z.D.M. G., XLVI, 548. 

* These are given also in Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVIII, 15, where they follow esa 
brahma, &c. Some are also in the Samayeda. The two RV. hymns have five and four verses ; 

®* Sankhayana has jzjosatz, See Samaveda, I, 446; II, 463, where are wifraya and os 


Jujésate. For the form, see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar 810 , ° 2 
has ju/osat, : , » § . Bs MS. of Samaveda 


-V, 2,2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 285 


‘Among the gods the singers sing the song; the youthful Indra, famous, takes up 
the strain.’"® ‘Resting beneath the p/aksa,’ rich in honey, rejoicing in wealth, 
may we meditate on thee, Indra.’ ‘O thou to whom, most strong, we have 
recourse, giver on all sides,* from all sides bring us (gifts).’ ‘Thou art the 
manliest, the lord, most generous to win us booty, when the (rite) is duly paid.’ ® 
‘For thou alone dost rule from of old, unsurpassed in might.’ ‘Do thou sing 


6 Sankhayana has marutah svarkah, a much better reading, which obviates the difficulties 
of devdtasv drkah with the unusual accent and use of drkah. Here I would read devdtah 
svarkih, the omission of 4 before sv being quite common in all Sanskrit MSS. The Samaveda, 
T, 445; Il, 464, has Mariah, and the phrase Mardtah svarkah occurs also in V, 1,1. The 
translation of the last words given by Benfey is: ‘ gepriesen wird der hehre Jiingling, Indra,’ 
but though Sru¢éh, xdurés, inclitus, perhaps means ‘famous’ here, @ stobhati must mean something 
like ‘sings in return’. Cf.n.11, below. A noun, grdstobha, is unlikely. Passive particles like 
prastubhandh, RV., 1V, 3, 12, ‘incited by shouting,’ afford no support for a passive use here. 

7 The reading in Sankhayana and in Samaveda, I, 444; II, 465, is pusyema and fa, which 
explain the accent on dhimdhe (for which, cf. Benfey, Samaveda, Glossar, p. 100; Whitney, 
Roots, p. 82, and in Colebrooke’s Zssays*, I, 111, 112), although the accent might be otherwise 
explained. There is a parallel difference of reading between Sankhayana Aranyaka, XII, 16, 
and the parallel passages pasyema— pafyantah. The words upa praksé are explained by Sayana 
as one word, plaksavrksasampaditani patrany atra plaksasabdena vivaksitant tesam samipavaritr 
yagapradesa upapraksah, but they, must mean ‘ beneath the //aésa tree rich in honey’, as 
rendered by Aufrecht, Rgveda, II, xlvi, n., or ‘in a dwelling rich in honey’, as translated by 
Benfey, who derives the word from pra+ 4/ 4st, but who also (p. 130) suggests a derivation from 
pra++/ghas and a meaning ‘food’. To take it from wpa+4/fpre as an infinitive (as in RV., V, 
47, 6) is possible but not probable. In favour of Benfey’s derivation from »/4s2 is the form 
vanapraksam, Samaveda, I, 580, but there is a v.l. vanakraksam. The last words mean, 
according to Benfey, ‘lass deine Schatz’ uns mehren, bergen, Indra!’ according to Aufrecht, 
‘ mégen wir unseren Wohlstand mehren, und den von dir verlichenen bewahren, Indra.’ The 
translation given above is that of Sadyana, and may well represent the view of the passage taken 
by the author. The pl/aksa (Ficus infectoria) is used as an upper darhis, Satapatha Brahmana, III, 
8, 3, 10. Cf. Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 59. 

8 In any case visvdtodavan must be considered as practically one word. Probably vévaco- 
davan should be read as in the Samaveda, I, 437; cf. Samavidhana Brahmana, WES Bs 5 
Bloomfield (Vedic Concordance, p. 879") treats the phrase as one word. 

9 Suprdnite is so rendered by Sayana. Hillebrandt in his text of Saikhayana Srauta Sitra, 
XVII, 15, 5, apparently by conjecture, reads supranitz, followed by Bloomfield (/.¢., p. 998°), 
but both his MSS., B and K, read sepranite, which is presumably the older reading. I think the _ 
reading should be supranite unaccented, and would translate, ‘ Thou, O good leader, &c.,’ the word 
being found frequently in this use, and the voc. e.g. at RV., III, 1, 16; 15, 4. Neither this 
nor the next verse is in the Samaveda; ‘vam hy eka ifise is =RV., IV, 32, 7%; mamhistho 
vajasdataye =RV., VIII, 4, 181; 88, 64. 

10 Sankhayana teads: ‘vam hi radhasyata eka, &c., corrected by Bloomfield (/.c., p. 456°) 
to radhaspate. Sayana takes sandt as sanitum, ‘thou canst give,” The next three verses are not 
in Sankhayana. For the accent sanat, see Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1114 d. For 
dmrktah, cf. RV., Ill, 6, 4; 11,6; IV, 3, 125 X, 104, 8. 


286 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Vi 2, 2— 


forth, that dost know indeed all that has been aforetime or that is now." ‘O 
Mitra and Varuna, grant us strength and food. O Indra, make us strength 
abounding.’? ‘(Grant) prosperity, strength, wealth, to him who seeks gain.’® 
Soma impels not him who keeps not vows, gain will not come near him.’ Then 
come three dv:padas,“ beginning, ‘This Brahman.’ Then comes one dvzpada, 


11 This occurs in Samaveda, I, 450, as: wffvasya prdé stobha purd va sdn yddi vehd niundm, 
which Benfey renders, ‘Vor allem sei gepriesen nun, seist du uns ferne oder nah,’ but this passive 
use of 4/studh is not probable. My rendering is of course very conjectural, and it supposes that 
asa is read. 

12 This verse, as far as the latter part is concerned, agrees with Samaveda, I, 455, which 
runs: aja mitré vdrunah pinvatédah pivarim tsan krnuhi na Indra, Here pinvata has the 
three deities as its subject, and its use is therefore regular. But in the Aranyaka text the plural 
is quite irregular, cf. I, 1,2, n.7. The text could be amended, but it is clearly original. Cf. 
the strange afvébhih in Jaiminiya Brahmana, III, 77; on the other hand, wttarabhyam= 
uttarabhih in Apastamba Grhya Sitra, VI, 14,15 (Oldenberg, S. 2. Z., XXX, 281, n.). For 
the form Ayuuhi, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 704; Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 62; 
Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 310. See also Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 393 sq. 3 
Zubaty’s articles in Vienna Oriental Journal, II and U1; and Amold’s Vedic Metre, Chap. VI, 
with whose results I regret I cannot on the whole agree (cf. 7. R. A. S., 1906, p. 718, and Vedic 
Metre, pp. xiii, xiv). 

18 In Samaveda, I, 441, this verse runs: sd paddm maghdm rayistne nd kamam avraté 
hinoti nd sprédd rayim (for the form, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §1197b), meaning ‘ Health, 
a dwelling, prosperity to him who seeks wealth, The man who pays no vows obtains not his 
desire, he wins not wealth’. Sayana renders rayisdui as havirlaksanasya dhanasya dhatari, but 
this cannot be right. If the Aranyaka form is correct, it is presumably from sam, as in gosan, 
RV., IX, 2, 10, &c. It may of course also be the acc. or nom. neut. of rayzsduz, compare 
gosdnim dhiyam, RV., VI, 53,10. The only probable construction of the text here is ‘ there is 
(or ‘may there be”) in the seeker of wealth, prosperity’, &c. R has rdyzh, which is clearly 
wrong, as probably is sé7fdd. For the omission of the verb in the Samaveda version, cf. RV., 
II, 6, 5; Pischel, Vedische Studien, I, 19; Geldner, ibid., 166; n. 7 on V, 1, 5. 

14 These verses (the accents are from the Samaveda) are given in ASvalayana Srauta Sitra, 
VI, 2,6: esé brahma yd rtolya Indro nima sruté grne\\ vt srutdyo ydtha patha Indra tudd 
yantu ritdyah \tvém te chavasas pate yénti glro na samydtah \\ They occur also (with v7 
$rutayo for vt srutayo, and mah for va in v. 3) in Sankhyana Srauta Sitra, IX, 6, 6, and (with 
pathé for patha) in Samaveda, II, 1116 (=I, 438), 1118 (=I, 453), 1117. The first verse also 
occurs in Taittiriya Brahmana, II, 4, 3, 10 (fratzka only); III, 7,9, 5; and the fratiza in 
Aitareya Brahmana, IV, 3. See Benfey and Griffiths’ translations, and for grve, Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 719. Perhaps it may be taken as a passive, cf. RV., I, 79, 12: Adta 
grnita ukthyah, rendered as ‘is praised’ by Oldenberg (S. &. £., XLVI, 106), and see 
Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 264.2 On the other hand, cf. nn. 6 and 11 above, where 


* So also arate means ‘he sings’ and ‘he is praised’ according to Oldenberg, /.¢., p. 136, and 
Neisser, Bezz. Beitr., XII, 298. I am not sure that in any case the passive sense is quite 
essential, The uncertainty is of course a sign of early date; cf. the Middle and Passive in Latin, 
Lindsay, Latin Language, pp. 519-521; Delbriick, Verg7. Synt., IV, 433. 


V5, Y TRANSLATION AND NOTES 287 


‘To the yokes for him’ (RV., VII, 34, 4);"° the sdadohas verse ; the dhayya verse, 
‘What he won’ (RV., X, 74, 6); and the s#dadohas verse. 


@ stobhati and pré stobha must be active, and so here and in RV., I, 79, 12, the activity may 
be that of the god, not of the poet. In the RV. passage it has just been said: dgnt rdksamst 
sedhati, and I see no reason to give a passive sense to grwite. The verses may then be rendered, 
‘ The holy season’s lord, Indra by name, famous, utters praise. Let gifts approach thee, Indra, 
as paths the way. Like songs, to thee, lord of might, do men fare eagerly.’ It should be 
noted that in I, 438, the Samaveda has gy#é, but in I, 1116, gre. The accent on grué is quite 
unintelligible,* and can only be explained by the fact that the Taittiriya Brahmana,? //, cc., has 
gané. In the Aitareya only esa brahma (not as Aufrecht’s text es@) is cited; a striking instance of 
the danger of arguments from the use of Jratikas only as a sign of later redaction (cf. Bloomfield’s 
proof of the posteriority of the Gopatha Brahmana to the Vaitana Sitra, Introd., p. 26), since the 
argument would show that the Aitareya Brahmana was later than the Aévalayana Srauta Sitra ; 
cf. also Oldenberg’s remarks in Gott. gel. Anz., 1907, P. 234, ND. 2. 

18 Sankhayana adds the verses, RV., VIII, 29, 4, and VI, 17, 15, but as there are only six 
instead of nine new verses, the total number of dvifada verses made up is still only twenty-one. 
The Aitareya adds a twenty-second verse, see I, 4, 2. 

The passages corresponding to the fassas are given in Sahkhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 4; 5, 
thus: the sides are divided into the a4sas, bahus (arms), and prahastakas (hand). ‘The aksas 
are VI, 47, 8, and a verse not from the RV., sa surye janayan, &c. Then for the right dahu, 
the strophe of the rathantara saman, repeated as a kakubh, then the sadadohas verse. Then 
similarly the antistrophe, and a dhayyd verse. Then the rathantara pragatha. Then the hymn, 
RV., VI, 22, exchanging for VI, 22, 2, the verse X, 28, 2. For the left dah precisely the 
same treatment of the drat sa@man, but no dhayyd, and the hymn X, 28, with VI, 22, 2, as its 
second verse. The prahastakas are respectively VIII, 97, 13-15, and VIII, 97, 10-12. 

Then comes XVIII, 6, the caturuttarant, viz. RV., VIII, 92, 19-21; VIII, 12, 22-24; I, 
10, 1-3; VIII, 88, 3, 4 (@ pragatha, or 3-5), by half verses ; I, 80, 1-3 (panktisamsam); VI, 
34, 1-3; and I, 83, 4-6, pacchas, then the sédadohas. 

It is worthy of note that, just as the Aitareya refers only to the esa brahmd verses by the 
pratika of the first verse, so the Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVIII, 15, 4, also uses only the 
pratika. St is almost impossible to avoid the conclusion that this book XVIII (and presumably, 
also XVII) must be not earlier nor later than the main body of the Sitra, and this will modify 
to some extent Hillebrandt’s view, /ztwal-Litteratur, p. 25. Similarly the Aranyaka may 
be written after the Aéyalayana Srauta Sitra. Cf. my note in /. R. A. S., 1907, pp. 410-412. 

In the Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 18, 1, it is said that Visvamitra was the seer OLR Vine ls 
19, 22 and 23, and that Vamadeva asyjata them, tan ksipram samapaiat, while in IV, 20503 
RV., IV, 20 and 21, are also declared to be samzpata hymns: Vdamadevo va imal lokdn 
apasyat tan sampataih samapatat (Sieg, Die Sagenstoffe des Rgveda, p. 103). 





® It falls under none of the exceptional cases, Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 106 ; Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 597; 598; Weber, Ind. Stud., X11, 7° sq.; Delbriick, A/tindische 
‘Syntax, pp. 21-29; Oldenberg, Z.D.M.G LX, 707-7405 see my note, J-K.A.S., 1908, 


. 202. : 
if Also the Apastamba Srauta Sitra, XIV, 2, 13, cited by Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, 


p. 207°. 


3. (Then come) the eighty gayatri tristichs.! He takes out the last three 
verses of the hymn, ‘Great is Indra who by his might’ (RV., VIII, 6). (Then 
come) three verses of the hymn, ‘A cake for us’ (RV., VII, 78). Of the 
verses following, ‘Indra indeed is the drinker of Soma beyond others’ (RV., 
VIII, 2, 4), he omits the last three. Of the others he omits, ‘Sweet are the 
draughts of Soma, come hither’ (ibid., 28), and puts in its place the verse, 
‘No other mighty one’ (RV., VIII, 80, 1). (Then comes) one verse, ‘ Born 
with a hundred strengths’ (RV., VIII, 77, 1). (Then comes) the remainder (of 
the hymn, RV., VIII, 92), ‘Much invoked, much praised’ (ibid., 2). He omits 
the last verse of the hymn, ‘To him that hath renowned treasures’ (RV, Vil, 
93, 1). (Then come the hymns), ‘The deeds of the impetuous one’ (RV., 
VIII, 32), ‘Those that kindle Agni’ (RV., VIII, 45), and ‘For us, O Indra, 
rich in food’ (RV., VIII, 81), and the following hymn. (Then comes) the 
siidadohas verse. 

4, (Then come) the eighty drha# tristichs." There are twenty-nine verses 


1 They are— RV., VIII, 6, 1-45 = 45 verses. 
” 78, ie 3 ” 
” 2, 4-39 — 36 ” 
(For verse 28, RV., VIII, 80, 1, is substituted.) 


» 77, © = I ” 
” 92, 2-33 = 32 » 
” 035 Loot ao ” 
” 32 =O ” 
» 45 = 42 ” 
” 81 a 9 » 
” 82 = 9 2”? 


= 240 Verses, 


In Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 7, the verses are: RV., VIII, 6, 1-45; 2, 4-27; 
31-393 45, 1-423 32, I-30; 92, 4-18; 22-33; 93, 4-18; 22-33; III, 51, 10-12; VIII, 76, 
10-12; 69, 4-6; VI, 45, 1-30, which gives 81 ¢ycas and not 80. The number is reduced to 80 
by the omission of one of the three ¢vcas, III, 51, 10-12; VIII, 76, 10-12; 69, 4-6. 


1 These are— RV., VIII, 1, 1-29 = 29 verses. 
» 3, 1-63 g-20 = i8 4, 
» 41-14 = 14 » 
33, I-15 lh oy 


”? 
VHT, 32,15 2; 4-21; 24-7 = 24 
(For VII, 32, 10, is substituted VIII, 99, 1.) 


6 Valakhilya hymns =) 5076. 
VI, 46, 3-14 = fa" oo: 
Ill, 44 = fi oe 


III, 45 ts 


”? 


eV ar 4 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 289 


of the hymn, ‘Sing of nought else’ (RV., VIII, 1). He omits the seventh and 
eighth stanzas of the twenty stanzas beginning, ‘Drink the fragrant Soma’ (RV., VII, 
3, 1). (Then come) fourteen stanzas beginning, ‘ When, Indra, forward, backward, 
upward’ (RV., VIII, 4, 1). Then fifteen stanzas beginning, ‘We with the Soma 
thee’ (RV., VIII, 33, 1). In the hymn, ‘May not thee the sacrificers’ (RV., 
VII, 32), he omits the dvzpada (ibid., 3), and the pragdtha connected with the 
Rathantara Saman (ibid., 22). Further he omits the ragatha, ‘No one Sudas’ 
chariot’ (ibid., 10), and inserts in its place the pragd/ha, ‘Thee men but 
yesterday’ (RV., VIII, 99, 1). (Then) six Valakhilya hymns beginning, ‘Him 
of good gifts’ (RV., VIII, 49, 1). (Then) the rest (of the hymn, RV., VI, 
46), beginning, ‘Who active ever slays the foe’ (ibid., 3). (Then) two hymns 
beginning, ‘May this delightful one for thee’ (RV., III, 44, 1). He omits the 
seventh and eighth stanzas of the hymn, ‘Both let him hear’ (RV., VIII, 61). 
He omits the last stanza of the hymn, ‘ With strength him that finds treasure’ 
(RV., VIII, 66). (Then come) eleven stanzas beginning, ‘Who is king of 
men’ (RV., VIII, 70, 1). (Then the hymns), ‘Him who works wonders, enduring 
the onslaught’ (RV., VIII, 88), ‘To be invoked by us in all’ (RV., VIII, go), 
and nine verses of the hymn, ‘The blessings thou dost bear, Indra’ (RV., VIII, 
97). (Then comes) the s#dadohas verse. 


RV., VIII, 61, 1-6, 9-18 = 16 verses. 
» 66, I-14 ard ee, 
9» fO, I-1t = ITI +5 
ope =m 6) 
x go og 6 ” 
» . 97, I-9 a O33 
= 240 verses. 


Of these, however, no less than 80 are satobrhati verses. In Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 
8-11, the af##z is given as follows: VIII, 97, 1-9; VIII, 62, 7-9; I, 36, 7, 8; VIII, 70, 7-12; 
= 20 pratyaksabrhatis: then V1, 46, 3-10; VII, 32, 1, 2, 4-9; VII, 32, 12-21; VII, 32, 
24-27; VIII, 1, 1-4; ma u tud puriivaso; VIII, 3, 9-12; VIII, 3, 17-20; VIII, 4, 1-14; 
VIII, 61, 3-6; VIII, 61, 9-18; VIII, 66, 3-14. Hillebrandt in his index gives the references 
differently, but this is apparently due to a confusion between pragdthas and stanzas, There are 
really 43 pragathas. The one ma u, &c., is not apparently from the Samhita; Hillebrandt’s 
indices all ignore it, and it does not appear in Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance. Of the last six, 
three only are selected to make up the 40. Then come 20 more fratyaksabrhatis, VIII, 1, 
5-24. Then 20 more: VIII, 1, 25-29; VIII, 33, 1-15. Then 40 pragathas, the three over 
the first 40, VIII, 70, 1-6; VIII, 88,1, 2; VIII, 90, 1-6; VIII, 99, 1-8; VIII, 49-55 (the 
Valakhilyas), omitting VIII, 53, 5,6; 54,3,4- Then I,175,1; VI, 42, 4; III, 53, 18; VI, 
47,19; VIII, 78, 10; VIII, 89,7; VIII, 101,13; X, 102, 1; 3; 12; making 10 drhaéis, and 
III, 44; 45, making up 20 in all. The whole éarhatz aSitc consists therefore of 80 drhatis and 80 
(not 160 as Friedlander) pragathas, giving (80 + 80 =) 160 brhatis and 80 satobrhatis, just 
as in the Aitareya. Cf. Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 8 and 9, for the gdyatri and barhati aSitis. 
KEITH U 


290 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Via" 


5. (Then come) the eighty usnih tristichs.. There are the two hymns 
beginning, ‘Indra who is the greatest drinker of the Soma’ (RV., VIII, 12, I). 
He omits the last stanza of the hymn, ‘Sing forth to him’ (RV., VIII, 15). 
(Then comes) the hymn, ‘To Indra sing the saman’ (RV., VIII, 98). He 
omits the last three stanzas of the hymn, ‘ Let us utter, O comrades’ (RV., VII, 


* There are— RV., VII, 12 = 33 stanzas. 
pee UB; =o ” 
9» (5yI-12 = 12 4 
” 98 ge UH ” 
> 24,127 = 27 3s 
I, 84, 7-9 = ” 
V, 40, 1-3 = oes 
VI, 43, 1-3 =F 3 ” 
= 126 usnzh stanzas. 
Then gayatri stanzas— RV., VIII, 14 = 15 stanzas. 
xO) == J12' a 
Fa a et eee th 235) ” 
Ill, 37, 1-lo = 10 4 
Lee =P TOL BG: 
» 5 ie ” 
” 6 Se 2” 
” 8 LO ” 
» 9 — eco ” 
VE 45, I-30 = 39 2 
7,30, 23-15 = 03. 


= 133 gayatri stanzas, or 114 wsazh stanzas, 
making in all 240 wsmzhs. 


According to Sankhayana Srauta Siitra the verses are: RV., VIII, 13, 1-33; VIII, 12, 1-21, 
28-33; VIII, 15, 1-12; VIII, 24, 1-27; I, 84, 7-9; V, 40, 1-3, =36 ¢rcas or 108 wsnth stanzas, 
XVIII, 12. Then, XVIII, 13, come RV., IV, 30, 1-6; IV, 30, 9-22; IV, 32, 1-21; I, 30, 
1-15; VIII, 14, 1-15; VIII, 16, 1-12; VII, 64, 1-12; VI, 82, 1-9 (Hillebrandt’s I, 30, 1-5, 
and VIII, 82, 1-7 are slips), making 104 gayatri stanzas. Then VIII, 21, 1-16, kakubh 
pragathas; then VIII, 98, 1-12 in wsyehs. We thus get 240 stanzas, consisting of 120 (108 + 12) 
usnihs, 104 gayatris, 8 kakubhs, and 8 satobyhatis (i.e. VIII, 21, 1-16). The Sankhayana 
Aranyaka, II, 10, points out that to get 240 wsmzhs it is necessary to take away four syllables from 
each of the 80 satobrhatis, which with 160 drhatis make up (V, 2, 4) the darhatz treasit¢c. Then 
the 8 kakubhs give 8 usnihs, while the 8 satobyhatis yield each three, or 24 in all, sets of four 
syllables. Adding the 80 and the 24 we have 104 sets of four syllables, which added to the 
edyatris give 104 usnihs, to which again must be added 120 wsnihs, 8 hakubhs, and 8 usnihs, 
left after the deduction of 24 syllables from each sa/obyrhati, making a grand total of 240 usuzhs. 

This complicated version, as Dr, Friedlander points out, probably arises from an attempt 
to remedy the apparent inaccuracy of the Aitareya in permitting 80 satobrhatis in the barhatt 


asiti. Its success is not obvious, and that the attempt should be made may fairly be reckoned 
a sign of lateness, 


aV, 2, 5 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 2gt 


24, 1). Then three tristichs, ‘Who alone bestowed’ (RV., I, 84, 7), ‘Come 
hither to what is pressed with stones’ (RV., V, 40, 1), and, ‘Under whose sway 
Sambara’ (RV., VI, 43, 1). Gdvarri verses become usnih verses by equalization. 
Every seven gayairis make six usnzhs. (Then come) the hymn beginning, ‘If, 
Indra, I, like thee’ (RV., VIII, 14, 1), and the two hymns beginning, ‘ The lord 
of men’ (RV., VIII, 16, 1). He omits the last two stanzas of the second hymn. 
He omits the last stanza of the hymn, ‘For the strength that slays Vrtra’ (RV., 
Ill, 37). (Then come) three hymns beginning, ‘The doer of fair deeds to 
our aid’ (RV., I, 4, 1). Then two hymns beginning, ‘Indra, lasting wealth’ 
(RV., I, 8, 1). He omits the last stanza of the hymn, ‘Who has brought from 
afar’ (RV., VI, 45). Then come three stanzas of the hymn beginning, ‘ Let 
splendid feasts be ours’ (RV., I, 30, 13). (Then comes) the sizdadohas verse. 
In the case of all these three sets of eighty tristichs, there is made a pause after 
the half-stanza. The eighty tristichs are the food, and the vasa verses are 
the stomach (of the bird). The vasa hymn begins,? ‘Worthy of thee, O wealthy 
one’ (RV., VIII, 46, 1), and ends, ‘Gainer, gainer of good’ (ibid. 20). The 
verse, ‘Giving wealth’ (ibid. 15) is a dvipada, and, ‘Now then’ (ibid.) an 
ekapada. It ends with the verse, ‘Of that milk yielder’ (RV., VIII, 69, 3). (Then 
comes) the si#dadohas verse. 


2 Cf.I, 5,1. The explanation of the number 21 stanzas given by Sayana there and here 
is that the passage ends with verse 20 and the s#dadohas verse makes up the 21. This view 
may be supported by the fact that the sadadohas verse is here set out with its pratzka. It is most 
probable that we should understand that the 21 stanzas are made up by the inclusion of the 
siidadohas verse, and then that there follows again that verse in its usual capacity of separating 
the different parts of the whole. Sayana does not clearly appear thus to have taken it, but 
it seems most probably so, and the translation is based on this view. 

Sankhayana in Aranyaka, II, 11, and Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 14, takes the whole hymn, 
VIII, 46, as being used. The priority of the Aitareya is evident as vv. 21-24 contain 
a damastuti of PrthuSravas. The same remark applies to the Satapatha Brahmana, see Eggeling, 
S. Ba fey SLL, E12. 

It is worthy of note that an annotator in S? considers that Sayana’s explanation of the 
number 21 is inconsistent (this is not the case) and inaccurate. He argues that the 21 stanzas 
are made up by splitting ver. 15 into an ekapadad and a dvipada. This view is at first sight 
plausible, but the mention here of these divisions is more probably due to an explanation of 
yathopapadam in I, 5,1, and so Sayana there takes it. The other view is, however, accepted 
by Eggeling, S. B. £., XLII, 112, n. 2, who points out that the version of the Mahaduktha 
contained in MS. Ind. Off. 1729 D gives ver. 15 as an ekapada and a dvipfada, which certainly 
tells against Sayana. 

For gayatris and usnihs, cf. Rgveda Pratisakhya, XVI, 10sq.; for sampada, Saakhayana 
Srauta Sitra, XV, 10, 5. 


292 AITAREYA ARANYAKA sie 


ADHYAYA 3. 


(Then come) the thigh (verses)2 In the hymn, ‘O Indra and Agni, ye two’ 
(RV., VIL, 4o), (he recites) the half-stanzas as gayatris,” but the second half 
of the second as an anustubh, up to the last stanza. The hymn, ‘To thee, the 
mighty, the intoxicated one’ (RV., X, 50), has nivids inserted. Between the two 
hymns, ‘Who in the forest as it were has been set down’ (RV., X, 29), and 
‘Who first is born, the wise one’ (RV., H, 12), are® inserted the hymn, ‘Come 
hither standing on thy chariot-seat’ (RV., IL, 43), and the stanza, ‘Wandering 
alone in the midst of many’ (RV., X, 55; 5). As many decades‘ of verses in 
tristubh and jagaii addressed to Indra as they insert, after transforming them into 
brhatis, so many years may a man be fain to live beyond the normal life, at 
the rate of ten verses for a year®; or he need not do so. (Then come) the 


2 Cf, I, 5,1. The verses are RV., VIII, 40, 1-10; X, 5°, 1-7; X, 29, 1-18; III, 43, 1-8; 
Kees Laas et, 178, see ehapada; 1, 11, 1-8; VII, 23, 1-6; VII, 24, 
1-4, 6, 5. 

In Sankhayana the vasa hymn is followed, XVIII, 15, by the dvipadas, 1, 2, 2, above; 
then comes the Aindragna sakta, VIII, 40. Then the dvapana, RV., X, 167, 1; HU, 21, 1-6; 
I, 84, ro-12; VII, 31, 10-12; VI, 46, 1-3. Then the dnustubha samamnaya, RV., I, To, 
4-12; 1h, Siete, tee I, 84, 1-6; I, 72, 2-5; I, 176, 1-53 V, 35) 1-73 V, 38, 1, 25 V, 39, 1-43 
VI, 44, 1-6; VIII, 34, 1-15; VII, 63, 4-6; VIII, 89, 5, 6; VIII, 95; X, 152. Then the 
tristupchata, RV., 1, 323 VI, 253 UL 12; T1714; WII, 43; II, 46; IU, 51, 4-6; IV, 16; 
VII, 24; VII, 23; VIII, 69, 13-15. See Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 16-20; Aranyaka, II, 12-16. 
These confused masses of verses show distinctly the later character of the Sankhayana ritual. 
See also Satapatha Brahmana, VIII, 6, 2, 3, where RV., X, 50, is called the spine; IX, 1, 1, 44; 
3, 3, 19; in the last passage the vasa is given as 35 in Eggeling (8. B. Z£., XLIII, 223), which 
must be an error as there are only 33 verses, cf. Introd., p. 36. 

2 The second verse is a dvipada in Sakvari. The first three feet make up a gayatr7, that 
is, they are recited with a pause after the second foot and om after the third. The second four 
feet are recited as an anustubh, with a pause after the second and om after the fourth. The last 
is a tristubh, and it is recited by padas, that is, a pause after the first foot and om after 
the second. The remaining ten verses are in mahapankti, and therefore are each divided into 
two géyatris for recitation. It is characteristic of the deliberate differences between Aitareya 
and Saikhayana that the latter, XVII, 16, divides ver. 2 into an anustubh and a gayatri, 
not wice versa. 

8 That is, if one desires life (Sayana). See n. 5. For X, 55, 5, cf. Ludwig, Agveda, II, 
186; Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth., 1, 465. 

4 Cf. I, 5, 2,n.6. Sayana here renders dasati as verses produced in the Samhita, which 
is a collection of ten Mandalas. But the daSato below certainly suggests that it means decades 
as probably in I, 5, 2. 

5 This must be the meaning, and so Sayana takes it. He, however, takes wa vd as meaning 
that each drhatz produces a year of life, contradicting the ten-drhazi rule. This is not 
impossible, in which event he points out the insertion of the nine ¢ristwbh verses gives eleven 
brhatis or eleven years’ longer life. But it is not natural, and it ignores ¢vistubjagatinam, 
there being no agatis in the nine verses, and therefore in accordance with the ordinary use 


-V, 3, 2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 293 


hymn, ‘That steed impelled by the gods’ (RV., X, 178), and the ekafada,’ 
“Indra rules all.’ (Then comes) the anusfubh hymn, ‘All songs have caused 
Indra to grow’ (RV., I, 11). Having recited the first half-stanza of the first 
stanza of this hymn, he combines’ the first half-stanza of the second stanza with 
the second half-stanza (of the first stanza), (joining) quarter-stanza with quarter- 
stanza so as to make anustubhs. Up to the last stanza he combines every 
succeeding half-stanza with the preceding. The rest are done in the usual way. 
(There are) six verses beginning, ‘ Drink, Indra, the Soma, let it gladden thee’ 
(RV., VII, 23, 1). Having recited four verses of the hymn, ‘ Thy place, O Indra, 
is made on thy seat’ (RV., VII, 24), and then joining*® the last stanza, he ends 
with the second last stanza. The Sastra finished,® he mutters the ukthasampad. 
In the place of the wk¢havirya the ukthadoha is used. 

2. ‘Thou art the head of the world,’ the essence of speech, the fire of breath, 


of ma va in Agvalayana (e. g. Srauta Sitra, VI, 55. 22)> €aunaka’s pupil,* I take it to mean that, 
unless one is @yuskama, one need not insert the verses. Cf. Sayana’s note: yady adyuskiamah syat 
tadanim .. . praksipet, whence it appears that he did not regard the dvapana as essential. 
He may be combining two differing previous comments, The idea is curiously inverted. 

® Not in the Rgveda. See Samaveda, I, 456; Vajasaneyi Samhita, XXXVI, 8; A$valayana 
Srauta Sitra, VIII, 2, 21; Samavidhana Brahmana, II, 6, 7, which all have vés‘vasya ra@atz. 

* See I, 5,2, n. 12. Sankhayana, XVIII, 20, applies the same combination to the udubrahmiya 
hymn, RV., VII, 23. The first and last half-stanzas in both cases are left unaltered. The other 
sets of four Jadas are treated as anustubhs. 

8 For a formal definition of samtata, see ASvalayana Srauta Sutrayl,. 24) xOs 

® In the Agnistoma, the frakrtz, the Niskevalya Sastra, Eggeling, S.B. Z., XXVI, 
339, n., ends with a Mantra, wuktham vacindrayopasrnvate tva, Agvalayana Srauta Siitra, V, 15, 
23, of which uwktham vacindraya forms the uw&thasampad, and the rest the wkthavirya. The 
Hotr here recites the samzpad, but in the place of the wkthavirya come the uwkthadoha, i.e. the 
verses set out in V, 3, 2. For the w&thavirya, cf. V, 1, 5, n.6; Haug, Attareya Brahmana, 
p- 177; Eggeling, 7.c., 327, n.; Caland and Henry, Z’Agnistoma, p. 233. Sayana ascribes 
the verses and formulae to a Sakhantara as usual. 

1 The rendering of these verses is very doubtful, and I have mainly followed Sayana. The 
difficulty is increased by the fact that E has here no accents, and Rajendralala has apparently 
followed a most corrupt MS. or has scattered accents at random. They do not occur in 
Sankhayana. Both Rajendralala and the Anandasrama edition print the verses with stops 
only at sdrvam, vydma, pinvati, and dihanam (and in the former case also at ast), as if they 
were prose. They seem clearly, however, to be intended as verses, and I have divided them 
into jagatis with mixed tristubhs. Indrah may belong to the first verse, and other divisions are 
no doubt possible, but the original metrical form of e. g. rtdm satydm vijigyandm vivacanam 
is certain. For similar cases of verse treated as prose, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VIII, 25, 3, and 
27, 2 and 3, where f/okas appear in prose form. In VIII, 27, 3, d4avati is two syllables only 





® The Brhaddevata, IV, 139, in the ‘B’ recension mentions ASvalayana, and though this may 
point to the verse being late, it may also be quite correct, since a pupil of Saunaka appears 
to have been the author of the Brhaddeyata, cf. Macdonell, I, xxiv, and Asvalayana was evidently 


one of his oldest pupils. 


294 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V, 3, 2- 


the abode of mind, the entrance of the eye, the source of the ear, the resting-place 
of the heart, thou art all, (Thou art) Indra, the undying sacrifice, the ambrosia, 
the sky, right, truth, conquest, decision, the end of speech, the pervading, that 
which is beyond all, the light, the udder, the unanswerable, that which was before. 
Thou art all,? speech, the water with the lightning that goes thither and returns,’ 


as elsewhere. A striking example of verse disguised as prose is the inscription on the Piprahva 
stipa, see Fleet, J. R.A. S., 1907, pp. TIT 84., following, with minor differences, Thomas, 
J.R.A.S., 1906, pp 462 sq. In the Aitareya, Z/. cc., we have :— 


Ksatrena ksatran jayati balena balam asnute \ 

yasyaivam vidvan brahmano rastragopah purohital\ 

tasmat visah samjanate sanmukha chamanasah \ 

yasyaivam videan brahmano rastragopah purohitah \\25 \\- 2 uN 
tasya raja mitram bhavati (2 syll.) dvisantam apabadhate \ 
yasyaivam vidvan brahmano rastragopah purohitah \ 

tasmai visah, &c., as above, 


and in other places fragments of verse appear, as is only natural, since gnomic sayings like 
them tend in all languages to become verse. The old character of these Slokas appears from 
their metrical form, and they may be compared with the verse cited from Satapatha Brahmana, 
XI, 5, 4, 3, by Oldenberg (S. B. E., XXX, xix). Similar verses composed at later dates are found 
in the characteristic late metre in the Grhya Sitras, quite freely (Oldenberg, /.¢., XXXV-XXXVii), 
one being attributed (Agvalayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 7, 16) to Sanunaka, and Slokas are recognized 
in the lists of compositions, e.g, Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 4, 10; IV, 1, 2; see Sieg, 
Die Sagenstoffe des Rgveda, pp. 7 84. 

2 Sayana has: yasya yasya vastuno yad yat pirvam karanam ripan tat sarvam ripam ; 
and he explains pdrag arvag as uttamadhamaripa vac. 

8 Sdépru is so explained by Sayana, and pdrag and arvag probably go with salilam. In the 
Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, I, 9; 10, this passage from /ndrah . . . amrlam duhanam 
appears, but in a different connexion and in an inferior, perhaps secondary, form, which looks as 
if it were borrowed from the Aranyaka. The parallelism has escaped not only Oertel, but also 
Bloomfield (Vedéc Concordance). Quite irrelevantly appear the words (the gayatrt as brahman 
is the subject of discourse) : tasyaitani namanindrah karmaksitir amrtam vyomanto vacah \ 
bahur bhiiyas sarvam sarvasmad utiaran jyotih \ rtam satyam vijianam vivacanam aprati- 
vacyam \ piirvam sarvam sarva vak \ sarvam idam api dhenuh pinvate parag arvak \\g\\ 
sa prthaksalilam kimadughaksite prénasamhitam caksussrotram vakprabhitam manasa vyaptam 
hrdayagram brahmanabhaktam annasubham varsapavitram gobhagam prihivyuparam tapastanu 
Varunapariyatanam Indrasrestham sahasraksaram ayutadharam amytam duhana sarvan imanl 
lokan abhiviksaratiti \ Ocertel renders, ‘ These are its names: Indra, action, imperishableness, 
the immortal, end of the firmament of speech ; the manifold, the numerous, the all, the light 
higher than the all; righteousness, truth, distinction, decision which is not to be contradicted ; 
the ancient all, all speech. This all also, [like] a cow, fattens hitherward, thitherward. She 
that milks immortality possessing individual oceans (?), possessing wish granting imperish- 
ableness, connected with breath, possessing sight and hearing, superior by speech, permeated 
by the mind, having the heart as its point, apportioned to the Brahmans, pleasant through food, 
having the rain as means of purification (?), cow-protecting, higher than the earth, having 
penance as a body, having Varuna as an enclosure, having Indra as leader, possessing a thousand 
syllables, possessing ten thousand streams, flows in all directions unto all these worlds.’ It 


Ve ayia TRANSLATION AND NOTES 295 


which yields milk and fattens*. (Thou art) the eye, the ear, breath, that which is 


should be noted that the MSS. read wi77jAanam, a clear error for vijigydnam, properly a perf. 
part. middle of ji (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 809), a word elsewhere unknown but 
of interesting function (for g, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 146), which is rendered 
very probable by the metre, afrativdcyah (C), sd, caksusrotram, hrdayogram, brahmanabhra- 
ktram (a), °bhratram (B), “bhrtram (C), Varunapariyatanam, duhinadh. These readings 
confirm the drahmanabhartrkam of the Aranyaka text. Hydaydgram is no doubt a possible 
and an easy conjecture, but Sayana already had /ydayogram, and its appearance here certainly 
shows that the tradition hardened to Aydayogram at a very early date. Anmnasubham is tempting, 
but uncertain as Sayana read dunafubhe. Cf. Satapatha Brahmana, IX, 5, 1, 12, satyanrte 
vacam for Mantrayaniya Samhita, II], 7, 3, satydurtim. So in Atharvaveda, XIV, 1, 11, Srotre 
replaces RV., X, 85, 11, Svotram quite wrongly (cf. Whitney, Zvans/ation, p. 742). I consider 
therefore that (especially in view of the accent) it is very likely that dumasubham should be 
replaced. For Ardayogram if it really is= hydayagram might be compared Maitrayani 
Upanisad, V1, 35, dvidharmondham for °andham (Max Miiller, S. 2. Z., XV, li). But error 
of text is easy. Vyomdnto vacah must, I think, be divided into wydma and dnto vacdh. The 
sense ascribed to Zudrasrestham is possible, and Zndrajyestham may mean (as in RV., AV., and 
TS.) ‘having Indra as its best’. Varunapariyatanam may perhaps be right, but it is far from 
certain, and Sayana had varunavayvitamam, a more recondite form (see n. 12 on II, 4, 3) than 
that of the Brahmana. The words dahur bhaiyas should be bahor bhityah. This example 
answers the query of Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit Syntax, § 122, n. 2, as to whether the idiom 
‘siisser als suss’ is Vedic as well as classic (his Samskrzt Syntax, § 251, 3). The same phrase 
is found in V, 1, 5, in a Mantra passage, and in the parallel passage, Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 8. 
Cf. also such phrases as dahu ca me bhiyas ca me, Taittiriya Samhita, IV, 7, 4,2; /.2.A.S., 1909. - 

The accents of the R edition are very incorrect. Vivdcandm is quite impossible. In the 
case of the compounds R has Afdayogram, brahmandbhartrkdm, varsapavitram, vakprabhitam, 
prthivyupdram, tdpastani, Indrajyéstham, ayttaksdram, brdhmavdrcasam. Varsdpavitram is 
supported by varsdnirnij (RV.), and varsdmedas (AV., °medhas, AV. Paipp.); sahasradharam 
by the RV.; ayiitdksaram by analogy with sahdsradharam, &c.; tdpastanu and brahmandbhar- 
trkam depend on analogy ; Indrajyestham has abundant authority; gébhagam may be compared 
with gémagha (RV.), but cf. gobhdj (RV.). Vakprabhiitam and satydsammitam are supported by 
usage (Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p.96; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, Il, i, 227 sq.), 
and hfdayogram is probable (Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1287 a, gives several examples 
of different accents, Wackernagel, pp. 238 sq., decides for accent on the first member as usual in 
determinatives with adjectives at the end (for examples, cf. p. 233)). On this analogy, p/thivyu- 
param may be right, or possibly we should read prihivy uiparam as two words, but the gender 
of zparam would be strange if it is a noun (meaning either ‘ lower Soma stone’ (RV., AV.; but 
cf. Ved. Stud, I, 108 sq.), or ‘ lower part of sacrificial post’ (VS.)), since there it is always masc. 
(cf.n. 5). The accent on Vdruna° must remain doubtful, but if it is a case of a past part., the accent 
should be on the first. None of these words have found their way into Wackernagel’s lists. 

For similar cases of double accent in MSS., cf. Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Reveda, 
PP- 39, 49 (from B); Wackernagel, p. 40, points out that in cases of componnds the Atharvaveda, 
XIX and XX, Satapatha Brahmana, Taittirlya Aranyaka and Maitrayani Upanisad (he ignores 
this work) are very badly accented. His theory of accent (pp. 40 sq.) lays stress on the fact that 
determinatives (save those with verbal second parts—other than forms in -éa, -/?) originally had 
the accent on the first part and only later on the second. The accents here must depend to some 
extent on (a) the validity of the theory, (4) the view as to the age of the Aranyaka. 

4 Pinvati as it stands spoils the construction, but may be right. Possibly it was originally 


206 AITAREYA ARANYAKA , 308- 


measured by truth, which is produced by speech, and proceeds from the mind, 
what is truth in the heart, and borne by Brahmins. (Thou art) food and prosperity, 
purified by the rains, rich in cows, that beyond the earth,° to which Varuna and 
Vayu most resort, that which has for its body penance,’ has Indra as its 
mightiest, which milks ambrosia, with a thousand streams and countless letters.” 
These, O hymn, are thy powers; there are the powers of speech. With these 
for me now milk the great wealth of ambrosia. Prajapati created this prayer, 
the essence of the Vedas. With it may I obtain all; let it win all desires greatly. 
Thou art dhzh, bhuvah, and svar, the three, thou art the Veda.® Milk, O 
prayer,” children for me. Life and breath milk for me. Cattle and folk milk 
for me. Prosperity and glory milk for me. The world (to come), splendour 
of renown, courage, prosperity in sacrifice, milk for me.’ All this he makes the 
Adhvaryu repeat, if he does not know (the Mantras). Then being urged on to 
sacrifice (by the Adhvaryu, who says), ‘ Om," offer the Soma singer of the hymn,’ 


pinvde (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 716), the nom. of the participle, or Zznvatz, reading 
dhenth. The Jaiminiya Upanisad penvate may arise from a misreading of z or 7. 

5 Gébhagam may mean ‘prospering cows’, and varsdpavitram, ‘purifying by rains.” -Prthi- 
vyupardm is yiipasya mulam (Sayana). If this is correct (cf. n. 3), the next adjective may belong 
to it or to ¢épfastanu, but it is much more likely to be merely = ‘ beyond the earth’, as in the 
Jaiminiya Upanisad, which has Varunapariyatanam and annasubham, ‘pleasant through food.’ 

6 Apparently we must follow Sayana and supply munisarirajatam or something similar. 
The verses are late in character, and ¢dpastanu might mean ‘lean through penance *, but the 
translation of Oertel ‘having penance as a body’ is at least as probable (cf. the accent). The 
uktha is blindly praised. 

1 Diuhanam is taken as nom. neut. Sayana renders it as with gokulam. Ayutaksaram is due, 
he says, to the fact that there are so many syllables in the dohanaprakarana, vasiinam pavitram 
asi sahasradharam (Taittiriya Samhita, I, 1, 3,15; Maitrayani Samhita, I, 1, 3). He takes 
ayutaksaram and sahdsradharam as accus. agreeing with aw/tam. They are perhaps more 
probably nominative. 

® Or, as Sayana, ‘these sounds are thy powers.’ Bloomfield (Vedic Concordance, p. 300°) 
reads whthabhiitayah. The other seems simpler ; w4¢ha and vac are easily identified, or rather 
the latter lies at the base of the former. For dydsam, cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§§ 921-925, 573 c; Delbriick, Altimdische Syntax, pp. 352, 353- 

9 The conjecture véddst for veda ast is easy, but unnecessary ; ci. n. Eton dit, 2, 4° R Venn: 
6,7; 1, 45,6; I, 3, 6; IIL, 14, 3, &c. See also Agvalayana Grhya Siittra, 1, 15, 3, for veda ’sé. 
To take ¢rayo, &c., as a separate Mantra is wrong. 

10 Sayana takes drahma as accusative. I prefer to regard it as vocative, despite the apparent 
parallelism of the next sentences. For another neuter voc., cf. Il, 7,n.1. Katyayana Srauta 
Sitra, VII, 4, 13, has prajam me dhuksva, and also dyur me dhuksva, pasin me dhuksva. On 
the other hand Atharvaveda, X, 8, 25 has adhok — brahma ca tapas ca. i 

11 Cf, V, 3, 3. The Adhvaryu utters the prazsa twice, see Agvalayana Srauta Siitra, I, 5, 3: 
chaikam presito yajati, See Sabbathier, Agwistoma, p. 58, for the phrase, and for the gen. 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 297b; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 160, 


-V, 3,2 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 297 


uttering the cry, ‘We who sacrifice,’ he offers sacrifice with the usual? (stanza), 
and holding back as it were his breath, repeats a secondary vasaj,” «The ac 
companiment of the vasaf is described elsewhere." The Adhvaryu brings up 
the vessel containing the libation and the (three) a#grahya bowls.” As soon 
as he perceives the food, the Hotr descends from the swing towards the east.”® 


12 RV., VII, 23, 1, see ASvalayana Srauta Stra, V, 15, 23: pila somam Indra mandatu tveti 
yajyd, ond VII, 11, 27. For the aih, see ibid., I, 5, 33 4: agur yajyadir anuydjavarjam \\ 4 \\ 
ye3zyajamaha ity agih. See also Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, pp. 101sq.; Weu- und Voll- 
mondsopfer, p. 95; Eggeling, S. B. Z., XLIV, 32, n. I. 

18 4nuvasatkr is freely used as a compound verb in the Aitareya Brahmana (I, 22, 4, &c.), 
Aévalayana Sranta Siitra, and Saakhayana Srauta Sitra, and should be written as one word. 
Vyavanya is rendered ucchvasam akrtva by Sayana, who takes iva as eva, The reason for the 
expression avuvasat is given in Hillebrandt, Aétual-Litteratur, p. 1023 Eggeling, S. B. Z., 
XXVI, 351, 0.1. After the yaya the Hotr says: devd 3 vau 3 sat and somasyagne vihi 3 
vau 3 sat, thus making two vaw 3 saf cries. For the vasatkara, cf. Apastamba, Yajiiaparibhasa, 
96 (S.B.Z., XXX, 341). The words somasyagne viht occur in Aitareya Brahmana, ITI, 5, 4; 6: 
ASvalayana Srauta Siitra, V, 5, 19, and the brevity of this passage is only explained by the fact 
(see the following note) that the writer clearly knew the ASvalayana Srauta Satra (cf. Introd., 
p- 19): cf. the relation of Grhya Sutra and Srauta Sitra in the case of ASvalayana and 
Sankhayana. Oldenberg, who once thought the evidence was in fayour of assigning the two 
Siatras of Sankhayana to different epochs, has now abandoned the attempt and leaves the question 
open (see S. B. Z., XXIX, 5, 6; XXX, xxxiii sq.), while I am inclined to think that there is no 
evidence werth counting against the traditional authorship in either case. 

44 Cf, Asvalayana Srauta Sitra, I, 5,17: vag ojah saha ojo mayi pranapanav iti vasat- 
haram uktvoktvanumantrayate\ This is a direct reference. Ci. also Aitareya Brahmana, II, 
8, 9, where it reads fan anumantrayeta vag ojo saha ojo mayt pranapandv ity dtman eva tad 
hota vacam ca pranapanau ca sthapayati sarvayuh sarvayutvaya. The reference here might be 
supposed to be to the Brahmana passage and not to the Srauta Sitra, but the use of azumantranam 
and the mode of reference are hopelessly opposed to this view. The style of reference is 
reminiscent of A$valayana Grhya Sitra, I, 1,1: wktant vaitanikant grhyani vaksyamah, which 
is a clear reference to the Srauta Sitra, and I think an assertion of the identity of authorship. It 
may be noted that, although Oldenberg (5.2. Z., XXIX, 158) clearly indicates that he has some 
novel view on the relations of Saunaka and Aévalayana, he does not (in S. B. £., XXX) carry 
out his promise of discussing the point, save that (ibid., p. xxxv, n. 2) he alludes to the fact that 
Aévalayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 7, 16, quotes a yajnagatha by Saunaka. This of course in no way 
contradicts the view of the relation as pupil and teacher reflected on the tradition of the Katha- 
saritsagara and recorded in the most precise terms by Sadgurusisya. The B version of the 
Brhaddevata, which probably was composed by a pupil of Saunaka’s, distinctly quotes Aévala- 
yana, which suits the tradition admirably (p. 293, note*). 

15 Cf, Asvalayana Srauta Sitra, VII, 3, 22; Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 21, 10, 
vaisvakarmano ’tigrahyah. They are drawn ‘over and above’ (a¢z), Weber, Znd. Stud., IX, 
235; Eggeling, S. 8. E., XXVI, 402, 0.45 XLI, 6, n. 2. 

16 Cf. I, 2,43 Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 17; Srauta Sitra, XVIII, 21,6; 7. For yathd na 
with fut., cf. Delbriick, Aindische Syntax, pp- 596 sq.; Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit- 

Syntax, §§ 197, 277- This case illustrates admirably the origin of the use in its relation of 2¢ 
and the 2nd person; see also Maitrayani Sambita, II, 2, 7; IV, 1, 9; Taittiriya Samhita, 
TI, 3, 5,1; /-&.4.S., 1909. 


2098 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V3, 2 


Then they tie up the swing to the west that it may not slay the reciter when 
about to eat. For the Hotr eats seated’on the place of the swing. Then the 
Hotr consumes the (libation in the) vessel with the words uttered in response,” 
‘May speech, the deity, rejoice in the Soma,’ ‘May Soma, the king, shower life 
on me for my breath,’ ‘May my breath milk mightily all life.’ The third pressing 
(in this rite) is taken over™ from the last day of the Abhiplava rite, except as 
regards the hymn containing mvzds addressed to the All-gods (RV., I, 89). In 
its place are inserted forty-one verses of the ‘water’ hymn of Dirghatamas, 
‘Of that noble grey sacrificer’ (RV., I, 164), and the hymn anobdhadriva (RV., 
I, 89). The strophe and antistrophe of the Vaisvadeva Sastra are taken over 
from the one day form” (the Visvajit). If the Yajfiayajfilya Saman is omitted,” 


1 Upasrstena is explained by Sayana as wtaranujiapurvakena; the word occurs often in 
Sankhayana Srauta Sitra, but not in a parallel passage. Cf., however, XVIII, 1, 12. The verse 
vag devi (jusénd) somasya trpyatu is found in Vajasaneyi Samhita, VIII, 37, and elsewhere, 
Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 853”. Sa me, &c., is a quasi verse. It is tempting to render 
dyuh as if it were a dative, ‘may Soma rain on me for life, for breath,’ and it might possibly be 
so taken as the sentence is a Mantra, and therefore not to be judged by the ordinary rules of 
prose (cf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. viii). In that case dyuhprandya would not be 
a tatpurusa compound, since ‘the breath of life’ is not in Sanskrit ayuhprana, nor yet a dvandva, 
but rather a case in which the mere base is accepted as sufficient to denote the case relation when 
followed by a case form in a parallel word, cf. e.g. RV., I, 26, 9, where Max Miiller would so 
render (see Oldenberg, S.B.Z., XLVI, 15) dmyta mdrtyanam, and see Pischel, Vedesche 
Studien, I, 608q., 225 sq.; Jacobi, Gdtt. gel. Anz., 1880, p. 855; Wackernagel, Altindische 
Grammatzk, 1, xvii, and II, i, 157, who accepts this view of RV.,1, 26,9. Cf., however, Aitareya 
Brahmana, /.c. on n.14, where sarvdyuh sarvayutvdya occurs. The gen. is one of partitive 
force, cf, Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, p. 160; Monro, Homeric Grammar*, p. 146. For loc. 
with ds, cf. Aitareya Brahmana, VI, 3, 10; for acc. exx. in Jud. Stud., 1X, 295. 

18 For the Abhiplava, see ASvalayana Srauta Sitra, VII, 6; Eggeling, S. 8. Z., XXVI, 403. 
It has six days. The hymn referred to is RV., I, 89; cf. Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVIII, 22, 8. 
The hymn, RV., I, 164, 1, is called sa//a also in Sankhayana Aranyaka, Il, 18, and Srauta 
Sitra, XVIII, 22,7. It is of course derived from v. 41, gaurir mimaya salilani taksati; cf. also 
Brhaddevata, IV, 43. : 

19 The Vaisvadeva Sastra begins therefore with RV., V, 82, 1-3, 4-6. The contents of it and 
the Agnimaruta are given in full in I, 5, 3, which explains the brevity with which they are here 
treated. Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, XVIII, 22 (cf. Sankhayana Aranyaka, II, 18), gives the 
Sastra as RV., V, 82, 1-3, 4-6; IV, 53; I, 160; I, 161; I, 164 (the whole); and I, 89, with 
nivids; and V, 53,5, as a paridhaniyad. Anobhadriya is used as a name of I, 89, also in 
Regvidhana, I, 20, 5, but Bloomfield (Vedic Concordance, p. 169») does not cite thinspaeece 
which is earlier. pa 

* The Agnimaruta for the Sankhayana is given in detail in Saakhayana Srauta Siitra, XVIII 
23; ef. Aranyaka, II, 18. It consists of RV., III, 3; V, 55; the Yajiayajiitya or a suet: 
VI, 48, not noted by Bloomfield (Vedie Concordance, p. 735°) who omits also any safeveilets. 
to this passage 5 if 141. If the Yajiayajiiya Saman is employed, the Agnimaruta Sastra con- 
stitutes itself in the Aitareya thus: RV., III, 2; I, 43,6; V, 55; VI, 48,1and2; VII, 17, 11 and 
103) SN YO TES OGG oh &e., the rest being as in the Jrakrté (Sayana). If the Ilanda Saman is 


aN; 3.3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 299 


then the strophe and antistrophe (in the Agnimaruta Sastra) consist of the 
six stanzas, beginning, ‘O Agni, thy fame, thy strength’ (RV., X, 140, 1), when 
the Ilanda Saman is employed (three stanzas being used). If more (than three) 
are used in this Saman, then so many are employed (in the Sastra) as the anti- 
strophe, beginning, ‘Agni, for ourselves as it were’ (RV., X, 21, 1). -Thus is 
completed the Mahavrata and this day and the Agnistoma.”"_ At the proper time 
they should carry the swing to the bath, and burn together the seats. 

3. No one! who has not been initiated should recite the Mahavrata, nor 


used, then for the two sragathas, VI, 48, 1 and 2, and VII, 17, 11 and 12, are substituted X, 
140, I-3, and 4-6 respectively, being the two parts of the I]anda Saman. If, however, all the six 
stanzas (X, 140, I-6) are used for the stotriya, then X, 21, 1-6, must form the anuriipa. So Sankha- 
yana, who gives further variations. For the Ilanda, cf. Oldenberg, Got?. gel. Anz., 1908, p. 714. 

21 The Mahavrata is a form of the Agnistoma, and so in a sense the Agnistoma is finished. 
The utensils and the swing are both cleansed, while the vedi and the bysis are both consumed 
by fire. Saikhayana Srauta Sutra, XVII, 24, develops the final close of the ceremony in some 
detail. The Aranyaka, II, 18, has: ¢ad Agnistomah samtisthate, The burning points clearly 
to an original sun spell. The question, however, has recently been raised whether the use 
of fire is not merely piacular, cf. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Ostris, p. 151, 0. 45 Westermarck, 
Origin and Development of Moral Ideas, 1, 56, n. 3. The usual view is that both the burning 
and the waving of torches in such rites are intended to evoke heat by magic. Cf. Warde Fowler, 
Roman Festivals, p. 84. 

1 Sayana, as usual, ignores the difficulties of this passage. (1) The words zty eke most 
probably refer to the whole passage (cf. Ill, 2, 4, n. 2), because the very first prohibition 
contradicts the passage above, V, I, 5,0. 5; when the case of an adzksita Hotr is deliberately 
discussed. The sense then must be, as Eggeling (S. B. Z., XLIII, 367, n.1) takes it, that 
(1) no one but a dikszta can recite, and even he only (2) if there is a cétyagnt, and (3) a year- 
long sa¢tra, and (4) not even he for another unless he be father or teacher. It may be noted that 
Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1, prohibits recitation to another, save in the case of sattvins and of a father 
and a teacher, which corresponds with the rule here, since sattrins of course are entitled to recite 
for one another. But ibid., I, 5, and Srauta Sutra, XVII, 13, 6, regard a cétyagni as optional, 
perhaps a later idea (cf. Weber, Ind Stud., X11, 2147, 0.). The tule of those here cited thus 
excludes the Mahavrata as anything but a sattra. Katyayana Srauta Sitra, XVI, 1, 2, insists on 
an altar at the Mahavrata (Eggeling, 5. B. Z., XLII, xxv, n. 2). But it should be noted that 
this is inconsistent with the exception of the father and the teacher, for they could only be 
concerned—being ex hypothest not sattrins, in an ekdha or ahina rite. Possibly, however, the 
view that one can recite for a father or teacher does not contemplate the case of an ahzna 
or ekaha, but means that in a satira the sacrificer may carry out the sacrifice for the benefit 
of his father or teacher though they are not initiated and cannot take part themselves; this view 
I incline to think the most probable, despite Dr. Friedlander’s view (p. 29, n.2). It cannot mean 
that, the teacher or father being dzksita, the Hotr recited for them only, for in the Mahavrata all 
the saétrins equally obtain the benefits of the rite (cf. Eggeling, S. 2. E., XLII, xxv sq.), and 
therefore are forbidden to perform for others outside the circle of the initiated,* cf. Satapatha 


ee 


* It may be noted that the prohibition of performing sacrifices by other than Brahmins is 
ascribed in the Satapatha Brahmana, II, 3, 1, 39 (cf. Katyayana Srauta Sutra, IV, 14, 11; Max 


300 AITAREYA ARANYAKA W335 35> 


should he recite it when there is no altar, nor should one recite it for another, 
nor if it does not last a year, so say some. Only one may recite it for a father 
or a teacher, for that is recited for oneself.2 (The only® utterance (of the 


Brahmana, IX, 5, 2, 12 and 13; X,5, 2,5. (2) Presumably for this reason Sayana renders the 
passage as equivalent to ‘no one who is not dksita should recite the Mahavrata at another’s 
sacrifice (i.e. an ahima or ekéha) unless there is a cétydgni; or unless that other is a father or 
a teacher’. His explanation is that the Mahavrata is of three forms, ehaha, ahina, and satira. 
As in the sattra, the yajamdana and Hotr are identical, then the diksa@ is automatic. In the 
other two rites the Hotr is not the yajamdana, and may be either dzksita or adzksita, In the 
Agnistoma, &c., if svarthe he is diksita, as these are Soma sacrifices (cf. Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
Litteratur, p. 125). If the sacrifice is not a Soma one, then he is not. Only the @ks¢¢a can 
perform at a parakiya mahavratakarman, and he only if there is a cetyagnz. But all this is very 
difficult and inconsistent. The z@samvatsara ity eke he takes as a separate prohibition confined to 
one school. But this seems less likely. (3) Max Miiller, S.2.Z., I, 266, 267, takes the passage 
thus: ‘No one who is adikshita, uninitiated, should recite it for another person ; nor should he 
do so, when the Mahavrata is performed without (or with) an altar, or if it does not last one 
year.’ But this hardly makes sense, since an adzksifa can never recite if there is a sattra, and 
the construction of the sentence shows that the series of prohibitions is not directed to an 
adiksita but to a priest in general. He is not to recite if adzksz¢a, nor if there is no fire, &c. 
Dr. Friedlander, on Sankhayana Aranyaka, I, 1, follows Max Miiller, without commenting on the 
difficulties. (4) The only other possibility is to render, ‘No one who is not initiated must 
recite, nor must one recite if there is no fire, nor for another (i.e. allowing ahzmas and ekahas 
if by chance the yajyamana is the Hotr in fact). Some say, ‘nor if it be not a sa¢éva. One may 
recite for a father, &c.’ In this case the passage confirms in part the view that there was 
probably a cztydgnz at the ekaha and ahima rites, Eggeling, S. 8. #., XLII, xxv. 

4 Saikhayana Aranyaka, I, 1, has G¢mane haivasya tac chastam bhavatt, The one gives the 
body, the other learning. A¢mano here is no doubt correct as less easy than adtmane. It is 
a predicative possessive gen., as in I, 2, 2, n. 8. Cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 298; 
Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit Syntax, § 64. For asya, cf. Caland, Ueber das rit. Siitra des 
Baudh., pp. 44, 45. 

8 Sayana says: atra kecid vakyantaram adhiyate. ‘This can hardly refer to recitation, and 
throws grave doubt on Winternitz’s interpretation of a similar phrase in Haradatta (Mantra- 
patha, I, xix). The passage is given in all the MSS., but it cannot be original. In addition to 
being quite out of place, it is almost unintelligible here. It is a general description of the 
praisa of the Adhvaryu in the case of Sastras, whether accompanied by Narasamsakhyacamasas 
or not. In the case of the Hotr’s Sastras the praisa is ukthasa yaja somasya. In the case of the 
Hotrakas, what it is is disputed. Sayana says (1) some supply wkthafa yaja somanam (cf. 
Katyayana Srauta Sitra, IX, 13, 33 (somasya); 14, 12 (somanam); Apastamba Srauta Sitra, 
XII, 27, 19 (somasya) ; 28, 14 (somanam)) and make this the praisa ; (2) others, so’yam arthah 
prakrtita eva prapta iti matva, reject the passage ; (3) others repeat wkthasd yaja somasya, and 
assume the mention here is hotrakanam Sastresu visesavidhanartham. The second alternative is 
the most probable. The words wkthasé—somdnadm, which appear in the text after hotrakanam, 
are certainly spurious and cannot have been read even by Sayana, whose note would be 


Miller, S. B. #., XXX, 321), to the fact that Brahmins only can eat the remains of a sacrifice. 
The reason is no doubt a reflex of the doctrine of the presence of the divinity in the sacrifice 
(which in certain cases forbids any eating whatever, e.g, ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 8, 31), for 
which see my article in the 7. R. A.S., 1907, pp. 939 q.; Robertson Smith, Red. of Sem., 1,276 sq. 


-V, 3,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 301 


Adhvaryu) on the Hotr’s Sastras, whether accompanied or not by libations for 
Naragamsa, is ‘Offer the Soma with the hymn’, and it also occurs in the 
Hotraka’s Sastras): This day one should not teach to one who is not a regular 
pupil, and has not been so for a year, assuredly not to one who has not been 
so for a year, nor to one who is not a drahmacarin and does not belong to 
the same school,‘ assuredly not to one who does not belong to the same school, 
nor to one who has not come to that place.6 There should not be more than 
one saying or twice, twice only. ‘One man should tell it to one, says Jatu- 
karnya. ‘Not to a child or a man in the third stage of life.’7_ Nor standing 
to one standing, nor walking to one walking, nor lying to one lying, nor seated 
on a couch to one so seated, but seated on the ground to one so seated (should 
the teacher teach). Nor (should the pupil) lean backwards,* nor forwards, nor 
be over clothed, nor adopt postures, but he should raise his knees, without 
wearing special apparel, and so learn. He should not learn when he has eaten 
flesh, or seen blood, or a dead body, or done what is unlawful, or anointed (his 
eyes) or oiled or rubbed his body, or had himself shaved, or bathed, or has 
put on colour, or put ona wreath, or had intercourse, or written,® or obliterated 


unintelligible if he had had them before him. The reason for their insertion is obvious. For 
the libations, cf. ZL’ Agnistoma, p. 220. The gen. is presumably partitive, cf. Speijer, Vedésche 
und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 67; V. 3, 2; 0. 17. 

4 Cf, Gautama Sitra, XIV, 21, and Biihler’s note in his translation (5. 8. E., II), where 
he differentiates it from sahddhydya. Here, however, it is perhaps used in that usual sense. 

5 Where the teacher lives. He is not to go to the pupil’s house. 

6 Because it is so sacred. According to Sayana, Jatikarnya insists on one lecture only 
to one person at a time, and the same teacher to avoid sampradayavicheda. 

7 This sentence must also belong to Jatikarnya. This seems the proper way to interpret the 
iti, which, however, Sayana explains as Sisyaprayuktanisedhasamaptyarthah, and so Max Miiller 
takes it. For the idea, cf. Manu, VIII, 66, &c. 

® T.e. lean on a Audi (or a wall, &c., Apastamba Dharma Sutra, I, 2, 6, 17), or rest with his 
hands on a stick (on the ground, Apastamba, l.c.,17). The other renderings follow Sayana, who 
gives ucchistadyakramana for navratyam ahramya; cf. A’valayana Srauta Sitra, XII, 8, 19. 
For ativitah, cf. Manu, VIII, 23: samvitangah. For napitena karayitod he has zakhanikrnta- 
nadi ; cf. Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, VI, 1, 6, and for the syntax, Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, 
pp- 2248q- He takes naktva as referring to the eyes. Varnakenanulipya he refers to sandal or 
saffron being smeared on; for varnaka, ef. Béhtlingk, Dzct., VI, 24. For anapasrita, ibid., 
I, 41. For these rules, cf. Apastamba, I, 2, 6, 23-27. 

9 These translations follow Sayana and Max Miller. Though they no longer ‘seem to be the 
earliest mention of actual writing in Sanskrit literature’, in view of the discoveries of Biihler, 
Indische Palaeographie, and Ind. Stud., 111 (1898); Hoernle, 7. 4..S.B., LXIX, pt. i; Rhys Davids, 
Buddhist India, ch. VU and others, they are interesting. Writing on palm-leaves may be meant 
rather than on wood. The violent repugnance to writing shown here and elsewhere is certainly in 
favour of this view, accepted by Macdonell (Sanskrit Literature, p. 16) and Winternitz (Gesch. 
der indisch. Litt., 1, 29), that writing first came into use on the South Western Coast through 
commerce, and that MSS. are later. For a different but very improbable view, cf. R. Shamasastry, 
Ind. Ant., 1906 ; J. R. A. S., 1907; pp- 426, 427- 


302 AITAREYA ARANYAKA Wie3s37 


writing. ‘He should not finish learning this in one day,’ says Jatiikarnya. 
‘He should do so,’ says Galava. ‘He should finish all before the sets of eighty 
tristichs, and resting’ in another place learn the rest,’ says Agnivesyayana. 
Where he learns this, he should Jéarn nothing else ; but where he learns some- 
thing else he may at will learn this there also. He who does not study this 
does" not become a sa/aka; even though he study much else, yet if he study not 
this, he does not become a s#a/aka. Nor should he forget this; even though 
he forgets something else, he should not forget this. Assuredly ” never should 
he forget this. If he forget not this, let him know that it is enough for himself.” 
Let him know that truly it is enough. He who knows this should not com- 
municate ® nor dine nor amuse himself with one who knows this not. 

Now we shall set forth the rules of study. When the old water about 


10 Samayamdanah is taken as samadpayan by Sayana, which is possible. I follow Max Miiller. 
On the passage as a whole, cf. Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 293- On the form AgniveSyayana, 
cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1219. It occurs as a name of a grammarian in the Taittiriya 
Pratisakhya, XIV, 32. AgniveSya occurs in the Vaméas in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 6, 2, and 
IV, 6, 2, in both Kanva and Madhyandina Sakhas (Max Miiller, S. B. E., XV, 118, n.; 186, n.). 
Jatikarnya (the word is found in the gana, gargadi) occurs in the same passages with Galava. The 
spelling seems clearly Jatu°, though in Max Miiller’s translation the two forms Jatu° and Jatu® 
occur. Jatikarnya occurs in Sankhayana Aranyaka, VIII, 10, and frequently in the Sankhayana 
Srauta and Grhya Sitras (III, 10, 1), Katyayana’s Srauta Sitra, the Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya, 
and in Kausitaki Brahmana, XXVI,5. Galava is known to Nirukta, 1V, 3; Brhadaranyaka, 
II, 6, 3; IV, 6, 3; Brhaddevata, and Panini as a grammarian; see Max Miiller, Rgveda 
Pratisakhya, p. 6. 

11 ¢Should not become’ is Sayana’s version. Literally it must be ‘is not a (true) szataka’. 
Cf. Apastamba Dharma Siitra, I, 2, 8,27. The exact force of the optative is rather doubtful: it 
may be that it is the indefinite use, of which examples undoubtedly occur in Sanskrit (cf. Speijer, 
Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 283; also in III, 2, 1, n. I, and Introd., p. 61), or it may be 
an opt. in protasis with the apod. in the indic. to denote the certainty of the result, though the 
rule of similarity of mood is usually strictly observed in the older language, see Whitney, 
Sanskrit Grammar, § 581 f£, who enforces his rule partly by alterations in the text of the Maitrayani 
Samhita (see his review of v. Schroeder’s ed., P. A. O. S., Oct., 1887); 7. &.A.S., 1909, p. 153- 

12 Sayana says that this is read by some only. It is in all the MSS., but is an easy addition. 
Cf.n.14. Jo here and above follows a negative sentence and is practically merely an emphatic 
negative as usual in classical Sanskrit, Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 240; Sanskrit 
Syntax, § 402, R. 1; ef. Caland, Ueber das rit. Stitra des Baudh., p. 51. 

8 Sayana renders purusarthaya, and Max Miiller gives as possible ‘for acquiring a knowledge 
of the self’. For the dat., cf. I, 4, 2. Atsan, however, is merely the ordinary reflexive, Speijer, 
Vedische und Sanshrit-Syntax, § 127; Delbriick, A/tindische Syntax, pp. 208, 262. 

lt This again, Sayana says, is read only by some, and as it is one of those easy additions 
it cannot be accepted as genuine. Naturally a chapter of this kind lies open beyond others to 
such interpolations as this. 

15 Sayana renders samuddiset as ‘study with’ (¢asya purato grantham etam na pathet). The 
sense is probably ‘enter into discussion with’. evamvid and anevamvid here are clearly com- 
pounds; cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, IU, 1, 68. é 

16 Then come general rules for all Vedic study, not for the Mahavrata alone. These are found both 


-V, 3,3 TRANSLATION AND NOTES 303 


the roots of the trees has been dried up,’? he should not study, nor in the 
forenoon,"® when the shadows meet, nor in the afternoon, nor when a thick 
cloud has risen; and when rain" falls out of season he should stop his study 
of the Veda® for three nights, nor in this time *' should he tell tales, nor even 


in Grhya and Dharma Sitras (Oldenberg, 5.3. #., XXX, xxxiv, xxxv); Khadira Grhya Sitra, 
Thaary efi Saakhayana Grhya Siitra, IV, 8; VI, 1; Hillebrandt, Xztwal-Litteratur, p.56 and 
reff.; Gobhila Grhya Sitra, III, 3; Apastamba Dharma Siitra, I, 3, 9-11 ; Gautama Dharma 
Siitra, XVI, with Biihler’s notes. 

17 The time after the full moon of Pausa, i.e. January-February is meant, cf. Weber, Dze 
vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra, TI, 322 sq.; Oldenberg, S. B. #., XXX, 77, n.3 
Apastamba Dharma Sitra, I, 3, 9, 2, with Biihler’s note; Manu, IV, 95; Yajiiavalkya, I, 142; 
143. The four months after the full moon of Asadha are forbidden in Sankhayana, VI, 2,1. The 
term is five months, beginning in the middle of Sravana, Gautama Dharma Sitra, XVI, 1 sq.; 
of Prausthapada, Gobhila Grhya Sitra, III, 3,1; Khadira Grhya Siitra, ITI, 2,16. Sravana is 
also given by ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, III, 5, 2; 3; Sankhayana Grhya Sitra, IV, 5, 2; Para- 
skara Grhya Sitra, II, 10, 2; HiranyakeSi Grhya Sutra, II, 18,1. The tmesis wpa -napite is 
very unusual, but #fafzrane would be almost equally strange, though not impossible. Kaksodake 
is a curious expression, as explained by Sayana. The separation of prefix and verb is (see Caland, 
Ueber das rit. Siitra des Baudh., pp. 48, 49) rare in the late Sitra style and is difficult to assume here, 
though this may be quoted from an older (? metrical) text. Upapwrana seems elsewhere unknown 
in the sense ‘somewhat (?) old’. Nothing is indeed more characteristic of the Vedic Sanskrit than 
the separation of particle and verb. Holtzmann (Grammatisches aus dem Mahabharata, p. 48) 
says that the only example * in the Epic occurs in a pseudo-Vedic hymn to the A'vins, I, 3, 62: 
devi adhi visve visaktah. Even thé Brhaddevata has no certain case of such separation. On 
Jacobi’s theories of the beginning of the year (Festgruss an Roth, pp. 68-74), see Whitney, 
J. 4.0. S., XVI, lxxxii sq. ; Biihler, Jd. Ant., XXIII, 238-249 (dates of the commencement of 
Vedic study at p. 249); Thibaut, ibid., XXIV, 85-100 ; Oldenberg, Z. D. 1. G., L, 451 sq. 

18 When study is permissible (hardly ‘ at any time’ as in Max Miiller), he must not so study 
in the forenoon or afternoon, when shadows are meeting ; i.e. he should begin at sunrise when 
the shadows first appear, and cease before sunset when they again disappear (Sayana). 

19 For the case of a cloud, cf. Apastamba, I, 3,11, 31. Rain out of season (ibid., 27; Manu, 
III, 104, combines the two into a cloud out of the ordinary in the rains) is explained by Sayana 
as rain falling in months other than Sravana and Bhadrapada, August and September, or according 
to the Smrtikaras, under Naksatras other than the 13 from Ardra.to Jyestha. 

2 The study of Vedangas, like wyakarana, is not prohibited (Sayana). He adds a@rdradi- 
jyesthantasya trayodaSanaksatraparimitasya kalasya urstikalatvam abhyupetya tato "nyatra 
vrstau satyam akalavr stinimittan triratradhyayanavarjanam ichantt, 

21 Asmin is vague. Sayana gives either adhiyamane svadhyaye or mahavratadhyayanakale. 
The rendering ‘ at that time’ of Max Miiller is perhaps intended to refer to the ¢7ivatram, since 
the translation continues ‘not even during the night, nor should he glory in his knowledge’, 
since asya seems to be taken with ratrau. Triratram, of course, includes days, so that the 
rendering is quite possible, though probably the first of Sayana’s alternatives is correct. For 
the acc., cf. Speijer, Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, § 28 and reff. The instr. is one of 
separation, ibid., § 335 Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 283. The usual case is the abl., 
Speijer, § 52; Delbriick, Altindische Syntax, p. 446, who ignore this passage. 





@ But cf. the warning as to Holtzmann’s accuracy in Biihler, Ind. Ant., XXIII, 146, and 
Winternitz’s review there cited. In this case the fact seems substantially correct. 


304 AITAREYA ARANYAKA V5353 


at night at this time be fain to set them forth.” ‘This’ 3 is the name of this 
great being. He who knows thus ‘this’ as the name of it, becomes drahman. 


2 The text reads: nasya ratrau ca na ca kirtayiset. Sayana, followed by Max Miller, 
takes this as consisting of two sentences, (1) masya ratrau ca, (2) na ca kirtayrset. Sayana 
renders, (1) Aimcasya mahavratasya patham ratrau na kuryat, (2) Rimca mahavratabhiyno 
"ham ity evam janamadhye kirtim api nechet. Max Miiller’s version, which is much more 
probable, is cited above. But ‘not even at night’ would more properly be a vatrau cana 
than a ratrau ca, cf. III, 1, 3: ndtidyumne cana. Further kirtayiset is quite impossible. The 
form required is cékirtayiset, and no easier error than cana cikirtayiset being changed to cana 
ca hirtayiset can well be conceived. Then the whole must mean, I think, ‘nor even at night 
in this time (probably adhiyamdne svadhyaye) should one be fair to proclaim (tales).’ The 
adhyayana takes place during the day (see above), and neither then nor even at night, when 
the adhyayana stops, is the telling of tales to be permitted. For the form czkirtayzset, an opt. 
desid. from a denominative (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1056), see Whitney, § 1068. 
Such forms are very rare; hence the non-recognition of this case by the commentators. Cf. also 
Aitareya Brahmana, III, 30: vaci kalpayisan, where Aufrecht (p. 430) proposes to read czkalpa- 
yisan (presumably by haplography for vac7 cikalpayisan); 1, 24,5: Glulobhayisat (cf. Liebich, 
Panini, p. 32, D.)$ Apastamba Srauta Siitra, XII, 24, 5: dcbhaksayiset; Kathaka Samhita, 
XVI, 3: pipayayiset; Ind. Stud., 1X, 264; Holtzmann, Grammatisches aus dem Mahabharata, 
p- 46. 

23 Sayana renders, followed by Max Miiller, ‘ This, the Artsuddhyayavakyam mahavrata- 
vakyam va, thus learned (=7#2), is the name of the paramatman. He explains that the Veda 
produces dvahman and so is identified with it, and its sacred character resulting from this power 
causes the long list of ¢yamas here given. This cannot be right. The word ¢ad is the name 
of the drahman; see I, 3, 4, where this is most expressly stated. 

The end of the section renders it probable that it may be accepted as coming from Saunaka. 

. Otherwise the passage would be suspect, since it contains passages whose genuineness was 
doubted even before Sayana, and the possibility of it all being an interpolation cannot be entirely 
excluded. The use of d*ahman is striking, especially in the pred., and confirms the view that 
brahma is not to be found save on good grounds in any early texts. For Atharvaveda, IV, 35, 2, 
see Weber, Znud. Stud., XVIII, 140; for Maitrayani Samhita, II, 9, 1, see v. Schroeder, /zd. Lit., 
Pp. 91, n. 1. Muir, Zexts, V, 323, finds him in Satapatha Brahmana, XI, 5, 6, 9, &c., but 
needlessly. Hopkins, Religion of India, p. 195, and Oldenberg, Buddha*, p. 30, n. I, are vague. 
The St. Petersburg Dict., V, 138, cites Taittirlya Brahmana, II, 7, 17, 1, as the oldest passage, 
but Sayana’s view may be wrong, and none of the passages in Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, 
p. 168, are necessarily so taken. He occurs, of course, in the Taittiriya Aranyaka, X, but that is 
not early, though its lateness has been needlessly exaggerated on insufficient grounds. Eggeling 
(cf. S.B.£., XLIV, 525) finds him nowhere in the comparatively late Satapatha, though he 
appears in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (cf. Deussen, Phil. of the Upanishads, pp. 172 sq.), and 


in the later Upanisads and in the earliest Buddhist texts, which, however, can only be doubtfully 
dated, 


APPENDIX 
SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA VII-XV. 


Tuis Appendix contains the text of Sankhayana Aranyaka, VII-XV, edited 
from the Berlin MS. Orient., fol. 630 (A)' and Bodleian MS. Sansk. e. 2? (B). 
The Bodleian MS., which is at least 200 years old, save for ff. 65 and 87 
which were replaced in a.p. 1781, is extremely accurate on the whole, and 
the text which it presents is in most cases also supported by parallel 
readings in other Upanisads and Aranyakas. In many cases the old method 
of denoting the e, az, 0, au is retained, but not consistently, showing that the 
MS. belongs to the period of transition to the new style. Frequent errors 
are (1) the reduction of double consonant to single, e.g. fare duvisantam, 
XII, 20; (2) the insertion of a needless 2, e.g. sapatnakksayanam, XII, 19: 
this may be a mere graphical sign as apparently in the Manava Grhya Sutra °; 
(3) haplography, e.g. pramiye fared), XII, 20; hence probably bhavisyati 
for bhavisyatifi in IX, 7; (4) the writing of 7 for 7, e.g. maricir, VIII, 7. 
Many, though not all, of these errors have been corrected in a later hand, or 
sometimes by the first hand in the margin. The most serious source of error 
is probably omission, see e.g. VIII, 2,n. 7; 4, n. 3. As usual ch is written for cch 
in all cases,# and 7 replaces 7; I have restored cch and 7. Further, as the text 
is attached to the Rgveda, I have treated two verbal prefixes as each separate 
and accented, as usual in the text of the Rgveda.5 Both MSS. agree in several 
errors, e. g. the omission of /rayasya and the reading szcyef (for sécyefa) in VII, 2. 

The following list gives the correspondence between the two texts of the 
Aitareya and the Sankhayana Aranyakas :— 


ArrareyA ARANYAKA. SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA. 
Santi verses (pp. 75, 76). VII, r. 
Lt, 1, 4: WADE 
THiS 1; 23 Vil; 3: 
oo VII, 4-7. 


1 See Weber, Berlin Catal., Il, 5; Keith, 7. R. A. S., 1908, p. 363, n. 2. 

2 Described in Winternitz and Keith’s Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian 
Library, pp. 59, 60. Purchased in 1886 for the Library through Dr. Thibaut, 

3 Knauer, Manava Grhya Sutra, pp. xxxii, xxxiil. 

4 See above, p. 10, n. 2; Macdonell, 7. .A.S., 1907, p. 1105. 

5 Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 107. 


KEITH xX 


306 éANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


Arrareya ARANYAKA. SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA. 
¥II, 1, 4. VIL Ss 39. 
Liter: VII, 10. 

III, 1, 5. VII, 11-13. 
HI, £76. VII, 14-16. 

—_— VII, 17. 

Til) 4, 6. VII, 185. 19. 

_ Wile 20: 

(Cf. II, 6.) VII, 21. 

— VII, 22. 
bee Ee = Vil, « 
1-2; 2. VIII, 2. 

III, 2, 3. WIL 4 3/4. 
III, 2, 35 4- WEIR: 

III, 2, 4. VIII, 6. 

Ill, 2, 43 5: VOL 4. 

SLE 2; 6s VIII, 8; 9. 
II, 2, 6. WILE to; “15: 


The verses in Adhyaya XII sometimes make nonsense, and could be 
corrected from the parallel texts. But all that can usefully be done is to edit 
what apparently was the text of the Aranyaka, recognizing that it already 
contained much that in the course of oral tradition had become corrupted. This 
is the principle on which Winternitz has edited. the Mantrapatha} and is the 
only sound method of procedure. 


1 See his Preface, pp. Xv sq. 


Apuyaya VII. 


Om \rtam vadisyamt satyam vadisyamt \ tan mam avait tad vakiaram avaiv avatu 
mam avatu vaktaram\mayt bhargo mayt mahak\van me manast pratisthita mano 
me vact pratisthitam \ avir avir mayy' & bhur vedasamatsarinih? \ riam ma ma 
himsith \ anenadhitenahoratran samvasam? \ Agna ila nama tla nama rsibhyo mantra- 
hrdbhyo mantrapatibhyo* namo ‘stu devebhyak \ Siva nak samtama bhava sumrlika 
Sarasvati ma te vyoma* samdrsi\ adabdham mana istram caksuh \ siryo jyotisam 
srestho dikse ma ma himsif Wx WW? 

1 mary B; maryo Anand. ed. of Kausitaki Upanisad. : 2 ¢santr A, Anand. 
° mantrapati B, after which occurs a break in the MS. which has been repaired in new paper on 


which is supplied zamo-devebhyah. * yyoma B as corrected. A has Sarasvatt. 5 See 
above, pp. 75, 76, and IX, 1, and for réam, S.R.A.S., 1908, Pp. 1124. 


ADHYAYA VII 307 


Athatah samhttaya upanisat\ prthivi pirvariipam dyaur uttarariipam vayuh sam- 
hiteti Sauraviro Manditkeyah\ akisah samhitety asya Mandavyo vedayam cakre \ sa 
haviparthrto’ mene na me ’sya puirena samagad iti \ parihrto mena ity Agastyah 
samanam hy atra pttus ca putrasya ca vayur akasas ca \ ity adhidaivatam \ atha- 
dhydimam \ vak pirvaripam mana utiararipam pranah samhiteti Sauraviro 
Mandiikeyah\ atha ha smasya putra aha Dirghah\ manasa va agre kirtayati tad vaca 
vadatt fasman mana eva piirvariipam vag uttararipam manovakpr danas tv eva samhi- 
teti \ sa eso ’’svarathah prastivahano manovakpranasamhitah svargam lokam gama- 
yali \ sa_ya evam etim samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahma- 
varcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur ett \tti nu Manditkeyanam \\ 2 \\ 


_ * Bas corrected has hapiparthvrto, and parihvrto, A has °hvyto as a correction, Cf. Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 1, 1. 


Atha? Sakalyasya \ prthivt purvariipam dyaur uttarariipam vayuk samhita 
vrstih samdhih Parjanyah samdhata\ tad ulapt yatrattad balavad anudgrhnan maha- 
megho? vrstim varsati® dyavaprthivyau samadhatam \ ity adhidatvatam \ athadhya- 
imam \ puruso’yam sarvam andam dve bidale bhavatas tatredam eva purvarupam 
idam uttarariipam \ tatrayam* antarenakaso yathasau dyavaprthivyor antarena- 
hagah \ tasmin etasminn akase praina ayatto bhavati yathamusminn akase vayur 
Gyatto bhavati \ yathamini trini jyotimsy evam imani puruse trint jyotimst \ 
yathasau divy aditya evam tdam Sirasi caksuh \ yathasav antartkse vidyud evam 
idam aimant hrdayam \ yathayam agnih prthivyam evam tdam upasthe retah \ evam 
iva ha sma sarvata G!manam anuvidhayahedam eva pirvaripam tdam uttararipam 
manovakpranas tv eva samhitett \ sa eso’svarathah prastivahano manovakpranasam- 
hitah svargam lokam gamayati \ sa ya evam etim samhitam veda samdhiyate 
prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur eft W300" 


1 This section is preceded in the MSS. by the following: Sakalyasya prthivy agnih prthivi 
vag anuvyaharah sa yadi nirbhujah khalu vat vayam madhyamo vak pranena mata jaya praje 


vag brhadgatir vali sarvam uttamam \\3\\. These are of course the initial or most important 
words of the following sections in order. _ * “megha A, B. 3 varsamtt A, B. * yatha 
trayam B. 5 4 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 2, and 1 ad fin. 


Prthivi pirvariipam dyaur uttararipam vayuh samhita disahk samdhir adityah 
samahateti Visoamitrah \ tty adhidaivatam \ athadhyatmam \ vak purvariipam mana 
uttarariipam pranah samhita Srotram samdhis caksuh samdhata \ sa ya evam clam 
samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena 
lokena sarvam ayur eli \\4\\" 

‘5 A, B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka, 
Agni piurvaripam candrama uttararupam vidyut samhiteti Siryadattah \ ity 


adhidaivatam \ athadhyaimam \ vak pirvaripam mana uttararipam saiyam sam- 
X 2 


308 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


hitad \ sa_ya evam etam samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahma- 
varcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur ett W5\\* 
16 A,B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Prthivi pirvariipam dyaur uttararupam halak samhiteti Radheyah \ tty adht- 
daivatam \ athadhyatmam \ vak purvarupam mana uttararupam aima samhita \ 
sa ya evam etam samhitam veda samdhiyate projaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarca- 
sena svargena lokena sarvam ayur ett \\ 60? 

1 A,B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Vak purvariipam mana uitararupam vidya sanhitett Pauskarasadih \ sa ya 
evam etam samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena 
svargena lokena sarvam ayur ett V7 WW? 

1g A,B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Athato ’nuvyaharah \ prino vamsa ttt vidyal \ sa ya ena pranam vamsam 
bruvan param upavadec chaknuvan hakcic cen manyeta pranam vamsam samadhak 
prinam vamsam samdhitsitum* na saknosity Gha? pranas tua vamso hasyatily enam 
briyat \ atha ced asaknuvan* manyela pranam vamsam samadhitsis tan nasakak 
samdhatum pranas twa vamso hasyatity evainam brizyat \ yatha tu* katha ca bruvan 
vabruvan va briyad abhyasam eva yat tat tatha syat\na tv evanyat kusalad brahma- 
nam briyad \ atidyumna eva brahmayam brixyat \ natidyumne cana*® brahmanam 
brityan namo’ stu brahmanebhya ta Sauraviro Mandikeyah 8° 

1 dhitsatam B pr.m.; samadhitsitam Bsec.™m.  _ 2 artha B. 3 gsaknuvantam B sec. m. 
4nu()A,B. FxacaA,B. °9 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III,1, 4. Read perhaps samadham. 

Sa yadt pranam vamésam bruvaniam param upavedec chaknuvantam cen manyeta 
pranam vamsam samadhitsisam pranam vamsam samdhitsitum 2 na saknosity aha* 
pranas toa vamso hasyatily enam brityat \ atha ced asaknuvaniam manyeta pranam 
vamsam samadhitsis tam nasakah samdhaium pranas tva vaméso hasyatity evainam 
briyal \ yatha tu katha ca bruvaniam vabruvantam va brixyad abhyasam eva yat 
tat tatha syat\na to evanyat kusalad brahmanam brityat\ atidyumna eva brahmanam 
briyat \ natidyumne cana* brahmanam bryan namo ’stu® brahmanebhya itt Saura- 
viro Mandikeyak \\ 9° 

1 prana B. 2 samadhitsatam B pr. m.; situm B sec. m. 3 artha B. * ma ca A, B. 
5 Add B sec, m. 6 10 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 4. The reading para for param 


would improve the sense, though no yersion of 9 and Io is satisfactory. Cf. Aitareya Aranyaka, 
IIE 1, 4; 0:5. 


Athato nirbhujapravadah’\ prthivyayatanam nirbhujam divayatanam pratrnnam 
antariksayatanam ubhayamaniarena \sa ya enan® nirbhujam bruvan param upavadet 
prthivim devatam arahk prthivi iva devata risyatity enam briyat \ atha yadt 
pralranam bruvan param upavaded divam® devatim aro dyaus (va devata rixyatity 


ADHYAYA VII 309 


enam briéyat \ atha yady ubhayamantarena bruvan param upavaded antariksam 
devatim aro ‘ntariksam twa devata risyatity enam* briiyal \ yad hi samdhim 
vivartayati® tan nirbhujasya ripam \ atha yac chuddhe aksare abhivyaharatt tat 
pratrnnasyagra u evobhayamantarenobhayam vyaplam bhavats® \ annadyakamo nir- 
bhujam briyat svargakamah pratrunam ubhayakima ubhayamantarena \ sa ya 
enan® nirbhujam bruvan param upavaded acyostha avarabhyam sthanabhyam ity 
enam briyai\ atha yadt pratrnnam bruvan param upavaded acyostha uttarabhyim 
sthanabhyam ity evainam briyat \ yas tv evobhayamantarentha fasya nasty 
apavadak \ yatha tu kathi ca bruvan vabruvan va briiyad abhyasam eva yat tat 
tatha syat\ na tv evanyat kusalad brahmanam briiyat \ atidyumna eva brahmanam 
briyat \ natidyumne cana™ brahmanam brian namo ’stu brahmanebhya itt 
Sauraviro Mandikeyak \\ 108 

1 nirbhujah® A,B. 2 enan (m for assimilated x) B. © * Add B sec.m. * evainam A, 
B pr. m. ; exam B sec. m. ° °yanti tam B.. ° bhavataBpr.m. .7 nmacaA,B. *% 11 A,B. 
See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 3. In the latter part druvantam and para cea upavadah for 
bruvan, param, and apavadah seem essential, giving the reasonable sense: ‘if one is rebuking one 
who says the shige det the one (the latter) should say, ‘‘Thou hast fallen from the two 
lower (avara) places.” ’ So in the case of the pratynna the two upper places are referred to, 
but in the case of the xbhayamantarena rebuke is impossible, and no reply is suggested. It 
would really be more natural to put the words of the apodosis in the mouth of the rebuker, 


but besides the difficulty of avara and wftara, it is hardly possible that the section should give 
directions for cursing persons who recite. 


Atha khalv chur nirbhujavaktrah \ pirvam evaksaram pirvariipam uttaram 
ultararipam yakaravakarav*' antarena sa samhiteti\ sa ya evam efam samhitam 
veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam 
ayur ett WII? 

1 °karam B pr.m. For the opposite case, cf. XIII, 1, n. 5. 212 A, B. See Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 1, 5. 

Atha vai vayam brimo nirbhujavakirah sma tti ha smaha Hrasvo Mandiiheyah\ 
pirvam evaksaram purvariipam utlaram uttarariipam tad yasau matra pirari- 
pottararipe antarena yena samdhim vivartayaht yena matramatram vibhajah’ yena 
svarat* svaram vijidpayatt sa samhiteli\ sa ya evam elam samhitam veda sam- 
dhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur 
eft WI2? 

1 So A, Bclearly. The Aitareya has svarasvaram. * 13 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III,r, 5. 


Atha ha smasya putra aha madhyamah Pratiyodhiputro’ Magadhavasi \ piirvam 
evaksaram purvaripam ultaram ultarariipam tad yasau matra samdhiviynapani 
sama tad bhavatt simaivaham samhitam manya* tt \ tad etad rcabhyuditam \ ma 
na stenebhyo ye abhi druhas pade\ niramino ripavo’nnesu jagrdhuk \ a devanam ohate 
vt vrayo hrdt\ Brhaspate® na parah samno vidur tli \\* sa ya evam elam samhitam 


310 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa hrahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam 
ayur eft W130° 

1 Pratiyodhi® B pr. m.; Pratibodhi in Aitareya. _ 2 manyata B. 3 Brhaspade B. 
4 =RV,, Il, 23, 16. 5 14 A, B, See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 5- 

Vak pranena samdhiyata ta Kauntharavyah pranak pavamanena pavamano 
vitvair devair vitve devak svargena lokena svargo loko brahmana saisavarapara 
samhila \ sa ya evam elam avaraparam samhilam vedaivam hava sa prajaya 
pasubhir yasasé brahmavarcasena svargena lokena samdhiyate yathatsavarapara 
samhita \ sa yadi parena vopasrstak svena varthenabhivyahared abhivyaharann eva 
vidyad divam samhitagamad viduso devan abhivyaharartham evam bhavisyahty 
etenavaraparena tatha haiva tad bhavati W14\\" 

135 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 6. 


Mata purvariipam pitottararupam praja samhiteti Bhargavah \ tad efad ekam 
eva’ sarvam abhyaniktam \ mata ca hy evedam pita ca praja ca sarvam \ satsaditt- 
samhita? \aditir hy evedam sarvam yad tdam kimeid visvabhitam \ tad etad rcabhyu- 
ditam \ aditir dyaur aditir antartksam \ adilir mata sa pita sa putrah \ visve deva 
aditip patica janah \ aditir jatam aditir janitvam iti \* sa _ya evam elam samhitam 
veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam 
ayur eli W154 
_ 1 ?iva B pr. m, 2 ditth B. 3 =RV., I, 89, 10. #16 A,B. Cf. Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 1, 6. 

Java pirvariipam patir utiararupam putrak samhita retah samdhih prajananam 
samdhanam ttt Sthavirak Sakalyah \ saisa Prajapatisamhita \ sa ya evam etam 
samhitam veda prajayate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena 
sarvam ayur eti \16\"* 

117 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, ITI, 1, 6; Vienna Or. Journ., XVIII, 274. 


Praja pirvaripam Ssraddhottararupam karma samhita satyam samdhanam it 
Kasyapak \ saisa satyasamhita" \ tad ahur yat? satyasamdha deva tt \ sa ya evam 
etam samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena 
lokena sarvam ayur ett W17\W* 


1 Satyam? Bpr.m. The reference is not known to me. The epithet is in Atharvaveda, VI, 
6, 19; 20. 2 ya B. 8 18 A, B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Vak samhitet’ Paticalacandah \ vaca vat vedak’ samdhiyante*® vaca chandamst 
vaca mitran’ samdadhatt \ tad yatraitad adhite va bhasate va vact tada prano bhavati 
vak tada pranam relhi® \ atha yal svapitt va tusnim va bhavatt prane tada vag bhavatt 
pranas tada vacam relhi av anyo ’nyam relhak \ tad etad rcabhyuditam \ ehak 
suparnak sa samudram a vivesa \ sa tdam visvam bhuvanam vt caste \ tam pakena 


ADHYAYA VII 311 


manasapasyam antitas\ tam mata relhi sa u relhi maiaram iti \* vag vat mata 
prano vaisah \ sa ya evam etam samhitim veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa 
brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur eti \18\\ : 


* devah B pr. m.; vedah marg. 2 °dhiyate B. 8 yelhi throughout MSS., I have restored 
the 7 as in a Rgvedic text. * RV., X, 114, 4. 5 19 A,B. See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 6. 


Brhadrathantarena ripena samhita samdhiyata iti Tarksyah \ vag vat rathanta- 
rasya riipam préno brhata ubhabhyam u khalu samhita samdhiyate vaca ca prayena 
ca \ efasyam ha smopanisadi samvatsaram ga raksayata* iti Tarksyah \ elasyam 
ha sma matrayim samvatsaram ga raksayata® itt Tarksyak \ sa ya evam eam 
samhitam veda samdhiyate prajay& pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena 
lokena sarvam ayur ett \19\* 


* raksata B pr. m.; raksayata B sec. m. 2 raksata B pr. m.; text marg. 5 20 A, B. 
See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 1, 6. 


Gatth pirvariipam nivttir utlararipam sthitih samhiteli Jaratkarava* Arta- 
bhagah \ tasyam etasyam samhitayam dhvamsayo nimesah kasthak kalak ksana 
muhiirta ahoratra ardhamasa masa rtavak samvatsaras ca samdhiyante \ sais& 
samhitaitan kalan samdadhati kalo gatinivyttisthitih® samdadhatt gatinivritisthit- 
bhir idam sarvam samdhiyate \ ity adhidaivatam \ athadhyaimam \ bhitam pirva- 
ripam bhavisyad uttararipam bhavat samhiteti* halasamdhifi \ tad etad rcabhyu- 
ditam \ mahat tan* nama guhyam purusprk\ yena bhiitam janayo yena bharyam \ 
prainam jatam jyotir yad asya priyam \ priyak sam avisanta paiiceti \* sa ya evam 
etam samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena 
lokena sarvam ayur ett \20\\° 

1 Zara B, but see Weber, Catal., II, 6; Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, III, 2, 1. 2 Osthiteh B 
sec, m. 3 samhititra B pr. m.- * tam B. 5 =RV., X, 55, 2 $91 A,B. Not 
in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Athato Vali$ikhayaner * vacah \ paficemani mahabhitant bhavaniiti ha smaha 
Valisikhayanih \ prthivi vayur akasa? apo jyotimst tant mithah samhitani bhavanti \ 
atha yany anyani ksudrant mahabhitant samdhiyante satsa sarvabhitasamhita \ 
sa ya evam efam samhitim veda samdhiyate prajaya pasubhir yasasa brahmavar- 
casena svargena lokena sarvam dyur eft \\ 21° 
1 Vala’ B, butimarg. % fam A. * 22 A,B. Not in Aitareya Aranyaka, but see II, 6. 


Sarva vag brahmeli ha smaha Lauhihyah'\ ye tu keca® §abda vacam eva 
tam vidyat \ tad athaitad rsir aha \ aham Rudrebhir Vasubhi§ caramitt* \ satsa 
vak sarvasabda bhavati* \ sa ya evam etam samhitam veda samdhiyate prajaya 
pasubhir yasasa brahmavarcasena svargena lokena sarvam ayur eti\ yatha caitad 


312 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


brahma kamaript® kamacari bhavaty evam hava sa sarvesu bhitesu kamarupi 
Ramacari bhavati ya evam veda ya evam-veda \\ 22 we 
 Lty Aranyake saptamo ’dhyayah \ 
1So A,B sec. m.; Jaukikyah pr. m., but cf. Weber, Catal., I, 6. 2 kena ca B marg. 


35 RV, X47 125; 2 eer. 5 yupi A, corr. in B, But the masc. of B may be a 
constructio ad sensum. 6 23 A, B, Not in Aitareya Aranyaka. 


Apuyaya VIII. 


Om \ praino vaméa iti ha smaha Sthavirah Sakalyah \ tad yatha Salavamse 
sarve ’nye vamsah samahitah syur evam evaitasmin prane sarva aima samahitah \ 
fasyattasyaimanah prana usmarupam asthint sparsaripam majanak* svararupam 
mamsam lohitam ity etac caturtham aksararupam 2 \ trayam tv eva na etat 
proktam ttt ha smaha Hrasvo Mandikeyah \ tasyattasya trayasya trinitah® sastt- 
§atant bhavant’ samdhinam trinitas? tant saptavimsatisatant bhavantt saptavim- 
satiéatani samvatsarasyahoratranam tat samvatsarasyahoratrany Gpnott \ sa esa 
samvatsarasammanas caksurmayah Srotramayas chandomayo manomayo vanmaya 
dima \ sa ya evam etam samvatsarasammanam caksurmayam Srotramayam chando- 
mayam manomayam vanmayam* aimanam veda samvatsarasya sayujyam salokatam 
sariipatam sabhaksatam asnute putrt pasuman bhavatt sarvam ayur elity asya- 
rumtheyo vedayam cakre Wi\\* 


1h om. B. 2 trinitas B. ° vanmaya B, corrected into °mayam. 2 SES 
Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 1. 


Atha Kauntharavyah \ trint sastigatany aksaranam trint sastisatany usmanam* 
trint sastisatani samdhinam \yany aksarany avocamahant tani yan? iismano ratrayas* 
ta* yan samdhin avocamahoratranam te samdhayak \ ity adhidaivatam \ atha- 
dhyaimam \ yany aksarany adhidatvatam avocamasthint tany adhyaimam \ yan® 
iismano ’dhidatvatam avocama majjanas te ’’dhydimam \ esa u ha vat sampratiprano 
yan majjaitad reto na va rle® pranad retasak stddhir astt yad va rte® pranad retah 
sicyet tat piyen na sambhavel \ yan samdhin adhidatvatam avocama parvani tany 
adhyatmam \ tasyatlasyasthnam" mapjiiam parvanam ttt paticetas catvarimsacchatant 
bhavant’ samdhinam paticelas tad asitisahasram bhavaty asitisahasram varkalino* 
brhatir ahar ahant sampadayanit \ sa ego *hahsammanas caksurmayah srotramayas 
chandomayo manomayo vanmaya ama \ sa_ya evam etad ahaksammanam caksurma- 
yam srotramayam chandomayam manomayam vanmayam aimanam vedahnamsayujyam 
salokatam sariipatam sabhaksatam asnute putri pasuman bhavati sarvam ayur eli \2\ He 


1 usmanam B pr. m. 2 yany usmammno B pr. m. 3 yatriyas B corr. * tan B pr. m. 
® yany us° B pr. m. ® rteh B. 7 Read probably ¢asyactasya[trayasy|-asthnam &c. as in 
Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 2. 8 baskalino B pr. m. corr. to bérkalino, which is clearly = 


A’s varkalino for va(z)arkalino, as in Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2,2. Weber, Catal., II, 6, takes it 
asa propername. The form isunique. °Om.Bpr.m. 1° See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 2. 


ADHYAYA VIII 313 


Catvdrah purusa iti Vatsyah \ sarirapurusas chandopuruso vedapuruso maha- 
purusa itt \ Sarirapurusa itt yam avocima ya evayam dathika aima \ tasyaitasya 
yo ’yam asarirah prajhatma* sa rasah \ chandakpurusa th yam avocama yena vedan 
veda Rgvedam Fajurvedam Saimavedam itt \ tasyaitasya brahma rasas tasmad 
brahmistham brahmanam rivyam kurvita yo yajrasyolbanam® vidyat \ mahapurusa 
itt yam avocama samvatsara eva \ fasyattasydsav* ddityo rasak \ sa yas cayam 
aSarirah prajidima yas casdv aditya ekam elad itt vidyat \ tad etad rcabhyu- 
difam \3\\* 


_ | asariraprajhatma B. 2 °odbalam (?) B pr. m. 3 asy om. B. * See Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 2, 3. 


Citram devandm ud agad anikam \ caksur Mitrasya Varunasyagneh \ apra 
dyavaprihivi antartksam \ siirya aima jagatas tasthusas cet’ \\' efam evanuvidham 
samhitam samdhiyamanim manya®* itt ha smaha Vatsyah\ etam u hatva bahorca 
mahad*ukihe mimamsata etam agnav adhvaryava etam mahdavrate chandoga etam 
asyam etam aniartksa efam divy etam agnav etam vayav etam candramasy elam 
naksatresv efam apsv etam osadhisv etam sarvesu bhitesv efam aksaresv eva * 
brahmety upasate\ tad etad rcabhyuditam W4W° 


» =RV., I, 115, 1. 2 manyata A, B. 5 maha only B. The dukthe are supplied from 
A, and Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 3, and are added in B in marg. * etam B sec. m. 
5 See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 3. 


Ud vayam tamasas pari \ jyotis pagyanta uttaram \ devam devatra suryam \ 
aganma jyotir uttamam tt \\" sa eso’ksarasammanas caksurmayah srotramayas chando- 
mayo manomayo vanmaya aima \ sa_ya evam etam aksarasammanam caksurmayam * 
$rotramayam chandomayam manomayam vanmayam atmanam parasmat samsatt 
dugdhadoha* asya veda bhavanty abhago vact bhavaty abhago ’nitkte*\ tad elad 
reabhyuditam 5° : 

t =RV., I, 50, 10. 2 dis B pr. m. 3 dugdha& B. * nakicke B pr. m.; ndke A, 
Bsec.m. ’xakte must be right. B has “dhogo. 5 See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 3; 4. 


Fas tityaja sacividam sakhiyam \ na tasya vacy apt bhago asti\ yad im Srnoty 
alakam Srnott)\ na hi praveda sukrtasya pantham ttt \* nasyanitkte vaco bhago astily 
eva tad aha \ tan na®* parasma elad ahah Samsen nagnim cinuyan na mahavralena 
stiiyan naitad dimano ’pi hiyd* it \ sa yas cayam aSsarirah prajfidima yas casav 
aditya ekam elad ity avocama tau yatra vipradrsyele \6\\* 

1 Synomi B, 2 =RV., X, 71, 6. 3 nah B. * hiya B. 5 See Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 2, 4. 


Candrama ivadityo dréyate na rasmayah pradurbhavantt lohini dyaur bhavati 
yathi mafzistha vyastak payur bhavati sampareto ’syatma na ciram wa jivisyatiti* 
vidyat \ sa _yat karaniyam manyela tat kuryat\ athapy adarse vodake va jthmasirasam 


314 S4NKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


vasirasam valmanam pasyen na va pasyet*® tad apy evam eva vidyat \ athapi chidra 
chaya bhavatt na va bhavatt tad apy evam eva vidyat \ athapt chidra tvadityo 
rathanabhir tvakhyayeta® tad apy evam eva vidyal \ athapt nila twagnir drsyeta* 
yathi mayuragriva mahameghe va maricir wva pasyed anabhre va vidyutam pasyet 
abhra enam na pasyet tad apy evam eva vidyat \ athapy apidhayaksim upekseta 
yatraitad varatakan’iva na pasyet tad apy evam eva vidyat \ athapy® apidhaya 
harnad upasita ya eso 'gner ta jvalatah sabdo rathasyevopabais tam na" yada 
Synuyat tad apy evam eva vidyat \ athapt viparyaste kaninike drsyete dvijthme* va 
na va drsyete tad apy evam eva vidyat \ sa yo "to éruto ’mato ’vijnato ’drsto ’nadzsto 
'ohustak Srota manta vynata drastadesta ghosta sarvesam bhitanam aniara *purusak 
sa ma aimeti vidyat \ sa utkrdmann evaitam agariram prajiatmanam abhisampadyate 
vijahatitaram dathikam \ saisa sarvasyat vaca upanisat sarva haivemak sarvasyat 
vaca upanisada imam tv evam™® acaksate 7 \\ ¥ 

1 jivisyati B. —_ pasyetad B.  °* khydyet B pr. m.; text sec.m., A; eva B. 4 drsyate B. 
5 qva B clearly; cf. XI, 3, n. 2. 6 Here in the MS. a new page, f. 65, has taken the place 
of the original leaf of the MS. It is, however, in an old hand. u tatra B, but za is 
implied in the abbreviated version of XI, 3, below, and inserted in Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 
3,4. °ehveA, %°rapA, % iy add A. 1 Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 4; 5. 


Prthivya riipam sparsa antarikgasyosmano divah svarah\ Agne riipam sparsa 
Vayor ismana Adityasyya svarah \ Revedasya rupam sparsa Vajurvedasyosmanak 
Samavedasya svarah \ rathantarasya rupam sparsa Vamadevyasy'osmano brhatak 
svarah \ pranasya rupam spars& apanasyosmano vyanasya svarah \ prapasya 
riipam sparsa apanasyosmayo manasah svarah \ pranasya rupam sparsa apanasy- 
osmana udanasya svarak svara itt Punardatiak \ esa u hatva sarvam vacant 
veda ya evam veda \8\\? 


1 deva® B. 2 See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 5. 


Atha khalu tyam daivi vina bhavati tada'nukyiir asau manusi vind bhavate \ 
tad yatheyam Sastravati tardmavatt bhavaty evam evasau Sastravati tardmavatt 
bhavatt \ tad yathasyak Ssira evam amusyah Sirah \ tad yathasyat vamsa evam 
amusya dandak \ tad yathasya udaram evam amusya ambhanam \ tad yathasyat 
mukhanasike aksini ity? evam amusyas chidragit \ tad yathasya angulinigraha 
upastarananity evam amusyah parvant® \ tad yathasy&a angulaya evam amusyas 
tantrayah \ tad yathasyat jihvaivam amusya vadanam \ tad yathasyah svara evam 
amusyak svara \ tad yatha hatveyam romasena carmanapihita bhavaty evam 
evasau romasena carmanapihita bhavati \ romasena ha sma carmana pura vina 
apidadhatt \ saisa datvi vind bhavati \ sa ya evam etam datvam vinam veda 
$rutavadanatamo* bhavatt bhimiprasya® kirtir bhavati® susriisanie"™ hasya parsatsu 


ADHYAYA IX 315 


bhasyamanasyedam astu yad ayam thate yatrarya vag vadatt® vidur enam 
fatra \gi® 

1 From f. 66 on the old hand resumes. 2 aksinity B sec. m. 3 sarvant A. 
* °yadanantamo B. ° bhiimim® A,B. §° dhati Bpr.m.  susrusante B, ° vadantiB. vacan 
may be read, but see Satapatha Brahmana, II, 2, 3,15. ° See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 5 

Athatas Tandavindasya' vacah \ tad yatheyam akusalena vadayitra vina- 
rabdha na krisnam vinartham sadhayaty evam evakusalena vaktra vag arabdha 
na krisnam vagartham sadhayati \ tad yatha hatveyam kuSalena vadayitra vina- 
rabdha krisnam vinartham sadhayaty evam eva kusalena vakira vag Grabdha krtisnam 
vagartham sddhayati \ tasyat va etasyat vinayat ya toisth sa samhitett Katyayanipuiro 
Jatiikarnyah\ atha ha smaitat Krisnaharito 2 brahmanam evodaharati \ 10% 

1 °yimdavasya B pr. m. 2 So A, B, and Weber, Ca#a/., II, 6. It is very probably an 
error for Kysna®, Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 6. 8 See Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 6. 

Prajapatih prajak srstva wyasramsata sa chandobhir aimanam samadadhat' \ 
tad yac chandobhir aimanam samadadhat! tasmal samhnita \ tasyat va elasyat 
samhitayat nakaro balam sakarah praya aima samhila \ yaisa? ksudramisra vikrits 
tani nakhant romani vyahjananiti \ sa_yo'tra victhitset sapakaram eva briyad rte 
nakaram iti sanakaram eva briyat\ evam eva yo "tra victhitset sasakaram eva briyad 
rie sakaram® iti sasakaram eva briyat \ tau va etau nakarasakarau vidvan anusam- 
hitam rco’dhiyitayusyam ti vidyat \ evam eva vidyat \ atha vag ttthasapuranam * 
yac canyat kimcid brahmi kriyevadhiyita tad apy evam eva vidyat\ te yad vayam 
anusamhitam rco dhimahe yac ca Mandukeyiyam adhyayam prabrumas tena no 
nakarasakara upaptav iti ha smaha Hrasvo Mandikeyah \ atha yad vayam anu- 
samhitam rco’dhimahe yac ca svadhyayam adhimahe tena no nakarasakara upapiav 
ttt ha smaha Sthavirah Sakalyah \etad® ha sma vat tad vidvamsa ahuh KavaseyaR® 
kimartha vayam yaksyamahe’ kimartha vayam adhyesyamahe vact hi pranam 
juhumak prane vacam yo hy eva prabhavak sa evapyaya itt \ ta etah samhita 
nanantevasine brityan nasamvatsaravasine*® nabrahmacarine navedavide napavakira 
ity acarya ity acaryah W111 N° 

Ly Aranyake ’stamo ’dhydyah \ 

1 So A, B. 3 athaisa A. 8 nakavam A, B. * itihdsa® B. Both the MSS. have 
brahmi. Read perhaps brahmi ksatry evadhiyita. 5 taadd Bsec.m. ° °kavarseyadh B sec. m. 
7 vaksyamahe B pr. m., and for apyayah below, avyayah. *° va add Bpr.m. 7? See Aitareya 
Aranyaka, III, 2, 6. 


ApuyAya IX. 
Om\ tat Savitur vrnimahe\ vayam devasya bhojanam \ frestham sarvadhatamam \ 


turam bhagasya dhimahi\ 
tat Savitur varenyam \ bhargo devasya dhimahi\ 
dhiyo' yo nak pracodayat\\ 


316 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


adabdham mana tsiram caksuk \ siiryo jyotisam Srestho dikse ma ma hinm- 
sth wr? ‘ 
1 dhiyo B; see RV., V, 82, 1; III, 62, to. 21h VEE: 

Fo ha vat jyestham ca Srestham ca veda Jyesthas ca ha vat $resthaé ca svanim 
bhavatt \ prano vai jyesthas ca Sresthas ca\yo ha vat vaststham veda vaststho ha svanam 
bhavati vag vat vasistha\ yo ha vat pratisthim veda pratt ha tusthaty asmims ca* 
loke’musmims ca* caksur ha pratistha\ yo ha vat sampadam veda sam hasmat kamafe 
sampadyante srotram ha va u sampat\ yo ha va ayatanam vedayatano ha svanam 
Bhavati mano va ayatanam \ atha hema devatah Prajapatim pitaram etyabruvan 
ko vat nak? Srestha ttt \ sa hovaca Prajapatir yasmin va utkrante Sariram papistham 
iva manyeta sa vat Srestha ttt \2\* 


1 pratiha and asmint B. 2 ca add B sec. m. rca oe * I have kept this 
enumeration though 1 (like VII, 1) is merely a Santi, as it is followed inthe MS. See Chandogya 
Upanisad, V, 1, 1-7, which has a parallel version with the better reading prate ha tisthatt. 


Sa ha vag uccakrama \ yatha mika avadantah pranantah pragena pasyantas 
caksusa Srnvaniah Srotrena dhydyanto manasaivam itt 3 

Caksur hoccakrama yathandha apasyantah prinantah prayena vadanto vaca 
Srnvantah Srotrena dhyayanto manasaivam ttt \\ 4\ 

Srotram hoccakrama \ yatha badhira asyyvantak pranantah pragena vadanto 
vaca pasyantak caksusa dhayanto manasatvam iti \5\ 


Mano hoccakrama \ yathai bala amanasah pranantah pranena vadantah vaca 
pasyantas caksusa Sryvantah srotrenarvam iti \\6\\ 


Prano hoccakrama \ tatas tad yatheha saindhavah suhayak padbisasankin 
samkhided evam asau pranan samakhidat* \ te ha sametyocur* bhagavan motkramir 
tt \ sa hovaca pranak kim ma* annam bhavisyatiti \ yat kimcasvabhya twasaku- 
nibhya itt \ kim me vaso bhavisyatity apa ttt hocuk \ tasmad va ayam asisyan * 
purastac coparistac cadbhi: paridadhati \ lambhuko*® hasya vaso bhavaty anagno ht 
bhavati \ tad ha smattat Satyakamo® Jabalo Gosruta" vaiyaghrapadyayoktuovaca \ 
apy evam sushasya sthanoh prabriyd) jayerann asya sakhah* praroheyuh palasaniti\ 
vanaspate Satavalgo viroheti dyam ma lesir antariksam ma ma himsir iti ha Vajna- 
valkyah® WN 

1¢ om. B sec. m. Above it has sama’. 2 cus B. 3 kima and no z¢ B. 
* afisya B, and part dadhati, as in Chandogya Upanisad, V, 2, 2. 5 lumbhuko B pr. m.; 
lambuko B sec. m.; anagnau B, For a similar error (az for e), cf. IX, 8, n. 4; X, 3, n. I. 
These are due to the older mode of denoting the diphthongs. ® va(?) add B. 7 In 
Chandogya Upanisad, V, 2, 1 sq., which is parallel to this passage, there is Gofsutaye, which 
may well be read here. 8 Sasichasah B pr. m.; Sakhah B sec. m. ® See Vajasaneyi 
Samhita (which is here cited in terms), V, 43: where for /estr is /ekhir. s and &h interchange 


passim in MS. and I prefer desir (//és=+/ris). Also mda is only once used in antariksam, &c. 
Probably it is here a dittograph. 


ADHYAYA X 317 


Atha yadi mahaj’ jigamiset triratram diksitva* mavasyayam sarvausadasya 
mantham dadhimadhubhyam upamanthyagnim upasamadhaya parisamuhya pari- 
stirya paryuksya daksinam janv acyottarato’gneh kamse mantham krtva hutva homan 
manthe sampatam anayet \ jyesthaya Sresthaya svahety agnau hutvd manthe* 
sampatam anayet \ pratisthayat svahety agnau hulva manthe sampatam anayet \ 
sampade svahety agnau hutva manthe sampatam dnayet \ tat Savitur varenyam 
itt pacchah prasya tat Savitur vrnimaha ttt paccha acamati mahavyahrhbhis catur- 
tham nirnijya* kamsyam carmant va sthandile va samvisate \ sa_yadi striyam pasyet 
samrddham karmett vidyat samrddham karmeti vidyat \8\\ 

ulty Aranyake navamo ’dhyayah \\ 

1 yadi mahamiset B pr.m., text marg. 2 diksitua B. 3 mantham B, A has jyais- 
thyaya Sraisthyaya. * nirnaijya B, possibly an error (cf. XI, 3, n.1) for mzrneyya, an irregular 
strong gerund (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, §992b). The parallel, Chandogya, V, 2, 8, 
has nirnijya. The words mahavyahrtibhis caturtham (CimB) no doubt mean ‘ accompanying 


the fourth act with the three words dhar bhuvas svar’, as would be needed in the case of the 
first RV. verse, which has only three Padas. 


Apuyaya X. 

Om \ athato ’dhyatmikam antaram agnithotram ity acaksate\ ela ha vat devatak 
purusa eva pratisthita agnir vact vayuh prana aditya$ caksust* candrama manast 
digah Srotra apo retast \ etasu hat vat sarvasu hutam bhavati ya evam vidvan 
asnati ca pibati caSayati ca payayati ca \ so ’$nati sa pibatt sa trpyati sa 
farpayatt WIN 

1 caksusi B. 

Sa irpto vacam tarpayati vak trptagnim tarpayaty agnis trptah prthivim 
tarpayati prthivi trpia yat kimcit prthivyapthitam \ bhavad bhavisyad bhitam 
fat sarvam tarpayati ya evam vidvan asnati ca pibati caSayati ca payayatt ca \ so 
"$nati sa pibati sa trpyati sa farpayati \\2\\ | 

Sa trptah pranam tarpayatt pranas trpto vayum tarpayatt vayus trpta akasam 
tarpayaty akasas trpto yat himcakasenapihitam \ bhavad bhavisyad bhitam tat 
sarvam tarpayatt ya evam vidvan asnati ca pibati caSayatt ca payayati ca \ so 
"Snati sa pibati sa trpyatt sa tarpayaht \3\\ 

Sa trptas caksus tarpayati caksus trptam adityam tarpayaly adilyas trpto 
divam tarpayati dyaus irpta yat kimetd divapihitam \ bhavad bhavisyad bhitam 
tat sarvam tarpayatt ya evam vidvan asnati ca pibati caSayati ca payayatt ca \ so 
*énati sa pibati sa trpyatt sa tarpayatt \\4\\ 

Sa trpto manas tarpayatt manas trplam candramasam tarpayati candramas 
irpto naksatrant tarpayatt naksatram’ trptani masams tarpayantt masas trpta 
ardhamasams tarpayanty ardhamasas trpla ahoratre tarpayanty ahoratre trpte rtums 


318 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


tarpayata’ rtavas trpiah samvatsaram tarpayanti samvatsaras typto yat kimeid 

samvatsarenapthitam \ bhavad bhavisyad bhutam tat sarvam tarpayatt_ya evam vidvan 

asnati ca pibatt casayatt ca payayati ca \so’snati sa pibati sa iypyatt sa tarpayalt \\5\ 
1 tarpayati B. 

Sa trptah srotram tarpayati srotram trptam digas tarpayatt digas irpta avantara- 
digas tarpayanty avantaradisas typta yat kimcavantaradighhir apthitam \ bhavad 
bhavisyad bhittam tat sarvam tarpayati ya evam vidoan asnati ca pibatt caSayatt 
ca payayatt ca \ so ’Snati sa pibatt sa typyatd sa tarpayati \\O\\ 

Sa irpto retas tarpayati retas typtam apas tarpayaty apas iypla nadims tarpa- 
yanti nadyak trptik samudram tarpayant’ samudro typto yat kimett samudrenapt- 
hitam \ bhavad bhavisyad bhittam tat sarvam tarpayatt ya evam vidoan asnati ca 
pibatt caSayati ca piyayatl ca \ so ’$nati sa pibati sa trpyati sa tarpayatt \7\\ 

Sa trptas tad etad vatrajam dasavidham agnihotram bhavati \ tasya prana 
evahavaniyo "pano garhapatyo vyano ’nvaharyapacano mano dhumo manyur arcir 
danta angarak sraddhi payo vak samit satyam ahutih prajiatma sa rasah* \ 
tad etad vatrajam dasavidham agnihotram hutam bhavati \ rohobhyam rohobhyam 
abhyaritham* abhi svargam lokam gamayati ya evam videdn asnati ca pibatt 
casayati ca payayatt ca\atha ya tdam avidvan agnthotram juhoti yathangaran * 
apohya bhasmant hutam tadyk tatyas tadrk tat syat* 8° é 

u liv Aranyake dasamo ’dhyayah \ 


1 prajtiatmah B; sa om. A. 2 So A; °rvulham B. 8 yathé ang? B. 
* tadrk tasya tadrk tasyat B. 5 For X, 2-8, cf. Chandogya Upanisad, V, 19-24. 


ApuyAya XI. 


Prajipatir va imam, purusam udaticat’ \ tasminn eta devat& avesayad vacy 
agnim prane vayum apane vidyuta udane parjanyam caksusy Gdityam manast 
candramasam Srotre disah Sarire prihivim retasy apo bala indram manyav isanam 
mirdhany akasam a@tmant brahma \ sa yatha mahan amrtakumbhah® pinvamanas 
tisthed evam hatva sa tasthau \ atha hema devata iksim cakrire kim ayam asmabhif 
purusah® karisyati kim va vayam* anena \ hantasmac charirad utkramameti \ 
ta hoccakramuh \ atha hedam Sariram riktam iva parisusiram®\ sa heksam cakre 


ttt \ 1a hopasasyje’ \ ta hopasr;tak® sukham alabhamana imam eva purusam punak 
pratyavivisuh Wi 


1 adamcata A, B, and cf. Weber, Caéal., II, 6 ; text Cowell’s MS. B. 2 amrtah B, 
a common error, e.g. XI, 4,n. 2, The reference is to the swelling of the Soma. 3 kim 
ins. B pr. m. * mayam B pr. m.; corr. marg. > So B, from Sas and affix zra (cf. 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, § 1188 e). 5 maksam A, B. I take fariram as the subject. 
na bhaksam (m for bh) is still easier to conjecture, but is less plausible. * " opasrje B. For 
the perf., cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, I, 5, 21; VI, 4, 2. 5 cra Bs 


ADHYAYA XI 319 


Van-mamely agnir avivesa\ praino mamett vayur avivesa\ apano mamett vidyuta* 
avivituh \ udano mameti parjanya avivesa \ caksur mamety dditya avivesa \ mano 
mameti candrama avivesa \ $rotram asmakam ti diga avivisuk \ Sariram mamett 
prthivy avivesa \ reto’smakam ity dpa avivisuh\ balam mamelindra avivesa \ manyur 
mametisana avivesa\ miirdha mamety akasa avivega \ atma mameti brahmavivesa \ 
sa yatha mahan vrksa ardra upastktamiilas tisthed evam hatva sa tasthau \\ 2\\ 


1 vidyuta B, vaid® A (as in XI, 1), but dvivefa. The verb is clearly wrong, cf. XI, 5. 


Athayam purusah praisyan’ pura samvatsarat samvatsarasya adrstik pasyatt \ 
chidra chaya bhavati na va bhavatt \ mahimeghe va maricir tva pasyed anabhre va 
vidyutam pasyed abhra endm na pasyet \ aksini va apidhaya varatakani*va na 
pasyati \ harnau vapidhayopabdim iva na Srnoti \ nasmil loke ramate nainam 
mana§ chandayati® \ iti pratyaksadarsanani \\3\\ 

1 praisthyan B; read perhaps the usual presyan, cf. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 


I, 320, 321, and IX, 8,n. 4. A has vidyutah below. 2.baratkan B; see VIII, 7, n. 5, 
which passage is parallel. 8 “chandayiti B. 


Atha svapnah \ purusam krsnam krsnadantam pasyati sa enam hantt varaha 
enam hanti markata enam hanti bisani khadayatt suvarnam bhaksayitva* vagiraty 
ehapaundarikam® dharayatt gam savatsam daksinamukho naladamalt vrdjayati \ sa 
ya etesam kimcit® pasyet panduradarsanam kalim* striyam muktakesam mundam 
tailabhyangam® kausumbhaparidhanam gitany ustrarohanam daksinasagamanadini ° 
viksyoposya payasam sthalipakam Srapayitva sarupavatsaya gok payast na tv eva 
tu krsnaya agnim upasamadhaya partsamuhya paristirya paryuksya daksinam 
janv acya sruvenajyahutir juhoti W4n' 


1 bhaksitvua B, corr. in marg. to bhaksay”. 2 chah A, B. 3 kamcit corr. in B, but see 
Aitareya Aranyaka, III, 2, 4: 4 kamlim B. 5 °bhyangah A, B. Or tailabhyangakaus° 
may be read. ® Text doubtful: B has daksinagamanddini: the intermediate letters are 
obscure and have been corrected in a later hand. A has “afa°. 7 See VIII, 7. 


Vaci me’gnih pratisthitah svaha \ prane me vayuk pratisthitak svaha \ apane 
me vidyulah* pratisthitah svaha \ udane me parjanyah pratisthitah svaha \ caksust 
ma adityah pratisthitah svaha \ manast me candramah pratisthitah svaha \ $rotre 
me disah pratisthitah svaha \ Sarire me prthivi pratisthita svaha \ retast ma apak 
pratisthitak svaha \ bale ma indrah pratisthitah svaha \ manyau ma isanah pra- 
tisthitah svaha \ miurdhant ma ahasah pratisthitah svaha \ atmant me brahma 
pratisthitam svaheti \ athaitad ajyavasesam sthalipake samavaniniya 2 sthalipakasyo- 
paghatam juhott W5\ 

1 yaidyutah pratisthitah A, 2 naya B, The root is samavani-ni. 


Vact me ’gnih pratisthito vag hydaye hrdayam almani tat satyam devanam 


320 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


maham' akamo martsyamy annavan annado bhityasam svaha \ prane me vayuh 
pratisthito prino hydaye hydayam atmant tat satyam devanam maham akamo 
marisyamy annavan annado bhityasam svaha \ apane me vidyuiak pratgine : 
apano hrdaye hrdayam Gtmant tat satyam devandm maham akamo marisyamy 
annavan annado bhiiyasam svaha \ udine me parjanyak pratisthita udanam hrdaye 
hydayam Gtmant tat satyam devanim maiham akimo martsyamy annavan anna 
bhiyasam svaha \ caksust ma adityah pratisthitas caksur hrdaye hrdayam* atmant 
tat satyam devanim maham akimo marisyamy annavan annado bhiiydsam svaha \ 
manast me candramah pratisthito mano hydaye hydayam atmant tat satyam devanam 
miham akimo marisyamy annavan annado bhityasam svaha \ Srotre me disak 
pratisthita digo hrdaye hrdayam atmant tat satyam devanam maham akamo 
marisyamy annavan annado bhityasam svaha \ Sartre me prthivi pratisthita prthivi 
hydaye hrdayam atmant tat satyam devanam maham akamo marisyamy annavan 
annado bhiyasam svaha \ bale ma indrak pratisthito balam hrdaye hrdayam atmant 
tat satyam devanam miham akamo marisyamy annavan anndado bhiyasam svaha \ 
manyau ma isanak pratisthito manyur hrdaye hrdayam atmant tat satyam devanam 
maham akémo martsyamy annavan annado bhiyasam svaha \ mirdhant ma akasah 
pratsthito mirdha hrdaye hrdayam atmant tat satyam devanam ma&ham akamo 
marisyamy annavan annddo bhiyasam svaha \ aimant me brahma pratisthitam 
atma hrdaye* hrdayam atmant tal satyam devanim maham akaimo marisyamy 
annavan annado bhiyasam svahett \ athattat sthalipakasesam Gimant samavaniniya 
Juhott \\ 61 


1 Soclearly A,B. 7 vat? A; pratisthito A,B. * Henceforth the scribe of B abbreviates 
to hrdaye-ha. * Even here the abbreviation is meant. 


Asma jagatam ayas tratstubham loham ausniham sisam kakubham rajatam 
svarayam suvarnam gayatram annam vairajam* typtir anustubham nakam 
samrajyam Brhaspatir barhatam Brahma pankiam Prajipatir atichandasam Savitri 
sarvavedachandasena chandaseti \\'7\\ 


1 °rajyam B. 


Asmeva sthiro vasant jagatena chandasa \ puruso manth pranah sittram annant 
granthes tad granthim udgrathanity’ annakamak® \ mrtyave brahmanam api sarvam 
ayur asiyayusman maham akamo marisyamy annavan annado bhityasam svaha \ 
aya* tva sthiro vasint traistubhena chandasa puruso manth pranah*-svaha \ loham 
?va sthiro vasany ausnihena chandasa puruso mamk pranah-svaha \ stsam iva sthiro 
vasant kakubhena chandas& puruso manth pranah-svaha \ rajatam tva sthiro vasant 
svardyena chandas& puruso manih pranah-svaha \ suvargam tva sthiro vasanit 
Syalrena chandas& puruso manih pranah-svaha \ annam iva sthiro vasand vatra- 


ADHYAYA XII 321 


Jena candama puruso manth pranah-svaha \ irplir iva sthiro vasany anustubhena 
chandasa& puruso mamk pranak-svaha \nakam tva sthiro vasant samrajyena chandasa 
puruso manih pranah-svaha \ Brhaspatir tva sthiro vasani barhatena chandasa pu- 
ruso manih pranah-svaha\ Brahmeva sthiro vasant paikiena chandasa puruso magth 
pranah-svaha \ Prajapatir iva sthiro vasanit atichandasena chandasa puruso manip 
pranah-svaha \ Savitrir® iva sthiro vasani sarvavedachandasena chandasa puruso 
mani prainah-svaheh’ \ priydyat va jaydyar® priyadya vantevasine ’nyasmat vapi 
Jyasmat kimayeta tasma ucchistam dadyat \ sa hapt Satam varsani jivat’ punak 
punak prayukjino’ jivaty eva jivaty eva W8\\ 


Ziv Aranyaka ehadaso ’dhyayah \\ 


1 udgrathanimy B. 2 ka B pr.m.; 2ano B sec. m. 8 ya B sec. m. * The 
scribe abbreviates henceforth to frad-sudhd. I have so printed to save space. 5 savitrir 
B pr. m.; °¢riv B sec. m.; °¢riva A. Possibly savztr¢ jva with shortening may be meant (cf. 
Macdonell, Sanskrit Grammar, p. 63; Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 1, 321, 322). 
° jayai B pr. m.; corr. in marg. 7 prayujano B, is just possible. 


ApnyAya XII. 


Om \ hastivarcasam prathatim brhadvayah \ 
yad Adityat' tanvak sambabhuva \ 
tan mahyam samaduh sarvam® ete \ 
Adityaso Aditya® samvidanah Wi \\ 


yat te varco jatavedah \ 
brhad bhavaty ahitam \ 
tena ma varcasa tvam \ 
Agne varcasvinam kuru \\2\\ 


jac ca vaca va puruse \ 
jac ca hastisv ahitam \ 
suvarne gosu yad varcah \ 
mayt tad hastivarcasam \\3\ 


yad aksesu hiranyesu \ 

gosv asvesu yad yasah \ 
surayam piyamdanayam \ 

mayt tad hastivarcasam \\ 4 \\ 
mayt bhargo mayt mahah \ 

mayt yajfasya yad yasah \ 


KEITH ¥ 


322 <4INKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


tan mayt Prajapatih \ 2 
dot divam iva drmhaiu Woe WEN 

1 ta B pr. m. 2 sarva A, B sec. m. as in Atharvaveda, III, 22, 1; cf. Whitney’s 
translation, pp. 126, 127. This verse has on the whole better readings than the Atharvaveda. 
3 Adityah B. 4 T have, for convenience, numbered the verses throughout. The text in the MS. 
is only divided into sections. I have also printed the verses in Padas without Sandhi. 5 For 
ver. 1, cf. Atharvaveda, III, 22,1; ver. 2, cf. ibid., III, 22, 4 and 3; Vers. 3, 4, cf. ibid., XIV, 1, 
35; VI,.69, 13 ver. 5, cf. ibid., VI, 69, 3 (with deve dyam twa drmhatu); Samaveda, I, 603 
(with paramesthi for tan mayi). B omits div. 


Asvina saraghena ma \ 
sam anktam* madhuna payah\ 
yatha madhumatim vacam \ 
 guadami janesu \\6 \I 
ghrtad ullupto” madhuman payasvan \ 
dhanamjayo dharuno dharayisnul \ 
rujan sapatnan* adharams ca krnvan \ 


a roha mam mahate saubhagaya \\7\\ 


Prajipate na tvad etany anyah \ 

visva jatani part ta babhuva \ 
yathamas te juhumas lan no astu \ 

vayam syama patayo rayinam \\ 8u4 
ayam sano’ nudatam me sapainan \ 

Indra ‘va Vriram prtanasu salha \ 
Agnir iva kaksam vibhriah purutra \ 

vatesu nas tigmajambho nu marsti \9\\ 
ayam sano yo "nuvadi kala \ 

Indra® twa Vriram vi puro ruroja\ 
anenendro vi mrdho vthatya \ 

fatrinyatam & bharad bhojanani \\10N" 2 NN 


1 samahan A; sammahan B. Presumably an imperative from 4/mah, trans., Asvina being 
voc. The parallel, Atharvaveda, VI, 69, 2 (=IX, 1, 19), has madhunanktam subhaspati, and in 
the last Pada, avadaéni janan anu, which is better metre and syntax. I read °anxktam; for 
synt., cf. J. R..A.S., 1908, p. 1124. 2 urlupto A, B. Cf. Atharvaveda, V, 28,14; XIX, 33, 
2; 46,6. Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Reveda, p.118, ver. 9 4; below, ver. 34- 3 sapat- 
nad B. 4 —RV.,X, 121, 10, and see Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance, p. 612; below, ver. 35. 
5 sa yo B. 6 fila (Rila A) iva only A, B. The parallel with /zdra above seems conclusive. 
In both cases Zudreva (or Jndro va) must be read metré causa. B has viduro corrected to vivo. 
7 Last line=RV., V, 4, 5; &c. 


jayendra Satriit jahi séra dasyin \ 
Vriram hatveva kulifena vi vysca*\ 


ADHYAYA XII 323 


augha iva Sapain*® pra nudat sapatnan \ 
jahyat sapatnan svadhitir vaneva W11\\ 


anu vrsca madhyat pra*® vrscoparistat \ 
vt vrsca pascat pratt Sura vrésca\ 

tvayd pranuttan maghavann amitran \ 
Stira* risantam Maruto ’nu yantu \12\\ 


tvam rudratir hetibhih pinvamanah \ 
Indram manvana Maruto jusania \ 

suparnadh kankah pra myrsantv enan \ 
mahiyatam damstri vardhanesu \13\ 


brahmanuttasya maghavan prtanyatah \ 
visvag® Indra bhangah patantu \ 

ma jrataram asata ma® pratistham \ 
mitho vighnanad upa yanki mrtyum W14\\ 


Agne yasasvin yasase sam arpaya \ 
Indravatim apacitim tha vaha \ 
ayam murdha paramestht suvarcah \ 
sajatanam utiamasloko astu \Wi5\" U3 
1 The metre requires “Sena vrSca. 2 §apat B, the word being no doubt misunderstood. 
’ pra vi A, B, but not only this is bad metre (in no case is the metre good, but az vyfca may 
be read), but the zz following renders the double prefix most improbable.  * amitrait chure A, 
B, possibly for sa rerisa(m)tam. *vifak A,B. °®SoIread. The verse is a mutilated version of 
Atharvaveda, VI, 32, 3 (= VIII, 8, 21) : ma jnataram ma pratistham vindanta \ mitho vighnana 
upayantu mrtyum. See also ASvalayana Grhya Sitra, III, 10,11; /.4.0.S., XXVI, 227. 
B has Satamah, pratisthamaho vighnanam, yatt. A has tho, vijiatam. The text is merely 
a conjecture. 7 Cf, Taittirlya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3*°, ending: samaninam uitdmah slokb 
astu. Either sa jaf? or sajat° is possible, and wttamah Sloko or uttamasloko. 


bhadram pasyanta upa sedur agan\ 
tato diksim rsayah svarvidah \ 
tatah ksatram balam ojas ca jatam \ 
tad asmat deva abhi sam namantam \\16 W 


dhata vidhata paramota samdrk \ 
Prajapatih paramesthi suvarcah \ 
stomam chandamst nivido ma ahuh \ 
efasmat rastram abhi sam namantam \\17\\" 


abhy & vartadhvam upa sevatagnim \ 
ayam sastadhipatir no astu \ 
Vom 


324 .. S§ANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


asya vijnanam anu sam rabhadhvam \ 
imam pascad anu jivatha sarve W318 \\ : 


alardo* nama jato ’st \ 
pura siryat purosasah®\ 
tam toa sapatnaksayanam °\ 
vedatho™ vistambhajambhanam \\19 \\ 


nardhe pramiyeta® tared® dvisaniam \ 
hkalpeta vakyam prtanah saheta\ 
pramayukam tasya dvisantam ahuh \ 
tramanim batlvam yo bibharii W20oW N4Nl 
1 Cf. Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3; Taittiriya Aranyaka, III, 11,9 (with pdsyanta, dgre, 
and ¢dfo); Atharvaveda, XIX, 41,1; and Whitney’s translation, p. 963. Cf. p.349. A, B have 
adgan and pasyema. 2 Cf, Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4 (with viraya stémas, and abhé san- 
namama), A has stoma. 3 Cf. ibid., V, 7, 4, 43 5, With apa méta sakdm, and vo (B has 
mno). 4 So A, B. The word may be connected with aradu or aratu, Atharvaveda, XX, 
131, 9. Cp: p. 349: 5 = Atharvaveda, X, 7, 31°. ® sapatnahksapanam B. But Asapanam 
is too like sayanam in MSS. to render the reading doubtful. 7 The metre is wrong and veda 
may belong to the line before, or ato be an interpolation. 8 pramiye B pr. m. 9 are Be 


na sa saptam' asnati na kilbisam krtam \ 
natnam divyo Varuno hanti bhitam \ 

natnam kruddham manyavo ‘bhi yanti”\. 
tramanine bailvam yo bibharti \ 21 \\ 


nasya tvacam himsati* jalavedak \ 
na mamsam asnatt na hantt tant \ 
Salayur asmih jaradastih praiti \ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibharté \\22\\ 


nasya praja dusyatt jayamand \ 
na Sailago* bhavati na papakrtya \ 
nanyan mithas tasya kulesu jayate\ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibharit \\23\\ 


nasyapavada na pravadaka® grhe\ 
na sampatantyo® na vivesa tasmat \ 
nasminn alaksmih kurute nivesanam \ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibhartt \24\ 


natnam rakso na pisaco hinasti \ 
na jambhako napy asuro na yaksah \ 


ADHYAYA XII 325 


na siittka lasya grhesu™ jayate\ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibhartt W255 NN 


* samt (?) suptam A,B. * abhimati? A,B.  * Probably metri causa (- vu v after caesura). 
Cf. ver. 25%, 26%. * Sai/aka@ B pr.m.; Sailago A, B sec. m, dhavati is disyllabic. Cf. Hopkins’s 
Ancient Epic of India, p. 260, and for a similar case in the Aitareya Brahmana, my note, 
J. R.A. S., 1908, p. 202. ° pravataka B. If pravaddakd is right, the 4a must add nothing 
to the word, ° sampatatyo B pr. m.; tafosec.m. A has viseta. ” kulasya A, 


nainam vyaghro na vrko na dvifi \ 
na Svapadam himsati kimcanainam \ 

na hastinam kruddham upaiti bhitim'\ 
tramanim batlvam yo bibhartt \ 26\\ 


nainam sarpo na prdakur hinasti \ 
na vrsctko na ttrasci*naraji \ 
nainam krsno *hir abht* samhate \ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibharti \27\\ 


nainam pramatiam* Varuno hinasti \ 
na makaro na grahakh §tumarah\ 
paravarac chivam asmat krnoti \ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibharti \\28\\ 
pramayukam asya dvisantam ahuh \ 
puspam tva chinnam saha bandhanena \ 
augha tva Sapan pra nudat sapainan \ 
tramanim bailvam yo bibhartd \29\\ 


ayam mani pratisaro Jambo jivaya badhyate \ 


anenendro Vrtram ahann rsina® ca manisind 30 U6N 
| bhitam A,B sec.m. Cf. /7.A.0O.S., XXVIII, 390. ? tirascinaraja B; °cina’ A. 


8 bhi only A, B, The animal 4ysya is doubtful (Atharvaveda, XI, 2, 2, is taken otherwise by 
Whitney in his translation), and the 4ysno ’hih is regular; hence I add ’hir, * °rttam B, see 
Aitareya Aranyaka, II, 1,1, n. 2. 5 rsina B, 


sahendra dvisatah sahasvaratif \ 
sahasva prtanayatah \ 
naga wa purvapadabhyam \ 
abhi tistha’ prtanyatah \\ 31 
agad ayam bailvo manih \ 
sapaina’ksayano vrsa \ 
tam pasyanti kavayah sarvavirah \ 
yuhi sapatnan samare saheyuh® \\ 32 \ 


326 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


amrlam me mayau sutram Asvinav apt nahyatam \ 
batlvah sahasraviryo ’st ma te bharia risam * aham N33\ 
ghrtad ulluplo® madhuman payasvan \ 
dhanamyjayo dharuno dharaytsnul \ 
rujan sapatnan® adharamés ca kravan \ 
a roha mam mahate saubhagaya \\ 34 \\ 
Prajapate na tvad etany anyah \ 
visva jalant part ta babhuva \ 
yathamas te juhumas tan no asiu \ 
vayam syama patayo rayinam \\ 35 \ 


asa tttham mahan asiti patica™ V7 \ 


1 stha add B marg. 2 sapatnahksapano B. Cf. Atharvaveda, I, 29, 4; 6. 3 tsa- 
heyuh B. 4 yisam B. B has delvah. 5 wr A; ulupto B; cf. ver. 7. 8 sapatnad 
Beecher vet. 7. 7 i.e. RV., X, 152, 1-5, giving in all forty verses. Their use in the ritual 


(XII, 8) is by verses 1-8, 9-14, 15-18, 19, 20-35; 36-40. 


Athato manthalpak \ bhitthamah puspena triratroposito jivato hastino dantan 
matram uddhytyagnim upasamadhaya * partsamuhya parishrya paryuksya daksinam 
janv acyottarato ’gneh kamse maim krtva hutva homan manau sampatam anayet \ 
hastivarcasam tty elabhip pratyrcam® astabhif saptarairam madhusarptsor vasa- 
yitva triratram eham va badhniyad® ghrtad ullupto ity elayarca \ ata evotlaran 
sadbhir hrdayasilagramanim pratodagramamm va musalagramanim * va khadira- 
sdramanim va mamsaudane vasayttva triratram eham va badhniyat \ ata evottaram 
catasrbhir vrsabha’® srngagramanim ghrtaudane vasayitva triratram ekam va badhni- 
yat \ ata evotlaram ekayatrandamanim hilaudane® vasayttva triratram eham va 
badhniyat\ ala evottaram solasabhir™ bailvuam saptarairam madhusarpisor vasayttvd 
trirairam cham va badhniyad ghriad ullupta ity etayarca \ ala evoliaram pancabhir 
mahavarohasyodoham® mudgaudane vasayttva trirairam eham va badhniyac chakiau 
salt® prathamam hastichayayam vatyaghre vapr carmany asino vapt juhuyad asino 
vapt juhuyal W8\ _ 

 Ity Aranyake dvadaso ’dhyayah \\ 
1 ipa? B. 2 pratrcam B. 8 dadhniyad B. 4 mifala? B; mus° A. 5 ysabhah B. 
® °audanena B. 7 sodasibhir B. 8 mahavarahasod® B. o in MSS. is often confused 


with d, cf. Hoernle, Osteology, p. 132. The name of a wood of sorts seems essential, and udiham 
(a ‘besom’, cf. Taittiriya Brahmana, III, 8, 4,3) may be meant. The alternative is to take 


udoham as a gerund. ® satz B. 
ApuyAya XIII. 


Athato vatiragyasamskrte Sartre brahmayajnanistho bhavet \ apa punarmriyum 
Jayati \ tad u ha vaima drastavyah $rotavyo mantavyo nididhyasiiavya wt \ tam elam 


ADHYAYA XV 327 


vedanuvacanena vividisanit brahmacaryena tapasa sraddhaya yajhiendnasakena ceti 
Manditkeyah \ tasmad evamvic chanto' danta uparatas titiksuhk sraddhavitto bhittval- 
many evatmanam pasyed iti Mandavyah \ yo 'yam vijitanamayah purusah pranesu 
sa esa neti nety aimavagrhya tdam brahmedam ksatram®” ime deva ime veda ime 
loka tmani sarvant bhiitanidam sarvam yad ayam aima \ sa’ esa tat _fvam asily 
aimavagamyo *ham brahmasmitt \ tad etad brahmapurvam aparam anaparam 
ananiaram abahyam ayam aima brahma sarvanubhiir tty anusasanam tht Vajna- 
valkyak® \ tam etam naputraya nananievasine briyad tll \ ya imam adbhif parigr- 
hitam vasumatim dhanasya pirnam dadyad tdam eva tato bhiya idam eva tato 
bhitya ity anusasanam \* tam® etam upanisadam vedasiro na yatha katham cana 
vadet®\ tad elad rcabhyuditam \W1\\ 


u Ziy Aranyake trayodaso ’dhyayah \" 


1 vichanto A, B. 2 ksatra B. 8 This is an exact quotation, save for the insertion of 
aparam of Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, II, 5, 19. B pr. m. has drahma. For the earlier part, cf. 
that Upanisad, II, 4, 5; 6; IV, 4, 25; 273; 28, and for the next words, VI, 3, 20 (13 Kanva). 
* This is clearly an inaccurate reminiscence of Chandogya Upanisad, III, 11, 6. 5 tav B. 
5 vede B. 7 Simply lg It B, but (a) this contradicts the colophon to XII, 8; (6) there 
is no connexion with XII; (c) A, Weber’s MS., Cava/., 1, 6, has XII. Cf J. &. A.S., 1908, 
pp. 380, 381. 


Apuyaya XIV. 


rcam miurdhanam yajusam uliamangam \ 
samnam Ssiro ’tharvanam mundamundam \ 
nadhite ’dhite vedam ahus tam ajiiam\ 
Sira$! chitvasau kurute kabandham iw 
sthanur ayam bharaharah kilabhut \ 
adhitya vedam na vijanai’ yo ’rtham \ 
yo ’rthajita it sakalam bhadram asnute \ 
nakam eti jrdnavidhiutapapma \\2\\* 
1 Siva B. 2 The numbers are added by me. 3 B ends with llroll. Really 
Adhyaya XIV should be combined with Adhyaya XIII into one Adhyaya, but the Berlin MS. 


(Weber, Catai., II, 6) treats this as a separate Adhyaya. For ver. 2, see Nirukta, I, 18; 
Burnell, Samhitopanisad Brahmana, p. 38. 


ApHYAYA XV. 


Atha vamsak \ om \ namo brahmaye nama acaryebhyah \ Gunakhyac Chankha- 
yanad asmabhir adhitam \ Gunakhyah Sankhayanah Kaholat Kausitakeh \ Kaholah 
Kausitakir Uddalakad’ Aruneh \ Uddailaka Arunth Priyavratat Saumapeh \ Priya- 
vratah Saumapih Somapal \ Somapak Saumat Prativesyat \ Saumah Prativesyah* 
Prativebyat\Prativesyo Brhaddivat \ Brhaddivah Sumnayok \ Sumnayur Uddalakat\ 


328 SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA 


Uddalako Visoamanasak \ Visvamanad Vyasval \ Vyasvah Stikamasvat \ Sakamasvo 
Devaratat \ Devarato Visvamitrat \ Visvamitra Indrat \ Indrah Prajapateh \ 
Prajipatir Brahmanah \ Brahma Svayambhif \ namo brahmane namo brahmane \ 


 Liy Aranyake paticadaso ’dhyayak \* 
Li Sankhayanaranyakam samapiam \ 


1 Udalukid B. % Somah Prativesyah, Winternitz, Bod/. Catal. p.60. A has Somapih and 
Somah. 3 ity Aranyaké Upanisado ckidaso ’dhyayah \ iti Samkhayana Upanisadah samap- 
tah\ sampirnam \ Srihanu Srisamvat 1837 (=A.D. 1781) varse miti jyesthasudt 15 Sukrava 
B. But this is all on f.87, which is a recent restoration and is of no authority. The number 
XV is given in the Berlin MS. to the Vamsa, which ends: z¢z Samkhiyanaranyake panwadaso 
*dhyayah \\ cha \\ samaptah \\ Subham bhavatu \\ svaste samvat 1734 varse asadhasuddha 13 Sanau 
abhyamtarandgarajhatiyarajanagaramadhye \ Rajapure vastavyam lisakadiksitamamhamnara- 
ghunatha \\ pamdyasimajinrsimhaputrapautrapathanartham \ ‘The VamSa clearly begins with 
the ‘author’ of the Aranyaka, i.e. Gunakhya; why Oldenberg (S. 2. Z., XXIX, 4, 5) should 
think the author of the Siitras is meant I cannot understand. See also my Sankhayana Ara- 


nYARA, P. 72. 


INDEX I 


QUOTATIONS FROM RGVEDA, 


(The first numbers in brackets denote the reference in the Samhita. The second, the page and 


column of Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance. 


Sankhayana Aranyaka.) 


Agnim naro didhitibhir aranyoh (VII, 1, 1*), 
I, I, 2 (11); &. I, 2. 

Agnir neta-sa vrtraha (III, 20, 4*°), I, 2,1 
(15°). 

Agne tava Sravo vayah (X, 140, 1*), V, 3; 
mta2h). 

adah su madhu madhunabhi yodhih (X, 120, 
3°), I, 3, 43 V, 1, 6 (49°). 

Aditir mata sa pita sa putrah (I, 89, 10°), 
Hiss 6(50")= Sz VIL, 15° 

adya no deva Savitak (V, 82, 4%), 1, 5,3 (53°); 
S. Il, 18. 

anaivo jata anabhisur ukthyah (1V, 36, 1°), 
I, 5, 3 (61°). 

anustubham anu carcuryamanam (X, 124, 9°), 
II, 3, 5 (67*)- 

rz Samasya yad asan manish (x20, 4°); 
I, 5, 2 (not in Bloomfield, 75*). 

apasyam gopam antpadyamanam (I, 164, 31°), 
II, 1,6 (79). Verse cited in full. 

apan pran eti svadhaya grbhitah (1, 164, 38"), 
II, 1, 8 (81%). Verse cited in full. 

abodhy agnih samidha jananam (NV, 1, 1), I, 
I, I (89°). 

abid tua Da hai CV ss Fea. 29 2 
(91"). 

abhi tua Siira nonumah (VII, 32, 22%), V, 2, 2 
(91°). 

abhi pra vah suradhasam (VIII, 49, 1°), V 
2, 4 (92>). 

abhur eho rayipate rayinam (VI, 31, 1*), V,; 
2, 2 (97*). 


The pratikas are given exactly as in the Samhita 
text, except that the original forms z fawsa are restored. 


References marked S. are to the 


ayant te astu haryatah (III, 44, 1*), V, 2, 4 
(105); S. II, 9. 

aSvayanto maghavann Indra vajinah (VII, 32, 
23°), V, 1, 6 (128°). 

ASsvina yajvarir tsah (1, 3, 1*), I, 1, 4 (129%). 

asat su me jaritah sabhivegah (X, 27, 1*), I, 

Te Varta TIGIa2° or Ge dase 

e ona palitasya hotuh (1, 164, 1*), I, 

5,33 V, 3, 2 (145°); S. II, 18. 


adganma vrtrahantamam (VIII, 74, 4*), I, 1, 
I (154°). 

adgnim na svavrktibhir (X, 21, 
(155°). 

a gha ye agnim (VIII, 45, 1*), V, 2, 3 (155>). 

a ti na Indra ksumantam (VIII, 81, 1°), V, 
2, 3 (158). 

@ tena yatam manaso javiyasa (X, 39, 12°), 
II, 3, 8 (159°). 

@ te maha Indroty ugra (VII, 25, 1°), V, 1, 2 
(159°). 

a tva ratham yathotaye (VIII, 68, 1*), I, 2,1 
(161*); S.I, 3. 

ad it pratnasya retasah (VIII, 6, 30°), III, 2, 
4 (162>), 

a dhursv asmai (VII, 34, 4°), V, 2, 2 (167°). 

a na Indro dirad & na asat (IV, 20, 1°), V, 
2,2 (167). 

a no bhadrap kratavo yantu visvatah (1, 89, 
1*), 1,5, 33; (V,3, 2 as dnobhadriyam, not 
in Bloomfield) (169). 

ano visvasuhavyah (VIL, 90, 1*),V, 2, 4(170°). 


DD Mose Ee) 


332 


a yatam Rudravartant (1, 38°), £154 279")- 

a yahi vanasd saha (X, 172, 1?) allen 
(180°). 

a& yahy adribhih sutam (V, 40, 1*), V, 2, 5 (180*). 

& yahy arvan upa bandhuresthah (RV. van?) 
(Til, 43, 2°), V, 3, 1 (180%). 

aurtaso ’vataso na kartrbhih (1, 55, 8°) 1, 2, 
6 (189°). 

a sasate prati haryanty uktha (I, 165, 4°), 
I, 2, 2 (190°). 


ittha hi soma in made (I, 80, 1°), V, 2, 2 
(198*). 

idam vaso sutam andhah (VIM, 2, 1°), eyo 
(198); $. 1, 3- 

Indra it somapa ehah (VIM, 2, 4%), V, 2,3 
(206%). 

Indram visve avivydhan (1,11, 1), I, 5, 25 
V, 3, 1 (207). 

Indra nediya ed tht (VIII, 53,5°),1,2,1 (210°). 

Indram id gathino brhat (1,7, 1%), V,2,1 (212%: 
RV., I, 7, 1-9 are called arkavat in I, 4, 1). 

Indravayit ime suté (1, 2, 4°), 1, 1, 4 (213°). 
Padas ® and » are cited. 

Indrasya nu viryani pra vocam (1, 32, 1), 
Wes Oe 

Indragni yuvam su nah (VII, 49, 1), I, §5 15 
V 23,0 (220%). 

Indraya sima giyata (VII, 98, 1°), V, 2,5 
(@23%5 §. II, 10. 

Indraya hi dyaur asuro ananrata (I, 131, T)5 
Wetinsticaagh)s ; 

Indra yahi citrabhano (I, 3, 5*), 1,1, 4 (224"). 

Indra yahi tatujana (I, 3, 6°), I, 1, 4 (224°). 

Indra yahi dhiyesitah (1, 3, 4°53 5; 6), 1, 1,4 
(224*). 

Indro madaya vavrdhe (1, 81, 1°), V, 2, 2 
(227°). 

imam stomam arhate jatavedase (1, 94, 1°), 
I, 5, 3 (231%). 

ima nu kam bhuvana sisadhama (1,157, 1°), 
Viney 2 2oaus 


inkhayantir apasyuvah (X, 153, 1°), V, 1,1 
(244). 

ugro jajite viryaya svadhavan (VII, 20, 1*), 
WO ep eer ey; 

ut tistha Brahmanaspate (1, 40, 1°), I, 2, 1 
(256). 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


ud u brahmany airata $ravasya (VII, 23, 1°), 
V, 2, 2 61°). 

ud ghed abhi srutimagham (VIII, 93, 1°), 
W923, 1312025). 

ud vayam tamasas part (I, 50, 10%), III, 2, 4 
(263). 

ubhayam Synavac ca nah (VIII, 61,1*), V, 2,4 


(272°). 


ehah suparnah sa samudram & vivefa (X, 114, 
4°), III, 1, 6 (296%); S. VII, 18. Verse cited 
in full. 

endra yahy upa nah paravatah (1, 130, 1°), 
We bE (3020). 

endra sanasim rayim (I, 8, 1%), TI, 2,5 (302”). 

esa stomo maha ugriya vahe (VII, 69, 5%), 
I, 5, 2 (307). 


omasah carsanidhrtah (1, 3, 7), 1, 1, 4 (312°). 


katara purva katara pardyoh (I, 185, 1°), I, 
By 3 (316°). 

hatha maham avrdhat hasya hotuh (UV, 23,1°), 
MWe. SMa)? §. 1,2. 

kaya subhd savayasah sanilah (1, 165, 1°), 
T, 2,295-N5-3 5, ca@ro*)- 


garbhe nu sann anv esam avedam (IV, 27,1”), 
II, 5,1 (345%: the verse is given in full). 

eam asvam rathyam Indra sam kira(VI, 46,2°), 
V, 1, 6 (346). 

gaurir mimaya salilant taksatt (1, 164, 41°), 
I, 5, 2 (355%) 


citram devanam ud agad anikam (1, 115, 1*), 


ITI, 2, 3 (369%); S. VIL, 4. Verse cited in 
full. 


jajnano nu Satakratuh (VIII, 77, 1*), V, 2, 3 
(372°). 

Janistha ugrah sahase turaya (X, 73, 1°), I, 2, 
a9 Ve Fy tRG7aD 

jatavedase sunavama somam (1, 99,1*), 1,5, 3 
(376%). 


tam v abhi pra gayata (VIII, 15, 1*), V, 2, 5 
(408*). 

tam vo dasmam rtisaham (WIM, 88, 1*), V, 2,4 
(387"). 


INDEX I 


tat Savitur vrnimahe (V, 82, 1%), I, 5, 3 
(392); S. II, 18; IX, 1. 

tad id asa bhuvanesu jyestham (X, 120, 1"), 
I, 3,43 73 V» 1, 6 (395%); Sa eee 

tad devasya Savitur varyam mahat (1V 53, ied 5 
I, 5, 3 (396%); S. II, 18. 

tam u stuhi yo abhibhityojah (VI, 18, 1"), V; 
2, 2 (406). 

tarobhir vo vidadvasum (VIII, 66, 1°), V, 2, 4 
(409°). 

ta asya siidadohasah (VII, 69, 3°), V, 1, 6; 
2,5 (second reference omitted in Bloomfield, 
419°). 

tam su te kirtim maghavan makitva (X, Ranio), 
I, 3,73 V» 1, 6 (420°). 

tivrasyabhivayaso asya pahi (X, 160, 1*), V; 1; 
1 (431°). 

tyam a su vajinam devapitam CXGE P9535 cEo 
V, 3, 1-(447")- 

trikadrukesu mahiso yavasiram (Il, 22, 1); 
VW, 1, % (440°)> 

tvam soma kratubhih sukratur bhith (1, 91, 2%); 
I, 2, 1 (455°)- 

tvam hy ehi cerave (VIII, 61, 7*), Via302 
(456°). 

tvam ida hyo narak (VIII, 99, 1°), Vs 2, 4 
(466°). 

tvim id hi havamahe (V1, 46, 1°), V, 2, 2 
(466°). 

tvavatah purivaso (VIII, 46, 1°), V, 5 5 
(466°). 

tve kratum api vrajanti (X, 120, 3), 1, 3,4 
(467"). 

tue ha yat pitaras cin na Indra (VU, 18, 1), 
V, 2, 2 (468%). 


dadi reknas (VIII, 46, 15%), V, 2, 5 (470°). 
dakvamso daiusah sutam (1, 3, 7*)s 1, iy 4 
(475°). 


nakih Sudaso ratham (VII, 32, 10*), I, 2, 35 
V, 2, 4 (525). 

nadam va odatinam (VIII, 69, 2"), 1, 3, 53 84 
V, 1, 6 (528°, where it is not noted that sada 
is used in the Aranyaka for this yerse),S. RRS 

na hy anyam balakaram (VIII, 80, Tv 2a 5 
(544”)- 

nimisas cif javiyasa (VIII, 73, Sy eLignss 
(550"). 


331 


ninam atha (VIII, 46, 15°), V, 2, 5 (556). 
nrnam u toa nrtamam girbhir ukthair (UI, 51, 


WO Toss Psa Vin fy CEST 


pavaka nak Sarasvati (1,3, 10"), 1, 1,4 (581°). 

pinvaty apah (I, 64, 6"), I, 2, 1 (686°). 

piba sutasya rasinah (VIII, 3; 1*), II, 2, 4 
(587°). 

pibé somam abhi yam ugra tardah (VI, 17, 
1%), I, 2, 2 (587°). 

puruhttam purustutam (VIII, 92, 29) ies 
(595”)- 

purolasam no andhasah (VII, 78, 1°), V, 2,3 
(596°). 

prakrtany rjisinah (VIII, 32, 1*), .V, 2,3 
(607"). 

prajé ha tisro atydyam iyuh (VIM, tot, 14°), 
II, 1, 1 (614°). Verse cited in full. 

pra ninam brahmanas patth (1, 40, 5*), 1, 2,1 
(623). 

prayajyavo Maruto bhrajadrstayah (V, 53,1*); 
I, 5, 3 (626°) ; S. II, 18. 

pra va Indriya brhate (VIII, 89, 3°), L 2, 1 
(628°), 

pra vo devayagnaye (III, 13, 1*), 1, 1,1 (630°). 

pra vo mahe mandamanayandhasah (X, 50,1"), 
I, 5, 23 V, 3, 1 (630°). 

pra samrgam carsaninam (VIII, 16, 1*), V; 
2, 5 (631). 

praitu brahmanas patir (1, 49, etna Gear 
(643°). 

pro sv asmat puroratham (X, 133, 1) s) Vda 
(644*). 

brhad Indraya gayata (VII, 89, Ts lye ean k 
(649°). 

Brhaspate na parah samno viduh (11, 23, 16%), 
IIL, 1, 5 (654%); S$. VII, 13. 

Brhaspate prathamam vaco agram (KS70 a4); 
I, 3, 3 (654°). 


bhiya id vavrdhe (VI, 30, 1*), 1, 3,75 Vi 15 
(673")- 

Marutvai Indro vysabho ranaya (II, 47, 1°), 
I, 2,2; V, 1,1 (692°). 

maha Indro ya ojasa (VIII, 6, 1°), V,2, 3 
(695°) ; S. I, 8. 

ma cd anyad vi Samsata (VII, 1,1"), V,2, 4 
(702"). 


332 


Mitram huve pitadaksam (1, 2, 7%), I, 1, 4 
(713). Padas * and P are cited. 

mo su tva vaghatas cana (VII, 32, 1°), V, 2,4 
(723”). 


ya dnayat pardvatah (VI, 45, 1°), V, 2, 5 (724°). 

ya Indra somapatamah (VI, 12, 1*), V, 2, 5 
(725")- 

ya cha id vidayate (1, 84, 7*), V, 2, 5 (726°). 

yok satrahaé vicarsanth (V1, 46, 3), V, 2, 4 
(777")- 

yatra brahma pavamanah (1X, 113, 6*), III, 2, 
4 (741°). 

yad agna esa samitir bhavati (X, 11, 8), V, 1, 
I (749°). 

yad anti yac ca drake (1X, 67, 21), Ill, 2, 4 
(751")- 

yad Indra prag apig udak (VIII, 4,1), V, 2, 4 
(753°). 

yad Indraham yathaé tvam (VIII, 14,1), V, 2, 
5 (754°) 

yad vavana (X, 74, 6*), V, 2, 2 (760%). 

yas tigmasrigo vrsabho na bhimah (VII, 19, 
1°), V, 2, 2 (770°). 

yas tityaja sacitvidam sakhayam (X, 71,6*), III, 
2, 4 (770°, where the variant in TA. is not 
noted) ; §. VIII, 6. Verse cited in full. 

yasya tyac chambaram made (V1, 43, 1*), V, 
2,5 (774°). 

ya Indra bhuja abharah (VIII, 97, 1°), V, 2, 4 
(778°); $. II, 9. 

yavad dyavaprthivi tavad it tat (X, 114, 8°), 
I, 3, 8 (786°). 

yavad brahma visthitam tavatt vik (X, 114, 
8%), I, 3, 8 (786*). 

yo jata eva prathamo manasvan (II, 12, 1*), 
T5523, Vy-g,-4 (808), 

yonis ta Indra sadane akari (VII, 24, 1*), V 
3, § (810°). 

yo raja carsaninam (VIII, 70, 1°), V, 2, 4 
(812>), 


’ 


In the Santi verses (see Crit 
abhisu nah (IV, 31, 3°), (not in Bloomfield, 96»), 


avadams tvam Sakune bhadram & vada (II, 43, 
3°), (not in Bloomfield, 186). 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


vathantaram & jabharé Vasisthah (X, 181,14), 
HI, 1, 6 (817°). 

ratrisikta (X, 127, 1*), III, 2, 4 (823°). 

vevatir nah sathamadah (1, 30, 13%), V; 2,5 
(830). 


vane na va yo adhayi cakan (X, 29, 1*), 1, 5, 25 
V, 3, 1 (8374). 

vayam gha tua sutavantah (VIII, 33,1), V; 2s 
4 (838°). 

vayav & yaht darfata (1, 2, 1*), 1,1, 4 (860%). 
Padas * and » are cited. 

vartrahatyaya savase (III, 37,1*), V, 2, 5 (863°). 

vavrdhanah savasa bhiryojah (X, 120, 2*), 
I, 3, 4 (863°); S. 11, 1. 

vidhum dadranam samane bahiinam (X, 55, 
5%), V, 3, 1 (869°). 

viso vtfo vo atithim (VIII, 74, 1*), I, 1,1 (877°) ; 
S tha: 

vaisvanaraya dhisanam rtavrdhe (111, 2, 1*), 


I, 5, 3 (906%). 


sakhaya @ §isamaht (VIII, 24, 1*), V, 2, 5 
(951). 

sanitah susanitar (VIII, 46, 20%), V, 2, 5 
(966%). 

samidhagnim (VIII, 44, 1*), V, 1, 1 (980%). 

sahasradha pakcadasany ukthaé (X, 114, 8"), 
V, 3, 8 (1001%). 

suta wt tvam nimisla Indra some (VI, 23, 1*), 
Wig Oy (OEE 

surupakrtnum itaye (1, 4,1*), V, 2, 5 (1021), 

surya atma@ jagatas (1, 115, 14), Il, 2, 4; ILI, 
2, 3 (1025°). 

svadavah soma & yaht (VIII, 2, 28), V, 2,3 
(1054). 

svadoh svadiyah svaduna syja sam (X, 120, 3°), 
I, 3, 43 V, 1, 6 (1055°). 


hastacyutt janayanta (VII, 1, 1°), I, 1, 2 
(1065°). 
hotajanista cetanah (II, 5, 1*), 1,1, 1 (1072). 


. Note on I, 1) also occur! :— 


haya nag citra & bhuvat (IV, 31, 1*), (319°). 
kas tu@ satyo madanam (IV, 31, 2%), (not in 
Bloomfield, 322), 


* In view of the variants in the MSS, I have given only the first Padas. All the verses are 


assumed to be quoted in full. 


INDEX I 


tac caksur devahitam (VII, 66, 16), (not in 
Bloomfield, 388°). 

tvam Agne vratapa asi (VII, 11, 1), (not in 
Bloomfield, 450°). 


bhadram karnebhih Srnuyama devah (I, 89,8*), 
(664%, where only the fravika is given). 

bhadram no api vitaya manah (X, 20, 1°), 
(not in Bloomfield, 664"). 


333 


Sam na Indrigni bhavatam avobhih (VII, 35, 
1*), (917%, where only the Zraszka is given). 

Sam no Mitro Sam Varunah (1, 90, 9%), (not in 
Bloomfield, 918»). 


stuse janam suvratam navyasibhih (V1, 49, 1*), 
(1041*, where only the fradika is given, as in 
the next). 

syona prthivi bhava (1, 22, 15"), (1046*), 


The following occur in the Sankha@yana Aranyaka I, II, VII-XII. 


Aditih dyaur Aditir antariksam (I, 89, 10°), 
VII, 15 (50°). Verse cited in full. 

adhvaryavo bharatendraya somam (II, 14, 1°), 
II, 16 (59°). 

astavy Agnih Simivadbhir arkaih (1, 141, 13°), 
II, 18 (136*). 

a mandrair Indra haribhih (III, 45, 1*), I, 9 
(1765). 

Indrah sutesu somesu (VIII,13, 1*), II,10 (218*). 

uta sya nah Sarasvati jusana (VII, 95, 4°), 
i 2¢ana°) 

ud vayam tamasas pari (I, 50, 10*), VIII, 5 
(263°). Verse cited in full. 

ud vam caksur Varuna supratikam (VU, 61, 
x"), I, 2 (263°). 

uruvyacasa mahini asascata (I, 160, 2*), II, 
18 (276°). 

rsva ta Indra sthavirasya bahu (V1, 47, 8°), 
I, 4 (294). 

ka u Sravat katamo yajAiyanam (IV, 43, 1°), 
I, 2 (315°). 

kim u sresthah kim yavistha na gagan (1, 161, 
1*), II, 18 (327°). 

kuvid anga namasa ye vrdhasah (VII, 91, 1*), 
I, 2 (329°). 

ko vas trata vasavah ko varita (IV, 55, 1*), 
I, 2 (335°). 

te hi dyavaprthivi visvasambhuva (1, 160, 1*), 
IT, 18 (445°). 

devayor elt stiryas tatanvan (VII, 61, 1°), I, 2 
(491°). 

dvarav rtasya subhage vy avar (VII, 95, 6°), 
I, 2 (513). 

na nindima camasam yo mahakulah (1, 161, 
1°), II, 18 (529). 


Prajapate na tvad etiny anyah (X, 121, To*), 
XII, 2, v. 8 (612%). Verses in full. 


balittha tad vapuse dhayi darsatam (1, 141,1*), 
II, 18 (644). Insert ¢ad in Friedlander’s text. 

brhan mahanta urviya vi ra@jatha (V, 55, 2°), 
II, 18 (650°). 


mahat tan nama guhyam purusprk (X, 55, 2"), 
VII, 20 (694°). Verse cited in full. 

mahan Indro nrvad & carsaniprah (VI, 19, 1*), 
I, 3 (695°). 

ma na stenebhyo ye abhi druhas pade (II, 23, 
16*), VII, 13 (706%). Verse cited in full. 


ya eka id havyas carsanindm (VI, 22, 1*), Il, 4 
(726°). 

yam siryasya duhitavynita (IV, 43, 2%), I, 2 
(728°). 

yadvat taras tanvo yavad ojah (VIII, 91, 4*), 
I, 2 (786%). 

yavan naras caksasa didhyanah (VII, 91, 4°), 
I, 2 (786°). 


- vide vrdhasya daksaso mahan hi sah (VIII, 13, 
1°), II, 10 (867°). 
visva vamani dhimahi (V, 82, 6°), II, 18 (885°). 
visvo hy anyo arir djagama (X, 28, 1*), Il, 4 
(891*). 


Sasa itthé mahawt ast (X, 152, 1°), II, 15; 
XII, 7 (923). 


sa pratnatha kavivydhah (VIII, 63, 4*), II, 15 
(974*)- 

sahiyaso Varuna Mitra martat (IV, 55, 1°), 
I, 2 (1005*). 

stotaram in maghavann asya vardhaya (VIII, 
97, 1°), II, 9 (1041). 

stomair Vatsasya vavrdhe (VIII, 6, 1°), II, 8 
(1043). 


INDEX II 


QUOTATIONS FROM OTHER SOURCES THAN THE RGVEDA, 
NIVIDS, PRAISAS, ETC. 


(All the Padas of metrical passages are given as in Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance 


(Harvard Oriental Series, Vol. X, 1906). Metrical passages are marked (yv). 


The references 


in brackets are to page and column of the Concordance.) 


agnir ivanadhysyah prthiviva susada bhiya- 
sam, V, 1, I (14°). 

atichandasa tva (chandasodiihamt), V, 1, 4 
(348%, under gdyatrena tua, &c. The separate 
Mantras should rather be given separately). 

atho tanur eva tanvo astu bhesajam (v), I, 3, 4 
(47°). 

dnu dyavaprthivi piirvdhitau,V, 1, 1 (v) (64). 

dnu mam Indro énu mam Brhaspatth, V, 1, 
1 (v) (66°). 

dnu mam Mitravdruna ihavatam, V, 1, 1 (¥) 
(66%). 

énu Samsiso disah, IV,  (v) (66°). 

dnu sbmo dnu vag devy avit, V1, 1 (v) (67°). 

antariksam ivanapyam dyaur ivanadhysyo bhu- 
yasam, V, 1, 1 (70, with the misreading 
°dhysto, which is in no text or MS. and is 
contradicted by the context). 

énto vacb vlbhuh sdrvasmad uttaram, V,3,2(v) 
(not in Bloomfield). 

annam iva vibhu yajita iva prabhur (v1. pra- 
bhur) bhiiyasam, V, 1, I (74°). 

dnnasubhe varsdpavitram gébhagam, V, 3, 2(v) 
(not in Bloomfield). 

apanam anvinkhasva, V, 1, 4 (81°). 

apanaya tua (ullikhamt), V, 1, 4 (82). 

amttasya sriyam mahim, V, 3, 2 (v) (102°). 

ayutaksaram amftam dihanam, V, 3, 2 (¥) 
(not in Bloomfield). 

drcanty arkam devdta‘}) svarkah, V, 2,2 (v) 
(113). 


avratém hinoti nd spréad rayth, V, 2,2 (¥) 
(125%, under avrazo). 

ahar iva svam ritrir iva priya bhiyasam, V, 
Eek GusOs)s 


Adityas tua jagatena, &c.,V,1,4(165°*, cf. 164°); 
bene 
anustubhena tua (chandasodihamt), V, 1, 4 
(384*). 
Gpa iva rasa osadhaya iva ripam bhityasam, V, 
ips (GE On 
abhis tudm abhistibhih (v), IV, 1 (176°). 
& yahi piba mdtsva (v), IV, 1 (179°). 
dyuh préindm me dhuksva V, 3, 1 (180%, cf. 
Katyayana Srauta Sutra, III, 4, 13, where 
fs prandm is omitted). 
a yb mdnyaya manydve (v), IV, t (183°). 
& stobhati Sruté yiva sd Indrah (v), V, 2, 2 
(193”)- 
idam madhu, V, 1, I (204%). 
idam madhtt 3, V,1, I (204%, no separate head), 
ind vdsuh sdmajah parvatesthah (v), V, 2,1 
(205%, as 70 vas &c.). 
Indrah kérmaksitam amrtam vydma (v), V, 3; 
I (207°, see also note for parallel). 
Indrah patis tavdstamo janesv dé (v), V, 2, 1 
_(207"). 
Indrah sdsvadbhir johiutra évaih (v), V, 2, 1 
(214"). 
Indram dhdnasya satdye (xv), IV, 1 (210°, cf. 
RY, -VILL73;5°). 


INDEX II 


Indrasya dhysitdm sdhah (v), V, 2, 1 (215°). 

Jndrasya réntyam brhdt (v), V, 2, 1 (216*). 

Indro vide tém u stusé (v) IV, 1 (228°). 

Indro visvam virijati (v), V, 3, 1 (228°). 

imam tivrasutam piba, V, 1, 1 (231). 

tsam no Mitravdruna kértanélam (v),V, 2, 
2 (239°). 

ike ht Sakrdh (v), IV, 1 (246°). 


ukthasa yaja somasya, V, 3, 2; 3 (om is pre- 
fixed), (246°, 313%). 

wpa praksé mddhumati ksiydntah (v), V,2, 2 
(266° as upaprakse). 

upehi visuddha (quasi-verse), IV, 1 (272°). 

tipo mdnyadya manydve (quasi-verse), IV, I 


(272°). 


rtdm satydm vijigyandm vivacandm (vy), V, 
3, 2 (not in Bloomfield). 

rbhir vigahd esdh (v), V, 2, 1 (916° as fatrin 
&c.; which rather belongs to the end of the 
preceding Pada). 


etas ta uktha bhitayah (v), V, 3, 2 (300% as 
ukthabhitayah). 

evd hi deva 3h, IV, t (305%, no pluti). 

eva hi Pasa 3 u, 1V, 1 (305%, no plutz). 

eva hi Visna 3u, IV, 1 (305%, no pluti). 

eva hi Sakrdh, IV, 1 (305%). 

eva hindraé 3, IV, 1 (305% as Aindram). 

eva hy agna 37, IV, I (305%, no plutz). 

eva hy eva, IV, 1 (305°). 

esa brahma, V,2, 2 (pratika only) (306°). 

chy eva 3 idam madhu, V, 1, I (309*)- 


osthapidhana nakuli &c. (v), III, 2, 5 (316* 
gives other citations but not this). 


ausnihena tua (chandasodithamt),V,1,4 (348°). 
krdtus chandd rtdm brhdt (v), IV, 1 (336). 


gayatrena tua (chandasodithami), V,1,4 (348°). 
gava iva punarbhuvo mithunam wa maricayo 
bhiiyasam, V, 1, 1 (348°). 


caru mam tha vadayet (v), III, 2, 5 (not in 
Bloomfield). 
cthitvo abht no naya (v), IV, 1 (368*). 


Jagatena tua (chandasodithami), V,%, 4 (348°). 


Beh 


jétiram dparajitam, IV, 1 (382°). 
jystir iidhar dprativadah piurvam (v), V, 3, 2 
(not in Bloomfield). 


tdpastanv Indrajyestham sahdsradharam, V, 3, 
2 (not in Bloomfield). 

tam iitdye havamahe (v), IV, 1 (406°). 

tabhir ma thd dhuksva, V, 3, 2 (424°). 

téjah prandsyaydtanam mdnasah, V, 3, 2 (not 
in Bloomfield). 

ténahdm visvam apyasam, V, 3, 2 (440°). 

té no devih suhavah Sdrma yachata, V,1, 1 
(441°). 

traistubhena tua (chandasodihamt), V, 1, 4 
(348*). 

tudm hy éka isise (v), V, 2, 2 (456°, cf. RV., 
IV, 32, 7°): 


dantaih parivyta pavih (v), III, 2, 5 (not in 
Bloomfield). 

didhrsindm dhrsitém Sdvah (dub. read.) (v), 
V, 2, I (475°): 

dvaipadena tva& (chandasodihamt), V, 1, 4 
(348*). 

dhent pinvati cdksuh Srétram prandh (vy), V,3, 
2 (not in Bloomfield). — 


namas te gayatraya, V, 1, 2 (533°). 

namas te brhate, V, 1, 2 (533°)+ 

namas te bhadraya, V, 1, 2 (533°). 

namas te rathantardya, V, 1, 2 (533°). 

nddhysa & dadharsa (dub. read.) (v), V, 2, 1 
(545")- 

nindm tém ndoyam sdm nyase(v),1V, 1 (556°). 


pancavimsasya stomasya, &c., V, 1, 5 (563*). 

pasun visam me dhuksva, V, 3, 1 (578°). 

panktena tua (chandasodiuhami), V,1, 4 (348"). 

pitdro ma visvam iddm ca bhitdm,V ,1,1(583"). 

pivarim tsam krnuhi na Indra (v), V, 2, 1 
(588°). 

puré ydd im dti vydthih, V, 2, 1 (594"*). 

purd va yddi vehasa niindm (v), V, 2, 2 (not in 
Bloomfield as a separate entry). 

pusyanto rayim dhimdhe tam Indra (v), V, 2, 2 

597”). 

pirtth savistha Sasyate (v), 1V, 1 (598*). 

pirvasya yat te adrivah (v), IV, 1 (598). 

pirvinam puriivaso (v), IV, 1 (598). 


336 AITAREYA 


Prthivyupardm Vérunavayvitamam, V, 3, 2 
(not in Bloomfield). 

prinimatarah Mardétah svarkah (v), V, 1,1 
(605). 

pr dcetana pré cetaya (v), IV, 1 (608°). 

Prajapatir iddm bréhma (v), V, 3, 1 (610°). 

pratt vam yjist (v), V, 2, 1 (6188). 

pratistha h¢dayasya sdrvam (v), V 
Bloomfield). 

priébho janasya Vrtrahan (v), IV, 1 

pré vo Indraya (v), V, 2, 2 (628°). 

prénam anuprenkhasva, V, 1, 4 (635”)- 

prandya tva (ullikhamt), V, 1, 4 (637°). 

premim vicam vadisyami, &c., V, 1, 5 (642°; 
in the parallel passages from Latyayana and 
Sankhayana Bloomfield reads svargam ayis- 
yan and svargam isyan respectively, I think 
wrongly); S. 1, 8 (with variants). 


) 3, 2 (Mot in 


(625°). 


barhatena tua (chandasodithamt),V,1, 4 (348*). 

bréhma prajam me dhuksva, V, 3, 2 (658°). 

brahmeva loke ksatram iva S$riyam bhityasam, 
Vi 10s 1 (O01). 


bhivo vajandm pdtir vdsan dnu (v), IV, 1 
(670°). 

bhitebhyas tua, V, 1, 4 ee 72>). 

bhur bhuvah svar, 1, 3, 2; V, 1, 4 (674°). 

bhur bhiivah svar tréyo vedo’ sé, V, 3, 2 (not 
separated in Bloomfield). 


mimhistha Indra vijiro (2) grnddhyat (vy), V, 
2, 1 (676°). 

mamhistha vajrinn riijdse (v), 1V, 1 (676°). 

mimhistho vajasataye (v), V, 2,2 (677%, cf. RV., 
VIII, 4, 184; 88, 64), 

matsva médam puruvaram maghiya (v), V, 2, 
I (678). 

mana ivapurvam vayur iva Slokabhur bhiya- 
sam, V,1, 1 (682>), 

mayt kirtih, V, 1, 5 (689%). 

mayt ghosah, V, 1, § (689*). 

mayt bhagah, V,1, 5 (689). 

mayt bhuktih, V, 1, 5 (689>). 

mayt bhujak, V, 1, 5 (689). 

mayt mahan, V,1, 5 (690*). 

mayt yasah, V, 1, 5 (690°). 

mayt srif, V,1, 5 (690°). 

mayt Slokah, V, 1, 5 (690°). 

mayt stobhah, V, 1, 5 (690%). 


ARANYAKA 


maye stomah, V, 1, 5 (690°). 
mitirdha lokanam asi (v), Vy 3,2 (719%, treated 
apparently as prose). 


yth sdvisthah Surinam (v), IV, 1 (769»). 

yam tva kdvistham imdhe (v), Vy 2, 2 (762")s« 

ydsyeddm Grdjas tijo yijo vanam sahah (v), 
V, 2, 1 (two Padas, in 777° the first Pada is 
given, with the remark that the Aranyaka 
omits yzéjah, but the second Pada is not 
given under yah). 

yijo vanam sthah, see preceding. 

yé Agnijihvé uta va ydjatraéh (v), V, 1, I 
(795°)- 

ye 3yajamahe, V, 3, 2 (804, without putz). 

6 mamhistho maghénam (v), 1V, 1 (811°). 


rayim pisdngasamadrsam (v), V, 2, 1 (820%, cf. 
RV lets 6) 

rayé vajaya vajrivah (v), IV, 1 (825°). 

Rudras tva traistubhena &c., V, 1, 4 (828) ; 
Se Leis 


lokém brahmavarcasadm abhayam yajfiasamrd- 
dhim me dhuksva, V, 3, 2 (832°). 


vasi ht Sakréh, WV, 1 (847%). 

vasi ht Sakré vdsan dnu, 1V,1 (847°). 

vasavas tua gayatrena &c.,V,1,4(848*); S.I, "6 

vak, V, 1, 5 (852°). 

vag devi somasya trpyatu, V,.5, 2 (853°). 

Vayth Pisé Vartinak Sémo Agnth (v), V,1, 1 
(860%). 

vida maghavan vida gatim (y), IV, 1 (867%). 

vida maghavan vidé3m, IV, 1 (867%). 

vida raydh suviryam (v), IV, I (867°). 

vipra gathdm gayata ydj jijosat (v), V, 2, 2 
(871%). 

vt va asmasu rajast (v),1, 4, 3 (not in Bloom- 
field, perhaps as not being considered a 
Mantra). 

visedto davan visvdto na & bhara(v), V, 2, 2 
(879°). 

ulsvasya pra stobhavidvin(v),V,2,2 (881%,where 
the whole line with Zzro is given as if one 
Pada), 

visve tua deva anustubhena &c., V, 1, 4 (886°). 

vyanam anuvinkhasva, V,1, 4 (go9”, where the 
quotation is given as anu vinkhasva), 

wyanaya tvollikhamt, V, 1, 4 (909°). 


INDEX IT 


Sdm padém maghdm rayisdni nd sdmah (v), V, 
2, 2 (920°), 

Sdvistha vajrinn rfijdse (v), IV, 1 (922°), 

Sthsa Sdcindm pate (v), IV,1 (924°. 

Siro 6 gésu gachaté (v), IV, t (933°). 

§rlyam yaso me dhuksva, V, 3, 2 (930°). 


sdmvesah cdksusah sdmbhavah Srétrasya,V, 3, 2 
(not in Bloomfield). 

sam Srotram atmana sam aham atmanda, V,1, 5 
(949°). 

sdkha susévo ddvayah (¥);, (dub. read.) IV, 1 
(952°, ef. RV., I, 187, 3°). 

Sam caksur manasa sam aham manasa, V,1, 5 
(956°); S.1, 8. 

satydsammitam vakprabhitam mdnaso vtbhi- 
tam (v), V, 3, 2 (not in Bloomfield). 

sé nah parsad ati dvisah (v), IV, (965°). 

sé nah parsad dti sridhah (v), IV, 1 (965%). 

sanad dmykta djasa (v), V, 2,2 (966*). 

sé no dadatu tém rayim (v), IV, 1, 2, 1 (967°). 

sé no netdram mahayama Indram (v), V, 2,1 
(967°). 

sapté rdjano yd udabhisiktéh (v),V,1,1 (937%) 

sém anyésu bravavahai, IV, 1 (975°). 

sa me pranah &c. (quasi-verse), V, 3, 2 (984°). 


In the Santi verses occur the following (see note on LANE 


Agna ila nama ila nama rsibhyo mantrakrd- 
bhyo mantrapatibhyo (5*) ; S. VII, 1. 

adabdham caksur.isiram manas (v) (not in 
Bloomfield, cf. 40%); $. VII, 1; IX, . 

anu mam aitv indriyam (¥) (not in Bloom- 
field). 

anu ma yantu devatah (v) (not in Bloomfield, 
who, 66%, gives MS., I, 13, 7%: anu mayantu 
(sic) devatah), 

anu ma Srir uttisthatu (x) (not in Bloomfield), 

anenadhitenahoratran samdadhamz, II, 7 (not 
in Bloomfield) ; $. VI, 1. 

avatu mam, I, 7 (not in Bloomfield, 118*). 

avatu vaktaram, \1,7 (not in Bloomfield, 118*) ; 
S. VI, 1. 


avir avir ma edhi, 1,7 (not in Bloomfield). 
uditas Sukriyam dadhe (v) (not in Bloomfield, 
250%), 


rtam vadisyami satyam vadisyamz, 11, 7 (287*); 
S. VIL, tr. 


KEITH 


337 


sam prano vaca sam aham vaca, V, 1, 5 (985"). 
GESLL& 

Sdrvam vik pdrag arvak sdpru salildm (v), V 
3, 2 (not in Bloomfield). 

sarvasyai vaca wanda, UI, 2, 5. 

sdrvan kaman duham mahdt (v), V, 3, 2 (993*)- 

sd sahdtur vrtrahdtyesu Sdtrin (v), V, 2,1 
(998°). 

sd suprénite nftamah svaral asi CVs. Ve ay 2 
(998°). 

sutds te sbma uipa yahi yajitdm (v), V, 2,1 
(1015), 

suparno ’st garutman, V, 1,5 (1017>) ; Sh Bo 

sumnd @ dhehi no vaso (v), IV, 1 (1020), 

Sirya iwapratidhrsyas candrama iva punar- 
bhur bhiyasam, V, 1, 1 (1026*). 

suryo nitksatrair avatu thé manu (v), V,1, 1 
(1026), 

somo me rajayuh pranaya varsatu, V, 3, 2 
(1037). 

suam yat taniim tanvam airayata (v), I, 3, 4 
(1054, cf. 1049”, 1055”). 


hfdayégram brahmandbhartrkam (v), V, 3, 2 
(not in Bloomfield). 


(The accents are not given.) 
osthapidhana nakuli (v) (cf. supra). 
caru mam tha vadayet (vy) (cf. supra). 


tad aham atmani dadhe (v) not in Bloomfield). 

tad vaktaram avatu, Il, 7 (not in Bloomfield, 
396°) ; S. VII, 1. 

tan mam avatu II, 7 (not in Bloomfield, 402°) ; 
S. VII, 1. 


dikse ma ma himsth (not in Bloomfield, 404 Sys 
ae V LAE sucks Te 


nama rsibhyo &c. (see agne t/a &c.) (not in 
Bloomfield, 530”, but in 5*). 

namo vo astu devebhyah (v) (not in Bloomfield, 
but cf. 5°). 


mano me vact pratisthitam, 11, 7 (not in Bloom- 


field, 685”) ; S. VII, 1. 
mayi $rir mayt yasah (v) (not in Bloomfield, 
690°). 


ma te vyoma samdrsi (v), (703%); § on VOL, 2. 


338 


van me manasi &c., II, 7 (not in Bloomfield, 
853°); Sh NATE re 

vedasya ma ani sthah, U, 7 (not in Bloomfield, 
903). Cf. S. VIL, 1. 

Siva nah Samtama bhava (v), (925°) ; §. VII, t. 

$rutam me ma prahasth, U1, 7 (not in Bloom- 
field, 940°). 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


satyam vadisyami, Il, 7 (958) ; S. VII, 1. 

carvah sapranah sabala uttisthamt (x) (not in 
Bloomfield). 

sarvasyai vaca tana (v). (Cf. supra.) 

sumrlika Sarasvati (v), (1020?) ; S. Vil, r. 

stiryo jyolisam Sresthah (not in Bloomfield, but ~ 
cf. 40"); S. VIT, 1; IX, 1. 


In II, 3,8 the following Slokas occur. 


tatra devah sarva ekam bhavanti, 14, 24 (391). 
tatra devah sarvayujo bhavanti, 3° (391). 
tad viyiiya kavayo nvavindan, 3° (397°). 

tena papmanam apahatya brahmana, 4° (438°). 


namayattah samatrpyah srute’dhi, 3° (547*)- 
nainam astripuman bruvan, 5° (559°): 


nainam vaca striyam bruvan, 5* (559)- 


pumamsam na bruvann enam, 5° (952”)s 


yac casyth krivram yac colbanisnu, 3 (7367). 
yad aksaram parcavidham sameté, 1* (749*)« 
yad aksarad aksaram eti yuktam, 2* (749°). 
yad vaca om iti yac ca neti, 3* (759°). 

yasmin nama samatrpyan Srutedhit, 4°(773°). 
yujo yukta abhi yat samvahantz, 1°, 2” (791°). 


vadan vadati ka$cana, 5° (835*). 


satyasya satyam anu yatra yujyate, 1°, 2°(960"). 
svargam lokam apyeti vidvan, 44 (1050°). 


Prose formulae in $ankhayana Aranyaka I, Il, VII-XIV. (Most of these are not in 
Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance.) 


annam granthth, XI, 8. 

annam iva sthiro vasani vairajena chandasa, 
XI, 8. 

annavan annado bhiyasam, X1,6; 8. 

apane me vidyutah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

apane me vidyutah pratisthita apano hydaye, 
XI, 6. 

aya iva sthiro vasini traistubhena chandasé, 
IEEE 

arko’st, §.1, 7 (113°). 

asmeva sthiro vasaini jagatena chandasa, XI, 8. 


aimani me brahma pratisthitam svaha, XI, 5- 
atmani ma brahma pratisthitam atma hrdaye, 
XI, 6. 


udane me Parjanyah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

udane me Parjanyah pratisthita udino hrdaye, 
XI, 6. 

granthim udgrathani, XI, 8. 

caksusi ma Adityah pratisthitah svahd, XI, 5. 

caksusi ma Adityah pratisthitas caksur hrdaye, 
XI, 6. 

tat satyam devinam, XI, 6; 8. 


trptir iva sthiro vasiny Gnustubhena chandasa, 
XI, 8. 


nakam iva sthiro vasané samrajyena chandasa, 
XI, 8. 

puruso manih, XI, 8. 

Prajapatir iva sthiro vasiny atichandasena 
chandasa, XI, 8. 

Prajipatis tuarohatu vayuh prenkhayatu, i, 7. 

pranak sitram, XI, 8. 

prane me vayuh pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

prane me vayuh pratisthito vayur hrdaye, XI, 6. 


bale ma Indrah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

bale ma Indrah pratisthito balam hrdaye, XI, 6. 

Brhaspatir iva sthiro vasini barhatena chanda- 
Sa, eX 8 

Brahmeva sthiro vasini panktena chandasa, 
XI, 8. 


manasi me candramah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

manasi me candramah pratisthito mano hrdaye, 
XI, 6. 

manyau ma [sanah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

manyau ma [sanah pratisthito manyur hydaye, 
XI, 6. 

maham akamo marisyami, XI, 6; 8. 

mirdhani ma akasah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 

mirdhani ma akaSah pratisthito mirdha 
hydaye, XI, 6. 


INDEX II 


yt satyasamdha devih, VII, 17 (probably yat 
is not quoted). 
rajatam iva sthiro vasani svarajyena chandasé, 
8 
? 
retast ma apah pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 
vetast ma apah pratisthita reto hrdaye, XI, 6. 
loham iva sthiro vasiny ausnihena chandasé, 
XI, 8. 
vact ma Agnih pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 
vact ma Agnih pratisthita Agnir hydaye, XI, 6. 
Sarire me prthivi pratisthita svahda, XI, 5. 
Sarire me prthivi pratisthita Sariram hyrdaye, 
XI, 6. 
Srotre me disah pratisthitah svahd, XI, 5. 
Srotre me disah pratisthitah Srotram hrdaye, 


3 Ue 


339 
sam devo devyadadhét, I, 5 (Srauta Sttra, XVII, 
15, II datvya) (970*). 
sam Prajapatih pasubhih sam aham pasubhih, 
I, 8 (985°). 
sam brahma brahmanyadadhat, 1, 5 (985°). 
samt mahan mahatyadadhat, I, 5 (985”). 
Sarvam ayur asiyayusman, XI, 8. (Cf. Atharva- 
veda, XIX, 61, 1.) 
Sdavitrir tva sthiro vasant sarvavedachandasena 
chandasa, XI, 8. 
et tva sthivo vasani kakubhena chandasa, 
? 
suvarnam iva sthiro vasini gayatrenachandasa, 
8 
? 
hrdayam hrdaye, XI, 8. 
hydayam atmani, XI, 6. 


Verses other than Rgvedic in Saakhayana Aranyaka.I, II, VII-XIV. The references 


to XII and XIV are to verses. 


Agnir iva kaksam vibhrtah purutra, X11, 9°. 

Agne yasasvin yas$ase sam arpaya, XII, 15* 
(Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3°, with the 
reading °emam ; Bloomfield, 27°). 

Agne varcasvinam kuru, X11, 24(Atharvaveda, 
III, 22, 3°; Bloomfield, 28>). 

adhitya vedam na vijanati yo’rtham, XIV, 2» 
(Nirukta, I, 18°; Comm. on Samhitopanisad, 
p. 38 ed. Burnell). 

anuvyicamadhyat pra[vt|vrsoparistat, X1I,1 2%. 

anenendro vi mrdho vihatyd, XII, 10°. 

anenendro Vrtram ahan, XII, 30°. (Cf. Atharva- 
veda, VIII, 5, 3%; Bloomfield, 68°.) 

antariksam ma ma himsth, IX, 7 (Vajasaneyi 
Samhita, V, 43; Bloomfield, 70>). 

abhi tistha prtanyatah, X11, 31% (g1*). 

abhy & vartadhvam upa sevatagnim, XII, 18%. 
(Cf. Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4%.) 

amrtam me manau sitram, XII, 32%. 

ayam Sastadhipatir no astu, XII, 18° (Taittiriya 
Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4°, with 70). 

ayam sano nudatam me sapatnan, XII, 9*. 

‘ ayam sano yo "nuvadi kila, X11, t0*. 

ayam manth pratisarah, XII, 30%. (Cf. Athar- 
vaveda, X, 3, 3%; 67; Bloomfield, 107.) 

ayam murdha paramesthi suvarcah, XII, 15° 
(Taittirlya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3°). 

alardo nama jato ’st, XII, 19°. 

Asvinav api nahyatam, XII, 33°. 

Asvinad saraghena mad, XII, 6* (Atharvaveda, 
VI, 69, 2%; IX, 1, 19%, with 7). 


(Several not in Bloomfield.) 


asya vijinam anu sam rabhadhvam, X11, 18* 
(Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4°). 


Adityéso Adityé samvidinah, XII, 14. 

& roha mam mahate saubhagaya, XII, 74; 34% 
(185°). 

& vadami janesu, XII, 64 (Atharvaveda, VI, 
69, 24; IX, 1, 194, with vadani janah anu). 


Indra tva Vrtram prtandasu salhé, XII, 9” 
(cf. 206°). 

Indra?) iva Vriram vi puro ruroja, XI, 10” 
(cf. 206°), 

Indram manvinad Maruto jusanta, X11, 13°. 

Indravatim apacitim tha vaha, XA, 15° (Taitti- 
riya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3°). 

imam pascat anu jivatha sarve, XII, 184 
(Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4°). 

ivramanin bailvam yo bibharti, XII, 204-299. 


ream murdhanam yajusim uttamangam, XIV, 
ro 

rsind ca manisind, XII, 30%. (Cf. Atharvaveda, 
VIII, 5, 8°: rstneva manisind.) 


etasmai rastram abhi sam namantam, XXII, 17% 
(Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4%, with za- 
mama). 


augha (v.1. ogha) iva sapan pra nudat sapatnan, 
PL, ELSES 20%, 


halpeta vahkyam prtanah saheta, XII, 20%. 


Z2 


340 


gosv akvesu yad yasah, XII, 4”. (Cf. gosv asvesu 
yan madhu in Atharvaveda, IX, 1, 18.) 


ghrtad ullupto madhuman payasvan, SOUS GE 
34° (360%). 

jayendra satriin jahi Siva dasyin, XII, 11°. 

jahyat sapatnan svadhitir vaneva, XM, 1 13 

jambo jivaya badhyate, XU, 30°. 


tatah ksatram balam ojas ca jatam, XII, 16° 
(389"). 

tato diksam rsayah svarvidah, X11, 16°. (Cf. 
Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3+) 

tad asmai deva abhi sam namantam, XII, 164 
(394° with zamantz). 

tan mayi Prajapatih, XM, 5°. (Cf. Atharva- 
veda, VI, 69, 3°.) 

tan mahyam sam aduh sarvam ete, GN os 

tam tva sapatnaksayayam, XII, 19°. 

tam pasyanti kavayah svarvidah, XII, Bape 

tena ma varcaséd tvam, XII, 2°. (Cf Atharva- 
veda, III, 22, 3.) 

tvaya pranuttan maghavann amitran, POD By SER 

tvam rudrair hetibhih pinvamanah, XU, 13%. 


divam yaya divam yaya, V,15. (Cf. RV., VIII, 
34, 19: B reads jaya.) 

divam iva drmhatu, X11, 5°. (Cf. Atharva- 
veda, VI, 69, 34: divd dyam iva drmhatu.) 

dyam ma lesth, 1X, 7. (Cf. Vajasaneyi Samhita, 
V, 43, which has Zekhzh ; Bloomfield, 508%.) 


dhanamjayo dharuno dharayisnuh, XII, yes 
34; (Cf 516%.) 

dhata vidhaté paramota samdyk, XII, 17°. 
(From Taittiriya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 3°: it 
occurs also in RV., X, 82, 2%; see Bloom- 
field, 518°.) 


na jambhako napy asuro na yaksah, X11, an 

na makaro na graho na $i(m)sSumarah, X11, 28°. 

na mamsam asnati na hanti tani, X11, 22°. 

na vréciko na tirascinaraji, XII, 28°. 

na svipadam himsati kimcanainam, XII, 26°. 

na sampatantyo(?) na vivesa tasmai, XII, 34°. 

na sa Saptam (2) asnati na kilbisam krtam, Xi, 
21%, 

na sitika tasya grhesu jayate, XXII, 25° 

na sailago bhavati na papakrtyd, X11, 23°. 

na hastinam kruddham upaiti bhitim, X11, 26°. 

nakam eli jidnavidhitapapmad, XIV, 2° (Ni- 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


rukta, I, 184; Comm, on Samhitopanisad, 
p. 38 ed. Burnell). 
naga iva purvapad a \bhyam, XIV, 31°. 
nadhite’dhite vedam ahus tam ajiam, XIV, 1°. 
nanyan mithas tasya kulesu jayate, XIV S23: 
nardhe pramiyeta tared dvisantam, XII, 20°. 
nasminn alaksmih kurute nivesanam, XII, 24°. 
nasya tvacam himsati jatavedah, XII, 22°. 
nasya praja dusyati jayamanda, XII, 23°. 
nasyapavada na pravadaka grhe, XII, 24%. 
nainam rakso na pisaco hinasti, XI, 25°. (Cf. 
Atharvaveda, I, 35, 2°.) 
nainam vyaghro na vrko na dvipi, XII, 26*. 
nainam sarpo na prdakur hinastt, X11, 27°. 
nainam kysno Chir) abhi samhate, X11, 28°. 
nainam kruddham manyavo "bhi yanti(?), 
XII, 22°. 
nainam divyo Varuno hanti bhitam, XU, 21°. 
nainam pramattam Varuno hinaste, XIII, 29°. 


paravarac chivam asmai krnoti, XI, 28°. 

pura siiryat purosasah, XII, 19” (Atharva- 
veda, X, 7, 31>). 

puspam ivachinnam saha bandhanena, XU, 29. 

Prajapatih paramesthi suvarcah, XII, 17°. 
(Cf. 610%.) 

pramayukam tasya dvisantam ahuk, XII, 20° ; 
29%, 


bilvah (bailvah) sahasraviryo ’si, XII, 33°. 

brhad bhavaty ahitam, XII, 2 (Atharvaveda, 
III, 22, 4°, with ahuteh). 

brahmanuttasya maghavan prtanyatah, XI, 
15°. 


bhadram pasyanta upa sedur agan, XII, 16°. 
(Cf. 664”.) 


mayi tad hastivarcasam, XII, 34; 44 (Atharva- 
veda, III, 22, 5°). 

mayi bhargo mayi mahah, X11,5*. (Cf. Gopatha 
Brahmana, I, 5, 15, 16; 17; Bloomfield, 689°, 
690.) 

mayi yajiiasya yad yasah, XII, 5°. 

mahiyatam damstri vardhanesu, XII, toe 

maho vighnana upa yanti (2?) mrtyum, XII,14%. 
(Cf, Atharvaveda, VI, 32, 34; VIII, 8, 21°.) 

ma jratdram asata (?) ma pratistham, XII, 14°. 
(Cf. Atharvaveda, VI, 32, 3°; VIII, 8, 21°.) 

mé te bharta risam aham, XI, 33°. 


INDEX II 


aC Ca Vaca VA Puruse, XII, 3°. 

yac ca hastisv &hitam, XIII, 3°. 

yat te varco jatavedah, XII, 2°. (Atharvaveda, 
III, 22, 4%.) 

yatha madhumatim vacam, XII, 6°. 

yatha sapatnan samare saheyuh, XI, 324. 

yad aksesu hiranyesu, X11, 4%. (Cf. 729°.) 

yad Adityai tanvah sambabhiiva, XII, . (Cf. 
Atharvaveda, III, 22, 1.) 

yo ’rthajita it sakalam bhadram afnute, X1V, 2° 
(Nirukta, I, 18°; Comm. on Samhitopanisad, 
p- 38 ed. Burnell). 


(Cf. 729°.) 


rujan sapatnan adharams ca krnvan, XII, 7°, 
34°. 
rohobhyam rohobhyam abhyaritham (?), X, 8. 


vanaspate Satavalfo vi roha, IX, 7 (Vajasaneyi 
Samhita, V, 43; also in KV., III, 8, 114, &c.). 

vatesu nas tigmajambho’nu marsti, XII, 91. 

vi ursca pascat prati Sira vrs$ca, XII, 12", (Cf. 
899°.) 

visvag Indra bhangah patantu, XII, 15>. (Cf. 
894, 895%.) 

Vriram hatveva kulisena [vi] vr$ca, XII, 11°. 

vedatho vistambhajambhanam, XII, 19%, 


341 


Satéyur asmik jaradastih praitt, XII, 22°. 

Satriyatam & bharé bhojanant, XII, 104 (RV., 
V, 4, 5°; Bloomfield, 916), 

Sivas chittudsau kurute kabandham, X1V, 14. 

Stira (2) risantam Maruto’nu yantu, XM, 124. 


sajatanam uttamasloko astu, XVI, 154. 

sapatnaksayano usa, XII, 32° (970°). 

sam anktaim (?) madhuna payah, X11, 6*. 

sahasva prtanayatah, XII, 31 (1004"). 

sahendra dvisatah sahasvaratih, X11, 31*. 

samnam Siro’ tharvanam uttamangam, X1V,1», 

suparnah kankah pramysantv enan, XII, 14°. 

surayam piyamanayam, XII, 4°. (Cf. Atharva- 
veda, XIV, 1, 35>.) 

suvarne gosu yad varcah, XII, 3°. 

stomam. chandamsi nivido ma ahuh, XII, 17° 
(Taittirlya Samhita, V, 7, 4, 4°, with s¢omdé, 
which perhaps should be stoma, but see 
J.R.A.S., 1909, p. 430). 

sthanur ayam bharaharah kilabhit, XIV, 2* 
(Nirukta, I, 18*; Comm. on Samhitopanisad, 
p- 38 ed. Burnell). 


hastivarcasam prathatam brhadvayah, X11, 1* 
(Atharvaveda, III, 22, 1°, with drhad yasah). 


INDEX Ill 


PROPER NAMES, EXCLUDING THOSE OF DEITIES, FOR WHICH 
SEE INDICES IV-VI. 


Agastyah, I, 2, 2. 
Atrayah, II, 2, 1. 


Agastyah, UI, 1,1; $. VU, 2. 
Agnivesyayanah, V, 3, 3- 
Arunayah, Ml, 1, 4. 


Revedah, 1, 3, 2; (acc.) TI, 2, 3; S. VIIL 3; 
(gen.) III, 2, 5; $. VIU, 8. 


Kéavaseyah, II, 2, 6; §. VII, rz. 

Krsnaharitah, VU, 2, 6 (v.1.°haritah). (Krtsna- 
haritah), S. VII, 10. 

Kauntharavyah, VW, 1, 6; 2, 2; §. VII, 14; 
VU, 2. 

Ksudrasuktah, I, 2, 2. 


Galavah, V, 3, 3- 
Grtsamadah, Il, 2, 1. 


Cerapadah (2), Il, 1, 1. 


Jatikarnyah,V, 1,53 3, 3- (Katydyaniputrah), 
§. VIII, 10. ; 
Téruksyah,\I1,1,6(v.1.Zarksyah); Tarksyah, 

Tarksyam, 1, 5,2. (Larksyah), §. VII, 19. 


Dirghatamasah (gen.), V, 3, 2. 


Paiicalacandah, Ill, 1, 6; §. VIL, 18, 
Pavamanyah, Il, 2, 2. 
Pragathah, Il, 2, 2. 
Pratibodhiputrah, WWI, 1,5. (Pratiyodhipu- 
trah), S. VII, 13. 


Badhvah, Wl, 2, 3. (Vats(y)ak), S, VIL, 33 4- 


Bharadvijah, 1, 2,23 4, 25 II, 2, 23 Bhara- 
dvijapristhah,V, 2,2; Bharadvajaya, Il, 


2, 4- 
Bharadvajam, I, 2, 2; (ace.) I, 2, 2. 


Madhuchandah, I, 1, 3; (gen-) 1,1, 35 Ma- 
dhuchandastvam, I, 1, 3. 


-Mahasiktah, il, 2, 2. 


Mahidaisa Aitareyah, 11, 1, 8; 3, 7- 
Maksavyah, WI, 1,1; (Mandavyah), S. VU, 2. 
Mandikeyah, Ul, 1, 1; Méandikeyanam, 
iON eee §. VII, 2; Mandikeyzyam (acc. 
masc.), III, 2, 6; S. VIU, 11. 
Madhuchandasam, I, 1, 3; (ace.) I, 1, 3- 
Madhyamah, Il, 2, 1. 


Yajurvedah, I, 3, 2; (acc.) III, 2, 3; S. VIL, 
33 (gen.) III, 2, 5; S. VILL, 8. 


Vangavagadhah (?), Il, 1, 1. 

Vayamisi (2), Il, 1, I. 

Vasisthah, 1, 4,23 5,23 Il, 2,23 4; Vasi- 
sthaprasahah, V, 2, 2. 

eins I, 2, 2; Vasukrat, 1, 2,2; (nom.) 

eas 

Vamadevah, Il, 2,13 5; S. I,2; °devyah, S.1,2. 

Vasisthena, I, 5, 2. 

Vasukram, I, 2, 2; §. I, 3; (ace.) §. RGR 
Vasukrena, I, 2, 2. 

Visvamitrah, 1,2, 2; Il, 2, 13 §. VII, asd, 
2; (voc.) S.1, 6; Vesvamitram, Il, 2, 3; 
Visvametraya, Il, 2, 4. 

Vaisvamitram, I, 2, 2; Il, 2, 3. 


Zz 
Satarcinah, II, 2, I. 


INDEX III 


Sakalyah, see Sthavirah ; Sékalyasya, II, 1, 1; 
§. VII, 3. 

Sarkaraksyah, U1, 1, 4. 

Saraviro Mandiikeyah, Ill, 1, 13 33 4. (Sau- 
vaviro), §. VII, 23 83 9; Io. 


Be 


Samavedah, I, 3, 2; (ace.) III, 2, 3; S. VIL, 3; 
(gen.) III, 2, 5; S. VIII, 8. 


Sthavirah Sakalyah, UW, 2,1; 6; §, VII, 16; 


VILE 1 3CEr, 


Hiranyadan Vaidah, II, 1, 5. 


The following other proper names occur in the Sankhayana Aranyaka. 


Ajatasatrum Kasyam, V1, 1; Ajatasatruh, VI, 
1, &c. 
Atharvanam, XIV, I. 


Arunim, Ul, 1; see also Uddalaka. 
Arunikeyah, VII, 1. 


Uddilakah, Uddalakat, XV. 
Uddalakah Arunih, Uddalakad Aruneh, XV. 
Usinaresu, V1, 1. 


Kaholah Kausitakih, Kaholat Kausitakeh, XV. 

Kasividehesu, V1, 1. 

Kurupaticalesu, VI, i. 

Kausitakih, Ul, 17; 1V,1; 7; (gen.) Sarvajzto, 
EY, 7. 


Gargyo Balakth, V1, t, &c. 

Gunakhyah Sankhayanah, XV ; (abl.) XV. 
Gosrutavaiyaghrapadyaya, IX, 7. 

Gautama, V1, 1; (gen.) VI, 1. 


Citro Gangyayanih (v.1. Gargy°), III, 1; (acc.) 
iit, i. 

Janakah, VI, t. 

Jératkéra(va)h Artabhagah; VH, 20. 

Tandavind(av)asya, VIII, 10. 

Dirghah (Mandikeyah), VU, 2. 


Dirghatama Mamateyah, V1, 17; (dat.) 11,17. 
Devaratah, XV ; (abl.) XV. 


Punardattah, VII, 8. 
Paingyah, 1V, 2. 


Pauskarasddth, VII, 7 (cf. Max Miiller, Reveda 
Pratisakhya, p. 6; Panini, VIII, 4, 48). 

Prativesyah, XV; (abl.) XV. 

Priyavratah Saumapih, XV; (abl.) XV. 

Brhaddivah, XV ; (abl.) XV. 

Bhargavah, Vil, 15. 

Magadhavas?, VII, 2. 

Matsyesu, VI, 1. 

Madhyamo(Mandikeyah) Magadhavasi,V MU, 2. 

Mandavyah, VIi, 2. 

Vajitavalkyah, 1X, 7; XII. 

Radheyah, VU, 7. 

Lauhikyah (2), VII, 22. 


Vats(y)ah, VIII, 3; 4 (Badhvah in Aitareya). 
Valisikhayaneh, VII, 21. 

Visvamanah, XV; (abl.) XV. 

Vyasvah, XV ; (abl.) XV. 


Suskabhrngirah, TV, 6° (ck Srauta Sitra, 
KV IES 53): 

Svetaketum, Xl, 1. 

Satyakamo Jabalah, IX, 7. 

Satvanmatsyesu (so Max Miiller and Cowell, 
S.B.E., 1, \xxvii for savasanmatyesu; more 
probably savafa°, as Oldenberg), VI, 1. 

Sakamasvah, XV; (abl.) XV. 

Sumnayuh, XV ; (abl.) XV. 

Suryadattah, VII, 5. 

Somapah, XV ; (abl.) XV. 

Saumah Prativesyah, XV; (abl.) XV. 


INDEX IV 


WORDS OCCURRING IN VERSES OTHER THAN RGVEDIC, 
NIVIDS, PRAISAS, ETC. 


(When the case or gender is ambiguous, it is nom. or masc. unless otherwise specified. 


Words are given in their forms 27 fausa. 
intervene.) 


Prefixes are connected with the verb, unless words 


A. In Aitareya Aranyaka and parallel passages in Sankhayana Aranyaka. 


adksitam, V, 3, 2. 

agnth, V, 1,1; agné 37, 1V,1. 

agnijihvah, V, 1, 1. 

ati (with acc.), IV, 1; V, 2, I. 

atichandasa, V, 1, 4. 

adrivah, IV, lI. 

ddvayah, IV, 1. 

ddhysah, V, 2, 1 (prob. w.r. for adh? se). 

dnu (with acc.), IV, 1; V, 1, 1. 

dntah, V, 3, 2- 

antariksam, V, 1, 1. 

annam, V,1, 1. 

dnnasubhe (?), V, 3, 2- 

anyésu, IV, I. 

dpardzitam (acc.), IV, 1. 

apinam, V,1, 4; apdnaya, V, I, 4. 

apurvam, V, 1,1. 

dprativadah, V, 3, 2. 

abhdyam (acc. neut.), V, 3, 2. 

abhtstibhih, IV, 1. 

amum, V,1, 5. 

dmyrktah, V, 2, 2. 

amptam, V, 3, 2; (acc.) ib.; (gen.) ib. 

ayiitaksaram (nom. or acc. neut.), V, 3, 2. 

arkdm, V, 2,2; drkah, V, 2,2 (perhaps w.r. 
for svarkah). 

arc: drcanti, V, 2, 2. 

arvak, V, 3, 2. 

“Nav: avatu, avatim, avantu, V, 1,1; avit, 
Visi) die 

avratdm (acc. masc.), V, 2, 2. 

CSET EET OR PI. CRN TRH Vig OR OG 
astu, 1, 3, 4. 


Vas: séninyase (? stnyase), IV, I. 

ahim, V,1,1; 5; 5-1, 7; asmasu, I, 4, 3. 

ahar, V,1,1. 

@, IV, 1; (with loc.) V, 2, 1. 

atmad, V,1, 2; (instr.) V, I, 5. 

adityah, Ved bs24s S$. L, be 

anustubhena, V,1, 43 S. I, 7. 

ap: apyadsam, V, 3,2 (the ref. to /pyaz is 
corrected in Whitney, Roots, &c., pp. 248, 
249); andpyam, V, 1, I. 

adpah, V, 1, 1. 

abhih, IV, i. 

aydtanam, V, 3; 2 

dyuh (ace:), Vy 35 \2- 

Grdjas(?), V, 2, 1 (perhaps w.r. for drdzjas (?)). 

Vi: imahe,V, 2,2; chi, V,1,13 2%pehi, IV, % 

“lam, V, 2, 2. 

2A G72 IN, PE hTisH 2,105 A(ACC, LV Rea esas 

inch, WV. i250: 

Lndrah, 1V,13 V, 1,13 2,13 23 3,13 23 (acc.) 
IV, 1; V, 2, 1; (dat.) V, 2, 2; (gen.) V, 2, 

OG (voc.) V, 2, 2; with p/udz, IV, 1. 

Lndrajyestham, V, 3, 2 (accent dubious). 

wmam, V,1,1; 53 imam, V,1, 5. 

£0G, Vi, Eo Xe 

ésam, V, 2,2; tsé, IV, 1. 

thd, III, 2, 5; V, 2, 25 3, 2. 

Vinkh: anuprenkhasva, anvinkhasva, anu- 
vinkhasva, V,1, 4. 

t0t, V 552, Fe 

Air: airayata, 1, 3, 4. 

Wis: ife, IV, 1; tfise, V, 2,2; Hand, II, 2, 5. 


INDEX IV 


ty TV, tT. 

uktha (voc.), V, 3, 2 

ukthasah, V, 3, 2. 

uté va, V, 1, I. 

uttarah, V, 1, 2; #¢taram (nom. neut.), V, 3, 2. 
udabhisiktah, V, 1, 1 (dubious accent), 

wpa (with loc.), V, 2, 2; zo, IV, 1. 


utdye, IV, I. 
udhah, V, 3, 2 
Vath: uduhami, V,1, 4. 


W177: ritjdse, WV, 1. 
ryist, V, 2, 1. 
erame Leas VG 3 2 
rbhuh, V, 2,1 


ékah, V, 2, 2 

etah, V, 3, 2 

eva, IV, 1; V, 1, 13 eva, I, 3, 4. 
évath, V, 2, 1. 

esdh, V, 2,1 


Gjasa, V, 2, 2 
osadhayah, V, 1, I. 
osthapidhand, Il, 2, 5. 


ausnihena, V, 1, 4; S. I, 7. 


Rdrma, V, 3, 2 

kaman, Rise ge 

Ririzh, V, 1, 5- 

&ulidantaih (so comm., but see zahulz), III, 2,5. 

wv kr : krnuhi, kdrtana, V, 2, 2; harisyantim, 
36 Bee at 8. 

hratuh, IV, 1. 

ksatram, V, 1,1. 

NV ksi: kstydntah, V, 2, 2. 

WViksi: dksitam, V, 2, 2 


/ gam: gachatt, 1V, 1; gachanlim, V, 1, 5. 
garuiman, V, 1,53 S. is. 

ga: pra-gadyata, V, 2, 2 

gatim, IV, 1. 

gathdm, V, 2,1. 

gayatrena, V,1, 43 §. 1, 8; (dat.) V, 1, 2. 
gavah, V,1, I. 

Ver: grnddhyai, V, 2, %. 

gébhagam, V, 3, 2 

gésu, IV, I. 

grivah (acc.), I, 4, 3 

ghosah, V,1, 5. 


345 


cm, V5 I; 8 

cdksuh, V, 1,53 3, 
candramah, V, 1, 1. 
AV cit: ctkitvah, IV, 1; pré cetaya, IV, t. 


chanddh, IV, 1; (instr.) V, 1, 4; S.4, 73 (in 
SV., chdndah is read.) 


2; (gen.) V, 3, 2 


Jadnasya, IV, 1; (loc. plur.) V, 2, 1. 
A jus: jiujosat, V, 2, 2 

jétaram, IV, 1. 

johiitrah, V5 43 

ivbtib, V, 3, 2. 


tanuh, I, 3, 4; tanum, 1,3, 43 tanvah (gen.), 
I, 3, 45 tanvam, I, 3, 4 

tém, IV, 1; V, 2,13 23 ¢éna (neut.), V, 3, 2; 

te, S.I, 7; tan,V,1, 4;S. I, 75 tabhil, V, 3) 2+ 

price Wieser 

tavdstamah, V, 2, 1. 

tivrasutam (ace. mee) EMBERS: 

tujah (gen.?), V, 2, 1 

A trp: trpyatu, V, 3, 2 

tGah, V, 3, 2 

trdyah, V, 3, 2 

traisiubhena (n.), V, 1, 43 §. Te 

taHE AV, T} Vi, 2, 23 ta, Vg I 45 25233 Si Wie 
Ze(dat.), Vy, 23,85, (Ren: Ik VG. 0s Vy. 1y aaeoyr ae 


daksinah, V, 1, 2. 

dantath, III, 2, 5. 

Vda: dadatu, V, 2, 13 ? widah, IV, 1. 

dtsah (acc.), IV, 1. 

Vduh: duhaim, V,3, 2; dhuksva, V, 3, 2; di- 
hanam, V, 3, 2 

devdtasu, V, 2, 2 (perhaps w.r. for devdtah sv°). 

devih, V,1,1; 4; deva3h, IV, 1. 

devi, V, 1,13 3, 2 

dyaviprthivi, V, 1, 1. 

dyumnaya, 1V, I. 

dyauh, V, 1, I. 

dvisah (acc.), IV, 1. 

dvaipadena (n.), V, I, 4. 


dhdnasya, 1V, 1. 

dha: ddhehi, 1V, 1; dhimdhe, V, 2, 2. 

WV dhy : dharayasi, I, 4, 3. 

A dhys: ddadharsa(?),V, 2, 1; dadhysandm, V, 
2,1; dhysitdm, V,2, 1; anadhrsyah, aprati- 
dhysyah, V,%, 1 

dhent, V, 3, 2 


346 


na, V,2,13 23 (ofcomparison) II, 2, 5 (dub., 
see 2akult). 

wah (acc.), IV, 1; (dat.) V, 1,15 2,15 25 
(gen.) IV, 1; V, 2, 1. 

nakuli (2), Il, 2, 5. 

ndksatrath, V, 1, 1. 

namah, V,\, 2. 

ndvyam (m. or n.), IV, 1. 

ni: abhi-naya, WV, 1; suprdyite, V, 2; 2 
(dubious use and accent). 

nundm,1V,1; V, 2, 2- 

n¢tamah, V, 2, 2. 

netiram, V, 2, I. 


paksah, V,1, 2. 

Av pat: patisyantim, V, 1, 5- 

patih, V, 2,1; (voc.) IV, 1. 

padim, V, 2, 2. 

parak, V; 3, 2+ 

parvatesthih, Nea. 

pavih, III, 2, 5. 

pasun, V, 3, 2. 

pinktena, V, 1, 4. 

pitérah, V,1,1. 

A pinv: pinvati, V, 3, 2 (accent dubious). 

AV pib: plba, IV, 1; piba, V, 1, I. 

pisdingasamdrsam, V, 2, 1 (v.1. °sadys$an),. 

pivarim, V, 2, 2. 

pucham, V,1, 2. 

punarbhih, V, 1,1; °bhuval, V, 1, 1 

puré, V, 2,13 2. 

puruviram, V, 2,1. 

purivaso, IV, 1. 

Ps pus: pisyantah, V, 2, 2. 

pirtth, IV, 1. 

pirvam (nom. neut.), V, 3, 2; (gen. masc.) 
IV, I. 

piirvinam, VN 5% 

purvdhitau, V, I, 1. 

Pisd, V, 1, 13 Pisa 32, IV, 1. 

AV pr: parsat, IV, 1. 

prthivi, V, 1, 1. 

prthivyupardm, V, 3, 2 (accent and reading 
dubious). 

Prsnimatarah, V, 1, ¥. 

praksé, V, 2, 2 (v. 1. «epaprakse). 

pracetana, IV, 1. 

prajam, V, 3, 2. 

Prajipatih, V, 3, 2. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


prati (with acc.), V, 2, I. 

prdtistha, V, 1,25 3, 2. 

prabhuh, V, 1,1 (v.1. prabhith); (voc.) IV, 1. 

prabhih (v1. prabhuh), V, 1, 1. 

prastobha, V, 2, 2 (more prob. pra + A stubl). 

prandh, V,31,53 3, 23 (aces) V, 1,45 3, 235 
(dat.) V, 1, 45 3,25 (gen.) V, 3, 2- 

priyah, V, 1,1. 


bahu (acc.), V, 1, 53 (abl.) V, 1, 5; Sie: 

barhatena, V, 1, 4. 

brhdt, 1V,1; V,2,13 orhate (name of Saman), 
Vi35 2. 

Brhaspitih, V, 1%; 1. 

bréhma, V,1, 13 (acc.) V, 3, 25 (voc.) V, 3, 2+ 

brahmavarcasdm (acc.), V, 3, 2- 

brahmandbhartrkam (nom. neut.), V, 3, 2 
(accent dubious). 

WV bri: sam-bravavahai, IV, I. 


bhagah, V, 1, 5. 

bhadraya (name of Saman), V, 1, 2. 

bhargah, V,1, 5. 

bhuktih, V, 1, 5. 

bhujah, V, 1, 5- 

bhivah (indecl.), V, 1, 45 3» 2. 

AV bhi: bhuvah, WV, 1; bhiyasam, V, 1,1; bhit- 
tdm (acc. neut.), V, 1,1; bhkutebhyah (dat.), 
V,1, 4; vébhitam (nom. neut.), V, 3, 2+ 

bhitayah, V, 3, 2. 

bhityah (ace.), V, 1,53 $.1, 8. 

bhith (indecl.), V, 1, 43 3, 2+ 

AV bhy : abhara, V, 2, 2. 

bhesajam, I, 3, 4. 


mamhisthah, 1V, 1; V, 2,13 23 (voc.) IV, I. 

maghdm, V, 2, 2; (dat.) V, 2, 1. 

maghavan, 1V,1; maghénam, IV, I. 

/ mad: matsva, 1V,1; matsvd, V, 2,1. 

madam, V, 2,1. 

madhu, V,1, 1. 

midhumatt, V, 2, 2. 

man: manydaya, VV, t (accent dubious). 

mdnah, V, 1,13 (gen.) 3, 2; (instr.) V, 1,53 
(abl.) 3, 2. 

manydve, IV, I. 

maricayah, V, 1, 1. 

Mariutah, V, 1, 1. 

/ mah: mahdyamah, V, 2, 1. 

mahan, V1, 5; mahat, V, 3, 25 mahin, V5.85-26 


INDEX IV 


man, II, 2,53 V, 1,13 5.3 md, V,1,1; me 
(dat.), V, 3,23; weayz, V, 1, 5. 

Mitravdrunau, V,1, 1}; 2,2. 

mithunam, V, 1,1. 

mtirdhd, V, 3, 2. 

A mrj: dmrktah, V, 2, 2. 


yah, IV, 1; V, 1,23 yd, V, 1, 23 ydd, IV, 13 
V, 1, 2; ydm, V, 2, 2; ydsya (masc.), V, 2,15 
¥é, V, 1, 15 3, 2- 

a/yaj : yajamahe, V, 3, 2; yaja, V, 3,23 33 ¥a- 
jamanam, V,1, 5. 

ydjatrah, V, 1,1. 

yajndh, V, 1, 13 (ace.) V, 1, 55 2, I. 

yajnasamyddhim, V, 3, 2 (accent dubious). 

yat (when), I, 3,4; V, 2, 1; (so that) V, 2, 2. 

yadi, V, 2,2. 

yam: yachatu, V, 1,1. 

yasah, V, 1,53 (acc.) V, 3, 2. 

ya: aythi, IV, 1; upayahi, V, 2,1. 

yujah, V, 2,1. 

yuva, V, 2, 2. 


vantyam, V, 2,1. 

rayim, V, 2,1; 23; (nom.) 2. 

rayiséni, V, 2, 2 (reading dubious). 

rdsah, V, 1, 13 3,23 (acc.) V; 3, 2. 

A raj: virdjati, V, 3, 1; vi-rajasi, I, 4, 3- 

rajanaya (name of Saman), V, 1, 2. 

raja, V, 3,23 rajanah, V, 1, 1. 

vatrih, V, 1,1. 

rathantaraya, V,1, 2 

raye, IV, 1; (gen.) IV, 1. 

Rudrah, \V, 1, 4. 

A ruh: anvarohami, V,1, 43 §.1, 73 ao- 
hantu, V, 1, 43 §.I, qe 

riipam, V,1,1. 


J likh: ullikhami, V, 1, 4: 
lokim, V, 3, 2; (loc.) V;1,1; (gen. plur.) V, 
a, i 


vah, V, 2, 2. 

A vac: vaksyantim, V,1, 53 §. I, 8. 

vajrin, IV, \. 

vajrivah, IV, i. 

vad: pra-vadisyimi,V, 1,53 §. 1,8; va- 
disyantim, V, 1, 5; vadayet, UI, 2,5. 

vanam (?), V, 2, 1. 


347 


Vérunah, V, 1, 1. 

Vdrunavayvitamam, V, 3, 2 (accent and 
reading dubious), 

varsdpavitram, V, 3, 26 

vdsait, IV, 1. 

vast, IV, 1. 

vdsuh, V, 2, 1; vaso, IV, 1; Vasavah, V, 1, 4. 

AV vah, cf. uh: udiihaimi, V,1, 4. 

va-va, V, 2, 2. 

vakprabhitam, V, 3, 2 (accent dubious). 
Zz . 

Duo NG ta bs 5 5) 35 2 3 (aces) Vin ty 5 ¥ Ose) 
V,. Tes geen, TEL, 3) 83. Vy 3, 2s 

vajaya, IV, 1; vajandm, IV, 1. 

vajasitaye, V, 2, 2. 

vam, V, 2,1. 


‘wayuth, V, 1,1 


vigahadk, V, 2,1. 

vijdrah (?), V, 2, I. 

vijigyandm (accent dubious), V, 3, 2. 

vid: vida, IV, 1 (or védah); vide, IV, 13 
vidvan, V, 2, 2. 

viprah, V, 2, 2. 

vibhuh, V, 3, 23 vibhu, V, I, I. 

vibhitayah, V, 3, 2. 

vivacanam, V, 3, 2. 

visam, V, 3, 2. 

visvam (acc. neut.), V, 1, 13 3, 13 2; véisoasya, 
Wedd sy ONUep VT Lads 

visvatah, V, 2, 2. 

visudtodavan, V, 2, 2 (perhaps w.r. for vésva- 
todavan). 

visvddha, IV, I. 

Visnd 3 1, V5 Fe 

Nor: partortd, Ill, 2, 5. 

vrtrahdtyesu, V, 2, 1. 

vrtrahan, IV, 1. 

vrtrahdntamaya, V, 2, 2. 

AV vrs: varsatu, V, 3, 2. 

védah, V, 3, 23 (gen. plur.) V, 3, 2. 

vat, I, 4, 3- 

vairajena (n.), V, I, 4« 

vyathth, V, 2,1. 

vyanam, V, 1, 43; (dat.) V, 1, 4 

vyoma, V, 3, 2. 


Sakréh, IV, 1. 
$dcinam, IV, i. 
§atriin, V, 2, 1. 
$dm, V, 2, 2 


348 


Sarma (acc.), V, 1, 1. 

Sdvah, V, 2, 1. 

S§dvisthah, IV, 1; (acc.) V, 2,23 (voc.) IV, 1. 

sams: dnusamsisah, IV, 1; $Sasydte, IV, ¥ 
(accent doubtful). 

$dsvadbhih, V, 2, 1. 

MV siks : Stksd, IV, 1. 

Szrah, No 2;t 

Sirah, LV, 1; (gen. plur.) IV, 1. 

Srih, V, 1, 83 (ace.) V, 3, 23 Sréydm, V, 1, 

V$ru: Srutéh, V, 2, 2. 

$rétram, V, 1,53 3, 23 (gen.) V, 3, 2. 

Slokah, V, 1, 5. 

$lokabhuh, V, 1, 1. 


Sd, UV, tga 2, 15 2: 

sdmvesah, V, 3, 2. 

sakha, IV, i. 

satydm, V, 3, 23 satydsammitant, V, 3, 2 (accent 
dubious). 

san: sanisyantim, V,1, 5. 

sanat, V, 2, 2. 

saptd, V, I, I. 

sdpru, V, 3, 2. 

sam, V, 1, 5. 

sdmajah, V, 2,1. 

sdmbhavah, V, 3, 2. 

sdérvam (nom. neut.), V, 3, 2; (acc. neut.) V, 3, 
23 sdrvasmat (neut.), V, 3, 2; sdrvan, V, 3, 
2; sarvasyaz (gen.), III, 2, 5. 

salilim, V, 3, 2. 

sdhah, V, 2, I. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


sahdsvadharam, V, 3, 2 (nom. or acc. neut.). 

satdye, IV, I. 

sahdtuh (?), V, 2, I. 

sic: udabhisiktéh, V, 1, 1 (dubious accent). 

su: sutdh, V, 2, 1. 

suparnah, V, 1, 5. 

sumné, IV, I. 

suviryam (acc.), 1V, 1 

susévah, IV, 1. 

susada, V,1, 1. 

suhdvah (or voc.?), V, 1, I. 

suryah, V, I, 1. 

A/ Sx]: SasY 7, V, 3, 2 

sémah, Viz Ey i 12,13 wages 2cuceena as 
3, 2. 

a stu: stuse, IV, 1 (or stesé). 

A stubh: astobhati, V, 2,2; prastobha, ib. 

stobhah, V, 1, 5. 

stomah, V, 1, 5. 

AV spr: sprsat, V, 2, 2. 

sridhah (acc.), IV, I. 

svam, V, 1,13; svam, I, 3, 4. 

svah, S. Hi, Ais 03, 2 aKAce.)) Vig Lyn 

svarét, V, 2, 2. 

svarkih, V, 1, 13; and perhaps 2, 2. 


V han: aghnanah, V, 1, 1. 

EZIN,, DV oeeas 

Whi: hinoti, V, 2, 2. 

hu: havamahe, IV, 1. 

hfdayasya, V, 3) 2. 

h?dayégram, V, 3, 2 (accent dubious). 


B. In Sankhayana Aranyaka and the Santi verses in the Aitareya Aranyaka (A). 


akamah, XI, 8. 

aksesu, XII, 4. 

Agnih, XI, 6; XII, 9; (acc.) XI, 18; (loc.) 
3G Ry GO 

ajnam (acc.), XIV, 1. 

Atharvanam, XIV, 1. 

atho, XII, 19. 

Aditya, XII, 1; Adityai (abl. or gen.), XII, 1. 

adharan, XII, 7 3 34. 

adhipatih, XII, 18. 

anuvadi, XII, 10. 

antariksam (acc.), IX, 7. 

annam, XI, 8. 

annavan, XI, 6; 8. 

annadah, XI, 6; 8. 


anyat (nom.), XII, 23. 

apacttim, XII, 15. 

apavadah, XII, 24. 

apanah, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 5. 

amitran, XII, 12. 

amrtam, XII, 32. 

ayah, XI, 8. 

ayam, XIV, 2; anena, VII, 1; XII, 10; 30; 
A. II, 7; asmai, XII, 28°; asya, XII, 39, &c.; 
asmin, XII, 24. 

aratih, XII, 31. 

arkah, I, 4. 

artham, XIV, 2. 

arthajhah, XIV, 2. 

ardhe, XII, 20. 


INDEX IV 


alaksmih, X11, 24. 

alardah, XII, 19 (of doubtful form and mean- 
ing; cf. perhaps arafu (Lex.), aradu (AV.): 
but perhaps it may be from 77 (cf. a/artz, 
RV., VII, 48, 8), for adar-ta (like vavd-ta, 
Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, p. 442; Mac- 
donell, Vedic Grammar, p. 120, n. 5), the 
tenuis becoming a media (cf. Macdonell, 
p. 22) and meaning ‘ active one’. Or a/aja?). 

a/av: avatu, VII, 1; A. I, 7. 

aS: afnati, XII, 21; XIV, 2. 

HW as: asiya, X1,8; afata, X11, 14 (doubtful, the 
MS. reading is ma jaataram Satamah prati- 
sthah, and I amend to afa¢a to give sense and 
metre). 

asma, XI, 8. 

asvesu, XII, 4. 

Afvinau, XII, 33. 

as: asi, XII, 33; astu, VII, 1; KID TES 
A. II, 7; sthah, A. I, 7. 

asau, XIV, 1; imam, XII, 18. 

asurah, XII, 25. 

aham, XII, 33- 

ahoratran, VI, 1; A. II, 7. 


akasah, XI, 5; 6; ani, A. II, 7. 
atichandasena, XI, 8. 

atma, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 
Adityasah, XII, t. 

anustubhena, XI, 8. 

aGpah, XI, 5; 6. 

ayuh (acc.), XI, 8. 

ayusman, XI, 8. 

arolharah, §.I, 7. 

Gvir avir, VU,1; A. TI, 7 (av7r, in second case). 
Ghuh, XII, 20; 29; XIV, I. 


Ji: eti, XIV, 25 praiti, XII, 2; adhite, 
XIV, 1; adhitya, XIV, 2; adhitena (neut.), 
VII, 1; A. Il, 7; samarpaya, XII, 15. 

Indrah, XI, §;6; X11, 9; 10; 30; (voc.) XII, 31. 

Indravatim, XII, 15. 

iramanim, XII, 20-29. 

iva, XI, 8; XII, 9; 10; 29. 

isiram, VII,1; IX, 1; A. II, 7. 

tha, XII, 15. 


inkh: prenkhayatu, 1, 7. 
I$anah, XI, 5; 6. 


349 


uttama‘Tokah, XII, 15. 
uttamangam (acc.), XIV, I. 
udanah, X1, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 
uparistat, XII, 12. 

usasah (abl.), XII, 19. 


ream, XIV, I. 

rtam (acc.), VII, 1; A.II, 7; (? nom.) VII, 
re AG I 7 

rsind, XII, 30; rsayah, XII, 16. 


oghah, XII, 11; 29. (The older form is 
aughah, and this may best be read here.) 
ojah, XII, 16. 


ausnihena, XI, 8, 


kaksam, XII, 9- 

kankah, X11, 14. Cf. Ind. Stud., XIII, 264, n, 

hkabandham (ace.), XIV, 1. 

kavayah, XII, 32. 

kakubhena, XI, 8. 

ila, XII, 10; XIV, 2. 

kilbisam, XII, 21. 

kultsena, XII, 11. 

kulesu, XII, 23. 

kr: Rurute, XU, 29; XIV, 1; &rnoti, XII, 
28; uru, XII, 2; Arnvan, XII, 7; 343 
krtam, XII, 26. 

ky snah (ahth), XII, 28. 

WV kip: kalpeta, X11, 20. 

MV krudh: kruddham, X11, 21; 26. 

ksatram, XII, 16. 


“ga: agan (MSS, °dn), presumably a plural 
form of the imperfect of ga as a second 
class verb (cf. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, 
§§ 855, 621, but if soa lateform, The other 
texts have agre), XII, 16; agat, XII, 32 (in 
both cases probably with true aorist effect). 

gayatrena, XI, 8. 

grhe, XII, 24; grhesu, XII, 25. 

gosu, XII, 35 4- 

A grath: udgrathani, XI, 8. 

granthis, XI, 8; (acc.) XI, 8. 

grahah, XU, 28. 


ghytat, XU, 75 34- 


caksuh, VII, 1; IX, 1; A. U, 7; XI, 6; (loe.) 
le Bs Oe 


35° 
candramah, XI, 5; 6. 


chandémst (ace.), XII, 17; chandasa, XI, 8. 
A chid: chittod, XIV, 1; chinnam, XII, 29. 


A jan: jayate, X11, 23; 25; sjayamana, XM, 
23; jatah, XII, 19; salam, XII, 16 (neut. 
nom.). 

janesu, XII, 6. 

jambhakah, XII, 25 (cf. Vajasaneyi Samhita, 
XXX, 6, &c.). 

jaradastih, XM, 2. 

Jagatena, XI, 8. 

jatavedah, XII, 22; °vedah, XII, 2. 

jambah, XU, 30 (cf. Unadi Sitra, IV, 95; 96: 
presumably it denotes some special shrub or 
tree), : 

ji: jaya, XII, 11, and II, 17 (?). 

jivaya, XII, 30. 

jiu: anu-jivatha, X1MI, 18. 

A jus: jusanta, XII, 13. 

A jiia: vijanatt, XIV, 2. 

jiianavidhitapapma, XIV, 2. 

jyotisim, VII, 1; IX, 1; A. II, 7. 


tam, XI1,19; ¢ad(nom.), XII, 3; 4; (acc.) XII, 
4; tasya (masc.), XII, 20; 29. 

tanvah (abl.), XII, 1. 

tigmajambhah, XII, 9. 

térascinaraji, XII, 28 (reading doubtful: the 
MS. B has ¢ivaSct na ra@jé which would easily 
give tirasct na raja if ¢ivasct could mean 
‘animal’ and if ra@@ were naturally intro- 
duced here (cf. p.161). But ¢2vaScinarai= 
snake occurs several times in the Atharvaveda 
(e.g. III, 27, 2), and the temptation to read 
°rajth or rajt (as a parallel form) is very 
great). 

trptch, XI, 8. 

AV t¥: taret, XII, 20. 

traistubhena, XI, 8. 

tvacam, XII, 22. 

tvam, XII,.13; tvd, XII, 19; ¢e, XII, 33. 


damstri, XII, 13. (The usual form is damstra, 
Panini, ITI, 2, 182, and Gana.) 

A dabh: adabdham, VII, 1; 1X, 1; A. I, 7. 

dasytin, XXII, 11. 

dé: samaduh, XI, 1. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


divyah, XII, 21. 

disah, X1, 5; 6. 

diksdm, XU, 16; dikse, VII, 1; IX, 1; A. Tl, 7. 

durak, XII, 10 (v.1. = ‘giver’; cf. RV., I, 53, 
3; VI, 33, 5, where occurs vf duréd grnise, 
and Aitareya Aranyaka, V, 2, I, n. 4). 

A dus : dusyati, XII, 23. 

Nadrh: drmhatu, XIMI, 5. 

devah, 1, 5; (nom. plur.) VII, 17; (gen.) XI, 
8; (dat.) VII, 1; A. Il, 7. 

devyd, I, 5. 

dyam, 1X, 73; divam, XI, 18; XI, 5; (loc.) ib. 

Advis: dvisantam, XI, 20; 29; dvisatah 
(acc.) 2chives es 

dvipi, XII, 26. 


dhanamjayah, XI, 73 34- 

adharunah, XXl, 73 34. 

WV dha: samdadhami, A. U1, 73 sam-adadhat, I, 
5 (here it means ‘has united’, not a mere 
past. The use is remarkable: cf. samadhat- 
tam in VII, 3, where the Aitareya version has 
the correct aorist); akitam, XII, 2; 3- 

dhata, XII, 17. 

adharayisnuh, XI, 7; 34. 


na, see sanipat, 

nah, XU, 9. 

nam : abhisamnamantim, XII, 16; 17. 

namah, VII, 1; A. Il, 7. 

nah: apinahyatam, XII, 33. 

nakam (ace.), XIV, 2. 

nagah, XIU, 31. 

nividah (acc.), XII, 17. 

nivesanam (acc.), XII, 24. 

nud: nudatam, XII, 9; pranudat, XII, 11; 
29; pranuitan, XII, 12; see brahma’. 


WV pat: patantu, XII, 15. 
payah, XII, 6. 

payasvan, X11, 75 34+ 
paramah, XU, 17. 
paramesthi, XII, 153 17°. 
Parjanyah, XI, 5; 6. 

wv pas : pasyanti, XII, 3; pasyantah, XU, 16. 
pasubhih, I, 8. 

pascat, XII, 12; 18. 
pipakrtya, XXII, 23. 
paravarat, XII, 28. 
pinvamanah, XII, 13. 


INDEX IV 


pisacah, XI, 25. 

pura (with abl.), XII, 19. 

purutra, XII, 9. 

purah (acc.), XII, ro. 

puspam, XII, 29. 

AV pit: pityamanayam, XII, 4. 
pirvapadabhyam (t°padbhyam), XII, 31. 
prtanah, XII, 20. 

prtanayatah (acc.), XII, 31. 

prtanyatah (gen.), XII, 15; (acc.) XII, 31. 
prthivi, XI, 5; 6 

prdakuh, XU, 27. 

praja, XVI, 23. 

Prajapatth, 1, 7; 8; XI, 8; XI, 17. 
pratistham, XII, 14. 

pratisarah, XII, 30. 

WV prath: prathatam, XII, I. 
pramayukam, XII, 20; 29. 

pravadakah (? MS. pravataka(h)), XII, 29. 
pranah, XU, 6; (loc.) XII, 5; 6. 


A badh : badhyate, X11, 30. 
bandhanena, XII, 29. 

balam, XI, 6; XII, 16; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 
barhatena, XI, 8. 

bilvah, XII, 33 (v-1.). 

brhad, XII, 2. 

brhadvayah, XII, 1. 

Brhaspatih, XI, 8. 

bailvam, XII, 20-29 ; bailvah, 32; 33 (v.1.). 
brahma, 1, 5; XI, 6; 8. 
brahmanuttasya (masc.), XII, 15. 
brahmanya, I, 5. 


bhangah, XU, 14. 

bhadram (acc. neut.), XII, 16 ; XIV, 2. 

bhargah, XII, 5; VU,1; A. II, 7. 

bharta, XII, 33. 

bharaharah, XIV, 2. 

a bhi: bhitam, XI, 21. 

bhitim (?), XII, 26. ; 

A bhi: bhavatt, XVI, 2; bhava, VII, 1; A. 
Il, 7; sambabhiva, X1l,1; abhit, XIV, 2 
(without true aorist sense); adhd (injunc- 
tion), VIL, 3 A: IL. 7. 

A bhy : bibharti, XVI, 20-29; abhara, XII, 
10; wibhrtah, XII, 9. 

bhojanani (acc.), XII, 10. 


makarah, XVI, 21. 
maghavan, XII, 15. 


"351 


manih, XII, 30 ; 323 (acc.) XII, 20-29 ; (loc.) 
SIT, 33. 

mad: pramatiam, XII, 29. 

madhund, XII, 6. 

madhumatim, XII, 6; madhuman, XII, 7; 34- 

madhyat, XII, 12. 

man: manvinah, XII, 13. 

manah, VII,1; XI, 1; 6; A. Il, 73 (loc.) 
NTT le bs OSA. Ll Ve 

manisina, XII, 30. 

mantrakydbhyah, VII, 1; A. II, 7. 

mantrapatibhyah, VII, 1; A. II, 7. 

manyuh, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6; manyavah, 
Man 

mays, XIE 23°43 53 VIL, 1. 

Marutah, XU, 12. 

AV mah: sam maham, XV, 6 (doubtful reading : 
perhaps imperative (Whitney, Sazskrit 
Grammar, § 618), the sense may be, ‘ may 
the payas gladden me with honey mead, 
O Agni,’ but I read anzktam), 

mahah, XII, 5; 14 (if so read, the sense must 
be ‘hindering their greatness ’, but the other 
version, mzztho, is better). 

mahan, 1,5; mahate (neut.), XII, 7; 343 ma-- 
hatya, I, 5. 

mahiyatam, XII, 13. 

ma: asata (?), XII,14; marisydmi, XI, 6; 8; 
risam, XII, 33; lesth (2), IX, 73; vyoma(!) 
VE, e355 A.U, 73: Aemsthy Vili IX, I. 
A. Il, 7; prahkasth, A. Ul, 7. 

mamsam, XII, 22. 

mithah, X11, 23; 14(?). 

mi: pramiyeta, XII, 20. 

mundamundam, XIV, I. 

miraha, XI, 6; XII, 15; (acc.) XIV, 1; 
(loc.) XI, 5; 6. 

my: marisyami, XI, 6; 8. 

V mrj: anu marsti, XIU, 9. 

mytyum, XII, 14. 

myrdhah, XII, to. 

mrs: pra mrsantu, XI, 4. 

Mie, Vilyt Pg LL, F< 


yaksah, XM, 25. 

yuyusam, XIV, I. 

yajhasya, XII, 5. 

yatha : avadimi, XII, 6; saheyuh, XII, 32. 
yad (pron.), XI, 2; 3. 

yasah, XM, 43 53 yasase, XII, 15. 


352 


yasasvin, XII, 15. 

ya: anuyantu, XM, 12; abhiydnié (abhi- 
mati B, which can hardly be right), XI, 21; 
upayanti (yati B), XU, 14. 


vaksah, XM, 25. 

rajatam, XI, 8. 

A rabh : anusamrabhadvam, XiI, 18, 

rastrame (acc.), XII, 17. 

Aris : risam, XM, 33 ; résantam, XII, 12. 

A ruj: vi-ruroja, XII, 10; rujan, XII, 73 34- 

rvudrath, XII, 13. 

J ruh: aroha, XI, 73 34; viroha, IX, 73 
Grohatu, 1, 7. Cf. abhyariitham, X, 8. 

retah, X1, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 

rohobhyam, X, 8. (Cf. Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, 
VIII, 25, 3-) 


Vlup: ulluptah, XU, 7; 34- 
loham, XI, 8. 


A vad : avadami, XII, 6; vadisyami, VII, 1; 
Aire 

vana (acc.), XII, 11. 

vanaspate, 1X, 7. 

Varunah, XII, 213; 29. 

varcas, XII, 2; 3; (instr.) XII, 2. 

varcasvinam, XII, 2. 

vardhanesu, XII, 13. 

A vas : vasini, X1, 8; samvasami, VII, 1; “da- 
dhami, A. Il, 7. 

vasumatin, XIU, 1 (not in Chandogya Upan- 
isad, III, 11, 6, and from Jacob's Concordance 
apparently foreign to the Upanisads). 

WV vah : Gvaha, XM, 15. 

va, XII, 3. 

vak,VU, 1; X1,6; A. II, 7; (acc.) XII, 6 ; (in- 
str.) XII, 3; (loc.) XI, 5; 6; VII,1; AED 

vaktaram, VII,1; A. Ul, 7 

vakyam (acc.), XII, 20. 

vatesu, XII, 9. 

vayuh, XI, 3; 6. 

vijianam (acc.), XII, 18. 

HN vid: veda, XI, 19. 

vidyutah, XI, 5; 6. 

vidhata, XXI, 17. 

vistambhajambhanam, XII, 19 (the reading 
seems certain). 

visvak(?), XII, 15. 

vrkah, XX, 26. 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


Nort: abhyavartadhvam, XU, 18. 

Vrtram, XI, 9-11; 30- 

orsctkah, XXII, 28. 

vrsa, XII, 32. 

vedam, XIV,1; 2; (gen.) A. Hl, 7; vedasa- 
matsarinih (?), VIL, 1. 

vairajena (so rather than jyena), XI, 8. 

vyaghrah, XI, 26. 

vyoma, VII, 1; A. II, 7 (error for yuyoma). 

Yovrasc: anu, vi, pra, prati-vy$ca, XII, 12 
(exact readings are doubtful). 


$ataval§o, IX, 7. 

Satayuh, XII, 22. 

fatrin, XM, 11. 

Satrayatam, XII, 10. 

Samtama, VII, 1; A.W, 7. 

AV Sap: Saptam, XI, 21 (saptam A, B). 
Sariram, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 
Sastd, XII, 18. 

Sapan, XII, 11; 29. 

Sirah (acc.), XIV, I. 

Sivam (acc, neut.), XII, 28. 
$i(m)Sumarah, X, 28. 

Sara, XII, 113 12. 

$rutam, A. II, 7. 

$rvesthah, VIL, 1; IX, 13 A. II, 7. 
$rotram, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 5; 6. 
$vapadam, XII, 26. 


sakalam (acc. neut.), XIV, 2. 

satyam (nom.), XI, 8; (acc.) VI, I; A. I, 7. 

satyasamahah, Vil, 17. 

sad: upaseduh, XII, 16. 

samdrk, XII, 17. 

samdy i, VII, 1; A. TI, 7 (w.r. for “faz). 

sapatnaksayanah, X11, 32; (acc.) XII, 19. 

sapainan, XII, 7; 323 34, &c. 

samare, XII, 32. 

sampattapah, XU, 24 (wa- a must be merely 
a strong negative, since savipad hardly can 
be taken as ‘ misfortune’; I read °fatantyo). 

Sarasvatt, VII, 1; A. Il, 7. 

sarpah, XII, 27. 

sarvachandasena, XI, 8. 

sarvam (acc.: v.l. sarve), XII, 1; sarve, XII, 18. 

sarvavirah, XII, 32. 

AV sah: saha, sahasva, XII, 31 ; saheywh, XII, 
32; saheta, XII, 20 (saha might be=sa ha, 
but this is unlikely). 


INDEX IV 


saha (with instr.), XII, 29, 

sahasraviryah, XII, 33. 

salha, XM, 9. 

samnam, XIV, 1. 

samrajyena, XI, 8. 

sdraghena, XII, 6. 

Sdvitrih (?), XI, 8. 

sisam, XI, 8. 

suparnah, XII, 14. 

sumrlika, VII, 1; A. Tl, 7. 

surayam, XII, 4. 

suvarcah, XII, 17. 

suvarnam, XI, 8; (loc.) XII, 3. 

sutika, XII, 25. 

sutram, XI,-8; XII, 33. 

suryat, XVI, 19; stiryah, VI, 1; IX, 1; A. II, 7. 

A sev: upasevata, XII, 18. 

satlagah (MSS. gazl°), XII, 23. 

Saubhagaya, XII, 7; 34. 

stomam, XII, 17. 

A stha: abhitistha, XXII, 31; pratisthitah, °a, 
am, ah, X1, 5 and 6; fratisthita, VU, 1; 
Peake a 5) eee VIE TG As TT, ¥: 


KEITH 


350 


sthanuh, XIV, 2. 
sthirah, XI, 8. 
suvadhitih, XII, 11. 
svarvidah, XII, 16; 32. 
suarajyena, XI, 8. 


Vhan: hanti, XII, 22; abhisamhate, XII, 28; 
ahan, XII, 30; yaht, XII, 11; hatva, XII, 
11; vthatyd, XII, 10; vighnanah, XV, 14; 
(B vighnanadm, which with maho and upayati 
might conceivably =‘ the might of persons at 

variance (a gen. in dm) goes to destruction,’ 
but the 7z must be wrong.) 

hastinam, X\I, 26; hastisu, XII, 3. 

hastivarcasam, XII, 1, &c. 

Vha: gahyat(?), XU, 11; prahasip, A. It, 
ve 


Mhims: hinasti; XI, 253 27; himsatd (metri 
causa), XII, 22; 26; Acmsth, VU, 1; 1X, 
1; 7; A.U, 7. 

hiranyesu, XII, 4. 

hyrdayam, XI, 6; (loc.) XI, 6. 

hetibhih, XI, 13. 


INDEX V 


WORDS OCCURRING IN ARANYAKAS I-III, OTHER THAN 
WORDS OCCURRING IN QUOTATIONS. 


(When the case or gender is ambiguous, it is nom, or masc. unless otherwise specified. See 
also p. 344. As II, 5 and 6 have no Khandas, the II is repeated where necessary to avoid 
ambiguity. Parallel words in the Sankhayana Aranyaka I, II, VII-XII are referred to as S.) 


ah, Il, 3» 8. 

amsaphalakam, I, 2, 2. 

akérah, U1, 3, 6; Il, 2,3; S. VII, 3. 

akrtsnah, Tl, 3, 5. 

aksaram, Vl, 2,2; 3,8; IU, 1,53 (ace.) II, 3; 
Siig (e@ccudds) sUEl mks: S. VI, 103 (nom. 
plur.) I, 3,4; 73 (acc. plur.) II, 2, 25 
VIII, 2; (instr. plur.) I, 3, 8; (gen. plur.) I, 
a, 43 3)8; Il, 2,2; $. VIM, 2; (loc) S. 
VIII, 4. 

aksarasammanah, I, 2, 2 ; §. VIM, 5; (acc.) 
III, 2,2; S. VIM, 5. 

aksinz, II, 4,1; (acc.) I, 4, 2; IU, 2, 43 S. 
VIII, 7; (abl. with z) II, 4, 1. 

aksah, 1, 2, 2 (collar-bone). Cf. aksam 
and aksah, §, II, 4 (also in the Bodleian 
MS.). 

Agnih, I, 4,1; 2; Il, 1,13 53 75 4,15 23 
I 525 §. VI, 3, &c.; (acc.) 1,1, 2; I, 
1,1; Ill, 2,4; S. VII, 6; (gen.) I, 3,53 
TL, 3, 73 Ul, 2, 45 6; Coc.) I, 2,35 
VIII, 4; (abl.) S. XII, 8. 

agnihotram, Vl, 3, 3; S. X, 1; 83 (acc.) S: 
Me. Bh 

agram,1,3,33 4, I. 

hea MG A ae IW ay TER YS §. VIL, 2; (with 
abl.) II, 5. 

aghnyah, I, 3, 5- 

angam, I, 5; (nom. plur.) I, 2,2; (abl. plur.) 
UW, 55 (gen. plur.) I, 4,15 U, 3, 55 ya- 
thangam, Oe i 


angulayah, I, 1,2; 2,25 Ill, 2, 53 §. VIL, 93 
angulih, S. Ul, 5. 

Nac: pratyacyante,\, 4, 1. 

Jaf: vyajyamand, M1, 3, 6. 

anakaram, III, 2, 6 (rte nakaram, §. VII, 11). 

andam, Ul, 4,1. Cf. anda. 

andajant, Il, 6. 

atah, 1, 3, 43 4, 23 UL, 1, 23 Ul, 2, 43 S. 
VIII, 7. 

att (with acc.), I, 3, 3; che Aes 

atithth, 1, 1,1. 

atidyumne, III, 1, 33 §. Vil, 8; 9. 

atid, Il, I, 2. 

attri, Il, 1, 2. 

atyayam, Il, I, I. 

Gtr; 1, 3585/4523 5s Ls) ao Siege S. 
WiLD a reece: 

GlAG, Le Dy es OoCas §. VI, 2, &c.; atha kasmat, 
I, 2, 2; 5,23 atha hah, U, 4,3; athatah. I, 
4,13 11, 1,2; 7; Il, 1,/33.36°93 3, 6s 
atho,1,1, 2; 3343 4,235, 13 Il,1, 6; 3,6. 

Nad: atti, Il, 1, 2; 3, 1; adant, Il, 3, 1; 
adyat, adyuh, Il, 1, 2; adima, Il, 4, 23 
ddyah, adyd@, Il, 1, 2. 

Aditih, WI, 1, 6; $. VIL, 15; Aditisamhita, S. 
VII, 15. 

addhatumau, I, 2,3. 

adhastat, Il, 4, 1. 

adht (with acc. and /car), II, 3, 1; (with loc.) 
T35935:0.0a Sloka) ; (with loc. and dhavatz) 
WE BRR 


INDEX V 


adhidaivatam, I, 3, 3; 8; Il, 1, 2, &c.; §. VIL, 
2, &c. 

adhipatih, 11, 3, 73 (acc.) Il, 3, 7. 

adhyatmam, I, 3,3; I, 1,2, &c.; §. Vo, 2, &c. 

adhyayam, Yl, 2,6; §. VIII, 11. 

adhvaryavah, III, 2, 3; $. VIII, 4. 

an: samananti, Il, 1, 2; abhipranitam, 
abhyapanitam, I, 4,3; abhipranya, I, 4,3. 

anakamamarah, I, 3, 8. 

anantevasine, III, 2, 6. 

aniruktah, see 4/vac. 

aniyah, I, 5, 1. 

anisanant, Il, I, 5. 

ana (with acc.),; I, 4, 13 Il, 1, 23 7; 3, 13 33 
(adv.) II, 1, 7. 

anukrtth, see tad°. 

anuvidham, Il, 2, 3; S$. VII, 4. 

anuviadhah (v.1.), Il, 3, I. 

anuvyaharah, Il, 1, 4; = VII, 8. 

anustup, 1,1, 1, &c.; (acc.) I, 1, 2, &e.; (nom. 
plur.) I, 3, 5; §. 1, 2; (gen. plur.) II, 3,5; 
anustubayatanani, I, 1,2; anustupsirsanah, 
I, 1,1; anustupsampannam, I, 3,6; anu- 
stupsahasram, Ul, 3, 5- 

anusamhitam, II, 2, 6; §. VII, 11. 

antucanatamah, I, 2, 2. 

anrtam, I, 3,63; (acc.) II, 3, 6. 

anekikurvan, Ill, 1, 5- 

antah., I, 5) 23 3. 

antatah, I, 1, 3, &c.; §. II, 10, &e. 

antah (with loc.), I, 5, 1; $. IL, 11. 

antarapurusah, V1, 2, 4 (antara’, §. VII, 1). 

antariksant, U, 1, 2, &c.; (acc.) I, 1, 2, &c.; 
§. VII, 10; (gen.) I, 1, 7; Il, 2, 5; $. VI, 
8; (loc.) I, 1, 2; §. VII, 3. 

antariksalokah, 1, 2,33 4,33 (acc.) I, 4,3; 
aby Sed \loc.).1, 4, 3. , 

antariksayatanam, Ul, 1,3; S. VI, ro. 

antartksyah, I, 3; 5. 

antarena (with acc.), I, 2,33; 5,2; III, 1, 2; 
5; S. VI, 11; 12; (with gen.) S. VII, 3. 

antastyam, I, 5, I. 

antastharipam, TH, 2, 1 (aksarariipam, S. 
VILL, 1). 

annam, I, I, 3, &c.; S. MI, 43 Gaec.) I, 2, 43 
il, 4,2; Guster.) I, x, 2; Il, 2,45; (gen.) 
ies ays loc.) LL 3, F ¢(nom.7plur.) 
Il, 3, 1; annatamam, I, 4, 1. 

annavan, I, IT, 3. 


355 


annadah, 1, 1,2; Il, 3; 13 (nom. neut.) II, 3, 
1; (acc. masc.) II, 1, 2; 3, 13 (nom. plur.) 
II, 3, 13 annddatamah, I, 2, 4. 

annadyam, I, 1,23 2,3; S. TeaCACC, luda 2s 
2,43 I, 1, 75 (dat.) I, 4, 25; (gen.) I, 1, 43 
2,3; 3,8; 8.1, 75 (gen. plur.) I, 5, 1. 

annadyakimah, 1, 1, 2; Il, 1,3; S. VI, 10. 

annayuh, I, 4, 3. 

anyak (with abl.), I, 2, 2; anya, I, 3, 2; 
anyat, II, 3,5}; Il, 2,1; anyam, U, 4, 33 
(with abl.) III, 1, 3; S. VII, 8; 9; anyena 
(neut.), III, 2, 4; azyasmaz, §. XI, 8; anya- 
smin (neut.), I, 3,2; aye, III, 1,1; §. VI, 
1; anyani (acc.), III, 2,3; anyesam, I, 1, 
4; anyat kimcana, Il, 4, I. 

anyo’nyam, I1,3, 73 Il, 1, 6; §. VII, 18. 

anvancam, I, 2, 4; anicim, I, 2, 4. 

apacttth, I, 2, 43 4,33 apacityaz, I, 4, 2. 

apasyan, see / pas. 

apahatapapma, I, 2, 3. 

apahatyd, 1, 2,2 (probably apahatyah, ablative, 
or perhaps apahatyat, dative), 

apadakam, I, 3, 4. 

apanih, TW sh 2; L305; 57 Aes 2s §.X, 8; 
(instr.) Il, 1,8; 4,33 (gen.) III, 2,5; S. 
VIII, 8; (loc.) $. XI, 1. 

apayam, II, 3, 3. 

api, I, 3, 43 Il, 1,45 3,33 Il, 2,55 utapi, 
Ill, 1, 2; S$. VII, 3; Aapi, S. XI, 8. In II, 
3, 3, @f¢ most probably goes with yanéz, and 
in III, 2, 5 with dadhaiz. 

apyayah, 111, 2,6; (avyayah B) §. VIII, 11. 

apranakam, I, 3, 4. 

abhi (with acc.), I, 4, 2; (adv.) II, 3, 5; 
abhisam (with acc.), see / bhi. 

abhijityat, I, 1, 2, &c. 

abhivijnanam, Il, 3, 2. 

abhutih, Il, 1, 8. 

abhyatmam, Ul, 3, 6. 

abhyaptyat, I, 4, 2. 

abhyasam, I, 1,33 43 S. Vi 7s ree 

abhyutthanam (acc.), I, 5, 1. 

amayah, Il, 2, 4. 

amutah, I, 1, 2. 

amrtah, Vl, 1, 83 5; 6; amrid, Ll, 1, 8; 
amrtam, V1, 1, 8; (acc. masc.) I, 3, 8; (acc. 
neut.) I, 3, 8; I, 3, 2. 

amy takumbhah, Sle. 

ameghe, III, 2, 4 (anabhre, S. VII, 7). 


AazZ 


356 AITAREYA 


ambhah, Il, 4,13 (acc.) I, 4, 1. 

ambhanam, Il, 2, 53 §. VII, 9. 

ayam (pron.), I, 2, 3, 8&c.5 §. VIII, 9, &e: 3 
(adj.) I, 1, 2, &c.; §. VI, 3, &c.; axena (neut. 
pron.), I, 3,6; (neut. adj.) II. 3, 7; asmat 
(masc. pron.), I, 1,4; 2, 2,&c¢.; asmat (masc. 
adj.), II, 3, 43 IL, 5; 6; (meut.) IL, 1, 4; 
asya (masc. pron.), I, 1,14, &c.; asyat (abl. 
pron.),1,2,4; (gen.) IIT, 2,5; §.VI, 9 ; (adj.) 


I, 3, 43 asyah (pron.), I, 3,8; Ul, 2, 53 - 


f. 


§. VII, 9 3 asmin (masc. pron.), I, 1, 4, &c.} 
(masc. adj.) I, 4, 3, &c.; asyam (pron. ), I, 
I, 73 4) 23 Ill, 2, 35 (adj.) 1, 3,43 anayoh 
(loc. fem. adj.), I, 4,2. See also zmam and 
ebhyah. 

ayanam, II, 3, 1. 

avatnimdatre, I, 2, 4- 

aram, 1, 1, 4 (dat.). 

artpram, I, 3, 3- 

GFhGligN tay es Ll tse site 

arkalinah, Wl, 2,2; S. VII, 2. 

arkavatya, 1, 5,2; arkavatisu, I, 4,1; arka- 
vantt, §. Il, 2; 6; arkavatz, S. Ib, 28: 

Aare: arcata, I, 2, 2; abhyadrcat, Wl, 2, 1. 

arf: arjayan, I, 5,2; anvavarzat, I, 4, 2. 

arnave, II, 4, 2. 

arthena, MII, 1, 6; §. VII, 14; vdgartham, S 
VIII, 10. 

ardhebhyah (dat.), ‘ places,’ II, 2, 2. 

ardharcah, I, 2, 6. 

alam, Il, 4, 2 (dat. pers.); 3, 6 (dat. thing). 

A/av: avayat, Il, 4, 3 (others refer it to @-v7), 

avakasah, III, 1, 5. 

avarabhyam (abl. neut. adj.), III, 1, 3; S. 
VII, 10. 

avarapara, II, 1, 6 ; §. VI, 13; (acc.) ITI, 1, 
6; S. VII, 13. 

avaruddhyat,1,1,23 33 43 2,43 3) 7- 

avaiicah, I, 5, 1. 

AV ak: asnute, I, 1, 1, &e.; abnutah, III, 2, 4; 
asnuvata, Sait 4; asnuvita, I, 3, 3; asna- 
vai, I, 4, 3. 

Vas: asnati, I, 2, 4; afnan, I, 1, 43 aa- 
yati (Pan., I, 3, 87 and Sch.), S. X, 1, &c. 
asandpipase, Il, 3, 25 4, 2; (instr.) II, 4, 2; 

asanayapipasabhyam, Peas 

asarirah, I, 3, 6; Il, 2,3; §. VIII, a OcCes 
atariram, Il, 3,6; S. VII, 7. 

aSirasam (acc.), II, 2, 4; $, VII, 7. 


ARANYAKA 


asitayah, Xl, 1, 2; §. II, 10; asitibhih, S. Iino: 

asitisahasram, WN, 2, 25 §. VII, 2. 

asvah, I, 2,43 (acc) Il, 4, 2; (nom. plur.) 
LEG: 

asvarathah, UI, 1, 1 ; §. VU, 2, &c. 

ASvinau, I, 1, 4. f 

asakaram, Ul, 2, 6 (rte sakaram, S.VIU, TL). 

astau, 1, 3, 4, &c. 

astamim, I, 5, 2. 

astaduSa, 1, 3, 7- 

a/as: asmi, Il, 1,23 43 2,33 sz, Il, 1, 45 
asad, 14,335, 23 23 ast, 11, 2,25 4) 25 
asani, II, 1, 4; 2, 23 aste, I, 1, 3; S. 
VIII, 9; smah, I, 1, 4; syat, I, 2,2; 1,3, 
6; 4,33 syatam, I, 2,3; sywh, I, 2,35 I, 
2,1; S. VIII, 1; asa, I, 2,2; asantam, I, 
I,1; santam, Il, 2,13; 25 santau, EN os 
satz, 1, 5,2; satyah,1, 4,1; sad,1,4, 2; 1, 
I, 53 sa¢z (masc.), §. XII, 8. 

Vas: asyaminah, 11,3, 5; vyastah, II, 2, 45 
§. VIU, 7; véparyaste (nom. du. fem.), II, 
Gp ee §. VII, 7. 

asamwatsaravasine, III, 2, 6; §. VIM, 11. 

asuh, U1, 1,8; 6. 

asurah, Il, t, 8. 

asau (masc. pron.), II, 1, 2, &c.; (masc. adj.) 
1 CB eRe S. VII, 3, &c.; (fem. pron.) 
IU, 2,5; (fem. adj.) III, 2,5; adas (pron.), 
I, 3, 3, &c.3 amum (adj.), 1, 4,3, &c. 5; aneu- 
na (neut. adj.), II, 3, 7; @#usmai (masc. 
adj.), Il, 3, 73 @smusyat amusyah (gen. 
pron.), III, 2, 5; °ak, S. VIL, 9; amusmin 
(mase. adj.), I, 4, 3, &e.; S.VII,3; amzne 
(adj.), III, 1, 2; S. VU, 3. 

astripuman, Il, 3, 8. 

asthi, I, 1, 6; asthini, III, 2,1; 2; §. VII, 
13 23 asthnam, II, 2,1; §. VII, 2. 

asmakam, Il, 1, 4; §. XI, 2; asmabhih, S. 
XV. 

asvadu (acc.), II, 6. 

Nah: Gha,\,1, 1, &e.; cheh, 1, 1,1, &e.; S. 
VIII, 11, &c.; nzraha, I, 2, 2. 

aha, Il, 3, 7 (contrasted with «: anenaha— 
amuno); ahatva (dub.), II, 1, 2. 

ahah, 1, 1,2, &c.3 (acc.) Ijty an, cers $7, 
18; ahknah (gen.), I, 1, I, &c.; S. ila 
&c.3 ahant, 1, 1,3; 2, 4; Il, 2,4; §. VII, 
2; ahani, V1, 2, 2; (acc.) Il, 2, 4; aknam, 
U2) Ej ocC. 


INDEX V 


ahahsaymanah, Ill, 2,1; S$. VIII, 3; (ace.) 
Ty ag es Ss VILE a. 

ahoratre (nom.), $. X, 5; (acc.) II, 1, 4; S. 
X, 5; ehorairah, Ill, 2,1 ; §. VI, 20; (gen. 
plur.) III, 2,2; S. II, 10; VIL, 1; akord- 
trani (acc.), §. II, 10; VII, z. 

aham, Il, 1,23 43 83 2,23 33 45 3,83 4,33 
Til, 1, 5 


@ (with abl.), I, 3, 8; Il, 1,6; 8; (with acc. 
and dhavatz) II, 3, 7. 

@packh. 1, 2,25 Lr, 6; 3,13 33 6; TI, 1,13 2; 
§. VI, 2, &c. ; (instr.) $.X, 3; (ace.) S.X, 3; 
I, 5; (loc.) II, 3, 1; III, 1, 2; 2, 3; S.VII,3. 

akhyanam, II, 3, 4. 

adgnimarutasya, 1, 5,3. Cf. dgnimarutasiktants 
§. I, 18. 

dcaryaya, III, 2,4; S.1,1; (nom. plur.) IH, 
2,6; S. VIII, 11. 

ajand, I, 4, 2. 

ajnanam, Il, 6. 

Gjye (acc.), 1, 1,1; ayani, 1, 1,2; ayyesu, I, 
I, 2; ajyam, §. I, 2. 

atithyaya, 1, 1, 1. 

dima (=body), I, 1, 2; 2,23; 3,85 II, 3,43 
5B; (acc.) L 1, 23 3, 8; §.Il,1. (= vital 
self) I, 3, 7; (gen.) I, 3, 7- (= self in 
various senses) II, 3,1; 2; 73 4513 53 6; 
Ill, 2,1; 2; 33 4; 6; S. VI, 6; VIII, 1, 
&e.; (ace.) 1,3, 5; U, 3,1; 25 73 53 Ill, 
fae ons 3: 33.45 63) 5. VUl,-3, &c. ; 
(instr.) II, 1, 8; 6; (dat.) II, 3,7; Il, 2,4; 
(gen.) III, 2, 1; $. VII, 1; atmani, Il, 5; 
§. XI, 1; aman, I, 5,2; $.1, 8, &c. 

atmabhiyam, Il, 5. 

adar$e, Il, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

dditah, Ul, 5. 

Adityah, 1, 4,2; Tl, 1,13 23 53 73 4,13 23 
Ill, 1, 2; 2,3; 4; S. VU, 3; VII, 7, &.; 
(gen.) II, 1, 73 3, 73 Ill, 2, 5. 

adrtyam, I, 2, 3, &c. 

ddesta, II, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

anustubham (acc.), 1, 1, 3; (nom.) §. XI, 7. 

andam, Il, 1, 2 (andam, S. VII, 3). 

Nap: apnavani,\, 4,33 5,23 awapnavama, 
I, 2,43 Gnoti, Il, 3,4;8; apnuvanii, I, 
2,45 S. I, 18; apyate, I, 3 8; 5,25; a- 
yante,1,5,1; vydptam, II, 1,3; S. VII, 10; 
upaptau, III, 2,6; S. VIII, 11 ; °ah, S.1, 6; 


357 


aptani, I, 3, 8; aptva, 11, 5,6; atyat, I, 1, 
33 2,15 353, 8; S. Il, 5, &e.; abhyaptyat, 
I, 4,253 updptyat, 1, 3,7; avdptyai,S. I, 5; 
ipsati, II, 3, 23 tpsantah, I, 1, 1. 

apah, I, 3,53 I, 1,73 83 3,13 35 4,105.25 
6; S.I, AS VIL a NS Fy Soc, epee.) 
II, 4,1; v.72. of B in S. X, 7; XI, 1; afak 
(acc.), II, 4, 3; adbhyah (abl.), Il, 4,1; apam, 
Il, 1,73 apse, 11,2; adbhih,S.I, 4; Il, 1. 

ayatanam, Ill, 1, 3; (acc.) II, 4, 2. 

ayuh, I, 1, 3, &c.; (acc.) I, 3, 8, &c.; S. Vo, 
2, &c.; (abl.) I, 5,2; I, 3,5; (loc.) I, 2, 2. 

ayusman, I, 1, 3. 

dyusyam I, 2,2; II, 2,6; $. VIM, 11. 

arbhavam, I, 5,3; S18: 

aryah (acc. fem.), III, 2, 5; (nom. masc.?) 
§. VI, 9, prob. aya (nom. fem.). 

dvapanam, I, 5, 2; Il, 3, 13 $. II, 14; (acc.) 
ib.; (instr.) I, 5, 2. 

avasathah, V1, 4, 3; (nom. plur.) II, 4, 3. 

avabhyam (dat.), II, 4, 2. 

dvi, I, 3,33 TL, 1, 53 3, 6. 

avirbhiyah, Il, 3, 2. 

avirmilah, Wl, 3, 6; (acc. masc.) II, 3, 6; 
upasiktamilah, $. XI, 2. 

avistaram, Il, 3, 2. 

as: dsate,1,1,1; upasate, Il, 1,4; wpasmahe, 
II, 6; asta, Il, 1, 4; upasdm cakrire, i,t, 8. 

asandi, I, 2, 4; (acc.) I, 2, 4. 


Ai: eti, I, 3, 2, &e.; apyett, 1, 4, 2; II, 2, 4; 
3, 1; 8; pratt, II, 1, 2; 3,73 53 sametz, 
II, 3, 8; atiyanti, 1, 2,2; apiyaniz, II, 3, 3 ; 
upayanti, II, 3, 4; g. II, 18; dyantz, II, 1, 7; 
atyayan, dyan, II, 1, 1; tyat, 1, 3,2; atiyat, 
Tl, 1,1; prayan,lI,5; upeyaya,II,2,3; same- 
paretah, Ill, 2, 4; §. VII, 7; pretya, II, 
3, 7; praitoh, Il, 3, 5; adhite, Ul, 1, 6; S 
VII, 18; adhimahe, III, 2, 6; $. VII, 11; 
adhyesyamahe, iI, 2,6; S. VII, 11; adhi- 
yanah, III, 2, 5; presyan, §. XI, 33; adhi- 
tam, S. XV, 13 dyatah (gen.), Sled 
adyanti, oct, 4. 

itah, II, 1,1; 83 53 etakpradanah, Il, 1, 8; 
itahsambhytah, I, 1, 8. 

itarah, 11, 5; (acc. masc.) §. VIII, 7; (nom. 
plur. masc.) II, 3,1; (acc. plur. masc.) II, 
3, 1; (gen. plur. masc.) II, 3, 2; (loc. plur. 
masc.) II, 3, 2; (loc. plur. neut.) I, 1, 2. 


358 AITAREYA 


iti, I, 1, 1, &c.; (summary of an enumeration) 
II, 6; II, 2, 2; §. VIII, 2; 9- 

idam (nom. pron.), I, 3,3; 4,13 HU, 1,13 
(nom. adj.) IT, 1,15 43 (acc. pron.) I, 3,53 
1K ai ae 

idamdrah, 11, 4,33 (ace.) Il, 4, 3- 

Indrah, 1,1, 1, &c.; S.1, 1, &e.5 (ace. Ty 25 
2; §. XI,1; (gen.) I, 2,1; II, 2,3; 5.1, 2. 

Indrariipam, I, 2, 1. 

Indraviyu, 1, 1, 4. 

indriyam, 1, 2,25 (loc.) I, 2, 2; (nom. plur.) 
III, 2, 1. 

imam (adj.), 1, 1,23 3,23 4532 &C5 imam 
(pron.), I, 3, 43 II, 2, 53 zmasmat (masc, 
adj.), Il, 3, 73 @mau (nom. adj.), 1, 2,33 
ime (acc. du. adj.), III, 1, 5; te (nom. 
plur. adj.), I, 1, 23 2) 35 5,15 tah (nom. 
adj.), I, 3,33 Il, 1 13 (pron.) II, 2, 53 
imani (nom. adj.), I, 2,23; 3,43 4,2; 1,1, 
132; 85363 2man (adj.), 1, 2, 4; emak (acc. 
adj.), II, 1, 6 ; zdnz (acc, adj.), II, 1, 8. 

zyam (adj.), 1, 3,43 I1,1,13 II, 2, 5; (pron.) 
(O15 iy OR LNG eto 

tramayah, II, 1, 3. 

iva (almost = eva): cirataram iva, 1, 1,23 ad- 
dhatamav iva, I, 2, 33 samnadativa, 1, 3, 5385 
5,1; 11,1, 25 53 3,13 63 4,33 6; IU, 2, 
7760 (58 Shy WAUOE 528 OCs oe 

zsam, I, 2,4; ztsah, I, 1, 4. 

tha, I, 1,23 11,4, 33 IL, 2, §; S. VII, 3. 


HV iks: upekseta, Il, 2, 4; III, 2, 45 §. VII, 
4; thsata, II, 4, 1; 3; viksya, S. XI, 4; 
abhivyatksat (v.1.), II, 4, 3. 

Ninkh: prenkhate, 1, 2, 3. 

Vir: prerte, Il, 1, 2. 

iryatam, I, 5, I. 

Ais: i$e (3rd sing.), II, 1, 23 5. 

isvarah: caritoh, 1, 1, 13 bhavitoh, praitoh, 
Il, 3, 5. Cf. varah-yadi napaparajetoh, S. 
Tinto 


u, 1,1, 1, &c.; (=or) 1, 3,13 «ha eva,1,3,8. 

uktham, \, 2, 1; S. I, 43 (ace.) II, 3,13 23 S. 
Tye (loc) pli oss.) Ll kecacce tune) 
USE p ace (ecieralhine)) 5 5 oe 

ukthamukhe, 1, 2, 43 3, 1- 

ukthavat, 1, 2, 1, &c. 

ugrah, 1,3, 4 (from Rgveda). 

uccath, II, 3, 6. 


ARANYAKA 


utapi, II, 1,2; S. VII, 3. 

uttamaya, I, I, 2. 

uttarah, 1, 4,23 II, 3,4; (nom. neut.) IIT, 1, 
5; (abl. du. neut.) IT, 1, 3. 

uttararipam, III, 1, 1, &e.5 §. VII, 2, &c. 

uttaroltarikramah, II, 3, 3- 

udake, III, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

udaram, I, 5,1; 11, t, 43 Ill, 2, 5; S. UL, 113 
VIM os idoc:) 155, 3 §. 11, 1. 

udanah, I, 3,33 (gen.) $. VIII, 8; (loc.) S. 
XI, Fr. 

udumbarah, 1, 2,3; S. Es 7s 

udgata, 1, 2, 4. 

uddhth, 1, 3, 8. 

udbhijjant (v.1. udbhiyanz), II, 6. 

AV und: undantz, I, 3, 5- 

upantsad, III, 1,1; 2,5; §. VI, 2; (acc.) S. 
XIII, 1; (loc.) II, 1, 6; $. VI, 18; (nom. 
plur.) III, 2, 5; S. VIII, 8. 

upabdip, III, 2, 4; S. VIII, 7; (acc) S. 
DIE Bt 

uparé (with abl.), I, 2, 4. 

upavadah, 111, 1,33 (apavadak B) §. VII, 10. 

upasthe, III, 1, 2; S. VIL, 3. 

upanisu, II, 3, 6; Seil/ se 

upiptyat, 1, 3,73 S.1, 7: 

ubhayok (gen. neut.), I, 3, 7; ubhabhyam (instr. 
masc.), III, 1,6; S. VII, 19; ubhayesam, I, 
Be, 

ubhayam antarena (as nom., acc., and instr.), 
III, 1, 3; S. VII, ro. 

ubhayakamah, III, 1, 3; §. VII, 10. 

ubhayatah, I, 4; 2. 

ubhayatodantéh, Il, 3, I. 

ubhayyah, 1, 2, 3. 

urah, II, 1, 4. 

uru (acc.), II, 1, 453 wrvasthive (v.1.), I, 5,1. 

ulbanam, III, 2, 33 §. VIII, 3. 

ulbanisnu, II, 3,8 (a Sloka). 

usnam, II, 3, 3. 

usnik, II, 1, 33 3) 83 1, 1,6; 3, 4; (om. plur.) 
I, 4,1; S.II, 10; (acc.) ib. ; (instr.) §. II, 10. 


unatiriktau, I, 4, 2. 

Gris Ly 1 2s See Ly ae 

arvasthive (v.1. urv°), I, 5, I. 

ark, I, 2,33; 8.1, 73 (acc.) I, 2,43; (gen.) I, 
2, 944 4Sd I 

urdhvam, 1, 5,23 Il, 1,45 3) 33 43 5- 


INDEX V 


tismanah, I, 2, 43 UI, 2,5; S. VIII, 8; as- 
manah, III, 2, 2; Se VIII, 2; w#smanam, 
III, 2, 2; S. VIII, 2. 

usmarupam, III, 2, 1; coe VIG, 


Vr: arak, Il, 1,3; S. VU, ro. 

re, I, 3, 1; II, 2, 23 3,65 rea, I, 3,25 4,23 
II, 3, 6; ream, III, 2, 4; 53; rcak (abl.), I, 
3, 2; (nom. plur.) II, 2, 2; (acc. plur.) IIT, 
3.6: 

AV rj: see Varj. 

rtavah, I, 3, 8; §. VII, 20; X, 5; rtun, S. 
X, 5; rtunam, I, 3, 8. 

rte (with abl.), II, 4, 3; III, 2, 2; (with acc.) 
§. VIIL. 23 11. 

vrs: adhyrstaya, I, 2, 4. 

rse, II, 2,33 S. 1, 6; rséné, I, 3, 2, &e.5 rsa- 
yah, Ill, 2,6; rstbhyah (dat.), I, 1, 35 7sé- 


nam, I, 2, 2 


ekam (nom. neut.), I, 1, 1; 2, 33 5, 2; III, 2, 
eis MALS, 45 ea, LL, 2,:35)'35'3 5°45, 113 
2,4; ekena, I, 4,2; ehayd, 1,1,2; 4,2; 
eke, I, 1, 1; Il, 3, 5; ekesam, I, 2, 3. 

ekatam, I, 4, 2. 

ekadha, 1, 2, 3; 5, 2. 

ehapadam, I, 5, 2. 

ehapundarikam, III, 2, 4; S. XI, 4. 

ehavini$atih, I, 4,23 5, I- 

ekavimfsah, 1, 4,23 5,13 ekavinisam, II, 3, 4. 

ekasatam, I, 2, 2. 

ekasatatamah, I, 2, 2. 

ehaksaradvyaksarantam, 1, 333. - 

ekadasa (Satant), II, 3; 6. 

ehahahsantyam (or ehahah), I, 1, 3, &c. 3 eka- 
hah, §. I, 16. 

etadantam, I, 5, 3. 

etanmayani, II, 3, I. 

etavatd, 1,2, 4; etavati, Il, 3, 4; e¢dvantah, 
TL, 3; 2 

enat (nom. v.1.), II, 4,35; evan, 1, 3,43 ii, 
1,236; 2,2; 3,33 65 4,2; IL, 1,33 2, 
£355 §. VII, 8, &c.; endm, 1, 4,2; 5,13 
Il, 5; enat, 1, 5,2; 3,33 11, 4,35 53 ene, 
I, 2, 3; evayoh, II, 1,1; enah, II, 1, 7. 

ebhyah (dat.), Il, 2, 23 4, 33 esam (masc. 
pron.), I, 2,3; (masc. adj.) I, 1,25; (neut, 
adj.) I, 3, 8; Il, 3,53 esw (mase. adj.), I, 2, 
33 3.435 Il, 3,7 


359 


eva, 15.1, 1, oC, 

evam (with veda, vidvan), I, 1, 2, &c.; 2,43 3, 
rs 10, 7, Gs 53 LL a, x7 ccens §. VII, 2, &c. 

esa (pron.), I, 2, 3, &c.; es@ (pron.), I, 2, 4; 
(adj.) I, 2, 2, &c.; e¢at (pron.), I, 2, 2, &c.5 
(adj.) I, 1, 2, &c.; e¢am (pron.), II, 3, 4, 
&c.; (adj.) I, 1,1, &c.; e¢am (adj.), I, 3, 25 
II, 1,73 LI, 2,5; etat (pron.), I, 1, 3, &c. 5 
(adj.) I, 1, 1, &c.; etena (masc. adj.), II, 1, 
8; etayd (pron.), I, 5, 2; (adj.) I, 3, 8; II, 
4,3; etena (pron.), I, 2, 2; (adj.) I, 2, 25 
5,2; Il, 2,33 etasmat (pron.), I, 3, 4; II, 
3, 23 (neut. adj.) I, 1, 23 etasmin (neut. 
pron.), II, 3,35 (neut. adj.) I, 1,35 2,45 
etasyam (adj.), III, 1, 6; §. VII, 19 ; e¢asya 
(masc. pron.), I, 2,4; (neut. adj.) I, 1, 1, &c.; 
etau (pron.), II, 1, 73 efe (acc. neut. pron.), 
I, 5,23 e¢abhyam (instr. masc. pron.), II, 3, 
1; e¢ayoh (gen. masc. pron.), II, 1, 7; (gen. 
masc. adj.) I, 4,13; e¢e, I, 1,1, &c.; eah 
(adj.), 1,3, 2; 8; Il, 3,33 e¢and (adj.), I, 
3,43 etan (adj.), 1, 1,25 3,75 eta (adj.), I, 
3, 2, 8; etesam (masce. adj.), I, 1,23 3,73 
II, 1, 7; ease (pron.), II, 4,2; $. X, 1. 


aikahikam, I, 1,3, &c.; S. II, 18, &c.; (loc.) 
§. IL, 18; atkahikau, I, 2,13 5,2. 

aikya (tinstr. neut.), III, 2, 3. 

aindram, I, 2, 1, &c.3 S. I, 1, &c.; (masc. 
nom.) ib.; (masc. acc.) II, 3, 5; (masc. 
abl.) II, 3, 6; (meut. abl.) I, 2,2; (neut. 
loc.) I, 5; 3. 

aindragnau, 1, 5, 1. 

aindrinam, I, 5, 2. 


om, 1,1, 13 Il, 3,6; 8 

odatyah, I, 3, 5 (from Rgveda). 

osadhayah, II, 1,3; 6; osadhinam, I, 2; UH, 
1,3; osadhisu, III, 2, 3; §. VIII, 4. 

osadhivanaspatayah, 1, 2, 43 Il, 3,13 253 4,1, 
2; (acc.) IL, 3, 1; (loc.) II, 3, 2. 


audumbarim, 1,2; 4; audumbare (nom, du.), 
I, 2,33 eudumbaram (nom.), §. 1, 7. 

ausniham (nom.), S. 1,92 (act.). 1a 
ausnihi, 1, 4, 33 §. II, 5; ausnihim, 1, 4,33 
Sellers 


kah, Il, 4,33 6; kd, 1, 3, 25 kim, Il, 3,53 45 
3; kena (neut.), II, 3,73 Aasmat (=why?), 


360 AITAREYA 


I, 2, 2; the following indefinite pronominal 
phrases occur: yad u kimca, V1, 1,2; yad 
vai Rima, 1,3,13; yad ha kimca, V1, 35 33 
yac ca kina, I, 3,25 yat kimcedam, II, 6; 
yad idam kineca, I, 4, 1, &c.; II, 1, 2, &c.; 
Ill, 1, 6, &c.; yad ha himcedam, MU, 1, 25 
yah kaSca, U1, 3,65 yat kimca, TI, 3, 63 ya- 
syai kasyat ca, I, 4,2; yasyam kasyamscid, 
Il, 1, 6; aScana, I, 3, 85 Aigeca himea, I, 
I, 3, &c. 3 Aémcid (acc.), III, 2, 43 §.XI, 43 
has cid, $. VII, 8; yad idam himcid, §, VI, 
15; yat kind, S. X, 2, &c. , 

haksasi, 1, 2, 2. 

katarah, V1, 6; katarena, I, 4, 3. 

hatham, Il, 4, 33 2a kathamecana, Sent. 

kadacana, Il, 1, 6. 

haninaka, Xl, I, 5. 

haniyah, IU, 3, 5. 

hanyake, UI, 2, 4 (Aaninike, §, VIII, 7). 

hayasubhiyam, 1, 2,2; (acc.) I, 2, 2. 

karnau, Il, 4, 13 (acc.) ITI, 2, 4; §. VIII, 7; 
(abl.) II, 4, 1. 

karma, 11,1, 1; 33 (dat.) II, 1, 7; (abl.) H, 
1, 6; (dat. plur.) I, 5. 

halyanakirith, V1, 3, 5. 

kavayah, XI, 3, 8. 

hakakulayagandhikam, II, 2, 4. 

hamah, 11,6; (acc.) I, 1,4; 3,13; (nom. plur.) 
Upstieetn §. II, 16; (acc. plur.) I, 1,25; 3; 
2,4; 3,73 Il, 8; 6; S. 1, 16; (dat. plur.) 
II, 3,6; (gen. plur.) I, 1,2; 35 3.735 44- 
mam (ady.), I, 1, 13 III, 2, 4. 

kamayate, 1, 3,137; Il, 1,6; Admayeta (with 
dat.), S. XI, 8. 

halah, S. VII, 6. 

kale, 11, 3, 6. 

kimarthah, U1, 2,6; S. VII, 11. 

hirtik, 1, 5, 23 I, 3,6; Il, 2, 5; S. VIII, 9. 

kirtikdmah, I, i, 1. 

kumarah, I, 3, 23 (acc.) II. 5. 

kumbyd, I, 3, 6. 

kufalat, III, 1,3; S. VU, 8; 9. 

Vky : haroti, 1,2, 4, &c.; arom, Il, 4, 2; 
vydkarott, 11, 6; ureute,\, 5,2; samskurute, 

vd, 1,43) Auryat, Uy 0, a, 8c. S. Via. 
kurvita, II, 2, 33 kuru, Il, 1, 43 aneki- 
Rurvan, Ill, 1,5; &4rtam, II, 1,3; III, 2, 4; 
niskrtam, 1,1, 43 samskrtam, 1,1, 4; ak- 
rtd, I, 2, 43 vasathrtya, 1, 2, 43 chandaska- 


ARANYAKA 


ram, 1, 8,13 &riyate, 1,1, 35 2, 4% Sans 
hriyante, I, 5, I CE£ J jita and Wi vid. 

hrtakrtyah, W, 5; for krtya, cf. krtyah, S. 
itr 

krtsnah, U1, 3, 5; 4rtsnam (masc.), §. VIII, ro. 

krtsnataram (acc.), 1, 3, 5+ 

AV krs : avikarsan, Ii, I, 5. 

kysnam, I1,1,5; II, 2,4; §. XI, 43 Arsuam, 
Il, 2,4. 

krsnadantam, III, 2, 43 Sai as 

kysnavatsam, II, 2, 4. 

WV kip: samkalpayati, V1, 1,1; trcakipiah, Silja. 

kiptyai, I, 3, 8. 

kratuh, U1, 6; Rratavah, I, 3, 4. 

AV kram: udakramat, utkramama (So kiay 
uthrante, 11,1, 43 utkramya, 11,5; 6; uc- 
cakramuh, S. XI, 1; utkraman, §. VII, Vs 

krivam, Il, 3, 8 (a Sloka). 

Rua, see yatra. 

ksatram, I, 1, 33 (gen.) I, I, 3- 

Aksar: ksarati, U1, 2, 2; atiksaranti, I, 2, 2. 

ksudram, Il, 2, 2. 

ksudramisrani, 1,6 (Rsudrani, §. VII, 21); 
hsudramisré (vikrtih), S, VIL, 11. 


JV khad : khaditva, U1, 2, 4; ehadayati, §. XI, 
4, where is dhaksayitua for khaditva. 

kharath, Ul, 2, 4. 

khalu, II, 1, 5; S. VI, 18. 

khadah, Il, 3, 4. 

khan#, MI, 3, 3. 

khurah, VW, 1, 4. 

WV khyd: abhikhyayeta, UII, 2, 4 @&hyayeta, S. 
VIII, 7); abhivyaikhyat (?), 11, 4,33; prati- 
khydya, 1,2, 4; samkhyayamanayam, §.11,17. 


gandham, Il, 1, 73 gandhan, II, 6. 

AV gam: gachati, 11,5; partgachati (with acc.), 
I, 5,13; @-gachati, 1, 1, 4; agachaniz, I, 1, 
I; 2; @-gachanti, 1,1, 4; a-gachatah, I, 
1,4; agamat, III, 1, 6; S. VII, 143 gatam 
(ace, masc.), II, 5; @gatam (nom.), II, 3,8; 
agatah, III, 2, 4; adhigamyante, II, 3, 3; 
gamayatt, §. VII, 23 33 upajagama, S I, 6. 

garbhah, II, 5; (acc.) II, 5; (loc.) II, 5. 

Vea: udagat, 1,3, 4; samagat, III, 1,1; S. 
VII, 2; samagat, I1,1,5; upagah, II, 2,3; 
abhipragat, Il, 2, 2. 

aga: udgayati, I, 3, 4. 


INDEX V 


gatha, II, 3, 6. 

gam, Il, 4,23 §. XI, 4; gavah, II, 6; gah, 
Ill, 1, 6; S. VII, 19; gok (gen.), 
x 4s 

gayatram, I, 4,1; II, 3, 43 §. XI, 73 (acc.) 
be 

gayatrt, I, 1, 1, &e.; §. II, 7; (ace.) I, 4,33 
5, 1; S.11,83 gdyatrih (nom. plur.), 5.1, 
10; gayatryah, S. 1, 23; (loc. plur.) I, 4, 1. 

girth, Il, 1, 8. 

guha, I, 3, 3- 

Ver: girati, Il, 1,8; apagirati, III, 2, 4 (ava- 
girati, S. XI, 4); grnihi, I, 1, 4. 

ertsah, II, 2, 1. 

Verh: grhnanti, 1, 2,4; anudgrhnan, III,t, 
a; §. VII, 3; agrahaisyat, Il, 4,3; grahi- 
tum, Il, 4,33 grhyate, I, 4,2; wighrksat, 
Il, 453- 

gesnah, II, 3, 6. 

gopa, Il, 1, 6. 

gopayatz, II, 1, 6. 

grahah, 11, 4, 3; graham, §. II, 17. Cf. sagra- 
ham, §. I, 17. 

grivah, I, 4, 1; grivanam, §. Il, 3. Cf. gratvam, 
§. II, 3, and mayiira®. 


W ghra: dighrati, Il, 6. 
ghrtaci, I, 1, 4. 
ghosah, WU, 2, 4; ghosah, U, 2, 2. 


ghosta, U1, 2, 4; S. VIII, 7, which has aghz- 
stah. 


ca, 1, 1, 4, &c., see Introd., p. 65. §. VII and 
VIII agree with the Aitareya. 
a caks: acaksate, 1, 4,1; 11,1, 4; 6; 85 2, 
mie 254,313) LULL, 2, 5 5 §. VIL; X, 1, &e. 
caksuh, 1, 3, 8, &c.; §. VII, 3, &c.; (ace.) II, 
1,73 S.X, 4; (instr.) II, 1, 73 4,33 (abl.) 
II, 4,13 (gen.) Il,1,7; Il, 2,5; (nom. 
du.) II, 3, 8. 

caksurmayah, caksurmayam, YS a7 1 5.25935 
S. VIII, 13 2. 

catvarah, II1, 2,3; $. VIII, 3; catvari, I, 1, 
2; catuhSatam (acc.), catuhfate (loc.), S. I, 
10; caturvimésatikrtvah, Sit, ti: 

catvarimsat (Satanz), III, 2, 2 ; §. VIII, 2. 

caturaksarani, V1, 3, 6; (acc.) §. II, 10. 

caturtham, UII, 2, 1; $. VUI, 1. 


361 


catusparvah, I, 2, 2. 

catuspadah, 1,1,23; 5,13 “pats, 1,1, 23 5,1. 

candramah, UE Barh ey nae disk seedy 
§. VIII, 7, &c.; (acc) S$. X, 5; XI,1; 
(gen.) II, 1, 7; (loc.) III, 2, 3; $, VII, 
4, SoC. 

A car: carati, II, 1,63; caranti, II, 1, 73 ad- 
hiva—caranti (with acc.), II, 3, 13 parica- 
rantt, II, 1, 73 paricaratah, Il, 1, 73 ca- 
ritoh, I, 1, I. 

carmana, III, 2, 53 S. VIII, 9. 

caturmasyanti, II, 3, 3. 

carum, III, 2, 4. 

Aci: vicinott, Il, 1,7; ntcinvantz, II, 1, 8; 
cinuyat, III, 2,4; S, VIII, 6; nyacayan, 
Il, 3, 5- 

A/ cit : vicikitset, III, 2,6; S. VII, 11. 

cittant, II, 3, 2; (gen.) IT, 3, 3. 

ciram, III, 2, 4; S. VIII, 7. 

cirataram, I, I, 2. 

cerapadah (% proper name), II, 1, 1. 

cya: pracyavate, 1, 2,25; acyosthah, III, 1, 
33 S. VII, 10. 


AW chad: channah, V1, 1, 6; chadayanié, I, 
T, 0: 

A chand: chandati,1,1,3; avachandayatt, S. 
Dae Be 

chandah (nom.), I, 4,13 5, 23 S. 1, 23 (acc.) 
EREpt 3035107) (0c. Ly T,0217) (OM. plur.)ol, 
1,4; 3.4; 11,1,6; 3,43 S. 11,5; (ace. 
plur.) III, 1, 6; $. VIL, 18; (instr. plur.) I, 
ads UF; 1,673) 53 Ty 9) 63-8. VEIL 
13 (gen. plur.) I, 4,1; II, 1,1; 3, 53 S. II, 
5; (loc. plur.) I, 3, 4; (nom. dual) S. I, 2. 

chandahpurusah, U1, 2, 3; $. VIII, 3. 

chandaskaram, 1, 5,1. For the form, cf. a- 
maskaram, S. 1,5; Macdonell, Vedic Gram- 
mar, Pp. 71. 

chandashrtim, I, 5, 2. 

chandastah, II, 3, 4. 

chandastvam (acc.), II, 1, 6. 

chandogih, III, 2, 3; S. VIII, 4. 

chandomayah, chandomayam, III, 2,1; 2; 33 
§. VII, 1; 2; chandomayi, chandomayim, 
I, 3, 4- 

chayam, III, 2, 43 chaya, §. VIII, 7. 

A chid: ucchindyat, ucchidyai, I, 2, 4. 

chidrah, III, 2, 4; S. VIII, 73 chédram, UI, 


362 AITAREYA 
2, 4; chidra, §. VIII, 7; (nominal) chz- 
drani, 8. VII, 9. 

chuvukena, 1, 2, 4. 


jagati, I, 3, 43; II, 1, 6; Jagatisahasram, I, 


3, 5s 

jangamam, II, 6. 

jan: jayate, 1, 1, 23 Il, 1, 2; (adhiva- 
jayate, &—jayate) 3,15 53 prajayate, I, 2, 
4, &c. 3 prajayete, I, 3, 4; sayante, I, 3, 53 
8; Il, 1,73 aayata, Il, 4, 33 Jayeta, UL, 
3, 6; jatak, 1, 3, 43 janayate, II, 5. 

janma, II, 5; (gen.) I, 5. 

A jap: japet, 1, 3, 25 Tl, 2,43 53 
japati, 8. 1, 4. : 

jagatam (acc. neut.), I, 1, 35 (nom.) S. XI, 75 
jagatah, I, 1, 3. 

jatavat, I, I, 2. 

Jatavedasyam, 1, 5,3; °vedasyah, I, 5, 3. 

jaya, II, 1, 6; S. VII, 16; (acc.) I, 3, 53 
jiytyat, S. XI, 8. 

jarujani, II, 6. 

Vi: cf. abhijityat, I, 1, 2, &c.; apa -jayatt, 
S. XIII. 


SoL-43 


jikme, III, 2, 4 (dvijthme or ve, §. VIII, 7). 

jJihmasirasam, Il, 2, 43 §. VIII, 7. 

jihvd, III, 2, 5. 

A jiv: jivanti, 1, 5,2; srvisyati, II, 2, 43 S. 
VIII, 7; jzvatz, §. XI, 8; jrvatah (gen. 
masc.), S. XII, 8. 

jivaksaram (acc.), I, 3, 8; (instr.) I, 3, 8. 

jivahah (acc.), Il, 3, 8; (instr.) IT, 3, 8. 

jutih, UI, 6. 

V jr: jiryate, Il, 1, 7. 

AV jita: vijanati, Il, 6; III, 1, 5 (vaiapa- 
yatt, §. VII, 12); pratéjanate, Il, 3, 5; 
samajanata, 1, 2, 2; janiyam, II, 2, 3; 
abhiprajanihi, 11,4, 2; viyidtam (acc. neut.), 
Il, 3, 23 avijadtah, III, 2,4; S. VIL, 7; 
vijijnasam eva cakre, 5.1, 6. 

Jyayim, 1, 4, 2. 

Jyesthah, U1, 1, 15 fyestham, I, 3, 43 7. 

jyotih, Il, 3, 13 (acc.) Il, 1, 7; (nom. plur.) 
IT, 3, 15 14,65 111,.2,35,S. Vil, 3: 

A jval: prajvalatak (gen. masc.), III, 2, 4 
(jvalatah, §. VIII, 7) ; jvadantim, III, 2, 4. 


nakarah, U1, 2, 6; $. VII, 11. 
nakarasakirau, III, 2,6; $. VIII, 11; (acc.) 
III, 2, 6; S. VII, 11. 


ARANYAKA 


tat (nom.), I, 1,1, &c.; ¢am, 1, ty 2 ey 
tam, 1, 1,2; II, 3, 6; dat, 1,1, 1, ec. 3 
tena (masc.), II, 2, 4; ¢asya (neut.), II, 1, 
23 tasyat (gen.), I, 2,23 3, 43 II, 3, Gs 
tasmin (masc.), II, 3, 15 tau (nom.), 
I, 4,1; 23 11, 1, 4; 2 (nom. meuts),n ka ly 
2; ze (acc. fem.), I, 4, 2; tayoh (gen. 
masc.), II, 3, 6; ¢e, 1, 1, 1, &c.; “ah, I, 1, 
2, &e.; tani, 1, 1,2; I], 1,1; ¢ah (acc. ), 
I, 3,53 cabhyak (dat.), I, 4, 2; (abl.) II, 
4, 33 ¢at (=so, then), I, 1, 1, &c.; tasmat 
(=therefore), I, 1, 1, &c.; Zena ( =therefore), 
I, 2,25 43 Il, 2,35 tad yad, I, 2,35 4: 
See also Introd., VI, p. 58. 

(Oy Laos 

tatamam (acc. neut.), II, 4, 3- 

tatah, II, 2, 4. 

tatavatya, 1, 3, 3- 

tatpratisthayam, I, 1, 3, &c. 

tatra, II, 3, 6; III, 2, 5. 

tadanukrtih, Il, 2, 5; S. VIII, 9. 

tan: pratayi, pratéyata, 11,1, 5; samtatah, 
II, 5; samtanoti, 1, 4,3. Cf. tatamam, I, 
4, 3. 

tantih, 11, 1, 63 tantyd, II, 1, 6. 

tantisambaddhah, M1, 1, 6. 

tantrayah, Ill, 2, 53 §. VIII, 9. 

tanvam, I1, 3, 6; tanwzh, ae are 

A tap: tapati, 1, 2,4; Il, 2,1; 2; abhyata- 
pat, Il, 4,13 33 tapan, II, 2,3; abhiap- 
tasya, 11, 4,13; taptabhyah (abl.), II, 4, 3. 

tapasvitamah, 1, 2, 2; tapasvi, I, 2, 2. 

tardmavatt, III, 2, 5; §. VIII, 9. 

(aia, 1,353. 

tavan, 1, 3, Se Tle ys tavante ly oon 
3, 8; (ace.) I, 5, 2. 

tirah, Il, 3, 6. 

tiryaricam, I, 2, 4.° 

tu, Tyr, 1, occ. 

tilam, II, 1, 8. 

tisnim, III, 1,6; S.VII, 18; tisnimsamsah, 
°sam, §. II, 1. 

trcam, 1,1, 13 treah, I, 1, 13 teak, §. Il, 1; 
trcanz, II, 2. : 

treasitih, 1, 4,3; (ace.) I, 4, 3; (nom. plur.) 
IT, 3; 43> (abl. plur,) Ly 3-45 

trtzyam, II, 5; (adv.) II, 2, 3. : 

Vtrd: abhi -trnatti, 1,3, 1; abhititrtsati, I, 
a ike 


INDEX V 


Virp: samatrpyan, I, 3, 8; atrapsyat, TI, 
4,33 ‘rpyatt tarpayatz, S.X, 1, &c.; trptah, 
°d, “ane, °ah (m. and f.), X, 2 sq. 

tejah, 1, 1, 3; 2, 23 (acc.) II, 5; (loc.) I, 2,2. 

tejasvi, I, 1, 3- 

Vitra: atrayata, Il, 2, I. 

trayah, 1, 1,1, &c.; tésrah, I, 2, 2; Il, 1, 1; 
3, 43 értmé, 1,1, 2; 2,3; Il, 3,35 43 III, 
I, 2; ¢risu (neut.), I, 3, 4. 

trimfat, I, 1, 2. 

trimsinyah, I, 2, 2. 

trih, I, 1, 2, &c. 

trinivitkam (acc. neut.), I, 5, 2. 

trivat, 1, 5, 3. 

trivrt, 1, 4,1; II, 1,5; (name) II, 3, 4; ¢vz- 
vrtahk, I, 1, 2, &c. 

tristup, I, 1, &c.; §. I, 2; (acc.) I, 2, 2, &c.; 
(nom. plur.) S. I, 2. : 

tristubjagatyah, 1, 5,2; (gen. plur.) I, 5, 23 
(loc. plur.) I, 5, 2. 

tredha, Il, 3, 43 oT, 2. 

traistubhah, 1, 2, 2; §. I, 23 traistubham 
(nom.), S.xL. 3: (acc.) I, 1, 3; (instr.) S. 
‘eee 

tryaksaram, I, 3, 4- 

tvam, 11, 1, 43 2,3; tvamt, II, 2, 3; ¢vd, III, 
1,3; ¢vayt, I, 3, 4. 

tvak, 1, 4,13; 1, 1,6; 4,13 (acc.) II, 4, 2; 
(instr.) II, 4, 3; (abl.) II, 4, 1. 

tvesanrmnah, 1, 3, 4 (from Rgveda). 


daksinah, 1, 4,2; U,3, 4; S. Ul, 5; daksi- 
nam, Il, 2, 3; daksinah (fem.), 1, 2, 3. 

daksinémukhah, U1, 2, 4; S. XI, 4. 

a/ day : dayeta, 11, 3, 6 (with instr.). 

darbhah, 1, 2, 3. 

darsapiirnamasau, II, 3, 3. 

daga, 1,1,2; 3,43 73 with dasatah, U, 3, 
43 da:asatani, Il, 3, 4. 

dasatah, 1, 3, 8; II, 3, 4. 

dasatinam, I, 5, 2. 

dasamah, 1, 3, 7; dasamim, I, 4, I. 

dasaksare (nom. neut.), I, 3, 7. 

dasinz, 1, 3, 43 dasinibhyam (instr.), 1, 4, 2. 

Nada: dadami, Vl, 2,3; dadatt,1,1, 4; da- 
dyat, 11,3, 6; S$. XI, 8; dadyuh, Il, 1, 5; da- 
dusah, 1, 1, 4; attam (nom. neut.), II, 3, 4. 

damani, damabhih, Il, 1, 6. 

darbhyak (nom. plur. fem.), I, 2, 3. 


363 


adivayatanam, §. VII, 10 (divpdyatanam, A. 
LY 13). 

divyah (fem.), I, 3, 4. 

ase, Il, 1,65, desak(mom.), U0, 1, 55) 7 3.2535 
Ast 328 S. Vil, 43 X, 65 (accoeLl, 1-1-4 
6; S..X, 6; digbhyak (abl.), Il,1, 7; disame, 
Roi etal f 

WV dif : anadistah, IIT, 2, 4; $. VIII, 7. 

dirghajivitamah, 1, 2, 2; dirghazivi, 1, 2, 2. 

V/ du: dutah, 1, 4,1. Ch 7.R.A.S.,1909, p. 204. 

Vduh: duhe (3rd sing.), I, 3, 2, 

dugdhadohah, VI, 2, 4; S. VIII, 5. 

“dr: vidarya, II, 4, 3. 

dr : Gdriyante, 1, 1,1; and see ddrtyam. 

Vdrs: drsyate, U1, 3, 2; III, 2,4; drsyete, 
I, 2, 3; arSyante, III, 2, 4; arsyeyatam, 
III, 2, 4 (dréyete, S. VIII, 7); dadyse, I, 
I, 33; 8; adarsam, Il, 4,3; drstam (nom. 
neut.), II, 4,3; adrstah, III, 2,4; S. VIII, 
7; drstva, Il, 4, 3- 

drstih, 11, 6; adystih (acc.), SAX, 3 

devam, II, 3, 4; devah, 1,1, 4; Il, 1,23 43 
5; 83 2, 13 25 3,83 63 aevan, 1), 1,8); 
devebhyah (dat.), 1, 1, 4; (abl.) IJ, 1, 8; de- 
vanam, 1, 4,3; 1,1, 23 II, 1, 6. 

devata, II, 1, 8; III, 1, 3; devatam, III, 1, 3; 
devatayai (dat.), Il, 4,2; devatah (nom.), 
I, 3,2; 8; II, 1, 53 3,33 S. X, 1; (acc.) 
Thay 45s §. XI, 1; devatdsu, II, 4, 2. 

devatamayah, II, 2, 4. 

devarathah, II, 3, 8; (abl.) S. I, 8. 

devaretah or devaretasam (2), I, 2, 4. 

devalokam (acc.), I, 3, 8. 

devim, I, 3,1; devyai (gen.), I, 3, 1 (w.r. for 
daivyat). 

daivam, 1, 4,33; daivi, daivim, III, 2, 5; S. 
VIII, 9; datvyai (gen., v.1.), I, 3, 1. 

daihikah, YI, 2,3; S. VIII, 3; (ace) S. 
VIII, 7. 

doh, I, 2, 2. 

dyauk, 1, 4,3; TI, 1,2; 75 4,13 Ill, 1,1; 
2; 2,4; S. VII, 2, &c.; divam, II, 4,1; 
iWB, See TSS §. VI, 15, &c.; diva, S. X, 

; divah (gen.), II, 1,7; Il,1,25 2, 5; 
VII, 8; dé, III, 1, 23 33 2, 3; S. 

VI, 3, ccc. 

dyivaprthivyau, II, 1, 2; §. VIL, 3; (ace.) 
Ill, 1, 2; dyavaprthivi, I, 3, 8 (from 
Rgveda) ; dudvaprthivyoh (gen. ?), S. Vil, 3. 


364 AITAREYA 

dyivaprthiviyam, 1, 5, 3 

drastd, Il, 2, 4; S. VIIL, 7. 

draghiyah, 1, 5, 1. 

J dru: upadravatt, Il, 3, 4 

dvau, I, 1, 2, &c.3 dve (nom, neut.), I, 1, 2, 
&c.; $.1, 2; (acc.) I, 1, 1; dvabhydm (fem.), 
I, 4, 2; dvayok (gen. masc.), I, 4, 2 

dvadasa, 1,3, 43 S.1, 2; cf. dvadasarcam, S. 
Las 

dvadasakrtvah, 1, 5, 1 

dvadasavidhah, I, 5, I. 

dvah, dvarda, Xl, 4, 3- 

dvavimsim, 1, 4,2; avdvimsyoh (loc.), 1, 4, 2. 

advitiya, 1, 5,1; dvitiyam (nom.), II, 5; (acc. 
adv.) II, 2,3; S. I, 6. ; 

dvipada, 11, 3, 43; dvipadah, I, 4, 2; (acc.) S. 
Il, 12; dvtpadayoh (loc.), 1, 4, 2 

dvipratisthah, I, 1, 23 5,1; (acc.) I, 1, 23 
5, I. 

Advis: dvisan, II, 1, 4, &c.; dvisantam, UW, 
1,83; dvisyat, Salas: 


adharmena, Il, 1, 7. 

Vahaé: dadhatt, 1,1, 43 2, 33 3, 83 5,23 
api dadhati, Wl, 2,5; $. VII, 9; saxda- 
dhati, 1, 1, 1, &c.3 samdadhatz, II, “s 6 
(ati, §. Vil, 18); paridaihati, I, 5; 213 sa~ 
madadhat, III, 2,6; °dadhat, S. VII, 11; 
paridadhyat, 1, 5, A samidadhat, III, 1, 2; 
samdadhatam, II, 1, 4; dhatte, I, 5, - 
dadhe, I, 2, 1; pemecnen: II, 1, 43 sama- 
dhataém, II, ne ; S. VIL, 3; wihitah, II, 
3,1; samahitah Ae samahitah, Ill, 2 ; 6. 
VIII, 1; wzhttam (nom. neut.), II, a 43 
apihita, III, 2,5; S. VII, 9; cn ee 
JOO Gs Siete §. VII, 8; anuvidhaya, II, 1, 2; 
§. VII, 3; apfédhaya, Ill, 2, 4; pratidhiyate, 
Il, 5; samdhiyate, III, 1, 1, &c.; S. VII, 
2, &c.; dhiyante, I, 3,3; samadhitsisam, 
NIT S143 samehiyananam, ie ees 
VIII, 4; samadhitsih, §. VII, 8; 93 saze- 
Whsistuwe: S. VII, 8; samadhah, , Vil, 8. 

dhama (acc.), II, 2, 3; S. I, 6. 

dhayyad, 1, 4, 23 (acc.) I, 4, 2. 

WV dhav: dhévayantz, Il, 1, 2. 

AV dhi: dhinott, 1, 2,3; dhinvantz, I, 3, 5. 

dhiydvasuh, 1, 1, 4 (from Rgveda). 

ahisanda, 1, 5, 3. 

adhin, 1, 1, 4. 


ARANYAKA 


ahih, I, 5, 2. 

Ahtimat, 1, 3, 5- 

Vdhr: didhéva, I, 5,2 
Sede ot 

dhrtih, I, 6. 

ee Ill, 2, 4; S. XI, 4; dhenavak, 


; aharayatz, III, 2, 4; 


» 5 
Vi es dhydtam (nom. neut.), II, 4, 3; dhya- 
tua, II, 4, 3. 
A dhvams : pradhvamsayan, III, 2, 3. 


na (=no), II, 3,6; 8; (negative with indica- 
tive) I, 1) 13 2, 0s 23 155 25) lls 25 2385s Os 
7; 8; 2,2; 3,23 53 8; IU, 1,4; 2,43 
(no verb) II, 4, 2; (with opt. =imperative) 
I, 1, 13 3, 23 I, 1,1; 3,6; 7; Ill, 1,33 
(with opt.= ee wale or indefinite) II, 1, 2; 
5; Ill, 2,23 43 5; (with perenaae) I, f 
3, &e.; Gwith subj.) §. VIII, 6; ekayd na 
trimsat, I, 1, 25 ma - cand, 1, Ess §: 
VII, 8; 9; 2a va, III, 2, 4; §. VII, 7. 

nah (dat), IL, 4, 23 (gen.) I, E; 43 2, Lpeas 

naksatresu, III, 2, Ne SAUL 4: 

nakhebhyah, 1, 3, 8; nakhdant, Sips ee 
Er 

nad: samnadati, 1, 3, 5; 8; nadan, I, 3, 8. 

nadah, 1,3, 5; 8; nadena, 1, 3,53; 8; uada- 
SY, ST) i 

AV nam: saninamante, III, 1,7; anatah, Il, 

2,43 vinatam (nom. neut.), II, 1, 2 

namah, III, 1,3; S$. VII, 8; °karam, I 

naladaméali, II, 2, 4; S. XI, 4. 

nava,1,3,7;83 4,1 

navakapalam, I, 4,1 (triné vd asya Sirsnah ka- 
palani, §. I, 2). 

navatih, I, 2, 2. 

navarcam, I, 3, 8. 

navasrakti, II, 3, 6 (said to be nom. ; ; Iread ih). 

ER es, PSs Se 

nanariipa, II, 3, 6. 

nandanam, II, 4, 3. 

wabhih, Il, 4,1; nabhim, Il, 4,2; nabhyat 
or °a@h (abl.), II, 4, 1 (in Sandhi za@bhya). 

nama (by name), II, 4,33; zdmd (adv.), II, 3, 
8; zamani, II, 1,6; namabhih, I, 1, 6. 

namadheyam (acc.), Il, 2,4; zamadheyani, I, 
3, 33 Il, 6. 

namayattah, Il, 3, 8. 

ndsikdyat (gen.), Il, 1, 2; mdastke (nom.), I, 


2 de 


INDEX V 


I, 23 4, 13 (acc.) Il, 4, 23 zasthabhyam 
(abl.), II, 4, 1. 

ni: anayat, Wl, 4,2; pranayanta, Il, 1, 5; 
pranitah, I, 1, 5. 

nigadah, II, 3, 6. 

nidhanam, II, 3, 4. 

nirbhujam, Il, 1,3; S. VU, 10; (ace.) TI, 
1,3; S. VU, 10; (gen.) III, 1,3; S. VII, 
10. 

nirbhujapravadéh, III, 1,3; S. VII, to. 

nirbhujavaktrah, WI, 1, 5; S. VI, 12. 

ntvit, 1, 5, 2; (acc.) I, 5, 2; Sis 

nividdhanam, I, 2,23 5,3. 

niskevalye, 1, 5, 2. 

nilah, III, 2, 4; S. VIII, 7. 

We Ned ws LIL, Ty Ts 2, 

nu: prandvam, 1, 5,1; pranaut?, §. II, 1. 

ned: ucchidyat, 1,2, 4; asat,1,5,2; dadhant, 
S. Lex. 

nauh, 1,2, 4; navam, I, 2, 4. 

nytinam, 1, 4,2; nyune (loc. neut.), I, 1, 2, &c, 

nyunaksara, I, 1, 2; (acc. du. neut.) I, 3, 4. 


paksah, 1, 4, 2; Il, 3, 43 paksau (acc.), S. iy 
4; paksabhyam, 5S. Il, 4. 

paksasi, U, 3, 8. 

panktih, 1, 1,33 3,83 4, 2; Il, 1, 6. 

patica, I, 2, 2; 3,8; HU, 6,1; S. VII, 21; 
patica catuarimsacchatani, MII, 2, 2; S. 
VII, 2. 

pancakrtvah, Il, 3, 4. 

pahcadasam, Il, 3, 4. 

pancapada, I, 3, 8. 

patcami, Il, 3,33 4 

pancarcam, 1, 3, 8. 

pancavinisatin, 1, 1, 2, &e. 

pancavimsah, 1,1, 2, &e. ; ra I, 1, &c.; (nom. 
neut.) 1, 1, 3; U,.3, 4; (acc. masc.) I, 1, 2; 
(nom, plur. neut.) I, 2, 2. 

parcavidhahk, Il, 3,3; (nom. neut.) II, 3, 1; 
4; 6; (acc.) I, 3,4; 8 

A pat: patanti, Il, 1,2; utpatanti, I, 4, 2; 
sampatanti, III, 2,4; patsyati, Il, 1, 4; 
prapatan, Il, 4, 2. 

patatri, I, 6, 1. 

patiyast, 1, 3, 5. 

pattrena, pattrani, I, 4, 2. 

pad: prapadyai, 1, 4,3; pratipadyate, I, 
I, 2, &c.; abhipratipadyate, 1, 3,3; abhi- 


365 


sampadyante, I, 1, 2; 2,23 3, 8; “padyate, 
§. VII, 7; apadyata, II, 1, 4; prapadyata, 
II, 1,43 4,33 pratipadyeta, 1,3, 23 sam- 
padyamanda, Il, 3,6; sampannah, I, 3, 2; 
(nom. neut.) II, 3, 4, &c.; (gen. nent.) -4I, 
3, 4, &c.; abhif~annam, I, 2, 4; pratipan- 
nam, I, 3, 4; prapanne (loc.), II, 1, 4; 
abhisanipadayet, Il, 3, 5; padi, UI, 2,25 abhi- 
sampadayanit, III, 2,2; S. VIII, 2. 

padam, I, 1,13 Il, 2,253 pade (acc.), I, 3, 73 
padani (acc.), S. Der 

padadnusangih (fem.), I, 5, 2; (acc. mase. 
plur.) S. II, 16; (instr.) ib, 

padvat, I, 3, 7: 

panthah, 11, 1,1; panthanam, Ill, 2, 4; pa- 
thibhih, U1, 1, 6 (from Rgveda). 

parah, WII, 1, 3; parena (masc.), III, 1, 6; S. 
VII, 14; parena (prep. with acc.), II, 4, 13 
parasmai, III, 2,4; 5.1, 13 parasmzn, ib. 

paramah, Il, 3, 6 

parastat (with gen.), II, 2, 4. 

para, see bhi. 

paran, WI, 1, 8; (tneut.) 4, 3; sarah, II, 3, 6. 

paragvacanena, II, 1, 2, &c. 

pari (with acc. and gacha/z), I, 5, 1. 

paroksena, Il, 4, 3. 

paroksapriyah, Il, 4, 3. 

Parjanyah, Ul, 1,1; S. VII, 3, &c. 

paryastavat, I, 2, 1. 

parvant, III, 2, 2; Ss: VET ays (ace, ly ar 3 
parvanam, III, 2,1; 2; S. VIII, 2. 

pavih, III, 2, 5. 

Av pas: pasyaté, Il, 3,2; 6; pasyantd, II, 3, 
2; pasyet, III, 2, 3 (vidyat, S. VIII, SO ne 
§. VIII, 7; pasyeta, III, 2,4; apasyat, I, 
4,3; apasyan, I, 1, 4; apasyate, I, 2, 4; 
pausyate, I, 2, 4. 

pasuh (=a sacrifice), II, 3, 3; (=cattle) pafa- 
Wah, 1, ty 4, doc.y S. IT; 1, See, s pasa, 1; 
5, 13 IL, 3,13 S. Il, 16; pasedhih, I, 2, 4, 
&c.; S$. VII, 2, &c.; pasiinam, I, 1, 2, &e.; 
pasusu, 1,1, 23 5,1; Ph eee 

pasuman, 1,1,33; Wl, 2,15 2; 33 S. Vill, 
I, &e, 

panktim, 1, 1,3; $. XI, 7. 

padaih, I, 3, 8. 

padyah, I, 1, 2. 

panam, II, 3, 4. 

fapat, II, 1, 6. 


366 AITAREYA 


paptka, M1, 3, 6. 

papmda, Il, 1, 43 (acc.) I, 1,2; 2, 23 3,43 
Il, 1, 8; 3,83 (@bl.) Il, 2;1; (gen.) I, 2; 
3; cf. apahatapapma. 

payasam (acc.), III, 2, 4; ae ae ye 

payuh, WII, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

pita, U1, 1,73 Ill, 1,6; S. VII, 15; petaram, 
IL, 1, 73 pétre, IIL, 2,6; S. 1,1; pateh, I, 
1,73 Ill, 1,1; S. VU, 2. 

pipilikabhyah (abl.), 1, 3, 8; I, 1, 6. 

oY pib: piban, Il, 1, 4; pibati piyayati, S. 
X, 1, &e. 

pumamsam, II, 3, 8; pumsak, I, 4, 2. 

pucham, I, 4,2; Il, 3, 4; (instr.) I, 4, 2. 

pundartkam, see eka’. 

punyam, Il,1, 73; (dat. neut.) II, 1, 7; (dat. 
plur. neut.) IT, 5. 

puirah, WL, 1, 13° 53°63 §. VIL, 2, &c.; 
(instr.) III, 1,1; S. VIL, 2; (gen.) II, 1,7; 
It, 4,4; SeVIL, 2. 

Dutre, VE 20h s 2)503\5 $: ALIS rence. 
punah, II,1,43 5,13 punah punah, S.XE, 
8; punah, ba bes ae punarmyrtyum, XIII. 

purastat, 1, 2,45 35 23 5y 3- 

pura (ady.), III, 2, 5; (with abl.) II, 3, 5; Ss 
XI, 3 (samvatsarat). 

purusah, 1, 1, 2; 353 4,13 23 NA RE ORR rr 
Anos VIL r eens.) WIL ray (ace.) TI, Sos 
4,13 I, 3,43 4,15; 2; IIL,2,3; S.XI,15 
(gen.) II, 1,73 3,15 (loc.) II, 3, 25 75 = 
X, 1; (nom. plur.) II, 6; II, 2, 3; $. VIII, 3. 

purusariipam, I, 4, 23 (instr.) II, 2, 1. 

purusayusah (gen.), II, 2,1; 3, 8;°sduz,S. IL, 17. 

pustin, I, 1, 1. 

pustikamah, I, 1, 1. 

pustiman, I, 1, 1. 

puspam, II, 3, 6; (acc.) II, 3, 6. 

V/ pu: pavate, 1, 2,3; abhyapavayata, II, 2,2; 
pavamanah, III, 1,6; S. VII, 14; (instr. ) 
TLL, 4.65.8. Vit, 10. 

AW pity : piiyet, WII, 2,2; §. VII, 2. 

purve, II, 1,13 purvane (acc.), S. LES Ds 

purvapaksiparapaksaw, II, 1, 7. 

purvariipam, II, 1, 1, &e.; S$. VII, 2, &c. 

pirvariipottarariipe (acc.), II], 1, 5; S. VII, 12. 

V pr: pirnam, II, 3, 6. 

Drihit, AL, V, as "7s 0341) lla Gs Mller 
S.VII, 2, &c.; (acc.) TIL, 1,3; $.X, 2, &e.; 
brthivya, S.X, 2; prthivydh (gen.), I, 1, 7; 


ARANYAKA 


Li; 3,23 §. VIII, 8; prthivydm, II, 1, 2; 

= SV, 3 

prihivyayatanam, IX, I, 3; §. VII, 10. 

prsthanam, I, 2,1; prsthan, Soria 

praiigam (ace.), I, 1, 3; (nom.) §. I, 2, &e.; 
(gen. plur.) I, 2, 1. 

prakasam (acc.), II, 1, 7. F 

pragathin, 1, 2,1; pragathebhyah (abl.), S. 
EO: 

prajananam, III, 1, 6; §. VII, 16. 

praja, I, 3,43 S. VIL, 153 (ace.) I, 3, 4, &c.5 
(instr.) I, 2, 4, &c.; S. VII, 2, &c.; (nom. 
plur,) Tt, 25a s(acc. plux)) das enue 
2, Os (sens plus) Ieeneee. 

prajatim, I, 4,15 prajatyat, I, 2, 45 3,13 43 
Aryl. 

prajana, 1, 4, 2. 

La apatih WN Ai fa 25 2ce os s)he mie ens 
6,1; Ill, 2,6; $1, 2; 1,47; VE ee 
&e: 3) Xl; 75 (gens) by 22 Lie a eoce) 
S. 1.2. 

Prajapatisamhité, U1, 1, 6; S. VI, 16. 

prapipasukamah, 1, 1,1. 

prajfata, III, 2, 4. 

prajkatma, III, 2, 3; §. VIII, 33 prajnalma- 
nan, S. VIII, 7; prajtenatmand, I, 6. 

prajfianam, Il, 6; (instr.) I, 3, 2; (gen.) I, 
6; (loc.) II, 6. 

prajhanetrah, 11,6; (nom. neut.) II, 6. 

prajiamayah, Il, 2, 9. 

pratt (with acc.), III, 2, 3; 4. 

pratipat, 1, 3,13 5,3; SI, 33 IL, 19, tor 
lowed in both cases by axucarah. 

pratipadanucarau, 1, 2,13 5, 2. 

pratistha, 1,1, 3, &c.3 & Il, 18; pratisthiyat 
(dat.), I, 1,23 pratisthdyad (abl.), I, 2, 4; 
(loc.) S. 1, 73 pratisthe (nom.), I, 5, 1; 
pratisthayoh (gen.), I, 4, 2. 

pratisthityai, 1, 4,2; S. II, 18. 

pratynnam, NUN rie ee S. Vil, 1603 (ace) ai, 
I, 3; 5.VII, 10; (gen.) III, 1, 3; §.VII, 10, 

pratyaksat, I, 3,23 5, 2. 

pratyaksadarsanénz, 111, 2, 4; - Xs: 

pratyan, I, 2, 43 pratyaicam, I, 2, 4; pra- 
tyafict, I, 4, 2. 

prathamam (nom. neut.), I, 3,3; 83 Il, 5; 
(acc. masc.) I, 1, 1; (acc. fem.) I, 3, 3; (instr. 
fem.) I, 1, 2, &c.; (acc. du, neut.) I, 3, 7. 

prathamavadi, I, 3, 3. 


INDEX V 


pradanat, Tl, 1, 2. 

pradesamatre, 1, 2, 4. 

prapade, II, 1, 4; (instr.) TI, 1, 4. 

prabhavah, Wl, 2,6; S. VII, 11. 

prasamsa, I, 2, 2. 

prastivahanah, Il, 1, 1; S. VI, 2. 

prahitam, Ul, 1, 5. 

prak (with abl.), II, 3, 33 4. 

pran, prak, I, 2, 4. 

prajapatyam, I, 2, 2; or ante 

pranah, 1, 3,7; 8; TI, 1, 4; 3,6; Il, 1,1; 
ws Gs) 2,6. §. VII, 8, &c. ; (= smell) II, 
Mame me(acte) ty 15.75 LL, t Os) 2, 63 Ss. 
VII, 8, &c.; (aindram) II, 3, 5; (instr.) I, 
Batoece.s At, 1, GO éccus IIL, r, 6; (abl.) 
Il, 4,1; (aindrat) Il, 3,6; Il, 2,2; S. 
VII, 2; (gen.) II, 1, 7; Ul, 2, 5; $. VIU, 
8; (loc.) II, 1, 4; Ill, 1, 6; 2,6; S. VIII, 
113; (nom. plur.) I, 1,2; 2,4; 3,73; 8; UH, 
1,23 (ace.) I, 5, 25 (instr.) I, 5, 23 (gen.) 
I, 3, 8. 

pranabhrt (nom. neut.), I, 3, 2; prdnabhriah 
(nom. plur.), I, 3, 1; (loc. plur.) II, 3, 2. 

pranapanayoh (loc.), II, 3, 3 

prant, I, 3, 4 

pratar, Il, 1, 5. 

pradurbhavanti, WI, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

priyah (with gen.), I, 2, 2; (neut.) II, 2, 3; 
priyaya, priyayat, 5. XL, Ss 

prenkhah, 1, 2,3; (acc.) I, 2,4; (gen.) I, 2, 3. 

prenkhatvam, I, 2, 3. 

Ao plu: popliyante, I, 3, 5- 

phalakam, phalake, phalakani, I, 2, 3. 

phalam, U, 3, 6; (acc.) 1, 2, 4; I, 3, 6. 


A bamh : sambathatamah (fem.), 1, 4, 1. 

batarakani, I, 2, 4 (varatakan, §. VII, fhe 
XI, 3). 

bandhund, Il, 2, 4. 

balam, III, 2,6; $. XI, 2; bale, S. XI,1. 

balavat, II, 1, 2; $. VII, 3. 

balim, II, 1, 5- 

bahu, 1, 2, 3; bahvi, II, 3, 6. 

bahuripam, 1, 5, 3- : 

bahvrcah, Il, 2, 3; $. VIII, 4. 

A badh : bibhatseta, Tl, 3, 7- 

barhatam (nom.), & Hl, g¢ X17; (ace) 12, 
3; barhati, barhatim, I, 4, 33 §. 11,73 93 
barhatyai (abl,), $. 11, 10; darhatah,S. 11,17. 


367 


baht, 1, %, 23 bahubhyam, I, 2, 4. 

bidale, III, 1,2; $. VII, 3; vidalah, S. II, > 

bibhradvajah, II, 2, 2. 

btsani (acc.), III, 2, 4; Soa, 4. 

byant, Il, 6. 

brhat (nom.), I, 2,1, &c.; II, 3, 43 brhatah 
(gen.), Ill, 1,63 S. VIII, 19; VII, 8. 

brhati, 1, 1, 3; I, 1,6; 3, 5; (acc.) I, 1, 25 
3, 8; Il, 3,53 (instr.) I, 1,63 drhatyat 
(abl.), II, 3, 6; (acc. plur.) III, 2, 2; S. 
VIII, 2; (instr. plur.) So 1h 9. 

brhatisampannanam (fem.), I, 5, 23 °sane- 
pannam (nom.), §. II, 17. 

brhatisahasram, I, 2, 4, &c. ; StlE 17; (acc.) 
Il, 2, 33 (gen.) Il, 2, 4, dce.; 6. Il, 19: 

brhadrathantarayoh (gen.), III, 1,6; °exa, S. 
VII, 19. 

bradhnasya, Il, 1, 2. 

brahma, I, 1,1; 33 2,23 3,8; Il, 1,1; 3, 
8; §. 1, 5, &c.; (accs) T1453) Sn axts 
Lege (dMstre ey Ts ise sis) Ze clos NTs kepO)s S. 1; 
5; (=spell) Il, 3,8; (gen.) I, 3,1; HU, 1, 3; 
brahmety upasate, III, 2, 3; S. VIII, 4. 

brahma, III, 2, 3 (probably the masc. here 
denotes ‘a Brahman priest’ ; §. VIII, 3 has 
brahma); brahmdanam, III, 2, 3 (certainly = 
priest); S. VIII, 3. Cf. p. 304. 

brahmagirih, II, 1, 8. 

brahmanya, I, 5, 2. 

brahmamayah, Il, 2, 4. 

brahmavarcasam (acc.), I, 1, 3; (instr.) II, 
Teds OCCHs §. VII, 2, &c. 

brahmavarcasvi, I, 1, 3. 

brahmistham, Ul, 2, 3; $. VIII, 3. 

brahmanam, Ill, 1, 3; 43 §. VU, 8; 93 arah- 
manan, Ill, 2, 4; brahmanebhyah (dat.), 
III, 1, 33 S. VII, 8, &c.; brahmani, S16. 

brahmanam (acc. neut.), §. VIII, 10; (nom.) 
S. I, 3; Il, 4; XI, 8, &c.; and see vagbrah- 
mana, VIII, 11. 

Av brit: briimah, WI, 1, 53 §. VII, 12; pra- 
briimah, VII, 2,6; abravit, I,1,43 2, 2; 
4, 2; abruvan, Il, 1,4; 2,13; 23 4,25 
abritam, U1, 4,2; briyat, Il, 3, 6; III, 1, 
3; 4; 2,6; S. VIL,8; 9; VIIIL,11; pra- 
briyat, III, 2, 6; §.1X,7; driyama, Il, 3, 
5; bravani, III, 2,6; bruvan, U, 3,8; II, 
Tasie S.VII, 8; 9; bruvantam, III, 1, 3; S. 
VII, 9. 


368 AITAREYA 

Vbhaks: bhaksayati, WI, 2, 4 (khadayati, §. 
XI, 4). 

bhaksam (acc.), I, 2, 4. 

WV bhaj : abhajimi, V1, 4, 2; vibhagate, WI, 1, 
5 (vibhajati, §. VI, 12). 

bhadram (neut.), II, 3, 4. 

bhagah, III, 2, 4. 

bhaginyau (acc.), II, 4, 2. 

bhavayitri, Il, 5. 


WV bhas: bhasate, WI, 1,6; $. VIL, 18; bha- 


sante, III, 2, 5; bhasamdnah, Il, 2, 5; 
(gen. masc.) S. VIII, 11. 

v bhid: nirabhidyata, nirabhidyetam, 
Zin At, 

AV bhi: bibhadya, 1, 35 4+ 

v bhi: bhavati, I, 1,1, &c.3 adhi - bhavati, 
Il, 3,1; anubhavaté (with acc.), I, 3, 5; 
abhavati (with acc.), Il, 3, 7; sagebhavate, 
II, 1,8; adhisambhavatz (with acc.), I, 3, 8; 
Il, 3, 7; parabhavatt, Il, 1, 4, &e.; bhava- 
tok, 1, 1,23 3,75 1, 4,23 IL, 1, 25 cbaze- 
sambhavatah (with acc.), I, 3,7; bhavantz, 
Dy deol, OcCs sie VL Ot mMOULAUCL lsat 5) is 
Tl, 1,43 2,23 samabhavat, Il,5; 6; abha- 
vatam, II, 1,4; abhavan, Il, 2,2; san- 
bhavet, III, 2, 23 dbhutdni (=creatures), I, 
3,43 8; II,1, 2; 53; 65; 2,3; (acc.) Il, 2, 
2; 4,33 II,1,6; 2, 3; (dat.) I, 1,3; 8; 
2,2; (gen.) II, 3, 7; IIL, 2,4; S.I, 1; VIII, 
7; (loc.) IH, 2, 3; $. VIL, 223 samdhittam 
(acc. masc.), II, 5; dhavetoh, Il, 3,53; bhit- 
va, Il, 3,73 4,23 sambhiiya, Il, 2, 43; bha- 
visyati, Il, 1, 4; Il, 1, 6; S. VII, 15 ; da- 
bhiiva, Il, 2,4; babhivuh, II, 1,8; para- 
babhivuh, Il, 1, 8; bhavayati, adhibhava- 
yeti, I1,5; bhadvayan, Ill, 2, 3; bhavayt- 
tavyd@, Il, 5. 

MV bhuj : bhojayttvad, II, 2, 4. 

bhuvah (interj.), I, 3, 2. 

bhuvanesu, I, 3, 4. 

bhih (interj.), I, 3, 23 dhiur bhah, I, 1, 8. 

bhitih, Il, 1, 8. 

bhimih, 1, 2, 4. 

bhimipra, I, 2,5; $. VII, 9. 

bhiyan, 1, 4,2; Il, 3,6; bhayasa (neut.), I, 
3, 6. 

AV bhy : bibharti, Vl, 2,2; 5; udbhrte, 1, 2,3; 
sambhytah, V1, 1, 8. 

bhratrovyah, Il, 1, 4, &e. 


Il, 


ARANYAKA 


maja, II, 1,6; III, 2, 2; §.VILIL, 2; majjénah, 
IH, 2,13 2; §. VIII, 1; 23 mazyatam, III, 
2,1; 2; S. VIII, 2. 

matzistha, II, 2, 4; §. VI, 7. 

matih, Il, 6. 

a/mad : anumadati,I, 3,8; anumadanti, I, 3, 
8; pramadyet, II, 1, 1; parimatiam, Suleg 

madah, II, 2, 1. 


. madhu,\, 1,33 3, 43 (acc.) I, 1, 35 3, 45 TH, 2, 4. 


madhyatah, 1, 2, 3; Il, 2, I. 

madhyandinah, 1, 2, 2. 

madhyamah, I, 1, 8; §. VII, 2. 

madhyam, Il, 3, 5- 

man: manyate, 1, 3,53; manye, III, 1,5; 
Bese §. VII, 13 ; manyeta (with aéz), I, 3, 
33; II, 1,4; 2,43 S. VII, 8; 9; VILL, 7; 
mene, III, 1, 1; §. VIL, 2; amatah, III, 2, 
43 §. VIL, 7 3 mimdamsante, III, 2, 3. 

manah, I, 3,2; 8; 4,23 Il, 1,33 43 53 3, 
8; 4,13 3; 6; IUl,1,1; S. VIL, 2, &e; 
(instr.)' I, 3, 25 11, 25°73) 45°35) LE ese 
VI, 23 (dat:) O, 3,53 (abl) 14 wien.) 
Il, 1,3; 7; S. VII, 8; (loc.) I,3,2; S. 
X, 1; (nom. plur.) I, 3, 4. 

manisa, II, 6. 

manomayah, III, 2,15 23 3; S. VILL; 13825 
(acc) Mid arr ares §. VIII, 1; 2. 

manovakpranasanihatah, III, 1,1; §. VII, 2, 
which has manovakpranas in VII, 2; 3, for 
pranas only. 

mayiragrivéh (?), I1,2,6; mayiragriva, S. 
VII, 7. 

maral, Wva> Ee (Acc, Ulspas as “ 

maricayah, Il, 4,1; maricth, Il, 4,1; TH, Be 
4 peo VILE, 

Marutah, I, 2, 2. 

Marutvatiyam, 1, 2,2; (ace.) I, 2, 2; (gen.) 
I, 2,1; S. 1, 3- 

markatah, Il, 2, 4; Sx1 4. 

martyena (neut.), I, 3, 2; martyant, II, 1, 8. 

mah: makayati, I, 3,8. 

makan Not. TL tas S..xe 3; mahat, I, 
2, 1, &c.; Il, 2,2; mahaid (loc.), II, 4, 2; 
PIL as 3. 

mahadvat, 1, 2, 1, &c.; S. I, 2, &c.; mahad- 
vatya, 1, 5, 2. 

mahah, I, 4, 3. 

mahapurusah, II, 2, 3; S. Viltos: 

mahabhutani, I, 6; S. VII, 21. 


INDEX V 


mahameghe, WI1, 2, 43 ak or “ah (2), §. VIL, 3; 
°, §. VIII, 7. 

mahévratam, I, t,1;.S.1, 13 (instr.) II, 2, 43 
§. VIII, 6; (gen.) I, 1, 1; (loc.) II, 2, 3; S. 
VIII, 4. 

mahévratatvam, I, I, I. 

ma: samnirmimite, I, 3,6; mitam, Il, 3, 
6; sammitah, I, 2, 4. 

mamsam, II, 1,6; Ill, 2, 13 §. VIII, r. 

matd, I, 1,6; S. VIL, 15. 

matrad, III, 1, 5; §. VII, 13; matraydm, II, 
1,6; §. VII,18; mdtram, §, X11, 8. 

matramatram, III, 1, 53 §. VIII, 12. 

méanusi, III, 2,5; S. VII, 9; (acc) I, 3,13 
manusyat (gen.), I, 3, I. 

mam, Ul, 1, 8; Ill, 2,5; md, Ill, 1,4; me 
(dat.), II, 1,43 Ill, 1,1; mahyam, I,1, 5; 
mad, II, 1, 8; Il, 4,33; me (gen.), I, 4, 3; 
5,13 23 Il, 2, 3. 

marutam, I, 5, 3- 

mili, see nalada°, 

mitram, I, 2,2; Il, 2,1; 33 weetrané (acc.), 

) ey, 6; S: VU, 18. 

mithunamt, I, 2, 4, &c. ; (acc.) I, 2, 4, &c. ; (in- 
str.) I, 3,4; (abl.) II, 3, 6; mzthunaz, I, 3, 4. 

mithunikarott, 11, 3,6. ~ 

mukham, 11,1, 2; (acc.) Il, 4,2; (abl.) I, 4, 1. 

mukhatah, I, 1, 2. 

mukhyah (fem.), 1, 3, 5+ 

mustimatre, 1, 2, 4. 

of miurch : amirchayat, Il, 4, I. 

murtih, Il, 4, 3- 

miulam, 11,1, 8; 3, 6. ‘ec 

mrtyuh, 11,1, 8; 4,1; 23 mrtyave, §. XESS s 
punarmrtyum, §, XII. 

myrsa, Il, 1, 5. 

meghe, III, 2, 4. 


yah,1, 1, 1, &c.; yo yam, I, 2,3, &c.; ya, esa, 
I, 2,4; U, 2,15; y4,1,1,25 yat, I, 1, 4, &c. ; 
yam,1I,1,5; yam,1,2,45; yat, I, I, 4, &e.5 
yasmét (neut.), II, 3,1; yasyat (gen.), I, 3, 
6; yasmin (masc.), I, 1, 4; 3,83; yasyam, 
Ill, 2, 5; yasmin (neut.), I, 9, 2. 

ye, Ul, 1,1; yah, I, 3,55 U,1, 1; yani, I, 3, 
4; Ul, 2, 43. yah (ace.), I, 3, 55 yesam 
(masc.), I, 1, 3, &c.; (indef. rel.) yad yad 
(acc.), I, 3, 7, and see Aah. 

yy: yaksyamahe, UW, 2, 6; §. VIII, 11; 


KEITH 


369 


yaujamanah, I, 1,23 2, 2; (acc.) I, 1, 2; 5, 
Es (date) 0 35.4. 

yajuh, II, 3,6; (instr.) I, 3,2; (abl.) I, 3, 2. 

yynah, Tl, 3, 33 (acc.) I, 1, 43 (gen.) III, 2, 
3; S. VII, 3; (loc.) Il, 3, 4; (gen. plur.) 
I 3) 3°37 Coc: plur.) Lay 4. 

J yat: dyattah, TW, 1,2; §. VIL, 3; ef. wa- 
mayattah. 

yatah, II, 1, 8. 

yatkamah, I, 1, 4. 

yatra-tatra, I, 3,8; $. VIII, 9; yatra ha kva 
ca, I, 3,8; 5,23 II, 1, 8; yatra kva ca, Il, 
2,5; tat —yatra,1,5,2; yatra -Zat, I, 3,8. 

yathé vai —evam,1, 3,1; yathayatanam, I, 4, 2; 
yathé (no verb), I, 4,1; III, 2,4; S$. VII, 
73 yatha — evam, II, 1,6; 3, 5; III, 1, 2; 
2,13 53 yatha -tathd, Il,1,2; 5; yatha 
tu kathé ca, Il, 1,3; 4; S. VI, 8; 93 ye- 
tha - evam haiva,§. XI, 1; 2. 

yathachandasam, I, 4, I. 

yathaprajnam, Il, 3, 2. 

yathavarnam, Il, 1, 5. 

yathopapadam, I, 5, I. 

yat (adv.) - ¢a¢ (time), I, 1, 1, &c.; (causal) 
By Sen knoccy si yar (enusal)> TY) aseaytace: = 
(condit.) II, 3, 6, &c.; after abhydsam eva 
(with sya¢), III, 1, 3; 4; S. VII, 8; 9. 

yada (time), II, 2, 4; S. VIII, 7. (The tem- 
poral sense is really practically conditional.) 

pads, I, I, Fy &e. 5 S. VII, 10, &c. 

yam : samprayachatt, 11,1, 7; 3,73 udaya- 
chan, I, 2, 1. 

yosah, I, 4, 3; U1, 3,7; (dat.) I, 4, 25 (instr.) 
UL Rote hod ote S. VII, 2, &c. 

yasasvi, I, 3, 5. 

WV ya: yati, VII, 2, 4; ayahi, I, 1, 4. 

yévat - tivin - tavat, II, 1, 7; yavati (with 
dyavaprthivt nom, du. as if sing.), I, 3, 8; 
yavatin, I, 5, 2. 

yu: viyiya, Ul, 3, 8; yoyuvatyah, 1, 3, 5 
(from Rgveda). 

A yup: anu-yujyate, Il, 3,8; yuktam (nom.), 
Tl, 3,83 yuktah, §. 1,8; yuke (du.), I, 
3, 8; yuktah, Il, 3,8; yuktaik (masc.), III, 
2, 43 yuajanah (v.1. yujanah), S. XI, 8. 

yujah (plur.), U, 3, 8. 

Ayudh: abhiyudhyatt, 1, 3, 4. 

posi, 1, 2,4, &c.; yosam, 1, 4,2; yosdtas (dub.), 
ibid. 


Bb 


aye AITAREYA 

J raks: raksayate, Ul, 1, 6; S$: Vil; t9- 

vagjavah, 1, 2, 3. 

rathasya, WI, 2, 4; S. VILL, 7; XI, 36 

rathanabhih, 11, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

rathantaram, I, 4, 2; Il, 3, 43 (gen.) II, 1, 
6; S. 11,43 VIL, 193 VILL, 8. 

vasmayah, III, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

vasah, Il, 3, 2; Ill, 2, 3; Savi, 3; vasam, 
Soil aie 

V raj: rajatt, I, 3, 7- 

rajanam (sama), II, 3, 4; §. Il, r. 

valrth, 1,1, 5; ratrayah, III, 2, 2; §. VII, 
2; ratrzh, Il, 2, 4. 

ratrisuktena, Ill, 2, 4. 

vaddhtkamah, I, 1, 1. 

rantimat, I, 2, 1. 

ric: ricyate, Il, 3,6; vréAcyat, Il, 3, 6; 
riktam, Il, 3,6; atzriktam, 1, 9, 2. 

WV ris: risyatz, Ill, 1, 3; §. VII, 9; 10. 

NV rih: relhi relhah, Wil, 1, 6 (borrowed from 
a RV. passage) ; §. VII, 18. 

ruc: viruruciseta (v.1, virurucuseta), III, 
aes 

AV rudh: avarundhe, 1, 1,23 33 3,73 evaru- 
ddhyat, 1,1,23 3; 43 2,43 3,73 evaruna- 
dha, I, 4, 3. 

A ruh: adhirohati, adhirohanti, adhirohet, I, 
2,43 anvadhirohatah, 1,2, 4; avarohet, I, 2, 
4; samadhirohantz, 1, 2, 4; samarohanz, 
11, O35) LO. 

rupam, I, 2,1, &c.; §. VII, 10, &c. ; (instr.) 
1,a,33 4; UL, 2,33 3,75 S. ViLjs93 (abl) 
e252 

ripasamrddham, I, 1, 3, &c.; °rddhayda, 1, 5, 2; 
°vddhau, I, 5, 2. 

retah, 1,1,2; 4,2; I, 1,33 3,33 73 4,1; 
2; 5; III, 1,2; 2,2; S. VII, 3; X, 7; 
(acc.) SX! 7; (abl.) II, 4, 1; (gen.) II, 1, 2; 
§. VIII, 2; (loc.) $. X, 1, 8. 

retasam (?), see devaretasam. 


AV labh : lebhe, I, 2,4; alabhamanah, §. XT, 1. 

lalatam, II, 1, 2. 

lokah, 1, 4,23 3; Il, 1, 3; 6, 6; IL, 1,6; S. 
VI, 14; (ace.) I, 4, 3; TT, 1, 23 3,35 3, 
33°75 83 Gnstz,) 1, 1.5, &o.: Ss Vil} 2; 
&c.; (abl.) I, 3, 7; 6; (loc.) I, 4, 3; II, x, 
A RG Os S.Xb 4: (nom. plur.) I, 1, 2; 
9,33 43 IL, 4,13 3; 5; (acc.) I, 4,1; § 


ARANYAKA 


I, 5; (gen.) 1, 1,2; 2,53 (loc.) Il, 3,73 
(nom. du.) I, 2, 3. 

lokapalah, III, 2, 3; (acc.) II, 4, 1. 

lokélokau (acc.), II, 3, 2. 

domanz, Il, 1, 63 4, 1; Son 4 (romant, Ss 
VIII, 11); (acc.) II, 4,2; (abl.) I, 3,8; U, 

Aas 

lomasena (neut.), III, 2, 5; (vomasena) S. 
VIII, 9. 

lohitam, Ul, 3, 33.73 UI, 2,1; S. VII, 1. 

Johini, III, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 


vamésah, VII, 1, 43 2,13 §. VII, 8; 9; VIII, 
See re Nee) INGE sis ep S. Vil, 8, 93. (@om: 
plur.) III, 2, 1; $. VII, 1. 

vangavagadhah (? proper name), II, 1, 1. 

vac: avocéma, Il, 2, 2; 3; S. VIII, 2; 
avocata, II, 2,2; avocam, S.1,6; uvaca, Il, 
ah, 28 S. I, 6; ace, S. 1, 6; uktam, TE 3, ae ccese 
antruktah, \, 2, 2; S$. Iles (nec. 2 aks 
anukte, III, 2, 4; S. VIIL, 5; anucanah, I, 
2,2; abhyanuktam, S. VII, 15. 

vata, II, 2,2; 4, 2. 

“vad : vadati, Tl, 1,5; 3,2; 6; 8; S2Vil, 
2; vadate, §.1,8; vadanti, 1, 3,2; II, 1, 2; 
3,2; abhivadati, I1,1,6; vadan, I, 3,5; 
IL, 3, 8; avadan, II, 1, 4; vadet (?), S. XIII; 
upavadet, III, 1,3; 4; S.VII,8; 9; udyate, 
I, 5,2; udyante, 1, 3,7; uditam, II, 1, 5; 
vadayet, Il, 2,5; abhyuditam, S. VII, 1 By 
&c.; vag vadati, §. VIII, 9. 

vanaspatisu, III, 2, 3. 

Vvap;: avapante, 1, 5, 2; samopyate, II, 3, 1. 

vayam, I), 1, 4; 63 Ill, 1, 5; 2,65 §. VII, 
II; vam (acc.), II, 4, 2. 

vayamst, I, 2,4; 4, 2; (? proper name) II, 1, 
1; vayasam, 1,2, 43 4, 2. 

vayogatah, Il, 5. 

varam (acc.), II, 2,3; S. I, 6. 

varahah, II, 2, 4; (instr.) III, 2, 4. 

Varunah, Il, 1, 7; (gen.) Il, 1, 7. 

varsam, II, 1,2; (gen.) II, 1, 2; (nom. plur.) 
I, 5a; Ilya, 23 (acc. 1, yas Sobre: 

vasah, 1, 5,2; 11,6; S. 1,11 3 aces) Team 
SEE TO; 113 (locs) D3 Fa@) sce a as S. EFL 

vasatkrtya, 1, 2, 4. 

vas : uposya, Ill, 2, 4; §. XI, 4. 

a/vas: vaste, II, 1, 6. 

vah: avahati, I, 1,7; pravahati, WI, 2, 4; 


INDEX V 


vahanti, II, 1, 6; samvahan'7, II, 3, 8; 
abhisamvahant?, Il, 3,8; vahatu, I, 1, 4. 
va ( =indeed), I, 2, 2; 4; 3, 8; II, 6; (=or) 
ier SIL, 1, 23-8; IN, 3; 6:. S$. VO, 

7, &c.; vé—va, III, 1; 6; S. VIL, 14. 

Ava: vayatt, IIT, 2, 4. 

Meee eet Sat te 2s S35) dy 2, eC, $ §. VII, 
seeder acc lt, Tek s 42°35 05° 8 ID, 1, 63 
Il, 1,6; 2,6; S. VIII, 8, &c.; (instr.) I, 3, 
wo it iy6 5 933) 5 8; Wl, 2,136; 
VII, 2, &c.; (gen.) I, 3, 1, &c.; §. VIII,8; 
(loc.) II, 3,5; Ill, 1,6; 2,6; S. VII, 18, 
&c.; (acc. plur.) IIT, 2, 5. 

vagbrahmanam, II, 2,6; drahmanant, §. VIII, 
10. 

vagrasah, II, 2, 5. 

vanmayah, III, 2,1; 2; 33 §.VIII, 1; 2; (acc. ) 
Siete 2509's §. VIII, 73) ae 

vajimat, I, 2, I. 

vadanam, III, 2,5; S. VIII, 9. 

vamah, II, 2, I. 

vayuh, 1, 2,3; I,2,1; 2; 73 3,1; 4,1; II, 
3,4 §. VII, 3, &c.; (acc.) S. XI, 1; (gen.) 
TI, 1,7; III, 2,5; (loc.) III, 2,3; S. VII, 4. 

varanam, I, 1, 3, &c. 

vartraghnam, I, 2, 1. 

Valakhilyah, 1, 5, 2. 

wrote Ie 3,45 55 11, 2, 15 4, 2: 

vimsatisatani (sapta), III, 2, 1; §. VIII, 1. 

vikarah, Il, 3, 6. 

vikrtayah, I, 5, 1. 

viksudram, I, 5, 1. 

vichandasah, I, 5, I. 

vijavah, I, 4, I (nom. sing. or nom. plur. ?). 

vijnanam, TI, 6; (gen.) UI, 2, 5. 

vid: veda, I, 1, 2, &c.; §. VII, 14, &c.; 
(ist pers.) II, 1,5; 8; weduh, II, 3,2; § 
VIII, 9; wedyat, 1, 5,2; I1,1,5; Il, 1, 4; 
§. VII, 8; vidvan, I, 1, 3, &c.; S. VIII, 11, 
&c.; vidusah (gen.), I, 3, 4; §.1, 8; (ace. 
pl.) §. VI, 14; vidvamsah, §. VIII, 11; 
vidusam, U1, 1,6; vedayam cakre, Ill, 1,1; 
§. VII, 2. 

vid, I, 3, 8. 

vid: anvavindan, Il, 3,8 ; vittoa, I, 3, 5. 

vidyut, III, 1, 2; §. VII, 3; (acc.) III, 2, 4; § 
VIII, 7; (nom. pl.) §. XI, 2; (acc.) $. XI, 1. 

vidha, Il, 3,3; 4; vidham (v.1. anuvidhah), 
Il, 3,1; vidhah, Il, 3,3; 4. 


371 


wibhitim, vibhiitayah, II, 1,4. 

virat, I, 1, 2; 3, 45 4, 1; (ace) I, 1, 2; 
(loc.) I, 3, 43 (instr. du.) I, 4,23 (om. 
plur.) I, 4, 1; 5,25 (acc.) I, 5, 2. 

viradtcaturthani, 1, 3, 4. 

AV vis: samvisati, 11,1, 6; abhinivifate, 1, 2,4; 
pravisat, V1, 1,4; 4, 2; pravisama, II, 4, 2; 
pravisata, II, 4, 23 pravisama, Il, 1, 43 vt- 
stah, 1, 3,8; avdstah, 11,1, 1 ; 2zvestam (acc. 
masce.), II, 1, 5; vestah (fem.), I, 3,85; nzve- 
stah (fem.), 11, 1,1; avefayat, Saxt I; duz- 
veta visuh, S, XI, 2; pratyavivisuh, §. XI, 1. 

Oakes yr, tT; 

visvam, I, 2, 2 (in an etymology); II, 2,1; 
visve devih, 1,1, 4; Ul, 1,6; S$. VII, 14; 
visvair devaih, II, 1,6; S. VII, 14; vifva- 
bhitam, S. VIL, 15. 

wisucth (acc.), II, 1,6 (from Rgveda). 

vistapam, II, I, 2. 

visrasa, II, 3, 7. 

vi: avayat, 11, 4,3 (Monier-Williams’ Dict., 
but not Whitney, Roots, &c., and av is 
much more probable). 

Vind, vinam, vinah (acc.), IIT, 2, 5; §. VIII, 
9; vindayat (gen.), §. VUI, 10. 

viravat, I, 2, I. 

CILVOTER Lalae Stee Aaa hay Eee ACC.) Ne aie oy 
(loc.) I, 2, 2; (nom. plur.) I, 4, 2. 

viryavan, I, 1, 3; viryavat, I, 3, 7. 

viryavattamah, I, 2, 4. 

Avr: parivrtah, Il, 3,5; parivrta, Il, 3, 5; 
III, 2,5; a@vréam (nom.), II, 1, 6. 

vrksah, Il, 3, 6; §. XI, 1; 2; (acc.) I, 2, 4. 

AN uvrt: udvartate, 1, 3,6; vivartayate (yanti, 
§. VII, 10), Il, 1, 3; 5; wyavartayati, I, 3, 
1; avarivartti, Il, r, 6. 

Vrtram, 1,1, 1 

vrthda, Il, 3, 6. 

Jors: varsati, I, 1,2; S. VII, 3. 

orsd, 1, 2,43 3,1. 

vrsanvat, I, 2, I. 

urstih, III, 1, 2; §. VII, 2; wrstim varsati 
(varsanti B), S, VII, 3. 

vrsih (acc.), 1, 2, 43 better read dyszh. 

vedih, 1,3,23; I, 2,2; Ill,1, 6; 2,4; S. VII, 
18; (acc.) III, 2,3; $. VIII, 3; (gen. plur.) 
Sib. & 

vedapurusah, Ul, 2, 3; $. VILL, 3. 

Wilby Sg By iy eee §. VU, 2, &c. 


Bb2 


aye AITAREYA 


vatsvadevam, 1, 5, 3. 

Hovyac: vivyace, X, 2, 2. 

vyahjanant, I, 2, 43 §. VIII, 11. 

vyanah, Il, 3, 3; $. VII, 8; X, 8, &e. 

vyavrttih, 1, 3, I. 

vyahrtib, 11, 2,2; (nom. plur.) I, 3, 2; (acc.) 
ign §. I, 6. 

Vora): vrijayati, IMI, 2, 45 §. XI, 4. 


WV kams: Samsati, 1, 1, 3, &e.; SIL 1 &e.$ 
VIII, 5, &c.; anusamsati, 1,5, 2; parikan- 
sati (with acc. and instr.), I, 4, 2; Samset, 
TH, 2, 4; famsa, II, 2,35; Samsisyantam, OF 
Ay BS Ser, S.1, 5; sastod, 1, 5,1; Sasamsa, 
Il, 2, 3; anuSasyante, Il, 3, 4; Sastam, Sits. 

Wak: $aknosi, U1, 1, 4; S. VII,8, &e.; afaknot, 
Il, 4,33; Saknuvan, Saknuvantam, MI, 1, 4; 
§. VII, 8; 9; afakah, II, 1, 4; $. VII, 8; 
asaknuvan, §.VII,8; esaknuvantam, §.VII,9. 

$atam,1, 2,23 4, 23 I, 2,13 3, 4; (acc.) II, 
2,1; $. XI,8; satani (ekadaSa), Il, 3, 6; 
(sapia), IMI, 2,1; S. VII, 2. 

Satarcinah, II, 2, 1. 

Satasamvatsarasya, Il, 2, 45 §. II, 17. 

Saphah, Il, 1, 4. 

Sabdavati, U1, 2, 5; $. VIII, 9. 

Sariram, TI, 1, 4; 2,4; Ul, 2,1; (acc.) I, 
tr; 43 (abl.)) Ulin, 43 §. XI, 1; (gen.) Il, 1, 
4; (loc.) S. XI, 1; (nom. plur.) II, 1, 8; 
(acc,) Ur, Ss) Gnstr.)) Li 3,15 

$artratvam (acc.), II, 1, 4. 

Sarirapurusah, VI, 2, 3; S.VUOL 3. 

Sarivabhedat, II, 5; 6. 

Sariryai (gen.), I, 3, 4; Sariryam, I, 3, 4. 

$a$vat, III, 1, 6. 

fastranam, I, 2, 1; Sastrena, . 1, 6. 

Santih, I, 1,3, &c.3 Santyaz (dat.), 1, 1, 3, &c.; 
§.1, 4, &c.; $antydm (or ehahah°), I, 1, 3, &e. 

falavamée, III, 2, 1; S. VIII, 1. 

Sirah, 1, 4,13 HU, 3, 4; III, 2, 53 §. VIII, ‘Os 
(gen.) II, 1, 4; S. II, 2; (loc.) III, 1, 2; S. 
Vit; 3: 

Sirastvam, Il, 1, 4; (acc.) II, 1, 4. 

Sisnam, II, 4,1; (acc.) Il, 4, 2; (instr.) II, 4, 
35 (abl.) I, 3, 5 II, 4, 1. 

Si: afayat, 11,1, 4; Sayanah, Il, 5; adhisete, 
S. Te 

Strsan, 1, 5, 2; Tyr, 4 

Strsanyah, 1, 5,1. 


ARANYAKA 


$ukah, I, 2, 4. 

Suklam, Tl, 1, 5. 

§uddhe (acc. du.), III, t, 3; S$. VII, ro. 

V Sus: Susyati, Il, 3, 6. 

AV Sr: asari, M1, 1,4; Séryate, 11,1, 4; asiryata, 
ihe 75 

V $7: $rapayitud, TI, 2, 4; §. XI, 4; °yadd, 
S. Il, 11. 

$vaddhdm, Il, I, 7. 

A $ri: Srayante, 1, 3, 23 asrayata, Il, 1, 4; 
$vitah, 1, 3, 23 (fem.) II, 1, 4. 

$rih, 1, 1,33 2,43 Sréivyam, |, 2, 4; Sriyai (dat.), 
I, 4, 2; Srzyah (nom.), II, 1, 4. 

$riman, I, 1, 3. 

MV $ru: visrnoti, Tl, 1, 73 Srnotz, Il, 6; Sr2- 
vant, Il, 1,7; afrnvan, Il, 1, 4; Srnuydt, 
Ill, 2,4; S. VIL, 7; wpasrnuyat, III, 2, 4 
(upasita, §. VIII, 7); afrutah, II, 2, 4; S. 
VIII, 7; SeSrasante,S. VII, 9; Srutam(nom.), 
Il, 4, 3; Srude, 153, 83 Sraiva, Wi, ers: 

$rutavadanah, U1, 2, 5; S. VILL, 9. 

Sxestham, I, 3, 3. 

Sresthatam, I, 1, I. 

Srota, III, 2, 4; S. VII, 7. 

Srotram, 1; 3,85 Al, 15 4545 bas §. VII, 4, 
cc.3 (ace) ik, ms 7 S. X, 65 -(instr.) I, x, 
73 4,33 (abl.) HW, 4,1; (gen.) Il,1,7; HI, 
2, 53 (loc.) Se. (nom. du.) IT, 3, 8. 

Srotramayah, Ul, 2,1; 2; 3; S. VIL, 1; 2; 
iGec) Uk iaar aces: S. VIII, 1; 2. 

$lesma, Il, 3, 3; Slesma, S. Tipu 

Slokah, I, 3, 8. 

+ fvas: prasvasiti, Il, 1, 8, 

Svastanam (acc. neut.), II, 3, 2. 


sat, I, 3,8; 4, 23 II, 2, 4. 

sattrimsatam sahasrani, 1, 2, 43 3, 83 sat- 
trimfat - sahasrani, S. ibe Te 

satpadah, I, 5, 1. 

salrcam, I, 3, 8. 

sasti$atani (triné), III, 2,1; S. VIII, 1. 


Sa, T, x, 1, Sceu's wad, ay SS ccc. 

samyogah, II, 1, 5. 

samvatsarah, Il, 2,6; S.1,1; X, 53 (acc.) 
III, 1,6; S.X, 53 (adv.) I, 1,13 (gen.) III, 
2,1; §, VII,1; XI, 3; (instr.) $. X, 5; 
(nom. plur.) S. VII, 20. 

samvatsarasammanah, III, 2, 3; S$. VII, 1; 
(acc.) III, 2, 3; S. VIII, 1. 


INDEX V 


samsadt, Ill, 2, 5. 

samskrtih, 1, 35 7- 

samhité, III, 1, 1, &c.; S. VII, 2, &e.; (ace.) 
III, 2, 3; 6; samehitadyai (gen.), III, 1,1; 
2,6; S. VII, 2; saghitah (acc.), III, 2, 6; 
§. VIII, rr. 

sakrt, I, 2, 2. 

samkalpah, I, 6. 

samgrahita, II, 3, 8. 

Wsaj: anusajati, 1, 5, 2; anusakta, ananu- 
sakta, I, 5, 2. 

sajaniyam, I, 5, 2; §. II, 16. 

samyphatyat, I, 2, 2. 

samynanam, I, 2, 2; Il, 6. 

sanakaram, III, 2, 6; §. VIII, 11 

sattyam, Il, 1, 5; (gen.) II, 1, 5. 

sattyatvam, Il, 1, 5. 

satyam;\, 2,2; Wi, 1,13 3,6; 8; §. VII, 173 
(acc.) II, 3,6; (gen.) II, 3, 8; satyavat, I, 
Byte 

satyasamhita, §. vu, 17. 

satyanrte, Il, 3, 6; (acc.) II, 3, 6. 

sad: upanisasdda, II, 2, 3. 

sadyah, 1, 3, 4. 

sadhricth (acc.), I, 1, 6 (from Rgveda). 

samtatyaz, Il, 5. 

samtani,1, 2,2 (=Aitareya Brahmana, V,16,14). 

samdhata, III, 1, 2; S. VII, 3. 

samadhanam, II, 1, 6; §. VII, 17. 

samahih, III, 1, 2; §, VII, 3, &c.; (ace.) III, 
I, 3; 5; (nom. plur.) II, 2, 2; (acc.) II, 2, 
2; (gen.) III, 2, 2; §. VIII, 1; 2. 

samdhivijiapani, U1, 1,5; S. VII, 13. 

sapta, 1, 5,13; 2; III, 2, 4; with vimSatifatant, 
KETS 3,1 5 §. Il, 10; VIII, 1; saptadasam, 
Il, 3, 4- 

saptanavatih, I, 2, 2. 

saptapadd, I, 5, I. 

sabalam, III, 2, 6. 

sabrahmakah, I, 2, 4. 

samam (nom. neut.), I, 1, 23 (instr.) I, 1, 2. 

samanah (a prana), Il, 3, 3. 

samanah : samananam (masc.), II, 3, 1; sama- 
nam, I, 1,2; Ill, 1,1; samdne (du.), III, 
fa Gs 

amanayatanda, I, 5, 2. 

samanodarkam, 1, 5, 3+ 

samudrah, 11, 3, 3+ 

sampat, 1, 1, 2; (instr.) I, 3, 8. 


373 


sampannatamah, II, 3, 2; 3- 

sampatah, I, 4, 2. 

sampratipranah, Ill, 2, 2; §. VOI, 2. 

samprativit, II, 3, 1; 6. 

sambhavah, II, 3, 2. 

sayont, II, 1, 8. 

saripatam, II, 2,1; $. VII, 1; 2. 

sarvah, I, 3, 5, &c. ; §. VIII, 1, &c.; sarvd, 
Il, 3,6; S. VIL, 22; sarvam, I, 1, 3, &c.; 
§. VII, 3; sarvam (acc, neut.), I, 3, 5; I. 
Hea §. VII, 2, &c.; sarvasyaé (gen.), 
III, 2,5; sarve, 1, 1, 3, &c.; §. VII, 1, &c.; 
sarvah, 1, 2,2; sarvani, I, 3, 4; I, 1, 2; 
6; sarvan, I, 1, 3, &c.; sarvah, Il, 2, 3; 
sarvant, 11, 2,2; sarvatk (neut.), I, 3, 43 
sarvebhyah (dat. neut.), II, 1, 3; 8; 2, 25 
(abl. neut.) I, 5; savvesdm (masc.), I, 1, 3; 
II, 2,1; 2; (prot. neut.) IIT, 2, 45 §. VIII, 7; 
sarvesu (neut.), III, 2,3; S. VII, 22; sar- 
vas, Se ks 

sarvatah, U1, 3, 83; S. VII, 3 

sarvayujah, I, 3, 8. 

sarvalokam (acc.), II, 1, 2. 

sarvasah, 1, 2, 4. 

salokatam, II, 2,1; 23 §. VII, 1; 2. 

savanant, II, 3, 3; (abl.) I, 3, 3; (gen-) I, 
Paes 

savyah (fem.), I, 2, 3. 

sasakarant, III, 2, 6; S. Vin a1. 

sahasram, Il, 3, 4; (nom. plar.) I, 2, 4; 3, 8. 

sangah, I, 3, 8. 

saptyasya, I, 2, 2. 

sama, WII,1, 5; 3,6; §. 11,13; VII, 13; (ace.) 
Til, 4,825. Vil, 535 (instr.) I, 3, 25 Suir 
1; (abl.) I, 3, 2; sdmagah, S. I, 4. 

samatah, TI, 3, 4, 

sayam, II, I, 5. 

sayujyam (acc.), III, 2,1; 2. 

savitram, I, 5, 2. 

asi: sitam, II, 1, 6. 

A sic: sitcati, WU, 5; siktam, 1, 4,2; sicyate, I, 
1,23 III, 2, 2; sécyeta, IIL, 2,2; (sécyet (?)) 
§. VII, 2. 

simanam, II, 4, 3- 

su: sutam, 1,1, 4. 

sukrtam, Vl, 4, 2; (gen.) UI, 2, 4. 

suparnartipam, I, 4, 2. 

suparnasya, 1, 4, 2. 

suktam, 1, 2, 3; Xl, 2, 2; (ace.) I, 2, 2; 


yale 


AITAREYA 


(instr.) I, 2,2; (gen.) I, 5,3; (nom. du.) 
I, 5, 23 (gen. plur.) I, 3, 8. 

sadadohah, I, 4,1, &c.; §. 11, 1; (instr.) I, 
Agar (aces)) Rh boa 

As: upasytah, U1, 1,6 (upasystah, §. VII, 
14). 

Vsrj: samsrjatt, I, 3, 4; utsyjatt, 1, 5,13 
asyjata, II, 4,1; wpasyzat, SX, ¥; upa- 
(sa)sr7e, §. XI, 1; svat, Il, 4,13 3; §. XI, 
1; systak, 11, 1,2; vesystam (nom.), II, 4, 3; 
srstau, UL, 1, 73 srstah (masc.), I, 1, 73 
(fem.) II, 4,2; wpasrstah (fem.), S. Xi, 7: 
srstam, Ml, 4, 3; srstvd, UI, 2,6; veszzya, 
IL, 4, 3; prasrjyante, I, 3, 5. 

AV srp: udasarpat, Il, 1,4; sarisrpyante, I, 3, 
5; samutsrpya, I, 2, 4. 

somah, Il, 3, 3. 

WV skand: askandayatz, III, 2, 4 (not in S. 
Weal, UA 

stan: stanayat, 1, 2, 1. 

stanyau, I, 5, I. 

AV stabh: stabhamanam (acc.), 1, 4,13; vestab- 
dhah, vistabdhani, Il, 1, 6. 

V stu: prastautt, V1, 3, 4; stuvita, III, 2, 4 
(stayat, §. VIII, 6); stuviran, siuvate, 

I, 4. 

stobhasahasrani, Il, 3, 8. 

stomah, 1, 4,13; (gen. plur.) I, 4, 25 5, 1. 

stomachandasoh (gen.), 1, 4, I. 

stomatah, II, 3, 4. 

stomatisamsanayat (dat.), I, 4, I. 

striyam, II, 3, 8; S. XI, 4; strivém, II, 3, is 
5; striyad (gen.), I, 4,2; HU, 5. 

sthaviyah, 1, 5, 1. 

AV stha : uttisthat?, V1, 1,13 3,1; pratitisthatz, 
I, 1,1, &c.; adhitisthatd, Il, 3,8; pratis- 
thanti, 1, 1,1, &c.; aniépatisthante, 1, 5,1; 

udatisthat, Il, 1, 4; wtthasyatz, Il, 1, 4; 

sthitam (nom.),1, 1,15; pratisthitah, 1, 2, 2; 

pratisthita, 1, 3,45 pratisthitam,1,1,2; 6; 
pratisthitah, 1, 4, 2; S Cer ; pratisthaya, 
I, 4, 2; pratisthdpayati, 1,1, 2; tisthet, S. 
XI, 13 2; tasthau, S. >, Gl eiah ao fs 

sthinabhydm (abl.), III, 1, 3; S. VIE ro. 

sthalipakam, M11, 2, 4; S. XI, 6. 

sthavaram, 11, 6; (gen.) S. XI, 5; (loc.) S. 
> Qy ice 

sndvani, II, 1, 6. 

sparsah, III, 2,5; S. VIII, 8. 


ARANYAKA 


spavsariipant, III, 2, 1; §. VIII, 1. 
sparsosmabhih, Il, 3, 6. 
Vsprs: upaspréet, 1, 2, 45 sprsta, UL, 3, 63 
sprstam (nom.), II, 4, 35 sprstud, U, 4, 3. 
sma, 1, 1,1, &c., inthe form w ha sma, or ha 
sma, Il, 1, 3, &c.; atha ha sma, §. VII, 2 
(om. sma, A. III, 1, 1). 

smrtth, II, 6. 

a/srams : vyasramsata, U1, 2,6; §. VIII, 11. 

svam, 11, 5; svena (masc.), III, 1, 6; §. VI, 
14; (neut.) S. II, r. 

Av svad: svadayati, Il, 1, 7. 

osvap: svapiti, WI, 1,6; §. VII, 18; suptak, 
Il, 1, 8. 

svapnah, U1, 4,3; Ul, 2,4; S. XI, 4. 

svayam, III, 2, 4. 

SUCF aL oa ze 

svarah, Il, 3,6; svarah, Ill, 2, 53 §. VIII, 
8; 9; svarazh, II, 2, 4. 

svararupam, Il, 2, 1; S Wiles 

svarasvaram, III,1, 5; (svarat svaram), §. VII, 
15%, 

svargah, VII, 1, 6; (ace.) Il, 3, 8; (instr.) HI, 
1,1; S. VIII, 2, &c.; (nom. plur.) I, 2, 4; 
(loc.) II, 5, 6 (always with Jokah). 

svargakamah, II, 1, 3; §. VII, 10. 

suastitayat, 1, 5, 23; 3. 

svastyayanam, 1, 5,2; 3; (acc.) I, 5,2; 33 
Sale 

svadu, Vl, 3.545 (acc) LL, 6. 

A suid: svedate, 1, 3, 5. 


ha, I, 1, 1, &c.; $. VII, 2, &c. 

Vhan: hantt, Il, 2,4; apaghnate, 1,1, 2; 
apahatg, 1, 2, 23 3, 43 hanyat, Il, 3,6) 
hatva, 1, 1, 1; apahatya, Il, 3, 8; atyaze- 
ghamsat, Il, 4, 3. 

hanta (with subj.), II, 1, 4; $. XI, 1. 

havam (acc.), I, 1, 4. 

havih, Il, 4, 2. 

hastinah, U1, 6; (gen. sing.) S. XII, 8. 

hastyah, 1, 1, 2. 

ha: hasyati, TW, 1, 4; S. VII, 8; 93 vehi- 
yete, UI, 2, 4 (vipradrsyete, S. VIII, 7) 3 vija- 
hati, §. VIM, 7. 

ht, I, ,.2, &e. 

Vhims: hinastt, 1, 5; ahtmsanta, Vl, 1, 4. 

himkarah, 1, 3, 1; (instr.) I, 3, 1. 

himkrtya, 1, 3, 1. 


INDEX V 


hiranmayah, VI, 1, 3. 

Vhu: juhumah, VW, 2,6; $. VII, 11; hutva, 
Ill, 2, 4; jehotz, g, XI, 43 butane MTs 
aaaal, 2 KIT, 8. 

Nhu: hiiyate, Il, 2, 4. 


hr: viharati, 1, 3,5; 73 83; wrahkarati, I, 


eet ELIS Er a ghbtepdaarsthy TES S 
NIT, 10:5 asedbaraté, III, 2, 6; (uda®) S. 
VII, 10; prattharati, I, 343, vyaharat, 
4533 SAicesakerah, WSs, 635. VIL, ra 5 


37S 


°haranti, I, 1,8; aharata, I1,1, 7; abhivya- 
harsan (?), II, 1, 6 Charan S. VII, 14); 
parthrtah, Ill, 1, 1; S. VII,2; aviparthy- 
tah, III, 1, 1 ( parikriak, S.VII, 2); abhivya- 
breve, Il, 2,33 4,35 samudhrtya, Il,-4,1 

hrdayam, Il, 1,3: A, ns Os §.VII, 3, &e.; fae) 
TI, 4, 25 (abl.) Il, 4,45 (gen.) II, 1, 3. 

hota, I, 1, 3, &c. 

hotrakah, 1, 2, 4. 

hrasiyah, 1, 5, 1 


WORDS IN SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA VII AND VIII WHICH ARE NOT 
FOUND IN THE PARALLEL PASSAGES IN AITAREYA ARANYAKA III. 


akusalena (masc.), VIII, ro. 
aksarasamamnayah, VII, 4. 
angulinigrahah, VII, 9. 
apravaktre, VIII, 11. 
abrahmacarine, VIII, 11. 
abhagah, VIII, 5. 
abhivyaharartham, VU, 14. 
abhre, VIII, 7. 

ardhamasah, VII, 20. 
avedavide, VIII, 11. 


itthasapuranam, VIII, 11. 
thate, VIII, 9. 
upastaranant, VIII, 9. 
rivijam, VIII, 3. 

kalah, Vil, 20. 


Rkamacari, VU, 22 (bis: ? kamacari in first 


case). 
Rkamaripi, Vil, 22 (bis: 
case). 
kasthah, VU, 20. 
kirtayatt, VU, 2. 
kyrtya, VU, 11. 
ksanah, Vil, 20. 


? kamarupt in first 


gatih, VII, 20. 
gatisthitinivrttibhih, VU, 20; °th, ibid. 


tvisth, VIII, 10. 


dandah, VIII, 9. 
dirghah, Vil, 2. 


dhvamsayah, VII, 20. 


nimesah, VII, 20. 
nivrttih, VII, 20, and see gati. 


patih, VII, 15. 
parsatsu, VIII, 9. 


brahmi (2), VIII, 11. 


bhavat, VII, 20. 
bhavisyat, VII, 20. 
bhitam, VII, 20. 


mithah (samhitant), VI, 21. 
mukhanastke, VII, 9. 


yakéravakarau (acc.), VI, 11. 
A rabh: arabdéha, VU, 10. 


vaktrad, VIII, to. 
vacah, ViII, 10. 
vatsah, VII, 18. 
vadayitra, VIII, to. 
vikrtth, VIII, 11. 
vidya, VII, 7. 


$raddha, VII, 17. 


sabhaksatam, VIII, 1, &c. 
sarvabhitasamhita, Vi1, 21. 
sadhayati, VIII, to. 

siddhih, VIII, 2. 

sthitih, VII, 20, and see gatt”. 


376 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


WORDS IN SANKHAVANA ARANYAKA IX, X, XI, XII, 8, AND XIII, WHICH 


ARE NOT FOUND IN AITAREYA ARANYAKA I-III. 


(ARANYAKA IX 


IS MAINLY A REPETITION OF CHANDOGYA UPANISAD.) 


angarah, X, 8; (acc.) X, 8. 

NV atte: udatcat, XI, 1; acya, XI, 4; XII, 8; 
Chekxerse 

adhyatmikam, X, 1. 

anvaharyapacanah, X, 1. 

aparam (nom, neut.: not in Brhadaranyaka), 
XIII. 

amrtakumbhah, Il, 5, 19; XI, 1. 

ayas, XI, 7. 

avantaradifah (nom.), X, 6; (acc.) X, 6; 
(instr.) X, 6. 

Vas: pragya, IX, 8. 

aima, XI, 7. 


ajyavasesam (acc.), XI, 5. 
Gyahutih (ace.), XI, 4. 
atichandasam, X1, 7. 
antaram, X, 1. 

ardre, XI, 2. 

/ as: Gsinah, X11, 8. 
ISanah, XI, 2; (acc.) XI, 1. 
ucchistam (acc.), XI, 8. 
uttaram (ady.), XII, 8. 
uttaratak (with abl.), XII, 8. 


udiham (?), XII, 8, n. 8. 
ustrarohanam, XI, 4. 


rsabhasrngagramanim (?), XII, 8. 


cham, ekaya, XII, 8. 
crandamanim, XII, 8. 


kamse, XII, 8. 

kamsyam, IX, 8. 

halim, XI, 4. 

hkumbhah, see amyrta°. 
Arsnayah (gen.), XI, 4. 
hausumbhaparidhanam, X1, 4. 
ksamam (?) (with dat.), XI, 1. 


khadirasiramanim, XII, 4. 


£arhapatyah, X, 8. 
gitdni (acc.), XI, 4. 


ghrtaudane, XII, 8. 


catasrbhih, XII, 8. 
caturthim, IX, 8. 
carman, XII, 8. 


janu (acc.), XI, 4; XII, 8; cf. IX, 8. 


tadrk, X, 8. 

tilaudane, XII, 8. 
trptih, XI, 7. 
tailabhyangam, XI, 4. 
triratram (adv.), XII, 8. 


daksinam (acc. neut.), XI, 4; XII, 8. 
dantah, X, 8; dantan, XII, 8. 
daSavidham, X, 8. 


dha: upasamadhaya, XI, 4; XI, 8. 
dhiumah, X, 8. 


nadyah, nadin, X, 7. 
nakam, XI, 7. 
AV ni: samavaniniya, XI, 5; 6; 8. 


patcabhih, XII, 8. 

payah, X, 8; (loc.) XI, 4. 
parisusiram (v.1, °sus°), XI, 1. 
panduradarsanan, XI, 4. 
papistham, IX, 2. 
pinvamanah, XI, I. 
pratodagramanim, XII, 8. 
pratyycam, XII, 8. 


AV badh: badhniyat, XII, 8. 
Brhaspatih, Xi, 7. 

bailvam, XI, 8. 
brakmayajfianisthah, XII, 1. 


bhasmani, X, 8. 
bhitikimah, XII, 8. 


manim, XII, 8. 

madhusarpisoh, XII, 8. 

manyuh, X,8; (loc.) XI, 1. 
mahivarohasya (°rah° B), XI, 8. 
mamsaudane, XII, 8, 


INDEX V 


masah, masan, X, 5. 
muktakesam, XI, 4. 
mundam, XI, 4. 
mudgaudane, XII, 8. 
musalagramanim, XII, 8. 
mtikah, 1X, 3. 

mirdhant, XI, i. 


vandraya, XI, I. 
ramati, XI, 3. 


vas: vasayitva, XII, 8. 

NVvah: apohya, X, 8; parisamuhya, XI, 4; 
XII, 8; wdoham(?), XII, 8. 

vedasirah (acc. ?), XIII. 

vatyaghre, XII, 8. 

vairagyasamskrte, XIII, 1. 

vatrajam, X, 8. 

vairdjam (possibly °/yam with B to balance 
suarajyam), XI, 7. 


377 
$raddha, X, 8. 


sadbhih, XII, 8. 
sodafabhih, XII, 8. 


samit, X, 8. 

samudrah, X, 7; (acc.) X, 7; (instr.) X, 7. 
sarupavatsayah (gen.), XI, 4. 
savatsim, XI, 4. 

Savitri (?), XI, 7. 

stsam, XI, 7. 

sukham (acc. neut.), XI, r. 

WV st? : paristirya, X1, 4; XII, 8. 
sthalipakavasesam, XI, 6. 
sruvena, XI, 4. 

svarajyam, XI, 7. 


han: upaghatam, XI, 5. 
hydayasalagramanim, XIU, 8. 


RARE WORDS IN $ANKHAYANA ARANYAKA I, IL! 


aksitim, Il, 17. 
anantaryam (acc.), II, 11. 
argalesike (acc.), Il, 16. 
avatardah, I, 8. 

astif (acc.), I, 4. 


udubrahmiyasya, II, 6. 
upasarjanyam, Il, 17. 


rah: samardhayati, \, 1, &c. 


kadvan, 1, 2. 
kamapram, I, 7. 


/dih: digdhena (masc.), I, 8. 
devachandamst, I, 5. 


A dhrs: pradharsayati, pradharsya, \, 8. 


naksatriyam, Xl, 16. 


2 For Aranyaka III-VI see Jacob’s Concordance. 


parardhyam, I, 7. 
paricarmanyam, I, 1. 
parimadah, 1, 4; parimadafzapan, 1, 4. 
bahirdha, Ul, 11. 
bhitechadam sama, I, 4. 
mad: parimattam, I, 4. 
yatautiyam, Il, 16. 
Visvakarma, Il, 17. 

A vye: parivyayet, II, 16. 
vraje, I, 16. 
vratacaryaya, I, 6. 


samslesanam, II, 1; sanSlesani, I, 1. 
A sidh: samsiddhena, Il, 11; samsiddhabhih, 
Uh 20. 


Hairanyastipiyam, M1, 16. 


Bihler, Z. D. M. G., XLVII, 63, 


compares with garasvan, III, 2, Pali palasate (ASoka’s Pillar Edict, V) and palasada (Jat., V, 


406, v. 267), ‘ rhinoceros.’ 


For vijara nadi, III, 3, cf. Hopkins, J. 4. 0.S., XXVI, 56; on III, 


1 sq., see Windisch, Sachs, Ber., 1907, pp. 111 sq, Buddha’s Geburt, pp. 63 sq. 71 Sq 


INDEX VI 


WORDS OCCURRING IN ARANYAKA V, AND IN THE PARALLEL 
PASSAGES OF SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA I AND II, OTHER 
THAN THOSE OCCURRING IN QUOTATIONS. 


(When the case or gender is ambiguous, it is nom. or masc. unless otherwise specified. The 
words noted as occurring in quotations might also be classed in Index IV, but are of a slightly 


different type.) 


Agnih, 1, 1; (acc.) 1, 2; (gen.) I, 2. 

agnipucham, 1, 2. 

agnistomah, 3, 2; S. 1, 18. 

agrena, 1, 2. 

ankam, 3, 2. 

WV aj: aktvd, 3, 3; abhyazya, 3, 3. 

ajapaya, 1, 4. 

atah, I, I. 

atigrahyan, 3, 2. 

(OG, Ne, 103 PYG Os 

atha, 1, 4, &c.; atha ha, 2, 4. 

athatah, 3, 3. 

adiksitah, 3, 2; (loc.) £, 5. 

adhah, 3, 3. 

adhyayena, 3, 3. 

adhvaryuh, 3,23; (acc.) 3,2; (nom. plur.) I, 5. 

Van: vyavanya, 3, 2; abhyanya, S25 005 
abhyavaniti, §. I, 6. 

anagnat, 3, 3. 

anantevasine, 3, 2. 

ananvrcam, 1, 1. 

andrasamsesu, 3, 3. 

anidamvida, 3, 3. 

anupartkramanam, 1, 4. 

anuriipah, 1,1}; 3, 2. 

anuvasatkarotz, 3,2; cf.ananuvasatkrte, S.II ahve 

anustupkaram, 3, 1. 

anekena, 1, 5. 

antarena (with acc.), 3, I. 

antarvedt (in quot.), I, I. 

annam, 2,5; (acc.) I, 5. 

anyan, 3, 3; anyat, 3, 2; 33 (acc.) 3, 33 


anyasmat (neut.), 3, 3; anyebhyah (dat. 
masc.), I, 43 anydsu, 1,6; 2, I. 

aparena, I, 2. 

aparahne, 3, 3. 

apartau, 3, 3. 

apt, 1,4; 6; 3,35 punar aft, I, 4. 

aprakampt (acc.), I, 3. 

abrahmacarine, 3, 3. 

abhitah (with acc.), 1, 3. 

abhyatmam (acc.), 1, 4. 

aratni (acc.), I, 4. 

artham, 1, 4. 

ardhatrtiydsu, 1, 5. 

ardhatrayodasasu, 1, 5. 

ardharcam, 3, 1; (instr.) 3, 1; (abl.) 3, 1; 
(ace. plur.) 3; 1. 

ardharcyam, 2, 1; ardharcyah (fem.), 2, 5 
(reading doubtful). 

alam, 3, 3. 

avabrtham (acc.), 3, 2. 

avamah (acc. or perhaps nom.), 1, I. 

avasyakarmane, 1, 4 (v.1. °Rarmine). 

avasane, 1, 6. 

avratyam (acc. neut.?), 3, 3. 

asitayah, 2, 5; °ih, S. Il, is 

asvam, I, 6. 

astau, 2, 2. 

astamim, 2, 2. 

WV as: sydt, 1,335} 3533 syatam, 1, 3; satih, 2,2. 

Vas: paryasya, 1, 3. 

asamvatsare, 3, 3. 

asamvalsaravastne, 3, 3. 


INDEX VI 


asabrahmacarine, 3, 3- 

asamamnatah (fem.), 2, 2; (Joc. plur.) 1,6; 2,1. 

asmat (neut.), 3, 33 @5¥@,1,45 53 2,45 3.25 
33 asmin (masc.), 3, 3+ 

asvahakaraih, 1, 1. 

ah: aha, 3, 3- 

ahah, 1, 43 3,23 (acc.) 3,33 ahani, 1,53 3,3 

aha, 1, 6. 

ahih, 1, 4. 


agnidhriye, 1, I. 

acaryaya, 3,33 S. Lge 

ayapraiige, 1, I. 

ajyahutih (acc.), 1, 1; $.1, 4. 

atanah,1, 13 cf. ekahatdnah, 5 in4 

atmanam, 1,23 (dat.) 3, 3; (abl.) 1,6; (gen.) 
3, 33 atman, I, 6. 

adityam, I, I. 

anustubham (nom.), 3, 1. 

anobhadriyam, 3, 2. 

a/ ap: samapayet, 3, 3; anabhipraptaya, 3, 3. 

abhiplavikat, 3, 2. 

adyatanamt (acc.), 3, 2. 

dyusah (abl.), 3, 1. 

ardraya, 1, 4. 

avapanam, 3,1. 

A as: uparyasinah, 3,3; (dat.) 3, 3; asinah, 
3, 2. 

asandim, 1, 4. 

asyasammitam (acc.), I, 3- 

ahavam, 1, 3; (nom. plur.) 1, 5. 


Ai: antariyat, 3,3; adhiyat, adhiyita, 3,3; 
anadhiyan, 3, 3; ativitah, 3, 3; tam, 1, 2533 
adhitat (neut.), 3,33 #pa- afite (loc. neut.), 
3, 3; pratyetya, I, 2. 

itarah, 1, 4; ttaram (acc. masc.), I, 4; ttare 
(acc. du. neut.), I, 6. 

zi, 1, 1, &c.; enum., I, 3. 

idam, 3,2; (acc.) 3, 2. 

idamvid, 3, 3. 

imam (in quot.), I, 1; imdkh (acc.), I, 6. 

iva, 3, 2 (=eva in sense). 

isumatrah, 1, 3. 

tho eva, thaiva, I, 6. 


tydyat, 3, 2. 
tlandam (acc.), 3, 2- 
Ais: sampresitah, 3, 2. 


379 


ukthe, 3,1. 

ukthadohah, 3, I. 

ukthapatram (acc.), 3, 2. 

ukthaviryasya, 3,1; ukthaviryant, 1,5; uk- 
thaviryam (acc.), S. II, 16. 

ukthasanipadam, 3, 1. 

uttarah, 2,2; (acc. masc.) I, 2; 3,13 (acc. 
fem.) 2, 3; 43 (instr. masc.) 3,1; (gen. 
neut.) 2, 5; 3,13; wttarasyah (gen.), 3, 1; 
uttare (loc.), I, I. 

uttarena (with acc.), I, 3. 

uttaratah, 1,13 3, 4. 

uttamam, 1,1; 2,1; 53 3,13 wtamat (neut.), 
3, 2; uttamayah (abl.), 3,1; wttame (acc. 
du. fem.), 2, 5; wttamah (acc.), 1, 1; 2, 
35 5 

udakumbham (in quot.), I, I. 

udagagrah, 1, 3. 

udagdvare, I, I. 

udanmukhah, 1, 2. 

udaramt, 2, 5. 

udahitatarah, 1, 3. 

udgatda, I, 4. 

unmardanam, 3, 3. 

upamsu, I, I. 

upottamaya, 3,1; upottamayah (abl.), I, I. 

ubhau (acc.), 1,4; ubhabhyam, 1, 4. 

ubhayatah, 1, 3. 

ubhayasamsthanaviparyayah (?), 2, 1. 

usnthak, 2, 5. 


uri, 3,13; urn, I, I (in quot.). 
urdhvam, 1,33 43 (with abl.) 3, 1. 
urdhvagranthin, 1, 3. 
urdhvajfiuh, 3, 3. 


A rs: paryrsantt, 1, 3. 
rsabhah, 1,1; S.1, 1. 


chah, 3,33 eka, 2,2; 3; ehayad, 2,4; ekasmin, 
3, 35 eke, 1, 6. 

ehacatvarinisatam, 3, 2. 

chapada, 2,53 3,1. 

ehavinisatau, 1, 1. 

chasatam, 2, 2. 

ehadasa, 2, 4. 

chaikam (acc.), 1, 6. 

etatprabhrtinam, 2, 3. 

etadantah, 2, 5. 

etadadth, 1,6; etadadt, I, 6. 


380 AITAREYA 


enamt, 1, 4. 

eva, 1,23 43 3, 2. 

evam, 1,4; 63 3, 3. 

esa, 1, 33 etad, 1,3; 2,13; 3,15 etam, 2, 43 
3023 33 etdm, 1,6; 2,3; ead, 3,23 33 
etayd, 1,6; etasya (neut.), 2, 45 3,1; 23 33 
etasmin (neut.), 1, 53 ete (acc. neut.), 1, 6; 
etayok (gen. neut.), 1,6; e¢éh (nom. fem.), 
2,53; etd, 1,6; etand (acc.), 1,6; e¢ach, I, 1. 


atkahtkau, 3, 2. 
aindrinadm, 3, 1. 


audumbaram (acc. masc.), 1, 4; (instr.) 1, 1; 
audumbarant, 1, 3. 

audumbarim, audumbaryda, 1, 4. 

ausnihi, 2, 45 So it, 7 


kasmai cid (yadt), 1, 4. 

Raksodake, 3, 3. 

hatham, 3, 3» 

hartuh, i, 3. 

handavinah (acc.), 1, 5. 

hamam (adv.), 3, 3+ 

kamebhyah (dat.), 1, 4- 

Rasthani, 1, 3. 

hkirtayiset, 3, 3 (prob. cékirtayiset). 

Rusthasu, 1, 3. 

hiircdn, 1, 4. 

WV kr : karoti, 2,2; kuryat, , 4; upakrte (loc.), 
I, 2; &rtua, 333 °karam,1,6; 3,1; &ara- 
yanti, 1,5; karayitvd, 3, 3. 

WV kip: upakiptah, 1,2; klptachandasah, S. ise 

Akram: atikramya,1,2; anukramya, 1, 4; 
akramya, 3,33 niskramya, 1,1; 2. 

AV ksal: praksilya, 1, 3. 


A khan: nikhaya, 1, 3. 

khalu, 1, 6. 

AV khya: vyakhyasyamah, 3, 3; pratikhyaya, 
3) 2 


atasumM, 3, 3. 

A gam: upagamya, 3,3; jigamiset, 1,4; 8.11, 11. 
gayatram, 2, I. 

gayatri, 2,3; §. Il, 73 gayvatryah, 2, 4. 
giyatrikaram, 3, I. 

WV &Y 3 GEUrYA, 3, 20 

AV grh: udgrhniyat,1, 4; parigrhya, i, 4. 
goh, i, 6. 

grivah, 2,1. 


ARANYAKA 


ca, 1,13 23 33 43 53 63 3, 25 catva, 1,1; 

» NA — CANA, 3,33 C4-CA, 2, 43 4. 

catasrah, 1, 13 (acc.) 2, 23 3, I. 

caturangulena, 1, 3. 

caturuttaraih (neut.), 1, 4; caturuttarant, S. 
Las 

caturgrhitam (acc.), 1, I. 

caturvimsat, 1, 1. 

CAMASAN, 3, 2. 

a car: caritud, 1, 4. 

carma (acc.), I, 5. 

Get; Ts ORO Tes ie, 

cyaveta, 3, 2. 


chandamst (acc.), 1, 43; chandobhih, 1, 4. 
chandogebhyah (dat.), 1, 4- 

chaydsu, 3, 3- 

chidrant, 1, 3. 

chuvukena, 1, 4. 


NV jap: japati, 1, 43 53 §.1, 4, &c.; japema, 
3, 2. 

jJagaritah, 1, 1. 

A jiu : Jejeviset, 3, 13 jijiva, §. Il, 17. 


WV taks : tasténi, 1, 3. 

tatra,1, 63 3, 3- 
tan: upasamtatya, 3, I. 

tam,1, 4; tat (nom.), 3,33 (acc.) 3, 33 tena 
(masc.), 1,2; ¢asya (neut.), 3,13 2; tasmin 
(masc.), I, 1; Ze (acc. du. neut.), 3,1; ah 
(acc.), 1, 6; ¢dsamz, 2, 3. 

tavatyah, 1, 3; tdvatih, 1, 6; 3,2; tavanti 
(Gec:)sia5.t- 

tiryan, 1,33; tiryaficam, 1, 4. 

tisrah, 1,6; 2, 23 3,53 (acc.) 1, 13 2, 33 53 
tissu, 1, 5; trayak, 1, 53 2, hs rine, 1, 1s 
35 2,23 5. 

tirthena, 1, 3. 

tu, 1,43 3,33 ma te, I, 5. 

trcah, 2, 5; treakiptah, S. ity 

tycasitéh, 2, 3; 4; 5; (nom. plur.) 2,5; (abl.) 
3, 3- 

trtiye, ‘third period of life,’ 3, 3. 

trtiyavarjam, I, 6. 

tytiyasavanam, 3, 2. 

trayam, 2,1. 

trimfat (ekaya na), 2, 4. 

trigune (nom. du. fem.), 1, 3. 


INDEX VI 


triratram, 3, 3. 
tristubjagatinam, 3, 1. 
trih, 1,33 43 6. 
traitdham, 1, 2. 


daksinah, 2, 2; (acc. masc.) I, 23 4; §.1, 73 
(acc. neut.) 1, 4; (instr. fem.) 1, 3; (loc.) 1,1; 
(acc. plur. mase. in quot.)I, 1; (instr. in quot ) 
Te ic 

daksinatah, 1, 23 3. 

daksinottare (acc.), 1, 3; cf. daksinottarinam 
upastham krtva, S. Tou 

dafa, 1,13; daSabhih, 1, 4. 

dafatah, 3, I. 

dasatinam, 3, I. 

A/ dah: samdaheyuh, 3, 2. 

a/ da: dadyat, 1, 5. 

a/ da: avadaya, I, I. 

darbhye (nom. du. fem.), 1, 3. 

AW dif: samuddifet, 3, 3; Gdisya, 1, 4. 

dikstte (loc.), 1, 5. 

A drs: drstvd, 3, 2. 

deam, 3, 3; (loc.) 3, 3. 

dve, 1, 3; dvayok (gen.), T, 4. 

dvayi, 3, 3. 

dvard, I, 3- 

dvipada, 2,5; (acc.) 2,4; (loc. plur.) 2, 2; 
(gen. plur.) alt x 

duifatam, 2, 2. 


W dha: upadadhati, 1,6; atyddadhati, 1, 3; 
paridadhati, 3,1; pratyavadadhati, 1, 6; 2, 
3; 4; dhatte, 1,6; parithite (loc. neut.), 3, 
1; upanidhdya, 1,1; §.1,6; - 

dhayyd@, 2, 2. 

dhisnyam (acc. in quot.), 1,1; (abl.) 1, 3; 
(gen.) 1,4; (acc. plur.) I, 3. 

na (no verb), 1, 5; 3, 35 (with opt.) 1, 4; 5; 
3, 2; (with fut. and 7/2 after yathd) 3, 2; ehaya 
na trimsat, 2,43 Na Vai, 3,1; na—cana, 
V, 3, 3 (ex. conj.). 

nadavanti (acc.), 1, 6. 

NAVA, 2, 23 4. 

a/ nah: apinahya, 3, 3+ 

ninapanibhydm (instr.), 1, 4. 

napitena, 3, 3- 

nama, 3, 33 (acc-) 3, 3+ 

nityaya, 3, 2. 

nidarsanaya, 1, 6. 

nimustikah, 1, 3 


381 


nividah, 1,5. Cf. Zud. Stud., XVIII, 96, n.1. 
nividdhanam, 3,13; (abl.) 3, 2- 

niskevalyadya, 1, 5. 

nistarkyam (acc. masc.), I, 3. 

A/ ni: pranayati, 1, 4; ninayatha (in qnot.), 52. 
NO EVA, 3, 3 


paksah, 2, 23 (acc.) 1, 2; (dat. du.) 1, 6. 

paksapade, 1, 6. 

panrktih, 2, 2. 

patica, 2, 2. 

paticadasa, 2,23 4. 

parcadasastomah, 2, 2. 

pahicavimsasya, 1, 5. 

pattcavimsatim, 1, 1. 

pancavyayame (nom, du.), I, 3. 

patandaya, I, 6. 

patnyah, 3,5. . 

A pad : pratipadyate, 1, 5; abhipadyeta, X, 4; 
sampannam (neut.), 3, 2; prapadya, I, 3. 

pade (acc.), I, 6. 

padamatre, I, 3. 

parasmat, 3, 33 So Ba: 

paridhaniyayah, 1, 5. 

pascat, I, 2; (with gen.) 4. 

pascardhe, 1, 4. 

pani (acc.), 1, 4; panibhik (in quot.), 1, I. 

padam (acc.), 1, 4; padin, 1,6; 3,1; padath, 
I, 6; 3,13 padesu, I, 6. 

palam, I, 4. 

palasant, 1, 3. 

pucham, 1,23 2,2; (gen.) I, 2. 

punar apt, 1, 4. 

purastad, 1,1; 33; (with gen.) S; Wises 

Purane, 3, 3 

purusaksarani (acc.), 1, 6. 

pirnakumbhah (acc. or perhaps nom. as part 
of quot.), I, I. 

pirvam (acc. masc.), I, 43 3, 13 purvasmat 
(masc.), 3,1; purvaya, I, 3. 

pirvam (ady.), 1, 1. 

purvahne, 3, 3- 

prakrtya, 3,1. 

pragitham, 2,23; pragathau, 2, 2. 

pratigarah, 1, 6. 

pratipadanucarau, 3, 2. 

pratiharam, 1, 5. 

pratyaiicam, 3, 2. 

pratyanmukhah, 1, 2. 


382 AITAREYA 


prathamam, 1, 53 prathamayah (gen.), 3,13 
prathamayam, 1, 6. 

pradaksinam (adv.) (in quot.), 1,15 25 3. 

prabhitam (acc. neut.), 1, 5. 

prastotaram, I, 5. 

pra, \,2; 43 3,23 praficam, I, 4. 

pranmukhah, 1, 23 3. 

prak (with abl.), 1,1; 6; 3,13 3- 

pragagrabhyam (instr.), 1, 3 

pragudagdvare, i, 1. 

pragdvare, 1,1. 

pratahsavane, 1,1; (nom.) §.I, 2. 

priyah, 1, 5. 

prenkhah, 1,3; (acc.) 1,43 3,23 §. Il, 17; 
(abl.) 3, 2; (gem.) 1, 33 3, 25 (loc.) I, 4. 

presyah (acc.), 1, I. 

praisah, 3, 3. 


phalakam (acc.), 1, 45 (loc.) 1,4; (nom. plur.) 
1, 3; cf. prenkhaphalakam (acc.), S. I, 6; 
10 9% 


MV bath: badhnati, 1, 3; avabadhnantt, 3, 2. 

bahu (acc.), 3, 3- 

bairhatah, 2, 2; §. II, 5; barhatz, 2, 4; S. 
Is ic 

brhatah, 2, 2. 

brhatih (acc.), 2, 2. 

brhatikaram, 1, 6. 

brhatisampannanam, 3, 1. 

brahma, 1, 4 (=priest). 

brahma (neut. nom.), 3, 3. 

brahmacaripumscalyoh (gen.), I, 5. 

MV bru: briiyat, 1,4; 53 prabriyat, 3,2; pra- 
brutat, 1, 5. 

braihmanacchamsi, 1,1. 


MV bhaks : bhaksayati, 3,2; bhaksaytsyantam,3, 2. 

bhaksam, 3, 2. 

bhadram, 2, 2. 

WV bhid: sambhinnasu, 65 Sh 

A bhuj: bhutjita, 3, 3; bhuktud, 3, 2. 

V bhit: bhavati, 1,13 33 3,23; 3; bhavanti, 
1, 3; bhutasya (neut.), 3, 3; bhitanam, 1, 5. 

bhimidundubhim, 1, 5. 

bhiiyah, 3, 3; bhiyasisu, 3, 2. 


mad: praméadyet, 3, 3. 

madhyandine, 1, 1. 

madhyamam (acc. neut.), 1, 4. 
marutvatiyam, 1,1; (gen.) 1, 1; (loc.) 1, 1, 


ARANYAKA 


mahatah (gen. neut.), 3, 3- 

mahavratam, 3,2; (acc.) 3,33 (gen.) I, T- 
Manisa, 3, 2. 

madhyandine, 1, I. 

méarjaliyah, 1,1; (loc.) 1, 13 2. 

misrint, 1,33 misrasu, 2, I. 

mustimatrena, 1, 3. 

miuladesena, 1, 4. 

meghe, 3, 3. 

maithunam, 1, 5. 


yah, 1,53 3,33 pat, 3, 3- 

AV yap: yajatt, 3, 2. 

yajamanasabdah, 1, 5. 

yujnayajniyam, 3, 2. 

yatra, 3, 3. 

yatha (with verb), 1, 2; 3; (with noun) yatha 
vinam, 1,4; yathahth,1, 4; yatha na (with 
fut.) 272,995)2 

yathakalam, 3, 2» 

yathasthanam, 1, 6. 

yada, I, 4. 

yadt, 3,2; yadi kasmai cid, 1, 4; yady api, 
3, 3- 

J yam: prayachati, 1, 4. 

ytvatih (acc.), 3, 1. 

yupam, 1, 2. 

vrajju, 1,3; ragjubhyam, 1, 3. 

vrathantarasya, 2, 2. 

rajanena, I, 6. 

rajanastotriyena, 1, 5. 

rajaputrena, I, 5. 

vathantarah, 2, 2; S. Il, 5; vrathantaram, 
25 Oe 

Vruh: avarohati, 3,2; upavarohati, S. Tage 
samarohati, 1, 4; samarohantt, 1, 4; arohet 
(or vohet), 1, 4; avaruhya, 1, 4. 


WV labh: upalambhaniyah, 1,1; ‘lambhyau, §. 
Der, 

AV likh: ullikhami, 1, 4; ullikhati, 1, 43; ava- 
likhya, 3,3; wullikhya, 3, 3. 

WV lip: anulipya, 3, 3. 

lohitam (acc.), 3, 2- 

A vac: uktam, 3,2; prokte (loc. abs.), 1, 5; 
vacayati, 3,2; pravacayata, 1, 5. 

vatse, ‘in youth,’ 3, 3. 

WV vad: vadatyah, 1, 1. 

A vap: avapeta, 1,1; avaperan, 3, 1. 


INDEX VI 


varnakena, 3, 3. 

varse, 3, 33 varsani (acc.), 3, I. 
vasah, 2, 5. 

vasatkarott (anu), 3, 2. 
vasatkaranumantranam, 3, 2. 

/ vah: adhyithe, 3,3; °ah,S.11,3 3 upohate,t, 4. 
ua, 1, 33 43 53 2,13 3,33 -- va, 1, 3; va: 
UA, 3, 33 Va! Va: Va, 1,1; NAVA, 3, I. 

Vue: udvayatt, 1, 3; Samutah, 1, 3. 

vanam (acc.), I, 4. 

Valakhilyanam, 2, 4. 

vimsateh, 3, 4. 

vijavah, 2, 1. 

Av vid: veda, 3, 3- 

wibhiimah, 1, 3; vibhimau (acc.), I, 4. 

visvajitah (abl.), I, I. 

visamsthitasamcarena, 1, 1. 

viharanaprabhrti, 1, 1. 

vinam, 1, 4. 

vivadhah, 1, 3; (acc.) 1, 3; (loc.) 1, 3. 

vr: parivrte (loc.), I, 1. 

A ort ; paryavrite (loc. masc.); dvritya, 1, I. 

vrta (instr.), 1, 4 (? dvrta). 

ursth, 3, 23 vrsibhih, 1, 3; better drszh. 

Vat, 3, 3- 

vaidikena (masc.), 3, 3. 

vatsvadevat, 3, 2; (gen.) 3, 2. 

a vyadh: vyddhayanti, 1, 5. 

V vraj: parivrajatha (in quot.), 1,1; part- 
wrajya, 1, 3; vrajan, vrajate, 3, 2. 


A Sams: Samset, 1, 6; 3, 33 Sastam, 3, 3; 
Sastud, 3, 1. —- 

famsitaram, 3, 2. 

Satatantum, 1, 4. 

Sabdan, 1, 5. 

AV fam: Samayamanah, 3, 3. 

Sastram, 1, 6. 

$astradih, 1, 5. 

$akhaya, 1, 4; Sakhabhih, 1, 3. 

A/ $as: samsasti, 1,13 5. 

MV Si: $ayanah, 3, 3; (dat.) 3, 3. 

WV Sis: partsistasu, 1, 5. 

Szrah, 2,1; (acc.) 1, 2. 

Sesah, 2,35 45 3,15 (acc.) 1, 2. 

AV Sram: Sramyet, 1, 4. 

AV Sri: anapasritah, 3, 2. 

sriyam, 1, 6. 


sat, 1,1 (perhaps nom.) ; 2,2; 4; 53 3,13 2. 


383 


Sts, 15, 6: 

Samvatsarat, 3, 1. 

samsthanaviparyayah, 2, 1. 

sakydgadandat, 3, 3. 

sakthi (acc.), I, 4. 

A saj: vyatisajati, 1,6; 3,1; $. Il, 4. 

sadah (acc.), I, 2. 

sadhamadt, 3, 3. 

Sanadrasamsesu, 3, 3. 

sandhim, 1, 4. 

Sapalasaya, 1, 4. 

Sapla, 2,5; saptabhih, 1, 4. 

saptadasastomah, 2, 2. 

saptamim, 2, 4. 

sam (with dative, w.r. for fam?), 1, 6. 

samah, 1, 3. 

samamndtasu, 1, 63 2, 13 samamnatasya, 
1, 6; 

Sampada, 2, 5. 

sampatah, 2, 2. 

sampravadah, 1, 5. 

sarvam (nom. neut.), 2,1; sarvah (fem.), 2, 5; 
sSarvan, I, 3. 

salilasya, 3,2; §. II, 18 (name of hymn). 

savyam (acc. neut.), 1, 4; savyayd, 1, 3. 

Savyadaksine (nom. du.), 1, 3. 

sasakham (acc. masc.), 1, 4. 

Saha, 3, 3. 

samina, 1,5; 6. 

samidhenyah, 1, 1. 

siihte (du.), 2, 33 4,53 suktasya, 2,1; suk- 
LL CONY ee aay 

sucyah, 1, 3; sucibhyam, 1, 3. 

siidadohah, 1,6; 2,13 2; 33 43 53 (abl.) 
Tap Os 

A srj: upasrstena, 3, 2; cf. upasrstam, S18, 1 

AW srp: prasarpatt, 1,2; srapsyan,1,4; sama- 
dhisr pya, Si, Hie 

A stabh: avastabdhah, 3, 3; pratistabdhah, 3, 3. 

AV stu: stuvate, 1, 5; S. I, 4; stuviran, 1, 6; 
aioe Sadie Se age 

stotré, 1, 

stotriyah, 1,1; §. II, 1; (ace. pl.) S. 1, 

stotriyanuripau, 2,23 3, 2. 

slomasya, 1, 5. 

striyam, 3, 3. 

A stha: upatisthate, 1, 1; 2; §. 1, 53 sam- 
tisthate, 3, 2; §. II, 18 ; wésthite (loc. masc.), 
1, 43 samsthite (loc. neut.), 1, 1; désthan, 1, 


384 


13 23 3, 2; tésthate, 3, 2; pratisthapayati, 
TAs 

sthane, 1,63 3,13 23 sthdndni (acc.), 1, 43 
sthananam, 1, 4. 

sthine, 1, 33 (acc. du.) 1, 3. 

MV spré: upasprset, 1, 4. 

SVAJAM, 3, 3- 

SrUuvend, 1, I. 

svasya (neut.), I, 4. 

svadhyayadharmam, 3, 3- 


ha: atraha,1t,6; atha ha, 2,4; hatva, 3, 33 
ha sma, 3, 3- 


AITAREYA ARANYAKA 


Ahan: aghnanti, 1, 5; upahanisyas?, 3, 2. 

lhu: juhoti, 1, 1. 

M hii: Ghitya, 1, 5 

Vir: aharati, 3,2; wdharatt, 2,35 43 53 
viharati, 1,6; atiharati,1,4; hareyuh, 3, 
2; udaharisyamah, 1,6; udhytya, 1,6; 2, 
33 4; avehrtah, 1, 6; atcharan, §. I, 73 
upavahrtya, §.1, 7. 

hot@, 1, V3 453 35 2¢ 

hotrsastresu, 3, 3+ 

hotrsadanam (acc. v.1.°@), I, 3. 

hotra&h, 1, I. 

hotrakah, 1, 4; (gen.) 3, 3- 


INDEX VII 


BEGINNINGS OF KHANDAS OF ARANYAKAS. 


Agnim naro didhitibhir aranyor iti annddya- 
kamah, I, 1, 2. ; 

atha Kauntharavyah, Il, 2, 2; §. NOTES as 

atha khalo chur nirbhujavaktrah, WI, 1, 5; 
§.VIL11. Cf&. athato nirbhujapravadah, § 
VII, 10, and atha vai vayam brimo nirbhu- 
javakirah, §. VII, 12. 

atha khalv iyam sarvasyat vaca upanisat, MI, 
ae 

atha nirbhujapravadah, 
VII, 10. 

atha mahavraiam, I, 1, 1. 

atha Sakalyasya, U1, 1,2; S. VU, 3° 

atha sidadohah, 1, 4, 1 

atha hasma etat Krsnaharitah, Ii, 2, 6. 

athatah samhitaya upanisat, III, 1,1; § VII, 2. 

athato daksinah paksah, 1, 4, 2 

athato’nuvyaharah, II, 1, 4; $. VU, 8. 

athato retasah systih, Il, 1, 3. 

aratnimatra upart bhiimeh, I, 2, 4. 

asat su me jaritah, 1, 2, 2 


feta 330i S- 


atma va tdam, 1, 4,1 
atva ratham yathotaye, 1, 2, 
apa 3 ity apa itt, Il, 1, 8. 


r* ia: 


uktham uktham itt praja vadanti, Wl, 1, 2. 
upakrie stotre traidham, V, 1, 2. 


uri Indragni, V, 3,1. 


esa imam lokam abhyarcat, Il, 2, i. 
esa u eva bibhradvajah, I, 2, 2 
esa pantha etat karma, il, 1, 1. 


ausnihi trcasitih, V, 2, 5- 


ko ’yam atmeti vayam upasmahe, iI, 6. 


KEITH 


gayatram praigam kuryad ity chuh, \, 1, 3. 
gayatri trcasitin, V, 2, 3. 

gayatrim treasitine Samsati, I, 4, 3. 

griva yasyedam, V, 2,1. 


catvarah purusé iti Badhvah, WI, 2, 3; 
(Vats(y)ak) §. VIII, 3. 


tatratte Slokah, I, 3, 8. 

tat Savitur vrnimahe, 1, 5, 3; §.1X,1; II, 18. 

tad ahuh kim prenbhasya preikhatvam, I, 
a3 

tad ahuh kaitasyahnah pratipad iti, 1, 3, 2 

tad itt pratipadyate, 1, 3, 3; 6. 

tad id asa bhuvanesu jyestham itt pratipadyaia 
etad vava, I, 3, 4. 

tad id asa bhuvanesu jyesthant wi pratipadyate 
yad vat, I, 3, 7- 

tad id asa bhuvanesu jyestham tam su te kirtim, 
Vi E50: 

tad va idam brhatisahasram sampannam tad 
yasah, 1, 3, 7. 

tad va idam brhatisahasram sanpannam tad 
haztat, Il, 3, 5. 

tad va idam brhatisahasrant sampannan tasya 
yani, Il, 2, 4. 

tad va idam brhatisahasvam sampannam tasya 
va etasya, XI, 3, 6. 

tam deva pranayanta, MI, 2, 5. 

tam prapadibhyam prapadyata, Xi, 1, 4. 

tasya ya atmanam, II, 3, 2 

tasya vak tantth, I, 2, 6. 

tasya vaca systau, II, 2, 7. 

ta eta devatah, Il, 4, 2 

ta nadena viharati puruso vai nadah, I, 3, 5. 

ta nadena viharati prano vai nadah, I, 3, 8. 


cc 


386 AITAREYA 


dugdhadoha asya veda bhavanti, IIT, 2, 4. 


nadiksito mahavratant Samset, V, 35 3- 
nisthite prenkhe hota vanam audumbarant, V, 


iy 2g 


puruse ha va ayam adito garbhah, MI, 5, 1. 

pra vo mahe mandamandyandhasah, E82. 

prastotiram samsasti, Wiad » 5s 

prano vamsa itt Sthavirah Sdkalyah, Il, 2, 1; 
S.Vill, 1 


barhati trcasitih, V, 2, 4- 
brhadrathantarayo riipena, 1,1, 6; brhadra- 
thantarena ripenda, §. VII, 19. 


mahavratasya parcavimésatine simidhenyah, V, 
Tyee 


ARANYAKA 


miurdha lokandm ast, V, 3; 2- 


yathetam sadah prasarpatt, V, 1, 3. 
yo ha va atmanam, I, 3, 1. 
yo ha vai yajiie, IU, 3, 4. 


vathantaro daksinah paksah, V, 2, 2. 


vatam samsatt, 1, 5,13; atha vasam Samsatt, 
§. II, 11. 

van me manast, II, 7, I. 

vayav & yaht, I, 1, 4. 

vida maghavan, IV, I, I. 

Visvamitram hy etad ahah, Ul, 2, 3. 


sa tkyateme nu lokah, V1, 4, 3- 
sa esa purusah samudrah, M1, 3, 3- 


himkdarenaitad ahah, I, 3, t. 


PRATIKAS IN SANKHAYANA ARANYAKA I, II, VII-XV. 


agnth purvarupam, VU, 5. 

atha khalv iyam daivi ving, VIII, 9. 
atha yadi mahaj jigamiset, 1X, 8. 
atha svapnah, VIII, 4. 

atha ha smasya putrah, VXI, 13. 
athatas Tandavindasya vacah, VIII, to. 
athato dhyatmikam, X, 1. 

athato Valisikhayaner vacah, VII, 21. 
athato vairagyasamskrte Sarire, XM. 
athayam purusah, XI, 3. 

athaitam graivam, II, 3. 

athaitad avapanam, XI, 14. 

athaitad aindragnam, Xl, 13. 
athattam tristupchatam, XI, 11. 
athaitam prahastakam, Ml, 5. 
athaitam anustubham, Il, 15. 
athaité asitth, 11, 7. 

athaita ajyahutih, I, 4. 

athaitaé dvipadah, Il, 12. 

athaitant caturuttarant, II, 6. 
athaitant Sirsanyanz, lI, 2. 

athaitam aksam, V1, 4. 

asma jagatah, XI, 7. 

aSmeva sthiro vasani, X\, 8. 


Indrah sutesu somesu, II, 10. 


ud vayam tamasas part, VII, 5. 
ream murdhanam, X\V. 


gatih purvariupam, VII, 20. 
Gunakhyac Chankhayanad asmabhir adhitam, 
XV. 


caksur hoccakrama, VIII, 4. 
candrama tvadityah, Vil, 7. 
citram devanam, VIII, 4. 


jaya pirvaripam, Vi, 16. 


tad etad sakycchastayam, M1, 17. 
tad va audumbaram bhavatt, \, 7. 
tasya viso viso vo atithim, I, 2. 
tani va etant, I, 5. 


prihivi piirvaripam dyaur utiarariipam kalah 
samhita, VXI, 6. 

prthivi pirvaripam dyaur utlarariipam vayuh 
samhita, VUI, 4. 

prthivya ripam sparsah, VIM, 8. 

Prajapatih prajah systvd, VIM, 11. 

Prajapatir vé imam purusam udancat, XI, 1. 

Prajapatir vat samvatsarah, i, 1. 


INDEX VII 387 


praja purvariupam, VXI, 17. 
prano hoccakrama, IX, 7. 


mano hoccakrama, IX, 6. 
mahan Indrah, I, 8. 
mata pirvaripam, VII, 15. 


yas tityaja sacividam, VIII, 6. 
ya Indra bhujah, i, 9. 
yo ha vat zyestham ca, 1X, i. 


vak pirvariipam, VII, 7. 

vak pranena samdhiyate, VII, 14. 

vak samhiteti, VII, 18. 

van mamett, XI, 2. 

vact me gnih pratisthitah svaha, XI, 5. 


vact me gnih pratisthito vag hrdaye, XI, 6. 


C C.2 


Visvamitro ha od, I, 6. 
Srotram hoccakrama, IX, 5. 


sam vak pranena, I, 8. 

sa trptah pranam tarpayatt, X, 3. 
sa trptas caksur tarpayatt, X, 4. 
sa irptas Srotram tarpayati, X, 6. 
sa trpias tad etad, X, 8. 

sa trpto manas tarpayati, X, 5. 
sa trpto retas tarpayatt, X, 7. 

sa trpto vacam tarpayati, X, 2. 
sa yadi pranam, VII, 9. 

sarva vag brahmeti, VII, 22. 

sa ha vak, VUII, 3. 


hastivarcasam prathatam, XII. 
himkarena pratipadyate, Il, 1. 


VII]. INDEX TO INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 


(Only the more important points are here referred to. References to the Introduction 
are to pages, to the Notes to the Aranyakas.) 


Abuse, employment of, in ritual, V, 1, 5, 
Needy 

Agnimaruta Sastra, 28. 

Agnistoma, 27, 33. 

Aitareya Aranyaka, MSS. of, 1-11; commen- 
taries on, 11-15; divisions of, 15-26; the 
Mahavrata in, 26-39; the Upanisads of, 
36-52; style and grammar, 51-74; rela- 
tion of I and V, I, 2, 3,n.5; date of III, 
WOT 5, Hts 2 

Aitareya Brahmana, 16 sq.; relation to Kausi- 
taki Brahmana, 30-33; style and grammar, 
52, 66, 67. 

Anandatirtha, #7#a@ on Sankara’s bhasya, 11, 12; 
bhasya, 12. 

Apastamba, knows Vedanta (?), 26. 

Aranyaka, meaning of, 15; III, 2, 6, n. 11. 

Aévalayana, ‘ author’ of Aranyaka IV (?), 18, 
19; Srauta Sitra quoted in Aranyaka, V, 3, 
2,n.14; relation to Saunaka, ibid. 

Atharvasiras Upanisad, known to Gautama, 26. 

Atman, doctrine of, 49 sq. 


Bahyrca Brahmana Upanisad, 38. 

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, relation to Aitareya 
Aranyaka II, III, 41, 44-46. 

Brhaddevata, comparison of grammar of, with 
Aitareya Aranyaka, 72. 

Buddhism, relation to Aitareya Aranyaka II, 
III, 47-49. 


Chandogya Upanisad, relation to Aitareya 
Aranyaka II, III, 41, 44-46. 


Chariots (¢vécakra), I, 5, 3, n. 6. 


Deussen, discussion of theory of significance of 
Upanisads, 41 sq. 


Epic, date of, 50; I, 5, 2, n. 19. 


Fire, significance of use of, in ritual, V, 3, T, 
nl. 21. 

Fire altar, bird form of, 508q.; V, I, 2, notes 
2 and 5. 


Gautama, knows Atharvasiras Upanisad, 26. 

Gavamayana, 17, 26. 

Gopatha Brahmana, date of, 25, 26; cf. V.O./., 
XVIII, 191 sq. 

Grammar (including Accidence, Syntax, and 
Vocabulary’). 


a. ENGLISH INDEX. 


Cases, 58, 59, 68, 69; Accus. with /man 
alternating with nom., III, 1, 4, n. 3; 
with dz (two accus.), III, 1, 3, n. 6, 
J.4.0.8S., XXVIII, 378 sq, 398 sq. ; 
Instr. with antar + 4/2,V, 3,3, n. 21; with 
causative of 4/3/7, III, 2, 4,n. 16; Dat. 
with sam, V, 1, 6, n. 3; Gen. predica- 
tive, 1,2, 2, n.83 3, 4, n. 10; 11, 34 
n. 7; V, 3, 3, 2.2; partitive, with posi- 
tive adj., I, 2, 3,n.6; with verb (yaja), 
V, 3, 3; 2. 3; absolutely; Il, 3; 1,na6 
defining, TV, ,.m. 3h Vo 0, airs 
construction of whole and part, V, I, 4, 
Nn. ky noms, LS so. n- aa 


1 What is given in the Introduction is not repeated inthe Index. 


INDEX 


Compounds, disjunctive adjectival Dvan- 
dva, I, 3, 3, 0- 4. 

Concord, attraction of predicate, V, I, I, 
n.14; plural for dual (?), I, 1, 2, n. 73 
V, 2, 2,n.12; superlative agrees with 
subject, I, 2, 4,n. 6; masc. after masc. 
and neut., II, 1,7, n. 1; neut. adj. pred., 
TEE, f,2; 0s 4s 

Metrical lengthening of vowels, I, 3, 8, 
n. 9; V,2,2,n.12; in prose, III, 1,2,n.2. 

Moods, 62-63; Conditional, III, 1, 4, 
n. 3; Imperative in -fa/, V, 1, 5, n. 15 
Optative of characteristic, II, 1, 2, n.2; 
III, 2,3, n. 33 indefinite, IT], 2,1, n. 1; 
V, 3,3,n.11; 7-2. A.S., 1909, p. 1525 
Injunctive, I, 5, 2, n. 8. 

Numerals, use of acc. for nom., I, 2, 4, 
mE oae Ve £5) 25: Ds. 2 

Particles, 65,66; use of zva, I, 1, 2, n. 3; 
use of 20, V, 3, 3, 0-12; use of cana, 
Til, 1, 3, 2.6; use of ya?, 11,1, 2, 
3 0; 5, 2 Be 

Prepositions, 59; adhi with acc., I, 3, 1, 
n. 6; abhi with acc., I, 4, 2,0. 7; afz 
with acc., IJ, 2,5,n.8; abhitah with 
ace., V,3,1,n.6; wffarena with acc., 
V, 3, 1, 0-6; pare with acc., I, 5,1, 
n. 13; fascat with gen., V, 1, 4, n. 15. 

Pronouns, 58; enam, Ill, 1, 4,n. 3. 

Sandhi, 55; irregularcontraction of vowels, 
Til, 1,3,0.2; 2,4, 0.11; V, 3,2,0-9; 
HEGEL s F505 ted  *. 

Tenses, 59-62; Perfect and Imperfect, I, 
2,2, n.6; cf. J. X. A.S., 1909, Pp. 1505 
Perfect, original force of, II, 1, 8, n. 8. 

Verbal Nouns and Participles, 64, 65; 
infin. in foh, 1, 1, 1,n.4; gerund and 
partic. with »/man, III, 1, 4,n. 35 25 4, 
n. 7; gerund (time of), I, 3, 1, n. I. 

Voice, use of middle as passive in perfect 
forms, III, 1, I, 0. 3; in present and 
imperfect, V, 2, 2, n. 14} in participle, 
Nea; 25.0. Be 


4. SANSKRIT INDEX. 


amsaphalakam, 1, 2, 2, n. 11. 
GpsGhy N, 2.12, I-et + Vx 1, 0, 
atin, V1, 1, 11... 


VIII 389 

annatamam, I, 4, 1, n. 11. 

anyo ’nyam, III, 1, 6, n. 7. 

abhivyaharsan (?), UI, 1, 6, 0. 5. 

avir edhi, XI, 7,n. 1. 

athya bhavayan, III, 2, 3, n. 4. 

hkaksasi, I, 2, 2, n. 11. 

haksodake, V, 3, 3,0. 17. 

cthirtayiset, V, 3, 3) 0. 22. 

dutzh, 1, 4, 1, n. 9. 

nakuli (?), III, 2, 5. 

nana, V, 1, 4,n. II. 

paran, Il, 4, 3, 2. 3. 
XVII, 190. 

brahma, III, 2, 33 304, 367. 

rathantaraya, V,1, 2,0. 3. 


Cf. Ind. Stud., 


lpi, 23. 

vana, V, 1, 4, Nn. 3. 

vydthis, V, 2, 1, 0. 2. 
sambalhatamah, I, 4, 1, n, 10. 
smin (?), III, 1, 2, n. 4. 


Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, 46; V, 3, 2,n.3. 


Katyayana, grammarian, date of, 22, 24. 

Katyayana, author of Sarvanukramani, 21, 24. 

Kausitaki Brahmana, relation to Aitareya 
Brahmana, 31-33, 39. 

Kausitaki Upanisad, relation to Aitareya Ara- 
nyaka II, III, 4, n. 2; 46. 

Ksatriyas, interest in philosophy, 50; III, 2,6, 
n.11; 7. R.A.S., 1908, pp. 868 sq. 


Magic rites, I, 2, 3, n.1; V, 1,5, notes 13, 14, 
15, and 17. 

Mahaduktha, 28. 

Mahaitareya, Rsi, 39. 

Mahaitareya Upanisad, 39. 

Mahanamni, 18; IV, n. 1. 

Mahavrata, 26-39; see my Sankhayana Ara- 
nyaka, pp. 73-85. 

Mahidasa Aitareya, 16,17; I,1,1,n.4; UI, 
Baha tla de Lil; 2 On Dela 

Mantras, style of, V, 1, 5,0.73 V, 3, 2, 2.17. 

Manuscripts, description of, 2-8; value of, 8, 15. 

Marutvatiya Sastra, 28. 

Metre, II, 3, 8, n. 1. 


Nirbhuja, 1 7: 
Niskevalya Sastra, 28. 


390 AITAREYA 


Palaeography, confusion of &s and hy, 59; I, 
4, 3, n. 11; of s (s) and sy (sy), III, 1, 6, 
n.5; omission of 7, V, 2,1,n.53; of vzsarga, 
V, 3).6, 0.23 Vi, 01, nds) V5 2,08 le Os 
interchange of # and # (#), II,1,5,n.5; 3, 
3,0. 25 LIL, £,45193)5 001 ¢ andes lL. 75a, 
n. 3; of @ and Z, 3, III, 2, 6,n. 1; of a and 
G, 3; of aandz, 3; of aand.e, 3; of 7 and 
vi, 33 of y and 77, II, 3,6, n. 2. Cf. also 
P- 305. 

Panini, date of, 21-24. 

Parimads, V, 1, 1, n. 23. 

Patafijali, date of, 21, 22. 

Pranaje41 sq.3) 0, 35,7, Ds 584; 15 05) 05; Ls 
n, 63 2, n, 13. 

Pratrnna, 17. 

Purisapadas, 18, IV, 1. 

Purusa, 40 sq. 


Religion in India, 47. 


Sakalya, date of, 73; III, 1, 2, n. 1. 

Sakvari, see Mahanamni. 

Sankara, bhdsya, 13, 14. 

Sankhayana Aranyaka, relation to Aitareya Ara- 
nyaka I, 34-36; I, 1, 3, n. 2; to Aitareya 
Aranyaka II, III, 29, 30; grammar, 67, 68. 

Saikhayana Srauta Satra, XVII, XVIII, 70, 71. 

Santi verses, DA Iouisncrit. NOL lee, 

Satapatha Brahmana, relation to Aitareya 
Brahmana, 32; to Aitareya Aranyaka, 36-39. 

Saunaka, author of Aranyaka V, 18, 19; rela- 
tion to ASvalayana, V, 3, 2, n. 14. 


Sacrifice, only Brahmins can perform, V, 3, 3, 
need; 


ARANYAKA 


Samhita Upanisad, 40. 

Samhitopanisad Brahmana, relation to Aitareya 
Aranyaka III, 52. : 

Samkhya philosophy, derivation of Buddhism 
from, 50. 

Sayana, dhadsya, 13, 14; probably author of 
part of dsasya on Taittiriya Aranyaka III, 
2,4,0. 1; 2, 3,0. 5. 

Style of Aranyaka, 52-54. 

Svadhyaya, rules of, V, 3, 3- 


Taittiriya Aranyaka, relation to Aitareya Brah- 
mana, 33. 

Taittiriya Samhita VI, relation to Aitareya 
Brahmana, 33. 

Taittiriya Upanisad, relation to Aitareya Ara- 
nyaka II, III, 41, 46, 52. 

Tapas, 46; S. I, 6. 


Ubhayamantarena, 17. 

Uktha, 41. 

Ukthadoha, V, 3, I, n. 9. 

Ukthasampad, V, 3, I, n. 9. 

Ukthavirya, V, 1, 5, n. 6. 

Upanisads, interpretation of, 40, 45; dates of, 
49; meaning of name, III, 1, 1, n. 8. 


VaiSvadeva Sastra, 28. 

Vernacular, use of, I, 3, £, 2. 53 5, 2,0. 19. 

Visuvant, 27, 34. 

ViSveSvaratirtha, super-commentary on Ananda- 
tirtha’s bhasya, 12, 13. 


Yaska, date of, 24, 25. 
Yavanani, 23,24. See also Biihler, S. 2. £., 
Il, lxi; Zudian Studies, Ill, 26, n. 1. 


OXFORD 
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 








eee éiiad 





a ” wo — 
~~ 7 
—, 


= 





= ' 
an Me ro} 
AN  “W 








PK 
3031 


Ky 


Ww 
ws 
Eo 
= 
=P 
Fe 


Upanishads. Aitareyopanisad. 

The Aitareya Aranyaka. “Edited from the 
manuscripts in the India Office and the library 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, with introduction, 
translation, notes, indexes, and an appendix 
containing the portion hitherto unpublished 
of the Sankhayana Aranyaka, by Arthur Berrie- 
dale Keith. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1909. 

iv, 390p. fold. facsim. 23cm. (Anecdota 
oxoniensia. Aryan series, pt. 9) 


I. Upanishads. Aitareyopanigad. English. 
II. Keith, Arthur Berriedale, 1879-1944, ed. 


III. Kaushitakya- ranyaka, IV. Series. 


CCSC/mmb 





















°. » aR 
‘ ek . 
i exetae Wed 
ge ob abe Mh geen On 











Chega ae: 









Y ne uN, 
br al we 4b oe 
an od dy 





partste a es re at 
es 


xe 





= 


7, 
> 


= 





‘ fads 


