SHAKTI AND SHAKTA



              By
     SIX JOHN WOODROFFE




    GANESH & CO, MADRAS
    LUZAC & CO. LONDON
            1929
GMI VARNA           FesetROR INSTITo7E,
   ARIGHUR.       cOCHIN STATE,
              74MARI900
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
    ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES ON
  THE SHAKTA TANTRASHASTRA




      SIR JOHN) WOODROFFE,




          ‘THIRD EDITION
      REVISED AND ENLARGED




     GANESH & CO, MADRAS
     LUZAC & 0 , LONDON
             1929
                           PREFACE
                       ‘10 Tum Eprriox.
  IWS edition as buen revit and corrected throughout,
       and additions have been made to some of the original
  Chapters. Ap endix      I ofthe last edition has boon mede «
  zew Chapter (VIT) in the book, and the former Appendix IT
  has now been attached to Chapter IY. The book has
  roreover been very considerably enlarged by the addition
 ‘of eleven new Chapters. New also aro the Appendices,
‘The fist contains tyo lestares given by me, in French, in
  1917, before the Soceté Artistique ct Litéraire Francaise de
  Caleatia, of which Society Lady Woodroffe wes one of the
 ‘Founders   and President. The second represents        the sub-
 stance (published i the French Journal “Le Zotus Blew")
  of two lectures I gavein Paris, i the year 1921, before the
  Fronch Theoophical Society (October 8) and at the Musbe
  Guimet (October 6) ot tho instance of L’Aseociation Fran-
 caise des Amis de 1’Orient, At this last meeting Professor
Dr. Sylvain Lévi was presenb and M. Masson Oursel, also of
the Colage de France,       in an introduotory  speech said that
 ‘ag one increasingly   explored  the Tantrik literature  hither’o
almost unknown, discovery is made not of more and more
 <issinlaritie, but of « closer and closer coanection between
these Scriptures and the other Religions’. The Téatrik cult
 ‘was not, he sud, “1a mere superstitious imposition” (Simagrée
 superstitious). “Tis belief that man oan realize the divine
in him and outside him is the postulate also of allandthoseof
‘who have divinised the ritual word as Brohman
 all who sock in Yoga theurgio equivalent.” <The Press
 Notices (to which T might have added various addresses
 and letters of approval) are reprinted not mersly to serve
 ‘their usual purpoto as recommendations to a possible
 render, but also as showing, firstly, the state of Indian
 opinion on the Shistra, as sn integral par’ of Hinduism
 ‘and not merely a pathological excrescenco on it and
  secondly, the effect produced on Weslera minds to which
  the Sexipsure was presented for the rst time, ‘Thus, Pro-
  fersor Evola ("I Nuow Paese”) has recently very truly
 remarked that the Tintrik system ere described " ofers
 ‘many suggestions to the West in virtue ofits accentuation
 of Will and Fower”. (Offrono grande suggestione per gli
 Occidental in viet del loro accentuate estenzialmente 1s
 parte della volont « della potenca). ‘To him (* Bilis”,
 Octaber 1094) this Shika system is one of the moet impor”
 tant of astern eyetoms     (ora uno dei sistami Oriantali piu
 importants) mining on e grand foundation o vast ensemble of
 ataphysic, magio and devotion (Su questo sfondo grandioso
4 Tantra svolgonoun vasto insieme metafsco, magico, e de-
 vorional). Notevorthy too are the observations of Profzesor
 Dr, Winteritz in the " Osasztsche Zeitschrift” (1916 Heft
 8. See Chapter V ofthis boo) taat (as Thay all along con-
 ‘tanded) the Tantra Shistras deserve a study which they
 hhave previously not received, und that they have bean
 judged without knowledge, (Aus dem geoagtem erhellt dass
 ‘Avalon recht bat wenn ox erilért dase mon bisher ber
 Giese Literatur alow oft geurtellt und noch mehr Abgeurteilt
 hhat oe sie zu kennen tind dass dio Tantras ea verdienen,
 besser bekannt m werden, als es bisher der fall gewesen
 ist), This statement is the more weighty, as this artic is
 not attracted by the Scriptures which he takes to be pre-
dominantly magical. As to this see what T have said in
 Chapter V post.
       ‘The philosopher Herman Keyserling  in his now cslebrat-
 cd work “Das Reise Tagebuch Hiner Philosophon”, recently
 ‘eanclated into English (“ The Travel Diary of a. Philoso-
 ‘pier "), writes (pp.295-224) of the Tantras that “however
 ‘extravagant some of ite sayings my sound, their meaning
is lear and their fundamental ideas are in accordance with
 reagon’”. And again (p. 231), “T personally      am convinced
‘hat the teachings of the Tantras are correct on the whcle,
 ‘but that it i nevertheless in the order of things that they
 rect with los and loss observance for the devolopmient of
 Ihumanity tends avay from zitueliem.” T heve my doubts
 as xegans this lst point, A strong vtualistc revival is in
 force to-day and there i likely to be always the seciprocal
 reaction of Puritanism and Rituelisa,
       T cannot do betéer than conclude these foreign oriticiams
 with a note of the recent observations of a French writer
 fn the Jounal Z'Humanite” in which, referring to the
French edition (Bossard, Pars) of A. and E. Avalon's "Hymns
 to the Goddess", und other works on the Shtstra, he hes
 nothing to sey about its“ puesiity "or “worthlessness” but,
 on the contriry, writes ~ “These egnceptions display an as-
 ‘tonishing philosophio subtlety (Une étonnante subtilté phil-
 owphigue). This volume and others of the collection show
 the intarest which Oriental research has for all those who
 are interested inthe evolution of Iimanity, the future
 cohesion of -which may) be’ expectad because of ‘the
 community     of origin We have stil to loam much of
 Asia, Some Russian revolutionaries have called their coun-
 ‘ry Buresia, ab being the junction of the two Continents,
 ‘Thore is truth in this. If We persist in our Westara deca
 dene, it may be that the seat of civilization will pass to
 tho Bast, the great primitive source of gonerations cf men.
 Some posts have olready said :—Europe is no more and
 ‘that Asia alone contains the fatare in its secret valleys"
 With such poets and their prophecies of Western decadence
 T disagree, Nevertheless, it it rightly said thet we, Occi-
 dental, can complete our own culture and render ox
 ‘thoughts more complete and humane by observation of
 ‘the Orientals end establishing contnct with the conscience
 ‘of modem Asia; thst between these extreme points of time,
 past and peesent, wo shall discover fecuné traditions, and our
 desire for a spisitual university vill nd its satisfaction.
 Te is to ouch minds thet the great concepts of India will
rake appeal. 1 am glad to report that years of work
 Ihave home aome fruit in the shape of a more discriminating
 judgment. For myself itis enough. as it hus always been,
                           vill
to sy here in the words of the Frensh writer Dunoyer,
 “T do aot oppose. Nor do I propose, I money
expece.” But for this last we must both know the facts
‘and understand them, “Get knowledge, and with getting
tet understanding.” ‘This proocas on my own part has led
‘to the revision of some of the matter reprinted so os to
‘ring it into accordance with my present knowledge and
opinions.
Brooms, Vaunass, |
   ‘th August 1927,                               aw,
                        PREFACE
                    1 Stoown Komoy,
 TPHIS present dition is practically « now work, for 1
        have revised and added to all the original Chapters
 and written six new ones (1,6, 6,10, 14 and 15). Seven of
 te original Chapters embodied & set of Lactures delivered
 before, and at the request of, the Viveksnands Sosiery
 in Caleutta, a circumstance which will explain both the
 ‘manner of them as also the “Conclusions” with which the
 ‘volume closes.
    ‘These Lectures and other collected papers travene new
 ground in the Literature of Indign Religion, for they are the
 first attempt to give an authenticated and understanding
 general acoount, from the Indian standpoint, of the chief
 features of the Doctrine and Practice of thet clos of Indien
 ‘worshippers who are called Shaktas, that is, thoee who
 adore the Divine Power (Mabfohakti) as Mahddevi, the
 Great Mother (Dlagna Mater) of the universe. AS this
religious community shares in common with others certain
principles and. practioes, the work is also necessarily an
 soooant of the worship and spiritual disciplines called
Sidhand whic, in varying forms, are adopted by all com-
 munities of Indian worshippers (Sadhakas) governed by
 the gama and ita numerous scriptures called Tantras,
 "These Shiktas are to be found all over India, but are Inngely
 predominant in Bengal and Assim, in which former Prov-
 ince I have lived for about the lest thirty years, and with
 the belief of whose people therefore T am inore closely ac-
 aquainted than with any other. And this, in part, counts
 forthe foot that T deal with their faith. ‘Their doctrine and
 practice have not hitherto been understood and have been
 iksgoken of, due to abuses which have occurred among the
 members of some sections of the community. If, then, I
 Ihave succeeded in giving in this and otber works a just
  account of the Soriptue, and in reducing suchits ovil    as has been
  charged agsinst some of ite      adherents   to      sight   propor-
  tions, T shall be glad to hove been in a position to make
  some small retura to 4 and which, more than any other,
  last been my home, and to which I'am, in manifold ways,
  indebted.
        Though, os I said in the last edition, 1 rate highly
 Shalta doctrine and (with some exceptions) Shakte rituals, T
 ‘io not commit myself to the aoeptance of everything which
 any Shite may have held or done. And though Thave far-
 ished argument in favour of this much-sbused faith and
 practice, I am not here concemed to establish the éeuth
 and rightuess of either. Te is suficiet for my present
 purpose to show thet itis reasonable, and thot neither it
 zor “the Tantra” is the absurd and altogether immoral
 ‘thing which some have supposed it to be. My attimde
 is an objective one. I havo endeavoured to explain my
 subject 3 simply and licidly as the recondite matters
 treated of allow, from an entirely detached and unpre-
 juadiced etandpoin.
        Tn giving an account of Ladin beliefs and practices, we,
 who ace foreigner, must place oumelver in the skin of the
 Hindu, apd must look at their doctrine audT know,   situa through
 their eyes end not our own. Ita dificult,                   for most
 to do this: but until they    ean,  their  wore  lacks   real  velue.
 ‘And this is why, daspito their industry and leaming, the
 accounts given by Wester authors of Bastern beliefs 20
 generally si o give their true meaning. Many, T think, do
 not even make the attempt. ‘They look wt the matter from
 ‘the point of view oftheir own ereed, or, (what   is much worse),
 racial prjudice may stand in the way of the admission of
 fny exvllence or superiority in a coloured people. ‘The
 Inethod T follow is that of the Indian commentator, who,
 for the nonce, adapts himself to the standpoint of the doc-
‘ine which he explain, I mention this because two of my
 critics soem to thnk that my objectsto extablish the sues
 cvity of thie particular form of Vedintik teaching over
 others. One may, of course, have one's parsoral preferences,
 ‘but it is not my object here to establish the superiority of
 ‘any school of Indian thought. This is a matter which
each will decide for himselt. One of these critics has said,
 “The Tantsas axe claimed to be the specitic Shastra for the
 Kaliyuge by the TAntrike, Mr, Avalon seems to have
 ‘taken these Intter at their own valuation ; and this has
 ‘considerably influenced his whole estimate of these books
‘as Shastzea or authorities on the Hindu system. In doing
 20, he bas fallen into « series of curious errors in regard to
 other and particularly the Vaishnavic denominations.”
 ‘This criticism which was passed on one of my earlier books
 hhas been repented as regards this. What these errors are
 my oritics have not told me. I did not intend to deal,
 nor am I aware of having dealt, with the Vaishnava system
 beyond pointing out in the most general way that there is
 a Vaishnava and Shaiva'ss wall es 2 Shilta Agama. T have
 ctticized neltlior this nor the Shaiva Kgama, both of which
 fohools are alko of high value. ‘Though the instructed
 ‘Western reader is aware that there are other interpretations
 of Vedinta besides that of Shaftkara, many write as if the
 Vedanta meant his Mayivida. This is not so. Vedinta
 is Upanishad of which there are varying interpretations.
 ach has certain merite and certain defects, as must neces:
 sarily be the case when we apply logic to that which is
 logical. Indeed the point which I took, and which T had
 hoped T had made plain was this—Tantra Shastra does
 not simply mean the Shika Tantrs. The latter is only
 ‘one division of Agama which has to-day three main schools
 Bhikta, Shaiva, and Vaishnava. There are certain things
 common to all, ‘There are certain matters wherein they
 differ, Whea ib is said that the Tantra Shistra is the
 scripture of the Kali age, what is meant is that the Agama
 in all its schools is that, There are some ancient schocls
 of Vaichnava Agama such as the Panchardtra, and there
 fare comparatively modern developments of Vaishnava
 ‘teaching and.practice euch as that of the great Chaitanya.
                                ai
 “Tantei” dose not mean only “Shakta”. ‘This is the
 ‘main error of these critics and others.         Naturally, I have
 taken the Shaktas “ at their own valuation”, for my object
 isnot to show that they are right and others wrong, or the
 contrary, butto state what they,      the Shalcas, hold. ‘They
 lone can say this. A quarrelsome attitude as rogends
 ther creeds is the mark of a lower mind and of what the
 Shiktas call a Pashu. I believe e different position is
 ‘aasumed by all higher Stdhalas to whatever denomination
 they belong. Certainly a wide and liberal view is taken
 bby the Shika, Ths Sammohana Tantra (Ch. TX) says
 that “it is only a fool who soos any difference betwean
 Rams and Shiva.” Bach has his path which, if sincerely
pursaed, will procure for him the fruit of it. Whether
 ‘some paths in the Indian or other Religions are better and
 turer   than others, and gain for their followers greater fruit,
 T do not here discuss,
                                                      aw.
                              PREFACE
                           To Fret Epiniox,
           present work deals with its subject only in a very
        ‘general and, as far as the matter permits, popular way:
 ‘refer those who wish to purse it farther to the other works
 on Tantra Shisten which ar» publiahed under the neme
 “‘Asthar Avalon” to denote that they have beon waittan
 with the direct co-operation of others and in particular
‘with the assistance of one of my friends who will not permit
 ‘mp to mention his name, I do not desire sole credit for
what is as much their work as mine. I, in particular,       refer
ry reader to the series of Articles on the Mantra Shistra
 ‘hich I wrote fr the “Veidénta Kesari" now reprinting (sinoe
 published as “Gorlond of Letters”) and to the "Serpent
 Power” shortly to.be published (published in 1018, 2nd
 (present) Bdition, 1995). In thislast thero is given, for the
 first time, the rationale of Yoga through the Kundalint
 Sali, the outlines of which are indicated in. Chapter XVI
of this volume,
       ‘The Shikia Tantra is Sédhank Shastra of Monistic
 (Advaitavids) Vedinte. It isto me profound and power
 fal system, and its doctrine of Shakti or Divine Power is
 ‘one of the greatest evolved, through spiritual intuition, by
 ‘the hunan mind which, according to its teaching, is « mani-
 festation of the Divine Consciousness Iteelf (Shiva).
      ‘The Doctrine is Isid on grand lines and what is nob, in
 ‘hia Vast Land of great distances ¢
      1 wte this on a high plateau in Polamow, and Look
cross 2 wide stretch of tall grass with tips of waving silver,
the home, until about nine years ago (when the place was
finst opened), of the wild bison. ‘The green           and silver
 of the Prairie is splashed here and there with patches of
 ‘orange fower, which the blasing sun jowels with its points
 of light. The near distance shows the water of a mountain
 ‘tar and bwo clumps of tress—the groves of worship of the
 ancient Kolarian peoples. Here sparse remnant adore
 ‘to-day,as did their ancestors thousands of years ago. Of
                                 xv
 Brihmanism or other Aryan faith, thero is no sign. Be-
 yond, the grassland rises to mect the greet length of a
 ‘mousing hil-frest, dark green against the blue of distance,
 in which other Hill tops beckon forward the carious mind
 with their Iure of mystery. And this lure is all ound, for
 the upland is girdled some fiteen hundred feet below with
 ‘wooded valleys, valleys on the Fast black with great Sal
 forosta, which, as those ofthe upland, are the haunt of bes,
 tiger and sambur,—vwild forest, lit only here and there by
 zare ogen epnces, and the glinting stream and white sands
 cof the Koel River, Boyond the valleys, and all around the
 upland are a rele of Hills rising on the Kast, wave upon
 wave, Here man, who has not known himself and his
 greatness seems nonght, and Nature all, a feeling which
 ‘deepons as night falls om the earth with quick assault, the
 dazk dome of heaven sparkling with the light of countless
 sising stare, foding agnin et Dawn a8 the Visible Devata,
 ‘the reaplendent joyous Sun, the Bye of Vishnu, arises from
 cout the “Bastern Mountain ”
        Sus o vast sene is but one of many in this, itself vast,
 seoular, and awe-inspicing Iand, Such « view, we may
 imagine, was displayed. before the eyes of the incoming
 ‘Aryan peoples. Upon then the influence of the Soit fll,
 filling them with awe. The Spitit, manifesting in this Se-
‘red Barta, at length rovesled Itself in their minds, Within
 ‘them arose the Inner Sun, which is the Light ofall, unveil
 ing to the eye of mind truths hidden in its subtle garb of
  ‘thought. Theso tenuous veils again fell away, when, by
  ‘the intuition of the fores-aages, was realized the Spisitoal
  ther of Consciousness, whose Mother-Power (Shakti) as
  Will, Thought and Action ever personalizes as the life of
  this magnetio stotch of earth which is India, as the world
  of which its an head-ornament,     and as (in the words of the
  Indian Scripture) the countless other universes, which are
  ‘out the dust of Her Sovereign Feet
        ‘Nevoanar,                                  We
      Lith October i918.
                     CONTENTS.
             Seormow 1,—LvraopvoToRy
 Case.                                                    Pace
            ‘Bhtrate Dharma ..                       wa
     TI     The World    as Power (Shekti)           ..25
   W.       TheTantws           sw,                  sO
   IV,      Tantra and Veda Shistras .... 65
      We    The Retna             Ragen a tbe
                 Shiltas                             ++ 108
    VI      Shaktiand Shakts                         at
  VIL,     Is Shalti Forve?                          + M5
 ‘VI,       (Ghtntchire                                    a9
   TX,     Tantra Shisteas in Chioa                  + TL
     X.     A Tibetan Tantra             ey          .. 1
   XL       Shaktiin Teoim’.. 0 .                          ag
  XL.       Alloged Confict of Shistrss              .. 220
 XU.        Sarvinendenttha =... 285
               Stonon 2.—Doommnaas
  IV,       ChitShakti                   ss HD
   XV.      MaykShkti                            s,s, 8
  XVL       Mattar   and Consciousness .,            «810
 XVI        Shakti  and May              see 880
XVI.        Shiite Advaitevida            =... 842
  XIX.      Grestion                                       385
   XX.      The Indian   Magna            Mater.       + 383
                 Suoriox 3—Reroar,
 XXL        Hindu Ritul 4.0. 407
XML         Vedinta   and Tents                         + 48
 uae,                                             Page
 Xxx,         Tia Pelogy of Tisch Raleine
                   Ritual                           44
  xXIY. Shakti an Mantra .                          459
   XXY, Vamamila                                    486
               Shite Sddhani or Ordinary Ritval 490
               Panchatattva or Secret Ritaal        558
‘XXVI.         Matam Ruteo (The Right and Wrong
                   Taterpeetation)                  aos
           Srorios 4,—Yooa axp Coxotusroxs
 XXIX. Kundalini Shakti                             ase
                    (Tho Serpent Power)
   XXX, ‘The Agemas andthe Futare                   659
 XXXL. Conclusions                       %          er3
                         APPENDICES.
   (1) Quelques Concepts Fondamentaux des Hindous 08
    (@) Quelgues Observations, sur le Rituel Hindou 709
SHAKTI                 AND           SHAKTA.
                  Cnarren I.
    INDIAN RELIGION AS BHARATA DHARMA.
      FRIEND of mine who read the first edition f this book
        suggested that Ishould add to it an opening Chapter,
stating the most general and fundamental principles of the
subject sss guide to the understanding of what follows,
together with an outline of the later in which the sslation
of the several pars shoald be show, I have not at present
‘the time, nor in the prevent, book the space, to give effect
‘to miy friond’s wishes in the way I would have desired, but
will not altogether neglect them
      To the Westem, Indian Religion generally seems a
“jungle” of eomteadictory beliefs amidst which he is lost.
Only those who have understood ite main principles can
show them the path,
      Tt hes boen asserted that there is no such thing as
 Indian Religion, though there are many Religions in India,
This ia not 90, As Thave aleady pointed out (“Is India
Civilized*") there is» common Indian religion which I
have called Bhérata Dharme, which is an Aryan religion
(Asyadhams) held by all Aryas whether Brahmanio,
Budihist or Jain, These aro the three main divisions of
‘the Bhérata Dharma, 1 exciude other religions in India,
namely, the Semitic religions, Judaism, Christianity and
Islas, "Not that all these are purely Semitic. Christianity
 became in part Arysnized when it-was adopted by the West-
com Aryans, a2 also happened with Islam when accepted
by such Eastern Aryans as the Pomians and the Axyanized
 peoples of Incia.
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA.
       ‘Thus Sufism is either « form of Vedinta or indebted
tit
       ‘The genetal Indian Religion or Bhérate Dharma
 hholds that the world is an Order or Cosmos, It is not a
 Chaos of things and beings thrown haphazard together,
 in which there is no binding relation or rale. ‘The world-
 onder is Dianna, which is that by which the univeme is
 upheld (Dhfryate). Without Dharma it would fall to
  pictes and dissolve into nothingness. But this ie not possible,
 for though there is Disorder (Adhoma), it exiets, and can
 ‘exist only looelly, for a time, and in particular parte of the
  whole, Order however will and, from the nature of things,
 ‘muss utimetely assert iteelt. And this in the meaning of
  the saying that Righteousness or Dharma prevails. ‘This
is in the nature of things, for Dharma           is not a law
{imposed from without by the Ukabe of some Celestial Cua.
  1 is the nature of things’ that which constitutes them
 what they ate (Svalakshanadhirandt Dharma). Tk in
  the expression of their tre being and oan only ocase
  to bo, when thoy themselves coneo to. be. Boliet in
 ightcoumess is then in something nob arbitrarily im-
  posed from without by a Law-giver, but belief in « Print
 ‘pe of Reason which all-men can: recognize for themselves
 if thoy will Agein Dharma is not only the law of each
  being but neossarily also of the whole, and expresses the
  right relations of each part to the whole. his whele is
  ‘gain harmonious, otherwiseit would disolve. The principle
 ‘which holds it together as one mighty organism is Dharma,
  ‘The particular Dharma calla for such tecognition and action
 jn acconiance therewith. Religion, therefore, which ety:
 ‘mologically means that which obliges or binds together, is
 in ite mont fandamentel sense the region that the world
 is an Order, of which cach man, being, and thing, is « pare,
  and to which each man stands in a definit, established
  relation ; together with action based on, and consistent with,
  such recognition, and in harmony with the whole cosmic
                    BHARATA DHARMA.
  activity. Whilst therfore the religious man is he who foola
‘that his Bound in varying ways to all being, the irligions
  roan ise who epistically vonsider everything frum the
  standpointof his inited self and its interest, without negara
{or is fllows o the word at largo. Th essentially irmiglous
 characiar of such an attitude is showa by the fact thet, if it
 ‘were adopted by all, it would lead to the negation of Cosmos,
 ‘hat is Chios, Therefor all Religions are agreed inthe easen-
 tial ofmorality    and hold that salfishnes, in its widest sense,
in the oot of all sin (Adharma). Morality        is thon the tras
 ature of man. The guaeral Dharma (Simtnya Dharma)
 is the univeral lav goversing all, just as the postiouar
 Dhamma (Visheahs Dharma) vation with, and ia peculiar to,
 cach clas of being. Te follows fsom what ia above stated
fat disharmony         is sufering. This i an obviows          fact.
 ‘Wrong conduct is productive of il, ae right conductis pro-
 dustive of good. As s man sows, 20 he will reap. ‘Phere
 is an Tmmanent Justice. But these results, though they
 ‘ay appear at once, do not always do so. ‘The fruit of no
 action is los Té must, aocording to the law of cowality,
‘hich is alow of rsson, bear fact, If ts author            does not
 suffer for it here and now in the present Tie, he will do 50
 in seme fature one. Bisth and death mean tho eration and
  duatrution of bodies. Tho spste so embodied are infinite
 in number and etemal. The material univers comee and
  goes, This in Brakmanism has beea said (sce Santana
  YVoidika Dharma by Bhaguvan Das) to be “the Sysiale and
  Diastole of the one Universal Henrt, Ttslf ut ret—the
 rmoveles play of Consciousness”. ‘The appearance and
 disappearance of the Univene isthe nature or Svabhiva
  of That which it ultimately is, Tts immediate mse
 is Desire, which Buddhism calls ‘Trishni—or Thins,
  ‘hot is desi oF thitst for world-enjoyment in the universe
  of form. Aetion (Kazma) is prompted by desire and breeds
  fngnin desir This action may be good (Dharma) or Each          bad
  (dhama) leading         to   enjoyment    or  suffering.
                                  3
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘embodied soul (Jtvttma) will be rebom and reborn into the
  vworld until itis freed from all desi, ‘This involves the
  doctrine of Reincarnation. ‘These multiple births and
  deaths in the transmigeatory workds are called Savisara
  or Wandering. ‘The world is a Dvendva, that is composite
 ‘of happiness and suffering. Happiness of a transitory kind
  may be had theron by adhezenoe to Dharma in fellowing
  Kma (Desire) and Artha (the means) by which lawiul
  desizeo may be given effect. These constitute what Bral-
 manism calls the Trivarga of the Purughfrths, o: thre
 aims of sentient being. But justao desire leads to: maxi-
 festation in form, a0 desirelasmens leads away from it.
 ‘Those who reach thin state seek Mokyha or Nirvia (the
 fourth Parughictha), which is a state of Bliss beyond
 tho worlds of changing    forms, \For there: is a. est, from
 suffering which Dante (together with « natural tendency
to pass ite right limita) brings upon man. ‘They must, there-
 for, ether live with desire in harmony with the universal
 onder, or if desitles, they. may (for each i» master of his
 future) pasa beyond! the manifest and become That whichis
 Moigha or Nirvins, Relig, and therefore true civil
 zation consists in the upholding   of Dharm asthe individual
 and general good, and the fostering of spiritual progres,
 so that, with justice to all beings, tree happiness, whieh
 is the immediate end ultimate end of all Humanity, and
 indeed of all being, may be attained
        ‘Anyone who holds these belief follows the Bhérata
 ‘Diarma or common prinoiplee of all Aryan beliefs. ‘Thus
 ts regards God we may either deny His exiatence (Atheism)
 ‘of afiz it (Thsiom) oF say we have no suficiont proof one
 ‘way or another (Agnosticism). Tt is possible to aaoept the
 concept of an eternal Law (Dharma) and its sanotions in a
self governed universe without belie! ina pezsonal Lozi
 (Ishvara). 80 Safiya, which prooosds on intellectual
 ‘roof only, does not deny God but holds that the being of
 a Lord is “not proved”.
                  BHARATA DHARMA
        Tere ae then based on this common foundation three
  rain religions, Brahmanism, Budihism and Jainism. Of
  the second, « great and universal ‘sith, it has bean said
  that, with each fresh acquizement of knowledge, it seems
  nore dliculto seperate it from the Hinduism outof which it
emarged and into which (in Northeru Buddhism) it relapsed.
  Thinis  of coune not to say that there are no diflorences
  between the to, but that thy shace in certain general and
 ‘common principles as theit bass. Brahmanier, of which
 ‘the Shika dooisine a practoe ia» particu form, accepts
  Veda asia ultimate authority. By tis, in its form as the
 fonr Vedas, is revealed the doctrine of the Brakiman, the
 “Allpervader,” the infinite Substanoe whieh is in Ttelf
 (Gvaripa) Consciousness (Chaitanya or Chit) from Which
 comes oreation, maintenance and. withdzawel, commonly
 called destruction (though man, not God, destroys), and
 ‘Which in Tis wlation to the univense which the Brahman
 controls is known as Tshvars, the Roling Lord or Per
 tonal God. Voda both as apiitual experiance and the
 woul “which is heard” (@hiuti) 5 the watmnt for this.
  But Shruti, as the ultimste authority, hes received various
 interpretations andao we find in Brahmsnian, es in Obisti-
 sanity, difering achools und secs adopting various inter
 pretations of the Reveoled Word. Veda says “AIL this
 (Chat is, the Univense) is Brahman.” All ace agreed that
 Brabman ofSpiit is, relatively tous, Being (Sat), Conscious-
 ew (Chit) and Biss (Enande). It is Sochthidinanda,
 But in what sense ia “This” (dam) Brahman? The
 Monisti interpretation (AdvaitavEd), as given for instance
by the great scholastic Shatlartohicya, ip that there is 8
 complete identity in estence of both. There ia onc Spit
 (Rimi) with two aspests; as trmsomdent supreme (Para-
 rétmé), and ss immanent and embodied (Jtvatwna). The
                                                         form
 ‘byo ate at base one when we eliminate Avidy@ in theMonism
 of mind and body, Acconing to the qualified
 (Vishishtadvaita) of the great stholastie Réménuja, “This”
                              5
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
is Bmlunanin the senso thatit is the body of the Brahman,
{just as we distinguish our body from ourinner'sel. Accont-
ing to the Dualists (Dvaitavida) the saying is interpreted
in terms of nearness (Sémipya) and likeness (SAdrishya)
for, though God and man are distinct, the former so per~
vades and is so unextricably involved in the universe as
omeator and maintainer, that the latter, in this sense, seems
‘0 be Bmkman through proximity.
      ‘Then again thers is the Shuddhddvaita of that. branch
‘of the Agamas which ie called Shaivasiddhinta, tho Vaish-
pava Pancharbira doctrine, the Advaite of the Kashmirian
Shaivdgaiaa (Tika), the followers of which, though Ad-
‘vaiting, have very subtly oritioized Shaftkam’s doctrine
‘on several points. Dillaronce of views upon this question
and that of the nature of Mara, which the world is said to
be, necessarily implies diference twpon other matters of
Acctzine, Then thore are, witb-many resemblances, some
differences in ritual practice, Thus it enmes about that
Brakmeniem includes many divisions of worshipper calling
thomselves by different aames. ‘There ure Smértae who
‘am the present-day representatives of the old Vaidik doctrine
‘and ritual prootibe, and on the other hand a number of
divisions of worshippors calling themselves Shaktas, Shaivas,
Yaishnavas end eo forth with sub-divisions of these. Ttis
not possible to make hari and fast distinctions between
the secta which chare much in common and have been
influenced tae axe by the other. Indeed the universality:
‘of much of religions doctrine and pmetico is an established
fact, What eziata in India as elsewhere to-day has in othor
times and places beon in varying degroes anticipated. ‘In
Religion”” it has been said (“ Gnostics and their Remains”
vii) “thore is no new thing. ‘The same ideas are worked
‘up over and over again.” Tn India as elsewhere, bub parti-
culatly in India where religious antivity has been synenetistic
rather than by way of supensession, there is much whioh is
 common to all sects and mom again which is common
                               6
                  BHARATA DHARMA
 betwoen partioular groups ofseots. These latter ane governed
 ‘in generl, that i, in their okter forms, by the Agumes or
‘Tantra Shistras, which, at any rate to-day and for oenturies
 past (whatever may have boon their origin), admit. the
 authority of the Vedas and moognize other Sexiptores. (As
 to thete, aoe the Introduction to tho Kaulichirya Sadi
 nanda's Commentary on the tsha Upanishad whieh T have
 published)
      ‘The meaning of Yada is not commonly rightly under
stood. But this is « vast subject which underlies all others,
touching as it does the seat of all authority and knowledge
into which T bave not the spece to entar here. There are
four main classes of Brahmanical Seripture, namely, Veda
‘or Shrati, Smiti, Purtga, and Agama, There are alo
four ages oF Yugs. the latter being » fraction of a Kalpa
fo: Day of Brabat of 4390,000 years, ‘This posiod ia
‘he life of an univense, on the expiration of which ll m-
enters Brahman and thereafter isis from it. A Mahdyuga
is composed  of the Four Ages caled Satya, Trot, Dvagarn,
‘Kali, the first being the golden age of righteousness since
when all has gradually declined physically, momlly, and
spititually, For each ofthe ages & suitable Shistr is given,
for Satya or Krita tho Vedas, for Toth the Smritshistm,
foc Dvipara    the Purioas, and for Kaliyugn the Agama ot
TTantea Shistre, So the Kalispave Tantra sayy —
      rite shrutyobte dchdrastrldyém.anriti-sanbkowah
      Deipore tu purdnoléah, kalvigumasemnatah
(eee also Mabtnirviya Tantra I-98 et sop) end tho Tast-
padipe says that in the Kaliyage (the supposed. present
fge) the TAntxka aud not the Vaidik Dharm,         in the sense
‘of mode of life and ritual, i to be followed (soe “Principles
of Tantra,” Kd. A. Avalon), When it is said that the
‘gama is the pecolias Seriptare of the Kali age, this does
hot mean (st any tate to any particular division of its
followers) that something is presented which is opposed to
                               7
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Veda. It is true however thst, as bebween these followers,
 ‘there is sometimes a confict on the question whether u
  particular form of the Agama is uavedic (Avaidiks) or not.
  ‘The Agams, however, as a whole, purports to be a present-
-ment ofthe teaching of Veda, just as the Puranas and Smritis
  are, This that presentmentof Vaidik trath whieh is suitable
  for the Kali age. Indeed the Shaeta followers of the Agama
  chim tbat its ‘Tentras contain the very core of the Veda to
  ‘which itis doseribed to bear   tho same relation aa the Supreme
  Spirit (Parumitma) to the embodied spirit (Bvatma). In
  simular way, in the seven Tentrk Aches (ee Ch. 17 post),
  Kaulichirs is the controling, informing lifo of the grees
  body called Vedichirs, each of the Acharas, which follow
  the latter up to Keuldchéra, being more and more subile
 sheatbs, ‘The Tantra Shastrais thus that presentment of
  Vedansio trath which is modelled, aa)regards mode of life
 fund ritual, to moot the cbatsatarstieg and infirmities of the
 Kaliyuga. As men have no longer the capacity, longevity
 ‘and moral strength requized to carzy out the Vaidika Karma-
 ‘kinda (citual section), the ‘Tantra Shistm presoribss
 ‘Sidhand ofits own for the attainment of the common end
 of all Shistra, that isa hoppy life on earth, Heaven there-
 ‘after, and st length Liberation. Religion is infact the true
 ‘pursuit of happiness.
        ‘As explained in the next and fellowing Chapter, this
 Agama, which governs scconding to its followers the Kali-
 ‘yoga,    in itself divided into ieveral sohools oF communitios
 ‘of wombippem.         One of these divisions is the Shikta. Te
 in with Shilets doctrine and worohip, one of the forms of
 ‘Brahmanism, which is again a form of the general Bhirate
 ‘Diarma, that this book deals.
        ‘The Shika is so called because he is a worshipper of
 Shakti (Power), thatis, God in Mothe-form as the Supreme
 ‘Power which creates, sustains and withdravs the universe.
 His rule of life ia Sh@ktadharma, his doctrine of Shakti is
 Shaktivida or Shilea Darshana, Ged is worshipped as the
                   BHARATA DHARMA,
eat Mother because, in this spect, Gol is wotive, and
produces, nourishes, and maintains all. ‘Theological
Godhesd is no more female than male or neuter.
God is Motherto the Sidhaca who worships Her Lotus Reet,
‘he dust on which are millions of universes. The Power, or
Active aspect of the immanent God, is thus called Shakti. In
‘Het stetic transcendent aspect the Mother or Shakti or Shiv
‘sof the same natare as Shiva   or “the Good”. ‘Thatis,
sophicslly speaking, Shiva is the uncbanging Consciousness,
‘and Shalti ia ite changing Powor oppesring at mind and
matter. Shive-Shakti ie therefore Conscioumass and Ite
Power. ‘This theais the dootrine of dual aspeots of the one
Brabman acting through Its Trinity of Powers (Ichehh,
Will; Thins, Knowledge ; Kriya, Action). In the static
frantoendent aspect (Shiva); the one Brahman does not
‘change, and in the kinetic iminanent aspect (Shiva ot Shakti)
Tt does. There is thus -changelesmess in change. ‘The
individaal ot embodied Spirit (Jtvitml) is one with the
‘ransoendent spicit (Parwmitma). The former is a part
(zhsha) of the latier, and the enveloping mind and body
fre manifestations of Suprome Power. Shakta Darbana
     therefore a form of Monin (Advaitwvlde). In erection
fan effectis produoed without ebange in the Producer. In
Creation the Power (Shakti) “goes forth” (Prusarati) in »
series of emanations or transformations, which ate called,
in the Shaiva an] Shikta Tantmas, the 36 Tattvas. ‘These
mark the vatious stages through which Shiva, the Supreme
Consciousness, as Shakti, presents Itself as object to Itself
fs aubject, the later at fst experiencing the former as part
of the Self, and then through the operation of fay Shakti
fs different from the Self. "This ia the final stege in which
every Self (Purusho) is niutually exclusive of every other.
‘MAy&, which achieves this, sone of the Powers of the Mother
‘or Devi. ‘The Will-to-hegome-muny (Bahu syam prajdyeya)
 is the oreative impulse which not only areates but reproduces
 fan etemal ordes. ‘The Loni nmembers the diversities latent
                                 9
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  in His own Nay® Shakti due to the previous Karmas of
  <Tivas and allows them to unfold themselves by His volition.
  Tt is that Power by whioh infinite formless Consciousness
  veils Tself to Itself and nogates and limits Itself in onder
  that it may experienoe Ttself as Form.
        ‘This Mayd Shakti assumes the form of Prakriti Tattva,
  which is composed of tree Gunas or Fsctors called Sattva,
 Rajas, Tamas. ‘The fanction of Prati is to vil, limit, or
“nitse pare infinite formless Consciouszes, 30 as to produce
 ‘orm, for without auch limitation there cann      be theot
                                                          appear-
  ance of form. ‘These Gunas work by mutual suppresion.
 ‘The funotion of Tamas is to veil Cmsciousmess, of Sattva to
 reveal it, and of Rojas the active principle to make either
 ‘Tamas suppress Sattva or Sativa suppress Tamas. These
 Gupas are presenti all parfionlar existence, os inthe general
 cause or Prakriti Shakti, Evolution mems the inoreased
 operation of Sattva Guna.” ‘This the mineral world is more
 subjeot to Tamas thaa the rest, There is less ‘Taras and
 ‘more Sattva in the vegetable world. Tn the animal worid
 ‘Sativa ie increased, and still more so in map, who may tise
 ‘through the cultivation of the Sattva Guna to Pure Consci-
 ‘oumness (Moksha) Teself. To use Western pstlance Consci-
 coumess more and more appears as forms evolve and rise
 to man. Consciouaness does not in itself change, but its
 mental and material envelopes do, thus releasing and giving
 Conscioumess moro play. As Pare Conscioumess is Spirit,
the relea       of Itsefrom the bondsof matter means that Forms
 which issue from the Power of Spirit (Shakti) beoome more
 ‘and more Sattvik. A truly SAttvik man is therefore a
 spiritual man. ‘The aim of Sédhan is therefore the culti-
 vation of the Sattva Guna. Nature (Praigiti) is thus the
 ‘Veil of Spirit as Tamas Guna, the Revealer of Spirit. as
 Sattea Gana, and the Activity (Rajas Gups) which makes
 either work. Thus the upwarl of revealing movement
 from the predominance of Tamas to that of Sattva repromnta
 the spiritual progress of the embodied Spirit or Jivatms.
                                  10
                  BHARATA DHARMA
       eis the desie for the lie of form which produoes the
 univense. This desire exists in the collective VAsans, held
 like all else, in inchoate state in the Mother-Power, which
 passing from its own (Svatipa) formless state gives eect
 to them. Upon the expiration       of the vast length   of time
 hich constitates « day of BrabmA the whole wivere             is
 withdrawn into the great Cauasl Womb (Yoni) which pro-
 duced jt, Tho limited selves ane withdrawn into i, and
 again, when the creative throes are flt, azo put forth fram
 it, eoch oppeoring in thot form and state which ite previous
 Karma hid made for it, Those who do good Karma but
‘with desire and self-regard (Saka) go, on death,     to Heaven
 ‘and thoteafter reap their rewaed in good future birth on
 cearth—for Houven is also & transitory state. ‘The bad are
 punished by evil bistha on earth and auffering in the Helis
 ‘which are also tranitory. Those however who have id
 ‘themselves of all selkzaganding desire and. work selflessly
 (Nishiims Karma) realize tho Brahmen nature which ia
 Sechchidananda. ‘Such aze liberated, that it nover appear
again in the world of Pom, which inthe word of eflering,
 tad enter into he infinite conan of iss Itself This is
 Molaha or Mukti or Liberation. Asi i freedom from the
 ‘mivere of form, it can only be otiained through detach-
 ‘mont from te World end dostelesmess. For those who
desire tho world of form cannot be free oft. Life, therefor,
 ina Geld in which ma, who ins gradually ascended through
 Jower forms of minaral, vegetable and snimal lf, is given
 ‘the epportuaity of heeven-life and Liberation. The univeme
 ‘hse a moral poxpose, namely the affording to all existence
of a fald wherain it may reap the fruit of its actions. ‘The
 orms of Ife are therefore the stain (Soptua) oa which men
 owas to the otats of iafinit, eternal, and forma Blise.
‘This then is the origin and the end of mon. Te has made
{or himself    his own past and present condition and will make
  his future one. His ewential nature is fos. If wis, bo
  ‘ulopta the mens (SAchan8) whioh leo to lasting happiest,
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 for that of the word is otto be had byall, and even when
 attained is perishable and mixed with suilering, ‘This
 Sidlaua consists of vations means and disciplines employed
 to produce purity of mind (Chittashuddhi}, and davotion
 to, and worship of, the Mags Mater ofall. Tei with these
 means that the religious Tantra Shistras are meinly con-
 comod. The Shika Tantra Shistra contains « most elabo-
 rate and wonderful ritual, party its own, partly of Vaidile
 origin. To a ritualist itis of absorbing interest.
       ‘Ritualison art the art of religion. Art is the outward
 material expression of ideas intellectually beld and emotion-
 ally felt. Ritual art is coucemed with the expression of
‘those ideas ond felings which are specifically called religious.
 This a mode by which religious truthis presented, and made
intaligible in material forms/and symbols to the mind, Tt
‘sppeals to all netres passionstely sensible of that Beanty
in which, to some, God mostmnifests Himselt. But itis
smote than this. Tor it is the meana by which the mind is
tmnsformed ind purified, In patticular accosding to
 Indian principles itis the instrioment whameby the consciows-
rss of the worshipper (Sédbaka) is dbaped in actuat foct
into forms of expstienge which embody the teaths whieh
Soripture tesches, The Shikta is thus taught that he ia
 one with Shiva and His Power or Shakti. This is not
‘matter of mote angument. It is a matter for experience,
 Tie ritual and Yogu-practice which secure that experience
 for him. How profound Indian ritual is, will be admitted
 bby tesa who have understood the general principles of all
 ritual and symbolism, and have studied i in its Indian form,
 ‘with a knowledge of the principles of which itis an expres:
 sion, ‘Those who speak of “mummery,” “gibberish” and
 “superstition” betray both their incapseity and ignorance.
        "The Agamas ore not thenselves treatises on Philo-
 sopky, though they impliedly contain particular theory
 of life. They are what is called Stdhand Shistras, that
 is, pmctical Soripsures prescribing the means by which
                    BHARATA DHARMA
Insppinss, the quest of all mankind, may he attained.
‘And as lasting “happiness is God, they teach how man
bby womhip. and. iy pmotion of the ciniplines pm
scribed, may attain a divine experience. From incidental
Sataments tnd the pruttices dveriod the philosoply ix
cxitoted
       The speaker of the Tantrss and the swvesler of
the Shilta Tanta is Shiva Himelf or Shivd the Deet
Himself, Now it in the fist who tetohes and the sesord
‘who listens (gas), Now again the loiter asunies the
Tole of Gora and srawers the questions of Shiva (Nigame)-
For the imoThus areone one,of the Sometimes    thece are other intere
iooutors.                          Tentrs is ealled Tshvarakactkeya-
sativa, for thee the Lox! sddevaes ais aon Kaxtikoya,
‘The Tantra Shiota therein elaine to be n Revelation,
tnd of tho sam auteitial tras ac thore contained in the
Bieral Veda whish i an authorityto felt (Svtabsidah).
Those vho bave had experience of the tithe reonded in
Sitstr, have wso prcalaimed the practical means whereby
their experince was gnined. “Adopt those means” they
soy, “and you wll also have for youralf our experience”
"Ta isthe importance            of Stdnank nd all Sidhand Shoes.
‘The   Gumi says: “Doas T tall you. low the method
scribed by Seipture, Carb you desis, Attain a pare
Lisposition, snd then and this only wil yon obtain that
‘ntainy, that experience which will render any quetion-
ingy anosessery.”" ‘Tho practioal importance of the Agua
                asruription of theve principles dim the methods
Tiswihin ifsit enjoins  for the aiaiment of thot state in which
tho truthis realized. ‘The following Chapter sbortly explain
tome! the main festars ofboth the philonnplyand prastive
Of the Shalit division ofthe Agnma. For thi fal develop-
ont many volumes are necessary.                 What is here said is a
‘mere sketch in a popula form of a vast subject
       Till eoncice thie Chapter with extract from a Bengali
letter written tome shortly beowe his douth, now many
                                 8
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘year ago, by Pandit Shiva-chandre Vidyamava, the Shikta
 ‘author of the “Tentrstattva” which I have published under
 ‘the title “Principles of Tantra”, The words in brackets
 are my own,
        “At the present time the general publi are jgnorant
 of the principles of the Tantra Shéatea. The cause of this
 ‘gorau in the faot thot the Tanta Shistra is a Sidhand
Shistr, the greater port of which becomes intelligible only by
 ‘Sidland, or this eason the Shistra and its Teachers prohi-
  bit their general promulgation, So long as the Shistra was
Jearnt from Gurus     only, this golden Tale was fimmense   good.
Tn coune of time the old SAdhoné       has become almost extinct,
 ‘and along with it, the lmowledge of the deep and mighty
 principles of the Shéate is almost lost. Nevertheless some
 {nintabedowings of these principles (which can be thoroughly
 Jxown by Sichaafl only) have bees put before tho public
 partly with the view to preserve Shfstrio kmowledge from
 ‘destruction,and partly fr commercial oasons, When 1 eom-
 ‘mented to write Tantretstiva some 25 years ago (some 37
 years from date) Bengali socisty was in @ perilous state
 wing to the infix of other religions, want of faith and
 spitit of disprtstion, Shortly before this « number of
 English books had appeared on the Tantra Shastra
 ‘which, whilst ignorant of Dharma, Sidhand and Siddhi,
  contained some hideous and outrageous piotures drawa by
  ‘the Bangali historians and novelists ignorant of, and wn-
  fithfal to, Shlatrio principles, The Bnglish books by
‘Hnglish writers contained metelya reflection of what English-
  eduonted Bengalis of thos days had written, Both are
  even to-day equally ignorant of the Tantra Shistra, For
  ‘his reason in writing Tantratattva T could not go deexly
  into the subject.as my hesrt wished. I had to spend my
  time in removing thorns (objections and charges) from the
  path by reasoning and argument. I could not therefore
  deal in my book with most of the subjects which, when T
   Drought ont the fist volume, I promised to discuss. The
                  BHARATA DHARMA
‘Tantra Shistea is browdly divided into threo pasts, namely
Stdhand, Siddbi (that which is gained by Stdbant) and
Philosophy Darstana). Unlike other systems itis not narow
nor does it generate doubt by setting forth conflicting views.
For its speakeris One and not many ond He is omniscient,
The philosophy is however scattered throughout the Tantrik
‘treatises and is dealt with, as occasion ariee, in connection
with Stdhan# ond Siddhi. Gould (as T hed suggested to
him) such parts be collected aud arranged, according to the
piniples of the eubjectmatter, they would form a vast
system of philosophy wonderfl, divine, lasting, troe, snd
camying conviction to men. As a Philosophy itis at the
head ofall others. You have prayed to Parameshvara
(God) for my long life, and my desire to carry out my project
rakesmo sho pray frit), But the state of my body makes
re doubt whether the prayer will be granted. By the grace’
‘heraforo of the Mother the sooner the work is dono the
better. You sey ‘thst those who worship Pacameshvara,
He makes of one family. “Let therefore all distinotions be
‘put aside for all Sidbaks are, as such, one.’ This noble
‘piniple is the final word of all Shastras, all communities,
and all religions. AU distinctions which rise frou differ-
fences in the physical body are distinotions for the human
‘world only. They have no plaoe in the world of worship of
Parameshvara. Tho more therefore that wo shall approach
‘Him the more will the differences between you tnd me
‘Vanish, Its because both of us pruy for the removal of all
such differences, that Tam led to relyon your encouragement
tnd help and am bold to take up this dificult and dating
‘work. If by your gre the gate of this Tantrik philosophy
js opened in the thint part of Tantmatattva T date to say
‘hat the laarned in all conten will gaze and be astonished
foritis pure truth, and for this reason Ishall be ableto place
it before thers with perfect eloameas.””
      ‘Unfortunately this project of a third part of the Tantra-
tatore could not be carried out owing to the lamented death
                                 15
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 of its author, which followed not long after the soocipt of
 ‘his letter. Naturally, Like all believers throughout the
  whole world, he claimed for hia Scripture the possession
 in all its details of what was true oF good. Whilst others
 may not concede this, I think that those with knowledge
 and understanding and free from prejudice will allow that
 it contains @ profoundly conceived doctrine, wonderfully
 worked out in practice, Somo of its ideas wud principles
 fie shated (though it be under other names and forms) by
 all religious men, ond othess either by all or some Indian
 communities, who nre not Shitas. Leaving therefore for
 ‘the moment aside what may be said to be peculiar to iteslt
 it camot be that wholly sbsuni, repulsive, and infamous
 system (“lust, mummery and mogis” as Brian Hodgson
 called it) which it has bee sidito be. An impartial eriti-
 ism may be summed up in the few’ words that together
 ‘with what has value, % costing torte practices which aro
 nob generally approved ancl which have led to abuse, Asto
‘these the readeris mferred to the Chapter on the Pancha-
 ‘attra or Secret Ritual.
        Teonclude with o translation ofa artile in Bengali by
 well-known writer, (P. Bandyopahyiya, in the “Sthitye”,
 Shrabun 1320, Calcutta, July-August 1913). Tt was evoked
 by the publication of Artaur Avalon's Translation of, and
 Introduction to, the Mahinirviza Tantra. Teis aa interest-
 ing statement: as vegsrds the Shikta Tantza and Bengali
 views thereon, Omitting here some commendatory state-
 rents touching A. Avalon’s work and the writers “thanks
  1a hundred times" for the English version, the article oon-
  tinues as follows -—
        “At one time the Mahnirvépe Tantra had some popn-
  Insity in Bengal. Tt was printed and published under the
  editorship of Pandit Ananda-chandrs Vedinta-vagisba asc
   fsued from the Adi-Brahma-Saméj Press, Raj Rim
   Mohan Roy himself was « follover of the Tantras, married
   after the Shaive form and used to practise the Tantnk
                              6
                 BHARATA DHARMA
‘worship. His spititual preceptor, Svimt Hariherinanda,
vas well known to bea int who had attained to perfection
(Sidaha-porosha). He endeavoured to establish the Mahi-
nirvins Tantra as the Sexipture of the Brahn'a Samaj. ‘The
formule and the forms of the Brahma Church are lorrowead
from the initiation into Brahman worship, (Bralmiwxitksb)
in this Tantra, The Inter Brahmas somewhat losing their
selves in their spixit of imitation of Christian rituals ware
Jedto sbancion the path skovr to them by Rajé Ram Nokan ;
but yet even now many among them teste the Hymn to
‘the Brahman whieh occurs in the Mabtnievtna ‘Tantra,
In the fins exa of the excessive dissemination of Knglsh
‘ailture and training Beogal rsounded vith opprbrious
‘citiciams of the Tantras: "No-one among the educated in
Bangal could praise them. Riven those who called. them-
selves Hindus were nnable outoacily to sitpport the ‘Tsntrik
doctzines. ‘But even then there were very great Tantik
Séadhakas ond mon lesened in the Tantmas with whose help
 the principles of the Tontres might have been explained to
the public. Bat the educated Bengali of the age was be-
wwitched by the Chistian onltse, and no one cared to enquire
‘what did or did not existin their paternal heritage ;. the
znore especially thatany who attempted to study   the Tantras
ran the tisk of exposing themselves to contumely from the
“educated community”. Mahixja. Sir Tatindea Mohan
‘Tagore of sacred name alone publisted ta or thie works
with the help of the venerable Pandit Jagannohan Taskilad-
kim The Haretaitvardthiti asocinted. with the mame of
hin fathor ix even now acknowledged to be a marvelously
glorious production of the genius of the Pandits of Bengal.
‘The venerable (Briddba) Pandit Jogonmohan aloo published
‘commentary on the Mabhnirvins Tantra. Even at that
feoch such study of the Tantra was confined to a certain
seotionof the educated in Bengal. Mah8rdj Sir Tatindra
Mohan alone endeavoured to understand end appreciate
men like Bima KhopA (mad Bam), the Naked Father
                               7
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (Nengid Baba) of Kagda and Svémt Sodénands, The
 educated community of Bengal had only neglect: amd con-
 tempt for Sidhakes like Bishe Pagla (the mad Bishe) and
 Bint the Chandala woman, Bengal is even now governed
 by the Tantra ; even now the Hindus of Bengel receive
‘Tanisik initiation. But the glory and the honour whieh
‘the Tantzn had and received in the time of Mahtxdjte
 rishna-chandra and Shiva-chands no longer exist. This
is the reason why the Tantrit SSdhaks of Bengol sre not
0 well-known at present. Te seems as if the World-Mothor
Inas sgain wiled it, has again desired to manifest Her power,
so that Arthur Avalon is studying the ‘Tantms and has
published so besntiul a version of the Mahinirvins, The
English educated Bengali will now, we may hope, tum his
sttextion to the Tantma,
      "The special vintoo of the Tantra lies in its mode of
Stbant. It i nsithot mem worship (Upfsan) nor prayer.
Te is not lamenting or omtrition oF repentance before the
Deity. Te is the SAdhon8 which is the union of Purusha
and Prakriti; the Sidhan8 which joins the Male Principle
and the Mother Riement within the bedy, and strives to
make the attributed atiributcless.. ‘That which in in me
and that for which I en (this conscionmess is ever present
jn me) ia spread, like buster in milk, thoughoutthe ereated
worl of moving and wmoving things, through the gross
‘nd the subtle, the conscious ond uneoraciows, through all
Tis the objoot of Tantrik Bidhana to merge that selé:princ-
ple (Svarit) into the Universal (Vis8i). ‘This SAthan8 is to
be performed through the awakening of the forces within
‘the body. A msn is Sidda in this Sidhand when he is
is not mete “philosophy” ® mere attempt to ponder upon
hhusks of words, but something which is to be done in a
‘thoroughly practical manner, The Tuntras say—"Begin
‘practising under the guidance of @ good Gum; if you do
not obtain favourable results immediately, you can freely
                               8
                BHARATA DHARMA
give it up No other mligion dans to give 9 bold obal-
Tenge. We bolieve that the Saahané of the Movioms, and
the “soterie mligion” or seent Stdhioni (and rituals) of
the Chestims of the Remen Catholic and Greek Charches
is based on ths groundwork of the Tantes.”
      “Wherever tenes Sidhand ve lieve that ther isthe
syvtsm of the Tat. While tating ofthe Tantras some
time buck in the Séhity, Thintod at this omeltsionand T
connot ay thatthe author, Artie Avalon, hae not noticed
{i too, For ho has expres his rogprine tthe sinlasity
which existe between the Roman Ostolfe and the ‘Tanti
‘mode of Sidhint. ‘The Tantra has made the Yogu-syatem
of Patanjali easily pracicale sn has combined with it
‘he Tantric rituals and the eseronil observances (Karrna-
kenga); that is he feason why the Tantek aystom of
Skthaa has nen aoplet bya the religions sects of Tada.
this theory of the autquarins, thet the Tentra was
 bough into dia from Chall oF Shikadvipa bs corse,
then it may also be Safer thatthe Tantm passed from
Ghalden to. Beropa, Tha ‘ata is tobe fount in all the
serata of Buddbian jtho ‘Tantrik Sadia ie manifoct in
Goniuianism ; and Shines ix but another name of the
antik eal Many histori acknowledge thatthe worship
of Shakti or Tuntrik Sidhand which vs prevalent in Bayt
from anciont times spread into Phraitia and Creeee, Cane
sequently we may stppore thatthe infec ofthe Tatas
      felt in primitive. Chostianity”
tras “The    Tantra contains nothing like idolatry ot “worbip
of the doll’ which we, taking the ewe fom the Christian
hnissonaes, nowadays call it ‘This truth, the author,
“Arte Avalon, has mas very leat in the Introduction
 ia trmlation, The ‘Tanta repeatedly says tint ono is
 to alore the Deity by becoming « Deity (Deveta) hinael
‘The Istedevatd isthe very rll of Atma, and mot sepa
 ruta from Tey" He iv the reveptale of all, yet He in not
 Contained in anything, for He i the great witness, the
                             19
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  eteraal Parughs. The true Tantrik worship is the worship
  inand by the mind. ‘The less subtle form of Tantric worship
  is that of the Yontza. Form is bora of the Yantra. The
  form is made manifest by Japa, and avwakened by Mantra-
  shakti. Tens of millions of beautiful forms of the Mother
  bloom forth in the heavensof the heurtofthe Siddhaparusha.
  Devotees or aspirants of « lower order of competency (Nimna-
  adhildif) under the direstions of the Gea adore the great
  ‘Maya by making manifeat (to themselves) one of Her vations
  forms which oan le only seen by Dhyinn (meditation).
  ‘That is not mere worsbip of the idol; if were so the image
  would not be thrown into the water; no one in that case
  ‘would be so inreverent as to sink the earthen image of the
 Gorldeas inthe water. ‘The Primordial Shakti is to be
 awakened by Bhava, by Dhyne, by Japs andby the pieroing
of the six Chakras. Sheis all-will: No one can say when
 ‘and how She sbows Henslf aud to what Sidhaka, We
 only Know thet Sho is, and thare axe Hee names ani forms.
  Wondoriully transcending. is Her form—far beyoad the
  reach of word or thought, ‘This ug made the Bengali
  Bhakis sing this plaintive song.—
        “Hard indeed is it'to approach the sea of forms, andl to
           bathe in it
         Ah me, this my coming ia perhaps in vain 2”
        ‘The Tantra deals with anotherspecial subject, -Mantm-
 Shalt Tt is no exaggerntion to say that wa have never
  heard even from any Bengsli Pandit mch a dese exposition
 of Mantra-Shalti as that whieh the author, Arthur Avalon,
  hus given in his Introduction to the Mabinirvana Tantza,
  We hnd thought that Mentra-Shalcti waa a thing to be felt
 ‘and not to be explained to others, But the author with
 ‘the fore of his genius has in his simple exposition given us
 such explanation of it as is possible in the Buglish language,
 ‘The Tantras say that tho soul in the body is the very self
 ‘of tihe letters—of the Dhvani (sound). The Mother, the
  embodiment of the fifty letters (Varna, ie present in the
                                 20
                  BHARATA DHARMA
 various letters in the diferent Chekras. Like the melaly
 ‘hh issues wien the chords of lute are struck, the Mother
 ‘who moves in th six Chakras and who is the very self of
 ‘the letters awakens with x burst of hamony when the
 chords of the letters (Varoas) are struck in their order:
 4nd Siddhi beoomes as eacy of attainment to the Sidhaka
 as the Amalaka fruit in one’s hand when She is roused.
 ‘That ia why the great SAdhaka Ramaprasdd avalened the
 Motherhyth invocstion—‘      Arise O Mother (Jeg, jonas’.
‘That is the reason why the Bhakta sang—
      “How long wilt thou sleep in the MGlédhéra, © Mother
 ‘Kulakundaling1”
      “The Bod hans (awakening) ceremony in the DurgaPaj
 ia nothing but the swakening of the Shaleti of the Mother,
 the mere roasing of the couscioumess of the Kundalini
 This awskening, is) performed by. Mantra-Shakti. ‘The
 Mantra is nothing but the listmonious sound of te iute of
 ‘tho body. When the symphony is perfect, She who on
 Dodies the Worlde Jogannayt) rouses Herself. When She
 is awake it does not take long before the union of Shiva and
 Shakti takes place, Do Jape once; do Japs aoconling to
 rule looking up to the Guru, and the effetts of Japo of whioh
 wwe hearin the Tenten will prove to be true at every step
 ‘Thon you will undemstand that the antes is not mene trick
 ry, ofa false weaving out of words, What is wanted is the
 ‘good Guru; Mantra capable of granting Siddhi, and appli-
 ution (Sidhank). Artur Avalon has grasped the meaning
 of the principles of Mantra which are so dificult to under:
 stand. We may cartainly say that he could only make this
 impossible thing possible through inherent tendencies
 (Gavkdea) acquired in his provious life.”
       “The Tantrs asvepte the dootrine of rebirth. I does
 not however acknowledge it os a mere matter of argument
 or reasoning but like o geographical map it males clear
 the unending chain of existences of the Sidhaks, The
 ‘Tantza has vo divisions, the Dharma of Society (Sauiija)
                               a
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘and tho Duna of Spinitual Culture (SAdhant), According
 to the rogulation of Saméja-Dharma it acknowledges birth
and caste, But in Sidhane-Dharma thore is no caste
distinction, no Brahmans or Shidms, uo man or woman 5
distinetion between high und low follows success in Stdhiand
‘and Siddhi. We only find the question of fitness or worthi-
        Adhikra-tattva)in the Tantra, ‘his fitness (Achilin)
i discovered with referonge to the Sathekiiras of past oxis-
‘ences ; thot is why the Chandala PQrndnanda is a Brah-
‘mans, and Kriplsiddha    the Sadhska isequal to Sarvnanda ;
that is why Rimopraside of the Vaidya casto is fit to be
Ihonoured even by Brémanas. The Tantra isto bo studiod
with the aid of the toschings of the Guru; for its language
is extraordinary, and its exposition impossible with a mere
grammatical Knowledge of moots ai inflections, The
‘Tantra is only a system of ShaktiSédhana. ‘There are
rules in it whereby we may drow Shakti from all created
‘things. ‘There is nothing to be aovopted or tojected in it.
‘Whatever's helpful for Sddhand is acceptable. ‘This Sidhand
in decided according to the fitness of the particular person
(Aghikstanaséte), Ha most follow that for which he is
fit or worthy. Shakti potvados all und ombraces all beings
and all things—the inanimate and the moving, beacte aud
binds, men ond women. ‘The unfolding of the Power
(Shakti) enelosed within the body of the animal (Tivs) as
vwell as the man is brought about only with the help of the
tendencies within the body. The mode of Sddhand is
‘ascertained with regard to these tendencies. The very
‘meaning of Sidhanf is unfolding, rousing up oF awakening
‘of Power (Shakti). ‘Thus the Shikta obtains power irom
 all gotions in the world, The Sidhant of the Tantra is not
‘to he measured by the little mesiaring-yand of the well-
 bbeing or iL-being of your community oF mine.
      “Let you understand and Iundemtand,O my mind—
       Whether any one else understands it or not.’
 ‘The author, Archur Avalon, is fully conscious of this. In
                 BHARATA DITARMA,
spite off, bo has tie to explain almost all points making
‘them easyto comprehend forthe intallct of the materialistic
‘civilized society of to-day. For this sttempt   on his partwe
ae grateful to him.”
      "The Tantra has no notion of some separate far-secing
God. He preashos no sush dootsine in it as that God tha
Greator rules the Universe from heaven. In the eye of the
‘Tantra the body of the Sédbuka is the Universe, the aufo-
Joates (Atma-shakti) within the body is the desired (Inits)
and ths “tobe sought for” (Sidhya) Deity (Devata) of the
Sidhake. The unfolding ofthis selt-power isto be hrought
about by selfreatizstion (Ltma-tarshans) whic is to be
achieved through Sddkoas. Whoever reelizes his self at-
tains to Liberation (Mukti), The author, Arthur Avalon,
has treated of theay matters Siddliiats) in his work, the
‘Tantratativa. Many of the topics dealt within the MabA~
nirvina Tanta will ot be flly understood without
thorough pecusal ofthe book. ‘The Prineiplesof the Tautea
‘ust Le lectured on to the Bengali afresh. If the Maht-
nirvana Tanta as translated by Arthur Avelon is spread
abroad, if the Bengali     is once more desitons to hear, that
attempt might well be undertaken.”
      “Our land of Bengal usedto be raed by Tantrik works
uh as the Sicadétilaka, Shiktinandataratgint, Prine-
‘oghipl, Tantrasira, ete. Thon the Mahinirvina’ Taxte
did not have so great on influence. Tt seems to us taut,
considering the form into which, uso masult of English
education and cultare, the mind of the Beogali bes been
hoped, the Mebinirvdoa is a proper Tenira for the
time. "Raja Ram Molwn Roy enlesvoured to encourage
segard for the Mahinirvins Tuten because he understood
‘this. IE the English trusiation of the Mohnirvina ‘Tantea
 by Arthur Avalon is well received by the thoughtful public
in Bengal, the study of the original Sanskrit work may
 gradually come into vogue. This mach hope we may enter-
 fain, In fact, tho Englsh-edueated Bengali community is
                                 23
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘without religion (Dharma) ot action (Karma), and is devoid
of tho sense of nationality (Jattye Dharma) and caste. ‘The
 ‘Mahinirvans Tantra alone is fit for the country and the race
 ‘tthe present time. We believe that probably because such
 ‘an impossibility is going to be possible, «cultured, influential,
 rich Englishman like Arthur Avalon, honoured of the rulets,
 ‘has translater! and published the Mabinirvana ‘Tantra
 ‘Whos his Tantratattva is published we shall be able to
 speak out much more. For the present we ask the eduoated
 people of Bengal to mail this mort unprecedented Mebt-
 nirvina Tantra, te price is eight rupees, but the book ia
 Ibulky ; and cannot those who waste so much on frivolities
 spend eight rupees and obtain so precious » volume 1 Cer
 tainly they oan if they but have the wish to. ‘The reason
 of our requesting 20 rush is that Arthur Avalon, has not
spoken a single word to satisfy himself nor tried to explain
‘things acconding    to hia owm imagination. . He has only given
‘whatars true inferences acoonding to the principlesof Sstrie
reasoning. An aoapicious opportunity         for the English-mow-
ing public to understand the Tantra has arrived. It isa
‘onnsel of the Tantraiteelf,    that if you desir to renounce any-
thing, renomnee it only after a thoroxgh acquaintance with
its if yon desire to embrate anything new, novept it only
 after a searching enquiry. ‘The Tantra embodies the old
 religion (Dharma) of Bengal ; oven if itis to be cust away
 for good, that ought only to be done after it hus been fally
 Jaown. In the present case a thoughtful and educated
 Englishman of high position     hae taken it upon himself  to give
 1s & full introduction to the entra. We oun frankly say
 thatin this Introduotion he hss not tried a jotto stk of to
 lose over the conclusions of the Shastes with the vanity of
 explanation bom of his imagination. ‘He has endeavoured
 ‘o bring before the mind of his readers whatever actually ia
in the Tentza, be it regarded a cither good ox evil. Will
 rot the Bengali rosive with weloome such fall offering
  (Arghya) made by © Bhokia from a foreign land t””
                                   4
                   Carrer TL,
         SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER.
“THERE is no word of wider content in any language
        than thio Sinekrit tem moaning ‘Power’. For
Shalt in the highest cansal sense is God ax Mother, and in
nother seuse iis the universe which issues from Her Wann
‘And what ie there which is neither one nor the other t
Therefore the Foginihridaya Tantra thus salutes Her who
conceives, bears, produces. and theresfter nonishos ll
worlds: ““Obsisance be to Her who is pure Being-Conscious-
ness-Blis, a8 Power, who exists in the fom of Time and
Spaoe anc all that is therein; und who is the radiant Hhmi-
nati in all beings.”
      Tei therfore powihle onlyte outline here in a very
general way a fow of the mote important priniples of the
Shaltidootaine, omitting. ite deeply interesting practice
(Gdhaad) ia its forms as vital worship and You.
     ‘Torday Western acienco speaks of Buorgy asthe physical
ultimate of all forms of Master. So has it been for ages to
the Shiktas, 06 the worshippets of Shakti are called. But
‘they add that such Energy is only a linsited manifestation
(as Mind and Matter) of the almighty infinite Supreme
Power (Maki-Shakti) of Becoming in “That? (Tat), whioh
is unitary Being (Sat) Tol
      ‘Dhoit doctrine is to be found in the traditions, oral
and vwition, which age contained in the Agamas, which
(ith Parina, Smriti and Veda) constitute one of the four
great classes of Sutipture of tbe Hindus. The Tantzas are
Scriptures of the Agama. The notion that shey are some
  eer bye-ptoductof Hinduism and not an integral part of
rib eroneous The thie chet divisons ofthe Agama Thatae
                                               Kerala,
focally named Benge! (Goud), Kashmira and known.
Bengal is a home of Tantrashstra is      well           Tt is,
                             5
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  however, little known that Kashnir was in the past     a land
  where Tiutrike doctrine and practice were widely followed.
       ‘The communities of so-called “Pintrik’ worshippers
 are five-fold according as the cult is of the Sun, Ganesha,
  Visina, Shiva or Shakti. To the Knower, however, the
 five named are notdistinet Divinities, but different aspects
 of the one Power or Shakti. An instructed Shakti-vorship-
 per is one of the least sectarien of men. He can worship
in all temples, as the saying is. Thus the Sommoliana
  Tantra says that "he ia w fool who sees any difference be-
‘tween Rama [an Avatira of Vishnu] and Shiva”. “What
‘matters the name,” says the Commentator of the Shaichakra-
‘nirdpana, alter tuning through the gamut of them,
       ‘Tho Shaka is so called: because the chosen Deity of his
worship (Iphtedevatd) ig Shale. In his cult, both in
doctrine and prastice, emphasis is laid én thot aspect of the
One   in whicl ft is the Source of Chango and, in tho form of
‘Time and Spaco and all objeots therein, Chanye itself. The
wont Shalet i grammatically feminine. Ror this reason
‘an American Orientals oritie of the dovtrine has described
it ae a worthloen eyutan,, & moro, feminization of orthodox
(Ovhatever   that be) Vedanta-~a doctrine teaching the primacy
of the Female and thus ft only for'“suftmgottemouiate”. vis
sbeurd criticism of this kind which makes the Hindu somo-
times wonder whether the European has even the eapecity
to undorstand his bulifs, It is said of tho Mother (in the
‘Hymn to Her in the Mahdila- Samhita): “Thou art neither
girl, nor maid, nor old. Indeed Thou art neither female
nor male, nor neuter. Thon art inconceivable, immessur-
ble Power, the Boing of all which existe, void of all duality,
‘the Suprame Brahman, ettainablo in Tumiastion alone."
‘Those who cannot understand lofty idess when presented
in situal and symbolic garb will serve their reputation best
‘by not speaking of ther,
      ‘The Shaiva is so called because his chosen Divinity is
Shiva, the name for the changeless aspect of the One whose
                                26
         SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
Power of action and activity is Shakti, But as the two
tre necessarily associated, all communities acknowledge
Shakti. It ia, for the above reason,© mistake to swppose
‘that a ‘Tintrik,” or follower of the Agama, is necessarily a
Shiltta, and that the “Tantra’ is » Shaleia Soriptuze only.
Not at all. ‘The Shikte ts only one branch of the Agamike
school, And     oo we find the Soxiptuzesof Shaivaians, whether
of Nosth or South, called Tautras, as also those of that
‘ancient form of Vaishnavism which is culled the Pafichoratra.
‘The doctrine of these communities, which share certain
common ideas, varies from the monism of the Shiktas and
Northern Shaivas to the more ot less duslisti« systems of
others. The vitual is to a lange extent common in all ecm=
‘munities, though there are nesewavily variations, due both
to the nature of the divine aapeot worshipped andl to the
particular form Of theology taught. Shakta doctrine and
‘practioe ore contained primabily in tho Shikta Tantras and
‘he oral traditions, some of which  ave souret. As the Tantras
fare mainly Seriptures of Worship. such doottine is contained
by implication in the titual. For reasons above stated
recourse may be hid to other Scriptures in so far as they
share with those of the Shalta, oxrtain: common doctrines
‘and pructiow.. ‘The Tantra proper are the Word of Shiva
‘and Shaleti. But there are also valuable Tantzik works in
 the nature of compmdis and commentaries which are not
of divine authorship.
       ‘The concept ‘Shakti’ is not however peculiar to the
Shiktas, Every Hindu believes in Shakti os God's Power,
‘though he may differ as to the nature of the universe
‘oreated by it. Shilsia doctrine is a special presentment
‘of so-called monism (Advaita: lit, ‘not-two") and Shit
 ritual, even in those condemned forms which have given rise
‘to the abwes by which this Soriptore is most genevslly
 known, ia a practical spplication ofit. Whatever may have
 Theen the ate at the origin of these Agamic cults, all, now
‘and for ages past, zetognize and claim to base themsslves
                               27
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘on the Vedas. With these ore coupled the Word of Shiva
  Shakti as revealed in the Tontras. Shiletedoctine is (ike
  the Vedtats in general) what in Western parlance would be
  called « theology based on revelation—that is, so-alled
  ‘epicitual” or superoensual experience, in ite primary or
 secondary sense. For Veda is that.
        "This leads to # oonsiderstion of the mesoure of man’s
 lknowing and of the basis of Vedntik knowledge. It is «
 fundamental emor to regand the Vedénta as simply a specu-
 lative metaphyaio in the modern Westem sense. Its not
 so ; iit wene, it would have no greater tight to acceptance
 ‘than aay other of the many aystems which jostle one another
 ‘or our customin the Philosophical Fair. Tt claims that its
 superensual teachings car, he. established with certainty
 by the prostice of its) methods, ‘Theorising slone is in-
 suficint. ‘he Shikts, ubove al, & practical and aotive
 xian, worshipping the’ Divine AGtvity his watohword is
 ‘Kaiya or Action, Taught thet he is Power, he desires fully
‘o realize himself in fact as such. A Minti poem (Ananda~
 ‘sotra) speaks with aroused disdain of the leamed chatterers
 who pass ther time in futile debate around the shores of the
 “Laks of Doubt’
       ‘The basis of knowing, whether in super-sense oF seuse-
 knowledge, is actual expesience. Experienoe is of uv
 kinds: the whole or fll experience ; and incomplete experi-
 ence—thot iif parts, not of, butin, the whole. In the fist
 expetienos, Conscionmess is said to be ‘upwari-looking’
 (Camukdt)~that is, ‘not looking to another’. In the
 second      experience it is ‘outwardlooking’ (Vahinnuh!).
 ‘The fist is nob an experience of the whole, but the Experi-
 enceswhole. The seoond       is an experienoe notof parta of the
 ‘whole for the latter is pattess, bub of parts in the whole,
tnd issuing from its infiite Power to know itself in and as
 tho finite centres, as the mony. The worls of an Tndian
 philosopher, my friend Professor Pramatha Natha Mulchyo-
 ‘pahydye, optly call the fms the Fact, and the scoond the
                                   2
          SHAKTI; THE WORLD AS POWER
  Factscetion, ‘The Isha Upanighad calls the Supreme
  [Experience Pimms, the Full or Whole.
        Tis not, be it noted, «residue of the abstracting intel-
  leet, which inital? only a imited stress in Constionmess,
  but a Plenum, in which the Existont All is us one Whole.
  ‘Thoologially this full experiones i Shiva, with Shakti at
  rest or as Poteney. The second experince is that of the
 finite contmes, the numerous Purufhae oF Jivas, whieh axe
  also Shive-Shalcti aa Potency aotuslized. Both experiencas
 fam al. In fact there is nothing unreel anywhere. (“Bhe                 Allis
 ‘the Motor and She is reslity itelt. “Sa” senses             ham”
  Tam”), the Shilca says, and all thot he                              is She
 in the form in which he pereives Her. It is She who in,
and cs, him drinks the onseoratod wine, and She is the wine,
 ‘All is manifested Power, ‘which thus the reality               reality of
  Being ftom which it is put forth, But the                            of the
 aanifestation is of somthing which appears and disap-
 pean, whilst that of Causal Power to sppesr is enduring,
 ‘But this dinapgearanoe is only the coning tobe fora imited
 consciousness. ‘The sced of Power, which appest: as ina
 ‘thing for suck consciousness, remsins as the potency
 infinite Being itll. The infinite               Experione is zeal a
 ‘tho Full (Parma) ;   that    is, its  reality     fullness. ‘The finite
        ence is tal, ax such, Them is, pethaps,                   no aubject
 in Vedinta, which      is  mote    misunderstood        than    that  of the
 so-called “Uareality’ of the World. (evenvery              School    admits
 the reality of all Snite experience                 of ‘illuive” experi
fence szitly to-alled) while such experience last.whichButis
 Shatlkartchirys defies the trlyWorldRealas «as changing    that
changelee, In this         sense,     the                                thing
that relative reality only.            Shaflkara so defines Realtyof
 ‘ecause Te seta    forth    hie   doctrine    from the standpoint
 trangeendent Being. The Shikta Shisirs,                     on the other
 hand, is 8 practieal Seripture of Worship, word      delivered from the
 vworldstandpoint, azozding to which            the           is necessarily
 qeal, According to this view a thing may be neal and yet
                                     39
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 bo the subject of change. But its ality as a thing ceases
 with the passing of the finite experiencer to whom itis teal.
 ‘The supreme Shiva Shakti is, on tho otber hand, a rel, fall
 Experience which over endures, A worhipper must, as
fauch, believe in the reality of himself, of the world as his
field of action ant instrument, in ts eausation by God, and
in God Himself aa the object of worship. Mowwover to him
the world is real becanse Shiva-Shakti, which is its material
cane, in real. ‘That cause, vithont ceasing to be what it
js, beoamen the effiot. Further the World is the Lont's
Experience, Ho as Toni (Pati) is the whole Hxpsrience,
nr} as eroature (Pash) he ia the experiouoer of part in it.
‘The Expetience of the Lont is never unreal. The reality,
however, which changelessly endures may (if we 90 choose)
 he said to he Reality iy its fallast senso,
      Real however ts all experiance is, the knowing differs
‘according the experience i infinite oF finite, and in the
Inter case according to various grades of mowing, Full
experience, a ite name implies, is full in every way. As-
same that there. is at any ‘time’ po univene at
all, that. there is then a complete dissolution of all
universe, and. not of any particular univers,—evon then
the Power which produced past, and will produce future
universes, is one with the Supreme Consciouness whose
Shakti iti. When again this Power atualizas as e universe,
‘the Lonl-Conseiousness fom and in Whom it isuoa isthe
Altimower. As Sarvajfia he knows all generals, and as
Socvavit, all parfelars. But all ig known by Himas the
Supreme Salf, and not, as in the case of the nite centro, as
cobjecta other than the limited self
      Finits exporienoo is by ita definition a limited thing.
‘As the exporionce is of « suotional chameter, itis obvious
that the Imowing can only be of paris, anid not af the whole,
a the part cannot know the whole of which it is « pact
But the finite is not always so. It may expand into the
infinite by prooeses which bridge the one to the other,
                                »
      SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
‘The essential of Partial Experience is knowing in Time ond
‘Space ; the Supreme Expzriane, being changeless, is beyond
 both Time and Space as aspects of change. The Inttar is
the altarntion of para relative to one anothor in the chngo-
less Whole. Pull experiance is not sense-knowledge. The
latter is worldly knowledge (Laukika Jina), by a. limited
JInoving centze, of material objets, whether gross or subtle.
Full experience is the Supreme Knowing Self which is not
fan object of sll. This is mvoridly knowledge (Alaukika
‘Tiiina) or Veda, Sense-knowledge varies scconling to the
capecity ani attainments of the expetiencer. But the
normal experience may be enhanced in tro ways
physically by scientific instruments such as the t
‘aud miorosoope which enbanee the natural eapasity to see ;
‘or peychicaly by the attainment of what ao eae peychio
powers, Everything is Shakii; but psychic power denotes
‘at enhancement of normal eapacity which gives knowledge
‘of matter in it subtle form, whilst the normal man can
‘perceive it onlyin the grogs form as 6 compound of sensible
‘matter (the Bhitas).Payehio power is thus an extension of
natural faoulty. There is nothing ‘supernatural’ sbout it,
Alli natural, all is real. Tt is simplya power above the
normal. ‘Thus the clairvoyant oan ace what the normal
seooe-oxperionear cannot. He does so by the mind. The
{ross sense-organs are not, sotonling to Veddnte, the senses
(Indtiya). The sense is the mind, which normally works
through the appropriate physical omgans, but which, as the
real factor in sensation, may do without them, as is seen
both in bypnotio and yogic states. ‘The area of knowledge
is thus very widely increased. Knowledge may be gained
of subtle chemistry, subtle physiology (as of the Chakras ot
subtle bodily centres), of various powers, of the ‘world of
Spins,” and so forth. But though we are here desting with
subtle things, they ao till things and thus pat ofthe sense-
‘world of objecta,—that ia, of the world of Miya. Maya,
as later explsined, is, not “illusion,” but Experience in time
                               3s
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘and sptco of Saf and Not Self. ‘This is by no means nooes-
  sarily illusion, The Wholé therefore cmnot be known by
  sease-knowiedge, In short, sense or worldly knowledge
  annot establish, that is, prove, what in supersensual, sush
 as the Whole, its nature and the ‘other side” of ita processes
 taken as a collectivity, Reasoning, whether working in
 metaphysio oF science, is hased on the dati of sense and
 govemed by those forms of understanding which constitute
 ‘the nature of finite mind, Tt may eatablish conclusion of
 probability, but uot of vertuinty. Groands of probability
 Tay be made out for Idealism, Realism, Plorelism ond
 Monism, or any other philosophical system, In fact, fram
 what we see, the balance of probability perhaps favours
 Realism and Pluralism. Resson may thus establish that
 effect must have .osuse, but not that the cause is one.
 For all that wo ean say, there may bo as many causes as
 ‘ffeots, "Therefore it is said’ in’ Vedinta that “nothing [in
 these matters] is established by argument”. All Westen,
 systems which do not possess aotaal spiritual experience as
 ‘their basis, are systems which can claim no certainty as
 regards any matier not verifiable by sense-knowledge and
 reasoning thereon
        ‘Shaleta, and indeed all VeeAntik teaching, holds that
 the only source and authority (Pramfins) as rogasde super-
 sensual matter, such as the nature of Being in iteelf, and
 the like, is Veda, Veda, which comes from the root vid, to
 mow, is knowledge par excellence, that is supersentual
 expetience, which ncoording to the Monist (to use the nearest
 English term) is the Experience-Whole. Tt may be primary
 or secondary. As the first itis actual experience (Sikshat-
 kkfra) which in Bnglsh is called ‘spiritual’ experience
        ‘Tho Shikto, us a ‘monist,’ says that, Veda is fall ox
 perience as the One. ‘This is nob an object of knowledge
‘This knowing is Being. “"To know Brakman is to be Bral
 man.” He is a ‘monist," not beosuse of rational sxgument
  only (though he can adduce reasoning in his support), but
                                 2
        SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
 because he, or those whom he follows, have had sn fact sch
 ‘monistic’ experience, and therefore (in the light of such
 experience) intorpret the Vedintik texts
       But ‘spiritual’ experience (to use that Boglish
 ‘texm) may be incomplete hoth as to duration and nature.
 Thus from the imperfect ecstasy (Savikalpa-SamAdhi),
 even when of a ‘mouistie’ character, there is a return to
 vorld-experine, Again iémay notbe completaly ‘monsti’
 in form, or may be aven of a distinctly dualistio charartr.
 ‘This only menos that the alization hes stopped short of
tho nal goal. Thin being the cas, thst goal ie till pereived
 ‘hzough the foncs of daality which linger as part of the con-
 stitution of the exparencer. ‘Thus there are Vedéntik and
 ‘other sohools whieh ame not ‘monistic’. The spiritual
 experiences of all are real experiences, whatover be their
 caructr, an they ave true acconding to the truth of the
 stage in which the experienceis had. Do they contradict
 ‘one another? ‘The experiance which a moan has of a moun-
 tainat fy mile distance,     snot false boounse itis at variance
 swith that of the man who has elimbed it What ho sees
 js the thing from awhate he sons it. ‘The fist queation then
 int Ts there a ‘moniatio’ experionoe sn fact? Not whether
 ‘rnonism’ ie rational oF pot, and shown to be probable to
 fe intellect. But how can we know this "With certainty
 only by having the experience oneself. ‘The validity of the
 fxpetieuce for the experienser cannot be assailed otherwise
 ‘than by alleging fm or self-deception. But how con this
 bbe proved ! To the experience his experienoe is ral, and
  nothing eseis of any secount. But the spiritnal experience
 ‘of one is no proofto another who refuses to accept it. A
 ‘man mag, lowever, asept what another soys, having faith
 in th Intar's lege experience. Here we have the second
ary moaning of Veda, that is secondary Imowledge of super-
  sensual truth, not base on aetasl experience of the haliower,
  ‘baton the experience of some other which the former aocopts.
  Tn this seme Veda in recotded for Brabmanismn in the
                                3
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Scriptures clled Vans, which contain the standard experi-
 ‘ence of those wham Brakmanism recognizes as ita Raahis or
 Seem. But the interpretation of the Vaidit record is in
  question, just as that of the Bible is. Why acoept one
 interpretadion sather than another! This is a lengthy
 ratier, Sulice to say here that etch chooses the spiel
 food which his spiritual body needs, and waich ibis capable
 ofeating and asimilating, Thisis the dooteine of Adil.
  Hore, as elsewhere, what is one man’s meat is enotber man's
 poiscn, Nata works in all who are.not altogether beyond
 her workings. What is called the ‘will to believe’ involves
‘the afizmation   tht the form of a man's faiths the expression
of his natare; the faith ia the man. Téis not man's reason
 only which lsads to the adoption of a particular seligious
 bolet. Tt is the whole man as evolved at that perticular
  time which does so. His afirmotion of faith is an affr-
ration of his sf in terms of it. ‘The Shirt is therefore a
 ‘monist, either boctuse he has had himself spiritual experi-
 ‘ences of this character, or because he sgoepts the teaching
 ‘of those who claim to have, had such expscience. This is
 Ata knowledge, thetis eosived from a souree of authority,
 juut a knowledge ofthe gtiontie or other export is rosived.
‘Tein true that the latter may be veried. But so in ite own
 ‘voy oan the former be. Revelation to the Hindu is nob
 something stated ‘trom sbore', incapsble of vetifeation
  ‘below’. He who accepts revelation as teaching the unity
 cof the mony in the One, may himself verify it in his own
 experience, How? If the cisciple is what is called not
  fit to reive truth in this ‘monistic? form, he will probably
 deolare it to bs untrue and, adbering to what be thinks is
  tse, will not further troublo himself in the matter. If he
 ia disposed to ocept the teachings of ‘moniatic’ religion-
  philesophy, it is because his own spisitual snd psychioal
  ture is ata stoge which loads diecty (though in & longer
  ‘or shorter time as may be the vase) to actaal ‘monistio’
  experience. A particular form cf ‘spiritual’ knowledge
                               a
       SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
  like a portiular paychic power oan be developed only in
  him who has the capacity for it. To such an one asking,
  With desire for the fruit, how he may gather it, the Guru
 ‘oye: Follow the path of thote who have ackieved (Siddha)
  ‘and you will gain what they gained. This isthe ‘Path of
  ‘the Great’ who are those whom we esteem to be such. We
  esteem them became they here schieved that which we
  balieve to be both vorthy and possible. If a would-be
 disciple refuses to follow the method (S8dhand) he cannot
 complain that he has not fad its result, ‘Though reason.
by itself cannot establish mote than a probability, yet when
 ‘he supersensual truth has been learnt by Veds, #t may be
 shown to be conformable to retson. And this must be 80,
 ‘or all eaitiee axe of ono pigee, Reason is a limited mani
 festation of the same Shaki, whi is fully known in ecstasy
  (Samadhi) which. trangcends ll reasoning. What, there-
 for, isiational, cam never be épiritually true. With the
 sid of the light of Revelation the path ia made clear, and
  all that is seen tells of the Unseen. Fusts of daily life give
  axiiary proof, So many miss the truth which lies umder
  their eyes, leeause to find it they look away or upwards to
 sume fancied ‘Heaven’. ‘The sophisticnted mind fears the
 obvious, “Itis hore; itis bere," the Shikta and others
         For he and every other being is a microvomm, and 40
 the Vishwasira Tantra says: “What is here, is elsewhere.
 ‘What is not here, is nowhere.” ‘The unseen is the seen,
 which is not some alien disguise Debind which it Larks.
 Experience of the seen is the experiene of the msseu in
 time anc space. The life of the individual is au expression
 of the same laws which govern the universe, ‘Thus the
 Hind knows, fom his own daily rt, that the Power whieh
 projects the universe rests. His deramless slumber when
 only Bla is known, tells him, in some fashion, uf the osusal
 state of mivenal rest. From the mode of his awakening
 and other paychological processes he divines the nature of
 creative thinking, To the Shakta the thell of union with
                                  3
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 his Shae ia a faint refleotion of the infinite Shiva-Shaeti
‘Bliss in aud with which all uxiverses aze bora. All matter
is a relatively stable form of Energy. Tt lasts avrhile and
disoppoars into Energy. ‘The univers is maintained awhile,
‘This is Shakti us Vaishuavt, the Maintainer, At every
monent creation, as rejuvenesoent molecular eetivity, is
going on as the Shakti Brahmiof. At every moment there
is molecular death and loosening of the forms, the work of
Rudsigt Shale. Ceeation did not take place only at some
‘post time, nor is dissolution only in the future. Ab every
‘moment of time there is both. As it is now and before us
here, so it was ‘in the beginning’.
      Tp short the world is real. Tt is a truo oxperience,
‘Observation and reeson axe bere the guide, Even Veda is
no authority in matte falling within sense-imowledg.
If Voda were ta: contradict such Imowledge, it would, as
Shaflkara aays, be in'this meapect no Veda at all. The
Hindu is not troubled by ‘biblical siente”. Hare and now
the existence of the many is ecteblished for the, sense-ex-
petiencer, But there is another and Full Experience which
also may be bad here and now and is in any case also a
foct—that is, when the Self ‘stands out? (estas) from
mind and body and sense-expetience. This Full Ex-
perience is attained in ecstasy (Gemfahi). Both experiences
rmay be had    by the same experience. Its thus     the same
One who became many. “He said: Moy I be many,” ax
Veda tell. The ‘will to be many’ is Power or Shakti
which operates as. Maya.
      In the preceding portion of this paper it was pointed
cout that the Power whereby the One gives effect to Its Will
to be Many is Mays Shake.
      What arc called the 80 Tatevas (aeeepted by both
Shileiss and Shaivas) are the stages of evolution of the
One into the Many as mind and matter.
      Again vith what warrant is this affirmed ? ‘The secon
‘dary prool is the Word of Shiva and’ Shakti, Revealers
                               6
         SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
  of the Tantss-sbdstra, as such Word is expounded in the
 teachings ofthe Mast           (hry) in th gu
       Corroboration of their teachiog may be had by obses-
 vation of psychologioa states in normal life and reasoning
 ‘hereon, These pryohologoal states again ore tho individual
 repnsentation of the cllective cosmic processes. “As
 hate, so chewhere.”” Primary evidence is actual experience
 of the surtounding snd supreme states, Man doos not lesp
 at oxe bound from ordizary finite sense-experience to the
 Full Uxperienos. By stages he advanoas thereto, and by
 stages he retraces his steps to tho world, unless the fullness
 of experioncehas been sush as to burn up in the fre of Sli
 Inowledge the seed of desire which isthe germ of the world.
 Men's consciousness has no fixed boundary. On the coa-
 ‘rary it ie at root the Ininite Consciousness, which appears
 in the form of a contesction (Sabixoohn), du to limitetion
 ‘as Shakti  in the form of mind and matter, ‘This contraction
 ray be greater of let, As it is gradually loosened, consci-
 ‘ousness expands by degrees until, all bonds being gone, it
 bosomes one with the Full Goneciousness of Pirpa. Thos
 ‘there ate, according to common teaching, seven ascending
 light planes of experience, called Lolas, that is descending‘what are
 seen’ (lokycnds) ot experienced ; and seven darkobserved. that
 ‘lanes, or Talas, thatis ‘places’. Ib will be other from
 ‘one name is given from the subjective and the planes is the
 ‘the objective standpoint. ‘The centre of these as expeci-
 “Barthcplane’ (Bhtsloka). This is not the same the highest
 eno on catth, for every experience, including like geclogi-
and lowest, can be had here. The planesatethem       not
 tal strata, though necessity mayexperience. ‘The thus.
                                          picture                   ‘The
 Earth-plane is the normal                                   ascending
 ‘lanes ae states of     super-normal,     and the descending    planes
 'f sub-nonl expetionee, ‘Tho highest of the the Supreme planes   is the
 ‘Trutirplane (Batyeloka). Beyond this is Light itl,
 Baperience, which is aboveShakti,all planes, which is
‘and the Love     of Bhiva  and           the "Heactof    the Supreme
                                   37
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Lond’ (Hridayam parameshitub), The lowest Tala on the
 dark side is desorbed in the Purfnas with wonderful
 symbolic imagery ss a Place of Darkness wiers monster
  serpents, crowned with dim light, live in perpetual anger,
  Below this is the Shakti of the Lond called Tamomayt
 Shakti-that is, the Veiling Power of Boing in all its ink
  nite intensity.
       What then is the Reslity-—Whole or Parma? It ix
 certainly not a bare abstraction of intllet, for the intellect
 fs only a feactional Power or Shakti in it Such an ab-
 struction has no worth for man, In the Supreme Reality,
 which is the Whole, there 8 everything which is of worth
 to men, and which proceeds from it, In fact, as a
 Kaslmir Scripture says: “The ‘without’ appears without
 ‘only beoause itis within.” Unworth also proceeds from it,
 not in the sense that itis there a# unvotth, but because tbe
 ‘experience of duslity, to whisli evil is attached, arises in
 ‘the Blisful Whole, The Ill is not merely the collestivity
 (Gamashti) ofall which exits, for it is both immanent in
 ‘and transveads the universe. Xt is » commonplace that it
 is unknowable exteptto Itself. Shiva in the Yoginthridaya
 Tantra, ssye: “Who knows the heart of a woman? Only
 Shiva knows the Heart of Yogini (the Suprame Shakti.”
 For this reason the Buddhist Tintrik schools call it Shinya
 ortho Void. This is not ‘nothing’, but nothing known to
 tind and singe. Both Shiktas and some Vaithnovas we
 the term Shinya, and no one suspects them of being ‘Nihi-
 me
       Relatively, however, the One is eaid to be Being (Sat),
 Biss (Ananda) end Ohit~-an untransiatable term which
 has been most aeourately defined as the Changsless Principle
 of all changing experience, a Principle of which sensation,
  perception, sonception, sslf-consciousness, feeling, memory,
 ‘will and all other paychio states ore limited modes. Tt is
 riot therefore Conscioumoos ot Feeling as we understand
‘these worls, for these are direoted and limited, Tt is the
                                3
       SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
infinite root of which they are the finite ower. But Conse
cumess and pessiy (accorlng to the more ancient views)
Feeling appronch the next nealy to w dafnition, provided
that we do not understand thereby Consciousuoss and Boel-
‘ngin man’asonee. Wemay th (to distinguish it) call Cit,
Pare Consciousness ox Pu Feling as Blse (nonda) low
ing nud enjoying ite own full Reality. This, ax auch Puce
Consciousness oF Feeling, endures even when finite contres
of Consciousness or Kecling atie in It. I (as this syrtam
‘ssumes) there isa real causal nexus between the two, then
Being, a8 Shiva, is also a Power, or Shakti, which is the
sourve ofall Besoming. The fally Real, therefore, has two
aspects: one called Shiva, the static agpeet of Conscions-
ness, and the other called Shakti, the Kinetic aspect of the
amie, For this season Kall Slakti, dark aa a thunder-
cloud, ia represented standing and moving on tho white
inert’ body. of Shiva. He’ is white ag Thumination
(Braktshs). He is inert, for Pure Comssiousness is
Without action and. at rest, It is Sho His Power, who
roves. Datk is She here beesuse, a5 Kall, Sho dissolves
al in daviness, cht is vacuity of existence, which is the
Light of Being Uself Again She is Grentzx. Five corpee-
like Bhives form the support of Her throne, eetin the wish-
granting groves of the Isle of Gems (Mavidvipa), the
{olden sands of which am laved by the still waters Inof both  the
 Ocean of Neotar (Amgita), which is Immortality.
caves We have & pistorial prowntment in theologial fom
 Of te scenic doctsine that o every form of aotvity there
iso statio background.
      But until there is in fact Change, Shakti is merely the
 Potency of Becoming in Being and, as such, is wholly one
 with it, ‘The Power (Shek) and the possessor of Power
 (Ghaktimin) are one. As thetefore He is Being-Blise-Oon-
 Seiowsness, s0 it She. She alo is the Full (Pima), which
 js no mere nbetraction fom its evolved         manifesiations.
 On the contrary,   of Her the Mahdkali   Sota      say: “Though
                               %
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 vithout fet, Thou movest more quisly than wis. Though
without oar, Thou dost bese. “hough without nostrils,
Thou dost smell. Though without eyes, Thou dost sce.
‘Though without tongue, Thou dost taste all tastes.” Those
‘who talk of the ‘bloadlaws abstractions” of Vedinta, have
not understood it. ‘The goad of Man's Bsing is the
Supreme ‘I’ (Pimbham) which, though in Ttself beyond
fiaito pomouality, is yet ever faitely pemonalizing as the
Tings of the univers. “84"bam,”"—"She T am,
      ‘This is tho Suprome Shai, the ultimate objet of the
Shaktas’ adoration, though worshipped in several forms,
some gentle, some fomidabe
      But Potency is actualized as the uivene, and this
also is Shakti for the effecti the cause modified. Monistio
‘Veddnte touches that God isthe mataial onane of the world.
‘The statement that the Supreme Shaleti also existe as the
ons evolve from Iemay soem t conct with the dovttine
that Power iy ultimately one with Skiva who is changoless
Bring, Shakars angwers that the existenoe of a causal
nents is Miya, and that ther is (fom the transcendental
stanipoint) only a seeming eguse end seeming medication
or effec The Shits, who.-ftom his world-standpoint
posits the reality  of God 6 the Catue of the anivere, oping
that, while it is truo thet tho ofet   (as effect) is the cause
modified, the oonse (as cause) remnins whno
and will be. Creative evolution ofthe universeit tus was and is
                                                          differs
from the evolution in it, Tn the letter cage the material
nuss when produting an ellect ceases to be what it was.
‘Thus milk timed into curd cesses to be milk. But the
simile given of the other evolutionary process is that of
‘Light from Light’. ‘There is a similaity betroon the
‘conventional’ standpoint of Shatkara and the explans-
tion of tho Shilkia; the diflernce being that, whist to the
former the effet is (frum the transcendental standpoint)
‘urea’, it is (fom the Shikta’s immanent standpoint)
                               rs
       SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
      It will have heen observed that cosmic evolution
the nature of « polarization in Being into static and kinetic
sapects, This ia symbolized in the Shakta Tantras by their
comparison of Shiva-Shalrti to a grain of gram (Chanska).
‘This has two seeds which are 20 close together as to seem
ono, axd which sre surtounded by a single sheath. ‘The
soods are Shiva and Shakti and the sheath is Miy&, “When
‘the sheath is unpeeled, that is when Mayt-Shulti operates,
‘the two seeds come apart. ‘The sheath untolls when the
seeds aco reedy to germinsta, that is whon in the dreamess
slumber (Sushupti) of the World-Consciousness the remom-
brance of past enjoyment in Form gives rise to that divine
creative ‘thinking’ or ‘imegining’” (Srishtikalpand) whieh
is ‘orestion’, As the univers in dissolution sinks into a
Memory which ia lout 80 i i Bors again from the gorm of
recalled Memory or Shakti. Why! Such          » question may
te answered when we axe dealing with facts in the whole ;
but the Inter itself is uncansed, and what is caused is not
the whole, Manifestation is of the nature of Being-Power,
just os it is Tta nature to retumto Iigelf after the sctuali-
ation of Power. ‘To the devotee who speaks in theological
language, “Tt ia His Wil.” As the Yoginiiridaya says :
He painted the World-picture on Himself with the Brush
which is His Will and was plessed therewith.”
      ‘Again the World is oalled a Propatoha, thot is on
catension of the five forms of sensible matter (Bhits).
 ‘Where does it go at dissolution t Tt collapses into» Point
(Bindu). We may regart it es « metaphysical point which
is the complete ‘subjesttcation’ of the divine or full ‘I’
(Pientasntd), or objectively as a mathemstial point with-
out magnitude, Round that Pointis coiled a mathematical
Line which, being in touch with every part of the surface
cof the Point, makes one Point-with it. What then is meant
 by thete symbols of the Point and Lino t It is sald that
 the Supreme Shiva cots Himself in and as Tlis own Power
 or Shai. He is the 'White Point’ or ‘Moon’ (Chandra),
                              4“
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 whieh in Bluminetion and ia te completed process, the
   1 (Aham) side of experience, She is the ‘Red Point”
 Both colours are seen in the microoommic generation of the
 child. Red too isthe colour of Desir, She is ‘Fito’ whieh
is the object of experience or ‘This’ (Jitam), the objective
side of experience. The “This” here is nothing but: 8 mass
‘of Shiva’s own illuminating rays, These are reflected in
Himsolt ss Shakti, who, in the Kémakalvilia, is called
‘tho ‘Puro Minor’ of Shiva. ‘The Self seo the Self, the rays
being thrown back on their sourve, The ‘This’ is tho germ
 of what we call “Othemes,” but here the ‘Other’ is and is
 Jnown ss the Self, The relation and fusion of these two
 Points, White and Red, is called the Mixea Point or ‘Sun’.
 ‘These ‘are the three Supreme Lights,           A=Shiva, Ha:
 Shalti, which united spall *Aham! or “T’. ‘This ‘Sun’ is
‘thus the state of full “Fess! (Ptimpiham-bhiva). ‘This is
 the Point into which the World at dissolution lapses, and
 fom whish   in duo time it comes forth again, In tho latior
 case itis the Lonl-Consciousness as the Supreme “I” and
 Power sbout to oregte. For this resson Bindu is called «
 ‘condensed or massive form of Shakti. Tia the tense state
 cof Power immedistely prior to ity fist sotualization, That
 form of Shakti, again, by which the actualizstion ‘aks
 place is Maya; ‘and this is the Line round the Point. As
 coiled tomnd the Point, it is the Supreme Serpent-Power
 (ishékuadatint) enoivoling the Shive-Lifgs. From out
 this Power comes the whisper to enjoy, in woslde of form,
 ss the memory f pao} universes. arises therein. Shakti
‘then ‘sees’. Shalcti opens Her eyes as She reawakes from
 the Cosmic Sieep (Nimesha), which is dissolution. ‘The
 Line is at fist oviled and one with the Point, for Power is
 then ab rst, Creation is movement, an uncoiling of Mayi-
 Shakti, Hence is the world called Jagut, whish means
  ‘shat moves’. ‘The nstare of this Power is eiwular or
 spiraline; hence the roundness and ‘curvature’ of things
  cf whith we now hear. Nothing moves in « sealy straight
                               2
         SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
line, Hence again the univinwe is cho called « spheroid
(Bmhmands). The gross works ate viceular universal move:
mente in space, in which, is the Ether (sha), Conseious-
ness, as the Full (Pama), is never dichotomized. lint the
finite centres which arise ia it, om so. The Point, or
Bindu, then divides into three, in various ways, the chief
of which is Knower, Knowing and Known, which constitute
‘the duality of the worl-expesienve hy Mind of Matter.
       Unsurpassed for its profound analysis isthe account
‘of the thirty-six Tattvas or stages of Cowie Evolution
(eoospted by hoth Shaivas and Shaktas) given by the Norte
fem Shaiva School of the Agama, which flourished nftor
‘the date which Western Orientalists assigu to Shafikart-
‘chixya, und which was therefore ina position to critic
him. According to-this account (which I greatly condense)
Subject snd Object in, Pune Being aze in undistinguishable
union as the Supreme Shiva-Shalti. We have then to soe
hhow this unityis broken up into Subject. and Object. ‘This
does not take place all at ono. ‘There is wn intermediate
stage of transition, in which there is a Subjoct and Object,
bout both are part of the Self, which Imows its Object to be
Itself. Ta man's expotionce they are wholly sepsrate, the
Object ten being perosived as outside the Self, the plurality
of Selves being mutually exclusive centres. The provess
‘and the tesult are the work of Shakti, whose special function
is to negste, that is to negate Her own fullness, so that it
becomes the finite contre contracted as w limited Subject
pperoeiving a limited Object, both being aspects of the one
Divine Self
      ‘The first stage after the Supreme is that in which
Shakti withdraws Herself and leaves, as i were, standing by
itaolf the ‘I’ side (Aham) of what, when completed, is the
‘L-Phis’ (Abam-Idam) experience. | Butaiumultansously (for
 the ‘T' must have its content) She presents Herself as a
 This’ (Idam), at fz faintly and then cleasly ; the emphasis
 being   at fit laid on the 'T’ and then on the ‘This’. This
                                “3
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  last is the stage of Isbvara TTattya or Bindu, as the Mantra
  Shistra, dealing with the causal stato of ‘Sound’ (Shabds),
  calls it.’ In the second and third stage, as also in the fourth
 ‘which follows, though there is wn “I” and a This" ond there-
 fore not the undistinguishable “I-This’ of the Supreme
  Expsrimnce, yet both the ‘T and the “This? are experi-
 enved as aspects of and in the Self. ‘Then as « prelimi-
 nary to the division which follows, the emphasis is laid
 ql on the ‘T’ and the ‘This’. At this point Mayt-
 Shakti intervenes and completely separates the two. For
 that Power is the Sense of Differenoe (Bheda-Buddhi). We
 have now the finite centres mutually exclusive one of the
 other, each seeing, to the extent ofits power, finite oentres
ts objects outside of and different from the Self. Constious-
 eas thus becomes conieaced.) In lion of being Allnowing,
 itis a ‘Little Knower', ond in lieu of being Almighty Power,
 it is a ‘Little Doer’,
        May8 ia not rightly rendered ‘Ilion’, In the fit
 place itis conesived as a real Powor of Being and as such
 is one with the Full Reality. ‘The Full, fee of all illusion,
 cexpetienoss the engendering of the finite centres and the
centoes themselves in-and ss Tis own changeless pertless
 Self. It is these individual centres produced from out of
 Power as Méyi-Shakti which are ‘Ignormce’ or Avidya
 Shakti. They ato so called becaase they are not a full
 experience but ‘an experience of parts in the Whole. In
 snother sense this ‘Ignorance’ is a imowing, nomely, that
 ‘which a finite cantre alone has. Tven God cannot have
 man's mode of knowledge and enjoyment without becoming
 man. Ho by and as His Powor dose bocome man and yet
 remains Himself, Man is Power in limited form as Avidy8,
‘The Lord is unlimited Power as Méy8. In whom then is
 the ‘Ilusion’ Not (all will admit) in the Lord. Nor is
 it in fact (whatever be the talk: of it) in man whose nature
 it in to regard his limitations aa real. Bor these imitations
ste he, His expericageas man provide               s whereby
                                            no standard
                                 “
       SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
 itmaybo adjulged ‘Iusion’. ‘The latter is non-eonformity
 with normal experience, snd here it is the normal experience
 which is suid to be Mlusion. If there were no Avidy&
 Shakti; there would be no man, fa short the Jnowing
 ‘hich is Pull Experience is one thing and the knowing ofthe
 limited experiences is another. ‘The latter is Avidyt and the
 Power to produce it is May@, Both are etemal aspeots of
 Reality, though   the forms which are Aviyé Shakti come and
 0. If we seek to relate the one to the other, where and
by whom ia the comparison       made ? Not in and by the Pull
 Experience beyond all relations, where no questions are
 ‘asked or answers given, hut on the standing gromd of pre-
 sent finite experience where all subjectivity and obj
 ‘re real and where therefore, ipso facto, Lhcsion is negstived.
 "The two aspeots are never present at one and the same
 time for comparison. ‘The tniverse is teal as a, limited
 thingto the limited experience who is bimself « part of it.
  But the experience of the Supreme Person (Pardhanta) is
 necessarily differnt, otherwise it would not bt the Supreme
experience aball, A God who experionces         just as man does
 fs no God but man, ‘There is, therefore,      no experienoer to
‘whom the World is Musion. He who sees the world in the
 normal waking state, loses tn that form in ecstasy (Sam@-
 ahi). Te may, however, (with the Shikts) be said that the
 Supreme Experience is entire and unchanging and thus the
 fully Real ; and that, though the limited experience is also
 ‘eal in its own way, itis yeb an experience of change in its
  tovin aspects of Time and Space. May8, therefor, is the
  ower which engenders in Hself finite centres in Time and
  Space, and Avidyd in auch experienc in fact of the fnite
  experiencer in Time and Space. So much is this so, that
 ‘the Time-theorists (KélavSdins) give the name ‘Supreme
  ‘Time’ (Paruklla) to the Creator, who is also ealled by the
  Shikta ‘Great Time’ (shAkala). So in the Bhairarayd-
  ‘ala iis said that Mahideva (Shivo) distributes His Rays
  ‘of Power in the form of the Year. ‘That is, ‘Timeless
                                 45
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Experience appears in the Gnite cantres us broken up into
periods of tte. This ia the ‘Lesser Time” which eomes in
with the Sun, Mon, Six Seasons and so forth, which ave all
Shaktis of the Lord, the extends and moventents of which
give rise in the limited cheerver, to thenotion of ime and
Space,
      ‘That observer is easentally the Self or ‘Spitit? vehicled
by Tea own Shale in the form of Mind and Matter, These
‘tro ai Hts Body, the frst aubtl, the second gross. Both
ave » common origin, samy the Supreme Power. Each
is @ real mode of It, "One therefore does not produce the
other, Both are produced by, and exist as modes of, the
same Conse, There is a necessary parallelism between the
Parcaived and the Perceiver and, because Mind snd Matter
‘are at ase one as modes of the same Power, one can aot
on the other. Ming) is the subjective acd Matter the objec-
tive aspest of fhe one! polarized: Consciousness.
      ‘With the unimportant. exception of the Lokiystas,
the Hindus hive never shared what Sir William Jones called
 “the vulgar notions of mater,” according to which it ia
regaried as some gross, lasting and independently existing
contside thing
      Modern Westem Scones ow also dematerilizes the
pondemble uwatter of the universe into Energy. his nd
 the forms in which itis displayed is the Power of the Self
 to appear as the object of a limited cantre of knowing.
Mind again is the Self as ‘Consciousness’, limited by Tea
 Power inio such a centee. By auch contraction there isin
 lieu of an ‘All-mowver? # ‘Little Knower,” and in lien of
 tn ‘All-doer’ a ‘Little Doe”. Those, howeveto r,whom this
 ‘way of looking at things in maturally diffcalt, may regard
 ‘the Supreme Shakti from the objestive ospect as holding
 within Itself the germ of all Matter which develogs in Tt.
       ‘Both Minit and Matter exist in every particle of the
 ‘universe though not explicitly displayed in the seme way
 inall. ‘There is no comer of the universe which contains
                                6
          SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
 ‘anything either potential or actual, which is not to be found
 ‘elsewhere, Some aspect of Matter or Mind, however, may
‘be more of less explici         or implicit,     t Soin the Mantra Serip-
 ture itis aaid that each letter of the alphabet contains all
 sound. ‘The sound of » particular letter is explicit and the
 other sounds aro implicit. The sound of « particular letter
 is a particular physical audible mode of the Shabdabeahman
 (Brahman as the cause of Skabla or ‘Sound’, in Whom
   is all sound, sotual and potential. Pure Consciousness is
 {lly        involved in the densest forms of grossor organi matter,
 ‘hichis not ‘inert’ bub full of movement (Spend), for there
 in naught but the Supreme Cousciousness whieh does not
 move, Immarent in Mind and Matter is Consciousness
 (Ghit Shakti). Inorganic matter is thus Consciousness
 in full subjection to the Power of Ignorance. It is thus
 Consciousness identifying Tiself with such inorganic matter.
 ‘Mattern all ite five forms of density is presentin everything.
 ‘Mind too is there, though owing to its imprisonment in
 ‘Matter, sndeveloped. “The Brahman slseps in the stone.”
 ‘Life too which disploys itielf with th orgenintion of matter
   is potentially contained in Being, of which such inorganic
 ‘matter is, to some, a                    ‘lifles ” form. From this deeply in-
 ‘volved atate Shakti entems into higher and higher organized
 forms, Priya or vitalityis s Shakti the Mantra form of
 ‘whichis ‘Hangsah'. With the Mantea ‘Hang’ the breath
 joes forth, with ‘Sah’ it is indrawn, a fact whieh anyone
 can verify for himself if he will attempt to inspire after
 ‘pufting the mouth in the way it is placed in onderto pro-
 ounce the Ietter ‘H’. ‘The Rhythm of Creutive Power
 fe of breathing (a miotoeosmic fom af it) it two-feld—
 outgoing (Pzavritti) ot involution as universe, and sm evo-
 lution or retirm                (Nivpit i) ot Supreme Power to Itself.
 Shakti ay the Great Heart of the                           universe pulses forth and
beek in cosmic systole and diastole. So much for the nature
  of the Power as an Evolutionary process. It is displayed
  in the Forms evolved as au incteasing exhibition of
                                              a
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Consciousness from spparenily, thoughnot traly, unconscions
 matter, through the slight conscioumess of the plant and
 the greater consciousness of the animal, to the more highly
 developed consciousness of man, who in the completeness
 of his own individual evolution becomes freed of Mind and
 ‘Matter which constitute the Form, and thas is oue with
 ‘the Supreme Conscionsness Tiself.‘There are no gaps in
 the process. In existence them aro no rigid partitions,
 ‘Tho vital phenomena, to which we give the name of ‘Life,’
 appear it is true with organized Matter. But Life is not
 ten something entirely new which had no sort of being
 before. For such Life is only a limited mode of Being, which
 itzelf is no dead thing but the Infinite Life of all lives, To
 the Hinda the difference between plant. and animal, and
 Thetween the latter end, ma jas always been one rather of
 degree than of kind. ‘There is one Oonsciousness and one
 Mind and Matter throughout, though the Matter is organized
and tho Mind is exhibitedin various wayo. The         ono Shakti
 is tho Self as the ‘Bering’ (SAtratmA) on Which all the Beads
 ‘of Form are strung, and these Beads again are limited motes
 of Henelf as the ‘String’. Hvolution is thus the loosening
 ‘of the bonds in which Conscionmess (teel€ unchanging) is
 hud, such loosening being ineressed and Consciousness
 ‘more fully exhibited ss the process is carted forwand. At
 length is gained that: humon state which the Scripture cals
 so ‘hand to get’. For it, has. been won by much striving
 and through suffering, Therefore the Seripture wams man
 not to neglot the opportanities of a stage which is the
 necessary preliminary to the attainment of the Pull Ex-
 perience. Man by his striving must seek to become fully
 Thumane, end then to pass yet farther into the Divine Ful-
 ness which is beyond all Forms with their good and evi
‘This is the work of Sadhana (e wont whioh comes from the
 root ‘add,’ ‘to exert’), which is discipline, ritual worship
  snd Yoga. Ttis that by whichany result (Siddhi) is attained.
  ‘The Tintxik Shistra is o Sidhand Scripture, As Powers
                                 8
        SHAKTI: THE WORLD AS POWER
sxe many, a0 aybe Sadhana, whch sof vasons kinda and
degrees, Man may sok to ream the Mother Power in Her
limited forms ax health, strengeh, long life, wealth, mogie
powers and so forth, The so-called "New Thought” and
Icndred iterate hh bids men to thin: Power and ths
to become power, is very ancient, going luck atleastto the
Upanisbad which says! “Whats man thinks, that he
 becomes.” who have need for the Innite Mother as She i
      ‘ose
notin ony Form but in Herel, seek directly the Adorable
nein wom is the ewsence ofall which in of finite worth.
‘he gist of high form of Kasdchand               in given in the follow
ing veme from the Hymn of Mabikélaradra Hinsell to
Mahila
        Trt not my ody with pewanoes." way(nottorentis
body ew! If may be Godin basan gueto Hely                        Places.”
him) “Z lame nat my fe inTemple         pilgrimage
(The body isthe Dovdlayn         ot              of Divinity, "herein
fv all the epinitual       Tithas    oF   Holy      Place, Why then
{eoable to go esewhene 1)“ apend aot my already          time sn reading
the Vedas.” (The       Voas,      which    he    bap              stuied,
fm the record of toth havestanand    spiitual experince dcety  of  others.
Hie sek now                    that expeiece himself
What isthe us of merely reading           aboat it? The Rudéraaea
 Tanta enjins the mastering of jtthe esente             ofall Seriptures
‘which should thon   b   put   ie,            an   he who   ls fhresed
Tut the gain thiove avy the hunks and stave) “Bie Z
 serio to attain Thy te eae Frc




                                    0
                 Ouarsen IIT.
      WHAT ARE THE TANTRAS AND THEIR
               SIGNIFICANCE ?
AVERY common exproion in Poglih witing is “Tho
         ‘Tantra"; but its use is often die to 8 misconception
and leads to others. Por what does Tantra mean! The
‘word denotes injunotion (Vidhi), regulation (Niyama),
Shiota generally or treatise. ‘Thos Shafikara calls the
Sathya       a Tantra, A’seoularwiting may be called Tantra,
or the following note I am indebted to Professor Surendra-
nath Das Gupta. “he word ‘Tantra’ has been derived in
‘the Kashiké-Vritti(7-2-) from: the root ‘Tan’ ‘to.Spread’
by the Aunddike rule Sarvadhitubihyah tran, with the
addition of the suflx) ‘tran’, Vaohaspati, Anandagiti,
tnd Govindinands, Lowever, derive the word from the
oot ‘ute? of Tanti” in. tho sense of Vyutpadana, crgi-
nation or knowledge. In Ganapttha, however, ‘Tantst
thas  the same mesning as ‘Tan      ‘io Spread” end ite probable
‘that the former root is. modifieation’of the latter. Tho
‘meaning Vyutpdans is also probably derived by narrowing
‘the
eegenet sense of Vstirs whichis the meaning of the root
       ‘According to the derivation of ‘Tantra’ from Tan to
spread, Tantra is that (Scripture) by which knowledge
(Gina) is spread (Tanyate, visthryste jiimam snena, iti
Tantrum). ‘The sufix ‘Trai from the root “to save”.
‘That Imowledge io apreed which saves. What is that but
ligious loowledge? Therefore, as hore end generally
wed, Tentra means & particular kind of religions seipmuse.
‘The Kimike Agama cf the Shaiva Siddhanta (Tentsintara
Patela) says =
       ‘Tanati vip arthén tatoomantra-samanviten
       Trdnancha hurd yasmét tantra, styebhidhiyate,
                                 Ea
 THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
 (is callsd Tantra because it promulgates grant Imowledge
 concerning Tattva and Mantra and becanse it aves).
        Tt is & common misconception that Tanten is the
  name only of the Soriptureof the Shéktas or worshippers
  of Shakti. ‘This is not so, There are Tatrasof other sects
“of the Agama, Tsntras of Shaivas, Vaishnavas and so forth,
  ‘We cannot speak of “The 'Treatise” nor of ‘The Tantra”
  any more. than we can ‘ot do. spesk of the Purina, the
  Saunhieh. Wo can speale of “the Tantres”” es we do of
  “che Parkgas”, These Tentras ere Shistras of whit io
 called the Agama, In a review of one of my works it was
 suggested that the Agama is 0 class of Scriptures dealingat
 ‘with the womhip of Saguna fshvara which,was revealed
 the ola of the ge of the Upanishads, and introduced
  portly bicame of the falling into desuetude of the Vaidike
  ahi, and portly beeauso of the inereasing numbers of
  permons entering the Hindw fold itho wero not competent
  (Adhikr}) for that Achire, I will not however deal with
  thin historia! question beyond noting the fact thatsexes, the
  ‘zuma io open to     all pessons    of ll tastes and both
        isnot aubjectto the restxiotions of the Vaidika Achar,
  ‘This last term is @ common one eal somes ftom tho verbal4
  rot char, which means “to move or to act, the prefixths
  being probably used i the sense of restriction, a Reha
 ‘means practice, way, rae of fe governing Stdhak, endot
  tne who does Sidhanh oF practice for some desired
  (Sad.
        ‘The Agamas are divided into three main groups accordor
 fing os tho Tyhtadevati wonhipped ie Shakti, Shiva the
 ‘Vighpe. ‘The ftst is the Shikta Agama, the accond
 Shaivagama, and the thinl the Vaishnava Agams or Paicha-
 ratrs, This last is the Soripture to which the Shrimad
  Botgavata (K. 00.34) refers as SAttvata Tantra in the Hines,
     Tenoktang séttoatong tantram yj jndtied muktibhdg Biavet
      Yatra steishddradasdndng sangskéro vaishnavah smritah
                                   st
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      Some Aganas aro called Vaidik (Vaidika Zgnma) end
 some non-Vaidike (Avsidika). ‘The Kime Purine (XVI. 1)
 mentions as belonging to the letter, Kapila, Lalela, Vana,
 Bhairava, Piva, Pashohima, Pafichertim, Péshupote and
‘many other. Piabupsta again is said to be both Vaidika
 and Avsidika auch ss Lakula. Kira Purina (Uttam:
 Dhaga, Ch. 38) says “By Me was fist. composed, for the
attainment of Liberation, Shmuia (Vaidika) Péshupata
 which is excellent, subtle, and secret, the essence of Veda
(Vedashra). "The learned devoted to Veds should meditate
on Shiva Peshupati, This is PAshupata Yoga €o be
Iiy secleze of Liberation. By Me also hive boen spoken
Pasbupsta, Some, Lakula and Bhaireva opposed to Ved.
(Vedavidaviraddhéni), ‘These should not be practised.
‘They sre outside Veda.”" -Sunatumtra Sashith says :—
      ‘Slrautdsheandaribhedena dvividhaas shivigamah
      ‘Stowtisévomayah sloawah sah par doisitho macoh
     ‘Statanva tarash chai eatontro doshadhé.purd
      Tathé’sitadashadha pashchat siddhinto. wi gfyate
      torah shrutisiras tu shatakaprisareh.
      (Goo also Vayu Sushiti, Ch. I. 98)
[Shuivigams is of two kinds, Shrauta and Ashrouta
Shrauta is Shratistramays ond of two kinds, Svatautee
and tars. Svatantra js fistof ten kinds and. then Sid-
hints of igh:oen kinds. (Thisis the Shaivasiddhanta,
Agama with 28 Mila Agamas and 207 Upigainas. It is
Shuddhidvaita booanso in it there is no Vishesbana.) Ttara
is Shrutisira with numerous varitis.] Into this mass of
sects Ido not attempt to here enter, exept in a general
way. My subject isthe doctrine and titnal of the Shia
‘Thoro ae said to be Shaiva, Vaighnava, and Shika
Upinighade favouring one or anothor dootsin,
      ‘We must, however   in all nase distinguiak between hab
 1 School says of itself and whet others say of it. So far
 1 Tam aware all Xgamas, whatever be their origin, claim
 now to be based on Shruti, though of course os diferent
                             3
 THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
 interpretations are put’ on Shruti, those who nosext one
 interpretation are apt to speakof dif ering Schools us heroti~
 cal. These main divisions again have subdivisions. ‘Thus
there are several Schools of Shaivas ; ond there axe Saaktes
 with their nine Amndyas, four Sempraddyas. (Kerala,
 Kashmize, Gauds and Viliss) each divided into two-fold
 division cf inner and outer worship (Gammohsna Tantra,
 Gh. V). There is for instance the Northem Shaiya School
 called Tikaof Kashmir, in whieh country at one time
 ‘Tantra Shistras were very provelent. ‘There is sgxin the
 Southern Shaiva School called Shaivasiddhints. The
 Shiktas who are to be found throughout India aro largely
 prevalent in Bengal and Assam, ‘The Shiktes aro rather
 allied with the Nocthem Advaita Shaiva than with tbe
 otbers; though in them slio there is worship of Shakti.
 Shiva and Shakti are one and he who, worships one neoes-
 sorily worshipsthe othor., But whereas the Staiva predomi
 nantly worships Shiva, the Shakta predominantly worships
 the Shakti side of the Ardhsnérishvare Miri which is both,
 Shiva and Shakti.
       Mshivighgu‘ and Sadishiva are, also one, As the
 Sammohana Tantra (Ch. VITD soys “Withont Prakriti the
 Seriwdsa (World) cannot. be- Withont Purusha true
 Inowledge vannot be attained. Thorefore should both be
 wonhipped; with Mabtkalt, Mabskila.”” Somo, (Vishno)-  it say,
 speak of Shiva, some of Shakts, some of Naxdyana
‘Bat the supteme Nérayaga (Adinfrdiyan) is supreme Shiva
  (Parashamabbu), the Nirgapa Brabman pure as crystal. ‘The
  tho aspects of the Supreme reflect the one in the other.
‘The Reflection (Pratibimbs) is Mayt whence the‘The World- Ady
  Lords (Lokapilas) and the Worlds are bor.
  Talité (Maishakti) at one time assumed the male form        of
  Krishna   and at another that of R&ma (Ch. EX). For all
  sxpects are in Mabéletl,one with Bhairave MahikAla, Who
js Mabivighpu. “Tt is only a foot” it says,     “who sees any
  ‘ference between Rima sad      Shiva.”  ‘This  is of course to
                                53
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 look at the matter frum the high Vedantik standpoint of
 Shakta doctsine. Nevorthelea! separate worship and rituals
 ‘exist among the Sects. A common ptilosopkical basis of
 ‘the Shaives and thoseof Stas, who are Agamavédins, is
 ‘the doctrine of the Thitty-six Tatoves. These ane referred
 tein the Tantza (Ch. VI) so well known in Bengal whic is
 called Kulimava, They are also refered to in othar Shika
 works and their commentaries such as the Anandalabat
 ‘The Sharada Tilaka, a great authority amongst the Bengal
 Shaktas, ig the work of Lakshmanéchtrys, an author of the
 ‘Kashmir Shaiva school. ‘The Inter school as also the Shiletas
 fam Ailvaitins. The Shaive Siddbinte and Paficherbtre
 sare Shuddhldvaita.and Vighishf8cvaite respectively. ‘There
 is alo a great body of Buddhist Tantras of differing schools,
 [HL have published one—the Sbilchalca Serobhare ‘entra
 ‘as Vol. VIL of Tanteik Texts.|-Now all these schools have
 ‘Tantess of their owa.. Tho original connection of the
 Shaiva schools is said to be shown amongst other things,
 by the fect that some Tentras ore common, such as Mri-
 igendra and Matafiga ‘Penteas. Tt has been’ asterted that
 ‘he Shaleta school is not historically connected with the
 Shaivas, No grounda were given for this statement. What-
 ever be the historical otigins of the former, the two appear
 to be in several respecte allied st present, es any oné who
 knows Shikta literature may find out for himoelf. Tn tact
 ‘Shilcta literature isin paste uninteligible to one unacquainé-
 ed with some festures of what is called the Shaiva Dazshana.
 How otherwise is it thet the 86 Tattvae aud Shadadhva
 {see my “Garland of Letters" are comman to both ?
       ‘The Shaki     haveas
                           egain been divided  into theve groups
 ‘Thus the estoemad Pandit’. Ananta Shistt          in the Intio~
 uotion +o his edition’of the: Anandatahaxt spoaks of the
  Kaula or Shite Shisteos with sixty-four Thutras ; the
  Mishen with cighl Tanteny; and the Somaya group which
fare said. to be the most important of the Shikta Agamas,
  ‘of which five sre mentioned. ‘This classification purports
                                 Py
 THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
 ‘to be based on the nature of the object pursued, aooording
 fas it belongs to one or other of the Parughfsthas,
 Pancharatra Hterature ig very considerable, one hunitred
  and eight works being mentioned by the seme Pandit
 in Vol. XILL, pp. 857-368 of the “‘Thecsophist”. I would
 refet the reader abo to the very valuable edition of
 the Ahirbudhnys Samhitf by my frend Dr. Otto Schra-
 der, withan Introduction by the learned Doctor on the
 Pancharitza system where many Vaishnava Tantras and
Sauth tis are cited. The Trika school hus many Tantras of
 Which the leading one is Malinvjeya. The Svaclchhands
 ‘Tastes comes next. Jagadisha Chandra Chattoptdhyaya
 ‘Vidyavaridhi has written with learning and lucidity on thia
 school. Thé Shaivasiddhdnte has twenty-eight loading
 ‘Tantras and a large munbet of Updgamas, such as Téraka
 ‘Tantra, Van Tantsa and others, which will be found enumer-
 ‘tel in Schomerte’ “Der, Shaivasiddhinta", Nallaevami
 Pill’s “Studico in Shaivasiddhinte” (p. 204), and “Siva
 jBkausiddhiyar” (p. 211). The Sommohana Tantra (Ch.
 Vi) mentions 64 Tantras, $27 Upatantess, ag also Yamales,
 ‘Dimas, Saoihitds. and other Scripsures of the Shileta
 class; 32 Tentras, 125 Upatanins,as also Yémalas, Dima-
 zs, Purinas and other Seriptires of the Shaiva class; 75
 ‘Tantras 205 Upotentess, a8 also Yamales, Dimaras, Suithi-
 ‘és of the Vaishoava class; numerous Tantras and other
 scriptures of the Gipapatya and Ssura classes, and a number
 of Pavinss, Unepurigas and other variously named Sexip-
 ‘tree of the Botddhi claw. Tt then (Oh VII) mentions
 over 500 Tantras and nearly the sane amount of Upatanteas,
 of soma $2 Agamas, Chindgama (tee Ch. VI pot), Bauddh
 Agama, Joina, Pishupote, Képéliks Poncharitre, Bhairava
 ‘and others, ‘There is tins a vast; mass of Tantras in the
 Agamas Belonging to differing schools of docttie snd prac-
 ‘ioe, al of which must be studied before we san speak with
 certainty as to what the mighty Agama as a whole is. Tn
‘this book briefly deal with onesection ofitonly. Nevertheless
                              55
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
hon these Agamas bave boen- examined -and are better
icnown, i will, think,     be found that they are lengely vaziant
aspects of the same general ideas ed practices
      ‘Asinstances of general ideas I may cite the following :
‘the conception of Deity as » supreme Personality (Pari-
hhantd) aad of the double aspeot of God in one of which He
really is of becomes the Universe ; a true emanation from
“Him   in His creative aspect ; successive emanations (Xbhass,
‘Vyitha)   as offre from fre” from aubtlo to gros ; doctrine
of Shakti; pure and impuss creation; the denial of unoon-
fciow Maya such as Shaftkars teaches ; doctrine of MBya
‘Kogha and the Kenehukas (the six Shaiva Kanchukas being,
as Dr. Schrader says, repmeeented by the possibly earlier
dlassifcation in the Panchardtra of the throe Sakochas);
‘the carryingof the origin of things up and beyond Purosha-
Prakriti: aooeptance at a later stage of Purnsha-Pralit,
the Sasidyin Ganas, and evolution of Tattvas ae applied
to the dootrine of Shalt ; afimance of tho reality of- the
Universe ; emphasis on- devotion (Bhakti); provision for
all castes and both, sexe.
      Instances of commen practice are for example Mantra,
Bije, Yantra, Mudei, Nyésa, Bhiiashuidhi, Kundaliyogs,
construction and consecrat             ion andimoges (Kriya),
                                   of temples
religious and social observances (Gharya) such as Ahnike,
Vartéihramadharma, Utaava: and practical magio (Mayi-
yoga). Where theve is Mantra, Yantra, Nyasa, Dikgha, Gara
‘nd the like, thane ia Tantra Shistra. In fact one of the
‘names of ths later io Mantra Shioteo. With thesé similasi-
ties there ae oeclain variations of dostrine and practice
between the schools. Necessarily also, even on pointsof
common similarity, there is some variance in teminology
‘nd exposition which i unessential> ‘bus when looking:
 their broad features, it ip of.n0 account whether with the
Panchardirawe speak      of Lakskmt Shakti, Vyihe, Safikochs
‘x whether in terms of other schools we speak of Tripara-
 rundart and Mabilelt, Tattrns and Kenchukess. Again
                               s6
THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
 there ate some differences in sal whioh are not of grest
 ‘moment exept in one and that a notable instance, I refer
 to tho well-Enown division of wonbippers into Dakshin
 hima snd Vamichirs, ‘The seoret Stdhan8 of some of the
 latter (wich I may here say isnot usually understood) hae
 scquited such notoriety thatto most the term “The Tantra”
 cconotas this porioular worship and ite sbuses and nothing
‘lie, Imay here alo observe thst it is 8 mistake to suppose
 that aberations in dootrine and practice até peculiar to
India, A Missionary wrote to me some yours ago that this
foountry was a demon-hausted land”. ‘There are demons
haere, bat theyate aot the ooly inabitents ; and tendoncios
‘to be found here have existed elsewhere. The West has
produced many a doctriae aud practice of en antinomian
‘harictet. Some of the mort extreme are to be found thers.
Morcoves, though this does not sean to be recognized, itis
nevertheless ‘he fact that these Kula rites awe philosophi-
 cally based on moniatio doctrine. Now it ia this Kaula
doctrine and practice limited probably, as being a seoret
eotcine, af all times to-comparstivelyfew, which has come
to be lnown as “The Tantea”. Nothingi more incorrect.
"This is but one division of womhippers who again are
‘but one seotion of tho numerous fllowers of the Agamas,
Shaiva, Shikta and Vsighaava. ‘Though there are certain
common features which may be calle! éntrik yet one
foannot speak of “The Tentra” as though it were one
fntirly homogeneous doctrine and practi, Still less
foam ve identity it with the partioolar practices and
theories of one division of worshippers only. Further the
‘Tantras are concemed with Science, Law, Medicine and
fa voriety of subjeots other than spiritaal doctrine or
‘worship. Thus Indian chemistry snd. medicine i largely
indebted to the Tintsikas
       ‘According to o common notion the worl “Tantra”
is (Uo use the language of « wellnown work) “restricted
 to the neoromantic books ofthe Istar Shiviic or Sakti
                            oF
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 rmysticgm”(Wadel’s “Bucdhiats of Tibet,” p. 164). As
 charity covers many aint, so “myatio” and "myoticm”
 are words which cover much igubrance, “‘WNeoromanoy”
 ‘oo bias usnecesarily lage in writem ofthis school, Its,
 Dowever, the fat that Westom authors generally no under-
 stand the term “Tantra”. They are, however, in error
 in go doing at previouly explained. Here T shortly deal
 with the significance of the Tantea Shistr, which is of
 ‘vr also thigundartood, being genatally spoken of as
 a jumble of “Black             magi,” aid “orotio.mypticiam,"”
 cenented together by a sina which ie “messinglss msam-
 mery” A lange numuber of petaons who talkin this stain
 Dave never bad a Tantma    in thes hands, and auch Orientals
 fs have read some’ portions of these Scriptures have not
 agunerally understood them, otherwise they would not have
 found them tobe a0 ‘'meaninglew”. ‘They may be bad, ot
 they may be good, but they have ls méaning. Men ate not
‘such fools as,to believe for.ages in what is meaningless. The
 ‘ue of this form imple that their content had no meaning
 to thom. Very Lely far to define as thay do Mantrs a8
 “mystical word” Mudsh ae “mystical gestaree”” and
 ‘Yamten as “mystical diagrams” doen act imply knowlege.
 ‘These ertoncous notions a8 tothe nature of the Agama are
 cof course due to the mistaken identifeation of the whole
 body of the Scripture with one section of it. Further thie
 lasts only known through      the sbuses to which ts dangerous
‘practices as caried out, by inferior persons have given rise,
 Tein state ia the Shastra ital! in which they am preesbed
 ‘hat the path is fall of difioaty snd peril and he who fails
 ‘upon it goee to Hell, That there are chose who have s0
 failed, and other who have been guilty of evil magi i
 ‘welkinown. Tam notin this Chapler concerned with this
 ‘special situa or magic but with the practises which govern
{ie life of the vast mass of tae Indian people to be found
 inthe Taatmas of the Agamas of the differnt schools which
  T have mentioned.
                               8
THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
      A Wester writer in o review of ove of my books has
expressed the opinion thet the Tantra Shistra (I think he
‘meant the Shilta) was, least in its origin, alien ond in-
eed hostile to the Veds. He said “We are strongly of
‘pinion that in their essence the two principles are finds-
rmuntally opposed ond that the Tantre only used Vedio
forms to mask its essential opposition.” Till nat disouss
‘his qustion here. Tt is, however, the fact now, ag if haa
‘been for centuries past, that the Agamavédins claim to
‘beso their doctrine on Veda. Tho Vedinta is the final
authority and basis for the dootriaes set forth in the Tantras,
‘though the latter interpret the Vedénta in various ways,
‘Tho coal mesning of Veddnta is Upanighad and nothing else.
‘Many persons, however, speak of Vedantaas though itmeant
the philosophyof Shafikata, or whatever other philosopher
thoy follow. This ofcourse is incorrect, Vednta is Shrati
Shabkara’s philosophy. ig merely one interpretation of
Shrati justnb RémAnujo’s is another and that of the Shaivé-
gama or Kouligeme it a third. ‘Thors is no question of
competition between Vedintase Shruti and Taatra Shastra
Te is, howewr, the fact, that each of the followers of the
diferent schools of Agama contend tht thi interpretation
of the Shruti texts is the trus one end superior to that of
other schol. As a stranger to all these sects, T am not
hhere concemed to show that one system is better than the
other. Each will adopt that which most euiss him. Tam
only stating thé facts. As the Ahirbodhnya Sainhité of the
Pancharitra Agama says, the aspects of God are infinite,
‘and no philosopher can seize and duly express more than
‘oue aapect, This is pevfectly true. All systems of inter-
 pretation have some merits ts they have defects, that of
Shatkara included. The latter by his, Mayaveda is able
‘to precerve more completely thon any other interpretation
‘the changelessness and stainlessness of Brahman. It does
‘hia, however, at the cost of certain defects, which do not
 exist in other schools, which Inve also their own peculiar
                               9
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘merits and shortoomings. The basis-and soat of authority
  is Shruti or experience and the Agama interprets Shruti in
  its own way. Thus the ShaivarShikts doctrines are specific
  selntions of the Vedntic theme which differ in several re-
  pects from that of Shaikara, though as they agree (L speak
  of the Northern Shaiva School) with him on the fundamental
  ‘question of the unity of Jivétena and ParamAtna, they are
  therefore Advaita
        ‘The next question is how the experience of which
  the Rguma speaks maybe gained ! ‘This is also presribed
 fn the Shletra in tho form of peculiar Sidhants or dici-
  lines, In the first place there mostbe a healthy physieal
  ‘nd moral life. To.know a thing in its ultimate sense is to
 te that thing, To know Brahman, is according to Advaita,
 to Be Brahman. One. cannot realize Brohman the Pure
 except by being oneself. pure (Shudhachitta), But to
 attain and keep this stato, as, well os progress therein, cer-
 fain specific means, practice, rituals or disciplines are neces-
 sary. ‘The result cannot. le got by mete philosophical
{alk aboct Bpobman “Religion tarpreoial activity. "Just.
 as tho body woguimes exorcise, training and gymaasti, 0
 cea the miind. “This may bs of « merely intellectual or
 spiritual kind. The mesus-employed azo called Sédhand
 ‘which comes from the root. “Sadh,” to exert. Sidhand is
 ‘that which Ieuds to Siddhi. Sddhand is the development
 of Shakti. Man is Consciousness (Atma) vehiclod by Shakti
 in the form of mind and body. Bat thie Shake is at base
 ‘Pure Consciousness, just-as Atma is; for Atma and Shakti
 fre one. Man is thus a vast magazine of both Istent and
 expressed power. The object of Sidhant isto develop man’s
 Shakti, whether for temporal or spiritual purposes. But
 where is Sidhand t be found ? Seeing that the Vaidike
 hrs has fallen into practical desuetade we can find it
 nowhere but in the Agamas end in the Purdnas which aze
 replete with Tantrik rituals, ‘The Tantms of these Agamas
 therefore contain toth a practical exposition of spiritual
                                6
THE TANTRAS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
doctrine and the monns by which the truth it teaches may
be realiged. ‘Their authority dose not depend, aa Wester
‘writers, and some of their Eastem followers, suppose on the
dste when thiy wore revealed but on the question whether
Siidhiis gained thereby. ‘This too is the proof of Ayurveda.
The tast of modisine ia that it cures. If Siddbi is not ob-
tained, the fact thst it in written “Shiva uvicha’” (Shiva
speaks) or the like counts for nothing. ‘The Agama there-
foro ia a practical exgesition and applieation of Doctrine
varying according to ite dierent eohools.
      ‘The latest tendeney in medem Westem philosophy
is to ret upon intuition, as it was formerly the tendency    to
florify disleeti. Intution ns, however, to be led into
higher and higher posses by mesng of SAdhand. This
term means work or practice, which in its result is the
gadual wifoding of the Spir’s vast latent magazine of
power (Shakti), enjoyment, and. vision which everyone
‘osseaes in himself Tho philosophy of the Agama i, as
friend and collaborator of mine Profesor Pramathandtba
Mukhyopldhydys very well-put it; a practical philosophy,
‘adding, that what the intallecaal wood wants to-day is
this soxt of philomphy 1 philosophy sehieh not merely
aaguss bt experiments. ‘The form whic SAdhand takes in
f secondary matter. One goal may be reached hy many
paths. What is the pothin any particular oase depends on
Considerations of personal capacity and tomperament, re
and faith. For the Hindu there is the Agama which con-
tains forms of ciscipline wich hi race bas evolved and axe
‘therefore prima face suitable for him. This is not to say
‘that these forms ate unalterable cr acceptable to all" Others
vwilradop: other forms of Sidband suitable to then. Thus,
mongyt Christians, the Catholic Church presrites « full
fnd_powerfal Sédhand in its sacnments (Sathana) and
Womhip (Poja, Uplasn), Meditation (Dhyana), Rosary
(ope) and the like. But any aystom to be ruital must
Cxperiment to. gain experience. Tho significance of the
                              a
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘Tantms Shotre lis in this that it clnims to afford a means
  available to all, of whatever caste ond of cidher scaywhereby
  ‘he tmiths taught may be proctizaly realized.
        ‘Tho Tantras both in Todia and ‘Tibet sre the expression
 of principles which are of universal epplicetion.. The mere
 statement of religions treths avails not. What is nevsssary
 for all is a practical    method of realization. This   too the
 ‘oonltist needa. Further the ordinary mun of mankind can
 neither apprehend, nor do they derive satisfaction from
 rere metaphjuical conoepts. They accept them only when
 presented in penonal form, ‘They eare not for Shinyata
 tho Void, nor Saohohidénanda in tho senso of mex Con-
 sciousness- Being—Bliss. They appest to personal Bodhi
 satovas, Buddhas, Shiva, Vishno, Devi who will hest their
 prayer, end grant them id. Next they camot stand by
 themselves, ‘They need the eounsel and guidance of priest
 and Guru and. the fortifying. vitnés’of the sacraments.
 ‘They need a definite picture of their object of worship, such
 13 is detailed in the Dhyne of the Devatie, an image, a
 Yantra, a Mandala. and-s0-forth, 6 developed ritual end
Pictorial religion. ‘Thi in not to may. that they are wrong.
 ‘These natural tendencies however become accentuated in
 counte of time to o point whaxe “superstition”, mechanical
 devotion and lifeless formalism and other abuses ate pro-
 dluced. ‘There then takes place what is ealled a “Reform,”
 in the direction of a more spisitul raligion. This too ig
 acoentuated to the point of barrenness, Religion becomes
 sterile to produoe practical result and ritanl and piotorial
 religion reouss. So Buddhiam, which in its crigin has been
 represented to be'a reaction against excessive and barren
 ritualism, could not rest with s mere statement of the noble
 ‘truths and the eightfold peth. Something practical was
 reeds, The Mabiyana (Theggps Chhenpo) waa produeod.
 Négirjuna in the aocond osntury A.D. (*) is aaid to have
 ‘promulgated ideas to be found in the Tantros. In order 15
 realize the desired cod, we was made of all the powers of
                                 6
  THE TANTRAS-AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
  ‘mun, physical qnd mental, ‘Theistic potions as also Yoga
  ame again to the fore in the Yogacharyaand other Buddhist
 systems, The worbhip of images and an elaborate ritusl
 ‘was introduced. The worship of the Shaktis spread, ‘The
 ‘Mentrayfina and Vajrayina found acceptance with, what
  ‘an English writer (‘The Buddhiim of Tibet” hy I. Waddell)
 eccribes in the unsal style as its “silly munmery of um-
 ‘meaning jargon and gibberish,” the latter being said to be
 “the mort depraved form of Buddhist: doctrine". So-
 called Mintrle Buddhism became thus fully developed. A.
 ‘Tanteke seformer in the person of Trongkhapa arose, who
 codified the Tantras fn his work Lam-rim Cihea-mo, ‘The
 ‘great oode, the Kab-gyur, contains in one ofits sections the
 Tantras (Rgywd) containing ritual, worship of the Divine
 Mothers, theology, astrology, and natural stience, as do
 their Indian countérparta. ‘These fre of four classes, the
 Keiy8, Chany, Yoga, Anittam ‘Tantms, the lattor com-
 prising Mab, Anu and At-Yogn Tontras, The Tan-gyur
 similarly contains many. volumes of Tentzas (Reyud).
 ‘Then, at length, Buddhism us driven from out of India.
 Beskmeniam and its rituals sivived nd ineredaod, until
 ‘both in our day and the nearer past we see in the So-called
 reformed sects & movement towards what is claimed to be
 ‘a more spintial religion. Throughout the ages the same
 ‘movenients of aetion ond reaction manifest. What is right
 ‘eve lie in the middle eourse. Some practical method and
 situal is necessary if religion is not to be berren of result.
  ‘The nature of the method and.ritnal will vary according
 to the capesity and development of men. On the other
 Ihand, the “erooked influence of time” tends to overly the
 essential spititual teats with unintolligent and dend form-
 lism, ‘The Tantra Shistra staiids for a prinéiple of high
‘value though, Ike other things admittedly good, in itis thiseapablo
                                                                 con-
 of, and has snfezed,   abuse. An important point
 neotion should be noted. In Europe we see extreme puritan,
  reaction with the nevult that the religious movements which
                                63
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
embody them Yecome one-sided and without provision
for onlinary human nevds. Beahmnanism has ever been
all-inclusive, producing « Sédhand of varying kinds, materi
and mental, fo the diferent stages   of spitual advancement
fand exempting from further ritual those for whom, by
reason of their attainment, it a no longer necssary.
                     Cuarree IV.
             TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA.
 JJ mriting this Chapter T have in mind the dispute
       Which some have raised upon the question whether
 ‘the Agamoas, or ome of them, are Vaidikt 0: non-Vsidik,
       To not here deal with the nature and schools of Tantra
 ‘or Agama nor with their historia! origin, Something
 thas been said on these points in the Introductions to the
 ‘English temnalations of Pandit Shiva Chandra Vidydmava's
 ‘Tantratateve. I have also dealt with this subject in the
 ‘ovo Chapters. “What sre the Tontras and their signif
 cance ?” and “Shakti and Sbakta”. T wish to avoid
 repetitions, except 30 far ns is absolutely necessary for the
 slucidation of the patticula® ‘abject in nd. On the
 dliaputed question whether the’ Agamas axe Yaidik or non-
  Vaicik I desize to point,out that an answer cannot be given
  unless we keep apart to distinct matters, wi. (1) what
 ‘was the origin of the Agemas and (2) what they are nov.
  Tam not here, however, dealing with the first o historical
  question, but with the second vo far as the Shikia, Agama
 is concemed. Let us. assume, for the sake of argument,
  that (to take a specific example) worship of Kall and other
 Devis by'the Shiktas indicates the existence of non-Aryan
 ‘ements in their Aguma. The question of real importance
 Ihre, a9 slay, i not as to what wore the facts in remote
  past ages, bit what they ore now. The answer then is
fet it be as you will rogerding the origin of the Shea
 Agama; but se present Shikta worohip is an integral pact
 ‘of the general Hinduism and os such edmits the wuthority
  of Veds, accepting, ax later explained, every other belief
  held by the general body of the Hindu people.
       In e'recent prosecution under Sections 292, 298 of the
  Indian Penal Code against an accused who had ‘published
                                65
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Tantca (bat who was rightly acquitted), an Indian Deputy
 Magistrate who bad advised the proseention, and who
 claimed to be an orthodox, Hind, stated (L am informed)
in the witness box, that he eovld not define what the Tantra
 Shastra was, ot ataio whether it was a Hindu soripture of
 the Kali age, or waether « well-nown particular Shastri
 shown to him was one of the Tantras, Such ignorance is
 ‘typical of many at the present time and isa legacy from a
 vanishing age. How is it thot Shasta which has had dts
 {ollowens throughout India from the Himflaya (the abode
 ‘of Shivs and of Pirvatl Devi), to Cape Comorin (a corruption
 ‘of Kumdot Devl) which roled for centurias, so thet we mey
 speakof a Téntuik epoch ; which oven today governs the
 ‘howsebold avid temple ital of every Hindu ; how iat that
 ach a Sisira has fallen into complate neglect and disepate
 amongrtthe lager body of the English-edugstad community
 Tremember «ime when mention of the Shistra was only
 ‘made (I speakof couse ofthe same clas)    with bated breath ;
 ‘and when aay one who concemed himself therewith became
 ‘hereby line to the change of giving licentious away to
 drink and women. "The angweris both a genoral and parti-
 cular one. In the fmt place the Baglih-educated people
 of this comtey were fonnesly almost exclusively, and
 later to a considerable extent, under the sway of! theic
 agish edostor. Ta foot they were ina sense their
 creation, They were, and some of them still ce, the Ménasa~
 putea of tho English. For them what aa Hngish and
 Westem was the mode. Hinda coligion, philosophy and
  art weronly, it was supposed, forthe so-called“ uneducated”
 women and peasants and foe native Pandite who, though
 Teamed in thei futile way, had not received the illuninating
  advantages of « Wostom training. Ta my own time an
 ‘bjestion was (Lm informed) taken by Indian Fellows of
 ‘the Calcutta Univensty to the appointment of the leamed
  Pandit Chandraklnta Tacklladkirs to chair of Indian
  plilosophy on the ground that he was a mere tive Pandit,
                               ca
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
 In this case Buglish Fellows and the then Vice-Chancellor
 ‘opposed this absurd ond snobbish objection. When the
 authority of the Bnglsh tenohers was at its highest, what
 ‘they tought was law, even though their julgments were, in
  resprct of Indian subjects of which they had but scant
 and imperfect knowledge, defetive. Ii they said with, ori
 anticipation of, one Professor, that the Vedas were “the b
 bling ofa child humanity” and the Bethmanas “the drivel
 of madmen,”-or with anothor that the thonght of the Ups-
 nighads was a0 “Tow” that it could not he correctly renders
 in the high Bnglish language ; that in “treating of Indian
 philosophy a weiter bas to deal with thoughts of a lower
 ‘onder than the thoughts of the every-day life of Europe;
 that Smpiti was mere priestly tyranny, the Purinas idle
 legends and the Tantras mete wickedness and debauche
 that Hindu philoseply was (to borrow another English
 Professor's language coneemaing the Safshya) “with all its
 folly snd fanaticism little better than a chnotic. impecti-
 rence; and that Yoga was, according to the same man of
 learning, “the fanatical vagaties of theocracy;” that Indian.
 ‘nual wos nothing but supeztition, mammnery, and idolatzy,
 and (Indian) art, inelegant, monstrous and grotesque—all
‘this was with readiness scoepted as high learning and wisdom,
 ‘with perhaps her» and there an occasional faint, and even
  spologetis, demur. I recollect in this connection o rather
  halting, and shamefnced, protest by the laie Rajendra Lala
  Mitts. I do not say that none of these or other adverse
  criticions had any ground whatever. There has beon
  imperfection, folly, superstition, wickedness, here as elae-
  where. There his been much of it, for example, in? the
  countries whence these criticaof India came, Itis, however,
  cobviows thet such criticisms are so excessive asto be absurd.
       ven when giving an account of Eastem thought the
  Westem is apt to take up a “superior” attitude because
  hae believes himself to be superior. ‘The Bishop of Durham
  very clesrly reveals this sense of superiority ("Christian
                                 6
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Aspects of Life” by B. F, Westeott, 175) hon after stating
‘that the duty of the Chnistian missionary was to substitute
for “the stenle thei’ of Islam and the shadowy vagueness
of Hindu Philosophy « belief in a living and speaking God”,
Ite goes on to point out that “our very advantages” by way
fof the conscioumess of social and intelectual superiority
‘with-whichwe are filed” and “the national fore, which sets
{eas conquerors where we come at evangilista” onstitnte
‘danger in the mission fld. It in this notion of “super-
orty" leo which prevents axight understandipg, and. which
hovwitistanding the fact, insists on charges, which, if
established, woukd msintsin the ropatetion for inferiority
of the coloured races. Its this reiterated claim to sper
‘otty thot has hypaotized many persons’ amonget Bastorn
races into the belief that the European is, amongst other
things, always a safe and lenened exitie even of their own
bios and. potion.
     Raja Rammohs       Roy nwoe the fist to take up the case
of his faith, divorcing i from the supsratitious socrtions
‘which gother ezound all religions in the course of the ages
‘The same defence was made in tent times by that man of
upstanding’eourage, Sedmt Vivekinands. Foreign criticism
on Indian zligion now tends in some quarters to greater
cemprehension. T aay in some quarters; for even in quite
xecent yours Engl books have been published which would
bbe amaring, wete onc not avre of the deep ignorasioe and
prejudice which exist on the subject. Th one of theso books
the Hindu mligion is deséxibed as “a mixture of nightmare
nonsense and tme-wa             sting
                             rabbis  fullinamo wsefal parpose
whatever only adding to the general burden af existence
bore by Humanity in ite struggle for existence.” Tn
snotheé itis said to be “a weltaring chaos of torror, dask-
hess, and uncerteiniy. 1 ta veligion without the appre-
Thension of a:moral evolution, without definite eommand-
rents, without religious sanction in the ephero of morals,
‘without © moral code and without s God : such so-called
                             @
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  God, as thers is, Being “a mixture of Baselts, Doa Juan
  and Dick Turpin" Tt is there further desorbed ap the
 ‘most materal and childshly superstitions snimalism that
 fev r masquersded as idealism ; not another path to God
 bute pitof abomination a fa set fom Ged as the mind of
 ran cin go; stagaeringthe brain ofa rational man ; filing
 his mind with wild contempt for his species and which. bas
 only endured “becasse it bas failed". Exoept for the
 ‘parposo of fanstial polemic, ono sould aasume tht the
 ‘adurance of. faith wat in some measure the justifation
 of it is oil morewouderfl to learn from this work:
 (The Light of India” written by Me, Horcld Boghie and
 published by the Christian Literate Socisty for India)
 ‘that ont of this weltering ches of all that 5s igominiows,
 immoral and crealy superstitious, come forth men who
  (Ga the words of the author) ‘standing wt prayer startle you
 bby their Hkoness to the pictures of Chsist—eyes large,
 Tominous and tranguil—the whole face exquisite with
 reckness and majestic with epinit."” Ove marvel how
 these perfect men ssiso fom suck a worthless and indeed
 jpatrstent sowsee, This absurd picture waa highly coloured
 ‘ina joumlistic spicit-and with s purpose. In other eases,
 faulty criticism is dus to supercious ignorance. As another
  writer says (the italics are mine) “For en Englishnan to
 ‘et a plain statement of what Brahmaniam really means is
far from easy. ‘The only wonder ia thut people who have fo
 live on nine pene   a week, who matey when they are tea years
 old, are preventad from east life from rising out of what is
 ftten, not always, « degraded state, have any religion ut
 fll” As the Bishop of Peterborough has recently sn it is
 ‘lied for some to estimate worth in any other terms than
 ‘E a:d._ This to be hoped that   all such mobbish materialism
 ‘will be hindered from entraice into thie country. ‘These
  quotations reveal the depths of ignorance and all prejudiee
  hich stil exist. As we are however aware, English
  (tii is not as ignorant and prejudiced ag these, even
                              %®
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  though i be often marred by essential error. On the
 ‘conteiry there are an increasing number who appreciate
 and adopt, or appreciate   if they eannot accept, Indian beliefs,
 ‘Furtber than this, astern thought is having » marked
 inffuenco on that of the West, though its not often seknow-
 Jedged. Many have still the notion that they have nothing
 to loam in any domain from this hemisphere. Aftor all
 ‘what any one ela says should not affect the independence
  of our own judgment. Let others say what thoy wil. We
 should ountelves determine matters which concern us.
 ‘The Indian people will do 60 when they free themselves from.
 ‘that hypnotic magi, which makes them often place blind
 relianos on the authorityof forsignons, who, even when cisim-
 ing to be sdhelas, are not alwaya free from bias, religious
 or madial. Sach counsel, though by mo means unnecessary
 to-day, is beppily bocoming less needed than in the pact.
       ‘Phore ore, however, stil many Indians, porticularly
 those of my owe generation, whose Hoglish Guras and their
 teaching have made them captives. ‘Their mind has been 0
 dominsted. snd moulded to a Wester manter of thinking
 (philosophical, religious, artistic, social and political) that
 ‘they have scaely any groater capacity to appreciate their
 own cultural inheritance then their teachers, te that capacity
 in any particular case more or less. Bote of them oare
 nothing for their Shistra. Others do nat understand it.
‘Tho class of whom T epeak aro,in fact, as T have a id, the
 Minssoputrs of the English in a strict sense of the term.
 ‘The Indian who has lost his Indian     soul must, regain it if he
 ‘would retain that independence im his thought and in the
 ‘ordering  of his life which is the mark of o man, thstis of
 ‘oue who seeks Svardjyasiddhi. How oan an imitator be on
the same level as his original? Rather           he must sit a6 &
 Chel at the latter's fe t. Whilstwe can all lear something
from one another, yet some in this land have yet to lem
 ‘hat their cultural inheritance with all ite defscta (and
 none is without such) is yet @ noble one ; am equal in xank,
                                  Ea
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  (to say the least), with those great past civilizations which
  have monlded the life and thought of the West. All this
  tas been admitted by Indians who have discernment. Such
value. my ovm remarks possess, is due to the fact that Toan
 see and judge from without as an outsider, though (I will
 ‘admit in ono sanse) interested observor—interested because
 Thave at heart Indian wellare and that of all others which,
 as the world now stands, is hound up with
         ‘As rogards the Tantea Shistra in partioular, greater
 ‘gnorauoe prevailed snd sil exists. Its Vamaohira peactice,
 however, seemed so pevoliar, and its abuses were so talked
 of, that they captured attention to the exclusion of every-
 thing else; the more particularly that this-and the rest
 of the Shitra is hard to understand. Whilst the Shistra
 ‘provides by ite Achiras forall types from the lowestto the
 ‘moat advanced, its essential conoepts, ander whatever aspect
 they are manifested, and into whatever pattem they are
 woven, arp (as Profsssor De La Vallée Poustion saye of the
 Buddhist Tontea) of metaphysical and subtle character.
 Tndend itis largely beosuse of the subtlety of its principles,
 together with the diculties which attend titaal. exposition,
‘hat the study of the Tanéras, notwithstanding the com-
 perative simplicity of their Sonsirit, has been hitherto
neglected by Western scholars. Possibly it was thought
that the practicesmentionod rendeved any stay       of systera,
 in which they oooured, unnecessary. ‘There was and stil
 is some ground for the adverse esitciam which has been
 pesoed on it, Novertheless it was not u just appresiation
 Of the Shistra as & whole, nor even an accurate judgmentin
 respect of the particular titul thus singled oat for eondem-
notion. Let those condemn this Shistra who will. That
is thei affair. But let them fit study and understand it,
        T have dealt with the subject of the Tantras in several
 popers. It's only nevessary here to sty that “the Tantra”
 fs it is called was wrongly considered to te synonymous
 with the Shilsa Tantras; that in reepoct of tho latter the
                                ”
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘whole attention was given to the Vaméch4ra ritual and io
‘magio (Shaiksrma); that this xitual, whstever may in
 ‘rath be said against it, was not understood ; that it was
 completely ignored that the Tantras contained a remarkable
 philosophic presentment of religious tecching, profoundly
 applied in a ritual of prychological worth ; and that the
 Shlstras were slo a ropertory of the slobemy, medicine,
Ise, religion, art and so forth of their time, Tt was mufiient
to montion the wor! “Tantra” and there was supposod to
‘be the end of the matter,
       T have often boon asked why I had undertaken the
study ofthe Tantra Shistra, and in some English (as opposed
to Continental) quarters it has been suggested that my
time and labour might be more worthily employed. One
atawer is this:—Following the track of unmeasured abuse
T have always found>something’ good. The present case
is no exception, T protest and have always protested
against unjust aspersions upon the Civilization of India and
ts peoples. TE there be what is blamoworthy, ‘acouzaey
requites that ariticiam should be seduoad to its, true pro-
portions. Having been all my lfe/a student of tie world’s
religions and philosophies, entered upon a particular study
of this Shéstra to discover for myself what it taught, and
whether it was, as represented, a complete reversal of all
other Hindu teaching with which I was aoguainted. For
it was sid to be the cultivation or pructice of gluttony,
lust, and malovolonoo (“foroity, lust, and mummery” 6
Brinn Hedgson calle it) which T knew the Tadisn ShAstra,
like all the other religions Soxiprames of the word, strictly
forbid.
     T fomd thst the Shlstra was of high importance in
‘the history of Indian religion. ‘The Tantra Shastra or
ams is not, os some sem to suppose, a petty Shistra of
1 account ; one, and an unimportant staple, of the malti-
‘ruiinous manifestations of religion ins country which
                               n
           TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  jvarms with avery form of raligious sect, It is on the
  contrary with Veda, Smyti and Purka one of the foremost
 ‘important Shiotias in India, governing, in various degrece
  and ways, the temple and household ritual of the whole of
  India today and for centavies pest. “Those who are so
 strenuously averse to it, by that very fact recognize and
 fear its induence,, Brom s historial point of view alone, it
 is worthy of study asan important part of Indian Culture,
 ‘whatever bo ita intrinsic worth. History cannot be written
 if we exclude fiom it what we do not porsonally'like. As
 ‘Terence grandly seid —“We are men end nothing which
rman has doneis alien      to, us." ‘There are some things in
 ‘some of the Tontras and spirit which they manifest of
 whieh their student may not personally approve. But the
 cause of history is nob to be influenced by petsonsl predie
 lections. Tt isso influenced in fact. ‘There are somo who
 Ihave fonnd in the Shfstra a useful weapon of attack against
 Jodi raigion and ite tendencies. Should one speale of
 ‘he heights which Indian epiritual experience as resched,
fone might be told that the infamous depths to which it
 Jnad descended in the Tantra Shistra, the PushtimArgs,
 ‘the Veislnava Sahajfya and so forth vere more certainly
 ‘established, Did one praise the high morality to be found
 in Indian Shastra, it might be admitted that India was not
 altogether destitute of the light of goodness ; but it might
 ‘be aslad, what of the darkness of the Tantra ? And so on
 fad so forth. Leb us then grapple with and not elude the
 objection, Thare was of oouree something in all this.
 Bat such objectors and others had not the will (ven if they
 hd the capacisy to understand) to give true presentment
 of the teachings of the Shistis. But the interests of fais-
nesg require both. Over and shove the fact that the Shistza
‘nan historical fact, it posses, in aomne respects,    an intrinsic
 value which justifies ita stady.   Thus   i t i the storehouse   of
 Tndian ocoultiom. This oooult side of the Tantras is of
 scientific importance, the moro particularly baving regard
                                 %
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 to tho present revived interest in ovealtist study in the
 West. “New thought” as it is oslled and.kindsed move-
‘mente sree form of Mantravidya, Vashfkaragamis bypuot-
 fm, fascinetion, ‘There is “Spiritualism” end “Powers”
 in the Tenteas snd 20 forth. For myself, however, the
 philosophioal and religious aspect of the Scripture is more
 {important ‘stil. The main question forthe generility of
 amen is not “Powers” (Siddhi). Indeed the study of occult
 jm and ita practice bas ite dangers; and_ the pursuit of
 ‘these powers is considered an obstacle to the attainment of
 ‘that true Sidchi whichis the end of every Shisira, A
 subject of grester interest and valuo is the remarkable
 pusentation of “Vedentio knowledge which the Shikta
 ‘Tantra in porticular gives (I never properly understood the
 ‘Vedanta until after I had. stadied the Tantras) as also the
“ttual by which i is soughtto gain relizaton (Aperokgha-
 jBiina). ‘The importanoe of the Shika Tantra may bo
 summed up by the statement       that it is « Sédhana Shésira
of Advaitavdda, I will develop this Inst matier in a future
 paper. Iwill only say now thst the main question of the
 ay overywhete is how to realise prectcally the trathsof
 ‘eligion,' whatever they be. This applics to all, whether
 Hindu, Mobamedan or Christian. Mere philosophioal speca-
 Jation and talk will avail nothing beyond a clarification of
 intallect. But, that, we all know, is not enough. Tt is not
 whut ye spoodlate about but what we are, which counts,
 ‘The fandamental question is, how to realize (SAkshitkr)
 religious teaching. ‘This is the trait of Skdhan8 alone ;
 whether the form of that Sidhand be Christian, Hindu,
 ‘Mohamedan, Buddhist ot what else. ‘The chief Sédhana-
 shistra for ‘the orthodox Hinéu is the Tontra Shastra
‘or Agama in its varying schools, In this fact lies ite chief
 siguifioance, and for Hindus ite'practical importance. This
  sand the Advaitavida on which the Shilets ritasl rsta io in
  my opinion the main reason why Shikta Damhans or
  doctrine is worthy of study.
                                ”
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
       ‘The opinion which I had fonned of the Shastra has
 ‘een corzoborated by several to whom I had introduced
 the matter. I'sbould lke to quote here the lat letter I had
 only a month ago from an Indian fiend, both Sonskcitist
 and philosopher (a combinationtoo ram). He says “they
 (the Tantras) havo teally thrown before me # flood of new
 Tight. So much so, that I voally feel ax if T have discovered
 ‘new world. Mach of tho mist and basiness has now been
 ‘eared avay and I fzd in the Tantras not only a gros nnd
 subtle philosophy but‘ many of the missing links in the
 development of the diferent systems of Hinu philosophy
 which T eould not discover befare but which T have been
 seeking for, for some years past.” ‘Those statements might
 perhaps leed some to think that the Shistra teaches some-
 thing entirely, that iin every respect, nev. As reganis
 fundamental doctrines, the Tentéa Shistra (for convenience
 Toonfine myself to the Shaka form) teathes much which
 is to be dound in-the Advaita Vedinta, Therefore
 ‘those who think that they will fad in the Shastra some
 fundamental truths couceeaing the world which are entisely
‘new will be disillusioned. ‘The observation does not apply
 to some doctrinal teaching, presentment, methods, and
 detail, to which doubtless my friend's letter referred. He
 ‘who has truly understood Indian Shistras as 4 whole will
 ‘ecognize, under vatiety of form and degree of spixitual
 advancement, the same substance by way of doctrine.
      Whilst tho Shikta Tantra recognises, with the four
 Vedas, tos Zgnmas aud Nigamas, iis now based, a are al .
 other truly Indian Shistzes on Ved. Veda, in the sense of
 Knowledge, is ultimstely Spiciual Expenenoe, mainely
 Cait which Brahman is, and in the one pavtless infinite
 Osean of Which the wosld af s limited stress ii Con-
 tioumess erses, So it is std of the Devt in the Com-
 fentaryon the Tvishatl—
    Vedintamahdndya-janye sikslathira-ripa-brakmanilya.
                              7s
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
        She is Brohman-knowladge (Brahmavidy8) in the form
  of direct realization produced by the Vedntic great saying
  (MabAvakya)—thot is “Tat tvam ai” (“That thou art”)
  and all kindred sayings So'bam, (“He Lam”), Brabmasmi
  (“Tam Brahman”) ond to forth, In other words, Seli-
 knowledge is seltiuminous and fundamental and the basis
  of all other knowledge. Owing to ite transoendency it ix
  beyond both prover and proof. Tt is selfreslized (Svinu-
 hava). Bot Shruti is the souros from which this know-
 ledge arses, as Shaflkara says, by removing (as also {0
 some extent resson mey do) false notions concemning’it. Tt
 revesls by removing the superincumbent mass of human
 error, Again, Veds in s primary senso isthe world as Idea
 in the Cosmic Mind of the creating Brshman end includes
 all fos of nowedge., ‘Thusit is eternal, sising with snd
 ss the Sarhakérasat the beginning    of every creation, This
 is the Vedamiiribrahman.” Vads in che secondary sense is
 tho atiows pattial ovelations relatingt» Tattvs, Bralman
 ‘or God, and Dhsrma, morality, made at difecent times and
‘places Yo the several Rithis which are embodied in the four
 Vedas, Rik, Yajus, Sima and Atharva, Veda is not co-
 extensive therefore with the four Vedas. But aro thess,
 even   if they be regarded asthe “earliest,”the only (to use an
 English tzrm) revelations ? Revelation (AlkAshavénf) never
 eases, When and wherover there is a trie Rishi or Seer
 ‘thor is Revelation. And in this sense the Tantra Shastra or
gama clsims to be « Revelation. The Shabdabeshmamti
 is Nignmédishictrameya:: it being said that Agama is the
 Poramétmaof that Marti, the four Vedas with their Afigas
 taro its JIvatm ; the six philosophies its Indriyas ; the
 Purinas and Upapurinas its gross body; Smriti its hands
‘and otber limts and all other ShAstras are the hairs of its
 body. In the Heartlotus are the fifty Tejomayf Matrikl. Tn
 the pericarpare the Agomas glittering like millions of suns
‘and moons which are Servadharmamays, Brshmajfiinamays,
 Servasiddhimaya, and Mértimin. Those were revealed
                                 76
         TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
to the Righis. In fact oll Shistras are said to constitute
one great many-millioned collection (Shatakoti Saiihite)
each being partiular manifestations to man of the one,
essential Veda, From this follows the belief that they 4o
not contradict, but are in agreement with, one another
for Truth is one whatever be the degree in whioh it is
received, or the form   in whieh the Seers (Righis) promnlgated
ito those whose spiritual sgt has not strength enough to
disoorn it dirotly and for themselves, But how, according
+o Indian notions, can tat whieh is put forward s a Reve-
lation be shown to'be such? ‘The enswer         is that.of Ayur-
‘veda. A medicine is 8 good one if it cures. In the same
‘way a Shistra is truly such ifthe Siddhi which it claims to
give is gained ns the fruit of the practic of its injunctions,
According tothe competency’ and) under the conditions
prescribed. ‘The peinsple isa practical and widely adopted
fone. ‘The troo must bs judged by ite frat. ‘This principle
aay, if applied to the general life of today, lead to an
adverse judgment on some Téatrik practices. If so, lot
it be. It is, however, am error to suppore thst even such
practices as'have bean condemned, olaim to rest           on any
‘other basis than Veda, It is by the learned in Tantra
Shistee said to be ignorance (Avidy8) to see a difference
between Agama and Veda,
      Ignorant notions prevsil on the subject of the relation
of the Tentras to Veda and tho Vedas. I read somo yoara
‘ago in a Bengali book by a Brahmo author that “the
difference was thst between Hell and Heaven". Now on
‘what is such a condemnstory comparison based ? Tvs safe
to challenge production of the proot of such sm assertion.
Tet us examine what the Shakta Tantra (to which allusion
was made) teaches.
      Jn the first place “Hell” resognizes “Heaven,” for the
ShAlete Tantra, os I have eid, acknowiedged the authority
of Veds, All Indian Shietras do that. If they did nob,
they would not be Indian Shastra. ‘The passages on this
                              7
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
point are so numerous, and the point iaulf i so plain that I
 will only cite « few.
      Kelarpeva Tarte says (I 85, 140, 141) that Kula-
 dharma is based on and inspired by the Trath of Veda,
 asm vidétmakam shdstrom viddi kauléimakam priye. 1x
 the same place Shiva cites passages from Shrati in support
‘of His doctrine. The Prapsnchesdra and other Tantra cite
 Vaidika Mahivikya and Mantns; ond os Mantras are a
 partof Ved, therefore, Meru Tantra says that Tantra ia
 part of Veda (Prigatoghint 70). Niruttare. Tanta call
‘Tantra the With Veda and Kélchéva is namod the fith
Eshrama (2); that is it follows all others. Mateyasticta-
‘mahitentea (XII) says that the disciple must be pure of
soul (Shnddhaima) ond a imover of Ved. He who is
ddovoid of Vaidike-koiy8 (Vedalriyi-vivert) is disqualified
 (Maharudraydmala, I Khands, Ch. 15; 1 Kbands, Ch. 2;
Prtnatoghil 108).' Gadbarvs Tantra (Ch. 2, Prinatorhint
6)suys that the Tints SQahaka must bea believer in Veda
(stil), over attached to Brahman, ever apeoking of Brah-
rman, living in Beukinos and taking shelter with Brahman ;
wich, by the way,i & queer demandto make of these, the
supposed object of whose rites is mere debauchery. The
 Kaldmaava eaye that theze ie no knowledge higher then that
 of Veda and no doctrine equal to Keula (IIL. 118, aki
velddhika vidyd na Raulasamadarshinam). Here ‘a dis-
tinction is drawn betwoen Veds which is Vidy8 and the
 Kaula teaching which he calls Dasshana, See also Mabie
 nirvana Tantra (I. 1810; TL, 815). In Mabfnirvina
 ‘Twntra (IIT. 72) the Muntre Om sachohiekam Brahma ia
 given and in the Prapagohaséra (Ch, XXIX) this (what it
 calls) “Secretof the Vedas" is
      ‘That tho Shakta Tantea claims to be based on Veda
 faimits of no doubt. In fact Kulluka Bhatta, the cel
 brated commentator on Mono, seys that Shruti is of two
 kinds, Voidik and TAatrik.
       Voit toni chaiva doividha shratih Hirst,
                             6
              TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
        ‘tis of course the fact that different sects Bandy words
  ‘upon the point whether they in fact truly interpret Shrati
  ‘and follow practice conformable to it. Statements are
 ‘made by opposing schools that certain Shistras are contrary
 ‘to Shruti even though they profess to be based thereon. So
8 citation by Bhiskarariya in the Commentary to V. 76
‘of the Lalitdsshasrandma      speaks of same Tantras as “opposed
 to Veda” (Vedaviruldhdni). The Véyn Sambité says
  “<Shaivigama is twofold, chat which is based on Shruti and
 ‘that which is aot. The former is composed of the essence
cof Shruti. Shraute is Svatantra and Ttare (¥. ante p. 16).
 Shaixigamo’pi duividhah, skrasdo’ shraulash cha samemrital
 Shrutistramayah shraniah ewtantastoitaro mata.
       So again the Bhigavata or Poncbarstra Agama has
 ‘beon said to be non-Vaidik ‘This, matier has been discus-
 sed by Shaikaréchirya and Ramnnjafolloving Yamunt-
  chirya,
        ‘We mustin all cases distinguish betwraen what a school
 says of itself and what others say of it, In Christianity
 Doth Catholicism and Protastantism olaim to be based on
 ‘the Biblo and each alleges that che other is a wrong inter-
  pretation of it. Hack again of the numerous Protestant
 ‘aeots says the same thing of the others.
        But is Shikta Tantza contraryto Veda in fact? Let
 ushorily survey the main points inits doctrine. It teaches
  that, Paramatm& Nixguna Shive is Suchchidananda (Pr
  panchasira, Ch, XXIX: Kulasv, Ch. I, vv. 6-7). Kular-
  ‘pava says ‘“Shive is the impartite Supreme Brahman, the
 Al-xowing (Sarvajfia) Crestor of all. He is the Stainless
  One: and the Lord of all. He is’ One without a second
  (Advaya). He is Light itsslf. He changes not, and is
  without beginning or end. He is attributeless and above
  the highést, He is Sechahidananda”” (I, 6-7. And see the
  Dhytioa end Pancharstnastotra in Msbinirvéna Tantra TIT,
  450, 50-88), Brabmon is Sochchidénanda, Etamal (Nitya),
                                   n
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Chaageees (Nizvikdra), Partces (Nighkala), Untouch-
  ed by May (Nirmala), Attribuicless (Ninguna), Formless
  (Anipa), Iinperishable (Althara), Allspreading like spave
  (Vyomasannjbha), Selfilluminating (Svayamjyotih), Reality
  (Gators) which ia beyond mind end speech and is to be
  approached through spivitual- feeling alone, (Bhavand-
  gamya) (KulimavaI. 6-8; TI, 92, 98; IX. 7). Mahi-
 nirvins (IIT. 50, 69-08, 67-68, 745 THL. 12). In His aspect
 1 the Lord (tshvurs) of all, He is the Al-Imower (Sarvajéia)
 Lord of sll: whose Body ia puro Sattva (Shuddhassttva.
 aya), the Soul of the universe (Viskvétmd) (Mahinirvina
1.61, TIL 68), Such definitions simply re-afirm the teach-
 ing of Vede. Brahman is That which pervades withoat
 limit the Universe (Prapanchastra XXIX; Mabdnirvins
 iL, 88-88) 5 cil the, sesernuin seed (Shdrada Tilaka I,
 Shiletinandstarafigint 1, Prapatonbint 13). This Brahman,
 hha two-fold aspect as Parabrahma (Nitguns, Nishkals) and
 Shabdabrahman (Saguna, Sakals). Sammabans, a highly
 interesting Tantra, saya (Ch. I) shat Kubjik is of twocfold
 ‘aspeot, namely, Nighcslé when She is Chindra-vakte8, and
 Sakala when ‘called Paramuldi. So too is Gubyakelt
 ‘who as the fast is Hkavaktsi mshépashupatisht advaita-
 Dhivasampann® and as the-eedond Dashavaktrd. So the
 ‘Kalirava saye Shabdabrahmaperamsbrahmabledena Brak-
 mano dvaividhyom uktam (Khanda V, Ullisa 1). ‘The
 same Tantra says that Sadiahiva is without the bonds (of
  Maya) and Jiva is with them (Pishabaddho bhavej jivah
  ‘ishamulktah Sacdshivahi, IX, 42) upon which the author of
  ‘the Pripatoshint citing this passage aayn “thus the identity
  of Jivs and Shivais shown (iti Shivajtvayoraikyam uktat),
  ‘The Shikta Tantra is thus Advaitavida : for it prodaims
  thot Parambimé and Jivatmns are one. So it affirms the
  “grand words” (Mabvakya) of Veda—‘Tat tvam asi,”
  “So’ham,” “Brehmésmi" (Mahanirvina VILL 264-265, V
  105 ; Propenchasére II; identifying Helm with Kundalf
  ‘od Hangsah ond then with So’bam. Yah Stkshmah
         TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  So’ham (i. XXIV, Jatompava Tantra XT. 10. As to
  Brahmdemi, see Kulamave IX. 82 and2, 41 So"hambhbvens
  pjeyet). ‘The Mantra ‘all this is surely Brahman (Sarva
  Ikhalvidam Brahma) is scconding to the Mabinirvana (VI.
  98) the end and aim of Tintrika Kuldehirs, the realization
  of which saying the Prapanchastra Tantra describes as the
  ‘ith or Supreme State (Ch. XIX); for the, identity of
‘ivitmd and Peramttm is Liberntion which the Vedéntasia
  efines to be SIvabrahmmorsikxyam). Kuldrnava refers
  to the Advaita of which Shiva speaks (Advaitantu shivonok-
 tam T. 108, Seo also Mabinirvina IL. 38-84; IMl.'38-85 ;
 50-64; Praponchasira II, XIX, KXIX). Gandbarva
 ‘antes says thet the Sidhaka must be s nondualist (Dvaite-
 hina). (See Ch. 11 i, Prtpatoghinf 108 ; Mabéradraydmala
 ‘ Rhanda,Ch, 15; 11 Khanda,Oh. 2), Its useless      to multi-
 ply quotations on this point of which thers is xo end. In
 fact that particular form of worship which has earned the
 Shilta Tantrasill-fame claims to be a practice application
 of Advaitavida. The Sammohana Tantea (Ch. VIII) gives
  Thigh praise to the philosopher Shatkardchirya saying
  ‘that He wae an inosrnation of Shiva for the destruction of
 Buddhiom. Kaulichieys is eaid to properly follow a full
 Anowledge of Vedantic doctrine. Shivain the Kultmava
 (L120) says “some desire dualism (Dvaita), others nou-
 dualisin (Advaita) but my truth is beyond both (Dvaiti-
 dvaitavivarjte).”
       Advaitavedanta is the whole day and life of the Shikta
 Sidhoka. On waking at dawn (Brahmam@hurta) he sits
 ‘on his bed and moditates “I am the Dev? and none other.
‘Tam Brshman       who is beyond all grief, I am a form of
 SschchidAnands whose true nature is eternal Liberation,”
   Ahom Devi na chényo'smi, Brakmaivdham na shokabldk,
   Sachchidénandartipo"ham. nityamuldasoabhévavdn.
       ‘At noon sgain seated in Péjdsana at time of Bhite
 shuddhi he meditates on the dissolution of the Tatovas in
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Pormbtma. Sooing no difference between Paramling
 and Jivitml ke afires 88/ham “Tam She”. Again in the
 fevening after ritual duties bo fica himself to be. the
 ‘Akhilatm and Sechobidénanda, and heving so thought he
 flepe. Similarly (I may here interpose) in the Buddhist
 ‘Tantea—the Sidhaka on rising in the state of Devadeha
 (tLayi-sleu) imagines that the double drums are sounding
 in the bosvens proclaiming the Mantras of the 24 Vira
 (@Pahvo), and regards all things around him as constitating
 the Mandala of imaelf. ax Buddha Vajrasattva. When
 bout to sleep ho again imagines his body to, be that of
 Budde Vajrativa and then morges himself into the
 ‘tangull stale of the Void (Shdnyaté).
      Gondharva Tentra soys “having saluted the Guru as
 directod and thought ‘Soham’ the wise Sédhak the per
former of the rite should ponder the unity of Jtva and
 Brahman,”
      Guriin nadod vidhanena so"hams is purodbasa
      Aikyom sambhivayed dhimén’jiossya Brakmano'pi cha,
      Kilt Tentra says “Having meditated in this way, a
Sédhakcs should worahip Devt as his own Atma, thinking T
am Brahman.” Kubjikt. Tantra says (Devi io oalled
 Kubjiktbocause Sho is Kupdalf) “A Sdahake should medi-
tate on his own Self as one and the same with Her (Taya
sabitam Gtmtnam ekfbhOtam vichinteyet): and 0 on
      The cardinal doctrine of theso Shalta Tantra is that
of Shakti whether in its Svaripe (thst is, as I isin Ttaef)
ts Chidtipint, the Parapralyiti of Paramitmé (Mabinirvina
TV. 10) org Maya and Prakriti (seo as to the Intter the great
Hyun to Prakytiin Propenchastra, Ch. XI). Shakti as
‘the Kubjikd Tontra aay (Ch. 1) is Casciousness (Chaitanyar
rip) ond Bliss (Anandaripinf). She is at the same time
support of (GunAshraya) and composed of the Gunas (Gun
may?) Maya is however explained from the standpoint of
Sihand, the ‘Tantra Shastra being a Sthons Shastra, and
                              b2
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  not acconiing to the MAyévada, that is, transcendental
 standpoint, of Shatkara
        ‘What is there in the grest Devi Stkta of the Rigreds
  (Mandala X, Sikin 196) which the Sbakte Tantra does not
 ‘wach? ‘The Righi of this revelation was a woman the
 ddsughter of Righi Ambbrina. Te was fitting that a woman
 should proclaim the Divine Motherhood. Her Hymn says
  “T am the Soversign Quoen the Treasury of all tressures ;
 ‘the chief of all objests of wombip whose all-pervading Self
 al Doratis manifest; whoco bicthploce isin the midst of
 ‘he causal waters: who breathing forth gives form to all
 cemeated worlds and yet extends beyond them, 90 vast am I
 in greetuess." (The full Hymn is translated in the French
 Biition of A. and B, Avalon's “Hyrns to the Goddess”.
 Bossard Pats.)
        ‘tis uadlats to sta quotations to show that the Shikta
 ‘Tantra accepts the dootrine of Karma which as the Kulét-
 ‘ava (IX. 195) seye diva cannot give up until he renownces
‘the frit of it; an infinite mumborof universes, and their
  transtoriness (Mahénirvina THI. 7), the plurality of worlds,
  HReaven and Hel , the seven Lokas, the Devas and Devis,
  who as the Kulachédimani Nigame (following the Devi-
  ‘Salcta)seys (Oh 1) ere but parts ofthe gront Shakti (Shaktt-
 andstarsfgint III), Being Advaitavada, Moksha the
  state of Liberation and 20 forthis Poramatma. Tt actepts
  Smyiti and Purkpas ; the Mabinirviga and other Tantras
  saying that they are the governing Shistras of the
  ‘Tretd and Dvipara ages respectively, as Tantma is that of
  the Keliyuga. 0 the Tarépradipe (Ch. 1) says that in the
   Kalipuga the Matrika and not the Vaidika Dhsrma is to
  ‘pe followed. Tt is said that in Satya, Veda was undivided.
   In Dvtpera, Krishnadvaipayana seperated it, into four
   ports. In Satya, Vaidike Upisand was Pradhins, that is,
   rovailed ; Skdbukas worshipping Indra for wealth children
   fd the like; though Nishkims Righis edored the Sarva
   shaktimin (Devistits is Advaitesiddhipirna). In Trets,
                                 8
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  worship according to Smriti prevailed. Tb was then that
  ‘Vashightha is said to have done SAdhané of Brebmavidy&
  seoording to Chindhirskrama. Though in the Dvapara
  there was both Smriti and Puréya, rites were generally
 ‘performed according to the Purigss. There was also then,
 fs always, worshippers of the Pimashaktimabtvidya, At
the end of Dvaparaand beginningof the Kali agp the Tantra
 Shistra was taught to men. Then the tan Sathsliras,
 Shriddha and Antyeqbtikriy8 wore, as they aro now, pet
 formed according tothe Vaidikedharma: Ashramachira
 according to Dayabhiga and other Smyiti Texte; Viatas
 according to Purtna; Dfkgh& and Upésand of Braman
 with Shakti, and various kinds of Yoge Sadhana, according
 to the Agama which is divided into three parts Tentra
 (Sactvaguns), Yémals (Rajoguna),    and Démacs (Tamogana).
 ‘There were 64 Tantra for each of the thtee divisions Ashva-
 Ikrintl, Rathaketnta, Yishauletnts
       Such is a Thntrik tradition oncoming tho Ages and
 ‘their epproprints Soriptuns. Whether this tradition has
 ‘ny hislocial basis still awaits inquiry, which is rendered
 ificals by the fact thet many Taatzaa have been lost and
 others destroyed by those inimical to them. Tt ia sufisient
 for my purpose 10 meraly state what is tho belief; that
 purpos: being to ahow that the Tantra Shistra recognizes,
 snd alsims not to borin confit with, Ved or any other
 ‘eoognized Shastra. Tt accepts the six Philosophies
 (Darshans) which Shiva says are the six Limbs of Kula and
 pports  of His body, anying that he who sovars them severs
 ‘is Limbs (Kolmgeva TI, 64, 84-86). The meaningof this
 ia tnt the Six Philosophies and the Six Minds, as all els,
 are ports of His body. It accepte the Sbabde doctrine of
 Mimarisa subjeot to certain moiifcetions to mect its
 ootrine of Shakti. Tt, in common with the Shaiva Tantra,
 accepts the doctrine of the 36 Totevas, and Shadadhva
 [Tativa, Kalé, Bhuvana, Vamo, Pada, Montra; see
 my “Gorlacd of Letters”),           This is an elaboration in
                              8
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
 detail which explaii the origin of the Purusha and Prakriti
 ‘Tativas of the Séfkhya. These are shown to be twin
 facets of the One and the “development” of Shakti into
 Purusha-Pralgiti Tattva,      is shown, ‘These Tativas inchude
 the ondinary 24, Praliti with ite Gunas to Prithivt. Té
 accepts the doctrine of the three bodies (causal, subtle,
 gros) and the three states (Jégrat, Svapna, Sushupti) in
 their individual and collective aspects. It follows the modo
 of evolution (Parinéma)of SAalehys in so far as the develop-
 ‘ment of diva is concemed, a9 also on Abhiso, in the nature
 of Vivaitia, “from Fire to Fire” in the Pure Oreation.
 ts exposition of the body includes the five Prinss, the
 seven Dhitus,the Doshas (Vayu, Pitta, Kapha) antso forth
 Eropenchastza IN), On the titual side i contains the
 ‘commonly aoceptod ritualof present-day Hinduism ; Mantra,
 Yantro, Peatima, Tita, Shilagrams, Nydsa, Jape, Paja,
 Stoten, Kavachs, Dhyana snd.       so forth, as well a the Vaile
 ites which are the ten Samiskins, Home and the like.
 Mos of the commionly accepted ritual of the day is Téntile
 Ts aooopta Yogain all te forme Matra, Hath, Leya, JRAna ;
 and is in partioular distinguished by its paotice of Laya or
  Kupdalt-yoga and other Hatha processes.
       ‘Thereforenot only  is the authorityof the Veda acknow-
 ledged along with the Agamss, Nigamss and Taatres but
  there is uot s single doctrine or prectce, amongst those
 Iitherto mentioned, which is ether-not generally held, or
  which has nos the’ adherence of lange numbers of Tndiim
  womhippem. Tt accepts all the notions common to Hindu-
  fm as a whole. Nor in there # single doctrine previously
 ‘ment                is contrary to Veda, that is on the as-
               which ioned
  sumption of the truth of Advaitavéds. For of course it
 fs open to Dualistsand Vishightédvaitine to soy that its
  Mouistic interpretation of Veddate is not true exposition
‘of Vaidik truth. No Shilta will however say thet, Subject
  to this, Ido not know of anything which'it omits and should
  Tbave inoluded, oF states contrary to the tenor of Vaidil
                                  85
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 octrine. If there be anything Isball be obliged,  asa student
of the Shastra, to any one who will ell my attention to it.
‘Tho Shistca has not, therefore, up to this point shown itself
‘as “Hell” in opposition to the Vaidik “Heaven”
       ‘But it may be ssid that I have omitted the main thing
which gives it its bad and un-Vaidik charsoter namely the
illfamed Panchatattva or worship with meat, wine, fish,
grain and woman, I have also omitted the magic to be
fom in some of the Shistrs,
       The lattor may be fist shortly dealt with, Magic is
not peculisr to the Tontres. It isto be found in plenty in
the Atharvavede. In fact the definition of Abbichiic is
“he Karma described in the Tontras and Atharvaveda”.
Abhichina is magical process with intent to destroy of
injure. It is Himsi-kams,) or aot injariows to others.
‘Thor is nothing anti-Vaidik then in Magic. Imay, however,
there also point out that there is nothing wrong in Magic
 (Ghatlarma) per re. As with so many otber things it is the
 vse or abuse of ft which makes it sight or wrong. Tf a man
 Jells, by Mirage Karma, @ rival in hie business     to get rid
‘of competition end to suoceed to his clients’ custom, he
omits « very grave sin—one of the most grievons of sins.
Suppoce, however, that a inen saw a tiger stalking a child,
for & dacoit aboutto slay it for its golden omament ; his
Kling of the tiger or dacoit would, if necessary for the
safety of the child, be a justifiable act. Magic is however,
likely to be sbused and fas in fact been abused by some of
‘the Tintils. I think thin ia the mest sazious charge extab-
lishod ageinat them, For evil magio which proceeds from
malevolence is « greater crime thin ay sbuse of aatural
sppetite. But in ths, asin other matters, we must distin~
guich between what the Shistra soys and the prectioe of ts
followers. ‘Tho injunction laid upon the Sidhak is that
hhe “should do good to other beings as if they were his
 own sal”, Atmavat carcathtethyn tam kurydt kulehoar’
 (Kuldcgava Tontra XII. 63). In the Kelérpava Samhita
                                86
         TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  (e diffrent ond far inferior work to tho Tantza of that
 name) Shive recites some horrible rites with the ‘lesh of
 at and bat; with the coiled linen of « Chandala woman,
with the shroud of a corpse, and so forth; and then he says
  “My heart sembles Gridayam kampate mama), my limbs
 tremble (géirini mama kampante), my mouth is dry oh
 Parent?! (omlkham shushyste Pirvatt!) Oh gentle one my
 ‘ind is all disturbed (kghobbo me jayste bhadre). What
 rote shall Tsay 1 Oonosal it (Ne vaktevyam) ‘conceal i
 ‘concesl it” He then says :—"In the Kali age Stdbakas are
 guerally greedy of money, Having done greatly sinful
 ‘ots they destroy living beings. For them there is neither
Guru nor Rudes, nor Thee nor Sédhika. My dea life! they
 are readyto do acts for the destruction of mon. Therefore
it i wong to reveal these hiatiem, uh Devi. T have told
 ‘Thee out of affection for Thoe, boing. greatly pleased by
 ‘Thy Kisees and embriée. But it should be as carefully
 ‘omicesled by Thee as thine own secret body. Oh PArvatt!
  allthis is greatly sinful and avery bed Yoga. (iiahi-
  pétakeyuktom tat keyogo'yam uddbritah,)”
       Kolikile sidhakévwu prégasho dhanalobupd
       Mahdkrityém vidhdyaiua prininds baihabhaginah
      ‘Na gurw ndpi Rudso wd naiva town naina edahikd
       ‘Mahaprapivindshdya somarthah prénavalobie
       ‘Bat prakiskonam devi deghéys parikalpyate
       Snehena tava deveshi chumbandtinganaisiatia,
       ‘Sontushyaioa mayl devi sarvam etat prakéshitam
       {Teayl gopyam prayainena svayoniriva Péreati
       Mahdpétaka-yultom tat uyogo’yam uddhriah..
        “None of these things are ever to be done by Thee
   Oh Daughter of-the Mountain (Sarvathd naiea kortovyas
  teayé Parvatanandini). Whoever does 90, inows the sin of
  estioyingMe. destroy all such, as does fire, dey grass.
  Of a surety such inour the ein of slaying a Bethmane, All
  such inou the sin of slaying « Brthmas
                               87
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Soret naiwa Kortanyas toy Porostanandini
       Badludkd manna deveshi Rrtydmimdrs samdchort
       aaya sarvam hordmydshu vainih shughatyinam yathd
       “Avyorthdm trakahatyancha brakmebotyim sa vindai
       ‘When therefore we condemn the sin of evil magi itis
 necessexy to femember both such teaching as is contsined
in this quotation, and the practice of those of goa life who
 follow the Shs, To do tia to be hoth fair and accurate,
 ‘There is nothing, in any event, in the point chat the magical
 contents of the Tantra Shastra make it contrary to Veda
 ‘howe who bring such a chazge mast also prefer it againat
 the Atharvaveda,
       ‘As 0 matte of fact Magic is common to all aly
 religons. Te has been practised, though condemned, in
 Christan Burope. Tt is not neouseary to go back to the
 ald witoboraft tials, "hove ate some who protest against
‘its recrudescence to-day, . It has been well observed that
‘there are two significant facts about oogultism, namely its
catholicity (it is to be found in all lands and ages) and. its:
macng power of recuperation aftr it la been suppotedto
Tuave beea disproved as mars “aupenstition”. ven some
quarter     of» conturyago (Tam quoting from the same euther)
there were probably aot a aoare of people in London (aad
thove lept their preoccupation to themselves) who bid aay
interest at all ia the subject exoept from a purely anti-
querian standpoint. Magic was dismissed by practially all
‘eduoated man as somethingtoo evidently foolish and non-
‘sensioal to deserve attention or inquiry. In recent years
‘the positon has been reversed in the West, and complaint
is ogain made of the revival of witchorait end occultiem
fevday, The roaon ofthis is that modern soni investi-
Getion has established the objectivity of some leading
Phenomens of occultiam. For instance a litle more than
‘a contary  of 80 ago i was still Llioved  that a person could
inflict physical injury on another by means other than
physical. And thisis whatis to be found in that portion
                              88
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  of the Tantra Shistras which deal with tho Shatkarma,
  ‘Witehes confessed to having committed this erine and were
  punished therefor. At a later date the witehoraft tials were
  Ihld to be evideneo of the suposstition oth of the accused
  and aconsere. “Yet psychology now llows the prinsiple
  thot Thought is itself a Force, and thas by Thought alone,
 properly directed, without any known physical means the
 ‘thought of snother, and hence his whole condition, can be
 affected. By physical means I mean ditect physical
 rans, for occaltism may, and doce aval, itelf of physic
 1msana to stiraulate and intssify the force and diveotion of
 ‘thought. This is the meoning of the magio rituals which
 Ihave beon ao mush ridiculed. Why is black the colour of
 ‘Micspa Karma Becanse that colour incites ond maintains
 fand emphasizes the will to kill. So Hypnotism (Vseht-
 ‘keragam), as an. instance’ of the exercise of the Power of
 Thought, makes uso of gostures, rotatory instruments and
 0 forth.
       "The Magician having a firm faith in his (or her) power
 (for faith in oecutism as in Religion is essential) surrounds
 Ihimeelf with overy incontive to concantratad, prolonged and
 (Gn malevolent magic), malevolent thought, A Sgure or
 other object such as part of the clothing, hair, nails and 20
forth of the vietim representsthe person to be attacked by
 ‘magic. ‘This serves   as the ‘immediate object’ on whichthe
 rmigical thoughtis expended. The Magician is helped by
this and similar aida to a state of fixed and malignsnt at-
 ‘tention whi is rendered intense by astion taken on the
  substituted abject. Tt is not of course the injures done to
  this objeot which are the dineat caus of injuryto the pecson
attacked, but the thought of tho magician of which these
  injuries ore @ materialisoion, ‘There is thas present the
  céroumstances which » modem psychologist would demand
  for suvcess in & telepsthio experiment. As the witchorait,
  ‘tials show, the viotim is fist affected in thought and then
  in body by the malignant thought tins focussed upon him,
                                 89
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Sometimes no apparent means sss employed, us in a cosa
  reported   to me by a fiend of mine as goourting nu Boribuy
  Hotel when a man well-known in Tadia for his “Powers”
  (Giddhi) drove away, by the power of his thought only, »
  party of persoas sitting ot a neighbouring table whose pre-
  fence was greatly diotastefal lo one of hia companions.
  This, ifthe eect of magical power, was an instanceof what
 ‘the ‘Tontras call Uohehatana, In all cases the general
  principle ia the same, namely the setting in motion and
 direction of powerful thought by appropriate means.
       ‘This isthe view of those who give what may be called
 4 peychological explanation of theco phanomens. Thoso
 TroUld hold that the magica symbolisms are withouy ia-
 htent fee but work aozonding to moe and individual
 characteristios on the mind which does the rest. Others
 believe that thore isan inherent power in Syrnboiam itself,
 that the “Symbol” ig.not moely suo but an actual ex-
 pression of, and instrimant by which, cetain oocalt laws
 ‘am brought into play. Tn other words the power   of “Symbo-
 lism” derives not nierely from tho elect which st may
 Ihave on particular minds likely to be affected by it bat
 from iuell as a law extemal to human thoughs. Some
 again (and Todian magicians amongst others) believe in
 ‘the presence and sid of discarnate personalities {euch as
 ‘the unclean Pisbichas) given-in the carrying out of occult
 operations, Similady it is commonly held by some
 tht where so-called “spiritualist” phenomena sre real
 and not fraudulent (as they sometimes are) the action is
‘not that ofthe dead but of Infernal Spirta simulating them
 nd mislea          men ding
                         to their rain, Qccultim in the ense
 of a beliot in, ond claim to be able to use, certain
 ange of forsee which may be called preteruaturl, has the
 adherence not only of savage and bacbarous people (who
 always baliove in it) but also of an increasing number of
 “ivlid” Londoners, Besiner, Americans, Patisians and
 other Western peoples. ‘They difer in oll else but they
                             90
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
 fre united in this. Even what most would regard as down-
 right superstition still abundantly flourishes in the West.
 Witoess the hindreds of thousands       of “touchtwood” figures
tnd the like sent to the txoops in the zecent war, the horror
of sitting 18 to a table, and so on. In fact, from the earliest
 ‘ges, magic as gono hand-in-hand with religion, and if for
 short periods the former has been thought to be dead it
 always rises again. Ts this, ns some aay, the mark of the
 inherent aly credulity of mankind, or does the fact show
 that there is something in the claime which ocoultiam na
 ‘mado   in all ages? Tadia (I do not speak of the English-
 educated community which shares in the ride and fall of
 English opinion) has always believed in occultiam and some
 of the Tantra Shistras are repertores of its ritual. Magic
 and superstition proper exist in thie country but are also
to be foundin the West. ‘The same remark apples         to every
 Aepreciatory citicisar passed pon the’ Indi people.
Some have thoaght that ocoultism ia the sign both of sava-
 gery and barbarism on the one hind and of decadent eivi-
 lization on the othex. Tn India   it has always existod ond still
 ‘exists, Tt has boen well said thet there is but one mental
      ide impossible to. the educated man, namely Wank
 incredulity with regard to the whole subject. ‘There has
 been, and is, a change of atsitade due to an increase of
 eychologial knowiedge and scientific investigation into
 objective facts, Certain recontlitions have been suggested,
  bringing together the ancient beliefs, which sometimes exist
 in omude and ignorant fons. These reconciliations may
  bo regarded as insuficiently bome outby the evidence. On
  the other hand proposed reconciliation may bo accepted
  as one that on the whole seems to meet the claims made
  by the ocoultist on one side snd the scientific psychologist
  con the other. But in the presot state of knowledge itis
 ‘no longer possible to teect both claims as evidentiy absurd.
  Men of approved scientific position have, notwithstanding
  the ridicule and scientifo bigotry to which they have been
                                ot
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  exposed, considered the facts to be worthy of their investi-
  gation. "And on the psychological side successive and con-
  tinuous discoveries ere being mode which corroborate anci-
 ent beliefs in substance, though they are not always in oon-
 sonsnoe with the mode in which those beliefs were expres-
 sed. We mast face the fact that (with Religion) Oocultism
 iin some form or another a widely diffused belief of hnmaa-
 ity. All however will be agreed in holding that malovolont
 Magic is a great Sin, In leaving the subjeot of Magio I
 may here add that modem peychology and its data afford
 remarkable corroboration of some other Indian beliefs such
 ‘as that Thought is a Foroe, and that its operation is in
 field of Conaciousness which is wider than ‘hat of which the
 rind is ordinarily aware. We may note also the aid which
 in derived fom the establishment of dual and multiple
 jersonslities in undetstanding how it roay be possible that
in one unity there may be yet varying aspects.
       ‘The second charge is tho alleged Avaidik charaoter
 of the seoreb Panchatattya Sidhund, with ‘ine, flesh and
 ‘woman, its alleged immiorality of principle, and the evil
 lives of those who practise i, Iam not in the present paper
dealing in full with this subject; not that Tintond     by any
 ‘means to shirk it; but it is more appropriately the subject
 cof consideration in future Chapters on tho subject of Shakta
 ‘Phntik Sidhand of which it forms a part. What I wish to
   ay now is only this:—Wo must distinguish in the fest
place between a principle and its applization. A principle
 aay be perfectly right and sound and yet a supposed appli-
 cation    may not be an application in fact; or if therebe an
 application, the latter may violate some other moral or
 physical law, or be dangerous and inexpedient as leading
 to abuse, I will show later that the principle involved is
 cone which i claimed to be in conformity with Vaidik truth,
 andto be in fact recognized in varying forms by all asses
  of Hindws. Some do so dualistically. ‘The Sidhant of the
  Shiktia Tantco is, whether right or wrong, an application
                                2
          TANTRA       SHASTRA AND VEDA
 cof the principles of Advaitavdda and in ita full form should
 not ibis sid, be entered upon until after Vedintio principles
  have been mastered. For this reagon Kauladharma hae
‘een called the fifth Ashrams. Secon            I wishdly
                                                       to point
  cout that this ritual with wine and mest is not as some
  suppose new thing; something intrduoed by the Shikta
  ‘Tintuils, ‘On the contrary   it is very old and has sanction
 in Vaidik practioe as will appear from the authorities cited
in the Appen         to thisdix
                             Chapter. So much ia this so, that
  fa Téatrik Sidhu discussing the metter with Bengali fiend
 of mine said of himself, as follower of this ritual, that he
‘was 8 Hindu ond that those who were opposed to it were
 Jsinas, What he meant, snd whst seems to be the fact,
 is that the present-day general prohibition against the we
 ‘of wine, and the generally prevalent avoidance, or limitation
 ‘of an snimal dict, sre due to the in iuence of Jainism and
  Budahism which arcs fter, and in opposition to, Vaidik
  ‘usoge, ‘Theirin uence ismost marked of counee in Vaishna-
  ‘vim but hae sot been witho        eflet elewhere,
                                            ut When we
  examine ancient Yaidik usage we find that meat, lah and
‘Mudc (the latter in the form of PurodAisha) were consumed,
  ‘and intoxicating liquor (in the form of Soma) was drunk,
  in the Vaidik Yejfiss. We also discover some Vaidik rites
in which there was Maithuna. This I hove dealt with in my
  ‘article on “Shakti and Shakta”.
        ‘The abovementioned facts show in my opinion that
‘there is ground for the doctrine of the Thatrikas that i ia
  ‘8 mark of ignorance (Avidy8) to sever Veda and Tantra,
  ‘My conclusion is not however « counsel to foliow this nor
  ‘any other particular form of ritual. Tam only conoerned
   tostate the facta, Imay, however, here add two observations.
        ‘From an outside point of view (for I do not here deal
   with the subject otherwise) ve must consider the: age in
  ‘which a partioular Shistra wes produoed and consequently
  ‘the conditions of the time, the then state of society, ita
  moral and spiritual development and 20 forth | To
                                 cy
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  understand some rites i the path history of this and other
 countries one must eek, in iw of surace explanations, their
cecult significance    in the history  of the hutuan race; and
 ‘the mind mast cestitaelt bck into the ages whence it has
 emerged, by the aid of those traces which it still bears in
 the depths of its being of that which outwardly expressed
 itself in ancient: custom
       ‘Take for instance the rite of human sscrifice which the
 Kilikalplats says thet the Rajt alone mey porform (Raja
 naravalim dadiyenné yo'pi parameshvar’) bub in which, as
 the Tontrasirs states, no Brdhmapa may porticipate
 (Bréimandning naravatidane nédhikérad). Such sx snimal
 sacriice is not peculiarly “Tiatrik” but an instance of the
 survival of a rite widely spread in the ancient world; older
 thm the day when Jehovah bade Abrabam sactfios his son
 (Gen. XXM) ond thst on which Sunshsepe (Aitareya
 Brahmans VII, 8) ike Tnado was teleased. Reference itis
 true, is made to this sacrifice in the Shistras, but save as
 somé rare exneption (I myeelf judged « cage in Court some
years ogo) it does not exist to-lay and the vast mass of
 ‘men do not wish to sez it revived. ‘The Chakra ritual
 similerly is either disappearing or bocoming in sprit trans-
 ormed. where there had been abuse.
       ‘What is of primsry value  in the Tantra Shastra are cer-
 tain principles with which I have dealt elsewhere, and with
 which T deal agnin in partin this and the following lectaves
 ‘The application of these principlesin ritualis a questionof
 form. All form is passing thing. In the shape of ritual
 ite validityis limited to place and time, As ao limited,i¢
 will continue so long as it serves   a useful purpose and meets
 ‘the needs of the age, and the degree of its spiritual advance-
 ‘ment, or that of any particular body of men who practise it;
 ‘otherwiseit wil disappear, whilst the fonndstions of Vedanta
 on which it rests may remain, In the same way itis said that
 ‘we ounselres come and go with ourmerits and demerits, but
 ‘hat the Spit ever abides beyond both good and evil,
                                 cy
                     Nove ro Cxarres IV.
       ‘The following note as to Tantra Shistra and Veda was
 kindly prepared for me at my request by 8}. Braja Lal
 Mukerji, a. —
 MY purpose in this paper is not            to give to the public
          ‘ny pre-conoeived opinion, bub is simply to put
 ‘together ceriin facts which will ensble it to form a correct
 ‘opinion on the subject.
       ‘These facts havo boen collected from sources as to the
 ‘suthantiityof which there is xo doubt. ‘There is no dispute
 that most ofthese works disclose the state of Vaidik society
 DYiorto the 6th century B.C. snd that at the time when the
 said works were composed the Vaidik rituals weye being
 observed and performed. Certain elements which have
 ‘been ausumed to be non-Yatdik, appearin the ssid works or
 at least in many of them, and they have been summarily
 Ainpovod of by vome acholavs as supplementary (Pacishishte),
 or interpolations (Pralshipta). The theory that these
 portions sre interpolations is based on the asswngtion that
 ‘he said elements are non-Vaidik or post-Vaidik and. also
con the assumption that at ths times when the said. works
 ‘wore composed, the Anushtup-chhandah was not, known ;
  and that therefore, those portions of the said works which
  appear in Anostubh, must be later interpolations. We
 need not go into tho proprity of these assumptions in this
  pper; but aufieit to say, that the fret assumption simply
begs the question, and the second one        is notof any importance
  in connection with the subject of this paper; inasmuch
  as, the statements made in the Anustybh portions are
  cortoborated by earlier authorities as to whose antiquity
  there isno question, andin any case, the fact thatthe siats-
  ments have been made aze proof of earlisr usage ot custom.
        ‘Vaidike sacrifices are divided into three clases: (1) Pala
  yujuns, (3) Haviryajnas and (2) Some secrifioes; and there
                                     95
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  aro sub-divisions unr each of the said classes. ‘Tho Soma
 socriices are classed under shmee heads accocding to the
 numberof days required for performance, vc, Hkh, Ahins
 ‘nd Sotra, Eke sacrifices are those whieh are performed
 in one day by three Savanse, exactly aa in the Jagaddhist
 Aj; Ahina enorifoes are performed from two to eleven
 days and Satras axe performed during a long period, the
 minimum number of days required being thirtasn and the
 ‘maximum being a thoustnd years. ‘The twelve-day aacri-
 fices aro arranged as 0 sepacsis clas . ‘The principal Soma-
 juss are (1) Agnishtoma, (2) Atyagnishtoma, (8) Ukthysb,
 (4) Shodash, (6) Vajapeyah, (6) Atiratrah, (7) Aptoryame,
 ‘Tho Takia or Havizysjans ooo also peineially eeven in
 umber, namely, (1) AgnySdheyam, (2) Agnihotram,            (8)
 ‘Darcha-pournamésa, (4) Ch&turmasyam, (5) Agrayaneshti,
 (© Nirudabapashubandhs, and (7) Sautztmasni, The Pola
 yyajnas are sleo seven in umber, namely, (1) Ashtake, (2)
 Pirvanars, (@) Sriddham, (4) Sttvari, (6) Agrabtyani,
 (6) Ohoitri, and (2) Ashvayuji. The last aeven ‘are to be
‘performed with the help of the Gribya fe and are described
 in th Geibya works. The others are described in the
 Srauta works.
       Whatever be the differeno: among these Yojnas in
 rogard to the number of stomas or stotmas ond the Stmans
 to be sung snd the Kaptlas, Grahas, or the number and
 stare of sucrfces or es to other particulars, there are
 some ideas which provall in all of thom. AIL Yajnas azo
 Dased  on the des that Mithuntkarana leads to spiritual happi-
 ness, Sexual intercourseis Agnihotra (8.B. XI. 6.2. 10).
 Mithuntiesrone is consecration (8. B. IIL. 2.1. 2, eta)
 They enclose the» Sadas secretly, for enclosing is Michunt-
 Keron aud therefore itmastbe done sosretly (S.B. IV.
 6,7, Sand 10). Bricks (Vishvajyotis) are made became
 the ‘making of the bride causes generation (8. B.
 VL. 3.6). Two Pidas or Charanas of an Anusbtubh vero
 tre read in a detoched manner and the two remaining are
                              6
            TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  read together to imitate the manner of sexual union (A. B.
  LD. 6. 8); they do not worship a female Devatd unless she
  is coupled with @ male Deva (A. B. TUL 9, 4); they use a
  couple of Ohhandas distinguishing the one as mle from the
 ‘other as female and the two are taken together and believed
 to be the symbol of Maithuna, and by such Maithuns the
esied result of s ritual is achieved (A. B. V. 3. 1); they
 beliove that the reading of the Ahsnasy8 mantes (8. 8. 8.
XI 24. 1410; A. V. XX. 180) will confer bliss (A. B. VI.
 {5 10); they suy that the highest and best form of Maithana
 is thatof ShraddbA and Satya, Pity end Truth (A B. VIL
 2.0) and thie kind of Maithana in ths ubateootia directed for
 Aguibotets who have puriied themselves by actual per
 formanoes aud observances in a religious epirit.
      ‘Thoy direct the obserranoe snd psrformance of Maithuna
 ‘asa sebigions rts or pact ofa religions rte (U.S. IV. 3. 17;
 KASS. XUL 42;T.A.LV, 7,54 02, 754A. 1 2% & 10;
 V.1.5.18; G.GS.11.5.6,9, 10; SGS.Li. 96; KGS.
 1.4.15;HGS 124.3; Ap GS. 8.10;P.GS. La
 ‘Ap.88. V. 95. 11; Tan. Br. VIIL7. 12; Ohh. Up. IL 13,
 1-2) and they dinect: that Mantms are to be uttered
 during    the observance of this rte (Br. D. V. 90 ;,VIIL. 82;
 RY. V. 62 4; RLV. X. 85.97; RV. Kh, 90.15 Rik P, I
  15, 18; As SS. VIIL 8. 28; G.B. VI. 16). One of the
 artiles of faith of the Vaidik people therefore was, that
 texual union led the way to bliss hereafter and mast be
 performed    in a true religious spirit to ensure spiritual welfare;
 wanton indulgence being seversly deprecated. Ida (a
 woman)ssid :—“if thou wilt make wse of me at the sacrifice,
 then whatever blessing thou shslt invoke through me, shal
 bbe granted to thee.” (S.B, I. 81. 0. et.)
       ‘The Vaidik people performed their Soma
 Haviryajnas which included tho Saatramani, with libations
 and drinks of intoxicating liquor (L&S. V. 4, 11; KSS
  XIX. 1, ete.; S88. XV. 155                XIV.18. 4;8B. V.1. 2. 125
  V.1.5.28 ; XII.7, 8.14, oto. ;XUL8, Lote. ; XU.8.2, 31,
                                   7                            °
        1
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  m2; V5.4 10, et; XUL 7, 8.8; Ap. SS. XVIIL 1.0).
 Surh purifies the ssctiioor whilst itself is purifedof (8.8.
 XIL 6 1,16)- Rishi Keksbivin sings the praises Suxd
 (RV. 1. 116, 7), Tk is said to bo a desimble thing (R.Y.
 X.107,9; VOL2. 12), They prefer Soma, the sweet drink.
 Soma is Pormhutih (8.B. VL 6. 3. 7); it is tho neotor of
 immortality (SB. TX. 4. 4.8). They deprecate and punish
 the wanton nse of intoxicating liquor (Ap. Dh. 8, I. 25. 8;
 Gs Db. 8. XXIIL 10; Va.
  1.18, ete,; 8.VB.L. 5), They divect the we of Surd and
 ‘Soma for attainment of happiness and prescribethe manner
 ard pupote of drinking the seme; they preseribe the
 ‘meastize snd mumber of drinks to be offered or taken at a
 sacrifice (.B. V. 1. 2.9, otc,V. 8. 4), and they add that a
 beachof these rules destroys te efficacy of the rite, They
 offer libations of Sur to the Fathers (A.B. TIL 1. 5; 8B.
 YV.5. 4.27, eto). Thay offor Surf to the Ashwins (R.V.B.
 L.44). They offor Sard to Vindyala’s mother (Yag. I. 288).
‘Daring the performance of sacrifice, the priests and the
 Ihouseboider sit together; they oll touch their cups, and
‘aise them to their mouths, all the while reciting proper
 Mantras addressed to Devas (A.B: VE 8. 1) and then they
dxink (A.B. VIL 8. 7).
       ‘The Vaidikc people used to offer to their Devatis st
 ‘sir secrifces animal and vegeiable food. Tha vegetable
substarces are Tandnla, Pishtal, Phalfkarane, Purcdésbs,
 Odans, Yavégth, Prithala, Loja, Ditae and Sak, and the
 animal food wes Payab, Dadhi, Ajyam, Amiksb& Vajinam,
 Vap8, Mamsam, Lobitam, Pashurassh ; the principal of
these being Dhina, Kerumbha, Paribaha, Purodisha snd
 Payasya (A.B. IL 3. 6). Indeed it would not be inomect
to say that no Vaidik rite oan be performed without these
offerings ; the forme and the mode of preparation snd the
 number of cakes to be offered, differing in ench ease (A.B.
 Lt; Wi8; Tas;                   M26; 8B.1L2.9; 188,
 V.4.t,0t0.5 Ap. SS.XIL. 3.12; KIL. 4.0.14; ESS, Y.
                               8
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
 809; Tait. Be. IIL 2.6, ete. They offer onimal sacrifices
 (Ket, 88. Chap. VE; 8.B. If. 6.4; Ill. 8.1; V.1. 3.2.
                                                8.
  TI. 15), which include the horse, goats, sheep, oxen (Tait.
  Br. TT. 8. 1, ete) and human beings (Tait. Br. OL 4 1).
 ‘Thay believe that by posforming animal saesifiow, the
 sserioarransoms himselé (8. B, XI. 7. 1. 2; A.B. IL 1.3)
 or wins oll these works (Ap. SS. VIL. 1.1). ‘The animalis
the sucrifices himself (A.B, Il 2.1). ‘They ditect by special
 rules, ia what manner the snimal should be kil, cut and
 offend (AB. II. 6; 8B. IIL. 8.1. 19), Thay were aware
 that wanton killing of animals wes wrong (A.B. TL. 1. 7)
 tnd believed thst offering animal sucrifies to the Devatts,
 ‘wis one of the means ‘yheseby bliss hereafter could be
 ‘tained (Be, Dh, 8.1L 4 28). Andi yas only for certain
 ‘Yajuas that imal cou baslain (Va. Dh. S.1V. 68 :8.G.8.
 TI, 16; 1 BaS. TV). Wanton killing of animals was very
 severly punished (Ap. Dh. 8. 1. 26. 13-96; Ga, Dh &.
 XKIL 16, oe.;Va, Dh:8, 18,98, oo.; Ba. Dh. 8.1. 19.6).
       ‘The Vaidile people fom the time of the easiest Yajnas
 severely deprecated lnstof any kind whatsoever and they
 ‘allowed Maithuns, Mémss, Madya and Mode for religious
 ‘purposes only and as offerings to the Devas. The Chakra
 sittings ofthe antile QM N.'T. Ch, VI) heve wamistakable
 similarities with the Vajapeya and Suntrimoni (8B. V3
 KSS.XIV;AB.I1. 4.9; 8. X17. 1, ete.; ESS. XIX)
 nd even the manner of drinking ia compeny has been
                                                         abowe.
 ‘proverved aa will appear from the references givenmembers
       ‘When performing Yejoe in    company,    tha              of
 the company become Brdimanns and there is no distinction
 of caste (AB. VIL 4 1).
       ‘Vhe worship in both Vaidik and Tintrk rites         begins
 with Achasnana, whichjs a form of      ablation,   in which   eer-
 tain parts of the body ase touched with water.are exactly In this
 respect, the Vaidike and the Tiatrik     practices
                                Ey
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
similar (@.G8. 1. 2.5; Tait, ATL 11 MNT, Chap. W).
‘They purify themselves by uttering some mantras as Eijas
while contemplating the Deities of certain parts of their
bodies ond touching such parts with their fingers (A.A.
TIL.2.1.2; UL 2.8.2; R.V.B.IL.16). They contemplate
cach Deva through his or her particular Mantras (R.Y.
TI. 82,10) which will be found oolletedin the Perishishta
to the Taittilye Aronyaks. ‘They make uso of certain
sounds for removing unclean spsits, eg., Khat. Phat, Hum.
(DA. TV.27;       S.¥. St 1.2.15 1.1.3; AtsnynganeVI. 1
 IV.2, 19 ;SB.1.6.2.185 1.38.14; L7.2, 1144; L.
21; XI. 2.2.9 and 6; BLN-T. Chap. TIl) and for other
purposes (ALB. IL. 3. 6). They attribute a Deity to each
letter in « Mantea (A.B. I. 5.5)
       ‘Thay make gesiaris with their agers a1 part of their
religous rites (8B. IT. 1. 3.25 ; III. 4,8. 2) and locate the
‘Devatds of particular soutds in particular parts of their
bodies (PS. 54, 56 ; KSS, VIL 11, 78). They perform thie
baths as a means of and withthe view           of pleasing their
Devas (G. Sa, 8. and MNP.) and in performing the Aoha-
‘mana they snotifice unto themselves conceiving thet they
‘aze part and parcel of the Great: Brahma (TA. X. i). They
worship the Great Brahma thrice daily, such worship being
called Sandhyé-bandand or Ahuike-kriy8, twilight prayors
or deily rites. How and when the forms of Vaidik Sandhya
now practised by Vaidikas commenced as not yet been
asogrtained but, there is no doubt that prior to the time
‘when the Teitisys Aranyaka was composed the ‘practice
existed in ite present form. If wil be remembored that it
is only in that work thot we find the Sandhyé-mantras
recoried. The practice of Prindyma and Torpens to
Rishis, Fathers, and Devas also existed before Boudhtyana,
 ‘This practice of Vaidik Sendhya worship should be compared
‘with the Téctrik mode, to gain an insight into the relation
 ship of the Vedas and the Tertras,
       ‘In the Yajnas, the Vaidik people principally worshipped
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
  () Somuovot!    (GB. UL 6.465 TL 1.49; UL 8.1.7;
  ¥. 2.9.14; V. 3.5.6; V.467; ¥.6.27)10 whom
  animals   are sacrificed (8B. IL. 0.1.7; V.a.4. 1; XIL
  17.2.8) and whois the same as Vale or Vagdevt who became
 ‘lioness and wont over to th Dovatis, on their undertaking
 ‘thatto her offerings should he mad before they were made
 to Agni (.B. IL. 5.1.21) and who bastows food (6.B. XT
 8.2. 16); (2) Mahddeva or Mshesha, enother form of Agni,
in all his eight forma (.B. VI 1. 3. 10 et sey); (8) Rudra,
 (4) Vishos, (6) Vindyace (Gancoba), (8) Sanda (Kartikeya)
 (GV. E 4 81 ef cop) (7) the Tingam or Phollus (DA. X.
 17) on whom they meditate during the daly Sondhyd. vor
 ship and who is the same as Shambha viding on a bull, (6)
 Shiva (&.V.B. 1. 2.2). They aio worshipped (9) the ow
 ‘whom they called Bhagevath (A.B. Y. 5. 2) and also (10)
 Indra, Varuna, Agnip Soma, Rusa, Prshan, ‘tho Ashwins,
 Stryya and some other Deities. For purposes of attaining
 ternal bliss they worshipped Ratridev! (8.V-B. IIT. 8) and
 ‘hin Ratridev is dasoibed asa gil growing into womanhood
 who bestows Beppinsis. She has long and flowing hair,
Tas in her hand a noose. If she is plessod, thon all other
 Devas aze pleased. She being ploaséd offers boons, but the
  worshipper must reject the seme and then be will gain
 fodom from rebirth. This is the worship of Raici; it
  requiet ua fasting and must b> performed at night. The
  Mantas to be rected, is the Rati Stkta. which commenoes
 ‘with Ratzr bakhyad (Rig Veda X. 127 1) tobe followed by
 ‘rate plrthivam raj
       ‘The Rig-Vidhana-Brihmans (IV. 19) which follows the
 Sima-Vidhioa-Botbmana declares that the Ratri Stkia
 rust bo recited ; the vorhip mast bo potformed sswith,8
 Sihllipaka Yojus, TAI is substantiallyand thethey sameare somo-
  but in form different from, Vagievl;
times worshipped as oxe and the sameber(Tait.  Br. I . 4 0. 10
 sez), The ROG Seta desoribes             os black (R. V. X.
  137.8). ‘The portion of the Rata Sista whichis inladed
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  in the Khila portion of the Rig-Vods (BV. Kh. 25) calla
  Rétzi Devtby the name     of Dung6 and this Mantra appoors in
 ‘Taittifya Aranyale (X. 1). She is described her as the
 ‘eater of oblations ; therefore, she isthe same as Agni (Fie)
 ‘and as such she has tongues which are named as follows :
 (0) Kal, (2) Kara, (8) Manojaba, (4) Sulit, (6) Sadbsimxa-
 vara, (6) Sphulingini, (7) Shuchismict ond these tongues
 Toll oat and by these tongues offerings are received (Grihya-
 Sangreba I. 18, 14). The Bribnd-devati mentions that
 Aditi, Vak, Sarasvatt and Dungh are the same (Il. 70).
       ‘Tn confority  with the Vaidik system the Tantrik system
 ‘of worship soknowledges thot Om isthe supreme Bija (A.B,
VOL 3.0; 10.1.2; V8.7; AA              IL 8.8; Cbh    Up. Lt
 ésug.; TA. VIL. 8; X. 68.21 of oq; Shakstyans, p. 108
 (Oppert) ; Phaini VIE. 2, $7 Br. D. TL 127, 188; GB.
 E124; Le 17,19; MINT. TI 29) and they cleo asknow-
 Tedge snd ws the Hinkéra of the Vedas pronounoed Hum
 G@BL4 12; 1K 1.2.3.4; AB ILS, 12; 188.1
 10,25 ; L1.273 T-1.4; 1V.3.22}, Tho rules and practice
 of Achamana, apd the bath are exaotly the same as will be
 found on s comparison of chapter V of the Mabanirvana
 ‘Tantra with the Sninasttre of Gobtila, The Tatras prefar
 ‘to wo single compounds insteed of Tong sentences to express
 sn ides and form one letter Mantras very much aceording
 to the Veidik method. Wo also find the pruction of Nydsa
 ‘and Shui foresbudowed in the Vedas as has been already
 mentioned. (See also SB. VIL 6. 2. 12). The principal
Devt of the Veds is Serasvat!, who is called Nagna in the
 ‘Nighanty, expressing mndeness, and also referring to that
 tage of a woman when womanhood hes not exprested iteelf.
 “Ese again take thase ideas with tha ofthe Sima-Vidhina-
 ‘Brahmana, we have the almost complete form of a Devt
 ‘who is called at the present day by the name of Kall, An-
 other Devt whose worship is very popular at the present
day is Durgl, who has a lion for ber csrrir. Tt wil have
 been cbverved, that Vach turned herself into 0 lion, and
          TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
 ater earnest solicitations weut over to the Devas; and
 therefore, Vich and the lion are identically the seme. Wo
 have alresdy given references which show that Vach and
 Durgh. wre the same ; and these facls explain how Darga
 ‘aso lion to carry hex. The worship of tei isto be pet-
 formed at night snd therefore the worship of Kali must be
 ‘night porformanoe ; and therafore, must partako of all
 tho features of a night performance ; and theso elaments
 rast be sought for in the Vaile Atiitra. ‘The Atirtra
    1 yoriomance  of thre Paryysus orounds of four Stoims
 and Shistras in each and at the end of each ibstionsare
 cffeed, followed by drinking of Soma, ‘The same rules
 fnd practices as in the Atirtira are substantially followed
in the worship of the Devt KAU, thdng being vory lagely
 ted wader the name of, Vijayé and Amita, Te will be
 remembered thst. the Devt of the Atinite isr Saraswat,
 ‘The principal male Devald, of the Taatas is Mabideva
 named also Shiva, Mabesha, Shambhu, Soma aad also in a
          sapect Rida, Ruta and Mabidevaare odmitted-
            ods. Raden ig described ag having bows and
 arrows and bas bundzed Heads and thomand oyce (8B.
 TV. 1.1.6; Yojur Voda UL 27), Mabidova is Mahtn
 eval, the great God (SB. VE. 8. 16). Te opponss thot
 ‘he Mantzad of the dilferout agpoets of Mahideva, which
 fro even now used by Tntrlas, were known and used by
 ‘the Vaidik people. I cannot, however, trace the name
 ‘Mahosha in Voidi literature, Shiva ean be identified with
Radra Susheva, whois a kind god (.B. V.4. 4.19). Mubi-
 dleva (Soma) is olad in a tiger skin whieh oan be treoad    in
 Vaile literature (&.B. V. 8. 5. 8; Y.    4  1. 10). Rudra    is
 black, in the Tantas os well asin the Vedas. Tle is the
 same ae Manya with « Devt on each side of hin’ (SB,we mustTX,
  1.1.6; XL. 6.1. 12 ond 12), In this conneotion, Nit
 not fail t0 note wome of the attributes of Vaiik those
 Nirrté i blac and is a terible Devt and punishesDevt of
  who do not ofer Soma to hes, She is the
                               103
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 rmisfortunes and somoves oll misiortane. She is the genetrix
 ‘and she is fond of the oremation ground (S.B. VIL 2.1;
 AB. IV. 2, 4)
       ‘The Tantras diet the worship also of Ganesha, Kartik
 sand Vishou, for whose worship the Sémo-Vidhina-Bréhmana
 prescribes the singing of certain’ Stmans, known as the
 Vinyake Samhita (GV. 4. 5. 8. 8), Skanda-Samhita
 (SV. 8.2.1, 4) and the Vishnu-Samhita             (8 V. 3.1. 2. 9)
 respectively.
       ‘The Tantins also dizsot the use of certain figures which
 fre callod Yantras, Those may be of verious kinds and
 forms and nay be wsed for vutious purposes. One of these
 Wihictis sonstantly used, is triangle within       a square (MLN.T.
 aap. ¥) and chis con be traced to the rules for the prepa-
 ration of the Amnilshetra, ot the Fine Altar of the Vaidik
 people (SB. Vio 1. 6), Another eurious circumstance
 ‘in connection with the shi, that both inthe Vaidile and
 ‘the Téntrik ritual, tho heads of five snimals are used in ita
 preparetion (6B. VI.2.1.6-8). The worship of the Lingaam
 4s foreshadowed by the Vaidik Deity Vishna Sipivishta,
  (R.Y. VIL 1001, ot6.; Nirakta V.2. 2) nd the serpent which
‘brines round Devas or Devis is foreshadowed by the Serpa-
 réjni, the Serpent Queen           (&B-TV. 69.17) whois the same
 as Vach.
       ‘The facta collected here will iis hoped, enable impartial
 seveto come to definite conclosion as to the relationship
 of tho Vaidik to the Tatil stual,

                       ABBREVIATIONS.
      AAc=Aitareys Eranyske: A.B—Aitareys Bréhmana,
As, SS—Lshvoldyene Shreuta Sites, Ap. SS—Apx
‘tamba Shrauta Str. Ap. Dh,        S—Apastambs Dharma
Sitra, Ap. GS—Apestamba Grikya Stee, AV—
Atharva Vela, Ba. Dh. S—=Beudhiyans Dharma Site,
                                 104
        TANTRA SHASTRA AND VEDA
Ba, S8—Baudbtyaon Shute Sita, Be D.—Bribad-
evath (Caloutta edition). Ohh. Up=-Chhindatea Upa-
nishad, Ga Dh            S—Gautama Dharma Site. GB.
Gopatha Brthmans. @G8—Gobbils Gribya Sttra. G.
Sn. S—=Gobhila Solna Sita. H.G.S—Hiranyokeshiya
Gribya Sita, KSS—Katylyana Shroute Stim, Kh,
GS=Khidia Grliya Sit, L&S—Latyayana Stasta
Sites, MNT-—Mshinirvina Tantra, N
Shilohi, Neh—Nighanta. Ni.—Nirukta. P
Shilabi. PGS—Partsham Grikys Sitm. R.
Veds. RVB—Rig Vidhina Brihmana, Bik, P==Rile
Pavishishta. RV.Kh—Rig Veda Khila, S.B—Sbatapatha
Bribmaus, §..S=-Sinkdyéyans Grihya Stra? S.V.B.
Sima Vidbios Brohnans. SVSi—Sima Veda Stobhe
portion. S.V.—Stma Veda. S8S—Sankliybyana Shrauta
                vaitatya Araayaks, ‘Tait. Br=Tatttictya
            . Tan. Br=Tandya Brabaions, Va, Dh =
              Dharma Site. Yug—Yejuavalkya,




                          105
                            Cuan V.
    ‘THE TANTRAS AND RELIGION OF THE SHAKTAS.
       [What follows this brackot is a-translation, done in
 literal fasbion, from the Gorman, of an article by the learned
 Sunskriist; Professor Wintemitz, entitled “Die Tantras und
 dip Religion dor Saletas” published in the Berlin monthly,
 the “ Optasiatische Zeitschrift,” 1916, Heft 2. The article
 does not show ® complote comprchension of its subject-
 ‘matter, not was this to be expected. In Buropean fashion
 Bédhalea is translated “Magician” and Sidhand is thougiit
 ‘of as “magical evocation” and Mahayogini as “Great Magi
 cian”. ‘This is the more unfortunate, as the Professor
 evidently does not like “magic”, Tt is true that in Indra
 jalavidy@ there ia Sidhana to achiews ite purposes, but what
 is of course meant ia SGdbant in its taligious sense. Wo
Ihear again of idolatry” though idolatry isnot in the sense
 jn which those who make the change uss the word) to be
foand in any part of the world. Mantr           is astill “gibberish,”
 “crash” snd s9 ons After all, many. of these matters are
 as much a question of temperament as argument. ‘The
 ‘mind swhich takes these views:is like that of the Protestant
 ‘who called the Catholic Mass “Hosus Pocus”. It is super
 stitious trash to him but a holy reality to the believer, Such
 crnticiam involves the fallacy of judging others from one’s
 thousands is capable of grasping the inner significance of
 ‘his doctrine snd for this reason it is kept secret nor doss
 ‘any waiting rovodl it to thoso without understanding. . The
 earned Professor has also evidently no likingfor “Occultism™
 and “India-inddists” (Indiensschwarmern). But the former
 exits whether we like its facts or not. Nevertheless, in
 sending this artiols one feels oneself  in the presenco ofalearned
 rind which wills to be fair and is not to be stampeded from
 investigation   on hoaving the frightful word “Tantra”. Several
                                 106
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS’ RELIGION
 appreciations re just, Partilarly noteworthy is the
 recognition that the Tantra Shastras or Agamss are not
 ‘meraly some pathological exorescence on “Hinduism” but
 simply one of ia severe presentations. Nor       are they simply
 Scriptures of the Shiktas. Their metophysios ond ethics
 tare those of the common Beshmaniam of wich all the sects
 are offshoots, whatever be the special peclisritis in present
 mont of doctrine oF in ita application. Bafore this Professor
Albert Grunwodel     ad said (in kis“Der    Weg Naoh Sombbalo,”
 Munchen 1916): “The Tantzas are nothing but the cou
 ‘tinuationof the Veda” (Die Tanti, sind eben die fortsetmmg
 des Veis). He cals also the Tantras the “model-room’
 (Alt-saal) of Indian Art (Che Aktsaal is «room in tn Acad
any of Artin which casts ate kept as models for the students).
 ‘These Scriptures, he adds, “furiah the wexthetice and in
 fact we find that in the later books (af the Kalachalra) the
 ‘whole figurative mythology (of that system) has been built
 up on this schéme. Whence this evelution of forms arises
is indeed another question which will bring many a surprise
 to the friends of ‘National Indien Art’ (ie!) ‘Talking is
 easier. ‘The Jsins too have such things.” I may add that
 ‘the foot that some Jans carry out vome. so-called “Tntike
 rites” is not generally kmowa;--Vaishnevas and Bauddbas
  fo have these rites. Notions and practice: generally
  charged   to the Shaktas    only are held and oarsied     out by
  cther sects. Te isto be remembered algo that there are many
  schools of Agama. Some of them state that other Agamas
  were promulgated “for the delusion of men”, Te is needless
  ‘to ad tha, here as elsewhere,    to the adherent of a particular
  ‘Agama his partioular soripmue is good, and it is the scip-
  true of his opponent which is “for delusion”. Orthodoxy
  is “my doxy” in India also amongst some sects. Sbikta
  iberaliem (being Advaita Vedanta) finds place for all
        Ttesnnot, therefore, be said tht the Agamas are wholly
  worthlase and bed without involving all Hinduism ih that
  charge. On the contrary the Profesor discovers that bebind
                                  107
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 the *‘nonsonso” there may bea doop senso and that “immo-
 rlity” is not the end oF aim         of the Cultof the Mother
 Fle also holds tnt if the Ants Scriptures contain some
 things to which he and others take objection, such things
in no wise exhoust their oontents. Ther is nothing wonder-
 ful about this discovery, which snyone may make for himself
 by simply reading and understanding the documents, but
 the wonder consists in this that it has not hitherto been
 thought neceacary (whore it has been possible) to resd and
 tundersiand the Taner Shistras fst and then to, criticise
 om All che greater          thon are our thanks to ths learned
 Sousletnt for his shaco in this work of justion I. W.}
    [NDIA remains still the most important country on earth
       for the studentof religion. In Indis we moet with
 all forms of rligioas thought and feeling which we find
 on earth, axd shat not only at diferent times but alo all
 together even to-day. Hem we find the most primitive
belsf in ancestel Spsits,      in Demons and Nature Deitas with
 «primeval,   imageles stctifisial eat. Hare alo ia polytho-
 fim posing all limits, with the most riotous idolaxy,
 temple cat, pilgrimages,sd so forth. And, sido by side
 with snd beyond these crtiest forms of religious life, we
 find what is deepest: and most abstract of what religious
  thinkers of all times have ever thought ehout the Deity,
 the noblest pantheistic end the purest monotheistic concep-
  tions, Ta Tadia we alo find « priestomft as nowhere else
  on earth side by side with a rligious tolermce which              lela
 sect aftersect, with the   moat  wonderful   saints,   exist together.
 Hore there were and still are free roclme, aseatics,               and
  rmendicent monks,    to  whom     renuncistion    of   this word     is
  really and tenly a matter of deepest sincerity, and fools   together
 ‘with them hots of     idle   mendicant    monks,     vain         and
 Ihypeorites, to whom religion is only a cloak for selfish
      1, Sce ae to the Secret Rital and ite Objects, "Shake and
 ‘Skuta,   Onde
                                108
THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS'                             RELIGION
ppusuits for the graticaton of greed for money, of greed
{or fame or the hankering after power.
        rom Indie slao a powerful stream of religious ideas
hs poured forth over the West, and especially over the
‘Bast, hs flooded Cental Asia, has spread over Tibet, China,
‘Cores and Jepan, and has trickled throughthe further East
down to the ramotest islands of the East Indian Archipelago.
‘And Sally, in Indias well as outaie India, Indian religions
have often mized with Christianity and with Islam, now
giving end now taking,
        Tndeed, suflsiont reason existe to weleome every work
which costbutes in one way or other toa richer, deeper oF
trider lnowledge of Indian reiglan. I would ike, therefore,
to draw attention in what fellows ta some recently published
‘works of thia nature,
        ‘These are the exceedingly ietivrious publications of
 Arthor Avalon     with eforenos tothe literature of the Tantra.
 Through these works we obtain, for tho first time, a deeper
 insight into the Iterature of the Tantras, the holy books of
 Shit, and into the-uatare of this much abused religion
 itself. It ia true thot HL HL Wilsnt in is esays on the
 teligious scat of the Hindus which appeared from 1838 to
 1892 has given a brief but slatively reliable end just ex-
 psition of this religion. M, Monier-Wiiams® who has
 treated more fully of Shiktiam, wosship of thetreble    Goddess,
tnd the contents of the Tatras,       has only  to tell       and
 horsble things. Ho describes the faith of the Shikias, ofof
 the worshippers of te feminine Deitis, as a mixture
 senguinary sscrfces and orgies with wine and A. women.
                                    sect presnted by Barth
 Similar ia the picture of this admits
 ‘who on the one hnd indeed                  that the Cult of the
  Nother is based on a deep meaning ond that the Tantns
  tre algo full of tbeosoghical and moral refections and ascetio
      Works, Va. 1, London,      1882,pp. 240.265.
     2. Beahmani      and smHindoiem, 4th e., London, 1881, p.180
      B. The Religions of Indie, Yd ed, London, 1889,p. 199
                                  109
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  theories, but is not thereby prevented from saying that the
  Shakta is “nearly always a hypocrite and a superstitions
  Asbauchoo,” even though many amongst the authors of the
  ‘Tantras may hav roally beloved that they were performing
  asucred work! RG. Bhandarkar?              to whom we owe tle
  latest and most riiable exposition of Indion sectarianism,
  Inxppocs in fact to desl with the Shiltas very summarily
  Whereas the greater part of his excellent book deals with
  the religion of the Vaishnavas ond with the sects of the
  Shaives, he only devotes few pagesto the oct ofthe Shktas
  which evidently seems unimportant to him: He speaks,
  however, both about the metaphysical doctrines and about
  the cult of this sect, with in every way, the cool, quist
  objectivity of the historian. ‘The exposition is only a little
 too brief and meagre. So, ll the- more are Avalon's books
 vweloome.
         ‘The most valuabla\is the) Gomiplete Haglish translation
 ofa Taniza, the Mabiairvina Tontza,* withan Introdution
of 146 pages, hich, introdces us to the thief doctrines
 cof the Shktss ond with the exocedingly complicated,
 pecbapt purposely confused, terminclogy of the Tantmas,
HE we have        been accustomed,   up till the present,      to see
 nothing elge in’ Shiktism snd-in the Tantmas, the saored
 books of this sect, than wild superstition, oocult: humbug,
 Sdiooy, empty magic and a cult with a most objectionable
 ‘morality, and distorted by orgies—then a glimpse at tho
taxt made ccoossible to us by Avalon, teaches us that
        T Op. Cie, p 304
       2. Vaishncvism, Skaivism and Minor Religions Systems.
 (Grunatis der indo-arschen Philologie and Altertumst 111 (6),
 ‘Strassburg, 1813, . 142.) 1 (Dr. W.) have spoken mareundeflly about
 this work in the Deutsche Literstareeitong, 1915, No.2, [To the
 latove Professor Wintereite   might have added Profesor Vallée
 Poussins Studies—J. W.]
       3. Tanti of the Crest Libera (MahGsirrdga. Tantra a
 ‘Translation from tho Santi, with tion
                                      Cottoduition and Commentary
by Artha Avslon, LondLaree      on.& Co, 1918.
                                  ne
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS' RELIGION
‘these things are indeed to be fonnd in this veligion and in
its soored texts, but that by these their contents arenever-
 ‘theless, in no wise exhausted,
       On the contrary, we rather find that bekind the non-
  sense there lies hidden after all much deep cense and that
 immorality is not the end and aim of the cult of the
 Mother. Wa find that the mysticiam of the Tantras has
 ‘heen built-up om the basia of that mystic doctrine of the
  ‘unity of the soul and ofall withthe Brahman, whichis pro-
 claimed in the oldest Upanishads and which belongs to the
 ‘most profound spesulations which the Indian spirit, bas
 imagined. This Brahman, however, the highest divine
 principle, is, according to the doctrines of the ShAikta philoso-
 pphers, no “nothing”, but the etcmsl, primeval Knergy
  (Shakti) out of which everything. bas been created, hss
 originated, has been bom. Shekti, “Energy,” however,
  is not only grammatically feminine. ‘Humsn experimce
teaches aka that life is bom from the womb of the woman,
  from   the mother. Theroors    the Indian thinkers,  from whom
  Shiltim ne originated, beliowod that the highest D:
  ‘the supremest creative pringple, should be brought nearest
   to the human mind aot through the word “Father”, but
  ‘through  the word “Mother”. And all philosophical concep
  tions to which language has given feminine gender, aa well
 ‘soll mythologial fgares which appear feminine in popular
 baie, bovome Goddesses, Divine Mothers. So, before all,
 there is Prakyti, taken’ from the Songihya ‘philosophy,
  primeval matter, “Natore”, who stands in contrast to
 Purusha, the male spirit, ands identical with Shakti, And
 ‘thin Shak is, again, mythologieslly conceived as the spouse
 cof God Shiva, Mahideva, the “Great God”. Mythology,
 however, knew already Umi or Pirvati, “the daughter of
 the Mountain”, the dsughier¢f the Himalaya, as the spouse
of Shiva. And so Prakriti, Shakti, Um, P8rvoti, are ever
 fone and the same. ‘They are only different names for the
 fine grest All-Mother, the Jaganméti, ‘the’ Mother of all
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘the living”. The Indian mind had beon long since accustomed
 ‘o sve Unity in all Multiplicity. Just as one moon reflects
  itself in innumerable waters, so Devi, “the Goddess”, by
  ‘whatever other names she may be otherwise oalled, is the
  ‘embodiment of all Gods and of all “energies” (Shaktis) of
  the Gods. Within her is Brahma, the Oreator, snd his
  Shakti; within     be is Vishnu, the Preserve, and his Shakti;
  within her ie alao Shiva aa Mahdkla, “great Father Time”,
  the great Destroyer. But as-this ote is swallowed up by
  heeslf, che is oso Adyakflika, the “primordial Katt”;
  and ns a “great magician”, Mabayogini, she is at the same
  time Creatsx, Preservatcix, and Destroyer of the world
  Shoia also tho mother of MahAkAle, who dances. before
har, intoxicated by the wine of Madhuka blossoms! As,
  however, the highest Deityis & women, every women is e-
 ‘garded as an embodiment ofthis Deity. Devt, “the God-
 dese”, in within every feminine-being. ‘This conception itis,
 which ha led to a woman worship which, undoubtedly, has
 taken the shape, ia many cizdos, of wild orgies, but which
 Also—at least according to the testimony      ofthe Mabinirvana
 ‘Tantea—could appearin a pur and nobler form, and has a8
 surely done so.
         ‘To the worship of th6-Devi, the Goddess, who is the
 joyously orestive energy of nature, bslong the “five trae
 things” (Panchstattva) through which mankind enjoy
 gladly, pteserve their life and procmeate ; intoxicating
 drink which in 8 great medicine to man, a breaker of sorrows
fand a source of pleasure ; meat of the animals in the villages,
 in th sir and in tho forests, which is nutritious and strengt
 fens the foree of hody ond mind ; fsh which is tasty and
 ‘augments procrestive potency ; roasted oom which, easly
 obtained, grows in the earth andis the rootof life in the
 ‘three works; and ffthly physical * union with Shakti “the
        1 Asal          ‘Woe tings” bogie with aa M, they arealso
 called “the five MC
       3. Mabaiertoa ants, VEIT 18 (150)
    THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS! RELIGION
 source of bliss of all living beings, the deepest cause of orea-
 tion and the rootof the etemal world”. But these “five
 ‘true things” may only be used in the cizele of initiates, and
only after they have been consecrated by sacred formulas
 and cotemonies. ‘The Mehinirvina Tantra lays stress on
 ‘the fact that no sbuse may be made of these five thing.
‘Who drinks immoderataly is no true worshipper of the Devi.
 Immoderste driuking, which disturbs seeing and thinking,
 destroys the eflooof the sacred action. In the sinful Kali
 ‘age alto, only the own spouse should be enjoyed as Shakti.
In everything the Tantza takes all imaginable trouble to
 exouse the Panchatattvs ceremonies and to prevent their
 abuse. Tn the Kali age aweets (milk, sugar, honey) must be
 ‘used instead of intoxicating drink, and the adoration of the
 Totas feet of the Dev! should be substituted for the physical
 union. The wowhip should not be) secret, indecencies
 should not soe, andevil, impions people should not be
 ‘admitted to the circle of the worshippers? Truo, it is
  permissible for the “Hero” (Vira) who ia qualified to bo
  Sidhaka or “magician” to unite in seoret worship with
 ‘other Shaktis. Only in the highest “hoavenly condition”
  (Divyabhévs) of the stint do purely symbolical actions take
 ‘the place of the “five true things”.
       ‘But to the worship of the Devt belong in the first place
  ‘Mantras (formulas) snd Bijas (monosyllabic mysterious
  ‘words like Aim, Klim, Hrim, ete); further also Yantras
  (iagrams of a mysteriqus meaning, drawn on metal, paper
  ‘orother materiel), Mudzéa (spocil finger positions and band
  ‘movementa) and Nyfeas. (These last consist in putting
  ‘the tips of the flagers and the Aat of the right hand, with
  certain mantra, on the various parts of the body, in order
  ‘by that to All cue’s own body with the life of the Devt.)
  By the application ofall these means the worshipper renders
        1, Mabanievaya Tents, IV, 2991, ¥ 14.
       2. Mandvivdoa Tani, VI, 180, (ip. 185 #4); VI, 168. (p.
  104 £): VILL, 171, 190 (p . 177, 180),
                                 ng
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘the Deity willing end foroes him into his service, and be-
comes # Sédbaks, magician, For Sidhen8, “Magic”,
is the chief im, though not the final aim of Dev! worship.
       "This bighst ond final aim i the samo as that of all
Indian sects and religious systems: Molgha or deliverance,
the unifeation with the Deity in Mabtnirvana, the “great
extinction”. The perfected saint the Kaula reaches thisean-
dition slradyin the presen life and is one whois liberated
whilt living (Jivannmulca). But the way to deliverance
can only be found thnough the Tantra, or Voda, Smit,
Purdinas and Isihiea are cach the aacred books of past ages
of the world, whit for our prevent evil age, the Kali age,
‘the Tuatras have been revealed by Shiva for the salvation
of mankind (I, 20 fi). ‘The Tamimas thus on the strength
of their own showing indicate themselves to be relatively
modem works’ Tn the present age Vedic. and othar rit
and prayers have no value but only the mantras and coro-
monies tanghtin the Tantcas (IT, 1): And just as the
‘worship ofthe Dev leads equally to thoroughly mataralistio
resulta thsough mage tnd to ths kighast ideal of Nirvina,
0 them ie a strong mixture in the worship ioe of the
fseosuous and the epsitual. Chasnoteristic is Mahiairyiqa
‘ont V, 180-151 (P. 86 12): The worshipper fist ofers
‘0 the Devi spiritual adoration, dedicating ter his heart
auher set, the nectar of his baat as the water for washing
 her fet, his mind asa pt of honour, the restlessness of his
fenses and thoughts as 8 dance, selfessnss, dispassionato-
ness, and so forth as flowors, but then he ofers to the Devt
fn oooan of intoxicating drink, « mooatain of meat and
died fish, « heap of roasted. com in mill, with eugar and
 butter, “nectar” ond other things. Besides the “ve txue
things” and other elements of this most sensuous worship
‘ich is ealoulated to predace the intoxication of the senses,
and in which also bells, incense, flowers, lights and roses
      T._ Noe 10;
 the Supa Yorn ofTe tethenextprevent
                               oe yee thane Sei one Tost
                             14
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS’ RELIGION
are not lacking,   those i also the quiet contemplation (Dhyéna)
 cof the Deity. And likewise, we find side by side with man-
 ‘ras whioh ave completely senseless and insipid such besut-
 fal sayings ss, for instanco, V, 166: “O Ady Kall, who
 dele in the innermost sou of all, who art the innermost
 light, O Mother {Accept this prayer of my heart. I bow
 ‘down before the.”
        ‘The ShAkias are a soot ofthe religion whichis eommonly
 designated “Hinduism,” a term which is facile one bub
 ‘which hasnot been chosen very happily. The word embraces
 all the sects and creeds which have oviginsted from Brah-
 rmanism through « mixture with the cults of the sborigines
 of India and thus representa kind of degeneration ofthe od
 Brabmaniaal religion, hut which still hold fast more or les,
 to orthodox Brakmaniem’ ahd ao dintinguish theméelves
 from the heretical sats (Buddhiets une Jains). Ta. reality
 those in steivtly no sonio im apelking of “Hinduism” as a
 “ayatem” or at one “religion”, For its imposible to say
 where Beshmanism ends and where “Hinduism” begins.
 We are also altogether ignorant as to how much the old
 ‘Beulmnanio religion had alteady aasimilated from the faith
 fad the customs of the nov-Ayaa populace. For it is not
 ‘admissible to elaseify without farther aio all animal worship,
  all demon worship ll ftichian sad so on a8 “non-Aryan’
  Jn realty all sia of “Hinduism” which are telateil to a
  ‘womip of Vishnu or of Shiva, are nothing but offshoots of
  ‘he criginal Brabmaniem, which they never, however, deny.
  o also Shktiom has ae especial characteristic merely ths
  ‘worship   ofthe Salts, ofthe fale deities, with ite accestory
  matter (of the “ive trae things,” the worship inthe chakra
  ‘or “circle” of the initines, and se on). For the rest, its
  ogmatics—or if it be prefered, ite metephysies—as well
  tas its ethics are altogethor those of Brahmaniam, of which
 1882, p84 m
                               ns
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
also the essential situal institutions havo boon preserved.
‘Tn dogmatios it is the teachings of the orthodox systems
of the Vedanta and the Sifikhya, which micet us also in
‘the Tenteas dearly enough, sometimes even under the
‘rash of senseless magio formulas. And as fat as ethics ore
concerned, the moral teaching in tho VIII chapter of the
Mahtnisvina Tantre reminds us from beginning to end of
‘Mana’a Code, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Buddhist sermons.
‘Notwithstanding tho fact that in the ritual proper of the
Shikta there are no caste difforencee but in Shakti worship
all castes  as well as the sexes are oqual, yetin harmony with
Brakmanism, the castes are recognized, with this modif-
cation that a fifth caste is added to the four usual ones,
‘which springs from the mixture of the four Older ones,
namely, the caste of the Sémanyas... Whilst Manu, however,
Gistingnishes four Asbrames or stetuses of life, the Mahi-
nirvins Tantas teaches that there are only two Ashramas in
‘the Kali age, the status of the householder and that of the
acootio. For the vest, everything which          is tought in our
‘Tantra about the duties towands parents, towards wife and
child, towards relations and in general towards fellowsnea,
right find a place, exatlyin the:same way, in any other
religious book or even in & profane manial of morals, 8
‘mexample      we may quote onlyfew verses ftom this Chapter
VIL: (oe. 24, 25, 88, 85, 39, 45-47, 63-67).
       ‘The duties of each of tho casts as well as the duties
of the king ate not prescribed much differently from Manu.
Family life is estimated very highly. by the Mabinirvina
Tantra, So itis rigorously prescribed that no one is allowed
to devote himselfto the ascetic life wao has chisdren, wives,
orsuch like near restions to maintsin.! Entirely in eonso-
nance with the presotiptions of the Brahmanic texts also
tice the         “sueraments fom conoeption until the maztiago
      7 Tn the Knullpa-ArthaobGsire, the oldest wanaal of palitice
((1.1:1919, p. 48) & Snes pratribedfr him who Becomes am acetic
without having previously made provision for wife and ebil
                                 116
 THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS’ RELIGION
 ‘which are desesibed in the 9th chapter of the Mahiuirvina
 ‘Tantra (Sumskdras). Likewise in the 10th chapter the
 diretion forthe disposal and the cultof the dead (Shrddha)
 fare given. _ A pevulisity of the Shiktas in connection with
 marriage consists in the fact that side Ly side with the
 Braima merciage for which the Brohmanic. prescriptions
 are valid, theme is also a Shaiva marriage, that is a kind of
tarrage for a limited period which is only permitted to ther
rnibe of tho ciclo (Chakra) ofthe initintas. But children
‘out of such marriage are notlegitimate and donot inherit!
0 far Bralmanic Iav-applies also to the Shéltias, and #0
the section conseming civil and eximinal law in the 11th
and 12th chapters of the Mahinirvina Tantra substantially
agres with Manu.
      Ff couse, notwithstanding all this, the Kauladhwema
cexponsded in the Thntra is declared the best ofall religions
in an exuborant manser and the veuomtion of the Kula-
saintis praged as the highest mest, Tei anid in a well-
‘known Buddhist text: “As, ye monks, thereis place for
every kind of footprints of living beings tat move in the
feotprint of the elephant, because, ass laiown indeed, the
‘footprint of the elephant is the fistin size amongst. all, so,
ye monks, all salutary doetines are contained in the four
noble truths.”” So itis end in the Mshiairvina Tantra;
(probably in reoollection of the Buddhist postage): “As
‘the footprints of all animals disappear in the footprint of
the elephant, so disappear all othor religions (diarma) in
the Kula religion (bul-dharma).”
      rom what as been said iti clear that Avalon if sight
when he deslares that uptill now this litersture as been
nly to0 oftan judged and still more condenmed without
knowing it, aud that the Tantras deserve      to become better
     1. It ie lecorest to call them iegitimate children, But
fiprings of « Rests marsage ar preferential Inberitors.—JW.
    ‘2 XIV, 180 ef. Majfimaniays 28,
                              17
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Inown than has been the ease hitherto, From the point of
 view of the history of mligion they ate already important
 {or the reasou that they have strongly influenced MabAyéaa
 Buddhism and specially the Buddhism of Tibet. It js,
 ‘therefore, much to be welcomed that. Avalon has undertaken
 to publish a series of texts and translations from this liter-
 ature, It is true that we have no desire to be made ac-
 ‘quainted with all the 364 Tantras which are said to exist.
 For—this should not be denied, that for the greatest part
 ‘these works contain, after all, only stupidity and gibberish
 (doch nur Stumpfsinn und Kauderwelsch”). This is
‘specially true of the Bijas and Mantras, the mysterious
 syllables and words and the magie fommulas which All these
 ‘Volumes, To understand this gibberish only to a certain
 degree and to bring some sense into this stupidity, it is
 necessary to kaow the Tintrio meaning of the single vowels
 ‘and oonsonanta, “For, amongst the chief instruments of the
‘magio which plays such a great port in these texts, belongs
 the spoke word. It is not the meaning embedded in the
 mantra which exercises powor over the deity, but the wor!,
 ‘the som. Back sound possesses special mysterious
 rmesning. ‘Therefore, thers are special glossaries in which
 ‘iia mysterious meaning of the single vowels end consonants
 is taught. A fow of such glossaries, indispensable helps for
 the Sidbaks, or rather the pupil who wants to develop
himself into a Sddhako, have been brought to light in the
 finns volume of the series of Tntric Texts," published by
 Avalon:—The Mantrébhidhina belonging ‘to the Rudra-
 ‘yhmnla, Bkiksbarakoohs asoribed to Purushottamadeva the
 Bijunjghanta of Bhkirava and two Métvicanighantus, the
       1, ‘Téntuk Teas published by Arthur Avalon: Vol. . Tantra
 Dldtne, TL Shajehalra Nidpaas, UT, Prapalcbasien (since
 Deblished and not before Professor Winteruite when he wrote
  heveview),IV, KalachOdkmngs, V. Koldrgava, Vi. Kaltviltse,
  VIL. Shrichaea Sambhara, VIEL. Tantrart, IX. XEmshaltvlten,
 ad
                               118
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS' RELIGION
 ‘one by Mabidhora, the other by Médhava.t Added to these
 is one other auxiliary text of this same kind, the Modri-
 nighanta, belonging to the Vamakeghwara Tontra, an ea
 uneratio of the finger positions as they are used in Yoga.
       ‘The second volume of the sume series of Texts contain
 the text of the Shatchakzaniripana, the “desoription of the
si eile,” together with no less than three commentaries.
‘The “six cncles”are six plas in the human body, imagine!
as lotue-shaped, of great mystical significance and therefore
cf great importance for Yoga. The first of these circles
fs MAléchtra, whiel-is desorbed as o triangle in the middle
of the body with its point dowawends and imagined es»
rec lotus with four petals on which are wtten tile dour
golden letters Var, Sham, Sam and Sham. In the contre
of thi lowsis Svayambhnliige).At the rootof this reddish
brown fie. the Chiteintuadi opens, through which tbe
Devi Kundalin? asoends, more delicate than a lotus fibré
‘and more effalgent than lightning, and so on? The
Shatcbaleanirdpaga is the VI chapterof the Skritativue
‘kintémani composed by Pumtsanda Swami, In addition
‘the volume contains the text of a hymn, entitled Pidulee-
ppancakam, which is sad: to have been revealed by Shiva,
and a voluminous commentary.
      ‘The thind volume of the Series contains the text of the
Propaichasératanira which is ascribed to the Vedantic
philosopher Shafkactcharya, and by others to the deity
Shiva in his incarnation as Shaikordchtrya
      ‘The name Shankara spears fainly often in Tantes
literature, but & nota          all sure that the works in question
seally came fom the Philosopher. Avalon prefuoes the
      Cf. 1m connecten with these glomaries also Ta Zac
Die jndischen'Worterbucher (Grands der indovsrechen Pil.
8, 1897) See. 3
           Any oneia erste
them 2. deseibed
                               in these "Sixto Cites”
                       lon'sod Intodetion       the      Chara willTesta,
                                                    Aahanievssa       nd
pyPw)iebiat Gand                more fay im The Serpuct Power”
                                    ng
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  text by a detailed description of the contents of the work,
 Proponcha mesns “extension,” “the extended Universe”
 from whieh “Prepetichasira”” “the innemiost being of the
 universe”. ‘The work bogins with a description of cteaion,
 accompanied, in the first two chapter, by detailed expos.
 tions of Chronology, Embryology, Anatomy, Physiology
 tard Payehology, whioh aro exactly as “scientific” as both
 ‘he ollawing chapters which treat of the mybterious mean-
 ing  of the lotto of tho Sarai alpbabst snd of the Bias
 Tho further chapters which partly contain situals, partly
 prayer, moiitations and Stott, axe of greater importance
 from the standpoint of the history’of religion. To how
 Dgh    « dogres in the Shakti cul the erotie element predomi
 nstes, is shown in TX, 28 #., whore a destription is given,
 “how the wives of the gods, demons, and demi-gods impelled
 bby mantmss come to the magician, the Sidhales, oppressed
 by tho groatauss of tlsie desites.” In the XVIII chapter,
 ‘the mantras   snd the dhytnas (meditations)  for the adoration
cof the God of love tad his Shastis are taught,    and the union
‘of man snd woman is zeptesented as @ mystic union         of the
 “1° (dhambara) with perception (Buddht) and as « sacred
 sucrifial action, When a man honours his beloved wife
 in such a way, sho wil, struck hy the arrowe of the Ged of
 love, fllow him like shadow even in the other world
 (RVIML, 28). The XXVIII chaptar is dovoted to dndha-
 narigheara, tho God who is half women —Shiva, roptsented
as wid looking man, forms the right-hand haf af the body,
 and his Shakti represented as voluptuous woman, the lett-
 Thana half. The XXXII chaptor which seems’ to have
 originally closed the work describes ints dst part ceremonies
 fgainat cildlesoness, the caus of whichis indicated ag Ick
 cof vensration of tho Gods and neglect of the wife. ‘The
 second part is connected with che relation between touchor
 ‘acd popil which is of extreme importance for the Shikta
 religion. Indesd, worship ofthe Guru, the teacher, plays a
  prominens part in this sect.
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS’ RELIGION
       However, the rituals and Mantess described in this
 ‘Tantra are not exclusively connected with the diferent
 forms of the Devi and Shiva, but Vighou and his Avatiras
 ame also often honowed. The XXXVI chapter contains
 4 disquistion on Vishnu Trlokyamchana (the Enchanter
 of the triple world) in verses 35-47 tronsloted. by Avalon.
 Te is w description glowing snd sensuous (Voll sinalicher
 Git.) Vishnu shins ike millions of suns and i of inf
 Deauty. Full of goodness hin eys rests on Ska, his spouse,
 sho embraces lis, full of love. Ske too io of incomparable
 beauty. All the Gods and Demons and their wives offer
 Thomage to the August Pair. ‘The Goddesses, however, press
 ‘themselves in buming yearning of love towards Vishnu,
 whilst exdaiming: “Be our husbsnd, our refuge, August
 “Lord!” In addition to this pasrogeAvalon has also trans-
 lated the hymns to Praleii (Chapter XT), to Vishau (Chapter
 XXI) and to Shiva Chapter XXVI.A Of these hymns
 ‘the same holds good as of the collection of hymns +o the
 Devi, which Avalon, together with his wif, has tranalated
jn separate volume? Whilot manycf these texts are
 rire insipid litanies of aamnes and epithets of the worshipped.
deities, there are others, whieh,as to profoundness of thought
 and beauty of language msy:bs put side by side with the
  best productions of the religious Iyris of the Indiana’ So
 ‘the hymn to Prakiti in the Prapafichaséra XI, 48, begins
  swith the words :
        “Be gracious to me, O Pradbins, who art Praksiti in
  ‘he form of the elemental word. Life of all that Lives.
  ‘With folded hands Tmake obeisance to thee our Lady, whoso
                     ‘to do tht which we eausot undoretand.”
                  gible that the posta have found much more
  intimate eres of the heart when they spoke of the Deity
       T. Ineedooton, pO
       2, Toteeduetin, p29A 45 f. and 82
       8. Hymas to the Goddess transated from the Sansloit by
   Ath and Ellen Avalon (118).
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘ae their “Mother” than when. they addressed themselves
to God as ather, So, for instance, it is seid in s hymn to
the Goddess V ascribed to Shaficara :
                                2
      By my ignorance of Thy commands
      By my poverty and sloth
      hind nct the power to do thst which I should have done
      Hence my omission to worship Thy feet.
      But Oh Mother, auspicious deliverer of all,
      All this should be forgiven me
      For, a bd son may sometimes le bom, but bad
           mother never:
                                3
      Oh Mother 1. ‘Tho hast many sons on earth,
      But J, your son, am of.no, worth’
      Yot itis not meet that Thou shouldst abandon me
      For, a bad son may sometimes be bor, but a bed
           ‘mother never,
                                4
    Oh Mother of the world, Oh Mother!
    Lave not wombipped Thy fet
    Nor have I given abundant wealth to The,
   ‘ett ation which Thou batoweston me is without
        compare,
    or, 4 bad aon may sometines be born, but a bed
        saother never
     Avalon looks with grat sympathy on the Shékte
religion which has found the highest expression for the
divine principle in the conception “Mother”. He is of
opinion? that when the Europesn thinks   that it is a debase-
‘ment of the deity to conesive of it as faminine, then this
    3. Hymns
         to the Goddess, p. 94, Verse 24,
    42, Hymns tothe Geddes, rfae,
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS' RELIGION
 can only be because he         “looks upon his mother’s sex as
  lower than his own” end because ie, thinks it unworthy of
  the deity to conceive it otherwise than mosculine. ‘That
  ‘the conception of the Indian and especially         of the Shaka
  ispin this conection, the more unbssed and unpejudioed
  fone, we will fely concede to Avalon. He, however, goes
  til further and believes that the Tantras not only have an
  {treat fom the point of view of the history of religion,
  ‘bat that they also posess an independent value as mancals
  of.Sidhant, thetis magic However grateful we might
  be to the editor and traniator of these texts for having
 rade us better sequainted with a little Mnown and much
 ‘misunderstood Indisn system of religion, we yet would hope
‘to be saved from the possibility of seein              added togthe
  Vedantsta, Neo-Buddhists, Theosophists and other India-
  faddists (Indienschwarmem) in Europe snd America,
  audherents of the Saabs of she Shalt cult, The student
 of religion cannot     and may not lsave the Tantras        and Shile-
tism unnotved. They           havo thoir place in the history of
  religion. But, may this o@oultia, whish offen fows from
  ‘very tarbid sourees—(thia word should not be translated
 as "Benrt Science” ths abusing the eared name of Science,
   but rather as “Myntery Mongering” Geheimtusrei) remain
   fr away from our intalloctual lit.
        [To the above may bo added recent critcistn of 3.
   ‘Masson Onrsel of the College de France in the Journal “Isis’”
   (G,  1690) “Thowhichis                       teanslated from the
                            summarized and strangeness
  ‘reach:            obocant    of language,
                                        y                   of thoaght
   tnd rites sometimes adjudged       scandalous,  lave   tamed   ewey
   from the sady of the immense Ténteik literature oven the
   most courageous ssvants. If, however, the Tanims have
   ‘appeared to be a mere mass of aberrations, tis Decause the
   key to them was unknowa. The ‘Tantras are the culmi-
   nation of the whole Indian literature. Into them flow both
   ‘the Vedic and popular outs, ‘Tintricism ha imposed itself
      1, The Text, Val 1 34
                         13
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘on the whole Hindu mentality (le Tentrisme, est imposé &
 ‘toute la mentulité hinddus). Arthur Avalon has under-
 taken with complete surcess a tagk which in appearance
seems to be a thanklessone butiain relityfecund     of        exults,”
       The article of Dr. Winternite deals largely with the
 Mabinirvina Tantra, “Bectuse objections cannot be easily
found against this Tantra, the theory   bas boen Intly put for-
‘wand by Dr. Farquhar in his last work on Indian Literature
‘tot this partioular scripture is exceptional and the work of
Ram Moun Roy's Guru Haribaténands Bhirati, The
 angumentis in effect “All Tentras are bad ; this is not bad
‘therefore  it is not a Tantra.”" In the first plaoe, the MS,
 referred to in the Preface t> A. Avalon's translation of
 this Tantra as baving been brought to Celoutte, was. an
 old MB. having the data Shabba 1800 odd, thet i, several
 Inndreds of yeats ago. Seoondly, the Mabinirvina which
 belongs to the Vishnulkrintd, ot as some say Rathakrinth,
 is mentioned in the MabSsiddhisira Tautes, an old copy of
‘which was the propecty of Raja. Sir Redhiksant Dev (b.
 1783—d. 1867), a contemporsty of Raja Ram Mohun Roy
 (17741888) who survived. the Intter’s son. The eatliest
 edition of that Tantra by Anondachandra Vedintavigtsha
 was published from a text in the Sanskrit College Library
 which is not likelyto have had amongst ita MSS. one which
 was the vork of a man who, whatever be the date of his
 deaths, must have died within a comparatively short peried
 cof the publication of this edition. In fact, the Catalogue
 describes it as an old MB. and en’ original Tantra, Dr.
 Bojendralala Mitra in his notice of a MB. of the: Tagore
 collection speaks of it as containing only the frst half of
 fourteen chapters. This is so. The second half is not
 published    and ia very mts. ‘The Pandit’ copy       to which
 ‘eferenco was made in the Preface to A. As tonslation of
  the Mahdnirvine coxtnined both paris. How comes it that
if the Tantra was written by Roja Ram Mohun Roy's Gura
‘that we only have the Sirs half and not tho second containing
                                 124
  THE TANTRAS AND SHAKTAS' RELIGION
 amongst other things the so-called mogic or Shatkarms.
 Tt should be mentioned that there are three Tantras—the
 Nirvana, Brihsnnirviya and Mahdnirvaga Tantra, similar
 ‘to the group Nile, Brann snd Mehdaila Tantras, It is
‘to be noted alae that  in the year 1208 B.S, or 1888.an edition
 of the Mobinirvdna was published with commentary by a
 ‘Sennyasin callitg himself Shafikardcharyé under the auspices
 of the Danda Sabie of Magikamila Ghat, Bonares, which
 contains more verses thanis contained in the text;commentod
 ‘upon by Hariharénanda and the interpretation of the latter
 as also that of Jagamohan Tarkilafkara, are in several
 ‘matters oontroverted. We sre saked to suppose that
 Hiarinarduande was both the author of, and commentator
 co, the Tantra. That the Mahinirvina has its merits is
 obvious, but there are athors which have theirs. ‘The same
  critic speaks of the Pespafichasira ae rather foul work”,
 ‘This exiticiam is ridiculous: The text is published for any
  cone to judge. All that can be said is what Dr. Wintarnits
‘nao cai, namely, that there are afew passages with sensuous
  cxotioimagery. These are descriptive of the state of women
  in love. What is wrong here? There is nothing “foul
in this excopt for people to whom all erotic phenomens are
  foul. “This is’ very indeoent picture,” seid on elderly
  lady  to Byron, who retorted" Madam, the indeoency consists
  in your remark.” Tt cannot be too often saeerted that the
  tncient East was purer in these matiars than the modern
  West, where, under cover of a pruviently modest
  exterior, a ‘cloaca of extraontinarily varied. psycho-
   pathic filth may flow. This was not so in eatlior day,
  whether of Bnst or West, when a spade was called a spade
  ‘and not 1 horticaltoral instrument. In America itis stil,
  Tam told, considered indecent to mention the word “leg”
   One must soy “limb”, Seid Tertullian : “Natura veneranda
 cetnon erubescenda” ; that is, where the knower venenates,
   his unknowing oritic blushes.
        ‘The Prapafichaséra which does not even deal with the
                                 15
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
ite against which most objection bas been taken (while
the Mahinirvine does), treats of the creation of the world,
the generation of bodies, physiology, the classification of
the letters, the Kal, initiation, Japa, Homs, the Gayatri
‘Mantra, end xitaal worship of various Devstas andso forth ;
‘with facts in short which are not “foul” with or without the
 ualiying
nay
            rather”                                iW)




                            126
                         narra VI.
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA.
     HAKT who is in Herelf pure blissful Consciousness
         (Chidtpint) is also the Mother of Notare and is
  \atate iteelf born of the creative play of Her thought. ‘The
Shika feith, or worship         of Shakti, is, I believe, in aomeof
 its essential foutures one of the oldest and most widespread,
 religions      in the world. Though very ancient, i ia yet, in
 ita ctoontials, and in the developed form in which we know
 it to-day, hatmosions with someof the teashings of modem
 Philosophy and science; not that this is necesssrily » test
 tits truth, Te may be here noted that in the West, and in
 Dertioular in Ameries and England, s large aumber of
  books ane now being published. on “New Thought,” “Wil
  Power,” " Vitalie,” “ Orestive Thought,” “Right Thought,”
  “Self Unfoldment,” “Secret of Achievement,” “Mental
  ‘Thesapeutics” andthe: like, the principles of which are
cementilly those of some forms of Shakti SQdhank both
  higher      and lower, There are books of disguised magiosa
 hhow to control othors (Vashiarans) by making them buy
 ‘what they do not want, how to secure “affection” and 20
 forth which, nobwithstending some hypocrisies, are in
 ‘certain respecte on the same lovet as the, Téntsik Sharam
 as a low class of books on magio are called. Shavars or
 ‘Chandila ore amongstthe lowest of men. ‘The ancient ancl
 a the same time distinguishing character of the faith i
 instanced by temple worship (the old Vaidik worship was
 ‘gmcrally       in the home or in the open by the river), the cult
 of tages, of Lings and Yoni (oeither af which,i is sa
 ‘were part of the original Vaidike proto), the worship
 cof Devis end of the Maga Mater (Uhe great Vaidik Devath
 ‘was the male Indra) sod other mates of both doctrine and
  Practice.
                                    7
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Many yeats ago avard Ssllon, with the aid of
 learned Orientalist of the Matiras Civil Service, attempted
 to learn ite mysteries, but for reasons, which Teed not here
 discuss, did not view them from the right. standpoint. He,
 hhowever, compared the ShAktss with the Greek Telesticn or
 Dynamics, the Mysteries of Dionysus “Fire born in the
 cave of initiation” with the Shakti POja, the Shakti Sho-
 Ghana with the purification shown in d’Hancarvilles’
 “Antique Gresi Vases” j and after refering to tho froquent
 rent of this ritual in Uhe writings of the Jews and other
 fiucient author, concluded that it was evident thet we had
 stil surviving in India inthe Shika worship a vory ancient,
 if not the most ancient, form of Mystic in the, whole
 world, Whatever be the valse to be given to any parti
 calar piooe of evidence, he Was) right in his general conela-
 sion, For, when we throw our minds tack upon the history of
 this worip we see stretching! sovay into the remote and
 fading past the figure of the Mighty Mother of Nature, most
 ancient among the ancients; the Ady Shalt, the dusk
 Divinity, many breasted crowned with towers whose vel
is never litted, ni, “the one who ig oll that has been, is
 and will ke,” Kall, Hathor, Cybele,the Cowmother Godcless
 1a, Tripurssundast, the Tonie Mother, Tef the spouse of
 Shu by whom Ho effects the hirth ofall things, Aphrodite,
 Astarte in whose groves the Béslim ware sat, Babylonisn
 Mylites, Buddhist TAs, the Moxioan Ish, Hollenio Osa, the
 consorsted, the free and parm, African Salambo who’ like
 Parvati roomed the Mountains, Roman Jano, Rgyptisn
  Bast the flaming Mistress of Life, of Thought, of Love,
 ‘whose festival was celebrated with wanton joy, the Assyrian
  Mother Suecoth Becoth, Northern Freia, fdlopralrit,
  Semele, Mays, Ishtar, Saitio Noith Mother of the Gods,
  cinrnal deopest ground of all things, Kundali, Guhyx-
  rmabibbairoet and all the rest.
      "And yet there are people who allege that the “"Tintrie™”
  coltis modern, "To deny this is not to say tat there haa
                               28
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘been oF will be no change or development       in it, As man
 changes, so do the forms of his beliefs. An ancient feature
 of this faith and one belonging to the ancient Mysteries is
 ‘the distinction which it draws between the initiate whose
 Shaki is wwake (Pmbaddhs) and the Pashm the unillumined
 or “animal” and, as the Gnostics called him, “material”
 man. The Natural, which is the manifestation of the
 ‘Mother   of Nature, and the Spiritual or the Mother as She
 is in and by Herself sre one, Lut the initiate alone truly
 rovogninse thie unity. He knows himself in all his natural
 fimotions as the one Consciousness whether in enjoyment
 (@ukti), or Liberation (Mukti). Te is an essential principlo
 of Tintzik Stdhanf that man in general must rise through
 and by means of Nature, and aot by an ascetic rejection of
 ‘Her. A profoundly true. principle is here involved what
 fever Ins been said. of certain applications of it, When
 Orpheus transformed the old Bacchic cult, it was the purified
 ‘who in the besutiful words of Karipides “went dancing
 cover the hills with the daughters of Iacchos”. I camnot,
 however, gointo this matter in this paper whieh is convemed
 with some general subjects and the ordinary ritual. But
 the evidence is not limited to mystaries of the Shakti Paja,
 ‘There are festares in the ondinary outer worship which are
 ‘very old and widespread, as are also other porta of the
 esoterio teaching. In this connection, a ouricus instance
 fof the existence, beyond Tndis, of Tantei doctrine and
 pmotioe a here given. The American Indian Maye Serip-
 ‘ture of the Zuais called the Popul Vuh speaks of Hurakan
 or Lightning, that is (I am told) Kundalishaka; of tho" air
 tube” or “White-cord” or the Sashumna Nadi; of the
  “two-fold aie tube” that is Tai and Pingald; and of various
 bodily centzes which are marked by animal glyphs
       ‘Perhaps the Panchatattva Ritaal followed by somo of
 the adhements of the Tantra is one   af the main causes which
 Ihave operated in some quarters against acceptance of the
 ‘uthority of the Seriptures and se such responsible for the
                                129
       ‘                                                 *
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 notion that the wosship is modern. On sho contrary, the
 tusoge of wine, meat, and so forth is itslf very old." There
 fre people who tale of those rites as though they were some
 entively new and comparatively modem invention of the
 “Tantza”, wholly alien to the spirit and practice of the
 early times. IC the subjeot be studied it will, T think, be
 found that in this matter those worshippers who practise
 ‘these sites are (exept possibly as to Maithuna) the con-
 ‘Souatom of vary ancient practices which hd their connter-
 pts in the earlier Vaidikichira, but wore sibsequently
 abandoned, possibly under the influence of Jainism and
 Buddhism. 1 say “counterpart”, for 1 do not mean to
 ‘suggest thatin every respect tho rifos were the same. In
 details and as regards, I think, some objects in view, they
 dliflred. ‘Thus ve find) in) this Panchstattva, Ritual 9,
 counterpart to the Waidike usage of wine and animal food.
 ‘As regards wine, wo have the partakingof Soma; mest
 ‘was oflsred in Mantafshtales Shridaha ; fihin the Asbfaka-
 shriddha and Pretashrdddha; and Maithana: as recog-
 nized rite will be found in the Viradevya Vaata and Mabi-
 ‘vate of univemally recognized Vaidik-texts, apart fom the
 alleged, snd genstally unknown, Sauthagyakinds of the
 ‘Aiberveveds. to“ whoh=the--EAlikopanishad and .other
 “Titik” Upanishads are ssid to belong. Possibly, how-
 ever, this element of Maithuns may be foreign and imported
by Chinichire (ce Ch. V). So again, as that distinguished
 scholat Professor Ramendica Sundara Trivedi has pointed
 ‘out in his Vichitraprasanga, the Mudra of the Panchatattva
 ‘correszonda with the Purodisha dak of the Soma and othor
 ‘Yigas. ‘The present rule of abstinence from wine, and in
 some cases, meatis due, T balieve, to the original Buddhism.
 1 is so-alled “Tantriks", who follow (iu and for their
 tual only) the estior practice. It is true that the Samhita
 of Ushinth says, “Wine is not to be drunk, give or taken
 (MGadyam apeyam adeyam sgrihyam)” but the yet greater
  Mana states, “There is no wrong in the cating of mest or
                                130
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘tho drinking of wine (Na misinabalishane dosto na madye)”
  ‘hough be rightly edis, as many now do, that sbstention
  therefrom is produstive of great fruit. (Nivettita maba-
  halt). The Tantei proctice does not allow extra-rtual
  or “useless” drinking (Vrithfpana),
       ‘Barther, i is common error to eanfound two distinct
 ‘things, namely, belief nd practioe and the wetten reconds
 of ik These latter may be comparatively recent, whilst
 that of which they syeak may be most ancient, When I
 speak of the ancient past of thin faith T am nob referring
 rarely to the writings which exist today which are called
 ‘Tentras, These are composed gonorally in a simple San-
 slit by men whose object it was to be understood rather
 ‘han to show skil in literary ornament. ‘This simplicity ia
 sign     of age. Butab the some time itis Loukiks and not
 Arsha Sonskrit. Moreover, thete are statenients in them
 Which (unless interpolation) fix she limite of their age. I
‘am not speaking of the weitings themselves butof whst they
 say. ‘The faith thet they embody, or at least ite earlier
 forms, mey have existed for many ages beforeit was reduced
 to-writing amongst the Kulas or family folk, who received it
 ‘as handed down by tradition (Piramparyya) justas did the
 Vaidike Gotras, ‘That: such beliefs and practices, like all
 other things, bave had their development in coureo of time
 is alto o ikely hypothesis.
       ‘A vast number of Tantras have disappeared probably
for ever, Of those which survive large number are un-
 aown. Most of those which are available are of a trag-
 mentary charnoter. ‘ven if these did oppesr later than
 some other Sbistras, this would not, on Indian principles,
 affect their authority. According to such principles the
 authority of © Scripture is not determined by its date ;
 and this ia sente, Why,it in-esked, should something said
 1000 years ago be on that account only ter than what
 ‘was said 100 years ago? Tein held that whilst the teaching
 of the Agama is ever existent, portilar Tantras are
                               131
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 constantly Veing revealed and withimwn. There is no ob-
 jection against a Tantra merely because it was revealed
 to-day. When it is said thet Shiva spoke the ‘Tanta,
 ax Brahma wrote the celebrated. Vaishnava poem called the
 Brahmasombita, it is not meant thst Shiva ond Brahma
 matarilied and took @ reed and wrote on birch bark or
 leaf, buo that the Divine Consciousness to which men gave
 ‘oss and other names inspired a particular man to tancb,
 or to write, @ particular doctrine or work touching tho
 eternally existing truth. This again does not mean that
 ‘here was any one whispering in his eat, but that those
 ‘hings rose in his consciousness.       What is done in this
 ‘world is done-through man. There is @ profounder wisdom
 ‘than is generally acknowiedged in the saying “God helps
 those who help themselves”. Ingpisktion too never cease.
 ‘Bubhow, it maybe asked, ar we to know that whotis said
 is right and tre? ‘The answer is “by ita, fruits”. ‘The
 authority  of Shist is detormined by the question whether
 Siddai io gained through ita provisions oz aot. Tt is not
 enough that “Shiva uvdcha” Ghiva_ says) is wait in it,
‘The tost is that of Ayurveda. A medicineis a true         one if
 it curs. The Indian tot for everything ts actual experience.
 eis from Sombahi that the ultimate proof of Advaitavdda
is sought. How is the existence of Kalpss mown! Tt is
 sai they havo been remembered, os by the Buddha who i
 recorded as having called to mind 91 past Kalpas. ‘There
 ‘re argumenta   in favour of rebirth but that which in tendered
 fis real proo!is-both the faote of ordinary daily experience
 ‘which can,"itis said, be explained‘only on the hypothesis
 of procexistence; as also actual reoollestion by self-developed
 individuals of their previous lives. “Modern Western me-
 ‘thois operata throug magneto sleep producing “regression
 ‘of memory”. (See A. de Rochas “Les Vies Successves””
  and Tancelix “La Vie posthume”.) Age, however, isnot
‘wholly without its wes : became one of the things to which
‘man look to 60s in a Shfsta is whether it has been accopted
                                 132
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 or quoted in works of recognized authority. uch a test
 of authenticity ean, of course, only be aifowled aftér the
 lapse of considerable time. But it does not follow that a
 statement is in fast without value because, owing to its
 having beon made rotently, it is not possible to subject it
to such atest, This is the way in which this question of
 ‘ge and suthority is looked at on Indian principles.
        A wide survey of what is called orthodox “Hinduism”
 today (whatever bo its origins) wil disclose the following
 results :—Vedate in the sense of Uponishad ap its eomnon
 dectrinal bass, though vasiusly interpreted, and great
number of dering disciplines ot modes of practic: by which
‘tho Vedtata doottines are realized in actual tact. We
rust carefully distinguish these two. Thus the Vedanta
 says “So’ham "; which ia Hats, “Hakirais one wing ;
 Sikea is. the othes: When stripped) of oth wings She
 ‘Tira ia KamakslA.” (Tanteurdja Tantra.) The Achirss
 set forth the mens by which ““So'ham” int be translated
 into actual fact dor the. particular Sidhike, Stdlind
 cies ft the soot “Aah” which tieans eft or striving
 or accomplishment. fort for and towards what! Tho
 suswer fot those who deste iis lberstion from every form
 ‘im the hicrarchy of forma, which osist as such, because
 consciousness has s0 nite itelf es to obseure the Reslty
 ‘which it is, and which “Soham” or “Shivo'ham"” affirm.
 ‘And why should man liberate himself from material forms ¢
 Boounse itis aad, that way only Testing, kappiness les
 ‘hough a passing” yet, fmitftl bliss may bo had here by
 ‘those who identify themselves with the ctive Brohman
   (Shales). Tee the antual experienceof this delaration of
   “Sovhaeh" which in ite fondamental aspect is. Veda -—
 Inowledge (Vid) ot actual Spiitaal Experience, for in the
 ronistic seuse to traly Know anything is to be thot
  thing. This Veda or experionce is not to he Ind. sitting
 down thinking vaguely on the Great Ether nad doing
 nothing. Man must drasform himself, thats, aa! in onder
                             133
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 to luow. Therefore, the watchword of the ‘Tontms is
Kriy&. or setion,
       Tho next question is what Kriy should be adopted
towards thio end of Jaina. ““Tanyate, vistiryate, jnfuam
‘auena iti Tenteam,” Avoording to this derivetion of the
‘word Tantra from the root “Tan” “to spread”, itis defined
 as the Shistm by which knowledge (Ixdna) is spread.
 Mark the word Inna. The end of the practical methods
 which these Shtotras employ is to spread Vodintio Juin
 tie boro wo find that varioty which is so paraling to those
 who have not gone to the root of the religious life ot Ind
 ‘The end is substantially one. The means to thet end neces-
 sarily vary sevording to knowledge, capacity, and tempers-
 ment. But here again we mey analyse the means into
 ‘two mein divisions, namely, Vaidik, and TAntzk, to which
may be added o third or the mixed) (Mishra). The one
 body of Hinduism reveals) os it were, « double framework
 reprinted by the Vaidik and ‘Téntrik Achéras, which
 Ihave in certain instances been mingle.
       ‘The word “Tantea” by itaef simply    means os I have
 already said “treatise” snd not neossearly religious
 Soxiptare, When ites the lat er significance, it may mean
 the Scripture of several divisions of worshippers who vary
 jndoctrine end practice. Thus thro ore Tantras of Shaivss,
 ‘Vaighnavas, and Shaktas and of vations sub-divisions of
 these. So amongst the Shaivas there are the Shaivas of
 tiie Shaiva Siddhénta, the Advaits Shaiva of the Kashmir
 School, PAshupatas and a multitude of other seote which
 Ihave their Tantras, Tf “autzio” be ed as meaning an
 tadheroat of the Tantea Shfstra, thon the word, in any
 particular ease, ia without definite meaning. Aman to
 ‘whom te application is given may be a worshipper of any
 of the Five Devaits (Sizya, Ganeeba, Vishnu, Shiva, Bhakti)
 and of any of the various Sampradayss worshipping that
 Devaté with their varying doctrine and, practice. ‘The
  term is 6 confusing one, thougi common practice compels
                                134
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
its we, So far a6 T know, those who are named “autres”
 do not themselves geuerally use this tam but eall them
selves Shikias, Shaivas and the lke, of whatever Sanvpre~
 diya they happen to be.
       Agu Tantrs i the name of only one class of Seriptnre
followed hy “Tintries”. There aw others, namely, Nig
ras, Agmuus, Yanualas, Danworas, Uidtsbas, Ksksbapttss
 andso forth. None of these names are used to describe the
audhesents of these Shistras exoxpt; so far as 1 am aware,
Agua in the se of the term Agamavadin, and Agamintn
in the descriptive name of Agents Shiva. T give later
Sintof these Scriptussa containedin th various Agumas.
Ti we summarise thom shortly under the term Tautea
Shistr, or prfersbly Agans, then e have four main
‘asses of Indian Sorigture, namely, Voda (Samhita, Brih-
‘mega, Upenishad)y Agana! ‘or Tehten ‘Sista, Purina,
 Sept, Of these Shastmas the.anthority of the Agama or
 ‘Tantra Shistza has een denied in modeta times. This
 view may be shown to be erroneous by reference to Shéstras
cf admitied authority. Ibis spoken of ay the Tifth Veda,
 Kollula ‘Bhatta, the celdbrated’ commentator on Mant,
 says: “Shrat! & tivafold; Vailike and) Matrik (Vaid
‘nts chaiva dvividhalrutih Kitt)”. ‘This nafers to ths
 Mautza portion of the Agimas. In the Great Vaighnava
 Bhistn, the Shrimad Bhigevate, Bhagavan soya: “My
 ‘vombip is of the three kinds— Vaidik, Tintrik and Mixed
  (Qishea)” ond thst, in Kaliyuga, “Keshava is to be wor-
 shipped according ‘to the injunction of Tantra.” The
 Devfbhigevate speaks of the Tantrm Shistra as a Vedéngs.
 Te is cited as authority in the Ashtovitishati Tattva of
 Raghinandina who preseribe for the worship of Durgi as
 trfore him bad done Shekatia, Harindthe, Vidyédhara
 snd many others. Some of these and other references are
 given in Mahimaboptdhyaya Vidaveshvaro ‘Tarkarata’s
  ‘Tantser Prickinatva in the SEhieya Samhith of Aswin 1317.
  ‘The Térhpradipa and other Tantrle works say that in the
                             135
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Kaliyuge the Téntrika and not the Vaidika Dharma is to
Jn followed. This objection sbout the Inte characterand
thensfore unauthoritativeness of the Tantra Shistras gone
rally (Ido not apeak of any particular form of it) ns bean
taken by Indians from their Kuropesn Guras.
      ‘According to the Shika Soriptares, Ved in its wide
sense dots not only mean Rik, Yajus, Sama, Athsrva as
now publiabed but comprises these together with the gene-
rally unknown al unpablished Uttara Kanda ofthe Atharra
Vadis, called Saubhigya, with tho Upsnishads attached to
this.” Styana's Commentary is written on the Piva Kinds.
‘Theve are said (ehbagh I have not yet veried tho fact) to
be 64 in number. Some of these, such as Advaitabhive,
Keuls, KAiké, ‘Tsipars, ‘Téré, Arana Upanishads and
Yahvrichopanishsd, Bhivenopenishad, I Eave published
as the XT volume of Téntrik Texts. /Armi means “She
who is red” Redness (Lauhityam) is: Vimassha, (Bee
Vol. XI, Ténttike Texts. Hd. A. Avalon.) I may also bere
refer my tender to the Kauldchdrya Saddnanda’s Com-
‘mentary on the grsat Taha Upanishad, Tpoluded also in
“Vela” (according to the some view) ato tho Nigarss,
‘Agamas, ‘Yimals and ‘Tantraa,” From theeo all other
Shastcas which expaia the mieaning (Artha) of Veds such
ss Porkps and Smt, ako Ttihse and 90 forth are derived.
‘All these Shistras constitute what is called w “Many million
ed” (Shitakoti) Sambita whieh are developed, the one from
the other at it wore an unfolding cies. In the Tanta
Sangraba called Sarvllisa by the Sarvavidyasiddha Sarva
nandanttha the Iatier cites authority (Néxdyant Tantra) to
show that from Nigama came Agama, Here I pause to
nota that the Sommobane says thet Kersln Sampradiye
is Dakshina and follows Veda (Vedamisgasths), whilst
Gouda (to which Sarvinandantth belonged) is Vama and
follow Nigama. Hence apperently the pre-eminence given
to Nigama. He then says from Zgama came Yamala,
‘from Yamala the four Vedas, from Vedes the Purdgas, from
                             136
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Purina Sorti, and ftom Smyiti all other Shistras, There
‘9, he says, five Nigamas and 64 Agsmas. Your Yamalas
‘ie mentioned, which are sui to give the gress form (SthAla-
ripe). As some may be surprited to lear thut tho four
‘Veda came from the Yimalas (ie, were Antargata of the
‘Yimalas) which literally means what is uniting or compre-
Ihensve, I subjoin the Sonat verse from Nasiyant Tantrs
        BrabmoyimelesanB¥ttam sdmaveda-matom shive
        Ruiroydmalacomjdta rigudo paramo mokén
         Vishnuydmalasambhite yajurouleh Buleghoori
        Shaktiydnalasanbhttain atkarea poramom mahat
      Some Tansrat are called by opposing sects Vedavirad-
ni (opposed to Veta), which of couree those who actept
‘them deny, just as the Commentary of the Nityishoda-
shikdroava speaks of the Panchoriin os Vodabhrashts,
‘That some sects were originally Avaidika is probable, but
in process of time various amalgamations of scriptaral
 authority, bli and practice took place.
       ‘Whethar wo accopt or not this theory, according to
 ‘hich the Agazas and Kindred Shistrsare given suthority
 with the four Vedas wo have to accept the facts. What
 faze these?
       ‘As T havo sai, on oxttninstion the one bodyof Hindu
fm reveals as it were a double framework. I am now
 looking at the matter from an outside point of view which
 is not thet of the Shalta worshipper. We find on the one
 Ibind the four Vedas with thir Sembitis, Boibmenas, and
 Upenishadsand on the other what has been called the
  “<Tith Vodo,” that   is Nigama, Agama and kindzed Shistras
 and certain expecially “Tintrik” Upanishads attached to
 the Soubbigya Kanga of the Atbarmaveds. Thete are
  YVaiik ond Tantrik Kalpa Sitms and SAktas such a8 the
 Tentsika Devt ond Mateya Sikias. As s counterpart of
the Brahmastitras, wo have the Shakti SOteas.of Agastya,
 ‘Thon thore is both Veidil and “TEntrik” ritual such se the
 ‘ten Vsidie Sactskavas and tho Tantrie SeahakAras, such ag
                             137
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Abhishek; Vaidik and Téntck initiation (Upmayana ead
 ‘Dilaha); Vaile and Téntrik Gayatat; the Vaidile Om, the
 so-called “Tintrik” Bijas such as-Hring;                Vaidila Guru
and Deshiks       Gura andso forth. This dualism may         be fond
 carried into other matters 9s well, such as medicine, Inv,
 writing, So, whist the Vaidik Ayurveda employed: generally
vegetable drugs, the “Tntriks”        used metallic substances. A
 counterpartof the Vaidika Dharmapatntwas the Shaiva wif,
 ‘that is, sho who is givon by desire (Kama), T have already
 pointed out tlie counterpartsof the Panclatattva in the
 ‘Vedas. Some alloge a special form of Tantrik script at any
 rate in Gavds Desha and so forth.
       ‘What is the mesning of all this? Ttis not t present
 ‘possible to give a certain answer. ° The subject he been 30
 neglected and is 20 little "mown, » Before tendeting any
 conclusions with any certainty of theit comectness, we must
 examine the Tanirik Texts which time hes spared. Tt will
 bbe seadily poosived, bowever, that if thore     be such « double
 frame as T suggest, it indicates that thees wero originally
 ‘ovo sourees of religion one of which (pssbly     in sre respects
 ‘the older) incorported parte of, and in time langely super-
 sede    the other. And thisis what the “Tlnteiks” impledly
 allege in theiz viewsas tothe rlation ofthe four Vedas and
 Agomas. If they are not both of authority, why shoud
 such reverencebe given     to the Deshika Garus and to Taataik
 Diksha
       ‘Probably, there were many Avaidike culls, not without
 1 deop and ancient wisdom of their own, Ut is, cults out-
 side the Vaidik religion (Vedab§hye) which in the coume
 of time adopted certain Vaidik rites such as Homa: the
 ‘Vaidikas, in their own turn, taking up some ofthe Avaidika
 practiow. It may be that some Brihimanas joined these
 so-oilled Andrya Sampradiyas justag we Sind to-day Brib-
 ‘manas officiating for low costes and being called by theit
 name. At length the Shéstras of the two cults were given
  ft least equal authority. ‘The Vaidiz practice then largely
                                  138
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 disappeared, surviving chilly both in the Souista rites of
‘to-day and as embedded in th ritual of the Agamas. ‘These
 ‘ze speculations to which Ido uot definitely commit myself.
 ‘They sre menly suggestions which may be worth oonsi-
 Aesstion when seatch is made for the origin of the Agama
 Hf they be correct, then in this, os in other esses, the bulits
 ‘and practices of the Boil have been upheld until today
 against the inoming calta of those “ Aryas” who followed
 ‘the Vaidi rites and who in thirturn infneodthe various
 religions communities without the Vaidile fold.
       ‘The Smirias of today represent what ia genezlly
 cilled the Shrauéa side, though in these sites there are
 Iingled mony Pauranic ingrodienta. ‘The Arya Samija
 ig auother prevent-day representative of the old Vaidika
 Achira, mingled as it seems to me with a modernism, which
 is puritan and otherwise. ‘The other, or TSntrik side, in
 represented by the general body. of present-day Hinduism,
 ‘aod in particular by the various sectarian divisions of
 Shaivas, Shikag Vaighnavas end so forth which go to ita
  making.
       ‘Etch scot of worshippers has ita own Tantras. In a
 previous Okapter I have shorly refarod to the Tantras of
 the Shaivasidahiata, of the Pancharatra Agama, and of the
 Northern Shaivaism of which the Milintvijaya Tantra sets
 ‘the type. The old fivefold division of worshippers was,
 scoorling to the Panchopisana, Saura, Ganapstya, Vaigh-
 nava, Shaiva, and Shieta whose Mila Devatis wore’ Strya,
 Ganapati, Vishnu, Shiva and Shakti respeotively. At the
 present time the thefold division, Vaishnava, Shaiva,
 Shikta, is of tore practical importance, as the otber two
 survive only toa limited extent to-day. In parts of Westar
 Tndis the worship of Ganesha is still popular and I believe
 ome Suuras oF traces uf Sauras hare and there exist, oa
 ‘pesially in Sind
       ‘Six Amntyas aw mentioned in the Tantras, (Shad-
 imnayily, ‘These are the six Faces of Shiva, looking sat
                                139
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (Parvimndye), South Dalohinémndya), Wost (Pashohi-
 minndya), North (Utartmniys), Upper (Urddhvisautya)
Lower and concealed (Adhdmntys), ‘The six Rtondyas are
 ‘thus so called aoconding to the onder of thei origin. They
 are thus deseribed in the Devylgame cited in the Tanta
rahaays (gee also, with some vasiation probably due to
‘corrupt text, Patala TI of Samayichéra Tantra) :—“(1) The
coin tho Bast (that is in front) is of peso-Hke lustre with
 tres eyes and crowned by the erescent moon. By thia
fave T (Shiva) revealod (the Devs) Skst Bhavanesheac,
 ‘Tripats, Lalité, Pad, Shilin, Sarsevatl, Tvasita, Nity,
 Vojeupractivin, Aenapiione, Mahilalsh, Lakakmt, Vag
inf with oll their rites and Mantras. (2) The Southern,
 fs00is of a yellow colour with three eyes.” By this faoe T
 revesled Prastdasadishive, Mahiprisadamantrs, Dakshind-
marti, Vatuke, Monjughosks, Bhairava, Mstasanjtvini-
 vidyl, Mrityunjayt with their sites ond Mantras. (8) The
aoe    in the West (that is atthe back) is of the colour of a
 freably formed cloud. By this face I revedled GopAla,
 Kridhns, Nariyana, Visudeva, Nrisvths, Vimans, Varia,
Rimachandrs, Vishou, Hashana, Ganeabs, Agni, Yama,
Sézya, Vidhe (Chandra) ond othor planota,       Garuda, Dik”
plas; Haownén and other Sura, their rites and Mantas.
 (4) ‘The face in tao Nort is Dlue in colour snd with three
 eyes. By this faco, I revealed the Devis, Dalshinakik,
 Manila, Gohyaidlt, Smashfnalali, Bhacrakalt, Hkajeta,
 ‘Ugmatacd, Tirint, Kitydyant, Obhionamastd, Nussarasvat,
 Darga, Joyadurgd, Nevadurga, Vashult, Dhimivit, Vishi-
 lilokt, Gouri, Bogeldmukdi, Pratyangici, Mitanget,
 Mahishamaniin, thir vites and Mantmas. (6) The Upper
 faco ie white. By this face I revealed Shelmatsripam-
 eundar, ‘Tripweshf, Bhairavt, Tripursbhairevt, Smasbna-
 Dhaicert, Bhuvoneshtbhairevt, Shathatabhairevi, Anna-
 pirabhairavt, Panchamt, Shodasht, Maint, Valsva's, with
‘hei ites and Mantras. (8) Tho sixth faoa Below) is sttous,
  cf many colours and concealed. Is is hy thip mouth that I
                             140
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  spoke of Devatisthfna, Asana, Yantra, Mala, Naivedya,
  Validtoa, Sidhind, Purashoharans, Mantrasiddhi. It is
 called febintmnéys.” The Samayfchtra Tantra (Ch. 2)
 says that whilst the fist four Amnayas are for the Chatur-
‘varge or Dharma, Arths, Kams, Moksks, the upper (Orddhva-
 mntya) and lower (Adhimaiya) are for liberation only.
 ‘Tae Sommohona Tantra (Ch. V) fst explains Parvimatya,
 Dolabinimnaya, Peachimdmatys, Uttarimndys, Unddhvt-
 riya according to what is called Deshaparyyéya. T am
 informed thatno PAjé of Adhimndya is generally done but
 that Shadanvaye Shimbhavas, very high Sadhu, at the
 oor of Liberation do Nyaa with thn sixth concealed Hace.
 It is seid thot Pétala Amnaya is Sombboguyoge. The
 ‘Nisha aspect in Shaletleama is for Parva, Tripurh ; for
 Dakshina, Saura, GAnapatya and Vaishnava; for Pashobi-
 roa Reudra, Bhairava ; for Uttare, Uget, Apottdrint. Tn
 Sbaivalarma the sume asp is for the fmt, Sampstpradé
‘and Mohesha ; for the second, Aghora, Kali and Vaishnava
 Darshana ; for the third, Reudrs, Bhsiravs, Shaiva ; for
 ‘the fourth, Kuvecs, Bhsimve, Saudanbsim; ond for
 Urddhvémntys, Arddhandrigha ond Pranava, Niruttara
 ‘Tantra says that the Sint two Awniyns contain rites for the
Pasha Sédhak (6ee as to the mesning of this and the other
 classes of Sadhakas, the Chapter on Panchatattva ritual
 Pirsdnniyodiam karma péshesam Bathitam priye, and
 ‘0 with the next). ‘Tho third or Pashchimérmtya is com-
 bination of Baska ang Vira (Pasichindimndysjom karma
 peshu-sirasamdshritom). Uttaramntya ia for Vira and
 Divya (Cearémadyajam karma dieyevirdshrizam priye)
 ‘Tho upper Amnfya is for the Divya (Urddhadmadyodtam
 Karma divyabhdvdsiritomn prige). Tt aids that even the
 Divya dees Sédhont in the cremation ground in Virabhava
 (Chat is, heroic frame of mind and disposition) but he doos
 ssuoh worship without Virésana,
      ‘The Sammohana also gives classification of Tantras
 according to the Zmnfyas an also special olasientions,
                             140
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
such ae the ‘Tentras of the six AmnAyas eocording to Vetuki-
mnaya, As only cue Text of the Semmohana 1s available
whilst T write, itis not possible to spexk with certainty of
avoumoy as regards all these ‘details.
      ‘Boch of these divisios of worshippers have their oim
Tantras, aa alko had the Jninas and Bauddhas. Different
seota had their own particular subdivisions and Tantras of
which there are various dassifications accoriing to Krantis,
Deshaparyaya, Kalaparyiya and s0 forth,
      The Sommokana Tantto mentions 92 different Agomss
including Chindgams (@ Shékta form), Pashupata (a Sbaiva
form}, PancharBtra (a Vaishnava orm), Kapilike, Bhairava,
Aghora, Jaina, Bauddha; each of which is said there to
contain a certain number of Tantras and Upatantras,
      ‘According to tho. Sammohana ‘Tantra, the Tantra
according to Kalaparyiyn are the Gt Shakts Tantras, with
327 Upatantras, 8 Yamalas,, 4 Démaras, 2 Kelpalaidis and
several Sombités, Chidamenis (100) Amnavas, Purkoss,
                                         14 Chintdmanis. The
Dimaran and so forth. ‘The Vaighnava dacs contains 75
‘Tonteas with    the samo inluding Kelpae and other Shictrs,
‘The Sours class as Tantras with ita own Yamalas, Uddishas
‘and other works, And the Ginapatya class contains 30
‘Tantras with Upotanties, Kalpss end other Shistras,
including one Damar aud one Yimala. ‘Tae Bauddha
 class contains Kalpadramas, Kamadhonns, Silos, Kramas,
 ‘Amboras, Purinas and otter Shistrs,
       ‘According to the Kulimsva and Jninadipe Tantras
 here are seven Achiras of which the fret, four, Voda,
 Vaishnava, Shaiva end Dakshina belong to Bashvéchtm ;
 then comes Viena, followed by Sidahinto, in which gradual
 approachin made to Kuclichixe the reputed higheot.Hleo-
 Whore six and nine AchAras ave spoken of snd different,
 Kind of Bhivas, Sabhive, Vibhiva snd Dehabhiiva and so
 forth which are referred to in BkivachOdamani.
                             tae
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      An account of the Aehirss in givan in the Haratatev-
ddhiti (pp. 889-342. Soe in particular Vishvasica Tantra
 (Ch, 24) ond Nityde Tantra and Prigatoshink, The fist is
‘the best account).
      Vedachira is the lowest snd Kaulichira the highest.
(Koliraava Tantra 11). Their chamctarstis are given in
‘the 24th Patals of Vishvasira Tantra. ‘The firs four belong
to Pashvichisa (sce Chapter on Shikta Sidhand) and the
last three ar for Vira and Divya SAdhsles. Sumomarsing
‘the points of the Vishvasira'- a Sidhaks in Vedichéra
should carry out the preseriptions of the Veda, should not
cohabit with his wife except in the prriod following the
‘courses. “He should nob cat fish and meat on tho Parva
days. He should no: worship the Deve at night. In
‘Vaighnavichira he follows. the injunctions (Siyama) of
 Vedichara, He must give up esting of flesh (Nity& Tantra
 saya he must not Kill simals), avoid sexual intercourse and
 even the talk of it. This doubiless  means a negation  of the
 ‘Vin ritual. He should worship Vighnu. This Achim is
 distinguished fom tho last by the grent endurance  of Tapas
 fand the contemplation of the Supreme everywhere, In
 Bhajviohtra, Vedichlra is. presribed with this difference
 tnt there must be wo slaughterof animals and meditation
 ison Shiva. Dakshinkchira is said to have been practised
                                                          This
 bby Rishi Dalshindmisti and io therefore 2o called.Bhivas.
 Kinira is preparatory fot the Vico ond’ Divya Vijey®
 Meditation is on the Supreme Ishvart after taking
 (Hemp). Japs of Mantra, is done st night. Siddhi is
 attained by using « rosary of human bone (Mshishasich)
 fs certain places including » Shaktipitha, Vimichare is
 ‘approved of Vins and Divyas, One should be continent
 (Grhmachict) at day ond worship with the Panchatattva
 at night(* Panchadatitbramenatva  ritra devinn prapajaye).
 ‘Tho statement of     Nity8   (Ponchatatinuhalpena     rotrat
 desing prapijayet i, i€corectiy reported, 1 think, incorrect.
 ‘hin ia Vira Sithanf ond the Vira should generally only
                              143
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘uso substitutes when the real Tattvas cannot be found.
 Chakra worship is done. Siddbi is destroyed by revelation
thereof; therefore the Vima pathis hidden. The Siddhénti-
shart i superior to the lest by his knowledge “hidden in
‘the Vedas, Shistees and Purina like fire in wood, by his
freedom from fear of the Pasho, by his adherenoe to the
‘rath, and by his open performanoo of the Panchatattra
ritual, Open and frank, be cares not whet is said.” He
offers the Panchatattvas openly. ‘Then follows « notable
‘posoage, “Just as iti not blamendle to drink openly in the
Seuirimani Yajna (Vaid rita), son SiddhGntichira wine
 is drunk opeuly. As it ia nob blameable to Kill horses in
the Ashamedha Yajaa (Vaid rite), s0 no ofenosisTanta      com
‘mitted in klling animals    in this Dharma.”    Nity8.
says. that an article,  be it pure or impure, becomes pure by
purification. Holding © cup made of omen skull, and
‘wearing the Ruisilahs, tho, Siddkantachtsl moves on
‘earth in the form of Bhairava Himself. The knowledge of
the last Achira, that of the Kaula, makes one Shiva, Just
ts the footprint of every animal dissppest in that of the
‘lephont, co every Dharma is loet in the greatness of Kule-
harms,” Here there ato io injunctions or prohibitions, no
restriction as to time or pace, in favt no rule at all. A
 Kania is himself Gara and Saddshiva and none are superior
to him. Kaulas are of three classes, inferior (the ordinary
 or Prikrita Kauia), who is ever engaged in ritual such as
 Tapa, Hoins, Poja, follows Virdchics (with Panchatattva)
 fand strives to atiain the highland of knowledge ; middling
 is the Kanla who does Sdhan8 with the Panchatattva, is
 deeply immersed in meditation (Dhyfina) and Somidbi ;
 fuperioe, the Kaula who “Oh Mistress‘of the Kenlas sees
 the imperishable, and all-pervading Solf in all things snd
 all things in the Self.” He is a good Kaule, who maka ho
 Gistinotion between mud and ssodal-peste, gold and siraw,
                                                        Kaula
 fa home and the eremstion ground. He is 8 superior equally
 ‘who tmeditates on the Saif with the self,   who   has
                                144
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  segued for all, who is fall of oontentment, forgivencas ad
  comphasion, ‘Nityd Tantra (Patala TI) anys that Kavas
  ‘move about in various abapes, now as an ordinary man of
  the world-adheving to socal rules (Shishta), at other times
  ‘sione who has fallen therefrom (Brashta). At other times
  he avers to be as weird and unearthly as a ghost (Bhita),
  Kaulichims is, i says, tho esianoe which is obtained from
 ‘he ocean of Veda and Aguma after chuming it with the
 staf of knowledge. ~
       Tn a modern acconnt of the Kobiens (see Sanktana-
 stdhana-Tottva or Tantrenubuya by Sschehidinanda
 vim) itis nid that some speal                  e and Yogt-
                                      of Aghortchire
 bra 03 to further divisions betwesn the last but one
 fd last. However this may te, the Aghorss of today
 faa seperate soot who, it in alleged, have degenemted into
 rere eaters of oorptes, though Aghots is said to only mean
  cone who is liberated from the terible (Ghora) Sarhetra
  In Yogichire waa-leamt the upper heights of Sidhand and
 ‘the mysteries of Yoga such as the movements of the Vayu
{in the bodilyamiezocosms (NhudvabrabmoGnda), tbe regulation
 ‘of which oontzols the inclinations and propensities (Veit).
  Yogiohica is entared by Yoga-diishi and achievement in
 ‘Ashtdngeyoga qualifies for Keultchira, Whotber there
 ‘yore such farther divisions T cannot at presint aay. T
ppsfer for the time being to follow tho Kulimava. ‘The,
  Brimt’s oooount   of these is as follows -—Ved8chéra which
consist i the daly practice of the Vaidik vites (with,     I may
‘add, some ‘Ténteik-obvervances) is the gross body (Siitla-
 Geha) ‘which comprises within it all the other Achim,
 ‘which are as it. were its subtle body (Sblshmadehs) of
 Yarious degrees.” ‘The worship is largely of an extemal
 hamct       the object
                    er,  of which ia to strengthen Dharma,
 "This i the path of action (Kriyimege). This and some
other observations maybe & modern reading ofthe eld factsof
 but aro on tho whole, 1 think, justifed. The second    atago
 Vaishnavicbire is the path        of   devotion  (Bhaktimings)
                               4s
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
and the sim is union of devotion with faith previously
sioguired. ‘The worhipper passes from blind faith to an
understanding of the supreme protecting Energy of the
Brahman, towards which his devotion goes forth. With
‘an inoreasing determination to uphold Dharma and to
destroy Adharms, the Sidhaka pases into the third stage
or Shaivéchira which the author cited calls the militant
(Gehatiriye) stage, wherein to lowe and mercy sre added
strenuous striving and the cultivation of power. "herp it
union of faith, devotion, and inward determination (Antar-
Inksha). Entrance is here made upon the path of knowledge
(Ininamargal. Following this ia the fourth stage oF
Dalahindchira, which originally ond in Tontré Shistza
does not mean “right-hand worship” but sccording to the
uthor cited is the Achfra “favourable” to the acoomplish-
rent of the higher Sadhan8 of ‘which Dakshina-Kabks is
Devt (The Viehvisirs, already cited derives the word
from Dalehindmrti muni, but Dolesina in either case has
the same meaning. Dakshinakal i a Devi of Uttartmasya
and approach     is       here-made to Viré vituals.) This stage
commences when the worshipper can make Dhyina and
Dhara of the threefold Sbaleti of the Brahman (Icbehh,
‘Kriy8, Jina), and understands the mutual connection of
‘the those and of their expression ae the Cunas, and until he
reorives the rite of initiation called PamAbhishekha, At
‘his stage the Sédhakeis Shika md qualified for the worship
of the threefold Shakti of Brohman (Brabma, Vishno,
Maheshvara). He worthips the Adya-Shaicti as Dalsina-
Klik     in whom are united tho three Shakti. The aim of
this stage is the union of faith, devotion, and determination
with knowledge of the threefold energies. (Passage is
hus male from the Deva-aspeat to the Devaswhole) Up
to this stage the Sédhake hat followed Pravritei Manga, ot
‘he outgoing path, the path of worldly enjoyment, albeit
‘curbed  by Dharma. ‘The Sidhaka now, upén the exhaustion
of the forces of the outward current, makes entry on the
                              446
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 path of rotum (Nivritimtrga). As this change is one of
 ‘primary importance, some have divided the Achizas into
 the two broad divisions of Dukshintchira (inckuding the
first our) and Vaochira (includingthe last three). Strictly,
 however, the first three can only be thus included in the
 sense that they are preparatory to Dakshingchiiea proper
 and aro all in the Pravrtti Marga and are not Vamichéra,
 e's thus said that men are born into Dakshindchira but
 ‘re received by initition into Vamichira, As Dakshina
 bira does not mean “right-hand worahip"” so Vamach8ra
 does not mesn, a is vulgstly supposed, “left-hand worship”
 “Left-hand” in Bnglish has’a bad sense and itis not sense
 to suppose that the Shistra, which prescribes thie Achra,
 tect gives it a bed name, "Vima is variously interpreted.
 Some say it is the worship itv whieh’ weman (Vim) enters
 that in Latistdbant. Vie, this author says, “means
 “adverse” that is the Stage averse to the Pravritti, which
 governs in varying degrees the previous Aohiras. For,
entry is hore made on the Nivritti path of return      to the
 Source of outgning, (In this Achira also there is worship of
 the Vam8 Devi) In Vimchira the Sidhake commences
 to droctly destroy Pravaitti and, withthe help of the Cura,
 to cultivate Nivriti. The help of the Guru throughout ia
 necessary. Tt is comparatively eaay to lay down rules for
 the Pravitti Marga bat nothing can be achieved in VémA-
  chive without the Gur’s help. Some of the disciplines are
 admittedly dangerous and, if eatered upon without authority
 and diseretion, will probebly lead to abuse. The method of
the Guru at this stage is to use the forces of Pravrittiin
 such a way os to render them self-destructive: ‘The passions
 which bind (notably the fundamental instincts for food,
 rink, end sexuel satisfaction) may be itis said so employed
 asto act 1s forees whereby the particular fe, of which they
 fre the strongest physical manifestation,is rusedto the uni-
  versal ifs. Passion which has hitherto run downward and
 outwards (otten to waste) is directed inwards snd upwards
                               147
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘and-transformed to power. But it is not only the lower
 physics! desires of eating, drinking, and sexual intercourse
 Which must be subjugated. ‘The Sidhaka must at this stage
 ominence (the process continues until the fruit of Kauli-
 chérs is obtained) to out off all the eight bonds (Psha)
 which have msde him © Pasha, for up to and inaluding
 Dakshindchira is Psohu worship. ‘These Pash, bonds or
 “afictions” are variously entimeratad but tha mone-nnmer-
 ‘ous classifications are merely elaborations of the smaller
 divisions, ‘Thun, according to tho Devf"bhigavata, Mobs is
 ignorance or bewilderment, and Mabimoba is the desire for
 ‘worldly pleasure which flows from it. The Kulirpaya entra
 ‘mentions eight primary bonds, Dsyé (that is pity as the
 feeling which: binds ss opposed to divine compassion or
 Karupl), Mohs (ignorance), Lejjé (shame, which does not
 ‘mean that a man ia to be s shameless sinner but weak worldly
 shame of being looked town upon, of iniriaging conventions
 ‘and so forth), family (Kula, which oeasea to be a tie), Shila
 (here usage, convention) and Varna (caste; for the en-
 lightoned is beyond all ite distinctions). When, to take the
 SBvii’s example, Shri Krishna stola the clothes of tho bath-
 ing Gopis or millanalds and cowherjs and made them
 approach Him nakéd, He removed the artificial coverings
 which are imposed on man in the Sathsira. ‘The Go
 were eight, a9.ar9 the Bonds; and the errors by which the
 ‘iva is misled ate the clothes which Krishna stole. Freed
 of thess the Jiva is liberated irom all bonds arising from his
 esites, family and society. Formerly it was sulfcient. to
 live in worldly fashion according to the morality governing
life in the world. Now the Sidhaka         must go further and
  tumnscend the world, or rather seek to do so. He rises by
 ‘hose things which are commonly the cause of fall. When
 ‘he ns completely achieved his purpose snd liberated himself
 from all bonds, be teaches the stage of Shiva (Shivatva).
  tis the sim of the Nivritti Stdhons to liberste man from
  ‘the bonds which bind him to the Saiistma and to qualify
                              8
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  the Vira Sédhako, through Rajaska Uptsand (oe Chaptsr
 on Panchatatéra) for tie highest grades of Stdhand jn whioh
  the SAtivika Gas predominates. He i then Divya cr
 divine. ‘To the truly Sétbvik there is neither attachment,
 feat or disgust (Chin). What is thus commenced in
  Vimichtsa, is gradually completed by the rituals of Si
 hivtdchira and Keuléchirs. Tn the last three Achires
  fhe Sidhu becomes more and mote freed from the
 noms of Setistea andis attached to nothing, ates nothing,
 isachumed of nothing (ally shametl acta binge hypothest
below his acgnized stage), and has freed himself of the
 svtifical bonds of family, caste, and society. He becomes
 an Avadhita, that is, ont who has “washed of” everything
 and bas relinquished the world. Of these, ax stated later,
 there are several clases.» Vor him there is no rule   of tims
 or place. He becomes, like Shiva himself,» dweller in the
 cremation ground (Smashtna)-. He “attains Brahmajntine
 or the Gnosis in perfect form. Oa recsving Mabdptimma-
 Aish, he perfornis his own funeral rites and ie dead to the
 Sastre, Saoted alone ia sono quiet place, he remains in
 constant SamAdhi (cstaey), and atinin it in its highest or
 Nirvikslpa fom. ‘The Groat Mother the Supreme Pralziti
 ‘Mhi         dwellseakt
                     in his eset i which is now the inner one
 uation giound whorein all passions have been bunut away.
 His becomes « Paramahustua who is liberated whist yet
 ving (lvanmul).
      rom the above    it wil be seen thatthe Achiras are not
 various eats in the Baropesn sense, ut stages in a continis
 ‘ous prooes through which the Siahaka must pass before bo
 Tosokos the supceme state of the highest Kaula (for the
 Kaulas azo of difcing degrees). Passing from the gross
 outer boy of Velchisa, be Teams its imernose coeneodof
 Aootrne, not expresed but latent init. These stages Jiva
 fot be and are not ordinaly passed through by eachare as
 in the course ofa single lif. On the contrary oftheybirths, in
 ‘rule traversedin the eoume of # multitude
                              149
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘which oe the weaving of the spiritual garment is reaom-
zonced whore, in a previous birth, it was dropped on deat.
In one life the Sédhaka may commence at any stage. IE he
is 8 true Keula now it is becouse in previous births he as
by Sidhand in tho preininary stages won his entrance into
it, Knowledge of Shakti is, as the Nirutiara Tanten says,
acquired after many bitths; end according to the Mahi-
nirvina Tantra it it byemetit acquired in pravious births
‘that the mind is inclined to KaslAchir
       ‘Kaaladharm is in no wise sctatian but on the contrary
claims    to be the heed of all sects, Ib is said “at heart a
Shakts, outwardly a Shsive, in gotheringe © Vaishnava
 (orho ere wont to gather together for worhip in praise of
Hox) in thus mony a guise the Kaulas wander on earth.”
     Anal-shatioh vahihshaivth» sabhdyém waisksandmatth
     Niné-ripadharais Kaul vicharonti mahitdle
"The saying has been ssid to. be sn expression of this claim
‘whieh is T think involved in it. Tt does however sito [ thinke
indicate ssereey, and adaptability to sectarian form, of him
‘who hs pietoed to the eote of tht which all sets in vary-
ing, though pariiel, ways present, A Kaula is one who
Ihas possed throngh these ind. other stages, which have
 fs their own inmost doctiine (whether these worshippers
know it or not) that of Kauléchirs, Tt is indifferent what
 the Kaulas apparent sect may be. The form is nothing and
 everything. Tt is nothing in the sense tt it bas no power
 to narcow the Kanlas inner life. It is evecything’in the
 senes that knowledge may infuse ita apparont limitations
 with an universal meaning. A man may thos live in all
sects, without (heir form being ever to him a bond.
       Tin Vaidik times there wore four Ashramas, that i
 states and stages in the life of the Arya, namely (in their
 onder) that of the chaste student (Brahmacharya), secular
 life as s matried house-holder (Grhasthe), the lf of the
 forest recluse with his wile in retirement from the world
 (Vénaprastha), lasly that of the beggar (Bhikaha or
                               150
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Avaidhite), wholly detached from the world, spending his
 time in meditation on the Supreme Brahman in preparation
 for shortly coming death. All these four were for the
 Brahmans casto, the fret three for the Kshacteiya, the fst
 ‘ovo for the Vaishya and for the Shida the second only
 (Yogiyajnavallya, Ch. 1). As neither the conditions of
life nor the charsoter, eapacity and powers of the prople of
 this oge allow of the Smt and third Ashrama, the Maha-
irvine Tantra states (VITI. 8) that   in the Kali ago there are
nly two Ashraias, namely, the second and las, and these
fare open to all castes indiscriminately (vb. 12). ‘The some
‘Tantra (XLV. 141 et seg) spesks of four classes of Kulayogis
or Avadhiitss namely the Shaivivadhite and Brabmiva-
dbiita, which are each of two kinds, imperfect (Apia) and
perfect, (Pima). The frst three shave enjoyment. and
practise Yoga, ‘The fourth or Paruinahatisa should be
Absolutely chaste and should not touok metal. He is beyond
all household dutios ond caste, snd mitual, such a3 the
‘offering of food and drink to Devat&. Tho Bhairavadémara
dlasses the Avadhta into (a) Kuldvadhtta, () Shaiviva-
he, () Brmdvadhtta, (d) Hahsévadhita, Some speak
of three divisions of euch of the classes Shaivavadhdta and
Brohmvedhtts (see pp. XLLIL, XLLV of Introduction          to A.
‘Avalon's Ed. of Mabfnirvina). ‘The Shaivivadhitas are
not, either, from a Western of Shistrio stondpoint, as high
as the BrahmAvadhita, The lowest of the last class oon
Ihave intereonne only with the own wife (Svakiy Shakti
ts opposed to the Shaiva Shakti); the middling has ordi-
natily nothing to do with any Shakti, and tho highest: must,
‘under no circumstance touch woman oF metal, nor does
he practise any rites or keep any observances
      ‘The main divisions here uxe Yedécira, Dakshindchiira
and Vémachica, VedSchira is not Vaidikichéra, thst is
in the Shraute sense, for the Shranta Vaidikichima appears
to be outside thin sevenfold Tantsik division of which Ved6-
chins   is the Patrik counterpart. For itis Tantrike Updeand
                               151
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  with Vaidik sites ond montras, with (I have been told)
  Agniss Devati, As a speculation       we may suggest that, this
  Bobiéra was for those not Adhik@dt for what is called the
 Shrauta Vaidiktchira, The second and third belang and
 lead up to the completed Dakshinkchirs, This is Pashvd
 chara. Vamichira commences the other mode of worship,
 leading up to the completod Kaula the Keultvadhita,
 Avadhita, and Divya. Here, with the attainment of
 Bruhmajnins, we reach the region which is beyond all
 Kchésas which is known as Seechobbéchira. All that: those
 Delonging    to this stats do or touch   is pure, In and after
 ‘Vamitchiva thete is cating and drinking in, aud ae part of,
 worship and Maishuns. After the Pashu there is the Vira
 ‘and then the Divya. Peshu is the starting point, Vita is
 on the way and Divya.s       the goal. Each. of the sects hae a
 Dakshina and Yiine division. Tb is, commonly thought
that this ia peculier to,Shaktas:- but thia is notso. Thas
 there ero Via, Ginspatyas and Vaishnavas and so
 forth. Again Vimichima. is. itself divided again into
 ‘aright aad left side. In the former. wine is taken ina
 coup of stone or other substance, ard worship ia with the
 ‘Syvaldya Shakti or Stdhoke's owm-wife; in the latter and
 ‘more sdvanced stage drinking is done from a ekeull and
 worship may be with Parasti, thet is, some other Shakti
 In the case howeverof some aorta which belong       to the Vari
 ‘chia civision, whilst thre is mest and wine, there is, I am
 ‘told, no Shakti for the menibers are:chaste (Brahmsckari),
 So far as T can oscertain there conta which sro mentioned
Inter soem to belong to rhe Shaiva as opposed       to the Shits
 soup.
        ‘The TAntrik Sangraha called. Shdktinonds-Totangiat
 ‘by Brohméuanda Svimi saye (Oh. 9) that Agama is both,
 Sedtigame ond Astdiguma and that the former alene is
  Aganis acconling to th primary meaning of the: word
  (Sadagama eva. dgamashabdasya mukhyateds. Ho then says
‘that Shiva    in the Agama Samita condemns       the Assdégame
                                  152
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 saying “Oh Deveshi, men in the Kali ago are gonerly of
 ‘» Rijesi -and Tdmasik disposition and being addicted
  to forbidden ways deceive many others, Oh Sureshvari,
thove who én.diorgard      of the Varndshrama Dharma ofer
 tovus-esh, blood and wine become Bhitas, Pretas, and
 Brabmardishacas,” that's, various forms of evil spite.
 This prohibits such worship a8 is opposed to Varntahrams-
 hams, Tes said, however, by tle Vimicht's, who take
 conseersiad. wine and fleshoa » Yajn, not to cover their
       ‘eis not meommonly thought that Varoohizn is that
 Anhira into which Vami or woman enter. This # tue
 aly to. ceria extent: th is, ita w tous definition of
 hove Sidhakas who do. worsbip with Shakti according to
 YVamichira rites. Butit seems to be incoreet,      in so fae aa
 ‘there are, Iam told, worhipper ofthe Vamaekira division
 who are chaste (Brikmachéif},.Vimioliir means Kterlly
 “NeSe” way, not “left-handed” in the English sense which
 ‘cons    whit is bad. Aa the name is given to these Sddhskas
by themselvesitis not likely     that they woald adopt a tile
 ‘hich condemns them. | Whatthey mean ia that this Acbtra
 ia the oppwito of Dakahinichira. Philosophical       it is more
 ‘monitio. Tt is enid that even in tho highest Siddhi of
 Dakshinichart “there is always some One above him";
 ‘but the fruit of Vamndchére and its subsequent and highest
 stages is that the Saahaks “besomes the Emperor Himself”
 ‘Tho Bhiva differs, and the power ofits method competed
‘with Dalsantchire is said to be that between mile and
       “Moreover it i to be noted that the Devt whom they
 ‘womip is on the left of Shiva. In Vamdchira we find
  Kapilvkas, Kslamukhas, Pishapatas, Bhtadikema, Digam-
bass Aghors, followers of Chindchira and Kaulaa gane-
 rally who azo initiated. Ta come cases, an in that of the
 audyanocd division of Kanlas, wombip is with al ve Tativan
  (Poxchatattva}- In some eases there is Brahmacharya x
                               153
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  in the caso of Aghora and Pishupate, though these drink
 ‘wine and eat fesh food. Some, Vamichies, T am informed,
 never cease to be chaste (Brahmachari), such as Oghada
 Sadhus, worshippers of Batuka Bhairava, Kanthadhici
 and followers of Gorakshanftha, Sitandthe and Mateyendza-
 nitha, Tn Nilakrma there js no Maithana. In some
seota thor are differing pmotios. Thus, T am told,
 amongst the KAlamukhas the Kalaviras ‘only worship
 Kumvis up to the age of nine, whereas the Kémamokanas
 ‘worship with odult Shaktis,
       Some advanced members of this (in ite general sense)
 ‘Vamachére division do'not, T am informed, even take wine
 fand meat. It is said that the great VamAchsst Sadhaka
 Réja Krishoachandra of Nodio, Upioaka of the Chhinna-
 rast Mirti, did not take wine, Such and similar Sédbakeas
 Ihave passed beyond the preliminary stage of VAmAchira,
 ‘and indeed (in its special sense) Vimiohira itsalf. Thay
may be Bribma Keulas. As regards Stdhalis generally it
{is woll to xemember whot the Mabaktls Sombitd, the great
Shastra of the Medhyasths Knclss, says in the 11th Ullsa
called Shavtraryoga-kathanam -—“Some Kenlns there are
who seek the good of this world (dhikirchadhvittondnai).
 Bo also the Vaidiles enjoy-what is here (Avlikértham
émayanie ; a do, I may interpose, the vast bulk of present
‘hummity) end are not seekers of liberation (Amite ratin
‘na hervant). Only by Nishleimasidhant i liberation
 attained.”
      ‘Tho Ponohatativa ace either real (Pratyalsha, “Idea-
lining” slatementa to the contrary are, when not due to
fguormnce, false), substitutional (Anukalpa) and esoteric
(Divyatatéva), As regards the second, even a vegetarian
 would not object to “mest” which i in fact ginger, not the
abetainerto “wine” whichis coooanut water in a bell-metal
vessel. As for the Hsoterio Tattva they are not material
articles or protices, but the symbols ior Youie processes,
‘Again somo notions and practiad are more moderate and
                              154
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  otherd extreme. ‘The account given in the Mahanitvana
  of the Blairavi and Tattva Chakns may be compared with
  fome more unrestrained practice; and the former again
  may be contrastéd with a modem Chakra described in the
  18th Chapter of the Life of Bejoy Krishna Gosvim! ky
  Saguabonda Maiira, Thoro a Thatriks Siddha formed a
  hajers at which the Gosvami was present. ‘The later tays
 ‘that all who wore thove, felt ss if the Shakti was their own
 ‘Mother who had borne them, and the Devatda whom the
  Chskreshvara invoked appeared in the cirle to accept the
 firings. Whether thisis accepted as x fact or not, itis
 obvious that it was intended to describe © Chakra of a
 different kind from that of which we lasve more commonly
  heard. There ate some practices which are not correctly
 ‘understood ; there ate some principles which the bu of men
  will not understend ; for to so understand there must be
  besides knowledge that: undefnable Bhava, the possession
‘of which arses with it the explanation which         no words
  can give. Ihave dealt with this ubjeotin the Chapter on
 the Panchatateva. ‘There axe expressions which do not
  bear their susfase meaning, Gondugea-iiakshana is not
  “beef-eating” bab putting the tongue in the root of the
 tihrost. What some transisteas “Ravishing the widow”
 refers not to 8 woman but to prooess in Kundalt Yogs and
 0 forth, Lastly ond this is important; a distinction is
 seldom, if ever, made between Shistric principles and actual
 ‘pmotice, nor is count taken of the conditions properly
 governintheg worshi       and pits abuse. Tt ia eney to under-
 stand that it Hinduism hes in general degenerated, there
 Jag bom a fall here. Tt ia, however, a mistake to suppose
 that the sole object of these rites is enjoyment. Tt is not
 necessary to be a “Tintrik” for that. ‘The moral ofall this
 is, thatitis beter to know the fasta than to make erroneous
  ‘generalizations.                                         divi=
       ‘There are saidto be three Krintas or geographical
 sions of India, of which roughly speaking the North-Eastem
                                 155
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  postion is Vighsulstints, the North-Westom Rathaletint&
  and the remaining and Southern portion is Ashvakrénta,
  ‘Avcording to the Shiktamangale and Mahdeiddhisdra
  ‘Tantens, Vishnukrdnta (which includes Bengal) extends from
 ‘the Vindbya range    to Chattala ox Chittagong. From Vindbya
 to Thidet aod China is Rathakeintt, There is then some
 dliference betwen these two Tontras as to the postion of
 Ashvalcrinté, Accordingto the fimt this last Krinta
 extends from the Vindhya to the sea which parbaps includes
‘tho reat of India. Accordingto the Maisiddhisira Tantra
 it extends ftom the Karstoyt Riverto point which cannot
 be identisd with certainty in the text cited, but which may
bbe Java. To eochof these 64 Tantras have been assigned.
 ‘One of the’ questions awaiting solution  is whether the ‘Tantras
 of there three geographical divisions are marked by both,
 doctrinal ond inal ‘peonlinrties-ati. if so what         they ane,
‘This subject has been referred: to in the first volumeof the
 “Principles of Tantra” wherein a list of Tantess is given.
       Tn the Shilkia division thera are foar Sampradiyas,
 namely, Kerala, Kishmira;-Gauda tad Vilésa, in cach of
 which there ia both outer azd inner worship. The Saxamo-
 Ihana Tantra gives theeo four Sampradyis, also the namber
 of Tantra, not only inthe fist three Sampradyas, but in
 China and Divide. +I have been informed that out of 68
 Deshas (which included beside Hunas, places outside India,
 such as Chins, Mshéchina, Bhota, Sitthala), 18 follow
 Ganda extending fom Nepéla to Kalings ani 19 follow
 Kerala extending from Vindhyfechala to the Souther Sea,
the remaining countries forming part of the Kashmir
 esha ; and thet in each Sampmdiya there ar» Paddbatia
 suchas Shuidha, Gupta, Uges. Thezois variance         in Deaths
 ‘and Rituals some of which are explained in the Térasukca
 snd Shaktisangama Tantra.
       ‘Wheto are also Yetious Matas such as Kai Mata, called
 ‘Virkisauttare of which the Devatdis Kalt-(ee Introduction
 to Vol. 8. (Tontrardjs) Tantei Texts); HAdi‘Mata called
                                136
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Hastaashja of which Tyipurasundect is Devas and Kahidi
  Mata the combination of te two of which Tard is Devat&
 that is Nissaresvati, Certain Deshas are called Kadi,
 Hadi, Karhidi Deshas and each Mata has several Amniyas.
 Tis said tbat the Hatheatirs Mahavidya is the Sovereign
 Lady of Yoga whom Jainas call Padmavatt, Shiktas Shakti,
 Bauidhus Tas, China Sidhakas Mahogré, snd Kaalas
 Ohakreshvast. ‘The Kedis oall hoc Kalt, the Hidia Sh.
 smdart and the KAdi-Hidis Hahsah. Volumes VIII and
 Kil of “TAntrik Texts” contain that portion of the Taatra-
 ajo which belong to Kédi Mate and in the Rngliab,Tntro-
 duction I bave dealt with this subject.
       Gauds Sampradaya considers KAdi the hightst Mata,
 whilst Kishmira ond Kerala worship ‘Tripart and ‘Tard.
 Possibly there may have been oxiginally Deshas which
 were the exnlusive seats of specfia sohools of Tantra, but
 later and st present so far ss they exist, tis counct be
 ssid. In eadh of the Deshas diffrent Sampradayss may be
 found, though doubtless at particular places, as in Bengal,
 particular seats may be predominant,
      In my opinionit is not yet posible to present, with
  both socuracy and completeness, the doctrine and practice
 of any particulst Téntrik Sohool, and to indicate wherein it
 difers from other Sebools. I isnot possible st presentto
soy fullyand precisely who the original ShAktas were, the
  nature of their sub-divisions and of their relation to, oF
 distinction fom, some of the Shaiva group, Thus the
 Kaulas ote generallyin Bengal included in the Brahmajuft
 Bhikta group but the Sammohana in one passage almady
 cited mentions Kaula and Shikta separately. Pomibly
 it ia thore meant to distinguish ordinary Shakias from the
 special group called Kaula Shiktas, In Kashmié some
  Kaulas, T believe, call themselves Shsivas. or an answer
 ‘0 these and other questions we must await a further exami-
 nation of the texts, At present I am doing clearing of mud
  (Paikeddbara) from the tank, notin the expectation that
                               157
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘can wholly clas away the mul and weeds, but with        a desire
 to make a beginning which others may complete,
       He who las not understood. Tantra Shistre has not
 ‘understood what. “Hinduism” is as it exists to-do
 subject is an important pert of Indian oattare and t
 worth stndy by the duly qualifed. What I have ssid sbould.
 bbe sulciontto warn the ignorant from making rash goneral-
 inations. At present we can sey that he who worships
 ‘the Mantza and Yantra of Shakti is a Shaka, and that there
 ‘wore several Sampradayas of these worshipper. What
‘we osn, and should feet, do is to study the Shikta Darshana
 as it existe today, wotking back from the known to the
 unknown. What I am about to desctite is the Shiite
 faith as it exists to-day, that is Shaktivdds, not as something
 entirely new but as the development and smalgamstion of
 the various cuits, which were its ancestors,
       Summariaing ShAkta, doctrine we may first afm that
 itis Adeoitawdda ot Monism. This we might expect seeing
 that it loatished in Bengal which, asthe old Ganda Desha,
 ja the Guru both of Advaitavida and of Tontrs Shistra,
 From Genda came Geudaphdichisys, Madhustdana
 Sarasvati, author of the great Advoitasiddhi, Rimachandra-
 irthabhicett, Chiteultohtrya and others, There seems
 to me to bs a strong disposition in the Brahmspardyana
 Bengali temperament towards Advaitavida. For all
 ‘Advaitine the Shakta Agama and Advaite Shaivdgams
 ‘must be the highest form of worship. A’ detailed scoount
 of the Advaita. teachings of the Shiktasis a matter of great
 ‘complexity and of o highly esoteric character, beyond the
 seopeof   this paper. Tmay here nota thatthe Sita Tantra
 speak of 04 Tattvas made up of 10, 12 and 16 Kats of Fite,
 Sun and Hoon constituting the Kémokalé respectively ; and
 10 of Sudishiva, 6 of Ishvars, 10 each of Rudra, Vishna
 ‘and Brahm#, The 61 Kalle or Matrikis which ate the
 Sikabmaraps of 188 81 letters (Vama) are «portion
 of these #4, These are the 61 coils of Kundalt from Bindu
                                 158
                    SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 to ShmbtikotpatlSundrt meainod iz my “Gaxandof
 etter”
 ‘onlipoeor inthe  Sade wieon tinjrbyMatte      Skate who“Pheer
                                         thwe Siig                 take ‘inaall
The Sst also ae out hn 30 ‘Tatts which are common
 of Shas and Shai; the ve Kalle which ate Stmtays
 to the Tatra, namely, Nia, Paha, Vidys, Shine,
 Skat,              wed the Shadadbed, umely, Varn, Pa, ad
 ‘Mantra, Kala, Tattva, Bhuvena, which represent the
 ‘Asha tapect and the habia scpect respetiely. (ee
 *Gasland
        To poof ror Latta")popular mation, « east and tendar
 cononpt       of the Shaltar ithe Mederioal             af Go, that
 God     t o  Shak!    or the  Por
 tithisayethe waive. Thi athe tought    which   prodvoa,    alae
                                                          oe wemipes          act
 Though the Bammotapa Tanta gives hgh place tal
 tare conqueror of Badan peaking of hi we 8
 ‘actoraion
 td incelf ‘ithof Gir,the fiveand Mabijeas)
                                         Sengtveasithe fourdigamae    dnp
 Sharan of yomkip do not teach Maybvhdn ax cot forth
 fcoorlng to Ghafiar’s trntendental method. May
 toot tessl,BMEnot etapa
                       Sols pot ad taal      an misaoWl a something,aoc
 vite
 Tian, Bertman
             Bohman intsin neva
                              aber aminedape though  with isnotanything. Babebal
 Teal, Mayt          to e Skin in Shut; Skt vellng Horst
 te Cnacioum, but which, ox bing Balti rnacoumeat
 ‘To te Skea cut howonstheMoiters is‘The Coacow:                     Advaina
             This theScheelstandpoint
 ofea.Shaara's                   cin that.of Eddband.
                                                 ther dostine i given
 fiom the standpoint ot Siddhi. I willno axgu this queton
 fee, When Shi is obtained there wilbe no anument                     co ya
 fd mutthat ink
 ati                                   ti admite,
                  event andMan act"it according   fo thewbjectfotme" whieh 1
 impeer on him. Iti more important ater all to rie
 inn tn-unitsnlto expo         pranceit inof pheopcl
                                              te Divan Cnnoeroney,
                                                                 forma
 flan to adanpl
                                       159
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
        ‘The Divine Mother frst appears in and as Her wosahip-
  per's earthly mothos, then es his wife; thivlly ss Kalk,
 She reveals Harel      in old age disease end'death. Te is She
  ‘who manifests, and not without purpose, in the vast
  outpouring. of ‘Suithire Shakti which was witness in
  the great world-confict of our time. ‘Tho tezble beauty of
  such forms ia not undettood. And so wo-got the: recent
  utterance of @ Missionary Professor ot Madras who being
  moved to horor st the sight of (think) the Chisounda-
  ttt callod the Dovi a “She-Devil", Lastly She takes to
  ‘Horzlf tho dead body in the fierce tongues of flame which
  light the fanszal pyae.
       ‘The Monist is netarally unsectarisa and ao the Shaka
 faith, as held by those who undertand it, 4s free froma
 narrow sectarian spirit
       Noxtiy it, like the other Agamas, makes provision: for
all castes and both sexes... Whatever     be the trae doctrine of
 ‘the Vaidikas, their practice isin fact, manked by exclusive-
 ress. ‘Thug they exclude worsan and Sbfidms. Ie is-ensy
 to undecstand why th so-called Anteya. Sampadéyas did
 not do sc, A glorious ature of the Shilta faith ia the
honour which it pays to worian, And/this       is natural for those
 who worhip the Great Mother, .whose representative
 (Vigraba) ll earthly: women aro. Sirigo dewdh sriyeh
 ‘prdnah, “Women:are Devas ; women are life tee,”             as-an
 ‘old Hymn in the Sorvollaa has it. Is is- because Woman is
 a Vigeata ofthe Amba Devi, Hor likeness in flesh and blood,
 that the Shilta. Tatras ebjoin the honour and. worship of
 ‘women ard gila (Kurtis), and forbade all harm-to them
 ssach 8s the Sati rte, enjoining that not even a female animal
 is to be socrifood. With the same solicitude for women,
 ‘the Mahinirvina proscrbos that even if « man speaks rudely
 (Durvvachyang kstheyan) to his wife, he murt fast for a
 ‘whole day, and enjoine the edueation of daughters before
 ‘heirmartiage. The Moslem Author of the Dabistan Gi, 164,
 Ed. 1848) says “The Agama favoun both sexes equally
                                160
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Men and women equally compose mankind. This sect hold
‘vomen in great esteem and call them Shaltis und to ill-twet
 ‘Shakti that is « womanis «orime.” The Shakta Tantras
 ‘again allow of women being Guru, oF Spiritual Director, a
  revetence which, the West has not (with rare exceptions)
 yet given them, Initiation by Mother bears eightfold
 Jrnit. Indeed to the enlightened ShAlcta the whole universe
 is Sixt or Shakti, “Ahm sti” az the Advaitsbhiva
 Upmnishad says. A high worship therefore which can be
 ‘offers to the Mother to-day consists in getting rid of abuses
 ‘which have neithor tho authority of ancient Shéatra, nor of
 rmoder social ecionco and to honour, cherish, educate and
 ‘advance women (Shakti). Seriyo deodh ériyah prdndh.
 Gauiamtya Tantra says Saroasurnddhikdrasicha nérindns
 yoqya cot ch; that is the Tantra Shisten is for all castes
 ‘ind for worn : and the Mabtnirvipa says that the low
 Kaula who refuses to initiate « Chandaln or Yavana or a
 ‘woman out of disrespect goes the downwant path. No one
 is excluded from anything except     on the grounds of « zeal
 and not artificial oF imagined. inoompetency.
       An American Orientalst criti, im speaking of “the
 worthleasness of Tintrie philosophy”, said that it was
 “Religious Femsinion run-mad,” aiding "What is all this
but the femivieationof orthodox Veddnta It i a doctrine
 for sufrayete Monists: the dogma unsupported by any
 ‘evidence thot the female principle ontedates and énabuies the
 male principle, nod that this female principle is supreme
 Divinity.” The “worthlesmess” of the TEntrik philosophy
 is @ personal opinion on which nothing need be said, the
 ‘more porticalerly that Orientalists who, with ianficient
 Inowledge, have slrady committed themselves to this view
 se not ltely to easly abandon it, The present criticism,
 however in disclosing the grounds on which it i based, has
 show that they are without worth, Wore it not for auch
 ‘ignorant notions, ¢ would be unnecessary to say that the
 Shikta SAdhaka’ does not believe that there is » Woman
                               161
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Suffragetto or otherwise, in the sky, surrounded by the
‘members of some celestial feminist association who rales the
1male members of the universe. As the Yamala says for the
benefit of the ignoraat "neyam yosiit na cha umd na
shando no jadah smriah”. That 's, Godis neither female,
tale, hermaphrodite or unconscious thing. Nor in his
octsine concarmed with the theories of the American
Professor Lester War and other as to the alleged pre-
‘erivence of the female principle, We aro not hore dealing
‘with questions.of science or sociology. Te is a common
{ult of western cvticiom that it gives matecial interpreta-
tions of Indian Soriptares ond so misunderstands it, The
‘Shhicta dootzine is conceme with those Spiritual Principles
‘which exist before, and are the origin of, both men and
‘women. Whether, in the eppearance of the animal species,
the female “antedates” the male is 8 question with which
it is not concerned, “Nor does it say that. the “female
prinsple” is tho, ouprome Divinity. Shiva the “malo” is
o-equal with Shiva the “female,” for both are one and the
same, An Orlntalist might have remembered that in the
‘Skilhye, Proigiti is spoken of as “female”, and Purusha
ae “male”. And in Vedanta, Mayland Devt are of the
feminine gender. Shaktiia not a male nor a female“ per-
fon”, not a male not & feniale “principle”, in the sense in
‘vhich sociology, which ia concemed with gross mstter, uses
 those tenas. Shakti in symbolically “female” hecanse it in
tho productive principle. Shiva, in so far as He represents
the Chit or consciousness aspect, is actionless (Nisberiys),
though the two are inseparably astociated even in czeation
‘The Supreme is the stteibuteless (Nixgunn) Shiva, or the
nenter Brahman which. is neither “male”nor “female
 ‘With euoh mistaken genoral views of the doctrine, it was
not likely that ite moze subtle aspects by way of relation to
 Shadkara’s MéyBvida, or the SAfikhya Darshana should
 be appreciated. ‘The doctrine of Shakti has no mom. to do
 ‘with “Feminism” than it has to do with “ld age pensions”
                               162
                SHAKTI       AND SHAKTA
 or aay other sosilogical movement of the day. Thin ix a
 good instance of those apparently “smart” and cookware
 judgnents which Orientalints ond othem pas: on things
 Tndisn, The errors would he lost ridiulows if they were on
 ‘ecasions inore modest as regards their claims to know and
 ‘understand. What is stil more important, they would not
 ‘probably in such case give unnecessaey. ground for off,
       The charsotsrstic feutanes of Shikta-tharma are thus
 ita Moatsm ; itn oonoept of the Mothechood of God ; its
  unsectarian spirit wud provision for Sbfdeas and women,
 to the later of whom it renders high Ronont, recognizing
 that they may be even Gurus; and lastly its Sédhund
 shalfully designed to realize its teachings,
       As Thave pontol out on’ many an oecasion this question
 of Sédiand i, of the highest importance, and. bas been in
 recent times mach overlooks. eis sist. which more than
 anything elie given vale te the Agama or Tantra ShAstes.
 More talle about religion ie only nn intllectual exercise,
 Of what use are grand phrases about AtmA on the lips of
 those who hate and injure one another      and will not help the
 poor. Religion as kindness. Religion agein is ® practical
 ‘ctivity. Mind ond body must be trained. ‘Thereis a spiritual
 ts wal ae a mental and physical gymnsstic. According to
 Shilta doctrine each man and woman contains within bim-
 self snd herself a vast latent magazine of Poweror Shakti, a
 tarm hich gomes ftom the root “Shak” to be able, to have
 force to do, #o act. They aro euch Shakti and nothing: but
 Shakti   fo the Svardpe of Shakti that is Shaktius ios in itelé
is Consciousness, ad mind and body      ate Shaeti. ‘The problem.
 thenishow to raise and vivity Shakti. This is the work of
 Sidhandin the Religion    of Power. The Agama is a practical
 philesophy, and as the Bengali ffend ani collaborator of
 nine, Professor Pramathandtha Mukhyophdhyiya, whom
 ‘cite again, has well pat it, what the intalleobual world
  wants to-day in the sort of philosophy which not merely
 argues but. experiments. ‘This is .Rriyk, The form which
                               163
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Sicdhand takes necessa             acconding to faith, tempera-
                              variesrily
‘ment and cspacity. Thus, amongst Christions, the Catholic
 Church, ike Hinduism, has s full and potent Sédhant in
 its sacraments Sainskita, temple (Church) and private
 ‘worship (Pajé, Uplcané) with Upechira “bel, light and
 incense” (Ghantd, Dipa, Dips), Images or Pretim® (bence
 it has been called idolatrous), devotional rites such as
 Novenas and the Tike, (Vesta) the threefold “Angelus”
 ‘at mom, noon and evening (Sandhyt), rosary (Japa), the
 sweating of Kavachas (Scapulars, Medsls, Agnus Dei), pilgr-
 image (Tirtha), fasting, abstinence and mortification (Tapas),
 monastic renunciation (Sannyésa), meditation (Dhyina),
 ending in the onion of mystical theology (SomAdhi) and so
 forth. ‘There aro, other smaller details such for instance
 as ShAti-abhisheka (Asperges) into which I neod not enter
 here, I may, however, mention the Spiritual Dizeotor who
 cocupies the place of the Gunn the worship (Hyperdulis)
 cof the VirginMother which made Svimi VivekAnanda
 all the Italian Catholics, Sbaktes; and the we af wine
 (ladya) and breod (corresponding to Made) in the Buche-
 ist of Communion. Service. Whilst however the Blessed
 Virgin evokes devotiin as wie as that which           is here paid
 to Dev, she ia not Devt forshe       is not God but a creature
 selected ‘ss the vehicle of His incamstion (Avatéra). In
 ‘the Eucharist the broad and wine are the body and Hood
 of Christ appearing under the form or “accidents” of those
 raterial substances ; so algo Téra is Drovamays, that is,
 the “Saviour in liquid form”. (MahanirviaeTr. xi, 105°
 107.) Tn the Catholio Church (ehoogh the early practios
 ‘was otherwise) the Inity no longer take wine bur bread
 only, the offciating priest consuming both. Whilst hon-
 ver the outward forms in this case are similar, the inner
 meaning is different. Those however who contend thot
 eating and drinking are inoonsistant with the “dignity”
 of worship may be reminded of Tertullian’s saying thet
 Christ instituted His great sacrament at 6 mesl. ‘These
                                 165
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  notions are thove of the dualisi with all his distinctions.
  For the Advaitin every function end act may be made a
  Yajua. Agape or “Love Feasts,” © kind of Chales, were
  held in early times, and discontinued as orthodox practice,
 ‘on account of sbuses to which they led; though they are
 sid still to exist in some ofthe smaller Christian sects of the
 dey. ‘There are other oints of ritual which are pecaliar
 to the Tantra Shisten and of which there is no counterpart
 in the Catholic ritual such as Nyise and Yantra. Mantra
 ‘exist in the form of prayor and es formule of consecration,
 Dut otherwise the subject in concsived of differently bars
 ‘Phere are certain gestures (Burd) made i the ritual, es
 ‘when consecrating, blessing, and so forth, but they ere not
 0 mumerons or prominent as they ate here, T may some
 day mote fully develop these interesting analogies, but what
 T have seid is for the preset suficient to establish the
 ‘numerous similarities which, exist between the Catholic and
 Indian Ténirik ritual. Because of these facta the “‘reform-
        Christian sects have charged the Cetholio Church with
     aganinm”. Tt is in fact the inheritor of very ancient
 ‘practices but is not necessarily the worse for thst. The
‘Hindu finds his Sidhand in the ‘Tantras of the Agama in
 forms which his race has evolved. Tn the abstract there i
 tuo reason why his race should not modify these forms of
 Salud or evolve new ones. Bat the point is chut s moat
 Ihave some form of Sdlkond. Any system to be fruitful must
 caperimentto gain experience, It's hecsuse of its powerful
 sacraments and dizciplies that in the West the Catholic
 Churoh has survived to this day. lnlding firm upon its
 “Rodk” amid the dissolving sects, born of what i called
 the “Reform”. Ibis likely to exist when these, as presently
 existing sects, ill have diseppeared. All things survive
 bby vivtuo of the tmuth in them. The particular truth to
 ‘which I here refer is that o faith cannot be maintained by
 rere hymnsinging and pious addresses. For this reason
 teo Hinduism hus survived.
                                165
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘This in not necessary to say that either of these wil,
 a presently existing forms, continue until the end of time,
 ‘The se-clled Reformed or Protestent sects, whether of
‘West or Hat, sve, when viewed in relation to man in general,
 the imperfect expression of a truth mininderstoed and
 tisopplied, namely that the higher man spiritually asoends
 ‘the las dependent: he on form. The mistake whieh such
 ‘Sects make is to look at the matter from one side only, and
 to suppove thot oll men are aliko in their sequizement,
 ‘The Agams is guilty of no such ertor. It ofers form in al
 ite flluess    and viehness to those below the stage of Yous,
 ft whioh point man resches whet the Kuldrgava Tantra
 calls the Varua and Ashrams of Light (Jyotirvaratshram!)
 rind gradually releases himself from all form that he may
 unite his elf with the Fonsless One, T do not know which
 ‘most to edmire— the colossal ‘affirmations of Indian dootrine,
 or the woadous varity of the diferig diseiplines which i
 prcsoribos for thois realization in fact
       ‘The Buddhists, called Brihmanini Shilavratapart-
 marsha, that i; a, eystem belleving in the eflesey of ritual
 acts, And 90 iti, and s0 at lengeh Was Buddhism, when
 passing through Mahayina it ended up with the full Tantsike
 Stdband of the Vajrayina School. ‘There axe human
 ‘eendensies which cannot be suppressed. Hinduism will,
 however, disappear, if and when SAGhané (whatever be its
 form) ceases ; for that will be the day on which it will no
 longer be something zeal, but the were subject. of philoso-
 phic snd historical talk. Apert from ite great dootrine
 of Shakti the main siguiicanes of the Shea Tantra Shistza
 lies in this, that it affirms the principle of the necesily of
 Sailhond wn clains to aftonl a means availabe to all of
 ‘whatever easle and of either ses whereby the teachings of
 Vedinta niay be practically -reaied
       But let no one take any statement from any one,
 myself melded, blindly, without examining and testing it
 Tom only eonsemed to state the facts se Llmow them, Ie
                               156
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
is man’s promgetive to think. The Saneleit word for
 “mau” vanes from the soot man “to thiuk”- ‘Those who
are Shikias may be pleused st what T have ssid about
their faith. It nimst- not, however, be suppceed that a
Aoctrne is necessarty true simply Deeause iti old. There
are some hoary errs. AS for science, its conclusions shift
from yearto year. Recent. discoveries have 30 abated its
pride that it has considerably caused to give itself those
pontifeal aim which formerly annoyed some of us, Most
‘wll fel tnt if.tbey aro to how to any Masterit should he to
‘opisitual one. A few will think that they can safely walk
alone. Filosophy again is one of the noblest of life's
ppuuits, bat here too we must examine to see whether
‘what is proposed for our acceptance is welfonnded. The
‘maxim is curent that there’ is nothing ao absurd but that
it has been held by some philosopher ot anothar. We must
each oualvos julge and chose, and if honest, none oan
lame our thoi. We must put all to the test. We may
here realoctthe words of Shruti—“Shrlaeyah, Mantarya,
‘ididiyastaeyah,”—"listen, reason snd ponder”; for
‘ag Mana says. “Yastartoninusondiate. 92 dharmam veda,
netarah”—"Hle who by. dsousion investigates, ho knows
Dharma and none other.”” Ultimately thoro is experience
Alone which in Shilta speech is Salam —“She T an”.
                  Nors 70 CHAPTER VI.
     Ihave refered to the Vaid and Agamic strands‘in Indian
      ‘Dhamma, T wish to add some weighty remarks made
 by the wellimown Vedintic Monthly the Prabuddha Bharata
 (iayavati, U.P., July 1914, 1916). They were elicited by
 ‘the publication of Arthur Avalon’s “Principles of Tantra”.
 After pointing out thst a vindication of the Tantras rebounds
 directly to the benefit of Hinduism asa whole, for Témtiism
in ite real sense is nothing but the Vedic religion straggling
  with wonderful success to reestert itself amidst all those
  new problems of mtigious life end diseiptine which historical
                                167
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘events and developments threst upon it, and after refering
 to the Introduction to that work, the author of the review
 ‘wrote aa follows :—
       “In this new publication (Messrs. Lumo & Co, of
 London) the most noteworthy feature of this new Intro-
 duction be haa written for the Tantratattva is his sppreci-
 tive presentation of the orthodox views about the antiquity
‘snd the importance of the Tantras, and it is impossible to
over-estimate the value of this presentation,
       For hitherto all theories about the crigin and the im-
 portance of the Tantras have been moze oF lees prejudiced
 by « wrong bias against Tntsikiem which some of its own
Iter sinister developments were calculated to create. This
 bias has mail almost every such theory read either like
condemnation or an apology: All investigation being thas
dliqualifid, the true history of TMantrikism. bss not yet been
‘written ; and ve find, enltared people mostly inclined either
‘to the view that ‘Tantskinm originally branched off from the
Baddhistic MubBylna or Vajmyhaa as ¢ onle of some cor-
rupted    and seltdeluded mionastics, or to the view that it
was the inevitable dowry which some. barbarous now-Aryan
races brought along with them into the fold of Hinduism,
According to both these views, however, the form which
this Téntrikiam—either a Buddhistio development or a
‘barbarous importation     has subsequently assumed in the
literature of Hinduism, is its improved edition ss issuing
from the crucibles of Vedic or Veddntic transformation.
But this theory of the curious eo-mingling of the Vedas and.
‘Vedinta with Buddhistio corruption or with non-Aryan
Iborbasity is perfectly insdequata to explain the all-pervad-
ing influence which the Tentras exert on our present-day
religions life. Tero it is not any hesitating compromise
‘that we havo-got before us to explain, but a bold organic
ryntheris, « legitimate restatement of the Vedic oulture for
‘the solution of new problems and new difficulties which
signelized the dawn of @ new age.
                                168
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
        In teasing the evolution of Hinduiom, modem historians
 take a blind leap from Vedio ritualism direct to Buddhiem,
 as if to conclude that all those newly formed commanities,
  with which India had been swarming all over since the close
 of the fataful ers of the Kurukshetra war and to which was
 denied the tight of Vedie sacrifices, the monopoly of the
 ‘higher threefold castes of pure orthodox descent, were going
 all the time withoat any religious ministrations, ‘These
 Aryanised communities, we must remember, were actually
 swamping the Vedic orthodoxy, which was already gredually
 Awindling     down to a halpless ‘minority  in all ita souttsred
 contres of inlusnee, and was just awaiting the final blow to
 be dealtby the zisoof Buddhism. Thus the growth of these
 new communities and their occupation of the whole land
 ‘constituted a mighty event that lad been silently taking
 place in India on the outekicts of the daily shrinking ortho-
 oxy of Voie sitnalism, long. before Buddhism appeared
‘on the field, and thismomentous eventour modera historians
 fil to take due otice of either, it may be because, of &
 curious blindness of -self-complacency or because of the
 Aiszzle which the sudden triumph of Buddhism and the
 overwhelming mass of historical evidenoas loft by it, create
 Doefore their eyes. The traditional Kali Yuga dates from
‘the tise of these communities    and the Vedio religious  culture
 of tle preceding Yuga underwent a wonderful transformation
 slong with o wonderful attempt it made to Aryanise these
 rising communities.
       History, as hitherto understood and read, speaks of the
 Brakmins of the pre-Buddhistic age,—their growing alien-
 tion from the Jndna-kinga or the Upanichadic wisdom,
 their impoteney to save the orthodox Vedic comnimities
 from the encroachments of the non-Vedie ores and races,
their ever-deepening religious formalism snd sodial exclusive
 ees, But this history ia silent on the marvellous feats
  Which the Upanishadic sects of anchorites were silently
 ‘performing on the outakirte of the strictly Vedic community
                                 169
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 with the object of Aryauising the new India that was rising
 cover the ashes of the Kurukshetr. conflagration. This
 now Indi was not sttietly Vedic like the Indin of the bygone
  ‘ges, for it could not claim the religious ministeations of the
 ortbodox Vedio Brakmins and could not, therefore, perform
 ‘Yajnas like the latter. The question, therefor, is as to how
 ‘this new India became gradually Aryanieed, for Aryanisation
  in essentslly « spiritual process, consisting. in absorbing
 ‘new communities of men into the fold of the Veiiv- religion.
  ‘The Vedio rtualism that prevailed in those days was power-
less, we have seen, to-do anything for these new communities
 ‘springing up all over the country. Therefore, we are obliged
 to tum to the only other factor in Vedic religion besides the
 Karma-kinda for an explanation of those changes. which
 the Veric religion wrought in, the. rising communitiss in
 onder to Axyanise ‘them. The Upanishads represent. the
 Jnfna-kinds      of the Vedio religion and if we study all ot
 ‘hen, we find that not only the estes situaism of Yajnes
 was philosophised upm the arti Upanishads, but the
 foundation for @ new, and no les slaborate, situaliam was
 filly lid in many of the later Upanishads. For example,
 we studyin these Upanishads how the pillosophy        of Pancha
 vupBsana (fivefold worship, wz, the worship of Shiva, Devt,
 Sun, Ganesh end Vishnu) was develozed out of the mystery
 of the Pranava ("Om"). ‘This philosophy cannot be dis-
 assed as a post-BudGhistic interpolation, veeing that some
 features of the same philosophy can be clearly traced even
fn the Brahmavas (¢g., the discourse about the conception
 of Shiva)
       ‘ere, therefore, in some of the later Upanishads we find
 recorded the sitempts of the pre-Baddhistis reshuses of the
 forait to elaborate'a post-Vedio rituslism outaf the doctzine
 of the Praniva and the Vedie theory of Yogio practices.
 Ero in these Upanishads we find how the Bije-nantras and
 ‘the Shachaka of the Tentms ware being orginally develop-
 ce, for on the Pranava or Udgitha lad been founded a
                                 170
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 special learning end a sooo! of philosophy fron the very
 earliest ages and some of the “epinal” centres of Yogic
 ‘meditation had been dwelt apon in the earliest, Upanishads
and coresponcing Brahmanas, The Upakaranss of Téntske
 worship, namely, auch material adjuncts as grass, leaves,
 water and 6'on, were most: apparently adopted from Vedic
 ‘worship along with their appropiate incantations. So even
 from the Brahmsnas and the Upanishads stands out in
 oar ref « ayoter of spsitualdisipline,— whichwe would,
 unhesitatingly classify ao Ténteik—having at its core the
 Pancha-vpstna and around it s fair round of rituals and
 rites consisting of BYjamantras and Vedic incantations,
 proper mieditative processes and proper manipulation of
 saored adjuncts of worship adopted from the Vedic sites.
 ‘This may be reganded.05 the eatiest configuration which
 ‘Tantrikism had on the eve of those silent but mighty social
 ‘upheavals through which’ the Aryanisation of vast and
 inereesng multitudes of new races proseededi pre-Buddlis-
 tic India and which bad their calmination in the eventful
 centuries of the Buddhist eowp de grace,
       Now this pre-Buddhistio ‘latinas, peshays, then
 recognized as the Vedic Puncha-upisana, could not have
 contiibuted ot all to the creation of new India, had it
 remained confined completely within the limits of monastic
 sects. But like Jainism, this Pancba-upésana went forth
 all over-the countryto bring ultta-Vedie communities under
 ita apiritual ministrations, Even if we enquire cateully
into the social conditions obtaining in the strictly Vadie
ges, we find that there was always an extended wing of
the Anjauisel society where the purely Vedic Karuakinga
ould not be pronsuigated, but where the moulding influence
cof Vedio ideals worked through the development of suitable
spititual activities. Tt is alwayy to the Jndaakdqda and
 the monastic votaries thereof, that the Vetic religion owed
ity wonderful expansiveness and its proguessive selfadapte-
 bility, and every religions development within the Vedle
                              ye
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  fold, but outside,the ritual of Homa sacrifices, is traceable
 to the spiritual wisdom of the all enonncing forest recluse.
 ‘This “forest” wisdom was, most forebly brought into 1e-
 quisition when after the Kurukshetra a new age was dawning
 with the onrush snd -upheaval of noo-Aryan snd semi
 Aryan races all over Tadia—on echo of which may be found
 in that story of the Mahtbharate where Arjuns fails to wo
 hain Gindiva to save hit protogée from the robbery of the
 snon-Aryan hordes
        ‘The preatast problem of the pre-Buldhistio ages was
  fe Aryanisation of the new Indie that rose and surged
 furiosly from. every side against the fst-lwindling centres
 of the old Vedic orthodoxy struggling hard, bat in vain, by
 social ensctments to guan ita penilous insulation. Bub
 for those religious movements, such os those of the Bhdgn-
 vatos, Shilkins, Sauryas, Shaivas, GAnapatyas and Joinas,
 that tackled this problem. of Aryanisstion most suoesfuly,
 all that the Vedio orthodoxy stood for in the zeal sense
 would have gradually perished without trsee. ‘These movo-
 ments, apecally the five culte of Vedio worship, took up
 many of the non-Aryan races end cast their life in the mould
 of che Vedio apstaal ideal, minimising in tis way the gult
 ‘hat existed botwem than end the Vedic orthodoxy and
  thereby rendering pomible their gradual amalgamation
 ‘And where this tase emained unfuliledovring t the mould
 proving too narrow stil to fit into the sort of life which
 nome on-Aryan ricet oF oaramunities lived, there it
 rmaized for Buddhism to solve the problem of Aryanisation
  in due time, Bot atil wo must nniembor that by tho time
  Baddhism made ite sppeorance, the pre-Buddhistic phase
 of Tintxik worship had already established itelf in India
 0 widely and so finnly that instead of dislodging it by its
 impetuous enset—all the force of which, by the bye, was
tainly spanton the tottaring orthodoxy of Vedic ntualism—
  Buddhism. was itself swallowed up within thos or four
  centuries by its perhaps least suspected opponent of this
                              ie
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Tantrik worship and then wondesfully trensfonned and
 jectd on the arena as the Mabiyéna.
       The publication of these two volunes in an event of
 gest interest and importance. Tho religious beliefs of the
 modem Hindus have been represented to English reader
 from various pointsof view, but the peculiar mould into
 which they have been songht to be eatt in comparatively
 ‘modern centuries has not retsived adequate attention. ‘The
 ‘exponents of the roligion of modern Hindus tele cognizance
 smote of the matier snd sourve of their belies than of the
 change of form they have Deen undergoing through the
 ‘many.omturics. The volumes under review, as wall as
 other publications brought out by Arthur Avalon, serve to
 carry this important question of form to such s prominence
 as almost mekes i obligatory for every exhaustive exposition
 ‘of Hindu doctrine in future to acknowledge and discriminate
 in them the formative infuencea of the Tint reataterent.
 1m the Tenttatattva, the presentation and vindication of
 ‘the Hindu seligiour beliefs and pct svowedly” and
eloeely follow the aethodolony of tho mtrs, ond tho
 learned pundit haa folly succeeded in establishing the fact
 ‘hat what lee behiad these belies aud practices is not mere
 prejudice   or supemtsion but aaystemof profound philosophy
 based on the Vedas. Every student of modem Hinduism
 should acquaint himself with this, namely, its immediate
 background of intr philosophy and zitusism.
       "The Hindu religious consciousness is ke a mighty
  Ganges emerging ftom the Himalayas of Vedic wisiom,
 reeciving tributaries and sending ont branch streems_st
 ‘many points in its conre. And though the nature of the
 current, its colour, volodty or wee may vary at different
  places, the Ganges is the une Ganges whether at Handwar,
  Allalnbad or Caloutta, ‘The atteam ia not only ono bat it
  dug ela ite one misin channal in spte ofall the many tba
 tars and branches, And the whole ofthe stream is sacred,
  though diferent ota may choose special points and
                             13
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  confiuencss. as of special sanctity to themselves, deriving
  inspiration thenos for their special sectarian developments
  Now, though the rise of Titik philosophy and ritualism
  crested in former times new coments and backwaters slong,
  the steam of Hinduism, it was easantially on important
  coourrance in the nisin stream: and channl ; and inatend of
  producing a permanent bifurcation in that stzeam, it coal
  coved with it, colouring and renovating, more or less, the
 ‘whole tenour of the Hindu religions conscionsness. As
 a rennlt, we fnd Téntrik thought ead sentiment equally
 operative in the extreme metaphysial wing of Hinduism
 ‘8 well a in its lower mottarat-iact phases.
          This actual permeation of Hindu seligiousconsciousnes
 Dy ‘TAnteie tought and eentiment shoul receive the fullest
 recognition at: the hands of every’ up-to-date exponent
 His predecenomn of formor generations might have to
 stoengthen their advocacy’ of Mintek doctsnes by joining
 ingne with the advocates of particular plnges of Hind rel-
 sion and plilosophy... But the present epoch iu the history
‘of our religioas consciousness is pre-eminently an epoch of
 ‘wonderful syathetio mood of thought ancl sentiment, which
 i gradually pervading the Hindu religious consciousness
 ever since Sof Ramakrishna Peramahamsa cnibodied in him-
 self its immediate possibilities, to find in the literature thet
 inbbeing 0 admivably provided for Ragish readers by Arthar
 Avalon an oeousionsl tendenoy to use ‘Antrle doetsines aa
  ‘weapons for combating certain phsses of Hindu belict and
  practice. This tmdeucy seers to betray quite a wrong
 stendpoint in the stady of the-Tontres, their relation to
  other Seriptres and their neal historical significance."



                               a4
                       Cuarrax VIL.
                   18 SHAKTI FORCE!
 “THERE are some posons who have thong, and ail
               , thot Shakti means foreeand that the worship
cf Skat ia the worship offoree.. Thus Keshub Chander Sen
 (New Dispensation,p. 108), wrote
        Four centuries. ago thy Shikins gave way before the
 Bhaktas. Chaitanya’s say proved invincible, ani earied
 all Bengal captive. Hiven toxiay his-goapel of love rules as
« living force, though his ‘olowers have considerably da-
 clined hoth in faith and in morals. Just the rovers of this
 ‘we find in Bngland and ater European countries. ‘There
 ‘he Shiktas are driving the Bhaktos ost of the field. Took
 at the Huxley, the Tyndalls and the Spencers of the day
 “What ae they but Shalt, wormhippees of Shakti or Foroe ?
 ‘The only Deity thay adore, if they’ at all dore one, ia the
 ‘Prime Foros of the universe. To it they ofl dry homage.
  Surely then the selentsts and. matetilsts of the day are ©
  sect of Shakti-worshipger, who are chasing evay the true
  Ghestinn devoteeh who adore the God af Love. Alas! for
  ‘Buropean Vaighnavus they sre tetreating before the advanc-
  ing millions of Wester Shiktas. We sincerely trast, how-
  ‘ove, the dikeomfiture of devotion and Bhakti will be only
  ‘or & time, and that a Chaitanya will yot arise in the West,
  crush the Shtltas, who only recogaizn Poros a8 Deity and
  fre aunk in eamality and voluptuous, and lead natures
  into the loving faith spsitulity, simplicity, ani rapturoun
  devotion of the Vaishnava
         Profesor Monier Williams ("Hinduirm”) also celled
  ft 8 doottine of Force.
         Reeently'the poet Rabintrannth Tagore has given the
   authority of his great name to ths err (Mfodera Review.
   ‘uly, 1910), After pointing out that Bypism is. the price
                              us
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 pid for the fact of existence and that the whole universe
js asintngin the desire tant tho"1” should be, he says that
‘man hae viewed this desire in two different ways, either as
‘& whim of Creative Power, or joyous self-expression of
Creative Love. Is the fact then of his being, he asks, 0
revealnent, af Rorce ot of Love? Those who hold to the
first view must also, he thinks, xcomnize conflict as inevitable
 and etemal. For according to them Peace and Love aro
 Ibut a precatious coat of armour within which tho weak seek
shelter, whereas that which tho timid anathematise ns
 unrighteousness, that alone is the road to suovess. “The
 ride of prosperity throws man’s mind outwards and the
iisery and insult of destitution draws man's hungering
‘desires likewise outwards. These two conditions alike leave
 man unashamed to place above all other gods, Shakti tho
Deity of Power— the Cenél One) whoee right hand wields
‘the weapon of guile. In the polities of Kurope drank with
Power we see the worship of Shalt.”
       In the same way the poct says that in the days of their
political disruption, the cowed. and down-trodden Indian
‘people through the mouths of their posta sang the praises
cf the aame Shakti, “The Chandi of Kavikanglon and
 of the Annaddmangula, the Ballad of Ménasi, thé Godacas
‘of Suakes, what are chey but Paans of the triumph of Evil t
 ‘The burden of their song is the defeat of Shiva the good st
 ‘the hands of the cruel deceitful criminal Shakti.” “The
male Deity who was in possession wap fairly harmless,
 But all ofa suddena feminine Deity tums up and demands
 ‘to be worshipped in his stesd. That is to say that she
 insisted on thrusting herself where she had no right. Under
 what title! Force! By whet method? Any that would
       ‘The Deity of Peace and Renunciation did not survive
 ‘Thus he adds that in Europe the modem Gulé of Shakti
 ays that the pele anemic Jesus will not do. But with
 hhigh pomp snd activity Europe eslebratesber Shakti worship.
                                196
                   IS SHAKTI FORCE?
       “Lantlythe Indians of today have at to the worhip
 of Burope’s Divinity. Tn the mame of seligion some sre
 soying tht it is cowanlly’ to be alld of wrongdoing
 Both those who have attained world’y wacoess, and those
 ‘who have failed to attain it are singing the same tane.
 Both fat at righteoumzess ax an obstacle which both would
 overcame by physical force.” I'am not concerned here
 vith any popular eon that there may be. Afterall, when
‘ve deal with x Shastri term itis to the Shastra       itself shat
‘we must look for ite meuaing. Shakti comes from          the ot
 Siak “to be abl,” “to do”. Te indiatos both antvity and
 opacity thereon. ‘The world, aa wool, ie activity. But
 ‘when we have sai that, we bave alwody indicated that is
 erroneous to confi the meaning of the term Shakti to any
 special fomn of activity. On the contrary Shakti means, both
 ‘owerin general    and every particwat form of power. Mind
 is Power: s0.is Matter:, Mind is constantly functioning
 in the form of Friai, Reasoning, Will aad Feeling (Bhiva)
 such as love, aversion, and so forth are all aspects of Mind
power in ita ganeral      sense. Forosis power translated to
‘he material plane, and ia therefore only one and the grossest
 sapect of Shakti ce power. But all these special powers aro
                                                           Mother
 Timited fot of the great oxeative Power whichisis notthe worship
 (Ami) of the Univene. Worship of Shakti
 of these limited forms, but      of the Divine wil, knowledge
 fand action, the cause of these effects. That Mabishakti is
 perfect conscioumness (Chidrpini) and Bliss (Anandamayi)
 ‘hich, produces fqm Ttelf the contracted consciousness
 experiencing both plesmure and pain. This production is
 hot at all a “whim”. It is the nature (Svabbdva) of the
  nltimate
      Bi ix Love (Niretishayapreméspadatean dnandatoon).
 ‘The production of tho Univene is according to the Shiktaof
  an act of love, illustrated by the so-olled erotic imagery
  the Shastra. The Sf loves itself whether before, oF in,
  cetion. ‘The thrill of human love which continues the
                                WT                          >
      ”
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 life of humanity is an infinitesimally small fragment anid
 {aint reflection of the ereative aot in which Shiva and Shakti
join to produc the Bindu which is the med of the Universe.
      T quite agree that the worship of mere Force is sve
 ‘and extept in a transient senso futile. Fore, however,
 be monallad by the good purpose wich i serves ‘The
 antithesis is not rightly between Might, and Right but be-
 ‘tween Mightin the servioe of Right and Mightin the service
 ‘of Wrong. ‘To worship foroe merely is to worship matter.
 ‘He however who worships the Mother in Her Material forms
 (Gthilardipa) will know that She as othors,    and will worship
 ‘erin   all such forms. He will also know that Sho ia beyond
‘limited forms ae that which gives being to them all. We
 may then sey that Force is a gross form of Shakti, but
 Shakti  is much more than-that “here” (Uh), and the infinite
 Power of Conscioumest “there (Amutra). This last, the
  Shakti of worship, ia called. by. the Shiotra the Pirmi-
  hhambbéva or the experience “ All T ann”,




                               178
                        Caarrm VIII.
                       OBINACHARA.
                 (Vasuisunes avo BupvEa.)
  J" bs been the subject of debate whether the inti
       Panchatattva ritaal with wine and so forth is a pro-
  uot of Buddhi         and sm,
                              whether it is oppose    to Vaidika
                                                            d
 Dhsrms, Some have supposed that these rites originally
                              ‘penetrated into India where they
 reenived ite impress, and again made their way to the north
 to encounter earlier original forms. I have elsewhere pat
 forwar    some factstwhich mggest that Uhese rites may be
 ontinuance, though in another form, of ancient aicie
  tuage in which Soma, Meat, Fish and. Purodiisha formed
  part. Though there ate somie Msithuna vites in the Vedas
  itis possible  that the ‘Bengal Shalta ritual in this rxpect
  has its origin in Obinichirs. Possibly the whole ritual
  comes therefrom, I have spoken of Bengal because we
 should distingnish it ftom other forms of Shikta worhip.
  ‘Tho matter is so obteare at prosent that any definite afirm-
 ‘tion as to historical origins lacka justiintion. Most
 ‘important however in the alleged Buddhist connection is
‘the story of Vashistha     to bo found in the Tantras. Keis
 ssid to have gone to Mahichina (Tibet), which, acconding to
 ‘popular belief is halt way to heaven. Mahideva is said to
‘be sible at the bottom of the Manasa          Lake tova
                                                    near Kaisa,
 Some of the Texts bearing on it have been collected in the
 ‘Appendixto the edition of the Tack Tantra which has been
 ‘published by the Vareadra Amusandbins Samfti, The T&xi
  ‘Tantra opans (2) with the following question of Devt
  ‘Tick of MahfoslaSormevatt: “Thou didst speak of the two
  Kulabheixovas, Buddha ond Veshishtha, Tell me by
  what Mantra they became Siddba."” The same Tentra (LV.
  10) defines & Bhairava as follows: “He who purifies these
                                  179
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 five (i, Panchatatova) and after offering the same (to the
 ‘Dovata) partakes théroo! is a Bhairava,”” Buddha then is
 said to be a Kula-bhairava, Ibis to be noted that Buddhist
 ‘Tanteiks who practise this ritual are accounted Kaulss.
 Shiva replied, ““He Jandrdana (Vishnu) is the excellent
 Deve in the form of Buddha (Buddhactpf.” Tt is said in
 the Samayichirs Tantra that T&rd and Kalk, in their
 different forms, as also Mitang, Bhairavi, Chhinnamasta,
 and Ditimavatl belong to the northern Amndya. The sixth
 ‘Chapter of the Sommohane Tantra mentions « umber of
 Scriptures of the Baudéhe dass, together with other of
 the Shikta, Shaiva, Vaishnava, Sanra and Ganaputya
  lasses.
        Veshiahtha is apoken of in the XVI Cbapter of the
 Radrayimala and the Ist Potale of the Brokmayimela,
 ‘The following is the acoomnt in the former Téntrik
 Scriptame:—
        ‘Vashishta, the selé-controlle’, the son of Brahma,
 ‘practited for agos sovere austarties in a lonely apot. For
 ‘six thousand years he did Sédhan8, but atill the Daughter
 of the Mountins did not sppear to him, Becoming angry
Ihe went to hia father and told him his method     of practice.
 ‘He then said, “Give me another Mantra Oh Lord since this
  Vidya (Mantra) does not grant me Siddhi (success) other-
 ‘wise in your presence I shall utter a terrible cue.”
        Dissuading him Brahm said, “Oh son, who art learned
 in the Yoga path; do not do.so. Do thou worship Her again
 with wholehearted feeling, when She will appear and grant
  you bons. Skbe is the Supreme Shakti. Sho seves from
fall dangers. She is lustrous like ten million suns. She
 is dark blue (Nil). She is cool like ten miltion moons.
  She ia like ten milion lightning ‘ashes. She is the spouse
  of Kala (Kalakimini), Sheis the beginning ofall. In Her
  there is neither Dharma nor Adhsrme. She is in the form
  ofall, She is atached    to pure Chindchdra (Shudthaching-
  chirarett). Sho is the initiator. (Pravarttik) of Shakti-
                                180
                       CHINACHARA
  chakra. Her greatness in infinitely boundless. She helps
in the orosing     of the ocean  of the Sata, She ie Buddi-
  cahoari (possibly Budditshvari, Lord of Buidhi). She
  is Buddhi (intelligence) itaelt (Buddhiripa). She is in the
 form of the Atharea branch of the Veias (Athacvavedashi-
 lckin, Numerous Shistcc reforenoes connect the Tantra
  Shistra with the Atharvaveda. (Gee in this connection my
 citation irom Shaktisongama Tantea in “Principles of
 Tantra”) She protects the beings of the worlds. Her
 sotion is spread throughout, the moving sud motionles.
 Worship Her, my son. Bo of good sheer. Why ao eager to
 eure? Thou art the jewel of kindness. Oh son, worship
 Her constantly with thy mind (Chota). Being entirely
 fengrosced   in Her, thou of a surety shalt gain sight of Her.”
       Having heard these words of his Gara and having
 bowed to him agai and again the pure one (Vashishtha),
tersed in the meaning nf Vaidnia, betook himself to the
 shore   of the ovosn. For full a thous        yests and
                                                     he did Japa
  of Her Manta. Sill he reseived no message (Adesha).
 Thereupon the Muni Vashiahts grew angry, and being
 perturbed of mind prepared to curs the Mahividy’ (Devi).
 ‘Having sipped water (Achamana) be uttered great and
 terrible curse. Thereupon Kulesvart (Lady ofthe Kaulas)
 ‘Mahbvidy’ appeared before the Muni.
      ‘She who, disgels the fear of the Yogins said, “How
 now Vipra (Ate Viprs), why have you terribly cursed with-
 ‘out cause? Thou dost not understand My Kuldgama nor
 Iknowe      how to stworbip. How      by mere Yoga practiceoon
 either man of Deva got sight of My Lotus-Reet. My worship
 (Dhydna) is without austerity nd. pain, To him who desires
 My Kaldgama, who is Siddha in My Mantra, and knows
‘My pure Vedch            My éra,
                             Sidban8 is puse (Puny) and beyond
 ven the Vedos (Vedinmapyagechaca). (This does not mean
 unknown to the Vedas or opposed to them but something
 ‘whiod surpasses the Valdik ritual of the Pasko. This is
 mide plain by the following injunction to follow the
                                  181
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Atharvaveds] Go to Mahdckina (Iibet) ond da cownry
  of the Bauddhas    and abeays follow the atharvoveda (Bouddia-
  deshe'tharvasede Mabdetine sai naj). Tiaving gone there
  and soon My Lotus-Feet which are Mababhiva (the grest
  blissful feeling which in Her true nature She is) thou shalt,
  Oh Maharshi, bovome versed in My Kula and s great
  Siddha.”
        Having s0 said, She became formless and disappeared
 in the ether and then passed through the ethereal region.
 ‘The great Rishi having heanl this froth the Mahdvidya
Sarasvati wontto the lond of Okina where Buadho és extablish-
 ed (Buddhepratishthits). Having repeatadly bowed to the
 ground, Vashishthe Said, “Protect me, Oh Mahideva who
 at the Impsrishable One in the form of Buddha (Buddba-
 raps), Tam the very humo Vashishths, theaon of Brahma,
 My mind is ever ‘pertatbed. Ihave come here (Choa)
 for the Sidbanf of the, Mubadovi. I tmow not the path
 leading to Siddhi, Thou knowest the path of the Devas,
 Seeing however thy way of life (Aebira) doulte astail my
mind (Bheydnd      sont me brik becanao       he saw the (to hima)
 extriondinary ritual. with wine and woman). Destroy them
 ‘and my wicked mind which inclines to Vaile ritual (Voda-
 mint; that is, the ‘onlinaxy- Pook ritual) Ob’ Lond in
 ‘Thy shode there ar ever rites which are: outside Veda (Veda-
  vahihrita that is, the Vaid sifaal and whatis consistent
 ‘with Vede as Vashishtha then, supposed). How is it that
 ‘wine, seat, woman (Angend) are drunk, eaton and enjoyed
 bby naked (Digambara) Siddbas who are high (Varn), and
 avetinspting (Raktapinodyste). ‘They drink constently
 and enjoy (or make enjoy) beautfal women (Muhurmubuh
 prapivants ramayanti vardngandm),. With red eyes thoy
 fre ever exbilarated and replete with fesh and wine (Sadd
 méngésavaih pdrndh). They ite powerful to favour and
 punish, They are Beyond the Vedas’ (Vedasyagocharth).
 ‘They enjoy wine ond women (Hadyastrtsovane ratih)”
  (Vasnshtha merely saw the ritual surface).
                                182
                          CHINACHARA
       ‘Thus spoke the groat Yogt having seen the rites which
 fore outside the Vedas (Veda-vahishkite, . and). ‘Then
 bowing low with folded hands he humbly said, “Blow con
‘nclinations such as these be purfing tothe mind? How con
 tere be Siddhi without Voids rites?”
       ‘Manah-pravrtiveschu katham thaveti pévoni
       Kothong vt jiyate siddkir veda iryyang vind prablo,
       Buddha said, “Oh Vashishtha        listen the while T speak
 ‘0 thee   of the exellent Kula path, by the mere knowing of
Which ons becomes ina short time like Rudra HFinslf.
 T apeak to thos in brie of the Agame which is the essence
of all and which fonds to Kulasidahi. Féret          of all the Vira
 (Gero) should   be pure (Shuchi. Buddha here states the condi-
 tions under which ouly. the zites are permisible). His
 mind should be penetrstod with discrimination (Viveks)
 and freed of all Pashubbdva (atate of an uninitste Pasha
 ‘or animal man). Let hint avai the company of the Pasha
 fand remain slane in a lonely place, fee rom hut, anger and
 other passions. He should constantly devote himself to
  ‘Yoga practice, He should be fim in his resolve to learn
 ‘Yojg ; be should ever tread the Yoga path and fullyIn now        this
 the meaning     of the Veda (Vedkrthasipuno mabén).
 way the plows one (Dhaemdtma)       of  good   conduct    and   lange-
 anes of heart (Auérys) should, by gradual degmes, matin
 his trotth, and theough the path of breathing compass              the
 destmuotioa of mind. Following. this practico               the   self-
 ‘controled (Vash) booomes Yogi. In slow degrees of practice
 ‘the body firstly sweats, ‘This i the lowest stage (Adhama)-
‘The next is middling (Madhyama). Here there is trembling
  (Kampa). In the thind or highest (Para) stage one is able
 to levitate (Bhimityaga). By the attainment of Siddhi in
 Prinfiyfna one becomes a master       in Yogs. Having become
  «a You! by practice of Kumbhaks (restsuint of breath) ho
  Should be Mauni (given over to silence) and and      full of intent
  Gevotion (Bkdnta-bhakti) to Shive, Krishna                  Brakma,
                                  183
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘Tho puro one should realize by mind, ation, and speech that
  Bram, Vishau and Shiva ace restless like the moving air
  (Vayavigntichanchaleh. Quaere, Pechops the transient
 nature of these Devatéa, 03 compared with the supreme
 Shakti, is indicated.) ‘The man of steady mind should. fix
  it on Shakti, who js consciousness (Chidriga). "Thereafter
 ‘the Mantrin should practise MahOvirebhiva (the feeling of
 ‘the great hero) and follow the Kula path, the Skalt-chakra,
 the Vaishnava Sativa-chalers and Navavigraha and should
 worship Kulaktyaynat, the exzollant one, the Pratyalrba
 Dovaté (Chat i, the Deity who responds to prayer) who
 grants prosperity and destroys all evi She is conseiownaess
 (Chidipa), She is the abode of knowledge (Juana) and is
 Conscioumess and Bliss, lustrous s6 ten million lightnings,
 ‘of Whom all Tattvas ate the embodiment, who is Raudst
 with eighteen srné, fond of wine and mountains of flesh
 (the text is Shindmdngsdchalopriyim, but the fist word
 shouldbe Surd), Man should do Japs ofthe Mantra, tcking
 refuge with Her, and following the Kula path. Who in
the thice worlds Inows a path higher thas thin? By the
 igrace gained therein, the gmpat Brahma Himeolf became tbe
 Grontor, and Vighany whoos substance is Sattve-guna, the
 object of adoration of al, highly: deserving-af worship, the
 ‘grat, and Tord of Yajurveds, became abl to protect. By
 it Hara the Lord of Viras, the wrathiul one, Lord of waath
 and of mighty power, became the Destroyer of all. By the
 sgnce of Virsbhiva the DikpAlas (Protector of the quarters)
 Decame like unto Rudra, By 8 month's, practice power to
 attract (Akarshanasidhi) is attained; Tn to months one
 Iheccmes the Tord of Speech. » In four months one becomes
 Tike unto the Dikpils, in Sve months aso becomes the five
 azcows (probably mosters the five Tanmétree), and in six
 smomths he beconies Rudta Himweli- ‘The fruitot this method
 (Achara) is beyond all others. This is Kaulamtrga. There
is nothing which surposses it. Tf there be Shalt, the Vipra
 becomes & complete Yog! by six months’ practi. Without
                             184
                      CHINACHARA
  ‘Shakti even Shiva can do nought. What then shall we say
  cof men of small intelligence,”
        “Having eaid this, He whose form is Buddha (Buddha
  ript) made him practise Sidand. He sxid, “Oh Vipr, do
  thou serve Mabishakti, Do thou practise Sidhauf with
  wine (adyasHdiand) and thus shalt thow get sight of the
Lotus Peet of the Mahtvidya,”” Vashishtha having heand
 ‘ese vor of the Gara and meditatiog on Devi Sanuavatt
‘wont tothe Kulamandape to practi the wine staal (dint
 sidbant) ood having repeatedly done Sidban8 with wine,
 reat, fh, parched grain aud Shale he became a complete
 ‘og! ‘A (Ptrnayor)
           similar ascount is given in the Beshmaytmale,
 ‘There are some variante bowever. ‘Thos while in the
 Ralzayfmala, Vashishha iy said to, have resortal to the
 shore of the ocean, inthe Brahmayaola he goes to Kimi-
 chy, the great Tlntrik Pltha and thrive ofthe Devt. (The
 prevalence of Her worship amongst the Mongglian Assamese
 kb noteworthy.) Te may be here ated that this Yimala
 ates that, exept at Une of worship, wine should not be
 taken nor should the Shakti be udothed. By violation
 of these provisions lip; it says, je shortened, aud. man goes
 to Hel.
        ‘According to the sccount of the Brahmayémala,
 ‘Vashishtha complaining of his il-muoess was toldto go to
 ‘he Blue Mountains (Vildobsls) and worship Parameshvatd
 near Kimikdya (Kammup in Asam). He was told that
 Vighau in the form of Buddha (Buddharigf) alone lnew
 {his worship accontng to Chinichima. Devt aid, “without
 Chinichia       you cannot please Ble. Goto Vighny     who ia
 Uibodhardpt (Ilumined) and worship Me according to the
 Achara taught by Him.” Vasbishtha then went to Vishnu
in the country Machina, which is by the side of the Hima-
 laju (Himavatpéechve), a country” inhabited by great
 Sidialae and thowsands of beaut and youthful women
whose hearts were gladdened     with wine, and whose minds
                              185
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘ere blissful with enjoyment (Vilisa). ‘They were adorned
  with clothes which inspired love (Shringhravesha) ond the
  movenient of their hips made tinkde their girdles of little
  bells. Five of both fear and prudish shame they enchanted
  the world. They suroud Ishvara and are devoted to the
  ‘worship of Devt. Vashishtha wondered greatly when he saw
  ‘Him in the form of Buddha (Buddharips) with eyes drooping
  rom wine. “What” he said, “is Vighou doing im His
  Baddhs form? This way (Achdra) io opposed to Vela
  (Vedavidaviruldha). 1 do xotrapprove of it (Anammato
  ‘mama).” Whilst       so thinking, he beard a voice coming,from
 ‘the ether saying, “Ob thou who att devoted to good acts,
 think    not ike this. ‘his Aobire     is of excellent result
                                                             in the
 Sidhanf of Tarini, Sho is nob pleased with anything which
 is the contrary    of ths... 1 thou. dost wish to gain Her grace
 speedily, then worship Her scoording to Chinkchira.”
 ‘Hearing thin voice, Vashishtha’s hairs stood on end and he
{fell to the ground. Being filled with exovoding           joy be
 ‘prayed to Vishnu io the form of Buddha (Buddhardpo).
  Buddhs, who ed taken wine, seeing him was greatly
 ‘pleased and said, “Why have you come here !” Vashishtha
  bowing to Budths told him of his worship of Térint, Buddha
  who is Haxi and fall of knowledge (Tattvajadns) spoke to
  him of the five Mahiras (M: that is, the fire commencing
  with   the letter Mor Madya, ot wine and so forth) which are
  in OKindchéra (Majndnam Okinachérddikiéranam) saying
  that this should not be disclosed (@ common injunction as
  regards this ritual and rendeze it from the oppouents’stand-
  ‘poin: suspect). “By practising it thou shalt nob ogain sink.
into the ocean of being. It is full of knowledge            of the
  Resence (Tettvajndns) and gives immediate liberation
  (Mukti).”” He then goes on to explain # principal feature
  of this cult, namely, ite freedom from the ritual rules of the
  ordinary worship above which the Sadhake ts risen. Tt
  fs mantal worship. In it bathing, purifcation, Japa, and
   ceremoniel    worship is by the mind only. (No outward acta
                                    186
                      CHINACHARA
tare necessary ; the bathing and eo forth is in the mind and
 notin aebual water, ais the cage in lower and less advanced
 wort.) ‘There are no rales      as to auspisious
                                                and insuspici-
 cous times, or as to what should be done by-day and by night.
 Nothing is pure or impure (there is no ritaal defeot of im-
 purty) nor prohibition ageinst the taking of food. Devt
 should be worshipped even though the worshipper bas had
 his focd, and even though the place be unclem. Woman
 ‘who is Her image shouldbe worshipped (Pajanam steiyxh)
and never should any injury'be doneto hor (Stidvesho naiva
            )
      ‘Are we here dealing with an incident in which Shikya-
 sui oF some otter Buddhs of Buddhism was concermed {
       ‘Accordingto Hindu belie the Ramayana was composed
 in the Treté age, and, Vashihtha was the family priest of
 Dashamatha and Rama (Aiikanda VIl4:6, VIIL 6, Ayodtyi-
 Jkanda V. 1). The Mabsbhinata was composed in Dvapare
 Krishna appeared in the Sandhyt between this and the
 Kaliyuga. Both Kurclabstm and Buddha vere in tha
 Kali age. Actoraing to this chronology, Vashishtba who
 ‘was the Guru of Dasharatha was earlier than Shakyamuni.
 ‘There were, however, Buddhas before the latter. ‘The text
 does not mention Shakyamuni or Gautama Buddhs. Ac:
 cording to Buddhist’ tradition there were many other
 ‘Buddhas before him such as -Dipankara “he Luminous
 One”, Krakuchhanda and others, the term Budaba being a
 term applicable to the enlightened, whoever be be. Tt will
 no doubt be sid by the Western Orientlist     that both these
 ‘Yamalas were composed after the time of Shikjamuri.
 ‘Batf this be so, thair author or author, as Hindus, would
 be aware that according to Hindu Chronology Vashishtha
 ‘antedated Shakyamuni. Apart from the fact of there being
 other Buddhas, according to Hiuduism “types” as distin-
 guished from “forms” of various things, idese, snd faiths,
 tre persistent, though the forms are variable, fst as is the
 ‘ase with the Platonic Ideas or eternal architypes. In this
                               187
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  scase neither Vets, Tantmusbistre nor Buidhism had an
  abolute beginning at any time. As types of ideas oF faiths
 ‘they are beginningless (Anda), though the forms may have
 ‘varied. from age to age, and though perhaps some of the
  types may have been latent in some of the ages. IE the
  Weds are Andi so are the Tantra-shastras. To the Yogie
  vision ofthe Rishi which makes Intent things patent, variable
 orms show their hidden types. Nothing i therefore abso-
 Iutely new. -A-Rishii the Toot Yaga will know that whieh
 svi spoarently bogin in Kali or Dvépara but whith already
 really latent in his own age. Vighau appeare to bit vision
 ‘tu the embodiment of that already latent, but subsequently
 petent, cult, Moreover in © given age, what is Isteat in ©
 particular and (@oy AryBvarta) may be patent in another
 (cay MahGchina). In. this way, seeoning to the Hinda
 Shistrs, there it a exential conasrvation of types subject
to the conditions   of timo, place, and person (Deshallaptra.
 Mowsover, according to these Shastra, the ereative power
 in n reproducing principle, ‘This means that the world.
 proces in oolio according to a.potidie law. The proosas
 jn one Kalpa i substantially repeated in another and
 ‘Vashishtha, Buddhs, and the rest appeared not only in the
 present but in previous grand eyelet or Kalpas. Just as
 ‘there is. no absolute frst beginning of the Universe, so no-
 thing under the sun is absolutely nee. Vaabishtha, therefore,
 right have emembored pest Buddhas, as he might have
 foreseen those to come. In Yogic vision both the past and
 the futare can project their shadoves into the present. Every
 Porlna and Samhit® illustrates these principles of Yogic
 intuition baokwards and forwerds, To the mind of Iabvara
 Doth past and faire are knows. And eo it is 9 euah who,
in the necessary degree, partakeofthe qualities of the Lord's
 mind. The date upon which a particular stra is compiled
 is, from thie viewpoint, unimportant. Even « medem
 Shastra may deal with ancient matter. In dealing with
  apparent anuchronisms in Hindu Shara, it is nesosary to
                              188
                        CHINACHARA
 ‘bear in mind these principles. ‘Ths of cone isnot the view
 of “Oriental scholacs” or of Indians whom they have
 stampeded into regarding the belts of their country 9s
 absurd, Tt is however the orthodox view. And as an Indian
 friend   of mine to whose views I have referred has said,
 “What
 ing       the Peychic
       to good  ‘meiums’research  society of cannot
                             and ‘sujet      the Westbe is Withheld
                                                             conced-
 from our ancient supemen—the Rishi.”
       ‘The pecaline features to be noted af this story are these,
 Vasbiahtha must have known what the Vedas and Vaidie
 its wore, as ordinarily understocd. He is deseribud as
   Velma Yet le wan surprised on sesing. Chintchira
 ites and disapproved of them. Ho apeaks of it aa “outside
 ‘Vede " (Vodavshishicits) and even opposed to it (Vedavida-
 Yiruldha)- Ox the otier hand Ue connection with Veda is
 shown, in that the Devt who promulgates this Achira is
 connected with the Atharvaveds,, and directs Vashishtha
 alway to follow that Veda, and speaks of the AchAra not
as being opposed       to, but 4s somethings0 high         as to be
  beyond, the ontinary Vaidik ritual (Vedinmapyagocharah),
 Hh is to be fully Iearued in the import of Veda (Vedartha-
 nipuno). Tt was by the grace of the docttine and practice
 of Chtatchfra that Vishnu became the Lord of Yajurveda.
 ‘Tho moaning therefof appears lo be, that the doctrine and
 practice lie implicit in the Vedas, but go beyond what is
 onlinasily aught Vishnu therefore says that itis not to be
 disclosed. What moaning again aze we to attach to the
  Word Vighnubridhartps. Buddha means “ealightened”
 but here #portioular Buddha seems indicated, though Vishnu
 is also spoken of os Udhodhsrpt and the Devt as Buddbesh-
 vw, ‘The Téré Tontra calls hima Kulabbsirava, As is
  ‘ell known, Buddha was an incarnation of Vishnu, -Vashish-
 thn is told to go to Mahtchina by the Himalaya and the
  country of the Banddhas (Bauddtadesbe). The Bauddhas
 ‘whe follow the Panchatsttvm aitual are atconnted Kula,
  This a noteworthy fact that the flower of the Devt is Jab,
                                189
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘tho scarlet hibiscus dt China rote, As the last name may
 indicate itis perhaps not indigenous to India but-to China
 ‘whence it may have been imported possibly through Nepal,
 ‘This legend, incorporated as itis in the Shilstra iteslf, seems
 to me of primary imyortanee in determining the historical
 origin of the Panchatative ritual.
                    Cuarrme IX,
         ‘THI TANTRA SHASTRAS IN CHINA.
 [ADOPTING for the purpose of this estay, and without
         discussion as to-theit aocuracy, the general views of
 Orientalists on chronology nd the development of the
 Buddhistio schools, the history of the Buddhist Tantea is
 shortly as follows. ‘The Mahéyna (which commenced no
 ‘one imows exactly when) was represented in the first and
 second centuries by the great names of Ashvaghosha and
 Nigirjuna. Ta great scripture is tho Prajaphramita. Tes
 Gominance under the protection ‘of Kanishka marks the
 fit sieps towards metaphysical, theistic, and vitulistio
 religion,a recurring. tendenoy aniongst      nen to which T
have previously referred. . In the second: half of the first
 century ADD, Buddhism, epperenty in its Mahtyéue form,
 spread to China, and thenos to Corsa, then to Japan     in the
 sixth century A.D. and to Tibet in the seventh. Some time
 between   the 4th and Sth oenturies A.D. Assngs, « Buddhist
monk of Gndhrs, s said to have promulgated        the Buddhist
 Yogichims which, as ita name imports, was an adaptation
 of the Indian Patanjalfs       Yogt Darstnna. Dr. Waddell
 says that “this Yoga parasite (most Enopsans dislike
 ‘what they understand of Yogo) containing within itedf
 the germs of TAniriam” so n developed “monster
 outgrowths” which “cankered' “the little life of purely
 Budihistic stock” in the Mabtyfina, which is iteelt
 ‘characterized as merely “sophistic nihilism”. Whatever
‘thst may mean, it certainlyhae the air of reducingthe
 Mabiyinato nothingness. We are then told that at the
 cad of the sixth century ““Téntrism or Sivaio mysticism (a
  vague word) with its worship of fomsle enesgies (Shakti) and
  Flendesses begun to tinge both Hindnixm and Buddhism,
  the Intter of which “became sill more debased with silly
                                sor
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA.
  contemptible mummery of unneaning jargon, gibberish,
 charmed sentences (Dhétant) andl magic circles (Mandalé)"
 in the form of the “Vehiclo” called Mantraydna alleged to
 hhave beon founded by Natrjuna. who reosived it from the
 Dhytni Budethis Vairoehena through the Bodhisattva Vajea-
 satura at the “‘Izon tower” in Southern India, Continuing
 he sayn “that on the evolution in the tenth century of the
 demoniacal Buddhas of the Kélachakea (system) the Mantra:
 xyina developed into the Vajraydna “the most depraved
form of Buddhist doctrine” wherein the “Dovotes"” endes-
 ‘your with the aid of the “Demeniacal Buddhas” and of
 ““Fiendesses” (DAkicl) “to obtain veriow Siddhis". The
‘missionary author the Revd. Gmbam Sandberg, who is
10 little favournble to Buddhism that he can discoves (p: 200)
in it “no echemé of metaphysics or morality which can be
dignified with the title of an ethical system,” when however
peaking of this “most depraved form” in a short Chapter
on the Tanta and Tantrik       rites (“Tibet and the ‘Nbetans”,
218) says that this new vehicle (Nasg-kyi Thegpa) did not
profess to supersede the time-honoused Vajrayana (Dorje-
‘Thogpa) but it dlsimed “by ita expanded mythological
scheme and ite fascinating and even sublime mystic conoep-
tions to crystallize the old TAntrik methods into « regular
sciencé as complicated as it was resowroeful.” We are all
natarally pleased at finding resemblances in other doctrines
to teachingsof our own, andso the reverend author, after
pointing out that a leading featare of the Kélaohakra (Dus-
Kyikhorlo) was the evolution of the idea of a Supreme
Personal Being, says that “many fine and distinctively
‘heiatie chanuctarstos of the Deity, His dispeition, purity,
fatherliness, benevolence and. isolated power are set oat in
Aho Ralachakra treatises.” But he is, a6 we might expect,
fof the opinion that this vas only en effort towards the
eal thing, probably influenced by the fact of Christian and
Mahomeden ‘teaching. We commonly find ‘that a Semitic
source is alleged for what cannot be denied to be good in
                               192
      THE TANTRA SHASTRAS IN CHINA
 Hinduinm, or its child Budi. One wonders however
 Ihow the “‘Gemoniaeal Buddhas” and “Fiendesses” work
 ‘themselves into this be-prised flo to teach Christen
 dens, At the risk of straying from my subject, I may point
 ‘out that in Buddhiem the Devatés are given both peaceful
 (Zhi) and wrathful (Rhro) aspects. ‘The latter denotes the
 tervible (what in Tzdin is called Bhairava) aspeots of the
 Divinity, but does aot change Kim or Her into s Demon,
 atleast in Buddhist or Indian belie. Even te the Christian,
 God bas both a torible and benign aspect. It is true that
 seme of the representations of the former aspect in Northeen
 ‘Badahism ae, to mest Westerns, demoniae in form, but that
 is the way the Tibetan mind works in enieavouring to
 Picture the matter for itself, an the Hindus do with their
 Devs Kall, Chhinnamagté"and Chandi, Another and
 aritially voneeived idea of Bhainsva. is pictured in a
 Deantiful Indian Kangra painting in my possesion in whieh
 st mouldering retmsined wrath, as it were a lowering dark
 storm-clond, envelopes the otherwise restrained face and
 immobile posture of the Devatt. As rogerde the esoteric
vworahip of Dikings I have esd a word in tho Forewordto
 ‘the seventh Yolume of my “Tinta Texts”. Without
 Iving Tecoumte to abuse, wocan better state the geaesal
 couchision by saying that the Tentrik ealt introduced
 tistical form of organized worbip with prayer, litanis,
 Taymns, musi, flowers, incense, recitation of Mantra (Jape),
 KavachaaoF proteotams in the’ form of Dhsanis, offerings,
 help ofthe dead: in short, with all practical aids to religion
 forthe individual together with a rich and pompous public
 staal    for the whole body of the faith
       "Por the following faets, to for 9 China is concemed,
  Tam indebted in the main to the Jeamed work of the Jesuit
 FatherL, Wieger “Hitoire des Croyances religiewses et des
 ‘opinions. philotophigues  en Chine” (Paris Challame! 1917).
 ‘The author cited states that Indian Tantrism “the school
 ‘of efcacious formnla” developed in China in the seventh
                              193
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 and sighth contusion of our ore, ae a Chinete adaptation af
 the old Theistic Yoge of Paxanjali (Second emtury B.C)
 recast by Samanta Bhadra, “‘and fixed in polythestc (*)
 for” by Ascmgha (dre. 400 A.D. or as others say 600
 AD). A treatise of the latter trmslted into Chinese in
 47 AD. had but litle succes. But in 716 the Indian
 Shubhakara came to the Chinese Court, gxined the support
 of the celebrated Tehang-sei, known under his monastio
 ‘name Thing, to whom he tanght Indian doctrine, the lattar
 in retum giving aid hy woy of traniations. Shabhakars,
 fn the TAntak way, thought thot the Buddhist Monks in
         swore losing ter time in mere philosophising since (L
 cite the author meationed) the Chinese people were not
 capable of abstract speculations. Probably Shabhakars,
 like all of his kind, was @ practical men, who recognized, at
 ‘men of sense must do, that in view of the present charactar
 of human natar, tligion anuat be otganized and brought
 to the poople in such a form as ‘ill be fruitful of-renwt
 Metaphysical speculations count with then: for little either
 in China or elsewhare: Shubhakser and his schcol taught
 ‘tho people tint “nun was zot like the Bazans a fruit with-
 cout kernel”. Tis body contained a Soul. A moral life
‘was neousary ; for after death the Soul was judged and if
 found wicked wos cast into Hell, But how was man to
 guard against this and the evil epirits around him? How
 ‘was he to secure health, wealth, panion for his sins, good
 boeing in this world end the heresfizr? The people were
 thm taught the existence of Divine Protector, including
 some forms of Hind Divinites a lao the mannerin which
 this help might be invoked. They were instacted in the
 ‘ue of Mantras, Dhan, and Mudra the meaning of which
 is not explained by Dx. Waddell’ defiition “certain dis-
  tortion   of the finger". They were taught   to pray, to make
 coflrings, and the various other rituals everywhere to be
 found in Tantza Shistra. Father Wieger says that pardon
cffsins and saving from the punishment of Hell was explained
                              194
     THE TANTRA SHASTRAS IN CHINA
 by the Chinese ‘Tntciks of this school not as a derogation
from justice,    but the affect of tbe appeal to the Divine
 Protector which obtained for the sinful man a fresh lease
 of life, a kind of respite during which he was enabled to
 redeem himself by doing good in place of expisting his sins
 by tortare in Hell, The devout intrik who sought after
 his death to be born in the heaven of auch and such Buddha,
 obtained hia wish. Sinners who hud done nothing for
 themselves might be helped even after sheir death by the
 ‘proyers of relatives, friends ond priests. The devotion of
 ‘the TMutrike for the salvation of the decessed was very
 rest. “Let us suppose” says one of the Texts “that a
 member of your family     ia thrown in prison. What will You
not do to relieve him there,or to get him out from it. Tn
‘the same way we must at for the dead who aze in the great:
 Prison of Hell.” Prayer and chasity with the view to aid
 ‘them is sccounied to their metit. Above al itis necessary
 ‘to obtain the eid of the priests who deliver these bound souln
‘hy the ritual ad foo, accompaniedby music which forms an
  important part of the Buddhist intr rites. ‘The resem
blance of all this to the Catholic practice       as regards the
  soulsin purgatory   i obvious. As in the Indian Compendia,
  such at the Tantrasira, there were prayers, Mantras and
  ‘Dhrants to protect against every form of evi, against the
  bed Spirits, wild beasts, natural calamities, human enemies,
  snd s0 forth, which were said to be effective, provided that
  ‘thoy were applied in the proper disposition and at the
  right time and in the right manner. But more effective
  ‘than oll these was the initiation with water (Abhisheka).
  For innumerable good Spirits surround the initiates in all
  places and st all times so that no evil touches them. Tt
‘was recommended also to carry on the body the written
  name of one’s protector (Iahtadevat8) or one of those signs
  which were called “Transcendent seals conquerors of all
  Demons”, This pmctice agsinis similar to thet of the
  ‘we by the Indian ‘Tantriks of the Kavachs, and to the
                                  105
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 praction of Cotholice who wear scepulars, “Agnus Dei”,
 fand consecrated medals. In onder to encourage frequent
 invocations, as also to count them, the Buddbist Tantrks
 Ihad Budchistio chaplets like the Indian MAla and Catholic
 Rossry. The beads varied from 1080 (Quaere 1008) to 27.
 In invoking the Protectors the worshipper held firmly one
 bead with four finger (the thumb and fist finger of oth
 Jhanda) and then centred his mind on the formule of invo-
 cation, Carried on the body, theso Rosatica protected
 from every il , and made all Unt one said, a prayer. To
 ‘use the Indian phrase all that was then said, was Mantua,
       ‘Tantricism was reinforoed. on the arsval in 719 A.D,
 of two Indian Beahmanas, Vajrabodht and Amoghs. ‘Tbe
 demand for Tentras then became so great that. Amogha
 was officially deputed hy the Imperial Government to bring
 ‘back from India and Ceylon as manyas he could. Amogha
 ‘tho   was the favourite  of three Rmperon holding the rank
 ‘of minister and honoured with many ttles Lived tll 774, He
 ‘made Tétsicism the fashionable sect. ather Wioger says
 ‘that in the numerous works signed by him, there is not to
 bbe found any of those rites, Indian or Tibetan, which come
 ‘under the general teri Vamfchita, which ineludes worship
‘with wine and women. He hast from Buddhist sources that
 they deplore the shuses which ss regards this matter have
 taken plaze in India. “Tn the state of decadence witnessed
 to-day there largely semaine only a litusgy of itvboations
 accompanied by Muds8 and Music, with lantams and flags
 from which Bonzes of low degree make a living when called
 ‘upon by householders to cure the sick, push their business
 and0 forth. Asiogks, however, demanded more of those who
 sought initiation. Inthe Indism fashion he tested (Pariksb)
 the would-be disciple and initiated only those who were ft
 and had the quality  of Vsira, To such only was doubtless con
 fied the higher esoteric teachings and ritual, Initiation was
  confersed by the ritual pouring of water on the head
  (Abbisheka)-aiter     solemn act of contrition and devotion,
                                  196
      THE TANTRA SHASTRAS IN CHINA
        ‘The following is » description of the rite of initiation
  (Abbisheka). It is the Buddha who speaks. "Just as sn
 mpesil prin is necogniod ss he who shall govern so my
 disciples, tested and perisotly formed, are conseorsted with
  water. For the purpose of this cersmonyone plates          on &
  height, or at least on sisng ground, a platform seven feet in
 diameter strewn with dowers and sprinkled with soented
 ‘water. Let silence be leapt all around. Persian incense is
 ‘burnt, Place « mimor of bronze and seven arrows to keep
 ‘away demoniac spite. The candidate who hae been previ-
 couily prepared by a rigorous abstinence, fully bathed and
clad in freshly washed garments kneals on the plstform and
 listens to a lectare explaining the meaning of the rite. His
 right shoulder ia uncovered and his two hands joined. He
 oma interiorly the necasaty intention. Then the Master
 of the oaremonyy holding him firmly by tho sight bend,
‘pours with the left on the head of the candidato for initiation
 ‘he staal water.” This initiation made the Cela a son of
  Buddhe ond depository of the Istier’s doctrine, for the
 ‘Tantms were deemed to represent the esoteric tenching of
  the Buddha, just as in Indis shey contain the essence of all
 Jnowledge as taught by Shiva or Devt.
       ‘The initiates of Amogha were distinguished by their
 retired life and secret practices, which gained for them the
 name of “Sohool of Mystary”. Tt trnspired that they were
  awaiting # Saviour in a futuro age. This rendered them
 ‘suspect in the eye of Goverment who thought that thoy
‘wate perhaps a revolutionsry eocity. ‘The sect was accor-
 ingly forbidden. But this did not cause it to diseppear.
  On the contrary, for as the Reverend Father says, in
  China (end we may ad elsewbers) the forbidden fruit is
  that which is of all the most dalious. The lover ranks
  avoided ths higher initiation  and largely lapsed into meckani-
  ‘al formalinm, and the true adepts wrapt themselves ina
  Iystery stil more profound, aveaiting the coming of the
  future Buddhs Moitoeye, who, they tought; bad inepized
                               197
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Asaigha with the doctsine they held. Psther Wiegsr says
‘int their momlity is severe and their lie very mister.@
                ext sévéc, leur vie igs ausér). There is
(Len moraleof teachers
Sierarey                who visit the hovecholds at appointed
intervals,   always after ightlll, Iaving before daybroak
tnd supported by the alms of those whom they thus teach.
The learned missionary author sds that TAntrk adopts of
‘this olass are often converted to Christianity and quickly
 become excellent Christians “simon their moral a7e good
and thoy have « ively bale n the supermatara”. (“Leurs
coum tyant été bonnes et leur eroyunce an rumatxl
‘attra viv.”)
      “Here T may note on the subject of Dhtronts, that it
hs boon suid that thete were only inteotuced into China
daring the Tang Dynasty. Father Wieger, however, (p.385)
       at an suthentio Riddkimintes is to be found in
translations made by LeowKeatek'on in the second century
‘AD. Buddha is soit to have announced to. Ananda, who
accompanitd him, that five hnnded seats ater his Nirvana,
‘soot of magisans (whom the autho calls Siaite Tris)
 would be the ease of th swarming ofevil rpnit Intrus-
fons were then given for thes exorsimm. ‘This pats the
“*Sivaites” far back,




                             198
                        Onarren X.
                 A TIBETAN TANTRA,
     (hie Chapter is an edmimbly understanding review
(repsinted from the “Theosaphist” of July 1919) by Mr.
Johan Van Manea, the Tibetan scholar. It was written on
the seventh volume of Téntrik Texte which contains the
fist Tibetan Tantra to be published. The Tantra which
was selected for the seriss was the Shrichaica-Sombhara,
because the Editor happmed to have manuscripts of this
snd other works of tne same schocl]
 ALU lovers of Indian philwophy ace familar with the
         ragnificent series of works on the Tantra which,
 ‘under the general editorship of “Arthur Avalon”, have seen
the light within the last few years. Some 18 volumes, either
 texts, translation, or studies,    have hitherto been: published,
  and tho titles of a numberof father works are anounced a
{in preparntion     or in the press. Jurt now a new volume has
 ‘been aided to the series, onstituting Vol.    VIL ofthe “Texts”,
  1nd this book is undoubtedly one of the most interesting
  of all those hitherto isued.
        Up tll now the series has only dealt with works and
  thoughta originally written down in Sanskrit; this new
  volume goes further afield and brings   ws the text and tranala-
  tion of a Tibetan work, desling with the same subject the
  whole teres is intended to study. Tibetan antrism is un-
  Aoubtedly « development of its Indian protobype, ond at a
  further siage of our knowledge of the whole subject, the
  historical development of this school of thought will be, 20
  doubt, studied minutely. ‘Though this present volume
  ‘brings valuable material towards such an histarcal study,
  ‘our Enowledge of the Tantra under this expect is as yet far
  ‘00 limited to enable us to say much about this side of the
  questions raised by ite publication ot to find a place for it
                                  199
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 in the present review of te work, What is more urgent
 now is to exnmine     this book as it stands,   to try to define
 the general trend of its contents, and to atzempt to value
 it generally in terms of modem’ speoch and thought, In
 our disousion of the book, therefore, we shall not oonoern
 ourselves with questions of technical scholanship at all, but
 stzampé to go to the heart of the subject in such a manne
 as might be of interest to any intelligent man attracted
 ‘towards philosophical and religious thought. And itis per-
 haps easier to do so with the present work than with many
 ‘others in the series to which it belongs, for more than these
 others this work males an appeal to the intellect direct, and
 proves very Inman and logical, so as to evoke © response
in even such readers as aze not prepared    by a detailed know-
 ledge of system and tomninology, to, disentangleen elaborate
 outer form feom the inner substance, Te ia trae that here
 also, every page and slmost every line stles with names
 snd tomhs, but tho thought connecting such terms is clear,
 tnd these, serving much the purposes of algebesieal notations
 in mathematical formula, oan be easily filled in by any
 reader with values derived from his own raligious   and philoso-
 pphical experience.
       The Tantnss have, often; tot been kindly spoken of. It
 Jas been said that they have hitherto played, in Indology,
 the part of a jungle which everybody is anxious to avoid.
 Sill stronger, great historian in quotedas having axid that
 it would be “the unfortunate lot of some future scholar to
 wade through tho disgusting details of drunkenness and
 Acbauchory which were regarded as an essential partof their
 religion by a latgo section of the Indian community not long
 ago” And Grinwedel, spesking especially of the Tibetan
 ‘Tanteas (Mythology, p. 106), from the immense literature of
  ‘whichas yetnothing had bem translated,   says : “To work out
‘these things willbe, indeed, 9 saorifixum intellects,   but they
  fm, afterall, no more stapid than the Brakmanas on which
  so much Jabour haa been apent.” But here we have the first
                  A TIBETAN TANTRA
   translation into « Ruropean language of one of these Tntrle
  ‘texts end far from being obsoene ot stupid, it strikes us as
 a work of singular bosuty and nobility, and as @ crestion of
   religious art, almost unique in ite lofty grandeur. It is so
   totally unlike any religious dooumert: we are acquainted
  with, that itis almost inconceivable tat this ia only a brief
  specimen, a fist specimen, mede sccessible to the general
  public, of « vast literature of which the extant (aa existing
   in Tibet) cannot yet even be messured..- Yet, in saying that
   ‘the nature of our book is unique, we donot mesn to imply
  ‘that close enslogies cannot be found for it in the religious
  literatures end practices of the world. Such sn aloofaess
  ‘would be rather suspicions, fcr real religions experience is,
‘of course, univers, and, proceeding from the same elements
in the human heart, and agpiting to the same ends, must
  always show kinship in manifestation. Yet this Tibetan
  product has a distinctive style f its own, which singles it
  ‘out in appearance as clestly, let us sey, as the specific
  charister of Assyeian or Hyyptian art is differen      from that
                                                                t
  of other styles,
        ‘When we now proceed to examinethe document before
    tu, a the outect a verdiot of one of the erties of Ténteism
  comes    to our mind, to the effect that the Tantesis perhaps
  the mosb elaborate system of auto-suggestion in the world.
  ‘This dictum was intended a & condemnation ; but though
  accepting the verdiot  as correct, we ourselves are not inclined
  + accept, together with it, the implied conclusion. Auto-
  ‘suggestion is the establishment of mental states and moods
  from within, instead of os s result of impressions reoeived
  from without, Evidently there must be two kinds of this
tasto suggestion, true ondo fale one. ‘The true one          is that
  ‘which produces, states of consciousness corsesponding to
those which may be produced by realities in the outer world,
and the falseone is that which produtes states of conscious-
  ‘eos not correspondingto reactions to any, reality without.
In the ordinary      way the consciof oumess     man is shaped in
                                  201
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 sesponte to impressions from without, and 00 ultimately
 rests on sensation, but theoretically there is nothing imn-
 ‘possiblein the theory that these ‘modification of the think
 ing principle” should be brought about by the creative wil
 ‘and wat rather on imagination and intuition than on sen-
 sation, This theory has not only been philosophically and
 scientifically disciseed, but also practically applied in many.
 ‘sch               ool
            of mysticism     or Yoga. Lf T remember well, there is
 ‘mort intersting book by a German (non-mystic) Profesor,
 Staudenmeyer, dealing with this subject, under the title of
 “Magic as om Bzperimental Soiene: (jx German), and the same
 dea seems lo to underlie Steiner's theory of what be
 calls “imaginative clairvoyance”. In Christian mysticism
 ‘this bas been fully worked out      by de Loyoln in his “Spiritual
 ‘Exer                ciies
                06 applied               ” of the Christ. In what
                             to the Ression
in now-a-days called New Thonght, this principle is largely
 applied in various mamers; In our book: we find it applied
fm terms of Tintrik Buddhiom             with a fulness and detail
 surpassing all ther examples ofthis type of meditation. In
‘onder to present the idea in such way thet it may look
 plausible   in itself, we have fist: to sketoh out the rational
 ‘underlying sny such system. This is easily done.
      ‘We can conosive of this universe as an immense oceanof
 constiouor sness     intelligence in which the separate organisms,
 Ihumsn beings included, live and move and have their being.
 Tf wo conoeive of this mass of consciousness as subject to
laws analogous to those         of gravity, and at the same time as
 ‘being fnidio im nature, then the mechsnism of all intel-
 Jeotual activity might well be thought of, in one of its aspects,
 sas hydrauliein character. Let any organiam, fit to be a
 bearer of conasiounness, only open itself for the reception of
 it, and the hydzautic pressure of the surrounding sea of
 consciousness will ake it flow in, in such a form at the
 ‘constructiof onthe organism aesumes. ‘The wave and the
 sea, the pot and the water, are froguent eymbels in the ast;
  ted to indicate the relation between the all-conseiousness
                 A TIBETAN TANTRA
‘and the individual conssiousness. If the human           brain is
 the pot sunk in the ocean of divine consciousness, the form
 of that pot will otermine ths form which the all-conssious-
 ness will assume within tht brain.
       Now imegination, or auto-suggestion, may determine
 tat form. Through ue, intuition, speculation, tradition,
 authority, o: whotever the deteminant factor may be, any
 such form maybe choren. ‘The man may create any form,
 snd then, by expectancy, stillness, pensivity, love, sspiration
 ox whatover term wo chvose, draw the coamie consciousness
 within im, nly determining ite form for himself, bat
 ‘mpersonlly roeiving the power whichis not from himeelf,
 ‘but from without. ‘The process is like the preparation of a
 ‘ould   in whichmolten metal isto be east, with this difference,
thatthe metal cast into the mould ienotselFactive and alive,
 and not ever-preseut andl pressing on every side,   a8 the living
 consciousness i which constitutes our universe.
       ‘We may take on ilstratio from the mechanical
 vniverse. Tho universe ig one seething mass of forcesin
constant interplay. "The foes axe there abd st work all
 1h time, buvonly become objected when emught i suitable
 reocivers. The wind-ore, if uot caught by the arms of the
 vrindmll, the foros of sbream oF watertall, if not siilaly
 gathered in a proper mechanism, disporse themselves in
 Spee and are not focused in and translated into objeative
 ‘nite of action. So with the vibrations sent along the wine,
 in telegraphic oF telephonic communication, or with the
 other whrations sent. wirelessly. Ine miverse peopled
 vith inteligences, higher beings, gods, a whole hierarchy
 of entities, from the highest power and perfection to such
 ts belong to our own Timited clas, constant steams of
 intelligence snd conscioumess rust continuowly flash
through space and fil existance, Now it ces, theoretically
 indeed, very probable, assuming that consciousness is one
 and akin in extence, thst the mechanical phenomenon of
 sympathetic vibration may be applied to that consciousness
                               203
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ae wollen to whataro rogarded as merely mechanical vibra-
 tions. 0, putting all the above seasonings together, itis
 at lonat « plausible theory that man, by ® prooess of suto-
 suggestion, may so modify the orguns of his consciousness,
 ‘and likewise attune his individual conscionsness in such
 ‘way, as to become able to entor into a sympathetic relation
 with the forces of cosmic consciousness ordinarily manifest-
 ing outside him and remaining unperoeived, passing him ae
 it wore, instead of being caught snd harnessed. And this
 is not only a theory, but more than theta definite state-
 ‘ment given as the result     of experience by mystis and! medi-
 ‘atom of all times ond climes.
      ‘Now wemay       ask: how has this method     been applied in
 ‘our present work? A coreful analysis of its contents makes
 1 disco       several ver
                        interesting characteristics. Fist of llwe
Dave to remember thet our text presupposee a familiarity
 ‘with the rdigions conceptions, names, personalities and
 hilosophioal priniples of Northom Buddhism, which are all
reely used in the composition. What is strange          and foreign
in tham    to the Wester readeris so only becwtse he movesin
 ‘unfamilia: surroundings. But the character of the compo-
 sition is one which might be compared to such analogous
 ‘Western productions (with great dlferenses, however) as the
 Pession Flay at Oberammergeu or the medizval mystery-
 plays. Only, in some of the latter the historical element
 predominates, whilstin the Tibetan componitionthe mytho-
 Togical clement (for want of a better word) forms the basis
 fand substance. Tn other words in this ritual of meditation
 the Gods, Powers and Principles are the actors, and not
 historical or qymbolical personages of raligiows’ tradition.
 Secondlythe play is enacted in the mind, inwardly, instesd
 cof on the scene, outwardly. The setors ste not persons, but
 ‘conceptions.
       First,  the moditator has to swing up his consciousnessto
‘ oeriain pitoh of intensity, steadiness, quot, determination
  and expectancy. Having tuned it to the required pitch, he
                                   204
                 A TIBETAN TANTRA
{izes it on a simple centre of attention which      is to serve as
 ‘starting-point or gate through which his imagination shall
well up as the water of a fountain comes forth through the
  opening of the waler-pipe. From this cantral point the
  mental pictures come forth. They are placed round the
  cectzal conception. From simple to complex in ordeniy
  progression tho imaginative structure i elaborated. ‘The
  chief Goés appoar suodassively, followed by the minor
  Abities, Spaces, regions, directions are carefully deter-
 ‘mined. Attributes, colour, symbols, sounds are all minute-
 ly presoribed and deftly worked in, and explications oare-
 fully given, A miniature world is evolved, sesthing with
 clemental foros working inthe universe as eosmieforees and
 in man as frees of body and spirit. Moet of the quantitiss
inthis elaborate notstion ar. takan from the body of indige-
 nous religiom teachi      snl mythology.
                                  ng Some are so universtl
 ‘and transpazent that the mon-Tibetin reader cau approciata
 ‘them even without a Inowledge of the religious technical
  terms of Tibet. But anyhow, an sttantive reading and xe-
  reading reveals something, even to the outsider, of the forve
  of this eymbologcal structure, and. makes him intaitively
feel thet here we are assisting in the unfolding of a grand
  spiritual drama, sweeping up the mind to heights of exalt-
  tion and nobility.
        ‘As to the terminological side of the taxt, Uhe Eaitor's
  ‘sbundint notes prove as valuable sa useful. ‘They may
 Aistarb the elevated unity of the whole at tet, but after
  some sasiduous familiarising, lead to fuller and deeper
   comprehension. Even 0 single reading is suficient to gain
 the impression that a stataly ard solemn mental drama is
   enacted before us with an inherent impressiveness which
  ‘vould sttach, for instance to a Christian, to the performance
   of a ritual in which all the more primary biblical persons,
   Inman and superhuman,were introduc            in suitable
                                                      ed, ways,
   fs actors. And the superlative cleverness of this structure |
 ‘Starling from a single basio note, this is developed into a
                               205
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘chord, which again expands into» melody, which is than
 elaborately harmonised. Tpdood tho meditation is in its
 asexce both music and ritual, The initial motives are
 developed, reposted, elaborated, and new ones intreduced,
 ‘These again are trested in the seme way. A symphony is
 evolved and brought to « powerful climax, and then again
 ‘this full world of sound, form, meaning, colour, power is
 withdrawn; limited, taken book into itself, folded up and
 dliseclved, ‘ued inwarde again and finally netumed into
 ‘utter atllaess and test into that tranguil void from which
 it was originlly evoked and whichis its etemal mother. T
 do not know of axy literature which in its nature isso abso-
 Tutely symphonio, 90 directly akin to musi, as this sample
 ofa Tibetan meditetional exercise. And curiously enough,
 ‘tmakesus think of another manifestation of Indian religions
        forin wor this dooumenti akin to the Indian temple
 decoration, eapcially the South Taian gor, which in its
 cnaless repetitions and elaborations seams indeed instinct
‘with the same spisit which: bas given birth to this scheme of
 imagination taught in these Tatras, Only, in stone or
 plaster, the mythological host is sterile and immovable,
 ‘whilst, a8 created in the living mind, the similar structure
  partakes of the life of the mind within and without. ‘The
 ‘sculptural embodiment ia, therefore, serviceable to the less
  volved mind. The Tantra is for the religious thinker who
  ‘possesses power.
        But we ssid that our meditational stroctume was also
  skin   to ritual. What we mean by this is that all the figures
  ‘and images evoked in the mind in this meditation are, after
  all, only meant, as the words, vestures ond gesturesin
  ritual, to suggest feelings, to provoke states of consciousness,
  and to furnish (jf the simile be nt thought 120 pathetio)
  ‘pegs to bang ideas upon
       ‘Like as fine piece of music, o a play, can onlybe well
  sendered when rehesrsed over and over again, and practised
   s0 that the form side of the produotion becomes almost
                                  206
                  A TIBETAN TANTRA
 ‘mechanical, and all powor in the production ean be devoted
 ti the infusion of inspiration, so can this meditation ony
 be pertotly performed after untold prastioe and deve
 1e would be a totally mistaken idea to rend this book as a
 sre piece of literature, ance to go through it to see whatit
 containg,    and then to let it go.. Justas the masterpiecesof
‘music can bo hesnd hundreds of times, just as the grest
 sitaals  of the world grow in power      on the individual in the
 ‘measure with which he becomes familiar with them and
 altogether identies himself with the most infinitely small
 rinutie of their form and constitat
 ritual ia one which only by repetition can be ma
 perfected. Like the great productions of att or aabure, it
 has to “grow” on the individual,
       ‘This meditationsl exercise is not, for the small, nor for
  the slippont, nor for those ins hurry, It is inherently an
 csotero thing, one of thoos tosehings belonging to the regions
 cof “quiet” and “tranquillity” and “rest” of Taoistic: phi-
 loaophy. To the ignorant, it must be jabber, and so it is
 “iuly esoteric, hiding iteelf by his own nate within itself,
 ‘hough seemingly open and rccessble to all. But in con-
  nection with this meditation we do not think of pupils who
 rend it once or twice, or ten times, or a hundred, but of
     tere thinkers who work on it as a life-work through
 laborious’ years of strenuous endesvour. For, what most
  be done to make this meditation into a reality? Every
  ‘concept  in it must be vivitied and’ drenched with       life and
 power, Every       god in it must be made       into a living   god,
 every power manipulated        in it’ made into a potency. ‘The
 ‘whole structure must be made vibrant       with forces opoble of
 tntéring info aympathetio relation with the greater cosmic
 forecs in the universe, crented in imitation on « lower scale
 within the individual meditator himseli. To the religious
Imind the universe is fled with the thoughts of the gods,
  with the powers of grea’ intelligences and consciousness,
 Iudictng etemally through spece and really oonstituting
                                   207
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 the world thatis. “The world is oaly «thought in tho mind
 of Goa.” It must take years of sirenuous practice even
to build up the power to Visualize and correctly produoe as
 an internal dram ‘hia meditation given in our book. To
fendow it with life aud to put power into this fe is ‘an
fechievement thatno small mind, no week devotee, can hope
to perform. So this meditation is e solemn ritual, like the
 Roman Catholic Mass ; only itis periomed in the mind
instead of in the church, and the mysiary it celebrate is an
individual and aot # general sacrament.
      Tn what we have ehid above we have tried to give some
                                                         work,
outlines of the chief charaotarstca of thin remarkable publio,
how brought within the reach of the general reading
fand especially of benefit to those among them interested in
the stidy of comparative religion along broad lines, We
‘owe, indeed, a debt of gratitude to Arthur Avalon, whose
enthusiasm for and insight into the Tndian religiousgem andfor
‘Philosophical mind have unearthed this partioular
4is. ‘We may be particulasly grateful chat his enthusiasm
Thos not  act ts a limit, so a8 to prevent him from dealing
‘with other than Sanskrit Lote alone, and from looking for
ireanure even beyond the Tzalayee. Tn. this connestion
wwe may mention that itis his intention to maintain this
catholio attitude, for he is now taking steps to incorporate
dso an important Japanese work on the Vajreyana in his
‘Tintrikseries. As faras this frst Tibetan texts concomed,
the choice Ins been desidedly happy, snd he has heen no
Tess forsinate in having been able to secure © competent
collaborator to undertake the philological portion of the
work, the teomlating snd editing labour. ‘The result of
 Uh assovinting hima with o capable indigenous scholar
 to produce the work, has been great sucosr,» production
‘of practical vslue which will undoubtedly not diminish in
 all eatentials for a longtime to come. For not only is this
 particular work in and for itself of interest, with a grt
 beauty of i own; it has nother value in quite other
                             208
                 A TIBETAN TANTRA
  irections than thoa> connected with the study of meditation
  for of religious artistic creation.
        ‘The work fomishes a most important key to « neve way
  of understanding many phases ond productions of Indian
  philesophy. ‘The projection of the paraphernalia of Hindu
  mythology inwards into the mind as instruments of medi-
  tation, the internalsing of what we And in the Purinas or
  the Epio axtamalised az mythology, has woamed to me 0
  throw fresh and illuminating light on Indian symbology.
 ‘To give an llustestion: In this Tantra we find an elaborate
 rmanipelation of weapons, shields, armour, as instruments
 {or the protection of the consciousies. Now all these
 implements igure, for instance, largely and elaborately in
 saush a work sa the Ahirbudinya Sambié, of which Dr.
 Sohrider bas given uw» splendid. summery in his work,
 Inirodustion    to the Panckardtra, But) in the Ponckandtra
 all these implements are only ttributes of the gods. In
 cour text we ind hintsto how all these extaznal mythologi-
 tal data can also bs applied      to and tindemtoodas internal
 workings of the human conscioumoss, and in this light
Tndian mythology assumes a new and rioher significance.
 donot want to domore here than hint atthe point involved,
 but no doubt any student of Hindu mythology who is also
 interested in Hindu modes of thought,in the Hind Psyche,
will nt once see how fruitful this ides ean be.
       One of the riddles of Indian thought is that its symbo-
 logy is kinetic and not static, and eludes the objective
 formalityof Western thought. That is why every Hindw
 fod i snother, who ix again another, who is ance more
 ‘another. Did not Kipling say something about “Kali who
 is Pirvati, who ia Sitale, who is worshipped against the
 suall-pox”” ? Bo also almost every philosophical principle
 is an “aspect” of another principle, but never a clearcut,
 ‘well-circumsctibed, independent thing by itself, Our text
 {oes far towards giving & hint a8 to how all these gods and
 ‘principles, whieh in the Purigas and other writings appear
                              209
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 tas exim-human elements, may perhape alto be interpreted
 as aspects of the human mind (and even human body) and
 become psychological mythology instead of a cosmic one,
       ‘The idea is not absolutely new, but hns been put for:
 ward by mystics before, The Cherubinic Wanderer sang
 ‘that it would be of no avail to anyone, oven if the Chtist
 ‘wore hom a handred times over in Bethlehem, if he wore
 not: bora within the man himself. Tt has been aaid of the
 Bhagovod-Gitd    tat i sn one sanee the desma        of the soul,
 ‘and that meditation on it, transplanting the Geld of Kuru:
 Jehetre within the man consciousness, may lead to a
 <irect realization of all thatis taught in that book, andto
 vision of all the glories depicted therain. ‘hat idea is’ the
 same as that which isthe basa of our text. Its message is
“ Cresto a universe within, fn order to be able to hear the
 echoes af the universe without, which ine with that within,
 in essence.” Tf seers, necaltiss, meditators really exist,
 ‘they may bs able to outline the way and mathod by which
 they themselves have attained, So it wae with de Leyala
 ‘and his “Spiritual Exercises," and there is no, reason why
 it should not be the same with the hook we are discussing
 here.
      ‘As to how far we have here a result of practical     experi
 cence, or only an ingenious theory, © great “attempt,”
 anit ware, we will nat and eannot decide. To make state-
 ‘mente about this neds previous exporiment, and we have
 coaly read the book from the outsie, not lived its contents
 trom within. But hovever this may be, even suchan outer
 ‘reading is sufficient to revesl to us the grandeur of the
 ‘conoeption put before us, and to enable us to feel the sympbo-
 rio splendour of the crestion as a work of zeligio-philoscphic
 art; and that alone is enough to enable us to judge the work
‘a masterpioos and a dooument     of fimt-lass value in the field
 cof religions and mystical litemtare. ‘The form in very une
 ‘Wester indeed,,end in many ways uttesly unfamiliar and
  perhaps bewildering. But the harmony of thought, the
              A TIBETAN TANTRA
sgeatoess of the. fundamental conception, the sabtimity of
endeavour embodied in ity are cleat; and theso qualities
are certainly enongh to gain for ite admirers and friends~
perhaps here and here dssple “evenin out times so badly
‘opated to hear this Tibetan echo fom tint other world,
‘which in many ways we in the West male it our atrenuows
Dosinoss to forget and to discount,




                             at
                      Cuarrex XI.
                  SHAKTI IN TAOISM.
“Tiina oe te Divine Poverav ditngbeing                   is
        ‘ron the Divine Essence (Svaripa), the former
generally imagined for purposes of worship as being in
female form, is very ancient. The concept of Shakti in
Chinase Taosm is not merely & proof of this (for the Shakti
notion is much oldss) but is sn indication of the ancient
Tndian character of the doctrine. There are some who
erroneously think that the conoept had its origin in *Sivaic
rmpaticiem,” hsvingits oxigin somewhere in the sixth century
of our era. Lao-tzo or tho “old master” was twenty years
Senior to Confucius end hie life was said to have been passed
between 570-490.B.0, A date commonly accepted by
oropean Orintaliste as that of the death of Buddha
 (Indian and Tibetan opinions being reganded, as “extra-
‘vagant”) would ring his life into the sixth century B.C.,
cone of the most wonderful in the word's history. Lao-tzo
js sid to have aitten the Tao-ticking,'the fundamental
textof Teoism. Ths title means Treatise on Tao and Tei.
‘Tuo which Lao-tze calle “Tho great” is in its Sanskrit
equivalent Brahman ond-Toi is Tts power or activity or
 Shakti. As Father P. L. Wioger, SJ., to whose work
 (Histoire des cxoyances religieuses et des opinions philoso-
‘phigues en Chine, p. 143 et seg. 1917) T am hore indebted,
 points. out, Loo-te did not invent Taoism no more then
 Confucius (657-419 B.C) invented Oonfuciansim. It is
 characteristic of these and other Ancient Bastarn Mastors
 ‘tt they do not claim to be more than “trenkmitzes” of a
 ‘wisdom older thin themselves. Iso-tze was not the frstto
teeth Teo-iem. Ha Ind precarsor who, however, ware not
  tiuthor. “He was the writer of the ft hook on ‘acim
‘which served s the besis for the further development of the
 locirine, On this account its paternity is abtsbated to him,
                 SHAKTI IN TAOISM
  ‘There was reference to thin dootsin i i oid in the ofl
  aschives (p. 748). The pre-Taoiste wero the annalists and
  astrologer of the Tcheou. Lao-tue who formulated. the
 system was one of tham (i, 62) The third Ministry con
‘taining these arohivescepstared all which came fom foreign
 parts, as Taoism did. Kor as Father Wieger says, Taoism
4 tn te main kines 0 Chinese adeptation of the comtemporary
 doctrine of the Upanishals For le Taoisme est dans ses
 grails Tignes une adaptation Chinoise de la, doctrine
 diene contemporaine des Upanishads”), ‘The actual
 {aot of importation eano:in-defoult    of documents be proved
 ‘bubasthe losmed author eaye, the fact that tho doctrine was
 not Chines, chati¢ was then current ia Indi, and its sudden
 spread in China, eats in favour of the arguent for foreign
 importction almost a certain conclusion. ‘The similarity of
 the two doctrines is obvious to anyone acquainted with
 tnt of the Upenishacn and. the, doctrine of Shakti. ‘The
 dual of the manifesting Unity (Tao) denoted by Yinn-
 Yang appeaas for the fist time in a text of Confucius, 0
 contemporary of Lao-tae, who may have informed him of it
‘All Chinoso Monism descends from Lao-tze.. ‘Tho pa
 aroha texte wore developed by tho great Fathers of Taoism
 Lie-teeu and ‘Thong tzeu (oe “Les Pércs du oystémo
 ‘Taoist by the sume author) whom the reverend fathor call
 the only rl thinkers that China has produced. Both were
 practically prior to the contact of Greece and India on the
 Indus under Alexander. “The fit development of Taoism
 ‘was in the South. It passed lator to the North whereit had
 a great influence.
       ‘hezonlingto Tsoism there vas in the begining, now,
 and ever yall be an ultimate Reality, which is varicusly
 called Huan the Mystery, whioh cannot be named or defined,
 Teooupe Haman languege is the language of limited beings
 touching Tinted. objects, whereas ‘Tao is imperceptible
                                                         which
4 the sense and the uuproduccd cause of all, beyindprinciple
 ‘there inothing : Outhe   Fomless,  or  Tao te eal
                              213
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 the unlimited inexheustible sourve from which ell eomes,
 ('Taole principe pazceque tout derivede lui") Liself proceeds
 from nothing but all from Tt. 80 itis euid of Bratman that
 Ttis  in Ttelf beyond mind and speech, formless and (as the
 Brahmssiitra says) That from which the Universe is born,
 by which it is maintained and into which it is dissolved,
 From the abyss of Tts Being, It throws out all forms of
 Bristerce and is never empticd. It ig sn infinite source
 exteriorisng from Iuolf all forms, by Tts Power (Tei)
 "These forms neither diminish nor add 40 Tao which remains
 fevor the same. These limited beings aro as a drop of water
 jin Ka co n. Tao is the eum of, and yet aa infinite, beyond:
all individual existences. Like Brahman, Tso is one, eternal,
 infnite, seli-existent, omnipresent, unchsnging (Immutable)
 ‘and complete (Pérna), At a particular moment (to speak in
 cour language for Iwas then beyond time) Tao threw out
 from Itself ‘Tei Its Power (Vertu or Shaleti) which operates
 in alternating modes called Yinn and Yang and produces,
 as it were by condensation of ite subtility (Shakti ghant-
 ‘hittho Heaven and Barth          and Air between, from which
 ‘come all beings. ‘The two thedee of Ite activity, Yinn ond
 Yang, are inherent in the Primal het, and manifest as
 modes ofits Tei or Shakti” Yinw is rst, and therefore after
 ‘he creation of the phenomenal world a going back, retraction,
 ‘concentration towatts the original Unity (Nivritti), whereas
 ‘Yang is action and therefore she opposite‘ principle of going
 forth or expansion (Pravritti). These modes appear in
<restion under the sensible forms of Rarth (Yinn) dnd Heaven,
 (Yong). ‘The one original principle or Tao, like Shiva and
 Shakti, thus becomes dual in manifestation as Heavens
 Earth from which emanate other oxistaness. Tho state of
 ‘inn is one of rest, concentration und imperceptbility which
 vas the own state (Svariips) of Tso before time and things
 wore. The state of Yang is that of action, expansion, of
 ‘manifestation in sentient beings and is the state of ‘Tso in
 time, and that which isin a sense not Its true state (“Lietat
                               a4
                   SHAKTI IN TAOISM
 ‘Yinn do eoneentantion, de repos, dimperoeptibilité, qui fut
 alui da Principe avent le temps, ext on Stat propre. Liotat
  Yong Wexponsion et d'sction, de manifestation dans les
 tres sensibles, eat son état dans le temps, en quelque sorte
impropre”). All this again is Indian. The primol state of
 Brakman or ShivaSbakti before manifestation is that in
 ‘hich It rests in Itelf (Svartpa-vishrtnti), that is, the state
 cf rest and infinite formlesaes:. It then by Its Power
 (Ghai)    manifests the universe. There exists in this Power
‘the   form of two movements or rhythms, namely,’ the going
forth or expanding (Pravetti) and the toturn or centering
movement (Nivzitti). This is the Eternsl Rhythm, the
‘Pulss of the universe, in whioh it comes and goes fom that
 which in Tleelf, does ueither. But is this & real or ideal
movenent ? Acconling to Father Wieget, Teoism is o
realistic and not idealjstie pantheiem in.which Tuo is not
 ‘Conscious Principle bus ¢ Neosssary Law, not Spiritual but
 “Material, though imperceptible by teason of its tenuity and
 state of rest (“Leur eystéme ext un panthslsme realista, pas
 ‘ddaliste. Au commencement          était un étre unique       non pas
 intelligent mais loi fatsle, non spirituel mais matériel,
 imperesptible « force de tenuité,d’ abord immobile”). He
‘bo cals Heaven and Barth unintalligent agents           of production
 cof sentient beings   (Ageut     non-intelligents    de    In produs-
 tion de tous les 6tres sensibles). Tepoaic      with   all  respect for
 the opinion of one who is made a special study of the
 subject which T have not so far as its Ohinese aspect is
 ‘concerned. But even if, a0 is possible, at this, epoch the fall
 idealistic import of the Vedinta had not been developed, I
 doubt the aseuracy of the interpretation which makes Tao
 material and unconsciows. According to Father Wieger,
 ‘Tao prolongates Itself. Bach being is 8 therefore       prolongation
 (Prolongement) of the Tuo, attached to it and                       nob
 iminishingTt, Taoiestated hy him to be Universal                Natiare,
 ‘che um (Sancashti) of all indjvidual natures which are
 ‘erminal points (Temnineisons) of ‘Tao's prolongation.
                                  215
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Sinilaslyin the Uponishads; we read of Brarshan producing
 ‘he work from Itself ae the spider produces the web from
 out itelf. Twois thus the Mother ofal thot exists ("la méro
 de tout ce qui est”). If so, itis the Mother of mind, will,
 emotion and every form of consciousness. How ate these
 derived from merely 3 “material” principle ! May it not
bbe that just as the Upanishadsuse material imagesto denote
 cemeation and yet posit a spiritual conscious (though not in
 cour limited sense) Principle, Leo-tze, who was indebted to
 them, may have dane the same. Ts this also not indicated
 by the Gnostic doctrine of the Taciss "| ‘The author cited
 saya that to the coamioataten of Yinn and Yang correapond
 ‘n the mind of man the states of rest and activity. When
 the human mind thinks, it fills itself with forms or images
and is moved by desies, "Then                        the effects
                                     it perceives only
 cof Tao, namely, distinet sentient       beings. When   on the
 contrary the action of the human mind spops and is fixed
 ‘and empty of images of limited forms, itis then the Pure
 Mirror in which is reflected the inefiable and mnnameable
 Eusence of Tao tell, of which intuition the Pathers of
 ‘Taoism speake at length. (Quasi an contra Yeoprit hu-
rain est aété est vide’ ot fixe, alow miroir net et par, il
 ‘mire V'easence ineffable ot imnomable du Principe Tui-meme.
 ‘es Péres nous parleront au long de cette ‘intution,”) This
 commen analogy of tho Mirror is also given in the Kima-
 Kealaviliss (v, 4) where it speaks of Shakti as the pure
 rimor'in which Shiva reflects Himself (pratphalati vimar-
 sha darpane vishade). ‘The conscious mind does not reflect a
 ‘material principle aa ite oasence, Tis essence must have the
 principle of oonssiounness which the mind. iteelf possesses.
 It is to Tei the Virtue or Power which Tao emits from
 Iuelt (“ce Principe se mit « émetize Tei sa vertu”) that we
 should attribute what is apparently wnconsoiows and material
Bat the two are one, just as Shiva tho postessor of power
 (Ghakimin) and Shakti or, power are one, and this being
fo distinctionssre apt     to be lost. In the same way in the
                              216
                  SHAKTI IN TAOISM
 ‘Upsnishads statements may be found which havo uot the
 aocarney of distinction between Brahmaand its Prakriti,
 ‘which we find in Inter developments of Vedinta and parti-
 ularlyin the Shikta form of it. Moxcover wo aro bere
Gealing with the One in Its character both as causeand
as substance of the World Its efiet.~ Itis of PrakritiShaleti
 and possibly of Ze that-we may say that itis en epparentiy
 ratefi unconscious principle, imperoaptible by reason of
 its tenuity and (to the degree that it is not productive of
 objective efit) immobile. Further Father Wieger assures
 ‘us that all contraresiasue from the same unchanging Tao
 and that they axe only apparent (Toute contraiété n'est qu!
 ‘apporoste”). But colative to what 1 Ho says thst they
 tte not subjcotive illusions of the human mind, but objestive
 ‘appearances, double aspects, of the unique Being, corres-
 ponding to the altemating modalities of Yinm and Yong.
 ‘Thas isto. For ut Shaflkara says, external objeots are not
manly projections of the individual human mind but of
 ‘the cosmic mind, the Ishvati Shakti.
      ‘We must not, of oourse, ead ‘Taoism as held in the sixth
  cantury B.C. as fit were tho eame   as the developed Vedanta
 ‘of ShaBlers who, according     to European   chronology, lived
more than a thourand      years ater” But this interpretationof
  Vedinte is an aid in enabling us to sce what is st least
  implicit in easter versions of the meaning of their common
  source—the Upanishads. As is wellknown, Skaikara
  developed their doctrine in an idealistic sense, and therefore
  his two movements in creation are Avidy8, the primal igno-
  ance which produoes the appearance cf the objective
  tnivene, and Vidya or knowiedge which dispels such igno-
   race, ripening into that Essence and Unity which is Spiit-
  Consciouress Itself. Aupunishadie doctrine may be regard-
  fed either from the world or material aspect, or fiom the
  fou-world and spirtoal aspect. Men have thought in both
  ‘ways and Shailara's version is on attempt to synthesize
   then.
                                 a7
                 SHAKTI AND SHAXTA
       ‘The Taoist mustar    Ki (Op. 0
  Iusmaony was that ofal beings in thir common Being. All
  jis one as we experience in deep sleep (Sushupti). All
  conteaties are sounds from the same flute, mushrooms
 springing from the same humidity, not real distinct beings
  but differing aspect ofthe one universal “Being”. “1” has
 xno meaning except in contrast with “you” or “that”. But
 who is the Mover of all? Everything happens as if there
 ‘wane   & real governor. ‘The hypothesis    is acceptable provided
that one dons not make of this Governor a distinct Being
 Ho (I trarslate Rather Wiego'a words) is a tendancy without
 pelpetle fora, the iaborent norm of the univer, it imma-
 nent evolutionary formula, The wise know that the only
 Real is the Universel Norm. ‘The unrelecting vulgar
believe in the existence of distinet Beings. As in the cago of
 ‘the Vedanta, much misunderstanding exists because the
concept of Consciousness       differs in Hast amd Wost as I point
 out in detail    in the essay dealing with Chit-Shalti
      ‘The space between Hesven ond Barth in which the
 Power (Vert, Shalt, Te) is manifested is compared by the
‘Taoist to the hollow of & Bellows of which Heaven and
 Berth are tho two wooden sides; a bellows which blows
 ‘without exhausting sell’ The expansive power of Tao in
 the middle. spioe is imperishable, Ib is the mysterious
 Mother of all beings. The come and go ofthis mysterious
 Mother, that is, the altemating of the vo modalities of the
 One, produce Hoaven and Kerth. Thus scting, She is never
 fatigued. Prom ‘Too was exteriorized Heaven and Hath,
 From Tao emanaiad the producing univenal Power or
 Shakti, which again prodaced’ all beings without self
 cethasstion or fatigue. The ono having put forth ita Bowes,
 the later acts acooniing ovo altaruoting modalities of
 going forth and return. ‘This action produces the middle
 air or Ki which is tenuous Matter, and) through Yinn and
 ‘Yang, issue all gross beings. heir coming into existence
 is compared to an unwinding (DBvidage) from ‘That. or
                                218
                 SHAKTI IN TAOISM
‘Tao, as it wore a thread from real oF apool. In tho same
 ‘way tho Shilta Tantra apsaks of an “uncoiling”. Shakti
is coiled (Kundalint) round the Shiva-point (Binds), one
 with Tt in dissolution. On creation She-begina to uncoil
ina spiral line movement whichis the movement of eration.
‘The Taoist Father Liet-tze analysed the creative movement
into the following stagea:—""The Great Mutation” anterior
to the appesrance of tenuous mstter (Movement of the tro
tmodblitesin undefined being), “the Great Origin” or the
stage of tenuoas matter, “the Great Commenoament” oF
‘the stage of sensible matter, “the Grout Rlux” or the stage
of plastio matter and actual prov matarial compounded
existences. In the primitive stato, whon matter was im-
‘peroepliblo, all beings to come weve Intent in an homo-
geneous sate
      Twill only adda bearing oi the eubject of conscious
ness that the suthor cited states that the Twoists lay great
stress on intation and ecstasy which is saidto be compared
to the unconscious state of infancy, intoxication, and
narosis. These comparisons may pechaps mislead just a8
‘the comparison of the Yogi stateto that ofa log (Kashth-
vat) has misled, ‘This docs not. mean that the Yogi’s con-
sciouanees is that of «log of wood, but that hs ao mor
pesseives the external world than the latter docs. He dots
aot do 20 becaise he hse the SemBihi couscicus, that is
Tiuminstion and true being Htsel. Hb is one then with
‘Tao and Tei oz Shakti in their true state




                            219
                  Caarrme XIL
        ADLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS.*
[AL NOT nsomnon modem envi wgon the Tesi
       ‘Shien  i that chey mally confct, Ths in due toa
lackof knowledge of tho doctsine of Adhiktra and Bhtimik,
partioulaly amongst Wester critic, whose general outlook
find mode of thought is ordinsrly deeply divoigent from
that which has prevaiedin India. The idea that tho whe
‘world should follow one path is regarded by the Hindus 08
atid, leing conteary to Nature snd ite laws. A man
must follow that path for which he is fit, thst is, for which
he is Adikbrl. Adhikira or competency literslly means
spreading over” that is “taking posession of”. What is
to be known (Initavya), done (Ksstavya), acquited (Prap-
‘avya) io doterzsined aot once.end generlly forall, but
in each cane by the ines and capacity therefore of the
individual. Each man can know,       do, and obtain not every-
‘ing, nor indeedone common       thing, but that only of which
hoe is capable (Adhikast). What the Jive oaa think, do, or
obtain, it his oompetenoy or Adhiktra, a profound and
practical doctrine on whishall Indian teaching and Sidhand,
is'bosed, As men are different and therefore the Adbikéra
is different, so. there are different forms of tesching and
‘practice for each Adbikrs. Suoh teaching       may bo Shrauta
for Asbrauta, Daaling hare with the Sst i io nid that of
all Vidy8s the Lord is Tshiina, and thst these differing forms
‘ne meant for dling competencies, though all have one
‘andthe   some object and sim. "This as Len welland concise-
Ty worked out by Bh&skararfya, the Commentator on Téin-
‘tio and Aupanishsdic Texts in ‘his Bhishya upon the
Nitydshodashikdrnava, which                                i
     © This Chanter ergeliy appeared in the Tndlan Pept
Review, Wl. I, No, 4 (Spi 1918.
      ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
 af the great Vimaloshvar ‘Tantra, ‘The second portion
 af the Nitydahodashikérvara is alio known as the Yopint-
 Ividaya. These valuable Tanteik Tests have been published
4 the 60th Volume ofthe Poous Anandashrama Serie which
 includes also (Vol. 69) the Jnfnieneva Tantza, The im-
 portance of the Vamalashvara is shown by the faot thet
 ‘hiskarsriya claims for it the postion of the independent
5th Tantra which is mentioned in the Sist verse of the
Anandalchart, Others say that the Svatantes there spoken
 af, in the Jnindmava Tantrs, and others again are of the
 opinion that the Pandrardja isthe gent independent Tantra
 ‘of which the dnandalahart,(esribed to Shrimadacharyya-
 Vnngaratpida,       that is, Shafghardchiryye) speak.
 Bhiskaretdya who lived in the frst half of the eighteenth
 century, gives in his Commentary th following expesition-—
      Tn this wor all long for happiness   which is the sole
 sim of man. Of this there ano doubt. This happiness again
 is of two kinds, namely, that whioh i produeed and transient
 (Gritsims) and that which is unproduced and endaring
 (Aksitsims}, called-respoctively Desire (Kime) end Liber-
 ation (Moksha). Dharma procures happiness of both kinds,
and Artha helps to the attainment of Dharma. These
 ‘therefore are desired of all "Thewe are tho four aima of
 rman (Parushéstha) which though, sr between thenseves,
 dliferoat, ae yot intimataly connooted, tho ona with the
 other, The Kalpasien says that sellenowiedge in the aim
 find ond of man (Sravimambsh parushistbab). ‘This is
 said of Liberation as being tho highest end, sino it alone
 gives real and enduring happiness. This saying, however,
 Goes not muse any contradiction. For, each of the four is
 to be had by the Jaina and Vijuina spproprite for such
 tttainment. These (Purusbirths) are again to be attained
 according to the capacity of the individual seeking them
 (Paarish-ttaribachitsikasddbydni).      The competency of
 the individual Chitin depends sgaiz on the degree of ita
parity.
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      ‘Tho very momsiful Bhagavin Parameshvare desirous
 of aiding men whose mind and disposition (Chitte) difer
 ‘according to the results produced by- their different acts,
 promulgated diflerent kinds of Vidya which, though sppesr-
ingto be different0s bebresn themselves, yet have, as their
‘commen sim, te highest end. of all Imman life, that is,
Liberation.
      ‘Shruti also says. (Nrisinghapirvatipant Up. 1-63
Mahinteyana Up. XVII-8) :—"Of all Vidyas the Lord is,
Inbina” (shih sarvavidyindm) and (Sveta. Up. VI-18)
“T who desire Hheration scck refuge in that Deva who
creates Brahm who again reveals the Vedas and all other
leaming” (Yo Brahménam Videdbatt plrmam yo. vai
Yedangsboha prahinoti). The particle “cha” impliedly
signifies the other Vidyis collectively. We also fad it said
in furtherance of thot statement. “To him the fist bom
‘Hs gave the Vedas and Panigas,” Smit also states that
‘the omniscient Poot (Kavi), Carrier of the Trident (Shiva
shélapini), is the first Promulgstorof thew eighteen Vidyie
which take difering paths (Bhinnavarims). Tt follows
‘at, inasmuch os Pararnashivo, the Benefactor of the
‘Worlds, is the Promalg       of ator
                                 al Vid, they are all autho-
titative, though each is. applicable for differing clases of
competency (Adhikitibhedena). This bss been easy stated
in Sitosamhitd and similar works,
      Capacity (Adhikéra) is (for example) of this kind.
‘The tmbeliever (Nistika ic., in Veds) hes Adhikira in
Darshanas such aa Arhate (Jaina) and the like. Men of
‘the fest three castes have Adhikra     in the path of Ved.
Similasly the Adhikfira of on individual varies according
to the pusityof his Chitta. For we ste thatthe injunctions
relating to Dharma vary according to Asheama and caste
(Varas-bheds). Such texts as praise any partoular Vidy&
fre addres to those who are Adhikisf therein, and theit
object   is to induce them to followit. Such texts again as
disparage ony Vidyt are addressed to those who are not
     ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
‘Adhiks therein, and thoie objct ie to dissnae them trom
it, Nor again should these words of biame (or-praise) be
‘taken in an absolute sense, tha i otherwise than relatively
to the penton to whom they are addressed.
        Yani tatted vidyaprashafigsaldni vachanfni tai
tattadidhikicipais pratyeva pravertakini, Yani che tan-
nindalein’ tin tattadanadhilrinat prati nivartaldni. Na
ppunarnahi nindinylyeos vidhevastivakini (Bhiskarardya’s
Introductory Commentary to Nitydehodashikdreavo Tantra.
pa)
       ‘In easly infanoy, parents and guardians encourage the
play of the child in their charge. When the age of sindy
is reached, the same psrents and guardians chastise the
child who inopportanely plays. This we all see. A male
of the three higher castes should, on the passing of the age
of play, eam his etter and than metro (Chhendas) in onder
to master language, The Ago! Purina has many texts
 such as Puultles is a good Kavya” ; al of which encourage
 the stady of Kavya. We slso come across prohibitions
 such as "He ho has mastared the wubject should avoid all
 Alisoasion seating to Kiya". Waen tho object to be
 teined by the study of Klvya is ettained and competmney
 is gained for the next higher stage (Utiacsbhiimila), itis
 ‘nly harmful waste of time to busy oneself with & lower
 stage (PErvabhimil), in neplest of thot higher stage for
   the Skdband of which one has become competent. This
 is the meaning of the probiition. Azain the injunetion
 ia to ebuly Nydyaabistraso as to gain & Imowiedge       af the
 ‘Rerst as itis, and other than as it appears in the body and
       i                         ang such as “By teasing
 (Shungga) seek the Kimi,” Shungg--Hoto—Avayara-
 samudayitnakenyéyn, that is Logie with all its five limbs,
 ‘When itis known that the Atma, as suchis other than       the,
 body, is separste from the body and ao forth, and the
      ans whic lead to that knowledge are mastered,  then man
 js prohibited from occupying himself with the subject ofthe
                              23
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 former stage (Pirvabhimiks) by such texts as “Anvflshikt
 ‘nd Logi (Tarkavidya) are useless” (Anvikshileim taska-
 Vidydmanneakto nizarthiktm), Injunotions: such as “The
 ‘wise should practise Dharma alone (Dharmem evackarct
 prijnah)” urge man towards the next stage (Uttarabhimils),
 ‘The study of the Pirvamtm&iigss and the Karmakinds in
the Vedas is useful   for this purpose. When by this means
 Dharma, Artha and Kime are attained, there arises a desire
for the fourth Purushrtha (Liberation or Moksha), And
 therefore to sever men fom the former stage (Parvabhti-
 milks) there ave texis which deprecste Karma such as
 (Mond. Up. 1-2, 12) “By that whieh is made cannot be
 attained that which is not mede” (Nastyekritah lritena).
 Vashishtia soys that these (corlier stages) sxe seven
 and that all are stages. of ignorance (Ajnfnabhimiks),
 ‘Beyond these are stages of Jndna. For the attainment of
 ‘tho same there are injunctions ‘elating to Brahmajnine
which lead on to the next higher stage, auch as (Mund.    Up. 1.
 2,12) “He should goto the Guru alone” (Ba gram evabhign-
 chobhet) “Listen (Br. Ar. IL 4, 6, IV, 8,6), oh Maitreyi, the
 ‘Kimi should be malised”” (Atmé vA ate dreshtavyah).
 Some say that the JuAoa-bhimikis are many and rely on
 ‘he text “ The wise say that the stages of Yogm are many”.
 ‘The holy Vashishtha says that there are seven, namely,
 Vividishi (desi to know), Viohirma (reflection), ‘Tant-
 rmiinass (concmtzation), Sattvipntti (commencement of
 realisation), Assmsakti (detachment), Padctbabhivint
 (ealisation of Brahman only) and ‘Turyagd (ful ilwnina-
 tion in the fourth stata). The meaning of these is given in,
 ‘nd should be learnt from, the Jntnashistea of Vashishthe.
       ‘These terms are also explained in Brahmdnande’s
  Commentary on the Hathayoga Pradtpiké (1-3).. His
  count differ from that of Bhfskararéya as regards the
  name of the fist Bhimildl which he calls Infnabhiimi or
  Subhechehb, and the sixth is called by him Parirthi-
  Dhivint and’ not PadisthAbhtvint. ‘The sense in cither
     ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
ace is the same, According to Brahmdnanda, Jndasbhi-
ri is, the initial stage of Yoga characterised by Viveka,
YVairégy, and the six Sihanks beginning with Shama and
Jeading to Blumukaha, Vicbarand is Shravana and Manon
Ghrevanamanandtmika) Tanumanasd=Nididhydsana when
‘the mind, the natural charaoteristio of which is to wander,
in directed towards its proper Yogn-object only. These
the preliminary stages are known as Sidhandbbsniks
‘The fourth stage Sattvtpatti in Samprajnftayoga-bhtimil
‘The mind baving, been puriéed by practice in th» three
procvding Bhmiks the Yogt éommences to realise and ia
called Brahmavit The last thres stages belong to Asam-
Prajuttayogs. After attaiument of Settvapatti Bhinila,
ths Yog! resches the fifth stage callod Asamsaldi, Here
1h in totally detached ond in the state of wakening (Vuttish-
hate), As such be is called Brohmavid-vara. Ab the sixth,
ot Parirthibhivint Bhimiki, he meditstes on nothing
bet Parabrahinan (Parabrabmtiriktam na bhavayst). He
is supremely awakened (Paraprabodhita) and is awake
(Wyuvzits). Ho is thea, called Brohmavid-vartyén. Tn
‘the last orseventhatage (Tixyyuga) he ia Brakmavidvarishta,
and then traly attains iumination in iteelf (Syatalperato
¥6 vyuithinam pripnoti
      ‘The Upanishads and Uttaramimingst’ are helpfal for
‘hin purpose (Upayogl) ond should therefore be studied.
      Brahmajnina again is of two kinds :—namaly, Shabia
 and Aparokshinubbsvarips. “Understanding of the mean~
 ing of Shistra (Shlstredzisi), the word    of the Guru (Graror-
 vikyam) and certainty (Nishohiye) of the unity of the
{ndividual self (Svs) and the AtmA are powerful to dispel
inward darkness, but not the mere Imowledge of words
 (ShAbdsbodha). (See Vogavishisktha Utpatti, Kh. 1X.
 10) ‘Therefore, when the ShibdabhimikA ie attained
 ‘oxe should not waste one’s time further ab this stage, and
 there are texts which prohibit this. ‘Thus (Br. Ar. IIT, 8-1)
                               25
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 “Having booome indifferont to loaming let him remain
 simple as in childhood” (Péndityfuairvidya bilyena tish-
 set).
       Between   the second snd thin of the seven stages
 (Bhimika) there is the great, stage Bhskti, Bhakti-
 mimimsi (cg, Nimda Sit, Sansteujétfys) is helpful
 ‘and should bo studiod. Bhakti! continuss to the end of the
 ‘Agth Bhimika. When this last is attained the Sidhaka
 shins the fifth stage which is Aporolahinubhevaripa,
 ‘This ie Jivanmukti, Following closoly upon this ia Vide
 Ihakaivalya, In the text “From Jnins alone Kaivalya
 ‘omnes (Jind ova tu kaivalyam), the worl Jnina signifce
 something other and higher than Anvbbava (Anubhava-
 parstva). In Nyfya and other Shistras it is stated that
 ‘Moksha will be attained: by mastory in such particular
 ‘Shistra, but that is memely'a dovice by which knowledge
 fof the higher stage is nob disclosed. ‘This is not blame-
 ‘worthy because its object ia to remove he disinclinstion
 to stady such Shistza by reason of the delay thereby cansed
 in the attainment of Purushtctha (which disindlination
 would exist if the Sddhaka knew that there was a higher
 Shtstre than that whichhe was studying). There are texts
 such as “By Karma alone (eva) is achievement” (Karma-
naiva tu smsiddhih)     ; “Him whom ho seleets by him he is
 attainable” (Yamovaisha vrinnate teaa labhyah). The
 ‘word “eva’"refore to the Bhimikl which is spoken of and
 prohibits Sidhan8 for the attainment of fruit which can
 ‘only be gained by mastory of, or competency in (Adlikra,
 ‘the next higher Bhdmiki (Uttarabhimika). ‘Tho words
 ao not deny that there is a higher stage (Bhimikt). ‘The
‘word slone (eva) in “Jani eva tu” (“trom Jufua alone”)
 indicates, however, that there is a stage of Sidhan8 subse-
 quent to that here spoken of. ‘There is thus no conflict
 between the Rishis who are teachors of the different Vidyas.
 ach one of these Bhiimikds has many subdivisions (Avén-
 tacabhfmika) which cannot be altogether soparsted the
                               226
      ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
  fone from the other, end which are only mown by. the
<iscerning through experience (Anuhhava)- So. it has been
 said: “Oh Righava, Thave spokento theeof the seven States
  (AvasthA) of ignormos (Aina). Each one is hundred-
 fold (tbatis many) and yields many fruits (Nindvibhavs-
 ripinf). Of these many Bhimikis, each is achieved by
Sédhand through many births. When a man by grest
 effort prolonged through countless Lives, end scconting to
 ‘the mgalar   order of things (Kramena}, gains fall oompre-
hension of the Bitimik in which be has cartain knowledge
 of the Shabdatattva of Parsbrahman, be ceases to have
 ‘any great attachment to, or aversion for, Sangsira and
 this isa form of excellent Chittushuddhi. “Such an one is
 qualified for the path of Devotion (Bhakt).” For, it hes
  boon said: “Neither indifferent. (Nirvinna) nor attach-
 ‘ed; for auch an one Bhalctiyoga grants achievement
  (Bidahide).”
        Bhakti sgain is of two kinds; Gaunt (recondary)
  and Para (supreme)... The first coniprises Dhytina, Archana,
  Jape, Namakirtana aad the like of the Saguna, Babman.
  Porabhakti is the special state (Anurtgavisheshardps)
  ‘which is the product of these. ‘Tho fist division of Bhakti
  includes several others (Avéntara-bhimika). The first
  of these is Bhivanfsiddhi illatrated by such texts “Let
  hi meditate on woman as fire" (Yoshimagnim dhyaytta).
  ‘The second is worship (Upleti) as directed in such taxta
  (Cha, Up. TIL 18-1) os “Mand brahmotyupistta””, The
  third is Ishvaropésti (worship of the Loni). Since the
‘aspenta ofthe Lord vary acconding as He is viowed as Sazyya,
  Ganesha, Vishnu, Rudra, Parashive and Shekti, the forms
  ci worship belong to different Bhimikts. ‘The forms of
   Shakti again are endless such as Chhéy@, Ballabhs, Lakshmt
  and the like. In this manner, throagh countless ages       all
  these Bhimilets are mastered, when there arises Gaunn-
   bhakti for Tripumendat. On perfeotion of this there is
   Parabhakti for Her. ‘This is the end, for it bas beem said
                                27
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (Kulémava Tontra I. 82): “Kaslajutne is revesled for
 ‘him whore Chitta has been fully purifed, Arka, Gina-
 potys, Vaishnava, Shaiva, Danrgi (Shales) and other
 Mantras in theit onder.” Bhiskarardya also quotes the
 statement in the Kuldrpava Tentra (II. 7,8): “Higher then
  Vedichira is Vaishnavdchira, highsr than Veishua vich&ra
 ia Shaivichina, higher than Shaivichtn. is Dalshindchéra,
  higher then Dalshindchira inv VamAchise, higher than
 ‘Vimtchire ia Siddbintichiva, higher than Sid@hintAchira
  is Kauléchtma than which there is nothing higher nor better.”
        Many original texts might be cited relative to the
 onder of stages (Bhimilkrama) but which axe not quoted
  for fost of prolixty. Some of these have been eet out in
  Soubhigye-bhiskara, (that is, BhésksratAya’s Commentacy
 on the Lalitdeshasrandmn),| The Sundari tponfpanchal,
 Bhivanoptnishad, Keulopanishsd, Gabyopanishad, Maho-
 ponithed, and other Upanistada (Vedashizobhgn) describe
 in detail the Gount Biokti of Shri Mahttripurasundertand
 matter solating thereto. ‘The Kalpoctiras of Ashvaléyens
‘and otbers, the Smits of Manu ond otters come after the
 ‘Pirvaldnda (Karmakinda) of the Ved. In the same way
 ‘the Kalpastteas of Parashurims and others and the Yamalas
  and other Tantras belong to the letter part of the Veda or
 ‘the Upsnishadlinda. The Parinss relate to, and follow both,
  Kindss. Therefore the authority of the Smritis, Tantras,
  tnd Portas is duo to their being based on Veda (Smziti-
 ‘anira puriofmn vedamilakitvenaiva primfnyem): ‘Those
 swhioh soem (Pratyaisha) opposed to Shruti (Shrativirudda)
 form a class of their own and are without authority and
 should not be followed unless the Veda (Sftlashmut)) is
  examined (ond their conformity with it established), There
  are some ‘Tan‘ras, however, which ateih every way in con-
  flit with Veda (Ynite. sarvtmshena vedaviruddhinyeva).
  ‘Thoy are some Pashapata ShAstras end Pancharttra. They
ace ot for those who rein tis Bhtimika (ie, Veda Panthi).
  le who is quolifed for ries enjoined in Shruti and Smriti
                              28
      ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
 (Gtroutasmista-karmédhilra) is only Adhiist for these
 (Pishupata and Pencharhtma) if by xenon of some sin
 (Pipa he falls fom the former path. Tt-has therefore been
said "The ‘Lord of Kamala (Vishnu) spoke the Pancha-
 vitzes, the Bhigavate, end that which is known aa Vaikhi-
 xasa (Vaighinesdbbidiame foma of Vaishnavism) for thors
 vwho have fallen sway from the Vedas (Vedebhrashta).”
 ‘The following Texts relate only to some of the Shistras of
 tho classes mentioned. $0 we have the folowing -—"Fe
 ‘who bas flen from Shrati who is afrid of tho expiatory
 Tice (Prfyashchite) prescribed therein, should soak shaltor
in Tentes 40 thet by degrees bo may be qualified for Shruti
 (Ghratisidahyarthsmn).”” ‘Though    the general term “Tantra”
 js employed, particular ‘Tantas (thet i, those         opposed to
 Shruti or Asbrouta) ore hove “meant. The Adhikarana
  (Gitzs) Petyurashmanjasy’t (II. 2 $7) applies to Tantras
 ofthis olass.'The Agastya and other Tantras which describe
 the worship of Rama, Kena, Nrisingh, Rudra, Parashiva,
 Sundast (Shakti) and ethers evidently derive irom the
 RAmatipeni and other Upenishads. ‘Thame is therefore no
 reagon to doubt but that thoy aro authoritative.
       ‘Worship (Uplsti) of Sandaci Shakti     is of tvo kinds
  Bauhiryiga or outer, and Antaryfge orinner, worship. Antar-
 ‘yg is agnin of theee kinds :—Selala, Sukla-Nishlals,            and
 ishiala, thus constituting four Bhimikis. and then to 8As   slready
  stated, the passage is from s lowerto higher
  Yet higher BhOmiks. Five forms of Behisyége azeand.spoken     Yiw~
  3, namely, Kevala, Yimala, Mishra, Chakrayuke the beads
                                     divisions under
  ‘uliguera, whith have each fiveDeurbodhya
  ‘Abhigmans and others and                         and others in
  ‘erent Thatras, Bairyige         with   thoso    distinctions    by-
  Jongs io one aud the aauhe Bhimikt.          Distinctions in the
  injunctions (VyavasthA) depend not onon thedifferenoas
                                      entirely                      a2
  to ple, time, end capacity, and                          degree    of
  Chittashdahi (Na puunshchittaabuddhi-bhedens),              On the
  olber-band. injunetions given according to difference of
                                  29
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Bhiuikd, which is itaelf dependent on the degree of purity
of the Chitta, are mandatory.
      ‘To sum up the reply to the question raised by the ttle
of this paper :—‘The Shatras are many and are of diflering
form, But Ishvore is the Lord ofall the Vidyéis which are
‘thus authoritative and have a common sim. ‘The Adhikdira
cof men varies. ‘Therefore so does the form of the Shastr
‘There are many stages (Bhimikd) on the path of spiritual
advance. Man males his way. from a lower to higher
Bhimikf. Statements in any Shastra which seom to be in
confit with some other Shistrs must be interpreted with
reference to the Adis of the persons to whom they ace
addressed. Texts laudatory of any Vidyé aro addressed
to the Adbikist therein wth the objectof induoing him to
follow it. Texts in disparagementof any Vidy8 are addzess-
ed to tlcee who are not Adhikiet therein, either because he
hhas not attained, or has surpassed, the Bhimiké applicable,
‘and their object is to dissuade them from ‘following it
Neither statements re to be taken in an absolute senze,
for whatis not for one may be fit for mother, Evolution
governs the spiitual sa the physical process, and the truth
isin each case given in that form which is suitable for the
stage reached. From step to step the Sidhaka ses, until
having passed through all presentments of the Vaidik tras
‘which are necessary for him, he ottains the Vedasvarépe
which is knowledge of the Self
      ‘These ancient teschings are in many ways very eonson~
ant with what is called the “modemist” outlook. ‘Thus,
lot it be noted that there may be (as Bhiskarariys says)
Adhikire for Ashrauta Shéstra such as tho Arbata, and
‘there is » Seripture for the Vedabhrshte. ‘These, though
non-Vaidile, ate recognised a0 the Scriptures of those who
fre fitted for them. This ip more than the admission that
‘they wre the Scriptures in fact of such persons. ‘The mean-
ing of such recognition is brought out by an incident come
                               230
       ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
 ‘years ago. An Anglican clergyman suggested that Maho-
 ‘edanism might be o suitable Soriptare for the Negro who
 was above ‘fetichism”” but not yet fit to receive Christian
 ‘aching. Though bo claimed’ that the latter was the
 highest and the most complets truth, this recognition (quite
 ‘Hindu in ite character) of s lower ond less sdvineod stage,
 Drought him into trouble. For those who oxiicised him
 fave no rocogaition to any belief but their own: Hinduism
 does not deny that other faiths have their good fruit, For
‘his reason, ita tolerant tora degree which has earned it the
 change of bsing “indiferent to the truth’. Each to his
 ‘own. Ite principles admit o progrumive revelation of the
 Salf to the self, accondingto varying competancics (Adhilsirs)
 and stages (Bilmik) of spiritual advance, Though each
 ‘octeive and practice Belongs to varying levels aac therefore
the joumey may. be shorter or longer as the case may be,
 ultimately all lend to the Vedasvariya or imowledge of the
 Sel, than which there is no other end. ‘That which imme-
 diately proosdes this complete spiritaal experience is the
 Veddntik doctrine and Sidhané for which all others are the
 propiedeutik. There is no teal confit if we look at the
 tage    ab whish the partioular instructions are given. Thought
‘moves by an immanent        logis from less to a more complete
 ‘realizationof the true nature of the thinker, When al theis.
 letter bas truly known what       he is, he has Imown        what
 Vedayite iti Vedah, “Vodeis that by which                 what    is, aud
 hot is tre, is made known,”                                           only
      ‘Whilst the Smriis of the Seor vary and therefore         with the
 ‘those ate to-be aocepted whish ore in conformity     be   remembered
 Standard of true experience or Veda,        it i s to
 ‘that bocause s Seer auch as Kapila Adividvan              (upon whowe
 ‘Smuiti   or expotience the Skigkhys    is assumed     to   be founded)
 teaches Dvaitevida, it does not (ina thehigherHindaatage,view)‘fllow
                                                                 such at
 ‘that he bad not himself reached               may choose come  to
 ‘Advaitavida is aimed to be. A Seer people                and teach @
 down to the level of more ordinary
                                  ast
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Dvaitavéda muted to their capacity (Adhiktra). I all were
  to teach the highest experience tere would be nane to look
 after those who were incapableof it, and who must be led up
 ‘through the necessary preliminary stages. SAighhys is the
 science of analysis and discrimination, and therefore the
 preparation for Vedanta which is the science of synthesis
 ‘nd assimilation, Kapila, Gotama and Kandda tainly built
 on. reason deepened, and enlarged, it may be, by Smriti or
 subjective expstience. We do not find in them amy com=
 plote synthesis of Shot A general appeal is made to
 Shruti and a fow texts axe cited which acoord with what
 (whether it waa 90 in fact to them or not) iain fact a pro-
 ‘sionally adopted. point of view. ‘They concentrate the
  thoughts and wills of their disciples on them, withholding
 (if they themselves have gone farther) the rest, 86 nob at
 present suited to the capacity of the Bhishya, thus following
 ‘what Shafigkara calls. Armdhati-darsbana-nyiys. Never-
 tieless the higher truth is immanent in the lower. The
 Differential and Integral Caloutus are involved in elementary
 Algebra and Geometry aestse the former goneralizo what
 ‘the latter partioularive, But the teacher of cleméntary
 Mothematics in the lower forms. of @ school would’ only
 confound his young learners if he were to introduce such @
 general theorem (as suy Taylor's) to them. He must keep
‘ack the otter until the time is ripe for them. Again the
 {eat Teachers teach wholoheartedness nd. thoroughness
 in both belief and sction, without which the sooeptance of
 4 doctrine is useless. Hence a teacher of Dvaitavida,
  though himself Advaits-dambt, presents Dvaita to the
  Adhikat Shiskya in: such s forcible way. that. his reason
 ray be convinced and'his-intenest) may be fully aroused.
 ‘eis woloas to eay to a Sidhslea on the lower plane “Advait
 jn the whole truth. Dvnita is not; but though it is not, ie
  in suited to your copucity al therefoie aeeept it.” He
  will of couse sty that he does not then want Deatta, and,
  being incapable of understending Advaita, will love himself.
                               232
     ALLEGED CONFLICT OF SHASTRAS
 ‘This, Tmoy observe, is ono of tho sass of Seoptisian to-day.
 Jn the olden time i was possible to teack a system without
 anything being kaown of that which was higher. But with
 the printing of books some people learn that all is Mays,
 that Upisand is for the “lower” grades and ao forth, and,
 not understanding what oll this means, are disposed. to
 throw Shistric teaching in general overboard. This they
 ‘would not have done if they bad been fst qualified in the
‘rath of their plane and thus beoome qualified   to widerstand
 the truth of that which is mero advanced. Until Brahma~
 sikehétetra, all truth is selstive. Hence, Bhagavan. in
 ‘tho Gitd says: “Na baddhi-bbdam janayod ojnimam Kama
 sanginkn.” ‘Tradition supports llxse views. Therefore
 Vyleo, Kepils, Gautama, Jaimini, KenSda and other have
 differently taught, though they may have possibly experi-
 fenced nearly similarly. Joimini in hs Prva Mimimsi
difés in several respects from. Vyésa or Bédardyana in his
  Uttara-Mimimad though he was the disiple of the Inter.
 ‘Vyisa is Advaitadamsht in Veddnta bat Dvaita-dacsbt-ian
  Yogablilshys. Init to be supposed,    that Hus Shishya. was
 Anaihikad, and thst his'Gura, thensdore, withheld the
 Daghsr teeth roms him, dr was the Guru jétlous and kept his
  Shishys in aotions, withholding Brahma-jadna t
       A Rishi who he realized Advaita may teach Ayurveda
  or Dhanuveia. He need not be Sthflardacst, because he
  teaches Schila-visheys. Again Shdatras may difer, because
  ‘ir standpint and objeotiveis diferent. ‘Thus the Parea-
  rmimimsa deals with Dharme-jignist, stating that Veda is
  practical ani enjoine duties, so that a Text which does not
  directlyot indirectly mean or impose « dubyis of no account.
  ‘The Uteara-mfundmsh, on tho other hand, deals with Brakma-
  jigntst and therefore in the Sita‘ Tutin samanvayt tia
  Jaid down that a Mantra is relevant, dough it may not
  impose a daty ("Do this or do ast lo this”) but merely
  produces a Jadua (Know this, ‘That Thow axe”). The
  ‘ference in interpretation is incidental to dilference in
                              333
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  standpoint and cbjective. ‘The samo semnarks apply to the
   various forms of Advaita such as Vishishtddvaita, Shuddb-
  vaita; between the Shakcivads of the Shikta Agama and
  Viverttovdda. Tn some Shastras stress is leid on Karma,
  in others on Bhukti, and yotin others on Jndna a8 in the
  case of MAySvida. But though the emphasis is difierentiy
  placed, each is involved in the other and ultimately mest
 and blend. Tho Mabirmasteva soya: ‘Though men, accord
 ing to their natare, follow differing paths, Thow’art the
‘nd ofall a is th cooan of all th zivers which dow thereto.”
 Madhosidana Sarasvati commenting on this, has written
 his Preethnabhedo, the rooonilintion of varying doctrines.
 ‘To-day the greatest nood in these matters is (for those who
 ase capable of understanding) the establishment of this
 intellectual  and spiritual Whoo (Piraa). "he Seers who live
 in the exalted Sphere of Calm, understand the worth and
 significance of each form of spiritual oalture as also their
 Synthesis, ondto the degree that lessor minds attain this
 lovol to this extent they will also do ao. Whilst the lower
rind lives in a seotionof the whole faot aad therafore soas
 fiflorenoe and gonflict, tha illamined who live in and avein
 varying degress experience of the Bact iteelf, seo all suchas
 related parts of an Whole,




                             24
                          Cuarree XIU,
                       SARVANANDANATHA.*
 [HE Servos, a copyof whith ame into my poten
          some three years ago, isa sare MS. Ibis a Saigeaha
 by the Sarvavidyisiddba Sacvinandanétha who, though
 ‘elebrared amongst the Bengal followers of the Agams, is,
 T shodld think, almost unknown to the general public.
 ‘There is a life in Sanalit of SarvinandanGtha entitled
 Sarvinandatarnugint by bis son Shivondtha in which on
 sooount of the attainment of his Siddhi is given and 1 am
 indebted in respect of this article to a short unpublished
 romoir by §). Dinesba Chandra BhatttchSryys, formerly
 Research Scholar, who si a native of Tipperah ins had the
 desir to see Sarvanandandtha’s, place in the Historyof the
 socalled “Tintriciam” in Bengal duly seoogaind.
        Tt is seid that Sarvinanda had striven for Siddhi for
 seven provions bist nod vers preserveslives.the names             of the
 place whore       ho died in these suoossive               His   grand-
Tather      Vasudeva  originally lived st Purvasthali in tho Burd-
 ‘wan distziot but wasled      by a divine callto Mebor in Tippsrah
‘hor in ages past Marga Muni had done ‘Tapes. A deep
  hole  is still shown  0s being of MAtanga’s time, It is alo said
‘tat round aboat the plaoe where Sarvinaadantthcisoover   a performed
  his Shavectdhand, adept Sidhakas            even   now               the
  hidden Lings established by Mitange marked out by equally
  hidden baesiows or Kfles,                                   died after
       ‘Vasudeva then went to KamAikhy& where at boMehar              who
  undergoing severe       lapse.    Ho   left his  6on
  imelf afterwards bad a ton, the grandson was reborn    of   Vasudeva,
  In fac i ip anid that the grandfather Viaudeva                In early
  ‘as the son of his own oon, that ia, ag Servinanda.
  life the latiex was stapid and litemte, He was shocply
                cod fom Pie Hindustan Rese, Vol 1, January 1990.
                                 235
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  rebuleed by the Igeal Rajah for his jgnoranes in proclaiming
  ‘8 New Moon day to be Full Moon day. Being severely
  ‘punished by his relatives he determined to begin his letters
  find went out to search for the necessary pelm-leaves. There
in the jungle be met a Sanzyasi, who was Mahadeva himeelt
 in that form and who whispered in his ears a Mantra and
 eve him certain instructions. “His socvant Puna was an
 ‘edvanced Sidhalss, who had been psychically developed
 sunder Vasudeva. Puna separating the subtle (Sishma-
 <dcha) from the gross body, served as a corpse on the back of
 ‘which Sarvinanda performed Shavasidhané and sttained
  Siddhi that samo new moon night on whichto the amazament
  af all « perfect moon shone over Mehas. This full moon
 episode is popularly tho most famous of Sarvanands’s
 wonders.
       Some time aftar Sarvinanda loft, Mehar after having
 given utterance to. the cura that his own family would die
 out in the 22nd; and that of the looal chief in the 16th gene-
 ration. This ast announcementis said to have come true 86
 the Rajah’s desomdant in the fifteenth generation actually
 ‘ied without iaswe, though the farily survives through his
 adopted son, Sarvinands started for Beoanes but stopped
at Soahstiin Jeesore where he was dompelle to marry ogain
 ‘axd where he lived for some years. This place of worship
 atSenbistiiestillshown, At the age of 0 he went to Benares
 ‘with his servant Puna and nephew Sedsanda, At Benares
 the Shaiva Dandins were then, as now, predominont. He
 ‘quarrelled with them, or they with kim, on account of his
  doctrines and practice.
       In rotum for their trestinent of him he to their awe and
 ‘possibly disgust donverted (to it a ssid) their food into meat
and wine. *OF course the Bensses Dandins, as is wsualin
 such cate, give & diffrent sotount ofthe matter. Their
 ‘mudition is that, alter » Shistsic debate, Sarvananda was
 ouvinced by the Dandins that the Siddhi which he boasted
 of was no real Siddhi atall and was then made a convert to
                                236
                  SARVANANDANATHA
 their own dovitines, which is the most satisfactory of all
 results for tho men of piety who wrangle with othefs and ty
 ‘to make them come over to their views. It is worthyof
‘note how quarrelaome in all ages many of the pious and
 wonder-workers have been. But perhaps we do not hear so
 auch of the quieter sages who lived and lot others live,
 diffusing their Views not amongst those who were satisfied
 ‘with what thoy Kaew     or thought they knew, but among such
 as had not found end therefore sought.
       ‘After this event Sarvénanie diseppoared from Benares
 which rather points to the fect that the Dendins did not
 ‘oquine © distinguished adversary for their community.
 ‘Tradition is ellent as to what happened to him later and as
 to the date and place of his end.
      Sj, Dinesh Chandra Bhatidebiryye has made for me a
 calculation as to the date of Sarvinaada’s Siddhi which fel
 on & Pauss: Samkrinti eomesponding to. Chsturdasi ot
 ‘Amivieysfallingon a Friday. Between 1200 azd 1700 A.D
 ‘there are three dates on which the above combination took
 place, vis, 1842, 1426 and 1648 AD. The frst date is too
 ‘arlyas 15 oF 16 generations,    to which his family descends at
‘present, does not eaery us s0 far beck. ‘The Inst date seems
 ‘00 Ite. For aoconding to tradition Jinskivallabba Gurvvi-
 ‘hry, himself a famous Siddha, and ffth in descent trom
 Sarviuanda, was a contemporary of one of the “twelve
 ‘Bhuiyas” of Bengal late in the reign of Akbar (circ. 1600
 ‘AD). The date 1426 AD, is therefore adopted. It will
 ‘thos appear that he lived about a oentury before the three
 great Bengal Mhatrkas, namely, Kribinands, BrabmAnanda          But
 fand Purninanda, all of whom ore of the 16th osutury. from
this calculation    iss still to be verified by date oulled
 fan examination of the Sarvelltsa sich as the authorities
 which ite anthor cites.
                                                        he is best
       This last work, I'am told, is that by arewhichascribed
 Jaowa, ‘Two other short Tantrike works                         to
 Sarvinanda though whether it is the same           Siddha   is  not
                                 27
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  certain, There is, Tam told, » Navdmepdjapaddhati by
  Servinandandtha in MS. dated 1688 Vikramabda in the
  Raghunith Temple Library in Kashmir and another work
 the TripurirchanadtpikA is reported from the Central
 Provinces
        ‘Asis usual in such cases there is a legend that: Sarvi-
 anda ia ail living by Kayevyuha in some hidden assort of
 Siddha-purashss. ‘The euthor of the memoir frem which
 T quote, tells of a Sadhu who anid to my informant that some
 ‘yes ago he met Sarvénandanfithe ina place called Champa-
 Kktranya but only    for afew minutes, for the Sddbu was himself
 nisaoilovsly wafted elsewhere,
       ‘Some   very curious reading of deep interest to the paycho-
 logis, the student of psychio phenomens and the historian
 of religions is to be found in the stories which aro told of
 Sédhor and Sidghas’ of Sarvnanda’s type who, whether
 thoy did all that is recounted of them or not, yet lived so
 strangely, av for instance,   to tako another cage, that of Brab-
 minanda the author of the Shilctinandatorngint who,
 going   in his youth n quest of prostitute found in the bouse
The entered and in the woman who came to him his own
 ‘other, berclf the victim of a Mussulman ravisher. It was
 the horror of this encounter which converted his mind and
 led him to become a Sidhu, during which life he did Dhyne
 in the body of «deadand rotting elephantand the other thingn
 related of hima. They ewnit collection. But when their valno
 ‘nas been discovered possibly these traditions may have dis-
 appeared. Bven if all the facta rolated ofthese Sthus and
 Sildhas were the work of imagination (and whilst some of
 ‘them may be 90, others are in all probability tue enough)
 ‘they are worth preservation as uch. The history of the ht-
‘man mind is as much & fact fe anything which is reverenced
  because itis “objective”, This lest class of fact is generally
 ‘only the common experience. Tt is attractive, yet some-
 times fearsome, to follow the mind’s wanderings bath in the
  Fight ana in that curious dark, which only explorers in these
                                   238
                 SARVANANDANATHA
 paths know. [fone does not lose one's way (and in this lies
1 peril) we emerge with a confidence in ourselves at having
 ‘passed a test—a confidence which will serve our future. In
‘any oaseas I have suid there ia un opportanit   of researeh
                                                    y        for
 ‘those whose workings are in the cuter erat of mere historieal
 fot.




                               239
                         cnaera XIV.
                        CHITSHAKTI.
        (Rue Conscovesmee Asrucr or nme Usman.)
      THIT-SHAKTI ie Chit, as Shakti, that js as Power, or
         that aipectof Chitin which i is, through its asso
 ated Mayh-Sholc, operative to create the universe. Its 8
 commonly accepted doctrine that the ulimate Reality is
 Samvid, Ohoitanya oF Chit
       ‘Bul whit is Chit ‘Thazo is no worl in the English
 luagaage which adequately desoribes it, Tt is not mind
 for mind i limited instrument throng which Chit is
 manifested. It ia thit whiok is behind the mind and by
 Which ‘the ‘mind ital is thought, that is created. The
 Brbman is mindlew (Amsah)- If we exclude mind we
   so exclude sll forms of meatal proves, conception, percep-
 tion, thought, reason, wil, memory, pertiulsr sensation
 tnd the Bike, “We sce then left with    three available words,
 nomely, Consciousness, Fesling, Experience, To the fst
 term there are several objections. For if we use an English
 ‘word, we must wademtand it acponling to its generally  meant
 received mieaning. Genetnlly By "Conosiousness" is having
 selfeonscioumess, oF at least    something   partiolar,
 direction and form, whichis concrete and conditioned ; an
 ‘evolved produot marking the higher stages of Evoluticn.
 ‘According 40 some, it ia 8 mere function of experience,Tn thisan
 cpiphinamenon, a mere secident of mental process.
 tense it belongs only to the highly developed orgenism and
 involves a subject attending to an object of which,most aseon-of
 ‘tue, it is conscious, We ote thus asid to havo and heve
 sciowsuess when we ate awake (Jigrat avasthi) s0 when
 full expetiozce ofall objects présented to us; less in trio
 dreaming (Svopna svasthd) nd deep anesthesia recent
Areamless sleep (Suehupti). Imay hare observe that as is
  teseatohes show that this last state isnot so common
                               40
                      CHIT-SHAKTI
generally supposed. ‘Thatis complete dneasnosanessia rej
 there being generally some trace of dream. In the last
 state it's commonly  sid that consciousnesshas disappeared,
 and so of course i bes, if we faxt dine conesiousness in
 torms-of the waking state and of knowledge of objects,
 ‘Accordingto Indian notions there is a form of conscions
 experience in the despast sleep expressed in the wallixown
 phrase “Happily I slept I knew nothing”. ‘The sleeper
 recollects on waking that his stste has been one of happi-
 ness, And he cannot recollect unlase there hat been &
 previous experience (Anubhava) whieh isthe subjest-matter
fof memory. In ordinary poslance    we do not regard some low
 fnimal form, plante oF mineral as “conscious” Tt is true
 hae now in the West there is (ue. to’ the spread of ides
 Jug eurzent in India) growing up a widor we of the’ term
 “consciousness” in-onnettion not only with animal but
 vegetable ard mineral lie, bat it cannot be sid that the
 term “consciousness” his Yet generally acquired this wide
 signification, If then we use (08 for eanvenienos we do) the
 ‘orm “Conscionmess” for Chit, we must give it a content
 different from that which is attributed to the terms in
 cntinary Bnglish paslancs. Nextly i i-to he remembered
 that what in eithar view we understand by consciousness ia
 something manifested, and therefore limited, and derived
 from our Ssite experience. The Brahman as Chit in the
 infnita substestam of that. Chit in itelt (Svartpa) is not
 pertiular, nor conditioned and concrete. Paticulasty in
 that aspectin which it manifests as, and through, Mayi-
 Shakti. Chit manifests as Jnina-Shalti which, when used
 otherwise than as a loose syzonym for Chit, means know-
 ledge of objecta, ChitSvaripe ia ‘neither Inovledga of
 cbjesta nor selfconsrioumnes in the phenomens! sense
 Wabing, dreaming and dreamleas       alambar are’ all phano-
 ‘mont states in which experiance varies; sush variance
 boing due not to Chit but to the opseation or eeteation of
 partioular opesition of the vehicles of mind (Antahkarana)
                             ay
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
and sense (Indriya). But Chit. never disappears nor vasies
in either of the thee statos, but remains one and the same
throagh all. Though Chit Svaripa is not « knowledge of
cbjeots in the phenomenal sense, it ia not, acoosliog to
Staiva-Shakta views (I toler always to Advaita Shaiva-
arshana), a mere abytract knowing (Jaina) wholly devoid
of content, It contains within iteelf the Vimarsba-Shakti
‘hich is the eause of phenoruenal objects then existing in
the fom of Chit (Chidrdpint). ‘The Self then knows the
Self, Stil less can we speak of mere “awateness” as tha
oguivalant of Chit. A worm or meaner form of auimal
may be said to be voguely aware. Tn fact mete
ues” (aa yo unulertand that term) is « state cf Chit in
Which it ia seomingly. overwhelmed by obsouzing MAyA-
Shakti in the fom of Tamoguna. Unless therefore we give
to “uyvareness”, a6 also to condelbumess, e content, other
than that with whieh our experienes furnishes ws, both terms
are unsuitable, Tn some respeota Chit oan le more closely
Aeocribed by Resting, which soams to have been the most
ancient meaning of the term Chit Feeling     ie more primary,
in that itis only after wo ave been fist affected by somes
thing that mo become conscious of it, Feeling has thas
Deon ss to be the taw-matarial of thought, the essential
clemoit in the Self, what we oall paonaliey xing « partic
calar form of fecling, "Thuo in SA0KKy0, the Gunse
fue sail to-bn in tho nature of happiness (Sukha), soriow
 (Duliki) and illusion (Moha) as they are expesicnoed by
the Purishs-Conscioumess. And in Veddate, Chit and
Knauda oF Biss or Tove ore one. For Consciousnew then
is not consciousness of bsing (Sat) but Being-conscioumness
‘Gat-Chit): nor » Bring which io conscious  of Bliss Anand)
but Being-Consciousness-tss Gachohidnands). Further
“fotng’” han thin advantage that itis amocinted with all
forms of organi existonor oven according to popular usage,
and muy scientifcally bo aptly applied to inorganic matter,
 ‘Thus whilst most consider i to be an unusual and strained
                             242
                       CHIT-SHAKTI
‘we of language, to speak of the comeiouinom ofa plant or
stone, we can and do speak of the feng or tentienoy of
«plant, Farther the response which organic matter
‘makes to stitaali is evidence of the existence therein of tha
vital germ of life and sentioney (end therefore Chit) whiel
expands into the sentieney of ante, and the feelings and
exiotions of animals and men. Tt i pomible for any form
of unintelligent beitig to feel however obscurely, And it
‘must do so, if its ultimate basis is Chit and Ananda, however
 vled by MAya-Sholcti these may be. The response" which
 inorgsnio matter makes to stim is the marifertation of
 hit through the Sattvaguan of Miy8-Shakti, or Stakti
 in it form ae Ponlcit-Shleti, ‘The numnifetation is alight
 axl apparently mechanical becane      of the extreme predot
 ince of the ‘Tamogaoa in. the same Prakrti-Shakt
 Because of the limited mud extabmely. cgulatad. chnraetor
 of the movement: which seems to exclude all volitional
 process at known to ust ie cimently ammied that we
 hnnve merely to deal with what is an unconscious mechani-
 cal energy, Becuse vitality i so oireumsoribed and
 scomingly identified with the apparent meshanicsl proces,
 wwe areagtfo ascame mere mmsonsdiow mechanism. But
 te u fect thie latter iebnt the form dasumed by the
  conscious Vital Power which in ani works in all matter
 ‘whatever it be, To. the eye, however, unasinted by
 srieatife instrumente, which extend our capacity for
 experience, establishing artioial orgaas for the gaining
 thereof, the matter appears Jada (or unconscious) ; and 30
  both in common Hnglish and Indian perlanco wo call that
 lone livingo TIva which, aa organized matter, is endowed
‘with body and sentes, Phiospphically, however, as :welleveryas
 Scientifically, allie Iwata which i not PecamAims
 thing  in fact with form, whether the form existe asthe simple
 roletalo of matter, ot as the combination of these simploof
 forms info cells and greater organiame. The rexponte
 rhetalic matter in form of sentioney ita germinal form—a,
                              243
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘manifestation of Chit intonsely obsoured by the Tamoguna
  of Prati Shakti.
        Th plants Chit is ees obscured, and here is the sentient
  lite which gradually expends in animals anid men, aeronting
  's Chit gains freedom of manifestation throug      the increased
                                                             h
  opemtion of Sattvagins in the vehicles of Chit; which
  vehicles aro the mind and senses end he mote elaborate
 organization of the bodily paitile. What is thus mere
 insipent. or germinal sentiency, simelating. uncenseios
 mechanical movement in inorganie matter, expands by
 eget into foling akin, though at fist remotely, to
 lows, and into all the other paychie functions of conscious
 ness, pereoption, regoning, memory and will. "The maior
  has been very clearly put ia a Paper on “The Tour Cosmic
  Biementa™ by CG. Sunder which (subject to contain rexer-
 vations stated) apily describes the Indian views on the
 subject in hand. ‘He. rightly. says that sentionoy is an
 integrant constituent of all existence, physical es wall as
 ‘metaphysicaland, its manifestcnnation     be traced throughout
 the miner and chemical an well aa vegetable and. animal
 worlds. Teestontinlly comprises the fanetions of relationship
 ‘to environmen, response to tim, and atomic memory in
 the lower or inorganic planes whilst in the higher ot ine
 corganie planes it includes all Uae poyehi functions auch st
 canscioumess, pererption, thought, reason, volition and
 individoal memory. Tnorganic mattar through the inherent
 clement of sentiency i enviowed with mathesia or capacity
 of feeling and response to physi! ond. chemical stimli
 such as light temperatare, sound, elovtiity, magnetiam
 ‘and the action of chemicals. All such’ phenomena are
 examples of the facultyof peteeption and response to outside
 stimuli of matter, We must here include chemical sentioney
‘nd memory ; thatia       the atoms and molecule'sremembeance
 of its own identity and bebaviour therewith, — Atouiie
 ‘memory does not, of course, imply sel-o
                      CHIT-SHAKTI
‘way to given outside stimuli. We may call i stomio or
 phyrical oonscioumass. The conesiousnest of planta is only
‘tzpnoolike (what the Hindu books call “Comatzas) though
sothe of the higher aspects of sentinoy (ond we may here we
‘the word “Gonsciousess) of the vegetable world. sre highly
interesting ; auch os the turing of flowers to the sun ; the
pening and shutting of leaves and petals at certain tine,
senstiveness to-the tempszature and the obvious signs of
consciousness shown by the sensitive and insectivoroas
plants, suchas the Sundew, the Venus Fly-trap, and other.
‘The sentieney of micro-organisms which dell on the border
land between the vegetable and animal worlds have no
ssnse organs, but ar only endowed with tactilo insita-
bility, yet they aro possesod of payshic lis, sentianey, ond
ingination, whereby they pececive their environment ond
position, approach, atiack and devo feod, fe from harm-
fol substances and reproduc by division. ‘Their move-
rents appear to be positive, not reflex. Hveiy ell, both
‘vegetable and animal, possesses a biological or vegetative
 consciouenste, which in health is polarized or subordinate to
‘the governnient of the total organism of which it forms an
 integeal part; but whichis loallyimpairoa in disoase and
‘eases altogether at the death of the orgahism. In plants,
however, (alike animals) the cellar consciowsnass is dif-
fused or distributed amonget the tinouss or fibres; there
 Yeing apparently no special conducting or oentraliing
‘omgans of conscioumness such os we find in higher evolu-
 tionary forms, Animal conscionsnes in its highest modes
 boots self-consoionsness. ‘The psyehology of the lover
‘animals is still the field of much controversy ; some regarl-
ing these a0 cattesian machines and others ascribing to
 them a high degaoe of payohic development. To the animals
 ther is an endeavour ab ontzalization of conscioumess
 ‘which reschaa ita most complex stage in man, the possessor
 of the most highly organized system of consciousness, con
sisting of the nervous system and its centres and functions,
                              245
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 such as the Drain end solar ploxus, the site of Aja and
  upper centres, and of the Maniptica Chalke. Sestionsy oz
 ‘eoling is a constituent of all existance. We may call ib
 conssiousness however, if we understand (with the author
 cited) ths term “consciousness” to inolude stomio or physical
 consciousness, the trance conssiousness of pant le, animal
 ‘consciousness and man’s completed self-oonsciousness
          Tho term Sentienéy or Fesling, as the equivalent of
  manifested Chit, has, however, this dissdvantags -—whoreas
 intaligenoe and consoiousnass are terms for tho highest
      tributes of man's nature, mere sentieney, though more
  inclusive and common to all, is that which we share with
  the lowest manifestations. In the cose of both tenms, how-
  cover, it is necessaryto member that thby do not represent
  te Chic-Svardpa     or Citas Ibn itaelf. ‘The term Svaripa
  (own fom) is employed to convey, the notion of what
 constitutes anything whut it ia, namely, ite true natuse as
 itisin iteelf. Thus, though’the Brehman or Shiva manifesta
 in the form of the world as May&Shakti ste Svurtipa is
 pure Chit
         Neither sentiency nor conscious, as Itown to us
  is Chit Svardpa, They aie only limited. manifestations of
  Chit just a8 reason, will, emotion and memory, their modes
  are, Chit is the back-groun of all forms of experense
  which ave its modes, that is Chit velled by May&-Shakti
Chit Svaripa is nevor to be confounded with, oF limited to,
 ite porioalae modes. Nor is it thair totality, for whilst it
 ‘mnifesta in these modes Tyt, in Is ovm nature, infinitely
 ‘zonscends tham. Noither sentionoy, emscionmess, nor
 ‘any other term borzowed from a limited and dual mniveme
  avdequately esoribe what Chit isin Iteit (Srardps). Vita-
 lity, mind, mstter are its limited manifestetions in form.
‘Theae forms sre ceaselessly changing, but the undiferentioted
 substratum of which they are particulsrzed modes is ehange-
 Jess. That etomal, changeless, substratum is hit, which
 ray thus be defined as the changless principle of all our
                              246
                           CHIT-SHAKTI
  changing experince, Allin Chit, clothing itselfin forms by
  its own Power of ChitShakti and Mayt-Shakti: and that
  Power i not different fom Itself. Chit is not the subject
  ‘of knowledge ot speech. For as the Varaha Upanishad
  (Chap. IV) says it is “Tho Reality which remsins after all
  ‘thoughts are given up.” What it is in Itself is unknown
  ‘but to those who become It. Ttis fully realized oalyin the
  highest state of Hestasy (Samtdhi) and in bodiess liberation
  (Videha Mukti) when Spirit is free of ita vohidas of sind
  ‘and matter. A Modem Indian Philosopher has (Seo “Ap-
  ‘proaches fo Truth" and the “Patent Wonder” by Professor
  ‘Pramathandths MukhyopAdby8ya) very admirably analyaed,
  the aotion of the universal Ether of Conssiousness (Chida-
  ‘Kasha) ond the particalar Stress formed in it by the action
‘of MAyt-Shalti. In the frat place, he points out that logical
  ‘thought is inberently dualistic and thereiore presupposes
 1 subject and object. ». Therefore tthe pragmatic eye of
  the western, viewing the only experience known to him,
  conssiousness is elivays partioalgr laviag & particular fomm
  ‘and dinection. Hence where no direotion or form is dis-
  cemnible, they have been apt to imagine that coneciowmess
  ‘ae'such ns also gouged. ‘Thus if it wore conoeded that in
  profound sleep there were no dreams, or.if in porfoct snusa-
   thesia it were granted thet nothing particular was ft, it was
  ‘thereby considered to be conceded that emsciousmess may
  sometimes cease to cxist in us. , What      does in fact couseis
  ‘the consciousness of objects which’ we have in the waking and
  dreaming states. Consciousness as uchis neither subjeotive
  nor objective and is not identical with intalligence or under-
  standingthat, is with disected o informed cansoiousness.
   Any form of unintalligent'bsing which fedla, however chao-
   tioally it may bo, is yot, though obscurely &o (in the sense
 hhore meant) conscious. Pare consciousness, that is conscious
  ‘ness  as such, is the background of every fom of experience.
         In practical life and in Scienoo and Philosophy when.
  awayed by pragmatic ends, formless experience has no
                                  247
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 interest, but only osttain forms and tones of life and con-
 scjousness. Where these are missed we are apt to fancy
 ‘that we miss life and feling-consciousness also. Hence the
 cstential Baris of existence or Chit as been commonly
 looked upon as a very mitch specialized ond peculiar mani-
  festation in natare,
       On the contrary, Chit is Being or Reality itself
Chit sa auch is identical with Being as such. The Brahman
 is Both Ohit and Set. Though in oxiinary experianos,
 Boing nd Fealing-Conaciousnose aro oxcontially bound up
 ‘together! they still seem to diverge from each other.
 Man by his very constitution inveterstely believes in
  fon objective existence beyond and independent of his
 self. And this is #0, s0 long as lie is subject to the veil
  (Mayd-Shalcti). -But’m that ultimate basis of experience
 which is the Paramktima'the divergenoehas gone; for the
 sume boundless substratum which is the continuous: mass of
 experience is also that which is experienced, The eat ia ita
 ‘own object. ‘fo the exalted Yogin the whole univers is not
 different from himself as Atma. ‘Thi ie the path of the
 “apivard-going”” Kendall (Urddhva-Kundaliat)
       Further, there as bees a tendeney infactto look upon
 consciousness as a mere fonction of experience; and the
 Puilosopby of uneouscious ideas and mind-stuf would even
 {goo far   at to zogard itas a mere accident of mental process.
 ‘This ia to reverse the actual facts.
       Consciousness should rather be taken as an original
 datum than as Inter development and peculiar manifesta
 ‘ion. We should begin with it in its lowest forms, and
 cxplain its apparont pulsed: by extending the principle
 Of veiling (Miiyé-Shalt) which is consleasly working ia
 ‘man, reducing his life to oa apparent sores of pulse also
 ‘An explanation which does not start with this primordial
 cxtemsity of expetiencs cannot expict to end with it. For
 if it be nob positive at the beginning, it cannot be derived at
  the end.
                                 248
                       CHIT-SHAKTI
      But whnt, it may bo asked, is the proof of auch puto
cexpotienoe ? Peychclogy which only knows changing states
does not tell us of it. This is so. Yat from those states,
some of which approach indfferentiation, inferences may be
drawn ; snd experience is not limited to such sta‘es, for it
‘may transcend them.
       Ita true that ordinarilywo do not moet with a condition
of consciousness which is without a direction ot form ; bat
testa drawn from the incidents of ordinary normal life re
inguficiont, it has been arguad, to prove that there is no
consciousness   ata when this dizection and form uresuppooed,
to have gone. ‘Though a logical intuition will not tell its
own story, we can make reflection on intuition render us
some sorb of account, so that the intuitive fact appears in
review, when it wil appear Vast consciousness isthe basis cf,
indeed, existence itself, and not merelyaa sttendant circum
stance, But the only. proof of pare consciousmess ia sn
ingtance off This cannotbo eatablished by mere reflection.
"The bare consciousness ofthis or-that, the experience of just
going to sloep and jusb waking, and evén the consciousness
of bing as such, are but approximations to the state of
consciousness a8 euch, that ir pure consciousness, but ace
nob identiool with it. ‘Then, what evidence, it may be
sacked, have we of the fact that pur consciousness is an
‘actual state of being ? In,nomnal     life as well as in abnormal
‘pathological states, we have occasional stretohes of experi-
‘enoe in which simplicity of featare or determination has
 advanosd near to indifferentiation, in which experience
 has become almost atructursless. But the limit of pare
 experience is not thet reached. On the other hand, there is
 no conclusive proof that we have ever had a real lapse of
 consciousness in our life, and the extinctionof conssioumness
 ‘ts such ia inconesivable in any case. ‘Tho claim, however,
that oonsciouness     as such exists, reste not so much on logical
 argument as ou intuitive grounds, on revelation (Shruti)
 and spiritual experienoe of the truth of thes revelation,
                                 49
                 SHAKTI-AND SHAKTA
       ‘Acoosting  to Indian Mfouism, a Puro Prineple of Koy
ceuce not only is, but is the one aad only ultimate permanent
being     or ality. Tt does not regard Chitas a mere function,
accident, or epiphengmenon, but holds it to be the ever
existing plenum which sustains andl vitalizs all phenomenal
existence, andia the very basison which       all forms of multiple
experience, whether of sensation, instinct, will, understand
ing, orseason,rest. Itia, inshort, the unity and unchanging
Reality behind all these vorious changing forms which, by
‘tho veil or Méy@-Shakti, Jtva assumes.
       ‘Tho OhitSvardpa, inadequately described as mere
Diissful awareness of feeling, existsas the basis and appears
in the form of, thatis clothed with, mind ; a term’ whioh in
ite general sents    is not used merelyin te sense of the purely
‘mental fonction of reason btin the sense of all the forms
in which conscious is displayed, as distinguished from
 Chit Itself, which is the unity behind ail these forme whother
 season, senaation, emotion, instinct, or will, All these are
‘odes wherein the plarto unformed clayoflifsis determined.
For every conception of-volition is essentially on apparent,
ciroumscription of limitation of that Sot which isthe basis of
 phenomena! Fife,
       Professor? N. MukliyophdlayAyo      has described pure von-
sciousness to be an infnitude of “awareness,” laoking name
and form and every kind of datermination, which isa state
‘of complete quiescence where the potential       is zero or infinity
—a condition without strain or tension’which is at once
introduced when the slightest construction is put. upon it,
 resulting in a consciousness of Lare “this” ond “that”. Tt
‘a not a couscioumess of anything, It ip an. experience of
 nothing in partiouar. But ‘his raust not be confounded
 with no experience. ‘The former is taken to be the latter
 becaupe life is pragmatic, interest being shown in particular
 modes of awareness, ‘To-man’s life, which i litle else than
 1 system of partaltie, pure experience in which there is
 nothing particular to observe or shun, love or hate seems
                                  250
                        CHIT-SHAKTI
  ‘prticallyto be no experience at all. Pare Consciousness ia
  impartial. ‘There is no difference (Bheds) so far as pure
  Awareness is concerned. Pure Consciousness isa kind of ex-
  perience which stands sbove all antithesis of motion     and rest.
  Tedoosnot know Ttaelfeither as changing or statica, since it,
  is consciousness   as uch without any determinations or mode
  ‘whatever. To know itsalf as changing’ er pormanent, it
  ‘must conceal ita slogical and unspeakable nature in a veil
  (iayt). Every determination or form makes experience a
  divective magnitade. Conecioumeas then assumes e direc-
  tion oF special reference. Tt is not possible to direct and
  reférin  a epecial way without inducing   such » feeling of strain
‘or tension, whether the conditionsbe physiological or psycho-
  logical. Pure consciousness has, thus, been compaced to an
  cquipotential surice of electrical distsibation. ‘There is no
  Aiference of potentisis between any"tmo points A and B
  over this surface It isa stretch of consciousness, in which
  there is, apparently, no aenaible divenity of feature, 10
  preference, 0 differential incidence of subjective regard.
  ike the equipotential sariacs, such conacionsmess ia also
  quiesoent. Toseoine      « low ou it, there must be a difference
  of potentials between any two points. Similarly, to have
  4 reference, @ direction, & movement of attention, there
tunst be o determination in the, total experience            of the
  ‘moment in the given mass of consciousness. Absolute
  quiescence is a state of conseiousness which is pare being
  with no special subjective direction and reference ; with
  no difference of level ‘nd potential between one parb of
  tho experience and another. Experienco will show special
  subjective direction and reforenoe if it assumes atleast form
  or determination, much as “this” or that” ; to have no
  diflesence of level or potential, experience must be strictly
  undeferentiated—thatis to say, must not involve the least
 ideal or representative structure. Absolute quiescence exists
  only with that Conscioumess which is pure Being, or Para-
  maim.
                                  ast
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
         With mgard, however, to ll doscriptions of this stato,
  itmust    be borne in mind that they only negatively correspond
 with their subjeci-mattorby the elimination      of charwoteristios
  which are peculiar to, and constitute the human conscious-
  ness of,.the Jiva, and aro themfore alien to the Supreme
  Consciowsmess, They give us no positive information as to
  ‘the nature of puro Chit, for this is only known in Yoga by
  the removal of ignorance (Avidya) under which all logical
  thinking and speaking isdoné. This “ignorance” is nothing
  but a term for these limitations which make the creature
  what he is. It is a commen plaos in Indian religion and
  philosophy thot the Brahman       as Itexists in Teelfis beyond
  sll thought and words, and is known only by tle Samadhi
 of Yoga. As the Mabtnirvana Tontra says (IIL V. 6.
 et ey.): “Tho Brahman is/kngwn in two ways: from His
 1anifestations which are the object of Sédhant or as Tt is
 in itself in SomBhiyoga;”, for, as Oh. XIV, V. 185 Ibid.,
    sys, Atmajofin is the one means of libaration in whiok Ite
 ‘nature is realized. Tt is, perhops, in port atleast, because
 ‘the mosely nogntive and imperfoct charaotar of such des:xip-
 tion is not sufficiently noted that pare consciousness, as the
 author cited pointe ot, has in general aralcned no serious
 {interest inthe practioal Wests though it has been the crown.
 of glory forsome of, what have been suid to be, the stateliest
 forme of Baster thought, which asserts itself to bein poases-
 sion of an experimental method by which the condition of
 ‘pire consciousness may be realize. The question is, thus,
‘not one of merespecalation,     butof demonstration. ‘This state,
 ‘again, is believed by the Kast to bo not a dall and ‘dreary
 ‘condition, a dry abstraction or reduetio ad absurdum of ll
 ‘which imparts to our living its worth and signifoanoe. Not
 at all; since it is the fist Prinoiplein whichas Power all
 existence is potential and from whioh it proceeds. It is
 reasonsble, therefore, it is contended, to assume thot all
 ‘whidh life possessos of real worth exists in the Source of
 life itself. Life is only « mode of infinite Sapremacy
                                 252
                      CHIT-SHAKTI
with beatitode, whichis Being ond Consciousness in all its
metaphysical grandeus, an absolutely tnunderstandable
‘condition whic’ no imeginetion ean depict and no categories
can reach and posses,
       Owing to the necessarily negative character of some of
the descriptions of the Supreme Brabmen we ind such
‘questions How can it difer from a nullity 2” (“Dialognes
on Hindu Philosophy,” 259, by Rev. K. M. Banerjee) : and
the statement of the Bnglish Osientlist Colonial Jacob
(hose views are akin to those of other) that “Nirvins is
fn uncanscious (sz) and stone ke (ic) existence”, Buc m
rnisconeoption is the more extmandinaryin that it occurs in
the work of ah author who was engaged in the translaticn
cofa Vedanti treatise, These and many similar statements
seem    to establish that it ie possibleto make s special study
 af Vedinta and yet to minunderstand is peimary concepts
 ‘eis tre that the Brahman is unconscious in tho sense that
 Ttis act out consciousness; for if so, Te would he JTea and
 not Pasumatm, But this is only.tosay that it has not our
 Timilations...Te is ualimited: Chit, A stone ceprosents ite
 rmont veiled existence. In its Solf it is all light and self-
 iMumining (Svaproktaha). As Shruti says (Katha Up. 0-16)
 “All things ahed lustee by His lustre, All things. shine
 Decsnse He shines,” All things depend on Tt: bub It has
 not to depend on anything ols for Its manifestation. tin
  tlierfore better to say with the Hafisopanishad andthe
  Christan Gospel thi I is the Pesce beyond all msderstand-
 ing. thas been drily remarked that “Tho idea that Yoga
  repns a dull state ia du, porhape, to tho misunderstanding
  of Patanjalia definition of it.”
       ‘Man, however, ordinarily and by his nature sraves for
  modes and forms (Bhecménands); und though all enjoy-
  ‘ment comes from tho pure Supreme Consciousness, it is
  ‘supposed that dualistic variety and polarity are necessary
  forenjoyment. What, thos mite plenitude belongsto the
  sustaining sptit of oll life is transferred to life alone. All
                               253
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Ixovwlodge and existence aro identified with variaty, chango,
polarity. Whilst skimming over the chequered surface of
‘the sea, we thus, itis said, ignore the unfathomed <lepths
‘which arein repose and which nothing stirs, wherein is the
Supreme Pesoe (Shintd) and. Bliss (Paraménanda),
       "The Brihadéranyaka Upanishad says “Other beings
  jive on a fraction of this great Bliss.” ‘The Bling of Shiva
‘and Shakti are one, for they aro ingeparate, Hence sh is
called (Trisha T.'32) Bkabhoge: for Eks—Ishvara ancl
Bhoga=Svasvaripdnanda
       ‘Nydya and Saslkhys say that the chief end of,man
the absolute cessation of pain, but Veddntins, going beyond
‘his negative definition, sey that, all pain having surceased
‘on Unity with the Supsemo, the chief end is that positive
‘Biss which is of its estence, ‘The Devt Kalyaat, the Mother
of all, is Herself Bias—that is, all bliss from earthly blise
(Bhaonanazds) to Buahman-bliss (Brahminanda). As the
Commentator Shafikara in his commentary on the Trishatt
says (citing Shruti): “Who else can make us breathe, who
else can make ua lie, if this blissful Ther were not ?”
       1, further, it be asked what is pure Hxperience which
manifesta itolf in al those diverse forma, it mast be said
that from Its very definition pute Chit, or the Sapreme
Brahman (Parsbrahman}, is thst about which nothing in
particular em be predicated: for prodication is possible
only in relation to determinations or modes in consciousness,
‘And in this sexse Yogatattva. Upanishad. says that those
 ‘who seek a knowledge of it in Shastras are deluded : “How
 can that which is self-shining  be illuminated by the Shastras t
 Not even the Devas can describe that indesoribabie state.”
 ‘The Manduleye Upanishad, speaking of the fourth aspect
 (Pada) of Atma, says thet it in tho non-aual Shiva which ia
not an objoot which can be sensed, used, talon, datermined
 (ay any marie), oF of which an sscount can be given, but
is unthinkable and knowsble only by the realization of Atma
‘Negative predication may, however, clear sway improper
                                384
                         CHIT-SHAKTI
 notions. It is really iosorutabie Boing upon which no
 category      eax be fastened. This mast always be bore in
 rindin any attempted definition of this transcendent state
  It is of selfexistent (Nirldhire), unending (Nitya),
 changeloss. (Avil), undifferentiated (Alibinna), spaceles
 (Pama), timeless (Shtavata,all-porvading: Sarvatravastns),
 felt-ilumining (Svayamjyotih), pute (Shuldha) experience:
 ‘As the Kuldmava, Tantra saya (6, 7): “Shiva
 is the impartito Supreme Braman, the all-knowing
 Creator     of al. He is the stainless One and tho Lot! of
 all, Ho is one without « second (Advaya), He is light
 itaelt, He changes not, and is without beginning or end,
He is withént attribute and above the highest. He ix
 Bring (Sit), Consciousness (Chit), and Bliss (Ananda), As
 Sat, [tis unityof being beyond the opposites of “this”
 and “that,” “haze and there,” “theajand now" As Chit
 ‘tis an experiencing beyond the opposites of worldly know
  ledge and ignornnce, As Supreme Anan, His the Bliss
 ‘which is known’ spon the diatolutio’ of the dualistic state
  which Guotuates between, aad is composed of, happiness
  and sorrow ; for crested happiness is oaly on impermanent
  change of state (Vikas) or Becoming, bet the Supreme Bliss
  (Paramduanda) endures. “Bliss is the very naturethe (Svastpa)
                                                  with creature,
  of this Supreme Consciousness, and not, asof Becoming,
  ‘amet changing attsibate of ome form                            Sup-
  reme Being (Sat) is « unity without perts-(Nisbkeln).
                                                     immediacy of
  Supreme Feeling-Consciousness (Chit) ofis Self          is set over
    srperiencs, Tn the      Jiva, Consciousness
  fgainst the not-self; forlogiesl thoughtestsblishes Supreme »polasity
  ‘of subject and object, Thus the undifiérentiated     Blas (Par-
  Consciournéss txanscends, ond the Supremeof bappiness            and
  rfoanda) is beyond, the changing felingswhich, inthe worl
  fomow. Ttis the great Peace (Shnta)       Anandishrama, XXTX,
  of tho Hafisopanishad (V. 12, Bd. passes           worldly under~
  p. 508) as of the New ‘Testament,Pure Being, allpersists   in all the
  Standing. SachohidGnonda,         or
                                  355
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  states of Becoming which aro its manifestation as Shakti,
  Te may be compored to a continuous, partless, undifferenti-
  ‘ated Unity universally pervading the manifested word like
  ther oF spaos, as opposed to the limited, discontinuous,
  discrete character of the forms of “matter” which are te
  products ofits power of Shakti, Itisa state of quiescence
  fbve ofall motion (Nikspanda), and of that vibration (Span-
  dans) which, operating as the Primordial nergy, evolves
  ‘the phenomenal world of names nd forms, It is, in ahort,
  snid to be the innermost Self in every being—& changeleas
  Roality of the natare of s purely experiencing principle
  (Chaitanyam Atma) as distinguished from whatever may
  Aasume the fonn of either the experienced, or of the means
  of experience. This Chis in bodies underlies as their inner-
 ‘most Self all beings. ‘The Ohitor Atma as the underlying
 ‘Reality in all is, aotording to Vedanta, one, and the same in
 all: anlivided and unlimited. by any of them, however much
 they may be separated in time and space. It is not only
 all-pervading, but all-ranscending. Tt haa thus two-fold
 aspect: an immanent aspect as Shakti (Power), ix which It
 pervades the tniverses (Sogunn Brahman) : and tranzoen-
 dental aspect, in which Tt existe beyond all Its worldly
 ‘manifestations (Nirguna Brahmi). Chit, as itis in itt,
 is spsoeless snd timeless, extending beyond all imitations
 of time and space and all other categories of existence.
 ‘We live in the Infinite. All imits exist as Ohit. But these
limits arealso another aspect of Tt that ig Shakti. Teis a
 ‘boundless tranguil ocean on the surface of which countless
 varied modes, ike waves, are rising, tossing and sinking.
 ‘Though Tt is the one Cause of the universe of relations, in
 iteei Tt i neither 0 relation nor & totality of elation, but
 «completely relationless ‘Sltidentity unknowable by sny
 logical process whatever.
       Chit isthe boundless permaanent plenum which sustains
 and vitelizes everything. Tt is the universal Spicit, all-
 pervading like the Ether, which is, stains, and illamines
                                256
                       CHIT-SHAKTI
 all expsrionce and all proocss in the continuum of expotionce.
 In ft the universis bor, grows and dies. ‘This plenum or
 continuum is as such allporvading, eternal, unproduced,
 tnd indestructible: for production and destruction involve
 tho existence and bringing together snd separation of paris
 ‘hich in an absolute partloss continuum is impossible, Ié
 innecessarily   in tel, thats  as Chit, motionless, for no parts
‘ofan all-flingcondimuurn   can move ‘tom one pace    to snother.
 [Nor can such 8 continuum have any other form of motion,
 ‘such as expansion, sontsiction, or andulation since all
 ‘thoes phenomena involve the exiatenoe of parte and their
 displacement. Chit is one undifleentinted, portiea, all;
 pervading, etomal, spiritual substance. In Sanskrit, this
 ‘plenum is called GhidaeAsha ; satis, just os all material
 ‘things exist in the all-porvading physical Ether so do they
 and the latter exist in the infinitely extending Spiritnal
 “Ether” whieh if Chit, The Supeeme Consciousness is
 ‘thought of ata kind of Sexmanent spiritual “Space”: (Chi-
 dilkisha) which makes room for and contains all vasitioa
 tnd forms appearing and disappearing. Space itself is an
 aspect of sptital aubstance. Tt is «special postare of that
 ‘toes in life whieh tales place in’ unchanging conciouanees
  (@, Makhyopsdhyays “The Potent Wonder,” 21—24). In
      i Orean of Being-Consciousaeas we live, move end have
 ‘our being. Conscioumess a8 such (that is, as distinguished
  from the produets of Its yower or Shakti), is never nit.
  Like space, it cannot be limited, though, through the ope-
  ration of its power of se-aogntion or Miya-Shakti it may
  appear as detarmined. But auch apparent determinations
  do not ever for us express or exhaust the whole conscious-
  ness, en mor than space is exhausted by the objets in it.
  Experience is taken to ba limited because the Experiencst
  is swayed by & prgmatio intorst which draws hid attention
  ‘onlyto parsioalor features in tho continuum. ‘Though what
  is thns experienced is e part of the whole experience, the
  latter is felt to be an infinite expanse of conscioumess oF
                               287
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 sareneas in which i distinguished a definite mass of expeci-
 ally determinéd feeling
       ‘As Chit is the infinite plenum, ail limited being existe
 ‘nit, and it is im all such beings as the Spirit         or inner-
 most Self and as Mayé-Shakti it is their mind and body.
 ‘When the existence of anything is affirmed, the Brahman
 is affirmed, for the Brahma is Being iteel. ‘This pure
 Conseiousness, ot Chita the Paramktzna Ninna Shiva who
 in Baing-Consciousness-Bliss (Sachchidinands). Conaciotia-
 ness is Being, ParomAtms, eocording to Advaita Vedénta,
 is not @ consciousness of being, but Being-Consciousness.
 Nor itis « consciousness of Bliss, but it is Biss. All these
 fare one in pure Consciousness. That which is the nature of
 Paramétma never changes, nobwithstanding the creative
 ideation (Srishtikalpana), which is) the manifestation of
 Shakti as Chit-Shaksi and MAyé-Shakti.” tis, this latter
 Shakti which, acoording to the Shits Tans, evolves. To
 adopt a European analogy which is yet not complete, Niah-
 ‘kale Paramdémais God-bead (Brshmatvs); Sakala,or Saguna
 ‘Aun, is God (Ishvaro). Bash of the three systems Sis-
 ‘kkya, MayévAds, Vedinte, and Shakts monism agrees in
 ‘holding the reality of pure consciousness (Chit). The question
 ‘upon which they diferis as to whether tmoousciousnes is 8
 second indepandent reality, as Séikhye alleges; ond, if
 ‘not, how the admitted appesrance of unconsciousness as the
 orn ja to be explained consistently with the unity of the
  Brabman
       Sach then is Chit, truly known, os itis in Tesetf only in
 completed Yoga or Mokaha Incwn only through Its mani-
 festations in our ordinary experience, just sto se the simile
of the Kaivalya Kalika Tantra, we realize the presence of
 ‘Rhu or Bhtichchhay& (the Relipse) by his actionson the stn
‘and moor. ‘Phe Kelipe      is seen bus notte   cause of it. Chit-
 Shalt is name for the same changeloss Chit when associated
 in creation with its operating Méy8-Shakti. The Supreme
 Chit is called Pardssmvit in the schemeof the Thirty-six
                                28
                      CHIT-SHAKTI
 ‘Tattvas which is adopted by both the Shaiva and Shite
 Bgamas.
       ‘Acconiing to Shakar, the Supreme Brahman is
 defined as pure Jngns without the slightest tence of either
 actual or potential objectivity. The Advaita Shaiva-Shaktas
 regard thia matter differently in accordance with an essential
 principle of the Agamio School with which T now deal,
       ‘All oocultiam whether of Hast or Wost posits the
 principle that there is nothing in any one state ot plane
 Which is not in some other way, aotual or potential, in
 snother state or plane, ‘The Westéra Hermetié maxim runs
 “As above      ao below”. Thisis not always understood, ‘The
 saying does not mean that: what exists in one plane exists
 ‘that formin another plane, Obviously if itdid the planes
 would be the same anal not different. If Tahara thought
 and felt and saw object, in the mai way, and if he was
 loving and wauthful, junt sa men ate, He would not be
 Tnhvaia ub Jive, ‘The saying cited means that © thing
‘hich exata on one plane exists on al other planes, acconding
 either    to the form of etch plone, if it be an interme
 causal body (KAranavantarisharis) or wtimately as the
 rere potentiality of becoming which exists in Atma in ite
 sapect as Shakti, The Hermetio maxim is given in another
 formin the Vishvssira Tantra : “Whatis hereis elsewhere.
 ‘What in not here is nowhere”. (Yadiidsti tad ongara
  Yanneldetina      tat huachit}, Similarly tho northem Shaiya
 Shastra says that what appeam widhout only so eppoacs
 because    it existawitljn. One can only take cut of receptacle
what is frst assumed          to be withinit, What is in us mast
 fn some form be in our cause. If we are living, though
 finite fomns, it ix Decaute that conse is infinite Being, Tt
‘we have knowledge though limited, tis because our essential
 substance is Chit the Diuminator. If we have blis, though
  united with sorrow, itis because Tt is Supreme Bliss, In
 short, our experience must exist in germ ia Tt, This is be-
  cue in the Shakts Agama, these is for the womhipper @
                                    259
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
real creation and, therefore, a real nexus bebween the Brah-
‘man as cause and the worid as effect. Acconding to the
‘transcendent method of Shafikere, there ia not in the
alsolnte sense any such nexus. ‘The notion of creation by
Brahman is és much MByA as the notion of the world
created.
      Applying these principles we fin in our dusl experience
an #1" (Ahsm or subject) which experiences as object a
 “This” (dam): that is the universe or any particular
object of tho collectivity which compose it, Now it is said
‘hat the duality of “T” and “This” coine from the One
‘hich isin ite essential noture (Svaripa) an unitary exper
rice withont such conscious distinction. or Vedinte,
whether int ts Méyévda or Shakta form, agrees in holding
that in the Supreme there i no eonsciousness of objects such
as exists on this plane. ‘The Supreme does not see objecte
outside Tisolf, or it isthe whole and the experience of tha
holo ss Tebvara, It soos all thats as-Tiaelf. Itis Pama or
‘the Whole, How thon, it may be asked, can « supreme,
unchanging, partless, formless, Constiousuess produce from
Ttsolf someting which is s0 different from Ttsef, something.
‘whichis changing, with ports, form andco forth. Shafikara’s
‘answer is that, trunseendentelly, it does not produce any-
thing, “The notion that it does so is Maya. What then is
hia May ‘This [have more fully explained in my pa-
person “Miyé-Shakti” and on “Méy& and Shaleti”. Iwill
only here say that his May is an unexplainable (enieva-
chantya) principle of uneonsciouancaa sphich is not real, nob
umal, and not portly either; which is an eternal
falsity (MithyabhQta sanktant), which, though not
Brahman, is-inseparably associated with Tt in Its aspect
fs Ishvara; which May has “Brohman for its support
(aya Brakmashsit); froin which support it draws an
‘appearence of separate independent reality which in truth
it docs not possess. The Parabrihman arpect of the One
is not associated with May,
                              260
                          CHITSHAKTI
        According to tho Shékte exposition of Advaitavdds,
 ‘Maya is not an uncdhscious (oda) principle buts
 partioular Shakti of Brahman, Being Shakti tis wt base
 ‘consciousness, but as MayS-Shaleti iis Consciousness veiling
 Tieelf, Shakti and Sbaktiman are one and the sime: that
 i, Power and its Possessor (Shektinin), ‘Therefore MAya-
 Shakti is Shiva or Chitin that particular aspect which He
 ‘assumes aa the material cause (UpaidGne-kirana)            in exeation.
 Creation is real ; that    is, thora  is  a direct   causal   nexus be-
toreen Shira os Shale (Chit Shalcti and Maya Shakti)                  and
‘the universe, Ini short      Shiva   as  Shalt    is  the  cause  of  the
 ‘universe, and 6a Shale, in the form of Jive (all manifested
 forme), He actually evolves. Comparing these two views
 ShaBlkica aaye that there isin, absolute troth no creation
‘and theref             can, be nto question how
                 there or                                it stose. ‘This
 is because he views tho problem from the. transcendental
  (Paramarti                           ls) or Sida. The
                    standpoint of selfxeeliation
 Shakta Shdstma, on the other hand, being a practical
 ‘Sudhand Shiatza views the- matter from our, that is the
 ‘iva, siendpoint, To us the universe and ourselves are
 real. And Ishvaza the Oneafor is real, ‘Thotefore there is
 ‘reation, and Shiva ns Shakti creates by evolving into the
  Universo, end then appsaring as all JIvas. This              is the old
  Upanishadio docttine of the spider actually evolving the
web from iteelf, the web being its substance in that form.
‘A flower cannot be raised from seed unless the flower was
‘in some way already          there. ‘There                 fore
                                                        as there   is an
  “‘kham' and ‘"Tdam” in ous‘experience, in some way itis
 in the suprome experience of Porashiva or Parisamvit
  But the Idam or Univero is not there as withus ; other-
  wise Tt would be Jiva, Therefore it is said that thore are
  ‘ovo principles or aspectsin the Brahman, namely, that Pxs-
  Ikisha or Chit aspect, and Vimaroha Shakti, the potential
  ‘dam, which in ereation explicate into the Universe. Bat
  in the supreme experience or Amana, Vimarsha Shakti
  (hich has two states) is in Tis supreme form, The subtler
                                    261
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
state in in the form of consciousness (Chidr pint) ; the gross
stato is in the form of the Univstse (Vishvardpini). The
former is beyond the universo (Vishvotitend). Bub if
Vimrsba Shakti is there in tho form of eonsciousness (Chi-
ring), itis one with Chit. ‘Therefove iti aig thes the
‘Abun and Idam, without ceasing to bein the gupreme
‘experience, ar in suprome Shive in undistinguishable union
‘as Chit and Chidripinf. ‘This is the Ninguna state of Shiva-
shakti. As She is then ist undistinguishable union with
Shiva, She is hen 0 simple unmanifested Chit. She is
 then Chaitanya-ript      or Chideipint: a subtle Sanskrit
 ‘expression which denotes that She is the samo as Chit and
 ryt suggests that though in u preset sense She is one with
 Him, Shei yet in sense (with reference to Her potentiality
 of future moniestation) differnt from Him. She is Sachchi-
 anandamoyi and He is Sachohidfinanda. She is then the
 ‘unmanifested universe in the form of undifferentiated Chit.
 ‘The mutual telation, whether in manifestation or beyond it,
 ‘whether as the imperfect or Teal universe, is ono of in-
 separable connection or hermes (Avinabhive-sambandhs,
 Samanvays) auch as tbat betwoen “Teneas” (Aunt) and
 “1” (Aham), existence and that which exists (BhAva,
 Bhavat), an attxibute ane thatin whichj¢ inheive (Dharma,
 Dhurain}, sunshine and the sun and 20 forth. The Pancha.
 ‘rita School of the Vaismava Agame or Tantra, speaking
 of the Mabishakti Lakshmt says, that     in Her supreme state
 She is undistinguishable from the Windless Atmosphere”
 (Vasudeva), existing only af it were in the form of “dark-
 ness” snd “emptiness” (that is of inmanifested formless-
 ness). So the. MabGnirvina Tantra speaks of Her “dark
 fermlessness”. In the Kulachidimani Nigama Devi saya
 (1, 16.24) —"T, though in the form of Prakriti, rst in con-
 sciousness-biss” (Aham pralitiipa chet chidinanda
 porayend). Raghava Bhatta in his commentary on the
Sharada Tilaka (Ch. 1) says “She who is eternal existed in a
 subtle (that is, namanifested) state, es consciousness, daring
                               262
                       CHIT-SHAKTI
 ‘the final dissolution” (V8 anddicGpd chaitanyédhysena
 rmabtpralaye sQlshmé sthite) Te would be sniperty sey
  that She is then what She is (SvarGpa) namely Conscious-
 ness, butin ereation that consciowsness veils itself. ‘These
 ‘emis “fomless”, “subtle”, dazk”, “empty” all denote
 ‘the same unmanifested state in whick Shaki isin undistin-
‘zuishable union with Shiva, the formless consciousness. ‘The
 Panchardtra, (Ahirbudhnye Sambita, Ch, TV), in manner
 similar to that of the other Agana, describes the supreme
 stato of Shalt in the dissolution of the Univorae as one in
 ‘which manifested Shakti “rotarss to the condition of Brab-
 ‘an” (Brahmabhivan: brsjale). “Owing to complete inten-
 sity of embrace" (Atisafkleshét) the two all-pervading
 ones Narayana and His Shakti become as it were a single
 principle (Bkam tativaniva), “This tue to the Brahman
 condition is said    to take plade in the same way as & con
 Aageation, when there is no-miore combustible matter,
 retarns to the latent condition of fire (Vabni-bhtva). There
   ia the aqme fre in both cases but in one case there is the
 activity of combustion and in the other there is not. It
 follows from this that the Supreme Brabroan is not a mere
 ‘knowing without tiaoe of objectivity. Tn Tt the Abam is
 the Self as Chit: and the Idam is provided by Chidrdpint-
 shake, ‘There is Atmarima or play of the Self with the Belt
 in which the Self nows and enjoys the Self, not in. the
 form of external objects, but as that. aspect of conscious
 ‘ness Whose projection all objects are. Shakti ie always
  the object of the Self and ono with it. For the object is
  always     the Sof, since there is nothing but the Self. But
  in the supreme experience the cbject ix one in mature
  ‘with Shivs beg Chaitanya-ripa; inthe universe the objeot
  seems to the Jiva, the creation of and subject   to May, to be
  diffrent from tho Self a9 mind and matter,
         ‘The next point is the nature of creation or xather
  emanation (Abhise) for the former term: is associated with
  Gualistio notions of an exire-Cosmic God, who produces a
                                  265
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
world which is as separate from Himselfas is the pot from
the potter. According to this doctrine there is an IEvo-
Tution of Conscivusness or ChitShakti (associated with
‘Mayi-Shoketi) iato certain forms, This is not to say that,
‘the Brahman is wholly transformed into its emanations,
‘that is exhausted by them. The Brahman is infinite and
‘oan never, therefore, be wiolly held in this sense in ony
form, or in the universe 46 4 whole. It always transcends
‘the universe, ‘Therefore when Consciousness evolves, it
nevertheless does not eoase to be what it was, is, and wil be
‘The Supreme Chit becomes as Shgkti the universe, but still
semaina auprome Chit. In tho sumo way every stage of the
‘esaauation-prooess prioe to the real evolution (Parinims of
Prakriti) remains what it is, whilst giving birth to a new
Evolution, In Parintma or Byolution as known to us on
‘tis plane, wien one,thing is evolved into onathor, it ceases
+o be what it, was. ‘Thus when milk is ekanged into curd,
it coases to be milk. ‘The Evolution fom Shiva-Shakti of
‘the Pure Tattras ie not of this kind. Ttis an Abhésa ot
“shining forth”, adopting the simile of the sun which shines
without (it wae supposed) change in, oF diminution of, ts
light. ‘This unaffectedness inspite of ta being the material
cause is called in the Pomehardtes by the term Viryy, 0
condition which, the Vaishnava Lalabmt Tantra says is not
found in the world “where mille quickly loses its ‘nature
when curds appear’, It is a progess in which one dame
springs from snother flame. Hence it is called “Flame to
Flame”. There is 8 second Fleme but the first from which
it comes is unexboustedond stil there. ‘The cause remains
what it was and yet appears differently in the effect. God
is never “emptied” as it is ssid wholly into the world,
Bralman is ever changeloss in one aspect ; in another Tt
changes, such change being as it wore » mere point of areas
in the infinite Wher of Ohit. This Abbasa, therefore, ia a
form of Vivortta, distinguishable however from the Vivartta
‘of Mayavids, because in the, Agama, whether Vaishnava,
                               64
                       CHITSHAKT
 or Shilta, the ofect io rogandod as.real, wheress according
 to Shafkars, it is only empivically ao, Hence the latter
 system is called Sot-kitsnsvads or the doctrine of the
 reality of the original source or basis of things, and not also
cof the appurent effects of the cause. This Abhisa has been
 called Sadrisha Parinima (See Introduction to Principles
 cof Tantra, Vol. Il), term bortowed from the Stfikhya
 but which is not altogether appropriste. Tn the latter
 Philosophy the term is asedin connection with the state of
 ‘the Gunas of Prakeiti in dissolution when nothing” ia
 ‘produced. Here on the contrary we are dealing with
 mation and an evolving Powor-Conscioumness. Itis only
 ‘appropriate to this extent that, as in Sadsisha Pacindma
 there is no real evolution or objectivity, so also there is
none in the evolution of the ‘Tattvas until Mays intervenes
 ‘and Prakriti relly evolves the objective universe,
        ‘This being the nacize of the Supreme Shiva and of the
 evolution of conssioumess, this doctrine assumes, with all
 others, a transcendent aud a creative oF immanent agpect of
  Brakman, The fist is Nishkale        Shiva ; the second Sekala
  Shiva ; or Nirguna, Saguna; Params, Apara (in Shasikara’s
  parlance); Parmétins, Iahvam ; nd Paramabrahman,
  Shabdebrobmen, From th sceond or changing aspect the
  uuniverso is bor. Birth meana ‘manifestation’. Manifost-
  ation to what? The answer is. to
  ‘there is nothing but Chit. Crestion
  ‘whereby the changeless Chit through the power ofits Mays-
  Shalti appeats to Itclf in the form of limited objects. All
  is Shiva whether as subject or object.
        ‘This evolution of consciousnoss is described in the
  scheme of the Thirty-six Tattvas.
        Shafikarn snd Satikhyo speak of the 24 Tattvas from
  Pralaiti 1o Prithivl. Both Shaivas and Shiletas spenie of
  tho Thirty-six Tattvas, showing, by the extra number of
  ‘Tattvas, how Parusha ané Pralsti themselves originated.
 ‘The northern or Advaita Shoiva Agama ond tho Shélta
                               265
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Agama are allied, though’ all Shaiva Soripture adopts the
 same Tattvas, In oll the Agamas whether Vaishnava,
 Shaivo, ot Shikts, thero are points of dootsine which are
 ‘the same or similar. ‘Tho Vaishnava Panchardtra, ow-
 fever, moves in e diferent sphere of thought. It speaks
 in.liow of the Abhiso here deseribed of four Vytihe
 or forms of Naréyans, vis, Vasudeva, Safkarshana,
 Pradyumna ond Aniruddhs, ‘The Thirty-six Tattvas are
 ‘the 24 from Prithivi to Prakriti together with (proceeding
 upwards) Purusha, May and the five Kanchukas (Kala,
 Kala, Niyati, Vidya, Raga), Shaddhavidys (or Sadvidys),
 Shaleti, Shiva. ‘These ar divided into throe groups named
 Shiva Tattva, Vidya Tottva, Atma Tettva, and Shuddha,
 Shuddhtchuidha, Ashuddha Tattvas. The Shuddha or
 ‘Pure Tativas are all the Tattvas from Shioa-Shakis Tat vas
 ta snd including Sodvidye ‘Tettva, ‘The Pure—lmpure or
 “Mixed (Shuddhashnddhs)'Tsttvas aro those between the first
 ‘and third group whick are the Impure Tattras (Ashuddha
 ‘Tattva) of the world of duality, namely, the 2 Tettvas from
 Pralitto Prthivt. ‘Theother groupof thon nas follows :—
 Shiva Tattva inehides Shive Tattva ond Shakti Tattva,
 Vidya Tettva includes all Tattyas from Sadéshiva to
 Sadvidy8, and Atma Tativa iicludes all Tottvas from Mayé
 and the Konchukas to Peithivl, ‘The perticular description
 hereof thé 86 Tattvas, held by both Shaives and Shaktas, is
 taken from the northern Shaiva Kashmir philosophical
schoo, itself basedon the older Agama suchte Malintvijaya
 ‘Tantra and others.
       Tt i common doctrine of Advaitavida that the One is
‘of dual aspeat ; tho first static (Shiva) and the other kinetio
 (Ghakcti). This doctrine of aspects is a dovioe whereby it is
 sought to resoncilo the fact that thore is changelessnass apd
 change. Philosophically tis on evasion of the problem and
 not a solution. The solution is to be found in revelation
 (Neda)    and indirect Spiritual Expecionce (Samadhi). ‘These
 states vary indifferent’      men snd in different races and
                                 266
                      CHIT-SHAKTI
creeds. But in support of Advaitavida, reliance may be
placed on the fact thst, Samadhi or eastacy, in all ports of
‘the world and in al faiths, nde towards    some kind of unity,
more or less complete. All seek imion with God. But the
dispute isasto the nature ofthat union, Pure Advaitavada
is complete identity. The scheme now outlined shows how
‘that unitary experience, without ceasing to be what it is,
assumes limited forms.
      ‘The reader is refered to the Diagram.
      Pardsamvit shown on top of the Diagram is Nishkla
Shiva or the changeless Brahman aopoct ; and Shiva-Shali
below is the aspect of the supryme Brahman from which
change comes and which appears     as its products or changing
forms. Both are Shiva Shakti, When, however, Shiva is
kinetic, He is called Shakti. Regarding the matter from the
Shakti sapect both are Shakti, . Nether ever cxists without
the other, though Shakti is in ane aspect ChidrGping, and
in the othr in the form of the Universe (Vishvardpint), Tn
themselves and throughout they are one. The divergence
‘alos place in consciousness, after it has been subjected to
the oporation of Mayé, the effect of which is to polarize
coossiousness into an apparently seperate ‘“I” and “This”
Pacisarnvie is nol acoousted a Tettva, for Te ig beyond all
‘Tettvas (Tattvatita). Shiva ative ond Shakti Tottva
are counted separately, though Shakti Tattva is menely the
negative aspect of Shiva Tottva. Shiva Tattva and Shakti
‘Tattva   are not produoed. They thus are, even in dissolution.
‘They are Saguna-Brahman j and Pardssmvit is the Ninguns-
Brakmen. The fins evolved Tattva is Sadashive or Sedé-
kkkya Tative of which the mesning is Sot Abra yatal, or
that atate in which there is the first notion of Boing j for
                                                         a8 the
theo is the first incipioncy of the world-experiance separate
notion “I am thin” Which ultimately become: a
“[” and "This". In my “Garland of Latters” I have with
more technical detall described the evolutionof Jiva-con
‘ousness. Here T will only shortly summarize the process.
                              267
                     CHIT.SHAKTI
     AAs already stated, tho Ahm and Tdam exist in an
unitary stata which is indesorbehlo in Paraesmvit, Shakti
‘Tattva is called nogative because negation is the function
cof Shakti (Nishedbo-rytptra-rpa Shaktib). Negation of
wast 1 Tho answer is negation of consciousness. . Tho
‘universe is thos 8 product of negation. Where there is pare
cexparience there ia no manifested universe. Shakti negates
tie pure experience or consciousness to the extent that it
appears to itself Iimited. Shakti disengogea the unified
clemente (Aham and Tdam) which are Intent in the Supreme
EExperionco as an undistinguishable unity. How! The
snswer is one of great subtlety.
      Of the Shiva-Shakti Tattvas, Shiva represents the
Prakisha and Shakti the, Vimarsha aspect, which contains
potentially within ib the seed of the Universeto be. ‘The
result is that the Prakisha aspect is left standing alono.
‘The Shiva Tattva is Prakdsbe-matrs, that is, to use the
imagery of our plane, sn “I” without & This". This is a
statein which the anitery canssiournessia broken up to thia
‘extent, that it ie no longer a Perfoot Experience in which
‘the Aham and Tdam, exist in undistinguishable union, but
there is one Supreme Ahi Conssfousness only, whichis the
root of all limited subjectivity. To this Aham or Shiva
‘Tattva, Shakti gradually unveils Herself as the dam or
‘Vimarsha aspect of conscionsness. Tho result is thst from
Shiva and Shakti (in which the latter takes the playful patt)
‘thee is evolved the first produced consciousness called
Sadakehys Tabtva. ‘There is then an Aham and [dam aspect
‘of experience. But that expetiance'is not like the Tiva's,
‘hich atses ot a later stage after the intervention of May
Shakti. Tn the Jiva conscioumesa (Jtvstms) the object
(dam) is seen as something outaide and different from
Insel, In Sedakhya Tattva and all tho subsequent pure
 ‘Tottvas, chit  is Ishvara Tattva und Shaddhavidys ative,
‘the “This” is experienced as yart of the Self and not as
 seperate from it. There is (as will appeat from tue Diagram)
                             289
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
no outer and inner. Tho citele which roproaants the ono
Consciousness is divided into “1” snd “This” which ace
Yet parte  of the samme figure. The “This” is at fest only by
egrees and barily Dhyamala prayam) prasented to ihe
‘Aham like ® picture just forming itself (Unmilitamatma-
chitrikalpam). For this reason it is said that there is
‘emplians onthe Aham which is indioated in the Diagram by
‘the arrow-head. This is called the “Nimeshs” or ‘losing
‘of the eyes” of Shalt. Tt is socalled becouse itis the last
‘stage in dissolntion before all effects sre withdrawn into
‘their fist cae. Being the last stage in dissolution it is
the first in creation. Then the Tdam side becomes clear
in the next evolved Ishyare Tattva in. which the emphasis
is thorefore suid to be on the “This” which the Aham sub-
jectifies. This is the “Unmesba” or “opening of the eyes”
state of Shakti; for ths isthe state of consciousness when
it is fiat fully equipped to creste and does so. ‘The result
‘again of this is the'evolved consciousness called Shuddhs-
vidya Tattva in which the emphasis is equal on the “I”
and “This”, Conscionsness is now. in the state in which
the two halves of experience tre ready to be broken up and
‘experienond separately. Tt i at thie stato thet Mayi-Shaleé
intervenes and does s0 through its power and the Kenchkas
which are forms of it. May8-Shakti is thus defined as the
sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi): that isthe power by
which things are soen as different  fri the Bel inthe dual
manifested "world, ‘The Kanchukns which’ are evolved
from, and are porticular forms of, the operation of MAy8 are
limitations of the natal perfections of the Supreme Consci
oumness. ‘These are Kala which produoes division (Patich-
chheda) in the partess and unlimited ; Niyati which affects
independence (Svataniraté) ; Rage whieh prodaces interest
in, and then altachment to, objects in that which wanted
nothing (Péma) ; Vidy& which maleos the Purusha a “litle
mower" in lew of being all-knower (Sarvejnata) and Kal
 Which niakes Parushe « “little doce”, whereas the Supreme
                               270
                      CHITSHAKTI
was, in ite Keririttwa or power ction of almighty. The
 result of May’ and its ofthoots which are the Kanchukss
 is the prodaction of the Purusha and Prakriti Tstives. At
 this stage the Aham ond dam are completely severed.
 Each conscionsness regards iteelf an» separste ‘I’ locking
 upon the “This” whether its own body or that of others as
 outside its conscionsness. Bagh Purusha (and they are
 numberless) in mutually exclusive the one of the other.
 Prakriti ia the collectivity of all: Shaktia in controcted
  GatteuchadstpA) undiferentinted form, She is Fecling
 in the form of the undiferentiated mass of Buddhi snd the
 reat and of the three Gunas in equilibrium, The Purusba:
 or Self experienses, Her as object. Thon on the distur-
  Dance of the Gnas in Prakriti th latter evolves the Vikritis
  cof mind and matter. ‘The Prisha at this stage has experi-
  ‘ence of the multiple worl of the twenty-four impure Tattvas.
           ‘Thus from the supme “T (Parkbautd) which is the
  creative      Shivi-Shakti axpost of Pasfsamvit which change-
  leasly endures at Sachehhidtinanda, Consciousness experi-
  ences Iteelas object (Badakhyo, share, Sadvidys Tatévas)
  ‘and then through Maya aod the limitations or contractions
   which nee the Kanohukas or Satkochas it loses the know-
   Tedge that it is itself ts own object. Tt sees the separate
   “other” ; and the-oxe Conscioumess hecontes the limited
  experiencers which are the multiple selves and their objects
  cof the dual universe. Shakti who in Herself Svartipa)
  is Festing-Conscfousness (Chidrdpinf) becomes more and
  ‘mot gross until physical energy assumes the form and be-
   comes embedded in the “omnat” of mattar vitalized by Her-
  self as the Life-Principle ofall things. Throughout all forma
  itis the same Shakti who works ane appears as Chit-Shalti
   and May&-Shakti, the Spirit and Matter aapect of the Power
   of the Belf-Mlumining Pure Super Consciousness or Ohi


                              aq
                 (Cuarmee XV.
                MAYA-SHAKTI.
   (Tue PsvouoPavsa Asescr or mmm Uxrenesn.)
    ‘PIRIT, Mind and Matter are ultimately one, the two
       Totter being the twin aspects of the Fundamental Sab-
stance or Brahman and Its Poweror Shakti. Spistis tho
ssubsiance of mind-matter, the Reality (in the weuse of the
lasting changeleszness) out of which, by Ite Power, all
‘Appearance is fashioned not by the individual mind and
senses but by the cosinie mind and senses of which they are
Dut a part. What It creates It perceives. In the last
cchaptor I deslt with. the) Spisit,or Consciousness (Chit)
aspect: inthis T consider the mind-matter aspect in which
Consciousness vals aalf in” apparent, uncons:iousness.
‘Thove twin principles are called Purusha, Brahman, Shiva
fon the one hand; and Prakriti, ‘Maya, ond May@-Shakti
fon the other by the SAiikhya, Mayirada Vedinio and
Shakctivada of the Shalcta Agama respectively. The latter
Shastra, however, slone trents them ws aspects of the one
Srbstance in the manner ete described ond thus most
aptly in this respect accommodates iteelt to the doctrine
‘of Wester scientifio monism. So, Professor Haeckel points
fout in conformity with Shikia Advaitavada that Spirit ond
Matter are not tivo distinct entities but two forms or aspects
‘of one single Kntity oF fundamental Substance. According
 to him, the One Entity with dual aspect is the sole Reslity
which presents itself to view ap tho infnitely variod and
 ‘wondrous pictare of the universe. Whatever be the oase
teansoendentally in what the Buddhist Tantra aptly calls
 ‘The Void" (ShOnyats In Tibetan sTong-pa-nyid) which
is not “nothing” as some have supposed, but That which
is like nothing known to us ; the ultimate formless (Aripa)
 Reality as contrasted with appearance (sNang-va-dang) of
                               an
                         MAYA-SHAKTI
 form (Ripa) of which the Prajusptramitd-brideyagarbha
 says only “neti neti” con be afirmed,-in this universe im-
 raterial Spirit is just as unthinkable as epiritless matter.
  ‘The two ate inseparstely combined in every atom which,
 itself snd its foros, possess the elements of vitality, growth
  and intelligmee in all their developments. In the four
 ‘Kemts which are contemplated in the Chitkenda in the
 Malédhim Chalea, Atm prinartipt represents the vital
 aspect, JaAndtma ‘he Intelligence aspect, and Antaritma
 js that spark of the Peramétand which inheres in all bodies,
 fand which when spresd (Vypta) appears as tho Bhita or
 five forms of sensible matier which go to the making of the
 gzuse body. ‘These are all aspects of the one Paramstms
 Gtatmava Tantrs, Ch. XX1, Vv. 1-0)
        ‘The Vedinta tesognizes fur states of experience,
 ‘Tagmat, Srapas, Suabupti and Turtya, These, a6 my friend
‘Profescor Pramathanatha Mukchyopédhyiy                            a
                                                     ns, in his radical
  clear-thinking way, pointed out, my be regarded from two
 standpointa. We may, with Shafler, from the standpoint
  of Siddhi alano, xegard tho last only, that in transcondental
  fr pare experience (Sirvishesho-jaiaa),        ag tho real Fact or
  Experience : or we moy, with        the Sh8kte  Agarns, looking at
  the matter fom the standpoint of both Stdhana (that is
  ‘practical experiance) snd Siddhi (or transcendental expeti-
  fence), regard not only the supreme experience ts alone real,
  ‘bat the whole of experienoe without any reservation what
  tever—the whole coucrete Fact of Being and Becoming—and
  call it the Real. his isthe view ofthe Shaiva-Shakta who
  says thatthe world is Shiva's Experience and Shiva's Experi-
  fence can never be unreal, The question tums upon the
  {efnition of “Real”. Sbafikare's conception of that change-   term is,
  ‘hat, That to which itis applied must be absolutely
  less in all the “three times”. It in ‘Thab which abeclutaly
  continves through and unde:ies all the changes of experiences
  Ding that which is given inall the four states, Jagrat nd the
  rest. It is That which con never be contradicted (Vadhita)
                                    273
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 {in all tho thee tenses of time and the four stateo of Experi-
 uve, This is the Heher of Consciousness (ChidSksha) and
 none of Its modes. Our ordiaary experieuce, itis claimed,
 ‘a5 well as Supreme non-polar Nirvikalps Samdki proves
 this unchanging aspect of tho ultimate Substence, as the
 changeless principle ofall our modes of changing experience,
 which according to this definition are unreal. ‘Thus Shei
 knra’s Real —Being—Sat Chit-Ananda : Unreal =Becoming
      Vivartte-—agat—Prapancha or universe. According to
 ‘hia view, there are three lavels or planes of being (Satté),
 namely transcendental (Péramazthika), empirical (Vyiva-
 hhdeika) end illizory (Pratibbésika). ‘The Real (Satya) is
  that which is given in all the three planes (Paremdcthike
 Satya): the empirical (Vyavahsrile Satya) is that which is
 given in the socond andi third planes but not in the fist.
 Tt is worldly or. dual experience, ond not undual
 experience of Samédhi-or Videha-Mult! whieh latter, how-
 ever, undenies all states of experience, being the Ether of
 Consciousness Itself. ‘The last (Prétibhasike Satya) i given
 ‘or obtains only in he last plane, being only such reality as
 ‘oan be atinibuted to illusion euch aa “the aope-mnake”. A
 higher plane contradicts 9 lower : tho third ia contradicted
Iby the second, the sevond by the first, andthe fret by nothing
 at all, Thus there is a prooess of gradual elimination trom
 changing to changeless consciousness. Real change oF
 Parindmna is said by the Vedanta Paribhash to exist when
 ‘the effect or phenomenon and its ground (UpAdina or
zaterial cause) belong    to the same level or pane of existence ;
 as in the ease of clay and pot, mill and curd which both
 Delong to the Vyavaharika plane ; milk being the Upadina
 ‘nd curd tho effect or change appertaining it (Pasinimo hi
 ‘upidiua-sams-aattala-kiryyipatti). When, however, the
 cficos’s level of existance is diferent from (Visharsa) and
 ‘therefore cannot be equalled to that of ite material eause or
 Upédana ; when, for instance, one belongs to the Vyava-
 hhfrika experience and the other to the Pratibhasike, there
                                 274
                     MAYA-SHAKTI
ia Viverit (Vivartto hi wphdne-vichamo-suttale-kiryya-
pots). Thus, in the case of the “xopersnake”, the Sati of
‘the rope ie Voavabtika, while that of the Rejjecsarp is
only Pratibbdsike. For the same reason, the rope, and the
holo Jagat-prapanchs (univers) for the matcer    of that, ig 0
 Vivarta in relation to the Suyreme Experience of pare Chit.
On its own plane or level of Satté, every phenomenon may
be s Parinfima, butin relation to a higher level by which it
becomes Vadhita, itis only a Viverta,
      Tho Shalcta Agama diffors in ite presentment as follows.
‘The Fact  or Conerete Experience preznts   tyo aspocts— what
Professor Muliyopldhybya hae aptly oli in ia work the
“Patent Wonder”"—the Bihor and the Strese—the quiescent
Imuckgrourd of Chit and the sprouting and evolving Shale.
Agama takes this whole (Shive-Shakti) embracing all the
aspecte  as its rel. Tf one aspect bo taken apart irom the
others, we ace landed. in the wnmeal. ‘Thorefore, in the
Shakts Agama,all is real ; whether    the tramsdendent real of
‘Shafikara (Turlya), or the empirical real of waking (Jagrat),
dreaming (Svapna) or dreamless sleep Suabups). If it ix
fconended that Resla=-Changslessneas, then the last. three
states are not seal, But thie definition of Reality is not
adopted. Tis again conceded that the Supreme Substance
(aravast) is alone ral in the sense of changeleso, for the
‘worliscomeandgo. But the Agema say with the Satkhye,
thata thingis not uaseal because itechanges. ‘The Substance
Ihag two aspects, in one of which It is ehangelest, and in
the other of which It changes. It the same Substance in
Toth its Prilauha and Vimamhe aspects, Shaflkara Limits
Reality to the Prikashs aspect alone. Agama extends     it to
‘both Prdlasha and Vimarsha ; for these are aspects of the
ono. As explained later, thin Givergance of views andtumsof
pon the definition of Maya given by Shaikara,
Mayt-Shakti given by the Agama, ‘The Maya of Shaficara
is 6 mysterious Shakti of Ishvara, by which Vivartta is
sought to be explained und which bas two manifestations,
                              275
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  tie., Veling (Avarana) ond moving, changing and projecting
  (Vikshepa) power. Ishvara is Bralman seflected in Maya;
  1 mystery which is separate, and yet not separate, irom
  Braman in Tis Ishvara aspect. The Shakte May8-Shakti
 is sn aspect of Shiva or Bratman Ttaeli.
        Starting from these premises we must assume 0 real
 nexus between: the universe end ite ultimate cane. ‘The
 ‘creation is real, and not May8in Shafkara’s sense of Maya,
  but is the operation of and is Shokti Herself. The couse
boing thus real, the effect or niverse   is real though it changes
  nd passes away. Eon when it is dissolved, itis merged
‘in Sholti who is roal; withdrawn into Hor ae the Safldhyan
 tortoise or Prakriti withdrawa its limbs (Viksiti) into itself.
  ‘The universe either is as unmanifested Shakti, which is the
 perfect formless universe of, Bliss, or arists as manifested
 Shalt, the limited) end imperioct worlds of form, The
 assumption of such nexus necessarily involves that what is
 in the effot is in the cause potentially. Of course, the
 follower of Shafkars will say tbat if ereution isthe beoom-
ing patent o actual of what is Intent or potential in Shiva,
 then Shiva is not really Nishkala.. A truly Niranjonn
 Brakman cannot admit potential differentiation within
 Ttsclt (Bragatabheda). Again, potentiality is unmesning
 in relation to the absolute and infinite Being, for it pertains
to tmlation and finite existance. Ifit is suggested that
  ‘Brahman passes from one condition in which Maya lies as a
 seed in it, to another in which MAy8 manifeste Herself, we
 ‘re involved in the doctrine of an Absolute in the making.
 Ibis illogical to affirm that whilst Brahman in one aspect
 ‘oes not change, Ts in another aspect, that is os Shaki
ddoos truly change. All such objections have alogical founda.
   ion and it is for this reason that Shaflara says that all
 change (Crisht, Sthit , Laya)axe only apparent, being) but
 4 Kalpana or imagination.
        ‘But an answer is givento these objeotions, The Shilta
 ‘vill  say that the one Brahman Shiva bas two aspects       in one
                                 276
                       MAYA-SHAKTI
  of which, as Shakti, it changes andin the otherof which, aa
  Shiva, Tt does not. Reality is constitated of both these
  aspects, It is true that the doctrine of aspects does not
  solve the problem, Grestion is ultimately inscrutable. Tt
  is, however, he urges, betterto hold both the reality of
  ‘the Brahman ond the world leaving spiritual experience
to synthesize them, than to neglect ane at the cost of the
  ‘others. For this, i is argued, is what Shatikars docs.
  His solution is obtained at the cost ofa denial of true reality
  to the world which all our woeldly experionco sfims        ; and
  this solution is supported by the logical steroment that
  Maya is not seal ond is yot nob unreal, not partly real and
partly unseal. This alto it is sad, fea in the face of the
  logical principle of contradiction. Both theories, therefore,
  it may be said in different ways, run counter to logic. All
  theories uitimstely do. ‘The matter is edmittedly logical
  tat is beyond. logic, for itis beyond the mind and its
  logical forms of thinking. Practically, therefore, it is said to
be brtier     to base our theory on- our experience of the
 reality of the world, frankly leaving it to spinitual experi-
 ‘enco to solve a problom for which all logio, owing to the
  very constitution of the mind, fails, ‘The ultimate proof
 of authority is Spiritual Experience either reconded in
 ‘Veda or realized in Sam8abi.
        ‘As Ihave sizeady aad in my chapter onthe spirit-aspeot
‘of the One Substance, all occutism, whether of Kast or West,
 posits the principle that thereis nothing   in any one state or
 plane which is not in some way, actual or potential, in
 another state or plane. ‘The Western Hermetic maxim, “as
 shove so below”, is stated inthe Vishvasira Tantra in the
 form, “whatis here is thexe. What is not hereis nowhere”
 (Yad thdsti tad anyatra yan wehdcti natal Roach); end in
 the northern Shaiva Soriptnre in the form, “that which,
  appears without only a0 appears becouse it existe within,”
  Yartamindvabhdedndn Dhdvdndm auabldsanam —andah-
 thitovatim coo ghatate bahirdtmand”. For these reasons
                                 17
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  rman is rightly called © microcosm (Kshuédrabrabmdnds;
  Tominen quasi inotem quendam mundum. Firm. Natemas
  Math, TIT init). So Charaka says that the course of
  production, growth, decay and destruction of the universe
  td of man are the same. But those statements do not mean
  tnt what existe on one plane exits in that form or way on
  another plane. Is obvious that if it did, tho planos would
  be the same end nob diferent, It means that the same
  ‘thing exists on oxe plane and on all other levels of being or
  planes, according either to the form of thet plane, if it
  be whit is oalled an intermediate causel body (Karena
  ‘vantara-sharir) or altimately as mere formless potentiality.
  According to Shafikars all such argument is itest Maya.
  ‘And it may bo o to those who have realized true conscions-
  nets (Chitsvaripe) which is beyond all causality. The
  ‘Tantra Shisiris, however practical and Sidhwnd Shasta
  Ye takes the world to bo real nd then appli, so far as it
  anay, to the qusstion of ita crigin, the logie ofthe mind which
  forms   a part of it. Te ange that it in true thut thee is
  Suprame or Perfect Experian whichis beyond all worlds
  (Shukti Vishvottimg), bus ther is also worldly or (relatively
‘to the Supreme) impstict (inthe sense of limited) snd partly
 sormowfal experience. Because the one exists, it does no?
  follow thst the other doss not : though mere logic cannot
  construct an unassailable monism. Tt is the one Shiva
  ‘who is Biss ize, end who is in the form of the world
  (Wishvétmalea) which is Happiness-Unkappinoss. Shiva is
  both changoless ox Shiva and changeful as Shakti. How
  the One van bo both is « mystery. To aay, however, with
  Shatkara that it is Mayé, and in truth Brobman’ does
  ‘not change, is not. to explain, in an ultimate sense, the
  problem but to eliminate some other possible cause. and
  to give to what remains a name, Maya by itelf does not
  explain the ultimate, What can? It's only a term which
  is given to the woudwous power of the Creatrix by which
  ‘what seems impossitle to us becomes possfle to Her.
                               28
                         MAYA-SHAKTI
 ‘This is secognized, as it mast be, by Shaflksca who eays
 ‘that Maya is unexplainable (Anirvachantya)       as of courte
 it is, To “explain” the Crestor, ane would haveto be the
 Creator Hisueelf ond then in such case there would be no
 needof any explsnstion. Looking, however, at the matter
 from our own practice! standpoint, which is that which
 concerns us, we ere drawn by the foregoing considerations
 ‘to the conclusion that, what wo call “matter”, is, in some
 form,in the cause which, according       to the doctrine here
 Gescribed, produces it, But matter as experianced by us
ia not there; for tho Supreme is Spirit only. And yet in
 some eenéo itis thero, or it would not be hore at all.” It is,
 ‘there as the Supreme Shakti which is Being-Conscious-
 rness-Bliss (ChidrGpinf, Anandamay!) who contains within
 ‘Hereelf   the potentislity of all worids to be projected by
 Her Saskti, Tt i there as unmanifested Conscioumess
 Power (Chidrtpint Shakti). It. here egisisas the mixed
 conseious-unconsciousness (in the sense of the limited con-
 sciousness) of the psychical and material, universe. If the
 ultimate Reality be one, there ia thus one Almighty Sub-
                   is          cit (Shiva Shakti Svaripa) and
 forco-mind-mattes (Shiva-Shalti-Vishvatmaks). Spirit and
 ‘Mind-Matter are thus in the end one.
        This ultimate Supreme Substance (Pasavastu) is Power
 for Shakti, whioh is, again, of dual aspect as Chit-Sbalti
 ‘which represents the spiritual, and Mfay8-Sbalti which repre-
 sents the material and mental aspects. The two, however,
exist in inseparable connection (Avindbhive-sambandlia) ; a5
jngeporable to use # simile of the Shastra as the winds of
 heaven from the Etherin which they blow, Shakti, whois in
 ‘Hereelf (Svartipa) Consciousness, appears as the Life-force,
 ‘as subtle Mind, and as grees Matter. See volumes in my
 ‘World at Power” dealing in detail with Lite (Prina-Shalcti),
 ‘Mind (MénasiShalcti) and Matter (Bhite-Shalti). As all
 js Shakti and as Shalei-everfpa is Boing-Consciousness-
  ‘Biss, there is, and oan be, ‘nothing sbsolutely unconscious.
                                  279
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘Yor Shaktisvarips is unchanging Being Consciousness be-
‘youd all worlds (Chidrpixt Vishvottira), the unchanging
[principle of experience in such worlds ; and appears as the
limited psychical universe and as the apparently wnconsvious
‘material forms which are the content of man’s Experience
(Vishvatmika), The whole universe is Shakti under various
 forms. Therefore it is seen as commingled Spzit-Mind-
 Maer.
        ‘According to Shaiva-Shalta doctrine, Shive and Shakti
 aro one, Siva zepresenta the statio aspect of the Supreme
 substance, and Shalt ite kinetio aspoct : the term being
 derived from the root “Shak” which denotes capocity of
 action of power. According to Shafkars, Brahman has
 ‘aro aspect,in one of whichas Ishvara, itis associnted with
 ‘Maya snd seems to change,and in the other dissociated from
 Maya (Parabrahroan). Ia the Agams, tho one Shivais both
 ‘the changeless Parashiva: and: Peroshalti and the really
 changing Shive-Shakt’ or universe. As Shiva is one with
 ‘Himself, He ia never aisociated with anything but Himself
 ‘As, however, the Suprema, He is undisplayed (Shive-Shakti
 Srarfipa) aud, 04 Shiva Shakti, He is manifest       in the form
 of the universe of mind       asd  matter (Vishvardpa).
        ‘Before the manifestation of the universe there was
 Mabisatt® or Grand:being. Then also there was Shiva-
‘Shaldi, for there is no time when Shakti is not ; though She
 is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. Power is Power
 ‘both to Be and to Become. But then Shalt is not manifest
  snd is in ite own tra natuce (Svaripa); that is, Being,
  Pooling-Consciousness-Blise (Chiamayt, Anandamay!). As
 Bhivais consciousness (Chit) and Bliss or Lovo (Ananda),
  She is then simply Bliss and Love. Then when moved to
  create, the Great Power or Megole Duramis of the Gnostcs
  isaues from the depths   of Being and becomes   Mind and Matier
  ‘whilst zomaining whet She ever was : the Being (Sat) which
  is the foundation of all menifested life and the Spsit which
  sustains and enlightens it. This primal Power (Ady Shakti),
                               280
                       MAYA-SHAKTI
 ‘8 objoct of worship isthe Grest Mother (Magno Mater) of ll
 natural things (Nature Naturans) and nature itaelf (Notura
 Naturata). In Herself (Svaripa) Sho is not s persan in
 man’s sense of the term, but Sho is ever and incessently
 personalizing ; assuming the multiple masks (Persona) which
‘re the varied forms of mind-matter. As therefore manifest,
 She is all Personalities and as the oilletivity thereot the
 Supreme     Person (Pardhant8). But in Her own ground irom
 which, clad in form, She emerges and. personalizes, She is
 beyond all form, and therefore beyond all pseonelity kown
 tous. Sho works in and as all things; now greatly veiling
 Hee couscioumess-biss in gross matter, now by gradual
 stages morte fully revealing Herself in the forms of the one
 ‘uuiversal Life which She is.
      ‘Let us now first examine Her most gross manifestation,
 ‘that is, sensible matier (Bhita), then Her more subtle axpect
 8s the Life-foree and Mind, and lastly Hex Supreme Shakti
 spect as Consciousness. I here deal with the subject in a
 general    way having treated of it in greater detail in the books
 just now cited (“World ag Power” serie) cestain com-
       ‘The physical human body ie composed of
 pounds of which the chio! are water, gelatine, ft, phosphate
of ime, slbumen and febriae,and, of these, water constitutes
 tome two-thirds of the total weight. These compounds,
 ‘gain, are composed of simpler non-metallic elements of
 which the chief are éxygen (to the extent of about two-
‘hinds), hydrogen, corbon, nitrogen, ealeiumn and phosphorus.
 So about two-thinds of the bodyis water and this is H,0.
 Substantially thea our gross body is water. But when we
 {gtto thets simpler elements, have we gotto the root of the
 matter? No. It was formerly thoaght that matter was
 composed of ceréain elements beyond which it was not
 possible to go, and that these clemente and their atoms
 ‘wore indestructible. ‘These notions have been reversed by
 ‘modem science. ‘Though the alleged indestructiility of
‘the elements and their atoms is atil suid by some to present
                                 281
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  the charictor of a “praotical truth", wellknown recent
  dliscoveriea ond experiments go to re-establish the ancient
  doctrite of a single primordial substance to which these
  various forms of mattor mey be redaved, with the rerultant,
  cf the possible and hitherto derided trensmutation of one
  tlement into ancther ; sino each is but one of the many
  plural manifestations of the same underlying unity. The
 so-called elements are varied forms of this ono substance
  ‘hich themselves combine to form the vacious compounds
  "The varisty of our expetienco is due to permutstion and
  combination of the wioma of the matter into which the
  rimordial energy moterialies. Wo thus find that owing to
 ‘the variety of atomic combinations of HNO thare are
 differences in tho compounds. Tt is euros to note in pass-
 jing how apparently slight vesiations in the quantity and
 distribution of the toms produce very. varying substances.
 ‘Thus gluten which isa nutrient) food, and quinine ond
 strychnine whith are in varying degree poisons, are each
 compounds of CHUNO. Strychnine, a powerfal poison is
 Oy HlyaNaOs      and quisine in CoH, Nas, N andO aro the
 same in both and tere is a difference of one part only of ©
 fand 2 of H, But neither these compounds nor the so-called
 clements of which they ate composed axe permanent things.
 Scientific msttar is now found to be only relatively stable
 form of cosmic energy. All matter dissociates and passes
into the energy of whioh tia a materialized form and again
 it iamues from it.
       Moder Wester Science snd Philosophy have thas
 removed mony difultie which were fomnedly thought to
 be objections fo the ancient Indian doctrine on the subject
 There dealt with. Tt lus, in the fit place, dispelied the
 gross notions Which wore hitherto generally entertained as
 to the uature of “matter”. According to the notions of
 Quite recent scence, “matter” wes definedto be that which
 Inns mass, weight and inertia. Ib must be now admitted
 ‘that: the’-tvo latter qualities no longer stand the test of
                            MAYA-SHAKTI
 eramination, sinee, putting aside ou ignorance as to. the
 nature of weight, this quality vaties, if we conceive matter
 tobe placod under conditions which admittedly affect it; and
 the belief in inertia is due to superficial observation, i being
now generally conceded tha: the ial elementa of matterare
 in a state of spontaneous and perpetual motion. Tn tact,
 te most general phenomenon ofthe universe is vibration, to
 which the human body as all else is subject. Vacious
 vibrations affect diferently each organ of sensetion. When
 af certain quality and number, they denote to the skin the
 dogreo of external temperature ; other incite the eye to
 seo different colours; others again enable the ear to hoor
 defined sounds. ‘Moreover, “inertia,” whichis alleged to be
       icguishing qualityof “matter,”ia uidto be the poases
 sion of leotricity, which is considered uot to be “material”.
  What, shen, is that to whioh we attibuto “mass”? Tn the
 frat paoe, it is now admitted that “matter,” oven with the
 ‘Addition  of sll       posible forces, i insuficientto explain many
 phenomena, such as thoce of ight ; end it hes, accordingly,
‘come to befor some an article of suientfio fuith that ther is a
 substance called “Ether: s madium which, filing the
 ‘univer, transporta by ite vibretionsthe radistions of light,
 bat, cletesity, and peshaps action from a distance, such
 4s the attraction exersised between heavealy bodies. Te i
 anid, howover, that this Hther is not “matter”, but difers
 ‘profoundly from it, and thet i is only our infinity of know
  ledge which obliges us, in our attempted descriptions physi                of i,
 to bortow comparisons           from   “matter”           in its ordinary
cal sense, which slone is known by our senses. But if we
 aesume the existence of Ether, wo Inow that “material”
  bodias immersed in it con change their places therein. In
 ‘at,to tse an Indian                    expres ion, the characteristic property
 of the vibrations ofthe Aleiaha Tattva isto make the spaco
 in which the other Taitvas and their desivatived exist.
 ‘With “Matior” and Bcher ae their material, Wester                        purely
  scientific” theorea havo sought to construct the world,
                                       283
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘The sciontiso atom which Da Bois Raymond desoribed a
an exceedingly useful fotion—“austerst nutaiche fotion”—
    is no longer considered the ultimate indestructible element,
  but is held to be, in fact, « kind of miniature solar system,
formed by a cantral group or nucleus charged with positive
electricity, around which very much smaller elements, called
clectzons or corpuscles, changed with negative electricity,
gmvitate in closed orbits. ‘These vibrate in the etheric
‘medium in whick they ond the positively charged nucleus
cxist, constituting by thair energy, and not by their mass,
the unity of tho stom. But whst, again, is the constitution
of this *audeus” and tho cloctrons rovolving around it t
‘There is no scientific crrtainty that any part of either is due
to the presence of “matter”. On the contrary, if a hypo-
‘thetical corpusele oonaisting solely, of un electric charge
without material mass iz made tho subject of mathematical
tnalysis, the logioal infezenos is that the electron is free of
“matter”, and is merely en electric charge moving in the
Rther ; and though the extent of our knowledge regarding
the positive nucleus which constitutes the remainder of the
atom: is small, an eminent mathematician and physicist has
expressedthe opinion that, if thereis no “matter” in the
negative charges,the postive charges must also        be free from
it. Thus, in the words of the author upon whose lucid
 ‘analysis T have drewn, (Houllevigue’s *ivolution of
 Beience”) the atom has been dematerialiced, if one may say
 0, and with it the molecules and the entire universe.
  “Matter” (in the scientific sense) disappears, and we and
 all that surround    us are physically, accotding to these Views,
 tore disturbed rogions of the ether determined by moving
 cloctsio charges logial if impressive conclusion, becauses
 its by inoneasing     their Inowiedge of “matter” that physicist
 Ihave been led to doubt its soality. But the question, as
 hho poitits out, dow not remain there. For if the speculations
 ‘of Helmholtz be adopted, there is nothing absurd in imaging
  that two possible ditections of rotation of a vortex formed
                                   284
                        MAYA-SHAKTI
 within, and consisting of, ether correspond to the positive
 and negative electric charges said to be attuched to the Anal
 clements of matter. I that beso, thon the trinity    of matter,
 ther, and clectrcity, out of which science bas hitherto
 attempted to construct the world, is reduced to a single
clement, the ether (which is not scientific “matter”) in a
state of motion, and whichis the basis of the physical uni-
‘verse. Tho old duality of fores and matter disappears, these
 being held to he differing forms of the same thing. Matter
       rlatively stable form of enorgy inte whiok, on distur-
bance of its equilibriam, it disappears ; ior all forms of
‘mutter dissooiste. Tho ultimate basis is that energy called
{in Indian philosophy Prakciti, May8 or Shakti.
       Herbert Spencer, the Philosopher of Modern Soienco,
carries the investigation farther, holding that the universe,
whether physical or paychical, whether within or without
us,isa play of Porce, which, in the case of Matter, we expeti-
ence as object, and that the notion that the ultimate realities
fare the supposed atoms of matter, to the propertios and
combinations of which the complex universe is due,
true. Mind, Life     and Matter are each varying aspects of
to one coamie process from tha First Coase. Mind as such
js as much a “material” organ as the brain and outer sense
‘organs, though they are differing forms of foros.
     ‘Beth mind and matter derive from whut Herbert Spencer
calls the Primal Energy (Ady Shakti), and Heskel the
fundamental Spirit-Matter Substance. Professor Fitz Ea-
ward Hall described the Safkhya philosophy as being “with
all its folly and fanaticism little hettar than a chaotic im-
pertinence”. Tt has doubtless its wealmesses li all other
systems. Wherein, however, consists its “fanaticism”,T do
hot know. As for “"impentinence”, it is neither more nor
less ao thin any othor form of Wectem andonvour to solve
‘the riddle oflife. As regards its leading concept, Prakriti”,
the Professor said that it was a notion for which the Euro-
‘pean languages were unable to supply a name; a failure,
                               285
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
he added, which was “‘nowise to their disoredit”. Tho
‘implication of this sarcastic siatomont is that it was not to
the discret of Westem languages that they had no name
for so foolish a notion. He wrote before the revolution
of ideas in science to which I have refered, and with that
ratked antagonism to things Tndion which has been and
to some extent still is so common a festare of the more
ondinary type of professional orientalist
       "The notion of Prakritiis uot absurd. The doctrine of «
Primordial Substance waa held by some of tho groatost
minds in the past and has support from the most modern
developments of Science. Both now concur to reject what
‘the great Sir Wiliam Jones called the ‘vulgar notion of
ratarial substance” (Opera I. 6). Many people wereWaswont,               not
fas some still azo, to Jough sf the ides of Maya,
matter solid, permsneat ond real enough ! Bat according
to science wha are we: (as physic beings) at base ? ‘The
answer is, indnitaly tonuous formless energy which msterisl-
ies into relatively stable, yot essentially transitory, forms.
‘According the apt expression of the Shikta Shastra,
‘Shale, as She ereates, Becomes Ghanfbhtls, that is,
massive of thickened ; just as milk becomes curd. The pau-
cats by which the subile becomes gradually             more and more
fross continues until it develops into what has been                  called
the “rust” of solid matter       (Parthiva    bhdta).        ‘This   whilst
it laste is tangible enough. Bot it will not lst for ever, and
in some radioactive subatances dssocistes before ourto eyes.
‘Where docs it go, ssoonding to Shakta        doctrine, but that
Mothes-Power       from whose wom     it came    ; who exists ax all
forms, gross and subtle, and is the formless Conscioumeas
 Itself) ‘The poet's inspiration led Shakespeare           to say, “ We
 are such stull ae dreams are made of.”centuries    It is. a wonderfl
saying from a Vedinti standpoint,        for                  before him
 ‘Advaitavida had ssid, “Yes, dreams ; for the Lordsleep           is Him-
 self the Great World-dreamer      slumbering      in  causal              as
 shar, dreaming as Hirnnyagarbha          the universe experienced
                                     286
                       MAYA-SHAKTI
   by Him as tho Virkt or totality of all Svas, om waking.
   Scientifo revision of the notion of “matter”, helps the
  ‘Veddntio standpoint, by dispalling gross and vulgar notions
   upon the subject; by establishing ita impormanencs in its
  form as scientie matter by posting « subtler piical
  substance which is not ponderable matter ; by destroying
 the old duality   of Matter and Fore ; and by these and other
  ‘conclusions leading to the acceptance of one Primal Energy
  ‘or Shakti which tranaforma itealf into that relatively stable
  state which is perceived by tho sons as gross “mater”.
  ‘As, however, since deale with matter only objectively,
  ‘at is, from 0 dualisto standpoins, it does not (whnt-
 ever hypotheses any particular scientist may maintain)
 sesolve the essential problem which is stated in the word
                               “*Hlow oan. the apparent duality
                              ‘ein we. bridge the gulf between
  the object and the Self whish pereeives it Inio whatever
  fenuons eneray the material word is regolved, we are til
  Toft in the region of duality of Spit, Mind and Matter. The
  position is not advanced beyond that taken by Sinkhys
  ‘The anawer to the problom stated ie that Shakti which is
  the origin of, andi in, all things hos the power to veil Itself
  so that whilst in truth itis only socing itclf as objec, it
  does not, a8 the created Jva, perokive this bat takes things
  to be outside end different from the Salt. For this reason
  Maytis called, in tho Shistra, Bhodabuddhi or the sense
cof diffrence. ‘hia is the natural characteristic      of man’s
 ‘experience.
        ‘HRerbert Spencer,the Philosopher of Modern Science,
 carrying the investigation beyond physical matter, holds, asor
  T have elreedy ssid, that the universe, whether physical
  poyehical, whether as mind or matte, is a play of Fores;
  Mind, Tife and Master being each varying aspects of is thean
  one eosmio process from the First Cause. This, gain,matter”,
  Tndian notion. Fos, th afimation that “sciuntifi: and
  is an appearance produced by the play of Cosmic Force,
                               287
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 that mind is iteel! « product of the same play is what both
 Safkhye and Mayavida Vedénte hold. Both               theee sysiams
 teach that mind, considered in ited, is, like matter, an
 tmoonsciows thing, and that both it and matter ultimately
 issue from the some single Principle which the former calls
 Proleriti and the latter Maya. Consciousness and Unconsei-
‘ousness are in the universe insopamte, whatever be the
degree of manifestation ot veiling of Consciousness. For
 the porpose of analysis, Mind in itnelf—thet ia, considered
 hypothetically as dissocited from Conssiousness, which, in
 fact, in never the cate, (though Consciousness exists apart
 from the Mind)—is o force-process like the phyoioal brain.
 Consciousness (Ohit)   is noo be identified with mind (Antah-
 kearans) which is the organ of expression of mind. Consci-
fousmess is nota mete manifestation of material mind.
 Conscionsness must not be identified with its mental mode 5
‘an identification which, leads to, the difficulties in which
 westem metaphysics hes so often found itself. Tt is the
 ultimate Reslity in which sll modes whether subjective o
 objective exis
       ‘The assertion that mind is in itself unconscious may
 seem a strange statement to b Weetorn reader who, if he
 does not identify mind and. consciousness, at sny rate,
 regends the later as an attribute or function of mind. The
 paint, however, is of such fundamental importance for the
 ‘understanding of Indian doctrine that it may be further
 developed.
       “According to the Lokiyata Sshool     of Indian Matetialism,
 ‘mind was consideredto be the     result of   the chemical eombi-
 ‘nation of the four forms of material aubstancs, earth, water
fire and air, in organic forms. According            to tho Parva
 Mimiuise and the Nytye-Vaisheshika, the Self or Atma is
 in itself and that is by uature (Svebhavatnk), uncoos
  ada, Achidrips): for Atma is seid to be unconscious
  (Achetens) in dreamless sleep (Sushupti); and consciousness
  arises as a produced thing,by association of the Rema with,
                                288
                         MAYA-SHAKTL
 the mind, sensce ond body. The sender in referred to
 Pandit Chand Kanta Tirkilatkive’s Bengali Leotures
 on Hindu Philosophy. At p. 105 he cites Prabhakére
 ‘Mimistuakdcbiryye, saying that Veisheshike-Nybya.sup-
 ports the view, Sactetanashchitiayogattadyogens vind jadah.
 “Remi is Conscious by union with knowledge (Jntna]
 which comes to it by association with mind and! body.
 Without it, i is unoomcious.” KtmA, according to this
 Dorshana, ix thatin which (Rshraya) Jnana ineres. Kiomt-
 sila Bhatta says Atma ie parly Prakdshs ond Apraktsha,
 (uminoas and non-luminous) like © fire-fy. But this is
 Genied, ax Atm is Nirathsha (parties). Knowledge thus
 arices from the essocistion of mind (Manas) with Atma, the
 senses (Indriys) with Manas, and the senses with their
 objects, that is, worldly (Leubaka) knowledge, which is the
 ‘rue—that is, nox-ilinivé—approhension of objects, Jaina
 in the spizitual Vedantie gense of Mayda is Paramatmn
 or pure Consciousness realized. ‘The former Jnfna, in that
 it aries without eflort on the presentation of the objects is
 ‘not action (Kriyt), and differs from the forms of mental
 dotion (énsst Ksiya), suchas will (Tohebbt), contemplation
 fod the like. dimd manasdsorinyujyate, mana indriyena,
‘ndriyom ortena, tio Bhovatijnénam. Both these theories
 are sefuted by ‘Saflchys and Advaitevsda Vedanta (os
 intespreted by Shadkars, to which unless otherwise is Cousti-  stated
  refer) which effin that the very nature of Atma                     is
 ‘ousness (Chit), and all else, whether mind or be matter,  20.    ‘The
 ‘uncouscious, though the former   appeats    not   to
                                      Dut refleste consciousness,
‘iva mind is not itaelf consoious,conscious.
 fand therefore appesrs to be                     Consciousness as
 tuchisetemal ancimmutable; Mind isa crestion ad change-
 ‘thle, Consciousneas as ench is unconditional. Tn theby mind     that
fof the Jiva, Consciousness appesssto be conditioned  which   Shakti,
  Mayt-Shakti which produces     mind,    and    of
  rind is a particular manifestation. Mind, however, isis, notof
 ‘the resultant of the operstion of the Bhita—that
                                  289
      1                                                          >
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘gross nstaral foroes or motions-—but is, in SaBldhya andin
 Shite moniam, an evolution which is logisaly prior to
 them,
       ‘The mode of exposition   in which Consciousness   is treated
 as bsing in itself something spart from, though associated
 with, mind,is profound ; because, while it recognizes the
 interthingling of Spitit and Matter in the embodied being
 (Give), it yot at the same  time clearly distinguishes them. Tt
 ‘hus avoids the impatation of change to Spirit (Atma). ‘The
 Intter is ever in Tis own true natare immutable. Mind is
 ever changing, aubject to sensations, forming ideas, making
 sosolvas,   and so forth. Spirit in Taelfis nether thus affected
 nor sota, Manifold change takes plac, through motion and
 vibration, in tbe meonscions Prakriti and Maya, Mind is one
 of the results of such motion, ag matters another. Bach of
 ‘them is & form of specifi transformation of the one Prinei-
 ‘ple whence unconsclousness, whether rea or apparent, rises.
 ‘That, however, mind appears to be conscious, the Mayavrada
 Vedénta and Sitkhye admit. ‘This i called Chidathtoa—
 ‘that is, the appearance of somethingas Chit (Conssiousness)
 ‘which is not teally Chit. ‘This appaacanes of Consciousness
 is duo to the refleotion of Chit upon it. A piece of polished
 steel which lies i the eunshine may appear to be seiElami-
 ‘nou, when itis merely reflosting    the sun, whichisthe source
 of the ight it appears to give out. Chitas such is immutable
 ‘and never evolves. What do evolve are the varions forms
 of notural forces produoed by Prakriti or Maya. ‘These to
 ‘axe, however, conceived as being in association in such a
 ‘way that the result of such association is produced without,
 Ghit being rally affected at al. The classical illustration
‘of the mode and effect of such “associationis given          in the
 ‘Saflehyan aphorism, “Just like the jewel and the dower”
 Kusumavacieha manih (Saikkya-Pravachona-Sitss, I, 35)
 ~thatis, when a scarlet hibizous floweris placed     in contiguity
to 0 crystal the latter appears to be red, though it sill in
 fact retains its pure transparency, as is soen when the flower
                                  290
                    MAVA-SHAKTI
is removed. On the other hand, the flower as refloted in
the eryatal takes on a shining, transparent aspect which ita
‘opaque surface does not really possess. Tn the same way
Consciousness appears to: be conditioned by the force of
‘uneoosbiousnese in the Jiva, butis ally not so. “Change-
less Chit-Shakti, does not move towards onything, yet
seams to do so” (Sidikhya-Pravachans-Sitra). And, on
the other hand, Mind as one of such unconscious forces
takes on the semblance of Consciousness, though this is
borrowed from Chit and is not te own natural quality. This
sssocistion of Unconscious Force with Oonsciousness has a
‘tvo-fold rn, both obscuring and sovoaling. Te obscures,
in 90 far as, aad so long as it is in operotion, it provents
the realization of pure Gonssiousness (Chit). When mind is
lbgorbed pure Consciovgness shines forth, Tn this sense, this
‘Power or Miyé is spokan of ¢ Vail. In another sense it
evesls—that sy it manifests—the world, which does not
exist except through the instrumentality of May which the
worldis, Prakriti and MAy8 poduce both Mind and Matter ;
fon the former of which Conscionmnass is refleotod (Chid-
 Abhtsa). ‘The human mind, then, appears to be conscious,
‘bub ofits own natare ant inherent quality is not so, The
objective world of matter is, oF appears to be, on uncon-
scious reality. ‘These altemstives are nevessary, because,
jn Sifikhys, unconsciousness is a renlity ; in Vedinte, an
 appearance, Tn the Shakta Taatra, apparent unconscioumess
 isan aspect (Avidy& Shakti) of Conscious Shakti, Consci-
 coumess is, according to Advaita Vedanta, the true existence
 of both, illumining the one, hidden in the other.
      ‘The intemal instrument (Antahkarans) or Mind is one
 only, but is given different names—Buddhi, Ahafikara,
 Manss—to denote the diversity ofits functions. From the
 second of these issue the senses (Indriya) and their objects,
 the sensiles (Mabtbhita), or gross matter with the exper:
 sensibles (Tanméta) as its intermediate cause, All these
 proceed from Prakritiand Maya.
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘Therefore, scoonding to those systems, Coneciousnese is
 Ohit, and Mind or Antahkarana is 0 tronsformation of
Praksiti nd Maya respeotively. In iteli, Mind ia on une
‘conscious specialized organ developed out of the Primordial
Energy, Mila-Prokriti or Maya. Tt is thus, not in itself,
consciousness but special manifestetion of conscious
existence, bortowing its consciousness from the Chit which
is reflected on it. Shikta doctrine states the same matter
in a diferent form. Consciousness at rest is Chit-Srartpa,
Consefoumess in movement ie ChitShalti associated with
‘May-Shalei. The Shiva-Shakti Svartipn is consciousness
 (Chit, ChideOping}, Those is no independent Prakriti as
Safkhya holds, nor an unconscious May& which is uot
Brohman and yet not separate from Brahman, es Shafikara
‘teaches. What there is, i May&-Shalti; that's Conscious-
ness (for Shakti. isin itself such) veiling, as the Mother,
Heruclf to herself as Her creation, the Jive. ‘There is no
need then for GhidAbhaso. Wor mind is oonscioumeso veiling
itself in the forns or limitation of apparent mocnsciousness.
       ‘This fe an attractive expesition of the matter because in
the universe sonseiousmeas and unconstiousness are mingled,
and the abolition     of uncenseions Méy& satis tho desire for
 tunity. In all these cases, however, mind and matier re~
[present either the teal or apparent unconscious aspect of
‘things. If man's consciousness is, or appearto be, limited,
such limitation must be due to some principle without, or
attached to, or inherentin consciousness ; which in some
sense or other must x hypothesi be really, ox apparently
diffrent from the consciousness, which it seems to affect
fo actually affacs. In all these aystems, mind and matter
equally derive from « common fnitising principle which
scbually oF apparently limits the Infrite Consciousness,
Inall tree, there is, beyond maniféstation, Consciousness or
hit, which in manifestation appears ass prulleim of
‘mind and matter ; the substratum of whioh from a monistio
standpoint is Chit.
                                 292
                      MAYA-SHAKTI
       Hiarbort: Spenoer, however, se many other Wostom
 Philosophers do, differs from the Vedanta in holding that
 the nowmenon of these ‘phenomens is not Consciousness, for
‘the latter   is by them consideredto be by its very nature
 ‘conditioned and conorete. This noumencn is therefore
 declaredto be unknown and unknowable. But Fore as such
 is blind, and can only act as it has buen predetermined. We
 discover consciousness in the univeme. The cause must,
 therefoce, itis argued, be Constiousness. Itis but reasonable
 to hold that, if the fmt canse be of the nature of either
 Consciousness or Matter, and aot of bath, it must be of the
 ‘nature of the former, and notof the latter. An waconscious
 object may well be conceivedto modify Consciousness, but
 not to produce Conscioumess out ofits Sell. According to
 Indian Realism, the ParamAous sre the material (Upadéna),
 couse (Karana), and Tshvara the) instrumental (Nimitta)
 cause, for He makes them cambine. Acconding to Vedanta,
 Motier is really nothing but a determined modification of
 Imowledge in the Ishvare Consciousness, iteelf unaffected
  by soch determination. Ishvars-is-thus both tie material
 tnd instramental cause. A thing ean only dissolve into ita
 fown cause, The agency (Kartritra) of Ishvara is in Mayt-
  vida attributed (Auptidhika) only.
       ‘The Vedénta, therefor, in ity Shokkta presentment
 says, that the Noumenen is knowablo and known, for it
 is tho inner Self, which is not an unconscious prinoiple but
Being Consciousness, which, as sbove explained, is not
 conditioned or concrete, but is the absolute Selfidentity.
 ‘Nothing can be more intimately known than the Self. The
 ‘objective side of knowledge is conditioned because of the
 nature of its organs which, whether mental or material, are
  ccnditioned. Sensation, perception, conception, intuition
  are but differant modes in which the one Consciousness
 manifests itso, the diferences being determined by the
  variety of condition and forn of the difforent organsThoreof
 Knowledge thzough which tonsciousnoss manifests,
                                293
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
is thus 0 grost difference betwoon the Agaostic and the
Veutist.'The former, as for instance Herbert Spencer,
says that the Absolute cannct be laown bacsuse nothing
fan be predicated of it. Whereas the Vedintin when he
says that It cannot be known (in the omlinary senso) means
that this is because Tt is knowledge itself.
experience does not know a consciousness ofOurpureordinarybeing
withoat diference. Bu, though it cannot be pictured, it
ray be apprehended. Tt cannot be thought because it i
Pare Knowledge itself. Tt is thas state which is realized
only in Sambi but ie apprehended indirectly as the Unity
‘which underliea and sustaine all forme of changing finite
experience.
      ‘What, lastly, is Tile? The undeslying substance is
Bring-n-iteelf. Lifo 4 manifestation of swch Being. If
by Life we understand life in form, then the uikimate sub-
sanoe is not that ; for itis formless. Butin supreme
sense itis Life; for itis Btemal Life whence all Ife in
form proceeds. Tbia not deed Being. It were It eould not
produce Tile. "The Creat Mother is Life; Doth the life of
Her ohildres and the Life of their lives. Nor does She
produce what ie without life or potanoy of Ifo. Whatis
in the cause ia in the effect. Somie Wester Scientists have
spoken of the “Oxigin of Life”, and have sought      to find it.
Tei fatile ques, for Tifeas such has no ovgin thoogh life
in form has. We cannot discover the beginnings of that
‘which is eszantilly eternal. The question i viiated by the
false sasumption that there is anything dead in the sense
 that it is wholly devoid of Life or potency of Life. Thereis
 no such thing. The whole word is living manifestation of
 the soures ofall lif whichis Absolute Being. [tis sometimes
 made a reproach against Hinduism that i koows not a
 “living God?” Whatia mcant Tannob say. Fortis oortain
 that it does not worship « “deed God”, whatever such may
 bbe. Perhaps by “living” is maunt “Personal”. If so, the
 charge is again ill-founded. Ishvara and Ishvar re Rulers
                              294
                       MAYA-SHAKTI
 in whom all personalities and personality itvelf ere. But
 in thai ground they are beyond all manifestation, that is
 limitation which personality, as we understand it, inva
‘Man, the animal    and the plant alone it is true,exbibit certain
phenomena which are commonly called vital. What exhibits
 ‘ach phenomens, we have commonly called “living”. But
 it does not follow that what does not exhibit the phenomena
 ‘which belong to our definition of life is itself altogether
 “gead”, We may haveto revise our definition, asin fact
 ‘we are commencing to do. Until recently it was commonly
 saeumed that matter was    of two nds inorganic or “desa”,
‘and organi    or “living”. ‘The mineral wes tdoad”,tho vege”
‘able, imal and man were endowed with “life”. "Bub these
living forms ere compounded of so-called “desd”” matter.
 How, then, is it possible  that there is fe in the anganie king
 dom the parts of which xe utimstaly compounded of “dead”
matier t ‘This necessarily. started the futile quest for the
 “origin of life”. Life ean only ome from life: not from
 death. ‘The grestott errors arse from the making of false
 partitions in nature whioh do not exist. We make these
 imaginary partitions and hen vainly attempt to surmount
 ‘them. There are no absolute partitions or gis. Allis conti-
 ‘iuous, even i we eanzot ab prosentestabiah      in each caso the
 ‘connection. That there should be such gus is unthinkable
 ‘o aay one who has even in small degre grasped the notion
 cof the unity of things. There isa complete connected chain
 in the hierarchy of existence, from the lowest forms of
 apparently inert (but x0w held to be moving) matter,
 through the vegetable, enimal, homan worlds; and then
 ‘through such Devatds as are super-human intelligences up
 ‘fo the Bralaman, rom the latier to blade of grass (says
 ‘the Shastra) all are one.
        ‘Westem scientific notions have, however, in recent
‘years undergoue a radical evolution as regards the under-
 Tying unity of substance, destructive of the hitherto accepted
 notions of the discontinuity of matter and its organization,
                                 295
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘The division of nsture into the animal, vegetable and mineral
 kkingtioms is still reganded ss of practical use ; but it is now
  recognized that no such clesr line of demareation exists
  between them as hss hitherto been supposed in the West.
 ‘Batween each of natur’s types there are said to be inmumer-
 ‘able transitions. ‘The notion of inert, “deed” matter, the
 result of superficial observation, has given wey upon the
 revelation of the activities at work under this apparent
 inertia—forees which endow “brute substance” with many
 fof tho charuetoristice of living beings. Tt i no longer
 Dossible to dogmatically affirm where the inorganic kingdom
 fends and “life” begina. Tt must be rathor ossorted that
 ‘many phenomena, hitherto considered characteristic of
  “life”, belong to “inert matter”, composed of molecules and
 atoms, as “animated matter” is of cells and micelles. It
 ‘has been found thet so-called “inert matter”, possesses an
 extraordinary pow            er , and is not only capable
                         of ongenization
 of apparently imitating the forms of “living” matter, but
‘presents ina certain degree the same functions and properties.
        ‘Seationey is a characteristic of all forms of Existence.
 Physiologists measure the aensibiity of a Ising by the
 ‘degree of excitement necotsary to produce in it a reaction.
 (Ofthis it bas boen said (Le Bon “Brolution of Matter,” 250),
 “This sensibility. of master, a0 contrary to what popular
 observation seems to indicate, is becoming mare and more
 familiarto physicists. ‘This is why suchan expression es the
 “lie of matter”, utterly meaningless twenty-five years ago
 Jas come into common use. The study of mere matter
 yields ever increasing proofs that it has properties which
 were formerly deemed the exclusive appanage of living
 beings.” Life existe throughout, but manifests in various
 ways. ‘The azhitrary division which has been drawn be-
 tween “dead” and “living” matter his no existan          in ce
                                                              fact,
‘and speculations as to the ovigin of “life” are vitiated by the
 ‘assumption that there is enything which exists without it,
 however much its presence may be veiled from us. Western
                                296
                        MAYA-SHAKTI
 science would thus appear to be moving to the conclusion
 ‘that there is no “deed” matter, but that life exiets every-
 ‘where, not merely in that in whioh, as in “organi matier,”
 it is to us plainly and cleerly expressed, but also in the
 ultimate “inorganic” stoms of which itis Composed—stoms
 ‘hich, in fact, have their organizations as have the beings
 ‘hich they go to build—and that al, tothe minutest particle,
 is vibrating with unending Energy (Tejas). (See Author's
 “World as Bower”, “Life”.)
           Manifested life is Prina « form of Kriya Shake in, and
 evolved from, the Linga Shara, itself bor of Prakri
 Prin ox the vital principle has boon woll defined ("Hindu
 Realism”, by J. C. Chatter)             to he, “the special relation
 of the Atind with @ certain form of matter which, by this
 ulation,the Att organizes and buds up as a means of
 having experience.” This special elation constitutes the
 individual Prine in the individual body. Just as in the
  West, “life” is 6 term comnaronly used of arganized body
 only, so algo isthe term Prina used           in the Bast. Ib is the
 technical       name given-to the pheomens,          called “vital”,
 exhibited       by auch bodies, the source of whichis the Braman
 Tisell. Tho individual Prins is limited. to the poctioular
  body which it witalies and i a manifestationin all breathing
 creatures (Psat), of tho creative and sustaining activity of
  the Brabman. All beings exist so long as tho Prina isin
‘the body. Tris as the Kaushtiakt Upanishad says, “the life
 uration of al”. ‘The cosmic all-pervading Prius is the
 collectivity of all Pracas ond is the Brahman as the source
 of the individual Prins. On the physical plane, Prana
 manifests as breath through inspiration, “Sa” or Shakti
 ‘and expimtion, “Ha” or Shiva. So the Niruttam ‘Tantraby
  (Ghapter TV) says —“By Hangkira it goes out and
  Selerait comes in agen. A diva always recites the Supreme
  Mantra Hangea.”
           Hong-kirena bahir yati vah-kérona vishet punah
           Hongeet. paramam mantra jivo jopati sarcadé.
                                     297
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Broothing is itself tho Ajeph Mantes. Prasa io thua
 Shakti as the univeroally pervoding source of life, organizing
 itzeli as matter into whet we call living forms. When the
 Prina goes, the organism which it holds together disinto-
 grates. Nevertholoss cach of the atoms which remain has
 8 life ofits owa, existingas suoh sopirately from the life of
 ‘the organized body of whioh they formed a part; just as
 each of the cells of the living body las a life of its own,
 ‘The grees outer body is hetetogenoous (Parickobhinns) or
 radé up of distinet or well-defined parts. But the Prina-
 ‘maya Self which le within the Annamaye Self is = homo-
 geneous undivided whole (Stdhiroa) permesting the
 ‘whole ghysial bedy (Sarvapindavyapin). Is is not oub of
 ino distinct regions (AsédbAzana) as is the Pinda or mioro-
 cosmic physical body. Unlike the latter it has no specialized
 ongens each disohargig a speofe function. It is a homo-
 geneous unity (SedhArana), prevent in every part of the
 ‘body which it ensouls a¢ ita inner vital Sali Vayu,as
 universal vital activity, on entry into each body, manifests
 itealf in ten diffrent: ways. Tt-is the one Prins, though
 diferent names ane given acnotding to its functions, of which
 ‘tho five chief ere Appropriation (Pena), Rejection (Apina),
 Assimilation (Soméva), Distribution (Vytna), and that vital
 fanetion (Una) which is connected with self-expression
 in spocch, Prina in ite general sense representa the in-
voluntary refox action ofthe organism ; just aa the Tndviyas
 fro ono aspect of ite voluntary activity. Breathing is a
 ranifestation of ths Cosmic Rhythm to which the whole
 universe moves and scooxling to which it eppears and
 disappears. The life of Brahma is the duration of the
 outgoing breath (Nishvéea) of Kala,
       ‘The Safa rojeoting the Lokayata notion that Vaya
 fa « mere bio-mochanial foroe or mechanical motion voxult-
 ing from euch « Vayu, holds on tho principle of the economy
af categories, that life 8 resultant  of the various concurrent
 activities of other prinoples or forces ix the organism.
                              298
                      MAYA-SHAKTI
 ‘This, again, tho Vedintisto deny, holding thet it iss
 cperato, independent principle and material form assumed
 through Maya by the one Consciousness. In either case,
 ‘bis an unconscious force, soe, everything which is not the
 ‘Enna or Purusha, is, according to Méyavada and Safthys,
 ‘uxconstious,ot in Western parlance, material (Jada),
        Tf we apply Shilta principles, then Prina is name of
 to general Shakti displaying iteelf in the organization of
 ‘matter and the vital phenomena which bodies, when ongan-
 ized, exhibit. Manifest, Shakti is vitality, which is. a
 limited ooncrete display in forma of Her own foymless Boing
 ‘orSet. All Shaleis Jnfins, Ichchhd, Keiyd, and       in its form
 ‘e Prakriti, the Gunas Sattva, Rajas, Tamaa. Sbe desire,
 fmpelled by Har aature (Ichoha), to build up forms; aces
 how it should be done (Jnéns); and then does it (Kxiya).
‘The mest Témasio form of Kriy8 is the apparently mechanical
 nergy displayed in msterisl bodies. Bub this is iteelf the
 productof Her Vitivity and not the conse oft. Ultimstely
 then Prins, liko everything clse, is constiousness which, as
 Shalt, limits Itself in forms which it fst creatas and
 sustains; then builds up into other more elaborate forme
tnd agein sustsina     until their life-periodis run. All erestion
  ond maintonanco isa limiting power, with the sppearsnce
cof unconsciousness,    in ao far as, and to tho degres that,it
  confines the boundless Being Conscioussoss-Bliss; yt that
  Power ia nothing but Consciousness negating and limiting
 itaelt, ‘The Groat Mother (Shr! Masa) limits Her infinite
  being in and as the universe snd maintains it. Tn eo far ag
  ‘he form and it life isa limited thing, itis apparently un-
  cconssious, for consciousness is thereby limited. At each
  moment there is creation, butwe call the fist appearance
  creation (Grishti), and its continuance, through the agency
  ‘of Prana, maintenance (Sthiti). But both that. which is
  ‘appereatiy Hnsited and that whore operation haa that ffect
  is Being-Oonscioumess. Prina Viya is the selt-bogotien
  Dat limited manifestation of the etornel Life. It is called
                                  299
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Vayu (Vito move) beeae it courses throughout        the whole
 universe. Invisible in itself yet ite operations are manifest.
  For it determines the birth, growth, and decay of all ani-
 ‘mated organisms and as such receives the homage of all
 created Baing. For itis the Pranaript Atma, the Prins
 Shale.
      For those by whom inorganic msttar was considered to
 bbe “dead” or lifeless, it followed that it coald have no
 Fovling-Conacioumess, sive the Intter was deemed to be an
 attribute of lif, Farther, consciousness was denied because
it was, ond is indeed now, commonly assumed that every
‘conscious experience pre~supposes a subject, oonssious of
 beingauch, attending to.an object. As ProfessorP. Mukhyo-
pédhyéya (“Approiches to Truth”) has well pointed out,
coacioumess Was identified with intaligence or under-
standing—that is with direotad consciousness ; so. that
whore no dizeotion oF fox is, discernible, Western thinkers
Ihave been apt to imagine that conscioumess as such has
‘also concod. ‘To their pragmatic oye consciousness is always
partioular having « pertioular direction and form.
      According, howover, to Indian views, there aro three
states of conscioumess: (1) ¥enpramental supreme conscious-
‘ness dissociated from tind. This is the Paramitma Chit
which is the basis of all existence, whether organic or in-
ongenic, and of thought ; of which tbe Shruti says, “know
‘that which does not think by the mind and by which the
rind itself  is thought.” ‘There are then two main manifested
states of consciousness: (2) conscionsness associated with
‘mind in organic matiar working through its vehicles of
‘mind nd matter ; (8) eonscionsness associated with and
almost entisely veiled by inorganic gross mattor (Bhita)
only; auch as tho muffled consciousness, evidenced by ite
response to external stimuli,as shown in the experiments
with which Sir Jagedish Booe's main is associated. Where
are weto drav the lowest limit of sensation ; and ifa limit
bbe assigned, why there ? As Dr. Ems: Mach has pointed
                               300
                        MAYA-SHAKTI
  cout (Analysis of Sensations, 248) the question is natural
  enough if we start from the commonly current physical
  conception. It is, of course, not asserted that inorganic
 ‘matter    is conscious to iteslf in the way that the higher
 ‘organized life is. The response, however, which it mekes
 to stimuli is evidence that consciousness is there, though
 it lies heavily veiled in and imprisoned by it. Tnonganio
 ‘matter displays it in the form of that soed or rudiment of
   entioncy which, enlarging into the simple pales of feeling
of tho lowest degroes of organized lif, at length emergesin
 ‘the developed self-conssious senautions of human lif, Owing
to imperfect scientific knowledge, the first of these aspects
 ‘was not in eatiquity capable of physical proof in the same
 ‘way  or to the same extent, as Modern Stience with ts delicate
 instruments have made possible. Starting, however, from.
 the revesied and intuitionally held trath that ll wae Brah-
 man, the eondhusion neoessurily, followed. All Bhfita is
 composed of the three Gunas or fsotors of Prakciti or the
 paycho-plysioal potentials, sis the Sattva or Principle of
‘Presentation of Consoioume in gross matter (almost entiely
 suppressed by Tamas       or the Principe of Yelling  of Conscions-
 ness though    i be) which manifests    the phenomona of sonsibi-
 lity observed in matter. Ta shortsnsturit has been well said,
 ‘knows no sharp boundaries or yawning gulls, though we may
ignore the subile connecting iinks between things. There
 i no break in continuity. Being and Consciousness are co-
 extensive. Consciousness is not limited to thoseorganized   centres
 in the Ether of consciousness which ate called
  bodies. But just    a life is diferent expressed   in the mineral
  and in man, ao is Conscionmess which many have been apt
 ‘othinkexistain     the developed animal and even in'men only.
       ‘Consciousness (Ckit-Shakt) exists im all the hierarchy
  of Being, and is, infact, Being. Tt is, however, in all bodios
  ‘eile   by te power or Mayt-Shakti whichis composed of the
  three Gunss. Tn inorganic matter, oving to the predomin~
  ‘ance of Tamas, Consciousness is so greatly veiled and the
                                   301
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 life force is so restrained that wo get the appearunce of
 ingensitility, inertia and mere mechanical energy. Ia
 organized bodies, the action of Tamas is gradually lessened,
 0 that the members of the universal hierarchy become more
 and more Sittvik as they astend in the scale of evolution.
 Consciousness iteaf doas not change. It remains the same
 throughout. What does changeis its wrmppings, unconsci-
‘ous of apparently so, as they may alternatively be called.
 ‘This weappingis Mays and Prakriti with their Gunas. ‘The
 figuro of “wrapping” is apt to illustrate the presentment
 of Sitikhya and Miyavida. From the Shakta aspect we
 ray oompare the process to one in which it being aacumed
‘hat in one aspect there ia an unchanging light, in anothor
itis cither tumed up oF tured dowa as the case may be.
 Tn gross matter the lighsia/¢0, turned down tht it is not
ordinarily perceptible and even delicate scientific experiment
ay give rise to contanding assertions. When the veiling
‘by Tama is Jestened in organi life, and the Siva is thus less
‘bound in matter, the same Consciousness (for there is no
other) which previoasly manifasted ss, what seems to us, 0
‘more mechanfesl resction, manifests in is freer environment
in that seasation which we astosinto with constioumess as
popularly understood. Shakti who ever negates Herself as
‘Mayi-Shaleti, more and move reveals Herself as Chit-Shakti.
‘Them is taus a progressive release of Gonssiousess from the
‘bonds of matter, uti it attsins complete freedom or liber-
ation (Moksha) when the Atma is Iteslé (Atma Svardpf) oF
‘Puro Conscioumess. At this point, the same Shakti, who
Ihad operatedas Miya,   is Horself Conscionsness (Chidriipin!).
      According to the Hindu books, plants have a sort of
dormant Conseiousness, and are capable of pleasure and
pain. Chalrmpin says in the Bhinumat        thst ithe Consofons-
ness of plants ia a Kind of stupedied, daskened, or comatose
Consciousness. Udayena lso says that plents have a
dormant Consciousness which is very dull. ‘The differences
between plant and animal life have always been regaaded
                               302
                       MAYA-SHAKTI
 by the Hindus as being one not of kind, bub of degree. And
  this principle maybe epplied throughout, Life and Consci+
  ‘ousness is not a product of evolution. ‘The latter merely
  ‘manifests it, Mann speaks of plants as being creatures
  enveloped by darkness caused by past deeds having, how
  ver, an internal Oonseiousness and a capecty for plessare
  and pein. And, in the Mahabhéenta, Bhrigu says to
  Bhamdhvéja that plants possess the various sensee, for
  they aro aflctad by heat, sounds, vision (whereby, for
 instance, the creeper pursues its path to the light), odours
‘and tho water which they taste. I may refer also         to such
 stories as that of the Yimalarjmavziksbs of the Shrinsd
 ‘Bhagevata mentioned in Professor Brojendrs Nath Seal's
 learned work on “Tho Positive Srimees of the Ancient
 Hindus”, and Professor 8, N, Das Gupta's scholarly paper
 ‘on Parindina to which T am indebted for these instances.
       Man is suid to have passed throughall lowor states of
  Consciousness tnd is copeble of reeching the highest through
  ‘Yogs. Tho Siva attains birth as man after having been, itis
 said, Lorn 84lalchs(€4,00,000) of times   as plants (Vaishali),
  aquatic animals (Jalayoni), insects and the like (Krimi),
  binds Rakhi), beasts (Pashvadi), and monkeys (BGnara). He
 ‘thenis bom 2 las of times (200,000)     in the inforior species
‘of humanity, and then gradually    attains « better  and better
  Disth until he is libertad from all the bonds of matter.
The exact number of each kind of birth is in 20, 0 11,
  10, 80, and 4 lakhs, espectively—84 lakhs, As pointed out
by Maksmahopddhytya Chondrakénta Tarkilefikira Leo-
 ‘tures on “Hindu Philosophy” (6th year, p. 227, Lecture
  VID), preappoarance in monkey’ forins is not.’ Wester
 ‘theory only. ‘The Constiousness which manifests in him
 is nob altogether a new orestion, but an unfolding of that
  whioh has ever existed in the elements of which he is com-
 ‘posed, and in the Veuetable end Animal through which
 rorto his human birthhe has passed. In him, however,
  matteris oo re-arranged and orgenized ss to permit of the
                               303
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 fullest menifestation which has hitherto existed of the
 underlying Chit. Man's is the bith so “difficult of ettain-
 ‘ment (Durlabha). This is sn oft-repeated statement of
 Shastrain order that he should avail himself of the opportu-
 ‘ities which Bvolation hus brought him, If he does not, he
 falls bac, and may do so without limit, into gross matter
 again, possing intermedintely through the Hells of suffering.
 ‘Wostem writers in general deseribe such descent as un-
 scientific. “How. they ask, can a man's Consciousness reside
 jn an animal or plant? ‘The correct anawer (whatever be
 ‘popular bole ia that it doos not. When man sinks again
into an animal ho couse to ba a man. He dots not continne
 ‘to be both man and animel. His consciousness is an enimal
 cousciousness ond not a human consciousness. Tt isa
 childish view which regaids such a case as being the
 imprisonment of ¢ maa in/an animal body. If he cango up
 Ine can abo go- down. The: soul ot subtle body is not
 ‘fixed but, an evolving thing. Only Spinis (Chit) is eternal
 ‘and. unchanged. ‘In man, the revealing constituent of
 Pralciti Shakti (Battvaguns) commences to more fully
  develop, and his consciousneas is fully aware of the objective
 ‘orld end his own Bgo, and dispoys itself in all those fune-
 tions of it which aze called his faculties. We here teach
  the world of ideas, but these are & superstructure on consti
  ousnest and not ita foundation or basis. ‘Man's eonecious-
  ness is sill, however, veiled by Méyé-Shakti. With the
  greater predominance of Settvaguna in man, consciousness
  Tecomes more and more divine, until he is altogether fred.
  of the bonds of May, and the Jive Consciousness expands
  into the pure Brahman Conacioutness. ‘Thus life and Con-
  sciousness oxist throughout. Alls ving, All ia Conscious
  nes, Tn the world of gross motter they seem to disap-
  ‘peor, being almost suppressed by the veil of Mayt-Shakti’s
  ‘Tamoguna, As however ascent is made, they are less and
  less veiled, and True Conscioumess is at length realized in
  Samidbi and Moksha. Chit-Shukti and MAyé-Shalci exist
                                304
                          MAYA-SHAKTI
  ingepamble throughous the whole universe. ‘There is there-
 {fore according to the principles of the Shikia Shastra not
4 pattiolo of matter which is without life and consciousness
  variously displayed or concealed though they be. Manifest
 ‘Mayi-Shakti is the universe in which Chit-Shakti is the
 ‘hangoless Spirit. Unmsnifest Mayt-Shalti is Conscious-
 ness (ChidrOpini). There are many persons who think
 that they have disposed of a dootrine when they have given
 it an opprobrious, ot what they thinke to be an opprobrious,
 name. And ao they dub all this “Animism”, which the
 reader of Census Reports associates with primitive and
 savage tribes. There are some people who are frightened
 ‘by names, It is not names but facts which should touch us,
 Curtsinly “Animism” is in some reepecta an incorrect and
 childlike way of putting, the matter. It is, however, an
 imperfect presentasent of 9 contral truth which has been
 ‘held by some of the profoundest thinkers in the world, even
in an age which wa aze apt to think to be superior to all
 ‘others. Primitive man in his simplicity made discovery of
 ‘several puch tmths, And so it has been well said that the
 simple savage and tho child who regard all existonce as ain
 ‘0 their own, living ana feding like himself, havo, notwith-
 standing their orzors, more truly felt the pulse of being, than.
 ‘the civilized man of culture. How essentially stupid some
  of the latter ean be nesds no proof. For the process of
  civilization being one of abstraction, they are less removed
  from the concrete fact than he is. Hence their errors which
  seem the more contorted due to the mass of useless verbiage
  in which they are exprossed. And yet, as extremes      meet, $0
  Thuving passed throagh our present condition,   we may   regain
  ‘the truths perceived by the simple, not only through formal
  worship but by that which coussts of the pursuit of sll
  ‘knowledge and s:ience, when once tht husk of all material
  ‘thinking is cast oside, For him who goes the Motherin Soall
  ‘things, all scientific research is wonder and worship.was a
  Gratry said that the calovlus of Newton and Leibnits
                                  395
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
supmdogical procedure, and thet geometric induction is
essentisly a proosse of prayer, by which he evidently mesat
fan appeal from the faite mind to the Infinite, for light on
finite concerns. Tho seeker looks upon uot mere mechanical
‘movements of so-called “dead” matter, but the wondrous
play of Her Whose form all matter is. As She thus reveals
‘Horseli Sho indwoos in him a passionate exaltation and that
sense of security which is only gained as approaci is made
to the Cental Heart of things. For, asthe Upenishod says,
 “Fie only fears who sees duality”. Some day may be, when
fone who unites in himeelf the scientific ardour of the West
‘nd the allembroing religious feeling of India will create
another and a modem Chandi, with its multiple salutations
to-the sovereign World-Mother (Namastasyai namo namah).
Sach an one, seeing the changing magvels of Her world-play,
wil exclaim with the Voginthridaya Tantra, ‘'I salute Her
‘the Samvid Kslé who shines in the form of Spuce, Time
and all Objects therein.”
      Deshakllopadérthdima yod yad vost yathd yathd,
      ‘Pattadrdpena yf hati tam shraye samvidam kal.
      ‘This is, howover, not mero Neture-worship os it is
generally understood in the Wesb, or the wotship of Force
ts Keshub ChunderSen took the Shakta doctsine to be. All
‘hings exist in the Supzame who in Ttslf infinitely trans-
‘oends all finite forms. It is the worship of God as the
‘Mother-Creatrix who manifests in the form of all things
‘which are, as it were, but an atom of dust on the Fost of
‘Her who is Infinite Being (Set), Experience (Chit), Love
(Ananda) and Power (Shakti), As Philibert Commerson
said: “Le vie d’an naturaliste est, je Lose dize, une edo-
ration prague porpétnelle.”
      have in my paper “Shakti and My” (here reprinted
from the Indian Philosophioel Review, 1918, No.2) contrast
ed the three different concepts of the Primal Energy as Prak-
ziti, May and Shakti of Séaikhya, Veddnta end the Agama
respectively. I will not, therefore, repeat myself but wil
                              306
                         MAYA-SHAKTI
 only summarise conclusions here. In the first place, there
 fre features oommor to all thise conoepta. Hitherto, greater
 ppsins bave been taken to show the differences between the
 Darshanss thin to co-ordinste than systematically, by
 regarding their points of agresment or as regard apparent
 disngreement, their view-point. It bas beon eaid that
 ‘Truth cannotbe found in such a country as Indi, in whic,
 ‘here are six ayatems of philosophy disputing with one
 another, and where, even ia one system alone, there is &
 confict bobmeen Dvaita, VibishtAdvasta and Advaita. One
 might suppose fem such a eritcism thot all in Europe
 ‘vere of one mind, or that at lsat tho Christian Community
  ves agrood, intoud of being split up, asi is, into hundreds
 fects, An Amerisan bumourist observed with truth that
 ‘ze was 8 good deal of buen usiare in man evecywhen.r
 ‘Of couse ther is diforance which, 9-the Radd-ul-Mfohta
‘sa7s, is also the git of God. This is not to deny that rath
is only one. Ib is merely     to recogniza that whilst ‘Truth is
  one, the nabare and capacities of thogs  who sek it, or claim
 ‘0 possess it, vary. Tose a commen metaphor, the same
  ‘white light which ess through varicoloured glass takes
  nite various cclsa. All cannot, apprehend the trath to
the samo extect or in thesame way. Hence                the sensible
Tndisn doctzine of competenoy oF Adhikéra,            In  tho Chris
  ‘inn Gospel it is alo said, “Throw not your pearls           before
  srrine lesb they trample    upen   them  and    then   rend   you.”
  ‘What can be given 0 any man is only what be oanstandands   rosive
        ‘The Six Philosophies represent dilering which the
  accor               manner and to the extentto
              to the ding
  ‘one Trath may be apprehended. Each standard goetnotions      a step
  beyond the last, sharing, however, with    it  certain             in
  commen. As regards the present mater, al these systems
  start with the fact that there is , Spirit    and Mind-Matter,
  Consciandousnes                  s apparent or real. 8A5-
                       Uneorscousness
  eiys, Vedanta andthe Shika’ secondAgama Proksti, called the fst
  Porushe, Brahman, Shiva ; end the                            Maya,
                                  307
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Shakti respectively. All agree that it is from the associa
tion together of these two Principles thatthe universe arses
sand that such association is the universe. All, again, grea
thws one Principle, namely, the frst, is infinite, formless
‘consciousness, and the secondis @ fining principle which
makes forms. Thirdly, all rogard this last          as a veiling
principle, that is, one which veils consciousness : and hold
‘tat it is eternal, all-pervading, existing now as sod (MGla~
pralsiti, Avyalcte) and now as fruit (Vikriti), composed of
‘the Gunos Sativa, Rojas and Tamas (Principles of presenta-
tion of Consciousness, Action, and Veilingof Consciousness
respectively) ; unperoeivable except through its effects, In
al, ibis the Netaral Principle the material cause of the
material universe
      ‘The word Prakciti has heen said to be derived from the
soot “Kr”, and the ailix “Rein”, which is added to oxpresd
Bhava or the abstract des, and sometimes the Karma
or object) of the action, corresponding with the Gresle
fix Sie, Ktin infected jn the nominative become ts
Prakriti therefore, has Teen anid to comtespond with Phusis
(Natare) of the Grocks. In all thine aysteims, therefore,
it ia, os the “natural,” contrasted with the “spictual”
spect of things,
      ‘The first main point of difference is bebween S&Akhya,
on the one hand, and the Advaita Vedanta, whether as
interpreted by Shaikara or taught by the ShaivaShakta
‘Tentra on tho othor. Classical Sifikhya ia a dualistic
system, whereas the other two aro not(-dualistic. The
classical Safiehya posts a plurality of Atmans representing
‘the formless consciowsess, with one unconscious Prakriti
which is formative activity. Pralmiti is thus © real inde-
pendent principle, Vedntic monism does not altogether
discard theso two principles, but says that they cannot exist
as two independent Realities. There is only one Brahma.
‘The two categories of Safkhya, Purusbs and Pralciti are
reduoed to one Reality, thn Brahman; othermise the Valeys,
                               308
                         MAYA-SHAKTI
  “All this is verily Brahman” (Sarvam khalvidam Brahina),
 is told, = *
        ‘But how is this eflected? It is on this point thet
 ‘Mayivéde         of Shaflkare ond the Advaits of Sbaive-Shakta
 Agama differ. Both systems agree that Brahman has two
 fspecis in one of which It is transomdent and in another
 conative and immanent. Asooeding to Shailkara, Brahman
 is in ono aspect Ichvara sazooisted with, and in another ono
 issocited from May8 whioh, ia hip systems, occupies the
 lace of the Sankhyan Praiiti, to which               it is (save as to
  reality end independence) similer, What is Maya! It is
not teal independent Principe like the Stikkhyon Prakriti.
 Then is it Bmhman or not? According to Shaiikare,
 itis an unthinkable, alogicel, unexplainable (Anirvachantya)
 mystery. It is on eternal falaity (Mithyabhdea santtant),
  owing what false appearance of reality it possesses to tho
  Brahinan, with Whioh in one aspect itis associated. Ib is
  not real for thereis only one such, Tt cannot, however, be
  said  to be unreal     for itis the cause of tnd is empirical experi-
  cence. Itis something which         is neither rel (Bat) nor unreal
  (Asat), nor partly real and partly unreal (Sedasst),and which
  though not forming part of Bratman, and therefore not
  Brahman, is yet, though not © second reality, inseparably
  sovosiated and sheltering with (Miya brokméshrita) Bral-
  ‘man in Tis Ishvera aspect. Like the Sétichyan Prakriti,
  Maya (whatever it be) is in the nature of am umoonscious
  principle, ‘The universe appears by the zofeotionof ocnsoi-
  fousnest (Purusbe, Brakmsa) on unconsciousness (Prelit,
  ‘May8), Tn this way the anconscious is made to appear
   conscions. This is Chidabbtse.
         Miyf is ilusive and so is Shafikamn’s definition of it,
   Further, though May is not a sccond reality, but « myste~
   Hous something of which neither reality nor unreslity oan
 bbe affirmed, the fact of positing it at all in this form gives
   to Shatkara’s doctrine & tinge of dualism from which the
   Shilta docteine       is fres. For, it is to be noved that notwith-
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  standing that Maya is a flaty, i is aot, scoonding to Shali-
  Tears, 6 mere nogetion or want of something (Abhiva), but &
  positive entity (Bhavaripam ajafnam), thee isin the neture
  of » Power which veils (Achchhidsks) conssionsnes,
  Prakriti does in the case of Purusha. Shakuras syetem,
  ‘on the other hand, ss this advantage from 8 monistio
  stendpoint, that whilst he, like the Shiite, posits, the
  octrine of aspocts saying that in one aspect the Brabman
  is associated with Maya (Tshvare) and in another it is not
  (Pazabrekman) ; yet in usither aspect does his Brahman
  change. Whereas, according’ to Shaltia doctrine, Shiva
  does, in one aspect, that is as Shakti, change.
        ‘Whilst then Shofkore’s teaching is consistent. with
 ‘the changelessness of Brahman, he is not so successfulin
 cstablishing the saying, “All this ig Brohmen"’. The posi
 tion is reversed np regatds Shaiva-Shdite Darshans which
 pute forth ite doctrine of Mya-Shalti with greater simpli
 city. Shikia doctrine tales the saylng, “All this is Brah-
 ‘an (the realization of which, as the MahSnirvana Tantra
 states,is the aia and end of Kultchira) in ite literal sense,
  “This” is the universe. Then the universe    is Brahman, But
 ‘Brahman is Conacioumess.. ‘Thon   the universe is really That,
 But in whet way? Shafikam says that what we sense
  vith our senses is Méyé, which is practically something,
 Dat ine real sense nothing ; whish yet appears to be some-
 ‘thing because it is associated with the Brakman which
 alone is Real. Ite sppearsnoeof independent reality is thus
Dorrowed and is in this sense ssid to be                       “ilusory”.
 When, therefore, we s07, “All this is Brahman’
 ing to Shafikars, his means thst what is at the back
 cof that which we see ip Bmhman ; the rest ot appearanoe
 is Maya. Again, accosiing to Shafkara, man is spirit
 (Himé) vesiured inthe Mayile isis “of mind and
 rstte He, accordingly, can then only establish thé
 ‘mity of Ishvars and Jiva by eliminating from the finst
 Maya, and from the second Avidya ; when Brabman is left
                                  30
                     MAYA-SHAKTI
4s a common denominator, The Shikta, however, slimi-
nates nothing. For him, in the strictest sense, “All is
Brahmsn”. For him, man’s spirit (Aimé) is Shiva. His
‘mind and body are Shakti. But Shiva and Shakti are one.
Peramitma is ShivaShaldti in undistinguishable union.
‘Tivitma is Shiva-Shakti in that state in which the Self is
distinguished from the not-Self. ‘Man, therefore, according
to the Shika Tantm, is not Spirit seemingly dothed by 8
noi-Brahman falsity, but spisit covering Itself with its own
power or Mayd-Shalti. All is Shakti whether os Chit-
Shaleti or Mayé-Shakti. When, therefore, the Shika

 snd Chit-Shakti
       Shiva as Parabeahman’ is Shive-Shakti in that state
 when Shakti is not operating and in which Sho is Herself,
 ‘tat ie, pure consciousness (Chidrpin!), Shiva as Ishvara is
 Shiva-Shakti in that stare in which Shiva, aasooiated with,
 Mayt Shale, isthe source of movement and change ; Shivs-
Shaldi os Jiva is the state produced by such sction   which is
 subject to Mayh, from which Ishvara, the Méyin is free,
 ‘The oreative Saat is therefore chéngeloss Oi-Shaktiand
 changing Mly8-Shakti, Yet the One Shalit must never be
 conesived as existing apart from, or without the other, for
 they azo only twin aspects of the fundamental Substance
  (Paravastu). Vimarsba-Shalti (See Kémalalévildsa, Vol.
 X, Tintik Texts, Bd, A. Avalon) as Mayé-Shakti pro-
 ‘duces the fooms in which Spisit as Chit Shalt inheres and
 which it dluminstes (Prakdsha), But Mayé-Shalti is not
 ‘unconscious. How cau it bo ; for it is Shakti and one with
 GhibSbaiti, AU Shakti is and must te Conssiousness.
 ‘There is n0 upcenssious May8 which is not Brskman and
 ‘yet aot separste from Brohinan, Brahman slone is and
 exists, whether as Chit or ns manifestation of May&. All is
 Consciousness, as the so-called “New Thought”    of the West
 also afirms
                               3m
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      But surly, it will bo anid, thereis an unconscious ela-
‘ment in things. How is this accounted for if thers be no
‘uuoonscions May8? It is conscious Shakti veiling Herself
and s0 appearing as limited consciousness. In other words,
whilst Shafara says mind and matter are in themselves
‘unconscious but appear to be conscious through Chiddbhass ;
‘the Shaka Agama reverse the position, and saya that they
are in thamselves, thet isin thoit ground, conscious, fo they
are st base Chit; but they yet appear to he unconscious,or
‘more siritly limited consciousness, by the veiling power of
Consciousness Half as Mayé-Shsicti. ‘This being ao, there is
‘no noed for Chidabhtiaa which assumes, ast wore, avo things,
‘the Brahman, and unconscious Maya in which the former
reectaitsel.” Though some of the Shistras do speak of a
selection, Prativimbs is between Shiva and Shakti. Broh-
‘man is Mayi-Shalrti in that aspett in which it negates itself,
for itis the funotion of Shakti to, negate (Nishedhavyapera-
ripa shaktil), as it is said by Yoga-RAja or Yoga Moni
{00 he is alo called) in his oommentary-on Abhizava Gupte’s
Poramfrthasiea. In the Shikta-‘Tantms, it is a common
‘saying of Shiva to Devi, “There is no difference betieen
Mo snd Thee.” Whilst Shaikara’s Tshvara is assovintod
with tho unoonscious May, the Shaiva Shilta's Tshvara
is never associated with anything but Himself, that is as
‘Maya-Shaketi.
      ‘Whether this doctrine ie accepted as the final solution
of things ot not, it is both grest and powerful. I is
great because the whole world is seen in glory acconi-
ng to the strtest monism. as the manifestation of
‘Him   ond Het. ‘The mind is not distracted    and kept from
the realization of unity, by the notion of say unconscioas
‘Maya which is not Brahman nor yet separata fom It
Next, this doctrine accommodates iteelf to Wostem scinti
£8) monism, so far as the Intter goes, adding to it however a
rligious and metaphysical busis; infusingit with the epiit
fof devotion. It is powerful because its standpoint is the
                               jta
                      MAYA-SHAKTI
 ‘here’ and ‘now’, and not the transcendental Sida otand-
 point of which most men know nothing and cannot, oulside
 SmaAdhi, realize. 1t assumes the reality of the world which
 ‘to us is real. Tt allows the mind to work in its nevaral
 channel, It does not ask it to deny what goes ageinst the
 grain of its constitution to deny. Tt is, again, powerful
 ‘because,we stand firmly planted on s bs is which        ia real
 and natoral    to us. From the practical viewpoint, it does
 nat ask man to eschew and flee from the world in the
 ‘pint of ascotisism ; s coume repuznant to x large number
 cof modem minds, not only bocsuse mere aseoticism often
 involves what it thinks to bo a futile seltdenial ; but be-
‘cause that mind is waking to the trath that all is one ; that
 it so to deny the world is in a sense to deny an aspect of
‘That which is both Being and Becoming. It thinks also
 ‘that wast some natures are naturally ascetio, to attempt
asceti treatment in the case of most isto contort the natural
 being, and to intensify the very evils which asceticism seeles
 to avoid. Not ono man in many thousands has true
‘Vainlye or detachment       from the world. Most are thorough-
 ly even gluedto it, Again, there are many minds which
 are puzzled und confused by MAyavida and which, thore-
 foro, faleoly interpret it—may be to their horn. These
 men, Méy8vade, or rather their misindamtanding of it,
  weakens   or destroys, ‘Their grip on themselves and the
  world is in any cose enfectled. ‘They became intellectual
 ‘and moral derslcts who are neitheron the path of power
 norof renunciation, and who have neither the strength to
  follow worldly life, not to traly abandon it. It ie not neces-
 sary, however, to renounce when al is seen to be Her. And,
  when all is 80 seen, then. the spiritual illumination which
 ‘ronsfuses all thoughts and acta makes them nobleand pure.
  {eis impossible for « man, who in ahatover sense traly aces
 God in all things,     to er. IE be docs 50, ibis beoaasehia
  vision ia not fully strong and pure; and to ths extent seope
  is affonied to error. But given pevioct spiritual eyesight
                                 313
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  then all “this” is pure. For, as the Greeks profomdly
  seid, “pants kathara tois katharois", “To the pure all
  ‘things are pure”.
        ‘The Shilta’ doctrine is thus one which        hus not only
  grandeur but is greatly pragmatic and of exclling worth.
  Te has slways bem to me a surprise that ite value
  should not have been rightly appreciated. I can
  only sappose that ita neglect is due to the fact that it
 is the doctrine of the Shikts Tantras. ‘That fnot has boon
  enough to warrant its rejection, or at least = refusel to
 fexanize it, Like all practical doctrines, itis alao intensely
  positive. There are none of those negations which weaken and
 ‘hioh annoy those who, as the vital Westem mind does, fs!
 themselves to be strong and living in an atmosphere of might
sand power. For powerisaglorious thing. What is wanted
 in only the sense. that all Power is of God and is God, and
 that Bhava or feeling which interprets all thoughts and acts
and their objects    in terms of the Divine, and which ses God
 nnd aa all things. ‘Those who truly doso will exercise power
 not anly without wiong, bub with that compassion (Karunh)
 forall beings whichis so beoutiful a feature of the Buddbs
of northem and TWntrik Buddhism, For in them Shakti
  Herself has descended, ‘This is Sboktipéta, as itis techni
  cally oaled in the Tantra Shastra; the descent of Shakti
  which Westem theclogy calls tho grace of God. Bub grace
  is truly not some exterior thing, though we may pictorially
  think ofit as streaming’ from above below. Atma nether
  comes nor goes. ‘To be in grace      ia that state in which man
  commences to realize himealf Shiva-Shalti, His power
                                    as
 is, to use a Western phrase, “converted”. Ibis tured from
 ‘the husk of mere oubwordness and of limited selfsecking, to
  ‘shat inner Reality which is the great Saif Which, ab base,
  he (ia this doctrine) is.
        ‘The principlesof ShAkto doctrine which will vary ao-
  cordingto mace, are a regenerating dootrine, giving strength
 ‘where there is weakness, and, where strength exists, dresting
                                 34
                      MAYA-SHAKTI
 ittosight ends. “Shivo? hom”, “Lam Shiva”,“"84" ham",
 “Tam She (the Devt)", the Tantras say. ‘The Westeza
ray call It by some other name. Some call It this and
 some that, as the Ved says, “Lam He”, “I am Sho”, “I
 aun Tt”, mations      not to the Shiteso long as man identifies
 himself with the ‘Oversoul’,and thus harmonizes himself
 with its Being, with Dharmio eotions (as it manifests in the
 world) end therefore. neosssasly with Tt trun ends. In ite
 comple form the Shakte doctrine is moniatio. But      to those
 to whom monism mals no appeal,th Shikts will say that
 Dy adopting ite spi, so far as the forme of thet belief and
‘worship llow, they will experience a election ofthe joy and
 strongth of those who truly live becouse they worship Hex
 ‘who is Bterallife—-the Mother who is seated on the couch
 of Shivas (Mahsprete), in the Isle of Gems (Mfenidvipa),
 in the “Oooan of Neotax” whichis ol Being-Consciousness
 and Bliss
        ‘This is the pees! which those who have chursed the
 ocean of Tantra discover. That penal ie there in an Indian
 shell. ‘Thot iso bestifl nacre on the inner sbell whichis
 the Mother of Poss, Oates, the shall is naturally zoagh
 ‘and coarse, and beara the aosretions of weed ond yamaite
‘nd of thingsof all kind which exist, good or bad as we call
 ‘ham, in the ovean of existence (Samsdra). ‘The Saiptare
 lesds man to remove these aceretions, and to pass within
 ‘through. the crust, gross, though not on that adcount only,
  bad; for there is 6 gross (Sthile) and subtle (Scshma)
  aapect    of worship. Finally it lends man to seek to se
  the Mother of Poasl end lastly the Pearl which, enclosed
  ‘therein, shines with the brilliant vot sft ight whichis that
  of the Moon-Chit (Chiohshandsa) Itself



                               35
                           Carmen XVI.
               MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS.*
TPH subject of my lecture to-day is Consciousness oF
         Chit, and Matter or Unooneciousness, that i, Achit ;
‘the unchanging formlessnese and the changing forms. Ac-
cording to Shits AdvaitavAda, man is Consciousnsss-Un-
consciousness or Ohit-Achit ; being Chit-Shalci as regarda
is Antaritma, snd the particularizd May8-Shakti os to
bis material vehicles of mind and body. The reason that
L have selected this subject, amonget the many others on
‘Which I might have addressed you, is that these two ideas
tre the key concepts of Indian Philosophy and religion. If
‘they are fally understood both as to their definition and
relations, thon, all is understoodso fare intellect can make
such matters intelligitleto ma if they are not understood
then nothing is properly understood. Nor are they always
‘understood even by those who profess to mow and waite
on Indian Philosophy. ‘Thus, the work on Vedanta, of an
‘English Orientalist,   now in its seoond edition, describes Chit
‘as the condition of 6 stone or other inert substance. A more
‘sbsund error itis hard to imagine, Those         who talkin this
‘way have not leamt the clemente of their subject, It is
 ‘rue that you will fd in the Shastra, the state of the Yort
 described as being like a log (KAshtevat). But this does
 rot mean thet his Consciousness is that of a piece of wood :
 bit that he no moxe peresives the extemal world then a log
 ‘af wood does. He does aot do aa because he bas the Samadhi
 consciousness that is Uumination and trae Being itself.
        ‘Lean to-night only scratch st the surface of a profound
 subject. ‘To properly expound it would require a series of
 leotures, ond to understand    it in its deptis, yearsof thinking
 ‘thereon, I willlook at the matter first from the scientific
      Bas Seamer f Aides davend ata Das Btn Peat, Jane
                                316
         MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
point of views secondly, state what those concepts mean in
‘themselves ; and’ thindly, show how they are related to one
‘notherin the Satya and the Mayavads and Shaktivada
psentments of Vedinta doctrine. ‘The Shaktivids of
‘hich Ideal to-night may be found inthe Tantmas, Tt has
been suppos   that
                edthe Agamas arose  at the close of the age
of the Upanishads. They are Shastras of the Upasand
Kanda dealing with the worship of Saguns Tahvars. Tt has
been conjectared that thay aroas partly beca      of use
                                                     the delin-
ing strength of the Vaidika Achiss, and partly becauseof
‘increasing number of persona within the Hind fold, who
‘wore not competent for the Vaidike Zchfira, and, for whom
some spiritual dsvipline was necessary.” One common
fexture distinguishes tham; namely, thls toaching ie for
all castes and all vomen.. They express the liberal principle
‘tbat whilst socily. diferenses may. exist, the path of
relig     is ogenion
                   toll, and that spixtaal competency and nob
the external sims of oaste determine the position of persons
on that path, Takara in those Agamss is worshipped in
‘threefold forma as Vishnu, Shiva, Devi Therefore, the
Agames or Tuntras are threefold, Vaishnava, Shaiva and
Shalt, such as tho Pancharitze Agamas of the fet group,
the Shsiva SiddhGata (with ite 26 Tanteos), the Nekulisha
PAshupata, and the Kashmisian Tika of the second group 3
‘nd tho alloged division into Kauls, Mishra, Stmsya of the
‘third group. express no opinion on this last division. I
‘merely raft to this matter in onder to explain what T mean
‘by the word Agama. 'The Shaktivada, however, which I
contcast with Mayavida to-day, is taken from the Shakta
‘goms. By Mayivada I mean Shatkars's exposition of
Vedin‘a
     Now, with reformoo to the ecient aspect: of the
subject, Lshow you that in three main partiolans, modem.
vrester phyries and peychology support Indian philosophy,
whatever such support may be worth. Indved, Mo. Lowes
Dickinson, in an acute recent analysis of the state of
                              3H
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ideas in Tndia, China and Japan observes that the Indien
 form of religion and philosophy is that which most easily
 ‘ocommodates itself to modern western science. That does
 not. prove'it is true, until it is established that the concla-
 sions of westem science to which it does conform are true.
 ‘But the fact is of great importance in countering those who
 Ihave thought that easter ideas were without rational
 foundation. Tt is of equal importance to those two classes
 ‘who cither believe ia the ideas of India, or in the partioular
 conclusions of science to which I refer. Tho three pointa
 fon this head are ftly, that physicist, by increasing their
 Inovwiedge of so-alled “matter”, have hoon        led to doubt its
 reality, and have dematerialized the stom, and, with i,
 the entire universe whick the various atoms compose. ‘The
 tuinity of matter, ether and electricity out of which science
 ‘as hitherto attempted to constractthe world, bas been
 redused to & single lament>-the other (which snot scientific
 matter") in state of motion. Acconling to Stiikhyn,
 tho objective worldis composed of the Bhitas which derive
 ultimately from Alctabn. - do not say that scientific “other”
  is Aktsha, which is a concept belonging to a different supertrain
 of thought. Moreover     the sensible is derived  from  the
 sensible Aktsha Tanmitrs, and is not therefore an ultimate,
 ‘But it is importent to note the agreement in this, that
 both in Bast and West, the various foams of gross matter
 derive from same single substance which is not “matter”
 ‘Matter in dematerialieed, ond the way     is made for the Indian
 ‘concopt of Mayé. There     is a point ab which the mind cannot
 any longer wefilly work outward. Therefore, after the
 ‘Tanmétra the mindia turned withinto discover their cause
 in that Egoism which, reaching forth to the world of enjoy-
 rent produges sensorium, senses, nd objects of sensation.
 ‘That the mind snd aensea exe els0 material bss the support
‘of some forms of western plilesopby, auch as that of Herbert
 Spancer, for he holds that the Universe, whether physical ot
 ‘sychieal, is a playof foroe which in the case of matter we
                                 318
         MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
 ‘experience as objoct. Mind as such is, bo aye, as much
  a “matarial” organ’ as the brain and outer sense-orgons,
‘though they are difering forms    of Rorce. His adlimantion that
 scientific “matter” is an appearance produced by the slay
‘of cosmic foree, and that mind itealfisa product      of the ame
  play, is what Safkhya and VedBnta hold. ‘The way again
 is opened for the concept, Maya. Whit, however, Spenost
 ‘and the Agnostic School liold that the Reslity behind. thece
 phenomena is unknowable, the Vedanta affirms that it is
 Inowable and is Consciousness ital, ‘This i tho Self than
 ‘which nothing can be more intimately known. Foros is
 Tlind. Wo discover consciousness in the Universe. It is
 reasonable to suppose thotif the fst oause ie of the nature
‘of either Conscionsnessor Matter, and aot of both, it mustbe
  ofthe nature of the former and not of the later. Usconsci-
 ‘ousness or object, may be oonceived to modify Consoious-
 ‘ness, but not to produce Consciousnesouts ofits moanscious
  Salt, Accondingto Indian ideas, Spit which is the cause of
 ‘the Universe is pure Consciouscess. ‘This is Nisbkala Shiva :
  and, as the Creator, the grat Mother or Devi. The exis-
  tence of pure consciousness in the Indian sense has been
  decried by some thinkers in the West, where generally to its
  ‘magmatic oye, Conscioueness is always particular having a
‘ertioular ditection snd form. Tt amos this purtioulaity,
  however, through Maya. We must distinguish bebween Con
  sciounese a such and modes in consciousness. Conscious-
  ness is the unity behind oll forms of consciousness, whether
  sensttion, emotion, instinct, will or reason. ‘The claim that
  Consciousness as such exists can only be verified by spiritual
  experience. All high mystic experieness, whetberin Bast o
  ‘West, have boen experiences of unity in difering forms and
  degrees. Even, however, in normal life as wall   as in abnormal
  pathological states,we have ocenonal stretahes of experiance
  in which it becomes almoet structureless. Secondly, the dis-
 covery ofthe subliminal Consciousnesaidss Shistic dootrin
  in so far as it shown that behind    the susface consciousness
                                319
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 of which we aro ondinarily aware, there is yet another
 rysterious fied in which all ite operations grow. It is
 ‘the Buddhi which Boro manifests. Wellestablised oooult
 ‘powers and henomens now generelly accopted such as
 ‘clopathy, thought-reading, hypnotism and the ike are only
 explaingble on hypotheses which approach more neatly
 Hastem doctrine than any other theory which bas in modern
 times prevailed in the West. Thirdly, as bearing on this
 subjeot, we lave now the seieatifio recognition that from its
 ‘materia prima sll forms have evolved ; Ubat there is lif ot
 its potencyin all hinge : and that there sre no breaks in
 nature, Thereis the same matter and Consciousness through
 cout. ‘Thomis unityof life. There      is no such thing as “dead”
 matter. The well-known experiences of Dr. Jagadish Bose
 establish response to stimuli fn inorganic mattec. ‘This res-
 ponse may be interpreted to indicate the existence of that
 Sattva Gana.which Vodinta and Saiiehya affirm to exist in
all things organic or inorgunic. It is the play of Ohitin this
 Sattva,so mufled in Tamas as not to be tevognizable exoopt
 by delicate acientifio experiment, which appeans as the s0-
 called “mechanical” response, Gonscfousnoss is hare veiled
 and imprisoned by Tamas, Inorganie matter displays it in
the form    of that seed or rudiment of sentienoy which, enlaxg-
 ing into the simple pulses of feeling of the lowest degrees
 ‘of organized life, at length emerges in the developed self-
 feonscious sensations of human life. onsciousness is
 ‘hronghout thestme, What varies ite wrappings. There
 i thus, » progressive release of Conscioumees from gross
 matte, through plants and animals to mao. This evolution,
 Indian doctrine has tang       in its 84 las of previcas births,
 “According to the Hindu books, plants have & dormantsoe,and.  coa-
 sciousness. ‘The Mahabharata        says   that plants can
 ‘thus they reach the ight, Such power of vision would have
 ‘been ridiculed not long ago, but, Professor Haterlandt, the
 ‘wallinoven botanist, has established that plants possess an
‘organ of vision in the shape of a convex lens on the upper
                                  370
          MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
 surfuce of the leaf. The animal consciousness is greater, but
 seems to display itseli slmoat entirely in the sutisfaction of
 snimal’s wants. In msn, we reech the world of idoas, but
 these ere a superstructure on consciousness, and not its
 fomndstion or basis, It is in this modeless basis that the
 various modes of conscioumess with which we are familiar
 ‘n onr waking and dreaming ststes ariee.
        ‘The question then ariaes as to the relation ofthis princi-
 plo of Form with Formlessness; the unconscious Snite with
 infinite consciousness. It is noteworthy that in the Thom-
intio philosophy, Matte, like Prakriti, is the particulatizing
 cor finisicing principle. By their definition, however, they
 fre opposed. How then can the tio be ov?
        Sikhya denies that they are one, nd says they are two
 seperate independent principles, This, Vedénta in its tu,
 denies forit says that there is in faot only one true Reslity,
 hough from the empirical, dualistic standpoint there
 seem to be two. The question than is asked, Ts dualism,
 pluralim, oF monism to be accepted? Hor the Veddatist
the answerof Shruti is thab itisthe last, But, apart from
 this, the question in, Does Shruti record s trus experience,
 ‘and is it the foot that. spiritoal experiance is monistio ot
 dualistic | ‘The answer is, a8 Wo om see from history, thet
 ‘all high mystic experiences are experiences of unity in
 dilfering forms and degrees.
        ‘The question cannot be decided solely. by discussion,
 but by our conclusion as to the conformity of the particular
 theory hold with spiritual experience. But how can we
 reconcile the unity of pure consciousness with the plumlity
 of unconstious forme which      the world of exporience gives us ?
 Vednta gives various intellectual interpretations, though     says
 cxperiene sloae can salve this question, Shafkara trans-
 there is only one Sudvasta, the Bratman. From « ia,
 cendental standpoint, Iti, and nothing happens. no There  Tshvara,
 in the state of highest experiencs (Parsmétma),no liberation
 zo oreation, no world, no Jive, no        bondage,
                                  yt
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘But ampirially ho must and docs admit tho word or yd,
‘which in ta sed is the cosmic Sefsktra, whichis the couse
fall these notions which from the highest state are rejestd.
But is it real or unreal ? Shaflkara says ibis neither, Tt
cannot be real, for then there would be two Reals. It is
rot unreal, forthe world is an empirical fact-—an experience
of its kind, and it proceeds from the Power of Ishvara.
In truth, it is mexplainable, end as Styana saye, more
‘wonderful than Ohit itself.
      ‘Bat it is neither Sat nor Asct, than as MayA itis not
‘the Brahman who is Sat. Doss it then existin Pralayn and
if 20 how and where? “How can unconsciousness exist in
ppure consciousness? Shafikare calls it eternal, and says
thtin Pralaya, MBytsattéis Brahmasatt4, At that time,
Maya, as the power of the ideating consciousness, and the
‘world its thought do not exist: and only the Brahmen is,
But if so how dows the next universe atiee on the assump-
tion that there is Pralaya and that there is not with
‘Him os Maya the seed of the future miverse ? A Bija of
Maya es Safire, even though Avyakta (not present to
Conscioumess), is Yot by its terms diferent from conscious-
‘ness. To all sch queationings, Shatkara would say, they
to themeelves the product of the Mays of the state in
‘which they are put. This is true, but itis possible to put
the matterin s simpler way against which thers are not 20
many objections as may be laid agsins> Mayavada,
      Th seems to me that Shafikera who combats Saikhya
is still much influenced Ly itsnotions, and as a result of his
dootzine of Maya he has laid himself open to the.change that
his docizine is not Shuddha Advaita. Ili notion of Maya
retains a trace of the Sifithyan notion of separstaness,
though sepornteness i in fact denied. Tn Safkhya, Maya,
in the real Creatrix under the illumination of Purasha. Wo
find similar notions in Shakers, who compares Chit to
 ‘the Ayaskeintaman’, and denies al liberty of selédetermi-
 nation in the Brakiman whick, though itself unchanging, is
                              oo
         MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
the cause of change. June Rriyhie allowed onlyt Tabara,
‘8 concept which is itaelf the product of Mayd. ‘To some
‘extent the distinctions made axe porhape a matter of words.
‘To some extent particular notions of the Agamas are more
practical thon those of Shafkara who was a tranacendenta-
list.
      ‘The Agams, giving tho richest contentto the Divine
 Consciousness, does not deny to it knowledge, bat, in its
supreme aspect, any dual knowledge ; spiritual experience
 boeing likened by the BrihadArnyaka Upanishad to the
 union of man ant wife in which duality exists as one snd
 ‘there ia neither within nor without. tis thin sion whichis
 the Divine Lila of Shalti, Who in yet all tho time one with
 Har Lord.
       ‘The Shalcta exposition appears to be both simple and
 ‘dear, Loan only skateh it roughly—having no time for
 ite detail It ie est the purest Advaitevida. What then
 does it say ? Te starta with the Shruti, “Saevam Khalvidam
 Brahma”, Sarvam=vworld ; Brahman—consciousness ot
 Sachchidéoanda ; thereforethis word is in itself Conscious
       ‘Bat we know we exe not perfect contsionsnass, ‘There
isan eppatont unconacioumness. How then i this explained?
 ‘The opanifested Bralman, before all the worlds, is Nirguas
 Shiva—the Blssfal dual conscioumess. ‘This isthe stati
 aspect of Shiva. ‘This manifeeta Shakti whichis the kinetic,
 ‘spect of Brahman, Shake and Shaltiman        are ons ; thers-
 fore, Shiva manifests as Shiva-Shakti, Who are one andthe
 same, Therefore Shakti is consciousness.
     ‘But Shekti bas two espects (Mariti), via, Vidy& Shakti
ot Chit-Shakti, and Avidyé Shakti or Maya-Shakti. Both
‘ss Shalt (which isthe same as Shaktimén) arin themsel vas
foossions, But the differance is that whist Chit-Shalt is
‘aninating conseicumess, Maya is a Shakti which veils
‘conscious to itelf, and by ita wondroun power sppears
fas unconscious, ‘This Mayi-Shalt is Consciouaneas which
                              393
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 by its power appears aa unconsciousness. This Maya
 Shakti is Tiguna Shalt, that is, Shakti composed of the
                   This is Kamaklé which is the Trigunat-
                 These Gunas are therefore at base nothing
  but Chit-Sheiti. ‘There is no necessity for the Mayavadin’s
  Chidabhasa, thats, the flection of conscions reality on un-
  conscious unteality, as Mayévada says. Allis real exept,
 in the sense that some things endure and are therefore traly
  real : othars pass and  in that senso only aro not real. Allis
 Brabman. The Antaritma in man is the enduring Chit
 Shakti. His spperently unconscious vehicles of mind and
 body sxe Brahmanas Mayi-Shaleti, that i, consciousness
 fappesting as unconsciousness by virtue of its inscrutable
 power. Ishvera is thus the name for Brahman as Shakti
 ‘whichis conjoined Chit‘Shalti and Méyi-Shakti.
       ‘The Mother Deviis Ishvara considered in His feminine
 aspect (Ishvarl) as the Mother snd Nourisher of the world.
 ‘The Jiva or indivicnal self is an Amehaor fragment of that
 erat Shalei: the dilference being. that whilst Ishvare is
 Miyivin or the eontroller of Maya, Jtva is subject to Maya.
 ‘The Worldthiaker retaina Hix Supreme undual Conscious-
 ‘nese even in crvation, but His thought, that is the forma
 created by His thinking ore bound by His Maya, that is
 ‘the forms with which they identify themselves until by
 ‘the power of the Vidya Shakti in them they are liberated.
 Allis truly Set—or Brobman, In crestion Shiva extends
 His power, and at Pralays withdraws it into Himself. In
 ‘oreation, MEyt is in itself Consciousness which appears as
 ‘moonsoiousness. Before creation it is as consciousness
        Tmportant. practical resulte follow from the adoption
of this view of looking at the world. ‘The latter is the crea-
 tion of Inbvara. ‘Tho world is real; being unreal only in
 the sense thut it ia « shifting passing thing, whereas Atma
  as the true Realty endures. Bondage is real, for Bondage
 is Avidytsboiti binding consciousness. Liberation is real
 for this is the grace of Vidyashakti, Mon are each Centres
                                 34
          MATTER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
 of Powor, andif they would echiave sueoess mast, acoonding
 to this Shastra, realize themeelves os auch, knowing that
 ib ia Dovot which thinks and acta in, and as, them and that
 they aze the Devatd. Their world enjoyment is His, and.
 liberation is Bis peacefal nature. The Agamas deal with the
 development of this Power which is not to be thought of
 as something without, but as within man's grasp through
 various forms of Shakti Sédban8, Being in the world and
 ‘working through the world, the world itself, inthe words of
 tine Kulirmava Tantra, beaomes the seat of liberation (Mok bi-
 yste Samsim). The Vira or heroic Sédhska dees not shun
‘he world from fear of i But he holda it in his grasp and
‘wrest from it ite sooret, Realiing  it wt length aa Conscious
 ness the world of matter ceases to be an object of desir.
 Escaping from the unconscious driftings of a humanity
 ‘hich has not yet realized itself, He is the illumined master
 of himself, whother developing all his’ powers, or secking
 liberation afhis wil
       [As ML. Mosson-Ourel so well puts it (Bsquisse dune
histoire dela philosopkie indienne, p. 257) “Dansle tantrisme
 ‘riomphent moe conoeption immanentiste de l'intallgiblité,
 Leesprt sessigne pour but, non de s6 laisset vivre mais
‘de ae crferune vie digne de lui, une existaice omnisciente
 omnipotente, qu'il maitritera perce qu'il en sera auteur”
 (by Staband).]




                              385
                         Cuapren XVII
                      SHAKTI AND MAYA,
 JS fe Biehth Chapter of the unpublished Sammobana
       ‘Tantm, itis sed that Shaikara manilested onBuddhism    earth in
 the form of Shefilard   charyya,in   oréer  to   reot   out
froin India. Tt compares his disciplas and himself totheof five
 Mabipreta (who form tho couch on which the MotherAmnayss,the
 Worlds rests), and identifica his Maths with the
 ramaly, the Govazdhana in Pasi with Purvamndys (the
 Sampradéya being Bhogavita), and so on with theof rest,            the
 Whatavor he tho claims of Shatkara as destroyer          subtlety  was
 eat Buddhistio heresy, which          owing    to   its
 the most daageroue antagonist which the Veddnta ns evor
 Dad, oF his clans: ¢ expuunder of, Upanishad fom the
 standpoint of Siddhi, his Mayavide finds, no place in theis
 ‘Tontras of the Agamas, for ths doctrine and practice
 given ffom the standpoint of Sddhand, This isnot to say
 that the doctrine is explicitly denied. Ibis not considered.
 Tis true thatin actual fat we often give. sccommodation
 to ciffering theoriesfor which Togio ean find no living room,
Dutt obvious that in ao far asnan Se « worshipper he must
 accept the would standpoint, if he wont not like Kalidasa,
cnt from beneath himeelf tho branch of tbe toe onpossibility   which he
 sits. Nex, it would be amiatake to overook thebeen fed by
 of the so-called ““Tntzik” tradition having
 ‘ways of thought and practioe which ware not inthe strict
 ‘sense of the tenn, part of th Vaidik oul, or in the line ofits
 descent. The worship of tho Great Mother, the Magna
 Mater of the Near Past, the Adya Sbokti of the Shakia
 ‘Tuntras isin ite eaental (as      T have elsewhere pointed out)
  one ofthe oldest and most widespresd religions ofthe world,
  tnd ons which   i India was possibly, in its origing, indepen
  dent of the Brilmanio raigion «presented to us in the
  ‘Vaid Socrhitas ond Brikmanus. If this beso, it was later
                                  96
                 SHAKTI AND MAYA
 ‘om undoubtedly mingled with the Vedanta tration, so thab
 ‘the Shika faith of to-day is partioular presentation of the
 general Vedantilr tesching. This is historical speculation
 from an outside standpoint. As the Sarvollasa of Sarva-
 nandanstha points out, snd as is well-known to all ad~
herents of the Shakta Agamas, Veda in its general sense
 includes these and other Shastrnsin what is called the great
 Shatakoti Samhita, Whatever be the orgins     of the doctrine
 (ind this should not be altogether overlooked in any proper
‘approcintion oft}, Lam here concerned with ite philosophical
‘pect, ae shown to us to-day in the teuchings and practice
 ‘of the Shas who are followers ofthe Agams. ‘This tach-
 {ng oocupies in tome sense middle place between the
 Gualigm of the Satkhys, and Shatara’s ultes-monistio
 interpretation of Veddntsto whith, unless otherwise stated,
 refer, Both the Shaivs end Shaltta schools acoept the
 threefold aspect of the Supreme known 6 Prolkishe, Vi
 marshs, Prakisha-Vimarsha ; called in Téatrile worship,
  “The ‘Three Feet (Oharans-iritaya). Both adopt the
 ‘Thinty-aix Tattvas, Shiva, Shale, Sadishivs, lakvara and
 Shuddhavidy8, precoding the Purusba-Praksiti Tattvas
 with which the SAflehya commences. For whereas theve
are tho usimate Tattvas in that Philosophy, the Shaiva and
 ‘Shikia schools claim’ to show how Purusha and Prakriti are
 ‘themselves derived from higher ‘Tattvas. These Jatter
  ‘Tottvas are also deslt with from the Shubdi side es Shak,
 ‘Nida, Bindu and as Kalas which are the Kriya ofthe various
{grades of Tottvas which are axpeots of Shakti. ‘The Shakia
  ‘Tanteas, such as the Saubhigyarsindleara and other works,
 peak of ninety-four of such Kalis sppropriste to Sodshiva,
  Ishvera, Rudra, Vishnu, end Brobmé, “San,” “Moon,” and
  “Wire,” (indicted inthe form of the Ram Bfja with Chandma-
 ‘bindu traneposed) of which fifty-one ore, Mitrikt Kala,
 ‘being the subtle aspects of the gress letter of the Saraleit
  alpbabst. This last is the Mimmsake doctcine of Shabda
  adopted to the doctrine of Shakti. Common also to both
                                37
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
    ‘idkta and Shaiva Sampradiyas is the doctrine of the
 Skadadhvs. (Soe my “Garland of Letter")
        Tam not however here concerned with these detail,
 Dut with the general convept of Shakti which is their undes-
lying basis. Tb is sufficient to say thet Shaka doctrine is a
form of Advaitardds. In reply to the question what is
 “silent concealment’” (Goptavyam), it i said :—Atmaham-
bbava-bhivansyé bhivayitavyam ityarthah. Hitherto great
cr pains have been taken to show the differenoes between
‘the Darshanas than, by regarding their points of agreement,
to co-ordinate them systematically. So far as the subject
 of the present article is concemed, all three systems, S48-
 Icha, MAydvlda, Shalstivada, are in general agreement as to
 the nature of the infinite formless Consciousness, aud post
 therewith a finitixing principle, called Prakriti, Maya, and
 Shalt respectively. The main points on which Saiichya (at
 any rate in What bas been called its classical form) differs fom
 Mayivids Vedanta are in itstwo doctrinesof the plurality
 ‘of Atmans on the one hand, and the neslity and indepen-
 ence of Prakaiti onthe other. When however we examine
 ‘hese two SAflehys doctrines elosely we'find them to be mere
 accommodations to the infirmity of common thought. A
 ‘Vedantio conclusion is eonocaled within its dualistic present
 mont. For ifeach liberated (Mukta) Paratha is all-pervad-
 ing (Vibhu), and if there is not the slightast difference be-
 tiwoen one and another, what is the actnal or practical
 difference between such pluralism: and the doctrine of Atma ?
 -Agnin it is difficult for the ordinary mind to conceive that
 ‘objects cease to exist whén consciousness of objecte ceases.
 ‘The mind natarslly conssives of their existing for others,
 although, according to the hypothesis, it has no right to
 coposive anything at all, But bore again what do we find ¢
In liberation Praleiti cosses to exist for the Mukta Purusha,
 I effect wha is this but to say with Vedénta that Bay8 is
 not a zeal independent category (Padtths) t
        ‘Aortic has taken exception to my statement that the
                                 338
                  SHAKTI AND MAYA
  classical Siskthya conceals a Vedntio solution behind its
  Gualistic presentment, T was not then, of couse, speaking
 from 1 historical standpoint. Shiva’ in the Kulamava
 ‘Tantra says that the Six Philosophies are parca of His body,
 and he who severs them severe His body. They are each
 aspocis of the Cosmi Mind ae appeaving’in Humanity. ‘The
 Togeal process which they manifest i one and continous
 ‘The conclusions of each stage or standard can be shown to
 Yisld the material of that whioh follows. This is logial
 necessity if it be saeumed that the Vedanta is tho trusst and
 highest expression of that of which the lower dualistic snd
 pluralistio stages are the approach.
        In Sibiehya,the Purusba principle represents the form-
 Jess consciounness, and Prokrti formstive activity. Shat-
 kaa, dfining Realty a that which exists as the same in sll
 the three times, doesnot altogether digeand these two prin
 piles, bat says Eat they osnnot exist 8 two independent
 Realities, He thus reduces the two catagories of Sinehya,
 the Parusba Consciousness and Praksit: Unoonssiousness to
 one Reality, the Brahman; othervise the Vakya, “Al ia
 Bratman” (Barvem Khslvidam Brehm) ia falsSed. Bray
 rman, however, in. ona, aspectis. diesoeisted from, and in
 nother ascociatod with Maya, whichin his aystem takes the
 place of the Sakhyn Prakziti, But, whereas, Praleiti is
 fn independent Realty, Mayé is something which neither
 yeal (Set)  nor unesl (Asat) nor portly real mad partly unreal
 (Gadasst), and which though not forming part of Brshman,
 tnd thorefore not Bruhman, is yet, though not a second
reality inseparably astocited and sheltering with, Brahman
 (Aaya. Brahmésbrtt) in one of ite aspects > owing what
 false appearance of reality it has, to the Brshmen(thy     with
 ‘which itis s0 accocited. ‘Ib   io an Btorual Felsity
 Phutd senétan’), unthinkwble, logical, unexplainable
 (Avirvachantya). In other points, the Vedantio Mayé and
 Sifkdyan Prokriti agree. ‘Though ofMays        is aot a second
 reality, but a myetocious   something     which  neither reality
                               39
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  nor unteality can be afimed, the fact of positing it ot all
 iver to Shafara's dootrine « tinge of dualiem from which
 the Shakia tReoryis fee. According to Saikehys, Praksiti
 is real although it changes. This question of malty is one
 ‘of dofinition. Both Mflapralciti and May& are eternal.
 ‘The world, though 1 changing thing, as at least empirical
 realityin cither view. Both are meonseiousness. Conse
 cusnets  ia reflected on or in unconsciousness : thatis to state
 cove view for, as is known, there is a difference of opinion.
 ‘Tho light of Parusha-Oonscionsness (Chit) is thrown on the
 Pralniti-Unoonscionsness (Achit) in the form of Buddhi.
 ‘Vijnaoabbiksha     apeaks of mutual reflection. ‘The Vedéntic.
‘Prativimbavadinssay thnt Remis refooted in Antablearana,
 tnd the apparent likeness of the latter to Chit which is
 prodaced by such reflection. is, ChidAbhase or Jiva, Thi
 question of ChidAbhiass isqne of the main points of difference
 between Mayavida and Shaltivide. Nobwithstanding that
 Maya is a falsity, itis not, according to Sbaflars, » mere
negation ot want of something (Abhiva), but a. positive
 entity (Bhavardpamajinam): that is, it is in the nature
of © power which, veils (KohchbAdala) consciousness, as
 Prakriti does in the care.of Purushs, ‘The nature of the
 vont “Unexplained” a it ia in Haelf, and whether we call
it Pmlsiti or MAyé, is unknown, Tho Yoginthridaya
 ‘Tentea booutifully saya that we epesk of the Heart of Yoging
 ‘wo is Knower of Herself (Yogin! svavie), because the heart
 is the plaoe whence all things ise. “What man”, it says,
 “imows the heart of o woman! Only Shiva knows the
 HRoartof Yogini.” But from Shrati and its effects it is sid
 to be one, sl-perveding, eterasl, existing now as seed and
 now 4s frit, unconscious, composed of Gunas (Gunamayi) ;
 ‘uperccivabléexeepé through its effets, evolving (Parindmt)
 ‘hese effecta which area producta ; th i the world, which
Ihowever assumes in each system the character of tho alleged.
 cause; thutis, in S4tthya,tho effects ace real :in Vedanta,
 ‘either real nor unreal, ‘The forms psychio or physial arise
                                  330
                  SHAKTI AND MAYA
  in both eases as conscious-unconscious (Sadastt) eects, from
 the association of Consciousness (Purvsha or Tahvars) with
  Unvonsciousness (Prakriti or Maya), Miyote anena ii Maya.
  ‘Maya is that by which forms ste measured or limited, This
 ‘oo is the faecion of Prakiti. Maya, as the collective name
 of etamal ignorance (Ajnéna), produces, as the Pragaticha-
 shakti, these forms,     by frst veiling (Averanashalti) Consci-
 ousness in ignorance and then projecting these forms (Vik-
 shepashalti) from the store of the cosmic Semskaras. Bub
 what is the Tamas Gna of the Safikhyan Prakciti in effect
 but pum Avidya? Sattvais the tendencyto relectconscious-
 ness and therefore to reduos unconsciousness. Rejas is the
 activity (Keiy8) which moveo Prakriti      or Mayé to manifest in
 ite Tomasile end Sittvik aspect, Avidy8 means “na vidyate,”
 “is not seen,” and therefore is not experienced. hit in
 ‘sociation with Avidy& does not dee Itself ss such, ‘Tho fist
 experience of the Soul seawakening after dissolution to world
 experienceis, “Ther       is nothing”, until the Somskras arise
 from out this massive Ignorance. In short, Prekriti end
‘May ae like the maton prima of the Thomistic philosophy,
 ‘the finiticing principle; the activity which “measures out”
  (Miyate), thot is Limits and makes forme inthe formles (Chit).
 ‘The davotee Kamaléleinta luidly and concisely calle May,
 he form of Uke Formless (Shinyarys Aleica iti Mays),
       Tn one reqpect, Mayavida is a more consistent presen-
 {ation of Advaitevida, than the Shikta doctrine to which we
 now proceed. For whist Shaflksa's system, like all others,
 ‘pests the dootrine of aspects, saying that in one aspect
  the Brahman is associated with Mays (Ishvars), and that in
  another it is net (Parabrahman) ; jot in neither aepect doss
  his Brabmon troly change. In Shalt doctrine, Shiva doesn
  one aspect (Shakti) change. Brahman         is changeless and yot
  changes. But as       change   is only experienced    by Jivatma
 ‘subjectto Miy8, thereis not perhaps substantial difference
  between tuch a stetament, and thet which affirms change-
  Tessnose and only sceming change. In other respocts, however,
                                    33
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 to which I now proveed, Shakta doctrine is « more mosistio
 piscintation of Advaitevkda, If one were asked i most
 ‘essential characteristic, the reply should be, the absence of
 the concept of uconssious MBy8 as teught by Shaiizare,
 Shruti says, “Allis Brikman.”” Brahman is Consciousness:
 and therefor all is consciousness. ‘Them is no seo thing
 called Maya which is not Braiiman even though it be “not
 zeal”, “not unreal": & definition obvioasly given to avoid
 ‘the imputation of having posited a second Real. To speak
 of Brahman, and Mayt which is not Brahman is to apesk of
 two categories, however much it may be sought to explain
 ‘vay the sovond by saying that it is “not real” ond “not
 ‘uneal" ; a falsity which i yot oteral and oo forth, Like
a cortain type of modern Westem "New Thought”, Shikta
 Aoctzine affirms, “all ig conseiousness””, however much un-
   onseiousness appears init. The Kailéchéryya Sadinanda
   ays in his commentary     on the 4th Mantrs Taha Upsnishad
 (i. A. Avelon): “Tho changelesa Brahman, which is con-
 sciousness appeans in creation us MAy& which is Brahman,
 (Brahroamayt), consciousness (Chidrpin) holding in Herself
 unbeginning (Antal) Karmik tendencis (Rarmassmskdi) in
the form ofthe three Gunas. Hence,        She is Guaamaayt, despite
 being Chinmayt, As ther       is no second priniple these Gana
‘re Chit-Shakti.” The Supreme Devtis thus Praktshs vimar-
 sbistiarasyariping, or the union of Praldshsand Vimarsa.
       ‘Avsording to Shafkara, man ie Spirit (Atma) vestaned
 fn the Mayik‘tlsitios’ of mind and msttar. He, acsordingly,
 can only establishtho unityof Iahvaro and Jiva by eliminat-
 ing from the frst Mays, and fiom the sosond Avidyé j when
 Balman is left as common denominator. The Slik
 liminates nothing. Mon's spit or Atma is Shiva, His
 mind end body are Shakti. Shakti snd Shiva sre one,
  ‘Tho TtrSima is Shiva Shakti Soin the Paramitmé. This
latter exists as the one: the former as the manifold. Man
 i then not a Spirit covered by a non-Brohman faaty, but
  Spinit covering Tssif with Its own poweror Shakti
                                au
                   SHAKTI AND MAYA
        What then is Shalt, and how doesit come about that
 ‘here is seme principle of unconsciousness in things, a fact
 ‘which cannot be denied. Shakti comes trom the root
 “‘shak", “to be able,” “to have power”. It may be applied
 to any foma of activity. The power to te is visual Shakti,
‘the power to burn is Shakti offre,       and so forth. These are
 all forms of activity which are ultimately reducible to the
 ‘Primordial Shalti (Adya Shakti) whence every other form of
 Power prooeeds. She in ealled Yogint because of Her con-
 xection with all things os their origin. Tt is this Original
 Power which is known in worship as Dovt or Mother of Many
 Names. Those who worship the Mother, worship nothing
 “illusory” or unsoascious, but a Supreme Consbiousness,
 whose body is all fomns of consciousness-mconsciousess
 ‘produced by Her as Shive's power, Philosophical, the
 ‘Mothor or Daivachslt    is thei linet agpect of the Brahman.
 All three systems recogniz      thet there
                                       e isa static end kinetic
 aspect of things: Purushs, Bruhman, Shiva          an the one side,
 Pralsiti, Miy8, Shakti on the other. ‘This is the time-
 hhonoured atiampt to Teconcile the doctsine of a changeless
 Spirit, « changing Manifold, and the mysterious unity of
 ‘tho two. For Power (Shakti) ind the possessor of the Power
 (oaktimin) are one snd the same, In the Tanteas, Shiva
                    to Devt, “There is no difference between
                     We say thst the fire burns, but buming is
 fire. ine is uot one thing and burning another. In the
 supreme transcendental chingoless state, Shiva and Shakti
 tre, for Shiva is never without Shakti, ‘The connection
 ia called AvindbhAvasarmbendha, Consciousness is never
 without ite Power. Power is active Brahman or Comecious-
 ness. But, aa thoro is then no activity, they exist in the
 supreme sinto os one ‘Tottva (Ekam tattvam iva); Shiva
 ‘as Chit, Shaleti as Chidriping. This is the state before the
 thrill of Nida, the origin of all those currents           of force
‘which ae the universe. Accorting to Shatara, the Supreme
 Experience contains no brace or see of objectivity whatever,
                                   333
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  In terms of speech, itis an abstract consciousness (Jnana),
  ‘Acoording +o the view here expressed, which has bess: pro-
 founly elaborated by the Kashmir Shiva School, that which
 ‘appears “without” only 20 appears because it, in some form.
 ot other, exists “within”. 8 also the Shakta Vishvastra
 ‘Tantra says, “what is hero is there, what is not here is no-
  where.” Tf therefore we know duality, it must be beesuss
 the potentiality of it exists in that from which it arises
 ‘The Shaivachéleta school thus assumes s reel derivation of
 ‘the universe and a causal nexus bebween Brahian and the
 world. According to Shakers, thi notion of creation is
 iteelf Maya, and there is no need to find a cause for it. Soit
 in held thatthe supreme experionce (Amarsha) is by the Self
 (hive) of Himself as Shakti, who as such is the world  Ideal or
 Perfect Universe; not in tha sense of « perfected            of
 form, but that uitimate formless feeling (BhAva) of Bliss
 (Gnanda) or Love which atmoot the whole world is. Allis
 Tove aud by Love all is attained. Tho Shite Tantras
 ‘compare the state immediately prior to cretion with that
 ‘ofa grain of gram (Chanaks) wherein the two seeds (Shiva
sand Shakti)     are eld as one under a single sheath. ‘There is,
 tas it were, a Maithnms in this unity of dual aspect, the
 thrill of which     is Nada, productive of the seed or Bindu
 from which the universe is born, When the sheath breaks
 ‘and the seeis are pushed apart, the beginning of a di-
  chotomy ia establishedin the one conscionmess, where-
  by, the I", and the “This” (dam or Univetse) appear ss
 separate. ‘Thespecitc Shiva aspects, when viewed through
  Mays, the Self, and the Shakti aspect the Not-Self. ‘This is
 to the limited consciousness only. In truth the two Shiva
 ‘and Shaki sre ever one and the same, and never dissociated.
  ‘Thus each of the Bindus of the Kamakalé are Shiva-
Shakti appearing as Purasha-Prokati. At this point, Shakti
  aasumes several forms, of which the two chief are Chit-
  Shakti or Chit as Shaldi, and Miyi-Shakti or Miyh as
  Shakti, Maya is not here's mysterious unoonsciousness,
                                 a4
                 SHAKTI AND MAYA
 ‘non-Brahman, non-real, non-unreel something, Te is a form
 of Shakti, and Shakt is Shiva who is Conssioumess whichis
 real. ‘Therefore Méyé Shalt isin itself (Svaripa) Consi-
 ousuess and Brahman, Being Brahman It is real. Isis that
 aspect of conscious power which concesla Itself to Itaelf.
  “By veiling the own true form (Sveripa—=Conscioumess),
 its Shaltis alwoys arise”, (Svariptvarane chaaya shake
 tayah setatotthitah) as the Spandakiriké says, This is @
‘common prinoiple in all doctrine relating to Shakti. Indeed,
 this theory of veiling, though exprested in another form, is
 common to Stfihya and VedAnts, ‘The diference les in
 ‘this thatin Sathya itis a second, independent: Principle
 ‘which vils; in MAyBvida Vedinta it is the non-Brobmen
 ‘Mays (called a Shakci of Ishvara) which veils; andlin Shalts
 Advaitavide (for the Shaktas are non-lualiste) it is Con-
 sciousness which, without ceasing to be such, yet veils Teel.
 ‘As already stated, the Monitio Shaivas and Shaleas bold
 certain doctrines in common sush as the thirty-six
 ‘Tattvas, and what are called Shadadhvs which also
  appear es part of the teaching of the other Shaiva
 Bohools, In the thirty-six Tettva. scheme, May& which
 is defined as “the senso of difference” (Bhedabuddhi),
 for it is that: whiok makes the Self see things ns diferent
 from the Self, is technically that Tattva which appears
 ft the close of the pure creation, that is, after Shuddha-
 vVidyf. ‘This May relocta and limita im the Pasha or Jva,
 the Tehchha, Jnina, Kriya Shaktis of Ishvara, These
 again are the three Bindus which are “Moon”, “Fire”,
 and “Sun”, (Bee Anthor’s “Gatland of Letters”) What
 are Jnins snd Kriya (insluding Tchchbé its prliminaxy) on
 the part ofthe Pati (Lord) in sl beings and things (Bhiveshu)
 which   are His body : it is these two which, with Maya as
the thind, are the Sateve, Rejas and Tamas Gunas of the
 Pashu. This velling power explsins how the undeniable
 clement of unconscioumsss, which is seen in thingn exists.
 How, if all be oonscioumess, is that principle there ? The
                                335
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘suewer is given in the luminous definition of Shakti; “Te is
 te function of Shakti to negate” (Nishodhavyepiraripa
 sbaltih), that is, to negate consciousness and male  it appear
 to Tigelf as unconscious (Krika 4 of Yogerije or Yoga-
 ‘moni’s Commentary on Abkinava Gupte’s Peramirthashre).
 ‘im truth the whole world is the Self whether as “I'" (Aham)
 ‘or “This” ([dam). ‘The Self thus becomes ite own object.
 Tt becomes object or forn that it may enjoy dualistic ex-
 perience, Tt yet remains what it was in its unitary blissful
 ‘experience. This ia the Rtemal Playin which the Self hides
 tnd seeks itself, Tho formless cannot assume form unless
 formlessness is negated. Btemity is negated into finality ;
 ‘the all-pervading into the limited; the alldmowing into
 the “lids knower”” ; the almighty into the “Tittle doer”,
 and so forth. Itis only by negating Itselfto Itself that the
‘Self becomes ite own object in the form of the universe.
       Ht follows fom the above thst, to the Shilkts wor-
 shipper, there is no unconscious Mayé in ShaGikare’s sense,
 sud therefore thore is no Chidébhiea, in the sense of the
 reflection of consciousness on unconsciousness, giving the
 latter the appearance of consciousness which it does not
 truly postess, Ror all in Consciousness as Shakti.“ Aham
 Str", as the Advaitabhtvopanishad exclaims. In short,
 Shafikara saya there is one Reality or Consciousness and a,
 aot-real not-unreal Unconsciousness. What is really uncon
 scious appears to be conscious by the releooftion     the light
 of Consciousness upon it. Shikta doetzine says consciows-
 ness appears to be unconscious, or more truly, to have an
 clement of unconsciousness in it (lor nothing even empirically
 is abgolutely unconscioue), owing to the veiling play of Con~
 scioumness Ttaelf as Shakti
       ‘As with so many ather matters, these apparent differ-
 fences ane to some extent a metter of words. It is true that
 ‘the Vedlntists speale of the conscious (Chetana) and un-
 ‘conscious (Achetana), but they, like the Shilts Advaitins,
 say shat the thing in iteelf is Consciousness. When this
                                336
                  SHAKTI AND MAYA
ia vividly diaplayod by nenson ofthe reflection (Prativimbha)
 of consciousness in ‘Tattve, (each as Buddhi), capeble of
 displaying this reflection, thea we can call that in which it
 is so displayed, conscious. Where, though consciousness is
 all-pervading, Chaitanye is not so displayed, there we speak
 cof unconscictsness, ‘Thus, gross maiter (Bhtta) does not
 spear     to eflct Chit, endso appears to us as unconscious.
 ‘Though all things are at baco consciousness, some appear
 ‘as more, nd some as less conscious. Shatkars explains
 ‘hin by saying that Chaitanya is associated with a non-
 ‘conscious mystery or May whioh veils conscionsness, and
 Chaitanye gives to what is unconscious the appearance of
 consciousness through reflection. “Reflection” is form
 of pictorial thiaking. What is meant is thnt two principles
 fre astocisted together without the natare (Svaripe) of
 cither being really ailcted, and yot producing that effect
 ‘whichis Jive... SMMkta doctrine says that all is conscionsness,
 Dbut this some consoiousness assumes the appearance of
 changing degrees of unconsciousness, not through the ope-
 ration of anything other than itself (Mya), Dut by the
 ‘operition of ane ofits ova powers (Myfsbalti). Te is not
 ‘unconacioas Mayda Shafara’s sense which veils consoi-
  onsnest, but Cobscioumeas-as Shalt vail Tself, nd, 26 60
 ‘functioning, itis called MAyishakti. Tt may bo asked how
 ‘an Consciousness become Unconsciousness and. cease to be
 iteeli! The answer is that it does not. It never ceasesto
 ‘be Consciouaness. It appeorsto itself, a8 Jtva, to be um
 conscious, and even then not wholly: for es recent scientific
 investigations have shown, even so-called “brate matter"
 exhibits the clemente of that which, when evolved in man,
 is sell-conacioumeas, TE it be asked how constiousness can
 ‘obecary itself partially oat all, the only answer   is Achinty&
  Shakti, which Mayavidine as all other       Vedantsts    admit
   Of this, aa of all ltimates, we must say with the Western
   Scholastics, “omnia exeunt in mysteriumn”.
       ‘Prlcitis then, coosding   to Safkdyaye real independent
                               337
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  category diferent from Pumusha, ‘Tho both Miyivada
 ‘and Shaktivéda deny. MAyA is a not real, not-unreal
 Mystory dependent on, and associnted with, and inhering
 in Braman ; but not Brabman or any part of Brahman,
 ‘Mayd-Shalt is @ powerof, nd,in its Svardipa, not diferent
 from Shiva: is seal, and is an aspect of Brahman itself,
 ‘Whilst Brahman as tshvars is assosintel with May®, Shiva
 is never associated with anything but Himself, But the
 function of all thes is tha same, xemely to make forms in
‘the formless. Ite That by whish the Ishvara        or Collective
  Consciousness pictues the universe forthe individual Jia's
 ‘experience. Shalt ix threefold ex Will (Ichchhe), Know-
 edge (Jona), and Action (Kriya). All three are but difer-
 ing sapocts of the one Shakti. Consciousness and its power
 or action are at base the same. It is true that action is
 rmanifested in matter, that is appetent unconsciousness, but
 ite root, as that of all-elie is consciousness. JnAna is self
 proved and experienced (Svatabsidda), whazess, Kriya,
 bing inherent in. bodies, is persived by others than by
 counelves. The cbaructerietio of action is the manifestation
 of al objects. These objoots, again, characterized by consci
 fousnest-unconaciousness are in the nstare ofa shining forth
  (Aibhise) of Consciousness. (Here Abbéea is not used in
 its sense of OhidAbhise, but ss an intensive for of the
 term Bhisa.) ‘The powsrof ostivity and knowledge are
 only differing agpeeta of oze and the same Consciousness,
 ‘Aooording to Shafikara, Brahman has no form of self
 oterminstion. Kyl is a function of moonsoious May
  ‘When Iahvara is and to bo e doer (Kart), this is ateibuta
  (Auplahia)                                  Ie dolowe from the
                to Him by ignosonce only. differences
  bore that there ze other material                      between
  Shakta doctrine and MAyAvdda, such as the natare of the
  Supreme Experience, the reality and mode of creation, the
 realty ofthe would and so ith, The word, itis te, isnot,
  as the Mahtnirvéce Tantra says, absolute reality in the
  sense of unobanging being, for it comes and goes, It is
                               338
                  SHAKTI AND MAYA
noverthlees ealfr tia the experience of Shiva, and Shiva’s
‘experience is not unseal. Thus ogain the evolution of the
‘world   as AbhAso, whilt resemblingthe Vivarta of Mayavadn,
diflers from it in holding, aa the Sanihya does, that the
effec is real and not uuteal, as Shakar contends. To
treat of these and other matters wonld esrry me beyond the
scope of tis soy which only deals, and that in a summary
‘way, with the essential differences and similarities in the
concepts Prakriti, May and Shale.
      T may however conslude with a fow genezal remarks,
‘The doctrine of Shalt is » profound one, ané I think Lkoly
to be attmotive lo Western minds when they have grasped
it, just as thoy will appreciate tho Tantik watchword, Kriyt
oF action, its doctrine of progiess with snd through the
world and not against it, whiehiy involved in ita liberstion-
‘enjoyment (Bhuleismolkt) theory and)ther matters. ‘The
plilxopby i, ia ony cose, notes an American writer, in his
‘ignorance, abaurdy called it, “worthless” “religious Féni-
ssn ran mad," and a “feminization of Vedénta for sua
gotte Morista”, Te is not a “lemisization? of anything,
but ditinctivo, exiginal, and practical dectino worthy
‘fs oarfal andy. ‘The Weelarn atdent will ind much in
ic which is moze ccaeptable to generally prevalent thought
in Euzope. and Ameriea—than in the “illusion” doctrine
(in itself sn unsuitable term), and the ascetic practice of the
Vedintine of Shaikars’s-school. This is not to sey that
ways of teconelition may not be found by those who ko fk
enough. Ib would not be difficult    to show goound for holding
‘hat ulkinately she some inelestual results ore atiinedby
viewingthe matter from the differing standpoints of Sadan
snd Sida
      ‘Tho writer of an interesting artislo on the same subjestthe
in the Prabuddin Bhirsta (August          1016) states that
Sonnytst ‘Totapurt, the Guru of Shrt Ramakrishas,            maine
tained that a (Mfayavastia) Vedéntist could not         beliewe in
Shalt, for if causality ae be unsedlthere         is  no   need to
                               359
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  sudmit any powerto cause, and that it is Maya to apply tho
  principle of causation and to say that everything comes
  from Shakti. The Sannylal was converted to Sbikia
 octrine after all, For a8 the weiter well says, it is not
 ‘merely by intellectual denial, but by living beyond the
  “unreal”, that the Real is found. He, however, goss       on to
 say, “the Shaktivada of Tantro is not an improvement on
 ‘the MayAvdda of Vedinta, (that is the doctrine of Shaftkara)
  but only ita symbolization through the chromaties of senti-
 ‘ment and coucspt.”” It is true that it isa form of Vedinta,
 for all which ie try Tndian must be thet. It i also a fact
‘hat the Agamaas a ShAstro of worship is full of Symbol,
 Intellectually, however, it is an origizal presentment of
  ‘Vedanta, and from the practical point of view, it has some
 ‘pints of merit which MayavAda does not possess. Varieties
of teaching may. ba» different’ presentations cf one truth,
 leading to a similar end.) But one set of “chromatios”
 ray be mors fruitfol tha another for the mass of men. Tt
 i n this tha the strength   of the Shikta doctrine and practice
 lies. Moreover (vhother they be mn improyement or not)
 there ace differences between the two., Thus the followers of
 Shadleara do uot, so far as Tam aware, accopt the thirty-
 six Tattvas. A question, however, which calls for enquiry is
 ‘hat of the relation of the Shikta and Shaiva (Advaita)
 Schools,
        Maytvida is « doctrine which, whether trae or not, is
  fitted only for advanced minds of great intellectuslity, ond
 Yor men of ascetic disposition, and of the highest moral
  development. This i implied in its theory of competency
  (Adhikira) for Vedintic teaching. When, as ia generally
 ‘the ease i is not understood, and in some eases when i is
  ‘understood, but is otherwise ao} suitable, itis iableto be a
  ‘wenkening doctrine. The Shaka teaching to be found in
  tho Tentras has also its profundities which are to be revealed
  onlyto the competent, and contains a practical dectrine for
  all classes of worshippers (Sédhak), Tt has, i this form, for
                                40
                SHAKTI AND MAYA
the mass of men, a strengthening pregmatic value which is
beyond dispute. Whether, as some moy have contended,
it is the fruit of a trur spisitual experinee I will not here
discuss, for this would lead me into a polemio beyond the
scope of my present purpose, which is en impartial state-
rent of the respective teachings, on one perticular point,
siven by the three philosophical systems here disused.




                             aa
                      Cxarren XVUIL
                  SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA.
 [HAVE often teen asked—in wh consists the diferense
       between Veddnta and ‘Tantra’. ‘This question, is the
  product of substantial erzor, for it assumes that Tantra
 Shistra is not based on Vedinta. I hope thet, after many
 years of work, I have now made it olesr that tho Tantra
 Shastra ot Agama (whatavor be ite ultimate origin es to
 ‘which litle is known by anybody) ia now, ond has been for
 Centuries past, ole ofthe ztognized Scriptures of Hinduism,
 tnd every form of Hinduism is based on Veda and Vedanta,
 ‘Another ereneous question though less 20, is—In what con-
 sists the difference between Advaita Vednts and ‘Tantra’
 Shistrs. Bot here again. the question presuppotes a mis-
 ‘understanding of both Vedanta ond Agama, ‘There are,
 as should be well know, several schools of Advaita Vednta,
 buch as Méyavida (with which too commonly the Advaita
 Vedénta is identified), auchas the schools of the Northem
 Shaivdgama, and Shuddhtdvaite of VallebhtchAryya, Tn
 ‘the same way, there ase diferent schools of doctrine and
 ‘worship in what are called the ‘Tantei’, and a grievous
 ‘mista is committed when the Tantra is made to mean the
 ‘Shalta Tantra only, such sis prevalim ent       Bengal end which,
 according to sone, is either the product of, oF has been
 influenced by Buddhism. Some English-speaking Beogalis
‘ofa pact day,too ready      to say, “Aye aye”, to tho judgments
 of foreign cxities, on their religion as on everything else,
 and in a hry to disociata themselves from their conntry’s
 ““rapertitio        wore thens”,
                                soatee of she notion which has had
 sch cusmeney amongst Europeans that, “ Tantra " noces-
 raily meant drinking wine and x0 forth
       ‘Alegitimste   and accurate question is—In whet consists
 ‘the diference between, say, the Mayavadin’s Vodénta und
 ‘thet taught hy the Shikis Sompradtye of Bengal, One
                                ae
               SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA
 obviously fundamental difference ab once emerges. ‘The
 Egumas being osseatielly ritual or Stdhant Shistras are
 not immedistely and. practically concemed. with the Yous
 doctrine touching Parsmisthike Satta taught by Shaseard-
 charye. A Sidlinka ever assumes the reality of the Uni-
 ‘orse, and is s practical daalist, whstever bo the non-dual
 piilesophicel dostrines to which be may be intellectually
 sttmotad, He worships, that is assumes the being of some
 ‘Other who is worshipped, that ia a Real Lord who really
 czoaten, maintains, and roclly disolves the Universe. Us
 himself, tho object of hia wozahip and the means of worship
 ace weal, and his Advaita views are presented on this bacs.
 Teison this presentaent then that the next class of diferences
is to be found. What       ate they! The easenco     of thom lies
 in this that the Sidhaks looks at the Brahman, through the
 would, whereas to the Mayévadin Yoo, placing himself at
 the Brahman standpoint, thro is neither orestion nor world
 tbat the Inminous Atma, The Clear Light of the Void, as
 the Mahéyéniss cal it, that alone a. Nevertheless,       both the
 ‘Advaita Sadbalee aid the Advaita Yog! are one in holding
‘hat the Braman        alone js. Saroam Khalvidam Broha
 is the grest saying (Valeya) on whioh all Shiicta Tantra
 Shicts rests. ‘Tho diferencein interpretation then consists
 fn the mannerin which this MebtvAlye is to be explained.
 ‘Does it really mean what it says, oF does ib mean that the
 saying epplies only after elimination of May& snd Avidya,
 ‘Here there is the necessary difference because inthe case of
the Stdhak,      the V8kya must be explainedon the basisof
 his presuppositions alzeady given, wharees      the Yogt who
hhas passed   the stage in whichhe beceme Siddha      in Sadhons
                                                ‘Tho
 ‘surpastes, by sutoealization,al dualism. Paramnirthikavast mass
 of men ate better warned off discussions on
 Satt, Whither the conoept be traeor not, it only leads in
 their oase to useless axgument (Fichtra), aod thus       enfecbles
 them, Shiita doctrine, as its nome implies,       is  s   docizine
 cof power, Teis true that Yoga is power, indeed the highest
                                343
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
form of it (Fogubala). Bub it is » power only for those
‘qualified (Adhisi), and not forthe mass. Tam not then
fore here adversely criticizing Mayavads, It is a pity that
‘8's counizy whose grt glory it sto have presched Abieda
‘in varying forms, and therefore tolerance, is to-day full of
hateful Bheda of all kinds.   I say “hateful”, for Bheda is
 natural thing, only hateful when accompanied by hate
 find intolerance, Profowndly i is said in Halhed’s Gentoo
 las that, “contrarietics of rligion and divenity of beliot
 fe & detonstzation of the power of the Supreme. Difler-
 ences anc vatietes of created things are says ofthe Glorious
 ‘Essence, end types of His wonderful attributes whose cam:
 plate power formed all eratumes.” Ther is also the saying
 atisibuted tothe Apostle of God, Mabommad, in the Rada-
 UlMuhtar aad elsewhere="@iffecence of opinion is lao the
 gilt of God”. In these sayings ageaks the high spitit of
 ‘Moin. ‘Thame may be political remedies for sectarian il-
 feeling, but « medisine of more certain oft in this county
 is the teaching, “Rama Rahim ek hai”. Det us then not
 only objectively, but in all amity, examine the two great
 systems mentioned,
       ‘We all know what: is normal world-experience in the
 Samsire. Sonie through auto-reslisation have smper-normal
 or “mystic” experience. This lati of varying kinds, and
 sod in all religions, ‘The highest form of , acconling to
 Mayivids, i Nirvian Moluha, but there are many degrees
 short ofthis complete selfealization as the Whole (Pde).
‘Bat the great majority of men arenat concerned directly with
 uch high matters, but with a toaliztion of power in the
 ‘world, —World-experieno» is called ignorance, Ajnéns, ‘This
 1may confuse. It is ignorance only in this seuse, that whilst
  wwe havenormal expetionce, we are by thst very factigoring,
 that is, not having supes-normal exporiange. In super
 rnomual experience again thers is no finite world-experienee.
 ‘The Lord Himsel! cannot have men’s exposiance exsept as
 ‘and through mon, vidyé means Na Vidyot, that is, whieh
                              a4
                SHAKTA         ADVAITAVADA
 isnot soon or experienoed. Some speakin foolish disparage-
   rent of the world which is our very eloss concern. Asa link
   between Yoga and Bhogs, the Shakta teaches, Yogo Bhogd-
   yte, Lam now dealing with Mayavada. Whence does this
   ‘ignorance in the individual or Avidy& come? Ths world is
  sctually ignorant and man is partof it. This ignozance is
  ‘the material osuse of the world. Tis i not ignorance of the
  individual (Avidy), for then these would be a8 many’ worlds
‘as individuala; but the collective ignorance or Mays. Avid
  ‘exists to provide happinessor pain (Bhogs) for individuals,
  that is normal world-experienoe. Stated simply, ignorance in
  the sense of Miyi has no beginning or end, though worlds
  appear    and go. What is this but to say that it is in the
  natu (Svabliva) of the Real which manifests to do so,
  ‘and the nature of ite future manifestation proceeds pon
  lines indicated by the past collective Karma of the world.
         Now, enjoymentand salfering cannot be denied, nor
 the existence of on eloment of moonaciowsness in man, Bub
  ‘the Paramatm, as such,      does no, it is sid, suffer or enjoy,
  ‘but is Pune Conscioumess, What constiousmess then does
  20% Shafikars, who is ever eolicitous to preserve puity
of the Supreme unchanging Self, says that it is not true
  constiousnessbus, a false image of it reflected in ignorance
  and which disappears when the Istter is destroyed. This
‘sin fact Stfikhy        Duatism
                              mn in snother form, and bocause
  of this Shaktivida claims to have a poser Advaita doctrine.
  In Safkhya the Purusha, ond in Mayavida the Rima
 illamine Prakciti and MAy4 respectively, but are never in
  fect bound by her. What isin bondage is the reflection of
 Porusha or Atm in Prakriti or May8. This is Onidabhsa
‘or the appearance of consciousness ina thing which isin fact
 rot conscious ; the appearmce being due to the refection
 of consciousness (Chit), or ignorance (Ajntina), or unconsdi
 coanuat (Achit). Tho false consciousness as JYvitme euflers
 ‘and enjoys. According to the Shakta view there is, ae
 lever explained, no Chidabbtse,
                                  45
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      Now is this Ajndna independent of Atma or not? Its
invlependence, such as SABKhye teaches, is Genied. —Tguo-
‘ence then, whether collective or individnal, must be traced
to, ond have its origin in, snd rest on Consciousness as Atm.
‘How this sso is unexplained, but the unreal which owes is
existance in some inscrutable wayto Relityis yet, it is aid,
in truth no part of it. It is Brahman then which is both
the effsont avid material cause of igaorence with its thnes
Gunas, and of ChidAbhasa Brahms is the couse through
ita inaorutablo power (Ackintyshalitvét) or Mayi-Shalti,
      Novi this Shakti real or wnzeal 1 Acconding to the
transoondont standpoint (Parumacthila) of Mayavada itis
unreal, ‘The cveative consciousness is @ reflection on igno-
rance or Miy& It is Brahman seen through the veil of
Miyé, The is no: a denial of Brahman, but of the fact that
i creates. A trie onseioushess, it i said, can have no
incentive to create. rom the standpoint of the Supreme
State nothing happens. Both the conscionsness which as
Tnhvars cxeales, an as JIve enjoys ate ChidAbhass, the only
diference   being that the firsts nat, ond the second io under
‘the influence of Miya. Then it is asked, ignorance being
‘unconscious and incegable of independent operetion, true
consciousness being inactive (Nishkriya), and Chid&bhiaa
‘being unreal, how is ignorance capable of hiding true con-
sciousness and producing the world out of itself? ‘To this
‘the only reply is Svabbiva, that is, the very nature of igno-
ance malces it capable of producing apparently impossible
ficis. It is insoratable (Anirvachantva).
      ‘The Shika thon asks whether this Shakti is real or
‘unreal, conscious or unoonscious, Brabman or not Brahman ?
‘Hit be a Shakti of Brahmanit cannotbe unreal, for there is
xno untealty in Brahman. Tt must be conscious for other-
‘wite mmeonsciousness vould be a fector in Brshman. It is
 Braman then ; for power (Shakti) and the possessor of
 power (Shaktinidn) are one and the ssme.
      ‘Therefore, the Shikta Tantra Shéstra seys that Shakti
                                346
              SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA
  ‘which, operating as Chit and MAayé,is Ohit-Shakti and Maya-
 Shalti, is reel, conscious and Brahman iteeli (Saream
Ehalvidam Brahma), Ttfollows that Shakti whichis Brahman,
 in ite sepect as Crestor is, in fact, both the efficient. and
 ‘material couse of the world. If the first or couse is real,
 ‘0 is the second or world. Ifthe first be the cause of mn
 reality, then itis  in iteel unreal. But what is rel is Brah-
 ‘msn. Therefore, the world has a real cause which is not
 ‘unreal unconsciousness oF ignorance composed of three
 Ganss, but conscious Shskti and Bekman. Te,thorefore
 does evay with the necessity for Chidabhtse ; for, if real
 conscious Shalt is the cause of the woud, then there is no
 need for unreal unconsciousness which Mayévidsis driven
 to posit to secure the sisolute purity of the Brahman Coa-
 seiouaness.
        From the standpoint of MayAvdda, the objection to the
 exclusion of Ohidbadsn lies inthe foot thatif the world is
 derived direct from conscious Shakti (as Shtktas bola),
 than the Supreme Consciournsss is made both enjoyer and
 object of enjoyment. But if holds that Paramaime does
 rot enjoy end has no needto do 20; whilst the object of
 enjoyment is ancorsoious. Hence the trace of Sailkhysn
 dualism, the tm exestiig an influence over May by
 virtue of its proximity only (Sannidhimétrena Upakss)
Puro Amt is not itseli concerned. MayA seceives its ind
 ence, This is enalagous to what is called in Chemistry
 catalytic action. ‘The catalytic subatenos influences snothar
 bby ite mere presence, but remains itsslf apparently un-
 changed. Htma is in this sense en effciont but not insteu-
 mental or material cause of the world
        ‘As Auntis only Sechehidinanda, the world, so long as
itis considered to exist, must exist in Pure Consciousness
 (Btmasths), though eesentally itis different from it (Rtma~
 vilakshana), and does not exist forite pmpose. In MByavéda
‘the world, from the transcendental standpoint, does not
cist and Atm is not cognizant of it. Hence the question
                             347
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘f tho cause of Creation is bred of ignorance. So also is
 ‘the idea of eficient cause, for it proceeds from a search for
 ‘the cause of Creation which docs not exist. Maydvads, from
 ‘the standpoint of normal conventional experience (Vyeva-
 Dhérika Sait), epeaks of the Shakti of Atma as a cause of
‘Creation simply to provide the empirical world of the worldly
 ‘man with a worldly interpretstion of its worldly existence,
 ‘From this point of view, Brahman is looked at through the
 ‘world, which is the natural thing for all who are not liber-
 ated, From the other end or Brahmen, thereis no Creation
 nor workd, and Atma alone ia.
       ‘The Shéleta may reply to this Ie nob your Pam
 micthike stendpoint in fact empirical, arrived at by argu-
 ment (Vichére) with a limited intellect ? Tf inscrutable
 power is ¢ cause of the world, itis insorutable becanse the
 intellect cannot grasp ft, though ib is known to be Atma,
 ‘i the latter can show insertable power, how ean you sey
 ‘that it is incapable of appearing ss enjoyer and object of
 enjoyment ? To deny thiais to deny the uslimited character
 of inscrutable power. Tf it be objected that Atma cannot
be object of enjoyment, because, the formeris conscious and
 ‘the latter unconseious, what proof is there that suck en
 object is esouatislly uncanaciots ? It may be tht consci-
 foumness is not perosived in it, that is, the material world
 agpaars to be unconscious, and therefore unconsciousness
 comes in somewhere, otherwise it could not be perceived as
 ‘unconscious. Thus, « school of European idealiste hold the
 Universe to bo a society of Sprit ofall kinds and dogroes,
 Ihuman, animal, and vegetable, and even inorganio objects.
 All gre minds of various orders, Bven tho lasb are an order,
 ‘though yet to low tht they are in practice not apprehended
 as minds. The material world is merely the way in which
 ‘hese lower Kinds of mind apposr to our senses. The world
 of objects are (to use Berkely’s word) “signs” of Spirit and
 ‘the way in which i€ oommunicates itself to us. Thus, to
 ‘the Hindu, the Bharguh   in the Sun is the Aditya Devats, and
                                 348
                SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA
  the planeta are intelligences. The physicel eun is the body
  of the Strys Devatd. The whole Universe is an epiphany
  ‘of Spirit. “Matter is Ohit as objectto the mind, és mind is
  Ghit 4s the Knower of sush object. It is not, however,
  denied that ther is an clement of unconsciousness          in the
  material world as it appears to us. But the Shalta says
  tint Shakti has the power of hiding its consciousnese, which
 is exercised to varying extent; thus, to a grentar extent in
 ‘the case of inorganic matter than in the oage of tho plant,
  and les in the later than in man, in whom consciousness is
 ‘most manifest.
        ‘This power is Her Avidya Minti, justas conscioumessis
 her Vidy8 Mérti. Nothing then in the material world is
 absolutely unconsoious, and nothing is perfectly conscious.
 ‘Tho Vidi Mati ever ds bocaugs as consciousness it is the
 own nature or Svattps of Shakti, The Avidya Masti
 Which conceals consciousness eppear in Creation and dis-
 appears in disolution,
        ‘The MAyBvBdin may however ask whether this Avidya-
 shakti is conscious or unconscious, Tt cannot, he says, be
‘the latter, for itis sid to be Atm& which s conscious. How
 ‘then oan it conceal itself and appear as unconscious ? Kor,
 nothing can be wbatit     is not, and the nature of consciousness
 ‘sto eves! and not to oonveal. Tf again, conseiousness on
 cconnt of ite concealment, is incapable of knowing itself,
 it ceases to be consciousness. The reply is again that this
 altos empirical argument, based upon én imperfect idea of
 ‘the nature of things. Every one knows that there is con-
 sciousness in kim, but ab the same time he recognizes that
 it is imperfect, ‘The Maydvadin seeks to explain this by
 saying thet it is false constiousness (ChidAbhise), whiohis
 again explained by mesns of two opposites, namely, uncon~
 sciousness, which is an unseslity to which Chid@bhase ad-
 heres, snd tue consciousnoss or Atma, which, by virtue of
 ite inserutable power, cts as eficient couse in its production.
 ‘This theory compel ita adherents to ignore the world, the
                                  349
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  limited consciousness, and Shistra itaef in onder that the
  perfection of Atma may be maintained, though ot the same
 ‘ime, Shalt is admitted to be walimited and insczatable.
 ‘The Shalt’ answer on the other sie is that there isin fact
  no false consciousness, and essentially speaking, no wicon-
 scionsnest anywhere, though there spears to be some
 ‘usconsoionsness. In’ fact, Maydvada says that the un-
 conscious appears to be conscious throughtho play of Atma
  on it, whilat the Shale says that, really and st baso, allis
 consciousness which appenss to be unoonscioutness in vary
 ing dagrees. All consciousness, howover imperfct, i real
 consciousness, ite imperfection being due to ita suppressing
 ita own light to iteelf, snd all           ‘consciousnessis
 due +o this impesfection in the consciousness which see it.
 Mayivida seeks to explain sway the worl, from which
 nevertheless, it derives the materials fer its theory. But it
     saved that it fails to do so. In its attempt    to explain,
 it brings in a second principle namely wneongciousess, and
 ven a third Chidabhdsa, ‘Therefore, the theory of Shakti
 ‘vida which posits nothing but consciousess is (iis conten-
 8) 6 truer form of non-daaliam. Yet-we must note that the
 ‘theoriesof both aro’'made     up with the imperfect lightof
 ‘man'sknowledge. Something must then remain unexplained
 inall eystems, Tae Mayévida does not explain the character
 ‘of the Shakti of Atmé aa ecient couse of czestion, and the
Shakta doesnot explsin the character ofthe Shak of Rema
 ‘hich, in aite of béing true consciousness, hides itself. But
 wilt the Shaleta diffculty stands alone, tho otber theory
 Drings, itis sui, in its tran a numberof others. The Maya
 vvidin may also s k whether Avidya Micti is permanent ot
 transient. Ifthe lett, it cannot he Atm& which eteraally
 ia, whereas if i i, permanent eration is impossible. Te
 xay be replied that this objoction doca not lie the month
 of May&vada which, in a tronacendentel sense, denies eros
 tion, world, bondage and liberation. helater isu transition
  from bondoge to freedom which presupposes the reality of
                              350
               SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA
 ‘he world aad connection between it and that which is
 beyond ali words. This, Shatkara denies, ad yet seknow-
 lodges method of spiritual culture for liberation. ‘The
 answer of coune is that transcendental Atma is ever fre,
 ‘andl that such spiritual culture is required for the empirical
 (Wyavohtsikn)              the empizioal se or Chidathiss, for
                    need offrom
 ‘empirical   liberation        sn empirical world. But as all
 ‘ete conventions things are in an abeolate snse “unreal”,
 ‘the Maykvide’s instructions for spiritual culture have been
 likened to consolation given to soothe the griof of a stele
 ‘wammsn who has lost her son. [See J. N. Mazumdar’s paper
 ead befor the Indian Resesrch Society onthe Philosophical,
 Religious and Social Significance of the Tantra Shistra
 (Galy ats, 1915, to which I am here indebted}
       ‘Theoretically the answer may be suficient, though this
 ray not be allowed, but: the method ean in any case have
 fail pragmatic value only in exceptional cases. Doubtless
 ‘to the unlbersted MAydvidin Sddhakathe worldis roa,in
 the sense that it imposes it realty on him, whatever his
 ‘hoorioe   may be. Butitis plain thet such a yotom dose not
 (osdiaarly a least) dovelop the same powar os one in which
doubt as to the relity of things docs not exist. In order
 ‘hat instruction should work ws must assume a real basis
 for them. Thoreiore, the Tantra Shisira here spoken of,
 deals with true bondage in a trae world, and aims at trae
 liberation from it. Its Shale who both binds and liberates,
 ‘nd Sdahan8 of Hr ia the means of liberation. Nothing i
 ‘unreal or false, Shakti is and Shokti creates and thus
 fagpenns a8 the Universe. In positing an evolution (Pari-
 nim), the Shistra follows SASkhyo, becanse, both systems
 ‘consider the ultimate souroe of the world to be real, as un-
 tconscionn Prakziti oF conscious Shikti respectivaly. The
 Shakta takes literallythe grout saying, “AI this (aiverse)
 is Brahman" —overy bit of it. MAysvAda achieves. ite
 unity  by saying that Jivatma—Paramdima           after elimination
 of Avidy& in the first and Mayé        in the wecond.    Tguoranoe
                                3st
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
is something nether real nor unreal. Ibis not reel in com-
prison with the supreme unchanging Bratman, Tt is not
‘unreal, for we experience it as real, and it is teal for the
length ofthe duration of such experience. Again, Shaktivada
savumes a rel development (Parindma), with this proviso
‘that the cause becomes effect, and yet remains what it was
as cause. Mayivida says that there is trnscendentally
xno teal change but only tas appearance of it; that is, the
notion of Parindma is Miya like all the rest.
       ‘The Tantra Shistra deals with tras bondoge     in a true
‘world, and aime ot trae liberation from it, Atm binds itself
by the Avidya Marti ofits Shakti, and liberates iteelf by ite
VidyS Marti. Sidhan& is the mems whereby bondage
Deoomes liberation. Nothing        is uareal or false. Atma by
ite Shakti causes the playin itself of a Shakti which is
essentislly nothing but itself but operstes in a dual capacity,
‘namely 03 Avidyé and Vidya, Creation is thus an epiphany
cof the Atma, which appears and is withdrawn from and into
itself like the limbs of a tortoise. The All-Porvading Rtma
ranifoets iteell  in many Itvis as the world which supplies
tho objects of their enjoyment ; as the mind and senses for
the attainment of the objects ; as ignorance which binds;
1s knowledge which liberates when Atm ceases to present
itae ; as Avidy® ; and ns Shastra which provides the means
for liberation. Shaktivida affirms reality throughout, be-
‘onus i is @ practical Scripture for real men in a real world.
Without such presupposition Sadhan& is not possible,
‘When Sadhana hs achieved its object—Siddhi—as Auto-
realisation—no question of the mal or ware arises. In the
Baddhachavte-kivya it is anid (cited        in Hodgson “Nepal”,
48) that Saleya being questioned on an abstruse point, is
reported to have said, “Tor myself I ean tll you nothing on
these matters. Meditate on Buddha and when you have
‘obtained te supreme experience (Bodlijndna) you will now
‘the trath yourself.” In these high realms we Tench a point
 st which Wisdom is silence.
                                352
              SHAKTA ADVAITAVADA
       After all man in the mass is concerned with worldly
 reeds, and there is nothing to be ashamed of in this. One
 of the grestast dootrines in the Shileta Tantma is its Bukti
 Mukti teaching, and itis not lese great because it may have
bbeon abused. Allaystems are atthe mercy of thei followers.
 Instead of the aoetic method of the MAyavidin suited for
 men of high spiritual development, whose Ascevis is not
 something Inbonred but an expression of their own true
 nature, the Kaula teaches liberation through enjoyment,
 that i the world. The path of enjoymentis a natural one.
 ‘There is nothing bad in enjoyment itvef if it be socoxding
 to Dharma, Tt is only Adhsrma which is blamed. Libe-
‘ation is thus had through the world (Bfokshéyate Sametra).
 In the natural orfer of developnient, power is developed in
 worldly things, but the power is controlled by a. religious
 Stdband, which both prevents an extess of worldness, and
 roulds the mind and disposition (BhAva) into a form which,
 fat Tength aad raterally, develops. into that lmowldge
 which produoes digpassion (Vairdgys) for tbe world. The
 ‘two potlas lead to the tame end: Brut this is iteelf too big
 in subjest to be developed here. Sufficient be itto repeat
 what I have said elsewhere.
       “The Virs does not shun the world from fesr of it. He
 ‘holds ib im his grasp and wrests from it its seoret, Then
 cacaping from the unconscious driftings of « humanity
 ‘which has not yet realized iteelf, he is th illumined master
 of himself, whether developing sll his. powers or seeking
 beration at his wil.”
       ‘As rogerds the state of dissolution (Pralays) both
 systems are at ons, Tn positing an evolution Tentra follows
 Sinidbya because both the two later theories consider the
 ‘ultimate source of the world to be real ; real as unconseious
 Pralciti (S6fikhya) ; real as conscious Shakti (Shakte
  Tantra). In the Myavada scheme,        the source of the world
  is an unreal ignorance, and reveals itelf fist as Tanmétra
  which gndually sssume the form of senses end mind in
                                353                        ®
        a
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 onder to appoor before Chid&bhtse es objects of enjoyment
 tnd sufering. The Tantra Shastra agua, subjet to modif-
‘ations in consonance with ite doctrine, sgrees with Nyiya-
YVaisheshika in holding thst the power of conscioumness
which sre Will (Tchchhs), Knowledge (Jnéne) and Action
(Kriyi) constitute the motive power in cation. Thise
4c» the grest Triangle of Energy (Kmakald) fram which
Shatda and Arthe, the forees of the peyobio and material
worlds, arse




                           354
               Quaprnn XIX,
CREATION AS EXPLAINED IN THE NON-DUALIST
                 ‘TANTRAS.*
ASYCHOLOGICAL snalysis of our worldly exparence
         ordinarily gives us both the feeling of persistenoe and
change. This personal experience expresses & oosmic truth,
‘An examination of any doctrine of oration similatiy reveals
‘bro fundamental concepts, those of Being and Becoming,
Changslessness and Change,the One andthe Many. Tn Sane
Jit they om called the Katattha and Bhiva or Bhiva:
‘Tho frst inthe Spisit or Purusba or Brahman and Reman
which is unlimited Bsing (Sat), Consviousness (Chit) and
 Bliss (Ananda), According to Tndian notions the Atman as
such is and never becomes. ~ Ite Power (Shakti) manifests as,
Nature, which is the subject of chauge:, We may understand
Nature in a two-fold sense: fist, ad the oat principle or
‘nonmenal cause of the phenomensl world, thst is, as the Prin-
cipleof Becoming snd seconly,as sach World. Naturein tho
former sense is Malsprakriti, which means that, which existe
sa the root (Mila) substance of things before (Pra) crestion
(Keri), and which, in association with Chit, either tray    or ap~
‘parently creates, maintai       and destroys
                                       ns the Universe. ‘This
Malapralti the Shirada ilaka cally MilabGia Avyekta,
 tnd the Vedinta (of Shafikara to which slone I refer) Maya.
       Nature, in the second sense, thet ia the phenomenal
world, which is a product of Milapralit is the compound,
cof the evolutes from this root substamos which are called
 Vikritis in the Sitkhya and ‘Tontra, ond name and form
 (Qamaripa) by the Vedintins, who attribute thera to jgno-
 ance (Avidya). Mlapraliti os the material and instru-
‘mental cause of things is that potentiality    of natural power
       TA paper read by the Author at the Siver Jubilee of he
 Chaitanya Library, Caleats, eld on the 16th Jeouary 1915, ander
 the Presidency of HB The Governor of Bengal, sed revaed for
 Insertion in this Réition of "Shalt and Satta"
                                  355
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (eotura natazans) which manifest aa the Universe (nature
 natura).
       Touching these two Principle, there are certain funda-
 ‘mental points of agreement in the thre systems which Tam
 exnnining—Sétikhya, Vedanta and the Advaitevida of the
 ‘Tantra, They are as follows, Acoordingto the fst two
 systems, Brahman or Porushe as Sat, Chit’ nd Xnanda is
 Btemal Conscious Being. It is changelass ond has no
 activity (Kartsittva). Tt ia not therefore in Taelf « cause
 ‘whather instrumental or material ; though ia so far a Its
 simple presence gives the appearance of oonsciotaness to
 the activities of Pai, Ts may in aush sense bo designated
 an efiient cause, 80, sovorling to Sifilys, Prakriti
reflesia Purushs, andin Vedinta, Avidy® of the three Gunas
‘wakes th reflection of Chidénends. On the other hand, the
 substance or factors of Malaproknti or MAyt re tho thnee
 ‘Gnas or the three charastritics ofthe principle of Nataze,
 according t whick it revonls (Gattva) or veils (Tamas)
 Consciowsnesa (Chit) and the activity or energy (Rajes)
 which urges Sattva and Tamas to operation.
       Tt also ia Bteral, but ia unconscions (Achit) Becoming.
 ‘Though tis without conscioumess (Chaitanya), tin eemati=
 ally activity (Kartrittva}, motion oad chango. Te ie a true
 cause instrumental and material of the World. Bat note
 withstending all the things to which MAlapralsiti givas
 Dirth, Its substance is in no wise diminished by the pro-
 <luoton ofthe Viki or Tativag; the Gunas which eousti-
 tue it ever remaining the same. ‘The source ofall becoming
 is never exhausted, though the things which are ‘herefrom
 produced appear and disappear.
       Passing from the general points of agreement  to those of
 Aiference,   we note fistly, those between the BANKhye and
 the Vedinta. The SAflehya is commonly regynded aa
 Aualistic. eystem, which alfims that both Purusha ond
 ‘Prakriti are real, separate snd independent Principles, The
 ‘YVoddinta, however, says that there caanot be two Principles
                               336
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 which sre both absolutely seal. It docs not, however,
 altogether discard the dual principles of the Stakhys, but
      that Bflapraliti which it calla Maya, while real fom
 fone point of view, that is empiically, is not seal from
 nother and trenscendental standpoint. It afimas therefore
 ‘that the only Real (Sad-vasta) is the attributeless (Nirguna
 Brahman). Alleleis May and ita products. Whilst then
 ‘tho Soslchyan MAlepratzitis an Kteraal Rely, itis accord-
 ing to the transcendental method of Saaikara an. ctarmal
 unreslity (Mithyabbita Sandtant). The empirical reality
 which is rally flee is due to the Avidya which in inherent
 in the naturo of the embodied eptit (Jive). Maya is Avaeta
 ‘or no zeal thing, Ibis Nintativa, As Avidya i neither
 real nor unreal, is iis cause or May8. ‘The kernel of the
 ‘Veddntil argument on this pein isto be found      in ite inter-
prstations ofthe Vaidik Mahevaleys, “What Thou art” (Tat
 tram s i). ‘Tat here is, Ishvari, thet is, Brokman with
 Mayt as His body or Updhi, Tvam in the Ttva with Avidya
 site body. Te is then shown that Jiva ig only Brabmen
 when May is eliminated from Tahvara, and Avidy& from
 Jiva_ Therefore, only as Brakman is the ‘Tram the Tat ;
 horafore, nether Mayé nce Avidyt selly exist (thoy are
  Avastu), for otherwise the equality of Jtva end Tahara
 ‘ould not be afirmed. ‘This conclusion that Maya is Avast
  has far-reaching consequences, both religious and. philoso
  pice), and   so has the denial of it. Tt is on this question
  thet there is o fundamental diffrence between Shaikars's
  Advaitavids and that of the Shakts ‘Tantra, which T am
 about to disoux
       Before, however, doingso Twill rst contrast the notions
of orationin SAilehya and Vedanta. Tt is common groand
 ‘that creation is the appearance produced by the action of
  ‘MOlapraeitio* principle of Nature (Ackit) existing  in associ
  ation with Chit. Accordingto Safiehya, in Mélaprati or
  the potential condition of the Notaral Pzinciple, the Gunas
  are in stato of equality (SimyBvasths), that is, they are
                               357
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
not aflecting one soother. Butwhen         ss MAlapraiieeaentially
                                oven cheoging   in his sain of equity
the ‘Gunes. arewouldyet flat
tmovercnh                   cntiualy                    into themelves
(Gertpeparintina} This inbeeot gobo movement is the
ators of the Guna iteel, and exist without effecting any
bjetve reel, Ovingtothe pening of Ads or Kasia,
Creation tales place by tbe disturbance of thi equality of
‘the Gunas (Gunakshobha), which then commence to oscillate
tad act upon one another Ti thi inal eesti mation
which slow inthe Tatra as Cosmic Sound (Parsixbae),
Tes through th association of Paraahe with Mélaprart
in commie vibration (pandana) thet cretion takes plac.
‘The whole universe axses from vatied forms of this geaed
Initial motion. 80, sceotife matter” is now cnreatly
Tal to be the vasied apposiance produeed in our minds BY
‘vibration of, and im the single substance called ether. ‘This
new Western soientifa dacrne of vibiation isin India an
ficient inhettance, “Hefng.Whe Supreme Hangsn dwell in
the billlant      heaven.” ‘The word “Eingan”                comes, iis
said    fomsayathethatwordItiHani,calledwhich  meneBoorseGat! Teioe Motion
                                                                     in per-
Siyina                                    Haityn;
pelual motion, Hu Indian teaching oarsee the aplication
this doctrine beyon the alent ether which se phys
cal substance (Mahbbiita).              There is vibration in the causal
body thatis of the Ganas of Mllaprait ay the renut of
                   ms of Partshabdasist inthe subtle body
fofSudtebaperint
     mind (Antabearsoa) ;and inthe gros body, compoua de
of the Bhftas which desive {com the Tanmbias thei im-
‘mediate subtle source of origin. The Hiranyagarbha and
‘Virat Sound is called Madhyama and Vaikhari. If this strile-
 ing siniasity between ancient Baers wim and modern
 Sleutiio  macarsh hag not bean rsopushd a a to the
 fact tha the ordinary Wertern Oriental sod these ve
tale their ene from him inthis country, ate prone     fo the
 femowhat    contemptonus belief that, India notions oe. of
  “historic” iateert only, aid a sh,» welcome edn
                                    358
       CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 ‘possibly for some intellectual museum, but are otherwise
 ‘without value or actuality. ‘The vibrating Malapralarti
‘and its Gunas     ever remain the same, though the predomi-
 nonce of now one, and now another of tham, "produces the
  vorious evolutes called Vikrtis or Tattves, which constitute
 ‘the world of micd and matter. ‘These Tattvas coxstitute
 the elements of the crested world. They are the well-known
 Buddhi, Abssightra, Manas (constituting the Antablenrana),
 ‘the ten Indriyas, five Taumatrss and five Mabibhtitss of
     ther”, “ain”, “fe”, “eater” and “earth”, which        of course
must nob be identifid with the notions which the English
 terms connote, Those Tattvas are names for the elements
 which we discover as a rasult of a peychologics! analysis of
 our worldly experiance. That experience ordinarily gives us
 Doth the feeling of persistence end change. ‘The formeris
 due to the prosence’of    the Atma or Chit-Shakti, which exists
 ‘in us in association with Milaprokriti ox Maya-Shalti.. This
 isthe Chaitanya in all bodies. Change is caused by Mala-
 pralsiti or Maya-Shalti, and its cloments may be divided
 into the subjective and objective. Tattvas, or what. we call
 ‘mind and matter. Anslysing, ognin, the former, we discover
 ‘an individuality (Ahangletra) sensing through the Indsiyas,
 ‘8 world which forme the material ofits petoepts and con-
 cepts (Manas and Buddhi). The object of though or
 matter” are the varied compounds of the Vailita creation,
 which are made up of combinations of the gross elements
  (Miahibhéte), which themselves derive from the subile
 elements or Tanmaica. Now, according to Saikhya, al this
 isreal, forall are Tattves. Purusha      and Prakriti are Tativas,
fand so ave the Vilsitis of the latter.
        Accoading to the Vedinta also, creation takes place
 through the association of the Brahman, then Imown as the
 Lord or Ishvara (Mayopidhile-Chaitamyam Ishvacab), with
 Maya. ‘Thatis, Chitis associated with, though unaffected by,
  ‘Maya which operstes    by season of such association to produce
 ‘the universe. ‘The unchanging Sad-vastu ia the Brohman.
                                  359
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘The ever-changing world is, when viewed by the spiritually
 ‘wise (Jada), the form impased by Avidy on the Changeless
 Sat. Ibis true thatit hes the quality of being in socordance
 with the greatest principle of order, namely, that of causal-
 ity. Ibis the Sst, however, vhich gives to the World the cha-
 sacter of orderiness, because itis on and in assocstion with
‘that pure Chit or Sot that Mya plays, Its true tnt behind
 all this unreal appearance there is the Real, the Brahman.
 But the phenomenal world hes, from the slogisal standpoint,
 xno rel substratum existing as its instrumental and material
 caus. ‘The Brahman as such is no true cause, and Mayi
 is unreal (Avastu). "The world has only tho appeerince of
 realty from the reflection which is oast by the zeal upon
 the unseal. Nor is Ishvare, the creative ond ruling Lord,
 in8 transcendental vense real. For, as it is the Bremen
 in association with Maya, which Shanicera calls Ishvara, the
 latter is nothing but the Brahman viewed through Maya. It
 follows that the universe is the product of the association
 of the resl and the unreal, and when world-experience ends
 in liberation (Mukt),the notion    of Ishvara ag its ereatar:no
 longer exists. For His bodyis Miya and this i» Avasta.
 So long however as thare is & world that is, ro long as one
as subject   to MAyi that is embodied, so long do we recognize
 ‘the existence of Ishvora, ‘The Lond truly exists for every
 ‘iva eo long as he is such. But on attainment of bodiless
 liberation (Videba Mkt), the Jiva becomes ‘himself Sach-
 hidinanda,and ns such Ishvars does not exist for him, for
  Ishvora is but the Sat viewed through thot May of which
 the Satis free. “The Brahmanis tm, the world is false.
 "The Jiva is Brabmen (Parsmitms) and nothing else.”
       ‘The opponents of this system or Mayavida have charg-
 ‘ed i with being covert form of Buddhistic nihilinm
 (layavidem astcbokbistrom prachchhannem hauddbam).
 Te has, however, perhaps been more comcectly said that Shot
 Shafikara adjusted his philosophy to mect the Mayévide
 ‘of the Buddhists, and so promulgated s new theory of Maya,
                                360
     CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 ‘without        abandoning the faith or practice of it Shave
  Shia‘All Dharms,
                systems obviously concede at least the enpitial
 realty      of the word, The question is, whether it has =
 greter reality than that, and igo, in what way | SABichya
  Stirme       its realty;      Shadcara. deine i inEachondessyaten        to tute
 the complete unity of the Brimas.                                                   bas
 merits of its own. Safiya specie character of Chitato
                                                by    ita    dualian      is   able
 Drserve in ality            intgzty the                    band, inflected at
 Riranjena. This result, on the other                                         in some
 tho cone of that unity fr which ll lmindshunger. have, Sbadkare
 fom othr, « Hind of metaphysica
  by his MAyévéds secures ths unity, bot this achievement
 iat
  Whetherthe onsdered
                cost ofm denialas thof product
                                         the climate(Viki)reality      of the word,,
                                                                 of Bapeaksit
  Oras Maluprlis Rel                                               and that isthe
         ‘TheeShiktai, however,     another alemative,                       hore i,
  great.                  doctng. of Duality in Unity.the seslity                      of
  this Slots says, a without:    middle     couse     in   which
                                            compromising the truth of the
‘the world is affirmed
  tuity                 Bran, Libre aborly Shaflata
           of thecontends,           fot   whieh                    by sack ltty
  pecuaton                                            sta whatis developed
  ‘Bore aly later. "Theii Shakts               AdvaitarAde resoguizesHorethein
  TealtyofMlepsact s thethe soto                    of Mya Shai ood,
‘ qulied weyitfloy                          S8lkiya, thatOn theMClepeaks other t a
  {een from the Sanya                      in holding
  Mayi-Shale ie not as prizeplese                paate from the Brahian,
  but exit in andworl, atherefor,                                    one Brahman
                                         principle is ofthe theappearance        of the
  tubwtance,          ‘The Brshmen as Power. "Th ground principle
  eal Teis the
  of such appearance or Méy&-Shakti is the Real as Atma and
  ower, horeis thon»the tality                    behind all appearances            , ©
   teal substance bekind                eppatentttnaformatio         ns.         MA
                                                                     so is Ishvam.
                                                                               Boal. T
                                                       real,   and
                                    eternal
   ‘Tho traforuations ate the e changing
   Shakti as such         is  both              and
                                                           forme    ofthe
   pass now to the Adveitevid ofthe Shakta Tero,
                                           361
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      ‘Tho Shékta Tontra in not a formal system of philosophy
(Darshans). Tt is in the broadest sense, a generic term for
‘the vatings and Various traditions which express the whole
culture ofa certain epoch in Indian History. The contents
fre therefore of an enevolopedie characte, religion, ritual,
domestic rites, law, medicine, magio, and so forth. It has
thus great historical value, which appeoms to be the most
fashionable form of recommendation far the Indian Serip-
tures now-a-days. ‘The mem historian, T believe, derives en-
coursgsten® from the fact that outof bed meterial mey yet
tbe made good history. T am aot here concemed with this
aspect of the matter. Kor my present purpose, the Sbilta
‘Tantra is part of the Upisand kands of tho threo depart-
amenis of Shruti and is a system of physical, psychical and
moral training (Sadiasnd), worship, and Yoga. Tt is thus
essentially practical.” This is whst itelaims to te. To its
cities, it hse appearedto be s aystem of immoral indisci-
pine. Tam not here concerned with the change but with the
dlctsine of eration to be found in this Shistra. Under-
Tying, howovey, al this proto, whatscever bo the worth or
                                                   philosophy
‘otberwise which is attributed to it, there is s forthe
 ‘which must be abstracted, as     Ihave bere done        first
‘imme, with some diffculty, end on points with doubt,
‘rom the disquistions on Teligion and the ritual and Yoga
 directions to be fonnd in the verious antras, The funda
 ‘mental principles are as follows.
       Te is suid that the equality (Amya) of the Gunas is
 Malapralat, which has ectivity (Karsiteva), but no con-
 scioninoss (Chaitanya). Brubman is Sachehidananda who
 Iuua Ghaitanys and no Karbitiva, Bub this is so only if
 ‘we thus logically diferentiate them. As 8 matter of fact,
 however, the two admittedly, ever and everywhere, co-exist
 and cannot, excopt for the purpose of formal analysis, be
 thought of without the otfer. The connection between
 the two is one of unseparateness (Avindbhiva Sambandhs).
 ‘Brahman does not exist without Preksti-Shakti or Prati
                              362
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 without the Brahman. Some ell the Suprame Chaitanya
vith Pralsti, others Prakati with Chattanya. Some worehip
 Teas Shiva; others       os Shokti. Boil are one and the came
 Shiva is the Ono viewed from Ite Cait aapzct. Shakti is
 the One viewed from Its May aspect. ‘They sre the “male”
 ond “female” aspects of the same Unity which is nether
 tale nor famale, Akula is Shiva, Kala is Shalt. The
same Supreme is worshipped by Sadhan6 of Bralanan, as
 by Sidhand of Adylehalti. The two cannot bo separated,
 for Brahman without. Praksiti is actionlas, and Prakciti
 without Brahman is unoonscious. ‘There is Nishkala Shiva
 or the trinacendent, atsibuteloss (Nirgune) Brahman j and
 Selale Shiva or the embodied, immanent Brahman with
 attibutes (Saguna),
        ‘Kald oF Shekticoresponds with the Sttihyan Mals-
 praksiti or Sdmyavasthd of the three Gunes and the Ve-
 déncie May6. But Kala which is Milapralciti and Maya
 eternally is, an therefore when wo speakof Nistlala Shiva,
  itis not mean thas there is then or at any time no Kal,
{or Kal everis, but that Brahman is meant which s thought
 cof ac being without the working’ Pruliti (Pralzitoranyab),
  Maytals then Intent in it, As the Duvtin che Kuls-
  chidamani sys, “Alum. Pralstiripa chet hidénenda-
  pardyaad”, Saksla Shiva i, on tho other hand, Shiva
 ‘considered as associated with Prakriti in operation and
  tanifesting the world. In one oase, Kali is working             or
 rmanifer, in the other it is not, but exists      in   a potential
 state. In the same way the two Shivas are and        one and the
 fame, There is one Shiva           who is Nisgune          Saguns,
 ‘The Téntsle Yoga treatise ShatchaleranirGpana describes the
  ‘ivatin a the Paryyiya of, that ia another namo for, the
  Parambimé ; adding that tho root of wiedom (Mlevidya)
isa knowiedge      of their identity. When the Braman mani-
  festa, Tt ip called Shalt, whichis the magnificent concept
  round which Tantra is built. ‘The ferm comes from tho
  soot “Shik”, which means “ta be able”. It is the power
                                 363
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘which js the Brabmon and whereby the Brahman manifests
Kisolf; for Shakti end possessor of Shakti (Shaktiman)
fe ote and the same. As Shakti is Brabman itis also
Nirgund ood Saguns. Ishvara is Chit Shakti, thot is,
Chit in association with the operating Prakriti as the
ficient cause of the creation ; and Mayé-Shakti which
rmeans MBy8 os o Shakti that is in creative operation as
‘he instrumental (Nimitia) and material (Uptsdéns) couse
cof the universe. ‘Thisis the Shakti which produves Avidya,
just as Mahimya or Ishvest is the Great Liberatrix
‘These twin aspects of Shakti appear throughout exestion
‘Thus   in the body, the Chit or Brahman aspect is conscions
Kami or Spist, and the Maya nepoct ie the Antahlearoan
land ite derivatives or the uoonscious (Jada) mind and
ody. When, however, we. speak here of Shakti without
any qualifications, what is meant is-Chic-Shalti in assori-
tation with May&-Shakti thats Ishvarl or Devt or Mahimay,
the Mother of all worlds. Tf we keep this in view, we shall
not fall into the error of supposing that tbe Shakias (whose
religion is one of the oldest in the-world ; how old indeed
in us yet little know) worslipmateral fore or gross mstter,
Ishvara or Ishvart is not Achit, whieh, as pare Sattvaguna
is only His or Hor body. Miy®-Shaleti in the sense of
Malopraksiti is Chit. So also is Avidya Shakti, thoughit
appears to be Achit, for there is no Chidabhis
       Tn a certain clase of Indian images, you wil see the
Lord, with a diminutive female figure on His lap. ‘The
‘makers and worshippers of those images thought of Shakti
‘a being in the subortimate postion which some persons con-
sider a Hindu wife should oceapy. This is however not the
‘conceptionof Shite Tantra, according     to which, Sheisnot 0
‘uandmaid of the Loni, but the Lord Himslt, being bat the
name for that aspest of His in which He is the Mother and
Nourisher of tho worlds. As Shiva is the transcendent,
 Shalt is the immanent aapect of the one Brahman who is
 Shivw Shakti. Being Ite aspect, Tt is not different trom,
                               364
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
  Dut one with, In the Kulashidimani Nigoma, the Bhai-
ravl addressing Bhairava seys, “Thou srt the Guru of all,
 T entered into Thy body (as Shakti) and thereby ‘Chow
 ‘idst boceme the Lord (Prabhu). There is none but Myself
 ‘Who is the Motherto create (Kazyyavibhivin). ‘Therefore
 itis that when creation takes place Sonship is in Thee
 ‘Thou sloxe ax: the Father Who wills what I do (Karyya-
 -vibhivaks ; that is, She is the vessel which reeives the
 nectar which flows fom Nitytnanda). By the vnion of
 Shiva and Shaleti otetion comes (Shiva-Shakti-samayogat
 jyato sishtlcelpent). Aa al in the universe ie both Shiva
 tnd Shakti (Shivachaitimaya), thezefore, Oh Maheshvora,
 ‘Thou art in every place and Tam in every place. ‘Thow
 art in sll nd I'am in all." The creative World thus sowa
 ts sei in Its own womb,
       Such being ths nature of Shakti, the next question is
 whether Mayas Shafleara effims ia Avastu. It is to be
 remembered that according to his empitioal method it is
 taken as real, but transoondantally i isallged to be an
 toral unreality, baoruse, the object ofthe Istter method
 ia to explain avay the woild altogether0 4s to avcare tho
 pore unity of the Bmbman, ‘The Shakte Tentrs is how-
fever aot conoered with amy such purpose. It is an UpBsn&
 Shistee in which the World and its Lord have reality.
 ‘There cannot be SAdhand in an unreal werld by an unreal
 Sidiaka of an unreal Lord. ‘The Shits replice to Maya
 ‘vida :—If it be said that My is in some unexplained way
 -Avacta, yot itis admitted that there is something, however
 unreal it may be alleged to be, which is yet admittedly
 stemal and in association, whather manifest or unmanifst,
 with the Bmbman. According to Shafars, May existe
ts the mate potentiality of some future Would which shall
 fvise onthe ripening of Adzishta which May is, But
 in the Mahinievina Tastm, Shiva seys to Devt, Thou
 xt Thyself the Part Praleriti of the Paramatma” (Ch. TV,
 ¥. 10), That is MAy® in the sense of Mlaprakeiti, which
                             365
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 in sdmittedly eternal, ia aot Avastu, bubis the Power of the
  Brahman one vith which is Chit. Th Nishkals Shiva, Shakti
 lies insctive.. Tt manifesta in and aa crestion, though Chit
 ‘thus appearing through its Power is neither exhausted nor
 affected thereby. We thus find Ishvart addressed in the
 ‘Tantra both as SachchidtnandsrGpint and Triguntimile,
 refetring to the two real principles which form part of she
 cone Brahman substance. The philosophical difference be-
 ‘tween the two exponitions sppearsto le in this, Shaikare
 says that there are no distinctions in Brahman of either of
 ‘the three kinds : avagata-bheda, that i, distinction of parts
  within one nait, svajSttye-bheda or distinction hetween unite
‘of one class, oF vijitiya-bkeda or distinction between units
 of different classes. Bhlrati, however, the Commentator
 (on the Mshinirvans (Ch. Il, v.84) says that Advaita there
 ‘mentioned means devoid of the last wo classes of distine-
 tion, There is, thetefore; ior the purposes of Shakta Tantra,
 ‘8 svagnta-bieda in the Brahman Tiself namely, the two
 apacte accordingto which the Beabmaa is, om the one hand,
  Being, Chit end on the other, the principle of becoming
  Which manifests as Nature or seeming Achit. Tn a myste-
 ious way, however, tereis 8 union of these two principles
  (Bhavayoga}, which thus exist without derogation from tae
  partless unity of the Brahman which they are. In short,
 ‘the Beshman may be conceived of as having twin aspecta,in
  oneof which, Tt is the cause of the changing word, and in
  tte other of whichTt is the unchanging Soul of the World.
 Whilst the Brahman Svartipe or Chit is Itself immutable,
  the Brahman is yot through its Power the cause of change,
  ‘and is in one aapsot the changeful world.
        But what then is “real”; a term not always correctly
  understood. According to the Mayavdda definition, the
  “real” is that which ever was, is and will be (Kalatraye-
  settvdvdn) jin the words of the Christian liturgy, “as it was
  in the begining, is now, and ever shall be world without
  end” ; therefore that which changes, which was not, but
                                366
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
    and     then ceases +o be is scconding to this definition
    ‘unreal”, however much from a practical point of view it
 ‘may appear réal to us. Now Mayévads calls Mileprokriti
 in the sense of May& the material cause of the world, no
 independent real (Avactu). The Shakta Tantra says thet
 the Principle, whence all becoming comes, existe     as 8 real
 substratum s0 to apeak below the world of nares and forms,
 ‘Thin May®-Shaccti is an eternal reality. What is “unreal”
 (so0ording to the sbove definition), sf these names and
 forms (Avidyt), that is, the changing worlds (asat-trilkt-
 sadbhavam svaripam Bratmansh smoitan, Ob, Ill, v. 7,
 ‘Mabénirvins Tantes). ‘These are unreal however only in the
 sense that they are not permanent, but come and go. ‘The
 body is called Sharira, which comes from the root Shri—"to
 decay”, for itis dissolving end being renewed at every mo-
 ‘ment until death. Again, however real it may seem to us,
 ‘the world may be untaal in the sense thab it is something
 ‘other than what it seems to be. ‘This thing whioh I now
 hold in my hands seems to me to be paper, whichis white,
 smooth and so forth, yet wo axe told that it really is some
 ‘hing different, namely, » number of extmordinarily rapid
 vibrations of etherie substance, produting the false appesr-
 ‘noe of scientific “matter” Ih the same way (as those who
 worship Yentms know), all natare is the appearance pro-
 duced by various forms of motion in Prilritic substance.
 (Seream Khaloidam Brahma.) ‘The real is the Brshman and
‘ts Power. ‘The Brahman, whether in Its Ohitor    MAy@ aspect,
 ctarnally and changelessly endures, but Avidya breaks up its
 undivided unity into tho changing manifold world of names
 tnd forms. Ts follows'from the above that Brahman and
 Isivars are two co-being aspects ofthe Ono ultimate Reality,
 ‘as Power to Be and to Become. For as Shatkara points
 cout (Comm. Shvetdshvatera Up. I. 2) Devitmashakti, the
 ‘cause of the world, is not sepsrate from the ParamAtma, as
 Sklchye alleges its Prodhéns to be. And thus it is that
 Shiva in the Kuldmaya Tantss (L. 110) says, “some desire
                               397
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ualism (Dvaitavida), othera monism (Advaitsvads). Such
  however know nat My truth, which is beyond both monism
  ‘and dualism (DvaitAdvaitavivarjita).” This saying may
  doubiless mesn that to “the knower (Jnan!) the argu-
  ‘menia of philosophies! systems are of no secount, a
  indeed the case.” Tt has also « more literal meaning
  above explsined. The Shastra in fact makes high claims
  for itself. The Tontra, it has been said, takes into its arms
  fs if they were ite two children, both dualism snd monism
  affonling by its practical method (Sadhana), and the
  spinitual knowledge generated thereby the means by which
  their antimonies aze tesolved and harmonized. Tis purpcee
 is to give liberstion to the Jiva by « methed according
  to which monistic truth is reached through the duslistic
 world ; immersing its Sidhalas in. the curent of “Divine
 Bliss, by changing duality into ity, and then evolving
 ‘rom the latter a dualistic. play, thos proclaiming the won-
 erful glory of the Spouse of Paramashiva in the love
 embrace of Mind-Matter (Jada) and Consciousness (Chai-
 tanya). Tt therefore says that those who havo realized this,
 ‘move, tnd yet Temain ansoiled in the mud of worldly actions
Which lead othare npan the downward path. Tt claims, there-
 fore, that its practioal method (SAdban) ia more speedily
fruitful than any other, Tte practical method is an spplica-
  tioa of the geversl principles above described. In fact, one
 of its Acharas which has led to abusois an attemptto put
 into full practice the theory of Advaitavada. Shalkura has
 im his trenscendental method dealt with the subject as part
 of the Jana Kinda. Though the exponent of the Mya
 ‘vida is estormed to be a Mahapurushs, this method is not
 in favour with the intrio Sadhaka who attributes much
 of the prantial atheism which ia to be found in this country,
 fae eliowbore, to a misinderstending of the trnscondental
 doctrines of Mayévida. ‘There is some truth in this charge,
 for, as has been well stid, the volgarization of Shalars’s
 “Higher Seience” whichis by its nature an esoteric doctrine
                                368
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 destined fora small minority, murt be reckoned & misfortune
 ino faras it ha, in the language of the Gti, induced many
 people to take to another's Dharma instzad of to their owa,
 Which is the “Lover Scienoe” ofthe grest Vedantin followed
 in all Shistmes of worship. Such Shistre mus: nevessarily
 ‘ffir God as a zeal object of worship. Dionysius, the
 Areopagite, the chief of th line ofall Chistian mystics suid
 ‘that. we could only spsak “apophatially” of the Supreme
   8 Teexisted in Teel, that is, other than as Tt displays It-
 self to us. Of Tt nothing can be affirmed but that Tt is not
 thia and not that. Here he followed the, “neti neti”, of the
 ‘Vedinta, Isharfis not less real than the things with whieh
 wwe are concerned every day. She is forthe Indian Stdhaka
 the highest reality, and what may or may not be the state of
 Videha Mokti has for him, no prectiel concern. Those only
 who hve sttained ie wil know whether Shefikars is right
 cor not} not that they, will think about this ot any other
 subjeot; but in the sense that when the Brahman is known
 all is known, A friend from whom I quote, writes that be
 Thad once ooeasion to learn to wast ridiculous haughtiness,
 ‘some of the modern “adepte” of Shei Shafikara’s school are
 apt to let themselves be castied away, when one of them
 spoke to him of the persousl Tahvara ss bsing a “*pitiable
 creature”. ‘The truth is thot cuch sovoalled “adopts” are
 no adepts at all, being without the attainment, a far from
 the spitit of Shafkars—whose devotion snd_povers made
‘him soem   to his followersto be an incarnation of Shiva Him
 self. Such a remark betrays o radical misunderstanding
 of the Veddnto. How many of those, who to-day discuss
 his Vedinta fom merely literary standpoint, have his,
 fo indeed any faith? What seme woulddo is to dismiss
 ‘he faith and practice of Shaikara as idle superstition,
  tnd to adopt his philosophy. But what is the intrinsio
  value of a philosophy which emanates from a mind which
 {is s0 ignorant as to be superstitious ? Shafikara, however,
  has said thot faith ond Shand are the prelimizaties for
                                369
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 competency (Adhikien) for the Jniuskinds. He alone
is competent (Adhikir?) who possesses all good moval and
intellecual qualities, faith (Bhraddhs), capacity for the
‘highest contempletion (SemAdhi), the SARKiyan discrimi-
nation (Viveks), absence of all desire for anything in this
 world or the next, und an ardent longing for liberation.
 "There are few indeed who can claim even imperfectly all
such qualifications. But what of the rest! ‘There is no
 ‘Vaidik Kernaleinda in operation in the present age, but
‘there aro other Shistmas of worship which is either Vail,
 ‘Thnttik or Paurdnik. These provide for those who are stil,
 as are most,on the path of desire. ‘The Tantra affirms tit
nothing of worth can be schieved without Sadhan. Mere
specalation ia without result. ‘This principle is entirely
sound whatever may be thonght of the mode in whieh itis
sought to be applied. Those to whom the questions here
discussed am not mere matters for intalleetoal basiness ot
 reoreation will recall that Shaikara has gaid that liberation
is ettainod not merely by the discussion of, and pondering
 ‘upon revealed truth (VichArs), for which fewonly       are compe-
 tant, bat by the grace of God (Ishvara Anugraha), through
 ‘the worship ofthe Mother and Rather from whom el creation
 springs. Such worship produées inowledge, In the Kula-
 chidamani,the Devi seys             —"Oh all-knowing One, if Thou
 Imowert: Me then of what se are the Amnfyas (revealed
 teachings) and Yajanar (ritmal)? Tf Thou knowest Me not,
 then again, of whnt use are they?”” But neither ar, in
 another sense, without their useo for thereby the Sidhaka
 Decomes qualifed for some form of Unidhv@mniys, in
 Which there ar6 no rites (Karma).
       ‘With this short exposition of the nature of Shaktitottva
 sccording to Shikta ‘Tantra T yass to an equally brief
 account   of its manifestation in the Universe. tis sufficient
 ‘to deal with the main lines of the doctrine without going
 into their very great sccompenying detail. There follow, on
‘the main theme, the account given inthe calabrated Sheed
                                 370
    CREATION IN NON.DUALIST TANTRAS
 Tiloka work writton hy Lelahmantchfeyya, the Gura of
 Abhineva Gupta, the great Kashnian ‘Titik, about the
 ‘commencement of the eleventh cantury, and its Commen-
 tary by the leaméd ‘Tantrik Pandit Réghava Bhatte whioh
 is dated 1454 AD. This work has long been held to be
 of gest authority i Bengal
       ‘Why crestion takes place cannot in an nltimate sense
 be explained. Tt isthe play (Lila) of the Mother. Could
 this be done the Brahman would bo subject to the law of
 causality which govems the Universe but which its Couse
 necessarily transcends
       ‘The Tantra, however, in common with other Indian
 Shdatras recopnizes Adrchta Sriahti, or the doctrine that the
 impulse to creation ie proaimataly caused by tho Arishta
 or Karma of Jivas., But Karnais steral and itself requires
 explanation. Kari comes from Somskfica and Samekfia
 from Karma. "The peoceas of) creation, maintenanoo and
 Aisoluion, sesoading to this view, umosasing'y resus as
 fn eternal shythm. of obamie life and death which is tho
 Mother's play (Eile). Andso itis suidof Hr in the Lalita
 Sehusranima that, “the series of universes appear and dis-
 appscr with the opening end shutting of Her Byes”. The
 existence of Karma implies the will to cosmic Iife. We
 produce it as the result of suoh will, And when produced
 it becomes itelf the onuse of it,
       Tn the aggregate of Karma which wil atone periodwhichor
 nother ripen, thoto is, at any particular sime, some of
 ae ripe and other® which are not so. For the fruition
 ‘the former only crestion takes place. When this seed
 ripens ond the time therefore approaches for the crestion
of enother universe,the Brshman manifests in Its Visvartipa
 Aspect,   20 that the diva may enjoyo suifr therein the fut
 of his Kamms, and (anless liberation be attained) secunnlate
 fresh Karma which will involve the creation   of futare worlds.
                                                           Maya
 ‘When the uizipened actions which are absorbed’ orin Shakti
  become in courte of time spe, the Vitti   of  Mya
                              am
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
in tho form of desire for exeation arises in Paramashiva, for
 the bestowal ofthe fut of this Karma, - This state of My
 is variously called by Shruti, Tkshane, Kame, Vichiktehs,
       Tt is when the Bohman “siw", “desired”, or
  “thought” “May Ibe many”, that there takes place whatis
 known as Sadrishaporindma in which the Supreme Bindu
 sppaars. This,    in its tiple aspect, is known as Kamala,
 manifestation of Shakti whence in the manner hereafter
 described the Universe emauatas. This KimakalA is the
 Malls or soot of all Mantra, ‘Though erestion takes plase
 in onder thet Karma mey be suffered and enjoyed, yet in
  the agaregate of Karma which will at one time or smother
 igen there is at any particular pesiod some whioh axe xipe
 and others which are not se. For the frition of the former
 only creation takes place.. As cretion will serve no purpose
 in the oste of Karma which is not ape, there is, after the
 ‘exhanstion by fmuision of the ripe Karma, a dissolution
 ralaya). ‘Then the Universe is again merged in May&
 ‘which thus abides tnt the ripening    of the remaining actions.
 Karma, like everything cle, re-enters tho Brahman, end
 semains there in @ hidden potential stato as it were a seed.
 ‘When the seed ripens-cceation again takes pleco.
       With Thana, or the manifestation of creative will,
 cationis really instantancoas. When the “Word” went
 forth, “Let there be light”, theze sas light, for the ideation
 of Ishvaa is creative, Our mind by its constitution is
 however Jed to think of erestion as a gradual prooess. ‘Tho
 Siiithya sterts with the silation of the Chinas (Guna-
 Ikshobha) upon which the Vikeitis immediately appear. But
 junta it explains ita real Parindma in terms of successive
 emanations, so the Shikta Tentra describes « Sadrishapari-
 némain the body of Ishvam their cause. ‘This dovelopment
 is nota real Parinda, but a resolution of llc tolike, thats,
 there is no actual change in the nature of the entity doalt
 ‘vith, the various stages of such Parindma bring but names
  for the multiple aspects to us of the some unchanging Unity.
                               372
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
        Shakti is one, Tt appears av vesious by its manifesta
 tions, In one aspect thené is no Parinéma,ior Sachohid-
 nanda is as such immntsble. Before and after and in
 creation It remains what It wos. There is thereforeno
 Parindma in or of the Akshsrabrahman as such. ‘There
is Parindma, however, in its Power sapect. The thes
 Ganss do not change, each remaining whit it is. They
 fre the same in all forms but apposr to the Jiva to exist in
 iflerent. combinations. ‘The appearance of the Gunns it
 <iflcrent proportions is due to Avidy’ or Karmo. which is
 this apparent Gusakshobha. 1b is Samsk&ra which gives
 to the Stmya Prakriti, existence as Vaishsmya, What the
 ‘Tentma describes 03 Sadrishoyorindma is bat an analysis of
 ‘the diffzent aspects of wit is shortly called in other Shas-
 ‘mas, Tesbana, ‘This Sadzishapsrindma is emcemed with
 the evolution of wht is named Part Sound (Parashabda-
 stishti). This is Cosmic Som; the cotsal vibrationin the
 substance of Mlapraliti whioh gives bitth to the Tatevas
 ‘which aro ta Vitis: such Cosmic Sound being that which
 is distinguished in thotight fom the Tattyas so produce.
        ‘The ShéradA sayo that from the Salle Porameshrara
  who is SechchidGnsnda issued Shaki thet is, that power
  whieh is necessary for creation. God and His power are
  yet more than the creation which He manifests. Shakti is
 ‘said to issue from that whichis alreedy Sakala or axsocinted,
 ‘vith Shale, because 6s Raghave Bhatte says, Ske who is
  tems] (Anddirtza) was in a subtle state as Chaitanya
  uring the great dissolution (Pralaya), (Y@ Anéiripa
  CaitenyAdhyasena Mahipraleye Sikshmé Sthit).
        ‘With however the disturbance of the Gunss, Prakriti
  became inclined (Ucbchbtint) to creation, and in this sense,
 is imagined to issue. Shakti,in other words, pasces fom a
  ‘Potential state to one of actuslity. The Parameshvaze is,
  fhe ads, describedas Sachchidananda in oxderto afin that,
  even when the Brahman is associnted with AvidyA, its own.
  ‘rie nature (Svaripa) is uot allected. Acconiing to the
                                373
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Shira, from this Shakti iesuos Nace and from the latter
 Bindu (uown as the Parsbinds), The Sharada thas
 enumerates seven aspects of Shakti. This it does, acconting
 ‘to RAghava Bhotts, co aa to make up the seven exponent
 ports of the Omir. In some Shikta Tantms this first
 Nici is omitted and there are thus only six aspects. The
 Shaiva Tuntras moction five. Those which recognize Kal
 as e Tutiva identify Néds with it. In some Tantmas, Kaldis
 sxscciated with Tamoguns, snd is the Mahilella whois both
 the obild and spouse of AiyAshalti; for creation comes fro
the Thmasi aspect of Shakti. In tho Shéradftilska, Nada
 sind Bindu are one end the same Shalt, being the names of
 ‘ovo of Her statos which are considered to represent Her ag
 being som proneto creation (Gehshhindvastht), ‘There are
 toro states of Shaksibinda auitable for eeation (Upayogy’-
 vasthd)." As thoro a no mass oF Ghana in Nishala Shiva,
  that Brshman. represents, the Avhanivasth&. The Pr
 panchastrs Tantze says that She, who is in the frst place
 ‘Tetera (mom "thatness”), quickens under the influence of
 hit which She redlete; then She longs to create (Vichi-
 ‘ktsbu) and becomes massive (GhanfbhGtl) snd sppears
 as Bindu (Parabinda). Ghanibhita moans that which was
 not dense or Ghana but which has becomeso (Ghanfvasthi).
 Te volves the notion of solidifying, coagulating, becoming
 massive. Thus mil in eBid to become Gaanfohite when
 it condenses into cream or cuni. ‘This ia the fist gross
 condition (Sthildvesth6); the Brahman aasocisted with
  Méyh in the form of Kezms assumes that agpeot in which
  eis regarded as the primal oause of the subtle and gross
  ‘bodies. "There then lis in it ia potential, undifferentinted
  amass (Ghana), the imiverse and boinga about to be created.
  "Tho Perabinds is thus a compact aspect of Shakti whersin
  action oF Kriyd Shalt predominates, It is eompared to a
  gain    of gram (Chanaks) which under ite outer abgath (My8)
  fontaine two soods Shivashakti) in close and mdivided
  ‘union. ‘The Bindu is symbolized by a cide, The Shinya
                              374
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 ‘oF empty spsce within is the Brakmapada, The supreme
 ‘Light is formles, but Bindu implies both the void and
 Guns, for when Shiva becomes BindurtipaHo is with Gun.
 Righava says, “She alone con create. When the desire
 for appearance as all Her ‘Tatbvas seizes Her, She assumes
 the state of Bindu whose characteristic is action” (Kriya-
 shakti). This Bindu or Avyakta, as it is the sprouting
 root of the universe, is called the supreme Bind
  (Parsbindu), or cousal or Kérana Binda, to distinguish it
 from that aspect of Tiself which is called Bindu (Katyye),
 ‘which appears as « state of Shalt after the differentistion
 of the Pasabindu in Sadsishaperinime. ‘The Parabindw is
 the Ishvara of the Vedanta with Maya as His Upéahi. He
 is the Soguna Bralman, that is, the combined OhitShaktt
 and Méy8-Shalei or Ishvara with undifferentisied Prakriti
 as His Avyaktasharir. Some call im Mahévishau ond
  others the Brahmpurusha, . Here is Paramashiva. “Some
  call the Hangsa, Devi. They ate those who are Aled with
a passion for Her lotus fect.” As Kalfcharana,the Com
  ontator of the Skatchaleaniripana says, it matters not
  whatI: is called. It is adored by all. Tt is this Bindaor
  state of supreme Shakti which is worshipped in setret by
  all Devas. In Nishcsla Shiva Prukiti existe into hidden
  potential state. ‘The Binda Porashaktimayo (Shivashakti-
  ‘maya) ia the firse movemeat of creative activity which is
  both the expression and result of the universal Kare or
  store of unfulilled desire for cosmo life.
        This then said that the Parabindu “<divides"* or “differ
  centintes”. In the Satyuloka is the formless and lustrous
  ‘One. She existe lke grain of gram (Charaka) surrounding
  Horelf with May. When castingoff (Utstijya)the covering
  (Bandbsna) of Mays, She, intent-on ereation (Unmukbhf), be-
  comes twofold (Dvidhf bhittv4), or according     to the account
  there given threefold, on thenon ths diffrentiotion     in Shiva
  and Shakti (Shiva-Shakti-vibhigenn) orises    creative  ideation
  (Grishtikalpens). As so unfolding the Binda is known as
                                 375
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  te Soul Brahman (Shubdabrabman). “On the difernti-
  ation of the Pavabindu there azo9e unmasifested sound”
  (Bhidyamdode parkd bindoravyaktdtand rave "thavt).
  Shabda here of couse dees nat mean physical sound, which
 is the Guna of the Karyyikisha or otomio Alisha. ‘Tho
 latter is integratedand limited and evolved at later stage
 in Vilziti Parindms from Témasike Ahangkéra, Shabda-
 Tahman is the undiferentieted Chidikisha or. Spiritual
 Ether of philosophy, in asociation with ita Kaldor Prakriti
for the Salen Shiva of rolgion, It in ChitShakti vehield
  by undifcrentinted Praliti, from which ia evolved Nida-
 rtza (“Sound anly” or the “Principle of Sound") which
 is unmanifest (Avyaita), from which again is displayed
 (Vyakta) the changing universe of names and forms, To is
 ‘the Prenavartpa Brahman or Ort which is the cosmic causal
 principle and the manifested Shebdirths. Avyalts Nada or
 ‘umanifested Soand is the vaclfferntisted cousal principle
 of Manifested Sound without any sign ot characteristic
 ‘manifestation such as letters and the like which mark ita
 displayed. product. Shabdabsdiman is the all-pervading,
 importite, unmanifested Nadabinds substance, the primary
 creative impolee in Parashiva which ie te cause of ths maui-
 ested Shibdarthe. Thin Bindw is called Para Doceuse Tt
 i the fist and supreme Bindu. Although Itis Shak like
 the Shalcti and Nada which provode It, Tt is considered as
 Shalt on the point of creating the world, and as such Tt is
 from this Perabiadu that Avyakta Soma is sad to come.
       ‘Righava Bhatia ends the dscassion of this matter by
 shorily saying that tho Shabdabralman isthe Chsitaaye in
 all creatures which as existing in breathing reatures (Pra)
 is known as tke Shalti Kundalin of the MGladhira., ‘he
 acourncy of this defititio is contested by the Compiler
 of the Prinatoshint, but if by Chaitanya wo, understond the
 Manifested Chit; that is, the later displayed a and with
 MAlopralaiti in Camic vibeation (Spandana), then the
 apparently diflering views are recanciled.
                             376
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
       Tho Parabindu on such differentiation manifests under
  the threefold aspects of Bindu, Nada, Bija, This is the
  fully developed and kinetic aspect of Pomshabds, ‘The
  ‘Bindu which thus becomes threefold isthe Principle in which
  the gorm of action sprouts to manifestation producing a
 state of compact intensive Shaki. The threefold aspect of
 Bindu, es Bindn (Karyya), Nada ond Bije are Shivamay
 Shivashaktimaya, Shaktimaya; Pare, Silshma, Stbila
 Tehchha, Judua, Kriya; Tamas, Ssttva, Rajas ; Moon, Fire
 and Sun; and the Shalctis which are the cosinio bodice
 Known ac Tshvare, Hirenyagarbhs, and Visit. All three,
 Bindu, Bija, Nada azo te difersnt phases of Shakti in exe-
 ation, being different aspects of Perabindu the Ghanévastha
 of Shakti, ‘The order of the three Shaktis of-will, action
 and knowledge difer in Ishvara and Jtva, Ishvara is all-
 Jknoving and therefore the order in Him is Ichchhd, Jndna,
 Kriya. In Jiva, it is Juda; Tohebbi, Kriya. Tolubhd is
 ‘nid to be the capacity which conceives the idea of work or
 action ; which brings the. work. before the mind and wills
 to do it. Ta thia Bid, Tomas ie suid to be predominant,
for there is as yet no stit 4o tion. Nad is Jina Shakti,
 that is, the subjoctive direction of will by knowledgeto the
 desimed end. “With it is associated Sattvs. Bije is Kriya
 Shakti or the Shakti which arises from that effort or the
 action done, With it Rajoguna or the principle of activity
 is sssocisted. Kriyé arises from the combination of
 Tehchh& snd Jndna,_ Tt is thus said, “Drawm by Ichchha-
 shake, illumined by Juinashalcti, Shalt the Lord appearing
 a Male creates (Kriyfshalti). From Bindu is is said arose
 Roudsl; from Nada, Jyeehth@; and from Bijs, Vama,
 From theve srose Rudra, Brahma, Vishnu.” It is also eaid
 in the Goralshs Samhité, “Tokchhs is Brébnt, Keiyé is
 Vaishnav! and Jnana is Goust. Wherever there are these
 three Shaktis thero is the Supreme Light called Om.”” In
 the Salala Pammeshvara or Shabdabrahman in bodies
 (that is, Kundalint Shakti), Binduin which Tamas prevails
                               317
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 is, Raghava says, called Nirodhilel; Nida in which Settva
 provails is called Ardhondlu, and Bij the eombinetion of
 the two (chokha and Jndma) in which Rojes as Keiy&
 works ie called Binds. ‘The three preceding states   in Kunda-
 Tint are Shakti, Divani, and Nude. Kandalnt is Chit-
 Shakti into which Sottva enters a state known as the Para-
 makashivasthé, When She into whom Ssttvs has entered
 ia next pioread by Rajos, She is ealled Dhvani which is the
 Alsharfvastha. When She is again pierced by Tamas, She
 is called Néda, This is the Avyaktavasthd, the Avyulea
 Nida which is the Parabindu, Tho three Bindua which are
 aspecta of Parshindu constitute the mysterious Kamala
 triangle which with the Harddhalzald forma the roseate body
 of the lovely limbed great Devi Triparamandasi who is
 ShivakAm®ond manifests the aniverse. Sho is the trinity of
 Divine ensrgy of whom the Shrltatsvdmava saya -—“Those
 slotious men whio. wocshipin that body in Samerosya are
 fred from the waves of poidor in the untraversable sea
 of the Wandoring (Samsirs)”. The main principle which
 undeclos thp elaborate detail’ hers shortly summariad is
 this. The state in which Ohit and Prakriti-Shakta areas
 one undivided whole, that is, in which Prokriti las Intent
 (Nishleala Shiva), is succeeded by one of diffeentiaticn, that
 ia, manifestation of My@ (Sakala Shiva). Ta euch manifeata-
 tion it displays eoveral sapects. ‘The totality of such aspects
is the May body of Tshvarein      which areinclnded the oausal,
 subtle and gross bodies of the Jiva. These or, oocording
 to the Shamat, soven aspects of the first o: Pard state of
 Sourd in Shabdasrishti which are the seven divisions of the
 Mantre Om, vie:—A, U, M, Nada, Bindu, Shai, Shinta.
 ‘They constitute Parashsbdasriskti in the Ishvara creation.
 ‘They are Tshvars or Om and seven aspects gf the cosmic
 cual body ; tho collectivity (Samushti) of the individal
 (¥yoohti) causal, subtle ond gross bodies of the Jiva.
       Before passing to the manifested Word and Ite messing
 (Bhabdictha), it is nevesary to nove wast is oalled Artha-
                              378
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
 srish           Avikritior Qadvishaparindm : that isthe causal
            the tlin
 state of Sound called Porasbsbia ; the other three states,
 vis, : Pashyantl, Madhyamé and Vaikhsrt manifesting only
 {in gros bodies. As Porabindu is the causel body of Shabda,
 Tt is also the causal body of Artha which is inseperately
 ‘associated with It 4s the combined Shabdérthe, As such,
 Hr is called Shambha who is of the natuze of both Bindu
 snd Kalé and the associnto of Kalé, From Him issued
 ‘udtshiva, “the witnessof the world”, and from Him Isha,
 ond then Rudra, Vishnu snd Brahmi. ‘These six Shivas
 ‘ae various aspects of Chit as presiding over (the fsst) the
 subjective Tativas und (the rest) the elemental world whose
 ‘oentrea are the five lower Chalaas. These Devatis when
 considered as belonging to the Avikriti Parinéans are the
 Devaté aspect of apparently diffzrent states of causal sound
 by the proosss of rescution of lke to like giving them the
 ‘semblance of all pervasive crestive energies, They are Sound,
 ‘powers in the aggregate (Ssmeshti). As appearing in, that
 is, prsiding over, bodies they are the ruling Lords of the in«
 dividual (Vyeshti) evolutes from the prim      osuso ofalShabda.
       ‘The completion of the causel Avilziti Pasindma with
 its ensuing Oosmie vibration in the Gunas is followed by a
 real Periniwsa of the Viksitia from the substance of 3Gla-
 Prokriti, ‘There then spears the manifested Shabdartha
 or the individual bodies subtle or gross of the Jtva in which
 tre the remaining three Bhtvas of Sound or Shaktis called
 Pashyoutf, Madhyami, Vaikharl, Shabda literally means
 ‘ound, idea, word ; and Artha ita meaningthat  ; is, the objec
 tive form which corresponds to the subjective conception
 formed and lenguage spoken of it. The conception is due
‘to Samschra, Arta is the externalized thought. There is
 psycho-physial pirallelism in the diva. In Ishvara thought
 i truly erestive. ‘The two ars inseporable, neither existing
 without the other. Shabdérthahas thus a composite mean~
 ing like the Gree: word “Logos”, whichmemns both thought
sand word combined. By the manifested Shabdérths        is meant
                                379
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘what the Vedintins call Namarépa, the world of names and
 forms, but with this difference that according to the ‘Tantric
 notiens hero diseussod there is, underlying this world of
 names and forms,     a real material easse that is Pavashabde ot
 Malepraksiti manifesting as the principle of evolution.
        ‘The Shared’ sys thot from the Unmanifested Root-
 Avyalta Being in Bindu form (Mélobhite Binduripa) or
 the Paravastu. (Brahman), that js, fom Mélaprakiti in
 emotive operation there is evolved the SAfikhyan Tatevas,
         Transcendental, creation of all things takes place
   multaneously. But, from the standpoint of diva, there is
1 eal development (Parindma) from the substance of Méla-
 ‘bhdta Avyulta Bindurdpa (os tho Shéradé calls Malupraketi)
 cof the Tattvas, Buddhi, Ahongkina, Manus, the Indviyas,
 ‘Toumtras and Mahibh@tas in the onder stated. ‘The
‘Tantea therefore adopts the SGakiyanond not the Vedantic
 onler of emanation Which starta with tbe.Apanchikritn Tan-
 rmtra, the Témasik ports of which, on the one hand, deve-
 lop by Penchiarans into the Mshébhita, snd on the other,
 ‘tho Réjasi and Stttvik parts of which ate collectively and
 separately the source of the temsining Tattvas. Tn the
 Shakin Tantra, the Bhites derive directly and not by
 Ponchfiarana from the Taumétins. Panebflarana exists in
 respect of the compounds derived from the Bhitas. ‘There
 is fusther point of detail in the Téntzik exposition to be
 noted. The Shékts Tantra, as the Purénes ond Shaiva
 Shietras do, spesks of & threefold aspect of Absngkrs,
 ‘scoonding to the predominance therein of the respective
 Gunas. From the Veikicike Ahanglca issue the eleven
 Dovatis who presie over Manas and the ten Indriyas; from
 ‘the Taijase, Absngktra is produvedthe Indrives and Manas:
 ‘and from the BhOttdiks Ahangkima the Tsumftras. None
‘of these differences in detail or onder of emanation of the
 ‘Tabtvas bas substantial importance, In one case start is
 ‘ude from the knowing principle (Budi), on the other
 from the subtle object of inowiadge the Tanmétre,
                                 380
    CREATION IN NON-DUALIST TANTRAS
        ‘The shovementioned oreationis     known se Ishvara Siskti
 ‘Che Vishvasira Tantra says that from th Barth come the
  herbs (Oshadhi), fom the latter food, and from food seed
  (Betas), From    the latter living beings ere prodaced  by the aid
  ‘fun and moon, Here whatis called Jtsa Srisht is indi-
  cated, 4 matter into which T have no time to enter bere.
         ‘To sum up, upon this ripening of Karma and the urge
  therefrom to cosmio life, Nishkala Shiva becomes Saksla.
  Shalrti manifests and tho causal body of Tshvara is thought
 ‘of ab assuming seven esussl aspects in Sadrishaparindma
 ‘which are aspects of Shalai shout to create. The Parabindu
‘or alate of Shokti thus developed is the causal body of both
 ‘the manifested Shabda and Artha. The Parabindu is the
  source of all ines of development, whether of Sheba, or as
 Shambim of Artha, oF a8 the Mlablita of the Manifested
  Shabdlstha. Oa, the completed ideal development of this
 ‘causal body manifesting a the triple Shaktis of will, know-
 ledge snd action, ths Shabélrths in the sease of the mani-
  fested world with its subtle and gross bodies appears in the
  coder described
         ‘Brom the above description, it will have been soen that
  ‘ho creation doctzin» hore described js compounded of vari
  ou elements, some of which it shares with other SbAstras,
  and some of which aze its own, the whole being set forth
  according to a method snd terminology which is pecaliarto
  itael. Tho theory whichi a form of Adva‘tavade ls then
 ‘some chamotorstios which are both Safkhyan and Vedaatic.
  ‘Thus it accepts a resl Mlapralerti, not however as an inde-
  penlenb principle in the S6RKdayan senso, but as a form of
‘he Sbaktiof Shiva. By and out of Shiva-Shaktiwhore ono,
  ‘here isn real creation. Tn such erestion, there is a special
  ‘Adsishta Shristi up to the trmnaformation of Shakti as Parse
  bbindo, This is Tshvase teva of che thistyaix Tattvas, «
  scheme accepted by both Advaita Shaivas and Shaktas,
         ‘Then by the operition of May&-Shakti itis transformed
  into Purusha-Prokriti and from the latter are evolved the
                                38
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘Tativas of the Stfikhya. Lastly, there is Yaugike Shusti
of the Nyfya Vaisheshila in that the world is beld to be
formed by a combination of the elements. It sczepts, them
fore, Adrshta Srshti from the appearance of Shakti, up to
‘the complete fomation of the Causal Body know in its
tHe form as tho Kamakal; thereafter Perinima Srishti of
‘the Vikrits of the subtle and gross body produced from the
‘emusal body down to the Mahgbhdtas ; and finally Yougika
Sriahti   in so far as it ia the Bh@tas which     in varied! oom
nation go to make up the groee world,
      "There are (and the doctrine here digeuased is an instance
ofit) commen principles and mutual connections existingin
‘and between the diferent Indion Shistra, notwithstanding
individual peculiarities of presentment due to natural vatiety
of intellectual or temperamental standpoint or the purpose
in view. Shiva in the Kulimava says thet       all the Dacebanas
sre parts of His body, and fe who sovers then severs His
limbs, The meaning of this is that the »3x Darvisnas are
‘the Six Minds, and these, as all lee, ere parts of the Lond’s
Body.
      (Of thess nix minds, Nyfiya and Vaiahoshike teach Yau-
gike Srishti; SGGic.ya ond Potagjliteoch Yaugika Sriohti
‘rd Parisidma Srishal; Maybvids Veddute teaches Yougike
Sriahti, Pariafmssristi acrording to the empizicel method
snd Vivarte according to the transcendental method. Ao-
cording    to the Vivartts of MayBvida, thee    is no real change
Dut only the sppeacance of it. Accordingto Shiltavada,
Uitimate Reality does in one aspect relly evolve but. in
snother aspect is immutable. MayAvida effects its synthe
sis by its doctrine of grades of realty, and Shikta-vida by
ite doctxine of aapocts of unity and duality, duality in unity
tnd snity in duality. Ultimate Reility as the Whole is
neither merely static nor merely active. Tt i both, The
‘Natural and the Spiritual are one. Tn this sense the Shakia
system claims to be the synthesis of all other doctrines.
                              382
                     Cuarren XX,
             ‘THE INDIAN MAGNA MA‘TER.*
                     Ivmopucrony.
      8 the Inst oocasion that I had the honour to address
         you, I dealt with the subject of the poychology of
 Hindu religious ritual from the particular standpoint of
 ‘the religious community called Shakias, or Worshippers of
 the Supreme Mother. ‘Today I speak of the Supreme
 Mother Herself as conceived and worshipped by them.
        ‘The worship of the Great Mother as the Grand. Multi-
plier is one of the oldest in the world. As I have elsewhere
 said (“Shakti and Shkta,” second ed. 04), when we throw
 our minds beck upon the history of this worship, ve discem
 ‘even in the most remote and fading past the Figure, most
 snoient, of the migity Mother of Nature. I suspect thet
 in tho boginniang tho Goddess everywhere sntedated, or at
 least was predominant     over, the God. Tt bas boen afirmed
  (Gioia: “ Aigean Civilization,” 248) that in sll countsies
 from the Euphratesto the Adriatic, the Chiet Divinity was
‘at first in woman    form. Looking to the east of the Buph-
 rates we sce the Dusk Divinity of India, the Adyé-Shati
  and Mabi-Shaleti, or Supreme Power of many names—as
  ‘agadambs, Mother of the World, which is the Play of Her
  who is named Lalit, Maya, Mahétripurasundart end Mobi-
  Jeundaling, a Msbi-Vaishnavi, the Sapphire Devt who
 supports the World, as Mabiletltwho dissolves it, as Gubya-
 mababhairsvi, and all the rest,
        ‘This Supreme Mother is worshipped by Her devoteos
 trom the Himilayas, the “Abode of Snow”, the northem
 Thome of Shiva, to Cape Comorin in the uttermost south—
 for the word Gomorin is @ corruption of Kim&st Devt or
 ‘the Mother. Goddesses aro spoken of in the Vedas as in
        FromVol No.3,
                   2,        “Tedian Ars and Tatts” reporing
 lecture given tothe India Society, Londoa, Nov. 18, 1098,
                                  383
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 the lator Scriptures. OF these Iattor, he Shilkta Tantens
‘are the particular repository of Mother-worship.
      ‘To the Shikta, God is his Supreme Mother. In in-
numersble births he has bad countless mothers and fathers,
and he may in future have many, many mote, ‘The human,
‘and indeed any, mother is sacred as the giver (under God)
of lie, but itis the Divine Mother of All (Sivimid), the
 ‘Treamure-House of Compassion”, who alone is both the
Giver of lif in the world and ofits joys, aud who (as Perini)
is the Savioureas from ita miseries, and who agein i, for al
‘who unite with Hor, the Life of all lives—that unalloyed
Dliss named Liberation. She is the Great Queen (Maha-
réjns) of Heaven noi of yet higher worlds, of Earth, and of
the Underworlds. To Her both Devas, Devis, and Men
give wonhip. Her eet ore adored by even Brubms,
‘Vishan, and Rudca.
      ‘The Shikta system, in ite origin. possibly Non-Vaidik,
in in several respects an original presentment, both as 32°
gards doctrine and practioe, of the great Vedéntio Theme
concerning the Oné and the Many. AS an organic and
<ynamio system it interprets ll in terms of Power, from the
tom of Matter, whioh is said by modem science to be
reservoir of tremendous energy, to the Almighty, which ia
‘the commonest name in all Religions for God. Tt is the
calt of Bower both as the Partial and as the Whole, us the
‘worshipper may desire. God is here regerded under bwin
aspects! as Power-Holder or the “male” Shivs, and as
Power or Shakti, the Divine Spouse and Mother.
      ‘The symboliam of the Shikias’ “Jewelled Tree of
‘Tantma” is brillimt, and meets the demand of Nietasche
‘that the abstract should be made attractive to the senses.
 Teis langaly of the so-called “erotic” type which is to be
foun to some and varying degre in Hinduism as a whole,
      ‘The symbols employed are either geometcic—thot is,
 “Yanttie—or pictorial. A Yanira is « diogrammatio present
 ation of Divinity, as Mantra   is its sound-expression. The
                              384
          THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 former is tho body of the latter. las higher worship is
 done with Yantzs
      ‘Piotorial symbolism is of higher and lower types. ‘The
former is popular, snd the latter may be described by the
‘French term peuple
      T will now show you # Yantm and the greatest of
‘Yantras, nemely she Sbrlyantre, figured on the truth of the
“Tantzik Texts”. We have no longer to deal with pictures
of persons ond their surroundings, but with tines, curves,
cinoles, triangles, and tho Point,
      ‘The great symbol of the Mother ia the Shvéyantna, from
‘the centre of which She arses like the soler orb at morn,
Dut in a Blaze of light excelling the brilience of countless
‘midday sams end the coolness of innumerable moons. The
centre is the Point, or Bindu—that ia, the Mother es Con-
oontrated Power. sendy to create, Around Her is the
Univense, together with its Divinties or Directing Inteli-
genoss. From the Point the World isaues. Into it on
dlssolution it enters ‘The extended Universe then collapees
into an usextended Point, which itself then subsides like
Dubble on the susface of the: Cousal Wotets, which are the
Immense.
                    1.—Tan Divwse Moron,
      ‘The Real as Shiva-Shakti may be regerded from three
sspeste—namely, as Universe, a5 God, ond es Godhead.
‘The Real is the World, but the Real is more than the World,
‘The Realis God., ‘The Realis God, but itis lao more than
‘what wo understand hy the word God. ‘The Real is, a
were, beyond God as Godhesd. This does not mean, aa
‘some have supposed, that God ia a “fiction”, but that the
Rael os it is in its’ own elogical being is nob aequately
Aesoribed in terms of ite relation to the world as God, T
vill desi, then, fst with its agpect as Godhead, then a8 the
Supreme Self, or Person, or God, and thirdly, with Shiva-
Shakti as the manifest and limited Univers.
                               385
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      Pervading and transcending the Exstent in the
“Spiritual Bther”, alo called the “Immense” in which is
the Measurable, which Tnunense is also oxled the "Fuct™
(Sa) in which ace the Fact-Secions (Kalé) which Fac i
fso called the elogieal Experience-Whole (Barna), in which
fang all Experienoe-Modes (Fri) of the limited lve.
       "The altimate that in Evedneble Rea x in this system,
‘not mere undetermined Being, but Power which is the
Source of all Determinations, ‘This Power is bothto Be, to
telfconserv, and to resist change, a8 alo tobe tha afiont
Canin of chengo, and at material onaas to Bacome and
tzufler change. Relatively to the World, Inmmatable Being
iss Divinity called Shiva the Power-Holder, and His
Power is Shakti or the Mather Shivd, but in the supreme
logical state, Powerto Be apd. Being-Power-Holder are
merged in one aacther.
       ‘What i the nstare of this Alogi pornos In
‘the Yoginthridsya Tsntra it is asked, “Who knows the
Tart ofa woman # Only Shiva noms the heatof Yogin”
that in, the Divine Matar so-called, as txing one wit,
‘hatin       the foro, all hat exist, and   ap boing in Herself
tho One in which they ate,
       Since the Imeducile Raal is the Whole i caunot be
conceived or desribed, To is nether Father nor Mother,
for itis beyond Fucherbood snd Mothechood and all other
stabs. I is sogioa.
       ‘Though it cannot be conoxived or put into words, some
coneepta are ld to be mare spropsiate to it than others.
‘And thus it is approximately said to be infinite undeter-
‘mined Being, mindless Bxperiencing, end Supreme Bliss
rnelloyed with pain and sorrow As Bsing ani Power ave
rorged im this alogcal state, Power, in its form an Power
to Bo (Ohidrpit) i also Being-Oneatinanos and Bliss,
Shiva-Shakti, the “two in one”, are here the Nameless One.
       "Tho exprience of this aogicl state is not, however,
‘that of an “I (dham) and “”            (Idam).   The next or
                              386
             THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
ccousal aspect of the Real is « Supreme Self. Its third and
effectual aspect is the limited selves or Universe.
      ‘Tho physical Hther is » symbol ofthis alogical state, in
which the twofold Shiva-Shalti are the One in the unit
state, which is called the “Ither of Consciousness” (Chidd-
bisa),
      Physical Ether is the all-extending, homogeneous,
relative Plenum in which the Universe of particulars exist,
‘The “Spiritual Ether," or “Bther of Conscioumess,”” is
the undetermined, all-iftusive, though inextended, absolute
Plenum (Pdrna), in which both these particulars and the
phiysicel Btber itself existe. ther is the physioal counter
part of Consciousness, just as the Notion of Space is its
peyehical counterpars. These sre such counterpasts be-
‘cause Consciousness becomes through ite Power as material
cceuse both Metter and Mind. Rach is « manifested form
of Spirit in Time and Space... The shoreless Ocean of Nectar
cor Deathlessness is another symbol of the alogical Whole.
      ‘We now passto a consideration of the asme Real in ite
aspect as related to the Universe, which is the appearance
of the Immense as the Mesatrable or Form, ‘The Real is
hheno related to the Universe as ita Cause, Maintainer, and
Directing Consciousness. Form is Mdyd, which, however,
in this eyatem (whatever be its meaningin Mdydudda) does
not mean “Tikusion”, All is power. All is real
      ‘The slogical One is here of dual aspect as Shiva and
Shakti. The two concepts of Being and Power are treated
‘as two Persons. Shiva ia the Power-Holder, who is Being-
‘Conseiousuess-Bliss, and Shulcti is Power and tho Becoming.
She, in the alogical state, ig also Being-Conscionsness-Bliss.
‘Without ceasing to be in Herself what, She ever
‘and will ba, She ix now the Power of Shiva as efficient and
material couse of the Universe and the Universe iteelf.
‘Whilst, Shiva, representa the Consciousness aspect of the
Real; She ie its aspect as Mind, Life, and Master. Ho is
the Liberation (olaha) aspect of the Real. She is in the
                               387
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
form of the Univense or Samadra, A Shiva-Shaleti are in
themselves one, so Moksha and Samadra ere at root one.
      Shiva, in the Kuldmava Tantm, sayn that His doctrine
iq neither non-dualist nor dualist, but beyond both. We
have here 8 non~inalistio system oa regands its teaching
concerning the Alogical Whole, in which Shiva-Shakti ore
fused in one. We have again a kind of Duo-Monotheism.
Tes Monotheistic because, Shiva end Shale are two aspects
‘of oneand tho some Realty. It is dual because, these two
aspects are worshipped as two Persons, from whove union
as Being and Power the Universe evolves.
      ‘The experience of this stato, relative to the Alogical
‘Whole, is a disruption of unitary slogical experience. I
sey “relative” beoause the Whole is alveys the Whole
Sach disruption is the wotk of Power. She, as it were,
disengoges Herself as Power, from the embrace in which
Power-Holder and Powerare fused i one, and then r=
‘presents Herself to Him. On this rpresintation, Con-
aciousnest-Power assumes certain postures (Mudrd). pro-
piratory to the going forth ap Universe, and then, when
Power is fully concentrated, manifests as the World.
      ‘The term Consciousness, which is inadequate to describe
the slogical sate, is here approximately appropriate, for the
experience ofthis stata is that of an “I” and “This”. But
{tin to he distinguished from man’s Consciousness. For
‘the experiencer as man is a limited (and rot, ax here,
 Supreme Self), and tho object in experionced as separate
from, ancl outside, the Self (end not, s in the case of the
Loni snd Mother, s one with the experiencing Self), The
experience of Shivaas the Supreme Self viewing the Universe
is, “All this I am”?
      ‘As contrasted with the logics, all-iffusive, Spiritual
‘Ether, the symbol of the second aspect of Shive-Shakti, as
‘the Supreme Self and Csuse of the Universe js the meta-
physical Point (Bindu) or Power as a Point. What, then,
ia the meaning of the latter tam! Tn Being-Power about
                               388
           THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
to evolve there ina stressing of Power which gathers itaulé
togetherto expen aguin ts Universe. When it has become
concentrated ana condented (Glanibideé Shaki civ ready
‘to ovolve, Bindu, ot the Point, is, therefore, Power in that
Concentrated ste in which itis ready an about to evolve
‘the Universe. Though infinitely small, as the Absolute
Little, whan compared with the Atsots Great oe Spinital
ihe, i is yt a source of infniva energy a8 (to bortow a1
example from aodenn stiono) the relatively Little or Atom,
or other unit of matter, exsting in the relatively Groat of
the physical Ether, is suié to be s source of tremendous
uergy. Jutta, again, the relative point or atom i as a
faccin the relaive Bthor,ao tho Absolute Poti conceived
to be in the Absolute Ether. I say “conosived”, beoaue,
ts bothitisSpsitaal  Point and Spiitual Btheraze cach sbao-
Inte,         only figuratively that the one con be anid to be
“'yithin® the other. ‘The "Inle of Gents” (Aanidatpa)
in the "Ocean of Nectas” (dowtdmeen) in another symbol
of thin etete,
      The painting now shower exhibits oth the Alogical
Snmense and the Point of Powor or Bindu “in” it. The
omer is here symbolized by. the shoreless “Oroen of
Nectar” (Amritérnava}—that is, Immortelity. This sym-
‘bol of all-diffusive Consciousness is similarto that of the all-
spresding Ether. In the Hae, tringail GamsWaters of Boral
Tate (dowridroaco) i aot the Isle of Point(Manip). of Power.
‘This Island is the Bindu or metaphysical
‘The Teun’ is shown ae » golden cizeular fans. ‘The shomes
                                                 is forested
of the Tsland are made of powdered gens.flat,Tt Coampoka,
tvith Mooming and fragrant trees— Nips,
Pinta, and Kedamin, ‘here, too, is the Kalps bees        tree
Jaden with fower end fruit, In its lesves the black
‘hum, and the Koel birds make love. Its four branches are
 fhe four Vedas, In the centre there is a Tithouseina made  of
Chindémani stone which grants a  dois,                jeweled
 ‘Mandopa ot amning. Under it and on a gonmed ond golden
                           2%
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 throne there ia the Mother Mahitripurasundart as the Deity
‘of the Bindu, which, asshown Inter, becomes the three Bindu
 ot Puras. Hence Her name “Three Pures” or Tripura. Ske
 is red, for red is the active colour, and She is here creative
 as Vimarika Shakti, or, the “This” of the Supreme Experi-
 encer, which through Méys becomes the Universe. What
 tan calls Matter is fsst experienced by mindless Consciows-
 ness os a “Thin”, which is yet though the “Other” one
 swith the Sof. ‘Then, by the operation of Méyd, the “This”
 is expeticuced by mind aa veparate and diferent from andin
 ulside the Self, as complete “otherness”, She holds
 ‘Her four hens, bows and sarows, noose and goud, which
 fare explained Inter. She sits on two inert male figures
 which lie on a six-sided throne. ‘The upper figure is Shiva
                             because, he is associated with his
 (Sabla), who is awake,material
 Power as efien        and t cause.) On Hts head is the
 crescent Digit of the Moons called Néda, the name for 8
 ‘state of strosing Power, His Shakti being now erestive. He
 lies inest, for He is Immutable Being. He is white because
 he is Consciousness and Tlwurinstion (Prakésha). Con-
 ‘sciousness illuminates and mekes manifest the forms
 volved by its Power, which in ite tim by supplying the
 form (as object umoonsciows) tsips Shiva to display Himselt
 as the Universe whichis both Being and Baooming. Under
 him is another male igure, daxcer in colour, to represent
 colotressneas (otmma), with closed eyes. This mysterious
 ‘gum (Nishkela Shivo} ix called Shova ox the Corpse. Tt
 iMlustrates the doctrine that Shiva without his Power of
 Shakti can do and is, so fax as the manifested is concemed,
 nothing. There is profundity in the doctrine of which this
 Corpse is a symbol. To those who have understood it &
 real insight is given into the Kaula Shikia system.
       ‘This representation of Shiva and Shakti as of the same
 se, but the former lying inert, is perhaps peculier to the
  Kaila Shikeias, and is the antithesis of the well-known
  “Dancing Shiva”
                              390
           THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
       I will hore note some other eymbulism, piotorial and
 geometric or Yantro
       Pictorally, Shakti is shown either as the equal of Hor
 Spouse—that is, as an Androgyne figure in which the right
 half  is male and the left femole—or ea two figures, male and
 female, of equal siz, as in the last picture, Inequality is
indicated where the Shakti is smaller than the male
 Divinity. The mesning of thin difference in dimension of
 ‘tho figures of Shakti lies in e diforence of theological and
 philesophical ooncepts which may yet be reconciled. In the
 Shits view, the Power-Holder ad His Power as She is in
 Horse, that is, otherwise than es the manifested form,
 fre one end equal. But He is recumbent. ‘This picture
 (chown) is the Mother as the Warrior Leader or Promachos
 ‘with Shiva under Her feet. : Where the figures are unequal
 it is meant to assert (a fact whieh is not denied) that
 Supreme Power as manifested is infinitaly less than Power
 ‘unmanifest. ‘What Power is in no wise exkousted in the
 ‘manifestation of the Worlds whish are said to be aa it were
 but dust on the foot of the Mother.
       Passing to Yaatrio symbols, the Male Power-Holder
 Shiva is represented by & triangle standing on its bass.
 A triangle is selected es being the only. geometric
 figure which represents ‘Trinity in Unity—the many Triads
 such ss Willing, Knowing, and Acting in which the
 ne Conssioumess (Chit) displays ited. Power or the
 feminine principle or Shakti is necessesily represented by
 the same figure, for Power end PowerHolder ase one
 ‘The Triangle, however, is shown reversed—-that is standing
on its apex (Plate IV). Students of ancient symbolism are
 aware of the physical significance of this symbol, To sush
 reversal, however, philosophic meaning may also be given,
 since all is seversed when reflected in the Waters of Myé.
       ‘Why,  it may now be asked, does the Shikta lay stress on
  the Power or Mother aspect of Reality Like all other
  Hindus,he believes in a Static Real as Immutable Being-
                                39
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
                                         and serves to main-
Consciousness, which is the ground of Dynamic
tain that which, in this system, is the            Reel. Ho
will point ont, however, that the Mother is also in one of
Hr aspects of the same nature as Shive,          who is such
Statio Real. But it is She who does work. She alone
‘bo mover ae material cause, He as Immutable Being
doco and can do nothing without Her as His Pover. Hence
‘the Kula Shikta symbolism shows Shiva as lying inert and
to be, if deprived of His Power, bit. corpse (Shea).
      TEven when associated with his Shakti es ofclent couse,
Skiva does aot move, A not tmndommon pictur, counted
 obscene, is merely the pictorial symbol of the fact thetis
 Being, ‘even when associated with its sctive Power,
 Immntable, It is She 92 Power whe takes the active and
‘changeful pact in gonerstion,as also in conceiving, bearing,
and giving birthto the World-Child. Al thisis the fanetion
of the divine, ar it ig of the: humaa, mother. Ta such
 work the male is but » helper (Sahebért) only. In other
 systane it in eke Mother whois the Helper of Shiv, Te ozis
 thus to the Mother thab man oes the World of Form
 Universe. Without Her as material cause, Being cannot
 display iteclt. Tos but corpse (Shove). Both Shiva and
 Shakti give that supreme beyond-vorld Joy which is Liber-
 ation (Mult, Porandvanda). ‘They re cach Supreme
 Consciousness and Bliss. ‘The Mother is Anandlakart        or
 Ware of Bliss. To attain to that ia to be liberated. But
 Shadi the Mother is alone the Giver of World-Joy (Biulsi,
 Bhavana), eince it is Sho who becomes tho Universe.
 ‘As such She is the Wave of Beouty (Saundaryalahart)
 Further, i i through her Form ag World that She, a8 also
 Shiva, arp in their Formless Self attained. If, however,
 unions sought dinestly with Resltyin ts non-world aspect,
 it must necessarily be by rmuncetion. Liberation may,
 however, be attained by aocoptance of, and through the
 ‘World, the other espeatof the Real. In the Shilta method,
 it ie not by denial of the World, but, by and through the
                              soa
            THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 World, when laown as the Mother, that Liberation is
 ‘tained, World enjoyment is mado the means and instra-
 nent of Liberation (Mokshdyate Samadra). ‘The Siutkia
 Jas both (Biudsi, Mukti). ‘This essential unity of the
 ‘World end Beyond World, and passege through and by
means of the former to the latter is one of the most pro-
 found doctrines of the Shikta, and ia none-theles so be~
 cause their application of there principles has been limited
 to man'a gross physical functions, and such application has
 sometimes led to abuse. Tor these and other reaeons pri-
 ‘macy is given to the Mother, and it is said: “What care
J for the Ratherif I but be on the lap of the Mother”
       T’note here in connection with the primacy of the
 Mother-God that in the Moditermnean (A8gean) Civilization
the Male God is suid to have boen of » standing inferior to
 the Mother, and present only to make plain Her charactor
 as the fruitha womb whance all that exista springs (Glotz,
 248, e202.)
       Such, then,isthe great Motherof India        in Her aspectas
 She is in Herself as the slogioal world-transcending Whole
 (Péma), and secondly,    as She is asthe Creatrix of the World.
 Tt remain    now buts to sby a word       of Her as She exists in
 ‘the form of the universe.
       ‘The paycho-physical universe is Méyd. ‘The devotee
 Kamnalikints lucily defines Méyé as the Form (Aira) of
 ‘the Void (Shinya) or Fornloas (not Nothingness). Is isit
 Real! Tein rel, becouse 3éyd, considered a» a Power,
 ‘Devi Shakti,and Sheieresl. Theeff                    ecto
                                                 the transformation
 ‘of that Power must also be real. Some make a contrast
 between Reality and Appearance, But why, it is
 asked (apart from persistence), sbould appearence be unreal,
 and that of which it is such appearance alone be real?
 ‘Moreover, in system such a this, in which Power trans-
 fom ited, no contrast between Reality and Appearance
inthe sense of waneaity amergee. The distinction is between
 the Real as it isin ite formlese Self and the same Real as it
                                393
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
apptans in Fom. Moreover, the Woe is experienced by
the Lord and Mother, and their experience ia never unreal
We ae here on healthy       evel above the miasmeof Dluson,
‘Tho experience of man (io take hos the highest type ofall
other selves) is not the Experience-Whole. “He knows the
World as other than Himself, just becouse Power has made
him man~ that is, o limited Experiencer or omtre in the
Whole, That     is @ fact, and no Mlusion or Deosit.. When
Hl realizes Himself se All this Tam”—-that i, as an “7”
‘which knowa all frm aa iself— then Consciousness a man
expands into the Experience-Whole whioh ie th Fact (Sat.
      Man is Shakti, or the Mother, in so far as ho is Mind,
Tie in Form, and Matter. He is Shiva, in oo for os his
essence i Consciousness as Tt is in Tself, which is also the
nature of the Mother in Her oym alogicel Sel.
     ‘This union is achieved by rousing the sleeping Power in
the loweat coutze of solid matter and leading it upwards to
the cemobeum a6 the centre of Consciousness
      row past ta the seoond part of my paps, which deala
vith the eosmio evolution of Power--that is, the “going
forth” of the Supreme Self upon ita union with ite Powor
in manifestation. As the tevalt of suck evolution we have
terms limited to God only, but the forms into which Power
evolves are also Shiva-Shakti. God as the Mother-¥ather
is supreme Shivi-Shakti. The Limited Selves are Shiva-
Shakti appearing os Form in Time and Space. The
Measurable or World (Samsdra) and tho Tmmense Exe
perience-Whole (Moksha) are at root oné. This is funda-
rental doctrine in the community to whose belifs reference
ia now made.
                      I.—Evouwmoy.
      Shiva and Shskti as the Cousel Hood (Shive-Shokti
 ‘Tattvaa) of the world-evolution are called KAmeshvara
 ‘and KAmeshvari, Kama is Desire. Here it is the Divine
                              34
          THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 Dasite, oF (to use a Western tom) the Libido, which in
the Veda is expressed as the with of the One, “May T be
 many" Solna the Veda says: “Dette fits arose in it
 the primal germ.” The form of this wish tell us what
 Libido, ini Indian sense, mana, Tn ta primary sence, it
 ‘oes not mean sessions desire, bot the will to, and afirm-
 ‘nooof, “otherness” and diffeentstion, of which sensnoxs
 desi is later and grose form in the evolutionary series,
 Prooteaton i theinividual counterpart of Cosmic Creston,
       ‘Why were the worlds (for there are many) evolved
 ‘Tho anwver giver ie beonus it in the nature (Soabhase) of
 almighty formless Being-Power, whilst remaining what it
 fi, to become Form—that i to exist ‘The Soobhdee, of
 nature of Baing Power, a Al, or Pia, 8 vem which means
 free spontaneous sctivity Hence Lalita, o: “Player”,
 {sa name of the Motber ns Se who Plays and whose Play
 is WorldPlay. Sho is beth Joy, (Anardacnayf) and Play
 (Uémay), "be action of man aad of other selves i, in
so far as they ate the payoho-phyaicel,dotennined by their
 Karma, The Mothsrs play is not idle ot meaningless 20
 farsa man ix conoered, fr tho vorldja tho fold on and
 moans by whisk he attaiae all hie wortho, che grstest of
 whichis Union with the Mother ar She is in Herself as
 Highest Being, The Player is Pover, How does it work t
       The Whole (Parma), which aienns bere, the Abyolute
 Spixtual Whole, and not the celative Whole o> peycho-
 physical universe, cannot as the Whole change, Te is
 inmutable. Change can then take place only in Tt. This
 is tho work of Power which becomes limited centres in the
 Whole, which centres, in relation to, and compared vith,
 the Whol, are a contraction of i
       owes rorke by reguticn, contraction, and fnitication,
 ‘Phin subtle dovttine i explained profoundly and in detail
 fn the scheme of the thirty-six Tattvas scxepted by both
 non-dvalists, Shaivas snd Shaktas, andis alo dealt within
 ‘tho Mantra’ portion of their Scrptures. A Tatten is a
                             395
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
   Postute (Mudré) of Power that is, Reality-Power defined
  ha particular wog, snd, therefore, the alogical aspect is
  thet whieh is beyond all Tuttvas (Tattodsta), A Tatton ix
  then & stage ix the evolutionary process. Monira is « most
 important subjectin the Tantra Scriptures which treatof
  Sound and Movement, for the one implies the other. Sound
 ‘a5 lettered speech is the vehiole of thought, and Mind is &
  vvehisle of Consciousness for world-experience. ‘The picture
  of Shiva siding a bul is a popular presentation of that fact.
  Bullin Sonskrt is “Go”, and that word alzo moans “sound”.
 ‘Nida os inchoate stressing sound i chown in the form of «
 frescent-moon on His head. ‘The cult of the Bull is an
 ancient one, and it may be that originally the animal had
 no significance as Sound, but sutsequently, owing to the
 ‘sameness of the Sanakzit term for Bull and Sound, the
 ‘animal became a symbol for sound, » Sometimes, however,
 ‘8 moro lofty conceptiom is degraded to w lower one, It is
  haere noteworthy ‘hit the cressent-moon worn by Diana and
 ‘used in the worship of ather Goddesses is aid to be the
‘Ask or vessel of boat like shape, aymbol of fertility or the
 Container of the Germ of all Lie,
        Tecan only in the most simamary manner deol with the
 subject of the Evolution of Power, illustrating it by Yautrie
 aymboliam.
        ‘The Shive and Shakti triangles are ever united. To
  represent the alogical state, we may place one triangle
  without reversal upon the other, thus making one triangular
  figure. ‘This will give some ides of the state in which
 ‘he two triangles aa “I and "This" are fused         in one ag
  ‘Being-Cousciousness-Bliss.
        ‘Here, however, we are concerned with the causal state
  which is the Supreme Self in Whose experience there is an
  “DT” aud a “This”, though the latter is experienced as the
  Self. ‘Thore is, therefore, a double ‘riangular figure ;
  Shiva and Shakti are in union, but now not asthe
  ‘logical Whole, but as the Supreme Self experiencing His
                                398
            THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 object or Shakti as one with Himself. The mariage of the
 Divine couple, Kimsshvara and Kémeshvast—that is, Being
 ‘and Power to Become—i the archetype of all generative
 embraces
        ‘To represent this aspect, the triangles are placed across
 fone snother, 60 to produce a Hexagon, in whiok one tri-
angle represents     the “I”, orShiva, and the other the “This”,
 or object, as Power and its transformations—that i, Shak.
       AAs the result of this tmion, Power assumes certain
 Postares (Iudrd) in its strossingto manifest os. Universe
The fist of such produced stresses i, from the Tatts expect,
 Sadichiva, and, from the Mantra aspect, inchoate sound oF
 ‘movement called Néda, This state is shown by the Hexa-
  gon with» crscentncon, the symbol of Néde, in ite
 centre. This Néda is not manifested sound or movement,
 ‘but an inchoate state of both.
        In the next Mantzig stage (corresponding to the Tat-
 tvas, Ishvars and Shuddhavidya) the ereseent-moon en-
 larges into the full moonlike Bindu, This algo is strssing
 Power as inchoate sound and movement, but is now such
 ‘Power may to evalve into manifested sound and movement.
 ‘Tho word Bindu also means seed, for itis the ceed of the
 ‘universe 6 the result of the uafon of ita ultimate principles
 as Shiva and Shakti. "The Point, or Bind, is shown as «
 circle, s0 as to display its content. In the diagram, a line
 divides the Point, one half representing the “I”, and the
 ‘other, the “This” aspect of exporience. ‘They aro shown
 in one circle to denote that the “This”, or objest, is not
 ‘yet outade the self as non-sel.. The Bindu is compared in
 ‘he Tantras to a grain of gram (Jhanata), which contains
 ‘ovo seas (Alam anil dam) 30 close to one another within
 ‘hsir common sheath 26 to soom to be one seed
      -At the atage when Consciousness lays equal emphasis on
 the “L'" and “This” of experience, Méyé-Shakts and ite
 derivative powers called sheaths (Koncbuba) ancl contrac
  tions (Sandocha) operate to disrupt the Bindu, whicl comes
                                  397
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 apart in two, Now the “I” and “This” are separated,
 the latter being experienced ns outside the sel ors nom-ael.
 "The former becomes limitedes 6 “Little Knower” and
 “Little Doer”. This is the work of Méyé-Shaki, Power
 again (as Prabriti-Shabi) evolves the psycho-physical organs
 of this limited Self, as Mind, Senses, and Body.
       T bave spoken of two Bindus standing for Shiva and
 Shakti, Their intar-rlation and ite product is anothor
 form   of Nédia. ‘These then make three Binds, which      are a
 groscer form of the Kdnalald. ‘The Divinity of the thee
 ‘Bindus is the Mother ss MahAteipurasundac, “the Baau-
 ‘eous One in whom are the three Puras,” or Bindus.
       ‘The Mantza equivalent of the state in which the Bindw
 divides and besomes threefold is the first manifested sound,
 ‘which is the Great Mantré Om, As the Supreme Bindu
 bursts there is « miassive, homogenodus, vibratory move-
 rant, as it wore © costcie till (amanga spandana) in
 psycbo-phyeioal Subatarce the sound of which to man’s
 {gross eats ia Om. The original sound of Om is that which
 was heard by the Absolnte Bare of Him and Her who
 caused thet ‘movement. Om is the gromé-soud and
 ground movement of Noture. ‘The Mundakopanishad says
‘hat the Sun travels the universe chanting the mantra Om.
 ‘From Omi are derive all special (eishesta spandana) move-
 ‘monte, sounds, and Mantras. Tt in itaelf threefold, since
 itis constituted by the unionof the lotters A, U, M. The
 Divinities of these thee letiess ere Brahm, Vishnu, Rud
 ‘and their Sbaktis. ‘These, together with Sadidhiva and
 ‘sha, are the Five Shivas to whom reference is made in the
 rizual, and who are pictured in the Skakta symbolism as
 the Five who are Dead (Prat).
       Bower, after involving itself in sci matter, technically
 called “Kast”, then testa in ths last-named clement.
       ‘The evolution of the Tatts is nota tamporal prooess.
 ‘Time only ootes in with sun and moon, on the completion
 of the evolution of the Tatioas us constituent elements of
                              398
           THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 the universe. ‘The Zatioas are given as the rosults of an
 falysis of experience, in which the Prius is Iogioal not
 temporal. For these reasons a Caustl Tatira does not
 cease to bo what it is as Cause when it i tmnsformed into
 its efect, which is not the case im the manifested world
 wherein, as the Laksbmi-Tanta says, “Mile when it be-
 comes ound ceases to be milk.” Reality does not cease
to be the Alogical Whole becouse it is from the Causal
 Aspect a Supreme Self, Tt does not cease ta be the Cosmic
 Ovuse because it evolves as the Universe its effect. Nor
 in such evolution doos any TTttva cease to be what itis aa
 couse becouse it ia transformed into ita effect.
       [Lam now in the position to explain the great Yantra oF
 diagram slready shown you, which ie used in the worship of
 the Mother and which is, called the Shirt Yanéra, a symbol
 ‘of both the Univeme and its Cause:
       L have not the time to describe ft at length, but ite
 meaning may be generally stated
       Tein composed of two sets. of Triangles. One seb is
 composed of four male ox Shiva triangles called Shré-
 Inthas, denoting foar aapeote (Tata) of evolved or
 limited Oonscioumess-Power, and the five fomele or Shakti
 ‘triangles (Skisaywnott) denote the five vital functions, the
 five senses of knowledge, the five senses of action, and the
 ‘five subtle ond the five gross forms of matter. ‘The place
 of the paychio element as Mind snd the Psycho-physical
 Substance of both Blind and Matter, I will indicate later
 ‘when we hove fully formed the Yantra,
       "These two sets of triangles are superimposed to show
 ‘he union of Shiva and Shakti. Asao united they make the
 figure within the cight lotus petols in the full Yanira now
 shown you. Outside these ight lotusce there ore
 sixteen other lotuses. ‘There are then some lines, and a
 surround with four gates or doors, which surround is found
 in all Yandres, al is called Bhipun. Tt sorves the purpose
 of what in Magio is called a Fence.
                                399
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
         ‘This Yantra has nine Ghakros, or comparimenta, formed
 bby tho intersection of the Triangles,
        "Thore is ista ed central point or Bind, the Chakra af
 Bliss. The central point or Bindu is Supreme Divinity~
‘the Mother es the Grand Potential whence all the rest
 which this diagram signifies provocd. Tt is red, for that is
‘the active colour, and thus the colour of Vimarsha Shaki,
 or Hvolving Power
        ‘Tho second Chakra is the white inverted Triangle, or
 “Ohakra of All Accomplishment”. In the comers of this
white Triangle are the Divinities of the general Peycho-
physical Substance and its first two evolutes as, Cosmic
 Mind. Outside the Chakra is Kama, the Divinity of
Desire, with His Bow of Suget-Cane, which is the Mind as
director of the seases - with its Five Arrows, which are the
five forms of subtle matter, which in'their gross form are
perceived by these senses             with his “Noose, which is
Attraction, and his Goad, which is Repulsion. Another
‘version (tcking tle Bow and Arrow us one symbel) makes
te three implements, the Powers of Will, Knowledge, and
Action.
       ‘The third Chakra is eight red Tviangles, and is called
“Destroyer of all Disease,” term which means lack of
that, Wholeness (Apirmam-manyata) which is Spiritual
Health.
        ‘The fourth Chakra ia ten blue Triangles. ‘The Ath is
ten red ‘Triangles. The sixth is fourizen blue Triangles.
‘Tho seventh is cight red petals, The eighth is sixteen
biue potala, and the ninth is the yellow surround, Each
of these Chakras has its own name. Tn them there are a
number of lesser Divinities presiding over forms of Mind,
Life, and Body, and their special functions,
        "Those who hear the Devas spoken of as “Gods” are
ppussled by their multitude. This is dueto the il-endering
of the terms Devas and Devis as Gods and Goddesses. God
is the Supreme Mother and Father, the “Two in One”, who
                                 400
           THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 are slone tho Supreme Saif, and es such receive supreme
 worship. All forms—whether of Devas, or men, or other
 creatures—in so far as they are the peycko-physival form,
 subtle or gross, are manifestations of the Power of their
 Tmmanent Havence, which is Spint or Infinite Conscious-
 nes, That Bsvence is in itgelf one and changeles, but as
 related to &partiular psycho-phyaieal form as its cauee and
 Dineotor of its functions itis it Presiding Consciousness.
 ‘Ming and Matier aze not, as eush, selfguiding. They ate
 volved and dirsoted by Consciousness, The presiding
 consciousness of the Form and ita functions is ite presiding
 Devatd. Deva is thos the consciournoas aspect of the
 payoho-physical form. S0 the Desa Agni is the one Coa
 Acioumnese in its aspect an the Lord of Hie. A Deoatd may
 flso mean an aspect of, the Causal Consciousness sel.
 ‘And so Mahdtripurasmudatis the name given to the creative
 ‘aspect of such Consciausness-Power, as Mahikalt is that
                 samme Conciousnest-Power whieh dissolves sll
 worlds, of the
 aspect
       ‘The object of the worship of the Yanira is. to attsin
unity with the Mother of the Universe in Her forms ax Mind,
 Tie, and Matior and their Devas, os propezatory to Yoga
 union with Her on She is n herself as Pure Gonstiouseas,
 ‘The world ia divinied in the consciousness of the Worship-
 per, or Séilake, The Yantra ia thos trenaformed in his
 contoiousness    from a material object of lines and curves into
‘ mental state of union with fhe Universo, ite Divinities and
 Supreme Deity. This leads to auto-ealization ac Mindless
 Conscioumness. ‘The Siyé Yonira is thus the Universe and
 ita one Causal Power of various aspects, Tho worshipper,
 ‘00, is a Shet Yonira, and rslizas himsslf as suc.
                     TU.—Drssovtt0N.
     T hve dealt with the nature of Shiva-Shakti and the
‘evolution of power as tho Universe, and now will say a word
ts to the relative ending of the world on its withdrawal to
                              400
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 reappear again, and aa to the absclute ending for the indi-
 ‘vidual who is liberated.
       Tn Hindu tolief, this Universe had s beginning, and
  will have an end. But it is only one of an infinite series
 in which thereis no absolutely frst Universe. ‘These Uni-
 ‘verses come and go with tho beating of the Pulso of Power
 now actively going forth, now retarning to rest, For the
 ‘World has its life period, which, reckoning up to the Great
 Dissolution, is the duration of an outgoing “Breath of
 “Time”. Indus courss another Universe will apposr, and ao
 fon to all etemity. 'Thia ner of Worlda of Birth, Death,
 ‘and Reincamation is called by the Hindus the Somedra,
 ‘and was named by the Greeks the Cycle of the Becoming
 (Bublos tén genesvin). All gelves which are withdrawn at
 ‘the end of a world-period continue to teappear in the new
 worlds to be until they are Liberated therefrom,
       ‘The picture uow shown depicts the Mother-Power which
 dinsolves—-thatie, withdraws the World into Herself. This
 is another aspect of one and the same Mother. As such She
 is MahAllt, dask blu ike @ rain cloud. Wéda is in Hor
 Ihead-dress. Sheia encima by serpents, as is Shiva, She
 holds in Har hands, besides the Lotus and two weapons, a
 skull with blood init. She wears @ gorland of kuman heads
 which are exoterically the hesds of conquered Demons, bat
  tse egoterically the letters of the alphabet which, as well ag
 ‘the Universe of which they sre the seed-mantras, are
 sclved by Hor. She standson the white, inert Shiva, for it
 is not He bat His power who withdraws the Universe to
 Herself, Ho Ties on a funessl pyro, in the burning-ground,
‘where jadkali—favourite animals of KAli-—and carrion binda
 fare gnawing ond pecking at human flosh ond bone. The
 Cremation ground is a symbol of cosmic dissolution,
       In a similar picture, we see the Mother standing
  on two. figures, the Shiva, snd Shava previously explain-
  fed. On the Corpse the hair has grown. The Devas,or
  Goda’,     as they are commonly called, axe shown making
                                 40a
               THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 ‘obeisance to Har on the loft, for She is their Mothor as woll
 as being the Mother of men. ‘There ate some variations in
 ‘the imagery. ‘Thus KA, who is commonly represented
 naked—thatis, free of horown Mdyd--is here i this be here)
 shown clad in skins. Her function here shovn is commonly
 called Destruction, but ss the Sanskrit. saying goes, "the
 ‘Deva does not Destroy”. Tho Supreme Self withdrawe the
 Universe into Tiself. Nothingis destroyed. Things appear
 snd disappear to reappear.
       ‘To pass beyond the Worlds of Birth and Death is to be
Liberated. Human salves alone can ttain liberation.
 ‘Hence the supreme vorth of human life. But few men
 understand and desire Liberation, which is the Bxperience-
 ‘Whole. They have not reached the stage in which it is
sought as the Supreme Worth.. The majority are content
 to sook the Partial in the satisfaction of their individual
 inersts, But as-an uoknowa Sage cited by the Commen-
 tatom on the Yoginllsidaya and Nityashodasika Tantres
 ‘has profoundly said, “Identification of the Self with the
 ‘Non-Whole or Partial (Apdmammanyatd) is Disease and the
 sole souros of every misery.”” Hence one of the Chakras of
 tho Slot Yantra which Ihave shown you is called
 “Destroyer of all Disense” Eternel Health is Wholeness,
 whichis the Highest Worth as the Experience-Whole. ‘The
 “Disease of the World” refers not to the World in iteelf,
 ‘Which is the Motherin form, butto that darknessof vision
 which does not see that it is Her. As Upanishad ssid,
 “Ho alone fears who sees Duality." This recognition of the
 unity of the World and the Mother has its degrees. ‘That
 ‘Whole is of varying kinds. It is thus physical or bodily
  hhenlth as the physical Whole which ie sought in Hathayoga
  Man, as bo develops, lives more and more in that Current
cof Enorgy, which, having immersed itself in Mind and
  ‘Matter for the puzpeee of World-Exporience, retams to
  iteeli as the Perfect Experience, which is Transcendent
  Being-Power. With the transformation of man's nature his
                               493
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
values beoome higher, At length he discerns that his Self
is rooted in and is a flowering of Supreme Being-Power.
His cramped experience, loosened of its limitations, exponds
into folness. For, it mustbe ever remembered, that: Con-
‘sciousness eo i is itself never evolves. Itis the Immutable
Hesence, and Shakti the “Wave of Bliss” as they each
fare in themselves, Evolution is thus a gradual release from
the limitations of Form created by Being-Power. Interest
in the Partial and Relative Wholeness gives way to a stxiv-
ing towards the Mothor as the Absolute Whole (Pérne),
which Sho is in Her owa spuceloss, and timeless, nature,
      ‘This complete Liberation is the Perfoct Experience in
‘hich the Self, cramped in Mind and Body, overcomes its
‘dy: bonds and expands into the Consciousness-Whole.
‘The practical question is therefore the conversion of Im-
perfect (dpiirna) into Periect (Parna) Experience. This
last is not the “standing aloof” (Kaivalya) “here” from
some discatled Universe “over there”, upon the discovery
‘that it is without reality. and worth’ For the World is
tho Mothor    in Form. Tbs ono and the anmo Mother Power
‘which really appeoes as the peycho-physical universe, ond
which in itself ia Perfect Congeiousness. Liberation is,
‘sccording to this systema, the expansion of the empirical
conscioumess in and through and by means of the word
into that Porfeot Consciousness which is the Experienos-
Whole. This can only bo by the grace of the Mother, for
who othernise can loosen the knot of Mdy@ which She
‘Herself hs tied ?
      ‘The state of Liberation can only be approximately de-
scribed. Kien those who have returned     from ecstasy cannot
find words for that whish they have in fact experienced,
 “A fall ose,” iti ei, “makes no sound.” Ibis not in
this eystem an experience of mere empty “being”, for this
isan abstract concept of the intellect produced by the power
of Consciovsness. Tt is @ concrete Experience-Whols of
infinitely rich “content”. ‘The Mother is both the Whole
                                494
             THE INDIAN MAGNA MATER
 and, se Somvid Kald, is tho Cause and axchstype of all
 Partials (lf). She is Homeli the Supreme Partial as
 She is alao the Whole, So, Shois the Supreme Word
 (Paravdt), Supreme Sound snd Movement (Porashabda
 Paranda), Supreme Space (Parayyona), Supreme or
 ‘Transoondental Time (Parabéla), the infinite “limit” of
 that which man knows on the rising of Sun aid Moon.
She is again the Life of all lives (préna-prinagya). She
 ‘thus oontaina within Hersolf in their “limit” all the
 rwalities and values of worldly life which is Her expression
 in Time and Space, But over and beyond this, Sheis also
 ‘the alogical Experienoc-Whole. ‘This Experience neither
 supersedes noris superseded by expetience ar the Supreme
 Self, This Alogical Experience is only approximately
 spoken of as Infinite Being, Consciovsness and Joy which
 is the seamless (akhanda) Kxporionce-Whole (Pima).
 Relative to the Supreme. Self the Perfect Experience,
 ‘She as His Power is the Perfect Universe, In the alogical
 ‘transcendent state in which Shiva and Shakti are mingled
 ‘as the One, She is the Massive Bliss (Ananda ghana) which
 is their tnion, of which it has been said: Nivatishage
 ‘premdspadatsam Anandatvam, which may be translated :
 “Love in ite Iimit or uttermost love is Joy". ‘hia is the
 love of the Sel! for it Power snd for the Univense as which
 such Power manifests. She is called the Heart of the
 Supreme Lord (Hrdayam Parameshituh), with whom the
 ‘Shileta unites himself as he says S@hom—"She 1 an.
        IE we auslyse this description we find that it can be
  summed up in the single Sansinit term Anandaghano, oF
  Mase of Bliss, The assence of the Univeme is, to the
  Shilkta, nothing hut that. Mystical states in all religions
  fre experienass of jay. An I have elsewhere said, the
                                                    in Shékta
  freative and world-sustaining Mother, as seencrowned
  worship (Hddimasa), is a Joyour        Figure           with
  ruddy flashing gems, clad ia zed raiment (Louhitgam etaaya
 coroasya vimarsial) more effulgent than millions of red rising
                               45
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘wuns, with ono end granting oll blessings (varamudré),
 tsed with the other dispelling all fears (abiayamudrd), Te is
  true that She seems fearful to the uninitinte in Her form ss
 Kali, bxt the worshippers of this Form (Kédémaa) know Her
‘as the Wielder of the Sword of Knowledge whieh, severing
 rman from ignarance~that is, partial kmowledge—gives him
 Perfect Kixperience. ‘To such worshipper the bursing ground
 —with its corpees, its apporitions, and haunting malignant
 spirits—is no terror. These forms, too, are Hers.
        Hinduism has with, doep insight seen that Fear is an
‘omential mark of the animal, and of man in go far as ho is
  ‘au animal (pasha), The Shileto unites himself with this
 joyous ond Ubersting Mother, saying S@ham-—"She T
  smn”, As ho realizes this he is the feszlesa Hero, ot Vira.
  For he who sees Duality, he slone fears, To see Duality
 ‘mans not merely £9 see othemess, bat to sea thet other as
 ‘lien non-self. ‘The fearless win all worldly enterprises,
 ‘nd fesrlessnessis aleo the mark of the Ifustinate Knower.
  Such an one is sso in his degree independent ofall otward
 power, and Mrigunjoya, or Master of Death. Such an
 ‘one is’ not oabled for himaslf by the thought of Death.
 In the apt words of French author (“L’Ame Paieme,””
 83), he no more fers than do the eave ofthe trees, yellow
 ing to their fall in the mists of autumn, An imperishable
 instinc tells him thot if he, like the leaves, is about to fall,
he ia alo the tree on which they will comé out again,     as also
  th Barthin which both grow, and yet again (es the Shilkia
  ‘would sy) be is alto, in hia Bedy of Biss, the Bssence which
  1s the Mother-Power sustains them al . As that Rassnce
  isimperishsble, so in the despest sense is its form ae Nature.
For whatever exista can never altogether     cesse toe. thet
  ‘man's. consciousmess expauds into that Lordliness which
  sees all ag Tisell, or ho snd all lower beings sre withdrawn
  into the Womb of Power, in which they are conserved to
  reappear in that Sphurana or Blossoming which is the
  Springtide of some new World.
                                 406
                        Cuapren XT.
                       HINDU RITUAL"
                              L
    Pia well ssid that Ritual is the Ast of Religion. As
       practiod by the Hindus it is not rightly Judged, bo-
 cause the religous and philosophical doctrines of which it
 isa practical expresion snd method are either unknown or
 risunderstood. If we add to incapacity, a temporament
 Iectile to all Ritualism, the ovultent oriticism is “mum-
 ‘mexy,” “idolatry,” “gibborish,” sndso forth. Tt is true
 that Ritaal is meaningless to those who do not low its
 resting ; just asa Sologram sent in oyphor ie without sense
 to thoss who ate ignorant of she eade accordingto which it
 is written. It may, howovek, be admitted that in so far as,
 and to the extent that Ritaal is carried out without under
 standing on the part of the worshipper, suc criticisms may,
 ‘to that extent, bs jastited. Daypite shallow views, Ritual
 is a nosesity for men at 6 whole. "Those who profoss to
reject it in zeligion are yet found to adhere to it, in some
 form or other, in gosial and political life. The necessity of
 Ritual is shovea by well-known historical reactions. Dogo-
neracy leads to “Protestant” aboltions.. ‘Tho jejune worship
 of the “reformer” laoks sppaal and power, and Ritual eomes
intoitsown sgain, ‘This caillationis woll marked        in Rsrope
 in the historyof Catholicima and Protestantism. Tt is dis
 playod   again anin excessive     Buddhism, which, starting as»
                      the BastinVaidik
 revolt from                           Ritual, wloptod in the end
 the elabomate nites to be found in the Hindu and Buddhiss
 ‘Tuntras. ‘The Brsbmanie position is the middle and stable
 ‘way, acknowledging the value of both the “Protaatant””
 ‘and “Catholic” attitude, Ite view is that all men need
 Ritual, but.in varying degree snd of various kinds, until
           pind fron the "Tieonopboal Review?
                               407
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  they ave Siddha, tntis, until they have achioved the end
  wich Ritual is designed to secure... When the endis gained
  there is no longer need for the means to it. Further, the
 ned becomes les and less 8s approach is made to that end.
 ‘Tho Ritual must bo suitable to the spiritual attainments
 sand disposition of the worshipper. For the simple and
‘ignorant the Ritual is of a Sehdla or gross kind. The word.
 Siidla in Sanskrit does not necessarily imply any moral
 censure. Tt is here used as the opposite of Sdésima or
 subtle. Agsin, count is taken of human emotion and of
 ite vasities. ‘The dispositions or temperaments, or Bidoa,
 cof worshipper vary. One worshipper may place himaelf
 bfore the Lond in the relation of servant towards his
 ‘Master, onother in the relation of a ftiend, end yet snother
 in the relation of a lover. “In the seme way, Yogn, in the
 sense of a system of seliconttol and selffulflment, varies.
 For those who are predominantly, intellectual there is tho
 ‘Yoga of Knowledge (Jnéna); for those in whom emotion
fs atzong therein the Yoga of Devotion (Bhakti); for such
 1 bilong to nsthor of those classes those    is tho great Yoge
 ‘of Action (Kerma). The ond to which each mediately ot
 directly works is the same. Thor is, in fact, no rebigion
 ‘more Catholic than Hinduism. For this easob, those who
 dislike and for ib spzak of ita “rapacious maw”. Tt has,
in fot, an enormous faculty of assimilation ; for there is in
 it that which will sotify all views and temperaments. In
 ‘the Weat, we are too apt to quarrel with views and practices
 which we dislike, We will aot, in such case, aocept them,
 ‘bat shst ia notmocsssarily a roason why those who Like tham
 should not do so. Thus, to some, oll Ritual is repellent,
 or some kinds of devotion, such as the use of eroti imagery.
 Tat cook. take or roloct wit is suitable or unsuitable to
  him. Controversy is futile. Fitness or Adiikdra is a
 fundamental principle of Hinduism. Some may be ft for
  one dootrine and proctce, and othors not. The-wisdom of
 ‘he universal man with a world-mind converts many n
                               498
                      HINDU RITUAL
  absolute judgment into relative one. For the judgment,
 “Thais bd”, he will ubetitute, “This is not good for me”.
 In this way he will both save his owa healt and temper,
 ‘and that of the other.
       ‘The term “Ritual”, in its religious sense, is included
 in the Sanskrit term Sédhand, though the latter word has a
 wider content. Tt is derived from the root Sodlt=to exert
 or strive for, and inoludes any exertion or striving for any-
 thing. Thus a man who goes through          & special training for
 fn athletic matah is doing Sédhand with a view to win in
 that contest. The takingof lesions        in a foreign language
 is Séthond with a viow to atiain proficiency    in that language.
 Osientaliss frequently translate the term by the English
 word “evocation”.       ‘There is, of course, Shand, to gain
‘the fruits of magio. But this is only one form of Sddhand,
 ‘The form of which'L write, and that’to which reference is
 generally made, is that effort and striving in the form of
 felf-training, dieipline, and worship whioh as as its end
 ‘spiritual’ and not merely physical or meutal result--though
 such result: necessarily involves « transformation of bot,
 mind and body. ‘The ead, then, is some form of Unity
 ‘with God as the Universe Father, or Mother, as tho Shaletan
 say. The person who does Sddhand is called Saihaka ot,
 if's women, Sédhikd, ‘The end sought by the process of
 ‘Stdhand is SAdbya or Siddhi. Sida, or sooomplishmens,
 ‘manna any suscssafal rsult, and the man who attains it
  is, in teapect of such attainment, called Siddha. The
  highest Siadhi is Unity with Brihman, the All-pervader,
 cither by merger in or expansion into Tt, a8 some say,
 or, as others hol’, by varying degress of astociation with
 ‘and proximity to the Loni. Dogmatic views                 on this
 ‘or other points ure necessarily, to some extent, reflectad
  in the Ritual presented for their realization, bat at the
  ‘Sédhand stogo there is loss divergence of practice than might
  bbe supposed, beciuce whatever be the doctrine held, « war
  shipper must practically be a dualist. or worship includes
                                 499
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 both a worsbipper and that which is worshipped. ‘There
 tre persons who, in popular language, “worship themselves,"
‘bub ths is not a spritual exercise, Whatever God may be
in Himself, Hersalf, or Itself, the worship is of @ Supreme
Person (Pumébam). ‘The world sometitios distracts the
‘Mind from this, ite supreme object. Nevertholess there is
another universal tendency towards it. This last tendency
ia proof of man’s divineorigin. Springing   rom auch ssonree,
The must neods rotum to it. ‘The striving to realize God
ia part of man's nature. Séihand is such striving in the
forms which experience has shown to be fruitful. Tn the
 Onphic Mysteries   it was said : “Tam the child  of the earth
and starry sey, but know that my origin is divine. Tam
devoured by and perish vith thirst. Give me without delay
the fresh water which flows from the “Lake of Memory’.
And again : “Pure, and issued from what is pure, I come
‘towards Thee.”
     So againSt. Augustine anid that the Mind was not at
est until it found itlf in God. Brahnianie doctzine also
states the same and gives the redsors for it. A profound
soying by on Tndian sage runs: “ Identifoation with the
imperfect (Aptmammanyats)—that is, want of Wiolonces,
is Disease and the soumte of every misery.” Whole
‘Hale-=Heolth. Kvory form of want of wholeness, be it
‘physioel, psychical or spinivul, is disease and infcts un-
‘happiness. God is the whole and complete (Pas), which
is without parts or section (Akhands). Man is the reverse
of this. But having sprafg from the Whole, he seeks self-
complation either by hecaming or reflecting the Whole,
‘The greatest of illneste is thet which the Hindu Sexiptares
call the Disease of Existence itself, in so far as such finite
existence involves » hindronce to the realization of perfect
infinite Being, For these reasons one of the Ohalras or
compartments of the great She Yantra, or Disgram, figured
on the Tantric texts ond other books which I have published,
is called Rogalars Chakra, that is, the “Disease-destroying
                               410
                   HINDU RITUAL
 Chakra”. What is moant by the saying ia that man’s
identification of the self with its pestionlar form, thatis
swith imperfection, is Disease, just a8 the knowledge thet he
 i one with the whole is Health lasting, To gain this itis
necessary that man should worship his Lordin one or other
of the many ways in which his fellows have done sc. For
‘that purpose he may invent a ritual, But the more effec-
tive forme for the mass are those aphich tradition aocredits,
Amongst the greatest of ritual systems isthat ofthe Hindus.
Hinduism (to use a popular term) cannot be undersioed
without a lowledge of t
       But, it may be soid, thero are many Rituals, Which
ane to be adopted, and how oan we know that: they will
five result ? The answer is that the Ritusl for any porti-
‘aler individual is tha for which he ist (AdAiRar). The
‘root ofits efficacy ie given by experiance. The Ayurveda,
for the Veda which tesches the roles 40-secure a long life
 (Ayub) says thot that only is a medicine waich euses the
disease and which, at the some time, gives rte to no other.
‘To those who pnt the question, the answer of the ‘Teacher
is Tey". Tf the setker will not try ho onanot complain
‘that he hag no suscess.. Tho Teacher has himself or herself
 (for aoconiing to the ‘Tantras a woman may be a Guru)
 been through the teeining, ond warranta success to those
 ‘who will faithfully adopt the means he bes himself adopted.
       What, then, axe te basis principles of Stidhand, and
 hhow does it work? ‘To understend this we must have
 cornect ideas of what the Hindu understand by the terms
 Spirit, Mind, and Body. Thave in my volumes on “Mind”
 and “Matter” explained these two terms and will now very
 shortly summarize what is there ssid, so far aa it touche
 ‘the main principles governing the subject of this paps.
                               0.
       "The ultimate object of the situal-thut is, the real-
 ‘uation of God—is effected by the trunsfomation of the
                               an
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
   worshipper into Kkenoss with tho worshipped. Tatof thons
 ssoume that the SAdhoka is doctrinally an adherent is more
  ‘Advaita Vedtnta which is called Bfonism, but which
 ‘courmely translated “Not two," or uon-dual, ecause,
 ‘whilst it can be affirmed that the ultimate Reality    is not
                                          all other predicates,
‘bro, ail as it i beyond number and then, investigate
 iWeannot be afinned to be one. Tet us,
 seme ofthe general principles on which te Ritual expressing
 ‘this doctrine works.
        Mania ead to be Spirt—to use an gis term—with
  thro vehicles of Mind and Body. Spit, or Brahman as it
 isin Fiself Bracips), cozonding to the Vedtate is, lative
 to ts, pure infinite Being, Consciousness, Blise (Sot, Chi
 Ananda), ‘Pat ie Sint viewed irom ous side and in relation
 to us, What Spit is Itself only Spirit in Ttelf can say.
 ‘This in only knovm in the experience of the perfect (Sida)
  Yog!, who has completely tcansformed himself through the
 climinati         those elements of Mind end Body. which
                of on
 fconstitate finite individuality. “To know Brahman is
 to be Brabman.”” God, oF the Lord (Ishvara)world is aspure,its
  infinite Spinit, nite axpoot relative to the
  Creator, Maintainer, and Ruler. Man a, ocording to this
  schoo, that sefaame Spin of Consciousness whic, in one
  ‘spect is immutable, end in another is finitized by Mind
  fand Matter. Consciousness and Mind are, then, twe difer~
  ent and, indeed, opposite things. Mind is not Conscious-
   nest, Dut ia (considered in itlf) an Unconsious force.
   Contciousess is infinite, Mind is « product of fnitizing
   pinciple or power inherent in Consciousness itself, which
   Appiars to limit consciousness. Mind per ais thus an un-
   conscious force limiting Consciousness. This stetement
   ‘ay som strange in the West, but ia comingto be aolnow-
  edged to some extant there, where it is now reoogaized
   ‘hat there is such 6 thing as unconscious min‘. VedAnta
   says that mind in tel is always an unconscious foree, ‘The
  ‘mind appears to be consicus, not becouse itis so ia itself,
                              4a
                    HINDU RITUAL
 ‘ut becante itis associated with and is the vehicle of Sprit
 ‘which alone is Consciousness in sell, The faction of
  Mind, on the contrary, is to cut up into sections sectioaless
 nnsciousness. Let us suppose that Consciousness is re-
  presented by an unbroken light thrown on a blank soreen.
 ‘This unbroken light imperfectly represents—(for images
 fail us in one respect or another)—Conscioumness. Let us
 suppore, then, another metal scree cut up into pattems,
 fmposed on the former, and thus letking the light through
in ports and in various shapes, and shatting it out in others.
 ‘This last opaque soreen represents Mind. Conscioumess is
 selfrevosling. Mind occluden it in varying ways, and is @
 ‘subtle form of the power (Shakti) possessed by Spinit to
 ppearin finitefonn. Matter or Body      is mother but grosser
 form of the same Power, And beesite Mind or Borly have
 ‘© common origin, the one as subject can know the other as
 ‘object. Cognition is then recognition. The same Power
 ‘which bas the capacity to co Yell itself can unvel itself.
 ‘The fib step towards such unveiling is taken      by Stdhand
 in ite form as sell-purifioation, both as regards body and
 ‘ind, self disipling and worship in ita various ritual forms
 ‘At a high point of advence this Sadhank enters what is
 ‘generally known as. Yogs.
      How then does Sddhan&       work ? Temust  be remembered
 ‘that there is mo such thing as mindor soul without some form
 of body, be it gross or subtle. The individual mind has
 always a body. It is only Spinit which is Mindless, and
 ‘therefore wholly bodiless. Mind and Body are each as real
 1s the other... When there is subject or mind there is always
 object or matter. ‘The proper discipline purifles and con-
 trols both. A puro body helps to the attainment of a pure
 rind, because they are each aapeots of one Power—Sub-
 stance, Whenever, then, thore is mind, it bas some object
 for content. It is never without content. ‘That object may
 The good or bad. ‘The ft design of the Ritual, then, is 90
 sectze chat the mind shall always have a good object. The
                                 413
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 bost of all object is ita Lord. What, then, io the result of
‘meditotion on the Lond ®
     ‘Whats the pcocess of knowing 1 When the mind knows
an object, that process consistsin the projention from the
Mind of « Mind-Ray, which goes out to the object, takes its
orm, and returns and models tbe mind itelf into the form
‘of the object. Thus, if sttention is completsly given, that
in without any distraction, to an image or Deity, » jor or
any other object, the mind so long as it holds that object is
completely transformed into the shape of that object. ‘Thus,
swith complete eoxcenteation on tho Lord, the mind is shaped
into the image of Him, with all His quolities., That image
is formulated by what is called the Dhyéns. The Ritual
fives the Dhyine of cach of the forms of God or Spirit
      Tet it be assumed, then, that the mind is thus trans-
formed ; itis then novessaryto Keep it so. The mind is so
‘unsteady, agile and variable that it has been compared both
with meroury and the reitlss monkey. If this variability
dlixplayed tantin the choice of good thoughts only, it would
not so much matécr, Bat there’ are others which ere not
good. Moreover, both intansity snd durability of trans-
formation are desived.. The endesvour then is to attain
‘complete powor of concentmation and for periods of increas-
ing langth. ‘The effct of ths isto establish in the mind a
tendenoyin the direction desired. All have experience of
‘the paychologieal trath that the longer and mote firmly an
‘object is held in the mind, the less is the tendency towards
 dlistmaction from it. A tendenoyis celled Sangakara, Such
tendenoy may be physical or yoyohicel, ‘Thus, the tendeney
‘of an India rubber band when stretched to return to ite
‘original condition before auch stretching,ia a physical ange
 ‘kira of Tndia rubber. In tho samo way, those azo psych
 cal eangokdras, Thus, » man of misecly disposition i iniu
 enced by some auffcient impulse to be, on a particular
 ‘cation, generous, but when that or other sufficient impulse
 Toks, his miserly disposition. or sangoktra scerts iteel,
                               “4
                     HINDU RITUAL
  On the other band, but litte is required to call out goneto-
 sity in a naturally charitable man, for the good tendancy
is there. Sddhand confirms good snd eradicates bad. song-
 shires, As tendencies are produced by past action, intel-
 Tectual or bodily, present and fntare good sotions will secure
 ‘that good sangekivas sre kept and others eliminated. Man
 is both bom with sangabiras snd acquires others. No
 “Hindu holds that the mind at birth is tabula      rasa. On the
 ‘ontzery, it is compounded ofall     the  sangskaras  or tenden~
 cies which resalt from the actiona of the previous lives
 of the individual in question. ‘These ste added to, vasiod,
 reversed or confirmed by actions taken in the present
 life, Many of such Songskéras are bad, and steps must be
 taken to substitute for them others, ‘All are aware that
 bad acts and thoughts, if mppented, result in the esteblish-
 ‘ant of a bed habit, thatis « bed Songokdra realized. The
 object of Sadhand is, then, firstly to substitute good objects
 for the mind in lien of bad objects, and to overcome the
 ‘tendency towards distznction and to revert to what is bad.
 ‘This means the stabilizing of chsracter in a good mould.
      ‘How is this to be ofected ? ‘Tho Sddhand        must svoid
 all distraction by Keeping      the  mind   ecouyied   vith what
 is good. "We accordingly find the repetitions which may be,
 Dut by no means necessarily are, “vain”. A commonis donein-
 stance of this is Japa, or repetition of mantra. This
 by count on a zosary (Mlé) ot with the thamb on the twelve
 phalanges of the fingers. ‘There are also forms of repetition
 jn varying woys. Thoughts are intensified and confirmed by
 appropriate bodily gestures (Mud). Again, real processes
 tre imagined. Thus, in Nyda, the worshipper with appro-
                                                               the
 piate bodily aotions places different parts of the body of‘Thus
 ‘Divinity on the cortesponding parts of his own body,
‘the Sédhcka imagines thot he has aoquired          a new divine
 body. Again, in the more subtie rte called Bhiashuddhs,
 the worshipper imagines that each of the component ele-
  rments of the body is absorbed in the next higher element
                                a5
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 antl all ate mexged in the Supreme Power of whom man,
as a compound af auch elements, isa limited manifestation,
‘Whilst this is merely imagined in SAdhand, it objectively.
‘and actually takes place in Kurdelint Yoge. The mind is
‘thus constantly oocupied in one form or enother with, and
‘thus shaped into, that which is divine and becomes iteelf,
‘by being kept in such shape, at length permanently divine.
‘For, as the Chuhbindogye Upanishad says: "What a man
‘thinks that he becomes." So slgo the Gandharva Tantra
says: “By meditating on anything as onecali, max bovomae
that.” Thinking always on the Lord, man is transformed,
within limits, into an imsge of Him. The preparatory
work of Siihsnf is completed in Yogo.
      will next shortly note some of the principal forms of
ritual employed in vorship, vi. image and emblem, Yantra,
Pia, Mantra, Mudré, Nydsa, Byitaghuddhi. These are in
‘constant use, either daily or on! special occssions. The
ritual of the Sacraments, or Sangekdrae, sre performed
‘once, vis,, on the date of that sacrament, such as naming
‘ceremony, marriage arid 40 forth.
                              I.
       ‘The third Chapter (here summarized and explained)
 of the Sanslait work called “ Wave   of Bliss, for worshippers
of the Mother-Power (Shakti)”, desis with the necessity for
 ‘the use of images end other forms as representations of the
 formless All-Pervsder (Brakman), The later is, in Its own
 true nature, bodiless (asherti) and pure Consciousness,
 cf in Weetem languege, Spirit, But Brahman, through
 is power (shakti), assumes all the forms of the Univers,
 just as it is said an aotor (nstovat) assumes various roles.
 ‘Thus Brahman has two aspests: the subtle, in which It
 ‘tsown unmanifested Self; and the gross,    in which It appears
 tg the manifested universe.     Or,  if we    reserve the word
 utile” for what, though itis not pure Spirit, is yet finer
 ‘than gross metter-that is, Mind, we may sy that the
                              46
                        HINDU RITUAL
 ‘Uitimate Reality hus three aspects : (a) Supreme or trans
 cendent, that is pure formless Spirit; (2) subtile, or the
 same Spisit as manifested in mind ; (¢) gross, or the same
 spinit as manifested in Matter. Tt is clear that one cannot
 ‘meditate on thet which is wholly formless as isthe supreme
 Brahman, which is without body.
        Tn meditation (Dhyana) there is duality, namely, the
 subject who moditates and the object of such meditation,
 ‘hough, in fact, the two are (according to the Advaita or
 ‘non-dualiom of the Shaktas), both differing aspects of the
 one Brahman through Its Power. As the mind cannot
 remain steady on what is formless (amtirta), therefore, a
 form (mfict) ie necessary. Form ip gross or subtile. Form
 is necessary both ia Sddhand and Yoga~in the latter for
 acquiring accomplishment in. Tritaka-Yoga, that is, steady
 gaze which leeds to one-pointeduess (Ekégrata), and this
 Tatter to Samédhi or ecsteay, ‘The grossast form is that
 ‘which is shown in the round, With hands, feet, and so
 forth--thati,     the image. Nothing     is here let to the imagi-
 nation, ‘The particular of the     image,   thet is, how it should
 ‘be shaped, ite colour, posture, and so forth, is given in
‘what are called the meditations ox Diydvas, and the dimen-
 sions may be found in the Siipe Shistms. These describe
 ‘the form, attitude, tho position of tho hands and legs, the
 ‘articles such ss weapons and the like carried, tho vehicle
 ‘or Vahans—end the attendant Divinities (dvarana Devatd).
 ‘Less gross forms axe piotures or representations in the flat,
 ‘emblems such as the Shélagrama stone sacred to Vishnu,
 ‘the Linga of sign of Shiva, and the inverted triangle whieh
 ig the emblem of the Mother. Thus a Lings set in the Yoni
 for triangle represents the union of Shiva and Shakti, of
  God and His Pover, or in philosophical language, the union
  of the static and kinetic aspects of the one Ultimate Reality.
  ‘A still more subtile form is the Yantra, which literally means
  “instrument,” 0, the instrument by which worship is
  done, Tt is a6 shown on the Mat, © disgmm which veries
                                  “7
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘with  ench of the Devaid           s and has been called
                            or Divinities,
 “the body of Mania”. Whilst gross (sthGla) meditation
 takes place on the gross image, emblom or Yantm, subtile
 (silahma) meditation has as ite object the Mantra, The
 ‘Manira and the Devat are one, A Manéra is Devatd in
 ‘that form, that is as sound. Heating is oonsidered the
 finest of the aonses. What is called Supreme Muditation
 is nothing but ecstasy, or—Conscionsnest, frood of both
 its sable and gross vehicles, and, therefore, limitetions.
       ‘As the Brohman is only directly known in the ecstasy
 cof Yogs, It is imagined with form, of, es some translate
 ‘this passage, It assumes form for the sake of the worship-
 ‘pers (upAsaldnd Rargyérihan). These forms ate male ot
 female, such ss, in the first class, Brahmé, Vishnu, Siva
 ‘and other, and in the seaond.‘Triporasundart, Lekshmt,
 Kalt end others, ‘The worship of a Emuch (napmgsakn)
 form does not bear fait.’ What shall be the selected or
 patron Divinity depenis on the oompetenoy (edhikira) of
 ‘the worshipper, that js, what is suitable oft for him given
 his character and attainments. Tae Yamala seys: "Men
seo Him in variousways, each accord                  own inci-
                                             to his ing
 nations.”” Bus an sdvaitist woushipper should at the same
 ‘ime remember thet eoch is n aspect of one and the same
 Deity.
       Vartha Pusfina says: “What Durgi is, that is Vishn,
 find thet als is Shiva. Tho wiso know that they are not
 diferent from one another. The fool, who in his portiality
 ‘thinks otherwise, goes to the Rourava Hel.”” There is
 however, from the nature of the case, some distinction in
 ‘the case of the worship of those on the path of enjoyment,
 who should worship according to the tiode in which they
 hhave been initisted. But the renouncer should discard in
 every way all notions of diffrence. The Wave of Bhs,
 ‘iting Sameya Tantra, says: “By the worship of some
 Deve, liberation is with diffouity stisined, and by the
 ‘worship of others exjoyment is to be hd, but     in the oase
                               438
                      HINDU RITUAL
of the worshipper of the Mother, both enjoyment and
Liberation lie in the hollow of his Hands."" But, unless pray-
ed to, the Mother or Devt does not give fruit, end naturally
10, For the Devi is moved to action through the prayers
of the worshipper. Essentially the worshipper is the Devt
Hlrself, and unless She in Her form as the worshipper is
moved, She in Her aspect as the Supreme Lord—" Our
Lady”—does not move.
      ‘By “worshipper” is meant one who is proficient im
Karma sl Bhakis Yoga. "The Jndnayogi’s effort is diteoted
‘towards the atteinment of the formless Brahman. Worship
implies duality, and so does Manéra-yoga of which worship
isa part, Krom the Bija-manira or seed mantra the Devas
‘vise and this Devatd is the Brshman, In the Karma
‘Parfna itis said : “Those who think themselves         to be differ-
ent from the Supretie Lord will never see Him. All“Medi-        their
Iabour isin vain.”     ‘Therefore, the   Shefirama   says:
tate upon yourself as the Supreme Mother—the primordial
Power—by your mind, word, and body.” All three                   take
prt in the ritual. ‘The mind, which must           from   its nature
have an object, is given « good object, that is, thewtters  image of
jts Lord. Tt holds to. that.        ‘The   worshipper             the
ritual words and with his body. performs the ritual acta,
such as the gestures (Mudrd), the giving of offerings, and 30
forth. And the reason is, 08 the Gandharvs Tantra that”        says:
“By meditating     on anything 99 oneself, man     becomes
‘The mind assumes the form of its object—that is, by good
‘thoughts man is transformed into what is good. So the
‘worshipper is enjoined constantly to think: “Tam manthe
Doel asd none other.” By meditating on Vishoa,becomes
becomes Vishnu. By meditoting on Deef, man for be
Devi. He is freed from bodily ills and is liberated, Ad-
attains spiritual knowledge. Such knowledge, in themeso
nite sense (though there are also other schools)                    in
“to be”. ‘To know Brahman isto be Brahman,such.Brahmen     Brakman
Tieell is not an object, and is not mown as
                                419
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
is knova by being Brahmen, which man stains Uhsough
ivual forms, and Yoga processes, of which worship is «
necessary preliminary.
                              IV.
      Tn tho preceding paragrapis, T have, in very general
outline, dealt with the meaning   of SAdhand as ritaal worship,
both as to ite chject and the principles on which it is based,
T hace given at the some time come examples. T propose
‘hereto pats few rematis on certain other pertiular forms
of ritual, I have already referred to imege worehip upon
whieh, however, I will add a word,
      ‘Western people speak of the image worshipped as being
an “idol”, just as some so-called “reformed” Hindus
influenced by Wester views gall it @ “doll”. The Hindu
term is Prattka end Pratimé indiesting slat which is placed
befort ones the imanedinte and apparent abject of worship,
representative of the Invisible Supreme. ‘The mind cannot
seize pure Spirit any more than (to wse the simile of ax
Tadian author) pair of tong ean seize the air. The mind
‘must, howover, necessarily have before it some definite
object, and one of such objeots i the image or emblem.
‘At the same time, the Hindwimage is something more shan
‘mere aid to devotion    such sje the case in general as regards
‘mages in the Catholio ritual. For, by the “life-giving”
(préna-pratishta) ceremony the life of the Devata or Divi-
nity is invoked into the image. Deity is allspervading and
 therefore cannot oomé or go, ‘The imsgo, lke everything
cle, is already an appearance of Deity immanent in it, in
the particular form or mould of earth, stone, metal, wood
‘or wantever other the substance may be. Therefore, “in-
‘voottion” (dedhana) and ‘dismissal’ (Visarjana) in the
Ritual by which the Deity is invoked “to’be present” and
bid "to depart” mean this—that the immanence of Deity
in the object of worship is recognired, kept present before,
‘and ultimataly released from the mind of the worshipper
                               40
                        HINDU RITUAL
In factZthe Deity is there, situal  or no situsl. By the ritual
 the Deity  ia not aly therein fact, butis ao for the conscious
 ness of the worshipper whose anind is transformed into
 Divine mould, The Deity does not move, but the mind of
 the worshipper does so. It is the particular modifcetion,
 Frit of the mind which comes nd goes. Personally, T
 Ueliove that “Idolatry” in its strictest literal senso is not to
 ‘be found anywhere. The inost ignorant individuals belong-
 ing to 8 primitive humanity are awazo that they are, in one
 sense, in the presence of “stocks    and stones”, ond that the
 ‘worshipful character of tho image is not beciuso it is such
 stook and stone, for,in that ease all stock and stone is wor-
 shipful, but for other reasons. Tb has been noted already
 ‘that the ritual is graded in this matter, as in others, into
 gras and aubtle, The subtle form is that in which the
 Teast is left to the imagination, namely, an image in the
 round. Leseo,     in the order given,is the picture  on the fla 5
 ‘the emblem which has no external likeness to Divinity (euch,
 ‘as the Linga and Shélagrame ston), and then the Yantra
 or diagram    of worship: This Yantrais madeup of difisrent
 combinations of lines snd curves, and is described ox the
 ‘body of the Mantra. Busides these extsmel objects, there
 ‘are mental representations of them and of other things.
 ‘Thus actual flowers may be offered physicelly, or mental
 “flowers” may be offered by the mind, or the “flowers” of
 the virtues may be laid before the Devatd
       How often the word Manira is used, and yet how few
 ‘can sey correotly what the term means ? It is only possible
There to lay down a few general lines of explanation of a
 ‘subject with which T heve endeavoured to desl in my recent
  work, The Garland of Letters; for Gatland or Rosary are
 ‘names given to the alphabet or Sanskrit letsars, which sre
  cach a manifeetation of the Mother of the Universe
       ‘The Universe is movement, of various kinds, of the
  ultimate substance, ‘This movement is sensed in five ways.
  ‘Whatever is heard is the sound made by some particular
                                 4
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 form of movement, ancl the hearing by mind ani ear is
          ‘form of movement. If theze be no movement there
‘a nothing to bear. When w letter is uttered in our hearing
 ‘there is a partioular movement which can be represented as 8
 form for the eye, which form again involves colour, for what
 i perfectly colourless is formless, and, therefore, invisible,
 ‘The letters axe temporarily manifested by the action of the
 ‘vocal ongans and the circumamiient air, but are in them~
 selves, that is, os attitudes of Power, etzmal, As Postums
 of Power they aro eterual, though as manifestations they
 ‘appear with each universe ond disappear with it. Thy
 ‘are, like all else, o form of appearance of the Magna Mater,
‘the one great Mother-Power, and sre particular world-aspects
 of Her. The sound which is beard, and the mind and eer
 ‘which hearit, ore each euch appearances... Bach thing as
 a double aspect—oae as produced thing, or effet ; the
 otheras the particnlnr Cousal Power which produces ot mote
 accurately manifeste as that thing, That power again,
 relative to any of its particular productions, is an sspect of
 the general Mother-Power,      and is, a8 such, © DevatA. Thus,
 the sun is « glorious epiphany of the Brahman, or All-
 Pervader which, in ite character a§ the power inher’ in
 ‘that portioular ‘manifestation, is the Son-Lord or Sirya-
 Dovotd, Devaidin       its supreme (para) sense is the Lordof
 ‘All, manifesting as the All. ‘The Sun Devatd is the same
 ‘Lord  in the chezacter of o pertioular power ofthe All-Powes-
 ‘el manifesting in this form of-the Sun. Whilst, thereore,
 in « souse, Mantra is the Sonnd-aspect of all that is, each
 Devati ns His or Her own Manda, and it is to. such
 ‘mantras that the Soriptare refers, Tho Mantra docs not
 ‘merely stand for or symbolize the Devotd, Still lessis ita
 ‘mere conventional label for the Devaid, Tt is the Devaa.
 ‘The Devatd and Mantra are therefore one
       Ineach   mantra however, there sre two Shakti      or powers.
 ‘The Dreatd who is the mantra is called the indicating power
 (Fédiaka Shakti), The Devatd who is indivated (Vaya
                                  42
                     HINDU RITUAL
 Shales) is the Ultimate Reality, or Saprme Brahmas.
  ‘The former leads to the latter. As each worsbippet has his
 ‘own Patron Deity or Ishtadevat8, so esch worshipper is
 initiated in and practises a particular mantra, The
 Patron Deity is a porticular aspect of the One Supreme
  Reality vhich cannot, be dixecly worshipped, but which
 is worshipped indirectly as an aspect of thnt Reality in a
  world of duality. What Mantra « worshipper should prac-
 tise ia determined by the Guru who initistas. He should
 settle whut it shall be by reference to the physical, payohi-
  cal and. spiitaal choractesistice of the worshipper. This
 is the theory, bub ia practice a state of things often existe
 ‘hic bas led to the vorticsm that Mandra is “jabbox”.
 ‘Thus (fo take but one example), 1, though not a Hinds,
 ‘was once asked by 6 Brahmin lady, through & pundit lmown
to both of us,to tell he the meaning of her mantra, and this
 ‘though she had passed fifty, she hd never been told, nor
  could she find out even fom the pundit. She was led to
 ‘skeme and thos to reveal her mantze which sbould be kept
 scoret, because ah bad heard thit Thad a manuscript Bija
  Kotha, ot Diotionary, which gave the meaning: of mentrss,
 ‘This incident is significant of the present otats of things
 ‘Initiation has often and perhaps in most oases now-a-deys
 little reality, being mezely a “whispering inthe eat”. A trae
 ‘and high initiation is one in which not mere instruction is,
  given, but thereis alao an actual transference of power by
 teacher to digsiple which ensbles the disciple both to
  understend, and then trensforms him by infusing him with
 the powers of his Guru.
       ‘Maniva-sédhand consisia of the union of the Séidhand
 akii ot the power ofthe individual worshipper          aod the
 ‘Mantra shai os the power of the mantra tel. The worship-
 per exerte his own individual powerto achieve through the
 mantra, and es he does ths, the power ofthe mantra, whic
in as far greater thin his own as the Devaid    is greater than,
 he, aids bis effort. On the theory this must be e0, because
                                433
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA.
 tas the worshipper more end more realizes the Deval in
 ‘uantra form, and identifes himself with the Devasd, be
 gains divine powers which supplement his human power
 ‘85 8 worshipper, There are some Mantras which may be
 called prays, such    as the greet Gayatr! Mentra which prays
 for illumination of the understanding. A mantra, however,
 in not to be identifed with prayer, which may be said in
 any form end in any language that the worshipper chooses.
 Prayer may be, of counse, @ great power, but itis never-
 theless the power of the partioular worshipper only what
  ever thet may be.
       ‘Worship (Pja) is done with meditation, recital of man-
 ‘mas, obeissnce, manual gestures, the making of offerings
 and the like. ‘The gestures (Ifudrd) are part of & system
 which employs both body end mind, end makes the former
 ‘express and emphaoize the intentof ions  the latter. Similarly,
 ‘an orator gives expression to his thought end emphasizes
 it by gesture, ‘Thus, in the Maieys Mudré, the hends are
 ‘pt into the form of 8 fish to indioste that the worshipper
 {n oflr     to theing
                    Deity not merely the little quantity of water
 ‘whichis eed i the worship, hut that hit intention i to
 offer all the oceana with the fish and other marine snimals
 ‘therein, This is part of whist as been called ‘* axummery”,
 ‘Well—it is “ecting” ; but itis not necessurly more foolish
‘than touching one's het as © sign of respect. ‘The charge
 fof mummery as against all religions is largely due to the
 not that there exe many people who will pess judgments
 ‘on matters which they do not understand. Ignorant and
  halfeducsted persons everywhere people the world with
  fools boceuse they sme themselves sich
       Asana, ot pooture belongs to Yoga, except that the
 ‘general posture for worship is Padmdzana, end worehip ie
  port of Mantra Yoga.
       Tapa is “recite!” of Mantra, ‘There ig no exnot English
  equivsient fori, for “recital” signifies oniinary utterance,
  whereas Japa is of three kinds, namely : (a) that in whiob
                                 434
                     HINDU RITUAL
 dw Marais auiby uttered ; 2) whare the ips axe moved,
 bot no sound is heard ; and (e) mentel or by the mind only.
 ‘The count ie done en a zosexy (nd) ot on the phalanges
 of the fingers.
       Oneof the great Mantra   is the physical actof breathing.
 ‘As this is done of itelf 60 many timos a day, now throughs
 ‘the right, and then through the let nostril automatially,
 ie is called the Ajapa Mandra—thatis, the mantra which
 i said without Jopa or willed efort on man's pert. The
 mantsa which is thus sutomatically said is Hongech.
 Breath goes ous with Zong, and comes in with Sah. When
 ‘outbresthing and inbeeothing tele place, the throat and
 routh are said to be in the position in which they are when
 pronouncing the letters Hand 8 respectively. In which      other
 ‘words, owbresthing isthe game form of movement
 is heard as the letter TL
       ‘An important tite much geferred fo in the Tantrss is
 ‘Nydas, which means the “placing” of the hands of the wore
 shipgeron different partsof his body, imagining at the same
 time that thereby the cormaponding perts of the body of
 his Tciadentdace being there placed. Tt terminates with
 a movement, “apreeding” the Divinity oll over the body.
 “flow aburd," romeone may say, “You cannot spread
 Divinity lke jam on bread.” Quite so; but the Hindu
 now ell thet the word Brahman means the All-spreading
 Immense and cannot therefore be spread. Bub whet may
 bbe and is spread is the miné—often ciroumseribed enough—
 of the worshipper, who by this thought and ac is tanght to
 remember and realize that ho is pervaded by Divinity, and
 to afim this by his bodily gesture. The ritual is full of
 affirmations. Affirm sgain, affizm, and etill affirm, This
 injunction one might expect irom w systam which regards
 ‘man and ll that existe a Kmited forms of unlimited Power
  (hake), Afi in every woy is « principle of the ritual,
2 principle which ought to be as easily undersiood           as a
  child's repetition in onder to Teara a    lesion. A  man    who
                               es
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘aly thinks himacif to be becoming divine becomes, in
  faob, in varying degrees, so.
        ‘is not ponsiblin sn account such as this to mote ore
 ‘than a fow of the leading rituals, and 1 conclude therefore
 with the very important Bhitashuddhi. This term doss
 rat mean, as an English orintelst thought, “the driving
 aavay of demona” but purifcation of the Hlementa (Bhita)
 of whichthe body is composed. ‘There ae five ofthese with
 centres or Chakras in the spinal column. The gross
 at tho bao ofthe spine whieh isthe seat ofthe power called
 Kundalint. In Yogs this poweris roused, dled up through
 ‘the column, when it absorbs as it goes, eachof tho centres
 and the elements, and then the psyohio centre, nelly merg-
 ing with Spisit or Pure Gonsoiousness in the upper brain
 ‘which is the “seat” of the latter. In Yogs thin actually
tokes place, but. very few are Yogie; and not all Yous
 ‘posseas this power. Therefore, in the 0668 of ritual worship
 ‘his ascent, purification of the body, ani merging of Matter
 and Mind in Consciousness takes place in imagination only.
 ‘The ‘‘man of sin’” is burt in mental fir, and a new body
 is created, refreshed with the nectar of divine joy arising
fom the union of the “Divine pair” (Shiva and Shakti) oF
 Conscioitiness and ite Power. This is done in the imagins-
 tion of the worshipper, and not without result since as the
 ‘Chokhndogya Upanished says : “What man thinks that
 he becomes.” So also the Gandharva Tantea says: “By
 ‘thinking of That, one becomes That.”
       In Kundalint    Yous or Lays Yor, there is efleted a
 progressive sbsorption of all limited and disorete forms of
                                                      Continuum
 ‘experience, that is fut-sections into the PrimaryTherefore,
 ‘which is Shivs and Shakti united together.                   it
 is a merging or more properly expansion of the finite into
tthe infinite, of the part into the whole, ofthe thinkable and
 ‘measurable into the unthinkableand immeasurable. When
 ‘we worship this progress is imagined. ‘There      is in time s
  ‘transformation of Mind and Body into» condition which
                                6
                    HINDU RITUAL
renders them fit for the spiritual experience, which is the
‘Bamddhi of Yogaor the eosiasis or “standing   out” of Spirit
from its limiting vehicles. Consciousness is then the Parma
or Whole




                             “7
                 Cusrrie XXI,
        VEDANTA AND TANTRA SHASTRA"
 wees: ‘your representative asked me to speak this even=
                hae suggested to me os my subject, thet Shastra
 which is 8 practical application ofthe Vedanti teaching
 Mere talk about Vedinia is nothing but e high form of
 amusement. If more than thisis to be achieved, definite
 Sidhand is necessary. In tho grand opening chapter of
 ‘the Kullimava entra it is aid :—"In thia world are count-
 less masses of beings sofforing oll manner of pain. Old
 age is waiting like & tigress. Life ebbs away as it were
 water from out of & broken pot. Disease kills like eneties
 ‘Prosperity ia bub a dream ; youth is ike @ flower, Life is
 seen and is gone likelightaing. The-body is but @ bubble
 cof water. How then cmnone:know this end yet remain
 ‘content The divétma passes through lakes of existence,
 yot only as man can he abiain the truth, This with great
 Aiicaley that one is born as man. Therefore, he isa self-
 Kkler whe, having’ obtained. such exellent bizth does not
 Ixow whit is for his good. Some there bo who having
 drunk the wine of delusion ere Tost in worldly pursuits,
 veok not the fight of tims end are moved not at the sight
 of suffering. There ere others who sve tumbled in the
 ep well of the Six Philosophies—idle disputanta tossed
 on the bewildering ocean of the Vedas and Shastrss. They
 study day and night and leam words, Some egain, over
 powered by conceit, talk of Unmané thongh not in any way
 realizing it. Mere words and talc anno’ dispel the delusion
fof tho wondering. Daskoots is not dispelled by the mention
cof the word amp’. What thon is thereto dot Tho
 Shastzas are many, life is short and there are « million
  obstacles, Therefore should their essenoe be mastered just
        * Speech at the Meeting held in Calcutta on the Anniversary
  cof Swami Vivekananda on 28th January 1917,
                                  4s
          VEDANTA AND TANTRA SHASTRA
 ts the Hangsa seporates the milk from the water with which
 it hss been mixed.”
        Ts then ssys that knowledge alone ean gain liberation.
 But, what is this knowledge, and how may it be got?
 Knowledge in the Shictric sense is actual immediate ex-
 perience (Skshitkere), not the mere reading about it in
 ‘books, however divine, and however useful as a preliminary
 such study may be.
       How then to gain it? The answer is, by Sidhant
 a term which comes from the root “to exert”. It is
 necessary to exert onsself according to certsin disciplines
 which the various religions of the world provide for their
 adherents, Much shallow talk takes place on the subject
 cof ritual, It is quite true that some overlook the fact that
 itis meely « meansto amend. » But it isa novessary means
 allthe same, This end esnnot be achieved by merely sitting
 in Psdmdsana and attempting to meditate on the Nirguna
 Brahman. One may as well try to seize the air with a pair
 of tongs. How then may the Vedintic truth he realized ?
 ‘The Indian Shéstrs purports to give the means for the
 Indian body     end mind, What Shistea? Not the Karma-
 ‘kinda of the Veda, become with the exception of a fow
 hardly surviving rites, auch ap Toma, it has passed away.
‘The sotual discipline you will find in the Tantras      of the
 Kgomas.
        T prefer the use of this term to that of “the Tantra”,
 ‘now so common, but which has risen frum a misconception
 tnd leads to others. ‘Tantra means injunction (Vidhi) or
 reguistion (Niyama) or treatise, de. simply Shastra, Thus
 Bhafikaca calls the SAfikhya “Tantra”. One cannot speak
 ‘of “the Tantra” any more thin one oan speak of “the
 treatise”, We do aot epeak of the Purina, the Samhita,
 Dub of the Pardnas and Sambitas. Why then spoole of
 “the Tantra'"? One can spesk of the Tantras or Tantra
 Shasteo, ‘The fact is that there is an Agama of several
 schools, Shaiva, Shakta and Vaishnava, Shiva and Shakti
                                 cy
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘ae ane, ‘The Shaive (in the aasrower sense) predominantly
‘worshipe the sight side of the Ardhansrishvara Miri, the
Shiite worships the loft (Vama or Shakti) side ; the plas
of woman being on the left, ‘The Vaishnsva Agama is the
famous Ponchardtra, though there are Tantras not of this
schoal in which Vishnu is the Isbtedevat&. All Agamas
of whatever group share certain common idess, outlook and
practi. There are also carlin differences. Thus, the
Northern Shaivagams which is oalled Tika and act “the
‘Tantra io, on is also the Saeta Tantra, Advaito. ‘The
Souther Shaiva school which is called Shaiva Siddbnta
and not “the Tantra”, as also tho Vaishneva Agama or
Poochardtr (ond not “the Tantra") are Vishishtdvaita,
‘There a ome vasianoe instal alg s follows from vasiance
in the Ishtadevath worshipped. Thus, as you all know, itis
only  in some forms of worship thet there is animal sacrifice,
‘ndin one division, again,of worshippsts, there are rites
‘which have led to those abuses which have gained for “the
‘Tentra” iil fame. A person who enta meat can never,
it is ssid, attain SidAhi in the Shivs Manta according to
Dalshivopisaas, Each ope of these schools has ita own
‘Tantsas of which thete were st onetime probally thousands.
‘The Shaiva Siddhanta speaks of 5 chiof Tansras or Agannus
‘with many Upatantras, In Bengal mention is made of
64. ‘There are numerous Tantets of the Northem Shaiva
school of which the Malinvijaya and Svachehhanda Tantras
fre leading examples. The original connection between
‘the Shaivatchools of North and South is shown by the faot
‘hat there are some books whick axe common-to both, such
 ss the Mitenga ond Moigendra Tantms, ‘The Panchachtra
 is composed of many Tantzas, suck as Lalsbrni and Pedma
 ‘Tyntras  end  other works called Sams. Ia the Com-
 mentary to the Brahms Sambita which hus been called the
 “easence of Vaishnavism”, you will nd Jiva Goswami con-
 stantly refering to Goutamiya Tantra. How then has it
 ‘ome about that there is the ignorant notion that (o we the
                             430
        VEDANTA AND TANTRA SHASTRA
 words of an Raglish work on Tibetan Buddhism) “Tantras
 is restricted to tho nootomantio books of the later Shivaic
 or Shakti mysticism” Tan only explain thia by the fact
 ‘that those who so speak had no knowledge of the Tantras
 ‘as a whole, and were possibly      to some extent misled by the
 ‘Bongali   we of the term “the Tantra”, to denote      the Shakcta
 ‘Tontras current in Bengal. Naturally,the Beagalis spoke
 of their Tantms at “the Tantra”, but it’ does           not follow
 ‘that this expression truly represents the fact. I might
develop this point at great length but eannot do so here.
 T wish merely to corect @ common notion
       ‘Woll, it i in theae ‘Tanteas ot the Agamas that you will
 find tho vitual and Sidhand which governs the orthodox
                       ‘lao in some of the Purduas which contain
       Tam nob congernedto disouis the merits or the reverse
of thse various forms of Sadhana.        But the Agama teaches
 fn imporient lesson the value of which all must admit,
 namely ;—mere talk about Religion and ite trutias will
 achieve nothing spiritual. There must be sction (Kriya).
 Definite means mus be adopted if the truth istobe realized,
 ‘The VedAntais not speken ofas a mete apeculation as some
 ‘Westom Orientalists desoribeitto'bo. Tt claims to be basod
 on experience. The Agemnas say that if you follow their
 dieotion    you wil gain Siddhi. Asa Tibetan Buddhist onoo
 ‘explained    to me, the Tantias wore regarded   by his people
 rather ag 8 scientific discovery than as a revelation ; that
    » something distovered by the self rather than imparted
 from without. They claim to be the revesled means by
which the Tattva or other matters may be discovered. Bub
 the point is, whether you follow these direotions or not,
 you must foliow some. For this reason every ancient faith
 hhas its ritual. Tt is only in modern. times thet persons with
 Dut litle undomtanding of the subject have thought xtnal
 to be unzocessary. Their condemnation of it is based on
 the wndoubied sbuses of mechanical and unintelligent
                                aa
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
devotion. Bus because « thing is ubaaed it does not follow
‘that it is iuelf bad.
        ‘The Agems js, asa fiend of mine well pubit, practical
philosophy, adding whet the intellectual world wants most
‘ovday is this sort of philosophy—a philcsophy which not
merely argues but experiment. He rightly points out that
‘the latest tendency in modem Western philosophy'is to rest
‘upon intuition, as it was formerly the tendenoy to glorify
dialectics, But, as. to the latter “‘Tarkapratishthdnat,””
intuition, however, has to be led into higher and higher pos-
sibilities by means of SAdhanf, which is merely the gradual
‘unfolding of the Spirits vast Iniont magazine of power,
‘enjoyment, and vision which every one porsesss in himself.
All that xsis is Jere. There is no need to throw one’s
fee Into the heavens for it, The Vishvastin Tantra says,
“What is hereis there : what isnot here is nowhere.” As
    have ssid, Lam not here concerned with the truth or ex-
pediency of any perticular religion or method (a question
‘which each must decide for himself), but to peint out that
the principle     is fully sound, natnely, that Religion is and is
‘based on spititoal experience, and if you wish to gain such
experience it is not enough to tall: about or have a vague
wish for it, but you must adopt some definite means well
calculated to produce it. The claim of the Agama is that
it provides auch means and is thus « practical application
 of the teaching of the Vedtnta, The watchword of every
 ‘Tantrik is Kriy8—to be up and doing. You will ind in
 the useful compilation called Yetidharmaniraaya that even
 Dandins of Shafikan’s school fellow a Tanti ritual suited
 to their state, In fact all must act who have not achieved.
         ‘This leads me to say 8 word on the Svimi in whose
 honour we mest to-day. He was always ap and doing,
 ‘The qualities I most admire in him aro his activity,
 ‘mantinoss and courage. ‘There ate still Tndians (though
 fortunately not 90 numerous as there were when I frst
  sme to India now getting on for 30 years ago) who seem
                                  492
       VEDANTA AND TANTRA SHASTRA
‘to be ashamed of and would apologive for thir life, cuatoms,
  zace, art, philosophy and religion aad so forth. ‘The Srdmi
  ‘was not of this sort, He was, on the contrary, amongst the
  fit to afirm his Hindu faith andto issue a bold challenge
  to all who attacked it. ‘This was the atiitade of a man,
  eis also s manly attitude to boldly reject this faithif after
  fully studying ond understanding it you find that the doo-
  fines it prosches do not commend thomselves to your
  reason, For we must, st all cost, have intellectual, as well
  as every other form of bonesty. But this is another thing
  from the shame-facod apology of which T speak and which,
  is neither one thing nor snother. Tho Svimi spoke up and.
  fled. And for this all musb honour him who, whatever
  bbe their own religions beliofs, value sincerity, truth and
   courage which aro the badge of every nobility. Andhere,so
   T offer these few wonis to his memory which we all
   ‘either by our speech or presence, honour to-dey.




                               433
                   (Cearrm XXII.
       ‘THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RELIGIOUS
                      RITUAL
       HE word “religious” in the title of this lectare hes
          ‘en inserted in order to exclude magical ritual, with
which T do not deal, though I have « word or two to say
 fon the subject.
       ‘As regards the word “Hindu”, it mast be remem-
 ‘bored that there is considerable vatiety of doctrine and
 cual, for there are a number of communities of Tndian
 worshippers. ‘Though, pethaps, too much stress is gene
 rally Inid on these difarancas, and suficiet, notice is not
 taken of fundamental points of agreement, yet there are
 differences, and if wate to be exact, we must not forget
Viat fact, Te isnot, of course, possible, during the how oF
0 at my disposal, to treat of all these difleences. T have,
‘therefore, selected the ritual of one of these soumunities
called Shaktias. These worshippers are sb called because
‘they worship the great MotherPooer or Mohishalci.
‘Their doctrine and pctice is of importance, because, (88
‘an Ttalian author has recently observed.) ofits ssoentustion
‘of Will and Power. He describes it as “a magnificent en-
semble of metapkyic, magic, and devotion raised on gran-
 dose foundations.” And so, whether it be acceptable ot
rot, T think itis. ‘The title, therfore, is, in this matter,
 not extot, Some of what is hero suis of common appli-
 cation and some is peculiar to the Shaktas.
      ‘Now as to the word “Ritual”. Ritual is the Art both
‘of Religion and Magic. Magic, however, is more com-
 pletely identified with vitual than is religion ; for magic
is ritual, using the latter term to include both mental and
      % Leste delivered bore the Tndia Society on June 24, 1035,
 Chairman: Sie Francis Yourghorband
                                434
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
 bodily activity   ; whereas religion, in the wide sense of
 Dharma, is not merely ritual-vorship, but covers morality
 also. And so, itis finely said: “The doing of good to others
 i tho highest Dharmis.” In this sense of the term Dharma,
 wwe are not concerned with ritual. Ritual has been the
 subjeot  of age long dispute. Whilst there are some who
 favour it, other ate fanaticelly opposed to it. In this
 ‘mutter, India, a3 uausl, shows hor great reconciling wisdom.
 Sho holds (I speok of those who follow the old waya) that
 ritual is & nocassity for the mass of men. To this
 abe adopte what: I may call the “ Catholic” at
 ‘males, however, conceason on the othar hand to the Pro
 ‘estaut” view, in holding that, as a man becomes more
 ‘and more spiritual, he is less and less. dependent on exter
 nels, and chorsfore on titual,, which may be practically
 dispensed within the cage of the highest.
       ‘Thenas to the word, “Psyobology”. In onder to unde
 stand dae ritual, one must now the psychology of the
 people whose it is; and in order to know and to under
 stand their yeychology, we must: know their metaphysic,
 ‘There are some who claim to dispense with metaphysi,
but the Indian people have been, throughout their history,
 pre-eminently thinkers. Whe threo grontest metaphysical
 peoples have been, in the past, the Greeks and the Indians,
 both Brahmanist and Buddhist, and, in modern times, the
 Germans. ‘The Groek, Sonskrit, and German languages
 are preeminently fitted for metaphysical use. Wo must
 ‘then deal with metephysic when treating of Hindu ritual
 do not propose, however, here to enter upon the subject
 ‘more than is absolutely necessary to understand the matter
 in hand.
       Now,.1hen we lock sround us, we see everywhere
 Bower, ot Shalt. 'The world is ealed Jagst, which means
 “the moving thing”, Deceure, anticipating moder doctzino,
 he Ancient Hindus bela that everything was in o stave of
 ceaseless activity, which was not the Brahman in Tteelé
                               435
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
(Grortips), Such movement ia either duo to tho inherent
power of mind and matter, or to a cause which, though
immanent in the universe, yet is not wholly manifested by,
Dut transconds it, ‘This latter altemative represents the
Indien view. Powor (Shakti) connotes a Power-holder
(Ghsktimin). Poweras universe is called Samstra. The
state of power, as it is in itself, that is, the state of Power-
holder, is (to use ono of the bettertenown terms, though
‘there are others) Nirvana.
       ‘What, then,is the nature of exparienoein the Samara 1
‘The latter is the world of form, and Dharma ia the Law of
Form. Form: novessarily implies duality and limitation.
‘Themofore, experience in Samsira is an experience of form
by form. It is limited, dualistic experience. Tt is limited
or Apiima (not the whole oF completa), relative to the state
of Nirvina, which‘is the whole (Paroa) or complete or
Perfect Experience, Therefore, whilst the latter is a state
of allsnowingness and all-mightiness, man is @ contrac-
tion (Safkochs), “and is a “‘litte-knower” and “ little-
doer”. The Power-holder is called Shiva-shakti--that is,
‘the supreme Shivashakti, for the univene, boing but
‘the manifestation of tho ttmucendent             Shiva-shalei, is also
itself Shivacshakti. ‘The names Shiva and Shakti are the
‘twin aspects of one and the same Reality. Shiva denotes
‘the masculine, unchanging aspect of Divinity, while Shakti
denotes its changing feminine aspect. ‘These two are
‘Hamsah, Ham being Shiva ond nile, and Sah being Shakti
fond female, It is this Hamash, or legendary “Bind”,
which is said, in the poem called “Wave of Bliss,” “to
ssvim in the wators of the mind of the great”, ‘The uamani-
fest Shiva-shakti aspect is unknown, except in the Sami-
hi or oestasy of Yoga. But tho Shakti aspect, as mani
fosted in the universe, is near to the Shilcta worshipper.
 Ho can see Her and touch Her, for itis She who appears
 fas the universe,  and so it is said: “What care I for the
 Father,   ifT but be on the lap of the Mother?” ‘This           is the
                                436
        PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
  Great Mother, the Magna Mater of the Mediterranean
 civilisation, and the Mahidev! of India that August Image
 whose vast bedy is the universe, whose breasts ace Sun
 ‘and Moon. It was to Her that the “mad”, wine-drinking
 Sedhu Bhima referred, when he said to a man I knew who
 had lost his mother: “Earthly mothers and those who
 fsuok their breasts are mortal; but deathless are those who
 have fod at the breast of the Mother of the Universe.” Tt
is Bho who pemonalizes      in the form of all the beings
                                                        in the
 univére; and it is She agsin who, as the essence of such
 personslizing, is the Supreme Personality Paxthentd),
 ‘eho in manifestation is ‘God in Action”. Why, it may.
 bo asked, is God thought of as Mother? This question
 may be countered by another—“Why is God called
 other 1” God is sexless.. Divinityis spoken of as Mother
 Deoause It “ conceives, beass, gives birth to, and nourishes
 tho Universe”. In generation man is stid to be « helper
 ‘only. ‘The leamed may call this mother-notion, “infan-
 tiliam’” and “anthropomorphism”. But the Shakts will
 ‘not be afimid, and will reply that itis not be who has arbi-
‘rwsily invonted this imoge of the Mother, but that is the
form in which Sho ns heraclf presented Herselfto his
 mind, The great Shakia poet, Rémaprasida, says.“ By
 feeling (Bhiva) i She kxown. How then can Abhiva
 (that is, lack of feeling) find her!" In any case he may te-
 call the lines of the Indian poet: “‘1f I understand, and
 you mderstand, O my mind, what matters it whetber any
 other understand or not?”
      Viewing the matter more dily and mataphysically, we
 havo then to deal with two states. Brstly, the limited
 expecioace of Sametza the Booming, and the Perfect
 experience ox transcendent. Being, which ia Nirvina, Thin
Inst state is not forthe Shkia mere sbstrsct Boing. This
 ia Setion of the mtiocinating intellect, It is « massive,
rich, and conerte experience, a state which—being power
 fal to produce from: out telthe Universe~-mast therefore
                             437
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 hold the seed or essonco oft within itself. This « mistake
 ‘on this view to suppose that those who attain to it will
 love anything of worth by so doing.
       ‘The first point which is therefore established is that
 there are these two states, Both are so established by ex-
‘perience the fimt by the onlinary experience man bas of
 this world, and the second by supernonmal spiritual experi
 fence. For the Hindu holds that the Supreme State is
 proved not by speculation or argument (which may yot
 tender ite sxpport), bub by actual spiritual experiente.
       ‘The second point to remember is that these tuo states
 are one, We must not think of ‘crestion” in the
 sense, in which there is an infinite break between man and
 God, and, therefore, man cannot become God. Mau, ia
 ‘his system of VedAnta, is, though © contcaction of Power,
 nevertheless, in essence, the slf-same) Power whichis God.
 ‘These ia unity (Abbeda) es Essence, and diffrence (Bheda)
 as Manifestation. Smilarly, Islamic philosoply distin-
 iBtishos between independent Zat, o essence, and dependent,
 fand desivative Attsibute, or Sifat. Basonce is one, Mani-
 festation is different. The two ore thus neither identical
 nor separate, Theze js that which the Hindus call Abheda-
 Bhoda.
       ‘The third point then is that Man, being such Power,
 he can by his effort, end the grace of his patron Deity,
 hance it even to the extent that be becomas one with Di
 nity. Aud so it is eaid that “by the worship of Vishnu,
 rman becomes Vishnu”, To know © being of thing is,
 teconding to non-dual Vedtnta, tobe that thing. To know
  God, then, ia to be God. Mon can then pass from limited
 expetience, or Samséra, to Perlect Experience, ot. Nit-
 vina. ‘This “towering tenet,” to use Brian Todgson’s
 phrase ("Nepal"), that finite mind may be rised to. ine
 finite consciousness, is also held by Buddhism.
       ‘The practical question then is: How is this experi-
 ‘ence of oneaess with Divinity, its powers and attributes,
                               438
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
 obtained 1 The enswer is that thisie the work of Shdhan&
 and Yogs
       ‘The term Stdhan& comes from the root SAch, which
 rmenns to exert, to strive to attain a particular result or
 Sidahi, as it is called, ‘The'peraon making tho effort is
 callod Sadhakn, ond if he obtains the result desired, ot
 Siddi, be is called Siddha, Btymologically Stdhané may
 refer to any effort, Thus a perwon who takes lessons in
 French or in riding, with a view to learn that language o
 to become s horseman, is coing SAdhan8 for those purposes
 respectively. If French or ring is leamt, then Siddhi is
 obtained, ard the man who attains it is Siddha, or pro-
 ficient it French and riding reapectively. But techuially
 Stdhand refers either to Ritual Worship ot Ritual Magic.
 ‘A Sibalce i always a duit, whatevar his theoretical
 lactrine may bo, because worship impli both wosshipped
 fand worshipper, ‘The highest ait of zligious, worship is
 attainment of the Abode or Heaven of the Divinity wor
 shipped, ‘This Heaven is not Nirvins, The latter is «
 formless state, whereas Heaven is 2 pleasurable abode of
 forms—a state intermediate hetween Death and Rebirth,
 ‘Avoordingto the otdinary view, Ritual Worshipis a pre-
  paration for Yoga. When than is Siddha in SAdband
 the becomes gualid for Yoga, and when he is Siddha in
 ‘Yogs he attains Perfect Experience. Yognis thus the pro-
 cess whereby man is raised from Limited’ to Perfect Ex-
 perience, The Stdhan8 with which Tam now concemed
 is religious Stdhang, a spititual effort to achieve a moral
 and spiritual aim, though it may also seek material blessings
  from the Divinity worshipped.
       Magio is the development of supernormal power, either
 ‘by extension of uatural faculty or by control over other
 ‘beings and forces of nature, I use the word “ supernomaal””
  and not “ superatural” because all pover is natural. Thus
‘one men may dee to a certain extent with his eyes. Another
                               439
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 van with more powerful eyes vil see bette Aman with
f telescogo will se farther than either of these two. For
 the telescope isa acientde extension ofthe natural faculty
 of sight. Over end beyond this is the “magical” exten-
 Sion of power called clairvoyance, The last. power is
 Dataral Put not normal, Magic (of which there bas been
 fbuso) hua yet been indiscriminately condemned. - Who-
 thr an act is good or bed depends upon the intention and
 the surroading cieamstanoes, and this same rule applies
 wither the act is normal or magical. ‘Thos man may
 in defence of his life we physoal moans for self-protection,
 coven to the causing of the death of his adversary. Kiling
 in auch a case doce aot became ad becauso the moans
 employed are not nonual bat" magical”. On the other
 hhand, Black Mago, or Abhichim, isto doing of harm to
 auother without “lawfal excise, This the Soriptare
 (Bhistr)    condemns aso greet sin. As the “ Kulémava
 Tantra” says (XII. 68), Aémavot sarsabhuebigohitam
 duryytt Kuleoard”—that      i, © man should not injure, but
 should    do good. to others as if they wen his own self.
 Tn tho Tantm Shfstrae arp to be found magical taal
 Some clases of won, exch as tho “DAmaors,” are lzgaly
 occupied with this subjeck, Tt is « mistake, however, t0
 fuppose that beanse s practioe is described in the Serip-
  tuto, iis connselled by st. A Fook on legal medicine may
 state the substances by sui manner in which a man may
  te qoitoned, Tt descrites the process which, if oazsed
 out, prodioss « particular real, uti does not on that
 fccoant come killing, As mgards the magical ites
 temarlves, the view tiat they are mere childish super
 sition ie not an understanding one. ‘The objetive real
 timalates, in s support of, and serves the Mind-Raye,
 ‘hic, the Hindus would sey, aro not less but more power.
 {al than the physical forms we call Xorays and the like.
 {Te has Long ben known in India, as it iv hocomiog known
 in the West, tat the mind is not merely @ pasive mirror
                             490
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
of objects, but isa gmat and active Power. As I hive al-
ready said, however, I do not propose to deal with this
subject, and now retura to that of religious worship.
      ‘Religious ritual is either formal (Karma, such as the
‘Homa rita, or is devotional (Upssand), according as the
‘ct done belongs to the Karma or Upasind Kéndas, which
together with the Jnana Kanda, constitute the three-fold
division of Veda, ‘Tho distinction between Karma and
Upfsand is this. In ritual Karma the result is producod
by geriomence of the rite, such as Homa, independently
of the eflortof the Sédhaka, provided there be strict situal
accuracy ; whereas, the feuié of Upisand, or psychological
‘worship, depends on the personal devotion of the worshipper,
and without it the act is of no avail. Uptsand, or dover
tional worship, is again either gross (Sthila) ‘or subtle
(Bilshms), acconting to the degres of competency or ad-
vYanoament of the Stdhaka.or person who does Sadhana.
We must nof understand by the word “ gross” anything
bad. Tt is morely used in. eontradistinotion to the worl
“subtle”, ‘Thus, a worshipper who in doing his Sidhand
before an exterior image is pesforming gross worahip, where-
1s he who worships & mentally conceived image is doing
subéle womskip. A man who offers esl flowers is doing »
part of gross worship. Subtle worshipin such a case would
be the offering of flowers of the mind.
      I will now shortly examine the Vedintic theory of
Ming, which mast be known if the ritual isto be understood.
‘There is no Mind without Matter or Matter without Mind,
except in dreamless sleep, when the latter is wholly with-
Gzawn, ‘The Mind has always an object. In a literal sense,
thereis uo vacuozs mind. This not eware, of course, ofall
object, but only of thoseto whichit pays attention, Nextly,
Mind i not Consciousness (Chit) which is immaterisl.
Mind, on the contraty, is 8 quasi-materil principle of Une
conseiousness, whieh, on one view, appears to be conscious
by mason, of the association of Consciousness with it,
                                “an
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Ascording to the Shikta Shastra view, Mind is an uneon-
 ‘scious quasimatarial force, being tho power of Conscious-
 ness to limit iesf, and to the extent of such Limitation, to
 ‘appear as unconscious, “How then does Mind operate t
 A Mind-Ray goes fosth to the object, which in ite tum
 ‘stapes tho mental substance. into the form of the objéct.
 Thus, when a msn thinks of an image of Divinity intently
 ‘and ‘without distmation, hia mental substance takos the
 form of the image, Tho object which is pereaived leaves
 ‘an impr on the mind, and thin impress, if repeated, sta
 up a tendanoy ot Samskére. Thus a man who ropeatodly
 ‘thinks good thoughia has « tendancy towards the thinking
 fof such thoughts, aud by continued good thought chareoter
 fs moulded and’ tyansformed, As the Chhandogys Ups-
 ished says: “Asa man thinks that he becomes.” Simi
 Tarly, the Gandharva anta:says:“ By meditoting on
 anything an the self, one becomes that thing.” man
 can thus shape his mind for good or bad
      ‘The mind affect the body. Aa iti saidin the West, “the
 soulis form anddoth the hodymale." Rysry thought        has a
 cormsponding shange inthe material substance of the brain.
       ‘Well, thes, at the mind must have an object which
 ‘gait shapes the mind, tho situal sleots « goed object,
 namely, the Divinity of worship with all good aticibutes
       ‘The Stdhaka rooditates on and worships that, Con
 tinned thought, repetition, the engagement of the body
in the mental ction co-oparate to produce lasting and good
 tendancy in the mental substance. Sinosre and continned
 effort offscts the tmnsfomation of the worshipper into =
 likeness with the Divinity worshipped. For as he who is
 always thinking bad thoughts becomes bad, so he who
 ‘inka divine thoughts becomes himalf ‘divine, ‘The
 transformation which is commenced in Shdhend is com-
 pleted in Yoga, whou the diflerence between worshipper
  fd worshipped ceaces in that unitary consciousness which
  is ecstagy of Somsdhi, or transcendent perfect experienc.
                              “2
      PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
      Int us now examine some illustrations of the peycho-
logical principles stated.
      Divinity ag it ia in Itself cannot (a8 an Indian writer
‘has said) be seized by the mind any more than air can be
grasped by a pair of tongs. Tt is necassery, therefor, to
Ihave something placed before one. as a rapresentaive of
something else, which is what the Sanslrit terms, Prettke
Pratima, for tho object worshipped, moan. ‘This may be
‘an external object or « mental one, "As regards the former,
‘there are varying dogrece af grossacss and subtlety. The
‘grooves is that in which there is no call upon imagination
that is, the Image of three dimensions. Less s0 is the
‘pointing on the fist; then comes the emblem, which may be
quite unlike the Devata or Divinity, of which itis an em-
‘lam, such oa the Shélagréme. stone in the worship of
‘Vishna, and, lastly, the Yantra, which is the dingrummatio
body of a Mantra,
       ‘Worship is ouior—thst is, of an outer object with
physical acts such as Bodily prostrétions, offering of real
flowers, and a0 on : of ib may be partly oF wholly mental,
as in the latter case, where oth the form of the Divinity
is imagined (according to the meditational form or Dhyne
given in the Soriptares) as also the offerings.
       ‘The forms of worship vary according to the capscity
cof the worshipper. In the simplest form, the worshipper
<dzaws upon the daily life, and treate the Divinity whom he
invoke as be wold & guest, welcoming It after its joumey,
offering water for the dusty foet and the mouth, present
ing It with lowers, lights, clothes, and eo on. ‘Thee in-
agredients of worship are called Upéch8cl, In the psychor
physiological sites of some Shikios, the abuse of which
thas brought them illfame, the Upiehis ate the functions
 cof the body. In image-worship, the mind is shaped into
‘the form of the object perceived, But the perception of
 fa material imogo is not enough. ‘The worshipper must soe
 Divinity befor him. ‘This be invokes into the image by
                                443
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘what is called the welcoming (RvAhana) and Life-giving
 (Prinapratishehi) conemenies, just ae, at the conclusion of
 ‘he worship, le bids the Deity depart (Visarjana). Ua-
 comprehending minds bave asked: “How can God be
 made to come and go?” The answer is that He does not.
 ‘What come and go are the modifications, or vritts, of and
 in the mind of the SAdhsks or worshipper. ‘To invoke the
 Deity means, then, @ direction not to the Deity, but by the
 ‘worshipper to himself to understand that the Deity is there,
 Deity which is omsipmsent is in the Image as elsewhere,
 whatever the Sidhaks may do or not do. ‘The Sdhaka
 juforms hia own mind with the notion tat the Deity is
 pprosent, Tois then conscious of the presence of and medi-
 tates on Divinity and ite attsibutes, and if he be undis-
 ‘tracted, his mind ond its thought aze thereby divinely
 shaped. Before the, Divinity so present, both objectively
 ‘and  to the mind/of tho, Siahaks, worthip is done. It is
 lear that the more this worship is sincerely continued,
 ‘hy greater bothin degree and persistence the transform
 ation effected. ‘The body is. made to take its part either
 by appropriate gestures, called Mudra, or other acts euch
 aa prosteations, offerings, Mbations, ‘and -so forth. By
 constant, worthip tho mind-and disposition become good,
 for good thoughts repeated make a men good. Ritual
 produces by degrees transfomation, st first temporary,
 Inter lasting. "Bidding the Divinity deport” means that
‘the mind of the Sadhaka has ceased to worship the Image.
 Ie is nob that the Deity is made to retire at the behest of
 his worshipper. A true Sédhaka has Divinity ever in his
 ‘thoughte, whether be is doing formal worship or not.“ In-
 vitation’” and “Bidding Depart” are done for the purposes
 ‘of the worship of the Image only. Peonally, I doubt
 ‘whothor idolatry exista anywhere in the sonse that & wor
 shipper believes a material image ss such to be God. But,
  in any case, Indian image-worship requires for its under
 standing and practice some knowledge of Vedanta,
                               “4
        PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
       ‘Transformation of consciousness-feding by tual may
 be illustzated by a chort examination of some other of its
 forms.
       Gesture of the bends, or Madr, is a common part of
 ‘the ritual, There ia nevessarily movement of the hands
 and body in any worship which requires external action,
 but I here speak of the specially designed gestures. For
 instance, T am now making the Fish gesture, or Matsya
 Minish. "Tho hands xopresent- fch and its. fins. The
 raking of this gesture indicates that the worshipper ia
 offering not only the small quantity of water which is coa~
 tained in the ritual vessel, but that (such is his devotion)
 his intention is to give to the Deity all the ocesns with the
 fish and other marine animals therein, ‘The Sadhaka
 right, of course, form this intention withoutandgestuze,           but
 experience shows that gesture emphasizes                  intensifca
 thonght, aa in the cage of pmblic      speniing,      The     body is
 mado to move with the thought. T refer here toto denote         ritual
 ‘gestures, ‘The term Mudrh       is also   employed
 Dodily postures assumed in Hathayoga as 0 health-giving
 gymnattic,
       ‘sana, or sest, has more importance       in Yoga than in
 Sidiand. “The principle as regards        Asana   is to secure a
 ‘comfortable seat, because that is favourable       to meditation
 ‘and worship gmerally. If one is not Asana ere,there
                                             comfortable              is
 Giatmaction and worry. Both Madr and                            there-
 fore, encilaryto worship ss Pj6, the principle which       of
  hus ean described.                                             either
       ‘Tope is rectal of Manta, tho count boing done    Whatis a
con a rosery of the phalanges of the isfingers,Divine     Power, ot
  Manteo t A Mantra is Divinity. It
  Daivi Shaldti, manifesting in a sound dody.an imageThe is Sbistra
                                                                a mere
                              who think that
saye that those go to Hell merely
  tone, that Maniras are              letters, and that a Guru
  js a mers man, and nob a manifestation and represent-
  tive of the Lord as Sapteme Teacher, Tuminator, and
                                  “45
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Disector, The chief Mantra is Om, ‘This represents to
 Truman ears the sound of the fint general movement of
 Divine Power towanls the manifestation of the Universe.
 All other Mantras am» particular movements and sounds
 (or the two co-exist) derived from Om. Here the Sidhaka
 stzives to realize his wiity with the Mantra, orDivinity,
 and to the extent that he does 0, the Mantra Power
 (Mantss-Sbaleti) sipploments his worship-power (SAdhand
 Shalt), This nite is also an illustration of the principle
 that ropstition males peroot for the repetition is doue {it
 ‘may be) thousands of times,
       ‘Tapa is of theee Kinde-—gross, subtle, and supreme, Tn
 the fimt, the Mantra is audibly repeated, the objective
 Dbody-aspect oF sound predominating ; in the second, there
 fs no andible sound, the lips and other organs ‘oming
 ‘hemaelves into the position which, together with contact
swith tho air, produce the soundof the letars; in the thind,
 ‘the Japa is mental—that ie, thor is emphasis on the Divine,
 or subjective sapect. This is a means for the xitual resl-
 iation— that is, by mind—of the unity of human power
 and Divine Power.
       ‘Nyiisa is an important rite, ‘Tho word means “ placing”
 —that is, of the hands of the Sidhaks on different parts
 of his body, at the seme time, saying the appropriate Man-
 tras, and imagining that by his action the cormsponding
 paris of the body of the Deity are placed there. ‘The rite
 ‘terminates with « movement of the hands, “spreading” the
 Divinity all over the body. It is not supposed that the
 Divinity can be spresl like bubler on bread. ‘The Supreme
 Mother-Power is the Brehmas, or All-Pervading Immense.
 ‘What is all-spreading cannot be moved or spread. What
 ‘can, however, be “spread” is the thought of the worship
 ‘per, who, with appropriate bodily gesture, imagines that the
 Deity pervades his bods, which is renewed and divinized,
 By imagining the body of the Deity to be his body, he
 putes himeef, and affzms his unity with the Deva,
                                 446
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
      An sential clement in all rites js Bhétashuddhi,
which means the purifcation of the lemonts of which
the body in composed, Man is physical       and peyehical. The
physical body is constituted of five modes cf motion of
‘material substance, which have cach, it is said, centres
in the spinal column, at points which in the body corses-
pond to the position of variou plexuses, ‘hese centres
{xtond'from the base ofthe spine to tha throst. Between
‘tho eyebnows in tho sixth or payohical centro, or mind
[At the top of the bran, or eerebram, isthe place of con
‘sciousness; not sit Consciousness in itslf--that is, ina8
distinct from Dfind—can have 8 oentre ot be localized
fny vay; for, tin immaterial end all-pervading. But at
this point, it ia the least veiled by mind and matter, abd i,
therefore, mest manifet. This place is the Inabodethe of lowest  trans-
cendent Shiva-Shakti as Powerholder.
contre (alazhEm), which ia the          base of the spine, there
Sleeps the Immment Cormic Power in bodies               called Kun
Gals Shadi, Here Sho is ondinasily              et    rest,     Sho is
fo, a0 long as muan enjoy lnited wosl-experience,                   She
is'thon roused." Jdgrahé anonRémaprstda, (   Aris,        Motes”)
falls out the Sédhaln post, !" When so “How                        long
tril thou slo in thethe Méliahtire                       roused,    She
jg led up through           spinal column, absorbing all the
physical and psychical centres, and unites with Shiva as
fonscioumess in the cerebrum, which is known as the
 ‘"thowend-psalled lotus”. ‘The body in therel drenched        of their
 with  aud renowed by the nectar whichis theia thaecstasy which
 Tuion and is immortal fe.Divine Nan aad Women. Meta-is
                                  This
 the mariage of the Tuner                   of uch union, there
 physically speaking, for the durationExperienoe           for Woxld-
       substitution of the Supreme
Experience,
     ‘This is the real process in Yoga. But in ritual (for
all are not Yools) it is imagined only. In imagination,
‘tho ‘man of sin” (Pagepurusha) is burnt in mental fire,
                              ay
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Kundalint absorbs the contres, unites with Skiva, and then,
 relocending, zeorettes the ceutres, bathing them in nec-
 tar, By the mental representation of this process, the
 mind snd body are purified, and the fonmer is made to
 realize the unity of man and the Supreme Bower, whose
limited form: be is, and tne manner whereby the Universe
 is involved into and evolved from Shive-shalt
       ‘All these, and other rituals which T have no time to
 rmention, keep the mind of the Sadhak occupied with the
 thought of the Supreme Power and of his essential unity
 with Te, with the result that he becomes more and more
 Hhat which he thinks            upon. His Bhiva, or disposition,
Decomes purified and divinized go far as that can be in the
 world, At length practice makes perfect in Sdhand, anc
 on the arising in such purifed and illuminated mind, of
 Imowledge and detachment from the: word, there is eom-
 petency for Yoga. When in tum practice in Yoxe makes
 perfect, all limitations on experience are shed, and Nirvina
 is attained.
       Ondinacily it is stid that enjoyment (Bhoga) only en-
 chains and Yoga only liberates. Enjoyment (Blogs)
 doce not only mean thet which is bad (Adharma). Bad
 enjoyment certainly exchains and also leads to Hell.
 Good—that is, Iewlul—enjoyment also enchains, even
 ‘though Heaven is its fruit, Moreover, Bhogs means both
 enjoyment and sufering, But, according to the Bengal
 Shilkta worshippers, Enjoyment (which must novessurily
 be lawiul) and Yous may he one, According to this me-
 ‘thod (cee Masson-Oumeel, “ Hequisse d'une Histoire de la
 Philosophie Indienne”), the body is not of nevassity an
 obstacle to liberation. "For, thexe is no autinomy, except
 such as wo outsslves fancy, between Neture ond Spirit,
 fand therefore there is nothing wrong or low in natural
 funtion, Nature is the instrument for the reslization of
 ‘he aims of the Spirit, Yoga controls but does not frus-
 toate enjoyment, which may bo itseli Yogs in so for as it
                               “8
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
  pacifies the mind and makes man one with his inner self
 ‘The spontaneity of life is under no saspioion. Supreme
 ‘poweris immanent in body and mind, and these are also
 forms of its expression, And so, in the peycho-physio-
  logical rites of these Shaltas, to which T have referred,
 ‘the body and its funotions are sought to be msde a means
 of, as they may otherwise be an obstacle to, liberation.
 ‘Tho Vis, or heroic man, is powerfl for mastery on all the
  plains and to pass beyond them. He dees not shun the
 ‘wortd from fear of it, but holds it in his grasp and learns.
 its seort. He cam do so brcause the word does not exist
 in iaolation fom some transcendent Divinity exterior to
 ‘Nature, but is iteelf the Divine Power inseparate from the
 Divine Besence. He knows that he is himeelf as body and
rind such power, and as Spiritor Self such essence. Wien
Ihe hss learned this, he escapes both from the servile sub-
 jestion to ciremnstance, and. the ignorant driftings of
  humanity which ins not yet realized itself. Most are still
 not men but candidates for Humanity. But he is the
 illumined master of himself, whother he is developing all
  his power in, thia world, oF libersting himself therefrom
  ‘at his will
        Teonclude by citing verse from a Hymm in the great
  © Mabikila Sambitd,” by « Sédbaka who had surpassed
  ‘the stage of formal external ritual, and was of a highly
  advanced devotional type. I frst read the verse and then
  give a commentary theron which is my own.
               T tors not my body by austerity
        (Bor the body is the Divine Mother, Why then tor-
 ture it? ‘The Hymniatis° speaking of those who, like him-
  self, have realized that the bodyis a manifestation of the
  ‘Divine Reience. Ts does not say that no one is to practise
   austertien, ‘These may. be necessary for those who havecon
   not realized that the body in divine, and who, on the
                                                      must  be
   ‘ary, look upon it    ase  material obstacle which
   striotly controll. It is @ common mistake of Western
         .                      “9
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 cities to take that which ia moant for the porticlar enso
 ‘applying to all.)
                    “Take no pilgrimages.”
       (For the saozed places in their esoteric sense are in the
 ‘bedy of the worshipper. Why should he who knows this
 travel ? Those, however, who do not know this may pro-
 ‘itably travel to the exterior sacred places such as Benéres,
 ‘Pasi, Brindaban,)
           “T waste notmy time in readingthe Vedas.”
       (Thin doce not mean thst no one isto read the Vides,
 He has already done so, but the Kelmava Tanta says?
“ Taxtract the essence of tho Scriptures, and then cast avvay
 ‘the mst, as chaff  is separated from the grain.” When the
 cesvonce has been extracted, what neod is there of further
 reading and study t Moreover, the Veda recalls ths spititual
 experiences of others. What each man wants is that ex-
 perience for himself, and this is not to be had by reading
 and speculation, but by practice, as worship or Yoga.)
       But, saya the author of the Hymn, addressing the
 Divine Mother:
              “Tak refuge at thy Sacred Fost.”
       (Por thisia both the highest SSthand and the fruit of)
       In conclusion, Iwill say # wont apon the Tantra Shi-
 stra to which I have referred. The four chief Scriptures
 of the, Hindus az Veda, Smuiti, Purine and Agama,
 ‘Ther are four Ages, and to each of these Ages is assigned
 its own peoulisr Scriptuse. For the present Age the go-
 coming Scripture is the Agama. The Agama ot “ tradi-
 tions,” is made up of several schools such as Vaishnava,
  Shaiva and Shakts. Te is a mistake to supposo that
‘gra isa name given only to the Souther Seriptures, and
 ‘hat Tantza in tho name of the Scriptures of the Bengal
 School of Shéletas, ‘The Sorigtur of all these communi-
 ties is the Agama, and the Agama is eonstituted of Soxip-
  tures called Tantra and also by other ams. To these
  ‘Tunteas tiles are given just as they are given to chapters in
                              450
       PSYCHOLOGY OF HINDU RITUAL
4 bopk, such a6 the Taluhmt Tantra of tho Vaishnava
Poncherétrs, Mélintijaya Tantra of the Kashmir Shaiva
gama, and’ the Koltranve Tantza of the Bengil Shakta
Agama. These four Scripiares do not sapersede or con-
‘adit one another, but azeaaid to be various expresions
of the one truth presented in diverse forms, suited to the
Inhabitants ofthe diferent Ages, As a Pandit very learned
in the Agama told me, all the Scriptures constitute one
grat   “Many-millioned   Collection” (Shstakoti Samhita).
Only portions of the Veidike Ritual have survived. to-day.
"The bulk of the ritual which to-lay governs all the old
schools of Hindu worahipper ie tobe found in the Agamas
fod their Tantras, And in this lien one reason for their
Importance,




                            4st
                       Cuarem XXIV.
                    SHAKTI AS MANTRA.
                     (werancavt Smaxr)
 Ti8 isin every way Doth a most important, a8 all
         ‘as a most diffelt, subject in the Tantra Shastra ; 00
 <liffculs that itis not understood, and on this nocount has
 been ridiouled, Mantra, in the woris of @ distinguished
 Tndian, has been called ““memningless jabber”. When we
find Indians     thus talking of their Shastra, itis not surprising
 ‘that Europeans should taks it to be of no account, They
 naturally, though erroneously, suppose that the Indian
 always understands his owa belief, and if he says they aro
 absurd itis taken that they are so. ven, however, smongst
 Indians, who-bave ot lost themealves through sn English
 Biucstion, the Science of Mantra is Inxgely unknown.
 ‘Ther are not many stulents of the Minimsd now-a-days.
 ‘The English Educated have in this, as in other matters,
 genecally taken the cue from their’ Westem Gurus, and
 ‘peased upon Mantravidya a borcowed condemnation. ‘There
 fre those among them (particularly in this part of Indie),
 ‘those who have in the past thoughtlittle oftheir old culture,
 fand have been only too willing to sll their old lamps for new
 ones. Becanse they are new they will nt always be foxind
 to give better light. Let us hops this will chango, as indeed
 twill, Before the Indian condemns his cultural ishesitance
 let kim at least first study and understand it. Tt in true
 that Mantra is meaningless—to lose who do not know its
 eating : but to those who do, itis not “Jabber”; though
 of course like everything else it may become, and indeed
 ‘has become, the subject of ignoranoe and superstitious usp.
 A talogram written in oode in @ merchant's office will seem
 ‘the merest gibberish to those who do not know that code.
  ‘Those who do mey spell thereout s transaction bringing
                                  452
                SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 lakghs of “roel” Rupooe for those who have sent it. Mantra
 Vidy8, whether it be true or nob is « profoundly conceived
 science, and, a inverproted by the Shakte Agama, is 8
 practical application of Vedantio dovtrin
      ‘The textual source of Manteas is to be found in the
 ‘Vedas (sce in perticalar the Mantra portion of the Atharva-
 veda s0 associated with the Tantra Shisira), the Purinas
 sand Tantras, The Istter Scripture is essentiallythe Mantra
 Shastra, In faot itis no called generally by Sédhals and
not Tastsn Shistra. And co itis said of all the Shastrss,
 ‘symbolizod os a body, that Tantra Shisizs which consists of
 Mantra is the Parsmatm8, the Vodas aco the Jivatmi,
 Dazahaaa or systems of philosophy are the senses, Purdinss
 are the bodyand the Smuitis are the limbs. ‘Tantra Shistra
 is thus the Shakti of Consciousness, consisting of Mantra,
  For, os the Vishvaséra Tantra (Ch. 2)says, the Perabralman
 in Its form as the Sound, Brahman (Shabda-Brabman_ ot
  Segane-Brakman), whose substance is all Mantra, exists
in the body of the Jivitma, Kundstint       Shalt is a form of
 ‘the Shabda-Brahman in individnal bodies (@harad@-Tilaks,
  Ch, 1), Teis tom, this Shabda-Brahman that the. whole
universe proceeds in the form of sound (Shubia) and the
  objects (Artha) whiah sound oF words denote. And thi ia
‘the mesning ofthe statement thst the Deviand     the Universe
  tre composed of letters, that is, the signs for the sounds
  ‘which denote all that is.
       ‘At any point in the flow of phenomena, we can enter
  the stzeam, and reslize therein the changsless Real. The
  latteris everywhere and in all things, andis hidden in, and
  manifested by, sound as by all else. Any form (and all
  which is not the Formless is that) can bs pieroed by the
  ‘mind, and union may be had therein with the Devat who
  isabits oot. Ttmattors not what that form      may be. And
  why? Whit I hove said          concerning  Shakti  gives the
  answer. Allis Shakti. Alls Gonsoiousness. We dasireto
  think and spesie, This is Tohchb® Shakti, We make an
                                453
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  cffort towards realization. ‘Thin in Kriya Shakti, We
 ‘think snd know. This ia Jnina Shakti. ‘Through Prins-
  ‘vay, another form of Shalti, we speak; and the word we
  utter is Shakti Mautramayt. Vor whot is lotter (Varna)
 ‘hich is made into syllable (Pada) and sentences (Vilkya) ?
 ‘Ts may be hoard in speech, tus affecting the sense of hear-
 ing, Te may be seen asa form in weting, Temay        be tactu-
 ally sensed by the blind through the perforated dots of
 Braille type. ‘The same thing thas affecting tho vatious
 tenses. But what is the thing which does so? ‘The senses
 are Shakti, and so is the objective form whioh evokes the
 sensation. Both ate in themselves Shakti as Chit Shakti
 ‘and Maya Shalei, and the Svartipn of those is Chit or
 Feeling-Oonsoiousness.      When, therefore, « Mantra is real-
 ized ; when there is what ia-clled in the Shastra Mantra-
 Chuitanye, what happsas is the anion, of the consoiourness
 of the Stdhaka with that Consciousness which manifests
 in the form of the Mantza. It i this union which makes
 ‘the Mantza “work”
        ‘The subject is of such importance in the Tantras that
‘their other name is Mantra Shlstm. But what is o Mantra ?
 Commonly. Orientalists end -othsrs describe Mantra as
 “Prayer,” “Formule of worehip,” “Mystic aylables” and
 20 forth, These are but the suparficalities of those who do
 not know theit subject. Wherever wo find the word
  “Mystic”, we may be on our guard : for itis @ word which
     vers much ignorance, ‘Thus Mantra is said to be a
    ‘mystic” worl ; Yantra a “mystio” disgram, and Madi
 a “mystic” gosture. But have these definitions taught ws
 anything! No, nothing. Those who framed these def.
 nitions knew nothing of their subject. And yst, whilst T
 tam aware of no work in any European langage which
shows knowledge of what Mantra is or ofits science (Mantra-
 vidya), thete is nevertheless perhaps no. subject, which
 thas boen eo ridiculed ; not unusual attitude of ignorance.
 ‘Thor is « widely difused loyer mind which says, “hat I
                                 484
                  SHAKTI AS MANTRA
  do not understand is absurd”. But this science, whether
  well-founded of not, is not that. Those who ao think might
 ‘oxpeot Mantras which a1® prayeze and the meaning of which
‘they understand ; for with prayer the whole world is familier.
 ‘Bubsuch appreciation itelf displays a lackof understanding,
 For there is nothing necessarily holy or prayerful alone in
 Mantras as some think. Some combinations of letters
 ‘onstitate provers snd are celled Mantras, as for instance
 the most celebrated Gayate! Mantra,
          A Mantza is not the same thing as prayer or self
 dedication (Atma-nivedans). Prayer is conveyed in the
 ‘words the Sidhaka chooses. Any set of words or letters is
 ot a Manta, Only thst Mantra in which the Devat
 has rovesled His or Hor portioular aspects can reveal that
 sapect, and ie therefore the Mantra of that ono of His or
 Her pastioular aspects. Tho ielutions ofthe letters (Vaas),
 ‘whether vowel oF consonant, Nads and Bindu, in'a Mantra
 indicate the appearance of Devatain different forms. Osx
 tain Vibhiti or speots of the Devas are inberent in ceriain
 ‘Varua, but perfec: Shakti doesnot appear       in any but « whole
 Mantra, All letters are forms       of the Shabda-Brahman,      bat
 ‘only perticular combinations of leans are particular form,
 just as the nameof @ particular being is mado up of certain
 letters and not of any indiseriminataly. ‘The whole universe
 is Ghali and is porvaded by Shakti, Nada, Bindu, Varma
 are all fomas of Slankti and combinations      of theao, and these
 combinations only ace the Shabda corresponding         to the Artha
 ot forms    af any perticular Devata, The gross leteced sound
 is, as explained later, the manifestation of sound in a more
 subtle form, and this again   is the production of causal “sound”
 in ite mupreme (Para) form. Mantras aro manifestations of
 Kulelcundalin (sxe Chapter on the same) which is » name
  for the Shabda-Briaman or Saguns-Brahman in individual
 ‘bodies. Produced Shabda is an. aspect of the Jva’s vital
 Shalei, Kendalf is the Shekti who gives life to the Jiva.
 Sho it is iho in the Maldhdea Chakra (or basal bodily
                                   455
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  centre) ia the cause of the sweet, indistinot and murmuring
 ‘Dhvani whichis compared to the humming of a black bee.
 ‘Thence Shabis originates and, bsing frst Por8, gradually
 ‘anifeste upwards as Pashyantf, Madhyam, Vaikhart (8
 post) Tust as in outer space, waves of sound are produced
  by movements of air (Vayu), #0 in the space within the
 <iva's body, waves of sound are said to be produced aceord-
 ing to the movements of the vitol air (Prina-vayu) and
 ‘the process of in and out breathing. As the Svartipa of
 ‘Kundali, in whom ar all sounds, is Paramétmé, so the
 ‘substance ofall Mantra, Her manifestation, is Conscioumesa
 (Chit) manifesting aa Istiors and words. Infact the letters
 of the Alphabet which are called Alcshara ere nothing but
 ‘the Yantra of the Akshara or Imperishable Brahman. This
 is however only realized. by. the Sadhake, when bis Shakti
 generated by Sidhant i united with Mantra-Shakti.
 Kundalini, who is extmmely. subtle, ‘manifesta in gross
 (Sthala) form in differing agpeots as different Devatis, Ib
 is this grosa form which is the Presiding Deity (Adishthatet
 ‘Devatd) of a Mantra, though  tis the subtle (Stkshms) form
 ‘atwhlch  ll SAdhaleas aim. -Mintra and Devatlaze thus one
 ‘and particular forms of Brubman as Shive-Shalti, ‘There
fore the Shastra anys that they go to Hell who think that the
 mage (or “Idel”” a it is commonly called) is buts stone and
 ‘tbe Mantra merely letters of the alphabet. It is therefore
 also ignorance of Shétric principle which supgoses that
 ‘Mantra is merely the name for the worts in which ong ex-
 presses what cme has to say. to the Divinity. If it ver,
 ‘he Sidhaka might choose his own lenguoge without reconrss
 to the eternal and determined sounds of Shistr. (See gene-
 zally as to the above the Chapter on Mantra-tattva   in second
 ‘volume of “Principles of Tantra,” Ba. A. Avalon.) ‘The
 particular Mantra of a DevstA is that Devatt. A Mantra,
  on the conteary, consiat of certain letersareanged in definite
 sequence ofsounds of which the letters axe the zprosentative
 signs, To produve the desigued effect, the Mantra must be
                               456
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 intonedin tae proper way, socordingto beth soul (Vara)
  ‘nd rhythm (Sars). For these reasons, Mantra when
 ‘translated ceases to be such, and becomes a mere word or
  sentence.
       ‘By Mantra, the sought-for (SAdhya) Devatd appests,
‘and by Sidi therein ia had vision of the three worlds, As
  the Mantra is in fact Devata, by practice thereof this in
 Known. Not merely do the rhythmical vibrations of its
 sounds regulate the unsteady vibrations of the sheaths of
 ‘the worshipper, bub therefrom the image of the Devat®
  appear, As the Bribad-Gandharva Tantra says (Oh. V) :—
       ‘Shrinu devs pravakshydmi Bijéndm deva-rGpatin
       ‘Montrochchdranandirena deo-ripam prajéyat.
       Mantrasidahi isthe ability to make a Mantra efficacious
 ‘and to gather its fruitin which case the Sdhaka is Mantra-
 siddhs, As the Prfinatochint (610) says, “Whatever the
 Sthaka desis that he surely obtains.” Whilst therefore
 myer may end in merely physical coma, Mant is ever,
 when rightly said, potent compelling force, a word of
 power effective both to produce material gain and aocom-
 lish worldly deeirs,as also to promote the fourth sim of
 ‘sentient being (Chaturvanga), Advaitic knowledge, and
 eration. And thas it is eaid-that Siddbi (euccess) is the
 certain reslt of Japa or recitation of Mantra
       Some Mantras constitute also what the European would
 call “prayers”, as for instance the celebrated Gayatrt. But
 neither this nor any other Mantra is simply « prayer. The
 Gaystet rans Om (The thoughtis directed to the three-fld
 Energy   of the One as represented by the thres Iotiers of which
 ‘Om is compomed, namely, A or Brahms, the Shakti which
 creates; U ot Vishnu, the Shakti which maintains; and Mor
 Ruate, the Shakti which “destroys,” that is, withdraws the
 world): Nada and Binds, Barth, Middle region, Heaven {ot
 ‘which as the transmigrating worlds    of Samsti, God, a3 Om,
‘as aso in the form of the Sun, is the Creator). et         ur ao-
 template upon the Adorable Spirit of tke Divine Creator who
                                 457
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
isin the form of the Sun (Raityn-Devatt). May He direct
‘our minds, towards alainmant ofthe four fold aims (Dharma,
‘Arte, Kima, Moksha) ofall sentient Being. Om. This great
‘Mantra    bears a meaning omits face, thoughthe Commentacies
explain and amplify it, The Self ofall which existsin the
tinree regions appears in the form of the Sun-god with His
body    of fie., ‘The Brahman is the cause of all, and as the
visible Devaté is the Hye of the World and the Maker of
‘the day who vivifes, ripens and reveals all beings and
‘things. Tho Sum-god is to the sum what the Spirit (Atms)
in to the body. He is the Supreme in the form of tho great
Luminsry. His body is the Light of the world, and He
Hansel! is the Light of the lives ofall beings. He is every-
where. He isin the outer ether as the sus, and in the
inner ethereal region of the heart. He is the Wondrous
Light which is the smokeless Fite. Heit is who is in con~
stant play with creation, (Srishti), maintenance (Sthiti)
‘and “destruction” (Pralsye) ; snd by His radiance pleases
Dotheye and mind. Let us adore Him thet we may escape
tho misery of birth and death, May He ever direct out
rminds (Buddhivritti) upon the path of the world (Teivargs)
‘and Uberation (Moka). Only the twice-borm castes and
‘men may utter this Gdyatel, To the Shira, whether man
or womaa, and to women of all castes, it is forbidden,
‘Bat the Tantra Shistra has not the exolusivencss of the
 Vaidik system. ‘Thus the Mahénirvina provides (LV.
 109-111) a Brahmogéyatd for all: “May we know the
 Supmme Lori. Leb us contemplate the Supreme Essence.
 ‘And may the Brahman direct ws.” All will eadity under-
 stand such Mantras as the Gyate, though some comment,
 ‘which is thought amusing, has been made on ths “‘mesning-
 less” Om. T have already stated what it moans,-namely,
 (chortly speaking) the Energy (Nada) in Soddkhya Tattoo
 ‘which, springing from Shiva-Shakti Tattva, “solidifies” it-
 self (Ghaufbhdia) asthe creative Power ofthe Lord (Binduor
 Iehvera Tattva) manifesting in the Trinity or Crestive
                                438
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 Energies. (Bor furtherdetails    see my “Garland of Lettere”.)
 “Om” then stands for the most general aspect of Thab
 ts the Source   of all. Aa itis recited, the idea arisesin the
‘mind corresponding with the sod which hss been sala to
 be tho expression on the gross plane of that subile “sound”
 which accomponied the freb creative vibration. When
rightly uttered thia great syllable has on awe-inspiring effect.
 ‘As T hoard this Mant chanted by some hundted Bude
 Gkist monks (ane alter the other) in a northern monasbary
it scemed to be the distant murmuring roll of some vast
 cosmic ocean. “Om” is the most prominent example of
 ‘a “meeningless” Mantre, thatis, one which does not bear
 its meaning   on its face, oudof what ip called a seed ot Bia
 Mantra, because they are the very quintessence of Mantes,
 tnd the seed (Bija) of the frit, which is Siddbi (spiritual
 achievement). These sre properly monosyllabic. Om is
 « Vaidik Bij, but it is the souroe of all the other Tantrik
 Bijas which represent particular Devat® aspects of that
 ‘hich is protonted s.2 whole in Om, As a Mantre-Shistra,
 ‘ibe Tontcas have greatly elaborated the Btjes, and thus
 inourred the charge of “gibberish,” for such the Bijas sound
 to those who do not know what they mean, Though a
 Mantra such as 9 Bije-mantra may not convey its meaning
 ‘on its face, the initiate knows that its meaning is the own
 form (Svartpe) of the porticular Devati whose Mantra it
 is, and that the essence of the Bija is that which makes
lotters sound, and exist in all which we say or hear. Every
  Mantrs is thus « particular soma form (Ripa) of the Breh-
 ‘man, Ther aro a very large muraber of theso short unoty-
 rmologisal vocables of Bijao such a9 Him, Shy, Kel,
  Him, Hum, Phat called by vasious names. ‘Thus the first
 4s called the MAyA Bij the seoond Lakahrat Bija, the tid
  ‘Kalt Bij, the fourth Kirche Bije, the fifth Varma Bija,
the sixth Astra Bij, Ram        is Agai Bija, Em is Yoni Bia,
  ‘itm is Kéma Bija, Skofm is Bodhi Bla, Aim Sarasveti
  Bija and so forth, “Bach Devatd has His or Her Bija.
                                459
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘Thus Hsin is tho Méyé Bijs, Kolm the Kali Bija, Tho
      jn is used in the worshipof the Devot® whove Mantra it
 is. All these Bfjas mentioned are in common use. ‘There
  area large numberof othe, some of which       are formed with
 ‘the fret lettre of the mame of the Devata for whom they
 stand, such as for Gam (Ganesha), Dam for Darga,
         ‘Unt us then shorty see by examples what the moaning
 of such a Bij is, (For a fuller aooount soo my “Garland
cof Lotiers”.) In the fist place, the reader will observe
 ‘the common ending “‘m"" which representa the Sanalet
 Desthinge Izcown as Nida and Bindn or Chandra
 binds. ‘Those have the same meaning in al : They aro
 ‘the Shaldis of thet name appearing in the table of the 36
 ‘Tavtvas given ands, They are states of Divine Power
 immediately preceding the manifestation of the abjestive
 universe, ‘The other letters denote subsequent. develop-
 amants of Shakti, and. various. aspects of the manifested
 Devstt mentioned below. ‘There aro Sometimes. variant
 interpretations given. Take the grat Bhubaneshvasi oz
 ‘Myh Bij, Hoo. T have given one intorpretation in
 aay Studies above cited. Brom the Minti compendium
 ‘the Prinstonhinf quoting the Barad& Tantra we got tho
 following: Fim=H+R+1+M. HeShiva, R—=Shakti
 Prakriti, T=DMahimay8, “ME” is as shove explained, but
 js hore statod in the form that Nada is the Progontrix of
 ‘the Universe, and Bindu which is Brahman as Ishvara and
 Ishvarf(Ishvaratattva) is dosoribed for the Sidhaka ao the
 “Dispeller of Sorrow”. The meaning thorefore of this Bia
 Mantra which is used in the worshipof Mahimayé or Bhuba-
 aneshvasf is, that that Dov! in Her Turlya or transcendent
 stateis Nida ond Bindu, aod isthe causal body manifesting
 se Shiva-Shakti in the form of the manifested universe.
 ‘Tho same idea is exprewed in varying form but with the
 same substanca by the Devigité (Ch, IV) which says that
  H=gross body, R—subtle body, T=caussl body and M-=
  the Turfya or transeendent foutth state, Tn other words,
                              460
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 the S8dhakea worshipping the Devi with Haim, by that Btja
calls to mind the transoendent    Shakti who isthe causal body
 of th subtle and gross bodies ofall existing things. Shrtm
 (see Barada Tantra) is used in the worship of Lakshmt Devt.
 Sh=Mahalakehinl, R—=Wealth (Dhanttham) whichas well
 ‘as T=(satisfaction or Tushtyartham) She gives. Keim is
used in the worship of Kali, Ka=KAlt (Shakti worshipped
 for relist from the world and ite sorrow). R=Brahma
 (Giiva with whom Shois ever sssocisted).           I=Mahimby&
 (Ger aspect in which She overcomes for the Sidhakn the
 ‘Maya in which ac CroatrixSho a involved him). Aim "in
 ‘wed in tho worship of Snraavatt and io Vaghhava Bla. Dim
 is uiedin the vouhip of Dugl, D=Durga.             U=proteotion,
 Nide=Hor aspect as Mother of the Universe, and Bindu
 in ite Lord. The Stdhaka- asks Durgé as Mother-Lordto
 ‘proteot him, and looks on Her‘in Hor protecting aspect as
 upholder of the miverse (Iegaddbttct). In “‘Strim,” 8=
saving from difficulty. TSdeliverer, Re(here) liberation
 (Mluktyartho wpha ukto’ta). T=Mahimaya, Bindu=Dis-
 peller of grief, Nédo=Mother of the Universe. She as
 the Lord isthe dispeller of Maya and the sozrows it produces,
 ‘he Saviour and deliverer from all difficulties by grant of
 liberation. T have dealt. elsewhere (“Serpent Power”)
 with Hum and Him the former of which is called Varma
 (ermour) Bja and the latter Kitrchs, Ht denoting Shiva in
 “a”, His Bhairava or formidable aspect. (pec. generally
 Vol. 1, Téntsik Toxts.‘Tantrtbhidhina). He is an armour
 to the Sidhaka by His destruction of evil. Phut is the
 ‘weapon oF guarding Mantra used with Hum, just as Svéha
 (the Shale of Fine), ia used with Vashat, in making offerings,
 ‘The primary Manten of a Devath is called Mila-mantra,
 Mantras are solar (Sura) and masculine, and lunar (Soumya)
 ‘nd feminine, as alo neuter. If it be aekod why things
cof mindare given sex, the answer is for the sake of the
 requiraments of the worshipper. ‘The masculine and neuter
 forms are celled spesfially Mantra and the feminine Vidy&,
                               46"
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘hough the fev term may be used for both, Neuter Mantras
 end with Namob, Hum, Phat are masouline terminations,
 and “Tham” or Svah@, femizine (sce Shared@silaks TI,
 Niradepanchardica VII, “Prayogasdra, Prinatoshint 70)
       ‘The Nitya Tantra’ gives various names to Mantra
 acoording to the number of the syllables such as Pinds,
 Karat, Bija, Mantra, Mala, Commonly however the term
 Bije is applied to monosyllabic Mantras,
       ‘The word “Mantra” comes from the root “man” to
 think “Man” is the first syllable of masana or thinking
 {It is also the root of the word ‘"Man” who alone of all
 creation ia propoely a Thinker. “Tra” comes from the
 soot “tré,” for the effect of a Mantes when used with that
 end, is to save him whe utters snd realizes it. Tra is the
 first syllable of Trdne or liberation from the Samsara
 ‘By combination  of man and tra, thatis called Mantra which,
 from the religious stand-point,, calls forth. (Amantrans)
 the four sims (Chaturvargs) of sentiont being as happiness
 in the word and eternal blis in. Liberation. Mantra is
 ‘hus Thoughtmovement vehicled- by, and expressed in,
 ‘pooch. ts Svaripa is, like all else, consciousness (Chit)
 which is the Shabda-Brahmas. A Mantra is not merely
 ‘sound oF otter. Thi io form in which Shakti manifosta
 ‘Hsreel,‘The mere utterance of a Mantra without mowing,
 its meaning, without tealzation of the consciousness whigh
 Marita manifests a mote movement of tho lips and nothing
 ‘else, We are then in the onter husk of consciitsness;
 just as we are when wo identify oumelves with any other
 form of gross mattar which is, as it wore, the “crust” (as
 ‘friond of mine has aptly called it) of those subtler forces
 which emerge from the Yon’ or Cause of al, whois in Flengelf
 Consoionaness (Chidripinf). When the Sadhaka inows the
 moaning of tho Mantm.he makes an advance. But thisis
 nat enough, He musb, trough is consciousness, realize
 ‘that Consciousness which sppeors inthe form of the Mantz,
  tnd thus attain Mantra-Chaitanya, At this poins, thought
                              462
                 SHAKTI       AS MANTRA
 is vitalized by contact with the centro of all thinking. At
 this point agaia thought bécomes truly vital and creative,
 ‘Then an effect is created by the realization thus induoed.
         ‘The ereative power of thought is now receiving increas-
 ing scceptance in the West, whioh is in some cases taking
 ‘over, and in othéry, discovering anew, for itself, what was
 ‘thought by the oncients in Tadis, Because they have
 discovered it anew they oall it “New Thought” ; but its
 fondameatal principle is as old as the Upanishads which
 snid, “what       you think that you become”. All recognize this
 principle in the limited form that a man who thinks good
 becomes good, and he who is ever harbouring bad thoughts
 ‘comes bad. "But the Indian         end “New Thought” doctrixe
is more profound then this. Ta Yeddntic India, thought hasthe
 been ever held crestive,, The world is a creation of
 thought (Chit Shi eesocisted with, Maye Sali) of the
 ‘Lord (Ishvara and Ishvarl), Her and’ His thought is the
 aggregate, with almighty powers of all hought, But each
‘man is Shiva and can attain His powers to the degree of
 his ability to consciously tealize himself as such. ‘Thought
now works in man's amall magic just as it frst workedin
 the grand magical displayof the World-Crentor. Bach man
ig in various degrees @ orcator. ‘Thought ia as real as any
 form of gross matter. Tndeed i is more real in tho sonse
 ‘hag the world is tee! a projection of the World-thought,
 which again is nothing but the agaregnta in the form of the
 Samskras or impressions of past experience, which give
 ive to the world. ‘The universe exists foreach JIva.becsuse
 hho consciously ox mneonsciously wils it. It existe for the
 totality of beings because of the totality of Samskaras
  which ate held in the Great Womb of the manifesting Obit
  Itself, ‘There ia theoretically nothing that man cannot,
  accompliah, for he ia at base the Accomplisher of al . But,
 jn practice, bo oan only accomplish to tho dogres that he
  identifies himself with the Supreme Oonaciouasess and Ite
  forces, which undedie, are at) work in, and manifest se,
                               483
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  the universe. ‘This is the basal doctrine of all magic, of
  all powers (Siddhi) including the greatest Siddhi which
  is Liberation itself. He who knows Brahman, becomes
  Brakman to the extent of his “knowing”. ‘Thought-
  reading, thought-trinaference, hypnotic suggestion, magical
  projections (Mokshane) and shields (Grahana) are becoming
  Jmown and practised in the West, not always with good
 results, For this reason somo doctrines and practices
 ‘axe kept concealed. Projection (Mokshana) the oocultist
 wil understand. But Grahane, T may here explain, is
 not so much a “fence” in the Western sense, to which se
 ‘8 Kavscha is put, but the knowledge of how to“catch””
 a Mantra thus projected. A stone thrown at one may be
 ‘wanded off or caught and, if the person so wishes, thrown
 Deck at him who threw it: 80 may a Mantra. It is not
 nooasiary, however, to do #0. ‘Those who are sheltered by
 ‘their own pure strength, automatically throw back sll evil
 {influences which, coming back to the ill-wisher, harm or
 destroy him, Those familiar with the Western presentment
of similar matters will more readily understand than others
 ‘who, like the Orientalist and Missionary, ag a rule know
 nothing of ocoultism and regard     it aa superstition. For this
 reason their presentmentof     Indian  teaching isso often igno-
 rant and sbsurd. The oocullst, however, will understandthe
‘Indian dootrine    which regards thought like mind, of whichit
  is the operation, as « Power  or Shakti ; something therefore,
  ‘very real and creative by which man oan seoomplish things
 for himself and others. Kind thoughte, without a word, will
  do good to all who surround us, and may travel sound the
  ‘world to distent friends. 80 we may suffer from the il-
   wishes of those who surround us, even if euch wishes do not
  materiale into deeds. Telepathy is the transforence of
   though   from a distance without the use of the ondinary sense
   organs! So, in initiation, the thought of a true Gura may
   paseto hia disciple  allis powers. Mantra      ia thus « Shakti
   (Manta Shakti) which Iends itself impartially to any use.
                                 464
                SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 Mon cua identify himeel with anyof nature's forces and for
‘any end. Thus, to deal with the physical effecte of Mantra,
 {it may be used to injure, lil or do good ; by Mantra again
 kind of union with the physical Shakti js, by some, said
 to be eficoted. $0 the Vishnu-Purfne speaks of genera-
 tion by will power, as cme Westerners believe willbe the
 case when man passes beyond the dominstion of his gross
 sheath ond its physical instioments, Children will then
 agnin be “mind-bom”. By Mantra, the Homa fire may,
 i ia anid, be Kt, By Mantra, again, in tho Tantrik
 initistion celled Vodho-dlaba there ia, it is osid, such a
transference of power from the Gura to his disciple that the
 Istter svoons under the impulse of the thought-power which
 pierees him, But Mantra in also tat by which
 ‘man identifies himself with That which is the Ground
 ofall, Tnshort, Mantrais « power(Shakti) in the form of
 idea ‘clothed with sound... What, ‘however, is not yot
 understood in the West in the particular ‘Thought
 asin wih ig Mantra, o tba,                          Much of the
 “New Thought” lacks this philosophical. bas:
 supped by Manfwvitya, ering taf on the Vedas
 doctrine. Mantesvidyl         is thus that form of Sédbantby
 which union is had with the Mother Shakti in the Mantca
 form (Mantramayi), in Her Sthila snd Stkshma aspects res-
 ‘pectively. The Shaka passes from the first to the second.
 ‘This Shand works through the letters, as other forms of
 Sidhand work through form in the shape of the Yantra,
 Ghataox Pratima All suck Sdhand belongs          to Shaktopdya
 Yogs s distinguished from the introspective meditative
 ‘Brocesics of Shimbhavopiya which seeks more directly the
 realization   of Shaleti, which ia the end oommon to both. The
 ‘Tantci doctrine as tegaeds Shabda in that of the Mimimsa
 ‘vith this exception that it is modified to meet ite main
  doctrine of Shakti,
        Tn order to understand what a Mantta is, we must
 ‘know ita coumie history. ‘The mouth speais a word, What
         w                         495                       *
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 is it and whence han it come {As regurds the evolution of
 ‘consciousness asthe worl, I rofer my readerto the Chaptars
 con “Chit Shakti and Mly&Shakti’ dealing with the 38
 ‘Tattvas, Utimetely, there is Consciousness which in ita
  aspect as the great “I ses the object 6s part of itsalf, ond
 ‘then 9s other than itself, and. thus has experience of the
 imiverse, This is achioved through Shakti who, in the
 ‘words of the Kamakalévilése, is the pore mirror in which
 Shiva experienoes Himaelt (Shiverips-vimemha-nitmalde
 Gorshah), ‘Neither Shiva nor Shalt lone suffices for eration
  Shiveripa hore=Svarips, Abam ityevamAkaram, that is,
‘the form (or experience) which consists in the notion of “I”.
 Shakti is the pare mirror for the manifesttion of Shiva’s
 experience as “I” (Abam). ham ityeyam rpam jnfinam
 ftasys prakeishane nimalidatshah: as the commentator
 ‘Natandnands (V2) says. The notion is, of course, similar
 ‘0 that of the relection of Purusbs on Prakriti os Sattra-
 rayi Badabi and of Bratman on May. Froim the Mantra
 sapect starting from Shaleti (Sbaleti-Tativa) aasocistad with
 Shiva Ghivah-Tabtva), there was produced Nada, and from
 Nids, came Bindu which, to distinguigh it from other
 Bindus, is mown se the causal, supreme or Great Bindu
 (Karena, Pars, Mabthinda). ‘This is very clearly set forth
 in the Shiredé ‘Tilaka, a Tintrik work by an authorof the
 ‘Kaskmirian School which was formerly of erest authority
 among the Bengal Shaktas, 1 have dealt with this subject
 in deta in my “Gasland of Letters”. Here T only sum-
 rmarizo conclusions.
                  Tterally means and ia ‘unually translated
             che word coming from the root Shabd “to sound”.
 ‘emunst not, howorer, be wholly identified with sound inthe
 seuse of that which is heard by the ear, or sound as effect
 cof cosmic stress. Soundin this senseis the effect produced
 through excitation of the ear and brsin, by vibrations of the
 atmosphere between certain limita. Sound s0 understood
 exists only with the cense organs’ of hearing. And even
                             466
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
 ‘then it may be perosived by some and notby others, due to
 Jroenness or otherwise of natural hearing. Turcher the best
 ars will miss what the miorophone gives. Considering
 Shatda from its primary or osusal aspect, independent of
 the efiect which it may or may not produce on the sense
 organs, it is vibration (Spandana) of any kind or motion,
which is not merely physical motion, which may become
sound for human ear, given the existence of ear and brain
ad the fulfilment. of other physical conditions. Thus,
Shabda ie the pessbility of sound, and may not be actual
sound for this individusl or that. ‘Thore x thus Shabia
‘wherever there is motion or vibration of any kind. Tt is
now said that the electrons revolve in a spbere of positive
‘eotriation at an enormous     rate ofmotion. If the arrange-
‘ment be stable, we have an atom of matter. If some of the
electrons are pitched off from’ the atomic syatem, what is
called radio-activity ix observed. Both these rotating and
shooting elections’ are forms of vibration as Shab, though
it is no sound for mortal ears. To a Divine Ber all such
‘movements would constitute the “music of the spheres”.
‘Wore tho human ear sublle enough, a living treo would
present itself to it in the form of a partioolor sound which
is the natural word for thai tree. Tb is said of ether
(Aicisha) that ts Guns or quality   is sound (Shabd) ; that is,
ther isthe possibility of Spandana     ot vibration of any kind.
Tt is that state of the primontial “material” substance
(Prkziti) which makes motion or vibsution of any kind
possible (Shabdeguna Akdshah). ‘The Brahman Svartpa or
Chit i motionless. Tt is aleo lnown as Ohidalsha. But this
Actsha is not crested. Chiddketsha is the Brahman in
which stress of any kind manifests itself,» condition from
‘which the whole creation proceeds, hic Ohidlksha is
known as the Shsbda-Brahman through its Mayéshakti,
‘whichis the cause of all vibrations manifesting themselves
fs sound to the ear, as touch to the tactile sane, as colour
and form to the eye, as taste to the tongue and as odour to
                              497
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘he nose. All mental fanotioning againis foxm      of vibration
  (Spandana). Thought is e vibration of mental substance
 just asthe expression of thought in the form of the spoken
  ‘word is a vibration afocting the ear. All Spundana presup-
 poses heterogeneity (Vaishamys). Movementof say kind ii-
 plies inequality of tensions. loctrio curt flows betwoen
 ‘bro points because there i a difference of potential hetween
 them, Fluid lows from one point to another becsuie there
 ia diference of pressure. Hoat travels beseuse there is
 <iferance of temperature, Tn orvation (Sristi) this condi-
 tion of hatorogensity appears and render miotion poasibe.
 Titohs is tho poasbility of Spandana of any kind. Hence
 ite prevoience in the order of crestion. Akisha mews
 Braman with Mayd, which Mayashalsi or (to nse the words
 cof Professor P. N. Mulehyophdhytya) Stress is rendered
factual fom 8 ptovions stateof poribility      of stress whichis
 the Shaktis natural condition of equilibriam (Praki
 ‘StmySvasthl). Tn dissolution, the Mlyt-shakti of Brahman
 {scoceding to the poziodic law which isa fundamental postus
 late of Indian coamogony) returns to homogeneity when in
 ‘onsequence Aleisha disappears. This disappearance moans
 fat Shakti ie equilibreted, and that therefore there is no
 further possibilty of motion of any kind. As the Tentzas
 say, the Divine Mothet bosomes one with Paruuashiva
       The Shimdé says—From tho Sakala Perameshvara
  who is Soobohidinanda issued Shakti; fom Shakti came
  Nida ; and from Nada issued Binds.
       Sachchiddnandavibhacd: sakalat_paromeshoardt
        Avichchiaktistato nddo ndddd bindwsamudbharah.
        Hore the Salala Parameshvara is Shiva Tattva. Shakti
  is Shakti Tattva ohorein are Samant, Vyipint, and Anjant
  Shaltis, Nida is the Stat produced goareo of Mentzs, and
  ‘the subtlest form of Shabda of which Mantre is » manifest-
  ation, Nada ia thiosfoli, as MabGadda or Nidinta and
  ‘Nirodhint representing the fst moving   forth of tao Shabda-
  ‘Brahmass Nida, the filing up of the whole wivemse with
                               408
               SHAKTI AS MANTRA
Nidlanta ond the specie tandeney towands the next state
‘of uumanifested Shabda seepeotively. Nida in its three
forms isin the Sadiikhye Tattva, Nada becoming slighty
‘operative towards the “‘speakable” (Vichy), (the former
‘operation being in regard to the thinkable (Mantavya)]is
cilled Arddbachandra which develope into Bindu. Both
of these sre in Ishvara Tattva, This Mabibind is thres-
fold as the Kamsksla. The undifferentiated Shabds-Brah-
‘man or Brahman as the immediate cause of the manifested
Shabda and Artha is an unity of consciousness. (Chai-
tanya) which then expresses itzelf in three-fold function as
the three Stalls, Tchchh, Jnine, Kriy8; the three
Gnas, Sattva, Rajes, Tamas; the threo Bindus (Karyys)
‘which are Sun, Moon and Fire; the three Devatds, Rudm,
Vishau, Brahma and soforth. ‘These are the product of
‘the union of Prakiaha and Vimasbe Shakti. This Triangle
of Divine Desiceis the Kémakala, ot Oreative Will and its
fast subtle manifestation, the cause of the mniverse which is
personified as the Crest Devi Tripureeundart, the KAmesh-
vara and Kémeshvart, the objectof worship in the Agames,
Kimakalavilse, as explained in the work of that name, is
‘the manifestation of the union of Shive and Shakti, the great
“1 (ham) which devologo through the inkarent power of
ita thought-activity (Vimarsha-Shakei) into the universe,
unknowing a8 diva its tuo nature and the secret of its
‘gowth through Avidyd Shakti. Here then there oppesrs
‘the duality of subject end object; of mind and matter,
of the word (habia) and its mesning (Artha). ‘The one
is not the cause of the other, but each is inseparable from,
and concomitant with, the other as a bifurcation of the
‘undifferentiated unity of Shabda-Brahman whenos they
proceed, The ane coamic movement produces at the same
time the mind and the object which it, cognines ; names
(Nama) and language (Shatda) on the one hand; and
forms (Ripa) or object (Artha) on the other. ‘Theee are
all purls of one co-rlinated contemporaneous movement,
                              9
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  tnd, therefore, exch aspect. of the process is related the one
  ‘to the other. ‘Tho genssis of Shabin is only one apeot of
  the creative process, namely, that in which the Brahman
  is regarded   as the Author of Shabda    and Artha into which
  the undifferentiated Shabda-Brahman divides Itself, Shakti
  is Shalds-Brahunan ready to oreate both Shabda snd Artha
  on the differentiation of the Parabinda into the Kamakala,
  whichis the root (Mla) of all Mantras, Shahvla-Brabman
is Supreme “Speech” (Par6-Vak) or Supreme Shabda (Para-
  Shakds). From this fourth state of Shabds, there are thre
  cothors—Pashyantd, Madhyam& and Vaileharf, which are the
  Shabde axpect of the stages whereby tho seed of formless
  consciousness explicates into the multitadinous concrete
 {ideas (expressed  in language of tho mental worid) the couter-
 part   of the objective iver, »But forthe last tres states,
 of sound the body js tequired and, therefore, they only
 cist in the Jive, In the Intier, the Shabda-Brahman is in
 the form of Kundatint Shakti in the Mldhére Chakea,
 In Kundalint is Parashabda, Thin develops into the
 “Meiks” or “Litle Mothers" which are tho subtle forms
 of the gross manifested letters (Vorus), The letters make
 up syllables (Pada) and syllables make sentences (Vkya),
 of which elements the Mantes is composed. Para Shabda
 in the body develops in Pashyantt Stabda or Shakti of
 general movement (Siménye Spanda) located in the tract
 4Srom the Mélddhira to the Manipara associated with Manas,
‘Tethen inthe tag upwands       to the Andhata becomes Madya-
 iid or Hiranyagarbha sound with partieulstized movement
  (Wisheshs Spanda) associated with Buddki-Tettwa. Vayu
 proceeding upwanis to the throat express iteof in spoken
 speech which is Vaikhart or Virdt Shabda, Now itis that
  the Mantm issues from the mouth and is heard by the ear.
  Because the axe cosmic movement produces the idesting
 ‘ind and je accompanying Sabde and the objets cognized
  or Artha, the creative force of the universe is identified with
  the Masrits and Varnss, and Devlin       said tobe in the forms
                                  470
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
  of the letters from A to Ha, which are the gross expressions
  of the forees called Mitrkh ; which again are not different
 from, but are the.same forces that evolve into the universe
 cof mind and matier. These Varuas ar, for the same Yeas0n,
 associated with certain vital and physiological centres which
 fare produced by the same pover that gives birth to the
 letters, Itis by virtue of these centres and their controled
 fazea in the body that all the phenomens of human psychosis
 run on, nd keep men in bondage. The creative force isthe
 ‘union of Shiva and Shale, and exch of the letters (Varna)
 ‘roduced tharfrom and theseby a past and parol of that
 ‘Foros, and ore, therafore, Shiva and Shalt in those parti-
 cular forms. For this reason, the Tantra Shistre soys that
 Devaté and Mantra compocod of letters, axe one. In short,
 Mantras are made of leer» (Varna), Letters are Matrik8,
 Mati is Shakti and Shale is Shiva, ‘Through Shakti
 (one with Shiva) Nada-Shakti, BinduShalti, the Shabda-
 Brahman or Pere Shabda, arise the Matrikéy Vara, Pada,
 Vakya of the lettered Monta or manifested Sheba.
       ‘But what is Shabda or “Sound”? Here the Shakta
 ‘Tantra Shictea follows the MimBms& doctrine of Shabda,
 with auch modiGeations ae are necessary to adapt it to its
 doctsine of Shalt. Sound (Shabde) whichs quality (Guns)
 of ether (Bkisha) sndis snsod      by hoatingis twofold, namely,
 lettered (VamnBimoka Shatda) ond ualettered o Dhvani
 (Dhvanyétmaka Shaba). The latter is caused by the
 striking of two things together, and is apparently meaning-
 Jess. Shabda, on the contrary, which is Andhata (a tem
 applied to the Hesr-Lotus) is that Brahman sound which
isnot onused by the etriking of two thingstogether. Tetiered
 sound is composed of sentences Vila), words (Pada) and
 letters (Vame). Such sound has a meaning. Shabda
 ianifestingat speech ie said to be eternal. ‘This             the
 Naiyéyikas deny      saying   thot   i t in trantitory.  A  vord
 js uitered and it is gone. This opinion the Mimimst
 denies saying that the perception of letieted sound must be
                                an
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Jistinguished fom lettered sound iteelf. Perception is due
  ‘to Dhani caused by the striking of the air in contast with
  ‘the vocal orgaus, namely, the throat, pslate and tongue aud
  so forth, Before thore is Dhvani there must be the striking
  of oxe thing against another. It is nob the mere striking
  Which is the Isttored Shabda, ‘This manifests it, The
 lettered sound is produced hy the formation of the vooal
  organs in contact with air; which formation isin response
  to the mental movement or ides which by the will this
    aks outward expression in sucible sound. Te i thi per-
  ception whichi transitory, for the Dhvani whieh manifests
  ideas in Iaaguage is such. But lottored sound as itis in
 iteelf thats, ae the Consciousness manifesting Idea express-
  ed in speech   is eternal. Te was not produced at the moment
 it was perosived. Tt wos only manifested by she Davai
 Te exinted before, agit existe after, suoh manfesstion, just
 ‘as 8 jarina dack room which ia reveled by » fash of ight-
ning ia not then produced, nor does it ozase to exist on
 cnasing to be perocived through the disappearance of its
 smanifester, the lightning. The airin contact with tho voice
 ‘organs reveals sotnd in the form of the leerof the alpha-
 bet, and their combinations is. words and sentences. ‘The
 loitars are produced for hesting by the person desiringto
 speak, and hocome audible to the ear of others through the
 oferation of urlettered sound or Dhvani. ‘The latter being
 ‘ manifeser only, lettered Shabda is something other than
 it manifester.
       ‘Before desoribing the nature of Shabda in its different
 form of development, it ia necessary to understand the
 Indian psychology of perception. At each moment, the Siva
 in subje             ct infaances which from all quatters
              to innumerable
 af the Universe pour upon him, Only thoso reach his
 Conacioumess which attract his attention und exe thus
 selected by hin Manas. The later attends to one or other
 cof these cenieimprossions and conveys it to the Buddhi.
‘When sn object (Arta) is presented to the mind, and
                              a
                SHAKTI AS MANTRA.
 perceived, the latboris formed into te shape of the object
 Derocived. This i called s mental Vritti (modification)
 which iia the object of Yoga to suppress. Tho mind as.
 Vritti ia thus 0 repragcntation ofthe outer subject: But, in
 so far as it in such mepretentation, the mind is as much an
 object as the outar one. The Inter, that ia, the physical
 object, ia oaled the gross object (Stile arth), and the
 formet or mental impression is called the subtio objest
 (GAlshina arti). But, besides the object, there is the mind
 ‘hich persives it Ts fllowe tha the mind has two aspects,
 in one of which it ia the perceiver, and in the other the
 perceived in the form of the mental formation (Veit),
 ‘hich in creation precedes ite outer projeotion, and after tha
 creation follows as the impression produood in the mind by
‘tho sonsingof « groan physical object. ‘Tho mental impres-
 sion and the physical object exactly. comespond, for the
 physical object is in fact bus.» projection of the cosmic
 Imagination, tough it had the same wality as the mind
 Jas; no moze and no less. ‘The mind is thu both cognizae
 (Gefhaka) aud cognied (Grtbya), soveler (PmalSahaks) and
 vealed (Prskishya), denoter (Viohnko) and denoted
 (Vachya). When the mind. parosives an object, it is trans-
 formed into the shape of thst abject So the mind whieh
 ‘thinks ofthe Divinity which it wommhipe (Iaktadevatd) is, at
 length, throngh cootinued dewptin, trnsformed into the
 likeness of Unt Devatd. By allowing the Devatd thus to
‘occupy the mind for long, it becomes as pure asthe Devatd,
 ‘This ia a fmdamental principle of ‘Tintrik SAdhen® or
 religious practice. The object pereoved is called Artha, w
 term whieh comes from the root “Ii”, which means to geb,
 to know, to enjoy. Artha is that whichis known ond which,
 ‘therefow,is an object of enjoyment. The mind as Aztha,
 that is in the form of the mentel impression, isan exact
 reflection of the outer objector grasa Arthn. As the outar
 object is Avths, go is the interior subtle mental form which
 corresponds to {u.‘That aspect of the mind which cogaizes
                              473
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 is called Shabéa or Nama (anme), snd that axpoct in which
 itis ite own object or cognized is called Arthe or Raga
 (form). The outer physical objeot, of which the later is in
 ‘the individual an impression, is also Artha or Rya, and
 spoken spoech isthe outer Shebda. ‘The min is thus, {com
 the Mantra aspect, Shabia and Atths, terms corresponding
 to the Vedintic Nama and Ripa or conoepts and concepts
 objected. ‘The MAyavide Vedduta says that the whole
 erestion is Nima and Réps. Mind as Shabda is the
 Poveet (Shakti) the function of which is to distinguish
 tnd identify (Bhodasamsergevritti-      Shalt
       Fast asthe bodys causal, ble end gross, ois Shobdlay
cof which there axe four states (Bhiva) called Pard, Peshyantt,
 Madhyamé and Vaikharl Por sound is thst whiok exists
 on the differentiation of the Mahabindu before actual mani-
 festation. This ig motionless, causal Shabia in. Kundaling,
 in the Mélddhfra centre of the: body. That aspoct of it
 in whieh it commenoes to move with « geneel, thst is, non-
 particulariznd, ‘motion (Simanya Spanda) is Pashyantt
 ‘whoco plaoo is frm the MGladhes to the Maniptra Chale,
 th next contns. Tt is hore associated with Manns, Toso
 represent the motionless and fimt moving Ishvara aspect
 of Shabds. Madhyam Shabia is associated with Buddhi.
 Te is Kironyagarbha sound (Hiranyagarbbaripe) extending
 dom Pushyantlto the heart. Both Medhyamé eound which
 is the inzer “naming” by the cognitive aspect of mental
 movement, as also its Artha or subtle (Sikshma) object
  (Aztha) belong to the mental or subtle body (Skshmea or
 ‘Lings Sharkra). Perception is dependent on distinguishing
  snd identification. Tn the perception of sm object: that part
  of the mind which identifies and distinguishes and thus
  names” or the cognizing partis, from the Shabda aspect,
  subtle habia: and that part offs which takes the shape of,
  ‘nd thas constitutes, the objet (a shape which corresponds
  ‘with the outer thing) is subtle Artha. ‘Ihe peroeption of an
 object ia thus consequent on the simultaneous functioning
                              474
                SHAKTI AS MANTRA
  of the mind in ite two-fold aspect aa Shabda ond Artha,
  whioh are in indisecluble relation with one another as
  ognizer (Grdhakn) and cognized (Grthys). Both belong
  to the subtle body. Ta création Madhyama sound first
  ‘ppeared. At that moment there was no outer Artha.
  Then the Cosmic Mind projected this imer Madhyama
 ‘Artha into the world of acuaual experience and named
 itin spoken speech (Vailehari Shabda). The lastor Vaikhaxt
 ‘Shabda is uttered speech, developed in the throat, iseuing
 from the mouth. This is Visit Shabéa, Veikbhact Shabia
 in therefore Innguage oF gross lettered sound. Its corres-
 ponding Arthsis the physical or gross object which lmguage
 denotes. This belongs to the gross body (Sthils Shara).
 ‘Madhysent Shabia is mental movement oF ideation in its
 cognitive aspect, and Madlayam8 Arths is the mentel im-
 pression of the goss object. ‘Te inner thought-movement
 {nita aspect   as Shabdstha, and considered hoth in its know-
 {ng aspect (Shabda) ards the subtle known object (Arthe)
 belongs to the subtle body (Sékshma Sharfra).. ‘The canse
of these two is the first general movernent towards partioular
 {ideation (Pashyant) from the motionless cause Para Shabda
 or Supréme Speech. Two forms of inner or'hidden speech,
 canal subtle, accompanying mind movament thus preoede
 and lead up to spoken languago. ‘Tho inner forms of idea-
 ‘ting movement constitute the subtle, and the uttered sound
 the pross aspect of Mantra which is the manifested Shabda-
 Brahman.
       ‘The gross Shatda called Vaikhext or uttered speech,
 ‘and the gross Artha or the pliysical object denoted by that
 speech aze the projeotion of the subtle Shabda and Artha,
 ‘through the initial aotivityof the Shobda-Brahman into the
 world of gross sensual perception. Therefore, in the gress
 physical world, Shabda means language, thatis, santences,
 ‘words and letters which are the expression of ideas axid are
 Mantra, In the subtle oF mental world, Madhyoma sound
 is the Shabda aspect of tbe mind which “‘nemes” in ite
                               478
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  spect as cognizer, end Asthu isthe same mindin its aepect
  1s the mental object of ite cognition. Tt is defined to be
  the outer in the form of the mind. Tb is thus similar to
 the state of dreams (Svepne), es Parushutls is the causal
 dreamloas (Sushupti), and Vaikhert the waking (Jégret)
 state, Mental Arths ie a Samskics, an impression left on
 the subtle tody by previous expecience, which is recalled
 ‘when the Jiva reawakes to world experience, and recllects
 the experience temporarily lost in the cosmic drearless
 stato (Sushupti) which ia destruction (Praleya).      What is
 it which arouses this Samekira? As an ef ect (Kriyé) it
 rust have a cause (Karana). This Kérana is the Shabda
 or Name (Nims) subtle oF gross corresponding to that
 particular Artha, When the word “Ghats” is uttered,
 ‘this evokes in the mind the image of an object, namely, &
 jar; justas the prasentation of that object does. In the
 ‘Hivanyagarbha state, Shabds as Samskéra worked to evoke
 ‘mental images, ‘The whole world is thus Shabde ond Attha,
 thatia Name and Form (Néma, Raa). These tvo are in-
 scparohly aisooiated. ‘There is ne Shabda without Artha
cor Atha without Shabda. ‘The Gresk word “Log s”          also
 ‘means thought aud word combined. ‘There is thus a double
 Tine of oration, Shabia tind: Artha ; ideas and language
 together with their objects. Sprech es that which is heard,
 or the outer manifestation of Shabia, stands for the Shabda
 creation. ‘The Artha creation are the inner and outer ob-
 jesta se n by the mental or physical vision, From the
 ‘oamic eneative standpeint the mind oomes frst, and from
 it ia ovolved the physical world acoonding to the speed
 Semulchras which ed to tho existenos ofthe pertioula existing
 ‘univers. Therefore, the mental Arths preoodes the physical
 ‘Artha which is an evolution in gross matter of tbe former.
 ‘This mental state corresponds to that of dreams (Svapna),
 ‘when span lives in the mental world only. After creation
  whichis the waking (JOgrat) stato, thore is forthe individual
 ‘an already existing eralldism of names and objects.
                               46
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
       ‘Uitered speech is a manifestation of the immer naming
 or thought. ‘This thought-movement is similar in men of
 ‘ll races, When an Englishman       oran Indian thinks of an
 ‘object, the image is to both the same, whether evoked by
 the object itselfor by tbe utterance of ite name. For this
 reason possibly if thought-resding be sooepied, a thought-
 Tesder whose oerehral cantre is en ropport with that of
 smother, may fead the hidden “spoosh”, that is thought,
 ‘of one whose spoken speech he cannot undersiand.
 Thos, whilsb the thonght-movement is similar in all
 ‘men, the expression of it a5 Vaikhact Shabda difers,
 -Accozding te tradition thare was once an universal language.
 ‘Acconding to the Biblical account, this was go before the
 confusion of tongues atthe Tower of Babel. Similarly there
is, (a friend tells me thoughhe bas forgottento send me the
 reference), in the Rigveda, mysterious passage which speaca
of the “Tareo Fathers snd thee Mothers”, by whose sction
 like that of the Elohim “all-comprehending speach” was
 ‘made into that which was not eo, Nor is this ualikoly,
 ‘when ve consider that difference in gross speech is due to
 difference of raoes evolved in the course of time. If the
 instruments by which, and conditions under which thought
is revealed in speech, were the same for all men then
 there would be but one language. But now this is not so.
 Racial characteristios and paysioal conditions, such as the
 ature of the vocal organs, climate, inherited impressions
 ‘and so forth differ, So alio does Tanguage. But for each
 pertioular man speaking any particular language, the
 tattered name of any object in the gross expression of his
 inner thought-movement. It ovola the idea and the idea
 is consciousness as mental operation. That operation can
 be so intensified as to be itself oreative. ‘This is Dantra-
 Chaitanys.
       1s in ssid in the Tontra Shfotms that the fifty let-
 tem of the siphsbet. are in the six bodily Chalcas called
 MAlsahirs, SvidhishthGna, Maniptra, Antheta, Vishuddha
                               an
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  find Ajnd. Theso 60 letters multiplied by 20 are in the
 ‘thoussnd-petalled Lotus oF Sslsriza
       From the above account, it will be understood that,
 when it is suid that the “Letters” aro in the six bodily
 Chokeas, it is not to be supposed that it is intended to
 atsurdly affim that the letters as written shapes, oF as the
 uttered scunda which axe heard by the oar re thors. The
 lettom in this sons, that i, as gross things, axe manifested
 only in speech and writing. ‘This much is clear, But the
 precise sigfiance of this statement is a matter of some
 difficulty, There isin fact-no subject which presents more
 dificalsies than Mantzavidy, whether considered generally
 ‘oF in tation to the particular matters in hand. I do not
 pretend to have elucidated all its dificuties.
       What proceeds from the body. is in it in subtle or
 ‘auisl form. Why, however, it maybo asked are particular
 letters assignedto particular Chala, have heani several
 explanations given which do not, in my opinion, bear
 ‘the test of examination,
       If the arrangoniont be not stifcal for the purpose of
 ‘idan, the simplest explanetion is that which follows :—
 From the Brahman are ptoduiosd the ve Bhitas, Bther,
 ‘Air, Bir, Water, Hart,i the order stated ; and from them
 issued the six Chakras from Ajuto MAldhisa, The letters
 ‘re (ith the exception next stated) pisced in the Chakras
 in thair alphabetical order; that is, tho vowels as being the
 fist lettera.or Shaltis of the consonants (which cannct be
 ‘pronounced without them) are placed in Vishnddhe Chalks
‘the first consonants Ks to Tha in Anata and so forth until
 ‘the Mlacharn wherein are set he last dou liters from Va
 to Ss, ‘Thus in Ajné thoro are Ha and Koha az being
 Brahmobfjas, Tn the next or Vishiddha Cholera aze the 16
 ‘vowels which originated frst. ‘Therefore, they are placed
 in Vishadah the ethereal Chala ; ether alo heving origi-
 rated fist. ‘Tho same principle applies to the other letare
 in the Chakeis, namely, Ka to ‘Tha (12 letters and petals) in
                             478
               SHAKTI AS MANTRA
Andiste;; Dato Pha (10) in Manipira ; Ba to La (8) in
Svidhishthina ; and Va to Sa (4) in Mélddtre, The con-
nection betwoen partioular letters and the Chakrasin which
they are place is further aid to be due to the fact that in
uttering any pottiular letter, the Chakra in which it is
placed and its surroundings sre brought into play. The
sounds of the Ssaskrit alphabet ate classed according to
the organs twod in their srticlation, and are guttural (Kan
‘),palatals (Plu), cenebsals (MGaddhs), dentals (Danta)
and libala (Onhtha). When so articulated, each eter, itis
said, “touches” the Chale in whiohit ia, and in which on
‘is’ account it Jan been placed. Tt uttering them certain
Chakras are afecied; thut is, brought into play. ‘This, itis
allegod, will be foundto be so, ifthe ltier is carefully pro-
nomced and attention is paid to the accompanying body
movement. ‘Thus, in utteringHa, the boad (Aju) is touch
i, and in wtering the deop-sested Va, the basal Chakm or
‘Milichica. Tn making tho fist sound the forshead is felt
to be alfectd, and in making the last the lower part of the
body afound the roat-lotus. This is the theory put forth
su acconntng forthe postion ofthe letters in the Chakra.
      ‘A Mantra is, like everything eae, Shalti. But the
moze utterance of « Mantra without more is @ mere move
rent of the ips. ‘The Manure must be avakened (Pra-
Duddh) just ike sny other Shakti if effect i to be had
therefrom, Ths is the union of sound and iden through a
Jnowledge of the Mantra ond its meaning. ‘The recitation
of a Mantes without Inowing ite meaning is practically
fruitless, I say “practicely” beoause devotion, even
though it be ignornat, is never wholly void of fmt, "But
knowledge of the meaning, is not enough ; for itis possile
bby reading a ook or secriving oral matructions to gat
to imow the measing of a Mantm, without anything
further fllowing, Each Mantes is the embodiment of a
particular form of Consciousness or Shakti. This is the
Mantta-Shakti, Consciousness or Shaleti also existe in the
                            49
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 form of the Sdhske. The object then isto unite these two,
 ‘when thought is not only in the outer husk, butis vitalized
 by wil, knowledge, snd action through ite conscious eantre
 ‘n-union with chat of the Mantrs. ‘The latter is Devat or
4 partion manifestation of Shakti: and the Sidhaka who
 ‘dontifes himself therevith, identifies himself with that
 Shakti, Acconling to Voge when the mind ia concentrated
 fon any objec ite unified with it. Whan man isso dent
 fied with « Varna or Tattva, then the power of objects to
 ind eases, and he becomes the controll. ‘Thus, in Kunda
 link-Yogs, the statio bodily Shakti pieres the Chukras, to
 meet Shiva Shalt in the Sshatrdra. As the SAdbaks is,
 ‘through the power of the rising Shakti identified with each
 of the Centres, Tattvas and MAtrikd Shaktis they cease to
 bind, til passing through al be attains Samah. As the
 YVarnac are Shive-Shakti, concentration on them draws the
 rind towards, and then infest with, the Devaté whichis
 cone with the Mantsa, The Devatd of the Mantra is only
 ‘the creative Shakti assuming that partioular fom. As
 already stated, Devatd may be realized in any object, not
 merely in Unatias, Yantms, Chatas, Pratimts or other
 sional objects of worship. The anmie pover which manifests
 to the ear in the Mantes is represented in the lines and
 curves of the Yantra which, the Kaulavall Tantra says is
 the body af the Devata —
     Yantram mantranayam prokiom manirdtma devataiva i
      Dehitmanor yathé Biodo yonta-devatoyostath
       ‘The Yantra ia thus the graphic eymbol of the Shale,
 indicated by the Mantra with which identification takes
 place, ‘The Pratims or image is « grosser visual formof the
 Devatt. But the Mantras sre particular forms of Divine
 Shakti, the realization of whioh is fficacions to produoe
 partioulor results. Asin Kundalint-Yogo, so lao here the
 ‘entiation of the Sddhaka with diferent Mantras gives
 ite to various Vibhftis or powers: for each grouping of the
 leetors represents & now combination of the Matis Shakti
                             480
                     SHAKTI AS MANTRA
  Tt is the ctomal Shalcti who is tho life of the Mantra,
  ‘Therefore, Siddhi in Maatm SAiband is the union of the
  Sidhaka’s Shalcti with the Mantra Shale; the identifeation
  of the Stdkala with the Mantra is the identification of the
  mower (Vedak), knowing (Vidya) and known (Vedys) or
  the Stdhska, Mantra and Devatd, Then the Mantra. works.
  ‘The mind must feed, and is alwaye feeding, on something.
  Tt seizes tho Mantra and works its way        to its heart. When
 ‘there, it is the Chitta or mind of the Sidbaka unified with
  the Shakti of the Mantra which works, Then subject and
  object, in ite Mantra form, meet as one. By meditation the
 Sadhais gains unity with the Devata behind, as it were, the
 Mantra and Whose form the Montra is. The union of tho
 ‘Stahoka of the Mantra and tho Devatf of th Mantra is the
 result of the effort   to realize permanently the incipient desine
 for such union, ‘The will towanls Divinity is a dynamic
 foroe whieh pieroea everything      nnd finds there Divinity itself.
 It is because Westemers end some Westemized Hindus ¢o
 rot understand the principles of Mantra; principles which le
 at the contte of Indian. religious theory and practice, that
‘they seo nothing in it where shey do not regard it as gross
 superstition, Tt must be admitted that Mantra Sédhant is
 ‘often done ignoruntly. Faith is placed in extarnais and the
 inner meaning     is often lost, But even suoh ignorant     womhip
 inhetter than none at all, “Tt ie better       to bow to Nargyana
 ‘with one's shoes on than never to bow at all.” Much also
 is aid of “vain repetitions”. What Christ condemned was
  not repetition but “vain” repetition. ‘That man is a poor
 _paychologist    who does not Imow the effect of repetition, when
 done with faith and devotion. Its « fect thet the imnor king-
            lds to violence and ean be taken by assault, Indecd,
 it yinlée to nothing but the song will of the Shake, for
 it is chat will in ite purest and fullest strength. By practice
wwith the Mantra, the Devatd is invoked. ‘This means that
 ‘the mind iteelf is Devati when unified with Devata. This
 is attained (hrough repetition of the Mantra (Jape).
                                   4s
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘Tops is compared to the action of s man shaking =
 sleeper to wake him up. ‘The Stdhakn’s own eonscionsness
   ia avakened. ‘The two lips sre Shiva and Shakti, The
 rmoverment in utterance is the “coition™ (Meithuna) of the
 ‘ovo. Shabda which iasues therefrom ig in the natare of
 Bindu, The Devatd then appearing is, as it were, the son
 cf the Sédheks, Itis not the suprome Devat who appears
 (Gor Ibis actionles), butin all eases ‘an emanation produced
 ‘by the Sédhaks’s worship for his benefit ooly. Tn the ease
 cof worshipper of the Shiva-Mantea, © Boy-Shiva (Bala
 Shiva) appests whois then maile strong by the nurture which
 ‘the Stdhakn gives him. The occultist will understand all
 such eymboliam to mean that the Devatd is « form of te
 Consciousness which bevomes the Boy-Shiva, and which,
 when strengthened is the full-grown Divine Power Itself
 All Mantzas aro forms of consciousness (Vijudnaripa), and
 ‘when the Mantr is folly practised it enlivens the Sams
 ikira,and the Artha appears to the mind, Marctras     used in
 worship are thus # form of the Samskéras of Jivas; the
 Artha of whieh mnifests to. the-conscicumess which is
 ‘pure. The easenve of all this is—concentsate and vitalize
 thought and will power, that is Shsketi.
       ‘The Mantra method is Shiktopaya Yogo working with
 concepts and form, whilst Shimbhavopéya Yoga hss bean
 wel suid to be 8 more direct attempt at intuition of Shakti,
 par from all paseing concopts, which, a8 they cannot show
 the Reality, only servo to hide it the more from one’s view
 ‘and thus maintain bondage. ‘These Yoga methods are but
 examples of the universal principle of Sidhanf, that the
‘Sidhake should frst work with and through form, and then,
 s0 far 4s may be, by a meditation which dispansea with it.
       Tt has been pointed out torme hy Professor Suron
 ‘Nath Das Gupta that this Varnu-Sidhen8, so important a
 ‘content of the Tantra Shistra isnot altogether its eveation,
 bout, as T have often in other matters observed, a develop”
 ‘ment of ausient Vaidik teaching. For it was, be says,
                              482
                 SHAKTI AS MANTRA
first atbempted in the Rranyaka Epoch upon the Pratikop
‘sen on whivh tho Tatrik SAdhanb is, he suggests, based 5
hough, of course, that Shastra has elaborated the notion
{into © highly complicated system which is so poculiar a
feature of ite religious discipline. ‘There is thus a ayathesis
of this Pratfkopiisand with Yoga method, mating 2 all else
upon a Vedéntio basis.




                            485
                        Cuarren XXV.
                        VARNAMALA,
                   (Tum Gantann oP Lurraes.)
TOHE word has novo altogethor fren without the Wit-
        dom, nor its Teachore. ‘Thé dogreo and manner in
“whichit he been imparted have, however, neoessarily varied
according to the capucities of men to reecive it. 80 also
 have the symbols by which it has been conveyed. ‘These
symbols further have varying significance according to the
spiritual advancemen     of tthe worshipper. This question of
ddegme and variety of presentation have led to the superi-
ial view that the difference in beliefs nogatives exiatence
‘of any commonly established Truth, But if the matter be
regarded moro deeply, it will bo soe that whilst there is
fone essential Wisdom, its revelation he been moro or lose
camplete according to symbole evolved by, and, therefore,
{fitting to, particular mcial temperaments and characters.
‘Symbols aro natarally misunderstood by thore to whom the
beliefs they typify are mnfamiiar, and who differ in tempe-
rament Soom those whe have evolved them. Ta the ordinary
‘Wester mind the symbols of Hinduism are often repulsive
‘and abuurd. It must not, however, be forgotten that some
‘of the Symbols of Wester Faiths heve the same effect on
‘the Hindu. Trom the picture of the “Slain Lamb,” and
 ther symbole in terms of blood and deuth, he naturally
‘shrinks in disgust. The same offect, on th other hand, is not
seldom produced in the Weatern at tho sight of the terrible
 forms ia which Indie has embodied Her vision of the un-
 Aoubted Terrors which exist in and around us, All i not
smiling in this word. Eyen amongst persona of the same
race and indeed of the samo faith we may observe such
ifferences. Bafore the Catholic Cultus of the “Saoned
 Heart” had overcome the opposition which it ot firt
                                44
                       VARNAMALA
encountered, and for a considerable time after, ita imagery
‘was regaried with aversion by some who spoke of it in terms
which would be today counted. as shocking irreverence.
‘These differences are likely   to exist so long as men vary in
mental attitude and temperament, and until they reach the
stage in which, having discovered the essential truths, they
become indifferentto the modo in which they aro presented.
We most also in such matters distinguish bebween what
symbol may have meant nod what it now means. Until
quite recent times, the English pessoat         folle and others
danced around the fower-wresthed Maypole. That, the
pole originally (ike other similar forms) represented the
great Linge admits of as little doubt as that these folk,
‘who in resent ages danced arourd it, were ignorant of that
fact. ‘The Bishop       mitre 's
                              ie said to be the headof a fish
worn by ancient, neareastom hietophants. But what of
that? Tt has other associations nov.
     ‘Let us illustrate these general remarks by a short study
of one gortion of the Kali symbolism which affects eo many,
‘who are not Hindus, with disgust or horror. Kall is the
‘Deityin thet sapect in whioh Tt withdraws all things whieh
Tt hed oroatod, into TtseléKaltis co callad bocauso Sho
devours Kala (Time) and then resumes Her own dark form-
Tesoness. ‘The scene is lid in the cremation ground (Shms-
shine), amidst white sun-dried bones snd fmgments of
flesh, gnawed snd pecked at by carton beaste and binds.
‘Hore the “heroio” (Vito) worshipper (Sidliaka) performs at
ead of night his awe-inspiring rituals. Kallis get in ouch
4 soene, for She is that aspect of the great Power which
‘withdraws all things into Horslf at, and by, the dissolution
of the universe. He slone worships without fear, who has
aband        sll oned
                 worldly desires, and sock union      with Her as,
‘the One Blissfl and Pesfoct Experience. On ths buming
ground all worldly desires aze barat vay. Sho is naked,
and dark like threstening rain~loud. She is dark, for
Ske who is Herself beyond mind and speesh, reduces all
                                485
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 things into that worldly “nothingness,” which, as the Void
 (Shinya) of all which we now mow, is at the ssme time the
 All (Pars) which is Pence. She is naked, being olothed in
 ‘space alone (Digamber!), becouse the great Power is un-
 limited ; further, Sbe is in Hemsett beyond Maya (May&tita) ;
 ‘that Power of Here which creates all universes. She stands
 upon the white corpselike (Shavaripa) body of Shiva.
 ‘He is white, becaure ho is the illuminating transcendental
 aspect of consciousness. He is inert, because he is the
 hangoloss aspoct of the Suprome and She the apparently
 hanging aspect of the same. In truth, She and He are one
 and the sume, being twin aspects of the One who is chinge-
 Tesenoss in, and exists as, ebange. Much might be said in
 explanation of these and other symbols suchas Her loosened
 Iisiz, the lolling tongue, the thin, stream of blood which
 ‘tickles from the comers of the mouth, the position of Her
 foot, the spron of dead men’s hands around Her waist, Her
 implementa and 20 forth. (See Hymn to Kalt by Arthor
 Avalon. Vol. 9, Tantrike Texts.) Hore I take only the
 agorlend of fresbly-severed heads which hangs low from Her
 neck,
       Some have conjectured that Kalt was originally the
 Goddess of the dark-skinned inhabitants of the Vindhya
 ‘lle taken over by the Brihmanas into their worship. One
 ‘of them has thought that She was a defied Princess of these
 folk, who fought agsinst the white in-coming Aryans. He
‘pointed to the significant fact that the sovared heads are
 those of white men. ‘The Western may say that Kali was
 ‘an objectification of the Indian mind, making a Divinityof
 the Power of Death, An Eastem may roply that Sbe is tie
 Bafiketa (eymbol) which is the effect cf the impress of «
 Spiritual Power on the Indian mind. I do not pause to
 consider these matters here.
       ‘The question beforeus is, what does this imagery mean
 now, and what has it meant for centuries past to the initiate
 ‘in Her eymbolism 1 An exoterio explanation describes this
                                 486
                          VARNAMALA
 Garland se matte up of the heads of Demons, which Bho, 04
 ‘power of rightooumess, has conquered. Aocording to an
 inner explanation, given in the Indian Tantza Shéstes, this
 sting of heads is the Garland of Letters (Varnam8la), that
 is, the fity, and as some count it, fty-one letters, of the
 Sensi Alphabet. The same interpretationis given in the
 ‘Buddhist Demchog Tantm in raspsctof the gurland worn by
 ‘the grent Hieruka, ‘Those letters represent the universe of
 names and forms (Namardpa), that is, Speech (Shabda) ond
 ita meaning or object (Artha). Ske’ the Devourerundivided       of all
 “alanghtece” (chet i, wishdeaw),       both  ito   Har
 CConasioumese x the Great dissolution of the Univer hich
 ‘ny at. She wears the Letters which, Sho as the Grostxix
 Dore. She wears the Letters which, Sho as the Dissolvingis
 Power tals to Honelf agnin. A very profound doctrine        me from
 ‘connected with these Detters which space setprevents
                                                     out  in   greater
fully entering into  Bere.   This  bas   been
 detailin the Sod Kaition, 1025, of the “Serpent.             Power”
 (Kindaling) whieh projects Consciousnessin Tts truegoodnature     and
 blissful and beyond all-dnalism, into the World of                  by
 evil. ‘The movements of Her projection re indicated       Petals     of
 ‘tho Letters eubtla and.grom which exist        on   the
 fe inner bodily centres or Lotus.                              means
       Very shortly stated, Shabda whichcanstlitorlly           (Para-
 Sound-—here lettered sound—is in its (Pari Wak).state ‘This
 shabde) mown as “Supreme that aspect of Reality oris
                                  Spoech”
 the Shabis-Brahman or Logos;
                           which it is the immediate cause ofis
 Consciousness (Chit) ia dichotomy
 mation ; thats of the                  in Consciousness which
 “1 and “This,” subjeot and           objest,  mind and matter.
 ‘This condition of causal Shabde is the Cosmic           Droamless
                                     awakening
 State Gashupt). This Logos, idestes the universe, from   ite ome
 sleep, “sees,” that is, exestivelyShabéa, As Consciouanets        and
 {s then known se Pashyantt in the Orative Mind, which
 “sees” oF ideate, forms arise
 are themselves impressions (Semskma) cared over from
                                  487
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  previous wotlis, which ceased to exist ax such when the
  Univer entered the state of cansel dreams sleep on the
 previous discon. These reatite ax tho formless Con-
 Eciousnoss awakes to enjoy once again sensual ie in the
 sword of forme,
       ‘The Cosmic Mind is ot fist tcf both cogniing subject
 (Grihalea) and cognied objet (Grthyn); fort has not yet
 Projected it thought into the plane of Mattrs cho mind as
 Ecbjectcognizr is Shabia, and tho minda the object cog:
 Dizod, that i, tho nnd in the fom of objec, i aubile Arch,
 ‘This Shabda called Bfadhyamd Sbabde is an “Inner Naming”
 or “Midian Speech” At this sage, tha which snswece
 {fo the spoken letters (Vamos) are the “Little Mothers"
 fo MAtckd, the subtle fomas of gross pech, There is wt
 this stage a dilorentition’ vf Cousiouseas ito subjent
 tnd objec, but the later now within and forms part of
 ‘he Soll This i the stata of Coumit Deeaming (Srapna).
 "This "TLiéden Specch” is undezntandab ofall men i they
 ‘mn got in mental apport one with the other. 8 a thought-
 ster oan, tite, sea the thoughts faman whosespaken
 specthh     cannot uerstand, The Cosmio Min then projects
 ese mental images on to the material plane, and thay
 ‘there become materialized as Gross physical objects (Sthils
 fsthe) which make impressions fr without on the mind
Of the cmstad consciousness. Thins the cosmic wakingstate
 (Ggras). At tis last stag,th thonght-moverent expresses
 fll through tho vooalosgine in conto! with the air as
 ‘tiered speech (Vaikhac Shnbda) sade up of lottery, pla.
 bes and sentences, ‘The physical unfettered sound. which
 ‘manifests Shabds is called Davani, ‘This lettered Sound is.
 Manifested Shabia or Name (Nina), and the physical
 bjects dennied by speech are the gross Artha or form
  ag).‘This manifested speach varies in men, for their individual
  and mcial characiarities and the conditions, sachs country
  fd climate in which they live, difler. ‘Thesis a tradition
                               488
                        VARNAMALA
 ‘that there was once an universal speech befor the building
 of the Tower of Babel, signifying the confusion of tongues.
 ‘As previously stated, a friend has drawn my stieution to a
 ypessege in the Rig-Veds which he interprets in a similar
 sense. For, it says, that the Three Fathers and the Three
  Mothers, like the Biohim, made (in the interest of creation)
  all-comprehending speech into that which was not 20.
         Of these letters and names and their meaning or objects,
  that is, concepts and concepts objeotifed, the whole Uni-
  verse is composed. When Kalf withdraws the world, that
is, the namesand forms which       tho lotters signify, the dualism
 in conscioumess, which is creation, vanishes. There is
 neither “I” (Ahsm) nor “This” (dam) but the one non-
  dual Perfeot Experience which Kalin Her own true nature
  (Gvaripa) is. In thin way Her garland is understood.
          “Surely,” I hear it aid, “not  by all. Doos every Hindu
 ‘worshipper think such profundities whea he sees the figure
 cof Mother KAW!” Of course not, no more than, (say) an
  ‘ordinary Italian pessant mows of, or can understand, the
  subtleties of either the catholic mystics or doctom of
  theology. When, however, the Western man undertakes to
  depict and explain Indien eymboliem, he chould, in tho
 interest both of knowledge: and fairese, understand what
 itmeans        both tothe high 6 welas to the humble worshipper.




                                489
                         Cuarran XXVI.
                       SHAKTA SKDHANA
                    ('mx Omprany Rervas.)
 GADHANA jn tht which produces Sitdhi or the rout
       sought, be it material or apiritual advancement. Tt
 is the means or pructice by which the desited eni may: be
 ‘attained end contista in the training and exorcise of the body
 ‘and psychic faculties, upon the gradual perfection of which
 Siddhi follows. ‘The nature or degmo of spiritual Siddhi
 ‘depends upon the progress made towards the realization of
 ‘the Atmi whose veiling vesture the body is. ‘The means
 ‘employed are numerous, and elaborate, such as womhip
 (PGja) exterior or mental, Shistric learning, austartios
 (Tapas), Japa or tecitation of Mantra, Hymns, meditation,
 and so forth. ‘The Sédhend is necessarily of a naturo and
 chazacter appropriate to the end sought. ‘Thus Stahant for
spititual Imowledge (Brahmajadna) which consists of
extemal control (Dama) over tho ten senses (Indriys),
intemal contrel (Shuma) over the anind (Buddhi, Abankirs,
‘Manas), discrimination between the transitory and etetnsl,
renunciation of both the world and heaven (Svarga), difers
from the lower Sidhan8 of the ordinary householder, and
 Doth are obviously of a kind different from that presoribed
 ‘and followed by the practitioners of malovolent magic
 (Abbiebéra), SAdbakas again vary in their phyaios], mental
‘and moral qualities and aro thus divided into four slasses,
‘Mridu, Madhya, Adhimétral, and the highest Adhimitmma
 who is qualified (Adhiktxt) for all forms of Yoga. In a
similar way, the Shakta Kaula        are dividedsinto the Prkrita
 ‘ot common Kavle      following    Virichtra   with the Pancha
 tathvas described in the following Chapter; the middling
 (Qfadhyams) Kaula who (may be) follows the same or other
Sadhan& but who is ofa higher type, and the highest Kaula
                                 490
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 (Kaulikottama) who, having surpassed all rituaism, medi
 ‘ates upon the Universal Sef. ‘These are more particulatly
 Aescribed in the next Chapter
       Until a Sédhoka ia Siddha all Siahan8 is or should be
 underialen with the authorityand under the direction of 8
 Guru or Spititual Teacher and Director. There is in
 reality bub one Guru and that isthe Lond (Ishvara) Himself
 He is the Supreme Guru sa also is Devt His Power, one
 With Himself. But       ho acts through man and hnman means.
 ‘Tho ordinary human Guru is but the manifestation on earth
 cof the Alinitha MabAkfla and Mahakalt the Supreme
 Gru abiding in Kaildss, As the Yogint Tantea (Ch. 1)
says Gurch ethinam ii Railésam, Hoit is who is in, and
 speaks with the voice of, the Earthly Guru. So, to tum
 ‘to on analogy in the Went it in Christ who speaks in the
 voioe of the Pontifex Maximus when. declaring faith’ and
 ‘morals, and in the voi of the priest who confers upon the
                                                       man who
 speais   in either ease but God through    him. Tt is the Guru
 ‘who initiates and helps, and the relationship bebwoea him and
 ‘the disciple (hishye) continues until the attainment of
 spisitual Siddhi, Tio. only from him that S€dbao8 and
 Yogs are learut. and not (as it is commonly said) -from
 thousand Shistras, As the Shatiamnedipiks soys, mete
 book-knowiedg> is useless.
       Pustake Ukhité vidyé yona, sundari japyate
       Siddhir na jayateiasya kalpakot-shatair   api.
       (O Beautoous one! he who does Japa of » Vidys
   (Mantra) learnt from a book can never attain Siddhi
 ‘even if he pomiats for countess millions of years.)
       Manu therefore says, “of him who gives natural birth,
 ‘aud of him who gives knowledge of the Veda, the giver of
 saored Knowledge is the more venerable father.” The
‘Tantra Shsizes also aro full of the gresiness of the Guru.
 Hp is not to be thought of as e mere man. ‘Them is no
 difference betwoen Guru, Mantra and Deva, Gurus father,
                                  49
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
mother and Bekman, Guru,        i is said, can save from the
‘weathof Shiva, but inno way none be saved from the wzath
of the Guru, ‘Attached to this greatness there is, howover,
responsiblity; for the sins of the disciple may recoil upon
him. The Tantra Shastra: deal with the high qualities
‘hich are demanded of a Guru and the good qualities which
are to be looked for in an intending disciple (oee for instance
‘Tanteasiva, Ch. 1). Before initiation, the Gura examines
and tasts the intending disciple for a specified period. The
Jatter's moral qualifications az parity of soal (Shaddbitm’),
control of the senses (Jitendriya), the following of the
Panushérthe or aims of all sentiont being (Parushictha-
pperdyans). Amongst other, those who are lewd (Kamuka),
adulterous (Para-daratum), addicted to sin, iguorent, sloth-
ful and. devoid of religion should be rejected (see Mataya-
stkta Tantra, XIT, Poinateshint 108, Makaradceyim:
I. XY, Il, i, Kuldmaya Tontra Ch. XIII). The good
‘Siihsla who's entitled to the knowledge of all Shistra ia
hhe who is puro-minded, selt-oontrolled, ever engaged in
dloing good to all beings, free from folue notions of dusliam
attached to the speaking of, taking shelter with and ever
living in the conciousness of, the supreme Brahman
(Gendharva Tantra, Ch. i)
      ‘All orthodox Hindus of all divisions of worshippers
submit themselves to the directionof a Guru. ‘The latter
initiates, ‘The Vail initiation into the twroe-born classes
is by the Upinayans. This is for the first three castes
caly, viz, Bribmane (priesthood and teaching), Kshatriya
(Grasses), Vaishya (merchant). All exe (ti said) by birth,
Shideu (Jammanh jiyate Shudreb) and by esorament (that
fi, the Upanayaua ceremony) twiee-bom. By study of the
‘Vedas one ia a Vipra, And be wao has knowledge of the
 Brahman is a Brahmans (Brhms jantti bribmansh),
 From this well-Imown verse it will he seen how few there
 really are who aze entitled to the noble name of Briana,
 ‘The Tévizik Mantra-initiation is s diferent ceremony and
                              492
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
 is forall csstes, Initiation (Disha isthe giving of Mantea
 by the Guru, The latter should first eatablish the life of
 ‘the Gru in his own body ; that is the vital power (Prina-
 shakti) of the Supreme Guru in the thousand-petelled lotas
 (Gshasttrs). He thon transmits it to the disciple. As an
 mage isthe instrament (Yantza) in which Divinity (Devatva)
 inheres, so algo ia the body of the Guru. The candidate is
 preptrod for initiation, fasts and lives ehestaly. Initiation
 (hich follows) gives spiritual knowledge end destroys sin.
 AAs one lamp is lit at the flame of another, so the divine
 Bhakti consisting of Mantra is communicated from the
 Garu’s body to that of the Shishys, Ineed not be always
 repeating thnt this is the theory and ideal, which to-day is
 fenerally remote from the fact. ‘The Supreme Guru speaks
 with tho voice of the earthly Gurm at the tine of giving
 ‘Mantra, As tho Yogint Tanten (Ch. 1) says:—
        Meanira-pradéne-Ktle hi’ ménsishe Naganandins
        Adhishthdnam Mavet tara Mahdbdlasya Shonkari
       ‘Ato na. gurié devi ménuske-ndtra    samshayah,
        (At the time the Mantra is communicated, there is
in man (i, Guta) the Prosence of Mahikala, ‘There is
 no doubt that man is not the Gam.) Guru is the root
  (Qldla) of initiation (Diksha). Diksha is the root of
  Manisa, Mantsa is the root of Devatd, ond Devatd is
 ‘the root of Siddhi. The MandamAla ‘Tartra says that
 Mantzeis hors of Guru, and Devata. of Monten, so. that
  thie Guru is in the yostion of Fathers Fathor to tho Ishte-
  devatd, Without initiation, Japs (recitation) of the Mantra,
  Pj, and other situa aots are weless.. ‘The Mantra chosen
  fot the candidate must be suitable (Anaktls). Whather
  Mantra is Svakula ox Alcula to the person about to be
 initiated is escertained by the Kuldladhaka, the zodiacal
  cizole ealed Rishichaka end. other Ohekras which may be
 found in the Tantrasfia, Initiation by a woman is effcaci-
‘ous; that by the mother is eightfold so (i). For, according
                                 493
                     SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
to the Tantra Shiatea, a woman with thetion, noceacar                      y qualif-
cations, may be a Gur and give                       initia The Kulaguras
fr Jour in nomiber, each of them being the: Guru of the
preceding ones, ‘There are also three lines of Gurus                                (see
Mahinizwins,Ba.       A.   Avalon,       p.   111,   n.      105    p.   190,    n.   9)
      So long as the Shakti communicated by » Gn to and                               his
disciple i not flly developed, the relation of Teacher
Dinector and Disciple existe. “A man is Shishys soGaralong andas
hhoisSAdhaka, When however, Siddhi is attained, dssppear.
Shishye, es alo all other dualome, ond relation, number of
Besides the preliminary initiation, there are a which marke
other initistions or conseortions (Abhisheka) ShAktal
greater and. greater degress of advance from Stdhana
hela when entrance it made on the path of htbhish              SkAkta
to Pimodilahihhis    hela     end    Mahipfi     roadfis                    ekn also
called Vimsjd-grahanGbhishek. On the attainmeownnt offaxeral                        per-
fectionin the last grade    the  SAdhala        performs          his
Tita (SirAddha), Takes PGenkbnti with his sacred thnead
tnd orowa lock, The relation of Guru and Shishyamntil nowhe
ceases, Prom this point. he ascends by himself
realizes the great saying SoThom “THe Tam”, amsa.                   Saban “She
Tam”, Now he is Jivan-mukta and Paramab                                           exert
      ‘The word Sdbant comes from the root Sd todisci-
or strive, and Shahan       is theefore striving, pmotie,
pline and worsin    hip  onder   to obtain success oF Sitdhi, which
‘naybe of any ofthe kinds, worldly or spiritual, dsined,                             but
 which, on the celigions    sie.    of the     Shistras,         means       spiritual
 hudvancemont with ite fruit of happinoss in this. world                             and
 in Heaven and at        length     Liborati    on      (Misha)              He     who
 practioes Sédhanf is GF a mon) called Sidhaka                               or (if «
 women) SAdhiKa, But men varyanc              in capaci, temperment,
[knowled          ge adv and eme
             and general                                   theneforent,    the means
 (Gor SAdhsns slso   means      instrume     nt)    by      which       they    are to
 be led to Siddhi mos: vary. Methods which are ignorant                       suitable
 for highly advanced       men     will    fil   ao     regards        the
 ‘and undeveloped for they camot understand them. What
                                          494
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 suits the latter has been long out-paaied by the former.
 ‘At least that is the Hindu view. Te is called Adbikfism or
 competency. Thus some few man are competent (AdIikAst)
 to study Vedinta and to follow high mental rituals and
 Yoge processes. Others are not. Some are growi-up
 clin      and rust be dealt    with as such. As sll men,ond
 indeed all beings, sre, aa to their psychical and physical
 bodies, made of ‘the primondial substance Prakziti-shabti
 (Prakrityttmaks), se Pralsiti is Honelf the three Gunss,
 Settve, Rajes ond Temas, and ay all things and beings are
 composed of there three. Gunas in varying proportions, it
 follows that men axe divisible into throe general classes,
 andy, thoes in whiohthe Sattva, Rejas, and Tamas Gunde,
 ‘predominate respectively, There aze, of oourse, degrees in
 ach of these thres ladies. Amongst SAtvika men, in
 ‘whom Ssttva predeminates, some ate more and some less
 Séttvika than othore and so'on with the rest, ‘Those three
 clisses of temperament (Bava) aro kxown in the Shalea
 ‘Tantras as the Divine. (Divyabhéve), Heroic (Viabhave)
 nd Animal (Pashubhiva) temperaments respectively.
 ‘BhAva ia defined as a property or quality (Dharma) of the
 Manse or mind (Prinatoshing, 670). ‘The Divyabhtva ia
 ‘hut in which Sattva-guna predominates enly, because i
is to be noted that none of the Gunas are, oF ever can be,
 beent. Praliti cannot be pattitioned. "Prekmiti ie the
 ‘three Gunas, Sottra is essentially the spiritual Guna, for
 itis that which man fests Spirit or Pure Consciousness (Chit).
 ‘A Sittvikn man is thos a spiritual man. His is a ealm,
 ‘pare, equable, refined, wise, spizitual temperament, five of
 iateriality and of pation, or he possesses thise qualities,
 imperfectly,   and to the degree that he postesses    them he is
 Sittvik. Pashubhéva is, on the otbor hand, the tempera
 ‘ment of the men in whom Tamas gune prevails md produces
 such datk characteristics as ignorance, error, spathy, sloth
  nd 20 forth, He ecalled « Pashu       or animal bosaise Tamas
  predominates in the merely animal neture as compared with
                               495
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘he disposition of spistually.-minded men. He is also Pasha
 Ibeaue he i bound by the bonds (PAsba). The term PAs
 comes from the root Pash to bind. ‘The Kultimara enume-
 rates eight bonds, namely, pity Daya, of the type which
 ‘Taoist call “inferior benevolence" as opposed to the divine
 compassion of Karun®), ignorance and delusion (Moke), fear
 (Bhaya), shame (Lajja), disgust (Gheina), family (Kuls),
 Ibabit. and observance (Shila), and caste (Vara). Other
 larger enumerations aro given. Tho Pashu is the man
 ‘eanght by the world, in ignorance and bondage. Bhisksra-
 ‘riya, on the Site “have no converse with « Pasha”, says
 tat'a Pasha is Bubiemuleha or outward looking, secing the
 outside only of things end not inner realities. ‘Theinjunc-
 tion, he says, only applies to converse as regards things
 spiritual,
        ‘The Shaiva Shastta speaks of three classes of Pash,
 namely, Sakala bound. by the, three Pasha, Ana, Bheda,
 Katma, that ja, limited knowledge, the seeing of the one
 Self as many hy the operation of Miya, and aotion and
 it product. These are the thyee impurtios (ala) called
‘Znavamala, Maytmala, and Kirmamals. ‘The Sakala Siva
 or Pes is bond bya hres, the Pralaytcala by the frst
 and last nd the Vijatndlalaby the fist only. (See as to
 ‘these the diagram of the $6 Tattvas) He who is wholly
 freed of the remaining impusity of Anu is Shiva Tinsel
 ‘Hero howovor Posh i used in a diferent sons, that i, uo
  denoting the creature 2s contesated with tho Lord (Pati).
  In this sense, Pasha isa name forall men. In the Shikia
  ‘us of the term, thoughell men sre certainly Pash, as com-
  ‘pared with the Lord, yet as between themselves one my be
  Pari (in the narrower sense above slated) and the other
  not. Some men are more Pasha than others. Tt ia a mis
  take to suppose that the Pashu is necessarily a baad man.
  He moy be and oftenis a good one. Ho is corsily Dotter
  ‘han a bad Vir-who is rallyno View atall. His, however,
  not, according to this Slitstr, an enlightened   man in tbe
                             496
                     SHAKTA SADHANA
  sense that the Vien or Divya is, and he ie generally markod
  dy various degrees of ignorance and material-mindedness,
  tis the markof a bad Pasiu         to be given over to grass acts
  fofsin, Between these two comes the Horo or Vira of whose
  temperament (Virabhiva) so mach is heard in the Shika
  Shastras. In him there is prevalent the strongly active
  Rajas Guna. Rojas is always aotive cither ta incite Tamas
  ‘or Sattva, In the former case the resultis a Pashu, in the
  Intiar case either    Vira or Divya. Whare Sattva approaches
  perfection of development there is the Divyabhfve, Sattva
  ia hero firmly ostablished in calm and in high degroa. But,
  ‘until such time, and whilst man who hes largely Hiborated
  himoelf through knowledge of the influence of Tamas, is
  active to promiots Sativa, he ia1a Vim, Boing heroiv, he is
  permitted to meet his enemy Tamas faco to face, counter-
  attacking where the lower developed man flees away. Tt
  ‘has beon pointed out by Dr, Garbe (Philosophy of Ancient
  India, 481), as before him by Baur, that the analogous Gnostic
  classification of men as material, psyohical, and spiritual
  ‘luo corresponds (25 dows this) to the three Gunas of the
  Safikhya Darshan.
        ‘Even in ita limited Shtle sense, there aro dogross of
  Pashu, one mn being more so thin another. ‘The Pishas
  fam the creations of May& Shakti. Tho Devi thersfore is
  ppiotured as hosring thom, But as She is in Her form as
 ‘Maya and Avidy’ Shakti the cause of bondage, so as Vidya
  Shakti She breaks the bonds Pashupishs-Vimochin!) (see
 ‘¥. 78, LalitdsahasranAm), and is thus the Liberatrix of the
  Pashu from his bondage.
        ‘Nitya Tantes says that the Bata of the Dirya is the
 ‘best, the Vita  the next best, and Pashu the lowest. In fact,
  the ctato of the Inet ie the starting pointin Stdhand, thet of
the dst the goel, and that of tho Vire is the stoge of one
  ‘whe having cossed to be a Pashu ison the way to the attain
  mens   of the goal. From being a Pashin, « man rises in this
  for some other birth to be @ Vim and Divyabhava or
                                   497
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
Devatabhiva is awakened throngh Virebhiva, ‘The Pich-
 chhild Tontra says (X, see also Utyatti Tantra, LXIV)
‘that tho difference between the Vira and the Divya lies ia
‘the Uddhatamanase, that is, passioateness or activity by
 whiok the forme                 r and which is due to the
                     is characterized,
 ‘reat effort of Rajas to prooure for the Sédhaka » Sattvik
 state, Just as there are degrees in the Pashn stste, 0
 there are clesses of Vis, some being higher than others,
       ‘The Divya SAdhaks also is‘of higher or lower kinds
 ‘The lowest is only a.dogree higher than the host typs of
  Vira, ‘The highest’ completely realize the Devernature
 wherein Sativa exists in state of lasting. stability
 ‘Amongst this clas ere the Tattvajnéut and Yogi. ‘The letter
‘ae emisncipated from    all ritual. ‘The lower Divya class may
 apparently tske part in the ritnal of the Vira. The object
 and and of all Sadhen6, whetherof Pashu or Vita or Divya,
 in to develop Sottvaguna, ‘The Tantres give descriptions
 cf eachof the three classes. ‘The chief general distinction,
 ‘which ie constantly sepoated, between the pare Pash (for
 ‘there aro also Vibhiva-poshus) and the Visa, is that the
 former dots not, and the later does, fllow the Panchctattva
 ritual, in the form presoribed for Vittchdrs and deseaibed in
 ‘the next Chapter. Other pottions of the description. are
 charnctotistiog of the TAmasik charncter of the Psskn. 80
 ‘Kubjie Zanéva (VII) after describing this class of man to be
 ‘the lowest, points ont vations forms of their ignorance. 80
 ‘says that he tlle ill of other classes of belisvers. ‘Thetis,
 Iho fn aoctatian-minded.and decries other forms of worship
 ‘than his own, s chaructarstic of the Pasha the world over.
  Hoo distinguishes one Deva from another an if they oro
  really difforent and nob merely the plaral manifestations of
 ‘the One, 80, the worshipper of Rama may abuse the wor
 shipper of Krishna, ond both decry the worship of Shive
  or Devt. As the Veda says, the One is called by vatiouws
  names. Oving to bis ignorence “he is elweys bathing”,
  tat i, he is alwoys thinking about external and ceremonial
                                 498
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 purity, This, though good in its way, is nothing sotnpared
 with internal purty of mind, He has ignorant or wrong
 ideas, oF want of faith, oncoming (Shakts) Tantra Shastra,
 Sacrifioes, Gura, Images, and Mantra, the lst of which he
 ‘thinks to be mere lettats only and not DevatA (ee Prana
 toshinl, 647 tao, Pichohhilé, X). He fllows the Veidi
 rule relating to Maithuna on the fith day whon the wife is
 Rituanstd (Riw-hélom, vind devi ramanam parioarjayel)
 ‘Some of the descriptions of the Pesha seem to refer to the
 lowest class. Generally, howeve:, one may say that from
 the standpoint of a Viréchir, all those who follow. Veds-
 chia, Veishnevéchaca and Shaivichtra are Pasbus. The
 Kubjik Tantsa (VID) gives a desotiption of ‘the Divya.
 Tia enlogies would seem to imply that in all matters which
 it mentions the Pashuis lacking... But this, as regards some
 ration, i Stati (praise) only. Thus Be has « strong faith
in Ved, Shistza, Dova and Guru, and over speaks tho trath
 which, as also other good qualities, must be allowed to the
 ‘Peshu, He avoidsall cruelty and other bad actions          and
‘regards alike both friend and fos, He avoids the company
 of the intigionswho decry’        the Devata All Devasho
 regards 0s beneficial, worshipping all without drawing
istinotions. Ths, for instance, whilst an orthodox up-
 country Hindu of the Pashu kind who is « worshipper of
‘Rima cannot even bear to hear tho name of Krishna, though
 ‘Vishnu, tho Divya would equally reverence both knowing
ach to be an aspect of the one Grest Shakti Mother of
 Doves    and Men. ‘This is one of the frst qualities of the high
ShAkta worshipper. As a worshipper          of Shakti he bows
  down at the fect of women rogarding thom as his Guru
(Serindm pidatalam      drishivd qurwiod Bhdvoyet suit). He
  ‘offers everythingto the supreme Devi regardingthe whole
‘universe as pervaded by Stet (Shakti, not “‘woman”) and
  as DevatA Shiva is (he knows) in all men. ‘The whole
  ‘universe (Brakménda)    is pervaded by Shiva Shalt,
                                499
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘The description cited also deals with bis ritual, saying
 that he does daily ablutions, Sandhys, wears clean cloth,
‘the Tripondza     mark in ashes or red sandal, end ornaments
of Radriksha beeds, He does Japa (recitation of Mantras
 extemal and mental) and vorship (Archana), Ho wor-
ships the Pits and Devas and perforin all the daily rites.
 “Ho gives daily charity. He meditatea upon his Gure daily,
and does worship thrice daily and,.as « Bhairava, worships
 Parameshvart with Divyabhive, He worships Devi ot
 night (Vaidik worship being by day), and after food (otdi-
 nary Vaidik worship being done before taking food). He
 rales obeisince to the Kaula Shakti (Sulastx) versed in
 ‘Tantre and Mantra, whoover She be and whether youthful
 or old, He bows to the Kula-trees (Kulavriksha). He
 ver strives for the attainmént and maintenance of Devati-
 ‘hive and ia himself of the nature of a Devata
       Portions of thio description appear to raf to the ritual
 and oot Avadhite Divys, ond to this extenb are epplicable
to the high Vien also, ‘The Mabfnirvans        (I, 36) describes
the Divya as all but a Deva, ever pure of heart, to whomall
 ‘opposites ao alike (Dvandvtta) such as pain and pleasure,
 heat and cold, who is free from sitechment to worldly
‘things, the same to all creatures ond forgiving, The text
 Thave published, therefor, says that there is no Divyabhara
 in tho Kaliyaga nor Pashubhiva ; for the Peshn (or his
 wile) mast, with his own hand, collet leave, flowers and
 frail, and cook is food, whish regulations and others are
 Impessible or difficult in the Kali age. As a follower of
 ‘Smmti, he should not “see the face of a Shtdra et worship,
 cor even think of s women” (refering to the Panchetattra
 ritual). The Shyémfrchana (cited in Harstattvedtdbiti,
 '348) speaks to the same effet. On the other hand, there is
 ssuthority for the proposition that in the Kalivagn there is
  nly Pashubhiva. ‘Thus, the Prinatoshint (510-617) cites 2
  ‘passage purporting to come from the MehGnirvna which
 is in direst opposition to the above—
                                 500
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
       Dinys-vra-maye Uitoah kalau nésti kadAchane
       Kenalam pashu-bidvena mantrasiddhir Baaven nrindon
       (dn the Kali age there is no Divya or Virthava, tis
 only by the Pashi-théva that men may sttain Maxtm-
 siddhi.)
       T have disoussod this latter question in greater detail in
 ‘he
 Texts”introduction   to the sixth volume of the series of “Téntxke
       Dealing    with the former postage from the Mahinirvina,
 the Commentator explains it as meaning “that the oondi-
tions and characters of the Kaliyuga are not such as tobe
 ‘productive of Pashubhiva, or to allow ofits AchAra (in the
 sense of the strict Vaidik ritual). No ons, he seys, can
 now-a-days fally perform the Vedchéra, Vaishnavach&ra,
 and Shaivachéra rites without which’ the Vaid and
 Paurfnic Yajoa and Mantre ote fruitless. No one now
 goes through the Beshmacharye Ashrama or edopts, after
 tho Aftioth year, Vanaprastha. ‘Those whom the Vaidile
rites do not control cannot expect the frit          of their obser
 vances. On the contmry, men have taken to drink, associ:
ate with the low and are fallen, a8 are also those who asvoc-
 ste with thom, ‘There can, therefore,          be no pare Pash.
(That is epparantiy         whilst there mey be « natazal     Pasa
 disposition the Vaidik rites appropriate to this Bhiva caa-
 not be carried ont.) Under these circumstances, the duties
 prescribed by the Vedas which are appropriate for the
 Pashu being incapable of performance, Shiva, for the liber-
ation of mea of the Kali age, has proclaimedths Agama.
 Now there is no other way.”
       ‘Wo are, perhaps, therefore, correct in saying theb it
  comes   to this—In a bad age, such as the Kali, Divya men
azo (to say the lust) very coca, though common-sense             and
                rast, I suppose, allow for exceptions. Whilst
  ‘the Pashu natural disposition exists, the Vaidik ritual which
  he should follow cannot be done. It is in faot largely
  obsolete. ‘The Vaidik Pashu or man who followed the
                                    sor
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘Vaidile rituals in thir entirety is nonexistent, He must
  follow tho Agamio rituals which, as a fect, the bull of men
  dio. ‘Tue Agoma must now govem the Pashu, Vira and
‘would-be Divya alike.
         ‘As I have frequently explained, there are vatious
 communities of the followers of Tantra or Agama ac-
 cording to tho several divisions of the worshippers of
 the five Devatis (Panctopisaka). Of the five classes,
 the mest important are Vaishnava, Shaiva and Shakta.
 I do aot, howovor, hastate to repeat. a statoment of a
 foot of which those who spoak of “The Tantra” ignore.
        ‘The main cloments of Sidhené axe common to sll
 such communities following the Agamas; such as Paje
 (Ganer and outer), Pratima or other emblems (Linga, Shalo-
 gama), Upechdrs, Sendiyé, Yejns, Vrate, Tapas, Mandala,
 ‘Yantre, Mantra, Japa, Purieboharana, Nyse, Bhite-
 shaddbi, Must, Dhyane, Samskira ands0 forth. "Even the
 ‘Vamachara citaal which some wrongiy think to be peculiar
 to tho Shakias, is or was followed (I am told) by mem-
bers of other Sampradiyas inelading Jainas and Bouddhos.
 Both, in so fae as they follow this ritual, are ‘reckoned
 amongst Kaulas thoug                   h, ofa lower clas,
                             as being uoa-Vaidik,
        ‘A main point to be here remembered,       and one-which
 establishes both the historioal and practical importance of
 ‘the Agamas is this:—That whilst some Vaidik rites still
 ‘exist, the bull of the ritual of to-day is Agamio, tet i, what
 is popularly called Tintrik. The Purdnas are replete with
 ‘Tantrikrituas.
        Notwithstanding a general community of ritual forms,
 ‘thare aro, somo variances which are due to two causes
 fially, to diferenoe in the Devatd worship, and secondly, to
 Aiflerence-of philosophical basis according as itis Advaita,
 Vishishtsdvaita, or Dvaita, ‘The presentment of funda-
 mental ideas is sometimes in different terms, Thus the
 Vaishnava Pancharétra Agama describes the creative pro-
 cess   in terms of the Vydhss, and the ShaivaShakta Agomes
                                  502
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
  explain it as the AbhAbe of the thivty-six Tativas. There
  deal with only one form, namely, Shaka S4dhanA in whi
   the Ishtadevat® is Shakti in Her many forms
        I will here shortly describe some of the ritual forms
  above-mentioned, promising that 80 cursory an account:
  does not do justiceto the beauty aid profundity of many
  ‘of them.
        ‘There are four different forms of worship corresponding
 ‘to four different states and dispositions (Bhiva) of the
 ‘Sidbake himeslf, ‘The realization that tho Supreme Spirit
  (Parmitml) and tho individual spirit (JIvAtmd) are one,
  that everything is Brakman, and that nothing but the Brah-
 ‘man has lasting being is’ the highes: state or Brahma
  bhiva, Constant: meditation with Yoge-processes upon
 the Devata in the heart is the lower form (Dhyanabhiva).
 Lower still is that Bhdva of which Joya (recitations of
 Mantra) end Hyatosof praise (Stava) axe the expression ;
 and lowest of all is externel worship (Bahyapt)
       Péjabhiva. i. that which arises out of the dualistic
  notions of worshipper nd worshipped, the servant and the
  Lond, « dualism which nocestarly exists in greater or less
 ‘degree until Monitio experience (Advaita bhivs) is attain-
 ed, Ho who realizes the Advaitatattva kaows that alli
 ‘Brahman, For him there is neither worshipper nor worship-
 ped, neither Yoru, nor POj& nor Datrant, Dhyéna, Stava,
 Jepa, Viata or other ritual or processof Sidhand. "For, he
‘a Siddha in its fullest sense, that is, he has sttained Siddhi
 which is the sim of Sadhand. As the Mahdnirvina says,
 “for him who has faith in and knowledge of the root, of
 what use aro the branches and leaves?” Brihmanism
 ‘nus sagely resolves tho Western dispate as to the neousity
 or advisability of vitual. Tt afm it for thooo who have
 nob abiainod the end of all ritual, Tt lessens ond refines
 ritual es eptitual progress is made upwards ; it dispenses
 ‘with it altogether when there is n0 longer need for it. Tut,
 ‘until a man is @ real “Knower”, ome SAdbandis necessary
                                  503
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 if he would Become ons, Tho nature of Sédhon8, again,
 differs aovording to the temperaments (Bhiva) above de-
 scribed, and also with reference to the capacities wna spictaal
 advancement of each in his own Bhiva, What may be
 suitable for the unlottered peasant may not be so for those
 more intellectually and spiritually advanced. Tt is, how-
 over, afine general principle of Tantrik worship that capacity,
 and not social distinction such as caste, determines compe:
 ‘tenoy for any particular worship. This is not 60 a8 regards
 he Vaidik ritaal proper. One might have supposed that
 ‘eredit would have been given to the Tatra Shastra for this,
 ‘But oreitis given for nothing. ‘Those who dilate on Vaile
 foxclusiveness have nothing to say os regards the absence
 of i in the Agems. ‘The Shidra is precluded fom the
 performance of Vaidik rites, the reading of the Vedas,
‘nd the recitalof Vaid Mantras, His worship is practically
 limited to that of bis Ishtadevat, the Vinedingw-pOj&
 with Tintrik and Penrinilé mantra and such Vrata as consist
 in penanco and charity. In other eases, the Vrata is per
 formed through « Brthnians, ‘The Tantra Shistra makes
 no oasie distinotion os rogarés worship, in the sense that
 though it may not challenge the exslusive right ofthe twice-
‘born to Vaile rites, it provides other and similar rites for the
 Shidra, ‘Thus there is both a Vaidix ond Tantric GByatst
 tand Sandhya, and there are rites available for worshippers
 of all castes, All may reed the Tantras which contain their
form of worship, and carry them out and recite the Téntrik
 ‘Manis, All castes, even the lowest Chandla may, if
otherwise ft, recive the Tintrk initiation and bo a member
 of a Chakra or circle of worship. In the Chakra all the
 members partake of food snd drink together, and are then
deemed to be greater than Brihmanas, though upon the
 break-up    of the Chakra the ordinary casts and social relations
 aze reestablished, It is neossmry to distinguish between
 social diferonose and competency (Adhiléra) for worship,
 Adbikira, so fundamental o principle of Brihmonism,
                                504
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
 ‘means that all are not equally entitled to the same teaching
 ‘and ritual. They ere entitled to that of which they are
 capable, ieespective (according to the Agama) of such socal
 distinctions as caste, All aro competent for Tantrik worship,
 for, in the words of the Gantamiya which is a Vaishnava
 ‘Tantra (Cup. 1), the Tantra Shastra is for all castes and all
        Sorua-oamdihikfirash cha ndrinam yogya eva cha
 ‘Though according to Vaidile usage, the wife was oo-operator
 (Sahadharmint) in the housshold rites, now-a-days, = far as
 can gather, they are not accounted much in such matters,
 ‘hough    it is said that the wife may, with  the consent of her
 Inusbend, fat, take vows, perform Home, Vrate and the like,
 ‘According to the Tantra Shastra, a woman may not only
 receive Mantra, bat may, as Guru, initiate and give it (see
 Radrayimala 11, ii, and XV). She is worshipped both a5
 wife of Guru and as Guru herself (ecoib, Ii, Matrikébheda
 ‘Tantra (c. vil), Ansadakalpa ‘Tantra cited in PrAnatoshist,
 1. 68, and as regards the formar Yogint Tantra cap. i. Gree
‘patni Makeebini       qurur eva). ‘Tho Devi is Heresléthe Gura
‘of all Shisiras    and women, sa indeod all females Her embodi-
 routs, axo in a peooliar sonse, Her representatives. For
this reason all women are worshipful, and no harm should
 bbe ever done them, nor should any female animal be sscri-
 ficed.
        ‘Pj is tho common term for ritual worship, of which
 there are numerous synonyms in the Sanskrit language
 suoh as Archang, Vandana, Saparyy®, Arhand, Namasya,
 ‘Aroha, Bhajant, though some of these stress oeriain done aspoots
 ‘oft. Paj8an also       Vrata  which are Kémyn,  that is,       to
 gain a particular end, aro preceded by the Sankalpa, that
 is, a statement of therasolve to worship,as alo of the part
 cular object (if auy) with which it is done, Tt runs in the
 form, “I—of Gotra—and so forth (identifying the
 individual) am about to perform this Paj (or Vata) with
 the object—.” Thereby the attention and will of the
                                  595
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Stahaks are fotusved and braoed up for the matterip hand,
  Hore, es elsewhere, the vital which follows is designed Toth
  by ite complexity and variety (which prevents the tiring
  of the mind) to keep the attention always fixed, to prevent,
 it from straying and to emphasize both attention and will
  by continued sets and meatal workings.
        Tho object of the worship isthe Ishtadovats, thet i,
 ‘the partiular form of the Deity whom the Sidhaka wor:
  ships, such as Devi in the case of a Shikta, Shiva in the
  case of the Shaiva (in eight forms in the case ‘of Ashts-
  ‘mirtipGja as to which see Todala ‘Tantra, cap. V) and
  Vishna as ouch or in His forms aa Rama and Krishna ja
  the case of the Vaishnava Sédhaka,
        ‘Au object is used in th outer Paja (Buhyapaj) stich
 ‘85 an image (Pratima), 0 picture, and emblem euch as a jar
 (Kolass), Shilegrdsta {in the case of Vishnu worship), Lings
‘end. Yoni of Gausipetta    (in the case of the worship) of Shiva
 (vith Devt), or « geometrical design called Yantee, In the
 case of outer worship the frst is-the lowest form’and the
 Inst the highest, Ttisnot all who are capable of worshipping
 swith a Yonira, Tt is obvious that simpler minds must be
 satited with images which delineate the form of the Devat
 ‘completely and in material form. ‘The advanced contem-
 plate Devatd in the lines and exrves of a Yantra.
        Tn external worship, the Sédhaks should frst worship
  inwardly the mental image of the Devst& which the outer
  objects assist to produce, end then by the life giving (Prina-
  pratishths) ceremony he should infuse the image with life
  by the communication to it of the light, conseiousnese, and
  energy (Tejts) of the Brahman within him to the image
  without, from which there then bursts the lustre of Her
  ‘whose substance is Conscioumnoss:Iteel (Choitanyamsy?).
  Tn ovary placo Sho exits aa Shakti, whethor in stone or
rmotal as eoewhere, but in matter is veiled and aéemingly
  inert. Chaitanya (Consciousness) is arousedby the worship-
  per through the Prinapratishthd Mantra. An object exists
                                  596
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
  fof SAdhale onlyin go far as his mind perceives it. For
  od in him ita estence us Consciousness is realized
       ‘This ia a ting place to say « word on the subjoot of
  ‘tho alloged Idolatry” of the Hindus. We are all awareof
  ‘that a similar charge has been made against Christians
  the Catholic Church, and those who ate conversant with
  this controversy will bo better equipped both with know-
Tedge and coution against the mating of general and indis-
  criminate charges
        Tt may be well doubted whether the world contains
 su idolater   inthe nnae in which that term is used by persons
  ‘who speak of “the heathen worship of sticks and stones”.
  According to the traveller A. B. Klis (“The evenshi “nogroes
                                                        speaking
  peoples of the Gold Coast of West Aftica”),
  of the Gold Coast are always conscious thab their oferiga
‘and worship are not paid to the inanimate object iteelé but
  to the indwelling God, and every mative with whom I have
  conversed on the subjeot has laughed at the posibility of
  its being supposed thst he would worship or cer sacifce
+o some such object as. stone.” Nevertheless a missionary
 or some traveler tight tll him that he did. An absurd
‘attitude on the part of the superior Wester is that    in which
  ‘he latter aot mony tolls the coloured races what they
  should believe, but what notwithstanding denial,       they én
{fact believe and ought to hold according to the tenets of the
  lattars rdigion
        "The charge of idolatry is kept up, actwithetanding the
  explanations given of their belicts by those against whan
  itis made. In fot, tho conviction that Bastem races axe
  infriar is reeponsible for this. If we disregard such beliefs
  then, anything may be idolatrous. Thus, to those who
  disbelieve in the “Real Presence”, the Catholic worshipper
  ofthe Host isan dolater worshipping the material substance,
  broad. But, to.the wordhipper who belioves that it is the
  Body of the Lord under the form of bzead, such worship
  can never be idclatrous. Similarly as rogerds tho Hinds
                              507
                 SHAKTI        AND SHAKTA
  worship of images, They aro not to be huld to worship
 lay or stone because others disbelieve in the efficacy of
 the Prénepratishth® ceremony. When impartially consider
 ced, there is nothing nevossarily superstitious or ignorant
 in this rite, Nor is this the case with the doctrine of the
 Real Presence which     is interpreted in various ways, Whether
cither   rite has the alleged   effect attributed to it is another
 ‘question, Allmatteris, according to Shalta doctrine, « mani-
 festaton of Shalt, thats he Mothor Hers in material
 guise, She is prosent in and as everything which exits
‘The onlinary man doos not go view things. He sces marely
 {gross unconscious matior. Tf, with euch en outlook, ho were
 fool exough to worship whatwas inferior to himself, he would
 be an idelater. But the very act of worship implies that
 ‘the abject is supotior and conseigus, To the truly enlighten-
 ed Shikta everything isan object of worship, for all is a
 ‘unifestation of God who is therein worshipped. But that
 ‘way of looking at things mast be attained. ‘The untutored
 ‘mind must be aided to seo that this is so. This is elected
 by the Prinapratisktht cite hy which “life is established”
fn the image of grom matter. ‘The Hindu then bolioves
 that the Pratimd or image is © reprosentation and the dwell-
 ing place of Deity, Whab dilfermuce, it may be asked, does,
‘this eally make How           can a man's belif alter the objective
 fact! The answer is, docs not. God is not manifested
 by the image merely because the worshipper belioves Him
to be there He is there in fact slready. All that the
 Prinapeatishtha rite does is to enliven the consciousess
 of the worshipper into a realization of His presence, And
 if Ho be both in fact, and to the bell of the worshipper,
 provent, then the Image is a proper object of worship. Tt
 4 the subjective state of the worshipper's mind which
 vtormines whethor an act is idolatrous or not. ‘Tho Prina-
  [pratishtha riteis thas a mode by which the Sidhaka       is given
‘a trae object of worship and is enabled to affirm          a belief
  in the divine omnipresence with respect to that partioular
                                    508
                    SHAKTA SADHANA
 ‘object of his devotion, ‘The ordinary notion thet it is
‘mero matter      is cast aside, andthe divine rotion that Divinity
is manifested       in all that is, is held and affirmed. “Why not
 ‘then”” (come missionary ‘has ssid) “worship my boot?”
 ‘There are contemptible people who do so in tbe Buropesn
 ‘sense of that phrase. But, nevertheles, there is no reason,
 according to Shika teaching, why evenhis boot shonld not
  be worshipped by one who regards it and all elso as 8 mani-
 festation of the One who iain every objest which constitutes
 ‘the Many. ‘Thus this Menisti belief is alfirmed in the wor-
 ship by some Shilktas ofthat which          to tho gross and ordinary.
  mind ie merely an objaot of lust. To such minds, this is a
 revolting and obsceno worship. To those for whom such
 ‘object of worship is ebsoene, such worship is and must be
 ‘obscene, But what af the mind which is so purified that it
sees the Divine presence in that which, to the mass of men,
 is an incitomentto and objeotof lust! Aman who, without
  desire, can truly so worship mast be e very high SAdhaka
 indeed. ‘The Shite Tantra affirms the Greek saying that
to the pure all things are pure, In this helief and with, as
  the Jninimava Tantra says, the object of teaching man
  ‘hat   this isso, we ind the ritual uss of substonces ordinanily
  accounted impure, ‘The real objection to the goneral adop-
  tion or even knowledge of such rites lcs, from the Monistic
  standpoint, in the fact that the vasb bulk of humanity are
  cither of impuze or weak mind, and that the worship of en
  ‘object which is capable of exciting lust will produce it,
  not to mention the hypocrites who, under cover of such a
  ‘worship, would ses to gratify their desiree. In the Paradise
  Legend, just as amongst some primitive tribes, man and
  ‘woman     go naked. It was and is after they have fallen that
  ‘nakedness is observed hy mindsno longer innocent, Rightly.
  therefore, from their standpoint, the bulk of men condemn
  ‘such worship. Bocouse, whatever may bo its theoretical
  justification under conditions which rarely occur, prag-
  ‘matically and for the bulle of men they azo fullof danger.
                                      599
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘These who go to meet temptation should remember the
 risk. I have read that it is recorded of Robert: d'Arbrissel,
 ‘the saintly fomder of the community of Fonte a’Bvreult
 ‘that he was wont.on occasions to sleep with his mins, to
 sortify bis flesh and as @ mode of strengthening his vill
 against its demands... He did not touch. them, but his
 exceptional suooess in preserving his chastity would be no
 ‘ground for the ordinary man undertaking so. dnngerovs an
 fxperiment. In short, in order to be completely just, we
 mush in individual cases, consider intention and good faith.
 ‘But, practically and for the mass, the counsel and daty to
 avoid the occasion of sin i, according to Shtstik principles
 themselves, enjoined. As a matter of fact, such worship
 has been confined to 40 limited a class that it would not
 Ihave been necessary to deal with the subject were it not
 connected with Shilcta worship, the matter in hand. To
 overt again to the “missionnry's boot’”: whilst all things
 tay be the object of worship, choice is natarally mado of
 those objects which, by reason of their offset on the mind,
 are more fitted fr it, An iiage oF one of the usual emblems
 ig-more likely to raise in the mind of the worshipper the
 thought of e Devatt than a boot, and therefore, even epart
 from scriptural outhority, it would not be chosen. But,
 it has been agein objected, ifthe Brahman is in and appears
 ‘equally in ell things, how do we find some affirming that
 ‘one image is more worthy of worship than another. Similar
 ly, in Catholia countries, we find worshippers who prefer
‘certain churches, shrines, places of pilgrimage and. 2e-
 presentations of Christ, His Mother and the Saints Such
 ‘preferences ore not statements of absolute worth but of
 personal inclinations in.the worshipper due to his belist in
 their special effoncy. for im. Psychologiclly all this
 ‘means that e particular mind finds that it works best in
 the dizeotion desired by means of particular instruments,
 ‘The image of Kalt provokes in general only disgust in am
 European mind. But to the race-consciousness which has
                               50
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
 evolved that image,   of Doity, it ia the oause and object of
 ferveat devotion. Ta every cee, those means must be sought
 and applied which will produee a prectioal and good result
 for the individual consciousness in question, It must bo
 admitted, however, that image worship like everything else
 is capable of sbuse; thet is a wrong and (for want of
 Detter term) an idolatréus tendency may manifest, ‘This is
 dus to ignorance. Thus the aunt of a Catholic schookboy
 friend of mine had a statue of St. Anthony of Padua Tt
 ‘tho saint did not answer her prayers, she ured to give the
 image « besting, and then abut it up in a cupboard. with
 its “faco to the wall” by way of punishment, I could cite
 caummbers of instances of this ignorant state of mind taken
 from the past and present. history of Europe. Tt is
 quite ecroneous to suppose that such absurdities are con-
 fined to India, Afri or other coloured countries, Never
 theles, we must, in -esch case; distingish between the
 trae scriptural: tesching and the acts and notions of
 ‘which they are’an abuse,
       The materials used or things dene in Pj are called
 Upachéra, ke common umber of theco is sixteen, bat
 there are more and les (abe “Principles of Tantra,” val. i.
 ‘The sixteen which include some of the lesser number and
 are included in the greater are : (1) Asana (seating of the
 image), (2) Svagata (welcoming of the Devsta), (8) Padya
 (water for washing the feet) («) Arghys (offerings which
 ray be general or Siminys and special or Vishesha) made
in the vestel,(6)(@) Achamans (water for sipping end clean-
 sing the, ipt—orfered twice), (7) Madhuperks (honey, ge,
 nile and curd), (8) Snina (water for bathing), (9) Vesana
 (lot for germent), (19) Sbharana (jewels), (11) Gandha
 (Bexkuane), (12) Pushpa (Bowers), (18) Dhapa (incense), (14)
 Dipa (lights, (16) Naivedya, (food), and (16) Vandana 0:
 ‘Namasiiya (prayer)
       ‘Why should such things he chosen ? The Westerner who
 ‘has heard of lights, flower and inoense in Christian worship
                                jut
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  may yet ask the reason of the rest, ‘The answer is simple,
 ‘Honour is paid to the Devat in the way honour is paid to
 friends and those men who are worthy of veneration, So
 the SAdhaka gives thst same honour to the Devsta, a course
 ‘hat the least advanoed mind can understand. When the
 guest arrives he is bidden to take a seat, he is welcamed
 and asked how he has journeyed. Water is given to him
 to. wash his dnsty foot and his mouth, Food and other
 ‘things are given him, and so on, These are done in honour
  of men, end the Deity is honoured in the same woy.
        Some partioular articles vary with the POjé, ‘This,
 ‘Tulas loaf is issued in the Vishnu-pdja; eel leaf (Bilva)
 {in the Shiva-pOja, and to the Devi is ofered the scarlet
 hibiscus (Jaba). ‘The Mantras said and other ritual details
 may vary accurding to the Devstd. wombipped. The seat
 (Asana) of the worshipper is parted as also the Upackara.
 Salutation is madeto the Shakti. of support (AdhAra-shalet),
 the Power sustaining all, Obstructive Spirits are driven
 vay (Bhitipesarpane) and the ten quarters are fenced
rom their attack by stelking the earth three times with the
 left foot, uttering the weapou-mantra (Astrabja) “Phat”,
 ‘and by snapping the fingers round the head. Other rituals
 ‘alto enter into the warship besides the offering of Upachara
 such as Prindyama or Breath control, Bhitashudahi. or
 ‘purifcation of the elements of the body, Jape of Mantra,
 Nyasa (v. pos), meditation (Dhyfna) and obeisance (Prs-
 ima).
        Besides the outer and material POjt, there is « higher
 {nner (AntazpijA) and montal (Minasap6ja). Here there
in no offering of material things to an image or emblem, but
  the ingredients (Ugechsa) of worship are imagined only.
  ‘Thus the Sédhaks, in lew of material flowers offered with
  ‘the hands, lays a the feet of the Devata the flower of good
  action. In the secret Réjasik Pajé of the Vamfchtsi, the
  ‘Upachira are the five Tattvas (Panchatativa), wine, most
  and s0 forth described in the next Chapter. Just as flowers
                                st
                SHAKTA SADHANA
‘nd incense and co forth aro offered in the general publio
tual, so in this specil seeot ritual, dealt with inthe next
‘Chapter, the functions of esting, drinking and sexual union
‘te oflred to the Devat
     ‘A marked featoro of the Tantra Shistras is the use of
the Yantra in worship. This then takes the place of the
{mage or emblem, when the Sidhaka bas arrived at the
stage when he is qualifed to worship with Yantra, Yantra,
in its most general sense, means simply instrament oF that
bby which anything is aocomplished. In worship, itis that
bby which tho mind is fixed on its objeot. ‘The Yantra, in
lieu of the image or emblem holds the attention, and is
Doth the object of worship, ‘and the means by which it is
carried out. It is said to be co eallod beoause it subdues
(Niyantrana) Inst, enger and the other sufferings of Jtva,
and the snlferings caused thereby. »(Tuntze-tattva, 519.
Stdhinuna Uptsini-tattva) The Yantra ia a disgram
drawm or psinted on paper, or other substances, engraved
con metal, oxt on crystal_or stone. The magicel trestisos
mention extraordinsty Yantras drawn on leopand’s and
donkey's skin, baman bones and so forth. ‘The Yantras
‘vary in design acoocding to the Devat whose Yantra it ia
tard in whose worshipit is used. ‘The difference between &
Mandala (which ia also a Sgure, marked generally on the
ground) is that whilst @ Mandala moy be used in the ease
of any Devata, « Yantra is appropriate to a specific Devat
only, As different Mantras are diferent Devatis, and
diffeving Mantras are used in the worship of each of the
Devatis, so variously formed Yantres are peculiar to each
Dovuté and sr uted in ite worship. The object   Yantras sre
therafore of vasious designs, according  to the       of wor-
         The cover of “Téntrik Texts” shows tho great
Shr Yantra, In the metal or stone Yantras no figures of
Devatis are shows, though these together with the appro-
priate Mantees commonly eppear in Yantras draws ot
painted on paper, such as the Devata of worship, Avarana
                            513
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Shaldis and oo forth. All Yantras have a common edging
 called Bhipura, a quadrangular figure with four “doors”
 which encloses and separates the Yantra from the outside
 World. A Yantré in my possession shows serpents crawling
 outside the Bhipu. The Kanlavaliys Tantre says that
 ‘the distination hebwoen Yantra and Devaté is that between
 ‘the body and the self, Mantra is Devaté and Yantra is
 Mantra,in that itis the body of the Devatd who is Mantra.
     Yantiam mantra-mayam prokiam manirdimé devataiva. hi
     Déhdimance yathd Dledo yontredevatayes tathé.
       ‘As in tho case of the image, certain preliminarios pro-
 cole the worship of Yantra, The worshipper fast moditates
 ‘upon the Devata and then arouses Him or Her in himself
 He then communicates the Divine Presenoe thus aroased
 to the Yentsa, When the Devata bas by the appropriate
 ‘Mantra been invoked into the Yanita, thé vital ais (Prins)
 ‘of the Devatt, are infused. therein by the, Prénapratishtha
 ceremoay, Mantra acd Mud (6ee for ritual Mebdnirvans
 Vi. 2 cg) The Devatais thereby installedin the Yantra
 which ia no longer ‘mere gross-matter veiling the Spinit
 ‘which has been always there, but instinct with its aroused
 ‘prosenos which the Sidhaka    first weloomes and then worships,
      ‘in Téntrik worship, the body as well as the mind has to
do ite part, the former being mado to follow the later.
 "Thisis of course seen in all itual, where there is bowing,
 genutlestion   and so forth, As all else, gesture is hero much
 claborated. ‘Thus, certain postures (Asana) are assumed in
 ‘worship and Yoga. ‘There is obeisance (Pranima), some.
 ‘times with eight parte of the body (Ashsingaprandma), and
 circomambulation (Pradakhina) of the image, In Nydin
‘he hands are made to touch vavious parta of the body and
 soforth, A-nota        instance of ble
                                      this practic axe tho Modna
 ‘which dre largely used in the intr ritual. Mudri in
 ‘this sense is ritual manaal gesture. The term Mudra has
  tres meanings. In worship (UpQsant) it mesns these
  gestures, Ta Yoge it means postures in which not only
                                  M4
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
the bands but,the whole bedy takes part And, in the
 seoret worthip with the Panchatattve, Mudr& means various
 kinds of parohed cereals which are taken with the wine and
 other ingredients (Urachira) of that particular worship.
 ‘The term Muddis derived from the root “to please” (Sud).
 ‘Tho Tantrarije says thet in its Upasant form, Mudra is s0
 called beoanse it gives pleasure to the Devatds. ‘These
 Mndrts are very mumerons. It has been said that there
 faze 108 of which 55 aro in common use (Shabdakalpadruma
 Sub, Yoo Mudra and see Nirvins Tantra, Chap. XI).
 Possibly there are more, 108 is @ favoarite mumber. "he
 ‘Mudr8 of Upisand is the outward bodily expression of
 ‘nner resolve which it at the same time intensifies. We all
 now how in speaking we emphasize and illustrate our
 thought by gesture. So in welcoming (Avihane) the Devata,
 fan eppropriste gestare ismade. When veiling anything, the
 hhands assume that. position (Avagunthana, Mudr§). Thus
 again in maleing offering (Arghya) a gesture is made whish
 represents a fish (Matoya Mudrl), by placing the right
 hhand on the back of the lett and extanding the two thumbs
finlike on each side of the hands. This is done as the ex-
 pression of the wish and intention that the vessel which
contains water may be regarded as an ocean with fish and
 all other aquatic animals. The Stdhaka says to the Devatt
 of his worship, “this is but a small ofering of water in fat,
  but so far as my desie to honour you is concerned, regard
 it is as if T were ofering you an ocean.” ‘The You! in the
 form of an inverted triangle representa the Devt. By the
 ‘Yon! Mudr8 the fingers forma triangle as « manifestation
  of the inner desire thet the Devt should come and place
 ‘Herself before the worshipper, for the Yoni is Her Pitha or
  ‘Yantra, Some of the Mud of Hathayoge which are in the
  natare both of « health-giving gymnastic and special posi
  tions required in Yoga-practice are described in A. Avalon's
     ‘The Serpent Power”, ‘The Gheranda Sambitt, « Tantrik
  ‘Yoga work, saya (IIT. 4. 8. 10) that knowledge of the Yoga
                                sts
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Muda grant ell Siddhi,and that their performance produces
  physioal benefits, such as stobility, Grmnoss, and cure of
  Aiacese.
        Bhitashuddhi, an important Tinivik ito, means parii-
 cation of five “elements” of which the body is composed,
 and not “removal of evil demons,” as Professor Monier-
  Williams’ Dictionary has it. Though one of the mea
 of Bata is Ghost or Sint it is over af to give euch itera
 translations without knowledge, or absurd mistakes are
 likely to be made, The Mantramahodadki (Taranga 1)
 speaks of it asa rte whichis peliminary to the worship of a
 Deve,
        Devirchi-yoquati-préptyai Bitta-shuddhim. saméchare
 (For tho attainment of competenny to worship, the claments
 of which the body is composed, should be purified) The
 rateriel_ human body is/a eonipeund of the five Bhiitas
 of “earth”, “water”, “fie”, “air”, ard “ether”. ‘These
 ‘terms have not theit usual ‘Knglish meaning but denote
tho five forms in which Prakriti the Divine Power as materia
 prima munifests Herwlf. These have each a centre of
 ‘operation in the five Chakras ot Padamaa (Contre oF Lotases)
 ‘which   exist in the spinal eohimn  of the human body (see
 ‘A. Avalon's “Sorpant Power” where this matter ia fully d0-
 scribed). Tn the lowestof these contres (MAladhtra), the
 Great Devi Kandalnt, a form of the Saguna Brahman,
 resides, She is ordinarily sleeping there. In Kundalini
 ‘yoga, She is aroused and bronghé up through  the five centres,
 absorbing, as She pases through each, the Bhita of thet
 contre, the subtle Tanmétra from which it derives and the
 connected omgen of sense (Indriya). Having absorbed all
 ‘these, She isle to the sixth ox mind centre (Ani) between
 ‘the eyebrows where the last Bhita or ether js absorbed in
 rind, and the latter in the Subtle Prakriti, The last in
 ‘the form of Kundalt Shakti then unites with Shivain the
 ‘upper brain called the thousand-petallod lotus (Sehsesira)
  In Yoga this involution sotaally talze place with the resalt
                                516
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
 thatecstery SamAdhi) is attained. But-very low are succes
 ful Yogls, Therafore, Bhitasbaddhi in the enoe of the
 cntinary worshipper is an imaginary process only. ‘The
 ‘Séahaka imagines Kundall, that She is roused, that ono
 clement is absorbed into the other and so om, until all is
 ‘absorbed   in Brahman, The Yoga process        will be found
 desoribod in ‘The Serpent Power”, and Oh. V. 98 et seq.
 of the Mahinirvina gives an account of the ritual provess,
‘Tho Stdhakx having dissolved all in Bradman, « process
‘which instil into his mind the unity of all, then thinks of
 ‘tho “black man of sin” in his body. ‘The body is then
 purifed. By breathing and Mantra it is first dried and
‘thon busnt with all ita snfl inccations. Ttis then mentally
bathed with the nectar of the watormantra from head to
 feet. ‘Tho Sadhaka then thinks that in liea of his old sinful
body a new Deva body has comié into being, He who with
 faith and sincerity believes that he is regenerated is in fact
 so. To each who truly believes thet his bodyis a Deva body
 it becomes a Deva body. ‘The Devs body thus brought into
 ‘beingis strengthened by the Hacth-mentre and divine gaze
 (Divyardrshi), Saying, with Bijs, the Mantra “He I am”
 (Go'bam) the Sidhaka by Jivanyésa infuses his body with
‘the life of the Devi, the Mother of al.
        yi is a very important and powerful Tantei rite,
 ‘Tho word comes from tho root, “to place”, and moans the
placing ofthe tips of the Gingers and palm of the right hand
  con various parts of the’ body, sccompanied by Mantra,
 ‘Thono are four general divisions of NyAss, vi, inner (Antar),
  outer (Baht), acconding to the creative (Srishti) and dis-
  sclving (Samhra) order (Krama). Nyasa is of many kinds
  such as Jtvanyles, Métzikt
  Shadanganyian on the body or(Hideydi-shadangu-nyisa)
                                       Lipinyass, Rishi-nyiso,
  ‘and with the hands (Angushthidi-shadange-nyica), Pitha-
  nyfea and so on. ‘The Kulirmava (IV, 20) mentions six
  Kinds. Ench of these might come under ons or the other
  of the four gensral heads.
                                87
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Before indicating the principle ofthis rite lt us briefly
 soe what it is, After the Sidhala has by Bhtitashuddhi
 dlissalved the sinful body and made a new Deva body, he,
 by dive-nyisa infuses into it the life of the Devt, Placiag
dhs hand om his heaxt be says, “Hel am” thereby identifying
 ‘bimeelf with Shiva-Shakti. He then emphasizes it by going
 cover tho parts of the body  in detail with the Mantra Am and
 the rest thus: saying the Mantre snd whst he is doing,
 tnd touching the body on the particular part with his
 fingers, he recites —"Am (and the rest) the vital force
 (Petna} of the blessed Klik (in this instance) are here
 nm (and the rest) the life of the Blosood Kali is hare;
 ‘nm (and the rest) all the senses of the Bleed Kalikt are
 haere; Am (and the rest) may the speech, mind, sight, hear-
 ing, sense of smell of the Blessed Kalil coming here ever
 abide here  in peace and happiness: Svihs” By this, the body
 is thought to. become. like that of Dévata, (Devatémaya).
 Matis are the fifty letters of the Sanakit alphabet, for
 ‘a from s mother comes birth, so from the Brahman who,
 ss the oreatar of “‘sound” is-caled “Shabdabrahman”,
 the universe proceeds, The Mantro-hodies of the Devat
 aro composed of the Natrikt or lotters.. ‘The Sidhakn frst
 ‘sola the letters mentally (Antar-métriki-nytse) in. their
 several ploes in the six inner contres (Chairs), and then
 cextemally by physical action (Bahywmitrikienytse). The
 letters of the slphatet form the different parts of the body
 of the Devati which is thus built up in the Sédhaka himelt.
‘He plaoes his hand on different parts of his body, uttering
 Gistsotly at the sume time the appropriate Matcké for
 ‘hat part. ‘The mental disposition in the Chakra is that,
 given in the “Serpent-Power” by A. Avalon, each letter
 being repeated thus, Om Ham Namah (obeisance), Om
 Kham Nameh and to on with the rest. The extemal
 disposition is aa fellowa—The vowels are placed on the
 forehead, face, right snd lft eye, right and left ca, sight
and left'nostel, right and left cheek, upper and lower lip,
                                 58
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
  upper and lower teeth, head and hollow of the moath. The
 consonants, Ka to Va,are placed on the base of the right arm
 and the elbow, wrist base and tips of fingers, left arm, and
 right and left leg, right and left side, back navel, belly,
 heart, right an left shoulder,   and apace betweenthe shoulders
 (Rakuda). Then, from the heart to the right palm, Sha ;
from the heart to tho left palm, Sha (ssoond); from    the heart
 ‘o the right foot, Sa; from the heart to the left foot, Ha;
 and lesty from the heart to the belly and the heart to the
 mouth, Keha, ‘This MAtvikt-nytea is of soveral Kinds,
       ‘One form of Rishi-nyase is a follows :—In the head,
 salutation to Brahma and the Beahmarshis in the moutd,
 selutstion to GAyatit and other fomms of Verse; in the
 Theat, salutation to the primordial Devatd Kal in the
 hidden part (Gubye), salutation to the Bija Keim, in the
 thro fect, saluiation to Hin; ia all the bedy, salutation
 to Shrim and Kaliki,. Tn, Shadanga-nyass on the body,
 certain letets ate placed with the salutation Namah, and
 ‘with the Mantres Svaha, Vashab, Vaushat, Him, Phst on
 the heart, head, eromlodk: (Skike), eyes, the front and
  buck of the palin. In Kara-nytsa, the Mantras are assigned
 to the thumbs, index fingers, middle fingers, fourth fingers,
litle finger, end the frontand back of the palm, Prom
 the above examples the meaning of Nyion is seen, By
 associating’ the Divino with every part of the body and
 ‘with the whole of it, the mind and body azo sought to be
 rade divine to the consciousness of the Sidhaka, They
 are that already, but the mindis made to so regard them.
 ‘What if it does the English reader may ask? How can the
 regarding a thing as divine make it so? In one sense it
 does not, for mind and body are as Shakti divine, whether
 this be kuown or uot. But this must be known to the
 Sidhaka    or they are not divine for him. His mindis trained
 to look upon them as divine manifestations of the one So-
 ‘preme Essence which at base be and they are. According to
 Hindu views, primary importance is attached to mental
                                 stg
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 states, for as tho Divine Thought made the World, man
 sakeshis character therein by what he thinks. If heis
 ‘always thinking on material things and has desires therefor,
 ‘he becomes himself material and is given over to lust and
 other passions. Hf, on the contrary, he has always his mind
 on God, and associates everything with thé thought of Him,
 ‘his mind becomes pure and divine, As the Upsnished
 says, “What e man thinks that he becomes.” ‘Thought is
 everything moulding our bodily features, moral and intel-
 Teotual character and disposition, leading to and appesring
 jn our actions. Much superficial criticism is levelled at
 ‘this or othor situal, its variety, complexity, ite longthy
 character ond so forth. If it is performed mechanically
 and without attention, doubles it is mere waste of time.
 ‘But if i is done with will attention, faith and devotion, it
 ‘must necessurly achieve the result intended, ‘The rete
 ation of the sanie idea under varying forms brings home
 ‘with emphasis to the consciousness of the Stdhaka the
doctrine “his Soripture teaches him, vis, that his essence
 is Sprit end his mind'and body are its manifestation. Alli
 divine. Allis Consciousness. ‘The object    of this and all the
 other ritual is to malo that statement o real experience
 for the Sidhaks. For the ottainment of that state in which
 the Sédhels feels that the neture (Bhéva) of the Devatd
 Ines come upon hin, Nylsa isa great auxiliary. Ib is as i
 were the wearing of Divine jewels in different parta of tho
  body. The Bijas of the Devatés (which are Devatis) are
 ‘ihe jewels which the Sadhaka places on the diferent parta
‘ofhis body. By the particular Nyasahe places       his Abhishte-
 evatd in such parts, and by Vyipala-Nydesa he spreads its
 presence throughout himseli, He becomes thus pemtheuted
 by the Divino and its manifestations, thus merging oz ming-
 ling himself in or with the Divino Self or Lord. Nyfea,
  sans snd other ritual aro necossary for the production of
  the desired stato of mind and. its. purification (Chittar
  shuddhi). The whole aim and end of ritual is Chittashuddi,
                              520
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 ‘Transformation of thought is trauaformation of boing, for
  particular existence is a projectionof thought, and thoughtis
  «projection from the Consciousness which is the Root of all.
       ‘This is the essential principle and rationsl basis ofthis,
 as ofall, Tantrik Sédhand, Nyda also has cortain physical
 ‘fects, for these are depandent on the state of mind. ‘The
pure restful state of meditation is reflectedin the body af
 the worshipper. The actions of Nydsa ere said to stimalate
 the nerve centses and to effect the proper distribution of
 the Shartis of the human Seams according to their disposi
     ns and relations, proventing ditoord and distraction dang
 Worship, which ittelf holds steady the state thus indaood,
       In the Chapters on Mantramayt Shalti and VarnazaAlé,
 as also in my “Garland of Letters”, I have dealt with the
 nature of Mantra and of its SAdband An account will
 ‘also be found of the sabjost in tho Mantratattya Chapter
 of the second volume of Principles of Tantza”, Mantra
 is Devaté ond by Sadhana therewith the aonght-for (SAdhya)
 Devata is attained, that is, becomes present to the con-
 sciousnessof the Stdhaka or Mantrin. ‘Though the purpose
 of Worship (Paja), Reading (Patha), Hymn (Stava), Sacidice
 (Fors), Meditation (Dhy&ns), end that of the Dikahé-mantea
 obtained on initiation are the sume, yot tho lattar is said to
bo far more powseful, and this for the reason that in the
 fst the Sédhaka's Stdhand-shakti only operates, while in
 the case of Mantra that, Sidhand-shalti works in eonjunc-
 tion with Mantra-shakti which has the revelstion and force
 of fire, than which nothing is more powerful. ‘The special
 Mantra. which is received at initiation (Diksha) is the Bija
 fo Seod-Mantra sown in tho field of the Sadhaka’s heart,
 and the Téntrik Sandhys, Nydss, POjé, and the like are
 ‘the stem and branches upon which bynans of praise (tui)
 and prayer and homage (Vandans) are the leaves and flower,
 tnd the Kavachs consisting of Mantra, tho fruit. Gee
 Ghaptor on Mantrotatéva, volt, ‘Principles of Tantra,” Ed,
 A. Avalon)
                              sar
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘The utterance of a Mantra without knowledge of its
 rmcaning or of the Mantra-stdhand is a meré movement of
 tho lips and nothing more. ‘The Manira sleops. This is
 rot infrequently the caso in the present degeneracy
 ‘of Hindu religion, For example, a Brihmana lady
 ‘confided to me her Dikshé-mantra and esked me for its
 meaning, as she understood that I hed Bija-kosha or
 TLexioon which gave the meaning of the leiters. Her Gua
hhad not told her of its meaning, and enquiries elsewhere
 amongst Brihmanas were fruitless. Sho had been repeat-
 ing the Mantra for years, and time had brought the widom
 ‘bat it could not do her much good to sepeat what was
 withoat meaning to her.~ Jaya is the utterance of Mantra,
‘as described later. Mantra-sédhan8 is elaborate, ‘Thece
 are various proowses preliminary ta end involved in its
‘ight utterance which again consists of Mantra, There aze
 the scoraments or posifications (Samra) of the Mantra
 (Wanizasiza, p. 90). "There are “birth” and“     death” defile
 mentsof « Mantra (ib, 76, tse.) which have to be cleansed.
 This and, of conrse, much else mean that the mind of the
 ‘Mantrin bas to be propared and cleansed for the realization
 of the Devatd. There are a number of defects (Desh)
 ‘which have to be avoided or cured. There is puriication
 ‘of the mouth which utters the Mantra (Mfulebt-shodhans)
 {sto as to this ond the following Shérada Tilaka (oap. x),
 purifcetion of the tongue (Jihvé-shodhans) and of the
 Mantra (Ashauche-bhanga), Mantra processes called Kuilika,
 Nirvana, Setu (sce Shiradé Tilaks loc eit Tantrasira, and
 Puroshcharanabodhing, p. 48) which vary with the Devata,
 cof worship, awakening of Mantra (Nidribhanga) ite viteliz-
 ing through consciousness (Mantrachaitanya), pondering
  on the meaning of tie Mantra and of the Matrikis constitut-
ing the body of the Devata (Mantrictha bhivent), ‘There
  fre Dipant, Yonimadsd (seo Purohitadaxpanaca) with
  meditation on the Youiripa-bhagavatt with the Youifja
  (Bing) snd 20 forth,
                              seo
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
       In ascertaining what Mantra may be given to any
 particular individual, cortain Chakm calculations exe made,
 sceanting to which Mantme are divided into thoee
 which are friendly, serving, aupporting or destroying
  (Giddhe, Stdaya, Sosiddhs, Ari). All this ritual has
 4s its object the establishment of that pure state of mind
 and feeling which are necessary for success (Mantras).
 At length the Mantrin through his Chit-shakti awakening
 ‘and vitalxing  the Mantra which   in trath is one with his own
 consciousness (in that form) pierees through all its ceatros
 ‘and contemplates the Spotless One (Kubjik Tantra V).
 ‘The Shakti of the Mantza is called the VSchikt Shakti or
 tho means by which the Vichy Shakti or ultimate object
 is attained. ‘Tho Mantra lives by the energy of tho former.
‘The Sagune-Shalct ia the form of the Mantza is awakened by
 Sédhund and worshipged and She itis who opens the portals
 whereby the Vachyt-Shakti is reached. Thus the Mother
 in the Saguna form is the Presiding Deity (Adhisthitet
 Devatd) of the Gyatet Mantra, As the Nirguna (formless)
 One, She is its Vichy Shakti. Both are in truth one and
 tho same, But the Sidhaka, by the laws of his nature and
 its three Gunas, must frst meditate onthe gross (Stile)
 form before he can realize the subtle (Sikshma) form which
is his liberator. So far from being merely superatition, the
 Mantra-sidhani is, in nrgo port, based on profound notions
 of the natore of Consciousness snd the psychology of ita
 workings. The Sidhala’s mind and disposition ate purified,
 the Devaid is put before him in Mantra form and by. his
 own power of devotion (Sdhana Shakti) ond that latent
 in the Mantra itself (Mantra-shalti) and expressed in his
 mind on realisation therein, such mind is first identifed
‘with the gross, and then with the subtle form which is his
 own transformed consciousness and its powers.
       Tapa is defined as Vidhdnena mantrochchiranam, that
 is for default of other more suitable words), the utterance
 ‘or recitation of Mantra according to certain rules, Japa
                                523
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ay however beof nature whichis not defined by the word,
  recitation, Tt is of three kinds (Jninémava Tantrs, XX)
  namely, Vachike Japa, Updthahu Japa, Minasa Japa, ‘The
  fit   is the lowest and the last the highest form. Vachika
 is verbal Japa in which the Mantra is distinctly and audibly
  recited (Spashia-véché), Upéiiuhu Japa is less gross and
  thereiore superior to this. ere the Mantra is not uttered
  (Avyakta) but there is 2 movement of the lips and tongue
  (Gphuradvaltra) but no artculato sound is heard, Tn the
  highest form or menial uiterance (Minase-japa) there is
  neither artioalote sound nor movement. Jope takes place im
  the mind only by meditation on the letters (Chintanaishara-
 ‘ripavia). Certain conditions are prescribed as. those
 under which Japa should be done, relating to physical
 cleanliness, the dressing of) the hair, garments worn, the
 sented postore (Asana), the avoidenoe of certain states of
 rind and actions, and the nature of the recitation. Japa
 {sone a specified number of times, in Is by great Sidha-
 kas, If the mind is really centred and not distracted
 throughout thase long ond tepeated exercises the result
 rast     be successful. Repetition is in all things the usual
 process by whith a oettain thing is fixed in the mind. It is
 ‘not considered foolish for one who hae to leer e lesson
to repeat it himself over and over again until itis got by
 hheart. ‘The same principle applies to Sidhand, If the
 “Hall Mary” is sid again ond again in the Catbolio rosary,
and if the Mantra is similarly said in the Indian Japa, neither
 proceeding is foolish, provided that both be done with atten
tion and devotion, The injunction ageinst vain repetition”
 ‘was not against repetition but that of a vain character,
 Courting    is done either with a Malé or rosery (Malé-japa.or
 with the thumb of the right hand upon the joints of the
 fingers ofthat hand according to a method varying scoording
  to the Muntre, (Rare-japs),
        Puradhcharanais a form of SGdhané in which, with
  other staal, Jape of Mastra, dose « large auniber of times,
                                534
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 forms the chist part, A short ecoount of the site is given
 in the Puroshcharana-bodhint by Harekumira ‘Tagore
 (1806). Bee also Tantraséra 71 and the Pureshsharydmmava
 of the King of Nepal.) The ritual deals with preparation
 for the Sadhand as regards chsstity, food, wosship, measure
 ‘ments of the Mandape or Pandal and of tho altar, the time
 and place of performance and other matters. ‘The Sidhaka
 ‘must Iead a chaste life (Brahmacharyya) during the period
 prescribed, He must eat the pure food called Havish-
 ‘yhnngm or tiled: mile (Kxktra), fruits, Tndian vegstables,
 ‘and avoid all other food which has the effets of stimulating
 the passions. “He mst bathe, do Japa of the Stvitet Mantra,
 entertain Bribmanas and so forth. Panchagavya is eaten,
 thats, the five products of the cow, namely, nik, curd, ghee,
 zing, and dung, the two last (except in the case of the
 sigorously pious) in» omaller quantity, Before the Pj
 Shore is worship of Ganesha, and Kebstrepéla and the Sun,
 Moon, and Devas are invoked. ‘Then follows the Sankalps.
 The Ghata or Kalasa (jar) is placed in which the Devsts
 is invoked, A Mandala or figute of a. particular dosign is
 marked on the ground end on it the jar is placed. . Then
 the five or nine goms.are placed inthe jar which is painted
 red and covered with leaves. The ritual then prescribes for
 the tying of the erown lock (Shikha), the postare (Asana)
of the Sadhaka, Jopa, Nyast, and the Mantra ritusl, There
 in meditation as directed, Mantra-chaftanya and Japa of
 the Mantra the number of times for which vow has been
 mode.
        ‘The dally life of the religions Hindu was in former
    imes replete with worship. I refer those who are interested
in tho matter     to tholittle work, “The Daily Practives of the
 Hindus" by Scisha Chandve Vasu, the Sondhyivandana. of
 all Vecik Shikhés by B. V. Kamesvara Aiyyar, the Kriya-
 kindavaridhi and Purohite-darpanam, The postions and
 Madris ore Ulustrated im Biss, 8. C, Belnos' “Sandhya or
 daily peayer of the Brahmin” published in 1891. It is not
                                 525
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 hhore possible to do more than indicate the general cutlines,
 ofthe rites followed.
       As the Sidhaka wwakes he makes salutation to the
 Guru ofall and resites the appropriate Mantras and confeas-
 ing his inherent human frailty (‘“T know Dharma and yet
 would not do it, I know Adbarma end yet would not
 renoanes it,”)—the Hindu form of the common experience
 “Video msliora”, he prays that he may do right and offers
 all the notions of the day to God. Upon touching the
 ground on leaving his bed he salutes the Rarth, the
 ‘anifeetation of the All-Good, He then bathes to the
 acoompaniment of Mantra an makte oblation to the
 Devas, Rishis or Sears and the Pitris who issued from
 Sandhya, Brohmé       the Pitimaba of humanity, and then does
 rite.
       ‘Thin is the Vaidike form which differs aooording to Veda
 and Sbikhé for the twice-born and there ise Tantrikt
 Sendhya for others. It is performed thrice @ day at morn,
 at noon, and evening. ‘The Sandhy& consists generally
 speaking, of Achamana (sipping of water), Marjjens-antna
 (eprinklng of the whole body), Prindiyma (Breath-control),
‘Aghamarshana (expulsion of sn), prayer to the Sun and then
 (the canon of the Sandhya). Jepa of the Glyatst:mantra,
 Rishinyfoa and Shsdange-nyisa (7. cic), and meditetion
 fon the Devi Gayatr, in the morning as Brabmant (Shakti
  of Creation), at midday es Vaishnavi(Shakctiof maintenance),
 ‘and in evening ee Rudrint (Shakti which “destroys” in
 the sense of withdrawing creation). Tho Sandhyt with
 ‘the Aupisana firerite and Panchayajos       are the three main
Aaily rites, the last being oflerings to the Devas, to the Pitri,
 to animals and binds (after tho Vaishvadova rite), to men
  (os by entertainment of guests) and the study of Vaidik
 texte. By these five Yajuas, the worshipper daily places
  hhimeelf in right relations with all being, affirming such
  relation betmeen Devas, Fitri, Spitits, men, the omganic
  creation and himself
                                 526
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
        ‘The word “Yajna” comes from the root Yaj (to worship)
  snd is commonly translated “sacrifice”, though it includes
  other rituals than what en English reader might understand
  by that term. Thus, Mamu speaks of four kinds of Yajna
  as Deva, Bhauta (where ingredients are used), Nriyajaa
  and Pitriyajna, Sometimes the termis used in connection
  with any kind of ceremonisl-ite, andso one hears of Japa-
  yajma (cecitetion of Mantra), Dhydna-yajna. (meditation)
  land so on. ‘The Panchatattvs ritual with wine and the rest
  is ecconnted a Yojue. Yajnas are also classified eccording
  to the dispositions end intentions of the worshipper into
  Séttvika, Rijasika and Tamasika Yajna. A common form
  of Yajua is the Deva-yajua Homa rite in which offerings of
  ghee are made (i the Kanda or firepit) to the Deva of Fine
  ‘Who is the earer of oblations to the Devas, Homa is an
  anciont Vaid rte incorporated with others in the General
 ‘Tinteik ritual. Te ig-of several kinds, and is performed
  either daly, or on special eccasions, suchas the sacred thread
  ceremony, ynarriage andso forth. Besides the daily (Nitya)
  ceremanies sich as Sandhyd there are occasional cites (Nai-
  mika) and the parifcatory sacraments (Samskiira) per
 formed only once,
        ‘The ordinary ten Samakdiras (see Mabfnirvina Tantza,
  Oh, IX) are Vaidik rites done to sid and purify    the individual
 {in the important event of hs life, namely, the Garbhadbina
 sanotifying conception prior to the actual placing of the
  seed in the womb, the Purhsavana and Simantonnayana or
  actual concaption and during prognency. It bas besa
 ‘suggested that the rst Saskia is performed with refer-
  tence to the impulse to development from the ‘fertilization
  of the ovum    to the critical period : the second with reference
‘to the same impulse from the lest peziod to that of the
  viability etage of the fostus”, and the third refers to the
  period in which Uhere is viability to the full term (see
  Appendix on Samskiras. Praoavaréda, 1. 194). Then
 follows the Samskra on birch (Jite-karma), the naming
                                   597
                SHAKTI       AND     SHAKTA
 ceremony (Nina-kerans), the taking of the child outdocrs
{or the fist time tosee the sun (Nishleramana), the childs fist
 cating of vice (Annaprdsana), his tonsure (ChOdalcarena), and
‘ho investiture in the oase of the twice-bora with the sacred
‘thread (Upanayans) when the child ia reborn into spiritual
life, ‘This initiation must be distinguished from the Tatrik
initistion (Mantra-diksha) when the Bije-mantre is given by
the Guru. Tastly there is marriage (Udvths), These
Somskiras, which are all described in the ninth Chapter of
‘tho Muhfnirvina Tantra, are performed at certain stages in
the human body with a view to effect results beneficial to
‘the human organism through the superphysical and sub-
jective methods of ancient Eastern science,
       Vrntoina part of Naimittike—oecasional    ritual or Karma,
Commonly translated as vows, they are voluntary devotions
pericrmed at specfed times in honour of perticular Devatis
(such as Krishna’s biethday); or at any time (euch as the
Sivitriveata). Bach Vsste has ite peculisities, but there
taro cartain faatures common to all, euch os chastity, facing,
Dathing, taking of pure food only and no flesh or sh, The
‘great Vrata for a Shikta is the Durgi-pt}jé in honour of
the Dovt as Dung.
      ‘he fasting which is done in these or other casos is
called Tapes, a term which includes all forms of ascetic
austerity and zealous Sidhant such as the sitting between
five fires (Penchignitapsh) and the like, ‘Tapas has how-
fevera stil wider moaaing and is then of three kinds,
namely, bodily (Shisteaka), by speech (Vachika) and by
mind (Ménsse), a common division both of Indian and
Buddhist Tantra, The first includes external worship,
reverence, support of the Guru, Brahmanas and the wise
(Prajna),     bodily clesnliness, continence, simplicity of life
‘and avoidance of hurt to any being (Ahimsa). ‘The sevond
form includes trath, good, gentle and affectionate speech
 and study of the Veins, ‘The third or mental Tepes includes
 solf-rostraint, purity of disposition, tranquillity and silence.
                                 528
                      SHAKTA SADHANA
  Bach of thoso classes has three subdivisions, for Tapas may
  be Sittviku, Rajasika, or Tamas according as itis done
‘with faith, and without regard        to ite fruit; or fr ita fruit;
 cor ia done through pride and to gain honour or respect or
 power; or lastly which is done ignorantly or with a view
 toinj             ure
             and destroy   others such as Abhich       or thetraStdhand
 of the Téntrik Shatkarma (other than Shanti), that is, fasci-
 ation or Vashikarana, paralyzing or Stambhana, creating
 enmity or Vidveshana, driving away or Uchchatana, and
 ‘killing or Marana when performed for a malevolent purpose,
‘Karma ritual is called Kamnya whon it is done to gain some
 ppartionlar end such as health, proaperity and the like. The
 ‘highest worship is called Nishkiima-Karme, that is, it is done
‘ot to seouze any material benefitbut for worship’s sake only.
        ‘Though itis not part of ordinary ritual, this is the only
 place where I can conveniently mention peculiar Sidhand,
 Prevalent, so far as Iam, aware, mainly if not wholly
‘amongst Téutukes of Shilcta type which is called Nila-
 ‘idha       or Black n’ Sidhent, This is of very limited         appli-
  cation being practised by some. Vira Sidhakas in the cre-
 ‘mation ground, There are terrifyin           thing:gin these rituale
  fand therefore only the fearless practiso thom Tho Vira
  ‘ruins himself to be indifferent and above all fear. A leading
  ite ia that called Shava Stdhani which is done with the
  ‘means of & bumun corpse. I have explained elsewhere
  (ee “Serpent Power") why a corpse is chosen. ‘The corpse
is laid with ite face to the ground. ‘The Sidhak            sits onnthe
  beck of the body of the dead man on which he draws a
  Yantra and then worships. If the rite is successful it is
  said that the head of the corpse turns round and asks the
  ‘Stahaka what is the boon he craves, be it liberation or
  tome material benefit. Te is belioved that the Devi speaks
  ‘through the mouth of the corpse which is thus the material
  medium by which She manifeste Her prosenco. In another
  rite, the corpee is used as a cent (Sheviisane): There are sit-
tings also (Asana) on skulls (Mundisana) and the funeral pyre
                                    579
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (Chitdsana), However repellent or suspect these rites may
 appear to be tow Wester, it is nevertheless the fact that
they have been and ere protised by genuine Sadhakss of
fame such as in the past the famed Meharijo of Nattore
‘and others. ‘The interior cremation ground is within the
‘body that being tho place where the passions are bumt
‘away in the fire of knowledge
      "The Aay& Shakti or Supreme Power of the Shalctas ia,
 in the words of the Trisha, concisely deseribed as Fleinanda.
hidalcitia: Eks—Makya, Ananda—Saldem, Chit—Chai-
‘tmyam or Prakishe—Jninem j and Hisitih=Svarips. She
is thus Stchehidfnanda-brabmarips, Therefore,       the worship
of Her ia direot, worship of the Highest. This worship
is based on Advaitavids, Therefore, for all Advaitins, its
Sidhand is the highest. ‘The Shikta Yantrais thus a
Sédhand Shisira of Advaitavdda, This will explain why it
is dear to, and so highly considered by Advaitins. Tt is
claimed to be the one and only stepping stone which lesda
dirwetly to Kaivalya or Nirvinamulti ; other forms of wor-
ship procaring for their followers (irom the Soura to the
Shaiva) various ascending forms of Gaunamulti, Others
of course may claim this prixity, Every sect considers
itself to he the best and is in fact the best far those who,
with intelligence, adopt it, Were it not so its members
would presumably not belong to it but would choose some
other, ‘No true Shilkia, however, will wrangle with others
over this, He will be content with his faith of which the
‘Nigamakalpatara says, that aa among castes the Brdhmancs
‘re foremost, so amongst Sidhakes are the Shileas. Fes,
se Niruttora Tastza says, thoro is no Nievina without
knowlege of Shakti (Siakeininam vind devi nirvdnam,
naive jdyute), Amongst the Shéktas, the foremost are snid
to be the worshippers of the Kili Mantra The Adimahi-
vy is KAlikA, Other forms are Mirttibheda of Beahma-
ripint Kilika, Kaltkule is followed by Jntnis of Divya
 ‘and Vira Bhivas; and Shrfiala by Karmin Stabakas.
                              530
                SHAKTA SADHANA
 According to Nirutiare, Kéltkul includes Kal, Psd, Reeta-
alt, Bhuvand, Mardint, Tripats, Tvart8, Pratyangirdvidya,
Durga; and Shrtkula’ includes Sundatt, Bhairavi, BS
Bagald, Kamala, Dhimavati, Matang, Svapnevatividya,
‘Madiuiati Mabividya, Of ‘these forms Kalki is the
highest or Adyamirti as being Shuddlasattvagunapredhind,
Nurvikéra, Nitgunsbesbmasvartipaproktshikt, ond, as the
Kamodhea Tantra says, directly Kaivalyadiyint. Tart
is Sattragunitmiks, Tattvavidyidiyin, for by Tastajatine
‘one attains Kaivalya. Shadashl, Bhuvansshvarl Chhinma-
masta are Rajahpradhina Sattvagundtmilet, the givers of
Gounamuleti and Svarga. Dhémivett, Kamala, Bagalé,
MBtangt are Tamahpradlins, whose action is invoked in the
‘magical Shatkarma.
     ‘The most extential   point to remember as giving the
kkey to all which follows is that Shaktadharmais Monism.
(Advaitavida). Gandharya, Tantra says, “Having as enjoin-
ed saluted ‘the Guru and thought ‘So'hem’, the wise
Stdhaka, the performer of the rite should moditate upon
the unity of Jiva and Brahman.”
      Grn nated: vidhinena.a9'ham iti purodhasah
      ikyom sonBhévayet dkimin jessy brakmano'pé cho.
      Kall Tantra says: “ Having thus meditated, the Stdheka
should worship Devt with the notion, <So'ham’.
      ‘Boum dhyited tato devim su’haméiménam archoyet.
      Kubjika Tanira says: “A Sédhuka should meditate
‘upon himself as one and the same with Her” (Tayd sabita-
métmaram ckidhétam vichintoyt). ‘The seme teaching is to
be found throughout the Shistra; Nila Tantra directing
the Stdhaksto think of himself as one with Térint; Gan-
dharvs Tantra telling him to meditate on the self as one
with Tsipuri not different from Paramatma; end Kall
kulasarvaava as one with Kalikt and so forth. Vor as the
Kultrmava Tantra says: “The boiyis the temple of God.
‘iva ia Sadiahiva. Tot him give up his ignorance as the
                                sar
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 offering which is thrown away (Nirmélye) and worship with
 ‘the thought and feeting, “T am He’.”
       Deko dovilayah protiah joo dcoah Soiéshivah
       Tyqjed ajnénanirmdiyam so°ham Bhéwena pajoyet
       ‘This Advaitevida is naturally expressed in the ritual
 ‘The Samhitd and Brihmanas of the our Vedas are (as
 contrasted with the Upanishads) Traigunyavishaya. ‘There
 is therefore mnch in the Vaidik Karmakinda which is
 contrary to Brahmajnine. The same remarks apply to
 ‘he ordinary Pasha ritnal of the day. ‘Thero aro differences
 of toucbable and untouchable, fod, caste, and sex. How
 em a man direstly qualify for Brahmejnine who even
 in worship is always harping on distinctions of caste and.
 tex and the like! He who distinguishes docs not mow.
 (Of such distinctions the higher Tintrik worship of the
 Shikta type knows nothing. As the Yoginf ‘Tantra says,
 the Shistra    is for all eastes end for women os well as men.
‘Tantra Shastra is Upisand Kanda, and in thisShtlta Upasand
 ‘the Karma and Jnéoa Kandas are mingled (Misera). That
is, Kamo is theritual expression        of the teaching of Jnana
Kinda and is calotlated to lend to it. There         is nothing in
 it which contradicts Brahmajnan. This fact, therefore,
 renders it more conducive to the attainment of such spiritual
 experience. Such higher ritual serves to reveal Jaina in
the mind of the Pasiu, So it is rightly said that o Kula-
 jndut even if he be a Chandi, is better thon a Brhmana
 eis on thoso old Tintrik principles that the Indian religion
 of to-day oan alone, if ofall, maintain itself. They have
 no conoem, howevec, with souial Ko and what is called
 “gooial reform”. For all seoular purposes the Tantras
 resognize caste, but in spiritual matters spiritual qualii-
 cations alone provail. There are many such sound and
 ‘high principles in the Tantra ‘Shistra for which it would
 reosive credit, if it eould only obtain a fair and unprejuciced
 ‘consideration. But there are none eo blind as those who
 ‘wil   not see, And so we find that the “pure          and high”
                                  sa
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
  ribual of the Veda is ott in contrast with the supposed “low
  ‘and impare”” notions of the Tantras. On the contrary, &
  ‘Téntrik Pandit, once said to me: “The Vaidik Karmakdnde
is as useful for ordinary men as is 9 washerman for dirty
  thes. It helps to ramove their impurities, But tho
 ‘Tantra ShAstre is like « glorious tree which gives jeweled
 sit.”
       Stdhant, as T have said, is defined os that which leads
 to Siddbi, Stdhant comes from the root “Sidh”—to
 cxertto strive, For what! That depends on the SAdband
 and ile object. Sadhsnd is exy means to axy end and not
 ‘necessarily religious worship, ritual and discipline, He who
 does Hathayoga, for physic health and strength, who
 aooomplishes a magicel Prayoge, who practises to gain an
 eightfold memory” ands0 forth are each doing Sadhané
 to gains portioular rosult (Siddhi), namely, health and
 strength, a definite magical result, increased power of 1e-
 ‘allstion   and so forth. A Sidi again is any power gained
 as the zosult of practie. Thus, the Siddhi of Vettla Agni
Sidband is control over the fre-lement. But the Stdhank
which is of most account and that of which I here speak is
 religious worship and discipline to attain true spiritual
 experience, What is thus sought and gained may be either
 ‘Heaven (Svarga), secondary liberation (Gounamukti) or
full Nivins, It is the latter which in the highest
 sense is Siddhi, snd striving for that end is the chief and
 highest form of Sidbanf “The lntter term includes not
 rmrely situal worship in the sense of adoration or prayer,
 Dut every form of spivitual discipline such as sscraments
 (Gamskra), susteritios (Tapes), the reading of Seripture
 (Gridhyays), meditation (Dbyéos) and so forth. Yoga
{sa stil higher form of Sidhand; for the term Yous. mesos
 strictly not the result but the means whereby Siddhi in
 the form of Samfidhi may be had. Ordinarily, however,
 Sdhanf is used to express all spiritual disciplines bosed on
 the notion of worshipper and worshipped; referring thus
                             533
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘to Upteand not Yoga. ‘Tho latter pusses beyond those
 and all other dualisss to Monistio experience (Samadhi,
‘The fret leads up to the seoond by purifying           the mind
 (Chittashadéhi) chsracter end disposition (Bhava) so as to
 render it capable of Juknn or Laya Yoge ; or becomes itselt
 Parabbakti which, as theDevibhogavata say, isnot different
 from Jndna,
       ‘The great Siddhi is thos Moksha; and. Moksbe is
 Pararnitmd,     that is, the Svarfpaof Atmi. But the Sidheke
 is Jivitm, that is, Kim associated with Avidya of which
 Mokabs or Param              is fre. Avidy8 manifeste as mind
tnd bedy,      the subtle and grees vehicles of spiit. Man is
  thus therefore Sphit (AtmasvarGpe), which is Sachchidd-
 anda, Mind (Antahlcarana) and body (SthOle-sharira). The
 ‘ovo latter aro forms of Shakti, thatis, projections       of the
 Grestive Conscioustess through and) as its Maya. ‘The
‘ential opezation of May and: of the Kanchtikas is too
 seemingly contract conssionsness. As tho Yoginfhridaya
 ‘Tantea sys, the going forth (Pratare) of Conscionmnass
 (Gamvit) is infact contragtion (Samleosh os Matri, MAna,
 Moya or Known, nowing, being Inown). Conscionmess
 is thus fnitized into w linited self which and other sek
vves regard one snother ss mutually excusive, ‘The One
  Self becomes its own object as the many forms of the
 tuniverse. It conceives itself as separate from them. Obl
 vious in. soperstoness of its essential natare    it regards all
 other parsons and things as differnt from itself. Tt acta
for the beneit ofits Limited self. It isi fact sash in the
 primary    conse of the term ; and this selGslmess   is the root
 of all ite desizes, of ll ita sina, The more mere worldly
 desires aze fostered, the greater is the bondage of man to
 ‘the mental and’ matarial ples, . Exoasively selfish desires
 lxplay themselves as the sins of lust, greed, anger, envy and
 0 forth. ‘These bind more firmly than regulated desire and
 moreover lead to Hell (Navaka). ‘The most general and
 ‘ultimate objet of Sidhan is therfore to east off fom the
                               54
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
Self this wel of Avidyt and to atiain that Perfoct experience
 which is Atmanvartpa or Moksha. But to know Brahman
is to be Brahman, Brahma wwia brakmaiva                Bhavati se
Shruti    saya,     Tn eteenoe  man   is Brahman,     But   owing
‘to Avidyé    it is necessary to do something in order that
 ‘hia ever existent fact may be realized. That action
               the work of Sadhand in its endeavour to clear
 (Kriy) theis veiling
 avay                   of Avidy® which is ignorance, In the
 sense that Avidyh is being removed man may be said by
 ‘Sidhanf, to become Brahman: that is,ho realizes himself
 as what he truly is and was Sidhend, therefore, by the
grace of Devi or “descent of Shakti” (Shaktipata) “converts”
 {to use an English term) the Sédhaka, that is, tums him
  away from separatist worldly enjoyment to seck his own
 ‘tzuo self as the pare Spiritual Experience, ‘This trans-
 formation is the vork abd aim of Sidhana, But this experi
‘ence is not to be lad in ta completatt eense at once and at
 ‘8 bomd. Itis,as Pataajali says, very rare, Indeed those
  who truly desire it are vory few. Brahman is mindless
  (Amsnsh) ; for mind is-afetter on-true consciousness.       This
 rindlessness (Ninilambapust) is sought through the means
 of Yogs. But no would-be Vogl can sttain this state unless
 his mind is already pare; that i not only free from gross
 sin, but already posting come freotom from the bondage
 of ‘worldly desires, cultivated and trained, and desirous of
 liberation (Mumnlshu)- The aim, therefore, of preliminary
‘Sivdhant is to secure thet purification of mind (Chittashuddli)
 ‘which is alone the basis on which Yoga works. ‘The fist
  abject then is to restrain tho natural appetites, to control
‘the senses, and all that excsstve selishness beyond the
  bounds of Dharma which is sin (Papa). Dharma presoribes
 ‘hese bounds because unrestricted selfish enjoyment leads
 ‘man downward from the path of his true evolution. Man
fs, ezagerde      part offs nature, an aninal, and has, according
‘o the Shistra, passed through all animal forms in his $¢ lakhs
  of previous biiths, But he has also 6 higher nature andif
                                  535
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Ihe conforms to tho path Inid out for him will progress by
 egress to the siate of that Spitit whose limited form he
 now is If he strays from that path he falls back, and
 continued descent’ moy bring him again to the state of
 apparently unconscious matter throtgh many interven-
 ing Hells in this and other worlds. For this resson, the
 Shistra repeats that he is a “‘selékille” who, having with
 dificulty attained to manhood, negleots the opportunities
 cof further progres which they give him (Kuldmnava
 ‘Tantra 1), Therefore, he must avoid sin which leads to a
  {all. How con the impure realize the Pure? How can the
  rate seeker of sensual enjoyment deste formlegs liberating
  Bliss? How oan he recognize his unity with all if he is
bound in selfshnase which is the root of all in? How can
hie realize the Brahman who thinks himself to be the separate
  enjoyer of worldly cbjecta and is bounl by all sensualites *
 In varioxs forms this is.the teaching of all religions. Tt
  would be hanlly nocessary 10 elabornte what is 90 plain
  wore it not apparently supposed that the Tantra Shastra
 is a strange exveptionto these univerolly recognized princi
 ples. “T thonght”, said a revent English correspondent of
 imine, “that the Tontea was a wholly bed lot belonging to
‘to left hand path.” ‘Thisis not 60: common though the
 notion be. ‘The Shlstro teaches that the S@dhaka must
 say his “Six Enemies” which are the six cerdinal sins and
 all others allied with them. Whether all the means enjoined
  tare good, expedient, and fiting for the purpose is diferent
 rmaticr, This is a distinction which none of ite crits ever
 ranks but which accarscy and justice require they sboald
 auuke if they condemn the method. Tt is one thing Lo say
 ‘that a particular method prescribed for a good end is bad,
 dangerous, or having rogard to the present positim of the
  genecality of men, unadvisable; and s totally different thing
 to ay that tho nd which is sought is itsdf bad. ‘The Tantra,
 ike all Shistras,seols the Paramirtha and nothing else,
  ‘Whether all the forms of search are good (and against the
                                536
                  SHAKTA           SADHANA
  bull of thom no moral objeotion can be zaised) ia another
  question. Tet it be for argument supposed thet oue or
  otter of the means preseribed ia not good but evil. Ts it
 seeurate or just to condemn not only the particular Shastra
in which they ooour (as the discipline of a particular class
 of Stdhakas enly), but also the whole of the Agamas ofall
 classse of worshippers under the mislesding designation
 “The Tantra "?
        Tem here speaking from the point of view of one who
 ia not a Hinda. ‘Those, however, who are Hindus must
 logically either deny that the antes, Ghistra is tho Word
of Shiva ‘or accept all which that Word says, For if a
 Tantra proscribes what is wrong this vitines the suthorty,
 in all matters, of the Tantra in which wrong is ordained. Tt
snay be that other matters deals with should be socepted,
 but this is co not because of any authority in the partisular
 Tantra, but because they have the coustanance elwhere of
2 true ‘suthoritative scriptare. “From this logical position
 a0 escape is poribl.
       “Let os for the moment  turn to-the celabrated Hymn to
Kali (cf, a0 those who zoad it might call, tho extremist,
 ‘hat ia Via Shilete worohip) entitled the Karpirédi Stotra
 (Tank Texts, Vo. IX), which lke most (probably all of its
 ind haa both a material (Schila) and subtlo (SOshma)
 meaning. In the 10th verse it i aid thst the Devt delights
to roceve in sacrifice tie flesh, with bones and hair, of goat,
 buffalo, cat, sbéep, camel and of man. Tn its literal sense
{his passage may be taken as an instance ofthe man-sacifice
 af.which we find traces throughout the world (and in some
 of tho Tantra) in past atagea of man's evolution. Human
 swariioes permitted by other Somites wero forbidden by
 the Motaio Code, although there is an obvious allusion +0
 such a curtom in the account of the contemplated sacriice
 af Inigo by Abraham (Gen. xxii. The Ieteites, however,
 affered bloody sacrifices the savour of which God
 (Yahireh) is represented as enjoying, they being neoessary
                             537
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 jn His honour and to avert His wrath (Gen. vi. 21;
 ‘Lov. i 9, 13, 17; Judges vi 17, xi, 15 ;Gen. vii. 20-21;
 1 Sam, xsvi 19), Nothingis more commonn all raligions
 (aud Christianity as by some understood provides many
 examples) than to materially understand spiritual truths,
 ‘For such is the understanding of material or Sthfladarshin
 (qroely.secing) men. But, even in the past, those who
were spiritual refered all sasrifce to the self: an inner
 sacrifice which all must make who would attain to that
 Spirit which we may call Kil, God, Allah, or what we will.
 ‘But what io the Svaripa-vyakdbya or true meaning of this
  apparently revolting verse? ‘The moaningis that inner
  cr mental worship (Antary8gs) is done to Her who is black
  (Asita) beoause She is the bouncloas ($it6==Baddbd) Consci-
  ‘umes (OhidetipS) whose true nature is eternal liberetion
  (Nityamulte-Seabhivi), And jast aa in outer worship
  material offerings (Cpadhiea) fe ronda, 20 the Sidhaka
 sacriicos to Her his lust (the Gout-Kitma),his anger (tho
 Baffalo-Krodha), his greed. (the Cat-Lobha), his stupidity of
 ‘Musion (the Sheep-Moba), his envy (the Gamel-Matsaryya)
and his pride aud. infatuation with worldly things (the
 ‘ManMads). All will readily recognize in these animals
 ‘and man the qualities (Guna) here attributed to them. It
is to such as so sacrifice to whom is given Sidi inthe form
 of the five kinds of Mukti.
       Competency for Tantra (Tantrashfstridhikars) is dee
  scribed in the second Chapter of the Gandharva Tantra ua
 follova :—Tho aspizant’ must be intelligent (Dalksha), with
 seasea controled (Jitendriya), sbetsining from iojury to all
          (Gervehimst-vinirmukt), ever doing good to all
 (Garveprinichite rats), pure (Shuehi), a believer in. Voda
 (Astiks), a non-daalist (Dvaitabina), whose faith and refuge
 is in Brohman (Brshmanishths, Brahmavidl, Brikma,
  Brakmaparfyana), “Sachan one”, it adds, “is competentfor
 ‘hin Scrptaze othenise he ie no Sdidhaka"” (So"emn shostee’
  ibd tad anyatra a sédhobuh). Ye wl. bo allowed        by ell
                              538
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
 thet these are strange qulifcstions for « follower af “a
bad scripture of tho left band path”. ‘Those        who azo on
 such a path are not supposed to be seekers of the Brahman,
 nor solcitons for the goor of all being. Rather the reverse
 ‘The Kuldensvo Tantra (which I may observe deals with the
 illfained Pauchsiative ritual) gives in the thirtoenth Chap-
 ter a long lst of qualifications nooessary in the case of a
 ‘Tintrik disciple (Shishya). Amongst these, it rojocte the
 slave of food and sexual pleasure (Jihvopasthapera); the
 Tustfal (KCimnka), shameless (Ninlaja), the greedy and vorae
 ons eater, the sinnar in gonaral who does uot follow Dharma
 and Kchiea, who ia jgnorant, who has no desze for episitnal
 knowledge, ‘who is « hypocrite, with Brakman on his Tips
 ‘but not in his heart, and who is without devotion (Bhakti),
 Bach qualifications are inconsistent with its alleged inten-
 tion to encourage sensuality unless» we assume that all
 such tall in all the Shistras throughout all time is mere
 Ihypootgy
       Tt is dot however suificiont for the Sidhaka to turn
from sin and the oocasions    of it, Tb is necesiary  to present
 the mind with a pure objest and. to busy it in pure actions
 ‘hie not only exeludes other objects and actions but trains
 ‘tho mind in such a way towards goodness and Mumination
 that it at Ieogth no longer desires wrongful enjoyment; or
 lavefal Poshu enjoyment or even enjoyment infused with »
 spiritual Bhiva, and thus finally attains desielesmess
 (Nishkimabhéva). ‘The Mind dominated by matter, then
 regulated in matier, concioualy releases ise to dest work
 rough matter, then againet matter; then rising aboue
 rattor it, at length, enters the Suoreme State in which all
 the antithesis of Matter and Spirit hve gone
       ‘What.then are the means by which spiitual Siddhi is
 attained ! Some are possibly common to all zligions;
 some azo cartaizly.common to more than one raigion, such
 fs objective tual worship (Babyapajé), inner or mental
 worship (Minase-PGja or Antazpija) of the Inhtadevata,
                                539
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  prayer (Pricthand), sacraments (Samakima), self-discipline
 for the control of the will and nataral appetites (Tapes),
 reditation (Dhyins) and so forth, Thers is, for instance,
 as 1 have elsewhere pointed out, a remarkable similarity
 between the Tantei ritual of the Agamas and Christian
 situal in its Catholio form. It has been suggested that
 Catholicism is really o legacy of the ancient civilization,
fan adaptation of the old religions (allied in many respocts
 with Shata worship) of the Mediterranean races ; deriving
 such of ite strength from its non-Christian elemente, I
 rll nob obterve on this exonpt to say that you do not
 Aispose of the merita of any ritual by showing (i it be the
 fact) that is is extremely old and non-Christian. Christi-
 ‘ity is one of the great religios, but even ite adherents,
 ‘unless ignomnt, will nop clsim for it the monopoly of all
 ‘at is good.
       ‘To deal in detail: with, Téntrike Sidhaka would take
 ‘more than 6 volume, T have shortly simmarized some
important sitoala. I will now shorlly indieute some of the
 ‘general poychologial ‘principlas on which it is based and
‘hich is understood, wil give the key to an understanding
 of the extraorlioney complesity and variety of the actual
 ritual details, I will also ustrate the application of these
‘principles in some of the mare common fomns of worship.
       tis rovognired in the first place thot mind and body
 mutually react upon one another.’ There must therefore
be o physical Sédkané as the groundwork of the mental
 Sidlans    to follow. India has forages recoguized whatis now
 becoming generally admitted, namely, that not only health
 Dut clarity of mind, charicter, disposition, and morals,
 fae affected by the nourishment, exercise, end general
 treatment of the body. ‘Thus      from the ,moral aspect, ono of
‘the arguments agsinst the use of moat and strong drink is
 ‘the encouragement they give to animal passions. Why
‘then it may be asked do these form a part of some forms
  of Shalta Sidhan8? T answer this leter. It is however
                                 540
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
 4 Hindn trait to insist on purity of food end person. ‘inte
“Hathayoge dealsin fall with tho quostion of body cleanliness,
 food, sexual continence,    and physical exercise, Bub there
 ‘are injametions, though less strict, for the ordinary house-
 hholder to whom wine and other intoxicating drinks and
 ‘he eating of beet (thought by some to he « material found-
 ation of the British Empire, but now recognized by several
 ‘medical authorities to be the source of physical ills) and
 some other foods, es also all gluttony, as regards permitted
 ood, are forbidden. Periodical fasts are enjoined ; ale,
 uring onrtain religions exercises, the eating of the pure
 food called Havishydnnam made of fruit, vegetable and rice.
 ‘The eexual life has also its regulations, Tn short, iia said,
 let the body be well treated and kept pure in order to keep
‘the mind sane and pure anda good and not rebellious
 instrument for mental Sedhani. In. the Tantras will be
 found insinncesof several necessary bodily perfections in the
 Sidhaka. Thos he should not be deformed, with defestive
 limbs, wanting in, or having excoss of any limb, weak of
 limb, crippled, blind, deaf, dirty, diseased, with unnatural
 ‘movements, paralysed, slothful in action (Kuilérnava, XIT).
       Tat us now past to the mind. Ros the understanding
 of Hindu ritual ¢ is neveaary to understand both Hinds
 philesophy and Hindu yeychelogy. This point,20 fax as I
 fam aware, hus never been observed. Certainly Indian ritual
 has never been dealt with on this basis. Tt has generally
 been considered sufciont to class it as “Mummery” and
 then to pass on to something supposed to be more worthy of
 consideration. Tb is neoeseary to remember that (outside
 successful Yoga) the mind (at any rato in its normal state)
 in never for one moment unoocupied. At every moment
 of time, workly objects are seeking to influence it. Only
 those actaally do sp, to which the mind, in its fuculty as
 ‘Manas, gives attention. Tn ono of tho ntrik Texts (Shat-
 ‘lakrauiripana), the Manas is aptly spoken of 0 a docr-
 ‘keeper who lots some enter and keeps others outside, For this
                                sat
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  zoaton itis called Sancalpeviklphtmala : that is, it selects
 (Gusikelps) some things which the senses (Indriya) present
 to it and rejects (Vikalps) others. Tf the Manas attends to
 the sensation demanding entrance itis admitted end passed
‘onto the Buddhi and not otherwise, So the Brihadranyala
 Upanished anys, “My Monss was elecwhere ond therefore I
 lid not hear.”” This is a seeret for the endarence of pain
 which not only the martyrs and the witches kmew, but
 some others who have suffered lesser pains. When the
   ensstionia pastod on to the Buddhi, aa also when the latter
 ‘acts upon the material of remembesod percepts, there is
 formed in the Buddhi a Vritti, The later is « medication
‘of the Mind into the form of the perosived object. Ualess a
 ‘man is a Sidahayogt, it ia not possible to avoid the forma-
 tion of mental Vritts,.. The object, therefor, of Skdhand is
 firstly to take the attention away from undesirable objecte
 tnd then to plaoe a desirable object in their stead. For
 ‘the mind mat feed on something. ais objest isthe Tshta-
 devaté. Whon a Sédhala fully, sincerely and deeply
 contemplates and worships his Ishtedevatd, his mind is
formed into « Voiti in the form of the Devata. As the
 Inte!  is all pasty, the mind, which contemplates it, is during,
 tand to the depth of such coitemplation pure.” By pro-
 longed and repeated worship the mind becomes naturally
 pure and of itself tonds to reject all impure uotions. What
to others    is a source ofimpurity is pure. To the pore, as
the Hellenes ssid, all things are pure. ‘Things are not impure,
 Te is the impure mind which males them so. He learnsto
‘00 that everything and act are manifestationsof tho Divine,
 ‘Ho who realizes Consciousness in all objects no longer has
 esire therefor. In this way a good disposition or Bhiva,
‘ao it is called, is attained which ripens into that which is
 divine or Devatdbhava, This is the principle on which all
 Sédhand, as well as what is called specifically Manteayoga,
 is based. It is profoundly said in the Kuldmava Tantra
 thot o mon must rise by means of the same things which
                                 sia
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
aro the couse of hin fall. Tf you fall en the ground    you must
 reine yourself by it, The mind is thus controlled by means
 of ita own object (Vishaya) ; that is, the world of name and
 form (Namartpa). ‘The unregulated mind is distracted by
 Nimarips, But the same Nimarips may be used as the
first means of escape therefrom, A particular        form there-
 fore of Namarfipa productive of pure Bhiva is therefore
 given as the object of meditation. This is called Sthfla or
 Ssguna Dhyana of the five Devatis Material medi are
 used as the frst steps whereby the Formless One is, through
 ‘Yoga, attained, such os Images     (Pzatima), emblems (Lin
 Shilageéms), picboren (Chitra), rural markings (Bhiti
 rekhi), Jar (Ghata), Mandales and Yantras. To theoe wor-
 ship (PQja) is done with other rites such as Japa, Nydsa
 and so forth, and gestures (Mudra). Siddhi in this is the
 Smmidhi called Mahabhava.
       ‘Whe second principle to, be noted i that the object or
 mind's content, as also the service (Seva of it, may be either
 ‘ross (Sthil) or subile (Stkshma).. This distinction per-
 ‘vades all the rituals and rightly fo; Men are not all ab the
 same dogres of intlloctual and spiritual advancement, For
 ‘the simple-minded these are simple material and tontal
 images. Progressively considered, the objects used to fix
in the mind the thought of the Devaté arc images in human
 or semi-human form, similar pictures, non-human forms or
 emblems (such as Linga and Gsuripatta, Shilageima, the
 Jer or Ghata, Mandalas) and lastly Yontras, The image
is not merely used for instruction (ut pictura pro seriptura
 Taberetw),   0° to incite in the mind a mental picture, but
 after the PeinpratishthS rite is itedf worshipped. 80
 ‘also amongst Christians, where however this rite is unknown,
 “ikcones asheiropeietoi” (what ere called in Sanskrit
 Svayambiu emblems) and wonder-werking images have
 ‘been directly venerated. Superficial persons doubtless thiake
 themselves profound. when they ask how thé Devatf can be
 invoked (Avihana). ‘To them alo the dismissal (Visarjara)
                                 543
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  savours of childish impndenoe and absurdity. How (I
‘have read) can God be told to come        and go? A Christian
 ‘who sings the Hymn, “Veni creator Spiritus”, is indeed igno-
 rant if he fancies that at his request the Holy Ghost comes
 to him flying through the skies. As Sharbkara says, Spirit
 (Atma) never comes and never goes. ‘That which in fact
 ‘moves is the mind of the Sédhaka in which, if pure, Spirit
 manifests Ttsel. That Sprit is in all places, and when the
 Stdbala’s mind fully realizes its pretence in the Image,
 ‘the latter ao the manifestation of that Spin   is a Stting object
  of worship. Some knowledge of Vedinte is needful for
  the understanding and performance of image-worship.
  ‘Yantra worship is however higher and i fitter for those who
  hhave reached @ more cdvanced stage in Stdhant, The
 ‘term, a5 I hove said, literally means an instrument; that
 by which anything is accomplished, Tn Upéanné it is that,
 instrument by which the mind is fied upon. the Devat of
 ‘worship. Tt is, 05 dzavn, © diagram consisting of lines,
 angles ond curves, varying with the Devatd. worshipped.
ta alo, to some extent, accordingas it is a PAj8 or Dharana
 ‘Yantra, the whole being ineladed in s common Bhipura,
 ‘A Yontra is three-dimensional, though it is very generally
 represented by Grawing on the flat, The Yantra and
 cach part of it, as ropresenting        certain Shakti, has a
 siguificance which is knownto. the instructed Sédhak,
 On tho great Shei Yantra with its Baindavaand other
 ‘Chakras there is an enti literature. Tt is neglected now-a-
 days Those who have fully understood it are masters in
 ‘Tantra Shastras, ‘The subject is shortly dealt with in the
 Introduction to the Tentraxdje (Vol. VILL, p. xi, ‘Taatrike
 ‘Texts, Kd. A. Avalon), Not onlyis the object of worship
 ‘subtle   or groes, but 0 also is the ritual with which it is
  worshipped. For the simple Indian vorship avails itselé
  of the ontinary incidents of daily life understood by even
  the most ignortnt. And so we see the tending of the idol,
  ‘waking it, bathing it, giving it food, patting it to sleep and
                                 on
                  SHAKTA SADHANA
 so forth. In ordinesy worship thero is the offer of Sowers,
 Tight, incense and the like Upschéra. In the subtle inner
 oF mental worship (AntarpOjé) these ere but aymbcls. Thus
 the Jnineshvare Sambitt cited in the Manteayogarahssya-
 nimaye speaks ofthe offering of “flowers of feeling” (Bhiva-
 ‘pushps) to the Divinity- namely, the virtue of selfeseness
 (Anahaibltra), desielesmness (Arfiga), guilelesmess (Adam-
 Da, freedom from malico and envy (AAvesha, Amétaaryys),
 ‘and infatontion and delusion (Amada and Amoha), and con-
 ‘rol over the footings and mind (Akshothake, Amansles).
‘TH who can truly make such offerings to Dev! is » high
 Sidhaka indeot. The Shastra makes wonderful provision
 for all types. It recognizes that there must be a definite
 object to which the mind must tum chooses that object
 ‘with oview    to the capactia  ofthe Sédhaka ; and similarly
 regulatesthe ensuing worship. Much ignorant        talk takes
  place as to the supzosnd worship of the Formless, Worship
 fmplios an object of worship and every object hos some
 form. But that form and the ritaal vary to meet the needs
 cof difering onpacitis and. temperaments; commencing
 with the’ more or Jess anthropomorphic image (or Doll;
Puttall, a8 those who dislike such worship call it) with its
 ‘uanteral eervice reproducing the ways of daily life, passing
 ‘throug’ pictures, omblems, Yentras, and mental worship to
 adoration of the Point of Light (Iyotirhinda) in which at
 Teagth, conscioumess being merged, all worship ceases.
       ‘The Shalcirahasya summarises the stages of progress
 in a ahort verse, thes:—“By images, ceremonies, mind,
 identification, and knowing the Self, a mortal attains Liber-
  ation (Kaivalya)”
       Tn the same way, meditation is either gross (Sthfla) or
 subtle (Stkshma). The forms of the Mother of the Universe
 fare thresfold. There is first the Supreme (Pero) form of
  which the Vishnuyfmala seys “None know”, ‘There is next
 Her subtle form which consists of Mantra, But as the
  ‘mind cannot settle itself upon that which is formless, She
                                545
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘appears also in physical form aa celebrated in the Devt
  stotras of the Parinas and Tentras.
      "The third principle to be noticed is the pact which the
  body is made to tak in the ritual Necessarily there is
 ‘ction in any ose to oarry out the ritual, but thie is so
  prescribed a8 to emphasize    the mental operation (MAnasl-
 Teri), and in addition certain aymbolio gestures (ifude8)
 fro prescribed. Tho body is made to take its part in the
 ritual, the mental procossos being thus emphasised and
 intensfed. ‘This    is based on well-known natural tendency.
 ‘When we speak with convietion and intensity of feeling, we
 naturally adopt appropriste movements of the body and
 gestures of the hands. We thus speak with the whole body.
       ‘Take for example Nyfsa which like Yantra is peculiar
 to the Tantras. The object of the Sidhaka is to identity
 hhimgelt with the Devati he oontemplatos and thns to attain
 Devatibbiiva    for which if is, in its many. forms, a most
 powerful means. Regarding the body of the Devati as
 composed of Bja Mantras, he not merely imagines that his
 ‘own body is 80 composed but he actually places (Nyasa
means placing) these Btjas with the tip of his fingers on the
 ‘various parta of his own body. The Ablishta Devata is thus
 in imagination (expressed by outward acta) placed in each
 of the pacts and membersof the Sédhaka's body, and then
 swith the motion of his arms he, by Vyapaka Nyasa, as it
 were, spreads the presence of the Devat all ovor his body.
 ‘He thus feels himself permeated in every part by the presence
 of Doraté snd identiied with tho Divine Self in that its
 form, How, it may be asked, can the Devat be spread as
 it wore butter on bread? These are crude questionings and
 because crtice of the ritual do mot get beyond this erade
 state of mind, this ritoal is not understood. Dovaté is not
 spread. God is everywhere and He is not to be placed
 ‘by man's fingers anywhere. What ia done is to produce in
 ‘man's mind the notion that le is so spread. Again with
  certain ritual acts Muda is mace, This Mode’ expresses
                                46
                    SHAKTA SADHANA
 boy the hands the thought of the worshipper of which itis
 sometimes a kind of manual shorthand.
        ‘A further important point far consideration is that the
 montal Vritti is not only strengthened by scsompanying
physical action, but by a prolonged repetition of either or
 both, ‘There may he literal repetition of either or both, of
 ‘hich « grominent example         is Japa of Mantra with which I
 have dealt in the Chepters on Shalt as Mantea and on the
 YVarnanslt;      or the object of contemplation may be severed
 into parts, e8 where meditation is done not simply on the
 Devold as a whole, but on each of the para of His body
‘and then on the whole; or » particular          result, such as the
 dissolution of the Tatevas     in Bhttashaddhi, may be analysed
 into the component parts of a prooess commencing with the
 fist movement and ending with the last. Repetition of
‘word and idea Gxes't in the mind, and ifthe same exental
 ‘ought can be presonied in vavod foris the effect is more
powerful and at the same time last ealeuated to tire. “Vain
 repetition” is itself in the mouths of many a vein criticism
 ‘when not o platitads, TE it ia in fact vain it ia vain, But
 it nead not be so. Jn the cazrent gross way of looking st
 ‘things it is asked, “Wil the Deity yield (ike » modom
 politician) to repeated lamour1" ‘Tho answer is th
 Dovatd is not eo afected. What is'in fact aflcted is the
rind of the Sidhaka himself which, being thus purified by
 insistent efor, becomes a fit modium for the manifestation
 of a divine conscionmess (Devatibhiva), In short fast
 Todian tual camot be understood unless the. Vedéntik
 principles of whish they are « particular practical apph-
 Cation are undarstood. Even when in devotion, complate
 understandingand feeling are not atisined, the intontion
 ‘0 gain both will achieve sucoas by quickening the worship-
 per's interest and strengthening the foros of the will.
       ‘A word now asto Symbolism which exists inal zligions
  in varying degrees. The Tantra Shista is extraordinarily
  {ull of it in all ite kinds—form, colour, language, number,
                                 7
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
action, ‘he subject isa highly interesting but very lengthy
fone. T ean only make two remarks with regard to it here,
‘Red isa favourite colour in the Shalts Tantres. As pointed
fut in the Bhavanopanishad (Sétra 28) an Upanishad of the
Kidimata and Bhiskararkya’s commentary thereon, edness
denotes Riiga and Vimarshe Shakti. (See Introduction to
‘Tantearhje, Vol. VIII, Tantrik Texts, Ed. by A. Avalon
and Vel. XT, Tantei Texts) ‘There is « good deal of what
ia called erotic symbolism in some of the Tantras, ‘This
is apt to shock many English people, who are by no means
all 2 moral in fach as somo might think this sensitivity
suggests, “The Hindus are very natural as regeeds sexual
matters.” An English clergyman remarks (E. F. Elwin
‘India and the Indians”, p. 70) “A leading Indian Christin
‘said to me ‘there is no reserve among us im the sense that
‘you English people bave it. ‘There is nothing which our chil
ren do not know." " Ttshould be added, says this author,
“that the knowledge of evil (why T may ask i it always
vil!) does not as a matter of course produce evil.” The
‘mind of the ancionts was natural one and thoy called a
spade » spade and not an hortioultaral insteument, ard were
rnot shocked thereby... For instance, coupled Yeb> Yum
figures were not thought impure, Another point hus been
colsezved upon by the Ttalian author Guido Gezzano, ramely,
that the European has lost the power of “worshipping
‘through the flesh” which existed in antique pagan times.
(Verso la cana del Mondo). Fear of erotic symbols is rather
indicative  in the generality of cases of» tendency
                                                  to weakness
and want of self-control. ‘The greet Edward Carpenter
speaks of the “impure hush” in these matters. A. permon
‘hose mind is naturally beat towards sensual thoughts but
‘who desiresto control them has no doubt a fear, which one
raudily understands, of anything whish may provoke such
houghis. Bus such a man is, im this reapeet, lower than
hhim who looks upon nataral things in a nataral way without
fear of injury to himself; and greatly lover then him 0
                                8
                 SHAKTA SADHANA
 ‘whom all is a manifestation of the One Consciousness, and
 ‘ho realizes this in those things which are the cause of all
 to the imperiectly selfgoverned Pashu. Nothing is in
 iaell impure. It is the mind which males itso, Tt is
 however absolutely right that porsons who feel that they
 have not sufficient set-control should, until they exin i,
 avoid what they think may do them injury. Apart irom
 symbolism there are statements in some Shastras or so-called
 Shistras which are, in the ordinary modern sense, obscene,
 Some years ago a man wrote to me that he had come across
 fn tho Tantras “obscenities the very reading of which
 was demoralizing”. The vory fact that theoe portions of
 the Scripture had such an effec on him is» suficient reason
 ‘that he and others similarly situated should not read them.
 ‘The Tantra Shistra recognizes this principle by certain
 {injunctions into which T cannot err bere. ‘the Kulirmava
 expresely says that the Chapter’ on the Wine ritual is
 not to be read (Na pathed dsavollsom); thabis, by the un-
 qualified,
      Again ib is not necessary to admit either that every
‘Text which oalls Itself «Tantra is a gensin      one or e
                                                         if 20
 that it was the product of «high class Sidbaka. What is
 authoritative is that which is generally admitted to be eo.
 TByen if the Scripturebe one of general acceptance, there
 is another matter to be remembered. As pointed ‘out in
 ‘KarpGradistotea (Vol. IX, Téntrik Texts, p. 11, where in-
 ‘stances are given), an apparently “obscene” statement may
 disguise something whioh is not so. Why it may be asked ¢
 ‘Am intending disciple may be questioned as to such passages.
 If he is a grost-minded or stupid man his answers will show
 it, Those who are not ft for the reception of the doctrine
 ray be kept off on heszing or reading such statements which
 ray be of such a character that anyone but « fool would
  mow that they wore not to be taken literally. It may be
 ‘that the passages which my correspondent read were of
  this character.
                                349
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      As regards eotio symbetism,    however, (for to this ! now
 limit myeotf itis not peculiarto tho Tamtzas, It is ae old os
‘te kills aad may be found in other Scriptures, Tt isa matter
 of embarrassment to the class T bave mentioned that the
 Bible isnot nee from it, Mitton, after referring to Solomon's
 ‘wedied Ieisures says, “In the Song of Songs whichis generally
 belived, even inthe jollest expressions,   to igure the spousals
 of the Church with Ohrst, sings of © thousand raptures
 between those two lovely ones far on the hither side of
 ‘camal enjoyment.” If we would picture the cosmic pro-
 ‘esac wo must take tho materials therefor from our own lif,
 tis not always neosteary to go tothe erotic life, But man
‘has generally    dono so for reasonsT need not discuss     here
 ‘and his selections must sometimes be admitted to be very
 apt. It has however bean said that “throughout Shikta
 symboliam and peeido-philesophising, there lies at the basia
 of the whole system, the conception of sexual relationship
 fa the ultimate explanation of the universe.” Reading
 ‘hese words as they stend, they ete nonsense. What is
 true is thab some Shikta Tantras convey philosophio and
 scientifo truths   by the media of erotic imagery ; which is
 ‘snotier matter, But so also does Upanishad. The charge
 ‘of yeendo-philosophy is illfounded, unless the Advaita-
 vvedinta is such. ‘The Shite Tantra simply presents the
 Vedtutik teachings in a eymbotial ritualistic form for the
 ‘worshipper to whom it also prescribes the means whereby
 they may be realized in fast. ‘Those who think otherwise
 Ihave not mastered the alphabot of the subject,
      1 will conslade with a reply to 2 possible objection to
 ‘what Ihave above written, Itmay be said that some of the
 rituals to which I have alluded are not merely the property
of the Tantra Shistms, and that they are not entitledto any
 ‘rodit for thom. Ttiso faob that some (many have become
 extinct) Vaidik rituals such as tho ten Samskiras, Sandhya,
‘Homa and s0 forth are imbedded in and have been adopted
 by the Kgamas, ‘Theao end other rituals ars to be found
                                550
                   SHAKTA SADHANA
  alto in the Punta Th any ease the Agama in what i is,
  ‘hother is clamenta are original or derived. If the rites
  audopted aro creditable then prose must be given for the
  adoption of that which is geod. If they are not, Blame
  equally attaches to the original a6 to the copy. Whit hove
  ever the Agamas havo adapted has boan shaped so as to be
  ruitable forall, that ie for others than those for whom the
  criginl ritusls were intended, Further many of the rituals
  here desribed seem to have been introduced by and to be
  peculiar to the Azamas. Possibly some of these may have
  heen developed from other forms or seeds of form in the
 Vaid ritual. ‘Ihe whole rubject of Indian staal and ita
  origin inatill awaiting enquiry. Personally I am disposed
  to favour the view tint the Agnes have made a cont
  bution which is both orginal aud considerable. To me also
  fhe contsibution seune to lave. greater conformity with
 ‘Voddntk doctrine, which is applied by the tual in a
  psyehological manner which    is profound Onan “historical”
 Viewof the matter      this seoms neseessily be so. For,
 according to that vow, the early Vaid ritual either ante:
  dated or was contemporanaous with the promulgation of
 ‘tho Veddntik dodizine to be found in the Upanishads, for
 ‘the general sccoptanoe of which considerable time “was
  neccesary. Tt could not therefore (if at all) embody that
Aeotrine in th same way or to the came dogreo aa a Ritual
  developed at a ime when thet dovtrine had been widely
 iseminated, geuorlly accepted and at least to « greater
 Agree eystematized. Ritual is only a practical expression
‘of doctrine, end the Agamas, according      too generally aocept-
 cd view, did not come into being easier         than « date lator
 ‘than the frst aud chief Upanishads, and perhaps at the
 logo of what is generally called the Aupanishadik ege. No
  “"Kstoical" argument, However, i yotentcely trustworthy,
  as the mstetial upon which i isto be based has not been
  ruficently explored. For myself Iam contont to deal with
‘roseut-day facta. According      to the Indian view, all Shtras
                               sst
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 axe vasious parts of one whole and that Part which a8 a
 present-day fact contains the bulk of the ritual, now or
 recently in practice, consists of the Tantras of the various
 schools  of Agama As an Indian author end follower of the
 Shaivéguma has said—the Temple ritual throughout India
 is govemed by the Agamas. And this mustbe so, if it be
the fact as alloged, that ‘Temples, Images, and other matters
 were unknown to the original Vaidik Aryas If the Agamas
 have oped some ofthe nual of ihe et thw in thee
           course of time took to themaclves the practices of
 ‘howe cosh the bay of man for whom the Vill Karma
 kinda wat orginally designed, —VedRnta in ite various frm
 1hss now for canturies constituted tho religious notions of
 Tndia, and the Agamas in their difeing schools are ita
 practical expression in worship and ritual afording the
 ‘means whemsby Yedaatile doctrine is realised,




                             552
                        Cuarrmn XXVIL
                   ‘THE PANOHATATIVA,
                     (Cee Sone Rrvvat)
  TPE notaity of the Shikta Panchatativa situa with
         ‘Wine and woman has thrown into the shade not only
  the practical topics with which I havedeatt, but every other,
  including the valuable philosophical preseitment of Vedinta
  contained in the Shikta Tantra. Notwithstanding, and
  indeed because of, the off-hand and (in certain respects)
  {ignorant condemnation which this ritual has received, the
  interests of both scholarship and fairness (which by the’ way
  should be identical) require that we should fist ascertain
 ‘the fncls, think oleasly and feasleesly, and then determine
  without prejudice. Teom both the Shdatrike and historical
 point of view the subjeotis of auch importance that it is
‘ot possible for me to here desl with it otherwise than in
‘very general way. It is necessary, however, in a pa er on
 Upland,fo a lens touch sj the sates bows a
against everything one says abput the Tantras, there is raised
the express or implied quary “That may be all very well.
 But what about the infamous Panchamskirs?” Anything
said in favour of the Sbistra is tins discounted in advance.
       ‘Wo must first diseutangle the guneral principles involved
 from their pasticular application. The principle may be
 sound and yet the application may not bo ec. We may,
 for instance, approve striving for Vedinlik detachment
 (Audistaya), whist at the same time we may reject
 the Aghora’s application of it in eating human carrion,
 Next, lat nssce what in fact i th ritual application of these
 ‘principles, Then    lo us judge    the intention with which the
 Fitual was prescribed. A principle may be good and             the
 intention may be good, but its       application  may be intrinsi-
 cally bad, ot at least dangerous, and therefore inexpediont
as leadingto abuso. In life it i « mistake to altogether
                                 553
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  roglect the pragmatical aspect of any theory. Logie and
  life donot always go band    in hand, Lastly   lot us see whether
  the application is good or bad or inexpedient ; or whether
it is partially    one or the other.
        In the fret placeit is neoastary to clear the air of some
  ‘common misceneeptions. Ttis commonly thought that all the
  practitioners of the Panchatattva ritual with wine, woman,
  tand so forth oro igumoral men, professing to follow’ « Scrip:
  ture which does not ecvept the ondinary rules of morality
  1s regards food, drink and woman which enjoin that: men
 should curb their sensual desires. Rathor is it thought
 that it teaches thet men should yield to them and thus
 “enjoy” themselves. ‘This view turns at least this partion
 of the Shikta Tantra into a scripture of libertinism, thinly
 veiling itzelf in peoudo-religious forms. Its followers are
suppored to be in the condition of a sanmual man who finds
 ‘his wishes thwarted by the rales of morality of his felons
 around him and who, asking himself ow he can infeinge
 ‘those rules under colour of same supposed euthorty, gives
 to the fulfilment of decite a “religious” axnction. In the
 words of an Englih waiter, the bent towards religion of
 some sort is so strongin India that some ofits people even
 “sin religiously”. They axe, an this view, hypocrites putting
 ‘themselves to a desl of unnsoeseary trouble, for man can
and do in India, asclsowhere, gratify their desires without
 religious rituals, and if wishful to extablish a theory of enjoy-
 ‘ment justifying their conduct, they cam, as some have also
 done in India as elsewhere, advocate an “epicuresn” material-
 fam for that purpose. For the true sensualist who wishes
 ‘to got at the object of his desire, these long Téntri rituals
 would be obstructive and wearisome. Whatever may be
 ‘thought of tho ritual in question, those notions of it are
            ‘he chargy however, hare, const                        ©
 blot on this com's civilization, which has been allowed
 to remain because some who know better ore either alraid
to acknowledge that they follow these rites, or if they do
                                  554
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 nob, that it may be supposed that they do so. ‘This blot,
 in 60 far as it is not justied by actual fact, T propose in
 ‘the present Chapter to remove
       ‘The word Shéstre or Scriptures comes from the root
 ‘Skis, to cantzcl, because its object is to control the conduct
of men otherwise       prone to evil. Whether      its methods be
 ‘mistaken or not, the Bhakta Scriptureisa Shastre. Morality
 or Dharma ia preached by all Shastra whether of East or
 ‘West. ‘That morality (Dharma) is in ite esventils the
 same in all the great Scriptures. For whab purpose is con-
 duct controlled # ‘The Indian answer is—in order that man
 ‘may make for himself « good Karma which spells happiness
 in this and the next world (Pazaloka), and thet then he may
 at length fove himself of all Karma and attain Liberation
 (Moksha). Bad Karma leads to, suffering here end in the
 Hills of the afterlife. ‘This is taught in the Shaleto, as in
 ‘other Shiatres, which’serk to train the Sidhaka to attain
 Liberetion. In a work of the presat scope, I have not the
 space to cite authority in support of all these clementary
 propositions, ‘Thore is, however, an abundance of Texts
 {in support of them. Consult, for instance, the grand opening
  Chapter of the Kuliimava Tantra, which points out the
 frailty of Man, the passing mature of this world and of all
 it gives  to Man, and his duty to avail himselt of that Manhood
  which is 10 difficult of attainment so that be docs not fall
  but sists end advances to Liberntion. I cite the Kultzaava
 rot merely because itis reputed to be a great Tantra. and
  authority readily accessible, but because it teaches in fall
  the practice of the rituals under consideration. But what
is Liberation t Tt is the state of Brahman the Pure. How
‘oa the Pure be attained by counselling the practoe of what
  ‘the author of the Shistra thought to be impure. Every
  ‘Tantra oounses the fellowing of Dharma or morality. ‘The
  ‘sane Tentra (above cited) in its Chapter dealing with the
  necessary qualifications of a dissiple points out that he most
  bbe of good charuetor and in perticular must not be lewd
                                555
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  (Kémuka) and given over to drink, glaitouy and woman.
  the is a0, he is not competent fr this particular sitaal and
  must be tinued by other disciplines (Peshvichicy,
         T bere and hereafter deal with these partioular ia-
 fractions of morality beoause they alone in this matter
 ‘concern 1s in our stlempt to understand a ritual which is
 supposed to be an instance of the commission of these very
       ‘The Mebtnirvina antes, which is of special intarest
‘because it isan sttempt to provide a goncral code including
 low (in ie Wuropean sense) for the fellowers of its cult,
 rakes provision, amongst other matter, for general dovency
 and so forth, forthe state-punishment (anknowa to English
 legislation) of men who go with prostitutes (XI. 43) as aio
 with unmarried girls (,, 99-84), with women of probibited
 agree (ib), with the wives of othere(t 85-11), or who mere-
 ty loae with an e@ of lst apon them (i. 47), stating (i, 46)
 “4 man should consider as wife only that women who has
been married to him accordingto Brahma (the common)
 or Shaiva form, All cthes women are the wives of others.”
 1 deplores (F-87) the evil oasioms of the present age (Kali-
 ‘yugn) with its ivligion,  Int, adultery, gluttony and addic-
 tion to strong drinks. How strangely hypocritical are
 ‘these laments in a Shastra which is supposed to eouseiously
 promote the very tendencies it; deplores. It has bean ssid
‘hat the Mahinievina is worthy exception in an unworthy
 class, Tt ia tro that this Tantra evidences what may be
 called a reforming tendency on ecoount of abuses hich
 Thad ocourred ond thus puis resitictions on the ordinary
 householder as rogards particular portions of the ritual,
 a fact which mado s Pandit, of whom I was told, sty that in
 compatizon with the Mabfinfla Tantra it was “a woman's
 Shastra”. Nevertheleos on the general matters here dealt
 ‘with it is not an exception. Possibly those who so speak
 ‘had only read the Mabdnirvina which is the sole Tantra
 which has been translat             ed Certainly nothing
                                in English,
                                556
                  THE PANCHATATTVA
 thet they sey indicates any real acquaintanos with any
 other, ‘There are in fact other fine end more philosophical
 ‘Tontzes, and all the grest authoritative Sorptares are at
 ‘one, 20 far as Tam arate, on the general question of morality
 snd the search for Liberation with which I here deal. How,
 as T have said, could it, on commonly acoepted. principles,
 be otherwise? Whether the Sidband they teach is good
 snd effective for the ond sought is axother matter, and stil
‘ore so is the question whether it has Been productivein
 fast of abuse
      ‘What then are the goneral Indian rules touching dvink-
 ing, eating, ond sexual intercourse! In ancient Vaidie
 ‘times intoxicating liquor was taken in the form of Soma,
 Such drink was found, however, inthe course of time to be
 prodaotive of great ov, and was three cursed by Brahma,
 Shuketshtrya and Krishna Te was then prohibited with
 the resalt that Tnia has been the most temperate among              that
 ‘the grest peoples of tho world, Manu having declredsbsten-
 ‘hough the drinking   of wine was a  natural      tendency,
 tion sheetrom was produotive of great frut, ‘The orUsbansh
 Samhita ys “Wine should not be drank given taken"
 (Mayon apeyain adeyam egrdiyam), ‘Theinvolving           drinking of
 vine is one of the great sins   (Mahipitek)                        expi-
 ation (Priyashshite), and otherwise lesding            the sinner to
 that great Hell in which the slayer  ofa   Brikonana       is confined
 (Vist Purins,1. c. vi). Tn ancont Vaid times, meatin-
 twas eaton Ly the fai-osloared anburmbeired               Aryans,
 lading even bec, as is dono by their fellow-Aryans               of the
 ‘West. But in prooese of timo     the    slanghtor      of   cattle   for
 food was absolutely probibited and ceriain            meats euch a
                                                  held to be impure,
that ofthe domesticated fowl andand pigfishwereto-day,
‘As regards the eating of flesh wao submit to the1 believe             the
 hugher eastes (ouside Bengal)                                 orthodox
                                                                    striot
 Sinirie discipline take neither. ButNorthe dobulkhighof theand people
 Brahmanss in thet province,
 there, both men axl women, eat fish, and men consume
                                   387
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  the Mesh of male gouts previously offered to the Deity.
 Grain ofall kinds is a common diet. T speak,                of course, of
 orthodox Hindus, Some who have adopted                  Western    civil
 ‘zation bave taken ove with it the eating of beet, the Krishna,   whisky
 peg and champagne, the cures of Bram, Shula,
 fand the Hel of their Shistrs being nothing to them.
       As regards Durgh Devt the absurd statement has been
 sade (“Empire of India” by Sit Bampfylde Buller, 16) thet
 “fo extzominte among Her votarios any sexual reetiaint is
 a denial of Her authority.” Yet it ia common ground to
 all Shistras thal sexual intercourse (Maithuna) Theby.» Vaid          man
‘vith a woozanwhois     not  lawfl   to  him is   e  sin.
 Dharais strict on this point, It forbids not merely nctual
 Maithana but what is called Ashidnge (eightfold) Maithona,
 namely, Smaranam (thinking) upon i), Kictianam (talking
 of if), Keli (play with women), Pyekshanam (making eyes
 at women), Gubyabhishanam (ll in private with women),
 Soulelpa (ish or rosolve for suxual union), Adhyavastya
 (determination towards it), Kripfaishpetti (actuala follower      accom
 plishment ofthe sexual at),     I n  short, the    Pashu
‘of she ordinary vitual (and except forsitual purposes                those
 ‘ho are no: Pasko) should, in the words                of   the  Shikta-
 Iramtys (cite by Mabimahopldhyya Krisbnanthato Nyéys-               . 16
 panchinana Bhattéchryye in his Commentary vavoid
 of the Karptfistot, Tintrik Texts, Vol. TX), of
 Maitiuna, conversation on tho subject nd assemblies
       ‘Maituram tothahdldpom tadgesiiin parivarjet.
      liven in marrage cortain rules aze to be observed such
 as that which presries intercourse on the fifth day                  after
the termination of   the  period (Ritubdlam      vind      deo   ramanam
 porivorjayet) which is said by the Nitya Tantra to tobe alla
  Charactristio of the Pashu. Polygamy is permissible
  Hindus,
       ‘The Divinity in woman, which the Shilta Tantra in
  particular prolaiins, in lao recognized in tho ordinary
                                   558
                THE PANCHATATTVA
  Valdik teaching. The wile ia a Howe Goddess (Gsiht-
  deveti) united to her husband by the sacrament (Satelira)
 of roatiag    and isenob to be reganted merely  aa an object
  of enjoyment. Further, Vaidik Dharma (now uoglected)
  presribes that the householder should ever worship with
  his wife as neoossary pertner therein, Sasiido dharmamd-
  caret (see also Mateyestets Tantra, XXX1), According to
‘the sublime notians   of Shruti the union of man and wife in
 ‘a veritable cactificial rite—a sacrifice in fire (Home) wherein
 she is both hearth (Kunda) and flame—and he who knows
 ‘his a8 Homa attains Liberation (sce Wantra 18 of Hora-
 pralarena of Bribadiranyaka Upanishad and award
 Carpenter's remarks om what is called the “obscenity” of
‘in Upanishad), Similac               , Mantra for Maithona
                               the Téntcke
 runs (#2 Pranstochinl and Tantrastra 008), “Om, Tnto
‘the Fine which is Spirit (Atma) brightened by (the pouring
 thereon) of the ghes of mexit and demerit, I by the path
 of Sushumnk (the cantral‘nerve") ever asics (do Homa
of) the functionsof the senses using the mind as the Indl.
 Svabé."” (In the Homa:rte the performer poure ghee into
 ‘the fire which causes it to shoot up and flame. The ghee
in poured in with a ladle. This being intema        Homa lthe
 tind is the ladle which makes the offering of ghee).
                                Om
     Dharnditharma-havirdiple dondgnase manasé suck
     ‘Sushundvarenand    iggam akshadritsr jukomyoham: Sedid,
        Here sexus! union tales ox the grandeur of great
 rite (Yijun) compared with which the ordinary mere asinal
 copulation to ease desire, whether dene grosily, shame-
 facedly, or with fippant gallantry is base. It is
because thie high conception of the function is not mown
 tnt a “grames” is changed agunst the association of
 sexual function with religion which dost not belong to it
 Grosanese is properly attributable to those who mate like
 dumb animals, or coarsely and vulgesly, not to sich ae
 realize in this fonction the cosmic activity of the active
                               $59
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Brahman ot Shive Shalt with which they then, ab always,
  unity. themselves.
    = Tt has been already explained that S4dbakss have
  been dividod into three cassee—Pashu, Vira and Divya,
 ‘and for each the Shastra prescribas a suitable Sidhand,
 ‘Tins, Rojas and Séttvik accordingly. As later stated,
 ‘he Panchatattva rtaal init fll literal sens is not for the
 Pashu, and (judging upon principle) the Divya, unless of
 ‘the lower ritual order, shosld bs beyond it. Tn ita fallest
cond literal senso itis for the Visa and ie therefore called
 Rjasik Sidhand or Upisind. It ie to be noted however
 that Pashu, Vire and Divya are the three primary classes
 (Mukibyasihaks). Besides these there are secondary divi-
 sions (Gaumasédhaks). ‘Thos in addition to the primary
 ‘or Svabhive Poshu there is the Vibhiva Pasha who is a
 stop towards Vistchtra. Virus againhave been said to be
 of three kinda, Svabhava Vir, Vibhtva Via, and Nontrs-
 siddba. Vir. If is to this Raja Pajt thet the Hymn to
 Chionamasta from the Devirabasyalhands of the Rudra-
 ritual refers when the Vim therein say,
          ‘Alipishagnrandr- hegapparham
           Bahwvidhabulandrydrumbha-somb’doita     ham
           Pashuganacinatho   Tham Bhairacia dario}ham
           Grurucharanarat'ham Blaivec'}am Shivo'ham
        (“I follow the worship wherein there is enjoyment of
 ‘wine, flesh snd. wife as also other diferent forms of Kula
 ‘worship. In Bhairavi (the Goddess) I seck my refuge. ‘To
 tho
 mL)foot of Guru Tam devoted. Bhairava am I. Shiva
        ‘To the ordinary Bnglish reader tho assciation of eating,
 inking and sexual union with worship will probably be
‘noongraous, if not downright repulsive.“ Surely,” he might
 say, “such things are far apart from prayer to God. We go
 and do them, itis true, beceuse they are a necessity of our
 ‘imal neture, but prayer ar worship have nothing to do
 with such coarseness. We may pray before or after (aa in
                              60
                THE PANCHATATTVA
  Grace) on taking food, but the physial acta betweenare not
 prayer. Such notions are based partly on thay dualiom
 ‘which keeps separate and apart Ged and His creature, and
 portly on certain false and deprecistory notions concerning
‘matter and material fnctions. According        to Indian Monism
 such worship is not only understandable but (I am not
 speeking of any particular form of it) the only religions
 attitude consistent   with its principles. Mam i, in his essence
 or spirit, divine and one with the universal Spirit. His
 ‘mind and body and all their functions are divine, for they
 aro not morely a manifestation of the Power (Shakti) of
 God but thst Power iteelé, To cay taat matter isin itecl
 low or evil is to calumniats that Power. Nothing in antusal
 fnnotion is low or impure to the mind which recogaines it
 ss Shaiti and the working of Shakti, Tt is the ignorant
 ‘and, ina troe sense, valgar mind which regards any natmral
 function   as low or Coste,» 'The actionin. this case is sean.
 in the light of the inner vulgarity of mind. It hos been
 ‘suggested thatin its proper application the Msithuna Karma
 is only an application-to. sexual function of the principles
 cof Yoga (Maston-Oursel Histoirede Ia Philosephie Indienne,
 ppp. 281-288). Once the reality of the world as grounded
 in the Absolute is established, the body seems to be less
 ‘an obsiacle to freedom, for it ss form of that salf-same
 Absolute, The erestive function being natural is not i
 itee culpable, There is no real sntinomy between Spirit
 and Nature which is sn instrument for the realization of the
 Spirit, ‘Tho method borrows, it is ssid (0h), that of Yoga
 not to frustrate, but to regulate enjoymert. Conversaly
 enjoyment produces Yoga by the union of body and spirit
 Tn the paychophysiclogial rites of these Shikias enjoy-
 ‘ment is not merely an obstacle to Yoga but may also be a
 means to it, This, ho cays, is an important conception
 ‘which recalls the discovery of the Mabéyéna thet Sumstra
 and Nievins azo one, For here are made one, Yoga which
 berates and Bhoge which enchains (i,), Tt will then be
                                 sor
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 seadily understood thet according to this doctrine only
 ‘those are competent for this Yoga who are truly free, or
 on the way to freedom, of all dua,
        Extemal worship demands certain acts and instruments,
 such as bodily attitude, spooch, and materials with which
 ‘the sito is done, euch 06 flowers, incense, lights, water and
 other offerings. These materials and instrumenta are called
 Upachére. Osdinaly there are sixteen of these, but they
 ray be more or less. There is nothing absolute in either
 the quality, quantity or uature of the offerings. Ordinarily
 such things ar offered as might be given to guests or friends
 ‘or others whom the worshipper loves, such as seat (Asona),
  welcome (Svigata), water to wash the feet (PAdya), focd
 (Naivedys), cloths (Vasona), jewels (Abbarana), with other
 things such at Tights, inosiss; and flowers, In inner or
 rental worship (AnasapQ) these are not things material,
‘but of tho mind of the              worthip er. Pleasing things are
 selocied os offering to the Devat® because the worshipper
 ‘wishing to please Devats offers what        ho thinka to be pleasant
 and would be glad himself to receive, But wan who
 sovognized the divinity (end therefore value) of all things
 right offer any. With much o disposition a piece of mud
 ‘or8 stone would be as goodan offering as any other. There
 ‘ro some things the ordinary man looes upon es “unclean”
‘and, aa Tong a8 be docs #0, to offer such o thing would be
 fan offence. But if to his “equal eye” these things are not
 30, they might be given, Thus the Vire-sfidhand of the
 Shakta Tantra males situal use of what will appear to
 ‘most to be impure snd repulsive substancis, This (as the
 ‘Tninimava Tantza suys) is done to accustom the worshipper
 ‘not  to see impurity in them but to regard them as al else,
 fu manifesstion of Divinity. He is taught that taere is
 nothing impore in itseli in natural functions though they
 be made,by misuse or abuse, the instruments of impurity.
‘Hore agnin impurity consists not in the act ger ae but in
 ‘the way and in the intention with which it is done, ‘Toe
                               362
                  THE PANCHATATTVA
 ‘Vien  all things, aos, and functions, done with right intention,
 ray be instruments of worship. For, a Vira is ane who
 sesks to overcome Tamas by Sativa, Therefore, the natural
functions of eating, drinking and sexual union may be used.
 ‘ag Upachiza of worship. ‘This does not meen that a man
 maydo what he likes as regards these things ond pass them
 off a5 worship. They mast be rightly done, otherwise, 8
run would be offeri         his sin to ng
                                        Devati.. ‘The-principle of all
 this is entirely sound. The only question which existsis as
 segarde tho application to which the ritual in question puts
 it, Worship and prayer are not merely the going aside at
1 particular time or place to utter seb formule or to perform
 particular ritasl acts, ‘The whole of life, in all its rightful
 particulars, without any single exception, may be an act of
 ‘wors      ifman buthipmakesitso, » Who caa rightly deny this
Ofcoume, as long ag a man regards any function as impure
 cor matter of shame, his mental disposition is euch that he
 cannot worthip therewith. To do so. would distract and
 perturb him. But both to the nataralminded end illumi-
 rate man this is possible. ‘The principle here dealt with is
 not entiely peouliar to thio school. ‘Those Hindus who are
 not Monists, and whatever be their philosophical theories,
 ‘ao worshippers in practice are 60, for worship connotes the
 ‘dualism of worshipped (Updeya) and worshipper (Upisak),
‘of the meara or instrament (Sidhans) and thet to be at-
 tained thereby (Sidhyo)], yet make offering of their acts
 to Devati. By thus offering all their daily speech, each
  word they say beoomes, in the words of Shietra, Montm,
 ‘Nor, if we examine it, is the principle alien to Christianity,
{or the Christian may, in opening his day, offer all his acts
 ‘therein   t0 God, What he therea                    is worship. The
                                                does fter
 ference in these cases and          that  of  the   Vira principle lies
(at any rate in practice) is this, that the latteris more
 thorough in its application, no act ot function being exchud-
 ‘ed, and in worship, the Shakta being « Monist is taught to
  regurd the offering not an given to someone other thon his
                                    563
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘ovn essential Self, Dutto That, He is thus, according to the
  theoryof this practice, led to divinise his functions, and by
  thoir constant association with the thought of Brahman his
  tind   is, itis said, pwified and led away from all eamal de-
  sires, If those fonotions are set apart as something common
cor impure, viotory is not easily won. Therei still some part
  of his life into which Brahman doss not enter and which re-
  rains the source of distraction. By associating them with
  religion, itis tho religious feding which works fst dough
  and then supersedes them. He thus gradually’ attains
  Divyabhava and the state of the Dovat8he bas worshipped.
  For itis common Indian principle that the end of worship
  is to assimilate oneself to its object or Deveti. Thus it is
  ssid in the Agni Purina that by worship of Rudra one
  becomes Rucrs, by worship of Vishnu ono becomes Vishuu,
  and by worship of Shalcti one becomes Shakti. This is so
  Docanse the mind mentally transforms itl into the Hkenees
  of that on whith itis sot, By thinking always, on the other
Ihand, on censual objecto one becomes sensual, Even before
  worship, one should strive to attain the true attitude of
  ‘worship, and 60 the Gandharva Tantra says, “He who is nob
  Devs (Adeva) should not worship Deva. ‘The Deva sloxe
  should worship Deva.” ‘The Vira or strictly the Sidhaka
 ‘qualifed to entet Virichira—since the true Vira is its
 finished product—commences Sidhand with this Rajasik
 ‘Uptsana with the Panchatattva as Upachara which are om-
ployed for the transformation of the sansual tendencies they
 ‘connate. I have heard the view exprested that this part
  of the Shistra yas really promulgated for ShOdras, Shiva
 Iknowing the animal propensities of their common life must
lead them to take flesh and wine, prescribed these sites with
‘8 view to lessen the evil and to gradually wean them from
 ‘enjoyment by promulgating conditions under which alone
  such enjoyment could be had, and in associatingit with reli-
 ‘gion, “Tt is better to bow to Niriyana with one's shoes on
  than never to bow at all” A.man with taste for deine will
                              564
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 only incase bis that by animal ntsfaction (Pashspéne.
‘Bat i when he dink he an be made to ear the liquid
 4 divine manifeststion and have thought of God, gradually
 such thoughts will ovecome and oust his senna! desires,
 a the same principle children axe given powder in jam,
though this msthod isnot confined to actual children only.
‘Those who so argue contend that a Brikmans should, on no
account, take wine, and Texts are cited which are said to
 suppor! this view.” T-have dealt with this matin in the
 Tntroduetion to the sixth yolume of “Tantik Texte”
 {Te afsint to say hor that tho reply givin i that auch
 ‘Vorts refer to th» unnthoired coprmption of wine an by
 uninitiated (Anabhishita) Brbmanas. Tn he sume place
 have discussed the question whsther wine can be taken at
all by any one in this Kali age, For, avording    to some
 suthortes, there is only Pashabbive in the Keliyugs, If
‘this be correct then all wine-drinking, whether ritual or
otherwise, is prohibited.
       or the woreip    of Shalt, the Panchstattva are de-
 clared to be essential: Without the Panchatattva in one
 form or another ShaitipGjt cannot be performed (Mabi-
 nirvina, V. 2824), ‘The reaton ofthis i that those who
 ‘womhip Shakti worship Divinity a Creatix snd in the
 form of the universe, Tf She apposrs as ead in aatural
 fmton, She mrtbe worshipped therewith, othervin, 99
 the Tantra cited says, worship is frites, ‘The Mother of
 the Universe mt be wersbipped with these five elements,
 namely,  wine, meat fib, grain, and woman, ot thir substic
 tiles. ‘By ter use the cnverse (Jagad-brabmseds) stele
 is used as the atile of worship (Upachir). The Mahi-
 nievine (WIT. 103-111) says that-vine which gives joy end
Gigpala the somows of ren is Fie; flesh which nonrishes
tnd insroms tho srongth of mind and body in Aie; fish
 which increases gonerstive powerof ieia Woter,   meals grown
 bn earth and whith are the bass          ae Bact, and sexual
tion, which isthe      root of the world   and the origin of all
                              365
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 creation, is Ether. They thus signify the Power (hak)
 ‘which produces all ery elements, all terrestrial and aq
 Tio, al vegetable lif, and the will, knowledge end action of
 the Supreme Prakriti productive of thet great bliss which
 saocompanies the proosss of creation. (See also Harstattva-
 didhiti XV, Kamiya Tontes, Niganatattvastra IV).
 ‘The Kailisa Tanti (Parvikiny8, Ca. XO) identifies this
 Peniad (Panchatativs) with the five vital airs Prinddi)
 and the Give Mahipreta which aupport the couch of Tripara-
 sundax,
       With these preliminaries, and postponing for the
 ‘moment further comment, we may proceed to un examina-
 ‘tion in greatar detail ofthe five (Pancha) elements (Tattva),
 namely, Wine (adja), Mest (Mfamea), Fish (Xatsya),
 arched Cereal (Muir), and Sexual Union (Maithune) which
 ‘stand-‘or drinking, eotiog end propegation. Because they
 all commence with the letter M, they are valgarly called
 Panche-maciea (or five 3).
       ‘These Panchotattve,, Kuladravys or Kulatattva as
‘ey are called, have more esoteric names, Thus         the lat is
 Joownas ‘he fifth”. Womanis called Shakti or Prati
 ‘A Nintzik commoniy calls his wife his Shakti      or Bhairavi
 Woman is aleo called Ltd or “ceogper”, becanse woman,
 clings to and depends on man as the creeper does to the
 tree, Hence the ritual in which woman is enjoyed is called
 Latéatdhana, Wine in called “causal water” (Krannvisr)
 or Mietha water (Ththavdsi)
       Bat the Panchatativa have not always their liter
 mesning, The meaning differs according as they refer to
 ‘the Tamasik (Pashvihrs), Rajosk (Virehére) or Saitvik
 (Divyichirs) Sidhands respectively. “Wine” is only wine
and Maithuaa is only sexual union in the ritual of tho Vin.
 ‘To the Pasi, the Vira ritual (Visichara) is prohibited os
 ‘wamuitable to his stata, and the Divya, unless of the lower
ritaal kind, is beyond such things. The result       is that the
 Panchstattra have each three momninge, ‘Thus “wine”
                               566
                  THE PANCHATATTVA
 ‘may bo wine (Vira witul), or it may be coccanut: watat
 (Pasha ritual) or it may mean the intoxicating lowledgo
 of the Supreme attained by Yoga, according ae it is used in
 conncotion with the Vira, the Pasko, or the Divya reapec-
 tively. ‘The Panchotattva     are thus threefold, namely, real
 (Pratyakshatatova) where “wine” means wine, substitational
 (Anukalpsiattva) where wine means eooaannt water or ome
 other liquid, and symboical or divine (Divyatattva) where it
 isa symbol to denote the joy of Yous-knowiedge. The Pasha
 ‘worships with the substitutional Tattvas mentioned later
‘and never takes win, the Vite worships with wine, and the
 Divya’s “wino” is epsitual Imowledge. ‘There are further
‘moadifcations of thes» goneral rules in the cate of the inter
 ‘modinto Bhivas, Thus the author next cited says that
 ‘whilst the Svabatva Vira isa deiner of wine, the Vibhéva
 Vira worships internally with the five mental Tattvas and
 extemally vith substitutes, ‘The Mantrasiddhvia is free
 ‘to do as he pleases in this tatter, subjectto the general
 Shistrix rulss. In an exey by Pandit Jayachandra Sid-
 dhirtebhishan, onswering       certain charges made aguinst the
‘Tantra Shistra, he, after stating that neither the Vibhiva
 Vira nor Vibhive Pashu need worship with real wins, ays
that in modern Bengal     this kind of worship is greatly preva-
 lent, Such Tintrks do not tak wine but otherwise worship
 ccording    to tho rulo of Tantra Shiatea. It is, as be says,
 tan erroneous but common notion that @ ““TAntrika”” neces-
sarily means a drinker of wine. Some Sadbskas           agsin, in
 lien of the material Batthona, imagine the union of Shiva
‘nd Shalit in the uppee brain centre known as the Sabasrira
       The Divya Panchatattva for those of a truly Sittvika
 or spiritual temperament (Divyabbiva) have been described
 as follows:—-"Wine” (Medya) sccording to Kauls Tantra
 (bee p. 88 of Panchatativa-vichira by Nilamani Mulkhyopi-
 hydya) ie not any liquid, but that intorieating knowledge
 sequired by Yoge of tho Pazabrahman which renders the
  worshipper eeneleesas regards the external world. “Meat”
                                 567
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 (faze) is not any feshly thing, but the act whereby the
 ‘Suihala consigns all his acta to Me (Mam), thati, the Lord,
 “Fish” (Mateya) is thot Sttevik knowledge by which through
 ‘the seute of “fineness” (@ play upon the word Matsys)
 ‘the worshipper sympathizes with the pleasure and pain of
 all beings. Mad isthe act of relinquishing all association
 vith evil which remlts in bondage. Coition (Maithuns)
ia the union of the Shakti Kendalin, the “Inner woman’*
 and World-foree in the lowest centre (Ifliahtra. Chakra)
cof the Sadhalza’s body with tho Suprome Shiva inthe highest
 centee (Sahasrfra) in the upper Brain (see Kesay on Kunda-
 lint Shakti post). This, the Yogini Tantra (Ch. VI) says, is
 ‘the best of all unions for those who are Yat that is, who
 Ihave contrlle their passions,
       ‘Sahasréropari bindaw ‘kundalyd, melanam Shive
      Maithunam paramass drasyam yotinim parirttam.
 Accor        to theding
                      Agumasica, ‘wine’ is the Somadhirsor
 unar ambrosia which drops ‘rom the Sakasrira. “Ment”
 (Widzsa) is the tongue (Ma) of which ita part (Amsha) is
            ‘The Sidhaka in cating it controls is apooch.
 “Fish” (Mataya) are thowe bo (Vayu or current) which are
 constantly moving   i the two “river (that is, Yoga “nerves”
 cor Nadts) called Ida and Pingala, that is, the sympsthetios
on each side of the spinal column. He’ who controlshis
 bresth by Prindyima, “ests” them by Kumbhaka or
 retention of breath. Mudri is the awakening of knowledge
 in the pericarp of the great Sahasrirs Lotus (the upper
 Drain) where the Atmi resplendent as ten million suns and
Aeliiously cool a8 tan million moons is united with tho
 Devt Kundalint, the World-force and Conscioumess in
individual bodies, after Her ascont thereto from the MAli-
 htra in Yoga. The ezoterlo meaning of cation or Maithuna
in thus stated in the Agoma, The ruddy hued Re isin the
 Kunda (ordinarily the seed-mantra Ram is in Menipte
but perbsps here the Kunda in the Méldhira is meant).
‘The lever Ma (white like the autumnal moon, Sattraguna,
                                568
               THE PANCHATATTVA
 Koivelyariya-prakritript (Ch. 2, Kémadhons Tantra) is
in the Mabayoni (aot T may observe the genitals but
the lightning-ike triangle or Youi in the Sshasrira or
upper bran) in the form of Bina ( Ghaaibhéte oz “ou
densod’ form of Shakti and transformation of Nada abel).
When M (Oaiira) seated on the Hamsa (the “hind” which
is the pair Shiva Shakti as Jiva) in the form of A (A-Kéra)
unites with R (Relea) then Brahman knowiodgo (Brahma-
jana) which i the source of supreme bliss is gained by the
Sidhaka who is then called Amarima (Rojoyer with the
Bel), for his enjoyment je in the Atmt in the Sahasrara
(or this reazoa to the word Rama, which sleo moans sextal
enjoyment,i equivalent to the liberator Brabman, Rebar
ama) The union of Shiva and Shakti is described (Tantra-
sire, 702) a8 true Yous (Shioashaksizamdyogo yoga. evs na
somshayah) from which, s8 the Yale says, arises thet Joy
‘which is known as tho, Supreme Bliss (i., 703) (Samyogdj
fgate saukbya porandnandatakshanan).
     This is the inion on the purely SAttvik plane which
ccrreaponds in the Rajeal: plane to the union of Shiva and
Shalett in the persons of their worshippers. Tt veil have
‘been observed that hero in this Divya ox Sittvike Sadhana
“Wine”, “Woman” and vo fort ate really names for Yogile
operations
  he substitutional Tattas of Pashvichica also do not
answer to their names, being other substances “which are
taleen os substitutes of wine, meat, fish (see KulachAdémani ;
Bhairavayimala, Ch. 1). ‘These ‘have been vatiously de-
scribed and sometimes    a8 follows —In lea of wine tha Pasha
should,   if « Brihmana, take milk, if « Kshatriya   ghee, if a
Vaishya honey, and if Shdma liquor made from rice.
Cocoant water in a bellmetal utensil is also taken a5 a
substitate, Salt, ginger, sesamam, wheat beans (Misha-
cli) and gurio re aome of tho substitutes for meat ; the
 white brinjal vegetable, red radish, masur (a kind of gram),
red sesamim aud Paniphala (an aquatic plant) teke the
                             569
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  place of fish. Padily, ico, wheat and grain genorally are
  ‘Mudea both in Tauauske (Pashvichira) and Rajesik (Vice
  chira) Sédhands. In lien of Moithona there may be an
  offering of overs with the hands formed into the gesture
  called Kachchkapa-muds4, the union of the Karavia flower
 (oprsantetive of the Litiga) with the Aprijita (Clitorie)
  flower which is shaped as and represents the female Yoni
 and other substitutes, or thare may be union with the
 Sidtoka’s wife. On this and some other matters here dealt
 with thoro is. wariant practice.
       ‘The Kaulledechanndlpict epoals of what ie called the
  Aayatattvas, Adyamadya or wino is hemp (Vijay8), Adyo-
 shuddhi or meat is ginger (Aidraka), Adyamine or fishis
 citron (Jambi), Rayarmdré is Dhinyaja, that is, made
 from paddy and’ Adyschakti is the worshipper's own wit.
 Quoting {com the Tantrantars it says thet worship without
 these Adya forms is fruitless. “ven the strictest, total
 fbstainer and vegetarian will not object to “wine” in the
 shape    of hot milkor cosoanut water, oto ginger      or other
 substitutes for moat. Nor is there any offense in reganding
 sexual union botween the Sidhaka snd his wife not ae a
 ‘mare animal fanetion but’ as a ascrifcial rite (Yajoa).
       ‘Av thie point we may pass the literal Tattvas, Wine
 hero is not merely grape-wine but that whioh is made from
 ‘various substances such as molasses (Gauci, rice (Paisht) oF
 the Madhitka flower (iMdhv!) which are suid by the Mah-
nirvina Tantra (Ch. VI) to be the best. ‘There       are others
 suchas, wine nade from the juice of the Palmyra and date
 ‘ace, and anisood (Maareya wine). Meat is of three kinds,
 ‘that is, animals of the wster, earth, and sky. But no female
 animal must be slain. Superior kinds of Ssh are Shale,
 Pithins, and Rohita, Muda which every Orientalit whom
 I have read calla “ritual gesture” or the like is nothing
 of the kind here, though thst is « meaning of the term
 Mude8 in another connection. ‘They cannot have gone far
  into the subject, for itis elementary knowledge that in the
                              570
               THE PANCHATATTVA
Panchetettva, Mode means parehed cereal of vasious kinds
‘nd is defined in Yogint Tantra (Ch. VI) as—
      Bhrishtadhényéditam yudyad charcantyan prockakshate
      ‘S€ mudrd kathitd Devt scrveshtim, Nagunaniini
      (Oh Denghter of the Mountain, fried paddy and the
like—in fact all such (cereals) as sre chewed are called
Mudra.)
      ‘The Mabdnirydne (Ch. VD) anys that the most excellent
is that made from Shali rice or from barley or wheat and
‘hia has been fied in clarified butter, Meat, fish, Made
offered to tho Devata along with wino ie technically called
Shuddhi. The Mahinisvina says thet the dsinking of wine
without Shudabi ie like the swallowing of poison and the
Sidhant is fruitless. It is vot dificult to see why. Pes,
‘wine taken without food has grestar ellect and produces
ester injury. Moreover, sther check on indiscriminate
drinking is placed, for wine camnotbe taken unless Shuddhi
is obtained, prepared, and caten with the neoesmcy rites.
‘Woman, of Shakti, as She is properly eallod, since She is
ppurifed snd consecrated for the rite and represents the
Devi, is of three Kinds, namely, Sviya ar Suakiys (one’s ova
wile), Pasallya the wife of enothee ot tomo other woman,
‘and Sidhirent or one Who is:comtion, ‘This eapect of the
subject I deal with later. Here I will nly say that, where
sexual union is pormitted af all, the ordinary Shakti is the
Stdhaka’s Brill wife. It is only under certain conditions
thst there can be any other Shakti, Shaktis are also of
toro kinds, namely, thore who are enjoyed (Bhogy) and
‘those who are worshipped only (Pajya). A Sadhaka who
yields   to desire forthe latter commitsthe sin of incest with
his own mother.
       “Hoe again, according to Shite notions, one must not
‘think of these substances as mere gross matter in the form
 of wine, meat and co forth, nor on woman as mere woman;
 nor upon the rite as a mere common meal. The urusl daily
 rites mnst be performed in the morning, midday and evening
                             sr
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  (akinievin, V. 25). These are elaborate (i,) and take up
  ‘Tange part of the day. Bhitashuddhi is accompiched, ab
  which time the Séahale thinks that a Deva body has arisen
  as his own. Various Nyfses are done. Mental worship is
  performedof the Devt, the AdyA Kiliké, who is thought of
  as being in red raiment seated on a red lotus, Her body
  dark like a rain-clowd, Her forehead glesming with the light
  of the crescent moon, Japa of Mantra is then done and
  cuter worship follows. A further elaborate ritual sucosed,
       T pase here to ask the reader to conocive the nature
of the mind and disposition of the Sidhalea who has sinoerely
  pocformed those rites, Tait likely  to be lustfu           l t
                                                   or glattonous
 ‘Tho ouree ia removed from the wine and the Siudhaka medi-
 tates upon the union of Deva and Devi in it. Wine ia to
 bbe considered as Devatd. After the consecration of the
 wine, the meat, fish-and grain axe purified and are made
 like anto nectar. The Shalt is sprinkled with Mantra and.
 ‘made the Sidhaka’s own. Sho is the Devi Herself in the
 form of woman. The wine is changed with Mantras ending
 with the realization (Mshinirvane Tantre, VI. 42) when
 Homa is done, that offering is made of the excellent nectar
 ‘of “This-ness” (Idant®) held   in the eap of “T-ness” (Absamt8)
into the Fire whichis the Supreme T-nes (Pagthant).
       Abantipitra-bharitam ‘daniéparamémriam
       Pardhantmaye vaknaw homasetkéralddstanum.
       Here the distinction is drawn botween the “I” (Abam)
 ‘and the “This"”, ‘The former is either tine Supreme “I”
 (Porkhant8 or Shiva) or the individual “I” (Jiva) vebicled
 by the “This” or VimarshaShakti, The Sidhaka is the
 coup o vessel which is the individual go, “This ness” is
 offere              d Drinking isan offering to that Fire
          to the Supreme.
 which is the transcendent Self “whence all individual selves
 (Ja) proceed”. Wine is thon Tish Drevameyt, that i,
‘he Savio          Herselfureas
                           in the form of liquid matter (Mahi-
 nicvina, XI, 105-107). None of the Tabtvas can be offered
 ‘unless frst purified and consecrated, otherwise the Sidhe
                                 sr
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 oes to Tell, With further ritual the fist four Tttvas are
 consumed, the wine being poored as an oblation into the
 mouth of Kundall, aftar meditation upon Her as Conscious-
 ness (Chit) spresd from Her seat, the Malédhira to the tip
 of the tongue. ‘The whole ritual ia of great interest, aud
 T hope to give a fuller exposition of it on some future day.
       ‘Worship with the Panchatattva generally takes place
in a Chakra or circle composed of men and women, Sédhakas
 and Stdhiks, Bhnirovas end Bhatravis sitting in a circle,
 ‘the Shakti beingon the SAdhaka’s let. Hence itis called
 Chakrapija. A Lord of the Chal (Chakeshvera) presides
 sitting with his Shaleti in the contre, During the Chakra,
 ‘hore is no distinction of easte, but Pashus of any caste are
 ‘excluded, here aro various kinds of Chaler—prodactivo,
 it ia said, of difering fruits for the partiipstor therein. As
 amongst Tintrik Sidhskas we gome across the high, the
  Tow, and mere pretenders, so the Chakras very in their
 characteristics from sey the Tattva-chakta for the Brakma-
 ‘ksulss, and the ‘Bhairari-chakra (as dessribed in Mabi-
 nirvins, VII. 168) in which, in low of wine, the householder
 ‘alos milk, sugar and honey (Madhura-tzaya), and in Lien of
sexual union does meditation upon the Lotus Fest of the
 Divine Mother with Mantz, to Chakras the vitul of which
  will nt be approved such as Chidachales, Rnandabhavann-
‘yoga and others refered to later, Just as there are some
 inferior “Tantak” writings, 90 we find rituals of a ower type
  of men whose uutions or practices were neither adopted
 by high Sidbalas in the past nor will, if they survive
  be approved for practice today. What is wanted is a dis-
 criminstion which avoids both unjust general condem-
  nations and, with equal ignorance, unquslifled commenda-
 tions which do harm, I refer,      in my Kasay on “Shakti and
 Shilta’,     to a modern Chakra, I heard     a short time agoof
  ‘Gury, influenced ky an English education, whose strictness
‘went oo far that tho women did not form port of the Chakra
‘but sat in another     room, ‘This wao of course absurd,
                                 573
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
        ‘The two main objections to the Rajesik Paja are from
  oth the Hindu and European standpoint the alloged in-
  fruation of sexual morality, and from the former standpoint,
  the use of wine. By “‘Hindu'" T mean those who are not
  Shaktas, I will del with the latter point first. ‘The Vira
  Shalta admits the Smarta rule against the drinking of wine,
 ‘He, however, says that drinking is of two kinds, namely,
 ‘extreritual drinking for the satisfaction of sensual appetite,
 ‘and the ritual drinking of previously purified and conse-
 crated wine, The former is called Pachupina or “animal
 Grinking,”” and Vrithapina or “useless drinking”: for
  bringno part of worship, it ie forbidden, does   no good, but
 ‘on the contrary injury, and    leads to Hell,  ‘Tho    Western's
 sinking (even a moderate “whisky and coda”) is Pashu-
 péna, The Virtehtrt, like every other Hindu, condemns
 this and regards if-at e grest sin, “But drinking for the
 purpose af wor        is heldip
                               to stand on a. different groand.
 Tustasthe ancient Vaidils drank Soma aspartof        the Sacifice
 (ejna}, s0 does the Vira drink wine as part of his ritual.
‘Just as the Killing of animals forthe purpose of sacrifice is
 faccounted no “Icing”, s0 that it does:not infringe ageinst
 the rule ageinst injury (Ahimsa), 20 also drinking as part
 ‘of worship is eaid not to be the drinking which the Smrtis
 forbid. Por this reason it is contended that the nti
 secret warship (Rahasye-pOj) is not opposed to Veda. ‘The
 ‘wine ia no longer the gross injurious material substance,
 Dut fas been purifed and spintualized, so that the true
 Sédbaka looks upon it as the liquid form of the Saviour,
 Devi (Tér8 Dravamay!). The joy it produce is but a faint
welling up of the Bliss (Ananda), which in ite essence itis
 ‘Wine, moreover, is then taken under oerlain restrictions and
 conditions which should, f adbered to, prevent the abuse
 ‘whieh follows on merely sensual drinking (Pashupana). ‘The
 ‘rae Stidhaka does not perform the ritual for the purpose of
 sinking wino, (though possibly in these degenerate days
 ‘many do) but drinks wine in order that he may pesform the
                                4
                  THE PANCHATATTVA
 ritual. ‘Thus, to tae an analogous oase, « Christian abstainer
 right receive wine in the Eucharist believing it to be the
 blood of his Lord. He would not partake of the sscra-
 ‘ment in order that he might have the opportunity of
 rinking vine, but he would drink wine because that is the
 way by which he might take the Eucharist, of which wine
 together with bread (Mudra) is an element. I may here
 mention in this comnection that not only ere drops of wine
 sometimes sprinkled on the Prasids (sacred food) at Durgi-
 ppijd and thus consumed by persons who are not Vistehis,
 Dut (though this is not generally known and will perhape
 not be admitted) on the Prasida which all consume at the
 ‘Vaishnava shrine of Jagunnttha at Puri,
        This question about the consumption of wine will not
 appearto the average Europecn a serious affair, though it is
50 to the non-Shalita, Hindu. So strong is the general fealing
 ‘against it that when Babu Keshab Chandra Sen, in one of
 ‘his imitations of Chistian doctrine and ritual, started an
 ‘Eucharist of his own, the elements were rice and water. Tt
 is, however, a matter-af common reproach against these
 ‘Tintriks that some at least drink to exoess. That may be
 so, From what I have heard but little oredit attaches to the
 ‘commen run of this dae of Tantrles to-day. Apart from
 ‘the general degeneracy which las affected all forms of
 ‘Hindu religion, itis to be remembered that in ancient times
 nothing was done except under the suthority of the Gura,
 ‘He slone could say wiether his disciple was competent for
 ‘ony particular ritual, It was not opento any oue to enter
  upon it and do as he plessed: Nevertheless, we must clearly
  distinguish betwoen the commands of the Shistra itself and
 abuses of its provisions by protonded Sidhalus, It is
 ‘obvious that. excessive drinking prevents the attainment
  cof micoess and is a fall, As the Mabsnirvina (VI. 195-197 ;
 ‘ace alao VIIT, 171) with good senso rays, “ow is it possible
  for a sinner who becomes a fool through drink to say ‘T
  worship Ady Kalika’,” William James sys (* Vasietios
                                315
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 of Religious Experience”, 387) “The sway of alechol over
 ‘mankind is unquestionably due to ite power to otimulate the
 ‘mystical facaties of human nature, usually erushedto earth
 iy the cold fact ond dry criticisms of the sober hoar. Tt
 ‘unites, It is im fact the greatest exsiter of the “Yes”
 fonction   in man. Tt brings him from the. chill periphery
 ‘of things to tho radiant core.”_ In its effect it is one bit of
 the mystic consciousness. Wine, as is well-mown, also
‘manifests and emphasizes the true disposition of a man
 (Tn vino veritas”). (As to wine, drugs and ‘anesthetic
 revelation’ as to the cine to tho meaning of life seo R,
 ‘Paoules, “Introduotion to Prychology of Religion,” 61)
‘When the worshipper i ofa previously pure and devout is-
 position, the moderate useof wine heightens his felings of
 devotion. Bubif it is drunk in excess there oanbe no devo-
 tion at al, bat only sin. ‘This same Tantra therefore, whilst
doing away with wine inthe case of one clas of Chakra, and
 limiting the eonsumption in any case for bouseholders, says
 ‘that excessive drinking prevents success coming to Keula
 worshippers, who may not drink to such an extent that
 the mind is affected (literally “goes round”). “To drink
 Doyond this”, i saya, “is bestia”
     Yéwon no chilayed dristir yBoan a chélayen mana
     Tévat pénam prakurita pashu-péaam oiah param.
       ‘Yet the fact that the Mahfnirvina thought i nesessary-
 to give this injunction is significant of some abuse. Similar
 counsel may be found however elsewhere ; asin the Shytma-
 rahasya which seys that excgssive drinking leads to Tell.
  ‘Tis olso the great Tantrarija (Kadimate) eays (Ch. VIM)
  (Tantei Texts, Vol. VIII.
     No kndéchit pinet siddho devyarghyam aniveditom
     Phnoncha téeat kurta yéoatd syén manclayah
     Total Raroti chet sadyah pétaks Biavoti dhnwam
     Devatiquruscuinyat pivanndeavam dshayd
     Pliaks réjadandyash chévidyopteaka cea cha.
                                 376
                THE PANCHATATTVA
       (Tho Siddha should never drink tho Arghya (wine)
 meant for the Dev, unless the same hss beea fist offered
 (Jo Has). Drinking, again, should only be continued so long
 as the mind is ebsorbed (in the Devt), He who does 20
 thereattor is verily a sinner. He who érinks wine through
 rere sensual desire and not for the purpose of warship of
 Devuté and Guru is worshipper af Iguozanse (Avidy8)
 and a sinner punishable by the King)
       Tt must be admitted, however, that there are to he found
 words and pastes which, {they are to be taken literally,
 ‘would indicate that wine was not always taken in moders”
 tion, (See Hsavolln in Kultmoava. ‘Tho Uilis, however,
 tue stated tobe stages of initiation) Tn reading any Hinds
 BSeripture, however, ons must allow for exaggeration which
 fs called “Stuti". “Thus if there is much meat end wine we
 ray read of “mountains of Hesh"” and “ oceans of wine".
 Such statements were not made to bo taken literally. Some
 descriptions again may refer to Kaulivadhitas ho, like
 other “great” men in other matters, appear to have more
 liberty than ordinary folic Some things may not be “the
 word of Shiva” at al , Tt is open to any one to sit down
 and wite 0 “Tante,” “Stotm” or what not. ‘The Ananda
 tote, for example, reads in pats ike a ibertne’s drinking
 song. "Though it hea boen atteibutad both to the Kulacht-
 dimani and Kalémava, » leamed Tanti Pandit, to whom
 Tam much indebted aod to whom I showed it, langhed
‘nd said, “How can this be the word of Shiva. It is not
 Shiva Shistea, fit isnot      the writing o some fallen Uptake,
 (ovorshipper), itis the work of Achiryyas trying to tempt
 Asciples to themselves.” Though a men of nti lesm-
 ing of a kind ravely met with to-day, and a practitioner of
 the Chakrapja, he told me that he had newer heer? of
 ‘hin Btotra unt it wae sung at @ Chakra in Benares. On
 ssking snothor Pondit thore about it, be was told not to
 trouble himself over “what these kind of people did”. Even
 ‘when the worde Siva wofcha (Shiva said) appoar in e work,
                               37
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘i does not follow that it has any authority. ‘Though all
  the world condemns, as does the Shistra itelf, excessive
  sinking, yet it caaob be said thas, according to views
  generally accopted Ly the mass of men ia the word to-day,
the dvinking     of aleohol isa sin. General morality may yet
  fcoount it such in some futuro day.
       pass then to the other matter, namely, sexual union,
  ‘The oxdinary rule, as the Kaalikfrcbane-Dipik aya (1
  xoferto the exception Ita), is that worship should be done
  with the worhinper’s own wife, called the Alyé Shalt
  ‘hia is the general Tintrik rule. Possibly bocawse the
  exception to it led to abuse, the Mahinirvins (VIII. 173),
after pointing cut that men in the Kali ago axe weak of mind
 ‘and distracted by Inst, and 20 do not recognize woman
 (bac) to be the imago of Deity, presribes for euch ws these
 (Ga the Bharavt Chale) medication on the Feet of the Divine
 Mother in lew of Maithuna, or where the. worship is with
 ‘the Shakti (Bhogya) in Bhairavi and Taitva Chakra the
 worshipper should be wedded to hie Shakti according to
 Shaiva rites. It adds (ab, 129) thatthe Vine, who without
 aatsage wosshipe by enjoyment a Shalt, a without doubt
 guilty of the sin of going with another wornan.”” laswhere
 (V1. 14) it pointa ont that when the evil age (Kaliysgs) i at
ite strength, the wile alono ahold be the Sith Tattva for
  “this io void of all defeat” (Surva-docha-vivarjita). The
 Sammohana Tantra (Ch. 2) also says that the Kali age is
  Aominated by lust (Kame) and it is then most dificult to
  subjugate the senses and thet by reason of the prevalence of
 ‘ignorance (Avidyt) the female Youi is used for worship.
 ‘That is, by reason of the material nature of man @ material
 form is used to depict the supreme Yoni or Cause of al.
 ‘The commentator on the Mahinirvina Tantra, Pandit Jagan
 ‘mobena Tarkflankira (see Bhnkta Bd. 445) says, however,
  hat this role is not of universal application. Shiva (he
  says i this Tantsa prohibited Saban with th fifth Tathva
with othor Shuktis in the cate of men of ordinary weak
                             58
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 intelloct ruled by lus; but for those who have by Sidhand
 ‘conquered their passions and attained the state of a true
 Siddha Vira, theo is no prohibition as to the mode of Lxti-
 sidhand With this T deel later, but meanshile I may
  obnerve that because there is « Shakti inthe Chale it does
 not follow tht there is sexual intercourse, whish, when it
 ‘occurs in the worship of householder, ordinarily takes place
 outside the Chakra. Shaktis are of two kinds those who
 are enjoyed (Bhogy’s Shae) end those who
 only (Pajy8) as esrtly sepresentatives of aretheworshipped
                                                      Supreme
 Mother of all. ‘Those who yield to desive, oven in thought,
 ae rogerde tho Inttor commit the sin of inosst with thoit
 smother, Similarly, there is widespread: practioe amongst
 all Shaktss of worship of Virgins (Kumtxipija)—e very
 beautiful ceremony. Bo, als. in Beahmardjayogn there is
  worship of vingins oul.
        bis plan that up to tia point there is (apart from the
 objection of other Hindus to wine) nothing to be said against
 ‘the morality of the Sidhanf presoribed, though some may
 talee exception to the asocation of uataral finotion of any
 kind, however logtianato, with what they segard az worship,
‘hia ia not a question of morality and I have dealt with i
  The reader il also semembes that the situal already do-
  scribed spptas to the general mass of worshippers, and tbat
  to which I am passing is the ritual of the comparatively
  fow, and so-alled advanced Sidhakss. ‘The charge of
  ‘inmoralityogaint all Shales, whether flloving this tual
or not, fala people need not run avey in earon hearing
  hata manisa“Téntsik". Hemay notbe aShilta             Tantric
  at al , and if be is « Shits, he may have done nothing to
  ‘which the world nt Inge will tke moml exception
        T now past {9 another clas of cases Generally speak
  ing, we may disingaish nat only. between Dakthintebara
  tnd Vimichasa in which eh fll rites with wine and Shakti
  fre performed, but also Between « Vime and Dakshina
  Aivision of the latter Achitra ite, Te ison the former aide
                              379
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘that there is worship with 6 woman (Porastyt Shakti) other
 ‘than the Sidhaka’s own wife (Sraldya Shakti). But under
 what circumstances? Tt is necessery (as Professor de
 la Vallée Poussin, the Catholic Belgian Sunsicitist, says
 (Adhikarma-pradipa, 141) of the Buddhist Tantra) to re-
 member the conditions under which these ‘éntrie rituals
 are, sccording to the Sbisira, admissible, when judging of
  their morality, otherwise, he says condemnation becomes
 cexcatsiva (“Je erois Taillws quion a exageré ta characte
  Timmoraite des aces liuryiqus do Moithuna favte @oveir
Jicd es dirs conditions dan esqulles is, doivint       etre pra-
  qués.” See also Massou-Oursel Baquisse dune Histoire dela
 Philosophie Indienne 1923, p. 280, who saya that Wester
 ‘people often see obscenity where there is only symbolism.)
 ‘As I have said, the ordinary   rule is that the wifeor Adya
  Shakti should be on-pextormer (Sahadharmint) in the rite,
‘An exception, however; exists whare the Shak hs no wife
  for she is ineompetent (Anadhiktrin(). here seems tobe
  1 notion that the Shastra directs union with somo other
person than the SAdhaka’s wife. This isnot 0. A direction
‘to go after otber women as such would bs counsel to commit
  fornication or adultery. What the Shistrn says is—that
if the Sadheks has no wifé, oF she is incompetent (Anadki
 ‘kitin), thea only may the Sadhke take some other Shaki.
 ‘Next, this is for the purpose of rial worship only. Just
 as any extm-titval drinking is sin, so also outside worship
  ‘any Maithuna, otherwise than with the wife, is sin. The
  ‘Taltvas of each kind can only be offered after puriicstion
 (Shedhana) end during worship eocording to. the rules, ro-
  strctions, and conditions ofthe Tantrk sual. (See Tantza
 ira, 098, citing BhivechGddmani, Ubtar-Kuldmrite. In
Gh IV, Brihannfla Tantee it is said Paraddrdn     na gachehheran
 gochehiech cha prépayed yads, but that is for purposes of
 Worship). Outside worship the mind ie not even to think
of the subject, as is said concerning the Shakti in the Uttara
 Tantra,
                               580
                THE PANCHATATTVA
        Péjakilam vind nényam perusham manash sprivket
        Pijtrkdle cha Dewshi weshyewa parioshayet,
         What then is the meaning of this “competency” the
  nonexistenos of which relaxes the oxdinary rulo? ‘The
  principle on which worship is done wit. another Shakti is
  aid inthe Gohyablitbnds ofthe Mail Garhi ot
      lows :—
         Yédvishah sdillakah proktah sdk “pi cha tdiriskt
        Tatah siddhion avdpnoti ndnyathé warsha-koibish
        (‘Asis the competency   of the Sédhaka eo must  bo that
  of tho Sidhik, In this way only is suocea attained axd
  not otherwiz even ia ten million years.”) ‘That is both the
rman and the woman must be on the'nsme level and plane
  of development. ‘Thus, in the performance of the great
 Shodhinyasa, the Shaki, must be postesed of the same
  owas and compstaney as th Stain, Ta other wos,
 ‘8 Sahadharmint mast have) the: same competency
 Suhain ith lam she yeloa'tn le Nene nt
 for any man ab his own undisciplined wil to embark on a
 ‘practice of this kind. “He ean only do so if adjudged compe-
‘ent by his Gurl, A person of an ignorant ireligions,       and
 lewd disposition is, proper'y,.insompstent. ‘Thon, it is
 commonly thought, shat beesuse another Shakti is permitted,
 unlimited promiscuity is allowed. ‘This is of course not eo.
 ‘Tomustbe admitted that the Shakts Tantra atleast pretends
 40 be religions Scripture, and could not as such directly
 promote immoralityinthis way. For, under xo pretenoe can
 morality, or Sidhan8 for spiritual advancement, be served
 ‘by dictions for, or tacit permissions of, uncontrolled
 promiscuous sexual intercourse. ‘There may, of course, have
 been hypocrites wandering around the country and its
 ‘women who sought to cover their lascivioumess with the
 cloak of a proteried religion, But this is not Sadhana bat
 conscious sin, The fruit of Sidhand is lost by license and
 ‘the growth of sensuality. The proper rule, I sm told, is that
 the mlotionship with such a Shakti should be of a permanent
                                set
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  chasucter; it boing indeed held that a Shaki who is
  abandoned by te Sédhala takes away with her the latter's
  rorit (Punya}. ‘The position of euch a Shakti may be
  described os a wife “in religion" for the Stdbaka, one who
  being of his competency (AdhikAre) works with him as
 Sahadharmiat, in the performance of the rituals of their
 common cult.’ Ta all cates, the Shakti must be frst made
 lavefl acconting to the rales ofthe oult by the performance
 of the Shaiva sacrament (Shaive-samskira), From a thind
 party view i may, of coum, be said that the necessity for
Al this is not won. I am nat here concerned with that, but
 state the rules of the oult ae I find it. Tt ie desirable, in the
 intoesta both of the history of religion and of justi to
 the eult desoibed, to state these facta soourately. Kor, it
 is sound theology, that, good faith is inconsistent with sin.
 ‘Wo cennot call « man immoral who is acting aovording to
 his lights and in gocd faith, Amongst « polygamous people
 such es wore the Jews and as ate the Hindus, it would be
 absurdto call man immcral,         who in good fsith practised
 that polygamy which was ellowablo by the ueago which
 governed him. Other Hindus might or might not ackuow-
 ledge the status of & Sbaiva wife, But a Shaiva who was
 ‘bound   to a woman in that form would not bo en immoral
 usu. Timoralty, in the senso in which en individual is
 rade responsible for his actions, exists whore what is be-
 lieved to be wrong is conscionsly followed. And so whilst
 1 Thats acting in good faith and according to his Shistra
 isnotin this anise immoral, othor Tantra who misused tha
 tual for thee libidinous purpeaee     wonld be 0. S0,of course,
 would alao be those who to-day, without bali in the Tantra
 ‘Shiatze, and to satily theie passions, practised such situals
 as run counter to prevalent social momaity. Though the
 genuine TAntaik might be excused, they would not escape the
 ccarge. When, hovever, we are judging a religionby the
 standard of another, which claims to be higher, the lower
 religion may be considered immoral. The distinction is
                                siz
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 commonly overlooked which exists between the question
 ‘whether an individual is immoral and whether the teaching
 tnd practice which he follows is so, We may, with logical
 ‘consistency, answer the frat in the negative and the second
 in the afirmative. Nevertheless, we must mention the exis-
 tence of some practices which seem difficult to explain and
 justify, even on the general principles upon which Téntrik
 Sédbané procesds. Peculiar liberties have been allowed to
 the Siddba Virns who are said to have taken pert in them,
 Possibly they are non-existent to-day. A Sidaha Visa, 1
 ‘may incidentally explain, is a Vira who has became aecoin-
 plished (Siddbe) by doing the vito called Purashcharana of
 his Mantze tho number of times multiplied by one lakh
 (100,000) that the Maniro contains letter. A Pandit friend
 talls me that the Siddhemtlarabaays desribes a rite (Chidd-
 chakra) in which fifty Sidaiba Vites go with fifty Sbaitis,
each man getting his conupanion by lot by selecting ane out
 of a heap of the Shaktie jackets (Chia). His Shakti is
 the woman to whom the jacket belongs. In the Snoh-
‘chakra (Love Chakra), the Sida Vira pair with the Shaktis
 nooording as they have a liking for them, Anandabhavans-
yoge is snother unlzown rite perfmsed with not lcs than
Eee and not more than one. hundred           and eigh> Shaltis
 who surround the Vira, Te unites with one Shakti (Bhogy’
 shakti) and touches te rest. In the Urab Chakra (Uraé-
 spider's web) tae Virus sit in pairs tied to one another with
 cloths. A clue to the meaningof these rites may perhaps be
found in the fact that they are said to have besn performed
 at the instance, and ot the cost, of third parties
                                                 for the wttais-
 ‘mont of some worldly sucvess. ‘Thus the frst was done,
  Tam told, by the Rajis to gain saccess in battle. If this
be so they belong rather to the side of magic than of religion,
 sud aro in ony caso uo part of the ordinary Sidhant to
 ‘attain the true Siddhi which is spiritual advancement. Tt
 ray abo be thet just as in the ordinary ritual Brakmonas
 are fed and recsive gifts, these Chaleras were, in part at
                                385
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Teast, held with the same purpote by the class of people
 ‘who hed them performed. Tt is also to be noted (I report
‘what I am told) that the body of the Shekti in the Chala
ia the Yantra. By the unionof Vira and Shakti, whois a
 form (Kkira) of the Dev, direct union is had with the latter
 ‘who being pleased grants all that is desired of Her. ‘There
 fa thus what i teohnically called Pretyalsha of Devati
 whereas in Kumfrtpij and in Shavasidhant the Devt
 speaks through tho mouth of the virgin or tke corpao re-
 spectively. ‘The Siddha Vires communicate with Shiva ond
 Shakti in Avadhttaloka,
        "This question of diflering views and practice was noted
 Jong ago by the author ofthe Dabistan (Vol. 2, pp. 164, 164,
 Ed. 1843) who says that        on a leamed Shakta being shown
 «statement, spparently cotbslling immorality, in 8 book
 bused it, saying that the Text was contcaryto custom.and          books
that no such thing was to be found in the ancient there                 is
 ‘The Muslin author of the           Dobistan     anys   that
 another class of Slitktas, quite diferent from those provi-
‘ously alluded to by him, who dink zo wine and never have
 intercourse with the wife of another
        T, the move readily here and elsewhere state what is un-
  favourable to this Shstra, as my objecttowards is notto “ideaice”
  it (a processt which my strong        bent              the clear and
 accurate statement of facts i averse) but statement   to describe the
 practice     as T find it to be; on       which                     just
 Judgment may be founded, After all men have                   been and
are of all nds high and low, ignorant              and   wise,   bed and
 food, and just as in the Agamas there are           diftering school,
 50 it is probable that in tho Shékta practics themselves
 ‘there are the same differences,
        ‘Lastly, the doctrine that the illuminate knower                of
 Brahman (Brahmajnint)         is above   both   good    (Dharma)     snd
 evil (Adharma) should be noted. Such an orone“dois « a8Svech-        you
 chhichist whose way it Sveckehhichire Europe are there
 ‘will”. Sinilac doctrines and practice in
                                   384
                    THE PANCHATATTVA
  called Antinomisnism, The doctrine is not peculiar to the
 ‘Tantras. It isto be found in the Upanishads,and isin fact
 ‘very commonly held doctrine in India, Hore agein, as 80
 stated and as understood outside India, it hus the eppesranoe
of being worse than treallyis. IfMoniai          views are aocept-
                                                              c
ed, then theoretically we must admit that Brahman is be-
  yond good and evil or these are terms of relativity applicable
  to boings   in this world only. Good baa no meaning except in
 relation to eviland vice versa, Braman ia beyondall duali-
 ties, and a Jndnt who has become Brahmsn (Jtvenmulta)
is ulso logically ©, It is, howover, equally obvious that if
     man hes complete Brehman-consciousness he will not
 coththanerni        unconsciousl
                              se y, do an aot which if done con
 scio           usly He is ex iypotbeyond
             would   be  wrong,                        iesilust,
  gluttony and ell other passions. A theoretioal statement of
fact that a Brahmajeint is beyond good end quil is nob
statement that he may will to do, and is permitted to do,
  evil. Statements as zegerds the postion of » JIvanmukta
faze mete pease or Stati. In Svechehhtc                   is theare-
                                                   there htre
 ‘ical freedom, but it is not consciouly availed of to do what
  is known to be wrong without fall and pollntion. Sveck-
clhtchivin is « name of the Devt, for She does whut She
pleases since She is the Lord of all. But of othersthe
  Shaktisonggnma Tantra (Part IV) saye—
        ‘Yadyapyasti trikdlajnastrilokySkarshona-sharsch
        Tathd ’pi laukibdchram manasdpi na langhayet.
  (Though # man be kuower of the Thres Times, past
Dresmt, and future, end though he be a Controller of the
  three world, even thea he shonld not transgrese the rales of
conduct for men in the world, wer it only in his mind.”)
       ‘What these roles of conductare the Shastra. provides
‘Those who wrote this and similar counsels to be found in the
  ‘Tantzs Shistras may have prescribed methods of Sédbant
  ‘whi           not bo approved, but they were not immoral-
           will ch
  tminded mes. Not, whatover be the actual result of their
  ‘working (and some have been evil) was their Soriptare
                                   385
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 devised with the intention of ssnctioning or promating what
 they lelieved to be immoral. They promoted or oounte
 enced some dangerous practices under certain Imsitations
 Which they thought to be safeguards, They have Ted to
 abuse as might have bom thought to be probuble,
       ‘Let us now distil from the mass of msterial to which 1
 have ouly eursrly relerrd, those principles underlying the
 practice which ate of wrth from the standpoint of Tntion
 Moniam of whieh the practice is a remarkable iustration,
       ‘The three chief physical appetites of man are eating
 ‘and dbinking whomby bis body in sustained, and sexual
 {intercourse whereby itis propagated. Considered in them-
 selves they are natural and harmless. Maxu puts this very
 clearly when he says,‘*There is no. wrong (Dosha) in the
 fotingg of meat and duking of wine, nor in sexual inter
 course, for these ng uatural indinations of mon. But
 abstention thereftom is productive of great fruit.” Here I
 ‘may interpose and say that the Tintrle method is not a
 forced abstention but a regulated use with the right Bhiva,
‘hat is, Advaitabhtva or monistio feeling, When this is per
 fected, natural desires drop away (excepb so far as their
  fulfilment is absolutely necessary for phytical existence) as
 things which are othervise of mo cceount. How is this
  done? By transforming Pashubhiva into Virgbhiva. ‘The
 latter isthe fosling, disposition,    and chazuoter of a Vis
        ‘All things spring fom and aze at base Ananda er Bliss
  whether itis perceived or not, The latter, therfore, exists
{in two form;        as Multi whichis Snandagvaripa or transcen-
 dent, unlimited one, andas Bilt or lizited worldly bliss
 ‘Whnteik Stdhand claims to give both, because the one of dual
 aspect     is bath. ‘The Via thus lows that Jivatm and Para-
 rmitmé are one ; that ibis the One Shiva who appearsin the
 form of the multitude of men and who act, suffers, and ei-
 jeye through them. ‘The Shivasvartpais Bis ita (Paromi-
  nani). ‘The Blo of enjoyment (Bbogdawoda) it one and
  ‘the same Bliss manifesting itself through the limiting forma
                               386
                   THE PANCHATATTVA
 of mind and matter. Who is it who then enjoys and what
 lis is thus manifested ! I is Shiva in the fovme of the
 Universe (Vishvaxtps) who enjoys, and the manifested bliss
 jaa limited form of that Supreme Bliss which in His ultimate
 nature He is. In his physical functions the Vira identifies
 dhimeolE with the collectivity ofall functions which constitute
 ‘the univeral life. He is then conscionsly Shiva in the form
 of his own and all other lives.     As Shiva exists both in His
 Svardipa and as the world (Vishvaripa), so union may, and
 should, be had with Him in both aspects, ‘These are known
 as Sikshma and Sthfla Simarasya respectively. ‘The
 Stdbaka is taught not to think that we are one with the
 Divine in Liberation only, but here and now,in very act
wwe do. For in truth all such is Shakti It is Shiva           who
 ‘as Shaktiis acting in ond through the Sidhaka So though,
 ‘according to tae Vaidik injunctions, there is no eating or
 rinking before worship, itis sid in the Shakts ‘Tantra that
 he who worships Klika when hungry and thirsty angers
 Hor. Those who worship a God who is other than their own
 ‘Essential  Self may think  to please Him by such acts, butto
 ‘the Shileta, Shiva and Jiva are one and the same. Why.
 then shonld ono give pain to Jivat Tt was, I think,
 Professor Royos who esid, borrowing (though probably
 ‘unconsciously) an eaoential ‘Tntrik idea, that God suffers
 and enjoys is and as and throuk man This is so.
 ‘Though the Brahmasvaripa is nothing but the perfect,
 factionless Bliss, yotit is also the one Brahman who as Jiva
 suffers and enjoys; for there is none other, When this is
 realized in every natural function, then, each exercise thereof
ceases to be & mere animal act snd becomes            a religious
 rite—a Yajna. Every fonction is o part of the Divine
 Action (Shakti) in Nature. ‘Thus, when talking drink in the
 form of wine the Vira kmows it to he Tard Dravamayt, that
 is, “the Saviour Hemdf in liquid form”. How (it is seid)
 ‘can he who truly sees in it the Saviour Mother roosive from
 it harm? Meditating on Kundalini as perveding his body
                                 387
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 to the tip of his tongue, thinking himself to be Light which
is also the Lightof the wino ho takes,be says, “I sm Sho”,
 (84 ‘ham “Tam Brahman”, “I Myeelf offer offering (Abuti)
to the Belt, Svahé.”” When, therefore, the Vite ests, dxinks
or has sexual intoroourse he doco so not with the thought
 of himself as a separate individaal satisfying his own peculiar
limited wants; an animal filing as it were from nature
the enjoyment ho has, but thinking of himself in auch
 enjoyment as Shiva, saying “Shivo’ham,”” “Bhaira-
 vo'ham”, Right, sexual union may, if asosiated with
 ‘meditation and ritual, be the means of spiritaal edvance ;
‘though persons who take a vulgar and animal view of this
 function will not reedily understand it. ‘The function is
 ‘thereby ennobled and receives a new significance. The
 ualistis notions entertained, by both some Eastems and
 Westoms, that the “dignity” of worship is necessarily
offended by association with nstoral function is erroneous
 ‘Aa Tertulisn says, the Fiuchacst was established st a meal,
 (As to sacramental meals and “Feeding         on the Gods”, see
 Dr. Angus’ ‘The Mystery Religions          and Christianity”, p.
 191.) Desire isaften an enemy but ib may be made an ally.
 ‘Aright method does not exclude      the body, for it is Devath,
 0 is a phase of Spirit and belongs to, and is an expression
 ‘of, the Power ofthe Sell. ‘The Universe was created by end
 with Bliss. That same Bliss manifests, though faint, in
 ‘the bodies of men and women in union. At such time the
 jgnorent Pashu is intent on the satisfaction of his passion
 only, but Kulasidhakos then meditate on the Yoginanda
 Marti of Shive-Shakti and do Japa of their Tebtamantra
 thos making them, in the words of the Kaltkulasarvasva,
 ike sinloss Shuke, If the union be legitimate what, I may
‘ask, is wrong inthis On tho coateary tho physical function
 is ennobled and divinised, An act which is legitimate does
not become illegitimate because itis made a part of worship
 (Opioans). Thisis Vitbbava, An Rnglish writer has aptly
 spokenof “the profound pagan instinct to glorifythe
                                588
                    THE PANCHATATTVA
 aenerative impulee with religious situal” (Times Lit, Sup.,
 11-6-1026), ‘Tho Shakta is » developed and typical case.
       The notions of the Pashu are in varying degrees the
 reverse of all this If of the lowest type, he only knows
 himself as a sopesate entity who enjoys Some more
 sophisticated, yetin truth ignorent, enjoy and ate achamed ;
 tnd thus think it unseemly to implicate God in the supposed
 ‘coarseness of His handiwork as physical function. Some
 again, who ate higher, rgard these funotions as an acceptable
 ait of God to themas lowly ereatares who enjoy and are
 separate from Him. ‘The Vaidikess took enjoyment to be
‘the fruit of the sucrfice and the git of the Devas, Others
 who are yet higher offer all that they do to the One Lord.
 ‘This dualistic worship is embodied in the command of the
 Gitta, “Tat madarpanam kurushva.”. “Do all this as an
 offering    to Me.” What is*all”? "Dogs it mean all or some
 particular things only {But the highest SAdhand from the
 Monistic standpoint, and which in its Advaitabhiva differs
 from all others,is that of the Shakte Tantra which proclaims
that the Sidhska ts Shiva and thet itis Shiva wio in the
 form of the Sidhaka enjoys
        So much for tbe principle iavolved to which, whether
 it be accepted oF not, camnot be truly denied nobility and
 grandeur.
        ‘The epplication of this principe is of greatly less interest
 ‘and importance, To certein of such rituel applications
ray be aasigned the charges commonly made aguit this
 Shistra, though without accurate knowledge and discrimi-
 nation. Tt was the practice      of an age the character of which
 vwas not that of our own. ‘The particular shape which the
 ritual   has taken is de, I think, to historical causes. ‘Though
the history of the Agamas is still obacure, itis pomsible that
 this Panchatattve-Karma is in substazee «continuation,
 in altered form, of the old Vaidik usage in which eating and
 sinking were « part of the seoriice (Yajna), though any
 extre-ritual drinking called “ useless” (Vrithipéna) or Pashu
                                 38
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 <rinking (Pashupfina) in which the Western (mostly a hostile
 cxitio of the Tantra Shistra) oo largely indulges, is « great
         ‘The influence, however, of the original Buddhism and
 Jainism were against the consumption of meat and wine ;
 fan influence which perhaps continued to operate on post
 Buddhistic Hinduism up to the present day, except among
 certain followers of the Agamas who claimed to represent
  the easier traditions and usages, I say “certain,” because
 (08 T have mentioned) for the Pashu them are substitntes
 for wine     and meat, and so forth; and far the Divya tho
  TTattvas are not moter things but Yoga proceases. I
 have shown the similarities between the Vaidik and Téntrike
 ritual in my paper on “Shakti and Shikts” to which T
 refer. If this suggestion of mine be correct, whilst the
 ‘importance and yrevalence ofthe sncient ritual will diminish
with the passeve of time and the cksnges in religion which
 ‘it effects, the principle vill abaya retain ita inherent value
 for the followers of the Advaita Vedinta. Tk is capable of
 application according to tho modem spisit without recourse
 to Chakras and their situal details in the onlinary daily
life of the householder within the bounds of his Dharma-
  shastra
        ‘Nevertheless the vitnalhas existed and still exists,
  though at the present day often in a form free from the
  objections which are raised against certain ancien liberties
  of practice which led to abuse. It is necessary, thereiore,
both for the purpose of accuracy and of a just             of ita
  present adherents, 1o consider the inlention with which the
 ritual was prescribed and the made in which that intention
  was given eflet to, Tt isnot the fact, os commonly alleged,
 ‘that the intention of the Shastra was to promote and foster
 ‘any form of sensual indulgence, If it was, then, the Tantres
 ‘would not be a Shastra at all whatever else they might con-
 ‘ain. Shastra, as have previously said, comes from the
  root ‘“Shis” to control; that is, Shistma exists to control
  men within the boonds set by Dhara. The intention of
                                 590
                 THE PANCHATATIVA
 ‘this rtasl, when ightly understood, is, on tho conteary,
 ‘to regulate natural appetite, 1o curb it, to lift it from the
 ‘teough   of mere animality; andby associating          it with
 religious worship, to ifect a passage from the state of desire
 ofthe ignorant Pashu to the completed Divyabbiva in which
 tere is desitelaseness. It is aaother instance of the general
 principleto which I have refered    that man must beled from
the gross to the subile. A Stdhales         onco well explained
 the matter to me thus: Let us suppose, he said, thet
 man's body is « vessel filled with cil which is the passions,
 If you simply empty it and do nothing more, fresh oil will
 tole ite place iasuing from tho Source of Desize which you
 have left undestroyed. Tf, however, into the vosel theze is
 Aroppod by slow degrees the Water of Knowledge (Ini),
 it wil, as being heavier than oll, descend to the botiom of
the vessel and will then expel an equal quantity of oil. In
this way all the ol of passion is gradually expelled and no
 ‘more can re-enter, for the water of Jndna.wil then have
 wholly taken it place, Here again the general principle of
‘the method    is good. As the Latins  said, "If you attemptto
expel nature with © pitchfork it will come back ogain.”
‘You must infuse something else aa a medicament sgainst
 ‘the ils which follow the natural tondency of desire to
 exceed the limits which Dharma sot
       ‘The Tantrk Pandit Jaganrechana arkalanktra in his
  valuable notes appended to the commentary on the Mabt-
 nirvins Tentre of Hariharinands Bhirai,the Gura of the
 celebrated “Reformer” Raja Ram Mohan Roy (Ed, of K, G.
 Bhakta, 1888), says, “Let us consider what most contributes
to the fall of & man, making him forget his duty, sink into
 sin and dio on ensly death. First among these ate winethings  and
 ‘women, fsh, meat, Mudsé and accesories, By these
 Thon have lst their maahood. Shiva then desires      to employ
 ‘theee very poisons in order to eradicate the poison ‘Thisin the
 hnoman system, Poison isthe antidote for poison,                 is
 ‘the right treatment for those who long for drink    or  lust   for
                                sot
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘women. The physician must, however, be an experienced
 cone. If there be a mistake    as to the application the patient
 is likely to die, Shiva has said that the way of Kulichira
in ag dificult a8 itis to walk on the edge of a sword or to
 hhold o wild tiger. There is « seret argument in favourof
 the Panchatativa, and those Tattvas so understood should
 be followed by all, None, however, but the initiate can
 fgragp this argument, and therofore Shiva has directed that
 ft should not be revealed beforo anybody and everybody.
 ‘An initiate when be sees © woman will worship her as his
 own mother and Goddess (Ishtadevata) and bow before ber.
 ‘The Vishau Purina says that by feeding your desires you
 cannot satisty them. Itis like pouring     ghee on fre, Though
 this    is truc, an experienced spiritual teacker (Guru) will
 Jmow how, by the application of this poisonous medicine,
 ‘to Kell the poison of the world (Samsira). Shiva has, hon-
 cover, prohibited the indiscriminate publicetion of this. ‘The
 object of Tantrk worship is Brahmasiyujya or union with
 Brahman. If that is not atiained nothing is attained.
‘And with men's propensitiesas they are, this can only be
  attained throngh the special treatment prescribed by the
  ‘Tanteas, If thisis not followed,  then the senmua! propensities
  are not eradicated. and the work is, for the desired      end of
  ‘Tantra, 18 useless as harmful magic (Abhichira) which,
  ‘worked by such © man, lends only to the injury of himself
  and others.” ‘Tho postage cited rofers to the necessity for
  the spiritual disection of the Guru. To the want of such
 is accredited the abuse of the system. When the patient
 (Shishya) and the disease are working together, there is
 ‘poor hope for the former : bat when the petint, the disease
and the physician are on one, and that the wrong side, then
nothing can save him from a descent in that downward
 path which itis the object of Sidban8 to prevent,
        Al Hindu edhools soak the suppression of mere animal
‘worldly desire Whatis peculiar           to tho Kuulas is the
partioular method employed for the translormation of desire
                                 59
                 THE PANCHATATTVA.
  ‘Tho Rulimava Tantra says that man must be taught 10
tae by the means of those very things which are the eanse
of his fal. “Asone        falls on the ground, one must lit one-
 ‘lf by aid of the ground.” So also the Buddhist Subhasits
 Sangraha says that a thom is used to pick cuta thor.
 Properly applied the method is a sound one. Man falls
 ‘through the natural functions of drinking, eating, and sexual
  intercourse, If theso are done with the feding (Bhtve) and
 under the conditions presoribed, then they become (itis
 tought) the instruments of his uplift to a point at which
such ritual is no Jouger nevessary and is surpeseed.
       In the first edition of the work, T spoke of Antinomian
 Dovtrine and Practice, and, of some Shikta theories and
rituals which have been supposed to be instances of it This
 word, hovever, requires explanation, or it may (I have since
 thonght) lead to eror in the present connection. ‘Thee ia
 always dangerin applying Western terms to facts of Enster
 ie, Antinomianiam is the name for heretical theories and
practices which havo arisen in Christian Burope. In shore
the term, as generally understood, has & mesning in refer
ence to Christiasity, namely, contrary ot opposed to Law,
hich here is the Judaio law as adopted and modified by
 ‘that ralgion. ‘The Antinomian, for varying reesons, on
sidered himself not bound by the ordinary       laws of conduct.
 Te is not always possible to state with certainty whether
 any particular sact or parton alleged to be Antinomian
 was in fact such, for on® of the commonest charges made
 against sects by their opponents is that of immorality.
 ‘We are rightly warned against placing implicit reliance
 ‘on the accounts of adversaries, Thus charges of nocturnal
orgies were made against the exrly Christians, and by the
 latter ageinst those whom they regarded as heretical dis-
 sidents, such as Manicheans, Montanists, Prsclianiste and
 ‘others, ad agninst most of the medieval sects such as the
 Cathari, Waldenses and Fraoticell, Nor can we be always
certain as to the nature of the theorise held by persons
                                  593
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  sidto be Antinomiaa, for in a lage number of cases we
 have only the acconnts of orthodox opponents, Similarly,
 hitherto every account of the Shakta Tantra was given by
  persons both ignorant of, and hostile to it. In some cases
‘it would seem (I speak of the West) that Matter was held in
contempt as the evil product of the Demiurge, Tn others
  Antinomian doctrine and practice was based on “Pan-
  theism”. ‘The latter in tho West has always had as one oft
 tendencies a leening towerds, ar adoption of Antinomianiam,
  Mystios in their identification with God supposed that upon
 ‘heir conscious union with Him they were exempt from the
 ules governing ordinary men. The lew was spisivulized
 {nto the one preceptof the Love of God which ripened into a
  conscious union with Him, one with man’s easence. This was
  deemed    to be a sinless state, This Amulric      of Bena (d.
  1204) is reputed to havo said that %0 those constituted in
Tove no sin is imputed (Dizert etiam quad in chartaecomat-
 tutismullum peccatum imputabatwr). His followers sre
  alleged to have maintained that harlotry and other camal
  ‘vioes are not sinful for the spiritual man, becsuse the sptit
  in him, which is God, is not affected by the flesh and. cen-
  rot sia, and becanse the man who is nothing cannot sin s0
  long as the Spirit which ix God is in him. In other words,
   sin ia & term relative to man who may be virbuous or sinful,
  But in that state beyond duty, which is identification with
 the Divine Essence, which et 200% mam i, there    is wo question
 of six. The body at no time sins, Tt isthe state of mind
  which constitutes sin, end that state is only possible for a
  sind with s buman and not divine consciousness. Johann
  ‘Hartmam i reputed to have said thathe hed become com-
  pletaly one with God ; that a man free in spirit is impec-
 cable and can do whatever he will, or in Indian peslance he
  is Svechchhachért, (Gee Dollinger’s Beitr zur Sectenge-
  schithte des Miticlalter’s i, $84) ‘This type of Antinomt
  ‘anismis sxidto have been widespread         daring the Inter
 smidale ages and wes perpetuated in some of the parties of
                                 594
                 THE PANCHATATTVA
 the soiled Reformation. Other notion lang to similar
 results were based on Quiststo and Calvinitio teneta in
 which the human will was so subordinated to the Divine
 ‘ill  as to lose its freedom. ‘Thus Gomar (A.D. 1681) maine
                 “sins take place, God procuring and Himelt
 willing that
‘tained    that they take place”. God was thus msde the
 antbor of sin. Tt has been alleged that the Jesuit casvists
 ware “constructively antinomian” because of their doctrines
 ‘of philosophical sis, direction of attention, mental rece
 ‘vation, and probebilism. But this is not 9, whatever may
De thought     of such doctrines, For hare there wus mo question
 of opposition to the law of morality, but theories tonching
 ‘the question “in what that law consisted” and whether eny
particular act was in fact a violation of it, ‘They        did aot
 ‘each that the Inw eon in any case be vileted, but deal
 vith the question whether any pertiular act was such
 Violation. Antinomianism        of several kinds and based on
 varying grounds las been charged ageinst the Manishieans,
 ‘the Gaostca generally, Coinltes, Cerpocretes, Rpiphanes,
 Meosalians (with their promiseaous seeping together of men
fand women), Adamites, Bogomiles,         followers of Amalrio of
 Bena, Brethren of the Free. Spirit, Begherds, Fratricell,
 ‘Johann Hartmann (“s man free in spirit is impeccable”) ;
 ‘the pantheistic “Libertives” and Familsts” and Ranters
 of the Sixteenthand Seventoonth Contures ("Nothing is sin
 ‘pub what, man thinks to be #0” ; “God oees no einGata-in
him who kows himsel to be in a state of grace”; see
 keor's ‘Antinomiarism    Discovered and Refuted’, A.D. 1632 and
see Rufus Jones’ Studies in Myatical Religion’, Ch. XIX),
 ‘the Alumbrades or Spanish Illuminate (Prabuddhs) Mystics
  of the Sixteenth Century ; Magdalena de Cruce d'agrilar
  tnd others (Mendes y Pelayo—“ Historia de los Heterodoxos
 spanolee”) whose feschings according to Malvasia (Cata-
 Jogus onmiom haeresiam et concitioram) contained the
  following proposition, “A perloct man cannot ein; upon  even an
  act which outwardly regarded must be            locked        as
                                  595
                   SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  vicious cannot contaminate the soul which lives in mystical
 union with God." “The Holy and Sinloss Baptista” held
 ‘hat the elect could not sin, an antinomian docizine which
 ‘hs often appeared in the historyof theological-ethical specu-
 lntion to the effect that the believer might do whathe liked,
since if he sinned, it afected the body only, with which his
soul had no more to do than arith any of the other things of
 this woeld (Beliort Bax Ansbentists 35). ‘The Free Brothers
 hela that for the rebaptized, sin was impossible as io bodily
‘act could affect the soul of the believer. Women        did not
 sin who went with Brethren beoause there was a spiritual
  bond between them (id, $8). Kessler alleges that the
 ‘Votaries practised rensuality on the plea that their souls
were dead to the flesh and that all the flesh did was by the
 will of God (@., 62). The Almnbrada Francisca Garcia is
 alleged to have said that her sexual excesses were in obedi-
 cence to the voice of God and that “camal indulgence was
 ‘embracing God’? (Lea's Inquisitionin Spain, IIT, 62). Similar
  octsines ar alleged of tho French Mluminés called Cueri-
  nots of the Soventocath Century; the German “Theoso-
  pphers” of Schonhers: Hva Ven Buitler: the Muckers ofthe
  Eighteenth Century; some modem Russian sects (Taslal
  “La Ruscie Sectaire”)    and others, Whilst itis to be remem-
  ered thst in these and other cases we must reosive with
  caution the secounts given by opponents, there is no doubt
  ‘that Antinomianism, Svechchhicharaand the like is a well-
  ‘known phenomenon in roligious history often sesocited
 with so-called ““Pantheistio” doctrines. The Antincmian
 doctrines of the Talian nuns, Spighi   and Buonamici, recorded
  by Bishop Scipio de Ricci “Z'wemo e nato Ubero y nesouno
1o puo legare nelloepirto :” “man 's born fcee and none can
 chain his free Spirit” are bere dealt vith in more detail, for
 ‘the writer Rdward Selon (“Annotations on the writings of
‘the Hindus”) thought that he hed found in the last cited
  ase an instance of “Tintrik doctrine” in the convents
  cof Italy in the Righteonth Century. I will give some ressons,
                                 596
                  THE PANCHATATTVA
 which refute his view, the more partioularly beoauze they
ate contained    in a very rare work, namely, the first edition
 of De Potter's “Viede Scipion de Ricci Kveque de Pistoie
 ot Prato”, published st Brussels in 1895, and largely with-
 drawn at’ the instence of the Papal Court, The second
 edition is, I believe, much expurgated. Receiving report
 of abuses in the Dominioan convent of St Catherine de
 Prato, the Bishop of Pistoia and Prato made an inquire
‘tom inté the conduct of the mn, and in partion aa to the
 teachin    end practice
                    g of ther leaders, the Sister Buonaumic,
 formerly Priomss end afterwards novice-mistrsi, and the
 Sister Spighi, assistant novioe-mistrem. Do Potter's work
 contains the original interrogatories, in Italian (1. 381) in
the writing of ‘Abbe Laurent Pali’, Vioar-Bpiscopal at Prato,
 ‘takenin 1781 and keptin the archives of the Ricci family
‘The Teoching of the two Sisters T surmmarise as follows :—
     God” (1. 418, 418) “is a Seat principle (Primo principio)
‘who is 0 collectivity (in Sanskrit, Samasht) of all men and
‘things (un complerio di tuts Te cose anak di tuto il genere
 suman). ‘The universal Master or God i Nature (ot ¢ it
amacstro, che ¢ Taio cee la natura). Ss God is the totality
of the universe aidis nothing but Nature we all participate
 in the Divine Bstonce (Questo Dio non aliro eho lx Natura,
 Noi medesimi per questa ragione particiviamo in qualche
‘maniera delteiser divine). Man's soul is a martal thing
 consisti     of Merry,
                    ng Intligen             andceWill It dis with
tho body disappe             as aring
                                might a mirt.' Man is fre and
‘therefore none an enchain his fee spirit (428). ‘The only
 Heaven end Hell which existe is the Heaven and Hell in
this world. ‘Ther        is none e  other. After desth there is
 neither pleasu      nor suffering.
                           re The Spirit, being free, it is
the intention which renders en act bad. Iv is suficient
 (L40 )     to elevate the spit to God and then no action,
 ‘whatower it be,is gin (Resen         il nostrodo
                                                 spirito libro, Vinten
sine 6 quello que rondo cativa Torione. Baste dunque cola
‘mento cloearai a Dio perce qualevoglia asione non sia pocat).
                                  597
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘There ia no sin, Certain (impure) acts exe not sin provided
   that the sprit  is always elated to God. Tove of God and
  one’s neighbour is the whole of the commanéments. Man
  (Z. 458) who unites with God by means of woman satisfies
  both commandments, So also docs he who, lifting his
  spirit to God, has enjoyment with a person of the same sex
  ot alone (Csoiamo    oom aleuno @equal sesso 0 da te sol). To
be united with Cod is to be united as man snd woman. ‘The
  tara life (I. 418) of the soul and Paradise in this world
is the trancubetantintion (or it may be transfusion) which
talcesplaco when man is united with woman (Depone erode
 questa vila cera defonima essere la -ransusansiazione
 (forse wansfusone) neiPumirsi che fa Tuomo con la denna).
 ‘Matis Clodesinde Spighi having stated that Paradise consist
 ed in the fruition in this world of the Enjoyment of God
(la fruisione di Dio) was asked “How is this attained'"?
 Hier reply was, by that act by which one units oneself with
 God. “How again", she was questioned, “is this union
 effected?” ‘To. which the, answerwaa “by wo-operation of
‘man and woman in which I recognize God Himeelf." 1. 428,
 (Mediante Tuomo ned quale 6 risonosco Tddio.) Bvecything
 ‘was permissible becouse man was free, though sote might
 obey the lew enjoyed for the general governance of the
 world. Man, she stid, (1.490) can be saved in all religions
 Un tute religione ci possiamo salare). In doing that
 which we erroneously call impare is real pusity ordained
 by God, without which man cannot arrive at « knowledge
 ‘of Him who is the trath (¢ esereiando erroncamente quello
che diciamo impurita era la vera purita: quella Tidio i
 comonia     ¢ virle noi pratchione, ¢ senza della que non vi
 ‘¢ maniera di trove Tadio, chee writ). “Whore did you get
  allthis doctrine "The sister said “I gnthered it from my
  natural inclinations” (L'lo ricewto dall inetinasione delta
  natura).
       ‘Whilst it will nt be necessaryto tall the most ignorant
  Tndien that the above doctrines are not Christan teaching,
                                 598
                 THE PANCHATATTVA
 it is nooesasy (as Sellon’s rematk shows) to inform the
 English reader thet this pantheistic libertinian is not
 ‘Mintik”. ‘This imperfect cherge is dus to the eathor's
 lnowledofgethe principlesof Kaula Sidhant I will not
 descriallbethe obscene and perveraotase which these
 “Religious” practised. It i suficient that the reader should
throw bis eye back a few lies and see that their teaching
 {usted sodomy, lesbianism and masturbation, tins as
abhorrent to the Tentee Shistsa as any other. “Owing, how.
 ever, to ignorance or prejudice, everything is called ““T'n-
 ‘rik into which woman enters and in which sexual union
‘ales one religond or so-called religious character or com-
 plerion. ‘Tho Shistra, on the contrary, teaches that there
is & God who transcends Notare, that Dharma or morality
governs all men, that thers is sin and that the acts here
 referred to are impurities lesding to Holl; for there
 is (it says) both sufferinandg enjoymentnot onlyin
‘this but in an afterlife, It was apparently enough for
 award Sellon to adjudge the theories and practioes to be
 ‘Tantei, that these women preached the doctrine of intention
 and of sexual union with the feeling or Bhiva (to use a
snd this is an instance      of it These carupt theorosare
anercly the “raligious” and “‘phiesophical” bassfor a fe
cof unrestrained Hbertiniam which the Tantza Sbtstra con-
  dlemns es emphatically as any other Scripture. The object
of the ‘Tanto ritual isto formard the morality of the senses
by converting mere animal functions into acta of worship.
 ‘The Scripture says in effec, “Just as you offer flowers, incense
 and 20 farth  to the Devatd, in the Réjasik worship let these
 physical fanotions fake their pleco, remembering that it is
Shiva who ie working in ond through you.”” The dootrineof
 te Brethren of the Tree Spint (Delacroix “Le Mysticisme
 spevulatt en Allemagne au qustorzitme siecle) so far as it
  vwas probably osly held, bas in points, resemblance      to come
                               599
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  of tho Tantrie and indeed Aupanishadie teachings, for they
 ‘both hold in common certain general principles to which I
 will seler (s00 also Prege’s “Geshichte der Deutschen
 Mystic im Mittelaier”), Other dootsines and_practices
 with which they have been charged are wholly hostile to the
 Shakta Darshana and Sidhond. Amaltio of Bena, a dis
 ciple of Scotus Brigena held that God is all, both creature
and erentor, end the Eatence ofall which is, The soul which
 attains to Him by contemplation becomes God Himself, It
‘was charged ogainst him that man could act in the manner
 of God's action end do what he pleased without falling into
 sin. The doctrine that the Bralmajntat is above good and
 vil ie go generally misunderstood that it is probable thet,
 ‘whatever may have been the case with some of his disciples,
‘the charges made against the master himself on this point
are false. Tt has been well said that one is prompt to accuse
‘of immorality any one who places himself beyond tradi-
 ional morality. Ae regards the Brethren of the Free
Spirit lao, tit alloged dootrine comes-to us from the mouths
  cf thei: adversaries, They az id to havo hold that thoro
  ‘wore two religions, one for the ignorent (Mfidhe), the other
  {or the illuminate (Frabuddba), tne fist beingthe traditional
 saligion of the letter and ritual observance, and the other of
  frvedom    and spizituality. ‘he soul is of the same substance
  a8 God (identity of Jivitmt and Peramatmé). When this
 is realized men ia deified. Then he is (es Brabmsjnin\)
 above all law (Dherms), The ordinary rales of morality
 bind only those who do not see beyond them, and who do net
 eile in themsdves that Power which is superior to all
 ‘these laws, United with God (dnina deo via) man enjoys
 a blessed freedom. Tle sees the inauity of prayers, of fast,
 cof all those supplications which can do nothing to change
‘the onder    of natare, Te is one with the Spiit of all. Free
 of the law he follows his own will (Svechehhachés.. What
 the vulgur call “sin”, he can commit without soiling hime.
 ‘There is distinction between the sct whichis called sinful
                              600
                 THE PANCHATATTVA
and sin, Nothing ia cin but what the dosr tokes to te cach.
 ‘The body does not sin. Tt is the intention with which an
  act is done which constitutes sin, “The angel would not
have fallen if what he did had been done with a good inten
tion” (Quod aagelus wom cesidsset si bona intentione fvisit
 od fect). Man becomes odin all the powers of his being
 fncloding the ultimate elements of his boty. ‘Therefore,
wisdom lies not in reranciation,          but in-enjoyment end the
 satisfaction of his desires. 'The tormenting. and insatiable
 peosion for woman is a form of the crestive spontancons
 principle. The worth of instinct renders aoble the acts of
the flh, and he who is united in speit with God ean with
 impunity fulfil the sensual desires of the body (item quad
 sumitus deo oudacter possit enplere ibidinam arms). ‘There
is no more sin in serual-union without mariage than within
it apd so forth. With the historian of this sect and with
cour Imowledge of the degree to. which pantheistic doctrines
are minunderstood, we may reasonsbly doubt whether these
sacourations of their enemie represent in all perticulars their
‘rue teaching, Ttscens, however, to have been eld by those
‘who have dealt with ths question thatthe pentheistic doctrine
of the Brethren led to.conclusions contrary to the common
 ‘morality. Itis alo highly probable that some at least of the
‘excesses condemned were the work of false brethren, who fnd-
ing in the doctrine & convenient excuse for, and an encour.
 ‘agementof ther licentiousness,        sheltered themselves behind
its alleged authority. As this remark of Dr. Delacroix
                    must judge   & doctrine (end we may instance
‘that   of theone Shaleas)
fuggeets,                   by whut ita sinosre adheréats hold and
do, and not by the practices of impostors who slweys hie to
secta which‘seem to hold theories offering opportunities for
 Tibertinim, One may here recall Milton who says with insight
 “That sort of men who follow Antinomianism and other
{fanatic dreams be such most commonly as are by nature gilt-
ed to religion, of life also not debauched and th their opini-
‘ons having full swing do end in satisfaction of the flesh.”
                                   Gor
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Whilst thero is a similority on some pointe between
 ‘Kaula teaching and some of the Western pantheisto theories
 ‘above alluded to, in others the two are manifestly and
 Ginmetcically opposed. There are some who talk os if
 intellectual and moral aberrations were pecaliar to India,
 No country is without     them, bub the West owing to ite chaos
 of thought snd morale, has exhibited the worst, With the
 ‘exception of the atheistic Chirviks and Lokiyatas no sect
 {in Tndia has taught the pursuit of sensual enjoyment for ite
 own sake, or justifed the commission of any and every
 {even unnatarel) sin. ‘To do so would be to run counter to
 {ideas which aro those of the whole intellztual and moral
 Cosmos of India. These ideas include those of a Lew
 (Dharma) inherent in the natare of all being; of sin as ite
infraction, and of the panishment of sin as bad Karma in
 this and ‘the nexé world (Paraloka),, It is believed and
‘taught that the end of man is lasting happiness, but that this
is nat to be had by the satisinotion of worldly desires. Tn-
 deed the Kala teaches that Liberation (Molsha) cannot
bbe had eo long as a man has any worldly desires whether
 ‘good or bad. Whilst, howover, there ison ctemal Dharma
 (Ganftens Dharma), one sod the same forall there are also
  particular forms of Dharma governing particular boties of
 ‘men. It is thus a general rule that oman should not un-
 lnvwfully satisfy his sexual desires. But the conditions under
 which he may lawfully do so have varied in every form and
 degree   in times and places. In this sense, as the Sarvollise
 says, marriage is a conventional (Péribbiekika) thing. The
 ‘convention which ia binding on the individual must yet be
 followed, that being his Dharms, Sin again, it i taught,
conssta in intention, notin a physical act divorced therefrom,
 Were this otherwise, then it is said that the child which,
 ‘when issuing frum the mother’s body, touches her Yoni
 would be guilty of the heinous offence called Guru-alpoga.
‘The doctrine, of a single act with diflering intentionsis
 illustrated by the Ténivik maxim, “A wie is kissed with
                                 602
                THE PANCHATATTVA
 ‘one feeling, & daughter's face with another” (Bhévens
 humid (ned Didvena dubicénanam). In the words of the
 Survollise, a man who goes with a woman, in the bei
 tat by commission of such act he will go to Hell, will of a
 surety  go thither. On the ther hand it may be said that if
an act is really awfal bu is done in tae belief that itis une
 lavfal and with the deliberate intantion of doing what is
 unlawful, there is subjective sin. The intention of the
 Shastra is not to unlawfully satisfy carl desire in the way
of eating and drinking and so forth, but that man should
 unite with ShiveShekti in worldly enjoyment (Bhaumée
 anda) as a siep towands the supreme enjoyment (Pars-
 ‘minands) of Liberation In so doing he must follow
‘the Dharm prescrib         by Shiva,
                                ed It is true that there are
 different observances for the illuminate, for those whose
 power (Shakti is awake (Prebuddhs) and forthe ret. But
the Sadhana of these last is ax necessary an the frst and a
 stepping stone to it. The Kaula doctrine and practice may,
 from a Wester standpoint, only be callod Antinomian, in
‘the sense that holds, in commonWith the Upanishads, that
 ‘the Brahmajnint is above both good (Dharma) and evil
 (Adhaems), and in the sense that some of thes» practioesare
 contrary to whst the general body of Hinds worshippers
 consid     to be erlawul. ‘Thos Shata Darshana is ssid by
 some to be Avaidika. It is, however, best to leave to the
West its own labels and to state the caso of the Bast in ita
 own terms,
      ‘Afterall, when everything unfavourable has been maid,
‘the abuses of some Téutrike ure not to be compared ether in
 nature or extent with those of the West with its widespread.
 sordid prostitution, its drunkenness and gluttony, its sexual
 pervartities and fis so-called pathologicalbut traly demonis-
‘al enormities. "To take a specific esample Is the drinking
 of wine, by a limited mmber of Vimickaet Tantriks in the
 ‘whole of this country to be compared with (say) the con-
  sumption of whisky in the single city of Caleutta? Is
                             G03
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  this whisky drinking les worthy of condemnation because
 itis Pashuptna or done for the esislacti        on appetite
                                            of eensusl
 lone? The dualistic notion thet the “dignity” of religion
 is impaired by association with natural function is erroneous,
       ‘The wel-known Engish writer, Sir Conan Doyle,
 doubtless referringto these and other wrongs, has expressed
the opinion that during the then last quarter of = cen-
 tury we Westerns have been living in what (with some few
 ameliorating features) is the wiekedest epoch in the world’s
 istory. However this may be, #f our own great sins were
 here Known, the sbuses, rel and alleged, of Tanteke would
 bbe seen in better propartion. Moreover an effective reply
 ‘would be to hand against those who are always harping on
 Devadisls and other seusualities (supposed or real) of, of,
 conneoted vith, Indian worship. India’s general present
 record for temgermnce and sextal control is better than that
 of the West: Tt is no doubt a just observation that abuses
 committed ‘under the supposed sanction of religion are
worse than wranga done with the aene that they are wrong.
 ‘That there have beet Ayposrites covering the satisfaction
of thei appetites with the closk of eligion is likely.
 But all Sidhakas are not ypoorites,and all cases do not
 show abuse, I cannot, therefore, help thinking that. this
 constant insistence on one particular feature of the Shastr,
 together with ignorance both of the perticalar rites, and
 neglect and ignorance of all eee in the Agama Scripture is
simply part of the general polemie cerried on in some quarters
 against the Tndian religion. The Tentra Shistea is doubtless
 thought to be a very useful heavy gan and is therefore con-
 stantly fired in the stteck, ‘There may be some who will
 not reedily believe that the weapon is not oo formid-
 able as was thought, All this is nob to say that there have
 rot been abuses, or that some forms of rte will ot be oon-
 sidered repugnant, and in fact open to objection founded
 on the interests of society at large. ALL this againis not to
 sy that I counse             l of any theories or practioe,
                     the acceptance
                               604
                 THE PANCHATATTVA
 not justified by the evolvod morality of the dey. According
to the Shistra itself, some of these methods, even if carried
 ‘out es directed, have their dangers. ‘This is obvious in the
 actions of e lower class of men, whose conduct ss made
 the Seriptare nototioas, The ordinary man will then ask:—
 “Why then court danger when there is enough of it in
 condinary life?” T.'may bere recall an observation of the
 mporor Akbsr which, though not made with regardto
 ‘the matter in hand, in yot well in point, Ho suid, “I have
 never known of a man Wao Was lost         on « straight zead."”
       Te in necosuary for me to so guard myselt because those
 ‘who cannot judge with detachment are prone to think that
 others who deal fairly and dispessionately with any doctrine
 or practice are necessarily its adherents and the counsellors
 of it to others,
       My own view is this ~Piobably on the whole it would
be, in general, better if men took neither “Alcohol in the
 form of Spirits or Mest, purticulsly the latter, which is
the source of much disease. ‘Though             it is said that
 Kkiling for sacrifice is no “killing”, it cam hardly be
 denied that total abstention from slaughter of animals
 constitutes a more complete conformity with Ahims& or
  doctrine of non-injury to any being. Moreover, at x cer-
 ‘in stage meat-eating is repugnant. A feeling              of this
 ind is growing in the West, where even the Meat-eater,
 impelled by disgust and a rising regard for decency, hides
 ‘aay the slaughter houses producing the mest which he
 ‘openly displays at his table, In the some way, sexual errors
 are common to-day. Whatever lioeise any person may
allow Kimself in this matter, few if any will claim it for
others and foster their vices. Nor was this the intention of
 ‘the Shastra, Tt is welLinown, however, that much of mbat
 pesos for religious sentiment is connected with sex instinct
 even if religious life is not a mere iradiation of thereprodue-
 tive instinct” (908 “Religion and Sex”, Cohen).
                                   605
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       T understand the basis on which theso Téntcike practices
  reat, Thus what sooms repellent is soughtto be justifed on
 the ground that the Stdhale should be above all likes and
 dlilikes, and should sco Brahman in all things, But the
 ‘Westem critic will say that we must judge practice from
 the practical standpoint. é was this consideration which
 vwas at the back of the statement of Piofosior de ln Vallée
 Poussize (Bowthiam. Béudes et Materiaux) that there is
 in this country what Taine called a ‘reasoning madness
 which makes the Hindu stick at no conclusion howover
 strange, willingly accepting oven the absurd. (Jl y regne
 des Porigine    ce que Taine appele la folie ruisonante, Lee
 Hindous vont solontirs jusqud Vabwinde). ‘This may be
 too stzongly put; but the soying contains this truth that
 the Indian temperament is'an absolutist one. But such a
 temperament, fit has ita fascinating grandeur, also caries
 with it the defects ofits qualities; namely, danger irom
 ‘which those, who make s compromise between life snd
 easun, are five. ‘The answer again is, that some of the
 Aootrines and practioas here dessrbod ware never meant
 for the genaral body of mex.
       Adie all, as I have elcwhoce said the question ofthis
 particular situa practioein lagely of historia intecest only.
 Such practice to-day is, under the influences of tho time,
  being transformed, where it is not altogether disnppeing,
  with other ritual customs of « past age. Apart from my
 desire to clear avay, 90 far as is rightly possible, changes
 ‘whieh have iin heavily on this country, I am only intrested
 here to show fusly that the practice is not modem in-
 vention but seams #6 be a continuation in another form of
 ancien? Vaidike usage ; seondly that it claims, like the rest
 ofthe ritual with which Ihave deat, to be an applicationof
the Advaitavads of the Upanishads ; and lastly thu (putting
 aside things generally repugnant and extremist practioes
 ‘which have led to abuse) a great principle is involved which
 ray find legitimate and ennobling application in all daily
                              606
                     THE PANCHATATTVA
 acts of physical function within the bounds of man's oxdinary
 Dharma, Thove who eo practise this principle may become
‘the true Vira who hus been said to be not the man of great
 physical or sexual sizength, the grent fighter, eater, drinker,
 or the like, but
           ‘Jitendriyah satyovadi nitydwushthdnatatparah
           Kémédvoalidénasheha oa viva iti giyate,
         “He is a Hero who has controlled his senses, andis a
 speaker     of truth: whois ever engaged in worship end has
 sacrificed Inst and all other pastions.”
        ‘The attainment of these qualities ia the aim, whatever
  in enid of some of the means, ofall such Téntrle Stdhan8,




                               607
                       Carne, XVII.
                       MATAM RUIRA.
              (Pum Riot avy Wrona Isreareeramon.)
  ‘J oxnnveton with the dovtine and Stan fact dose-
       ce itis apposite to cite the following legend from Tibet,
 which shows how, according. to its Sidbakas, it may be
 cithersightly or wrongly interpreted, and hor, in the latter
 case, it leads to tersibie evils and their punishment.
       Gua Padma-tambhava, the so-called founder of
 “Lamaiam,” had five women disciples who compiled several
 scconnts of the teachings of their Master and hid them in
 ‘various places for tbe benefit of future beliovers One of
 these diseiples—Khandro, Yeshe Teogysl—wvas 2 Tibetan
 lady who is sid to have possessed atch a wonderful power
‘of memory        that if she was told’ a thing only onso she 20-
 ‘membered it for ever. Sho gathered what she had heard
from her Guru into a book called the Padma ‘Thangyig
‘Serteng or Golden Rosary ofthe history of her Guru who was
 entitled. the Lotus-bon. (Padma-simbbava). ‘The book
 ‘was hidden away and was subeoquertly, under inspiration,
 revealed some five hundred-yeers ago by a Terton,
       ‘The first Chapter of the Work deals with Sukhavatf, the
 realm of Buddha Amitibha, In the second the Buddha
 emanates a ray whick is inowmated for the welfare of the
 Universe. Tn Chaptar TIT it is eid that there have been a
 Buddha and a Guru working together in various worlds nnd
 ‘at various times, the former preaching the Sttras and the
 latter the Tantras. ‘The forth Chapter speaks of the
 Mantras and the fve Dhydat Buddhas (es to which se Shxi-
 chakra-sambhara Tantra in Téntrik Texts, edited by Arthur
 Avalon), and in the fifth we find the subject of the present
 apter, an account of the origin of the Vajrayana Faith,
 ‘The present Chapter      is based on atranslation, which I asked
                                    608
                     MATAM RUTRA
 Kazi Dewasamdup to propare for me, of portions of the
 ‘Thangyig Berteug, T have further bad, and here acknow-
 ledge, the nssstonce of the very lexrned Lama Ugyen Tanzin,
 fn the elucidation of the imer meaning of the legend. 1
 cannot go fully into this but give certain indioetions which
 will enable the competent to work out much of the rest for
 ‘themselves from the terihle symboliam in which evil for
 evil’ sake is here expressed
       ‘The story  is that of the rise and fall of the Self, The
 disciple “Transoendent Faith” who hecame the Bodhisattva
 ‘Vajrapini illutestes the formar; the oase of * Blac: Salva-
 tion” who ineamated oo a Demonieo Rubra disploye the
 latter. “He was no ondinary man, for,st the time of kis
 initiation he had alveady attained eight out of the thistoen
 stages (Bhiimika) on the way to perfect Buddhabood. His
 powers were correspondingly grest. But the higher the rise
‘the greater the fall if it comes. ‘Uhroaghmin
 and misspplying, as 60 many others have done, the Téntrik
 doctrine, he “fell back” into Hell Extruordinary man
‘who were teachers of recondite doctrines such as those of
 ‘Thubla, who was himself “hard to oversome”, seem not
 to have failed to warn loscer brethren aguinst their dangecs.
 1s commonly suid        in Tibet of the so-called “heroic” modes
 of extremist Yogu, vat they wait the disciple with the ut-
 ‘most speed either to the heights of Nirvana or to the depths
 of Hell. For the aspirant is.compered to a snake whichis
 rade     to go up eollaw Bamboo. It must ascend and escape
 ‘at the top, at the peril othervise of falling down. Not-
‘withstanding these warnings many of the vulgar, the vicious,
  the misunderstanding, and the fools who plsy with fire
  have gone to Helle fax more terrible than those which await
  Inman frailties in pumuanoe of the common life of men
  ‘whose progres if sow ia sure. “Black Salvation”, though
  fn acvanced dissple, misinterpreted his teacher's doctrine
  find consciously identiying himself with the world-evil
  fell into Hell, In time he rose therefrom and incarnating
                                  609
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 at inst in gross material forms, heat length manifested. as
 fe great Rutz, the embodiment of all wieketness. The
 ‘Tibetan Itutea hero epoken of end tho Indian Rudra seem
 to be etymologicaly the same but their meaning is diferent,
 Both are fierce and tersble Spirits; but a Rutra as here
 ‘depicted in essentially evil, and neither the Lord of any
 sensual celestial peradi, nor the Cosmic Shakti which
 loosens forms. A Rutea is rather what in some secre circles
is called (though in ungrarmatical Sanskrit) an Adhitni,
 or a aoul upon the lowor and destructive path. ‘The general
 destmictive energy (SambraShalti), however, uses, for
ite purpose the disintegrating propensities of these forms.
‘The evil which appears as Rutsa is the expression of various
Kinds of Egeism. ‘Thus Matam Rutra is Fgoiamas ottachod
to the gross physical body.. Again, all sentiont worldly
being gives expression to ts feelings, saying “I am happy,
‘unbsppy, and    so forth,” All this ig here embodied  in the
 speech of the Rutra and is called Akar Rutra. Khatram
‘Ratrs is Pgoiam of the mind, a when itis sid of any object
 ‘thisis mine”. “Black Salvation” became a Rutze of such
 terriio power that fo save him and the world the Buddhas
 intervened. ‘There are four methods by which they and the
  Bodhianttvas subdue and save sentient being, namely, the
 Peaceful, the Crna or Attractive, the Fascinating which
 renders powerles (Vashtzaranam), and the stora method of
 downright Fores. All forms of Egoiam must be destroyed
in order that the pure “That Which Is” or formless Con-
 sciousness may be attained. “Black Salvation” incamated 2s
the Pride of Fgoismin its most teribie form, And, in order
‘oo subeiue him, the last two methods had to be employed.
“He was, through the Glorious One, redeemed by the suforing
‘hich attends all sin and bocamethe “Dark Defenderof the
Faith”, which by his egoistc apostasy he hed abjured, to
be Inter the Budiths known aa the “Lord of Ashes” in that
world which is called “the immediately asléproduoed".
How this came about the legund describes,
                               610
                     MATAM RUTRA
        ‘The fifth Chapter of the Gelden Rossy says thet Gura
 Padma-Vajrdhare was rebom as Bhilahu Thubkashonaa,
 ‘hich means the “youth who is hard to overcome". . He
 vvas a Téntrik who preached an abstruse doctrine which ia
 condensed in the fllowing vers
            “THe who hes attained the “That Which Ts?
              Or uncrested Tn-itaelf ness
              Is unaffoced even by the ‘four things’
              Just as the loud which floata in the sky
              ‘Adheres not thereto.
              ‘This ia the way of Supmeme Yogs,
              ‘Than thio in all the those workda
              ‘There is not a higher wisdom,
        This Guru had tvo disciples, Kuntsi and his servant
 Pramadeva, Tothe lattewas given, on initition, the mame
 ‘Transendent Faith", and tothe farmer “Bleck Salvation”.
 This ast name was « prophetic pricion thab he would. be
 saved, not through petcsfol or agreeable means but trough
 the just wauth of the Jinas ‘The real meaning ofthe verse
 as understood and practised by Pramedeve and at declared
to be xight by the Guru wae as fellows: "Tho pure Con-
 sciousness (Degpe-yeahes) is the foundation (Gabi hasin)
 of the limited consciousneas(Rnamsbes) and isin Scripture
 “That which is," the real uncceated.“"In-Tasll-nese
 ‘This being unaffectad or unrated is the path of Tantr
 Passions (Kesha) are like clouds wandering in the wide
 ‘spaces of the sky. (These clouds ere distinc’ from, and. do
 rot touch the background of space against which they
 appear) So passions do not touch but disappear from the
 Void (Ghinyati). Whilst ascending upwards te thiee-fold
 sccomplisiments (Activity, nomactivity, absolute repore)
 aust be persevered in; “and this ie the meaning of our
 ‘Teacher Thubka's doctrine.”
       ‘The latter, however, was misunderstood by “Black
 Salvation’ (Tharpa. Nagpo) who took it to mean that he
 was to make no effort fo save himself by the geining of
                             on
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 merit, but that he was to indulge in the four acte of snfal
 ‘enjoyment, by the eye, nose, tongue and organ of generation.
 On this account he fell out with his brother in the faith
 Pramadeva, and later with is Cra, both of whom be caused.
 to be persecuted end banisted the country. Continuing
 in a career of reckless and sin-hardened life, he died un-
repeatent aiter e score of yoars passed in various diabolical
 ppmotices. He fll into Hall and continued tere for count-
 ess ages. At-the close of the time of Buddhs Dipankara
 (Marmedzad or “Light maker”) be was reborn seversl
 times as huge sea monsters, Atlongth, just before the time
 of the last Buddha Shakya Muni, be was born ss the son
 of « woman of loose morals in a country called Lankktpuri
 of the Rékehases, ‘This woman used to consort with three
 Spirts- Deva in the morning, a Fire Genius at noon, and
 2 Daitya in the:eveting. “Black Salvation” was sebom
 in the eighth month a8 the offspring of these three Spirits,
‘The child was a tercible monsies black of colous, with three
heeds, each of which hd thres eyes, six hands, four feat
 and two wings. He was horrible to look at, end immediately
‘at his birth  all the auspicious signs of the enuntry disappear-
 ed, and the eighteen inauspicious signs were seen, Malignant
 epidemics attacked the whole region of Lenkapurt, Bome
 ied, others only suffered, but all were in misery. Lament-
 ation, famine snd sowow beset the land, There were
 Aiseso, bloodshod, mildew, halstorms, droughts, floods and
 all other kinds of calamities, Even dreams were ‘rightfl,
 sand ominous signs portending a grevt cetasirophe oppressed
 all, Evil spirita roamed the nnd. So grest were the evils
 that it seemed as if the good merits of everyone had been
 exhonsted all at once
       ‘The mother who had given birth to this mohstar died
 ‘nine daya after its birth. The people ofthe country decreed
 ‘hat this monstrous infant showld be bound to the mother's
 ‘corpse and loft in the ccmotary. Tho infont waa thon tied
 ‘to his mother’s breast, ‘The mother was borne away in a
                                 61
                     MATAM RUTRA
 stretcher to the cemetery, and the stretcher was left at the
 foot of « poisonous tree which had» bear's den at its roob,
 & poicouous   stake coiled round the middle of its trank,
 and a bird of prey sittingin its uppermost branches. (These
 animals are the emblems of lst, cnger and greed respectively
 which “kindle the fire of individuality”) Ab this place
 there was » huge septlchre built by the Rakshasas where
they used to leave their dead at the foot of the trea. Elo-
 plants and tigers cune there to die; serpents infested it,
 and witoh-like spirits called Dikints and Ghouls brought
 Toman bodies there. After the bearors of the cozyoe hud
 left, the infant sustained his life by mucking the breasts of
 his mother's corpse. Theos yielded only a thia, yellowish,
 watery fluid for seven days, Next he sucked the blood and
 lived a week ; then he goawed at the bresat and lived the
third weole; then he ate the entrails and lived for a week.
‘Then be ate the otter fesh and lived for the Ath week.
 Tastly he crunched the bones, sucked the marrow, Hcked
 the humours     and brains end lived a wook, He thus in six
 ‘weeks developed ful physical maturity. Having exhausted
his stock of food he moved about ; and bia motion shook the
 cometary building to pieves. He observed the Ghouls and
 DAkinis feasting on Inman corpses which he took as hia
 food and human blood as his drink, filling the skulls with it.
Fis clothing was dried human skins as also tho hides of deed
 elephants, the flesh of which he also ate. He ate slso the
flesh of tigers and wrapped his loins in their fure, He used
 serpents as bracsles, aiklets, armlets and as neciiaces
and                    lips were thick with frozen fat, and his
 ody was covered. with ashes from the burning ground.
 He wore o garland of dead skalls on one string ; freshly
 severed heads on another; and decomposing heads on a
 ‘third. "These were worn ercesvse asa triple garland. Each
 cheek was adorned with a spot of blood. His three great
 heads ever wrathful, of three differen’ colour, were fexwe
  and horvible to look at, The middle heed wos dark blue
                                6:3
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 sand those to the right and left were white and red respec-
 tively, Hie bedy and limbs which were of gigantic sizo
 and proportions were asky grey. His skin was course and
 his lnir as stiff ap hog’s bristles. His mouth wide agape
 showed fangs. His terrible eyes were fixed      in a stare. Half
  cof the dari brown hair on his head stood erect, bound. with
  four kinds of suakes. The nails of his fingers and toes
‘wore like the telons of a great bird of prey, which seized hold
  cof everything within reach, whether animals or human
  ‘corpses which he crushed and swallowed. He bore e trident
  ‘and other weapons in his right hands, end with his left ho
  ‘led the emptied skulls with blood which ho drank with
  ‘great relish, He was a monster of ugliness who delighted
  {in every kind of impious act, His unnatural food produced
‘a strange lustre on his face, which shone with a dull though
  ‘great end terrible light. His breath res so poisonous that
  ‘tho touched by it were attacked with various diseases,
  For his nostrils breathed forth disease. His eyes, ears and
  farms produced the 404 different ill. ‘Thus, the diseases
  paralysis, epilepsy, bubonic swellings, urinary ils, akin
   iseascs, ches, rheomatim, gout, cali, cholers, leprosy,
‘cancer, emall-pox,    dropsy and various   other sore and boils
  ‘appeared in this world wt Ghat time. (For evil thoughts and
  acts make the vitel spirit sick and thence springs gross
  disease.)
        "The name of this great Demon was Mstam Rutra, He
‘was the fruit of the Karma of the grest wickedness of his
  former life as Tharpa Negpo, At that time, in each of the
  24 Pilgrimages, there was © powerful destructive Bhairava
  Spirit. ‘These Devse,. Gandharvas, Ralshesos, Asuras and
  Nagas wore proud, malignant and mighty Spirits, daepotic
  asters of men, with groat magical powers of illusion and
  teaneformation. ‘These Spisits used to wander over these
 ‘counties dressed in the eight sepulchral raiments, wearing
  the six kinds of bone omaments, and armed with various
  ‘weapons, accompanied by their female consorte, and reveled
                                614
                     MATAM RUTRA
 in all kinds of obscone ongics. ‘Thoir chief cocupation. con-
 sisted in depriving all sentient beings of theiz Lives. Alor
 consultation, all these Spisite elected Matam Rutma as thir
  Chief. Ths ell these non-huzsan beings became his slaves,
 In the midet of his horrible retinve he continued to devour
 ‘human beings alive until the race beoeme almost destroyed
 sud the cities emptied. He was thus the most terible
 scourge that the earth had ever seen. All who died in thote
 days fll into Hell. But, as for Matom Rutra himsalf, bis
 pide Imew no bounda: he thought there was no one greater
 ‘than himelé and world roar out :
        “Who is there grester and mightier than I? If then
 bbe any Lord who would excel me, Him too will Taubjugete,”
      ‘As there was no one to geinsay him, the world was
 opprested by heavy gioom.. At that time, however, Kal
 proclaimed,
      “In the country of Lankd, the lend of RAlskasus,
       In a portion of the city called Koka-Thingmali
      On the peakof Malaya, the abode of Thunder, ng,
      ‘Thre della the Lord of Lank’, King of Ralsbasas.
       His is disciple of the light-giving Budaha.
       His fam far excels thin.
       Hr is unconquerable in fight by any foe.
       Hie sloops secure and doth awake in peace.”
       Hearing this, the pride and ambition of the Demon
 became aflame. “His body emitted ames great enough
 ‘to have consumed all worids st the great Kalpa dissolution,
His voice reoundedin a deep thunderi          rourngike thetof
‘ thousand claps of thunder heard together. With sparks
 of fire ying from his mouth he summoned a: huge fore
 Ho filled the very heavens    with them, and moving    with the
 speed of a metacr he invaded the Rékshasa's capital of
 Koka Thongmaling. Encamping, Metam Rutro proclaimed
 his name proudly, at which the eatire country of Lank&
‘trembled and. was shaken teribly as though by an oarth-
 quake. ‘The Rakshass, both mule and female, became
                              615
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 tenified. The King of the Rakshasas sent spios to find out
 the cause of these happenings. ‘They went and sew the
 tombe foros, and being terried at the sight reported the
 fearful news to their king, He sat in Samidhi for a while,
 and divined the following :— According  to the Stra of King
 Gunadbara it was said, “One who bas vexed his Guru's
 heart, and broken his friend and brother's heart: the
haughty son, being released from the thnes Hells, will take
 rebirth here, and be will serely conquer the Lord of Lenk.
 Jn the end, he will be conquered by many Sugatas (the
 biissal ones, or Buddhas). And this event will give birth
 to the Anuttar-Vajtoyéna Feith.” ‘The Buddha Mar-
 ‘modzad having revealed the event, he wishedto see whether
 this wae the Matam Rutra Demon referred to in the pro-
 pphasy. So he collated «fetes of Rakahasas     and went forth
 ‘Yo fight a battle with the Demon Soren, Matam utes
 ‘was very angey and aiid +
    “Tam the Grest Invincible One, who is without peer,
        T ari the Tshvare Mahadeva,
     ‘The four groat Kings of the four quarters are my
         vassals,
     ‘The eight different tribes of Spirits are my slaves,
     am the Lord of the whole World.
     Who is going to withstand end confront me ¢
     Rutra, Matra, Merutm,””
        With this battle cry he overcame the forces of the
  RAkshesas, ‘Then the King of the Rakshasas and all his
  forces submitted to the King of the Demons, saying “I
  repent me of my attempt to withstand you, in the hope of
  upholding the Faith of the Buddhas, and to spread
                                                  it far and
  wide. T now submit to you and beceme your loyal subject.
1 will not rebel against you.” When he had thus overeome
  the Rikshasos, ho assumed th title of Metamla, the Chit
  of all the Rakshesas, His pride increased, end he pro-
  claimed, “Who is there greater than I?”
                               66
                      MATAM RUTRA
       ‘Thon, Kall wguin cleverly excited his ambition ond
 pride by saying, “The Chist of the armies of the Asuras
 (Chain thatis “not Devas"), nated Mahslaru, is mightier
 ian you." ‘Thereupon he invaded the realms of the
 Asuras,     with his demon force, and all the Asuras becoming
 afected with vasious terrible’ maladies were powerless to
 resist him. ‘The Rutra caught hold of the Asura King by
 ‘the leg and whining him thrice round hie head flung him.
into the Jambudvipa where he fall in a place called the
 Genegyad, meaning the place of cight merita, Then
those of the Asuras who had uot een killed, the eight
 planets (Grabas), and the twenty-eight constellations
 (Nakshatras) and ‘their hosts sought refoge in every diree-
tion, but failing to obtain safety anywhere, they retumed
 and surrendered. themselves to the Demon Matam Ruta
 "Then the Asures guided the Katte and his foros      to a Palace
 named the Globular Palace ike’ skull where they estab-
lished their Capital, In the contre of this Palace, the
 Ratzo hoisted his banner of Victory. ‘They ermanged their
readful weapons by the side of the entrance, and the place
‘was surrounded by numerous followers with magical powers
‘Having thus shewn his own great magical powers, he took
 ‘up the King of Mountains, Mera, upon the tip of his finger
and whirling      it round his head, he proclaimed   these boast-
 ful words, “Rutra, Matra, Marutra, who is there in this
universe grester than myself? In all the three Lokas,
‘there is mone greater than T. And    if there be any, him also
  will 1 subdue.” ‘To these boastful words Kall answered,
      “In the thirty-third Deva-Loka   and in the happy celestial
           regions of the Tushita Heavens,
        Sitting amidst the golden assembly of disciples,
        In the Holy Saviour ofall beings, Regent of the Devas
           (Dampe-Togiax)
         ‘Having been anointed, He is venerated und praised
           by all the Deva Kings.
                                 617
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
        Ho summons all tho Devas to his assembly by sound-
          ‘ng the various instruments of heavenly music
       Accompanied by a celestial Chorus,
       He is greater than yourelt.”
       On her 80 saying, the Archdemon blazed forth into a
fury of pride and wasth, and ect forth to conquer the Tushita
 Heavens. ‘The Bodhisattva (Dampe-Togka:) wes sitting
‘enthroned on a throne of precious metals, in the midst of
 ‘housands of Devatia, both male and femsle, and was
preaching Dharma to them. ‘The Archdemon seized Dampa-
‘Togkar from his throne, and threw him down into this
 world-system. All the Devas and Deyis there gathered
 cexclsimed, “Alas, what a fate, O, the sinful wretch!”
 seven times aver. Thereupon the Rutre fiercely said :
     “Put on two cloths, and sit, down on your seats, every
          one of you!
       How con I’be conqueredby you! Iam the mighty
          Aestroyer and subjugator of all.”
       (The expression “Put on two clot” was said by
 way of contempt for the priestly robea which consist of
 three pieces, being e wrapper above, and one below and
 one over both. Dampe-Togkar ia the Boihisnttva who is
 coming     as Buddha to teach in the human world, He de-
 seends from the Tushita Heavens where he reigns   as Regents)
       ‘When the celestial Regent of the Tushita Heavens
 (Dampe-Togkar) was aboutto pass away from there, be
 ‘uttered this prophesy to his disigles, who were around  him :
     “Listen unto me, Ye my disciples
      ‘This apostate disciple, Tharpa-Nagpo (Black Salvation),
     Who does not believe in the Buddha's Doctrine,
      Hl ie destined to pervert the Devas end Asuras,
      And to bend them to his yoke.
      Fe hates the perfect. Buddhs, and he will work much
         evil in this world-system,
      ‘There are two, who cin deprive him of his terrible
         power
                                618
                    MATAM RUTRA
        ‘They ere Thubka-Zhonmu and Dad-Phage (Pranuadeva,
           ‘Arya Shriddba called Transcendent Faith)
        ‘They will be able. to make him taste the fruite of his
           evil deeds in this very life,
      He will notbe subdued by pesceful, nor by any gene-
        He will only be conquered by the methods of Fescins-
           tion and Stermness
        (The various means of redemption bave been previously
explained. ‘Thubla and his good disciple “Transcendent
Buith"” who bad then become Buddha Vajm-Sateva, and
Bodhisattva Vajeepéni wero selected for this purpose. ‘They
‘sasumed the forms of the Devatés with the Horse's head
(Fiayagetve) and tie Sow's head (Vojra-Vartht,)
     “Who, of the Noble Sangha, will doubt this,
        ‘That Hayagriva end Vajra-Varabt wil give him their
           bodies.
        (When i is said “These will give him their bodies”
this means, as hereafter described, entering the Rutza’s
hody, eamming bis shape and destroying his Rutre. life
and usture. ‘They give him their divine bodies so that
they may destroy his demonise body.)
        ““And who will not trust-in the Wisdom of the Tinos,
            to conquer him by the upward-piercing method,
          From this (demon) will come the Precious-nectar,
           which wil be of use in acquiting Virtue
          From this (demon) will originate the changing of
            poiton into eli.
         (There are various Téntrik methods suited to various
 natures, “The upward-pieroing” (Khatar-yer-phig) is that
 cof Vajiapina, This ia the method which goes upward
 fand upwand, thet is straight upward without delay and
 ‘without going to right. or left. To change poison into
 nectar or elixix is a wel-lmown principle of these schools,
         “This Demon will have to be ground down and destroy~
             ed to the last atom, in one body.
                                  61g
                  SHAKTI        AND SHAKTA
        (Ub is said “in one body” because, ordinarily, several
 lives aze necessary; but in this case snd by this method
 Liberation is achieved in a single life-time and in ono body.
‘Not one atom of the Rutra body is let, for Egoism is
 wholly destroyed.)
        “The Divine Horse-headed Deity (Vojra-Hayegtivs),
              is he who will dispel this threataning misfortune,
          Dad-phags, (Pramadeva who was given on initiation
              the name “"Transoendent faith”) is at present Vajra-
          And pani Thubla-Zhonnu
                    (Bodhisattva). is, sb present, the Buddha
              ‘Vajrasattva.
         ‘The divine prophesies           of the Jinas are to be intet-
                                :—
              preted willthus exterminate
          ‘They                            their opponents
          For myelt I go to take birth im Mayi-Devt’s womb
          {wil pmctise Samadhi at the 2008 of the Bodhi-Tre.
           I wil not-hold those beliefs in doubt.
         Yor it has been said thst the Buddba’s Faith will
               ‘riamph over this,
           And will romain long in the Jambudvips.
           By means of the mysterious practice of Hmencipating
               ‘by means of Communion.”
        (he practice here referred to is the method called
 onda (sByor aGrol) which has both exoterio and esoteric,
  reonings, each as in the ease of tho lastar the communion
  of the Divine Male and Female whose union destroys to its
 nnitermost root egostic attachment ; the communion with,
 Shinystd whose innermost significance is the nomduel
 Consciousness (gNyismed-yeshes) which dispels ignorance
 ‘and outs atthe 200t of all Simic life by the destruction
 fof all the Rutra forms. “Female” here is Shinyatf and not
 fa-woman, When a learned Lama is asked why the tarmaof
 tex are wed they say it is to symboliso Thabs (pia) and
 Sheerabs (Prajnd) which itis not possible to further explain
 here. (See Vol. XIII, XIV of Téntrik Texts, Ed. A. Avalon.)
                                 620
                          MATAM RUTRA
       “The Matam Butea, which is clinging to the body as
          “DP will be
         All forms of worldly happiness and pain, the Egoism
          of Speech (Akar Rutea),
         Will be destroyed.
         ‘The saying ‘this is mine’ of anything,
         ‘The mental ‘I’ (or Khatram-Ratra) is ireed.
         ‘The teue nature and distinguishing attributes of
          Ruins,
         Which is menift outwardly, existe inwandly, and
          lies hidden secretly,
        Jn hort all the fifty-eight              Rutras, with their hosts,
          will be destroyed completely.
       (L have alresdy dealt with the meaning                     of the term,
 Ruta, Here the Bgoimms of body, feelings, mind are
 referred to, The Glorious One vill eradicate the physical
and all other Rutras, the monster of the self in al te forms,
 gross, subtle and causal.)
       “The world though deprived of hsppinees will zejoice
              ain,
        ‘Theag world will be Aled with the Precious Daarma of
          the Tei Ratne,
         ‘The Righteous Faith has not declined, nor has it
                    away.”
       (Thus did the Regent of the Tushita Heavens prophesy
 ‘tho advent of the Tintrink method for the complete destruc-
 tion and the eliminatio of the domon of “Egotiam” from
‘the natuerre of thrie ng devoteese ch thheeciespath by meaneds of Jordol)
      ‘Aft utte tthhos prop                           he panss away and
                     i  r
took re,-bin the womb ofatQ                  u Maee    y& Devt, ‘Then the
 ‘Arc hd em  on      vi
                   ha sung      bj ug    edall   th e   Ded vas of the thiriy-
 third and the Tusitaa, Tleave appo che two Demonsss
                                     ns ,          in te
 Mire and Devadati his two chmoin officers,f to suppre
 Indm and Brahms, The Artach               de himsel took up his
 abode in tke Malaya Moun in, in the place called thse
 ‘aman skoll-like Mansion, He used to ieed apon Deva
                                      6a
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
tnd Ituman beings, both males end females, Drama, bell,
‘oymbals and every kind of stringed and other musical in
struments were played to him in a perpetual concect with
songs and dances. Every kind of enjoyment which the Devas,
‘used to enjoy, he enjoyed perpetually. (8th Chapter ends.)
      ‘The 9th Chapter deals with the defeat and destruction
of the Archdemon Matam Ratza by the Buddhas of the
ten direotions —
      ‘Then there assembled together Dharmakéye Buddha
Samantabhadea (Chotkcu Kunta Zangpo) snd his atten
ants from tbe Wogmin (Akanishta) Heavens, from other
‘Heavens, Sambhoga-kya Vajradhare with his attendants ;
 and Vajrapini Nirmduakya with his sttendants. In
short, from the various heavens of the ten directions came
the diferent Buddhas, and Bodhisetivas, All held a coo
 sultation together and’ came to this resoation
       “Unless the powerof the Budidhas be exerted to subju-
 gate the Butea, the Faith of the Buddhas will esas to
 spread and will degenerate. That body which has com-
 mitted such violent oxtrages on every other being, must be
 rade to suffer the agonies     of being hurt by weapons, wielded
 by avengers. If he is not mnds to feel the consequences
 of his desds, the Jinas who'have proclaimed the ruth wil
 be falsified. He isnot to be destroyed but to be subdued.”
Having thos agreed, all the Buddhas began to seek with
 their omniscient eyes, him who was destined to conquer
this Rutra, ‘They saw that Thubka-Zhonna who had at-
tained the state of Buddha Vajea-sattva and Dadphags
 who had become Vajea-pini were to subdue him, and that
‘the time was alio ripe. So both of them came with their
respective retiuue end were bleswed ond endowed with
Power by all the Buddhas, who gave these instructions,
“Do ye assume the forms and sexes of Chenrezi and Doma
(Avsiokita and Tért) and do ye subdue the Enemy by
              ‘the shapes of the Deities having the Hors-mane
and the Sow's head (Haya-gaive and Vaja-Varih),
                                  622
                     MATAM RUTRA
        (Tho later ‘2 commonly knownin English teansla-
 tions as the “Diamond Sow”. Vajmais the Sandeit
 equivalent of the word Dorje in ‘Tibetan. ‘The latter
 jus many meanings; Indra’s thunderbolt, the Lemas’
  seoptre, diamond and ‘so forth: and is in ‘ct used of
  anything of « high and mystical chamctar which is lasting,
  indestructible, powerful and imesistible, Thus the high
 ‘priest presiding at Tantrik Ritesis called Darje Lopon. In
  fact, diamond is so called because of the hard character of
‘this gem. In the Indian Tantike        worship, Vajma cove as
  in Vajrapushps (Vajrs-lower), Vajra-dhimi (Vajre-ground),
  and s0 forth, but these are not “diamond” Bowers or earth.
 ‘An extremely interesting enquiry is here opened which is
  beyond the soope of this Chapter, for the tam Vajra, which
  is again the appellation of this particular school (Vajrayana),
  and  is of great significance in the hitory of that power-
  side of religion which is deat with in the Shakta Tantra,
Seo Introductionto Shr-Chakra- Sambhava, edited by Arthur
  Avalon, Vol. VII of Tinteik Texts. Here, without further
  atiampt at explanation, I keep the term Vajra adding only
  that Hrinis is not, as bas been thought, Veje-Varaht
  (Dorje-phagmo) Hexslf but the Bije Mantra (Ha, x, xf,
  ss) of Her four attendant Dakints.)
        Vajra-Sattve and Vajraptni, Buddha and Bodhisattva
  of the Vajmyina faith transformed themsclves into the
  forms of Haya-griva and Vojra-Vérahi, and assumed the
  costumes of Herukas. (Tho Herukas are 6 class of Vajra-
  ‘yina Devati, of half terrible features, represented as partly
  ‘made with an upper garment of human skin and tiger skin
  round the loins. They havea skull heed-dress, carry bone
  rosaries, a staff and Damara like Shiva. ‘The Hertkas are
  described in the Tibetan books as being beautiful, heroic,
  ‘aweinspicing, stom and majestic) Blacing in the nine
  kinds of physical magnificence end splendour, they pro-
  ceeded to the Malaya Mountain,—the abode of the Rutra
 On the four sides of the Mountain were four gates, Each
                                 623
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
gate was guasded by a Demoness, bearing respectively «
Mare's, Sow's, Lion's and a Dog's head. ‘These the Glorious
One conquered, ani united therewith in a sptit of non-
attachment. From their union were bom tke following
female issue: (1) The White Horse-fved, (2) the Black
Sowfaced, (8) ‘Ihe Red Lion-faced, (4) and the Green
Dogeiuced daaghters. Proceeding still further He mst
another cordon of textries, who too wore females, bearing
‘he heeds of (1) Liones, (2) Tigress, (3) Fox, (8) Wolf, (6)
YValtare, (6) Kank, (2) (1) Raven, and (8) Ow, With these
‘Demonesses ton, the Glorious One united in e sptit of non-
attachment, and blessed the act. Of this unioa were born
female offering, each of whom took after the soother in
outward shape or Matter, and after the father in Mind,
‘Thus were   the cight Demi: goddesses) bom: viz. the Lion-
headed, Tiger-headed and so forth. Being divine in mind,
they possess presceice. and’ wisdom, although from
‘heir mother they retainod their shapo and features, which
are those of brutes
      ‘Then again proceeding further inward, Te came upon
the daughters of the Rutrasand of Ralahsses, named re-
spectively, Nyobyed-ma or “She who maddens,” Tagbyed
ma ‘She who frightens,” Drimetime “The unsullie
Kempama “She who dries one up,” Phorthogms “She who
bears the Cup” and Zhyongthogma the ‘bow! besser”.
      "The Glorious One united with these in the same marner,
‘and from them, wore born the eight Matte of tho cight
‘Sthanas (oacred places), known as Gaurlmi and so forth
‘These, too, possessed divine wisdom from their father and
terriic featores and shapes from their mothers
      (There are 94 Sthinas which are places of pilgrimage
tnd eight grozt cemeteries making 62 in all. In each of
these cemeterias there & a powerful Goddess also called
Mamo, that is, Matrika. These terible Goddesses are, ae-
cording to the Zhi-Khro, Gaurimé, Teaurima, Chandalt,
Vetilt, Ghasmast, Shonamf, Framo, Poskest. These axe in
                               64
                     MATAM RUTRA
colour white, yellow, yellowish white, black, dask green,
dank bluo, red, reddish yllow, and aro situated in the Bast,
South, N.W., North, SW., N.H., Wea, 8, *narvelets of
‘the conch shell mansion” (brain) sspectively. These  are the
ight great Mates ofthe eight grat Comataies, to whom
prayer is made, that when forms re changed and entzanceis
rade on the intermediate plane (Bordo. See as to this Dr.
vans-Wents, “Tibetan Book of the Dead”), they may place
‘the spirit on’ the clear light path of Radiance (Bods).
       (These various sccouplomenta denote tho union of Divine
 Mind with gross matter. In working with matter the Divine
 ‘ind is always detached. Work is possible even forthe liber-
‘ted consciousness when free from attachment, that is, desire
 (Kama), which is bondage. he Divine Mind mites with ter-
‘ible forms of gross matter that thes may be instruments ; in
 ‘this case instruments wheteby the gross Bacism of the Rutra
 is to be subdued )
       ‘Then going sight into the imermos® abede, he found
 ‘that the Ruta bad gone out in_ search of food, which
 consisted of human flesh nnd of Devas Adopting the
 iguice      of the Rutz, the Glorious One went in to the
 Consort of the Rutra) the Rakshast- Gueen Krodheshvart
 (Cady of wrath) in the same spirit as before, and blessed the
 act, By Krodbeshvari, He had male jesus, Bhagavan Vajra-
 ‘Heruke, with three faces and six hands, tenife to behold.
 ‘Then the Glorious One, Hayagriva, and his divine Consort,
 Vajnu-Visihi, each expressed their triumph by neighing
 and grunting thrice. Upon hearing thece sounds the Rutra
 ‘was struck with mortal fear, and coming to tho spot, he anid:
       “What sayest Thon, little son of Hayageiva and Vajra-
           Vardi.
          AIL the world of Devas and Asuras
         Proclaim my virtues nd sing my praises
         T oannot be conquered. Rest yoursslves in peace,
         Rogad mo with kuility, and bow down to me
                               605
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
          Even the Regent of the Devas,
           ‘of the odd garment (priestly dress),
          Failed to conquer     me in days of yore.
      Saying this he zased his hands, and cams to lay them
on the young one’s head. ‘Theteupon, Hayagelva at; ouce
entered the body of the Rutza by tho teeet path (Gubys)
from below and piercing him 2ight through from below up
‘wards, He showed        His Hess Head, on the top of the head
of the Rutss. Tho wily fat of the Retsa's body sande the
“Hons's head look green, ‘The mane, being dyed with blood,
became 72d, and the eyebrows, having been splashed with
the bile ofthe Demon, became yellow. The forehead, being
splashed with the brains, became white. Thus the Glorious
 One, having assumed the shape and dtosses of the Ruts,
 took on a terible majesty,
       ‘At the same time, Vejra-Vartll, His Consort, also
 entered the body of the) Rutm’s Cotecrt. Krodheshvat,
 io the same manner piscing and impaling her. Sho
 creed Her own Sox's head right wp thioagh the crown of
 the Demonest' head, uni it fowered above it.The Sow's
 head had sssomed a black colour, from having bean steeped
  in the fat of the Ralahasl ‘Thenthe two Divine Beings
 emabraced each other, and begot an offspring, « Divine Be-
 ing,   « male of the Terrific Onder, a Krodabhairava. Having
 done this, Hayogetvaneighed shrilly six times, and Vajns-
 ‘Vaskht granted deesly five times, ‘Then the hosts of the
 huddhas and the Bochisattvaa sstembled thers ax thickly
 ae hind of proy sottling down on carton, They fll sll
 space, ‘They were of the peacelul, the wasehfal, the hal
 peaceful and the hell-nthful order, in incouceivably
 large numbers. They begun to surround the Rutra-Thaxp-
‘Nagpo, who, being unable to bear the pain of being stretched
‘under, ered in agony :—
       “Oh, T am defeated! The Home and the Sow have
            defeated the Ruts.
          ‘The Biiddias have defeated the Demons
                             626
                          MATAM RUTRA
          Religion hae conquered Iereligion,
          ‘The Sangha bas defeated the “Tirthikns,
         Indea lus delested the Asuras,
         ‘The Asuras have defeated the Moon
          ‘The Garuda has defeated the Ocoan
         Fire defeats fuel, Wind scatters the Clouds
         Diamond (Vajra) pieroes metals
         Ob | it was I who said that last night's dream. por
           ‘ended evil.
         Ob! slay me quick, if you axe going to slay me.”
      Aa he ssid this, his bowels were involuntarily loosened,
 and from the exereta which, being thus purified, fll into
 ‘the Ocean, there at once arose a precious sandal tree, which
 was a wish-granting tee. This tree struck its root in the
 nether world of the Serpent-spirits, spread its folinge in
 te Asuro-loks, and bore its fruits      in the Derarlokas, Ard
the fruits were named Amita (the essence and elixir of life).
       ‘Then the two Chief Actor and Actress, Hayagriva and
 Vejra-Vaxtbt aoted the joyful plays called the “Plays of
 Happy Cause," “Happy Path’, and “Happy Remult’,in the
 nine glorious mesauzos. ‘That is, playain which tho actore
 fare happy being the melo and fomalo Divinities, in this
 case Hayagriva and Vajra-Virsht They are the cause ;
 ‘their play being exoterially "Dalliance”” (Cia), and their
 resalt the dispelling of Rgoism which is Iumination.)
       ‘Just as a vietor in a battle, who has slain his enemy,
 swing the armour     ana the accoutrements of hs slain opponent,
 ‘and pute them on as ¢ sign of triumph,       so also, the Glorious
 One having conquered the Rutra, assumed the eight ao-
 coutrements of the foo, including the wings, and the other
‘adornments which made him look so bright and magnificent,
 ‘These the Glorious One blessed and consecrated to the use
 of the Divine Deities, Having done all this, both Hayagriva
 and Vejtu-Vartht retarced to the Realm of pure Spiritual
 Being (Dharmadhatu), ‘Ubus it comes about that those
 costumes, assumed by the Rutra, came to be adopted as
                                  627
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 the attire of the Deities,          ‘Their having threo heads, the
 cight sepulchral oramenta, and the eight gloious costumes
 sand wings, had origin in this event.
       ‘Then Pal Chagne-dorje (Shit VajrapSni) multiplied
 himself into countless Avatires, and theso again multiplied
 ‘themselves into myriads of Avatieas, all of the terible
 and wrathful type. ‘The Rutrs too showed supernatural
 powers, for he temsfomned himself into a nize-headed
 Monster, having ighteen hands, as loge as the Mount
 ‘Meru, Should it be doubted, how this sinful boing could til
‘Possess auch supernatural        powers, one must know that he was
 4 Bodhisuttva of the eighth depres (One who has attained
 ight Bhimikis or stages of advance out of thirteen) who
 had fallen back. Hence was it, that even the Buddhas found
 it dificult to subdue him, not to count the world of Devas
 and men, Then, Vajraptini manifested stil greater divine
  powers of every imaginable desorption, and all the Buddhas
 ‘and Bodhissttvas fixed their abodes on the greatly enlarged
  and distended body of the Riza. ‘The latter being unable
to bear the agony of this prosaure, roared with pain,
     “Come quick         to the reso, O my fellowes, who inhabit
             tho ton dinections
       ‘To tho right and left of the SkalLlike Mansion
      ‘And those who live in the gardens and the oxchards,
       ‘Yakshas, Rakaberas, and Pretas millions in number,
             ‘advance to the rescue at once.
       0 ye followers and adherents of the Rutra, who dwell in
            ‘the twenty-four places, and countries
       ‘Numbering      millions and tens of million, who have sworn
            ellegiance to me
      And promisedto serve me faithfully,           and yo from the
            flimitable spaces in every direction
      Fil the heavens and the earth with your innumerable hosts
     And all in one body strike (at the foo) with the weapons
            in your hands, sounding the bettle ery
      Om-rulw-rlu.”
                                    8
                      MATAM RUTRA
      ‘Though he uttered these commands, there         was none to
 obey him, Everyone surrendered to Bhogavin Vajcar
 Horuka, Thue all the subordinates of the Rutra, the thirty-
 ‘two Dikinis, the seven Métrikis, and the four “Sisters,”
 (Gringbats), the eight Furies (Bermas or flaming one),
 the eight Genii spirits or attendants on the Devatts) and the
 sixty-four Messengers all came over to the Heruka and
 the Divine offepring (the Krodla-Bhairava) took upon
hhimeeli the duty of serving the food of the Deities,
       (This the Deity umually invoked waen any puriicetion
 ‘and religious contrition has to be peeformed or dove. By
 thio itis coon that his undertaking to earvo the food of the
Deities means purifying       and aboolving the sins of the Rutra.)
       ‘Vajropling, producing ten divine beings of the terrific
 type (Krodhabhairava), gave a Phurpo (triangular shaped
dagger) to each of them, and commanded them to go and
 destroy the Rutee and. his, party. ‘Thereupon Hayegriva
 came agein, and neighed three times; upon hearing which
 ‘sound,    the entire host of the Rutra were seized with   a panic
 ‘and all wore subdued. Then Black Salvation’ (Tharpe-
 Nagpo) and his followers were rendered powerless and help-
 less: humbled and quite submissive. So thoy surrendered
 ‘heir own homes, personal omaments, end lives, and uttored
 ‘these words of entreaty
     “Obeisance to Thee, 0, Thou eld of the Buddhas!
          influence,
       Obeisance to Thee, O, Thou who dost eause. Karma to
          bear éruit.
      1 and all of us having sown previous evil Karma
       ‘Are now reaping the fruits thereof, which all indeed
          may see.
       Our futare depends on what we have done now ;
       ‘Karma follows us, as inexorably as the shadow does,
           the body.
       ‘veryoue must taste the frit of what each has himselt
          done.
                                  a9
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       ‘ven should one repent, and bo sorry for his deods
       ‘There is no help for him as Karma cannot be avoided.
       So we who axe destinedby Karma to drink the bittor
          up to the very dregs,
       We do therefore offer up our bodiesto serve      as the
          cushion of Tay footstool.
       Pray accept them as such.’
       Having said so, they laid themselves prostrate, and
 from this originates the symbolism of every Deity having
 ‘8 Rutrm undementh his feet. ‘Then the vassal Chiels of the
 Frat submitted their prayers—
      “We have no claimto sit in the middle,
      [Be pleased to place us at the extremitigs of the Man-
          alas,
      We have     no right, to,detand.ofthe best of the ban-
          quets
      Wo pray’ to be favonted swith the Teavings, and the
          regs of food and drink
      ‘Henceforth, we are Your subjects, and will nver disobey
          ‘Your commands
      We will obey You in whatever You are pleased to
          command.
      ‘As a loving mother i attracted towards her son,
      Bo aball we, too, be surely dravn near those who
          remind us of this oath of allegianes.
      ‘Thus did they toke the ooth of llegiance, ‘Then
 the Holder of the Mysteries, the Glovious One Vajrapni,
piesced the heart of the prostrate Rutea with the Phurpa
dagger and abvolved him. AU his Kérnsk sins and his
Passions (Klesha) were sls immedistely absolved. ‘Then
power was conferred on him, and vows were laid on him,
and the waler of Faith was poured on him. His body,
speech and mind were blested and consecrated towards
Divine Service, and the Darje of Faith was laid on the
head, throst and heart. ‘Thenceforward he was em-
powered to be the Guardian of the Faith, and named
                                630
                    MATAM RUTRA
  the Good daek One, and his secret name conferred at the
  Thitiation vas Mab@kila, ‘Thus as ho inckuded in the
  assombly of the Vajuydna Deities. Finally, it was revealed
 to him that he would become a Buddha, by the name of
 ‘Thalwai-Wangpo (the Lord of Ashes) in the World called
 ‘Kod-pe-liundrup (that is “self-produced”” or “made-all-
 at-once”). ‘Then the Rutma’s desd body was thrown on
 this Jambudvipa, where it fell on its back. The head
 fall on Sinhala (Ceylon), the zigkt erm ond hand apon the
 "hogar (?) comtey and the left hand on Le (Ladake
 country). ‘The right leg fall on Nepal, and the left on
 Kashmis. ‘he entrails fell over Zahor. Ube beast fll on
 Urgyen (Cabul), and the Tinga on Magedha, ‘These form
 tho sight chief countries. Thus the eight Matckts of the
‘ight Sthinas, headed by Goarimé snd others: the eight
 natural StOpes headed by Potala; the eight occult powers,
 ‘which fascinate; the eight guardians (ome), who enchant;
 the eight great trees, the eight great realm-protactom
 (Shing-kyong), the cight lakes, the eight great Naga sprit,
 the sight clouds, and. the eight great: Dikpalas (Chyogs
lkyong ot Protectors of the Directions) as well as the eight
 seat cemotaree originated,
      ‘With the end ofthe sith Chepter of tho Golden Roassy
 is concluded the’ account of the Vajraytna Dovatis who
 aypeared to aid in tho conquest of baman Egoism which
 had manifested itself in terible fom in the person of the
 great Rutra, As all but the fully pare have in them Rutra
 clements, they are enjoined in Vajrayina to follow the
 ‘methods of expurgation there revesled




                            631
                         Cuapren XIX.
                    KUNDALINI SHAKTI.
                               (Yoos,)
       ‘HE word ‘Yoga’ comes rom the root “Yuj” which
          means “to join” and, in its spiritual sense, it ia that,
 process by which the human spirit is brought into near
 ‘and conscious communion with, or is merged in, the Divine
 Spirit, according as the nature of the human spit is held
 ‘oo be separate from (Dvaita, Vishishtadvaite) or one with
 (Advuita) tho Divine Spieit. As, according to Shikta doo-
 ‘rine, with which alone we are concemed, the latter pro-
 position is affirmed, Yoga is that process by which the
 ‘dentty ofthe two (Jivatma and Pararnttmt),— Which identity
 exerin fact exists,—ip realized by the Yogl or practitioner of
 ‘Yoga. It is do realized beoguse the Spirit has then pieroed
‘through the veil of May which as mind and matter obscures
 this Imowledge from itself. ‘The meant by which this is
 achiaved is the Yoga process which liberates from Mayi.
 So the Gheranda Sambiti, 2 Hathayoge toate of the
 ‘Tintrik school, ays (Chap. 5): “There is no bond equal in
 strength to Mays, and no power greater to destroy that
 ond than Yoga.” From an Advaita or “Nouitio stand-
 point, Yoga in the sense of « final union is inapplicable,
 for union implies a dualism of the Divine and Human
 spirit. Insuch case, it denotes the process rather than the
 result, Whon the two are regarded as distinct, Yore may
 apply to both A person who practises Yoga is called a
      ogi”. According  to Tucian notions all are not competent
 (Adhikitd) to attempt Yoga; only a very few are One
 sust, in this or in other lives, “have rst gone through
 Koma or ritual, and UpAsant or devotional, worsbip and
 ‘obtained the fruit thereof, namely, a pure mind (Chitte-
 siudali). ‘This Sansitit ‘term does not merely mean a
                                 632
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
tmind free from sexcal impurity, as an English reader might
 suppose, ‘The attainment of this and ether good qualities
is the ABC of Btdhand, A pemon may have & pure
 ‘mind in this wenso and yet be whelly incapeble of Yorn.
 Chitiashudahi consists not merely in moral parity of every
 kind, but in knowledge, detachment, ospacity for pure
 intellectual functioning, sttention, meditation end s0 forth
 ‘When, byKarms and Upiean6, the mind is brought +0 this
 point and when, in the cam of Veddntik Yoga, there is
Alspassion and detachment from the warld and ita dosiros,
 ‘ton the Yoga pat is open for the realization  of Tattvajnina,
 ‘tbat is ultimste Truth, Very few persons indeed are com-
 ‘potent for Yoga in ite higher forms. The majority should
seak their advancement along the path of ritual and devotion.
      There are four main forms. of Yous, according to a
 common computation, namely, Mantrayogs, Hathayogs,
 Laysyogs, and Réjayogy, the general charnceristis of which
 hhsve been descibed in “Tho Serpent Power”. It is only
 necessary hero to note that Kundaltyoga is Laye-yous.
 ‘The Bighth Chapter of the Sammohans Tentza, however,
 speaks of five kinds, namely, Joins, Réje, Taye, Hatha, and
 ‘Mantra, ond mentionsas five aspeotaof the spiritual lif,
Dharma, Kriya, Bhivo, Jndna,and Yoon; Mantrayoza being
‘nid to be of treo kinds, according as itis pursued along. the
poth of Kriya or Bhiva, Many forms of Yoga are in fact
 ‘mentioned in the Books There are seven Sidhenis of
 Yoga, namely, Shatkarme, Keane, Mnudri, Protyabaca,
 Prindydma, Dhyne, and Samédhi, Which are cleansing of
 ‘the body, seat, postures for gymnastic and Yoga purposes
 the abstraction of the senses fom their objects, breath
 control (the celabrated Prindytma), meditation, and eostasy,
 hich is of two kinds, imperfect (Savikalpa) in which
 dualism is not wholly overccme, and perfect (Nirvikalpa)
 hich is oomplete Monit experience —“Abam Brahmas”,
 “Tem the Brhman "—e Imowledge in the sense of
 realization which, itis to be observed, does not produce
                               633,
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  Liberation (Mfokaba) but i Liberation iti. ‘The Samadi
  of Laye-yogn is said to bo Saviklpasamidhi, end that of
  complete Raja-yoge is said to be Nirvikalpasamadhi, The
 ‘arnt four processes are physical and the last tree mental
  and supramental (sec Gheranda Samhiti Upadesha, 1).
 By these soven processes respectively certain qualities are
 ‘gained, namely, purity (Shodhana), firmness and strength
 (Dridhata), fortimde (Sthinatd), steadiness (Dhairya), light-
 ness (Lghava), realization (Pratyaksha), and detachment
 leading to Liberation (Nisliptattva)
       ‘What is Imown os the eight-limbed Yoga (Ashttnge-
 yoga) contains five of the sbove Sidhants (Asana, Print
 ‘yama, Pratythira, Dhyne, and Samidhi) end threo others,
namely, Yama or self-control by way of chastity, temperance,
 avoidance of harm (Ahimsd) and other vistues, Niyams oF
 religious observances, charity andeo forth, with Devotion to
 tthe Losi (Tshvara-pranidhina), and Dhtveng, the fixing of
‘the internal organ on its subject as directed in the Yogo
 practice. For further details, I refer the reader to my in-
  troduction to the work entitled “The Serpent Power”
  (2nd Bd., 1928). Here I. will only deal shortly with
 ‘Laya-yogn or the arousing of Kundalint Shokti, « subject
  of the highest importanos in. the ‘Tantra Shastra, end
 ‘without some kmowiedge of which much of its ritual will
 not be understood. I cannot here enter into all the details
 ‘which demand a lengthy expesition, and which 1 heve
 givenin the Introduction to the two Sansinit works
 called Shatchskranirdpans, and Péduletpanchaka translat-
 ed in the volume, “Tho Serpent Power” which deals with
 Kandaliné    Shakti and tho piercing by Her of the six
 bodily centres or Chakras. The general principle and
 meaning of this Yoge law never yet been published, and
 the present Chapter is devoted to a short summary of
 ‘these two points only.
       All the world (I speck, of course, of those interested in
 such subjects) is beginning to speak of Kundalint Shekti,
                               634
                  KUNDALINI SHAKTI
  “cette fameuso Kundslint” an a Fronch friend of mine calls
   Her, ‘There is considerable tall about the Chakras and the
  Serpent Power but lac of undarstanding as to what they
  mean, This,     as usual, is sought to be covered by an air of
  mystery, mystical miste, and sometimes the attitude; "I
should much like to tall you if only I were sllowed       to give
  it out.” A silly Indian boast of which I Intely read is, “I
  have the key and I keep it.” Those who relly have the
key to anything are superior men, above boasting.“ Myst-
  cism,”” which ig often confused thinking, is also a fertile
  evil of humbug. Ido not, of course, speak of true Myat-
  ism, Liko oll other matters in this Indian Shfatra. the
  basis of this Yoga is essentially rational. Tts thought, lke
  ‘that of the ancients generally, whether of East or West,
‘has in generel the form and brilliance of a cut gem. Tt is
this quality which makes it 0 dear to some of those who
  have hed   to wede through te slush    of much modem thought
 and literature. No sttampt has hitherto been made to
  explain the general principles which underlie it. This
form of Yoga is on opplication of tho gorerel principles
relating to Shakti with which I have slzeady dealt. The
 subject bas both « theoretical and practical aspect. The
latter is concerned with the teaching of the method in such
  a way that the aspirant may give effect to it. ‘This cannot
 be Jeszat from books but only from the Gura who has himself
  successfully practised this Yogs.- Apart from difficulties,
 inherent in writen explanations, it cannot be practically
 learnt from hooks, because the camying ont of the method
 is afected by the natare and capacity of the SAdhaka and
  what takee place duringhia Sidhand. Further, though
  some general features of the method have been explained
‘to me, I hsve had no practical experience myself of this
  Power. I am not spesking as a Yog! in this method, which
 Tam mob; but a3 one who has read and studied the
 Shistee on this matter, and has hed the further advantage
‘of some oral explanation      whichs have enabled ime to better
                                 635
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA.
  understand it I have dealt with this practical sido, oo far as
 itis possible to me, in my work on “The Serpent Power".
 ‘Even so far as the matter can be dealt with in vriting, T
  cannot, within the limite of such a paper as cis, deal with
 it in any way fully. A detailed description of the Chakras
 ‘and their sgniicance cannotbe attemptad here. I refer the
 render to the work entitled “The Serpent Power” (eeoond
 Eeition). What I wish to do is to treat the subjeot on the
 ‘brondest lines possible and to oxplain the. fondamental
 ppinciples which underlis this Yoga method. Tt is because
 ‘these are not understood that there is mach confused think-
  ing and misty, if not mysticel, tell upon the subject. How
 ‘many persons, for instance, can correctly answer thequestion,
  “Wat is Kundalini Shakti” One may be told that it
 is s Power or Shakti; thabit is coiled like a serpent in the
 MMlddhéra ; and. that it wakened end goes up through
 ‘the Chakras to the Sahsscira: > But what, Shalt is it?
  Why, again, isi coiled like a serpent + Whatis the meaning
of this! Whst ie the nature of the Power? Whyis it
 in the MélAdhixe 1 What isthe mesning of “awakening”
 ‘the power? Whyif awakened choold it go up? Whet
 ‘aro the Chakros? Ibis easy to say that they are regionsor
 Totuses. What are they in-thomselves? Why have eseh
of the lotuses a diffrent: number of petals? Whatis a
  petal? What and why are the Latters” on them ? What
is the effectof going     to the Sabasrirm : and how dons thet
‘fit come about t These and other similar questions require
  fn answer before this form of Yoga oan be understood.
  T have ssid something os to the Letters in the chaptars on
  Shatios Mantra and Varnamélt, With these ad with other
  general questions, rether than with the details of the six
  ‘Chakras, set forth in ‘Ihe Serpent Power” I will hore deal,
       In the frst place, it isneceesaryto remember the funds-
  mental principle of the Tantra Shastra to which I have
  aleedy referred, vis, that man is a microcosm (Kehudre-
  ‘brabminds). Whatever exists in the outer universe exists
                                636
                  KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 in him, All tho Tattwas and the worlds ar within him
 tnd 20 are the supreme Shiva Shula,
       ‘The body may be divided into  two main parts, ramely,
 the head and trunk on onehand, and the logs on the other,
In man, the centre of the body isbetween thete two, at the
 bse of the spine where tho loge begin. Supporting the
 frank and throughout the whole body there is tho spinal
 cord This is the axis of the body, just as Mount Mera is
 the axis of the earth. Hence man's spine is called Mera-
 onda, the Mera or axisstafl, The loge and foot aro gross
 matter which show less sigos of conscionmess than the
 ‘tank with ite spinal white end grey matter; which trunk
 iteelf is grestiy subordinate in this respect to the head
 ‘containing the organ of mind, or physicel brain, with ite
 ‘white and grey msttar,» The position of the white and
 grey matter in the head and spinal column respectively
ae reversed. ‘The body and logs below the centre are
 ‘the seven lower or nether worlds upheld by the sustaining
 Shaktis of the universe. From the centre upwards, con-
 scioumess more freely ‘manifests through the spinal and
 cerebral centres, Hero there aro the seven upper regions
 or Lokas, o term which Satyinands in his commentary on
 Isha Upsnishad says, reans“whstare sven” (Lokyante),
 ‘that is, experianced and ore hence the fruits of Karma in
 the form of partioular re-birth, These regions, namely,
 Bhih, Bhuvah, Svab, Tapah, Jana, Mahab, and Satya Lokas
 correspond with the six centres; fve in the trunk, the
sixth in the lower cerebral centze ; and the seventh in the
 upper Brain or Satyaloka, the abode of the supreme Shiva
 Shakti
       ‘The six centres are the Méladhim or roct-upport
 situate    ot the dbase of the spinal column in a position
 midway ia the perineum between the root of the genitels
 and tho anus, Above it,in the region of the genitals,
  ‘abdomen, heart, chess or throat and in the forehead be:
  ‘broen the two eyes (Bhrimadhye) are the Syidhishthina,
                              ou
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
‘Maniptre, Anibata, Vishadiha and Ajnk Chakras or
Totuses (Padma) rexpectively. ‘These are the chief centres,
‘though the books speak of others such as the Leland and
‘Manas and Soma Chakras. In fact, in the Advaita Mar-
‘anda, a modern Sanskrit book by the late Gura of the
Mabiréja of Kashmir, some fity Chslras and Adhiras are
‘mentioned: though the six stated are the chief upon whieh
all noooants agree. And oo itis suid, “How can there be
any Siddhi for him who knows not the six Chakras, the
sixteen Adbiras, the five Ethers and the three Lingas in
his own body?” ‘Tho soventis rogio’ boyond the Chaleas
is the upper brain, the highest centre of manifestation of
 Conseiourness in the body and therefore the sbode af the
 supreme Shiva-Shakti, When “abode” is said, it is not
 ‘meant, of course, that te Supreme is there placed in the
 sense of our “placing”, mately, it is there and not
 lsewhere. ‘The Supreme ie never localized whilst ite maui-
 festations are. Tt is everywhere both within and without
 ‘the body, but itis aid to be in the Sahaarima, because itis
‘hore that the Supremte Shiva Shakti is realized. And this
 smitst be 20, because consciousness is realized by entering
 in and pessing theough the highest manifestation of mind,
 ‘the Settvamayl Budchi, above and leyond which is Chit
 ‘and Chideipint Shakti themselves. From their Shiva-
 Shakti Tettva aspec          t Mind in its form as Buda,
                        are evolved
 Abamkma, Manas and associated senses (Indtiyes) below    the
 ‘entre of which isin and above the Ajnd Chakra and
 tho Sshasrira. Fram Ahamkfra proceed the Tanmatres or
 fzonrals of the ense-partcalars whick evolve the five forms
 ff sensible matter (Bite), namely, Heisha (*Rther"),
 ‘Vayu ("iz"), Agai ("Bre"), Apas (" Water”), and Prthivt
 ("Barth"), ‘The Boglsh translation given of these terms
 ‘do not imply that the Bhitas are the same as the English
 clements of ir, fire, water, carth, ‘The terms indicate
 ‘varying degreesof matier from the ethereal to the solid.
 ‘Thus Prithivi or earth is any matter in the Prithivi state;
                                638
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 that is, which muy bo vensed by the Tnasiya of smell. Mind
 and matter pervade the whole body. But there are ventos
 therein in which they are predominant. ‘Thus Ajad is a
 centre of mind, and the five lower Chakets are centres of
 ‘the five Bhitas; Viskudiha of Akisha, Anihata of Vaya,
 Maniptra of Agni, Svidbishthina of Apas, end M@lRdhira
 of Prithivi.
       In short, man asa miorooosmn is the all-parvading Spirit
 (hich most parely manifeste in the Sebasrira) vehicled by
 ‘Shaldi   in the form of Mind and Matterthe centree   of which
 are the eixth and following five Chakras respectively.
       ‘The six Chakras hove been identified with the following
 plexuses commencing from thelowest, the Méladhira :—"The
 Secrococoygeal plems, the Sacral plexus, the Solar plexus
 (hich forms the grost junetion of the right and lett aym-
 pathetic chains Id and Pingal8) with the osrebro-spinal
 ‘axis, Comneoted with this is the Lambar plexus. Then
 follows the Cardiac plerus (Anddata), Laryngeal plexus, and
 lastly the Ajni or cerebellum with its two lobes, and above
‘this the Manas Chalera or sensoriam with its six lobeo, the
 Soma-chelrra oF middle Corebrum, ond lastly the Sabaarira
 cor upper Osrebrum, ‘To some extent these localizations are
 yeb tentative, This statement may involve an erroneous
View of what the Chaleras really are, and is likely to produce
‘wrong notions concerning them in others. ‘The six Chaleras
 ‘themselves sre vital centres within the spinal column in the
 hits and grey matter there. They may, however, ond
 probably do, influence and governthe gross tract ontside the
 ‘pine in the bodily region lateral to, and co-extensivo with,
 ‘that section of the spinal column in which « particular
 centre is situated. The Chakras are ountres of Skalcti as
 Vital force, In other words, they are oentres of Prinaakalti
 manifested by Prinavayu ia the living body, the presiding
 ‘Devatis of which are names for the Universal Conseiousness
as It manifesta in the form of thote centres. ‘The Chakras
 are not perceptible to the gross sonses, whatever may be a
                                699
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘Yogi's powers to observe what is beyond the senses (Atfa-
 driye), Even if they were perceptible in the living body
 ‘which hey help to organize, they disppoar with the dis
 integration of organism at death,
       In an article on “The Physical Exrors of Hinduism”,
 (Caleutia   Review, X1, 436-40) it was said:—*Tt would
 indeed excita the surprise of our readars to hear that the
 Hindus, who would not even touch a dead body, much less
 discot it (which ia incorrect, should possess any anstomical
 Iknowledge   at al. Tbie the Tantra that farnish us with
 some extraordinary pieces of information concerning the
 Fpuman body.....But of all the Hindu       Shistras extant, the
 ‘Tantras lio i the gueatestchaourity....The Tntyk theory,
 con which the wellknown Yoga called ‘Shatchalaabbed”
 i founded, mappo             tes
                        te exstonce  of six main internal organs,
‘alld Chakra       or Padmas, all Bearing special resemblance
 to that famous flower, the lotus, ‘These are placed one
 above the other, and oomnected by three imaginary chains,
 the exblems of the Ganges, che VamtnA, and the Sana
  vs. Such isthe obstinacy with which the Hindus adoro
 to thes erroneous notions, that, ven when we show them
 Dy sclual dissection the nowesistence of the iagiaary
 ‘Chakras in the human body, they will rather have recourse
  to exouses rovolting to common-sense than acknowledge
  the evidence of their own eyes. ‘They say, with a shame-
  leamess unparalleled, that these Padmas exist os long as a
 ‘man lives, but dissppeer the moment he dies.” This
 Alleged“ Shamelesaness” remindme ofthe story of dector
 ‘who tald my father “that be had performed many post-
 rmortems and had never yot discovered a soul.”
       ‘he petals of the lotuses vary being 4, 6, 10, 19, 16, 2
 respectively ; commencing from the Mélidhéra and ending
 with Ajo, ‘There are 60 in all, as are the letters of the
 alphabet which ae in the petala; that is, the Matrkis are
 associated with the Tabivas since both are products of
 the sume creative Cosmic Process manifesting either as
                               640
                   KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 physiological or psychological function Tt is noteworthy
 ‘that the number of the petals is that of the letters leaving
 ut either Kesha or the Second La, and that these 50-multi
 plied by 20 are in the 1000 petalsofthe Sabasrira, a number
 ‘which i probably only indicative of multitude and magni
 tude,
       Bot why, itmay be asked,do the petals vary in murnbert
 Why, for instance, are there 4'in the Miladhira and 6 in the
 Svidhishthina ‘The answer given is chat the number of
 petals in any Chale js determined by the mumber and
 ‘postion of the Nadie or Yoga “nerves” around that Chaka.
 ‘Thus, four Nadis surrcunding and passing through the vital
 movements of the Milidhira Chakra give it the appesrance
 of s lotus of four petals. ‘The petals are thus configurations
 made by the position of Nadis at eny particular centre.
‘These Nadia are not those which are known to the Vaidya
 of Medical Shistras. ‘The latier are gross physical nerves.
 [But the former here spoken of are called Yoga-Nadis and
 are subtle channels (Vivara) along which the Prinik currents
 flow. The term Nadi-comes from the root “Nad’” which
 ‘means motion. ‘The body is filled with an uncountable
 number     of Nadia, If thoy were revealed to the eye the
 body would present the appoarance of = highly compli-
 cated chart of ocean currents, Suporficially the water
 seems one and the same, But examination shows that it,
 is moving with vaxying degrees of force in all directions.
 ‘All these lotuses exist in the spinal column.
      ‘An Indianphysician and Sankritist     has, in the Guy's
 Hospital Gazette, expressed the opinion that better anatomy
is given in the Tanteas than in the purely medical works of
 the Hindus. I Lave attempted elsewhere to oo-relate
 present and ancient anatomy and physiology. I can,
 owever, only mention here some salient gives      points, first
 pointing out that the Shivsevarodaya Shastra             promi
 hnence to nerve centzes and nerve eurrents (Vayu) and their
 Control, such teaching being for the purpose of worship
                               642
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  (Dptsand) and Yogs, ‘The sims and object of the two
 Shastras axe not the seme.
        ‘The Merudanda is the vertebral column, Western
  Anatomy divides it into five regions ; and itis to be noted
  jn ooroboretion of the theory here exposed that these cor-
  respond with the regions in which the five Chakras are
  sitnate. ‘The central spinal system comprises the brain
  fr enoephalon contained within the akuil (in which aro tho
 Lalani, Ajnd, Manas, Soma Chakras ond the Schesréra);
 ‘a also the spinal cord extending from the upper border of
 the Atlas below the cerebellum and descending to the
 second lumbar veriabra where it tapers to ® point called
the {ilu terminate, Within the spine is the cord, « com-
 pound of gzy and white brain matter, in which are the
 five lower Chalmas, It is noteworthy that the lum trmi-
 role was formerly thonght to be mere fibrous éond, an un-
 suitable vehicle, one might think, for the Maltdira Chakra
 fand Kundalt Shakti, Recent miozoseopio. investigations
 have, however, disclosed the existonce of highly sensitive
 grey matter in the lum terminale which represents the
 ‘position of the Miladhéra Advordingto Wester science,
‘he spinal cord is not merely a conductor between the
 periphery and the centres of sexsution end volition, but
 is also an independent centre or group of centres, The
Sushumni i a Nadt in the centre of the spinal column.
  ts base is called the Brahmadvira or Gate of Brahman.
  ‘As regards the physiological relations of the Chakras all
  ‘that can be said with any degree of certainty is that the
  four above the Maladhéra have relation to the genito-ex-
  cretory, digestive, cardiac and respiratory fonctions, and
 ‘that the two upper centres, the Ajni (with associated
  Chakras) aud the Sabasrira denote various forms of its
  cerebrel activity ending in the repose of Pure Consciousness
‘therein gained through      Youu. ‘The Nedls on each side
  called Ida and Pingnla are the left and right sympathetic
  cords crossing the central eclumn from one side to the other,
                                642
                KUNDALINI SHAKTI
  raking ab the Ajut with the Sushumnd a three-fold knot
  called Trivent which is said to be the spot in the Medulla
  ‘where the eympethotic cords join together ard whence they
 take their crigin—these Nails together with the two-lobed
 ind and the Sushumaf forming the figure of the Caduceus
of the God Mercury which i aid by some to represent them
       How then does this Yoga compare with others ¢
       Tt will now be askod what ere the goueral principles
 ‘which undedic the Yoga practice above desctibed. How is
 it that the rousing of Kundalint Shakti and her Union with
 Bhiva effect the state of exstatio union (Samédhi) and
 spirivual experionce which is alleged. he reader who has
 understood the genersl principles recorded in the previous
 essays should, if he has not already divined it, readily
 appreciate the enawer here. given.
       In the first plc, thore are two iain lines of Yoga,
 namely, Dhyne or BbGvaxd ogo and. Kundalt Yoge, the
subject of this work; and there is a marked diference
between    the two. The fist classof Yoga is that in which
ecstasy (Gemédhi) is attained by intellective processes
(Kriyé-jnins) of meditation and the like, with the aid, it
ray be, of aurillary processes of Mantra or Hatha Yoga
(other than the rousing of Kundalini Shalei) and by detach-
rent from the world ; the second stands spart as that por-
tion of Hatha Yoga in which, though intellective processes
aro not neglected, the oreative and sustaining Shakti of the
 whole body is actually aud traly united with the Tord
 Consciousness, ‘The Yog! makes Her introduce him to Her
‘Lord, nd enjoys the bliss of union through Her. Though it
is he who arouses Her, itis She who gives Jnina, for She is
Herself that, The Dhyinayogi gains what acquaintance
 with the supreme stato his own meditative powers can give
 him and knows aot the enjoyment of union with Shiva in
 and through his fundamental Bedy-Power. ‘The two forms
 cof Yoga difer beth as to methed and result. ‘The Hatha-
 yori regards his Yoga and ite fruit     as the highest. ‘The
                              643
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Tninayogt may think’ similsly of his own, Kundalini
 is so renowned that many seck to mow Her. Having
studied the theory of this Yous, I heve been often aaked
 “Whether one can get on without it.” The answeris, “It
 depends upon what you are looking for.” Tf you want to
 rouse Kundalini Shaitti to enjoy the bliss of union of Shive
 and Shakti through Her and to gain tho accompanying
 Povers (Sidahi), i is obvious thet this end can enly, if at
      be achieved by the Yoga here described. But   if Libers-
 tion is sought without desire for union throvgh Kundalt
 then such Yoge is not necessary ; for Liberation may be
 obtained by pure Jnéoayoga through detachment, the
exerciee, and then the stilling of the mind, without any
 reference to the central Bodily-Power at all. Tnstend of
setting out in and from the world ta unite with Shiva, the
 Tninayogh, to atéain this reslt, detaches himself from the
  world, ‘The one is the path of enjoyment and the other of
 ‘seceticiom. Samddhi may also be obtained on the path of
 devotion (Bhakti) as.on thst-of knowledge, Indeod, the
  highest devotion (Parabbakti) is not different from know-
 edge. Both are realization, But, whilst Liberation (Mukti)
  is attainabla by either method, there are other marked
  differences between the two. A Dhyinayogt should not
neglect his body Imowing that as he is both mind and
‘matter each reacts, the one upon the other. Neglector
 ‘mere mortification of the body is more apt to produce dis-
 ordered imagination than « true spizitaal éxperience. He
 ‘snot concemed, however, withthe body in the sense   that the
 ‘Hathayog! is. Tt is possible to be « suocessfal DhySnayogt
 ‘and yet to be weak in body and healt, sick, and short-lived.
 His body and not he himself determines when he shall dis,
 ‘He cannot die at will. When he is in Sumtdhi, Kundali
 Shaldi is stil sleeping in the Mélidhara and none of the
 physical symptoms and peychical bliss, or powers (Sida)
 Gescribed as accompanying Her rousiag are observed in his
 cease, ‘The ostasis which he calls “Liberstion while yet
                             644
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 living” (Jivanmoulet) is not @ sate like thab of rel Libera
 tion. He may be still subject to suflering body from which
 hae escapes only at death, when, i at all, he is liberated. His
ccstasy is in the nature of a meditation which pastes into
 the Void (Bhivanasamtdh) effected through negation of
 all thoughtform (Chitta-veiti) and detachment from the
 ‘world; s comparatively negative prooess' in whish the
 positive act of raising the central power of the body takes
 no part. By hie eforo the mind, which is » product of
 Kundalint a= Puaksti Shakti, together with ite worldly
 desies is stilled so that the veil produced by mental fano-
 tioning is. removed from Consciousness. In Layayoga,
 Kundalint Herself, when roused by the Yogt (for such rousing
 is his act and pert), ackicvesfor him this iumination,
       ‘But why, it may be asked, shonld one trouble over the
 body and its Central Power, the. more particularly an
 ‘hore ase unurusl risks and ‘dificulties involved? ‘The
 answer has been already given—alleged completeness and
 certainty of realization through the agency of the Power
 ‘which is knowledge itselt JnAnaripé Shalt), an interme-
 inte acquisition of Powers (Sida), and intermediste and
 final enjoyment. ‘This answer may, however, be usefully
 developed as a fundamental principle of the Shalta
 antes,
       ‘The Shilkta Tantra claims to give both Enjoyment
 (Bhukti) in the world and Liberation (Afulti) from
all worlds, This claim is based on a profoundly true
  principle, given Advaitavada as a basis, If the ultimate
 reality is the One which exists in two aspects of quiescent
 ‘enjoyment of the Self, in liberation from all form and active
 ‘enjoyment of objotts, that is, as pure sprit and spit in
 ‘matier, then © complete union with Reality demands such,
  unity  in both of Tts aspects, Tt must be known beth “‘here””
  (Tha) and “there"” (Asmotra), When rightly apprehended
  ‘and pructied, there is tenth in the doctrine which toaches
  that man should make the best of both worlds. ‘There is
                                 645
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 no real incompatibility between the two, provided action
 is taken in conformity with the universal law of maniiest-
 ation. Tt is held to be false texching that happiness here-
 after cen only be had by absence of enjoyment now, or in
 Aeliberstely soughtfor suffering and mortification. Tt is
 the one Shiva who is the Supreme Blissful Experience and
 ‘who appears in the fomn of man with a life of mingled ples
 ste and pain, Both happiness here and the bias of Liber-
 ation hore and herotfter may be attained, if the identity of
 these Shivas be realized in every haman ech ‘This will be
 achieved by making every human fonction, withoutexeeption,
 a religious act of sacrifice and worship (Yajaa). In the
 ‘ancient Vaidik ritual, enjoyment by way of food and drink
 was preceded and accompanied by ceremonial sacrifice and
 ritual. Sach enjoyment waste fruit of the sacrifice and
the gift of the Devas, At a higher stage in the life of a
 Siddhakn, itis ofered to the One from ‘hom all gifts come
 ‘and of whom the Devatie cco inferior limited forms But
 this offering abo involves a dualism from which the highest
 Monistic (Advaita) Sidhand of the Shikta Tantra is free.
 ‘Here the individual life end the worldlife are known ss
 ‘one, And so the Tinteik Sicha, when eating or drinking
  or falling any other of the natural functions of the body
 does so, saying and believing, Shivolham, “I am Shiva”,
 Bhairavo'bam, “I am Bhairava”, “‘S4’ham”, “I am She”.
 Tt is not merely the seperate individual who thus acts and
 fenjoys, It is Shiva who does so in and dough him. Suoh
 fan one recognizes, as has been well said, that his life and
 the play ofall its actvitios are nota thing apest, tobe hold
 and pursued egotisticaly for its and hie own separate ake,
 tas though enjoyment vas something to be flehed from life
 by his own unaided strength and with a sense of separaved-
 ness; ut his life and all is activities are conceived a8 part
 of the Divine action in nature- Shakti manifesting and
 ‘operating in the fonm of man, He realizes in the pulsing
 beet of his heart the rhythm which throbs through and is
                               546
                  KUNDALINI SHAKTI
‘tho sign of the Univeral       Life, ‘To nogloct or to deay the
 rnceds of the body,to think of it as something      not divine, is
 to neglect and deny the greater life of whick it is a past
 and to falsify the greet dootrine of the unity of all and of
 the ultimate identity of Matter and Spivit. Governed by
 such « concept, even the lowiiest physical needs tal on a
cosmic significance. The body is Shakti, Its nesisare
 Shakti's needs; when man enjoys, itis Shakti who enjoys
 ‘through him, In all be sees anc does itis the Mothar who
 Jooks and acts. “His eyea and hands are Her. The whole
 body and all ite functions are Her manifestation. To fully
rilizo Har as such is to perfoct thie particular manifesta-
 tion of Hers which is himself, Man when seeking to be the
‘master of himself seks ao on all the planes to be. physical,
 mental    and spiritual; nor oan they be severed, for they are all
 related, being but difloring aspect of the one all-perveding
 Conscicumness, Whois, the more divine he whe neglects
sand spurns the body or mind that he may attain some fan-
 cied spiritual superiority, or he who rightly cherishes both
es forms ofthe ne pit which they cote | Realirtian
in more speedily and truly attained by disoaming Spi
toa aa al being pit elves, SSE F feing rom and
casting these aside as being ether tnspirtual o illusory and
 impediments in the path. If not rightly conceived, they
 ‘may be impediments and the cause of fall; otherwise they
 become instruments of attainment; and whet others are
 there to hand! And so the Kuldmeva Tantre says, “By
 what men fll by that they vise.” When acts are done in
‘the sight feling and frame of mind (Bhiva,        thoee acte give
 ‘exjoyment (Bhukt), ond the repeated and prolonged Bhiva
 produces at Imgth that divine experience (Tattvejntna)
 ‘which  is Liberation. When the Mother is seen én all things,
Bho is at length realized as She who is Beyond       them all.
       ‘These general principles have their more frequent appli
 cation in the life of the world before entrance on the path
 fof Yoga proper. ‘The Yogs here described is, however, lao
                                  67
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  tn application of theve sume prinsipls, in co far as it is
  lined that thereby both Bhukti and Mukti are attained.
  Ordinarily, itis said, that where there is Yoga there         is no
  Bhoga (enjoyment) ; but‘in Kaula teaching, Yogs is Bhogs,
  ‘and Bhoga is Yogs, and tho world itself becomes the seat
  of Liberation (Yogo biogiyate, mokshiate sums).
       By the lower processes of Hathayoge it is sought to
 attain a perfect physical body which will also be # wholly
 fit instrument by which the mind mey function, A perfoot
 rind, again, approuches, and in Samidhi passes into, Pure
 Consciousness itself. ‘The Hathayogt thus seeks a. body
 which shall be as sirong as steel, healthy, fre from suffer
 fing and therefore longrlived. Master of the body he is,
 anaster of both life snd death. His lustrous form enjoys
the vitality    of youth... He lives as long as he has the will
to live and enjoy in the world of forms. His deatis hthe
 “death at will” (Iohehhd-mritys);       when making the great
 and wondertlly expressiv    e  gesture of   ditlution (Samshira-
 ‘mndrd) he grandly departs. But, maybe sid, the Hathe-
 ‘yogts do got sick and dic, Tn the fit place, the fall dsc-
 line is one of difficulty   and risk, and ean only be purmued
 wunder the guidance of a sled Gura. A» the Goraksha
 Ssmbits says, unaided and-unsuecesful practice may lead
  not only to disease but Geath. He who seeksto conquer the
 ‘Lord of Death incurs the risk, on failure, of a more speedy
 ‘conquest by Him. All who attempt this Yoga do not of
 ‘course succeed or meet with the same measure of success.
 ‘Those who fail not only incur the infirmities of ordinary
 men, but alio others bronght on by practices which have
 ‘ben il pursued or for which they are not St. Those again
 who do succeed, do x0 in varying degree. One may prolong
 his life to the sacred ago of 84, others to 100, others yet
 further. In theory atleast those who axe perfected (Sida)
 go from this plane when they will, All have not the exme
 ‘caporacit    opportuny
                       ity, through want   of will, bodily stcength,
for circumstance. All may not be willing or able to fellow
                                648
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 ‘the strict rules secessary for suovess, Nor does modeen
 life offer in general the opportunities for s0 complete a
 pysioal onlture: All men may not desize such a life or
 ray think the attainment of it nob worth the trouble in-
 valved. Some may wish to be rid of their body and that
 ts speodily as posible. It is therefore eaid that it is easier
 to gain Liberation thin Deathlesmess. The former may
 be had by unselfishness, detachment from the world, moral
 ‘and montal discipline, But to conquer death is harder
 ‘than this, for these qualities and acts will not alone avail
‘He who doesso conquer holds life in the hollow of one hand,
 ‘and if he be a successful (Siddha) Yogt, Liberation in the
 other. He hes Enjoyment and Liberation. He is the
 Emperor who is Master of the World and the Possessor of
 the Bliss which is beyond all worlds, » Therefore itis claimed.
 by the Hathayogt nt every Sidhand is inferir to Hatha-
   og.
       ‘The Hathayogi who works for Liberation does a0
 through the Yogs Sidhant here described which gives both
 Enjoyment and Liberation, Ab every centr to which he
rouses Kundalint he experiences «special form of bliss
 (Ananda) and gains special powers (Siddhi). Carrying Her
 to the Shiva of his cerebral eentre he enjoys the Supreme
 Bliss which in its netare is that of Liberation, ond which
whan esteblished in permanence       is Liberation itself on the
 loosening of Spirit and Body. She who “shines like o chain
 ‘of lights”, a lightning flash—in the centre of hia body in the
““Jmer Woman” to whom reference was made when it was
 said, “What need ave T of any outer woman? 1 have-an
 Tonee Woman within mysef.”” ‘The Vira (Heroic) Sidhaka,
 Iknovring himself es the embodiment of Shiva (Ghivo'bam),
‘unites with woman as the embodiment of Shakti on the
 physical plane, The Divya (Divine) Sidhake or Yogi
 unites within himself his own Principles, female and male,
 ‘which sre the “Heart ofthe Lord” (Hridayam Parameshitub)
 cor Shakti and Her Tord Consciousness or Shiva. It i
                                649
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
their union which is the mystic coition (Maithuna) of the
‘Vanteas, There are bvo forms of union (Sémarasya), mney,
the fist which is the gross (Sthila), or the anion of the
physical embodiments of the Supreme Consciousness; and
‘the second which is the subtle (Sikshma), or the union of
the quiescent and active principles in Conscioumess ite
Tt is the latter which is Liberation,
      Tastly, what, in a philosophical sense, is the naire
fof the process here dewribed 7 Shortly stated, nergy
(Bhakti) polarises itself into two forms, namely, static or
potential (Kundalini) and dynamic (the working forces
of the body as Prima). Behind all activity there is static
Yackground. ‘This stetc centre in the human body is the
centzal Serpent Powerin the MGladhara (Rootsupport), It
  the Power which is the static support (Adhtra) of the
whole body and all its moving Prinik forces. ‘This Centre
(Bendza) of Power is « gross form of Chit or Consciousness;
that is, in itself (Svardpa), it is Consciousness; and by
appearance it in a Power which, aa the highest form. of
‘Fore, is « manifestation of it, Just ao ther i a distinction
(hough iontval at baso) between tue supreme quiescent
 Consciouaness and Its. active Power (Shales): s0 wheo
Consciousness manifests as Buergy (Shakti, it possesses the
‘prin aspeots of potential and Kinetio Energy. There can
bbe no partition in fact of Reality. To the perfect eye of
the Siddha the process of Becoming is an sseription
(Adbyisa), To the imperfect eye of the Sidhaka, that is,
the aspirant for Siddhi (perfected accomplishment), to the
pict, which. is still toiling through the lower planes and
‘variously identifying itself with them, Becoming is tending
to appear and appearance i rwal. The Shilete Tantra is a
rendering of Vedintik Truth from this practial point of
‘view, and representa the world-process as polarization
in Consciousnoss itll. ‘This polarity aa it existe in, and
‘ag, the body is destroyed by Yogs which disturbs the
equilibrium of bodily consciousness, which consciousness is
                               650
                    KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 the result of the maintenance of these two poles. In the
 ‘human body the potential pole of Energy which is the
 Suprame Power is stirred to actioa, on which the moving
 foroes (dynamio Shalt) supported by it are drawn thereto,
 ‘and the whole dynamism thus engendered moves upward to
 unite with the quiescent Consciousness in the Highest Lotus.
       ‘There is a polarization of Shakti into two.forms—
 static and dynamic, In a correspondence I had with
 Professor Pramatha Natha Mulchyopidhyaya, on this subject,
 hho very well developed this point and brought forward
 ‘some suitable ustrations of it, of which T am glad to avail
 ‘myself of. He pointed out that, in the first place, in the
 ‘mind or experience this polarization or polarity is patent
 ‘to reflection: namely, the polarity between pure Chit and
the Stress whioh is involved)        in it, This Stress or Shakti
 develoye the mind through an infinityof forma and changes,
 themselves involved in the ‘pure unbounded Ether of
 Conssioumess, the Chidaleishe, This analysis exhibits the
primordial Shakti in the some two polar forme as before,
 statio and dyasmic. Here the polarity is most fundamental
 ‘and approaches sbsoluteness, though, of course, it is to
bbe remembered      that there is no absolute   rest except in pure
 Chit. Cosmic energy is in ant equilibrium which is relative
 and not absolute,
       Pasting from mind, let us take matter. The
 ftom of modern science has, as have already pointed
‘out, ceased to be an stom in the senso of an indivisible unit
 cf mater, According        to the electron theory, the so-called
 atom it a miniature universe resembling our solar system.
 At the centre of this atomic system we have & charge
 fof positive electricity round which a cloud of negative
 charges    called Blectrons revolve. ‘The positive and negative
charges hold each cther in check so that the atom is in
 ‘condition of equilibrated energy and dees not ordinarily
 break up, though it may do so on the dissociation which
 ia the characteristic of all matter, but which is co clearly
                                   651
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘manifest in radioactivity of radium. We have thus here
 ‘again « positive charge ab zest ab the contre, and negative
 cbagges in motion round about the centre, What is thus
 said sbout the atom applies to the whole coamio system and
 universe, In the world-system, the planets revolve round
 ‘the Sun, and that systam itzalfis probably (taken as a whole)
 4 moving mass round some other relatively static centre,
 until   ve arrive at the Brohme-bindu        which is the point
 of Absolute Rest, round which all forms revolve and by
which all are maintained. He has apily suggestod              other
 ‘Mstrations of the same process. ‘Thus, in the issues of the
 living body, the operative energy is polarized into two forms
 ‘of enorgy—-ansbolio and kataboli, the one tending to
hange and the other to conserve the tismes; the actaal
 ‘condition of the tissues being simply the resultant of thete
 ‘two co-eistant or concurrent activities, In the case, again,
of the impregnated ovum, Shakti is already presented in ite
 ‘two polar aapeta, namely,tie ovum (possibly      the static) and
‘he spermatazoon, the dynamic. The gem cell does not
 cease to be such. Tt eplitsinto two, one half, the somatic
cell gradually developing    itself into the bodyof the animal,
‘the other half remaining encased within the body practically
 unchanged and as the germplasm is transmitted in the
           ‘of reproduction to the ofiapring.
       In short, Shakti, when manifesting, divides itelé into
 ‘two polar aspects—statio and dynamic— which implics that
 you cannot have it in a dynamie form without at the same
‘ime having it in e statio form, much like the poles of a
 magnet. Tn eny given sphere of activityof foree, we must
 Ihave, aceording to the commie principle, a static buskground
 Shakti at reat or “coiled” oo the Tauttas say. This
 sciontiie truth is ilustrated in the figure of the Tantric
 Kall, The Divine Mother moves os the Kinetic Sha
on the breash of Sadishiva who       is the statio background of
 pure Chit which is actionless (Nishlaiya); the Gunamayt
 Mother being all activity.
                                 652
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
        ‘The Cosmic Shakti is the collectivity (Samaahti) in
relation to which the Kundali in particular bodies is the
 ‘Vyachti (individual) Shakti. The body is, as 1 have stated,
 ‘® microcosm (Kshudrsbrahménda). In’ the living body
 ‘thereis, therefore, the same polarizaof tion       which I have
 spoken. From the Mahikundal! the universe has sprung.
 In Her supreme form Ske is at rest, coiled zound and one
  (as Chidrtpin) with the Shivabinda, Sho is thon at rest.
  Sho noxt uncolls Here to manifest. Here the threo calls
  of which the Tantras      speek axe the three Gunas, aad the
‘three and a half cols to which the Kubjikt Tantra alludes
  are Pralaiti and its three Gunas together with the Vikitis.
  Her 50 ‘coils are the letters of the alphabet. As She goeson
  uuncoiing, the Tettvas ond the MAtriks, the Mothers of
the Varn                 from Het. She ia thus moving, and
                  issue a,
  continues even after creation to move in the Tattvas 80
  ‘rested. For a8 they are born of movement, they continue
  to move, The whole world (Jaget) os the Sansert tomm
  imple, is moving. Sho thus contiouss creatively active
  until Bho has evolved Prithvi, the lst of the Tastvaa Figst
‘She creates mind dnd then matter, This latter becomes
‘more and more dense. It has been suggested that. the
  Mabibbitas are the Densities of modem science :—Air
  density sssocinted with the maximum velocity of gravity ;
  Vine density associated with the velocity of light; Water
  ‘or fluid density sssociatgd with molecular velocity and the
   equatorial velocity of the Barth's rotation; and Rarth
   donsity, that of basalt associate  with dthe Newtonian velocity
   cof sound. However this be, it is plain that the Bhitas
   represe           nt densityof matte
               an increasing                       until it reaches
                                                             r
   its throe-dimensionsl solid form. When Shakti has created
 this last or Prithivi Tettva, whet is there further for
  Her to dot Nothing, She’ therefore, then again ress,
  Bho is aguin coiled, which means       thet She is st rest. “At
  rest”, again, means thet She assumes o static form. Shakti,
   however, is never exhausted, that is, emptied into any of
                                  653
              SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
ite forms, Therefore, Kundalt Shakti at this poiat is, 08
it were, the Shalt ft over (though yet v plenum) after tbe
Paithid, the last of the Bhitas ies been created. We
‘havo thus Mebflndall st rest os Chidrapint Shakti in the
Sahasvira, the point of absolute rest; sn then the body
in which the relative static contre is Kundall at rest, and
round this oentee the whoa of te hotly forces move. ‘They
sme Shalt, and so is Kupdalt Shakti, The diference between
‘he two i that they azo Shalt in opecifc diffrentsted
forms in movement; and Kundalt Shakti is wndiferentiated,
residaal Shalt as rest, tint is, coilad. She is cailed in the
‘Miladhtra, which means foulamental support, and which
in at the same tims the sxat of the Prithvi or fast solid
 Tattva and of the vesdual Shakti or Kundalnf. The body
sry, therefore, be compared to a magnet with two poles
 ‘The MélAchAry, in So fara itis the seat of Kundalf Shakti
 ‘comparatively gros form of Chit (being Chit-Shakti and
‘Mayi-Shakf) i the etatio pole in rlation to the rst of the
‘body which a dynamic. ‘The “working” that is the body
 necessarily presupposes ond fins such a statio support
 Thence the name MOiaihtra, In one sense the static Shakti
 at the Méladhira is necessarily co-eistent with the crenting
 and evolving Shakti of the ‘ody; because the dynamic
 fapect or pole can never be without its static connterpart.
 Tn another rene, its the residual Shakti lit over efter euch
 operation
       ‘What, then, happens in the accomplishment of this
 ogu This static Shalt io afected by Prindydina and
 other Yogik proceses and becomes dynanic, Thus, when
 completely dynamic, that is, when Kundall unites with
Shiva in the Sabnerér, the polarization of the body gives
          The two poles are anited in one and there is the
state of consciousness called Samadhi. The polarization,
 cof cours, takes placein conssiousness. ‘Tho bedy actually
 continues to exist as an object of observation to others. Tt
                ‘orgoni life. But man’s consciounness of his
                             654
                 KUNDALINI SHAKTI
body and all other cbjocta is withdrawn because the mind
 Tiss cease, 20 far as his consciousness is concerned, the
 fonction, having ben withdrawa into its ground which is
        How  is the body sustained ! In the first place, though
‘Kondall Shakti isthe static centze of the waole body 8 a
 completo conscious organism, yet each of the parts of the
 body and their constituent cells have their own static
 centres which wphold such parts or calla Next, the theory
 of the Tintrls themselves is that Kundalt asounds, and
 ‘that the body, as s completo organism, ia maintained by
 the “nectas"” which lowe from the unin of Shiva and
 Shakti in the Sahasrire, ‘This vectar is an ejection of
 power genersted by their union My friend, however,
‘whom I have cited, is of opinion (and for this grounds may
 ‘be urged) that the’ potential Kudel! Shakti becomes only
 partly and not wholly converted into kinetio Shakti; and
 yet since Shalti—even as given in the Mla centre—is an
 Tnfinitude, i i aot depletod; the potential store always
 remaining tnezhaustod. Th this ets, the dynamic equiva-
 Tent ia a pastel conversion of one mode of enorgy into an-
 ‘other, If hovever, the celed power at the Mila bocame
 absolutely uncoied, there would zest the dissolution of
 the thme bodies, grss, subtle and causal, and comsequently
 Vieba Mukti beoause the statio background in seltion
to a particular form of existence would, acsoding to this
 hypothesis, have wholly given way. He would explain
‘the fact thatthe    body becomes colds a corpse as the Shakti
 leaves it, as being dae, not to the depletion or privation of
 ‘the static power at the Malédhira, but to the concentre-
tion or convergence of the dynamic power ordinarily diffused
 over the whole body, #0 that the dynamic equivalent which
 inset up against the static background of Kundalt Shakti
 is only the difused fivefold Prépa gathered home—with-
 dream from the other tissues of the body and concentrated
 along the axis, Thus, ordinarily, the dynamic equivalent is
                              655
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘the Prina diffused over all the tissues: in Yoga, ibis con-
 verged slong the axis the statio equivalent of Kundalt
 Shekti enduring     in both osses. Some part of the slready
 evailable dynamic Prina is made to act at the base of the
 axis in a suitable mamner, by which means the basal centre
 ‘or Mélidhar beoomes, as it wore, over-saturated and re-acts
 on the whole diffused dynamic power (or Pra) of the body
 by withdrawing it from the tissues and converging it along
 ‘the lino of tho axis, Tn this way the diffused dynamic
 equivalent becomes the converged dynamic equivalent
 along the axis What, according to this view, ascends, is
 ‘ot the whole Shakti bat an eject ike condensed lightaing,
 which at Iength reaches the Parsma-Shivasthina. ‘There
 the Central Power which upholds the individual world-
 ‘consciousness is merged in the Supreme Consciousness. The
 limited consciousness, transcending the passing concepts of
 ‘worldly life, directly intuits the unchanging Reality which
  underlies the whole phonomenal dow. When Kundali
 Shakti clepe in the MulAdhir, man is atcake to the world
  whoa she auafes to waite, and does unite with the suprem
  static Consciousness which is Shiva, then consciousness is
‘sleep to the world and is one with the Light of all things,
        Putting aside detail, the main principle appearsto be
 ‘that, when * wakened”, Kundalf Shakti either Herself (ar aa
  my friend suggests in Her eject) ceuses to be a statio Power
  which sustainsthe world-consciousness, the content of which
  is held only so long as She “sleeps”: and whenonce set in
  movement is drawn to that other statio cantze in the
 ‘Thousund-petalled    Lotus (Sahasrtra) which is Hersalf in union
 ‘with the Shive-conscioumess or the conscioumets of soetasy
 ‘beyond the vorld of forms, When Kundali “sleeps” man is
 ‘awake to this world, When She “ awakes" he sleeps, thatis
 Josos all consciousness  of the world and enters his causal body.
  {In Yoga he passes beyond to formless Consciousness,
        Thave only to add, without further discussion of the
  point, thet practitioners of this Yoga claim that it is higher
                                 656
                   KUNDALINI SHAKTI
 ‘than any other and that tho SamAdhi (scstasy) attained
 thereby is more perfect, The reason which they allege
 is this, In Dhylnayoge, ecstasy takes place through detach-
 ‘ment from the world, and mental concentration Joaditig to
 ‘vacuity of mental operation (Vritti) or the uprising of pure
 Conscioumess unhindered by the limitations of the mind.
 ‘The degree to which this unveiling of consciousness i effected
 depends upon the meditative powors (Jntnashalcti) of the
 Sidhaka and the extent of his detachment from the world.
 On the other hand, Kundalt who is all Shakti and who
 ig therefore Jnfnashaleti Hertolf producss, when awakened
 by the Vogt, fall Inéne for him. Secondly, in the Samdhit
 cof Dhyfnayoga there is no rousing and union of Kundalt
 Shakti with the accompanying bliss and acquisition of
 special Powers (Siddhi).- Further, in Kundalt Yoga there
 is not merely a Samédhi through meditation, but through
 the central power of the Jive a power which carries with
 it the foroes of both body and mind. ‘The union in that
sense is claimed to be more complete than that enacted
 throngh mental. methods only. ‘Though in both cases
 bodily consciousness is lost, in Kundalint-yogn not only
 the mind, but the body, in so fer ust is represented by its
 ‘centeal power (or maybe its eject) is actnally united with
 Shiva, This union produces an enjoyment (Bhulti) whieh
 ‘the Dhydnayogt does not possess. Whilst both tho Divya
 Yogi and the Vira Sidhaka havé enjoyment (Bhukti), that
 ‘of the former is eaid to be infinitely more intense, being an
 experience of Bliss tee, The enjoyment of the Vira
 Sidhaka is but « reflection of it om the physical plane, a
 ‘yelling np of the true Bliss through the deadening coverings
 ‘and trammels of matter. Again, whilst itis said that both
 Ihave Liberation (Malt), this word is used in Vira Sadhant
                                                          is the
 jn a figurative senso only, indicating a bliss whichof Multi,
 nearest approach on the physical plane to thatof Shiva and
 nd a Bhfiva or feeling of momentary union
          ‘which ripens in the higher Yogs Sadban’ into the
                                657
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 litorel beration of the Vogl He as both Enjoyment
 (Bhukti) and Liberation (Mukti) in the fullest and liters!
 sense, Hence its claim to he the Emperor ofall Yogas,
        However this may be, Tleave tho subject at this point,
swith the hope that others will continue the enquiry I have
 here initiated. It and other matters in the Tantra Shistma
 seam to me (whatever be their inherent value) worthy of
 fan investigation which they have not yet received.*




      "See “Bysterioas               Dr. Bele (Tempore
 Bombay), and "The Chakras”, by Dr ‘Leadbeater (Theosophies
 Publishing House, Madras).
                               658
                          Cxapren XXX.
               THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE.
       {The following isa reprint of « very understanding arti-
 cle in the Modern Revicw (February 1918), by Dr. Jemes H.
 Cousins, reviewing the works on Tantra Shastra then pub-
 lished by Arthur Avalon which have been considerably
 added to during the last tan years)
 [NDIA is ot pret experiencing the interesting sensa-
      tion of « national   revival ; and, ike all other such hap-
 ppenings, «national revival is no more confined to nation-
 ality or nationalism than a religious revival is confined to
 religion. Sach phenomena in the course of human
 history have revealed themselves in retrospect aa incursions
 cof energy from the hidden sources of life, to which the cie-
 cumstances of the time have given an adventitious bent ;
 and itis not always even cartain that the physical location
 of such movements yas their true home, This reminds
ro thatMr. G; K. Chesterton has remarked in his book on
 “The Vietorian Age in English Literstmre,” with his usual
 inconsequential profundity, that, “towards the end of the
 cighteenth century, the most important event in English
 history happened in France.” That is to say, the upheaval
 jn human conscioumess and emotion ealled tho, Frouch
 Revolution was far from being exclusively French in the
 scene of ite opsration or its results. Tt revolved the world
 ‘over: it moved in Wordsworth and Byron and Shelley, and
 in the latter is carrying its influence, in democratis thought
 expressed with the force of compelling imagination, right
 into the coming times.
       ‘Tt will be the same with the Indian National Revival
 ‘Tho extent to which it mesns a revival, o pethape a revo:
 Tution, for instance, in Burepeon dmma and postry is a
 ‘matter with regard to which positive prophecy may be safely
 indulged in by anyone who las come into contact with the
                                  659
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 stage and lteratore of tho last twenty years in Greet Britain
 ‘and lcland, and who has also touched not merely the outer
 side of the work of Rabindranath Tagore to which publishers
 ‘and book-sellers ave an eye, but the vital force that Yesta
 felt snd communicated when he murmured the songs of
 “Gitdnjali” through the streets of Dublin and along the
 country lanes of Normandy.
       But, even within ite own teritory, the Indian National
 Revival cannot be restricted to the political interpretation
 of nationality. One listens instinctively for reverberations
in the art, in cienos, in religion, and one isnot disappointed.
 ‘The Caleutta peinters and the researches of Bose come
 readily to the mind. Religion, however, is not so obvions;
 and yet 1 am inelined to think that a serie of stout books,
  tnd some slender ones all bound in bright red covers; which
 have ben gromiag in number en my bookshelf during the
last foar ot five years, will be found in future to be not
 isolated literary phenomena, interesting teansations for the
 Sansicit scholar, but-an integraland. perhaps vitally impor-
 tant constituent) of the Tevival, I refer to the series of
 tmanslations of works on the, Tantea Shistra or Agima,
 with introductions and. commentaries, by Arthur Avalon.
 (Principles  of Tantra, 2 vols; Tantra ofthe Great Liberation;
 Hymns to the Goddess; Wave of Blist; Greatness of Shiva,
 ‘Tinteik Teste, 6 vols. (containing Tantrabhidhdna, Shatcha-
 iccaniripana, Prapanchastra it Kulachtidainani, Kulirmava,
 ‘and Kaliviliss); Studies in Mantra Shstra and various
 Essays] The number of their cursory readers is probably
 small, the number of their stadents smaller stil; but I
‘think these books will rink among the precious things of
the firs quarter of the twentieth century, in much the same
 way ax “The Secret. Doctrine” of Madame Blavatsky and
 ‘The Periect Way” of Dr. Anna Kingsford ranked in the
last quarter of the nineteenth.
       My purpose in waiting this note on the firs tranelations
 of this venerable seripiae into a Buropeat language is not
                                 660
         THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE
  to enter into exposition or criticism, butto express a fow
 ‘general thoughts of x Westean mind which have arisen during
 a sympathetio reading of the translations and the discovery
 of their affinity with and satifaction of a need, whichis
 showing itelf outside Tadia, for a restatement of religious
 and philosophical principles that will be at once wider in
 their contact with the actual constitution of hnmanity, and
 rmore explicit in contrast with the curr sentimentality and
 vvaguenoss of Westom doctrine and mawkish practice.
       My fist contact with the Tantcik teaching was through
1 footnote in “The Voice of the Silence” in which Madame
 Blavataky refered to govern sects of “sorcerers” as being
 “all Téntikas”. The assumption that, since the sorcerers
 wore all Tintrikas, all Tintzkas were therefore soroeres,
 is nob necessarily involved isthe footnote as T now read it
 with greater knowledge and experience. In eny case, even
 if Madame Blavateky” adopted » hostile aititude to the
 Tantra, as she adopted a hostile attitude to spiritualism,
‘wo have the example of her great suooasor, Mrs. Besant,
‘who has bridged the gulf between Theosophy and            Spicitu-
 alism—or pechaps more accurately, bebmeen Theosophists
 tnd Spiritualists in their mutual stark for the realization
 of the inner worlis of faculty and expetience; an example
 ‘which encourages those who, inthe inereasing ight of modern
 xeésearch to which the translations under consideration are
 ‘notable contribution, are impelled to seek for the great
 unitiss underlying all diversities of religious thought and
 ‘expetience, even though they may, like myself, have found
 ‘their own path towards the conte along enother radius of
 ‘the vast cide of manifesation
       Ayast altogether foom the question of VamAchira,
 antinomianiem or abuses of Shikte Tantei situal within
‘the bouns of the general morality (which ritual, after all,
is only concemed with one portion of a vast Scripture
 governing not only the Vamichiris, Shakta or otherwise,
 but other communities), the fact that some of the
                                661
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
oot principles and ideas os well aa practices of Hinduism,
‘ancient and modern, are contained in the Tantik Sexiptares,
‘makes it incumbent on those who wish to understand fully
‘ihe significance and development of religion to rid themselves
‘of preconceptions and to study thess books, in which the
‘translator endeavours to substitute an accurate statement of
the facts for the “general statements by way of condem-
nation” which have been the only kind of literature on the
‘Tantmas heretofore in the English language. “The abuea
 of the commoner people.” ke complains, “as time went on
 Aeveloped such proportions as to ltimataly obscure all
 tlie matters in the Tantra, thus depriving them of that
attontion which is their due.” Unfortunately, it is just
 such developments that the purposely critical eye lights
 ‘upon. It abuses Islam for the baualities of Mohnrram festi-
 vities, ignoring the foot that tigerdancing and sword feats
 have no more bearing om the teachings of Koren than
      ind man’a buff” at a Christmas party bas on the Sermon
 con the Mount. ‘The translator undortakes to show that
 Tbohind the alleged “black magi ani sopsusl vites", there
 ‘oxista within the Tantra, “a high philosophioal doctrine and
 ‘the means whoreby is trith may be realized through deve-
 opment,” and the stadent who is worthy of the name can
 hardly eacepe the conclusion thatthe transit      has succeeded
jn his great and memorable work, Indeed, the success
achisved on the purely expository side is all'the time en-
 haneed by the challenging phenomenon of » decried and
abused Eastem scripture being championed with mission
ary ardour (albeit in the most judicial mannee) by a waiter
‘whose name tales him outside India in race (though the
‘rugaestion of France in one magazine might be modifed
in front of Burne Jones! unfinished pictare of Arthur in
Aealon), and who expresses the moat ancient and profound
‘ruths in the most excellent of modem Roglish. Mr. Kipling
may try to put a big “barmge” between Rast and West
fn the surface of the carth, bus apparently under     the surface
                              662
        THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE
 ‘there may be paomges and chanzols beyond his ken, Rein-
 camation may be a useful key.
       ‘The press citisisms in the West which followed the
 first publication of the translations offered an excellent
 ‘example of that process of finding in a thing thet which
 we are cepeble of finding, which is referred to in a non-
 ‘Tantrikscripsue as “the savour of life unto life or of death
 unto desth.”” Suck journals as had been in touch with
 recent Western movementa in the direction of cultivating
 the esoterio senso, not merely in mythological and theologi-
 cal matters, but in all relations of lfe—eeeing layer upon
 layer of significance and analogy in the simplest of acts—
 ‘welcomed the work on the strength of the percentage of
 wisdom which it disclosed, and notwithstanding a frankly
 observed perentage of matter which is unfamiliar, and
 therefore repugnant, to the Wester mind,
       But, thene were other joumals of the “literary” and
 “oriental” order,   to which the surface valueof thing malees
 ‘most appeal, which fixed ther enitcal eyes an certain phases
 of the Tantra Shtstra. They found a spot on the sun,
 fgnored the shining surlace, and proceeded to prophesy
 ‘wore than the plaguescf Rgypt, 08.8 sequel to the publi
 cation of books on the Tantra,
       ‘To valve this kind of oritisism for what it i worth,
‘one has only to imagine the effect of a first reading of cartain
 portions of the Old Testament, on simple follower of some
 gentle and peace-loving faith. If he was aa verbally clever
 ‘azo was forgstful, or perhags ignorant, of human peycho-
 logy, be would probably spend himeol in a piece of parallel
 “‘amartnees”   to that of the “Athenseum’” thus “Tt appears
 ‘that this Peslm of David is the fret to be translated into
 English. Unfortonstely the programme of similar enter-
prises projected by the translator deprives us of the hope
 ‘that it might also prove the last.”
       ‘The objection of the “Atheneum” reviewer,to the
 publication ofthe Tantra, Shasta i tha, in it, “we find the
                                 663
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 lofty conceptions of earlier and purer belie often almost
 entirely obscured by brainless hocus-pocus and debasing
 and sensual rites.” We may pass by the suggestion      of hooue
 pocus with a reference to the illuminating circumstance that
 4 man of the eminence of Edward Carpenter (in his recently
 publahed Autobiographical Notes) can see nothing but
literary hocus-pocus in the prose of George Meredith. ‘The
 calling up of the ghosts of te dead, or the evocetion of
 tumaeen powers by mantra, may be hoows-pocas in the
 ast : when itis done by the witch of Endor in tho Hebrew
 scriptures it ie quite another matter |
       ‘Phe objection of the non-Christian reader to certain
 of tho Paalm          s anc to certain incidents in hs history,
                   of David
 ‘would probably. be gronnded on the blood-thirstiness of
 the post, his claims tothe monopoly of a Divine Power which
 seems more savage than divine, and a sensuality tbat had
 no qualms (until aftermaeds when found out) in stooping
 to conrpiracy and lying, not to mention musder by proxy.
‘This is not of cous, all that is to be suid on tho subject,
 Dut itis the parallel to the “Athenwum” attitude to the
 ‘Tantra, ‘The Atheneum" would adsert that the iniguities
 of the Psalmist wore part of his Inman nature and the ci
 ‘cumstances of his time, and did not invalidate the truth
 fof Christian teaching, precisely as an apologist ofthe Tantras
  tight claim that past abusss in the application of some
 gener] principles of the Shirta Shastra do not touch their
 truth,
        ‘This attitude of exclusiveness on both sides is one of
 the inevitable things in human nature, and one of the most
 interesting of peyehologial probloms. Ti also the greatest
 bar  to the waflcaoftion   religion, and om only be undermined
 by scientific and rational advance, or oveleeped by int
 tion which comes from spiritual experience. T remember
 well a quaint and mcs respected figure in Dublin university
 Tite, some twenty years ago, a Professor of Oriental Len-
 guages or something of the kind, whose name now eludes me.
                              054
        THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE
 Indeed, my only memory of hie pervonality is of « brown
skin acd a foreign head-dress. But I remember the impaot
 which a reply of his to some teasing undergraduates made
 ‘on me, They twitted him of heathen ignoranoe in worship-
 ping God with tree heads. He smiled and said it was
 almost as bad as worshipping a God with three persons, a
 sly dig at their Tvinitarianism whick they did not anticipate,
 and which helped a least one searcher after truth a stage
 nearer   his deste. It is easy for tho Westarnor   to condensn
 the “heathen practice” of slaughtering goate in the Temple
 cof Kall, and it s equally easy for the Westerner to excuse
 tho slaughtering, not for religious serifce but for appetite,
 of vast numbers of cattie and sheep; which is funny and
 vvery sad.
       Tt is somewhere round this point that the twin globes
 of heterodoxy ("your ‘daxy”) and oribodaxy ("‘my ‘doxy”
 revolve, ‘There ore reprehensible practices connected. with
 ‘Tintrik observance; but honesty compels the recognition
 of tho fact that every practice suppeeed to be encouraged
 by the ‘Tantras vith a view to te attainment of occult
 powers or spiritual illumination is duplicated outside TAntrik
 observance, and vith no other motive than self-gratifcation.
      ‘The diferenee in position teems to be this; Christianity
 (whichis the nominal religion of the critics  of Tantra in the
 West, and must therefore mainly be referred to) narrows
 itself to a counsel of perfection in conduct, and hence, since
 the true observers of Christ's injunctions (“Resompanse
 xno man evil for evil” illustrated by the Great, Wor !) are
 jn an obvious “microscopic minority,” reduces the partici-
 pants in ealvation to a small and choice company. Christi-
 nity, as ondinaily interpreted, puts an impassable gult
 between the ideal and human neture. The Xgama, on the
 contrary, throws its circumference around the whole circle
 of human activity, and by linking every phase of conduct
 with religion, endeavours to lift conduct irom stage to
 stage, not, as in non-Téntrik observance, by focussing
                                665
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘attention on the act iteel!, which only intensifies it, but by
  gradually raising consciousness which wil, in due time, influ
 fence conduct. Ib includes worship with flesh-foods, intoxi-
 ‘canta  and sex, becaus          e that those are irherentin
                          it recognizes
certain stage of human development, and becsuse it believes
‘that they are more certain to be transcended through being
 ‘aszoriated with the religious idea, than through being left
 lone, or in an antagonistic rlationship to religion. Tam
 quite aware that this statement of the matter will shock:
any af my Western frionds who happen to reed these               lines:
 it shocks the Noneonformist lobe of my own brain which
 ‘had s quarter of a century of careful development. Bub 1
  cannot ignore the phallic clement involved in every Cristian
 ‘marriage cetemony, and I cannot forget the fragments of
  slaughtered and cocked animals that are on every wedding
  Drealifast table, It all depends on mental adjustments,
 ‘and what the grect edueationist, Herbart, ealls the “apper
  ception macses” that spring into relationship in response
  to impacts from without, The Mahfdevt herself anticipat
  ed the degrading tendency of human natuxe in the Kali
  ‘Yuga, when aho said to Shiva “I fest, O Lord! that even
  ‘that which thou hast ordained for the good of men will,
  through them, tum out for‘evil.” But it would be 98
 fealish to attrtmte the debasement of the observance to the
  ‘Tantra as o whole, a it would be to blame the gigantic
 slaughter aud glattony of Christmas on the teachings of
 ‘Jesus Chuist. He Himself commanded his followers to do
 all things in His Name: Tantra takes the oi! to its fullest
 extent.
       ‘We must not, however, allow ourselves to be lured into
 ‘the very mistake which we are condemning, that is, the
 ‘xing of attention on thst which is, in reality, only a frao-
 tional part of Tintrik teaching and practice even in its
 Shilita form. It is enough to expose the falsity of the eu
 rent attitude of exiticiem, and to point out that the Tantra,
 recognizing the spiritual gredations of human evolution,
                                666
        THE AGAMAS           AND THE FUTURE
 not only takes cognizunce of the “debasing and sensual”
 ‘spects of human nature, and tres to elevate thom through
 religion, but puts its severest condemnation on those who
 participate in the lover sites when in consciousness they
 belong to the higher levels of evolution.
       Tis this cognition of psyehie distinctions that marks
 the Tantra as a scripture that will appesl more and more
 to the futore. Science has paseed inwards from the physical
 to the psychical, end it will drow mligion with it in due
 ‘ime, and leave thooe aystams outside thai have naba paycho-
 logioal basis to thar faith and practice, In hia ogpect,the
 Keamas present » cozteast to Christianity ; nob that the
 kernel of Christianity does not oome from the same hidden
 ‘Troe as all the other grent Religions, but the over
 growths have, in the cage of Christian faith ond practice,
 ‘obscared the implicit psychology of the system by seatic
 mentality. ‘The Tantra Shastra, inthis respect, also presents
    contrast to that other venerable presentation cf the 12
 lationship of Humanity to Divinity and the Universe, the
 ‘Vedénta, os, however; in ultimates, but ia method. “The
 “Tantra,” as the editor says, “harmonises Vedintic moniam
tnd dani. Tis purposeisto give liberation       to tho jiva by a
 ‘method through which monisic truth is reached through
 the dualistic worl.” That is to say, it accepts the prineiple
 of the One Aboiute as the source ‘nd goal of evolution,
 but it focusses its attention on a point nearer human power,
  and substitutes for philosophical dissertation, practice
 besod on knowiedge of, and relation with tho relative world,
 though with the Absolute as aim. It says to the spiritual
 athlete, “Your aim of a development 0 harmonious thet
 it wil appear to be as one, is excellent, but you will not
 seoure it by disoassion or moditation merely: you must
 realize the actuality (if not the philosophical reality) of
 ‘izeps and triceps, and descend to pushing against walls
 and moving yourself up and down on w piece of commen
 iron stretched between two ordinary wooden supports,”
                                667
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Tt says, “Faith is good, bot it ia unvwite to defer practise
 tnt faith is secure, Get to work, and faith wil follow,
and be more than mere faith ;"~ an injantion which ia
hot far removed fem the hrstian commandment to the
disciple to live shel   and heaballfnow of the detains.
     ‘There is « further distinction which has to be masked,
Simple religion, such as Christianity, removes God from His
creation, and removes Him also from full contact with a
‘complete humanity by speaking of Him as single-sexed,
‘nd co vitiating the whole superstructure of commentary
‘and customs, Simple philosophy, on the other hand, zedacaa
everything to abstraction. ‘The trike teacher, however,
eclaes: "It as impossible to hold the firmament between
fa pair of tongs as i is to worship an atzibuteless Brahman
by a mind with sttrbutes.”" Tentra replaces the attribate-
Jess as an object of contemplation, by Shakti (the Creative
‘Bnergy in all its forms, personified as feminine) as an object
‘of worship, and holds that the subtler sapects of Shakti can
 ‘only be reached through Her physicel nd mantra forms,
       ‘Thus, the Tanten Shiatea unites, the religious and phi-
 losophie fanotions of human uataze, by presenting a systom
 ‘which ia in ine with modem peychology in its recognition
 ‘of human divergeacies on the level and in the vertical, and
‘which at the same time gives to humusn and extra-human
  powers the warsth and appeal of personality. It is as
  monotheistic as Christianity or Islan, notwithstanding the
 ‘yeind kind of propagandist arithmetic that taught me in
 ‘my ignorant youth that Hindus worshipped a thoussnd
  “gods” (but slwaya spelt with a small 9) when in simple
 reality, the thousand gods (as far as Tantme Shistza is con-
 cemed) are but names for expects and operstions of the
 Msbidovs aa secognition of the “Divino immanance”,
‘which slowly but certainly Snding its way into the advanood
 religions of the West
       ‘But the monothciam of the Shakta Tantra (that is,
 ‘ts uncation of the fundamental duality of Shiva-Parvati
                              668
        THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE
  on the thither side of manifestation) ie tmaailable, ‘This
  Shisirs is never guilty of the ineonsistency of attsibuting
 to the One Absolute sctions and qualities which can only
  properly belong to degroos of relsiivity. ‘Thus it escapes
  the mazeof contradiction in which orthodox Christian
 esis has lost itself (ike Daedalus and Icarus in the labyrinth
 of their own building) by claimingits God as the One end
  Only, and then degrading that lofty conception to partici-
  pation in prejudices and actions belonging purely to the
 relative planes of the universe. The Agama also escapes
 the coldness and impersonslity of phileeophioal abstraction
  which is only endurable by the few who are able to breathe
 in “the chill sir that enfolds the wise”. Pare philosophy
 tas never countenanced the persozal element in devotion ;
 otherwise it would not have been philosophy but religion,
 ‘Long ago Cosar sid that those who followed philosophy
 did not worship the pods, So much the worse for philosophy
 fs a moving influence in human advancement; ib remains
 the intellectnal interest of the Tenmed few, when it might
 hhave been the inspirer snd uplifter of the unleemed but
 intelligent many. ‘The neod ofthe future, nay, ofthe presont,
 as I have pointed oat in my book, “The Bases of Theoso
 phy" is a restatement of truth in « form and through &
 ‘method that will make religion philosophical and philosophy
 religious; and it appears to-me that the Tentra Shastra,
being based on an experimental and demonstrable psychology,
 and vivifed by the breath of personal devotion, and
 ‘made practical by application in daily life, is bound to exert
 tan ever-increasing influence on humanity a it rises towards
 ‘the needs which the Shistrs supplies, incuding a tual,
 with regard to which the editor, in a moment of rulreshing
 Ieligereny, says: “Doubtless, to the never ‘protestant’
 spirit, whether iamuing {com Europe, Arabia or elsewhere,
 all ritual is liable to be regarded as ‘mummery,” exept,
 possibly, the particalsr anit perhaps jejune variety which
 it call its own...             «for even the most desiccated
                                669
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  ‘Protestantism haa not been able sltogether to. dispense
  with i."
       Tt is declared that the Tantra Shstea was given as
  the scripture suitable to the Keli Yuga. The degeneracy
‘of humanity     in the present age was not considered     to be
 capable of being influenced through speculation snd medi-
 ‘ation alone; but rether through discipline and mantrik
 practioes thst would vibrate throagh the meteral inoros
 tations of the agos, and shake eorssioumess into activity.
 “The word is a mere display. of letters,” enya the uthor,
 refering to mero philosophical discussion, “Wiilst mantra
 is mass of radiant energy. Sayings give advice to men of
 ‘the world, whilst mantras awaluen superhuman Shakti.”
       Yet, while it may be quite trué thet a people gota just
 the government which it deserves, it is certain that an age
does not get the reyenersting influende that it needs in the
sume measur        as the e need.) Thet which would assuredly
bo its salvation is always in advance, Ta eneier and lese
 sophisticated times, the disease and its remedy may have
 exist     and beenedapplied side by side; but, to-day, we have
 ‘an exteaordinary monster (compounded of cheap literature
 ‘and cheaper education) called Enlightened Public Opinion,
 or sometimes The Man in the Strest, that interpooes iteelé
 between principles of reform and their execution, and labels
 ‘ag “premature” the age’s most urgent, need.’ That has
 been the experience of reform in the West, particularly
 daring the last six or seven years in which it has become
 ‘obvions to a few clearseeing minds that the general vulgs-
 imntion and matorislization of lifo which was setting in all
 over tho world (not excluding India) was the dirvet out-
 come of a predominantly masculine attitude and. argani-
 zation in affairs, including religion, Hence the. struggle
 which developed not only in Grest Britain end Ireland, but
in America, Kussia and elsewhere, with faint echoes in
 India as yob, for tho active participation of the feminine
 element in all departments of life; with all that hangs
                              So
        THE AGAMAS AND THE FUTURE
 upon that cloment not merely in the matter of sox difference,
 but in the qualities of conservation (which is not conser
 vation as many erroneously think), intuition, devotion,
 seerfce, which must become active complements of the
        line qualities of aggression, reason, question, acqui=
 sitiveness, if a balanoed humen organization and character
 are to be achieved.
       ‘That struggle not only challenged the male exclusive-
neat of politic, ints personnel and its intareats and methods,
 ‘but invaded the very pulpite of Christendom. So acutely,
 indeed, did some women feel the lnc of the presentation
 of the feminine ede of life in the ordinary churches, thet
 they bended themselves into a church run by women, but
 with a pulpit    freely open to both sores, and « litmrgy and
 attitade that was exclusively human.
       ‘This innovation ‘was, T am catvinesd, the deepest
 {indicator of the source of tha lopsided order of things ;
 that is, « purely masoatine concept of Divinity, and a con-
 sequent purely masculine religious organization with its
sequel, a purely masculine social machine. ‘The conscious:
ness of that defect is growing in Buropa, sided by the last
 great example of the logicel end of tretieved masculine
 aggression, the Buropean Wor. The fll inckusion of the
feminine element in public life wil be the great fight of the
‘immediate foture, together with the uprising of a eomplete
 democracy (displacing the peeudo-democracies of to-day)
Dbased on tho equal rights and dutiss of en and women in
 ‘tho rumen household of the State.
       ‘These circumstances, end the manner in which they
 sxe capable of being met. by the Tantra Shastrs, give
‘nother ground for the belief that some of” the findamen-
tal priocples of this ancient scripture wil become ore of
 ‘he religions influences in modem life, not necessarily
rectly, inthe sense of superseding Christianity in the West,
Dut certainlyin an interaction through whish the Shits
‘ShAstra wil kelp os an ivitan, oo topes, i the great oyster
                                on
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 of Wostera, end perhaps Raster, religion, to produce the
 Mother-peas! of a completo and true religious exegesis and
 prectice.
       All tings are_possile to © scripture whose supreme
 personifcations, Shiva and Parvati, give and reveive in-
 stroction mutually, the feminine sido being of equal impor-
 tauce with the mescaline. On the lmees of the Mother, as
‘the author pts it, “all quarrelsabout daality and non-duality
 fare settie’. When the Mother acats herself in the hese,
 tion everything, be it stained or stainless, becomes but an
 comament for Her lotus feet.”” “She lives in the bodies of
 all living creatures wherein She is present in the form of
 energy, even in such lifeless things as rocks and stones
 ‘There is no place in the world where Mahtmfya is not.”
 ‘Here we have an anticipation of modem scientific thought
   sto the universal permeation of energy; but. the Tntrik
idea of energy   is of a Consciousness, and therefore of a
 Power related to personality, andso, capable not merely of
 ‘ciontific stady but of worship, though the worship ia
 ‘always (to the higher Téntsika) with the realization of
 the passing nature (Maya) of all limitation by contrast
 with the Supreme Reality.
       ‘With such an ideal as the Divine Father end Mother,
 equal in all respects in manifestetion, and One beyond
 manifestation; and with all the implications of infuence
 fon conduct and organization inherent in euch » belie;
 ‘one is moved to pray for the purifcation of practice where
 such purification is needed, so that the Shistra may
  without obstruction fulfl the prophecy of its future; for
 itis no leo « opiritual than it io a physical truth, that it
is only when misculine and feminine are in equal co-oper-
 ation, though through dissimilar famtion, that there is the
 possibility and promise of a futur.


                             CA
                         Cuaron XXXL
                         CONCLUSIONS.
 JBEAHMANISIE oe Hindu, as in its Inter development
          the former has been alle, is not merely a religion. Te
 is & Socio-Eoonomio System, the foundation of which is the
 Taw of Caste and Stges of Life Tast System has its
 ‘alture of which several forms of Religion, resting on a
 certain common basis, are but a part. Dealing, however,
 with Brahmanism in its religious aspect,we may say that it,
together with Jainism and Buddhism, are the three chiat
 religions of India, as opposed to those of the Semitic origin.
 All hres religious systems share in common eartain fenda-
‘mental concepts which arp denoted by the Sanskrit, terms
 Karna, Sarséra anit Moksha. These coucepta constitute 0
 commen denominator of Tndiaii Belief as next stated.
        ‘The Universe is in constant activity? Nothing which
 is Paycho-physical is_at rest. Karma ie Action. The
 Paycho-physical as such is determined by Karma or action,
 ‘and, therefore, man’s present condition is determined by
 past Karma either his own, or thatof colectiviies of men
 of which he is « member, or with which he ism elation, as
 also by thé action of natural causes, Tn the some way,
 present Karms daterines the future Kamus, ‘The doctrias
 of Karmais thus the airnanco             of tho Law of Cawality
 operating not only in this but in an infinity of Universes.
       1. Vasniahrama Dharma, For this reaton it was commonly
 thougit that an Individual von-Hinds cannot Become a. Hind
‘boners there ino place for him ia the caste ayetem. ‘The Patna
 FEC have, homever,    recently held that Hinds Taw reeogaizes con
 version to Hindulam and conversion makes the person converted
 ‘Hind in every sense, iy for mariage. (Thompson oe Maharaja
 of Tike.)
       2A Saosht term for world is Jagat    or that whick move, since
 the Univere is in constant motion.
                                  613,
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘As you sow so shull you reap. The present Univere is
 not the frst and last only. It is true thst this particular
 ‘Universe has «beginning and an end called dissolution,*
 for nothing composite is etamal ; but it is only oxe of @
 ‘ries which has neither beginning nor end. There has been,
 is now, and ever will be an Universe,
        Mental action as desize for worldly enjoyment, even
 ‘hough such enjoyment be lawful, keeps man in the Worlds
 ‘of repeated Birth and Death, or (to use the English term)
 of Reincamation. ‘These worlds the Greeka called the
 Cyele of Becoming, and Hindus the Samséra, «term which
 literally means the unending ‘moving on’ or wandesing,
 that is, being bom and dying repestedly.* These worlds
 ‘comprise not only Barth but Heaven and Hall, in which
 ‘70 reaped the fruits of man’s actions on Earth, Heaven
 and ll are states of exjoyment and suffering which exist
 haere on earth as wall asin tho’ after-death stato as the 1o-
 sult of man’s good and bod actions returning, When ten
dics there is no resurrec         of tion
                                     the gros body. ‘Thatis
 solved int itp subti slements, and the specific relation
 btmeen man and perticalar gross body comes to sn end
 ‘Bat there is always some body until odiles iberation' is
 achieved. On desth man in his tublle body enjoys the state
 called Heaven or fer in thet called Fell. Neither i eter-
 nal,    but each s partof the Cycle of the Becoming. When,
 ‘then, man has had Horvenly enjoyment ox aufesedthe pains
  of Hel in his male body, in the afterdeath state, acoarde
ing to his merits or demerits, he in ‘reincarnated’ in a
 ‘ross body on Barth. He continues thus to be ‘reinoas-
 fated’ until he has found and dasires the way out from
the Cyee,thit is, until he ceases to desire workdexistenoe,
 “His desire is then not oaly for vlease from the suferings
       2, Kel TonThe Genet
                      ites dostrne a
       3) Puaratpatt,
       4 Vides Mak
                             or
                          CONCLUSIONS
 and limited bappiness of the Cele but also (according to
‘Vediinta) for the attainment of the Supreine Worth which
is Supreine Bliss. ‘There is, in short, a change of values and
states. Man, as Nietzsche said, is something to be trans
‘eended. He cannot transoend his present state so long as
he is attached to and-desis to remain in it. ‘This libera-
tion from the Cycle is called Motsia or Multi. For all
‘Three Systoms ere at one in holding that, notwithstanding
‘the Law of Causality, man is free to liberate himself from
the Cyele, Ceusality govems the Paycho-physical. Spirit
tas such is Freedom from the Peycho-physical. All threa
Systams assume Stato of Liberation.
        Whether the Universe aa a play of force is the work
of & Personal God is question which Philosophers have dis-
‘puted bothin the Bast and the West... One set of Buddhist
professed belief in Deity as the Lord, Another? affirmed
Svabhiva which means the proper vigaut of Nature and whet
is called creation is truly spontaneity resulting rom powers
inherent in the Psycho-physical substance eternaly.*
        Mayavada Vedtnta reconciles to a great extent these
toro. views by its doctrine that the Personal Brahman or tha
Lord is the self lose absolute Bmhman a conceived by the
Paycho-physicl experiences, though thelatter as the Abeolués
‘exclusive   ofall relations is not the former. Ta Shakts doctrine
Braman is the Lord or Crestor and Director of the
Universe but in its own asture is more than that.
        Whether there is or is not a Personal God or Loni
{as held by somo systems), belief in such a Lord ia no
‘esential portion of the Common Doctrine. Both Jainism
and Buddhism are atheistic in the sense of being Lordloss
       1 Parmirta
      2. The Aishvartka School
      4, Srabhtvikas. ‘he frst tem mets Belial in a Lard and the
second is derived from Svabhava or ova nature
      “LAs Brian Hedeson hes pointed out (Nepal 28)
      5 fshears.                        6. Nitsbvara
                                   ons
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 tho           later aysam, in some forms
           th ugh                            of the later Noth
em schools takeson a theistic colour. Tn fact, the notionofa
 Personal God iano easential pact even of Brahmanism itself.
 For, puting aside downright atheists in the Western sense,
 such as the Indisn Chtrvskas and Tokayates who denied
 God, Soul, immortality and fature life, it ie to be observed
 tnt some schools! posit no such Lond whilst others* do,
       ‘Two other conospts of ist rate importance are Dharma
 and ite comdative Adianma, These two terms, in the
 ‘Brakmanic sense, mean right activity aud its opposite. ‘They
ar therefore connected with Karma of which they are to
 species. The term Dharma comes from the root Diri which
 ‘means to. uphold and maintain, for right activity. does
 that, All three ayrtems post right and wrong! activity
 tod this ote eleing nnd using capone
 Dhacma is thas the Lew of Being as Form, Mora
 at of agian                   NAP Cleland sto
‘substance ofthe Brahmanic concept is held by all. Dharma
‘s a technical term isnot hero included amongst the common
 ‘concepts, besause, its sense varies in Baddhism in which it
hs its own peouliar meaning, whilst        in Jainism the word
 raans something wholly diferent      from  what it does in any
 thor            eystom.*
       ach of the common concepts must be intorprted in
 ‘the caso of any pertialar Indian faith in tems ofits own
 ocular tenets as regards these concepts and other matters
  such a6 the Reality* and Dissolution’ of the Universe,
       1, Mintast ard Nirshvarstokhys.
       2. Seshvara Sénkinya or Yogn Schoo! and the Nyay2-Vaishe-
 shika and Veddus
         5. Panga,                       4. Papa,
       5, Ip Talal the word means a principle of motion (Dbarma)
 sasite opposite (Adbarma) is the geacipe of rest
       , Brabmaoism and Jsinim are opposed to Boddhstc subjec-
       ‘. The views of the Mngmst on Dissolution ave pecalla tit,
                                 676
                        CONCLUSIONS
 Karma! and Liberation, Thus, the latter ie dofined dit
 ently in Buddhism, Jainism and in the vasious Brahmanical
 schools, Acvording to all systems, Liberation is described
 as the release from the bondage of Birth and Death, Limi-
 tation and Soflering. In some ystems? it is not positively
 said   to be Joy,* but is described as a pure painless  state of
 ‘That which, in association with mind and matter, manifests
tas the empiricalsalf. Tho Jainas regardit as a state of
 happiness. Some Buddhist deseriptions are to the same
 effect, but in goneral Buddhism deprecates the disensaion
 ‘of go inconceivable a state. ‘The Vedanta, on the other hand,
 positively describes it to be unalloyed and unonding Joy
 fo that the nature of such Joy, whether as arising through
 the identifcation of the individual self with the Supreme
 Self or in association, therewith, is, variously affirmed by
 ‘the non-dualist, qualified non-duslist snd dualist Brahmanic
 Schools
        Brahmasiem adds to these concepts of the Cycle,
 (Samsira), right and wrong action (Dharma, Adharma),
 Causality (Karma), and Liberation (Moksha), that of the
 Kiman,
        Al recognized Brahmanie’ systems affirm tho Ltman,
 ‘hough they difer on the quettion of ite ature! aa also
 whether it is one? or many." It is on this question whether
 there is or is not an Atman that the Brahmans” and
 Badadhistio Schools are in diapute. ‘The point in issue as
       4. ‘The, Juiniam apes in ite own peculiar way of the term
      ‘1 Mintnst, Sinkhye-Vogt, and Nyfya-Vaishesbik.
       © Ananda,
      4, In NylyaVaisheshika it i the Seat of Conscioasness. and in
 SStaklia and Advaita Veddom it i Consciousness,
      1. As in Vedanta,
       6. AS the Atmins and Purwshar of Nrdya-Vaisheshika and
 SStnklya-Yorn respectively.
      7. The Jaina also combated the Huddhistic doctrine of Anges,
                                or
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
formuleted from the standpeint of Vedinta may be shortly
stated to beas follows:
       Every one admits the existenoe of « psycho-physical
Flux either as the Individual or tho Universe of bis experience,
Indeed, one of the Sansierit names of the world is Jagat,
‘which means “ the moving thing”. For the Universe ie in
constant activity. At every moment there is molar or
‘mleeuler change. As an object of seosible perception
‘the Universo is transitory ; though some things enduro
longer or shorter than others. ‘The question is, then,
‘whether, besides psycho-physical transience, there is & spi
‘tual enduring Besenee of the Universe and of man, which
 rnanifests in the latter as the empirical sei whereby knows
 itzeli as permanent amidst all its changeful experiences.
 ‘The Buddhists    are repnta fo have held that there is nothing
 but the flow. Man is only a continually changing yeycho-
 ‘Physical complex withont # attic centre, series of momen-
 ‘tary mental and bodily states, necessally generated one
 from the other in continuous transformation. Ta this
 Flux there is no. principle of permanence on which as on
 thread”? the worlds as beads are strung, Man may
 have the notion thet he is a Self, but this does no, it is
 suid, prove thet there is an Atmnan as ‘substratum’ of such
 empirical ef. To this Vedinta asks—If so, who is it that
 is born and dies and re-incarnatas ! Tt then answers ite
 question by saying that the embodied sel* is bora and dies,
 Dut that the Atman as such is not a Self and is neither
 bor nor does it di, Bisth and Death are attributed to it
 ‘wheu ie appears in connection with peycho-physical bodies,
It is the embodied Atman which is bom and dies. The
Atman at it is in its own bodiless mature is unborn and
tamal
        Change and changeleseness aré terms of logical that is,
Aualistie thinking, anc have no meaning exoept in velation
       1, Sautems,                   2, jataa,
                                678
                     CONCLUSIONS
  to one nother. All activity implies a static condition
  relative to which it is active. ‘There can be no Universe
  except by tae combination of the active and non-active.
 Without activity the Universe does not become. Without
 some principle of stability it cannot exist even for & moment
 fas an object of the senses. ‘The alogical Atman as such
 eternally endures The Universe as the Paycho-physical
 is the product of the Atman as Power. As such product it
 is transiont. It presents, however, the appearance of rele-
tive or Limited stability because of the immanence of the
 tan. ‘The Atman manifests es the relatively stable
  and empirical elf, end That which manifests as such olf
is also the Brahman as essenoe of the Universe which is
 the object of such sel, For Atmam and Brahman are one
  and the same.
        Accordingto the wecond standard; Atman is the seat of
  conscioustess. In the Vedinta, however, Atman is con-
  ciousness iteoll. Whatever may have boon its origin, as to
  which nothing is of cerlainty known (Mather Goddess
  ‘Wors     is a9 old hip
                      as the world), Shikta doctrine is now a
  form of Vedinta which maybe called Shalrif-vide or Shakta
  Vedanta,
        Kulamave Tantra specks of that.“ Monism of which
  Shiva speaks” (Advaitanta Shivencktam, I. 108). See
  also Mahinirvina Tantra, Chepter II, 3834, TIT, 38—35,
  5084; Prapanchasira Tantse, II, XIX, XXIX; Advaita-
  Dhivopanisbad. For the identity of vital and Paramétmna
 in iberation (Mukti), which the Vedintasira defines to be
   Tivabrihmanoh aikyam, see Mahinicvina Tantra, VII,
   264, 265; V, 105). See also Prapenchastra Tantra, TL,
 ‘where Hyim' is identified      with Kundall and Hamsab,
   and then with “So’ham”, See also <b., Chapter XXIV :
   “That. which ia subtle T am” (Yah Sulshmah Soham) ;
   and Infnémava Tantrs, XXL, 10. As to Brobmésmi,
 see Kulamava Tantra, IX, 82, and i, 41 : So'ham bhivena
   pajayet. ‘Tho Shite disiple (Stdbal) shoul not be a
                                 679
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 dualist (Mahirudraydmala, I Khanda, Chapter 16; TT
 Khanda, Chepter 2). Similady, the Gandharva Tanta,
 Chapter 2, says thathe must be devoid of dualism (Dvaita-
 ‘hina) (see Prinatoshinl, 108). In fact, that. particular
 form of worship which bss earned the Kevla Tanteas
 their ill aame it a practical application of Advaitavade.
 Kauléchéva is said to propery follow 2 full knowledge of
 ‘Vedintik doctrine. Ax the Shatchakraniripana (ave “ Ser-
 pent Power”) says, the JfvdtmA or embodied spiit is the
 same os the Parsmitmé or Supreme Spirit, and knowledge
 of this is the root of all wisdom (MGlavidya).
       ‘Shikta Vedlats teaches its doctrine from the practical
 standpoint which Mayhvade cells Vyavahirika. It lays
 stzess on the concept of Power. Atman is not mere Being
 only, Even in the dissolution of the world Being is Power,
 though Power or Shekti is then conscioumess as sch
 (Chidetping), Atman manifesta at the universe by and
 out of its power, Atman and Power sro nover separated,
 nd oo itis anid that “there is no Shiva without Shaki
 ‘of Shakti without Shiva”, Shiva without Power is but
  “corpse”. Both Shiva and Shacti are of the same nature
since they are both: Being-Consciousness-Blis, But Power
 manifests as the Becoming or Peycho-physical universe.
 Poweris both Power to Be, to seltconserve, and resist
 ‘change, 68 well as Power to Become the universe and as
 material cause the universe itself. Power to’Be in the statio
 aspect of Shiva‘Shakti. Power to Become is the changeful
 aspect of Skiva-Shalcti.
       In Mayévida the world is auid to be produced by the
 Power of the Lonl—or Tshvara. But whilst Ishvara ia
 Brahman or Godhead as conceived by the Paycho-physical
 cxperiencer, Brahman, on the other hand, is not Ishvara.
 ‘The former is beyond (in the sense of, exclusive of) all re-
 lations with the universe, and so, though wrongly, some
 people call Ishvara “ Unreal” and the universe created by
 Him an ‘illusion’. According to Shaktivida, not only is
                              68
                         CONCLUSIONS
 Iehvare Brahman, but Brahman is Ishvara, and no ques
 tion of the reality of either Ishvara or the world auises.
 ‘We may, howover, sey st once that Godkeal is zeal, Ged
 is real and the universe is real. ‘The use of the term “illu
 sion’ only tends to mislead even in Méyavida. According to
 ‘the concise definition of Kamalakanta,u celebrated Sidhakca,
 Maya is the ‘Form of the Forsless’ (Shdnyasya kaya. ati
 ‘Méyé), The world is the Divine Mother in form. As She is
 in Hertel She is formless.
         Discussion on the subjact of the reality of the World
 ia often vain and tedious, because,
 several meanings, and that in which it ie used ie
         ‘The terms “Absolute” and “Transcendental” should
also be clearly defined. The distinction between Maya-vada
 and Sfakti-réda hinges on these definitions
         Both “Absolnte” und “Transcendental” mean *be-
 yond relation’. But the term, “beyond” may be used in
 ‘wo senses : (a) excpeding or wider than xian; (6) hav-
 ing no relation at all. ‘The fist does not deny or excinde
 relation, hut aays that: the Absslnte, though involving ell
 relations within Itedf, is not theit som-total; is not
 exhausted by them; has Being transeending them, ‘The
 latter denies every trace of relation to the Absolute ; and
 says that the Absolute must have no intrinsic or extrinsic
 relation; that relation, therefore, has no place in the Being
 ‘of the Absolute,
         Shakti-vada adopts the fit view, Mayi-vada the
 second. From the first point of view, the Absolute is
 relationless Being av cell ar Manifestation as an infinity of
 relations. This is the true and complete Alogieal-Whole
 Tyasmuch as the Absolute exceeds all relation and thought,
  two cannot say that It is the Cause ; that It is the Root of
  Ceoation ; and so forth; but inasmuch also as Tt doss
  involve relation and thought, we can say that Tt is the
 Firat Cause that there has been a real creation, and oo
  forth,
                                 68x
                 SHAKTI       AND      SHAKTA
      ‘The Maytevkda. vow by negating all relation from the
reality of Brahman negates from ite transcendent stand-
point the reality of eataition, creation, and 0 forth.
      “Beyond” saay, therefore, mean (1) axceding”,
“faller than”, “'not exhousted by", or (2) exclading, no-
anting, expunging. By diagrams «
                           Diageam
                )                             ®


        Ais beyond B,                 Ais heyond B,
        en, exceeds B,                ‘ie quite outside of B.
        In Shalti-ida, the Supreme Reality is fuller than any
 Acfsition (imitation) which may be proposad. Tt is even
 beyond duality and non-duality. Tis thus the Experience-
 ‘Whole the Alogical. ‘Ths May&-vita Pure Brahman i an
 aspect of It: but Tt is not the Whole (Pdma).
        ‘The expression “wider than relation” may be thus
 ‘Mlustrated : T am related in one way to my         witej in another
 ‘way to my children; in yet another wey to my brothers,
 friends, andco on, I am not fully expressed by any one
 of these relations, nor even hy their aggregate for, as a
 member of an infinite Btres-system, I bear an infinity of
 relations, Pragmatically, most of these axe ignored, and: it
is thought that I am expremed by a certain eet of relations
 ‘which distinguish me from another person who has his own
            Bat Brahman as Absolute cin have no wich “ Set".
 ‘He ia expressed, but not fully expresed, even by the in-
 finite set of relations which the cosmos is, because relations,
  finite or infinite, imply a logical, and therefore segmenting
  and defining thought ; but Brahman as Absoluts-=Expe-
  ience-Whole=the logical.
                                68a
                         CONCLUSIONS
       Since Brahman=Hxperience-Whole=Chit as Power-to
 Be-and-Become, it is nothing like the unknown and wn-
 knowable Being (° Thing-in-tsal) of Wester Seepties and
 Agnostics,
       Tn all Indian Systems, the world is real, in the sense
 ‘that it haa objective existence for, and is not a projection
 of, the individual mind. In all ‘such Systems, Mind and
 Matter co-exist, and this    is so even in that form of Zkajiva-
 ida which holds that Brakman by Its own veiling and
 limiting Power makes one Primary Self of Ttslf, and that ell
 other solves are but reflexes of the Primary Self, having as
 raflexes no existence apart from thut of the Primary one.
 ‘The world of matter is not a projection of an individual
 rind, but its reality is co-ordinate with that of the indi-
 vidual mind, both being derived irom the Seli-veling and
 Saltlimiting operation of Braman eppearing as the One
 ‘Tiva  ox Primary Self. Brakman, in appearingas Primary Self,
 falco appears as its (logical) Correlate or Pole—the Not-Seli;
 ‘and this Not Self is the Roct-Matter‘on which the Primary
 Salf is rellected as multiple selves and their varied relations.
 Matter, in this fundamental conse, is not thorefore tho
 product of the first or primary individual (Self); itis with
Self the coveffect (logically speaking) of a common funda:
 mental uotivity which is the veiling and limiting action
 ‘of the Supreme Being.
       ‘The version commonly givenof Kkajtva-vada—namely,
 that the ono Primary Self is Me, and that You, He and the
 rest, and the world of objects are the projection of Me—
 is loose and unpaychological. In the first place, Me cannot
 bbe there (logically conceiving) without its Correlate or
 Pole—the Not-Me; so thet, by the very act by which
 Me is evolved irom Brahman, its Comelate is also evolved,
 fand this Cormelate is RootMaticr. In the: socond place,
 projection, reflexion, and so forth presuppose not only the
 projecting or reflecting Boing (that which projects or re-
 fleets), bub ako something on which the projection or
                                 685
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
  reflection i cast, Projection out of nothing and projection
  into nothing will give us only nothing.
        ‘Where then there ie Matter thare
                                        is Mind, Whore there
  js no Matter ther is no Mind One is meaningles without
 ‘the other. Each is every whit as real as the other, But
  these is no Tadian systam which is Realist in the sense
 ‘that it holds that Mattar existe when there is no Mind to
 peresive it, Buch a state i inconceivable. He who alloges
 4b, Kioclf aupplion the perceiving Mind. In the Fist
 Standard! Mind* and the so-called “atoms”*      of Metter are
 separate, distinct and independent Reals Matter does not
 derive from Mind nor the letter from the former. In the
Second Standard’ both Matter and. Mind aro equally res,
 Dbut derive from © common source the Psycho-physial
 Potential* which ap suck is meter,” ‘Peychio’ here means
Mind as distinct from Consciousnass in the sense of Chit
 ‘This Paycho-physial Potential is a. Real! independent. of
 Consciousness which is the other Real. Tn the Thied
 Standard ag non-dval VodAuta the postion ia tho ame, ox-
 capt thas the Paycho physiol Potential snot an indepen-
 dent Real but ie the power of the One Supreme hasRealtrueas
 God. ‘The world is then Heal in the sense that it
 objective Reality for the individual Kxperienoers for the
 darntion of thei experience of it. No one denies this,If ulti-
       ‘The next question is the yroblom of Monism.
  rate Reality be One, how eam it be the couse of and be-
  ome the Univote. Iti anid thet Reality is of dual expect,
 rnunely, a8 ib isin reltion to the World as Ishvara, the
 ‘Lord of God, ad as iti in itself beyond such relation which
     1. NytyaValsbeshika
    2. Manas.
    8. Paramins
    4 Drew.
    5 sankbye-Yorn,
    6 Pai.
     1, LmStakya one; ta Shiva Darshana many.
                             684
                         CONCLUSIONS
 we may call Brahman. According to Mayivida, Ishvara
 is Brahman, for Tshvara is Brahman as soon through the
 Veil of May, that is, by the Paycho-physical Rxperienoer.
 But Brahman is no Ishvara because Brahman is the abso-
 Inte alogical Real, that ia, Realty, not ae conceived by
 ‘Mind ht ax it is in itsalf beyond all elation. ‘The notion
 of God as the Supremo Self is the highest concept imposed
 ‘on the alogial which, as it isin ital, is not « Self either
 supremo oF Hiited. ‘The Absolute as wuch is not a cause
 ‘There is, tiansoondentally speaking, no ration, m0
 Universe. The Absolute is snd nothing hippens. Tt is
 ‘only pragmatically « Conse. There is from this aspect
 xo nexus between Brahman and the World. In the
 logical order there is. What then is the Universe ' It
 jn in this connection that ik. is mid by some to be an
 “ithasion, which js an inapt term. or to whom         is it an
 “<Ilusion’” {Not to the Payého.physial Experimsr to
 whom itis admittedly seal. Nor is it an illusion for the
 Experienoo-Whole. It ia only by the importstion of the
logical notion of a Self to whom an object is real or unreal
 ‘that wo oan speak of sion. But there isin this state of
 ‘Liberation no Self) More comestly we eay that the World
 is Mays, But what is May in Mayivida ? It is not real,
 for it is neither Brahman nor sn independent Real, Nor
is it unreal for in the logical order itis veal. Tt is nether
 Brahman nor different from it aa an independent realty
 Te is unexplainable.” For this reason one of tho scholastice
of this System calls the doctrine of the Tasccutal
       Tn the doctrine of Power (Shektivada), Maj
 Divine Mother Power or Mahimiya. Tho two aspects of
           ‘as Brahman and Ishvara are accepted. The Lord
 is real, but that which we call ‘Lon is more than Lord,
                                        ivinn even the kaowledge that
 the phenomena have    ceased  to  appear    and are therefore wncel is
 pot found.   See  Das  Gupta:   Jadlan   Phiewpiy,     142,
     2. Anirvachansrs.
                                   685
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 for the Real is not adoquately defined in tera only of
 its relations to the Universe. In this sense it is slogical,
 ‘st is, “ beyond Mind and Spesch”. As the one ultimate
 Reality is both Ishvare and Brahman, in one aspect it is
 the Cause, and in the other it isnot. But itis one and the
 same Reality whichis both as ShivaShakti, As these are
 real ao are their appearince, the Universe. For the Uni-
 ‘verse is Shiva-Shakti, Tt is their appearance. When
 say it is their eppecrmce we imply thst there has been a
 zeal bevomiug ising from them as Power. Realizy bas
 ‘wo aspects. Fist as it isin itself, and secondly as it exita
 fas Universe. At base the Somoéra or worlés of Birth
 and Death and Moksha or Liberation axe One. For Shiva-
 Shalt are both the Experience-Whole and the Part which
 exists therein 68 the Universo, "Reality is a oonorate unity
 in duality and duality in unity. In practioe the One is
 realized in and as the Many‘and the Many as the Oze. So
 in the Shikta Wino ziual the worshipper conceives himself
 ‘to bo Shiva Shakti as tho Divine Mother. 1¢ is She who
 as and in the person of the worshipper, Her manifestation,
 consames the wine which is again Herslf, the Saviouress
in liquid form.‘ Tris mot only he who as a separate Self
 does #0. ‘This principle ia applied to all Man's function
 ings and is of cardinal importance from a Mouistio stand-
 point notwithstanding its welldmown abuse in fact.
         Real is again used in the senso of eminence. ‘The
 Real in that which is for itelfand has reason for its being
 in ital, ‘The Real as God is the perfect and changeless
 tand ths“ Good”.* The Universe is dependent on the Ens
 Realissimum, for i proceeds from it and is imperfect as
 limited and changeful and in a sense it is that which does
not endure and       in this senoe
                                 is called ‘unreal’. ‘Though,
 hhowever, the Universe comes and goes it does s0 eternally.
 ‘The Supreme Cause is etarlly creative, The Real is then
  7Tie Drvanayt                              ee
       2. The      ingof Sh
                      CONCLUSIONS
  both infnite Changeless Being 2 wlio unbegining and
unending process as the Becoming. In this systethe         m
 Real both is ani becomes. Tt yet becomes without dero-
 f2tion from ite own changeleemess, as it were a
 of Life which pours itelf forth incesuntly from enFountain
 sad Suess somos, Both the ifte and Siteinfiniteane
       ‘Real in again used in the sease of interest end value
 and of the ‘worth while’. In this sense, the worshipp
 prays to be led from Unreality to Reality, but this doeter
 not mean that the world is unreal, but thet i is not the
 suprome worth for him.
       In whatever sense, then, the term Real is used the
 Universe is that. Al is real for es Upaniahad says, * All
 this Universe is verily, Brabmaa”.®) The Scriptura
 says “AID. Tt doesnot say “This” be not “That”.l Text    ‘The
 ‘whole is an alogical conceote Reality which is Unity in
 Duality and Duality in Unity. ‘The doctrine dose not
 love hold of either the One or the Many, and for this exaon
 the Lord Shiva suys in the Kolkmava ‘Tantea, “There are
 seme who seek dualism and. some non-dualina, but my
 Aoctrine is beyond both.” That is, it takes account of
 and reconciles both Dualism and Non-Dualis,
       Reality is no mere abstraction of the intellect making
 jettison of all that is conerete and varied. Tt is the
 perience-Whole whose object is Ttael€ a8 such Whole, Ie
 is also Partial Experience within that Wholo. ‘This vaio
 of Whole and Part is alogical, not unknowable, for thoie
 unity ip. fact of actual experience just as we have the
unity of Power to Be and Power to Beoome, of the
 Conscious and Unconscious, of Mind and Body, of freedom
 and determination, and other dnalities of Man's experi
 encing
    1, Sarvam Kbalvidem Brahe
                            687
                       APPENDIX I.
   Quarquus Coxcerss Foxpanmyraux prs Hnsnovs.
    (Deux Conférences données par Pintem & la Societé
  “Artistique et Littéraire Francaise de Caleatia, 1917).
                              L
       Lomque je fus prié de faire une conférence ot oblige
 de fuiro choix d'un sujet, je n'ai pu penser qu’ celui qui
 sf si fortament intéresé pendant des années et duqual je
ppuin parler avec quelque connaissance.
 pe Test pourtble que aucune entre vou le trouveront
 aside; mais ne valaitil pes mieux traiter d'un sujet sur
 Tequal jfavais quelque chose & dire que de rsquer @éveller
pou d'intérét on vous par Ik maniére dont jarais pu parler
 Ge choses qui en avaient également peu pour moi.
       Tai eu Pabord Vintention de yous parler de objet
 do mes études sotuelles, du “Serpent” ;—le mot représente
te pouvoir cctlte éveilé dan le corps bumain porls “Yous”.
 Bile sujet vous intérs, pout-étrs pourronsnous Vshorder
 nine tre fois. Mais & Is réBexion, Yai cone qu'il fallait
 commence de manitxe plus éldmentaire—per les premiers
 pincipes,~ oar ce qu auras ditaurait pu dtr inintlligible.
 Ht parmi ces prindipes, je ne puis choisir que quelques
 concepts conducteurs et les tmiter de fagon courante et
 ‘sperfcielle. Sur chacon de cee concepts dl y ourait un
 volume a écrie. Chacun d'eux est un concept fondamental
 de Ia Penaée Tindove :—Vedo (Connsissence), Brahman ou
 Shiva (Dieu) ot 9 Puissunce (Shakti ;1'Univers évalué
 per Lui et de Lui, Karma (action), Dharma (moralité,
 ‘Svarga (ciel), Novak (enfer), Mokshs (Libération).
       ‘A quelle sutorité foul sen reférer'—telle et la
 preniéee question, Par quelle éprenve peut-an avoir ai
tune chose    est vrnie 1 Ts éponse est: “par expérience”.
                            688
                         APPENDICES.
 TLy a une oxpltience censorielle quo nous acquérons par les
 fens et esprit, Personne ne discute ‘ela, Mais ily@ ce
 que les Hindows appellant “SchOle-darshin,”"—des hommes
 ‘vue grosaire, & vue étzoite, qui limitent lexpSrience & ce
 plan matériel
       Ainsi les matériaistes Hindous (Lokayata) n’admettent
 agu'une ospico de preuve—la percoption (Pratyaksha). Mais
 VHindou orthodoxe nous dit point du tout. L'expérience
 apirituele n'est pas moins réelle que celle acquise dans le
 plan physique. Naturellement estte demitre peut-étre
 SprowvSe d'une manidze qui n'est pas permiso pour autre,
 Siu homme déclare quill « va des montagnes au centre du
 Aéeort australion,        chaoun pout aller li-bss et vérifier ow
 conteedite son astertion. Mais s'il nffirme qu'il a conversé
‘sveo un Esprit ou rep une illumination, il peué ou meati ou
 tre abuse; et commont dans’ oss-cas verifier? Cette
 ‘vétflcation peut avoir ou ne pas avoir d'importance ; mais
 supposons gu’lle en ait une, Supporons qu'un homme
 prétende qu'il a trouvé la voie expérimentale d’un grand
 bonheur (Mobeulcha), et cette assurance d’esprit qui permet
 ‘bran homme da vogner dans des régions dangerenses, extra-
 yant du venin mame (Visha) le nectar de Vimmortalité
 (Amrita) ; dans ce ote nous “pouvons étre intéresiés a
 savoir ai oe quil dit est veai. Il est possible que ce ne
 soit pas vind; mais si clest vrai, ce n’en est pasmioins we
 fexpétience, méme oi nous ne pouvons la vécifier par lessens.
 ‘LiHindow dit quelle peut étre vérfiée en ayant In méme
 expérience sorméme, “Allezot faites de méme." ‘Toutes
 Jes pratiques (Sédband) sont des moyens d'atteindre un
 risultat particulier. Le maftre dit, ‘Je sais veci dizecte-
 ment.” est ce qu'on appelle Aparokshe Jaina, “Vous
  pouves m’en croire.”” Sion avcepte, cst de a comnaissanoe
 indirecte avi de seoonde main. (Paroksha Jndina) “Si vous
 n’étes pas peéts & aocepter ma déclaration maintenant, faites
  ‘comme je vous indique et vous pourrez aoquérir V'expérience
  ‘yous mémes, Gest lo auoots (Siddhi) obtenu par son
                                    689
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ceascignement qui est In preuve rélle de Vantorité dun
 Shastze.
       a philosophic et la religion hindoues sont basées sar
 1e Yeas.
       Veda vient du radical senserit “Vid” qui signifi
 “Sovoir”. Sevoir quoi! Ce qui a le plus de valeur &dire
 su—Dieu, Cest co que les Hindous appellent Paramartha,
 le supréme objet du désir et des tentatives. Ce qui sppart
 cent su monde ext appellé Artha, Le Veda est done Vexpéri-
 ‘ence spirtualle ot Ip constat de celle,
       Tea Vésités ales existence ot le lois qui gouvement
 leurs monifestationsne sont pass inventées par "homine wnais
 sout éiemelles. Vala en tant que sagese divine, eat une
 forme de Dieu (Brohmavedamtiti), qui apperait dans
 esprit des voyants (Rishi), qui eurne sont pas le auteurs,
 1mais les commémorateus de la véritd vue et repreduite par
 eux, Les Rishi voient la, vérité aveo low toisiéme       cal ow
 cil spititvel Gufaachakstu). ls n'inventent pas mais
 coregistrent Ta vérité qui lear est xévilée. Ainsi cst un
 constat dexpéti ence spintualle. Llexpérience sensorielle
 cot suns valeur dans les domaines qu dépastent lessens
 {(Atfadriya). Pour oes il y 8 la prenve appellée “autorité
 verbale” (Shatds ou Veda), Cette preuve ost lo téocignage
des choses nonvues. Elle est la révélation de oe qui est
 conn comme étant entenda (Shruti. Ta multitude dépend
 nécessaireent pout I connaissance de oes vérités, de ceux
 qui les ont “vues” directement et dont les expériences sont,
 enregistrées dans le Shruti, Crest une Svidence secondaire.
 Lvidence primaire est de wir par soiméme. L’Hindow
 croit & Ja réalité de In connaissance spirituelle et pense que
‘dans des conditions convenables, toute pestonne, ayant les
 qualieations névewies, ct qui suit lee préceples des
 oritares verra la vérité,noa obsourdoent comme au travers
 une lentil, au moyen des sens et de esprit, mais cinecte-
 ment. La Tradition, d'aocord avec le Veda, est eonnue
 sous le nom de Smrit
                               690
                      APPENDICES
       La Vodint est Ia dernire partie des Vel tmitant de
 J comnaissonce spirtulle, Yautre partie constituant la
   ection mtuslique, considésés comme “connaissance in
 frioure”. IL y a deux espices hommes, dont le premidre
 ‘comprend les mondainsqui posen des sets, bons oumasrais,
 ave lo désir den récolter les fruits (Saitme). Pour os
 fens, ily a le connaissance inforioure. Pour les autres,
 eatrdvecoux qui agent sana le dir d'une r6compense
 ulvéieue, il y & la aageana éeotérique. Lenasignement,
 sotérique qui eat content dans les Upanishads est inttulé
 Vedinta ou “fn des Vedae". Vedinta sigaife exsiemont
 ‘Upanisbad, o'est-idiee Ved, et non pas aucune philosophie
 partioalére. Ty a planar interpeétations do Veddats,
 Qi sont des philwophios wéantiques d’éoles vardes —,
 lualistes, monistes qualiides, @t monistes. Dershana, ow
Philosophie, vient radical Drish Voir,” earls ptilosophie
 donne la vision mentale. qui, permet @éperesveir la vrivé
 rovélde par les paroles da Veda
       Tes" oviantalistes cocidantaux souvent sonsdézent la
 philesophie vedantique comme ure simple métaphysique
 diana le sens da spéculation intllectulle. 1 est posible
 que fait il soit sins. Jone le erois yas, mais je ne
 loutorapas, Il est suffizantde Aire quick
 ‘point sinsi, Le Brofesout Deieen dénsture toute
 Ssion quand il la teaite en simple métapkysique et de-
 tmande sux Hindows d'y adhérer comme tlle. Pourquoi
 adhtressientils A une métapliysique queloonque Quelle
 en es Io prouve “Tarkapratisnthangs” stilseule.”dit, aJe
 Contaaie, "Rien n'est Gabli par ln discussion
 puis émestre une théore, 6t vous, plus edroit, pourrez la
 ‘onteedize t ea émettre ine seconde qui sera démentie     pax
 ting tise, Aust afrment is que la          base deta philoso
 Phie ext Ia névation, ou oxpétionce spsiuelle. Le Pro-du.
 fessear Deiwsen, quis, je emis, iudiélo scholastique
 soyen-age, aint ose fit on reconnaissantqo Ie position
  crthodoxe sx Indes est similaire & calle de In scbolastique
                              69
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘ctholigue, ancienne ox moderne. La philosophie modeme
 fen goneral est & la recherche de Is vérité: on essume que
 celle-ci existe, mais on ne sit ce quielle est. Pourtant un
 ‘Hindoz, ou an eatholigue, on un chrétien, acoeptant 'autorité
 e In révélatin, ne cherche pas Ia véritéde cette mani.
T sait A6ja ce quelle est, car la rév6lation le lui dit. Il ne
 Ja cherche que dans oe sens qui sfforve de compzendre ce
 quilt et non de Aéoouvrir quelque chose qu'il ne sat pas.
 ‘erreur du Professour Deussen est commune aux orienta
 listes, mais je cite son cas parce qu'il est Iui-méme cet oiseau
 ‘are, un orientaliste métaphysicien qui kime et admire son
‘sujet et‘effozce de lui rendre justice, car il conselle 'soceptar
 tion de Venseignement védaztique. Mais comprend-i vrai-
 ment le Vedinta quand il le considére comme une spéeu-
 lation et en couselle’soceptati               on | IL n'sccepte
                                      comme telle
 pas Ia possihilité de communion spinitualle ou Yoga.
 ‘Lrensemble de la deetsine hindowe se base sur ele. lle ne
 ‘pose pos en fait uno supposition spéoulative, mais une
 octrine rével6e qui ext une expérience spirtuelle, expdri-
 fenoe qui peut-étze aoyulse per quiconque est qualié pour
 Faoquétir, Ta fonction de Ie philosophie est de ccordonner
 ‘et de séconciir lee enseignoments du Veda, de les expliquer
 cet de lea fortfir par Jes conclusions de Ia raison, Car nous
 sommes faits dune pidoo, ot ce qui estirationel ne peut étre
   pinituellement veal. esprit ext venu de Dieu et cherche
  le comprandre dant le plan matériel. Tl ne faut pss
  sapposer que Sa nature ot la Vérité concernant le monde
  soient telles, qu'ellea violent la zaicon qui mane également
  de Lai et, sous cette forme, est Laiméme.
        Te sujet des Vedas et dautres Beritures est ‘Tativa,
  quieat  la nature do Dien, ou Brahman, et Dharma (moralité),
  dont explique le sens plus tard. Shastra (Keriture), vient
  du radical “Shas,” “contabler,” car 'Beritare ooutrOle 1a
  conduite des hommes,
        Ta sujet de Brahman est immense. Je ne puis faire
 ‘que quelque marques. Brahman (Dieu) vientde Bringha
                                  602
                         APPENDICES
 qui veut dite exister partout, car Diew est cat Hire qui existe
 en toutes choses. Il eat Celi sans panel (Advaya).
      Aucun Hindow xe eroit en plus d’un Dieu comme
 Auteur ot Mattre do univers. Je parle des Hindous pro-
 pprement dits. Je no sais pss ce qu'il en est des tribus
 shorigines. Les livres dTorientalistes et de_missionnsires
 ‘vous parleront de plusious millions de “Dieux”. Mais
 PHindou nveat pas ronponsable do eeld. Is n'a jamais
 qualifé ces dtres comme dieux. Ce sont les orientalistes et
 Jes missioasires qui Pont fait, et se retournant ensuite, ont
 it: “comme tout cela est about!”
      ie mot traduit par “Dien” est Deva, ox Devatt, qui,
littéralement signfie “Radieux”. Ces “Radieux,” comme
les anges de Venssignement chrétien, sont des étres supra-
physiques ovcupant difcents grades dans Is hiérarchie de
existence. Les nna sont teés élovéa et d'autres infdrours
‘Ly a susi dev xprite maling,“Aucun de tous cowx-ci a'eat
Dieu dacs le sens européen. Il est dit exprenément qu'il
ont émanéde Brahman ou Dieu. QuandIe mot Devatt eat
employé & propos de Celui, Je mot Supréime (Para), 7 est
aénéraloment     attaché (Peradevata),. Mais le nom ordinsize
de Dien est Brahman, et encore plus souvent Ishvara (le
Seigneur)lo motsignifiant “Chui qui dirige, qui commande”.
Quelquefois Diew est adoré sous le nom de Shiva qui           signise
“le Bon,” ou de Vishnu qui signe“ Celui qui remplit tout".
Brahman, Vishnu, Shiva ou Rudra, la ‘yinité hindoue
(Cimaucti ne sont qu'un Diou dansacs trois différents aspects,
comme Créateur, Soutien et “Destructeur” du monde.
Brahman est désigné dans le Brahmasutra comme Celui
dont proobde Univers, par qui il est maintena, et dans qui
il est disous. Les éeoles discutent, de méme quilles le
font en Burope, dans quel sens cette definition doit &tme
comprise, et quels sont les rapports entre Tunivers, V'ame
de Phomne et Diew.
      Pourtmnt tontes sont accord sur In défnition, quelle
‘que soit leur maniére de Vinterpriter. Elles acceptent
                                693
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘toutes que la nature (Svartipe) de Brahman est Btw in-
 changeable (Sat), Conscience (Chit), et Béstitude (Rnands).
 ‘lest la Béstitade supréme, Tout bonheur terreste viext
 4e hi, o next que fraction transitire et mél de douleur
 desa Béatitude. Il possédela Béstituie qui ne varie jamais.
       On a dit de Brahman la méms chose que o® quan
 trouve dans les Keritnres occidentales, Le Hangs Upa-
nih dit qu'll et Ia Paix Shinta) au delb. de tote compré-
 hhension humaine,
       “Le coeur est agité tant qu'il n'est pas parvenu jus
 qu’ Lai,” dit St Augustin : ot dos sigoles evant Ini I'Upani-
shad dissit Ia méme chose en affmant qu’ “Test Béstitude,
et seul est hourenx celui qui V's trouvé.” Brohman est le
‘principe, sans changement, de toute notre expérience. Par
Lai, nows pensons et agissons, nous entendons, gottions, ot
finsi de suite. Sa conscience est [a fondation sur laquelle
sont batis notes esprit (Mind) ot lea objets qu'l pergcit. Le
Monde est Brahman car il n'est rien qui ne soit ui. Mais
Braluman n’est pas le Monde, car Il y ext non sculement
jmmanent, mais I le dépease,
      ‘L'Univers existe en Lai, se meut en Lui et se dissout
en Lai, St Paul aussi dit : “en Tai nous vivons.” Notre
monde et le grand univers dont il n'est qu'un fragment,
ne sont qu'une “tension” limitéeet changeante dans Vinfinie
ft invariable surface du calme geéan de la Constience,
Comme le dit Vimpartil et savant iclandais, professeur
Ballentyne, on « couvent aoousé & tort lee Vedintistas
de peécende que Je plénoménal est le réel, tandis que
YYenstignement veui est sinsi reaversé On les a aconsés,
eux et leur doctrine, dm certain nombre d'autres choses.
On adit par exemple que existence de Brakman est comme
tun bloc de pierre, qu'elle n'est rien, car ello est sans les
attribuis de [existence phénoménsle, et autres absurdités.
 Je moommande & eenx qui sont désireux de porter des
 Accusations de s'instroire & Yavance deleur sujet. Gomme
le fait remarquer le Dr. Ballantyne dana son “‘Hindouiame
                             604
                      APPENDICES
 comparé ou Chrstianiame,”" quand V'ndigine intrait do 6
 pays découvre       qu’on porte dex accusations siicules, il
 etint      ceux qui les portent comme des gens inférieur,
 incapables do tompronde s8 croyance,
        Voild pour Vinteligance. nsnite passous & Vespect
 spirituel de ces critiques. Un Sannyte! (ascte) de I'lnde
 cecidentale, quand des gens vensient demander son avis sur
 des points controverses et du mmo genre, avait coatame
 de xépendse: “Penser-toujours & Dieu ot ne dies du mal
 A'oucune religion.” Si lox gens avaient tonjoun cette
 ‘pennée poécente A Pespri, il n'aassient jamais ni Je tomps,
 ni Vonvie do parler sm mal. Comparons cette attitude
 avec les horibes persdeutions qui ont déshonord Voecident
et les querelles (tant pis pour les bypoctisis de nos jours)
 ‘qui durent eatze les Siculaistex et lex Eglines, et entre les
 Betiss‘be ells-mémes
            monde est sortie Brakman pat volonté      ou Shakti
 qui est ommés     la Mére de Univers. Pour luster davant-
 ‘go les remanques dja faites, un critique orientalis amér-
 cain nomme oette adoration dels Mize une doctrine pour
 sfimgetter monistes. Je n'ai pas le temps @expliquer
 ici combion cette affrmation est ridicclament erronée
 Cette doctrine n'a pas plus de rapport avec In question
 {niniste quievec les pensions clo vellesse. Maia comment
 blimer V'Amérieain quand nous touvons un Hindow dis
 ‘ingué qui dit quo les Shktas, oa fidéles de In Maro (0
 broux dans le Bengale) pansent que Diew “st une femme”
 (Gi), eb ce sontsespropres mots, “est-mne femme”. Lrexpli-
 Cation ext que I'Hindou en question, quoique Sanskeitits
 isting, Gait si européanisé qu'il ne pouvait plus com-
 prendze les idées de son pays—De plus, il appertensit &
 “ine des seotes soi-disant réforméss, qs pratique un mélange
 @Phindouisme ot de protestantisme anglais ot était 'antago-
 histo par tanpéeument de pavcllas eroyences. Le mot
 “"Yftce” comms le mot “Pare”, sont pris dans notzo plan
 comme symboles, On sppelle Diew “Mere”, non parce
                              695
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 aqu'll est masculin ow féminin, car Dieu dépasse tout sexo,
 wai parce que, comme Ia mére humaine porto ot nowrsit
 son enfant, Diew congot, porte, nousst et protige le monde.
 ‘Les uns emploient le mot “MBre”. Le Bhsma insensé (ainsi
 qu'on a suraommé un religioux tantrigue du sidele dernier),
 cisait: A am homme qne je cannais at qui avait perdu. s
‘bre: “les mires ot sou qui ont euoé ae lait sont marta,
 rnaia celui qui a sucle lit de soins do la Mire Universelle
‘est immortal.” D’autres Voppellent “Pere”. Mais le Péro
ct Is Méxo ne ao querellent pis & ce propos, quoique leurs
enfants le fassent. Voild pour la question de dévotion.
        Philosophiquement Shakti, qui vient du radical “Shak”
 “Gxe capable”, ou “pouvoir”, dénote Vaspect cinéiique
fou monvant de ls Supréme Conscionoe qui ment le monde,
tout comme Brabman on Shiva dénotent Vapect statique
fou sars changement de la Conscience, I y a dono du
changement daus Vinvasiabiité. Brahma, en tant que
i-méme, ne change pas. Brahman en tant que monde,
change.
        ‘Apris svoir examiné la connsisance fondamentale de
Dieu et de sa Puissance, je passorai an monde qui est issu
de Ini, Le monde, en sanseit st le “Jagat”, un mot qui
signifie “mouvement”, ear le monde oonsidéeé dans son
ensemble ot dane chaque atOme, est une chose continuelle-
font mouvante. Rien ne s'aréte un seul moment. Aw
contzaie, Brahman est immobile.
        Te mionde es: composé d'Eaprit (Mind ou Antahkacont),
cet de Matidre (Bhita). La Mate nous est rélle peniant
fn durée, mais n'est pas uno chose indestructible elle qu'elle
te manifeste. Elle se trensforme en ether, Vsther en esprit,
(mind) et Texprt en Conscience. Quoique notre grand
posite aio dit, il ya plasioum sole, que none sommes de la
Iéme étoffe      que es Réves, “Wo are such stuf as dreams aco
madeof” ; ce est que sécemment quel sienee occidentale
cst arrivde aux méines conclusions. La Matis et TBapst
(Guind) représentent les aspects objectifs ct subjectits de
                             656
                        APPENDICES
 existence. Ce qui est pour nous “objet” ext “sujet” en
 Iniaméme, Reprt (mind) et Matiére sont des formes de la
 ons; 21 408 rappin se! pols casei: ans. kT
 les ides hindones, esprit (mind) est, ou bien, (car ln étoles
 ‘arient),    une foree incanscientsen fait, ou bien une apparence
 ainconscience.
       T/Espeit (Mind) ert un limitation (calle on apparente)
 dela Conscience. Crest Ia Conscience, qui est In source de
 TTeaprit ot Ie fond do toute experience. Cotte fore est une
 raxifeststion de Shalti, qui de sa propre nature est
 Conscience, Tl ne faut. pas identifier Yesprit (find) eveo
 1s Conscinoe. Ce nest qu'un instrument de 1a Consci-
 ‘ence. Deu et sans In pensée tale que ous Ia concevous
 (Amanah), mais TL est la Consciente elleméme. Esprit
 (ind) et matitee sont done ting manifestation de la Consei-
 ‘ence, qui est le principe invariable de Fexpérience, par
 lequel nows pensons et pisans. Comme toutes les choses
 prvotdent de Shakti, ou Puissance de Dieu, et comme
 Shakti on la Puissance de Dieu est Conscieuce, en fin de
 compte, matitre ox esprit (nnd), tout et Conscience.
 Pourtent eb noturelement nous ne petceyons point ceci, eat
‘notze nature ext dans la Guali, Nous envisageons les choses
 comme existant en dehors do nous ot elles sont extérioures
 pour la conscinnce limite de homme. Mais "homme ot
 PFoniversne sont que de minuscules partes du grind “Boi”?
 ou Brahman, qui expétimente univers comme Lni-mtene,ex:
 fon Bhakti, “le Coour du Seigneur”, suivant une belle
 pression de In Pardpraveshikd, Dane Vhomme,             il y a une
                                                               mais
 distinction entre le sujet et Vobjet, esprit at matidze,i serait
 ‘une parelle distinction   n'existe   pas  en  Dieu,  car
     1 divisé en parties et limité. Tl est lo Conscianee Su-Le
        Jc, qui es Béstitade, qui Elle méme est Amour.
 Moi prime (Atm8), eat aon propre objet
       Ls “oj unique”, dans aon Partdis do bonheur supnizne,Ja
 fu dela des moudes du bien et da mal mélés, entendForce
 ‘voix du Serpent qu'on appelle Kundalint (dui est le
                                oor
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 qui s’entouls) ; et c'est Hlle qui, pelerisant In. Conscienco
 unique en objet et eujet, la projetis dans les mondes de la
 ‘dualitéet du bien et du inal, dont Is limite est le teanckane
 de Ia lame fiasuboyante de Papée de la déexse Kilt
                                0
      Ta dernitce fois {fi dtndid tes concepts de Veda on
 Conneissance Spitituelle, Brahman ou Shiva (Diew), et sa
 Paiseance (Shale); Univers (Iagst) 6volné par Tri et de
 Ini, Esprit (Mind) ot Matiére. Aujourd’hul fexeminerai
 ceux de Atmé (le Moi); Dasrma ou Morlité; Karma
 (Actiou) ; Svarga (Ciel); Naralen (Enfer) et le Bonheur
 Saprime, Molshs ou Libération
       Ty aun “Moi” quion appelle Atma. Cet Atma est
 “Btre-Conacience-Béatitude” (Secbchidananda). IL ¢ deux
 aspects, suivant qu'il est transcendant et non-manifesté, ou
 immanent et manifests, Ceatdie, dans énonciation
 ‘Biropéenne, suivant que nous V'envisegions comme Diew, on
 homme et sues eréatuces. Dans son aspect transoendant
 ‘suprime, Atma est appelé Paramatma, qui veut dire Moi-
 Supréme, Dieu ost le seul Moi-Supréme. Shiva est Para-
 imiitma, cor Tl existe en Ini-méme. Sous un antre aspect,
“Atsut eat appelé Sivatuit Lezadical“ Jiv” signifi * Vivre”
 et Jivatma, par coméquent, est Atma se manifestant dans
 tous les dimes, c'estabdire les créatures qui, aéanmoins, ne
 sont que des formes imitéss du Supréme Shiva d’on elles
 ‘viennent.
      Philosophiquement Jiva ou JivitmA est toute forme
 Gétre manifesté, organique ou inorganique. Populairement
 Te terme Jiva est appliquéA la vie organique sous la forme
 @Stres vivants. Suivent le Monisme Indien,i n'y a qa’un
 Kimi. Paramttmé et Jtvitma sont un. Diou et la
 Geéature vont un; mais dans qusl cons? Ceci n'est
 ‘géutralement pos compris. Prenons n/importe quel komme
 fn particulier. Ul est un Keprit (Spirit) en esprit (mind) et
 ‘matiéce (body). Son esprit ou son corps sont habiles ox
                               668
                      APPENDICES
 stupldes, gronds ow petita, et ainsi de auite. Il eat évident
 que pour outant quil est une forme particule esprit,
 (qind) et de matitre (body), il ne peut éire semblable &
 ‘Dieu considéréen Li-méme (Svartips ou propria forma), est
 ‘ce dernier est pur Esprit (Spirit). Mais pour autont que
 Vhomme est Esprit il est un aveo Dieu. L'Esprit (Spirit)
 cestun. L'Raprit (Spirit) n'est pas divinéen classes srperi:
 ‘es ou inférioares, premiize ou seoonde, comme en chemin
 ae for, Lhomme en tant qu’Beprit (Spit) n'est, per
 conséquent, pes diffrent de Dieu en tant qu’Bsprit (Spirit)
‘Mois Phomme, poar sutant qu'l et esprit (mind) ext matiére,
 nest pas semblable A Dieu tel quil est en luiméme, ear
 ‘TL est pur Esprit (Spirit). Mais alors, peuiron demacder,
 que sont esprit (Blind) et matidre ? On ne peut pas dire
 quill y ait quelque chore qui ne soit-Diew en aucun sens, car
 dang oe oas, il y aura Dieu et non-Dieu, et Diew ne serait
 ‘es infin et omniprésent.Ily warsit qualaue chove of I! ne
 sexsit pas—Le réponse eat que, alors quo Vesprit et Is
 rmatidrs ne sont pas co que Diew cat en Iu-mame, eo qu'on
 appalle en sansetit son Svartpa, (en latin propcie fora),
 Sle sont su putisance dapporatire sows des formes limitées
 qui est appel6o Shakti, Il ext Beprit (Spct) ou Btre-Con-
 science-Béatitade. Se Puissanoe engendre esprit (mind) et
 ratibre, qui sont des formes de forces inconscientes : ce
 qui vext dire qu'll nous apparait sous oss formes. Par
  ““apparence” comme espzit et mtitre, il ne faut pas com-
 ‘prendre que “ui” dans son aspect aupréme change en coci
  co cola, mais bion Vexpécionco que nous avons do Lui. Ba
 runé, la vraie nature inteme étemelle ds Vhomme est
  Esprit (Spirit) quest. Lanatare extérieure, ou véhicule
  de Vesprt, est d’apparence multiple. Mais esprit et matiére
 sont.l8 puissance manifestée de Dieu, et la puitsance ‘nest
 pas diferente de.son poseesteur. D's lore, Pomme comme
  Esprit est un avec Dieu (Brahman ou Shiva), ct comme
  ‘esprit (mind) et comps, est une manifestation particule de
  0 Puitsance ou Shalti. Shakti, et Tai, dans lequel elle
                                 699,
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 existe (Shaktimin), ow possessour de puissance, ne sont
 gu’. On dit: “Aime ton prochain comme toi méme."*
 ‘Lindow dit: “Oui, paree qu’su fond il est toi-méme."
       Dharma est un concept magnifique. On le traduit,
 por Religion, Devoir, Lai, Bonnss Oeuvres, Usages, Coutames,
 Mésite, Piété, Moralité, et sinsi de suite. Adharma est lo
 contraire de toutes ces significations de Dharma, Mais
 nous devons plonger plus avant si nova youlons saisie In
 profondeur ds ce concept. Voyons d’abord, oomme je le
 fis toujours, 'Gtymelogs.
       Dhscmn vien:duadical       “Dri” “content,” “soulever"
 Crest oe qui soutient univers (Dbariyate). Cert oe gui fait,
 ‘ung petsoane ou d'une chose ce quelle sont, et en méme
 ‘temps les diffrencie meds Yantre, Dharma signif le
 rsture d'une chose (Syalalahanadhérandt dharma). Ainsi,
 est le Dharma cu few de brler du poisson de nager, de
 homme de penser et de litter pour es bats Jes plns slevés.
 Creat done    Ia loi fondamentale un éize, Den réaulte que
sium dire not pas cetta loi il sutio ot pért        Ta fois.
 tum animal mang: des oliments contraires & sa nature, il
 offense son Dhssina, Chacune de os maladies est une
 offense consiente ou inconstiente ¢ontte les lois de notre
 fre physique. Chaque péehé ext une ofense conte notte
 tre moral. Ainsi diton que la moralité est partie da Ia
 nature dime personne. Co n'est pas une chose artiscill,
 ingpicde dn dehors comme le serait 'Ukase d'un Tear Us
 ‘verse, cest-dire quelque chose qui pent 6tre ow n'étre pas.
       ‘Ble est nécotsirament compre dans Texistanc, oat
 ‘ll to nature existence. $i Vhomme suit le Dhamma, il
 pprospite dant ce monde ou dans te futur (Poraloks). "Si
 Vhomne suit le Dharma en faisant de bonnes actions avec
 ledésir de récolte les frais de ses actes ita sn ciel Svarga);
 s'l commet de mauvaises actions, il ia en enfor (Neral)
 (0 sont dea 6tate de Vame dans lesquels elle existe aprés la
 mort et avantla prochaine rfincamation. Le Vishnu Purana
 dit que la vertu est Ice, le vite Venter, et Venfor ext ce qui
                                 700
                         APPENDICES
 fait mal, Ni Venter ni le ciel ne sont élemnels. Aucune
des bonnes actions commises dans une vie limite ne mésive
Je ciel Gtecnel, ni les mauvatses actions V'enfer étemel, Rien
n'est demel que Brahman, Si les bonnes actions sont
‘commises de fajon déeinteresage, sans désir your In récom~
pense, msis en offrande au Seigneur, et si "homme atteint
ls vésitable connsissence spirituelle, slo Y'ame est libérée.
De quoi t~du monde des formes et par conaéquent de 1a
soufrance. est un état qui dépaase let cels of les enters,
 car il ext éternel, et eux sont transitoies.
       Te Karma détermine la renaissance et suai la jouis-
sance du ciel ou ley tourments de Venter. Le mot vient da
“Kei"\—fnire, agir, et signe toute action. Comme je
Vai dif, tout univers so ment. Rien ne santo, méme
pour un seul monent, -L'homme est toujous agissent,
“Action” ne signife pas seulement action extérieure,
comine de rene Tes bras ot Tes jambes, mais ans V'sotion
‘mentale (Mdnaaloiy8) de la penage. E¢ eomme on lo sat,
‘plus ection cat répetée ou prolongés, pls elle tend & ve
reproduire. Cest ainsi que naiteent les Ibitudes, Nous
‘nous tiodelons sur le carantére ie not acts.
       Ainsi un homme profondément attaché & la méte-
physique regardere naturollement les choses dans un état
esprit philosopbicue. Cold s'eppelle Sangslara, ou impres-
sion, tendaroe, Si tn homme répite constamment des
scten (Karma) charitables, ces actes prodaisent sur Pime
tune impression appelée Sangskima qui reste imprimée aprs
que les actes gui Vont produite ont été accomplis. Cette
Songskare, ou impression, tend & se manifester dans l'avenir
per d'autres actes ohsritabes. L'homme devient de dis-
 positions charitables.
       De méme pont les mauvaises actions et tendances,
Karma Gent bon ou manvais. Le bon Karma engendire le
Donkeur directement dans cette vie, dans l'autre monde
fappelé Parsloks, et dans des incamations futares. Le
mauvaia Kerma ongendzo le melbour. Quand un homme
                                yor
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 rmeurt, son corps périt, mais son ame demoure. Cette time
 et le corps vital et mental. Le corps mental porte les
 impressions (Sangskdn) du Karma. Et quand le moment
 srrive de Is fin de la, durée du ciel ot de Venter, cos Sangs-
 kira ow tendances latentes mGrissent et Ubomme renait
 dens m corps confomme & son Karme préeddent qui est
 nommé Adrishta, ou valeur morale, L’anivers a on but
 moral. Il nous dosine le champ dans lequel nous pouvons
 gofter ou sour lee conséquensss do nos actes et gngner
 foule celou la Libération. Les mémes principes s'appliqnent
 pour Ta dissolution de Tunivers.. Car, comme Vindividu
‘mourt, a jour univers entier périrs. Ty a des detructions
 pportelles et totales. Dans cos demniétes T'univers entier
 etoume & ls Puissance de Dion dont il est issu, et aprés
 ‘un certain temps, il sungit 8) nouvesu de Zai.—Pourquoi ?
 Liexplcation est que 8a volon’é (Shadi) contient, quoign’en
 ‘masse indisceraible, Vonivers, consistant dans Vensemble
 des Songskira, Le Shale d’sbord obsourcit 1a conscience
 de fagon quelle ne se recannait pas elle-mésne, maisse oroit
  un individu aéparé    de Diow et des eutres onéstares et de cet
  obscurissement (Avidy8) najsent les Saugskbra on ten-
  dances, et de celles-i 'ama (Antablarane) et le corps qui
  accomplissent des actes dapris le Karma antérieur, Dieu,
  fn exéant le monde, agit avec justice, car il crée chacan
  suivant ses aotions antésoures. Si nous souffrons main-
  tenant, cest parce que nous avons par nos acies merité
  de soufri. Si nous n'avons pas merité pareille soufrance,
 Titre Supsine, d’aprés en idées hindows, est accusable
 injustice et de partials, & moins que vous ne puiosiez
 donner quelqs’ explication qui Vexempte. Ba séalité,
 totes les théorss ne sont des expliations que daas une
 certaine meswe. “Omnia exeont in mysterium,” IL y &
 es questions dont on ne trouve. 1a solution que dans Vex
 ‘périence spirituelle. Ainsi dans le Brihad@rasyakopanishad,
 Je gran sage Yajnavalleya. avait répondu mx questions
 indiscrtes   de safemme, la oflbre   ct savante Gargl. “Garg,
                                 702
                       APPENDICES
 nfen demande pas trop! Preads gunde que ta t8fe n'éclate,
 Tne faut pas trop demander surla Divinité. Tu en deman-
 des trop ; Garg, “n’en demande pas t2op!"
       a vrais explicetion, (i yen dune), est celle du Bhakta
 ou dévot: “Cat Sa Volonté” Junqua un oxrtain point
 pourtant, Ia théotis de Kamns et de la réincamnetion expli-
 quent Is vie dane meileure fagen qu'snetne autre théorie.
 action do Dieuet comparso bLfist de la paie qui fete
 Jes plantes bonnes ot mauvaises. Sa puisance les fait
 fgrandir, mais qu‘lles soient bomues ow msuvaises épend
 de leurs semences, ls Sangsciras. Comme je I'si dit, les
 atone sont bonnes ou mauvaises et méritent respective-
 ‘ment bonheur terrestee ot cal, ou malhour tezrestre et enfer.
 Ty a besucoup d’enfers, méme sur terre. Nombreux sont
 ‘ox qui souffent io ¢ ie que pour quelques-uns, la
 tere ellezméme semble un vériteble enfor. Mais elle est
 sn rlalité8 que nous la fac.” Ainsi quae dit le visux
 Bouddhiste Keskaichiryyapiad ; “Cotame tm peintre qui
 dassine la gue d'un homible dSuion (Falah) cat efimyé
 rméme par son propre oavage, ainsi Vhomme est efimyé
 pr le mondé.”” Le doctrine de Karma exptime dans la
 forme Is plas complbte Ia vécité “Tu récolteras o» que ta
 as semé.” “Jour viendsa qui tout poles.” Karma est
 ‘ssi double dans   oe sens que, bon ow mauvas, i est accompli
  voc le ddr de ses séeompenses (Salm) ou sans ce Air
  (Bisbekma). Noun devons tows agi, mais Kanna pout
  else Ton ou Yautre. Supposon quim komme doane de
  TFargent & un sutre aves leapoir ttre loué par les autres
  our cet act de générosité, ou mime aves Tespoir de gagner
Te cel par aon ate; son acte ext accompliavec       le désirde
  la récompense (Sakima). Tl     sera exaueé et urs  la Jouange
  ‘on le cil. Mais 'l le fait your Diew seulement, ot pour
  Pemour de la henté, ne cherchant rien pour Ini-méme, avec0
sera le Nebichmna Karma, Salina Karma, ow Karma
  ‘is, reoit sécompense ou chétiment sur Ie terro, ou dans
  Je ciel et Venfer. Maia enfer et le ciel sont des mondes
                              73
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘autané que le monde présent, ‘Tous deux sont des choses
 extérieures (Bihya). Il ya dualitéen eux. ‘Mais quand le
 ‘moi phénoménal, le Bgo humain, est détru par Phomme
 devenant purement désinteressé il passe au delé de Is terre,
 du ciel et de Venfer, et son esprit devient um aveo Dieu, IL
 en atoujours &é ainsi, mais alors seulement i le comprend.
 Tatteint alors le supréme béatitude qui est éternelle, Il ue
 renait plus jamais, Et ceci est Varden désir de toute
 ypensée spitituelle aux Indes ; délivrance de In renaissance
ft unité aves Dieu. Coci eat possible & tous; oar quand
 homme seforee @’y arrive, i ae produit en Ii ce qu'on
 oppelé lo Shaktipita—ltitralement “Ia descente de Puis-
 stance”—la Puissance de Dieu. Clestoe que les théologiens
cccidentanx appellentln Grave et que les Horitures Shaivaites
 eignens pr "Angra Sha, Par nit pe aun
  Youdel.
       Diew, porle moyen de "homme, revét diverses apparen-
 oes et peut stem dépouiler. L’homme par ses actions
 étermine gon sort. Void le concept fondamental de tout
 ‘enseignement ocoulte en Ocsdent comme en Orient. Nout
 ‘ne sommes pas, comme Is suggere Omar Khayyam, de
  simples pions humains our Mécbiquier divin. Nous sommes
  Tes maltres de notre destinge.
        Te Monde existe pour moi parce que, consciemment ow
  inoonsoiemment, je veux qu'l existe. Le Monde existe pour
  Yous porve que, conscicmment ou inconsciemment, Yous
  voulez quilexiste. L Univers entier existe paroeque dans Ia
  YVolonté Divine est emtente ia semence qui est l'ensemble
  otal des sire dont Vunivers est une manifestation.
        a Paramarthe on “Stmmum Bonum” est Ia Libéra-
  tion (ola), qui ext indJpendance de toute forme,et union
  seo Esprit incorpore. Cest le Nirvins, V'apaisement, le
  sejour of Von ne se désole plus, le séjour oi Yon ne meurt
  ni ne nait—lmmortalté,
       Pour résumer, le Veils, en tant que sige de Vautosté,
  censeigne que Diew (Shiva ox Brahman) est um Ktre infini et
                               704
                        APPENDICES
pre, conscience et béatitude, dont Lui-méme est Je propre
‘objet. Par son pouvoir ou Shale il devient son propro
objet, et ainsi apparait comme Univers, conscience Enitée ob
‘appacente inconstience. L’dtat de Vesprt     et de la matitre
dans lesquels Je Shakti spparait est aussi décerminé pour
‘chaque forme per son histoire cosmique antérieure, ou
Karma, sous la forme subtile de Sangekima. Si Vhomme
‘accompli de bonnes actions, suivant Je Dharma,il récolte le
 bonheur sur la terre ot au'cial; le contraire sil eommet de
‘mauyaises sotions. Mais un homme peut dépasser le bien
et le mal, Dharma et Adharma.; dans le sens de vrai
surhomme, Vhomme, qui a vainen toutes les passions et le
moi fimité Pour celui, il y a Libération du moi imité
enformé dana les formes, ot Vunion avee co qui est parfois
appeléen oesident la Susime (Ovemoal); c'est le Brahman
 ou PEspet dominant,
       On traite panfois le Vedanta. de pessimiste, et il Vest
‘pour autaat-gu'im bonheur véritable ne peut pes tz atteint
 ansce monde. Le Christianisme lest aussi dans oe méme
 ‘sons. Mais tous deux sont optimintes dansoe quils prichent
 ‘our fagon quil y a une délivrance de Je souffrance et un
 onheur dternel—Le dessein-de toute pensée hindoue, ot
 ‘aussi de toute penaée lnimaine: est ds trouver le honheu.
 ‘Pour siteindre le bonheur tertertre ot odlete, 1a moralité
 fst indispensable, Pour atteindre le bonheur supréme, il
 faut aussi ls Sageaso (Jaina). Nous devons développer
 esprit. La foi du charbonnier peut paraitre une belle
 chose & certains mais nous ne sommes pas destinés & étre
 ‘tous charbonniers.
       TLy a trois choming principaux et plusieurs Intéraux.
 ‘Ainsi que me le disait, il y a bien longtemps, un ami, qui,
 dans sa sphire, était un Muminé—et je n'ai jemais oublié
 ‘sa question; “What do you want”? Que voulez-vous ?
       TLy a deux voies pour attsinde le “Paramactha”” ow
  “summum bonum”. Cs sont la voie du travail, du rituel
  (Kamae) et de la dévotion (Bhakti); ot la voie de tn
                                705
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 connaissance (Jnins). Le premiére est pourIs masbe des
Thommes : la seconde pour ‘quelques-uns seulement. La
premiéze purifie, développe et prépare un homme pour la
‘oie de la connaissance. Mais un homme, parle réultat de
pratiques dans ses vies antérieures, peut venir su monde
qualifié pour entrer ’ane fois dans Ia haute voie de le con-
      Tes Bouddhistes nomment le systime hindoa “Shiln-
‘viatapsrimarsa,”” ce qui veut dine “oroyance i Is necesite
es sacrements (Sangakiira) eb des aeuvres pieuses."" Crest
‘yaa, Le estholicime, comme le Brahmanisme, tombe
sous la méme observation. . Bn oosident, V'église catholique
reprisenta cette incon de voir, eles divisions protestantes
4u Christisnisme sont, b des degrés divers, opposes au rituel
cot aux sacroments.. Ta, faaon de-yoir de Ukindon, en cect
comme on dautzes isties, ext towt inclusive. Tl ext dit
que rituel ct snerementa dont néocsssires pour tom coux
‘qui n'ont pas atten état de connsissadee (qui ne sont pas
 *connsiseanta” ou Jnin!), Mais au furet & mesure gu’on
vance vera oot Siat, los sotes rituals devietert ce moins
en moins nécessaires.. Suivant Karma-Yoga, quoique vous
ppensiez on fassiez, pinserle ef faiterle en adoration du
Seigneur. ‘Tat Kurusva madarpanam,” comme dit le
Bhagevadgtta. L'adoration n'est pas seulement; In pridre
A Pélise, aa temple ou ailleurs. Cest ln vie elle méme,
‘quand tous sos actes sans exception sont offorts au Seigneur.
Tlest dit dans le Bhagavadgtta : “Impurtal je suis pour
tous les Gime.” (Cst-idire que le Seigneur mgarde et
‘nite tous les tres également.)
     Je n'a) ni ami ni ennemi. Mais je suis en ceux qui
m'adorent avec dévotion, et ils sont en moi.”
     “Samohamasrvabhutashu na me dveshyosti na priyah
     “Yo bhajanti tu mim bhaktya mayi te, teshu chapye-
hom.
     ‘La conclusion est quil y'a un grand Moi (Paramitmd)
qui spporit multiple (Jivitma). Cette doctrine est en~
                              706
                        APPENDICES
   seignés pire religion qui dit que ou qui voulentattsindze
  Te vrai bonheur doivent aliser leur wnité aveo le grand
  Moi par Volservance de Dkarma ot les pratiques d'une vie
  religeuse. Ceux qui entent dans Ia voie du péché, qui est
  Tévitement Sgoiste de Dharms, soufirent Venter sur is terre
  ot dans des Vies futures. Ceux qui observent Daarma en
  ‘yuo d’obtenis tne recompense terrestre oa obleste obtiennent
 coe qu'ls désirent. Coux qui, per une pratique assidue sur
 les voiesinfsiontes, sont prdparés par lout ardent désir de
 libération (Mfumuleb) A entrer dans Ia voie de la con
 naiseance, obtiendroat la libéretion de toute forme terestre
 ot josizont   do ls Béstitude swpiime et sans fin. Tous les
 {te cherchent lo bonber. Cest ln religion qui dit com-
 iment o» bonbeur pout sire attint. Quester qui fat que
 Mhomme eit mligieusement disposé? Cest le résultat de
 ses propres actions et do Shaktiptta, Cetve formule expres-
 ‘ave signe chute ou. desceuta de puissance. Creat Ia
 descente de a Poissance, ot, comme nous Ie disons, de Ia
 Gries dans Thome. Celle est aconiée & osiui qui a de
Ja dévotion pour Ia Mize de tous les mondes. Cest pour
 cola que ls hommes Ini adgestont ours pitas, ct le sage
 saline alors Unit avee Bile ot tom ponx le Seigneur, qui
 cat toute Blatitude.
       Je terminerai par le pridre, ou “antra,” Ia plos
 flix, qui eat estine asst Indes comme Ia plus grande de
 toutes es Mantcas. On Pappsllé Gayatel, car celui qui la
  chante sara sauvé. Malgré Ia poauté de clle-c, il y a
 autres pies plus belles. Mais Ia GAyatel est le plus
 réputée et se répite, comme L/Angelus, trois fois par jour :
 le matin, le midi et le soit, aux moments appalés Sandhya,
 cc a été répltde pendant des sitles avant Ta naissanoe dit
 Crist Elle commence et fnit avec Ie Mantra “Om”
  aqui est Ie son produit par Vagglomération des trois letires
 ‘AU, qui désignent le Ssignour sous ses trois aspects—
 ‘lui qui end, (ls lott A),—Calai qui préservo, (la appslélettre
  jet celts qui rotize (la lntere M),    communément
                              707
                     SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 "Ip Destructeur", Je dis “Celui qui retire,” oar Dieu ne
 cert pas (Na Devah srishtinishaknh). Lyhomme détruit :
 ‘Dovut n'est pas destruoteur, Dien retire les choses vers
 Lati-méme. Ce Mantra “Om’” est la serence (Bij) de tous
 les Mantras. La Gayatri est
       “Om bhuh, bhuvah, svab, Tet savitur varenyam
       bhargo devasya dhfmaki, dhiyo yonah prachodayit,—”
 ui signif
       “Om term, Patmosphdrw centrale, ciel! Contamplons
       admirable Eaprit       qui est le Créateur Divin, Pais
      1 disiger nos eaprits. Om.”
       Test de coutame sux Indes, comme marque de esprit
 hhautement, robin, de commencer tout éerit par uno
 dédicaco & Dieu sous eo forme masouline ou féminine. On
 ‘trouve cela on t8te des letizes, comptes, livres, et ainsi de
 suite, de méme que le “AMD.G.”, eb quires formules que
 nous trouvons chet les Oatholiques. Ox termine aussi par
 Jes mots “Om Shinti Shanti,” “Om In_paix soit aves vons,
1s paix soit pari vous.”” Je parle des Hindous orchodoxss,
 cet non des anglicio& qui souvent doivent & leur éucation
 de revoir auoane croyance dix tout.
       1       ains, suivant Vusege orthedoxe, je termincrai ma
 conférence pit les voeux de bonheur: “Om, Shanti Shénti.”




                              708
                      APPENDIX IL.
    Quecquss OssmavasioNs sux ue Rerust, Huoov.
    Deux Conférences deandes par} Sutevr & la Socat®
      ‘Thlosophique otaT'Association Francaise das Amin
                    de POrient a Pars 1021,
      On commence toutes choses, ux Indes, avec le grand
‘Mantra Om, gui est ls semence le tous les Mantras, qui e-
                      et ainsi renfsrme toute Ta connsissance
spiztuelle Brshmen
‘pelconte   den Hindous
      Cet, comme son, Mécho approximatif du premier at
fondamental mouvement. vibratoire et oréataur. Jo is
pprozimati,paree qu le Manta, 1 que nous e pronongons,
ft expriné par une Douche humaine impartaite et limitée,
‘essu par une omsile granite ot lmitée. Le wénitable son
‘xt prononcé pat Pongane paciat et absolu da Seigneur et
entenéa pat ton orale supréme et abeckio
      Mon sujet est Je Ritual Hindon. On a bien dit que le
‘Ritual et Vat de la Religion. Mais pour le omprendre il
fant connaitre In doctrine dont i eat Vllusttion. Psi
I souvent des eritigues qui parcant dune jniztligence
complite du Ritual Hindou. Tl ext vai que cette inintali-
agence séulte souvent de Vignorance dusens. Un téégramme
chifré parst da gulimatian & qui n'en connaft pos la lé.
Tes Mantras tels quo ing, ing, ving, string, eto,
sont intelligibles aux seuls intiés. Il faut done étudior
@abord la métapsychique et la prychologie hindonee.
      Tei pari de Brahman ; ve terme signif !noommen-
sarable
      Ts pemoanes et choses du monde constitaent le mesu-
 abl.
      Te meturable ext. produit par lz pouvoir de !Taoom-
rmeuaurale, et comme Facommensurable est en so-méme
‘pure conscience, le monde de Tespit et de Ia matidre est
‘produit par le pouvoir de la conscience,
                             709
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
      Comment s'appele-til, 02 Pouvoir?
      May, Ce torme & mon avis est mal traduit par le
rot “illusion”, i, per exemple, je prétends voir une chose
ui wexiste      pas, ou sje vois uns chose qui existe  mais que
je Ia voie d’umé fagon etronéo, dans ce cas on parle avec
raison d'illusion.
      “Mais comment peut-on qualifier d’illusion une expétience
tolle que calle de,la réalité de Punivers, une expérience que
tout le monde pactage ?
      Te Moni est réel. n'y 0 poutBtre pas de dooten
‘aussi mal comprise que celle qui traite do ls “rfalité da
Moni”
      Comme je I'si expliqué dans mon livre “Ta Réalié”,
toutes Iss philosophies hindouss sans exception, en tant
qwépistémologies sont fondidtement réslistes—plus réa-
Tintos méme que le réaliame des Scolesocsidentales.. tant
onné que pour tout adorsteur il y-a un lin rél entreIa
 ‘suse ou Pouvoiz inviaible et Vefib ou pouroit visible, ot
 que, dautee part, lo Pouvoir invisible est xél, il sensuit
 que ton efet est rél. Mais effet que nous appelons monde
 n'a pas Is rlalit6de Ia Canse Supréme, parce qu'il ne dure
 ‘pas comme dure cette cause. La cause en elle-méme ext
 immusble. L’Univers epperait. et disparatt
       ‘Mayd ext done le Pouvoirinfni qui mesure, eat dice
 gui crée les formes qui sont- mesurables oa fnis.
      ‘Mayd eat le pouvoir de In pure conscience qui est la
igande Pemonnalité (Pardhanid) lo grond Mci (Purndham).
      Le grand Moi est Bre jafini, pure conscience et joie
 Gemelle, Sa puissance s'appelle en Sanscrit| Shakti,
      Cette puissance a doux aspects: Aspect supréme, im-
 mente, comme cause; aspect mesurable, comme effst—
 'est-A-dire los personnes ot les choses. dx monde.
      Ta puissance et celui qui ln posoéde ne sont qu'une
 seule halt
       (Ce Pouvwir, ou Shakti, ae manifeste sous des formes i-
 rites. Oss formes sont lo Pouvoir se montrant en tant
                                710
                       APPENDICES
  qu’elict. Il faut ae rappeler que selon le Vedénde moniste
  Dieu est la cause matérialle du monde: Tefet est donc In
  couse on Pouvoir modifié. Le Fouvoir qui crés ces formes
 sb appelé Ma, et les formes sinsi produites sont nommeés
  Ignorance ou Avidyé.
        Tgnorance veut dire conscience limité, La Conscience
 en soi-méme, distooide de Vesprit’ et de Ia matide, est ili-
 mite. LTgnorance est, de notre point de vue, ime con-
 tinction de la conasience infine, illimitée, La conscience
 limitée est Vexpérience mendiale du petit moi. Ts con
 ‘science illimitée est la pastnite expérience du Seigneur oa
 du Grand Moi.. Le mot Sansocit pour Seigneur est Zukeara,
 aque signife Celui qui constrait, qui gouveme.
       ‘Ainsi que co mot I'indique, le Seigneur est la Grande
 Persomnalité visible comme Monde,
       Le Moi Suprénie a Ini-méme wi fondement™ : I'Im~
 tense, impersonal, Invisible; le ‘Transcendent ct sons
 nom. "De fagon analogue le grand philosophe du. Moyen
 Age, Hekharde, distingue enteo Dieu ot Je Divinité
       ‘Diow ou Ie Seigneur (lakvars) est lacommensurable
 yu & travers Ia Méyd ; esticdire Vexpécience limitée
 dualste. On se trompe on perlant dun Seigneur ilasoire.
 Te Seigneur est ITncomusenstrable tel qu'il se présente &
 1s ecnssience limitée. Le Brahman en soiméme n'est psa
 connaissable, sauf par ooux qu'un yogu parfait a libérés
 de toutes los limitations dulistes.
       ‘Quelques-unes de ses oréatures, empruntant le vocabu-
 lire humain, 'eppallent Pare, D’autres, comme Ia commu-
 nauté zeligicum hindoue qui porte le nom de Shileta—lea
 adozateurs de son pouvwir ou Shakti—invoquent la personne
 ‘supréme (Pardianéd) comme Mere. Néaumoins il est dit
dans les feritaresde ces Shaltas       que le Moi n'est ni mBle
 ni femelle, ni neutze. Le Mot est indescriptible, socessible
 seulement par Bhea on Slan d’adoration et les prooédés de
 Is Yoga: Mais de toute nécessité il fant pour le désigner
 employer des expressionsde Ia vie quotidieane. On Iadore
                                mr
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 ‘alors avee raison comme Mire (qui done nous est plus cher
 que notre Mére humaine#) yeroe qu’Blle—Is Divinité, 1s
 Délese—congoit et porte univers dans son sein pat imagi-
 nation (Kalpané) éu suprime Moi—une imagination non
 pos arbitrate, mais qui se dirige suivant les tendances (ow
 Songséra)réstitantdee actions des tres individuals dans
 Je passé d'une infnité &’Univers. Bile enfarte Vunivers, le
 rnourit eb le protige. Lee Hindous donnont au Seigneur
 ce titre adorable; Jagadbandu, qui signifo “Ami du
 Monde”. En taxt que novs sommes nous-mémes amis du
 monde nous participms, b ls natu divine,
       ‘En soiméme Ells est étre infni, conscience pure, et
 joie &temelle.
        Considéée comme Ia Puissanoe de 1'Bir, sa figure
 seyonnante eat Yesotériqus Soleil et les tondeuns de ses
 ow asina sont, égotériquoment péelant, o Lune ot le Feu.
  Cee tecisfemxe ne sont pat Tes Tumibros physiques que nous
  connaissons, mais des aspects de Ia Paissance eréatioe;
  ils correspondent au Moi (Aham) qui sonnatt,b Yobjet count
  (lequel, selon Vexpérionce humaine, est le nonmal),               et &
  anion des deux qui dence lien Pexpétience           que   nous   avons
  a monde.
        ‘Vai parléde V'ame de Minivers. Le Corpsde la Déesso
 ‘ost Ia collectivité peyehique et. physique, cestA-dire            tons
 les Boprits e:toute a matitredu       mondo.    Comme      calletivité
 des Bsprits, la grande Persounalit fait Pexpérienoe physique,du monde
 entieren tant qunteligible.          Comme   colletivits
ce Moi fait experience du Monde entier en tant           que matériel
 Dexpérience dui Grand Moi est infiniment           riche   pare quill
 cesteonscienc ilimitée, associéeaveo la oollectivité psyohique
 ct physique comme corgs. La Grande homme,        Persounslité, sous
 forme du. Moi limitS—Vindividn comme                        animsl ow
 plantejonit do notre oxpérianco terest
       ‘Ainsi son. corps est triple il est oorge comme Cause out
 Pouvoirecéatear inf; lest corp subtil on pouveir                mental
 ‘ini il est corps      gresier,   pslpuble, pouvoir    snatéxel     fini.
                                   re
                        APPENDICES
Te Noi Supsime & Luimime wn “landement” : Je Beahman
impersonnel, invisible, transoendant et sans nom.
      Tim Décnse erdtice sappelle Mahdiripurasundart, “Ia
Belle au teint de Rose, couleur d’Aurore". Crest Is Déesce
‘tutélaire de Ia doctrine et des pratiques connues sousle nom
de Sirioiyd, ainsi que du cute appelé Hadimaia ; est 18
rime qui, sous Vaspect de Mokdkdté (object da calte
Kadimeta), noize comme wn nuage oragenx, engloutit le
‘Temps (ou Kéla) qui parait sveo le Soleil, Ia Lune et los
astres physiques. MabAlels, om le Temps supréme,—parce
quil y a deux tomge—ent tin des Nomis do. Diew méme.
‘Te remarque ici qui ext inifftront de dire Dien ou Déesse,
On appells Dieu Shiva, qui vout dive “lo Bon”, sinsi quo
ddaos la langue anglo-asxonne le mot “Goa” dédive du mot
“Good”. Msis pour distinguer extre Diew et son Pouvoit
qi te maniferte comme Monde, on nomme le premier du
‘terme matculin Shiva, et le segond. du terme fEminin Shake
qui signify puiwance. Crest ainsi que Je Shekhinah du
Tamu des Jaitsest fminin, Rappelonsnons également
1s Magna Mater des Gress, des Romains ot Vantres pouples
‘de Pantignité. La calte dela Mere ost trés ancien. Shiva,
ou le Dieu on soi, ast Vaqpect statiquo de immense, ow
Bralmon. Shokt, on Buisance, est. son aspect dyna-
tiqee Dieu en action immense sui comme Puitsance,
tesorable seulement, dans sos efets, “'est-iire le per
tonnes etles choses du Mone. Cesout            Ib deux noms pour
tise seule sélité. Mais do préférnce parceIo  Shikia   ou edorateur
Ge Shalt adore la Méxe-Puissance                 qu’dlle est visible
dans ses formes et      proche   de nous.    Nous    Is connaissons
 sous Taspect du Monde, qui est son corps. Le Brahman
 framcendant     west réalisé que dans Vextasedu Yogs. inst
 Yon dit: “Le Pere ast rien pour moi, pourra que je sois
 asin eur les genous de Ia re.”
       Tei indigué sommainement: Vobjet de clte.de toutEn
 slouné ot abstroction faite de toute mythelogie, forme de
 Zymboliome, In doctrine philosopkique est une
                                73
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Vedénds, moniate enseignant Tezintence d'une seule réslité
fondamentale, I'Btre pur, qui eat pure conscience eb joie
immuable. I existe comme Pouvoir d’étre, lequel est
Js couse du changement. I n'y. pas dewt chos’s, mais te
seule sous deux aspects : I'Etie invisible ot incounaissable—
en ce sens qu'il nest pas un objet —dont le Rowvoiren soi
‘mame (en Sanskrit Svariga cest-i-dire éte infini-conssience-
joie) ne se manifeste point, et "Etre visible, on Puisssnce
raniestéo
      ‘Au moment de la manifestation'il y a une dishotomic
apparente du Moi et du nonMoi, du sujet et de Vobjet, de
esprit et de la matitre. Lesprit, au sens d'intelligence
est [Bire pur se manifestant sous Is forme subtle limité
de Vintelligence ; et Ie matitre est le méme Bre sons la
forme grossitre et palpable.” Le puissence qui se manifeste
 contient ls semence’ ot eacences do Yendances (Sangektra)
 vers la manifestation, et, cos tendances sont produites par
 les actions des univers infnis du passé, Pour parler plus
 simploment, Univers tel. quil est, existe parde que, on
 ‘prinsige dui moins, i'a A6jS existé, ot il existera tel gail
 sera, parce quil existe maintenant eb qu'il exten train de
 rodiize des tendanoes qui 8 manifesteront dans Vunivers
 futur, Quand ces tendaccee sont prétes & peraitre, clest-t-
 dre so trouvent dans des conditions favourable, 1¢ monde
 naft du sein de la Puisance. Uy a use évolution dea
 principes constituants de lunivers qui se combinent pour
 constitaer Is bidrarchis des Etres—plantes, enimaax. hom-
 mes, esprit
       ‘aspect impersonnel de Vhamense on so-méme ext lo
 sujet du yoga Son aspect en tant que grande Person
 aalité que on adore et qui nous aide, est Te sujetde
 Sédlans.
       Je ne mYoccupe pas iei du Yoga, mais du eute situel,
 ou Stdhant, mot déivé de la racine sanskaite Sédh qui
 signife “isie des efforts”. Si ces efforts ont Veffet dsir
 Je succls ov sccomplissement s‘appelle Siddhi. Le terme
                               nm
                        APPENDICES
  lots ext ins compréhonsf ot no ge rextreint pos 8 une signi
  fiation seligiewe. Par example, un homme désire coa-
  nafice Is Inngus frangase.       Son étule pour atteindre oe but
  est Sédhand, Sil réussit I obtient un Siddhi, ea Vespéce
  le comneissance de le longue frangaise, I] est Siddha ou
  ‘compli en ee qui conceme cette connaissance. Un autre
 essais q'obtenir des pouvoirs magiques. Tl se livre & des
  pratiques pour les aoquérr. Las moyena qu'il emploie aont
  din Sidhon magique. Pour oatts saison lee Onintalistas
  couropéens traduizent sonvent le mot Sédkand par évoootion
 ‘magiqus”. Maia Is signification n'est pas aussi resireinte.
 La signification Is plas géuérale de Sddiand est discipline
 4e soi eomme purification du corps et de lesprit, étude ot
 discussion des Védes ot autres écritures sacréas, pratique
 es vertus, adoration, et toutes ls formes éu culte ritul.
 ‘Oni qui secomplit avec stces le ritual est Siddia en situel.
 Colt qui est: Siddha dons les hantes formes de Sédhand
 (cor il y ena plusieurs) ext qualiié pour entrer dans la voie
 du Yoga. Calii qui est accompli ou Siddha on Yoga est
 diapensé de toub rituel & proportion des progrés qu’il «
 obtenus. Alors commence le Yoga Sédiand, Celui qui
 fait le Sadhond eat appelé Sedtaks. La différence fonda-
 ‘mentale entze Sédhand. ot. Yoga est qu'il y 8 toujours un
 objet dans le Sédband, comme culte ritual. Dans lo cults
 ‘Skala (cr lo cultes     et doctrine varient) on tachede sidenti-
 fier aveo Vobjet du oulte, Mais, en virité, Ia distinction
 entre Padortour et oc qui ent adoré subiste. On est
 toujours dualisto, méme ai ’on profess       une doctrine
                                                      e fonciére-
 ‘ment moaiste. Maia par Ia pratique on spproche do plus
 on plus de la réalisatio de Pidentité entre le supzéme Moi
ot Je moi limité et individuel. En Yogeil y s réalisation
 actuelle de cette identité. Prenons, par exemple, le rite
 connu sow Je nom de Bhss-Shuddis. Salon In philosophic
 ‘Singkiyaily « plusiows prinoipes consttutits de Vumivers eb,
  par conséquant, €u corpe humain. Rappelons-nous en effet,
  que le corpe hamain eat un microcosm (Kshudrabrakmdnda)
                                   ms
                SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 contenant toutee quily « dens "univers ox msczoeosme, Cas
prineipes ont dos centres partioliers d’optration dans Por:
 sganisme kumain ; ils procédent les ws des autres. Dans le
 rite appelé Bitia-Shuddhi on s'fforee par imaginationde
putifer les conizes et absorber les éléments inféricure ot
 plus matériels dans les éléments plus subiils dou ils sont
 sorts par évolution. De cette manidre on arrive & Shiva et
 Skalti eux-mémes, dans leur demeare du lots ax mille
 ‘pétnles, qui est, dans son sens phyniqne, la porte supérieure
 ‘du corveeu. Maia tout oe procesmus n'a lieu qu'en imagins-
 tion, Dans ce qu’on appelle Kundalini Yogo, on éveille
 résllamens de son sommeil i Déesse sous la forme d'un
 serpent extourant   le Zinga, ou principe mil, dans le centre
 le plus bas de Vorganisme le Maéithira).
        Fu Yoga il y a ainsi réalisation.efieotive de Vindentité
 de In conscioneo ot de In puissance-—de Shiva et de Shale.
 ‘La conscience est Pte exsentiel qui appamat comme orge-
  nisme limité, et.sa puissance manifeetbe ext Leaps ot le
  comps physique. Comme ily a plusieurs gensse do Sédhand,
  ily a plusieurs voies de Yoga, telles que le Karma Yoga, le
   Bialsi Yoga eh le dnd Yoga. La enrsctérstique de vette
  octrine est quelle préche la conciliation entre In jouissance
  ‘du monde ow Bhoga, et le Yoga, tandis que selon les autres
  doctrines sil y a Yoga dans Te sens de renoncement au
  monde, il n'y & pas Bigga, ou jouissance du monde. Tl est
  dit ainsi quion pent goguer la ibération méme ea mengeant
  le fruit doux et snoré da monde. Tl west pas nécesss
  do sfenfuir du monde. Le monde est In Déssss elleméme
  comme tine forme de puissance, Ce qu'il faut faire, oft
  connafize cette indentitéet dans toutes les fonctions physiques
ct les sctions identifier avec Elle en dst : Sd’ham “Crest
 lle que jo suis.” Ainsi le Sédhaka ou celui qui fait le
 ‘Sidiand on. buvant du vin selon les rites, ofte le vin & la
   ouche de la Déesse Kundalint en son peopre corps. Ce
  vest pas lui senl—lindividu limité—qui boit, mais le
  Déesse gui se manifesta comme Sédhaka,
                                16
                      APPENDICES
      Ea Enzope on commence § connaite quelque pew le
 ‘Yoga mais on ue sait presque rien de sa condition preslable,
Je cake rituel ov Sédiand, Certuines. personnes méme
stefloroent de protiquer le Yoga sons y étre qualifies, fante
@etude et de pratiqne prélminaires. Par uno foibles
naturelle nous sommes trop portés i nous exoite donds des
qualités nécestaites pour ls plus grandes entrepcses.
      Of trouve-t-on ce rituel # A oe propos on ignore m
fait de premidte importance: Crest que Ia plus grande
partie du ritual des Hindous dive des écritures nommées
Tantras, Le reste fait parie da cituel védique—tel le
Homa ou seotifios dans Ie fou~et des Parkas, qui contien-
nent aussi moints rituels Tantriques. Donc, si on veut
Siniter au ritnel Hindon i faut comnaitre les Tandras ou
Agamas des diverse écoles—Saura, Génapaiya, Vaishnava,
‘Shaiva, Shaka, Cast wwe erreur txop répandue, de cox-
fondre le Tantra Shastra aves les Shditas, quine sont qu'une
des éooles om communautés dadorateurs de I'dgama,
ou tradition ligieuse. Lex abu mémes qu'on impute
sux Shakite (et do tals abue sont pronvie) pouront dtr
reproshés aussi aux sutres vommunautés, Tout ritual ext
sujet & des abus, surtout lorsque le vin et la femme y ont
‘part, En ces matitnes fl faut @abord distinguer entre la
doctrine des deritures et les abus de ses adhérexts, eb sus
centre les éeoles ot communaatés religieuses de Sadhakas.
Tass Tanérasjouissent en Europ: d'me mouvaise répata-
tion, 1 y a oui des Hinduos qui ayant reyu une éda-
cation oocidentalene les comprennent pas mieux que les
                      ne sont pas cependant tout entidms
 amas de stupidité et de sensualité quion @ généralement
jpensé, Sans doute iln'y © yas de fumbe sons fou, mais il
 peut ensiver que Yon prenne pour de Ta fumée ce qui n’en
‘est pas, e¢ [on peut so tromper quant& importance du feu,
 Sans doute aussi il y @ des gens qui (avec ow sans raison)
 abhorrent les pratiques de quelques Tentristes ou de quelques
                               "7
               SHAKTI AND          SHAKTA
  communaités tantrigues, mais le mot Tantra ou Agama,
  Join de présenter anx yeux des Hindous orthodoses en
 général aucune acceptation feheuse, désigne your eux
  quelque chose de vénérable
       Le mot Tanira dérive de la racine Sansksite Tan, qui
 signifio “répandu, propegé”. La syllabe Tra veat dire
 ssuver. Quel objet ainsi répendu, pout sauver ? La con-
 rnaissance. Connnissonce de quoi? De tout, cesi-a-dire
Je connaissance profane et sucrés, Cinque gente de eonnais-
 fsance ous souve & sa propre fagon, La connsissance
 médicale (il y 8 deo Tontras médioanx ot alchimiques) ssuve
 notre existence corporelle. Ainsi Tantr signife props-
 ‘ition de Is connaissance, surtout de Ia connaissance de
 Diew et de la morale, du eulte et da Yoga qui nous manent
 vers Tai et (selon ley Shdbtas) nous transforment en La.
 Cheque Tentra, comme nos lives, porte un titre qual qui
 soit. Ainsi lo Tantra que j'ai cité seppsle Yoginthridaya
 co qui signe “Coour de Yogiat"”. Yoga ett ic la Décsse
 cllerméme, qui est appelée dans un texte Keshmiricn le
 “Coeur di Seigneur”. Les Tontras sont des Shdstras, mot
 tneduit généralement par “Beritures”, mais qui vient de
 la rocine Shas, qui signiie eonteler, parce qu'un Shéstra
 indigue et contrble lo conduit des hommes
       Liobjet final da culte est Je Poavoir Supréme, quelle
 aque soit sa forme dans le cults. Ie Yobjet ext la Mére sous
 ses formes diverses qui sont elle-méme. Ces formes sont
 faites de matidre intelligence ou d’émotion. Par 'émation
 ou Bldva on pout ralicor la Maro d'une mani indesripti-
 ble. Quel est alors le but du eulte ? Il est double, Ces-
 taines personnes veulent.que Von cherche & obtenir por le
 culte 125 choses mondaines, tales que santé, longsvité,
 ichesse, enfants, pouvoins oooultas et toutes les autres
 formes de puissenc> dont checune est la Mére sous une
 forme pactiulitre, D’auttes ont de ls dévotion pour la
 ‘Mire cle-méme et cherchent & trouver un bonkour sons fix
  en Is Mre telle qu’ella est en elle-méme, c'est-dire atre
                                78
                          APPENDICES
 ‘pur, consoience pore, joie pure qui eurptsss tous Ie Mondes
 Prog cs deme sont se formes lini
          ‘me reste i indiquer bribvement les moyens de gagner
Jo but disiré, cest-ndire les principes et opérations du
 rituel, qui se fondent sur une profonde psychologie. On
 doit voir elsirement que Vesprit ou Pintelligence n’est pas
Ta conscience, Au contraire lesprit—aw intelligence, senti-
ment, volouté—eet en Ini méme une foree inconsciente.
 Cette assertion parattra Strange & des Kuropéens. Néan-
‘moins elle repose sur une doctrine qui se véific de plus en
‘plos aujourdhai. Nous commengons, nous aussi, & com
‘prndre quill y a du consciont et le T'inconscient dans
esprit; notre intelligence paraft consciente quoiqn’elle
soit une force ineonsciente, parce quelle est asscciée 3 Ia
‘conscience qui est Ia nature méme de I’Btre en son essence.
En effet, In foro quest intelligence parait émietter Ia
conscience et, produire. ve régultat guau lieu d’avoir une
constience pure et illmitée, nous avons plusieurs consciences
limitées. Lex metécalistes ont raison un certain point
de vue quand ils afiement quo Vmtelligence est une chose
‘matérelle. Mais     ils ont torten nant Vespriven tant qu’Etze
pur ot Conscience. En Vedinta tout ce qui n'est yas Brab-
‘man en soi (Searpa) est inconseient sous laspect subtil
‘comme intelligence om sous Taspect_gorssier comme matidre
       ‘Lesprit (je parle de Mind ou Intelligence), se répand
dans tout le comps physique, ou il_y «plusieurs centres
Wopération. Ainsi jl y @ un esprit ablominal dans le
‘Manipira Chakra qui ditige les fonctions de cette partie
du corps. Mais le centze de Vintelligence est le oerveau,
dant la partie supérieure s'appelle le Lotus au Mille Pétaes.
 (Pout-etre les cimonvolutions du cerveau ont-lles sugeéeé
Pidée do cos mille Bétales.)
       Dé lors, de quelle fayon se produit la connaissance
aun objet? La théorie védantique sur oe point decommenceIn télé
hse faire admettee ; elle donne une explication se zappeler
pothie et autres phonomtnes oceultes. Il faut
                                 ng
               SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Aabor que Vintelligence west jamais sans avoir quelque
 objet vers leguel elle se dizige, On voit un objet, par
cexemplg un triangle renversé.—le-symbole de la Mite.” Ein
 le voyant un rayon Mental (Mind-ay) va au-devant de
 Vobjet, le susi, le pénétre et Villumne, Le rayon Ini-méme
 est opaque comme les Tayons X, Mais, de méme que ve
sayen physique il 6laie objet qui, sons cola, serait obscur.
Te Rayon retourne au oervean. Lesprit comme le mental
‘ou Afiad, est slo fogonné sous Te forme de objet. Au
‘ontrite, Peaprit (comme Ame ou conscionee) est immuable.
 1a conscience n'est pas une actvité du cerveat. Tn d'autres
 termes foree qui s'eppelle esprit ou Mind, pend ls forme
dian triangle, Cette théovie est de premiére importance
ppour explication du situel, et aussi pour Vexplication des
phénoménes ccoaltes.. Tots) nous sonnaissons los objets
par le moyen das rayons mentaus, Chez quelques—uns
ces rayons ont en ont das ponvoirs oczites
      On dit, que dans Vinitistion qui s'applle Van Dékkt
le Guru, c'est & dire Vnitiateur ot directeur, projette de sa
propre peroonne dans la perwonne de con disciple une force
«qui peut en méme temps faite évanouit oe dernier ot épuiser
le Mattre.
      risque V'cprit oa intlligenve « toujours un objet et
<ul ext fagonné selon Ia forms méme de cet objet, le Ritael
preserit un bon objet, cestA-dire un objet divin. Bn
adorant cet objet divin, Vintelligence est fagonnée & la
forme de Vobjet divin Iui-méme.
      objet varie elon In hiéarohie des Sidhakas, ou
sdorataurs. Pour Voaprt simple il y a une image grosiéze
aqui ne Insbo rin & Pimagination. Si Ton s'4l8vo plus haut
ily ls peinture (on peut ici se rappeler que Egle Ortho-
dloxe, qui proserit les images, sdmet les peintures ou scones).
Texisto des symboles tels que le Lings de Shiva et le Sla-
‘grima de Vishnoa. Le plas subtil des objets excérieurs ost
le Yaniva c'est-hcire “Vinstrament” par lequel on adore,
Gest im disgramme composé de lignes droites ou courbes
                               720
                       APPENDICES
  ob d’antres figures comme le grand Shriyasira sux nout
  ‘tinngles entrelacés ontourds d’suizes figures avec 1 point
  qui sappolle Bindu stad an contre. La Bindu est un point
  métaphysique V'Tnergie supréme, ot les autres figures sont
  ea formes subtiles et grossitres. Le Yantra sappelle le
  corge d'un Monéra. Chaque Devatt ou forme de le Déesse
  sun Manira et son Yontra pertculers.
       Te caliz de la Deoad est aoit extériour, soit mental
  ct intéieur, Dans le pramier ess il y © mn objet exterior
  tal qulune image ; dane le second, ou eulte supérieur,
  Vobjet est imeginé. Dans le culte oxtériour on trouve des
 ome do rituals gui convisanent sux intalligenose simples.
 Ts sont modelés surla eérémonie quotdienne. On soubaite
‘a Vimagela bienvenue; on Ini offre de eau pour9¢ laver
 Jes piods, des sliments pour quelle se nourrse, ete. Pout
 les Saihaka plus, avancés, le ituel est plus subtil. Les
 fvoessoires du cults comme, les flours, Venous, ete, sont
 rnommés uptoidras. Tes updchéros, dana le culte sesre,
 sont les fonctions physiques da compe qu’on afte &
 1s Déesse, Quand on-6 meng & bien ces formes supérienres
 adoration, on passe au Fogo et Fon voit réllement,
 ‘et non por Vimaginasion, le Point de Lumitre entre les
 you.
       Ayant sinsi institaé um objet bon et couvenable pour
 Vespeit, le Rituel cherehe d’sbord & fixer lesprir    sur cet
 objet eth empfcher toute distraction, esprit par aa
 nature se modife continuellement. On le compare au
 Iercure ou au singe, qui sont texjours en mouvement. Un
 des provéiés principaux pour ssrurer cette stbilité, coniste
 ‘a socomplir pendant la joarvée un graad numbre de céré-
 ‘monies, on & répéGerun grand nombre de fois des formules
 ct dag actes, tls que le Japa ou résitationde Mantra. Ici
 Jes Hindous, épris toujours de clawifcation, distinguent
 ‘sis Japas le Japa inférisus, simple articulation des
 livres: le Jaya mental le plas élevé, et entre les dows oe
 qu’on appelle Upangsiu Jopa.
                               nr
                  SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
       Le troisitme but du ritual aprés la sdlection d'un objet
 ct 1s concentration sur lui, est Vdentification, en imagi-
 nation, de V'sdorateur et’ ador& Comme exemple je
 ypronds le rite trés important qui s'appelle Nydwa, Ce mot
 signife placcr. On brile en imagination le corps du péohé.
 On place les maine sur diverses parties du corps. On pense
 au divin corps de la Devatf ou du Dieu, et en méme temps
 fon place les mains sur le coeur, par exemple, en disunt:
  “lp coeur dela Devaddse trouve ici.” De méme sur les
 ‘outros partes du corps. Pais & le fin du rite le Sadhaka
{fait aveo lea doux mains un geste sur tout son oorpsen
  ppensant quill y sepand ainsi partout [a Divinité. Do cette
 ‘anidre, apes avoir brlé (en imagination)le viewxcorps, on
  se constrait, un corps nouveau et divin. On imagine sinsi
  avoir pour corps le oorpa dels. Depa.
        Le rite appalé Bhiiasbuddhi, qua Yai déja mentions,
  est une oérémonio préparatoire & tout culte, Crest un autre
  example trés important de T'ident‘ication rituélique de V'ado-
  satent et de V'adoré. Aprés avoir ainsi longuement pratiqué
  Te culte en suivant sts les régles pour la purification physi-
  que ds corps (parmi leaquelles esles tovehant Ia nourriture
  sont trbs importantes parce que cortains aliments entretien=
  nent les mauvaises passions) et en étudiant et en suivant
  les préceptes dle la morale, le Sghaka se transforme de plus
  fen plus en la nature de Ia Divinité qu'il adore. Dans les
  Qupanishads il est dit: “Connaftre Braman, eest etre
 Bralman.” On ve connatt point vraiment me chose tant
 ‘qu'on le connait seulement comme objet. Il faut stre
 identié avec Vobjet. Ainsi les Yogis chinois, épris do la
 nature, sidentifent, par exemple, avee une chute dau,
 Il est aussi dit dans le Chhindogye Oupanishad qu’on
 devient ce que Von ponse, En pensant toujours & la Divi-
 nitd, en megsrdant tout co qui existe comme me forme de
 la Mére on dovient la Mére elleméme autent que faire se
 peut Ceat-ddice en gardant en méme temps sa conscience
 individuelle, On est slow qualifige pour entreprendre le
                                 me
                        APPENDICES
   Yoga, o8 Von ticks de s'éever su-dessus de Ie conscience
  personnel.
        il faut so rappeler ques Mire divine a deux sspoota,
  estdire sa natute propre comme conscience absclus, ot
 son aspect comme Monde ou. conscience limit.
       Te rituel s'oceupe de aspect relat dx monde et.
 adres ila conscienes inités un pratiquant du xtuel
  Méme si Yoo attaint,ccpiglétement la but du rtuel, on a
 fans doute une vive consciance de Ia Mere, ma‘s          renloment
 comme objet de connaisseae ou comms sentiment. 1 en
 doit te sins juagu’a oe qu'on devienne un Siddha Yoo,
 ou Yogt scoompli. La Mare slo casse d'etre Vobjetj
 Vadoratour et co quil adore ne faisant plus eésllement qu'un.
 In teat cametérstique du aula Dharma ou religion ext
 aqui tdobe de concliar la jouissance qui s'appelle Bhoga,
 ct le Yoga en tantsque ve saoétique, Pour atteindre Ie
 Dbut suprims, corti personnes faient le monde. Si lo
 ‘monde est mauvais, éparé de Dieu, on comprend ls raisons
 de estta action, mais en mézne tampa il fat ae demoanderai
 lls est eficaos, Car comment peuton Ssbappor au monde ?
 De pls, le mondo est n agpiot de la Are. Tl y 0 doa
 gens qui pratiquent les austétités. Un beau chapitre (le
  prmiet) du Kuldravs Tantra ou “Océan de le doctrine
  Kula” remarque & oe sujet: “Les nes vont tout mus.
 Devons-nous les tenir pour des Yogis? Les chiens dos
 ‘ilages   se roulent dans a poussitre. Sontis    pour col dea
 yoois? (On fait ici allusion sux protiques des Yoris qui
 ‘ouvzent’ leurs corps de condres.) Les proces e'exposent
 fuss! a froid ot Ala chaleur; est-ce qu’ls sont alors des
 yeeia”? hommes peuvent, si cola lour plat ot lour fat du
      ‘Les
 Dein, pratiquer des sustérits, main Ia seale cause de libé-
sation eat Ia connaisun, dans le sens do wéalisation. Le
  vérité se trouve dans le texte védique: “out étze est
  Brahman” “out éire” désigneici le Monde. Dés lors
  le Monde est Brahman sous cette forme. Ne fuyor pas le
                                73
                 SHAKTI AND SHAKTA
 Monde mais tiches dupprofondir sa nature oscanticlle
 Vives dans le monde, jouisser du monde, accomplissant: de
 bounes actions qui portent de bons fruits, et en tout ae
faites qu'un aves la Mére de tout, Chaque wesion alors
revét um caractére cosmique, On a alors la conscience que
est Ia Mére qui en nous jouit du monde, Ainsi le Yoga
evient Bhogs ou jonissance, et le Monde est trausformé
en champ de libéretion (Molahdyste sangatira). Cex pour
 gui suit que les choses sont. au fond la Conscience ou la
‘Mére en clleméme, pour ealuili alles vossent d'etre des
 objets de das,
       Je conclus per un varsct d'un hymme do la grande
Mahdkdla Sanghité énorme ouvmage Tantrigue inconmu,
 Aprés chaque verset je donne un commentaire
       “Je ne torture pas men: corps par des susvéités.”
       (Cor le corps ‘st le séjour de la divinité (Devaleys).
 Hest la Mere. Pourquoi. done le torturer2)
       "Jo no fsis pas de pelerinages.”
       (Car les lux sucrés, on Tirtha, au sens exoterique, sont
 dans le corps de Yadoratews. Pour celui gui ssit oda &
 quoi bon faire des voyages t)
        “Je ne perds pas mon temps lite les Védas
       (On les a déjh étudiée, Tle rappellont les experiences
 spisitulles d'autrui, Ce que Ton demande eat d'éproaver
 ces expériences soi-méme. Il est dit dans le Kuldmara
 Tantra: “Revanez le sens méme des Reritures saceées et
rejeter tout le reste, de méme que Vhomme separe le bon
‘grain de Viverai.” Ce n'est nila loture ni lea idées epéou-
lntives qui donnent des fruits, mais la pratique, c'est A-dize
Sudband et Yoga.)
      ‘Ht auteur de Vhymne, sadressant i la Mére, conelut.
 “Je me réfugie aupnés de tes Pieds Sacrés.”


                             74
            WORKS ON TANTRA SHASTRA
                               ar
                       ARTHUR AVALON.
Tawraa
  oat). or A rmTrandation
                     Gasar Lammnamion (Matron
                          from
  ‘golaton a Ommestry by theAthaSenekit,
                                      Avalonwith(SondIne
‘Tug Asove mows op Skwexnm Text. With the
   ‘oomeatary of Hariharhasnda Botrati. Printed fom.
   Masuscipt of Ramm oben Roy                                  20
‘Hrates     ro zie Gooonss,) Fro the Tastee and other
   ‘Shistins ari the Shotees of Shankanioitys. With
   Introduction
   Smakeit by Arthurand Commentary.
                          aod Mile AvaloaTranalsted sess
                                                     fom tho
Provereres
   Sava 7hiveTaina)      GhostPant Wgptuera
                                     I. The Tontetstira
                                                 Bhatiahecyeof
   Maboday,” Bed wi co Tateaeton and Come
   smontary by Arthur Aron                  aie
                  do, Pane TL With ou Tatroduction
   ty
   ‘SethueSissies
              Avalon Bare ete Mande, ed by 2
‘Wavacr       Bs (nena) A‘antion a Oa
   mentary by Arthur Avalon (Seomd Bawion) -.
 oars op Sarvs (Mchinnastawa of Pushpadanta).A
  ‘Tronlatonand Commentary by Ares Avalon, ogothor
   ‘ih Bsns Gummontry of Segannatn Chabert 2
    (Sexmd Baiton)
 Tea Urisasan, Foreword to new commentary on. by
    ‘Kanllohirys, Saitnanda with Tronslation and Inteo-
    dotion by 17Msjumdar =.                          :
 ‘Sonmrz      Tower, kaBring  the Shatchakewnivi    pans and
    “Phduie-peocha        rw works    on Laya Yogn Basalt
    ‘Tect with complete ‘Tranelation, Introduction and
  Commentary (Seed Bilin)
                            ‘TANTRIK TEXTS
 Vou,‘drénighaneu-—A
         1. Tormasmoeana           wif BijeNighaney
                         Tlie Dieiouary.               altel ond     Mu Rs, a.
                                                                by THeh-
    Sih Vgratan wih a Eto a Beth by
   “Archer Avalon (out       of prt)                                       20
 ‘Vou Tl Srarcrarauvtrrac,—A work onthe six
   ‘centres ofthe body by Puratasads Sedan, with Com
     mentary of Shankara, Paduld                              (*Rivsfala
     footstool of the Cura), with                         sary of Kall
     charana and Notes fm the ike of Vihvanatha on tho
     Second. Patala of Kaivalya-kiid Tatra with an
     {otcodnotion    in Bngliek by Avtbur Avaloo                           a0
 ‘Vor, IIL, Prasaxonasina Tastes ~-Raita by Tekan
     “Videtcatn, with an Inrodvetion       in Engst by Arthur
     Asal                                                                  rm)
 ‘Vou TY. Koueropasasr Nroswa—itited by Gian
     Chonda      Vedsouatiths.
     ‘Alshaya Kuvies       Maite Withxz 22.aa Tntoduation by 20
         V. Kerasurava Bateaas aied by TMetabtha Vil-
 ‘Vo‘yiuina,    with Induction               inEglish Wy Arthur Avalon. 40
‘Vou. VI. Resrvizaga Towraa Waited. by. Phevet! Cha-
     ‘aoa Tarkatithe with Boglidh Introduction by Artur
      ‘kealon                                                              a8
  ‘Vou Vil, Simuomakussonitine—A Badahied Twntsa,
     edited
     Vejeaydonby Kasi     Daseamdup
                   by Arthur   Avaioa with a Forewordon the wo
  Vou. VITE Tarmaniss (Kanpct).—iest Pat, edited
     by Mabinaheptthrtya Cakabmaae Shite Drbvide
     with Dnteduotion by Arthur Avalon                                     40
 ‘Vou Do Kuarunant Srom.—(lymn to Ki) with Ia.
     ‘roduotion
     vim Withand innersenae        Commentsyby byArchur
                        complete Traneaton                 Vimelasanta
                                                                  Avalon. 4 @
 Vou X Rasuxsavmias—A Tintele Prcasa ofthe
     ‘Kschmir School by Paaydnanda wish Commentary by
     Neteotandandshe with fal Traneaton by Arthur
     ‘Avalon                                                 sense:       HAD:
 Vou Xi doumiiavorsiiems, Karon,
    ‘igoranena Katona and oie Upaihes,
    “With Ietoduction by Arehar Avalon
 Vou XIL Tastmnanass. Second Patt
 ‘Vor, XI. Masanemvasc Tasrma
 Tobehadof»
        BWU       & 00,
                      ZA    LONG DON; GANESH & CO, MADRAS.
                      SOME PRESS NOTICES
                  oy Womis 1 uae aroeooixo List.
        "Ma, Aviron is, 0 far as Tam aware, «ew comer Oriental
 studia, but be malne his entranoe therein with ‘celat'. is book
 Dilley inangastas the study of the Tastras, the literature of
  hich owupic a front rank sn the ligious life of Baden Indi.
 ‘er the Tantra guerst dion Belfs, doctrine, practice ond inai-
 twins Naverthaloes, the learned in. Tarope have hitherto put
 ‘them side, ond have asither published any TAstrie text
 ‘or tetsslation of thom. Wootem opinion hae crushed thes all
 andar the weight of « comeon illfane, ant summarily coudeaned
hum as compiltions which are both stupid and obveene. Me. Avalon
 ‘bos thesfoent Bizaelf so worl forthe reabiitation cf this ealom-
siotd Tierstue, and announces for easly publcetion 4 revicn of
 ‘works on the Tani and its testa Aya commeneunent, he hae
 select the MahdoirvAaa Tantra, notwithstanding, or sath, forthe
 very ronson, that tbe taxthas already bots trunslted in India by a
 Bengali author. Poe he wished    to show how muslght ax atteative
‘and serious sty can shedupon the more mechaaical anderstanding,
 of words. Tn hia york be lias not made even the least demaad
‘on Baropesn leaening. He Bas, on the coatrty, been able to die
 ‘ease with it without pejadion to his resume. On the other hax,
1eshows himself to be familiar with considerable numberof Tate
 works, He cites tham with profusion in the original Sarat, and
 <esives from them he explanation of tannicel terms of which the
 Aictonariee do not giveus the meaning. Hie translation is preséed
 Dy an Tnteuctionof 150 pages, which isthe moet said and exact
 ‘ounont that Las as yet besa Written onthe decriesof the Dentris
 ‘sie ontology, mystical phraseology, worship, ogs, and ethics.
  Allitems of information gven inthis exposition are supported by the
 ‘sutheritis he citea. Wo, however, greatly regret thet Mr. Avalon
 ‘has not added to his vork on index of the technical terms which he
 defines in one or another past of his work; for in that ease our dic
 ‘ionaios would have been eoriched hy an extemal valuable supple-
 rmant. The depth of the Tick curent which rune trough the sete
       ili in iad ter aston amine We
                                    i
 ange of Tndiaa erature will only be appreciated when wo atein
 's postion to give praite meaningsto many terms which ar a present
  ‘vague and without doinition. It is alo to the Tantras with ther?
 magia] invocations (Stdhasf) thst we must look for an explanation
  cof all the enigmatical figures which decorate in their swaming
  raltitudes     the fagudes of the Tadian templs."—Translated from
  ‘a Rave Orisque, (Professor Sylvain Tévi, College do France)
           “he Teatms have hitherto played in Tnalogy the pars of 2
  {nglo whioh everybody      ix ansion to avoid. Teie therefore         x matter
  ‘of congratulation that at last samsbedy Is rade up his sind
  vinsieallyto explore the jungle.              .....That thae books Gineloding
  ‘hose in preperstos) aro Likely to became e great boon, everybody
‘will admit eho koows to what an extent Madianal and Modern
   Hinduiom are pentrated by Teniron.”-—Thessophist
           “tis to Si John Woodroffe more thanto any ether Tndianiot
   ‘at we owe the dust, inthe slightest way adeqnats introduction to
   ‘the extensive ‘hatek literature of Mediwral ond inter Shalt oF
   ‘the alt of the AryuDeovidian Magna Mater to Western readers
   (Ge works) ave absolutely intispeosable fr el students of this very
rized but widespread and ingorianl plas of now-Fei Hinduism.
‘A subjest high haa elledforch che severest ropmobation                 frm the
‘vast majority of Onontliste-but         hitherto       from  s very insdequate
    ienowledge of the litersture."—Ossul Revo (GK. 8. Mead),
           “the only tally inetructive studies we heve on the ‘intik
  ‘teadtion, ite soriptanes, doctenes, ceremonies, and precics.
   So far ecbolace have fonght very aly of thie Tati and State
   brary and with good season... The subject is one of the
   most dial to disentangle. Forth serious student of comparative
   religion, hacer, the Tanira ia « mine of information... Suite
  ent bas vow been said to give the reader some slight indication of
  ‘the probleme and puree that avait solution in this etrango wocd
  of religious prtesos and experience containedin the Tantras. ‘There
  fre ew who are in aay way competent even to study the subject;
  much Ise to deal with it, Mr. Avalon is a coussgeous pioneer into
  thie unknown land... His translation is therfore a wey
  ‘usfalpieoe of work and practically opens up for us a new fed of
  ttady, though parhaps the most balling in the whole vast complex
  ff Hinds ligion. We wish him ancotesin his laboura"—The Que
          ‘sWaatover difense thine may exist ax tothe value of Téntsk
     iteratre, there ca bo none as to the very valuable services which
                                      iv
 Sir John Woodrfe has been tendering ty shis publiation of hie
 sass of booksto the cause of the Thai eult i particule: and the
 elucidation    of an importat phase of Metianat and Modere Hinduism
        “phe studies of the General Wiitor of these Taiz Texts are
 eaually coming to grips with the essentials and      if this m-foem
 lation should ever be achieved it will be due mainly to the pioneer
 labours of Sir John Woodnofc inthis moe dicot eld of reestch
 td Lis praiseworthy sttempte to clarify the theory underline the
         io:"—The Que.
       “This quite true thet hither the Tantze Shista, or body of
‘xeatisos dealing with the tee, ceremonies, and practices aod doctrine
 cof what wo may vaxture to cll Hindu sasure-worship, hae hitherto
 oan prictcaly a closed book to Wester sebolars, and that Mr.
 ‘Avalon ia doing e very great service for students of comparative
 rligion by making     a mmall part of it acousible, Bot it is @ most
 lift ond dangerous subject in every way, and confronts us with
 endless problems, religions, poychial sud moral, that are chacst
 ‘unireamed of today in the Wost....Pandit Battichtryya's teatie
 ina vory able polemie Sled with ontbmasts of high hetorcal beauty
 in defence ofthe Tantra, in which he skifully avids the abuses that
‘luetr go thickly ron. the wubject, and dexterously makes the
 1bgh ideas of Indian philosophy subservient to hie porpocs......The
 treating (Bénoipas of Tantra) of which the prvent volume represerts
 Part T only, it tho most remarkable pronouncement       on the sabject
 ‘which han yet appeared, and Mi. Avalon isto be thankd for making
 it cosibs to Westar readers. It is full of pointe of very great
 neces,” —The Quedt.
            fo hao already on several ooosions drawn the attention of
 ‘ou readers tothe courageous effort which Arthur Avalon ie malerg
to supply atudente of comparative religion with materiale which will
 enable them to teeat with greeter undertandiag eartin axpceta of
 eligion in India hitherto welled in almost impensteable obeeusity
     wo . « His industry snd wise co-operation with Indian Pancits
 ‘hove nc supoiedus with « maes of material that requires the mest
 ‘acefal sifting and enalpia and we owe him « dab of gratitude for
 raking it ancssible to ws.”"—The Quet
        “Nt literatnre has been neglected by Sauecit scbolers a
 well as students of comparetive miligion «Me. Arthar
  [Avalon bas devoted himlfto the study of these obscure writings
                                     v
 with ax cathisiem worthy, some would think, of other Sexslatt
 ‘writings ds yet untranslated. One may jain in bis hope that mech
 ofthe peejadie aginst theta will disappear whan the Tantresare
 read intheir eoticety              cellent translation... Me.
 ‘Avalov and kis sollaborstor deserve to be congretlated on their
 ‘moose in a aelly dfcn tacke"—Tines of India
       “The dost realy important work that 1 know of on the spirit
 of any Ritual Philosophy. No thinking Christian theologian, car-
 tainlyoo Catholic should leave it mea.” Hanean Keyserling
 im hin Dae Reise Tagobuch Biner pilorphen.
       “Tnse two valuable volumes for the fast time try to posent
‘what may well be desribed aan inside view ofa manimpotan ravch
of Hina spiritual eure, sot only ‘0 the western world but even
 to the galled modern readerin Hindustan iteell . . . .. The
 ‘rasslatnr az>--theie appasuntly French per-name matwithstanding
 —nmistakably Bagh, hut without the las itloinaularty os
 twristio of their rage. "They evidently went to the study of thes
 ‘usinvting books with an solely open mind, and have availed
 themselves of every help that they could get from genuine Hindu
  ‘Pandite and Sldhakas im their stuty and intarprtation of these
 sored texts, ‘These and other volumes in preperation will throw
  fonsiderable tight upon an sspect of Hinds thought and cultere
  ‘which bas ao long baod th modern intllect.”-—Blindu Review.
        “Thaae to works dos! with a deoadent phe of Tian rlgion
  rofesed bythe ane of Shaltas. Ta the Tanteas or Srpsare        of this
  tect  wo fod the lofty conseptins af easier and purer bela often
 ‘nowt ete obseused by brualasshooos pocus and debasing and
 Sensval ites. Of atch a characteris the ligion which the teaneletar
  Of thie work excols el recommends to the world of the twentieth
 ‘century! Te appanss thas thi Tantea i he Be #0 ba translated into
  aglich. Unfortunately the programme of similar enterprise pro-
 jected by the tranclator dpeives ue of the hope that it might leo
 ‘prove the Tet.” dibenaun,
        “Sir Taha Wooeflas—that       are Uhieg—an Ragishman who it
 really iaterated in tho ootrines of Teds, and has published
 snamerous works   ox one eopect of eush doctrine which in ualowa to
 ‘he Baropean publis. . .it     isto bs boped thet other tansltions
 into the Frouch wil follew.’—(Translated      fram the French). Reeve
  de Philuophie (R. Gaence.)
       “A muaguioees hiatal and phillognal eeord duo to the
  svar who has taken on himselé with eomplete stone a tase whieh
 aig acom to bo tharkdeas but whichis in zeety feound, opeuing
 for the Grst time an enormoas and almost ualnowa branch ef Indian
 Titrature.” (Isis, translation from the Franch of MM Masson
 Otel)
      "To speak fnokly, wo bliove the Tntik teachings to zepresent
 the Hindu spiit at its very worst                ‘Bot whatever be the
 smart of the Tatras from a moral and intellectual point of view,
‘here cam be mo doubt of thie iunense sinfooncs coer India, and 8 &
 Ascunest of the Hiada mind—alnort a¢ it lowest, wo thik—thia
 translation, roads with coaridrable aki and furnished with weal
 ‘tes, dstngt vale,"-—Luaa's Oriental Lit
      “me poset translation in sho fst ever pbiched fn Banope of
 ‘ay Indian Tantra... masterly translations... . We
 aa therfore warmly recommend these works to the openminded
 celtst and mystic alike—but only to such; to all but these they
 will ramain‘s esledbook'."-—Oscult Review.
      “The Para Shas the ours of ome ofthe mot fundamental
 concepts a regards worohp,. Whilst tho Yeo and Vedintic liter
 stares bave abtratad attention almost from the davn of oriental
 reecazeh, the study of TAstrik Iiveatare has not asly been noculti-
 ‘lad bit an aversion was created by come degenerate practices and
 abuses mnong some of the followers of this seol. In Mr. Avalon
 ‘hae myetio writings have found an enthunadic exponent and a
 ‘aring investigator who ds determined to disentangle the loey ccm
 aptons of earier eu purer beliefs from mack of th miseonoeptions
 ‘sed misandertandiags which have grown round then by the éo-
 ‘bung    and aeasual cites practised in the nameof Tantra... 5
 thi great work"—Madras Mai
      “His soblasly works, eapecialy those resting to ‘unten, ave
 given Win an enicent position among writers, bith Bastar and
 ‘Westar, on Todian Pilowphy . . has pomated himeal of the
    st of Bharata Shale cr Taian cultors.....the range of mebjeta
 ““Bhicata Shakti" ie a wido one ehowing hew eomplstely the aathor
  hos apprebendedthe soul of Indie, sa how deeply hae entered into
  is being   the reliatiou of ite damsnezing dea—one Life esryehers,
 in the od os in the highest intelleo   of mat.”-—The Phophit.
      “Sense in only Beginning to diacem the great trath discovered
 nadia eotarien ago...                 perusal of Si John's books on
 ‘Honda Philoophy “Powerserce” will have a glviouly stinulating
  ‘fact on Toate who ave leaat to fee themselves infer or beeks
  ‘wand ansong the races of makind."—Afalabar Jour.
       “"SiJohn Woodaofc believe profoundly inthe individuality of
 ‘2 nation and the chem of antiquity and elusive richness of Indian
 coalture args hm to express in no ambiguous wards the reed of self
 ‘aalanton by India of her own destiny. Sir Jehn deserver wellof
 Indis. ‘The ethical aspect of Mahatma Gandhi's crade against
 ‘groma msterisiam joins hands vith the scholarly protest of eminent
 thinkers ke Sie John Woodroffe, in rejecting for India and the
 Tatian poople the quackeryof chesp ogbinn and the taahof ignobla
  ppuruite.”—2indwithan Review
        "Oa eating    that au Baropean hae translate a THatik treatise «
 fesling  of disregard fr his wurkewt once comes over a; for the Tantra
 is nota Shisira which revenl ite trae meaning except wheat has
  ‘ou stied undera Guru... We commenced zeaing the trans-
 lation    with migpiviags. Happily, however, a perusl oft has ehar-
  fl us, That the asthor bas taken avery effort ad eare to express
 ‘the true xen of all thati containedin the orginal i patent in the
 teanalation of every vere. The Introduction not only reveals the
 Tearing of ths author, but also the proof          that he Dar waerstodin
  tokat ight Hine gardde Tastes Shdste ... ‘He eommeneed
  his work witha Hindu’ bear, with a Hindu’s regard, and a Wind's
 faith, andso his translation i what it oughtto le,”—Hitbad.
        ‘Speakingof some    of the texts" tho same Journal says: “The
  ‘books have beon edited with very grat ence, We have never before
  soon such sfoutles edition of any Tantra, May the labour ofthe
  tvockers be fuitfal.”—itobad (translated from the Bexsal.
        “Tho Incd Lerodetion of hia books extremely valvable. The
 ‘great principle f thin Tantra which he sy admirably places before the
                                                                     trans-
  public will endare, The Eogish rendering is faultless, in theThe beant-
 Intone have showa consunnate knowledge of Sanskrit
  fol Boglish zedering               “Every line af the Preface and Tato
 Gustin is replete with tender eympathy for tbe anciont Hinds
 ideal "—Indian Miter.
       “Jy porasing the author's Tntroduotion to the Mubdairvdna
 ‘Tantra, we have beea beiidered with astonishment. We Bnghis-        could
 never have drenntthatt        was potible for amodern Christan
 ‘ma to so flly understand such matters as the mode of Tati
 Sidhant , , . Theauthor basloarnt                 a great del ofthe inmes
‘and octet dostrine ofthe Tuntss .. . Tis                no exo erationto
 say that we have never bear, even fom any Bengli Pandit, such a
sles expoiton     of Mantre Shaka that which the entor has given
     2 + « Wemyoscainlysay       that he ould only make thimpoa-
  bio thing pombe through inherent tendencies (ams) aoqized
 in his previous le           Arthur Avalon bas xot spoken single
 word to sitiey himself nor tied to explain things sccorlingto hin
 cmmimagintion, He has only gor what are re ere, cong
to the principles of Shiai rearing             ‘vill eete    a evols-
 tion  of ids ainong the   chars   of Europe. And   i f hey commence
 Iolite          rnp n Beagle            one of Tht Sichack
 sums a if ho World Mother has again wile aus agin
 Seve omnes Ho power w tht Arthur Avalon tdying he
 Tere          as phe oo beau veriof the Mba?”
 ahi (cama fra the Bogs).
      “Sr Joh'loefor India night have otesond im some mie
 fiving ao povicing wach gus dit for fe vanity of Indi
 atonatin,i epet fo tr Heanngr and vinta of «somewhat
 ieauadcy Golden Age Bat ifthe was, peltcly minded,
sod often abit Hida read sis bok, “tna sve |
 tare and canoe, he would ae couch fo chan his
 Som sums sp tke potion adminbiy".nu terry          + Ble sage
                                                           devepecont
 See with ein aod gor tnngh
      DigaysThe Tint
                         Tteory Serplonent. of nog hat it in
                  uch Tneidty-antavercy
 sina dic         to deny that oven ise best ofthe onetaits, the
 Tin oft      ken
      “Jon Wovdrfein    fo Se"ne ofindthe Sprit
                                           fo living garine
                                                       aglaien howe
 innate soynstnce with te rls ai evinaton of anent
 Tada en iondscedsbasingeympahy          wih the cost ands pop.
 “a han essed tetas of Sir Winn Jones and ade the
 disomy ofthe Thats Iter to the Werter wen inpiaed
 vith whole enti for heels nail of Tian
Tite “TheThe poet
              Boral tration (Mabdsires) i tingid by ts
 slogan en by spond and compe aves hy hich
 {tie  bated, ‘The noes ace lt he pin                 nd exmtain aay 8
  ‘alah ist. ‘hs mt eile                past ofthe book, however athe
  Tatton, woh contains «complete surrey ofthe all manila
subj tend inte bok confine ek sew mate, aad
                                  ix
 ‘hat asa mst be weleom to th ganralzeader andthe Orientals
  ‘Werbsarily congratulate Mz. Avalon on the publication of tis fine
  ‘bolt ok forse wth pleasure ta the books he is preparing.
  faymas to the Goddess” oeeapiez a prominent place among the
  couneats 20 far published of the istryof religions; for no book
  Tas yet boos publitbed in avy Buropean Inaguege which give us
  ‘aoh a dep isight into the mind of the Devt worshipper es this.
  ‘The eiting (of the text’ has beon doe with great care” Then
  phist, Prof. Dr BO. Schrader,Kiel Uncen).
               ‘Oa “Shakti aad Shakta,” the ame Joural says ‘I ie ot
  fairs judge           « movenent by ite extremist exponents and therefore
  ‘he prstente the Tantrat to ua justae ho finds them impartially bat
 sapupathetialy and brings to bear upon them all the wright af his
  learning and scholenbip. “Ha reveala a wonderful grasp ofthe funda-
  smastala of epadiousnes.”—Pheephist.
               “‘Aotar Avalon's Raglish sewcalation of the Mabivirvdna
  ‘Tantrain dastnedts inaugurate now epoch in tho advanooment of
  Oriental states beth bscoate he hus by his exzllen Tntrodoction
  ‘ofthe Tanire opened outa new eld of study and hae also, ino
  {ollowed the ornox tatereetations veitlout making te let effort
to init upon he reader inthe name of he Sha, eas an onprtions
  ‘ehh aro forign toi ‘This as beeu dave in a way which diseases
  ‘is deep insight into the Bivea,"—Calett Univeraty Magazine
               “Our Rw impression wag ane of amazement and delight. As all
  stavtente ofthe Shivers aware, the Maldnireana i oe of the mest
   inportast of Hinde philosophical works combined with elaborate
                     toad its translation, therefor, by a European involved
  ‘xtainly « prodigions amount of study, sympathy, and real under
  standing. Of the latroduetion alone it ay bo sad that forts Ini-
  Aity,consseues, directness, and. for its depth of penetration end
  insight, it aay ite laim to be « etandard workon the muchrabwee
  ‘Paniras, nul the author would have rendered Hindaiom indebted
 ie had dove nothing ele. Tein powerulltoraryand pilosophical
 ‘induction...                wabiastd reader wil be sure told out how vdi-
aloasly miseproemted have been the THatrik prncipetand prac-
 ties,—momacla            ble Smt scholarship and thoroughly Hinduied our
 lookgen, al trae unienstandingof, ono ofthe mos: abstruse braxche
 of Hinde thought. Hzhas susiaized o burning interest and vividly
 post interretation through his entire work. He bas succeded
 hie dione nterprse ..                         resommundable to vate of rae
  ‘and yet posit translations of Hindu scriptures, We hove zarly
  ‘ome across sich an illuminsting exposition and a masterly vind
  cation of the andelying ideas ad principles of Devt vorship.”—
  Prabuiia Bldraa.
        “A taskof no andinary difialty, bat Mr. Avalon has pesformed
 it with remarkable sucore . Ble sommentaries have ote
  Aated many imotty problema ; he has brought to cur Inowlodgo en
  immense sfore of information of prime importatee, which has bean
  0 Tong hidden from un, . . the Totroduction is a masterly
 Aisertation on the sabjent, aod foraahos proof of ie lenilacty
  with th subject graspof mind, and facility of treatment which we
  aauot but admire. . bo has elusldetedto an extent, hitherto
  unattempted, someot theabstrusest mysticims and obsouties of
‘ot lieratare, In resding hetero and loidexplanetions uf the
‘many extremely abstruse point with which ME. Avalon deat, iti im
  possibleto realize that the writer ie dealing with seubjeot whichis
  ‘quite foreign to the phew in which he was born. We cannot but
 ‘spout an expogson of thanks for the valuable serves which Ns.
  ‘Avalon is rmdoringto ‘Tatrik litrature."—Amriea Bacar Patrik.
        “the author bs treated the subject with eaze and atiention,
  sod diseussodthe Sostea in aa impartial maaser, athe Tantza,
‘as in other Shires deoing sith the inoer life eke are paxeoges
 fall of technical expressions. I is, therefore not difiult to realize
 ‘whnt endless trouble the suthor has gone through inthe endeavour
 ‘wo master thistechnical language co aso enable him to write this book.
 ‘The footie show that he Kas sought the assstence of Stdhaks
 vars inthe ins meaning of the Tantra, We eatnot say whather
 te publoation ta the wold by « foraigner of these acret Scriptures
 ina fulSlmen     of tthe prophecy ontained inthe Tatras, but we think
 ‘hat more good than eviis italy to result.              The two volumes
in quaston desorvo« very high unk among books of vir lass, The
 ‘eanalation {saa lsid       ca it ia oomplote. In ite perusal we do zot
 oogniss that wears xeadng a tranlation a all. We hoestily deste
that thove books should be was zesived by all."-~Uiodhana,
        "Persually, we axe sot admirers of either the TAasek ealt or
  literature... butt eaanoe be jgaomed by any vecous student of
  Hindsion..."—induatas. Review.
        “We woleome these two books for more reasons than one. The
‘Tantra entre evry pe of human life, ond theres hardly branch
 of Ioarning wish ie ot cored by them. Tt hus been the custom
   ‘among zone poopleto run down the Tantra Shlstra as obsoen and
  ‘im oral—es contaiing the gems of auagohy aad @lorder. Tt has
   boon the custom among those supericiel writers and xpeakrs to
  opine that our Sbtstres             are speculationswhick donot,
                               dry, ntllectul
  in thaie higher phase, though devoid of the taint of idolatry, eo0-
  tain anything to toush the difarent phasts of human nature, To
  ‘Hom we resomsooad these tno books, if they have a genuive desire
tw kaowour ShAzasin theietran aspect. Thuy bave been translated
  with great care, and re as faithfal reproductions of the texts as
  ftanslations could be, The Tatroduction to the Mahdnirvina is a
  artery summary of eveything that the bepinner ought to know,
  ‘nad tho fostaatas to tho translations have udded gently    to the value
‘of the book, and have made cest many « kootty pont which to tho
  condiaary euder is obscure. Wo aze pleased to notioe that the learned
  ‘sthor is bringing oat otber books of thie clas. It was through the
  forts of Rarpian acholar thet the Vedas and Darshanse were
 saved from oblivion, and it was left to another Bnropean scholar
  to-do justice to the sactad Tantras"—Tie Rergclec
        “thsse book, dealing with the serot myntsian and magic
  ‘of Inia, ae the mont intersting which hace bon published in recent
             LNewe Metophysivde Tundechou.
        “Aa ineatismae benads to all interested in India and Taian
‘thoughts opening up the east domais of TAntrit- lore, wakih formsd.one
 of tha mott important yet svongelyseplecte         region inthe roa of
  Sonsiritc Learning «+ the psjadion of Wootern Suodltst,
  feed the consequent distrust of Baglih-slacated Hindus, taking their
  fou from their Buropsan Gora have been inetrumeatal in making
  ‘the Taatra looked upon with dsfsvour by the preset generation,
  ‘But thereis no deuying that alow he whol of presourday Winduion,
  ‘ow bot ite philwpie     nd ribwlite eids, Rasa Tautrik asin...
  Iastery trarslstions ant adminuble intrdvetion to the Tantei
  system of thought and selteulture. . . Tb makes for the fet
 time a scvitif     fore en ie
                            initiate the reader ino Ube mpaterin ofthis
  Branch of Stored Literate." ~The Galoute Univrsity Magazine.
            reat historian bas said that it would be the unfortonate
 lot of some futur scholar to wade through the diaguting details of
 drunkenaess and debauchery, which were regarded as an easeatia
  pect oftheir roligion by a larg section of the Indian Community
 ‘hot long ago, This o matte                 r that such an unfortx-
                                  of congratalation
 ‘nae scolar     hs ade hie sppearsnce . . . . To the Raropean reader
 wsaoquainted with Tastes it will reveal « new wosd altogether, so
 unlike things   they have seen, heard, or even red ; for fw have heerd
 ‘of e mligious system which enjoins the enjoyment of the plesewres
 of lif, and oven exossive indulgence in then—a aystem which
 enjoins offerings of wine and meat and evan things unspeakable to
 ‘the Deity. ... Hon the most squeamish critic is bound to pro-
 onwes this Sas atampt at tnenlating « ‘TEnscik work into. Regish
 tobesescense, . . . Thefootnotes             will be very much appreclated,
snthey milly cusdste theideas embed inthe worof the original
in the majority of cnses."—The Englishman (Colutts).
       ‘he Tani ofrs many suggestions othe West in vitae of ts
 scoentuation of Will and Power . . . With tho advantage
‘derive from a long residence in Indie the euthor brings to is work.
1 deep understanding of the langeage, « comprehensive knowledge
of Rasta wisdom, lucdly expressed, wide gonerl culture, and a
 sift of pentzstingcticiom."—I! Nuowo Pacse (Roma)
       “This       eof the mostimportant of the Raster Systems—the
 Indian Shilcta Tantra—in which thoe very obscura of thought
 vith mich Ruropeas thinkers have most long and vainly struggled
 ace developed in fall aad explained most clanly . . . The
 rit of having rvtored the Tantza to ita proper splendour is due
 to Asthur Avalow a ésvant, who has the unigue gifts of deep under-
 standing and shoowdly pliloroghic extique. All those who believe
 in het iatioation of which the Indians poatifate between                the truly
 ‘el an that power whichi within          he   javidas]     and  yottransoends
 ‘hz, ow itt in that he haa taught eens             to find wey, not merely
 ‘iy which the troth may be thought of or diseussad but by which
 it lived, by which tin valzed, by which it may be powetsed'
 ‘Byes, Revista Mensile di Studs Relist (3. Hvala).
       ‘sor many years past the ShAsten has euered neglect ab the
 hands of both Indian and Buropean acholas, and manuscripts are
 rapidly dlappeasing, This, with the general jgorance prevailing
 ‘eganling the subjontmatter of the Tantra, threntens to pass the
 ‘Shisten ital into oblivion, and ehe thanks ofthe publi,              expecially
 fof the Hindu publi, axe due to        Arthur    Avalos   for  hia  attompt    at
 osoing it from this undonerved fata...                         Arthor     Avalon
 ‘Shange     al this, THe pauntates    into the laaemactsencinm of our
 imligin           dispenses,with the aupreions
                                   too,                             ond arrogant
‘unner tha is gealy adopted              by the   Haropesn     scolar  in desling
 ‘pith matters naa, Ho sites in ehe               Bngich    language,     but the
 matter and method       ar eatiely thoso of « devout Pandit!"—The
 Bsprss Borkipore)
       “Two very welome additionsto oarstee of tacaltion        from the
 Seaskrit . . . It was e happy thought on the par of Archur
 ‘Avalon to present the chief works of thie ancient religion in Bxgish
 Gres... exteumely fascinating phenomenon which ia pre
 seated ia the booke here tramalated                 ‘har interprstation
 of the Hyanns selected fr translation is guuerally unimpeachable.
 ‘Wo are lad to Team thet Mr. Avalon proposes to fraualate more
 of these Tantras. Very fw scholars have the training to atampt
 tho tasik”-— Tie Nation (New Yor),
       “Asthar Avalon hnemale s vary happy choice rom among the
 imumense matezal of Indian literature,                ‘Th fist attempt
 ‘hick has boen sade in a Boropent language fo poy within the reach
 cofa wider cizee of atholan oxo of tho rimetour ‘Tantra, which
 constitute  the sacred serine ofthe Kali, o Sinful Age, and which
sr, thuafor,       a Mighly inortant sours for the eudy of prose
 doy orhodas Hinduiew, Te adertaling in as pralseowortiy 48
 ita diffcult_praisworthy becauseof the: sbovementonsd import
‘ance which affaches to these magical texts, aud dificult by reason
 ‘of the innumerable obstacles which oppoas the Buropean who tice
 to understandwud tanslate      the technical tamsnclogy here emplayed.
In this circumstance les doubtless the reason which up to now has
 blndeved the uutiing bend of favertigatons into Indian Hteratare
from approaching the Tantms, and it ig therfore to be reckoned 0
 the epecial oredit of Arthur Avalon that ke ha not been deterred
 ‘om his task by these diffcultis .               ‘The whole work bears
 ‘the sampof onscientiousnes and aecuracy....In the cate of gush
 4 trmulation even the Dest Sunsirit ditionary fails in matters of
 idialyy. I is necessary, therefore, to be familiar with eammen-
 ‘aries onthe samesubjeotf      we would anderetaad what Hida worship
 is ond meme... Arthur Avalon has consintiouly fled
 his obligation; a fart which is noted, so that even the lmenmay
1hevea notion ofthe labour which has had to be expended      ia the om
pletion of this compilation... . For the student of rlisions
‘there i, then, a mine opened for is inguves, and we may therefore
 vweloume with pleasuro the announcement that the dstnguiahed
 English Sensis hes decided to continue his work ox the Taxtre
 tdto publish abortly three new works on the same eabject.”
 —Literarsshs Zentablt fur Deuschiond (PB).
        “Ths is nob the fist time shat the Sblstras (other than the
   ‘Tantr) of the Hindus have been tzanalated by Baropen savants,
 ‘Siac the “dsaovery of the Saashit language by SirW. Tones, the
   sttenton ofthe leerned in Euzope hae been wiely dawn to other
  ‘Shistras of the Hindus, But tho Tantra Shistra has not bean 30
  fortunate, Waropean savente heving been previouly under the
  impreson that it-vas utterly contemptible and fll of superstition.
  (Me. Avalon ithe Gest to attempt to Temove this atime, and he in
‘therefore undoubtedly the objet of gratitude of every Hind...
  ‘tis ot sufcont peise to any thatthe traalation (Maidairrtna)
 1s excellentant faithful as possible, forthe book has a distinctive
  feataze ofits oma which we wll bee describe.            The diffrence
  ‘etmeea Europe and Inia ie very goat. ‘The etrmundings, educa-
  tien, inlinntion, and notions of the Turopean ae tatlly distinct
  from ours, Whavover, therfore, he endosvours to sualyzs oar
  ‘histra, Dharma, Arta, and Literature, he judges them by the eatie
  standanl as his ows. ‘The Huopeea cavants stady Tndion Shistra
  ‘with Buropean eyes nd ply their own preformed conceptions to
 i, Whilet they show great eagemets to judge what is good and
‘whet isbud, they donotsow any desire to acertin the rel charsciar
 ‘of oar Scrptatt, Waete such Seriptares resemble those of the
  aropean, they call it good, sad condemn it an bad vhero they
 Afar, Taine displays this defect in the Humopesn character in the
following observation: ‘Hare close by us is poor Ms. Max Mller,
  vio, in onler to sclistie the study of Sanelsit, was campelled
 to say in the Vaces the worshipof moral God--that is to say,
 ‘the aligion of Paley and Addo.” Whether that be o ox nat Twill
 ot inguir, my par                        to illustrate how Kuopeans
 impove thee notions either consionely or usconsciousy on us. And
‘thas their incomparable zeal and great labonr is often lost. ‘Mr.
  Avalon, however. hs uot so done. He did not begin his study with
  ‘sy pramnosived nations, butin che trae spit of « archer after
 truth He hus oafully cxumined the Shistra with India eyes,
‘Astining fom shore, he has endeavoured to undentand ic.
  What I have tosay inthat the way A Avalon has dealt with itis
  Dp. -Besive or tare the Shee if you lik, bt fest try toundee-
  stand the eubjsct Before expressing your epion..The socrery
  (cuhaays) of Tosta ia hand to get ot end understand. Nobody eonle
  ‘have Dolioed that « szanger would guin no complete grasp of the
  subject, The educated men ofthis country ave sued the subject
 ‘tofallinto such neglect, thet there ia now x0 differoace between then
 nde forigner, Ose ie atrunk with wonder at the extreondinary
 grasp which the author has of Indian Philosophy. Tt isan though one
 were reading » book by « Hindu Philosopher and Sidhaka . . He
 is wcoal frond of Tadia and hat discostd Hindu Dharma with the
 ye of « Hindu Sidlale.”—ProsBld. Touualatad from the Ben-
 ‘eli (S. Upendra Ohandsu Guo),
       “The Tantra has not boowo fortuets. Tho savants of Burope
 Ihave previowaly been ander the impression that She Tantra Shistra
 i attrly ntemptible         and fll of aaperstitions. , Avalon's nthe
 fet attempt to remove that stigmas from the Tactea Shiatra. He
 fa undoubtedly, thereoce, the object of gratitude of every Hinds,
 ‘There is ensther feature which distinguishes his work fom the Hindu
 ‘Shastra published by other Europosn seholes. Mr. Arthur Avalon
 Aid nt bagi che etudy      of thie Shitstra with any ps>-conosved notions
‘He has ettampted to interpret, in the rus apint of «searcher after
 ‘rath, a charatarstio      whichis larg inthe caseof the majorityof
 ‘Baropoun scholara, Mf, Avalon his sot imposed his own notions
 in this manner, He haseacfullyseen the Indian Sitetra with Indian
  yes. -..oEle has aot abused but in plac            of doing so, he has tied
  careally to understand        the   Shistr.    Those    who in the name of
 ‘cient faith have pat wicked interpwetatione on the Sst have
  done evil and not good.”——Protib..
        “tis strange that, though Hindus ands sured writings have
  boon eritclly studied by Weatera scholar for nearly eontury, this
  ‘Tantei phooe and ite Sviptures hare been Litherto negected, with
‘the taut thet vary litte now of then, snd tha ile, to, i all
  fof misconception. To the exliary mind the anteveryiv mention       associated
  With all that ix sbomineble in Hindaiom, aad its                              is
  cough to provoke dsgust.,....This work of Mr. Avalon i a gener:
‘ous os wellas couragecus           task, and if at the nd of his labours he
 ‘soeeds in removing aven something ofthe sigaa which attachen
‘to ths name of Tanke,he wil have achieved wo orizarytriomph..
 ‘This pacticular conaer of the eld of Sausrit is virgin soi, and Mr.
 ‘Avalon bas entered uponit with enthusiasm, and persists init with
‘doggedarss      thet sugars vol for his final sucess. His programme
‘of operations   has already met with discouragement fom what we may
  call the orthodax schoo! of phillogers, and one criticalto theauthority  elusi-
 ‘ather uncritivally   anid that he was devotinghs years
  dltion of “brainless    hocus   yoous’.    But  we  are  gladto see   that  his
  labours have been highly ottlled in Bengal, the prsent hotne of
  "TBatricm, which    i delighted atthe disinterested efforts   ofan English
  san to vindicate ther fith and ite underlying philosophy before
  the learaed world. Oze exallet trait of hia ocholeahipSa that he
  loos not treat the Tentea wstings ea merely to bo understood with the
  tid of the Sasalit dictionary and grammer. Ho has stadied theta
  ‘living human documents expounded by indigenout Pandite....0
  ‘kiful exposition Prinspls of Tantra) of Téntsk dostries by one
  of thece Pundits thanualves....is vary trenchant."—The Timerof
  Inia (Bombay)
        “But in Sr Jokn Wosdroile we have « complete understanding,
‘of thewpistual philosophy ofthe Indians... the Mts Text books
  ‘which he has illumined with gneet power aad ringing convietan have
  this memage of perfect ls. .Hs has moet slfliy and teathflly
  Drought ont the okt atengeh of our people which we reqnize for the
  Dpllding of our Tadian nation, ‘The “World as Power, ‘Bharata
  ‘Shaki! “Ts Ladin Civilized”       toa ere expositions of the intense
  vision sich he bas for glotified Tain,” Those velumes appeal to
  the edutated Indish G0 moald anew hie aational life, and herein
  ‘comes the dleinetion ofthat great contsibetion which Bir Joka has
  tuade forthe ragenenatinn of thin ancient equntty."—The Liberator
        "He   has had he pone ana passion to we inte      the heart of tng
  ‘andrea the hatry of civilization in Uke epochs of the mind, Ex
  ternal of sneceso abd failazo cold not dim is vison eu he Tooked
  for the teiumphe of Hale Railsophy which resched the very con
  fines of thought. Ho shed light on obscure regions af itu practice
  ‘and specilation, He ir one of the greatest intarpreters of the
 ‘Tent end the ebief of Eamopean soholazs to reveal the vigour, the
  snubtance andthe Rhythms of ghie thoughts."—Te New Empire.
        “No Orientals in ignorant    of big work. Tt ie an astonishing fact
  in the History of Tndianins—the opening up by one man alone af
  iserature the most uzkmown and misunderstood, bafing above
  ‘all by its strtage technialicen, Now there ae the clauents of
  ‘Taatsk Library which we owe to the oourege and inowledge of
  “Arthur Avulon.”—Le Menage, Pacis (ranslated from the Fre:ch),
        “The appearance of Acthur Avalon asan exponent nd defenderof
‘the Tetras is momento eveutin the history             of Saneleit revearch,
  1No‘better or sturdier champion     the  Tantras  could   seeare in moder
  ‘times,  and his povertl gresp ofthe Thtek philosophy         snd nitelism,
  Ihe thorough appreciation wf the THatrik ideals and mathads, bis
                                      xvii
‘unabating energy and anal in tneing the Thntik myeteries, more
‘haa justify in us the hope that educated minds       in the Bast as well as
‘Weat wil be er long diaabused of all tha: mae of prejudic th they
have allowed to gather romd the name of Tantre. Ibis needles
ta point ont that this sabe vindication of the Tontras refunds dre
te the Benet of Hinduion as a whale; for Tanticiam in ite ral sense
nothing bud the Vedio sliion atrugling with wonderful veces to
roseetitalf amidst. all those new problens of raligious life end
Aicipine        which later historical events and developments thrust
‘pon it,...Ju this mew publcation (‘Principles of Tantra’).
Avalon       bas not only fully mintuined the tradition of Specir mente
 {nh tranalaion, but has again brought out beloe the vould of
 Stoslert research another testimony of his wonderfal amount of
stay       and insight intheshape of another Introdntion,    no less profound
 and weighty than his Intewdetion to the ‘Tantra of the Gest
 Tiberation'. But the most noteworthy feature of this new Intro-
dletion ia his appreciative presentation of the erthodox views shout
‘Uh sotiquitynd the importance of the‘Tantas, ond ite imopoeibe
‘tp oversatimate the value of this presntation."—Prabuddho Bloreta
 (layavati, UB)
         “Tp a mind of superior vigour and aouteness Mr, Avalon uniter
 ‘fur mneo estmive intimsey with the products of Indien thovght
 {has ye have ever encountered, after aoqeaintanes vith humreds
 of educated Esropeans, in any other indiidaal of hi clase .
 Amrita Basar atrida
         "The book (Prncgles of Taitre) chosen by Mr. Avalon for
 intoduing the Wert tothe study ofthe Tanta ie at alleventsan
 fextraceliary work... The axthor has watten the book with
 bi ife-blond, as I were, aa i i inposible not o fel sympathy
 swith Aim...         Theve a perhaps ao one Living at presext from whom
 tre may get 0 much solid information on the subject concemed
‘than fron SJ. Shiva Chandzs, the axthar af this wor
 The Common
         “lost of those who know Ina now what mersl and socal=
srt have bean esaciatd with Tints sites and it may be doubted
‘whether, evenas an historical document, this long, obscure, end re-
palsive apology (‘xneiples of Tanta’) was worth the enniiderable
Inbour of translation and. annotatien."—Spesator
         “This Pineiplesof Pant’, Vol I)isan English translation by
1, Arthur Aral, the pionoes in the fel of Tintsk research and
 Aedioated by himto the author of tho work, wo is one ofthe highest
 living authorities in Bungal on the subject concerned . . . . There
 ‘are sil many people who below that ‘the chief, and practically the
 ‘ole, auboote of the Tantra’ are ‘sensual rites and black magic’
 ‘To Sham this book will be a revelation. for it vill show them that
 ‘hor is etl qitae differnt aspect of the Tantras, which is no Tes
 ‘prominent for having buen altogother neglected so far, They will be
 sstonshedto find that it is posse to deal withthe philomphy of the
 ‘Tantras withost even refering to those ten axd thst magic, and
 they wil grow aupieioun witl*reged to thote general statements
 ‘The vale of the booeis undeniable, as nothing ike thus heen        0 at
 svallable to the Wortera student...           Asthur     Avalon's Tntro-
 Aluetion ie Bk thet to hi tranlation of the Mihénirvinn~a very
 remarkable pisce of work”—The Thuewphist (Professor Dr. ¥. 0.
 Schuader, Kiel University),
       "Mr. Arthur Avalon has rendered an ign service to humanity
 geerally und the Taina people, ia particular, in editing the Thatrike
 ‘Tent anion ard in treolating some thought-povoking work on
 ‘Tanta, For truly ther iano more marvellous       foun of mystic Hindu
 iam thanthe practical reed ofthe Mateik .. .. Mz, Avalon appeacs
 to_havo ovidensy    been well arquainted with some ofthe best Téntxike
 ‘Stihulas of the éay."—Kealpata,
       “The mestof Mr, Avalon's timely publication has become widely
‘koowa by this time in Taio and outside. Nobody can deny that hit
 works heve dspeled « mags of gloom that was hitherto enshrouding
 ‘the Thole lore in the minds of tke outside world and schol have
come to rosie nov that the religious Bistry            of dhe land is not
 sundarataod if proper aly be net mae ofthe Téxtr Kigatre
 ‘Tantra cobues this Power of Netue, i Natare Heoself with « cone
 svjnussoul snd thus teensfgures the whole    ie and creation ata mani-
 festation ofa ving Power, sa-coascions and self-sficient. Unlike
  ‘Vents, Tetra never views My8 or Prat as something seperate
 nd yot aot erpanste fom Brahman. bagpets that Brahmas and its
 ‘Shalit ce ena ad the sams when viewed      fm the standpeint of ea
 tion, Te males no bairapliting      deren     between Miya and Mayin~
  Making   to much of ths datinetion without adifrence has led tothe
 degenercy of the Vedat ent in some quarter. Punjabi Vedlcta
thas beouie tema of roprosch Such extreme             view in the enoeof
  ‘unt persoas cuts tem say fom the natural und aafe moorings of
 ‘worship and loaves them sdeift inthe chtos    of Viera.
                                    xix
       the most ettions of sbsusities is the opinion which the
 ‘Western Ocentlist holds about Tantra. Devoid. ofall traditional
 ‘altar of the and, untaughtand unalded by eny teacher; often in
 stapendows ignorance abont the inerlife of the people with bit of
 spratling knowledge of Sansa andthe dry spsit of reearch, the
 ‘Westar Oriactalrt alan Yoid 40 epen the trescurehouse of the
 ‘Hinds scciptagee withthe help of hie pramatare scence of hilo-
 ingy. No wonder that he oft pate in the wrong key and commits
‘gregiws lanese, And thers ars goma in our own land who take
 the ue feo thoix Westors Gams and pasa iavectives upoa the
 Shislca . . At present the entire ritualii                m (Upéoera)
                                                   and worship
 fn Tudia. ore mainly conducted acoing to the rues of Tani. A
 ‘thorough kaovledge of [a philosophy ic necessary to ndesstand the
smenning of Hindu rituals and ceremonies, The present work will be
of invalu               to this puxpeee."—Velanza Rasori (Maras).
                service able
       ““Bvidentlythe doctrine of the Tantmsig nothing but « pure
 ‘Yedtatioone... Ose of the most striking features of the Tanta its
 doctrine ofboth enjoyment and lbertion...-Tho Tantrs have log
‘boon neglected by fonegn scoluct      and their blind Indian followers.
 Bat now itis balieved thet thiagh the uninching zal and enengy
 fof Me, Asthar Avalon, these vorks will be rescued from obscurity
 ‘aod truly sppreciated."—Afodera. Review.
       “Acthur Avalon hs by his leured edition of Tanti Texte
 in both Sensiitand agli, indeed rendered an eminent serve to
 the oaute of Sons fitesatur. Thu ‘Tantras have hitherto been a
‘sealed book to many and this at¥emptto preduoe      in ued and eloquent
  ‘aglsh the nin prineples of the cult cannot filto iit admiration
‘eon all Lovee of the sacred Itersture ofthis county. ..admieable
 introduction" Mabimahopddhyira Seta Ohandre Vidytbiishana
  in tho Galote Reviow
       “fo aspect that ‘thu Avalon” ie one of th lered Panite
 of Bengal who antivespeeck has aot boon without inuenoe uponkis
 ‘lost nigecouble Hogs, seams ohare the bli ofthe Sait”
                                                            no fur ax hero
 whose work be edita aad his historical scuma is not, native,
 revealed, any grentor.    His  nguistic  ease  is  purely             But
 rightly he aye the greatast    tase on the philosophical   importance   of
 ‘Tontra. I contains“ deep pillsophic doctrine’ Tat us wee what
 it is, We may pass over the nual, grunting        thst it i perhaps the
 ‘most elaborate system of auto-suggestin in the worid....What           is
 ‘his laetrne)exzept the feminizationof orthodox VedAnta. Its a
 dootinn for sata nonin, the dogms useupported by ax
 ideae that the fonle prinle anteater and icles the male
 eile aod thst this pncpls se upuene aivaity Shive himelt
 Yorsipe er.....Ht it lig Boris sun mad, The eres in
 of imprtane wing the Tri: Tet are th epitiate contain of
 io nduon sp thse contest has loag been ved           by ubuence
ff docunest ant by ack of understanding   of wach works  a8 were
 availabe, Tewillaow be poablto pus upon these texts judgment
                                                            hear-
 ‘andon aonliga ater than. the na judgment unde enhitherto
       “We son no sean, however, to modify the opinion
‘The works tho fa offered in this eeries conoborate thet opinion.
  But we valne highly the werk done in editing the eevis if for no
  other reason that i gives us #2] insight into She jargon of the situa
‘nd the wortle                Thatzik Philoscphy. It is a ditinct
                         of sanese                                   gain to
  Jove just why itis worthless and to have this point demonstrated
  by ita adacant."—he Nation (New York).
          "The Onthoity ix typical of the wholo ‘latsik system whith
‘in inte eapination ove of the grestest attempts yt made to embrace
  the whole of God manifrtedend unmanif                in theetedadoration,
  selediacipline and owldge of w single soul...-M. Avalon in in
 publication isita upon the greatness ofthe ‘Tantra and seeks to
daar aray by « dispassionate watement of tho real factathe cloud
  ‘of misconceptions which have obacund oar view of this profound
 tod powerful systen......--Tho work of trandlction has been ad
   tairably done Tt in at once ffhfl simple and. geeceful in etyle
   ‘nd shyth."—Arye (adr).
        “<ethe'Tan         cbeome th Tanteas az fal of indeoenoy,the
                      ae tas
   ‘Tantaare foded with Avaau, tho Tantnas are Jonthncme, the
 ‘Tantus ace ecbl, the Kt ofthe on-Aryanis the object of wocshipto
   of the Mstze" Buck loud wordsof condemas                         wont
                                                             weeetion
‘resound withoat pense inthe wouths ofthe Bnglish educated cla:
 ‘iftonannas ofthe high dass Brava anitis tn Bengal are Bhalts
 ‘and yt thi gion Books wore Deng merlin this fskion. Having
   reesirad an English initiation and education they wee extting with
   their ova hand the branchon which they were sected, At that
 ‘moment Asthar Avalon (people say he is Mr. Juste Woodroe)
   Iola their fate pride and revealedthe greatnees of the Tantra and
   ‘the Boglnh-edueated  Babua commenced to rab theireyer. Bravo, Oh,
   Tngishman | What orald not be dozo ty others from Keehntnanda,
 Agamavigihs to Shiva Chandra Vidylmeva that you havebe
 dane ! But what i theze of novelty in it? What werkof ours can
 dane unless «white woslmas is employed 1 Hume started the Can-
 {ese and ve aatumad the garb of Patriots.           We were aboutto exn-
 ig to the waters Hindu Dharma            as someting fll of rubbish when
 the Trimdti in the shape of Chlotel Olott,, Modame Blavatsky
 nd Mex. Besant cxme across the seven ooeans and thirten zivers
 ‘nd gave myetial interpretations of smeesing and the sound of the
Tisard and we made obeisance to you, Ob Timi! and batch ater
 ‘alt of us aasmed the ganbof the Theoephint"—Bldrataurha
          “To the Western mind the geaeieverm ‘Hindu’ conveys for
‘the oat part the iden of Vedio philosophy. With the zeligious
 sl ritoslistic side of Hinduism the Occident io practically un-
 ‘aoqosinted Th fect till Mr. Avalon approached the subject of the
 ‘Tentm Shivtza hitherto related by scholars to the limbo of super-
 stiton if nothing worse the European mind knew nothingof ortho:
 induion                      Tn 8 mastery critica introdustion Me, Avalon
 ‘spproaches& field of romarch shoastwsexplored. The result of bie
 invontgatons into he matore, origin, age aud authoity of Thntrio
 woeehip, whilee proving the cau eader with « fund of useful
 Information,       shold also prove of xo amall value to the Oriental
 strdent      and pave the way fo « mone and mose complete appishen-
 ‘ion of the tndelying fath of « oem of warship which has come
 ‘rsounoualy to e os] associated with wine and women, Hack magic
  fhedcoon, ‘Tho facesaud ttoperomal efforts of Mr. Avalon to
  Tenove the haadieap from ® mush mieunderstod form. of worship
 eserves the mpport ofall students of Eastern end. especially of
  HB aeligons thought." Onell Rien.
           “Iu these days when we axe being ooded by Wostern acience
 ‘ond scientieeduontionand even our great living poet Rabiednenath
  ‘Tagore seems to have become hypsctized hy the fale gitoe of Wes-
 ‘tern materials iti» zlielto como acroa a bool of the type we
 have bors us. Si Jon Woodroffe              ir ane of the very  few who bas
  bileheactedly stood up for Tndion cultare....We thank Six John
 {or the dispassionate way he has eated the ubject (“Bhirete
 ‘Saket His as bem a tak based an the high pedestal of janice
 ‘to n mitch maligoed and totally seglected calture!"—dmrita Bazor
  Peirika,
           ‘The yous 1915 will ever remain s memorable dot in Indianiem,
‘the your in which wo stosved inane lot whole Wray            of texts, tons
  lutions and catival eesays on the Tati Literature hitherto abmest
  nokmows. Our admization vat mingled with omazment. A lit
  of wore was reveled all at once and, if the writer concealed himeslt&
  ‘under « paeadouym, this posudonym hus conquered the glory of be
  savant, a rtpown certain and free fram the eaprice of Time. As
  ‘more   and more explore                d A. Avalon discovered 20%
                               ths literature,
 ‘mare and more dssinilritia but loser and closer coanection                    with the
  ‘ther reliions. The Tuutrk cult in not s mere superstitions impes!=
tion (Simagrée ewperettous). Ite belief that ma can realize divi-                     the
  ‘vine    in him ond outide him is    te  ostlte     of  al     thwe  who     hae
 isd th ritual word ao Brahman ond of al who sek in Yoga                      a thew
  nsivalen!'—{Translaed fom the French) Bullatin de IAsocaton
  Brancise dea Amia de Loren (Wasson Ouse!)
             ‘seems evident from these two books (Sead of Race’ and R.
  ‘Tagoe's Ooze of Indian Calta’) that India is taking upoa her
tall tho task of eduontingthe world           an to what edueation             really is.
‘Wail     othercountsie    ate looking to the   mere purse       valus  of  ecuostion,
  adie is looking at ite vol value and that i the value which will
  nately jnotity Hael."—Asion Reo.
        “"Thaon books (Teatad) are probably the Worst that Fondo
‘hae   prodaoedfo     they conistin them
  hac and dingearsa and maasingleas syllables suid to be instinct
  vith pupecnabutel power with hero and thore herilecleasly            flth.
‘The tetalaior who writen andar a nem de plume               i s               an Euro-
  ‘pean disciple of nome Paadit belonging fo the left-hand ShAte
  Aa be ehows greet sympathy for the sot. Tle in always ready to
  elead way ofits doctsies and prastices oven the him                mest shameful.
  ‘he opell of Hinduism seems to have wosked within                         in another
  Aliection also, for he does uot show theslightest acintillation of histor:
  cal interest in ll thathe writes, alchowgh the wiole subject bristles
 ‘vith historia problems, On the other hand, hisof faithfal                disipleship
  thas brought bim a wonderful understanding                     the   teaching      and
  alt of the sect... his fatrodustion and commentary are of
  goat exegetical value”Inlernational Hovie              of Miasonsw (Dr. J. W,
   enquabar),
        “'Stadents of Hindniam wil be thaxfulto Me. Arthur Avalon
{or this new contsibutioa tothe stud               y Philosophy culture.”
                                              of TAatrik
  Hine Review.
        “"Tuminating discussion ("Serpent Power"), Author makesa
  tome really fine brant defaitions ... throughout maintains
    ‘sicly soiontife sttitude though be is obviously impressed with
   ‘tho extradinary nature of the Téetsik Doctrine."—Britain oni
   Indi
        “The Tauteaoflers many suggestions to the Westin virtueof
  ite acoentuation of Will and Power....with the advantage derived
  from a long residence in India, the author brings to his werk # deep
  ‘understanding    ofthe languagy «comprehensive knowlege of Basten
  wisdom lucily explained, a wide general culture and a penetrating
  certo." Nuow Pave (Roms).
        “The developed intelligence will grasp the situation. Tei fully
  explained    in these works. Horeitis that we find the valueof the c-
 called Tntsduction      by Mz, Avalon. Ie ie eeally a Tseatie well wore
  peblisetion ax a volume complete in itself... Tis a fascinating
study waich can be sucesefally undertaken only by an Indian stadent
 learned in Westam metheds        of investigation or by » Western savent
  in foll sympathy with Tndian thought and feeling. ‘The lerrsed
 ‘editoris compotantto undertake this task . . . "Th fate af the cult
 is instrutive. Ths ritual was taken oyer by end absorbed in the
 forthodoe Brabraniaa of the Srritis The rel ie that the
 ‘ton ‘Tents woeeip’ ia ow by the other alates confined to ite
 ‘sn-alled    lower form aud is aeaoiated     inthe publi mind with wine
‘nd inmorality.,.-All stants of Hindaien arvinvitedto reed the
 eared sathorsinsodiotion.!—he Modern Word (C. 8. N.)
        “The * Prinaiplen of Tantra’ x a xematlble production of the
 lay... Ta hisilluninating Tatvoduction Asthue Avalon has evinced
  ‘thorough gp of the true Inwardness of the Tantra." The Indian
  Mirror
        “The general impremion aboot Thun of whichMr, Avalon ie
‘an euthasiastio and fearess exponenthas bom thst it in a degraded
 form of religion sanctioning immeral practices under its vel. «
 “The wathor hae ladreelyshowa thet taking its philosophical expect
 {nto consderaios it can attain s very high evel andcompare favour-
 bly wit, oF even exoel, the docteines of Stnkhya or Méptvida,
 ‘There ix, no doubt, that tho author hes done goed eerviee to the
 ‘Tantra Agama and stodents of philsephy in general by hn scholly
 conteibution which bas filed his beer and ia a labour of love.”
 ‘Quarterly Journal ofthe Mythic Seve
        * Oumpletely vindicate himself as studentof Orieatalisn who
 tas show moro profound sympathy with th eseaials ofthe Haster~
 ‘nes spiitual life than almost any scholar one ean readily thinkof.
   No rig has sufored more giewously ox account of prejudice
‘nd superficial study than the doctsine of                       Tantism. . We oodally
   commend the esays."—Bombay Crone
          “This attitude towands lf ie especially open to the exireme of
  sensuality, The author fxnkly adits thet worship presexted by
  ‘this shoo!    has Je to abuses which have attached    fo the woré Tantra
  ‘uh an exaggerated onos of il-epute. Bat similar excesses have
‘een found       in other state ands aystem must notbe judged only by
  itnfailaes.....The place of prominence throughout is given to the
  philoaphicarpect Theft fact which strike the stadent ofBaste,
                 in the author's  extraordinary Inovledge and the second
 iphilosophy
       his impactiality.    Ha ie evidently attracted by the inte con-
 ‘cuption of Shalt! but be is careful to avoid elaining eny meit for
 Dis protegé hate does not justify by facts end laid reoning and
 ‘what i more he writes neither ox practitioner nor even as ah ade
 esasof the eystom he champlons."—New Fadia.
          “Most mnsitorous prodvetions. From what has bean ssid it is
‘lor shit Aoaion i gh, on Bn delaan tat wp 1 ow ths Terture
  aw ben to ef judged ond more aften eonderned without Evang
 if, and that he Fantuz deserve to Becoms batter known than haz
  ‘ben he cave hitherto!"—Paol D. M. Winteita in Ostoratioce
          “Sie John Woodeflo ites ((World as Power) with pewes,
   Iowiedge, and lucidiy—thzeo rare quakes in aathorship." Co.
   cult Bowie,
         “eThare is one of he mod important of the Baers sjsteme—theIn-
  dian Shite Tantra in which tho very obscutesof thought with
  ‘which Bazopean thnkece have Jong and vainly strggled, aro deve-
 opedin fll and explnoed most clearly. ts not tao mock to say that
  only aisletime ago the Tantra was barely own to us oe if known
  ‘tall, projudyel by ite glosee at once wo futile and obscene. "The
  ‘mest of having rstared the Testa to its yropereplendour is due to
  ‘Arhur Avalon, « sevent who aids to a kuowledge uf the languege
  ‘coupled with the advantage of long residence in India the unique
  itof both deep andercuding          ond an seate philosophic eign
  ‘Bigehns, Revista Moule af Soult Religions (tunseted from the
  eli). Prof. J. 0. Hvola.
          “One cannot do enough homage to the maguifeent series of
  ‘pablistions      which an Baglsh eavact under the pseudonym                of Arthur
   ‘Avalon has bevught into being—a      plead  of Tati     works,            texts sad
  translations, One ofthe mast inacossible schols of Tein epee
  lation hae thus. thanks to hin, been fratflly explord”—Reeue
   Plilosoique, Pais (tassated fom the French).
        “Teis want of faith n tho children of the niin thamalves,      as Sir
  ‘ohm has very eorrctlydotestel with his tru insight       nto the preeut
  fondition of Indi, which is one of the most obvious eaves of the
  inert ad independent condition of the ooontry. ‘The remedy he
 sagesta i tre a hie dingronn, “the will of Tin nul be atong,
  suring, naceivo, adamant to wrongfelnseeut—but Lenaicent Sir
 ‘ohn Woodroffe hae clearly wxderstood (“Bhireta Shakti) the very
 ‘oul of Tia ail the true epitit and significance of Indian culture.
  Tu every hook that Sir John Woodroffe hus witten is seen the
 stamp of an assiduous scholar, «doop thinker an s just etic. The
  ‘ook unter review ("Reality ')revela the man with he deep inset
 ‘into Indian esltuce and civilization as wells his greet oxigiuaty in
 ‘uuating of the vatios systems af Indian philosephy, the undeslying
 ‘pit of which be has suectededto represent so futhfully.”-Pra-
 ude Barta.
        “Shows (“Reality”) groat, power      of thought, and grasp of the
subject with whighhe deals...              dimostrates with clearseis an
 afinity Between Indien thougat and modem scintife themes
 .             + reveals to-the render thst all Indian pilosophies are
‘ot pessimist.                       thie book ie « cometive....-From
 ‘the Tadian point of viaw ‘Beed of Race! presents the strongest
 pmsible case for nartaring and preeerving from extmetioe our
 asia) sonl and culture, ‘That sock an extgetion is thretened
‘there need hardly bem doubt. I ther b, it wil be dispelled by zeed-
 ing thie work Primarily iti hei inheritance from the hoary post
 which shreagh neglect or want of freight which is being ub-
 ‘merged in the rising Bod of Westem eultus.”—Bulleti             of Tudian
 Rationale Society,
       “thse outstanding    faturse merch out from the lst of Westra,
 scholars: sil, his deep and cea insight into the tae characterof
 the types of Jadion thought... Secondly, he is nota definite mere naxrator
 ‘bus an exporitor     who  dele  with   the  matier   from          seand-
 ‘eint, and thinly, this exposition (Reality?) is made intimately
fn rayport with the living thought of the day . . . A profound
 ‘and lightened apprecistion of Tnfiaa thought . . . And so we
  bbieve and hope with this sincere lover of what is trae, noble and
   beantifol in Indien civilization that the Indian mind wll again bring
 ‘tuelt into living touch with that thought whieh means Power and
 thab discipline which manne the ealizstion of Bower to hes,
 Todia. hus need of such a Seer      as be. Only thos who have seen
 the whole   car sce whut Todie hes Been an thought, He ries above
 Tinittions imposed by geographical boundaris. He bas a vsion
 ‘of the Mother Shakti whose manifestations all ealtarer and elvis.
 tions ar, and having this vision he has co uses abet truth,
 ‘odaea and beuuty Leng found in a panticnlarage wal inthe in
 stitation   fa paricolarsaes only. Hisobjeetinta    do jutic snd thie
 Jha given him both sympathy and detachment, Tis sympathy has!
 ‘again giv hin wosdeful insight into the tive nprings or dyzamsic
 rues ofan alien civilization... frcefal aad inepzing, svesine!,
‘oid, deop and infrming Sir John hes mightily hoped to-day the
  foundation of ra) Suara ia Talia the basis of whic isthe ealturl
  ‘and iia ageneration    of Tada, the recovery by Bhirata of th rel
  ‘ante of in power." he Secon (Caleute)
