THE 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 


VOL. 4 


AMS PRESS 


NEW YORK 


Google 


THE 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 
a 


Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars, 


EDITED BY 


Mayor B. D. BASU, 1I.M.S, 
(Retired) 


Vol. IV.—The Yoga Sutras of PatanjJali. 


PUBLISHED BY 
SUDHINDRANATHA VASU 
FROM THE PANINI OFFICE, BHUVANESWARi ASRAMA, BAHADURGANS 


Allababad 
Printep By Apurva Krisana Bose at THE JNDIAN Presg 
1912 


Google 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Pataffjali. 
Patanjali’s Yoga sutras. 


Cover title: Aphorisms of yoga. 

Original ed. issued as v. 4 of The Sacred books of the 
Hindus. 

English and Sanskrit. 

1. Yoga. I. Vyasa. Yogabhasya. English & 
Sanskrit. 1974. II. Vacaspatimigca disciple of 
Martandatilakasvamin. Yogatattvavaisaradi. English & 
Sanskrit. 1974. III. Rama Pras&fda, ed. IV. Title: 
Aphorisms of yoga. V. Series: The Sacred books of 
the Hindus, v. 4. 

B132.Y6P26413 1974 181’.452 13-3789 
ISBN 0-404-57804-7 


Reprinted from the edition of 1912, Allahabad 
First AMS edition published, 1974 
Manufactured in the United States of America 


International Standard Book Number 
Complete Set: 0-404-57800-4 
Volume 4: 0-404-57804-7 


AMS Press, INC. 
New York, N.Y. 10003 


(Go gle 


1 


cy weg oy peer eS 
ie Pare oy 


PATANJALUS YOGA SUTRAS 


WITH THE COMMENTARY OF VYASA AND 
THE GLOSS OF VACHASPATI MISRA 


TRANSLATED BY 
RAMA PRASADA, ™.a. 
WITH AN INTRODUCTION 


FROM 


- --RAI BAHADUR SRISA CHANDRA VASU 


PUBLISHED BY 
SUDHINDBANATHA VASU 
FROM THE PANINI OFFICE, BHUVANESWARi ASRAMA, BAHADURGANS 


Allababad 
PrinTepD By Apurva KrisHna Bose aT THE INDIAN Press 
1912 


(Go gle 


INTRODUCTION. 


The aphorisms of Patgfjali on the Yoga Sftras are contained in 
four chapters and are nearly two hundred in number. Tho author of 
the aphorisms is said to be the same Patafjali who wrote the famous 
commentary on Panini’s aphorisms, under the name of the Mahabhasya 
or the Great Commentary. Another work is also attributed to him—the 
great work on Medicine. Ifso, he was not only a great Grammarian 
and a great Philosopher, but a Great Physician. He prescribed for the 
body, mind and spiritall three. The age of Patafjali is now generally 
fixed at three centuries before Christ.* 

The word Yoga comes from a Sanskrit root which means “to go to 
trance, to meditate.” Others however derive it from a root which means 
to join ; and Yoke in English is said to be the same word as Yoga. Both 
roots are feasible—in the case of the root to join, Yoga would mean the 
science that teaches the method of joining the human soul with God. 

The philosophy of Patafjali is essentially Dualistic. The Jivas or 
Purusas or human egos are separate individual entities and exist from 
eternity ; so is also Prakriti, and so also Idvara or God. It thus believes 
‘in three Eternal co-existent principles, the God, the Man and the Matter. 

But man is found to be involved in matter, to have fallen from its 
pristine state of purity. The aim of Yoga is to free (viyoga) man from the 
meshes of matter. But the highest form of matter is mind—the C itta 
(a term which would include that which is technically known as manas, 
as Ahamkara and as Buddhi). ‘The students of Sankhya need not be told 
that the first product of Prakriti or the -root-matter is Mahat or the Great 
Principle—the Buddhi, then comes the Ahamkara or I-principle—the 
matter through which can function the I-ness : and then the Manas or 
the matter which is the vehicle of thought. These three vehicles—the 
thought-vehicle (Manas), the I-vehicle (Ahamkéra), the Pure-Reason- 
vehicle (Buddhi)-—constitute Chitta or the subtlest form of Matter. To 
free man from the fetters of this Chitta is thus the problem of Yoga. 

The man when freed from all vehicles, remains in his own form 
called Svarfipa. It is not made of Prakritic matter. It is the body which 
belongs to man—is partof man from eternity—the body in which he 

* See Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra's preface to his Edition of the Yoga Aphorisms of 


Patafijali and also his paper on Gonikaputra and Gonardfya as names of Patafijali, pp. 261 
et seq., of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal for 1888. 


Google 


ii INTRODUCTION. 


dwells in Mukti in super-celestjal worlds. It is the body in which the 
Triune God is directly active—Isvara, Prana and Sri—or the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Ghost. This svaripa—deha, is the body of Prana—the 
body of Christ of the Gnostics. This is the incorruptible undecaying 
body, the spiritual body. 

But when man is not in his Own-Form (Svarfipa), he functions 
naturally in the lower vehicles, and his form is there the form of his vehicles 
—whether it be of Buddhic, Ahamkéric or Manasic matter. In fact the man 
of Psychology is this triad—Ahamkdara, Buddhi and Manas. 

The human consciousness in whatever lower body it may function 
is always a dual consciousness—it must be alternately pleasurable or 
painful. Pleasure and pain are the marks of consciousness functioning 
in Chitta. The Svarapa consciousness is only above all pains. 

Next to this primary division of all consciousness, as regards their 
nature ; the consciousness as regards its quality is five-fold:—(1) it may be 
a true consciousness of some objective reality—something which is out- 
side the man and his vehicles ; or (2) it may be an incorrect consciousness 
of outward reality ; or (3) it may be a hallucination ; or (4) it may be non- 
perception of anything external but of rest; or (5) it may be the reviv- 
ing of old perceptions. In other words, the .consciousness looked at 
from the subjective or emotional point of view is either pleasurable or 
painful ; looked at from the objective or cognitional point of view it is—(i) 
true perceptions, (ii) false perceptions, (iii) hallucinations, (iv) sleep, and 
(v) memory. 

Thus both the emotional and the intellectual aspect of the Chitta~ 
or the Triune Man is to be checked. Buthow is it to be checked. The 
answer is by constant practice and want of attachment or Dispassion. 
There must be constant exertion to keep the mind on one point. This 
is called Abhydsa. The intellectual functioning of the Chitta is to be 
checked by Abhy4ésa—putting the mind to think of one object, and as 
soon as it strays away from it to bring it back again to the same point. 
This practice or Abhyasa, steadily persevered in, would make the mind 
one-pointed, with the help of Viveka or discrimination. 

As regards the emotional sides of the mind, it must be checked by 
Vairagya or dispassion. Pleasure or Pain, attraction or repulsion, love 
and hatred can be controlled only by this world-weariness-—realisation that 
there is nothing in this world or the next worth striving after, worth 
desiring or worth hating. The highest form of Vairagya will be attained 
when one will realise his separateness from all Prakritic vehicles—when 
he can say “ I am not Body, or Desire, or mind, or Reason or I-ness.” 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. lil 


The state of Samadhi or trance induced by Practice and Dispassion 
is two-fold—Samprajiidta and Asamprajifiata. In the first, the man has 
shut off from his consciousness all external impressions, but his internal 
self-initiated activities have not ceased. In the other, even these are 
stopped. 

There are some entities whose consciousness is in a state of Saméa- 
dhi naturally, who have not to acquire it by any exertion. These are the 
classes of beings called Videhas and Prakritilayas. Their consciousness 
is cosmic. The Videhas are Devas. They are Mukta from the begin- 
ning: but in some future Kalpa they may come into the world-cycle. 
The Prakritilayas are Adhikari Purusas, the great office-holders in the 
cosmic hierarchy. They are the perfect ones of the past Kalpa. 

In the case, however, of ordinary entities—for the Videhas and the 
Prakritilayas do not stand in need of Yoga—the method of suppressing 
Chitta-functions consists in having faith, energy, retentive memory, medi- 
tation and wisdom. One must cultivate these qualities in order te 
become a successful Yogt. 

The success is quicker according to the amount of energy put in 
by the person in his practice. But the best and the safest method of 
Yoga is the love of God. Loving God with all one’s heart and soul, 
would quickly bring about the cessation of all mental functions. God is 
@ spirit untouched by sorrow, action and its fruition. He is Omniscient, 
He is the Teacher of all, and from eternity. His mystic name is Om. 
One must recite this Om constantly meditating on its letters and their 
imports; and thus all obstacles to concentration will be removed, and 
the Inner Self will manifest itself. The obstacles to concentration are 
disease, languor, doubt, heedlessness, laziness, sensuality, delusion, &c., 
mentioned in I. 30. But when the mind is concentrated, there is no pain 
or despondency, no fidgetiness, no difficulty of breathing. To attain 
concentration and remove these obstacles, the aspirant must practise to 
fix his attention on One Point, One Truth. Of course the highest 
Truth is God and so the constant attitude of the mind should be God- 
pointed. | 

The aspirant must strictly regulate his conduct as regards others. 
He must show happiness and feel happiness when dealing with those 
who are happy. Let him have no feeling of jealousy towards them. He 
must show compassion towards those who are suffering. He must not 
be callous to the miseries of others. He must be complacent towards the 
virtuous, and hate not the sinner. These are the moral attributes that he 
must try to cultivate. 


Google 


lv INTRODUCTION. 


There are, however, Some particular methods which quickly bring 
about concentration ; one of them is thé regulation of the breath. ‘The 
monotony of slowly breathing in and breathing out brings about hyp- 
nosis. Fixing the attention on various parts of the body, such as the tip 
of the nose, palate, &c., are also helpful. The astral senses are deve- 
loped by this means, and when the practitioner gets first-hand knowledge 
of astral sights, sounds, &c., his doubts are removed, and he feels more 
earnestness in pursuing the path. 

If the astral development is not wanted, the practitioner may 
concentrate his attention on the light in the heart: and upon the thought 
“Tam.” This also steadiecs the mind. 

Or he may fix his attention on some great and holy saint or sage— 
such as Zoroaster, the Buddha, the Christ, &c. 

Or he may fix his attention on the objects of his dreams. Some- 
times in dream he may be shown a great Deva or a great Teacher. 
Let him not reject it as fancy. By fixing his attention on it he may 
acquire steadiness of mind. 

Or he may fix his attention on the ideas that pass through his mind 
just before he goes to sleep, the pictures that arise when one is half-awake 
and half-asleep—the hypnopompic (as Myers calls them). Or he may fix 
his attention on the pictures that one sees just before awakening—the 
hypnogogic. If he can fix his attention on these, he may easily pass into 
hypnosis. 

By such concentration all mental impurities are removed, and the 
mind becomes like a pure crystal that reflects truly and correctly all 
objects that are presented to it. They are no longer distorted pictures 
or dim and dull reflections of outer verities. The mental vehicle is 
purified, and the knowledge that now arises is far more true than 
any knowledge that he had before. The mind, however, enters as an 
element in every such knowledge, and the past ideas and memories 
tinge such knowledge. This state is called Savitarka or mixed’ up 
trance. But when the mind reflects only the object, without adding 
to it anything from its own associations and storehouse, it is pure 
idea and is Nirvitarka Samadhi. In this state the light of the Self shines 
outon purified mind. It is not only a pure crystal that faithfully reflects 
the outer objects, but it is illumined, as if it were, by a light which was 
dormant within its own inmost centre. Such a mind is called the Truth- 
bearing mind. It has truth within it and truth without—a mass of truth 
—a tree carrying the fruit of truth—a female full with truth. Up to this 
time the objects of the mind were mete ideas and inferences, mere thoughts, 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. Vv 


‘Now the contents of the mind are things, the very things as it were, and 
not merely thoughts of things. The mind modifies itself, as it were, into 
the very thing itself; and thus the thing is known more truly and essenti- 
ally than it was known ever before. In thisstate of mind, the time 
and space cannot impede the perception of the object. The object may 
be inside a box, behind a wall or hundreds of miles off, the mind faithfully 
reproduces it. ‘The object may be the subtlest and the minutest, not visi- 
ble even under the strongest microscope, the mind reproduces it. For it 
no longer depends upon the senses for its knowledge, but has become the 
all-sense itself. In this way the mind becomes the highest sensory :— 
by constant practice the mind gets into the habit of reflecting the trance 
objects. But even this habit is ultimately to be conquered if one wishes 
to rise to the higher levels of what is called the seedless trance. 

The First Chapter thus, in fifty-one aphorisms, gives what may be 
called the theory or the science of Yoga. An ardentand intelligent person 
can Jearn enough from this chapter alone to become a practical Yogin. 
But for men of ordinary intellect, more detailed teaching is necessary, 
The Second Chapter enters into such teaching. It may be called the art 
of Yoga—the technique of it. 

The art of Yoga consists in bringing under control and purifying 
the three lower vehicles of man, namely, the body, the mind and the 
spiritual Self—the astro-physical, mental, and the causal bodies. The 
astro-physical body is to be purified and brought under control by what 
are called ascetic practices,—early rising, bathing, fasting, bearing hard- 
ships, etc., in short, all that go under the name of Tapas—or austerities. 
Themental body must be purified and strengthened by study, by acquir- 
ing knowledge. An ignorant person cannot be a Yogi. The causal or 
spiritual body isto be developed by entire devotion to God. Thus an 
atheist cannot be a true Yogi: 

These three helps—austerities, study and resignation to the will of 
(od—facilitate trance and remove “ afflictions.” The “ affliction” is the 
technical name of certain intellectual and emotional weaknesses to which 
all human beings are liable. They are five in number :—(1) The first is the 
Nescience or Wrong Notion of things objective— mistaking the non-eternal 
for the eternal, the impure for the pure, the painful for the pleasurable, 
the non-Self for the Self. (2) The second is the wrong notion about things 
subjective—identifying one’s Self with the vehicles in which the Self 
functions, taking the bodies for the soul. These two are intellectual defects. 
(3) The third is the emotional weakness. It is the desire uatural of man, 
running after pleasant things. (4) The fourth also is emotional—hatred of 

2 


Google 


vi INTRODUCTION. 


things that give pain. Thus these two—love and hatred—are emotional 
defects. The fifth defect is neither intellectual nor emotional—it is instinc- 
tive—the instinct of self-preservation—the instinctive fear of death—the 
love of life. These are the five “‘ afflictions ” of Yoga—Avidya, Asmité, 
Raga, Dvesa and Abhiniveda—Nescience, Egoism, love and hatred and 
instinctive dread of death. These “ afflictions ” are destroyed by meditation 
and the methods already mentioned. 

These “ afflictions ” are the root of the body of transmigration, the 
root of re-incarnation, of birth, life and suffering. The pleasure and pain 
which a man suffers are the result of his past acts, the virtuous acts are 
the seed of pleasure, the vicious of pain. The word “ affliction” is thus 
@ purely technical term, forit includes the high heavenly pleasure also 
which is the result of virtuous actions. But in the philosophy of Yoga— 
as well as that of Sihkhya-—all such pleasures are also considered as pains: 
because philosophically the world is painful, all its experiences, even those 
which people call pleasurable, are painful to the philosopher. This is 
stated in the memorable aphorism, II. 15, p. 100. 

All world-experience being thus painful, the philosopher seeks to 
find the root-cause of this experience and: this is the conjunction of the 
knower and the knowable—the Self and the not-Self. Because man is tied 
with mind, and cannot extricate himself from the embraces of mind-matter 
that he suffers. When he masters the mind, and is not her slave, then 
there is no pain—there is no necessary experiencing of joy and sorrow. 
The non-ego to which the man is tied has the three well-known attributes 
or Gunas—the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—the Light, the Activity and 
the Inertia—is the source of all elements, and producer of all sensations 
and senses. 

The Yoga system of cosmogony is the same as that of the 
Sahkhya, so far as the evolution of the world-elements out of the 
Primordial matter called Prakriti is concerned. It is summarised 
in If. 19. 

What is the nature of the Self ? This question naturally arises after 
one has learned the nature of the non-Self. The man is pure consciousness: 
and the non-Self exists for him. If man is pure consciousness, how does 
he perceive the non-Self ? He knows the non-ego by a sort of reflex ac- 
tion. The mind catches the reflection of the non-Self ; and the man be- 
comes conscious of that reflection. The man is thus the seer of the 
pictures in the mind. The non-egoor the knowable thus exists for the 
sake of the Man. In the state of Mukti, there exists no knowable for that 
Man. Though to the Perfect Man there is no knowable, it does not 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. vii 


mean that the knowable ceases to exist. It exists with regard to the other 
souls that have not reached perfection. 

A question is often asked : If the ultimate goal is the separation of 
man from the non-Self, the knowable, why was this conjunction between 
the two brought about ? Why was man tied down tonon-Self, to matter- 
mind? ‘The answer to thisis: In order that Man may perfect his nature by 
acquiring all experiences and passing through them. Unless the Man 
learns all that the Matter-Mind has to teach, the conjunction is not 
broken. The effective cause of this conjunction lies in the Avidyé—the 
Wrong Notion. When, therefore, the Avidya or Nescience is removed, the 
conjunction is removed and the Man shakes off the eternal burden. How 
is the Avidyé to be removed? The Avidya& being Wrong Notion, can be 
removed only by Right Notion call Viveka-Khyati or Discriminative 
knowledge. This discriminative knowledge has seven stages—four deal- 
ing with the phenomenal knowledge and three with the mental or subjec- 
tive notions, as described in II. 27. It is on reaching this that the title 
of Adept or Kusala is given to the Yogi. 

The acquisition of this Adeptship is through the practice of eight- 
fold Yoga. The famous phrase Astahga Yoga refersto this. The eight 
accessories of Yoga are enumerated in II. 29. Five of these are external, 
as if, compared with the last three. The eight Afhgas are so important 
that it can well bear repetition here. 

First, Practise Restraint, i.e.,.be moral. This restraint or Yama con- 
sists of five sub-divisions :—(a) do not kill or injure any being. Be kind 
to all. Ahimsa; (6) Speak and act truth ; (c) Steal not, nor acquire illicit 
gains ; (2) Practise continence and celibacy ; (e) Be not avaricious. These 
are universal rules. 

Second Niyamaor Observance. This is also five-fold :—(a) Be clean 
in body and mind, (6) Be contented, (c) Practise asceticism and austerity, 
(d) Study sacred books, (e) Be devoted to God. 

While practising Yama and Niyama, if obstacles arise, always try 
to think of the opposite quality. If he feels a strong desire to tell a 
falsehood, let him not fight the desire, by a frontal attack, by checking it. 
Let him substitute the opposite desire—the beauty of truthfulness. If 
he hates another, let him think of the good qualities of that man. If he 
is in danger of breaking the vow of celibacy, let him think of the glorious 
future of the Brahmachéri. Pratipakasa Bhavana—thinking of the con- 
trary—is the key of success. It isthe great strategy in this moral battle, 
and is embodied in II. 33. ‘The moral qualities mentioned in Yama, must 
be absolutely observed—no sophistical diminution of their absolute nature 


Google 


Vili INTRODUCTION. 


is allowed to the Yogi. To him the moral laws are absolute: Thus the 
first rule of Ahimsa says “kill not.” Thisis an absolute rule. There can- 
not be any exceptions or reservations. The enemies of the country, the 
renegades of religion, the blasphemers of sages and saints, the murderer, 
the criminal—kill none. To Yogt the vow of non-killing is absolute. He 
must not kill even in self-defence of himself or of his near and dear ones. 
Hence the rule says : “ They (Yama) are the great vow universal, and not 
limited by caste, country, age and condition.” (II. 31). So also with 
truth. One must not lie for the sake of one’s country or State or Brahmana 
or cow, &c. Not only this: there are certain omissions which become 
as bad as actual commissions of these sins. He incurs sin if he causes 
another to do it or permits its being done. 

The third Afga of Yoga is Asana or posture. No particular pos- 
ture is obligatory, but the posture must be such as is steady and easy ; 
not painful or irksome. ‘The various postures given in books of Hatha 
Yoga such as Gheranda Samhita or Siva Samhita are useful as physical 
exercises, for the otherwise sedentary Yogt. 

The fourth Afga of Yoga is the much abused Pranayama or the 
Regulation of breath. The Yogahas come to mean, in the thoughts of 
many, posturing and nose-closing. But the right regulation of breath as 
a mental and physical effect was pointed out long ago. The Western 
science has come to recognise its advantages and Books of Breathing 
are not as rare now as they were when we first wrote about it in 
1882. 

The fifth Afga of Yoga is Pratydhara or Abstraction. It is a state 
uf catalepsy when the senses do not come into contact with their objects. 
It is the state of the inhibition of the senses. A pistol may be fired near 
the ear of the Yogi and he will not hear it. Ammonia may be held under 
his nostrils and he will not smell it, and so on. 

All the above five are Bahirahga or the external. The internal 
Yoga which has to deal with the mind and mind alone consists of the last 
three Ahgas—Dharana, Dhyana and SamAdhi. 

The Third Chapter gives a description of this Antarahga Yoga. The 
Dharané, Dhyana and Samadhi are collectively called Samyama. 

When the stage of catalepsy is reached, the Yogi fixes his mind on 
any particular portion of his body. This holding the mind in a particular 
part is Dharana or concentration. 

The continuation of the mental effort to keep the mind there is 
Dhyana or meditation. 

This meditation (Dhydna) turns into Samadhi or contemplation 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. 1X 


when the Self is lost as if it were, the object of meditation alone remains 
in the mind and sliines out alone. 

This Samyama—concentration, meditation and contemplative trance— 
is the great instrument of acquiring all knowledge of supersensuous verities. 
It is the strong searchlight of the mind which turned on any object, 
reveals its inmost core. It is the great light of wisdom—-Prajidloka. 

This Samyama must be applied to plane after plane of nature, 
physical, astral, mental, &. One cannot jump to a higher plane, leaving 
of an intermediate plane--the progress is gradual. 

The Yogi who has mastered Samyama as regards a higher plane 
should not desecrate this faculty by employing it in lower planes. He 
who by Samyama, has learnt communion with God, should not waste his 
faculty in thought-reading, clairvoyance, bringing messages from the dead 
to the living or vice versa. He should not squander his energy in hunting 
up the past records in the astral light, nor the shadows of the future in 
the Brahmic Idea. 

What is the state of mind in Samadhi and Nircdha ? Isit a state 
of perfect quiescence of the mental body ? As regards the mental body 
it is astate of perfect stillness so far as the vehicle is concerned, but it is 
a state of great molecular motion in the mental body itself. The molecules 
of the mental body are thrown in a very high state of vibration, though 
the body in al] appearance is in perfect calm. This vibration of the mo- 
lecules of the mental body, becomes by practice, rhythmic and this rhyth- 
mic flow is the mental peace of Samadhi. The swing of the vibration lies 
between one-pointedness and all-pointedness-- between the contraction 
to a point and expansion to embrace a whole universe. That which ap- 
pears to be the stillness of Samadhi is perhaps the highest activity possible. 
Even what is called one-pointedness is itself a state of utmost activity. 
When the mind ‘is one-pointed it does not mean that one idea is indelib- 
ly impressed on the mind like an engraving on a stone, but that the mind 
is working so quickly that the image of one is formed in no time as it 
were, destroyed in no time as it were, and formed again. This quick succes- 
sion of the same form is one-pointedness. In ordinary states one idea is 
followed by another idea. In one-pointedness the same idea vanishes 
and re-appears again and again. Thus what is called fixing the mind to 
a thought is really making the mind reproduce one thought over and over 
again, in the utmost quickness-of succession, without the intrusion of any 
foreign thought. 

The Third Chapter then gives a list of psychic powers and how to 
acquire them by applying Samyama. The power of knowing the past, 


Google 


x INTRODUCTION. 


present and future is by making Samyama on three-fold modifications 
which all objects are constantly undergoing (III. 13). 

Methods are laid down as how to acquire the memory of past births, 
how to read the thoughts of others, how to disappear from sight, how to 
get strength, how to see through closed doors, how to know the solar 
system and astronomy, &c., &c. These methods have a meaning only for 
him who knows the practice of Samyama. Without that no amount of 
thinking on the solar plexus will give one a knowledge of internal 
anatomy, &c. 

The Fourth Chapter deals with Kaivalya or final emancipation—the 
realisation by Man that he is separated from Mind-Matter. 

The psychic powers or Siddhis are either innate, or produced 
through the means of medicinal drugs, or suggestion of Mantra, or asce- 
ticism or contemplation. Some are born psychics, as Kapila, Sweden- 
borg, &c. Temporary psychic powers may be acquired through anes- 
thetics, such as chloroform, hashish, &c. Psychic faculties may be 
developed by the recitation of certain Mantras, or the suggestion of sound. 
Some persons have acquired psychic powers through austerities. The 
fifth or contemplation is the method of this Yoga system. 

The born psychics are those who had practised Yoga in their past 
lives. They are like eggs in which the bird has already fully formed— 
break the shell and the bird comes out. But ordinary men are eggs that 
require hatching for lives to develop the bird. The born psychics are 
like a field by the side of a reservoir of water ona higher level. It only 
requires the opening of the sluice to floaqd the field with water. It 
only requires some exciting cause to make a born psychic a developed 
Yogi. Ordinary men are, however, like fields, which are away from any 
source of water, and which require to be irrigated by bringing water from 
a distance, with great exertion, in this life. A Yogi, having attained the 
power of Samédhi, sets about destroying his past Karmas. All Karmas 
may be divided into three classes :—(1) The acts done in the past whose 
consequences the man must suffer in the present life: the Karmas to 
expiate which he has taken the preseut birth or incarnation. They are 
the ripe Karmas(Prarabdha). (2) The Karmas done in the past, but which 
are not ripe, and will have to be expiated in some future life. They are 
the stored Karmas or unripe (Safichita). (3) The Karmas which a man 
creates in his present life, and which have to be expiated in a future or 
the present life. This last kind of act—the fresh Karmas, can be stop- 
ped. By devotion to the Lord and doing everything in a spirit of ser- 
vice, no fresh Karmas are generated. The incurring of debt is stopped 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


The man, however, has to pay off past debts —the ripe and unripe Karmas. 
The ripe Karmas will produce their effects in the present life. The Yogt 
does not trouble himself about this. But the unripe or stored Karmas 
require @ future birth. It is here that the Yoga is of the greatest prac- 
tical importance. The Yogt is not bound to wait for future lives in 
order to get an opportunity to pay off the debt of Safichita Karmas. He 
simultaneously creates aL the bodies that those Saiichita Karmas require. 
—through those bodies expiates all his Karmas simultaneously. Every 
one of such body has a Chitta or mentality of his own. This is the 
Nirm4ana-chitta or the Artificial mind—like the Pseudo-Personalities 
of hypnotic trance. These artificial minds arise simultaneously like 
so many sparks from the Ahamkaric matter of the Yogi’s Self, and they 
ensoul the artificial bodies created for them. These artificial bodies 
with artificial minds in them walk through the earth in hundreds— 
they are distinguished from ordinary men by the fact that they are 
perfectly methodical in all their acts, and automatic in their lives, All 
these artificials are controlled by the consciousness of the Yogt. One 
consciousness controlling hundred automatons. Every one of these 
automatons has a particular destiny, a particular portion of the Safichita 
Karma to exhaust. As soon as that destiny is fulfilled, the Yogt with- 
draws his ray from it, and the “man” dies a sudden death—a heart 
failure generally. 

Now what is the difference between the ordinary mind and the 
Yoga-created mind—the natural Chitta and the artificial Chitta. The 
natural mind by experience gains a habit, the impressions are stored in 
it and they, as VAasan‘s, become the seeds of desires and activities. The 
artificial miad is incapable of storing up impressions in it. It has 
no Vasanés and consequently it disintegrates as soon as the body falls 
down. 

The actions performed by the Yogt, through his ordinary or the 
extraordinary bodies—through the body with which he was born, or 
through the bodies which he gives birth to by Yoga power—are no actions 
in the ethical sense of the word. They are not Karmas—neither good nor 
bad. They are the paying up of the past debts, and not incurring of 
fresh liabilities. With ordinary men the actions are good or bad, or a 
mixture of both—white or black or gray, all such actions produce their 
effect—particular kind of birth, particular length of life period, particular 
kinds of life experiences—or produce their effect as tendencies to certain 
kind of actions, Both kinds of effects constitute the fate or the destiny 
of man, 


(Go gle 


xii INTRODUCTION. 


Tendency is memory. The essence of memory is converted into ten- 
dency. The tendencies with which a man is born are the extracts of all 
the memories of a particular kind. The events of the past life are not 
remembered, but from the tendencies of the present life one can éasily 
infer what those. events must have been to give rise to these tendencies. 
The surgical operation may be forgotten, hecause performed under 
chloroform, or in infancy, but from the nature of the cicatrix one can 
infer what must have been the nature of the operation. Therefore, the 
Smriti (memory) and Samsk4ra (tendency or habit) are really one (Eka- 
ripatva)—IV. 9. Acts produce habits, habits lead to acts—the circle of 
Vasana is eternal, and beginningless. Is it possible to break this chain 
of habits and acts, acts and habits? Jfdnais the only means. Through 
Jfiaua alone is possible to destroy this inexorable chain of causation. 

Now what is this Jiana or wisdom? It is the realisation of the 
distinction between the Purusa or Spirit, and Prakriti or mind-matter- 
energy. Purusa is pure consciousness or rather Chitsakti—power of 
consciousness, By his proximity to Prakriti (mind-energy-matter) it 
induces in the latter his quality. This induction takes place in the 
purest part of Prakriti in the Buddhic-essence (the mental portion of 
Prakriti): Just as soft iron becomes magnetised by its proximity to iron. 
Thus Chit-dakti or consciousness is two-fold,—the pure consciousness of 
the spirit or spiritual consciousness and the consciousness of the Buddhi- 
sattva or mental consciousness. The pure Buddhisattva (devoid of Rajas 
and Tamas) reflects the spirit and appears likes spirit and is mistaken for 
it. The Jiiana consists in the discrimination of this difference realising 
that the Chitta is the instrument and not the Self. In the state of Sama- 
dbi, when this highest knowledge is realised, then arises the positive 
activity of the Spirit. Up to this time the effort was in a sense negative 
only—separating the Spirit from mind-energy-matter. When this separa- 
tion is realised, then the Spirit manifests its own attributes fully. This 
manifestation of the attributes (dharma) of the Spirit on its own plane 
above the planes of Prakriti (mind-energy: matter) is the highest form 
of Samadhi. It is positive Samadhi and is called Dharma-Megha Samadhi. 
Dharma means highest activity, above the sphere of causation, where. the 
actions are neither white, black nor grey, an activity that leads to the 
highest end of Man—an activity which is the highest end of Man. It is 
ealled Megha or cloud, because this state of Samadhi rains such Dharma: 
—is full of Dharma and Dharma alone. It is the cloud which showers all 
blessings on the lower planes—while the Man himself basks in the Light 
of the Eternal Sun. Every Mukta Yogt is a Dharma-Megha—the Clond 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. xiii 


of Holiness—the showerer of good and nothing but good on all creation. 
A man who has become a Dharma-Megha—a Cloud of Holiness, is above all 
afflictions and Karmas, his mind is free from all taints, and there is no- 
thing that is beyond the scope of his knowledge. Being the Cloud of 
Dharma all attributes are known to him. Then the man is in his Svarfpa 
—this is Kaivalya, this is Self-realisation—the state of true Freedom, 
though full of highest activity. Such a Man, the Dharma-Megha, the 
Cloud of Holiness, is a blessing to the thirsting humanity—nay a blessing 
to the whole creation. 


Dated, 24th February 1910. 8. C. V. 


Google 


THE YOGA DA RSANA OF PATANJALI 
WITH 
THE SANKHYA PRAVACHANA COMMENTARY OF VYASA 
AND 
THE GLOSS OF VACHASPATI MISRA. 


CHAPTER THE FIRST, ON TRANCE (SAMADHI). 
Satra r. 


nN 
AY UWMTUMAATT tle tt 
we Atha, now, %* Yoga, of Yoga, or concentration, contemplation (Samé- 
dhi.) ysrery AnudA&sanam, a revised text, or explanation. 


1. Nowa revised text of Yoga. 


ertararagieny 
easier: a asarfaataaaaainte ang We 

wa Benger | waesatrsras: | Ienrguret urerainet air- 
wen inn aa: | @ @ ardinaiaraer aa: 1 fae ae frferairersd Prew- 
fife feeqaa: | ay fet Sa Rattray: aariet ane 
gaa Tease Aas anyras seftaaht fie a gH mendes 
aus Piraahge sae @ aanat amt yareaat | a @ 
fanart arrgra owaagraaatshrargra ceqatearch Breer: 
eaghartra ereoera: aarke a 8 i 

VYASA'S COMMENTARY. 

“ Now.”—This word here denotes undertaking. A text giving a 
revised critical teaching of Yoga is to be understood as having been 
undertaken. 

Yoga is contemplation (Samédhi, trance), and it is a characteristic 
of the mind pervading all its planes. The planes of the mind are :— 

Wandering (Ksipta) ; Forgetful (Mfdhba) ; Occasionally steady or dis- 
tracted (Vikgipta) ; One-pointed (Ekagra) ; aud Restrained (Niruddha), 


Go gle 


2 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Of these the contemplation in the occasionally steady mind does 
not fall under the heading of Yoga, because of unsteadiness appearing 
in close sequence. That however, which in the one-pointed mind, fully 
shows forth an object existing as such in its most perfect form, removes 
the afflictions, loosens the bonds of karma and thus inclines it towards 
restraint, is said to be the Cognitive Trance (Samprajfiata Samf&dhi). And 
we shall explain further that this is accompanied by philosophical curiosity 
(vitarka), meditation (vich4ra), bliss (Ananda), and egoism (asmit§). 


When however all the modifications come under restraint, the 
trance is ultra-cognitive (Asamprajfdta Samadhi). 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Bhagavan Patanjali here composed the aphorism, ‘“ Now a revised text of Yoga,” with 
the object of stating briefly the subject of the treatise he desired to write, so that it may 
attract the intelligent student and also that the reader may be able to understand with ease. 

The word ‘Now’ (atha) the first of the sentence is explained :—“ ‘ Now’: —This word 
here denotes undertaking.” 

This word ‘ now’ does not here denote sequence, as it does in, “‘* Now there is light.” 

The word ‘anusfsana’ means here a text-book, the derivative meaning being that 
by which something is taught ; and this cannot be begun in sequence of the performance 
of mental and physical restraint. On the contrary however the desire to know and the 
knowledge of realities appear in sequence of the desire to explain the knowledge of 
realities. Assays the Veda:—‘ Therefore let him see the self, in the self” after having 
controlled the mind and the senses and become desireless, enduring and contemplative, 
(Br. U. IV. 4. 28). 

Although it is possible that the questioning of a student the performance of purifica- 
tory actions (tapas), and employment of alchemy may serve as antecedents, they are not 
to be taken as such here, because the recognition and taking up of the study by a student 
are of no use in making a treatise on Yoga authoritative. Even if there should be no 
student for the time being, the work should be undertaken if authoritative. If however 
not authoritative, it should be given up, even though there be a student asking for it 
The existence of an immediate sequence between the knowledge of truth and the desire 
to explain it is hereby refuted. 

If, however, the meaning is to be taken to be undertaking, then by speaking of the 
Yoga to be discussed by undertaking the work, the whole meaning and object of the work 
is set forth; and the student is easily informed and set to work in the belief that trance 
is the means of the highest good, as set forth in the Vedas, the Smritis, the Itihd4sas, and 
the Purfinas, 

The question arises, Is the word ‘Now’ to be taken to mean undertaking in all 
works ? Because in that case it would mean the same in the Vedanta Sftra. 

Athito Brahmajijiasa. 
“ Now then a fiesire to know Brahma.’’—I., 1. 1. 

To meet this objection the Commentator specifies :—‘ This word here, &c. 

Another doubt arises. Howis Patanjali, the author of the Yoga Teaching, when we 
have it in the Smriti of the Yogi YAjfiavalkya, that Hiranyagarbha and no other ancient 
was the original teacher of Yoga. For this reason the author of the aphorisms has used 
the word ‘Anus&sana’ (revised text) which means teaching after jt has already been 
taught, not only teaching. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADEI), 1. 3 


Because the word ‘Now’ means here an undertaking, the Commentator says that 
the meaning is that, ‘a text giving a revised critical teaching of Yoga is to be understocd 
as having been undertaken.’ 


But why should it be said that a work teaching Yoga is undertaken here ? It is Yoga 
itself that is intended to be discussed here, 


For this reason is it suid:—‘Is to be understood, &c.’ Itis true that Yoga is spoken 
of as the subject of discussion here. It can, however, be discussed only by means ofa 
work treating of the subject. The action of the teacher works through the instrument 
and does not directly operate upon the object. With the object of specifically mention- 
ing the action of the teacher, his work treating of the subject of Yoga is to be understood 
as having been undertaken. Yoga, however, is to be undertaken as the subject of the work. 

It should also be known that the hearing of the sound of the word ‘atha’ (now) when 
used to denote undertaking, is considered auspicious, like the sight of a jar full of water, 
which some one may be carrying. 

The Commentator now removes the doubt as to the meaning of the word ‘ Yoga,’ 
which arises from its ordinary connotation. Thus says he,“ Yoga is contemplation.” 
The word ‘ Yoga’ is derived from the root Yuj, to contemplate, and not from the root Yujir, 
to join, in which latter case it would mean conjunction. 

Another question arises again. Trance (Samadhi) is to be described later on as 
being only a branch of Yoga. How can it then be that a part only may be the whole ? 

The Commentator adds for this reason :—‘and it pervades all its planes.’ It is the 
word ‘and’ (cha) which distinguishes the whole from the part. 

The planes are the states to be mentioned later on, the Madhumuati, the Madhupratiké, 
and the Visoka. They are the states of the mind in which the potencies only are left in 
residue in the mind. Yoga, defined as the restraint of mental modifications, is present in 
all these planes, i. ¢., in all these states of the mind. Not so the trance which is only a 
branch of it. 

Yoga is given here only its root meaning of contemplation, because the statement 
is made here only as an incentive to study, without intending to emphasize the distinc- 
tion between the whole and the part. The real meaning of the word ‘ Yoga’ is only the 
restraint of mental modifications. 

For the refutation of those who say that the restraint of mental modifications is 
dependent upon the self, by reason of the modifications themselves being cognitions and 
therefore dependent upon the self, it is said :—‘ and it is a characteristic of the mind,’ 

By the word ‘mind’ (chitta) the internal organ, the will-to-know is hinted at. The 
power of consciousness, which is ec -nstant in its eternity and thus unchangeable, cannot 
have the faculty of knowledge for its characteristic. The will-to-be, which is the same as 
the will-to-know, however may. This is the meaning. 

Grant that, but if the Yoga pervades all the mental planes, then, the wandering, the 
forgetful and the distracted planes of the mind too should be understood by the word 
‘Yoga’ showing as they do the restraint of certain mental modifications relatively to 
the others. To remove this doubt, the planes to be taken and rejected as falling with- 
in ‘Yoga’ are mentioned, beginning with the word, ‘ wandering, &c. 

The wandering plane or condition of the mind is that in which it is always thrown 
by disturbing Energy (Rajas) towards these and those objects, and is thus extremely 
unsteady. 

In the forgetful condition. the mind is possessed of the modification of deep sleep on 
account of the excess of inertia (the quality of Tamas). 

The occasionally steady or distracted is differentiated from the wandering. The dif- 
ference consists in the occasional steadiness of that which is for the most part unsteady. 


Go gle 


4 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


This excess of its unsteadiness is either acquired, or brought about by the obstacles of 
disease, disinclination, &c., to be mentioned later. 


The one-pointed is that which moves along one line only. 

The restrained mind is that in which all the mental modifications have been res- 
trained, and exist only as potencies. 

Of these, the wandering and the forgetful modifications are not denied here expressly 
the status of Yoga, being far removed as they are from that state, inasmuch as notwith- 
standing the existence of relative restraint in them, they do not even form links in the 
chain of causes which lead to the highest good, and because they are in conflict with the 
nature thereof. To the occasionally steady, however, the status of Yoga is expressly 
denied, because in this case.it is possible to mistake it as such on account of its occa- 
sional manifestation of steadiness over existing objects of knowledge. In the occasionally 
steady mind the contemplation does not fall under the heading of Yoga consisting as it 
does only of an occasional steadiness of the mind over an existing object. Why? Because 
it is followed in close sequence by its contrary state of unsteadiness and inapplication. 
Having fallen as it does in the midst of the manifestations of a contrary class, its very 
nature becomes difficult to distinguish from -the very first as cause or effect. A seed 
which has remained in fire even for three or four seconds, will most certainly not sprout 
into leaves, even though sown. 

Which contemplative mental state is then Yoga, if not the one which follows or is 
followed closely by unsteadiness ? 

‘That however which in the one-pointcd mind, &c.’ 

The words ‘existing as such’ keep out an object whose existence is only fastened 
upon the reality. The words,‘in its most perfect form’ are used to signify the best, 
i.e., that which manifests its essence to its utmost capacity. This is mentioned because 
the phenomenon of deep sleep also has a mind directed towards the one point which is its 
then object ; that isto say, the quality of inertia (tamas) which though characterized 
by the absence of all other mental phenomena, does still exist as such ; and the excess 
of inertia is bad because it is the cause of the afflictions. 

The word, ‘fully’ is used to qualify the words, ‘shows forth, because the showing 
forth, i. e., the knowledge of the realities may -be accomplished by verbal and inferential 
cognitions also. Knowledge so obtained however, is not competent to remove nescience 
(avidy4) which is directly present in the mind; whereas inferential and verbal knowledge 
are after all indirect, the object being absent. The word ‘fully’ (pra) signifies intensity, 
and therefore indicates direct perceptual knowledge. The present sight of two moons 
and the doubt as to any particular direction of space go on existing, even though in- 
ference and authority point the other way. 

Egoism and the other afflictions have their root in nescience. The appearance of 
knowledge means the removal of nescience. Egoism and other afflictions are also removed 
on the appearance of knowledge, because they are contrary thereto, and because the 
cause of their existence is destroyed, For this reason the words, ‘ removes the afflictions’ 
have been added to the description. 

For the same reason does it loosen the bonds in the shape of actions (karma). It is 
non-antecedent action that is desired to be understood here, by using the word denoting 
the cause to mean the effect. 

‘Loosens means renders unfit for the production of effects. It will be said further, 

“It ripens into life-time, life-state and life-experience, if the root exists. "—II. 18, 

“ And inclines it towards restraint’ means that it was not so inclined before. 

This cognitive trance is four-fold. Hence is it said, 

‘This is accompanied, &c.’ 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE ‘SAMADHD), 2. 5 


The ultra-cognitive trance is described by the words, 
‘ When however all the modifications, &c.’ 
In the cognitive trance are restrained those mental modifications of real cognition, 
&c., which are of the nature of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas and tamas): and 
this is done by resort to the class of mental modifications which are of the nature of the 
essence (sattva). In the ultra-cognitive, however, all modifications are restrained. This 
is the meaning. 


The mental planes of Madhumati, &c., which find their end in these two states, are 
allthe planes. That which pervades all these planes is called SArvabhauma, all-pervading, 


Sitra 2. 


TaspaACarcreg: WVU 


am: Yogah. yoga. fee Chitta, of the mind, mental, ft Vritti, of the modi- 
fications, changes, various forms. few: Nirodhab, restraint. 


2. Yoga is the restraint of mental modifications. 

Ter omnia at swagy | ariikereaferere: | 
erearegrreareerreararséy fir rereaaa | Pre fe seams faftetestracary 
Raa | veret & Read Gretrat Gaeibadreaira aa | ate 
anaisgrarraeraracraaaign wa | ate oeitatreracad ade: 
eae THATS wTagTAaTaaiet wale | ata Trager 

 STAAT SATATTT wate | aeat TereaTA- 
Peal wakra: | PafraRacattartrantrema aftaerar gat ata 
@ waguiamnt waar fata fannie | aeeeat face fre 
ataty safe maak | aqaed eenrtrat wate @ Prater: ani | at as 
fefeererra cerstere: | fare: @ arikeraghertrs cf v2 a 

VYASA. 
The following aphorism was composed with the object of formulat- 
ing 1ts definition :— 

‘ Yoga is the restraint of mental modifications.’ 

Because the word, ‘all’ is not put in before (mental modifications) 
the Cognitive also is termed Yoga. 

The mind is possessed of the ‘three qualities,’ showing as it does 
the nature of illumination, activityeand inertia. Mental Essence manifest- 
ing as illumination loves power and objects of sense, when mixed up 
with disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas). The same pierced 
through by inertia (tamas) approaches vice, ignorance, and absence of 
desirelessness and supineness. The same shining all round with the 
veil of forgetfulness removed, but affected by a touch of disturbing 
energy, approaches virtue, knowledge, desirelessness, and masterfulness. 
The same becomes itself when the least impurity of disturbing energy 
irajas) is removed. It then shows forth only the distinction of nature 


(Go gle 


6 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


between the Essence of objective being and the conscious principle 
(puruga), and approaches the state of trance called the Cloud of Virtue 
(dharma-megha). This the thinkers call the Highest intellection. (Param 
prasahkhyanam). 

The power of consciousness changes not. It goes not from object 
to object. The objects are shown toit. It is pure and infinite. ‘This 
phenomenon (of the knowledge of the distinct nature of the two) is, 
however, of the nature of the Objective Essence, and is the opposite 
thereof. On this account the mind freed from attachment to that too, 
restrains even this form of manifestation. In that state it is possessed 
of residual potencies alone. ‘That is the seedless trance. Itis called the 
ultra-cognitive because nothing 1s cognized in that state. 


This is the two-fold Yoga, the restraint of mental modifications. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

The second aphorism is introduced by the words, 

‘This aphorism was composed, &c.’ 

The word ‘its’ refers to the two descriptions of Yoga, mentioned in the previous 
aphorism. 

“ Yoga is the restraint of mental modifications.” 

That particular state of the mind in which the manifestations of real cognition, &c., 
have been restrained, is the state of Yoga. 

The question arises, is not this definition bad, inasmuch as it does not cover the 
Cognitive Trance, in which that class of mental modifications which are of the very nature 
of its essence (sattva) are not restrained ? 

For this reason the Commentator says :—“ Because the word ‘all’ is not put in, &c.” If 
the restraint of all the mental modifications were mentioned, the definition would not cover 
the Cognitive Trance. The restraint of mental modifications, however, which checks the 
operation of the vehicles of affliction, action and fruition, comprehends that too. -In the 
_ Cognitive Trance also, the mental modifications caused by disturbing Energy (rajas) 
and inertia (tamas) are restrained, In fact, the Cognitive trance is the restraint of these 
modifications. 

Why then does the one mind come into relationship with the wandering and other 
(more than one) planes? Further, what is the object of restraining the modifications of the 
mind so conditioned ? To meet this apprehended questioning, the Commentator first takes 
up the cause of the mind thus coming into relationship with different conditions (planes). 

‘The mind is possessed of the three qualities :— 

The Hssence (sattva) is there, because it’ has the nature of illumination. Disturbing 
Boergy is there, because of its possessing the nature of activity. The quality of darkness 
(tamas) is there, because of its possessing the nature of inertiu. 

The mention of the nature of illumination is suggestive. All the other qualities, 
therefore, of the Essence of things (sattva), such as brightness, lightness, joy and others 
are indicated. 

By activity other qualities of disturbing Energy, such as remorse and sorrow, otc., 
are indicated. 

Inertia is the characteristic modification of the quality of Tamas, the opposite of 
the quality of activity. By the mention of inactivity are indicated heaviness, intercep- 
tion, he] plessness, etc. 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH4I), 2. 7 


The meaning is that the mind although one, passes into more conditions than one, 
because it is made up of the three qualities (gunas) and its modifications are various, 
because the ‘ qualities’ beiug unequal, fall into a variety of combinations. 

Now the Commentator illustrates so far as may be, these very planes of the mind, the 
wandering and others, possessing a8 they do differences of sub-states :—-“ Mental Essence, 
&c.” 

Mental Essence means the Objective Essence (sattva) which has evolved as mind. 
By saying that the mental essence has the nature of illumination, it is shown that the 
mind has the quality of Essence (sattva) for its chief factor. 

When in the mind, the disturbing Energy and Inertia (rajas and tamas) are a little 
less predominant than its own Essence, but equal to each other, then to it are dear power 
and the objects of sense, such as sound, &c. The mind, on account of the Essence being 
its ruling factor, desires to dwell upon reality. But because the reality is veiled by 
Inertia (tamas) it mistakes the attainments of Attenuation (Anim&), &c., for the reality ; 
and desires to dwell and dwells upon them fora moment. Being pushed away, however, 
by Energy (rajas), even from this resting place, it finds not the rest sought after even 
there, but gets only a liking for them. As to sound, &c., why its love of themis well 
established as a matter of course, ever inclining as it does towards them by its own 
nature. It is the occasionally steady mind that is thus described. 

While explaining the wandering mind, the author indicates the Forgetful mind also 
by words beginning with, ‘ The same pierced through thereafter by Inertia, &.’ 

When Inertia flows into the mind and conquers Energy, then the Energy, having 
become incapable of driving the veil of the darkness of Inertia away from the Essence 
of the mind, it is rendered lazy by the Inertia, and approaches vice, &c. Ignorance is 
Untrue knowledge. Further, the knowledge in decp sleep is described as depending upon 
the notion of the absence of all other modifications, Therefore the state of forgetfulness 
(the Muth’ Bhdmi) is also indicated. The absence of masterfulness or supineness is the 
non-fulfilment of one’s wishes everywhere. The meaning is that the mind becomes 
pervaded by vice, &c. 

By the words, ‘ The same when the veil of forgetfulness, &c.,' the author means that, 
when the same mental Essence shines out in its own nature, then the mind approaches 
virtue, knowledge, desirelessness and -masterfulness, Forgetfulness is inertia (tamas) 
and the same is the veil. When the veil is removed, it becomes as above described. It 
is for this reason that it illuminates all the specialized, the unspecialized, the undifferen- 
tiated phenomenal and noumenal states and the Paruga. 

Inasmuch as notwithstanding this, it may not be capable of manifesting virtue 
and masterfulness on account of the absence of activity, the Commentator says :—‘ When 
it is affected by a touch of rajas, &c.’ The meaning is that because Energy is the cause 
of activity, virtue, &c., exist in that state. 

This gives a comprehensive description of the mental Essence of the two classes 
of Yogis who have reached the stage of Cognitive Trance, the Madhubhumikas and the 
Prajiidjyotisas of the middle path. Now the author describes the state of mind of the 
fourth class of Yogis, the Dbyanis or thinkers who have passed the domain of things to 
be known :— 

‘The same mind becomes itself, when the least impurity of disturbing Energy is 
removed. It is for this very reason that it becomes fixed in its own nature. Purified of 
the dross of disturbing Energy and Inertia (rajas and tamas) by the device of heating it 
with the re-agents of practice and desirelessness, the gold of the Essence of the will-to- 
know becomes established in its own nature, and becomes the master of the senses and 
their objects, It has thus fulfilled much of its work, but goes on working ; as its great 


(Go gle 


8 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


work with the achievement of the knowledge of the distinction between the Objeetive 
Egsence and consciousness. The author says :— 

“The same becomes itself when the least impurity of disturbing Hnergy is removed, 
It then shows forth only the distinction of nature between the Essence of Objective 
Nature and the. conscious principle, and approaches the state of contemplation called 
the Cloud of Virtue.” The Cloud of Virtue will be described later. -He -describes here a 
term better known among the Yogis :—“ This the thinkers, &o.” The thinkers call the mind 
showing forth the distinction of the natures of the Objective Essence and the Conscious 
Principle, and having the Cloud of Virtue as the other end, by the name of the Highest 
Intellection. The mind is here spoken of as an abstraction, because the characteristic 
and the characterized are intended to be spoken of as one. 

The Commentator now shows that the power of consciousness is the good and the 
faculty of discriminative knowledge is not the good. This is with the object of introducing 
the Inhibitive Trance (Nirodha Sam&dhi), which restrains the mental modifications of dis- 
criminative knowledge, and brings about the perfect freedom of the conscious principle :— 

“The power of consciousness changes not, &c.” 

Impurity consists in identifying.the self with pleasure and pain and forgetfulness. 
Pleasure and pain both cause pain to him who discriminates: Hence they too are to be 
given up like pain. Even the very beautiful gives pain having anend. Therefore that 
also has to be given up by him who discriminates. This impurity and end do not exist 
in the power of consciousness or the Puruga. Hence is it said to be pure and infinite, 

But how is this power of consciousness pure when it takes the forms of pleasureable, 
painful and forgetful objects, sounds, &c., while cognizing them? And how again is it in- 
finite, when it takes up that form and also gives it up? To meet this the author says :— 

‘The objects are shown to it.’ 

It is so described because the objective sounds, &c., are shown to it. It might be impure 
and finite if it took the forms of the objects in the same way as does the will-to-be. It 
is in fact the will-to-be that takes the forms of the objects, and presents them to the 
consciousness, which follows its forms. Thence is it said that the Puruga cognizes. 

The doubt again arises, how can an object be known if the power of consciousness 
do not take possession of the will-to-be appearing as an object ? If it does take possession, 
how can it be said that it has not taken the form of the object ? For this reason says 
the author :— 

“It goes not from object to object.” 

Going from object to object means motion, and the teaching is that consciousness does 
not move. But then how does it take possession of that form ? For this reason he says :— 
“The power of consciousness ohanges not.” 

The three-fold change, indicated by characteristic, differentia and condition, does not 
exist in consciousness, that it may put on the form of action and thereby change in con- 
junction with the will-to-be, It will be described further on how it cognizes, even though 
it moves not. 

Thus it is established that the power of consciousness is the good. It has been said 
that the manifestation of discriminative knowledge 1s not the good, being as it is of the 
nature of the will-to-be. For this reason it is the opposite of the power of consciousness, 

When even the manifestation of discrimination also is to be given up, what is to be 
said of the other modifications which are fullofshortcomings? Thisisthe meaning. Hence 
for this reason, the discussion of the Inhibitive Trance is properly introduced. .Therefore 
the author says :— 

“On this account the wind tends to tnrn from it, &c.” The meaning is that it checks 
the indulgence of discriminative knowledge too, by the Higher desirelessness, which |g 
the illumination of knowledge itself, 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHZTI,, 2, 3. 9 


Now he describes what the aspect of the mind is when all its modifications have been 

restrained : — 
“In thatstate, &c.” That state means the state of Restraint (Nirodha). The nature 

of restraint or inhibition is described :—“ It is the seedless.” 

The vehicle of actions with that of afflictions is the seed of life-state, life-period 
and life-experience. The seedless is that which has gone beyond that. 

Now the author gives another name of the same which is better known to the Yogis 
and which is descriptive of the mental state, the ultra-cognitive. 

“ Nothing is cognized in that, &c.” 

He summarizes :—" This is the two-fold Yoga, the restraint of the modifications of the 

mind.” 


Sotra 3. 


Ta Fes: TAS ISATTTAT Ul 3 tt 
wat Tadd, then, at that time, at the time of concentration. wg: Drastuh, of 
the seer, of the soul. «8 Sva-rfipe, in his own nature, or state, wrerry Avasthé- 
nam, resting, standing, remaining, lying. , 
3. Then the seer stands zn his own nature. 


aqaed take rasan, afaraen gee: Pears xfer 1 aar aeg: 
watsrerny | wreantet aarat Pattrafein Baer | eqetakre g 
er vary wardt 4 ata HH 


VYASA. 

There being no object of cognition in that state of the mind, what 
is the state of the conscious principle (purusa) who has identified him- 
self with the cognitions of the Will-to-be? ‘Then the seer stands in his 
own nature.” At that time the power of consciousness is established in 
its own nature, as in the state of perfect freedom. In the outgoing mind 
it appears to be not so centred in its own nature, though in reality it is 


the same. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Now says he, in order to introduce the next aphorism :— 

“ There being no object of cognition in that state of the mind, &c.” The word ‘what’ 
is inquisitive. The meaning is this. The conscious principle is always perceived as the 
very self of the cognitions of the Will-to-know taking on the forms of various objects. 
He is never perceived as separate from the cognitions of the Will-to-know. For this reason 
the knowledge of the will-to-be is of the very nature of the conscious principle, as light 
of the sun. And it does not exist when the mind is in a state of residual potency (sams- 
k&ra). And no existence can last as such when it has given up its nature. 

Let it be so. But then why does not the Purusa know the Will-to-be in its state 
of residual potency? To meet this he says :—‘ There being no object of cognition, &c.” 

It is not the Will-to-know alone, but the Will-to-know which has the objects of the 
Puruga to achieve that is the sphere of consciousness. The objects of the Puruga aré 
discriminative knowledge and the experience of the objective world. These two no 
longer exist in the state of inhibition (nirodha); Therefore the non-existence of objects 
in that state is established. The author gives the answer by the aphorism—“ Then the 
seer stands in his own nature.” 

2 


Google 


10 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


e 


By the word ‘svardpa’ (his own nature), the author excludes the appearances of the 
calm, the ruffied and the forgetful (the Santa, tbe Ghora and the Mfdha) which have 
been fastened upon it. The nature of the Puruga is consciousness alone, unaffected by 
the contacts (of objects placed alongside), not the cognitive action of the Will-to-know 
appearing as calm, &c. This is ofthe nature of contacts. “It is like the redness which 
appears in acrystal pure white by nature, when a Japa flower is placed in contact 
therewith. And it is not necessary that when the things placed in contact are removed, 
the thing with which they have been placed in contact, should also disappear. That 
would mean encroachment of the one into the sphere of the other. Tho locative case 
is used, because the thing and the nature of the thing are conceived as being separate, 
although in reality the same, and not distinct. 

The same meaning is rendered clear by the Commentator :— 

“At that time the power of consciousness, &c.”’ At ihat time, in the state of res- 
traint and not in the state of outgoing. 

Let that be so. But then the power of consciousness, not slanding in its own nature 
when the Will-to-be is in the state of outgoing activity, and becoming established in that 
state when in the state of inhibition, becomes changeful. If it be said that it reniains 
established in its own nature even in the state of outgoing activity, then there would 
be no difference between the states of outgoing activity and inhibition. For this reason 
says the author :— 

‘In the outwardly inclined mind, &c.’ 


The power of consciousness, constant because standing alone, is never disturbed 
in its own nature ; and for this reason is the same inactivity as in the state of restraint. 
The mother-of-pearl does not for certain, put on and give up its true nature, while 
becoming the object of true or false knowledge. The knower, however, fancies it to be 
something different from what it really is. 


In relation to the Inhibitive Trance, the Cognitive Trance also is a state of out- 
going activity. 
Sfitra 4. 


aPrare HAT Nh 8 Ni 


aimVritti, with modifications, eeay Saripyam, identification, wre itaratra, 
at other times, elsewhere. 


4. Identification with modifications elsewhere. 


et aft ¢ afiratreacanra staareanitreacs | SUT TAT ATRT- 
fatresfe: gen | aa af aay | CRae aud entita quar | 
Rranqenraaned saRrrsiteat eqaata ee wala gevet carta: | 
TAMA AAA FaTETAane: Aaa Ai 8 tt 

VYASA. 

How then? On account of objects being presented to it, identifi- 
cation with modifications takes place elsewhere. The conscious principle 
(puruga) is not unaffected by whatever may be the modifications of the 
mind in the state of outgoing activity. And so in the aphorism :— 


“ Knowledge is but one; discrimination alone is knowledge.”’ 


Google 


CH. I, ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 4. 11 
ag et oe yo 


The mind is like a magnet energized by nearness alone. Being 
seen it becomes the possession of its lord, the puruga. Therefore the reason 
for knowing the modifications of the mind is the eternal relation of the 
purusa. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


For the purpose of introducing another aphorism, the author puts the question, ‘ How 
then ? The meaning is this. In what manner does it shine then, if it {s not perceived to be 
what it really is. Adding the word which explains the cause, he reads the aphorism :— 


“On account of objects being presented to it, identification with modifications takes 
place elsewhere.” 


Elsewhere :—In the state of outward activity, whatever may be the modifications of 
the mind, the calm, the ruffied, and the forgetful, the same are the manifestations of the 
conscious principle as he exists in that state. 


The word Sain Sfrfpya (identification) means oneness. This is the meaning. The 
notions, ‘Iam calm.’ ‘I am ruffed,’ I am forgetful’, appear by fastening the modifications 
of the will-to-be upon the conscious principle, by taking the will-to-know and the conscious 
principle to be one on account of proximity, asin the case of the white crystal and the 
Japa flower, This happens in the same way as one looking his face reflected in a dirty 
mirror, becomes anxious and thinks,‘Iam dim.’ Although the fastening of the conscious 
principle upon the will-to-know, is like the knowledge of sound, &c., only a manifestation 
of the will-to-know, and although this manifestation must be considered to be unintelli- 
gent, having, as it does, its origin in the Prakpiti, showing forth as it does the will-to-know 
as the knower, the manifestation shines forth as a manifestation of consciousness, And 
similarly does this 4tma (self) appear to possess false knowledge, although in reality he 
has no false knowledge. He appears as the enjoyer, although he is not the enjoyer, 
He appears as possessed of discriminative knowledge, and illuminated thereby although 
devoid of it in reality. 

This will be shown further under the aphorisms :— 

“Consciousness not moving, takes its form and thus the will-to-know knows itself as 
such.” —22, 4, 

“Enjoyment (Bhoga) consists in the identification of the notions of the Objective 
Essence and the Conscious principle (puruga), which are quite distinct from each other.” 
—$4. 3, 

. The Commentator now says that this is recognized by another school also. 
“So is the aphorism, &c.” 


The aphorism “knowledge is but one; discrimination alone is knowledge,” is an 
aphorism of the Acharya Pafichashikhé. 

But how is knowledge but one? The modifications of the will-to-be in the shape of 
the objects, sound, &c., and in the shape of discrimination, are to be considered Unintelli- 
gent. This is one knowledge. The intelligence of the Puruga is distinct from it. Its 
recognition also is knowledge. For this redson says, “ Discrimination alone is knowledge.” 

It is in view of the discrimination of the world possessing the characteristics of 
appearance and disappearance, that it is said 

“ Knowledge is but one.” 


As to consciousness, it is the nature of the Puruga, not of the discriminative faculty. 
This, however, is not within the range of the perceptive cognition of the world. It fallg 
within the sphere of the inferential and verbal cognitions. This is the meaning. 


Go gle 


12 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


While showing thus that nescience is the radical cause of mental phenomena, in the 
state of outgoing activity, it is also indicated that conjunction, the cause of nescience, 
is the cause of enjoyment, and also that there exists between the two the relation of the 
owner and the owned. For the purpose of establishing this the Commentator says, 

“Tt becomes the possession of its lord.” 
This shows the relationship. 

| But the cognizer, puruga, can only be the lord of the mind, when it enjoys the benefit 
of the service rendered by the mind. Andit is not possible that he should so enjoy 
the service without coming into relationship with the benefit rendered; but it cannot be 
beneficially acted upon, and there it cannot come into relationship, If, on the other 
hand, the enjoyment of the benefit is to be considered to be due to the conjunction thereof, 
then the purusa must be considered to be changeful. 

For this reason he says, “act by mere nearness.” 

The mind is not conjoined to the purusa; it is merely placed near him. The near- 
ness of the puruga is not in space, nor yet in time, on account of the absence of juxta- 
position. It is defined by fitness, The purusa possesses the power of enjoying as sub- 
ject, while the mind possesses the power of being enjoyed. This is meant by saying 
“ Being seen, the mind becomes the possession of the lord.” 

The meaning is that it becomes the object of enjoyment by being transformed into 
the form of sound, &c. As to enjoyment, although it is a characteristic of the mind, being 
as it is a modification in the form of sound, &c., still it is spoken of as being a characteristic 
of the Purusa, because of his identifications, with the modifications, on account of the 
absence of the conception of distinctness between the mind and consciousness, 

Thus is established the enjoyment by the Puruga of the service rendered by the 
mind, although he is not conjoined to it; as is also established the unchanging nature of 
the Puruga. 

Well then, the relation of owner and owned which is the cause of enjoyment, has its 
cause in nescience, But what is the cause of nescience? There must be some cause 
for it, because no effect can come into existence without some cause, As they say, 

‘What to him doth make, 
‘““ Nescience manifest, 
“ Like dream and so forth.” 

This doubt is removed by putting the answer in the form of a summary :—“ For this 
reason, &c.” 

The meaning is this. The cause of the experience of the calm, the ruffled and the 
forgetful forms of mental modifications is the eternal conjunction caused by eternal nesci- 
ence; and the relation of nescience and potentialization (vasan4, in each being born from 
the other in eternal succession is without a beginning like the mutual relation of seed 
‘and sprout.) 

Siatra 5, 


aaa: Taaza: Pesztheset: yu Ul 


wea: Vrittayab, modifications, wera: Panchtayyah, five fold, of five kinds, 
fae: Klista, painful. sfaer: Aklist&b, not painful, 
5. The modifications are five-fold, painful and not- 


painful. 
at gaintrret sgt afr ree, gay waar eer | 
emg salrarsa aig fer | eafatesar quritenrchyerherits- 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 5. 13 


figer | Reesareaitear seafieer: | Rrefeercrarfiger wafer | ufgeftery 
Ragen xfer | rer order: eremrer aPahite rae | wrenttes qera ef | Te 


VAYSA. 


These then, the five-fold modifications of the mind, painful and 
not-painful, are to be restrained, being many. The painful are those that 
cause the afflictions and become the field for the growth of the vehicle 
of actions (karmadaya). The not-painful are those that have discrimi- 
nation for their object and which oppose the functioning of the “ qua- 
lities.” They remain not painful even though fallen into the stream of the 
painful. They are not-painful even in the intervals of the painful. 
The painful also remain in the intervals of the not-painful. Potencies 
(Faculties, of the same class are generated by the modifications themselves ; 
and the modifications are caused by the potencies. Thus the wheel of 
mental modifications and potencies turns round and round. Such is the 
mind which when its objects have been attainefl, rests unmoving like the 


self, or disappears. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Let that be. A man is taught to do what is only possible. And it is not possible to 
restrain the mental modifications without knowing them. Further, no one can count them 
even by a thousand lives of men, Being not counted, how can they be restrained? 
Having this doubt he introduces the aphorism laying down the number of these modi- 
fications. ‘“ These, the five-fold modifications of the mind, the painful and not-painful, are 
to be restrained, being many.” Mental modifications as a class are one: real cognition 
and others are their five forms. For this reason, modifications having these sub-classes are 
five-fold, have five sub-divisions. The plural number is properly used, because these 
modifications are many, on account of the distinctions due to different personalities, 
such as those of Chaitra and Maitra and others, The meaning is that whoever it may be, 
whether Chaitra, Maitra or any other, the mental modifications of them all are five-fold 
and no more. The use of the singular number of the word ‘mind’ is for the purpose of 
denoting theclass only. It should be understood to mean the minds. 

Now the author mentions a minor classification of the same, as that is useful for the 
purpose of practice. ‘Painful and not-painful.” The object is that the painfal are to be 
restrained by the help of the not-painful, and these too by the higher desirelessness, 
“The painful are those, &c.” This explains them, 

The afflictions of egoism, &c., are the causes of certain mental modifications, The modi- 
fications of which the afflictions are the moving causes are spoken of as such, i.e., painful, 
Or to put it another way. Of the Prakriti, which works for the achievement of (the objects 
of) the Puruga, the manifestations of the rajas and the tamas are only the causes of the 
afflictions, and they alone therefore tend towards misery. Affliction being painful, the 
painful are those in which this affliction, the rajas and tamas manifestation, exists. In- 
asmuch as they come into manifestation for the purpose of supplying tho afflictions only, 
they are for this very reason, the field for the growth of the vehicle of actions. The 
meaning is that the Puruga having become conscious of the object which is at hand by 


(Go gle 


14 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


means of the manifestation of real cognition, &c., becomes attached to them, or is repelled 
from them, and thus makes the vehicle of actions grow. Those become the painful mani- 
festations which are fertile grounds for the growth of virtue and vice. 


He describes the not-painful :—“ The not-painful are those, &c.” Discrimination is 
the illumination of the cognition of the Objective Essence of the Will-to-be, when it flows 
undisturbed. By speaking of it as an object, he suggests the knowledge of the distinction 
between the Objective essence and the Purusa, which is the object thereof. 


And because they have for their object the knowledge of the distinction between 
the Objective Essence and the Purusa, they are for this very reason the opposers of 
the functionings of the qualities. “ The function of the qualities is the initiation of the 
effects, This ceases with discriminative knowledge. Thus the object of the functioning 
of the qualities having been fulfilled, they are said to oppose their functioning. For this 
reason these mental modifications of Real Cognition, &c., are not-painful, 


Let that be. No one is born who has no desires. The mental modifications of all 
living beings are therefore painful. And it is not proper that not-painful modifications 
should exist in the midst of the stream of the painfal modifications. Nor having fallen 
in the midst of opposing forces, can they be fit to perform any work, even though they 
do exist. Hence to say that the painful are restrained by the non-painful and the non- 
painful by the higher desirelessness, is only a wish. Hence the author says :— 

“ Fallen into the stream of the painful too they are the non-painful.” 


Practice and desirelessness born by the study of the Veda, induction and precept 
remain themselves the non-painfal even though fallen into the stream of the painful. A 
Brahmana living in the viilage of Shala which is full of the Kirdtas, does not become a Kirata, 


The words “in the intervals of the non-painful” propound an analogy. Because 
they take their place in the intervals of the painful modifications, the non-painful ones, 
not suppressed by the painful, gathering strength in due course by habituation suppress 
the painful ones themselves. This is what the author says :--“ Similar potencies are 
created by modifications, &c."’ The meaning is that by the non-painful modifications the 
non-painful potencies are generated. This is the wheel of mental modifications and 
potencies which always turns round and round, up to the ultra-cognitive Trance. 

Such then is the mind, which in the state of suppression remains only in the state 
of residual potency and thus stands like the self; and it is said by way of an optional 
mode of expression that it disappears. The final meaning of the aphorism is summarized :— 

“ These painful and non-painful manifestations are of five descriptions.” The words, 
“ Five descriptions” give only the sense; they do not give the connotation of the word 
because the suffix “tayap”’ has never been used to connote description. 


Siitras 6 and 7. 


Ta AaaHeaaseTaT: WG 


TAAGAATAT: Taha vo 


ware Pramfpa, real cognition, right knowledge. fam Viparyaya, unreal 
cognition, indiscrimination. fw Vikalpa, imagination, verbal delusion. fragt 
Nidr&, deep sleep. «ra: Smritayah, and memory. 

mwq Pratyaksa, direct perception. sya Anuména, inference, wm: Aga- 
m&h, and verbal cognition, competent evidence. sara Pramapani, kinds of real 
cognition, (or proofs), 


Go gle 


—-—_ 


CH, I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH]), 6, 7. 15 


6. Real Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagination, 
Deep Sleep and Memory. 

7. Perception, Verbal Cognition and Inference are 
real cognitions. 

an fgeeaiigersa qsaer gaa: sarafraaeatareaa | 
TeRaTaarrrar Taare | efrasaienar fra aeraeqqumrafgrar 
eraraaanassa Aaerararcasarar af: veri saraq.| Heafakre: 
Qretahkawashrans | wtearadt get equiterrraePreaa: | wgaaer ger- 
waireagsat fraswndaeat age: aarat veer Sarena 
qhacqary | sar seereraneraaarch saa | rcagearscae | 
wea EITM Ta: qey TAtTATMAY mgwNnaeas TeqraqdAear 
afa: xtgua |. BEATS Tet Qa A Egat: | aA TAA | a 
aH J Teas Afaga: |e & HOH 


VYASA. 


These painful and non-painful modifications are of five descrip- 
tions :—Rea! Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagination, Sleep and Memory. 
The Real Cognitions are Perception or sense-cognition; Inference or 
Sequential Cognition and Verbal Cognition. 

Perception is the mental modification which cognizes chiefly the 
specific appearance of an object, being of the nature of both the generic 
and the specific qualities, and which has it for its object, by means of the 
impression caused therein by the external object through the passage of 
the senses. The result is the knowledge of the modifications of the 
mind by the Purusa, as if they were not all distinguishable from himself. 
We shall establish further on that the Purusa knows by reflex conjunc- 
tion with the will-to-be. 

Inference or Sequential Cognition is the mental modification which 
cognizes the generic nature chiefly and has for its sphere the relation 
which exists in objects of the same class with that which is inferred, but 
does not exist as such in objects of different classes. For example, the 
moon and the stars are moving objects, because they go from one place to 
another like Chaitra. And the Vindhy& mountain does not move, 
because it is not seen going from one place to another. 

An object perceived or inferred by a competent man is described by 
him in words with the intention of transferring his knowledge to another. 
The mental modification which has for its sphere the meaning of words 
is the Verbal Cognition to the hearer. When the speaker has neither 
perceived nor inferred the object, and speaks of things which cannot 


Go gle 


16 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


be believed, the authority of Verbal Cognition fails. But it does not fail 
in the original speaker with reference to either the object of perception 


or of inference. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

The author mentions them by their names, “Real Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagi- 
nation, Sleep and Memory.” In enumeration the different parts arc understood separately as 
they are spoken of; and this is a copulative composition in which each word is joined 
to the other in the sense of the word ‘Cha’ (and) which means the joining of the one 
to the other. 

As in the aphorism ; — 

“ Nescience is the taking of the non-eternal, the impure, the painful and the not-self 
to be the eternal, the pure, the pleasurable and the self.’’—-5. 2. 

The definition does not comprehend such confused manifestations of conscious- 
ness, as the forgetfulness of directions and the unbroken circle formed by a fast-moving 
point of light ; so even here notwithstanding that the modifications of Real Cognition, &c., 
are mentioned, the doubt may arise, that there are other modifications, besides those 
named, in existence. For the removal of this doubt, it was necessary to say Five-fold? 
It is thereby shown that there are so many modifications and no more.— 6, 

Going to divide the modification of Real Cognition, he gives the general descrip- 
tion of the sub-heads. “The Real Cognitions are Perception, Inference and Verbal 
Cognitions.” 

Right Knowledge consists in the unknown truth, which becomes the cause of the 
soul's setting about to act. The moans of obtaining that knowledge is the Real Cognition 
(the cognizing of the real). The mention of the division is for the purpose of refuting a 
larger or smaller number of sub-heads. é 

Out of these the definition of Perception is first given, because that is at the root of 
all other means of knowledge. 

“ Perception is, &c." 

By using the words, ‘of an object” the quality of being merely fastened upon (that 
is, existing as an idea alone) is denied. 

By using the words, ‘ which has it for its object 'it is denied that the externality of 
the object is the sphere of the mental idea thereof. By using the words, ‘by means of the 
impression therein caused by the external object,’ the relation of the idea in the mind 
to the external object of knowledge is shown. 

He gives the cause of the impression thereof, even though there be distance between 
(the knower and the thing known). 

“ Through the passage of the senses.” 


Some say an object is the generic quality alonc. Others say, an object is the 
specific quality alone. Other thinkers again say that an object is possessed of both 
descriptions of qualities, the generic and the specific. For their refutation, he says :— 

“Being of the nature of both the generic and the specific qualities." An object is 
not possessed of the generic and the specific qualities ; it is of the very nature thereof. 
This will be shown when the question of simultaneous non-cognition is discussed. 

Now he distinguishes the domain of sequential and verbal cognitions from that of per- 
ception :—‘ Which cognizes chiefly the specific appearance of an object.’ The meaning 
is that although in perception, the generic quality also shines out, still it is subordi- 
nate to the specific quality. This is only suggestive of direct knowledge—Discrimi- 
native knowledge also is suggested, therefore. 

He refutes the contradiction of the result of perceptive cognition. 


(Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 6, 7. 17 


‘The result is the knowledge by the Puruga of the modifications of the mind.’ 

The question is, How can knowledge by the Purusa be the result of a modification 
of the mind? If an axe operate upon a Khadira tree, it is not a Plakga tree that is cut 
thereby. 

For this reason he says, ‘as if they were not at all distinguishable from himself.’ It is 
not the cognitive modification of the mind that takes its place in the Puruga; it is on 
the contrary consciousness reflected in the mirror of the will-to-know, that appears in the 
form of the modification of the object, because the modification of the will-to-know takes 
the form of the object. Thisis the result of the act of perception. This consciousness 
thus reflected in the will-to-know is not separate from the will-to-know (Buddbi). It 
is of its very nature, and the modification thereof in the shape of an object is also of 
the nature of the will-to know. They co-exist in the same place. It is, therefore, proper 
that this should be the result of the perceptive cognition. This we shall show. 


For this reason the author says :—" The puruga knows by refiex conjunction with the 
will-to-know,.” 

Because Verbal Cognition has its origin in the recognition of the relations es- 
tablished by the inferences of the intellect of the hearer, on account of the appearance 
therein of the signs of co-existence, etc., in sequence of perceptive knowledge, it is| by 
inference that verbal knowledge becomes possible. For this reason and also because 
inferred knowledge is imparted thereafter by means of verbal cognition, the commentator 
gives the definition of inference before that of verbal cognition. 


“Inference or Sequential Cognition, &c.”’ 


The inferred object is the object possessed of the characteristic desired to be known. 
Objects of the same class therewith are those similar objects which are placed-into the 
same species on account of the possession of the same generic quality, which is the 
characteristic to be proved. By saying that it exists in objects of the same class with 
that which is inferred, the author does away with the presence of contrary and uncom- 
mon qualities in the antecedent. Objects of different classes are those which fall not 
within the same species, These are others than those which fall into the same class, 
are their contraries and mean their non-existence. By saying that they do not exist as 
such in objects of different classes, tho author emphasizes the neceesity of the possession 
of the generic qualities. Relation is that which furnishes the common bond. This is 
called the linga, the sign which is the common bond, the generic quality. By this he shows 
the characteristic nature of the thing to be proved (pakga, sfidhya) and thus does 
away with non-probability. 

‘Has for its object,’ (tadvigaya) means that to which it is bound, as the word 
vigaya (object) is derived from the root Shi, to bind. 

The author speaks of cognizing the generic nature, with the object of distinguishing 
it from the perceptive cognition. The sphere of inference is limited to the generie quality 
because it is dependent for its birth upon the cognition of relation; and in specific objects 
there can be no cognition of relationship ; and for this reason the common quality alone 
admits of the recognition of relationship. He gives an example :— For example.” The 
word ‘ and’ (cha) denotes a cause. Because the Vindhya is not a moving object, it does 
not change its location. Therefore when motion is removed, change of place disappears. 
Hence there being change of place, the moon and the stars are moving bodies ; as is 
Chaitra. This is proved. 

He gives the definition of the mental modification of Verbal Cognition :—“ An object 
perceived or inferred by a competent person, &c.” 
A competent person is an Apta. Competence (A ptt) which radically means “ reach,” 


means an all-round comprehension, or the constant presence along with each other of the 
8 


Go gle 


18 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


knowledge of the realities, mercifulness and the skilfulness in their acts of the instruments 
of knowledge. An A pta or a competent or an authoritative person is one who is possessed 
of this. An object seen or inferred by him is the object of verbal cognition. The know- 
ledge obtained by an authoritative person such as above described, by hearing is not 
mentioned here, because knowledge obtained through words has inferential and perceptive 
knowledge for its root, and therefore must be considered as having been mentioned by the 


mention of the two only. 


“ Transferring of his knowledge” consists in the production of knowledge in the mind 
of the hearer similar to the knowledge which exists in the mind of the authoritative 
person. For that object it is uttered in words, i,e., is made known for causing gain to, and 
removing the disadvantages of the hearer. The rest is easy. 


When the speaker speaks of things which cannot be believed :—such as, ‘it is the 
ten pomegranates themselves which will become the six cakes.’ 


‘Has neither perceived nor inferred’ :—Such as one who says, ‘ Let him who desires 
heaven, worship the village tree (Chaitya might mean the Buddha, the temple, &c., besides). 


Such an authority fails. 
The question arises that if it be so, the teaching of Manu, &c., also fails because 


they too speak of things not seen or inferred. 
Inasmuch as they say, ‘whatever of the dharma of whomsoever is disclosed by Manu, 


all that is laid down in the Veda,’ he was certainly possessed of all knowledge. 
For this reason he says :—‘ When it has been perceived by the original speaker, &c."’ 


The original speaker is in such teachings, of course, ishwara. 


Sfitra 8. 


Raat Preargrerraqiaasd ts t 


feeia: Viparyayab, unreal congnition, fer Mithyé, of the unreal, wry 
Jnfnam, knowing. wag Atad, not itsown. & Rapa, form, uftesy, Pratistham, 

occupying, standing, possessing. 
8. Unreal Cognition is the knowing of the unreal, 


possessing a form not its own. 

fraaar Rrererrarsy | A TAIT Tae ga: scariest aT | 
AVANT TATU | AT TAT MPAA SEAL Tere Hare 
aiaieageaaa aad ee) ad qsaqat waerar | afensierara- 
SAMRAT BU! we ca eqs Aer Aarts 
paarftrer xf | oa Rraresregariraresrt i ¢ i 

VYASA. 

Unreal Cognition is the knowing of the unreal, possessed of a form 
not its own. Why is it not the knowing of the real? Because the know- 
ledge of the real removes it, inasmuch as Real Cognition has for its 
object a thing as it exists. Therein is seen the removal of the wrong 
knowledge by the right one; as for example, the visual knowledge of two 
movuns is removed by the perception which has for its object the thing as 
it really exists, the one moon. 


ea gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 8. 19 


This it is that is the five-fold Nescience. As it is said :— Nescience, 
Egoism, Attachment, Aversion, and Love of life are the five afflictions, 
—3. 2. The sameare technically called respectively, darkness (tamas), 
forgetfulness (moha), extreme forgetfulness (mah&moha), Excessive dark- 
ness (tamisra) and blind darkness (andhatamisra). 


These will be described in the context of the impurities of the mind, 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Unreal cognition is the knowing of the unreal, possessed of a form not its own, 

Unreal congnition :—This is a statement of the thing to be defined, The knowing of 
the unreal, &c., is the definition, It means that it has a form which shines out as if it 
were real knowledge. 


The words, ‘ possessed of a form not its own,’ are equivalent to ‘not possessed of 
the form which is its own.’ As for example, the words, ‘eating what is not dedicated to 
the Pitris,’ mean ‘not eating what is dedicated to the Pitris.’ 

Doubt also is included in this. There is, however, this much difference. In this, 
the unstability of the form of the notion exists in the notion itself, whereas in the case of 
the perception of two moons, &c,, the unstability is brought home by the notion of the 
removal thereof, 

The question arises that if it be so, then on consideration, unreal cognition shows 
itself in imagination also, because there also, the real object is not perceived as such, 
For this reason says, it is “ the knowing of the unreal,” This means that this cognition 
is contradicted by the common knowledge of all mankind. This contradiction exists in 
the case of unreal cognition, but not in the case of Imagination. Forms of cognition due 
to Imagination are in common use with mankind, and it is only to those who show the capa- 
cities of a learned man and think thereupon that the knowledge of contradiction appeals 
in this case, 

Thus the question is raised, ‘ why is not that real cognition ?? The meaning is that 
the former knowledge is not the one that is removed by the opposite knowledge acquired 
thereafter ; but that it is the knowledge acquired thereafter that is removed by the former, 
which has been acquired before and nothing contrary to which has appeared, 

Refutes :—‘ Because it is removed by right knowledge. 

It might be real cognition if the birth of the latter depended upon the former. Here, 
however, either cognition is given birth to by its own cause, and is not dependent upon 
the other knowledge, The latter kaowledge thus does not take its rise by the destruc. 
tion of the former and its appearance and therefore, does not consist in the removal of the 
former, Nordoes the appearance of the former knowledge mean the removal of the 
latter, because this does not exist at that time. For this reason, the cause of the exist- 
ence of removability is the absence of the close appearance of contrariety: and the 
cause of the power to remove is the close appearance of contrariety. Therefore, that 
which is not right knowledge, is removed by right knowledge, inasmuch as the latter 
has for its object, something which exists as such. 

He gives an example :—‘ Therein is seen the removal of the wrong knowledge by the 
right one.’ 

He shows the evil nature of this unreal cognition for the purpose of removal :— This 
it is that is the five-fold Nescience.’ The meaning is that ‘ Nescience is the generico quality 
of all the five, Nescience, Egoism, &c.' The mistaking of the Unmanifested (Avyakta), the 
Manifested objective existence (Mahat), the Principle of Individuality (Ahabkfra), and 
the five atom-builders (Tanmatras)—the eight forms of the not-self, for the self, is 


Go gle 


20 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 
aa sa ee es 


nescience, darkness (tamas). Similarly, the mistaking by the Yogis of the eight attain- 
ments of Anim&, &c., which are inauspicious, for the auspicious, is the eight-fold for- 
‘getfalness (moha) which comes after the former. And this is called Egoism (asmita), 

Similarly the idea, ‘I shall enjoy sound, &c,, the ten enjoyments both as seen and 
heard, when I have acquired by Yoga tho eight attainments of Anim4, &c., and have there- 
by become a powerful man (siddha),’ is the greater forgetfulness, attachment (Rfga). 

Similarly, when led by such a judgment, one sets about to obtain these enjoyments, 
but finds that the attainments of Anima, &c., are not born on account of obstacles caused 
by some one and that the enjoyment of the pleasures of both kinds, seen or heard about 
traditionally, which depend upon the attainments, is not thus obtained, anger against 
the cause of obstacles appears. This is aversion (dvega), called utter darkness. 

Similarly, when the powers of Anim4, &c., have been attained, and the visible and 
heard-of objects of enjoyment ;have been obtained, then the fear that in the end of the 
Kalpa all this will be destroyed, is the love of sentient life, blind darkness (andhataémisra 
or abhinivesa). 

This has been said :— 


“ Right-fold is the division of darkness and so of forgetfulness; ten-fold of the 
greater forgetfulness. Utter darkness is eighteen-fold and so also is blind darknegs."’ 


Satra 9, 


WSTATATTATA Tat rH ue 


wea Sabda, by verbal expression. waJnana, by knowledge. wrt Anupati, 
followed in sequence, 7g Vastu, reality, an objective, substratum, yra: Sunyab, 
devoid of. fews: Vikalpah, imagination. 
9, Imagination is followed in sequence by verbal 
expression and knowledge, and is devoid of objective 


substratum. 

CAMTATTATAY Tega ewer: | a a reat | a rvaatraeret 
agua wWeEMAEakeat TIE TU | saat Faw 
gear eqeuitit | aqr Pfata gaveqr far ha eraigeat vale a 
eqaan are: | aar Qver Artie | car siafiaaeqaat Mena: gaesitastr 
ara: reat flea sf nfatad) areata meat | aasgafraal gee 
af! safeaderaraarmaaraa a gered am | denizen @ 
iret arf eaare xfer We Ul = , 


Imagination is followed in sequence by verbal knowledge and ex- 
pression, and is devoid of objective substratum. This does not reach 
‘up to real cognition. Nor does it reach up to unreal cognition. Even 
in the absence of an objective substratum, its action is found to be depend- 
ent upon the power of verbal expression and knowledge. 


As for example :—‘ Purusa is of the nature of consciousness.’ Now 
what is here predicated of what? seeing that Purusa is consciousness 


Go gle 


CH: I. ON TRANCE (SAMADBHD), 9. 21 


‘itself, and that there must always be a statement of the relationship of 
one to another in predication ; as in the phrase Chitra’s cow. 


Similarly, “the purusa is inactive and the characteristics of an 
object are denied to it.” 


“ Bana stands, will stand, has stood.” ‘The meaning of the root alone 
is understood by (the act of) the cessation of motion. 


Similarly in the sentence, “ The purusa has the characteristics 
of not being born,” the mere absence of the characteristic of not being 
born is to be understood, and not any positive characteristic possessed by 
the purusa. That characteristic has therefore, been imagined and has 
come into practical usage. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


“Imagination is followed in sequence by verbal expression and knowledge, and is 
devoid of an objective substratum.” If it is followed in sequence by verbal knowledge 
and expression, why should not Imagination (vikalpa) fall under the heading of Real 
Cognition? If, on the other hand, it is devoid of objective substratum, it must be the 
same as unreal cognition. For this reason, says:—‘This does not reach up to Real 
Cognition.’ Why does it not reach up to real cognition? ‘Because, in the absence of an 
objective substratum, &c.’ This shows why it does not fall under the head of real 
cognition. ‘Its action is found to be dependent upon the power of verbal expression 
and knowledge,’ This shows that it does not fall under the head of Unreal Cognition. 

This is the meaning. There being no differences in some particulars, it differs 
in others, while showing some points of similarity. There being no objective 
substratum for either the distinction or the absence thereof, imagination shows an 
unreal image of the substratum ; and it is not, therefore, an act of real cognition. Nor 
is it Unreal Cognition, because it differs from it, in being recognised as such in practice. 

Now gives illustrations taken from the sacred writings. ‘As for example,’ &c., which 
is the subject to be qualified? What is it predicated by? The quality and the thing 
qualified cannot come into relationship if they are not distinct from each other. The cow 
cannot be predicated of a cow; it can only be predicated of something different from 
itself, say Chaitra. 

This is what he says :—Thcre must always be the statement of relationship of one 
to another in predication.’ ‘Predication is the relation between the predicate and the 
predicated.’ In other words, it is the relation between the quality and the thing qualified. 
It is of this that the statement of asentence consists; as in the sentence, ‘This is 
Chaitra’s cow.’ 

Adds another illustration from the sacred writings too :—“ Similarly.” 

He to whom the characteristics of an object (i. e., the essential force which informs 
earth, &c.) are denied is spoken of as such. Who is he? The inactive Purusa. There 
is of course no such characteristic of an object in the Sinkhya teaching as non-existence, 
by which the Puruga may be qualified. 

The reading in some places is, “ The characteristics of an objective substratum are 
denied.” This means as follows:—‘Are denied, means ‘are pervaded by denial,’ i.e., 
they are possessed of the quality of being denied. Or in other words, it means that the 
characteristics of an object are possessed of the quality of being denied. But the char- 
acteristics of an object are not possessed of the quality of the non-existence of something, 


(Go gle 


22 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


because there can be no relation between existence and non-existence, They are, how- 
ever, taken as such (i.e., existing). 

Gives illustrations from the idiom of the world :—“ Bana stands.” As in the sentences, 
‘He cooks,’ ‘He breaks,’ the whole series of the moments of action in which some are 
antecedent and others subsequent, is recognized as being qualified by one effect, so also 
in the sentence ‘ He stands,’ the commentator mentions the same state of antecedence and 
postcedence :—‘ Will stand, has stood.’ 

Well, suppose that the action of cessation of motion consists in antecedent and post- 
cedent moments just like the action of cooking, and that being different from Bana it 
may be predicated of him. For this reason, says:—‘The meaning of the root itself is 
understood by the act of cessation of motion,’ The cessation of motion itself is imagined 
to be the characteristic of an object. Then this fancied characteristic is imagined to 
be a form of positive existence and even there is fancied an order of the precedence 
and postcedence. Such is the series of astonishing fanciful conceptions. Non-existence 
is imagined to be existence, and then it is imagined that it comes after something in 
succession. This fanciful] conception is found in all men, It is not, however, a charac- 
teristic different from the Puruga, so that it might be predicated of him. 

Gives another illustration:—‘ The Puruga has the characteristic of not being 


born.’ 

Many a thinker has held that the modification of imagination is not different 
from real and unreal coguitions. The detail of these illustrations is meant to explain 
the matter to them. 

Siitra 10, 


MATAITA ATA Tafraq ti ou 
waa Abhava, of non-existence, of voidness, wea Pratyaya, the cause, the 


feeling, ween Alamband, substratum wa ic, having for its substratum, or 
support, we: Vrittih, modification, fgt Nidré, deep sleep. 


10. Sleep is the mental modification which has for 
its objective substratum, the cause of non-existence. 


Taran saat) ata arart seraqanieaars | 
Ry Garena | Tae a aa: cat a archaea | s:aaeaeaqcey 
wart A OAT 0 gamaaiway | owe AeA | Tei a ara 
era a kraq see gfraltra fasaiai @ asad agar sean a 
ergata seargaa | agian: ssaaga afer a eg: denser 
Peat | St ae aararracrersaharaeaees Lo I 

VYASA. 

“Sleep is the mental modification which has for its objective sub- 
stratum the cause of non-existence.” And this isa particular kind of 
notion, because it is called back on awakening. How? ‘I have slept 
well, My mind is clear; it renders my intellect bright,’ ‘I have slept 
badly ; my mind is listless; it wanders and is unsteady.’ ‘I have slept 
with great stupidity ; my limbs are heavy; my mind is tired; it stands 
as it were lazy and absent.’ This calling back would certainly not exist 


(Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 10. 23 


on awakening, if there were no recognition of the cause: and there 
would not be memories dependent thereupon and having that for their 
object. Therefore sleep is a particular kind of notion, and further it is 
to be checked in trance like any other modification.—10. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The word ‘ vritti ’ is the subject of discussion and is, therefore, understood by context. 
As there is no difference of opinion among rival thinkers as to Real Cognition, Unreal 
Cognition, Imagination and Memory being mental modifications, the word is not used in 
those places separately for emphasizing the distinction. In the case of sleep, however, 
there is difference of opinion. It has, therefore, to be specially stated that it is a modi- 
fication of the mind. The understanding by context would not serve to emphasize the 
teaching. Therefore the word modification is repeated a second time. 


The non-existence spoken of is of the modifications of the waking and dreaming 
states. The cause (pratyaya) thereof is the darkness (the quality of inertia) which 
covers the light of the intellect (the buddhi, the will-to-know). The mental modification, 
of which this becomes the substratum (that is the objcct), is spoken of as sleep. The 
substance of the will-to-be being possessed of the three qualities, whenever inertia 
appears and overpowers the qualities of essence and disturbing Energy and thus throws 
a veil over all the means of knowledge, then the will-to-know does not put on the shape of 
the object of knowledge, and the purusa, being conscions for the time of the overpowering 
darkness of inertia alone, is said to be sleeping well with consciousness turned inwards, 


Why then this non-existence of the modifications should not be the modification of 
sleep? Why should it not be similar to the states of restraint and perfect freedom 
(kaivalya)? For this reason, says :— 

“ And that is a particular notion, because it is called back on awakening,” 

‘Calling back’ is the remembrance thereof with all its adjuncts. How? When the 
Tamas appears along with the Sattva, the reflection of one who has awakened after sleep, 
is like this:—‘I have slept well; my mind is clear and makes my intellect bright,’ 
Bright means pure. 

When the Tamas appears along with the Rajas, the reflection is similar to what is 
expressed by— 

‘I have slept painfully; my mind is unfit for work.” Why? Because it wanders, 
itis unsteady. 

Then speaks of the reflection of one who awakes after asleep, in which the Tamas 
appears, having to its utmost overpowered the Sattva and the Rajas :— 

‘I have slept very stupidly ; my limbs are heavy ; my mind is tired, lazy and as it 
were absent.’ 

The fact to be proved having been established by the canon of difference, now 
applies the same canon of difference to the cause thereof. 

‘Dependent thereupon means caused by the recognition. ' 

‘Having that for their object,’ means ‘haying the cause of the non-existence of the 
modifications for their object,’ 

The cause is recognized in this way, ‘ This is it.’ 

And it is recognized by him who awakens, i.e,, just on awakening. The meaning 
is that at the time of awakening, the knowledge of the notion exists along with the 
knowledge of the cause of the non-existence of the modifications, 

The question arises : The modifications of Real Cognition, &c., show themselves 
in an outwardly inclined mind; they are, therefore, to be checked, being contrary to 


Go gle 


24 PATANJALTS YOGA. 


a 


trance. Sleep, however, is similar to the modification of one-pointedness ; why then should 
it be contrary to trance ? 

For this reason, says :— 

‘And farther it is to be checked in trance like any other modification.’ The 
meaning is that although it is similar to the modification of one-pointedness, yet it is 
caused by Tamas, and is, therefore, contrary to both the Cognitive and the ultra-cognitive 
trances. 

The meaning is that that too is to be checked. 


Sitra 11. 


AA TATTATATNT: SIs 99 


wr Anubhiita, the objective mental, perceived. fava Vigaya, impressions, 
subjects. we: Asampramosah, not stealing away along, not slipping away. 
efa: Smritib, memory. 

11. Memory is the not stealing away along with objec- 
tive mental impressions (retained) (7. e., the reproducing of 
not more than what has been impressed upon the mind). 

waqatrrarenrane: Saft: | fi veraen Pret ere | aetfeatarreater | 
TRIE: | ASAT ATE arTarercerateerraars |=—|—- TERTTATTNS | 
SARC BASTHASNAaaaa wmengisaiont aft wale | 
aa TeaTacqal ah: | werercqal ea: ar a xa | anraratden 
arnfiaaden @ | wet afiaaden | ammearay epatererceata | 
waiter: aaa: sarataaataahrrerteragaarenras | water a 
FUE FAC AAATMAMT: | TATA | NT Aretae: | YaST Te | 
qeargaa ae | are: gatas | cat eat Tea Pere: | aret Frers 
Samar At Sarkrtarerertatay Aes Wve A 

VYASA., 

Does the mind remember the act of knowing or the object? The 
notion coloured by the object of knowledge shows out both the object 
and the act of knowledge, and thus begins the formation of the habit 
of the same kind. The habit manifests its own cause, and thus generates 
a memory, having the same form and consisting of both the object and 
the act of knowledge. When the manifestation of the act of knowledge 
is the first of the two, the modification is the intellect (buddhi). When 
the appearance of the object of knowledge is the first, it is Memory. 

This memory is two-fold: When the phenomenon to be remember- 
ed has become the very nature of the mind, and when it has not so 
become. In dream it is the former; at the time of waking the latter. 


All these memories are born in sequence of the impressions of Real 
Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagination, Sleep and Memory. Further, 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMAD4]), 11. 25 


all these modifications are of the nature of pleasure, pain and illusion. 
Pleasure, pain and illusion will be described among the afflictions. 
‘Attachment is the sticking to pleasure as such in sequence.’—7. 2. 
‘Aversion is the sticking to pain as such in sequence.’8.—2. Illusion, 
however, is Nescience. All these modifications. are to be checked. It is 


when these have been checked that there comes either the Cognitive or 
the ultra-cognitive trance. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


“ Memory is the not stealing away along with mental impressions.” Memory is the 
not stealing away along with an object which has come into the mind by real cognition, 
&c. It is only the object of knowledge which comes into consciousness by mental habit 
alone and which shines forth into the mind in consequence of the cognition of the cause 
of the habit, that is one’s own. The taking of an object, however, over and above that 
is theft, on account of its similarity with the act. The word ‘pramosha’ is derived from 
the root ‘ mush,’ to steal. 

This is the meaning; Right cognition and others all cause the knowledge of an 
object unknown, either in the ordinary or in some particular way. Memory, however, 
does not pass over the limitation of the former knowledge. It is that former knowledge 
or something less than that which is its object, never something more. This is the dis- 
tinction of memory from other modifications. The question, ‘ Does it remember the no- 
tion or the object ?’ starts this discussion. 

It would appear that the habit generated by an act of knowledge puts into the mind 
the object of knowledge only, because theimpression in the mind is caused by the 
coming in of the object of knowledge : and no mental impression can come into existence 
of itself. Ifthe mental impressions itself were reproduced, it would be the mental 
impression alone (and not the object of knowledge). 

For this reason the author comes to the final conclusion that it is a renembrance of 
both. Because the mental impression (the act of knowledge) tnkes its origin from the 
object of knowledge, the former is coloured by the latter. In reality, however, it 
manifests, é.e., illuminates the form, that is,the appearance of both the object-and the 
act of knowledge. 

That which brings anything into manifestation, is its cause (vyafijaka, manifester), 
Its manifestation is the form thereof. Hence the meaning of the original is, ‘ possessing 
the form of its cause.’ 

The question arises, what is the difference between the memory and the intellect 
(buddhi), if they have the same form as far as their genesis is concerned ? 

For this reason, the author says :—“ When the form of the act of knowledge is the 
first of the two, &c.” 

An act of knowledge consists in the taking in ofan object; and it is not possible 
that there should be the taking in of an object which has already been taken in, f.e., known. 
Hence by this is described the knowing of the yet unknown, which is intellection. It is 
described to be such as the form or appearance of knowledge is the first, i.e, the most 
important factor therein. And although there is no difference in nature, the preponder- 
ance of the quality is established. . 

Memory is described to be that in which the form of the object of knowledge is the 
first or foremost appearance. By the form of the object of knowledge being the first in 
appearance, it is meant that the object of knowledge has already been subjected 


to the operation of the other mental modifications, It is said the field of memory 
4 


Google 


26 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


comprises the mental impressions which have already been subjected to the operation 
of other mental modifications. And this is what is “not stealing along with mental 
impressions.” 

But this stealing exists in memory too. It shows in dream past phenomena impressed 
upon the mind at different times and places, suchas the names, &€., as connected with 
other times and places which have not passed into the mind as such. For this reason, 
he says, ‘It is two-fold.’ 

‘That which has become of the very nature of mind,’ means raised into being by 


mental potency, imagined. This is that in which the object of memory has already been 
made part of the mind. 


The other is that which has not become of the nature of the mind, which is not 
raised out of mental potencies, isnot imagined and is therefore real. 

This is not memory, it ison the contrary unreal cognition, fitting in as it does 
with the definition thereof. It is called memory because it only looks like it, just as what 
looks like real cognition is called real cognition. 

But then why is memory mentioned last of all? 

The reason is given :— ‘ All these memories, &c.’ ‘Impression in sequence’ means 
taking in. Memory is a modification preceded by this taking in. That is to say, the 
genesis of memory is therefrom. 


The question arises that an intelligent man will only check the modifications which 
cause misery to the Puruga, and such are the afflictions, not the modifications as such. 
What then is the object of their suppression ? For this reason, he says :—All these, &c. 
This is easy. 


Satra 12. 


e O_”A’ 
AANAAPAAT ATATA: 22 Ul 


were, Abhydsa, by practice, aareq, Vairdgyébhyaim, by desirelessness, 
unatiachment, «g, Tad, their. faw:, Nirodhah, restraint, control. 
12. They are restrained by practice and desireless- 
ness. 


surat Pera x sara ef | seareadtcrarat afertra: | Rreagtarar- 
wuaraten a ae serra aefe aaa ai ag Saar fas- 
Reaqkar at RerTael | warrard warden adage | at 
dente Reuse: faditinaa | Rasta Reeseta sqeresa eeTA- 
arTraaasrarend: We I 

VYASA. 

Well then, what is the means for restraining them? ‘“ They are 
restrained by practice and desirelessness.” 

The stream of mind flows both ways; flows towards good and it 
flows towards evil. That which flows on to perfect independence 
(kaivalya) down the plane of discriminative knowledge, is named the 
stream of happiness. That which leads to re-birth and flows down the 
plane of undiscriminative ignorance, is the stream of sin. 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 12, 13. 27 


Among these the flow of the desirables is thinned by desirelessness ; 
the flow of discrimination is rendered visible by habituating the mind to 


the experience of knowledge. 
Hence suppression of the mental modification is dependent upon both. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


The Commentator asks the means of restraint. “ Well then, what, &c.” He answers 
by the aphorism :—‘ They are restrained by practice and desirelessness.’ The operation 
of practice and desirelessness on the manifestation of restraint is collective, on account 
of each operating as a branch of fhe other. They are not optional. For this reason he 
says :—‘ The stream of mind fiows both ways, &c.” 

‘ Flows towards’ : The word prdgbhdré in the original means bank, limitation ; and 
the idea is that the stream is so banked, i.c., limited in its flow as to reach the state of 


perfect independence (kaivalya). 
“ Down the plane :” The word ‘nimna’ in the original means down, an inclination 


of the ground, such as makes it possible for water to flow ina particular direction. It 
also means depth, into which water would always flow. 


Siitra 13. 


aa fearat qatseaTa: 23 Ul 


wa, Tatra, of these, there. fe, Sthitau, as regards the steadiness, 
as regards keeping them perfectly restrained. w:, Yatnak, the effort, con- 
tinuous struggle, wee: Abhydsah, (is) what is called practice. 


13. Of these, practice is the effort to secure 


steadiness. 


aa fur aettsare: | Rrrenafener sonraritenfaiterrh: scereit 
Teiqrarearcarag ca AANA SAAT: NLA A 


VYASA. 
Steadiness is the undisturbed calmness of the flow of the mind, 


when it has become free from the modifications. 
Effort to secure-that end is the putting out of energy to secure, and 


aspiration towards that. 
Practice is the resort to the means thereof with the object of attain- 
ing it. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 
Of these, the author describes pratice by stating its nature and object ;‘ Of these, 


practice is the effort to secure steadiness.’ 
The commentator explains the same :—‘ When the mind has become free from the 


modifications :’ is separated from the modifications due to Rajas and Tamas, the flow of the 
modifications of the quality of Essence is established in the shape of calm one-pointedness 


and purity. Thisis steadiness. 
‘ Effort to secure that end,’ is the meaning of the locative case of the word ‘sthiti’ 


used to signify that object. As is the case in the sentence, ‘Charmani dvipinam hanti,’ 
of which the meaning is, ‘Kills the tiger for the sake of the skin,’ 


Google 


28 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


He clears the meaning of effort by giving synonyms : energy, aspiration. He explains: 
—‘ With the object of attaining that’, ‘ That’ here means steadiness, 


He speaks of the field for the action of that energy :—‘ Resort to the means thereof.’ 
The means for the attainment of steadiness are the internal and external Yogas, the 
restraints and observances, &c, The action of the actor is directed towards the means, 
not towards the fruit. 


Siitra 14. 


a g fearaaerasaennraay Cay: uy 8 


a: Sab, that, this, g Tu, and. Wwe, Dirgha-kdla, for along time. fcr 
Nairantarya, without interruption. «wt Satkdra, with devotion, wafer: Asevitah 
being well-attended to. gexf: Dridha, bhfmib, firmly rooted, of firm ground, 
well fixed. 

14. And this is firmly rooted, being well-attended 
to for a long time without interruption and with devo- 


tion. | 
a a frierstcedaenrara wegen | howresraear Peace: 
senate: | aver seraau fern oar a aaa: aenrcaresaht- 
arate | sqearadrentta artrerarakrgeeres rer: ye 
| VYASA, 


‘Well attended to for a long time,” “ well attended to without inter- 
ruption,” “well attended to with devotion,” 1.e, brought about by 
purificatory action (tapas,, by continence, by knowledge and by faith, it be- 
comes firmly rooted with welcome devotion. The meaning is that its opera- 
tion is not then conquered all at once by the outgoing habits of the mind. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


But how can practice secure steadiness, when its operations are opposed by the 
highway robber of outgoing habits, which are in existence from eternity ? He explains :— 
“ And this is firmly rooted, being well attended to fora long time, without interruption 
and with devotion.” 

This practice then reaches the state of firmness, but not at once, inasmuch as being 
possessed of the three qualities, its domain, the appearance of calmness, is often over- 
powered by the habits of outgoing. 

If again, having even had resort to pratice of this description, one gives it up, it 
will be overpowered by lapse of time. Hence it should not be given up. This is the 
meaning. 


9 


Siitra 15. 


eerquisatrrrtacaey asfarcedar Saraq nek tl 


ze Drista, perceptible. wywfes Anuéravika, scriptural. fava Visaya, enjoy- 
ments, fagwe Vitrisnasya, in him or of him who is free from thirst for, were 
Vasikara, supremacy. dw Safijfié consciousness. aay Vairdgyam, desirelessness, 


Google 


Cd. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADBHI), 15. 29 


15. Desirelessness is the consciousness of supre- 
macy in him who is free from thirst for perceptible and 
scriptural enjoyments. 


eurgerfretrratrereeer qeirercere Serer fererswrararieretfiete 
eke fren eqnatenpreaamerarautratrat frecaer Rearker- 
Rrewesnist Rrra featreeite: steamaarqaranfenmarngta- 

RS 
VYASA. 

A mind free from attachment to perceptible enjoyments, such as 
women, foods, drinks, and power, and having no thirst for scriptural en- 
joyables, such as heaven and the attainment of the states of the Videha 
and the Prakritilaya, ‘has, when it comes into contact with such divine and 
worldly objects, a consciousness of its supremacy, due to an understanding 
of the defects of the objects, brought about by virtue of intellectual illumi- 
nation. This consciousness of power is the same as the consciousness of 
indifference to their enjoyment, and is devoid of all desirable and undesir- 
able objects as such. This mental state is desirelessness (Vairdgya). 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


The author describes dgsirelessness :—‘ Desirelessness is the consciousness of 
supremacy in him who is freed from thirst for perceptible and scriptnral enjoyments.” 

He describes the freedom from thirst for intelligent and non-intelligent perceptible 
objects :—‘ women, &c.’ 

Power is lordship. Scripture is the Veda. Those that are known from the Veda are 
scriptural enjoyments, such as heaven, &c. He speaks of desire for them too ‘such as 
“heaven, &c.”’ 

The Videhas are the disembodied, who live only in the vehicles which serve as in- 
struments (of knowledge and action.) The state of the disembodied (vaidehya) is their 
state of existence. 

Others believe the Prakriti only to be the self. They meditate upon the Prakriti. 
They are merged in the functional Prakriti alone. (The functional Prakpiti is that in 
which the state of the equipoise has been disturbed, i.e, not the Malaprakrpiti). The 
state of the Prakpitilaya is their state of existence. 

Scriptural enjoyments consist of the attainment of these states. He who is free from 
thirst for scriptural objects, is the same who is free from the desire of attaining heaven &c, 


The question arises that inasmuch as there is absence of desire even for objects 
that have never been possessed, such absence too would be desirelessness if desireless- 
ness signified only absence of desire. Therefore the commentator says :—‘ when it comes 
into contact with such divine and worldly objects. Desirelessness is not the mere 
absence of desire. On the contrary, it is the consciousness of indifference to enjoyment, 
even though divine and worldly objects be in contact. He renders the same plainer: ‘Is 
devoid of all desirable and undesirable objects as such.’ 

Consciousness of supremacy is the consciousness of indifference, freedom from attach- 
ment or aversion. 


30 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


But then whence does it come? He explains :—‘ By virtue of intellectual illu- 


mination.’ 
The defect of objects is contained in their being surrounded by three-fold pain. 


Intellectual illumination is the full recognition of this fact with the object of removing 
them. By virtue thereof is the understanding of the defects brought about. 

The authorities speak of four stages in the unfoldment of consciousness :—The 
consciousness of endeavour, the consciousness of difference, the consciousness of one 


faculty and the consciousness of supremacy. 
Attachment, &c, are the impurities of the mind. The powers of sensation, action, and 


thought are led by these to work up their several objects. Endeavour is the putting in 
of effort for burning them, so that the powers may not incline to work upon their several 
objects. This is the consciousness of endeavour. 

When the endeavuur has began, some of the impurities are found to be ripe; others 
are being ripened;and others again are going tobe ripened. The consciousness of 
difference consists in differentiating the ripe and the ripening. 

When the powers become incapable of action, the wish alone remains in the mind, 
so faras the ripe ones are concerned. The consciousness of this state is called ‘ the 


consciousness of the one faculty. ' 

When physical and ultra-physical objects of enjoyment take up the position of 
receding, the position of indifference even to the wish, is beyond the three stages of con- 
sciousness, and is called the consciousness of supremacy. The object.of the first three 
having ‘been fulfilled by this alone, they have not been mentioned separately. Thus 


all is plain. 
Siitra 16, 


aa FereaTayaraay tl 2é 


va ‘Tat, that, wy Param, is higher, yew Purusa, of the Puruga, wi: 
Khy&teh, due to the knowledge, we Guya, to the qualities, Say Vaitrispyam, 


indifference. 
16. The same is Higher, when there is indifference 


to the “ qualities, ” due to the knowledge of the Purusa. 

meat qaaeniadreey lzergurrntraatreait from Taq 
ararerd=sghantaatentia say weierneramment Res x 1 ara 
aay AT UTAT asaTanarqary vera ale ari sayleacenate 
aaa | Sta oradiray | eta: tae: gar | Ber Pre valraemmat aen 
fresaimrataad wat a arava ef | erate qerarer acreaq | Taeta 
fe arerfrerh Rarer n te 

VYASA. 

He who sees the defects of the perceptible and scriptural objects of 
enjoyment, is indifferent (to them.) 

He whose Will-to-know is saturated with the notion of the distinc- 
tive nature of the Puruga, brought about by the purity of the effort to 
know him, becomes indifferent to the ‘ qualities,’ both in their manifested 


and unmanifested state. 


Go gle 


OH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI) 16. 31 


There are two forms of desirelessness. Of these the latter is but the 
light of spiritual knowledge. When this light shines, discrimination 
arises. Then the Yogi thinks thus:—Whatever was to be obtained has 
been obtained. The afflictions that were to be destroyed have been 
destroyed. The fast-jointed chain of life which, when it is not broken, 
there is or occurs birth after death and death after birth, has been broken. 
Desirelessness is but the highest perfection of spiritual knowledge ; and 
absolute independence (kaivalya) is nothing else. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having described the Lower desirelessness, the author now describes the Higher : 
“The same is Higher when there is indifference to the ‘qualities,’ due to knowledge of 
the Puruga.” 


He shows that Lower desirelessness is the antecedent to the Higher, and that it is the 
entrance to that. Lower Desirelessness is shown by the words, “‘ he who sces the defects 
of perceptible and scriptural objects of enjoyment, is indifferent to them.” 


“ Brought about by the effort to know the Purusa;” the knowledge of the Puruga 
is his recognition by means of the Veda, by inference and by the teaching of the masters. 
The‘ effort to know’ consists in the repeated resort to the means. The purity of the 
knowledge consists in the steady flow of the quality of essence (sattva), due to the 
removal of active disturbance (rajas) and inertia (tamas). This brings about the recogni- 
tion of the distinct natures of the Puruga and the “ qualitics.". The Puruga is pure 
and infinite. The ‘qualities’ are contrary thereto. The Yogi whose intellect is saturat- 
ed by the recognition, is spoken of as such. The trance known as the Cloud of Virtue 
is spoken of here, 


Such a Yogi is entirely free from attachment to the ‘qualities,’ whether possessing 
the characteristic of the manifested or the unmanifested ; so much so that he is free from 
attachment even to the mental phenomenon of the recognition of the distinct nature of the 
Objective Essence and the Puruga, which itself is a manifestation of the qualities. 


Thus there are two forms of desirelessness. The former desirelessness exists when 
the mental essence (sattva) has been rendered free from inertia (tamas), by the mani- 
festation of its essential nature (the sattva), but there stil] remains a trace of the dirt 
of disturbing energy (rajas). 

This view is common to the Taustikas, those who are addicted to enjoyment in the 
states. Itis by that of course that they become Prakritilayas. So it has been said :— 
‘One becomes a Prakritilaya by desirelessness.’ 

The last of the two is but the light of knowledge. By the use of the word ‘ but’ it is 
indicated that in that state no objects of knowledge exist. The mental essence as it 
exists in that state is similar to the same, but is besides untainted by the least impurity, 
of Disturbing Energy (rajas). It is therefore said to be the. light of knowledge. Mental 
Essence is by nature purity: but it puts on impurity by the taint of disturbing energy 
(rajas) and inertia (tamas). When the impurities of rajas and tumas have been washed 
away by the pure showers of desirelessness and practice, it becomes highly illuminated, 
and the light of spiritual knowledge is left there alone. 

He shows that in that state the ‘qualities’ become unworthy of acceptance :—‘ When 
this light shines, discrimination arises in the Yogi.’ The meaning is that the Yogi be- 
comes possessed of the present discriminative knowledge, when other forms of knowledge 
have disappeared. 


(So gle 


32 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


What was to be obtained, i.e., perfect independence (kaivalya) has been obtained. 
As will be said, ‘ the wise man becomes free while living.’ The meaning is that this takes 
place because residual potencies only remain with their root cut off. How is it that all 
that had to be attained, has been attained? Because the affiictions of Nescience, &c, 
which had to be removed, have been removed together with their residual aroma. 

But then there is the store of virtue and vice which is used as a chain to bind living 
beings to birth and death in the universe. How then can there be absolute freedom ? 
For this reason, the commentator says :—‘The fast-jointed chain, &c., is broken.’ The 
‘ fast-jointed chain ’ means that whose joints are so firmly and closely fastened together 
that they appear to be one whole and do not appear to have been fastened together. It 
is the pieces of virtue and vice stored, which, as individual pieces in the collection, are 
put together to make the fast joints of a chain, ‘The chain of existence ' implies that the 
living being is not freed from the bonds of birth and death. This chain is broken when 
the afflictions have been done away with. And so it has been said :— 

‘The vehicle of actions has its root in nescience.’—2.12. 

‘It bears fruit if there is a root.’ - 2.18. 

It may be questioned, that inasmuch as restraint is the intermediate stage between 
the fruition of intellection and the Cloud of Virtue, what is this that is called the mere 
light of knowledge ? 

For this reason, he says :—‘ Desirelessness is the highest perfection of spiritual know- 
ledge?’ The Higher desirelessness is but a form of the Cloud of Virtue, nothing else. As 
will be said further on. 

‘To him who deéBires nothing even from intellection (prasankhydna) comes the trance 
known as the Cloud of Virtue, by constant manifestation of discrimination (IV. 29.) and 

‘Then the knowable is but little, because knowledge is infinite, free as it is from all 
veils and impurities.’—(IV. 81). 

For this reason it is that absolute independence is this and nothing else.—16. 


Sitra 17. 


facta frartraeahaareasaqareessrattt: th 89 


fang Vitarka, of philosophical curiosity. few< Vichara, of meditation, ‘weg 
Ananda, of elation. www Asmit&, egoism. «1 Rupa, appearences, wR 


2 : 


Anugamat, by the accompaniment, by the company of, is accompanied by. rw: 
Samprajfiatah, the cognitive trance. 


17. The Cognitive Trance is accompanied by the 
appearances of philosophical curiosity, meditation, elation 
and egoism. 

wards Preakrage: waged eorere: aarftefttr | frarhirar- 
uaraihaaraqararenmara: | &ahRraareat eyes urant: | qa 
rare: | ataatera: | cariorarataaita | aw camarquatgua: aarkte 
efrert: faditn Redfern afrarceqéa Renin: ane: agter- 
fanetstnarary ef | aa Ta Grewal: Gang: W 9 A 

VYASA. 


Now then, how is the Cognitive Trance said to appear in those 
whose minds have been restrained by the two means? ‘The Cognitive 


(SO gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 17. 33 


Trance is accompanied by the appearances of philsophical curiosity medi- 
tation, elation, and egoism. ’ 


Philosophical curiosity (vitarka) is a superficial attempt of the mind 
to grasp any object. 


Meditation is a subtle attempt. Elation is bliss. Egoism is the 
consciousness of being one with the self. 


Of these, the first is the Savitarka Trance accompanied by all the 
four. The second is the Meditative (Savichara) where indistinctness ends. 
The third is Elative ‘Sananda) where meditation ends. The fourth is 
the purely egoistical (Sasmité) where elation ends. All these trances have 
something to grasp (Alambana). 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having described the means, the commentator now puts a question with the object of 
introducing the description of the acquisition they lead to, together with that of its 
various classes :—‘ Now then how is the Cognitive Trance, &c.’ The Cognitive Trance is 
accompanied by the appearances of philosophical curiosity, meditation, elation, and egoism. 

The Cognitive Trance is first described because it precedes the ultra-cognitive. 
The general nature of the Cognitive Trance is to be understood in the accompaniment of 
the natures, i.e., the forms, of philosophical curiosity, meditation, elation and egoism. 

He defines philosophical curiosity :—‘ A superficial attempt of the mind, &c.’ Grasp 
(&4bhoga) is the manifestation of consciousness consisting of the illumination of the nature 
of objects. It is called ‘Superficial’ because it has the gross phenomena for its sphere of 
action. As the new archer first aims at large objects only, and then at smaller and smaller 
ones by and by, so the neophyte in Yoga first learns the nature of gross objects of thought 
only, such as those made of the five Mahabhutas (physical states of matter), the four- 
armed god, &c.; and then the subtle ones. 

In this way the grasp of the objects by the mind becomes subtle. Meditation has 
for ita sphere of action, the causes of the gross phenomena, the subtle elements, the five 
tanmatras, the manifested and the unmanifested essence of matter (the liaga and the 
alinga). 

Having thus shown the range of the objective phenomena, he now shows the range of 
the instrumental phenomena :—‘ Elation is, &c.’ Elation is that blissful modification of 
consciousness, which consists in the illumination of the mind, as regards the acts of 
sensation, with gross phenomena for their objects. The nature of the powers of sensation 
is to enlighten, because they are born out of the principle of individuality, with the 
quality of essentiality (Sattva) predominating. Pleasure is a manifestation of the quality 
of Essentiality (Sattva). Acts of sensation too are therefore of the nature of pleasure. 
The manifestation of consciousness consisting of the illumination of this aspect is bliss. 

He describes the Cognitive Trance having the subject (Grihitri): for its sphere of 
action :—‘ Egoism is the consciousness of being one with the self.’ Hgoism is the subtle 
cause of the instramental powers inasmuch as they are born out of it; and this egoism 
appearing as the self, the subject is the consciousness of being one with the self. This 
Cognitive Trance has the subject for its sphere of action, because the subject is always 
hidden behind egoism. 

He mentions other minor differences of all the four :—‘ The first, &c.’ The cause is 
always present in the effect, as its antecedent state; not so the effect in the cause, 

5 


Go gle 


34 PATANJALIT’S YOGA. 


Therefore, this superficial range of consciousness is accompanied by all the four—the 
gross and its causes, the subtle, the instrumental and the subjective. The others have 
three, two and one cause, respectively as their spheres of action, and they have therefore 


three, two and one appearance, respectively. 
He distinguishes the ultra-cognitive :—‘ All these, &c.’ 


Sitra 18, 


TAMA: FERTTTST: WAs 


fees Virdma, of cessation, see praty4bhasa, the notion. wr: Parvah the 
former, the preceeding, all the three together means having for its preceding the 
notion of cessation, preceded by the notion of cessation, #er-3e: Samskara 
Sesab, in which remain only the (%* ) residual potencies or impressions. (#ew<) 

wa: Anyab, the other, 
18. Preceded by the constant repetition of the notion 


of cessation is the other; in which the residual potencies 
only remain. 


waretea: ake: Peayara: Perarar af | Rrcraverarearenqe: <- 
eaTtase: | aagfareraay dear Aitrafawer aarrcerenc: | 
aer at Atrenqaa: | Grave ears: acarqara a Hera xfer Aeraserar 
Pracqe sort feat 1 a arigqen | anaraqdé & Bred. Praserarar- 
CENTRAL ATA CAT MRT: TATETSTSTNT ET? HRS 

VYASA. 

What now are the means and the nature of the ultra-cognitive 
trance? “Preceded by constant repetition of the notion of cessation is 
the other in which the residual potencies only remain.” 

The ultra-cognitive trance is that state of mental restraint, in which 
all its modifications cease from action and remain only zn posse. Its 
means is the Higher desirelessness. 

Inasmuch as any form of practice having an objective phenomenon 
for its basis, cannot become the means of achieving it, the notion of 
cessation which is nothing substantial, is here made the basis; and that 
is devoid of any objective phenomenon. By the constant repetition of 
this notion, the mind having no object to grasp, becomes as it were, 
non-existent. The trance being thus seedless, is the ultra-cognitive. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The commentator asks a question to introduce the ultra-cognitive, whose discussion 
is now in order :—‘ What now, &c.’ 

“ Preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cessation is the other, in which 
the residual potencies only remain.” 

The words, ‘ preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cessation,’ show 
the means; the remaining words deseribe the'nature. The words, ‘in which the residual 
potencies only remain,’ are explained as, ‘in which al] its modifications cease, &c;' 


(So gle 


CH. ft. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 18, 19. 35 


The words, ‘preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cessation,’ are 
explained by the words, ‘Its means is the Higher desirelessness.’ 

Cessation is the absence of mental modifications. Its notion is the cause. Its prac- 
tice consists in its repetition over and over agam. That which this repetition precedes 
is described as such. 

Now he says why the lower desirelessness does not become the cause of restraint 
(nirodha) :—‘ Inasmuch as any form of practice having an objective phenomenon as its 
basis, &c.' 

The cause must be of the same class as the effect, not of a contrary class. The 
desirelessness which has an objective phenomenon for its basis is contrary to the effect ; 
the trance, that is to say, which has no object for its basis. It is therefore proper that 
it should be born only from a cause which has no objective phenomenon for its basis, the 
mere light, that is to say, of spiritual knowledge. It is only the trance known as the 
Cloud of Virtue, born as it is from the pure essence of the Will-to-know with the impuri- 
ties of the rajas and the tamas entirely removed, and the objects thereof left behind, 
that is infinite, sees the defects of objects and having given them all up, stands in its 
own nature, that can properly become the cause, as having no object for its basis, of the 
seedless trance, in which the residual potencies only remain ; because they are similar 


in nature. 

‘Is made the basis’ :—is made dependent upon that. 

Becomes as it were non-existent :—because it dues not produce any effect in the shape 
of mental modifications. 


The seedless is that which has no object for its basis. Or, it may be said that the 
seed consists of the vehicles of afflictions and actions. This is said to be the seedless, 
because the afflictions and actions have gone out of it. 


Satra 19. 


waren egrHaaararsy i ee ti 


wa Bhava, the objective existence. 4: pratyayah, the cause, t.¢., caused 


by objective existence. fagy-vaftearmy Videha-prakritilayanim, to the videhas 
( the gods ) and the prakritilayas that merged (**) in nature "aff. 


19. Is caused by Objective Existence for the 
Videhas and Prakritilayas. 

a aoa fra: | sare waneraga | eatararerat aerate | 
waren Rteratrearny | Atert tarat waves: | a & waerenramit- 
qaa frda Haerqeftrarguaa: caaentcaash aursndianarareatea | 
aa swelaear aftret aa cefacta faarairagaaita | areca 
qacradashrenrcannterenerie a 88 t 

VYASA. 

This is of two descriptions :—brought about by Objective Existence 
and brought about by the practice of the means. In the case of Yogis 
it is brought about by the practice of the means. In the case of the 
Videhas and the Prakritilayas it is caused by Objective Existence. 


Go gle 


36 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


In the case of the Videhas, the gods, it is caused by Objective 
Existence, because they enjoy a state of something like absolute freedom 
(kaivalya) with a mind functioning only so far as its own residual poten- 
cies aré capable of, and who while thus enjoying, live out the state 
of life, which is the fruition of their residual potencies. 


Similarly do the Prakritilayas enjoy a state of quasi-isolation with 
a mind which has its work still before it, but which remains merged in 


the Prakritis, as long as it does not come back by virtue of the work still 
before it. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now the author describes a sub-head of the Inhibitive Trance, being necessary as it 
is for deciding which is to be adopted and which to be rejected :—‘ This,’ the inhibitive 
trance, ‘is of two descriptions,’—caused by the practice of the means of achievement 
and brought about by Objective Existence. 


The means are faith, &c., to be described later. That which is brought about by 
these means, is the inhibitive trance so spoken of. 


That in which living beings are born is Objective Existence. It is Nescience. The 
modification of consciousness which consists in the identification of the not-self,—the 
forms consisting of the elements and the powers of sensation and action and the Pra- 
kpitis, known as the M@laprakpiti, the Mahat, the Ahankfra and the five tanmftras,— 
with self appears in the Taugtikas who have attained the states of the lower desireless- 
ness. This notion about the Objective Existence, becomes the antecedent of one descrip- 
tion of the Inhibitive Trance, This is spoken of as having been brought about by Objec- 
tive Existence. 

Out of these two the one brought about by effort, is for the Yogis, who work for 
freedom from Objective Existence. By the mention of this distinction the other is denied 
to those who follow the path of absolute freedom (Mokga). 

Well then, in whom is it caused by Objective Existence? The reply is given by 
the aphorism :—‘Is caused by Objective Existence in the case of the Videhas and the 
Prakritilayas.’ 

The Videhas and the Prakrpitilayas are distinct from each other. The meaning is 
that this trance is so caused for both of them. 

The author explains this :—‘ For the Videhas it is caused by, &c.’ 

Those who recognize either of the elements or the powers of sensation, action and 
thought as the self, and so constantly devote themselves to them, that their internal 
organ is fully saturated with that idea, remain, after separation from the body, immersed 
in the same elemental, sensuous and functional forms ; and all that remains of their mind 
is the habit of their particular devotion. They are called the Videhas (the disembodied) 
because they are free from the physical bodies. It is they who, with a mind capable of 
moving only along the line marked by habit, enjoy a state of something like absolute 
freedom, but are without the physical bedy. This state resembles the state of absolute 
independence, because the modifications of the mind are suspended for the time being. 
It however differs from absolate freedom, in the possession of the power of having to 
perform work still to be done. 

The reading in some places is “ upabhoga” instead of “upayoga’’ in the text. Upa- 
bhoga means enjoyment. The meaning of this alternative reading would be that the 
residual alone are the objects of enjoyment and not the modifications, 


Google 


Cg. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHM), 19, 20. 37 


When the limit has been reached they live out the state of life which is the fraition 
of their residual potencies. They come back to be born again. So says the Vayu 
Purana :—- 

“Those who devote themselves to meditation upon the powers of sensation, action 
and thought, live in this state for ten Manwantaras. Those who devote themselves to the 
elements live in that state for full one hundred Manwantaras.” 


Similar are Prakpitilayas. They believe one of the Prakritis, the unmanifested (Mala- 
prakpiti), the undifferentiated phenomenal (Mahat), and the principle of individuality, 
to be the self. Their internal organs are saturated with the idea of devotion to 
either of the Prakpitis. They are immersed after their separation from the physical 
body, in the one of these Prakritis, which thoy have made the object of their devotion. 


But their minds have not yet fulfilled the object of their existence ; they have still work 
before them. 


The mind would fulfil the object of its existence, if while following this very course 
of thought, it would also manifest the discrimination of the distinct natures of the 
Puruga and objective existence. If on the other hand this consciousness be not generat- 
ed in the mind, it has not fulfilled its object, and is therefore said to have its work still 
before it. The Prakritilayas having their minds merged in the Prakritis, with its work 
still undone, enjoy a state of something like absolute freedom as long as they do not come 
back by virtue of the work yet to be done. Although the mind has become similar to the 
Prakriti, yet they come back when the limit has been reached. Then they acquire the 
consciousness of the distinct natures of the Puruga and the objective existence. As 
on the cessation of the rainy season, the body of the frog is assimilated to the earth, 
and comes back to life again on coming into contact with rain-water, (so does the mind of 
the Prakritilaya). So says Vayu :— 


“For a thousand Manwantaras, the Abhiméanikas, those who identify themselves 
with the Prakpitis ; and for ten thousand Manwantaras the Buddhas remain without pain. 
Those who devote themselves to the Unmanifested remain in that state for a hundred 
thousand Manwantaras. The computation of time does not exist on reaching the Nirguna 
Puruga.” 


Thus this state also is given up, being subject to re-births. 


TALITY UW Ro tt 


wgt Sraddhé, faith. 4 Virya, energy. f% Smriti, memory, waft Samadhi 
trance. mm Prajfid, discernment. we: Pairvakab, having before, preceded by. 
qaeery itaresdm, for others, 
20. For others it is preceded by faith, energy, 
memory, trance and discernment. 


TAS aaArhorargad LALIT | TATA Arrat wafer | erat 
Gere: Serarg: | are wate Heart Arka ote ter erqarsten Prereet- 
faar draquarad | aqraadaer satreatsa ararrenat a Rrearge 
anni | aarkatae seean sarada | aa aad geq arate | az- 
vararaaiarare Scrarqesreara: earner tl Re ti 


Sitra 20 


Go gle 


38 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


a 


VYASA. 

It is brought about by the means of achievement for the Yogis. 
Faith is the pleasing wishful contact of mind with the object of 
pursuit. It sustains the Yogi, like a mother. Energy is born in him who 
pursues knowledge with faith. Memory comes to help when he is possess- 
ed of energy. On the appearance of memory, the mind ceases to be. 
disturbed and passes into trance. When the mind is entranced, discri- 
mination appears, by which it knows an object asitis. By constant 
practice thereof and by desirelessness with reference to the object thereof, 


comes the ultra-cognitive trance. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 

The author describes the sequence of the means of the achievement of this trance 
by a Yogi :—“ For others it is preceded by faith, energy, memory, trance and discernment, ” 

But the devotees of the powers of sensation, action and thought are also possessed 
of faith. For this reason he says :—‘ Faith is the pleasing wishful contact of the mind with 
the object of pursuit,’ and the object of the pleasing wishful pursuit of the mind here 
is the ultra-cognitive trance, as it comes into existence with reference thereto, after the 
nature of the objective world has been known by the Veda, by inference and by the 
teaching of the masters. There can be no wishful contact in the case of those who 
confound the powers of sensation, &c., with the self. In their case it is the opposite of the 
pleasing wishful contact, because their confusion has its origin in all-round forgetfulness. 
The powers of sensation, &c., cannot thus be objects of faith. 

He explains why that alone is faith :—‘ It sustains the Yogi like a kind mother.’ The 
meaning is that it does not let him fall down inthe wrong path, leading to the destruc- 
tion of its object. 

It is this particular wishfulness which gives birth to energetic effort guided towards 
the object wished for. Therefore he says :—‘ Energy is born in him when he pursues know- 
ledge with faith. ’ 

Memory means keeping it present in the mind, thinking thereupon. ‘Undisturbed ’ 
means ‘not only occasionally steady, not distracted.’ 

“Passes into trance” :—Trance is here the trance which is described as a branch of 
Yoga. The restraints and observances also are indicated, inasmuch as trance is 
mentioned there as coming after them. Thus he who has made all the branches of Yoga 
his own, reaches the stage of cognitive trance. This is what he says:—“‘ When the 
mind is entranced.'’ That is to say, when the highest limit of intellection is reached. 

He explains that the ultra-cognitive is born when the cognitive precedes it :—‘ By 
the constant practice thereof and by desirelessness with reference to the objects thereof 
at each stage comes the ultra-cognitive trance.’ It is that which is the means of achieving 
absolute freedom. Because the suppression which comes after the mainfestation of the 
knowledge of the distinct nature of the Puruga and the will to-know, is the final sup- 
pression which renders it unnecessary for the mind to go on working; inasmuch as it 
has now done the whole of its work and fulfilled the purpose of its existence. 

Satra 21. 


7 Re ll 

am Tivra, keef. #1 Sarnvega, the consciousness of supremacy, #mdaarry 
Tivra samvegéném, for those having consciousness of supremacy, for the 
extremely energetic. ‘wen: Asannah, proximate, speedy. 


@ 


(30 gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 21, 22. 39 


21. Proximate for those whose consciousness of 
supremacy is keen. 


a ag waar wate | aqaeatrarsitara water | waar wyrwTar 
mearrashrariara xf) aa ararakers: 1 ageair weenie 
afer | ater aeatarcearsRraritara ef | vartrarsitararat frererarrararae: 
aattienn aartined a ara W 22 8 


VYASA. 


There are nine descriptions of such Yogis. Their application to the 
means of achievement is mild, middling or intense. Thus some are of 
mild energy, others of medium energy, and others again of intense 
energy. Of these, the mildly energetic are three-fold, those having mild 
consciousness of supremacy, those having middling consciousness of 
supremacy, and those having keen consciousness of supremacy. Simi- 
larly, those of medium energy and those of intense energy. Of these, 
the attainment of trance and the fruit of trance are near to those who 
are intensely energetic in their application to the means of achievement 
and possess a keen consciousness of supremacy. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


If faith, &c., are the means for the attainment of trance, then trance and its fruit 
would accrue to all without distinction. Attainment however is noticed in some only, 
non-attainment in others. In some cases attainment is distant; in others it is very 
distant ; in other cases however it is accomplished very soon. To meet this the Commen- 
tator says :—‘ There are nine descriptions of such Yogis, &c.' 

The means of achievement are faith, &c. They are of mild, middling and intense 
energy in their application, by virtue of the habits of previous lives. The Yogis possessed 
of them are spoken of as such. 

Consciousness of supremacy is desirelessness. That also is mild, middling or keen by 
virtue of the habits of previous lives. 

Among these Yogis, the speedy attainment is shown such as it is by the Aphorism :— 
It is near to those who are possessed of keen consciousness of supremacy. This much is the 
aphorism; the rest is the commentary. The fruit of thelcognitive trance is the ultra- 


cognitive, and of that absolute freedom. 
Sitra 22. 


aeeatrarsraraar sea Frere: az tt 


gg Mridu, mild. wa Madhya, middling. wirwa Adhimatra, intense, ygwen- 
ferret Mridumadhyadhimatratvat, by mild, middle and intense natures, aa: 
Tatah, thence, further. ‘fi Api, also, (further). fa": Vigehsah, differentiation. 


22. A further also differentiation by mild, middl- 
ing and intense. 


Google 


40 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


ayrentrarrearansh ae | ager merdrensrarraeer ef | 


VYASA. 
Mild-intense, middling-intense and intense-intense. There is differ- 
entiation by that too. By that differentiation too the attainment of trance 
and its fruit becomes the speediest in the case of one whose application 


is intense and whose consciousness of supremacy is keenly intense. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
This has been explained by explanations already given of the commentary. 
Sfitra 23. 


SacaUTATAT| AT Wh RR 


ter fivara, of God. xfer Pranidhdna, feeling omnipresence or worship, 
devotion, tycsfrwem fdvaraprapidhanat, by feeling the omnipresence of God. 
@w vA, or. 


23. Or, by feeling the omnipresence of God (Is- 
wara). 


aaetarraa: amraafs 1) wueenm vara eikaraar 
a af | Saccitrarrar | sitrarargintraerratta Sacenazgreritrea- 
wart | aahrearaarsat aa mena: amen aating a 
aan VYASA 


Does trance become speedier of attainment in this way only ? Or, 
is there any other means too? ‘Or, by feeling the omnipresence of God.’ 
iSwara drawn towards him by the kind of devotion which consists in the 
feeling of His omnipresence, becomes gracious to him by merely wishing 
attainntent. By His merely wishing the attainment, trance and its fruit 
become speedier of attainment for a Yogi. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

The Commentator puts a question for the purpose of introducing the next aphor- 
ism :—'Does trance become speedier, &c.’ The aphorism is the answer. ‘Or, by feeling 
the omnipresence of God. ’ 

‘Feeling the omni-presence’ means a particular kind of devotion of the mind, speech 
and body. “Drawn towards" means brought face to face. “Wish for attainment ” means 
that any one may get something which he has not got, but which is desirable. ‘Merely’ 
signifies not by any other effort. The rest is easy.—23. 

Siitra 24. 


BUHAATHTMATTTTE: FeaaNs FAT: VV 


a2 Klega, of affliction, #4 Karma, of action. fae Vip&ka, of fruition. 
ama: Agayaib, by the vehicles. ways: Aparfmrigtab, not touched. gwefaer: 
Puryasa, Visesah, a distinct Puraga. tq: tévarab, God. 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADA)I), 24. 4) 


24. Igwara is a distinct Purusa, untouched by the 
vehicles of affliction, action and fruition. 


 arsaatoartr arate | a erenaRrareneneceerg Es 
So say oti BM: | PlSsHeh Hater | acne Pave: | 
ATFTMATAAT WiWAred A AAR qdarar: gee aakkqaad | a ie aenvet 
Aref | var ea qawan at arerg adara: eanftrin erate Ot arta Arh- 
qe: @ ges fae bac | Saat orarait afar aaa: Salsa: 1 a 
oftits seca Bat hacd sreat hacea ws atarat a yar a ares ger 
FR qarerqwhis: Taras vadbacer | qa ar wafadiaedtacr aerarizs 
gare Aadbacer | & g ata Ym Aoac xf | USAT THETCANAAATAT- 
fracer apafis sent @ fi amitre aéiateitre eft | ver aren A. 
req | aret oa: PH Ard vecarahirag 1 cate matesarthacered 
TAATAATTATT: Sara | CTA aaa: Beg Aw ae | Ta Te: 
erat arena ey | A avateaatate cafe 1 atari 
SMSTT TAG | THTTT wre iftaaer @ deat eft | a a acaarait- 
aya HAE TMeqerNeHheeareniaase4 ta 
wen Rrertirarcen srrenreaterearerrg ae Mere | TET THT TCR 
stihl a i, 
a gay fate ef ae 


VYASA. 


Now who is this called Igwara (God) that is neither the Mala- 
prakriti (the root of matter) nor the Puruga (the conscious principle of the 
human constitution)? ‘Iéwara isa distinct Purusa, untouched by the 
vehicles of affliction, action and fruition.’ 

The afflictions are Nescience and others. The actions are good or 
bad. Their fruition is the effect they bring about. Habits following them 
in their qualifications are the vehicles. These while really existing in 
the mind, are attributed to the Purusa, as he is the ehjoyer of their fruit, 
just as victory or defeat of the soldiers is attributed to their master. He 
who is not touched by this experience, is the distinct Purusa, Idwara. 


Are all those then who have reached the state of absolute freedom 
Idwaras and there are many such for they have reached the state of 
absolute freedom after cutting the three bonds? No, I’wara never had, 
nor will have, any relation to these bonds. As former bondage is known in 
the case of the emancipated, not so in the case of Idwara. Or, as future 
bondage is possible in the case of the Prakryitilayas, not so in the case of 
Iéwara. He is ever free, ever the Lord. 

6 


Google 


42 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Is there any, or, is there no reason for this supremacy of the Lord, un- 
limited by time, and due to His taking up the Universal Supreme Essence? 
The reason for that is the sacred teaching. What-then is the authority 
of the teaching? The authority is the supremacy of His Universal 
Essence. These two, the supremacy and the sacred teaching, exist in 
the Universal Essence of Iéwara eternally related to each other. For this 
reason does it become possible that He is ever free, and ever the Lord. 


And this divinity of His is free from excess or equality. It is not 
exceeded by another divinity. Whichever is the Highest, must he the 
divinity Idwara. For this reason wherever there is the culmination 
of this divinity that is Iswara. 


Nor is there any divinity equal to that. Because, in the case of 
equality, if one of the two equals says with reference to a common object 
of their attention, ‘let this be new,’ and the other says, ‘ let this be old,’ 
then one thing only necessarily happening, unrestrained fulfilment of the 
wish is interfered with, and one becomes less than the other. Further it 
cannot be that two equals should at once possess an object desired hy 
both. Because the wishes are contradictory. Hence he alone is Ixwara 
whose divinity is free from equality or excess, and He is -a ‘distinct 


Purusa.— 24. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The world is made of the conscious and the unconscious principles only. There is 
none else that goes to make it, If Iswara is unconscious, He must be the Malaprakriti, 
comprehending as it does all the non-intelligent modifications. If this be so, then there 
can be no such thing, by reason of his being non-intelligent that he should be brought face 
to face with the devotee, If, on the other hand, he is intelligent, then too it is impossible 
that he should be brought face to face with the devotee, because the power of conscious- 
ness is by nature indifferent, and because iswara is not like other Purugas in evolution, 
on account of the absence of any connection with the principles of egoism, &c. Further- 
more how is it possible that he should possess a wish for the attainment (of trance by the 
devotee) ? 


This is the meaning of the question, now who is this iswara, &c.? The answer to the 
question is given by the aphorism :—‘ igwara is a distinct Purusa untouched by the 
vehicles of affliction, action and fruition.’ 


Nescience (avidy4&) and others are the afflictions (kle#as), so called, because they 
afflict the Purusa in evolution with various painful blows. Good and bad actions are 
virtue and vice. They are called. actions metaphorically because they are born from 
actions, Their fruition consists in life-state, life-period and life-experience, The vehicles 
are so called, because by their means the residue which show themselves as fruitions, are 
embedded as potencies in the substance of the mind, 

As long as the karma which brings about the manifestation of the life-state of 
a camel does not bring into play the potencies of the experience which having been 
generated by previous existence, are suited to the life-state of a camel, the experience 
suited to the life-state of a came] cannot be caused. Therefore there must be a potency 


Google 


C8. tf. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 24. 43 


causing thé subsequent experience of the life-state of a camel, and it must be possessed 
of qualities similar to the experience of the life-state of a camel. 


Another question arises. What is the use of adding the words, untouched ‘by the 
vehicles of affiction, action and fruition’ in the aphorism, seeing that afflictions, &c., are 
the characteristics of the Will-te-be, and that they never touch the Puruga and there- 
fore the mere use of the word Puruga would have implied that he was untouched by 
them ? For this reason, he says :—‘ These while really existing in the mind are attributed 
to the Purusa’ in evolution. Why? Because he is the enjoyer, the intelligent agent of 
their fruit. Hence it is possible that iswara being a Puruga might come to be consider- 
ed as having some relation to these. For this reason their special denial of Him is 
proper. Therefore he says that the distinct Puruga who is not touched by the experience 
present in the Will-to-be even, is Idwara. 


‘ Distinct’ is that which is distinguishable. He is differentiated from the other 
Purusas. With the object of showing those who are taken out of the conception of the 
word iswara by the use of the word ‘ distinct,’ he first states an objection and then replies: — 
‘ All those then who have reached the state of absolute freedom. There are three kinds of 
bondages,—the bondage of the Prikritic modifications in the case of the Videhas, the bond- 
age of the Prakritis in the case of the Prakrpitilayas, and the bondage of honour, &c., in 
the case of those who experience the divine and worldly enjoyments. Those whose mind 
are saturated with devoted thought of the Prakpitis, reach the state of submersion into 
the Prakrpitis immediately after separation from the physical body. For this reason 
the others are spoken of as being bound at the previous end (of the chain of life) and 
the Prakpitilayas are spoken of as being bound only at the next, the fature end only; the 
previous and the second bondages being denied to them. Thus he shows the distinction in 
brief :—‘ He is always free, always the Lord.’ 


Divinity consists in the possession of knowledge and the power of action (Kriya Sakti). 
In this connection he puts the question :—‘ Has this supremacy of the Lord, unlimited by 
time, &c.’ The reason forthe question is that knowledge and power of action are not 
possible to the unchanging constant power of consciousness. It has been said that they 
live in the purified mental essence, when the rajas and the tamas have been removed. 
Further, itis not proper that Iswara who is ever free should become related even to 
the Highest Mental Essence, which after all has its origin in Nescience, as an owner to the 
thing owned. 

For this reason it is said that it is due ‘ to his taking the Universal Supreme Essence 
in hand.’ The relation of iiwara to the Essence of the mind isnot due to Nescience 
like that of ordinary Purusas; and there is therefore no sense of ownership in it. On the 
other hand he takes the Universal Mental Essence in hand thinking that he will thus give 
freedom to men surrounded by the three sorts of pain, and rescue them, being drowned 
as they are in the great ocean of birth after death, by teaching them Virtue and giving 
them knowledge; and that this teaching is not possible without the possession of the 
bighest power of action and knowledge ; and that this cannot be possible without taking 
in hand the mental Essence, pure and freed from the dirt of the disturbing energy 
(rajas) and inertia (tamas). The Lord even though untouched by Nescience, and 
conscious of knowledge, assumes the nature of Nescience, and becomes the possessor 
thereof. He does not devote Himself to Nescience as Nescience. A mimic personating 
R&ma shows all his actions but all the while does not forget himself. This form ofhis 
is assumed, not real. 

Let it beso. Inasmuch, however, as Iswara has to take up the Mental Essence 
(sattva), on account of the wish of helping the afflicted, and the wish tohelp is caused by 
the taking up of Mental Essence, because the wish itself is a modification of the Malaprs- 


(Go gle 


44 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


kriti, the relation of mutual support is evident, To remove this misconception he says 
that he is unlimited by time. It might be so if creation came first and the wish to help 
manifested afterwards.- But the arrangement of successive creation and dissolution being 
eternal, iswara draws the world inwards, having first made up his mind that he will take 
up the Highest Universal Essence, when the time comes forthe wish, arising out of an 
interior manifestation, to reach the limit of its operation, This divine Mental Essence 
potent with the residuum of this determination even though it passes into a state 
similar tothat of noumenal matter (Malparakriti) comes to manifestation again in the 
same state as Mental Essence, by virtue of the potency of that determination, when 
the ulterior limit of the Mahdpralayas, the Great Latency, is reached. This happens in 
the same way as in the case of Chaitra who goes to sleep, having made a determination 
that he must rise early next morning, and awakes at the same time by virtue of the 
potency of the determination. Hence because the determination of the Lord and the 
taking in hand of the Universal Essence are eternal and thus ever present, their relation 
to each other cannot be that of interdependence. 


Further, it should not be said that the divine Mental Essenee does not pass into the 
state of the noumenal root-matter, the equipoise of the Malaprakriti, even at the time 
of the Great Latency. That which never passes into the state of the Mélaprakriti, can 
never be the effect thereof. Norcan this Universal Mental Essence be the power of 
consciousness, because it is non-intelligent by its own nature. If it be not both these, 
then, it would come to this that it must be another class of substance, for which there is 
noauthority. Thisis not proper. There is no substance existing independently of the 
noumenon of matter (Prakriti) and consciousness (Purusa). 


Such is the greatness of the Lord unlimited by time. Is there any reason, any 
authority for it? Or, is it without reason, without authority? The answer is ‘ Its 
authority lies in the sacred teaching,’ the Vedas, the Smritis, the Itihasas and the 
Purfinas, 

The author introduces the consideration of the Sacred Teaching :—“ What then is the 
reason of the Teaching ? The Sacred Teaching is based upon observation and inference. The 
Universal Mental Essence of the Lord cannot depend upon anybody's observation and 
inference. Nor istheSacred Teaching based upon the observation of the Lord. Some one 
may, therefore, think that the proper reason for the existence of the Sacred Teaching is 
that iswara desires to manifest his own divinity. 


He refutes this by saying that the Sacred Teaching has its reasonin the Divine 
Universal Essence. The meaning is this. Evidently the mantras and the science of life 
are proved to be the works of the Lord by the virtue they show in action and by the 
certainty of the things mentioned therein, being never found to be otherwise. Further, 
it is not possible that any one possessed only of the ordinary means of knowledge of the 
world should be able, even in a thousand human lives, to note the agreements and differ- 
ences of various medicinal agents, their various compositions, and those of the mantras, 
by throwing them into and taking them out of the various classes. It cannot evidently 
be said on the ground of the existence of the relation of eternal interdependence, that 
the agreements and differences are known from authority,. and that authority is again 
based upon the canons of agreement and difference. Because during the Great Latency, 
the Mahfpralaya, both these manifestations cease to exist. 

Further, it is not the case that there is not authority for their existence. It will be 
shown that the universe is a modification of noumenal matter, the M@laprakriti, not 
different from it. It has been observed that things of the same class change into different 
forms, a8 in the case of the modifications of curds and sugar, &c., from milk and cane-juice. 
It has also been observed that different modifications have the same form in their antece- 


Google 


OH. 1. ON TRANCE (SAMADBR1), 24. 45 


dent state, Similarly the noumenal root-matter having different modifications in the forms 
of the Great Will-to-be, the principle of individuality and others, must have a form 
common to allin theantecedent state. This common antecedent state of the noumenal 
matter isthe state of equipoise, and that is the state of the Great Latency, the Mahapra- 
laya. Hence the Universal Essence of the will-to-be of the Lord, shining all round by 
reason of the absence of the veil of the impurities of disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia 
(tamas), must be considered as established by at least the promulgation by Him of the 
Mantras and the science of life. And similarly that collection of the Vedic knowledge 
too, which has for its object the teaching of how to attain worldly progress and divine 
freedom, can be adivine production only by virtue of the Universal supremacy of His 
Spiritual and Mental Essence, It is not possible to have confusion and falsehood, the 
products of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas and tamas), in the face of the culmination of 
Universal Essence. Hence it is established that the authority of the sacred teaching lies 
in the divinity of the Universal Essence. 


Let it be so. The teaching has its origin in the supreme manifestation of the 
divine Mental Essence, and therefore it shows the highest knowledge, This is an instance 
of inference by the canon of residue, not of the authority of verbal cognition. To meet 
this objection hesays:—‘The relation of these two, the Teaching and the Highest mani- 
festation of divine Mental Essence, &c.’ The meaning is that the Teaching does not give the 
highest knowledge because it is the product of the Highest Universal Essence, but that it 
teaches because of the existence of an eternal relation of the explainer and the explained. 
Supremacy exists in the Universal Essence of the divine mind, and the Teaching which 
promulgates it, is also present there as such. 


The author states the final conclusion :—Hence by it, i.e., the teaching which pro- 
mulgates the Highest Universal Divine Mental Essence, is it known, in the same way that 
the differentiating qualities of the signified are known by the sign, that He is ever free, 
ever the Lord. 


Having thus distinguished Him from other Purusas he now distinguishes Him from 
other lords also :—‘ This divinity of His is free, &c.,’ and explains freedom from excess :— 
‘There is noother divinity, &c.’ Why? ‘ Wherever there is the highest, &c.’ For what 
reason is His divinity free from the defect of being exceeded by any other divinities ? 
He gives the reason :—‘ Wherever there is the highest perfection of this divinity, &c.’ The 
meaning is that the divinity of those in whom it has not reached the highest perfection, 
is unreal, 


Now he explains freedom from equality :—‘ Nor is there divinity equal, &c.’ Unres- 
trained fulfilment of wishes means the removal of obstacles from the path thereof. When 
wishes are checked in their fulfilment, it means weakness. Even if it do not mean weakness, 
it means equality. For that reason he says that in both cases the unrestrained fulfilment of 
desires is interfered with. The desired effect is not produced, or if it is produced then 
the same thing is found to possess contradictory qualities (which is absurd). With this 
object, hesays: ‘In the case of two equals, &c.' If the wishes of more divinities than one 
be considered as never being contradictory, then each must be an Iswara. Butthen 
what is the use of having more iswaras than one? The purpose of divine rule is ful- 
filled by One only, Or, ifit be supposed that they perform the work of divine govern- 
ment by common conéent, then there would be no supreme Lord, just as in a republic. 
Further in the case of those who believe in the eternal possession of divinity, the 
succession of divinity is improper. Furthermore there is the defect of cumbersomeness 
(positing more agents than is necessary for the purpose of bringing about an effect), 
Thus everything is plain.— 24. 


Go gle 


46 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Siitra 2s. 


aa facfterd aster th ay tt 


wa Tatra, in Him, fcr, Niratigayam, such as is not exceeded. wiw Sar- 
vajfia, of the omniscient. #4 Bijam, the seed. 
25. In Him the seed of the omniscient is not 


exceeded. 

fe a are Pretend eetenitery | aikqndtrararearacrncney eat 
Atrameanet sfele chediatahkarar ay Ace a ade: | aia 
RIB aaeatner arferqracaraturaa | ax srernfaatse come 
Be gare ct) arse se FarKAIATAT a Rraasfareer 
errant | rer arergRrtestraRremran: wedea | TeTATAWErAaly zar- 
GWE: TATA | ATTA KITS AAEISIyG Tarkea: "aba iti 
aay area | arieeanfiratarreraitrera RSNA rere 
RATA AeT HATA VW 2s tt 

VYASA, 

The seed of the omniscient is the larger or smaller knowledge of 
the individual, the collective or the ultra-sensuous arising out of the past 
or the future. Whenever this reaches a point in expansion, beyond which 
there is nothing, it is the omniscient. There must be the highest limit of 
the expansion of the seed of omniscience, inasmuch as there is larger or 
snialler manifestation of intelfigence, just as it is in the case of dimension. 
Wherever knowledge reaches the highest limit that is the omniscient and 
that is a distinct Purusa. Inference is of service only in establishing 
the general idea. It has not the power of giving the special qualities. 
The knowledge of His distinctive names, &c., is to be sought out of the 
Veda. 

Although IXwara has no purpose of His own to fulfil by Iiis (crea- 
tion) His (creation) is purposed by compassion for other beings. ‘I shall 
lift the Purusa in evolution out of the world by teaching them knowledge 
and virtue, throughout the manifestations (Kalpas), the Latencies (Pralayas) 
and the Great Latencies \Mahapralayas).’ This is what he proposes to 
Himself. And so it has been said:—‘ The first Wise Being, the revered 
Great Sage, informed a self-made mental vehicle out of compassion, and 
gave the teaching to Asuri who wished to know.—25. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having thus established the authority of the Sacred Teaching for His powers of 
action and knowledge, he now puts forward the authority of inference for His power of 
knowledge :--‘In Him the seed of the Omniscient is not exceeded.’ He explains :—‘ The 
seed of the Omniscient, &c.’ 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH]), 25. 47 


The knowledge of things beyond the range of the senses, existing either indivi- 
dually or collectively, and caused by the appearance of the past and future forms, is 
qualified by the attributes of largeness and smallnes3, on account of the veil of darkness 
covering more or less of the essence of the will-to-be, The meaning is that this know- 
ledge is the seed, the cause of the omniscient. One takes in a little of the past, &., 
another more than that, another the most of all. Knowledge is spoken of as being, more 
or less with reference to the thing known. Wherever this knowledge expands so much 
that it passes beyond the limit of being further exceeded, that is the omniscient. 


This describes only the thing to be known. Now he speaks of the means of knowledge :— 
‘The seed of the omniscient must reach the highest limit, &c.’ This is the statemeut of the 
proposition to be proved. The ‘highest limit’ means the state of intensity which cannot 
be exceeded. It is not, therefore, by fixing a limit only that the proposition can be estab- 
lished. 


‘Inasmuch as there is larger or smaller manifestation of intelligence :’ This is the 
statement of the reason. Every thing which possesses the quality of being more or less, 
has a limit beyond which there is no manifestation of the kind; as is the case with the 
lotus, the emblic fruit and the Bel tree. The quality of largeness exists in these more or 
less. In the self (Atm4), however, the largeness is such that there is no largeness more 
than that. He shows the pervasion (Vy4pti). ‘As in dimension.’ This means that the 
conclusion does not fail by the qualities of largeness, &c., being exceptions to the rule, 
Thus the proposition is established. 


It is not necessary that the largeness of the parts only should be contributed to 
the largeness of the whole. The fact is that dimension is known to éxpand by the 
putting together of as many largenesses of individual factors as there may be, con- 
sisting of infinitesimal wholes reaching down to the atoms themselves. In the case of 
knowledge too this rule is not violated : and knowledge can, therefore, be more or less by 
having one, two or more objects of knowledge. Thus there is no exception to the rule, 
(or technically speaking, there is no exclusion of the middle term, which is marked by the 
pervasion). 


He summarizes :—‘ Wherever knowledge reaches, &c.’ 


The question arises that there are many Tirthank4ras, such as the Buddha, the Arhats 
and the seer Kapila ; why should not they be considered to be omniscient by this inference ? 
For this reason, he says :—‘ Inference is of service only.’ 


How then is the knowledge of his specific qualities to be acquired? Says:—‘ The 
knowledge of his special names, &c.’ 

Further, teaching of the Buddha, &c., is not properly speaking authority ; it only 
looks like authority. The reason is that it teaches things against all reasoning, such 
as the momentary nature of all objects and the non-existence of the self, &c. It is, there- 
fore, all misleading. Hence that which comes into the mind from the Veda, the Smrpiti; 
the Itihfsa and the Purfna is the only true verbal cognition, the real authority; and is 
for this reason the only true means of worldly progress and the Highest Good. With this 
object the knowledge of special names, &c., should be obtained. Special names, such as 
Siva, idwara, &c., are well. known in the Vedas, &c. 

By the mention of the word “&c.,” it is understood that He is possessed of the six 
accessories and the ten unchageables. As says the Vayu Purana :— 

‘Omniscience, satisfaction, eternal knowledge, independence, constant presence of 
power, infinity of power—these six are said to be the accessories (angas) of the Great Lord 
by those who know the-law. Similarly,. knowledge,, desirelessness, power of control, 
purificatory action, truth, forgiveness, endurance, creation, the knowledge of the self, 


(So gle 


48 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


and being the substratum of all activities—these ten unchangeable qualities (avyayas) 
always live in the Great source of all Good.’ 

Well let that be, But the Lord is ever satisfied and possessed of the Highest desire- 
Jessness. It is not possible that He should have any wish for the fulfilment of any objects 
of His own. Further, being compassionate He should be given to the creation of men 
possegsed of undisturbed pleasure. It cannot, therefore, be that He should create a world, 
fall of pain of all sorts. Further, a wise being cannot be considered as undertaking a 
useless task. He, therefore, has not created the world, although He is possessed of Kriy& 
Eakti, the power of creation. 

For this reason, he says :—‘ Although igwara has no purpose of His own, &c.’ compas- 
sionate help of living objects is His object. The individual mind fulfils its object, when it 
has caused the experience of sound, &c., and the manifestation of the consciousness of the 
distinct nature of the self and the not-self. Its activity ceases when it has done s0, 
and the Purusa then becomes absolutely independent of objective existence (kevali). 
With that object. the compassionate Lord informs men of the means of obtaining 
knowledge of the distinct nature of the self and the not-self; because thereby the 
object of the existence of the mind is fulfilled. iswara, therefore, helping man as He 
does with reference to the performance of pure and impure works by them, is not cruel, 
even though He sees their pleasures and pains and feels for then. 

Now he speaks of the entrance into the region of compassion, for the sake of explaining 
the means of obtaining the knowledge of the distinct natures of the self and not-self :— 
‘By teaching them knowledge and virtue, &c.’ Knowledge and virtue are both to be under- 
stood together, They manifest the knowledge of the distinct natures of the self and the 
not-self. 

Latency (pralaya) means the end of the day of Brahmi. In this state, the whole 
world except the Satyaloka becomes latent. The Mah4pralaya, the Great Latency, is 
that in which the Satyaloka and Brahm4 himself come to an end. Then the Parusas in 
evolution go back to their causes and hence are subject to the pain of death. The word 
Kalpa is only suggestive here. The meaning is that the Lord's determination to help the 
Parusas refers to the other Purusas also, who by virtue of the fruition of their action 
have to undergo births and deaths, and who become free from pain on reaching the state 
of absolute independence. This is the meaning. 

This theory that the compassionate Lord teaches knowledge and virtue is also com- 
mon to the teaching of Kapila :—So has it been said by Pajicha Sikha. ‘ The first wise man, 
&c.’ This is a quotation from Pajichasikhacharya. The first wise man means the teacher 
who was the first emancipated being of his school. It does not mean the Highest Teacher 
who is ever free. The reference is to Kapila who was the founder ot the school, and who 
was the first of those emancipated ones who had gone before among *the followers of the 
school. The tradition is that Kapila got the knowledge by the grace of Maheswara just 
as he was born, and he is known as such as a particular kind of Vignu's incarnations. 
Svayambha is Hiranyagarbha. It is learnt from the Veda that he too got the knowledge - 
ofthe Sankhya Yoga. The same iswara, the self-existent Visnu, was the first Wise 
man, Kapila. The meaning is that he is the iswara of those who proceeded from Svayam- 


bha and others.—25. 
Satra 26. 


HUT FATA Ie: AletaATA ag N Re 


a: Sah, that, He. a: Esab, this, here. yay Parvesdm, of the ancients, 
wi Api, too. 48: Gurub, the teacher, wat Kalena, by time. wee Anavach- 


chhedat, owing to the non-limitation, not being limited_by. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 26, 27. 49 


26. He is the Teacher of the Ancients too, not being 
limited by time. 
AAT qawray se | RAAT AT SOT | qa f& aca: staaraftenrt 
iendearthc ale Nematic a den we AMT AHEM THAT 
Remerantnraernigeay setae ll 2 Hl 


VYASA. 


The ancient teachers were conditioned by time. Wherever time 
does not exist as condition, that is ISwara, the teacher of the ancient 
teachers too. As the knowledge of His supreme power as existing in the 
beginning of the creation is obtained, so also is it obtained about His 
existence as such in other creations and other times. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now he shows the distinction of the Lord from Brahm, &c. ‘He,’ i. e., the one des- 
cribed formerly, ‘is (the real aphorism begins here) the teacher of the ancients too.’ 

He explains —‘ The ancients, &c.’ Time means a century, &c. 

‘Does not exist as a condition’ means time does not approach as a condition. 

The sapremacy of power means the manifestation thereof. Its knowledge is to be 
obtained from the Veda. By this arrangement the Lord i4wara is described.—26. 


Satra 27. 


aq WAR: TTT Vo ll 
wa Tasya, Him, ara: Vachakah, connoting. wea: Pranavah, the Sacred 
word —@ry Om. 

27. The Sacred word connotes Him. 

TS AMAR: TT: | aT hae: sage | faa dhaed arevaras- 
way sdrararsacateraira | fRuarser arrer araha ae aed: | aRa- 
eaipacel faatartakrraa | atrafea: Rerqaa: dara: aaetaraatert 
arenes rat | waa ge ef | aatateat arecaraaeeteeia aga: 
Prada 29 I 

VYASA. 


The sacred word connotes ‘Him.’ He is denominated by the sacred 
word, the Pranava (A U M). Is the relation of the sign and the thing 
signified between these conventional, or inherent as between flame and 
light ? His relation with the sign is inherent and thus ever present. 
Further, the convention of God shows only an object which‘exists (that 
which is inherent). As the relation already existing between father 
and son, is only expressed by convention, this is the father, this the son. 
In other creations too the same convention is adopted on account of the 
dependence upon the connotative powers of the sign and the thing 
signified. 

7 


Go gle 


50 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now he speaks of His sign (indicator, Vachaka) in order to explain the meaning of his 
devotion. ‘The sacred word connotes Him.’ Explains:—He is denoted by Pranava, &c. 
Introduces the opposite theory by putting a question. Is the relation, &c. Signifying is 
laying down, expressing. 

Others, of course, hold that if the relation of word and meaning is inherent, and that 
it is manifested by a convention that such and such a meaning is to be denoted by such 
and such a word, then in the absence of any relation between word and meaning, the 
meaning would not be conveyed even by a hundred conventions. If no jar exists whith 
may be shown by a lamp, even a hundred lamps would not reveal one. It is, however, 
observed that the word ‘elephant’ will signify a camel if a convention is made that this 
word will be used to signify an animal of that class. Hence the power to signify is 
conventional. 

Having thus stated their position, he explains his own teaching :—‘Its relation is 
inherent.’ This is the meaning. All words have the capability of meaning objects of all 
forms. Their relation with objects of all forms must, therefore, be inherent. And the 
convention: of igwara is the determining factor and the shower thereof. The division 
of the sign signifying and not-signifying something is also made by iswara’s convention 
or non-convention. This is what he says: ‘Further the convention of God, &c.’ 
He gives an illustration :—“already existing between, &c.” 

The question arises. Sound is a manifestation of the Prakpiti. At the time of the 
Great Latency it passes back into the state of the Prakriti. Its power also thereby 
disappears. ‘Then a particular verbal sign is born again through the successive states 
of Mahat, &c. But then the power of signification having disappeared, its manifestation 
does not remain possible, For this reason, he says :—‘In other creations also, &c.’ 

Although a word does become one with the Prakriti along with the power, it comes 
back into manifestation along with the power. As earth-born creatures becoming one 
with the earth on the cessation of the rains, come back to life on being wetted by showers 
of rain water. Thus God makes a convention similar to the convention which indicated 
the former relation. Hence on account of the eternity of the succession of similar usage, 
due to simultaneous knowledge, the relation of word and meaning is eternal. Independ- 
ent eternity is not meant. So say the Agamis. Without the authority of the Agama 
(the Veda) it is not possible to ascertain that tn other creations also the convention is 
the same. This is the meaning.—27. 

Sotra 28, 


AMTATUATAATT ll 2s tt 


aq Tad, its, ow: Japah, repetition. 7 Tad, its. wt Artha, meaning, wey 
Bhavanam, the understanding of. 


28. Its repetition and the understanding of its 
meaning. 

aofaafe Greraar Fen wears aaea cerita sraraa frerearca- 
granerea anfra: | aerreararrany | water A: cere Macey 
araaq | aged inftes: cae wea: Tae a arasaikraaasd sea | 
aur Stel | <aveaaveatrareta Arneeqredaarad | SATeATAATTeI AT 
QUANT THT Het Wh Ve I 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 28, 29. 51 


VYASA. 


The Vedic teachers hold that the relation of word and meaning 
is eternal, inasmuch as one co-exists with the other. The Yogi who has 
come to know well the relation between word and meaning must con- 
stantly repeat it, and habituate the mind to the manifestation therein of 
its meaning. The constant repetition is to be of the Pranava (A U M) 
and the habitual mental manifestation is to be of what it signifies, Id 
wara. The mind of the Yogi who constantly repeats the Pranava and 
habituates the mind to the constant manifestation of the idea it carries, 
becomes one-pointed. And so it has been said :— 

‘Let the Yoga be practised through study, and let study be effected 
through Yoga. By Yoga and study together the Highest Self shines’—28, 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Having described the sign, he now describes the devotion, pranidhAna, the means of 
feeling the presence of the Lord everywhere, in all circumstances and phenomena :—‘ Its 
constant repetition and the repeated understanding of its meaning.’ Explains:—‘ The 
constant repetition of the Pranava, &c.’ 

Repeated understanding (Bhivan&) means making it enter the mind over and over 
again until it becomes the very substance of the mental existence. 

What attainment does he acquire thereby ? Says:—‘ The mind of the Yogi who con- 
stantly repeats the Pranava, &c.’ The mind feels bliss in the One Lord alone. Quotes a 
verso of Vyfsa in this connection :—And s0 it has been said :—The Lord then becomes 
gracious to him up to his attaining the faculty of trance (Samadhi) and its fruit.—28. 


Siitra 29. 


AA: AAFAAATNTA SeITSATIATATALT URE tl 


wa; ‘latah, thence, sewq Pratyak, the individual. # Chetana, Soul. whee: 
Adhigamah, understanding. #f Api, also, too. wenm Antardya, of obstacles. 
wea: Abhavab, absence. Cha, and. 
29. Thence the understanding of the individual self 
and the absence of obstacles too. 


f areq wale | an: cerraaaritisomacrararaga | & arqer- 
TAT ARTITAA ATACHATTANAT ATA Wah WEI ealancrey wae Wa- 
aT: GOT TR wae: Hadtsqrateraraay qa: araagt a: gare. 
TORT W RE O 

VYASA, 

And what else comesto him? “The understanding of the indivi- 
dual self and the absence of obstacles.” Whatever obstacles there may be— 
diseases, &c.—cease to be by feeling the omnipresence of the Lord; and 
the true nature of himself is also seen. It is known that just as Idwara 
is a Purusa, pure, calm, free and without appendants, such is this 


(50 gle 


52 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Purusa also, the self underlying the individual manifestation of the 


Will-to-be. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


What more than this? ‘ Thence the understanding of the individual self, and the 
absence of obstacles.’ The individual self is the Pratyakchetana, the conscious principle 
whose cognitions are contradictory of the real, that is to say, the ignorant Purusa. 
In the case of the Wise this turns back on account of the possession of the eternal divine 
essence. He gets the understanding of the individual self as it really is. 

The obstacle will be described and their absence too. 

‘Whatever obstacles there may be:’ These words contemplate their description. 
The nature of a thing is its own self. By speaking of the nature of the self, the charac- 
teristics fastened on to the self by Nescience (avidy4&) are denied. 

The question arises. Since iswara is the object of devotion, how is it that the 
Individual unit of consciousness will be known by feeling His omnipresence ? It is 
evidently going beyond the mark. In reply to this, he says :—‘ As is iswara, &¢.’ 

Pure :—free from rise and fall on account of constant eternity. 

Calm :—undisturbed by afflictions. 

Free :—he from whom virtue and vice keep aloof. For this very reason He is without 
appendants. The ‘ appendants ’ are life-state, life-period, and life-experience.’ 

A similarity must necessarily mean some distinction. Therefore ‘now he distinguishes 
the Individual self from Iswara. The ‘self underlying the individual manifestation of 
the Will-to-be.’ This explains why the word ‘ Individual ’ has been added. 

When there are two contradictory objects, the understanding of the one does not 
conduce to the understanding of the other. The understanding of similars, however, 
conduces to the understanding of the other objects possessed of similar qualities. This 
happens in the same way as the understanding of one science contributes to the better 
understanding of an allied science. The effect of the analogy is in the understanding 
of one’s own self, not of the Highest self. Thus all is plain.—29. 


Satra 30. 


SATA TA TATRA ET ATM Tee TTT ET 
Rraarakacart Rrataaretseatrat: 2° tl 


enfy Vyadhi, disease. warm Stydna, langour. # Sarbsaya, indecision. sr 
Pramada, carelessness. wee Alasya, sloth. wedi Avirati, sensuality, want of 
non-attachment, «tf Bhranti, mistaken notion. q-aee-ufera Dargana-alabdha- 
bhaimikatva, missing the point, not being able to see a place which is just seen. 
wraferra Anavasthitatva, instability. feof: Chitta-viksepah, causing distrac- 
tions, or divertion of the mind. @ Te, these are. ween: Antarfy&h, the obstacles. 
30. Disease, langour, indecision, carelessness, sloth, 
sensuality, mistaken notion, missing the point, instability,— 


these causing distractions are the obstacles. 


we React & Rreeg rata: | gered Rrerat afer | eftreerrrerarz- 
mgeenactathaquarenymeanrcaerca4n Rrartaretsac4an | 


Google 


| Meet Hace Rraea ae Wecarestahre: safc feererea Rererees tr 
Praii alpaca fredirsteel aaciitien® Gast uecara: | wrererfererey 
aeparat at Rreeastret aartrakresa fe aft aqafeedt earfafer | ot 
Rratetar tararaet arrseranarneacran ceriretrat Wl Re ii 


VYASA. 


Now what are the obstacles that distract the mind? How many 
are they and what is their nature? ‘ Disease, &c.’ There are nine ob- 
gtacles causing distraction tothe mind. These exist with mental modifi- 
cations. In their absence they do not exist. The mental modifications 
have been described before. 


Disease is the disturbance of the equilibrium of the humours, 
chyle and the organs of the body. 

Langour is the indisposition of the mind to work. 

Indecision is the notion touching both sides of a question: It 
might be thus or thus. 

Carelessness is want of resort to the means of trance. 

Sloth is the inertia of mind and body consequent upon heaviness. 

Sensuality is the desire consequent upon objects of sense having 
taken possession of the mind. 

Mistaken notion is False knowledge. 

Missing the point, is the non-attainment of the state of trance. 

Instability is the incapacity of the mind to keep in any state that 
has been attained, because it becomes stable only when the state of trance 
has been reached. 

These distractions of the mind are designated the enemies and the 
obstacles of Yoga. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


He puts a question :—‘ Now what are the obstacles ?’ The answer consists of the 
words, “ distractions of the mind."’ Again he asks for the specific enumeration :—‘ How 
many, &c.’ The answer is ‘ Disease, &c.,’ the whole aphorism. The nine obstacles are 
mental manifestations which stand in the way of Yoga. They are contrary to Yoga and 
disturb the mind. They are called obstacles, because they turn the aspirant away from 
the direct path of Yoga. 

He gives the cause of their being the antagonists of Yoga:—‘They manifest with 
mental modifications.’ Indecision and False knowledge are antagonistic to the inhibition 
mind, because they are mental modifications. The others, however, which are not mental 
of the modifications such as disease, &c., likewise antagonistic, because mental modifi- 
cations manifest themselves along with them. 

He explains the meaning of the words :—‘ Disease, &c.’ 


Google 


54 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


The humours aro bile, mucus and gas, called Dhdtus, because they keep up the body. 
Chyle (rasa) is a particular modification of foods and drinks. The organs of the body 
are the organs of sensation and action. Disturbance of equilibrium means one of these 
becoming more and the other less than what is necessary. The indisposition of the mind 
to work means incapacity to work. Indecision or doubt is knowledge touching both sides 
of a question. Although the basis of doubt is the knowing of a thing to be what it is not 
and therefore doubt and Falsc knowledge do not differ from each other, yet doubt is 
separately mentioned here, because it is especially intended to bring out here the special 
characteristic of doubt, the touching and giving up of both sides of a question, which 
makes a sub-head of False knowing. 


‘Want of resort, to the meansof trance’ means the absence of these means, the want 
of effort. The heaviness of the body is caused by phlegm, &c. The heaviness of the mind 
is caused by inertia, tamas. Desire means thirst for an object. The states of trance 
are Madhumati, &c. If one has reached a particular state of progress in trance and is 
satisfied with it, then he will not reach the higher state and will lose the one already 
attained. Therefore, when a state of trance has been reached, effort must always be made 
to retain it.—30. 


Satra 31. 


ss ~ x 
TAT MAAR AAT aa PTT: |e 
3:4 Dubkha, pain. arian Daurmanasya, dispair, dejection. weer Afga- 
mejayatva, shakiness, ‘We Svdea, inspiration, ere: Prasviséh, and expiration. 
faa Viksepa, of distraction, «ya: Saba-bhuvah, companions, 


31. Pain, despair, shakiness, inspiration and expira- 
tion are the companions of these distractions. 


PatienygarsepsTeaparenr Aatwseys | Taare 
Prmanieé Berea MAST AATT TAA ATTA | STAACATST- 
frararaae: ata: aegrersralr HUTA ATHAMIATT | MAT TE ATT AT: 
aaa care: | aeatsa” arg’ Pearce a ware | a etvasgar 
fataartaeta vata | aartahraeta a wafer tl at a 


VYASA. 


Pain is either from one’s self, or from external terrestrial objects, 
or from the powers of nature. Pain is that affected by which people try 
to do away with it. 

Despair is the condition of the mind consequent upon the non- 
fulfilment of some desire. 

Shakiness is that which causes the organs to shake. 

Inspiration is the action of the life-force drinking in external air. 

Expiration is that which throws out the internal gas. 

These are the companions of the distractions of the mind. ‘They 
appear in him whose mind is distracted. They do not exist in him whose 
mind is entranced. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADEI), 81, 82. 55 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now he says that it is not only the nine obstacles, but that pain, &c., too appearing 
as their companions, act similarly :—‘ Pain, &c.’ 


Pain is that which is cognized as being contrary to the mind for the time. It is from 
one’s self, when it is either bodily such as caused by disease, or, mental, such as caused by 
desire, &c. It is from external causes when it is caused by a tiger, &c. It comes from 
the powers of nature when it is caused by such things as the planetary influences. All 
this pain is cognized by every living creature as contrary to one's being. It is, therefore, 
to be removed. This is what he says :—‘ Affected by which, &c.’ When physical life 
drinks in, i.e., takes in external air contrary to one's wish, the act of in-breathing becomes 
contrary to the branch of Yoga known as the Rechaka, the conscious out-breathing). 
When physical life expels the internal air against wish, the act of out-breathing is con- 
trary to the branch of Yoga known as Paraka, the (conscious in-breathing).—8. 


SAtra 32. 


AMMAVITAHACTAT: 32 I 


wa Tat, their, sftte Pratisedha, preventions. wy Artham, for. w Eka, of 
one, ara Tattva, truth or subject, ware: Abhyasah, habituation, 


32. For their prevention, habituation to one Truth. 


aaa Rete: aarkrrrareanaraanareaacreanat AUST | TATEAT- 
ae feagqreecqare | aefatardatnacaare: | atanfrtardina- 
wdaaa Ramada | ser g Tada saat ah a Prd aver ae- 
aa Rravanst areca Ritzer ay gate ada: senedtaferrd aaritaa 
qer waar a Teresa | ais agascerasara Prater at 
aera Ue Taek Tae ait sated atrncaay | sat sar- 
gtereta set aa: a ad: UEATIAAITat at Ragascerasant ar se- 
maaan cafe Srarrargaaha: | aanrtantariaaied Pratt | 
a @ faaatatahaan waratren qcaal aracay HIME CSN: 
WA AAT | WANA AS BT HAAMIEITA: MYT waa | HReriacear- 
aniaaraaagiaanaanaaaaeate | fe a wrargaangataae4- 
eaea tf | wt aaenardt acquis qeremedt 3 acaraafifsera: 
aaer Tere FE afe vakraazaraer: | we caeawravarn we- 
far sera: | eeraeraag Rrag ada aaah TART TAT TAT | zal- 
saamecaaangren wetlarara: | A a cede AEIad Tararertanriy- 
yaad | WaUTat a ceataara qa sat gTenganrariagied a f- 
Aq WH aR ll 

VYASA. 

Now these distractions, the antagonists of trance, are to be checked 
by the same practice and desirelessness. It is to finish the subject of 
practice that he says :—‘ For the prevention thereof, habituation to ONE 


(Go gle 


56 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


TRUTH.’ For the prevention of distractions, let the mind take to ONE 
TRUTH and make itself habitually familiar with it. 


To him who believes in a mind separate and distinct for every 
cognized object, in fact a bundle of notions only, and but momentary (in 
existence) all minds are one-pointed (ekAgra) only. There is no distracted 
mind. 

If, however, the mind is concentrated on one object, only when, 
having been drawn away from all other objects, it turns away to one 
object, then it is not separate and distinct for every cognized object. 


He who believes the mind to be one-pointed if it lows along similar 
notions, might opine that one-pointedness is a characteristic of the 
flowing mind. If so, then the flowing would not be one, because it 
is said to be momentary. 


If, however, it is the characteristic of a notion which is only a portion 
of the entire stream (of flowing mental phenomena), then it is always one- 
pointed, whether it flows along similar or dissimilar notions ; because in 
this case it is separate and distinct for every object. Thus we would fall 
upon the non-existence of a distracted mind. Hence the mind is one, 
has many objects, and is not momentary, but stable. 


Further, if it be thought that the notions are born, each separate 
from the other in nature, and are not linked (by the common basis of) 
one single mind, then how would any one mind remember a notion 
cognized by another. And how would any one enjoy the vehicle of action 
brought into being by the notions of another ? 

Howsoever the matter is examined, it illustrates the story of the 
milk and the cowdung. 

Further, if the mind be separate and distinct for every cognized 
object, then the notion of the identity of the self is destroyed. How can 
such notionsas, ‘I touch what I saw,’ and ‘I see what [ touched previous- 
ly,’ point toacommon knower, when all the notions are separate and 
distinct ? 

The notion of the ‘I am’ is always identical with itself and points 
out to but one cogniser. But there can be no single cognizer as a common 
basis, if it manifest itself in entirely distinct minds every moment. The 
notion of ‘I am’ as one undifferentiated continuous self is cognized by 
internal perception ; and the authority of perception is not to be defeated 
by any other means of knowledge. Other means of knowledge work only 
by the power of perception. Hence the mind is one and has many objects 
and it changes not every moment.—32. 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 32. 57 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Introduces the aphorism which finishes the subject under discussion :—‘Now these 
distractions, &c.' 

Now it ison account of the context that this aphorism is spoken of as finishing only 
half the subject under discussion. These distractions are spoken of as antagonists of 
the trance to explain the object with which they are to be checked. 


Although in the aphorism, ‘By feeling the omnipresence of the Lord’ the process 
of mental habituation only is described, yet desirelessness also is to be understood, be- 
cause it is a help to habituation. With this in mind, hesays :—‘ They are to be checked by 
the same practice and desirelessness.’ 

‘ This is said to finish the subject of practice’: —This sontence is spoken because the 
subject of practice immediately precedes. The ONE TRUTH is God, because that is the 
context. 

To the Vainagikas all minds are one-pointed only; there is no distracted mind. 
Hence their teachings and the acts they inculcate, are all useless. With this object 
he says :— To him who believes, &c." The theory is that the mind is separate and distinct 
for every object whether it to be a single one initself, or one out of many. It remains in 
being only so long as the object shines in consciousness and then disappears at once, not 
going to another object. 

Why does not the mind take in another object after having taken in one before that ? 
Because it is said to be momentary. This means that existence before and after, cannot 
be posited of a mind, which cannot be spoken of as remaining the same in more than one 
successive moment of time. 

According to our teaching the mind is not momentary in existence, and remains 
constant, whether the objects of thought be one or manifold. It is not confined to one 
single object seeing that it takes in and gives up objects every moment and can so far be 
called distracted, and also that it can cultivate one-pointedness when the modification 
of distractedness has been removed. This teaching and the acts recommended on its 
strength are not useless. With this object, he says :—‘ And if it becomes concentrated, &c.’ 
Concludes :—‘ Thus it is not distinct and separate for every object.’ 

Again he introduces the Vainisike :—‘ He who believes the mind to be one-pointed if 
it flows along similar notions, &c,’ His meaning is stated to be as follows :—‘Let it be 
granted that the cultivation of one-pointedness is not possible in a mind confined to one 
moment only and that therefore it is useless to put forth effort with that object. The con- 
tinuous succession of minds, however, is unending and not momentary inits nature; it is 
possible in the succession that distraction may be removed and one-pointedness culti- 
vated.’ 

He shows the defects of the theory in the case of either of the two statements thereof. 
If in the philosophy of the VainAghika one-pointedness is a characteristic of the flowing 
mind, i.e., of the un-onding succession of minds, then, there being successive mental 
births for succeeding mental impressions, there does not exist one flowing mind common 
to all the successive impressions. But why should it not be so? Because in your philoso- 
phy, whatever exists for as long a time as it may be, must be momentary ; there is nothing 
that is not momentary. 

Takes the other form of the theory :—‘If however it is, &c.’ If in the successive 
flow of mental phenomena a notion having the Highest Good appears at a single point, 
one-pointedness with reference to this particular notion may be secured by effort. 

Shows the defects of this theory. The whole of this succesive flow of mental pheno- 
mena may be a flow of either similar or dissimilar notions. It is, therefore, separate and 
distinct for every distinct object, and as such takes the form ofthe Highest Good simply 

8 


Google 


58 : PATANJALIS YOGA. 


for the expression of it, and therefore it is destroyed on the disappearance of the mind. 
Such a mind is always one-pointed. There can, therefore, be no distracted mind. It can- 
not, therefore, be that one-pointedness may be cultivated by and after the removal of 
distractedness, Concludes :-—‘ Hence the mind is, &c.’ 


Further says, that for another reason too the mind is one having many objects, and 
is constant not momentary :—‘ And if it be so, &c.' As the Teaching studied by Maitra 
is not remembered by Chaitra, and as the fruit of the vehicle of action grown by Maitra 
in not enjoyed by Chaitra, in the shape of virtue and vice, inasmuch as Chaitra is not 
related to it, so one notion cannot remember the object of another notion; nor can one 
notion enjoy the fruit of the vehicle of action grown by another notion. 


But, says the questioner, this line of reasoning will not be violated, if the relation of 
cause and effect exists ; and it is on account of the existence of that differentia, that in 
the Sradha and Yaiswanara sacrifice, &c., the fruit is seen reaching father, mother, 
and son, who are not the performers thereof; and also because the sweetness of the 
mango, seeds, &c., always appears in due course in the fruits thereof. 


For this reason, says :—‘ However is the matter examined, &c.’ Thisis the meaning. 
What is tho difference between notions falling into one succession and those falling into 
another, so that a notion falling into one succession may remember and enjoy the notions, 
experience and the vehicle of action grown by the notions of the same succession but 
not by the notions of another succession? Succession is not an independently existing 
substance, so that one succession may be differentiated from another succession, And 
it is not proper that a fanciful differentia may be fastened upon an action. No one can 
cook if he only fancies the existence of fire anywhere. Further, the relation of cause 
and effect also is not real, In the case of simultaneous existence there can be no such 
relation, as for example, between the right and left horns. In the case of objects which do 
not exist simultaneously, no relation of cause and effect necessarily exists ; because it may 
be that none of them can be predicated of a phenomenon appearing in the immediate 
present. The past and the future cannot exist together as being related to a pheno- 
menon appearing independently in the present. Therefore, being independent real objects 
as they are, they do not differ from’each other whether they fall in their own or in 
independent successions. The reason is that they. do not come into contact with each 
other, not being related to each other by either natural causation or by succession. 
This logic is like that of the milk and cow-dung cakes. 


“All that is produced from the cow is milk. 
Cow-dung cakes are produced from the cow. 
Therefore cow-dung cakes are milk.” 


This illustrates the story, which means that it surpasses in fallacy even the logic of 
the milk and the cow-dung. 


Furthermore, the destruction of that which has been done, and the appearance of 
that which has not been done, should not be mentioned here as an argument. Becausé the 
mind alone is the doer of actions, and the mind alone is associated with the pleasures 
and pains born out of them. It is because the mind enjoys pleasure and pain on account 
of the presence therein of the reflection of consciousness, and because the consciousness 
and the mind in which it is present are taken to be one, that they are attributed to the 
Puruga. The notions born ‘in the mind, when the notion of its being the self has already 
come in there, are of such a nature that they alone remember and enjoy their own fruits, 
not others. And it is not reasonable to say that the nature of a thing may be separated 
from it, and then joined to it again. It cannot be said of the nature of a thing that it 
might or might not be so, or why is it not so? 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH1]), 82, 38. 59 


He speaks to those who are satisfied with the above :—‘ Further, if the mind be sepa- 
rate and distinct for every object, &c., mental impressions and their memories have the 
characteristics of manifestation and latency. They are many and yet the mind in which 
they live, i.e., the notion of the ‘I am,’ is one and not different for each. This one notion 
of the ‘I am’ unites all those separate notions into one. How can this one hold all the 
extremely different notions into itself? Inasmuch as there is difference in the causes of 
the phenomena of cognition and memory and alsoon account of the presence in them 
of the contradictory qualities of manifestation and latency, there can be no single notion 
of reflex condition by virtue of which the mind, in which all the different and contradictory 
notions are generated, may be considered to be a single entity. 

For this reason, he says :—‘ It is cognised by internal] perception.’ 

But it may be said that the difference of causes and the possession of contradictory 
qualities refute the truth of this perception. In answer to this objection, he says :—‘and 
the authority of perception, &c.’ 

It is on the basis of perception alone that the unity of material and the contradic- 
tory nature of the characteristics of latency and manifestation have been established 
in the Nyiyakanik§ ; and the action of objections in a permanent mind is established in the 
Ny4&yakanika and the Brahmatattva-samiks4. Thus all is plain.—382, 


Sdtra 33. 


9? 
Stacageatana gaz:aguarguaasarai 
ASAT AAT ATATTAT N33 ll 
®t Maitri, friendliness. wee Karuna, compassion, mercy. fm Mudité, 
gladness, complacency. ste Upeksa, indifference of all these. ga Sukha, happi- 
ness. 3:4 Duhkha, misery. gra: Pugya, virtue. wyra Apunya, vice, favarey 
Visayanam, regarding the subjects, towards the subjects (respectively), arama: 


Bhavanatah, by cultivating habits, by constant thinking. ft Chitta, of the 
mind, were Prasidanam, purification. 


33. By cultivating habits of friendliness, compassion, 
complacency and indifference towards happiness, misery, 
virtue and vice (respectively) the mind becomes pure. 

eq Rreenraieetg oreta vite’ Migaaa cena 1 fst eeung- 
Rartaat qaragqenrquaysarat aaaraeracenqay | as waning 
qaaannee g asi aaa | gfadg wea! germtg gam 1 ay- 
eqMS_IAy | Taner Alas: Yet aa saNTIa | aaga re weatehr | 
servant fafa wad a3 0 
VYASA. 


How is the embellishment of the permanent mind taught by this 
science, secured ? ‘The mind becomes pure by cultivating habits of 
friendliness, compassion, complacency and indifference towards happiness, 
misery, virtue and vice.’ Let him cultivate in his mind the habit of 
friendliness towards all those who are found in the enjoyment of pleasure ; 


(50 gle 


60 PATANJALI'’S YOGA. 


compassion towards those who are suffering from pain; complacency 

towards those who are virtuous; indifference towards the vicious. By 

thus habituating the mind to these notions, the white characteristic makes 

appearance. Thence the mind becomes pure. Having become pure, 

it becomes one-pointed and attains the state of steadiness. —33. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Now the author begins to lay down the means of purifying the mind, which are contrary 
to such vices as jealousy, because trance and the means of its achievement cannot appear 
in a mind, unembellished and full of jealousy, &c. :—‘ How is the embellishment, &c.’ 

Whoever shows friendliness, i.c., a heart ready to help, towards the happy, the dirt 
of envy leaves him. When the mind shows compassion, é.e the wish to remove the 
miseries of others as if they were his own, towards those who are suffering, the dirt of 
the desire to do evil by others is removed. Whoever shows complacency, i.e., pleasure 
towards virtuously inclined beings, the dirt of envy is removed from his mind. Whoever 
shows indifference, i.e., the taking of the middle path and not taking sides, towards the 
viciously inclined, the dirt of impatience is removed from his mind. 

By this removal of the characteristics of the qualities of disturbing energy (rajas) 
and inertia (tamas), the white characteristic of essential purity (sattva) manifests itself. 
He becomes possessed of a very high manifestation of essential purity. His mind becomes 
inclined to the side of the restraint of mental modifications, because this enlightenment 
is natural to that state. When the mind becomes pure, it attains the state of steadiness 
and becomes one-pointed by the means to be described. If friendliness, &c., are not 
cultivated, the means cannot lead to steadiness.—838. 


Siitra 34, 


TSAR AT ATATST Re A 


mega Prachchhardana, by the expulsion, farwreq Vidhfranabhydm, and 
by the retentions. a V&, optionally. wwe Prayasya, of breath. 


34. Optionally, by the expulsion and retention of 
breath. 


cestatrarcanat at sary | Sezer araraiferarqenat serafratn- 
maa svete Praca atararmenat at ave: Pete’ earqery lt ae 
VYASA. 

Expulsion is the throwing out of the air in the lungs through the 
nostrils by special effort. Retention is the Prénéy&ma, the lengthening 
of the duration of the stay of the air outside the lungs. Let mental 
steadiness be optionally cultivated by these. — 34. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 
Now then he describes the means of steadiness :—‘ Optionally by the expulsion and 


retention of breath.’ The word optionally refers to the succeeding means. The option is 
not given with reference to the cultivation of friendliness, &c., because they must be 


present along with all (the means). 
Now he explains expulsion :—‘ The throwing out of the airin the lungs, &.’ “By 


special efforts” means such an effort as is laid down in the science of Yoga, by which the 
air is thrown out of the lungs slowly. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH1]), 84, 35. 61 


Now he describes retention :—Retention is Prinfyéma. It means the keeping out of 
the air which has been expired, lengthening the duration of its stay outside, not drawing 
in allat once. By thus expiring and inspiring air the body becomes light, and the mind 
thence attains the state of steadiness. The words ‘let it be cultivated’ have been taken 
from the sense of the words ‘causes mental steadiness, (sthitinibandhini) in the next 
aphoriam 

Siira 35. 


Senalnt eilinnas ann Rafter 3k 


feeweht Visayavati, of the sense, of the objects of senses, bringing sense 
perceptions, w V4, or, weft: Pravrittib, higher activity, aw UtpannA, appear- 
ing. we: Manasah, of the mind, mental, fefa Sthiti, steadiness. ffeewh Niban- 
dhanf, causing. 

35. Or, Higher sense-activity appearing, causes 

mental steadiness. 
faraadt at cafrecqer ever: feaftrratractt | arrest arcaarsea at 
frerrrererfarcen araeg fe: | firgrst cererfirey 1 argh wereefirey | fergrte- 
eae | Argrqa wearer gea sererfird fear ere ear 
franta aartirerat a arcraadtia | ata aanenentintiaceaizg 
safeacast freanta aaa) watt & eacsrengararaaiatacan- 
aurea aHAAe aay | cast TUATHA area AT TATA ATTY TAT 
whan cance ware aracad wtratraanieg qurentg a get 
after. 


faite: sereitnder jas agukeriatasena at ad qeareaait a 
aqanieataa | cere areata Pf gaa iukearg afag afrcarat 
TRMTCSAMTAT AIM at AAT TTA Teaey aerate | aa a 
afr srardtegtraaraarsearmrarta afreretir tt ae i 

VYASA. 

The power to cognize superphysical (divya) smell, which one gets 
by concentrating upon the fore-part of the nose (the olfactory organ) 
is the higher olfactory sense-activity. By concentration upon the fore- 
part of the tongue, the power to cognize taste ; over the palate, cognition 
of colour ; in the middle of the tongue, cognition of touch; in the root 
of the tongue, cognition of the sound. 

The Higher sense-activities appearing cause the steadiness of mind, 
destroy doubt and become the entrance to that state of cognitive power 
which is called trance (Samadhi). 


By this the Higher sense-activity, which is caused by concentrating 
upon the moon, the sun, the planets, jewels, the lamp and precious stones, 
&c,, is also to be understood to have that name. 


Go gle 


62 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Although whatever of the nature of an object is known by any 
science, by inference, or by the instruction of a teacher, is of course 
true, because they are capable of establishing the trath by teaching, 
yet, as long as even a portion is not known by one’s own senses, every- 
thing remains as it were unknown. The knowledge of such subtle mat- 
ters as the state of absolute freedom does not obtain firm ground in the 
mind. Therefore even if it were for the purpose of giving fuller light 
to what has been learnt from any science, by inference, or by the instruc- 
tion of a teacher, it is necessary that some particular object be perceived 
by one’s self. When one portion of what has been taught is perceived, 
the subtlest remaining portions are easily believed. It is for this very 
reason that inental embellishment is taught; so that when consciousness 
of power over the unrestrained mental modifications shows itself, the Yogi 
becomes capable of perceiving the objects of all such modifications. 
And when this happens, he gets faith, energy, memory and trance with- 
out any obstacle.—35. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author now mentions another means of steadiness :—‘ Or, Higher sense-activity 
appearing, causes mental steadiness.’ Explains :—‘ By concentration upon the fore-part of 
the nose, &c.’ The power is acquired by the performance of concentration, contemplation 
and trance. The cognition of superphysical smell means that the smell lies revealed to his 
sense. In the other Higher sense-activities, also it should be understood in the same way. 
This is to be believed on authority, not by contact with one's self. 


Let it be so. But whatis the use of these Higher sense-activities? They do not 
help in the attainment of the state of absolute freedom. For this reason, he says :—These 
mental modifications appearing, in but ashort time, incline the mind to steadiness either 
with reference to God, or with reference to discriminative knowledge. 


But the question is, how can a mental modification having one object, become — 
steady with reference to other object also? For this reason, he says :—They destroy, i. e., 
they remove, doubts and for this very reason become the entrance to trance consciousness. 

Teachos that other modifications also which are taught by the Veda consist in Higher 
sense-activity :—‘ By this, &c.’ 

Then the question arises, wherefore should there be doubt with reference to objects 
known by authority, &c.? For this reason, he says :—‘ Although whatever.........of course, 
&c.' The root of Yogais of course in faith. Arising from that, it reaches up to con- 
templation, &c., without obstacles. This is the meaning.—35. 


Sitra 36. 


fratar ar satieeadt i 3é ti 


faart Vidokaé, the painless state, the concentration on the painless. a V4, 
or, eafiert Jyotismati, the bright, effulgent state, the state of lucidity, the con- 
centration on luminous objects. 


36. Or, the state of painless lucidity. 


Google 


OH. 8. ON TRANCE (SAMADHD), 36. 63 


Rratrer at extra | cafeecter ave: fetPrafaragada 1 Eaa- 
gees arcaar at afearasaiaea he areacararaned as fefraancer- 
arate: qurq cen careqsiee freacat | aenfarat aaran” Pret Frea- 
ween araaaraakaaras wale | GigE | AAWATATAA- 
Rrarenie | ca aracanftarita rarer at Rarer afar a 
vafasatftreraegeat | war atrafiad Rarag wae ef 1 ae | 

VYASA. 

‘Or, the state of painless lucidity’ appearing as a Higher Activity, 
causes the steadiness of the mind. These words (italicised) are to be 
taken from the previous aphorism. This is the consciousness of thought- 
forms, which comes to him who concentrates upon the lotus of the heart. 
The essence of the Will-to-know is shining in substance. It acts like 
the Ak4sa (space, giving room to, or transforming easily into any form.) 
By diligent perseverance in that, the Higher Activity appears, taking 
optionally the shapes of the lights of the sun, moon, planets and precious 
stones. Similarly the mind concentrating itself upon the notion of the 
‘I am’ becomes like a waveless ocean calm, infinite, pure egoism. The 
following has been said in this connection :— 

“Knowing that self, small as an atom, his consciousness manifests 
as ‘1 am’ only.” 

This two-fold Higher Activity, the painless sensuous and the Purely 
Egoistic, is called the lucidity. By this the Yogi’: mind reaches the 
state of steadiness.—36. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


‘Or, state of the painless lucidity.’ Painless lucidity means that which is devoid of 
pain. The state of lucidity is the light shining in the lotus of the heart. Let the mind 
be concentrated upon the lotus which is located between the chest and the abdomen. It 
has eight petals and is placed with its face downwards. Its face has first to be turned 
upwards by the process of the expirative control of breath. In the middle thereof is 
the sphere of the sun, the place of waking consciousness, and is called A. Above that 
is the sphere of the moon, the place of dreaming consciousness, the U. Above that is the 
sphere of the fire, the place of dreamless sleep, the M. Above that is the Higher space, 
the Sound of Brahma Itself, the fourth state of ultra-consciousness, which the knowers of 
Brahma call the half-measure (the ardha matra). In the stalk thereof is the Artery of 
Brahma (the Brahman4di), with its face upwards. This passes through the spheres of the 
sun, &c. Beginning above that, is the channel known as Sugumnd. That runs through 
the external spheres of the sun, &c., too, That is the place of the mind. Performing con- 
centration upon that, the Yogi obtains consciousness of thought-forms. 

He now shows the form of the mental essence with the reason thereof :—-‘ The essence 
of the Will-to-be, &c.’ By saying that it acts like the Ak4da, it is intended to be shown 
that it pervades all forms. The lights of the sun, &c., appear as different forms ; and they 
putting on different forms optionally, appear as such (forms). The text understands here 
by the word Will-to-be, the mind and not the Mahattattva ; and it is intended to state here 


Go gle 


64 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


that the mind is of the shape of light appearing as such from its position in the Sugumné& 
channel, inasmuch as it takes its birth from the Vaikarika (the essential s4ttvic) form‘of 
the principle of Individuality (Ahankara), and is therefore full of the essence thereof. Its 
possession of the quality of pervasion too is established by its action upon various objects. 

Having spoken of concentration upon the mind, which is evolved out of the principle 
of Individuality (Asmit4, the basis of the ‘I am’), now he describes the nature of the con- 
centration upon the principle of Individuality or egoism :—Similarly, &c. 

‘Calm’ means that which is free from the waves of disturbing energy (rajas) and 
inertia (tamas). 

Infinite means all-pervading. 

‘Pure Egoism ’ signifies that which does not show more colours than one. 

He supports his theory by another's authority :—The following has been said in this 
connection, by Pafichasikha, 

’¢ Small as an atom,’ because it is difficult to know. 

‘That self,’ which is the basis of the principle of Individuality. 

‘Knowing’ means having pondered upon it and having come to know only this much, 


‘I am.’ 

Well then the lucidity might appear as various forms of light; but how can it be 
pure egoism only? In answer to this, he says :—‘ This two-fold, &c.’ The meaning is that 
the principle of Individuality remains essential light itself whon the dirt of disturbing 
energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas) has been washed away. 

He describes the result of both form of lucidity :—‘ By this, &c.'-—36. 


Satra 37. 


frawatrad at Prag th 309 0 


dim-cm Vita-raga, one who is desireless. fava Visaya, an object. ‘hrewfawy 
Vitarfgavisayam, having the desireless for its object. a V4, or. fry Chittam, 
the mind. 

37. Or, the mind having the desireless, for its object. 
Races at Pray dtacwmRraravaarqea at Arftrafirel feafer- 

UF SAT ele it As tl 

VYASA. 
The mind of the Yogi tinged by the colour of the mind of the de- 
sireless, which it takes up for study, reaches the position of steadiness.—37. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The desireless are such personages as J)vaipfyana and others, their minds become the 
objects of concentration, and the colour thereof is imparted to the mind of the Yogi.—87. 


Satra 38. 


aatrgratareaead aT 3s i 


wan Svapna, of dream. figr Nidrd, of deep sleep, sleeps. wm Jnana, the 
knowledge study. sven Alambanam, taking for its objects, resorting to, medi- 

tating on. a VA, or. 
38. Or, having the knowledge of dream and sleep 


as its object of study. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADBH)), 88, 39, 40. 65 


AMARA SIA AT | SANETATSe at Parerareeatat ar aera 
artrafird Rafrag aaa er i ac a 
VYASA. 


By making the knowledge of dreams and the knowledge of sleep an 
object of study, the mind of the Yogi determines towards the shape and 
attains the position of steadiness.— 38. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

When the time comes that this Yogi, in his dream state, worships the Lord Mahes- 
wara's form, enrapturing the mind by its beauty, placed in a secluded spot of some lonely 
forest, appearing as if arising out of the sphere of the light of the moon, tho limbs largo 
and small of the shape appearing as soft as the stalks of the lotus, the form seen as if made 
of shining moon-stoues, encircled with garlands of swect-smelling Méalati and Mallika; 
then on awakening he is full of elation, and then remembering the same form which was 
the object of dream consciousness, his mind determines towards the unity of that one 
form and attains the position of steadiness. 

The sleep to be understood here is the one in which the light of the quality of 
essentiality appears. (This is the sdttvic sleep). It is the same, on awakening from 
which the remembrance is, ‘I have slept pleasurably.’ This explains that the mind in 
that state becomes one-puinted. It is this that the knowers of Brahma define to be of 


the nature of Brahma (Brahmardpa). 
In the dream state it is not possible to bring mere knowledge without an object, 
within the range; therefore, the object also is brought within the range,--38. 


Stra 39. 


TAAATATATST W RE Ul 


vet-fiaa Yathé abhimata, according to one’s own choice, or what appeals 

one, according to one’s predilection, ‘arma Dhyanat, by meditating on. w VA, 
or. 

33. Or, by meditating according to one’s predilection. 


aafarartar | wathad ata wr ay aafeanerniy 
feaferrey eater aft tae H 
VYASA. 


Let him meditate upon whatever he wishes. Becoming steady in 
that instance, it reaches the position of steadiness in other matters also.— 
39. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
What more? Whatever is desired by one, the same has the form of his deity.—39, 
Satra 4o. 


ATATUNTAERATHASeT ARMTATT: Bo Nl 


wary Parmagu, the .minutest atom. w= Parama, greatest. wera: Mahattva, 
infinity, we: Antah end, wergrcrggrara: Reaching down to the minutest and 
up to the largest. we Asya, of this Yogi. where: Vasikdrah, power. 

9 


Google 


66 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


40. His power reaches down to the minutest, and 
up to the largest. 

CUANICAAECATAISE TAHT: | Gea Marae Wieqcawad 
fafrag saa eft | eye Arararaca wangsard fafa Rracq | oe 
argaat Sizagaraa aiseat: warare: & Gtr ataivnrcenairaracattqai 
niraiad 4 qaaarared wtnattera fr yok 

VYASA. 

Entering into the subtle it attains the position of steadiness upon the 
smallest of the small, down to an atom. Entering into the large, the 
position of mental steadiness reaches up to the largest of the large. 
His great power consists in not being turned back by any check while 
running along both these lines. The mind of the Yogi, full of this power, 
does not again stand in need of the mental embellishment due to habitual 


practice.—40. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


He shows how the nature of the self is to be reached as a point of steady concentra- 
tion:—‘ His power reaches down to the minutest and up to the largest.’ Explains :— 
‘ Entering into the subtle, &c.’ 

Summarizing what has already been said, he describes the connotation of the word 
‘power.’ ‘While running along, &c.’ Now describes a subsidiary result of the power. ‘ Full 
of this power, &c.’ 


Thus the means of obtaining mental steadiness have been described. The power 
too obtained by the steady mind has been shown.—40. 


Sitra 41. 
MITA ATTA AEUHTAY ATTATH TATA 
aarata: vee ul 


Ge Ksina, disappearing, powerless, zt Vyitti, modification of the mind. 
@wan: Ksina Vritteh, of that (mind) whose modifications have become powerless, 
have disappeared. when Abhijdtasya, of a transparent. «4 Iva, like. #9: Maneh, 
of acrystal, ya Grabitri, the knower. 2"4 Grahaya, knowing. sma Gréahya, 
the knowable all these three. ar~ Tat-stha, remaining in it, what is presented 
to it. asa Tad anjanatd, taking the tinge of that object, being coloured by 
that object, the power of appearing in the shape of any object. waft: Samé- 
pattih, the power of thought—transformation, concentration and oneness. 

41. Becoming like a transparent crystal on the modi- 
fications disappearing, (the mind acquires) the power of 
thought-transformation (samapatti), the power of appearing 
in the shape of whatever object is presented to it, be it the 
knower, the knowable or the act of knowing. 


(SO gle 


CH. T. ON TRANCE (SAMADRHD), 41. 67 


ara evahetiwen Qeren: fererecr Pe Rreer ar carafe Tqeae | 


efrarecionaea nigrum gs acargaat ara: | tase: 
Ris rescasaciiaar Ugh area aR Gennes TH Eh- 


ate Kavad | AM PRITAM FHRISTAATTT FAINTTST- 
atte fratad ef) ataahrantencer Gara agains, gee 
Pera wm aeaqgqaa ag fear aaqrarcahe: ar aarafatta- 
waa HBL NH 


VYASA. 


Now whatis the nature of the power of thought-transformation 
which the mind acquires, when it has thus obtained rest? This is des- 
cribed :—‘ Becoming like a transparent crystal on the modifications 
disappearing, the mind acquires the power of thought-transformation, — 
the power of appearing in the shape of whatever is presented to it, be it 
the knower, the knowable, or the act of knowing.’ 


‘On the modifications disappearing ’:—When the notions are at rest, 
(not in active work). 


* Like a transparant crystal’:—This is the statement of an analogy. 
As the crystal becomes coloured by the colour of the object placed beside 
it, and then shines according to the form of the object, so the mind is 
coloured by the colour of the object presented to it and then appears in 
the form of the object. 

Coloured by subtle elements placed in contact, it becomes of the 
nature of-the subtle elements and shines out in the shape of the subtle 
elements. 

Similarly, coloured by the distinctions of the world coming into 
contact with it, it becomes of the nature of those distinctions, and 
shines out in the form of the world. 

Similarly, is this to be understood in the case of the acts of knowing, 
z.e., the powers of sensation. Coloured by the acts of knowing taken as 
objects of thought, it becomes of the nature of the acts of knowing, and 
shines out in forms which show the nature of the acts of knowing. 


(Go gle 


68 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


——_. 


Similarly, coloured by the enjoying Puruga, taken as the object of 
thought, it puts on the nature of the enjoying Purusa, and shines out 
in the form which shows the nature of the enjoying Purusa. 


Similarly, coloured by the released Purusa taken as object of 
thought, it becomes of the nature of the released Puruga, and shines 
out in the form which shows the nature of the released Purusa. 


This then is Sam4patti, thought-transformation,—the mind showing 
itself like a transparent crystal, in the form of the object it comes in 
contact with, be it the knower, the knowable, or the acts of knowledge. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now the question is what is the nature and what are the objects of the Cognitive 
trance, when the mind has thus obtained rest? The Commentator introduces the next 
aphorism :—“ This is described, &c.” Reads the aphorism: --‘ Becoming like a trans- 
parent crystal, &c.’ Explains it:—The words, ‘when the notions are at rest,’ describe 
the mind as existing in the state, in which that class of mental modifications which 
have their origin in the qualities of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas and tamas) 
have been destroyed by habitual practice and desirelessness. By this itis meant to 
be explained that Mental Essence (sattva) being by nature pure, is not overpowered 
at the time, by disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas). 

He explains the analogy :—‘ As the crystal, &c.’ 

‘The object placed beside it’ is the upAdhi, the attributive substance such as the 
Jap& flower, &c. 

‘Coloured by proximity,’ taking up the light thereof. 

The form of the object placed beside, ‘is the red, blue or other colour of its own.’ 

‘Shines out,’ means, ‘shows the qualities of that form.’ 

He applies the analogy :—‘ Similarly, coloured by the object, &c.’ 

The object of knowledge (grihya) is the same to which the mind is at the time 
turned (alambana\. It is coloured thereby when the object passes intoit. Thus is the 
knowable distinguished from the knower and the act of knowing. 

‘Becomes of the nature of the object,’ means, ‘as if it has puton the quality of 
knowability having thus covered up its own mental form. For this reason shines out in 
the form of the knowable object itself.’ 

The subtle andthe gross are colours from the objective world only. The commen- 
tator divides them therefore into two:—‘ Coloured by the subtle, &c.' The distinctions 
of the world consist in its being self-conscious and not self-conscious, and of the 
differences of objects, such as the animals, cows, etc., and the mineral substances, such as 
the jar, etc. By this the two trances which are accompanied by philosophical curiosity 
and meditation are shown, 

Similar is the case with the acts, the means of Knowledge, the powers of sensa- 
tion (indriyas). They are so called because knowledge is obtained through their instru- 
mentality. 

The commentator renders the same plainer :—‘Coloured by the acts of knowledge, 
&c.’ Being an act of knowledge, but taken as an object of knowledge, itis here men- 
tioned as having both these qualities at the same time. 

‘Coloured by that,’ i. e., pierced through and through by that, and having covered up 
its own mental form it appears as [if it ,were the means, the external instrument fof 
knowledge. 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADBH)), 41, 42. 69 


By this has been described the Cognitive trance which is accompanied by elation. 

The one which is accompanied by egoism is now alluded to. ‘Coloured by the Enjoy- 
ing Puruga, &c.’ The Enjoying Purusa means, he in whom the notion of the ‘Iam’ 
resides. 

Because the quality of being a Puraga is common to the released Puruga, such 
as Suka and Prahlada too, they tvo have to be taken here as objects of trance. For 
this reason, the commentator says :—‘ Similarly, coloured by the released Puruga, &c.' 

Coming to the end, he explains the words ‘tastha tadafijnatat,’ appearing in the 
form of the object it comes into contact with. 

The thought-transformation called the Cognitive Trance consists in the assumption 
by the Mental Essence of the forms of the knower, the knowable and the act of knowledge, 
and the consequent showing of itself in the shape of the phenomenon which has entered 
therein, when the dirt of the rujas and the tamas has been removed by the increased 
power of contemplation, and when it is directed towards, i. e., fixed upon, these objects 
of knowledge. 

Here the order of the reading of the words, ‘the knower, the act of knowledge and 
the knowable,’ in the aphorism is not to be regarded, because it is contrary to the 
natural succession of the objects of knowledge. Similarly in the Commentary too the 
mentioning of the subtle elements first in order, is not to be regarded. All is thus 
beautiful.—41. 


Sfitra 42. 


aT UsaUAAaAe: GEA aaa AAT NVA 


am, Tatra, there, wa Sabda, of words, wa, Artha, of meaning. 8m, Jfiana, of 
idea, faae?:, Vikalpaih, with options. eet, Sankirga, mixed up. afar, Savi- 
tarké, indistinct. ware: Samfpattih, the thought transformation. 

42. There, the thought-transformation in which the 
options of word, meaning and idea are mixed up, is 
called Indistinct, (verbal). 

ae weqrieratrast agtat arent aarafe: | cere MritRrareat 
Riteadt AR ewrareakrata Rerararate cea geq) Rrasvaraarey 
SETA seasaay ser Rrarveaay weet Rare: wear: | ae aaraTe|r Ariat 
at vara: aatimerat aa: a tears saad ar 
ergray aarafa: akrarnagqeat | aan Ga mnqgaegertyat waTgara- 
erafrecrqarat = aarieserat | eT prsarea haar s rears arenrcATat- 
ai Affanl aarahacant sem | aa MAT SATaaTa Ty | 

MATZATA TATA, | A AT MATZATAMTAAHTT aeNA | AaNTaytal 
ra arf Aftaceranrst ea Hee 
VYASA. 

And that as follows :—The cow asa word, the cow as an object and 
the cow as an idea, although different from one another, are cognized 
as indistinct. Being analyzed, the characteristics of the word are differ- 
ent ; and the characteristics of an idea are clilferemt ; and the characteristics 


(Go gle 


70 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


of an object too are diffrrent. Thus their lines of existence are distinct. 
‘There, among the various descriptions of thought-transformation, if an 
object such as a cow, is present in the trance-consciousness of the Yogi, 
who has reached this state of thought-transformation, being pierced 
through by the indeterminate notions of word, meaning and idea, then the 
thought-transformation is mixed up and is called Indistinct. 


When, however, the mind becomes free from the memories of verbal 
convention, and the trance-consciousness is devoid of the options of in- 
ferential and verbal cognitions, the object makes its appearance in the 
mind in its own distinct nature (unmixed up with word and meaning), 
the thought-transformation is called Distinct (nirvitarka). This is Higher 
Perception. This further becomes the seed of verbal and inferential 
knowledge. Verbal and inferential knowledge are born therefrom. 
It does not go along with verbal and inferential knowledge. Hence the 
knowledge obtained by a Yogt through the stage of trance, called Distinct 
thought-transformation, is not confused by any other cognition.—42. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Thought-transformation in general has been described. By subsidiary classifica- 
tion it is four-fold. Thus: Indistinct or verbal, Distinct or wordless, Meditative and 
Ultra-meditative. Out of these the description of the Indistinct thought-transformation 
is given :—‘There, &c.’ Out of these thought-transformations the Indistinet thought- 
transformation is to be known. How? The notion of word, meaning and idea consists 
in this. The faculty of imagination (vikalpa) raises distinctions in the same thing and 
shows sameness in different things. Thus the word, meaning and idea are confused together, 
although in reality they are different from one another. Therefore is this thought-trans- 
formation confused, é. e.,'mixed up with the notions of word, meaning and idea :—‘ And that 
as foflows. The word cow, &c.’ The first phrase,‘ the word cow’ shows the unreal cogni- 
tion of the word being fancied as confused with meaning and idea. 

The second phrase, ‘the meaning cow,’ shows the notion of indistinctness from the 
meaning, when word and idea are taken in. 

The third phrase, ‘the cow as an idea’ shows the notion of indistinctness from the 
idea when word and meaning are taken in. It is in this way that the world is seen taking 
in these three without making any distinction among them, although in reality they are 
all distinct from one another. 

Well, but if they are taken in as not distinct from one another, whence does the 
distinction come in? For this reason, the commentator says:—“ Analyzed, &c.” Being 
examined by philosophers in accordance with the canons of agreement and difference, 
the characteristics of a word are found to be, that it is a modification of sound only, and 
that it possesses the qualifications of intensity, &c. The characteristics of the object 
are different, being absence of intelligence and form, &c. The characteristics of an idea 
are different, such as illumination and the absence of fixity in form, &c. Therefore their 
lines of existence are different, the lines, that is to say, along which their natural 
distinctions show themselves. 

When the Yogi is in the state of thought-transformation with reference to ‘ this cow, 
&c., taken in optionally, &c.’ his describes the Yogi's lower perception (the ordinary 


(Go gle 


CH. Tf. ON TRANCE (SAMADHD), 42, 48. 71 


perception). The rest is easy. To connect this with the next aphorism he first describes 
the Distinct Thought-transformation :—‘ When however, &c.’ 

Freedom from memories, &c,, means their absence, Verbal and inferential cognitions 
become possible only when preceded by the memory of verbal conventions. Convention 
consists in the mutual super-imposition of word, meaning and idea, in the phrase, ‘This 
is a cow.’ By these become possible the real and imaginative cognitions, traditional 
teaching and inference. For this reason the trance consciousness preccded by these is 
Indistinct. 

When, however, the mind is full of the object only and favouring the object only, 
constantly habituates itself to the cognition of the object alone, the memory of the con- 
vention does no longer interfere and is therefore given up. Further the options of verbal 
and inferential cognitions too, in which it has its origin, are also given up. Then in the 
trance-consciousness, void of these descriptions of knowledge, the object takes its place 
in its own distinct nature, and the mind is confined to the manifestation of the nature 
of the object alone. It does not show any of the mixed up percepts of the word and the 
idea. This is the Distinct Thought-transformation, That is the Higher Perception 
of the Yogis, because there is not in this, even a trace of untrue knowledge, the unreal 
fastening thereupon of other notions. 

Well let this be. The Yogis Jay down and teach the truths which they have learnt 
by Higher Perception. And howdo they do that, but by promulgating and teaching the 
truths by means of the processes of verbal and inferential knowledge resorted to for the 
sake of others. Hence verbal and inferential knowledge have the Higher Perceptive 
knowledge for their object. And verbal and inferential knowledge are subject to the inter- 
ference of im aginatio (vikalpa). For this reason the Higher Perception also is but a 
modification of imagination. 

Therefore he says:—‘ That is the seed of verbal and inferential knowledge.’ If Higher 
Perception went along with verbal and inferential knowledge in the same way as is the 
case with Indistinct thought-transformation, i. e, if the perception were confused on 
account of the percepts being mixed up, then it would be a modification of imagination 
only. This, however, is theirseed. Verbal and inferential knowledge are born therefrom; 
and it is not possible that the cause of a thing may also be the sphere of its manifesta- 
tion and be co-extensive with it. It is not that the fire lives in smoke, because the 
knowledge of the existence of smoke becomes the cause of the knowledge of the existence 
of fire. Therefore, the Yogis take in objects by non-fictitious (real and distinct) perception, 
and only teach it and promulgate it »y means subject to fiction (mixing up, confusion), 

Summarizes :—‘ For this reason, &c.’ 


Sutra 43. 


wafaahyat weagyeraraarataatear fatacat nese 


eyfa, Smpiti of memory. ‘tg, Parisuddhau, on the purification, or ces- 
sation. «wei, Svarfpa, its own nature. 3H, Sanya, devoid of, x4, Iva, as it were, 
wa, Artha, as the object. a, Matra, alone, frie, Nirbhdsa, shining, fafa'aet 
Nirvitarka, distinctive (wordless), 


43. Distinctive (wordless) thought-transformation is 
that in which the mind shines out as the object alone 
on the cessation of memory, and is as it were devoid of 
its own nature. 


(50 gle 


12 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Aftester: anrtter queue dee atatyst aera 
ardarskrater Pifiarat ar weqagawaraarermknaresaatya AT- 
SAT Vas TTS ACMA THAT TATVAST ATTRA 
arate er aar fest earafe: | rare ereTay | TAM CHATATRAT 
gular agraakanen varkaettat ore) @ a Genaeaar ara: 
enrat arate: HAA ARagha:  wa_qarsa 
meat wale | wabacer saree? a tra) @ oy aatsraater- 
aa 1 asmaara xeteadiaiga cataiga = fxaradnearhersa 
areata saan: feat | ae gave: a saurar agi 
a acUgiad serazeniagagitag fret 1 stu adie 
ott frais | agra Generate fe enigsarararg | wergqeadt 
qeqqarraaaay | aenqeraaa a aqaeanerrerren: aarraie- 
faaatar Rrearvaft Wea 4 


VYASA. 

The description of this Distinctive Thought-transformation is 
given by the aphorism:—“It is Distinctive, when on the cessation of 
memory, the mind shines out as the object alone and is, as it were, devoid 
of its own nature.” The thought-transformation becomes Distinctive at 
the time when the memory of the fictions of verbal convention, verbal 
and inferential knowledge, ceases; when the mind is coloured by the 
nature of the object; when it, as it were, gives up its own nature of con- 
scious cognition ; and when, therefore, it only shows out the nature of the 
object, and has, as it were, transformed into the shape of the object itself. 
And so it has been explained. 

The object itself is but a single output of the eflort of that (thought- 
transformation of the mind). 

The visible world, the cow, &c., or the jar, Xc., consists each in its 
own nature, of different collections of atoms. Each of these collections 
is a particular arrangement of the subtle elements. It is a generic quality 
and constitutes the very nature of the object. It is inferred by its visible 
effect. It has the form of its cause. It shows itself and exists. When 
other characteristics, such as those of the half-jar, &c., arise, it disap- 
pears. This characteristic is called the substratum (the independent 
Whole, the avayavi). Itis this substratum which is spoken of as being 
one, or large, or small, or tangible, or possessing the quality of action or 
transitory. 

To him, however, who does not believe this particular collection to 
be an independent reality and for whom the subtle cause does not admit 
of perception, there is of course no substratum; and_ therefore nearly all 


Google 


Cd. T. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 48. 73 


knowledge is false, being untrue knowledge and not possessing the form 
of the real. And then what would Real Cognition be, when there was no 
real object? Hence there is a substratum (independent of the consti- 
tuent parts) which being spoken of as being large, &c., 1s the object of 
Distinctive Thought-transformation. —43. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Connects the aphorism to be explained:—‘The description of this Distinctive 
Thought-transformation, &c.’ 

‘It is Distinct, &c.':—this is the aphorism. Imagination affects the knowledge of 
word-convention, verbal and inferential cognitions only. Cessation of the memory born 
therefrom, is spoken of here. 

Here, the cessation of the memory of the convention is the cause. The cessation 
of the memory of the verbal and inferential cognitions is caused thereby. The words 
‘inferential cognition,’ denote here the thing to be inferred by means of the process of 
induction. The words‘as it were' used in the text after ‘own nature’ are to be taken 
as qualifying the words ‘ given up.’ 

He refutes the contrary theories about the object of (this thought-transformation):— 
“The object itself is but a single, &c.” ‘Asingle output of the mind,’ consists in what 
puts out the mental act but singly. This means that the atoms which go to make up an 
object being naturally many are not the objects of the Distinctive Thought-transformation. 
The reason is that although the atom may otherwise well be the object of this thought- 
transformation, it cannot be so on account of its extreme subtlety, and because many of 
them being joined together to make a single whole large object, each cannot singly shine 
out in the mind and make as such a single notion. 

If so, why then it may be supposed that really existing atoms possess the character- 
istic of shining out in the mind by virtue of existing as derivative qualities of the single 
whole, i. e., by showing out {what might be called a) derivative grossness. For this 
reason, he says: ‘The object itself (i.¢., not the constituent parts).’ The meaning is that 
the grossness of an object being provable by perception, is impossible to conceal in the 
absence of any defect. 

To those who say that the objects cow, &c., and jar, &c., are formed by the successive 
formations of diatoms, &c., he says thit these objects ‘ consist, each in its own nature, of 
different collections of atoms.’ 

A collection of atoms isa modification showing a gross form, and it differs from an- 
other such modification. Each particular modification of collectivity is of the very nature 
of the object, its own form. The description applies equally whether it be an object such 
as a cow which is capable of enjoying, or, an object such as a jar which is capable of being 
enjoyed. Both these classes of objects fall within the connotation of the word ‘ world’ 
(loka, that which is visible), 

Now the question arises: Is this collection appearing as a gross form different from 
the subtle atoms, or, is itthe same with them? If different, how could they live in it as 
such and how could it have that form? A jar is different from acloth. A jar cannot there- 
fore take the form of a cloth; nor can the qualities which go to make a jar, live in a cloth, 

If, on the other hand, the whole in its collective form were the same with the parts 
(the atous), it would likewise be subtle and independent (as&dhérana). 

For this reason, he says:—‘ Each of these collections is a particular arrangement, &c,’ 
This is the meaning. A jar and other such objects are not entirely different from atoms ; 


nor are they entirely of the same nature. In the casc of their being like the horse and 
10 


Google 


74 PATANJALTS YOGA. 


the cow, the existence of the relation of the characteristic and the characterized could 
not be predicated. If, however, they were not different they would be of the nature of the 
characterized object itself, and this is not proper. Hence the substratum (the characterized 
object, the Whole) should be considered to be in some respects different and in others 
similar to its constituent parts, the subtle atoms. In this way everything becomes proper. 


By placing the words ‘subtle elements’ in the genetive case, he shows partial differ- 
ence ; and the words, ‘constitutes the very nature of the object,’ &c., show the absence of 
difference. 


‘It is inferred by its visible effect’ :—‘ Visible effect” means its perception as such 
and its being dealt with as such. 


‘It has the form of its cause’:—This is intended to show that in so far-as it is not 
different from its cause, it isin the nature of things that it should possess the form of the 
cause. 

Is this characteristic which is of the nature of the charactcrized object itself, per- 
manent? The commentator answers in the negative :—“when other characteristics 
such as those of the half-jar appear, &c.” 


Now he shows thas the form of the characterized object, the whole as such, is differ- 
ent from the atoms :—' This characteristic is called the substratum, &c.’ The meaning is 
that its function is the possession of qualities like the sweetness of water, &c., which are 
quite different from the functions to be performed by atoms, 


It is not only by inference that the independent existence of a substratum (the 
avayavi, the Whole as such) is established; but by the fact as well of the whole world 
treating it as such, inasmuch as the business of the world depends upon that. For this 
reason, he says :—‘ By this, &c.' 

Well, but the mental conception of the percept as an individual existence indepen- 
dent of its parts, may only avail if there is no contradiction. There is, however, contra- 
diction. Thus, whatever cxists has no parts, such as consciousness (vijiana); and the 
cow and the jar, &c., dq exist. This is a reason taken from the very nature of the things. 
Existence is qualified by the absence of the touch of such characteristics as are contra- 
dictory thereof. It is contradicted by the touck of contradictory qualities. 


The touch of contradictory qualities being found in an object possessed of parts, 
contradicts the pervading quality (excludes the middle term). It, therefore, disproves 
even the existence of the object. 


In the substratum there exists the touch of contradictory characteristics, such as 
occupying the same space or not occupying the same space, not being covered or un- 
covered, redness and not-redness, movahility and immovability, &c. 


For this reason, he says :—‘To him however, &c.’ This is the meaning. The proof 
of the existence hy perception is given as the reason, But the pole perceived as a limb 
of a bedstead may also become the pole of a plough, or something else different from what 
it has been proved to be by perception. As to its becoming something else, that is no 
reason, because the something clse is not so proved. As to the existence of the jar, &c., 
being proved by perception, why this existence consists of the capacity of performing 
certain functions; and that capacity is not different from: grossness (sthilattva), The 
reasoning which does away with grossness, does away with the nature of the thing itself. 

But the objection may still arise that the grossness of a thing is not its existence 
itself. Existence is the absence of non-existence. Grossness is the absence of non- 
grossness. The absences differ on account of the difference of the objects whose absences 
are contemplated. Therefore existence is not destroyed, even though grossness may 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 48. 15 


be absent, because the two are different. Or, it might be said that there is difference 
in the objects to be determined on account of the difference of their absences, If 
with a view to determine the nature of the object of perception, which being true 
cognition and free from the taint of imagination, precedes the determination of the 
nature of the object as such, you say that it is made up of the visible atoms, being inces- 
santly born without there being any interval between them, and without their having 
put on the nature of extreme subtlety; then, it is to be noted that the atoms of odour, 
taste and touch fall into the intervals of the visual atoms and that they do not exist 
without them. 

Besides, the notion of a grove, as a single whole, comes into the mind, because the 
intervals among the trees thereof is not perceived, (although it does exist). The theory, 
therefore, which speaks of the atoms as being visible and gross in themselves and as 
having no intervals, is false. How can the fancies based upon such a theory have any- 
thing to do with the realities of things, even on the strength of the conception of a 
causal chain (pdramparya) ? How can it be accepted as establishing the nature of the 
existence to the effect that they do not exist as parts but are wholes themselves. 


Therefore he who believes in the authority of perception free from the taint of fancy, 
must grant that grossness itself, being as it is the object of such perception, does exist 
as such. This is determined for certain without the taint of fancy, and must be 
admitted even by one who has no desire left for such things. And further, if existence as 
sach were to contradict and thus exclude grossness, why, it would exclude itself 
too as a necessary consequence. 


The very highly subtle atofns have, therefore, their intervals filled up with atoms 
of another class, and the theory of their being the objects of perception is shorn 
of admissibility. This is meant by saying, ‘To him, however, who does not believe 
this particalar collection to be an independent reality, &c.’ But the particalar 
collection although independently existing is still the object of certain (nirvikalpa) 
perception. 

Well then the subtle atoms may be the objects of certain perception. For this 
reason, he says :—‘ And the subtle object docs not admit of perception,’ Perception here 
means that which is free from the taint of imagination, is certain. 


‘To him who has such a chief,’ there is of course no substratum and for this reason, 
all knowledge is false, being defined as it is ‘‘ to be untrue knowledge, not possessing the 
form thereof.” The knowledge, that is to say, which has grossness for its object, and that 
again on which this rests, the knowledge of existence, is all false to him. 


Well, even go, the knowledge of self would not be untrue, inasmuch as the self does 
not exist as a whole consisting of parts. How then should it be said that all knowledge 
would become false? For this reason, he says :—“ Nearly all knowledge.” 


The question now arises, ‘ What even if it were so ?’ In answer he says :—‘ And then 
what would Right Cognitions be, &c.’ If the knowledge of existence (sattva), &c., be 
false then the knowledge of things which have their origin in Sattva, &c., such as the 
knowledge of there being no substratum, independent of parts, must also be false. For 
what is the object of this knowledge bnt the grossness which is the object of certain 
perception? And inasmuch as this grossness does not exist, its knowledge would certainly 
be false. Bat how is it that the object itself does not as such exist? For this reason, 
he says :—“‘ Whatever is perceived, &c.” 


As to contradiction (virodha) that is to be explained in accordance with the afore- 
said method of knowledge, by means of the variety of modifications, and by diflerencia- 
tion and non-differenciation. Thus all is beautiful.—43. 


Go gle 


76 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


Sutra 44. 


aaa afar fran a qeafasar sarearar ueen 


vem, Etaya, by this. 4, Eva, also, efea Savichaéré, this meditative, fawa 
Nirvichdra, the ultrameditative. , Cha, and, geafeen Siksma-visaya, having the 
subtle for their or its objects, earn VydkhyAta, are described. 


44, By this the meditative and the ultra-medita- 


tive, having the subtle for their objects, are also 
described. 


exatareentiyaie hal i TAT SL RTT 
aa wale oat Pfterteed | are aereg Rrra afreret Afaast @ ae 
aegha afar Aftart a! caquatate Mfeetar Preererhret- 
warrafe ll veh 


VYASA. 


Of these the thought-transformation into subtle element is called 
Meditative, when their characteristics are in manifestation and when the 
limitations of consciousness in space, time and operative cause are present. 
In this state too the subtle element comes into the trance-consciousness 
as qualified only by the present characteristics ; and is taken in only by 
a single effort of consciousness; and it is this much alone of an object 
that comes into contact with the faculty of Meditative Thought- 
transformation. 


That, however, is the ultra-meditative thought-transformation, which 
operates with reference to subtle objects unlimited in all ways, all round 
by the past, the present and the unpredicable characteristics, but running 
after all the characteristics possessing as they do in fact a nature common 
to all of them. ‘This in fact is the nature of the subtle element. It pre- 
sents itself to the trance-consciousness as such and colours it similarly by 
contact. As to the cognition it is called ultra-meditative, when it becomes 
the object itself, and thus as it were, becomes void of its own nature. 


Of these the Indistinctive and Distinctive thought-transformations 
have to operate upon things extended in time and space; the Meditative 
and the Ultra-meditative operate upon the subtle elements. It is thus 


Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH]I), 44. 77 


that the absence of uncertainty in both these is described by the descrip- 
tion of the Indistinctive alone.—44, 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Those that have manifested the characteristics of the jar, &c., are said to ‘ have their 
characteristics in manifestation.’ It means those that have already taken up the charac- 
teristics of the jar, &c. 


Space is indicated by above, below and the directions, &c. Time here is the present. 
‘Operative cause’: The earthly atom is born from the five classes of ultimate atoms 
(tanmatras), with a prevalence of the odoriferous minima. Similarly the liquid atom 
(apas tattva) is born from the four classes of ultimate atoms except the odoriferous 
minima with the prevalence of the gustiferous minima. Similarly, the flery atom is made 
of the three minima besides the odoriferous and the gustiferous minima, witha prevalence 
of the luminiferous minima. Similarly, the gaseous atom is born from the tangiferous 
and soniferous minima without an admixture of the other three classes of minima, with a 
prevalence of the tangiferous minima. Similarly, the birth of Ak4sa is from the one 
class of soniferous minima alone. This is the operative cause of the subtle elements. 


The subtle elements in this state are qualified by the limitations of space, time and 
their causes such as those specified. It means that, being limited by the consciousness 
of time, space and causes as they are, the cognition of these qualified objects is not in- 
dependent of the cognition of their qualities. 


The question is, what is thesimilarity of the Indistinctive to the Meditative Thought- 
transformation? For this reason, he says :—‘ Further in that state, &c.’ The earthy atom 
receives its indi?iduality from the five classes of ultimate atoms (tanindtras) grouping 
together and is taken in by a single effort of consciousness as a single whole. Similarly 
are the liquid atoms, &c., to be understood as coming into consciousness as single sub- 
stances, receiving as they do their individuality by groupings of three, two and one class 
of ultimate atoms (tanmatras) respectively. 


The present characteristic is that which at is present rising. By saying that ‘it is 
qualified only by the present characteristics,’ it is indicated that in this state of conscious- 
ness are present along with the object the optional operations of the memory of conven- 
tion and of verbal and inferential cognitions. Perception, while it cognizes the gross state, 
does not reveal the atoms. They are revealed by verbal and inferential cognitions. 
Hence it is proper that it (the Meditative Thought-transformation) should be mixed up 
with the operations of verbal and inferential cognitions. 


Now explains the Ultra-meditative :—' That however, etc,’ 

‘In all ways’ meuns in all modes of manifestation, as blue, yellow, &c. All round 
means by the consciousness of all the conditions of time, space, and causation. By de- 
scribing them thus, it is shown that the atoms are not limited by time. Further, he says 
that they are neither limited by the characteristics which are brought into operation 
by time :—‘ Unlimited by the past characteristic, i, e., those which have had their opera- 
tion ; by rising characteristics, i.e. those that are to be found in the present; by the 
unpredicable characteristics, i.e. the fature ones. 

The question arises that if the atoms are not conditioned by any of these character- 
istics, are they then quite fortuitous? For this reason he says :—‘ but running after all the 
characteristics.’ By what connection thendo the atoms run after the characteristics ? 
For this reason, he says : —‘ Possessing as they do in fact a nature common to all the charac- 
teristics, The meaning is that characteristics differ in some respects from, and are 
identical in others to, the atoms. 


ea gle 


78 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Now he says why this thought-transformation has this nature of the atoms as its 
object :—This in fact is the nature of the subtle element! The power which gives the 
knowledge of reality does not operate upon the unreal, 


Having described the object of that state of consciousness, now he describes its 
nature :—‘ As to the cognition, &c.’ 


Summarising he makes a statement which shows the differences of their natures— 
‘Of these, &c.’ Finishes :—‘ It is thus, &c.’ 


In both these :—in itself and the ultra-meditative.—44. 


Siitra 45. 


qari afagdsary ek i 


ga Siksma, of the subtle. faweay, Visayatvam, province both mean the 
quality of having the subtle for its object. « Chaand, wA, upto. fq Lifga, 
the noumenal. wae Paryavasanam, ending, extremity. wregrvaaery Reaching 
up to the noumenal. 


45. And the province of the subtle reaches up to 
the noumenal. 


eats atieewdaeray | uftacatmieacasd qeat rea: | 
MAAN Tana | awaer suena | araataer waa | 
arama weauraaia | agagge: | were fears ant fra: | 
fayMTaraiog qea fara: | a atiegTat qeaafer | arate get: qua 
sf) ae) aa gracafsger Grad a Ba gover fig &Reaeahr 
aca gear a vat) tae waa | wa: waa Grad Area are- 
ay N B's I 

VYASA. 


The odoriferous ether (gandha tanmitra) is the subtle object in 
relation to the atoms of the earthly class iprithvi); the gustiferious (rasa 
tammatra) to the liquid (4pas: atom ; the Jumniferous ether (rapa tanmA&tra) 
of the fiery {taijas) atom ; the tangiferous ether (sparga tanmitra) of the 
gaseous (vAyu) atom; the soniferous ether (Sabda tanmatra) of the 
AkAgic atom. Of these the principle of individuality (ahahkara) is the 
subtler cause. Subtler than this too is the purely Phenomenal Objec- 
tive Existence. The principal subtler than this too is the Noumenal 
(Alihga). There is nothing subtler than the Noumenal. 

But it might be said that there is the Purusa who is also subtle. 
True. As however is the subtlety of the noumenal in comparison with 
the purely phenomenal, such is not the subtlety of the Purusa. On the 
other hand, the Purusa is not the material cause of the Purely Pheno- 
menal. It is only the instrumental cause. For this reason the subtlety 
of the Mulaprakriti is described as not liable to be exceeded. 


(Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE '‘SAMADHI), 45, 46. 79 


VACHASPATI'8 GLOSS. 


Does the range of thought-transformation with reference to objective appearances 
extend up to the subtle elements only? No. ‘And the province of subtle reaches up 
to the noumenal. 

The characteristic of the odoriferous ultimate atom (gandha tanmatra) is in relation 
to the atom of the earthy class (Prithvi) the subtle object of the faculty of thought- 
transformation. In other places it should be construed in the same way. 

The purely Phenomenal is the Great Principle (Mahattattva), because it is that which 
immediately passes into latency (linga) into the Mulaprakriti. The noumenal is the 
Mulaprakriti, because it does not pass into latency (aliiga), into any other state. 

He describes the reaching up to the noumenal :—‘ There is nothing subtler, &e.’ 

States an objection :—‘ But it may be, &e.’ Replies :—‘ True, &e.’ The meaning is 
that as a material cause subtlety exists in the noumenal only, nowhere else, 

But the Mahat and the principle of individuality exist for fulfilling the objects 
of the Puruga. The Purusa also is, therefore, a cause of the noumenal. Why should 
it be said that stublety exists only in the noumenal? For this reason, he says :—It is cer- 
tainly a cause but not the material cause. As Mulaprakriti evolves into the phenomenon 
of Mahat and onwards, not so the Purusa. 

Finishes:—‘ For this reason the sublcty of the Mulaprakriti is described as not 
capable of being exceeded.—45. 


Soatra 46. 


aT Wa asst: AAMT: lh Ve UN 


am: Tah, they. wa Eva, only. aia: Sabijah, seeded, anfa:, SamAdhih, trance, 
46. They are the seeded trance only. 


at er erefter: rare: | arareret: erarreren aeteqarter xe aarhrety 
adits: | aw eqasd aftad: | Afar: qeast afrantr Affarc eri a 
aqulqesenra: aarbrith yee 1 
VYASA. 


These four descriptions of thought-transformation have their origin 
(seed) in external objects. Therefore is the trance too ‘seeded.’ In the 
case of the gross objects itis the Indistinctive and the Distinctive. In 
the subtle objects it is the Meditative and the Ultra-meditative. Thus 
is trance described to be four-fold.—46. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Says that the four states of thought-transformation have the objective for their 
sphere of operation, constitute the cognitive trance :—‘ They are the seeded trance only,’ 
The word ‘ only’ is to be taken as qualifying the word ‘seeded.’ By this the four descrip- 
tions of thought-transformation, having the objective state of existence as their sphere, 
are limited by being qualified as seeded. 

The quality of being seeded, however, is not restricted to these. It applies to the 
thought-transformations which have the subjective and the instrumental modifications 
also for their sphere of operation, in both its descriptions of Uncertain (savikalpa) and 
Certain (nirvikalpa). For this reason there are said to be four descriptions of thought- 
transformation in the case of the objective and the instrumental phenomena. Thus there 
are cight descriptions in all. The meaning of the commentary has been explained.—46, 


(SO gle 


80 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Satra 47. 


PPTATTAMITASAITATATS: th V9 I 


fifa'ere Nirvichdra, of the ultrameditative, fared Vaisdradye, when there is 
the undisturbed, pure flow. wer Adhy&tma, subjective, spiritual. ": 
Pras&dah luminosity, the fixedness of the mind. 


47. The undisturbed flow of the ultra-meditative 
causes Subjective Luminosity. 


Afradancaseaewray: | UYCUACUASTIaeT  TETETAAT 
qhraerer creanararainya: eaes: feefasrearer Farce | zat Pearce 
aartdancate waa aan {har warerareng: | qarafawa: At 
AGA VHS: AMTSTH: | Tart Bren | pogeches ee sn eet 
qtrattra fee qateretsazreae y ee 

VYASA. 

‘Undisturbed flow’ is the pure and constant flow, not overpowered 
by disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas), of the essence (sattva) 
of the Will-to-know, the very self of light, with the veil of impurity 
covering it removed. When this undisturbed flow is secured for the 
Ultra-meditative trance, the Yogi attains Subjective Luminosity. His 
intellectual vision becomes clear with regard to objects as they exist, 
irrespective of all sequence. And soit has been said :—‘ Having reached 
the stage of intellectual luminosity, the wise man is no longer an object 
of compassion ; he looks upon and compassionates others, as one upon a 
height looks down upon those in the plains.’ 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Now he describes the beauty of the ultra-meditative among the four descriptions 
of thought-transformation, which have the objective as their sphere of operation :—The 
undisturbed flow of the ultra-meditative causes Subjective Luminosity.’ Describes the 
meaning of the words, ‘undisturbed flow’':—‘ The pure, &c.’ ‘Impurity’ is the adhesion 
of disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas). The same is a sort of dirt having the 
quality of a veil. When the veil is removed from the essence of the Will-to-know, it 
shines out as the very self of light, and is therefore said to be not overpowered by them. 

But then, if the sphere of thought-transformation is the objective modification of 
existence, how can it secure Subjective Luminosity ? For this reason, he says :—‘ With 
regard to objects as they exist.’ The subjective is not its object. It is only that in 
which the subjective self lives, that becomes its object as such. 

‘ Without regard to all sequence ’ means simultaneously. 

Quotes on this subject the Géth& of the Great Seer :—‘ And so it has been said.’ 
Finding himself above all, on having reached the highest point of the vision of know- 
ledge, he is sorry to see the men of the world suffering from the thiee descriptions of 
pain.— 47. 


(Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 48, 49. 81 


Sdatra 48. 


MAA AT WaT wa i 


wea Ritambharé, full of truth, full of essence, essential cognition. a 
Tatra, there in, "w prajfia, the faculty of cognition. 
48. Therein the faculty of Essential Cognition. 


SAAC TT OMT | Ahercerarkakraet ar Tat waa gear aaah 
ger wafa.| wal aaaaag fafa) aa ax faqateeraditsc- 
ett) aa ara) armargaraa waranaracaa @ | frat weer 


wae Innate i ec ht 
VYASA. 


The cognitive faculty which shows itself in that state in the mind 
of the wise, bears the name of Essential Cognition (Ritambhara). The 
term itself expresses the definition. It always cognizes the essence, the 
truth. There is not even a trace of false knowledge. 

And so it has been said :-—‘ Cultivating the mind in the three ways 
of verbal and inferential cognitions and the practice of contemplation with 
tastefulness, one gets the highest Yoga.’—48&. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Expresses the concurrence of the Yogis by mentioning a technical term well-known 
among them and defiuing its own meaning :—‘ Therein, the faculty cf essential cognition.’ 
The Commentary is easy. ‘Cultivation by verbal cognition’ means the hearing of the 


Vedas. 

‘Cultivation by inferential cognition’ means thinking. 

Contemplation means keeping in mind. Practice means over and over again. Cone 
templation with tastefalness means welcome contemplation.—48. 


Siitra 49. 


favtardearq tl ee 


wr Sruta, heard, verbal, ww Anumana inferential, meray Prajfidbhyam, 
from those of cognition. weaAnya, different. faa Visaya object, www Anya 
visayé, having objects different from. fageérara ViseSa-arthatvat, because it 

refers to particulars ( faa ) 
49. It has different objects from those of verbal 


and inferential cognition, as it refers to particulars. 

a Tt | wargarcenaaaren terra | weramrarert 
ACTA A | TTA errartaatarsirargy | wey 2 aie fratta ea 
age: weg ei ange araraasata | ax ofa areas 
ern a vale alate | wgaa & Arar Arqerarc: | 
Rava 4 Rrate: aitaqettio | a area quasalkatracey Teqar see: 
aw sequafte | a area faweasraracararaisett | aarfiaetamig ca 


11 


(Go gle 


82 PATANJALTI’S YOGA. 


nt 


a fear wala) yaqurrat at gear at aengargarsenam- 
fererar er seat Praterereariaher Wi ve, 
VYASA. 
And that, moreover, ‘has different objects from those of verbal 
and inferential cognitions, as it refers to particulars.’ 


Verbal cognition refers to knowledge received from another. It 
has the generals for its objects. It is not possible to describe the parti- 
culars by words. Why? Because there is no conventional denotation 
of the particular in words. 


Similarly, inferential cognition has the generals for its objects. 
Wherever there is approach there is motion ; wherever there is no approach 
there is no motion in existence. This has been said. Further inference 
arrives at conclusions by means of the generic qualities. Therefore there 
18 no particular which can be made the object of induction and verbal 
cognition, 

Ordinary perception does not cognize the subtle, the distant and 
the intercepted. Nor can it be said that this particular does not exist for 
want of authority. This particular can only be cognized by the trance 
cognition, whether it be present in the subtle elements or in the Purusa. 
Hence this coguition has different objects from those of inferential and 
verbal cognitions, because it has the particulars for its objects. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Very well, the ultra-meditative has for its sphere of action the objects cognizable 
by verbal and inferential cognition and is the culmination of these faculties. It can 
therefore operate upon the objects of verbal and inferential cognitions only. Because 
it is not certainly possible that a mental potency born out of practice with reference 
to one object of thought, should be capable of causing the knowledge of another 
object. This would mean going beyond the proper limits. Therefore if the essential 
cognition is the same as the ultra-meditative, its objects must be the same as those of 
verbal and inferential cognitions. For this reason, he says :—‘ It has different objects.’ 


Mental Essence is luminous by nature, and has the power of knowing all objects, 
When veiled by inertia (tamas) it cognizes only upon the veil being removed by energy 
(rajas). When, however, upon the impurities of inertia and disturbing energy being 
removed by practice and desirelessness, the pure light shines forth, then, light passes 
beyond the limits of all measures and all finite objects, and becomes infinite ; what then 
is there that does not fall within tne sphere of its action ? 

Explains :—‘ Verbal cognition is the knowledge received from another,’ Its sphere 
of action consists of the universal, Why? Words cannot connote particulars. Why ? 
Because of their not being limited and because of overlapping (vyabhichara.) 

‘ There is no conventional denotation of the particular in words,’ because the relation 
of the sign and the thing signified is not found existing between a word and the particular. 
Nor is such a particular possible of being expressed by the meaning of a sentence. 


(Go gle 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADBH1), 49, 50. 83 


The same is the case with inference, whose operation depends upon the relation 
existing between the sign and the thing signified (the linga and the lingi) :—‘Similarly, 
has induction, &c.’ The words ‘wherever’ and ‘there’ denote the pervader and the 
pervaded, by a change of places. For this reason the conclusion is arrived at here by 
virtue of the common property. Concludes—‘ therefore there is, &c,' 


Well, then, let it be the ordinary perception which does not depend for its operation 
upon the knowledge of any relationship. For this reason, he says :—‘ Nor can it be said, 
&c.’ Ordinary perception may not depend for its operation upon the recognition of 
relationship. It does certainly depend upon the senses, and the senses are not in their 
sphere here (i.e., in the essential cognition). This is the meaning. 

Well, but, if the particulars are not such objects as can be known by verbal, inferen- 
tial and perceptive cognitions, then, there is no authority for their existence. For this 
reason, he says :—‘ Nor can it besaid that the particular does not exist for want of author- 
ity.’ The meaning is that a means of knowledge (pramfna) is neither co-existent with nor 
the cause of the thing known. It isnot therefore necessary that the reality to be known 
should cease to exist, because there is no means or power of knowing it, Those who rely 
upon the ordinary means of knowledge, do not doubt the existence of a deer-like mark in 
the moon at a time when only certain phases of hers are visible, For this reason it is said 
that it is capable of being known by the trance cognition alone. 

Here the atoms and the Purusas which are the subjects of discussion, are each of 
the nature of independent particularities, because, being substances, they are all separate 
from each other, All those that are separate from one another, being substances, are 
of the nature of independent particularities, as, say, sugar and a hair-shorn mendicant. Thus 
by this inference and by authority the special province of the essential cognition is 
defined, because otherwise there ;would remain a doubt as to its real nature, brought 
about by ordinary reasoning. till, the attempt to define it is not complete, and its 
existence is brought within the sphere of consciousness with difficulty, on account of 
its being far removed from ordinary objects, by inference and authority. The knowledge 
although thus brought about with difficulty is not so plain and well-defined as the know- 
ledge of collectivity, &c., obtained by words denoting them along with the proper 
accessories of enumeration of signs (signifying the particular object). Thus it is that 
its object is different from the objects of verbal and inferential cognitions.—49, 


Siitra 50. 


ASM: CERT SAACHITA ATA tl Wo Ul 


wen: Tajjah, born therefrom. dere: Samskarah, residual potencies, impres- 
sions. Wa Anya, other. eer Samskdra, residual potencies, impressions. xftwea 
pratibandhi, impeding. 
50. Residual potencies born therefrom impede other 
residual potencies. 
aartararskraca art: Tats: AER AAT AAT NTA ATS: | eER- 
tiserenreaaacdt | START AEH BAMATSHAIAT INIT | STRAITA- 
Genrahraaraenrar: waa awa serahtra’ aarkreqiasa | aa 
AAA TAN AT TAHT: AERA Cat Aa Ag? TERIaAIa ATaa | Tara 
TET aaa Gene eft wage cenrafiagd afret a aera | a 


Go gle 


84 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


acre: seen gs aeratgenaarercere’ gifts 1 Pre & 2 
| warrant f& Rraafeertr nyo 4 


VYASA. 


When the trance cognition has been reached, the Yogt acquires 
by the exercise of that cognition, newer and newer residual potencies. 
‘The residual potencies born therefrom impede other residual potencies.’ 
The potency born of trance impedes the outgoing vehicle of potencies. 
By overpowering the outgoing tendencies, notions due to them cease to 
exist. On the suppression of these notions the trance faculty gains 
in power. Then again the activity of trance cognition. Then again 
residua caused by the act of coguiition. In this way the vehicle of 


potencies is being constantly renewed. 


Well the act of cognition is caused by the potency and the potency 
is caused by the act. How is it then possible that the mind may not 
be given by this vehicle of potencies an object in itself? The potencies 
born out of the trance cognition do not give the mind a duty to perform 
with reference to themselves, because they are the cause of the removal 
of the afflictions. ‘They bring about the finishing of the duty which the 
mind has to perform. It is only up to the attainment of discriminative 
knowledge that the activity of the mind has to last. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Let that be. The cognitive trance has the reality of an object for its sphere of 
operation. Practice and the other means of restraint as described, are however out- 
going potencies. The trance cognition is known to be firmly bound up with them, They 
must therefore be obstacles to the full realization of that state of consciousness, shine 
as it would like atomic twinkles of light in the midst of a hurricane. To remove this 
doubt the commentator introduces the aphorism :--‘ When the trance cognition has been 
reached, &c.’ Reads the aphorism :—‘ Residual potencies born therefrom impede other 
residual potencies. 

The word, ‘there’ in ‘therefrom’ signifies the ultra-meditative thought-transforma- 
tion. ‘Other’ means the outgoing. Inclination towards the realities of objects is of 
the very nature of the mind. It is unsteady and wanders only so long as it does not reach 
the reality. When that is reached it takes up a steady position, and turns round and 
in the way of the wheel of potency, bent upon purification (i.e, upon acquiring that 
potency). Doing this it must certainly impede the mutual succession of the power and 
act of the cognition of unrealities, although the succession has had no beginning. The 
outsiders also say the same:—‘ Unreal cognitions do not contradict the nature of the 
objects as they do exist in reality, free from defects, even though the unrealities have 
existed from eternity ; because the mind is naturally inclined towards the realities.’ 

Very well, grant that the outgoing potencies are restrained by the operations of 
the trance cognition. But the first manifestation of the trance cognition has for its 
final object the ever-increasing unchecked manifestation of the poteney of trance cogni- 
tion. Thus itis plain that the mind even in that state, has the same old quality of 
having still a function to. perform, (The attajnment of the trance cognition too does 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADH1), 50, 51. 85 


not take it any nearer to the fulfilment of its object’. This is the question raised ‘How 
is it then that the mind, &c.’ Refutes:—‘The potencies born out of, &c,’ There are 
but two objects of the mind, the enjoyment of sound, &c., and the attainment of Discri- 
minative knowledge. Of these the enjoyment of sound, &c., comes into operation with 
the existence of the vehicles of affliction and action. When, however, the power which 
springs from the manifestation of trance cognition, entirely roots out the vehicles of 
action and affliction and the mind for that reason exists in the state of having mostly 
fulfilled its objects, the only object that then remains for it to achieve, is the attainment 
of Discriminative knowledge. Therefore the potencies of the mind due to the practice 
of the trance cognition cannot generate the habits of returning to the duties of enjoy- 
ment. They must check their forward march. They bring about the end of its duty 
of enjoyment, i.e., render it impotent to enjoy them. How? The action of the mind 
lasts only up to the attainment of discriminative knowledge. The mind only works for 
enjoyment as long as it does not experience discriminative knowledge. When, however, 
discriminative knowledge is born, the afflictions are removed, and the duty of causing 
enjoyment is over. This is the meaning.—50. 


Satra 51. 


aenta fata aatarantadia: aan: vue u 


we Tasya, of that, wi Api, too, f@* Nirodhe, by the suppression,” 
Sarva, of all. f¥tarq Nirodhat, owing to the suppression, fia: Nirbtjab, seed- 

less. «aaa: Samadhih, trance, 
51. All being suppressed, by the suppression of 


that too comes the seedless trance. 

fee area wafa | aenit Ata adhtrafedie: aa: | a a tad 
aarkisrenraendn | wereararara aenrcrat ofraedt waft) senfatraw: 
wen: amiianecenrrarca eft | Atraferermaraaaa Peraere- 
BAUSHieraagaay | Aearaktrraakiaas: ae Fareravha: qene- 
fad cent sHaraaiwarat ofadiraa | aang aearahraentrarchr?- 
Rear a Reeaat war) aenqateartrat aetacrarts cden®- 
fed Mada! afafara ges: weaarsafistsr: ge: east qa caer 


qf W 2 a 
ef sftaraene aterraaa Arrant sea: 
SATA AAT: |e I 


VYASA. 


And what more comes to the mind? ‘All being suppressed by 
the suppression of that too comes the seedless trance.’ ‘This opposes not 
only the trance cognition, but checks also the operation of the potencies 
generated by that cognition. Why? The potency of the habit of 
suppression that is acquired, removes the potencies of the habit of trance 
cognition. That there exists the potency of the habit of suppression, 
gencrated by the acts of mental control, is to be inferred by the mental 


Google 


86 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


experience of the succession in time of the act of suppression and the 
consequent rest. The mind disappears into its own inactive cause, along 
with the potencies which operate to lead to absolute freedom, and which 
are born of the trance cognition operating to suppress the outgoing 
potencies. ‘These potencies, therefore, being opposed to the continuance 
of the duty of the mind, do not become the cause of its further existence 
as such. And it is for this reason that the mind which has achieved 
its purpose, an? along with it the potencies which operate to lead to 
absolute freedom, ceased to act further. When the mind ceases to act 
further, the Purusa remains in its own true self, and is therefore pure, 


absolutely free, and released (madkta) as he is called.—51. 
This finishes the first chapter, on trance, of the Siakhyapravachana Commentary of 
the Yogaiastra of Patafijali. by Vyasa. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


It has been said that the cessation of the function of enjoyment is the reason for 
acquiring the potencies of the trance cognition. Now he puts aquestion: ‘ And what more 
comes to the mind?’ The meaning is that inasmuch as the mind possessing the potencies 
of the trance cognition, generates the flow of these potencies (into activity) the mind 
has stilla duty to perform as before; because something else is necessary to remore 
the necessity of the performance of this function too. The answer is given by the 
aphorism :—‘ All being suppressed, by the suppression of that too comes the seedless 
trance.’ The meaning of the word ‘ too’ is that not only the trance cognition, but the 
potencies generated by the cognition are also suppresscd by means of generating side by 
side with these the potency of higher desirelessness, defined t+ be the light of knowledge 
alone. The stream of the potency and the act of cognition which are being constantly 
generated ove from the other, having been checked, the effect is not born without the 
cause ; and this is the seedless trance. Explains :—‘ That’ seedless trance, being brought 
about by the higher desirelessness, which opposes the trance cognition, does by means 
of its cause, not only because the opposer of the trance cognition, but at the same time 
obstructs the flow of the potencies generated by that cognition also. 

Well, the knowledge born of desirelessness may very well destroy the cognition 
alone, because it exists as a cause, How can it destroy the potency, which in fact is no 
knowledge? Memory is seen operating even in a waking man with reference to objects 
seen in dreams. With this object he puts the question: ‘Why?’ The answer is: ‘The 
potency of the habit of suppression, &c., ‘Suppression’ is that by which the cognition 
is suppressed, that is the Higher desirelessness. It is from that, that the potency of the 
habit of suppression is born, The meaning is that it is not by the cognition but by the 
potency born of higher desirelessness, long, uninterruptedly and devotedly practised, 
that the potency of the cognition is destroyed. Well, let that be, But what authority 
is there for the existence of the potency of the habit of suppression? It can either be 
known by perception, or inferred by its effect, the memory thereof. But the Yogi can 
have no perception when all the mental modifications have been suppressed. Nor can 
he have memory, because the act of suppression operating upon the act of modification 
as such can leave no memory behind. For this reason, he says:—‘ The existence of the 
potency is to be inferred, &c.’ The ‘rest' in suppression means the state of suppression. 

The succession in time of that state means a mulitirta, an hour and a half, day and 
night, &c, The experience is to he of this succession. This is the meaning, The intensity 


Google 


CH. I. ON TRANCE (SAMADHDN), 51. 87 


of suppression is in accordance with the intensity of desirelessness and practice ; and 
this intensity is taken note of by its extension over the periods of time known as 
muhirta, an hour-and-a-half, &c., by the Yogi. And inasmuch as the moments of 
desirelessness do not exist together on account of a fixed order in the appearance, and 
on account of their extending over their own special periods of time, they cannot be 
adequate to bring about the intensity of suppression; it is therefore the store of the 
potential energy thereof, born of the collective effect of the moments of desirelessness, 
indulged now and again, that is desired to be understood here, 

Well the potencies of cognition may be destroyed. But how can the potencies of 
suppression be destroyed? For if they be not destroyed, the mind has still a duty left to 
perform. For this reason, he says :—‘ The mind disappears, &c.’ 

The trance cognition which suppresses the outgoing tendencies is the cogni- 
tive trance. It is the potencies born from that, that are here spoken of. The potencies 
which operate to lead to absolute freedom are the potencies born from the acts of sup- 
pression. Because the potencies of the outgoing acts of cognition have become embedded 
in the mind, it is said to be the possessor of the potency of outgoing cognition. The 
potency of suppression, however, is but newly born in the mind. The mind has therefore 
no duty to perform, even though the potency of suppression exists. The mind which has 
the duty of achieving the purposes of the Purusa, is said to have the duty of achieving 
those objects. The purposes it has to achieve are the enjoyments of sound, &c., and the 
attainment of discriminative knowledge. 

When however the potency of suppression only remains, the Purusa is no longer the 
substratum of the reflex consciousness of the Will-to-be (buddhi). Hence the potency 
of suppression cannot be an object of the Purusa to be fulfilled by the mind. The minds 
of the Videhas and the Prakpitilayas do not consist of a balance of suppressive potencies 
alone; they have therefore still a duty to perform. Also because they are possessed of 
the aroma of afflictions. 

With this in mind, says the commentator :—‘ And it is for this reason, &c.’ The rest 
is easy.—5l. 

The object and explanation of Yoga, the meaning of the modifications for the purpose 
of the performance thereof, the means of Yoga and its kinds are described in this chapter. 

Here ends the first chapter of Vachaspati’s Gloss, the Vachaspatya, on the commen- 
tary of Vyasa on the Aphorisms of Patanjali. 


(50 gle 


CHAPTER THE SECOND. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA. 


Sitra 1. 


ATVTATNAA ATA ATA AHATAT: te 


m™: Tapah purificatory action. rar SvAdhydya, study. tycafewm févara- 
pranidhdna, worship of God, making God the motive of action. fir" Kriy&, of 

action, a: Yogah, the Yoga. 
1. Purificatory action, study and making God the 


motive of action, IS the Yoga, of action.*— 52. 
ste: aarftahreca ann | ae sqhtertrets arrge: entkeraane- 
Ie (AT VaTegpsAcaeITarares Paar: | aTaaeaqar Aer: rear) srarkrent 
@ rare Rear segquieaarawe argrrarata av: daar eh ave 
eqatay | ae Rravaqaaarnaaraaareaitfa wat | cared: 
swaatrrrat wir Aare at | bacarart eificarat coups 
WY | ACHAT AT Lh 


The Yoga for him whose mind is already inclined towards trance 
cognition, has been described. How may onc with an out-going mind 
become also possessed of Yoga, is now considered ‘The Yoga of action 
is purificatory action, study and the devotion to God and making Him the 


VYASA, 


motive of action.’ 
Yoga is not attained by one not given to purificatory action. Im- 


purity is variegated by the eternal in-dwelling of the aroma of action 
and affliction, and is ever in contact with the network of enjoyables. It 
cannot be dispersed without purificatory action (tapas). For this reason 


* The word ‘tapas’ has been translated as purificatory action, because ‘ tapas’ 
means that which burns up impurities. 

The word ‘ Idwarapranidh4na’ has been translated as the devotion to God being the 
motive of action. The same word in the first chapter (I. 23) has been translated as 
feeling the omnipresence of the Lord. The root meaning of the word ‘ pranidhana’ is 
the placing of anything under another to the fullest extent (pra=fullness, Ni=under and 
dhdna=placing). In the chapter on trance the word can only mean the contemplation of 
Him as the substratum of all phenomena. Hence ‘iswarapranidhd4na' as a means of 
achieving trance can only mean the habituating of the mind to feel the omnipresence 
of the divine principle. In achapteron the Yoga of action however the word cannot be 
interpreted as carrying the same meaning. Asa branch of the Yoga of action ‘ pranidhana’ 
must have special reference to action which would he out of place in contemplation. It has, 
therefore, been translated here as above. The root meaning, itis easy to see, rans 
through both these meanings. 


Go gle 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA. 1. 89 


purificatory action has been taken up (as a factor of the Yoga of action). 
This is considered an action worthy of performance, as it purifies the 
mind when not impeded. 


Study is the repeated utterance of purifying words, like the A U M 
and others ; or, the reading of the teachings about absolute spiritual free- 


dom (Moksa). 


‘The devotion to God and making Him the motive of all actions’ 
means the dedicating of all actions to the Highest Teacher, or the renun- 
ciation of its fruit.—52. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The question is that the fruit of Yoga and the means thereof, having been described 
in the first chapter along with their sub-heads, what is the necedsity of writing a second 
chapter? The answer is given :—‘ The Yoga for him, &c.’ 

It is only practice and desirelessness that have been mentioned in the first chapter 
to be the meansof Yoga. They are, however, not possible for the out-going mind also at 
onee. The means, therefore, to be taught inthe second chapter are necessary in order to 
achieve the required purity of mental essence. It is only thereafter that the essence 
of the Will-to-know, becoming strong enough to preserve itself in that state, daily shows 
forth the powers of practice and desirelessness. ; 

‘Already inclined towards the trance cognition’ means not only occasionally 
steady. The meaning is how may the out-going mind also become posséssed of Yoga by 
the practice of the means to be taught ? 

The author of the aphorisms first takes up some of these means as of first rate 
importance and usefulness, and describes them as the Yoga of action‘ Purificatory 
action, &c.’ 

It is the action itself that is the Yoga in the Yoga of action. It is for this reason that 
in the Vigsnupurfna in the dialogue between Kesidhwaja and Khandikya it is‘said :— 

‘When the Yogi first comes into contact with the Yoga, he is called the Yuijamdna, 
the Neophyte, the Beginner.’ And beginning ‘with this are mentioned purificatory 
action and study, &c. 

Now the comment shows by the canon of difference that purificatory action must be 
a means of Yoga :—‘ Yoga is not attained by one who is not given to purificatory action.’ 

He shows a subsidiary result of the purificatory action, justifying its nature as a means 
of Yoga:—‘Impurity, &c.’ The impurity which is variegated by the aroma of eternal 
action and affliction, and which is for thie very reason in contact with, i.e., approached by 
the network of enjoyables, consists in the intensity of disturbing energy (rajas) and 
inertia (tamas), and cannot come to dispersion without purificatory action. Dispersion 
means the entire separation of objects in thick cohesion. 

But the question is what purificatory action may be inimical to Yoga, inasmuch as 
being taken up as a means of Yoga, it may become the cause of the disturbance of the 
physiological equilibrium of the forces of the body. How ther can it be a means of Yoga? 
For this reason the commentator says :— ‘ This is considered an action, &c.’ The meaning 
is that so much of a purificatory action only is to be performed as does not cause the 
disturbance of the equilibrium of physiological forces. 

The words AUM, &c,, include such portions of the Veda as the Purusa Sukta, the Rudra 
Mandala and the Brahmanas, &c., as also the portions of the Purfnas such as the 

12 


Google 


90 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Brahmapira, &c. The Highest Teacher is idwara, To him are actions to be dedicated. It 
is on this subject that the following has been said:—‘ Whatever I am doing, beautifal or 
ugly, with desire or without desire, I renounce all that on thy account; I do all things 
with submission to thee.’ 

The renunciation of fruit means the doing of an action without thinking in connec- 
tion with it of the fruit to be obtained thereby. The following has been said in this 
connection :—It is in the doing of action alone that thy duty lies, never in its fruits. 
Never make the fruit of action its motive; never become attached to inaction.—1. 


emfa Samadhi, trance, we Bhavana, bringing about. wt: Arthab, for the 
purpose of. @8 Klesa, afflictions. wprcert: Tani karandrthah, for the purpose 

of attenuating. ‘: Cha, and. 
2. For the purpose of bringing about trance and for 


the purpose of attenuating afflictions.—53. 

ait fran: | aarkrarrars: g caqeacuniar | @ MTraarara: aarki 
areata | ater waste TTT TAH MATT ATA arrears 
serafra: aerate act aqpHcUega: gy ACANTS: SRATST TATA SMTA: 
QUA WAT Garatkrarcrsafasaara Heakreaag ef n 2 y 

VYASA. 

The Yoga of action is certainly to be performed, ‘for the purpose of 
bringing about trance and for the purpose of attenuating the afflictions.’ 
It is that which being performed, brings about trance and atlenuates the 
afflictions. The afflictions thus attenuated become characterized by 
unproductiveness. When their seed power has, as it were, been singed 
by the fire of High Intellection ; and for this reason the mind after their 
attenuation, 1s never again touched by the affliction; and having by 
subtle cognition come up tothe discrimination of the distinct natures of 
the Purusa and Objective Essence, has the whole of its duty fulfilled 
and can only resolve into its cause.—53. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

The aphorism defining its object is introduced :—‘ The Yoga of action is certainly, 
&c,’ The aphorism is :—‘ For the purpose of bringing about trance and for the purpose of 
attenuating the afflictions.’ 

The question arises that if the Yoga of action alone be competent to attenuate the 
afflictions, there remains no use at allin High Intellection. For this reason the commen- 
tator says :—“ The afflictions thus attenuated become, etc.” The action of the Yoga of 
action operates only in attenuating them; it does not render the afflictions barren. 
High Intellection, however, operates to render them barren. 

Let that be granted. But if High Intellection alone is competent to render the 
affiictions non-productive, what is the use of attenuating them ? For this reason he says :— 


‘On account of their attenuation, &c.’ If the afflictions are not attenuated, the discrimi- 
nation of the distinct natures of the Purusa and the Objective Essence, remaining 


Go gle 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 2, 32. 91 


overpowered by a powerful enemy, does not even show the energy to riseand render 
them barren, from the very first., When, however, the afflictions have been dispersed and 
rendered weak, even then, though inimical to them, it only arises by practice and 
desirelessness, When it has thus been born, it is not again touched by them, it is not 
overpowered so long as it is not touched by them, The discrimination of the distinct 
natures of the Purusa and Objective Essence is a subtle faculty, because its object is 
subtle. 
“Can only resolve into its cause”? means can only disappcear.—2. 


Siitra 3. 


MAAMAA TALIA AIA: BAT: 2 


ufeer Avidy&, nescience. wferm Asmité, egoism. “ Raga, attachment. 
a Dvesa, aversion. wfiffan Abhinivesa, love of life, all these. a#a: Kleséh 
afflictions. 


3. The afflictions are Nescience, Egoism, Attachment, 
Aversion and Love of Life.—54. 


wet & gat: Praeett aft) aitreatferarcmaaritreaa: se a: | Be Tela 

coaeara4 waa: | a weqarar gota zeae attaranqeat rate 

RILIMa AAs WeIignwaeityat Harrah aEcier y 2 Wl 
VYASA. 


What then are the afflictions and how many? ‘The afflictions are 
Nescience, Egcism, Attachment, Aversion and love of Life.’ 


‘The afflictions’ are the five forms of Unreal Cognition. When 
quick with life, they render the rule of the “qualities” firm, establish 
change, send out the stream of cause and effect, bring about the fruc- 
tification of action by coming to depend upon one another for mutual 
support. —3. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


How is its duty fulfilled? It can only be so said to have fulfilled its duty, when it 
has caused the cessation of the action of the “qualities ;” inasmuch as the duty is 
nothing else but the bringing about of an effect by the “qualities.” For this reason the 
commentator puts the question, ‘What are the afflictions, &c.’ And he answers by the 
aphorism : —“ Nescience, &c.” Nescience and the others are the afflictions. He explains :— 
‘The five forms of Unreal Cognition, &e.’ 

Nescience is Unreal Cognition itself. Egoism and the others also carry nescience 
with them and cannot exist without it. They too are therefore unreal cognitions. The 
meaning is that for this reagon, they are destroyed with the destruction of Nescience. 

He says now that the reason for their destructibility exists in their being the cause 
of repeated births :—‘ When quick with life,’ i. e., when they are in operation, they render 
the rule of the qualities firm, i.e. strong. For this very reason they establish change, 
They send out, i.e, show forth the stream of cause and effect inthe shape of the Unmani- 
fested, the Mahattattva (the great principle) and the principle of individuality. 

Now he shows the object for which all thisis done by them :—‘ Bring about, &c.... 
for mutual support.’ The fructification of action consists in life-state, life-period and 


Go gle 


92 PATANJALT'S YOGA. 


life-experience. This is the object of the Puruga. It is these that the afflictions bring 
about. Does each of them do this by itself? No he says :—‘ By mutual support!’ The 
actions are supported by the afflictions and the afflictions by the actions.—8. 


Satra 4. 


t sgeaatitatarranr 2 tl 


wea: Avidy&, nescience. Gry Keetram, field. ertwy Uttaresim, for the 
others, ge: Prasupta, dormant. ay Tanu, tenuous, few; Vichchhinna, alter- 
nated, earawy Udarayan, or fully operative, for all these. 


4. Nescience is the field for the others, whether 
dormant, tenuous, alternated or fully operative.—55. 


Of tbese, Nescience is the field, the breeding ground for the others 
that follow, the Egoism, &c., having a four-fold possible mode of 
their existence, as the dormant, the tenuous, the alternated and the fully 
operative. 

What is dormancy? It is the existence in the mind as power 
alone in the germinal state. It is awake when it turns its face towards 
its objects. In the case of him who possesses discriminative knowledge, 
the germs of the afflictions are singed, and therefore even on the object 
coming in front, they do not come into operation. How can the burned 
up seed sprout? Hence, the wise man whose afflictions are gone, is 


(SO gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 4. 93 


said to have had his last birth. Jt is in him alone that the afflictions 
pass into the fifth state, that of the seed being burnt up; inasmuch as 
the afflictions do exist in that state, although their seed-power has been 
bnrnt up. It is for this reason that they do not awaken even when an 
object comes in front of them. This is the dormancy of those whose seed- 
power has been burnt up. 


Tenuity is now described. The afflictions become tenuous on being 
cut down by habituation to contraries. 


And they are alternated, inasmuch as they disappear and appear 
over and over again in the same condition. Anger is not observed to be 
in operation at the time of attachment. Anger does not arise when 
attachment has its play. Nor does it happen that attachment, while 
manifesting with referénce to one object, has ceased to exist altogether 
with reference to another object. Because Chaitra is attached to one 
woman, it does not follow that le is averse to others. The fact is that in 
the one his attachment has manifested itself, while in others it can be 
active in the future. It is this that becomes either dormant, tenuous or 
alternated. 

The fully operative is that which has found manifestation in the 
object. 

All these do not pass beyond the sphere of affliction. What ia it 
then that is called an affliction, whether it be the dormant, the alternated 
or the fully operative? This is true. But they become either alternated 
or any one else, only when they appear as so qualified. As all are 
removed by habituation to contraries, all are manifested by the operation 
of competent causes. 

All these afflictions are the modifications of Nescience only. How? 
It is Nescience alone that is the quickness of their life. The afflictions 
appear only in the form which is put upon an object by Nescience. They 
are found existing simultaneously with the cognition of the unreal ; and 
they disappear when Nescience disappears.—55. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The commentator shows that the afflictions which are to be overcome as being painful 
have their root in Nescience, “Nescience is the field for the others, whether dormant, 
tenuous, alternated or fully operative.” 

What of these is dormancy? The meaning of the questioner is that there is no 
authority for the existence of the afflictions at a time when they are not in operation with 
reference to objects. The answer is :—‘In the mind, &c.’ The afflictions of the Videhas 
and the Prakritilayas do not operate with reference to their proper objects ; they have 
gone to the germinal state, and as such do exist only in posse, as curds exist in milk. 
There js no other means of making them barren besides discriminative knowledge. It 


Google 


94 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


is for this reason that the Videhas and the Prakritilayas are understood as not possessed 
of discriminative knowledge. Their afflictions are dormant so long as they do not reach 
the limit of their time. When they do reach the limit, the afflictions come round again 
into manifestation and turn towards their various objects, They have existed in the 
potential state alone. This potency means the power of manifesting. The approach to 
the germinal] state indicates the power of producing the effect. 


How is it that the afflictions of him who is possessed of discriminative knowledge 
are not also dormant? To show this the commentator says:—‘To him who is possessed 
of discriminative knowledge.’ 

‘ Last birth’ means that he will not be born in another body. There will be no birth 
after the present one. 

‘No where else’ means in the disembodied (the Videhas), &c. But inasmuch as that 
which is, cannot be entirely destroyed, there is no use in the power of Yoga; the afflic- 
tions arise when their objects come in front. For this reason the commentator says :— 
‘The afflictions do exist, &c.. The meaning is that although the afflictions exist, yet their 
seed-power is burnt up. 

The contraries of the afflictions are the practices of the Yoga of action. The 
afflictions become tenuous when they are put down by the Yoga of action. Or, Right 
knowledge is the contrary of Nescience: the recognition of the distinction is the 
contrary of egoism: justice is the contrary of attachment wnd aversion ; the removal of 
the idea of dependence upon the body, i. e., that the body is the necessary adjunet of the 
soul, is the opposite of the love of life. 

Now he describes alternation :—‘Similarly, &c.’ The afflictions are overpowered by 
another affliction being in operation for the time ; or they arise and manifest themselves 
after alternate cessations on account of excessive enjoyment. Its difference from the dor- 
mant is explained by its being dependent for manifestation upon the seed-power and the 
organs of enjoyment; or by its repeated manifestation and cessation on account of the 
weakness of other manifestations which tend to overpower it; or by reiterated mainfesta- 
tions. Further attachment in esse may overpower anger, which belongs to a different class 
of affiictions. Or, an affliction of the same class, such as attachment to one object may 
overpower attachment to a different objec}. For this reason he says :—‘ Attachment, &c.’ 

Now he says that the affliction which is to manifest in the future must be understood 
to possess a three-fold line of action, whichever it may be at any time:--‘Itis at that 
time, &c.’ The word ‘that’ points only to the affliction which is to manifest in the future, 
not to the attachment of Chaitra, because that is of one of the three classes, i. e., the 
alternated. 

Now he describes the one in full operation:—’ That which is, &c.’ The question is 
that it is the one in full operation alone that afflicts, and it is therefore proper to call it 
an affliction ; but how is it proper to call the others afflictions? They do not afflict, not 
being in operation. For this reason he says :—‘ All these afflictions, &c.’ The meaning is 
that they do not pass beyond the sphere of afflictions, and may well be called by that name, 
because they tend to operation, and for this very reason are to be removed. 

Well inasmuch as they are all afflictions, they are one only. Why then are they 
described as being more than one? The answer is :—‘ It is true, &c.’ 

The question now arises that although it may be that the afflictions take their rise 
in Nescience, yet why should it be that they should cease to exist when Nescience 
is destroyed? The cloth is not destroyed with the destruction of the weaver. For 
this reason he says :—“ All these are the forms, &c."" All these are the modifications. 

This means that they are different modifications only in appearance, not in reality ; 
because they do not exist as separate from it, Why? The answer is :—‘In all thege 


(Go gle 


Cd. 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 5. 95 


nescience, &c.’ He explains the same. ‘Whenever, &c.’ The rest is easy. The following 
is a brief'statement. In those that are merged in some principle, the afflictions are dor- 
mant. In the Yogis they are tenuous. In those who are given to enjoyment (the ordinary 
mortals), they are alternate and operative. 


Siitra 5. 


atreagragarrag feaufsqerareatterar uu 


afieq Anitya, the non-eternal. wf Asuchi, the impure. 3:4 Dubkha, the 
painful, wer Andtman, the not self. all these. fra Nitya, the eternal. af: 
Suchib, the pure, ga Sukha, the pleasureable, wer Atman, soul, ef: Khyatih, 
supposing, taking to be, ‘wer Avidyd, nescience, 
5. Nescience is the taking of the non-eternal, the 
impure, the painful and the not-self to be the eternal, 
the pure, the pleasurable and the self.—56. 


TATA AST | wrengageacny Magayearnrentac- 
frat) aaa ard Rererrecrat vat grat sat aaareear a: waar 
Raree ef aug qari’ at ert: | sa a | ware at: 
ATS TELAT TTT ATE | aaumebensien agh’ fagitt | 
agen Qrrentte aa | aagT NATE SeT HAA war AvsaraqwaAht 
aa ag fret Frata erat | aeraswsraariteanaha staanat 
Hasrnaparasdiare Ra Kathraea: | wal Aaargar gRqakaveras 
cf | Gaarges quaremetared arise area: | rere Zee 
geeaia veal oituaaradentce:eorasfafatrara aes aa Prat 
gt | awgeaentactrer TARTU TRCIY AaaTaaay 
armas at THT getrenca at aaeTarararereaake | loan 
SARAH AT AAMAS ata Aqua Aa 
AIMGAGMNAMAATS Ata: A aatsatay ler agqeaar wae 
FSR FOTSAA FAT F Hartt Tuaisatirwrageqa- 
aed faa car artst fara a Rend fq afer: ave | ae 
anirere a ireqararar a araqart fag gat ca | 
Caan A TATE A TaTUTata: | Pg raced areacahrafr ity 

VYASA. 

Out of these the nature of Nescience is described :-—“‘ Nescience is 
the taking of the non-eternal, the impure, the painful, and the not-self to 
be the eternal, the pure, the pleasurable and the self.”’ 

The taking of the non-eternal to te eternal is the possession of such 
notions as that the earth is permanent, the firmament with the moon and 
the stars is permanent, the gods are immortal, &c. 


(So gle 


96 PATANJALT’S YOGA. 


Similar is the seeing of purity in the body, which is impure and 
highly disgusting. And it has been said :--‘ The wise know the body to 
be impure on account of its position, its origin, its process of up-keep, 
its perspiration and destruction and also on account of the necessity of 
keeping it constantly clean.’ Thus is purity seen in the impure. ‘The 
girl is attractive like the new moon. Her limbs are, as it were, made of 
honey and nectar. She looks, as it were, she has emerged from the moon. 
Her eyes are large like the leaves of a blue lotus. With playful flashes 
of her eyes she imparts life to the world of men.’ Now what is in this 
connected to what? This unreal cognition, however, of the pure in the 
impure is daily seen. By this is described the cognition of the sacred 
in the profane, the cognition of purposeless. As here so will the cognition 
of pleasure in pain be later described. 


“ All is pain to the discriminating because of the end, the remorse, 
the residual potency, and the mutual contrariety of the manifestations of 
the ‘qualities.’ 1I.—19. 

The cognition of pleasure under these circumstances is Nescience. 

Similar is the cognition of the self in the not-self. The external 
accessories, whether sentient or not sentient, the body which is the vehicle 
for enjoyments, the mind which is only a vehicle for the Puruga, are all 
manifestations of the not-self. The notion that any one of these is the 
self is Nescience. On this subject the following has been said :—- 

‘Those who believing the sentient or insentient objective essence to 
be the self, rejoice in their increase believing it the prosperity of the 
self, and are anxious when they decrease, believing it to be the adversity 
of the self have not awakened. ’ 

This nescience is thus possessed of four locations. It is the root of 
all this overgrowth of afflictions, the vehicle of action together with the 
vehicle of fruition. ‘This nescience should be understood as being a real 
substance, like the word Amitra(a, not, and mitra, friend, the compound 
meaning an enemy) and the word Agospada (a, not, and gospada, cow’s 
foot, the compound meaning a particular place). Asthe word Amitra 
does not mean the absence of a friend nor a particular friend, but some- 
thing opposite to a friend, an enemy; and as the word Agospada does 
not mean the absence of a Ciospada, nor a particular’Gospada, but a 
particular place distinct from both, another substance; so is nescience 
neither Real Cognition nor the absence of Real Cognition. On the con- 
trary, Nescience is another form of cognition, which is contrary to real 
knowledge (the cognition of the real). —56. 


Google 


CH. 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 5. 97 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Nescience is non-eternal and impure. It is, that is to say, an effect which is ever 
qualified by the presence of non-eternity. There are some, it is well-known, who believe 
the elements to be eternal, and meditate upon them devotedly with the object of assimi- 
lating their natures. Similarly do others meditate with devotion upon the heavens, the 
sun, moon, and stars as stages of the path of Smoke (the Pitriydna,) with the object 
of reaching them in the belief of their eternity. Similarly do people drink the Soma 
juice for attaining the state of the denizens of heaven, the gods, believing them to be 
eternal and immortal, inasmuch as the Veda says :-—‘ Drink we the Soma so that we may 
become immortal.’ This is the Nescience which is described as the cognition of the eternal 
in the non-eternal. 


Similarly with reference to the impure and highly disgusting body. Having said 
this much, he stops in the middle to quote a verse of Vyasa, describing the disgusting 
nature of the body. 

‘The wise, &c.’ 

The ‘position of the body' in the mother’s womb close to urine, &c. The ‘origin’ 
is the germ and sperm cells of parents. ‘The process of the upkeep of the body' is the 
transformation of the foods and drinks into chyle, &c. It is by this that the body is 
supported. Perspiration means sweating. Destruction or death renders the body of even 
a -man learned in the Veda, impure, inasmuch asa bath is ordained after it has been 
touched. 

The question is that if the body is by nature impure, what then is the use of washing 
it with earths and water? Forthis reason he says: ‘On account of the necessity, &c.’ 
This means that although by nature impure, the body admits of being purified by external 
applications ; as, for example, take the bodies of women by means of sweet smelling 
applications. 

He finishes the sentence :—The body which is impure is cognised to be pure in the 
way now described. ‘Like the new moon, &c.’ 

“ Playfal flashes denote the frolicsomeness of love.” 


‘Now what is here connected with what?’ The first ‘what’ stands for the body of 
a woman which is by nature so impure and therefore disgusting. By what poor similitude 
is the body related to the new moon ? 


By this illustration of the cognition of the pure in the impure body of a woman, is 
also described the cognition of virtue in the vices of causing pain to others under the 
impression of their being released from the world. 


Similarly are described the notions of usefulness in wealth, &c., which on account of 
the troubles incident upon collection and preservation, &c., are really things which con- 
tradict the real purpose of life. They are all impure on account of their being causes of 
disgust. 

Similar is the case of the cognition of pleasure in pain. This is easy. 
‘Similar is the cognition of self, &c.’ This also is easy. 

Similarly has it been said on this subject by Pafichasikhé. 
‘The sentient’ are the intelligent objects of enjoyment, such as wife, &c., and animals. 
‘The insentient’ are the non-intelligent objects, such as seats and couches, &c., 

All such have not awakened, means they are forgetful. 

This nescience is said to possess four locations, i.e., places where it manifests. 


Upon this the question arises that nescience being really located in an infinity of 
places, such for example, as the forgetfulness of directions and the appearance of a com- 
plete circle in the case of a rapidly rotating point of light, &c., why should it be described 

18 


(SO gle 


98 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


as being located in four places only? For this reason he says :—‘It is the root, &c.’ There 
may be other forms of nescience; that however, which is the root of repeated births is 
only fourfold. 

Now another question :—The word ‘nescience’ is a compound of ‘ne’ (ay =not) and 
science (fag = Science). Now is the prohibitive NE (a), the effective word of the compound, 
thus signifying the mere absence of the thing signified by the second word, asin the word 
Amaksika, one meaning of which is the absence of bees. Or, is the second word of the 
compound the effective portion thereof, in which case it would mean a particular form of 
knowledge, as in the case of the word Ardjapurusa, Not-public servant. Or, is it that 
the word denotes something which is neither the meaning of the first word nor of the 
second, but something different from both? Such a word would be the word Amaksika, 
beeless place. This meaning is different from the meaning of both the factors of the 
compound. 

Now the meaning of the word Nescience would be the absence of knowledge already 
existing, if the first word of the compound were the effective one. This, however, cannot 
be the cause of the afflictions. If the second word of the compound he the effective one, 
then the meaning of the compound would be ascience qualified by the absence of some- 
thing (particular) the science of the negation, (A, ofsomething). Scicnce, however, can 
only be the opposite of the afflictions, &c., not their sced. It is not proper that the 
destroyer of a thing should be a quality thereof. 


If it be considered that it means something different from both, then it can only 
mean the Will-to-know (buddhi) with the knowledge gbsent there from, i.e, something 
in which there is no knowledge. Now the Will-to-know can never be the cause of affiic- 
tions, &c., even though knowledge be absent therefrom. Whatever thus be the meaning 
given to Nescience, it can never be the root of afflications, &c. 


For this reason he says :—‘ It is to be considered, &c.’ It is possessed of substantiality. 
This means cannot be the absence of something existing as such. Neither is Nescience 
a particular form of science ; nor is it the Will-to-know devoid of knowledge. It is, as has 
been said, a cognition contrary to the Real Cognition ; it is the cognition of the unreal 
(or briefly, unreal cognition.) 

The relation of word and meaning depends upon how the world begins to understand 
it. In the world it is often seen that in words compounded with deprivative prefixes, 
the deprivative prefix, while denying the existence of the last word of the compound, 
signifies somthing which is the contrary thereof. Similar is the meaning here. He gives 
analogies :—‘ As the word Amitra.’ It does not mean the absence of a friend; nor does it 
mean a particular friend (a friend called A). On the contrary, it means the opposite of a 
friend, an enemy. 

Similarly, the word Agospada does not mean the absence of a cow-shed (gogpada) ; 
nor does it mean a particular cow-shed (styled A). On the other hand, it means a particular 
country where kine are not found. It is a substance different from both. He applies the 
analogy to the thing illustrated :—‘In the same way, &c,' 


Satra 6. 


STIUATTAHTAAaATAAT thE Ut 


at Drig, the subjective, power of consciousness, av Darsana, the instru- 
mental power of seeing, 21: Saktyoh, of (both these) powers. warm Ekatmta, 
identity. wiiva, appearance. wferw Asmité, egoism. 


Google 


CH, T1. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 6. 99 


6. Egoism is the appearance of identity in the na- 
tures of the subjective power of consciousness and the 
instrumental power of seeing. —57. 


ErqurereTera era ATTA | qaar reuitng fadara-ainiterrar- 
taerarafattariaa gat sera | Srenhrerarcerrktrrnarceawa4agyt- 
wrekraroranta wat am seat | weutawm gq am Facate 
water gat Aer x 1 wear Aran ghre: aé qaarercatrahrarahifaere- 
TEE TT ONI TGS area he 

VYASA. 

The Purusa is the subjective power of consciousness, and the Will- 
to-know is the instrumental power of seeing. The appearance of these 
two powers as if they were identical, is the affliction known as Egoism. 
Enjoyment is rendered possible when the power of enjoyment in the en- 
joyer and the capacity of being enjoyed in the Objective Existence, which 
are quite distinct and different from each other, are looked upon as, as it 
were, identical. When, however, their natures have been understood they 
become isolated; and how then can there be enjoyment? And so it has 
been said:—‘Not knowing the Purusa beyond the Will-to-know to be 
different therefrom in nature, character and knowledge, &c., a man has 
by forgetfulness the notion of self therein.—57. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having described Nescience, now he describes Egoism, which is quite as dear to the 
heart of man as attachment and the others :—‘ Egoism is the appearance of identity in the 
natures of the subjective power of consciousness and the objective power of seeing.’ 


Consciousness and seeing are two distinct powers. They are, respectively, the self 
and the not-self. The particular Nescience which is responsible for the cognition of this 
not-self as the self, and which is only a delusion and not a reality is Egoism. Although it was 
sufficient only to say “consciousness ”' and “ seeing” the word power is added to bring out 
their mutual relation of fitness as the enjoyer and the enjoyed. He explains the aphorism :— 
‘The Puruga, &c.’ 

The question arises, why should they not in fact be considered as one when in fact 
they are takenin as such ? How is it that their unity afflicts the Purusa? For this 
reason he says :—‘ Enjoyment, &c.’ The capacity of being enjoyed means the Will-to-be. 
The power of enjoyment in the enjoyer means Purusa, They are quite distinct from each 
other. Why? The reason is given to be that they are seen to be quite distinct from 
each other. The Puruga possesses the characteristics of unchangeability, &c., the Will- 
to-know has the characteristics of changeability, &c. They are, therefore, quite distinct 
from cach other. It is meant to be said by this that although they appear to be identical 
they are not in reality the same. ‘Are looked upon, as it were, to be one with each other.’ 
This explains that this notion is an affliction. This employs the canon of agreement. 

The cannon of difference is now applied :—‘ When, however, their natures are under- 
stood, &c.’ Understood means when the consciousness of discrimination has been 


attained. 


(Go gle 


100 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


Now he shows that this is conceded by others also: —‘ And so it has been said’ by 
Pajichasikh&. ‘Knowing the Puruga beyond the Will-to-know, &c.’ Its nature is constant 
purity, its character is indifference, its knowledge means intelligence. The Will-to-know 
is impure, not indifferent and non-intelligent. The notion of self therein is Egoism and 
it is Nescience. Forgetfulness is the potency generated by former nescience. Or it may 
be the darkness of inertia (tamas\, because Nescience is born of the quality of inertia 
(tamas).—6, 

Sitra 7. 


TT: USI 
ge Sukha, pleasure. wot Anusayi, the sequential attraction to, w:'RA&gah, 
attachment, 


7. Attachment is the sequential attraction to pleas- 
sure.—58. 


qagraum | gefwea gage: ga aaa at a- 
TeeTa Ser Bs cr af WA s* 
VYABA. 


The desire to possess, the thirst for and the hankering after pleasure 
or the means thereof, preceded by a remembrance of the pleasure in one 
who has enjoyed it, is attachment.—58. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

On the attainment of discriminative knowledge, attachment, &c., are removed, Egoism, 
brought about by nescience, is the root of attachment, &c. For this reason he describes at- 
tachment, &c., after egoism, Attachment is the sequential attraction to pleasure. 

Memory is not possible to one who has not cognized. Hence isit said :—‘In one 
who has enjoyed.’ When pleasure is remembered, attachment is preceded by the remem- 
brance of the pleasure in consequence of the enjoyment thereof. When pleasure is being 
enjoyed there is no necessity of the remembrance. The attachment, however, to the means 
thereof, whether remembered or actually present, is also preceded by the remembrance 
of the pleasure. Asa matter of course when a means of pleasure is perceived, it is re- 
membered as a cause of the pleasure of the same class. Or it is inferred that it will cause 
a pleasure similar to what has been before caused by an object of the same class. The 
means of pleasure is, therefore, desired. 

He describes the meaning of the word attraction :—‘ The desire to possess, &c.’—7, 


Siitra 8. 


aTagwat 25: tc 
ga Duhkha, pain. a Anuégayi, the sequential repulsion. jg: Dvegah, 
aversion. 
8. Aversion is the sequential repulsion from pain.—59. 
HATA TT | PMTs Vagecaga Pe aarat ata: wre 
VT TTT US I 
VYASA. 

The repulsion, the anxiety, the wish for removal and the anger at 

pain and the means thereof, which stick in the mind in consequence of 


(Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 9. 101 


the feeling of pain, in the case of him who has felt the pain, preceded 
by a remembrance of the pain, is aversion. — 59. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


‘ Aversion is the sequential repulsion from pain.’ ‘One who has felt pain, &c.” This 
is to be explained as before. Describes the meaning of the words sequential repulsion 
from pain :—‘ The repulsion, &c.’ Repulsion is the force which repels. Awplifies the 
same by stating synonyms :—‘ The anxiety, &c.’—8, 


Siitra 9. 


vatearer Preach aareetshaae: Wet 


ee-we Sva-rasa, by its own potency. sé Véhi, flowing. faye: Vidugah, in 

the wise. ef Api, even. aw Tathd, all the same, e: Rfddhah, established. 
afifiag: Abhinivesab, love of life. 

9. Flowing on by its own potency, established all 


the.same even in the wise, is Love of Life.---60. 
eaceraral Reais auredishRam: | aaea ot cqATArsite 


wale arnya qauraiafa | a aragnqancaaqanetar wees: | Trak 
@ EAA: Taaa B aAAraAT: FT: | SATAY BACH STAT TET 


TRATSATANTATS ATA | ATU SeSTE CAAT: GaNA YT ACW 
Swag | wrawarsraqey waa | rete gash eeragatact- 
WY FE REAL | Bar fe aM yHdte~puswcagp-eagaaney 
areat W& . 

VYASA. 

In all living beings exists the self-benediction, ‘ would that I were 
never to cease. May I live on.’ And this self-beneciction cannot exist 
in him who has not experienced the nature of death. And by this the 
experience of a former life is inferred. This is the affliction of Love of 
Life, which flows by its own potency. 

That even a worm just born should know the fear of death, which 
is the same as the knowledge of annihilation, and that this fear cannot be 
explained by perceptive, verbal and inferential knowledge, leads to the 
inference that the pain of death has been experienced in a former life. 
And as this affliction is found existing in the extremely ignorant, so alse 
is it established even in the wise, who have come to know both the start- 
ing and finishing ends of life. Why? The residual potency having 
been brought about by an experience of the pain of death, is necessarily 
common to both of them, the knowing and the ignorant.—60. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Explains the meaning of the words, Love of Life (abhinivesa). ‘In all living beings, 
&c.’ This self-benediction, this desire with reference to one's self is constant. ‘ Would 
that I were never to cease to be,’ie., May I never become extinct, May I live on, i.e., 


Google 


102 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


May I retain life.’ And this self-benediction, this love of life, this fear of death is not 
possible in a living being who has not experienced his liabilities to die. The unbeliever 
denies the fact of a previous life. The author, therefore, takes the opportunity to refute 
him :—‘ And by this the experience of a former life, &c.’ The experience of a former 
life is inferred, because the present body is being maintained. Birth means the coming 
into relationship with the experiences of a body, senses and mind which are new and 
which are specialized by a new coming together. Its experience means coming into 
contact therewith. That is inferred, How? Explains :—‘ This the love of life, &c.’ 
Without completing the sentence says that is is an affliction: ‘ this affliction.’ It is this 
love of life wnich through evil deé@ds, &c., afflicts, t.e., gives pain to living beings. It is, 
therefore, called an affliction. Finishes the sentence, ‘ which flows on, &c.’ 


The meaning is that it flows on by its own potency brought about by habituation, 
and is not externa]. Gives the reason, why it is not external even in the case of a worm 
which is just born, is full of pain and is of a very low type of intelligence. ‘That evena 
worm just born, &c.’ ‘Cannot be experienced’ means cannot be caused. This is the 
meaning. A child just born begins to shake when he sees a death-dealing object. The 
knowledge of death is inferred by his peculiar trembling. It is thereby found that he is 
afraid. Fear is seen as being caused by pain or the cause of pain. He has not experienced 
death in this life. Neither has inferred or heard about it. The knowledge of the 
peculiar pain and of the particular cause thereof which is causiug pain at any moment 
is therefore a previous possession of his. Allother means of the knowledge being ex- 
cluded, the only one that remains by the canon of residues, is memory. And this memory 
cannot exist without the residual potency of a former experience. And inasmuch as 
there is no experience in this birth, the experience of a former birth only remains as the 
cause proved to exist by the canon of residues. For this reason there was certainly 
contact with a former birth. The word ‘even’ necessitates a contact with something. 
Hence completes the meaning of the sentence by saying, ‘ And as, &c.' 


The extremely ignorant are those whose intelligence is very low. Explains wis- 
dom :—‘ Who have come to know both the starting and finishing ends of life.” The end 
means the point. The world of experience is’the first of the life of the Purusa. The 
final one is absolute freedom (kaivalya). The wise are so called because they have come 
to know of this by verbal and inferential knowledge. 

The fear of death is then established in the worm on the one side and in the 
wise man on the other. The question arises that although the fear of death might well 
exist in an ignorant man, it is not proper that it should exist in the wise, inasmuch as 
in the latter's case it must have been uprooted by knowledge. Andif it be said that it 
is not uprooted in this case, then the highest manifestation of the quality of essentiality 
(sattva) must be absent from him. With this object puts the question, ‘Why ?’ Gives the 


answer. ‘This residual potency, &c....is common, &c.’ 
The meaning is that the wise man is not he who has reached the state of the Cog- 


nitive trance, but only he who can discriminate by inference and verbal knowledge.—9. 


Sotra to. 


a TaTaAaASAT: TAT: Ue oll. 


@ Te, these, xftea Prati-prasava, along with the passing out of activity. 
ea: Heyah, that are destroyed. gen: Siksmab, (when but) potential. 


10. These when but potential, are destroyed along 
with the passing out of activity.—61, 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 11. 103 


aoraatar: qean | a qa san aratsrnear Arragaitarktrenz 
cca ee eee 


VYASA. 


These five afflictions, when their seed-power has, as it were, been 
burnt up, disappear of themselves along with that Yogi’s mind, when 
having fulfilled the purpose of its existence, it becomes latent.—61. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


The afflictions have been defined and they have been shown to be possessed of four 
states—-the dormant, the tenuous, the alternated and the fully operative—all of which 
are to be destroyed. How isit that the author of the aphorism has not mentioned the 
fifth state of the afflictions, the potential, in which the seed-power is, as it were, burnt 
up ? For this reason says:—‘ They when but potential are destroyed along with the 
passing out of activity.” That which falls within the sphere of man’s effort is of course 
taught. The destruction of the potential state is not within the sphere of man’s effort. 
It is, on the contrary, to be destroyed by the passing out of activity ; that is, by the 
mind passing back into its cause, the principle of egoism. 


Explains :—‘ These five, &c.’ This is easy.—10. 
Siitra is. 


ACAEATTAT: UM 


art Dhyana, by meditation, wa: Heyah, that are destroyed. «ag Tad, their. 
ee: Vrittyah, modifications. 


11. Their modifications are destroyed by medita- 
tion.——62. 


fearat g aterararamararg | wartareggrag | gaat a za 
VSTRM: Haalta AHA A TATA AAA erate aracgaetwat 
magraianet oft! gat a aerat war aw: Te Pry aa TRITEeAT 
aaa at wanat aa caeusiiqan: weg: gaat qm 
sretsrferaert xf NW RR It 


VYASA. 

When, however, they exist as retaining their seed-power, their modi- 
fications are destroyed by meditation. The modifications of the afflictions 
which are essential are attenuated by the Yoga of action; and having 
been so attenuated, are destroyed by the high intellection of meditation, 
so that they are rendered potential, 7.e, their seed-power is, as it were, 
burnt up. As the gross dirt of clothes is at first shaken off, and then 
the fine dirt is washed off by effort and appliance, so the gross essential 
modifications need but small antagonistic efforts, whereas the potential 
ones need very powerful antagonists.—62. 


Go gle 


104 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Well then, when the afflictions have been attenuated by the Yoga of action, to what 
sphere should the effort of the Purusa be directed, in order that they may be destroyed ? 
For this reason says :—‘ When, however, they exist as retaining their seed-power, &c.' 

Nifferentiates them from the barren ones and reads the aphorism :—‘ Their modi- 
fications are destroyed by meditation.’ Explains:—‘The modifications of the afflictions, 
&c.’ They are called essential, because even though attenuated by the Yoga of action, 
they are further capable of destruction by being rendered incapable of producing effects 
and losing their very nature by means of the mind resolving back into its cause, 

Mentions the limit of the effort of the Purugsa in the sphere of intellection :—‘So 
that they are rendered potential.’ 

Explains potentiality :—‘ Their seed-power has, as it were, been burnt up.’ Gives 
an illustration of the same :—‘ As the gross dirt of clothes, &c.’ 

Effort means washing, &c. Appliance means the use of washing ingredients. The 
illustration and the illustrated are analogous only so far as they possess grosser and 
finer dirt, and not in their removability by effort, because it is impossible in the potential 
afflictions, which disappear along with the mind resolving back into its cause. 

Those that require but little effort for their removal are said to need small antago- 
nistic ingredients. Those that require the agency of very powerful causes for rem :val, 
are said to need very powerful antagonists. High intellection is described as small, 
because it is lower in comparison with the resolving of the mind into its own cause.—11. 


Satra 12. 


SUIT: HAT TETEENAAATATT: eM 


Ra Klega, afflictions, ya Mala, origin. eye: Kledamilah, Having its origin 
in afflictions. #% Karma, of actions, wea: Agayah, the vehicle. ge Drista, visible. 
wee Adrista, invisible. e™#Janma, in births, qm: Vedaniyah, to be experienced. 


12. The vehicle of actions has its origin in afflictions, 
and is experienced in visible and invisible births.—63. 

HUTS: HATA ererrnIens: | aT GeqTyVTIMATA: KTASTAT- 
MERI: | TA FS WeAtataatgssratahass | aT aaa wesTaT 
amtittafaa hactacagiiagrgararracrarc a other: @ 
aur: qftqsad qurnarara efi gar ate ata Alcenhrrsaayg Rearere- 
Tay At AEITATAG at aay Ha: Fa: Facenre: aw ary qaenaina: wa 

ay gitqead | am aban Fatt ageavitard feet Tada atu | 
sat alt herdtieg: Sek cael Gert wae er de Toros 
at aft cemmdqna: sara: | ata araraty areagewnaata: 
marae eft Wk i 
VYASA. 


The vehicle of actions has its Origin in afflictions, and is experienced in visible and 
invisible births. 
Here the vehicle of good and bad actions is born of lust, avarice, 


forgetfulness and anger. Its operation is felt in the visible as well as 
in the invisible birth. Of these, the vehicle of good actions, which is 


Google 


OH. It. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 12. 108 


supplemented by intense energy in the shape of purificatory action, trance 
and repetition of mantras, or, which is accompanied by devotion to the 
Lord, the devas, the great seers and other possessors of great power, ripens 
into fruit at once. ‘This happens in the same way in which, in the event of 
repeated evil done to nen who are suffering the extreme misery of fear, 
disease and helplessness, or to those who place confidence in the evil-dover, 
or to those who are high-minded and perform tapas, the vehicle of evil-ac- 
tions also ripens into fruit at once. As for example, the youth Nandiswara 
passed out of the human form and was transformed into a god. As also 
Nahusa, the ruler of the gods, passed out of his own form and was trans- 
formed into an animal. Of the vehicles of action, that which culminates 
into the life of hell, is said to be experienced in the invisible birth. 


As to those whose afflictions have been destroyed, the vehicle of 
actions is not experienced in the invisible births. —63. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Very well, what aMlicts the Puruga by causing life-time, life-state and life-experience 
may be called an affliction. But it is the vehicle of actions that brings these about, 
not Nescience and the others. Why then are Nescience, &c., called afflictions ? For this 
reason says :-—‘ The vehicle of actions has its origin in afflictions, and is experienced in 
visible and invisible births.’ Itis so called because the afflictions are the roots out of 
which it is born and which bring out its operation. The meaning is that inasmuch 
as the vehicle of action has its origin in Nescience, &c., and is for that reason the cause 
of life-state, life-time and life-experience, they are called afflictions, Explains :—‘The 
vehicle of good and bad actions, &c.’ That in which something lives is its vehicle. Here 
the Purugas in evolution are to be understood as living in the vehicle of actions (which 
is for the reascn called a vchicle), Virtue and vice are the vehicles of actions, Virtue 
becomes the cause of the enjoyment of heaven, &c., when desirable actions are performed 
with desire. Similarly, vice manifests when such actions as the taking away of other 
people’s property are performed through avarice. The vice for which forgetfulness is 
responsible is such as the taking of the life of others in the belief that it is a virtue, 


The question arises that there is such a thing as virtue caused by forgetfulness 
and virtue caused by anger. An illustration may be taken from the fact of Dhruva 
having been given the highest position in the starry world on account of the pure vehicle 
of action, brought about by the desire to conquer his father, due to anger born of his 
ill-treatment, As to vice caused by anger, why that is well known, as it becomes the 
cause of people dealing death to Brahmanas and others. 


Says that itis of two descriptions:—~‘It is experienced either in the visible, &o,’ 
Describes that which is experienced in the visible life :—‘ That which is brought about 
by, &c.’ Gives illustrations, respectively:—-‘ As the youth Nandiswara, &c.’ 


‘Of the vehicle of action which culminates in the life of hell:’ The makers of the 
vehicle of action which takes to the hells known as Kumbhipdka, &c., are spoken of as 
‘leading to the life of hell.’ The vehiele of action formed thereby is not experienced in 
the visible life. It is not possible that by means of the human body which is the conse- 
quent form thereof, residua like that should be lived out, even by the constant 
suffering of thousands of years. The rest is easy.—12. 

14 


Go gle 


106 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Siitra 13. 


afa et afearnt Sea: he Ril 
afi Sati, if existing, 34 Male, be the root. ag Tad, its, faa: Vipakah, 
ripening. ofa Jati, life-state, ‘wr: Ayuh, life-time. #1: Bhoga, life-experience, 
all these three. 
13. It ripens into life-state, life-experience and life- 
time, if the root exists.—64. 
ale qe atest serge: | arg Sag Karat Parent wale 
UR US | WMT qwMaaen mMmacger Agradisrara: streaaat 
aaa aetidan gardtsrar ar am sara: Fata Aarne 
wale arena a a seerraanag adie af a a Paraferrar 
anfragatn ef aie Raa | Ries eA qe SAT ECHR wale 
ah srearierrenier | fdrar Rrarcar Maas salts sea Racafa var 
mah sea Raaaae | a arats GA eT we ICU | Heagarears 
TaN SgaARsey HAW: ainfrnea Sa HSMATAAATTALATAT STHTA 
TAR: | A atkrs eft | a Ah HAAHEA TeAA HIM | HeAaag RAG 
aang aaltae wear aati fraser: sam a 
arias (aia aieh Halaney wera: BT REAM WH AIT 
aura mite aa) an a qdarrgag: | ceansrmasraarat: ge: 
SUGAGATITAA AT: TH ATATATAT AMAT: TAM THTTE- 
aa aa Tard aafed Tata wa He aa wRaagT HAUT wear 
wale | aferergit ata dar Avr aera gett wer sala saint 
ears Raat ea | wat cara: Har TH eet | Tera 
TNaeaaaararean Amgen ar Serre Tera 
at HHATTAR TA PaTT RETA Fe g aaakrarngrardiaatre 
ayaathrcarrareensaag F faa’ fteata ada acase afafirit- 
qadeaa waa aTerat | Tear Halas as kaa oH ee | 
a Gent: eagasaar areata ef | aeaardanararnaraa: 
ee Raaaqagatadtass | ay gouadedtrae Aaararetari 
Raat aarasMaaeateaaaHeAT | HEAT | Ar TTEwATANAT 
straafrarnerea tat aia: | gaeataraea fara: carrnavararqaaa 
a Ruatarnscarraaminjgae at Reageraaie | at Bacar 
MR TH THR ART ATT: HUET | AATMA | FF EF lai APe- 
a manta ua qupdtsceta aka war gaa vq hia a 
WA HTT AAU | TAAKATATAT TAA | TITY WAT AFT: ayft- 
RC AHATA FAIS TIANA | HEATEGAS (A agai araa- 
ad Ta: erisaent ate Raakrarnraantaingaea at Pacaa- 


Go gle 


Cd. II, ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 107 


ara Huitaesaatetaena Maakrarner Hau: Bart ACMTAeerntc- 
UAH | AAT SARA aaeTraaaaHeT a | TaETtaa RAreT- 
Roark aegtatard ar reaehrgd at Rrcacqurefta | aracaara walfreagh 
Peravey a arnhae wth | afarneta Tarnrstraraancanied 
matters sraerat Ser t a AeateaqariesfaktiraRes: ware 
alos ler RR VYASA 


The vehicle of actions begins to ripen into fruit when the afflic- 
tions exist ; not when the afflictions have been rooted out. As the rice 
in the paddy has the power to grow only so long as the chaff remains 
attached thereto and their seed-power is not burnt up, not when the chaff 
has been removed; so also does the vehicle of actions grow into ripeness, 
when the afflictions are attached to it, and when its seed-power has not 
been burnt up by intellection ; not when the afflictions have been removed. 

The fruition is of three descriptions, life-state, life-time and life- 
experience. The following has to be considered in this connection. Is 
one action the cause of one life? Or, does it bring about more lives than 
one? The second question is this. Do more actions than one bring 
about more lives than one ; or do they bring about one life only ? 

It is not that one action only is the cause of one life only. Why? 
Because in that case there would be no regularity of succession in the 
fruition of present actions and those that are being heaped up eternally 
and some of which still remain unconsumed; and thus the world would 
lose all patience. This, however, is not the desired end. 

Nor is one action the cause of more lives than one. Why? There 
being more actions than one, it would necessarily follow that one action 
requiring more lives than one for fruition, there would remain no time 
for the fruition of the remainder. That also is not a desirable end. 

Nor again are more actions than one, the cause of more lives than 
one. Why? It is impossible that all of them should exist at once, and 
it must, therefore, be said that if such a thing be possible it can only be 
in succession that so many lives can manifest. And in this latter case 
the defect already stated is apparent. 

For this reason, the vehicle of the entire collection of good and 
bad actions done in the interval between birth and death, stands in all 
its variety with every action attached to one ruling factor of one life. This 
is brought into manifestation by death, is joined together by one link 
which at the time brings about death and thus causes but one life. 

The period of this life is limited by this very action. During the 
life-period all experience is also caused by that very action alone. Thig 


Google 


108 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


vehicle of actions is said to possess a three-fold fruition, causing as it does 
the manifestation of life-state, life-period and Jife-experience. 


For this reason the vehicle of actions is termed wnt-genital (Ekabha- 
vika), causing one birth only. 


That, however, which is experienced in the visible life only, may 
bring about but a single fruition, as causing life-experience; or, double 
fruition as causing life-experience and life-period ; or, a triple fruition 
as causing life-experience, life-period and life-state. It may be like Nan- 
diswara or like Nahusa. 


This mind, however, is as it were, variously coloured, all through on 
account of its becoming pervaded from eternity by the residua of the 
experiences of afflictions, actions and fruitions; and as such looks like 
a fishing net pervaded all over with knots. These, therefore, must have 
been brought about by more (previous) lives than one. 


It is this vehicle of actions which has been termed uni-genital (Eka- 
bhivika), causing one birth only; and the potencies which as residua 
cause memory, exist from eternity. 

Further the uni-genital (Ekabhavika) vehicle of actions is either of 
appointed or of unappointed fruition. The rule applies to that portion 
only which has to be experienced in the visible life and whose fruition 
has been appointed. It does not apply to that which has to be expe- 
rienced in an invisible life and whose fruition has not been appointed. 
Why? Because, that which has to be experienced in an invisible life and 
whose fruition has not been appointed, has a three-fold end. It may be 
destroyed without fruition. It may become merged in the ruling action. 
It may live on for a long time overpowered by the ruling action whose 
fruition has been appointed. 

Of these, the destruction of an action done takes place without frui- 
tion in this way that the black actions are destroyed by the rise of the 


white actions. The following has been said on this subject :— 
‘Two and two the actions, know, 
‘Of him that evil does 
One heap of virtue kills ; 
To do good actions therefore tend ; 
The wise such actions tell,’ 


As to mergence in the ruling action, the following has been said on 
the subject :—‘A little mixture of evil may be easily removed or borne; 
it cannot do away with the good.” Why? ‘There is much of the good 


for me, mixed wherewith it may cause some insignificant diminution 
even in heaven.’ 


Google 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 109 


And now how may it live on for a long time, overpowered by the 
ruling action whose fruition has been appointed? Death is said to be 
the cause of the simultaneous appearance of the actions whose fruition has 
been appointed and which are to be experienced in the invisible birth, not 
that of the actions which although to be experienced in the invisible birth, 
yet whose fruition has not been appointed. The actions whose fruition has 
not been determined upon, may either be destroyed or get mixed up, or 
stand unfructified for a long time, overpowered so long as similar actions 
competent to bring the cause of manifestation into play, do not incline 
it towards fruition. It is because the time, the place and the cause of 
manifestation are not determined that the working of karma is variegated 
and dificult to know. Inasmuch as the rule is not abolished by 
the exception, the vehicle of actions is recognized as causing one birth 
only.—64. . 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Let it be so, seeing that the vehicle of actions has its origin in Nescience, Let it 
also be granted that on the destruction of Nescience being brought about by the birth 
of knowledge, there should not come into existence another vehicle of actions. But the 
old vehicles of action which have been laid by in an eternal succession of innumerable 
lives, and the times of whose fruition have not been appointed, are impossible to finish 
off by experience and thus the chain of repeated births becomes interminable, For this 
reason he says :—‘ It ripens into life-state, life-ex perience and life-period if the root exists,’ 
The meaning is this. The vehicle of actions fructifies into pleasure and pain only. Life- 
state and life-period also are meant to fulfil that object and not to put in an obstacle 
thereto. Pleasure and pain follow in the wake of attachment and aversion, never exist 
in separation from them and cannot exist without them. And it is not possible that if 
any one is attached or averse to anything, he will not feel pleasure and pain respectively 
in contact with that thing. For this reason the mental plane becomes a field for the 
production of the fruit of actions only when it is watered by the stream of the afflictions, 
Hence the afflictions help the vehicle of actions in the production of their fruits also. It 
is for this resson that when the afflictions are destroyed, the power which helps to bring 
about the manifestation also disappears; and on that account, the vehicle of actions 
although existing, being innumerable and having no time for its fruition appointed, 
does not possess the power of producing fruit, because its seed-power has been destroyed 
by high intellection. 

The Commentary makes the same subject clear:—‘ The vehicle of actions begins 
to ripen when the afflictions oxist.’ Illustrates the same:—‘As the rice in the paddy, 
&c.,’ even though covered by the chaff, their seed-power should not have been burnt 
up by heat, &c., before they can sprout. Applies the illustration to the illustrated :—‘So 
also, &c.’ 

The question arises that the afflictions can never be destroyed, because nothing 
that exists can be destroyed. For this reason says:--'And not when the seed-power 
has been burnt up by intellection.’ 

Mentions three.descriptions of fruition:—‘ This fruition is, &c,' Fruit is that into 
which the actions ripen. 

The first discussion relates to the unity or multiplicity of lives as the result of a 
single action taken as the starting point, The second discussion refers to the unity or 


(Go gle 


110 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


multiplicity of lives caused by morc actions than one taken as the starting point. Thus 
there are four options. Refutes the first of these options:—‘One actiun is not the 
cause of one life. Question :—‘ Why?’ The answer is this. Actions have been laid 
by from eternity in each life. They are for this very reason innumerable, Ifa single 
life exhausts one action only, many a one remains unexhausted. To this are to be added 
the actions of the present life. There will thus be no rule for the successive fruition 
of actions, Asa necessary result there will be no comfort for-the world, and this is not 
desirable. The meaning is that when the actions that are exhausted are only isolated 
ones, and those that are being born are many, the vehicles of action will run into each 
other in confusion. They will keep being constantly born in uninterrupted succession, 
but there being no law for their fruition, there will be no comfort for men. It will be 
impossible for intelligent people to determine the order of their fruition, and thus there 
will be no satisfaction in the performance of virtuous actions. 


He refutes the second alternative :—‘ Nor is one the cause of more lives than one.’ 
Question:—‘ Why? The answer is this:—If one action out of those that have been laid 
by in many lives, becomes the cause of bringing about many lives, then the actions that 
remain unexhausted will be many more, and the result will be that there will.be no time 
available for their fruition. That also is useless, because the performance of actions 
having thus become useless, no one will attend to them. When on account of there being 
no rule for the successiun of fruition, satisfaction disappears in case of one action only 
being considered exhaustible in one life, what mention is to be made of the option in which 
one action is considered as exhaustible in more lives than one. In this case there will be no 
opportunity and no time available for the fruition of any present actions that may be done. 


He refutes the third alternative:—‘ Nor again are more actions than one the cause 
of more lives than one.’ He gives the reason thereof, These many lives cannot be lived 
all.at once in the case of one who is not a Yogi. It must, therefore, be said that such a 
thing is possible only in succession, if at all. It is only if a thousand lives were simulta- 
neously caused by a thousand actions, that the thousand actions becoming thus exhausted, 
time would become available for the fruition of the remaining ones, and a law for the 
succession of fruition becomes possible. But more lives than one cannot be possible all 
at once. The same defect, therefore, that was found in the first alternative becomes 
apparent here also. 

Three alternatives having thus been refuted, the only one that remains available 
by the canon of residues, is the last :—‘More actions than one are the cause of one life.’ 
For this reason he says :—‘ The vehicle, &¢,’ 

‘The interval between birth and death’ is the period of life which falls between 
the two events, birth and death on either side. 

‘In all its variety’ meaas variegated by the presentations of the fruits of actions 
in the shape of pleasure and pain. 

The ruling factor of life is that which is in ‘evidence above all and which fructifies 
in immediate succession. 

‘The action merged into’ is that which fructifios sometime along with it. Death means 
passing beyond the present life. [tis by that, that the vehicle of actions is brought into 
manifestation. This means that it is inclined towards the bringing about of its effects. 
| ‘Is joined together by ono link’:—Is brought into the state of one active force, 

working towards the bringing about of its effects in the shape of birth, &c. It thus 
causes one birth only, not more than one. This birth isas man, &c. The period of each 
such life is determined by that very karma. Each life has its appointed limit, with 
difference in time. During that life-period the enjoyment of pleasure and pain is brought 
about by that very karma, being as it is related thereto. For this reason the vehicle of 


(Go gle 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 111 


actions is said to cause three fruitions, causing as it does life-state, life-period and life- 
experience. The author summarizes the general rule:-—‘For this reason the vehicle of 
actions is termed uni-natal’ or unigental (ekabhavika). The meaning is that its mani- 
festation is limited to one birth only. 


Having thus described the three-fold fruition of the one-birth vehicle as being 
the general rule, he now differentiates the three-fold fruition of the present karma, the 
one that is experienced in the visible life:—‘ That, however, which is experienced in the 
visible life only, &c.’ In the case of Nandiswara, whose human life was broken off at the 
age of cight, the special virtue which on account of high energy and intense application, 
became the cause thereof, resulted in the double fruition of life-state and life-experience, 
In the case of Nahuga, however, the period of life being already dctermined by the karma 
which determined his attainment of the position of Indra, his antagonistic action of 
kicking Agastya, resulted only in his experience of the resubt of the vice, 


The question arises, Have the residua of afilictions and the residua brought about 
by the experiences of the fruitions of actions causing similar enjoyments, theic fruition 
in one Jife only, just as the one-birth vehicle of actions has? Tor if it be so, a man passing 
into the animal state of life would not have the experiences which are suited to that 
state of life alone. For this reason he says :—‘ The mind, bowever, is as it were variously 
coloured, &c,' 


‘ Pervaded from eternity’ means unified into a single manifestation of energy, 

Now he describes the nature of residua in order to differentiate virtue from vice, ‘And 
the potengies which as residua, &c.’ 

The author introduces now the discussion of occasional exceptions to the general 
rule of the vehicle of actions causing one-birth only. ‘ The vehicle of actions, however, 
&c.’ The word ‘however’ differcntiates it from the residual potencies, The rule of 
causing one birth only applies only to the vehicle whose fruition is to be experienced 
in the visible life only, and whose fruition has been appointed. It does not apply to that 
which has to be experienced in an invisible life, and whose fruition has not yet been 
appointed. He asks the reason therefore :— 

‘Why? and mentions the reason :—‘ Because that which has to be experienced, &c.,’ 

The author mentions now one of the three ends:—‘It may be destroyed without 
fruition. Mentions the second :—‘ It may be merged in, &e.’ Mentions the third :—¢ It 
may live on for a very long time, &c.” 

Of these, he divides the first:—‘Of these the destruction of an action done without 
fruition, &c.’ 

There are only three kinds of actions, the white, the black and the white-black, 
besides the actions of a Sannydsi, which are neither whiten or black. Now here the white 
vehicle of actions brought about by purificatory action and study, &c., becomes, as soon 
as it arises, the destroyer of the black one, which has not begun to fructify. 

It should also be understood that it destroys the white-black one too, there being 
similarity on account of the presence of the black one in that. His reverence quotes 
the Veda on this very subject :--‘The following has been said, &c.’ ‘Two and two the 
actions, &c.’ 

The two and two actions are the white and the white-black. This is related to the 
verb ‘kills. The word ‘two’ is used twice to indicate manifoldness. Of whom are these 
two-fold actions? Of the man who does the evil. What is that which kills? The answer 
is :—‘ The hcap of the good actions of him ‘who does good deeds.’ He speaks of a heap 
because a heap can be managed by a heap only. This makes out the white vehicle of ac- 
tions to be thethird one. The meaning is that the white vehicle of actions which is brought 
into being by the performance of such actions as avoid causing pain to others, is of such 


Google 


112 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


a nature that although one, it destroys the contrary vehicles of black and white-black 
actions, although they may be many. For this reason they tend, i.e, incline towards 
good actions, such as the wise men teach. Here it is a very high class virtue, this rise 
of white actions, that destroys others. 


It isnot by the pain consequent upon study, &c., that they are destroyed. It is 
not pain qua pain that is contrary to vice. It is contrary to that pain only which is 
brought about by vice itself. The pain which accompanies study, &c, is not brought 
about by vice. If it were so, the ordinances of study, &c., would be useless, because in 
that case vice would be born out of the very strength of the study, &c., ordained. Fur- 
ther the pain which accompanics study, &c., is not caused by them. If it were caused 
by them, the recommendation of study, &c., would become useless, because the more 
intense the application to study, &c., the more would thus be the pain caused thereby. 
If no pain be caused by the application to study, &c., thus recommended, why then the 
hellish states of Kumbhipaka, &c., may also be recommended as desirable, because in 
that case it would appear to be only on account of their not being recommended as desir- 
able that pain would not be produced. Everything, therefore, runs into all foar corners 
(i.¢,, nothing is well established in its own right place and is therefore absurd). 


The author divides now the second end (of actions):—Iu the ruling action such as 
the sacrifice of Jyotistoma, &c., its minor actions such as the killing of animals, &c., are 
merged as parts iu the whole. 


The killing of animals, &c., has two effects. The first is that being ordained as part 
of the principal action, it helps in its fulfilment. The second is that the causing of 
pain to all living beings being forbidden, it results in undesirable consequences. Of 
these when it is performed only as subsidiary to the principal action, then, for that 
very reason, it does not manifest its result all at once independently of the principal 
action. On the contrary it keeps its position of an accessory only and manifests only 
when the fruition of the principal ruling action begins. Itis said to be tacked on to the 
ruling action, when, while helping the ruling action, it exists only as the seed of its own 
proper effect. Patichasikhaé has said the following on the subject :—‘ A little mixture,’ 

When the ruling factor of the present karma born from the sacrifice of Jyotistoma, &c., 
is mixed up with the present cause of evil, it may be easily removed. Itis possible of 
removal by a sinall expiatory sacrifice. Even ifan expiatory sacrifice be not performed 
by carelessness, the subsidiary action would ripen at the time of the ripening of the 
principal only, and in that case the evil generated thereby would be easy to bear. The 
wise who are taking their baths in the great lake of the nectar of pleasure brought about 
by a collection of gvod actions, put up easily with a small piece of the fire of pain produced 
by a sinall evil. It is not, therefore, capable of diminishing, i.e. appreciably lossening 
the effect, of the good, i.e. of bis large virtues. 

He puts the question :—‘ Why ?’ The answer is put into tho mouth of the virtuous 
man :—‘ There is much other good for me,’ which stands apart as a consequence of the frui- 
tion of the principal factor of action beginning with the taking of the vow of sacrifice and 
ending with the distribution of charities. With that there will be alittle of the admixture 
of evil. Even in heaven which is considered as free from all pain, the enjoyment is the 

result of virtue mixcd up with a little of vice and there will, therefore, be a somewhat 
inappreciable diminution of enjoyment only. 

He divides the third alternative :—' How may it optionally live on, &c.’ The ruling 
action here means the most powerful one, not the whole consisting of many parts. ‘ The 
most powerful’ is that whose fruition has heen appointed with regard to time, because 
there remains no other opportunity forits fruition. That whose fruition has not been 
appointed is considered weak, inasmuch as there is oppurtunity for its fruition at other 


Go gle 


Cd, II, ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 14. 113 


times. ‘Living on for a very.long time’ is in the seed state only, not as helper of the 
principal action, that being independent. 

The question arises. It has been said that the vehicle of actions manifests at once 
at the time of death. It is now said that it lives on for 3 very long time overpowered. How 
is it that the former is not contrary to the latter ? With this object he puts the question: 
—‘ How may it, &c.’ The answer is :—‘ Death is said to be the cause of the simultaneous 
appearance, &c.’ The singular denotes the class. 

Now he lays down that what has been said applies to the other as well. ‘Not that 
of the action, &c.' The rest is easy.—18, 


Sfitra 14. 


ST STAULATTHA: FLATLARTSTT Ug Vl 


a Te, they. gm Hlada, pleasure. tam Paritapa, pain. we: Phalab, 
fruits, gre-aftere-we: Hladaparitapaphalab, Having pleasure and pain as fruits, g™ 
Puyya, virtue, ra Apunya, vice. gy Hetu, reason. geagraggram Punyapunya- 
hetutv4t, Because virtue and vice are their causes, 


14. They have pleasure or pain as the fruit, by reason 
of virtue or vice.—65. 


& grqakarrnen qeargratgany! & waguinn qeatgar Genet 
aVgH Dene ri aag Ge serge Rargenest 
TaTEeT TerKeTah Ata Wel 


VYASA. 


They, 7.e., life-state, life-period and life-experience, have pleasure 
for their fruit, when caused by virtue, and have pain for their fruit when 


caused by vice. 
As pain consists in what is contrary to the prevalent mental tenden- 


cies at a time, there must be pain to the -Yogi’s mind even at the time of 
the enjoyment of pleasurable objects. —65. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


It has been said that karma has its origin in afflictions. It has also been said that the 
fruitions have their origin in actions (karma). Now the question is of what are the 
fruitions the origin, so that they too have to be given up? For this reason he says :— 
‘They have pleasure or pain as their fruit, by reason of virtue and vice,’ Explains :—‘ They, 
i.e, life-state, &c.’ 

Although life-state and life-period only have pleasure and pain as their fruit, inas- 
much as those come before these, and not so life-experience, inasmuch as that comes 
after pleasure and pain have arisen, and inasmuch as it consists in the very experience 
thereof, yet that too is spoken of as the fruit of enjoyment, because being perceivable 
and enjoyable, it is an object of the act of enjoyment. 

The question arises that although the life-state, life-experience and life-period 
caused by vice and causing pain may well be regarded as removable, being found to be 
contrary, why should those be given up which have been caused by virtue and cause 
pleasure ? They are seen to be moving along the proper line. It is impossible that even 
a thousand inferences and so-called authdritative statements should do away with the 

15 


Google 


1i4 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


fact of their moving along the line of every individual mind. Nor are pleasure and pain 
possible of existence the one without the other, inasmuch as when pleasure is taken up, 


pain too is there as not to be given up, as they have different causes and different appear- 
(ances. For this reason he says :—‘ And as this pain, &c ’"—14. 


GRUNTS AUT aaa 
aa frataasug an 


aftera Parindma, of change. am Tapa, anxiety. dem Samskdara, habituation. 
3:8: Duhkhaih, by reason of the pains. 4 Guya, of the qualities, ff: Vrittih, 
of the functionings, fem Virodhat, by reason of the contrariety. 4 Cha, and, 
3: Duhkham, pain. Eva, indeed. #44 Sarvam, all. faafm: Vivekinah, to the 
discriminating. 

15. By reason of the pains of change, anxiety and 
habituation and by reason of the contrariety of the func- 
tionings of the ‘ qualities,’ all indeed is pain to the dis- 
criminating.—-66. 

eu agama | wtumawaenceay uaaatrae gear ax 
Rama: |. ated tina raadartaranrarira: Fargas ala | asta 
Ts Raa 4 ae Baars gals Slr | HeTaisata wat- 
RM | AMA | ATA AVATAR: eaaaia | feareaisaa ore: 
maray xf | rage aaa | at aaa Taariaacgqey | 
wT sergeanty ad | A Atearat Amara Saeed ad area | 
RATA AVIRAAAT Aas Ti: sista Aharnisfs | wane: 
qaed anmnare ta | a eat gearefawia rarintta get a gare 
fraagaen vale gears faa get 1 cw qkaragear am ofager 
qerrerarmfs aitrata fgatir | wa at aTIg MAT Ader TTT aET- 
aaaaaanartaiaeanangad ea | watt ro Baa: Gears a 
TTA: HAA ATA Bae a aReqeqa qa: Wwagwergwefa Aa wsgw7- 
etenat qataalguaate a naga srarmers waar stare erar- 
SUA | AGA? AACA Falgaaregqaaceanaean Tagaaahy Ta- 
AeHIIT Ta | Ta Hat Aaasqysas qa Te at ga: Kalwraway 
gf 1 qatianaiggeentar fad ata nferQaTARegs ale 
eenrehaarnen f& fare | warataqeisat sre eacta geet 
a aIag MTA, | Waa Saran Ataaa fRara Fact 
nfqaray | Kat Ff VAHAET VAQIIAATS Ast Ma MHAWsaaAar- 
Rareaatara Fragea aarcatsge trae Errer TATE _TCATAT- 
VFM Ala AS AONTAASAIAeraVswaaRA4W wa | ATTA 


Google 


CH. TI. ON THE: PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 115 


Rat SANTA ATA YA TET Ant atgaasaca Az - 
eat areal sreerer fe aura fatetrare gravis at" aera: | wear safafea- 
fran alagar: qequgasdahyean Ura A qs at sera faquAacaet| 
ae a quratie faraiterits Braga sara geafraarear qeeqé- 
w freee araraariat raferara: we caaea | aay mo ratacreraUahe 
TTAT: AMET aa VAST Nate zornaaagareaat Arte xr | 
aeaegaag ag Praia eer age HEN Garages swaadtsaaT | 
TLMNGT ARTA ATMA? | ara Paice’ aga eH! tit Uagacitres 
Tasahife | cafiqatt wet ager eRe | AIM Gare Garcegatat Aritar- 
a aah) aw gaage: aart Fa: | TATE: aan Tatg? | Aareveqrer- 
Rast Paraetar | RAGA: equrag | AT ata? TaKIAIMeT at Ba aT az 
aeqneae | aa atetredzTaqaE: tsar a RgaTg: | TaATNTTATA 
UPA LACAN GAAT | LATHE Agsy Trearatay y | 
VYASA. 

How is that possible? ‘By reason of the pains, &c.’ The feeling 
of pleasure depending upon the enjoyment of intelligent and non-intelli- 
gent objects, is in the case of every one followed by attachment. Here 
the vehicle of actions is born out of attachment. Further inasmuch as 
there is aversion to the causes of pain and also delusion, there exists also 
the vehicle of actions brought about by aversion and delusion. And so 
it has been said :—‘ Enjoyment is not possible without giving pain to 
beings.’ ‘There is also the physical vehicle of actions caused by giving 
pain to others. 

Tt has been said that the pleasure of enjoyment is Nescience. The 
calming down of the powers of action, sensation and thought, which 
comes in consequence of the satisfaction derived from enjoyment of their 
objects, is pleasure. The activity in consequence of want of satisfaction 
is pain. 

Farther, it is not possible to make the powers of action, &c., free 
from desire by the frequent repetition of enjoyments, because attachment 
increases in consequence of the repetition of enjoyments, and so also does 
the dexterity of the powers. The repetition of enjoyment is, therefore, 
no cause of pleasure. Whoever desiring pleasure enjoys certain objects 
and thus becomes addicted to them, in consequence, and having become 
addicted thus becomes entangled in the morass of pain, is like one who 
being afraid of the bite of a scorpion, is bitten by a serpent. 


This is the pain of change. In the state of pleasure even, it pro- 
duces a contrary effect and thus afflicts a Yogi alone. 


Google 


116 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Well, what is the painfulness of anxiety ? The feeling of pain in 
depending upon intelligent and non-intelligent objects is in the case 
of every one followed by aversion. Here the vehicle of action is born 
out of aversion. Whoever desires objects of pleasure, acts with his mind, 
body and speech and thereby favours some and disfavours others. He thus 
iays by virtue and vice by favours and disfavours shown to others. This 
is a vehicle of actions brought about by avarice and delusion. This is 
termed the painfulness of consequent suffering (tapa). 

What again is the painfulness of habituation ? By the enjoyment 
of pleasure comes into being the vehicle of the potency of pleasure. By the 
feeling of pain comes the vehicle of the potency of pain. By thus 
experiencing the fruition of-~actions in the shape of pleasures and pains, 
the vehicle cf actions grows. 


This is the eternal stream of painfulness which thus flowing on 
frightens the Yogt alone. Why the Yogi alone? Because the wise have 
in this case a similarity to the eye-ball. As a thread of wool thrown 
into the eye pains by mere touch, but not so by coming into contact with 
any other organ, so do these pains afflict the Yogi tender as the eye-ball, 
but not anyone else whom they reach. 


As to others, however, who give up the pain they have again and 
again taken up as the consequence of their own karma, and who again 
take it up after having repeatedly given it up; who are all round as it 
were pierced through by Nescience, possessed as they are of a mind full 
of afflictions, variegated by eternal residua ; who follow in the wake of 
the ‘I’ and the ‘ Mine,’ in relation to things that should be left apart,— 
the three-fold pain caused by both external and internal means, run after 
them as they are repeatedly born. The Yogi then seeing himself and the 
world of living beings thus surrounded by the eternal flow of pain, turns 
for refuge to right knowledge, the cause of the destruction of all pains. 


Further, by reason of the contrariety of the functionings of the 
qualities, ‘all is indeed pain to the discriminating.’ The qualities of the 
Will-to-know being of the nature of essentiality, activity and inactivity, 
become dependent upon mutual help, and set the formation of either a 
quiescent, a disturbed or adelusive notion possessed of the three qualities 
themselves. And the functioning of the qualities being changeful, the 
mind is said to possess the nature of changing quickly. The intensities 
of their natures and the intensities of their functionings are contradictory 
to one another. The ordinary, however, function together with the intense. 
Thus do these qualities bring about the notions of pleasure, pain and 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 117 


delusion by each subserving the others, and all thus enter into the for- 
mations of the others. Itis by the quality which is the leading factor, 
that the difference is introduced. It is for this reason that all is pain to 
the discriminating. 

The seed out of which this large heap of pains grows is Nescience, 
and of that the means of destruction is right knowledge. 


As the Science of Medicine has four Departments, Disease, the Cause 
of Disease, the Absence of Disease, and Medicine or the Means of Removal, 
so also this Science has four Departments. It is thus divided: the 
Universe in Evolution, the Cause of the Universe in Evolution, Liberation, 
the Means of Liberation. Of these, the Universe in Evolution being full of 
troubles is the pain to be avoided; the conjunction of the Purusa (the 
conscious principle) and the Prakriti is the cause of pain; the final 
cessation of the conjunction is the removal of pain. Right knowledge 
is the cause of the removal of the pain. Here the individuality of the 
remover is not to be considered the pain to be avoided; nor is to be 
considered as an object of desire to be aimed at. In the case of avoidabi- 
lity, the theory of their destructibility would come in. In the case of 
its being considered an object of desire to be aimed at, the theory of its 
being the effect of some preceding cause would come in. When both 
these positions have been given up, the theory of eternal immutability 
only remains. ‘This is the Right knowledge. 


Thus is the Science said to possess four Departments.— 66. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


The author introduces the aphorism by putting a question with the object of ex- 
plaining in the sequence, that although ordinary people do not at the time of feeling 
pleasure, have-the sense of its contrariety to the mind, and do not, therefore, feel the pain 
thereof, the Yogi has the sense of pain therein:—‘How is that possible?’ ‘By means, 
&c, Thisis the aphorism. The consequential change, the suffering (t4pa) and the 
habituation are themselves pains. It is by means of these, &c. 

He describes the painfulness of an object on account of the painfulness of sequential 
change :—'This feeling of pleasure...... in the case of every one, &c.’ It is plain that 
pleasure is not possible without the consequent bond of attachment. Where there is no 
co-existence there is no pleasure, It is in that that the feeling of pleasure consists. Attach- 
ment causes activity. Activity is responsible for the heaping up of virtues and vices, 
Of these consists the vehicle of actions born out of attachments, because nothing that 
does not exist cannot be born. He who enjoys pleasure and is at the time even devoted 
to it, goes on at the same time hating the causes of pain, by means of the mental modifica- 
tions of aversion which exists distinct and independent. When one becomes incapable of 
removing the causes of pain, he becomes deluded forgetting as he does the true nature of 
things. Thus a vehicle of actions is brought'into being by aversion also, and like aversion 
by delusion also, This is but another name of Unreal Cognition. There is, therefore, no- 
thing contradictory in its being the cause of the vehicle of action coming into existence, 


(50 gle 


118 PATANJALTS YOGA. 


The question arises : How can one who is attached, be at the same time averse and 
deluded? Aversion and delusion are not seen at the time of attachment. For this reason 
he says :—‘ And so it has been said :’ by us when speaking of the characteristic of alterna- 
tion in the afflictions. Thevirtue and vice which have their origin in the activity of 
speech and mind have both been described by what has been said so far, because the 
incident of their being born out of attachment, &c., is common to both, inasmuch as there 
is no difference in this matter between a mental and verbal expression of desire. As they 
say :—‘ The mental modification of desire differs not from its verbal expression.’ 


Now he shows that there is a physical vehicle of actions also :—‘ Enjoyment is not 
possible without giving pain to others.’ It is for this reason that the writers of the 
Dharmasastras speak of the five sins of householders. 


It may be so. But it is not proper that the pleasure derived from an object of enjoy- 
ment should be denied on account of this contrariety to the feeling of Yogis. For this 
reason he says:—‘Ithas been said that the pleasure of enjoyment is Nescience,’ when 
describing Nescience as consisting of the four-fold unreality of cognition. The elders do 
not look with favour upon mere consequential conditions. There is, of course, no feeling 
of pleasure caused to anyone by the enjoyment of honey mixed up with poison, even 
though he may useit. On the contrary, there is a feeling of pain in the sequence. So 
also has it been said by the Lord :—‘ The pleasure which is felt by the contact of the 
senses with their objects, that which is like nectar in the beginning and like poison in 
the end, is Rajasic pleasure.’—(Git&.) 

He introduces this : —‘ The calming down, &c.’ We do not hold that pleasure consists 
in the enjoyment of an object. On the contrary, the greatest pain of man consists in the 
desire for objects, of men, who being satisfied by objects are pained by the wish to possess 
them. This does not calm down without the enjoyment of the object. Farther, its 
calming down does not come about, being followed as it is by attachment, &c. Why then 
should it not be considered as the pain of consequence? This is the meaning. Satisfaction 
is caused by the cessation of the thirst for an object. The calming down thus caused 
consists in the cessation of the powers from their work. The author shows this very mean- 
ing by means of the canon of difference:—‘The restlessness in consequence of absence 
of satisfaction is pain.’ 

He refutes :—‘ Further it is not possible, &c.’ It is true that the cessation of desire 
is the faultless pleasure. It is not the repitition of enjoyments, however, that brings this 
about, The repetition of enjoyment, on the contrary, brings about the manifestation of 
desire, which is the opposite of the cessation thereof. As they have said :—‘ The desire 
for enjoyments is not calmed down by their enjoyment, It gathers strength like fire by 
oblations.—(Manu). The rest is not difficult. 

Now he questions about the pain of anxiety:—‘ Well, what is the painfulness of 
anxiety?’ He gives the answer:—‘ The feeling of pain, &c.’ The full description of its 
nature has not been undertaken, because it is well known to all men. It is similar to the 
pain of consequence or sequential change. The details of this are the same as those 
of the other. 

He now questions about the painfulness of habituation :—‘ What again, &c.’ Answers :— 
‘ By the enjoyment of pleasure, &c.’ The feeling of pleasure nourishes its residual potency. 
That brings about the memory of pleasure. That again causes attachment. From this 
follow the movements of mind, body and speech. TheSe cause virtue and vice. Thence 
comes the enjoyment of their fruition. Thence again is the mind habituated to it. This 
is the meaning of eternity, absence of beginning. And here again memory comes in by 
the intensity of the potencies of pleasure and pain. Thereby come attachment and 
aversion. Thence come actions. From actions proceeds fruition. Thus should this be 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 119 


understood. Following thus this stream of pain troubles the Yogi alone, not any one else. 
For this reason he says :—‘ This is the eternal] stream, &c.’ As to others the three-fold pain 
runs after them,...this is the construction. The pains caused by other beings and the 
powers of nature are described by one common characteristic, the external. The modifi- 
cations variegated by the eternal residua are described as the Nescience. It is the 
Nescience which causes modifications in the mind; they are, in fact, Nescience itself. It 
is by this that the feelings of ‘This is myself’ and ‘This is mine’ are generated in the 
Will-to-be the senses and the body, &c., and in wife and children, &c. These are the lines 
along which the ordinary Puruga moves. 


Under these circumstances thers is no rescue at all except in right knowledge. For 
this reason he says :—‘ The Yogi then, &c.’ 


Having thus shown the painfulness of pleasurable enjoyments, on account of the 
surrounding circumstances of sequential change, habituation and anxiety, he now shows 
the painfulness due to the very nature of their being :—‘ Further by reason of the con- 
trariety of the functionings of the qualities, &c.’ He explains :—‘ The qualities of Essence 
(Sattva), disturbing energy (Rajas) and inertia (Tamas) evolved as essentiality, activity 
and inactivity in their transformation as the Will-to-be, being dependent for support 
upon each other, bring about every notion, even though it be the notion of pleasurable 
enjoyments, as necessarily possessed of the three qualities, being as it is as such, either 
quiescent, that is pleasurable, disturbed, i.e., painful or inert, i. e., seedy (a feeling which 
is neither of active pleasure nor yct of pain). And even such a modification in the form 
of a notion of this Will-to-be is not permanent. So says he :—‘And the functioning of the 
qualities being changeful, &c,’ The mind has been said to be of a quickly changing nature. 

But how can one notion become possessed of the opposite qualities of quiescence, 
disturbance and seediness at one time? For this reason he says:—‘ The intensities of 
their nature and tho intensities of their functionings are contradictory to one another.’ 

Natures differ from natures, that is, the eight modes of mental being characterization, 
&c. Their functionings are pleasure and pain. Thus characteristic (i.c., virtue) differs 
when ripening into fruit, from Vice (that which is non-characteristic), when that ripens 
into fruit. Similarly, knowledge, desirelessness and power as also pleasure, &c., differ from 
contradictory characteristics of the same classes. The ordinary manifestations, i.c.. when 
their natures are not intensified, do not contradict their intense manifestations, i.e., 
when they are in the height of their manifestation. They, therefore, do manifest along 
with them. 

Well, we understand this. But how can the enjoyment of pleasurable objects be 
painful by nature? For this reason he says :—‘ Thus do these, &c.’ The meaning is that 
they arc both the same inasmuch as there is no difference in their material causcs and 
the material cause and the effect thereof are the same in nature. 

What, is it thena case of absolute identity of nature? If so, there would be no 
difference among mental conceptions as they do exist. For this reason he says :—‘ It is 
by the quality which is the leading factor, &c.’ The presence of the qualities is in their 
ordinary nature. The leading factor is that which is intense. For this reason, all is 
but pain to the discriminating, by nature as well as on account of surrounding circum- 
stances. And pain has to be removed by the wise, And pain cannot be removed unless 
its root is removed. Further, the root cannot be removed unless it is known. For this 
reason shows the root thereof :—‘ The seed out of which grows, &c.’ The meaning is that 
the seed is that out of which the heap of pains grows, i.e., from which it takes its birth. 

He mentions the means of its eradication :—‘ And of that the means of destruction, &c.’ 

Now he explains that this science, which is taught for the welfare of all, is similar 
to another science of the same class :—‘ As the science of medicine, &c.’ That science 


Google 


120 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 
a ee td 


which has four branches of discussion, is said to be a science of four departments. The 
question now arises that inasmuch as pain was ere now described as the thing which 
has to be removed and the universe in evolution is now described as the thing to be 
removed, is there not an evident contradiction in this? For this reason he says :—‘ The 
universe in evolution being full of pain, &c.’ 

Now he describes the minor operation of Nescience, whereby the evolution of the 
universe is set in :—‘ The conjanction of the Prakriti and tho Paruga, &c.’ 

He describes the means of liberation :—* Right knowledge is the means, &c.’ 

Some are of opinion that liberation consists in the destruction of the very being 
of him who does away with pain. As they say :—‘The salvation of the mind is like the 
extinguishment of a lamp.’ Others say that liberation consists in the appearance of pure 
knowledge by the destruction of the afflictions together with their potencies, He says 
to them :—‘ Here the individuality of the remover is not to be considered the pain, &c.’ 

He points out the defect in the theory of removal :-—-‘In the case of avoidability, &c.’ 
No wise man ever works for self-destruction, It is, however, seen that men who carry 
a body full of intense pain, do attempt to destroy themselves. True. But it is only a 
few who do so. 

Further, if this were so, there would remain no object of existence for the Puruga, 
inasmuch as there are spirits in evolution who enjoy different kinds of pleasure as gods, 
&ec., and they too reach the state of liboration. Hence, liberation is not to be considered 
to be the annihilation of the very being of him who removes the pain, 

Well, then, let us suppose that the mind in the state of liberation takes up another 
nature. For this reason he says :—‘ In the case of it being supposed that another nature is 
put on, the theory of there being another cause for it, &c.’ It means that if it ig something 
which comes into existence, it is an effect and is, therefore, impermanent. Being impermanent 
it cannot be considered liberation (Moksa). Mokga consists in immortality, The expres- 
sion of pure knowledge is not immortal. It is not possible that expression (santana) 
should exist as separate from the thing expressed, and as an independent existence. 
The things that are expressed arc, of course, impermanent. For this reason we should 
try to find out a theory which would make it possible that Moksa should be permanent, 
Is is only thus that it would be possible to make Moksa an object for the Puruga to 
achieve. For this reason he Says:—‘ When both these positions, &c.’ Hence Mokga is 
only the establishment of the self in its own nature. This alone is Right Knowledge, 
Thus is this science said to possess four Departments, —15. 


Sitra 16. 
SA TAAATAT Ngee 


ey Heyam, the avoidable. 3: Duhkham, pain. warren Anagatain, not-yet- 
come. 


16. Pain not-yet-come is the avoidable.—67. 


agarhrarreet air fig aac aReenc ata teararae | aqenrartey 
Raitegeaa vette ence wea Ne I 
VYASA. 
The pain which has passed away has been spent up by experience. 
It cannot, therefore, fall within the sphere of the avoidable. And that 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YO@QA, 16, 17. 121 


which is present, is being experienced at the time of its existence ; it can- 

not, therefore, be considered as the avoidable with reference to the future 

moment of time. Hence that pain alone which has not yet been experi- 

enced, troubles the Yogi who is sensitive as the eye-hall ; it does not 

trouble any other knower. Hence that alone is the avoidable pain. It is 

the cause of this avoidable pain only that is to be discussed. —67. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


By the use of the words ‘not yet come,’ the past and the present have been (taken 
out of the purview. He shows the propriety thereof :—‘ The pain that has passed away, 
&e.’ 

But why should pain which is present, ie., in the process of being suffered, be not 
considered as falling within the sphere of the avoidable, seeing that it has not been spent 
up by suffering ? For this reason he says:—‘ And that which is present, &c,’ The rest is 
easy.—16, 

Sfitra 17. 


TVET: Varit PARg: Ugo 


a Drastri, of the knower. pet: Drisyayoh, and of the knowable. rm: 
Samyogah, conjunction. ® Heya, of the avoidable pain. gy: Hetfh, the cause. 


17. The Conjunction of the knower and the know- 
able is the cause of the avoidable pain.—68. 


eee: Gat tadg: | rer ga: aaa gee | ea greek 
Qreat: Ga wan | atarectasentaawned aferaritearel eeaela et 
walt gave efrever aft: | aguandicatadt wtstaste 
HATHA UAS IMATE ATTA TATA, | ATE TTAT RNAT- 
Tacier ean tatgg re arcu: | ca area! aearegfte- 
dareearqanrenhasr Teassranc | KearegTeaeae: garseq warnrcawarey | 
ACN WIAA Herat HezHeT AT Tare weer waratsrt wear- 
umakaa atteratacard aad sat aan cérercarcaarn Aas get 
anti | wearercatrattrareanie | sete arened Care: Gwaag aay | 
meaty Praran areraresnet HA atikar acta afer dae 
afar | Ael g TAATA aaTaTageesM Fetsarzery eft Lo li 

VYASA. 

The knower is the Puruga (the conscious principle) who cognizes 
the reflection from the Will-to-know by conjunction. The knowable con- 
sists of all the characteristics present in the essence of the Will-to-know. 
This then, the knowable behaves like a magnet. It is useful only when 
placed here. On account of its capacity of knowability, it becomes the 
possession of the lord, the Purusa, who is of the nature of the power of 


knowing. It becomes the object of the act of enjoyment, inasmuch as 
16 


(So gle 


122 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


although by nature independent, it becomes dependent upon another, 
existing as it does for fulfilling the object of that other. It is different 
in nature from the power of knowing (consciousness), but puts on that 
nature by taking it up from another. The eternal conjunction of the 
power of knowing and the capacity of being known, brought about by the 
purpose of existence, is the cause of the avoidable pain. And so it has 
been said :—‘ The conjunction therewith is the cause ; by giving that up 
is secured the complete remedy of pain, inasmuch as that is found to 
be the cause of the removal of the real thing, the cause of pain. As, for 
example, the soles of the feet possess the capacity of being pierced, and 
the thorn possesses the power of piercing. The remedy consists in not 
putting the foot on the thorn, or putting it with a shoe on. Whoever in 
the world knows these three things, secures the remedy and does not 
suffer the pain caused by the prick. By what means? By the power 
of the three-fold knowledge. 


_ And here, too, it is the quality of the disturbing motion (rajas) that 
brings about the pain ; and it is the quality of the Essence (sattva) which 
is pained. Why? Because the act of pain must live in an object, and 
it can, therefore, live in the Objective Essence alone. It cannot live in the 
unchanging actionless knower of the field. Because consciousness 
(Purusa) has the Objective Essence for its field it follows along the lines 
of the phenomena of the Essence, and when the Objective Essence is 
pained, the Puruga also is pained by reflex action.— 68. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The avoidable pain hag been described. Its cause is now discussed. ‘The conjunc- 
tion of the knower and the knowable is the cause of the avoidable pain.’ 

Now he describes the nature of the knower :—‘ The knower, &c.’ The cognition by 
conjunction of the reflection from the Will-to-know (Buddhi) is the same as the reflection 
of consciousness into the Will-to-know. This is present even in the Purusas who are 
indifferent (Ud4sina). 

Well, but if this is all, it is the Will-to-know alone that can thus be visible to him, 
not sound, &c., which are not thus in contact with him (the Puruga). For this reason he 
says :—‘ The knowable consists of all the characteristics of the Will-to-be.’ By means 
of the passage of the senses the Will-to-be transforms as sound, &c. Sound, &c., thus 
becomes the characteristics of the knowable. This isthe meaning. Well, but it igs the 
Will-to-be that transforms as sound, &c.,and thereby puts on these appearances. As to 
the Purusa however, the change takes place in him when his relation with the Will-to-be 
is perceived. If this relation is not recognized, how can sound, &c., be perceived even 
though they have entered the essence of the Will-to-be ? The knowable cannot be cog- 
nized without being in contact with the power of consciousness. For this reason he 
says :—'This then, the knowable behaves like, &c.’ We have discussed in the first 
chapter that the essence of the Will-to-be, being touched by consciousness, takes in the 
reflection of consciousness on account of its extreme purity, and being thus as it were 
transformed into consciousness cognizes sound, &c.,in sequence. And it is for this reason, 


Go gle 


Cd. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 17. 123 


that the seer enjoying sound, &c., presented to it by the essence of the Will-to-be having 
transformed into the sound, &c., becomes the master, and the essence of the Will-to-be 
standing to it in that relation becomes its possession. This is the essence of the Will-to- 
be, which possessed of forms behaves as a magnet and becomes a possession of the Puruga, 
who is the lord, as the power of consciousness. Why? Because it becomes the 
object of the act of cognition in sequence. The cognition in sequence is the experi- 
ence of the Paruga, This means the action of the Puruga with the object in view. 
Becoming the object thoreof means becoming enjoyable. It is spoken of as his possession, 
because it becomes enjoyable by him. 


The question again arises that the essence of the Will-to-be being self-illuminated, 
how can it be the object of cognition ? For this reason he says :—‘It is different in nature 
from, &c.’ The essence of the Will-to-be can be self-illuminating only, if it is reality of 
the nature of consciousness, Its nature, however, is different from that of consciousness, 
being as it is of the nature of the non-intelligent. It takes up the nature of conscious- 
ness by borrowing it fromthe other. It is for this reason an object of cognition. 

The question now is that inasmuch as anything is said to be dependent upon 
another when something constituting it rests in that other, the Will-to-be cannot ve 
dependent upon the Puru3a, because nothing that belongs to the Will-to-be rests upon 
the Purusa, who is by nature indifferent. It further follows from this that the Puruga 
can have no action of his own. For this reason the author says:—‘ Although indepen- 
dent by nature, it becomes dependent upon another, &c. The purpose of its existence 
being the fulfilment of the object of another, z.e., of the Puruga, it becomcs dependent 
upon that other, i.e, the Purusa. 

Well then this relation of the power of seeing and the capacity of being seen can 
either be innate or accidental. If it be innate, then both the related objects must 
always remain as such. The relation cannot cease to exist, because both of them are 
indestructible. The relation being thus impossible of cessation, there can never be an 
end of births and deaths. If it be incidental (naimittika), then because the afflictions, 
the actions and their potencies are the modifications of the internal organ, they can 
exist only when the internal organ exists. And the internal organ is brought into 
existence by means of them. Thus each comes to depend for its existence upon the ex- 
istence of the other. Inasmuch as there cannot be this eternity of succession in the 
beginning of creation, the very setting in of evolution thus becomes impossible, and in 
fact non-existent. And so it has been said : —“ Action is brought about by the ‘qualities’ 
even according to those who believe that the Purusa is not the actor. But how can that 
be brought about ? Karma does not exist then? Nor is there untrue knowledge, nor 
attachment, nor aversion, &c. Nor is the mind born then, nor can any mental modifica- 
tions exist at all in the case of any one.” To remove this doubt theauthor says :—‘ The 
eternal conjunction of the power of knowing and the capacity of being known, brought 
about by the purpose of existence, &c.’ 

True, the relation is not innate ; it is incidental. And although it is thus incidental, 
it has no beginning, because its existence has been caused by an eternal cause. And 
this succession of afflictions, actions and potencies is eternal. In each creation they 
become merged into the Prakriti together with the internal organ, and manifest again 
in the beginning of another creation in the same state in which. they were before. The 
illustration has been mentioned more than once before of how certain creatures of the 
earth are reduced to earth on the cessation of the rains, but come back to life again when 
the rains return. 

Nescience is the cause of the conjunction by antecedence. The fulfilment of the 
object of the Purusa is the cause of keeping it on. It is by virtue of that that the conjunc- 
tion lasts. For this reason is it said to have been caused by the purpose of the Puruga. 


(Go gle 


124 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


“And so it has beensaid" by Pafichasikh& :—‘ Conjunction with that’ means the con- 
janction with the Will-to-be (buddhi). It is this conjunction which is the cause of pain. 
By the cessation of that is secured the absolute remedy of-pain. It is implied that pain 
lives on as long as the conjunction does not cease. The author repeats a well known 
illustration of the same :—-' As the soles of the feet, &c.’ 

Well let that be so. But when it is said that the conjunction with the ‘qualities’ 
is the cause of pain, it becomcs admitted that the ‘qualities’ are the pain-givers. Farther 
the action of the verb ‘to pain’ does not terminate in the actor alone, like that of the 
verb ‘Ig’ and others of the same class. There must be another object in its case which 
is pained. The Puaruga cannot be the object in which this pain may reside, because the 
Puruaa being imuutable it cannot possess the nature of being affected by the fruit of 
action. Therefore, it being necessary for pain that there should be something pained, 
we infer its von-existence when no object of pain exists, just as we see that no smoke 
exists when there is no fire. For this reason the author says :—‘“ And here too the 
quality of essentiality is pained, &c.*”’ It is the qualities which are either the pain-givers 
or the pained. Of these the Sattva being delicate like the soles of the feet, is pained ; 
the Rajas being sharp is the pain-giver. 

The author now puts a question :—‘“‘ Why is it the Sattva alone that is pained ? and 
not the Puruga.” The answer is :—‘“ On account of the action of pain, &c.” 

Well, then, does not the Puruga get pain? And further if it is only the non-intel- 
ligent Sattva that is pained, what loss is thereby caused to us? For this reason he 
says:—‘The Puruga is pained by reflex action.’—17. 


Sitra 18. 
FTAA US 


are Prakasa, of illumination. fw Kriya, of activity. feeft Sthiti, inertia. 
ge Silam, nature, swerafenfeefifey Prakdsakriydsthitisilam, Having the nature 
of illumination, activity and inertia, wa Bhfita, the elements. sfx Indriya, 
the powers of sensation, ‘wrvay Atmakam, consisting of. 3m Bhoga, experience. 
wet Apavarga, emancipation. wy Artham, object. gm@y Drisyam, knowable. 
18. The knowable is of the nature of illumination, 
activity and inertia; it consists of the elements and the 
powers of sensation, action and thought; its objects are 
emancipation and experience.—69. 
| wHrafinarierairs zyarararh Arminia’ eea7 | 
rere area | Hraretre cafeafeate aa ee ct Tor wert. 
Rann: gitar: eamerrrdta catatrnwtinaiagea: TeaTTxT- 
fycisorertrerai ns rareqerarant ager sata THA gg TTA: WATAAST: 
arquahactaferataty yates ATA Se MITAPATHTagAaashetar Fe 
qedaaat wnat: afaiarsitvaritinwnrartancay: wera 
tirana gfaagadaran: waTamesaremn waka | Gageafiepsady | ata- 
qakgamask qa gheniga qareyqea ataad | aairicias TTT 


Go gle 


Cd. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 135 


feat qureqed vtana ve re arrarnt sarageree waa fel 
araanie fe ar eat gore | arater Precuresearerarcurn Rrearerree” art 
are: SRTTATTUATTT ee | warelaeawmaTA anf | Te Ara | we 
a ag fry aig wdeandit a get qaqa aqu afwareacet- 
QAAPRAT ATA TATA AZ TIA TAT TCSST CA | aaa ArTTAAY afewar 
qerae Tea He Ger arakreae cr aa a eae TIAA at Ae gs az- 
ara: eats arakread @ fe aenwer Arata | as arate gare atarhh 
gar aaieeaa a Re aensear Mat) gata genatl qaarhkaereqara- 
art area ef | ata ceaarcierteaeaeraniaaa gal ATATAT: ae 
cariftieergran @ & aenwer ArKe Un Le 
VYASA. 

The nature of the knowable is now described :—‘ The knowable is 
of the nature of, &c.’ The quality of essentiality (Sattva) is of the nature 
of illumination. Einergy (Rajas) is of the nature of activity. Inertia is of 
the nature of inactivity. These ‘qualities’ are capable of being coloured 
more or less by proximity to one another. ‘They are ever evolving. ‘They 
have the characteristics of conjunction and separation. They manifest 
forms by each lending support to the others by proximity. None of 
these loses its distinct power into those of the others, even though each 
may exist as the principal factor of a phenomenon, with the others as 
subsidiary thereto. ‘They take to the lines of different manifestations 
of power in objects of the same or of different classes. When anyone 
of them is the principal factor of any phenomenon, the others show their 
presence in close contact. Their existence as subsidiary energies of the 
principal factor is inferred by their distinct and independent function- 
ing, even though it be as subsidiary qualities. Their powers come into 
manifestation by virtue of the objects of the Purusa having to be 
fulfilled. ‘They bring about the fulfilment by mere proximity, acting 
in the same way as loadstone. They follow along the line of the 
manifestation of one of them independently of any disposing cause. They 
are called by the name of Pradhana (primordial matter). This is styled 
the knowable. This it is that consists of the elements and the powers 
of action, sensation and thought. Jt evolves as the elements, the subtle 
and the gross Prithvi, &c. Similarly does it evolve as the powers of sen- 
sation, action and thought, the subtle and gross auditory and other 
powers. And this evolution is not purposeless, beginning as it does 
with a set purpose before it. The object of the “knowable” is of course 
the fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa, experience and emancipation. 
Of these, experience consists in obtaining the knowledge of the nature of 


Go gle 


126 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


the desirable and undesirable phenomena of the qualities ; which know- 
lege, however, does not recognize them as only the modifications of the 
qualities. Emancipation is the ascertainment of the nature of the enjoyer, 
the Purusa. Beyond the knowledge of these two there is no wisdom. 
And so it has been said: —‘‘And this one, however, having come to know 
the three ‘qualities’ to be the actors and the fourth Purusa to be the 
actionless knower of their action, and knowing also the outputs of the 
qualities, not yet known, that are being presented to the Puruga, who is 
of the same and not yet of the same class with them, no longer suspects 
the existence of any other wisdom.” 


Well, but how can either experience or emancipation, which being 
both of them the works of the Will-to-be live in the Will-to be alone, be 
predicated of the Purusa? As victory and defeat existing in the soldiers 
are predicated of their master, because it is he who enjoys the fruit 
thereof, so are bondage and freedom existing. in the Will-to-be alone 
predicated of the Purusa, because he is the enjoyer of their fruit. It is 
of the Will-to-be alone that the bondage exists until the object of the 
Purusa is fulfilled ; and it is the fulfilment of the object that is emanci- 
pation (Moksa). Similarly have perception, retention, judgment, rejection 
knowledge of realities and the distinction of unrealities their existence 
fastened on to the Purusa although they have their existence in the Will- 
to-be, because he is the enjoyer of their fruit.—69. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The presentation of objectivity is the cause of pain, and that has been described 
before. The author now describes the knowable:—‘The knowable is of the nature of 
illumination, &c.’ It is aquantum of essence (Sattva) as luminosity that is coloured by 
a quantum of inertia (témas) as weakness and by a quantum of disturbing energy 
(Rajas) as pain. Similarly may this be illustrated in the case of existences in which Rajas, 
&c., prevail. It is this that is intended to be said by, 

‘These qualities are capable of being coloured more or less by proximity to one 
another.’ 

They have the characteristics of conjunetion and separation ‘with and from the 
Purusa.’ As it is saidin the Veda:—‘One unborn is there who is red, white and black ; 
she goes on giving birth to many similar children. One unborn Purusa follows her en- 
joying ; another unborn (Purusa) gives her up, having enjoyed all her enjoyables.—(Sveta- 
Svatara Up.) 

It is said of them that they manifest forms, by lending support to one another, inas- 
much as it is thus that the prithvf and other tattvas are evolved. Grant that. But inas- 
much as Disturbing Energy (rajas) and Inertia (timas) subserve the quality of Essenti- 
ality (sattva), when the latter brings about the production of the quiescent notion (santa 
pratyuya), they too are the causcs of the production and must as such possess the virtues 
(that bring about the production), Such being the case, the same quiescent notion 
must be manifest even when the rfjas and the témas are the principal factors as is mani- 
fested it: the case of the equality of Essentiality being the principal factor, and not the 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 127 


disturbed and forgetful notions. For this reason the author says :—‘ None of these loses 
its distinct power into those of the others, even though each may exist as the principal 
factor of a phenomenon, with others as subservient thereto.’ It may be that RAéjas and 
témas exist as subservient factors when the quiescent notion has to be manifested, but 
their energies are not merged into that of the other. The fact that the energies are not 
merged is to be inferred from the fact of the effects thereof not disappearing into each 
other, Inasmuch as the quiescent, disturbed and forgetful effects are found along with 
the intensified manifestation of the several ‘qualities’, not being merged into the others, 
it is proved that the separate qualities of their energies are not destroyed by conjunction, 


Let that be granted. But if these energies are separate from one another and can- 
not be merged into the others, that it cannot be said of the ‘qualities’ that they can 
come together with the object of bringing about a single effect. Different energies are 
never found coming together to bring about a single effect. It never happens that 
thread, earth and straw should come together to produce a jar and such other things. To 
this he says in answer:—‘They take to the lines of different manifestations of power 
in objects of the same and of different classes.’ Although the power cf forming the mate- 
rial cause exists with reference to objects of the same class only and not with respect 
to others, the power of helping the cause to manifest as a particular effect does certainly 
exist in objects of different classes also. As to a cloth, straw does not possess the power 
of even helping the material cause in the manifestation thereof. It, therefore, cannot 
come together with thread to bring about a cloth. They are spoken of as taking to the 
lines of different energies in objects of the same and different classes, because it is their 
nature to do so, 

‘At the time of their being the principal factors':—When a divine body has to be 
generated, the quality of essentiality becomes the principal factor, and the qualities of 
disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (témas) are subservient. It is for this reason that 
these qualities show their antecedent closeness at the time of their not being the princi- 
pal factors, i. e., their modifications tend towards the immediate manifestation of the 
intended effects. 

The words ‘principal factors’ are intended chiefly to signify the state of being. As 
in the aphorism of Panini, ‘The dual and the singular in case of two and one,’ the mean- 
ing is that in case of duality and unity, the dual and singular are to be used ; for were it 
not so, the words used would be ‘twos’ and ‘ones’ (in the plural number). 

Well, but the question arises, that in the case of their being the principal factors of 
any phenomenon it is possible to posit their existence because they are then in manifesta- 
tion ; not so however when they are not in manifestation. What reason is then there to 
suppose that they do exist, when they are not in manifestation? For this reason he 
says :—‘ Their existence as subservient energies, &c.’ Even though they are not in mani- 
festation, yet their existence as substances subserving the principal factor by helping 
it to bring about a particular effect is inferred by their functioning alone, inasmuch as 
they do not possess the power of discriminating intelligently, the one from the other, and 
have the capacity of causing effect by coming together. They are, therefore, thus 
described. 

Well but granting that the qualities have the power of bringing about the manifesta- 
tion of effects by coming together, how is it that they do bring about the effects. It is 
not necessary that whoever has the power must use it also. To show that this power 
does not stop in its action of causing the manifestation of effects, he says :—-‘ Their powers 
come into manifestation by virtue, &c.’ The meaning is that the ‘qualities’ cease to act 
only when all the objects of the Puruga have been fulfilled. It is only then that they do 
not produce effects. 


Google 


128 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


The question arises that inasmuch as the qualities do not confer any benefit upon 
the Paruga, how can it be said that the fulfilment of the objects of the Parugsa sets them 
into action. For this reason he says:—‘They bring about the fulfilment by mere 
‘proximity.’ 


But the question arises that virtue and vice being the evident disposing causes of 
the action of the ‘qualities’ why is it said that their powers come into manifestation by 
virtue of the objects of the Puruga having to be fulfilled? In answer to this he says :— 
‘They follow inthe line of the manifestation of one of them, &c.’ Whichever of the 
three, whether the Sattva, the Rajas er the Tamas fuactions as the principal factor 
to manifest its effect, the others follow along its line without the existence of a disposing 
cause in the shape of virtue and vice. The same will be said :— 

‘No disposing cause sets the Prakpitis in motion; it removes the obstacles only, 
like the husbandman.”—8.28. 

“These qualities'’ are called by the name of Pradh4na—this is the construction. 
They are called by the name of Pradhana, derived as the word is from the root /DHA, ‘to 
maintain,’ meaning those by which the whole world is maintained. This is called ‘the 
knowable.’ 


Having thus described the nature of the qualities, now the author describes their 
effects :—‘ This it is that consists, &c.’ When it is proved that the effects exist in reality, 
it is apparent Lhat everything evolves according to its own nature. Now he explains 
how it is of the nature of the elements and the powers of sensation, &c. ‘It evolves as 
the elements, &c.’ Now he introduces the portion of the aphorism. Its objects are ex- 
perience and emancipation. And this evolution is not purposeless, inasmuch as it sets 
in with a fixed purpose before it. 


The author explains experience (bhoga):—‘ Of these, experience, &c.’ Pleasure and 
pain are the phenomena of the Will-to-be which is of the nature of the three qualities. 
It is the Will-to-be that modifies as these. Experience, however, does not consist in deter- 
mining their nature as qualities. For this reason he says :—‘ Which knowledge, however, 
does not recognize them as only modifications of the qualities.’ This has often bcen 
discussed. 


The author explains emancipation. ‘The ascertainment of the natare of the enjoyer.’ 
The radical meaning is that by which it is separated from something (Apa vrij, varga). 


Now he explains the non-existence of any other purpose :—‘ Beyond the knowledge 
of these two there is no other wisdom. And so it has been said by Paichadikha :—‘ And 
this one however, &c.’ 


The question now arises that experience and emancipation being both the modifica- 
tions of the Will-to-be and as such having their being in the Will-to-be, how is it that they 
are predicated of the Puruga, who is not their cause and in whom they do not live? For 
this reasons he says :—“ Well but how can either, &c.” It has been said that the Puruga 
is the enjoyer, and the subject will be discassed further besides. In reality, however, 
it is by the Will-to-be alone that the object of the Puruga is fulfilled. It is by this des- 
cription of the nature of the relationship of the Purusa to experience and emancipation, 
that the nature of the relationship of the Purusa to perception, &c., should also be known. 
But of these perception is the knowledge of an object such as it is. The memory there- 
of is retention. Judgment consists in discovering the particular differential of the 
precepts. Rejection means the removal by reasoning of the untrue facts that have entered 
the mind. The knowledge of realities consists in coming to a conclusion by ~jadgment 
and rejection. The knowledge of the things to be rejected and accepted, preceded by the 
knowledge of the realities, is the distinguishing of the unrealities.—18. 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 19. 129 


Siitra 19. 


fartariaatagarartigt gueattr ueen 


fag Visesa, specialised, wate Avidesa, unspecialised. fegrma Linga-mAtra, 
undifferentiated phenomenal. sfegf Alingdni, and the noumenal. we Guna, 
of the qualities, vwatfé Parvani, stages. 
19. The Specialised, the Unspecialized the Undif- 
ferentiated phenomenal and the noumenal are the stages 
of ‘the qualities.” —70. 


Prateey Prater: | wararas Arearer eaeaftares: | seater: aera sega 
FATT TRACT IAAT Caen Terra Ate | Taig hragqvasacea: 
areaqrea: qearfaiear: | asearfaaarsfeaarars cf | qa awararenarar 
men cehacatarn: | wack yar aaa aera aar- 
ara HeeTTTaeTy Prakenerrgrate | oftaegsratarca afaa a aar- 
wt TENT Tala Raqaiecaqernaesge wart aera 
afer | on jet Sears: atari Feared aresgaftara eft 1 afeerea- 
erat a gearet sgh i genvar wea wade 1 a ae 
gl dr 


| aTeT genrireierrererae | Tarat eTarenferen- 
UNA Gaartat areas wah 1 aA art aghrarnca wires | 


wwe ataargaian a ceed satrawaed | akahtardrararmaaar- 
TATA UPAR ASTAAAITATAT CA Tas | aw tact zft- 
wife | pene | aatser feraee ara xfer | varaa acuTaed ahaa a eared: 
arate | an artfsgarawyer TeTTe aT araE fefreat mTa- 


ahatg qaqa aaah Aesrd | aura geen Pater 
wearacnenia Rawat atta acaracatara: | set g waesaurazen aft- 
GAT VATSATATEAA WH Le ht 

VYASA. 

This is composed for the purpose of ascertaining the differences of 
nature shown by ‘the qualities’ which constitute the ‘knowable.’ The 
Specialized, the Unspecialized, the Undifferentiated Phenomenal and the 
Noumenal are the stages of ‘ the qualities.’ 

Here the elements known as Akééa (ether), Vayu (Invisible gas), 
Tejas (Steam or visible gas), Apas (liquid) and Prithvi (solid) are the 

17 


Google 


130 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


specialized modifications of the unspecialized soniferous, tangiferous, 
lumniferous, gustiferous and odoriferous measures thereof (the tanmatras, 
the subtle elements). 

Similarly are the powers of sensation (hearing, touch, sight, taste 
and smell), the powers of action (speech, grasp, position, execution and 
generation), the eleventh Manas, which has all these as its sphere, the 
specialized modification of the unspecialized modification of the principle 
of egoism. Thus sixteen-fold is the specialized modifications of the quali- 
ties. Six are the unspecialized modifications and _ these are soniferous, 
the tangiferous, the lumniferous, the gustiferous and the odoriferous 
‘ultimates’ the tanmatras. These five unspecialized modifications, the 
soniferous and the others, possess respectively one, two, three, four and 
five of the qualities of sound, &c. The sixth unspecialized modification 
is the Pure Egoism. 

These six are the unspecialized modifications of Pure Be-ness, the 
Great Principle, the Maha Atma. This Great Reality is the Undifferen- 
tiated Phenomenal Stage beyond the Unspecialized. In the Great Principle 
of Pure Be-ness do these live and grow up to their highest capacity. On 
involution they pass back into that state of Pure Be-ness, the great princi- 
ple ; and thence they pass into the state which neither IS, nor yet IS 
NOT, that in which it exists and yet does not; that which is Real, the 
Unmanifested, the noumenon, the background of all. This is their 
undifferentiated phenomenal modification ; and that which neither IS nor 
yet IS NOT, is the noumenal modification. The objects of the Purusa 
are no cause of the noumenal state. That is to say, the fulfilment of the 
objects of the Purusa does not act as the cause of manifestation with 
reference to the noumenal state, in the beginning. The fulfilment of the 
objeets of the Purusa is not, therefore, the reason of the existence of the 
cause. For the reason that it is not brought into existence by the Purusa’s 
objects it is said to be eternal. As to the three specialized states, the 
fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa becomes the cause of their mani- 
festation in the beginning. And because the objects of the Purusa 
become the cause of their manifestation, they are said to be non-eternal. 
The ‘qualities,’ however follow, up all these characteristics. They are, 
therefore, neither born nor disappear at each stage. They only appear as 
it were possessed of the characteristics of birth and death, because their 
individual phenomena in which they of course are present, are possessed 
of the characteristics of dissolution and birth with reference to their past 
and present, &c. As (when we say) “ Devadatta has become poor,” Why ? 
Because all his cattle are dead. The dcath of his cattle has caused his 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 19. 131 


poverty and not the destruction of his own substance. This is an analo- 
gous conception. 

The Undifferentiated phenomenal (Liga) is the next after the Nou- 
menal (Alihga). It exists therein as the same substance, and is distin- 
guished from that, because the law of the order of appearance is invisible. 

Similarly, the six unspecialised modifications have their being 
in the undifferentiated phenomenal and are distinguished from that hy the 
order of evolution being inviolable. 

Sinilarly are the elements and the power of sensation having their 
being in these unspecialized modifications, distinguished from them. 
And it has been said before that there is no other tattva appearing in suc- 
cession after the specialized modifications. Their modifications consist of 
the characteristic (dharma) the secondary quality (laksana) and condition 
(avastha, accident), They will be described.—70. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


It is for assertaining the different modifications of the ‘qualities’ that go to make 
up the knowable that this is composed :— 

“The specialized, the anspecilized, the undifferentiated phenomenal and the nou- 
menal are the stages of qualities.” 

“The specialized :""—The unspecialized modifications are those that are free from 
the specialities which may be described as the quiscent, the disturbed and the forgetful. 
The specialized modifications are their outcomes only. They do not evolve further 
tatvas. 

He describes them :—“Here the elements found, &c.” They are enumerated here 
in the order of their manifestation. 

The powers of sensation and thought are the specialized modifications of the unspe- 
cialized principle of egoism, with the quality of essentiality (sattva) as the principal 
factor. The powers of action are the modifications of the Rajasic form of that principle. 
The Manas is of the nature of both and should be considered as possessing both of these 
as the principal factors. Here the five tanmatras are the effects of the Will-to-be (bud- 
dhi), because they are the unspecialized modifications, just like the principle of egoism. 
Non-specialization consists in being the cause of further modifications. 

Having enumerated the tanmitras and the principle of egoism as the unspecialized 
modifications, now he enumerates the specialized :—‘ This is the sixteenfold, &c.’ Then he 
enumerates the upspecialized :—“Six, etc.” Next he illustrates by putting them to- 
gether :—“ And these are, &c.” The latter is in each case qualified by the former. The 
‘smell vibration’ has by nature five secondary qualities. The taste vibration has by 
nature four; the lumniferous three, the tangiferous two, and the soniferous has but one 
secondary quality, namely, the sound. 

Well of what are these six modifications or effects? Hesays :—‘ They are the modi- 
fications of PURE BE-NESS.’ That which is capable of fulfilling the objects of the 
Purusa IS. Its state is signified by BE-NESS, Pure means limited by that alone. This 
is the Great Principle, the Mahattattva. The meaning is that whatever of work is there 
for fulfilling the objects of the Purusa, whether it appears in the shape of the enjoyables 
of sound, &c., or in the shape of the discrimination of the distinction between the Puruga 
and Sattva (consciousness and the Essence of Objective matter), all has its end in the 


Google 


132 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


shape of the discrimination of the distinction between the Paruga and Sattva (conscicusness 
and the Essence of Objective matter), all has its end in the Great Principle of the Will-to- 
be. This is described as the Atm4, with the object of denying its smallness by showing 
that it constitutes the very nature, the very being of all modifications. This is the first 
modification of the Prakyiti. It is a real modification, not a mere unfoldment therof. 

“Beyond the undifferentiated means divided off from it in time with reference to 
the other objects which are nearer to it in time, i.e, the unspecialized. This is the Maha- 
tattva, the Great Principle of the undifferentiated Phenomenal. In tha‘Great Principle 
of Pure Be-ness lives the determining energy of all further phenomenal modifications, 
that is the unspecialized phenomena, because it is proved that they possess the capacity 
of effecting the fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa, possessed as they are of real 
existence. There they grow to their highest capacity of growth, t.e., reach that state. 
As to the modifications in succession of the specialized modifications of the unspecialized 
ones, these further modifications are characteristic secondary quality and condition. 
This is the end of their growth, 1.e., of their further modifications. 

Having thus described the order of evolution, now he describes the order of involution. 

Involution means passing into latency into the antecedent modification, the determining 
cause of its existence, its Atma (self). The Unspecialized modifications into which the 
Specialized ones have already become latent, pass back in their turn into the Pure Be-ness, 
the Great Mahatattva. Thence the Unspecialized modifications along with their Mahat 
modificatian pass back into the Unmanifested. It is called Alinga, the Noumenal, because 
beyond this do the phenomena pass into latency. This is the final state of latency of the 
phenomenal world. “ That which neither IS nor yet IS NOT” is a description of this state. 
Its existence consists in its possessing the capacity of effecting the fulfilment of the 
objects of the Puruga. Non-existence means want of capacity to be taken into account, 
to force itself upon attention. It is so described, as, being beyond both thése states of 
existence and non-existence. This is the meaning. The state of the equipoise of the 
three qualities of Essence, Inertia, and Energy is nowhere of use in fulfilling the objects of 
the Purusa. It, therefore, does not exist as such. On the other hand, it does not admit of 
being rejected as non-existent, like the lotus of the sky. It is, therefore, not non-existent, 

Grant that. But the principles of Mahat, &c., exist as such in the state of the 
unmanifested also, because nothing that exists cam be destroyed ; and if it is destroyed it 
cannot be born again, because nothing that does not exist can be born. It follows, there- 
fore, that the principles of Mahat, &c., existing in the state of the unmanifested, that state 
also can effect the fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa. How then can it be said 
that the unmanifested is not possessed of existence? For this reason he says :—‘ That 
in which it exists and yet does not exist.’ This means that the cause exists in that state 
but not the effect as such. Although the effect exists in the cause in posse, yet it is 
incapable of performing its function of fulfilling the object of the Puruga. It is, therefore, 
said to be non-existent as such. 

Further he says that this cause is not of the nature of a hare’s horn :—"‘ That which 
is real (not asat, non-existent).’’ It is beyond the state of non-existence, that is, of the 
existence of the effect only as such. If it were like that, then it would be like the lotus 
of the sky and no effect would follow from that. 

Having described what takes place in the case of every manifestation, now he 
summarizes :—‘ This is their undifferentiated, &c.’ ‘This’ refers to what has gone im- 
mediately tefore. The states of existence from the undifferentiated Phenomenal down- 
wards are impermanent, because they have been brought into manifestation by virtue 
of the objects of the Purusa having to be fulfilled. The noumenon, however, is permanent, 
because it has not been brought into being by the objects of the Purnga. The author 
describes the cause :—‘ The objects of the Purusa are no cause, &e,’ 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 19, 20. 133 


How is it, however, that the objects of the Puruga are no cause ? He says :—‘ That 
is tosay, &c.’ By using the words, ‘ does not act as the cause,’ he indicates, the know- 
ledge of the nature of the principle under discussion. This is the meaning. The fulfil- 
ment of the objects of the Puruga may be understood to be the cause with reference to 
the noumenal state, if that state bring about the enjoyment of sound, &c., or manifest 
the discrimination of the distinction between consciousness and Objective Existence. 
If, however, it did that there would be no equipoise. For this reason the objects of the 
Puruga are not understood to be the cause ofthe noumenal state. Hence the falfilment 
of the objects of the Purusa is not the cause of the noumenal state. This he sum- 
marizes :—‘ For the reason that it is not brought into existence, &c.’ The word ITI in 
the text means, ‘for the reason that.’ He describes non-eternity :—‘* As the three 
states, t.e., the undiflerentiated phenomenal, the unspecialized and the specialized.” 

Having described the nature of the stages, now he describes the nature of the ‘ quali- 
ties,’ :—‘ The qualities, however, &c.’ Then he gives an illustration :—‘ As for example, 
Devadatta becomes poor.’ 

The meaning is that when theentirely different phenomena of the rise, increase 
and decrease of his bovine wealth cause the rise and fall of Devadatta to be inferred, 
what need then be said of the appearance and disappearance of individual phenomena 
which although different from the “qualified ” themselves, are yet of their very nature 
and not altogether different from them. 

The question now is whether the order of manifestation is alterable. The answer 
is,‘ It is not.’ ‘The undifferentiated phenomenal is the next after, &c.’ The seeds 
of Nyagrodha are not certainly capable of putting forth at once the full-grown, thickly- 
set tree of Nyagrodha capable of protecting from the fierce heat of the sun with the 
thick setting of its leaves, twigs, branches and body. Thetree comes out only gradually 
in the ordered appearance of shoots, leaves, body and branches, brought about by 
contact with earth, water and heat. Here too must, therefore, be established an order 
of appearance proved to exist both by reason and authority. 

How have the elements and the powers of sensation and action their origin in the 
unspecialised modifications? It has been said before in the Commentary to this very 
aphorism. 

Now he says why the further modification of the specializeds modifications into 
other principles has not been spoken of. ‘There isno other appearance in succession 
after, &c.’ Are the specialized modifications then quite unchangeable ? If so, they must 
be permanent. For this reason he says :—‘Their modifications consist of the charac- 
teristic, &c.’—19. 

SUTRA 20. 


RST STATA: YeTshe sears Iza: Roll 


get Drastd, the seer, efirra: Drisi-matrah, consciousness only. 3g: Suddhah, 
pure. ff Api, even though, sew Pratyaya, by imitation, wa: Anupasyah, 
cognizing ideas. 
20. The seer is consciousness only; even though 
pure, he cognizes ideas by imitation.—71. 


ANGINA CAAT ACS TASTAUNCMTAugAoaa | ABI ERAT: Y- 
mist seaargaea: | eRrarraf geninta fava art | ae gear 
qe: aired a gaa aan aera req da | a aacaree | HEAT | 
eratmraaencatarenke afer Rear aarfaseraea eae 


Go gle 


134 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


areata aftenties gaat | carretera gq qereaaitertier aftérrate | 
wena aires ara gereraga enaseiar were Ale ee garet Aareta- 
Rrraer cavaratartreartir | fara ere afe: aeerenritrarceare: gee eft | 
aa STAT eT THAT aT Uae FTA MRA ATT AL 1 warat pha 
Ua A aa | weg afe Mad ce Ted War Heaeg_atsaat Tara 
tat qa: sere Araagarala aagasera agente ager ca cerraraa | 
Torry | autarit & traaksortarsna a oftarterr skreea- 
wa aahaaguata | seanga medaatMESTA BRTACTHRTATATAT g- 
Fareatsafirer f& errafatterrerraa 1 20 1 


VYASA. 


The knowable has been described. Discussion is now begun with 
the object of describing and ascertaining the nature of the seer (knower). 
‘ The seer is consciousness only : even though pure, he cognizes ideas by 
imitation.’ 

‘ Consciousness only’: This means that he is nothing other than 
the power of becoming conscious ; that is to say, he is not touched by the 
qualities. This Purusa cognizes the Will-to-be by reflex action. He is 
neither quite similar nor quite dissimilar to the Will-to-be (buaddhi). 
‘He is not quite similar.” Why? The Will-to-be having for its sphere 
of action objects known, and not yet known, is of course changeful. 
The changefulness is shown by its objects, such as the cow and the 
jar, &c., being both known and unknown. The fact, however, that the 
spliere of consciousness is always the Known, renders it plain that con- 
sciousness is not changeful. How? It never happens that the Will-to- 
know becomes the sphere of consciousness both when it takes in some 
notion and when it does not. Hence it is proved that the Known is 
always the sphere of the Purusa. Thence the unchangeability of the 
Purusa is shown. Further the Will-to-be exists to fulfil another’s object, 
bringing as it does more than one phenomenon together into itself, for 
the purpose of presenting them to the Purusa. The Purusa, however, 
has his own object before it. 

Besides the Will-to-be is the underlying determinative energy of 
all objective phenomena, and is as such of the nature of the qualities. 
It is, therefore, non-intelligent. The Purusa, however, is the seer of the 
qualities by proximity. or these reasons he is not similar. 

Well then let him be dissimilar. To meet this he says :—‘He is 
not quite dissimilar.” Why? ‘Even though pure, he sees the ideas 
after they have come into the mind.’ Inasmuch as the Purusa cognizes 
the ideas as the Will-to-be seized of consciousness is transformed into 


Google 


CH. If. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 20. 135 


them, he appears by the act of cognition to be as it were the very self 
of the Will-to-be, although in reality he is not so. As it has been 
said :—‘ The power of the enjoyer is certainly unchangeable, and it does 
not run after every object. In connection with a changeful object 
it looks as it were being transferred to every object, and imitates its 
modifications.’ 


And when that modification of the Will-to-be assumes the form 
of consciousness by which it is coloured, it imitates it and looks as 
if it were a mainfestation of consciousness unqualified by the modifica- 
tions of the Will-to-be. It is accordingly so spoken of.—71. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The knowable has been described; the discussion for the ascertainment of the 
nature of the seer is now begun :—‘The seer is consciousness alone ; even though pure, 
he cognizes ideas by imitation.’ He “explains it :—* Consciousness alone, not touched by 
modifying characteristics.’ By this the object of using the word only or alone is shown. 


Well, if it be so, if the power of the seer be free from all the attributes of sound, &c., 
they would not be known. Nothing that is not touched by the act of seeing, can be 
knowable. For this reason he says :—‘ That Puruga, &c.’ The passing of the reflection 
of the Puruga into the mirror of the Will-to-be is the knowing of the Will-to-be by the 
Puruga by reflex action. It is thus that sound and touch, &c., are known by the Will-to- 
be which has received into itself the reflection of the Purusa. And it is thus that they 
become the knowable. 


Well, if this be so, why should not consciousness and the Will-to-be be considered 
to be really one in nature? What is the use of this reflection of the Puruga into 
the Will-to-be? For this reason he says :—‘ He is not similar to the Will-to-be.’ In- 
asmuch as in the case of, dissimilarity jt would be difficult to account for reflection, 
itis further said:--‘ Nor is he quite dissimilar.’ Of these he denies similarity :—‘ He 
is not quite similar, &c.’ Then he asks the question :—‘ Why ?’ He gives the answer 
with grounds :—‘ The Will-to-be having for the sphere of its action, &c.’ Inasmuch as 
the Will-to-be is changeful it is dissimilar. When it assumes the shapes of sound, &c., 
then its sphere becomes instinct with sound, &c., and thus becomes known. If it has not 
taken up the forms of sound, &c., then they remain unknown. Hence the Will-to-be which 
takes up the forms of sounds, &c., only sometimes is changeful. And the statement is so 
made :—‘ The Will-to-be is changeful because it is the sphere of both the known and the 
yet unknown, like the sense of hearing, &c.’ 


As tothe dissimilarity of the Purusa with the Will-to-be, it is proved by the op- 
posite reasoning :—‘ The fact, however, that the sphere of consciousness is always the 
known, &c.’ 

Well, but if the known is alwaysthe sphere of the Purusa, then he can never be 
absolutely free (kevail.) With this in view he puts the question :—‘ How ?' The answer 
is:—‘It never happens that the Will-to-be becomes, &c.’ 

Inasmuch as it is possible that in the state of the restraint of mental faculties, 
the Will-to-be and the absence of actual cognition might co-exist it is said with the 
object of indicating contrariety :—‘ because the sphere of consciousness both when, &c.’ 

The first copulative signifies that the Will-to-be must be the sphere and the other 
shows the contrary state. The statement of the reasoning will stand thus :—The Purusa 


0 gle 


136 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


never changes, because he is the constant factor inthe phenomena of knowledge, in the 
outgoing mental state and the state of the Cognitive trance, That which-is changeful 
cannot be the constant factor inthe phenomena of knowledge, as the power of hearing, 
&c. This inference is by the canon of differente. 

He mentions another contrary characteristic also :—‘ The Will-to-be fulfilling as it 
does the objects of the Purusa by means of the residua of the afflictions and actions and 
the objects and powers of sensation, &c., coming together into it, exists for the purpose 
of another.’ The statement of the reasoning is thus:—The Will-to-be exists for the 
purpose of another, because its work is fulfilled by bringing together into itself various 
objects such as beds, seats and toilet powders, &c. 

He says that the Purusa is not like that :—‘ The Purusa, however, has its own 
object before it.’ All is made for the Purusa. The Puruga is not designed for any other. 
This is the meaning. 

He states another contrary characteristic :—‘ Because the Will-to-be is the underly- 
ing characteristic, &c.’ The Will-to-be determines the nature of all objects, as it is being 
transformed into their respective forms, Further, all these are the modifications of the 
three qualities of Essence, Energy and Inertia. For this reason the Will-to-be is proved 
to possess the three qualities by nature. Hesays that ‘the Purusa is not such.’ ‘The 
Purasa, however, is the seer, &c.’ The meaning is that he sees by reflection into it, not by 
being transformed into the forms of the objects (like the Will-to-be). He summarizes :— 
‘For these reasons, &c.’ The result of the reasoning being that he must be dissimilar, it 
is added that he is not altogether dissimilar. Why? Because (heaving been reflected 
into the mind) he sees the ideas by imitating the modifications of the Wi'l-to-be. The 
way in which this happens, has been described in the aphorism: “ Identificatien with 
modifications elsewhere,” —I. 4. 

So also has it been said by Paiichasdikha:—‘ The power of the knower is certainly 
unchangeable. The power of the knower means the self (Atm&.) And although for this 
very reason it does not in reality change with the modifications of the Will-to-be, it as it 
were follows the modifications of the Will-to-be, resting as it does in each object that 
comes into the changeful mind. 

The question arises, How is it that it looks as it were running after every object, 
although it, as a matter of fact, does not do so. Further how does it follow the modi- 
fications of the mind, when it does not modify itself? For this reason he says :—‘ Inas- 
much as the Purusa cognizes, &c.’ 

“Seized of consciousness ” :—This means having been coloured by contiguity. What- 
ever form the Will-to-be is transformed into, is as such coloured by consciousness. The 
Will-to-be is said to be ‘ seized of consciousness’ when each transformation of it is as 
such coloured by consciousness. This is the meaning. Although the moon is not as 
a matter of fact transferred into pure water, yet inasmuch as its reflection passes into 
water, it is as it were transferred into it. So also, the power of consciousness, although 
not actually transferred into the Buddhi, yet it is, as it were, transferred into it, because 
it is reflected into it. By that fact consciousness becomes, as it were, of the very nature 
of the Will-to be. It accordingly follows the modifications of the Will-to-be. This ex- 
plains the words ‘by imitation.’ It is said it cognizes by imitation as it cognizes by 
following the modifications of the Will-to-be.—20. 


Sitra 21. 


ATT WT FLATT NM 


7g Tad, his, wt: Arthah, purpose. gi: Tadarthah, for his purpose. 
gee Drisyasya, of the knowable. wen Atma, bein g, existence, 


(50 gle 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 21. 137 


21. For his purpose only is the being of the ‘ know- 
able.’—72. 


aqd ce eqaeren | ehrever qever eaxeuararaw ecaihfe aee 
Ge ewenen walt) eet waders: | aered g wwetw ferret 
Aenvaitarat gaat gary a equa ef | ARIETATTEA ATT: Tat A g 
Rragafer 22 1 

VYASA. 

The knowable comes out as the object of the Purusa appearing as 
an act of consciousness. For his purpose only, therefore, is the being 
of the knowable. The meaning is that it possesses the nature it does, 
for that purpose. Its nature, however, depending as it does upon another 
for its existence as such, is not cognized by the Purusa when the objects 
of achieving the puposes of enjoyment and emancipation are over. This 
would seem to imply that it is destroyed, because what constitutes its 
very being is thus done away with. But it is not destroyed.—72. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having described the nature of the knower and the knowable, now he says that the 
knowable exists for the knower, showing as this does in part the relationship existing 
between the two, the relation, that is to say, of the lord to his possessions. ‘ For this 
purpose only is the being of the knowable.’ He explains it:—‘The knowable comes out 
as the object of, i.e, being enjoyable by the enjoyer, the Purusa, appearing asan act 
of consciousness,’ For this reason the existence of the knowable is for his purpose only, 
i.e., for the purpose of the knower alone, and not for the purpose of the knowable. 

(The word translated here as the being is in the original Atm4, the self. Hence arises 
the question, How can the self exist for the self?) For this reason he says :—Possesses 
the nature it does for that purpose. This is the meaning:—The knowable being of the 
very nature of pleasure and pain, is the enjoyable. Pleasure and pain which consist in 
being of the same class with the then prevailing mental habit, are in reality put up 
as such for his purpose only. The objects also such as sound, &c., cause pleasure and 
pain only because they also are of the nature of the knowable. Anditis not themselves 
that are to be pleased or pained, because in that case these modifications would act as 
contrary to themselves. By the canon of residues, therefore, the power of conscious- 
ness only can be opposed or favoured. Therefore the being of the knowable is for the 
purpose of the Purusa only and not for the purpose of the knowable itself. 

It is because the being of the knowable is for the purpose of the Puruga and not 
for the purpose of the knowable_itseJf, that its nature acts to that purpose until that 
purpose of the Puruga is achieved ; and ceases to act when that purpose has been achieved. 
For this reason he says :—‘ Its nature, however, &c.’ In itself the knowable is unintelli- 
gent. It is ensouled by another, by consciousness which is the nature of the self. “ En- 
souled by consciousness” means that its nature as such is informed thereby. When 
enjoyment and emancipation have been achieved, it is no longer seen by the Puruga. 
Enjoyment is the experience of sound, &c., as pleasure and pain, &c. Emancipation is 
the direct knowledge of the distinction between the Purusa and Objective Existence 
(Sattva). The Will-to-be is unintelligent and by itself does not know either. It is 
only by the reflection of the Puruga into itself that it does so. The enjoyment and 

18 


Google 


138 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


the direct knowledge of the distinct natare of the Puraga and Objective Existence, belong 
therefore to the Puruga Himself. Thus when the enjoyment and emancipation of the 
Parusa have been achieved, the purpose of the existence of the knowable no longer re- 
mains. The enjoyment and emancipation have no longer tobe achieved. Hence it has 
been said :—‘ When the object of achieving enjoyment and emancipation has been 
achieved, &c.’ 

In this connection he raises a doubt :—‘It would follow, &c.’ and refates it:—‘ But 
it is not destroyed.’—72. 

Siitra 22. 


SAU Te AAAS AT TATA RAM 


erty Krita-artham, whose objects have been achieved, ft Prati, to him. 
wey Nastam, destroyed. ww Api, although. wey Anastam, not destroyed. 
Tad, from that. we Anya, to others, erarewar SAdhdranatvat, being common, 
owing to commonness, 


22. Although destroyed in relation to him whose 
objects have been achieved, it is not destroyed, being 
common to others.—73. 


we Say st anaes aqerararcaanry | wars ged we 
eet agate ari stanaae aerrgeranntaeanry! Hae gest safe ara sra- 
ACTPTST IRMA a werrertantet asi eat HAATIAIANTA BAT TT WCad- 
masa | waa Bearers smn arene xf | 
aren Arey! afranrankrearrrecerrrarrcerany: AAT LW RR 

VYASA. 

Why is it not destroyed? ‘Although destroyed in relation to him 
whose objects have heen achieved, it is not destroyed, being common to 
others” than him. Even though destroyed, i.e., passed into annihilation, 
in relation to one Purusa, whose objects have been achieved, it i8 not 
destroyed in reality, because it is common to other Purusas beside him. 
Although it is destroyed to the Purusa who has attained wisdom, it is 
not destroyed in relation to the Purusas who have not attained wisdom, 
as it has not done its duty by them yet. It is, therefore, still related to 
them, as an object of the act of consciousness, and is as such of course, 
ensouled by them into form. 

This further explains the eternal conjunction of the indestructible 
energies of the knower and the knowable. As has been said :—The 
characterised being eternally conjoined, there is eternal conjunction of 
mere characteristics also. —73. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


But becoming altogether unperceivable as it does, how is it that it is not destroyed ? 
Forestalling this objection, he asks the question, ‘Why is it not destroyed ?’ and answers 


(Go gle 


Cd, 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 22, 28. 139 


by the aphorism :—‘ Although destroyed in relation to him whose objects have been 
achieved, &c.’ The Puruga whose objects have been achieved, is so spoken of here. Even 
though destroyed in relation to him, it, the knowable,is not really destroyed, because 
it is common to all the other Purugas, whether they be the wise ones or the unwise 
ones. He explains :—‘ Even though destroyed, in relation, &c.’ Destruction means dis- 
appearance. The knowable, however, is not destroyed, being common to all the other 
Purugas. Consciousness is the nature of the self which is beyond the knowable. It is 
by that, that the knowable is ensouled. That is known in the Sruti, Smrpiti, Purana 
and Itihasa as the Unmanifested, One without parts, not dependent upon anything else, 
pervading, eternal, possessing the energy of all the effects in the world. 1t does not 
become the object of knowledge to the wise man the act being contrary to his nature. It is, 
however, seen by the unwise, and is not therefore non-existent, Colour is not seen by 
the blind man ; it does not, thorafore, cease to exist, boing visible toa man with eyes. 
Burther, there is not one Purusa only like the Prakyiti. That there are more Parugas 
than one is proved by differences of life, death, pleasure and pain and evolution and 
emancipation. As tothe Vedic texts which speak of the unity of the Purusgas, they are 
contrary to other authoritative knowledge; they also can somehow be reconciled by the 
absence of difference of time and place and by devotion. Further, the Vedic texts them- 
selves lay down clearly that the Prakpiti is one and that the Purugas are many. Thus 
the text :—‘ One unborn is there, who is red, black and white; she goes one giving birth 
to many children, One unborn Puruga follows her enjoying; another unborn Puruga gives 
her up, having enjoyed all her enjoyables.”--(Svetasvatara Upanisad). The aphorism 
under discussion explains only the meaning of this text. 


Inasmuch as the knowable, although destroyed in relation to one, exists in relation 
to another Puruga, the powers of seeing (consciousness) and being seen (the knowable) 
are permanent,and the eternity of their conjunction is hereby explained. The author 
states the concurrence of the Agamis with this position:—‘As it has been said.’ The 
‘ characterized,’ i.e., the qualities are in eternal conjunction with the selves (the 4tm4s), 
Hence their conjunction with the characteristics, i. e., the phenomenal state of Mahat, &c., 
is also eternal. Although the conjunction of the Mahat, &c., with each one of the Purugas 
has an end, notwithstanding its having had no beginning, yet the conjunction of all of 
them with the Mahat, &c., has no end, as these are common toall. Itis for this reason 
that the words used are ‘characteristics only.’ The author shows the generic qualities 
pervading all the phenomena of that class by using the word “only.” It is for this 
reason that although the conjunction of one Puruga with one manifestation of the principle 
of Mahat has ceased to exist, the conjunction of another Puruga with another manifesta- 
tion of the Mahat has not becomea thing of the past. It has, therefore, been spoken of 
as ever-present (Nitya).—22. 


Sitra 23. 


VACATANMAAM: WIM: TAT: UA 


w— Sva, of being owned. wtf Svami, of owning. ‘wt: Saktyoh, of the 
powers of both, «w«- Svardipa, of the natures. waefia Upalabdhi, the recogni- 
tion. a: Hetuh, that brings about. am: Samyogah, conjunction. 


23. Conjunction is that which brings about the re- 
cognition of the natures of the power of owning and the 
capacity of being owned.-—74. 


Go gle 


140 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Sara TaKaIs ST wage | wqentrarat: wetaaftata: 
SIT | Gea caret TeaA eae Gara SMTA ATT TATSNTT TTA 
@ Fer | at g Te: SrRATEiha: Srsvaht qalrarateres: ear xfer | Te 
firerer sarcUTER | AeaqatTer sfraratterett eamiiregen | ATH 
wart AARCUATAATATANAST Barat: a Ara eh | TaAea ws aepntca- 
CATEIART ATT CAAT TAA OTA Haeraicapeny | fRacaqea ara Pe’ g- 
araratrenrt wretheay eftrerer eater qhlafrrser sarakererearseng: 
eafarem fama a quae: mataagarnnt aaa ae- 
Rear arraeitcataedteny | i faftreenrert aftrerenrafrais | ata 
Tara fete qatar Rarcrencagra are | aur ata ada Rarch- 
CANTINA EAN | TAT ATED THY: TATAAACIT SAA ATT | HICBTRA- 
teri ahaata aaa | TUATAMAT TAA STATA CAT ETT 
safattie ae: | atanaranraat: sreage: gear vaRate eterrcoeAy 


ora Renew: | aa Renarageratacrgesral surat sar ararcakrrageall 
VYASA. 


This aphorism was composed for the purpose of explaining the 
nature of conjunction. ‘Conjunction is that which brings about the 
recognition of the natures of the power of owning and the capacity of 
being owned.’ The Puruga is the owner. ‘The knowable’ is whatever 
is owned. The former is conjoined to the latter for the purpose of know- 
ing. The cognition of the knowable which follows from that conjunction 
is enjoyment. The knowledge, however, of the nature of the knower is 
emancipation. Conjunction, therefore, ends when it has caused knowledge. 
Knowledge is, therefore, called the cause of separation. Knowledge is the 
contracditory of ignorance. Therefore, ignorance is said to be the reason 
for conjunction. Here knowledge is not the cause of freedom (Moksa) ; 
because the absence of Ignorance itself, meaning as it does the absence 
of bondage, is freedom (Moksa). When knowledge comes into existence, 
ignorance which is the cause of bondage disappears, and with it the 
bondage which is caused thereby. It is for this reason that knowledge, 
the seeing of the true nature of things, is said to be the cause of 
Kaivalya (absolute independence, standing alone.) 


And now what is this Ignorance (adardana), this absence of know- 
ledge? Is it a function of the qualities? Or, is it the non-reproduction 
of the mind which after having shown all the objects to the Purusa has 


Google 


Cd. 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 28. 141 


cr nr 


become latent? ‘That there should be absence of knowledge notwithstand- 
ing the presence of the knowable or the thing owned, is also unreasonable. 
Is it again the purposefulness of the qualities ? Or, is it Nescience which 
has passed into the state of latency with its own appropriate mental state, 
and has become the seed which produces the mind appropriate to its 
own manifestation? Is it again the manifestation of the potency of 
motion, on the potency of rest having expended itself. It has been said 
on this subject, that the Pradhana, the material cause of all manifestation, 
would become what it is not, if it tended only to rest, because in that 
case there would not be any manifestation into phenomena ; nor would 
it be what it is, if it were to remain in constant motion, because in that 
case, the phenomena would become eternal and never disappear. It is 
only when it tends to both these states, that it can be called the Pradhana 
(the cause of manifestation) not otherwise. The same considerations 
apply to any other causes that might be imagined. 


Some say that Ignorance (adargana) is nothing but the power 
which manifests as knowing (dardana). As the text says, ‘The activity 
of the Pradhana is for the sake of showing herself.’ 


Others say that Ignorance (adargana) is the characteristic of both the 
knower (Purusa) and the knowable, because the Purusa possesses only the 
power of knowing all that may be known, but does not know, before the 
setting in of manifestation ; and the knowable possesses only the capacity 
of causing all effects, but 1s not known at the time. Here this knowledge, 
though of the very nature of the knowable, stands in need of the incoming 
of the Purusa for its achievement, and is therefore a characteristic of the 
knowable. Again although it is not of the nature of the Purusa, yet 
depending as it does for its completion upon the illumination of the 
knowable, Ignorance looks as if it were a characteristic of the Purusga. 

Some again say that Ignorance is seeing or knowing (dardana) only. 

These are alternative conceptions of the teaching only. This mani- 
foldness of alternative conceptions is the common ground for the con- 
junction of the qualities with all the Purusas.—74. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Thus then having described the cause of conjunction to be the achievement of the 
objects of the Purusa and having further described the concomitant eternity of the 
Pradh&na as well as the cause of the conjunction common to all the Purugas, this aphorism 
was composed to explain the nature of the conjunction which is not common to all the 
Purugas but pertains only to the individual :—‘ Conjunction is the cause of the recognition 
of the nature of the power of owning and the capacity of being owned.’ Inasmuch as 
the knowledge is for his sake, the Puruga enjoying the benefits conferred by it, becomes 
its owner, and the knowable becomes its own (possession). This correlation of theirs 


(Go gle 


142 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


being determined as it is by the nature of the powers themselves, becomes the cause of 
the recognition of fheir natures, Itis this that is illuminated by the Commentary :— 
“The Puruga is the owner.” On account of fitness only as such, he is conjoined with the 
knowable as its own by virtue of its fitness again, The rest is easy. 


Very well. The recognition of the nature of the seer is called emancipation (Apavar- 
ga) because by the instrumentality thereof one is drawn away from the conjunction. 
Perfect frecdom (Moksa), however, is not a thing which can be brought about by means 
of anything. It would, therefore, certainly fall short of perfect freedom. For this reason 
he says :—Conjunction, therefore, ends when it has caused knowledge ; the conjunction, 
that is to say, of the individual Purusa with the individual Will-to-be. Therefore, know- 
ledge is called the cause of separation. 


But then how is it that the conjunction ceases with the attainment of knowledge. 
Ha says that :—‘ Knowledge is the contradictory of ignorance, &c.’ What then? For 
this reason he says :—‘ Ignorance, t.e., Nescience is said to be the reason for conjunction.’ 
Further he illuminates the same meaning :—‘ Here knowledge is not the cause of freedom 
(Moksa), &c.’ 


Well, but knowledge may remove ignorance being contradictory thereto ; how can 
bondage be removed ? For this reason he says :—‘ When knowledge comes into existence 
&ec.’ The meaning is that perfect freedom (Mokga) is the establishment of the self in 
its own nature, quite independent as he is of the Will-to-be; and that the means whereby 
it is brought about is not knowledge, but the removal of ignorance. 

In order to establish the particular ignorance which is the cause of the conjunction 
to all the Purusas, he now sets out the alternative forms of ignorance as such :—‘ And 
now what is, &c.’ He suggests a theory :—‘Is it a function of the qualities, &c.’ The 
function of the qualities is their power of bringing about effccts. It is by virtue of 
that that conjunction becomes the cause of creation (Samsara), 

Taking up the form of deuying what seems to be implied, he states the second 
alternative :—‘Or is it, &c.’ The meaning is that the mind by whom the objects, such 
as sound, &c., and the mental manifestation of the distinction between the Puruga and 
the Objective Existence are shown, is not born along with these states. He explains the 
same :—‘' In its own knowability, that is, sound, &c., and the manifestation in the mind of 
the distinctive natures of the Puruga and the essence of matter, the Pradhana is active 
only so long as the two-fold knowledge has not been brought about, When the two-fold 
knowledge has been brought about it ceases to act.’ This is another suggestion thrown 
out. . 

Now he mentions the third alternative :—‘Is it again the purposefualness of the 
qualities.’ The meaning is that inasmuch as the effect always exists, enjoyment and 
emancipation which have to manifest in the future, exist though not predicable in the 
present. 

He suggests the fourth alternative in the same form of suggestive interrogation :— 
‘Or is it Nescience, &c.’ The suggestion is that it may be Nescience which at the time 
of every creation goes into the state of latency of the Pradhana having been drawn in 
along with its own mind and then becomes the seed for the production of the same mind 
by its own potentiality. For this reason it is the residual potency of Nescience which 
is different from knowledge that is called Ignorance, 

He states the fifth alternative in the same form of a suggestive question :—'‘Is it 
that the potency of motion of the Pradhina, the potency, that‘is to say, which is respon- 
sible for inclining the Pradhina, towards the manifestation of effects, is essentialized on 
the potentiality of rest which lives in the Pradhina and which consists in the continued 
successive manifestation of the modification of equipoise, coming to an end? He states the 


Google 


CH. II ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 28. 143 


teaching of another school in support of the existence of both these potencies :—‘It has 
been said on this subject,’ by those who deny the existence of the one only. The Pradhina 
is that by which the world of modifications is created. If that Pradhdna always tend 
towards rest and never towards motion, then it cannot create any modification and must, 
therefore, become the contradiction of itself. If again it goon always moving and never 
tend to rest, then he says :—‘ If it were to remain in constant motion, &c.’ 


In some places the reading of both the words ‘sthiti’ and ‘ gati,' is in the dative 
ease, In that case the dative case and the word ‘eva’ are to be read as meaning the 
same thing. If it did not go into the state of rest, then no modification would disappear ; 
and if a thing which exists does not disappear, it can never also re-appear; and thus 
there would be no modifications. In this view nothing would ever be created, and thus 
there would be no Pradhfna. It is by motion and rest, both alternating, that this cause 
becomes Pradhfna, not otherwise. If only one of these alternative states were admitted 
then not only iu the case of Pradhdna, but in the case of other First Causes, such as 
Parabrahma, Ma4ya, atoms, &c., also the same discussion would be relevant. These causes 
too would be no causes, if they were to remain in constant rest, because in that case they 
would not produce effects. They would similarly be no causes, if they were to remain in 
constant motion, because in that case, the modifications themselves becoming eternal, no 
necessity would remain for a cause. 


He states the sixth alternative again as a suggestive interrogation. “Some say 
that ignorance is nothing but the power which manifests as knowing (darsana). It is 
said in the case of the Prajapati vow, ‘Do not see the rising sun.’ This signifies the 
mental mood which co-exists with and is responsible for the act of seeing not. So also in 
the case of ignorance too the denial of knowledge means that, co-existent with the absence 
of knowledge, there is a power which takes its origin therein and which with the object 
of bringing about the knowledge termed enjoyment, &c., joins the knower to the knowable. 

He cites a Vedic text in support of the same subject : —‘ The activity of the Pradhaina 
is, &c.’ Grant that the Pradhina becomes active for the purpose of showing herself as the 
Vedic text says; but it is not the power of knowing the nature of the self that becomes 
active. For this reason he says :—‘ The Purusa possessing the power of knowing all that 
may be known, &c.’ It is not the object of showing herself that only sets the Pradhina 
into activity, because before the setting in of activity, it could not be said whether it 
possessed the power of being seen. Hence itis the capacity of being seen that sets in 
activity. This the Vedic text says by implication. 

This is the sixth alternative, that the power of seeing (knowing) depends upon the 
Pradhina. Now he states the seventh alternative, which takes up the position that the 
power of knowing depends upon both. ‘Ignorance depends upon both, &c.’ Ignorance, 
i.o., the power of seeing is the characteristic of boththe Purusa and the knowable, Such 
is the position of some (thinkers.) 

This may be allowed with regard to the knowable, because all the powers have it 
as theirsubstratum. We cannot, however, allow it with regard to the Puruga, -The power 
of knowing has not the Purusa for its substratum, because knowledge does not enter into 
the Purusa to make a part of him, If it did, the Purusa would become changeable. (He 
would not remain the constant factor which he is always found to be in all mental pheno- 
mena). For this reason he says :—‘ Here this knowledge, &c.’ 

Let it then be of the nature of the ‘knowable.’ In that case knowledge, being a 
modification of the constituent energy of the ‘knowable’ m.st also be un-intelligent by 
nature. It could not, therefore, perform the function of the knowing as a characteristic 
of the knowable. The non-intelligent is not self-illuminating. For this reason know- 
ledge becomes a characteristic of the ‘knowable,’ only with reference to the incoming 


Google 


144 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


of the knower, the self, the reflection of consciousness therein, This is known by the act 
indicating the actor. 


Well but this too makes knowledge to be a characteristic of the knowable, not at the 
same time a characteristic of the Purusa too. For this reason he says :—‘ Again although 
it is not of the nature of the Purusa, &c.’ The essence of mattcr is certainly not of the 
nature of the Purasa. Still the incoming of the Purusa, i.c., the reflection of cdnscious- 
ness on which the act of knowing the knowable essence of the Will-to-be depends, makes 
it possible that the act of knowing be spoken of as it were to be an act of the Paruga, 
although not really so. This is the meaning. The characteristics of the Will-to-be shine 
forth as the characteristics of consciousness, because consciousness and the Will-to-be 
appear to be one, on account of the Will-to-be always carrying the reflection of conscious- 
ness along with itself. 


He now mentions the cighth alternative:—‘Some say that the seeing, i.e., the 
knowing of sound, &c., is itself ignorance, not that of the distinction hetween the Purusa 
and the Objective Essence, This is the sime az that the power of secing, although an 
authority for the perception of colour, is no authority for the perception of taste, &e. This 
is the meaning. The cognitions of sound, &c., as pleasurable appearances, &c., point to 


the conjunction of the knower and the knowable, because it is necessary for their 
achievement, 


All the alternative theories have been described. In order to accopt the fourth 
alternative, he rejects all the others, because all the other altcrnative conceptions of the 
teaching of the Sankhya, being common to all the Purusas lead to the absonce of variety 
of experience :—“ These are the alternative conceptions of the teaching, &c.”—28., 


Satra 24, 


TET CITAAT UAV 


wa Tasya, its. a: Hetnh, effective cause. fear Avidya, nescience. 
24. Nescience is its effective cause.—75. 


WY TANIA SATAN: | TT qlee | Rrqrarerraraacyy: | 
frrraeraarararntar a a arahist geveaia gfe: srsther enitrarcr 
ee easier estat “at alr el caar sei, 
A GRTHITUTATATR Gara | wy Bester | ATTaT 
araaTaaa | wees aT aIeTaTa A ae Reet ara aretha ar: 
are qaetseareTeTg heater | veg Rrrara art Rramate a street 
five miter fer et aeaTET | TaTaTagaitae AG | AT afarrafata draits 
maaan afcrate: | ened aeratrca zaarferada | aw Aree 
qfata are foriacars carer aftrtran: 9 22 kh 

VYASA. 

The effective cause, however, of the conjunction of the individual 
consciousness with its own Will-to-be is Nescience, which means the 
potency of the habit of unreal cognition. The Will-to-know, possessed as 
it is of the aroma of the babits of unreal cognition, does not culminate 
into the knowledge of the self, which is the end of its work, and thus 


Go gle 


Cd. Il. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 75. 145 


having still a duty to perform, comes back. When, however, it reaches 
the culmination of its work, which is the attainment of the knowledge of 
the Purusa, its work is achieved, ignorance is gone, the cause of bondage 
no longer remains, and it does no longer come back. 


Someone ridicules this position by the story of the impotent hus- 
band. <A foolish wife thus addressed her husband :—“ My dear, my sister 
has got children. Wherefore have [ none?” He said to her:—‘I shall 
beget children unto thee when I am dead.” Similarly, this knowledge 
while in existence, «<loes not cause the mind to cease from action ; what 
hope is there that it will cause cessation when suppressed? Says on 
this subject a teacher very nearly perfect: —‘“‘Is not Moksa (freedom) 
the cessation of the Will-to-be itself and nothing else? The Will-to-be 
ceases to act when the cause of ignorance no longer remains. The Ig- 
norance which is the cause of bondage is removed by knowledge. Moksa 
(perfect freedom) then is only the cessation of the mind from its work. 
Wherefore then this mental confusion out of place ?’’— 75. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


In order to establish the fourth alternative he introduces the aphorism :—‘ The 
effective cause, however, of the conjunction, &c.' ‘Individual consciousness’ :—The word 
Pratyak-chetana in the text means consciousness which cognizes by reflex action, and as 
the conjunction which makes it possible is not common to all the Purusas, and is the 
conjunction of one Purasa with his own independent Will-to-be, variety of experience is 
effected. (Hence the translation Individual Consciousness), 

He reads the aphorism: --* Nescience is its effective cause.’ But Nescience is Unreal 
Cognition. It is dac to the conjunction of consciousness with the individualized Will-to-be 
just as other experiences and emancipation are due toit. If the Will-to bo is not con- 
joined to consciousness, there can be no existence for unreal cognition. How is it then 
that Nescience is the cause of any kind of cognition ? For this reason he says :—‘ Which 
means the residual potency of Unreal cognition.” The Nescience of other creations drawn 
in with the mind in which it manifested, live in the Pradhana in the sbape of potential 
energy. The Pradhana, possessed as it is of the aroma of this potential energy, evolves 
oat of itself, the Will-to-be of a particular Purusa, jast as it was before. Similarly in 
the regular order of each creation preceding another. The ordor of creation being eternal 
no defect arises in the theory. It is for this reason that the Puruga is not free at the 
time of each creation. For this reason he says :—‘ The Will-to-be possessed as it is, &c.’ 

When, however, the knowledge of the Purusa reaches its end, fhen the canse of 
bondage in the shape of the rosidua of unreal cognition no longer exists, and # does not 
come back. For this reason he says :—‘ When, however, it reaches its culmination, &c.’ 

Here some nihilists ridicule this state of absolute independence (Kaivalya) by 
relating the story of the impotent husband. The author tells the story of the impotent 
husband :—“ A foolish wife, &c.” ‘ Wherefore ’’ inthe translation stands for “with what 
object ” in the original. Object here stands for reason. The object of an act is the reason 
of the action. 

The author shows the similarity with the story of the impotent :—‘ Similarly, &c.' 
This existing knowledge of the distinction between consciousness and the ‘ qualities’ 

19 


(Go gle 


146 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


a 


does not cause mental cessation; what reason is there that higher desirelessness, the 
light of knowledge alone will make the mind to disappear after having restrained it along 
with its residual potency? The effect of something exists only so long as the cause 
itself exists. It does not remain in existence when the cause ceases to exist. He refutes 
this by quoting the reasoning of a teacher who agrees on this point :—‘ Says on this 
subject a teacher, &c.’ 

A teacher very nearly perfect though not altogether, is called Achiryadeéa. As 
to a perfect teacher Vayu has described his qualities thus :—‘ One is called an Acharya 
because he understands the meaning of the teaching (Sistra) well, establishes one in 
right conduct also, and also himself keeps the right line of action.’ 

Mokga (absolute freedom) is only the cessation of the Will-to-be after it has achieved 
experience and the discrimination of the distinction between the Purusa and Objective 
Existence. It is not that the Will-to-be itself ceases to exist. This ceasing of the Will-to- 
know from its work of causing experience and emancipation, although the Will-to-know 
itself lives on, follows immediately upon its establishment in the state of the Cloud of 
Virtue (Dharma Megha) which is the culmination of discriminative knowledge, He illa- 
minates the same :— The Will-to-know ceases to act when ignorance, which is the cause of 
bondage, is removed by knowledge. The removal of knowledge (the cessation of the act 
of knowing) is brought about by higher desirelessness. The meaning is that perfect 
freedom (Moksa) exists even though the Will-to-know itself lives on.’ Having described 
the opinion of the teacher, he now gives his own :—-‘ Moksa then is only the cessation of the 
mind from its work.’ 

But it has been said that when the act of knowing ceases the mind itself very soon 
ceases to exist. How is it then this brought about by knowledge? For this reason he 
says :—‘ Wherefore then this mental confusion quite out of place?’ The construction is 
as follows :—We may be taunted thus if we believe that knowledge is the direct cause 
of the cessation of the mind. We, however, lay down that discriminative knowledge 
becomes useful in establishing the Purusa in its own nature, when having reached the 
highest point, by the successive appearances of the higher and higher stages of the inhibi- 
tive trance, it comes to co-exist with the state of mental cessation. How then have we 
laid ourselves out for a taunt ? --24. 

Sftra 25. 


ens e ~ 
ATA AAT A elat ATS. HICAT URUM 
ag Tad, its, waa Abhavat, on account of disappearance, #armra: Samyo- 


gabhivah, the disappearance. wa: Abhdvah, of conjunction. (#m), erry Hanam, re- 
moval. a@ Tad, that. €%: Driseb, of the knower, #aeaq Kaivalyam, absolute freedom, 


25. Removal is the disappearance of conjunction on 
account of its disappearance that is the absolute freedom 
of the knower.—76. 

2a Ta VIHA @ AANTIAy Araganas: W at THA | ATAT- 
ARAMA ETA ATER: HASTY | TENTAAMAATAANgT sha qeTaIIrsmears H- 
eafadt araraca cae: | caer aged: Saey garentettarsn: gare 
CU Ee ol] ee 


The pain that has to be removed has been described, as also what 
is called conjunction, the cause of the pain to be removed, together with 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 76, 77. 147 


the reason of its existence. Removal has to be discussed henceforward. 
“Removal is the disappearance of conjunction brought about by its dis- 
appearance; that is, the absolute freedom of the knower. The meaning 
is that on the disappearance of the conjunction of the Purusa and the 
Will-to-be being brought about by the disappearance of ignorance, 
bondage is for ever removed. This is removal. ‘This is the freedom of 
the seer (Purusa). It means his not getting mixed up again, 2.e., not 
being conjoined again with the ‘ qualities.’ —76. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Having thus described two departments of the science, now he introduces the 
aphorism for describing the third :—‘ The pain that has been removed is the fuiure pain. 
Removal is the disappearance, &c.' Explains :--‘ The meaning is &c.’ Because there is 
disappearance of conjunction even in the-state of the Great Latency (Mahipralaya), the 
words ‘for ever’ have been used. The removal is the cessation of pain. This shows that 
the object of the removal is the fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa. The rest is 
easy.—25. 


Satra 26. 


fraaearracasan erataray: ural 


fata Viveka, of discrimination. ft: Khyatih, knowledge. wagat Aviplava, 
undisturbed, ert Haua, of the removal. saa: Upfyah, the means. 
26. The means of the removal is discriminative know- 
ledge undisturbed.—77. 

SARCUATA Fat TCA Uta ATT SASIMAS: FST KIRHAT ETA 
am oreaara eri Maneaegar earaa: | aeaqeareaarers kranear- 
fa: | ar amaahererar gaa ger fernad aad ware ae- 
ad aan Rryag awe: rae at Sane qeeat aaitenrceerat ada 
ftareracaret Maer wale a fanentterga eras | ade Hearet- 
FST TAT TATATIT: Faas TANT ATAET ATA aTaEATATA Tle Ve ll 

VYASA. 

Pain is removed on the removal of thecause of pain. In the removal 
of pain consists the establishment of the Purusa in its own nature. What 
them is the means of attaining the state of this removal of pain? ‘ Dis- 
criminative knowledge undisturbed is the means of the removal.’ 

Discriminative knowledge is the recognition of the distinct natures 
of the Purusa and the Essence of matter (Sattva). This, however, remains 
shaky as long as false knowledge has not been removed. When false know- 
ledge has its seed burnt up and thus becomes incapable of fruition, 
then the dirt of disturbing energy (Rajas) being removed, mental essence 
is in the state of the highest purity and possesses the consciousness of 
the highest power; and in that state flows on the stream of the notion of 


Go gle 


148 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


discrimination, free from impurity. It is this discriminative knowledge 

undisturbed, that is the means of the removal. By this it is clear that 

the means of removal, the path of Moksa (absolute freedom), is the burning 

of the seed of false knowledge, so that it may not sprout again.—77. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


The author introduces the aphorism, in order to describe the means of removal, the 
fourth branch of the science :—‘ What then, &c.’ “ Discriminative knowledge, undisturbed 
is the means of removal.” Discriminative knowledge comes into existence by verbal and 
inferential cognition also. The knowledge so obtained does not remove the actual or 
potential outgoing energies of the mind. In the case of such discriminative knowledge 
they always return toaction. It is with the object of excluding the discriminative know- 
ledge thus acquired, that the word ‘Undistarbed’ is used. Undisturbed means ‘free 
from false knowledge.’ Disturbance is false knowledge. This is the meaning. Dis- 
criminative knowledge should be obtained by the teaching which consists of verbal 
knowledge. It should then be established in the mind by reasoning. It should be carried 
to its highest limit of illumination by devoted attention for a long time without interrup- 
tion and with reverence. Then does discriminative knowledge become direct. False 
knowledge is removed together with its residua. It becomes undisturbed... This is the 
means of removal. The rest of the Commentary is easy.—26. 


Satra 27, 


TA ACA AAT: TAT URI 


we ‘l'asya, hia. oma Saptadha, is sevenfold. wey: Pranta-bhamih, final 
at each stage. wt Prajiid, discrimination. 


27. His discrimination becoming final at each stage, 
sevenfold.—78. 


TSA ATA TT: wet | aes segigaeare: cTerara: aerate | 
DYCMNATASTANT TIRAANS ale aata aarstta weT 
fata valk | aaa ated et area ga: ate aafta | ater Fata a 
qatact daarafa | arated Mtrreartar era | arrar Ranearerstr 
alarara cant aqea wrataqr: sera: | Rra&aieeq afraftartrarc 
ah | gun fitRracazegat ca ararin caetan ward seatugen: 
ae aared weoha | a Beat sestarat qacegqrre: sarsarararaia | 
CaN Wwaeada: wearin Rast gay wat aa- 
Prat mrniagaga get: Pus rerearad | sarah @ aa yar 
GUS erst vale Jarcracariga ua 

VYABA. 

“His” in whom discrimination has come up into consciousness, 
consideration of attainments is sevenfold. “Sevenfold,” «e, of seven 
descriptions only is the conscious discrimination of the thinker when at 
each stage the mental notion is not further produced, on account of the 
removal from the mind of the dirt which constitutes the veil of impurity. 


Go gle 


Cd. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 78. 149) 


This is as follows:—(1) The pain to be removed is known. Nothing 
further remains to be known of it. (2) The causes of pain to be removed 
have been done away with. (3) Removal has become a fact of direct 
cognition by means of inhibitive trance. (4) The means of knowledge 
in the shape of discriminative knowledge has been understood. 


This is the four-fold freedom of conscious discrimination from ex- 
ternal phenomena. ‘The freedom from the mind itself is three-fold. The 
Will-to-be has done its duty. ‘he ‘qualities’ tending to become latent 
into their cause, disappear along with it, finding no support as they do, 
like stones rolled down from the edge of a hill-top. Nor once passed into 
latency, do they come back to life again, there being no object for it. In 
this state the Puruga, having passed beyond the limits of the relation with 
the ‘ qualities,’ remains only the light of his own pure nature and is free. 


The Purusa who has seen successively these seven stages of discri- 
mination is called ‘adept’ (kugala). He remains free and wise even when 
the mind is resolved into its cause, because he has passed beyond the 
sphere of the ‘qualities.’ —78. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The author describes by the aphorism the nature of the finality of the perfection of 
discriminative knowledge:—‘ His discrimination becoming final at each stage is seven- 
fold.’ Explains :—‘ His, &c.’ 

He in whom the discrimination has just up into consciousness, is the Yogi, in whom 
the mental phenomenon is present at the time. 

His ‘ consideration of attainments,’ means the sending back of his thought over the 
whole ground that has already been passed over. 

The veil of impurity of tho mental essence is the same as dirt. When that is 
removed, and when consequently, ‘the meutal notion is nut further produced,’ i.e. the 
outguing energy of the notions due to the yualities of disturbance (rajas) and inertia 
(tamas) is no longer active, he reaches tho final point iu a stage of undisturbed discrimi- 
native knowledge. This consciousness of discrimination of his is seven-fold, i.c., of seven 
descriptions only. The difference of descriptions of consciousness is due to the difference 
of its objects. 

The stages, i... the states are spoken of ay each beconing tinal, because each as 
such reaches its ultimate and highest point, The ultimate and highest point is that 
beyond which there is no point of its culmination. The stages of consciousness, ie. of 
discriminative knowledge, cach of which rcachcs its culmination, are spoken of as 
becoming final at each stage. 

Now ho describes these seven stages, cach reaching its own culmination :—‘ That 
as follows, &c.’ 

Out of the foar stages which are brought about by the effort of man, he Illustrates the 
firat :—-‘ The pain to be removed has been known,’ Whatever has its origin in the Pra- 
dhana is certainly pain, by reason of the pains of consequence, anxiety and habitua- 
tion, and by reason of the coutrariety of the modifications of the qualities.’ It has, there- 
fore, to be removed. Itis that which has been known. He shows its finality:—‘ nothing 
further remains to be known of it.’ 


Google 


150 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


He mentions the second stage :—‘ The causes...... have been dono away with.’ He 
speaks of the finality :—‘ Nothing more of them, &c.’ 

He mentions the third :—‘The removal which is brought about by inhibitive trance, 
has been made by me a fact of direct cognition, ascortained by internal perception, while 
I am in the state of Cognitive trance only. It is to be understood that nothing farther 
of it remains to be ascertained.” 

He mentions the fourth:—“ The means of removal in the shape of discriminative 
knowledge has been understood, i.c., has been brought into existence. It is to be under- 
stood that there is nothing more of it to be brought into being. This is the four-fold 
freedom of consciousness from external phenomena, Freedom means their ending. The 
fact of their being the objects of human effort has been shown by their being external 
phenomena.” 

Now hespeaks of the freedom from the mind, which is brought about after the 
states brought about by human etfort and which does not depend upon eflort :—* The frec- 
dom from the wind is, however, three-fold.’ He mentions the tirst: —‘ The Will-to-be has 
done its duty. The meaning is that it has achieved experience and emancipation, He 
mentions the second :—‘ The qualities, &e.' He shows their finality :—* Nor once passed 
into lateney, &e.’ 

He mentions the third:—‘In this state, &c. In this state the Purusa even while 
in life, iscalled free and wise; because this is his last birth. He says this:—‘ The Puruga 
who has seen in succession these, &c.’ He says that this state is not dependent upon 
the mind :—‘ He remains free and wise evon when the mind is resolved into its cause, 
because he has passed beyond the sphere of the qualities.’—27. 


Satra 28, 


AMIR saa Araaeanstneatst: Ushi 


am Yoga, of yoga. we Anga, of the accessories, aware Anusthanad, by the 
sustained practice. wafg Asuddhi, of impurity. a Kgaye, on the destruction. 
wr Jitana, of wisdom. @f: Diptib, the light. A, reaching up to. fs Viveka, 
of discrimination. ‘1a: KhyAdteh, the knowledge. 
28. On the destruction of impurity by the sustained 
practice of the accessories of Yoga, the light of wisdom 


reaches up to discrimiuative knowledge.—79. 


frer vata freeearetarara ci a a ikoatu anrafreaan- 
aaa | Imatgerqataaa saosin | AirgErersrararkrea- 
ana aragerarsaqdin Rerwergrserer BU ANNA APVATA- 
era: | Tat UM a araaragstad rat aa aganyheawad | a4 
wen a aftaa aur aeat @ aamatata araenta fafsasa | ar welkanr 
rate: retagaaertanent: | wagerrsctrerayed: | arargia- 
SaAAAaaanTHca | WM agra | alnendeq oftrarca war 
aa: Feeq aera aca | wer Aah areanmA ast waht 1 AaAeTE | 
aaa sardivahtiaraarcsaaay: | Ramnerayay: Hci aqurTed- 
afaie | asteafearca vat vale arcea fekrarca ave: gaara aeéiced- 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 79. 151 


arate ce ahraanrcad ger suena soar frercnca aaat- 
Parra | Ua CTT | TRRTRITT aeTaniagraey | ofr 
arigigerd Rranead: | Ramee atarge | ward ge yader 
Gain: | carne sinatra Fea FU GAy UT FAQ ATI 
arqe giearce wechPearany | ae se Tea RENqeTe Toth ath 
@ WR Vast Adataargaae @ qeqerseankears aa BTU | aT 
aqrenay qaralacay aah arngragrd a fata arco ova 
afer y Re 
VYASA, 

Discriminative knowledge becomes the means of removal, when 
achieved. There can he no achievement without the adoption of the 
means thereof. ‘This, therefore, is taken up. “ By the sustained practice 
of the accessories of Yoga is impurity destroyed and then the light of 
wisdom shines up to discriminative knowledge.’ 


The accessories of Yoga are eight, to be further named. By their 
sustained practice is destroyed the five-fold unreal cognition, which is of 
the nature of impurity. Destruction means disappearance. When that 
is destroyed, real knowledge is manifested. As: the means of achieve- 
ment are being practised more and more, so is the impurity being attenu- 
ated more and more. And asmore and more of it is being destroyed, so 
also goes on increasing more and more the light of wisdom following in 
the wake of destruction. This increase reaches its culmination in discri- 
minative kvowledge. This means that its highest culmination is in 
the knowledge of the nature of consciousness and the ‘ qualities.’ 

The practice of the accessories of Yoga is the cause of the separa- 
tion of impurity, as the axe is the cause of the separation of the piece 
of .wood cut offthereby. It is, however, the cause of the attainment of 
discriminative knowledge, as virtue is the cause of happiness. It is not 
a cause otherwise. 

Well, how many of these causes are there in the Teaching? They 
have been said to be nine only as follows:—-‘ A cause is said to operate 
in nine ways :—As the cause of birth, of preservation, of manifestation, 
of modification, of sequential cognition, of attainment, of separation, of 
differentiation, of upholding.’ 

Of these the cause of birth: the mind is of knowledge. 

The sustaining cause : the achievement of the objects of the Purusa 
is of the mind, as food is of the body. 

The cause of manifestation is as light is the cause of the manifes- 
tation of colour ; as also the knowledge of colour, 


(Go gle 


152 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


The cause of change or modification is, as for example, a different 
object of the mind. Or fire of the food that is cooked. 


The cause of sequential cognition is as the knowledge of smoke is 
of the knowledge of fire. 

The cause of attainment is as the practice of the accessories of Yoga 
of the attainment of discriminative knowledge. 

The cause of separation is as the same of impurities. 

The cause of differentiation is as the goldsmith is of gold. Simt- 
larly, as inthe case of the one notion of the same woman, Nescience 
causes forgetfulness; anger makes it painful; desire makes it pleasur- 
able ; the knowledge of realities makes it indifferent, neither pleasurable 
nor painful 

The cause of uphulding is as the body is of the organs of sensation 
and action and vice versa; the elements of the bodies and each of these 
mutually of all the othera. So also the animals, men and gods each of the 
others. Thus there are nine descriptions of causal operations. These 
sre to be applie:l to other objects also as may be As to the practice of 
the accessories of Yoga they operate as causes in two ways only.—79. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Now then having described the four departments of the science, and seeing that 
the discriminative knowledge which as the means of removal falls within these depart- 
ments, has not beenachieved like cow's milk, &c., (which although existing in the udders, 
is not obtained until it is drawn ont) ant farther seeing that this cannot be achieved 
without employing some means, he goes on to describe the means :—‘ Discriminative 
knowledge becomes the means, &c.’ 

Here shows hy the aphorism in what way does the means of knowledge operate as 
a cause of discriminative knowledge. ‘On the destruction of impurity, &c.’ The acces- 
sories of Yoga destros impurity by operating as may be along visible and invisible lines. 
It should be understood that the five branches of Untrue cognition are spoken of here as 
indicative of virtue and vice also, because they too are of the nature of impurities, being 
as they are the causes of life-stata, life-experience and life-period. The rest is easy. 

A cause is seen operating in more ways than one. In what does the practice of 
Yoga operate as the cause? For this reason he says :— 

‘ The practice of the accessories of Yoga, &c.' The cause of impurity being re- 
moved, means that it separates impurity from the essence of the Will-to-be. He gives an 
illustration :—‘ As the axe, &c.’ The hatchet separates the tree to be cut from the root. 

Farther, having separated the essence of the Will-to-be from impurity, it leads it to 

the attainment of discriminative knowledge, as obedience to law is the means of the 
attainnient of happiness. Similarly is the practice of Yoga accessories the means of the 
attainment of discriminative knowledge. There is no other way in which the cause 
operates. He says this:—‘It is the cause of attainment. &c.’ Inasmuch as it is said 
that there is no other way in which it operates, he puts the question, How many are the 
ways of operation altogether? He answers: ‘They are nine only.’ He enumerates them 
by a verse:—‘Birth, preservation, &c.' Now he illustrates them: ‘The cause of birth, 
&e.’ The mind operates to bring knowledge from the state of being unpredicable into 


Google 


CH. IT. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 79. 153 


the state of present existence ; it is, therefore, the cause of the birth of knowledge. The 
fulfilment of the purpose of the Purusa is the cause of the preservation of the mind. Born 
of the principle of egoism, the mind is preserved as long as it has not fulfilled both the 
objects of the Purusa. When, however, both the objects of the Puruga have been fulfilled, 
it is no longer preserved as such. For this reason the non-achievement of the objects of 
the Puruga is the cause of the preservation of the mind, after it has been born out of ite 
cause. He gives an illustration :—‘As food of the body.’ 

Manifestation means the placing of an object under certain conditions so that they 
may he!p in the act of perception either by means of the senses or by the act of the mind 
itself ; as light is the cause of the manifestation of colour. 

The cause of change or modification of the mind is an object other than that which 
has possession of the mind atthe time. So goes the story. Mrikandu was sitting with 
his mind entranced. He heard the fifth note of the musical scale emitted by a creeper 
that was ripening. He at once opened his eyes, and what did he see? The fair and youth- 
fal nymph Pramlocha. The sight of her beauty drew away his mind from the object of 
his then mental appli ation, and his mind became attached to her. He gives an illus- 
tration of this :—‘ As fire is of the things cooked.’ When raw, the particles of rice, &c., 
are so close as to make them hard to be separated. By cooking a change is introduced. 
The particles become loose. Fire operates as the cause of change, that is, of the intro- 
duction of softness instead of hardness. 

It is only the knowledge of an existing object that is brought about, by sequential 
cognition. The knowledge of smoke is the cause of the knowledge of fire. Knowledge 
is that which is known. The knowledge of fire here means the knowledge which is the 
game as fire, the mental idea of fire. This is the meaning. It is by sequential cognition 
that it operates'as the cause of the knowledge of fire existing in the present as the thing 
to be known. 

It is natural with causes to pass into effects; but for some reason they sometimes 
do not pass into that state. Take, for example, water. It is the nature of water to flow 
downwards when poured ona higher level. Butan embankment may be made to check 
its downward flow. The same is the case here. The essence of the WHll-to-be is by 
nature pleasing and luminous. It is natural for it to reach the state of happiness 
and discriminative knowledge. It, however, does not reach that state somehow by 
reason of being checked in its operations by vice (adharma) or by inertia (tamas). 
That check is removed by virtue or by the practice of the accessories of Yoga, ‘Its 
operations thus become unhampered; it reaches that state, being its natural producer. 
As will be said :—There is no operative cause to set the Prakritis into action; but it 
pierces through the impediments like the husbandman.’—iv. 8. It is thus that the practice 
of the acessories of Yoga is said to operate as the cause of the attainment of discrimina- 
tive knowledge. With reference, however, to another effect lower down, it is described 
as the cause of separation. Thus he says :—‘ The cause of separation is as, &c.’ 

Now he describes the cause of differentiation :—‘ The cause of differentiation is as 
the goldsmith of the gold.’ Gold is both different and not different from wristlets, ear- 
rings and armlets. It is different when it is necessary to point out the difference; not 
different when it is not desired to point out the difference. Thus is it differont from the 
ear-rings. The goldsmith, however, who makes wristlets, makes them from gold which 
is not other than the gold of the ear-rings. He, therefore, becomes the cause of introduc- 
ing another differential altogether into the otherwise quite identical gold. He is, there- 
fore, the cause of differentiation. 

Similarly is fire the cause of the differentiation of things that are cooked. It is, 
however, described above as the cause of modification. What is intended to be said there 
is that the difference between cooked and raw rice,as the characteristics of the same 

20 


Google 


154 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


qualified thing, is not intended to be conveyed; and therefore even though the two 
characteristics are born and disappear respectively, the thing qualified remains the 
same in both conditions. It is not possible to say that the thing qualified has become 
quite another thing. It is for these considerations that fire is only spoken of as the cause 
of modification. There is no overlapping. 


The meaning is not to be understood to be that different arrangement is the 
cause of differentiation, because in that case the goldsmith.in the text will be quite 
out of place. 


Having in the beginning described the cause of differentiation in the outside 
world, now he describes the operation of the same with reference to the mind :—Similarly 
as in the case of a single notion about one woman, &c. Nescience consists in the cognition 
of lovability, &c., in adamsel. When this nescience is coupled with forgetfulness (moha) 
one becomes stupid, that is full of stupid imaginings. ‘ Maitrais a very fortunate man 
to possess such a jewel of a wife. I am unfortunate not to possess her. In the same 
way the notion of the same woman in the mind of a co-wife causes aversion and conse- 
quent pain, Similarly, the notion of the same woman in the mind of the husband Maitra 
causes attachment and consequcnt pleasure. The knowledge of the realities thereof 
consists in the recognition of the fact that the body of the woman is after all nothing 
but skin, muscle, fat, bone and mucus; and that it is naturally impure on account 
of the place of its fecundation and the seed which grows int» it. This knowledge in the 
mind of the wise becomes the cause of the idea that it is neither pleasurable nor painful; 
and thus it becomes the cause of desirelessness, 


The cause of upholding :—The body is the upholder of the power of sensation and 
action. These powers again are the upholders of the body. The five forces of Prana, 
&c., are the manifestations of the common energy of these powers. The body dies in their 
absence. Similarly, muscle and the other portions of the body support each other in life. 
Similarly, are the elements of Prithvi, &c., the supporters of the bodies of men, of Varuna, 
Sun, Vayu and those that live in the Chandraloka. The elements further support each 
other in life. The Prithvi having the five qualities of odour, taste, colour, touch and sound, 
all. the five elements are present therein supporting and supported by each other ; as 
also four in the Apas, three in the Tejas, two inthe Vayu. The animals, men and gods 
also exist supporting each other in life. But how can they be the supporters of each 
other, seeing that they are not related to each other as the containor and the contained, 
For this reason he says :—‘ They live for each other, &c.’ The body of man is sustained 
by the materials supplied by the bodies of beasts, bird, deer, snakes and vegetables. Simi- 
larly, the bodies of tigers and others of the same class are supported by the bodies of 
men, beasts, and deer, &c. Similarly, the bodies of beasts and deer, &c., are supported by 
vegetables, &c. Similarly, the bodies of gods are supported by the sacrifices of goats, 
deer, clarified butter and Purod4sa, &c., offered by men as also by means of the accessories 
of sacrifice, branches and stones, &c. Similarly, the gods also support men by giving them 
the objects of their desires and by causing rain, &c. Therefore do they live for each 
other. The rest is easy.— 28. 


Sittra 29. 


AA AAAT AAT UTA AAT STN TTA AAT ATTA START A 


wa Yama, restraint. fa Niyama, observance. @rea Asana, posturesmeam Pré- 
naydma, regulation of breath. ‘emer Pratydhara, abstraction, wet Dhérapé, 
concentration. «m Dhyana, meditation. efi Samadhi, trance. (All these), 
wa Astau, eight, wat Afgani, the accessories. 


Google 


CH. I. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 80, 8]. 155 


29. Restraint, Observance, Posture, Regulation of 
breath (Pranayama), Abstraction, Concentration, Meditation 
and Trance are the eight accessories of Yoga.—80. 

ae Aga | TATRA UT ATA eTTETCaTTUTATAaAAT- 
VASHTTETK | AATHAATAGSA SST ST TATA: | 2S, Il 
VYASA. 
The accessories of Yoga are now determined. ‘‘ Restraint, &c.” We 
shall now describe their nature and practice in order. —80. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now the author determines the accessories of Yoga with the object of determining 
their number more or less. ‘The accessories of Yoga, &c.’ 
‘Restraint, &c.’ Practice, desirelessness, faith, energy, &c., are by their very nature 
to be understvod as falling under these wherever they may properly fall, not as indepen- 


dent means.—29. 
Satra 3o. 


TAUCATAARATAAAN MAT FAT: Well 


wa ‘Tatra, there. wfee Ahimsd, Abstinence from injury. «wa Satya, 
veracity, weta Asteya, abstinence from theft. sea Brahmacharya, continence. 
weftag Aparigraha, Abstinence from avariciousnesa, all these, wm: Yam&h, are the 
restraints. 


30. Of these the restraints are: Abstinence from 
injury (Ahimsa); Veracity; Abstinence from theft; Con- 
tinence ; Abstinence from avariciousness.—8l. 

Ta arereretTaaatrE Bar | eaTfear ada alan azar- 
AMANME | Sat aT TakaMerqerancakaara aciracara seat- 
GA | ATAASTHCMTAATAT TTY | TAT ArH | ST Beas TATA WAT Aur 
aati age AATAAA AMT TAT TATE SA ffarhertent fradcarenraar- 
qaraauaeat aera | at aa qTSara | wate aurgitd waned 
TUT KSA TT ANTS SMTA TAT TT a a aftaat air at 
afrahaaecat at aaherar echyarrercninger 7 yarqarara aly Aaqaerhy- 
dtaaranqarraraata cara wed waeTaAg AAMT geararaa gvanttraq- 
HU HE AA: argent aya ae ae | RTE 
gaat Wa: Stern aafets: gageeanaaties | meray qafr- 
SANTMRT ATA: | ATITUTAATAT MATT aA TITRA CAAT 
TAA TAT | 20 | ; 

VYASA. 


Of these, abstinence from injury is the not causing of pain to any 
living creature in any way at any time. The restraints and observances 
that follow have their origin in it. They are meant to achieve it. They 


0 gle 


156 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


are taught with the object of teaching it. They are taken up with the 
object of rendering the light of its appearance purer. And so it has 
been said:—As the Brdlmana goes on undertaking many a vow of 
restraint and observance, he goes on turning away from the sins commit- 
ted on account of forgetfulness, and having their origin in injury caused 
to others (Himsa); and by so doing he goes on rendering the Ahimsa 
itself purer and purer. 


Veracity consists in word and thought being in accord with facts. 
Speech and mind corresponds to what has been seen, heard and inferred 
assuch. Speech is uttered for the purpose of tranferring one’s know- 
ledge to another. It can only be said to have been employed for the 
good of others and not for their injury, if it is not deceptive, confused 
or barren in knowledge. If, however, it proves to be injurious to living 
beings even though uttered as such, it is not truth; itisasin only. By 
this outward appearance, this is a facsimile of virtue, and one gets into 
painful darkness. Therefore, let every one examine well and then utter 
truth for the benefit of all living beings. 


Theft is the making one’s own unlawfully of things belonging 
to others. Abstinence from theft consists in the absence of the desire 
thereof. 


Continence is the restraint of the hidden power, the power of 
generation. 


Absence of avariciousness is the non-appropriation of things not 
one’s own, consequent upon seeing the defects of attacliment and of the 
injury caused by the collection, preservation and destruction of goods. 
These are the restraints.—81. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Having enumerated the accessories of Yogaas the restraints and observances, &c., 
now he enumerates the restraints by introducing the aphorism :—‘Of these abstinence 
from injury, &c.' The restraints are abstinence from injury, &c. Now describes abstinence 
from injury as an accessory of Yoga:—‘Not causing of pain, &c.’ Qualifies such Ahimsé : 
‘The restraints and observances that follow, &c.’ 

‘Have their origin init’:—the other restraints and observances when performed 
without observing the vow of causing no pain are, as it were, not performed ; because 
in that case they are quite useless. The practice is resorted to only for the purpose of 
achieving Ahimsa. 

If Ahimsa is the root of all those that follow, how is it that they are meant for achiev- 
ing it? For this reason he says :—° They are taught with the object of teaching it.’ The 
meaning is that achievement here refers to knowledge, not to birth. 

Let that be. But if the following restraints and observances are for the purpose 
of giving a knowledge of Ahims4, then they are of no use; because that knowledge is 
obtained from the other sources. For this reason he says :—‘ For the purpose of rendering 


0 gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 81. 157 


the light of its appearance purer.’ The meaning is that if the following ones are not 
practised, Ahimsa would remain impure on account of the existence of untruth, &c. 


He mentions the concurrence of the Agamis with this :--‘ And so it has been said.’ 


Now he describes the nature of truth:—‘ Word and thought being in accord with 
facts.. Next he describes the nature of the facts :—‘ What has been heard, seen and jn- 
ferred as such,’ 


Otherwise it would not be truth. He describes this with reasoning. Speech is 
uttered with the object of transferring one’s thoughts to another; that is, for the purpose 
of creating in the other minds a knowledge similar to the knowledge existing in the mind 
of the speaker. For this reason, if it is not deceptive, &e. For example, Yudhisthira was 
questioned by Dronfcharya with reference to the death of his son “ My dear, your wealth 
is truth, is Aswatthim& dead”? His answer was, “It is true that Aiwatthiémd is dead,” 
but he thought at the time of the death of Aswatthima, the elephant, and not the son of 
Drona. This was merely a reply in the terms of the question. It did not transfer to the 
mind of Drona what was in the mind of Yudhisthira. The knowledge in Yudhisthira’s 
mind was that the elephant was dead, and this he had obtained hy the sense of his sight. 
The knowledge, however, that was transferred to the mind of Drona was that his son was 
dead. This is deceptive knowledge. 


‘Confused speeches’ is that which is born from confusion. The confusion may exist 
at the time of speaking, or, at the time of ascertaining the object of knowledge. 


Barren in knowledge is that whick carries no information. As, for example, the 
knowledge of barbarians carries no impression of the objects of knowledge tu the mind. It 
also means the speech which may be objectless. Such speech is not desirable to utter, 
In this case, even though the knowledge of the speaker is transferred to the mind of the 
hearer, yet it is not as it were transferred, because it is useless. 


Such speech also must be uttered for the good of others. If not so uttered, it is only 
the semblance of truth, not truth. For this reason he says :--‘It can only be said to be 
employed, &c.’ 

‘If, however, it proves injurious to living beings, &c.' Take, for example, the case of 
aman who has taken the vow of truth, being asked hy a gang of robbers if the caravan 
they be in pursui of had passed that way. He has seen it passing that way and says so. 
This utterance of his, even though technically truth, is not so in reality, as it tends to the 
injury of others. The rest is easy. 

He now describes theft, because the abstinence from any act depends upon the under- 
standing of the nature of the act. ‘Theft is tho making of things, &c.’ The object is 
to indicate the general by the particular. 

Inasmuch as the funetioning of speech and body depends upon the mind, the mental 
modification is mentioned here as the principal factor :--‘ Absence of the desire thereof.’ 

Next he describes the nature of continence :—‘ The restraint of the hidden power:’ 
The words “ hidden power,” are used to signify that the mere non-use of the organ is not 
continence. The desire of seeing and speaking to women and embracing them as the 
seats of Cupid is also incontinence. The meaning is that the other sensations tending 
towards that are also to be checked. 

He describes the nature of abstinence from avariciousness :—‘ Absence of avaricious- 
ness, &c,’ Here the defect of attachment has bcen described. Attachment increases in 
consequence of the repetition of enjoyment, as also the deftness of the powers in their 
functioning. 


The defect of injury also has been described. No enjoyment is possible without 
causing injury to others. 


Google 


158 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


are re ce ea a i a I RR <I 


Absence of avariciousness is the not making one’s own of objects, inasmuch as their 
possession originates in undesirable means if they are not sanctioned by the Sastras and 
are obtainable without effort even; and because there is evil done even in the preserva- 
tion of possessions, that are obtained even in accordance with the SAstras.—30. 


Sitra 31. 


SAAMI AAAAATASAT: AANA ACTAAT Ut 38 Ul 


aft Jati, life-state. @a Desa, space wea Kala, time. wa Samaya, and 
circumstance, waaftam:, Anavachchhinnab, not limited by, earn; Sérva-bhaumab, 
universal. wemay Mahdvratam, the great vow. 

31. They are the Great Vow, universal, and not-limited 


by life-state, space, time, and circumstance. (Samaya). 
—82. 

tai wttansaaaaaomn: ada Agaay | cwaheanmne- 
afsoat arene aeacag aaa far ea tarafsoer a ard ehreantt- 
fe aa ererafsaer a aaqdeat a qeaseh efrensii | aa fafreqcaea 
aaaafoa tamed ater eeeadiis | am a aframat qe wa 
fear ararafa | aattaaasaatcaaqiton afgarca: adia qitae- 
Tat | ahyig adfeag adiariRaairarcer addr aene- 
Rreqeaet Wn a8 tl 


And these are ‘the great vow, universal, not-limited by life-state, 
space, time and circumstance.’ 


VYASA. 


Of these, abstinence from injury is limited to life-state, as for 
example, the injury inflicted by a fisherman is limited to fish alone, and 
to none else. The same is limited to space, as for example, in the case 
of a man who says to himself, “I shall not injure at asacred place.” The 
same is limited to time, as for example, in the case of a man who says to 
himself, ‘I sliall not cause injury on the sacred day of the Chaturdasi, 
(the fourteenth) of the lunar fortnight.” 


The same in the case of a man who has given up the three injuries 
is limited by circumstance, as for example, when a man says to himeelf, 
“T shall cause injury only for the sake of gods and Braéhmans and not 
in any other way.” Or, as for example, injury is caused by soldiers in 
battle alone and nowhere else. The restraints of Ahimsa and the others 
are always practised without being limited by life-state, time, space and 
circumstance. Universal is that which pervades all conditions of life, 
everywhere, always; and is nowhere outof place. They are called the 
Great Vow.—82. 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 82, 83. 159 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


They have been described in general. Now he introduces the aphorism in order to 
describe how they are to be observed by the Yogis. ‘And these, &c.’ They are called 
Universal, because they are known in all states, described as life-state, &c.’ Inasmuch as 
it is said that the restraint of Ahins& and the others are to be practised, the same 
limitations are to be considered as applicable in the case of other restraints also.— 31. 


Siitra 32. 


QAASA TAT ANAT ATT TAT: WBF tl 


re, Saucha, cleanliness wea Santosa, contentment, wa: Tapah purificatory 
action. «ara Svadhydya, study. ‘tyerfvarnf, [svara-pranidhana, the making of 
God, the motive of all action. all these fa: Niyamah, the observances. 

32. The observances are Cleanliness, Contentment, 
Purificatory action, study and the making of the Lord the 
motive of all action.—83. 

draawar wravpaiwaraht Raa iar ara amerkatd 
AAVAAETUN FT AWN | WRaat Maasraatateaq | are: afeiea- 
arrarhnengaieear | at gxaeay ia a Rrecarftara frarca 
eaataa HIsaaraaa = | aati Bat qearant separarrwTenaqarAr 
wana Aeneas «wT ar | haunted afeaacagir 
SaRArgay | TaATaaAeAtsy a aaeaqr wae: ateltakadare: | Gearcedtar- 
RUAAATG: ARAMA Ta Aa: TerFacrarterarser- 
waATTATATARA RR A . 

VYASA 


Cleanliness, Contentment, Purificatory Action, Study and the making 
of Isvara the motive of all actions, are the observances. 

Of these, Cleanliness is external when brought about by earths and 
water, &c., and consists in the eating of pure things, &c. It is internal 
when it consists in the washing away of impurities of the mind. 

Contentment is the absence of desire to secure more of the neces- 
saries of life than one already possesses. 

Purificatory action consists in the endurance of the pairs of oppo- 
sites. The pairs of opposites are such as the desire to eat and the desire 
to drink ; heat and cold; standing and sitting; the absence of speech 
(Késtha Mauna) and the absence of facial indications (Akdra Mauna). 
It also includes such vows as the fasts of Chindrayana and Santapana, 
&c., so far as necessary. 

Study is the reading of the sciences of liberation (Moksa’‘, or the 
repetition of the Pranava, the syllable Aun. 

The making of Ivara the motive of all actions, means the doing of 
all actions to fulfil the purpose of that Great Teacher. It is with 


(Go gle 


160 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


reference to this state thatthe following has been said :—‘ Lying down 
on a bed or seated or wandering along a road, ever given to Yoga, with the 
network of the sins to be restrained, removed, conscious of the destruction 
of the seed of repeated births, he shares the joys of immortality.” 

Then is the understanding of the individual self and the absence 
of obstacles.—83. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


He describes the observances of Cleanliness, &c. 

“Cleanliness, Contentment, Purificatory Action, Study and the making of God the 
motive of all actions are the observances....... " He explains these :—“ Cleanliness is, &c.” 
The first ‘et cetera’ means such: things as cowdung plaster and other similar thi tg. 
Pure things are such as the urine of the cow, and barley, &c., which purify the body by 
removing impurities. The word ‘et cetera’ in connection with the eating of purifying 
things means the limitation of mouthfuls in size and number, &c.’ Instead of speaking of 
the purity caused by eating, &c., of purifying things, the words used here are only eating, 
&¢., things. It is to be understood that the effect is meant by the mention of tho cause. 

Mental impurities are pride, jealousy, vanity, &c. Mental purity consists in their 
removal. 

Contentment is the absence of desire to possess more than is necessary for the pre- 
servation of life. It should be added that this is because the appropriation of things not 
one’s own has already been given up. 

The absence of facial indications which let into the secret of one’s mind, is the 
control of onc's self, so as not to transfer the thought at random. Absence of speech is 
the ordinary holding of the tongue. 

The sins to be restrained are the causing of injury to others, lying, &c., which will 
be described later. They also include doubt and Untrue cognition. Next is described the 
sequence, on becoming purified by this much. 

Purther these restraints and observances are described in the Visnu Purdna :—“ Let 
the Yogi practise continence, harmlessness, truthfulness, abstinence from theft and non- 
covetousness without desire of fruit ; and let him makehis mind gradually fit for progress. 
He should also apply himself to study, cleanliness and purificatory actions and content- 
ment; and let his mind rest upon the Parabrahma. These are the restraints and observ- 
ances five each. When practised with desire they secure special fruit. To those who 
have no desire for fruit, they secure liberation.” —82, 


Satra 33. 


aHaTay WataeaTagT tl 33 0 


faex Vitarka, of the thoughts of sin, «ret Badhane, on the troubling of, sftew 
Pratipaksa, to the contrary. «ar Bhavanam, habituation. 


33. Upon thoughts of sin troubling, habituation to 
the contrary.—84. 


qast qaMaarany | fakarsat oraaarsray | wares sraraer farear 
raat wae geranaeagartuagqaaty axa gerrcren aitanttents arty 
area atreart atatg ara <arit arent | caqeart carat 
ahsatanrgia anqareraiarararaay | Sty earcrgity versa 


Google 


CH. TI. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 84, 85, 161 


AA MMR: THATAITgTAT ATTAIN: | T Hee TRAT ageqaearar 
qarregqey: sapere vray | Tar sat aTRATaASR Tar MET Tacragra ef 
qaary qareacealy area aa Ul 


VYASA. 


When during the practice of the restraints and observances sinful 
thoughts give trouble, the mind is to be habituated to the contrary ideas. 
When thoughts of the sins of causing injury to others and other sins 
appear in the mind of this devotee of wisdom, such as, ‘I shall kill the 
evil-doer,’ ‘I shall tell lies,’ ‘I shall appropriate this man’s wealth,’ 
‘T shall spoil this man’s wife,’ ‘Why should I not possess the things 
which this man possesses.’ When he is touched by the high fever of these 
sins, which tend to push him along the wrong path, he should habituate 
himself to think upon the contraries of such sins. He should entertain 
such ideas as these :—Being burnt up asI am in the fires of the world, 
I have taken refuge in the practice of Yoga, giving as it does protection 
to all living beings. Were I to take up the sins, having once given them 
up, I should certainly be a dog in my conduct. As the dog licks up his 
own vomit, so should I be acting, if I were to take up again what I have 
once given up. This should be applied to other aphorisms also.— 84. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


There are many obstacles in the way to good things. Thus obstruction being 
possible, the aphorism teaching the remedy thereof is introduced :— When these restraints 
and observances, &c.' The aphorism is, ‘Upon thoughts of sin troubling, habituation to 
the contrary.’ In the Commentary explaining the sins there is nothing difficult to under- 
stand.—88. 

Satra 34. 


faaar fearea: acartargaifearanmrsatg- 
GIR ATAATNATAT TATA ATATHARA Feet TaTTA- 
qAT NRE Ul 


ferat: Vitarkah, the thoughts of sin are, fee: Himsfdayah, the causing of 
injury to others and the rest. wa Krita, done. wha K4rita, caused to be done. 
exnfam: Anumodita&h, and permitted to be done.* @m Lobha, desire, mw Krodha, 
anger. ¥e Moha, ignorance. yaw Pirvakah, preceded by. 49g Mridu, slight. we 
Madhya, middling. fv: Adhimatrab, and intense, 9:4 Dubkha, pain. wm 
Ajiidna, unwisdom, wrn Ananta, infinite. we Phala, result, fruit, g:anwremrrwm: 
Resulting in an infinity of pain and unwisdom, wa Iti, thus, «fre Pratipaksa, 

to the contrary. wer Bhévanam, thinking. 
34. The sins are the causing of injury to others and 


the rest. They are done, caused to be done and permitted 
a1 


0 gle 


162 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


to be done ; they are preceded by desire, anger and ignor- 
ance; they are slight, middling and _ intense; their 
result is an infinity of pain and unwisdom; thus comes 
the habit-of-thinking to the contrary.—85. 


Rraet — citi i-th agaentirar 
PeMNrraner ce wag | ax fear araq! Heraritargarzats 
Prat | Gar gafatrar | saa ateranida satarawanaaet ie aut 
afrani | ormtaaer gare: agrenimarr rid aafaa- 
fact waft fgera: | agaentrarm:  gafeffar 1 agazier- 
waetasehit | aa serait mumuelany fe | aa aeatet 
merdensrarrarar ft 1 catersieraar eat wafer 1 ar gate: 
fRaaquraaqasa | mmig qeaateiaartis cangariecaiy 
area 1 a eet Rast Penernaanet afa . afaqeraraay | 
TWAGTA aTart eo aaraf ofaaaraaq | ama fanaa 
geen fama | adea crerkmaaa gaat att saree are. 
aaa | att face Aantaagrecd ated waft 1 ereaarac- 
atisintg caagaaa Sacred @ Marea aart 
nofreat gaan aang | sitaaresiata aq a 
eufaeqrararenan fier vdas qearet agen | caagaTeeahy Arse 
marae | Te frastat arranged Rrarnarre’ araaet Raney Aa: Tie- 
edie | sitqeraraarmarear erst: | qarer eeTrararaeaan acawaa 
anfra: args Wale We 

VYASA. 

Of these the causing of injury to others :—lIt is of three descriptions, 
that which is done, that which is caused to be done and that which is 
permitted to be done. Each again is three-fold. Prompted by desire 
of gain, as in the case of one who desires to obtain flesh and skin; 
prompted by anger as in the case of a man who has received some injury ; 
done through ignorance of the real nature of an act, under the impression 
that the act proposed is a virtue. 

Desire, anger and ignorance are again three-fold, slight, middling 
and intense. Thus there are twenty-seven modifications of injury caused 
to others. 

Mild, middling and intense are again three-fold each; Mild-mild, 
Middling-mild, and Mild-intense. Also Middling-mild, Middling-mid- 
dling, and \iddling-intense. Also Intense-mild, Intense-middling, and 
Intense-intense. Thus injury is of eighty-one descriptions, 


(Go gle 


CH. 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 85. 163 


This again becomes infinite on account of rule (niyama), option 
(vikalpa) and conjunction (samuchchaya). Similarly should this be 
applied to untruthfulness, &c. 


The contrary tendency consists in the notion that these immoral 
tendencies cause an infinity of pain and untrue cognition. This means 
that pain and unwisdom are the unending fruits of these immoralities, 
and that in this idea lies the power which causes the habit of the con- 
trary trend of thought. 


Further more the injurer first overpowers the strengths of the 
victim ; then gives him pain by blows from weapons; then takes his life 
even. 


Now as a consequence of overpowering strength, his intelligent 
and non-intelligent means of enjoyment lose the power of causing enjoy- 
ment. By causing pain he suffers pain among animals, earth-bound dis- 
embodied spirits, &c., and in hell. By taking life he lives every moment 
in a state of waning life. He is so much troubled that he prefers and 
longs for death; and yet, inasmuch as the effects of pain must run 
their course, he somehow lives on. And if somehow these acts of injury 
be mixed up with virtue, he is full of enjoyment but short-lived. 


Tbese observations may also be applied to untruthfulness, &c., as far 
as may be. Thus making himself familiar with the undesirable conse- 
quences of these sins, he no longer allows his mind to rest over evil acts. The 
habituation to the contrary tendencies becomes the cause of removing the 
gins. When these become characterised by non-productivity, then power 
caused by them becomes, to’ the Yogi, the indication of his suecess.—85. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


These sins having different natures, modes, characteristics and fruits, and each of 
these being an object of habituation to the contrary tendency, he now describes them by 
the aphorism, with the object of describing the nature of the contrary tendency :—‘ The 
sins are the causing of injury to others, &c.’ Explains :—‘ Now as the injury, &c.’ Rule 
(niyama) and untrue cognition and their combinations co-exist with the sins of injury, &c., 
on account of the infinity of differentiation among living beings. Then, vice causing the 
intensification of inertia, arises unwisdom also, which is nothing more than the four classes 
of untrue cognition. For this reason they fructify as unwisdom also. Thus the thought of 
their fruition as an immensity of pain and unwisdom is also an habituation to the contrary 
tendency. The author renders the same contrary tendency clearer. ‘ First overpowers 
the strength, i.c., his activity, the free motions of the body of the victim, that is the animal, 
&c., to be killed.’ By binding to the sacrificial pillar the animal loses the light of his life. 
‘The rest is very plain. 


The restraints and observances have been described. The removal of their tenden- 
cies by means of the habituation to the contrary tendency has also been described. 
There being thus no obstacles left, now he describes the indications of the success of 


Google 


164 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


these practices. By knowing these the Yogi having attained what he has undertaken, 
turns towards the work which is yet to be done. For this reason he says :—‘ When these 


become characterized, &c.'—34. 
Sétra 35. 


afearrtsrat acaterat avert: tay Ul 


witer Ahimsa, of (the habit of) not causing injury. sftrarry Pratisthayam, 
on the confirmation of. 4 Tat, his. eft Sannidhau, in presence. %wam:Vairatyagah 
giving up of hostilities (ram) (4). 

35. (The habit of) not-causing-injury being con- 

firmed, hostilities are given-up in his presence.—86. 
@ @ 
aera | aftensfrerat acafetr acenn: | aasritat aar ay 4 
VYASA. 
As for example all living beings give up their hostilities in his 


presence.—86. : 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Horse and buffalo, rat and cat, snake and mongoose, and others being natural enemies 
of each other, give up their animosities, by following the tendencies of the mind of the 
revered one, whose habit of not causing injury is confirmed.—35. 


Satra 36. 


AIMASA PHAtHaAAIa | 246 Ui 


ara Satya, of veracity. sftearery Pratisthay4m, in the confirmation. few Kriya, 
of action, we Phala, of fruition. ‘wraey Agrayatvam, the dependence of. 


36. Veracity being confirmed, action and fruition 
become dependents.—87. 


eeratrsiat frarnensracey | arian yar ofr waite arfirn: eet ateq- 
ee cent orettfer | aratreres arevrafr a 38 A 
VYASA. 
‘Be virtuous. This being said the object of the benediction 
becomes virtuous. ‘Go to heaven,’ he attains the heavenly state. His 
speech becomes effective.—-87. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Action signifies virtue and vice which are the results thereof and their fruition 
consists in heaven and hell. They become dependents upon him: they come to live in 
him. They come into existence by the speech of the master. He illastrates the depen- 
dence of action :—‘ Be virtuous.’ Illustrates the dependence of fruition :—‘Go to heaven.’ 
“ Effective’? means “ unchecked.” —36. 

Siitra 37. 


HAAMASA AATATTCATATT tt 39 


eta Asteya, of not stealing. sfrarery Pratisthdyam, in the confirmation of. #4 
Sarva, of all, «* Ratna, of jewels wwerry Upasthanam, the approaching him of, 


Google 


CH. fl. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 88, 89, 90. 165 


37. (The habit of) not-stealing being confirmed, all, 
jewels, approach him.—88. 


meaanrsrat aacanqarag | aaaraetrafise cart & 29 0 
VYASA. 
Jewels approach him from all quarters. --88. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
This is easy.—87. 
Satra 38. 


aaaastasrat saat: 3c i 


weed Brahmacharya, of Brahmacharya ; continence, sftegramy Pratisthayam, 
in the confirmation. 4% Virya, vigour. ema: Labhah, gaining; obtaining. 


58. Continence being confirmed, vigour is obtained. 
——89. 
maura aera: | wer wreatrarpargensat | Rarer 
faadg eraarara” cant aaa i ac 
VYASA. 
By whose attainment, the Yogi perfects his attainments unchecked, 
and having attained the power becomes capalle of imparting knowledge 


to learners.— 89. ; 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Vigour is power by attaining which, being unchecked, i.e., without giving way to 
obstacles, the Yogi perfects, that is, lays by the store of Anima, &c. 


Having attained the power :—When he is possessed of the eight attainments known 
as Tara, &c., and having other names as Uha, &c. 


Learners are the disciples of the Yogi. Knowledge means the Yoga which is an 
accessory of the Yoga. He becomes capable of teaching Yoga.— 38. 


Sara 39. 


sahagead AeaRwaT Garg: uRau 


wafrg Aparigraha, of non-covetousness, ‘4% Sthairye, in the confirmation. 
amaqn Janma-kathamta, of the how of births, dra: Sambodhuah, the knowledge. 


39. Non-covetousness being confirmed, the knowledge 
of-the-how of births.— 90. 


waftageda sania earns | wea vale Stseara Huagare fifa: 

ae Sufeatte & ar area: Kat ar ueam gaara qaeanqrearaea4- 

aravattarear waauraraad | Tar waned war Aaa qe Wake 
VYASA. 

Non-covetousness being confirmed, the knowledge of the how-of- 

births comes to him. Whowas I? How wasl? Whatis this? How 

is this? What shall we be? Or, How shall we be? In this shape 


Google 


166 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


comes to him the desire of knowing the nature of his own existence in the 
past, the present and the future. 
These are attainments due to the confirmation of the restraints. 
We shall now speak of those that are caused by observances.—0. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Non-covetousness being confirmed, the knowledge of the ‘how-of-births.’ Birth 
means coming into relationship with the physical body and the powers of sensation, &c., 
together. The how-of-birth means its modality. Its knowledge means its direct conscious- 
ness. It means the perfect knowledge of the past, the present and of all that is beyond 
ken, together with their modes. 

Questions about the past:—'Who was I?’ Questions about the different modes of 
the birth and preservation of the same :—‘ How was1?' Wishes to know the nature of 
the present birth :—‘What is this?’ Is the physical body the mere collection of the 
physical elements or something different therefrom ? Here too the words ‘ How is this ?’ 
are to be understood. In some books they actually appear. 

Questions about the future :—‘ What shall we be?’ Here too the how must be under- 
stood. Thus comes to him the desire to know of his own existence, i.e, the coming into 
relationship with the body, &c., in the past, the present andthe future. From the desire 
comes the knowledge, the rule being that one does whatever he desires. —39. 


Satra 4o. 


MASH AT ARAM: oll 


Srara Sauchat, by cleanliness, «tg Sva-afiga, to one’s own body. gyre Jugupsa, 
disinclination, v: Paraih, with others, wei: Asamsargah, cessation of contact. 


40. By cleanliness, disinclination to-one’s-body, and 
cessation-of-contact with-others. —91. 


area ATaT qr: | Tats great ATAACAATH: Brarager- 
quit srarfreagt afntate | fia atcaat: sraenrararet eaait ard 
fara serra sraghcaraend acnicerdtaman a- 
TIT || SO hl . 

VYASA. 

One begins to clean himself, being disgusted with the dirt of his 
body. Then he sees the defects of the body. He loses his attachment 
to the body, and becomes restrained in himself. Furthermore, he ceases 
to come into contact with others. He sees the nature of the body. He 
wishes to give up his own body, seeing that it is never pure, even though 
it is being constantly washed by water, &c. How should he come into 
contact with the body of others which are all the more impure ?—91. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 
This shows the external cleanliness to be the indicator of attainments.—40. 


Sfiitra 41. 


AAYSL MATAR TEA PATA TATA TAT Be 


Google 


Cd. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 92, 98. 167 


era Sattva, of the essence. wi Suddhau, on the purification. @rrra Sau- 
manasya, high-mindedness. vara Ekagrya, one-pointedness. fea Indriya, of the 
senses. 4 Jaya, control, we Atma, of the self. qa Dargana, the knowledge. 
aaa Yogyatva, fitness for all these, + Cha, and. 

41. And upon-the-essence becoming-pure, come high- 
mindedness, one-pointedness, control of the senses and 
fitness for the knowledge of the self.—92. 

fe a) aeaget dmadterafqasamaaaraeana a | agar 
NANT | WU Aaa: Aare aa awry aa chrawaeagara- 
marae amare vadiaceraedagivnad cr ll ee i 

VYASA. 

Further, high-mindedness, control of the senses and fitness for self- 
knowledge come upon the essence becoming pure. By cleanliness comes 
the purity of the essence. Thence high-mindedness, thence one-pointed- 
ness, thence control of the senses and thence fitness for self-knowledge, 
of the essence of the mind. This it is that comes to the Yogi by cleanli- 
ness being confirmed.—92. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Now hedescribes the attainments indicated by internal cleanliness :—‘ Further, &c.’ 
By washing off the impurities of the mind the essence of the mind shows itself in its 
purity. By the removal of dirt comes high-mindedness which is an index of purity. That 
which is pure becomes one-pointed. The mind having been thus controlled, the senses 
too are controlled, being dependent as they are upon the mind. Thence the essence 
of the mind becomes fit for self-knowledge.—4]. 


Siitra 42. 


~*~ 
AAMT: GAA: ues 
amine Santcsid, by contentment, wana: Anuttamah, excellent, extreme, 9a 
Sukha, of happiness, em: Labhah, acquisition, 


42. By contentment the acquisition of extreme happi- 
ness.—93. 

SANTA FRONT | TAM AeA | Vs RAgGeA ss Ta ed ae- 
Jay | TUAIGTAwa aes: Wea wera y ez 

VYASA. 

And so it has been said :—‘ Whatever of pleasure is there in the 
world of desires, and whatever of larger happiness is there in the world 
of heaven, they do not come to the sixteenth part of the joy due to the 
suppression of desires. —93. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Extreme means that than which there is nothing higher in existence. As was said 
by Yay4ti to Puru when he was begging his youth from him :—‘ The wise man who gives: 


(Go gle 


168 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


up desire so difficult to give up by the ignorant and never becoming old with age is full of 
bliss.” Shows this by ‘ whatever is there, &c.’— 42 
Sititra 43. 


aratexatafarareaaraa: Wea 


we Kaya, of the physical body. efaa Indriya, of the senses. fag: Siddhih, 

the attainment. wafg Aguddhi, of impurity. wam Ksayét, owing to the removal. 
ava: Tapasah, through purificatory actions, 

43. By-purificatory-actions, the removal of impurity 


and the attainments of the physical-body and the senses.—94. 
srapramiecateaaeaye: | wawaaaa an ferergeaace- 
ae agracumeramrenaeizcuarn | | azafra&icg ceptor. 
afe 4 va x 
VYASA. 

Purificatory actions, as they are being done, destroy the dirt of the 
veil of impurity. By the destruction of the dirt of this veil, come the 
attainments of the physical body. Anima and others. So also the 
attainments of the senses, clair audience and thought-reading from a 


distance, &c.—94. . 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Mentions the indications of the attainment of the Purificatory action. By Purifica- 
tory action, &c. The veil which is described as impurity consists of vice, &c, due to 
inertia. Anim& and others, such as Mahimf, Laghim4 and Prfpti. It is all easy.—43. 


Siatra 44. 


AMATATNVEVATAT AAA: VV Wl 


wrarag Svadhyayat, by study. ww @am Ista-devatd, with the desired deity. 
eam: Samprayogah, communion. 
44. By-study comes communion with the desired 
deity.—95. 
ererarqetaaresim | ar aera: area eerradiee qe 
reaita Ge ATET sere EFT Be 
VYASA. 
The gods, the Risis and the Siddhas become visible to him who 
is given to study, and they do take part in his work.—5. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Mentions the attainments indicated by the perfection of study :—! By study communi- 
on with the desired deity.’ This is easy.—44. 


Siitra 45, 


aartatifattamttrararg wax 


emfa Samadhi, of trance. fag: Siddhih, the attaiment. tenia févara- 
pranidhanat, by making févara the motive of all actions, 


(Go gle 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 96, 97. 169 


45. The attainment of trance by making Igvara the- 
motive-of-all-actions.—96. 


amiiiaiihacairararey | Sraftaadarse aaeisiaar w- 
aiftaaafad ara tavat Farat srerat @ | aaa say AUNT 
TMTAT ATT Ve Ut 

VYASA. 

The faculty of trance (samadhi) becomes perfect in him who dedi- 
cates all his powers to Ivara. By this he knows all that he desires to 
know, just as it is in reality, in another place, in another body or at 
another time. Then his intellect knows everything as it is.—96. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


‘The attainment of trance by making [svara the motive of all actions.’ It should not 
be said that inasmuch as the Cognitive trance is attained by making- isvara the motive 
of all actions, the remaining seven accessories are useless. These accessories are 
useful in the attainment of that mental mood which devotes all action to the purposes 
of isvara, by known and unknown subsidiary methods. They are also usefal in the 
attainment of the Cognitive trance, by a separate combination of accessories. Thus the 
same curds serve the purpose of a man and are useful for the purposes of a sacrifice. 

In this case the accessories of concentration, meditation and trance would not be 
the internal accessories of the Cognitive trance. The Cognitive trance would thus 
become a cause ‘equal in degree with them. Its directness (internality) is perceived by 
the other accessories not being directly turned towards it. The observance of making 
isvara the motive of all action has isvara only for its direct object. Its direct object 
is not the object of Cognitive trance. Therefore this is an external, indirect means. 
Thus all is plain. 

The word Prajan&ti =‘ knows,’ shows the radical:meaning of prajiia, intellect.—45. 


Satra 46, 


Rumgaaraag Neen 


fax Sthira, steady. gaq Sukham, easy. era Asanam, posture. 
46. Posture is steadily easy. —97. 
Tat weet: | aweearghe ae | Recqernrery | 
are waread sera agra wafterk averad Arana qs makes 
ghamigayeragd aacrera frcaer qereger AeTATA | BE 


VYASA. 

The restraints and observances have been described with attain- 
ments. We shall now describe the posture, &c. Of these, posture is 
steadily easy. Thus, for example, the Padmasana, the Virdsana, the Bhad- 
rasana, the Svastika, the Dandasana, the Sopasraya, the Paryanhka, the 
Krauiichnisidana, the Hastinisidana, the Ustranisidana, the Samasam- 


sthana, the Sthirasukha, the Yath4sukha and such others.—97. 
22 


(Go gle 


170 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Introduces the next aphorism :—‘The restraints and observances, &c.' ‘Of these, 
posture is steadily easy.’ Steadiness means absence of motion. The same must be easy. 
It must not cause trouble. Such should be the postnre. This is the meaning of the 
aphorism. Posture is the way in which one sits. He mentions different postures :—As 
for example :—The Padmasana is well-known. The Virdsana is that in which a sitting 
man has one foot in contact with the ground, and places the other over the partially 
inclined other knee. 

The Bhadrdasana is that in which the sitting man places the soles of both feet joined 
together below the testicles, and places both hands with the fingers interlaced over that 
region. 

The Svastika is that in which the left foot is placed, a little downward inclined 
between the right thigh and shank, and the right foot is placed in a similar position 
between the left thigh and shank. 

The Dandasana is practised by sitting with thighs, shanks and feet stretched straight 
along the ground with the ankles joined together, but the toes kept apart. 

The Paryanka is that in which the knees are extended and the arms are used to lie 
upon. 

The Sopasraya is that in which the tiger's skin or the decr skin or some cloth is 
used to sit upon. 

The Krauiichanis&dana and others of the same class are to be imitated from the 
sitting postures of the Krauiicha, the elephant, the camel. 

The Samasamsth4na is that in which the feet are so placed that the heels and fore- 
parts of both are joined together with the feet a little bent. 

The Sthirasukha is whatever posture may secure steadiness and ease. This is 
approved by the writer of the aphorisms. It is also described as Yathfsukha. This 
means any position that may secure ease.—46. 

Satra 47. 


TIAN MITA CAAA AAA UB 


maa Prayatna, of effort. fue Saithilya, by slackening. wea Ananta, as in 
the infinite, waraferay Samapattibhyam, and by thought transformation. 


47. By-slackening of effort and by thought-trans- 
formation as infinite.—98. 


TAMAMUSUTTAAATARAAT | ATA areas: 1 caVetqcaerer- 
eared Fa area vals | aera at aaa’ Ararat Pedant nee 4 
VYASA. 

The sentence is completed by adding the word, ‘is secured.’ Pos- 
ture becomes perfect when effort to that end ceases, so that there may be 
no more movement of the body. Or, when the mind is transformed into 
the infinite, that is, makes the idea of infinity its own, it brings about the 
perfection of posture. —98. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 
Having described the nature of posture, he describes the means thereof :—‘ By 


slackening of effort and by thought-transforming as infinite.’ The effort which is directed 
towards the accomplishment of a certain posture helps to keep the body in a particular 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 98, 99, 100. 171 


position. It is not the cause of the posture which as an accessory of Yoga is meant to be 
taught here. If that were its cause, the teaching would be useless, inasmuch as in 
that case the posture would be achieved by its own operation. Therefore this natural 
effort of the body does not bring about the posture that is meant to be taught. It is in 
fact its antagonistic. Further this natural effort being the antecedent of the posture 
that may at any time be desired, does away with the very object of posture. Therefore, he 
who practises posture as an observance taught here, should employ an effort which consists 
in suppressing the natural efforts of the body. Otherwise the posture taught here will 
not be accomplished. It is for this reason that the slackening of the natural efforts of 
the body is said to be the means of accomplishing posture. 

Or, the mind transformed into the idea of the infinite, the Great Serpent, who up- 


holds the sphere of the carth by means of his very steady thousand heads, brings about 
steadiness .—47, 


Sfttra 48, 


Aa SeSTARTITA: usc 


am: Tatah, then. # Dvamdva, from the pairs of opposite, waft: Anabhi- 
ghatah, cessation of disturbance. 
48. Thence cessation-of-disturbance from-the-pairs- 
of-opposites.—99. 
aat aarahrata: | xtarearigheracraasarenfraa it vc tl 


VYASA. 


When posture has been mastered he is not disturbed by the pairs 
of opposites such as heat and cold.—99. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Mentions the indications of the achievement of posture. 
“ Thence the cessation of disturbance from the pairs of opposites.” 
The Commentary has been explained by what has already been said.— 48. 


Sfttra 49. 


aferecata ara aTaa AAAS: TTUTATA: NEN 


afery Tasmin, that (the posture), fa Sati, being. qe Svasa, of the inspiratory 
breath, wgret: Prasvasayoh, of the expiratory breath. fa Gati, of the movements. 
fattq: Vichchhedah, stoppage. srerara: Prandyémahb, regulation of breath. 


49. Regulation-of-breath (Pranayama) is the stoppage 
of the inspiratory and expiratory movements (of breath) 
which follows, when that has-been-secured.—100. 

afer saTeSDaTeaaiaerese: SOTA: | AMAA STATA 
atacand are: | Meaes aeanhrencamare: | aaTifayest saarara: 


HUTA? Wl ve Wl 
VYASA. 
When posture has been achieved the cessation of the movements 


of both inspiration, the drinking in of external air, and expiration, the 


(Go gle 


172 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


throwing out of the internal air, is the regulation of breath (Pranayama). 


—100, 
VACHASPATI'S GEOSS. 


Posture also has becn described in the Visnu Purana :—‘ Having thus practised the 
Bhadrisana, &c., and being full of their qualities, &c.’ After posture describes the 
Prinfyima, at the same time showing that posturemust precede it:—‘ Pranfyama is the 
cessation of the inspiratory and expiratory movements of breath which follows when 
that has been secured.’ The cessation of the movements of expiration and inspiration 
exists in the Rechaka, Kumbhaka and Paraka branches of the regulation of breath. This, 
therefore, is a description of the ordinary Prinfyfima, This means that where in the 
Puraka the external air having been expelled is retained inside, the cessation of the 
movements of inspiration and expiration takes place. Similarly, where in the Rechaka, 
the external air having been expelled is restrained outside, the cessation of the movements 
of inspiration and expiration takes place. Similarly, in the Kumbhaka too. This is what 
the commentary says : —‘ When posture has been, &c.’—49. 


Sttra 50. 


TAT AA TET EAT Te TATA PT TALE ST TRAN KO 
wa Bahya, external. wan Abhyantara, internal. ee Stambha, total res- 
traint. wt: Vrittih, manifestation, @a Dega, place, wre Kala, time, ven Sankbyé, 
number, by these three, ¥gg: Paridristah, regulated. 4 Dirgha, long. gea: Sake- 
mab, and subtle. 
00. Manifestation as external, internal and total res- 
traint is regulated by place, time and number; and thus it 


becomes long-induration and subtle.—101. 

a F1 Tenqacamahaquasagam: west rq | 74 
VATATART NAAT: S AMT | AT AAA NAAT A gaat | Para- 
ATAT MGA: AHTTA RA | TN aa TA_Is ae ada: wera. 
areata aan gary naerava xt 1 wasaa asta afteer carer ear 
aural aed ate auriaraaacaakeer cere | apatite 
aiteer Tarahe: saTaware: saa samaeaahaataarataigara seas 
a Tae wat wee Mae aa xa aguaize: a aeqakamaen 
VIG I 4o 


VYASA. 

And that manifests as external, internal and total restraints, is regu- 
lated by time, place and number; is of long duration and subtle. The 
cessation of the motion of breath which precedes expiration is external. 
The cessation of the motion of breath which precedes inspiration is inter- 
nal, The third manifests total restraint where cessation of both these 
motions takes place by asingle effort. As water thrown ona heated 
stone shrivels up from all sides, so do both cease simultaneously. All these 
three are regulated by place. So much of space is occupied by it. Also 


Google 


CH. II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 101, 102. 173 


are they regulated by time. The meaning is that they are measured by 
ascertaining the seconds of their duration. They are also regulated by 
number. The first cessation is for so many, the second for so many, and 
similarly the third. Similarly it is thus mild, thus middling and thus 
intense. Thus it is regulated by number. This verily thus practised 
becomes long induration and subtle.—101. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


He introduces the aphorism by describing the three descriptions of Pranadya&ma :— 
‘ And that manifests as external, internal and total restraint; is regulated by time, place 
and number; is of long duration and subtle.’ The word Vpitti ‘manifestation’ is related 
to allthe three. He describes the Rechaka:—‘ That which precedes expiration.’ Des- 
cribes the Puraka:—‘ That which precedes inspiration.’ Describes the Kumbhaka :— 
‘The third, &c.’ Renders the same plainer :—‘ Where the cessation of both inspiration 
and expiration takes piace simultaneously by a single effort of restraint, not that it stands 
in need of restraining effort which is the culmination of the cffort of inspiration, nor that 
it stands in need of the restraining effort which culminates in the effort of expiration. 
On the other hand, as water thrown on a heated stone shrivels upon all sides as it is be- 
ing dried up, so also the air running in or out ceases its action by a strong effort of 
restraint, and stays in the body reduced toa state of greater than ordinary tenuity. It 
does not fillin and is not, therefore, Puraka. Nor does it go out and is not, therefore, 
Rechaka. 

In the external the limit of space is measured in a place free from wind by the effect 
upon straw or a piece of cotton wool, by ayard or foot-rule or by the hand. Similarly, 
in the internal itis measured by the sensation of touch at the soles of feet or at the 
forehead, slight like the touch of an ant. 

A ‘second’ (ksana) is the fourth part of the period of time taken by the act of shut- 
ting the eyes. It is measured by ascertaining the seconds of duration. 

A ‘matré’ (measure) is the time which is taken up by thrice turning up one’s hand 
over one’s knee and then snapping the fingers once. 

Measured by thirty-six such mftrés is the first attempt (vdghfta) which is mild. 
Twice that is the second, which is middling. Thrice that is thethird which is intense, 
This is the Pranfyéma as measured by number. It is described :—Thus is it measured by 
number, &c, 

The time taken by the inspiration and expiration of a healthy man is the same as 
that which is measured by snapping the fingers, as described, after turning the hand 
thrice over the knee. ; 

The first attempt when carried to its completion is said to be conquered or mastered. 
The time is intended to be described by so many inspirations and expirations. They are 
practically the same. 

This Pranayama becomes of long duration when it takes up greater space and time, 
being daily practised and being increased in succession of a fortnight, a day, &c. It is 
subtle, becanse it is known by very subtle trance (samadhi) not because it becomes weak, 


—50. 
Sfitra 51. 


TAPMAATATTAAN ATT NXen 


ara Bahya, the external, wrt Abhyantara, the internal, fw Visaya, region, 
spheres. wet Akeep!, passing over, going beyond. wwe: Chaturthah, the fourth. 


(Go gle 


174 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


51. The fourth is that which follows when the spheres 
of the external and internal have-been-passed.—102. 

MUTA Tan age | suewageafealateaktes wf: 
TUTEATTAT ATES ATRAR: | saan Qdaer: | agar prerarentara 
ATSNATAATA: TATA: | aataeg Rrearararhaa nee: AHIOT Ts 
uawagah west eager | aged saramarafaraagTarcarcy 
wa yaaa Tease: cara rere AAT xfer Ge 

VYASA. 

The sphere of the external, having been mastered by the measure- 
ments of time, space and number, is left behind. Similarly is the 
sphere of the internal thus measured, left behind. In the case of both, 
it becomes long and subtle. The cessation of the movements of both, 
in sequence of the attainment of that state, by gradual mastery over the 
different states, is the fourth. In the third the sphere is not considered ; 
the cessation of motion takes place with one single effort, and is then 
measured by space, time and number ; and thus becomes long and subtle. 
In the fourth, however, the spheres of inspiration and expiration are 
ascertained, the different states are mastered by and by, and it follows 
the perfection of both. Thus comes about the cessation of the movements 
of both. This is the fourth Pranayama and is thus distinguished.—102. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Thus three descriptions of Pranéyama have been described. Now he describes the 
fourth :—' The fourth is that, &c.’ Explains :—‘ The sphere of the external, &c.’ 

‘Left behind':—dethroned from its position, which has been mastered by practice. 
That also is protracted and subtle. 

‘In sequence of’ :—The external and internal Prindydmas preceded by a calculation 
of time, space and number, And this fourth one is not brought about all at once, by a 
single effort like the third one. 

On the other hand it reaches different states of perfection, as it is being practised ; 
and as one state has been mastered it goes on to the higher stage in succession, and it is 
thus acquired. This is said: —‘By gradual mastery over the different states.’ 

The question is that the cessation of the motion of both the Praufydmas takes place 
in the third Prano’yama also, which is described as the total restraint ; what then is the 
distinction between the third and the fourth. For this reason he says :—‘ In the third, &c.’ 
The third is brought about by a single effort and is not preceded by the thought of 
measurements. The fourth, however, is preceded by the knowledge of the measurements, 
and is brought about by much effort. This is the difference. The meaning is that the 
spheres of the Puraka and the Rechaka are not considered, but this is measured by time, 


space and number.—5l. 4 
Satra 52. 


Aa: ALTA THTATATAAT WRI 
wa: Tatah, then, @a@ Kstyate, is destroyed. sats Prakaga, of light, weer 
Avaranam, the cover. 


Google 


CH, II. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 198, 104. 175 


52. Thence the cover of light is destroyed.—103. 


Ta: attad THrATacay | Nrarararavaeraiser Arras: aftaa aa- 
SATAY HA Adaraaad | Aetentakqamsa searaire aaagsey 
ATATTS PRR | AEA THT HA ATTRA TTUTATATATATT 
qae vate ofrera a aftaa | ae Are | aa a ae sTarararaar Preaghe- 
Forat Aiea arreakesr it 4 I 


VYASA. 

The karma of the Yogi which covers up the discriminative know- 
ledge is destroyed as he practises the Praniyama. This is what they 
say :—‘ By the magic panorama of desire, the Essence, which is luminous 
by nature, is covered up, and the same is directed towards vice.’ This 
karma of the Yogi which covers up the light and binds him to repeated 
births, becomes weak by the practice of Prinéyaéma every moment, and 
is then destroyed. And so it has been said :—‘ There is no purificatory 
action higher than Prinadyama; purity is secured by that, through the 
destruction of impurity ; and the light of knowledge shines.—103. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 

He describes the object of Pran&éyaima:—‘ Thence the cover of light is destroyed.’ 
The cover is that which covers up the light of Mental Essence. It means the afflictions and 
sin. He explains :—‘ The karma of the Yogft......as he practices Pranéyaéma.’ Knowledge 
is that by which anything is known. It is the light of the Mental Essence, Discrimina- 
tive knowledge is the knowledge of the distinction (between the Objective Essence and 
consciousness). That which covers up discriminative knowledge ‘is the karma which 
covers up.’ Karma means the vice which is brought about by action so called, and the 
afflictions caused thereby. He says that the Agamis agree in this matter :—‘ This is what 
they say.’ Desire is spoken of as the Great Forgetfulness. By the mention of desire is 


to be understood Nescience also which is found inseparably joined to it. 

Vice is that which should not be done. 

The question arises that if Prindyaéma alone does away with vice what is the use 
of purificatory action? (Tapas). For this reason he says :—‘‘ Becomes weak ’’ and not 
altogether destroyed by it. Therefore, purificatory action is necessary for its destruc- 
tion. In this too the Agamis agree :—‘ And so it has been said.’ 

Manu also says :—‘ Let the defects be burnt up by Prénf&y4ma.' 

The Visnu Purfna speaks of the Praniyama as an accessory of Yoga:—‘ He who 
masters the air known as Prina by practice, is said to have secured Pranfydma.’ It is 
either seeded or seedless. When the powers known as Prana and Apfna are mastered one 
by the other, it is two-fold. The third is that when both are checked.—52. 


Sftra 53. 


UMW FV AAA Aga: WKN 


weerg Dharanasu, for concentration. 4 Cha, and. arm Yogyata, the fitness. 
aq: Manasahb, of the mind. 


53. And the fitness of the mind for concentration.—104. 


Google 


176 PATANJALTS YOGA. 


EG 


fa larcarg & area ate | steraararenta sreegatra- 
carat ay srarentar THATS WSR 
VYASA. 
Further, the fitness of the mind for concentration. By the practice 
itself of Pranayama is this secured. As laid down :— 
“ By the expulsion and retention of breath optionally.” —I. 34.—104. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Prandydma renders the mind fit for concentration, by making it steady. —53. 
Sfiitra 54. 


afrraresratt Prater EAR FaeeATUT TATA: & 


w Sva, their own. fawa Visaya, objects, #é%% Asamprayoge, on not coming 
into contact with. f*ere Chittasya, of the mind. ~ Svaripa, the nature. ‘WyWE: 


Anukarah, the following of, <a Iva, as it were. xfxaery Indriyégdm, of the senses, 
on the part of the senses, "eer: Pratydhdrah, is abstraction, 


54. Abstraction (Pratyahara) is that by which the 
senses do not-come-into-contact with their objects and 
follow as-it-were the nature of the mind.-—105. 


BIR Taree | waar «ae wasugare = eafearat 
weer | wearer eager raft | reer Rre- 
afmagtnhaaa aatPrasaagaaracatad | aT mgEcrart alert 
samaaqaara Aoaaagekars aaa Rraetra Preariee 
TUTTI 4S Wi 

VYASA. 

Now what is Pratyahira? ‘ Pratydhara is that by which the senses 
do not come into contact with their objects and, as it were, follow the 
nature of the mind.’ The meaning is that in the absence of contact with 
their objects, they initiate, as it were, the nature of the mind. The senses 
are restrained, like the mind, when the mind is restrained. They do not 
stand in need of other means like the control of the other organs. Just 
as the bees fly, as the queen flies ; and sit as the queen sits down ; so the 
sense becomes restrained, as the mind is restrained. This is Pratyahara. 
—105. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Thus then having been purified by the restraints, &c., begins the practice of Pra- 
tyfhara with a view to secure Samyama. The author puts a question to introduce the 
aphorism describing it :—‘ Now what, &c.’ Praty&hara is that by wh'ch the senses do not 
come into contact with their objects, and as it were, follow the nature of the mind.’ The 
meaning is that inasmuch as the mind does not come into contact with objective sounds, 
&c., as cause of forgetfulness, attachment and aversion, the senses of sight &c., too do 


Google 


CH. 11. ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 105, 106. 177 


not, on account of the absence of that contact, incline towards their objects. This is the 
imitation of the mind by the senses. Inasmuch however, as the senses do not imitate 
the mind in the fact of the taking in of the realities of the objects, because their field of 
operation is the external world alone, it is said that they, asit were, imitate the mind. 
By using the locative case it is shown that the ordinary quality of non-contact with 
their objects is the operative cause of the senses imitating the mind. ‘In the absence of 
contact with their, &c.’ Explains the imitation:—‘ The senses are restrained like the 
mind, &c.’ The similarity is that the cause of the restraint of both is and the restraint 
of both is due to, the same effort. Illustrates the same :—‘ Justas the bees &c.’ Applies 
the illustration to the object to be illustrated :—‘ So, &c.’ 

In this connection also says the Vignu Purina :—‘ The Yogi who is devoted to the 
practice of Pratyfhara should restrain the senses which are attached to the objects of 
sound, &c., and make them imitate the mind.’ 

Its object is shown even there. “Those of undisturbed mind have thereby the 
highest possible control of the senses. If the senses are uncontrolled, the Yogi cannot 
achieve Yoga.”—54. 


SOtra 55. 


aa: WaATasTaesaUT WKN 


wt: Tatab, thence. va Parama, the highest. aren Vasyaté, control, efxrary 
Indriyénam, of the senses. 


55. Thence the senses are under the highest control. 
—106. 


aa qtaraqaaiearny | waigaqnaatieana fe Sf | 
aed aaa dua ft aerate | weqizestnn 
Aewwery | ung qegeqed uaierhigawa fa se 
Rrdatrargnfrafatat Svise: 1 area qear fad agar afeahtrea 
Rreariiyare Aathganvacaeareaquaracaaanre ara xfer ll 4s A 

ue stages atearaaa amarest anraie- 
ar ara fara: ag: GAT WR A 
VYASA. 

Some say that the conquest of the senses is their non-attachment to 
sound, etc. Attachment is a defect which draws them away from the 
good. Others say that inasmuch as the enjoyment of unprohibited objects 
is proper, it should be said that contact with sound, &c., subject to one’s 
wishes, is the conquest of the senses. Others again say that the conquest 
of the senses is the obtaining of knowledge of sound, &c., without their 
causing pleasure and pain, in the absence of attachment and aversion. 
Jaugisavya says that itis only the want of action of the senses, on 
account of the one-pointedness of the mind. For this reason it is then 
that this control is the very highest, the restraint, that is to say, of the 


senses along witb the restraint of the mind } and also for the reason that 
28 


(Go gle 


‘Sistine pin! ul ‘ue, ~~ were swe eee 


sii” spat Se ciate “clas © ek 


lee a. Gaia 


sa FS i kN a EN 


178 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


the Yogis, being thus restrained, do not stand in need of employing 
other means, like those employed in the conquest of other organs.—106. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


‘Thence the senses come under the highest control.’ Are there any controls of the 
senses which may be said not to be the highest, so that itis said here that the highest 
control is secured ? Shows them :--‘ Some say that the conquest, &c.’ Explains this :— 
Attachment is desire. The word in the original is Vy4sana, which is described as 
meaning that which removes away fromthe good. The absence of this attachment which 
draws one away from the good, is the control. Describes another control :—The enjoy- 
ment of such sound, &c., as is not forbidden by Sruti, &., and the avoidance of those 
that are forbidden, is proper, that is, in accordance with propriety. 

He describes another control :—‘ Contact with sound, &c.’ The contact of the 
senses with sound, &c., depends upon one’s wishes. Man is free to enjoy whatever 
he likes. He is not dependent upon the enjoyment. 

He mentions another control also :—‘ The knowledge of sound, &c., without pleasure 
and pain, &c.’ 

He mentions the control which is preferred by the author of the aphorism, and 
with which a great Rigi isin accord. Jaigigavya says that it is the non-inclination of the 
senses towards their objects, the sounds, &c., along with the mind which has become 
one-pointed. Now he says that this is the highest control :--‘ For this reason is it then, 
&c.’ The word ‘ then’ (TU in the original) differentiates this control from other controls. 
The other controls do not remove the possibility of contact with the poison of afflictions, 
because they are of the nature of the conjunction between the serpent and the poison. 
Even the greatest professor of the science of poisons who has controlled a serpent, 
sleeps not with the serpent in his arms, without fear. This control, however, which is 
free from contact with all poisons, leaves no fear, and is, therefore, called the Highest. 

‘ Like the control of the other organs’ :—In the state of the Yataétma Yogi, when 
one sense has been controlled, the Yogi stands in need of further effort for controlling 
the remaining senses. Not so is there need of other effort to control the external 
senses, when the mind is restrained. This is the meaning.—55. 

Five objects have been treated in this chapter: The Kriy&é Yoga, the Afflictions, 
Fruitage of actions, the consequent Pain, and the four branches of the science of Sorrow. 

Here finishes the Gloss of Vachaspati on the second Chapter of the Commentary of 
Vy4sa on Pitanjali's Yoga Philosophy. The chapter describing ‘ The means of Yoga.’ 


ey gle 


CHAPTER THIRD. 
ON ATTAINMENTS (Visautis or Srpputs). 


Sitra 1. 


WAHT TAST VTUT th 2 i 


@eweu: (21), Degah-bandhah, fixity in one place. Steadfastness, frere 
Chittasya, of the mind, wee Dharand, concentration. 


1. Concentration is the steadfastness of the mind.—107. 

SH THT TATE ATTA | ATA THAT | SeraPayaTAeT ATCAT | 
aifram equgueds at sna aeart fig wtaaky tg aw 
at faa faaey shrarta aay eft arcar y 8 Il 


VYASA. 


The five external means of attainment have been described. Con- 
centration (Dhérana) is now discussed. ‘ Concentration is the steadfast- 
ness of the mind.’ Concentration means the mind becoming fast in such 
places as the sphere of the navel, the lotus of the heart, the light in the 
brain, the fore-part of the nose, the fore-part of the tongue, and such like 
parts of the body ; or by means of the modifications only in any other 
external object only.— 107. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Trance (Samédhi) and the means of its attainment have been described in the first 
and second chapters. In the third chapter are to be described the attainments which 
follow in their wake and which are the means of generating faith. The attainments are 
achieved by Samyama. Saumyama consists of concentration, meditation and trance to- 
gether. As means for the achievement of attainments, these three accessories are more 
intimate than the five external ones, and thus being internal, they are described here, 
in order that they may be specifically mastered. Among these too, concentration, 
meditation and trance are related to one another as cause and effect consecutively, and 
their order of causation is fixed. The order is respected here in the enumeration. 
Therefore concentration is described first. Thus the Bhfasyakéra says :— The five 
external means, etc.’ ‘ Concentration is the steadfastness of the mind.’ He enumerates 
the places for concentration in the body :—‘ The sphere of the navel, etc.’ ‘Such like 
parts of the body’ indicate the palate, &c. He describes the external objects :—‘ Or any 
other external object.’ It is not possible for the mind to come into relationship with 
the external objects bodily ; hence is it said : ‘ By means of the modifications only.’ 


On this subject also says the Purfna :-- 

“Having mastered the breath by means of controlling the processes of breathing, 
and having likewise subjected the senses to the mind by the practice of making their 
activity dependent upon the process of thought, he should let his mind rest upon some 
auspicious object.” The external auspicious objects are the Golden Footus (Hiranya- 
garbha), Indra and Prajipati, etc. 


Google 


180 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Further the following is said there :— 

“The personified appearance of the Lord leaves no room for the desire to possess 
any other object of concentration. The fact of the mind being held fast there is what 
is called concentration. And, O king, hear what that personified appearance of the Lord 
is that should be meditated upon; therecan be no concentration without something 
upon which the mind may rest. The face is cheerful and pleasing to the mind, the eyes 
are full of freshness and depth like lotus-loaves, the cheeks are beautiful, the forehead 
is bright and high, the ears are symmetrical and well-adorned by drops, the neck is 
long like the shell of a conch; the auspicious sign of fortune, the Srivatsa, marks his 
chest; with a deep navel and deep furrows appearing in the abdomen; with eight or 
four arms hanging from his body ; sitting with thighs and shanks evenly placed, and 
feet placed in the form ofa Svagtika, Such is the appearance of Vignu clad in clean 
yellow garb, adorned with beautiful head-dress, armlet, bracelet, etc. ; carrying his bow, 
the Saraga, his discus, his club, his sword, his conch-shell and his rosary of Rudraksa. 
He has become Brahma. With mind merged in Him, let the Yogi devote himself to 
meditating upon Him, Let him apply his mind to him so longas his concentration 
becomes well established, Practising this concentration or doing some other work in 
accordance with his own wishes, so longas the mind learns not to get away from the 
object of concentration, the Yogi should in that state consider his concentration 
achieved. —1. 

Sfitra 2. 


AA TAHA SATA NR A 


wa Tatra, there, 7 Pratyaya, of the mental effort, warm Ekatdnaté, conti- 
nuation, «rm Dhydnam, meditation. 


2. The continuation there of the mental-effort (to 
understand) is meditation (dhyana).—108. 


qT waAHAAa waa | afensat Warsamaey weqetwarar 
AM: TATE? AAAACANTTLNT ST SATA I 2 


VYASA. 

Meditation is the continuance, ?.e., the unchanging flow, of the 
mental effort to understand the object of meditation, untouched by any 
other effort of the understanding.—108. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 

The author describes the meditation which is brought about by concentration :— 
‘Continuance of the mental effort to understand it is meditation.’ Continuance of the 
mental effort means one-pointedness. The Commentary is easy. Here too says the 
Purana: ‘Meditation is the continuance of one-pointedness with reference to the 
effort of understanding directed to any object, there being absence of desire to under- 
stand anything else at the time. This is brought about, O King, by the foregoing 


accessories''—2. 
Sitra 3. 


qaaaaratrare eeeageaia AAhy: Wz 


we Tad, the same, «4 Eva, the same. w¥ Artha, object, the light of the object. 
am Matra, alone, fratey Nirbhasam, shining with, wea Svarfpa, itself. yay Sfinyam, 
devoid of, ¥4 Iva, as it were, efa; Samadhih, trance, contemplation. 


Go gle 


CH. IIT. ON ATTAINMENTS, 109, 110. 181 


3. The same when shining with the light of the 
object alone, and devoid, as-it-were, of itself, is trance (or 
contemplation, Samadhi).—109. 

atariarsrrara eraqgeatra aa: 1 erate drorarcaatky 
TITART wer waa wer wal saequraarear aarkuit- 
asad lt 2h 


VYASA. 

When on account of the object of contemplation taking entire 
possession of the mind, contemplation shows forth only the light of the 
form of the contemplated object, and is devoid, as it were, of its nature 
of self-cognition, then it is called trance (or contemplation). —109. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author describes trance which is brought about by meditation :— 

“The same when it shines by the light of the object alone, andis devoid, as it 
were of itself, is trance.” The Bh&syakfra explains :—‘ When on account of contempla- 
tion, etc.’ ; Shows forth only the form of the object of contemplation : ‘ Devoid, ete.’ 
Inasmuch as the question arises that if it is devoid of the nature of self-cognition, how 
can it illuminate the object, he adds:—‘ As it were.’ He mentions its cause :—‘ On 
account of the object of contemplation taking entire possession of the mind.’ 

The Purana has on this too : “ Trance is that in which the mind takes in the nature 
of the object of thought free from ‘ Fancy’ (kalpani), It is brought about by meditation.” 
Fancy (kalpand) consists in the perception of the act and the object of meditation as 
distinct from each other. The Trance-Cognition is free from this fancy. 

Having described the eight accessories of Yoga to Khandikya, Kusidhvaja thus 
summarized :—‘ The knower of the fieldis the employer of the means. The means ig 
knowledge, that is not intelligent. Having achieved the work of salvation, it has 
nothing of its duty left to do, and turns back.’—3. 


Satra 4. 


ATARA ATA: UW 2 i 


mary Trayam, the three, ea, Ekatra, together, #7: Samyamah, Samyama. 
4. The three together are Samyama.—110. 
FIAGA AAR: | ATADTLUTATAAATAT ATTA AAA | THfererarits itis 
araratht ean Kegqeat | Aaa waey ahaa Gara saa xy ey 
VYASA. 

These three together, concentration, meditation and trance are 
Samyama. The practice of all the three accessories with reference to one 
object of thought is Samyama. This word Samyama is a technical term 
of the science meant to denote the three.—110. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Inasmuch as the mention of concentration, meditation and trance, all three, each by 
its own separate name at every place, would be very lengthy, this aphorism is introduceg 


0 gle 


182 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


with the object of laying down a technical term for the sake of brevity :—‘ The three 
together are Samyama.’ The Bhasyakaéra explains:—‘ With reference to one object, 
etc.’ He removes the possible doubt that the word has the radical meaning of these 
three :—“ The word is a technical term, etc,” (The word Tantra in the original means- 
the science of Yoga. Hence‘ Tantrika’ meansa technical term of the science.) The 
province of Samyama is the ‘Three changes’ and such other places.—4, 


Satra 5. 


ASAT: WK A 
7 Tad, of that. waa Jayat, by the achievement. mm Prajiia, of the cognition, 
ara: Lokah, the visibility. 
5. By achievement thereof comes the visibility of the 
Cognition.—111. 
AMAARTASTH: | TA ATA TMCAATHITA A ATATSTAT AM TAT 
aaa fucatr vate aur aut aarisan Rance wafer ul & 4 
VYASA, 
By the achievement of this ‘Samyama’ comes the visibility of the 
Trance-Cognition. As Samyama becomes firmer and firmer so does the 
Trance-Cognition become more and more lucid.—1]1. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The author mentions the fruit of the practice for the achievement of Samyama :— 
‘By achievement thereof comes the visibility of the Cognition.’ Visibility consists in the 
maintenance of its flow free from impurity and unimpeded by any other effort of cog- 
nition. The Commentary is easy.—5. 


Satra 6, 


cer ytag fatrart u <u 


wa Tasya, its. wy Bhimisu, to the planes, regions. fafa: Viniyogah, 
application, 


6. Its application is to the planes.—112. 

vet airy rar: | acer Gane Rrengiataracng iret Rann | 
quaTacqhardaye Raga meng Gan sat ATTA PAeTET 
THSH LACT STINE BT anya wreaerntieg aA 
ae | MeATae aI TaN aT ATA Kaa writers Aer Tarar- 
POT: | HTL | TT MHA! Arta Att gaat Art Arnerada | Arsrareeg 
ania a arf cara Racial i & 


VYASA., 

When one plane has been conquered by Samyama, it is applied to 
the next immediately following. No one who has not conquered the 
lower plane, can jump over the plane immediately following, and then 
achieve Samyama with reference to the plane further off. And if this 


Google 


CH. It. ON ATTAINMENTS, 112, 118. 183 


Samyama cannot be achieved, how can the visibility of the Cognition 
come? For him, howexser, who has conquered the higher planes by 
making I¥wara the motive of all actions it is not proper to perform 
Samyama with reference to the lower planes, such as thought-reading, 
&c. Why? Because the object thereof has already been achieved by 
means other than this. As to which is the next immediate plane 
after a certain plane, itis the practice of Yoga alone that will teach 
this. How? Ithas been so said:—‘ The Yoga is to be known by the 
Yoga; the Yoga becomes manifest by the Yoga ; whoever is not confused, 
enjoys the Yoga for long by the Yoga.’—112. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

But whereto is this Samyama to be applied in order to achieve this fruit? For this 
reason the author says:-—‘Its application is to be to the planes.’ The Commentator 
specifies the planes. ‘When:one plane, &c.’ The application is to the unconquered 
plane immediately following the plane, that is, the mental state, which has been conquered. 

When the Indistinct Trance Cognition, having the gross world for its sphere, has 
been achieved by Samyama, the application of the Samyama is to be tothe yet uncon- 
quered Distinct Trance. When that has been conquered, the application is to be tu the 
Meditative Transformation, Similar is the application to the Ultra-meditative, 

For this very reason the Purina introduces the trance with reference to the subtle 
objeets, after she thought-transformation into gross objects has been achieved, and all the 
arms and ornaments have been put off one after the other:—‘ Then let the wise man 
meditate upon the form of the Lord as devoid of the conch, the club, the discus and the 
bow, calm and possessing only the rosary of Rudriksa, When concentration has become 
well-established hereupon, then let the Yogi meditate upom HIM as devoid of the orna- 
ments of head-dress, armlet, &c. Then should he devote himself to HIM as possessed of 
the limbs alone; and then should he think of himself as HISSELF. ‘Iam HE.’ Then 
should he devote himself to the thought of the ‘Iam’ alone. 

But then why is it that one conquers the higher plane only after having conquered the 
lower one? Why does he not conquer in the reverge order ? For this reason the Bhiasya- 
kara says :—‘ No one who has not conquercd the lower plane, &c.’ No one who starts to 
the Ganges from the Silihrada, reaches the Ganges without first reaching the Meghav4na. 

“For him who has conquered the higher planes by making idwara the motive of all 
actions, &c.” Why? Because the object, i.e., the conquest of the higher planes, has been 
achieved by another very proximate means, that is, devotion to God. When an object has 
been achicved, then the employment of a means for its achievement which does not intro- 
duce something new in the expected result, oversteps the propriety of the rule of practice. 

Well, let that be. But the sub-planes are known by authority. Their order, however, 
is not so known, How is that orderto be known? For this reason he says :—‘ As to 
which is the next, &c.’ When the preceding state of Yoga is conquered it becomes the 
cause of the knowledge of the nature and activity of the next. This isto be understood 
by seeing that the state is intended to be spoken of as being identical with the object of 


which the state is named. 
Sitra 7. 


TTA FT: 9 
wry Trayam, the three, wrcgy Antarahgam, forming an internal part more 
than, more intimate, via: Pairvebbyah, than the preceding. 


Google 


184 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


7. The three are more-intimate than-the-preceding.—113. 


TIAA THT | ATAAUN TAAL TIAA AAT ACT TANT: 

qaent aan: wae areas CRT NS A 
VYASA. 

The three, concentration, meditation and trance are more intimate 
means of the Cognitive Trance than the preceding five, the restraints, 
&c.—113. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


How is it that Samyama alone is to be employed in all places here and there, and not 
the other five, although both are the accessories of Yoga equally? For this reason the 
author says :—‘ The three are more intimate than the preceding ones.’ This three-fold 
means has the object to be achieved as its direct sphere of operation ; it is, therefore, 
called intimate, The restraints, &c., are not such ; they are, therefore, called non-intimate. 
This is the meaning.—7. 


Satra 8. 


aata ater freifser ic ui 


wy Tad, that. wi Api, even. sfyqyy Bahirafgam, the external part, non- 
intimate, fiwe Nribijasya, to the seedless. 


8. Even that is non-intimate to the seedless.—114. 
vate afte Peifred | aqeracge araara Pfseq area aftty¥ 
wate wEearazara arate iy ¢ tl 


VYASA. 
This intimate triad of means too becomes an external accessory of 


the seedless trance. Why? Because it comes into existence upon its 
cessation.—114. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


The triad of means is intimate only to the Cognitive Trance, not to the Ultra-Cogni- 
tive. The Ultra-Cognitive Trance being seedless, there is no similarity between the 
spheres of their operation and also because the seedless trance is born when the triad of 
means has long been under restraint, and the Cognitive Trance has reached its highest 
culmination, or which is the same thing, when the state of the higher desirelessness 
consisting as it does of the purity of knowledge, is reached. ‘ The triad of means, &c.’ 
‘Even that is non-intimate to the seedless.’ 


‘Intimacy ’ consists in having a common sphere of operation. Then, however, does 
not exist here. There is no immediate sequence here. What itis said that the non- 
intimate means of devotion to the Lord brings about that state and that therefore there 
is overlapping, it is meant that although the definition of the intimate overlaps, includ- 
ing as it does the means of devotion to the Lord, it does not possess the characteristic of 
following in immediate sequence and thus differs from the non-intimate. For this 
reason, in order to show that in the case of the Ultra-Cognitive the Samyama is rather 
a remote cause, it is said that it comes into existence upon the cessation thereof.—8. 


Google 


CH. it. | ON ATTAINMENTS, 115. 185 


syram Vyutthana, of outgoing. fraw Nirodha, of suppressing. dare: Sams- 
karayoh, of the potencies, wwa Abhibhava, the disappearance, mgwt Praédur- 
bhavau, and the appearance. fitw Nirodha, of the suppression. wv, Ksaya, with 
the moment, fer Chitta, of the mind. we: Anvayah, the conjunction. fe 
Nirodhha, of the suppression, suppressive. wera: Parin&mah, modification. 
9. The suppressive modification is the conjunction 
of the mind with the moment of suppression (nirodha), when 
the outgoing and suppressive potencies disappear and 


appear respectively.—115. 
au Prrafreerag ad gugeiaie stem fracitara: | at- 
aMtrTaeHAITA AAMT Mcrae Atravgitara: | STANT: 
rentaftreant 4 & cerararet xf cerahtrta Pear Airset wy 
Rreqaearknraagaia aeamdenakwadat Cad trent 
ardiad Praga Rrewatr ateca Rae sieraraitrs eenrcreaarer 
Rerrqturaera aenrcad Prats Mtrrearat eee y © hl 
VYASA. 

Change is of the very nature of the functioning of ‘ the qualities.’ 
What sort of change does, therefore, take place at the time of this function- 
ing in the moments of mental suppression ? ‘ The suppressive modification 
is the conjunction of the mind with the moment of suppression, when the 
outgoing and suppressive potencies disappear and appear respectively.’ 

The outgoing potencies are the characteristics of the mind. It is 
not that they are suppressed by the restraints of the acts of cognition, 
being of the nature of the acts of cognition, (as they are not of the nature 
of the acts of cognition). The potencies of suppression too are character- 
istics of the mind. The respective suppression and appearance of these 
two, when the characteristics of the outgoing potencies are destroyed and 
the potencies of suppression acquired, is the moment of suppression 
which the mind appears in conjunction with. This acquiring of different 
potencies by the one mind every moment is the suppressive change. 
In that state the potencies alone are left inthe mind. This has been 
described as the Suppressive Trance.—115. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The three changes are to be atilized in ‘By Samyama over the three changes, &c.' 


(P. Ill, 16). 
24 


Google 


186 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


— 


It is desirable to explain them. Hence the question in connection with the seedless 
trance mentioned in the last aphorism: ‘ What sort of a change, &c.’ In the states of out- 
going mental activity and trance (Cognitive), the heaping ap of different evident changes 
is a matter of direct knowledge. No change is, however, perceived in the Suppressive 
Trance. It is not, however, that it does not exist because it is not directly perceived, 
inasmuch as the mind is changeable on account of its being made up of the three qualities, 
and because it is impossible that the ‘qualities' should not change even fora moment, 
This is the meaning of the question. The aphorism is the answer to the question :— 
‘The suppressive change is the conjunction of the mind with the moment of suppression, 
when the outgoing and suppressive potencies appear and disappear respectively.’ 
In relation to the Ultra-Cognitive the ccngnitive too is an outgoing. Suppression is that 
by which this is suppressed,—the illumination of knowledge, the higher desirelessness. 
The disappearance and appearance (mentioned here) are of these outgoing and suppres- 
sive potencies respectively. This being the case, the disappearance of the outgoing and 
the appearance of the suppressive potency consists in the conjunction of the mind, the 
characterized, with the moment of suppression. This conjunction in time with the 
suppression is the conjunction with both these states. The mind as an individualized pheno- 
menon capable of possessing characteristics, does not, either in the Cognitive or the 
Ultra-Cognitive states, differ in nature from the states of the suppression and manifesta- 
tion of potencies. 

Well, but the afflictions following Nescience, which have their root in Nescience, 
are removed on the removal of Nescience, and do not after the removal of Nescience stand 
in need of any other effort distinct therefrom to remove them. In the same way, seeing 
that the potencies having their origin in the outgoing acts of the mind are removed 
by the removal of the outgoing activity itself, the potency of suppression should not be 
needed further for their removal. For this reason the Bhasyakara says :— The potencies 
of the outgoing, &c.’ It is not necessary that the effect should be removed by the mere 
removal of the cause. The cloth is not destroyed by the removal of the weaver. The 
fact is that the effect which is of the nature of the cause itself, is only removed upon 
the removal of that cause. 

The afflictions which have been described as following Nescience have been said to be 
of the nature of Nescience itself. It is, therefore, very proper that they should be removed 
on the removal of Nescience. It is not in this way that potencies are of the natare of 
the acts of Cognition; because it is seen that memory exists even though the acts of 
Cognition have been suppressed for a very long time. For this reason although the acts of 
Cognition may have ceased for a long time, it is necessary that the storage of potencies 
of suppression be attended to for the removal of the potencies originating in the acts. 
The rest is easy.—9. 


Sitra ro. 


TA TUFAATAT TEATTT Ngo 


we ‘lasva, its, wareafgar Prasanta-vahité, undisturbed (7erm) Flow (atfert) 
sesrma Samskarat, by potency. 


10. By potency comes its undisturbed flow.—116. 


Google 


CH. Iii. ON ATTAINMENTS, 116, 117. 187 


VYASA. 

Undisturbed flow comes to the mind by the deftness of practice in 
the generating of the mental potencies of suppression. In case the poten- 
cies are weak, the potency characterized by suppression is overpowered 
by the potency characterized by outgoing activity.—116. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 

Of what sort is the change of the mind brought about by means of the powerful 
suppressive tendency, when the potencies of outgoing activity have been altogether 
overpowered? In answer to the question the author says :—‘By potency comes its un- 
disturbed flow.’ 

‘““Undisturbed flow” means the flow in uninterrupted succession of the suppressive 
potencies alone, free from the impurity of the outgoing potencies. 

But then why does it stand in need of the deftness in generating potencies? Why 
not potency alone? For this reasen the Bh&isyakara says :—‘In case the potencies are 
weak, &c.’ The potencies referred to are those of suppression. Those however who read 
a ‘not’ before ‘overpowered,’ explain the potencies to be those of the outgoing activi- 
ties.—10. 


Satra i:. 


aawantada: aman Rear aarkrattara: een 


aatétr Sarvarthataé, of all pointedness. eam LEkagrata one pointedness, of 
these two. wa Kgaya, the destruction (of all pointedness), sa Udaya, the rise (of 
one pointedness) these two respectively of the previous two, frre Chittasya, of 
the mind, enfauftera: Samadhi-parinfmah, the trance modification. 

11. The trance modification of the mind is the des- 
truction and rise of all-pointedness and one-pointedness, 
respectively.—117. 

water aaah Bray aartraftorn: | awatter Area | 
aeprsrarty Rrra: | aarerarar: aaitatrara vers: | carmarar sata zrke- 
ata rer | atraeatergnd Prd ate Rraanarararaan: wranypararenaen- 
wget aardiaa a Praca aartraftara: 4 88 il 
VYASA. 

All-pointedness is a characteristic of the mind. One-pointedness is 
also a characteristic of the mind. The destruction of all-pointedness is its 
disappearance. The rise of one-pointedness is its appearance. The mind 
puts on both these characteristics. This mind then following along both 
these characteristics of destruction and manifestation which make its 
very nature, inclines towards contemplation. This is the trance modi- 
fication of the mind.—117. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now the author shows the state of the mental change towards Cognitive trance, 
‘The trance modification of the mind is the disappearance and rise of all-pointedness and 
one-pointedness respectively.’ 


(Go gle 


188 PATANJALIT’S YOGA. 


All-pointedness means distractedness. It cannot be destroyed; hence its destruc- 
tion is only its disappearance. Nothing which exists is destroyed. Rise is appearance. 
The disappearance and birth of the characteristics of all-pointedness and one-pointed- 
ness which are of the very nature of the mind, means that the disappearance is to be of 
all-pointedness, and the appearance is to be of one-pointedness. The mind following 
these too becomes inclined towards trance. The meaning is that it becomes qualified 
by the trance condition which is achieved gradually by the latter condition becoming 
the former.—11. 

Satra 12. 


aa: Fa: Meare Geamerat Maeranraaraeayay: ie Vw 


mm: ‘Tatah thence, y4: Punah, again. srenafatr Santa-uditau, the subsiding and 
rising, (arm) (afga) geemat Tulya-pratyayau, having similar, (a) Cognitive, acts. 
(ewe) freree Chittasya, of the mind, mental. ewan EkfgratA, of the one-pointedness, 
aftera: Parindmah, modification. 


12. Thence again comes the mental modification 
of one-pointedness, when the subsiding and rising cogni- 
tive acts are similar.—118. 

aa ga: orange qeameitt Rraetarmargitara: | awartatrerea 
qi: arr seteraed sha: watiragancgrad qaetareare- 
aot | a aad afiafraeternaraitarn 4 22 ht 

VYASA. 


Of him whose mind is inclined towards the trance modification, the 
former cognitive act subsides; and the later that rises is similar thereto. 
The mind inclined towards trance is common to both. The same hap- 
pens again and again up to the end of trance. 

This of course is the modification:of the one-pointedness of the 
mind which exists as an individualized unit independent of the charac- 
teristics. —118. 

VACHASPATI!’S GLOSS. 

‘Thence again comes the mental modification of one-pointedness, when subsiding 
aud cognitive acts are similar.’ 

Again, when trance having been achieved, the later state of trance becomes the 
former, the former subsides and the later cognitive trance modification arises. That is to 
say, one becomes the past and the other the present. When both these cognitive acts of 
him who has become inclined towards trance, become similar to each other, it becomes 
one-pointed. This shows the achievement of trance, and also of one-pointedness itself. 
The Bh&gyakara shows the limit :—‘ Up to the end of trance.’— 12. 


Siitra 13, 


Gat yaherag weTAaNTacaAATAT SATSATAT: Ul 


vay Etena, by this. a Bhiita, in the objective phenomena, «xy Indriyasu, 
and in the instrumental phenomena, wt Dharma, the characteristic quality. ew 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 19. 189 


Laksaya, the secondary quality, wren AvasthA, condition of all these three, sfterm: 
Parip4méah, the changes, =rerm: Vyakhyatéb, are described, 

13. By this are described the changes of charac- 
teristic (dharma), secondary quality (laksana), and con- 
dition (avasthaé) in the objective and instrumental pheno- 
mena.—119. 

aaa yahaty waeaarenatarn arena: | ata qataa Pre 
qhuaa wasaraereta yafqag wqitarar a 
aarat aaa | ay SqeMAA TATA ANAT ae Tate: 
war aarwaturaea | Perafeoauaticatig a | A wetaTaery 
mead saad fear sacaaakrarat ada sre: | wared eqatanir- 
atts Reisen | a atararranat seanat Rae: war sar 
Rrea ircatig a adaraaad tear wiernafernteanratraeata afer 
drseq TAA | A aaTTaadaranat watuat Age: | Te gaET cara 
qa auararaaanae wear wtaaafeerd adarreend afew ase 
SUMMA TAt ANAT aaisea feats | & atdararrarat want 
fone gaits ce gqaeratia 1 amaengitura: | Atraeg 
Rtrraearr sean wake Teer Aearseenrer xfs | TT waturaagenait- 
ures afar aa: ahtarar walat savaat wet: gitar, sauraracnr- 
enitr: aftura cara qaoetaraengitea: ard a away gugaaalersa | 
as @ TUTE | Tucan J vafaarcaga wararhafe | cara qahrag 
saatragfertrs: qitarar aizaer: | qeardaeaes ca afta afi<ase- 
arent f& wat afafaiaaaer wagre ogssad elas wea afaity adara- 
areareatararnagaaray warerneag walt a gq eae | gat gaa 
maa rear fran vray vata a qaairaureahi 1 wT 
are | watraar wat qdavaratimarg | qatqcdaendtaagatra: arewt- 
da oftada wercelt eaeie | raaare: | eA) WeRTaTRaITATagaet- 
ari aac Restrain | wtarae Parada | senha 


VaONIAA at | Tar yes THe feat wat aaearg Acar vader | 
aa cans ade adoawpreage: othe waters eff 
aeaq aftere: | qatat aaerararag | aft a waa wawAasty area a 
qaATAaAT Tareq wAaA | Te RH a res cenaeh | MTHS TRENT 
agararaiat | fra rarat saarat qratacat erat arfea aera: | maT 
g aaguienaey rar waafa | sa a aatfaaean qeatagenea age | 


(30 gle 


190 PATNJALI’S YOGA. 


ararara aah ae cadet Tanase | aM UTEta HRraqqranc 
aia a aaa: faq Fae arareaa aarama raha aq aw aca 
wa: | aa sawed + adit svar) ante smear’ often Fefaares 
afaareat anaret negadisuaa ofiticgae | rerenacat a enace: | 
ee aa Seach at arar 

Qreaa get a ert At | waeNaiuna Arzeaagte: afaga: | 
ae WIA SATA ARYAN TAs THANTT a Berke aqrarerat Bar 
aria aat aaa wat Gar Hgawarta cagq adafiinderararmererat 
@ Sized srstaf atate ssaa | ara are: | Hear Taras zorai 
frag Shasareg | ger aenamizaetest weqraat Worat RrareakrenRraraa 
feguriigaaaarst aera qorat Maraarkirat aRarancae fa | wta- 
aareta eet Rresrent care AraC ATaeTTATAT Tee: TCA TeTHTC AR I 
ASTHUSANS SAG erat adaraoad skrqara ee saaa: qitaaa | ar 
vaquuat stermaguanrenciterd afreere chr afransty aalercraren 
whet sauracaqeaean Ta weraitar A®araefita eh 1 cs war- 
atatsaty aati | at ca waeaaranitum afaaanatrrar cts 
aq aftara: aaraqhaamahigad | wr Aisa qicaratsafraey gered qa- 
TARTAN eavatreaes: scare ef 82 A 

VYASA 

It must be understood that by describing as above the changes of 
characteristic, secondary quality and condition with reference to the 
mind, the change of characteristic, the change of secondary quality and 
the change of condition with reference to the objective forms of matter 
and instruments of action and sensation have also been described. 

There, the disappearance and appearance of the characteristics of the 
outgoing activity and suppression were the modifications of characteristic 
(primary quality) in the characterized (the object as existing indepen- 
dently of the quality); also the modification of secondary quality. Sup- 
pression has three secondary qualities ; it is connected with three paths of 
being (adhva). 

Having given up the first path of being which consist of the 
secondary quality not yet manifested, it takes it up as a secondary quality 
existing in the present, although it has not thereby overstepped its 
primary quality. It is in this secondary quality which manifests in the 
present that its true nature is manifested. This is its second path of 
being. It isnot devoid of the past and the yet-unmanifested qualities 
(laksana). 

Similarly is the outgoing activity possessed of three secondary 
qualities and is connected with three paths of being. Having given up 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 191 


a eS Se 


the present secondary quality, but not having given up its characteristic, 
it puts it on as the second quality of the past. This is its third path 
of being, and it is not devoid of the secondary qualities of the future and 
the present. 

Similarly, inclining again to outward activity, it gives up the yet- 
unmanifested secondary quality; but not having given up its charac- 
teristic of existence as such, it gets on to it as the secondary quality of 
the present, where manifesting its true nature, it acts as such. This is 
its second path of being. And it is not devoid of the past and the future 
secondary qualities. 

Similarly, suppression again and outgoing activity again. 

Similar is the modification of condition. During moment of sup- 
pression, the suppressive potencies are being strengthened ; and the po- 
tencies of the ontgoing activities are being weakened. This is the 
modification of the conditions of the characteristics. 

Thus the objective changes by means of the characteristics ; the cha- 
racteristics possessed of three paths of being are changed by means of secon- 
-dary qualities ; the secondary qualities too are modified into conditions. 

Thus is it that the functioning of the “ qualities” is never devoid 
even for a moment of the changes of the characteristics, secondary quali- 
ties and conditions; and the functioning of the qualities consists in 
ceaseless activity. It has further been said that the cause of the activity 
of the ‘ qualities’ is their very nature. 

By this must be understood the three-fold change in the objective 
and instrumental phenomena, due to the conception of a distinction bet- 
ween the characteristic and the characterized. In reality, however, there is 
but one change, because the characteristic is the very being itself of the 
characterized ; and it is the change of the characterized alone that is 
detailed by means of the characteristic. It is only the characteristic 
present in the characterized object that changes states in the past, the 
present and future, the substance is not changed. Thus when a vessel of 
gold is broken to be made into something else, it is only the condition 
that changes, not the gold. 

Another says:—The characterized is nothing more than the charac- 
teristic, inasmuch as the reality of the former does not overstep the 
latter. If it were something co-existent, it would change as an indepen- 
dent existence only, simply changing into distinct anterior and posterior 
conditions. 

This is no defect. Why? Because constancy is not found therein. 
Thus the three worlds give up their individual appearances, because 


(Go gle 


192 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


eternity has been denied tothem. Yet they exist inthe case of disap- 
pearance also, because destruction has been denied to them. 


Further its subtlety is due to conjunctive existence; and it is not 
perceived on account of its subtlety. 


The change of secondary quality is the moving of the characteristic 
along the paths of being. The past characteristic joined to the past 
secondary quality, is not devoid of the future and the present secondary 
quality. 

Similarly, the present (characteristic) joined to the present secondary 
quality is not devoid of the past and the future secondary quality. Simi- 
larly, the future joined to the future secondary quality is not devoid of 
the present and past secondary qualities. For example, a man who 
is attached to one woman, does not hate all the others. 


Others find a fanlt in this change of secondary qualities. They 
say that all the qualities being in simultaneous existence, their paths of 
being must be confused, (and thus overlapping one another cannot be 
considered as distinct and different). 


This is thus met with. ‘That the characteristics do exist as such 
requires no proof. When there is such a thing asa characteristic, the 
differences of the secondary qualities also must be posited. It is not only 
in the present time that the characteristic characterizes. If it were so 
the mind would not possess the characteristic of attachment, seeing that 
attachment is not in manifestation at the time of anger. Further the three 
secondary qualities are not possible of existence in one individual simul- 
taneously. They may however appear in succession by virtue of the 
operation of their several causes. And so it has been said :—‘ The intensi- 
ties of nature and those of function are opposed to each other ; but the 
ordinary manifestations co-exist with the intense ones.’ Therefore, there is 
no confusion. For example, attachment being in the height of manifes- 
tation with reference to some object, it does not for that reason cease to 
exist with reference to all other objects. On the contrary it is then ordinari- 
ly in existence with reference to them. 

Similar is the case with the secondary qualities. It is not the 
characterized object that is posssessed of the three paths of being. Itis 
the characteristics that are possessed of the three paths. They may be 
visible or latent. Of these the visible ones assume different conditions, 
and are termed accordingly differently because the conditions are differ- 
ent and not the substance. This is in the same way as the figure of 1 
means ten in the place of ten, hundred in the place of hundred, and one in 


0 gle 


CH. IIT, ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 193 


the place of unity. Or again a woman, although one, is called a mother, 
a daughter and a sister. 

Some make the theory of change of condition defective as render- 
ing independent existence necessary. How? There being intervals be- 
tween the operations of the paths of being a characteristic is the future 
one, when it does not perform its function ; it is the present one when 
it does ; it has become the past when it has ceased to operate. 

Now the defect that the opponents find is that in this way, the 
characteristic and the characterized object, as also the secondary quality and 
the condition must necessarily be considered as independent existences. 

This is no defect. Why? On account of the variety due to the 
interaction of the ‘ qualities’ even in case of the ‘qualified’ being perma- 
nent. As the coming together of the indestructible qualities of sound, 
&c., is only a characteristic having a beginning and is destructible, so 
also is the undifferentiated phenomenal state of matter with a beginning, 
and is only a characteristic of the indestructible ‘qualities’ of Essentiali- 
ty, &c., and isas such destructible. It is for this reason that it is termed 
a ‘ Vikara,’ a product. Here is an illustration in this connection. Clay 
is an object possessed of characteristics. Its existence in the shape of a 
sod is a characteristic thereof. Given up this particular characteristic 
it ‘takes up another; and thus takes up another characteristic when it 
takes up the form of a jar. In the form of jar its secondary quality 
gives up its futurity and comes to possess the secondary quality as mani- 
fested in the present. It thus changes its secondary quality. The jar 
changes, showing comparative oldness and newness every moment. This 
is change of condition. 

Another characteristic taken up by the characterized substratum 
is but achange of condition. Of the characteristic too another secondary 
quality is a change of condition. It is, therefore, the change of one sub- 
stance only that is thus shown by differentiation. In this way this may 
be applied to other things also. Thus it is that the change of character- 
istic, secondary quality and condition do not overstep the being of the 
characterized substratum, and it is for this reason that there is but one 
change which runs through all these specializations thereof. 

Well what is this change? Change isthe manifestation of another 
characteristic on the removal of the previous characteristic ofa substance 
which remains constant.—119. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author classifies the changes of the objective and instrumental phenomena of 
matter, whose use will be described later, but whose occasion hag come now: —‘ By this 
25 


Go gle 


194 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


the changes of characteristic, secondary quality and condition in the objective and 
instrumental phenomena have been described.’ 


The Commentator explains :—‘ It must be understood, &c. The question is that it is 
the fact only of mental change that has been mentioned, not its modes in the shape of 
characteristic secondary quality and condition. How is it then that they are spoken 
of here over and above that ? For this reason he says:—‘ There the disappearance and 
appearance of the characteristics of outgoing and suppression, &ec.’ The brief meaning is 
that the words of characteristic, secondary quality and condition have no doubt not been 
used, but it is not that for that reason the changes themsclves of characteristic, secondary 
quality and condition have not been described. Thus in the aphorism :—‘ The suppressive 
modifications’ &c. (III. 9), the change of characteristic, is spoken of. 


Further he says that by showing this change of characteristic, the change of second- 
ary quality also in the characteristic taken as substratum indicated :—‘So also the 
change of secondary quality.’ 

Secondary quality stands for ‘Laksana.’ It means that by which something is indi- 
cated. This quality is due to difference in time. It is by time that a thing is given 
certain qualities by means of which it is diflerentiated from certain things standing in 
a different relationship to time. 

Suppression has three different secondary qualities. It is but another mode of say- 
ing that it is related tothree paths of being. The word ‘adhv4,’ path of being, implies 
time. 

“ Having given up the first path of being, which consists of the secondary quality 
not yet manifested,” 

The question arises, ‘Does this suppression, while giving up the first path of being, 
overstep the nature of the characteristic too in the same way as it gives up the path of 
being?’ The Commentator says that it docs not :—‘ Although it has not overstepped its 
primary quality too.’ 

It does not overstep its characteristic, but takes up the secondary quality as exist- 
ing in the present. The same suppression which had not manifested yet, has now come 
into present existence, not that suppression has become non-suppression. 

The meaning of the nature of a thing existing in the present is now described :—‘ It 
is in this secondary quality which manifests in the present that its true nature is mani- 
fested.’ 

‘True nature’ is that which performs the function proper to its existence as such. 

Manifestation means its essentialization as such. 

With reference to the yet unmanifested first path of being this is its second path of 
being. 

Well if it be so that it gives up the yet unmanifested path of being and takes up the 
present, and that having given up the present state, it will pass on to the past path of being, 
then, it necessarily follows that paths of being are subject to birth and destruction. This 
however is not proper, because nothing is born that exists not, nor is anything that 
exists destroyed. For this reason the Commentator says :—‘ And it is not devoid of the 
past and the yet unmanifested secondary quality, which go on existing in their generic 
unspecialized state. 

Having shown the secondary quality of the present existence of the yet unmanifested 
suppression, the Commentator now shows the third path of being, the passing’on to the 
past of the present outgoing activity :— 

“Similar is the outgoing activity, &e.” 

Well then does suppression alone exist in the yet unmanifested state, not outgoing 
activity ? The Commentator says No :— Similarly inclining again to outward activity, &c,' 


(Go gle 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 195 


This repeated manifestation of the outgoing activity is not the manifestation of 
any individual output thereof. It is a manifestation of the same class only. That which 
has passed cannot come back. 


“The manifestation of true nature is the essentialization of the object as possessing 
the capacity of performing its proper function.” 

It is this change of secondary quality thus described, which appears with reference 
to objects of the same class over and over again. For this reason the Commentator says :— 
‘Similarly, suppression again, &c.’ 

Now he describes the changes of condition which is indicated by the change of cha- 
racteristic :—‘ Similar is the modification, &c.’ 


The strength and weakness of the characteristics in their present path of being, are 
their conditions. The increase or decrease of weakness and strength every moment is 
the change of condition. 


He summarizes :—‘ This is the modification of the conditions of the characteristics.’ 
Now he determines the different relation of the different changes :—‘ Thus the object 
changes, &c.’ 


Is then this change of the ‘qualities’ only occasional ? He says No :—‘ Thus it is that 
the functioning of the qualities is never, &c.’ 

But then why is this change ever-existent ? He says:—‘ The functioning of the 
qualities consists in ceaseless activity.’ The word ‘and’ in this sentence means a cause, 

Functioning means action. But whence this functioning itself? He says :— It is 
of their very nature,’ ‘It has been said’ here in before, 

This three-fold change of the mind is taught by the author of the Aphorisms to be 
existing in the objective and instrumental phenomena of matter. He says: - ‘ By this 
must be understood, &c.’ 

‘This’ means the distinction between the characteristic and the characterized. 
When the distinction between the characteristic and the characterized is kept in sight, 
the physical elements of Ppithvi, &c., are the objects characterized, and the bodies of 
cow, &c., or the jar, &c., are the changes of the characteristic thereof. The forms which 
the characteristics put on in the past and the yet unmanifested and the present ones con- 
stitute the change of their secondary quality. When the cow, &c., have taken up the 
secondary qualities as existing in the present, their change of condition consists in their 
taking up the states of the newly-born calf, a little advanced in age, youth and old age. 
In the case of the jar, &c., too, their newness and oldness are their changes of condition. 

Similarly are the instrumental phenomena the characterized objects. The taking 
in of this or that blue, &c., is the change of characteristic of the sense of sight. The 
change of secondary quality consists in the assumption by the characteristic of the quali- 
ties due to the existence in the present, &c.,as such. The present sensation of a jewel, 
&c., may be distinct or indistinct. This is its change of condition. 

The change of the objective and instrumental phenomena is described, looking upon 
the characteristic, the secondary quality and condition as distinct from the characterized. 

Now the Commentator speaks of them when they are Jooked upon.as the same :—‘ In 
reality, however, there is but one change, &c.’ The word ‘ huwever’ turns away from the 
other view according to which the characteristic and the characterized are looked upon 
as distinct. Its reality is made known here, not that the nature of change is denied to 
the other. For what reason? Because the characteristic is the very being of the charac- 
terized.’ 

The question is that if the characteristic is only a modification of the characterized, 
how is it that people do not confuse the notions of the changes? For this reason he 


(30 gle 


196 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


says :—‘ And it is the change of the characterized alone that is detailed through the cha- 
racteristic.’ By the word ‘characteristic’ here are understood all the three things, 
namely, characteristic, secondary quality and condition. All this is the modification of 
the characterized alone by means of them. There is, therefore, but one change of the 
characteristic, &c., one not confused with the others, because there is no real distinction 
between them, the characterized objects themselves do not overlap ove another. 

The question arises that inasmuch as the characteristic and the characterized are 
not different from each other, and because the paths of being of the characteristic objects 
are different, the characteristic also must in this case behave as tke characterized 
object, on account of the characteristic and the characterized object being the same. 
For this reason he says :—‘ It is only the characteristic present in the characterized, &c.’ 

‘That changes states’:—The word ‘state’ here means a different arrangement of the 
thing, a different appearance. Thus when vessels of gold are styled differently as a Rucha- 
ka and Svastika, they differ only so far; not that the substance gold becomes not-gold. 
The reason is evident. They do not differ entirely. This will be stated further on. 

The Commentator brings forward the example of the Bauddha, who holds that the 
characteristic only is what exists :—“ Another says:—It is only the characteristics of 
the Ruchaka, &c., that are being thus born, which are the realities. There is no such 
thing as gold which might be looked upon as asubstance remaining the same smong more 
changes than one. If there be sucha thing as substance which remains constant even 
though the characteristics arc being changed, then that thing would be immutable like 
the power of consciousness. It would become an independent reality ; independent, that 
is to say, of the change which is of the very nature of the thing appearing to change. As 
the power of consciousness does not give up its nature even though the ‘qualities’ are 
constantly putting on different appearances, andis therefore independently eternal, so 
also would gold, &c., become independently eternal. This, however, is not desirable. 
Therefore the characteristic is not different from the characterized; the substance is 
not different from the qualities.” 

The Commentator refutes this argument :—‘This is no defect. Why? Because 
constancy is not found therein.’ 

We might admit this if we found that as a matter of fact the substance was constant 
in its so-called eternity like unto the power of consciousness. We, however, do not find 
this constancy of eternity. On the other hand the whole of this world, to say notbing 
of one substance only, is seen giving up its individual appearances ; the appearances, 
that is to say, that are meant to perform certain functions, 

How is this? On account of eternity being denied to them by the authority of 
reasoning. Ifa jar of earth did not give up its individuality of appearance, it would 
plainly be seen asa jar even whenit existed in the condition of a half-jar or in that of 
powdered clay, &c. ; and it would go on performing its function too all the same as before. 
Hence the three worlds are non-eternal. 

Well then let it be non-eternal alone, being practically quite non-existent as it is 
like the lotus of the sky, on account of its universality and the non-performance of any 
function. For this reason he says :—‘It exists in the case of non-appearance also, because 
destruction has been denied to it.’ 

The meaning is that it is not so very insignificant as to be altogether non-eternal 
and therefore to be classed as non-existent, Why? Because destruction has been denied 
to it by reason. 

Thus stands the reasoning :— 

That whichis non-existent is never visible and does not perform any function, as 
the lotus of the sky. 


Google 


CH. 11I. ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 197 


The three worlds, however, sometime have some functions and are visible. 

So are the following causes proving its existence to be mentioned. A thing is seen 
being born; characteristic secondary quality and conditions are ever found appearing 
therein. For this reason they are out of the category of such non-existent things as the 
lotus of the sky and the horns of a man. 

It is not, therefore, constant in its eternity, so that it may be classed with the in- 
dependent reality of consciousness, On the contrary it is only in a way eternal. This 
also proves that itis changeful. It is eternal in its change. 

By this it must be understood that in a piece of clay exist its effects the states of 
the jar, &c., which have not yet expressed themselves. Well, let that be. But if it exist 
even if removed, how is it that it is not perceived as before? For this reason the Com- 
mentator says:—‘It becomes subtle on account of conjunctive existence, that is, on 
account of its mergence into the casual state. It becomes unperceivable on account of its 
subtlety and is not, therefore, perceived.’ 

Having thus explained the change of characteristic the Commentator now explains 
the change of secondary qualities also as such secondary qualities. 

‘The change of secondary qualities, &c.’ 

The meaning is that each secondary quality is followed by others along with itself. 
The question is that inasmuch as at the time of conjunction with one secondary quality, 
the others ara not perceived, how can it be said that the others also are present along with 
it? For this reason the Commentator says:—‘For example, aman who is attached to 
one woman, &c.' The non-existence of perception does not disprove the existence of 
anything, proved to exist by other means of knowledge. The birth itself of a thing at 
different places is a reason for its existence. Nothing that exists not, can be born. As 
for example, the horn of a man. 

The Commentator states a defect suggested by another :—‘ Others find a fault in 
this change of secondary quality.’ If the past and the present, exist at the time when 
the present characteristic is in existence in the present, then the three paths of being 
must overlap one another. If, however, the paths come into being one after the other, 
then it comes to this that the non-existent comes into existence. This is the meaning. 

He refutes the argument :—‘ This is thus met with, &c.' The existence of tho 
characteristics in the present is only proved by perception. It also gives the knowledge 
of its existence in the past andin the future as related to the present. Itis plain that 
the non-existing does not come into existence and the cxisting is not destroyed. He 
says the same :—‘If it were so the mind would not possess, &c.’ The mind is found posses- 
sing the characteristic of attachment after the time of anger has passed away. If it be 
that attachment did not exist at the time of anger as capable of manifestation in the 
future, how could it be born? And if not born, how could it be perceived ? 


It may be so. Even then, however, how is it proved that paths of being do not 
overlap ? He gives the answer :—‘ Further the three secondary qualities, &c,’ The three 
secondary qualities are impossible of existence simultaneously. Where? In one mental 
modification. In succession, however, one of the qualities does come into manifestion 
by virtue of its manifesting cause. The ascertainment of the secondary qualities being: 
dependent upon the thing qualified thereby, it is along with the form of the thing 
qualified that the mind becomes possessed of the qualities, He quotes Pafichasikha 
Acharya on this very subject :—‘ And soit has been said, &c.’ This bas been explained 
before. He summarizes:—‘ Therefore there is, &c.’ On account of the contrary charac- 
teristics of manifestation and disappearance remaining merged in the cause, the paths 
of being do not overlap. He gives an illustration:—‘ For example, attachment to, &c.’ 
The knowledge of the existence of attachment with anger was explained before. Now, 


Google 


198 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


however, is explained the existence of relationship existing between attachment with 
respect to one object and attachment with reference to another. He applies the i)lustra- 
tion to the subject to be illustrated :—‘ Similar is the case with secondary qualities &c.’ 


The question is that inasmuch as identity can exist even though the identical 
object may not be perceived as such altogether, it follows that characteristic, secondary 
quality and condition being distinct phenomena, the characterized object which is nothing 
separate from them, should also be considered to be distinct from itself under each and 
every one of these varying states. He says that this view is not desirable, because it 
is contradicted by the perception of the identical substance remaining the same under all 
varying states. ‘It is not the characterized object that is possessed of the three paths 
of being,’ because the characteristics which are not distinct from it, are possessed of the 
three paths of being, The fact of the taking up of the three paths of being of the charac- 
teristics is further elucidated :—They are either visible, i. e., essential, present, or latent, 
that is not in esse. These are the past and the future. Ofthese, visible ones assume differ- 
ent states of strength and weakness, &¢,, and are termed accordingly differently, because 
the states are different, not the substance. By the word state are to be understood here 
all the three things, namely, characteristic, secondary quality and condition. This is the 
meaning It is only perception as such that establishes the distinction from, or the identity 
of the characterized object with the characteristic, the secondary quality or the condition. 
If there were unqualified identity between the characterized object and the characteristic, 
&c., then characteristics, &c., would no longer be what they are. They would not qualify, 
characterize and condition, as does not the very substance of the characterized object 
itself. Nor would they qualify the characterized object in case of unqualified distinction ; 
as the horse and the cow can in no way become the characteristic, secondary quality and 
condition, each of the other. Perception establishes that the characteristic and the 
secondary quality are neither totally distinct nor completely identical with the charac- 
terized object, and it also shows that the characteristics, &c., have all of them the proper- 
ties of appearance and disappearance, and that during these changes the object remains 
the same; andit also shows that the characteristics are not mutually exclusive. This is so 
perceived by every individual self. We follow this common perception, It is not com- 
petent to us to leave that aside and establish some theory of the perception of charac- 
teristics which may please ourselves. 

The Commentator gives on this very subject an illustration from the world : —‘ This 
is in the same way as figure of 1 &c.’ 

As the nature of unity remains the same, although with reference to its relative 
position it is styled as hundred, &c., so also the nature of the characterized object remains 
the same but it is styled differently on account of the differences brought about by the 
distinctions of distinct characteristics, secondary qualities and conditions. This is the 
meaning. 

He gives another illustration to elucidate the subject to be illustrated :—‘ Or again 
@ woman, although one, &c.’ 

In this connection he introduces the discussion of a defect considered as existing in 
this by others :—‘ Some make the theory of the change of conditions, &c.’ 

In the change of condition, i. ¢., the change of condition, of characteristic and secon- 
dary quality all the three, the defect of the imminence, of the independent existence 
of the characterized, the charactcristic, the secondary quality and the condition is point- 
ed out. 

He puts the questions :—How ? The answer is :—‘ There being intervals between the 
operations of the paths of being, &c.’ The existence of milk as suchin the present 
is the operation of the yet unmanifested path of being of curds, When onaccount of being 


Google 


CH, III ON ATTAINMENTS, 119, 120. 199 


intercepted thereby, the characteristic of changing into curds does not operate notwith- 
standing its presence in milk, then it is said to be yet unmanifested. When it does come 
into manifestation, it is said to be in present operation. When having achieved the 
change, it ceases from the operation of setting in the formation of curds, &c., then it is 
said to exist in the past. Thus the characterized, the characteristic, the secondary 
quality and condition existing as they do all of them in all the thrce times, must be recog- 
nized as independent existences. Eternity is but existence for ever. Further, there 
being existence for ever, all the four are never born. And this much and no more is 
the description of independent eternity (Katastha nityaté). The meaning is that the 
independent eternity of the power of consciousness too has no other speciality. 


He refutes the argument :—‘ This is no defect.’ Why ? On account of the variety 
due to the inter-action of the ‘qualities’ even in the case of the qualified Leing per- 
manent. Inter-action means the relation of overpowering and being overpowered by each 
other. The variety is of the inter-action. This is the meaning. Although the qualified and 
the qualities, all the four always exist, the eternity does not consist in being independent 
of phenomenal changes, because the nature of their change consists in the appearance and 
disappearance of their modifications, which modifications although brought about by the 
variety of the inter-action of the qualities, are of the very being of the thing modified. 


The power of consciousness, however, does not put forth any such modifications of its 
own being as periodical appearance and disappearance. Its eternity, therefore, is inde- 
pendent of phenomena] change. As they say :—‘ He whose nature is not destroyed, the 
wise call constant in eternity.’ 


Now he shows that the variety of inter-action is the cause of the variety of modifica- 
tion in the substratum (Prakriti) and the Vikaras, the phenomena thereof. As the coming 
together, which may be described as the change into Prithvi, &c, hasa beginning and is 
destructive, that is a disappearing characteristic only of sound, &c., i. e., of the five tan- 
mitras of sound, touch, form, taste and smell], which in relation to their effects are indes- 
tructible, i.e., do not pass into latency. 

He shows the same in the case of Park riti :—‘ So also the undifferentiated phenomenal 
state of matter, &e.’ That is termed a product. Not however subject to such changes 
is the power of consciousness. This is the substance. 


Having illustrated the Prakriti and the product (Vikriti), which are proved by 
philosophers, he new takes an illustration from the product itself well known in the world, 
in order to show the variety due to the inter-action of the qualities which is the cause 
of the changes of the characteristic, the secondary quality and condition: ‘ Here is an 
illustration of this connection, &c.’ 

It is not necessary that there should be change of condition in the case of secondary 
qualities only. The characteristic, the secondary quality and the condition are all im- 
plied here by the word condition (avastha) in the text. All, therefore, is a change of con- 
ditions, For this reason he says : —‘ Another characteristic taken up by an object, &¢e.' 

He gives the definition of Change (Parinama), which covers the whole connotation 
of the word :—‘ Change is the assumption by an existing object, &c.’—13, 


Siitra 14, 


areata wat een 


WA Santa, to the latent. sa Udita, to the rising. weaver Avyapadesya, the 
unpredicable, #4, Dharma, characteristics. aya Anupati, common, closely follow- 
ing. wit Dharmi, the object characterised. 


(Go gle 


200 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


14. “The object characterized” is that which is 
common to the latent, the rising and unpredicable charac- 
teristics.—120. 


ay | avatkarertenratgara ait | aeaaratee aire waste 
ah & a KetTaahagHaaRa THenasrenAes tes | aX TAT 
SANA TAIT WeRwaraasENags era | ast | ATAr- 
Ra aaa walt aa aftersrarscaratser fa Maa | az a ay 
arta eat: are shat werateareahe | ae Meat A Se AGTTaTITAT: 
SANNA SRA AANA TAUTT ATTA AAAAATAAT Waar: | 
SAVANNA AAT A waka eave: TaahaAara wearanry | TaranTaagaad- 
am qaqtanat tandaea cernaiaeata AAT: | TATATTT TT 
anarar aaa acaraeae | sereqatzar: & aa aataraiakr | wats | 
wegen: warts carey wate ee! Tat eracat RIG w- 
yaa wrathaas qrearqeata aa aatorafikr | THTSTHTC aT 
aa! A ay aATHTSATAATAnreHRe | a caeahrsraraharag qAe- 
sUa aravaarar Asa h wat | wer gq awaarTaas Meqd aeq Ara- 
we | weaeeta era Saea Hse ArH Aaa | AKT 
Wa Wage Wioaaenriia geqrahrerara farseat aat ar 
qa: Taerat | aerate saat Prerqahea 1 ee oy 

VYASA. 

Characteristic 13 the virtue (or power) of an object differentiated by 
fitness. The existence of this fit and proper virtue of an object is infer- 
red by the production of specific results thereof, as found to be of one 
sort in one and of another sort in another ‘object). Of these characteris- 
tics the present is that which is showing itself in operation ; and it differ- 
entiates between those that have become latent and those that are unpredi- 
cable yet. When, however, it coincides with the generic quality common 
to all these states, then it becomes of the very nature of the object alone ; 
then what is it in itself, and by what does it differ ? 

Now of the characteristics of an object that are either latent, rising or 
unpredicable, the latent are those that have been in operation and ceased. 
The rising characteristics are those that are in operation. They are imme- 
diate postcedents of the yet unmanifested secondary quality. Those that 
have passed are the postcedents of the present ones. Why are not the 
present ones the immediate consequents of the past ? On account of the 
absence of the relation of antecedence and postcedence (between the two). 
As the relation of antecedence and postcedence exists between the present 
and the future, not so between it and the past. It is not, therefore, the 


(Go gle 


CH. IIT. ON ATTAINMENTS, 120. 201 


immediate antecedent of the past. For this reason it is only the yet un- 
manifested that is the antecedent of the present. 

What then are the unpredicable ? All are of the nature of all. 
With regard to this it has been said :—The variety of all forms of juice, 
&c., due to the changes of earth and water, is seen in stationary objects. 
So also of the stationary in the self-moving and of the self-moving in 
the stationary. Thus all is of the nature of all without the destruction 
of species. This is subject to the limitations of time, space, form 
and disposing cause. ‘Their natures certaintly do not manifest simul- 
taneously. 


‘The characterized object’ is that constant nature thereof which 
remains common to all these manifested and unmanifested characteristics 
and which is the’ substratum of both the generic and the specific. In 
the case of him, however, to whom this is a characteristic only without 
a substratum, there must be absence of experience. How is it possible 
to adopt one cognition as the enjoyer of the action done by another ? 
Further there would be no memory thereof, because no one can remember 
what has been seen by another. Further a substratum common to chang- 
ing states does exist, because objects are called back to memory and 
recognized as such. It is this constant substratum that is identified 
as such even when it has taken up a different characteristic. For 


this reason it is not a mere characteristic, not common to different 
states.—120. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


The word ‘characteristics’ ig used here to denote characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition, because that is tha basic quality, Tho Commentator describes the 
characterized object which is subject to this three-fold change, by the aphorism :—“ The 
‘characterized object’ is that which is common to the latent, the rising and the unpredi- 
eable characteristics.’ The characterized object is that which is possessed of a character 
istic. It is not possible of being known without the characteristic being known. He 
explains the characteristic :—‘ Differentiated by fitness, &c.’ The characteristic is the 
virtue of a substance, such as clay, &c. That is the power of its producing a powder, 
a kneaded lamp, ajar, &c. All these exist therein in a state of latency (non-manifest- 
ation). 

If the characteristics exist in a state of latency in an object, they have to manifest 
themselves. But they co not manifest without the help of such adjuncts as water, &c. 
Water, &c., do not however exist in the causal states of the objects that are produced 
Whence thendo they come? For this reason he says :—'‘ Differentiated by fitness. 
The power producing jars, &c., is differentiated by the fitness (capacity) of being depen- 
dent for action upon the action of water, &c. Hence jars, &c., derive the capacity of 
being helped into manifestation by water, &c., from their causes themselves. They are 
not accidental. This is the meaning. 

Or, it might be that the words, “characterized by fitness” are an answer to the 
question. ‘What is a characteristic ?’ It is the virtue (power) of an object. ‘The 

26 


Google 


202 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


meaning is that it is their fitness alone that is the characteristic, Hence it is proved 
that the characterized object is what is possessed of that. He meutions authority for 
its existence :—‘The existence of this fit and proper virtue of an object is inferred by 
the production of specific results thereof, as found to be this or that, that is, the different 
appearances as powder, kneaded lump, a jar, &c. The meaning is that it is seen to be 
distinct in different objects by the observation of its effects, and the difference that is 
apparent in its effects. ‘ Found’ means observed. 


He now describes how a lump of kneaded clay which is perceived as existing in the 
present, differs from the state of its existence as powder which has now become latent 
and the state of its existence as a jar Which is yet unpredicable :—‘ Of these character- 
istics the present is that, &c.’ The meaning is that if they did not differ, the operations 
of the powder and the jar would also become similar to those of the kneaded lump, and 
overlapping be the result. 

He now says that the distinction described is not possible in the case of a lump 
which is yet in :the state of latency :—‘ When however it coincides with the generic 
quality, &c.’ What is it in itself and by what distinguishing trait should it differ ? 

Having thus described the distinguishirg traits 6f characteristics, he now divides 
them :—‘ Now of these characteristics of an object. &c.’ 

The rising characteristics are those that exist in the present. 

Now he explains the antccecdence and postcedence of the pathways of being :—‘ They 
are the immediate postecdents, &c.'’ He asks the reason :--Why are not the present 
ones the immediate consequents of the past? He states the reason :~-On account of 
the absence of the relation of antecedence and postcedence between the two. He 
explains the non-perception of a thing by the object in which it exists :—He also shows 
the non-perception of the existence by being the opposite of the perception thereof :— 
‘As the relation of antecedents and postcedence between the yet-unmanifested and | 
the present, &c.’ He summarizes:—For this reason the yct-unmanifested ig the only 
immediate antecedem of the present, because the yet-unmanifested precedes the 
present. The past cannot be the antecedent of the present. The present precedes the 
past and is therefore its antecedant, not unpredicable of it. Hence is it established 
that the past is the least important of the pathways of being. 

Well, let that be, Itis possible to distinguish the present and the past as being 
and having been perceived respectively. The unpredicable characteristics, however, 
from the very fact of their being unpredicable, are incapable of being distinguished. 
With this in mind he puts the question :—* What are then the unpredicables ? And in 
what objects are we to examine them?’ He answers the question:--‘ All are of the 
nature of all.’ With regard to this it has been said :—(He establishes the same). ‘ The 
variety of all forms of juice, &c., due to thechanges of earthand water, &c.’ The liquid 
is possessed of the soniferous, tangifcrous, luminiferous and gustiferous ultimate atoms, 
The earth (solid) is possessed of the soniferous, the tangiferous, the luminiferous, the 
gustiferous and the odoriferous ultimate atoms. A modification of all these is seen in 
the variety of all the forms of juice, &¢,, found in the roots, fruits, flowers, leaves, &c., of tree, 
creeper and cane-plant, &c. All these cannot be the modifications either of the solids 
or of the liquids different in nature from themselves. Ithas of course beeu shown that 
nothing can come out of nothing. 

Similarly the modifications of unmoving objects are seen in moving objects in the 
shape of a variety of chyle, &c. It is of course the uSe of these fruits, &c., that brings 
about the wealth of the variety of forms, &c. 

Similarly is seen the modification of animals into plants. It is well-known that 
pomegranates become as big as the fruits of Tala by obtaining a suck of blood. 


Google 


CH, II. ON ATTAINMENTS, 120, 121. 203 


He concludes :—‘ Thus all is of the nature of all, &c.’ Thus all, ie. liquid and 
solid, &c., is of the nature of all, i.e, juice, &c. He gives the reason thereof :--‘ Without 
destruction of species,’ The liquidity and solidity (earthiness), the generic qualities 
of these, are recognized as existing everywhere, and they are not therefore destroyed. 

Well, but if all this is of the nature of all, then everything being present every- 
where always and in all possible modes, even those results which do not exist simul- 
taneously should manifestatonece. For certainly, when all the necessary causes of an 
effect are present, it would not delay in its appearance, For this reason he says :— 
This is subject to the limitations of time, space, &c. Although everything can of course 
become the cause of everything, yet the operation of the cause is limited by space. 
Thus Kasmira (Cashmere) being the country of saffron, it will not grow in the Pdfichaéla 
country, even though the other causes of its growth were all present there. Hence 
saffron does not grow in the Pafichala and other countrics. 

Similarly there are no rains in the summer season ; therefore no growth of rice is 
possible in that season. Similarly a deer does not give birth toa man; the form of man 
cannot arise out of that ofa deer. Similarly, a man who is not virtuous, does not enjoy 
the nature of pleasure ; the disposing cause of virtue does not operatein him, Therefore 
it is that on account of the limitations of space, time, form and disposing cause, the 
nature, i.e., existing objects, are not produced simultaneously. 

Having thus divided the characteristics, he now describes the substratum as being 
common to all these states:—‘ The characterized object is that common, &c.’ The 
generic is the nature of the characterized, the substratum; and the specific is the 
characteristic. The substratum is of the nature of both these. This is the meaning. 

Having shown that the substratum, the characterized object, appearing in all the 
states thereof, is proved by direct knowledge, he now calls to mind the undesirable con- 
sequences of the theory of the Vainasika philosophers, who say that no independent 
substratum exists, and that tho mindis but a momentary act of cognition :—‘In the 
case however, &c.’ 

Further the object is called back to memory and recognized as such. Yajiiadatta 
does not call back to mind what has been seen by Devadatta. For this reason whoever has 
been the seer must be the recogniser.—14. 


Satra 15, 


SAIS WTA TS: UUN 


ma Krama, of succession. wars Anyatvam, the distinctness. twa Parinama, 
of modifications, wera Anyatve, for the distinctness. %3: Hetub, the reason. 


15. The distinctness of succession is the reason for 

the distinctness of modifications.— 121. 
mA Tura fa: | Gaea afia aa ce gitar eft caw: 
maraet Taras Rqaaaie | Tear qaer ase BAA: | 
M TET TATY ANAT AA A aca MA: | es: geaas Te sasraa chr 
TATRUTAHA: | SAUNTCUTABAT TSZCIAMTAATATAAATAMaA: HA? | TAT 
freseq adarrarargataara: RAT ATaTTEATA HT | HVAGaacarat aat 
AAAATA AT F UKAAA AEA GANA TATA: HA | Turgarqitara- 
MAIS TrEaMaAgTeT Meet FTIR FAIa | A aA augeyegafrar mAa- 
Raszarat wt aware ef | waeatonat a fRretsd ada: qitara 


(Go gle 


204 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


em | a at maraiahtart at stasrersa | atts wif aaeerrie- 
sareaate | zat gy acaraar afatnsterrarcearata @ cai fat aie: 
arava ma: ceraarad | ae ae adr aftesrearitesra | ax 
TASH: WREST Teq AMaTHT WITT BT ART warTgAaa oivaa- 
eqarsrergian | Atrrataence: ataratse arava | werakaca Maer 
aatearaafaar xfroq wa afta sareradardaey aguftaarinirre 
ere freq sofia n 24 fl 


VYASA, 


It then coming to this that there can be but one modification for 
one substratum, it is said that the distinctness of succession becomes the 
cause of the distinctness of modifications. This takes place as follows :— 
The order of causation is : the clay as powder, the clay kneaded into a 
lump, the clay appearing as a jar, the clay appearing as a half-jar, the 
clay appearing as a potsherd. 

The succession of a characteristic is that characteristic, which comes 
before it immediately. The kneaded lump of clay disappears and the jar 
appears in close sequence. This is the order of the sequence of the 
changes of the characteristic. The order of the change of secondary 
qualities is the sequential appearance of the present state of a jar out of 
its yet-unmanifested state of existence. Similarly is there a succession 
for the passing into its past state, of the present state of the kneaded lump 
of clay. There is no succession for the past. Why? Immediate sequence 
exists only. where there is a. relation of antecedence and _ postcedence. 
That does not exist in the case of the past. Hence succession exists in the 
case of two secondary qualities only. 


Such is also the succession in the case of the change of condition. A 
new jar begins to become old in immediate sequence of its appearance as 
anewone. This oldness is found being manifested in succession which 
follows the sequence of the moments of time, until it reaches the last 
stage. And this third change is distinct from the changes of characteris- 
tic and secondary quality. All these successions find their being in the 
conception of there being a distinction between the characteristic and the 
characterized object, because the characteristic also becomes sometimes 
the characterized, in its relation to the nature of another characteristic. 

When, however, the characterized object is spoken of as being what 
it really is, as not distinct from the characteristic, then by virtue of that 


conception, the objcct itself is described as a characteristic; and then the 
succession appears to be one only. 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 121. 205 


The characteristics of the mind are two-fold, the conscious (or patent 
Paridrista) and the unconscious (or latent, A-paridrista). Of these the 
patent are those that appear in consciousness as notions. The latent are 
those that are but the substance itself. They are seven only and it is 
by inference that their existence itself has been established. ‘Supres- 
sion, characterization, potentialization, constant change, physical life, 
movements, power are the characteristics of the mind, besides conscious- 
ness.’ 

Hereafter is introduced the subject of Samyama to be performed 
by a Yogi with the object of obtaining the knowledge of any desirable 
subject, when he has mastered all the means of obtaining knowledge as 


described, —121. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


‘The distinctness of succession is the reason for distinctness of modifications.’ Is 
one substratum subject only to one change , which may be described as characteristic, 
secondary quality, or condition, as the case may be ? Or, are the changes of characteristic, 
secondary quality and condition more than one? What does it come to then? It 
comes to this that the change must be one because the substratum isone. A cause 
which has but one form, cannot produce a variety of effects, because the variety in 
that case would be causeless. 

This being the suggestion, it is said:—Distinct changes are posited, because the 
orders of succession are different. 

Observers of the world have plainly observed that an order obtains in the suc- 
cession of the changes of one clay into dust, kneaded lump, jar, half-jar and sherds. It is 
also seen that the sequence between powdered clay and kneaded lump is independent of 
the sequence between kneaded clay and jar: the sequence between a jar and a half-jar is 
quite another. The sequence between a half-jar and pot-sherds is again quite different. 
In each of these one of the elements precedes another, The difference of order existing 
in one succession of changes establishes the distinctness of the changes. Although the 
substratum of clay is one, it puts on a succession of changes, whose order is established 
by allied characteristics appearing in succession to each other fn due order. The 
appearance is nut, therefore, causeless, This is the meaning. 

As is the case with the changes of characteristics, so also is the distinctness of the 
succession the reason for the distinctness of the changes of secondary qualities and 
the changes of condition. 

The same is illuminated by the Commentary :—‘It comes to this that there 
can be but one modification for one substratum, &c.’ 

‘The succession of characteristic, &c.’ :—The word ‘succession’ is used here to 
denote that which succeeds, looking upon the one to be nothing distinct from the other. 

‘Such is also the succession in the case of the change of condition.’ And so it 
happens that the barley grain, even though kept with great care by a cultivator ina 
grain-pit is, on the lapse of a large number of years, reduced to a condition, such that 
the cohesion of its particles gives way to the mere touch of hand, i.e., of being reduced to 
an atomic condition. This is not possible to take place all at once causelessly in the case. 
of new grain. It is, therefore, by a succession of different states appearing one after 
the other in moments of time as being small, smaller and smallest on the one side, and large, 
larger and largest on the other, that the specific condition appears. 


Google 


206 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


This distinctness of succession exists only in the case of distinctness being conceived 
as between the charateristic and the substratum. So he says :—‘ All these successions 
find their being, &c.’ 


The state of the characterized and the characteristic are relative down from the 
undifferentiated phenomenal to the products, and vice versa, inasmuch as the solids, 
clay, etc,, are also characteristics in correlation with the ultimate atoms (the tanmatras, 
or divine measures). So he says:—‘ The characteristic also sometimes becomes the 
characterized object in relation to the nature of another characteristic.’ 


When, however, the conception of the unity of the substratum and the characteristic 
is entertained with reference to the real substratum, the noumenal, i.e., when ‘by 
virtue of that conception,’ of the substratum being common to all its states, the charac- 
terized object itself is considered as the characteristic, then there is but one change, the 
change, that is to say, of the characterized object alone. Characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition enter then into the very being of the characterized. 


It is to be considered as having been said by this that the substratum is far 
removed from the state of constant independent eternity (Katastha nityata). 


Speaking of the change of characteristic, the Commentator takes up in the context, 
the distinctions of the modality of the charateristics *f the mind :—‘ The characteristics 
of the mind, &c.’ 

The conscious (patent) characteristics are those that come into our consciousness, of 
which we are conscious. The latent are those of which we have no direct knowledge. 
Those that appear, in consciousness as notions are the real cognitions, &c. Suppres- 
sion, etc., are those that are but the substance itself, This explains that they are not 
of the nature of illumination. 

Well, but if characteristics ure latent, they certainly do not exist at all. For this 
reason he says :—‘And it is by inference that their existence as substance itself is 
established.’ The knowledge that comes through authority is also spoken of here as 
inference by the similarity of their coming into existence after other knowledge. He 
mentions the seven characteristics by a verse :—‘Suppression, &c.' 

Suppression is the ultra-cognitive state of mental modifications. It is known by 
authority as well as by inference to be a state of residual potency. 

By the word ‘characterization’ the author suggests virtue and vice. The reading 
in some placesis ‘Karma’ (action) instead of ‘Dharma’ (characterization), There too 
virtue und vice caused by action are to be understood, Virtuous and vicioas tenden- 
cies of the mind (or, which is the same thing, good and bad character) are known by 
authority or inferred by the existence of pleasure and pain. 

Potentialization or the power which generates mental potencies, is inferred by 
memory. 

Similarly is the constant change of the mind in evolution inferred from the fact 
of the mind being made up of the three ‘qualities’ and of the function of the qualities 
being changeful. 

Similarly physical life, the specific action of the mind which sustains physical life, 
ig inferred as a characteristic of the unconscious mind by expiration and inspiration. 

Similarly are the movements of the mind, ie. the acts which set the different 
organs and parts of the body into motion, inferred by these very movements following 
thought in that direction. 

Similarly is power the subtle state of all the effects of thought which manifest in 
action (It is the idea of all actions). That this also as a characteristic of the mind, is 
inferred by seeing the gross appearances due to the mental images thereof.—15. 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 122. 207 


Sitra 16. 


ORUTAATAATATSaTaraT aT WEN 


uftera-ma Parindma-traya, the three fold change. #ma Samyamat by 
Samyama over. wa Atita, of the past. wma Andgata, of the future. sry Janam, 
knowledge. 


16. By Samyama over the three-fold change, comes 
the knowledge of the past and the future.-—122. 

qharasaaaagaanamamay | weenie aararenrat 
VINA AAITag a | WwTaNaaasasT BIA Teta wars 
aaikmaaMAaaaraaga ag araraafes it Le 


VYASA. 

By Samyama over the changes of characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition, comes to the Yogis the knowledge of the past and the 
future. The triad of concentration, meditation and trance together has 
been termed Samyam#, When direct knowledge of the three-fold change 
is obtained by means of Samyama, knowledge of their past and present 
is obtained.—122. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

‘Heneeforward up to the end of the chapter, the objects of Samyama and the attain- 
ments which indicate mastery over them, are discussed. Of these, the first object of the 
Samyama of a Yogi, familiar with:all the accessories of Yoga, that is introduced, is the 
triad of changes itself, whose modality has already been described :—‘ By Samyama over 
the threc-fold changes, comes the knowleage of the past and the future.’ 

The question is that inasmuch as direct knowledge is obtained only of the object 
with reference to which sumyama is performed, how is it that the Samyama on the triad 
of changes will become the cause of the direct knowledge of the past and the future ? 
For this reason the Comnentater says :—When direct knowledge of the three-fold change 
has been obtained hy means of Samyama, the knowledge of the past and the future, having 
as they do the relation of co-existence with these changes, is also brought about. The 
direct knowledge of the triad of changes itself, is the direct knowledge of the past and 
the present which it comprehends, The very essence of the one heing the essence of the 


other, the object of Samyama and direct knowledge are not different (in the aphorism). 
This is the meaning.—16. 


Sitra 17, 


USAT Y TA ATAT AA ATT AAS TRACT ATT TAT 
ATTAHAATTT 12 otk 


wq Sabda, the word. 4 Artha, the meaning, the object. sew Pratyaya the 
idea of all these. tac Itaretara, of each with the other. were Adhyasat, because 
of the coinciding. at: Samkarah, becoming one, appearing as one. #a Tat, their. 
wfra Pravibhaga, distinctions. rma Samyamét, by Samyama over. wf Sarva, all. 
wa Bhita, of living being. «a Ruta, of the sounds, sry Jiiinam, knowledge. 


Google 


208 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


17. The word, the object and the idea appear as one, 
because each coincides with the other ; by Samyama over 
their distinctions comes the knowledge of the sounds of all- 
living-beings.—123. 


traces gaa Masters wea seat Tat: ATTA STE TATAT TTT 
aad aaikraaateatser anrtrarctreastta: erenikaad ate 
aeatkr ahaha gaarafoonrr rer ara a we afarrat- 
AAA qrak asa agua | ath weanghereaasensararsa- 
mAAae taaisaaarientd qa sfatrngean aa tart 
UARGSATS: TaATaea wacararasecarentsgacayr SKyCAT 
Ramarirren satay ae aE Tg aa: MATT | TATA AAAS: 
sqaar qaarier atas ft agaeq werariintatacrenaag: azar: 
wa 1 asd meq: aisqaat asqak: And aq wratratacrarasg: 
aen wane | caaa qeaqrisea catacrearencegtal: | aaur Aith- 
creat Ariterat Artie art a oat sear: a waa 1 aaate arfer 
qTHTTNT a KH setter meee a at ograt earache | rar veer 
frareatit | an a qadiere aaareataraia Prrardiisgam: ql wce- 
want aftavgernh 1 ze" Saved oqcet siiRSTIA | 
Kraft sranearcake | aa area qquaruthreafaea: qa cRrasr ara 
Praratadh at HIcHaraeh At | WAT waepaisuray eerqarag Arareare- 
araaramerd Ka fmarat sree ar enfaaa | aat searserarat 
sftrarn: | rerun od aa sare ef Par: ata sree xfer TCH: | TST: 


qenrhiainaarn 4 were a afragnra: | Te er TY TET Aatac- 
aaa raardiswmengisxan sera eft frarn | ae aairarreraar- 
air adhyrerent aera xr Wt Lo il 

VYASA, 


Now the power of speech functions in the manifestation of literal 
sounds only. The auditory power is the substratum for the changes of 
sound alone. A word, however, is taken in by the will-to-know (buddhi, 


(Go gle 


CH. III, ON ATTAINMENTS, 128. 209 


understanding) all at once, having taken up a unified appearance just 
as the last literal sound ceases. Literal sounds, from the impossibility 
of being expressed simultaneously, have not the nature.of giving support 
to each other. They appear and disappear showing no connection with 
the particular word, nor bringing it into consciousness It is, therefore, 
said that each of them is not the word (itself). 

The letter, however, issingly a constituent of the word ; it has the 
potentiality of supplying a name for all objects ; it is, as it were, of 
universal application, inasmuch as it appears in combination with every 
conjoined letter, it takes different places in different combinations, some- 
times being placed before and sometimes after another letter. Thus 
there are many literal sounds, which being placed in different orders, 
help in denoting, by convention, certain dilferent sounds according to the 
difference in the order of their positions. For example, the literal sound 
of g, au, andh, possessed as they are of the potentiality of giving names 
to all objects, denote in this particular order (gauh) the particular object 
which is possessed of udders, &c., (a cow). 

A word is that single manifestation of consciousness, which 
appears just as the succession of literal sounds limited to a particular 
conventional meaning ceases; it is a conventional sign for the thing 
signified. 

Thus a single word is perceived as a single manifestation of con- 
sciousness ; it is brought into existence by a single effort ; it has no parts 
and no order ; it isnota whole of separate and distinct literal “sounds. It 
is a phenomenon of the will-to-be (buddhi) ; it is brought into conscious- 
ness by the operation of the notion of the last literal sound ; it is under- 
stood by the mind of the world, as having come into existence by conjunc- 
tion .of letters) on account of the eternal habit brought about by its ever 
having been with the help of literal sounds, separately named, uttered 
and heard, that the power of speech has functioned for the purpose of 
transferring the complete verbal thought signs from one mind to another. 
(And this being so), the ordinary mind distinguishes a word from another 
by conventional meaning, saying that such and such a succession of so 
many letters, 80 ending, denotes such and such an object. 

Convention, however, is a manifestation of memory showing the 
mutual correlation of word and meaning, in the shape of coincidence. 
‘This object is the same as this word, and this word is the same as this 
object’—such is the convention showing the one correlated to the other. 

Thus do word, meaning and idea run into each other on account 


of mutual correlation of coincidence. ‘lake, for example, the word cow 
27 


(Go gle 


210 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


the object cow and the idea cow. Whoever knows their distinction 
knows all. 

And in all words lies the power of asentence. If yousay “ A. tree,” 
the word ‘tis’ is understood, inasmuch as the object signified by a word 
never fails of existence. 

Similarly no action is possible without its means. Thus on pro- 
nouncing the word ‘ cooks,’ all the appliances necessary for the act of 
cooking are meant to be understood. It is only for the purpose of spe- 
cialization that the object, the subject and the instrument such as Chaitra, 
fire and rice are expressly mentioned. 

Then is also seen the combination of words in sentences for expres- 
sing meanings by the entire sentences. “Ihe Vedic student reads the 
hymns, lives, bears life.’ Ina sentence like this the words and the 
meanings of words are both expressed in consciousness. Hence should 
words be etymologically divided as expressing actions or nominal cases. 
Otherwise how would it be possible to construe a word, a noun or a verb, 
when one cannot be known from the other on account of external simi- 
larity. For example, take the words Bhavati, A’vah, Ajapayah. 

The words, the meaning and the idea of the sentence are distinct from 
each other. Thus svetate prdsadah (The mansion shines white) means an 
action. The words svetah prasadah (A white mansion), signify a noun. 

Both forms of speech denote both a noun and an affirmation of an 
action and also the meaning and the idea thereof. How? By the cor- 
relation, ‘this is that.’ The notion puts on but one appearance, the 
same as the conventional sign. As to the white object, it is the support for 
both the word and the idea. It changes its state, but goes neither with the 
word nor with the idea. Such is a word and such an idea; none goes with 
the other. Another is a word, another its meaning and another the 
idea. By performing Samyama in this way on their mutual distinction, a 
Yogi obtains knowledge of the sounds of all living beings.—123, 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


This is another subject for Samyama, here discussed :--‘The word, the object and 
the idea appear as one, because cach coincides with the other; by Samyama on their 
distinctions comes knuwledge of the sounds of all living beings.’ 

Here with the object of explaining the sound (verbal) which denotes a meaning, 
the commentator first mentions the province of the cperation of the power of speech 
(VAK) . Now the power of speech, Vik, manifests literal sounds in eight places. As it is 
said :—' There are eight seats of literal sounds, the chest, the throat, and the head, and 
also the root of the tongue, the teeth, the nose, the lips and the palate.’ 

This VAK, the power of speech, is purposed to operate in literal sounds only, such 
as they have come into existence by the recognition of the world. It does not operite 
to express the sign as such of a thing signified. This js the meaning. 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON ATTAINMENTS, 123. 211 


He ascertains the sphere of the operation of the power of hearing :—The auditory 
power, again, operates to change itself into the particular form of a literal sound, which 
is a distinct modification of the manifested inarticulate sound striking against the organs 
of speech. Its operation is limited to that much;it does not as such signify the thing 
signified. This is the meaning. 


He distinguishes the verbal sign signifying an object as such, from literal sounds as 
they have come into existence by the recognition of the world :—‘A word, however, (that 
is to say, the sign signifying a thing) is taken by the understanding all at once, having 
assumed a unified appearance, just as the last literal sound disappears.’ Each of the 
literal sounds is first taken in according as the sounds are familiar tothe world; and 
after they have been taken into the mind, they are brought together into a single mani- 
festation of consciousness, and thus asa sign signifying an object it is taken in by the 
understanding all at once. The single verbal sound ‘cow’ is a word, and is taken in as 
such by the understanding. Although each of the preceding sounds of component letters 
tends to bring into the field of consciousness the sound of the whole verbal sign, yet until 
the last literal sound is added to the sound-image that is being formed, the whole is not 
made distinct and clear. When the last litcral cognition has, however, come into operation, 
the entire sound-image constituting the word becomes clear. For this reason it is said 
that ‘a word is takenin by the understanding all at once, having assumed a unified 
appearance, just as the last literal sound ceases.’ 


‘Literal sounds from the impossibility, &c.’ This is said in reply to him who does no 
recognize on account of the distinctions obtaining among the different classes of letters, 
that words are taken in as entire single concepts all at once, but establishes on the 
contrary that the letters themselves singly have the power of signifying the object. 


It may be in one of two ways that the literal sounds may generate the mental 
impression of the signified object as each is being pronounced asa part of a complete 
word. They may carry the capacity of signifying the object, each of them, either as pegs 
which give support to a basket hung therefrom ; (Thus whenever the peg goes, the basket 
would go too) or, they may give support to the meaning as several stones placed together 
and made into a platform give support to a stool. 

The first theory does not hold. The pronouncement of one letter only does not carry 
the object to the wind, for if it did, the uttering of the other letters would be quite useless. 
When a work has been completed, the employment of an effort for its achievement, such as 
is not calculated to give the completed work any extra quality, would take the effort out 
of the category of the means of achievement. 

If this does not hold, the other remains. It is certainly possible inthis case, as was 
not possible in the case of many pogs placed separately, that stones placed together to 
make a single platform should hold a stool, because in this case the capacity of giving 
support to the stool is being employed at one and the same time. Letters, however, can- 
not all be pronounced simaltaneously, and for this reason they cannot carry the meaning to 
the mind even when brought together, because each of them does not take after the other, 
and the pronouncement of the one does not suggest the other. They do not attach to 
the form of one word only as if they were of its very nature. They, therefore, do not sug- 
gest the word, as each is being pronounced and passing into latency. Each maintains 
itself in separate and independent existence like a rod of steel. It is, therefore, said that 
each of them is not of the nature of a word. 

Inasmuch as this defect would not arise, if the letters forming parts of a word con- 
stituted as such the word itself, he says:—‘Each letter, however, singly is n necessary 
constituent of a word: it has the potentiality of supplying a name for all objects.’ All 
the potentialities of making all names are present in it. Thus the letter, G, is found to 


(Go gle 


212 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


exist in the words GAU, GANA, GAURA, NAGA, etc., which signify diflerent objects (a 
cow and others respectively). It has, therefore. the potency of supplying names for each 
and all of these objects. Similarly is the letter, O, found in the words, SOMA, SOCHI, 
ete., which means God and other things, and that too has, therefore, the capacity of 
naming a!l these objects. Similarly should it be understood everywhere else. Each of 
these letters G, etc., appears in combination with. i.e.,in contact with other conjoined 
Ictters, such as, O, ete. On account of there being such contact, it becomes, as it were, 
of univers:l application, i.¢c., cach of these letters becomes, at it were inany. and does 
not remain, as it is, one only. It does not of course, actually become many. Therefore 
the words, ‘as it were,’ have been added. The letter, of course, remains the same. 


The letter, G, placed before and the letter, O, placed thereafter distinguish the 
consequent sonorous impression frou the words GANA, etc Similarly docs the letter, 
O, placed aiter G, distinguish it from the words “OCHI, cte. A specific sonorous impres- 
sion is thus esta)lished in the mind asthe succession of litcral sounds appearing in the 
word ceases. This specific mental impression is the single image of the word, GAU, 
as manifested in the mind (Sphota). It is this sonorous image that denotes the specific 
quality of the species COW. 


This isthe meaning, Itis impossille that the notion of an object be caused by 
literal sounds on account of there being a fixed order of their succession ina word: 
because they do not come into existence simultaneously. Nor is it proper to hold that 
notwithstanding the order of the succession of literal sounds in a word being fixed they 
come together to manifest the notion ofan object by the operation of their residual 
potencies, in the same way as there is absence of antecedence and postcedence in the 
purificatory potencies brought about by oblations of combustibles, ectc.; orin the same 
way asthe heavenly state of existence is brought about. This isso, because option is 
inadmissible, 


Knowledge of an object is not, therefore, causcd by literal sounds. It is necessary 
that there should be perception of a single word as the means of calling it forth. 

This, however, is not the case with a word. A word is expresscd by sounds which 
differ frum each other in the effort which is put forth in pronouncing them (prayatna). 
These constituent sounds which goto furm this and that word, each differing from the 
other, are similar to each other in having their place of formation in the mouatb and the 
effort requisite for their pronouncement, always the saue. For this reason they make 
up a word similar to the others in some respect, although dissimilar in reality. The simi- 
larities here and there differ from each other by the difference caused by the relative 
positions of the letters, Itis by this complacement that words appear as posscssing 
different parts and composite natures, although in reality they are single and without 
parts. This happens inthe same way asa face possessing a constant tinge of colour 
and fixed features and dimensions show more reflections than one, each possessed of 
different colour, dimensions and features, when placed differently with respect to a mirror, 
a dagger and a jewel. The difference is not real. 

A verbal sign is single and partless. The letters are taken to be its parts by virtue 
of the difference of the contiguity of similar letters in different words. The difference 
of words being thus due to the conception of there being constituted by letters conceived 
as such a single and partless sonorous image (sphota). Having no distinctions in itself, 
it ig kept up in the mind, as it were, distinct and possessed of parts. It is for this reason 
that the specific sonvrous image of the word Gau is not determined by its part G, because 
therein it is similar to the sonorous images of such other words as GAURA, etc. It, 
however, determines the whole verbal image when qualified by the literal sound VU. Simi- 
larly the letter O is not competent to determine the single whole, the sonorous image of 


Go gle 


CH. I11. ON ATTAINMENTS, 128. 213 


the word GAU, on account of its similarity thercin with the words £OCHI, etc. It, however, 
does so, being qualified by the literal sound G. Although they do not co-exist, yet one 
can be qualified by the other by means of residual potencics coming to co-exist, And the 
two residual potencies have not different spheres of action, because two percepts of two 
different parts and the potencies born therefrom, have one word as the sphere of their 
operation. By the perception of the parts alone, the whole word is not manifested ; 
but it is manifested as tho succession of literal sounds ceases : and it should be added that 
the consciousness of the cessation of this succession manifests by virtue of the residual 
potencies of the perceptions of the different parts. It is a matter of observation 
that the past unmanifested impressions strengthen the present manifested impression 
by means of tho successive storage of their residual potencies. Thus the notion of the 
existence of a tree at a distance is at first dim, but by and by becomes distinct. It is not, 
however, possible that this may be the method of the literal sounds bringing about 
the perception of the object. Because the rule of dimness and clearness applies only to 
perceptive cognitions; and it is not by perceptions that literal sounds bring about the 
consciousness of an object. It cannot, of course, be that each of the constituent literal 
sounds of a word should produce an indistinct image of the objcet which becomes distinct 
only in the end. If the image is raised by the letters it must be quite distinct, Or, it 
may be said that it is never born at all. It can never be said that it remains indistinct 
and dim (asphata). The dissimilarity is that in the case of the scnorous image the distinct- 
ness and indistinctness are fancied after the perccptibility is established. Thus when 
the notion of the cessation of literal sounds takes its place in the mind through the audi- 
tory sense, along with the residual potencies left thercin by the perception of cach literal 
sound in succession, the literal sounds come together into the manifested sonorous image 
of a single word. This manifestation is brought about by a specific output of energy. 
The speciality of this energy depends upon the fixity of a particular order of the suc- 
cession of literal sounds. When, therefore, the order of the succession changes, the 
specific energy which is competent to bring about the particular verbal manifestation 
no longer exists, and the particular manifestation is not brought about. Literal sounds 
are thus limited to the expression of a particular mcaning by their dependence upon 
the order of their succession. They, thercfore, show the conventional limitation as it 
appears in the world, to be the sphere of the operation of a word having more parts 
than one. So many as two, three, four, five or six literal sounds possessing the power 
of naming all objects denote the particular object which is possessed of udders, &c.,, 
when they appear as G, AU and the aspirate H. 


Well, then, is it the letters alone which by virtue of distinct orders of succession 
denote an object? Is not a word independent of its constituent letters? For this reason 
he says :—‘ Thus a single word, &c.’ 

‘ The succession of literal sounds’ is the succession brought about by literal sound. 

‘The succession of literal sounds limited to a particular object ceases’: —Such are 
the letters of a word at the time when the successive pronouncement of the literal 
sounds is over. 

‘Manifestation of consciousness’ means the shining out of the Will-to-know (the 
buddhi) in the shape of a particular image. 

‘Limited to a particular conventional meaning’:—The literal sounds limited to a 
particular conventional meaning are, as has been said, the sounds of G, AU and H, in 
accordance with tho conceptions of superficial observers. The meaning is that G, &c., 
are also taken to be the signifiers of an object, being as they are the parts of a word and 
thus its necessary constituents. In reality, however, it is a single mental phenomenon 
which, as a word, signifies an object. He renders the same plainer :—‘ Thus a single word 


(Go gle 


214 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


is a single manifestation of consciousness, &c. All this related to it is understood by the 
mind of the world, &c.’ 


But why a single manifestation of consciousness? For this reason he says:—‘It is 
the object of a single effort of consciousness.’ A cow: This single word is the object of 
a single phenomennn of consciousness; it is, therefore, spoken of as a single manifestation. 

He mentions the cause of its manifestation :—‘It is brought into existence by a 
single effort.. The effort which manifests the word RASA is different from the effort 
which manifests the word SARA. And it is single, inasmuch as it is possessed of the 
quality of the individuality of the word RASA from the beginning, is differentiated by 
the fruit thereof, and has a determinate order of the antecedent and postcedent (literal 
sounds thereof). The different parts of the word which are understood to be existing 
as such hy differences in similarity and order of conti:guity, do not exist as such in reality, 
and a word is, therefore, said to be without parts. For this reason it has no order, because 
there is no existence in it of parts which may exist cither before or after each other. 

The question arises, that literal sounds appearing in order before and after one 
another in a word and being therefore its parts, how is it said ander the circumstances 
that a word has no order and no parts? For this reason he says :—‘It is not a whole 
made of separate and distinct literal sounds.’ Literal sounds are vot parts of a word; 
but by means of differences in similarity and order of contiguity, the word puts on of 
itself different forms «nd appears as it isin reality. The faces appearing in a jewel, a 
dagger, a mirror, &c., are not parts of the real face. ‘Jt is a manifestation of the Will-to- 
know (buddhi). This means that the collective appearance at the cessation ofa succession 
is known by the biddhi, is found in the buddhi, The operation of the notion of the Isast 
literal sound means the residual potency of the cognition of that sound. This residual 
potency when it is thrown in with the residual potencies of the cognitions of the pre- 
vious literal sounds, brings the whole word into consciousness, that is, renders it to the 
object of cognition. And it is shown below that the residual potencies left in the 
mind by the cognitions of sounds, coincide in space with the sphere of the word they 
make up. 

Well ; but if a word has no parts, no order and no constituent literal sounds, why 
does it never appear as such? A white crystal may appear to be red when besmeared 
with molten shellac ; but itis not that it will not appear pure white even when the 
colour has been removed. Literal sounds are, therefore, parts of a word. For this reason 
he says :—‘It is understood by the mind of the world, &c.’ Tho eternal functioning of the 
power of speech has gone on through the articulation into words of different literal 
sounds. This has been carried on with the help of literal sounds, separately named. 
uttered and heard by the hearers for the purpose of transferring them from one to other 
minds. Eternal habit is secured by the operation, . 

‘On account of eternal habit’ means that the mind which has preceived thus, is 
possessed of the habit thus acquired ; the habit, that is to say, of understanding the whole 
word as coloured by separate literal sounds. ‘As having come into existence’ (Siddhavat) 
means ‘ as it were, having a real and independent existence.’ 

By ‘conjunction of letters’ he means the speech of the older people which has always 
been so achieved. ‘Thus is the word known.’ The meaning is this. There is a certain appli- 
cation (up6dhi) which may cither be applied to anything or separated from it. Take for 
example lac or something similar. If it is separated from the crystal it shines out in 
its whlte purity. This is proper. As to the notion of a word, however, it ig never produc- 
ed except by a particular sound which is brought about by a particular effort. Further 
a word is always marred by similarity, and its notion is generated in the mind only as 
being made up of literal sounds. How then is it possible that a word may also be spoken 


Go gle 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 128. 215 


or known as pure and independent of literal sounds? As they say :—‘Sounds being 
similar in their nature becomes causes of wrong impressions. The cause of wrong im- 
pression takes them in as such; in the sight of those who know the word, it is fixed 
with reference to its means of production. This certain confusion in the world is but 
the contradiction of knowledge.’ Because the body of a word shows itself as always 
made up of articulated sounds; the world being superficial observers, believe that the 
literal sounds themselves are words; and they think that the literal sound only appear- 
ing in different combinations give different meanings. He says this :—‘ Distinguished by 
conventicnal meaning, ete,’ The meaning is that for the benefit of the ordinary mind to 
whom the real word is unknown as such, a word is divided into literal sounds by an act 
of the mind which is called convention. He describes the division into article sounds :— 
‘Of so many letters,’ neither more nor less. 


‘such and such a succession’ means one having a particular order of uninterrupted 
succession. ‘Succession so ending,’ is that which is taken in by a single act of the under- 
standing. He illustrates such and such an object:—‘Such as the generic quality of a 
cow, &c.’ 

‘Well ; out if convention means that a particular word is to denote a particular object, 
then there is no confusion between word and meaning. For this reason he says :—‘ Con- 
vention, however, &c.’ 

‘A manifestation of memory ':—The existence of this conventional relation is due to 
the function of memory. The convention which determines the meaning is not only this, 
that such and such a meaning has heen given to such and such a sound ; it is also that such 
and such a sound is remembered as correlated to such and such a meaning. This is the 
meaning, 

’ Whoever knows their distinction performs Samyama thereon and thereby knows 
all,’ that is, understands tho sounds of all living beings. The genitive case used, ‘their 
distinction’ is used only with reference to convention in which the forms are not distinct. 

A word has thus been established to bea single partless and jointless output of 
sound in which the literal sounds are only fancied to be articulations. Now he establishes 
that asentencc also is a single complete notion in the mind and that the words are simply 
fancied to be parts thereof. So he says :--‘ And inal] words lives the powor of a sentence.’ 
This is the explanation. A word is used to convey information to another, It is only what 
they are intended to convey that is conveyed to the other. The same is intended to be 
conveyed by them which is the ficld of any action, &c., with reference to them. It is not 
the object alone that is signified by them, but the entire meaning of asentence. All 
words are meant to complete the meaning of a complete sentence. Hence the same is their 
meaning. For this reason, where even a single word is used, even there the meaning is 
understood to be what it would be, if it were used together with another word. The whole 
meaning is not conveyed by one wordalone. Why? Because that such alone has not the 
power to convey the whole meaning. Therefore in such places it is the sentence alone 
that conveys the meaning not the separate words. Because however the words are parts 
of a sentence, they too have the power of denoting the meaning of a sentence, in the 
same way as literal sounds have the power of conveying the meaning of a word on 
account of appearing as articulations thereof. For this reason just as every literal 
sound is possessed of the power of forming all means, so every word also is as such 
possessed of the power of forming all sentences and thus denoting the meaning intended 
to be conveyed by all sentences. This is what is meant hy saying, ‘ And in all words 
lives the power of a sentence.’ When some one says, ‘A tree,’ it is understood, that a 
tree exists. The word, ‘tree,’ together with the word, ‘is,’ understood, give the mean- 
ing of a sentence, and hence the word, tree, exists as part of a sentence, 


Go gle 


216 PATANJALUS YOGA. 


But then how is it that the word, ‘is,’ is understood? For this reason he says :— 
‘The object signified by a word never fails of existence.’ In the world, words are the 
means of ascertaining the existence of objects; and a word, always joining the object 
signified to the word ‘is,’ everywhere gives the meaniug of a sentence. This is the 
meaning of an object never failing of existence. It is for this reason the practice of 
those who know the usage of words, that wherever there is no other verb, the word ‘is’ 
and ‘becomes ’ are to be considered understood, and arc to be supplied. 


Having described the nominal bases as never failing of a particular action he now 
shows that a particular-action never fails of a noun :—Thus on pronouncing the word 
‘Cooks’ the appropriate agents of the action signified are always understood. And the 
word excludes other inappropriate agents. It is thus that tho meaning of a sentence is 
differentiated. 

Similarly are words found existing in a sentence although they are not required 
there: and for this reason all the more is it that words possess the power of giving the | 
meaning of a sentence, For this reason he says :—‘ Then is also scen the combination 
of words in a sentence.’ Not even thus the words ‘ Vedic student, &c., used indepen- 
dently would convey such a meaning if they were not understood as conjoined to 
the words ‘is,’ &c. Thus the meaning is that this too has been fancied to be a part of a 
sentence. 

Let that be. But if the words themselvcs have the power of conveying the meaning 
of a sentence, there is no use of making sentences. The meaning intended to be conveyed 
by a sentence is conveyed by the words themselves. For this reason he says:—‘In a 
sentence like this, &c.’ It has been said that the meaning intended to be conveyed 
by a word is not conveyed by a word alone, until it is conjoined to another word 
understood. Hence are words separated from a _ sentence and fancied as separate from 
them; and hence also are words separated from the meaning of a sentence, and are 
distinguished as either verbs or nominal bases. Thus are words to be etymologically 
explained by introducing the divisions of cases. 

But then why should so much trouble be taken to explain them? For this reason 
he says :—‘ Otherwise how, etc.’ 

In the sentence GHATO BHAVATI, BHAVATi BHRISAM DEHI, BHAVATi 
TISTHATI, the nouns and verbs appear to be similar in external shape. The word 
BHAVATI in the first sentence isa verb and means ‘exists.’ In the o:her two sentences 
it is a noun and might be translated as ‘Your ladyship.’ 

Similarly in the sentences, Asvastvam and Ad4vas Ysti, the former Asvas is a 
verb and means ‘ be appeased.’ The second Asvas is a noun and means a horse. 

Similarly in the sentences, Ajipayah Piva and Maraydjapaya <hat-ran. In the 
former sentence it means the milk of a she-goat, and in the second it means ‘kill.’ 

Thus names and verbs being similar in external appearance, they would not be 
known as nouns and verbs if they were not to be separated from thesentence. How 
could they otherwise be explained as either verbs or nominal bases? Hence words 
should be separated from a sentence and explained. It is not that, merely by thus 
explaining words after having taken them out of the sentcnce, they would really become 
different in nature. 

Having thus ascertained the nature of words, he now begins the discussion of the 
absence of real confusion (sankara) among word, meaning and idea, upon which confusion 
has been fastened by convention:—‘These are the word, the meaning and the idea 
among which obtains a distinction.’ 

Thus, Svetate Prasadah, (white shines the mansion) means anaction. It is very 
plain here that the action of looking white which has to be established, comes first, 


Go gle 


OH, IIt. ON ATTAINMENTS, 123, 124. 217 
ee 


and then arises the consciousness of the purpose of the action having been established. 
The word ‘Sveta’ is a separate thing. Even where the word and meaning have their 
forms established, there exists a difference between word and meaning. He says this :— 
‘ Svetah Prag&dah iti’ (the place is white). The word here has the meaning of a noun. 
The absence of the case-ending is because the word is intended to express its own 
meaning. He divides the meaning :—‘These are words denoting botha noun and an 
action. The meaning of both these words is both of the nature of a noun and an action,’ 
He divides the idea :—‘ And also the meaning and the idea thereof.’ It is the word ‘CHA’ 
in the original which gives the meaning of the words, ‘the meaning of the idea thereof, ’ 
The relation shown here is with another object which is signified. 

The question is that if word, meaning and notion are known as single on account 
of confusion (sankara, coming together) whence does the distinction come? He puts 
the question with this object :—‘How?' He gives the answer :—'‘ By the correlation, 
this is that, &c.’ 

The meaning is that the cause of the notion of unity is the qualification of the 
convention; it is not real, however. The use of words ‘In the conventional sign’ in 
the locative case shows that convention is the cause thereof. He shows the reality :— 
‘And the white object, &c.’ The ‘states’ are newness and oldness. ‘Goes with’ means 
becomes confused. 

By performing Samyamain this way with reference to the distinctions of word, 
meaning and idea, the sounds of all animals, insects, &c., become distinctly intelligible to 
the Yogi. The Samyama performed with respect to the speech of man is equally performed 
with respect to their sounds also, inasmuch as both are of the sameclass. The Yogi knows 
their different sounds, their different meanings and their notions. Thus is it proved.—17. 


Sfitra 18, 


TTA ATRIA: USN 


went Samskdra, of residual potencies, arerewcera SAksat Karandt, by the 
bringing of into consciousness. w& Parva, of previous, ofa Jati, life: status, erry 
Jfiénam, knowledge. 

18. By bringing residual-potencies into conscious- 

ness, the knowledge of previous life-states (Jati) —124. 

ACHTAATHTANA aA | eA Aearat rene: | aargpaeerar 
araataa frarneaar waraaearet qaaarferenan: | aftarrreiatre- 
URAMAATATS TLE SANITARY AIA: ATHTaAAeNAA AAT | Aa 
darnramiraaarafaar aerafer arerencay | aheey = 
stfererrgerae Mira: | acartata TCA MCTOTAT ATA TATTT | TR 
qATSTA TAA | ATTA Hirer AERTATATEHLUNNY AeTaATg saint 
mA TETAT Pa aT MEO | WT WATATAATTT ATTRA | 
wag Aig vmenqahyagiaea ar acahraardenta grr 
amma taagag ge gaaaaa gages fairengreesate 
areraaaay Miner Sas | TNT ARTETTG WANGARATTA 
war acafrny ga aqua FaagVaag ga: quedaaaa afehiteg- 
qa aad gwag serait | arararaea sara | akqargaa: sara. 

28 


Google 


218 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


fa aavge Mitzal qaqa Pera 1 acvarr Mire 
vara | faagerenqayed aargayny | haeTTeETtaa Teas | 
qhrawerd waterufedaes set gard area et geweqgeqvarag: 
TMT VAATMANIAAAMN Hag HS TatraqgnAe nr hi 
VYASA. 


Residual potencies are two-fold,—those appearing as habits and 
causing memories and afflictions; and those appearing as virtue and 
vice and causing fruition. ‘These are the unconscious characteristics of 
the mind-change (parinima), activity (chesta), suppression (nirodha), 
ideation in action (Sakti), physical life (Jivana), characterization (dharma), 
now appearing along with them as they have been potentialized in 
previous births. Samyama over these has the power of achieving the 
direct knowledge of the residual potencies. And their direct knowledge 
isnot possible without the knowledge of space, time and operative 
cause. Thusisit that a Yogi brings into consciousness the previous 
life-states by obtaining direct knowledge of residual potencies. Similarly 
is obtained the knowledge of the life-states of others by obtaining direct 
knowledge of their residual potencies. 


The following story is heard in this connection :—Bhagavan Jai- 
gisavya obtained the knowledge of the distinction between the real and 
the unreal after he had seen the direct succession of live-changes during 
ten great creations by having obtained direct knowledge of his residual 
potencies. The holy Avatya, having takena body asked him: ‘You 
have lived and thereby become chastened through ten Great Kalpas. 
The essence of your Will-to-know has not been overpowered. You have 
experienced the troubles of life in hells, among animals and in wombs. 
You have been born again and again among men and gods. Have you 
through all this life experienced the greater quantity of pleasure or of 
pain,—which ? 

Jaigisava replied to Bhagavan Avatya:—‘I have lived through 
ten great creations. My mental essence has not been overpowered. 
I have experienced the troubles of hell and animal life. I have been born 
again and again among men and gods. I consider all that 1 have ex- 
perienced as pain only.’ 

Said the revered Avatya :—‘ This mastery of your reverence over the 
the First Cause and this invaluable joy of contentment of yours,—do you 
place these too to the credit of pain ? 

The revered Jaigisavya said-—‘ The joy of contentment is invalu- 
able only in comparison with the pleasures of sensation. Compared to 


Google 


Cd. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 125, 124. 219 


——ae 


the bliss of absolute freedom (Kaivalya) it is pain only. The possession 
of the three qualities is of the nature of the essence of the Will-to-know 
and whatever is possessed of the three qualities is thrown to the side of 
avoidable pain. The chain of desire is of the nature of pain. It has been 
said that when the anxiety of the pain of desire is removed, then comes 
joy, calm, undisturbed, all-embracing. ’—124. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The residual potencies born of cognitions are the causes of memories. The potencies 
of Nescienco, &c., are the causes of the fruition of the affictions of N escience, &c. Frui- 
tion has the form of life-state, life-experience and life-period. The causes have the forms 
of virtue and vice. 

‘Potentialized in previous births’:—Brought about their causes in previous life- 
states. The characteristics of the mind are change, activity, suppression, active ideation, 
physical life and characterization. Like them are those potentializations too unconscious. 
The characteristics have been heard about and inferred. Samyama performed over these 
along with their sub-heads has the power of producing the direct knowledge of both the 
residual potencies. 

Well; if this be so, the two residual potencies may be directly known. But how: 
can the previous life-states be known in this way? For this reason the Commentator 
says :—‘ And their direct knowledge is not possible without the knowledge of space, time 
and operative cause,’ Operative cause is the former body and the organs of the powers 
of sensation and action. The meaning is that the knowledge of the residual potencies 
together with the circumstances of their fruition, is not different at all from the direct 
knowledge of life-state, &c. Nowhe says that the Samyama over one’s own potencies 
applies to others also :— ‘Similarly is obtained the knowledge, &c.’ 

For the purpose of creating faith inthis he relates the story of the dialogue between 
the revered Avatya and Jaigigavya:—‘ The following story, &c.’ The great Kalpa is 
the Great Creation. 

‘Having taken a body’:—This’ means possessed of the glory of a Nirmankaya. 
‘Chastened ' denotes the state from which thedirt of Rajas and Tamas has been removed. 

‘ Mastery over the First Cause’ is godhead, It is by the possession of that, that he 
sets the Pradhana, the First Cause, into motion and gives to whomsoever he pleases such 
powers of body and sense as he wishes; and having made for himse.f thousands of bodies 
and powers he goes about as he pleases in heaven, midheaven and earth. 

Contentment is the destruction of desire, the characteristic of calmness of the 
essence of the Will-to-be. 

Satra 19 


TAT WRTAATAT 12 € 


sera Pratyayasya, of the notions. % Para, of other (minds). fn Chitta, of 
minds, eq Jiiénam, knowledge. 
19. Ofthe notions, the knowledge of other minds —125. 
TIA TRARY | TAT AAAI AANKUIAT | We 
MAA aaa TEATATENTATT | te Tet Srarargharareaa 
car a sata) qa seer aaiawa aattinaa araraarad 
quaqaast Ff Atrazine y Le 


Google 


220 PATANJALIT’S YOGA. 


VYASA. 


By Samyama over the notions and thus by obtaining the direct 
knowledge of the notions, comes the knowledge of other minds. But not 
of its object, that not being the direct object of the Yogi’s mind. He 
knows the mental emotion of love, but does not know the object of love. 
Because that which has been the object of the other man’s mind has not 
been the object of the Yogi’s mind. It is only the other’s mental state 
that has been the object of the Yogi’s Samyama. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Of the notions, the knowledge of other minds. 

Because the mind of the other only becomes directly known, the notion only is 
known. 

As the direct knowledge of the potencies brings about the knowledge of the previous 
life-states also, by causing the direct knowledge of the environments, so also it follows 
that when the mind of another is known, the object which is responsible for the existence 
of any particular state of the mind should also become known. This being the sugges- 
tion, the Commentator says: —‘ But not along with its object.’ The former Saryama 
was with reference to all the environments: this is with reference to the mind of the 
other only. This is the meaning. 


Satra 20. 
HASTGTATA MIM eT | AA THTMTATAT- 
AHSTAAT URoll 


wa Kaya, of the body. # Rapa, over the form. drama Samyamat, by Samyama. 

7 Tad, that (form). mm Grahya, capable of receiving (that), afi Sakti, the power. 

maoreeie ‘T'ad Grihya Sakti, Of perceptibility. er’ Stambhe, on the checking of, ww: 

Chaksuh, of the eye. waa Prakasa, with the light. wim’ Asamprayoge, there 
being no contact. weratvy Antardhanam, disappearance. 

20. By Samyama over the form of the body, on per- 

ceptibility being checked, and thus there being no-contact 


with the light of the eye, comes disappearance.—126. 


PACTATAT AMAA ACTH MATA | BITE BI 


Sa at sen Uneat okra | meraknaca ate aesrnra- 
aaaIMisardagead ara: | Tada eqralage Azarenyz y Ro 
VYASA. 


By Samyama over the form of the body, he checks the perceptibility 
of the form. On perceptibility being checked, and thus there no longer 
being contact with the light which carries it to the eye, disappearance 
of the Yogi is brought about. By this the cessation of the perception of 
sound, &c., must be understood as explained.—126. 


Go gle 


CH. III, ON ATTAINMENTS, 126, 127. 22] 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


“By Samyama over the form of the body, on perceptibility being checked, and thus 
there being no contact with the light of the eye, comes disap pearance.’ 

The body is made of the five tattvas. It becomes an object of perception to the eye 
on account of its possession of colour (for form). It is by colour that the body and its 
form becomes objects of perception. When the Yogi performs Samyama with reference 
to the form of the body, then is checked the operation of the perceptibility of colour, 
which is responsible for causing the ocular perception of the body. For this reason 
when the power of being porceived is checked, the Yogi is no longer visible. Thereby 
the light of sensation which is born in the eye of another, does not come into contact 
with the body that has disappeared. The meaning is that the body of the Yogi does not 
become the object of the other's knowledge. Disappearance is to be brought about when it 
is desired that the Yogi should not be seen by anybody. By this should also be under- 
stood another aphorism to the following effect: -By Samyama over the sounds, touches, 
tastes, smells of the body, their perceptibility being checked, there is no contact with 
the tympanun, skin, tongue and nose; and hence these disappear. 


Sotra 21. 
arama frend a HA aATATTAectatta- 
ARS FT AT UR 


grmry Sopakramam, fast in fruition. frewrry Nirupakramam, slow. «Cha, and, 

. wt Karma, action, Karma. #4 Tat, over these, 4a Samyamat, by Sarmyama. 

wma Apardnta, of death. my Janam, the knowledge. wftéa: Aristebhyah, by 
portents. a V4, or. 


21. Karma is either fast-in-fruition or slow; by 
Samyama over these comes knowledge of death; or, by 


arond Preumi a wa axraaaaraerate et at araftark 

ana faired Grand Reand a | ay aaa aw fared staat nea 
Bra AAT | aM Bata agahea Ra aypasgy Maqmagq | Wart 
a: BH Rat Fat aaa Aaa ge sive asa qtaa raaay 
aT at a wartreqaca wasqTaag aeaata cea Reva! 
tenn fart arand Reqnd a | aceraareqarde oz 

wa waaiteheat af = 6Pfrratearenertintantees a 
amtariark ari eave faikanat a osinfa stkrat AdsaeotT a qealt | 
arariranter pe ag fiaadiararrerneraca 1 rariterk 
wminnentagrar aa 1 att at aditerta ar arate 


yaterattaier lt 28 i 


The Karma which fructifies as life-period 1s two-fold, that which is 
fast-in-fruition and that which is slow-in-fruition. Thus, for example, 


VYASA. 


Google 


929 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


a wet piece of cloth, well spread, dries in ashort time. Similarly the 
fast-in-fruition. 


The same cloth when gathered up, however, will take a Jong time 
to dry. Similar is the slow-in-fruition. 


Further fire, thrown into dry hay and accompanied by wind in 
every direction, burns it inashort time; such is the fast-in-fruition. 
The same fire, however, applied to detached pieces of straw out of a heap, 
burns them in a very long time. Similarly the slow-in-fruition. 

Thus the one-birth Karma which is responsible for the period of 
life is two-fold, the fast-in-fruition and the slow-in-fruition. By Samyama 
over these comes the knowledge of death, the smaller end of life. 

‘Or, by the portents’:—A portent is three-fold :—Personal (Adh- 
yatmika), elemental (idhibhautika) and divine (adhidaivika). Of these, 
the personal:—He hears not the sound in his own body on stopping the 
passage of the cars. He sees not the light in the eyes on pressing them. 

And the elemental :—He sees the messengers of Yama. He sees 
suddenly and without thought the ancestors that have passed away. 

Similarly the divine :—He sees the heavenly worlds and the Siddhas 
suddenly. Or, he sees everything contrary to what he has been seeing 
the whole of his life. 


It is by these that a‘ Yogi may optionally know the proximity of 
death. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

‘Karma is either fast-in-fruition or slow; by Samyama over these comes the know- 
ledge of death; or, by portents.’ 

The Karma which fructifics into life-time is two-fold, the fast-in-fruition and the 
slow-in-fruition. The one-birth Karma certainly which is the cause of life-time, life-state 
and life-experience, fructifies into life-period. The fast-fructifying Karma is that which 
is going on fructifyiog without any reference to what time it may take to finish by causing 
experience, of which more hag been over and alittle only romaias, whose operation is 
going on but whose fruitage is impossible to enjoy during life by one body and which, 
therefore, delays the Yogi, keeping him in the bondage of births. 

The same when but a small portion of the fruit has been enjoyed and which is operat- 
ing to produce the remaining fruit with reference to the time that has been taken by 
the enjoyment of the past, works but slowly and, now and then, is slow to fructify. 

The Commentator rendcrs this plain by two illustrations :—‘ As for example.’ He 
gives an illustration to render the same plainer still :—‘ Or, as fire.’ 

The words ‘smaller end of life’ (aparanta) mean death with reference to the Great 
Latency which is the ultimate end. By Samyama over that Karma, thatis, over virtue 
and vice, accrues the knowledge of death. By this the Yogi knows his fast-fructifying 
Karma, and then makes many bodies for himself and thereby enjoys the fruit thereof as 
fast as he likes and dies whenever he pleases. 

He takes up the context :—‘ Or by portents.’ The indications are three-fold. They 
are called portents (arigtas), because they frighten like an enemy. 


Google 


CH, ITT. ON ATTAINMENTS, 127, 128. 223 


‘Or sees everything contrary, &e.’:—This excludes the trick of jugglers. But other- 
wise he begins to see heaven in villages and towns; he begins to see also that the world 
of men only is the world of gods. - 21. 

Satra 22. 


ban aN 
ASIST AAT URW 
fenfeq Maitri Adisu, over friendliness, &c, ae Balani, the powers. 


22. Over friendliness, &c , the powers.—128. 


fearkg ae | tirrengkate fet ara wag gfadg 
fat arakrear ast ad ua i efeag eat vrakrar Hema waa 1 que- 
seg ghat watren gard aut | ura aa: a aaaedt 
FAAAPAT ATA AAA | TITS _Iar ag arzar | casa aeat arfea aar- 


Pita a gaquaraearst AAATATATITT N22 I 
VYASA. 

Friendliness, compassion and complaisance are three feelings. Of 
these he gets the power of friendJiness by habituating the mind through 
conscious volition to sympathy towards happy beings. He gets the power 
of compassion by habituating the mind to compassion towards sufferers. 
He gets the power of complaisance by habituating the mind to com- 
plaisance towards the virtuous. By conscious habituating volition comes 
trance which is Samyama. Thereby are born the powers which know 
of no obstacle in their working. 

It is indifference that is practised towards the sinful, not conscious 
habitual volition. Hence there is no trance here; and hence by reason of 


there being no Samyama, there is no power of indifference.—128. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

‘Over friendliness, &c., the powers.’ By the performance of Samyama over friendli- 
ness, &¢., the powers of friendliness, &c., come to him. Of these the power which comes 
by the practice of the feeling of friendliness, is that by which he can make the whole 
living world happy, and hence becomes the well-wisher of all. 

Similarly, by the power of compassion he lifts suffering ercatures out of pain and the 
causes of pain. 

Similarly, by the power of complaisance he becomes just to all the world. 

Now the Commentator describes that the conscious practice of habituating volition 
is the cause of trance, as this will be of use further. 

‘By conscious habituating volition comes trance which is Samyama.’ 

Although Samyama means concentration, meditation and trance, and not only trance, 
still because trance is their immediate effect and is, therefore, the chief of the three, there- 
fore the word is used here as applying to the same. 

In some places the reading is — 

‘Coascious habituating volition is trance.’ There conscious habituating volition and 
trance would become the causes, i. e., the limbs of Sayama taken as whole. 

Power (virya) is effort. For this reason the man who possesses the power of friendli- 
ness, &c., puts forth an effort to render people happy, &c., and his effort is not checked. 


Google 


224 PATANJALTI'S YOGA. 


Indifference, however, means absence of effort. There can be no volition with respect to 
that; nor does there exist anything such as happiness, &c., which might thereby be 
brought into existence.—22. 

Stra 23. 


TAZ ERATTATAIPT URN 


“eq Balesu, over the powers. fa Hasti, elephants. s# Bala, power. wif 
Adini, and the others. 


23. Over the powers, the powers of elephant, &c.—129, 


aay ease | ehtaas danraaser walt | Aaaqas eanr- 
gaaaaer waly | aqss Aaarg~ayssr wawaraxaanhy i 22 ti 


VYASA. 


By Samyama with reference to the strength of an elephant he comes 
to possess the strength of an elephant. 
By Samyama over the power of the king of birds, one gets the 
power of the king of birds. 
By “amyama over the powers of Vayu, one gets the power of Vayu 
—129. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


‘Over the powers, the powers of elephant, &c. He gets the strength of whomsoever 
he performs Samyama over. —23. 
Satra 24. 


TTA MAA SASAa SAT H SATA 2 2 

warn Pravyittyah, of the higher sense-activity. @ra Loka, of the light. 
varera Nyasat, by the directing. yea Siksma, of the subtler. aafe Vyavahita, of 
the veiled. farag Viprakrista, of the remote. em Janam, the knowledge. 

24. The knowledge of the subtle, the veiled, the 
remote, by directing the light of higher sense-activity to- 
wards them.—130. 

Tw srararareaaakaaasweag | xteread sahreat 
aaaeeat 7 mMaraed Avit qed ar aed ar facwe ard ered aa. 
ARTS Nl Ve It 

VYASA. , 

The higher sense-activity of lucidity has been described. It is that 
higher sight which the Yogi’s mind directs towards the subtle, the veiled 
or the remote and thereby knows the object.—130. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Throwing that sight by Samyama over the subtle, the veiled and the remote, the 
Yogi thereby knows the object.—24, 


Go gle 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 181. 225 


Sotra 25. 


YAR TA BAA url 
yr-wrry Bhuvana-Jiidnam, the knowledge of the regions. g¥ Sirye, on the 
sun, swarm Samyamat, by Samyama. 
25. By Samyama on the sun, knowledge of the 
regions.—131. 


GIA AT Haag | astent: aaarararnaes maf aAegs 
ararera yale Fegerearea enaare aemesrerciaamtsatee4rs: | 
aac wate: qsafrar areesdia are | agi rarer aeate: 
forte svat: | aerat wasrnet arn: aaern et | sefenytesr Sts: 
TTA HET | ATE alter A are a eT CA GE 
ate | andrea Aer waa aaaisarretharnt- 
erase ARTHAS ARI STII: | TT TRAY 
airagedgan: mina: searpiiersaiter ae | AAT AETASTAT 
AMAT FAGAASASASIUA SATA AA WATSTey | A tle ARTA 
Aga ZR: Grane CAAUM:  HSAAMST Tiaaa ASH lee 
meer aa AMAT UT STITT TATA aret afgaare: ga qa: 


gaa: aca aft | PTTAARSTST afermar frargerarareqatg siti 
ents aqrairaatargenia etad fegqed aati 1 gqatr stata aar- 
mATeree AT: Maree: RYMTTMTATATTATA: FTW querray | ag: 
AMM AANAA SH garter ak anda Sqeq | Aaa WAKAITAT 
srqatrent Rrawa watnghrar eearaterat afeer | aera faaren ferar: 
TURP HATTA STAT HTACT: aa aqaiea aaqukra: aaa 
Ferada wgcaqualtetavedivenggnaragqyatatear = qwargaa4 
Srmrsreawaaatarn wardtaaaategaan: | ataea gaara: 
AMAT TA | ATS FT MITACATYTAIAT TaTH Wats eer | aT 
gas sei casey sakrerat quneadthacieiqueecmengasta- 
frararvencaratr squaagaisaan: waaarr | adg Atty 
genera Frage | qaeferreTgaTnye: | ae frat wee Gace 
qarcreregarane | Baal TTA | Gat Fay! fern wang | 1g 
AMAANTH WA Aer | agkigkataeiaarranen | gateway ge 
eferer Pe fraftaded | areerhranra: 8a sahara | Pea atv 
wrarmeghte wathaaraiaa: wthirrrcafaaie 1 8 at 


Google 


226 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


agate: | wwarpattee: ware arc: saat sreaks- 
gar semggericatih: gaaltarcn ae are svar qatar Tak- 
STA | BAST AAT AACA WSWATAT: AATITAT kere RENTTaR TAT SaTA- 
ERT KATES TT | TA maT wAas agar sare segufar 
METER TATA HTT AAT wart ele 1 a wafeaakren fase feean- 
auge: | fara age ore fia samara: | ara Berane: 
comrrer t i & qaitmasetrata frrwixagiracqe ad 
— aanies aia acameie TITRA aT aAaTA- 
| gaya wg: Basra aaqtt sarrarar wegM: RAT: 
a eereteret | wenravarea:: wafer sag aftferat: Tara 
afar arecantas: | amega: afanerage: gecritearar: afar 
AGA FIAT aA TEANAgET  sereercarhenararreaagen- 
ast sara ofiga i a ak andre: aad angan | Aeareta 
wareg Breaat aaee chr a araaer aren caraathtar anarenaitad | qq 
silaed catch en Gane aaunicee cen i 


ry 


VYASA, 
Their detail :—There are seven regions. Of these beginning from 
Avichi up to the back of the Meru, is the region called Bhur. 


Beginning from the back of the Meru up to the pole-star adorned 
with planets, asterisms and stars, is the starry region, the Antariksa. 


Beyond this is the region Svar, having five planes. The third is 
Mahendra ; the fourth is the Maharloka of the lords of creation ; after 
this is the three-fold Brahma region. These are the Janaloka, the Tapoloka 
and the Satyaloka. 


‘ First comes the triple plane 
Of Brahm4’s region high ; 
Creation's lords have then 
Their region ; and then, 
Cometh Indra’s region— 
Know all these as Heaven ; 
Then come the stars above, 
And the last cometh Bhur.’ 


This verse puts all these together. 

Then up to the Avichi, one placed above the other, are the six great 
hells, the Mah&kala (1), the Ambariga (2), the Raurava (3), the Mahérau- 
rava (4), the Kalasdtra (5), and the Andhatamisra (6), in which are the 
excesses of earth, air, fire, akada, and darkness respectively. Here are 
born beings who are to suffer from the consequences of their stored 
up Karma. 


Go gle 


CH. IIT. ON ATTAINMENTS, 181. 227 


Then are the seven Patdlas, the nether worlds, Sutala, Vitala, Tala- 
tala, Mahatala, Rasitala, Atala and Patala. 

The eighth is this earth, having seven dvipas and known as Va- 
sumati. In the middle thereof is the golden king of mountains, the 
Sumeru. Its peaks are of silver, coral, crystal, gold and pearl. Here, 
blue like the leaf of the blue lotus, on account of the sheen of the emerald, 
is the southern region of the heavens ; the eastern is white, the western 
bright, and the northern yellow. 

And on its right side is the Jambu (tree), whence is this called the 
Jambudvipa. Its night and day take their round of existence from 
the motion of the sun. 

This has three northern mountain chains having blue and white 
peaks. Their length is 2,000 yojanas. Surrounded by these mountains 
are three continents, 9,000 yojanas each. They are Ramanaka, Hiranmaya, 
and Uttarakuru. 

To the south are the three mountatn chains, Niséda, Hemakdata, 
and Hemasrifga, 2,000 yojanas in extension each. Among these are 
continents, Harivarsa, Kimpurusa and Bharata. The eastern regions 
of Sumeru are bounded by Bhadraéda and Malayavat, the western by 
Ketumala and Gandhamédana. 

In the middle is the continent of [lavrita. All this is one hundred 
thousand yojanas of Sumeru, each side being. half that dimension. 

It is to be knownthat this Jambudvipa is 100,000 yojanas in di- 
mension. It issurrounded by double its extent of salt ocean. 

Each twice as large as the preceding one are the other dvipas : Saka, 
Kuga, Kraufcha, Silmala, Gomedha, and Puskara. So are the seven 
oceans. There are beautiful mountains looking like mustard seed. The 
seven oceans which surround these like bracelets, taste as sugar-cane, 
wine, clarified butter, curds, gruel and milk (besides the salt one). They 
reach up to the real horizon. They measure fifty crores of yojanas 
(500,000,000). All this is well arranged in the sphere of phenomenal 
world. 

Here then in the Patalas, the oceans and the mountains are the habi- 
tations of the elementals. The asuras, gandharvas, the kinnaras, yakgas, 
raksasas, bhittas, pretas, pisdchas, apasmarakas, apsaras, brahmardék- 
gasas, kugmdndas, and vindyakas, live there. 

In the dvipas live good men and gods. Sumera is the garden of 
the gods. The gardens are Midravana Nandana, Chaitraratha, and 
Sumanasa. Sudharmé is the council of the gods. Sudargana is their 
city ; Vaijayanta their palace. 


Google 


228 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Above the Sumeru is the astral region, in which the planets, aster- 
isms and stars move round the pole-star, carried on in their courses by 
certain motive forces (Vayus). 

In the Mahendraloka live six classes of devas, the tridadas, agnisvat- 
tis, yamyas, tusitas, aparanirmitavasavartinas, and parinirmitavasavarti- 
nas. All of them have the power of fulfilment of desires by mere thoughts, 
and are possessed of the attainments known Anima, &c. Their life-times 
are measured by a Kalpa. They are very beautiful. They enjoy their desires. 
Their bodies come into existence without parents, by the mere force of 
their good actions. They have good and obedient nymphs in their families. 

In the great Préjépatya regions there are five descriptions of gods ; 
Kumudas, Ribhus, Pratardanas, Afijanabhas, and Prachitabhas. They 
have the Mababhftas in their power. Contemplation is their food. They 
live on for a thousand Kalpas. 

In the the first sphere of Brahma, the Janaloka, there are four classes of 
gods, the Brahmapurohitas, the Brahmakayikas, the Brahmamahakayikas, 
and the Amaras. They have power over the elements and the powers of 
sensation and action. Each lives twice as long as the preceding one. 

In the second, the Tapoloka, there are three classes of gods, the 
Abhiasvaras, the Mahaibhdsvaras, and the Satyamahdsvaras. They have 
power over the source of elements and powers, the tanmitras. Each 
lives twice as long as the preceding one. 

All of them are nourished by contemplation. Their knowledge is 
not checked in the region above them. There is nothing which is hidden 
from them on the lower planes. 

In the third sphere of Brahma, the Satyaloka, live four classes of 
gods, the Achyutas, the Suddhanivasa, the Satyibhas and the Samjiiasam)- 
finas. They donot build habitations. They live in themselves, one 
above the other. They have their power over the Malaprakyiti. They 
live on till the end of creations. Ofthese, the Achyutas enjoy the bliss of 
the Indistinctive trance (savitarka samadhi); the Suddhanivasas enjoy 
the bliss of the Meditative trance. The Satyabhis revel in pure bliss, 
(Ananda). The Samjifsamjfiinas are happy in the Egoistic trance. They 
live within the three regions (triloki). 

These are the seven regions including the Brahmalokas. The Vi- 
dehas and the Pakritilayas have reached the state of quasi-freedom, they 
have therefore not been placed in the phenomenal world. 

All this, the yet unseen, the Yogi must see by performing Samyama 
over the solar entrance and thence over the connected objects. Let him 
practise until all becomes clear.—131. 


(50 gle 


CH. II. ON ATTAINMENTS, 181. 229 


VACHASPATI’'S GLOSS, 

‘ Knowledge of the regions by Samyama over the sun.’ 

First, the Commentator describes the seven regions briefly up to the end of the verse 
which puts them together. Then he takes up in detailed description :—‘Then up from 
Avichi, etc.’ The word ‘ghana’ is used for Prithivi (earth). These great regions are to 
bo understood as having many sub-divisions. He gives their other names:—‘ The Maha- 
kala, &c.' ‘Its night and day take their round of existence from the motion of the sun.’ 
Whichever portion the sun‘ leaves, there is night. Whichever the sun adorns there Is 
day. 

He gives the dimensions of the whole of the Jambudvipa. This is a hundred thou- 
sand yojanas. How is this hundred thousand arranged ? Half of it, that is Afty thousand, 
is placed on either side of the Meru. Itis forthis reason that the Meru is the middle 
thereof. The oceans are twice each. They are like heaps of mustard seed, As the 
heap of mustard seed is neither above the ground like a heap of barley, nor yet level 
with the surface of the earth, so are theoceans also. They are adorned by mountains 
as with ornaments. Such are the dvipas. All this sphere of the earth is very well arrang- 
ed in the body of Brahmi's Egg together with the seven dvipas and all its forests and 
mountains, cities, oceans, which surround it like a necklace. 

Now he shows who live there in different places :--‘ Here then in the Pftalas, &c.’ 

He mentions the arrangement of the Sumeru :—‘Sumeru is the garden of the gods.’ 

Having described the Bhurloka with its various details, he now describes the An- 
tarikgaloka as well with details :—‘ Above the Sumeru is the astral region, &c.’ 

‘Operation of motive forces,’ means the working of the forces. 

He describes the heaven world :—-‘ In the Mahendra loka, &c.’ 

‘ Clagses of gods’ means species of gods. He describes the highest of powers of all 
the six :—‘ All of them have the power of fulfilment, &c.’ Desirable objects come to them 
by the mere force of wishing for them. They are very beautiful, adorable. ‘They enjoy 
their desires :’ This means that they are fond of the sex-passion. 

He describes the Maharloka :—‘In the great, &c.’ ‘They have the Mah&bhitas in 
their power.’ Whatever they like, the Mahfibhitas supply them with. The Mah&bhitas 
take this and that form in obedience to and in accordance with their wishes. 

‘Contemplation is their food ':—They are satisfied by mere contemplation and grow 
thereby. 

He describes the Janaloka :—‘ In the first of the Brahmalokas, &c.’ ‘ They have power 
over the elements and the powers of sensation, &c.’ The elements are the Prithvi, &. 
The powers are the senses of hearing, &c. Howsoever they desire to employ these, they 
do so employ them. 

Following the order of the above description he now takes up the second region of 
Brahm :-—‘In the second, &c., they have power over the source, &c.’ The source is the 
five tanmatras. They have power over them. The Agamis say that by their wish the 
tanmftras take the form of any body they desire. 

‘Each lives twice as much as the preceding one’:—The Mah&bhasvaras have twice 
the limit of the age of the Abhdsvaras ; the Satyamah&svaras have double their age. 
This is the meaning. 

‘Their knowledge is not checked in the region above them’:—‘ Above’ means in the 
Satyaloka. From the Avichi up to the Tapaloka whatever is there of the subtle and 
remote, they know. 

He describes the third region of Brahma, the Satyaloka:—‘In the third sphere of 
Brahm4, &c.’ ‘They do not build habitations, houses.’ Because they have no place where 
to support themselves, they live in themselves independent of any support in space, 


(Go gle 


230 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


They have power over the Malaprakpiti. The three qualities, the Sattva, the Rajas and 
the Tamas, function in accordance with their wishes. They live up to the end of creation. 
And so it is heard:—Having reached the performance of a function similar to that of 
Brahm, their spirits are prepared for that, and they accordingly reach the highest state. 

Having described the generic function of the gods, he now takes their names and 
describes the specific functions of each :—‘Of these the Achyutas, &c.’ The gods named 
Achyutas derive their happiness by the contemplation of gross objects. They are satis- 
fied thereby. The gods known as Suddhanivasinas find happiness in the contemplation 
of subtle objects ; they are pleased thereby. The gods named SatyAbhas derive happiness 
from the contemplation of the objects of the senses. The Samjiiasamjiiinas derive their 
happiness from the contemplation of egoism alone, and are pleased thereby. All these 
take up the Cognitive trance, 

Why are the performers of the ultra-cognitive trance, the Videhas and the Prakriti- 
layas, not placed within the lokas ? Those whose Will-to-be is attive and shows objects 
to the Purusa, carry on the evolution of the universe and are, therefore, within the world. 
Not so the Videhas and the Prakritilayas, even though their minds have stil] their duty 
to fulfil. Allthis up to the Satyaloka and down to the Avichi, the Yogi should know 
in the solar entrance, i. e., the tube called Susumna. 

Even by this much all is not known. For this reason he says :—‘ And thence on other 
objects besides the Sugsumn&, wherever the teacher of Yoga points out, until all this 
world becomes visible.’ 

The essence of the Will-to-know is by its very nature possessed of the power of illu- 
minating the universe. Being however covered by darkness it illuminates only those 
regions from which the cover is removed by Rajas. When the solar entrance is uncovered, 
the regions are illuminated. This rule does not apply elsewhere. The Samyama per 
formed elsewhere has only the power of unveiling as much of the Buddhic essence, as the 
Samyama is performed with reference to. Thus all is plain.—25. 


Sitra 26. 


~“ 
eT AST TAAT Wa 
wg Chandre, on the mcon. ara Térd, of the stars, starry. ae Vyiha, of the 
systems. wry Janam, the knowledge. 


26. On the moon, the knowledge of the starry 
systems.—132. 
GY ATMA | Te Sa HAT aTTrUt |e Hrwretarey Vs A 
VYASA. 


Let him know the starry systems by performing Samyama with refer- 
ence to the moon.—132. 


Sdtra 27. 
. 
TT ATMA UR 


a% Dhruve, on the pole-star. 74 Tad, of their, Wt Gati, movement. wry 
Jiianam, the knowledge. 
27. On the pole-star the knowledge of their move- 


ments.+--133. 


Google 


CH. Ii. ON ATTAINMENTS, 134, 135, 186. 231 


wa amPreraq | cat wa eat seat arerat af Pravtrarey | swea- 
fararag aan Heat att atatratg UV tl 
VYASA. 
Then let him know the movements of the stars by performing Sam- 
yama. with reference to the pole-star.-—133. 
Siitra 28. 


ART AASTTATAT UWAcit 


am Nabhi, of the navel. w Chakre, on the plexus. ara Kaya, of the body. 
we Vyfiha, of the system. wy Jfidnam, the knowledge. 


28. On the plexus of the nevel, the knowledge 
of the system of the body.—13¢4. 
wPram areata! Aran Gat Fear sree Krarrare | 
ara fragecAraet at Stat: | wae aa det ni Masini Wada 
get qeraeat arenes Rreare: Re I 
VYASA. 

Let him know the system of the body by performing Samyama over 
the plexus of the navel. There are three humours, gas, bile and phlegm. 
There are seven substances, skin, blood, muscle, tendon, bone, fat and 
semen. ‘The previous in order among these is external to the next follow- 
ing. Such is their comparative position.—134. 

Satra 29. 


HUSHI BAMA: URE 


wes Kantha, of the throat. g% Kipe, in the pit. yq Kgut, of hunger. fare 
Pipasad, thirst. fief: Nivyittib, the subdual. 


29. In the pit of the throat, subdual of hunger 
and thirst.—135. 
eroRe aerate: | Rigrar meareraegqedterencnsedtse- 
AUR TEAT ATATATTMS A TAS 1 VE, 
VYASA. 
Below the tongue is the throat; below that the gullet ; below that 
the pit (stomach). By Samyama there, hunger and thirst tease not.—-135. 
Satra 30. 


great KA U3 ot 


gireay Kfirma-nadyam, tortoise tube, @44 Sthairyam, steadiness. 
30. On the tortoise tube (kurmanddi), steadiness.—136. 


Google 


232 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


great ela | Kapa Se Fatarer are seat Sacra: faced 
waa | azar aagt Arar Ae it Ro 9 
VYASA, 
Below the throat pit in the chest is a tube of the shape of a tortoise. 
By performance over that, the Yogt gets firmness of position as that of 
snake, alligator, &c. (4.e., the power of hibernation).—136. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

26, 27, 28, 29 and 30. 

Whatever the Yogi wishes to cnow, he must perform Samyama with reference to that. 
Thus Samyama tending to bring about the cessation of hunger and thirst and steadiness 
have been taught by the words of the aphorism and have been explained by the words of 
the Commentary already explained.—s0. 


Siitra 31. 


asatfafe Rraatry uae h 


4 Murdha, of the head, the coronal. eafafa Jyotisi, on the light fag Siddha, 

of the perfected ones, gvay Darganam, the vision, 
31. In the coronal light, vision of the Perfected- 
Ones.—137. 
AN e e bd 
pasate Rrerqaaq | Are: suasater waeat sitfrest daa 
® © 
ear Rrarat arangfierteacaaritai eta y ak tl 
VYASA, 

In the skull there is a bright light in the hole. By Samyama there- 
upon comes vision of the perfected ones, the Siddhas, moving in space 
between earth and heaven.—137. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


By the word ‘ coronal’ the Sugumné tube is indicated. The Samyama is to be there.—81,. 


Sitra 32. 


STATET AAT NAAN 


mferg Prati had, by prescience. a Va,or. se Sarvam, all. 
32. Or, all knowledge by prescience (pratibha).—138. 


sift aa | ord ava arch afgtenrer erter qdaa | at 
qa vat arencer Fa at aaaa atari arit ortae|r eraeareqareae Waar 
VYASA. 
Prescience is also named Taraka. It is the fore-runner of discrimi- 
native knowledge, as light is the fore-runner of the sun at sunrise. The 
‘Yogi may also know everything by that, (as an alternative means) after 
the birth of knowledge, called prescience.—138. 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 188, 189, 140. 233 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Pr&tibha, prescience, is the same as self-suggestion (Uha), the coming into conscious- 
ness without external aid of anything unknown. When Samyama is performed with the 
object of attaining the Highest Intellection, then at the time of the height of practice, 
there'takes its rise a power which, as it were, draws in all knowledge. The Yogi knows 
everything by that. It is called Taraka, (from tri to swim, to cross over), because by 


bringing about the Highest Intellection it helps in crossing over the world of life and 
death.— 82. 


Satra 33. 


wa Fraafaq naan 


wea Hridaye, in the heart. fe Chitta, of the mind. eaa Samvit, the know- 
ledge. 


33. In the heart, the knowledge of the mind.—139. 


gaa Praag | akqaaergt qext guetta aga aw era aftr- 
serratierererterey tt 33 
VYASA. 


In the lotus-like cavity, the temple in the city of Brahma, lives the 
Intelligence. By performing Samyama with reference to that, comes the 
power of knowing the (Chitta).—139. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


The Commentator describes the word Heart (Hridaya). The self is called Brahma, 
being largest of all. His city is that in which he is housed, knowing it as he does to be 
his own, Cavity means hollow. The same is the lotus too with its face downwards. The 
same is the temple. 

He gives the reason for the mind knowing mind (the Manas knowing the Chitta): 
‘Intelligence lives there.’ By Samyama over that, the Yogi knows the Chitta with its 
modifications.—88. 

Sitra 34. 


AAGOTATA MART: TIT TAT 
AMA: WAAR ATA STATA 13 2h 


ara Sattva, of the objective essence. yew: Purugayoh, and of the Paruga. 
waa Atyanta, quite. wegwar: Asafkirnayoh, distinct from each other. 7 Pratyaya, 
the notion of distinction, wat: Avisesab, the absence. %m: Bhogah, is experience. 
woteart Parfrthatvat, because it exists for another, em Svartha, on his own 
object. dra Samyamat, by Samyama. yev-erry Purusa-Jfidnam, the knowledge of 
the Purusa, 


34. Experience consists in the absence of the 
notion of distinction between the Purusa and Objective- 


Essence, which are really quite distinct-from-each-other, 
30 


Google 


234 PATANJALT’S YOGA. 


because it exists for another. By Samyama on his own 
object, comes the knowledge of the Purusa—140. 


TUITSTALSTATT TSIM TST ArT: Teac TeyAgTsT- 
wray | afraed Terie | arraeaahansa CHA Tits BeTS- 
qraamena aftwa) aare aeareaitartrarseatraat Rraatsatte- 


frarree: qeeeirceraragtéar: seraearn drm | gewer afrakre- 
ware | & Arse: MVEA Tereary FET: | Teg Tentekrefrafrarrsarsar: 
freta: seers Gaareqeayea ver wad | at gewrerta ghraeaqrarar 
Ga eqIs | gar aa a ses larder Tale | wer Mey | Prerarc- 
at Ha Prarie it ae it 


VYASA. 


The essence of the Will-to-be is of the nature of illumination ; and 
when it overpowers the qualities of Disturbing energy (Rajas) and Inertia 
(Tamas), which are equally related to it by co-existence, it takes up the 
form of the notion of the distinction between the Purusa and Objective 
Essence. Widely different from that changing Objective Existence also 
in characteristic is the Purusa who appears as pure consciousness. They 
are quite distinct from each other. Experience consists in the notions of 
the two not being taken as distinct, because the objects are shown to him. 
The notion of enjoyment is the knowable, because the Essence of matter 
exists for another. There is another notion, however, the notion of the 
Purusa, which is quite distinct from this, and which appears as pure 
consciousness. 


By Samyama with reference to this notion is born the knowledge 
of the Purusa. The Purusa is not known by that notion of itself, which 
is the self-same as the Objective Buddhi. The Puruga only sees that 
notion of self by himself. And so it has been said :—‘ By what, Oh! is 
the knower to be known ?—140. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


When the Essence of the Will-to-be, which is of the very nature of the luminous 
essence of things, which is extremely pure, and which is on account of the utter suppres- 
sion of the Rajas and Tamas modified into the phenomenon of the distinction between the 
Purusa and the Objective Essence, is entirely different from the Puruga, what to speak of 
the Rajas and the Tamas? It is with this in his mind that the author of the aphorisms 
says, ‘ Distinction between the Puruga and the Objective Essence.’ 

Having the same in mind the author of the Commentary too says :—‘ The essence 
of the Will-to-be, &c.’ Not only possessing the nature of illumination, but modified too at 
the same time as the discriminative knowledge, and therefore extremely pure and lumin- 
ous, it therefore bears extreme resemblance to consciousness. ;This would mean confusion, 


ea gle 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 140. 235 


For this reason he says :—‘ Which are equally related to it by co-existence.’ Co-existence 
is the relation of one not existing without the other. Those which bear the relation of 
co-existence equally, are the qualities of Disturbing Energy (Rajas) and Inertia (Tamas), 
‘Overpowering’ means controlling. He describes the absence of confusion :—‘ Widely 
different from the Changing Objective, &c.’ 


The word ‘also’ signifies that it is not only different from the Sattva, but from the 
Rajas and Tamas also. ‘Changing Objective existence’ ig used to indicate the distinction 
of the unchanging Purnga. 


‘The notion of these two not being taken as distinctive':—The Will-to-be is of the 
nature of either the quiescent, the disturbed, or the forgetful notions. When conscious- 
ness is reflected into it, then the quiescence, the disturbance and the forgetfulness are 
fastened on to the consciousness. (This happens in the same way) as the moon reflected 
into pure water, looks as if trembling on account of the unsteadiness of the water. 


He mentions the cause of experience :—‘ Because the objects are shown to the 
Puruga.’ This has been explained often. 


Well; let the essence of the Will-to-be different from the Puraga. But how can 
experience be different from the Puruga? For this reason he says:—‘The notion of 
enjoyment,’ i.e., the notion consisting of enjoyment, ‘is of the Objective Essence and 
therefore existing for the sake of another. All that is enjoyable is of the nature of the 
knowable. Objective Essence is forthe sake of another, because it consists of many 
things brought together ; and because experience is a characteristic. That also is for the 
sake of another. It becomes the enjoyable of that particular enjoyer for whose sake so- 
ever it may be in existence. 


Or, it may be said that experience is the feeling of pleasure and pain as being in 
consonance or dissonance with the prevailing mental trend at any time. This cannot be 
in consonance or dissonance with itself. No self-contradictory manifestation can exist in 
itself. Hence it must be the objects that are either in consonance or dissonance; and 
it is this that constitutes experience. The self is the enjoyer; the knowable is that 
which he enjoys. 

‘Which is quite distinct from this':—The words ‘on account of existence for the 
sake of another’ are to be supplied here as understood to explain the distinction. 

Well; let that be. But if the Purusa is thas the object of knowledge, then there 
must be posited another intelligence, which this intelligence knows, and so on and on 
and thus there would be no stability of thought. For this reason he says :—‘ Tho Purusa 
is not known by that notion of itself, &c.’ This is the construction: The non-intelligent 
is illuminated by consciousness, not consciousness by the non-intelligent. How could the 
notion of the Purusa (being non-intelligent,as being a modification of the Will-to-be 
illuminate the conscious self? It has, however, been said that the conscious self, not 
depending for illumination upon another, illuminates the non-intelligent. By saying that 
the notion of the Purusa is of the nature of the essence of the Will-to-be, it is meant to be 
stated that it is of the nature of the non-intelligent, and is therefore unconscious as such, 
What looks like the objective appearance of the Puruga, and becomes as such an object of 
knowledge, is the reflection of the Puruga into the essence of the Will-to-be. This reflec- 
tion depends upon the Purusa as the reflection of the face into the mirror depends upon 
the face. The Will-to-be becomes the object of the Purusa by that reflection and not in 
its own nature of illumination. The notion of self-knowledge consists in making the 
object of knowledge, the reflection of the Puruga into the Buddhi. He illustrates the 
same by a Vedic text (Br. Up. II. 4-14:—) ‘And so it has been said’ by Isvara:—* By 
what Oh! is the knower to be known?’ That is, by nothing.—84. 


Google 


236 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Satra 35. 


aa: cfrwrramacaremearearat Stara ta KI 


wm: Tatah, thence. sf: Pratibha, prescience. ares Sravana, higher 
hearing. @q Vedana, higher touch, we Adaréa, higher vision, wre Asvdda, 

higher taste, armat Varta, higher smell, omae® JAyante, proceed. 
35. Thence proceed prescience, higher hearing, 


touch, vision, taste, and smell.—141. 


wa: wiReprqudearqureatcaral raed | siftrargeacraftafasre- 
CaAaATaaAL | wanfeargeqeraay | Aqareireretahaaa: | arate: 
aera | wearakacaaka | ara Reaneateratacanit Ae 
WA WY I 

VYASA. 

By prescience comes the knowledge of the subtle, the intercepted, 
the remote and the past and future. By higher hearing comes the 
hearing of divine sounds; by touch, the knowledge of divine touch ; by 
vision comes the knowledge of heavenly colour; by smell, the cognition of 
higher odours ; by taste comes the cognition of divine tastes. These are 


born constantly. —141. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Samyama over self-illumination is impossible until the Pradhfna has fulfilled its 
object of making the whole of herself known to the Purusa. Therefore, the author shows 
all the attainments which precede it:—‘ Thence proceed prescience, higher hearing, 
touch, vision, taste, and smell.’ By this it is also said that mind, hearing, skin, eye, 
tongue and nose favourably strengthened with the virtues resulting from the practice of 
Yoga, are the invisible causes respectively of prescience and higher hearing, &c. 

The words Sravana, &c., used in the text are technical terms for denoting the 
hearing of divine sounds, &c. The Commentary.is easy.—35. 


Stitra 36. 


a anragratt sgeara fear: naan 

® Te, they, wat Samadhau, to trance, weet: Upasargéb, obstacles, gram 
Vyutthane, to the outgoing of the mind.  fega: Siddhayah, perfections. 

36, They are obstacles to trance, but perfections 
to the out-going mind.—142. 

a garangwant sears Raa: 1% oenga: wartatraencrerar- 
at saaNieraeaNeTany | sy Ruawrarereraran Rea: ae 

VYASA. 

They, the powers of prescience, &c., prove to be obstacles when they 
appear in a mind which has reached the state of trance; because they 
oppose the knowledge obtained in that state. When, however, they 
appear in a mind which is active in going out, they are attainments.—142. 


(Go gle 


CH. ITI. ON ATTAINMENTS, 142, 148. 237 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


As it may be that one who has been performing Samyama with reference to the 
self, may on the appearance cf these attainments think that he has achieved what had to 
be achieved, and thus give up further effort, the author says:—‘ They are obstacles to 
trance, but perfections to the out-going mind.’ 

It is only he whose mind is active in going out that becomes proud of the possession 
of these as attainments. A beggar in life may think that the possession of a little wealth 
is the fulness of riches. The Yogi, however, who is inclined to the attainment of trance 
must reject them whenever they come. He has vowed the removal of all the three 
descriptions of pain to their utmost limit, That being the object of the Puruga, how can 
he take pleasure in the attainments which are the opponents of that state of being? 
This is the meaning of the aphorism and the commentary. — 36. 


Sfitra 37. 


TTA DSTA CAAT ATS FTA TET: 3 ON 


wea Bandha, of bondage. sree Karana, of the cause. Swear Saithilyat, on 


relaxation, me Prachiira, of the passages agra Samvedanat, by knowledge. 
«Cha, and. fer Chittasya, of the mind, W Para, other’s, wt Sarira, body. 
waq: Avegah, entering into. 

37. The mind may enter another body, on relaxation 
of the cause of bondage, and by knowledge of the passages 


of the mind.—143. 


errata frag acacia | aéihyae 
awassasear aot salsarare sea: ofrserk: | aed wait araarcme 
Atel antasrgae 1 warceaca a Raa aatiata waaeaaiee- 
faer waneaqara aet ad aati notiraty ffir Arieg 
fre akeanagvata | zwar agaciata afernt saaaqeratea Meara- 
agra aatqara qaroitran Praag ef 1 29 kh 

VYASA. 

The mind (chitta) which by nature passes into new states of. life 
and uever remains fixed in one state, is bound down to, 1.e., comes to 
stay in a body, because of the power of the vehicle of action. By the 
force of trance, the vehicle of action which chains it down, slackens 
its operation. And the consciousness of how the mind acts in the body 
is also the fruit of trance. By the destruction of the bonds imposed by 
arma, and by knowing the method of the mind acting upon the body, 
the Yogi withdraws his mind from his own body and throws it into the 
body of another. As the mind is thus thrown into another body, the 
powers of sensation, &c., follow it. Even as bees follow their king, as 
he goes on resting or moving on, so do the powers follow the mind as it 
enters another body.— 143. 


Google 


238 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


VACHASPATI’s GLOSS. 


Having described the power of knowledge, which has its culmination in the know- 
ledge of the Purusa, as being the result of Samyama, the author now describes the result 
of Samyama which takes the shape of the power of action :—‘The mind may enter an- 
other budy on relaxation of the cause of bondage, and by knowledge of the passages of the 
mind.’ ‘By the force of trance ’:—This means the performance of Samyama on the cause 
of bondage. Trance alone is mentioned because that is the principal factor of the three. 
By ‘passages of the mind’ are understood the passages through which and the modes 
according to which the mind acts in the body. There are nerves in the body by which the 
mind travels in the body to perform its functions. From the performance of Samyama 
on the passage of the mind along these nerves, accrues the consciousness thereof, which 
slackens the bond. Then by destruction of the cause of bondage he no longer remains 
confined to the body. But it may be that even though he may no longer be confined to 
the body, he may not know how to get out of the body by the proper passage, and he may 
thus not be able to go out of the body without injury, and may not also be able to enter 
another body. For this reason the passages and modes of movement also must be known. 
Ag the powers of sensation, &c., follow the mind they take their proper places in the 
body, as the mind enters therein, -37. 


Sotra 38. 


“ on 
SATAAASHA AMIS HUSH HF SeHllediay WI 
vam Udana, over Udana, sam Jayat, by mastery, ae Jala, water. % 
Panka, mud. aves Kantaka, thorns, with these, wfgq Adisu, and with the 
others, weg: Asangah, non-contact. zemfa: Utkrantih, ascension. « Cha, and. 
38. By mastery over UDANA, ascension and non- 


contact with water, mud, thorns, &c.-—144. 

SAAAMNACIFMSH AAAS Tonhars | TAAhrashe: srankys- 
at saa ter fear qari orn qeantrartrcaecazie: | aa aaat- 
CAATACATATN TRA: | MIATA SIA ATTASIRA: | Sraargara weg AA: 
arn art ef | Tat wart ore: | SarasaTseIgHHaaag_ sentra 
Tamas vate at akreta afr ya it 

VYASA. 

Life which shows itself as the operations of Prana and others, is 

the manifestation of all the powers of sensation and action. Its action is 


five-fold. ‘The Prina moves through the mouth and the nose, and mani- 
fests itself within the chest. 


The Samana manifests up to the navel. It is so called because 
it carries equally (Sama) (to all parts of the body, the juice of food, &c.). 
Manifesting down to the soles of feet (all over) is the Apana, so called 
because it carries away (apa). Manifesting up to the head is the Udana, 
so called because it carries upward (ut). The Vydna is so called because 
it pervades the whole body in every direction. Of these, the Prana is 
the chief. 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 145. 239 


‘By mastery over Udana is secured non-contact with water, mud, 
thorns, &c., and ascension comes at the time of death. He secures that 
because he has the power.’-—144. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


By mastery over Udana is secured non-contact with water, mud, thorns, &e. ‘ Life 
is the manifestation of the functions of all the powers of sensation, &c.’ It functions as 
Prana, &c. Pr4na and others are indications thereof. The functioning of the indriyas 
is two-fold, external and internal. The external is indicated by the cognition of 
colour, &e. The internal function is life. It is a particular effort, which is the 
common property of all the indriyas (powers of action and sensation) and the cause of 
the different actions of the Vayu Tattva, the motive power of the body. As they say :— 
‘Préina and other motive forces, the functions of the Vayu Tattva, are the five modifica- 
tions of the Vayu Tattva. They are the five modifications of the Indriyas (powers of 
action and sensation) incommon. Because they point to this that ‘its action is five-fold,’ 
the action of that effort (prayatna) is five-fold. 

The Prana has its sphere from the fore-part of the nose down to the heart. The 
Saména is that which carries equally, that is, to places where it is properly required and 
inasmuch as is required, the chyle which is made of foods and drinks. Its sphere of action 
is down from the heart to the navel. The Apfna is the cause of sending out of the body 
urine, feeces, foetus, &c. Its sphere of action is up to the navel and also down to the 
soles of feet. The Udana is so called because it carries upwards chyle, &¢e. Its function 
is from the fore-part of the nose up to the head, The Vy4na is all-pervading. The Prana 
is the chief of all these that have been described, because the Vedic text speaks of all 
these going out when Prana goes out. 

Having thus described the differences of Prana, &c., with reference to their fune- 
tions and the places of their location, the Commentator now introduces the aphorism :~— 
* By mastery over Udina, &c.’ When Udana is mastered by the performance of Samyama 
thereupon, he is no longer checked by water, &c. 

As to ascension, that takes place by the path which has its beginning in the flame 
(the Archirddi, northern path), after death. Having mastered that path, he ascends by 
that path. 

By the performance over Prana, &c., and by the acquirement of mastery over these, 
come appropriate attainments too. They should be understood according to the dif- 
ferences of their function, place of manifestation, and mastery, ete.—38. 


Sotra 39. 


AATAAASSATAT gen 


amt Samana, over Saména. wma Jayét, by mastery. wem Jvalanam, 
effulgence, 

39. By mastery over Samana comes effulgence.---145. 
AAMAAAINASA | Harqaaeasy so Fat ASA We, I 
VYASA. 

He who has obtained mastery over the Samana blows the fire into 
flame and thus shines.—145. 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 
The fire is of the body. The blowing it into flame means rendering it brighter,—89, 


Go gle 


240 PATANJALT’S YOGA. 


Satra 40. 


AATHUN: THITATAMST ATA Uoll 


wa Srotra, the power of hearing. waa Akaga, Akasa teen these two. 
ware Sambandha, over the relation, #wq Samyamat, by Samyama. feaqy Divyam, 
higher. wey Srotram, power of hearing. 

40. By Samyama over the relation between Akasa 
and the power-of-hearing, comes the higher power-of- 
hearing.— 146. 

arse aaatssarker vita) adeitararareat softer ad- 
megrat @ | war | qeterrararrntaeafeet waat wad | 
aaaqrarne fag) waraca Ara | area er rea T AG TATA 
gaa cemanrarqear qeququmitd sitaq | arrears: owe 
qe 4 genie aaessaa mafia | ate ara 
BAIATHA ATHTAT freq stT TaAAA ll vo i} 

VYASA. 


In Akasa abide all powers of hearing and all sounds. As has beeu 
said :—‘To all those whose organs of hearing are similarly situated, the 
situation of hearing comes to be the same.’ 

And this is a reason for (the existence of Akasa). Absence of ob- 
struction also has been so spoken of. The Akd4ga is also described as all- 
pervading, seeing that there is absence of obstruction in other places also 
than where a form may he. 

The power of hearing is the means of perceiving sound. Of a deaf 
und a not-deaf, one senses sound and the other does not. Therefore, the 
power of hearing only is the sphere for the action of sound. Whoever 
performs Samyama with reference to the relation between the power of 
hearing and the Akéga, evolves the power of higher audition.—146. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


It has been said that the power of higher audition comes to the Yogi who is per- 
forming Samyama with reference to the purpose of the self, because there yet remains 
something of the Pradhana to be scen, Now the author says that the powers of higher 
audition and other sense powers come by the performance of Samyama with reference to 
the powers themselves :— 

‘By Samyama on the relation between the power of hearing and Akasa (the soni- 
ferous ether) comes the higher power of audition.’ He describes the sphere of Sam- 
yama :—‘ The relation between the power of hearing and Akasa,’ the relation being that 
of the thing supporting and the thing supported. 

All powers of hearing, even though they have their origin in the principlo of 
egoism, reside in the Ak4sa, placed in the hollow of the ear, It is this where the power 
of hearing is located. When soundness or defect is noticed therein, soundness or defect, 
as the case may be, is noticed in the power of hearing also. 


Go gle 


CH. II. ON ATTAINMENTS, 146. 241 


Further, when of the sounds working in unison with the power of hearing, the 
sounds of ‘solids, &c., are to be taken in, then the power of hearing located in the hollow 


of the ear, stands in need of the capacity of resonance residing in the substratum, tho 
Akésa of the ear. 


In the perception of the external smells of solids, &c., by the senses of smell, &c., 
working in unison with the qualities of odour, &c., the operation is seen to be that the 
senses of smell, taste, touch, sight and hearing are located in physical vehicles only, 
because the powers of smell, &c., are seen to be working soundly or defectively when 
the physical vehicles are sound or injured respectively. 


This sense of hearing then, having its origin in the principal of egoism, acts like 
iron, drawn as it is by sound originating and locatcd in the mouth of the speaker, 
acting as loadstone, transforms them into its own modifications in sequence of the sounds 
of the speaker, and thus senses them. And it is for this reason that for every living 
creature, the perception of sound in external space is inthe absence of defects, never 
void of authority. So says the quotation from Pafichasikha :—‘To all those whose organs 
of hearing are similarly situated, the situation of hearing is the same,’ All those are 
Chaitras and other organs of hearing are similarly situated in space. The meaning is 
that the powers of hearing of all are located in Akasa. Further the Akfga in which the 
power of hearing is located is born out of the suniferous Tanmftra, and has therefore 
the quality of sound inherent in itself. It is by this sound acting in unison that it takes 
the sounds of external solids, &c. Hence the hearing, i.c., the sound of all is of the 
same Class. (The class is determined by the relative situation in space). 


This then establishes that the Ak&4a is the substratum of the power of hearing, 
and also possesses quality ofsound. And this sameness of the situation of sound is an 
indication of the existence of Akfsa. That which is the substratum of the auditory power 
(Sruti) which manifests as sound of the same class, is Akéda. Such a manifestation of 
sound cannot be without such an auditory power. Nor is such an auditory power a quali- 
ty of Prithvi, &c., because it cannot be in its own self both the manifester and manifested 
(vyangya and vyaijaka). 

Further the absence of obstruction is an indication of Akasa. If there were no 
Akasa, the forms would be in such‘close contact with one another that even a needle- 
point would not find room between them. Everything would thus be obstructed by 
everything. It cannot be said that the absence of obstruction is the result only of the 
non-existence of things possessed of form, because non-existence depends upon existence, 
inasmuch as there can be no cessation of existence in the absence of existence. Fur- 
ther the power of consciousness canuot be its substratum, because itis immutable and 
cannot, therefore, be limited. And further space and time, &c., are nothing different from 
the Prithvi and other substances. Therefore such a kind of change can only be of the 
Akasa. Thus all is plain. 

When it is shown that absence of obstruction is an indication of the existence of 
Ak&ga, then itis clear that wherever absence of obstruction is found, there must be 
Ak&sa in existence, and hence the Akasa is proved to be all-pervading also, For this 
reason, the Commentator says :—‘ Therefore although having no form, &c.’ 

. He mentions authority for the existence of the power of hearing:—‘The power of 
hearing is the means, &c.' Action is found to be capable of performance by means of an 
instrument only. Asa hole can be made by a gimlet only, so here too the action of hear- 
ing sound can only be performed by means of some instrument only. Whatever is the 
instrument of hearing, is the power of hearing. But then why should not the eye and 
other organs be the instruments of hearing also? ‘For this reason he says:—’ A deaf 
and a not-deaf, &c.’ The proof is given by the canons of agreement and difference both. 

81 


Google 


242 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


Further this is suggestive of other powers. By Samyama over the relations between 
the skin and. Vayu, the eye and the light, the taste and the Apas, the nose and Prithvi, 
the attainment of the higher powers of touch, &c., is also to be understood.—40. 


Satra 41. 


RAHN: TIT TTS TATA TA ATT TATT 12 8 Ut 


warerstt: Kaydkasayoh, between the body (ara) and the Akasa, eau Sam- 
bandha, over the relation, em Samyamat, by Samyama. ey Laghu, light. 
ze Tila, cotton. wai: Samapatteh, by attaining to. «Cha, and. ‘wary Akasa, 
through space. ww Gamanam, passage. 


41. By Samyama on the relation between the body 
and the Akasa, or by attaining to (the state of thought 
transforming as) the lightness of cotton, &c., passage 
through space (Akasa).—147. 

RAHN AAVTATAL ATS AM TALARATAAT | TH BATA TAT 
TaTTHTAG HIS Aa Seas Taraa Geant aawedg syY ar 
qed sean fader wgqual cq ae wWerat 
Reds aaeqiaiiagqaay fea cng Race adr wasarnraface 
wae eel 

VYASA. 

Wherever there is the body, there is the Aké¥a. The body becomes 
related to the Akasa, because the latter gives room to the former. Having 
mastered the relation by the attainment of the state of thought transform- 
ing into light things such as cotton, &c., down to the atom, the Yogi be- 
comes light. Thence does he get the power of roaming through space 
and walking over water with his feet. He walks over a spider’s web, 
and then walks over the rays of light. Then does he get the power of 
roaming through space at will.—147. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


By performance of Samyama on the relation between the body and the Ak4sa, or 
having attained by Samyama on cotton, &c., the state of the mind transforming itself as 
such, it becomes the cause of manifesting the qualities present therein. The Commentator 
mentions the stage of the attainments :—‘ Moves over water, &c.’—41, 


Siitra 42. 
(an Ly ea 
AYTHCTAT SCMARUAT AA: THMUMTATUT AT: WBA 
afe: Bahih, actual passing out, wafer Akalpité, outside the body. eft: 


Vrittib, acting. =*aeq Mahaé-videha, the great ex-corporeal. «a: Tatab, by that. 
gam Prakaéa, of light. waw Avarana, of the veil. wa: Ksayah, the destruction, 


(Go gle 


CH. ITI, ON ATTAINMENTS, 148. 243 


42. Actual-passing-out and acting outside the body 
is the Great Excorporeal; by that is destroyed the veil 
of light.—148. 


aecaerarzraaerateat aa: wararacaata: | wotrere alkararzhawrar 
ter am acm ar ak atts aaar aeafearia aalt ar 
sieaarqeaa | arg wecaeta aay tela waar aes: at werner 
am alacant arraraaeaat aerate | war qcacrerearierarteer area: | 
TACT MUM: THM AA TAI ATTA | THAT MATS 
TEI ST AAT AAT y BR Ni 
VYASA. 
That form of concentration in which the mind acts upon something 
outside the body, is named excorporeal concentration. 


This excorporeal concentration, if taking place by merely the mind 
functioning, while yet staying in the body, is called Fancied (kalpita) 
Excorporeal. 


That, however, in which the mind has no need of the body left and 
passes out of the body and then functions outside the body, is called the 
Actual Excorporeal concentration. 


Of these, the Actual Excorporeal, which is also called the Great 
Excorporeal, is attained by means of the Fancied Excorporeal. It is by 
this that the Yogts effect their entrance into other bodies. By this concen- 
tration the veil of the luminous essence of the Will-to-be, in the shape 
of the three vehicles of affliction, action and fruition, which has its origin 
in the Rajas and Tamas, is destroyed.—148. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author describes another Samyama too, which becomes the means of entering 
into another body, and also the means of destruction of afflictions, actions and fruitions :— 
‘Actual passing out of the body and then acting there, is the Great Excorporeal ; by this 
the veil of light is destroyed.’ 

The Commentator describes the Excorporeal :—‘ That form of concentration in which 
the mind functions outside the body, &c.’ In order tc describe the nature of the 
Actual Excorporeal and for explaining its means, he describes the Fancied Excorporeal :— 
‘If that, &c.’ ‘By merely the mind functioning outside the body.’ Fancy means that the 
presence outside the body has been fancied, although the mind is still in the body and has 
been acting outside only functionally and not by actual presence. 

He describes the Great Excorporeal:—‘ That however.’ Now he says that the rela- 
tion between the Fancied and the Actual Excorporeal is that the formeris the means of 
attaining the other.’ ‘By that concentration.’—By means of that concentration the 
mental modification of the Great Excorporeal is achieved. The afflictions, the actions and 
the three-fold fruition thereof in the shape of life-state, life-time and life-experionce have 
all their origin in the Rajas and the Tamas; because when the Rajas and the Tamas aro 


Google 


244 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


destroyed, the manifestation of the discrimination takes place by the quality of essenti- 
ality (Sattva) alone. This three-fold fruition having its origin in the Rajas and the Tamas, 
is of thoir nature and covers the essence of the Will to-be therewith. It is destroyed with 
its destruction, and the mind of the Yogi goes about at will and similarly knows also.—4z2. 


Siitra 43. 


WATT: UVB 


aN 

we Sthila, the gross, eey Svaripa, the substantive. gea Siksma, the 

astral, were Anvaya, conjunction, wart Arthavattva, purposefulness, seg 
Samyamad, by Semyama. yaa: Bhita-jayah, mastery over the elements, 

43. By Samyama on the gross (sthila), the substan- 

tive (svaripa), the astral (sfiksma), conjunction (anvaya) 

and purposefulness (arthavattva), is obtained mastery over 


the elements (bhiatas).—149. 

VSAM TACT TT ATL ANT Lore arfererren: sreqraar fase: 
SEB ATA: eqeurta oftentien: | crngerat seat ay | fated we 
eqeratay Ary A: | SAR we afxecwar arg: sant addr aferera 
MARTE ATSaa | WI Arareret Tegra frater | aar Are! 
qamfeaataaamat qaareanafatts | arnaavaggriss wer 7E- 
any | fast fe aq: sereatatqraargna: To zat qa TaltriaaezAt- 
WHAaaIgags ATE: | saI anger | aque ar qx wer arr 
agen fader ameanaraniniaa aqe: | a a aaqraaqatrnr | wrarat 
a mTeTOTAt ere ef | Tear Ares eft | ae Taher qaRrarraats- 
qatraraaara | qatrearrae: emer at ag ee | sqaitrarada: gre 
aac ga aargttte | MYA AATAATAA TT Ta aq pe eh a 
qaeaattiagay | wu ae qersd aarti yaar aettisaaa: ye 
ATM: AAA waa rraT Ag TTT: SAA LAA AT ararareda- 
qaay | wa yarat aaa wi enafnatuirstrer gor sraerarargary- 
Arseqaetarnt | wist ead sanded Amraanidar Twas | 
mrereenrenyenraeah eer | aftaqrat yg Tag Wwasty a 
SUG AT BET SIA waeT TAA | ae WarraTeTT Ti 
fren vawtirate | twarcengentey a masa AeA Pratkreit eze- 
sreaar water 4 v2 Ul 

VYASA. 

Here the word Sthila, gross, is used to denote the specific forms of 
Prithvi, Apas, Tejas, Vayu and Akasa, which appear as sound, colour, 
taste and odour, and have the qualities of conjuint action, &c. This is 
the first appearance of the elements, 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 149. 245 


The second appearance is that which is common to the others too. 
The Prithvi has forms, the Apas smoothness, the Tejas heat, the Vayu 
impulsion, the Akaga motion in every direction. This is denoted by the 
word substantive appearance (svarfipa), sounds, touches, tastes, colours 
are the specific manifestations of these common qualities. And so it has 
been said:—‘ These manifested together in one species manifest their own 
distinguishing characteristics.’ A group of the generic and specific quali- 
ties is here considered a substance (dravya). 


A group is ol two descriptions. The first is that in which the dis- 
tinctin oof individuals disappears in the whole, such as the body, 
the tree, the herd, the forest. The second is where the word shows the 
distinction between different individuals of the same group, as for exam- 
ple, a group of both gods and men. OF this group the gods are one 
portion, and the men the other. Both make one group. In this the 
distinction of individuals may or may not be mentioned ; as in a grove 
of mangoes,.a crowd of Braéhmanas ; a mangoe grove, the Brahmana class. 


This again is of two descriptions; where the parts of the whole 
are separate from each other and where they are not. A forest anda 
class are groups where the parts are separate from each other. A 
body, atree, an atom are all groups whose parts are not separable 
from each other Substance, according to Patafijali, is a group whose 
parts are not meant to be “distinguished from each other, and cannot be 
separated from each other. This has been called the etheric or substan- 
tive appearance (svaripa). 


And now what istheir subtle appearance? It is the Tanmiatra (the 
astral atom), the cause of the elements. The atom is one part thereof. 
It is a group, a composite substance, which consists of generic and 
specific qualities, and whose parts are not distinguished from each other, 
and which cannot be separated from one another. All the Tanmatras 
are similar tothis. This is the third appearance of the elements. 


Now as to the fourth appearance of the elements. These are the 
‘qualities ’ whose characteristics are essence, activity and inertia, and 
which follow the nature of effects. These are denoted by the word 
conjunction (anvaya). 

And now the fifth appearance of purposefulness (arthavattva). 
The purpose of experience and emancipation is apparent in conjunction 
with the qualities. The qualities are to be found in Tanmétras, in the 
elements and in things made of elements. Hence all these are full of 
purpose. Now by Samyama over the five elements, with their five 


Google 


246 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


appearances, the nature of every appearance over which Samyama is 
performed, becomes apparent and conquest over it is obtained. Having 
obtained conquest over the five appearances he becomes the Lord of ele- 
ments. The powers of the elements begin by this conquest to follow his 
thought, as the cows follow their calves. —149. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


‘By Samyama on gross, the substantive appearance, the subtle, the conjunc- 
tion and purposefulness, is obtained mastery over elements.’ Mastery is obtained by 
Samyama over each separately, the gross, the substantive, the subtle, the conjunction 
and purposefulness. The Commentator describes the gross :—‘ The word Sthala here, &c.’ 
The sounds, the touches, the colours, the tastes, and the odours of Akasa, Vayu, Tejas, 
Apas, and Prithivi are their specific forms so far as may be. 


The notes of the gamud, NO and MA, etc., cold and keat, etc., blue and yellow, etc., 
sweet-smelling, &c., all these differ from each other in name, appearance and object. For 
this reason they are specific. Of the qualities, five are the specific forms of the Prithvi; 
four (except smell) of the Apas ; three (besides odour and taste) of the Tejas ; two (besides 
odour, taste and colour) of the Vayu and only one of the Akfsa. These specific forms 
together with the characteristics of conjoint action, &c., are termed Gross in this 
philosophy. 

Among those, the characteristics of the Prithvi are :—Form, heaviness, roughness, 
obstruction, stability, manifestation (vritti), difference, support, turbidity, hardness, 
enjoyability by all. 

The characteristics of the Apas are :—Smoothness, subtlety, clearness, whiteness, 
softness, heaviness, coolness, preservation, purification, cementation, 

The characteristics of the Tejas are :—Going upward, cooking, burning, lightness, 
shining, destruction, power; possessed of such qualities is the Tejas different from the 
previous ones. 

The qualities of the Vayu are :—transverse motion, purification, throwing, pushing, 
strength, movability, throwing no shadow, roughness ; these aro the various charactcristics 
of the Vayu. 

The characteristics of the Akasa :—Motion in all directions, non-agglomeration, and 
non-obstruction : these three are said to be the characteristics of Ak&sa, diflerent from 
the characteristics of the preceding ones. 

It is together with these characteristics that they are called gross. 

Form (marti) is hardness brought about (samsiddhikam), stability of the lines of 
action and manifestation. 

Tejas is heat, stomachic, solar, terrestrial ; everywhere heat exists along with Tejas. 

The whole of this terminology makes no distinction between the characteristic and 
the characterized. 

The Vayu is changing; has the natureof constant motion. By movements of straw, 
&c., and by the movements of the body, the Vayuis inferred to be everywhere possessed 
of the quality of motion. 

The Akasa is motion in all directions, because the perception of sound is found 
everywhere. It has been established above that the sounds of terrestrial objects, &c., 
are only perceived on account of the sound-quality of Akasa, which resides in the power 
of hearing. 

This is meant by the-word Svardipa, substantive appearance, It is of this generic 
form that the sounds of the notes DO, &c, heat, &c., Whiteness, &c., astringent and sweet 


Google 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 149. 247 


smell, &c., are the specializations. The generic qualities of form, &c., too, such as 
Jambira, Panas and emblic fruit, &c., differ from each other on account of the differences 
oftaste, &c. For this reason these tastes, &c., are specific modifications of these. And 
s0 it has been said :—Of those that fall under a common genus, i.e., those each of which 
possesses one generic quality of form, smoothness or flow, &c., the differences are due to 
the characteristics possessed by the individual appearances of DO. &c. 

Thus the generic qualities of form, &c., and the specific qualities of sound, &c., have 
been described. 

Now he speaks to those-who say that a substance (dravya) is the substratum of the 
generic and the spccific: ‘In this philosophy asubstance is a collection (samudaya) of 
the generic and specific qualities.’ Even those who desire to establish that substratum 
of the qualities, cannot possibly conceal the fact of their existence in one group together. 
And if they do conéeal it, it cannot be that a substratum of theirs may he possible of exis- 
tence as substance, Hence let even that be the substance. We, however, do not find a 
substratum separate from the collection of qualities, and existing as substance. 

Asa collection of stones differs from the stones, and as further a different kind of 
their collection inthe shape ofa mountain is called a substance, the doubt arises that a 
mere collection is a substance, For the purpose of removing thatdoubt and for esta- 
blishing that it is only a particular kind of collection that is called a substance, he now 
describes the variety of groupings:—“ A collection is of two descriptions.” Because of 
this a substance is not a mere collection. This is the meaning. ‘Two descriptions’ 
mean two different sorts of collections. He describes the first mode :—‘ The first is that 
in which the distinction of individuals disappears altogether in the whole. They are 
80 called because the distinction between the different parts has disappeared. It is so 
called because the separation has disappeared. Thisis the meaning: A collection is 
understood by the words body, tree, herd, forest. These words denote a collection, but do 
not denote the different parts of the collections. That is no word denoting these indivi- 
dual parts isused. Hence itis the collection that is understood. Four illustrations are 
given with reference tothe parts being joined or separate and with reference to intelli- 
gence and non-intelligence. The meaning of the joined and separate parts will be des- 
eribed further on. 

He describes the second mode :—‘A collection, the distinction of whose parts is 
understood by the words as both gods and men.’ 

‘Gods and men’: This collection signifies an account of the parts being indicated 
by separate words, the two separate parts of the group. 

But the question is that inasmuch as the distinction of parts is not conveyed by 
using the word both, how is it said that the idea of the collection carries with it the idea 
of the distinction of parts ? For this reason he says :—And it is by these two parts that a 
collection is signified. The word ‘ both’ together with the words signifying the different 
parts forms the collection, since the sentence as such denotes the meaning to be conveyed 
by it. This is the meaning. 

Again he says that they are two-fold :—‘ This again, &c.’ With reference to whether 
the distinction is or is not intended-to be conveyed. He describes where the distinction 
is intended to be conveyed :--‘ A grove of mangoes, a crowd of Brahmanas.’ There must 
be distinction because the genitive case is actually used (not only implied.) Asin the 
case of the phrase, ‘ the cow of the Gargas.’ 

He describes where the distinction is not intended to be conveyed :—‘ Mango grove, 
Brahmana class.’ The meaning is that the mangoes are the same as the grove ; it is not 
intended that there should be difference understood between the collection and the 
individuals that go to make up the collection. They both imply a common object. 


Google 


248 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


He mentions another division :—‘ That again is twofold. Where the parts of the 
whole are separate from each other.’ This means that there is space between the 
individuals that go to make up the collection. Such groups are signified by the words, 
a herd, a forest. 

Their parts have spaces between them, the trees and the kine. 

The groups whose parts are not separate from each other are such as a tree, a cow, 
an atom. Their parte have no space between them. Whether thcy are taken to be the 
generic or the specific qualities, or the udders, &c., they have no spaces bet ween. 

Now he establishes which of these collections is what is called asubstance :—‘ Whose 
parte are not meant to be distinguished from each other, &c.’ 

Having thus described a substance as the context demanded, he now comes to the 
subject in hand :—‘ This has been called the substantive appearance.’ 

He pats a question with the object of describing the third appearance :—‘ And what 
is their subtile appearance ?’ and gives the answer :—‘ It is the Tanmatra, &.’ One 
of its parts is an atom possessing dimension. The generic quality thereof is form 
(marti). Sound, &c., are its specific qualities. It consists of the generic and specific 
qualities, It is a group which follows the difference of the generic and specific qualities, 
ite partes existing without any intervening space. Furtheras an atom has subtlety in ap- 
pearance, so are the Tanmatras sabtie in appearance, He summarizes :—‘ This is the third.’ 

Now the foarth appearance of the elements consists of the qualities which have 
respectively the characteristics of illumination, activity and inertia and whose character- 
istics too follow the nature of effects. For this reason are they described by the word 
Conjunction (anvaya). Now he describes their fifth appearance, purposefalness :—‘ The 
purpose of enjoyment and emancipation is apparent in conjunction with the qualities.’ 

Well, even if it be so, if the qualities be purposeful, how are the effects of the quali- 
ties purposefal ? For this reason he says :—' The qualities are to be found, &c.’ The 
things made of elements are such as a cow or a jar. 

Having thus described the Samyama and that upon which the Samyama is to be 
performed, he now describes the Samyama and its fruit :—‘ Now by Samyama over the 
elements, &c.’ The powers (prakpitis) of the elements are their natures.—43. 


Siitra 44 


adtshtrerfasrgaia: aaaeTATSAANTaTaT th Be 


mm: Tatah, thence, aff Anima-ddi, of attenuation and the other powers. 
mgats: Pradurbhavah, the manifestation of, wa Kaya, of the body. «eq Sampad, 
perfection. #q Tad, their, wt Dharma, characteristics, wre: Anabhigh&tab, 
non-resistance by. % Cha, and. 


44, Thence the manifestation of attenuation 
(anima) and the other (powers); as also the perfection of 
the body and non-resistance by their characteristics.—-150. 

SASROATANT EAT: HTTHTA AAT | AAT TART: | 
aftat agaala | afkar weraale | otfacegeanany eal aaa | 
sreTacSraee: | qagarar Porat atet iar qaarreg 
erirraraararag | threat set crarerasqernhe | ay wrarranbrer 
VaaFAA WI Agra yaredrraqeag | aa getty wre 
frquta suit) seq wea a ennaaiia: Gee aur aig 


(SO gle 


CH. M11. ON ATTAINMENTS 149. 249, 


ageniafe | carererbaatit Srrecqgeraran amatafraraaa geil yi 
a Freaker arta: were Rrarstreraarg rarer | ara: feavar: gp eater | 
atfrastn qe! + ary wordt aqeaacMARSATHIN ATTA: 
Rrararacreqat wae nee h 


VYASA. 


Of these, attenuation (Anim4): becomes atomical. Buoyancy. 
becomes light. Enlargement: becomes large. Approach (Prapti) : 
touches even the moon by the tip of his finger. Unrestrained will 
(Prakamya): absence of restraint to his will: merges into earth just as 
he plunges into water. 


Control (Vasitva) :—Obtains power over the elements and objects 
made thereof, and controls others. 


Creative Power (Isitrittva):— Controls appearance and disappearance 
and aggregations. 

Fulfilment of desires is the objective reality of one’s determination, 
i.e., the natures of the elements assume such appearances as he thinks of. 

Although he possesses the power, he does not interfere to set the 
objects of the world topsy-turvy. Why not? Because his desire with 
reference to thern is the same always which another Siddha of the same 
power has formerly willed. These are the eight attainments. The 
perfection of the body will be described. ‘ Non-resistance by their 
characteristics ’:—The Prithvi does not by cohesion interfere with the 
action of a Yogi’s body. He might even enter a stone in virtue of the use 
of his powers. The waters with their viscidity do not wet him. The fire 
does not burn him by its heat. The air moves him not by its motion. 
Even in Akasa, which naturally offers no obstruction, his body might 
become obstructed to sight. Even the Siddhas may fail to see him:—150. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now the autbor describes what powers the Yogi attains, when the eloments begin 
to follow his thoughts:—‘ Thence the manifestation of Attenuation (Anim4) as also the 
perfection of the body, and non-resistance by their characteristics. 

The Commentator says that by Samyama over the gross states of the elements and 
thereby mastering them come four atiainments. Of these, attenuation is the power of 
the body's becoming small even though it is large. Buoyancy means the power of its 
becoming light, even though itis heavy. Having become light it moves in space like 
a straw ora piece of cotton wool. Enlargement is the power of its becoming large like 
a mountain or the sky, even though it is small. Approach is the power by which all exis- 
tences come within the reach of the Yogi; thus he can touch the moon with the tip of his 
finger, though standing on the earth. 

He descriles the attainments obtained by the performance of Samyama over substan- 
tive appearance (svardpa). Unrestrained will is the absence of restraint to his will His 

82 


Google 


250 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


form is not resisted by the substantive qualities of form, &c. He merges into and emerges 
out of earth, as if it. were water. 


He describes the attainment to be obtained by Samyama and consequent mastery 
over the subtile form :—‘ Control :—The elements are Prithvi &c.’ Objects made thereof 
are such as a cow and ajar. ‘Obtains power over them’: acts with reference to them 
just as he wishes. 


As to the objects made of the elements, it is necessary that when their causes, the 
tanm&tras, and the atoms of Prithvi, &c., are controlled, their effects also should come 
under control, because they remain in whatever condition or arrangement he places 
them. 


Now he describes the attainments to be obtained by Samyama over and mastery of 
the conjunction (anvaya):—Creative Power:—Having mastered the Malaprakriti he can 
control the birth, destruction, and present existence, as it is for the time being of the 
elements and things made of them. 


He describes the attainments due to the performance of Samyama over purposeful- 
ness, ‘Fulfilment of desires’ means the objective reality of one’s desires. The Yogi 
who has become the master of the purpose of the qualities, makes everything according 
to the purpose he thinks they should fulfil. Even if he conceives that poison should act 
upon the body as Amrita, it would act so, and having taken poison he would still live. 

Well, let that be, but if he possessed these powers he would interfere with the order 
of nature in the world, but why does he not doso? He may transform the moon into the 
sun; or he may make the day from which the moon is totally absent, one from which she 
is not at all absent. Forthis reason he says:—Although he possesses the power, etc., 
these worshipful ones who have obtained the power of ordering as they desire, do not 
like to act against the will of isvara. As to the powers of objects they are changeable 
according to the difference of class, space, time and condition, and their natures are not 
for that reason permanent. It-is, therefore, proper that ey should act in accordance 
with their desire. These are the eight attainments. 

‘Non-resistance by their characteristics :’—The mention of non-resistance of these 
elements after the attainment of attenuation, &c., even though this is the result of the 
attainments themselves, is similar to the mention of the perfection of the body even though 
this is achieved by this very attainment. The reason is that the object of Samyama 
mentioned in this aphorism may be easily understood together with the fruit to be 
obtained by the performance of the Samyamas mentioned in the aphorism. The rest is 
easy.—44, 


Siatra 45. 


VIM AMAATATAA EAA BAA UV i 


wt Ripa, beauty, «ara Lavanya, grace. ae Bala, strength. ay Vajra, of 
adamant, adamantine. gm Samhanana, the power of striking or of bearing the 
strokes, hardness, all these embody, ewe Kaya-Sampat, perfection of the body. 


45. The perfection of the body consists in beauty, 
grace, strength and adamantine hardness.—151. 

SUCTAIATTMAEAAAT HTT | TNT: Harare 
AMARAAAT ll Vs 


Google 


Cd. ITT. ON ATTAINMENT’S, 151, 152. 251 


a 


VYASA. 


Fit to be seen, lovely, possessed of great strength, a body hard as 
adamant.—151. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The body is said to be adamantine when its build is as hard as that of adamant. 
Satra 46. 


TSUCASU AA AT GAARA eeIAT: tl Ve ti 


my Grahana, the act, wer Svaripa, the substantive appearance, wferw 
Asmit&, egoism. sa Anvaya, conjunction, weara Arthavattva, purposefulness 
(of sensation). #rq Samyamad, by Samyama over. xem: Indriya-jayab, 
mastery over the senses, 

, Reaouitaratceranthrrn | araaeeeat wTeyt- 
fafaer: | afaPrarat afasteaqs 4 a aceraruaraemret saaarat- 
Fra: & favafiae xfqau naar argerdiarr 1 aed ga: searerrenat 
qraawaa araraanangataaraaggin aq zalifraqs aat 
aad saaitiaeainagre aa aarreatrar Raneaqy wt sva- 
erarnar satateatelatter sat anita aregrerity ature | 
wat wt Tay awgnr gawsaeatia ) qaettahahqastg qari 
VIANA AT TH GAT TSAR TIThrarws: orga Atay Wve hy 

46. By Samyama over the act, the substantive 
appearance, the egoism, the conjunction and the purpose- 
fulness (of sensation) comes mastery over them.—152. 

VYASA. 

Sound, &c., possessed of generic qualities are objects. The act of 
sensation consists in the functioning of the senses with reference to the 
objects. And this functioning is not merely the taking in of the generic 
qualities of an object, because if also the specific qualities of an object 
were not thus taken in, how would they otherwise be perceived by the 
mind ? 

As to their substantive appearance, a sense isa substance ; it is a 
collection of generic and specific qualities whose parts are not possessed 
of intervening space and are. not distinguishable as being separate from 
each other. ‘These generic and specific qualities are of the essence of the 
Will-to-be whose very nature is illumination. 

Their third appearance is the principle of individuality character- 
ized by egoism. The senses are the specialized appearances of that 
generic appearance. 


(Go gle 


252 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 
Eee ae ae ee EE MAD RT ee 


The fourth appearance consists of the qualities which are of the 
nature of illumination, activity and inertia and which determine the 
nature of phenomena. The senses together with the principle of indivi- 
duality are their manifestations. 


The fifth appearance is that of their having the purpose of the 
Purusa to fulfil. This is inherent in the qualities. Samyama is to be 
performed over the five appearances of sensation, respectively, one after 
the other. When all the five appearances have been mastered, then the 
power of over-mastering sensation is manifested in the Yogi.—152. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author describes the means of conquering the senses for the Yogi who has mas- 
tered the elements :—‘ By Samyama over the act, the substantive appearance, the egoism, 
the conjunction and the purposefalness (of sensation), comes mastery ever the senses.’ 
The-meaning is that Samyama is to be performed with reference to the act, the substantive 
appearance, the egoism, the conjunction and the purposefalness, separately, one after 
another. The act of sensation consists in the taking in of objects, and this depends upon 
the objects to be taken in. Hence the determination of the nature of the act depends 
upon the determination of the nature of the objects to be taken in. 


The Commentator describes the nature of the object to be taken in :—‘ Sounds, &c., 
gre possessed of the generic and specific qualities.’ 


Having described the objects to be taken in he now describes the act of taking in:— 
‘And the functioning, &c.’ This fanctioning consists of sensing, i.e. the sense being 
modified into the form of the object. As to those who hold that the sphere of the func- 
tion of the senses is the generic qualities alone, he says to them:—‘And it does not con- 
sist in taking in only the form of the generic qualities.’ That which is taken in is not 
only co-existence with the generic qualities of the object. The mind is dependent for its 
action upon external senses, and works upon the external objects and depends upon them. 
If this were not so, there would be no blind and deaf people. If, such being the case, the 
senses were not to have the specific qualities for their sphere of. action, the specific 
qualities would not at all be known, How then would the mind know them in sequence ? 
Hence the act of sensation consists in the taking in of both the generic and the specific 
qualities. 

This act of taking in is the first phenomenon of the senses. 

Now he describes the second appearance :—‘ As to substantive appearance :—'‘ It is 
the principle of individuality which produces the power of sensation out of its own es- 
sence (the Sattva). Hence the instrumentality which is generic nature of the senses 
and also the action in connection with the appointed sphere of colour, &c., which is the 
specific quality, both are of the nature of illumination. This is the meaning. 


This is their third appearance. The principle of individuality is of course the 
cause of the senses. Wherever the senses are there must the principle of individuality 
be. Being thus the common cause of the senses, it is the generic quality of these senses. 

Tho fourth appearance :—The qualities appear as possessing two forms. They are 
of the nature of things which exist as such ; and they are also of the nature of the power 
which determines.the existence of phenomena. Of these the nature of the things in 
existence as such consists in their being the objects of knowledge; and these are the 
five TanmAtras, the elements and the things made of the elements. The power again which 


Google 


Cd. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 152, 155. 253 


determines the existence of the phenomena takes up the form of the instruments of 
knowledge, and consists of the senses together with the principle of individuality. This is 
the meaning. The rest is easy.—46. 


Sitra 47. 


aa Aaa RUTATA: TATAsTsAaT 1 VO UV. 


aa: Tatah, thence. *?tr-warty Mano-javitvam, quickness (as of the mind), 
feuce-ra: Vikarana-bhavah, uninstrumental perception, saa Pradhdua, over the 
first cause. 4: Jayah, mastery. 


47. Thence come quickness as of mind, un-instru- 


mental-perception and mastery over the Pradhana (First 
Cause.)—153. 

aar amie facnara: sarawaca | ataeatgaa afar 
waaay | ataarhPearmatsanetatrateat gras Raca- 


We? | SATHA ereakred wataag aaa Rear ayaa ssa | 
TATRA HCMNISTHAT HIATT | Fs | 


VYASA. 
Quickness as of mind consists in the attainment by the body of very 
quick motion. 


Un-instrumental Perception means the action of the senses at any 
time or place without the necessity of the presence of the body. 


Mastery over the Pradhana means the power of control over all the 
modifications of the Prakriti. These three attainments are called by the 
name of Madhupratik’. These are obtained by conquering the substan- 
tive appearance (svaripa) of the five instruments of sensation. — 153. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The author mentions the attainments due to the conquest of the five appearances 
of the sonses :—' Thence come quickness as of mind, un-instrumental perception and 
mastery over the Pradhana.’ 


Un-instrumental perception is the action of the senses outside the body. Place 
means Cashmére, &c. Time means past, &c. Sphere means the subtle, &c. 


Mastery over the Pradh4na means control of the modification of the Prakriti by the 
conquest of the senses together with the power of conjunction. These are the attain- 
ments which are called the Madhupratikas by the knowers of Yoga. 


Well, it may be that by the conquest of the senses they may come under control. 
But how their causes, the Pradhdna, &c.? For this reason he says: ‘And these, &c.’ The 
five appearances of the senses are their act, &c. 


‘By their conquest, &c.’ The meaning is this: Itis not by the mere conquest of 
the senses that these powers are obtained, but by the conquest ofall the five appearances; 
and the Pradhéna, &c., fall within these.-— 47. 


Google 


254 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


Sitra 48. 


AAZOM AMSAT AT TAA NSIa AaMNAa F Vs 


wea Sattva, pure objective essence, yew Purusa, consciousness, wen 
Anyata, the distinction between. ‘enft-aera Khy&ti matrasya, to him only who 
recognises. w#&wa Sarva-bhdva, over all states. wafaaaray Adhisthatrittvam, 
supremacy. w#é-waray, Sarva-jidtritvam, omniscience. Cha, and. 

48. To him who recognizes the distinction between 
consciousness and _ pure-objective-existence comes supre- 
macy over all states of being and omniscience.— 154. 

araea Thana aera a 1 Prep ace: 

Mas qrrarerey I Iqcer went qairacaarat Waar TeIagEnt- 

PANETT ATI ITATET aaarahistseay | watearar War aaTararaga- 

aera eartat are ceriveeaercdariua cae | adercead aateaat 

Tuat wraigaaweawaa wafuararamaese Want wratrers: | 

eerar Rarer ara Rafat over ait ate: etagaraeat aait Rack ee oy 
VYASA. 

Supremacy over all states of being comes to him who, having the 
essence of the Will-to-be in the highest state of purity on account of the 
impurities of the Rajas and the Tamas having been destroyed, and when 
the consciousness of power is at the highest, takes his stand at the mani- 
festation of the distinction between the Objective Essence and conscious- 
ness (Purusa). It means that the ‘qualities’ which are the substrata of 
all phenomena, being of the nature of the things that are in existence, 
as well as of the power which determines this existence, present them- 
selves before the Lord, the knower of the field, as one whole. 

Omniscience means the simultaneously discriminative knowledge of 
the ‘qualities’ being as they are of the nature of all phenomena, and 
showing forth as they do separately the quiescent, the disturbed and 
the unpredicable characteristics. This attainment is known as the ‘Sor- 
rowless’ (visoka). 

Reaching this the Yogi moves omniscient and powerful, with all 
his afflictions ended.—154. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Now the author shows the attainments subsidiary to the attainment of the knowledge 
of the distinction between the Objective Essence and the Puruga, with the object of 
attaining which are performed the Samyamas which bring about power of knowledge 
and action, and which by direct knowledge, and one after the other, go on strengthening 
faith in the object promised, by means of the presents of the attainments that are being 
made constantly :—‘ To him who realizes the distinction between the Objective Existence 
and consciousness, comes just then supremacy over all the states of being and omniscience,’ 


Go gle 


Cd, Il. ON ATTAINMENTS, 154, 155. 255 


Purity comes by the dirt of Rajas and Tamas being removed. Thence comes the con- 
sciousness of the highest power. The mental Essence was before the attainment of this 
state covered by the Rajas andthe Tamas. On the removal thereof it becomes subject 
to the power of the masterful Yogi. When it becomes subject to the Yogi who has just 
attained to the possession of the knowledge of the distinction between Objective Essence 
and consciousness then the Yogi becomes supreme over all states of being. The Com- 
mentator explains the state :—‘ The Gunas which are the substrata, &c.’ The objects to 
be determined and the determination mean the intelligent and tho non-intelligent pheno- 
mena. The power of action is explained by this. 

He mentions the power of knowledge: ‘Omniscience, &c.’ and gives a name to 
this two-fold attainment well-known to the Yogis, with the object of inclining towards 
desirelessness: ‘This is named the ‘Sorrowless.” Such a Yogi is described to be one 
whose afflictions and bonds, i. e. Karmas have been destroyed.—48. 


Siitra 49, 


ASUPATAN AISA RATA th VE 


weteram Tadvairagyat, by desirelessness for that. wf Api, even. @rewer 
Dosaebija, of the seed of bondage. wa Ksaye, on the destruction. @aer, 
Kaivalyam, absolute independence. 


49. The seed of bondage having been destroyed by 
desirelessness even for that, comes absolute-independence 
(Kaivalya).—155. 


qacrarany aredineas Raery | warete waht Sansa aeqerd 
fraemer oe ad a tare ered garearaitandt gate —o 
aa foamaa am gate eraaisedtrscaran 
Ag AAT Weed TeSha | ag wstaAg ges: gait a 
spurat wate wig URarataernat atadrarassraa 
raat quran: Saed aq ereaatrsr Pafrafata ges ef y ve, 


VYASA. 


When he comes to think that the discrimination of the distinctive 
natures, is after all a manifestation of the quality of Essentiality (Sattva) 
and that the quality of essentiality has been classed with avoidable 
pains; and that the Purusa is unchangeable, pure and other than the 
quality of essentiality (Sattva) then he begins to lose his desire for that, 
and then the afflictions having had their seed burnt up, become incapable 
of sprouting again like the burnt up seeds of rice. 


Then all the seeds of afflictions pass, together with the mind, into 
latency. When they have become latent, the Purusa does not then suffer 
from the triad of pain. This then, the state, that is to say, in which the 
qualities manifest in the mind as afflictions, actions and fruitions do not, 
having fulfilled their object, come back to action, is the final separation 


(Go gle 


256 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


of consciousness from the qualities. This is the state of absolute inde- 
pendence, when the Purusa remains consciousness alone, as in its own 


nature.—15d. . 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

Because the other Samyamas are all but the semblances of the object of the Parusa 
the author now shows that the Samyama for the attainment of discriminative knowledge 
is the fulfilment of the purpose of the Purusa, inasmuch as its fruit is the attainment of 
absolute independence by means of the manifestation of desirelessness: ‘On the des- 
truction of the seed of afflictions by desirelessness even for that, comes absolute inde- 
pendence.’ When on the destruction of actions and afflictions, the Yogi becomes conscious 
of what he says is knowledge of discrimination as a characteristic of the Sattva, &c.’ The 
rest has been described here and there and is therefore easy.—49. 

Satra 50. 


WFAUNAAAY ARAAAY JAUASIARTT VW vo tl 
enfi-scittere =Sthdni-upanimantraye, on the invitation by the presiding 
deities. (fraeaw) (erfq) wg Sanga, attachment. erm Smaya, smile of satisfaction. 


wey Akaranam, non-performance of. ya: Punah, again. wg Anista, -with 
the undesirable, egm Prasafigat, contact being possible. 


50. When the presiding-deities invite, there should 
be no attachment and no smile of satisfaction; contact 
with the undesirable being again possible.—156. 

MTT SEAM KC GAcrawagray | Bae: weal Ara: 
TIRIa ay: serteemrnradaaia | carat TIAAs- 
wae saa: | aeanrcoet fadta | yeast gare: | aay area ATTA 
HIATGT FARIA ANITA TATL | AqGNEa APTA aasaaea# . 
Gast: Bahra wer cha law aaa art areepaT merTET 
wrker tar: aeaighzag¢as: waacaktaetae Ar eereaarite cert 
RATA ATT Baas Harcawats aergy waza aaraahs arava 
RAITAT: Qvar HegHA Kear Al Saat MARST Wacar er vitraygat 
awa: KI aUpMKaaMay Naas MarrankeaaIACAAe WTA 
aarat Hrakraaahe faa: ARAIATAIT Ay AARNE TaAaa F- 
at aaa Aatadaaa subrerariza: | alatrcarsenasdgr- 
wey 8a geuraran freaarze: afta | a aes Seas: HRTaTAaT 
fragrant aBaceta ga: ofr aercracenaeangareer | 
zaftt a: warns: BaaTardarnat Ansa Afacat: aah 
waka | eENSaT Aaa a Haltaag Tararahy serra xr! TATA 
grata aga tig whararat a arakreaie | wararer are 
wet Rei aeteaa: gartt wea fan gargerakrae ax gache- 
TAR: | THEA TRERATT AAT aTIarsal ectakaeata ara draganaishryer 
SRreaatriat Wyo A 


Go gle 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 156. 257 


VYASA. 

‘When the presiding deities invite, there should be no attachment 
and no smile of satisfaction; contact with the undesirable being again 
possible.’ ‘There are four classes of Yogis:--(L) The prathama kalpika ; 
(2) The madhubhaémika; (3) The Prajfajyotih; (4) The atikrantabhéa- 
vaniya. 

The first is the one who is practising and in whom the light is 
just appearing. The second is he who has attained the Ritambhara 
cognition. The third is he who has attained power over the elements 
and the senses, who preserves all that has been known and has to be 
known, who has been doing what has to be done and who is given to 
practice. The fourth is the Atikrantabhavaniya. His sole object is to 
make the mind latent in the Pradhina. Its stages are the seven-fold 
in finality. 

Of these then the Brihmana to whom opens up the yet unseen 
plane of Madhumati, is invited by the gods from their various places. 
They tell him, ‘Come, sit here; enjoy yourselves here; this is a lovely 
enjoyment, here is alovely damsel; this is the elixir of life, which 
counteracts old age and death; here isa vehicle which moves through 
the skies ; these the kalpa trees; this is the pure stream of Mandakint ; 
these the perfected ones, the great seers, and beautiful and obedient 
nymphs; here are clairvoyance and clair-audience; here a body of 
adamantine strength. You have earned all these by your virtues. Come, 
take all this. This isan eternal, unfading, undying position which the 
gods love.’ 

Thus addressed, let him contemplate upon defects of attacliment. 
‘It is with difficulty that I have procured the light of Yoga, the destroyer 
of the darkness of afflictions, after having been long backed by the flames 
of the world and rolled into the darkness of birth and death. These 
winds of sensuous enjoyment, brought into sensuous existence by desire, 
are calculated to put that light out. Having seen all this how should 
I allow myself to be deluded by the mirage of sensuous enjoyments and 
put myself as fuel again into the burning fire of the same changeful 
existence. Farewell then, ye sensuous enjoyments; ye are but dreams, 
fit only to be enjoyed by weaklings.’ 

Having thus come upon a fixed resolution, let him practise bis 
meditation. Having thus not allowed himself to become attached, let 
him not indulge himself in a smile of satisfaction that even the gods 
begged him. If he indulges in such satisfaction, he will never perceive 
himself as having his hairin the grasp of death, and resting in fancied 

88 


Google 


258 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


security. Thus forgetfulness ever on the watch for a hole, and ever full 
of efforts, would find its way into the mind; and once there it will bring 
the afflictions back to life; and thence will come in contact with the 
undesirable. ‘Thus avoiding attachment and mental pride, the high 
mental state will obtain firm hold upon him and the object that is to be 
attained, will ever keep in front.—156. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Now seeing that there is possibility of obstacle in the way of the Yogi who is prac- 
tising the means of perfect freedom (kaivalya), the author teaches the cause of its re- 
moval :—‘ When the presiding deities invite, there should be no attachment and no smile 
of satisfaction ; there being possibility of contact with the undesirable again.’ 


The presiding deities are Mahendra, &c., who function in the regions of the powers 
thus obtained by the Yogi. The invitation comes from them. Attachment and a smile of 
satisfaction should not be indulged therein, because in that case there is again the possi- 
bility of the recurrence of the undesirable. Now with the object of determining the class 
of the Yogi whom the gods invite from their places, the Commentator mentions all the 
classes of possible Yogis: ‘ There are four classes, &c.’ Now he describes the nature of 
the Prathama-kalpika :—‘ Of these he who practises, &c.’ In him the light of the know- 
ledge of objects, such as the mind of others, &c., has just appeared ; it has not been 
mastered by him. He mentions the second :—‘He who possesses the truth-bearing cogni- 
tion, &c.’ The cognition there is truth-bearing (Ritambhara). It is he who desires to 
conquer the elements and the senses. 


He mentions the third :—‘He who has conquered the elements and the senses.’ 
By this the elements and the senses have been conquered by Samyama over the gross and 
other appearances and over the act of sensation and other appearances. He described 
him further :—In all those that have been achieved by the conquest of the elements and 
the senses, such as knowing the mind of others, &c., he makes up his mind to preserve, 
so that they may not be destroyed, In those again which have still to be achieved, such 
as the ‘ Sorrowless, &c.,’ up to the higher desirelessness, he resorts to all the means that 
should be adopted. The effort of many achieves the object of attainment by resorting to 
the proper means only. 


He mentions the fourth :—‘The fourth, &c.’ This worshipful being absolutely free 
while yet in life, and possessing only the last body, has the sole object of making the 
mind latent in the First Cause (Pradhana). 


Out of these he determines the Yogi who is invited by the gods :—‘ To whom opens 
up the yet unseen plane of Madhumati, &c.’ 

As to the neophyte (Prathama-kalpika) there is not the least suspicion in the mind of 
Mahendra, &c., that he will get to the end of Yoga. The third also is not to be invited 
by them, because he has got what they invite him for, by his conquest of the elements and 
the senses. In the fourth also the suspicion of attachment is removed the farthest on 
account of his having reached the state of higher desirelessness. He who remains is 
the second alone, fit to be the object of invitation. It is he alone whose cognition is 
truth-bearing, that can be the object of invitation. ‘ Undying’ is that which is not 
destroyed. ‘ Unfading’ is that which is ever renewed. 

He describes the fault of the smile of satisfaction :—‘If he indulges in the smile of 
satisfaction, &c.' He will never understand impcrmanency, being possessed of a false 
sense of security on account of satisfaction. The restis easy. 


Google 


CH. IIT. ON ATTAINMENTS, 156, 157. 259 


In different places it has been said that omniscience resultsfrom Samyama, That, 
however, does not mean the knowledge of everything without exception. It only describes 
the nature of the knowledge, as when they say,‘ We have tasted all vegetables.’ The 
meaning hereis that we have tasted all sorts ofsauces, not that there is none left. The 
word ‘ all’ ( sarva ) does signify that nothing remains ; as in the word ‘ The eater has eaten 
all the food that was givento him.’ Here the meaning is that nothing remains.—50. 


Siitra 51. 


° e 
ANAHAM: ATATSARA HAT UL UN 
weaemaa: Ksana-tat-kramayoh, (w8) over the moments, (a) And their. 
(#4) succession, #Ta Samyamat, by Samyama. fateery Vivekajam, born-of-dis- 
crimination, wy, Jiidinam, knowledge. 


01. By Samyama over the moments and their suc- 
cession, comes knowledge born-of-discrimination.---157. 


AUAHAM: ATTA AA | AMT AIRiTIS Tet TATTTT I- 
AUTH BIS: AIM ATA AT SAAT AT: TAY: FSA RENTAL TAV- 
VIIA Aas: AM: asraetssqeg MA: aUAMAIalier Fey AATEC 
ia | qheaarettr qealeernga: | & @ead Hat aeg Weasie afehatn 
Tega Skat afaaqaarat aeqeer wartarad | wR 
aegraa: masa | MART ATUTAAAKAT a Hralagq: Bre Caraare Ikra: | 
AAA BN AE AIT: | HATA A FIT TE YArcerrareqaansacey war AaT- 
araga AUT HAEATTAATA TaR? atta qatar aan: aie aEear- 
mtfet acetatere: | tg wataa: eared Tararhaar aretaredaae arara 
wet ora: aturanguale aatinrece ae oe qatar wa: 
SHAM: MIATA Aalenca aaga ans att TTT 4s It 

VYASA. 

As an atom is a substance in which minuteness reaches its limit, 
so, 2 moment isa division of time in which minuteness reaches its limit. 
Or a moment is that much of time which an atom takes in leaving the 
position in space it occupies and reaching the next point. The succession 
of moments is the non-cessation of the flow thereof. The moments and 
their collection do not fall into a collection of actual things. The 
Muhirta, the day and night are all aggregates of mental conceptions. 
This time which is not a substantive reality in itself, but is only a mental 
concept, and which comes into the mind asa piece of verbal knowledge 
only, appears to people whose minds are given to out-going activities, as 
if it were an objective reality. The moment falls under the head of reality, 
and is maintained by succession. ‘This succession consists in the sequence 
of moments. The Yogis who know time call this by the name of time. 


Google 


260 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Further two moments cannot co-exist. There can be no succession 
of two co-existent moments. It is impossible. The uninterrupted 
sequence of the first moment and of the one which follows, is what is 
called succession. For this there is but one moment existing in the 
present ; the antecedent and postcedent moments do not exist. There- 
fore, there cannot be any collection of them. 


Further, the moments that have passed and those that have yet 
to come, should be described as existing in consequence of universal 
change in evolution. For this reason the whole world undergoes change 
every moment, all these characteristics are relatively established in 
that one moment of time. By Samyama over the moments and their 
succession, direct knowledge is obtained of them both, and thence is 
manifested discriminative knowledge.—157. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Here the author describes the Samyama which is the means of obtaining the know- 
ledge born out of discrimination:-‘ By Samyamaover moments and their succession comes 
knowledge born of discrimination.’ The Commentator gives the meaning of the word 
* moment’ by an illustration :—‘ As the atom, &c.’ Wherever ina piece of stone, which 
is being divided and divided again and again, smallness reachesa point beyond which it 
cannot go, it is said to reach the limit of minuteness. That is called an atom. Similarly, 
the uttermost limit of minuteness of timc, isa moment,a division of time which is not 
related to any other division of time as a part antecedent and postcedent. 


He describes the same moment in another way :—‘ Or, as muchas, &e.’ The meaning 
is that a moment is that much of time in which a mere atom may go off its present place. 


He describes the meaning of the word succession :—‘ The non-cessation of the flow, 
&c,’ ‘Thereof’ means of the moments. 


Further this sort of succession is not real. It is, on the other hand, a mental concept. 
Because it is impossible that a collection of them should be contemplated as real, seeing 
that they do not exist simultaneously, he says this :—‘ The moments and their succession, 
&c.' Because succession has for its characteristic the existence of a moment not in 
simultaneity, and because the collective existence of moments is devoid of objective 
reality, the collective existence of moments and their succession is also void of objective 
reality. Men without the natural excessive intellection of a Vaib4ntika, being every 
moment given to knowledye which consists in out-going activity, and who are, therefore, 
confused, think that this Time is a reality. 


Well then, is the Moment also unreal? He answers in the negative. ‘The moment, 
however, is classed among realities,’ is a real substance. ‘It is given support to by 
succession’ :—The succession that gives support to the moments is only a rental concept, 
the result of imagination ( vikalpa ), 

He gives the reason for the succession giving support to the moment :—‘As to 
succession, &c.' 

He gives the reason for the succession being unreal :—‘ And two moments, &c.' The 
word ‘and,’ here signifies the reason‘ why.’ 

He saya to him who holds that the moments each belonging to a different class may 
oo-exist ;—‘ There can be no succession, &c.’ 


(So gle 


CH, 111. ON ATTAINMENTS, 157, 158. 261 


Why is it impossible? For this reason he says :—‘ Succession is, &c.' He con~- 
cludes :—‘ For this reason. ’ 

Well, then, are the antecedent and postcedent moments of the nature of the horns 
ofa hare only ? He says, No. ‘The moments that are gone and those that are yet to 
come, &¢.’ 

Existing in consequence of universal change :—This means followed in sequence 
similar. Concludes :—‘ Therefore, &c.' Because the present only has the power over the 
actions of objects proper to it.—51. 

Siitra 52. 


AAAATAACIM ATS TerTeTa: Tera: WARM 


ofa JAti, genus. wee Laksana, differentia. @2 Desa, position in space by 
all these. wen Anyatd, by separateness, wrawar Anavachchhedat, there being 
no distinction. ge: Tulyayoh, of two similars. aa: Tatah, thereby. sft: 
Pratipattih, the distinction. 


52. Two-similars are thereby distinguished when 
not separately distinguishable by genus, differentia and 
position-in-space.— 158. 


aa raat sofraa | siraauticarmaaqracrirer#n sf- 
afa: | FETA TATA arfaaaisuarat ig: | rtaaetahPr qeraer- 
wrt weranerst ereet Ar <afeanay Ae) garcrawaraie- 
| BRUNT TAAATSITAHT eS Falhaqacles | wala Taare nayeqwsTy 
RIqeaz QU Suda Tar qe Taagacaaeta akramg wate: | Wet 
Perta a cag ataaitaa cag | aa: ofrafafeteserat Ket 
qGaasHaerMey TarAeRaeaT Taher | A GASH Tag aeraTga- 
Suet | wagwawmgrgeg warcara sata | qaqa gerda wWarineqeassr- 
framtaer qdqcarydnaerMeTeneawangaucea YAM WIT ayIT- 
agua aguaawar faa: aaawaaraarareyq ARATE wa- 
rf | gz a qdaha | ase franesuamead gat 1 any a- 
eerertay afrara tran ierqeaTa Bg: | qangeg aright wad IH 
qfanatiaraaarararatita qegerrceartas areaeg: 1) 42 I 

VYASA. 

Its sphere is defined :—‘ Two similars are thereby distinguish- 
ed, when not separately distinguishable by genus, differentia and _posi- 
tion in space.’ When position and secondary qualities are the same, the 
genus causes distinction between two similars. Thus ‘ This isa cow,’ 
‘This isa mare.’ When position and genus are common, the secondary 
quality causes distinction, as is the case witha black-eyed cow and an 
auspicious cow. Between two emblic fruits in which the genus and 
secondary qualities are the same, difference of position causes distinction. 


Google 


262 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


am 


This is anterior and this is posterior. When, however, the anterior emblic 
fruit moves on to the position of the posterior one in space, at a time 
when the seer may be looking elsewhere, the position becoming the same, 
it can no Jonger cause distinction (as to which it was originally), the 
anterior or the posterior ? In the knowledge of truth, however, there 
should be no doubt. Hence has it been said, ‘They are thereby distin- 
guished.’ It means, by discriminative knowledge How? The space 
correlated to the moment of time of the anterior emblic fruit, is different 
from the space correlated to the moment of time of the posterior emblic 
fruit. And the emblic fruits are separate in the sequential notions of the 
movements in time correlated to their distinct positions in space. The 
sequential notion of space correlated to another moment of time is the 
means of their distinction. 


As in this case, so in the case of atoms which have community of 
genus, secondary quality and position in space. By discovering the yet 
unknown correlation of every atomic position in space toa different 
moment of time, the sequential notion of such a position in space for 
the anterior atom becomes distinct from such a position in space for 
the distinction of atoms, on the analogy of this illustration. The power- 
ful Yogi knows this distinction by the correlated moment. 


Others however say:—lIt is the last peculiarities (the Vigesa of 
the Vai¥esikas) that cause the notion of distinction. Even there the 
distinction is the difference of space and secondary quality and the 
difference of form, distance and genus. ‘The distinction on account of the 
moment of time can, however, be grasped by the intellect of a Yogt alone. 


As has been said by Varsaganya:—‘On account of the absence of 
the difference of form, intervening space and genus, there is no separation 


in the root. —158. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Although this knowledge born of discrimination has all existences for the sphere of 
its operation, as will be shown farther, still being very subtic, one particular sphere is 
first defined :—‘ Two similars are thereby distinguished, when not separately distinguish- 
able by genus, differentia and position.’ For ordinary men the difference of genus is the 
cause of the knowledge of distinction. When genus such as the characteristic of a cow 
ig the same; when also space, such as presence in the east, &c., is the same ; then the 
distinction of the black-eyed and the auspicious is the other means of distinction. In 
two emblic fruits the genus of emblic fruit is the same, the differentize of roundness, &c., 
are the same. The difference of space, however, is another means of distinction. When, 
however, some one desirous of testing the knowledge of the Yogi, takes the anterior fruit 
when he has his attention turned towards something, and places it in the spot previously 
occupied by the other fruit, having removed the other fruit from there or having conceal- 
ed it, then the space also becomes the same, and it can no longer be decided that this is 


Google 
2 


CH. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 138. 263 


the former and this is the latter. The ordinary wise man who is clever in the use of the 
three means of knowledge, will not be able to distinguish the two under such circum- 
stances. The knowledge of realities, however, should be free from doubt. It is not proper 
that a Yogi who is possessed of discriminative knowledge should remain doubtful. Hence 
has the author of the aphorism said :—‘ Are thereby distinguished, &c.’ 


Explains ‘thereby.’ It means by discriminative knowledge. The question now is: 
How can knowledge born by Samyama over moments and their succession distinguish an 
emblic fruit from another which is the same with reference to genus, secondary quality 
and position in space? The Commentator gives the answer :—‘ The space correlated 
to the moment of time of the antcrior emblic fruit, is different from the space correlated 
to the moment of time of the posterior emblic fruit.’ ‘The space correlated to the 
moment of time of the anterior emblic fruit, means the space which coincides with the 
one moment of time of the anterior emblic fruit ; or in other words, the change which has 
no interval between itself and the one moment of time. It is different from the position 
in space correlated to the moment of time of the posterior fruit, i.c., from the un-inter- 
rupted change of the posterior fruit. 

Let there be tlic difference of positions in space; but how does it affect the distinc- 
tion of the fruit? For this reason he says :—‘ And the emblic fruits are separate in the 
sequential notions of their moments of time correlated to their positions in space. The 
moment of time that is correlated to the distinct position in space of the emblic fruit, is 
that portion of time which is indicated by the change of anteriority and posteriority in its 
own position in space. The notion of this moment of time correlated to its distinct 
position means the knowledge thereof. It is by this knowledge that the fruits are dis- 
tinguished. The performer of Samyama knows that the two emblic fruits are diffcrent, 
by the knowledge of their becoming characterized by a moment of time correlated to the 
change of anteriority and posteriority, in a position other than that in which the changes 
of anteriority and posteriority in a moment of time existed formerly. Now although the 
former place has been changed, the Sainyama is performed with reference to the moment 
of time correlated to the present changed position of the same object, qualified by the 
change of position in space different from the former one. By the performance of this 
Samyama direct knowledge is obtained of the change in time in the other position. For 
this reason it has been said :—‘ The sequential notion of the moment of time correlated to 
another position in space, hecomes the cause of their distinction,’ 

Now he says that by the analogy of this very illustration, the same sort of distinction 
should be believed as existing among atoms, on the authority of a Yogi who alone can 
conceive of the distinction. ‘On the analogy of this illustration, &c.’ 

‘Others however say: (he cites their opinion) ‘it is the last, &c.’ The, Vaisegikas 
say that there are certain ultimate peculiarities which are manifest in the permanent 
substances. It is thus argued. The Yogis who are absolutely free do not distinguish 
between objects whose genus, position in space and secondary qualities are the same, 
and in which there is no interval ; and cannot specify either by pointing out mutual differ- 
ences or by defining their realities. There must, therefore, be some ultimate peculiarity 
(Visesa) : and it is that, that they make out to be the differentiating quality of permanent 
substances, such as atoms, &c. 

He refutes this theory :—‘ Even there, &c.’ Genus, space and secondary quality have 
been illustrated. Form is a manifestation of arrangement along certain lines. Thus 
having romoved a thing whose parts are beautifully arranged, another object whose 
parts are ugly in arrangement, is placed in the same position when the seer is otherwise 
employed. In this case the knowledge of distinction is obtained by the difference of 
arrangement. 


Google 


264 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Or, form may mean the body. It is by relation to the body that the selves whether 
in evolution or freo are distinguished by means of the action of the elements, such as it 
may be. Thus when the notion of distinction is caused anywhere by other means, it is 
not necessary to posit a differentia in the shape of ultimate peculiarity (Antya Visega), 
as the cause of the distinction. This is similar to the case of the Dvipas of Kuéa and 
Puskara in their aspec$ of planes of space. 

Inasmuch as it has been said that the differences of genus, position and time, &c., 
are known by the intellect cf the ordinary man, it is said that the difference of moment 
of time (ksana) is known by the intellect of the Yogi alone. The word ‘alone’ signifies 
the difference of the moment of time, not that of the intellect of the Yogi. It is inferred 
that the distinction between released Purusas also is known by the intellect of the Yogi 
by their relation to the body moving in the elements (bhdtachara). 

The teacher thought that in the ca8e of those who do not possess the means of dis- 
tinction, there are no distinctions in the ease of the Pradhina. Therefore, he said :— 
‘Although destroyed with reference to those whose objects have been gained, it is 
not destroyed with reference to others, being common to the others.’ 

He says this :—‘ On account of the absence of form, &c.’ The meaning is that the 
universe has difference indicated by the causes mentioned, But there is no distinction 
in the root, the Pradhana.—52. 

Sitra 53. 


e e e be 
aH AAATG TAMIA Ata ASAT YAN 

aay Tarakam, the intuitional, fav Sarva-visayam, having everything 
(s8) for its Sphere of operation (fava), siareaq Sarvatha-visayam, (ste) having 
allconditions (faya) For its sphere of operation. warq Akramam, having no 
succession, @&Cha, and, fa Iti, this. 

53. And itis the intuitional; has everything for its 
sphere-of-operation; has all-condition for its sphere-of- 
operation; has no succession. This is the entire discri- 
minitive knowledge.—-159. 


ach aakrag erdenterraaat ale raters | area eferar- 
rmaraahrenitrers: | TATA AT | fataredhyatrak: | adar- 
PrecatrererreRge aa Tate: TET srararaa: | oecinel 
aa ada aerdrera: | cafgansdt ara oitqietaiat — manat 
afrqarara araqer aiterarferera 1 43 I 
VYASA. 
It is intuitional :--This means that the knowledge comes by 
one’s own prescience and not by teaching. 
Has everything for its sphere of operation :—This meaus that there 
is nothing yet. known, which might not be made its object. 
Has all conditions for its sphere :-—The all, as it was or will be, or 
is with all minor modes of expression. It means that he knows all the 
conditions of these objects. 


(Go gle 


Cd. III. ON ATTAINMENTS, 159. 265 


Has no succession :—It means that he takes in the;‘ all’ as correlat- 
ed to but one moment. 
This is the entire discriminative knowledge :—The light of Yoga 


is part of this only, beginning with the Madhumati up to the end of this 
knowledge.—159. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Having thus described one branch of discriminative knowledge, the author now des- 
cribes discriminative knowledge :—‘It is intuitive; has everything as the sphere of its 
operation; has all conditions as its sphere ; has no succession ; this is the entire discrimi- 
native knowledge.’ 

‘Discriminative knowledge :’ This is the statement of the thing defined. The rest 
is the description. Intuition is called Taéraka, because it becomes the cause of crossing 
the ocean of the universe. Hoe distinguishes this from the knowledge by prescience 
already described :—‘ Has all conditions for the sphere of its operation.’ 

‘Modes of expression :’ means minor modes of differentiation. For this reason the 
knowledge of discrimination is complete. There is nothing anywhere which may not at 
any time or in any way be its object. This is the meaning, There may be other know- 
ledge obtained by cognitive trance, but that also is a part of this, and where therefore 
can there be any knowledge beyond this? Itis for this reason complete. The Commen- 
tator says this :—‘ The light of Yoga, i.e., the Cognitive Yoga, is a part thereof.’ 

Now he says what is the beginning and what is the enc :—‘ Beginning with the Madhu- 
mati, &c.’ The truth-bearing cognition is the Madhu, honey, because it causes, such 
sweet bliss. The meaning is, ‘having obtained the purity of cognition as described.’ 
The Madhumati is that state which is possessed of that and gives sweet bliss. The mind 
having reached that state, manifests up to the end of that state, passing through seven- 
fold stages of intellectual progress. It is for this reason that discriminative knowledge 
becomes intuitional, inasmuch as its branch, the light of Yoga, is intuitional.—58. 


Satra 54. 


awager: Ufsarra Haag tt Ke ht 


era-yenat; Sattvapurusayoh, of the objective essence and the conscious- 
ness, ¥@ Suddhi, of the purity. a Samye, on their becoming equal. 
@aey Kaivalyam, absolute independence. 


54. When the purity of the Objective-Essence and 


that of the Purusa become equal, it is absolute indepen- 
dence.— 160. 


TAA TSAA ATMA AATANTAET aT | SAUNT: Brent Kaew- 
fait | aq my ace afer garenrcamdrerarathtrat arg a- 
att vale aart geen afrarsatrarre vata aar gevercaitadmmar: 
ohracanaenat aaer wate | hacearibacey at Aaeasarnanta racveq 
ati af ara adined erat gata nifagiea Geary header: 
Sibay ert Bramrad Wala errqqae Madd afeaierea a araqgat 

84 


Google 


266 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


Sum g areraresdtarsrcaratafraneaaeaarenrat Tet + qa 
A&B a 
af sitarargqearea ateasaaa Rrafrarcerdra: Gare: 9 3 


VYASA, 


In the case of him who has obtained discriminative knowledge as 
well as in the case of him who has not obtained discriminative knowledge, 
it is absolute independence (kaivalya), when the purity of the Objective 
Essence and the Purusa become equal. When the essence of the Will-to- 
be with the dirt of the Rajas and the Tamas removed, has the notion of 
the distinctness of the Purusa as its sole remaining object, and all the 
seeds of affliction have been burnt up, then does it, as it were, assume a 
state of purity similar to that of the Purusa. In that state the purity of 
the Purusa consists in the absence of that enjoyment which is attributed 
to him, as it were, figuratively. In that state comes absolute indepen- 
dence (kaivalya), whether it be to the master or to the ordinary man, 
to him who is possessed of discriminative knowledge or to him who is 
not. 

He in whom the seed of affliction is burnt up, has no longer any 
need of knowledge anywhere. It is asthe means of purifying the subs- 
tance of the Will-to-be that knowledge and the powers born of trance have 
been touched upon. In reality ignorance is removed by knowledge. On 
its cessation there are no longer any afflictions. When there are no afflic- 
tions, there is no fruition of actions. The Gunas in that state have ful- 
filled their object. They, therefore, nolonger present themselves to be 
seen by the Purusa. Then the Purusa shining in his own pure light, 
becomes absolutely independent (kevala)—160. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having now described the means of absolute independence, the Samyamas together 
with the attainments, the author now introduces this aphorism in order to show that the 
knowledge of the distinction between the Objective Essence and the Purusa is the direct 
means of absolute independence :—‘In the case of him who kas obtained, &c.’ The mean- 
ing is that the knowledge born of discrimination does, all the same, become the means of 
absolute independence, whether or not there is the knowledge born of discrimination. 
‘It is absolute independence (kaivalya) when the purity of the Objective Essence and that 
of the Puruga become cqual.’ 

‘The master’ is he who has by the performance of Samyama obtained the power of 
knowledge and action, The ordinary manis he who has not obtained these powers. To 
him who is possessed of discriminative knowledge by the performance of Samyama des- 
cribed just before, or, to another who has obtained knowledge otherwise, in either case, 
the attainments are never under requisition for the purpose. ‘He in whom the seeds of 


affliction, &c.’ 


Google 


CH, IIt. ON ATTAINMENTS, 160. 267 


Well, but if they are unnecessary for absolute freedom their teaching is useless. 
For this reason the Commentator says :—‘ As a means of the attainment of the purity of 
the Objective Essence, &c.’ 

The attainments are not absolutely unnecessary in attaining absolute independence. 
They are not its direct means. The knowledge born of discrimination and that which is 
obtained by the successive performance of Samyama is only an indirect cause. The 
principal cause is the knowledge of distinction. This is the meaning. Ignorance is 
removed by knowledge. Knowledge means the Highest Intellection.-—54. 


In this chapter the direct means of Yoga have been described. Also the evolutionary 
changes have been dilated upon. Also the conjunction with the elements by Samyama. 
Also the knowledge born of discrimination. This is tho third chapter of VACHASPATI'S 
GLOSS on Vy4sa’s Commentary of the aphorisms of Yoga. The third Chapter, the Chapter 
on Attainments, is finished. 


Google 


THE FOURTH CHAPTER. 
ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE (KAIVALYA). 
Stra x, 


AMITAAT AAs: st: eu 


om Janma, birth, @wie Ausadhi, drugs. wa Mantra, incantations. av: 
Tapah, purificatory rites, wnt Samadhi, trance. ot: Jab, born, fage: Siddha- 
yab, attainments. 


1. The attainments are by birth, drugs, incantations, 
purificatory action (tapas) or trance.—161. 


wiatiasaveaaiien: Rrra | teratar wear: arehirc 
quraag caraadani: 1 westcrearnaaaanzahe: | aa ayST 
Rae: | eran aT ae Han rkamRaatiar: wa Aarewanr av 4 


VYASA. 

Attainments by birth exist in the body. 

By drugs, in the houses of the Asuras, by elixir and such like: 

By incantations, motion in space and the powers of attenuation 
(anima), &c. 

By purificatory action (tapas) the achievement of wishes. He takes 
such forms and goes to such places as he may like, and does other similar 
things. 

The attainments born of trance have been described.—-161. 


VACHASPATI'’S GLOSS. 


Now trance, its means and its attainments, have been described chiefly in the first, 
second and third chapters. Other subjects which it became necessary to take up by 
context, or by way of introduction, have also been discussed Here is to be discussed 
Absolute Freedom (Kaivalya), which is the ultimate of all these practices, &c. And this 
is impossible to explain without explaining the nature of the mind inclining towards 
the state of absolute independence, as also the other world and the self which being 
something beside knowledge alone (Vijifna), is related to the other world, and which 
enjoys through the instrumentality of the mind, pleasurable sound, &c. All this has to 
be described in this chapter, besides what might become necessary by context or by 
way of introduction. 

First of all, he describes the five-fold attainment, with the object of ascertaining 
which of the minds possessed of attainments is passing towards the state of absolute 
independence. 

‘The attainments are by birth, incantations, purificatory action or trance.’ He 
explains :—Exists in the body:—Some one has the power of attenuation in the body, 
just as he is born because actions done by him as man, which are calculated to cause 
the enjoyments of Heaven, have developed them into fruition in some heavenly region. 


Google 


CH. IV. § 2. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 162. 269 
a eg 


He describes the attainments due to drugs:—‘In the houses of the Asuras.’ Man 
passes to the places:‘of the Asuras for some resson. He is met there by lovely Asura 
damsels, and given an offering of elixir. Using that he comes to possess the attainments 
of freedom from decay and death, and other attaiments. Or, the same may take place 
even here by the use of elixir, as in the case of the thinker Mandavya, who resided in 
the Vindhya Mountains and who used the elixir, 

He next describes the attainments due to incantations :—‘ By mantras,’ 

He next describes the attainments of purificatory actions :—-‘ By purificatory action.’ 

He next describes the attainment of wishes:—Assuming such forms as desired. 
Whatever does he desire, be it the attainment of Anima or any other, that he attains at 
once, Whatever he desires to hear or to think anywhere, that he hears or thinks there. 
By the word, &c., seeing, &c., have been included.—1. 


Siitra 2. 


TETANY: THAT UR 


ora Jatyantara, to another life-state. tert: ParipAmab, change. sala 
Prakriti, of the creative causes. wea Apfrat, by the filling up. 


2. Change to another life-state by the filling up of 
the creative causes (Prakrity4pura).—162. 


TT HAP ATMTATATAT NATAL | ATALANTA: STHATTTTEL | TS 
quam sacgtuararaanagaraqagraneae Kahres 
wi ef Rreragzgrenqta salgetraarterran xf 12h 

VYASA. 

Here ‘change to another life-state by the filling up of the creative 
causes, takes place of the life-state into which the body and the powers 
have already changed and exist. On the former change going out 
comes the close appearance of their next change by the sequential showing 
forth of organ and parts which did not exist before; and the creative 
causes of the body and the powers favour each their own modifications 
by filling up, which again has the necessity of virtue, &c., as the incidental 
cause (of removing the impediment).—162. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


The attainments due to the trance have been described in the previous chapter. 
It is now desirable to say that the change into another life-state brought about by the 
four classes of attainments due to the use of herbs, &c., is also of the same body and the 
powers thereof. This, however, does not come about by mere material causes. The 
material itself, so far as it goes, does not prove to be competent to intensify or weaken 
the state of the divine and the not-divine, in him. It is plain that a cause having no 
elements of difference in itself cannot operate to produce different effects. In order to 
guard against the possibility of the change being taken as due to accident BION, he 
completes and reads the aphorism :—‘ Change to another life-state by the filling up of 
the creative causes.’ 

Here it is only the change of the body and the powers as they are in one state, 
that takes place into those suitable to another state. The change takes place of the body 


Google 


270 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


and the powers as they appear in man, into the life-state of the animals and gods by the 
filling up of the creative causes. 

The creative causes of the body are the elements of Prithvi, &e, The creative cause 
of the ‘ powers' is the principle of egoism. 

‘Filling up’ means the sequential showing forth, cntrance therein, of these causes 
By this comes about the change. 

Says this: —‘ By the former change going out, &c.’ 

Well, but if the change is favoured by the ‘filling up’ why does it not take place 
always? For this reason he says :—'‘ Has the necessity of virtue, &c. 

By this have been described the changes of the state of the body into childhood, 
boyhood, youth, old age; the change of the seed of the Nyagrodha into the tree; the 
change of the small piece of fire thrown into a heap of straw, into a large fire throwing 
out flames by thousand and embracing the sky itself.—2. 


Sotra 3. 


faraasaisth THAT aTAseg aa: ara 3 Ut 


fafremy Nimittam, incidental causes. ‘wary Aprayojakam, are those which 

do not move into action, set Prakritinaém, the creative causes. aw Varana, 

of the obstacle, %@: Bhedah, piercing through. 93 Tu, but. am: Tatah, from 
that. @feraa Ksetrikavat, like a husbandman. 

3. The creative-causes are not-moved-into-action 

by any incidental-cause ; but that pierces-the-obstacle from 


it like the husbandman.—163. 


iran cedrat acuqey aa: afrnay | aft ealterrtrel 
aan wat secant) asda aed sada eft) ad afe | aca 
Tee sea ArHay | Ta ATK: aqrgat quieaqrrat fgrafig: aa 
Pra Rerat at ate: GnTeRierace aret Arata aftaara cada: 
SrCATATATTAA A TAT TH THarraracaanra frafs akaarer wate 
wHaa: wz <q Rrarcargraaie | aut ar a aa afrncaferd a HA. a 
Taare | af qoaayngarar- 
RIateasTHses | wEesg ag equa Te aTTqergakraiea | au wat 
mafaars RICUATA Daya CTa Ta | aq wefarza aat 
Ravaaes | wt webacrea sarerat: | Aaazanenqaal aa way | aarRT- 
gfxattara sien) varie agersnrrga Sarerar: | wat g Avi agenranfahAehta 
aar Panatented WararaaHATeHr xe tt 2 
VYASA. 


The incidental causes in the shape of virtue, &c., do not move the 
creative causes into action; because the cause is not moved into action 
by the effect. How then? ‘That pierces the obstacle like the husband- 
man.’ 


Google 


CH. IV. § 3. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 163. 271 


As the husbandman desirous of carrying water from an already 
well-filled bed to another, does not draw the water with his own hands 
to places which are on the same or a lower level; but simply removes 
the obstacles, and thereupon the water flows clown of itself to the other 
bed, so it pierces through vice which is the obstacle to virtue, and that 
being pierced through, the creative causes pass through their respective 
changes. 

Or, similarly, the same husbandman does not _ possess the power of 
transferring the earthy and watery juices to the roots of rice in the same 
bed. What then? He weeds the ‘ring,’ the ‘Gavendhuka’ and the 
‘Syamaka’ out of the common bed, and when they have been weeded 
out, the juices themselves enter the roots of rice. 

Similarly virtue only becomes the cause of the removal of the vice, 
because purity and impurity are diametrically opposed to each other. 
It is not that virtue becomes the cause of the creative causes moving 
intoaction. On this point Nandigvara, &c., are illustrations. On the 
other side, too, vice counteracts virtue and thence comes the change to 
impurity. Here too Nahusa, the Ajagara, &c., should be taken as 
illustrations.—163. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

It has been said, ‘By the filling up of the creative causes.’ Here the doubt arises. 
Is this filling up of the creative causes natural, or due to some incidental cause such as 
virtue and vice? What is proved? Well, because the creative causes, notwithstanding 
existence, fill up only sometimes, and because it is said that virtue and vice are the 
incidental causes ; it is, therefore, proved that virtue, &c., are the incidental causes of the 
ereative causes moving into action. For this reason he says:—‘ The creative causes are 
not moved into action by any incidental cause; that pierces the ovstacle like the 
husbandman.’ 

It is true that virtue, &c., are the incidental causes, but they do not set the creative 
causes into action ; because virtue and vice are themselves the effects of creative causes. 
And the effect does not move the cause into action, because the birth of the effect 
depending upon the cause, it is subject to the action of the cause. What is self-dependent 
can only set an action in something which is dependent on it. The jar which is desired 
to be made or which has already been made, cannot certainly use the clay, the wheel 
and water for that purpose without the potter. Nor is it similarly the object of the 
Puruga that sets the creative causes into action. It isonly isvara who does this with 
that object in view. The object of the Purusa is said to be the power which sects in 
action, by virtue of its being the aim thereof. Further, if it were so, the tending of the 
aim of the Purusa towards fulfilment would very properly become the cause of the 
stopping of the operations of the phenomenal world.—3. 

But it is not by this much that virtue, &c., cease to be the means of chango altogether. 
Because they become the means of effecting changes even by removing the obstacles 
only, like the husbandman. As to Isvara, His action too should be understood to be 
of the nature of the removal of obstacles, so that virtue may be practised, This is 
what has been commented upon by the Commentary already explained. 


Go gle 


272 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Sftra 4. 
Pratufraraftrararsra tl 2 0 


fate Nirmana, of creation, created. feerf Chittani, minds. wftrn Asmita, 
from egoism, wer Matrat, alone. 


4. Created minds proceed from egoism alone.—164. 
ratarrarafararara | afearart Pret srcagqarery Patarehy 
mires at: Vera warts We i 
VYASA. 

When however the Yogi makes many bodies, then, are these bodies 
possessed of many minds or all of one mind only? ‘ Created minds pro- 
ceed from egoism alone?’ Taking as cause the mind which is egoism 
alone, he makes the created minds. Thence do the bodies become pos- 
sessed of minds.—164. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 
Now he considers the unity or manifoldness of the minds in the many bodies made by 


perfected powers, after the attainments have been achieved by the filling in of the crea- 
tive causes (Prakpitis) :—‘ When however.' 


Here if the bodies possessed more than one mind, the desire of cach such mind would 
be different from those of the others; and there would not thus be obedience tothe 
desired of one mind and no mutuality in relationship, just as in the case of two individual 
selves (Purusas). It, therefore, comes to this that it is only one mind which pervades 
more created bodies than one, just as the light of a lamp is diffused on all sides and illu- 


minates more bodies than one. Says he thereupon :—‘ Created minds proceed from egoism 
alone,’ ; 


All living bodies, as long as they live, are found to be possessed of one ordinary mind 
each. Take, for example, the bodies of Chaitra aud Maitra, ete. So are the created 


bodies (the Nirmfinakfyas). Thus is it proved that each of these bodies has a mind of its 
own. 


Says with this in mind :—' Taking as causo tho mind which is egoism alone. ’—4. 


Satra 5. 


safrae sash Praataaaaag tx 


wefa, Pravyitti, of activity. 42 Bhede, there being difference, remy 
Prayojakam, the director, faeq Chittam, the mind. w#4 Ekam, one, wary 

Anekesim, of the many. 
5. There being difference of activity, one mind 


the director of-the-many.—165. 
agfaat sank Rrawaaaaan! atgat Rrarat saaererahara- 
goad safatt adtrarat strsck Brat efteta ae: cafe: 4 
VYASA. 
How may it be that many minds may follow in their activities, the 
desires of one mind? With this object he makes one mid as the director 
of all the minds ; and thence proceeds the difference of activities. —165. 


CH. IV. § 6. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 166. 273 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

The aphorism is a reply to what has been said, that in the case of there being more 
minds than one, there would not be obedience to one wind, nor mutuality of relationship :— 
‘There being difference of activity, one mind the director of the others.’ This might be 
a defect if the Yogi didnot make one mind to be the director of more minds than one 
acting in more bodies than one. When that is made, no defect remains. 

It should not be said that there is no use in more minds than one that is one for each 
body, when one such mind is posited; nor should it be said that there is no use in making 
a directing mind, because one’s own mind can serve that purpose, The reason is that 


that which has been proved to exist by right reasoning, need no more be subjected to the 
test of being placed in consonant and dissonant positions. 


On this says the Purina:—‘The one Lord becomes many by his power of Lordship. 
For this reason and because having become many he again becomes one, these are certain- 
ly born by the differences of the mind, one-fold, two-fold, three-fold and manifold. The 
Yogisvara makes his bodies in this way and unmakes them. By some he enjoys objects of 
‘enjoyment and by other performs hard penances. He again draws in the bodies as the Sun 


draws in his ray.’ It is with this object that he says:—-‘How is it that all these minds 
act according, &c.’—5. 


Soatra 6. 


AH CATATAATTAT WW € U 


aa Tatra, of these, rm Dhydnajam, the meditation born, wey Ana- 
Sayam, is free from the vehicles, 


6. Of these the meditation-born is free-from-the- 
vehicles.—166, 


aT TAA | Tad Aatahed seaahaeranenire: 
fra aft i as ate warasi Rad agar ata arRaraar casa ia: 
aa: qoaarafraaen: atag aearenitrr xfer yy & Ul 


VYASA. 


The created mind is five-fold, as said:—‘' The attainments are by 
birth, drugs, incantations, purificatory action or trance.’ Of these the one 
that is born of meditation is alone free from the vehicles. It does not 
possess the vehicles, which cause the manifestation of desire, &c. Thence 
is there no coming into relationship with virtue and vice, inasmuch as 
the afflictions of a Yogi have ceased to exist.—-166. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Now he determines the mind, which tends to emancipation, out of the five descrip- 
tions of the minds of the perfected ones (siddhis), which have been described :—‘ The 
meditation-born is free from the vehicles.’ The vehicles are those that take possession 
of the mind as the impressions of the actions and the impressions of the afflictions, The 
mind free from the vehicles is that in which these do not exist. The meaning is that it 
becomes inclined towards emancipation. Inasmuch as there does not exist in this con- 
dition the manifestation of desires, &c., there is no coming into relationship with virtue 
and vice. But then why do not desires, &c., come into manifestation? For this reason 


he says :—‘ Because the afflictions of a Yogi have ceased to exist. ’—6. 
85 


Google 


274 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


Satra 7. 


amMUeSey arate uot 


wt Karma, Karma, action. wy Asukla, neither white. weery Akrisnam, nor 
black, afm: Yoginah, of a Yogi. fafray Trividham, threefold, ratwq Itaresim, of the 
others. 


7. A Yogi’s karma is neither-white nor-black ; of- 

the-others it is three-fold.—167. 

catat gq frat wale aa) Halgeraca Antaerahatag | 
SAIN RANA: | BU BRET Veisgerecat att) at Beu4r 
TUaAA | VHS He: arqaarearawt wiisigzegitie salnascaT: | 
TSH AT Mtearanareaaany | are nas aneqraacarg ae: arvarnirar a 
qeaisuwat vale! agerean aauat xtog rat acazeratle | 
age wai ce KearTagEdT agar | cist g yarat qa 
fafraiate 9 0 

VYASA. 

The vehicle of actions exists in the case of others. Hence, ‘A Yo- 

gi’s karma is neither white nor black; of the others it is three-fold. ’ 


This class of actions has four locations: the black, the black-white, 
the white, nor white nor black. Of these, the black is of the wicked. 
The black-white is brought about by external meaus, as in this the ve- 
hicle of actions grows by means of causing pain to, or acting kindly to- 
wards others. 


The white is of those who resort to the means of improvement of 
study and meditation. ‘This is dependent upon the mind alone. It does 
not depend upon external means and is not, therefore, brought about by 
injuring others. 


The one which is neither white nor black exists in the case of those 
who have renounced everything (the Sannydsis), whose afflictions have 
been destroyed, and whose present body is the last one, they wiil have. 
It is not white in the case of a Yogi, because he gives up the fruit of 
action; andit is not black, because he does not perform actions. Of 
the other creatures, it is of the three former descriptions only.—167. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 

Says that the others are possessed of the vehicles, with the object of showing the 
differences of the other minds from the meditation-born, which is not possessed of the 
vehicles :—‘ In the case of others, &c.' 

In the same connection he introduces the aphorism as describing the cause there- 
of :—' A Yogi’s karma is neither black nor white; of the others it is three-fold.’ 


Google 


CH. IV. § 8. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 168. 275 


‘Has four locations ’—Location means place (of manifestation). It has four loca- 
tions because it manifests in four such places. 

‘Brought about by external means’—lIn all such cases injury is sure to be caused 
to others. Itis notthat even in action done for the preparation of barley, &c., for food, 
&c., there exists no injury. It is possible that ants, &c., might be killed at the time of 
pounding them, and finally the arrangement is that trunk, &c., are produced by the de 
struction of seeds as such. 

‘Acting kindly’ means the favouring of Brahmanas, &c., by giving them presents, &c. 

The white is of those who are not Sanny4sis, but who perform putrificatory action, 
study and meditation. Heshows how it is white :—‘ This igs dependent upon the mind 
alone, &c.’ 

That which is neither white nor black, is the karma ofthe Sannyfsis (those who 
have renounced everything. He shows who are the SannyAsis :—‘ Whose afflictions have 
been destroyed, &c.’ 

Those who have renounced actions (the karma-sannyAsis) are not anywhere found 
performing actions which depend upon external means. They have not got the black vehicle 
of actions, because they do not perform such actions. Nor do they possess the white 
vehicle of actions, because they dedicate to Ivara the fruits of the vehicle of action 
brought about by the practice of Yoga. That whose fruit is not bad, is called white. 
That which has no fruit itself, how can it have any bad fruit ? 

Having thus described the four-fold division of karma, now he specifies which refers 
to which :—‘ Of these it is not white, &c.’—7. 


Siitra 8, 


aaeaheqraraguraaarasakaataard ts i 
a: Tatah, thence. aq Tad, their (of residual potencies). fas Vipaka, 
fruition, wee Anuguna, following. fara Vipékanuguydnam, of those that 
are competent to bring about their fruition. wa Eva, only, ‘what: Abhivyaktib, 
the manifestation, proceeding, araary Vasandndm, of the residual potencies, 
8. Thence proceed the residual-potencies compe- 


tent-to-bring-about their fruition alone.—168. 


aaehyarantaagaratarratnaraarang | aa eer Prratenawentear- 
algae | astra sain at fares at area: 
maITRAgAs aaraarae: | ae Be HA Resvara arcakrteng- 
eraraatraharitd eaakt 1 Pia Saragor carer atear ere | 
arcHeaS AGAG Fe aarrgaa: ll < | 
VYASA. 
‘Thence’ means from the three-fold karma. | 
‘Competent to bring about the fruition thereof.’ Whatever is the 
fruition of whichever class of karma, such residual potencies only as are 
competent to bring about the fruition of those actions, are manifested. 
When the karma relating to the state of the gods is fructifying, the resi- 
dua which are adequate to the state of the hell-born, the animals and men 
cannot manifest. On the contrary, it is only the impressions which are 


Google 


276 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


adequate to the state of the yods that are manifested. The operation of 
the rule is the same in the case of the hell-born, the human and the ani- 
mal tendencies.— 168. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Having ascertained the vehicle of actions, now he describes the developments of 
the vehicle of afflictions :—‘ Thence manifested the residual potencies competent to bring 
about their fruition.’ He describes the impressions which are competent to bring 
about the life-state, lifc-experience and life-period, whether hellish or divine, which are 
the results of the fruition of good and bad karma:—‘The residual potencies competent 
to bring about the fruition thereof.’ The residua which are born of divine experience 
are competent to bring about the fruition of divine karma. It is not possible that in the 
case of the manifestation of the residua of human experiences, the enjoyment of the 
fruitage of divine actions should take place, For this reason the impressions whose 
manifestation is brought about by karma are of the same class as the fruition thereof. 
This is the meaning of the Commentary.— 8 


Satra 9. 


siftararacaatyarneareday eshteencata- 
SUATT WE Nl 


enfa Jati, of life state. @2 Desa, of locality, we Kala, of time, smafgarny 
Vyavahitan&m, these being distinct. wi Api,even, wrrmnmq Anantaryam, sequen- 
tial non-interruption, fa Smriti, of memory. deer: Samskarayoh, and of poten- 
tial residue. wreuarm [karfipatvat, because of their being the same in appearance. 
9. Memory and potential-residua being the same in 
appearance, there is sequential non-interruption, even when 
there is distinction of life-state, locality and time.—169. 

R 2 Ri @e fe ° 5 2 | e fe : : 
aq warner: | a ae sfsacda a FATA AT HeaIAaa AT 
wat: gaa eesaacara carga Tag TAT Ie TTR. 
AHA ASAT SNe AAT eA aa wAakarraaat ara 
entrar Abihyahenrradaad | gaa eataenrctaeqane | 
DMAAATAMN AEH | AT BAAATATRAT: | AAT BT Therareteay Saslerieeer | 
mfituaeaters: wets: ala: aga Ge en raat 
eahrearn sanagivermmaaare | aaa erattararaty Pitre: 
ffanarargesqraraaara Rr | area: Senet raat Ke: we 


VYASA. 


The rise of fruition in the shape of a cat takes place by virtue of 
the powers competent to show them forth. Even if that rise is separated 
even by a hundred life-states, or by distance in space, or by a hundred 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 9. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 169. 277 


kalpas, it will rise whenever it does, by the operation of its own appro- 
priate cause. Thus will it appear again by taking up the residua which 
are present in the mind on account of the experience of the feline state 
in some former life. Why? Because even if there be an interval be- 
tween them, the residua are manifested by the similar manifesting karma 
becoming the operative cause thereof. Thus there is but sequential 
appearance. And for what other reason? Because memory and residual 
potency are but one in appearance. As are the experiences, such are the 
residual potencies ; and they are of the nature of the residua of actions. 
And memory is similar to the residua. Memory comes by the residual 
potencies separated therefrom by life-state and by time and space. From 
memory come again residual potencies. Thus it is that memory and 
residual potency are manifested by virtue of the vehicle of action coming 
into manifestation. Thus even though separated in time, &c., there is 
sequential non-interruption, inasmuch as the relation of cause and effect 
does not break. 


The Vasanas (aroma) are residual potencies, the vehicles. —169. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Let that be. But, when the state ofa cat is put on after the death of a man, 
it must be due to the manifestation of the residua of the human state of existence, in- 
asmuch as the one immediately follows the other. Itis not possible that the experience 
of the day immediately preceding be not remembered, but that the experiences of an- 
other day more distant therefrom be remembered. For this reason he says :—‘ There 
is sequential non-interruption, even when there is separation in time, life-state and space, 
on account of the memory and residaal potency being the same in appearance.’ There 
may be separation in life-state, &c., from the life of a cat. Still there is non-interruption 
on account of the fruit thereof, because the same memory is generated when the mani- 
festation is according to its own fruit and in consonance with karma which nuust fructify 
into the feline state. ‘The rise of a state’ is the vehicle of action, because it is from 
this state that the fruition arises. Further it takes its rise in accordance with its own 
manifesting cause, 

‘Manifestation ’ means tending towards the beginning of fruition. 

‘Thus will it rise again by taking up the residua which are, &c.’ The meaning is 
that if it does manifest, it would manifest by taking up the residua which manifest its 
own fruition, 

Having established the absence of interruption through the operation of the cause, 
now he establishes the same through the operation of the offect :—‘And for what other 
reason ?’ 

‘One in appearance’ means similarity. He says the same:—‘As are the experi- 
ences, &c.’ 

The question is that if the experiences are of the same appearance as the residual 
potencies, then inasmuch as the experiences are seen disappearing very soon, the 
potencies also must be taken as disappearing very soon. That being the case, how is it 
possible that the potencies, be'ng subject to speedy dispersion, should be competent to- 
bring about experiences, after a great lapse‘of time ? 


Go gle 


278 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


For this rcason he says :—‘And they are of the nature of the residua of actions.’ 
As the new residuum brought about by momentary action is permanent, so also is the 
potency generated by momentary experience. There must always be some difference in 
similarity. Ifit were otherwise and there were no diffcrence, there would be no simi- 
larity. The rest is easy.—9. 


Soatra ro, 


araraatiees anereat Frearg ge tl 


arary, Tasdm, for them. waféraq Andditvam, no beginning. Cha, and, ahr: 
Asisah, of the desire to live. fararara Nityatvat, owing to the eternity. 


10. And there is no-beginning for them, the desire- 
to-live being eternal.—170. 


atarmargea arkrar macar) arat araarararhrar  ercarzariz- 
aq | Fanraratrarnya warahfs qaed wear ar a caraerat | REA! 
MAAAMATYAATMNTAHET SU TVASAeAAAA GTITE: se wa | 
qa Tannth aeq ARragquad | aaqakaraagAas ag Are Mira: 
areanteaza ataat: srenar qeva Amearaada gia | azaererarened 
aerate fra wécatarancarsizerat sear: | aa areata: 
wares an wa! afta Ayaka atrafrareetarana: | as 
walmeradad | aad a fer ararafak a wicimearsaraed 
Sar eqqrnbrargangeraarsena ASTNA Ry | TUT AeA F Va Aear- 
ear eaikrat Maret MAANITAMTAMEATA: THs TaAadafer Taras 
TAHA: HT AAI Halagerad TIsHMoY | Maasalaray Wea yay 
qe a HG yaad AqaaTetazar MaAq Nt Yo I 

VYASA. 


There is no beginning for them, the residua, inasmuch as the 
desire are ever present. The desire, ‘Would that I may not cease to 
be,’ ‘Would that I may live on,’ is found in everybody. This self- 
benediction is not inherent. Why not? How could there be fear of 
death and desire to avoid pain, in any being who has only been born, 
if he has had no experience of liability to death, it being understcod that 
desire to avoid anything is only caused by remembrance suffered in 
consequence thereof; and that nothing which is inherent in anything 
stands in need of a cause. The mind, therefore, possessed as itis of 
residua from eternity, brings into activity by the operation of exciting 
causes, certain residua only, for the purpose of giving experience to the 
Purusa. 

Some philosophers say that the mind has only a form which is com- 
mensurate with the body with which it may, for the time, be connected; 


Google 


CH. IV. § 10. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 170. 279 


it contracts or expands like light placed in a jar or a house as the case 
might be. And thus they say that non-interruption and repeated are 
proper. The author holds that it is the manifestation alone of the 
self-existing mind that expands or contracts, and that it is this which 
has the necessity of the operation of the exciting causes of virtue, &c. 


These exciting causes are two-fold, external and internal. The 
external are those that stand in need of body, &c., as instrument, such as 
praising, giving of charity, and the performance of obeisances. The 
internal are those that stand in need of the mind alone, such as faith, &c. 
And so it has been said :—‘ These acts of friendliness, &c., are the sports 
of the thinkers; they do not from their very nature depend upon ex- 
ternal causes, and cause the expression of the highest virtue.’ 


Of these two means the mental ones are more powerful. How ? 
What can excel knowledge and desirelessness? Who can without the 
power of the mind render the Dandaka forest empty, or drink the ocean 
like Agastya, by the mere action of the mind alone ?—170. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


It may beso. The residua laid by in a former and yet againin a former life may 
manifest themselves, if there be authority for the existence of previous and further 
previous lives. But there is no authority for such a proposition. Merely the pleasuro 
and pain felt by a creature just born cannot be accepted as authority, because that 
ean be explained by taking it to be natural, like the budding and opening of a lotus flower. 

For this reason le says:—‘And there is no beginning for them, the desire to live 
being cternal.’ 

The meaning of ‘and’ is that the residua are not only un-interrupted in their 
fruition, but they are etcrnal as well, because self-benediction, the desire to live is 
ever-present. Self-benediction does not fall short of eternity, on account of the residua 
being cternal, 

But inasmuch as this is established by taking them to be inherent, the eternity of 
self-benediction is not established. 

For this reason he says :~—‘ The self-benediction, &ce.’ 

The unbeliever asks :—‘ Why ?' The answer is :—‘Of the creature who is just born, 
&c.’ For this very reason, how should it be that a child who has not experienced his 
liability to death inthe present life, who does not know, thatis to say, from the ex- 
perience of the present life that death also is a chavacteristic of his, should,as he may 
be falling away from the mother's lap, begin to tremble and hold with his hands tightly 
the necklace hanging on her breast, marked with the suspicious discus, &¢? And how 
is it that such a child should experience tho fear of death, which can only be caused by 
the memory of the pain consequent upon aversion to death, whose existence is inferred 
by the trembling of the child. 

Well, has it not been said that this is inherent and natural ? 

For this reason he says:—‘ Anything that is inherent, does not stand in need of an 
operating cause for its birth.’ This is the meaning. Such a trembling as becomes visible 
in the child must be due to fear, just like our own trembling of the same description. 
The fear of the child must be taken to have been caused by the memory of aversion and 


(Go gle 


280 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


pain, for the reason that it is fear just like our own, and the fear due to expected losses 
that might be coming, is not brought about by the mere memory of pain. Further, from 
whatever one is afraid, he infers to be the cause of some loss, and then expects that loss 
would even now cause pain. For this reason pain is caused by the aversion brought about 
by the memory of pain.. Remembering that he infers the cause of pain, which is of the 
same class which is being felt at the time. The child, however, has not in the present life 
experienced the pain of falling in any other place. Nor has tbat sort of pain been felt. 
Thence the experience of a former life only remains as the explanation, by the canon of 
residues. 


And this is thus applied. The memory of the child just born is due to the experience 
of former lives, because otherwise it would not be memory. It acts just like our own 
memory. Even the budding and opening of a lotas is not inherent, because what is 
inberent in anything, does not stand in need of any other cause for its manifestation. 
Even fire stands in need of other causes for the manifestation of its heat. In the same 
way, the cause of the opening of a lotus flower is the contact from outside of the rays 
of the rising sun: and the cause of the shutting up of the petals is the residual potency, 
which maintains the inactivity. Similarly the happiness of a baby which is inferred 
from smiles, etc., should also be considered a proof of a previous life. 


An ‘exciting cause’ is action just in point at the time of fruition. ‘ Bringing into 
operation,’ means manifestation. 


As the context demands, he mentions the opposite theory of the mind having a 
measure, with the object of refuting it :—‘ The mind contracts and expands like lightin a 
jar or a place, ete.’ 


Seeing that action takes place only where the body is found to be, there is no 
authority for the existence of the mind at any place outside the body. The mind further 
is not atomic in size, because in that case it would mean the simultaneous non-production 
of the five sorts of sensation when the large cake is devoured. Further there is no 
justification for adopting the theory that there isa succession in the case of these 
sensations, and that they are not being felt simultaneously. No such thing is seen. 
One atomic mind cannot be competent to come into relationship with the sensations 
located in more places than one. Hence the only theory that remains is that, the mind 
is of the dimensions of the body it inhabits, like the light of lamp which is confined either 
toa jar ora palace. Contraction and expansion of the mind in the bodies of an ant and 
an elephant manifest themselves therein. The opposite theorists thus say that the 
form, i.e., the dimensions of the mind are the same as those of the body. 


The question arises that if it be so, how can it come into contact with the seed and 
the field? It does not certainly go out of the dead body without any support, to come 
into contact with the germ and sperm cells in the bodies of the parents, being dependent 
as it is for its actions upon others. The shadow ofa pillar and such other things does 
not move if the things themselves donot move. Nordothe pictures disappear, when 
the picture cloth comes in. This being so, there would not be evolution of souls through 
births and deaths (Samsara). 


For this reason he says :—‘ For this reason the absence of interruption and for that 
reason Samsira is proper.’ 

And further, if there were a measure for it like that of the body, then the leaving of 
the former body and the taking up of the other body would be secured for it, by taking 
in the interval another body which would serve for it as a vehicle for the intermediate 
space. Itis of course along with this vehicle that it moves in the other body. So also 
says the Purdna:—‘Tho Yama drew out of the body with force the Puruga of the size of 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 10. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 170. 281 


the thumb.’ This then is the meaning of the absence of interval (Antara). And for this 
reason cvolution by repeated birth is proper. 


Not agreeing with this view, the author states his own theory :—‘ It is the manifesta- 
tion alone of the self-existing mind that contracts and expands.’ The Achérya (author) here 
is the Svayambhu. 


The doubt here is that ifthe mind cannot move into another body without some 
vehicle to support it on its way, how is it that it enters the intermediate vehicle itself ? 
If another body is posited for that purpose also, then there would be no stopping any- 
where. Nor is it possible that the mind should go out of the body along with the inter- 
mediary vehicle, because itis undorstood to take up the intermediary vehicle after it 
has left the previous body. 

In that case let us posit a subtle body, existing permanently from the beginning of 
creation up to the Great Latoncy. It would then be that this subtle body would 
remain inthe physical body, and itis along with this that the mind would enter the 
bodies appropriate to the different regions from the Satyaloka down to the Avichi. It 
would further be proper to speak of this body as boing drawn out, because that being 
permanent, the difficulty of providing for an interval would also disappear. 

But then there is no authority for such a proposition, that a subtle body of this 
description exists. It is certainly not visible to the senses. Nor can it be inferred as a 
necessity of evolution by passing from one body to another, because that can be explained 
even on the theory of the author. As to the verbal authority cited, the texts speak of the 
being drawn out of the Puruga, not of the mind, nor of a subtle body, but of the self. 
The self, however, the power of consciousness is non-transferable from one place to another. 
This drawing out, therefore, is to be described as being spoken of in a metaphorical sense. 
And thus the drawing out of the mind or of consciousness means wherever it may be, the 
absence of manifestation, It does not mean anything else. 

We allow what has been said in the Purdnas, the Itih4sas and the Smritis about the 
mind coming after death possess the body of a Preta (departed spirit) and also the 
release from that Preta body by the performance of the ceremonies of Sapindikarana, 
etc. But we do not submit to that body being the intermediary vehicle. There is no 
authority in the Vedas for the existence of such an intermediary vehicle. What happens 
is that the mind takes up the body of a Preta, and is therein taken away by the men of 
Yama; not that this body serves as tho intermediary vehicle. For this roason, the mind 
being of the nature of the principle of individuality, and that principle like AkAsa in all 
tho three worlds, the mental principle is all-pervading. 

If this be so, then its functioning also must be all-pervading, and this would mean 
that the mind is omniscient. For this reason, has it been said, that the manifestation 
alone of this all-pervading principle is liable to contract or expand. 

Let us grant that, but then how is it that the contraction and expaui3ion of the 
manifestation of the mind take place only now and then. For this reason be says :—‘ And 
the mind has need of virtue and vice.’ 

Divides the cause of the manifestation :—‘ And the cause is two-fold.’ 

By the, ‘&c.,’ in body, &c., the senses and wealth, &c., are meant. 

‘Faith, &c.’:—Here too energy, memory, &c., are to be understood. 

Mentions the consensus of opinion of the Ach4ryas, on the question of intermedia- 
tion :—‘ As has been said.’ 

Vihara means aetivity (Vyapira). 

The ‘highest virtue ’ means the white Karma. 

‘Of the two’ :—Out of the internal and external. 

Knowledge and desirelessness: -The Dharma born of these is understood here, 


86 


Go gle 


282 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


By what? This means by what Dharma brought about by external means. It is 
knowledge and desirelessness alone that overpower these, i.e., destroy their seed-power. 
This is the meaning. 


He mentions in this case the well-known illustration.—‘ The Dandaka forest empty.’—10. 
Sdtra 1. 


VINAMAMA: AWAASAUAATA ATTA: ULL 


@a Hetu, cause, va Phala, motive, wr Asraya, substratum, sea Alambana, 
object by all these four, ayérarcama Samgrihitatvit, being held together. «ry Egfim, 
of these. wra Abhdve, on the disappearance. aq Tad, of them. wa: Abhavah, 
disappearance, 


11. Being held together by Cause, Motive, Substra- 
tum and Object they disappear on-the-disappearance of- 
these.—171. 

Ranowrarsat: Syplaca4rsananaas aaa: | ApaAeeraTA Te | 
FAA FANT ITAL TALIA AAA ATT HLTA AT TEAL ATA: TTA 
queers a ae graataat gape cniehr | azatg wad 
warcamaa a aftrawnadaaentar ait qe aig araritars ee | 
He Ff wait wer cegeqaat way: | Aarqateara: | aaeg aTkrarcapwrt 
araarany | aerakrartrnrt aa ercrerar araat: enqueaerdt | aahyet- 
ad aeq Ui araat aay Tere | Ts FqREPTATEaRtt: ST- 
lat: GAY ATA: | TTA aeeTBTATaTAA arerararmeara: tt 2 Il 

VYASA. 

The cause :—By virtue comes pleasure, by vice pain. Irom plea- 
sure comes attachment; from pain aversion. ‘Thence comes effort. There- 
by, acting. by mind, body and speech, one either favours or injures others. 
Thence come again virtue and vice, pleasure and pain, attachment and 
aversion. “hus it is that revolves the six-spoked wheel of the world. 
And the driver of this wheel is Nescience, the root of the afflictions. This 
is the Cause. 


Motive or Fruit is that with a view to which appropriate virtue, 
&c., is brought about. ‘There is no non-sequential manifestation. 


The Substratum is the mind which has yet a duty to perform. It 
is there that the residua live. They no longer care to live ina mind 
which has already performed its duty ; their substratum is gone. 

The Object (4lambana) of the residua is the substance which when 
placed in contact calls them forth. 


Thus are all the residua held together by Cause, Fruit, Substratum 
and Object. 


Google 


CH. IV. § 12. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 172. 288 


When these exist not, the residua which depend upon them for 
existence, disappear too.—171. 
VACHASPATIS GLOSS. 


Now if thesc mental modifications and the residua are without beginning, how 
can they be destroyed? ‘The power of consciousness which is etornal is not destroyed. 
For this reason he says:—‘ Reing held together by Cause, Fruit, Substratum and Object, 
they disappear in the absence of these.’ 

It is observed that those that have no beginning are also destroyed. Take, for example, 
the case of futurity. The proposition, therefore, fails and is no proof. The power of con- 
sciousness is not destroyed, because there is cause which might cause its destruction, 
not because it has no beginning. And the aphorism too mentions the causes of the des- 
truction of the residua although they are without a heginning. Kindness and injury too 
point to the causes of virtue and vice, &c. By this the use of spirituous liquors, &c., is 


also understood. 
He mentions the reason thereof :—‘ The root of the afflictions, &c.’ 
‘Is brought about’ means that it is present. Itdoes not mean that the substance 


virtue is produced. 

Mentious reason thereof: —‘ There is no, &e.’ 

‘With a view to which’ means the substance which is in front, contact with the 
beloved, &c. The meaning of the aphorism is that, in the absence of the pervader the 
pervaded is absent.—11. 


Siitra 12. 


“A e ba’ 
AMAA ASTM TANTS WRU 
wita Atita, the past. wii Andgatam, the future, #ev: Svardpatah, in reality. 
afer Asti, exist. wa Adhva, of the paths of being. ¥em Bhicdat, there being 
difference. watery Dharmaniém, of the characteristics. 
12. The past and the future exist in-reality, there 
being difference of the paths of being of the character- 
istics.—172. 


AAA: AKAs: | A afer eat rarer eh gereta aeraren: ai Prafs- 
ward area ela) alata Raa TeAran | weagafra- 
AMAT AGHAST SMMATSS TAA TS AATTEY ATA FT | TA 
Saceranen araheaete fsrad arayg TET TEATA ATA TRIAS | 
fea anravives a canviae atti: Gegitag ay Pear 
aged aa Afra a gues a gta | ears Hee Mitra adartace 
wad argaraaaa Ret Mire ahr Ratargad Het arqdgenaaare | 
adi aaeaiaraa anqaa aal seafwar: | a a@ qaradarmt air: 
Pramas qeaastaadanant & | au afe aa awa a eeturama- 
aka wa atgqaaknaa weturdraiat | adamant: = waceafe- 
fit | a aT AAararMaMraacate aneast: aay grave aflen- 
nar aaa caer ANAT aTasraTaTAATATAA LR I 


Google 


284 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


VYASA. 

There is no existence for that which exists not, and no destruction 
for what exists. How then can residua which exist as substances be 
destroyed? ‘The past and the present exist in reality, there being differ- 
ence of the paths of being of the characteristics.’ 

The future is the manifestation which is to be. The past is the 
appearance which has been experienced. The present is that which is 
in active operation. It is this three-fold substance which is the object 
of knowledge. If they did not exist in reality, there would not exist the 
knowledge thereof. How could there be knowledge in the absence of 
anything that might be known. For this reason the past and the present 
exist in reality. Further, if the fruit of either the actions which cause 
experience, or those which cause absolute freedom were impossible of 
being defined for the aspirer, the actions of the wise with that aim and 
object would not be proper. And the means has the power of only 
bringing into the present state the actually existing though as yet un- 
manifested fruit, not of creating it anew. The means when in full mani- 
festation specifically favours the sequential manifestation of its object ; it 
does not create it anew. 


Besides, the substratum exists as characterized by more character- 
istics than one; and its characteristics have a distinct order of existence 
in consequence of the distinctions of the paths of being. 


It is not that the past and the future states of the object exist in 
substance in the same sense in which the specific appearance of the pre- 
sent exists. How then? The future exists as an appearance in itself to 
be manifested. The past exists by an appearance of its own which has 
been experienced. The present path of being alone is that which shows 
its own appearance assuch. The same does not happen with refcrence 
to the past and the future paths of being. Of course at the time of one 
of these paths of being, the others remain conjoined with the substratum. 
Hence the existence of the three paths of being does not come out of 


non-existence.—172. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

With the object of introducing the next aphorism the Commentator expresses a 
doubt : --‘ Thete is no existence for the non-existing, &c.’ 

There is no existence for the non-existent :—This may either be taken as a necessary 
sequence of the preceding, or, it may be taken as having been introduccd anew as an 
illustration. 

‘The past and the future really exist, there being difference of the paths of being 
of the characteristics.’ 

The non-existent is not born and the existent is not destroyed. The meaning of the 
aphorism is that the change of the path of being of the existing characteristics alone 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 13. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 173. 285 


means the rise and disappcarance of the characteristics. The appearance which has 
been experienced, means the appearance which it has taken up already, or in other words, 
that of which there is no manifestation inthe present. Thus the characteristic is exist- 
ent in all three times. 

He says this :—‘ If they did not oxist in reality, &c.’ The non-existent does not 
become the object of knowledge : it is therefore indefinable. 

Knowledge is but the shining out of its object in consciousness. It caunot exist in 
the absence of the object. Whether it be the knowledge of the Yogi which has all the 
three times for its sphere of operation, or the knowledge of mon like ourselves, it can- 
not be born in the absence of the object. But the knowledge is born. For this reason, 
the knowledge of him who feels that the past and the future ordinarily exist along with 
the present, is said to be a rcason for the existence of the object itself. 

Now he says that even on account of its being the aim (the object of action) the yet 
unmanifested exists :—‘ Further, tho fruit of ceithor the action which causes experience, &¢.’ 

The wise are those who can distinguish. And even in the case of what is to be 
done, whatever may be the cause of whatever, becomes spccialized in case of the exist- 
ence of the object alone, As is the case with the farmer and the student of the Veda, 
so is the case here. They do not certainly create non-existing things. Similarly, the 
potter, &c., are the causes of the coming into present existence of the jar which already 
exists. He says this:—‘ And the means has only tho power of bringing the future into 
present existence, &c.’ If, however, the past and the future do not exist because they do 
not exist in the present, why then, the presont also docs not exist, because it does not 
exist in the past and the futuro. The cxistence of all the threc, however, is unqualified, 
on account of there being no specialization of the substratum, and the paths of being. 
With this object he says :—‘ Besides a substratum exists, &c.’ 

Have a distinct order of existence :—This means that cach exists established in 
itself. 

In reality : means the real object, the substratum. 

If the past and the future did not exist as such in the past and the futare, they 
would not exist even in the present, because then, they would be nothing in roality. For 
this reason he says :—‘ Of course at the time of one of these paths of being, &c.’ 

He summarizes the subject :—‘ Hence tho existence of the three paths of being, 
&c.’—12. 

Sitra 13. 


A STHAVAT TUTATA: WW 2Q tl 
@ Te, they. svn Vyakta, manifested. em: Sdksma&h, and subtle. ye: 
Guya-Atmanah, and of the nature of the (sem) qualities (4). 
13. They are manifested and subtle, and of the 


nature of the qualities.—173. 


a saMAeAT Wareara: | a aeaat savarar wat adarar aTenreararsal- 
Ararat: qgarara: waver | gale qarat aaaasarsie | 
QTATIAT MMCLATARA ST MAAUMAA | BUA wa wi a eheqaasaie | 
aa else ore. cena aguante 1) 83 

VYASA 

They, z.e., these characteristics which are possessed of the three 

paths of being, are of the nature of the manifested, when they exist in 


Google 


286 PATANJALIT’S YOGA. 


the present, and are of the nature of the subtle when they passed into the 
past or are yet unmanifested. They are the six unspecialized appear- 
ances. All this is but the specific arrangement of the ‘ qualities.’ In 
truth, therefore, they are of the nature of the ‘qualities.’ So teaches the 
Sistra:—‘ The real appearance of the qualities does not come within the 
line of vision. That, however, which comes within the line, is but paltry 
delusion.’~-173. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Let that be. This detail, however, of the differences of the world which puts forth 
the appearance of the changes of the charactcrized, the characteristic, the secondary 
quality and condition in many ways, is not capable of appearance from one Malaprakriti. 
For this reason says :—-They are manifested and subtle and of the nature of the ‘ quali- 
ties.’ They, the characteristics possessed of the three paths of being, are both manifested 
and subtle, and they are of the nature of the qualities. There is nothing beyond the 
three qualities. The variety of manifestation is due to the variety which comes in se- 
quence of the eternal miseries and their residua which they have given birth to. 

As has been said in the Vayu Purfina:—This change of the Pradhana is wonderfu 
on account of showing forth all appearances. It is the six unspecialized manifestations, 
which in such a way as it may be, constitute the past, the present and the future of the 
manifested Prithvi, &c., and of the cleven instruments of action, sensation and thought. 

Now describes the eternal appearance of the universe, with the object of divid- 
ing the appearances thereof into the eternal and the non-eternal: All this is but the 
specific appearance of the ‘qualities. The meaning is that evolutionary changes which 
are visible, consist of different arrangements and forms. On this subject is the teaching 
of the Saéstra possessed of sixty Tantras. 

‘Is but paltry delusion':—This means that it is paltry as if it were delusion, not 
that itis delusion and nothing else. Paltry means destrnetible. As delusion changes 
even in a day, so also the modifications possessing the characteristics of manifestation 
and disappearance assume other appearances every second. The Prakriti is possessed 
of the characteristic of eternity, and in this way is different from the Mfyé, it is so far 
real.—13, 


Siitra 14, 


afturamarsegaad ll ee i 


fara Parigdima, of modification, earam katvat, on account of the unity. 
azq Vastu, of the object, araz Tattvam, the reality. 


14. The reality of the object on account of the unity 
of modification.-—174. 

Ual F Ga TU: Kate: weq caehrahs | etartecnseqae | 
Tenthatetatrarat gart cemeasrat acoaaae: gitara: | sitatirfea 
Meare Tegra: tara: waeqt er eft) weardtat afe- 
AAAMA AAT AK: TTA: PATA T TRA See: ata: GA 
Raat: var rte arateat AereenantrarrnrargMnregqaeny Aar- 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 14. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 174. 287 


ARRAS: BATA: | AeA Rreraagac: | aft g eTaadarat 
cantar sheath fet & aeqersmmagad eraaitaerataré aq | 
eanfrsarad gf a cemaisatia & arget caer | sequfeaire eaareeata 
qeg werararanns acme aqeaqqeas ATaIsIA we 


Qaals Sy: | 
Ue VYASA. 


When all are ‘ qualities,’ how is it that one modification is sound 
and the other the sense? ‘The reality of the object on account of unity 
of modification.’ One modification of the qualities possessed of the nature 
of illumination, activity and inertia, and being of the nature of an instru- 
ment, appears in the shape of organs. This is the sense of hearing. 
Another modification of the ‘qualities’ appeara in the objective state as 
the soniferous ultimate atom (Sabda Tanmatra). This is the object 
sound. 

The atom of Prithvi is a modification of sound, &c., existing along 
with the generic quality of form (mfirti), Itis a portion of the tanmatra. 
Single modifications of these atoms are the earth, the cow, the tree, the 
hill and so forth. In the case of other elements also, taking up the 
generic qualities of smoothness, temperature, impulsion and space, single 
modifications are to be understood by meditation. . 

There is no object not co-existent with ideas. There are, however, 
ideas, which are not co-existent with objects, such as those that are fancied 
in dreams. 

There are people who try to do away with the reality of objects by 
this reasoning, saying that objects are but the fabrications of the mind, 
like the fancies of a dream, and that they are nothing real. The objec- 
tive world is present by its own power. How is it that they give up the 
objective world on the strength of imaginative cognition, and even then 
go on talking nonsense about it? How is it possible to have faith in them ? 


—174. ; 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

Well there may be this sort of variety of modification of the three qualities. But 
how is a single modification hrought about in the shape of any one element, say the Prithvi 
or the Apas. This unity is contradicted by its nature. With this doubt the author intro- 
duces the aphorism :—‘ The reality of the object on account of the unity of modification.’ 
A single;modification of more than one is also observed. That as follows :—The cow, the 
horse, the buffalo, the clephant, all of them modify into a single substance, the salt, when 
they are thrown into a mine of salt. Wick, oil and fire change into a Jamp. In this way, al- 
though the qualities are more than one, asinglo modification does take place. For this reason, 
the TanmAtra, the elements and the ohjects made of the elements have each a real unity. 

In the case of instrumental appearances, being as they are the effects of the principle 
of individuality, and possessed as they are of the nature of illumination on acccunt of the 
preponderance of the quality of essentiality (Sattva), the modification is a single one in 


Google 


283 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


Seta ae ee ee or a ee 


the shape of an organ, such as the orzan of hearing. Of the sam? 40 alizies, another single 
modiGeation in the shape of Tannin is sound, the object, when they appear as objective 

phenomena, in the shape of non-intell ge nt appearances with the quality of Tamas prepon- 

derating. 

Sound, the object :—Sound here means tie goniferous ether (tanmitra). The word 
‘object’ (visaya) siguilics non-intelligence, because the tan nitra cannot possibly become 
the object of scnsation. The rest is easy. 

Now brings in the Vaisesika with his idealistic theory :—* There is no object which 
ig not co-existent with an idea.’ 

If the elements and physical objects be something different from mere ideation, then 
it may be that sucha Prakriti be put up as the cause of their production. They are not, 
however, different from ideas in reality. How is it then that the Pra dhana is put up asa 
cause ? How is it again that the instrumental appearances are fancied to exist as the 
modifications of the principle of individnality 2? Thus sccing that a non-iuntelligent object 
is not self-illuminative, it does not exist unless it co-exist with the ilea. Co-existence 
means relation. The denial of co-existence means its absence. The meaning is that 
without coming into rclationship with the idea it is of no use in practice. The idea, 
however, exists without being eo-existent with the objcet, because it is self-illaminative. 
It can exist as its own field of knowledge. It does not stand in need ofa non-intelligent 
object in practice, These are the two rules that are brought to notice by idealistic philo- 
gophers as going along with knowability. They are applied thas :—That which is known 
by any act of knowledge, docs not differ therefrom, in the same way as knowledge does 
not differ from the self. And the clements and the physical phenomena thereof are 
known by an act of knowledge. This leads toa knowledge of the pervaded which contra- 
dicts it. Knowability as it is secn, is pervaded by similarity, which contradicts the differ- 
ence tw be denied, bringing into consciousness the similarity which pervades itself, it 
does away with tho difference which contradicts it. Thus:—That which is perceived 
with something else always invariably, does not differ from it. Jast as one moon does 
not differ from another moon. And an object is invariably perceived together with the 
idea. This knowledge is perecived as being contradictory of the pervader. It contradicts 
the rule of the pervader consisting of the difference to be denied, This rule does away 
with arbitrariness, and brings into consciousness the difference which consists in the 


pervaded. 

Let it be. If the object is not different from the idea, how is it that it looks as if it 
were different. For this reason he says: — Fancied &c.’ As say the Vainasikas :—There 
is no difference on account of the rule of coincident perception. The difference between 
the yellow and the blue, &c., and their ideas, is brought about by delusive cognitions, 


Fxplains the nature of the faney :—‘ An object is merely an ideation,’ &c. Refutes:— 
‘ How is it possible, &c.’ This is connected with the words ‘ have fatthin them.’ 

‘Is present as contradictory knowledge’ :—How is it present ? ‘In the way, &c.’ In 
whatever way it shines as being the meaning of the word ‘ this,’ in the same way it is 
present by its own power. 

Now he shows that the object is the cause of the idea :--‘ Inasmuch as the object has 
given birth to the idea thereof by the power of its own perceptibility, it is not for this 
reason the perceiver of the object. Such a real object cannot be done away with by the an- 
authoritative force of imaginative cognitions. Inasmuch as imagination is unauthorita- 
tive, its power also is unauthoritative, because the power is of the same nature with it. 

‘The giving up of the objective world thereby’ means ignoring it as if it were re- 


moved from sight. 


Google 


CH. IV. § 15. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 175. 289 


In some places the reading is ‘Upagrihyate’ in place of ‘Utspijyate.’ The meaning 
is the same in either case. They ignore the existence of the outside world, and yet go on 
talking about it. How can thero be faith in them? The meaning here is this. The 
causes which havo been mentioned, i. e., invariable coincident perception and knowability, 
are not final, because application to the canon of difference is doubtful. Further the 
externality and the grossness which aro perceived to exist in the elements and the physi- 
cal phenomena thereof, which possess the forms of the ideas, are not possible of existence 
in the case of ideas themselves. Because cxternality means being related to separate 
space. Grossness means the pervading of morc porticns of space than one. It is not 
possible that one idea may exist in more places than one, and also exist in a place separat- 
od from itself. When a certain thing oxists in a certain place, there cannot exist in the 
same place, something else characterized by a quality opposite to the characteristic of 
being present in the same place. If it were possible the three worlds themselves would 
become but one. 


It may be said, let then there le difference of ideas. If this be so, whence does 
this consciousness of grossness come in the case of notions, whose sphere of operations 
is vory subtle, and which do not know of the cxistence and operation of each other, and 
which are only in relation to their own spherc of operation only, There should be nohigh 
talk about its being the sphere of imagination only. because there igs in that case no contact 
and because the reflection is very clear, Further the gross has never been mado the 
object of thought, so that the idea qualified thereby may be clearly perceived, even though 
at the back of it there may exist imaginative cognition. Further imagination is not con- 
fined to the knowledge of the thing itself as it exists in its own sphere, in the samo way 
as knowledge freo from the taint of imagination is. Further as imagination is not gross, 
itis not proper that it should be acting in the sphore of the gross. Therefore it is not 
possiblo that in the external cause there should be perecived grossness and externality, 
and hence it should be considered to be false. And the false is not inseparable from the 
idea, because if it wore, the idea itself would become contemptible like the false, on 
account of its not comprehending everything. Further knowability being not pervaded 
by identity, how can it bo the opposite of difference (bheda). As to the rule of coinci- 
dence of perception of the idea and of grossness, it is capable of explanation like that 
of the Sat and the Asat (the existent and the non-existent) either by their nature 
or by obstruction from some causo, even though both of them exist independently, 
Hence these two arguinents are not complete, and are therefore merely false simili- 
tudes of arguments, and they merely give rise to an imaginary conception of the 
non-existence of the external. Further the power of perception cannot be done away 
with by mere imagination. It is therefore well said, ‘How do they give up the objective 
world on the strength of imaginative cognitions ?’ 

By this also stands refuted the assertion that notions may be generated without there 
being any actual basis for them, as in the case of dream cognitions. 

The imaginative creation of the thing to be known, has boen refuted by establishing 
the existence of the substratum, the whole as being independent of the parts. Details 
will be found iu the Nyaéya-Kanika. More details nced not be entered into here.—14. 


Sfitra 15. 


aegarea Rravaraatere: Gar: ek U 


aq Vastu, in the case of the external object. aa Sdmye, in the being the 
same. fer Chitta, of mentality. Aaa Bhedat, there being difference. a: ‘Tayoh, 
their. fers: Vibhaktah, different. we: Panthab, ways of being. 

87 


Google 


290 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


15. There being difference of mentality in the case 
ef the external-object being the same, their ways-of- 
being are different.—175. 


RIAA | Teas Prataranan war: | aera 
yah Teg Aart away Anhagitaferd araaaagitaeed fg 
eanfisy | Sa aeqana madara Frac aegaTeas aga wWa- 
aaratte aa ta Paeranrarte aa Ta Rear Tea ArT aa qq 
arerecaeratia | nea aferda aitaaay | a areaaaia Raarrarre 
Rreitacratr FRAME MAMIE MA TATA TAT: Tat | AAI: AE 
umasaetia | agawadt aq gaan aca gua | water 
Praveen aitiemaa Ahageqe a geese aa Aarara4r 
Ranalt | Biaqte: | ataeRytaay Araneae i a cara grr 
ANANCAeS ATIAATAL FaTaTAUG FeqeTETAAITaAT Nl 2 U 

VYASA. 

And how otherwise is it untrue? ‘There being difference of 
mentality in the case of the external object being the same, their ways of 
being are different.’ 

One thing coming within the sphere of many minds is common to 
them all. 1t has certainly not been imagined by one mind. Nor yet has 
it been imagined by more minds than one. It is established 1n_ itself. 
How is this? There being dilference of mentality when the external object 
is the same. Even though the external object be the same the 
mind feels pleasure on account of virtue. The same object excites a 
feeling of pain on account of vice. The same causes forgetfulness on 
account of Nescience. The same causes the feeling of indifference on 
account of right knowledge. Now by whose mind has all that been 
imagined? Further it is not proper that another mind be coloured by 
an object which has been imagined by another. For this reason the lines 
of existence of the external objects and the ideas are different, as they 
exist as objective and instrumental appearances. ‘There is not even the 
least suspicion of confusion between them. 

Further in the Sankhya philosophy, an object is made of the three 
qualities, and the functioning of the qualities is ever changeful. The 
object comes into relationship with the minds on account of the exciting 
causes of virtue, &c.; and it becomes the cause of the notions as they are 
produced, each as such, in accordance with the exciting causes. 

Some say that the object is co-existent with tle idea, inasmuch as 
it is to be enjoyed thereby like the feelings of pleasure and pain. They 


Go gle 


CH. IV.§ 15. ON ABSOLUTE TNDEPENDENCE, 175. 291 


do away by means of this conception, the common nature of the object 
with reference to minds, and this but do away with the being of the 
object in previous and subsequent moments. —175. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Having now mentioned the reasons for believing that the object is different from and 
independent of the idea, the Commentator now introduces another reason given in the 
aphorism to establish the same :—And how otherwise is it untrue ? 


‘There being difference of mentality, even though the external object remains the 
same, their paths of existence are different. Whena certain thing remains the samo 
although the other changes into many states, they both differ from each other altogether. 
As the one idea of Chaitra differs from the different ideas of Devadatta, Vignumitra and 
Maitra, and although the ideas are different the object remains the same, tha object must 
be different from the idea. And the identity of the object even in the case of the difference 
of ideas, is ascertained by the knowers by comparison of notes. If one woman is beloved, 
hated, ignored and approached with indifference by many different people, they can always 
compare notes that the object of all these varying feelings is the same. For this reason, 
there being difference of mentality, i.e. of feeling, the paths of being of the two, i.e, of the 
object and the idea, are different. The path of being means that by which one thing 
differs from another in nature. The lover feels pleasure in the society of the beloved. 
The co-wife fecls pain. Chaitra whohas not been able to possess her, feels disappointed 
and forgets himself. 


Let it be so. But wherever an object in the shape of a beautiful woman has been 
fancied by the mind of one man, the minds of others also admit of being coloured by the 
same fancied object, and it is for this reason that the object even though fancied, becomes 
the common object of all the minds. 


For this reason says :—‘ It is not proper that the object fancied by one mind, &c.’ If 
that were so, then in case one of them possessed the knowledge of blue, all would come to 
possess the knowledge of the blue. 


The question arises that inasmuch as there is but one object in the opinion of those, 
who believe inthe independent existence of objects, how is it that one object becomes 
the cause of different feelings of pleasure and pain, &c. It is not proper that the cause 
remaining the same, the effects should be different. For this reason says :—‘ In the case 
of the Sankhya philosophy, &c.’ Evcn a single external object changing according to the 
threo qualities, admits of three-fold appearance. But in this way too, all without distine- 
tion would have the three-fold knowledge of pleasure, pain and forgetfulness with re- 
ference to the same object. For this reason says :—‘ Depends upon the operative causes 
of virtue, &c.’ The Sattva together with the Rajas gives birth to the feeling of pleasure 
which depends upon virtue. The same Sattva when free of the Rajas, creates the feeling 
of indifference which depends upon knowledge. And these virtues, &c., do not exist, all of 
them, in all the Purusas everywhere. It is only any one of them that exist anywhere at 
any time. Therefore the difference is proper. 


Some talkers say on this subject :—‘ The object certainly co-exists with the idea, 
because it is enjoyable by the Purusa like pleasure and pain. The meaning is this. Let 
an object be different from the idea, Still it being non-intelligent, does not admit of 
being known without the idea. The idea itis that illuminates it. Similarly it exists at 
the time of being known only. It cannot be said to be existing at any other time, be- 
cause there is no authority for its existence at a time when it is not the object of imme- 


diate knowledge, 


(Go gle 


292 PATANJALT’S YOGA. 


oo —- 


This the Commentator refutes without the help of the aphorisin :—‘ They by this, &c., 
An object is certainly common to all minds. It keeps on being cognized for a succession of 
more moments than one as possessed of the characteristic of change. Ifthat co-exists 
with the idea, it will be thus, it is such. Now what check is there upon the 
portion ‘It, that this may not disappear too ?—15. 


Satra 16. 


a watraaed Qaeq acaraa dar fH earq tt ve 1 
w Na, not. «Cha, and. eefee Eka-chitta, on. one mind, avy Tantram, de- 
pendent, %q Ched, if. seq Vastu, an object. aa Tat, by that, sew, Pramdyakam, 
to be cognized by that. aq Tada, then. fq Kim, what (only to denote the ques- 
tion), «ar Syat, would it exist. 
16. And if an object dependent upon one mind 


were not cognized by that, would it then exist ?—176. 

a Satreast Ageq acark aa fe ar! cafeday Areq 
earear fre aa Rex at create aarqegeaentteinyerararTTAT- 
Cian aah Fakrearat fe a ara | Generar at gaiteada Ha Seva 
% qrergaerar wet ater a cate afer getraqacatt a geta aen- 
PATS: TAQVTATANT: wararin as Rear sfrqer: caded aa: aea- 
ragga: qeaer Art xfer y 8G tl 


VYASA. 


If an object were dependent upon the mind, then in case the mind 
were restrained, or attending to some other object, the object would not 
be touched thereby, nor would it come into objective relationship with 
any other mind. It would not be cognized, 2. e., its nature would not be 
taken in, by any mind. Will it cease to exist at the time ? Or, coming 
into relationsnip again with the mind, whence would it come back to 
life ? 

Further the parts of an object which are not in contact with the 
mind, would not exist. Thus there would be no back, and how could 
then there be the front itself? For this reason, the object is self-dependent, 
and common to all the Purusas. Mindsalso are self-dependent. They 
come into relationship with the Purusas. By their relationship is secured 
perception, which is enjoyment (bhoga).—176. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS, 


Or, there may not be this disappearanco of a portion; let the object be co-existent 
with the idea. On this also says :—‘And if an object dependent upon onc mind were not 
cognized by that, would it then exist ? If the mind which cognizes a jar, does not at any 
time turn towards it on account of attention being directed towards a cloth, or if an object 
having been the object of discrimination the mind thereby becomes restrained, then the 
idea of the jar and the knowledge of discrimination would not be in existenee at the time, 


Google 


CH. IV. § 17. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 177. 293 


and the jar and the knowledge being dependent for their existence upon the co-existence 
of the idea thereof in the mind, would no doubt cease to exist. Says this :—* One mind, &c.’ 

‘ Would it then exist ? :’-—Means it would not exist. 

Further coming into relationship with the mind, how would the jar or the discrimina- 
tion be born again. Effects have constant causes and lead to them invariably by both the 
canons of agreement and difference. Effects cannot be born from causes other than their 
own appropriate causes. In the absence of the cause there would be no occasion for their 
existence. For, is it proper that an object being the cause of the knowledge thereof, it 
should :lso be the cause of itself? If this wereso, then the sweets which one might be 
expecting to get, and the sweets which one might be really using, would be equally 
placed with reference to taste, strength and digestion. It has therefore been well 
said :—‘ If it come into relationship with the mind, &c.’ 

Further the front portion of any object is always pervaded by the middle and poste- 
rior parts, i. ¢., it cannot exist without the simultaneous existence of the middle and 
posterior parts. If the existence of an object depended upon being perceived, then 
the middle and posterior parts would not exist, and thus on account of the cessation 
of pervasion the front part also would cease to exist. The object itself would not thus 
be in existence, how then would it be in existence along with the idea itself? Says 
this :—: The portions thereof which are in contact, &c.’ “ot in contact mcans not known. 
Concludes :—‘ For this reason, &c.’ The rest is easy.— 16. 


Sdtra 17. 


ATMA AAT GTATAT FY ATATATAT NN 29 I 


az Tad, thereby, sam Uparfga, colouring, wfaraa Apeksitvat, because of 
the needing. fer Chittasya, for the mind, by the mind. aq Vastu, an object. 
or Jfidta, known, weayqy Ajnhdtam, or unknown, 


17. The mind needing to be coloured thereby an 
object may be known or unknown.—177. 


VYASA. 


TEIN Ay Bae) ATEHraadency Keras4: | 
a Gah Praatreaardtaaqata aa a fasta re & ear gra- 
CAASAs FEAST? | TEGAT raTataerareareaicanrit Fray y sh 

‘The mind standing in need of being coloured thereby, an object 
may be known or unknown.’ Objects are in nature similar to that of 
loadstone ; the mind is similar in characteristic to iron. Objects coming 
into contact with the mind colour it. Whatever object colours the mind, 
that object becomes known. That which becomes known is an object. 
That which is not thus known is the Purusa and is unknown. The 
mind is changeful, because it assumes the natures of known and unknown 
objects..—77. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Let that be. If the object were self-dependent and also unintelligent, it would never 
be illuminated. If now it were to become illuminated, its non-intelligence too would 
disappear. No existence can remain as such when it gives up its nature. Nor is it proper 


Google 


294 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


that the nature of an unintelligent object should receive the illumination of its character- 
istic by being the receptacle of the action of the senses. Because if it became the cha- 
racteristic of the object then it would, like the qualities of blueness, &c., be the 
common attribute of all the Purusas. This being so, if one man became learned, all 
would become learned. No one would remain ignorant, Nor is it proper that the present 
should be characteristic of the past and the yet unmanifested. Hence to say that 
an object is self-dependent and (that it is the sphere for the act of perception is buta 
wish of the mind. For this reason says :--‘ The mind needing to be coloured by contact 
therewith, an object may be known or unknown.’ Eventhough an object is by nature 
non-intelligent, it colours the mind by coming into contact therewith through the passage 
of the senses, because such is the mirror of the mind, the power of consciousness being 
reflected into it, enlivens the mind with the colour of the object therein, and thus knows 
it. It does not however produce any sort of clearness, &c., in the object. Nor is it that 
the power of consciousness is unrelated to the mind, because it has been said that its 
reflection passes into it. Although the mind being all-pervading, and the senses being 
of the nature of the principle of individuality, cannot come into relationship with the 
object, atill the relationship of the object is with the mind which functions in the body. 
It is for this reason that they have been said to be of the nature ofthe loadstone, and 
that the mind possesses a characteristic similar to iron and that they colour it by having 
come into contact with it through the passagy of the senses. Says that it is for this rev- 
son that the mind is changeful: ‘On account of the object being known, &c,'—-17. 


Sditra 18. 


AU AAA ALATA: FETEATATLYTAT wes 


eq Sadé, always, erm: Jidtah, are known, Peer: Chitta-vrittayab, the 
modifications of the mind, arr Tat-prabhoh, to its lord, yevea Purusasya, the 
Purusa, wafterara A parigamat, on account of the unchangealhility, 


18. ‘lo its lord, the Purusa, the modifications 
of the mind are always known on-account-of-unchange- 
ability.—178. 

aeq gata a fava aq siakaagraaacsa: geren- 
fiona! a aang ges qtomataigrakaaraa wea4r- 
ATTASHTATATAT: SY: Bal Wat FT AAA: Jererqturitargar- 
mate wk it 

VYASA. 


To its lord, the Purusa, whose sphere of functioning the mind 
itself is, mental modifications are ever known, because he is unchangeable. 
If the lord, Purusa, too changes like the mind, the mental modifications 
too in which it functions would be both known and unknown, like the 
objects of sound, &c. The mind however is always known to its lord the 
Puruga. By this is inferred its unchangeability.—178. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Having thus established the mind and the object to be separate from each other, the 
author now reads the aphorisa, filling up the omissions, with the object of showing that 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 19. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 179. 295 


the solf is different from these changeful objects and that the characteristic of the Puraga 
is unchangeability, Which is the opposite of the characteristic of the objects and the mind. 
‘To the lord, Puruga, whose sphere of functioning the mind itself is, &c.’ The modifica- 
tions of the mind are always known to the Puruga, because he is unchangeable. The 
mind with its modifications is always followed by the Puruga in all its modifications of 
the wandering, the distracted, the one-pointed, up to the state of inhibition. By what 
reason then is the Purnsa, unchangeable ? ‘If the Puruga were unchangeable, it would 
both be known and anknown like the mind (chitta). It is however always known. 
It is therefore unchangeablo and for this reason differs from other changeable objects. 
Savs this:—‘If the lord Purusa changed, &c.’ Tho lord who is the enjoyer of the mind 
knows it constantly along with its modifications. This fact ostablishcs by inference 


the unchangeability of the Purugsa. Thus the meaning is that this unchangeable Puruga 
is different from the changing mind.—18, 


Sotra 19. 


TARAS TACT Ml VE Ui 


a Na, is not. va ‘Tat, it, erreq Svibhdasam, self-illumninating, gaara Dri- 
syatvat, because of its knowability ; because it is the knowable, 
19. It is not self-illuminating, being the know- 
able.—179. 

aang Fata ane Avan a aarkrarat Rraraariqat a 
ulead | a aera waar | qatar qaqa 
SCUATA AMAT TUT ATHY Tera | A AAT Tater: | a aTATae- 
ASTANA THTAAA | THAT THTTHAHAATY FST A TA ARIAT: 
asa aan i fa era Rafreameada weataears: | aaa 
rattenartramagaaas: | wafaracsitaaqaraarat safe - 
eae | Rats AlasEa_a a Uisgy Anta waraeagacaaaa genfafa 12a 

VYASA. 

A doubt may arise that the mind itself may be self-illuminating as 
well as the illuminator of the objects, as in fact it is helieved by the Vai- 
nadikas to be like fire, which illuminates itself as well as other objects. 
Therefore says :- ‘Itis not self-i]luminating being the knowable.’ As the 
other organs and the object of sound, &c., are not self-illuminative on 
account of their being knowable, so also should the mind be understood to 
be. Jire is no analogy here. Fire does not illuminate any form of itself 
which might have been non-luminous before.’ The illumination spoken of 
here is meant to be the illumination which is brought about by the contact 
of the luminous and the dark, not of the self-luminous. There can be no 
contact of anything with its own nature. Further, the statement that 
the mind is self-illuminating means that it is not perceivable by any 
other entity. ‘This is in the same way as when it is said that the Akasa 
is self-supporting, it is meant that it has no support at all. Living beings 


Go gle 


296 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


are seen acting in accordance with the consciousness of the movements 
of their Will-to-be. ‘Tam angry,’ ‘Jam afraid,’ ‘Tam attached here,’ 
‘T am repelled there,’ these notions are proper only on account of the 
knowledge of self-identification not being taken in.—179. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Mentions the Vaindsikas: -‘A doubt may arise, &c.’ This is the meaning. It'may 
be so if the mind be the sphere for the functioning of the Sclf. The mind howover is 
self-illaminative and it illuminates other objects also as it illaminates itself. How then 
‘ean it be the sphere for the constant knowledge of the Parusa? How moreover does it in 
its unchangeability differ from the changeable mind. Therefore, ‘It is not self-illumina- 
ting, being knowable.’ It might be so if the mind were self-illaminating, (self-knowing), 
but it is not. Being changeable, the mind is pervaded by perceptibility, like the colours 
of blue, &. Whatever is pervaded by perceptibility, is not capable of becoming self- 
illuminative, because the modification contradicts itself, The act and the object cannot 
both be the same. The cooking is not cooked: the cutting is not cat. The Parusa, 
however, being unchangeable as he is, is not the object of the act of consciousness. In him 
therefore self-illumination is not improper. His illuminativeness does not depend upon 
any other, he is self-illuminative and is not the object of the act of consciousness. Hence 
the mind is the object of the act of knowing on account of its being the knowable; it is 
not self-illuminative. The meaning is that because the mind is seizcd of the reficction 
of the self the object of its modifications are illuminated. 


But the fire is both the knowable and the self-illuminous as a jar, &c., aro brought 
to light by fire not so fire is brought to light by another fire. For this reason says :— 
Fire is no analogy here. Why not? ‘Tho fire does not illuminate, &c.’ The meaning 
is that fire may not be brought talight by other fire, but it is illuminated by conscious- 
ness. It is thus not illuminated by itsclf, and for this rcason therc is no over-lapping 
(Vyabhichara). ‘The illamination spoken of here, &c.’ The words ‘spoken of here’ 
differentiate from tho illumination which is of the nature of the Purusa, tho illumination, 
that is to say, which is of the for of the action. This is intended to be said: What- 
ever action there may be, it is scen in rclation to the subject, the instrument and the 
object. As cooking is seen in relation to Chaitra, fire and rice, so also illumination. Tlu- 
mination also is action. This also must therefore be like that, Relation lives in different 
objects; it is not possible in the absence of distinction, Further the assertion that the 
mind is self-illuminating, means that the mind is not perceivable by any other entity. 


Let that be. Let the mind be not perceivable by any othor entity. The mind would 
not cease to be if the act of knowing, which is neither its cause, nor its pervade, ceased 
to be. For this reason he says: ‘By the consciousness of the movements of his own Will- 
to be.’ The Will-to-be is the mind. Its movements are its functionings. Living beings 
are creatures. The various mental modifications of anger, greed, &c., are felt by each 
mind for itself, together with their substratum the mind, and also together with their 
objects. They in this way establish the objectivity of the mind. Renders the conscious- 
ness of the movements of the Will to-be plainer :—‘Iam angry, &c.’—19. 


Satra 20. 


CHAN BAWTATIUA Roll 


enewa Eka-samaye, at the same time,*Cha, and. ew Ubhaye, of both. 
wawery Anavadhadranam, impossibility of being cognised. 


CH. IV. § 21. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 181. 297 


— 


20. Nor can both be cognized at the same time.— 
180. 


Ras Vag | A Saher Sac aTaTCa Tar AT- 
ata ugaa &a fina ata a arcaftrenqara: | Re Il 


VYASA. 


And it is not proper that in one moment both one’s own nature and 
the nature of other objects may be ascertained. The conception of the 
advocates of momentary existence however is that acting is the same as 
being ; and the subject, object, instrument, &c., are the same too.—180. 


‘And both cannot be cognized at the same time.’ To him who says that the mind 
is both self-illuminating and the illuminator of objects, it cannot of course be possible 
that the object may be understood at the same time as the self of the mind, and by the 
the same act. An act which is not different from any other is not competent to bring 
about an effect which is not different. Therefore a difference of function must be recog- 
nized. And to the Vaindsikas there is no separation of operation for difference of 
effects. And it is not possible that there should be a difference of effects brought about 
by a single birth which is common to all and does not differ from itself. For this reason 
the knowledge of the object and the act of knowledge cannot be ascertained in one 
moment of time. This is what the Commentary renders clear:—‘ And in one moment of 
time, &c.’ And so the Vaindsikag say :—Whatever is the being of a thing the same is 
their action and the same the subject object. ‘Instrument, &c.’ Hence the knowability of 
the mind is for ever; and this removes the idea of its being self-illuminating. This also 
shows that the secr is unchangeable. Thus all is proved.— 20. 


Siitra 21. 


Praag gagearey: STAISTA URN 


ferent Chittantara-drigsye, in case of being knowable by another mind, 
afe-ag : Buddhi-Buddheb, of the wills to know, the wills to know. wfteeg: Atipra- 
sahgah, too many, abundance, superfluity, wft-ege: Smriti-Sahkarab, confusion of 
memories. % Cha, and, 


21. In case of being knowable by another mind, 
there will be too many wills-to-know the Wills-to-know ; and 
there will be confusion of memories.—181. 


ereatr: acares ard Rrarata anata ger ef | Arava 


ew afratciisag: catragrer | na fae’ Sfaanata aia afer aft: 
ea Tea aera eratatiragy: wTreargcs | Warat afaafram- 
Gaara Sas ww ata TAFTSHATAATATTA eared afe- 


A a 
SIM A AIA ARTs | SRrq, Acaaraale citer aaa 7 


ia al oT TNRA Te TT Grea ea S- 


Google 


298 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


rarat nefeaara Rrcmrargearara saat qtrehas seared aftearsteyar 
AAA FH? ALTAATIG Aa | APUITMTgAey Tas: UEFA Farag AT- 
fra Freer Ararcgraediier We A 


VYASA, 


There may be an opinion that the mind restrained in its own being 
may be known by another mind just in contact with it. ‘In case of being 
known by another mind there will be too many wills-to-know the Wills- 
to-know; and there will be confusion of memories.’ If the mind be 
cognized by another mind, by what may the wills-to-know the Wills- 
to-know be cognized. Even that by another; and that again by ano- 
ther. There will thus be too many of such Wills-to-know. And there 
will be confusion of memories. As many will be the cognitions of the vari- 
ous Wills-to-be, so many will be the memories. One memory will not he 
capable of determination on account of their confusion. Thus the Vaina- 
Sikas have confused everything by denying the existence of the Purusa 
who knows by reflex action the Will-to-know. Further, they are 
not logical in imagining as they do, the existence of the Purusa in 
some places. Some there are who say that there does exist a pure 
being, and that that being throws away the existing five Skandhas and 
takes up others. Having asserted so much they fight shy again of the 
same. 

Further they say that for the purpose of entirely doing away with 
the Skandhas, and for securing desirelessness, non-production and calm- 
ness, they would go to a teacher and with him live the life of a student. 
And having said this they begin again to conceal the very existence of 
that being. 

As to the Sankhyayoga theories, they declare by the word SVA (on 
one’s own) applied to the mind that there does exist the lord in the shape 
of the enjoyer of the mind.—18]. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Introduces the Vaindisikas again:—There may be a theory that although the mind 
may not know itself by its own life, on account of its being objective by nature, yet 
even that fact does not prove the existence of the sclf-restrained moment of the mind 
which generates the next may well be taken in by the last mental moment of its own 
succession. This is the meaning. ‘ Another mind just in contact therewith. This other 
mind is equal in knowledge, and between the two there is nothing else intervening.’ 
Therefore, ‘In case of being knowable by another mind, &c.’ The Will-to-be stands here 
for the mind. If the last act of mentality is not itself perceived, it cannot havo the 
power of perceiving the previous act of mentality. It is not proper that the previous 
Will-to-know should be known without coming into contact with the present Will-to-know 
itself. No one who does not take hold of the connecting rod can reach the holder of the 
od himself. Hence there is a regrussus ad infinitum. 


(So gle 


CH. IV. § 22. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 182. 299) 


The Skandhas are five :—Vijjiidna, Vedana, Samjiia, Rapa and Samskara. 

‘The theories of the Sinkhya yoga, &c.’ This means the theories of the Sinkhyas 
and the Yogas and of the Vaisegikas, &c., which are preceded by the Sinkhyas and the 
Yogas. The rest is easy.—21. 


Satra 22. 
PRIMA ALATTEAT ANTM BA TAATAT Ul RN 
fe: Chitteh, of the consciousness, wifiarr: Apratisamkramfyah, of such 


as is notable to transform from place to place, ag Tad, its. warewt Akardpattau, 
by transforming appearance. wafg-daevy_ Sva-Buddhi Samvedanam, knowing of. 
dqry, its own. *, will to be. af. 

22. Consciousness knows its own Will-to-be by 
transforming its appearance, though not-itself mnoving-from 
place-to-place.—182. 


ay! Are citaemaraeaqrane caagreatgay | wetartet 
f& maakkeftesna a otter staearta acaienquatt 
qeana sredaarmecaaca giraaacaraa afrzeateerer fk 
aTagracrenraa | tar Ara | A atars a a Prac firfrat Aareaert Herat 
arqarat ger veat Ra sar atead afaafaairet naar aca 


gfe wR 
VYASA. 


How ? ‘Consciousness knows its own Will-to-be by transforming 
its own appearance, though not itself moving from place to place. 
The power of enjoyment is of ‘course unchanging. It does not also go 
from place to place. In the changing abject it looks as though transferred 
thereto ; and there it follows its manifestations. And it imitates, as it 
were, the modifications of the Will-to-be whose form is now enlivened by 
the consciousness which has entered therein. By that imitation it is 
called a manifestation or modification of consciousness, without being 
actually qualified by the modifications of the Will-to-be. This means that 
it does not at all appear to be different from the modifications thereof. 


And so it has been said :— 

Nor nether worlds, nor mountain caves, nor darkness, nor seas, nor 
ravines are the hollows in which is placed the Eternal Brahma. The 
wise points out to the modification of the Will-to-be which does not look 
different from him.--182. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Let that bo. If however tho mind is not self-illuminative nor knowable by another 
mind, how should it be enjoyed by the Self himself? For although the Self is no doubt 
self-illuminating, it does not put forth any action anywhere. Without putting forth any 


(Go gle 


300 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


action he cannot be the actor. Nor can he be the enjoyer of the mind without 
coming into relationship with the mind through action. That would be going beyond the 
ordinary rule. 

With this in mind puts the question :—‘ How?’ 

Gives the answer by the aphorism :—‘ Consciousness knows its own Will-to-be 
by transformiug into its own shape, although not itself moving from place to place.’ 

What was said before, ‘Identification With modifications elsewhere’ (P. I. 4) has 
its origin here. The knowing by the Purusa of his Will-to-be is achieved when the 
Will-to-be takes the form of the Purusa, i.c., when it takes on the appearance thercof 
by receiving into itself the reflection of the Puruga. Similarly is the case with the moon, 
when reflected in pure water. Although the moon is not in motion, yet she appears to be 
in motion on account of the movements of the water, without any action of herown. In 
the same way without any sort of action on the part of consciousness, the mind in which 
the reflection of consciousness has taken its place, shows the power of consciousness to 
be active by its own movements, and makes it appear to be following itself, although in 
reality it does not follow it. It is by acting in this way that the mind brings about the 
experience of the Purusa and gives him the nature of the enjoyer. Thisis the meaning 
of the aphorism. The commentary does not explain the meaning here, because it has 
explained the same in many places already here and there. The Commentary here des- 
cribes the,meaning of the modifications of consciousness as not being independent of the 
modifications of the Will-to-be. As has been said :—‘ Neither the nether worlds, &c.’ They 
say that the mental modification in which the reflection of consciousness has made its 
place ison account of that very reflection, the cave of Brahma, who is pure in nature, 
eternal and auspicious. Itis in that cave alone that the hidden Brahmais to be found. 
When that is removed, he shines by his own light, there being no obstruction and no 
defect. Thisis the case with the revered one who has reached his last body. —22. 


Stra 23. 


TSTUMITH Pat Aaa Uz li 


wegrarceny Drastri-Drisya-Uparaktam, being coloured by. sw, the knower 
(te), and the knowable. gx, fry Chittam, the mind. eatiy Sarvértham, omni- 
objective. 


23. The mind being coloured by the knower and 
the knowable is omni-objective (sarvartha).— 183. 


MACATT ITA | TE TCAIT fad aataq | varie aaetaraar- 
a oo area «| RrerwenfaeRrar german «ganas agta- 
Rraaa ge reitacan Reateheata aarareaaeenre regency 
Rrenarairartad aaafia enitmntined aaraiasad | aga Pree: 
SAG ara: HeraTa Aealteargy: | WIL faaaraaag aa aia aead t- 
aqrkeerize aarti Bre ct | aagneaed senrefta & act arhasite 
wdearartenia Fratie | aaniicerat se aisk sfaftedt zaereare- 
aaAegeR @ Aefrras cand cela TeTerTTTT Tey. 
aingaise: oetat Farrarad |@ ges ck 1 ca adtameumeaasearta4rs- 
aactasatta: sRraseat & ceaaghtiaeteiara: get | 22 i 


Google 


CH. IV. § 23. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 183. 301 


VYASA. 


And it is known in this way :—‘ The mind being coloured by the 
knower and the known, is omni-objective.’ The mind is of course 
coloured by the objects of thought. ‘The mind being itself an object 
comes into relationship with the subjective Purusa through its modi- 
fication as Self. ‘Thus it is that the mind is coloured by both subjectivity 
and objectivity, the knower and the knowable ; it assumes the nature of 
both tha conscious and unconscious. Although it is of the very nature 
of the objective, it appears as if it were of the nature of the subjective. 
Although it is devoid of consciousness by its nature, it appears as if it 
were consciousness. Being of the nature of the crystal, it is termed omni- 
objective. 

It is by this similarity of nental appearance that some peopl are 
deceived into saying that the mind itself is the conscious agent. There 
are others again who say that all this is but the mind only and that 
there is nothing in existence of the objective world, such as the cow or Jar, 
all of which are governed by the law of causation. They are to be pitied. 
For what reason? Because they are possessed of a mind which is the cause 
cf confusion, shining forth as it does in the shape of all appearances. 


In the case of the trance cognition, the cognizable object is reflected 
into the mind, and it is different from the trance cognition, because it is 
the object upon which the act of cognition rests. If that object were the 
mind alone, how could it be that the phenomenon of cognition would be 
taken in by the cognitien itself. For this reason, he who takes in the 
object reflected in the mind, is the Purusa. Thus those who teach that 
the knower, the knowable and the means of knowledge are the three 
modifications of the mind, and thus divide the pienomena into three 


classes are the only true philosophers. It is to them that the Purusa is 
known.—183. : 
VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 

Thus has been established the existence of the Puruga, the unchangeable as a separate 
entity from the mind which is by nature changeable, being asit is by nature the know- 
able. Now he gives also the authority of the perceptions of the world to prove the same, 
‘And it is known in this way.’ The meaning is that it must be so. ‘The mind coloured 
by both the knower and the knowable is omni-objective.' As the mind coloured by the 
blue and other objects establishes their existence by perception itself, so also coloured 
by the reflection of the knower into itself, the mind establishes the existence of the 
knower too by perception. A notion is evidently made up of two percepts ‘I know the 
blue object.’ Therefore the subject also is of a nature similar to that of the object, Al- 
though proved by perception, it is not shown thereby as existing separately from the 
mind, like the reflection of the moon which is perceived to be quite distinct from the 
water into which it is reflected. The mental perception of the Self does not cease to be 
perception morely by this much. 


(Go gle 


302 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


© teers 


Farther inasmuch as the reflection in the water does not exist in reality as a moon 
it cannot be said that because the roflection is only a reflection and not the substance 
itself, that therefore the moon herself does not exist. In the same way, although con- 
sciousness becomes the objective in its state of mental reflection, it does not so become 
in its own nature. This is what is meant by the mind being omni-objective. Says this :— 
‘The mind coloured by the object of thought, &c.’ It is not by the external object alone 
that the mind is coloured by assuming its shape ; it is coloured by the Puruga too. The 
reflection of the Purusa is his, the Self’s manifestation (vritti). This reflection of the 
Puruga is to be accepted by the Vaindsikas also, How? If this be not so they must 
fasten the consciousness upon the mind, saying that there is consciousness in the mind. 
Says so:—' Misled by this similarity of the mind, &c.’ There are some Vain4sikas who 
speak of the existence of an eternal object, There are others who speak of the exist- 
ence of an idea, The question now is that, if the mind shines forth both as a subject and 
an object, there must certainly be a difference between the knower and the knowable. 
As they say:—Although the Self of the Will-to-be is not different, yet those who are 
given toseeing things separated from each other, see it as possessed of the differences 
of the concepts of the subjective and the objective. This being the case, how are they 
to be pitied ? Says for this reason:—‘In the case of the trance cognition, &c,’ They 
must be brought round by first convincing thom by the above reasoning that the Puruga 
must be something different from the mind, and then bringing them into touch with 
the trance cognition, which has the self as tho sphere of its operation by teaching them 
the eight branches of Yoga. That is to be done in this way. In the trance cognition the 
object of knowledge is the Self reflected into tho mind. It is different from the real Self, 
because it becomes the support to that Self (Atm4). Ifhe begin to say notwithstanding 
that he is given the reasons, that the support may be the mind itself, it is said :—If the 
object which appears as the Self, be the mind itself and nothing difforent from it, then 
how is it possible that the mind may be known bythe mind itself (the act of knowing 
that is to say, by the act of knowing itself). It is self-contradictory to speak of the 
action of a mental modification upon itself. Concludes :—‘ Therefore, &c.’ They are to be 
pitied and taught the truth, Says this:—‘In this way, &c.’ Class means nature. 


Satra 24. 


ATAEQTTT AMAT AA TIS AFAR UR 


aq Tad, that, sigtearenfi;, Asahkheya-Vasanabhih, (variegated) by innumer- 

able, (wée2a) residua (arenfi:). faery Chittam, mind. af Api, also, qraqy Pardrtham, 
exists for another. decaarftcara Samhatya-Karitvat, because it acts by combination. 
94. And the mind exists-for-another, also because 

it is variegated by innumerable residua, inasmuch as it 


acts by combination.—184. 


gaat ag | aqagararanii fants ard eemraitena | Tare 
crenata Restrnt ered aeeT ATTA A ATT TAT AEAAML- 
wary Tea atic rea a eat wfiaer a ge Prd gare 4 Wet BT- 
arpraaacard wat areata aratarraregay I TT GU A YT ATAT 
aT | Ta, Pheer aaa atingetgarencad seerente4- 
eqerhata ear | ETAT TT ae: @ a argent get ef 4 Re | 


(SO gle 


CH. IV. § 24. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 184. 303 
ea Ae eA a a Ie Oe ie EER ne ee ee eee eee eae 
VYASA. 

And for what other reason is this the case? ‘ And it exists for another, 
also because it is variegated by innumerable residua, inasmuch as it acts by 
combination.’ ‘This mind is variegated by innumerable residua. It must 
therefore exist for another, 1.e., for achieving the enjoyment and emanci- 
pation of another, not for the achievement of its own object. Because 
it acts by combination. Asa house which has assumed its shape as such, 
by various materials being brought together, cannot come into existence 
for itself, so also the mind which assumes a particular shape by more 
things than one coming together. The mental phenomenon of pleasure 
does not exist for its own sake; nor does knowledge exist for iteelf. 
On the contrary both these exist for the sake of another. That other is 
the Purusa who has objects to achieve in the shape of enjoyment and 
emancipation. It cannot be another of the same class. Whatever else 
the Vainasika speaks of beyond this as being of the same class, all that 
must be of the same. class, acting as that also would do by combination. 
The other however is peculiar to itself and differs from the others in not 
acting by combination. That is the Purusa.-—184. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Introduces another reason for believing that the mind is different from the Self :— 
And for what other reason? ‘ And it exists for another, also because it is variegated 
by innumerable residua, inasmuch as it acts by combination.’ The meaning of the 
aphorism is this. Although innumerable residua of action and afflication live in the mind 
and notin the Purusa, and although further, the fruitions depending upon the residua 
also live in the mind and this fact seems to establish the contention that the mind itself 
is both the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment existing for the enjoyer, and that every- 
thing therefore exists for the mind, still that mind, notwithstanding its being variegated 
by innumerable residua exists for another. Why ? Because it acts by combination. This 
isthe meaning of the aphorism. Explains :—‘ The mind, &c.’ 


Some one may say that although it may be granted that the mind acts by combination, 
yet notwithstanding this, why should it not be conceived as existing and acting for the 
sake of itself? Where is the contradiction in this theory ? Saysto him :—‘ Because it 
acts by combination.’ 


‘The mental phenomenon of pleasure.’ These words indicate the experience side 
of nature and the painful mind is also understood thereby. The knowledge indicates 
the emancipation side. This is the meaning. The pleasurable and painfdl minds con- 
sisting as they do of similar and opposite impressions are not possible of the Self, because 
the manifestations in that case would contradict themselves. Nor can anything elge 
acting by combination either directly or indirectly and thus causing pleasure or pain, be 
cithor favoured or disfavoured by them. Thorefore he alone who does not operate as pleasure 
and pain directly or indiroctly can either be favoured or disfavoured by them. This can 
only be the Purusa who is always indifferent and who can thus be emancipated. His 
knowledge too being dependent upon the object of knowledge, and being thus contradic- 
tory inits own manifestation, it cannot be said that the knowledge is its own object. 
For this reason emancipation from external objects becomes impossible, in the same wa- 


Go gle 


304 PATANJALIS YOGA. 


as emancipation is not possible in the case of the Videhas and the Prakritilayas. There- 
fore knowledge also exists for the sake of the Puruga, not for the sake of the mind itself. 

Nor is the mind in existence for the sake of another of the same kind, because that 
would mean infinite regression. He therefore for whose sake the mind exists must be the 
Parusa Who does not act by conjunction.—24, 


Sfitra 25, 


Acai smnaarnirananake: wk 


fege Visegadardinah (@f'":), for the seer (af'9) of the distinction (fad), we 
Atma, of the self. wa Bhava, of the nature and relation of. wen Bhavan, of the 
curiosity, fafeft: Vinivrittih, the cessation. wren fafieft: ceases the curiosity 
as to the nature and relations of the Self. 


25. For the seer of the distinction, ceases the 
curiosity as to the nature-and-relations of the Self.—185. 


feradea hia wravererarerathrate: lua sai gangrene ta aster 
aren geftae ren arentererars Tes Creat ExT A Tara PertageiA- 
dimacataria saiheafratreradtat TRATATATTATAAT warariaat saad 


ea afeara ef | arg frataahrar Prada | ger | Rraetae Rrraiters: 
qureacennverat gahraatcqrge ef 1 aarsareuamra arrarg- 
qroen faPraca xf tl 24 i 


VYASA. 


As the existence of seeds is inferred from blades of grass shooting 
forth in the rainy season, so it is inferred that he whose tears flow and 
whose hair stand on end when he hears of the path of liberation, has a 
store of Karma tending to liberation as the seed of the recognition of the 
distinction (between the Purusa and the Sattva). The curiosity as to the 
nature for the Self is naturally manifested in him. In the absence there- 
of, however, he gives up the nature thus described; and by the defect he 
loves the antithesis and dislikes the thesis. 


Here the curiosity as to the nature of the Self appears as— 
‘Who was 1?’ ‘ How was I?’ ‘ What is this?’ ‘ How is this ?” 


‘What shall we become?’ ‘How shall we become? This how- 
ever ceases in the case of him who sees the distinction (between the Puru- 
sa and the mind). Why? This varied change is of the mind alone. 
The curiosity however in the absence of Nescience is pure, that is, not 
tonched by the characteristics of the mind. For this reason too the 
curiosity as to the nature and relations of Self ceases for the wise. —185. 


Go gle 


CH. IV § 26. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 186. 305 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Having thus described the reasoned philosophy of the Self, which is the very seed of 
absolute independence, he now shows that the Puruga who has reached that stage of fitness 
is different from any other Puruga, who has not reached that stage of fitness. ‘For the 
seer of the distinction, ceases the curiosity as to the nature and relations of the Self.’ 

The curiosity as to the nature of the Self ceases in tho case cf him who possesses 
that curiosity, when he sees the distinction between the Subjective Puruga and the Objec- 
tive Existence, by the practice and effective achievement of the means of the Yoga. As 
to the nihilist who does not possess this curiosity, he is not fit to be taught. There can 
be teaching in the case of him who has pot first ascertained the fact of the existence of 
the Self in the world outside the present body. Hc cannot, therefore, come to know the 
distinction between the two and hence in the case of him there cannot be the possibility 
of any curiosity ceasing to be. 

But the question is. How is the curiosity to know the nature of the Self known to be 
existing in any mind? Says he for this reason :—‘ As in the rainy season, &c.' It is inferred 
that there exists some Karma done in the previous birth in the shape of the practice of 
the eight accessories of Yoga or of some portion thereof. Which is the secd out of which 
is to grow the knowledge of the reality, and which tends towards emancipation. And in 
the case of such one, the curiosity to know the nature of the Self must necessarily 
exist without even the necessity of practice. 

Shows who has not the capacity, by the authority of the Agamis. ‘In the absence, 
&o.’ The antithesis is that there is no fruit of action, there being no entity existing in an- 
other sphere of existence, or say there being no other world beyond this. The nihilist 
is he who likes this view, but does not like the thesis, which has the dctermination of the 
twenty-five tattvas in view. The curiosity as to tho nature of the Self has been described 
before. Speaks of the thought of him whosees the distinction :—‘ This varied change, &c.’ 
The meaning is that the curiosity as to the nature of the Self ceases in the case of him 
who is wise enough to know the distinction.--25. 


Sdtra 26. 


aat faaatast Racasat Fre 26 0 


vat Tada, then. faaa-fiery Viveka-nimnam, inclining towards discrimination. 
(faery fate) Maa Kaivalya, absolute independence. mmr Prigbharam, gravitating 
towards, fre Chittam, the mind. 


26. Then the mind inclines towards  discrimi- 
nation and  gravitates towards absolute-independence 
(kaivalya).—186. 

wat tata Raertent Kray) aqratagey ere Aerasnearara4ra- 
Praartraqenrrn wale Rarerstrae Rarer y Ae 
VYASA. 
The mind which ere now was heavy with sensuous enjoyment and 
tended towards ignorance, takes now the reverse course. 


It is now heavy with independence and tends towards discriminative 


knowledge.—1 86. 
89 


(Go gle 


306 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Now describes the nature of tho mind of him who secs the distinction :—‘ The mind’ 
is then inclined towards discrimination and gravitates towards absolute independence, 
‘This has been explained.’—126, 

Sdtra 27. 


~ ~ 3« ~ 
ANALY AAATKAUTY AERA: WO Ul 
afaxy Tachchhidresu, in the breaks in it. seaarerafe PratyayAntaréigi, arise 
other thoughts (sew), deta: Samskdrebhyah, from residua. 
27. In the breaks arise other thoughts from resi- 
dua.—187. 


atterg Teraraciitn Gentes: | TeraanreTeT 
aramarenikuRade afesrg seracuesenta at aa ar srrarefife 
a pa: ettanradisna qaeentter ef 29 I 

VYASA. 

In the mind inclining towards discriminative knowledge of the 
notions, and which has just entered the stream of the distinctive knowledge 
of the Purusa and Objeciive Existence, other thoughts appear in the 
intervals such as ‘I am,’ ‘This is mine,’ ‘I know,’ &. Whence? 
From previous residua, whose seeds are being destroyed.—187. 


VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


It may be so if discriminative knowledge is established in discrimination and never 
inclines towards outward activity. It is, however, seen in the case of one who is begging 
his food, that is, inclined towards outward activity. For this reason says :—‘ In the breaks 
arise other thoughts from residua.’ 

Thoughts (Pratyaya) arc those by which something is known, the essence of the mind. 
By that arises the discrimination of consciousness. It is of him that are shown the notions, 
‘I know,’ when absolute freedom is directly shown as separated from anything else. Or 
the forgetfulness that Ido not know. As also the egoism with reference to that, ‘I am,’ 
or ‘This is mine.’ By previous residua means the residua of outgoing activities.—27. 


Satra 28. 


CAAT FATATHT As I 


ery Hfinam, removal. er Esdm, their. eaaq Klegavat, like that of the 
afflictions. 3% Uktam, has been described. 
98. Their removal has been described like that of the 


afflictions.—188. 

EIaant % WITHA | UN HM qraetearar a ele wah TAT 
STATA qraelterara: FaAeHTeT + TITAN | araaenrtteg Rrar- 
Rrartaathragaca xf a Fart yj Re I 


Google 


CH. IV. § 29. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 189. 307 


VYASA. 

As the afflictions are no longer capable of budding forth when their 
seed-power has been singed, so also does not the conserved energy of 
previous residua give birth to notions when its seed-power has been 
singed by the fire of knowledge. The residua of knowledge, however, live 
on until the duty of the mind has been fulfilled. They are, therefore, not 
considered. — 188. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 

Let that be. Butifin the face of the existence of discriminative knowledge too, 
other thoughts arise, what is the cause of their utter removal so that these other thoughts 
may not rise again atall? For this reason says :—‘ Their removal has been described 
like the afflictions.’ The outgoing activities in their potential state are not altogether 
destroyed as long as the discriminative knowledge is not firmly established. In the case 
however of discriminative knowledge being firmly established the other thoughts are 
utterly destroyed and are no longer fit to be born again. 

By what cause does it come about that the afflictions born in the intervals of discri- 
mination even cease to give birth to other potentialities ? The cause is that the seed-power 
of the afflictions is burnt up by the fire of discriminative knowledge. In the same way 


the residua of the outgoing activities are burnt up. 
But the residua of outgoing activities are to be restrained by the residua of discri- 


minative knowledge, and the residua of discrimination are to be restrained by the potencies 
of restraint. And it has been shown that the potencies of restraint have not the exter- 
nal objects for their sphere of operation, The means of restraint are, therefore, to be con- 
sidered. For this reason says :—‘ The residua of knowledge, however, &ec. The residua 


of knowledge are the potencies of higher desirelessness. —28. 
Satra 29. 


THERTSTBM TT Tra raeaTasyay: 
TATE: NRE 


waeema Prasankhyine, in the highest intellections. wi Api, even. WRIEa 
Akusidasya, having no interest left, aaa Sarvathd, constant, fawert: Viveka- 


khydteb, from discrimination. wita; Dharma meghah, the cloud of virtue, vata: 


Samadhih, the trance. 
99, Having no-interest left even in the Highest-In- 


tellection there comes from constant discrimination, the 
trance known as the Cloud-of-Virtue.—-189. 
pd gage ada Rawererdaa: ear | age area 
sft a fafaeataaa aatia farmer aaa fanente- 
vq wader Pr Seer caterer? TAA AGTEA THAT ATA AAT: 
| Rent ze Ul oa 


When this Brahmana has no interest left in the Highest Intellection, 
i.e., desires nothing even from that, then unattached even to that, he 


Google 


308 PATANJALI'S YOGA. 


has discriminative knowledge ever present, and thus by destruction of 
the seed-power of potencies, other thoughts are not born. Then does he 
attain the trance known as the Cloud-of-Virtue.—189. 


-VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Thus the author of the Aphorism having described the Highest Intellection to be the 
means of the restraint of outgoing activities, now speaks of the means of restraining 
even the Highest Intellection :—‘ Having no interest left even in the Highest Intellection 
there comes from constant discrimination tho trance known as the Cloud of Virtue.’ By 
that Highest Intellection, he does not desire the possession of anything, even of the power 
of becoming the master of all existence. Nay he begins to feel pain even there. Having 
become desireless even there by seeing the defect of change, he comes to the possession 
of constant discriminative knowledge (undisturbed). Explains the same :—‘ Thus unattach- 
ed even to that, &c.’ As long as the notions of outgoing activities exist, the Brihmana 
does not come to possess the constant manifestation of discriminative knowledge. When 
however he arrives at the stage when all other thoughts cease to exist, then he becomes 
possessed of constant discriminative knowledge. Then comes to him the trance known 
as the Cloud of Virtue (dharma-megha), This is the meaning. Dissatisfied with the 
Highest Intellection and desiring restraint of that even, let him practise the trance 
known as the Cloud of Virtue. By the practice of that he becomes constantly possessed 
of discriminative knowledge,.—29. 


Sitra 30. 


© 
aa: SITHAATAT: 3 oll 
wa: Tatah, thence, #4 Klesa-karma, of action and afflictions. fit: 


Nivrittib, the removal, 
30. Thence the removal of actions and afflictions 
—190. 

aa: sp aenariahea: | agrarerearea: sa ayes pire wert | 
FUSTPUSS KAT SSM Cal Tahar | | THA TA saves Ha- 
Paget ware | wear) qeatiqaar weer wIcUny | we attag Tees: 
Ha aa ATA TAIT Cer Be | 

VYASA. 

By the attainment thereof, the affliction of Nescience, etc., are re- 
moved, even to the very root. And the good and bad vehicles of action 
are utterly uprooted. On the afflictions and the actions being removed, 
the wise man becomes free even while alive (the Jivanmukta). How? 
Because Unreal Cognitions are the cause of existence. No one being free 
from the affliction of Unreal Cognitions is seen being born by anybody 
any where.—190. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Thus does he become capable of restraining that. And now describes the object 
thereof :—* Thence the removal of actions and afflictions.’ But then how does it come to 


Be 


(Go gle 


CH. IV. § 81. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 191. 309 


pass that the wise become free while yet in the bonds of life? Gives the answer :—‘ Be- 
cause, &c.’ It is the vehicle of action grown strong by the residua of afflictions and ac- 
tions that surely becomes the cause of life-state, &c.’ And when there is no root, the 
shoots thereof cannot exist. As says on this subject the revered Aksapdda :—‘ By not 
seeing the birth of one who has no desires .'—30. 


Siitra 31, 


AAT AHATAAIA AALAATAAATACIT tt Rk 
aq Tadd, then. eatawaertra Sarva-dvaraya, mala, apetasya, from which is 
removed (wa) all (#8) obscuring (@raxs) impurities (4), were Jiiinasya, of know- 
ledge. wrirat Anantyat, because of the infinity of. #4 Jiieyam, the knowable. 
wevy Alpam, but little. 
31. The knowable is but little then, because of 
knowledge having-become-infinite, on account of the re- 


moval of all obscuring impurities.—191. 

aq watacaMSae eT THT | we: HF aeNTtaTa- 
figee smear’ val | aaeningmganad staat safite 
CHET Naar eMaAY vat) aT azat aa cacuMacand vale 
AA MANNA | HAAS AAS ATsd | AINA Aala: | TW- 


aq | wat awatqeaategiecaay | aiteer segeaaafigisay- 
crafter W ae 7 
A ® 


Knowledge when rid of all the impurities of affliction and action, 
becomes infinite. The essence of knowledge covered by the veil of 
Tamas, is but seldom shown forth and becomes capable of recognition by 
the activity of Rajas. Here, when all the impurities have been removed, 
then knowledge becomes infinite. When knowledge becomes infinite, 
but little remains to know, like the shining insect in space. On this it 
has been said :—‘ The blind man pierced the pearl; the fingerless put a 
thread into it; the neckless wore it and the tongueless praised it.’—-191. 

VACHASPATI’S GLOSS, 


Now describes tho state of the mind at the time when the Cloud of Virtue has been 
reached :—‘ The knowable is but little then because of knewledge having become infinite 
on account of their removal of obscuring impurities. The impurities which cover up the 
essence of the mind, are spoken of as tho obscuring impurities. These are the afflictions 
and actions. When the mental essence is frecd from alloy these obscuring impurities, 
knowledge, i. e., the power of knowing becomes infinite, i.e, immeasurable, and therefore 
the knowable remains but little. As in the season after the rains, the sun being freed 
of the clouds shines brightly all round and his light becomes infinitely strong, and for 
this reason, the jar and other such things that are to be lighted remain but little, so 
also the light of the essence of the mind, when freed from the Rajas and Tamas, becomes 
infinite, and but little remains to be lighted up. Says the same :—‘ When that becomes 
freed from all the impurities &c, Renders the same plainer by means of the canon of 


Google 


310 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


difference :—‘ When overpowered, &c.’ The meaning is that the Tamas is put into motion 
by the active Rajas and is for this very reason carried away from the place. For this 
very reason it is called the Cloud of Virtue, inasmuch as it pours forth showers of light 
upon all the virtues of things to be known. 

Well, this trance, the Cloud of Virtue, may be the cause of the calming down of the 
vehicle of actions along with the afflictions and the residua; but then how is it that when 
the Cloud of Virtue makes its appearance, the man is not born again? For this reason 
says :—‘As has been said on the subject.’ 

If an effect can be brought into existence even when the cause no longer exists, then 
the acts of piercing the pearl, &c., may well be performed by blind people, &c. Or, it may 
well be that whatever nonsense an ignorant world may talk about improper things, may 
be considered as very proper.—381. 

Siitra 32. 


ada: Hararat taneanadarag vl 32 tt 


wm: Tatab, by that. eretry Kyitarthandm, having fulfilled their object. wera 
Parindma, of the changes. m=" Krama, of the succession. «af: Samaptib, end. 

yerry Gupdnim, of the qualities. 
32. By that, the qualities having fulfilled their 


object, the succession of their changes ends.—192. 


at: Faratat wturnaafay wary | aa wAaaeitcarpartat 
garat qhanana: aaarad | ae Baannvant: gtaarmanr waaey- 


AM GAAET WBA 
VYASA. 


By that, z.e., by the rise of the Cloud of Virtue, the succession of the 
changes of the qualities is over, inasmuch as they have fulfilled their 
object, by having achieved experience and emancipation, and their succes- 
sion having ended, they no longer care to stay even for a moment.—192. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Well, the highest culmination of the Cloud of Virtue being the purity of the light 
of knowledge, which is the same as the Higher desirelessness, it may well uproot tho 
potencies of the vehicles of outgoing activities and of trance together with the vehicles 
of afflictions and actions. But the qualities are of the nature of things which go 
on performing their actions of their own power. How is it then that they do not go on 
making the same sort of a body for such Yogis as they do for all men? For this reason 
says :—' By that, qualities having fulfilled their object, the succession of their changes 
ends. The meaning is that the nature of the qualities, that thoy do not function with 
respect to him for whom they have already achieved their object.—32. 


Sitra 33. 


ayaa wRurarttedteatta: HA: waz tl 


wa Ksana, of moments. xfarit Pratiyogi, the uninterrupted sequence. wera 
Paripdma, of evolutionary change. ww" Aparénta, on the cessation, fata: Nigra- 
hyab, to be cognised as distinct, =#: Kramah, succession, 


ea gle 


CH. IV. § 83. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 198. 311 


33. Succession is the uninterrupted-sequence of mo- 
ments, cognised as distinct on the cessation of evolutionary 
change.—193. 

mea Sse at arafer | asian atararcrahaten sa: | ear. 
araarea GRUTAATAAT TAA WIA A | ATA AMAT OTA 
qed wate | hag a mA EE ea aa Reet _euhern aftar- 
Ricaeat aiax FzewAMar gereq | gitartmear sora aferait- 
araara ae a ead afeagq | saa a aearfrerenterered aa gang. 


Hg qeleg atararrcraraien ma weaaar Aearg afr wWIreaqs- 
CITITaATA: | gear werattsg qagety aEferar paar. 
ayaa we amuse: saga afitcinaguaa seque ef | 
warea earceq fee nara gag waraenfia maaarfad afr | ae 
anwAag | Sug af ct THragada: aal wat atede scat wk 
cua xfer) & Ar cera aal anat aftvania scart afreaa ef fasa gaa 
regent: Ytage: EUs A here ateq Head | aT 
MATAR: TAM A aM TAMA Ages Aaa gwala: war qwTafrser 
taedt tagged aft | se aaata: Ta Sant sqAeaagaaraaa4y 
aaa xf) gusenta warmagtaaftaacetta | weacrerarca are- 
erence Tare seat fer a3 


VYASA, 


Well, but what is this succession? ‘Succession is the uninterrupt- 
ed flow of moments; it is taken in by last end, the cessation of changes, 
A cloth which has not undergone the succession of moments, does not 
give up its newness and become old all at once in the end. 

Further, succession is found in the permanent also. This perma- 
nence is two-fold, the Eternal in Perfection ; and the Eternal in Evolution. 
Of these, the perfect eternity belongs to the Purusa. The evolutionary 
eternity belongs to the qualities, The Permanent or Eternal is that in 
which the substance is not destroyed by changing appearances. Both 
are permanent because their substance is never destroyed. 

Now with regard to the appearances of the qualities, the Will-to-be 
and others, succession has an end which is cognized by the cessation of 
the changes. In the eternal qualities however, whose appearances these 
are, it has no end. In the case of the Permanent ones, the existence of 
the released Purusas who are established in their own natures, is also 
known by succession. In their case too, therefore, it has no end. It is 
however conceived there, with reference to the necessary conception of 
the act of being attached to the word. 


(Go gle 


312 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


But then is there or is there not an end to the succession of evo- 
lutionary changes of the universe, which is ever present in the qualities, 
by motion or by cessation of motion? This cannot be answered as such. 
How ? 


There is a question to which only a one-sided answer may be 
given :—‘ All that is born must die and having been dead be born again.’ 
Well, but if the question is put in this form— 

Is it that all that is born must die, and having been dead be born 
again ? 

The answer that can be given to this is not a single one but must 
be divided in two. 

He in whem the light of knowledge has appeared, and whose desires 
have been destroyed, that wise man is not born; the rest are born. Simi- 
larly the question is, Is mankind good or not? The answer is again to 
be divided in two. The humankind is better in comparison with the 
animals, but is inferior in comparison with gods and scers (Risis). 

As to the question, Has the universe an end or has it not? Why 
this question cannot be answered as such? For the wise there is ces- 
sation of the successions of the universe. Not for the others. There is 
defect in formulating any other theory. Hence the question must neces- 
sarily be divided into two.—193. 

VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 


Puts a question in the context about the succession of changes (krama) :—‘ Well but 
what is this succession?’ The answer is :—‘ Succession is the uninterrupted sequence of 
moments cognized as distinct on the cessation of evolutionary change.’ 

That to which is mutually related tho moment relating backward and forward to 
the moment of the succession of changes is so called. The meaning is that succession is 
that which is the support of a group of moments. There can of course be no succession 
ascertained without the existence of that of which it is the succession. Norcan there be 
a succession of one moment only. The inference by residue therefore points only to the 
dependence thereof upon a group of moments. Says this :—‘ Succession is the uninterrupt- 
ed flow, &c.’ Mentions authority for the existence of the succession of changes :—It is 
taken in by the last end, the cessation of changes. 

Even in new cloth preserved with care, oldness becomes visible after a long time. 
This is the last end of change, otherwise called its cessation. 1t is for this very reason 
that a succession of change exists. And before that too is inferred the smallness, the 
greater smallness and the greatest smallness as well as the grossness, the greater 
smallness and the greatest smallness of oldness in regular sequence of one after the other. 

Shows the same by the canon of difference:—‘A cloth which has not undergone, 
&«.’ That which has not been subjected to the succession of moments, is spoken of as 
not having undergone that. 

Well, but this succession cannot be posited of the Pradhéna, because that is eternal. 
For this reason says :—‘Succession is seen in those that are permanent, By using the 
plural number shows that succession pervades all permanent objects, | 


Google 


CH. IV. § 388. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 198. 313 


Now shows the modes of permanence and then establishes how succession pervades 
the eternal :—‘ Permanence is two-fold, &.’ 


Well, the constantly eternal may be eternal, because it never gives up its nature 
such as it is. As to the changing substances, they are constantly giving up their appear- 
ances ; how can they be called permanent? For this reason says:—‘The Permanent or 
Eternal is that, &c.’ Characteristic, secondary quality and condition possess the 
qualities of appearance and disappearance; the characterized however remains the same 
in substance. 


Well, are all successions known by the cessation of changes? Says, No:—‘Now with 
regard to the appearances of the qualities, the Will-to-be, etc.’ Because the succes- 
sion of the characteristics ends on account of their being destructible. Not so however 
the succession of the Pradhaéna ends. 


Well, the Pradhfana might be said to be possessed of the succession of changes, 
because of the change of its characteristics. But the Puruga never changes. How 
then can there be a change of succession in the case of the unchanging Puruga? For 
this reason says :—‘ In those that are constantly permanent, &c.’ 


There in the case of those that are bound, they have the notion of non-separation 
from the mind; there is therefore a fastening of the change on them on account of the 
changes of the mind. In the case of those however that have been released, the existence 
of an unreal change has been fancied by ignorance with reference to the action of the 
word to be. Because the word precedes, fancy comes thereafter and puts on the appear- 
ance of the action of the word to be. 


It has been said that the succession of changes does not find an end in the qualities, 
Not suffering that assertion puts the question, ‘Is there an end to succession, &c.'? 


Cessation of motion means the Great Latency, the Mah&pralaya. Motion signifies 
creation. This is the meaning. 

If there were no end of the change of the universe (Sams&ra) on account of eternity, 
how then should it be in the Great Latency, that all the Purusas should all at once 
have an end of the succession of changes in their case, and again should the same 
succession of changes come into being all at once at the beginning of a manifestation ? 
For this reason it would follow that one Puruga alone being released, the universe of 
evolution would cease to exist for all, and thus all the Purugas would become released. 
In this way would come the end of the succession of the changes of the Pradhiéna, and 
the Pradh4na also would thus come to be impermanent. 

Further it is not allowed that the manifestation of existence which did not exist 
before is possible, and this assertion cannot therefore be taken to prove its infinity. 
When this becomes the case, it can no longer be said that the Pradhfna is beginningless, 
All the teachings of the Sastras thus come to be futile. This is the meaning. 

Gives the answer:—It cannot be answered; the question does not deserve to be 
answered. With the object of showing that this question cannot be answered, shows 
@ question which admits of a one-sided answer. ‘There is a question, &c.’ The answer 
to the question, Will all those that are born die? is Yes. This is true. Now speaks 
of a question which admits of an answer after being divided into two:—Are all those 
that are born bound to die and dying be born again? The answer that can be given 
to this is only possible after a division. 

In order to make the matter clear, mentions another question which admits of an 
answer only after being divided :—‘Similarly the question, &c.’ This question does not 
admit of a one-sided answer. It is impossible to say that the evolution of the wise 
and unwise is in general indefinite or finite. There can be no community between them. 

40 


Google 


314 PATANJALI’S YOGA. 


This is similar to the impossibility of ascertaining the goodness or otherwise of 
every living being all at once. The same is the case with the death of one who is just 
born. This can, however, be ascertained after a division. Says this:—The wise man 
ig not born, &c. This is the meaning. 

The inference is. that there being emancipation of all in the case of the freedom 
of one only from succession, the world must come to end. And this depends upon the 
emancipation proved to exist by the authority of the Sastras. - Thus here is the authority 
of the means of knowledge known as verbal authority, which establishes the emancipation 
understood. How can it be that the same SAstras should, by a certain teaching of theirs, 
stultify another authority of the S4stras establishing the eternity of the modifications 
of the Pradhana? Therefore, the inference which militates against the authority of 
the Agama cannot be considered an authority. It is of course in: the Veda, the Smriti 
and the Puranas that the succession of creation after creation is without beginning 
and without end. Further it is not possible that all the souls should cease to be born 
and die allat once, Even in the case of learned men who have been practising and 
working for more lives than one to achieve discriminative knowledge, this knowledge 
does not become well established. How is it then possible that in the case of all living 
beings, whether they belong to the class of the moving or the unmoving creatures, it 
should manifest all at once by some chance ? 

Farther it is not proper that the effects should manifest at one and the same time 
although the causes are not in existence at one and the same time. In the case of the 
manifestation of discriminative knowledge by succession, innumerable souls may be 
released by succession, but the destruction of the universe will not follow, because 
creatures are infinite and innumerable. Thus all is plain.— 88. 


Sitra 34. 
geraeaa guar wfasaa: haet ereaaiasr 
at Fateraratea naen 


Fee Purnsartha-Sinyanam, of those that are devoid of the object 
of the Purusa. yer Guifndm, of the qualities. sfrea: Pratiprasavah, becoming 
latent. €aey Kaivalyam, absolute freedom. eevaftesr Svardpa-pratistha, establish- 
ed in itsown nature. w V&, or. faftaf: Chiti-Saktih, the power of consciousness. 
«fa Iti, so, thus. 


34. Absolute freedom comes when the qualities, 
becoming devoid of the object of the Purusa, become latent ; 
or the power of consciousness becomes established in 
its own nature.—194. 

VYASA. 
mnirarcnactear Saerqa acaswaaarad | gewiearat 
gurat ofiwerg: Aad caaunitsr ar Paftrakafter | srarrcanrat qe- 
ararat a: sfiaee: srarcuaaat gua ata caaqtrer 
Raeafa tt ae a 


Google 


CH. IV. § 34. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 194. 315 


It has been said that absolute freedom comes when the succession 
of the functioning of the qualities in the performance of their duties is 
over. Its nature is now ascertained. Absolute freedom is the latency 
of the qualities on becoming devoid of the object of the Purusga, or it 
is the power of consciousness established in its own nature. Absolute 
freedom is the becoming latent by inverse process, of the qualities, when 
they are devoid of the object of the Purusa, after having achieved the 
experience and emancipation of the soul. 


The power of consciousness is absolute when it is not again limited. 
—194. 


Thus ends the Commentary of Vy4sa, the Sankhya-pravachana, the Fourth Chapter 
on Absolute Freedom. THE BOOK Is FINISHED. 


VACHASPATI’S GLOSS. 


Describes the connection of the aphorism defining the nature of absolute freedom 
{kaivalya) with the previous aphorism :—‘It has been said, &c.’ Absolute freedom is the 
becoming latent of the qualities when they become devoid of the objects of the Purusa.’ 

The becoming latent of the qualities in their cause, the Pradhéina, when they are 
devoid of the objects of the Purusa, having achieved them:—The out-going and the 
trance and the inhibitive potencies of the qualities which appear both as the causes 
and the effects, become latent in the mind. The mind becomes latent in the principle 
of egoism. The principle of egoism becomes latent in the undifferentiated phenomenal, 
and the undifferentiative phenomenal into the noumenal, 

This backward disappearance of the qualities which appear as both the causes and 
the effects, is called absolute freedom of the Purusa, in relation to the Pradhana from 
which he is released. Or, freedom is the establishment of the Puruga in his own 
nature. Says this, ‘Or, it is the power, &c.’ Inasmuch as in the Mahfpralaya, too, the 
power of consciousness is established in its own nature, but that is not Moksga, he 
says :—‘ Does not come into relationship again, &c.’ The word ‘ITI’ inthe aphorism means 
the end of the book. 

In this Chapter have been described the mind fit for freedom, and the trance known 
as the Cloud of Virtue, for establishing the Puruga, as he appears in the other world; also 
two descriptions of Mukti have been described and other things also by context. 

The root of the afflictions has been described, as also the afflictions ; both the Yogas 
are described together with the eight accessories. The way of Moksa in the shape of 
the knowledge of the distinction between the Purusa and the qualities has been 
rendered plainer, Absolute freedom has been ascertained to be the power of conscious- 
ness free from the afflictions. | 

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of Absolute Freedom in the Gloss of Vachaspati Misra 
on the Commentary of Vy4sa.—34. 


OM TAT SAT. 


For the service of Brahma. 


Google 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 


Digitized by Google 


216006-sn-pd#asn ssad.e/bso' sn4yTuey'MMM//:di14y / pazTiTHtp-a]Hoo9 ‘sajie1s paitum ay} uT uTewog 2T1qGN_ 
V6ZLSENEOSTOGE Apw//7OZ/Jeu*a,puey* pu//:sdiizy / IW LE:EZ OL-ZO-SZOZ UO payeusuayg 


Alphabetical Index of the Sutras. 


cH anraraparcany LV, 20 ee 

gate arate Aare @ qeakrrat arerar [, 44... 
ata yah aieerarreraitarar area: ILI, 13... 
arene aferarareszre: ILI, 29 see or 
eniagresd afrafertratraterg LV, Tes 

marae Gitarareaea fq: ITT, 15 


se ge a 20 ... 


RATHI: AaTaaasqeaarecarnrantaty If, 41 
era AAC TAT TTT LI, 43 

qarrent etdq 1], 30 
eared set aeaerae” aqarararcucme 11, 22 
la t garraa hac: I, 24 
B aye: RAIA Falwewenacara: II, 12 ae 
a a Ill, 43 ... 
am atcrereuray III, 26 ... 

afeadtcirmeg: cafrewcs LV, 7) ere 
Reeders eprmsrecererearey emgeereg eS TY 22 


(50 gle 


seitrafiacraq: anitra: Bree LV, 1 .... ays 
sntueroneieermareed eafteenrcttesent LV, 9 
wietuneanaaakea: aaa vgaay Il, 31... 
atereerat era ATS Sq TATA: sfaaqfa: [1], 52.. 
wmremeacaftarn: sreergery LV, 2 

aseq y weraracnian gente: (V, 27... 


TM? Tentiswrerenrcmtaardt 1,50 

aa: saralat oftarmareaartarany LV, 32 
She SU IV, 30. 
aa: acaraqaaearany |, 53 
ae ga: areadteat qererar frqedsrmarattara: LIL, ‘19 
ae saradaatasearacanitaga |, 29 
qa: Minrraqwaqaranearearay stadt III, 35 
SEMAN ES TACT eRT NTT, 1V, 8 
aa: attaad wararacay 1, 52 bee 
aetsrraTieaTe Ata: qraeeraqatahyaraca Ill, 44 ... 
aan xearaftrara: 11,48... 
aat arse Pawar: rarasasa tL, 47 
aC qarenagy wagsyy I, 16 
acntandanaranara: I, 32 
at TasRATAa vatay III, 2 
as fear gettseara: 1,13... 
aa waramaararay LV, 6... 
am farcferra-acteritsra_ I, 25 
aT WIAA: aratuiarrerst aaraha: T, 42 
aM Aaaraaseagaaenr zat: 11, 30 
aaa og eager II, 21 ... 
arate aferg Pafsrez II, 8 .. 
ATATACAAVTTATAT TA ATA: daerq II, 25 . 
ATAVATAT AAI Tres en IV, 24., 
aal gts: Maasreray [, 3 7 
an Gaara Racine Bray LV, 26 
AGT AAAS Hrereaseaie wast ([V, 31 
aT IITA Tey ATararay LV, 17 


Google 


( ili) 


PAGE. 

ataiarear cera sare: II, 3 = 180 
aacrearaty araeftsraa hazeay II, 49... - vee 235 
aa: wrarpacqinarathe Peart IT, 1... on -» =: 88 
afercatr sarasmaraamitireae: srurara: 1], 49... .. 171 
qe TaTaateal AeHrcrey III, 1.0 se = ... 186 
aren apitrg ferent: 111, 6... or a .. 182 
AS AAR: TWA: J, 27 Sd ss des ee 
Tal TAT ory: set 1, 27 ee af ... 148 
aeq tachrar Il, 24 a2 ue . 144 
cent Beret qdAtrenfeiter: eather: I, 51 = 85 
at aa aeter: darts: 7,46. ae. 9 
aT edted aienraanmt ale fazer II, 53 we. «264 
arataanieer arte frerarpiv, 10... ww. 278 
aaerarararas:: I, 21 i oes ia .. 38 
a sfsrarazar: aear: IT, 10 _ ... 102 
& sraqaitarnen grargvatgeare |, 14, a en 1S 
a AMAT Taras IV, 13, ‘ x ., 285 
a alibi a fama 11, 36... oe .. 236 
e qa JI, a see - .. 183 

steen eae Ill, 4 sii see ... 181 
xer ekrars: sets THAT ART: I, 20 . — ... 133 
oom qari eae? I, 17 ede ssi .. 121 
weewnqen Ard wars IV, 23 a si ... 3800 
TaTaaEATIeAaAAar Kawaya I, 31. ey 
qargaat ge IT, 8 - see a i ... 100 
wreaasgaienraaaeaar Il, 6 ' .. 98 
eergafreteaagenes eeterceet cre 1b... ee :) 
Qerarahraes aca II, 1. oe .. 179 
arcarg St Beta wera? IT, 58 aed $65 .. 175 
eaTaeardggaa: 1,11. ve a ... 103 
wea agatereraq iT, 27, os ... 230 
a feefraaed Seg core et AS eA 16... w. §-292 
aq aeanita Tea TV, 19 be wee 295 
atham HrASqERTAT II, 28 . (281 
Airaasaisk Tactat aarage aa: aficae IV, 3. ee 200 


Pabakraratetararargy IV, 4 oe es «279 


Google 


( iv ) 


Affarcharcascaremenrg 1,47. 

CAT URAL SET TANT I, 40. 

steereereemny te equity genre AAT II, 15 
qturrraeraargarararraerag 1], 16 ... 
aftartecaeqaery IV, 14 

goers qerat sre ded eet trae 34 


sTeTanatierraite yaar Amirwatey ees, sels 18 
segedatrarcanat at srueq |, 34 bas ans 
WATS ATATTAT: TATA I, 7 
NTT Thrag4¢ray If, 19 
saratraatrenettarerrs: I, 6 
TIWARI, 47 
qafaat ctrek Rrawnarang IV, 5 ... 
ATLAS MATT ATATS EMT [11 24 at 
TeeTAsTRTSY ae Rasen gar: 1V, 29 
sifrarat aaa lll, 32... 
; Freer qearficrin: II, 37 

serrdatrsrat dtaern 1, 38 ” ie 
qeg efeerdim Ill, 23... ee 
afgcaferaraharereter aa STOSTRTERCUTT: THI, 42 ... 
qTaceararaesasresarentn eat iach II, 50 
arnaracranead fh aay I, 51 
MATATAT Prtumetrearara I, 19 
WAAR! qa erarrey IIT, 25 
qasnfaty Rega Ll, 31 
aeaeartrarrearaarss feat: 17,22. 
eirenrgarrarat gegeanqeagqvarysarat arraraikae- 

Targary I, 33 eee ahs ee 
Hearty seth III, 22 ; 
qarraarearaar 1,39 ae 
ileal alla II, 29 
anifkaagrareens: |, = et 
AITGIAST ATTA eTeMiarraeene II, 28 
SIS mraerrag Ill, 45 
wegen’ Rradaqranfere Far IV, 15 ee i 
Prekarat siranargqay 1, 33 ss ie 64 


Google 


fartariaaiefegarariegret 
ferarent ar satftrenay I, 36 =... 


Google 


( vi). 


aarfitatetpacaitrarare 1, 45 

aarasaissaaay Ill, 39 

aaMNggaA: Yaar Il, 42 
qenranaencanqgasnaarag 1, 18. 
warsaamaan xara Rraez —— I, 11. 
qargaat crn UN, 7 a a 

quater aseriaaray I, 45 - 

QUA HETHA THA MATA ATARTARTEAAT AT Ulf, 21 
UFGIAAAN AEMATHCY Fachraragey LT, 50 
fucqanrearay II, 46 : 
VISLATTATLAT AA AATTATATY, AAT: Il, 43 
eahraiaat aaqerarrarreratar aftast I, 43 
wanhrarareert ar, 38 . 

warararal rrarstt ar aree isha ae: TI, 9 
RIAA Rraeq VSATTAHIT a TATSTT: If 54 
weatarat: waatatartg: earn Il, se 
ea deaila bei Siatieh i Il, 44 

eraaat uaa IV, 2 

eqa adaterg Ill, 33 ders 

danas: erqterarzarnar’ aeare: IV, 1 
2a gaaarrag II, 16 ae 

anata: aaaerast aay IT, 51 

samira gtararcrararer Ha: IV, 33 


eftuze tiara miniGaneuMTE g aeaTyaaTeATar: I, 41... 


(Go gle 


Pace. 
168 
239 
167 
217 
187 
100 

78 
221 
256 
169 
244 
71 
64 
101 
176 
139 
168 
306 
233 
282 
120 
259 
310 
66 


