31 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


"BR^^^XM^Ex 


nrno   ■%    P, 


^LIBRARY  ANMEX 


.  «()rf 


\  I 


IJAYTJI^^RPIF 


ISfri-i^ 


5"  "924  071    128  825 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924071128825 


ELEMENTS  OF  HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 


ELEMENTS 


OF 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY 


BY 

T.  A.  GOPINATHA  RAO,  M.A. 

SUPERINTENDENT  OF  ARCH/EOLOGY,  TRAVANCORE  STATE. 


Published  under  the  patronage  of  the  Government  of  His  Highness 
the  Maharaja  of  Travancore. 


Vol.  I— Part  I. 


THE  LAW    PRINTING   HOUSE 
MOUNT  ROAD    ::     ::     MADRAS 

1914 

All  Rights  Reserved. 


PRINTED   AT   THE   LAW   PRINTING    HOUSE, 
MOUNT   ROAD,    MADRAS. 


DEDICATED 

WITH  KIND  PERMISSION 
To 

HIS   HIGHNESS   SIR   RAMAVARMA. 

Sri  Padmanabhadasa,  Vanchipala,  Kulasekhara  Kiritapati, 

Manney  Sultan  Maharaja  Raja  Ramaraja  Bahadur, 

Shamsher  Jang,  G.C.S.I.,  G.C.I. E., 

MAHARAJA  OF  TRAVANCORE. 

Member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  London, 

Fellow  of  the  Geographical  Society,  London, 

Fellow  of  the  Madras  University,  Officer  de  L' Instruction  Publique. 

By 

HIS  HIGHNESS' S  HUMBLE  SERVANT 

THE  AUTHOR. 


PEEFACE. 


The  tall  spire  of  the  Hindu  temple  is  one  of 
the  first  objects  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the 
observant  foreigner  and  excite  his  curiosity  as  he 
travels  through  India.  On  going  into  the  temple, 
he  meets  with  a  number  of  what  may  perhaps 
appear  to  him  to  be  grim  and  meaningless  images, 
in  stone  and  bronze  and  other  materials,  some  with 
two,  others  with  four  or  more  arms,  holding  a 
variety  of  weapons  and  other  more  or  less  curious 
articles  in  their  hands.  The  man  on  the  spot  may 
tell  him  on  enquiry  that  one  of  those  images  is  the 
figure  of  Vishnu,  the  god  of  protection,  another 
that  of  Siva,  the  god  of  destruction,  and  so  on,  about 
the  innumerable  gods  and  goddesses  comprised 
within  the  tolerant  and  all-inclusive  fold  of  the 
Hindu  religion.  Some  such  foreigner,  more  curious 
than  others  of  his  kind,  is  sometimes  tempted  to 
study  these  images  somewhat  carefully,  find  out 
their  number  and  characteristics,  and  gather  the 
legends  relating  to  them   from   the  PurSnas  and 


vu 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

other  sources,  as  also  from  the  learned  natives 
of  the  country  well  versed  in  their  religious  and 
mythological  lore.  Then  at  last  he  may  come 
out  with  his  volume  on  the  Hindu  gods,  on  Hindu 
mythology  and  other  kindred  subjects.  Such  in 
fact  are  most  of  the  books  that  have  been  written 
hitherto  by  foreign  authors  on  topics  relating  to 
Hindu  Iconography. 

It  is  exactly  two  hundred  years  since  Ziegen- 
balg,  the  famous  Danish  missionary  of  Tranquebar, 
wrote  his  work  on  the  "  Genealogy  of  the  South 
Indian  Gods,"  with  the  aid  of  the  information  he 
gathered  from  some  people  of  the  Tamil  land.  In 
the  year  1785  the  book  known  as  "  Sketches  of 
the  Mythology  and  Customs  of  the  Hindus  "  was 
brought  out  by  George  Foster.  Moore's  "  Hindu 
Pantheon  ",  with  illustrations,  was  first  printed  in 
1810,  and  then  reprinted  by  Messrs.  Higginbotham 
&  Co.,  of  Madras,  in  1864,  with  notes  from  the  pen 
of  the  Eev.  W.O.  Simpson.  "Ancient  and  Hindu 
Mythology  ",  a  work  written  sympathetically  and  in 
defence  of  the  views  of  the  Hindus,  with  a  large 
number  of  extracts  from  the  Puranas  and  other 
Hindu  scriptural  sources,  was  thereafter  brought 
out  by  Col.  Vans  Kennedy  in  1831.  Another  work 
named  "  A  Classical  Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mytho- 
logy "  was  published  by  John  Dowson  in  1879. 


VUl 


PEEFAOB. 

The  last  among  such  works  is  W.  J.  Wilkins' 
"  Hindu  Mythology  ",  illustrated  with  pictures, 
and  explained  with  reference  to  the  Puranas  and 
other  religious  writings  of  the  Hindus. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  books  dealing  with 
Hindu  images  and  Hindu  mythology  are  not  alto- 
gether wanting.  Nevertheless,  Fergusson,  who  is  an 
eminent  authority  on  Eastern  and  Indian  architec- 
ture, has  justly  remarked — "  Whenever  any  one 
"  will  seriously  undertake  to  write  the  history  of 
"  sculpture  in  India,  he  will  find  the  materials 
"  abundant  and  the  sequence  by  no  means  difficult 
"  to  follow ;  but,  with  regard  to  mythology,  the  case 
"  is  different.  It  cannot,  however,  be  said  that  the 
"  materials  are  not  abundant  for  this  branch  of  the 
"  enquiry  also ;  but  they  are  of  much  less  tangible  or 
"  satisfactory  nature,  and  have  become  so  entangled, 
"  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  any  clear 
'  ideas  regarding  them ;  and  it  is  to  be  feared  they 
"  must  remain  so,  until  those  who  investigate  the 
subject  will  condescend  to  study  the  architecture 
"  and  sculpture  of  the  country  as  well  as  its  books. 
"  The  latter  contain  a  good  deal,  but  they  do  not 
"contain  all  the  information  available  on  the 
"  subject ;  and  they  require  to  be  steadied  and  con- 
"  firmed  by  what  is  built  or  carved,  which  alone  can 
"  give  precision  and  substance  to  what  is  written 


IX 

II 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

"  It  is  remarkable  that,  with  all  the  present  day 
"  activity  in  every  branch  of  Sanskrit  research,  so 
"  very  httle  has  been  done  for  the  illustration  of 
"  mythology,  which  is  so  intimately  connected  with 
"  the  whole  literature.  It  would  be  a  legitimate  part 
"  of  the  duty  of  the  Archaelogical  Surveys  to  collect 
"  materials  on  a  systematic  plan  for  this  object ; 
"  and  the  production  of  illustrations  has  now  become 
"  so  easy  and  inexpensive  that  photographs  from 
"  original  materials  of  a  satisfactory  class  might 
"  readily  be  published  to  supply  this  mostpressing 
"  desideratum.  The  details  of  the  emblems  and 
"  symbols  of  the  numerous  divinities  of  the 
"  pantheon  could  also  be  collected,  along  with  the 
"  delineations,  by  those  familiar  with  such  symbols. 
"  All  this  could  easily  be  accomplished,  and  it  is 
"  consequently  hoped  it  may  before  long  be 
"  attempted." 

It  has  to  be  said  that  the  books  by  European 
authors  referred  to  above  do  not  contain  the  infor- 
mation, which  is  available  in  indigenous  Sanskrit 
works  on  Iconography  ;  nor  do  they  give  pictorial 
representations  of  the  sculptures  that  are  actually 
found  in  this  vast  country.  On  the  other  hand, 
some  of  those  authors  have  given  what  might 
be  well  understood  to  be  their  own  version  of 
Hindu   mythology,   and   in    their  descriptions  of 


PREFACE. 

Hindu  images,  with  here  and  there  a  pungent 
remark  about  what  they  consider  an  uncouth  repre- 
sentation or  an  immoral  legend,  they  seem  to  have 
cared  to  study  neither  the  symbolism  underlying 
the  mythical  stories  nor  the  meaning  of  the 
images  illustrating  them.  A  book  on  the  model 
suggested  by  Fergusson  has  indeed  been  a  great 
desideratum. 

The  first  attempt  to  supply  this  want  to  some 
extent  was  made  by  that  many-sided  Bengali 
scholar  and  author,  Mr.  Nagendranath  Vasu,  in  his 
interesting  volume  on  the  Archaeological  Survey  of 
Mayarabhanja.  Some  years  ago  the  idea  occurred 
to  me  that  I  might  try  to  bring  out  a  book  on 
the  subject  of  Hindu  Iconography  to  supply  as  far 
as  I  could,  the  desideratum  noted  by  Fergusson.  I 
was  originally  under  the  impression  that  it  could 
be  done  without  pressing  much  into  service  the 
information  contained  in  original  Sanskrit  works 
of  authority  on  the  subject,  even  of  the  existence  of 
which  I  was  not  then  fully  aware.  Soon,  the 
bewildering  variety  of  images  that  were  found  in 
relation  to  one  and  the  same  god  convinced  me 
that  to  get  at  the  details  of  their  mythological 
meaning  and  moral  aim  without  the  help  of  the 
Sanskrit  works  bearing  on  them  was  almost  an 
impossible  task.     Luckily,  while  touring  in  North 

xi 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Travancore,  I  had  on  one  occasion  the  good  fortune 
to  get  hold  of  a  small  manuscript  work  entitled 
Silparatna  ;  and  on  deciphering  it  with  consider- 
able difficulty,  I  found  it  to  be  a  synopsis  in  Mala- 
yalam  verse  of  a  bigger  treatise  of  the  same  name. 
Another  small  fragmentary  manuscript,  which 
came  into  my  hands  later  on,  was  found  to  be,  from 
the  colophons  at  the  end  of  the  chapters,  an  agama 
csAled.  Anisumadbheddga77ia.  Some  years  previously, 
I  had  purchased  eight  or  nine  works  on  Saivagama ; 
but,  owing  to  want  of  time,  I  had  not  even  taken 
the  trouble  to  know  what  they  contained.  About 
this  time  I  begaa  to  look  into  them,  and  what  a 
mine  of  wealth  they  revealed  themselves  to  be ! 
They  contained  chapter  on  chapter  of  minute 
descriptions  relating  to  most  Saiva  images  and  to 
some  Vaishnava  images  as  well.  My  search  for 
more  d,gamas  and  tantras  resulted  in  the  collection 
of  a  large  number  of  them,  which  in  fact  belong  to 
all  the  various  Hindu  sects.  From  the  materials 
thus  acquired,  I  began  first  to  pick  up  merely  the 
descriptions  of  images,  as  they  are  given  in  them. 
The  agamas  generally  deal  with  many  other 
topics  than  simple  iconography.  While  engaged 
thus,  I  went  on  improving  at  the  same  time  my 
collection  of  photographs  of  the  sculptures  and 
castings  representing  the  various  Hindu  divinities. 


xu 


PREFACE. 

In  the  middle  of  1912,  I  actually  began  the  task 
of  writing  out  a  systematic  description  of  the 
images,  and  soon  finished  the  description  of  a 
number  of  minor  deities. 

After  having  proceeded  so  far,  it  struck  me  that 
the  chief  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  accomplishment 
of  my  undertaking  was  in  securing  the  required 
financial  aid  for  its  publication.  The  work  required 
photo-mechanical  reproductions  of  a  large  number 
of  images,  the  cost  of  which  alone  was  quite  enough 
to  scare  me  away  from  the  undertaking.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  I  should  really  have  been  compelled, 
howsoever  reluctantly,  to  abandon  my  cherished 
object,  but  for  the  opportune  help  and  encourage- 
ment most  generously  offered  by  the  enlightened 
Q-overnment  of  His  Highness  the  Maharaja  of 
Travancore.  The  Dewan,  Mr.  Eajagopalaoharya, 
readily  perceived  the  value  of  the  undertaking, 
and  promised  to  sanction  the  amount  required  for 
the  publication  of  the  work.  The  sympathetic 
attitude  of  this  highly  cultured  gentleman  at  the 
head  of  affairs  in  Travancore  afforded  a  new 
stimulus  and  induced  me  to  work  with  redoubled 
vigour  and  earnestness.  The  required  Sanskrit 
texts  were  all  quickly  gathered,  but  the  growth  of 
the  collection  of  the  needed  photographs  did  not 
proceed    apace.    I   then  approached  the   Dewan 

xiii 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

with  the  request  that  I  should  be  permitted  to 
go  out  on  tour  to  places  outside  the  State,  in 
the  Madras  and  the  Bombay  Presidencies  and 
also  in  the  Mysore  State,  to  obtain  the  photo- 
graphs. The  tour  was  sanctioned ;  and  my  visit  to 
these  places  not  only  enriched  my  photographic 
collection,  but  was  also  of  a  very  highly  educative 
value  to  me.  It  enabled  me  to  study  the 
various  iconographic  symbols  and  emblems 
directly  from  the  sculptures  themselves.  Wherever 
photographing  was  impossible,  there  1  indented 
upon  my  amateur  kuowledge  of  drawing  and  paint- 
ing. I  frequently  took  pen  and  ink  sketches, 
and  occasionally  full-sized  coloured  drawings  of 
mural  paintings,  although  this  latter  work  was 
extremely  tedious. 

I  consider  it  a  duty  to  refer  here  to  the  un- 
stinted help  which  I  received  from  my  friend,  the 
late  Mr.  M.  K.  Narayanasami  Ayyar,  Vakil  of 
the  Madras  High  Court,  who  secured  for  my  work 
as  many  photographs  as  he  could  take  during  his 
visits  to  various  outside  stations  in  the  Madras 
Presidency  on  professional  and  other  kinds  of 
business,  and  thereby  facilitated  my  work  very 
considerably.  Mr.  Narayanasami  Ayyar  was  a 
well  read  scholar,  critic  and  philosopher,  and  was 
to  have  contributed  to  this  work  a  learned   article 


XIV 


PEEFAOE. 

on  Devi-worship.  Unfortunately,  however,  the 
hand  of  death  deprived  vae  all  on  a  sudden  of  the 
further  help  to  which  I  had  been  looking  forward 
with  high  hope ;  and  the  result  is  that  this  work 
has  had  to  lose  the  advantage  of  an  erudite  and 
complete  account  of  Devi-worship  from  the  pen  of 
a  profound  scholar  well  versed  in  the  Sakta  and 
other  religious  schools  known  to  the  sacred  litera- 
ture of  the  Hindus. 

I  am  only  too  well  aware  of  the  several  defects 
which  abound  in  this  production  of  mine,  but  feel 
at  the  same  time  somehow  confident  that  scholars 
will  look  upon  them  indulgently  by  taking  into  con- 
sideration the  vastness  of  the  material  to  be  collect- 
ed and  digested,  and  also  the  fact  that  my  official 
duties  in  Travancore  have  been  so  heavy  as  to 
leave  little  time  for  much  extra  work  of  this  kind. 
Moreover,  I  have  to  state  that  this  is  in  more  than 
one  respect  the  first  attempt  of  its  kind,  and  does 
not  profess  to  be  anything  like  a  complete  presenta- 
tion of  the  subject.  I  shall  certainly  consider  myself 
under  the  circumstances  to  be  amply  rewarded  if 
this  humble  work  of  mine  serves  the  purpose  of 
simply  breaking  the  ground  and  induces  abler 
scholars  to  deal  with  the  subject  in  a  fuller  and  more 
satisfactory  manner. 

I  take   this  opportunity    of  again  expressing 


XV 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

my  deep  gratitude  to  the  liberal  Grovernment  of 
of  H.  H.  the  Maharaja  of  Travancore  for  their 
having  made  the  publication  of  this  work  possible ; 
and  personally  I  am  highly  indebted  to  Dewan 
Bahadur  P.  Eajagopalacharya  m.a.,  b.l.,  c.i.e., 
for  the  enlightened  and  encouraging  interest  he 
has  all  along  taken  in  the  production  of  this  work.  I 
cannot  sufficiently  thank  Pandit  V.  Srinivasa  Sastri, 
Smritivisarada,  but  for  whose  willing  co-operation 
and  unceasing  industry  it  would  indeed  have  been 
very  difficult  for  me  to  bring  out  this  work.  My 
best  thanks  are  due  also  to  Pandit  T.  Ganapati 
Sastri,  Curator  of  the  Sanskrit  Manuscripts  Library, 
Trivandram,  for  his  readily  helping  me  with  all  the 
manuscripts  I  applied  for  from  time  to  tiroe  in 
connection  with  this  work.  Mr.  D.  E.  Bhandarkar, 
M.A.,  Superintendent  of  Archaeology,  Western 
Circle,  showed  me  great  kindness  in  lending  me  his 
copy  of  Bupa-mandana,  which  seems  to  be  a  com- 
paratively late  work  on  Hindu  Iconography.  I 
have,  in  conclusion,  to  say  that  I  cannot  suffi- 
ciently express  my  gratitude  and  indebtedness 
to  my  respected  master,  Eao  Bahadur  Prof. 
M.  Eahgacharya,  M.A.,  of  the  Presidency  College, 
Madras,  for  the  very  great  interest,  which  he  has 
throughout  evinced  in  the  work  and  the  parental 
care  with    which    he    has   guided  me    at  every 


PREFACE. 

stage  of  its  progress.  He  was  ever  ready  with  his 
invaluable  suggestions,  and  was  to  me  a  never- 
failing  source  of  inspiration  and  encouragement. 
I  therefore  respectfully  beg  to  tender  to  him  here 
my  most  grateful  thanks  for  all  the  trouble  he 
has  taken  on  my  behalf. 

T.  A.  G. 

Teiplicane,  Madras.  ) 
September,  1914.       ) 


xvu 
III 


CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Preface               ...                ...                ...                ...  vii — xvii 

General  Introduction            ...                ...                ...  1 — 59 

Explanatory  description  of  certain  technical  terms.  1 — 32 

Ganapati           ..                  ...                ...                ...  36 — 67 

Vishnu               ...                ...                ...                ...  69—279 

(a)  Dhruva-beras  or  Fixed  Images                 ...  71 — 115 
{b)  Dasavataras  or  the  Ten  Incarnations  of 

Vishnu             ...                 ...                 ...  117—223 

(c)  Chaturvimsati-miirtayah       ...                 ...  225 — 244 

W)  Minor  Forms  of  Vishriu  :—                     ...  245—279 
Purusha,    Kapila,    Yajfiamurti,  Vyasa, 
Dhanvantarin,    Dattatreya,    Hari-bara- 
pitamaha,  Vaikuritha,  Trailokya-mohana 
Ananta,  Visvarupa,  Lakshmi-Naraya^a, 
Hayagriva,  Adimurti,  Jalasayin,  Dharma, 
Varadaraja,      Rahganatha,     Venkatesa, 
Vithoba,    Jagannatha,    Nara-Naraya^a, 
and  Manmatha. 

Garuda  and  Ayudha-purushas                 ...                 ...  281 — 296 

Adityas,  including  the  Nava-grahas       ...                 ...  297 — 323 

Devi:—             ...                ...                ...                ...  325—400 

Srichakra,  Devi,  Durga,  Nilakanthi,  Kshemankari, 
Harasiddhi,  Eudramsa-Durga,  Vana-Darga, 
Agni-Durga,       Jaya-Durga,        Vindhyavasi 


XIX 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 


PAGES. 


Durga,  Eipumari-Durga,  Mahishasura- 
marddani  or  Katyayani,  Ghandika,  Nanda, 
Nava-Durgas,  Bhadrakali,  Mahakali, 
Amba,  Ambika,  Mangala,  Sarvamangala, 
Kalaratri,  Lalita,  Gaurl,  Uma,  Parvati, 
Eambha,  Totala,  Tripura,  the  eight  Dvara- 
palakas  of  the  Gaurl  temple,  Bhutamata, 
Yoganidra,  Vama,  Jyeshtha,  Eaudri,  Kali, 
Kalavikarnika,  Balavikarnika,  Balaprama- 
thani,  Sarvabhutadamani,  Manonmani, 
Varuril-Chamarida,  Eakta-Chamunda, 

Sivaduti,  Yogesvari,  Bhairavl,  Tripura- 
Bhau-avi,  Siva,  Kirti,  Siddhi,  Eiddhi, 
Kshama,  Dipti,  Eati,  Svefca,  Bhadra,  Jaya, 
Vijaya,  Kali,  Ghantakarni,  Jayanti,  Diti, 
Arundhati,  Aparajita,  Surabhi,  Krishria, 
Indrakshi,  Annapiarna,  Tulasidevi,  Asvarii- 
dhadevi,  Bhuvanesvari,  Bala,  Eajamatarigi, 
Lakshmi,  Sri,  Mahalakshmi,  Bbumidevi, 
Saraswati,  Sapta-matrikas  and  Jyeshthadevi. 

Appendix  A — A  description  of  the  plan  and  of  the 
disposition  of  parivdradevatas  in  a  Vishnu 
temple  of  seven  a-yanlnas         ...  ...     1—45 

Appendix  B— A  detailed  description  of  the 
Uttama-dasa-idla  measure  to  be  used  in  the 
making  of  images  ...  ...     1 — 7] 

Appendix  C — Sanskrit  Texts  relied  upon  for  the 

description  of  the  images  ...  ...     1 — 160 


XX 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTEATIONS.* 


PLATE 

A.- 

B.- 
C- 
D.- 

E.- 
P.- 


I- 

II- 

III- 

IV- 

V- 

VI- 

VII- 

VIII- 

IX- 


TO  FACE  PAGE. 

-Yantras :  A    group    of    Salagramas  and    an 

image  of  Eama  made  of  a  piece  of  salagrama.  11 

-Saradadevi  and  Sankaracharya,  Kaladi       ...  32 

-Bust  of  Ohennakesava,  Belur.                       ...  36 
-Vishnu    bathing    Kachohhapesvara,  Conjee- 

varam  (A.  S.  M.)                                          ...  43 

— Sarabhamurti,   Tribhuvanam    (A.  S.  M.)    ...  45 
-Trimurti  with  Siva  as   the    central    figure, 

Tiruvottiyur.                                                 ...  45 

Trimurti  with  Vishnu  as  the  central  figure, 

Nagalapuram                                                ...  45 

—Weapons  held  by  images                               ...  4 

Do.                                                   ...  6 

-Other  objects  held  by  images                         ...  8 

•Headgears  and  ornaments  of  images              ...  12 

-Hand-poses  of  images                                     ...  14 

-Seats  of  images                                                ...  18 

-Head-gears  and  hair  knots  of  images            ...  28 

Do.                                       ...  29 

Do.                                        ...  32 


*  T,  8.  A  =  Trivandrain  School  of  Arts  ;  A.  8.  M.  Aroh^ologioal  Survey 
of  Madras.  A.  8.  My  =  Aroh»ologioal  Survey  of  Mysore;  A.  8.  Bo  = 
Arohseologioal  Survey  of  Bombay  ;  A,  8.  I  =  ArphEeological  Survey  of  India  ; 
I,  M.=India  Museum.  The  photographs  and  dravyings  whiohare  not  followed 
by  any  of  the  abbreviations  given  above  belong  to  the  author's  oolleotion. 


XXI 


HINDU  ICONOGBAPHY. 


PAGES. 


Durga,  Eipumari-Durga,  Mahishasura- 
marddani  or  Katyayani,  Chandika,  Nanda, 
Nava-Durgas,  Bhadrakali,  Mahakali, 
Amba,  Ambika,  Mangala,  Sarvamangala, 
Kalaratrl,  Lalita,  Gauri,  Uma,  Parvati, 
Eambha,  Totala,  Tripura,  the  eight  Dvara- 
palakas  of  the  Gauri  temple,  Bhutamata, 
Yoganidra,  Varna,  Jyeshtha,  Eaudri,  Kali, 
Kalavikarnika,  Balavikarnika,  Balaprama- 
thani,  Sarvabhutadamani,  Manonmani, 
Varurii-Ghamunda,  Eakta-Charounda, 

Sivaduti,  Yogas  vari,  Bhairavi,  Tripura - 
Bhairavi,  Siva,  Kirti,  Siddhi,  Eiddhi, 
Kshama,  Dipti,  Eati,  Sveta,  Bhadra,  Jaya, 
Vijaya,  Kali,  Ghantakarni,  Jayanti,  Diti, 
Arundhati,  Aparajita,  Surabhi,  Krishija, 
Icdrakshi,  AnDapiJirna,  Tulasidevi,  Asvarii- 
dhadevi,  Bhuvanelvari,  Bala,  Eaiamatangi, 
Lakshmi,  Sri,  Mahalakshmi,  Bhiimidevi, 
Saraswati,  Sapta-mafcrikas  and  Jyashthadevi. 

Appendix  A — A  description  of  the  plan  and  of  the 
disposition  of  parivaradevatds  in  a  Vishnu 
temple  of  seven  fwarore as         ...  ...     1 — 45 

Appendix  B— A  detailed  description  of  the 
Uttama-dasa-tdla  measure  to  be  used  in  the 
making  of  images  ...  ...     1 — 71 

Appendix  C — Sanskrit  Texts  relied  upon  for  the 

description  of  the  images  ...  ...     1 — 160 


xs 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.* 


PLATE                                                                                                   TO  PACE  PAGE. 

A. — Yantras  :  A    group    of    Salagramas  and    an 

image  of  Rama  made  of  a  piece  of  salagrama.  11 

B. — Saradadevi  and  Saiikaracharya,  Kaladi       ...  32 

C. — Bust  of  Chennakesava,  BeMr.                       ...  36 
D. — Vishnu    bathing    Kachchhapesvara,  Conjee- 

varam  (A.  S.  M.)                                            ...  43 

B.— Sarabhamurti,  Tribhuvanam    (A.  S.  M.)    ...  45 
F. — Trimurti  with   Siva  as   the    central    figure, 

Tiruvottiyur.                                                 ...  45 

Trimurti  with  Viabnu  as  the  central  figure, 

Nagalapuram                                                ...  45 

I — Weapons  held  by  images                                ...  4 

II—                 Do.                                                    ...  6 

III — Other  objects  held  by  images                         ...  8 

IV — Headgears  and  ornaments  ot  images              ...  12 

V — Hand-poses  of  images                                     ...  14 

VI — Seats  of  images                                                ...  18 

VII — Head-gears  and  hair  knots  of  images            ...  28 

VIII—                             Do.                                         ...  29 

IX—                             Do.                                         ...  32 


*  T.  S.  A  =  Tcivanclram  School  of  Arts  ;  A,  8.  M.  Arohreologioal  Survey 
of  Madras.  A.  8.  My  =  Arohseologioal  Survey  of  Mysore;  A.  8.  Bo  = 
Atohaeologioal  Survey  of  Bombay  ;  A.  8.  I  =  Arohfeological  Survey  of  India  ; 
I,  M,=India  Museum.  The  photographs  and  drawings  which  are  not  followed 
by  any  ot  the  abbreviations  given  above  belong  to  the  author's  ooUeotion. 


XXI 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

PLATE  TO  PACE  PAGE. 

X — Fig.   1.  Unmatfea-uohohhishta-Ganapati,  Ka- 

ladi.                                                 "  49 

X— Fig.  2.  Kevala-Ganapati,  Tiivandram  (T.S.A.).  49 

XI— Fig.  1.  Laljshmi-Ganapati,  Tenkasi  (A.S.M.)...  53 

XI — Fig,  2.  Uchchhisbta-Ganapati,  Kumbhakonam  53 

XII —                                  do.             Nanjangodu  ...  54 

XIII — Heramba-Ganapati,   front   view,   Negapafcam 

(A.  S.  M.)     ...  56 

XIV—                 Do.        back  view.     (A.S.M.)    ...  57 
XV — Fig.    1.  Prasanna-Ganapati,  P  a  1 1 1  s  varam 

(A.S.M.)                                                ...  58 

XV— Fig.    2.           Do.    Trivaadram  (T.  S.  A.)     ...  58 

XVI— Nritta-Ganapati,  Halebidu                              ...  59 

XVII — MadhyamaYogastliaDakamurti,  Mahabalipuram       80 

XVIII— Bhogastbaaakamurti,  Madras  Museum         ...  81 

XIX — Adhama  Bhogasfcbanakamiirti,  Tiruvottiyfir. . .  82 

XX— Bhogasthaaakamurtii,  Tadpafcri   (A.  S.  M.)  ...  83 

XXI — Sfcbaaakamiirci,  Mafchura  Museum  (A.  S.  I.)...  Between 

pages  84  and  85 
XXII — Bbogastbanakamurti,  Madras   Museum       ...  84-85 
XXIII--MadhyamaBhogaathanakamiarti,  Madras  Mu- 
seum 84-85 
XXIV— Yogasanamurti,  Bagali  (A.  S.  M.)                 ...  87 
XXV — Bhogasanamiirti,  Badami                              ...  88 
XXVI — Madhyama    Bh6ga?anamurti,     Conjeevaram 

Between  pages  88  and  89 

XXVII—                    Do                            Ellora         ...  88-89 

XXVIII— Bbogasanamurti,  Dadikkombu  (A.  S.  M.)   ...  88-89 

XXIX— Fig.  1.     Do.            Trivandram  (T.  S.  A.)    ...  90 

XXIX— Fig,  2.  Yogasayanamiirti,  Trivandram  (T.S.A.)  90 

XXX— AdbamaVirasanamurti;  Aibole  (A.S.Bo.)    ...  88-89 

XXXI — Madbyama  Yogasayanamuirti,   M  a  h  a  b  a  1  i- 

puram                                                       ...  91 
XXXII — Madhyama  Bhogasayanamiirti,    D  e  o  g  a  r  h, 

(I.M.)                                                      ...  no 


xxu 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTEATIONS. 

PLATE  TO  FACE   PAGE 

XXXIII — Madhyama     Yogasayanamurti,        Aihole, 

(A.S.Bo.)  ...  92 

XXXIV — Uttama  Bhogasayanamurti  Eaja- 

putana  (A.S.Bo.)  ...  93 

XXXV— The  ten  Avataras  of  Vishnu  (T.S.A.)        ...  123 

XXXVI — Varaha  panel,  Mahabalipuram  ...  i38 

XXXVII — Bhuvarahamurthi,  Badami  ...  140 

XXXVIII — Varaha,  Eajim,  Raipur  district,  CeD.  Prov., 

(A.S.Bo.)  ...  141 

XXXIX— Fig.  1,  Varaha,  Nagalapuram  ...  141 

XXXIX— Fig.    2,      Do.      Phalodi,  Jodhpur  district, 

Marwar  (A.S.Bo.)  ...  141 

XXXIX— Fig.  3,      Do.  Calcutta  Museum  (A,S  Bo.) ...  141 

XL—  Do.     Madras  Museum  ...  142 

XLI — Fig.      1,      Lakshml-Narasimha,      Madras 

Museum  ...  143 

XLI— Fig.  2,  Varaha,  Belur  ...  143 

XLI — Fig.  3,  Lakshmi-Narasirhha  Madras  Mesum.  143 

XLII — Kevala-Narasirnha,  Halebidu  ...  150 

XLIII — Standing    figure     of      Kevala-Narasimha, 

Badami  ...  155 

XLIV — Sthau9a-Nara3iraba,  Ellora  ...  156 

XLV—  Do,  Dadikkombu  (A.8.M.)  157 

XLVI—  Do.  Do.  (A.S.M.)  158 

XLVII—  Do.  Madras  Museum         ...  159 

XLVIII — Tnvikrama,  Rajim,  Raipur  Dt.,  Cen.  Prov., 

(A.S.Bo.)  ...  169 

XLIX—  Do.  Mahabalipuram  ...  170 

L—  Do.  Badami  ...  172 

LI—  Do.  Ellora  ...  174 

LII— Fig.  1,  Do.  Chatsu,      Jaipur      Db., 

Marwar  (A.S.Bo.)  ...  175 

LII — Fig.  2,  Do.  Nagalapuram  ...  175 

LII— Fig.  3,  Do.  Belur  ...  175 

LIII—  Do.  NuggehaHi  (A.S.My.)  ...  177 


xxui 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY, 

PLATE  TO  FACE  PAGE, 

LIV— Eaghu-Eama,  Shermadevi,  (A.S.M.)  ...  189 

LV—         Do.  Eamesvaram,  (A.S.M.)         ...  193 

LVI—         Do.  Mahabalipuram  ...  191 

LVII—        Do.  (T.SA.)  ...  195 

LVIII^Kriahna  and  Rukmini,  Madras  Museum    ...  205 

LIX—  Do.  Shermadevi,  (A.S.M.),..  206 

LX — Fig.     1,      Navanita-nrittamurti,       Madras 

Museum  ...  206 

LX— Fig.  2,  Do.  Madras 

Museum  ...  206 

LXI— Gana-Gopala,  Halebidu  ...  208 

LXII— Fig.  1.  Gana-Gopala,  (T.  S,  A.)  ...  209 

LXII— Fig.  2,         Do.         ,  (A.  S.  M.)  ...  209 

LXIII— Madana-Gopala,  Tenliasi  ...  210 

LXIV — Kaliyahimardaka Krishna,  Madras  Museum.  213 

LXV — Govarddhana-dhara    Krishna,    Nuggehalli, 

(A.  S.  My.)  '  ■.'..  2U 

LXVI—  Do,  Halebidu  ...  214 

LXVIT— Fig.  1,  Balakrishna  ...  215 

LXVII— Fig.  2,         Do.  ...  215 

LXVII — Fig.  3,  Vatapatrasayin  ...  215 

LXVIII— Buddha,  Borobudor,  (Dr.  A,K.,  Thcosophist).  221 

LXIX — ChennakesavasvamiD,  Beliir  ...  228 

LXX— Fig.  1,  Madhava,  Belur  ...  229 

LXX — Fig.  2,  Govinda,  Belijr  ...  229 

LXX — Fig.  3,  Madhusiidana,  Beliir  ...  229 

LXXI— Fig.  1,  Hari,  Beliir  ...  231 

LXX  I— Fig.  2,  Sri  Krishna,  BeliJr  ...  231 

LXXII— Fig,  1,  Hari-hara-pitamaha,  Halebidu      ...  252 

LXXII— Fig.  2,  Dattatreya  (A.  S,  Bo,;     ...  252 

LXXIII — Dattatreya,  Badami  ...  254 

LXXIV — Hari-hara-pitamaha,    Ajmere,    Eajaputana 

Museum  _  _  253 

LXXV — Vaikuritbanatha,  Badami  ...  256 


XXIV 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PLATE  TO  FACE  PAGE. 

LXXVI — Lak8bmi-Narayana,  Beliir                         ...  259 

LXXVII— Hayagriva,  Nuggehalli,  (A.  S.  My.)          ...  261 

LXXVIII-Adimurfci,  Nuggehalli,  (A.  S.  My.)             ...  262 

LXXIX— .Talaaayin,  Halebidu                                   ...  264 

LXXX— Fig.  1,  Varadaraja,  (A.  S.  My)                  ...  268 

LXXX— Fig.  2,         Do.       ,  Dadikkombu,  (A.S.M.),  268 

LXXXI — Vifchoba  and  Rukmabayi, Pandharipura  ...  273 

LXXXII— Fig.  1,  Manmatha  and  Rati,  Halebidu,  ...  277 

LXXXII— Fig.  2,  Do.  ,     Angur,    (A. 

S.M.)                                                   ...  277 
LXXXIII— Fig.   1,              Do,               ,    Nuggehalli 

(A.S.My.)                                             ...  278 

LXXXIII— Fig.  2,  Manmatha,  Tenkasi                     ...  278 

LXXXIV— Garuda             Do.                ,  Badami       ...  287 

LXXXV— Fig.  l,Garuda,  Palur                                ...  288 

LXXXV— Fig.  '2,  Sudarsana-Chakra,  fA.S.M.)        ...  288 

LXXXV. A.—  Do.  Obverse     and    Reverse, 

Dadikkombu,  (A.S.M.)                         ...  291 

LXXXVI— Surya,  Gudimallam                                  ...  312 

LXXXVII—  Do.     Meioheri                                         ...  311 

LXXXVIII—  Fig.  1,  Madras  Museum                         ...  313 
LXXXVIII— Fig.    2,      Do.     Ellora,    {Gave  temples  of 

India)                                                   ...  313 
LXXXVIII— Fig.  3,  Sarya,  Rupnagar,  (A.  S.  Bo.)      ...  313 
LXXXIX— Surya,  Ohitorgarh,  (A.  S.  Bo.)                 ...  314 
XC— Surya,  Ajmere,  etc,  (A.  S.  Bo.)              ...  314 
XCI— Surya,  Haveri,  (A.  S.  Bo.)                       ...  315 
XCII— S5rya,  Nuggehalli,  (A.  S,  My.)                ...  316 
XCIII— Fig.  1.  Surya,  Madeyur                            ...  316 
XCIII--Fig.  2.  Surya,  Ajmere,  (A.  S.  Bo.)           ...  316 
XOIV— Fig.  1.  Suryanarayana,  Belur                  ...  316 
XGIV— Fig,  2.  Surya,  Madras  Museum               ...  316 
XCV — Torana  of  a  Siirya  temple,  .Junagarh  Muse- 
um, (A.  S.  Bo.)                                      ...  317 


sxy 
IV 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 


PLATE  TO  FACE   PAGE. 

XOVI— The  Nava-Grahaa,  Suryanarkoyil,   (A.  S. 

M.)  ...  323 

XOVII— Sricbakra  ...  330 

XCVIII—      Do.       Sringeri  Hatha  ...  331 

XCIX— Fig.  1.  Durga,  Opakkur  ...  341 

XOIX— Fig.  2.     Do.     Mahabalipuram  ...  341 

C— Durga,  Mahabalipuram  ...  342 

01 — Durga  panel,  Mahabalipuram  ...  343 

Oil — Fig.  ].    Katyayani  or  Mahisbasura-marddani, 

Madras  Museum  . . .  344 

Oil— Fig.  2.  Durga,  Conjeevaram  ...  344 

OIII — Katyayani   or     Mahisbasura-marddani,     Gah- 

gaikondasolapuram,  (A.  S.  M.)  ...  345 

OIV—         Do.         BUora,  (A.S.Bo.)  ...  345 

CV—         Do.         Mahabalipuram  ...  347 

OVI — Standing    figure    of    Bhadrakali,     Tiruppalat- 

turai,  (A.  S.  M.)  ...  357 

CVII— Fig,  1.  Mahakali,  Madeyiir  ...  358 

CVII— Fig.  2.       Do.        Madras  Museum  ...  358 

CVIII— Fig.  1.  Parvatii,  BUora  ...  360 

OVIII— Fig.  2.  AnnapiJrna,  Trivandram,  (T  S.  A.)      ...  360 

OIX — Sridevi,  Mahabalipuram  ...  372 

OX—    Do.  BUora,  (A.  S.  Bo.)  ...  373 

CXI  -Fig.  1.  Lakshmi,  Madeyijr  ...  37.3 

OXI— Fig.  2.  Sridevi,  Trivandram,  (T.S.A.)  ...  373 

CXII— KoUapnra  Mahalakshmi  ...  375 

CXIII.— Sarasvati,  Gadag  (A.  S.  Bo.)  ...  377 

CXIV. — Sarasvati,  Garigaikondaaolapuram  (AS.M.)...  377 

CXV.— Sarasvati,  Bagali  (A.S.M.)  ...  377 

OXVI. — Fig.  1.     Sarasvati  with  a  Vina,  Halebidu     ...  377 

CXYI.— Fig.  2.     Sarasvati  dancing,  Halebidu  ...  377 

GXVII.— Fig.  1,     s'aradadevi,  Trivandram  ...  378 

QXVII.— Fig.  2.     Varahi    and    Vaishnavi.    Tirunandi- 

kkarai  ...  379 

CXYIII.— Fig.  1.     The  Saptamatvika  Group,  BUora  ...  383 


<cxvi 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PLATE  TO  FACE  PAGE. 

GXVIIL— Fig.  2.  The  Saptamakika  Group,  Belur     ...       383 
OXIX.—  Do.  Kumbhakoriam.      384 

CXX.— Pifchaa  ol' Sapta-Matrikas  ...       386 

CXXI.— Jyeshthadevi,  Mylapore,  Madras  ...       391 

CXXII.—        Do.  Madras  Museum  ...       394 

OXXIII.—        Do.  Kumbhakonam  ...       395 

Plan  of  a  Vishnu  temple  with  seven  avaranas  and  the  disposition 
of  the  parivdradevatds  in  it.     To  face  page  9  of  Appendix  A. 
Plate  1.  App,  B. — A  figure  of  Vishnu  drawn  in  acoordanoe  with 
the  Mito»tadasa-iaZa  measure,  To  face  page  9  of  Appendix  B. 
Plate  2.  App.  B. — Foot,  palm  and  ear.     Do.      15  of  Appendix  B. 
Plate  3.  App.  B. — Front  and  side  view  of  a   faoe  Do.     To  face 
page  20  of  Appendix  B. 


LIST  OF  THE  IMPORTANT  WORKS  CONSULTED. 


Adityapurai.ia. 

Agnipurana. 

Ahii'budhnya-samhita. 

Amsumadbhedagama. 

Anandalahari. 

Amnaya 

Arehseological  Survey  of  Mayura- 
bhaSja  by  Nagendranabh  Vasu. 

Bhagavata-purana. 

Bhavdpanishad  with  the  comment- 
aty  of  Bhaskararaya, 

Bhavishyat-puraria. 

Bodhayanagrihya-sutras. 

Brahmanda-pura9a. 

Brihad-Brahma-samhita. 

Brihat-samhlta  of  Varahamihira. 

Brahma -purana. 

Brahmavai  varta  ■  purana. 

Charidlkalpa. 

Chudamapi-nighantu  of  Mandala- 
purusha  (Tamil). 

Devibhagavata. 

Devimahatmya. 

Divakara-nighantu  of  Sendanar 
(Tamil). 

Garuda-purana. 

Hindu  Mythology  by  Vans  Ken- 
nedy. 


Hindu  Pantheon  by  Moore. 

Indrakshikalpa. 

Kamikagama. 

Karariagama. 

Kriyakramadyoti. 

Kumaratantra. 

Lakshana-samuchchaya . 
;  Lalitasahasranama  with  Bhaska- 

raraya's  commentary. 
I  Lihga-purana. 

Mahalaksmlratnakosa. 

Mabopanishad. 

Maitreyyupanishad. 

Mantramaharnava. 

Matsyapurana. 

Manasara. 

Markandeya-purana. 

Mayadipika. 

Nalayiraprabandham  (Tamil). 

Narada-Pancharatra-samhita. 
\  Narada-puraria. 

Naradasamhita. 

Nirukta  of  Yaska. 

Nrisirhhaprasada. 

Original  Sanskrit  Texts  by  Muir. 

Padma  -purana. 

Panoharatra. 
J  Pingala-nighantu  (Tamil). 


XXIX 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 


EaiamaUngikalua' 

Ramayana 

Bupamatidana. 

SaQdilyopanishad. 

Sattvata-samhiU. 

Satapatiha-Brahmana. 

Sarabhatantra. 

Saradatilaka. 

Sarva-siddhanta-sangraha. 

Saundaryalahari. 

Saura-pura^a. 

Siddhanta-saravali. 

Siddharthasamhita. 

Silparatna. 

Sivapurana. 

Skanda-purana. 

Sritatvanidhi. 

Sudarsana-sataka. 

Suprabhedagama. 


Tanfcra-sara  of  Anandatirtha. 

Tripurasundarikalpa. 

Tulasimahatmya. 

Vamana-purana. 

Vaikhanasagama. 

Varaha-purana, 

Vatulasuddhagama. 

Vayu-purana. 

Vicissitudes  of  Aryan  Civilization 
by  Kunthe. 

Vishnudharmottara, 

Vishriu-purana. 

Vishriusaliasranama. 

Visvakarma-silpa. 

Viitakhanda  of  Hemadri, 

A  work  found  along  with  the 
manuscript  of  Silparatna  and 
whose  name  is  unknown. 


ADDENDA  AND  COERIGENDA. 


The  following  were   discovered  shortly  after  bhe  book  was 

printed : — 

In  the  Karttari -hasta  pose  the  arm  is  lifted  so  that  the  middle 

finger  of  the  hand  reaches  to  the  height  of 
Karttari-liasta.        ,,        ,.,,..,  ,,         •   ^  n  ,    ., 

the    hikka-sutra ;   the   ring-nnger    and    the 

thumb  are  bent  so  as  to  meet  near  the  middle  of  the  palm  of  the 

hand ;  the  last  or  the  smallest  finger  is  also  slightly  bent ;  the 

fore-finger  and  the  middle  finger  are    stretched  out  and  kept  like 

the  legs  of  the  lette  r  V.     The  palm  of  the  hand  faces  the  outside. 

This  pose  of  the  hand    is  meant  for  holding  the   Mi'ikha,  chakra 

and  other  weapons.''      (See  Pis.  XX  and  XXII). 

Chhannavira  is  an    ornament  which   may  be  rightly    called 

a  double  vajnopavHa.     In  this,  two  yajnopa- 
Chnannavira.  ..        ,,  ,        .      ,, 

vitas   thrown    one   on    each    shoulder,  pass 

through  the  middle  of  the  chest,  where  they  are  connected  with 

the  urasshtra  or  the  chest-band,  and  reach  as  far  below  as  the 

ydni  or  the  public  region,  from  which  they  turn  to  the  back  and 

thence  to   the    shoulders.!     (See    the    figures     of    Eama    and 

Lakshmana  on  PI.  LV  and  of  Varaha  in  figure  1,  PI.  XXXIX). 


I 


XXXI 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Page     X— Line     6.     For  Arcbselogioal  read  Arohaeologioal. 
„    XVI—  „        1.     Omit  of. 
^^  9 —  _,      14.     Omit  handles. 

11—  Margin 

of  3 — 5.     For  beads  read  hands. 
13— Line  14.     For  PI.  IV.  Fig.  2  read  fig.  9. 
14_  ,_       24.     For  PI.  V,  figs.  1,  2    and  3  read  PI,  V, 

figs.  4,  5  and  6. 
15—  ,,        3.     For  PL  V,  figs.  4,  5  and  6  read   PI.    V, 
figs.  1,  2  and  3. 
For  saorificies  read  sacrifices. 
For  s  read  is. 
i^or  circuit  read  or  circuit. 
Omii  colour. 
For  great  rea(^  a  great, 
For  back  and  front  rearf.  front  and  back. 
For  will  read  would. 
Por  will  reatZ  would. 
For  mangoloid  read  mongoloid. 
For  case  read  the  case. 
For  PI.  rea(?  Pis. 

For  from  by  which  read  from  which. 
For  15  read  115. 
For  extarcts  read  extracts. 
For  his  read  this. 
OrttJi  which  are. 

Substitute  for  in  the  da\-  or  in  night,  inside 
house  or  out. 
Pis.  XLIX,  L,  LI.     For  Trivikrama :  Panel   Stone  :  read  Trivi- 
krama  panel ;  Stone. 

Page  211 — Line  14,  For  skillfully  read  skilfully. 

,,     247 —  ,,       3.  For  circuit  read  cirouita, 

,,     248 —  ,,     11.  For  alloted  read  allotted. 

,,     249 —  „  f.n.5.  For  svana  read  savana. 

,,     249 —  ,,  f,n..'J.  For  pratasvana  rend  pratassavana. 


XXX 11 


44— 

„      20. 

45— 

„      21. 

48— 

„        7. 

53— 

00 

11         "'-'■ 

55— 

„        4. 

65— 

„      17. 

83— 

5,9,26, 

84- 

1. 

100— 

„      11. 

104— 

„       1. 

113— 

,.      26. 

114— 

,.      11. 

115— 

,,  bottom 

125— 

„      12. 

133— 

,.        1. 

138— 

„      19. 

149— 

„    6-7, 

ADDENDA  AND  COEEIGENDA. 

Page  249 — Line  f.n.5.  For  madhyandinasvanaread  madhyandina- 

savana. 
For  fcritiyasvana  read  tritiyasavana. 
For  XXVII  read  LXXVII. 
For  Damhodhava  read  Dambhodbhava. 
For  Narayana  to  read  Narayana  are  to. 
For    anxiously     forward    read    anxiously 

looking  forward. 
Omit  of. 

For  latter  read  later. 
For  two  other  read  other  two. 
For  his  read  its. 

For  PL  LXXXVI  read  PI.  LXXXV-A. 
For  iconoclastic  read  iconoplastic. 
For  is  more  read  is  a  more. 
For  suprabhedagama     read     Suprabheda- 

gama. 
For  PI.  LXXXVIII  read  PI.  LXXXVII. 
For  PI.  CIV  read  PI.  XCIV. 
PI.    XGVIII.     For    Srichakara    and    Pleti : 
Sringari     read    Srichakra     and    Plate  : 
Srmgeri. 
from  below.     For  central  and  read  central 
shrine  and. 
For  of  ten  read  often. 
For  of  person  read  of  the  person. 
Omit  fuU-stop  after  desired. 
Omit  so. 

For  consort  read  consorts. 
For  Sita  was  read  SIta  is. 
For  conferor  read  conferrer. 
For  Markandeya  read  by  Markandeya. 


„    249— 

„  f.n.6. 

„    261— 

„     12. 

„   274— 

„     21. 

„   275— 

„     26. 

„   277- 

..     23. 

„   279— 

„       6. 

„   279— 

„     19. 

„    286— 

„     15. 

„    287- 

.,     12. 

„    291— 

„       6. 

„    295- 

„     21. 

„    295— 

„     25. 

„    806— 

„      9. 

„    313— 

„       4. 

Facing  page 

316.     i 

Facing  page 

331,   ] 

Page  323— Line    3 

„    331— 

„     11. 

„    332— 

„     16. 

„    367- 

„       2. 

„    369— 

„     20. 

„   373  — 

„       1. 

„    376— 

„     23. 

„    390— 

„     10. 

„    396— 

.,     17. 

XXXUl 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 


THE  origin  of  image  worship  in  India  appears  to 
be  very  ancient  and  its  causes  are  not  exactly 
known.  Many  believe  it  to  be  the  result  of  the 
followers  of  G-autama  Buddha  adoring  their  master 
and  worshipping  him  in  the  form  of  images  on  his 
apotheosis  after  death.  However,  there  are  indi- 
cations of  the  prevalence  of  image  worship  among 
the  Hindus  long  before  the  time  of  Gautama 
Buddha.  The  employment  of  an  external  object 
to  concentrate  the  mind  upon  in  the  act  of  medi- 
tation in  carrying  on  the  practice  of  Yona  is  in 
India  quite  as  old  as  Yoga  itself.  Patanjali  defines 
dliarana  or  fixity  of  attention  as  "  the  process  of 
fixing  the  mind  on  some  object  well  defined  in 
space."  This  process  is,  as  he  says,  "  of  two 
kinds,  in  consequence  of  this  defined  space  being 
internal  or  external.  The  external  object,  defined 
in  space  consists  of  the  circle  of  the  navel  (the 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

nabhi-chaJira),  the  heart  and  so  on.  The  fixing 
the  mind  thereon  is  merely  directing  its  existence 
to  be  there."  There  is  indeed  ample  evidence  to 
show  that  the  practice  of  Yoga  is  in  this  country 
much  older  than  the  time  of  Patanjali.  Vachas- 
pati  Misra,  a  commentator  on  Vyasadeva's  Bhashya 
on  Patanjali's  Yoga-Sutras,  mentions  a  great  sage 
Hiranyagarbha  as  the  founder  of  the  Yoga  doctrine, 
which,  he  adds,  was  simply  improved  upon  and 
promulgated  by  Patanjali,  as  evidenced  by  the  use 
of  the  word  anusasanavi  in  Patanjali's  first 
aphorism  Atlia  yoganusasanam.  This  old  sage 
Hiranyagarbha  and  his  successor  Varshaganya 
Yajnavalkya  are  alluded  to  by  Eamanuja  and  other 
later  teachers  of  Vedanta ;  and  Sahkara  actually 
quotes  some  Yoga  aphorisms  which  are  not  found 
in  the  work  of  Patanjali,  but  look  older  than  his 
time.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  image  worship 
among  the  Hindus  was  contemporaneous  with,  if 
not  older  than,  the  development  of  the  Yoga 
system,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  dates  from  before 
the  age  of  Patanjali,  who  has  been  assigned  by 
scholars  on  good  evidence  to  the  second  century 
before  Christ.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Yoga 
system  is  even  older  than  the  time  of  Buddha, 
because  Buddha  himself  is  declared  to  have  been 
initiated  into  its  practice  in  the  earlier  stages  of 


INTRODUCTION. 

his  search  after  enlightenment  and  truth ;  and  it 
may  be  taken  that  this  fact  is  evidenced  by  sculp- 
tured representations  of  Buddha  in  the  style  of  the 
G-andhara  school  as  an  emaciated  person  almost 
dying  under  the  stress  of  the  austerities  he  prac- 
tised.* 

Again,  Panini,  to  whom  certain  Orientalists 
assign  a  date  somewhere  about  the  sixth  century 
before  Christ,  mentions  in  one  of  his  grammatical 
aphorisms  (v.  3,99)  that  "likenesses  not  to  be  sold 
but  used  for  the  purpose  of  livelihood  do  not  take 
the  termination  han."  The  word  he  uses  to  denote 
an  image  in  a  nearly  preceding  (v.  6,  96)  aphorism 
is  pratihriti,  the  literal  meaning  whereof  is  any- 
thing made  after  an  original.  Commentators  on 
this  aphorism  understand  these  unsellable  reproduc- 
tions to  be  divine  images.  Evidently  then,  there 
were  images  of  gods  and  goddesses  in  the  days  of 
Panini,  which  were  apparently  not  sold  in  the 
bazaars,  but  were,  nevertheless,  used  for  the  purpose 
of  making  a  living.  This  would  indicate  that 
the  possessors  of  these  images  were  able  to  utilise 
them  as  religious  objects  which  were  so  sacred  as 
to  justify  the  gift  of  alms  to  those  who  owned  and 

*  See  fig.  61,  on  p.  110  of  V.  A.    Smith's  History  of  Fine 
Arts  in  India  and  Ceylon, 


HINDU  lOONOGBAPHY. 

exhibited  them.  Finally,  images  of  gods,  as  they 
laugh,  cry,  sing,  dance,  perspire,  crack  and  so  forth 
are  mentioned  in  the  Aclhliuta-Brahmana,  which  is 
the  last  of  the  six  chapters  of  the  Shadvimsa- 
Brdhmana,  a  supplement  to  the  Pancliavimha- 
Bralimana* 

As  regards  the  existence  or  otherwise  of  image 
worship  in  the  Vedic  period  in  the  history  of  India, 
opinion  is  divided  among  European  savants.  Prof. 
Max  MuUer,  {Chips  from  a  German  WorJcsJwp,  I. 
35),  answers  the  question,  '  Did  the  Vedic  Indians 
make  images  of  their  gods,'  in  the  negative.  He 
says,  "  The  religion  of  the  Veda  knows  no  idols. 
The  worship  of  idols  in  India  is  a  secondary  forma- 
tion, a  later  degeneration  of  the  more  primitive 
worship  of  the  ideal  gods."  On  the  other  hand 
Dr.  BoUenson  finds  in  the  hymns  clear  references 
to  images  of  the  gods,  {Joiirn.  of  the  Germ.  Orient. 
Soc.  xxii,  687,  ff).  "From  the  common  appellation 
of  the  gods  as  divo  naras,  'men  of  the  sky',  or 
simply  naras  (later?),  'men'  and  from  the  epithet 
nripesas,  '  having  the  form  of  men',  B.  V.  iii,  4,  6 
we  may  conclude  that  the  Indians  did  not  merely 
in  imagination  assign  human  forms  to  their  gods, 
but  also  represented  them  in  a  sensible  manner." 

'    Macdonell's  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  210. 
4 


INTRODUCTION. 

Image  worship  seems  to  have  become  common 
in  the  time  of  Yaska.  In  his  Nirulda  he  says, 
"  We  are  now  to  consider  the  forms  of  the  gods. 
One  mode  of  representation  in  the  hymn  makes 
them  resemble  men;  for,  they  are  praised  and 
addressed  as  intelligent  beings.  They  are  also 
celebrated  with  limbs  such  as  those  of  men." 

Later  on  Patanjali  even  gives  in  a  casual 
manner  an  idea  as  to  the  images  which  were  then 
commonly  in  use :  he  says  in  the  Mahabhashya 
"  What  about  such  likenesses  as  of  Siva,  Skanda 
and  Visakha,  which  are  known  as  Siva,  Skauda  and 
Visakha,  and  not  Sivaka,  Skandaka  andVisakhaka?" 

In  the  Ramayana,  we  see  mention  of  temples 
in  Lanka,  (Bk.  VI.  39,  21),  clearly  evidencing  the 
fact  that  there  existed  at  least  in  S.  India  the 
worship  of  images  enshrined  in  temples. 

Thus  there  appears  to  be  evidence  enough  to 
suggest  that  image  worship  was  probably  not 
unknown  even  to  the  Vedic  Indian  ;  and  it  seems 
likely  that  he  was  at  least  occasiouallj'  worship- 
ping his  gods  in  the  form  of  images,  and  continued 
to  do  so  afterwards  also.  Such  is  the  evidence  as 
to  image  worship  to  be  found  in  early  Sanskrit 
Literature.  It  is  desirable  to  direct  our  attention 
to  actual  sculptures  and  to  references  to  images 
occurring  in  ancient  inscriptions. 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

The  oldest  piece  of  sculpture,  in  South  India 
distinctly  Hindu  in  character,  is,  as  far  as  it  is 
known  now,  the  Lihga  at  Gudimallam.  From  the 
features  of  the  figure  of  Siva  carved  thereon  in 
half  relief,  from  the  ornaments  worked  out  on  the 
figure,  from  the  arrangement  of  the  drapery,  from 
the  battle-axe  upon  the  shoulder,  and  many  other 
characteristics,  it  may  be  put  down  to  belong  to 
the  period  of  Bhaurhat  sculptures,  that  is,  to  the 
second  century  before  Christ.  This  remarkable 
piece  of  sculpture  is  interesting  in  two  ways  ;  it  at 
once  assures  us  of  the  exact  nature  of  early  Lihga 
worship  and  also  affords  us  a  lower  limit  of  time  in 
relation  to  the  worship  of  Siva  in  the  form  of  a 
Lihga.  From  this  Lihga  we  may  safely  conclude 
that  Lihga  worship  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  2nd 
century  B.C. 

Then  again,  the  inscription  on  a  Garnda- 
stamhlia  discovered  in  Besnagar  quite  recently, 
states  that  Heliodoros,  the  son  of  Dion,  a  Bhaga- 
vata,  who  came  from  Taxila  in  the  reign  of  the 
great  king  Antalkidas  set  up  that  Gamda-dliraja 
in  honour  of  Vasudeva.  For  this  king  Antalkidas 
various  initial  dates  have  been  fixed,  which  range 
from  B.C.  175  to  135.  This  is  about  the  earhest 
known  inscription  mentioning  Vishnu  as  Vasu- 
deva ;  and  from  this  we  are  in  a  position  to  assert 


INTEODUCTION. 

that  the  worship  of  Vasudeva  in  temples  in  India 
cannot  be  later  than  the  2nd  century  B.C. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  noteworthy 
references  to  the  iconographic  aspect  of  the  Vishnu 
cult  in  inscriptions  : — The  Udayagiri  Cave  inscrip- 
tion of dhala,  son  of  Vishnudasa,  grandson  of 

Chhagala  and  vassal  of  the  Gupta  king,  Chandra- 
gupta  II,  dated  the  Gupta  Bra  82  (A.D.  401-2), 
records  the  dedication  of  a  rock-out  shrine  to  Vishnu. 
The  undated  inscription  of  the  Bhitari  stone  pillar, 
belonging  to  the  reign  of  Skandagupta,  mentions 
that  an  image  of  the  god  Sarngin  was  set  up  and 
a  village  was  allotted  for  its  worship.  Certain 
repairs  to  the  lake  Sudarsana  by  the  governor 
Parnadatta's  agent  Chakrapalita  is  said  to  have 
been  made  in  the  Gupta  year  138  (A.D.  457-8). 
The  same  person  also  built  a  temple  to  Chakra- 
bhrit  (Vishnu).  The  Gahgdhar  inscription  of  Visva- 
karma,  dated  A.D.  423-4,  records  that  a  person 
built  a  temple  for  Vishnu  and  the  Sapta-Matrikas 
and  dug  a  well  for  drinking  water.  Iran  stone 
pillar  inscription  of  the  time  of  Budhagupta,  dated 
Gupta  Era  165  (A.D.  484-5),  informs  us  that  a 
Maharaja  Matrivishnu  and  his  younger  brother 
Dhanyavishnu  erected  a  dhvaja-stwmhha  for  the  god 
Janarddana.  The  Khoh  copper-plates  of  Maharaja 
Samkshobha  dated  G.E.  209  (A.D.  528-9),  begins 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

with  the  famous  '  twelve-lettered  mantra ',  Om 
)uii)io  Bhagavate  Vasudevaya  of  the  Bhagavatas. 

The  following  are  similar  references  to  the 
Siva  cult  in  inscriptions  ; — Udayagiri  Cave  inscrip- 
tion of  the  reign  of  Chandragupta  II,  records  the 
excavation  of  a  shrine  for  Sambhu  ;  while  another 
in  Bilsad,  belonging  to  the  reign  of  Kumaragupta, 
and  dated  G-.E.  96  (A.D.  415-6),  nriakes  mention  of 
the  erection  of  a  number  of  additional  buildings 
attached  to  the  temple  of  Svami  Mahasena. 

The  facts  disclosed  by  the  inscriptions  quoted 
above  clearly  show  that  the  two  Hindu  cults  of 
Siva  and  Vishnu  were  in  an  advanced  condition  in 
the  5th  century  A.D.,  so  as  to  indicate  that  they 
must  have  had  behind  them  many  centuries  of 
developement. 

II. 

The  objects  worshipped  by  Hindus  are  images, 
of  gods  and  goddesses,  salagramas,  bana-Iingas, 
yantras,  certain  animals  and  birds,  certain  holy 
rivers,  tanks,  trees  and  sepulchres  of  saints. 
Besides  these,  there  are  several  minor  objects  of 
local  importance  and  personal  predilection,  which 
are  also  used  as  objects  of  worship. 

The  Hindu  images  of  gods  and  goddesses  are 
broadly  divisible  into  two  classes  as  the  Vaishnava 


INTEODUCTION. 

and  the  Saiva.     In  this  classiiication  may  well  be 
included,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  the  images 
of  Devi,  Ganesa,  and  other  such  deities  since  they 
are,  according   to  the  Puranas,    related  in  some 
manner  or  other  to  Vishnu  or  Siva.     As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  goddesses  associated  with,  Vishnu  and  Siva 
represent  their  various  divine  powers  and  energies. 
The  images  of  gods  and  goddesses  are  worship- 
ped by  the  Hindus  not  only  in  temples  as  public 
places  of  worship  but  also  in  private  households. 
Since  the  regular  worship  of  images  requires  atten- 
tion to  a  great  many  details  in  respect  of  ceremonial 
purity  and  piety,  such  worship  is  only  occasionally 
conducted  in  many  house-holds,  even  though  the 
rule  is   that  it   should  be   conducted  every  day. 
Every  Hindu  household  possesses  its  own  images 
of  the  family  deity  {ishta-devatds  Sind  hda-clevatas)  ; 
and  worship  is  offered  to  them  in  many  families 
only  occasionally.     On  all  other  days  a  sdlagravia, 
a  hdna-linga,  a  sphaUha-lihga  or  some  such  small 
object  is  worshipped,  since  nothing  can  be  eaten 
by  a  pious  Hindu  which  has  not  been  offered  in 
worship  to  his  deity.     A  mlagrdnia  is  generally  a 
fiintified  ammonite  shell,  which  is 

Salagrama,  .  ^    ^         , 

river  worn  and  thus  rounded  and 
beautifully  polished.  The  river  Gandaki,  which  is 
one  of  the  well-known  tributaries  of  the  Ganges,  is 

9 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

famous  in  India  for  its  deposits  of  salagramas. 
Each  of  tliese  lias  a  hole,  through  which  are  visible 
several  interior  spiral  grooves  resembling  the  re- 
presentation of  the  cliah'a  or  discus  of  Vishnu ;  and 
these  are  in  fact  considered  by  the  people  to  be  the 
naturally  produced  representations  of  the  discus  of 
Vishnu.  The  salagrama  is  in  consequence  looked 
upon  as  a  representative  of  Vishnu.  Eemarkable 
virtues  are  attributed  to  it  and  fabulous  prices  arc 
often  offered  to  some  particular  specimens  of  it. 
There  are  treatises  on  the  subject  of  the  examination 
and  evaluation  of  salagramas  ;  and  there  are  also, 
here  and  there,  a  few  experts  to  be  found  even  in 
these  days  for  estimating  their  value.  The  number 
as  well  as  the  disposition  of  the  spirals  visible 
through  the  holes  is  utilised  in  ascertaining  which 
of  the  many  aspects  and  avataras  of  Vishnu  a  given 
specimen  represents  and  what  the  value  of  it  is  to 
the  worshipper.*     The  Varaha-'purana  states  that 


*  A  good  or  auspicious  salagrama  is  ono  which  has  a 
chakra,  which  resembles  a  iiaga  (cobra)  reposing  in  a  spiral ; 
the  spirals  of  the  chakra  in  the  salagrama  should  have  in 
them  delicate  traceries  running  across  them.  Those  salagramas 
which  are  of  the  size  of  an  amalaka  fruit  or  smaller,  are  very 
efficacious,  Salagramas  may  be  of  the  following  colours : 
brownish  black,  green,  white,  red,  blue,  dark  brown,  jet-black, 
yellow  or  multicoloured.     They  are  said  to  belong  respectively 

10 


PLATE  A. 


3 


"Uf  uy  ly  m  m  Uf 


3T 


i|^ 


^ 


:n 


5IT 


111 


111  m  Jti  jh  JTi  m 


fl: 


sn 


t^ 


4T 


f?t 


■e 

e 
■e 

■G 


YantRAS. 


A    group  of  salagramas  and  an  image  of  Eama  made  of  a 
piece  of  ialagidma. 


[To  face  page  XI.] 


INTEODUCTION. 

the  river-goddess  of  the  Gandaki  requested  Vishnu 
to  be  born  in  her  womb,  to  which  Vishnu  acceded 
and  came  to  be  born  in  the  river  as  salagramas. 

It  is  a  fairly  common  sight  to  find  a  large 
collection  of  salagramas  in  many  important  temples, 
in  monasteries  called  mathas  and  even  in  certain 
old  households.  They  are  worshipped  by  Vaishna- 
vas  and  also  by  persons  of  the  Vaidik  Saiva 
persuasion ;  but  the  Agamic  Saivas  and  the 
Vira-Saivas  do  not  worship  them. 


to  Narasimha,  Vamana,  Vasudeva,  Samkarshana,  Damodara 
and  Aniruddha,  Narayana,  Kshetra-Vaishnava  (?),  and 
Sridhara.  A  salagrdma  with  three  chakras  is  said  to  belong 
to  Lakshmi-Narayana.  Fine  spiralled  ones  grant  all  the 
desires  of  the  worshipper,  whereas  black  ones  would  give  fame 
{Mrti)  ;  white  salagramas  destroy  sin,  and  yellow  ones  confer 
sons.  Sdlaqramas  of  blue,  etc.,  colours  grant  peace  and 
wealth,  while  red  bestows  enjoyment  ibhoga).  Even  pieces 
of  the  auspicious  salagramas,  might  be  worshipped.  The  fol- 
lowing specimens  must  be  avoided :  badly  mutilated,  and  rough 
surfaced  ones,  thase  having  a  large  number  of  holes  or  pits,  or 
scarred  with  many  lines,  porous,  unusually  large  sized,  those 
having  too  many  spirals,  or  having  only  one  loop  in  the 
spiral  (?),  big  mouthed  or  large  spiralled,  down-looking  and 
burnt  ones,  very  red  ones,  ill  looking  ones,  and  those  with  a 
number  of  chakras  in  a  line  ;  worshipping  these  brings  only 
misery  to  the  worshipper. 

11 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Bana-lin^as  mostly  consist  of  quartz  and  are 
egg-shaped  pebbles.    They  are  des- 

Bana-lingas.  .  ■  i  ^^ 

cnbed  m  the  Siddhanta-sardvali 
of  Trilochana  Sivacharya : — "  Banalingas  are  liked 
by  Isvara  and  may  be  in  sizes  ranging  from  the 
eighth  of  an  ahgnla  (inch)  to  one  hasta  (cubit). 
They  may  be  of  the  colour  of  a  xi'gQJamhu  fruit,  of 
honey,  of  a  black  beetle,  or  of  the  touch-stone,  or 
may  be  blue,  deep-red  or  green.  The  x>ltlm  should 
also  be  of  the  same  colour  as  the  hana-linga. 
They  have  to  be  either  like  the  teat  of  a  cow  or 
like  an  egg  in  shape,  and  must  be  highly  polished. 
These  hana-Jingas  are  said  to  be  found  in  Amares- 
vara,  on  the  Mahendra  mountain,  in  Nepal,  in  the 
Kanyatirtha  and  Asrama  near  the  same  place.  It 
is  considered  that  each  of  these  places  contains  a 
crore  of  hana-lihgas,  and  that  there  are  three 
crores  of  hana-lihgas  in  each  of  the  following  places 
of  Saiva  pilgrimage,  namely,  Srisaila,  Liiigasaila 
and  Kaligarta. 

Yantras    are    certain    mystic    and    magical 
diagrams  engraved  upon  metallic 

Yantras, 

plates,  or,  sometimes  drawn  on 
paper,  witli  certain  mystic  letters  in  association. 
These  diagrams  are  supposed  to  have  the  power  to 
protect  the  worshipper  from  ills  due  to  the  influ- 
ence of  evil  deities  or  evil  spirits,  and  to  bestow 

12 


INTRODUCTION. 

on  him  happiness,  wealth  and  eventually  even 
liberation  from  births.  Sometimes  they  are  worn 
about  the  person  of  the  worshipper  in  small  cylin- 
drical gold  or  silver  cases.  The  most  important 
of  the  yantras  and  the  holiest  among  them  is  the 
Srichakra.  (For  an  extensive  treatment  of  this 
ijantra,  see  under  "  Srichakra  ")•  It  is  held 
generally  in  very  high  esteem,  but  is  especially 
adored  by  the  worshippers  of  Devi. 

The  pious  Hindu  regards  the  cow  with   the 
reverence  due   to  a  divine  being ; 

Cow. 

and  to  him  she  is  as  dear  as  a 
goddess-mother.  Worship  is  offered  to  her  by  some 
Hindus  regularly  on  all  Fridays.  On  certain 
important  occasions,  she  is  specially  worshipped, 
as  for  instance,  on  the  day  following  the  Makara- 
sahkranti  in  South  India.  In  North  India,  one 
often  sees  cows  being  freely  fed  in  front  of  temples 
by  visitors  going  there  to  worship.  Every  cow  is 
to  the  pious  Hindu  an  avatara  of  Kamadhenu, 
the  mythical  all-bestowing  cow  of  the  god  Indra. 
Among  the  birds,  Garuda,  the  brahmany  kite, 

is  the  most  sacred  ;  and  when  a 

Birds. 

pious  Hindu  happens  to  see  one 
of  these  birds  hovering  in  the  sky,  he  invariably 
offers  obeisance  to  it.  It  is  considered  to  be  a 
very  good  omen,  if  one  of  these  birds  happens  to 


13 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

be  seen  when  one  goes   about   on   any  important 
business. 

Worship  is  also  offered  to  holy  rivers  like  the 
Ganges,  the  Godavari,  the  Kaveri, 

Sivers. 

etc.  The  Ganges  is  considered  to 
be  holy  throughout  the  year  ;  even  in  the  case  of 
this  river,  certain  specific  places  along  her  course 
and  certain  times  in  the  year  are  held  to  be 
very  sacred;  and  bathing  in  the  river  in  those 
times  and  places  and  doing  fuja  to  her  is  esteemed 
very  meritorious.  Various  other  rivers  and  even 
certain  tanks  are  considered  holy  during  particular 
periods  and  on  special  occasions  ;  for  instance,  the 
river  Kaveri  in  South  India  is  especially  worship- 
ped in  the  month  of  Tula  (October-November), 
and  pilgrims  from  various  parts  of  India  go  to 
Talakaveri,  Srlrangam  and  Sanghamukha,  which 
are  holy  places  situated  at  the  source,  the  middle 
and  the  end  respectively  of  the  river  Kaveri.  In  a 
similar  manner,  a  large  sacred  tank  at  Kumbha- 
konam,  generally  held  in  very  great  veneration,  is 
considered  to  become  specially  sacred  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Maliha-naksJiatra  in  the  month  of 
Magha  once  in  twelve  years ;  and  this  occasion  is 
celebrated  as  the  Mahamakha.  The  various  melas 
in  North  India  in  relation  to  sacred  rivers  and 
tanks  correspond  to  the  things  described  above. 


14 


INTEODUCTION. 

Tree   worship   is   also  a  common  feature   in 
popular  Hinduism.     The  asvatiha 

Trees.  "^    "^ 

tree  (Ficus  religiosa)  is  always 
sacred  to  the  Hindu.  The  sacredness  of  this  tree 
to  the  Buddhist  is  due  to  the  fact  of  Buddha  having 
obtained  his  religious  enlightenment  while  meditat- 
ing under  it.  On  those  mondays,  on  which  the 
new-moon  falls,  circumambulations  and  offerings 
of  various  things  are  made  to  the  asvaWia  tree  by 
many  Hindu  women.  In  South  India,  each  Siva 
temple  has  some  particular  tree  which  is  peculiar 
to  that  temple  and  goes  by  the  name  of  sthala- 
viiJcsha  or  the  tree  of  the  place.  For  instance, 
the  kadamba  (nauclea  kadamba)  tree  is  the  stliala- 
vriksha  of  the  famous  Minakshi-Sundaresvara 
temple  at  Madura ;  the  jambu  tree  is  the  sthala- 
vriksha  of  the  temple  of  Jambukesvara  at  Tiru- 
vanaikkaval  near  Trichinopoly.  The  tulasi  plant 
(ocimum  basilicum)  is  held  in  high  esteem  in 
association  with  Vaishnavism,  and  regular  pTija  is 
daily  offered  to  this  plant  in  many  Hindu  homes 
even  to-day.  The  leaves  of  this  plant  are  as  sacred 
and  pleasing  an  offering  to  Vishnu  as  those  of  the 
bael  tree  are  to  Siva. 

Another  object  of  adoration  to  the  Hindu  is 

Sepulchres  of       ^hc  sepulchre    of    saints.    Places 

saints,  hallowed  by  the  presence  of  such 

15 


HINDU  ICONOGBAPHY. 

sepulchres,  or  associated  otherwise  with  the  me- 
mory of  saints  and  sages,  are  venetrated  all  over  the 
country.  For  instance,  the  birth  places  of  Sahka- 
racharya,  Eamanujacharya  and  Madhvacharya, 
and  also  the  places  where  these  great  teachers 
passed  away,  are  held  in  high  reverence  by  their 
respective  followers.  The  temple  of  the  famous 
Vaishnava  devotee  Pundalik  near  Pandharipur  is 
visited  by  all  pilgrims  who  go  there  to  worship 
Pandharinath,  the  tradition  being  that  this  god 
appeared  at  Pandharipiir  in  response  to  the  duti- 
fulness  and  devotion  of  PundalD^. 

Many  other  minor  objects,  such  as  inscribed 
stones  and  even  ordinary  bricks, 

other  objects. 

etc.,  are  also  made  into  objects  of 
worship  occasionally.  The  conch  shell  is  used  to 
serve  more  than  one  purpose  in  the  conduct  of 
worship.  But  that  variety  of  it  which  has  its 
spirals  running  dextrally  clockwise,  when  viewed 
as  springing  up  from  within  is  specially  valued  and 
even  worshipped.  Indeed,  through  the  procebucb 
of  religious  stiuctification  and  deification,  any  suit- 
able object,  small  or  large,  may  be  made  into  an 
object  of  worship.  In  all  these  cases  it  is  not  the 
object,  as  such,  which  is  worshipped  in  reality: 
the  object,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  understood  to 
represent  the  deity  intended  to  be  wort^hipped. 

16 


INTEODUCTION 

III. 

Images  are  divided  into  three  classes,  as  chala 
(moveable),  acliala  (immoveable), 
of  images'.^*^°"^  ^^^  chalacJiala  (moveable-immove- 
able). The  moveable  images 
are  those  which  are  made  of  metal  and  are 
easily  portable  ;  of  these  the  hautulca-beras  are 
meant  for  archana  ;  the  ittsava-beras  are  taken 
out,  on  festive  occasions,  in  procession ;  and 
haliheras,  and  snapana-beras,  *  are  employed  in 
relation  to  the  daily  services,  for  the  purpose  of 
offering  bali  to  the  parivaras,  and  for  bathing 
respectively.  The  immoveable  images  are  com- 
monly known  as  the  mula-vigralias  or  dhnova- 
beras,  and  are  generally  made  of  stone  and 
permanently  fixed  in  the  central  shrine.  They 
are  invariably  large  and  heavy  images.  Dhruva- 
beras  are  of  three  kinds  called  sthanaha,  asana 
and  saijana,  that  is,  standing,  sitting  and  reclining. 
In  the  case  of  Vaishnava  images  each  of  these 
three  kinds  of  images  is  further  divided  into,  yoga, 
blioga,  vlra  and  abhichttriJca  varieties.  These 
varieties   of   the   standing,    sitting   and   reclining 


(^i^jrT^Rt^H^irt) 


17 


INTEODUCTION. 

images  of  Vishnu  are  worshipped  respectively  by 
those  who  desire  to  attain  yoga  or  spiritual  self- 
realisation,  bhoga  or  enjoyment  and  vlra  or  military 
prowess. 

There  is  yet  another  classification  of  images 
into  three  kinds  as  chitra,  chitrardha  and  cliitrU- 
hhasa*  Chitra  denotes  images  in  the  round  with 
all  their  limbs  completely  worked  out  and  shown. 
Chitrdirdlia  is  the  name  given  to  figures  in  half- 
relief,  and  chitrabhasa  refers  to  images  painted  on 
walls  and  cloths,  and  such  other  suitable  objects. 

Moreover,  an  image  sculptured  fully  in  the 
round  is  said  to  be  vyaJcta  or  manifest ;  if  it  is  half 
represented,  say  up  to  the  chest,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  images  on  the  viuhha-lihga,  and  in  what  is 
known  as  Trimurti  in  the  Blephanta  Cave,  it  is 
called  vijaMavyalxta  or  manifest-and-non-manifest ; 
and  objects  like  the  lihga,  the  salagrdma,  the  bana- 
linga,  etc.,  are  said  to  be  avyahta  or  non-manifest 
form. 

f%fr5=E^  II   The  Tamil  commentary  on  this  passage 

runs  as  follows  : — ersbsD/r  ^eiiiuiw.x^Lh  ei^sm lditiu^^ 
^(dsd     ^s)Tsi|L/i-li_^      Sl^^wQunek^    Quujir/rtp,  '  that 

which  is  measurable  by  the  six  ways  of  measure- 
ment is  called  cliitram:  f^^fcT'T^  f^  fcJl^^prra- 
^^  II 

18 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  images  of  no  gods  other  than  Vishnu 
should  be  represented  as  recHuing.  They  might 
all  be  sculptured  as  standing  or  sitting ;  but  the 
images  of  Vishnu  alone  could  be  in  all  the  three 
postures,  standing,  sitting  and  reclining. 

There  is  still  another  classification  of  images 
based  upon  their  terrific  {raiulra  or  ugra),  or 
pacific  {santa  or  saumya)  nature.  The  first  class 
is  always  characterised  by  sharp,  long  tusks  and 
nails,  and  a  large  number  of  'hands  carrying 
weapons  of  war.  The  images  of  terrific  nature  have 
also  wide,  circular  eyes,  flames  of  fire  round  their 
heads,  and  are  in  some  cases  adorned  with  human 
skulls  and  bones.  The  raudra  form  of  images  are 
worshipped  for  the  attainment  of  objects  requiring 
the  use  of  violence.  The  sS,nta  or  saumtja  form  of 
images  are  peaceful  looking  in  appearance,  and  are 
worshipped  for  the  attainment  of  peaceful  aims 
and  objects.  Among  the  images  of  Vishnu,  the 
VisvarCipa,  the  Nrisiriaha,  the  Vatapatrasayin  and 
Parasurama  are  considered  to  be  ugra-murtis ;  and 
Siva  as  the  destroyer  of  Kama,  of  the  elephant 
(G-ajaha-murti),  of  the  tripuras,  and  of  Yama,  has 
to  be  terrific  in  nature  and  appearance.  The 
terrific  images  are  not  meant  to  be  set  up  in 
temples  in  towns,  but  must  always  have  their 
temples  invariably  outside. 

19 


INTRODUCTION. 

Among  the  aspects  of  Vishnu  the  yuga  form, 
be  it  standing,  sitting  or  reclining,  must  be 
enslirined  in  a  temple  built  far  away  from  the 
bustle  of  the  village,  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  or  at 
the  junction  of  two  or  more  rivers,  on  hill  tops  and 
in  forest  recesses.  The  reason  of  the  choice  of  such 
places  is  quite  patent.  The  worshipper  of  the  yoga 
image  has  to  be  a  yvgi  or  one  aspiring  to  become 
a  yogi ;  he  would  certainly  desire  to  have  a  calm 
place  for  concentrating  his  thoughts  ou  the  object  of 
his  worship  ;  and  naturally  the  temple  intended  for 
the  conduct  of  worship  by  him  has  to  be  away  from 
human  habitations.  The  hhoga  form  is  the  form 
best  fitted  to  have  the  temple  therefore  constructed 
within  towns  and  villages,  as  it  is  conceived  to 
be  the  giver  of  all  happiness  to  its  worshippers 
and  has  therefore  to  be  worshipped  and  prayed 
to  by  all  sorts  of  men  and  women  belonging  to  all 
conditions  of  life.  The  v'tra  form  of  Vishnu,  a 
form  which  is  conceived  to  be  capable  of  giving 
physical  power,  prowess  and  strength  to  conquer 
enemies,  may  have  the  temple  for  it  built  either 
inside  or  outside  towns  and  villages. 

The  ahliicharika  form  which  is  worshipped 
for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  defeat  and  death  on 
enemies  is  looked  upon  as  inauspicious  and  is  unfit 
to  be  set  up  for  worship  in  temples  built  in  towns 

20 


INTRODUCTION. 

and  villages.  Therefore,  forests,  mountains,  marshy 
tracts,  fortresses  and  other  such  places  are  pres- 
cribed as  being  fit  for  the  construction  of  temples 
to  enshrine  this  aspect  of  Vishnu,  [vcvia  giri  jala 
(large  rasldmnte  satrudinuiakhe). 

IV 

Various  kinds  of  places  are  prescribed  for  the 
building  of  temples  to  the  several  gods ;  different 
forms  of  central  shrines  are  also  described  in  the 
agamas^'  as  suitable  for  different  deities,  according 
as  their  posture  is  standing,  seated  or  reclining. 

Temples  might  be  built  near  tanks,  rivers,  at 
the  junction  of  two  or  more  rivers,  on  the  sea- 
shore, in  villages,  on  the  tops  of  hills  and  at  their 
foot,  and  in  places  where  great  and  good  men 
live.  The  temple  of  Siva  might  be  constructed  in 
the  north-east,  north-north-east  or  east-north-east 

*The  words  dgama  and  tantra  are  used  throughout  this 
work  as  synonymous  ;  strictly  speaking  an  dgama  differs  but 
slightly  from  a  tantra.  The  former  is  said  to  deal  with  twenty- 
five  subjects,  such  as  the  nature  of  the  Brahman,  Brahma- 
vidya,  the  names  of  the  different  tantras,  creation  and  destruc- 
tion of  the  world,  etc.  The  latter  treats  of  only  seven  out  of 
the  twenty- five  subjects  dealt  with  in  the  dgamas.  Some- 
times the  word  ydmala  is  used  as  synonymous  with  dgama 
and  tantra;  and  a  ydmala  deals  with  only  five  out  of  the 
twenty-five  subjects  in  the  dgamas. 

21 


INTKODUCTION. 

corner  of  a  village  ;  that  of  Vishnu,  in  the  west ; 
of  Surya,  in  the  east  of  the  village  and  facing  the 
west ;  of  Durga,  in  the  south  ;  of  Subrahmanya,  in 
the  north-west.  The  Sapta-Matrikas  or  Mother- 
goddesses  with  Vinayaka  are  to  be  set  up  in  the 
north  near  the  fort  walls,  on  the  edge  of  the  sur- 
rounding moat  facing  the  north  side  ;  Jyeshthadevi 
is  to  be  set  up  on  the  banks  of  tanks. 

Different  sorts  of  vlvianas  or  domed  central 
shrines  are  mentioned  in  the  aga)iias  and  tantras. 
Some  of  them  are  square  (sama-cltatarasra)  or 
circular  {vritta)  in  ground  plan,  while  others  are 
rectangular  (ai/atasra)  or  oval  (vrittatjata).  Of 
these  the  square  and  circular  varieties  are  prescribed 
for  enshrining  the  sitting  and  standing  figures  of 
deities,  while  the  rectangular  and  the  elliptical 
varieties  are  naturally  reserved  for  the  reclining 
images  of  Vishnu. 

The  sayana  form  of  Vishnu  may  have  its 
temple  facing  any  cardinal  point.  If  the  temple 
faces  the  north,  the  head  of  the  reclining  image 
must  be  to  the  east ;  if  it  faces  the  south,  the  head 
must  be  placed  to  the  west ;  in  temples  facing  east 
and  west,  the  head  must  be  to  the  south.  This 
means  that  in  cases,  in  which  the  temples  face  the 
north,  the  south,  or  the  east,  the  head  of  the 
reclining  figure  of  the  deity  is  to  the  left   of  the 

22 


INTEODUCTION. 

worshipper ;  and  only  in  the  case  of  temples  facing 
the  west,  the  head  of  the  deity  is  "to  the  right  of 
the  worshipper. 

V. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  worship  of  the 

different  aspects  of  the  diety,  as  the 

The  effects  of     yoga,  bJioga,  vlra  and  abhicharika, 

worshippinif  the 

different  deities,  is  intended  to  enable  the  worship- 
per to  achieve  certain  desired 
ends.  When  the  diety  is  in  the  sayana  or  the 
reclining  attitude,  the  worship  thereof  is  said  to 
produce  different  results  to  the  worshipper  accord- 
ing as  the  head  of  the  image  is  in  the  north  or  south 
or  east  or  west.  If  the  head  is  in  the  east,  the 
worship  grants  peace  {sanfidam) ;  if  in  the  west,  it 
produces  plenty  {pushthidam) ;  if  in  the  south, 
victory  (jayadam) ;  and  if  in  the  north,  ahliicharika 
results.  The  daily  worship  offered  to  Vishnu 
in  public  temples  is  regarded  as  leading  to  the 
increase  of  the  population  in  the  place.  The 
worship  of  Indra  gives  plenty  to  the  people.  The 
worship  of  Subrabmanya  and  Chamunda  keeps 
children  in  sound  health  while  that  of  Surya 
removes  all  ailments,  physical  and  mental. 
Worship  offered  to  Kama  bestows  on  the  worshipper 
a  beautiful  body.     Ganesa  always  vouchsafes   his 

23 


INTRODUCTION. 

votaries  freedom  from  hindrances  in  their  under- 
takings, while  Duroa  and  Uma  grant  victorj'. 
The  worship  of  Lakshmi  brings  wealth  and 
destroys  poverty,  while  that  of  Sarasvati  results 
in  enabling  one  to  secure  learning  and  the  power  of 
speech.  The  Saptamatrikas  grant  their  worshippers 
wealth  and  happiness.  Siva  is  said  to  be  capable 
of  granting,  according  to  the  KamiJuigama,  all  the 
results  that  may  be  expected  of  all  the  various 
gods. 

Again  the  ugra  and  the  Sanfamurf is  of  Vishnu 
or  f^iva  are  looked  upon  as  granting  different  results 
according  to  the  position  in  which  their  temples 
are  constructed  in  the  village.  If  the  ugra  form 
of  a  god  is  set  up  for  worship  in  the  east,  the 
village  will  soon  be  ruined :  if  it  is  set  up  in  the 
south-east,  the  women  of  the  place  will  become 
immoral  ;  if  in  the  south,  ghosts  and  demons  in 
crowds  will  cause  trouble  to  the  people  ;  if  in  the 
south-west,  the  population  will  dwindle  through 
sickness ;  if  in  the  west,  mental  unhappiness,  bad 
conduct  and  mournfulness  will  arise  ;  if  in  the  north- 
west, bad  conduct  will  become  rampant  among 
the  people ;  and  if  in  the  north,  they  will  be  sub- 
jected to  all  sorts  of  affliction.  It  is  only  in  the 
north-east  that  the  ugra  forms  of  gods  may  be 
enshrined  harmlessly  so  as  to  grant  prosperity  and 


INTRODUCTION. 

abundance  of  children.  The  setting  up  of  an  ugra 
image  in  the  midst  of  a  village  is  strictly  prohi- 
bited. If  there  happens  to  be  a  raudra-murti  in  a 
village,  a  kantamnrti  should  be  set  up  before  it  to 
counteract  the  evil  effects,  or  at  least  a  tank  must 
be  dug  in  front  of  the  temple.  Such  things  go  to 
pacify  the  terrific  gods. 

A  kantamurti  may  well  have  its  temple  in  the 
middle  of  a  village.  Such  a  murfi  grants  happi- 
ness, long  life,  sound  health  to  the  people  and 
victory  and  prosperity  to  the  king  of  the  country. 

Varahamihira,  the  great  Indian  astronomer, 
states  that  the  pratishtha  of  the  various  gods  should 
be  through  the  hands  of  persons  of  the  caste 
peculiarily  suited  to  the  diety  that  is  to  be  set  up. 
Thus,  a  Vaishnava  image  should  be  set  up  in 
temples  by  a  Bhagavata ;  that  of  Siva,  by  a  Brah- 
mana  who  wears  the  hliasma ;  the  Maga  Brahmanas 
should  be  employed  for  the  setting  up  of  the  image 
of  Surya  :  Brahmanas  should  be  employed  for  the 
inatishtha  of  Brahma  ;  and  Jainas  and  Bauddhas 
should  set  up  the  images  of  Jina  and  Buddha 
respectively  :  those  who  worship  the  Matri-mandala 
should  alone  be  employed  for  the  setting  up  of  the 
Saptamatrikas. 


25 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

VI. 

To  the  Hindu,  the  omnipresent  God,  who  is 
the  father  of  the  universe,  appears 
Hindu     point     to  reside  in  everything,  as  much  in 
images.  the  loving  heart  of  the  devotee  as 

in  stocks  and  stones.  His  God 
may  or  may  not  be  conceived  as  anthropomorphic ; 
the  form  of  the  conception  depends  upon  the  stage 
of  advancement  of  the  worshipper  in  the  culture 
of  divine  knowledge  and  spiritual  wisdom.  To 
a  yogin,  who  has  realised  the  Supreme  Brah- 
man within  himself,  there  is  no  need  of  any 
temple  or  any  divine  image  for  worship ;  but  to 
those,  who  have  not  attained  this  height  of  realisa- 
tion, various  physical  and  mental  modes  of  worship 
are  prescribed,  and  rules  of  various  kinds  are  laid 
down  in  relation  to  conduct.  The  Hindu  sastras 
prescribe  image  worship  to  weak  unevolved  persons 
in  particular.*  The  Jahala-upanishad  distinctly 
asserts  that  the  yogin  perceives  Siva  in  his  heart, 
and  that  images    are  meant  for  ignorant   men.f 


ffra^  STfrTTT  f^T^o'Tr  i   Chhalari's  commentary  on  Madhva- 
charya's  Tantra-sdra. 


26 


INTEODUCTION. 

Again,  the  worship  of  images,  it  is  said,  brings  on 
re-births  and  is  not  therefore  to  be  resorted  to  by  the 
yogin,  who  desires  to   free  himself  from  them.* 
Accordingly,  the  images  of  the  Hindu  gods  and 
goddesses  are  representations  of  the  various  con- 
ceptions of  divine  attributes.     It  is  plain  that  the 
thought  of  thinkers  is  made  manifest  and  concre- 
tised by  various  means,  such  as  speech,  pictorial 
and    sculptural    representations,  and    signs    and 
symbols.     All  these  means  have  been  utilised  in  the 
history  of  humanity  for  bringing  divinity  down  to 
the  level  of  the  common  man  and  lifting  him  up 
gradually  to  the  sublime  height  of  true  divine  reali- 
sation.    This  is  indeed  what  the  seers  of  India  have 
done.     Sculpturally  it  may  be  said,  the  number  of 
hands  in  an  image  represents  the  number  of  attri- 
butes belonging  to  the  deity,  and  their  nature  is 
denoted  by  the  ayudha  held  in  the  hand  or  by  the 
pose  maintained  by  it.     The  larger  the  number  of 
hands,   the    more    numerous    are    the    attributes 
conceived ;  and  the    image  with  many  hands    is 
considered  to  be  tamasic  in  character.  Similarly,  the 
less  the  number  of  hands,  the  less  numerous  are  the 
gunas  conceived ;  and  the  image  may  thus  be  made 


27 


INTEODUCTION. 

to  approach  as  nearly  as  possible  the  description  of 
the  attributeless  Brahiuaii.  Even  in  image  worship 
there  are  thus  different  grades  of  evolution.  An 
image,  therefore,  has  to  be  understood  to  be  a 
symbol  meant  to  keep  before  the  eye  of  the  worship- 
per certain  attributes  of  the  deity  he  undertakes  to 
worship  and  upon  which  he  desires  to  concentrate 
his  thoughts. 

It  may  well  be  said  that  images  are  to  the 
Hindu  worshipper  what  diagrams  are  to  the  geo- 
metrician. To  the  latter,  an  ill-drawn  free-hand 
circle  serves  the  same  purpose  in  his  demonstration 
as  a  neat  compass-drawn  circle.  Similarly,  to  the 
Hindu  even  an  ill-shaped  image,  but  one  made 
according  to  the  directions  given  in  his  sastras 
serves  the  same  object  as  a  very  artistically  executed 
image,  provided  it  is  made  in  strict  conformity 
with  dastraic  rules.  Hindu  worshippers  of  images 
ignore  beauty  passively;  and  this  negligence  of 
artistic  merit  on  their  part  has  tended  to  make 
the  sculptor  very  often  a  careless  worker. 

Thus,  the  standpoint  from  which  the  Hindu 
views  the  images  of  his  gods  and  goddesses  differs 
very  largely  from  that  of  the  Greek.  While 
symboUsm  has  been  the  essential  feature  of  Hindu 
sculpture,  the  Hindu  artist  was  not  averse  to  secure 
beauty  in  his  images.     As  a  matter  of  fact  every 


INTRODUCTION. 

Agama  and  Tantra  insists  upon  the  necessity  of 
making  the  images  as  beautiful  as  possible.  When 
they  happen  to  be  ill-made,  the  fault  is  attributable 
entirely  to  the  incapacity  of  the  artist.  Neither  the 
Hindu  ideal  of  art  nor  the  injunction  given  in  the 
written  authorities  of  the  Hindus  is  responsible  for 
ugliness. 

VII. 

The  foregoing  remarks  lead  us  naturally  to 

look  at  the  probable  causes  of   the 

Decadence    of    decadence  of  the  iconoplastic  art  in 

Indian  Art    and      _    ^ 

its  causes.  India.     There  is  no  doubt  that  the 

arts  of  sculpture  and  painting 
attained  an  amount  of  perfection  in  ancient  India, 
which  could  stand  comparison  with  what  was 
attained  in  other  civilised  countries.  The  Indian 
artist  was  not  wanting  in  originality  and  vigour  in 
the  handling  of  his  subjects ;  he  was  also  true  to 
nature,  and  in  his  representations  of  animals  and 
birds  he  is  often  unsurpassed.  In  the  early  period 
of  the  history  of  Indian  art,  the  imagination  of  the 
artist  was  not  tied  down  by  mechanical  rules,  which 
became  the  bane  of  art  in  later  times.  The  early 
sculptor  was  guided  by  his  own  observation  and 
imagination,  and  dealt  with  his  subjects  with  a 
freedom,  which  made  him  able    to  produce   very 

29 


HINDU  IGONOGEAPHY. 

pleasing  results.  He  had  an  eye  for  the  beautiful  as 
well  as  for  the  humourous,  and  he  always  gave  free 
scope  to  the  display  of  his  powers,  although  he  never 
forgot  the  religious  motive  behind  his  workmanship. 
The  first  cause  that  brought  about  a  change  in 
this  natural  and  progressive  state  of  Indian  art  was 
the  entrance  of  Tantric  ideas  into  the  worship  of  the 
Hindus  as  well  as  the  Buddhists.  The  various 
aspects  of  a  divine  being  thus  came  to  be  repre- 
sented by  various  heads,  and  its  various  attributes 
by  its  various  hands.  The  sculpturing  of  such 
complicated  conceptions  in  the  form  of  extra- 
ordinary human  beings  with  several  heads  and 
hands  was  always  attended  with  a  certain  amount  of 
unavoidable  unnaturalness  and  clumsiness.  Like 
all  art,  the  Indian  iconoplastic  art  also  has  to  be 
judged  from  the  standpoint  of  its  motive.  To  those, 
who  cannot  appreciate  this  motive,  the  very  ideal  of 
the  art  remains  hidden  and  inexplicable.  The  con- 
sequence is  that  such  critics  can  pronounce  their 
opinions  only  on  the  technical  details  of  the  artist's 
workmanship,  but  can  never  grasp  the  soul  of  his 
art.  The  mediaeval  period  of  Indian  art  is  not 
wanting  in  really  noble  and  strikingly  artistic  pieces 
of  sculpture  in  spite  of  many  of  these  having  more 
arms  and  more  heads  than  ordinary  man  has. 
It  is   well   known  that  even   in  Europe   the   old 

30 


INTRODUCTION. 

mythological  art  presents  many  uncommon  and 
unnatural  combination  of  strange  elements.  The 
justification  of  these  combinations  is  in  their 
motive ;  and  the  art  which  exhibits  them  can 
certainly  be  artistic.  It  has  to  be  granted,  however, 
that  it  is  far  from  easy  for  such  art  to  be  really 
artistic. 

The  second  and  the  most  potent  cause  that 
has  injuriously  affected  Indian  iconoplastic  art  is 
the  hard  and  fast  rules  laid  down  in  the  Agamas 
and  the  Tantras  for  the  making  of  images.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  the  authors  of  the  Agamas  devoted 
a  large  amount  of  attention  to  the  beauty  of  the 
human  figure  studied  in  general ;  and  as  a  con- 
sequence of  this  they  naturally  laid  down  the  pro- 
portions and  measurements  of  the  various  limbs 
and  organs  of  the  human  body.  The  belief  that 
these  measurements  ought  not  to  be  disregarded 
under  any  circumstance  came  into  vogue  later  on  in 
recognition  of  the  authority  of  the  Agamas  and  the 
Tantras.  The  artist  thus  became  handicapped,  and 
his  imagination  had  no  freedom  of  action.  Not 
much  scope  could  be  given  to  the  display  of  the 
genius  of  the  artist,  under  any  circumstances, 
although  there  is  an  Ayama  rule  to  the  effect  that 
"  the  artist  should  fashion  the  image  as  best  as  he 
could." 

31 


INTRODUCTION. 

With  the  decline  of  the  Hindu  kingdoms,  the 
temple  building  activity  of  the  Hindus  ceased  ;  and 
with  it,  to  a  very  large  extent,  the  sculpturing  of 
Hindu  images  also  ceased.  The  orthodox  school 
of  sculptors,  who  followed  the  Agamic  instructions, 
has  very  nearly  died  out.  The  modern  set  of  stone 
masons  in  South  India  manufacture  stone  images 
of  very  inferior  workmanship  (See  PI.  B.).  In 
Northern  India  there  is  a  disregard  of  the  Agamic 
rules  ;  and  whether  it  is  due  to  want  of  knowledge 
or  to  other  causes,  it  has  produced  certain  salutory 
results.  Influenced  by  Western  Art  in  all  prob- 
ability, Kajaputana,  Central  India  and  the 
Bombay  Presidency  have  been  able  to  adopt  in 
recent  times  a  realistic  style  of  sculpture  ;  and  some 
of  the  modern  marble  images  of  Krishna  and 
Eadha,  of  Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  of  Ganesa  and 
other  gods  and  goddesses  offered  in  the  bazaars  for 
sale,  are  very  pleasing ;  a  few  of  them  are  even 
artistic  in  reality.  Freedom  for  the  display  of 
thought  and  feeling  through  art  constitutes  the  very 
life  of  all  art ;  and  the  art  of  image-making  cannot 
be  treated  as  an  exception.  It  is  not  that  the  Hindu 
does  not  desire  that  the  images  of  his  gods  and 
goddesses  should  be  sculptured  beautifully  ;  but  he 
will  not  easily  tolerate  any  glaring  departure  from 
the  rules  laid  down  authoritatively  in  his  Sastras. 

32 


PLATE  B. 


a 
P 


ic3 

-a 


c3 
J4 


c3 


[To  face  page  32.  J 


INTRODUCTION. 

VIII. 

If  one  studies  the  sculpture  of  India  from  the 
historic  point  of  view,  he  cannot 
f6a?^T°of"the     fail  to  notice  that  there  have  been 
variouTperiods!*    different  Stages  in  the   evolution 
of  the  art  here  as  elsewhere.     To 
be  able  to  assign  a  given  piece  of  sculpture  to  the 
particular  stage  of  its  evolution,  it  is  necessary  to 
know  with  some  amount  of  accuracy  the  various 
peculiarities  of  the  earlier    and   later   sculptures. 
All  the  earlier  specimens  of  sculpture  are  in  general 
free  from  the  cramping  influence  of  artificial  rules, 
and  are  notably  realistic  ;  a  desire   on  the  part  of 
the  artist  to  copy  nature  as  faithfully  as  possible, 
is   plainly   visible    in    his   work.     In   his   human 
studies,  the  bust,  though  fully  formed,  is  not  stiff 
and  severe  in  its  contours  as  in  the  later  speci- 
mens.    As  in   later  workmanship,  the   chest  does 
not  end  abruptly,  and  the  abdomen  begins  making 
sharp  angles  with  the  former.     There  is  a   gentle 
merging  in  of  the  one  into  the  other  without  any 
marked  line  of   demarcation   between   them ;  the 
outline  of  the  whole  of  the  body  is  like  two  gently 
curved  brackets  placed  at  a  little   distance  from 
each  other  with  their  concave  opening  side  turned 
outwards  and  resembles  more  or  less  the  outline 
of  the  face  of  a  cow.     Whereas,  in  later  sculptures, 

33 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

we  see  the  outline  of  the  body  to  be  the  outUne  of 
the  thistle  flower ;  the  lower  circular  portion 
represents  the  abdomen  beginning  abruptly  and 
with  a  severe  and  unpleasant  angle  at  both  sides 
from  where  the  thorax  ends.  In  the  earlier  faces, 
the  nose  is  rather  short  and  the  lips  are  somewhat 
thicker  than  in  the  later  ones.  The  eyes  are  less 
artificial  in  that  they  are  not  disproportionately 
long.  The  face  itself  is  noticeably  round  in  out- 
line in  the  earlier  art,  while  it  is  oval  in  the  later 
specimens  of  sculpture  ;  and  the  chin  is  invariably 
shown  somewhat  prominently,  although  it  is  really 
smaller  in  proportion  than  what  is  demanded  by 
accurate  art.  In  the  later  sculpture,  the  nose  is 
simply  a  long  triangular  pyramid  attached  by  one 
of  its  sides  to  the  face  with  the  apex  turned 
upwards.  It  is  so  awkwardly  attached  to  the  face 
that  it  is  alone  enough  to  mark  ofi  the  sculpture  to 
be  quite  modern.  The  sharp  upper  edge  running 
throughout  the  length  of  the  nose,  the  acutely 
pointed  tip  at  one  of  the  junctions  of  three  edges 
in  the  clear-cut  tetrahedron  making  up  the  nose, 
the  broad  wings  and  the  single  point  at  which  the 
nose  ends  at  the  top,  are  all  very  peculiar  to  the 
works  of  the  later  period.  The  limbs  are  also 
sculptured  with  severe  and  abrupt  outlines;  for 
example,  the   muscles  of    the   upper  part  of  the 

34 


INTEODUOTION. 

chest  iu  male  figures  are  so  modelled  as  to  protrude 
in  relief  with  their  margins  rising  abruptly  from 
the  general  surface  of  the  chest.  The  folds  in  the 
abdomen  are  also  worked  out  in  a  very  artificial 
manner  which  is  at  once  stifi  and  unpleasing  in 
effect. 

In  the  early  sculptures  the  arrangement  of 
the  drapery  is  very  effective  and  natural.  The 
folds  and  creases  are  delicately  worked  out  and 
the  dress  is  shown  to  flow  freely  down  the  sides 
and  on  the  person  of  the  figures  which  it  clothes. 
One  cannot  deny  that  there  is  a  certain  amount  of 
conventionality  in  the  arrangement  of  the  folds 
even  in  the  early  sculptures ;  but  the  conventional 
mode  of  the  formation  and  disposal  of  the  folds  in 
the  specimens  of  later  workmanship  is  very  strik- 
ingly artificial.  In  the  later  sculptures,  the  heavy 
central  folds  of  the  under-garment  descend  in  a 
sharp  conical  form  down  to  the  ankles,  the  lower 
part  ending  in  a  point  which  protrudes  somewhat 
forward.  The  smaller  folds  are  represented  as 
running  across  the  thighs  and  the  forelegs,  and 
are  marked  by  a  couple  of  deep-cut  equi-distant 
lines  slightly  curved  from  above  to  indicate  their 
descent  downwards.  On  each  side  of  the  figure 
there  flows  down  a  portion  of  the  end  of  another 
cloth  worn  as  a  girdle,  which  end  spreads   out  in 

35 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

the  form  of  a  fan  (see  the  figs,  on  PI.  XXXV  and 
LV.)  The  Uncs  representing  the  minor  folds  in 
the  drapery  of  the  figures  of  the  mediaeval  period 
are  less  artificial  and  less  unpleasant  in  effect 
than  those  of  a  still  later  period. 

Viewing  broadly  the  conditions  and  character- 
istics of  Hindu  sculpture,  it  may  well  be  said  that 
there  are  four  different  schools  representing  four 
different  regions  of  India.  The  first  comprises 
what  Mr.  V.  A.  Smith  calls  the  Mathura  school. 
The  second  school  is  represented  by  the  sculptures 
of  the  early  Chalukyas  of  Badami  and  also  by  those 
of  the  Pallavas  of  Kanchi.  All  the  three  groups 
comprisedwithin  these  two  schools  are  marked  by 
the  same  characteristics  of  simplicity  and  elegance 
combined  with  much  natural  realism.  The  South 
Indian  sculptures  of  a  later  period  corresponding  to 
the  re-established  dominancy  of  the  Cholas  and 
Pandyas  are  but  the  continuations  of  the  Pallava 
style,  and  may  therefore  be  classed  conveniently 
with  it.  The  third  school  of  Indian  sculpture  is 
the  later  Chalukya-Hoysala  school,  which  is  distin- 
guished from  the  other  schools  by  its  extremely 
florid  style  of  ornamentation  and  delicate  tracery 
in  details  (See  PI.  C).  In  this  school  convention 
naturally  holds  a  dominant  place ;  and  we  notice  a 
striking  similarity  between  figures  representing  the 

36 


PLATE  C. 


^^  raff  §^  iil^E^S? 


a 
a 
o 

00 


n 

a 

O 


:_.gat     *4 


To  face  page  36.] 


INTEODUCTION. 

same  subjects,  although  they  may  be  found  in 
different  and  distant  parts  of  the  country  ;  the  same 
kinds  of  ornamentation,  clothing,  head-gear, 
posture  and  grouping  may  be  observed  in  the  same 
subjects  in  a  uniform  manner.  The  fourth  school, 
which  resembles  closely  the  third  in  respect  of 
ornamentation  and  grouping,  is  chiefly  represented 
by  the  sculptures  of  Bengal,  Assam  and  Orissa.  It 
is  at  once  recognised  by  the  human  figures  therein 
possessing  round  faces,  in  which  are  set  two  oblique 
eyes,  a  broad  forehead,  a  pair  of  thin  lips  and  a 
small  chin  (see  figures  2,  PI.  LXXII  and  2,  PI. 
XCIII).*  To  these  may  be  added  the  improved 
modern  sculptures  in  marble  found  in  the  Bombay 
Presidency  and  elsewhere,  and  also  the  new 
characterless  sculptures  of  the  Madras  Presidency. 
They  are,  however,  of  a  miscellaneous  character 
and  are  too  incongruous  to  form  anything  like  a 
school.  All  the  images,  the  'photographs  of  which 
are  reproduced  in  this  volume,  are  assignable  to 
one  or  other  of  the  first  three  schools  above 
mentioned,  the  Bengal,  Assam  and  Orissa  school 
being  referred  to  only  very  occasionally. 


'^  We  ara  informed  by  Mr.  Abanindranafch  Tagore  that 
this  sort  of  face  is  known  in  Bengal  as  of  the  pan  type  (See 
Mod.  Eeview  for  March,  1914,  p.  261). 


37 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

IX. 

It  is  an  interesting  phenomenon  to  note  that 

there  are  vicissitudes  in  what  may 

Vicissitudes  in    be  Called  the  fortune  of  images  as 

the     Mstory    of  i  •         a        • 

gods,  objects  of  worship.  As  time  passes 

on  certain  images  somehow  cease 
to  be  popular  and  their  worship  is  eventually 
discarded.  Similarly,  the  contrary  process  also 
takes  place  and  images  unknown  to  religious  fame 
become  quite  famous.  New  images  are  often  set 
up,  and  in  time  they  too  become  popular  and 
famous.  The  three  important  goddess-images  of 
earlier  times  (from  the  5th  to  the  9th  Century 
A.D.j  are  seen  to  be  those  of  Sri,  Durga  and 
Jyeshtha.  Of  these  the  two  first  are  still  popular; 
but  the  last  one  is  almost  completely  forgotten 
as  an  object  of  worship.  That  Jyeshtha  was 
once  an  important  goddess  is  evidenced  by  the 
fact  that  in  the  Bodhayana-grihya-sutras  a  whole 
chapter  is  devoted  to  the  description  of  the  worship 
of  this  goddess,  and  that  the  Srivaishnava  Saint, 
Tondar-adippodi,  complains  in  one  of  his  Tamil 
hymns  that  people  were  in  his  days  wasting  their 
veneration  upon  Jyeshthadevi,  ignoring  the 
Supreme  God  Vishnu,  the  greatest  giver  of  all  good 
gifts.  The  Jyeshthadevi  group  of  three  figures — 
a    large    female  figure    in    the    middle    with    a 


38 


INTEODUGTION. 

bull-headed  male  figure  on  the  right  and  a  good 
looking  female  figure  on  the  left — (see  PI.  CXXI), 
is  now  often  thrown  away  as  lumber  in  some  corner 
of  the  temple  compound ;  and,  when  rarely  it  is 
suffered  to  occupy  its  old  place  in  the  temple,  it  is 
left  uncared  for  and  no  worship  is  offered  to  it. 
This  is  the  case  in  S.  India  ;  in  N.  India  also  the 
goddess  does  not  appear  to  be  treated  any  better. 
She  appears  to  be  worshipped  in  Bengal,  Orissa 
and  certain  other  parts  of  India  by  low  caste  people 
under  the  name  Sitaladevi  or  the  goddess  of  small- 
pox ;  there  is  an  image  of  hers  in  the  Bhulesvar 
temple  in  Bombay,  and  is  worshipped  on  certain 
occasions  by  the  women  there. 

Another  instance  of  such  a  vicissitude  may  be 
noticed  in  the  case  of  the  images  of  the  Varaha 
(boar)  and  Nrisimha  (man-lion)  incarnations  of 
Vishnu.  Almost  all  the  early  temples  have  the 
figures  of  Varaha  and  Nrisimha  set  up  in  them  : 
the  Tantras  and  Agamas  require  the  figure  of 
Nrisimha  to  be  set  up  to  the  west  of  the  central 
shrine  even  in  Siva  temples.  As  a  matter  of  fact 
an  image  of  Kevala  or  the  Yoga  form  of  Narasimha 
is  found  in  a  niche  on  the  west  of  the  central 
shrine  or  the  vimana  in  all  old  temples  Separate 
temples  built  and  dedicated  wholly  to  Narasimha 
and  Varaha  in    the  palmy  days  of  the  Chalukyas 

39 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

of  Badami  and  the  Pallavas  of  Conjeevaram.  But 
no  one  hears  in  these  days  of  the  pratishtlia  of  a 
new  image  of  Nrisimha  or  Varaha  anywhere.  In 
a  large  number  of  the  older  temples  Varaha 
and  Nrisimha  are  even  now  worshipped,  but  in 
the  South  of  India  their  popularity  has  very 
considerably  waned.  In  the  case  of  Nrisimha  the 
belief  in  modern  times  has  been  that  he,  being  an 
^lgra  murti,  will,  if  not  properly  worshipped  in 
due  form,  burn  down  villages  or  otherwise  cause 
harm  to  the  people. 

The  worship  of  Kartikeya  or  Visakha  is 
common  in  South  India,  where  the  god  is  known 
generally  by  the  name  of  Subrahmanya.  It  may 
well  be  said  that  there  is  not  a  village  in  South 
India  but  does  not  possess  a  shrine  for  this 
favorite  deity.  To  the  Hindus  of  Northern  India 
this  god  is  known  only  in  name.  Nowhere  in  the 
north  is  he  worshipped  by  decent  people,  and  no 
Hindu  snmahgali  (married  woman)  goes  to  a 
temple  of  Kartikeya  in  Central  India.  Because 
Kartikeya  is  not  worshipped  in  North  India  at  the 
present  day,  we  cannot  argue  that  his  worship  was 
always  unknown  in  those  regions.  In  fact  we 
come  across  the  figures  of  this  deity  in  the  rock 
temples  at  Elephanta  and  Bllora,  in  Orissa  and 
certain    other    parts   of  the   country.     Probably 

40 


INTRODUCTION. 

Subrahmanya  was  regularly  worshipped  in  Central 
and  Northern  India. 

Another  such  instance  is  the  form  of  Vishnu 
asYogesamurti,  that  is,  Vishnu  in  the  yoga  attitude. 
This  figure  is  found  in  the  famous  temple  at 
Badarinath  on  the  Himalayas,  and  replicas  of  it 
are  even  now  in  a  few  places  such  as  Srirahgam. 
One  such  replica  was  discovered  recently  at  Bagali 
in  the  Bellary  district  of  the  Madras  Presidency. 
Otherwise  the  worship  of  this  form  is  rare.  The 
instances  given  are  enough  to  show  the  trend  of 
change  in  Hindu  faith  in  the  matter  of  the  choice 
of  images  for  popular  worship. 

X. 

New  deities  and  their  images  are  also  seen  to 
come  into  existence  from  time  to 
^ JPnlo*'"''  °*  '^''^  time.  This  is  due  generally  to  two 
or  three  causes.  One  of  these  is 
the  apotheosis  of  saints  and  acharijas.  In  S.  India 
we  find  in  various  temples  many  images  represent- 
ing Saiva  and  Vaishnava  saints  who  are  known  to 
history  as  having  been  great  centres  of  light  and 
leading  in  their  respective  faiths.  For  instance, 
Siruttondar  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Pallava 
king  Narasimhavarman,  having  in  fact  been  one  of 
his    generals.     Tirujnanasambandha   and    Vagisa 

41 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

(Appar)  were  also  contemporaries  of  this  king.  All 
these  three  are  canonised  and  their  images  are  seen 
in  all  such  Siva  temples  as  can  lay  any  claim   to 
any  sort  of  importance  in  the  Tamil  land.     Simi- 
larly, there  are   images    of  historical  Vaishnava 
saints  enshrined  in  numerous  Vishnu  temples  in 
South  India.     Moreover,  temples  and  shrines  are 
erected  for  dcharyas  like  Sahkara  and  Eamanuja, 
and  for  other  minor  gurus  also  like  Vedantadesika 
and  Manavalamamuni.    In    the  bed  of  the  river 
Bhima  near  Pandharipur  is   the  pretty  temple  of 
the  famous  sage  and  devotee   Pundalik,  to  whom 
god  Krishna  appeared  at  that  place  in  the  form  of 
Purandhara    Vitthala    or     Pundalika-Varada    in 
response   to  his  prayers.     Images  like    these  are 
more  or  less  of  local  interest  in  most  cases,  and  not 
found  in  the  common   pantheon  of   the  Hindus. 
The  S.  Indian  Saiva  and  Vaishnava  saints  may  be 
said  to  be  practically  unknown  in  N.  India,  and 
the  Santa-sangha  of  N.  India  is  indeed  little  under- 
stood in  S.  India. 

The  fanciful  rendering  of  the  names  of  certain 
important  places  has  sometimes  given  rise  to  a  new 
god  and  his  image.  For  instance,  Kanchipura  is 
known  to  ancient  Tamil  literature  under  the  name 
of  Kachchi.  There  is  now  a  temple  in  Conjeeva- 
ram  dedicated  to  Siva  as  Kachchiyappeavara,  which 

42 


PLATE  D. 


Vishnu  bathing  Kachchhapesvara  :  Stone :  Conjeevaram. 


[To  face  page  43.] 


INTEODUCTION. 

name  is  Sanskritised  into  Kachohhapesvara.  The 
literal  meaning  of  the  correct  Tamil  form  of  the 
name  of  the  god  is  the  '  god  Kachchiyappa '  or 
'  the  Isvara  set  up  by  Kachchiyappa.'  But  Jcachch- 
hapa  is  the  Sanskrit  word  for  the  tortoise ;  and 
Kachohhapesvara,  the  Lord  of  the  Tortoise,  must  be 
Siva  as  worshipped  by  Vishnu  in  his  Kurmavatara 
or  tortoise-incarnation.  This  linguistic  fancifulness 
has  been  perpetuated  in  sculpture,  and  an  image 
embodying  this  fancy  is  set  up  under  a  tree  in  the 
praJcara  of  the  temple  (See  PI.  D.).  This  new- 
comer into  this  ancient  temple  is,  however,  entire- 
ly forgotten,  and  even  the  pujaris  in  the  temple 
are  not  able  to  say  what  that  piece  of  sculpture 
really  represents. 

A  similar  occurrence  may  be  seen  in  relation 
to  the  names  Chidambaresvara  and  Chitsabhesa. 
These  names  have  also  come  into  vogue  as  the  result 
of  the  Sanskritisation  of  a  distinctly  Tamil  word. 
The  old  name  of  the  place  in  which  the  temple  of 
this  god  now  stands  was  Tillai  or  Tillai-vanam. 
In  Tillaivanam,  there  was  evidently  a  temple  of 
small  proportions,  called  Chirrambalam  or  the 
small  temple.  When  the  god  of  this  temple  be- 
came the  family  deity  of  the  Chola  kings,  the 
temple  began  to  receive  much  royal  consideration. 
Gradually  '  the  small  temple  '  grew  in  isize  by  the 

43 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

addition,  by  successive  kings,  of  praMras  and 
gopuras,  mmidapas  and  tanks,  and  so  on ;  still  it 
retained  the  old  name  of  Chirrambalam,  It  is 
in  fact  praised  in  song  as  Chirrambalam  by  Tiru- 
jnanasambandha  and  Appar  and  also  by  the 
much  later  Sundaramurti.  The  popular  pro- 
nunciation of  this  word  Chirrambalam  is  general- 
ly as  Chittambalam ;  and  this  became  quite 
easily  Sanskritised  in  form  into  Chidambaram, 
which  again  was  paraphrased  as  Chidakasa.  There- 
fore the  Linga  worshipped  in  this  temple  is  con- 
ceived to  represent  the  element  diJcasa  or  ether. 
There  is  yet  another  modification  which  Chirram- 
balam underwent  in  the  hands  of  such  Sanskri- 
tisers  of  Tamil  names,  and  that  is  into  the  form 
Chitsabha.  The  origin  of  this  form  is  easily  made 
out,  if  the  previous  modification  of  the  name  is 
borne  in  mind.  The  word  ambalam  in  Tamil 
means  a  hall  which  is  translatable  in  Sanskrit  as 
sabha.  Thus  arose  Chitsabha,  and  the  god  therein 
became  Chitsabhesa,  that  is,  the  Lord  of  the  Mind- 
hall.  Thus  the  two  names  Chidambaresvara  and 
Chitsabhesa  came  into  existence ;  thus  also  must 
have  arisen  the  association  of  the  sphatika-lmga 
of  the  temple  with  these  names. 

Sectarian  prejudice    has  often  created    new 
images.    A  very  good  example  of  this  may  be  seen 

44 


PLATE  F. 


a 
o 


3 

an 

«3 

, , 

d 

u 

-43 

□ 

<D 

n 

O 

iS 

3 

ICI) 

cd 

tS 

n 

1:8 

a- 

^ 

13 


<n 

o 

P 

CD 


c3 

> 


1     H 


[To  face  page  45.] 


INTEODUCTION. 

in  the  creation  of  Sarabhamarti  as  a  manifestation 
of  Siva,  considered  to  have  taken  place  with  a  view 
to  curb  the  ferocity  of  Narasimha,  the  man-Hon 
incarnation  of  Vishnu.  This  avatara  of  ^iva,  if 
we  may  so  call  it,  is  a  curious  combination  of  man, 
bird  and  beast.     (See  PI.  E.) 

Another  example  of  this  tendency  is  seen  in 
the  case  of  what  is  known  as  EkapadamSrti.  This 
is  an  image  of  Siva  represented  as  the  chief  deity 
having  on  either  side  the  figures  of  Vishnu  and 
Brahma  projecting  from  him.  This  group  is  meant 
to  symbolise  the  idea  that  the  Supreme  Grod  of  the 
Universe  is  Siva  and  that  from  Him  have  evolved 
both  Vishnu  and  Brahma.  In  opposition  evidently 
to  this  Saiva  view,  and  with  an  equally  strong 
Pauranic  authority  on  their  side,  the  Vaishnavas 
have  similarly  represented  the  Supreme  God  as 
Vishnu  with  Brahma  and  Siva  proceeding  from 
Him.     (See  PI.  F). 

Often  in  the  Puranas  Siva  is  said  to  have 
paid  homage  to  Vishnu  and  equally  often  is  Vishnu 
said  to  have  paid  homage  to  Siva.  An  interesting 
instance  is  the  story  of  Vishnu  offering  redemption 
to  Siva  from  the  sin  of  Brahmahatyd,  or  Brahmin- 
killing.  A  similar  Saiva  instance  is  the  story  of 
§iva  being  pleased  with  the  devotion  of  Vishnu  and 
bestowing  on  him  in  appreciation  of  that  devotion 

45 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

the  discus  or  the  chakra.  Images  representing 
these  events  are  found  in  more  than  one  temple : 
the  image  of  Siva  as  Vishnvanugrahamurti,  that  is, 
as  Siva,  pleased  with  Vishnu  and  presenting  to 
him  the  chakra,  may  be  seen  in  the  sculptures  of 
the  Kailasanathasvamin  temple  at  Kanchi. 

XI. 

It  may  be  seen  that  the    Trivikramavatara 

of  Vishnu  is  sculptured,  with  the 

UniversaUty  of    same  details,  and  the  same  group- 

the  rules  of  Tan- 

tras  andAgamas.  ing  of  the  members  constituting 
the  theme,  whether  the  image 
happens  to  be  found  in  Madras  in  the  South,  in 
Bombay  in  the  West  or  in  Bengal  in  the  North- 
East.  The  only  difference  observable  in  the 
images  belonging  to  the  various  parts  of  the 
country  is  in  the  outline  of  the  features  and  the 
details  of  ornamentation.  The  Brihat  Samhitd- 
of  Varahamihira  says  : — desd.nurupabhushana- 
veshalankara-murtibhih  karya  pratima  lakshana- 
yuktd  sannihitd  vriddhida  bhavati-  This  means 
that  the  ornamentation  and  clothing  and  beautifi- 
cation  of  the  images  should  be  worked  out  in 
accordance  with  the  usage  in  the  country  in  which 
the  images  are  made.  Images  made  according  to 
the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Bastras,  when  set  up  in 

*6 


INTEODUOTION. 

the  neighbourhood,  bestow  prosperity  and  progress. 
It  is  thus  required  that  the  outUne  of  the  faces  and 
features  and  the  details  of  clothing  and  ornamenta- 
tion should  be  made  to  vary  from  place  to  place 
according  to  local  usage.  In  other  respects  no  varia- 
tion was  allowed  or  encouraged.  It  cannot  be  seen 
that  there  has  been  in  any  part  of  India  any  new 
canon  of  art  other  than  the  rules  prescribed  in  the 
Agamas  and  the  Tantras.  From  the  uniformity 
observable  everywhere  throughout  India  in  the 
arrangement,  say,  of  the  individual  figures  belong- 
ing to  a  subject,  it  is  clear  that  the  rules  laid  down 
in  the  Agamas  and  Tantras  have  had  a  very 
general  application.  The  same  rules  having  been 
obeyed  everywhere  in  the  matter  of  making  images, 
it  is  no  wonder  that  the  same  results  have  been 
produced  by  artists  belonging  to  all  parts  of  the 
country  in  so  far  as  the  art  is  apt  to  be  bound 
down  by  rules. 

XII. 

In   going    through    the  descriptions  of    the 

various  images,    as  given  in  this 

ce^°in^cu1iptu?e    volume,  the  reader  will  come  upon 

Slerstandinf of    ^  few    instances,    in  which    the 

*^|tg."*^*°"P*'^^    sculptures  of  two  different  parts  of 

the  country  differ  in  some  import- 

47 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

ant  details.  Taking  the  images  of  the  sun-god 
Si5rya,  for  example,  we  find  that  the  Agamas  lay 
down  the  rule  that  the  two  hands  of  this  deity 
should  hold  two  lotuses,  going  up  to  the  height  of 
the  shoulders.  In  the  sculptures  of  Bengal,  Orissa 
and  parts  of  Central  India,  we  meet  with  images, 
wherein  the  hands  of  Sarya  are  at  the  level  of  the 
waist,  while  the  lotuses  are  made  to  reach  the 
height  of  the  shoulders.  In  other  instances  the 
hands  themselves  are  invariably  raised  up  to  the 
level  of  the  shoulders.  This  appears  to  be  due 
to  a  difference  in  opinion  with  regard  to  the  inter- 
pretation of  certain  passages  in  the  Agamas  and 
other  allied  works.  In  this  case,  it  is  clear  that 
some  sculptors  understood  the  passage  as  referring 
to  the  hands  being  raised  up  to  the  shoulders,  while 
others  took  it  as  referring  to  the  position  of  the 
lotuses.  A  number  of  other  instances  in  exemplifi- 
cation of  differences  in  sculptures  arising  from 
differences  in  the  interpretation  of  the  original 
texts  are  drawn  attention  to  in  the  body  of  this 
treatise. 

XIII. 
The  materials  recommended  in  the  agamas 
for  the  making  of  images  are  wood, 

Materials    em-  . 

ployed  for  mak-     stone,  precious  gems,  metals,  earth 

ing images.  i  •      ^.  ,  ^ 

and  also  a  combination  of  two  or 


48 


INTRODUCTION, 

more  of  the  aforesaid  materials.  Tiie  precious 
stones  enumerated  in  the  againas  for  the  purpose 
of  making  images  are  sphatiha  (crystal),  padmara- 
ga,  vajra  (diamonds),  vaidurija  (cat's  eye),  vidnima 
(coral),  pi/s/ii/a,  and  ratna  (ruby).  Of  these,  spha- 
tika  is  said  to  be  of  two  kinds,  the  sunja-kanta  and 
the  chandrakanta.  Another  authority  adds  brick, 
kadi-sarkara  (a  preparation  the  chief  ingredient 
of  which  is  the  lime-stone)  and  dauta  (ivory)  to 
the  materials  noted  above.  Almost  all  the  dhniva- 
beras,  that  is,  the  images  set  up  permanently  in 
the  central  shrines  of  Indian  temples,  (Hindu, 
Bauddha  or  Jaina),  happen  to  be  generally  made  of 
stone.  There  are  a  few  instances  of  such  principal 
images  being  made  of  wood ;  the  most  famous 
instance  is  in  the  temple  of  Jaganuatha  of  Puri. 
The  figure  of  Trivikrama  in  the  central  shrine  of 
the  large  Vishnu  temple  at  Tirukkoyilur,  (South 
Arcot  district,  Madras  Presidency),  is  also  made  of 
wood.  Brick  and  mortar  or  kadi-sarkara  images  are 
also  occasionally  met  with  in  several  temples  ;  in 
the  famous  temples  at  Srlraiigam  andTrivandram 
(Anantasayanam),  the  main  central  images  are 
understood  to  be  of  this  kind,  Meial  is  rarely 
employed  m  the  making  of  dhntva-beras  ;  this 
material  is  almost  exclusively  used  for  casting 
utsava,  snapana  and   hali  images.     Instances  are 

49 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

noti  unknown  in  which  precious  gems  are  employed 

as  material  for  images.  The  palace  of  the  king 
Theebaw  of  Burmah  is  said  to  have  contained  a 
large  ruby  image  of  Buddha.  The  temple  at 
Chidambaram  has  a  sphatiJca-lioiga  which  is  about 
nine  inches  in  height  and  has  a  pindika  (base) 
of  as  many  inches  in  diameter. 

In  regard  to  bronze  images,  it  is  believed  by 
some  that  India  could  not  have  known  the  cire 
perdue  method  of  making  metal  images  earlier  than 
about  the  tenth  century  A.D.,  and  that  India  must 
have  therefore  borrowed  it  from  Europe.  That  the 
art  of  casting  metals  in  wax  moulds  is  much  older 
in  India  can  be  shown  in  more  ways  than  one. 
Taking  first  literature,  we  meet  in  it  statements 
like  the  following  •.'—'lohajatve  madhuchchhishtam 
agniitard)-lkritaiitu  yati  vastrena  sodhayet  sarvam 
dosJiam  tyaktva  tu  silpina  \ ,  which  means  that,  if 
images  have  to  be  cast  in  metal,  the  wax  must 
first  be  melted  and  poured  (out  of  the  mould)  and 
all  defects  removed  with  cloth.  {Karanagama, 
chap.  11,  v.  41).  Again,  verse  21,  chap.  34  of  the 
SiiprabJiedaqaiaa  runs  thus  : — mrnimayaiii  yadi- 
karyacltcluxlichliTilan-tatra  prakalpayet  i  lohajancha 
viseshena  inadhFuJtoJihishtma  nuiidtavi  > ,  that  is,  if 
the  image  i&  required  to  be  made  of  earth,  rods 
(of  metal  or  wood)  must  be  inserted  (in  them) ,  if  of 

60 


INTBODUCTION. 

metals,  it  must  first  be  prepared  well  in  wax. 
Lastly,  the  fourteenth  patala  of  the  Vishnu-fiamhita 
has  this — lohe  ■iiklifamaylm-archain  liarayitva 
mrida  vritam-sii  varnadlnt  samhodliya  vidravyd,h- 
gdra-vapu nah-JiU^alaili  karayedyatnM  sampurnam 
sarvato  ghanani,  which  means  that,  if  an  image  is 
to  be  made  of  metal,  it  must  first  be  made  in 
wax,  and  then  coated  with  earth.  Gold  or  other 
metals  are  purified  and  cast  into  (the  mould)  and  a 
complete  image  is  thus  obtained  by  capable 
workmen. 

Secondly,  there  is  plenty  of  epigraphical 
evidences  to  demonstrate  that  the  art  of  metal 
casting  was  practised  in  South  India  long  before 
the  tenth  century  A.  D.  In  the  several  inscrip- 
tions of  the  reigns  of  the  Chola  kings,  Rajaraja- 
deva  the  great  and  his  son,  Rajendracholadeva, 
engraved  on  the  central  shrine  of  the  Brihadisvara 
temple  at  Tan j  ore,  we  meet  with  scores  of  refer- 
ences to  images  cast  solid  and  hollow. '  It  is  well 
known  that  the  first  of  these  kings  reigned  in  the 
last  quarter  of  the    tenth  century    and  that  the 


* '  ghanam-aga       elundaruluvitta       Chandesvara-prasdda- 

devar,'  that  is,  the  god  Chandesvara-prasada-deva  cast  solid 

and  set   up;  (S.I.  I.    Vol.    II,    p.  134),     '  ghana-pollal-aga- 

chcheyda  rishabham ' ,  a  bull  cast  hollow,  (S.  I.  I.  Vol.   II, 
page  178), 

51 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

second  reigned  in  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh 
century.  Hence  it  may  be  asserted  without  fear  of 
contradiction  that  the  Indians  were  famiUar  with 
the  art  of  casting  metals  in  wax  moulds  earlier  than 
the  tenth  century.  The  bronze  images  of  Mahi- 
shasura-marddani,  Sakti,  Ganesa  and  Nandi  port- 
rayed on  the  plate  preceding  page  241,  in  the 
Annual  of  the  Director-General  of  Archaeology  for 
India  for  1902-3,  are  considered  to  be  as  old  as  the 
beginning  of  the  8th  century.  All  these  instances 
bear  out  well  the  statement  that  the  art  of  metal 
casting  is  an  old  one  in  India  and  is  evidently 
indigenous. 

XIV. 

The  images  in  the  central  shrines,  the  dliru  va- 
herafi,  whether  made  of  stone  or 
pai^Ted^^  of ^oid  ^o^'tar,  are  in  these  days  covered 
r"omT'°^"^^'  with  oil  and  made  to  look  black. 
At  what  period  in  the  history  of 
image  worship  this  practice  of  smearing  the  images 
with  oil  came  into  existence,  it  is  difficult  to  say  ; 
but  there  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  it  is  com- 
paratively a  recent  practice.  The  dhriiva-beras,  the 
Tiantulia-heras  and  the  ntsava-heras  are,  according 
to  the  Agamas,  not  to  be  bathed  in  water.  For  this 
purpose  of  offering  the  bath  the  snapana-bera  is 

52 


INTEODUOTION. 

particularly  intended ;  and  the  bathings  are  pre- 
scribed in  the  Agamas  to  these  images  alone.  In 
the  earlier  and  the  mediaeval  times,  the  dhriiva- 
heras  used  to  be  covered  with  a  thin  coat  of  stucco, 
which  was  painted  afterwards  with  the  colour 
appropriate  with  each  god.  Hence  it  is  that  we 
are  told,  in  the  descriptions  of  images,  that  the 
colour  of  this  or  that  image  is  black  or  blue  or  red 
and  so  on.  Even  now  there  may  be  found  a  few 
temples  in  which  the  dhruva-beras  have  still  the 
old  paint  on  them  ;  for  instance,  the  Varahasvamin 
cave  at  Mahabalipuram  contains,  in  its  central 
shrine,  the  painted  figures  of  Varaha  and  his 
consort.  There  are  traces  of  paint  to  be  seen  on 
several  images  in  the  caves  of  EUora  and  Ajanta. 

The  rules  regarding  the  colouring  of  images 
are  applicable  to  mural  and  other  paintings  also. 
The  Hindus  were  employing  canvas  for  painting 
purposes  from  very  early  times.  It  is  distinctly 
mentioned  in  Sanskrit  works  of  authority  that 
walls  and  cloths  afford  the  surfaces  on  which 
chitrabhasa  images  are  to  be  painted — pate  hliittau 
cha  yd  likhyan  cliitrahliasa-ihocliyate,  (Suprabhe- 
dagama).  Elaborate  instructions  are  given  for 
the  preparation  of  the  surface  of  the  cloth  intended 
to  be  painted  upon,  as  also  for  the  preparation  of 
colours.     The  very  name   chitrabhasa  applied  for 

53 


HINDU  lOONOQRAPHY. 

painting  is  suggestive  of  the  fact  that  the  principles 
of  light  and  shade  also  were  well  understood  pretty 
early  by  the  Indians.  This  word  chitrabhasa  means 
that  which  resembles  a  cliitra  or  solid  natural 
image.  The  appearance  of  solidity  comes  to  a 
picture  painted  on  a  flat  surface  only  when  light 
and  shade  are  properly  disposed  in  the  picture. 
From  the  several  instances  of  ancient  painting 
found  in  India,  it  is  easy  to  form  an  estimate 
regarding  the  great  progress  made  by  the  Indians 
in  the  art  of  painting  in  the  early  times.  The 
frescos  of  Ajanta  and  several  wall  paintings  in  the 
temples  on  the  Malabar  coast  of  the  Madras 
Presidency,  which  latter  have  not  as  yet  attracted 
the  attention  of  scholars,  disclose  a  notable  advance 
made  in  India  in  this  difficult  art  of  painting. 

XV. 

In  sculpturing  such  objects  as  the  air  and 
water,  certain  conventional  devices  are  employed. 
Air,  for  instance,  is  shown  by  lines  resembling  the 
outlines  of  a  cumulus  of  clouds,  (See  Pis.  XLIX 
and  LXXXIV)  ;  and  water  is  represented  by  a 
number  of  wavy  lines,  between  which  are  worked 
out  the  buds,  the  half-blown  and  the  full-blown 
flowers  and  the  leaves  of  the  lotus,  and  such 
aquatic  ^animals  as  the  fish  and  the  tortoise  and 

54 


INTEODUOTION. 

crocodiles.  (See  PL  LIl  and  PL  CX).  The 
device  by  which  fire  is  indicated  in  sculptures  is 
described  elsewhere  (see  page  7).  Mountains  are 
shown  by  a  number  of  boulders  piled  one  upon 
another,  (See  Pis.  LXV  and  LXVI) :  trees  are 
generally  shown  as  in  nature  in  all  schools  of 
sculpture,  (See  PL  IV),  except  the  Chalukya- 
Hoysala  school,  wherein  they  are  worked  out  in  an 
ornamental  and  conventional  manner,  (See 
PL  LIII).  Celestial  beings  are  distinguished  from 
human  beings  by  being  sculptured  as  flying  in  the 
air.  (See  Pis.  XXX  and  XXXI). 

XVI. 

The  Sanskrit  authorities  relied  upon  in  this 
work  are  mainly  the  Agamas,  the 
au^Wti'Sed  P^^rmas,  and  the  early  Vedic_and 
w^rk,  '"^  *^'^  Upanishadic  writings.  The  Aga- 
mas and  the  Tantras  do  not  appear 
to  have  received  much  attention  from  modern 
scholars.  Many  of  them  are  probably  not  older 
than  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  A.  D.,  and  some 
may  be  even  later  than  that.  The  Kdmikagama, 
among  the  Saivagamas,  is  perhaps  the  oldest.  In 
the  Uttara-Earanagama,  we  find  it  laid  down  that, 
on  the  seventh  day  of  the  mahdtsava  of  Siva,  the 
impalement  of  the  Jainas,  said  to  have  been  carried 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

out  at  the  instance  of  Tirujnanasambandha, 
ought  to  be  celebrated ;  even  now  the  name  of 
that  day's  iihava  is  given  as  the  'impalement  of 
the  Jainas'  and  is  celebrated  in  Madura,  the 
historical  scene  of  its  occurrence.  When  an  event 
of  this  description,  associated  with  the  life  of  this 
Saiva  saint,  is  found  mentioned  in  the  Karana- 
gama,  need  we  say  that  it  must  be  a  work  belonging 
to  a  time  later  than  the  time  of  Tirujnanasam- 
bandha ?  And  he  is  understood  to  have  lived  in 
the  middle  of  the  seventh  century,  A.  D. 

Again,  in  many  of  the  other  Saivagamas,  as  in 
this,  we  are  told  that  the  Drdvida-vedas  are  to  be 
recited  in  temples  as  a  part  of  the  service  in  the 
temple ;  by  Dravida-vedas,  the  Devaram  hymns 
composed  by  Tirujnanasambandha,  Vagisa  (Appar), 
and  Sundaramurti,  are  meant.  It  is  known  that 
the  last  of  them  lived  not  earlier  than  the  middle 
of  the  ninth  century.  Consequently  the  majority 
of  the  Saivagamas  have  to  be  looked  upon  as  being 
later  than  the  ninth  century.  Several  of  the  words 
employed  in  them  in  describing  the  r^igas  used  in 
the  singing  of  the  Bravida-vedas,  belong  to  the 
Tamil  language. 

The  prose  recension  of  the  Vaihhansagama 
is  perhaps  the  oldest  among  the  Agamas.  of  the 
Vaishnavas.     The  same  work  is  also  in  verse  ;  and 

56 


INTRODUCTION. 

this  is  distinctly  of  a  later  date.  This  latter  ver- 
sion requires  the  Dravida-vedas,  that  is,  the 
Prabandhas  of  the  Srivaishnavas,  to  be  sung  in 
front  of  divine  processions  during  festivals,  while 
the  Sanskrit  Vedas  are  to  be  recited  at  the  end  of  the 
procession ;  in  fact  both  the  elements  of  this  rule 
are  observed  among  the  Srivaishnavas  even  at  the 
present  day.  The  age  of  the  Alvars,  or  the  ^ri- 
vaishnava  saints,  has  been  fairly  satisfactorily 
established  to  be  between  the  beginning  of  the  8th 
and  the  end  of  the  9th  century  of  the  Christian 
era.  "When  we  meet  with  a  reference  to  the 
works  of  these  Alvars,  as  the  Dravida-vedas,  there 
is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  concluding  that  the 
Vaililianasagama,  as  it  is  in  verse,  is  certainly  not 
older  than  the  9th  century,  A.D. 

We  have  another  collection  of  Samhitas  called 
the  Pancharatra  Agania.  This  also  belongs  to 
the  Vaishnavas,  and  is  said  to  comprise  as  many 
as  108  samhitas.  Many  of  these  are  not  forth- 
coming and  are  perhaps  lost.  A  very  large  number 
out  of  the  extant  samhitas  are  quite  modern.  For 
instance,  the  Uvara-samhita  mentions  the  saint 
Sathakopa  and  the  dcharya  Eamanuja,  who  lived 
about  800  and  1000  A.D.  respectively.  Similarly 
the  Brihad-hrahma-samliita  also  mentions  Eama- 
nuja.    The    samhitas    that    mention    this    great 

57 
H 


HINDU  ICONOGKAPHY. 

Vaishnava  teacher  and  reformer  have  necessarily 
to  be  later  than  the  eleventh  century  after  Christ. 
Thus  it  may  be  seen  that  the  age  of  the 
Agamas  and  the  Tantras  is  mainly  between  the 
9th  and  the  12th  centuries  of  the  Christian  era- 
But  the  descriptions  of  the  images  as  contained  in 
them  may,  nevertheless,  be  older  than  this  period.  It 
is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  these  descriptions  were 
most  probably  not  invented  by  the  authors  of  the 
Agama  works  under  consideration,  but  were  col- 
lected from  previous  authoritative  sources.  In 
proof  of  this,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Varaha- 
mihira,  who  is  known  to  have  lived  in  the  6th  cen- 
tury, gives  descriptions  of  certain  images,  and  that 
his  descriptions  are  not  in  any  way  different  from 
those  found  in  these  later  Agama  works.  The  rules 
for  the  making  of  the  images  must  have  indeed 
been  formulated  at  a  much  earlier  time,  and  must 
have  long  remained  unwritten.  Varahamihira,  in 
his  Brihat-8amhifa,  mentions  a  certain  Nagnajit 
as  the  author  of  a  treatise  on  Silpa-sastra,  in  which 
the  rule  is  laid  down  that  the  face  of  an  image 
should  be  fourteen  ahgulas  in  length.  A  figure 
with  this  measurement  for  the  length  of  the  face 
Varahamihira  calls  a  Dravida  figure.  (According  to 
Varahamihira  the  length  and  breadth  of  a  human 
face  should  be  the  same,   that  is,  twelve  ahgulas). 

58 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  author,  Nagnajit,  quoted  by  Varahamihira, 
must  certainly  be  older  than  the  middle  of  the 
sixth  century  A.D.:  the  quotation  also  incidental- 
ly informs  us  that  Nagnajit  was  possibly  a  Dra- 
vidian  author  on  Silya-sastra,  and  indicates  the 
existence  of  a  school  of  sculpture  in  South  India 
then.  Varahamihira  refers  also  to  another  ancient 
author,  Vasishtha. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS. 


AN  EXPLANATORY  DESCRIPTION  OF 

THE  TECHNICAL  TERMS  EMPLOYED 

IN  THE  WORK. 


THE  explanation  of  a  number  of  technical 
terms  which  are  usually  employed  in  the 
description  of  images  may  well  precede 
their  systematic  description.  These  terms  relate 
first  to  the  objects  which  images  of  Hindu  Gods 
are  shown  to  bear  in  their  hands,  such  as  weapons, 
musical  instruments,  animals,  birds,  etc. ;  secondly, 
to  the  various  attitudes  in  which  the  hands  of 
images  are  shown ;  thirdly,  to  the  postures  which 
the  bodies  of  the  images  are  made  to  assume;  and 
lastly,  to  the  costume,  ornaments  and  head-gear 
in  which  they  are  represented.  The  most  import- 
ant among  the  weapons  are  : — 

Sankha      Khetaka       Khatvanga     Ankusa 
Chakra       Dhanus        Tanka  Pasa 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Gada  Bana  Agni  Vajra 

Khadga      Parasu         Sula  Sakti 

Musala  Hala 
The  sculpturing  of  the  several  objects  shown 
in  the  hands  of  Hindu  images  difiers  from  place 
to  place  ;  sometimes  they  are  not  alike  even  in  the 
same  place.  The  simple,  yet  striking,  representa- 
tions of  these  in  the  early  Chalukya,  Pallava,  and 
other  styles  of  sculpture  are  no  less  artistic  than 
the  minute  and  elaborate  carvings  of  the  later 
Chalukya-Hoysala  school.  In  the  detailed  descrip- 
tion of  these  objects  given  below,  only  their  im- 
portant variations  are  noticed. 

Of  these  weapons  saiikha,  chakra  and  gada  are 

peculiar  to  Vishnu.     In  rare  instances,  the  images 

of  that  deity  are  found  carrying  other  weapons  also, 

and  this  feature  is  noticeable  in  the 

Weapons. 

representations  of  several  of  Vishnu's 
avatar  as;  for  instance,  in  images  representing  the 
Trivikramavatara,  the  image  is  shown  to  carry,  in 
addition  to  the  three  weapons  mentioned  above, 
the  dlianus,  the  hana,  the  khadga  and  the  khetaJca. 
But  farasu,  khatvanga,  sTila  and  agni  are  generally 
associated  with  Siva,  while  ahkusa  and  fasa  are 
held  by  Ganesa,  Sarasvati  and  other  deities.  Sakti, 
vajra  and  tanka  are  Subrahmanya's  characteristic 
weapons.     Musala  and  hala  are  found  in  associa- 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OE  TEEMS. 

tion  with  Balarama,  Varahi  and  a  few  other  deities. 
These  are  all  briefly  described  in  the  order  in 
which  they  have  been  mentioned  above. 

SaiiJcJia  is  the  ordinary  chank  shell  which  is 
almost  always  found  in  one  of  the  hands  of 
the  images  of  Vishnu.  The  §anJcha  of  Vishnu  is 
known  by  the  name  of  Panchajanya,  being  suppos- 
ed to  have  been  derived  from  the  body  of  the  asura 
named  Panchajana.  It  is  declared  to  have  been 
employed  by  Vishnu  in  war;  by  the  blowing  of 
this  powerful  conch-shell,  he  often  struck  terror 
into  the  hearts  of  his  enemies.  The  conch  re- 
presented in  sculptures  is  either  a  plain  conch, 
held  in  the  hand  with  all  the  five  fingers  by  its 
open  end  (PI.  I,  fig.  1),  or  an  ornamented 
one,  having  its  head  or  spiral-top  covered  with  a 
decorative  metal  cap,  surmounted  by  the  head  of 
a  mythical  lion,  and  having  a  cloth  tied  round  it 
so  that  portions  of  it  may  hang  on  either  side  (PI. 
I,  fig.  2).  There  are  also  tassels  of  pearls  hanging 
on  the  sides.  Curiously  enough  a  kahhha  of  this 
description  is  shown  so  as  to  be  held  between  the 
first  two  fingers,  which  is  indeed  a  difficult  task  to 
perform.  In  a  few  instances,  attached  to  the  lower 
end  of  the  sanJcha,  there  is  a  thick  jewelled  ribbon 
which  is  made  to  serve  as  a  handle.  (PI.  I,  fig.  3). 
Sometimes  this  ornamental  variety  of  sanJcha  is 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

shown  with  jvalas  or  flames  of  fire  on  the  top  and 
the  sides. 

Chahra  is  also  a  characteristically  Vaishnava 
weapon.  It  is  also  carried  by  Durga,  who  is  said  to 
be  the  sister  and  as  such  the  female  form  of  Vishnu. 
It  is  shown  in  sculptures  in  two  different  forms. 
In  the  first  variety,  it  is  shaped  like  the  wheel  of 
a  cart,  with  spokes,  nave  and  all,  and  is  meant  to 
be  grasped  by  the  rim.  But  in  the  other  form, 
it  is  highly  ornamented,  the  spokes  are  made  to 
resemble  the  petals  of  a  lotus  so  that  the  internal 
parts  appear  like  a  full  blown  lotus  in  the  tout 
ensevihle  (PI.  I,  fig.  4).  As  in  the  case  of  the  sanJcha, 
the  cliakra  also  has  ornamentations  on  the  top  and 
sides  and  a  jewelled  ribbon  running  around  it  (PL 
I,  fig.  5).  It  is  in  some  cases  held  in  the  hand  by 
means  of  this  ribbon,  and  in  other  cases  between 
the  first  two  fingers.  It  is  a  weapon  resembling 
the  modern  quoit  and  must  have  been  used  as  a 
missile  to  be  thrown  against  the  enemy  to  cut 
him  through  and  kill  him. 

Gacldi,  is  the  ordinary  Indian  club.  It  is  held 
in  the  hand  by  the  images  with  all  the  five  fingers. 
In  some  cases,  however,  one  of  the  hands  of  the 
image  is  placed  upon  the  top  of  the  gada  which 
rests  on  the  floor.  In  the  earlier  sculptures,  its 
representation  is  always  plain ;  it  has  a  tapering 


PLATE  I 


Fig.  1  Fig.  2 


Pig.  11 


Fig.   i 


Fig.  12 


Fig.  5 


Fig.  1  Fig.  8  Fig.  6 


Fig.  9 


Fig.  10 


To  face  page  4. 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCEIPTION  OF  TEEMS. 

top  and  a  stout  bottom  (PL  I,  fig.  6).  In  com- 
paratively later  instances,  it  is  more  or  less 
elaborately  ornamented  (PI.  I,  figs.  7  and  8).  It  is 
a  weapon  meant  to  strike  the  enemy  at  close 
quarters  and  does  not  therefore  leave  the  hand  of 
its  owner. 

Khadga  is  a  sword,  long  or  short,  and  is  used 
along  with  a  JchetaJca  or  shield  made  of  wood  or  hide. 
The  Jchadga  is  either  single-edged  or  double-edged 
and  has  a  handle  which  is  not  different  from  the 
handle  of  swords  seen  in  the  pictures  of  the  Crusad- 
ers and  the  early  kings  of  Europe  (PI.  I,  figs.  9  and 
10).  Khetaka  is  either  circular  or  quadrangular  and 
has  a  handle  at  the  back,  by  which  it  is  held  (PL  I, 
fig.  11).  Sometimes  there  are  curious  emblems 
and  devices  depicted  on  the  face  of  the  khetalta  (PL 
I,  fig.  12). 

Musala  is  the  name  of  the  Indian  wooden 
pestle,  which  is  an  ordinary  cylindrical  rod  of  hard 
wood.  It  is  quite  capable  of  being  used  as  an  offensive 
weapon.  There  is  no  scope  for  the  introduction 
of  various  shapes  in  relation  to  this  plain  weapon, 
and  consequently  it  has  remained  unaltered  in  its 
form  from  early  times  (PL  II,  fig.  1). 

Dhanus  is  the  bow.  It  has  three  different 
shapes.  The  first  is  like  an  arc  of  a  circle,  with  the 
ends  joined  by   a  string  or  thong  taking  the  place 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

of  the  chord  (PI.  II,  fig.  2).  In  the  second  variety, 
it  has  three  bends,  the  top  and  bottom  bends  being 
smaller  and  turned  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that 
of  the  middle  bend  which  is  the  larger  one  (PL  II, 
fig.  3).  The  third  variety  has  five  bends  and 
belongs  to  a  much  later  period  in  the  evolution  of 
this  weapon  (PL  II,  fig.  4). 

Bana  or  the  arrow  is  so  represented  as  to 
appear  to  be  made  of  wood,  and  is  tipped  with  a 
metallic  point,  its  tail-end  having  a  few  feathers 
stuck  in  it  (PL  II,  fig.  5).  The  arrows  are  put  into 
a  quiver  slung  on  the  back.  An  arrow  is  extracted 
from  it  for  use  with  the  aid  of  the  fore-finger  and 
the  middle-finger. 

Para'su  is  the  battle  axe.  The  earlier  speci- 
mens of  this  are  light  and  graceful.  The  parasu  of 
the  archaic  type  consists  of  a  steel  blade  which  is 
fitted  on  a  turned,  light,  wooden  handle.  The 
handle  is  sometimes  fixed  in  a  ring  which  is 
attached  to  the  blade  of  the  axe.  Sometimes, 
however,  the  blade  is  fixed  in  a  hole  bored  in  the 
handle  (PL  II,  fig.  6).  The  later  forms  consist 
of  a  heavy  club,  closely  resembling  the  gada,  into 
which  the  head  of  the  -param  is  fitted.  The  blade 
is  disproportionately  small  in  these  later  forms  (PL 
II,  fig.  7),  but  is  of  proper  proportion  in  the  earlier 
types. 


PLATE  II. 


Pig.  9 


Fig.   14 


Pig.   12 


Pig.   13 


To  face  page  6. 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCEIPTION  OF  TEEMS. 

Hala.  This  is  the  ordinary  Indian  plough, 
probably  extemporised  as  a  weapon  of  war  (PL 
II,  fig.  8). 

Khatvaiiga  is  a  curious  sort  of  club,  made  up 
of  the  bone  of  the  forearm  or  the  leg,  to  the  end  of 
which  a  human  skull  is  attached  through  its 
foramen.  (PL  II,  fig.  9).  From  this  description  it 
must  be  clear  that  this  peculiar  weapon  comes 
from  very  remote  antiquity.  In  the  ornate  style 
of  the  later  Chalukya-Hoysalas,  the  osseous  shaft 
of  this  old  weapon  is  dispensed  with  and  a  well- 
turned  wooden  handle  is  substituted  in  its  place 
(see  PL  II,  fig.  10). 

TahTca.  The  small  chisel  used  by  the  stone- 
mason is  called  the  tanka.  Its  shape,  as  found 
in  sculptures,  is  given  in  PL  II,  fig.  11. 

Agni.  This  is  represented  in  two  varieties 
according  as  it  is  used  as  a  weapon  of  war  or 
employed  for  the  purpose  of  making  offerings.  In 
the  first  case  agni  is  represented  as  in  PL  II, 
figs.  12  and  13  ;  and  this  form  of  agni  is  commonly 
met  with  in  the  hands  of  Siva.  Agni  used  for  the 
purposes  of  religious  offerings  is  sculptured  as  in 
PL  II,  fig.  14. 

Sula  is  the  trident  which  is  the  favourite 
weapon  of  Siva.  It  is  represented  in  many  forms  ; 
and  the  essential  feature  of  all  these  is  the  triple 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

metal  pike  ending  in  sharp  points  and  mounted 
upon  a  long  wooden  handle  (PI.  Ill,  figs.  1  and  2). 

Ahhusa  or  the  elephant  goad  is  a  weapon  con- 
sisting of  a  sharp  metal  hook  attached  to  a  wooden 
handle  (PL  III,  figs.  3  and  4). 

Pasa.  As  the  word  indicates,  it  is  a  noose 
of  ropes  employed  in  binding  the  enemy's  hands 
and  legs.  It  is  represented  in  scupltures  as  consist- 
ing of  two  or  even  three  ropes  made  into  a  single 
or  a  double  loop  (see  PI.  Ill,  figs.  6  and  6). 

Vajra  is  the  thunder-bolt.  This  has  a  long 
history  beginning  from  the  Buddhistic  period.* 
In  later  Hindu  mythology,  it  is  shown  in  almost 
the  same  form  which  it  had  in  earlier  times.  It  is 
made  up  of  two  similar  limbs,  each  having  three 
claws  resembling  the  claws  of  birds ;  and  both  its 
parts  are  connected  together  by  the  handle  in  the 
middle  (see  PL  III,  fig.  7). 

Sahti  is  the  name  applied  to  the  spear.  It 
consists  of  a  metallic  piece,  either  quadrangular  or 
elliptical  in  shape,  with  a  socket  into  which  a  long 
wooden  handle  is  fixed  (see  PL  III,  figs.  8  and  9). 

The  second  class  of  objects  which  are  met 
with  in  the  hands  of  the  images 

Musical  instru-         o         -,  •         r  ■  •      i 

ments.  01  gods  consist  ol  certam  musical 

instruments. 

*  See  Elura  Cave  Temples  by  Burgess,  p.  12. 
8 


PLATE  III. 


Fig.  1 


Fig.  12 


I 


Pig.   2 


Fig.  5 


Fig.   10         Fig.  11 


Fig.   16 


Fig.  6 


Fig.   7 


Fig.  3 


Fig.   15 


Fig.  18    Fig.  17 


Fig.  19 


Fig.  i 


Fig.   13 


Fig.   14 


Fig.   8 


Fig.  9 


To  face  page 


DEFINITION  AND  DESOBIPTION  OF  TEEMS. 

Some  images,  as,  for  instance,  those  of  Dak- 
shinamiirti  and  Sarasvati,  are  shown  with  a  vind, 
held  in  the  left  hand  the  right  hand  being  made  to 
play  upon  it.  The  Damaric  is  another  instrument 
generally  found  in  the  hands  of  the  images  of  Siva 
and  of  his  manifestations  such  as  Bhairava. 
Murali,  also  called  Venu  is  the  flute  peculiar  to 
Krishna.  SahJiha  is  more  properly  a  natural  bugle 
than  a  weapon  of  war,  and  is  treated  as  such  in 
the  representations  of  Vishnu.  Ghanta  or  the  bell 
is  another  musical  instrument,  which  is  generally 
found  in  the  hands  of  Virabhadra  and  Kali. 

Vina.  It  consists  of  a  long  hollow  semi- 
cylindrical  body  handle  with  a  number  of  keys  on 
its  sides.  From  each  of  these  keys  proceeds  a 
string  or  wire  which  is  stretched  over  the  long  body 
of  the  instrument  and  tied  at  the  lower  end.  At  this 
lower  end  is  a  square  sounding  box,  and  to  the 
upper  end  a  hollow  gourd  is  attached  to  serve  as  a 
resonator.  It  is  played  with  the  left  hand  by 
passing  the  fingers  lightly  over  the  strings  and 
pressing  them  down  a  little  in  required  positions. 
The  right  hand  plucks  the  various  strings  periodi- 
cally to  suit  the  requirements  of  the  musician 
(see  PL  III,  figs.  18  and  11). 

Damaru  is  a  small  drum  with  a  hollow  body 
open  at  both  ends.     Over  each  of  the  open  ends  of 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

this  hollow  body  is  stretched  a  membrane  which 
is  held  in  position  firmly  by  means  of  a  string 
passing  to  and  fro  over  the  length  of  the  body  of 
the  drum.  By  pressing  these  strings,  the  tension 
of  the  membranes  may  be  altered  at  will  so  as  to 
produce  different  notes  by  striking  thereon,  or 
by  rubbing  one  of  the  membranes  with  a  resined 
stick.  Sometimes  there  is  a  string  attached  to  the 
middle  of  the  body  of  the  drum ;  and  to  the  end  of 
this  string  is  attached  a  bead.  By  holding  the 
drum  in  the  middle  and  shaking  it  suitably,  this 
string  with  the  bead  may  be  made  to  strike  against 
the  membranes  alternately  and  produce  the  requir- 
ed sound  (see  PI.  Ill,  figs.  12  and  13). 

Murali  or  Venu  is  a  flute  made,  as  its  name 
indicates,  from  a  thin  and  hollow  bamboo.  In  a 
piece  of  bamboo,  suitably  chosen  holes  are  bored 
in  proper  places.  By  blowing  in  the  hole  which  is 
near  to  the  closed  end  and  stopping  one  or  more 
of  the  other  holes  with  the  fingers  as  required, 
music  of  a  very  high  standard  of  perfection  is 
often  elicited  from  this  simple  instrument  (see  PI. 
Ill,  fig.  14). 

Ghanta  is  the  common  bell  (see  PL  IV,  figs. 
1  and  2.) 

There  are  certain  other  objects  shown  as 
held  in  the  hands  of  the  images  of  Hindu  gods. 

10 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OP  TERMS. 

Among  these  are  to  be  found  the  representations 

of   certain    animals    and    birds.     Siva   is    almost 

always  shown  as  carrying  a  mriga 

other  objects 

held  in  the  heads     or  deer,  and  his  son  Subrahmanya 

of  images. 

is    made    to    hold   a    Tiuhhuta   or 
cock  in  his  hand.     Parrots   and   beetles   are  re- 
presented as  being  carried  in  the  hands  of  Durga 
and  other  goddesses.     The  earliest  known  image 
of  Siva,  that  on  the  Linga  at  Gudimallam,  carries 
a  ram.     Later   sculptures  show   a  buck.     In  the 
case  of  the  ram,  it  is  held  by  the  hind  legs,  with 
the  head  hanging  downwards,  whereas  in  the  case 
of  the  buck  though  held  by  the  hind  legs,  it  is 
represented  in  the  actual  pose  of  "  bucking  "  up 
(see  PI.  Ill,  figs.  15  and  16).     We  see,  moreover, 
certain  utensils  in  the  hands  of  the  images.     The 
chief  ones  among   them  are   the  Tcamandalu,  the 
sruk,    the  sruva,    the    darpana    and  the    kapala. 
The   ajya-patra,   or   the   vessel    to  contain    ghee 
is  sometimes  found  in  association  with  the  figure 
of  Brahma,  who  is,  however,  more  generally  seen 
to  carry   a  pustaJca  or  book  in  one  of  his  hands. 
The  book  is  also  held  as  an  emblem  by  his  consort 
Sarasvati. 

Kamandalu.  This  is  an  ordinary  vessel  to 
hold  water  and  is  of  different  shapes.  It  has  in  some 
cases  a  spout.     The  earlier  specimens  are  simple 

11 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

in  design,  though  not  very  handsome  in  appear- 
ance. The  later  forms  are  more  symmetrical  and 
beautiful  in  design  and  workmanship  (see  PI.  IV, 
figs.  3,  4,  5  and  6). 

Sritk  and  smva  are  two  different  kinds  of 
spoons,  used  to  take  out  ghee  from  the  ghee-pot 
and  pour  it  out  to  the  sacred  fire  in  the  sacrifices. 
The  former  of  these  has  a  hemispherical  bowl, 
while  the  other  is  shaped  very  much  like  a 
modern  spoon.  A  srnh  of  large  proportion  is 
generally  carried  by  the  goddess  Annapurna  (see 
PI.  Ill,  figs.  17,  18  and  19). 

Davpana  means  a  mirror.  In  ancient  times, 
when  glass  was  either  unknown  or  was  not 
employed  for  making  mirrors,  highly  polished 
metal  plates  of  various  designs  were  utilised  to 
serve  as  mirrors.  It  may  be  remarked  by  the  way 
that  this  old  speculum  industry  has  not  yet  died 
out  in  India.  In  a  place  called  Aramula  in 
Travancore,  such  mirrors  are  still  manufactured ; 
and  the  mirrors  made  by  the  workmen  of  this  place 
are  so  true  that  they  do  not  show  distortion  in 
reflection.  Glass  mirrors  are  not  allowed  to  be 
used  in  temple  service  in  Malabar,  and  it  is  not 
rare  to  find  in  wealthy  temples  in  this  part  of  the 
country  speculum  mirrors  even  as  large  as  three 
feet  by  two  feet.     In   sculptures  the   clarpana  is 

12 


PLATE  IV 


Fig.  17 


To  ffloe  page  12. 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TEEMS. 

either  circular  or  oval  in  form,  and  is  mounted  on 
a  well-wrought  handle  (see  PI.  IV,  fig.  7.) 

Kapala  denotes  the  human  skull.  It  is  used 
by  Siva  as  a  receptacle  for  food  and  drink.  Later 
on  the  word  came  to  mean  the  cut  half  of  an 
earthen  pot,  and  then  a  basin  or  a  bowl.  In 
sculpture  the  kapala  occurs  as  a  common  spherical 
or  oval  bowl  (see  PL  IV,  fig.  8). 

PustaJca  means  a  book.  It  is  made  up  either 
of  palm  leaves  or  of  paper,  the  latter  variety  being, 
however,  comparatively  modern.  In  older  sculp- 
tures it  is  always  a  palm  leaf  book  that  is  represent- 
ed as  being  held  in  the  hand  by  Brahma  and  other 
deities  (see  PI.  IV,  fig.  2). 

ATisliam^la  is  the  rosary  of  beads.  The  beads 
are  either  rudrahslia  or  hamalahsha  in  variety,  and 
the  rosary  is  found  in  the  hands  of  Brahma, 
Sarasvati  and  Siva,  though  rarely  in  association 
with  other  deities  (see  PL  IV,  fig.  10). 

Flowers,  such  as  the  padma,  (lotus),  and  the 
nilotpala,  (the  blue  lily)  are  to  be  seen  in  the  hands 
of  the  images  of  goddesses  in  general,  though  more 
especially  in  the  hands  of  the  goddesses  Lakshml 
and  Bhumi. 

Figures  of  goddesses  sculptured  in  company 
with  their  consorts  are  always  represented  as  having 
only  two  arms.     In  one  of  their  hands  they  hold  a 

13 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

flower.  However,  when  there  are  two  Devis,  one 
on  either  side  of  a  god,  the  goddess  on  the  right 
holds  a  'padma,  (see  PI.  IV,  figs.  11,  12  and  13), 
while  the  goddess  on  the  left,  holds  a  nllotpala  (see 
PI.  TV,  fig.  14). 

We  next  come  to  the  terms  used  in  connec- 
tion with  the  various  poses  in 
iian^dl^°'^°^*^^  which  the  hands  of  images  are 
shown.  Each  pose  has  its  own 
designation,  and  the  most  common  hastas  or  hand- 
poses  are  the  varada,  the  ahhaya,  the  hataJca,  the 
sTiclu,  the  tarjajil,  the  katyavalamhita,  the  danda 
and  the  visjnaya.  There  are  also  certain  other 
hand-poses  which  are  adopted  during  meditation 
and  exposition.  They  are  known  by  the  technical 
name  of  miidra  ;  and  those  that  are  commonly 
met  with  are  the  cliin-mudra  or  the  vyukhy^na- 
mudra,  the  jTuuia-mudra  and  the  yoga-mudra. 

The  varada-hasta  shows  the  pose  of  the  hand 
while  conferring  a  boon.  In  this  pose  the  palm 
of  the  left  hand,  with  the  fingers  pointing  down- 
wards is  exposed  to  the  observer,  either  as  fully 
opened  and  empty  or  as  lightly  carrying  a  small 
bolus    (see  PL  V,  figs,  x, '%  and  a). 

Ahliaya-liasta  means  the  protection-affording 
hand-pose.  Here  the  palm  of  the  hand,  with 
the   fingers    pointing   upwards,   is   exposed  as   if 

14 


PLATE  V. 


Fig.   2 
Pig.    I  Pig.   3  Pig.  7  Pig. 


Fig.   i         Pig.  S  Pig 


Pig.  17 


Pig.  16 


To  face  page  14. 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCEIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

engaged  in   enquiring  about   the  welfare  of   the 
visitor  in  the  Hindu  fashion  (see   PI.  V,   figs.   ^ 
Xi^  and  B). 

KataJca-hasta  or  simha-lxarna  is  that  pose  of 
the  hand  wherein  the  tips  of  the  fingers  are  loosely 
applied  to  the  thumb  so  as  to  form  a  ring  or,  as 
somewhat  poetically  expressed  by  the  latter  name, 
so  as  to  resemble  a  lion's  ear  (see  PI.  V,  figs.  7  and 
8).  The  hands  of  goddesses  are  generally  fashioned 
in  this  manner  for  the  purpose  of  inserting  a  fresh 
flower  every  day  in  them.  This  is  also  the  manner 
in  which  one  of  the  hands  of  a  standing  or  a  reclin- 
ing figure  of  Vishnu  is  fashioned. 

Suclil-hasta  has  been  misunderstood  by  some 
Sanskrit  scholars  to  mean  the  hand  that  carries  a 
suchl  or  needle.  For  example,  Mr.  Nagendranatha 
Vasu  in  giving  a  description  of  the  goddess  Marichi, 
as  found  in  the  Sadhanamldatantra,  renders  the 
expression  vajranhisa-sara-sucJiidharl-daJishinalia- 
ram  as  "  the  goddess  who  holds  in  her  right  hands 
Sbvajra,  a  goad,  an  arrow  and  a  suchl."  But,  like 
the  tarjam-liasta,  the  suchl-hasta,  also  denotes  a 
hand-pose,  in  which  the  projected  forefinger  points 
to  an  object  below  (see  PI.  V,  fig.  9),  whereas 
in  the  tarjan'i-hasta  the  forefinger  has  to  point  up- 
wards, as  if  the  owner  of  the  hand  is  warning  or 
scolding  another  (see  PI.  V,  figs.  10). 

15 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Katyavalambita-hasta.  In  this  the  arm  is  let 
down  so  as  to  hang  by  the  side  of  the  body,  and 
the  hand  is  made  to  rest  on  the  loin,  indicating 
thus  a  posture  of  ease  (see  PI.  V,  fig.  11). 

Danda-hasta  and  gaja-hasta  are  terms  which 
have  misled  scholars,  some  of  whom  have  under- 
stood them  to  mean  a  hand  that  carries  a  staff. 
Literally,  the  word  daiida-hasta  may  have  such  a 
meaning,  but  in  Sanskrit  iconographic  works,  it 
is  used  to  denote  the  arm  and  hand  thrown  forward 
and  held  straight  like  a  stick  or  like  the  trunk  of 
an  elephant  (see  PL  V,  fig.  12). 

■Anjali-hasta.  In  this  hand-pose  the  palms  of 
the  hands  are  kept  close  to  each  other  and  the 
folded-hands  are  made  to  rest  on  the  chest.  This 
hand-pose  is  indicative  of  worship  and  prayerful- 
ness  (see  the  picture  of  Han  am  an  given  elsewhere). 

Vismaya-hasta  indicates  astonishment  and 
wonder.  In  this  pose  the  fore-arm  is  held  up  with 
the  fingers  of  the  hand  pointing  up  and  the  palm 
turned  away  from  the  observer  (see  PI.  V,  figs.  13 
and  14). 

Among  the  viudras,  in  the  cldn-viudra,  the 
tips  of  the  thumb  and  the  forefinger  are  made  to 
touch  each  other,  so  as  to  form  a  circle,  the  other 
fingers  being  kept  open.  The  palm  of  the  hand  is 
made  to  face  the  front.  This  is  the  mtidra  adopted 

16 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

when  an  explanation  or  exposition  is  being  given ; 
hence  it  is  also  called  vyaJchyana-miidra  and  san- 
darsanarmidm  (see  PI.  V,  fig.  15). 

In  the  jriana-madra,  the  tips  of  the  middle 
finger  and  of  the  thumb  are  joined  together  and 
held  near  the  heart,  with  the  palm  of  the  hand  turn- 
ed towards  the  heart  (see  PI.  V,  fig.  16). 

In  the  yoga-mudra,  the  palm  of  the  right 
hand  is  placed  in  that  of  the  left  hand  and  both 
together  are  laid  on  the  crossed  legs  of  the  seated 
image  (see  PI.  V,  fig.  17). 

Sitting  Postures  and  Seats. — The  Science  of 
Yoga  describes  various  postures  of  sitting,  as  suit- 
able for  meditation  and  mental  concentration. 
These  sitting  postures  are  technically  known  by  the 
name  of  asanas ;  and  the  l-u.rinasana,  the  padma- 
Sana,  the  bhadrasana,  the  iitliutiJiasana  and  the 
maharasana,  are  some  of  the  varieties  thereof.  A 
few  of  them  occur  in  sculpture,  as  well.  The 
names  of  some  of  these  sitting  postures  have  been 
interpreted  to  mean  particular  forms  of  seats, 
owing  to  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  asana,  and 
such  seats  have  been  worked  out  in  sculpture  ;  as 
instances  the  Jourmasana,  the  maJcarasana  and 
the  padmd.sana  may  be  noted.* 

*  See  PI.  VI,  fig8.  1,  2,  and  3.  In  fig.  1  the  padmasana  is 
represented  as  a  lotus,  in  fig.  2,  the  makaratana  as  a  mythical 
makara  and  in  fig.  3,  the  kurmasana  as  a  tortoise. 

17 


HINDU  IGONOGEAPHY. 

In  the  fadmasaiia  the  two  legs  are  kept 
crossed  so  that  the  feet  are  brought  to  rest  upon 
the  thighs  (see  PL  V,  fig.  17).  In  the  Imrmasana, 
the  legs  are  crossed  so  as  to  make  the  heels  come 
under  the  gluteals,  while  the  vlrasana  requires  the 
left  foot  to  rest  upon  the  right  thigh  and  the  left 
thigh  upon  the  right  foot.  In  the  Wiadrasana  the 
legs  are  crossed  as  in  the  Tiurmasana,  and'  the  right 
and  the  left  big  toes  are  caught  hold  of  by  the  right 
and  the  left  hands  respectively.  In  the  simhasana 
the  legs  are  crossed  as  in  the  kurmasana ;  and  the 
palms  of  the  hands,  with  the  fingers  kept  stretched 
out,  rest  supinely  upon  the  thigh,  while  the  mouth 
is  kept  open  and  the  eyes  are  fixed  upon  the  tip  of 
the  nose.* 

^  f^fRT^  cT«n  II  grfrnr^T  'firf#  =?  f^Jrr^ri^  ^r^!  i 

5^f^7T=^  nc^[^:?Tr  s^c^at'^  ?rJTrf|cr:ii  'Tcrc^jrm^  sfp^  3frTr%i??^ic 
q^i   "T^TRRTrf^gR  ^F^^^^^s^  I  ^d  »jjfi- 

^  Ti^  f^i^^w^^ifrfu^  II   ^r%==^r:  '^imt- 

W^  ffir-ii^T^  ?^  I  ^■^  ^u"^2rr  cRsTm  vf^Rnrrr^rTfH,  n 

(sTflt'-^^^flcTr^rr  f^r:^T^  ii) 

18 


PLATE  VI. 


Fig.  1 


Pig.   4 


»''.^R^SA^I^-  (^E.LLORA-5 

Pig.   2 


Pig.  3 

.1,  „^  .,    ,1, ..    .  -  I       I  I 


ii.i(.^nui..inmi  ).|m|,iiiiim»mMmJi^l'ii'mimmRi.JB»twui  ^ 


Pig.  5 


Pig.   6 


To  face  page  18, 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCEIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

Besides  the  above  asanas  there  are  some  others 
also  assumed  by  the  images,  such  as  the  alldhasana 
and  lithutikasana.  Of  these,  the  aXidhasana  is 
defined  as  a  particular  attitude  adopted  while 
shooting,  the  right  knee  being  thrown  to  the  front 
and  the  left  leg  retracted.  This  attitude  is  assumed 
by  Siva  aa  Trlpurantalia  while  destroying  the  three 
cities,  and  also  by  the  goddess  Marichi.*  The 
UtJiutikasana  is  a  peculiar  posture  in  which 
the  person  sits  with  his  heels  kept  close  to  the 
bottom  and  with  the  back  slightly  curved  (see 
the  figure  of  Kevala  Narasiihha  elsewhere). 

The  word  asana  means  also  a  seat  or  a  pedes- 
tal. In  this  sense  pUha  is  often  used  as  its 
synonym.  Descriptions  of  some  material  asanas 
of  this  kind  are  met  with  in  Sanskrit  works  treating 
of  the  make-up  of  images.  Sivprabliedagama  men- 
tions five  different  kinds  of  asanas,  namely,  ananta- 
sana,  simhasana,  ydgasana,  padinasana  and  vimala- 
sana.  According  to  Chandrajiiana,  anantasana  is 
a  triangular  seat,  simhasana  rectangular,  vimala- 
saHah.exa,gonSi\,ydgasa7ia  octagonal,  and padmasana 
circular.  The  same  Supjrahliedagama  adds  that 
anantasana  should  be  used  as  the  seat  for  the  image 


*  See  fig.  49  opposite  page   xoii   in    Mr.    Nagendranath 
Vaau's  Arch.  Surv.  of  Mayurabhanja. 

19 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

when  it  has  to  witness  amusements,  simhasana 
when  it  has  to  be  bathed,  yogasana  during  invoca- 
tion, padmasana  during  the  conduct  of  worship,  and 
oinialamna  when  the  offerings  are  offered.  The 
height  of  the  padmasana  consists,  according  to  the 
same  work,  of  sixteen  parts,  of  which  two  form  the 
thickness  of  the  lowest  layer,  five  make  up  the  lower 
lotus,  two  the  intervening  neck,  and  four  the 
upper  lotus  and  two  more  the  uppermost  layer 
(see  Pi.  VI,  figs.  1  and  6). 

Padmasana  should  always  be  circular  or  oval, 
but  never  rectangular.  In  the  absence  of  authorita- 
tive information  as  to  its  length  and  breadth,  it  is 
left  to  the  sculptor  to  choose  them  so  as  to  suit  his 
purpose.  Bliadrapltlia  is  another  seat,  the  height 
whereof  is  also  divided  into  sixteen  parts,  of  which 
one  forms  the  thickness  of  the  tipana  or  the  basal 
layer,  four  of  the  jagati  or  the  next  higher  layer, 
three  of  the  /iumuda,one  of  the pattiha,  three  of  the 
hantha,  one  of  the  ^econdi  pattiha,  two  of  the  broader 
maliapattiha  and  one  of  the  ghritavari  the  topmost 
layer  (see  PI.  VI,  fig.  6).  Bliadrapltlia  may  be 
either  circular  or  rectangular.  A  description  of  the 
wooden  seat  known  as  Mirmcisana  is  given  in  the 
Tamil  work  called  Saivasamaya-neri.  The  timber 
used  for  making  this  seat  is  the  iliippai,  harungali 
(ebony)  or  hilva  (bael).     The  kunnasana  must  have 

20 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

the  oval  shape  proper  for  a  mirror  (PI.  IV,  fig.  7). 
The  height  of  it  has  to  be  ionv  ahgulas,  its  breadth 
twelve,  and  it  should  be  provided  with  the  face  and 
feet  of  a  tortoise,  these  latter  being  one  mushti  or 
seven  angulas  in  girth  (see  PI.  VI,  figs.  3  and  4).* 
In  the  description  of  Chamunda  a  pyeta  or  a  human 
carcass  is  mentioned  as  a  seat  for  her.  PrUct,- 
sana  is  the  posture  in  which  the  yogi  lies  fiat  on  his 
back,  with  his  arms  outstretched ;  evidently  this 
attitude  is  meant  for  the  perfect  relaxation  of  all 
the  muscles  of  the  body  to  secure  complete  ease  in 
breathing,  and  in  it  one  is  certainly  apt  to  appear 
as  though  he  were  dead.  It  may  be  surmised  that 
this  yogic  asana  has  been  materialised  into  the 
above  curious  carcass-seat.  The  siihhasana  is  a 
four  legged  seat,  circular  or  rectangular  in  shape 
and  one  hasta  or  cubit  in  height.  The  four  legs 
of  this  seat  are  made  up  of  four  small  lions. 

^(muL)smLd-j>uirp  ■sk.iTLnir  ^esrLo. 

L/o3raiflrs)3rQL_s3r  (opo^iflsinsiJLj  uirir, 
npsnpLD  u^iBiT'm(^  (LpiLu^iusfr  eBpQs^tju 

(miBemLDLDir  ies)iBJ(^€dQiMeir  (o(Tyir, 
(Verses    57 — 6O5   Quir^eQeosssstsiLh^    esiffsua^LuuQK^) . 

21 


HINDU  IGONOGEAPHY. 

Images  are  clothed  in  different  materials,  such 
as  cotton  and  silk,  the  skin  of  the 

Costumes,  Oriia- 

ments  and  Head-     tiger  or  the  deer.     The  cotton  and 

gear. 

silk  clothings  are  dyed  in  various 
colours.  The  tigor's  skin  is  worn  over  the  silk  or 
the  cotton  clothing,  while  the  deer-skin  is  thrown 
over  the  body.  One  manner  of  wearing  the  deer- 
skin is  what  is  known  as  the  npavlta  fashion.  In 
it  the  skin  goes  over  the  left  shoulder  across 
the  body,  and  below  the  right  arm  and  comes  again 
to  the  left  shoulder  right  up  the  back.  The  head 
of  the  deer  is  made  to  hang  in  front  over  the  chest 
as  shown  in  fig.  18  on  PI.  V.  These  costumes  are 
shown  distinctly  in  almost  all  castings  and  sculp- 
tures of  images.  Some  of  the  sculptured  images  are 
even  painted  so  as  to  show  the  intended  colours  of 
their  chiselled  costumes.  In  almost  all  the  later  re- 
presentations of  Hindu  gods  and  goddesses  we  may 
see  the  yajTwpavlta  running  across  the  chest  from 
left  to  right.  In  the  Gudimallam  Linga,  which  is 
probably  the  earliest  known  Hindu  sculpture,  the 
yajTwpavita  is  not  found ;  and  the  image  of  Siva 
is  given  only  two  arms  instead  of  the  usual  four. 
At  what  stage  of  the  history  of  Hindu  sculpture 
the  representation  of  the  uajmpavlta  came  into 
vogue  is  not  quite  clear ;  it  is  found  in  what, 
according  to  Mr.  Vincent  A.  Smith,  is  known  as 

22 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

the  Gupta  period,  and  also  in  the  early  Chalukya- 
Pallava  period.  It  is  represented  in  these  later 
sculptures  as  a  ribbon  going  round  the  body  in  the 
manner  required  and  tied  in  front  in  a  knot.  It  is 
obviously  the  sacred-thread  of  the  higher  castes 
among  the  Hindus.  Hara  means  a  necklace  and 
is  seen  in  many  different  patterns.  In  the  earlier 
periods,  it  is  somewhat  short  and  forms  a  broad 
band  made  up  of  several  pieces.  Keyura  is  a  fiat 
ornament  worn  on  the  arm  just  over  the  biceps 
muscle  ;  the  hanhana  or  the  bracelet  is  worn  at  the 
wrist.  At  the  junction  of  the  thorax  and  the 
abdomen  also  is  worn  a  broad  belt  of  good  work- 
manship ;  it  is  called  udara-bandha.  The  belt 
going  round  the  hip  is  called  hatihandha,  and  the 
zone  employed  to  support  and  keep  in  position 
the  breasts  of  feminine  figures  is  called  kuclia- 
handlia.  Hindus  are  forbidden  by  the  rules  of  the 
Dharma-sastras  from  wearing  stitched  clothes. 
Hence  arose  probably  the  practice  of  women 
employing  this  Jcucha-bandha.  BJmjaiiga-valaya 
is  an  ornament  worn  at  the  wrist  by  Siva.  It  is  a 
bracelet  shaped  like  a  coiled  snake.  Its  circumfer- 
ence has  to  be  at  least  a  fourth  larger  than  that  of 
the  wrist  on  which  it  is  worn  ;  at  the  junction  of 
the  tail  with  the  body  of  the  snake,  the  hood  rises ; 
it  has  to  be  twelve  ahrpdas  high,  seven  in  width 

23 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

and  one  in  thickness.     Two  fangs  have  to  be  shown 
in  the  moath  so  as  to  be  visible  outside. 

A  very  large  number  of  ornaments  are  men- 
tioned as  useful  for  adorning  the  images  of  gods. 
There  are  ornaments  for  the  ear,  the  neck,  the 
shoulder,  the  forearm,  the  trunk,  the  breasts,  the 
loins,  the  ankles  and  the  fingers.  Different  kinds 
of  head-gears  are  also  described.  These  ornaments 
and  headgears  are  noticed  here  as  briefly  as  possible. 
The  ear-ornament  is  known  by  the  general  name  of 
liundala.  At  least  five  different  kinds  of  kundalas 
are  known,  namely,  the  patraJiiindala,  the  nalira- 
hindala,  which  is  the  same  as  the  maliara-hiindala, 
the  saiiMiapatra-lundala,  the  ratnakundala,  and 
the  sarpa-Iaindala.  It  appears  to  be  probable  that 
in  the  early  periods  of  Indian  civilization  men  and 
women  considered  it  a  beauty  to  have  large  ear- 
ornaments  attached  to  the  ear-lobes,  which  were 
often  specially  bored  and  dilated  for  the  purpose. 
Even  today  we  may  see  on  the  Malabar  Coast  ladies 
with  specially  bored  pendant  ear-lobes,  in  which 
there  shine  large,  but  light,  golden  discs.  In  the 
earlier  stages  of  causing  the  dilatation  of  the  lobes 
of  the  ear,  cylindrical  rolls  of  cotton  cloth  or 
flattened  spirals  of  cocoanut-leaf  or  palmyra-leaf 
are  thrust  in  to  produce  the  required  internal 
pressure.     In  course  of  time,  these  spirals  came  to 

24 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS 

be  made  of  a  thin  sheet  of  gold  m  imitation  of  the 
leaf.  This  form  of  golden  ear-ornament  is  known, 
rightly  indeed,  by  the  name  oi  patra-kimclala  (see 
PI.  IV,  fig.  16).  Its  Tamil  name  olai  is  interest- 
ing in  this  connection.  Again  conch  shells  were 
extensively  employed  in  making  ornaments  for  the 
ear  as  well  as  the  forearm.  When  the  shell  is  cut 
cross-wise,  it  produces  a  spiral  ring  which  may  be 
thrust  into  the  distended  ear-lobe.  This  himdala 
is  called  the  sanliha-patra  (see  PL  IV,  fig.  16).  A 
jewelled  circular  ear-ring  is  called  a  raftia-htndala. 
(see  PI.  IV,  fig.  17).  Ear-ornaments  made  in  the 
form  of  the  mythical  mahira  and  in  the  form  of  a 
cobra  are  called  respectively  the  makara-Jcinidala 
and  the  sarpa-Jcundalas  (see  PI.  IV,  figs.  18  and  19). 
One  or  two  ornaments  are  peculiar  to  Vishnu 
and  they  are  the  srlvatsa  and  valjayanti.  We  are 
aware  that  on  the  chest  of  Buddha  there  is  the 
mark  known  as  srlvatsa  ;  it  is  perhaps  introduced 
here  in  the  belief  that  Buddha  is  an  incarnation 
of  Vishnu.  Srlvatsa  is  a  mark,  a  sort  of  mole, 
which  is  conceived  to  adorn  the  chest  of  Vishnu  in 
association  with  the  kaustuhhamani  which  is  a 
jewel.  In  sculpture  this  mole  is  represented  by  a 
flower  of  four  petals  arranged  in  the  form  of  a 
rhombus,  or  by  a  simple  equilateral  triangle,  and 
is  invariably  placed  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest. 

25 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

The  vaijayanti  is  a  necklace  composed  of 
a  successive  series  of  groups  of  gems,  each  group 
wherein  has  five  gems  in  a  particular  order ;  it  is 
described  in  the  Vishmpttrana  thus  : — "  'Vishnu's 
necklace  called  vaijayanti  is  five-formed  as  it  con- 
sists of  the  five  elements,  and  it  is  therefore  called 
the  elemental  necklace.'  Here  five-formed  points 
to  five  different  kinds  of  gems,  namely,  the  pearl, 
ruby,  emerald,  blue-stone,  and  diamond.  The 
Vishnurahasya  also  says,  '  From  the  earth  comes 
the  blue  gem,  from  water  the  pearl,  from  fire  the 
Jiaustubha,  from  air  the  cat's  eye  and  from  ether 
the  Pushjjaraga.'  "* 

Head-gear.  The  commonly  known  Sanskrit 
name  for   the   head-gear  is  mauliA     There    are 

*  See    Bhaskararaya's   commentary   on  Lalita-sahasra- 
nama. 

T^  ^  \f^  Mr#  cm^r^frnTTr^cT:  ii 
^^^i  s^T'^i  Tz^^l  ^tt  ^^^^  i 

f^cTRI^  ^m  5r?TiT^3fl73T^q;  II 

3T^^r  \'A<s\a\  =?  *<u^njdn%rR;  ii 

?r?^^T«?  mR^qr:  %5nFq-^  ^rf^H  II 


26 


DEFINITION  AND  DBSCEIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

various  well-known  varieties  of  head-gear  such 
as  jata-maJctUa,  kirlta-mahitta,  and  karanda- 
iiiakuta ;  and  the  minor  varieties  thereof  are 
sirastraka,  kuntala,  kesabandha,  dhammilla  and 
alaka-chudaka.  In  the  formation  of  these  minor 
varieties  the  plaits  of  hair  are  bound  by  what  are 
called  patra-patta,  pushpa-2Jatta  and  ratna-patta. 
The  jata-makuta  is,  as  the  name  indicates, 
made  up  of  twists  of  matted  hair  done  into  the 
form  of  a  tall  cap.  The  Uttara-kamikagama  gives 
the  following  rather  long  and  somewhat  unintelligi- 
ble description  of  the  loshnlsha  in  which  the  jatd,- 


T^iTi  Tl'^d  ^^Tf  =^  TrWB:  I 
=^*qf^JHf|E3T^  (?)  ^7:^  q^j  ¥r%ri;  II 

(m^mt  II) 


27 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Dial-uta  is  included.  "  The  iisJinlsJta-bhushana* 
should  be'made  so  as  to  be  of  three  ahgidas  in  height. 
On  its  four  sides  there  must  be  iour  puris.  In  the 
middle  of  the  nsJtmsha  there  must  be  a  maharakata 
with  seven  holes.  On  each  side  there  has  to  be  a 
'patra-ldita  and  on  the  back,  a  ratna-Jcuta.  The 
breadth  of  the  ushnlsha  must  be  ten  ahgulas  at  the 
top,  while  at  the  base  it  has  to  be  the  same  as  that 
of  the  face  of  the  wearer.  A  crescent  of  the  moon 
has,  in  the  case  of  the  image  of  Siva,  to  be  attached 
to  it  cither  on  the  left  or  on  the  right  side,  and 
there  is  to  be  a  cobra  on  the  left  side.  The  jata- 
mahuta  is  in  fact  as  described  below  :  five  jatfks  or 
braids  of  matted  hair  are  taken  and  tied  into  a  knot 
three  inches  in  height  by  coiling  them  into  one  or 
three  loops,  the  remaining  braids  being  bound  and 

^\k^V■  T^sgJ  ^3TR?S  ^^T^HfJSRJ?;  II 

rmT%5'jRTf  g  ^J^  ^r^st^^^^n  ii 
^i^  irirwot  (?)  cRJT  ?r^T^R:ii]%cTri;  i 
^a;rf^:  "wnr^f^^  r^pfrm  f^%w:  ii 

(5m^rfiR?RqSS^c^Tf^5miTTS^  ll) 

28 


PLATE  VII, 


To  face  page  28. 


PLATE  Vril, 


To  face  page  29. 


(i( 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  TERMS. 

taken  through  to  be  left  hanging  on  both  sides" 
(see  PI.  VII,  figs.  1,  '2  and  3).  This  jata-maJcuta  is 
prescribed  for  Brahma  and  Kudra  among  the  gods, 
and  for  Manonmani  among  the  goddesses. 

Kinta-inaJcuta  is  a  conical  cap  sometimes 
ending  in  an  oraamental  top  carrying  a  central 
pointed  knob.  It  is  covered  with  jewelled  discs  in 
front  or  on  all  sides,  and  has  jewelled  bands  round 
the  top  as  well  as  the  bottom.  The  hirlta-maliuta 
should  be  worn  exclusively  by  Narayana  among  the 
gods.  Among  human  beings  the  Jcirlta  may  be  worn 
by  sarvabhaioiia  cliaJcravartins''  or  emperors  and 
by  adhirajas  or  superior  governors  of  provinces  (see 
PL  IV,  figs.  20  and  21). 

For  all  the  other  gods  what  is  called  the 
karanda-7nakuta  is  prescribed.  It  is  a  crown  made 
in  the  shape  of  a  haranda  which  is  generally  a 
bowl-shaped  vessel  (see  PI.  VIII,  fig.  2).  It  is  short 
in  height  and  small  in  size,  and  is,  as  pointed 
out  above,  indicative  of  subordination  in  status. 
This   is   the  headgear  of  all  the  various  kinds  of 

ft^i'Htc'^'^H  q^^l+lTii:  II  He  is  a  chakravariin  whose  vule 
extends  to  the  shoves  of  the  four  bounding  oceans  ;  he  who 
holds  sway  over  seven  provinces  is  called  an  adhiraja,  .while 
one  who  reigns  over  three  provinces  is  a  Naretidra. 

29 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

goddesses  ;  it  is  prescribed,  among  human  beings, 
to  adhirajas  also,  Sometimes  even  chakravartins 
are  seen  to  wear  only  the  haranda-maJiuta. 

The  remaining  kinds  of  head-gear  mentioned 
above  are  mostly  modes  of  dressing  the  hair.  The 
mode  called  hesabandha  is  employed  in  relation  to 
Sarasvati  among  divine  beings,  and  in  relation  to 
the  queens  of  adhircijas  among  human  beings,  and 
the  style  known  as  hiiitala  is  meant  for  the  god- 
dess Lakshmi  and  also  for  the  queens  of  emperors 
and  adhirajas  and  nave  i  id  fas.  (see  PI.  IV,  figs.  22, 
23  and  24). 

SirastraJca  is  said  to  be  meant  for  generals 
(parshnikas)  of  kings.  It  is  much  like  an  ordinary 
turban. 

The  wives  of  mandallkas  or  appointed  gover- 
nors of  small  provinces  should  wear  their  hair  done 
in  the  form  of  a  knot  which  is  technically  known 
as  dhammilla.  But  the  women  who  carry  torches 
before  a  king  and  the  wives  of  the  king's  sword- 
bearers  and  shield- bearers,  had  to  wear  their  hair 
in  a  knot  called  alaka-chudaka.  The  different  kinds 
of  knots  of  hair  as  described  above  seem  to  have 
been  bound  by  wreaths  of  flowers  called  louslipa- 
patta  or  by  strings  of  leaves  like  those  of  the  cocoanut 
palm  called  patra-patta,  or  by  a  jewelled  golden 
band  called  ratna-paUa. 

30 


DEFINITION  AND  DESCEIPTION  OF  TEBMS. 

From  this  somewhat  minute  description  of  the 
head-dresses  and  from  the  known  assignment  of 
particular  forms  of  gear  to  particular  classes  of 
divinities  and  human  beings,  it  is  easy  to  make  out 
without  mistakes  the  status  of  the  divinity  or  the 
human  being  having  a  particular  head-gear ;  and  to  a 
knowing  observer  these  head-gears  form  an  instance 
of  the  definiteness  which  prevails  in  the  conven- 
tional language  of  symbolism. 

Ghhannavlra  appears  to  be  a  flat  ornament,  a 
kind  of  jewelled  disc,  meant  to  be  tied  on  the 
makuta  or  hung  round  the  neck  by  a  string  so  as 
to  lie  over  the  chest.  This  ornament  is  mentioned 
pretty  frequently  but  what  kind  of  thing  it  means  is 
not  quite  easily  understood. 

Sanskrit  iconographic  treatises  insist  that  the 
Hraschahra,  or  the  halo  surrounding  the  head  of 
every  divine  being,  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  image 
thereof.  It  should  have  the  form  of  a  circle  or  a 
full-blown  lotus  (see  PI.  IX,  figs.  4  and  5),  eleven 
ahgidas  in  diameter,  and  should  be  away  from  the 
head  by  a  distance  equal  to  a  third  of  its  diameter. 
This  halo-circle  is  attached  to  the  back  of  the  head 
of  images  by  means  of  a  rod  whose  thickness  is 
equal  to  one-seventh  of  the  diameter  of  the 
siraschakra.  The  sirascliahra  has  theoretically  to 
be  something  which  is  aloof  and  unconnected   (see 

31 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

PI.  lY,  figs,  -o  aud  ■26"'  ;  but  iu  material  representa- 
tions, it  is  impossible  to  have  a  siraicJtahra  which 
is  not  attached  to  the  head  ;  hence  the  need  for  this 
connecting  piece.  This  piece  is  covered  with  and 
hidden  in  wi'eaths  of  flowers,  which  appear  to  adorn 
the  hair-knot  of  the  image  at  the  back,  so  as  to  make 
the  iirak'Jtali'a  appear  to  be  projecting  distinctly 
behind  the  head.  The  iiraicJial-ra  of  the  sculptures 
is  considered  to  correspond  to  the  inabhamajidala 
or  the  halo  of  light  wbich  surrounds  all  divine  beings. 
In  other  words,  it  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  material 
representation  of  the  glory  or  circle  of  light  shining 
around  the  head  of  gods. 

The  prabhavali  represents  something  similar 
to  the  prabha-mandala:  the  former  is,  however,  a 
ring  of  light  that  surrounds  the  whole  person  of  a 
god,  while  the  latter  is  a  circulai'  halo  that  is  shown 
close  to  the  head.  The  prabharali  is  an  ornament- 
al circular  or  oval  ring,  with  a  number  of  jviila^ 
or  protruding  tongues  of  flame.  Verv  often  the 
special  emblems  of  the  god  to  whom  the  prabliriraU 
belongs  are  sculptured  on  each  side  of  it ;  for 
example,  ia::/:ha  and  cJidlij-a  are  found  in  associa- 
tion with  the })rabhdvali  of  Vishnu,  parasii  and  paia 
with  that  of  Siva  or  Ganesa.  In  some  instances, 
the  prabliai-alj  of  Vishnu  contains  his  ten  avatai'ar^ 
carved  on  it  in  the  usual  order  from  right  to  left. 

32 


PLATE  IX. 


c3 


Tl 

n 

cS 

^. 

J3 

ca 

irfl 

al 

-^3- 

!> 

>-= 

103 

CO 

rH 

>-n 

on 

ta 

To  face  page  32. 


GANAPATI. 


GANAPATI. 


VIGHNESVAKA  is,  as  the  name  indicates, 
the  deity  presiding  over  obstacles  ;  as  such, 
he  happens  to  be  the  god  who  either  puts 
obstacles  in  the  way  or  removes  them.  That  he 
has  the  capacity  for  doing  both  these  things  is 
evident  from  the  account  of  his  origin  given  in  the 
Lingapurana.  It  is  stated  therein  that  the  Asuras 
and  Buhsliasas,  performed  sacrifices  and  other 
acts  of  virtue,  and  received  several  boons  from 
Siva  the  Supreme  Grod.  Protected  with  the  boons 
thus  acquired  from  god  Siva,  they  began  to  fight 
against  the  Devas  and  defeat  them.  Indra  and 
the  other  gods,  afflicted  by  the  defeats  received 
at  the  hands  of  the  Bakshasas,  complained  about 
their  hard  lot  to  the  Supreme  God  and  prayed  to 
him  that  he  should  create  a  being,  who  would  be 
the  lord  of  obstacles,  Vighnesvara,  and  throw 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  Asuras  and  Bd,lishasas 
in  their  attempts  to  perform  acts  of  merit,  and  thus 

35 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

render  them  unfit  to  receive  any  more  boons  from 
Grod.  Siva  yielded  to  this  request  of  the  gods  and 
willed  that  a  son  be  born  to  him  to  fulfil  this 
object.  Then  one  of  his  am§as,  that  is,  a  part  of 
his  power,  took  shape  in  the  form  of  a  handsome 
being  and  was  delivered  out  of  the  womb  of 
Parvati.  Him  Siva  named  Vighnesvara,  and 
advised  him  to  hinder  the  A.vtras,  Balshasas  and 
other  wicked  people  from  performing  sacrifices  and 
other  virtuous  acts,  but  to  render  all  assistance  to 
the  Devas  and  other  good  beings  in  their  endeavour 
to  perform  such  acts-  Vighnesvara,  thus  born  and 
thus  installed  in  his  position,  has  continued  dis- 
charging his  duties  in  the  world  of  his  Hindu 
devotees  and  worshippers. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  upon  Vighnesvara 
were  laid  the  duties  of  hindering  and  also  of 
facilitating  all  acts  of  virtue,  according  to  the 
motives  with  which  their  performance  was  under- 
taken. Various  other  accounts  of  the  origin  of 
Vighnesvara  are  also  found  in  the  Pnranas.  The 
Siva-purana  gives  the  following  account  of  the 
birth  of  Vighnesvara  : — 

"  The  origin  of  Vighnesvara  is  different  in 
different  aeons  of  creation.  I  am  relating  to  you 
now  the  story  of  the  birth  of  this  god  as  it  took 
place   in    the    BvetaTialpa.     Once   upon  a   time, 

36 


GANAPATI. 

Jaya  and  Vijaya,  the  two  companions  of  Parvati 
suggested  to  her  that,  though  she  had  Nandi, 
Bhrihgi  and  others  among  Siva's  attendants  as  her 
servants,  still  it  would  be  better  for  her  if  she  had 
a  person  as  her  own  servant.  Parvati  took  the 
advice  in  good  part,  and  it  so  happened  subse- 
quently that,  on  one  occasion,  when  she  was 
bathing  in  one  of  the  inner  compartments  of  her 
mansion,  Siva  not  knowing  where  she  then  was, 
went  into  the  place  where  she  was  bathing. 
Parvati  realised  the  value  of  the  advice  of  her 
friends  fully  then  and  resolved  upon  creating  a 
person  who  would  be  to  her  a  faithful  servant. 
She  took  a  little  of  the  dirt  on  her  skin  and 
created  out  of  it  a  lovely  being  and  ordered  him  to 
keep  strict  guard  at  her  gate  so  as  not  to  allow  any 
one  inside  without  her  permission.  Once,  Siva 
himself  happened  to  go  to  meet  his  consort, 
but  could  not  get  access  into  her  apartments,  as 
the  new  gate-keeper  would  not  allow  him  in.  Siva 
then  tried  entreaties  and  threats,  none  of  which 
proved  effective ;  he  then  resolved  upon  forcing  his 
way  in  somehow.  On  noticing  this,  the  new 
clvarafcdaka  administered  to  Siva  a  few  cuts  with 
a  cane  and  drove  him  out.  Incensed  at  the 
behaviour  of  this  insignificant  servant  of  his  con- 
sort he  ordered  his  Bhuta-ganas — host  of  demons — 

.37 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

to  kill  him  at  once.  In  the  fight  that  ensued 
diva's  host  of  demons  were  completely  defeated 
and  driven  away.  Then  Vishnu,  Subrahmanya 
and  others  tried,  on  behalf  of  Siva,  their  strength 
with  Vighnesvara  and  met  with  no  better  result. 
Then  Parvati,  on  seeing  that  her  son  Vighnesvara, 
was  fighting  single-handed  against  powerful  oppo- 
nents, sent  two  minor  goddesses  to  his  help.  They 
drew  towards  themselves  by  their  mysterious 
power  all  the  missiles  aimed  against  Vighnesvara 
and  protected  him  from  injury.  Finding  thus  that 
no  direct  methods  of  attack  succeeded  as  against 
Vighnesvara,  Vishnu  thought  of  using  strategy 
and  with  the  aid  of  his  mayn  he  caused  confusion. 
Thereupon  the  two  minor  goddesses,  finding  their 
presence  no  longer  of  use  there,  returned  to 
Parvati.  It  then  became  easy  for  Siva  to  cut  off 
and  remove  the  head  of  Vighnesvara. 

"  The  news  of  the  destruction  of  her  son  was 
conveyed  to  Parvati  by  the  sage  Narada  ;  and  on 
hearing  it  she  became  so  angry  that  she  created  a 
thousand  fighting  goddesses  to  bring  trouble  on 
all  those  that  took  part  in  the  destruction  of  her 
Vighnesvara.  These  goddesses  attacked  the  gods 
and  made  them  feel  very  miserable.  To  rescue  the 
gods  from  this  pitiable  condition,  Narada  and 
other  sages  prayed  to  Parvati,  who  promised  to 

38 


GANAPATL 

restore  peace  as  soon  as  her  son  was  brought  back 
to  life.  Siva  on  hearing  this,  ordered  the  gods  to 
proceed  to  the  north  at  once  and  bring  the  head  of 
the  first  living  being  they  met  and  fix  it  on  the 
neck  of  the  beheaded  son  of  Parvati.  The  gods 
immediately  proceeded  and  came  across  an  ele- 
phant ;  they  cut  off  its  head  and  brought  it  and 
attached  it  as  directed  to  the  trunk  of  Vighnes- 
vara.  That  elephant  had  only  one  tusk,  and 
Gajanana  (the  elephant-faced  Vighnesvara)  has 
therefore  only  one  tusk  even  to-day,  and  is  known 
by  the  name  of  Ekadanta.  When  Parvati  saw  her 
son  brought  back  to  life  in  this  manner,  she  felt 
pleased  and  took  him  to  the  presence  of  Siva. 
Vighnesvara  apologised  to  Siva  and  the  other  gods 
for  his  past  remissness  in  conduct  and  bowed  in 
deep  reverence  to  his  divine  father.  Siva  was 
thereby  highly  gratified  and  conferred  upon 
Vighnesvara  the  commandership  over  his  own 
demon-hosts,  and  anointed  him  as  Ganapati.  It 
is  thus  that  Vighnesvara  became  Gajanana  and 
Ekadanta  and  Ganapati." 

Quite  a  different  story  is  given  about  the 
origin  of  Vighnesvara  in  some  of  the  other  Pura- 
nas.  Kennedy  in  his  Hindu  Mythology  has  given 
the  following  summary  of  the  story  as  found  in  the 
Varaha-'purana,  the  Matsya-imrana  and  also  the 

39 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Skaiida-paraiia: — "The  immortals  and  holy  sages 
observmg  that,  whether  the  actions,  which  they 
or  others  commenced,  were  good  or  bad,  no 
difficulty  occurred  in  accomplishing  them,  con- 
sulted together  respecting  the  means  by  which 
obstacles  might  be  opposed  to  the  commission 
of  bad  actions,  and  determined  to  have  recourse 
to  Eudra.  They  accordingly  proceeded  to  Kailasa, 
and  thus  with  reverence  addressed  him :  '  0, 
Mahadeva,  god  of  gods,  three-eyed,  bearer  of  the 
trident,  it  is  thou  alone  who  canst  create  a 
being  capable  of  opposing  obstacles  to  the  commis- 
sion of  improper  acts.'  On  hearing  these  words, 
Siva  looked  at  Parvati  and  began  to  consider  in 
what  manner  he  could  effect  the  wishes  of  the 
gods ;  and,  as  he  was  immersed  in  thought,  from 
the  splendour  of  his  countenance  (which  represents 
the  akasic  portion  of  his  body)  sprang  into  exist- 
ence a  youth,  shedding  radiance  around,  endowed 
with  the  qualities  of  Siva,  and  evidently  another 
Eudra,  and  captivating  by  his  beauty  the  female 
inhabitants  of  heaven.  Uma  regarded  him,  and 
when  she  saw  him  thus  lovely,  her  natural  dis- 
position was  excited,  and  incensed  with  anger 
uttered  this  curse  : — '  Thoa  shalt  not  offend  my 
sight  with  the  form  of  a  beautiful  youth,  therefore 
assume  an  elephant's  head  and  a  large  belly,  and 

40 


GANAPATI. 

thus  may  all  thy  beauties  vanish.'*  Siva  thus 
spoke  to  his  son  : — '  Thy  names  shall  be  Ganesa 
Vinayaka,  Vighnaraja,  the  son  of  Siva ;  thou  shalt 
be  the  chief  of  the  Vinayakas  and  the  ganas ;  success 
and  disappointment  shall  proceed  from  thee  ;  and 
great  shall  be  thy  influence  amongst  gods,  and  in 
sacrifices  and  all  affairs.  Therefore  shalt  thou  be 
worshipped  and  invoked  the  first  on  all  occasions, 
or  otherwise  the  object  and  prayers  of  him  who 
omits  to  do  so,  shall  fail.'  "f 

"In  the  Matsya-purana  it  is  said  that  this 
figure  of  Ganapati  was  formed  with  the  head  of  an 
elephant,  while  another  tradition  has  it  that  one 
day,  when  she  was  bathing,  Parvati  formed  the  oil, 
ointments,  and  impurity  that  came  from  her  body 
into  the  figure  of  a  man,  to  which  she  gave  life  by 
sprinkling  it  with  the  water  of  the  Ganges."! 

"  In  the  following  passage  of  the  Skanda- 
purana,  however,  the  birth  of  Ganapati  is  ascribed 
to  Parvati  only: — Siva,  addressing  Parvati.— 'For- 
merly during  the  twilight  that  intervened  between 
the  Dvaparayuga  and  the  Kaliyuga,  women,  bar- 

*  "  Indignant  at  Siva  producing  without  her  participation 
so  perfect  a  son." 

t  Kennedy's  Uiivlii  Mythology,  pp,  353-54, 
\  Kennedy's  Hindu  Mythology,  p.  353,  f.  n.  2. 

41 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

barians,  Sudras,  and  other  workers  of  sin,  obtained 
entrance  into  heaven  by  visiting  the  celebrated 
temple  of  Somesvara."  Sacrifices,  ascetic  practices, 
charitable  gifts,  and  all  the  other  prescribed  ordi- 
nances ceased,  and  men  thronged  only  to  the  temple 
of  Siva.  Hence  old  and  young,  the  skilled  in  the 
Yedas  and  those  ignorant  of  them,  and  women  and 
SQdi-as,  ascended  to  heaven,  until  at  length  it 
became  crowded  to  excess.  Then  Indra  and  the 
gods  afiiicted  at  being  thus  overcome  by  men,  sought 
the  protection  of  Siva,  and  thus  with  reverence 
addressed  him  : — '  0,  Sahkara,  by  thy  favour  heaven 
is  pervaded  by  men,  and  we  are  nearly  expelled  from 
it.  These  mortals  wander  wherever  they  please, 
exclaiming,  '  I  am  the  greatest ';  and  Dharmaraja, 
beholding  the  register  of  then-  good  and  evil  deeds, 
remains  silent,  lost  in  astonishment.  For  the  seven 
hells  were  most  assuredly  intended  for  their  recep- 
tion; but,  having  visited  thy  shrine,  their  sins  have 
been  remitted,  and  they  have  obtained  a  most  excel- 
lent futurity.'  Siva  replied: — '  Such  was  my  pro- 
mise to  Soma,  nor  can  it  be  infringed ;  and  all  men, 
therefore,  who  visit  the  temple  of  Somesvara  must 
ascend  to  heaven.  But  supplicate  Parvati,  and  she 
will  contrive  some  means  for  extricating  you  from 

'■  The  same  as  Somnath." 
42 


GANAPATI. 

this  distress.'  The  gods  then  kneehng  before  Parvati, 
with  folded  hands  and  bended  heads,  thus  invoked 
her  assistance  with  laudatory  strains  : — '  Praise  be 
to  thee,  0  supreme  of  goddesses,  supporter  of  the 
universe !  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  lotus-eyed,  resplend- 
ent as  gold  !  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  beloved  of  Siva- 
who  Greatest  and  destroyest !  Praise  be  to  thee,  0 
mountain-born !  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Kalaratri,  0 
Durga,  who  pervadest  the  universe,  and  art  the  sole 
substance  from  which  all  female  forms  whether 
mortal  or  immortal,  originate!  Grant  us  thy  aid,  and 
save  us  from  this  fearful  distress.'  Having  heard 
the  supplication  of  Indra  and  the  gods,  thou,  0 
goddess  !  wert  moved  with  compassion,  and  gently 
rubbing  thy  body,  there  was  thence  produced  a 
wondrous  being  with  four  arms  and  the  head  of  an 
elephant ;  when  thou  thus  addressed  the  gods  : — 
'  Desirous  of  your  advantage  have  I  created  this 
being,  who  will  occasion  obstacles  to  men,  and 
deluding  them  will  deprive  them  of  the  wish  to 
visit  Somanatha,  and  thus  shall  they  fall  into  hell.' 
This  heard,  the  gods  were  delighted,  and  returned  to 
their  own  abodes,  relieved  from  all  fear  of  mankind.' 
"  The  Elephant-headed  then  thus  spoke  to 
thee,  0  Devi : — '  Command,  0  lovely  goddess  !  What 
I  shall  do.'  Thou  didst  reply, — '  Oppose  obstacles 
to  men's  visiting  Somanatha,  and  entice  them  to 

43 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

give  up  such  a  purpose  by  allurement  of  wives, 
children,  possessions,  and  wealth.  But  from  those 
who  propitiate  thee  by  the  following  hymn,  do  thou 
remove  all  difficulties,  and  enable  them  to  obtain 
the  favour  of  Siva  by  worshipping  at  his  shriae  of 
Somanatha : — Om,  I  praise  thee,  0  lord  of  diffi- 
culties !  The  beloved  spouse  of  Siddhi  and  Buddhi, 
Ganapati,  invincible,  and  the  giver  of  victory,  the 
opposer  of  obstacles  to  the  success  of  men  who  do 
not  worship  thee,  I  praise  thee  0  Ganesa !  The 
dreadful  son  of  Uma,  but  firm  and  easily  propi- 
tiated !  0  Vinayaka,  I  praise  thee  !  0  elephant-faced, 
who  didst  formerly  protect  the  gods  and  accomplish 
their  wishes,  I  praise  thee !  Thus,  continued 
Parvatl,  '  shalt  thou  be  praised  and  worshipped  on 
the  fourth  of  each  half  month  ;  and  whoever  pre- 
viously invokes  the  god  Vinayaka,  no  difficulties 
shall  impede  the  attainment  of  his  proposed  object, 
and  a  most  beneficial  result  shall  he  derive  from 
sacrificies,  pilgrimages,  and  all  other  devotional 
acts.'  ''* 

The  SuprabJiedagama  has  a  version  of 
its  own  regarding  the  birth  of  Ganesa.  Siva 
addressing  Vighnesvara  informs  him  of  his  origin 
thus  : — "  I,  in  company  with  Parvati,  retired  once 

''  Keanedy's  Hindu  Mythology,  pp.  354 — 356. 
44 


GANAPATI. 

to  the  forest  on  the  slopes  of  the  Himalayas  to 
enjoy  each  other's  company-  Wc  saw  there  a 
female  elephant  making  herself  happy  with  a  male 
elephant.  This  excited  our  passion  and  we  desired 
to  enjoy  ourselves  in  the  form  of  elephants.  I 
became  a  male  elephant,  and  Parvati  a  female  one, 
and  pleased  ourselves,  as  a  result  of  which  you 
were  born  with  the  face  of  an  elephant." 

In  the  earliest  known  reference  to  him,  in  the 
Aitamja-hralnnmia  1. 21,  Ganapati  is  identified  with 
Brahma,  Brahmanaspati  or  Brihaspati.  "  The  art 
of  writing  was  usefully  employed  ",  says  Muir,  "  in 
the  early  ages  of  philosophy.  Lists  of  words  appa- 
rently submitting  to  a  general  principle  of  classifi- 
cation, or  having  the  same  sense,  were  drawn  up. 
These  lists  formed  ganas  which  were  appreciated. 
Ganapati,  the  Lord  of  the  ganas,  was  a  name  of 
Brahmanaspati.  It  was  gradually  recognised  as 
knowledge  itself.  It  was  Brahma.  It  was  the 
Veda.  Pratisakhyas  give  ganas.  Yaska's  treatise 
is  a  collection  of  such  ganas." 

It  is  stated  that  when  Vyasa  composed  the 
Mahabharata,  he  employed  Ganesa  as  his  amanu- 
ensis, who  wrote  to  Vyasa's  dictation  using  his 
own  tusk  as  his  stile. 

In  the  Bralimavaivarta-imrl'ma  it  is  stated 
that  Ganesa  was  Krishna  himself  originally  in  the 

45 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

human  form.  Sani  went  to  him  while  a  child. 
The  head  of  the  child  in  consequence  separated 
and  went  away  to  Goloka.  The  elephant  Airavata 
had  then  a  son  in  the  forest.  His  head  was 
removed  and  fixed  on  the  body  of  the  child. 

Thus,  we  see  that  Ganesa,  who  is  the  same  as 
Yighnesvara,  is  considered  to  have  been  born  solely 
to  Siva,  solely  to  Parvati  and  to  both  Siva  and 
Parvati,  and  is  also  held  to  be  Krishna  in  another 
form.  He  is  identified  with  the  Parabrahman 
and  with  Brahmanaspati  or  Brihaspati  elsewhere. 
So  confusing  indeed  are  the  accounts  about  the 
nature  and  origin  of  Vighnesvara. 

At  present  in  practice,  he  is  the  god  whom  the 
pious  Hindu  "  invokes  when  he  begins  all  sacrifices 
and  religious  ceremonies,  all  addresses  even  to  supe- 
rior gods,  all  serious  compositions  in  writing,  and  all 
wordly  affairs  of  moment."  Vighnesvara  is  known 
by  various  names,  such  as  Ganapati,  Ekadanta, 
Heramba,  Lambodara,  Surpakarna,  Gajanana  and 
Guhagraja.  The  reason  of  the  appellations  Vigh- 
nesvara, Gajanana,  Ekadanta  and  Ganapati  or 
Ganesa  has  already  been  given  above.  The 
Bralnnavaivarta-pnrana,  however,  explains  the 
meaning  of  some  of  the  names  of  this  god  in  a 
peculiarly  artificial  manner  thus  : — Oa  in  Ganapati 
stands  for  wisdom  and  iia  for  i/ioksJia  or  the  salva- 

46 


GANAPATI. 

tion  of  soul  emancipation.  The  fcdi  or  lord  of 
these  is  Ganesa  the  Parabrahman.  Eka  in  Elm- 
danta  indicates  the  one  only  Supreme  Being  and 
danta  is  indicative  of  strength.  Ekadanta,  there- 
fore, is  the  all-powerful  Supreme  Being.  In  the 
word  Heramha,  the  syllable  he  represents  helpless- 
ness or  weakness,  and  ramba  denotes  the  protection 
afforded  to  weak  beings  to  safeguard  them  from 
harm ;  hence  Heramba  means  the  Protector  of  the 
Weak.  By  eating  the  food  and  cakes  offered  by 
Vishnu  and  Siva  the  belly  of  G-anesa  became  dilated, 
and  hence  he  has  come  to  be  known  by  the  name 
of  Lambodara.  The  ears  of  Gajanana  which  are 
waving  to  and  fro  are  emblematic  of  the  winnow- 
ing away  of  the  obstacles  of  devotees  and  are  also 
indicative  of  wisdom.  Because  he  was  born  to 
Parvati  before  Guha,  who  is  the  same  as  Subrah- 
manya,  he  is  called  Guhagraja.  The  Bhavisliyat- 
purana  says  that,  since  he  leads  the  good  in  the 
path  of  righteousness,  he  is  called  Vinayaka. 
Another  explanation  of  the  name  Vinayaka  is  given 
in  the  Vamana-purana  to  the  effect  that,  as  he 
was  born  without  a  nUijalia  or  sire,  he  came  to  be 
named  Vinayaka. 

It  is  said  that  the  shrines  of  Subrahmanya 
are  rather  common  in  South  India ;  but  those  of 
Vighnesvara    are    even    more  numerous.     Every 

47 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

village,  however  small  has  in  it  an  image  of  Vigh- 
nesvara,  with  or  without  a  temple  to  house  it  in. 
At  the  entrances  of  villages  and  forts,  below  pipal 
trees  adjoining  villages,  on  the  right  side  of  the 
entrances  into  Siva  temples,  in  the  niche  which 
is  at  the  commencement  of  the  innermost  prahara 
circuit  in  the  temples  of  Vishnu  as  well  as  Siva 
and  also  in  separate  shrines  specially  constructed 
in  Siva  temples  in  the  south-west  corner,  the  figure 
of  Yighnesvara  is  invariably  to  be  seen. 

In  Bupaviauijana  it  is  stated  that,  in  a  temple, 
dedicated  to  Gauesa,  there  should  be  on  the  left 
of  the  image  of  this  deity  the  figure  of  Gajakarna ; 
on  the  right,  of  Siddhi;  to  the  north,  of  Gauri ;  to 
the  east,  of  Buddhi ;  to  the  south-east,  Balachandra 
(Bhalachandra  ?);  to  the  south,  of  Sarasvati ;  to  the 
west,  of  Kubera  ;  and  at  the  back,  of  Dhumraka. 
Each  of  the  four  gates  of  the  shrine  should  have  a 
pair  of  dvarapaJas.  Those  at  the  east  gate  are 
named  Avighna  and  Yighuaraja  ;  at  the  south 
gate,  Suvaktra  and  Balavan  ;  at  the  west  gate, 
Gajakarna  and  Gokarna;  and  at  the  north-gate, 
Susaumya  and  Subhadayaka.  All  these  images 
are  to  be  dwarfish  in  stature  and  should  possess 
terrific  look;  one  of  their  hands  should  be  in  the 
tcnja)!/  -pone,  another  should  carry  a  dauda:  and 
the  other  two  hands  should,  in  the  case  of  Avigbua 

48 


PLATE  X, 


^li:^^^ 

M 

■ 

[^HJ^HHBhI^^ 

:^_ 

5 

■ 

jfe^jljC^ 

^1  j 

K^M^j 

RMlHi 

ykj 

[^K 

Ij^^fB^^jM^UIHI^ 

^^^H 

Hj^^j^Kt''.! 

o 
> 


& 


C5 


c3      =5 


[To  (ace  page  49.] 


GANAPATI, 

and  Vighnaraja,  carry  the  parasit  and  the  fadvia  ; 
in  the  case  of  Suvaktra  and  Balavan,  the  khadga 
and  the  IMtal-a  ;  in  the  case  of  Gajakarna  and 
Gokarna  the  dhamis  and  bana  ;  and  lastly  in  the 
case  of  Susaumya  and  Subhadayaka,  the  padma 
and  the  anhisa. 

Vighnesvara  may  be  represented  as  sifiing  or 
standing.  The  seat  may  be  a  2^<^i'dmasana  or  a 
mouse  or  in  rare  instances,  a  lion.  If  the  figure 
is  a  standing  one,  it  should  have  a  few  bends  in  the 
body  so  as  to  be  of  the  drihhahga  or  trihlianga 
type.  The  standing  image  of  Ganapati,  may  also  be 
of  the  saviabhahga  type  without  any  bend  what- 
soever. In  the  case  of  the  sitting  image,  the  rule 
laid  down  is  that  it  should  have  its  left  leg  folded 
and  resting  on  a  seat,  while  the  right  leg  has  to  be 
crossed  so  as  to  rest  on  the  left  thigh,  (see  PI.  X 
fig.  1).  Owing,  however,  to  the  sculptors  generally 
making  the  belly  a  little  too  big,  the  legs  cannot 
be  shown  to  cross  each  other  in  front.  Therefore, 
they  simply  show  the  right  leg  as  bent  and  make  it 
rest  vertically  on  a  seat,  (see  PI.  X,  fig.  2). 

The  trunk  of  the  elephant-head  of  this  god 
may  be  shown  as  turned  towards  the  left  or  the 
right.  Generally  however,  it  is  turned  towards  the 
left ;  only  in  rare  cases  do  we  meet  with  figures 
with  the  proboscis  turned  to  the  right.     A  Ganesa 

49 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

with  the  trunk  turned  to  the  right  is  known  in 
Tamil  as  Valamburi  Vinayaka ;  and  the  same  god 
with  the  trunk  turned  to  the  left  is  called  Idam- 
buri  Vinayaka.* 

Vighnesvara  is  figured  in  most  cases  with  only 
two  eyes ;  the  agamas,  however,  prescribe  three  eyes 
to  him  in  certain  particular  aspects.     His  image 
may  have  four,  six,  eight,  ten  or  even  sixteen  arms ; 
but"  the  majority  of  such  images  have  only  four 
arms.     The  belly  of  this  god,  Lambodara  as  he  is 
often  enough  called,  has  to  be  very  capacious.     On 
the  chest  has  to  be  thrown  a  snake  in  the  form  of 
the  yajndjKU'lta  ;  and  another  snake  should  serve 
as  a  belt  going  round  the  belly.     The  following 
Pu  rank  account  of  how  he  came  to  possess  a  girdle 
of  snake  is  interesting.  Once  upon  a  time,  Vighnes- 
vara, received  from  a  number  of  devotees  innumera- 
ble quantities  of  the  modaha  cake,  and  put  them  all 
into  his  capacious  stomach.     He  then  started  to 
go  home  and  mounted  upon  his  precious  charger, 
the  mouse,  and  began  to  drive  it.     It  was  already 
dusk,  and  the  poor  over-burdened  little  mouse  was 
hardly  able  to  move  along.     In  such  a  plight,  it 
sighted  a  large  snake  crossing  the  path  ;  and  in 

*  The  words  vnlam  and  idam  mean  '  right '  and  '  left '  in 
Tamil. 

50 


GANAPATI. 

terror  it  tripped  and  fell  throwing  down  the  rider 
god  Ganesa  also.     This  fall  caused  the  bursting  of 
his  inflated  belly,  and  the  cakes  were  all  scattered 
pell  naell  on  the  floor.  He  picked  them  patiently,  put 
them  once  again  into  his  burst  belly  and  tied  round 
it  for  security  the  very  snake  which  caused  him 
so  much  damage.   It  is  thus  that  he  got  the  snake- 
girdle.     The  moon,  who  was  then  in  the  company 
of  his  twenty-seven  starry  consorts,  saw  all   that 
took  place  on  the  earth  below  and  burst  out  in 
loud  laughter  quite  audible  to  Ganesa.     This  god 
became  greatly  annoyed  at  the  insult  offered  to  him, 
grew  wild  with  anger  and  plucked  one  of  his  own 
tusks  and  hurled  it  at  the  moon.     It  struck  the 
moon  and  hit  him  so  hard  that  he  began  to  lose  his 
lustre  rapidly.     The  nights  became  pitch  dark,  and 
the  gods  thereupon  approached  him  with  prayers 
and  implored  him  to  pardon  the  offender,  and  to 
restore  to  him  his  light.     Pleased  with  the  praises 
of  the  gods,  Vighnesvara  modified  his  curse  some- 
what, changing  it  from  perfect  loss  of  light  in  the 
moon    to   one   of   periodic   waning,    and   waxing. 
This  story  accounts  also  for  Ganesa  having  only 
one  tusk  in  addition  to  its  offering  an  explanation 
of  the  waxing  and  the  waning  of  the  moon. 

There  are  several  varieties  among  the  images 
representing  this  elephant-headed  god  ;  and  we  give 

51 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

below  a  dcscnption  of  these  varieties  in  brief  out- 
line. 

Bala-Ganajjati  is  a  form  of  this  god  sculptured 
like  a  child ;  it  has  of  course  four  arms  and  the 
head  of  an  elephant.  A  mango,  a  plantain,  a  jack 
fruit,  and  a  sugar-cane  are  to  be  held  in  the  four 
hands.  In  the  trunk  the  image  has  to  carry  a 
wood-apple.  Its  colour  should  be,  it  is  said,  like 
that  of  the  rising  sun. 

Taruna-Ganapaii  represents  a  form  which 
carries  in  its  hands  the  pasa,  the  ankusa,  the  wood- 
apple,  jainbu  fruit,  the  sesamum,  and  a  bamboo- 
stick,  and  has  to  be  scupltured  as  a  youth.  The 
colour  of  this  god  should  be  red. 

Bhalitl-Vifjhmsoaia  is  also  an  image  with 
four  hands  in  which  are  placed  a  cocoanut, 
a  mango,  a  lump  of  sugar,  and  a  cup  of  payasa, 
which  is  a  sweet  preparation  of  milk  and  rice ; 
and  the  colour  of  this  image  has  to  be  white  like 
the  autumnal  moon. 

Vlra-VighnUa.  The  image  of  this  type  of 
Vighnesvara  should  be  sculptured  as  having  six- 
teen hands.  The  things  which  it  should  carry  in 
its  hands  are  a  vetala,  or  vampire,  the  weapon 
sakti,  bow  and  arrows,  the  sword  and  the  shield, 
the  mudgara  or  hammer,  the  gada,  or  the  club,  the 
ankusa,  the  pam,  the  sida,  the  hunda,  the  parasu 

52 


PLATE  XI. 


[To  face  page  53.] 


GANAPATI. 

and  the  dhvaja.     The  colour  of  this  image  has  to 
be  red. 

Sakti-Ganesa  represents  a  class  of  images 
consisting  of  Lakshml-Ganapati,  Uchchhishta- 
Qaiiapati,  Mahd,-Ganapati,  UrddJiva-Gaiiapati,  and 
Pingala-Ganapati.  Of  these  the  Lakshmi-Gana- 
PATI,  should  have  eight  hands,  and  carry  in  them  a 
parrot,  a  pomegranate,  a  lotus,  a  water-vessel  of 
gold  set  with  rubies,  the  ankusa,  the  pasa,  the 
kalpakalata,  and  the  bud  of  the  plant  called  bd.7ia. 
Water  should  be  shown  to  be  flowing  from  the 
proboscis.  The  colour  of  this  image  has  to  be 
white.  Such  is  the  description  given  by  Aghora- 
sivacharya  in  his  Kriyakramadijoti.  But  the 
Mantramahodadhi  states  that  Lakshmi-G-anapati 
should  have  three  eyes  and  should  hold  in  two  of 
his  hands  the  danta  and  the  chahra,  while  another 
hand  should  be  in  the  abhaya  pose.  Nothing  is 
said  about  the  fourth  hand.  Evidently  the  fourth 
arm  is  intended  to  hold  Lakshmi  in  its  embrace. 
The  colour  of  Lakshmi-Ganapati,  according  to  this 
authority,  should  be  golden  colour.  It  is  stated 
also  that  the  goddess  Lakshmi  should  be  sculptured 
so  as  to  be  embracing  G-anesa  with  one  of  her 
arms ;  she  should  carry  a  lotus  in  another  hand, 

Uchchhishta-Ganapati    is     worshipped    by 
many  even  in  these  days  with  a  view  to 

33 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

achieve  their  various  desired  objects ;  and 
this  god  is  considered  to  be  a  great  giver 
of  boons.  In  the  Kriijahramadijoti 
quoted  above  it  is  said  that  this  image 
should  carry  in  its  hands  a  lotus  flower, 
a  pomegranate,  a  vlna,  some  quantity  of 
paddy  and  an  aJeshamala.  The  Mantra- 
hialiarnava  prescribes  that  UchckhisJita- 
Ganapati  should  carry  the  hana,  the 
dhanus,  the  2Jas^  and  the  anJcusa,  and 
should  be  reddish  in  colour ;  he  should  be 
seated  upon  the  padmasana,  with  a  nude 
Devi,  and  should  be  shown  as  if  he  is 
making  attempts  for  coition.  A  more 
elaborate  description  of  this  deity  is 
found  in  the  TJttara-KamiTid,gama.  The 
figure  has  to  be  a  seated  one,  with  four 
hands,  in  three  of  which  it  should  carry 
the  pasa,  the  aiiJcusa,  and  a  piece  of  sugar- 
cane ;  the  fourth  hand  should  be  touching 
the  private  parts  of  the  naked  figure  of 
the  associated  Devi.  This  god  should 
have  three  eyes  and  be  of  dark  colour. 
He  should  wear  on  the  head  a  ratna- 
inakuta.  The  nude  Devi  should  be  sitting 
upon  his  lap ;  she  should  be  decked  with 
all  ornaments  and  have  only  two  hands. 

54 


PLATE  XII. 


Uchchhislita-Gsnapati  ;   Stone:  Nanjarigoclu. 


[To  (ace  page  54.] 


GANAPATI, 

The  name  of  this  goddess  is  Vighnesvari, 

and  it  is   particularly   stated   that    she 

should  be  sculptured  beautifully.     There 

is  great  deal  of  difference  between  the 

description  of  Uchchhishta  Ganapati  as 

contained  in  the  books  and  the  execution 

in  the  actual   sculptures.     In  all   cases 

this  god  has  a  nude  Devi  seated  on  his 

lap ;  two  of  his  hands  carry  the  pa^a  and 

the  anku§a,  one  has  a  laddiiJca  in  it,  and 

one  of  his  arms  is  used  in  embracing  the 

Devi  about  her  hip.     It  is  the  proboscis, 

but  not  one  of  the  hands,  which  is  in 

contact    with    the   private  parts   of   the 

Devi.     And  the  right  hand  of  the  Devi  is 

shown  to  be  holding  the  private  parts  of  the 

god  ;  in  her  left  hand  she  carries  a  lotus. 

Maha- Ganapati.       The    image    of    Maha- 

Ganapati   is  one   with  ten  arms ;  and   it 

should  have  in  its  hands  a  lotus  flower,  a 

pomegranate,  a  jewelled  water-vessel,  the 

gada,  his  own  broken  tusk,  a  sugar-cane, 

ears  of  paddy  and  the  fiasa.     The  colour 

of  this  image  has  to  be  red.     The  figure 

of  Sakti,    whose   complexion   is    white, 

should  be  seated  on  the  lap  of  this  god, 

and  she  should  a  have  lotus  in  her  hand. 


55 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Urddhva-Ganapati  should  carry  in  five  of 

his  hands  a  kalhara  flower,  ears  of  paddy, 

a  bow  made  of  sugar-cane,  the  bana,  and 

the  tusk.      With  one  of    his   arms   he 

should  embrace  Sakti  about  her  hip.     The 

colour  of  this  god  has  to  be  golden-yellow, 

and  that  of  the  associated  Sakti  should 

be  like  that  of  the  lightning. 

Pingala-Ganapati,  is  also  a  figure  with  six 

hands  in  which  it  may  be  seen  to  carry 

a  mango,  a  bunch  of  flowers  plucked  from 

the  kalpaJca  tree,  a  sugar-cane,  sesamum, 

modaka,  and  parasu.    It  should  have  the 

figure  of  Lakshmi  by  its  side. 

The  general  characteristics  of  Sakti-Ganapati, 

according  to  the  V/ghiiesvara-pratishtha-vidhi,  are 

that  he  should  be  seated  on  the  padmasana  with  a 

green  coloured  Sakti  by  his  side,  whom  he  should 

be  embracing  about  her  waist,  and  that  there  should 

be  no  contact  between  the  hips  of  the  god  and 

the  goddess.     His  colour  should  be  the  crimson  of 

the  setting  sun.  He  should  hold  the  weapons  pa'sa 

and    vajra  and   be  made   to   look    terrific.     The 

Mavtramaharnava,  on  the  other  hand,  has  it  that 

danta,  anhisa,  pasa  and  ahshamsJa  should  be  placed 

in  the  hands  and  the  modaka,  in  the  trunk  of  this 

Ganapati,  and  that  Sakti,  decked  with  all  orna- 

56 


PLATE  XUI, 


Heramba-Ganapati :  Bronze:  Nilayatakshiyamman  Temple,  Negapatam. 

(Froct  view). 


[To  face  page  56.] 


PLATE  XIY. 


Heramba-Ganapati. 
(Back- view). 


[To  face  page^57.] 


GANAPATI. 

merits  and  clothed  in  gold-laced  cloth  should  be 
seated  by  his  side.  ' 

Heramba.  The  figure  of  Heramba  is  very 
different  from  all  other  figures  of  Vighnesvara.  It 
has  five  elephant  heads,  four  facing  the  four  cardi- 
nal points  and  the  fifth  placed  above  these  so  as  to 
be  looking  upwards.  It  should  be  seated  upon  a 
powerful  lion.  It  should  carry  the  pasa,  danta, 
ahhamala,  parasU',  and  a  three-headed  vmdgara  in 
its  hands ;  in  another  hand  there  should  be  a 
modaka,  and  two  other  hands  have  to  be  held  in 
the  varada  and  abhaya  poses  respectively.  The 
colour  of  Heramba  has  to  be  golden  yellow. 

Prasamia-Gaiiapati.  This  Ganapati  is  describ- 
ed as  a  standing  figure  which  has  either  a  few  bends 
in  the  body  or  is  perfectly  erect.  One  authority  says 
that  the  figure  should  be  abhahga,  while  another, 
says  that  it  should  be  samabhaiiga.  The  bends,  when 
found,  are  generally  three.  The  seat  or  pedastal 
upon  which  this  figure  should  stand  is  the  padma- 
sana.  This  G-anesa  has  to  be  scarlet  in  colour  like 
the  rising  sun,  and  should  be  draped  in  red  cloth. 
In  two  of  his  hands  he  should  hold  the  y»«sa  and 
ahlcusa,  while  the  remaining  two  are  to  be  one  in 
the  varada  and  the  other  in  the  abhaya  pose.  In 
regard  to  this,  however,  there  is  generally  a  differ- 
ence   observable   between   what  is   found  ■  in   the 


57 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

actual  sculptures  and  the  description  given  in 
books.  Prasanna-Ganapati  is  not  seen  in  actual 
sculptures,  to  have  two  of  his  hands  in  the  varada 
and  ahliaya  poses,  but  is  made  to  hold  in  them  a 
danta  and  a  modalca  respectively,  the  latter  of  these 
being  represented  as  if  it  is  being  picked  up  with 
the  trunk,  to  be  lifted  and  put  into  the  mouth. 

Dhvaja-Ganapati,  should  have  four  hands, 
carrying  a  book,  an  akshamala,  a  danda  and  a 
hamandalu,  and  be  of  terrific  look. 

Unmatta-UchcMishta  Ganafati,  is  represent- 
ed by  an  image  with  three  eyes  and  with  a  body  of 
red  colour.  It  carries  in  its  four  hands  the  pa^a, 
the  anJcusa,  a  vessel  containing  modakas,  and  the 
danta.  It  is  seated  upon  the  padmd.sana.  It 
should  be  made  to  look  as  if  the  elephant  is  in 
must  (rutting). 

Viglinaraja-Ganapati  should  be  sculptured  as 
carrying  the  pasa  and  the  anlnisa,  and  as  eating 
a  mango  fruit.  The  image  should  be  seated  on  a 
mouse  and  have  the  colour  of  the  deep  red  sun. 

Bhuvarie'sa-Gana'pati  should  have  eight  hands. 
The  saiikha,  a  bow  made  of  sugar-cane,  arrows  of 
flowers,  the  broken  tusk,  the  pasa,  the  aiikusa,  and 
shoots  of  paddy  grass  are  to  be  held  in  them  ;  the 
colour  of  the  body  is  to  be  white.  It  is  worthy 
of  note  that  the  sugar-cane-bow  and  the  flowery 

58 


PLATE  XV. 


t 

p. 

^vr\ 

fl- 

-4-=i 

CO 

C5 

fM 

rfl 

0 

a 

rn 

O 

c3 

Sx 

m 

m 

« 

tH 

« 

nn 

-s- 

fq 

^0 

&H 


[Ti,  face  page  58.] 


PLATE  XYI, 


"^"^^ 


x; 


,\^-'.^-' 


^c 


%1 


*^  ^<^%^>>  .  ?.^'  ^\  Pt^ 

^         ft  '^.^f*-;.--^       -^ 


J>-.^ 


•^<%' 


.5  '^- 


f^nS^. 


#H^Ct 


Nritfca-Ganapati :  Stone : 
Hoysalesvara  Temple,  Halebfdu. 


[To  face  page  59.] 


GANAPATI. 

arrows  are  the  attributes  of  Kamadeva,  the  Hindu 
god  of  love. 

Nritta-Ganapati.  This  is  a  representation  of 
Ganesa  as  dancing.  This  image  should  have  eight 
hands  in  seven  of  which  should  be  held  the  pasa, 
the  ahhisa,  cakes,  the  kutlid.ra  (a  kind  of  axe),  the 
danta,  the  valaya  (a  quoit),  and  the  ao'iguUi/a  (a 
ring) ;  the  remaining  hand  should  be  freely  hang- 
ing so  as  to  be  helpful  to  the  various  movements 
of  the  dance.  The  colour  of  the  body  of  this 
Ganesa  has  to  be  golden  yellow.  To  show  that  it 
is  a  dancing  figure  it  is  scupltured  with  the  left  leg 
slightly  bent,  resting  on  the  padmasaua,  and  the 
right  leg  also  bent  and  held  up  in  the  air.  The 
sculptures  of  this  figure  have  generally  only  four 
hands,  but  not  eight  as  in  the  description  given 
above. 

Haridra-Ganapati  is  also  known  as  the 
Batri-Ganapati  and  should  have  four  arms.  The 
pasa,  the  anhusa,  modaJca,  and  the  danta  are  to  be 
held  in  the  four  hands.  His  image  should  have 
three  eyes  and  be  of  turmeric  yellow  colour  and 
should  wear  yellow  clothing. 

BJiUlachandra.  It  is  said  that  Chandra  (the 
moon)  was  cursed  by  Darbhi  (?)  and  began  to  lose 
his  brightness.  Seeing  this,  Ganapati  took  up 
Chandra  and  wore  him  on  his  forehead  as  a  tilaka, 

59 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

and  thus  saved  him  from  disaster.  That  form  of 
Ganapati  which  hence  has  the  moon  on  the  forehead 
is  known  as  Bhalachandra.  The  Brahmanda- 
piirana  gives  this  explanation. 

Surpaliarna.  The  story  regarding  this  form  of 
Ganesa  is  that  once  upon  a  time  Agni  was  cursed 
by  the  Rishis  to  become  extinguished  and  lost. 
Agni  accordingly  became  quite  powerless.  Ganesa 
took  pity  and  fanned  Agni  into  life  again  with  his 
ears,  as  with  a  surpa  or  winnowing  basket.  Hence 
he  is   known   as  Surpakarna. 

Ekadanta.  The  story  here  is  that  Parasurama, 
having  destroyed  the  Kshatriyas  with  the  parasii 
lent  to  him  by  Siva,  went  to  Kailasa  to  offer  thanks 
to  his  divine  benefactor.  But,  when  there,  he  was 
stopped  at  the  gate  of  Siva's  abode  by  Ganapati, 
who  told  him  that  Siva  and  Parvati  were  in  con- 
versation and  that  no  stranger  could  then  be  allowed 
to  enter.  Not  caring  for  the  injunctions  of  this 
door-keeper,  Parasurama  tried  to  force  his  way  into 
the  house ;  a  fight  then  ensued  between  him  and 
Ganapati,  in  which  Parasurama  hurled  his  parasu  at 
Ganesa  in  great  anger.  Ganesa  was  able  enough 
to  resist  the  blow  of  the  axe ;  but  he  did  not  do  so, 
because  he  could  not  bear  to  see  his  father's  battle- 
axe,  pass  for  a  powerless  weapon.  He  therefore 
received   the  blow   on  his  left   tusk,  which   thus 

60 


GANAPATI. 

became  broken  and  lost.  Accordingly  he  became  a 
single-tusked  god,  Ekadanta.  The  authority  for  this 
also  is  the  Brahmanda-purana.  In  a  large  number 
of  sculptures,  however,  the  figure  of  Ganesa  is  re- 
presented without  the  right  tusk,  contrary  to  the 
description  given  in  the  Brahmanda-purana. 

We  have  already  remarked  that  Ganesa  is 
the  akasic  part  of  Siva  looked  upon  as  the 
Lord  of  the  Universe-  Perhaps  to  represent  him 
as  the  vast  expanse  of  space  which  is  everywhere 
and  encloses  all  things,  his  belly  is  made  so  capa- 
cious as  to  contain  in  it  the  innumerable  thousands 
of  modakas  — round,  ball-like  cakes, —  which  most 
probably  represent  the  various  beings  in  the 
universe  floating  in  the  ocean  of  akasa  or  ether. 
The  Padma-purana,  however,  explains  the  modaka 
to  be  the  symbol  of  Mahabuddhi,  Supreme 
Wisdom. 

The  following  account  is  given  in  the  8iva- 
mahapurana  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
Ganapati  came  to  be  married  :  when  Ganapati  and 
Subrahmanya  attained  marriageable  age,  Parvati 
and  Siva  consulted  each  other  as  to  which  of  them 
should  be  married  first.  It  was  resolved  that  he, 
who  successfully  circumambulated  the  earth  first, 
should  have  his  marriage  celebrated  first.  Subrah- 
manya began  the  race,  got  ready  his  peacock-vehicle 

61 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

and  started  on  the  trip  round  the  earth.  But 
Ganesa  was  indifierent  at  the  time  and  utterly 
unmindful  of  his  brother  going  in  advance  in  the 
race,  for  he  felt  sure  that  he  himself  would  in  any 
case  come  out  successful.  As  soon  as  Subrahmanya 
was  out  of  sight,  Ganesa  came  near  to  his  parents 
and  circumambulated  them  seven  times,  and  quoted 
a  Vedic  text  to  the  effect  that,  if  a  son  made  seven 
pradaJcslunas,  circuits,  round  his  parents,  he  obtained 
the  merit  of  having  circumambulated  the  earth. 
The  parents  were  highly  pleased  with  the  wisdom 
of  Ganesa  and  married  to  him  two  fair  damsels 
named  Buddhi  and  Siddhi.  To  the  former  was  born 
the  son  named  Kshema,  and  to  the  latter  the  son 
named  Labha.  When  all  this  had  taken  place 
Subrahmanya  returned,  and  demanded  the  prize 
promised  by  his  parents.  He  was  then  informed  how 
the  prize  in  the  race  had  been  won  by  Ganesa, 
and  was  asked  to  wait  for  his  own  turn  to  come 
in  the  matter  of  marriage.  Feeling  disappoint- 
ed and  angry,  Subrahmanya  retired  to  mount 
Krauncha  to  do  penance  there  and  live  the  life 
of  celibacy. 

The  above  account  clearly  shows  us  that 
Ganesa  is  conceived  to  be  the  Lord  of  Buddhi  and 
Siddhi,  that  is,  the  lord  of  wisdom  and  the  attain- 
ment of  desired  ends. 


63 


GANAPATI. 

Explanations  relating  to  the  weapons  in  the 
hands  of  Ganapati,  will  be  found  in  the  chapter 
on  Ayudha-purushas  and  what  they  mean. 

The  illustrations  of  Ganapati  given  on  plates 
X  to  XVI  are  all  from  actual  sculptures.  Among 
these,  fig.  1,  PI.  X  is  that  of  the  stone  Ganapati  set 
up  just  two  years  ago  in  the  newly  constructed 
temple  of  Saradadevi  and  Sankaracharya  at  Kaladi. 
The  image  was  executed,  it  is  reported,  by  a  Bombay 
artist,  and  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  work  of  the 
new  Bombay  school  of  sculpture.  There  is  an 
evenness  of  symmetry  in  the  balance  of  the  limbs 
and  also  a  natural  proportion  in  size  as  between  the 
head  and  the  trunk,  as  well  as  between  the  trunk 
on  the  one  side  and  the  hands  and  legs  on  the  other. 
The  modelling  of  the  hands  and  legs,  of  the  orna- 
ments and  the  drapery  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired. 
This  figure  holds  the  ahkusa  in  the  back  right  hand, 
the  pasa  in  the  back  left  hand ;  the  modaJca  cake  is 
in  the  front  left  hand  and  the  danta  is  held  in  the 
front  right  hand.  The  proboscis  of  the  elephant- 
head  is  shown  to  be  playing  with  the  flower  garland 
hanging  from  the  neck.  This  last  feature  possibly 
indicates  that  this  Ganapati  represents  that  variety 
of  Uchchhishta-Ganapati  which  is  called  Unmatta. 

Fig.  2,  PL  X  is  a  very  pretty  ivory  image  of 
Kevala-Ganapati  carved  in  the  School  of  Arts  at 

63 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Trivandram.  It  carries  in  its  hands  the  same  things 
which  the  image  represented  by  fig.  1  does.  Though 
influenced  by  Western  art,  the  artist  in  this  case 
has  still  followed  to  a  great  extent  the  ancient 
ideals  of  image-making,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  old 
conventional  style  of  the  mahuta,  by  the  folds  of  the 
drapery  shown  on  the  figure  and  by  many  other 
minor  details. 

The  stone-figure  of  Lakshmi-Ganapati,  the 
photograph  whereof  is  given  on  PI.  XI  as  fig.  1,  is 
found  in  the  Visvanathasvamin  temple  at  Tenkasi, 
which  is  known  to  have  been  built  by  a  Pandya 
king  named  Arikesari  Parakrama  Pandyadeva  in 
1446  A.  D.  The  image  is  therefore  likely  to  have 
been  set  up  about  this  period.  The  workmanship 
of  this  piece  of  sculpture  is  far  from  satisfactory  ; 
no  heed  is  paid  to  what  may  be  mentioned  as  the 
natural  proportion  of  the  parts  of  the  image,  as 
may  be  seen  from  the  unsuitable  size  given  to  the 
trunk,  the  head,  the  belly  and  the  hands  and  legs. 
Some  out  of  the  ten  hands  of  this  image  carry  the 
chaJcra,  sankha,  sida,  parasii,  danta,  and  fasa  ;  and 
articles  which  are  carried  in  the  other  hands  it  is  not 
easy  to  make  out.  There  is  a  water-vessel  shown 
as  being  carried  in  the  proboscis  of  this  Ganapati. 

In  the  Nagesvarasvamin  temple  at  Kumbha- 
konam    is   set    up    the    figure    of    Uchchhishta- 

64 


GANAPATI, 

Ganapati,  the  photograph  whereof  is  reproduced 
as  fig.  2  in  PI.  XI.     It  has  four  hands,  and  carries 
in  three  of  them   the    parasu,   the  j^a^a   and   a 
modaJca,  while  the  fourth  is  employed  in  embracing 
the  goddess.     The  proboscis  of  the  image  is  touch- 
ing the  private  parts  of  the  goddess,  who  is  herself 
carrying  a  flower  in  her  left  hand  and  is  touching 
with  her  right  hand  the  private  parts  of  Q-anapati. 
The  stone  image  of  Uchchhishta-Ganapati  figured 
on  PI.  XII  belongs  to   the  Mysore    State.     As 
described  in  the  Mantra-iuaharnava,  this  Ganapati 
is  seen  carrying  in  his  hands  the  anku§a,  the  pasa, 
the  dhanus  and  the   bana ;  in  other  respects  this 
image  is   almost    similar  to   the   Kumbhakonara 
image. 

The  bronze-image  of  Heramba-Ganapati, 
whose  back  and  front  views  are  shown  on  Pis. 
XIII  and  XIV,  belongs  to  the  Nilayatakshi- 
yamman  temple  at  Negapatam.  In  this  figure, 
which  is  seated  upon  a  lion,  two  hands  are  kept 
in  the  varada  and  the  abhaya  poses  respectively, 
while  the  other  eight  are  shown  to  be  carrying  the 
parasii,  pasa,  danta,  anJmsa,  and  four  other  weapons 
which  are  not  easily  identifiable.  It  should  be 
observed  that  the  image  has  five  heads ;  four  of 
them  are  facing  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  one 
is  situated  centrally  on  the  top.     This  piece  of 

9  Gfj 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

sculpture  does  not  appear  to  be  older  than  the 
fifteenth  century  A.  D. 

Two  illustrations  are  given  here  to  show  the 
form  of  Prasanna-Granapati  as  executed  in  sculp- 
ture. Of  these  fig.  1,  PI.  XV  represents  a  bronze 
statuette  belonging  to  the  Siva  temple  at  Pattis- 
varam  in  the  Tanjore  district.  It  is  a  tribhanga 
image  with  three  bends  in  the  body,  and  is  standing 
upon  a  pdamasana.  Surrounding  this  image  there 
is  the  prahhavali :  and  it  carries  in  its  four  hands 
the  aiiJcusa,  pasa,  viddal-a  and  danta.  Its  head  is 
adorned  with  the  haranda-makuta.  It  is  probably 
not  later  than  the  twelfth  or  the  thirteenth  century 
A.  D.  Fig.  2  on  the  same  plate  is  an  ivory  image 
of  Prasanna-Ganapati  made  in  the  School  of  Arts 
at  Trivandram.  It  is  a  perfectly  erect  figure  being 
saviahlianga,  and  in  its  hands  we  see  the  same 
things  as  in  the  hands  of  the  bronze  statuette  of 
Pattisvaram. 

The  figure  of  Nritta-Ganapati  shown  on 
PI.  XVI,  is  found  in  the  Hoysalesvara  temple  at 
Halebldu,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Hoysala  kings. 
The  construction  of  this  temple  is  said  to  have  been 
begun  in  the  year  1121  A.D.  in  the  reign  of  Vishnu- 
varddhana.  Therefore  the  age  of  this  sculpture 
may  well  be  assigned  to  somewhere  about  the  last 
quarter  of  the  twelfth  century.     It  is  a  very  fine 

66 


GANAPATI. 

piece  of  sculpture,  perfect  in  modelling  as  well  as 
execution  and  pleasing  in  effect.  The  image  carries 
in  six  out  of  its  eight  hands  the  pamsu;  pam, 
iiiudaka-patra,  danta,  sarpa  and  perhaps  also  a 
padma-  One  of  the  right  hands  is  held  in  the  pose 
called  datida-hasta,  while  the  corresponding  left 
hand  is  in  the  vismaya-hasta  pose ;  and  the  pro- 
boscis carries  a  lotus  with  its  stalk  and  a  few  leaves 
attached  thereunto.  Above  the  head  of  this 
Ganapati  an  umbrella  is  sculptured ;  and  the  head 
itself  is  adorned  with  a  very  artistically  wrought 
Jcaranda-maJcuta.  Below  the  seat  is  worked  out  a 
mouse  as  if  engaged  in  the  act  of  eating  up  a  few 
niodahas  thrown  on  the  floor.  On  either  side  of 
the  mouse  we  may  see  the  figures  of  a  few  devotees 
sitting  with  offerings  in  their  hands,  while  on  the 
left  and  right  of  the  image  of  Ganapati  are  some 
musicians  playing  upon  drums  and  other  instru- 
ments. 


67 


VISHNU 


DHRUVA-BERAS. 


VISHNU 


IN  modern  popular  Hinduism,  Vishnu  is  one  of 
the  gods  of  the  Hindu  trinity,  and  is  conceived 
to  be  responsible  for  the  universal  protection,  as 
Brahma  and  Siva,  the  two  other  gods  are  held  to  be 
responsible  for  universal  creation  and  destruction. 
However,  Vishnu  is  in  fact  an  old  Vedic  god,  who 
is  mentioned  in  all  the  four  Vedas —  the  Eigveda, 
the  Yajurveda,  the  Samaveda  and  the  Atharvana- 
veda.  In  none  of  them  does  he  appear  as  the  one 
supreme  deity.  He  is  there  identified  with  the  sun, 
and  is  said  to  have  stridden  over  the  seven  regions 
and  to  have  covered  the  whole  universe  by  means 
of  three  steps.  According  to  Sakapuni,  an  old 
Vedic  commentator,  Vishnu  is  the  god  who  has 
manifested  himself  in  the  threefold  form  of  fire, 
lightning  and  the  solar  light  on  earth,  in  the  mid- 
region  of  the  atmosphere  and  in  the  sky  respectively. 
According  to  Aurnavabha,  another  commentator, 
the  three  steps  of  Vishnu  do  not  denote  fire,  light- 
ning and  the  solar  light,  but  indicate  the  different 


73 

10 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

positions  of  the  sun  at  his  rising,  culmination  and 
setting.  The  idea  underlying  this  solar  explanation 
is  obviously  incorporated  in  the  dliyana-'slolta, 
dhyeya-ssada  savitri-mandala-madhyavartl  Nara- 
yana-ssarasijasana  sannivisMah  lieyuravS.n  makara- 
Jcundalavan  hirlti  liari  liiranmaya-vapiili  dhrita- 
Sanhha-chahrah,  wherein  Vishnu  as  Narayana  is 
described  as  residing  in  the  orb  of  the  sun.  The 
idea  that  Vishnu  is  the  sun  appears  to  be  still 
maintained  in  the  worship  of  the  sun  as  Siirya- 
Narayana  generally  conducted  on  Sundays  and 
other  prescribed  occasions.  In  the  Eigveda,  Vishnu, 
has  received  in  one  place  the  epithet  '  the  ancient ' 
and  in  another  '  the  protector  '  applied  to  him. 
The  supreme  position,  which  he  now  occupies  in 
Hindu  theology,  became  his  at  a  later  period  in 
history.  In  the  majority  of  references  to  Vishnu 
in  the  Vedas,  he  is  introduced  as  the  subject  of 
laudation  forming  one  among  a  great  crowd  of  other 
divinities  ;  and  there  he  is  in  no  way  distinguished 
from  them  as  being  in  any  respect  superior.  From 
this  fact  we  may  conclude  that  he  was  regarded  by 
the  ancient  Vedic  bards  as  a  god  who  was  on  a 
footing  of  equality  with  the  other  deities.  In  the 
Vedas  the  Adityas  or  sons  of  Aditi,  are  alluded  to 
as  being  seven  or  eight  in  number.  In  the  Sata. 
patlia-BraUmana  they  are  once  said   to  be   eight, 

74 


VISHNU. 

and  in  another  instance  twelve,  in  number ;  and 
Vishnu  is  included  as  one  among  them.  The 
Mahabhdirata,  after  referring  to  the  twelve  Adityas 
as  the  sons  of  Kasyapa'by  Aditi,  declares  that  the 
twelfth  Aditya  is  Vishnu,  who,  though  the  latest 
born,  surpasses  all  Adityas  in  the  greatness  and 
glory  of  his  attributes. 

Thus  the  solar  origin  of  Vishnu  seems  to  be 
easily  demonstrable  ;  and  it  is  probably  not  with- 
out a  struggle  among  his  worshippers  that  he  rose 
to  occupy  the  position  of  eminence  which  became 
his  in  later  times.  The  SatapatJia-Brahrnana  says 
that,  when  Vishnu  attained  the  pre-eminent  position 
among  the  gods,  the  other  gods  became  envious  of 
him,  and  through  machinations  managed  to  have 
his  head  cut  off.  Soon,  however,  they  became 
alarmed  at  the  loss  of  Vishnu  and  desired  to  have 
him  restored  to  them.  With  this  object  they  pray- 
ed to  the  Asvins,  the  celestial  physicians,  and  they 
made  Vishnu  whole  again  and  placed  him  alive 
among  the  gods.  Vishnu  is  also  conceived  in  the 
Vedas  and  elsewhere  as  the  Sacrifice,  and  in  this 
aspect  he  is  at  present  worshipped  under  the  name 
of  Yajna-Narayana. 

Concerning  the  position  of  Vishnu  in  Vedic 
Mythology,  Muir  says—"  It  will  be  observed  that 
in  the   preceding   classification  of  the  gods,  the 

75 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

principal  places  are  assigned  to  Agni,  Vayu  or 
Indra,  and  Surya,  who  appear  therefore  to  have 
been  regarded  in  the  time  of  Yaska  (the  Vedic 
Commentator),  as  the  triad  of  deities  in  whom  the 
Supreme  Spirit  was  especially  revealed.  Vishnu  is 
only  alluded  to  as  one  of  the  divinities  who  were 
worshipped  conjointly  with  Indra ;  and  Eudra  is 
only  mentioned  as  worshipped  along  with  Soma. 
If  we  may  judge  from  his  silence  regarding  it,  the 
conjunction  of  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Eudra,  as  the 
triple  manifestation  of  the  deity  (trimurti),  would 
appear  to  have  been  unknown  to  Yaska".  Weber 
has  given  his  view  of  Vishnu  in  the  following 
terms  : — "  According  to  our  view  it  would  have 
been  perhaps  more  advantageous  for  the  course  of 
the  representation  in  general  to  start,  not  from  the 
later  triad  of  gods,  but  from  the  Vedic  triad,  which 
so  often  appears  in  the  BraTimana  texts  themselves, 
viz.,  that  of  Agni,  Vayu  and  Surya,  the  rulers  of 
the  earth,  the  air  and  the  heaven ;  as  we  have  in 
fact  actually  to  recognize  this  as  the  foundation  of 
the  later  triad.  The  sun,  as  the  generative,  creative 
principle,  is  throughout  the  ritual-texts  regarded 
as  the  equivalent  of  Prajapati,  the  father  of  crea- 
tion. The  destructive  power  of  fire  in  connection 
with  the  raging  of  the  driving  storm  lies  clearly 
enough  at  the  foundation  of  the  epic  form  of  Siva. 

76 


VISHNU. 

By  the  side  of  Vayu,  the  wind,  stands  his  com- 
panion Indra,  the  lord  of  the  hght,  clear  heaven  ; 
and  with  him  again  Vishnu,  the  lord  of  the  solar 
orb,  stands  in  a  fraternal  relationship.  This  close 
relation  of  Vishnu  to  Indra  is  far  from  being 
estimated  by  the  author  in  its  full  significance. 
Vishnu  owes  to  Indra  his  blue  colour,  his  names 
Vasava  and  Vasudeva,  and  his  relations  to  the 
human  heroes,  as  Arjuna,  Rama  and  Krishna, 
which  have  become  of  great  importance  for  his 
entire  history". 

When  we  come  to  the  later  period  of  the 
Itihasas  and  Puranas,  the  supremacy  of  Vishnu  is 
clearly  established,  and  he  has  already  acquired 
his  place  in  the  Hindu  trinity.  The  manifestations 
of  this  Vishnu  as  the  supreme  protective  god  in 
the  Hindu  trinity  are  all  embodied  in  interesting 
images  some  of  which  we  describe  in  the  following 
pages. 

The  materials  for  the  description  of  the  images 
of  Vishnu  are  not  so  abundant  as  they  are  in  the 
case  of  the  images  of  Siva.  Besides  the  unpublish- 
ed VaiJihanasagama,  the  Tantra-sara  of  Madhva- 
charya  and  a  few  other  minor  works,  no  other 
authorities  are  available  in  relation  to  the  images 
of  Vishnu.  The  Pancharatragama,  which  was 
propagated  in  S.  India  by  the  great  Vaishnava 

77 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

reformer  Eamanujacharya,  is  said  to  consist  oi  one 
hundred  and  eight  aamhitaa  :  of  these  a  very  large 
number  is  reported  by  Vedantadesika  to  have  been 
lost  even  in  his  time.  Of  the  few  of  the  remaining 
saihhitas  that  have  come  down  to  our  own  days, 
only  three  or  four  have  been  published.  The 
Satvata-safiihita,  the  Narada-pancharatra-saihliita 
and  the  Brihad-hralima-samhita  have  appeared  in 
print ;  but  unfortunately  they  do  not  contain  any 
valuable  information  on  the  subject  of  iconography. 
The  Vailihanasagama,  which  is  probably  the  older 
agama  of  the  Vaishnavas,  is  not,  however,  wanting 
in  information  in  this  respect.  In  the  sculptures  of 
Mahabalipuram  and  in  other  Dravidian  rock-cut 
shrines,  including  the  famous  Kailasa  at  EUora,  it 
is  the  Vaililuuiasagama  that  appears  to  have  been 
followed.  This  important  agama  and  other  avail- 
able authorities  have  been  taken  advantage  of  in 
giving  the  following  detailed  description  of  the 
principal  Hindu  images  commonly  met  wifch  in 
India. 

The  principal  image  in  a  Vishnu  temple  is 
generally  represented  in  one  of  three  attitudes,  that 
is,  standing,  sitting  or  reclining.  The  standing  image 
is  called  a  sthanalta-murti,  the  sitting  image  an 
asana-murti  and  the  reclining  image  a  sayana-murti. 
The   images  in  each   of  the   three  attitudes  are 

78 


VISHNU. 

classified  further  into  the  yoga,  bJioga,  vlra  and 
abhichSirilca  varieties  in  consequence  of  certain 
slight  differences  in  their  descriptive  characteristics. 

These  varieties  are  intended  to 
.'^"^*"  ^**^      be   worshipped  by   devotees  with 

different  desires  and  objects  in 
view  :  thus,  the  yogi  should  worship  the  yoga  form 
of  Vishnu,  the  persons  who  desire  enjoyment  should 
worship  the  bhdga  form,  those  who  desire  prowess 
the  I'lra  form,  and  kings  and  others  who  wish  to 
conquer  their  enemies  the  ahhicliariha  form.  Some 
of  the  Vishnu  temples  in  S.  India  have  central 
shrines  built  in  three  storeys  ;  as  examples  we  may 
mention  the  Vaikunthapperumal  temple*  at 
Conjeevaram,  the  Kudal-alagar  temple  at  Madura, 
the  temple  at  Tirukkottiyur  and  the  temple  at 
Mannarkoyil  in  the  Tinnevelly  district.  In  the 
three  storeyed  central  shrine  of  such  temples,  each 
storey  is  occupied  by  an  image  of  Vishnu,  the  stand- 
ing, sitting  and  reclining  images  being  placed  in  the 
lowermost,  middle  and  uppermost  storeys  in  order. 
The  yoga,  bhdga,   vlra  and  abhicharika   images  of 

*  See  the  sectional  elevation  of  tlie  Vaikunthapperumal 
temple  on  PI.  Ixiii,  in  Eae's  Pallava  Architecture,  or  Fig. 
210  on  p.  359  of  Fergusson's  Eastern  and  Indian  Architecture, 
as  re-edited  by  Burgess. 

79 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

Vishnu  are  again  classified  into  superior  (uttavia), 
middling  (madhyama)  and  inferior  (adhama)  forms 
according  to  the  number  of  the  subordinate  deities 
and  other  beings  found  in  association  with  the 
central  Vishnu  image. 

It  is  taught  that  the  images  of  Vishnu  should 
always  be  sculptured  in  keeping  with  the  iittama- 
da'sa-tala  measure,  a  complete  description  of  which 
may  be  found  in  Appendix  B. 

As  the  name  indicates  this  is  a  yoga  variety  of 
the  standing  figure  of  Vishnu.  It  should  have  four 
arms  and  should  be  of  dark  colour.  The  back 
right  hand  has  to  carry  the  chakra,  while  the  front 
one  is  to  be  in  the  abhaya  or  varada  pose.  The 
„       ,,       ,         front  left  arm  should  rest  upon  the 

Yogastnanaka-  *■ 

"^'^'^ti-  hip  {latyavala7nbita-hasta),  while 

the  back  left  hand  has  to  hold  the  sahhha.  The 
rishis,  Bhrigu  and  Markandeya,  have  to  be  sculp- 
tured as  kneeling  and  resting  on  one  knee  on  the 
right  and  left  respectively  of  Vishnu  ;  or  the  goddess 
Bhudevi  and  Markandeya*  have  to  be  sculptured  on 
the  right  and  the  left  of  the  Vishnu  image.  The 
figure  of  Siva  has  to  be  carved  on  the  north  wall  of 


*  Punya  is  another  name  of  Markarndeya :  in  the 
Vaikhanasagama  Punya,  Puraija  and  Amita  are  given  as 
synonyms  for  Markandeya  :  iTT^Ttjf  giref  g^l>Jiq-i%^]%]%  \\ 

80 


PLATE  XVII. 


Ma'ihyama  Yogasthanakatnurti  :  Stone  ;  Mahabalipuram. 

[To  (ace  page  80.] 


PLATE  XYIII. 


zm 


^.r^- 


\ 

y^^,^ 


•"•^;'sit:S^4*^i£iis*Ssii'_-.i7 


A\'it<,'>*«»\^ 


Bhogasthanakamurti :  Bronze:  Madras  Museum. 
[To  face  page  81.] 


VISHNU. 

of  the  central  shrine  so  as  to  face  the  south.  It 
should  have  four  arms ;  one  of  the  left  arms  has 
to  rest  on  the  hip,  while  the  other  has  to  carry  a 
deer  ;  the  raised  right  hand  has  to  hold  a  parasu, 
and  the  other  right  hand  being  held  in  the  abhaya 
pose.  On  the  south  wall  of  the  central  shrine  facing 
the  north,  a  standing  image  of  Brahma  should  be 
sculptured  with  four  arms  ;  two  of  the  hands  should 
carry  respectively  the  asJihamala  and  the  kaman- 
daJtt,  while  the  third  hand  has  to  be  held  up  so  as 
to  represent  Brahma  in  the  act  of  praising  Vishnu, 
the  fourth  being  placed  on  the  hip  in  the  katya- 
valamhita  pose.  Vishnu  in  association  with  the 
deities  and  rishis  mentioned  above  is  understood  to 
be  the  Yogasthanakamurti  of  the  w^^ama  class.  If 
the  subordinate  images  of  Brahma  and  Siva  happen 
to  be  wanting  in  the  group,  then  the  main  central 
image  of  Vishnu  is  said  to  be  of  the  maclhyama 
class ;  and  if  the  Pujakamunis  are  also  omitted, 
the  group  is  held  to  belong  to  the  aclhama 
class. 

This  is  also  a  standing  image  of  Vishnu  having 

four  arms.     The  image  carries  the 

^^°e:asthanaka-     cliakra  and  hahkha  in  the  two  back 

hands.  The  front  right  hand  is  in 
the  abhaya  or  the  varada  pose,  while  the  front  left 
hand  hangs  by  the  side  so  as  to  rest  upon  the  hip 

81 
11 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

or  is  made  to  be  in  the  kataha  pose.  The  colour  of 
the  Bhogasthanahamiirti  has  also  to  be  dark.  The 
figure  of  Sridevi  should  be  made  to  stand  on  the 
right  side  of  Vishnu,  with  her  right  leg  placed  firmly 
on  the  ground  and  the  left  slightly  bent.  In  the 
right  hand  of  this  goddess  there  should  be  a  lotus 
flower,  and  the  left  hand  should  be  allowed  to  hang 
freely  by  her  side.  The  colour  of  Sridevi  has  to  be 
golden  yellow.  On  the  left  of  the  figure  of  Vishnu, 
there  should  be  the  image  of  Bhudevi,  whose 
colour  has  to  be  dark.  In  her  left  hand  she  should 
be  made  to  hold  the  blue  water-lily,  and  her  right 
hand  should  be  made  to  hang  freely  by  her  side. 
On  the  right  and  left  of  Vishnu  respectively  Bhrigu 
and  Purana,  obviously  meaning  Markandeya,  have 
to  be  kneeling  on  one  knee,  or  sitting  in  the 
titJattiJcasana  posture.  Above  the  central  figure  of 
Vishnu  there  should  be  the  images  of  the  goddesses 
Maya,  Samhladini,  Kamini  and  Vyajani,  of  the 
divine  musicians  Tumburu  and  Narada,  of  a  pair  of 
Kinnaras,  of  a  Yaksha,  a  Vidyadhara,  the  risJiis 
Sanaka,  Sanatkumara  and  the  luminaries  Surya 
(sun)  and  Chandra  (moon\  On  the  north  and  the 
south  walls  of  the  central  shrine  the  figures  of  Siva 
and  Brahma  have  to  be  respectively  worked  out  as 
in  the  case  of  Yogasthanahamurti.  The  image  of 
Vishnu,   in    association^  with  ^the  group    of  gods. 


82 


PLATE  XIX 


Adhama  Bhogasthanakamurti  : 
Stone ;  Tiruvottiyur. 


[To  face  page  82  ] 


PLiTS    XX 


Bhogasthanakamurti :  Stone:  Tarlpatri. 


[To  lace  page  83.] 


VISHNU. 

goddesses  and  devotees  as  described  above,  is  said 
to  constitute  a  Bhogasthanakamiu-ti  of  the  uttama 
class.  If  the  figures  of  the  Yaksha,  the  Vidyadhara, 
of  Narada  and  Tumburu  be  absent  from  the  group, 
the  image  will  belong  to  the  madhyama  class.  If, 
in  addition,  the  figures  of  Sanaka,  Sanatkumara, 
Surya,  Chandra  and  the  Pujakamunis  be  also 
absent  from  the  group,  the  central  image  of  Vishnu 
will  belong  to  the  adhama  class. 

In   this,  as  in  the  previous    instances,     the 

central  figure  is  a  standing  image 
^'"^muru.*^*"      of  Vishnu.     He  Carries  in  his  hands 

cliakra  and  sankha  as  usual.  The 
Sanskrit  texts  do  not  mention  for  what  purpose  the 
other  hands  are  to  be  used.  Surrounding  the  figure 
of  Vishnu,  the  following  images  have  to  be  sculp- 
tured, namely,  those  of  Brahma,  Siva,  Bhrigu, 
Markandeya  Kishkindha,  Sundara,  Sanaka,  Sanat- 
kumara, Surya  and  Chandra.  It  is  not  easy  to 
make  out  who  are  referred  to  by  the  names 
Kishkindha  and  Sundara  here.  In  company  with 
such  a  group  of  images  the  standing  figure  of 
Vishnu  happens  to  be  the  Ylrasthana'kamurti  of 
the  uttuma  class.  If,  however,  the  images  of 
Kishkindha,  Sundara,  Sanaka,  Sanatkumara  be 
absent,  it  will  belong  to  the  madhyama  class.  If, 
further,    the  images  of    Surya,  Chandra  and  the 

83 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Pujakamunis*  be  also  absent,  it  will  be  known  as 
belonging  to  the  adliavia  class. 

This  type  among  the  images  of  Vishnu  has 

either  four  or  two  arms,  has  to  be 
Bthanakamu^rti.       ^^  ^^"^^  complexion  and  possess  a 

faded  countenance.  This  image 
should  be  clothed  in  black,  and  is  not  to  be  sur- 
rounded by  any  divine  beings  or  human  votaries  as 
in  the  previous  cases.  If  a  temple  for  this  type  of 
Vishnu  has  to  be  built,  it  is  said  that  there  should 
be  no  beauty  or  symmetry  in  its  construction  and 
that  it  should  be  situated  in  the  quarter  known  as 
the  paisachajjadaA     The  ceremony  of   installing 


'^  The  Pujakamunis  mentioned  in   the  description  of  all 

the  aspects  of  Vishnu  appear  to  refer  to  Bhrigu  and  Markan- 
deya. 

•^^tti^cr^n^rft^  ^reg»iprf^  ^-  ii 

=Er3Eisrf^i%*rTJt  g  sri^^i^g^  ft  i 


84 


PLATE  XXI. 


SthanakaoQurti :  Scooe  ;  Mathura  Museum. 
[Between  pages  81  and  85.] 


PLATE  XXII 


Bhogasthanakamurti :  Bronze:  Madras   Museum. 
[Between  pages  84  and  85.] 


PLATE  XXIII. 


^^^ 


.s^ 


Madhyama  Bhoi:;Sthanakamu!  ti  :  BroDze  :    Madras  AJuseum. 
Bctwten  pase;  Si  and  55. _ 


VISHNU. 

the  abhicharikamurtis  should  be  conducted  in  the 
dark  half  of  the  month  under  such  inauspicious 
asterisms  as  the  Ardra  iiaksJiatra  and  at  night  in 
a  chararasi  month. ' 

This  is  a  seated  figure   of  Vishnu  with  four 
arms,    and  should    have    a  white 

Yogasanamurti.  ,       .  .         ,        ,       , 

complexion  ;  on  its  head  there 
should  be  ?bjatamaJiuta,  and  the  asana  on  which  it 
is  seated  should  be  the  hrahmasana  which  is 
synonymous  with  the padniasana.     The  front  hands 

^?ir^^  wit-  sTrrwiTS^RRT^  rrm  ii 

If  a  village  is  divided  into  five  (concentric)  divisions,  the 
outermost  one  is  called  the  paiiachapada  :  temples  for  Siva, 
Vishnu  and  the  Saptamatrikas  must  be  built  in  this  division. 
Or  the  village  might  he  conceived  as  divided  into  sixty- four 
squares  by  two  sets  of  nine  lines  drawn  at  right  angles.  The 
space  covered  by  the  four  central  squares  is  called  the  brahrna- 
pada,  the  next  outer  circuit  of  twenty  squares  is  called  the 
daivika-pada,  the  circuit  of  twenty  squares  immediately 
surrounding  this  daivika-pada  is  called  the  vianusha-pada 
and  the  outer-most  circuit  of  twenty-eight  squares  is  called 
the  paisacha-pada. 

*  Chara-rdsi  is  the  same  as  chara-bhavanam ;  this  is  said  to 
be  '  the  varying  signs  of  the  zodiac,  i.e.,  the  first,  fourth,  seventh 
and  tenth  '  which  are  Mesha,  Earkataka,  Tula  and  Makara. 

85 


HINDU  IGONOGEAPHY. 

of  this  Vishnu  image  are  to  be  in  the  yoga-mudra 
pose.     It  is  distinctly  mentioned  that  sanJcJia  and 
chahra  ought  not  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  this 
image.     The  colour  of  the  underwear  of  this  deity 
has  to  be  yellow  and  that  of  the  upper  cloth  has  to 
be  white.     The  image  is  shown  as  wearing  a  yajTib- 
pavlta  on  the  body,  kitndalas  in  the  ears,  keyuras 
on  the  arms  and  a  hara  round  the  neck.     Its  eyes 
have  to  be  slightly  closed.     On  the  north  wall  of 
the  shrine  of  the  Yogasanamurti  the  figure  of  Siva 
in  the  sitting  posture  should  be  sculptured,  and 
on  the  south  wall  that  of  Brahma  in   the  same 
posture.     On  the  back  wall,  which  is  the  western 
one,  there  are  to  be  the  figures  of  Chandra,  Barya, 
Sanaka  and  Sanatkumara.     On  either  side  of  the 
central  Vishnu  image  Bhrigu  and  Markandeya  or 
Markandeya  and  Bhumidevi  have  to  be  represented. 
A  grouping  of  deities  and  votaries  such  as  this  is 
essential   in   relation    to  the  iittama  class  of  the 
Yogasanamurti  of  Vishnu.     If  the  images  of  Chand- 
ra, Surya,  Sanaka  and  Sanatkumara  happen  to  be 
omitted  in  the  group  the  image  would  belong  to  the 
madlujama  class  ;  it  would  belong  to  the  adliama 
class,  if  Bhrigu  and  Markandeya  be  also  wanting 
in  addition. 

The  following  slightly  different  description  of 
the  Yogesvara  form  of  the  image  of  Vishnu  is  found 

86 


PLATE  XXI Y. 


[To  face  page  87.] 


Yogaaanamurti  :  Stone  :  Bagali. 


VISHNU. 

in  the  Sidclhartha-samhita  as  quoted  in  the 
Vachaspatya-kosa  According  to  this  authority- 
Vishnu  has  to  be  sculptured  as  seated  upon  the 
paclmasana  with  the  eyes  slightly  closed  and  the 
vision  fixed  upon  the  tip  of  the  nose.  The  two 
front  hands  should  be  kept  on  the  crossed  legs  in 
the  yogamudra  pose.  On  either  side  of  the  seated 
figure  have  to  be  carved  a  padma  and  a  large  sized 
gada  respectively.  In  the  two  other  hands  which 
are  somewhat  raised  there  should  be  the  sudarsana- 
chahra  and  the  panchajanya-hanTilia.  This  aspect 
of  Vishnu  is  conceived  to  bestow  the  salvation  of 
souls  from  the  bondage  of  birth  and  death,  and  is 
therefore  specially  fit  to  be  worshipped  by  yogins. 
In  this  aspect  Vishnu  is  seated  on  a  simliasana, 
with  his  consorts  Lakshmi  and 
°^  '     Bhumidevi   on  the  right    and  left 

sides  respectively.  The  colour  of  this  form  of 
Vishnu  has  to  be  dark.  He  should  have  four  arms, 
in  one  of  the  two  right  hands  the  chaJcra  has  to 
be  held,  while  the  other  has  to  be  in  the  varada 
or  ahliaya  pose.  Of  the  left  hands  one  has  to  carry 
the  sanhha  and  the  other  has  to  rest  on  the  hip  or 
upon  the  lap  or  kept  in  the  simhaJcarna  pose.  To 
the  [right  of  Vishnu  there  should  be,  as  we  have 
already  said,  the  image  of  Lakshmi.  Her  left  leg 
should  be  folded  and    made   to  rest  on  the   seat, 

87 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

while  the  right  one  has  to  be  hanging.  Similarly 
Bhumidevi,  who  has  to  be  on  the  left  of  Vishnu 
should  have  her  right  leg  folded  and  resting  on 
the  seat,  the  left  one  being  left  hanging.  Lakshmi 
should  carry  a  lotus  in  her  left  hand,  and  Bhumi- 
devi a  nllotpala  in  her  right  hand;  their  other  hands 
are  to  rest  upon  the  slmliasana  or  to  be  kept  on 
their  laps  or  to  be  held  in  the  liataha  pose.  On  the 
south  wall  of  the  shrine  of  Bhogasanamurti  there 
should  be  the  image  of  Brahma  and  on  the  north 
wall  that  of  Siva,  both  these  images  being  in  the 
sitting  posture.  Markandeya  and  Bhrigu  have  to 
be  kneeling  with  one  knee  on  the  floor.  The  rest  of 
the  details  are  exactly  similar  to  those  given  in  the 
description  of  the  Yogrisanamarti.  On  the  back 
wall  of  the  shrine  immediately  behind  the  central 
figure  of  Vishnu  there  should  be  the  images  of  the 
goddesses  Maya  and  Samhladini,  of  Tumburu  and 
Narada,  of  a  pair  of  Kinnaras,  a  Yaksha  and  a 
Vidyadhara,  the  risliis  Sanaka  and  Sanatkumara 
and  of  Chandra  and  Surya.  The  celestial  halpaha 
tree  should  also  be  sculptured  on  the  wall.  A  group- 
ing such  as  this  constitutes  the  ntfama  class  of 
Bhogasanamurti.  If  the  Kinnaras,  Tumburu  and 
the  Narada,  the  Yaksha  and  the  Vidyadhara  happen 
to  be  absent,  the  image  of  Mshnu  would  be  consider- 
ed to  belong  to  the  inadhijauia  class;  if  further  the 

88 


PLATE  XXV 


Bhogasaoamurti :  Stone  :  Badaoni. 


[To  face  page  89.] 


PLATE   XXVI. 


B 

> 


c 
o 
o 


a 
o 


a 
Id 

lO 

s 


•-a 


[Between  pages  88  ani  89  ' 


PLATE  XXYII. 


■■*  •'r-''-f''**t. 


^1  adlu  ania   l->ho;:as:in,v.nuirtii  :   S(,ono  :    l-iUova. 


PLATE  XXVIII 


^.  VT^ 


f   '    *  .» 


<5D 


Bhogasanamurti :  Slone  ;  Dadikkombu. 
[Between  pages  83  and  89  ] 


PLATE  XXX 


.  /^jv  "'  ^  ".mp^'f-  >^*i'3«rr> ' 


o 


c 
o 

03 


S 

cS 


[To  (ace  page  89.] 


VISHNU. 

images  of  Saaaka  and  Sanatkumara,  Surya  and 
Chandra  and  the  Pujakamunis  be  wanting,  it  would, 
belong  to  the  adliama  class. 

This  variety  of  the  image  of  Vishnu  is  repre- 
sented as  seated  upon  the  simhasana 

Virasanamurti. 

with  the  left  leg  bent  and  the  right 
somewhat  extended.  Lakshmi  and  Bhumidevi 
should  be  shown  in  association  with  it  as  kneeling 
on  the  floor  on  one  knee  in  the  positions  generally 
occupied  by  the  sages  Markandeya  and  Bhrigu. 
This  image  of  Vishnu  should  be  draped  in  black 
clothing,  while  the  colour  of  the  figure  itself  has  to 
be  coral-red.  In  one  of  the  right  hands  the  chak- 
ra  should  be  held  and  the  other  hand  should  be 
in  the  abhaya  pose.  One  of  the  left  hands  has  to 
hold  the  saiikha  and  the  other  left  hand  should  be 
in  the  sirhha-Jiarna  pose.  On  the  right  of  the 
figure  of  Vishnu  there  are  to  be  the  images  of 
Brahma  and  Markandeya,  and  on  the  left  of  Siva 
and  Bhrigu.  Two  celestial  damsels,  Kamini  and 
Vyajani,  should  be  shown  as  waving  chamaras  on 
both  the  sides,  and  there  should  also  be  the  following 
figures  surrounding  the  central  image,  namely,  those 
of  Sanaka,  Sanatkumara,  Tumburu,  Narada,  Surya 
and  Chandra.  Such  a  group  of  images  is  repre- 
sentative of  the  Virasanamurti  of  the  uttama  class. 
If  Tumburu,  Narada,  Kamini,  Vyajani,  Sanaka  and 

89 

13 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Sanatkumara  be  absent  from  the  group,  then  the 
image  of  Vishnu  would  belong  to  the  rnadhyama 
class  of  the  Virasana  variety.  And  if  the  figures  of 
Brahma,  Siva,  Lakshmi,  BhOmidevi  and  Surya  and 
Chandra  be  absent  it  would  belong  to  the  aclhama 
class. 

This  is  also  a  seated  image  with  either  two  or 
four  hands.     The  seat  upon  which 

Abhicharika-  .1  ■      •  r  tt'   1  •  -1      , 

sanamurti.  ^'^^^  image  ot  Vishnu  IS  made  to  sit 

is  known  as  the  vedikasana,  which 
is  an  unadorned  pedestal   meant  to  be   used   for 
minor  deities.     The   AWiicliarihasanaiiiurti  must 
have  an  ill-looking  face  suggestive  of  viciousness  or 
ta  iiias'a-guna.     The  complexion  of  the  figure  of  this 
form  of  Vishnu  has  to  be  blue  and  the  colour  of  the 
garment  should  be  black.  The  eyes  must  be  upHfted ; 
there  should  be  no  attendant  deities  around.     The 
installation  of  this  kind  of  image  should  take  place 
in  what  is  called  a  chara-rasi  month,  on  the  Ashtami 
tithl  in  the  dark  fortnight,  and  under  such  inauspi- 
cious asterisms  as  the  Ardra  nahshatra.   The  shrine 
should  be  situated  in  the  paisacha-pada  and  should 
face  the  direction  of  the  enemy  who  is  to  be  injured. 
This  is  a  recumbent  image  of  Vishnu  with  only 
two  hands ;  about  a  fourth  of  the 
^°^S,i!^^'       body  should  be  somewhat  raised, 
and  the  remaining   three-fourths 

90 


t»L,ATB  XXIX 


(Fig.  1.)  Bhogasanamurti :  Ivory  :  Trivandram. 


(Pig.  2.)  Yogasayanamiirti :  Ivory  :  Trivandram. 

[To  face  page  90. J 


PLATE  XXXI. 


3 
a. 


a 

o 

GQ 


Id 

a 

ca 


lO 

a 

>. 

M 


[To  face  page  91.] 


VISHNU. 

should  be  lying  flat  upon  the  serpent  bed.     The 
right  hand  should  be  placed  near  the  pillow  so  as 
to  touch  the  hirlta ;  the  other  hand,  bent  at  the 
elbow,  should  be  held  in  the  liataha  pose.     Or,  this 
left  hand  may  be  made  to  be  parallel  to  the  body 
so  as  sometimes  to  touch  the  thigh.     The  right  leg 
has  to  be  stretched  out,  while   the  left,  should  be 
slightly  bent.     The  image  itself  should  be  adorned 
with  various  ornaments.     The  eyes  must  be  some- 
what opened.     The  colour  of  the  image  should  be 
a  mixture  of  black  and  yellow.     By  the  side  of  this 
recumbent    figure   there    should  be   Bhrigu    and 
Markandeya,  and  near  the  feet,  the  demons  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha,  while  on  the  lotus  issuing  from  the 
navel  there  should  be  Brahma.     On  the  back  wall  of 
the  shrine  and  above  the  level  of  the  image  of 
Vishnu  should  be   sculptured   the   images   of    the 
Ayudha-purushas,  of  Gavuda,  of  Vishvaksena,  and 
of  the  Sapta-rishis,  all  standing  with  their  hands  in 
the    anjali  pose.     On   the    south  wall  should   be 
shown  Brahma,  and  on  the  north  wall  Siva, — both 
in  the  sitting  posture.     Such  a  group  constitutes 
the   uttama   class   of    Yogasayanamurti.      If    the 
figures  of  the   Sapta-rishis  and    Vishvaksena   are 
absent,  the  group  belongs  to  the  madhyama  class  ;  if 
the  Pujakamunis  and  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  are  also 
absent,  it  is  conceived  to  belong  to  the  arlhama  class. 

91 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

This  type  of  the  image  of  Vishnu  should  be  of 

dark  colour  and  have  two  or  four 
^  Bhogasayana-      ^^^^    ^^^^   ^    ^^^   ^^^-j^    ^^^^_      jj. 

should  be  recumbent,  with  a  fourth 
of  the  body  slightly  raised  and  the  remaining  three- 
fourths  lying  flat  upon  the  serpent-bed.  One  of  the 
right  hands  should  be  made  to  touch  the  JcirUa  or  be 
stretched  out  towards  the  head.  One  of  the  left 
hands  is  to  be  made  to  lie  parallel  to  the  body  so 
as  to  rest  upon  the  thigh.  Nothing  is  mentioned 
about  the  other  two  hands,  when  the  image  is  given 
four  of  them.  The  right  leg  should  be  stretched  out 
straight  and  the  left  should  be  slightly  bent.  It  is 
laid  down  that  the  distance  between  the  two  legs 
should  be  twenty  angulas,  that  between  the  ankles 
four  angulas,  and  that  between  the  knees  fourteen 
angulas.  The  face  of  the  image  should  be  deflected 
from  the  medial  \iia.e(brahmasutra)  by  three  angulas. 
On  the  head-side  of  this  recumbent  figure  of 
Vishnu  there  should  be  the  figure  of  Lakshmi  seated 
so  as  to  be  in  contact  with  the  shoulders  of  Vishnu. 
This  goddess  should  have  in  her  right  hand  a  lotus 
and  hold  her  left  hand  in  the  JcataJca  pose. 

In  another  manuscript  it  is  stated  that  one  half  of  the 
body  should  be  raised  and  the  other  half  should  rest  upon 
the  serpent-bed.  The  whole  body  of  Vishnu  in  this  recumbent 
posture  should  resemble  a  bow. 

92 


PLATE  XXXIII 


^^m 


a 
o 


lO 


[To  fane  page  92.] 


PLATE  XXXIY 


i'*:* 

c3 

.A^K 

a! 

<^^ 

' 

0 

y 

a 

c3 

'5 

'""     \--' 

M 

V    '-'-J  ^. 

<D 

^■'■' 

c 

o 

<i^ 

cc 

-is 

''■   .''    i      ■    ;     ■ 

^ 

■-     t'  \- 

t3 

.  ^'  V.- 

a 

!"-•  / 

03 

■  1    r :-,; 

a 

e3 

i." ,  ■'  ^'  *■■ 

;>= 

/.V;'.>X'«  ,  ■ 

c3 

^t» 

K         '     '        \     ' 

C3 

on 

/      '  1 

lO 

'         "               1 

^ 

-'  --■'  '-  - 

pq 

[To  (ace  page  93. 


VISHNU. 

Bhumidevi  should  be  shown  seated  on  the 
foot-side  of  Vishnu  so  as  to  make  her  touch  the 
left  foot  of  the  recumbent  Vishnu.  This  goddess 
should  hold  a  nllotpala  flower  in  her  right  hand 
and  keep  the  left  hand  in  the  hataka  pose.  On  the 
right  side  of  the  hautula-bera  there  should  be  the 
seated  image  of  Markandeya,  and  corresponding 
to  it  on  the  left,  there  should  be  the  image  of 
Bhrigu.  On  the  south  wall  should  be  sculptured 
the  figure  of  Brahma  and  on  the  north  wall  that  of 
Siva,  both  of  them  being  in  the  sitting  posture. 
Again,  on  the  south  (apparently  outside  the  shrine 
and  in  niches  provided  for  them  in  the  wall),  there 
should  be  the  figure  of  Ganesa,  and  on  the  north 
that  of  Durga.  Near  the  feet  of  the  central  image 
of  Vishnu  the  demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  should 
be  worked  out  in  a  ferocious  attitude  indicating 
their  tendency  to  rush  into  violent  action,  their 
legs  below  the  knees  being  hidden  within  the  waves 
of  the  ocean.  They  should  both  be  made  to  appear 
to  be  suffering  from  the  scorching  effect  of  the 
poisonous  breath  of  Adisesha,  the  serpent  upon 
which  Vishnu  is  reclining.  Brahma  should  be 
seated  on  the  lotus  which  issues  from  the  navel 
of  Vishnu  ;  on  his  right  there  ought  to  be  the  five 
Ayudha-purushas  and  Garuda.  Above  the  figure 
of  Garuda  on  his  right  there  should  be  the  figure  of 

93 


HINDU  lOONOGRAPHY. 

the  sun-god  Surya.  Similarly  on  the  left  of 
Brahma  should  be  shown  the  Asvini-devatas, 
Tumburu  and  Narada,  represented  as  young  child- 
ren, and  also  Chandra  the  moon.  Besides  these 
there  should  also  be  the  guardian  deities  of  the 
eight  quarters,  the  DiJc-palakas  as  they  are  called, 
and  Apsaras  damsels  waving  chamaras.  A  collec- 
tion of  gods  and  votaries  as  described  above  makes 
the  central  Bhogasaijanamurti  belong  to  the  utiama 
class.  If  the  figures  of  Tumburu  and  Narada  and 
of  the  Dikpalakas  be  absent,  it  would  belong  to 
the  madhyama  class  ;  and  if  the  figures  of  the 
Piijakamunis  and  the  Apsaras  damsels  be  further 
wanting  in  the  group,  it  would  then  belong  to  the 
aclliama  class. 

This    is   also   a   reclining   figure   of  Vishnu  ; 
its    colour   has   also    to    be    dark. 

murtT^*^*^*'  ^^^  °^  '^®  right  arms  should  be 
made  to  serve  as  a  pillow  for  the 
head,  while  the  other  should  hold  the  cliahra ; 
similarly  one  of  the  left  hands,  carries  the  saiiklia, 
the  other  left  hand  being  stretched  out  parallel 
to  the  body.  On  the  sides  of  the  feet  of  Vishnu 
there  should  be  seated  the  goddesses  Lakshmi 
and  Bhumidevi.  The  demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha 
should  be  holding  the  feet  of  Vishnu  in  their 
hands  as   if  in  the  act  of  supplication.     Ou  the 

94 


VISHNU. 

right  and  left  of  the  Jiautaka-befa  there  should  be 
the  sages  Markandeya  and  Bhrigu  respectively,  and 
Brahma  should  be  seated  on  the  lotus  issuing  from 
the  navel  of  the  recumbent  image  of  Vishnu.  The 
five  Ayudha-purushas,  Garuda,  Chandra  and  Surya, 
the  seven  rishis  and  the  twelve  Adityas  and  the 
eleven  Rudras,  Apsaras  damsels,  Tumburu  and 
Narada,  two  Kinnaras,  Sanaka  and  Sanatkumara, 
and  Brahma  (?)  and  Siva  should  also  be  shown  on 
the  wall  at  the  back  of  the  shrine.  Then  the  image 
of  Vishnu  would  belong  to  the  icttama  class  of  Vlra- 
sayanamurti.  The  five  well-known  weapons  of 
Vishnu  are,  the  chaJcra,  gacla,  saiikha,  dhanus  and 
hhadga.  If  the  Rudras,  the  Adityas,  the  Apsaras 
damsels  and  the  seven  rishis  be  absent  from  the 
group,  the  image  of  Vishnu  would  belong  to  the 
viadhyafna  class ;  and  if,  in  addition  to  these,  the 
Kinnaras,  Sanaka,  Sanatkumara  and  the  Pujaka- 
munis  be  also  absent,  it  would  belong  to  the  adhama 
class  of  Vlrasayanamurti. 

In  this  case  the  image  of  Vishnu  should  be 
lying  on  the  floor,  the  bed  consis- 
satanim^L^'  ti^g  0^  the  serpent  Adisesha  with 
a  hood  having  only  two  heads  and 
with  the  body  coiled  into  two  turns.  The  hood  of 
the  serpent  should  not  be  raised  high.  The  com- 
plexion of  the  Vishnu  image  should  be  blue  ;  and  it 

95 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

may  have  two  or  four  arms,  and  should  be  shown 
to  be  in  full  slumber  and  therefore  lying  completely 
flat  on  the  serpent.  The  face  should  be  so  made 
as  to  present  a  faded  appearance,  and  the  image 
must  be  clad  in  black  clothing.  There  should  be 
no  attendant  deities.  Such  a  figure  is  conceived 
to  belong  to  the  idtataa  class  of  the  Ahhicharika- 
murtl-  If  the  serpent  has  one  head  and  has  its 
body  coiled  only  into  one  turn,  the  image  of  Vishnu 
lying  thereon  would  belong  to  the  madJiyama  class. 
Again,  if  the  image  has  no  serpent-bed  at  all  and 
is  made  to  be  lying  fiat  on  the  bare  floor,  it  would 
belong  to  the  adhaiiia  class. 

In  illustration  of  the  standing,  sitting  and 
reclining  images  of  Vishnu,  figures  prepared  from 
photographs  of  nineteen  such  actual  images  belong- 
ing to  the  various  parts  of  India  are  given  herein. 
Plate  XVII  represents  an  image  found  in  Maha- 
balipuram  and  belongs  to  the  inadhyaiiia  class  of 
the  Ydgasthd)iakainTirti.  Resting  on  one  knee  are 
found  on  the  right  and  left  of  Vishnu  the  images 
of  Bhrigu  and  Markandeya.  They  have  one  of 
their  hands  in  the  pose  of  praising,  while  the  other 
is  seen  resting  upon  the  hip.  Tlieir  heads  carry 
jatainaknta,  which  is  a  characteristic  of  rishis  in 
general.  Above  these  images  of  Bhrigu  and  Mar- 
kandeya there  are  the  images  of  two  dwarfs,  who 

96 


VISHNU. 

are  very  probably  the  Aijnclha-punishas  relating 
to  the  Chakra  and  Sankha ;  both  these  images 
are  also  seen  to  have  one  of  the  hands  in  the 
pose  of  praising.  The  central  figure  of  Vishnu 
wears  the  hirlta-makuta  and  carries  in  one  of  its 
right  hands  the  chakra  and  in  one  of  the  left  hands 
the  sankha ;  the  other  rigiit  hand  is  in  the  ahhaija 
pose  while  the  other  left  hand  is  seen  to  be  resting 
upon  the  hip  in  the  katyavalambita  pose.  Across 
the  chest  and  passing  over  the  front  right  arm  is  the 
yajnopavita ;  round  the  neck  the  hara  is  worn,  and 
the  udara-handha  goes  round  the  abdomen ;  and 
there  are  keyuras  on  the  arms  and  katakas  on  the 
wrists.  This  image  of  Vishnu  is  standing  on  the 
padma-pitha.  It  may  be  assigned  to  the  seventh 
or  at  the  latest  to  the  eighth  century  A.D.,  as  all 
the  works  of  sculpture  found  in  Mahabalipuram 
were  executed  in  the  palmy  days  of  Pallava  rule 
and  prosperity  in  South  India. 

Plate  XVIII  represents  a  bronze  statuette  of 
the  Bhogasthanakarnurti  preserved  in  the  Central 
Museum  at  Madras.  It  appears  to  have  lain  buried 
in  the  earth  and  discovered  as  a  treasure-trove ;  its 
face  and  portions  of  its  chest  are  covered  with 
verdigris,  but  in  other  respects  it  is  in  an  excellent 
state  of  preservation.  This  figure  of  Vishnu  carries 
in  its  back  right  and  left  hands  the  chakra  and  the 

97 
18 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

miikha  respectively,  while  the  front  right  hand  is 
held  in  the  ahhaya  pose  and  the  front  left  hand 
is  made  to  rest  upon  the  gada.  The  image  is 
adorned  with  the  hirlta-mahuta  on  the  head,  with 
inaliara-hmidcdas  in  the  ears,  with  haras  round  the 
neck,  with  the  yajnopavlta  smdudara-bandha  round 
the  body,  with  keyuras  on  the  arms  and  katakas  on 
the  wrist.  The  figure  stands  upon  the  padma- 
pltha,  which  has  on  either  side  a  vertical  metallic 
strut  to  fix  the  prabhavali  on.  From  the  features 
noticeable  in  the  workmanship  and  its  details,  it 
may  be  assigned  to  tbe  tenth  or  the  eleventh 
century  A.D. 

The  figure  of  Vishnu  reproduced  on  Plate  XIX 
is  seen  set  up  in  a  niche  on  the  west  wall  of  a 
shrine  in  the  large  Siva  temple  at  Tiruvottiyur  near 
Madras.  This  shrine  was,  according  to  an  inscrip- 
tion found  on  a  wall  therein,  constructed  in  the 
fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Rajakesarivarman  Vira- 
rajendradeva  (A.D.  1067-8.)  Therefore  the  image 
of  Vishnu  shown  on  Plate  XIX  must  have  been  set 
up  about  this  period  and  must  be  nearly  eight  and 
a  half  centuries  old.  Being  placed  in  its  present 
position  as  an  attendant  deity,  it  is  naturally  isolat- 
ed, and  has  no  deities  and  votaries  in  association 
with  itself :  it  should  therefore  be  classed  as  a 
Bhogasthdnakamarti  of  the  adJiavia  class. 

98 


VISHNU. 

The  photograph  of  the  standing  figure  of 
Vishnu  reproduced  on  Plate  XX  represents  an 
image  from  Tadpatri  which  belongs  to  the  highly 
degenerated  later  period  of  the  Hoysala  school  of 
sculpture  in  South  India.  Marked  features  of 
degeneration  in  the  art  are  prominently  visible  in 
the  long  inartistic  nose  of  the  image,  in  its  very 
small  chin  and  disproportionately  broad  shoulders. 
Like  the  figure  shown  on  Plate  XIX,  the  image  of 
Vishnu  in  this  case  also  holds  the  chal-ra  and 
sankha  in  the  back  hands  ;  the  front  right  hand  is 
in  the  varada  pose,  while  the  front  left  hand  is  in 
the  katyavalamhifa  pose.  On  the  right  of  this 
central  Vishnu  there  is  the  image  of  Lakshmi  and 
on  the  left  that  of  Bhumidevi.  The  height  of  these 
goddesses  is  up  to  the  knee  of  Vishnu,  as  required 
by  some  authorities.  The  goddess  Lakshmi  holds 
a  lotus  in  her  left  hand,  and  Bhumidevi  has  a 
nllotpala  in  her  right  hand.  In  the  light  of  the 
conventional  art  of  image-making  this  piece  of 
sculpture  is  not  without  merit ;  but  otherwise  it 
is  certainly  disappointing.  The  stone  statuette  of 
Vishnu  preserved  in  the  Mathura  Museum  at 
Muttra,  is  reproduced  from  a  photograph  on  Plate 
XXI.  It  may  be  seen  to  carry  in  its  back  right 
hand  the  gacla,  in  the  back  left  hand  the  cliakra,  in 
the  front  left  hand  the  sahhha,  and  in  the  front 

99 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

right  hand  a  full-blown  lotus.  A  'Vishnu-image, 
which  carries  the  chakra,  kmllta,  gacla  Siud  padma 
in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  carried  in  the 
present  instance,  is  considered  to  be  a  special  form  of 
Trivikrama.  The  chief  peculiarities  worth  noticing 
in  this  image  are  the  curious  cut  of  the  face  and 
the  shape  of  the  klnta.  The  face  is  of  the  type 
which  is  characteristic  of  the  sculptures  in  Northern 
India  generally,  and  more  especially  in  Bengal. 
Its  oblique  eyes,  thin  lips  and  pointed  chin  clearly 
indicate  the  Mangoloid  features.  This  type,  we  are 
told  by  Mr.  Abanindranath  Tagore,  is  known  in 
Bengal  as  the  pan  or  leaf-shaped  type,  and  is 
characteristic  of  the  Bengal-Orissa  school  of  sculp- 
ture. The  group  of  the  three  bronze  figures  of 
Vishnu,  Lakshmi  and  Bhumidevi  pictured  on  Plate 
XXII  is  found  in  the  Central  Museum  at  Madras. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  figure  pictured  on  Plate 
XVIII,  the  central  figure  of  Vishnu  carries  in  the 
two  back  hands  the  chakra  and  the  sankha,  while 
the  two  front  hands  are  in  the  abhaya  and  the 
kataka  poses  respectively.  The  gadd  which  must 
be  under  the  left  front  hand  is  however  wanting  ; 
evidently  a  gada  made  separately  used  to  be  insert- 
ed under  this  hand  whenever  required,  and  it  is 
likely  that  this  separate  piece  of  casting  has  been 
lost.     As  usual  the  goddesses  Lakshmi  and  Bhumi- 

100 


VISHNU. 

devi  are  on  the  right  and  left  of  Vishnu  and  are 
also  carrying  a  lotus  and  a  nllotpala  respectively. 
One  special  point  worth  noticing  is  that  the  goddess, 
who  stands  on  the  right  of  Vishnu  or  of  any  other 
deity  such  as  Subrahmanya,  is  shown  to  be  wearing 
the  liucha-handha,  while  the  goddess  who  stands 
on  the  left  is  shown  to  be  without  it.  This  general 
rule  is  followed  in  this  instance  also.  The  expla- 
nation of  this  observed  fact  is  not  apparent.  This 
peculiarity  is  perhaps  connected  with  the  right-hand 
and  left-hand  manner  of  worshipping  (dalxsliinci- 
chara  and  vamachara)  the  Devi  goddess.  From 
the  size  and  form  of  the  Ivnta-mahita  of  Vishnu 
and  karanda-makuta  of  the  goddesses,  from  the 
peculiar  curvature  of  the  pose  of  the  hands  of  the 
goddesses  and  the  formation  of  the  faces  of  all  the 
three  figures,  it  may  be  surmised  that  they  cannot 
be  older  than  the  twelfth  or  the  thirteenth  century 
A.  D.  The  original  of  the  photograph  reproduced  on 
Plate  XXIII  is  a  very  pretty  little  piece  of  workman- 
ship of  the  conventional  style  of  art.  The  whole 
height  of  this  group  of  images  is  not  more  than  ten 
inches.  In  the  centre  is  a  standing  figure  of  Vishnu 
with  the  clialira  and  the  saiikha  in  its  back  liands  ; 
the  front  right  hand  is  held  in  the  varada  pose, 
while  the  front  left  hand  is  kept  resting  on  the  hip 
in  the  hatyavalamhitu  pose.     On  the  right  and  left 

101 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

of  Vishnu  are  the  images  of  the  goddesses  Lakshmi 
and  Bhumidevi.  The  former  holds  a  lotus  in  her 
left  hand  and  the  latter  a  /fdotjyala  in  her  right 
hand.  On  the  right  and  left  respectively  of 
Lakshmi  and  Bhumidevi  stand  Jaya  and  Vijaya, 
the  two  door-keepers  of  Vishnu  with  chakra,  saiiklia 
and  g'acla  in  three  of  their  hands,  while  the  fourth 
one  is  held  in  the  abliaya  pose.  Surrounding  the 
images  of  Vishnu  and  others  is  the  prabhavali  in 
which  are  worked  out  the  ten  incarnations  of 
Vishnu,  of  whom  Buddha  is  one.  On  the  right 
and  left  of  the  prabhavali  respectively  are  sculp- 
tured Vishnu's  characteristic  symbols  the  chalra 
and  the  sanMa,  immediately  above  the  mythical 
vialiciras.  Below  the  simhasana,  is  seen  Graruda 
kneeling  on  the  right  knee  and  keeping  both  the 
palms  of  his  hands  open  as  if  to  receive  in  them 
the  feet  of  Vishnu  ;  a  cobra  is  thrown  upon  his 
shoulders  in  the  fashion  of  a  garland.  To  indicate 
that  the  seat  on  which  Vishnu  and  others  stand  is 
a  simhas'ana,  two  lions  are  sculptured  on  either  side 
of  Garuda.  This  piece  of  sculpture  is  probably  not 
older  than  two  or  three  centuries  at  the  most. 

We  now  come  to  the  illustrations  of  the  seated 
figures  of  Vishnu.  Plate  XXIV  gives  the  photo- 
graph of  a  Ydgasariamurti,  othexwiaeknovfu  also  as 
Ydgesamurfi.     It  is  found  in  the  Kallesvara  temple 

102 


VISHNU. 

at  Bagali  in  the  Bellary  district  of  the  Madras 
Presidency,  and  belongs  to  the  later  Chalukya 
period.  It  conforms  in  every  detail  to  the  descrip- 
tion of  such  an  image  given  in  the  Sidclhartlia- 
samJuta.  The  two  front  hands  are  in  the  yoga- 
mudra  pose,  and  the  padma  and  gada,  which  would 
otherwise  be  held  in  these  hands,  are  sculptured 
separately  on  the  right  and  left  respectively.  The 
back  hands  carry  the  cliahra  and  the  sao'iJcha.  The 
image  itself  is  seated  on  the  ixuhvlisana  in  the 
yogasana  posture,  and  is  adorned  with  various 
ornaments,  such  as  the  kirUa-makuta,  makara- 
knndala,  keyura,  kataka,  liara  and  yajnopavlta. 
Surrounding  the  head  is  a  prahliamandala  with 
radial  rays  proceeding  outwards.  Outside  this  and 
concentrically  with  it  is  seen  a  prahliavali  also.  In 
its  inner  margin  is  the  characteristically  pretty 
creeper-ornamentation,  in  each  circle  of  which  may 
be  seen  sculptured  from  right  to  left  the  ten 
avatdras  of  Vishnu.  It  is  also  an  item  of  convention 
that,  when  the  central  figure  in  any  piece  of  sculp- 
ture happens  to  be  standing,  those  that  surround 
it  should  also  be  standing  ;  they  may  be  seated  or 
standing  when  the  central  figure  is  seated  or  reclin- 
ing. They  should  also  be  in  the  same  posture  as 
the  central  figure,  when  it  is  in  the  yoga  attitude. 
This  last  rule  is  followed  in  this  case,   as  also  in 

103 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

case  of  the  figure  of  Dattatreya  of  Badami  shown 
elsewhere  in  this  volume. 

The  next  Plate  XXV  gives  a  representation  of 
the  figure  of  Vishnu  found  in  Cave  III  at  Badami, 
the  ancient  capital  of  the  Chalukyas.  The  rock- 
cut  shrine,  in  which  it  is  sculptured,  was  brought 
into  existence  in  A.D.  678  by  the  king  Mangalisa ; 
and  the  sculpture  of  the  image  of  Vishnu  is  there- 
fore at  least  a  century  older  than  the  one  belonging 
to  Conjeevaram,  which  is  shown  on  the  next  plate. 
In  this  piece  of  sculpture  found  at  Badami  Vishnu 
is  represented  as  seated  upon  the  serpent  Adisesha 
with  a  hood  consisting  of  five  heads  and  with  the 
body  coiled  into  three  turns.  The  left  leg  of 
Vishnu  is  folded  and  made  to  rest  flat  upon  the 
serpent,  while  the  right  leg  is  also  folded  but  rests 
upon  the  serpent  vertically.  On  the  right  thigh 
of  the  image  rests  the  right  front  hand  held  in  the 
caracla  pose  while  the  front  left  hand  is  made  to 
rest  on  the  left  thigh.  In  the  back  right  and  left 
hands  the  cl/alia  and  the  sahkha  are  respectively 
held ;  the  figures  of  two  celestial  damsels,  one  on 
each  side,  are  seen  standing,  each  carrying  a  cha- 
mara.  The  figure  of  the  goddess  Lakshmiis  sculp- 
tured on  the  left  wall ;  and  Garuda,  the  bird- 
servant  of  Vishnu  is  shown  seated  on  the  right  of 
the   image  of  Vishnu.     Lakshmi  holds  a  lotus  in 

104 


VISHNU. 

her  right  hand,  and  Garuda  is  sitting  with  his 
hands  folded  and  crossed  against  his  chest  and 
himself  leaning  upon  the  body  of  the  serpent. 
Below  the  seat  the  figures  of  dwarfs  representing 
the  deva-ganas  may  be  seen,  some  of  them  engaged 
in  dancing  and  others  playing  on  various  musical 
instruments.  This  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
pieces  of  sculpture  belonging  to  the  mediieval 
period.  The  calm  and  serene  countenance  of 
Vishnu  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the  free  and  easy 
attitude  of  Garuda,  and  the  hood  of  the  serpent  is 
indeed  chiselled  in  a  masterly  manner. 

Plate  XXVI  represents  a  piece  of  sculpture 
found  in  the  Kailasanathasvamin  temple  at  Con- 
jeevaram.  In  the  centre  of  the  group  is  seen  the 
image  of  Vishnu  seated  upon  a  simliasana  with  the 
right  leg  hanging  and  the  left  folded  and  made  to 
rest  on  the  seat.  Though  the  back  right  and  left 
hands  are  held  aloft  as  when  they  carry  the  sahkha 
and  the  cliahra,  these  are  not  actually  found  in 
those  hands.  They  are  however  borne  by  two 
small  attendant  figures,  the  Ayudha-purushas  of 
Sankha  and  Ghakra,  who  also  carry  each  a  chamara 
resting  on  the  shoulder.  The  front  right  hand  of  the 
image  of  Vishnu  is  held  in  the  ahliaya  pose,  while 
the  front  left  one  is  made  to  rest  with  the  palm 
showing  upwards  on  the  folded  leg.     On  the  right 

105 

u 


HINDU  lOONOGKAPHY. 

of  Vishuu  is  seated  the  figure  of  Lakslimi,  with 
the  right  leg  hanging  and  the  left  leg  bent  and 
made  to  rest  upon  the  seat.  The  left  hand  of  this 
goddess  is  in  the  luitaha  pose  and  the  right  hand 
rests  upon  the  siihhasana.  On  the  left  of  the  image 
of  Vishnu  there  is  the  figure  of  BhumidevI  whose 
left  leg  is  hanging  and  the  right  leg  rests  supported 
on  the  seat.  The  right  hand  of  this  goddess  is  in 
the  IritaJia  pose,  while  the  left  hand  is  made  to 
rest  upon  the  seat.  The  temple  in  which  this 
panel  is  seen  sculptured  was  erected  by  the  Pallava 
king  Narasimhavarman  II  in  the  last  quarter  of  the 
seventh  century  A.D.  Therefore  this  sculptural 
representation  of  what  may  be  called  Vishnu's 
Bhogasanamurti  of  the  luadhyama  class  is  most 
probably  twelve  centuries  old. 

PI.  XXVII  represents  a  finely  sculptured  panel 
found  in  Cave  No.  14,  locally  known  as  the  Bavana 
liCb  Mud.  In  this  the  figure  of  Vishnu  is  seated 
with  both  legs  bent,  the  left  lying  horizontal  and 
the  right  one  vertical.  Both  the  front  hands  are 
broken  and  therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  say  what 
articles  they  carried ;  the  back  hands  are  raised  as 
if  they  were  meant  to  hold  the  sanJcha  and  chalcra. 
The  figure  of  Vishnu  is  adorned  with  a  pyabha- 
niandcda,  Idnta,  hara,  and  yajnopHvlta.  On  the 
right  and  left  of  the  central  Vishnu  are  the  figures 

106 


VISHNU. 

of  the  goddesses  Lakshmi  and  Bhamidevi  respect- 
ively. The  hah'  on  the  heads  of  these  figures  is 
tied  up  in  the  form  of  a  crown  (dhammilla) ;  the 
goddesses  are  decked  with  all  ornaments.  The 
figure  of  Lakshmi  appears  to  have  held  a  flower 
in  the  right  hand,  which  is  however  broken.  On 
the  back  wall  are  sculptured  the  figures  of  Kamini 
and  Vyajani  each  carrying  a  cliamara  in  her  hand  ; 
besides  these  there  are  two  other  celestial  damsels 
carrying  flower  garlands  and  other  offerings.  Below 
the  seat  are  seen  sculptured  the  five  Ayudha- 
jnirushas  and  G-aruda.  These,  as  also  the  four 
female  figures  at  the  back  of  the  central  figure,  are 
shown  with  a  prabhdmandala  each.  This  sculp- 
ture, like  all  the  rest  in  Ellora,  has  suffered  damage 
at  the  hands  of  the  iconoclastic  Mussalmans. 

The  figure  on  Plate  XXVIII  is  the  representa- 
tion of  an  image  which  is  sculptured  on  a  pillar  in 
the  Varadarajapperumal  temple  at  Dadikkombu 
near  Dindigul  in  the  Madura  district  of  the  Madras 
Presidency.  This  image  belongs  to  the  period  of 
the  Nayakas  of  Madura,  and  is  perhaps  not  older 
than  three  centuries.  In  this  sculpture,  Vishnu  is 
seated  upon  Adisesha,  whose  body  is  coiled  into 
three  turns,  with  the  right  leg  hanging  down  and 
the  left  leg  folded  and  made  to  rest  upon  the 
serpent.     In  the  back  right  and  left  hands   the 

107 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

chakra  and  the  §anhha  are  held  and  in  the  front 
right  and  left  hands  there  are  the  gada  and  the 
padiJia.  An  image  of  Vishnu  executed  in  this 
manner  is  said  to  be  that  of  Vasudeva.  Below 
the  seat  and  slightly  to  the  left  of  the  image  of 
Vishnu  there  is  a  figure  of  Garuda  standing 
with  the  hands  folded  and  held  in  the  anjali 
pose. 

The  pretty  ivory  image  of  Vishnu  represented 
by  fig.  1  on  Plate  XXIX,  is  one  of  the  most  recent 
productions  of  Indian  art  having  been  carved  in  the 
School  of  Arts  at  Trivandram.  It  is  almost  similar 
in  most  of  its  details  to  the  Dadikkombu  sculpture 
represented  on  the  previous  plate. 

An  example  of  the  Virasanamurti  image  of 
Vishnu  is  available  among  the  sculptures  to  be 
found  in  the  temple  at  Aihole.  In  the  panel,  the 
photograph  of  which  is  reproduced  on  Plate  XXX, 
the  figure  of  Vishnu  is  seen  seated  upon  the  serpent 
Adisesha.  In  the  back  right  hand  the  clial;ra  is 
held,  and  in  the  back  left  hand  there  is  the  sahJcha  ; 
the  left  leg  is  bent  and  made  to  rest  horizontally 
on  the  serpent-seat,  while  the  right  leg  is  also  bent 
but  rests  vertically  upon  the  same  seat.  The  right 
arm  is  stretched  and  thrown  upon  the  right  knee, 
and  the  left  hand  is  placed  in  ease  upon  the  left 
thigh.     The  goddesses   Lakshmi  and  Bhiimidevi 

108 


VISHNU. 

are  shown  as  flying  in  the  air  on  the  right  and  left 
of  Vishnu,  while  two  rishis,  also  shown  as  flying, 
are  figured  somewhat  below.  This  group  repre- 
sents the  adliama  class  of  Virasanamurti. 

Five  Plates  are  given  in  illustration  of  the 
reclining  images  of  Vishnu.  Of  these  the  figure  on 
Plate  XXXI  represents  a  large  panel  sculptured  on 
one  of  the  walls  of  a  rock-cut  cave  in  Mahabali- 
puram.  In  this  admirable  piece  of  sculpture  there  is 
a  central  image  of  Vishnu  reclining  upon  the  serpent 
Adisesha ;  near  the  feet  there  are  the  demons  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha  ;  above  are  the  Ayudha-purushas  of 
Chakra  and  Gada  looking  in  the  direction  of  the 
demons  ;  below  the  serpent-bed  the  risliis  Markan- 
deya  and  Bhrigu  are  shown  kneeling ;  and  the 
goddess  Bhumidevi  is  also  just  there.  This  reclin- 
ing figure  of  Vishnu  has  the  fourth  of  the  body 
towards  the  head  slightly  raised,  while  the  remain- 
ing three-fourths  thereof  is  stretched  flat  upon  the 
bed.  The  right  arm  is  taken  near  the  head  and  the 
left  arm  is  bent  at  the  elbow  with  the  hand  held  in 
the  latal<a  pose.  The  right  leg  is  fully  stretched 
out,  while  the  left  leg  is  somewhat  bent.  This 
image  of  Vishnu  is  further  adorned  with  the  kirlta- 
mahuta,  hara,  Jiundala  and  ijajnopavlta.  The 
demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  have  their  hair  tied 
up  in  knots  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  on  one 

109 


HINDU  ICONOGKAPHY. 

side  respectively,  and  each  of  these  carries  a  garln 
iu  his  hand.  Tn  its  artistic  quahties  this  piece  of 
sculpture  also  may  take  rank  as  one  of  the  finest 
production  of  the  niedifeval  period.  The  flying 
figures  of  the  Ayudha-purushas  are  admirably 
chiselled  and  convey  the  appearance  of  flight  in  an 
exceedingly  realistic  manner.  The  demons  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha  are  shown  as  if  conspiring  with  each 
other,  and  their  attitude  clearly  brings  out  their 
intention  to  strike  at  once  at  A'ishiru.  The  figure 
of  Vishnu  in  this  panel  represents  the  Yorjusaijana- 
riuirl/  of  the  mailhi/aiiia  class. 

The  next  illustration  which  is  given  on  PI. 
XXXII,  is  that  of  an  image  to  be  found  in  the 
ruined  temple  of  Vishnu  at  Deogarh  in  the  Jhansi 
district  of  the  (hiited  Provinces.  In  this  sculp- 
ture Vishnu  is  seen  reclining  on  the  serpent 
Adisesha,  with  the  head  directed  to  the  right  of  the 
obseivcr.  The  reclining  body  is  in  its  upper  half 
somewhat  raised  and  the  other  half  is  made  to  lie 
flat  on  the  serpent-bed ;  the  whole  body  has  the 
outline  of  a  bow  which  is  described  in  the  agamas 
as  appropriate  to  the  reclining  images  of  Vishnu. 
One  of  the  left  hands  is  supporting  the  head,  while 
the  other  is  seen  I'cstiiig  upon  the  bed  ;  one  of  the 
right  bands  is  held  in  the  lutfalca  pose,  and  the 
other  is  stretched  out  parallel  to  the  body  so  as  to 

no 


PLATE  XXXII. 


Bhogasayanamurti :  Stone  :  Deogarh. 


[To  face  page  110.] 


VISHNU. 

rest  upon  the  thigh.  The  ornaments,  kirlta- 
mahita,  kiuidala,  Jidra,  keyara,  kataka  and  vcuia- 
mdjlu,  are  all  carved  with  great  skill.  Above  this 
image  of  Vishnu  there  is  the  figure  of  the  four- 
faced  Brahma  seated  in  the  middle  of  the  lotus 
issuing  from  the  navel  of  Vishnu.  Like  the  other 
attendant  deities  in  this  sculptured  group,  Brahma 
also  possesses  only  two  arms  ;  in  his  left  hand  he 
carries  a  kaitiandalu,  and  the  right  hand  is  held 
in  the  chin-muclra  pose.  There  are  jata-makutas 
on  the  heads,  and  a  deer-skin  is  thrown  across  the 
body  in  the  upavlta  fashion,  with  the  head  of  the 
deer  made  to  hang  on  the  chest.  To  the  right  of 
the  image  of  Brahma  is  that  of  Indra  seated  upon 
the  celestial  elephant  Airavata  ;  and  he  carries  in 
his  right  hand  his  particular  weapon  vajra.  To 
the  right  of  Indra  is  to  be  seen  what  appears  to  be 
the  figure  of  Subrahmanya  seated  on  his  peacock. 
Siva  also  is  seen  in  the  group  seated  upon  his  bull. 
Parvati  is  leaning  upon  Siva  with  her  left  arm 
resting  upon  his  shoulder.  It  is  not  easy  to  make 
out  whom  the  figure  to  the  left  of  Siva  represents. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  left  leg  of  Vishnu 
rests  upon  the  lap  of  Bhnmidevi,  who  is  shown  to 
be  holding  his  right  foot  in  her  hands.  By  her 
side  are  made  to  stand  two  Ayudha-purushas  re- 
presenting respectively   the   Gada  and    Dhanus. 

Ill 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Below  the  seat  we  find  the  figures  of  Lakshmi  and 
of  the  Ayudha-purushas  representing  the  Chakra, 
Sahkha  and  Khadga,  the  last  of  whom  is  shown  to 
be  attacking  the  demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha, 
each  of  whom  is  armed  with  a  club.  The  whole 
of  this  group  deserves  to  be  taken  as  a  Blibgasayana- 
inurtl  of  the  niadJujama  class;  and  it  clearly 
discloses  the  masterly  hand  of  the  artist  who  might 
well  be  given  a  place  in  the  first  rank  of  the  artists 
of  the  medifeval  India.  As  regards  the  age  of  this 
piece  of  sculpture,  it  has  to  be  said  that  Mr.  V.  A. 
Smith  is  inclined  to  place  it  in  the  first  half  of  the 
sixth  century  A.D.  From  the  peculiarities  dis- 
coverable in  some  of  the  details  of  the  sculpture, 
such  as  the  stalk  of  the  lotus  on  which  Brahma  is 
seated,  the  deer-skin  covering  thrown  on  the  body 
of  that  deity,  the  hirlta-mahuta  of  Vishnu,  we  are 
however  obliged  to  assign  it  to  the  same  age  to 
which  the  sculptures  of  the  early  Hindu  caves  at 
BUora  belong,  that  is,  to  the  end  of  the  seventh  or 
the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century  A.D. 

The  illustration  on  PI,  XXXIII  gives  a  birds- 
eye  view  of  a  reclining  image  of  Vishnu  belonging 
to  the  iiiadJiyama  class  of  the  BhogasayanamTirti- 
In  this  illustration  Vishnu  may  be  seen  lying  on 
the  serpent-bed  with  the  front  left  hand  placed 
near  the  head  on  the  pillow  and  the  back  left  hand 

112 


VISHNU. 

bent  at  the  elbow  and  made  to  rest  on  the  bed. 
Both  the  other  hands  are  stretched  parallel  to  the 
body.  The  legs  are  somewhat  bent  and  cross 
each  other.  Near  the  head  to  the  right  there  are 
the  weapons  chaTtra  and  khadga,  while  on  the  left 
there  is  the  §anlcha.  Just  near  the  sanMa  is  shown 
the  figure  of  Markandeya,  with  a  flowing  beard  and 
with  the  head  covered  with  a  jatfl-muJcuta  ;  the 
hands  of  Markandeya  are  made  to  rest  on  the  chest 
in  the  anjali  pose.  Below  him  there  is  apparently 
the  figure  of  Bhumidevl  with  a  flower  in  the  left 
hand.  Below  this  figure  of  Bhumidevi  there  are 
shown  the  demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha.  One  of 
these  figures  has  been  covered  up  with  chunam, 
and  could  not  come  out  clearly  in  the  photograph. 
On  the  right  of  Vishnu  and  near  his  feet  is  seen 
the  figure  of  Garuda  kneeling  on  one  knee  and 
having  his  hands  in  the  anjali  pose.  Above 
him  is  the  Ayudha-purusha  representing  Chakra, 
and  above  this  Chakra  there  is  the  goddess 
Lakshmi  seated  so  as  to  have  one  leg  hanging 
down  and  the  other  supported  on  the  seat.  She 
carries  in  one  of  her  hands  a  lotus.  This  panel 
belongs  to  the  temple  of  Vishnu  at  Aihole, 
and  belongs  most  probably  to  the  same  age  as  the 
pieces  of  sculpture  represented  by  PI.  XXX  and 
XXXI. 


113 
16 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

The  small  ivory  image  of  YogasayanamQrti, 
fig.  2,  PL  XXIX  was  carved  in  the  School  of  Arts 
at  Trivandram.  In  this,  Yishnu  is  seen  reclining 
upon  the  serpent  Adisesha  with  his  right  hand 
stretched  out  towards  the  head  and  the  left  one 
bent  at  the  elbow  and  held  in  the  Tcataha  pose. 
Below  the  right  hand  is  a  small  Linga,  over  which 
a  lotus  is  held  by  Vishnu.  The  local  Purana 
extolling  the  god  at  Trivandram  informs  us  that 
Vishnu  absolved  Siva  at  Anantasayanam  of  some 
sin  from  by  which  he  was  afflicted  ;  hence  the  image 
of  Vishnu  in  the  temple  at  Trivandram  is  also 
shown,  as  in  this  piece  of  sculpture,  as  holding  his 
right  hand  over  the  Linga-image  of  Siva  in  the 
varada  pose. 

The  image  of  Vishnu  figured  on  PI.  XXXIV 
belongs  to  Eajaputana.  In  this  sculpture  Vishnu 
is  seen  possessing  four  arms,  the  right  one  of  which 
is  held  in  the  jnana-mudra  pose  over  the  chest. 
Another  right  hand  which  is  broken  appears  to 
have  been  kept  near  the  Jdrlta  as  if  supporting  it. 
The  front  left  hand  is  stretched  out  and  made  to 
rest  upon  the  thigh,  while  the  back  left  hand,  which 
is  broken,  seems  to  have  been  held  in  the  hataJca 
pose.  The  whole  figure  of  Vishnu  resembles  the 
out-line  of  a  bow.  To  bring  about  the  appearance 
of  a  bow  the  artist  has  given  the  right  leg  a  stiff 

114 


VISHNU. 

and  inartistic  shape  ;  this  leg  is  kept  stretched  out 
on  the  lap  of  Bhumidevi,  while  the  left  leg  is  bent 
and  resting  upon  the  serpent-bed.  The  image  of 
Vishnu  is  adorned  with  the  hirita  and  other  orna- 
ments and  a  lotus  is  seen  issuing  from  the  navel  of 
Vishnu.  On  the  right  and  near  the  head  of  the 
central  figure  of  Vishnu  are  to  be  seen  four  figures 
possibly  those  of  the  sages  Sanaka,  Sanatkumara 
and  others,  while  on  the  left  and  near  the  feet  of 
Vishnu  there  are  what  appear  to  be  the  figures  of 
the  Sapta-rishis  and  the  five  Ayudha-purushas. 
On  the  bed  adjoining  the  right  hand  of  Vishnu  is 
the  weapon  gada ;  below  the  cot  on  which  Vishnu 
is  lying  on  Adisesha  are  seen  a  number  of  figures 
engaged  in  fighting.  This  scene  depicts  perhaps 
the  fight  between  devas  and  the  asuras. 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 


DA^AVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 


INCAENATIONS  of  divinity  are  considered  to 
be  of  three  kinds  which  are  respectively  called 
avatara,  avesa  and  amsa.  What  has  to  be  taken  as 
a  complete  incarnation  is  designated  an  avatara,  a 
partial  incarnation  is  more  or  less  temporary  in 
character  and  is  known  as  avesa,  while  the  incar- 
nation of  a  portion  of  the  power  of  a  divine  being 
is  characterised  as  amsa.  Krishna  and  Eama,  for 
instance,  are  understood  to  be  complete  incarnations 
of  Vishnu  and  are  therefore  avataras.  Parasurama 
came  into  the  world,  it  is  said,  to  suppress  the 
haughtiness  of  the  unruly  Kshatriyas,  for  that  was 
the  God-appointed  mission  of  his  life.  This  work 
he  finished  long  before  his  life  came  to  an  end.  In 
fact  it  is  supposed  that,  being  a  chiranjlvi  or  ever- 
living  personage,  he  is  still  alive.  Soon  after  the 
completion  of  the  mission  of  his  life,  he  met  Eaghu- 
rama  and  handed  over  his  own  divine  powers  to 
him  and  retired  to  the  mountain  known  as  the 
Mahendra-parvata.    The  divine  power  thus  possess- 

119 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

ed  by  Parasurama  was  with  him  but  for  a  short 
time  ;  it  was  not  a  life-long  endowment ;  hence  his 
incarnation  is  considered  to  be  an  ave'sa  or  temporary 
possession.  Again,  for  instance,  the  sahhlia  and  the 
chaJcra  of  Vishnu  as  representing  parts  and  aspects 
of  his  power,  are  conceived  to  be  occasionally  ordered 
by  Vishnu,  to  be  born  among  men  to  improve  them 
in  their  ways  and  bring  about  a  betterment  in  their 
condition.  When  these  emblems  of  the  aspects  of 
divine  power  are  born  as  embodied  beings  upon  the 
earth,  they  become  saints  and  achieve  the  purpose 
of  their  earthly  incarnation.  Such  beings  represent 
the  amsas  of  Vishnu.  The  most  commonly  accepted 
and  recognised  incarnations  of  Vishnu  are  ten  in 
number ;  and  they  are  declared  to  have  been  assumed 
on  ten  different  occasions  by  him  with  a  view  to 
destroy  certain  asuras  and  to  set  right  the  wrong 
done  to  the  world  by  them.  These  ten  avatar  as  of 
Vishnu  are  Matsya  (fish),  Kurma  (tortoise),  Varaha 
(boar),  Narasimha  (man-lion),  Vamana  (the  dwarf) 
including  Trivikrama,  Parasurama,  Eaghurama, 
Krishna,  Buddha  and  Kalki.  Some  Hindu  authori- 
ties do  not  consider  Buddha  to  be  an  avat5,ra  of 
Vishnu,  and  substitute  in  his  place  Balarama,  the 
elder  brother  of  Krishna,  as  an  avatara. 

"  Sections  231-233  of  the  Matsya-purana  are 
devoted  to  the  same  subject  (the  incarnation  itself 

120 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

and  its  results).  I  give  an  abstract  of  the  17th 
section,  in  which  Vishnu's  incarnations  are  enume- 
rated. It  is  here  stated  that  it  was  in  consequence 
of  a  curse  pronounced  by  Bhrigu  (as  we  shall  see 
further  on)  that  Vishnu  assumed  most  of  these 
forms  (y.  37).  There  were  twelve  conflicts  between 
the  gods  and  Asuras  {vv.  39-52).  It  is  related 
(ov.  58  ff.)  that  on  one  occasion  when  Prahlada 
had  been  overcome,  and  Indra  had  gained  the 
empire  of  the  three  worlds,  Sukra,  the  priest  of  the 
Asuras,  left  them  and  went  to  the  gods.  They, 
however,  entreated  him  not  to  desert  them,  when 
he  re-assured  them  by  the  promise  of  his  support 
{vv.  60  jf.).  They  were  nevertheless  attacked  by 
the  gods,  and  again  resorted  to  Sukra,  when  their 
assailants  left  them.  Sukra  then  referred  to  their 
former  discomfitures,  counselled  them  to  wait  for  a 
favourable  turn  of  fortune,  and  declared  his  inten- 
tion to  resort  to  Mahadeva  and  obtain  certain 
sacred  texts  which  would  ensure  their  victory. 
{vv.  65  ff).  They  then  promised  the  gods  to  desist 
from  hostilities  and  to  betake  themselves  to  aus- 
terities {vv.  73  ff.).  Sukra  accordingly  went  to 
Mahadeva  and  asked  for  texts  more  powerful  than 
those  possessed  by  Brihaspati,  the  priest  of  the 
gods ;  when  the  deity  directed  him  to  perform  a 
painful  rite,  imbibing  the  smoke  of  chaff  {karia- 

121 
16 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

dh'uDia)  with  his  head  downward  for  a  thousand 
years.  This  he  agreed  to  do  (ri).  78^'.).  Hearing 
of  this,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  defenceless 
state  of  the  Asuras,  the  gods  went  to  attack  them. 
The  Amras  remonstrated,  and  in  the  absence  of 
Sukra  resorted  to  his  mother  for  help,  and  were 
re-assured  by  her  {vv.  83  ff.).  The  gods,  however, 
followed  and  assailed  them,  when  the  goddess 
(Sukra's  mother— her  name  is  not  given) — by  her 
magical  power,  rendered  Indra  helpless,  and  then 
the  other  gods  took  to  flight  {vv.  Qljf.).  Vishnu, 
however,  interposed,  and  desired  Indra  to  enter 
into  him  (Vishnu).  This  provoked  the  goddess, 
who  tlireatened  to  burn  them  up  ;  Indra  called  upon 
Vishnu  to  slay  her  before  she  could  carry  her  threat 
into  effect.  Vishnu,  though  hesitating  to  kill  a 
female,  cut  off  her  head  with  his  weapon  {vv.  96  ff.). 
Vishnu  was  hereupon  doomed  by  a  curse  of  Sukra 
to  be  born  seven  times  in  the  world  of  men  ;  and  in 
consequence  of  this  he  appears  for  the  good  of  the 
world  when  unrighteousness  prevails."  * 

"  In  consequence  of  Sukra's  curse,  which 
operated  periodically,  Vishnu  was  born  time  after 
time,  after  a  decline  of  righteousness,  which  he  re- 
established, destroying  the  Asuras.     For  Brahma 

*  Muir's  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  pp.  151-153. 
122 


PLATE   XXXV 


c3 

g 

1:3 


14 


c3 

•a      - 


icS 


> 

i4 

d 

M 

9. 

K- 

101 

^J-l 

n 

oi 

m 

CO 

c3 

H 

id 

<; 

13 

> 
-^ 

^ 

z 

a 

H 

lOS 

H 

oi 

> 

s 

en 

101 

M 

[To  face  page  123.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

had  decreed  that  all  those  Asuras  who  should  be 
disobedient  to  Prahlada  should  be  slain  by  men. 
Vishnu's  incarnations  are  then  enumerated  (w. 
234-245 j,  viz.,  (1)  a  portion  of  him  sprang  from 
Dharma,  (2)  the  Narasimha,  or  Man-lion,  and  (3)  the 
Dwarf  incarnations,  which  are  called  the  celestial 
manifestations,  the  remaining  seven  being  the 
human  incarnations  caused  by  Sukra's  curse  {v.  238). 
These  seven  are  (4)  the  Dattatreya  (5)  Mandhdtri  (6) 
Parahurama,  (7)  Bama,  (8)  Vedavyasa,  (9)  Buddha 
and  (10)  KalJd  incarnations.  (Eight  instead  of 
seven  are  obtained  if,  with  the  Mahratti  expounder, 
we  understand  the  beginning  of  verse  243  to  refer 
to  Krishna).  The  Blid^gavata-Piirana  gives  twenty- 
two  incarnations  (i.  3,  Iff.),  viz:  Those  in  the  forms 
of  (1)  Pitrusha,  (2)  Fara/z a  or  the  Boar,  (3)  Narada, 
(4)  Nara  and  Ndrdyana,  (5)  Kapila,  (6)  Dattatreya, 
(J)Yajna,  or  Sacrifice,  (8j  Bishabha,  (9)  Prithu,  (10) 
Matsya,  or  the  Fish,  (11)  Kurma  or  the  Tortoise, 
(12  and  13^,  Dhanvantri,  (14)  Narasimha  or  the 
Man-lion,  (15)  Vdmana  or  the  Dwarf,  (16)  Para- 
surdma,  (17)  Vedavyasa  (18)  Bdnia,  (19  and 
20)  Balardma  and  Krishna,  (21)  Buddha,  and 
(22)  Kalki.  These  last  two  are  represented  as 
future.  But  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu  are 
innumerable,  like  the  rivulets  flowing  from  an 
inexhaustible   lake.     Bishis,  Manns,  gods,   sons  of 

123 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Manus,   Prajapatis  are   all    portions   of   him   {v. 

26)."*- 

There  are    here  and    there    references  to  the 
.„    ,  avatar  as  of  Vishnu  even   in   the 

Early   referen- 
ces to  the  avata-     ancient  literature  of  the  Hindus;  for 

ras  of  Vishnu.  .  _        , 

instance,  in  Satapatha-Bralmiana 
it  is  stated  that  Prajapati  took  the  form  of  a  tor- 
toise ;  similarly  the  T aittirlya- AranyaJca  mentions 
that  the  earth  was  raised  from  the  waters  by  a 
black  boar  with  a  hundred  hands.  All  the  avataras 
are  more  or  less  directly  referred  to  in  the  later  Sans- 
krit works  like  the  JRmnayana,  the  Mahabharata, 
Bhdgavata-ptirdna  and  the  Vishnu-'purdna. 

The  Mahabharata  (see  Vana-parvan,  12,   797 
The  Matsyava-      f  •)  says— "  Then  the  God  {lU.  the 
^^^^-  Unwinking),   kindly-disposed,  said 

to  those  rishis,  "  I  am  the  Prajapati  Brahma,  above 
whom  no  being  is  discoverable  :  by  me  in  the  form 
of  a  fish  you  have  been  delivered  from  this  danger. 
[By  '  you  '  here  the  Grod  Brahma  is  meant] ."  The 
Bhdgavata-Purdna  gives  the  following  account  of 
the  origin  of  the  fish  avatdra  of  Vishnu  : — "  Being 
thus  addressed  by  Vishnurata,  the  divine Badarayani 
related  the  deed  of  Vishnu  achieved  by  him  in  the 
form  of  a  fish.     At  the  end  of  the  past  Jcalpa  there 


*  Muir's  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  p.  156. 
124 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

was  a  Brahma,  that  is,  there  was  a  partial  dissolu- 
tion of  the  universe,  in  which  the  earth  and  other 
worlds,  became  submerged  under  the  ocean.  Then 
the  powerful  Hayagriva  (a  ralishasa),  coming  near, 
snatched  away  the  Vedas  which  had  proceeded  from 
the  mouth  of  the  creator,  who  from  the  drowsiness, 
which  had  come  on  through  lapse  of  time,  had 
become  disposed  to  go  to  sleep.  On  discovering  this 
deed  of  Hayagriva,  the  chief  of  the  Danavas,  the 
divine  lord  Hari  took  the  form  of  a  saphari  fish  and 
recovered  the  Vedas.".  *  This  fish  avatdra,  as  seen 
from  the  above  extarcts,  was  meant  to  recover  the 
lost  Vedas  from  the  ocean. 

Another  account  of  the  fish  incarnation  of 
Vishnu  is  to  be  found  in  the  Agni-yurdna.  Therein 
Agni  addressing  Vasishtha  says  : — "  Listen,  0 
divine  sage  !  while  I  narrate  to  thee  the  different 
forms  which  Hari  has  assumed,  in  order  to  punish 
the  wicked  and  protect  the  good.  Previous  to  the 
conclusion  of  the  last  Kalpa,  at  which  time  the 
universe  was  overwhelmed  with  a  deluge,  Vaivas- 
vata  Manu  performed  with  much  devotion  a  severe 
tapas.  One  day  as  he  was  offering  an  oblation  of 
water  to  the  manes  in  the  river  Kritamala,  a  small 
fish  appeared  in  his  folded  hands,  which,  as  he  was 
about  to  throw  into  the  water  said  : — '  Throw  me 
*  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  p.  39,  f.n. 

125 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

not  into  it,  0  best  of  men  !  for  I  am  afraid  there 
of  the  larger  fishes  '.  On  hearing  this.  Manu  placed 
it  in  a  jar.  But  the  fish  increased  in  size,  and 
said,  '  Give  me  more  space  '.  The  king  then  placed 
it  in  a  small  pond ;  but  it  still  increasing  in  size 
and  demanding  more  room,  he  threw  it  into  a  lake, 
and  at  length  into  the  sea,  where  it  in  an  instant 
expanded  to  the  size  of  a  hundred  thousand 
yojanas.  With  astonishment  Manu  beheld  this 
wondrous  change,  and  then  said — '  Why  0  lord  ! 
who  art  Vishnu  Narayana,  hast  thou  thus  deluded 
me  ?'  The  fish  replied — '  On  the  seventh  day  from 
this,  the  universe  will  be  submerged  beneath  the 
ocean  ;  do  thou,  therefore,  taking  all  kinds  of  seeds 
and  accompanied  by  the  seven  Eishis,  enter  into  a 
boat  which  has  been  prepared  for  thee  ;  and  during 
the  night  of  Brahma  fasten  it  with  a  mighty  snake 
to  my  horn.'  Having  thus  spoken,  the  fish  dis- 
appeared ;  and  on  the  foretold  day,  the  sea 
commencing  to  exceed  its  bounds,  Manu  entered 
the  boat ;  and  instantly  there  appeared  a  very  big 
horned  fish,  to  whose  horn  he  fastened  the  boat. 
Then  Vishnu  repeated  to  Manu  the  Matsya- 
piirana  ;  and  afterwards  slew  the  asura  Hayagriva, 
who  had  purloined  the  Vedas  from  Brahma".* 

*  See  Kennedy's  Hindu  Mythology,  p.  432. 
126 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

The  image  of  Matsya  may  be  made  either  like 
an  ordinary  iish,  or  in  a  form  which  is  half  fish 
and  half  man,  the  upper  portion  being  that  of  man 
and  the  lower  that  of  the  fish.  The  image  is 
generally  given  four  hands,  two  of  which  carry  the 
sanliha  and  chakra,  and  the  other  two  being  held 
in  the  var'ada  and  ahhaya  poses.  The  human  half 
is  generally  decorated  with  all  the  ornaments 
generally  worn  by  Vishnu,  and  on  the  head  there 
is  the  kirlta-maTiuta. 

We  have  already  seen  that  this  tortoise 
The  Kurmava-  aoatara\<-A,%  assumed  by  Prajapati, 
**""*•  according  to  the  account  given  in 

the  earlier  writings,  for  creating  offspring.  In  the 
later  works,  as  for  instance,  the  Bhagavata-purana, 
it  is  stated  that  Vishnu  assumed  the  form  of  the 
tortoise  for  supporting  on  its  back  the  mountain 
employed  in  the  churning  of  the  ocean  to  obtain 
the  ambrosia  for  the  gods.  "  In  his  eleventh 
incarnation,  the  Lord,  in  the  form  of  the  tortoise, 
supported  on  his  back  the  churning  mountain,  when 
the  Gods  and  Asuras  churned  the  ocean"  (Bhag. 
Pu.  1.  3,  16).  The  story  of  the  churning  of  the 
ocean  is  well  known  and  needs  no  description  here. 

The  image  of  this  avatara  is  generally  worked 
out  in  a  form  which  is  half  man  and  half  tortoise, 
the  lower  part  being  that  of  the  tortoise.     As  in 

127 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

the  case  of  the  fish  avatara,  this  image  also  has 
four  hands  two  of  which  carry  the  sao'ikha  and  the 
chaJcra,  while  the  other  two  are  held  in  the  varada 
and  ahliaya  poses.  The  image  is  adorned  with 
ornaments  and  with  the  hinta-makicta  on  the  head. 
The  image  of  the  Kurmavatara  may  also  be  like 
an  ordinary  tortoise. 

One  of  the  earliest  references  to  the  earth 
TheVarahava-  having  been  lifted  up  from  the 
depths  of  the  lower  regions  by  a 
boar  is  found  in  the  Satapatha-Brahviana,  wherein 
it  is  said  that  Emusha,  a  boar,  raised  the  earth  up. 
In  the  Taittirlya-Aranijal-a  also  the  earth  is  said  to 
have  been  lifted  up  by  a  black  boar  with  a  hundred 
arms  :  [varahena  krishnena  sata-haliuita  uddhrita) 
The  BSunayana,  in  describing  the  origin  of  the  earth 
mentions  incidentally  the  uplifting  of  the  earth  by 
the  boar-incarnation  of  Vishnu.  Vasishtha  speaking 
therein  about  the  origin  of  the  worlds,  says  that 
in  the  beginning  all  was  water  out  of  which  the 
world  has  been  formed  and  that  out  of  that  water, 
arose  Brahma,  the  self-existent,  who  became  a  boar 
and  lifted  up  the  earth.  According  to  the  B&ma- 
yana  therefore  the  uplifter  of  the  earth  was  Brahma 
and  not  Vishnu.  In  the  Bhdgnvata-purana  it  is 
said  that  with  a  view  to  create  the  universe,  the 
Lord  of  Sacrifice  became  desirous    of  lifting  up  the 

128 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

earth,  which  had  sunk  into  the  lower  regions,  and 
assumed  the  form  of  the  boar.  Here  the  act  of  Uft- 
ing  up  the  earth  is  attributed  to  Vishnu. 

The  Vishnu-pur  ana,  the  Lihga-2Mrana  and  the 
Qaru^a-yurana  mention  Brahma  as  the  uphfter 
of  the  earth  from  the  ocean  :  but  they  at  the  same 
time  identify  Brahmi,  with  Vishnu.  The  Vislmu- 
furana  gives  the  following  account  of  this  incar- 
nation : — "At  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa,  that  divine 
Brahma,  Lord  of  the  Prajapatis  who  had  the 
nature  of  Narayana,  created  living  beings.  At  the 
close  of  the  past  (Padma-)^aZj»a,  Brahma,  the  Lord, 
endowed  predominantly  with  the  quality  of  good- 
ness, awoke  from  his  night-slumber  and  beheld  the 
universe  void.  He  is  the  Supreme  Lord  Narayana, 
who  cannot  even  be  conceived  and  exists  in  the 
form  of  Brahma,  the  deity  without  beginning,  the 
source  of  all  things.  This  Lord  of  Prajapatis  dis- 
covering by  intuition, — when  the  universe  had  all 
become  one  ocean, — that  the  earth  lay  within  the 
waters,  and  being  desirous  to  raise  it  up,  assumed 
another  form.  As  he  had  formerly,  at  the  commen- 
cement of  previous  halpas,  assumed  the  shapes  of 
the  fish  and  the  tortoise,  (so  now),  He  entered  into 
the  body  of  a  boar, — a  form  composed  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  sacrifice, — this  Lord  of  Creatures,  who 
throughout  the  entire  continuance  of  the  world  re- 

I2y 

17 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

mains  fixed,  the  Universal  Soul,  the  Supreme  Soul, 
the  Self-sustained  Supporter  of  the  Earth,  hymned 
by  Sanaka  and  other  saints  residing  in  the  Janaloka, 
(therefore  He)  entered  the  water.  Beholding 
Him  then  descend  to  Patala,  the  Goddess  Earth, 
bowing  down  prostrated  herself  in  devotion  and 
sang  the  praise  :  '  Eeverence  0  bearer  of  the  Shell 
and  Club,  to  Thee  who  art  all  things :  raise  me  today 

from  this  place  :  by  Thee  I  was  formerly  lifted  up 

Having  swallowed  the  universe,  when  it  becomes 
one  ocean,  doest  Thou  0  Govinda,  sleep.  Thou  who 
art  meditated  upon  by  the  wise.  No  one  knows  that 
which  is  Thy  form  :  the  gods  adore  that  form  which 
Thou  assumest  in  Thy  incarnations.  Worshipping 
Thee,  the  Supreme  Brahma,  men  desirous  of  final 
liberation  attain  their  object.  Worshipping  Thee, 
the  Supreme  Brahman,  who  shall  obtain  liberation 
without  adoring  Vasudeva  ?  .  .  .  .  Thou  art  sacri- 
fice. Thou  art  the  vashatkdra  (a  sacrificial  formula). 
Thou  art  the  uMara  (the  mystic  syllable  Om), 
Thou  art  the  fires.  '  .  .  .  Having  been  thus  celebra- 
ted by  the  Earth,  the  glorious  Upholder  of  the 
Earth,  with  a  voice  like  the  chanting  of  the 
Samaveda,  uttered  a  deep  thundering  sound.  Then 
the  great  boar,  with  eyes  like  the  expanded  lotus, 
tossing  up  with  his  tusks  the  earth  which  resembled 
the  leaf  of  the  blue  lotus,  rose  up  from   the  lower 

130 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

regions  like  a  great  blue   mountain (The 

boar  was  then  lauded  and  praised  by  Sanandana 
and  other  saints  in  a  hymn,  in  which  various 
members  of  his  body  are  compared  in  detail  to 
various  materials  and  implements  used  in  sacrifice. 
See  Wilson's  Vishnu-pur  ana,  2nd  ed.  i. ,  pp.  63  ff.) 
....  On  having  been  thus  hymned  in  praise,  the 
Supreme  Soul,  the  Upholder  of  the  Earth,  lifted 
the  earth  up  quickly,  and  placed  it  upon  the  great 
waters.  Resting  upon  this  mass  of  waters,  like  a 
mighty  ship,  the  earth  does  not  sink,  owing  to  the 
expansion  of  its  form"  .  Compare  Mahdbharata, 
iii.,  10,  932,#. 

The  Lmga-purana,  which  is  of  the  Saiva 
variety  of  j^'ttfmidssin.d  has  not,  as  such,  any  interest 
in  glorifying  Vishnu,  describes  Brahma  as  the  deity 
who  assumed  the  form  of  the  boar,  (part,  i.  4,  69  ff.) 
'  In  that  night,  when  all  things  moveable  and  im- 
moveable had  been  destroyed  (and  became  absorbed) 
in  the  universal  ocean,  Brahma  slept  upon  the 
waters;  and  beholding  the  universe  void,  Brahma, 
chief  among  the  knowers  of  the  Vedas,  then  resolved 
to  create'.  Having  assumed  the  form  of  a  boar,  this 
eternal  god  taking  up  the  earth,  which  was  over- 
flowed by  the  waters,  placed  it  as  it  had  been  before." 
The  Agni-purana  informs  us  that  there  was 
a  chief  of  the  Asuras,   named  Hiranyaksha,   who 

131 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

vanquished  the  gods  and  took  possession  of  their 
heavenly  capital,  and  that  the  gods  had  recourse  to 
Vishnu,  who,  to  help  them,  assumed  the  form  of  a 
boar  and  slew  the  demon  Hiranyaksha.  In  the 
later  writings,  this  boar  avatara  is  treated  exclu- 
sively as  one  assumed  by  Vishnu ;  and  the  agamas 
and  tantras  also  attribute  this  incarnation  to 
Vishnu.  Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  des- 
cription of  this  avatara  of  Vishnu  as  found  in  the 
various  other  works.  These  sculptured  figures 
comprise  three  different  couceptional  types  of  the 
avatara,  namely,  (i)  Bhuvaraha,  Adivaraha  or 
Nrivaraha,  (ii)  Yajnavaraha  and  (iii)  Pralaya- 
varaha.     These  will  be  dealt  with  in  order. 

The  figure  of  Bhuvaraha  should  have,  accord- 
ing to  the    Vaikhanasd,gama,  the 
Adivaraha.  face  of  a  boar  in   association   with 

the  body  of  a  man.  It  has  four  arms,  two  of 
which  hold  the  sanhha  and  the  chaJcra  as  usual. 
The  right  leg  should  be  slightly  bent  and  be  made 
to  rest  upon  the  jewelled  hood  of  the  mythical 
serpent  Adisesha,  who  must  be  sculptured  as  in 
company  with  his  wife.  Of  the  remaining  two 
hands,  the  left  hand  should  be  shown  as  supporting 
the  legs  of  Bhumidevi,  seated  on  the  god's  bent 
right  leg,  with  her  own  legs  hanging  down,  while 
the  right  hand  has  to  be  thrown  round  the   waist 

132 


DASAVATAEAS  Or  VISHNU. 

of  his  same  goddess.  The  boar-face  of  the  god 
should  be  sHghtly  tilted  up  so  as  to  make  the 
muzzle  approach  the  bosom  of  the  goddess  as 
though  he  is  engaged  in  smelling  her.  The  colour 
of  the  image  of  Varaha-Vishnu  is  represented  by 
the  darkness  of  twilight.  The  associated  figure  of 
Bhijmidevi  should  have  her  hands  in  the  anjali 
attitude.  She  should  be  decked  with  flowers  and 
dressed  in  clothes  and  should  be  adorned  with  all 
suitable  ornaments.  Her  complexion  has  to  be 
black.  Her  face  should  be  slightly  lifted  up  and 
turned  towards  her  lord,  and  should  be  expressive 
of  shyness  and  joy.  The  top  of  her  head  should 
reach  the  chest  of  the  figure  of  Varaha,  and  her 
image  should  be  made  in  accordance  with  the 
pancha-tala  measure.  .  Such  is  the  description 
given  in  the  Vaihhanasagama. 

The  Silparatna  gives  a  slightly  different  des- 
cription. Nrivarahamurti  or  the  man-boar  image  of 
Vishnu  should  have,  according  to  this  authority,  in 
its  hands  the  gada  and  the  paclma  and  carry 
Bhumidevi  on  the  tusk.  One  of  its  feet  should  rest 
upon  the  serpent  Adisesha  and  the  other  on  a  tor- 
toise. Or,  the  goddess  might  be  shown  as  seated  upon 
the  left  elbow  of  the  Varaha,  with  a  nilotpala  flower 
in  her  hand.  Her  face  should  have  eyes  which  are 
expressive  of  wonder.     One  of  the  two  right   hands 

133 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

of  this  Varaha  image  should  be  made  to  rest  upon 
the  hip.  The  Silparatna  further  says  that  instead 
of  the  Varaha  being  half  man  and  half  boar,  it  may 
be  worked  out  wholly  as  a  boar  with  a  thick  snout, 
broad  shoulder-blades,  long  tusks  and  a  big  body 
covered  with  up-turned  bristles. 

The  Agni-purana  gives  very  nearly  the  same 
description  of  the  image  of  Varaha-Vishnu.  But 
it  adds  that  the  right  hand  should  carry  the  kmikha 
and  the  left  hand  either  a  padma  or  the  figure 
of  Lakshmi.  In  this  latter  case,  the  figure  of 
Lakshmi  should  be  shown  as  seated  upon  the  left 
elbow  of  the  god  and  the  figures  of  BhOmi  and 
Adisesha  are  to  be  near  his  feet.  The  Agni-Purana 
says  that  the  setting  up  of  the  Varahamurti  for 
worship  brings  to  one  emancipation  from  samsara. 

The  Vislmudharmottara  also  gives  the  same 
description  with  a  few  additional  details.  In 
describing  Adisesha,  it  states  that  that  serpent 
should  be  sculptured  as  possessing  four  arms,  a 
hood  ornamented  with  jewels  and  eyes  expressive 
of  wonder  ;  the  face  of  Adisesha  should  be  slightly 
lifted  up  as  if  indicating  a  desire  to  see  the  Lord. 
Two  of  Adisesha's  hands  are  to  be  in  the  anjali 
pose,  while  the  other  two  should  carry  the  hala 
and  the  musala.  He  should  assume  the  attitude 
of    the    alidhUsana.     The    same   authority    adds 

134 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

further  that  the  image  of  Nrivaraha  may  be  also 
sculptured  seated  like  Kapila  in  the  dhyana 
attitude  ;  or  the  hands  may  be  so  placed  as  if  offer- 
ing pindas  ;  or,  the  whole  figure  may  be  sculptured 
exactly  like  a  boar  shown  to  live  in  the  midst  of 
asuras.  When  the  image  is  represented  like  a  full 
boar,  it  should  be,  as  when  associated  with  Siva  as 
the  Lingodbhavamurti,  shown  to  be  digging  the 
earth.  According  to  the  Vishnudharmdttara,  again, 
the  philosophic  import  of  this  avatara  is  the  defeat 
of  ignorance  embodied  in  the  shape  of  Hiranyaksha 
by  Eternal  Wisdom  and  Almighty  Power  incarnat- 
ed as  Yaraha- Vishnu. 

This  form  of  the  Varahamurti  has  to  be  of 
white  complexion,  and  should  have 

Yajaavaraha. 

four  arms,  two  of  which  are  to 
carry  the  §ankha  and  the  chahra  ;  the  figure  should 
be  seated  upon  a  simhasana,  with  the  right  leg 
hanging  down  and  the  left  resting  upon  the  seat ; 
it  should  be  clothed  in  yellow  garments  and  adorned 
with  various  ornaments.  On  the  right  side  should 
be  seated  the  figure  of  Lakshmi  having  the  golden 
yellow  colour.  Her  left  leg  should  be  bent  and 
kept  resting  upon  the  seat,  while  the  right  should 
be  left  hanging.  Her  left  hand  should  carry  a 
lotus  and  the  right  hand  should  be  resting  on  the 
seat.     On    the  left    of    Yajnavarahamurti,    there 


135 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

should  be  seated  Bhumidevi  of  dark  complexion, 
with  her  right  leg  bent  and  resting  upon  the  seat 
and  the  left  leg  hanging  down.  In  her  right  hand 
she  should  hold  a  n'dotpala  flower  and  the  left  hand 
should  rest  upon  the  seat.  The  face  of  this  goddess 
has  to  be  slightly  turned  towards  the  god  and 
should  be  expressive  of  surprise. 

This  type  of  the  image  of  Varaha- Vishnu  has 
_   ,  to  be  seated  upon  a  simhasana,  with 

Pralaya- Varaha. 

the  right  leg  hanging  down,  while 
the  left  one  is  bent  and  kept  resting  on  the  seat. 
This  image  should  have  four  arms,  in  two  of  which 
the  sahhha  and  the  chaJcra  have  to  be  carried, 
while  the  front  right  hand  should  be  in  the  abhaya 
pose  and  the  front  left  hand  be  resting  upon  the 
left  thigh.  The  complexion  of  Pralaya- Varaha  has 
to  be  blue  ;  and  the  image  is  to  be  clothed  in  yellow 
garments  and  decked  with  all  the  usual  ornaments. 
On  the  right  of  Pralaya-Varaha  and  on  the 
same  seat  should  be  placed  his  consort,  Bhijmidevi, 
with  the  right  leg  hanging  down  and  the  left  bent 
and  made  to  rest  on  the  seat.  She  has  to  be  dark 
in  complexion  and  should  be  wearing  all  her  suit- 
able ornaments  ;  in  her  left  hand  there  should  be  an 
vfpala  flower,  and  her  right  hand  should  be  resting 
upon  the  seat.  She  must  be  made  to  look  at  her  lord 
with  amazement  which  is  clearly  visible  in  her  eyes. 

136 


DA8A7ATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

It  is  said  that  when  Vishnu  gave  up  his  boar- 
form  and  returned  as  Vishnu,  to  his  own  heavenly 
abode  known  as  Vaikuntha,  Siva  took  the  long  tusk 
of  the  discarded  animal-body  and  used  it  as  an 
ornament. 

Such  are  some  of  the  descriptions  of  the  several 
forms  of  Varahamurti  as  given  in  the  dgamas 
and  tantras.  The  peculiarities  of  the  actual 
sculptured  forms,  which  are  represented  in  the 
illustrative  plates,  deserve  to  be  noticed.  One 
prominent  feature  of  the  Varaha  images  printed  in 
the  Pis.  XXXVII  to  XLT  is  that  they  are  all 
facing  the  proper  left  and  have  the  Devi  resting 
upon  the  bent  left  leg,  the  hanging  legs  of  this 
Devi  being  held  by  the  right  hand  of  the  god  him- 
self. The  figures  on  Pis.  XXXVI  to  XXXVIII  and 
figs.  '2  and  3  on  PL  XXXIX  possess  an  attitude 
which  suggests  that  they  are  about  to  jump  up  ;  and 
this  peculiarity  of  attitude  is  demanded  in  fact  by  the 
Sanskrit  authorities.  In  PI.  XXXVII  alone,  is  the 
Devi  carried  by  Varaha  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  ;  and 
she  is  there  standing,  not  sitting,  as  required  by  the 
agamas.  PI.  XXXVI  is  an  elaborate  piece  of  sculp- 
ture wherein  the  central  figure,  Varaha  in  company 
with  the  Devi,  is  flanked  on  the  sides  by  Brahma  and 
possibly  Siva,  the  former  standing  on  the  left,  and 
the  latter  on  the  right.     On  a  close  examination  of 

137 

13 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

the  figure  on  the  left,  it  may  be  seen  that  it  has  three 
faces  and  four  arms.  The  figure  of  Brahma  holds  a 
kamandalu  in  the  lower  left  hand,  the  other  left 
hand  being  placed  in  what  is  known  as  the  pose  of 
praise ;  the  upper  right  hand  is  held  in  the  kataJca 
pose  and  the  lower  right  hand  is  made  to  rest  upon 
the  hip.  The  cloth  is  worn  in  the  upavlta  fashion. 
Up  above  the  head  of  Brahma  is  given  a  figure 
which  is  probably  Chandra  with  the  hands  held  in 
the  anjali  pose  and  facing  Varaha.  To  the  left  of 
Brahma  is  seen  a  person  wearing  the  jatSi-maJcuta  ; 
and  he  appears  to  be  a  male  likely  to  be  the  rishi 
Narada,  for,  in  front  of  him  and  near  his  hand  is 
seen  the  handle  of  a  vlna,  which  is  a  musical 
instrument  characteristically  associated  with  this 
sage. 

The  large  figure  to  the  right  of  the  central 
Varaha  in  PI.  XXXVI  wears  the  jaia-mahuta  and  is 
standing  with  his  hands  which  are  apparently  in 
the  ahjali  pose.  The  statement  that  this  image 
may  be  that  of  Siva  is  based  only  on  the  relative 
size  of  the  figure  and  its  jata-maJcuta.  The  height 
of  this  figure  is  exactly  equal  to  that  of  Brahma ; 
both  these  figures  of  Brahma  and  Siva  come  up  to 
the  shoulders  of  Varaha  ;  and  this  is  the  height 
which  is  generally  prescribed  in  Sanskrit  works  on 
iconography  for  the  principal  ones  among  the  atten- 

138 


PLATE  XXXyi. 


-5rjir«!?!S0iS2fcCgg;3«O,,„,.,,^^^. 


V^-ieO^^-^^^JiPWt^ 


a 

u 

3 

.p. 

Its 
J3 


o 
a 
o 


o 


[To  face  page  138.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

dant  deities.     There  are  however  some  dfficulties 
in  the  matter  of  this  identification  ;  this  figure  has 
only  two  arms,  which  is  uncommon  for  Siva  in  the 
sculptures  of  the  period ;  secondly,  Siva  and  Brahma 
are  rarely,  if  at  all,  shown  as  adopting  the   anjali 
pose  of  the  hands  and  with  bowed  head ;  even  when 
they  are  sculptured  as  attendant  deities,  their  hands 
are  usually  shown  in  the  pose  of  praise;  thirdly, 
there  is  in  front  of  this  figure  a  vma,  with  a  crooked 
handle  and  the  gourd  resonator,  evidently  belong- 
ing to  the  being  whom  the  figure   represents,  and 
indicating  that  it  may  well  be  a  rishi.     Up  above 
this  figure,  which  may  be  of  Siva,  there  is  the  figure 
of  Surya  in  the  prahhamandala  worshipping  Varaha 
with  folded  hands.     The  form  of  Surya,   like  that 
of  Chandra,  is  here   represented   only  up  to   the 
middle  of  the  body,    the  lower  portion  being  left 
unsculptured ;  this  is  meant  evidently  to  suggest 
that  they  are  up  and  unsupported  in  the  sky. 

To  the  right  of  what  we  have  supposed  to  be 
the  figure  of  Siva  stands  a  female  figure,  with  her 
hands  folded  in  the  anjali  pose  and  her  feet 
immersed  in  water  :  her  head  is  adorned  with  a 
haranda-maTiuta.  She  is  the  goddess  of  earth 
Bhiimidevi,  just  rescued  from  the  ocean.  Under 
the  right  foot  of  Varaha  is  Adisesha,  with  a  five- 
headed  nRga  hood  on  the  head.     He  has  also  his 

139 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

hands  in  the  aTijali  pose  and  is  worshipfuUy  looking 
at  the  great  deliverer  of  the  earth  with  uplifted 
head.  Half  of  his  hody  is  plunged  in  water,  which 
is  represented  in  the  sculpture  in  the  usual  convan- 
tional  manner  with  lotuses  and  waves,  although 
the  lotuses  are  of  course  out  of  place  in  the  ocean. 
The  execution  of  this  elaborate  panel  is  very 
artistic,  and  the  proportion  of  the  various  figures  is 
effective  and  appropriate.  The  drapery  is  arranged 
in  quite  a  natural  fashion  and  is  very  becoming. 
The  big  tusks  and  the  powerful  snout  of  the  boar 
are  intended  to  indicate  great  strength  and  terrific 
power. 

PI.  XXXVII  represents  a  group  of  images 
found  in  No.  Ill  cave  at  Badami.  In  it  great 
prominence  is  naturally  given  to  the  principal 
figure  of  Varaha.  The  attendant  deities  Brahma 
and  Aiva  are  shown  with  their  consorts  on  the 
proper  riglit  and  left  of  the  central  Varaha,  and 
certain  (Mvaa  are  shown  as  sailing  in  the  air.  Both 
Brahma  and  Siva  have  one  of  their  hands  held  up 
in  the  pose  of  praise.  At  the  foot  of  Varaha  is 
Adisesha's  wife  ;  on  the  proper  left  is  standing  erect 
Adisesha  himself,  and  on  the  proper  right  is  an 
attendant  woman  holding  the  chaitri.  This  piece  of 
sculpture  is  about  a  century  older  than  the  one  at 
Mababalipuram  shown  in  PI.  XXXVI, 

140 


^LATB    XXXVll. 


311 'i?^: 


-4te 


1^ 


\ 


Bburarahamurti :  Stone  :  Badami. 


[To  lace  page  140.] 


PLATE  XXXYIIt 


^  :^^.:': 


Yai-aha  :   Stone  :  Eajim,  Eaipur  District,  Central  Provinces. 
[To  face  page  141.] 


t>LATB  XXXIX, 


03 

a 
o 

02 


e3     a 

ic3    S 


o 


f^ 


o 

cd 

u 

ja 

cd 

eu 

e 

f-i 

ni 

S 

§ 

o 

^ 

-» 

-4^ 

rf) 

o 

h 

-*-> 

n1 

M 

j:3 

P 

> 

M 

'    .' 

03 

oq 

O 

1— ( 

eo 

li( 

[To  face  page  141.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

PL  XXXVIII  and  the  fig.  2  on  PL  XXXIX 
represent  images  which  are  more  or  less  of  the 
same  age  as  that  on  PL  XXXVI  ;  they  do  not 
seem  to  be  far  removed,  in  point  of  time,  from 
the  early  Ohalukya-Pallava  period.  The  first 
of  these  is  sculptured  in  great  detail  and  with 
a  characteristic  vigour  that  is  truly  artistic.  This 
figure  of  Varaha  has  four  arms,  and  is  seen  to  carry 
the  Devi  on  one  of  the  left  elbows ;  this  associated 
left  hand  and  the  corresponding  right  hand  are 
clasped,  while  the  other  left  hand  is  made  to 
rest  on  the  bent  leg  so  as  to  be  suggestive  of  the 
support  needed  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  goddess. 
The  sculptor  has  strayed  a  little  from  his  autho- 
rities in  representing  Adisesha  as  supporting 
Varaha's  two  feet  in  the  two  palms  of  his  hands 
instead  of  on  the  hood.  This  Adisesha  is  in  the 
attitude  of  alldhasana.  A  whole  world  of  Nagas 
is  sculptured  in  the  adjacent  slab,  showing  all  the 
Nagas  as  engaged  in  the  act  of  reverencing  Varaha 
with  their  hands  held  in  the  anjali  pose.  The 
wriggling  snake-halves  of  the  bodies  of  these  Nagas 
and  Naginis  make  their  life  and  activity  manifest  in 
a  remarkable  manner.  Fig.  2,  PL  XXXIX  represents 
a  remarkable  piece  of  art.  The  happy  proportion  of 
the  parts  of  the  body  of  Varaha,  the  delicate  poise 
of  the  image,  the  minutely  carved  ornaments,  the 

141 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

sculpturing  of  the  Nagas  underneath  an  expanded 
lotus  leaf  so  as  to  be  suggestive  of  the  patala-loha, 
which  is  the  abode  of  these  beings,  all  these  and 
many  more  features  in  the  workmanship  stamp 
the  artist  as  a  real  master  of  his  craft.  That  to 
this  vigourous  and  highly  powerful  Varaha,  the 
supporting  of  a  Devi  is  like  child's  play,  becomes 
patent  by  the  ease  with  which  she  is  shown  to  be 
held  on  his  bent  left  hand.  Another  point  which 
is  artistically  noteworthy  is  that  the  lotus  leaf  on 
the  head  of  Varaha,  which  with  its  concave  side 
turned  down,  serves  as  an  umbrella,  and  indicates 
the  god  to  be  just  rising  up  from  the  ocean.  Alike 
for  its  effect  and  for  its  execution,  this  image  is 
remarkable  and  praiseworthy. 

Next  in  point  of  time  is  the  image  represented 
as  fig.  3  on  PI.  XXXIX.  There  is  nothing  very 
peculiar  in  it,  except  that  it  shows  that  the  same 
rules  of  iconography  must  have  been  applied  to 
the  image  of  Varaha  in  Bengal  as  in  Bombay  and 
Madras. 

Figs.  1  on  PI.  XXXIX  and  that  on  PI.  XL 
represent  comparatively  recent  productions,  and 
both  of  them  belong  to  Madras.  The  latter 
is  a  bronze  image  preserved  in  the  Museum  at 
Madras,  and  the  former  is  a  stone  image  to  be 
found  in  the  Vishnu  temple  at  TSTagalapuram  in 

142 


PLATE  XL.    7C 


/!>'««SM5i'«!ilBW^:»'j««*l«''^«»''"»s\'«^^ 


mmmiuu 


Varaha;  Bronze:  Madras  Museum. 


[To  face  pnge  142  ] 


PLATE  XH. 


-a 

•a 


a 

.a 
en 


OB 


m 


r^- 


%  ; 


>-^''i 


<s> 
a 
o 


li 

CO      03 

J-    n 

:z;  ^ 

,  ■      to 

a  2 

CO    =3 

03    '^ 

o 


pR 


m 


[To  f  ICC  page  143.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

the  North  Arcot  district.  They  have  very  similar 
characteristics  ;  neither  of  them  is  in  the  attitude 
of  jumping  ;  both  are  shown  to  be  cahnly  standing 
on  the  right  leg  which  is  firmly  set  on  the 
pedestal ;  the  left  leg  is  bent  and  is  supported 
on  the  hood  of  Adisesha ;  the  two  upper  hands 
carry  the  saiikha  and  the  chaJcra  as  usual ;  the 
lower  left  hand  is  thrown  round  the  Devi  so  as 
to  support  her  in  the  seated  position,  and  the  lower 
right  hand  is  in  the  abhaya  pose.  Here  we  may 
also  notice  the  arrangement  of  drapery  and  the 
mechanical  way  in  which  the  yajnopavlta  and  the 
other  ornaments  are  arranged  on  the  figures  as 
characteristic  features  of  later  art.  It  is  easy  to 
observe  in  the  bronze  Varahamurti  of  the  Madras 
Museum  that  the  image-making  art  had  distinctly 
decayed  at  the  time  of  its  casting. 

Fig.  2,  PI.  XLI.  is  the  representation  of  an 
image  which  belongs  to  the  Chennakesava  temple  at 
Belur  in  the  Mysore  province.  The  characteristic 
details  of  ornamentation,  the  minute  and  clearly 
traceable  workmanship  in  the  carving,  the  excellent 
and  beautiful,  though  conventional,  sculpturing  of 
the  various  figures  marks  this  Varaha  image  as 
belonging  to  one  of  the  most  attractively  artistic 
schools  of  a  late  period.  We  see  Varaha  here  with 
twelve  hands,  in  the  right  six  of  which   he  carries 

143 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

the  sula,  thrust  into  the  body  of  Hiranyaksha,  the 
anJcusa,  the  ghanta,  the  Jchadga,  the  cliakra  and  the 
bana  in  the  order  from  below :  in  two  of  the  left 
hands  a  fruit  (lemon)  and  the  Jchetaka  are  seen,  and 
something  which  is  held  in  the  third  left  hand  is 
not  capable  of  being  made  out  from  the  photograph  ; 
the  fourth  left  hand  gives  support  to  the  hanging 
leg  of  the  Devi,  while  the  fifth  carries  the  sahhha 
and  the  sixth  is  held  in  the  vismaya  pose.  This 
Varaha  is  treading  upon  two  asuras, — notice  their 
round  eyes  and  tusks,  and  also  the  sword  and  shield 
in  their  hands, — who  are  shown  as  lying  crushed 
under  the  feet  of  the  deity.  In  front  stands 
Bhumidevi,  whose  head  has  been  unfortunately 
broken  away,  with  her  hand  in  the  anjali  pose. 

There  is  an  orthodox  explanation  of  the 
symbolism  underlying  the  boar  avatar  a  of  Vishnu 
given  in  the  Padma-purana.  The  Vayu-purana  also 
gives  the  same  passage  word  for  word.  In  them  it 
is  stated  that  the  sacrifice  (yajna)  is  as  a  whole 
symbolised  by  the  boar,  and  that  its  various  limbs 
represent  the  limbs  of  the  sacrifice.  The  grunt  of 
the  boar  corresponds  to  the  Bavia-ghosha  and  the 
four  legs  are  the  foar  Vedas  :  the  tusk  is  the  yupa- 
stambha  (the  sacrificial  post) ;  the  tongue  stands  for 
agvi  (the  sacrificial  fire)  and  the  bristles  constitute 
darblia  grass;  the  head  is  the  Brahman  priest,  the 

144 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

bowels  form  the  TJdgatri  priest,  and  the  genital 
organ  constitutes  the  Hdtri  priest  required  to 
officiate  in  the  sacrifice.  The  two  eyes  of  the  boar 
are  said  to  be  emblematic  of  the  day  and  the  night, 
and  the  ornaments  in  its  ear  are  taken  to  represent 
the  Vedahgas.  The  mucous  flow  from  the  nose  is 
the  ghee,  which  is  delivered  into  the  fire  by  the 
spoon  {sruva)  consisting  of  the  snout  (tunda). 
Prayaschitta  is  represented  by  the  Varaha's  hoofs 
and  their  knees  stand  for  the  pasu  (the  animal 
victim).  The  air  breathed  is  the  antaratman,  the 
bones  of  the  boar  constitute  the  mantras,  and  its 
blood  is  the  soma  juice.  The  vedi  (the  altar)  is 
symbolised  by  the  shoulders  of  the  boar  and  the 
havis  is  its  neck.  What  is  called  havya-havya  is  re- 
presented by  the  rapid  movements  of  the  boar  ;  the 
dakshind  fee  paid  to  the  priests  is  its  heart.  The 
wife  of  the  sacrificer  is  its  shadow,  while  the  whole 
body  of  the  animal  is  taken  as  representing  the 
sacrificial  chamber.  One  of  the  ornaments  on  the 
body  of  the  boar  is  made  to  represent  the  ceremony 
called  pravargya. 

Kasyapa-prajapati   begot   by    Diti   two    sons 
named  Hiranyaksha  and  Hiranya- 

Narasimha.  ^ .  '  "^ 

kasipu.  The  former  of  these  receiv- 
ed certain  boons  from  Brahma,  which  made  him 
notably  powerful ;  and  he  thereupon  began  to  sub- 

145 
19 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

jugate  the  gods  and  tease  them.     The  gods  in  their 
new  affliction,  complained  to  Brahma  and  sought 
his  help  to  overcome  the  troublous  might  of  the 
asura  Hiranyaksha.     Then  Brahma,  together  with 
the  doleful  gods,  approached  Vishnu  and  implored 
him  to  deliver  them  from  the  troubles  caused  by 
the  asura.     In  response,  Vishnu  created  a  strong 
warrior,  whom  he  sent  with  Garuda  and  a  few 
other   assistants   to   vanquish    Hiranyaksha ;   but 
they  could  not  succeed  in  their  endeavour  to  do  so. 
Then  Vishnu  himself  proceeded  against  the  demon, 
when  he  was  opposed  by  Hiranyakasipu,  his  son 
Prahlada   and   a   host    of   other   asuras.     In  the 
struggle  that  ensued,  the  asuras  were  overpowered 
and  Prahlada  realised  that  his  father's  great  oppo- 
nent could  be  none  other  than  the  Supreme  God, 
and  entreated  his  father  and  all  his  allies  to  give 
up  the  impossible  contest.     All  the  good  advice  of 
Prahlada  proved  to  be  of  no  avail,  and  Hiranyaka- 
sipu persisted  in  carrying  on  the  war  with  Vishnu. 
The  result  was  that  Vishnu  became  angry  and  tore 
the   asura   Hiranyakasipu   to   pieces.     On  seeing 
this,  the  other  asuras  ran  away.     Such  is  the  brief 
account   found  in   the   Eurma-purana   about  the 
Narasimhavatara  or  the  man-lion  incarnation  of 
Vishnu.     It  is  easily  seen  that  it  does  not  give  us 
the   circumstances   under  which   Vishnu    had    to 


146 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

assume  the  curious  form  of  the  man-lion.  The 
Saura-purana  follows  the  Eurma-purana  in  stating 
that  Prahlada  himself  opposed  Vishnu  at  the  begin- 
ning but  later  on  became  devoted  to  him  on  seeing 
his  divine  valour  and  making  out  therefrom  that 
he  must  surely  be  the  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

We  are  also  informed  in  the  Puranic  legends 
that  Hiranyaksha  and  Hiranyakasipu  were  in  fact 
Jaya  and  Vijaya,  the  two  door-keepers  of  Vishnu 
who,  having  incurred  the  displeasure  of  their 
master,  were  cursed  by  him  to  become  incarnated 
as  asuras  and  to  turn  out  to  be  his  enemies  in  a 
number  of  births.  In  one  of  these  they  were  born 
as  Madhu  and  Kaitabha,  in  another  as  Hiranyaksha 
and  Hiranyakasipu ;  in  the  Mahabharafa  period 
they  were  Sisupala  and  Dantavakra. 

The  name  Hiranyakasipu  is  derived  in  the 
Vayu-purana  from  the  following  legend.  Once 
Kasyapa  was  performing  a  sacrifice,  and  his  wife 
Diti  was  in  an  advanced  stage  of  pregnancy. 
Kasyapa  had  several  costly  gifts  for  the  sacrificial 
priests ;  and  one  of  them  was  a  gold-plated  wooden 
seat  for  the  hotri'pnest.  It  was  kept  covered  with 
hu§a  grass.  As  the  sacrifice  was  going  on,  Diti 
gave  birth  to  a  son ;  and  the  baby,  as  soon  as  it 
was  born,  walked  straight  to  the  place  of  sacrifice 
and  there  sat  upon  the  gold-plated  seat  and  began 

147 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

to  repeat  the  Vedas  and  the  Purauas.  The  per- 
formers of  the  sacrifice  weru  exceedingly  pleased 
with  the  child  and  called  him  Hiranyakasipu  and 
prophesied  that  he  would  become  very  powerful. 

According  to  the  Pad  ma -pur  ana  Prahlada  was 
a  Brahman  a  in  his  previous  condition  of  existence ; 
and  though  now  born  as  the  son  of  Hiranyakasipu, 
he  still  retained  his  old  and  ardent  devotion  to 
Vishnu.  The  father,  of  course,  did  not  like  that 
his  son  should  be  a  devout  adorer  of  his  mortal 
enemies,  the  gods  ;  and  with  the  object  of  getting 
rid  of  such  a  misbehaving  and  undesirable  son,  he 
subjected  him  to  various  forms  of  cruel  treatment. 
But  Prahlada,  by  the  grace  of  Vishnu,  remained 
quite  unscathed,  and  began  to  preach,  with  even 
greater  earnestness  than  before,  the  doctrine  that 
Vishnu  was  the  omnipresent,  omniscient,  omnipo- 
tent Grod  who  filled  all  space  and  reigned  every- 
where as  the  Supreme  Lord.  Then  once  Hiranya- 
kasipu, in  a  fit  of  exasperation,  asked  his  son  why, 
if  Vishnu  was  omnipresent,  he  did  not  see  him  in 
the  pillar  of  his  hall.  Thereupon  Prahlada  struck 
the  pillar  with  his  fist,  and  according  to  another 
account,  Hiranyakasipu  himself  angrily  kicked  the 
pillar,   and  at   once  Vishnu  came  out  therefrom 

half-man  and  half-lion,  and  tore  Hiranyakasipu  to 
pieces. 

148 


DA8AVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

It  is  said  that  Hiranyakasipu  had,  in  his 
earlier  life  adored  Brahma  and  obtained  from  him 
boons  to  the  effect  that  he  should  be  so  invulnera- 
ble as  not  to  be  killed  by  man  or  beast ;  that  he 
should  not  die  either  in  the  day  or  in  the  night, 
that  he  should  not  die  either  in  the  day  or  in  night, 
side  it  and  that  no  weapon  of  any  kind  should 
injure  him.  After  he  obtained  these  boons  he 
naturally  became  haughty  and  irrepressible  in  his 
worrying  behaviour  towards  the  gods,  and  it 
became  imperative  that  he  should  be  killed.  But 
at  the  same  time  the  boon  conferred  by  Brahma 
on  him  had  to  be  respected.  Consequently  Vishnu 
assumed  the  from  of  a  man-lion,  and  tore  Hiranya- 
kasipu with  the  claws  at  the  time  of  lingering 
twilight  forming  the  junction  between  day  and 
night,  himself  being  seated  upon  the  doorsill  of 
the  mansion  of  Hiranyakasipu.  It  is  obvious  that, 
in  so  causing  the  death  of  the  asura,  not  one  of 
the  boons  bestowed  on  him  by  Brahma  was  coun- 
teracted and  shown  to  be  futile.  This  account 
given  in  the  Padma-picrana  is  substantially  in 
agreement  with  what  is  found  in  the  Vishnu-purana 
and  some  other  Puranas  also. 

The  images  of  Vishnu  as  Narasimha  are  of 
two  kinds,  namely,  the  Girija-Narasimha  and  the 
Sthauna-Narasimha.      The    first    kind     consists 

149 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

generally  of  a  single  figure,  which  should  be  shown 
seated  on  a  padmasana  in  the  uthutiJca  posture, 
the  forelegs  being  maintained  in  the  required  posi- 
tion by  the  ijoga-paUa  belt  going  round  them  and 
the  back  of  the  body.     The  conception  underlying 
the  name  Girija-Narasimha  is  that  the  lion  comes 
out  of  a   mountain   cave.     Kevala-Narasimha   is 
another  name  by  which  this  single  image  of  Vishnu 
as  man-lion  is  called  ;  and  it  may  have  either  two 
or  four  arms.     In  the  latter  case,  the  upper  right 
hand  should  hold  the  chalcra,  and  the   upper  left 
hand  the  saiikha,   and  the  two  other  hands  being 
stretched   forward   and   supported   on   the  knees. 
This   form  of  the  image    of   Narasimha   is  often 
designated  as  the  Yoga-Narasimha.  (See  PI.  XLII). 
The    colour    of   this    form   of   the    image  of  the 
man-lion  Vishnu  should  be  crystal   white.     The 
Silparatna,  however,  gives  a  somewhat  different 
description,   and  says  that   the   cliah-a   and   the 
sahhha  should  be  shown,  near  the  two  out-stretched 
hands  and  that  the  other  two  hands  should  carry 
the  gada  and  the  padma. 

Sometimes  Girija-Narasimha  is  represented  as 
seated  upon  a  simhas'ana  with  the  right  leg  hang- 
ing down  and  the  left  folded  and  made  to  rest  upon 
the  seat.  The  image  generally  has  four  arms,  and 
the  back  right  and  left  hands  carry  the  cliahra  and 

150 


PliATE  XLiIJ. 


Kovala  Narasimba  :   Stone  :  Halsbirlu. 


[To  face  pafje  ISO.] 


DA8AVATAEAS  OP  VISHNU. 

sanliha  respectively.  The  front  right  hand  has  to 
be  shown  in  the  abhaya  pose,  and  the  front  left 
hand  as  resting  upon  the  hip  in  the  Jcatyavalambita 
pose.  While  the  colour  of  this  form  of  the  image 
of  Narasimha  is  required  to  be  white,  the  colour  of 
the  garments  has  to  be  red.  Moreover  the  image 
should  be  adorned  with  all  suitable  ornaments,  and 
on  the  head  the  haranda-^naliuta  should  be  worn. 
On  the  right  of  such  Narasimha  there  should  be 
the  image  of  Lakshmi  seated  on  the  same  seat,  but 
with  her  left  leg  folded  and  made  to  rest  upon  the 
seat,  and  the  right  leg  hanging  down.  In  the  left 
hand  this  goddess  should  carry  a  lotus ;  and  her 
right  hand  should  be  made  to  rest  upon  the  seat. 
The  image  of  Bhumidevi  should  be  shown  seated 
on  the  left  of  Narasimha,  with  her  right  leg  folded 
and  made  to  rest  on  the  seat,  while  the  left  leg  is 
made  to  hang  down.  In  the  right  hand  of  this 
goddess  there  should  be  shown  the  nilotpala  flower, 
and  the  left  hand  should  be  shown  as  resting  upon 
the  seat.  The  colour  of  the  image  of  Lakshmi  has 
to  be  golden  yellow,  and  that  of  Bhumidevi  has  to 
be  dark.  Both  the  goddesses  should  be  adorned 
with  all  appropriate  ornaments. 

The  conception  underlying  the  name  Sthauna- 
Narasimha  is  that  the  lion  in  this  case  comes  out 
of  a  pillar ;  and  this  Sthauna-Narasimha  is  also  a 

151 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

seated  image  with  four  arms.  In  the  two  back 
hands  there  should  be  the  sahTcha  and  the  chakra ; 
the  front  right  hand  should  be  in  the  ahhaya  or  the 
varada  pose,  and  the  corresponding  left  hand 
should  be  made  to  rest  on  the  thigh.  The  left  leg 
has  to  be  folded  and  supported  upon  the  simhdsana 
while  the  right  leg  should  be  hanging  down.  The 
neck  of  this  type  of  Narasiiiaha  should  be  covered 
with  a  thick  mane ;  the  colour  of  the  image  should 
be  white  and  that  of  the  garment  red.  There  should 
be  sharp  curved  teeth  made  distinctly  visible  in 
the  mouth  of  the  man-lion. 

In  a  second  manuscript  of  Vaikhanasagama  a 
somewhat  different  description  of  the  image  of 
Sthauna-Narasimha  is  given.  According  to  this 
description  the  image  may  have  twelve  or  sixteen 
hands,  and  there  should  be  three  bends  in  the  body 
(tribhanga).  On  the  left  thigh  thereof  Hiranya- 
kasipu  should  be  stretched  out  with  the  belly  being 
ripped  open  by  two  of  the  hands  of  Narasimha. 
One  of  the  right  hands  should  be  in  the  ahhaya 
pose,  and  another  has  to  carry  a  sword  so  as  to 
make  its  point  reach  up  to  the  kundala  in  the  ear. 
One  of  the  left  hands  of  Narasimha  should  hold  the 
makuta  of  Hiranyakasipu,  and  another  should  be 
shown  as  lifted  up  for  administering  a  blow  to  the 
demon.     The  legs  of  the  asura  are  to  be  taken  hold 

152 


DASAVATARAS  01  VISHNU. 

of  by  a  right  hand,  and  two  other  hands,  one  right 
and  one  left,  should  be  lifted  up  to  the  ears  of  the 
image  and  be  holding  the  drawn  out  entrails  of 
Hiranyakasipu  in  the  form  of  a  garland.  The 
figure  of  Hiranyakasipu  should  be  sculptured  so 
as  to  indicate  that  he  has  been  attempting  to  kill 
his  opponent,  and  be  for  this  purpose  armed  with 
a  sword  and  a  shield.  As  if  to  appease  the  highly 
excited  wrath  of  Narasimha  while  engaged  in  des- 
troying this  demon,  Sridevi,  Bhudevi,  Narada  with 
his  Vina  and  Prahlada  with  his  hands  in  the  anjali 
pose  should  all  be  shown  as  standing  on  his  right 
and  left.  Above  these  should  be  sculptured  Indra 
and  the  other  Lokapalas  with  their  hands  in  the 
anjali  pose. 

If  the  figure  of  Narasirhha  is  sculptured  with 
only  eight  hands,  two  of  them  should  be  employed 
in  tearing  open  the  belly  of  Hiranyakasipu,  while 
four  others  should  carry  the  saiikha,  the  gada,  the 
cliakra  and  the padma.  The  remaining  two  should 
be  holding  the  drawn  out  entrails  of  Hiranyakasipu 
garland-wise.  The  neck  of  the  image  must  be 
thick ;  the  shoulders  and  the  hip  must  be  compara- 
tively large  in  size  and  the  abdomen  as  well  as  the 
waist  must  be  notably  thin.  The  whole  of  the 
image  should  be  painted  golden  yellow,  yellowish 
brown,  blue  or  scarlet  red.     The  Vishnu dharmot- 


153 
m 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

tara  prescribes  the  dlldhasana  for  the  Sthaunamurti 
and  adds  that  it  should  be  clothed  in  a  blue  garment. 
The  same  authority  informs  us  that  Narasimha, 
when  worshipped,  increases  one's  knowledge  of 
the  Supreme  Being  and  that  Hiranyakasipu  is  a 
personification  of  evil  and  ignorance. 

A   third   variety  of  Narasimha  is   called  the 

Yanaka-Narasiiiiha.     In   this    as- 
Nai^^tmh'a.         P^ct,  Narasimha  should  be  seated 

upon  the  shoulders  of  Garuda  or 
upon  the  folds  of  Adisesha.  This  Narasimha 
should  possess  four  arms  in  two  of  which  he 
should  carry  the  iaukJta  and  the  chaJira.  Nothing 
is  mentioned  as  to  how  the  other  hands  are 
kept  engaged.  Over  the  head  of  Narasimha  there 
should  be  the  five-headed  hood  of  Adisesha 
held  like  an  umbrella.  The  figure  of  Narasimha 
should  be  adorned  with  all  ornaments.  We 
have,  however,  not  come  across  even  a  single 
instance  of  this  variety  of  Narasimha  in  actual 
sculptures. 

Besides  the  Girija-Narasimha  and  the  Sthauna- 
Narasimha  described  above  there  are  a  few  other 
varieties  whose  descriptions  are  not  found  in  the 
Sanskrit  authorities  available  to  us ;  however, 
illustrations  of  the  undescribed  forms  of  Narasimha 
with  a  brief  description  of  each  are  added  below. 

154 


PLATE  Xlilll, 


Standing  figure  of  Kevala-Narasithha  :   Stone  :   Badami. 
[To  face  page  155.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

The  Saiva  accounts  state  that  Narasimha, 
after  killing  Hiranyakasipu,  grew  arrogant  and 
harsh.  Siva  thereupon  assumed  the  form  of  a 
sarabha,  a  mythical  creature  held  to  be  partly  bird 
and  partly  the  beast  lion,  tore  up  Narasimha  and 
wore  his  skin  as  a  garment,  using  his  face  as  an 
ornament  on  the  chest. 

In  illustration  of  the  descriptions  given  above, 
one  picture  of  the  Kevala-Narasimha,  which  is  the 
same  as  the  Yoga-Narasimha,  and  two  of  the 
Sthauna-Narasimha  have  been  given  ;  and  six  other 
pictures  which  do  not  correspond  to  the  descriptions 
are  also  reproduced  here.  The  figure  of  Kevala- 
Narasimha  (PL.  XLII)  is  the  principal  image  in 
the  Narasimha  temple  near  Halebidu.  In  it,  it  has 
to  be  noticed  that  the  two  up-turned  hands  carry 
the  sanJcha  and  the  chakra,  but  not  the  gada  and 
the  padma  as  required  by  the  8ilparat7ia.  In 
respect  also  of  having  the  sankha  and  the  chakra 
sculptured  near  the  two  hands  made  to  rest  upon 
the  knees,  this  image  differs  from  the  description 
given  in  the  Silparatna.  The  workmanship  leaves 
nothing  to  be  desired.  The  rigid  posture,  re- 
presenting the  unshakable  firmness  of  the  mind 
of  the  yogin  and  showing  a  very  strict  adherence 
to  all  the  prescribed  details  is  in  fact  wrought  so 
beautifully   that  no   praise   can  be  too  much   in 

155 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

appreciation  of  the  skill  and  ability  of  the  sculptor. 
In  the  prahliUvaU  surrounding  the  image,  there  are 
sculptured  the  ten  avataras  of  Vishnu.  The  imdma- 
sana,  upon  which  Kevala-Narasirhha  is  required  to 
be  seated,  is  here  absent ;  and  instead  of  it  we  have 
only  a  raised  seat  placed  upon  a  well  designed 
pedestal,  in  front  of  which  the  G-aruda-lanchhana 
or  the  Garuda-emblem  is  worked  out  to  indicate 
that  the  deity  resting  on  the  pedestal  is  Vishnu. 

Strictly  speaking  PL  XLIII  also,  illustrates  a 
form  of  Kevala-Narasimha.  Here  we  have  a 
standing  image  instead  of  the  sitting  one  as 
required  by  the  books.  The  sankha,  chahra,  gada 
and  padma  are  sculptured  in  human  form  as 
Ayudha-purushas  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  their 
real  condition.  Above  the  two  uplifted  arms  of  the 
man-lion  image  are  to  be  seen  the  personified 
Sankha  and  Chakra,  hovering,  as  it  were,  while 
near  the  gada,  on  which  the  man-lion  is  leaning, 
there  stands  the  slender- waisted  goddess  represent- 
ing the  Gada  ;  and  to  the  right  of  and  near  the  leg 
of  Narasimha  stands  the  personified  Padma.  This 
is  indeed  an  admirable  piece  of  sculpture,  rich  in 
details,  correct  in  pose  and  possessed  of  true  pro- 
portions. The  face  is  that  of  a  real  lion  and  not,  as 
in  PI.  XLII  that  of  a  conventional  form  of  the 
animal  with  pointed  ears  and  stiff  and  straight  mane. 

156 


PLATE  XLIV. 


Sthauna  Narasirhha:  Panel-Stone:  Ellora. 


[To  face  page  156.] 


PLATE  XLY, 


Sfchauna  Narasimha  :  Stone  :  Dadikkombu. 


[To  fdoe  page  157.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Narasiiiiha  is  here  shown  in  the  pacific  mood,  and 
the  calm  expression  on  the  face  is  very  well  brought 
out.  The  ornaments  are  all  minutely  carved  and 
unmistakably  bring  to  light  the  great  skill  of  the 
artist. 

Over  the  head  of  the  central  man -lion  image, 
we  see  the  images  of  Brahma  and  Siva  with  those 
of  their  consorts,  floating  in  the  air  praising  and 
glorifying  Narasimha.  This  piece  of  sculpture  is 
found  in  Cave  No.  Ill  in  Badami. 

We  do  not  as  yet  know  what  the  written  autho- 
rity is,  on  which  Narasimha  with  Hiranyakasipu,  as 
depicted  in  Pis.  XLIV  and  XLV,  is  based.  That 
these  two  pieces  of  sculpture,  one  found  in  Ellora 
and  the  other  in  distant  Dadikkombunear  Dindigal 
in  South  India,  should  exhibit  so  nearly  the  same 
main  features,  clearly  indicates  the  existence  of  an 
authoritative  description  in  some  work  bearing  upon 
the  formation  of  images  and  forming  the  basis  of 
these  productions  of  interest  and  value.  In  both 
these  we  see  that  Narasimha  is  shown  as  advancing 
towards  Hiranyakasipu  from  the  right,  as  the  latter 
approaching  in  a  defiant  attitude,  with  the  sword 
lifted  up  to  strike  the  adversary ;  in  both  Narasimha 
is  made  to  take  hold  of  the  body  of  Hiranyakasipu 
so  as  to  overpower  him ;  moreover  one  of  the  right 
hands  of  Narasimha  in  each  of  the  sculptures  is 

157 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

held  up  as  if  he  is  going  to  deal  a  blow  to  the  enemy 
with    the   open   palm   of   that    hand.     The    same 
objects  are  found  in  the  hands  of  Narasimha  in  both 
the  sculptures,  namely,  kahhha,  cha'kra,  kliadga  and 
hlietaka  ;  and  again  one  of  the  hands  is,  in  relation 
to  both  the  images,  in  the  abJiaya  pose.     Although 
based  on  the  same  authority,   the    two   pieces  of 
sculpture  are  very  dissimilar   in    respect  of   their 
artistic   merit.     The   conventional  lion's  face,    the 
conical    Idnta,    the    expressionless    attitude,     the 
straight    mechanically    arranged  mane    and  other 
such  inartistically  executed  details  in  the  Dadik- 
kombu  image  proclaim  its  positive  inferiority.   This 
and    the    images    represented  by    the    figures  on 
Pis.  XL VI  and  XL VII  belong  to  the  period  of  the 
Nayakas  of  Madura  (16th  and  17th  century  A.  D.) 
when  the  sculptor's  art  was  in  South  India  at  its 
lowest  ebb.     The  Dadikkombu  image  is  indeed  in  a 
marked   contrast   with    that  of  Ellora  in  almost 
every  respect.     In  its  workmanship  it  is  decidedly 
inferior  and  the  artist  was  obviously  utterly  lacking 
in  imagination.     The  sculpture  at  Ellora,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  full   of  expression  and  suggestive 
of  energy  and    vigorous    action ;  the  attitude   of 
Narasimha  indicates,  in  a  manner,  the  alldhasana  ; 
the  face  of  a  real  lion,  with  the  curling  mane  and 
the  uelicately  sculptured  Idnta,  tend  to  enhance 

158 


PLATE  XLVI. 


Sthauna  Narasimha  :  Stone:  Dadikkombu. 


[Tj  fdco  pigs  15y.i 


PLATE  XL VII. 


Sthauna  Narasimha  :  Bronze:   Madras  Museum. 


[Xo  face  page  15'J.. 


DASAVATAEA8  OF  VISHNU. 

the  artistic  effect  of  the  whole  piece.  The  hand 
thrown  on  the  shoulder  of  Hiranyakasipu  keeps 
him  literally  at  an  arm's  distance ;  a  second  hand 
catches  hold  of  his  crown  and  renders  him  motion- 
less, while  a  third  by  tightly  gripping  the  sword- 
carrying  hand  of  Hiranyakasipu,  completely  disarms 
and  overpowers  him.  The  master  touch  of  the 
work  of  the  artist  may  be  seen  in  the  way  in  which 
the  interlocking  of  the  leg  of  Narasimha  with  that 
of  Hiranyakasipu  is  carried  out.  The  sculptor  has 
obviously  intended  to  suggest  the  divine  nature  of 
Narasimha  by  making  his  two  feet  rest  upon 
two  padnias  or  lotuses.  The  arrangement  of  the 
drapery  is  also  well  worked  out  and  artistic. 
The  defiant  mood  of  Hiranyakasipu  is  very  well 
brought  out  in  the  haughty  smile  on  his  counte- 
nance. 

Nevertheless,  it  has  to  be  observed  that  degene- 
ration in  the  art  was  evidently  already  setting  in  ; 
and  in  proof  of  this  we  may  note  the  conventional 
form  of  the  jaw  of  the  lion,  and  also  of  its  ears 
which  are  ornamented,  pointed  in  shape,  and  are 
shown  to  rise  immediately  above  the  jaw.  From 
an  examination  of  the  sculptor's  work  itself,  it 
may  be  easily  made  out  that  the  image  of  Narasimha 
found  at  Badami  is  very  much  older  than  that 
which  belongs  to  Ellora. 

159 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

The  bronze  figure  of  Narasimha  at  the  Madras 
Museum  (PL  XL VII),  evidently  belongs  to  a  very- 
late  period,  as  it  is  strictly  conventional  in  all  its 
details.  The  artist  has  obviously  aimed  at  complete 
symmetry,  and  the  disposition  of  the  hands  on 
both  sides  is  such  as  to  make  them  balance  one 
another  well  in  effect.  Though  so  conventional 
in  conception  and  execution,  it  is  far  from  being  a 
discreditable  piece  of  work.  The  abnormally  large 
tusks  shown  in  front  in  preference  to  the  sides,  the 
tracing  of  the  nania  mark  on  the  upper  mane, 
the  curiously  shaped  eyes  and  ears,  and  the 
disproportionally  small  lirlta  are  all  characteristic 
features  denoting  the  later  period  of  sculpture  and 
casting  in  South  India.  It  is  well  worth  com- 
paring this  image  with  that  found  at  Dadikkombu 
(PI.  XL VI). 

Figures  1  and  3  on  PL  XLI  represent  Lakshmi- 
Narasimha.  These  two  bronzes 
NSSha.  belong  to  the  Madras  Museum. 
In  both  these  cases,  Narasimha  is 
seated  upon  a  padmasana,  with  his  right  leg  hang- 
ing down  and  the  left  leg  bent  and  made  to  rest 
flat  upon  the  seat.  On  the  lap  so  formed  by  the 
bent  leg  Lakshmi  is  seated  with  both  her  legs 
hanging  down  ;  and  each  of  the  feet  of  Lakshmi  is 
seen  to  be  supported  on  a  lotus.     The  upper  right 

160 


DASAVATABAS  OF  VISHNU. 

hand  of  Narasiraha  holds  the  chahra,  while  the 
lower  right  hand  is  in  the  abJiaya  pose.  The 
upper  left  hand  carries  the  sahkha ;  and  the  lower 
left  hand  embraces  the  goddess.  The  right  hand 
of  Lakshml  is  taken  round  the  body  of  Narasimha 
in  embrace,  and  her  left  hand  holds  a  lotus  in  it. 
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  fig.  1,  PI.  XLI,  a 
Garuda  in  the  dUdhasana  may  be  seen  sculptured 
as  the  Idnchliana  of  Vishnu  between  the  legs  of 
Narasimha  and  Lakshml. 

Bali,  the  son  of  Virochana  and  grandson  of 
Prahlada,  the  great  devotee  of 
^ri^ikrama^  Vishnu  in  the  man-lion  incarna- 
tion, was  able  to  vanquish  the  gods 
by  means  of  the  strength  he  had  acquired  through 
his  religious  penances.  Indra  was  in  consequence 
driven  out  of  his  kingdom  ;  this  pained  Aditi,  his 
mother,  who  prayed  to  Vishnu  to  be  born  as  a  son 
to  her  and  to  conquer  the  axttras  and  restore  the  lost 
celestial  kingdom  to  Indra.  Accordingly  Vishnu 
was  born  as  the  son  of  Aditi :  and  when  he  was  a 
young  boy,  he  proceeded  to  the  place  where  Bali 
was  conducting  a  sacrifice,  and  begged  of  him  for 
some  land  to  be  given  as  a  gift.  Bali  saw  the 
Brahmin  boy  dressed  as  a  Brahmachdrin  or  Vedic 
student  arrive  there,  and  after  duly  honouring  him 
asked  him  to  give  out  what  he  wished  to  have  from 

161 

21 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

him  as  a  sacrificial  gift.  8ukra,  the  guru  of  the 
asuras,  knowing  that  the  young  Brahmacharin  was 
no  other  than  Vishnu  himself,  warned  his  disciple 
Bali  to' be  careful  in  making  promises.  Noble  and 
generous-hearted  Bali  however,  paid  no  heed  to 
this  warning,  and  said  that,  if  Vishnu  who,  as 
Yajna-purusha,  is  the  divine  embodiment  of  the 
sacrifice  and  for  whose  acceptance  he  was  offering 
the  sacrifice,  should  himself  come  to  him  to  ask  for 
a  favour  on  the  occasion  of  the  sacrifice,  he  would 
consider  it  to  be  the  greatest  honour  shown  to  him 
by  that  great  deity,  and  would  certainly  promise 
to  give  him  anything  asked.  The  boy  then  asked 
Bali,  the  emperor  of  the  asuras  to  bestow  on  him 
the  gift  of  just  three  paces  of  space,  which  was  of 
course  readily  promised  and  confirmed  by  the  cere- 
monial pouring  out  of  water.  At  once  this  Vamana, 
the  young  dwarfish  boy  so  designated  in  Sanskrit, 
assumed  a  gigantic  form  and  with  one  pace  he 
measured  the  whole  of  the  BhuloJca  or  the  earth- 
world  and  with  another  the  Antarihsha-loka  or  the 
mid-world  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven. 
There  was  thus  nothing  left  for  measuring  out  the 
third  pace  of  space  which  Bali  had  promised  ;  and 
he  thereupon  requested  the  god  to  utilise  his  own 
royal  head  for  measuring  out  the  third  pace. 
Immensely  pleased  with  Bali,  this  Vamana  who 

162 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

had  been  Trivikrama,  or  the  god  of  three  strides 
after  he  assumed  his  enormous  proportions,  sent  him 
by  the  pressure  of  his  foot  to  the  PdtalaloJca,  that 
is,  the  nether  world  of  asuras,  there  to  be  sovereign 
over  the  asuras  with  the  love  and  support  of  Vishnu 
himself.  The  worlds  so  acquired  from  Bali  were 
duly  made  over  to  Indra  to  the  great  satisfaction  of 
Aditi ;  and  the  gods  again  became  independent  and 
continued  to  live  as  before  under  the  sovereignty 
of  their  own  lord  Indra.  Such  is  the  Puranic  story 
in  relation  to  the  dwarf-incarnation  of  Vishnu. 

Written  authorities  in  Sanskrit  say  that  the 
image  of  Vamana  should  be  executed  according  to 
the  paTbcha-tala  measure;  its  whole  height  from  head 
to  foot  should  be  only  56  ahgulas.  It  should  have 
two  arms,  one  of  which  should  carry  a  kamandalu 
and  the  other  an  umbrella.  On  the  crown  of 
the  head  there  should  be  a  tuft  of  hair  tied  up  in  a 
knot ;  and  there  should  also  be  a  pair  of  hitndalas 
in  the  ears,  a  deer-skin  worn  in  the  u'pavlta  fashion, 
the  sacred  thread,  a  waist  zone,  and  a  hauplna 
(loin-cloth).  In  his  third  finger  there  should  be 
the  pavitra  or  the  ring  made  of  the  sacred  hum 
gra;,s.  He  should  also  carry  with  him  a  book.  All 
these  are  intended  to  show  that  the  image  it.  that 
of  a  vedic  student  or  brahmanical  braJimacharin ; 
and  the  image  should  be  sculptured  as  a   small 

163 


HINDU  IGONOGEAPHY. 

lad  beaming  with  intelligence.  Some  authoritieb 
differ  from  the  Vaikhanasrigajita  in  holding  that 
Vamana  is  not  to  be  represented  as  a  young 
boy,  but  as  a  deformed  dwarf ;  and  they  therefore 
require  that  the  image  should  be  worked  in  the 
form  of  an  ill-shaped  man  with  hunch  back,  pro- 
truding joints  of  bones  and  a  big  belly.  In 
actual  sculptures  we  see  both  these  descriptions 
exemplified. 

The  image  of  Trivikrama  may  be  sculptured,  it 
is  said,  in  three  different  ways,  namely,  with  the 
left  foot  raised  up  to  the  level  of  (1)  the  right  knee, 
or  (2)  to  the  navel,  or  (3)  the  forehead.  These 
three  varieties  are  obviously  intended  to  represent 
Trivikrama  as  striding  over  the  earth,  the  mid- 
world  and  the  heaven-world  respectively  ;  and  are 
all  exemplified  in  sculptures  also.  The  image  of 
Trivikrama,  with  the  left  foot  lifted  up  only  to  the 
level  of  the  right  knee  is  however,  rarely  met  with 
among  available  pieces  of  sculpture.  The  rule  is 
that  Trivikrama  images  should  be  worked  out  in 
accordance  with  the  itttaiiia-daia-tala,  measure, 
and  their  total  height  should  be  131  angalas. 
Trivikrama  should  have  either  four  or  eight  hands. 
If  there  be  only  four  arms,  one  of  the  right  hands 
should  be  made  to  hold  the  sanklia  and  one  of  the 
left  handp  the  cJiakni ,  or  it  may  even  be  that  the 


164 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

left  hand  carries  the  chakra  and  the  right  hand  the 
sankha.  The  other  right  hand  should  be  held  up 
with  the  palm  upwards,  and  the  other  left  hand 
stretched  out  parallel  to  the  uplifted  leg  ;  or 
this  right  hand  may  be  in  the  ahhaija  or  the 
varada  pose.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Trivikrama 
is  sculptured  with  eight  arms,  five  of  the  hands 
should  carry  the  saiiJcha,  chakra,  gadd,  sdrncja 
(bow)  and  liala,  the  other  three  being  kept 
as  in  the  previous  instance.  The  right  leg  of 
Trivikrama  is  to  be  firmly  planted  upon  the  earth  ; 
and  the  left  should  be  used  in  taking  the  stride  of 
world-measure.  The  colour  of  the  image  is  to  be 
dark  as  that  of  the  rain-cloud* ;  it  should  be 
clothed  in  red  garments  and  decorated  with  all 
ornaments.  Behind  it  there  should  be  sculptured 
the  tree  called  kaljmka,  and  Indra  should  be  shown 
holding  over  Trivikrama' s  head  an  umbrella.  On 
either  side  Varuna  and  Vayu  should  be  made  to 
wave  chdmaras  ;  and  over  them  on  the  right  and 
the  left  there  should  be  the  figures  of  Surya  and 
Chandra  respectively.  Near  these  again  there 
should  be  seen  Sanyasa,  Sanaka  and  Sanatkumara. 
Brahma  should  be  made  to  take  hold  of  the  uplifted 

^    Sritaioa-ntcUu  statea  that  the  colour  of  Trivikrama  is 
blood-red. 


165 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

foot  of  Trivikrama  with  one  of  his  hands  and  wash 
it  with  water   flowing  from   a  kaniatidnlu  held  in 
the  other  hand  ;  and  the  water  flowing  down  from 
the  washed  foot  of  Trivikrama  should  be  shown 
as  being  of  a  snow-white   colour.     Siva  should  be 
sculptured  with  his  hands  in  the  anjali  pose  and 
as  sitting  somewhere  in  space  above  the  height 
of  the  navel  of    Trivikrama.*     Near  the  leg  upon 
which    Trivikrama   stands,   there    should  be   the 
figure  of  Namuchi,  a  rctkshasa,  in  the  attitude  of 
bowing  in  re\ercnce  to  the  great  god  Trivikrama. 
On  the   left  Garuda  should  be   shown  as  taking 
hold  of  8ukra,  the  gam   of  the  rakaliasas,  with  a 
view  to  belabour  him  for  obstructing  Bali  in  giving 
the  gift  asked  for  by  the  Brahmanical  boy  Vamana ; 
on   the   right    Vamana   himself   should  be    made 
to  stand  with   :in  umbrella  in  his  hand  and  ready 
to    receive    the    promised    grant   of   three   paces 
of   space.     Near  him    and   opposite  to  him    Bali 
should  be  shown   as  standing  golden  in  hue  and 
adorned  with  ornaments  and  carrying  in  his  hands 


*  Up  to  the  knee  of  Trivikrama  is  the  bhuloka,  above  it 
and  up  to  the  navel  is  the  antanksha-loka  and  above  it  and  up 
to  the  {ovelTea'l  is  the  :;iMiivi,lohi.  Hence  the  iiosition  of 
Siva  ;  ha  is  j.ssigned  to  the  ■oW.rii<iLdka,  that  is,  to  the  region 
above  the  a;riul  of  Trivikrama. 


166 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

a  golden  vessel  to  indicate  that  he  is  ready  to  pour 
the  water  ceremonially  in  proof  of  his  gift.  Behind 
the  emperor  Bali  there  should  be  his  queen.  Above 
the  head  of  Trivikrama  the  figure  of  Jambavan 
should  be  shown  as  sounding  the  drum  called  bJieri 
in  Sanskrit  so  as  to  exhibit  the  Joy  of  the 
celestial  beings  at  their  coming  delivery  from  the 
rule  of  the  asrtra  emperor  Bali.  So  says  the 
Vaikhanasagama.  But  the  SUparatna  requires 
that  the  image  of  Trivikrama  should  be  sculptured 
as  standing  on  the  left  leg,  the  right  being  stretch- 
ed out  for  taking  the  measuring  strides.  Moreover 
the  Vishnu dharmottar a  mentions  that  the  following 
objects  should  be  held  in  the  hands  by  the  image 
of  Trivikrama,  namely,  the  danda,  pasa,  saiikha, 
chakra,  gada,  and  padma  and  it  is  required  that 
all  these  should  be  sculptured  beautifully.  In  this 
work  we  are  warned  against  the  ayudhas  being 
represented  like  human  beings,  that  is,  as  Ayudha- 
purushas. 

In  some  instances  of  the  sculptures  of  Trivi- 
krama we  see  directly  in  front  of  the  finger  of  the 
outstretched  hand  of  Trivikrama  an  ugly  face  with 
wide  open  eyes  and  a  gaping  mouth  carved  out. 
It  is  not  easy  to  explain  this  face-figure  satisfac- 
torily. The  statement — ekordJiva-vadanah-kanjo 
devd-rispharifpkshanah — is  found   in    Vishmidha? - 

167 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

mottara  ;  in  another  reading  of  this  passage  the 
expression  ekordha  is  found  instead  of  ekordhva. 
Evidently  this   passage  means   that   the  face   of 
Trivikrama  should  be  sculptured  so  as  to  be  some- 
what upraised  and  with  large  eyes.     If  the  second 
reading  be  adopted,  the  passage  might  be  under- 
stood to  mean  that  a  god  should  be  worked  out 
with  a  half-face  and  with  a  wide  open  eye.     In  a 
number  of  cases,  the  face  of  Trivikrama  is  slightly 
uplifted  in  conformity  with  the  first  reading  inter- 
preted above.     The  second  sense  seems  to  have 
been  adopted  by  those  sculptors  who  have  worked 
out  the  ill-looking  face  in  association  with  their  re- 
presentation of  Trivikrama.     There  is  yet  another 
possible   explanation  of  this   face-figure.     In  the 
VaraJia-pitrana  it  is  stated  that  when  the  foot  of 
Trivikrama  was  lifted  up  to  measure  the  heaven- 
world,    the  Brahmanda  burst   and  cosmic   water 
began   to  pour   down    through  the  clefts   of   the 
broken  Brahmanda.     This  face  is  perhaps  meant 
to   represent   the   Brahmanda   in  that   condition. 
The  Imutiika-hera  of  Trivikrama  should  be  made 
in  the  ordinary   form  of  such  Vishnu  images  with 
only  four  arms. 

To  illustrate  the  above  descriptions  there  are 
given  here  eight  photographed  figures  of  Trivi- 
krama.    The  first  of  these  (PL  XLVIII)  represents 

168 


PLATE  XLYIH 


i^.-^;--.^ 


Trivikrama  :I Stone  :  Eajim,  Eaipur  District,  Central  Provinces. 
[To  face  page  169.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

a  very  beautiful  piece  of  sculpture,  in  which 
unfortunately  the  legs  are  broken  and  the  face 
is  slightly  mutilated.  Below  the  uplifted  leg  of 
Trivikrama  we  may  see  Adisesha,  seated  in  the 
dUdhasana,  with  his  hands  in  the  anjali  pose  and 
with  his  face  gently  raised  towards  Trivikrama  in 
adoration.  His  head  is  associated  with  a  seven- 
headed  hood  of  a  serpent,  on  the  coils  of  which  he 
is  himself  seated.  The  delicately  chiselled  eyes, 
which  are  half  closed  in  abstraction,  the  lips,  the 
chin  and  the  nose  are  all  admirably  worked  out ;  and 
the  general  attitude  of  the  figure  is  perfectly  natural. 
Near  the  out-stretched  hand  of  Trivikrama  is  shown 
the  grinning  face,  disclosing  a  long  row  of  teeth 
and  two  sharp  and  curved  tusks  at  the  corners  of 
the  mouth.  Immediately  below  this  face,  there  is 
the  stem  of  what  appears  to  be  a  tree,  probably  the 
kalpaka  of  the  gods  ;  its  top  and  branches,  however, 
are  not  to  be  found.  This  stem-like  thing  cannot 
be  taken  to  represent  the  water  which  flowed  out 
when  the  Brahmanda  broke ;  for,  it  has  on  it  the 
markings  which  are  invariably  associated  with 
trees  in  conventional  sculptures.  The  loin-cloths 
of  both  Trivikrama  and  Adisesha  are  carved  well 
and  produce  a  good  effect.  This  piece  of  sculpture 
appears  to  be  as  old  as  the  beginning  of  the  eighth 
century  A.  D.     It  deserves  to  be  noted  that  here 

169 

32 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

the  left  leg  of  Trivikrama  is  lifted  far  above  the 
navel  but  is  below  the  forehead. 

The  next  picture  (PL  XLIX)  represents  a 
huge  panel,  about  eight  feet  by  six  feet  in  size, 
carved  on  the  north  wall  of  the  rock-out  shrine 
situated  to  the  south  of  what  is  called  '  Ganesa 
Ratha '  at  Mahabalipuram.  In  this  group  of 
images  the  central  figure  is  that  of  Trivikrama. 
It  has  eight  hands  ;  three  of  the  right  hands  carry 
the  chakra,  the  gada  and  the  khadga;  and  the 
remaming  right  hand  is  held  up  with  the  palm 
turned  upside,  as  required  by  the  Vaikhanasagama. 
Three  of  the  left  hands  carry  the  hahkha,  the 
khetaka,  and  the  dhanus,  and  the  fourth  left  hand 
is  stretched  out  parallel  to  the  uplifted  leg.  This 
leg  itself  is  raised  up  to  the  level  of  the  forehead. 
Near  the  foot  of  the  leg  stretched  out  to  measure 
the  heaven-world,  Brahma  is  shown  as  seated  on  a 
padmasana  and  as  offering  with  one  of  his  right 
hands  puja  to  that  foot.  His  image  is  given  four 
hands  and  is  made  to  wear  the  jata-makuta  and 
Jcarna-kundalas.  In  the  corresponding  position  to 
the  right  of  Trivikrama  we  see  Siva  also  seated  on 
a  padmasana.  His  image  also  has  four  arms, 
one  of  which  is  held  in  the  pose  of  praise.  It  is 
also  adorned  with  the  jata-makuta  and  kundalas. 
Immediately  below   Siva  is  Surya,  the  sun-god, 

170 


PLATE  XLIX. 


ipi|«»WW^P»w»?wi!^»^rr  -  .^ 


[To  taoe  page  170.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

encircled   by   a    halo.     The    way  in    which   the 
legs  of  this  god  and  also  of  Chandra,  the  moon- 
god,  are  worked  out,  suggests  that  they  are  both 
residing  up  in  the   heavenly  world  without  any 
terrestrial  support.     This  sun-god  has  only  a  pair 
of  hands,  both  of  which  he  holds   stretched  out 
in   the  act  of  praising  Trivikrama.     Chandra  is 
sculptured  below  the  shield  of  Trivikrama,  with  a 
halo  round  the  head,  and  is  also  shown  to  be  in  the 
attitude  of  praising    Trivikrama.    In   the   space 
between  the  head  of  Trivikrama  and  Brahma  there 
may  be  noticed  a  peculiar  figure  turned  towards 
Brahma.     It  has  the  face  of  a  bear  and  is  made  to 
carry  what  is  evidently  a  drum.     This  figure  is 
obviously   that   of    old   Jambavan,    sounding  the 
drum  in  joy  due  to  the  victory  of  the  Devas  over 
the  Danavas.     At   the   foot    of   Trivikrama    sits 
Namuchi  to  the  right ;  and  the  other  three  figures, 
that  are  to  be  seen,  are  perhaps  representations  of 
Bali  and  some  other  prominent  asuras.     There  is 
one  other  figure  shown  as  if  cutting  somersaults  in 
the  air,  and  carrying  something  like  a  staff  in  the 
right   hand.     It  is  not  possible  to  say  whom  this 
figure  is  intended  to  represent.     The  Brizhmanda- 
purana  states  that  when  Vamana  grew  to  be  gigantic 
in  size  and  became  Trivikrama  some  of  the  Dana- 
vas were  hurled  up  into  the  air  as  if  by  a  hurricane. 

171 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

This  figure  is  perhaps  one  of  the  Danavas  so 
tossed  up.  This  piece  of  sculpture  belongs  to  the 
seventh  century,  that  is,  to  the  palmy  days  of 
Pallava  supremacy  in  Conjeevaram. 

The  third  picture  (PI.  L)  represents  a  piece  of 
sculpture  almost  similar  to  the  just  noticed  Maha- 
balipuram  sculpture  in  many  of  its  details.  It  is 
found  in  Cave  III  at  Badami  in  the  Bombay 
Presidency.  Here,  the  fourth  right  hand,  instead 
of  being  lifted  up  as  in  the  case  of  the  image  at 
Mahabalipuram,  is  made  to  carry  a  hana.  In  this 
panel  Brahma  and  Siva  are  absent ;  but  the  scene 
wherein  Bali  granted  the  gift  asked  for  by  Vamana 
is,  as  it  were,  inserted  instead.  Immediately  below 
and  to  the  left  of  the  erectly  planted  leg  of 
Trivikrama  there  is  the  image  of  Vamana  facing  to 
the  left  and  with  the  right  hand  stretched  out  to 
receive  the  religious  libation  of  water  to  be  poured 
out  in  proof  of  the  gift  made  by  Bali ;  and  the  left 
hand  of  the  image  holds  an  umbrella.  In  front 
stands  Bali,  the  emperor  of  the  asuras,  holding 
with  both  the  hands  a  vessel  of  water,  as  if  ready 
to  pour  the  water  into  the  hands  of  Vamana. 
Behind  him  to  the  left  stands  his  queen.  The  king 
is  not  made  to  wear  the  crown,  because  of  his  being 
engaged  in  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice.  In  the 
back-ground,  behind  Bali  there  are  the  images  of 

172 


PLATE  li. 


>m{(fif^*- 


■' '  -/#  F^-;  I; 


,& 


'  ^  '"^"^^ 


/ 


^-  \i 


f 


li  t 


In 


i   "i« 


% 


Trivikrama  :  Panel-Stone  :  Badanii. 


[To  face  page  172.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

four  persons  wearing  mahutas.  They  may  be,  as 
we  surmised  in  the  previous  instance,  some  of  the 
principal  raJcshasas  on  the  side  of  Bali.  On  the 
right  side  of  the  fixed  leg  of  the  god  Trivikrama  sits 
a  figure  holding  the  god's  leg.  As  observed  in  the 
case  of  the  Mahabalipuram  sculpture,  this  figure 
may  well  represent  Namuchi.  Behind  it  to  the 
right  is  another  figure  carrying  in  the  right  hand  a 
staff,  while  the  left  hand  is  pointing  to  Trivikrama. 
It  is  not  easy  to  say  whom  it  represents.  Opposite 
to  the  out-stretched  arm  of  Trivikrama  is  the  grin- 
ning face,  which  we  observed  and  remarked  about 
in  describing  the  first  picture.  Above  the  same 
arm  are  shown  two  small  figures  flying  in  the  air  ; 
and  near  to  the  one,  which  is  on  the  left,  there  is 
the  figure  of  the  crescent  Jiioon.  Perhaps  these 
two  represent  Surya  and  Chandra.  Just  near  the 
foot  of  the  uplifted  leg  of  Trivikrama  is  a  rahshasa, 
shown  head  downwards  and  carrying  in  the  hands 
a  sword  and  a  shield.  At  the  foot  of  the  panel 
there  are  groups  of  celestial  beings  sounding  vari- 
ous musical  instruments  out  of  joy  due  to  the 
success  of  the  gods  over  the  demons.  The  age  of 
this  piece  of  sculpture  is  the  latter  half  of  the  6th 
century  A.  D.  It  indicates  very  creditable  work- 
manship and  is  agreeable  in  its  synthesis  and 
almost  perfect  in  modelling.   Fortunately,  it  is  not 

173 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

much  mutilated.  The  left  leg  is  lifted  above  the 
navel ;  and  hence  this  Trivikrama  has  to  be  sup- 
posed as  being  engaged  in  measuring  the  higher 
heaven-world.  The  same  subject  Trivikrama  is 
sculptured  also  in  Cave  III  at  Badami  on  a  larger 
scale  and  is  of  equally  good  workmanship.  (See 
Arch.  Suro.  of  West  hidia,  Belgaitm  and  Kal'adgi 
Volume,  Pi.  XXXI,  wherein  Trivikrama  is  called 
Viratarupa). 

The  fourth  illustration  (PL  LI)  represents  a 
sculpture  found  at  EUora.  It  is  in  Cave  No.  16, 
which  is  called  the  Dasa-avatara  Cave.  The 
treatment  of  the  subject  in  this  instance  is  almost 
identical  with  that  shown  in  the  third  illustration. 
The  prominent  differences  are  that  here  the  sword 
is  held  by  Trivikrama  in  a  horizontal  position 
instead  of  vertically  as  in  the  other  instances ; 
secondly  the  hand  holding  the  bow  is  extended 
forwards.  The  figures  of  Surya  and  Chandra,  of 
Namuchi  and  the  other  representative  r^kshasas 
are  absent.  Below  the  out-stretched  leg  of  Trivi- 
krama are  the  figures  of  Vamana  (wholly  mutilated), 
of  Bali  and  his  wife  in  front,  Bali  being  shown  as 
pouring  water  into  the  hands  of  Vamana  in  confirm- 
ation of  the  gift  he  is  making.  There  is  one 
other  figure  in  this  small  group ;  it  seems  to  be 
that  of  Sukra  dissuading  Bali  from  giving  the  gift. 

174 


PLATE  LI. 


U>M 


Trivikrama  :  Panel-Stone  :  Ellora. 


[To  face  page  174.] 


PLATE  LII. 


■    •■.''■-■;^?w"-\*^*lj 


* 

t      '            -l 

' 

^ '  ..-=..  .i  \  ,   '■ 

^  *"  -•'-« 

t^'-.  \>^ 

■"  -.  %    <^'  ",^"  ...  .^ •Ww""  V 


■  t 


O 


* 

« 

r* 

.» 

■i 

a 

d 


PJ:^ 


c:) 

c; 

(D 

k 

CJ 

0 

rf 

S 

4J 

ca 

0 

d 

-t^ 

fT( 

tw 

0 

!> 

kl 

■  r^ 

H 

u 

trt 

^ 

Hj 

[To  face  page  176  ] 


DASAVATARAS  OP  VISHNU. 

For  this  objectionable  behaviour,  on  the  right  side 
of  the  panel,  Sukra  is  shown  as  having  been 
caught  hold  of  by  the  hair  and  belaboured  with  the 
fist  by  Garuda.  This  sculpture  may  be  assigned 
to  the  middle  of  the  8th  century  A.  D.  The 
upraised  leg  is  here  also  lifted  considerably  above 
the  navel. 

The  fifth  illustration  (fig.  1,  PI,  LII)  is  that 
of  a  sculpture  found  in  the  Indian  Museum,  Cal- 
cutta. The  sculptor  was  evidently  badly  wanting 
in  artistic  skill ;  nor  did  he  follow  the  instructions 
laid  down  in  the  Sanskrit  works  offering  guidance 
to  persons  of  his  profession.  The  face  of  the  image 
is  much  larger  than  is  demanded  by  true  art  or 
suggested  by  the  agamas ;  and  the  body  is  dis- 
proportionately small.  The  out-stretched  leg  looks 
almost  like  an  atrophied  limb,  and  is  too  short  for 
the  size  of  the  image  taken  as  a  whole.  This  figure 
of  Trivikrama  carries  in  three  of  the  hands  the 
gada,  chaJcra  and  sahJcha,  and  a  lotus  is  held  in  the 
hand  that  rests  upon  the  thigh.  In  this  respect 
it  is  in  agreement  with  the  sculptures  of  Mysore 
belonging  to  the  later  Chalukya-Hoysala  type.  To 
the  right  of  the  planted  leg  of  Trivikrama  is  a  god- 
dess carrying  a  vlnd ;  who  she  is,  it  is  not  possible 
to  ascertain  from  the  Sanskrit  authorities  at  our  dis- 
posal.    Below  the  left  leg  is  worked  out  the  scene 

175 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

wherein  Vaniana  is  shown  as  begging  a  gift  from 
Bah  who  is  granting  it.  Behind  BaU  stands  his 
queen,  and  also  Sukracharya,  his  (luru.  Over 
this  group  and  just  immediately  below  the  lifted 
leg  of  Trivikrama  is  the  disc  of  the  sun,  and  the 
crescent  of  the  moon  is  seen  near  the  hand  carry- 
ing the  gada.  Brahma  is  seen  seated  on  his 
padmasana  just  above  the  left  foot  of  Trivikrama. 
In  addition  to  these  we  see  immediately  below  the 
right  foot  of  Trivikrama  some  sculptures,  which 
seem  to  depict  Bali  and  his  queen  as  they  appeared 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  Trivikramavatara — a  king 
and  a  queen  with  hands  in  the  anjali  pose  are 
sculptured  at  the  bottom  in  the  left  corner.  These 
are  perhaps  meant  to  represent  Bali  and  his  queen 
residing  in  the  Patala-loka.  In  another  compart- 
ment adjoining  to  the  one  in  which  Bali  and  his 
queen  are  seen,  there  is  a  horse  tied  to  a  post. 
This  is  probably  the  horse  which  was  meant  to  be 
the  victim  in  the  great  sacrifice  which  Bali  was 
celebrating.  The  sculptor  of  this  piece  has,  like  the 
artists  of  the  Hoysala  kingdom,  followed  in  his 
work  the  description  of  Trivikrama  as  given  in 
relation  to  the  Ghaturoimsafi-murtayah,  or  the 
twenty-four  images  of  Vishnu  beginning  with  that 
of  Kesava.  All  the  images  in  this  group  of 
twenty-four  forming  a  class  are  standing  figures  of 

176 


PLATE  LIU 


fn^' 


y- 1 ; 


6:1  ..H- 


-H*t^, 


it 


Trivikrama  :   Stoue  :  Nuggaballi. 


[To  face  page  177.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Vishnu  with  four  arms.  The  various  images  are 
distinguished  from  one  another  by  the  arrangement 
of  their  saiikha,  chaJcra,  gada  and  padma.  Among 
these  images,  that  which  holds  the  gadd  in  the 
back  right  hand,  the  chakra  in  the  back  left  hand, 
the  sankJia  in  the  front  left  hand  and  the  padma 
in  the  front  right  hand,  is  declared  to  be  the  image 
of  Trivikrama.  The  rule  regarding  the  different 
arrangements  of  the  four  above  noted  articles  is 
intended  to  be  observed  only  in  relation  to  the 
class  of  images  which  are  called  Chaturvimsati- 
murtayah ;  therefore  a  real  Trivikrama  figure  which 
is  outside  this  class,  need  not  be  in  accordance 
with  that  rule.  Somehow  the  mistake  has  been 
committed  by  this  artist,  as  by  the  Hoysala  school 
of  artists,  of  applying  the  rule  to  a  Trivikrama 
image  not  belonging  to  the  class  of  the  '  twenty- 
four  images'. 

Fig.  3,  PI.  LII  and  PI.  LIII  illustrate 
two  pieces  of  sculpture  of  the  Trivikramavatara, 
which  belong  to  the  Hoysala  period.  The  smaller 
picture  represents  the  image  to  be  found  in  the 
Chennakesavasvamin  temple  at  Belur,  while  the 
larger  one  represents  an  image  at  Nuggehalli,  both 
these  places  being  in  the  Mysore  State.  These 
sculptures  are  types  of  the  extremely  florid  and 
highly   decorated  art  of  this  period.     The  images 

177 

23 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

are,  however,  accurate  in  proportion  and  natural 
in  pose  and  attitude.  The  elaborateness  of  the 
workmanship  in  all  the  richness  of  their  ornamental 
details  is  such  as  to  extort  the  admiration  of  even 
the  most  adverse  critic.  The  designs  of  the  sanklia, 
chaJcra,  and  other  weapons  are  admirable.  Justly 
was  Euvari  Nandiyabba  .  .  ta,  the  artist,  proud  of 
his  skill  and  engraved  his  name  on  the  pedestal 
so  that  posterity  might  know  it  and  remember  it. 
Practically  speaking  there  is  almost  no  difference 
between  the  two  pieces  of  sculpture.  In  the  Belur 
one,  however,  the  figure  of  Trivikrama  is  made 
to  stand  on  the  left  leg,  and  it  is  the  right 
one  which  is  stretched  out  to  measure  the  upper 
regions.  In  this  respect  it  follows  the  authority  of 
the  Silparatna.  The  peculiarity  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  weapons  wielded  has  already  been  noticed. 
Over  the  right  foot  of  Trivikrama  sits  the  hoary, 
long  bearded  Brahma  washing  it  with  the  water  of 
the  celestial  Gahga,  which  is  shown  to  be  flowing 
down  therefrom  in  the  form  of  a  river.  The  idea  of 
the  river  is  suggested  in  the  sculpture  by  the  fishes, 
tortoise,  etc.,  which  are  shown  in  it.  Below  the 
right  leg  of  Trivikrama  stands  G-aruda  with  his 
hands  in  the  anjali  pose  and  himself  being  in  the 
ahdhasana.  Over  the  head  of  Trivikrama  is  the 
usual  fine!}'  carved  creeper  design,  which  perhaps 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

stands,  in  this  instance,  for  the  hilpaJca  tree 
required  to  be  worked  out  in  compliance  with  the 
descriptions  which  are  given  in  books.  In  the 
Nuggehalli  sculpture  however,  the  Jcalpaha  tree  is 
not  represented  in  this  conventional  manner  but  is 
worked  out  exactly  like  an  ordinary  tree.  On  this 
tree,  the  disc  of  the  sun  and  the  crescent  of  the 
moon  are  shown  as  if  shining  from  above.  On  the 
left  of  this  image  of  Trivikrama  there  is  a  male 
figure  whose  identity  cannot  be  made  out.  These 
two  images  of  Trivikrama,  as  also  the  one  which  is 
found  in  the  Calcutta  Museum,  have  their  uplifted 
leg  going  up  to  the  level  of  the  navel. 

The  last  illustration,  fig.  2,  PI.  LII,  represents 
the  image  found  in  the  Vishnu  temple  at  Nagala- 
puram  in  the  North  Arcot  district  of  the  Madras 
Presidency.  This  temple  is  known  to  have  been 
built  in  the  reign  of  the  great  Vijayanagara  king 
Krishnadevaraya,  and  the  sculpture  also  belongs 
to  the  period  of  the  reign  of  the  king.  Here 
also,  the  image  of  Trivikrama  has  four  arms, 
two  of  which  carry  the  saiiJiha  and  the  chaJcra, 
while  the  third  is  stretched  parallel  to  the  uplifted 
leg  and  the  fourth  is  held  in  the  varada  pose. 
Brahma  is  shown  as  washing  the  foot  of  Trivikrama ; 
the  water  flowing  down  therefrom  forms  a  vigorous 
river,  in  which  a  few  fishes  are  made  to  be  visible. 


179 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

This  furiously  descending  river  Ganga  is  made  to 
fall  on  the  jata  of  Siva,  who  is  seated  in  the  yoga 
posture  on  the  top  of  the  mount  Kailasa.  The 
story  of  Siva  receiving  the  descending  celestial 
river  Ganga  on  his  head  is  brought  into  association 
with  the  incident  of  Brahma  washing  the  feet  of 
Vishnu  in  the  Trivikrama  incarnation.  There  is 
authorityfor  this  in  th.eBhagavata-pu7"ana*' ;  and  the 
mixing  up  of  the  two  events  is  evidently  intended 
to  show  that  the  water  sanctified  by  washing  the 
foot  of  Vishnu  was  devoutly  received  by  Siva 
on  his  head.  It  is  argued  from  this  that  the 
superiority  of  Vishnu  over  Siva  is  disclosed  by  Siva 
himself.  Here  we  have  an  instance  of  sectarian 
prejudice  altering  the  usual  composition  of  sculp- 
tures, to  which  fact  attention  has  been  drawn  in 
the  General  Introduction.  The  lean  body,  the 
characteristically  sharp  nose,  the  erect  Jcirlta  and 
the  mechanically  arranged  folds  and  the  creases  in 


*  Bhag.  Pur.  Bk.  VIII,  ch.  18.  "  And  the  righteous  Bali 
held  OH  the  crown  of  his  head  that  auspicious  and  sacred 
water  with  which  Hari'a  feet  had  been  washed,  and  which  is 
capable  of  destroying  the  sins  of  one's  race, — (that  water) 
which  was  held  on  his  head  in  profound  reverence  by  that 
god  of  gods  Girisa  (Siva)  who  is  wearing  the  moon  (as  an 
ornament)  on  his  forehead. 

180 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

the  clothing  of  this  image  of  Trivikrama  mark  it 
out  to  be  a  comparatively  late  production. 

The  reason  why  Vishnu  became  incarnated  as 
Parasurama  is  given  in  the  Agni- 
purana  thus  : — "  Observing,  sub- 
sequently, that  the  Kshatriyas  oppressed  the  earth, 
Hari  assumed  a  mortal  form,  in  order  to  protect  the 
gods,  the  Brahmans  and  mankind,  and  was  born  as 
the  son  of  Eenuka  and  Jamadagni,  the  son  of 
Bhrigu.*  At  this  time  there  was  a  king  named 
Kartavirya,  who,  through  the  favour  of  Dattatreya, 
had  obtained  a  thousand  arms,  and  who  excelled 
in  valour  and  every  warlike  quality.  One  day 
that  he  had  gone  to  hunt,  he  was  invited  to 
refresh  himself  from  his  fatigue  by  Jamadagni,  who 
sumptuously  entertained  him  and  his  attendants 
by  means  of  the  cow  Sabala,  which  granted  all  that 
was  wished ;  the  king,  noticing  the  extraordinary 
virtues  of  this  cow  requested  that  this  should  be 
given  to  him  ;  but,  on  this  being  refused,  Jamadagni 
was  slain  by  the  son  of  Kartavirya,  and  the  king 
returned  home.  During  this  occurrence  Eama  had 
gone  to  the  woods,  and  on  his  return  having  found 
his  father  slain,  he,  on  this  account,  delivered  the 

*  It  should  be  "  of  the  race   of  Bhrigu."     Jamadagni'a 
father  was  Richika  and  not  Bhrigu, 

181 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

earth  from  twenty-one  generations  of  Kshatriyas. 
He  then  performed  expiatory  ceremonies  at  Kuru- 
kshetra,  and,  having  bestowed  the  world  on  Kasyapa 
and  the  Brahmanas,  retired  to  the  mountain 
Mahendra."  * 

The  Vishnu-pitrana  also  contains  an  account 
of  the  birth  of  Parasurama  and  how  he,  though  a 
Brahmana,  took  to  the  ways  of  the  Kshatriyas. 
"  In  the  lineage  of  Pururavas  was  born  Kusamba, 
who  engaged  himself  in  devout  penances  with  the 
object  of  having  a  son  equal  to  Indra.  Beholding 
the  intensity  of  his  devotions,  Indra  himself  took 
birth  as  his  son  lest  a  prince  equally  powerful 
like  him  might  be  born.  He  was  accordingly 
born  as  Gadhi  or  Kausika.  Gadhi  had  a  daughter 
called  Satyavatl.  Eichika,  one  of  the  descendants 
of  Bhrigu  wanted  her  in  marriage.  The  king 
was  reluctant  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage 
to  a  peevish  old  Brahmana,  and  wanted  from 
him  as  the  bridal  present  a  thousand  fleet  steeds, 
whose  colour  should  be  white,  with  one  black  ear. 
Having  propitiated  Varuna,  the  god  of  ocean, 
Eichika  obtained  from  him,  at  the  holy  place 
called  Ahatlrtha  a  thousand  such  horses.  And 
after  giving  them  to  the  king  he  married  his 
daughter. 

*  Vans  Kennedy's  "  Hindu  Mythology,"  p,  434. 
182 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

"  In  order  to  have  a  son  he  prepared  a  dish  of 
rice,  barley  and  pulse,  with  butter  and  milk,  for 
his  wife  to  eat.  And  being  requested  by  her  he 
made  a  similar  mixture  for  her  mother  by  partak- 
ing of  which  she  should  give  birth  to  a  martial 
prince ;  keeping  both  the  dishes  with  his  wife,  and 
giving  her  instructions  as  to  which  dish  was  intend- 
ed for  her  and  which  for  her  mother,  the  sage 
went  to  the  forest.  At  the  time  of  taking  the  food 
her  mother  said  to  Satyavati — '  Daughter,  every 
one  wants  to  have  a  son  gifted  with  great  qualities, 
and  no  body  wishes  to  be  excelled  by  the  qualities 
of  his  mother's  brother.  It  is  therefore  desirable 
for  you  to  give  me  the  food  which  your  husband 
has  set  apart  for  you  and  to  partake  of  that  intend- 
ed for  me ;  for  my  son  shall  be  the  sovereign  of 
the  world.  What  is  the  use  of  wealth,  strength 
and  prowess  for  a  Brahmin  ?'  Being  thus  address- 
ed Satyavati  gave  her  own  food  to  her  mother. 

"  When  the  sage  came  back  from  the  forest 
and  saw  Satyavati,  he  said  to  her — '  Sinful  woman, 
what  hast  thou  done  ?  Your  body  appears  as  very 
fearful  to  me.  Surely  thou  hast  taken  the  food  which 
was  intended  for  thy  mother.  Thou  hast  committ- 
ed a  wrong.  That  food  I  had  consecrated  with 
the  properties  of  power,  strength  and  heroism ; 
whereas  your  food  was  consecrated  with  the  quali- 

183 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

ties  of  a  Brahmaua, — gentleness,  knowledge  and 
resignation.  As  you  have  exchanged  messes,  your 
son  shall  follow  a  warrior's  propensities  and  use 
weapons,  and  fight  and  slay ;  your  mother's  son 
shall  be  born  with  the  desires  of  a  Brahmin  and 
shall  be  devoted  to  peace  and  piety  '.  Hearing  this, 
Satyavati  fell  at  her  husband's  feet  and  said — '  I 
have  done  this  through  my  ignorance.  Be  thou 
propitiated  so  that  I  may  not  have  such  a  son. 
If  this  is  inevitable  let  my  grand-son  be  such,  not 
my  son '.  Being  thus  addressed  the  sage  said — 
'  So  be  it '. 

"  Thereupon  she  gave  birth  to  Jamadagni  and 
her  mother  brought  forth  Visvamitra.  Satyavati 
afterwards  became  the  river  Kausiki.  Jamadagni 
married  Eenuka,  the  daughter  of  Eenu,  born  in  the 
race  of  Ikshvaku,  and  begot  on  her  a  son,  Parasu- 
rama,  the  destroyer  of  the  Kshatriya  race,  who 
was  a  portion  of  Narayana,  the  preceptor  of  the 
universe."* 

Parasurama  had  four  elder  brothers.  Once, 
when  Kenuka  the  mother  of  Parasurama,  was  bath- 
ing, she  saw  Chitraratha,  the  beautiful  king  of 
Marttikavata  also  bathing  with  his  wife  at  a  dist- 

*   Vishnu  Purana,  Part  IV,   Sec.    VII.     Manmafchanath 
DuW*  Translation. 


Ibi 


DASAVATAEAS  OP  VISHNU. 

ance  and  felt  filled  with  desire  for  his  company.  As 
soon  as  she  returned  home  Jamadagni,  learning  the 
cause  of  the  delay  in  her  returning  home,  ordered 
successively  his  first  four  sons  to  kill  their  mother ; 
but  they  refused  to  do  so,  for  which  Jamadagni 
cursed  them,  so  that  they  lost  their  senses  and 
thereafter  behaved  like  beasts  and  birds.  Then  he 
ordered  Eama  to  do  it :  and  he  immediately  severed 
her  head  with  an  axe,  and  then  prevailed  upon  his 
father  to  grant  him  the  boons  that  Eenuka  might 
be  restored  to  life  and  not  remember  that  she  had 
been  slain,  that  he  himself  might  not  be  affected 
by  this  sin,  that  his  brothers  might  recover  their 
former  state,  and  that  he  himself  might  be  un- 
rivalled on  the  field  of  battle  and  obtain  a  long 
life.* 

The  same  story  regarding  the  birth  and  deeds 
of  Parasurama  is  found  recorded  in  the  Bhagavata- 
purdna  also.  He  is  described  therein,  as  in  the 
V-ishm-ptirdna,  as  an  incarnation  of  Narayana  and 
the  terminator  of  the  race  of  Haihayas  ;  and  it  is 
said  that  he  was  clad  with  the  skin  of  the  black 
deer  and  had  matted  hair,  that  his  body  was 
resplendent  as  the  sun,  and  that  he  carried  a  bow 
and  arrows,  and  an  axe  and  other  weapons  of  war 

*  Mahabhdrata,  III.  115  ;  10167  H 

185 
21 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

in  his  hands.  By  his  power  he  secured  for  his 
father  a  place  in  the  constellation  of  the  Sapta- 
rishis,  (great  bear)  in  the  sky.  Parasurama  is, 
according  to  the  Bhagavata-purana,  supposed  to 
be  living  even  now  on  the  mount  Mahendra. 

In  sculptures,  the  rule  is  that  the  figure  of 
Parasurama  should  be  worked  out  according  to  the 
madliyama-dasa-tal a  measure,  that  is,  it  should  be 
of  120  ahgidas  in  height,  and  possess  only  two 
hands  ;  in  the  right  hand  the  parasu  should  be  held, 
and  the  left  hand  should  be  in  the  sTicJd  pose  (as  if 
pointing  to  something).  On  the  head  there  should 
be  the  jata-malaita  :  and  the  yajnopavlta  should 
adorn  the  body,  as  also  a  number  of  ornaments. 
The  colour  of  Parasurama  should  be  red  ;  and  his 
clothing  should  be  white.  The  Agni-'piirana,  how- 
ever, states  that  Parasurama  should  have  four 
hands  carrying  the  paraki,  hliadga,  bana  and 
dJtanus;  and  the  Vishnudharmottara  adds  that  he 
should  be  shown  as  wearing  the  deer  skin.  The 
JiautuJca-bera  of  Parasurama  may  be  made  either 
according  to  the  description  given  above,  or  be  an 
ordinary  figure  of  Vishnu  with  four  hands. 

Eama,  Sri-Eama  or  Kamachandra,  the  ideal 
hero  of  the  Hindus  in  every  res- 

Baghava-Bama. 

pect  and  the  husband  of  Sita,  the 
perfect  model  of  Hindu  womanhood,  was  born  of 

186 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Dasaratha  of  the  race  of  Eaghu.  The  whole  story 
of  Rama  from  his  birth  up  to  his  ascent  to  heaven 
is  given  in  the  famous  epic  poem  of  Valmiki  known 
as  the  Ramayana.  Even  a  cursory  study  of  that 
poem  will  enable  all  persons  capable  of  appreciat- 
ing its  poetry  to  understand  the  exalted  character 
of  Rama's  righteousness  and  valorous  heroism  as 
well  as  of  Sita's  noble  life  of  faithful  devotion  and 
trying  suffering  and  womanly  self-surrender  to  her 
fate  and  to  her  lord.  The  story  of  Rama's  banish- 
ment to  the  forest ;  of  Ravana  carrying  away  from 
there  by  stealth  his  wife  Sita  to  Lanka  ;  of  Rama 
thereupon  entering  into  alliance  with  Sugriva,  the 
chief  of  the  monkey-tribe,  and  with  his  aid  learn- 
ing through  Hanuman,  the  monkey-messenger,  the 
whereabouts  of  Sita  and  her  lonely  suffering  and 
longing  to  be  delivered  by  Rama ;  of  Rama  then 
going  to  Lanka  with  an  army  of  monkeys  to  punish 
Ravana  and  relieve  Sita  ;  of  the  wonderful  building 
of  the  bridge  from  India  to  Lanka  ;  of  the  fight  in 
Lanka  between  Rama  and  Ravana  supported  by 
their  respective  armies  ;  of  the  final  destruction  of 
Ravana  and  the  whole  host  of  the  Rakshasas  in 
Lanka;  of  Rama's  return  thereafter  along  with 
Sita  and  his  own  brother  Lakshmana,  who  had  out 
of  his  personal  love  and  attachment  accompanied 
him  to  the  forest ;  and  then  of  Rama's  installa- 

187 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

tion  ill  Ayodhya  as  king  of  Ayodhya  and  his 
righteous  rule  therein  for  long  years  are  all 
portrayed  in  full  detail  in  the  first  six  books  of 
the  Ramayana.  The  seventh  book  called  the 
Uttarakanda  narrates  how,  out  of  deference  to  a 
falsely  censorious  public  opinion,  he,  as  king  felt  it 
necessary  to  banish  his  dear  and  long  tried  life- 
companion,  Sita,  to  the  forest  even  at  the  time  she 
was  big  with  child  and  nearing  the  time  of  delivery ; 
how  there  she  was  taken  care  of  by  Valmiki  and 
gave  birth  to  her  twin  sons  Kusa  and  Lava ;  how 
the  sage  Valmiki  brought  these  up  and  duly 
educated  them  ;  how  in  the  meanwhile  Rama  sent 
round  the  horse  designed  for  his  forthcoming 
horse-sacrifice  ;  how  this  horse  was  detained  by 
these  boys  ;  how  in  consequence  a  battle  arose  in 
which  they  showed  themselves  to  be  unconquer- 
able ;  how  at  last  Rama  himself  had  to  offer  fight  to 
subdue  them  ;  how  then  he  made  them  out  to  be 
his  own  sons  and  took  them  away  with  him ;  how 
thereafter  Sita  ^vith  a  sense  of  security  and  relieved 
anxiety  passed  away  into  the  bosom  of  her  mother 
Earth  ;  and  how  at  last  he  made  over  his  kingdom 
to  his  sons,  and  himself  ascended  to  heaven, 
leaving  behind  him  the  hallowing  memory  of  a 
human  life  that  was  in  every  way  really  divine  — 
the    Utbarakanda   narrates   all    these   things.     It 

188 


{•liATE  lilV 


i^'P/v 


^r^-^. 
^fi 


a 

ID 
CO 


[Tolaoe  paga  189/ 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU 

is  no  wonder  that  this  Earn  a  has  come  to  be  looked 
upon  as  a  human  incarnation  of  God ;  nor  is  it 
surprising  that  all  those,  who,  in  his  life  time 
upon  the  earth,  were  more  or  less  intimately 
associated  with  him,  are  also  looked  upon  as  being 
gifted  specially  with  divine  power.  In  fact  there 
are  very  good  reasons  to  explain  how  and  why  it 
is  that  Eama  has  long  been  recognized  in  this 
country  as  one  of  the  ten  avatcbtaH  of  Vishnu. 

The  image  of  Raghava-Eama  is,  like  that  of 
Parasurama,  to  be  worked  out  in  the  ijiadhyama- 
dasa-tala  measure  of  120  ahgulas  in  height.  It 
should  never  have  more  than  two  arms ;  in  the 
right  hand  the  hcma  or  arrow  should  be  held,  and 
in  the  left  hand  the  dhaniis  or  the  bow.  The 
image  of  Sri-Eama,  which  is  another  name  for 
Raghava-Eama  should  be  a  standing  one,  with 
three  bends  in  the  body  :  in  other  words,  it  has  to 
be  a  standing  image  of  the  tribhanga  variety.  The 
colour  of  such  an  image  of  Eama  has  to  be  black, 
and  it  should  be  dressed  in  red  clothes.  On  the 
head  there  should  be  the  hirlta-mahuta,  in  evidence 
of  the  fact  that  Eama  was  the  son  of  an  emperor  : 
otherwise  also  the  image  should  be  fully  adorned. 

The  figure  of  Sita  should  be  placed  on  the 
right  side  of  Rama,  and  should  be  made  according 
to  the  navdrdha  (or  nine  and  a  half)  tala  measure  ; 

189 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

it  should  be  so  high  as  to  reach  the  shoulder  of  the 
image  of  Rama :  and  no  bend  in  the  body  need  be 
shown  in  the  figure.  It  should  be  golden-yellow 
in  colour,  and  should  be  draped  in  parrot-green 
clothings  and  be  adorned  with  all  the  necessary 
ornaments.  The  hair  of  the  head  should  be  tied 
up  in  a  knot,  and  a  Imranda-mahuta  should  adorn 
the  head.  In  the  left  hand  there  should  be  a 
7illdtpala  flower  and  the  right  hand  should  be 
hanging  down  freely.  It  should  be  so  sculptured  as 
to  appear  to  be  looking  at  Rama  with  a  supreme 
sense  of  happiness. 

On  the  left  of  Rama  should  be  shown  the 
standing  figure  of  Lakshmana  made  in  accordance 
with  the  dasa-tala  measure  of  116  ahgulas ;  in 
height  it  should  go  up  to  the  shoulders  or  to  the 
ear  of  Rama.  Adorned  with  all  ornaments,  and 
dressed  in  black  clothing  the  golden-yellow  image 
of  Lakshmana  should  in  all  other  respects  be  like 
that  of  Rama. 

Moreover,  Hanumau,  the  faithful  monkey- 
messenger,  should  be  shown  as  standing  a  little  in 
front  and  also  to  the  right  of  Rama,  and  should 
be  only  so  high  as  to  reach  the  chest,  the  navel  or 
the  hip  of  Rama.  The  figure  of  Hanuman  should 
be  sculptured  in  accordance  with  the  saptatala 
measure  of  84  angulas.     It  should  be  represented 

190 


DASAVATABAS  OF  VISHNU. 

as  having  only  two  hands,  the  right  of  which  is 
placed  upon  the  mouth  in  token  of  loyalty  and  the 
left  is  made  to  hang  down  so  as  to  reach  the  knees ; 
for  this  is  the  attitude  which  has  to  be  assumed  by 
servants  in  the  presence  of  their  masters.  The 
look  and  posture  of  the  image  of  Hanuman  should 
be  such  as  to  evoke  compassion  and  to  bring  into 
prominence  the  ever-ready  willingness  of  this  faith- 
ful messenger  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  his  master. 

The  Vishnudharmoftara  says  that  the  figures 
of  Bharata  and  Satrughna  should  also  be  associat- 
ed with  that  of  Eama,  but  that  these  figures  as 
well  as  the  figure  of  Lakshmana  should  not  have 
the  Tiirlta-maTiuta  on  the  head. 

The  shrine  of  Eama  is  required  to  be  built  in 
the  south-east  corner  in  a  Vishnu  temple.  In  the 
shrine,  so  situated,  the  standing  figures  of  Kama, 
Sita,  Lakshmana,  Bharata,  Satrughna  and  Hanu- 
man should  all  be  set  up  as  described  before.  The 
heads  of  all  the  images  except  those  of  Eama  and 
Sita,  should  have  only  the  knot  of  hair  shown  on 
the  top.  Bharata,  who  should  stand  to  the  right 
of  Eama,  might  be  represented  as  carrying  a  bow 
and  arrows,  or  as  carrying  a  sword  and  a  shield. 
Like  Eama,  he  should  also  have  the  Snvatsa  mark 
and  wear  the  Jcaustubha  jewel.  His  complexion 
has  to  be  black,  and  the  colour  of  his  clothes  should 

191 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

be  red.  Satrughna  should  be  made  to  stand  on  the 
left.  He  is  to  be  of  golden-yellow  colour,  and 
should  wear  a  red  cloth  ;  in  all  other  respects,  he 
should  resemble  Lakshmana.  The  Vaihhanasa- 
gama,  which  has  been  followed  throughout  in  these 
descriptions,  states  that  the  image  of  Sita  must  be 
shown  as  standing  with  the  right  leg  erect  and 
firmly  planted  on  the  ground  and  the  left  slightly 
bent. 

The  group  of  bronze  figures,  consisting  of  those 
of  Eama,  Lakshmana,  Sita  and  Hanuman  the 
photograph  whereof  is  reproduced  on  PL  LIV,  be- 
long to  Shermadevi  in  the  Tinnevelly  district  of 
the  Madras  Presidency.  The  first  three  figures 
mentioned  have  each  three  bends  in  the  body  and 
are  of  the  trihliahga  variety ;  the  injage  of  Rama  has 
its  right  hand  lowered  and  slightly  bent  at  the 
elbow  and  held  as  if  to  receive  an  arrow  in  it,  while 
the  left  arm  is  lifted  up  and  bent  so  as  to  hold 
the  top  of  the  bow ;  the  feet  of  Rama,  like  those  of 
all  the  other  images  m  the  group  rest  wgonpadma- 
sana.  The  image  of  Lakshmana  is  similar  in 
every  respect  to  that  of  Rama.  The  image  of 
Sita  has  the  right  hand  hanging  down  and  the  left 
hand  is  held  in  the  kataka  pose.  The  figure  of 
Hanuman  has  the  left  hand  resting  upon  the  thigh, 
and  the  right  hand  is  placed  upon  the  mouth. 

192 


PliATE  liV. 


^^ 

^JgjJHMHj^jM^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

ilS 

« 

a 

a    > 
i  ,1 


M 


(D 
M 

n 
o 


"^i 


^v>*<*^4|f 


a 

B 
O 


-is) 

;> 


a 

led 


a 
p 


1=3 


ic3 


[To  face  page  193.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

The  image  of  Rama  is  adorned  with  the  kirlta- 
maliuta,  that  of  Lakshmana  has  the  hair  shown 
as  tied  up  in  a  knot  on  the  crown  of  the  head, 
while  those  of  Sita  and  Hanuman  are  seen  with 
the  Jcaranda-mahuta  on  the  head.  From  the 
features  of  the  images  and  the  details  of  workman- 
ship, they  may  be  taken  to  belong  to  the  twelfth 
or  the  thirteenth  century  A.  D. 

The  figures  on  PL  LV  belong  to  a  much  later 
period  and  may  be  assigned  to  the  sixteenth  or 
the  seventeenth  century  at  the  earliest.  They 
are  all  worked  out  in  exactly  the  same  postures  as 
the  figures  on  PI.  LIV.  The  uplifted  left  hands 
of  Bama  and  Lakshmana  are  made  to  hold  the 
bow  as  usual.  The  figure  of  Sita  is  made  to  stand 
to  the  left  of  Rama,  and  has  bends  in  the  body  in 
the  direction  opposite  to  the  bends  in  the  body  of 
Rama  ;  the  left  arm  of  this  goddess  is  made  to  hang 
down,  and  the  right  hand  is  held  up  carrying  a 
lotus  flower  in  it.  The  image  of  Hanuman  is 
made  to  carry  in  both  the  hands  two  cylindrical 
bodies  which  probably  represent  two  lihgas.  The 
tradition  is  that  when  Rama  reached  Ramesvaram 
he  decided  to  set  up  a  linga  there  in  honour  of 
Siva  ;  for  this  purpose  he  deputed  Hanuman  to 
fetch  one  from  some  sacred  place.  Before  Hanu- 
man returned,  however,  the  auspicious   moment 

193 

26 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

for  setting  up  the  liiiga  arrived,  and  Rama  there- 
upon installed  there  a  locally  obtained  linga  at  the 
proper  moment.  Hanuman,  who  returned  too 
late  with  two  lihgas  is  here  represented  thus.  This 
group  of  images  belongs  to  Eamesvaram.  The 
larger  image  of  Hanuman  printed  on  the  same 
plate  belongs  also  to  Eamesvaram.  Here  Hanu- 
man stands  in  the  attitude  of  ready  obedience  to 
receive  the  commands  of  Eama  ;  his  right  hand  is 
placed  in  front  of  the  mouth  and  the  left  hand  is 
made  to  hang  down  and  rest  upon  the  thigh. 

The  stone  images  of  Eama  and  Hanuman, 
the  photograph  whereof  is  reproduced  on  PL  LVI, 
are  to  be  seen  in  the  Vishnu  temple  at  Mahabali- 
puram.  This  piece  of  sculpture  is  a  comparatively 
modern  work,  being  most  probably  one  or  two 
centuries  old.  Just  behind  the  right  shoulder  of 
Eama  might  be  noticed  the  quiver  to  contain 
arrows.  The  figure  of  Hanuman  has  the  hands  in 
the  anjali  pose. 

PI.  LVII  represents  a  complete  group  consist- 
ing of  Eama,  Lakshmana,  Bharata,  Satrughna, 
Sita  and  Hanuman,  all  carved  in  ivory  a  few  years 
ago  in  the  School  of  Arts  at  Trivandram.  The 
three  brothers  of  Eama  have  their  hands  in  the 
anjali  pose  ;  Lakshmana,  like  Eama,  carries  also  a 
bow,  and   Sita   has    a   lotus  in  her   right   hand ; 

194 


PLATE  LVI. 


^:*^^^ 


;^fc-t^^  ;  .;•    :^  ^v,        \ 


-  ^y^:>^' 


-i;-.'^.yV.:-.'C-.^f.' 


Eama. 


Stone  :  Mahabalipuram. 


Hanuman. 


[To  face  page  194.] 


PLATE  liYH. 


a 

a 

a 

M 


ic3 


103 

M  a 


CO       o 


c3 

.a 


c3 


[To  face  page  195.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Hanuman  holds  the  right  hand  in  front  of  the 
mouth  and  keeps  the  left  hand  across  the  chest. 
To  indicate  that  Bharata  and  Satrughna  are  the 
incarnations  of  the  chakra  and  the  saiiJcha,  the 
artist  has  carved  these  emblems  of  Vishnu  in  front 
on  the  top  of  their  crowns. 

It  is  convenient  for  more  reasons  than   one 
to  deal  with  the  two  avatdras   of 

Balarama  or  Bala  _  / 

bhadra  -  Rama,    Balarama    and    Sri-Krishna    to- 

and  Krishna. 

gether.  Both  were  the  sons  of 
Vasudeva  and  Devaki,  and  both  had  to  be  secreted 
and  saved  from  the  tyrant  Kamsa,  the  brother  of 
Devaki.  A.  short  account  of  the  lives  of  these  two 
Yadava  princes  is  given  in  the  Agni-purmia,  and 
for  a  very  detailed  account  we  have  to  go  to  the 
Harlvarhsa,  to  the  tenth  skandha  of  the  8r'imad- 
bhagavata,  to  the  Vishnu-pur  ana,  and  the  Bralnna- 
vaivarta-purana.  The  MahSbbharata  also  gives 
information  regarding  Krishna's  relation  with  the 
Pandava  brothers  and  his  services  rendered  to 
them  and  to  Arjuna  in  particular  among  them. 
The  Agni-purdna  says  : — "  In  order  to  relieve  the 
earth  oppressed  by  wickedness,  Hari  was  conceiv- 
ed as  the  seventh  son  of  Devaki ;  but  owing  to  his 
having  been  extracted  from  her  womb  and  con- 
veyed into  that  of  Eshini,  he  was  known  as  her 
son,  under  the  name  of  Balarama.     Afterwards  he 

195 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

(Hari)  was  bom  as  the  eighth  son  of  Devaki,  and 
became  celebrated  under  the  appellation  of  Krishna. 
His  parents  however,  feared  the  vengeance  of 
Kamsa,  and  hence  his  father  Vasudeva  conveyed 
him  to  the  couch  of  Yasoda,  while  she  was  asleep 
after  child-birth,  and  thence  removed  her  new-born 
daughter*,  whom  he  gave  to  Devaki.  Kamsa  on 
hearing  the  cries  of  the  infant,  hastened  to  her 
chamber,  and,  seizing  it,  was  about  to  dash  it  on 
the  floor,  when  she  prevented  him  from  doing  so. 
Enraged  at  this,  he  exclaimed — '  Has  it  not  been 
predicted  that  thy  eighth  conception  shall  be  the 
cause  of  my  death  ?' — and  threw  the  infant  to  the 
ground.  But  it  sprang  on  high,  and  said — '  Why, 
O  Kamsa  !  dash  me  on  the  floor  ?  He  who  shall 
slay  thee  has  already  been  bora'.  After  saying 
this,  it  slew  the  guards  and  disappeared.  Kamsa 
then  sent  Putana  and  others  to  effect  the  destruc- 
tion of  that  child  of  Devaki,  who  had  been  entrust- 
ed to  Yasoda  by  Vasudeva  and  was  being  brought 
up  by  her  in  G-okala  with  a  view  to  safeguard  him 


*  This  infant  was  none  other  than  an  incarnation  of  Durga, 
who  is  thus  addressed  in  a  stanza  in  the  original : — '  0  most 
revered  Durga !  womb  of  the  gods  1.  Ambilia  !  Bhadrakali ! 
Avenger  !  goddess  with  many  names !  the  man  who  repeats  at 
morning,  noon  and  evening  thy  sacred  names,  shall  assuredly 
obtain  all  his  wishes  '. 


196 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

againsfc  the  attempts  of  Kamsa.  Thus  Krishna 
and  Rama,  in  reality  the  guardians  of  the  universe 
gladly  became  the  guardians  of  cattle  amongst 
cowherds  and  milkmaids." 

There  are  various  stories  told  regarding  the 
wonderful  exploits  of  Krishna  during  the  period  of 
his  childhood  as  well  as  boyhood.  It  is  said — 
"  Once  Yasoda,  being  angry,  bound  Krishna  to  a 
mortar ;  but  he,  dragging  it,  passed  between  two 
trees,  by  which  it  was  obstructed ;  and  then  he 
pulled  until  the  two  trees  fell :  another  time  she 
tied  him  to  a  cart,  but  he  broke  it  into  pieces  with 
a  blow  of  his  foot :  when  Putana  offered  him  her 
breast,  he  sucked  until  she  fell  down  dead.  When, 
also,  he  had  become  a  youth,  he  conquered  the 
serpent  Kaliya,  and  expelled  him  from  the  pool  in 
the  Yamuna ;  he  restored  peace  to  Talavana  by 
slaying  the  demons  Dhenuka  under  the  form  of  an 
ass,  Arishta  under  that  of  a  bull,  and  Kesi 
under  that  of  a  horse.  He  abolished  the  festival  of 
Indra,  and  when  the  lord  of  the  sky,  in  consequence, 
poured  down  torrents  of  rain,  he  uplifted  the  moun- 
tain Govardhana,  and  rendered  these  torrents 
innocuous.  Being  then  sent  for  by  Kamsa,  he 
proceeded  to  Mathura  with  his  attached  cowherds, 
amusing  himself,  as  he  went,  by  various  incidents. 
First,  he  slew  the  royal  washerman  who  refused  to 

197 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

give  hiiii  the  garments  of  Kamsa,  and  then  clothed 
himself  and  Eama  with  them  ;  he  then  gave  wealth 
to  the  flower-woman  who  voluntarily  supplied  him 
with  garlands :  he  next  rendered  straight  the 
crooked  woman  who  presented  him  perfumed  oint- 
ments :  and,  having  afterwards  slain  the  elephant 
Kuvalaya  at  the  gate,  he  entered  the  amphitheatre, 
and  beheld  Kamsa,  with  his  ministers,  guards,  and 
attendants.  There,  in  a  wrestling  match,  he  slew 
the  gymnasts  Chanara  and  Mushtaka,  and  then 
slew  Kamsa  himself  the  king  of  Mafchura.  After 
this,  he  made  Ugrasena  the  king  of  the  Yadavas. 
Two  of  Kamsa's  wives,  however,  were  daughters 
of  Jarasandha ;  and  they  acquainted  their  father 
with  what  had  occurred ;  and  he  immediately 
besieged  Mathura  with  a  mighty  army.  But, 
though  Krishna  defeated  him  then,  he  afterwards 
caused  the  city  of  Dvaraka  to  be  built,  and  chose 
that  place  for  his  residence.  There  he  dwelt  with 
his  sixteen  thousand  and  eight  wives,  the  two  chief 
ones  among  whom  were  Bukmini  and  Satyabhama. 
Having  received  instruction  in  learning  from 
Sandipana,  he  restored  to  him  his  lost  child,  slaying 
for  the  purpose  the  Daitija  known  as  Panchajanya 
and  then  receiving  due  honour  from  Yama  ;  he 
further  brought  about  the  death  of  Kalayavana 
through  Muchukunda. 


198 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

"  By  Rukmini  was  born  to  him  a  son,  named 
Pradyumna,  whom  the  Daitija  Sambara,  on  the 
sixth  day  after  his  birth,  carried  away  and  threw 
into  the  sea.  He  was  swallowed  by  a  fish  ;  which, 
being  taken  by  a  fisherman,  was  given  to  Sambara  ; 
and,  on  its  being  opened  the  infant  was  found 
within  it.  This  infant,  Sambara  gave  to  his  wife 
Mayavati,*  who  recognised  it  to  be  her  husband 
Kama,  and  brought  it  up  with  much  care  and 
affection.  When  afterwards  Pradyumna  became 
grown  up,  she  thus  spoke  to  him, — '  Thou  art 
Kama,  whom  Siva  rendered  body-less  {ananga), 
and  whom  Sambara  carried  away  and  threw  into 
the  sea  ;  do  thou,  therefore,  slay  him.  '  Pradyumna 
in  consequence  slew  Sambara,  and  then  returned 
to  his  parents. 

"  The  One  Lord  lived  happily  as  Krishna  in 
this  world  with  Rukmini  and  with  his  other  wives, 

and  begot   a  numerous   race   of  sons He  also 

assisted  the  Pandavas  in  their  war  with  the 
Kauravas,  and  relieved  the  earth  through  them 
from  the  heavy  burden  of  wicked  men  by  which  it 

*  On  Kama's  body  having  been  consumed  by  Siva,  this 
god  promised  to  his  wife  Rati  that  her  husband  would  be 
afterwards  born  as  the  son  of  Krishna ;  and  it  was  in 
expectation  of  this  promised  event  that  Rati  had  come  to  be 
born  as  Mayavati. 

199 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

was  oppressed.  When  at  last  the  object  of  his 
incarnation  was  accomplished,  then  the  whole  race 
of  the  Yadavas  was  destroyed  by  mutual  slaughter, 
in  consequence  of  the  curse  of  the  divine  sages. 
Balabhadra,  the  incarnate  form  of  Ananta*, 
departed  to  heaven  ;  and  Hari,  forsaking  mortality, 
returned  to  Vaikuntha."t 

This  account  from  Agni-purana  does  scanty 
justice  to  the  greatness  attaching  to  the  character 
of  Krishna,  and  throws  very  little  light  on  the 
way  in  which  his  elder  brother  Balarama  was 
helpful  to  him  in  almost  every  one  of  his  great 
achievements  in  life.  As  king  and  statesman,  as 
warrior  and  hero,  as  friend  and  supporter,  as  guide 
and  philosopher,  and  as  teacher  and  religious 
reformer — particularly  as  the  expounder  of  the  ail- 
comprehensively  monotheistic  religion  of  love  and 
devotion  to  God  conceived  as  Vasudeva,  his 
achievements  have  been  so  great  and  glorious  that, 
among  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu,  none  receives 
more  cordial  or  more  widespread  worship  than 
Krishna. 

*  At  the  beginning  of  this  account  taken  from  the 
Agni-purana  Balarama  is  said  to  be  an  avatdra  of  Vishnu 
but  at  the  end  he  is  described  as  an  incarnate  form  of  Vishnu's 
Serpent  Ananta. 

f  See  Kennedy's  Hindu  Mythology,  pp,  439-441. 

200 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Balarama  is  rarely  worshipped  independently 

as    a    god.     The    glory   of  the  younger  brother 

Krishna  has   thrown  the   elder  brother  into   the 

shade ;  and  hence  his  image  is  only  occasionally 

worshipped  in  association  with  that   of  Krishna 

as  Parthasarathi.     However  descriptions  are  not 

wanting  for  the  making  of  the  image  of  Balarama. 

The     Vaikhanasagama     states     that    the    image 

of  Balarama  should  be   sculptured   according   to 

the    madhyama-dasa-tala   measure    consisting   of 

120  ahgulas  in  height.     The  figure  of  Balarama 

should  carry  the  niusala  in  the  right  hand  and 

the  hala  in  the  left.     The  complexion  of  Balarama 

should  be  white  and  the  colour  of   his   garments 

red.      The   figure    of   Balarama  should  have  the 

hair   on   the    head  tied    up    in    a   knot    on    the 

top.     The   Brihatsamhita   adds  that  the   eyes  of 

Balarama   should   be   rolling  on    account   of  the 

excessive  intoxication   of    liquor    drunk    by    him 

and  that  there  should  be  a  kicndala  in  only  one 

ear.     According  to  the  Agni-purdna  Balarama  is 

required  to  carry  the  gada  and  the  hala  if  he  is 

shown  as  possessing  two  arms :  if,  however,  he  is 

represented  with  four  arms  the  back  right  hand 

should  carry  the  viusala  and  the  front  right  hand 

the  chakra,  and  the  back  left  hand  the  hala  and 

the  front  left  hand  the  saiikha. 


201 

%6 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

On  the  right  of  Balarama  should  be  standing 
the  figure  of  his  wife  Eevatidevi  of  yellow  comp- 
lexion. She  should  be  shown  as  clothed  in  pushpa- 
vastra,  a  term  which  may  mean  a  cloth  in  which 
are  worked  out  floral  designs  or  a  garment  compos- 
ed of  flowers,  but  the  former  interpretation  is  more 
appropriate.  The  left  hand  of  Eevatidevi  is  let 
down  hanging,  while  the  right  is  shown  as  carry- 
ing a  lotus  flower. 

The  Jia^ituha-bera  of  Balarama  may  be  made 
in  accordance  with  the  description  given  above,  or 
be  an  ordinary  figure  of  Vishnu  with  four  arms. 

The  Brihatsamhita  adds  that  Durgadevi 
should  be  sculptured  as  standing  between  the 
images  of  Balarama  and  Krishna ;  she  may  be 
shown  as  possessing  two,  four  or  eight  arms.  If 
she  is  represented  with  two  arms  she  should  be 
made  to  carry  a  lotus  flower  in  her  right  hand 
and  the  left  hand  should  be  made  to  rest  upon 
the  hip ;  if  she  is  sculptured  with  four  hands, 
there  should  be  a  book  and  a  lotus  flower  in  the  left 
hands  and  one  of  the  right  hands  should  carry  an 
aksli'amala,  while  the  other  is  to  be  held  in  the 
varada  pose ;  if  she  is  shown  with  eight  hands, 
there  should  be  the  Jcaniandalu,  dhanus,  sastra  (a 
book  ?)  and  a  lotus  flower  in  the  left  hands ;  and 
the  bana,  a  mirror,  an  akshamala  are  to  be  seen  in 

202 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

three  of  the  four  right  hands,  while  the  fourth  is 
to  be  held  in  the  varada  pose. 

The  Vaikhanasagama  lays  down  that  the 
figure  of  Krishna  should  be  made  according  to  the 
madhyama-dasa-tala  measure  of  120  ahgulas  in 
height.  The  complexion  of  the  image  of  Krishna 
should  be  black,  and  it  is  to  be  clothed  in  red 
garments  and  adorned  with  various  ornaments.  It 
should  be  made  to  have  a  hifita  on  the  head  or  it 
should  be  shown  that  the  hair  is  tied  up  in  a  knot 
on  the  top  of  the  head.  In  the  right  hand  a 
peculiarly  curved  stick  should  be  carried,  (see  fig 
15,  PL  II),  and  the  left  arm  should  be  lifted  up 
and  bent  at  the  elbow :  the  palm  of  this  hand  has 
to  be  facing  downwards.  This  hand  may  carry  a 
sanhha  also.  In  all  other  respects  the  figure  of 
Krishna  resembles  that  of  Eama. 

On  the  right  of  Krishna  there  should  be  the 
image  of  Rukmini  golden-yellow  in  complexion ; 
her  hair  should  be  shown  as  tied  up  in  a  fashionable 
knot  and  adorned  with  flowers.  The  right  arm 
should  be  hanging  down  and  in  the  left  hand  a 
lotus  flower  should  be  held. 

On  the  left  of  the  image  of  Krishna  there  should 
be  the  image  of  Satyabhama  of  dark  colour ;  she  is 
also  shown  as  wearing  her  hair  in  the  same 
fashion  as  Eukmini.     In  her  right  hand  she  should 

203 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

hold  a  tlower,  and  the  left  arm  should  be  hanging 
down  the  side.  Both  Eukmini  and  Satyabhama 
are  to  be  adorned  with  various  ornaments.  The 
figure  of  Satyabhama  should  be  sc  sculptured  as  to 
indicate  an  evident  desire  on  her  part  to  look  upon 
her  lord  with  great  fondness  and  love.  Some 
authorities  would  prescribe  for  the  devis,  says  the 
Vaikhanasagama,  the  haranda-maliuta.  From 
this  statement,  it  is  clear  that  the  Vaikhanasagama 
is  not  in  favour  of  this  form  of  head-gear  for  them. 

On  the  left  of  Krishna  Graruda  also  should  be 
made  to  stand  steadily  with  his  hands  in  the 
anjali  pose. 

The  kautuka-bera  of  the  Krishna  image  might 
be  sculptured  as  above  or  might  be  a  simple  form 
of  Vishnu  with  four  arms. 

The  Vishnu-dharmoUara,  however,  says  that 
Krishna  should  have  in  one  of  his  hands  the  chahra 
and  that  Rukmini  should  have  in  her  right  hand 
a  nilotpala  flower  instead  of  the  lotus  as  mentioned 
in  the  Vaikhwiasagama. 

The  figure  of  Krishna  as  described  in  the 
Vaikhanasagama  is  found  enshrined  in  a  large 
number  of  temples  in  South  India  under  the 
common  name  of  Mannar  which  is  a  corrupt  form 
of  Mann-annar,  meaning  one  who  resembles  a 
king.     The  left  hand  of  the  figure  is  required  to 

204 


PLATE  LYIII. 


«? 


-T 


c^ 

> 

M*f' 

V 

w-^' 

,' 

^ 

V 

.  _ii^^S!i;■5y■'^:^ 


Krishna  and  Eukmini :   Stone  :  Madras  Museum. 
[To  face  page  205.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

be  kept  as  described,  because  it  is  intended  to  be 
made  to  rest  upon  the  shoulder  of  Satyabhama.  A 
reference  to  the  illustrations  would  make  this  point 
clear.  The  short  stick  in  the  hand  of  Krishna  is 
sculptured  in  the  form  of  the  shepherd's  hook.  In 
Tamil  it  is  called  hunil,  and  the  Srivaishnava 
saints  as  also  the  author  of  the  classic  epic  Silap- 
padigaram  often  speak  of  Krishna  as  '  Madhava 
who  aimed  and  hit  at  fruits  with  a  calf  for  his  hinil ' 
alluding  of  course  to  his  killing  the  Vatsasura. 

One  of  the  two  illustrations  given  below  repre- 
sents a  stone  image  in  the  Madras  Museum.  In 
this  illustration  Krishna  has  his  arm  actually  rest- 
ing on  the  shoulder  of  the  Devi,  who  may  be  either 
Eukmini  or  Satyabhama.  The  hair  on  the  head 
is  done  up  into  a  knot  and  encircled  by  wreaths  of 
flowers.   (See  PI.  LVIII.) 

Such  a  piece  of  sculpture  consisting  of  Krishna 
and  the  Devi  is  sometimes  called  by  the  name  of 
Sauriraja-pperumal  in  Tamil. 

The  second  photograph  is  that  of  a  metal 
image  from  Shermadevi  in  the  Tinnevelly  district. 
In  this  the  figure  of  Krishna  is  shown  as  wearing 
the  hair  tied  up  on  the  top  of  the  head  so  as  to 
assume  the  shape  of  a  crown.  The  right  hand  is 
in  the  hataha  pose  and  is  obviously  intended  to 
receive  a  separate  metallic  stick,  which  might  be 

205 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

passed  through  the  ring  formed  of  the  forefinger  and 
the  thumb  (See  PI.  LIX.).  In  both  the  illustrations 
the  figures  of  Krishna  and  the  Devi  have  three 
bends  and  are  therefore  of  the  trihhahga  type.  It 
appears  from  the  peculiarities  of  the  sculpture  that 
they  must  be  assigned  to  about  the  eleventh  or 
the  twelfth  century  A.D. 

As  the  name  indicates,  this  figure  is  intended 

to  represent  Krishna  as  dancing 
nrittrmurtt  ^ith  joy  for  having  secured  a  ball 

of  butter  to  eat.  In  the  hand  the 
ball  of  butter  is  invariably  shown.  This  is  a 
common  piece  of  sculpture  in  South  India,  and 
may  very  often  be  even  purchased  in  bazaars  as  a 
toy  for  children  to  play  with.  The  Navanita- 
nritta-murti  is  made  to  stand  on  the  left  leg  which 
is  slightly  bent  at  the  knee-joint,  while  the  right 
leg  is  lifted  up  and  bent  inwards  as  in  dancing. 
The  right  hand  is  held  in  the  ahliaya  pose  or  should 
be  with  a  ball  of  butter  in  it,  and  the  left  arm  is 
stretched  out  and  thrown  outwards. 

This  image  has  to  be  adorned  with  all  orna- 
ments and  might  be  shown  either  as  wearing  a 
cloth  or  as  being  nude.  When  the  ball  of  butter 
in  the  hand  is  not  shown,  it  has  to  be  understood 
that  the  dancing  and  the  joy  are  due  to  the  certain 
expectation  of  getting  the  butter.     This  descrip- 

206 


PLATE  lilX. 


Krishna  and  Eukmim:  Bronze:  Shermadevi. 


t'lo  facB  page  206.] 


PLATE  L,X, 


i-  i 

/ 

4 

p«:: 

:            . 

i-^^ 

1            * 

"•"W 

r 

% 

^^ 

1 

'* 

a 

-t^ 

0 

.. 

m 

(T) 

-M 

N 

p 

P 
O 

>• 

m 

OD 


T 

a 

a 

tn 

<n 

m 

3 

n 

%H' 

(==C 

P 

m 

rt 

08 

T1 

a 

Oi 

^S 


'--   p 
^  2 


[To  face  page  206.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

tion  is  followed  in  the.  concrete  representations 
figured  in  the  illustratioas  given  below.  The 
Madras  Museum  image  has  in  the  right  hand  the 
lump  of  butter ;  and  the  right  leg  though  lifted  as 
required,  is  supported  upon  a  lotus,  which  is  purely 
the  artist's  addition  to  ensure  the  stability  and 
equilibrium  of  the  standing  figure  by  providing  it 
with  better  and  firmer  attachment  to  the  pedestal. 
(See  fig.  1,  PI.  LX.) 

In  the  second  illustration  of  this  aspect  of 
Krishna,  (See  fig.  2,  PI.  liX.)  the  image  is  shown 
with  the  right  hand  held  in  the  kataJca  pose,  instead 
of  with  a  ball  of  butter  in  it,  bub  is  exactly  similar 
in  other  respects  to  the  Madras  Museum  image. 

Gana-Gopala  or  Venii-Gopala  is  another 
variety  of  the  Krishna  image,  in 
or^ven'u'^aopaia.  which  he  is  conccivcd  to  be 
delighting  with  his  enchanting 
music  the  hearts  of  the  cowherds,  the  cowherdesses, 
and  the  cows  who  are  his  companions.  In  the 
case  of  these  images,  the  rapture  of  music  has  to 
be  clearly  depicted  on  the  face  ;  and  they  are  in 
consequence  generally  so  very  pretty  as  to  attract 
attention  wherever  they  may  be.  The  aspiring 
artist  also  has  often  found  this  form  of  Krishna 
representation  a  very  suitable  subject  giving  ample 
scope  for  the  display  of  his  deep    devotion  and 

207 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

artistic  skill.  Venu-Gopala  is  generally  surrounded 
by  cowherds  and  cowherdesses.  This  image  of 
Krishna  is  made  to  stand  erect  with  the  left  leg 
resting  on  the  floor ;  and  the  right  leg  is  thrown 
across  behind  or  in  front  of  the  left  leg  so  as  to 
touch  the  ground  with  the  toes.  The  flute  is  held 
in  both  the  hands,  and  one  end  of  it  is  applied  to 
the  mouth.  It  is  said  that  the  complexion  of  such 
images  of  Krishna  should  be  dark  in  hue  so  as  to 
resemble  the  rain-cloud  in  appearance.  The  head 
should  be  ornamented  with  a  bunch  of  peacock's 
feathers.  There  should  be  three  bends  in  the  body. 
Four  illustrations  of  Gana-Gopala  are  given 
here.  That  from  Halebidu,  (PI.  LXI.),  is  one 
which  fairly  tallies  with  the  description  given 
above.  But  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  here  there 
are  no  cowherds,  cowherdesses,  cows  and  calves. 
It  is  a  detached  piece  of  sculpture  probably 
removed  from  some  rained  temple  at  Halebidu ; 
and  it  is  now  set  up  along  with  other  images  in 
the  wall  of  Kedaresvara  temple  which  is  being 
newly  built.  This  circumstance  accounts  for  the 
absence  of  these  inseparable  companions  of  Krishna 
as  Venu-Gopala.  Nothing  but  the  highest  praise 
is  due  to  the  artist  for  the  perfection  of  his  work 
and  the  resulting  beauty  of  the  image.  There  is 
the    visible  appearance  of    deep  musical  rapture 

208 


PLATE  liXI. 


GaQa-Gopala  :  Stone  : 
Halebldu. 


[To  face  page  208-] 


PLATE  LXH. 


a 
o 


ic3 
lO 

O 

0 


00 


a 

a 

> 


o 


ic8 

a 

lO 

d 


OJO 


[To  face  page  209.] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

on  the  face  of  Krishna.  The  happy  face  and  the 
very  well  carved  hands  and  fingers  disclose  in 
a  remarkable  manner  the  high  capacity  of  the 
sculptor.  The  characteristically  minute  work- 
manship in  relation  to  the  jewels  and  the 
drapery  which  prevailed  in  the  Hoysala  school^ 
is  exemplified  here  at  its  best.  The  second 
illustration  is  of  a  group  of  ivory  images  consisting 
of  Venugopala  and  two  cows  one  on  each  side 
(See  fig.  1,  PI.  LXII).  This  group  of  images  was 
carved  recently  in  the  Trivandram  School  of  Arts. 
Herein  also  the  image  of  Krishna  is  made  to  con- 
form to  the  description  given  in  the  Sanskrit  texts. 
The  third  illustration  is  a  bronze  figure  in  which 
Krishna  is  represented  with  four  hands  instead  of 
two.  In  the  right  upper  hand  the  chakra  is  held 
and  in  the  corresponding  left  hand  there  is  the 
kahkha  ;  the  two  other  hands  hold  the  flute  in  the 
manner  required  to  play  upon  it.  On  the  head  is 
the  kirlta  ;  and  in  all  other  respects  it  is  an  ordinary 
figure  of  Vishnu.  On  either  side  the  figures  of 
Lakshmi  and  Bhumi  may  be  seen  standing  with 
the  usual  lotus  and  nildtpala  flowers  in  their  hands. 
(See  fig.  2,  PL  LXII).  The  fourth  photograph  is  of 
the  figure  sculptured  on  a  pillar  in  the  Visvanatha- 
svamin  temple  at  Tenkasi  in  the  Tinnevelly 
district.     The  temple  in  which  this  image  is  to 

209 

27 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

be  found,  was  built  by  the  Pandya  king,  Arikesari 
Parakrama  Pandya  in  the  year  S.  1362  (corres- 
ponding to  A.  D.  1447).  It  is  an  image  of  the 
conventional  type  ;  nevertheless,  it  has  been  exe- 
cuted with  great  care  and  produces  a  notably 
good  effect  (See  PL  LXIII).  Here  Krishna  is  repre- 
sented with  eight  arms ;  in  three  of  the  right 
hands  he  holds  a  padma,  a  -paraku,  and  the  chakra, 
and  in  three  corresponding  left  hands  he  carries  a 
bow  made  of  sugar-cane,  a  pasa  and  the  ^ahkha. 
With  the  two  remaining  hands  the  flute  is  held  as 
if  he  is  playing  upon  it.  The  legs  are  worked  out 
according  to  the  description  given  above  which 
however,  is  not  followed  by  the  Halebidu  sculptor. 
Ikshu-kodanda,  (the  sugar-cane  bow),  and  the  arrow 
of  flowers  are  the  peculiar  emblems  of  Kamadeva, 
the  Indian  Cupid.  The  Srltatvanidhi  calls  this 
variety  of  Venu-Gopala  by  the  name  of  Madanago- 
pala. 

Another  form  in  which  Krishna  is  worshipped 
is    as  Parthasarathi,    that  is,    as 

Partliasaratlii.  .  r       »    •  tn      • 

charioteer  oi  Arjuna.  Durmg 
the  famous  war  between  the  Pandavas  and  the 
Kauravas  fought  on  the  field  of  Kurukshetra, 
Krishna,  it  is  well  known,  served  Arjuna  as  his 
charioteer.  Corresponding  to  this  conception  of  the 
charioteer,  an  image  of  Krishna  is  described  in  the 

210 


PLATE  liXIII. 


■-"*Wfei 


■     ■II 

ill      i    I 


Madana-Gopala  :  Stone  :  Tenkasi. 


[To  fane  page  210.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

Vaikhanasagama.     In  this  image  Krishri,a  is  repre- 
sented as  holding  the  reins  in  one  hand  and  a  cane 
in  the  other,  and  as  in  the  act  of   mounting  a 
chariot,  the  right  leg  resting  on  the  floor  and  the 
left  leg  placed  in  front  of  the  chariot.     The  chariot 
itself  is  made  to  carry  a  flag  on  the  dome  above,  and 
is  shown  to  be  yoked  to  excellent  horses.    Arjuna, 
with  bow  in  hand,  stands  on  the  ground  with  his 
hands  in   the   anjali  pose.     The  right   hand  of 
Krishna  is  held  so  as  to  be  in  the  vyakhydna-mudra. 
From  this  description  it  must  be  clear  that   the 
occasion  for  worshipping  Krishna  as  Parthasarathi 
arose  not  in  consequence  of  his  having  guided  the 
chariot  of  Arjuna  skillfully  in  the  battlefield,  but  in 
consequence  of   his  having  taught  Arjuna   those 
immortal  lessons  of  religion  and  philosophy  which 
are  contained  in  the  immortal  Bliagavadglta. 

In  the  temple  of  Parthasarathi  at  Triplicane 
the  arrangement  of  the  images  is,  however,  quite 
different  from  the  description  given  above.  The 
central  shrine  of  the  temple  faces  the  east ;  adjoin- 
ing the  back  wall  (which  is  the  west  one)  of  the 
shrine  and  occupying  the  central  position  stands 
the  image  of  Krishna  ;  it  has  only  two  arms,  in  the 
right  one  of  which  is  kept  the  saiikha  while  the 
left  hand  is  held  in  the  varadaTpose.  To  the  right 
of  the  image  of  Krishna  is  that  of  Eukmini  with  a 

2n 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

lotus  in  the  right  hand  ;  her  other  hand  is  let  down 
hanging.  The  image  of  Satyaki,  the  younger 
brother  of  Krishna  is  seen  standing  to  the  left  of 
that  of  Krishna  :  in  its  right  hand  is  seen  a  Tihadga 
and  the  left  hand  is  kept  in  the  varada  pose. 
Near  the  south  wall  and  facing  the  north  is  the 
standing  figure  of  Balarama  :  it  carries  in  its  right 
hand  the  hala  (the  plough)  while  the  left  hand  is 
kept  in  the  varada  pose.  By  the  side  of  the  north 
wall  and  facing  the  south,  stand  the  figures  of 
Aniruddha  and  Samkarshana  each  carrying  a 
danda  in  their  right  hands  and  keeping  their  left 
hands  in  the  varada  pose.  One  of  the  inscriptions 
found  in  this  temple  states  that  these  images  were 
set  up  by  a  mendicant  Brahmana  in  the  year 
S.  1486  (A.  D.  1564-5). 

It  is  recorded  in  the  life  of   Krishna  that  he 

punished  and  drove  away  to  the 
dfkSsiS:!"'     sea    the   serpent    named    Kaliya, 

which  had  its  abode  in  a  pond 
called  Kalincli  i^i  the  river  Yamuna.  This,  most 
probably  refers  to  Krishna  having  abolished  the 
original  cult  of  serpent-worship.  The  image  of 
Krishna  representing  him  as  chastising  the  serpent 
Kaliya  should  be  sculptured,  it  is  said,  in  the  form 
of  a  child  dancing  upon  the  hood  of  a  serpent, 
holding  in  its  left  hand  the  tail  of  the  reptile  and 

213 


PLATE  LXIV 


J 


\ 


..>afM  »  ■  ^^  ■    -^-m^ 


KaliyahimarJdaka-Krishni :  Bronze  :  Madras  Museum, 
[To  Eaoa  page  213,] 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

keeping  the  right  hand  outstretched  so  as  to  make 
the  whole  of  the  right  arm  appear  Uke  a  streamer.* 
This  description  of  Kaliyahi-marddaka-Krishna  is 
faithfully  carried  out  in  almost  all  sculptures  and 
castings.  The  bronze  image  of  Kaliyahi-marddaka- 
Krishna,  whose  photograph  is  reproduced  on 
PL  LXIV,  belongs  to  the  Madras  Museum.  This 
image  very  nearly  resembles  the  Navanita-nritta- 
Krishna.  In  the  hand  stretched  out  and  held  in 
the  flag-pose  the  tail  of  the  serpent  Kaliya  is 
caught.  The  left  foot  of  Krishna  is  placed  firmly 
on  the  hood  of  the  serpent  while  the  right  one  is 
lifted  so  as  to  indicate  that  it  is  going  to  be  used  in 
administering  a  kick  on  the  hood  of  the  serpent. 
The  image  of  Krishna  is  further  shown  to  be  wearing 
short  drawers  ornamented  with  floral  designs.  The 
right  hand  is  held  in  the  ahhaya  pose.  This  bronze 
casting  is  probably  at  least  five  centuries  old  and  is 
a  fine  specimen  of  what  may  be  called  the  medieval 
art  of  South  India.  It  may  be  mentioned  here 
that  Kaliyahi-marddaka-Krishna  is  sculptured  also 
on  the  wall  of  the  pillared  walk  round  the  central 
shrine  in  the  great  Kailasa  temple  at  EUora. 

*  Tbe  term  employed  in  the  original  is  patdha-hasta  ; 
this  would  at  first  appear  to  mean  a  hand  carrying  a  flag  or 
standard.  But  it  is  a  term  borrowed  from  the  Dharata-sdstra 
and  it  means  therefore  a  hand  held  like  a  streamer. 

213 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

Two  illustrations  of  Grovardhana-dhara-Krishna 
are  given  on  Pis.  LXV  and  LXVI. 
dhara-Krifhna.  The  former  of  these  represents  an 
image  belonging  to  Nuggehalli, 
while  the  latter  represents  one  belonging  to  the 
Hoysalesvara  temple  at  Halebidu.  Both  of  them 
are  typical  of  Hoysala  school  and  are  about  six 
centuries  old.  Pi.  LXV  shows  Krishna  as  holding 
aloft  the  Govardhana  hill  with  the  right  hand, 
while  in  the  other  PI.  LXVI  it  is  the  left  hand 
which  is  used  for  the  purpose.  Accordingly  the 
body  of  the  former  image  is  bent  to  the  left  and 
that  of  the  latter  to  the  right.  In  both  cases  cows, 
cowherds  and  cowherdesses  are  worked  out  and 
shown  to  be  taking  shelter  under  the  uplifted  hill, 
which  again  is  represented  in  both  cases  as  having 
on  it  trees,  wild  beasts  and  hunters  giving  them 
chase.  The  Nuggehalli  sculpture  was  executed, 
according  to  the  label  engraved  below  it,  by 
Baichoja  of  Nandi,  who  bears  the  birudas  or  dis- 
tinguishing titles  of  honour  meaning  that  '  he  is  a 
rod  of  diamond  to  the  hills  representing  the  titled 
rival  artists  '  and  also  '  the  destroyer  of  the  mosqui- 
toes making  up  all  the  titled  architects'.  Many  of 
the  sculptural  decorations  in  the  temple  at  Nugge- 
halli appear  to  have  been  executed  by  this  able 
artist. 


2U 


PLATE  LXV. 


^"*  '''▼■ ""« 


fffMlS^^ 


Govardliana-dbara  Krishna  :  Nuggehalli. 


[To  face  page  214.] 


PLATE  LXYl. 


S,  1?\  »,i.     '^-    ...      •*      '-^^W     ^-     «         -^  ,  * 


-^?^ 


" 


ggggt 


-     .    -      -- — ■ «-  —  

Govardhana-dhara  Krishna  :  Stone  :  Halabidu. 


[to  face  page  214.^ 


PLATE  liXYII. 


(S 

a- 

J3 

oj 

'O 

n 

^4 

1— 1 

o3 

leg 

CQ 

m 


p^ 


m 


ffl 

c- 

. 

^ 

ci 

m 

'TS 

n 

^ 

M 

crt 

ictf 

It; 

W 

,. ^ 

(Tl 

1—1 

XI 

^H 

rin 

ca 

Fr 

a 

f2  H 


00 


[to  face  page  215.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OE  VISHNU. 

At  the  end  of  the  description  of  the  different 
varieties  of  the  Krishna  images,  the  Vaikhanasa- 
gamarema^vka  : — "  The  forms  of  Krishna  are  so  in- 
"  numerable  that  they  cannot  all  be  described. 
"  Therefore  the  worshipper  might  sculpture 
"  Krishna's  image  in  any  form  in  which  he  chooses 
"  to  conceive  him."  Besides  the  aspects  of  Krishna 
considered  above  there  are  a  few  others  which  are 
not  described  in  the  Sanskrit  texts  available  to  us  ; 
however,  a  large  number  of  images  of  Krishna  as 
a  child  (Balakrishna)  are  met  with  in  sculptures. 
Krishna  alone,  among  the  avatar  as  of  Vishnu,  is 
worshipped  as  a  child,  a  youth  etc.,  forms  fit  for  ex- 
hibiting the  various  kinds  of  hliahti  or  love,  as  for 
instance,  that  of  a  mother  to  her  child,  that  of  a  wife 
for  her  husband  and  that  of  a  friend  for  a  friend. 
As  a  baby  Krishna  is  represented  as  crawling  on  all 
fours,  sometimes  with  a  ball  of  butter  in  his  hand 
(See  figs.  1  and  2,  PI.  LXVII).  Another  form  in 
which  the  child  Krishna  is  often  sculptured  is  as 
lying  upon  a  leaf  of  the  vata  tree  (Indian  fig)  and 
is  hence  known  as  the  Vata-patra-sayi.  This  form 
is  symbolic  of  God  brooding  over  the  ocean  of  the 
chaos  caused  after  the  destruction  of  the  universe 
at  the  end  of  an  jeon.  (See  fig  3,  PI.  LXVII). 
A  third  variety  is  known  as  Santana-Gropala  and 
is  described  in  the  Sntatvanidlii  as  follows  :  the 


215 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

infant  Krishna  should  be  portrayed  as  lying  on  the 
lap  of  Yasoda  and  sucking  milk  from  her  breast,  his 
face  should  be  turned  up  a  little  and  seeing  his 
mother's  face.  One  of  his  hands  should  be  laid  on 
the  breast  of  his  mother.* 

Among   the   ten   avataras   of   Vishnu,    some 
authorities  maintain  Buddha  to  be 

Buddha.  ,.11 

one,  while  others  do  not  consider 
him  to  be  such  an  avatara.  The  Puranas  them- 
selves are  divided  in  their  view  of  the  matter. 
Some  of  them,  like  the  Bhagavata-purdna,  for 
instance,  include  Buddha  among  the  avataras  of 
Vishnu,  while  others  do  not.  Among  those  that 
mention  him  to  be  an  avaMra,  Bhagavat'a-purana 
says — "  Then,  after  the  Kali  age  begins,  a  person 
named  Buddha,  son  of  Anjana,  will  be  born  among 
the  Kikatas,  in  order  to  delude  the  enemies  of  the 
gods  (the  aauras)."  A  commentator  explains  the 
geographical  position  of  the  country  of  the  Kikatas 
by  the  remark  viadhye  Gaya-praclese,  meaning  in 
the  region  near  Gaya.  The  Agni-imrana  states — 
"  The  Suras,  having  been  defeated  in  battle  by  the 
Asuras,  sought  the  protection  of  Vishnu ;  he,  in 
consequence,  was  born  as  a  deluder  in  the  form  of 


*  f^^  =?  ^i  Ti3g%  ^^  sfercTH  i  aTp^r^^JsnT  "^x^ 


.1 
216 


DASAVATARAS  OF  VISHNU, 

Buddha,  the  son  of  .Tina ;  by  him  the  Asuras  were 
deceived,  who,  on  being  induced  to  abandon  the 
religion  of  the  Vedas,  lost  all  power  as  warriors. 
From  that  time  has  the  religion  of  Buddha  flour- 
ished ;  and  many  are  the  heretics  who  have  for- 
saken the  sacred  ordinances  of  the  Vedas"  In  a 
dialogue  between  Parasara  and  Maitreya,  recorded 
in  the  Vishiiu-purana,  the  latter  asks  the 
former  who  the  Nagnas  were,  why  they  were  so 
called,  and  what  their  character  was.  To  this 
the  former  replies — "  The  Rigveda,  the  Yajurveda 
and  the  Samaveda  are  the  threefold  clothing  of 
the  several  castes  ;  and  the  sinful  wight  who 
throws  off  this  is  called  the  udgiiii  or  the  naked 
person,  meaning  an  apostate.  The  three  Vedas 
constitute  the  dress  of  all  men  ;  and  when  people 
neglect  them  they  are  left  bare."  He  then  pro- 
ceeds to  narrate  the  origin  of  Buddha,  the  deluding 
personage.  In  a  battle  that  took  place  between 
the  gods  and  the  Asuras  headed  by  Hrada,  the  gods 
were  defeated  ;  they  fled  to  the  northern  shore  of 
the  milky  ocean  and  there  prayed  to  Vishnu  to 
restore  them  to  their  original  state.  The  Lord  was 
pleased  with  their  prayers  and  emitted  from  out  of 
his  person  a  deluding  form,  which  he  gave  to  the 
celestials  and  said  to  them — "  This  deluding  form 
shall  deceive  the  Daityas,  who  being  thereupon  led 

21V 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

astray  from  the  path  of  the  Vedas,  shall  be  slain." 
This  Being  that  so  emanated  from  Vishnu  proceed- 
ed as  a  naked  mendicant,  with  his  head  shaven,  and 
carrying  in  the  hand  a  bunch  of  peacock's  feathers, 
to  the  Daityas  who  were  engaged  in  severe  auster- 
ities on  the  bank  of  the  river  Narmada,  and 
addressed  them  gently,  saying — "  0,  ye  Chiefs  of 
the  Daitya-race,  why  do  you  practise  these  devout 
penances  ?  Do  you  expect  rewards  in  this  world 
or  in  the  next  ?"  The  Asuras  replied — "  0  worthy 
personage  of  great  mind,  we  have  been  engaged  in 
these  penances  with  a  view  to  reap  fruits  in  the 
next  world."  The  deceiving  personage  then  told 
them  that  his  teachings  would  bring  them  final 
emancipation  and  that  they  were  worthy  of  receiv- 
ing those  teachings.  That  is  why  the  Daityas 
came  to  be  known  by  the  name  of  Arhaias  (mean- 
ing those  that  are  worthy).  Then  he  preached 
against  the  sinful  massacre  of  animals  taught  by 
the  Vedas,  and  taught  many  moie  things  opposed 
to  the  path  of  the  Vedas.  The  word  Bnddlii/adhve, 
meaning  "  know  ye  ? "  was  uttered  by  their  new 
preceptor  at  the  end  of  his  discourse  to  the  Daityas ; 
and  they  responded  hj  Bdi,ymg  Bud dhy ate — "it  is 
known."  Thus  those  that  have  followed  the  reli- 
gion preached  by  this  deluding  personage  came  to 
be  called  nagvas  as  well  as  budd.has.     The  Vishnu- 

218 


DA8AVATAEA8  OF  VISHNU. 

Purana  says  many  hard  things  against  Buddhism 
and  Buddhists. 

Practically  the  same  account  is  found  in  some 
of  the  other  Puranas  also,  which  need  not  be  given 
here  in  detail.  The  following  is  a  description  of 
the  image  of  Buddha  as  gathered  from  the  Brihat- 
samhita,  the  Agni-pitrana  and  the  Vishnu-dhar- 
mottara. 

The  figure  of  Buddha  should  have  on  its  feet 
and  the  palms  marks  resembling  the  pad?na  or 
lotus ;  the  body  should  be  full  and  fresh  and  of  fair 
complexion  ;  and  the  head  should  have  short  curly 
hair  on  it.  The  image  as  a  whole  should  appear 
calm  aud  full  of  grace,  as  though  it  represented 
Buddha  as  the  father  to  all  creatures  and  it  must  be 
seated  on  'a,  j^admasana.  The  lobes  of  the  ears  must 
be  made  pendant.  The  body  should  be  covered  with 
the  Jcashdija,  the  yellow  garb  of  the  ascetics,  and  on 
the  shoulder  there  should  be  a  piece  of  valhala, 
or  clothing  made  out  of  the  bark  of  certain  trees. 
The  hands  should  be  in  the  varada  and  the  ahliaya 
poses.  This  description  is  that  of  a  Dhyani- 
Buddha.  It  is  in  a  way  foreign  to  Hindu  iconogra- 
phy to  notice  in  detail  the  innumerable  sculptural 
representations  of  Buddha.  Hence  the  image  of 
Buddha  is  described  here  mainly  as  it  occurs  in 
Hindu  sculptures.     Throughout  the  Chalukya  and 

219 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Hoysala  countries,  Buddha  is  seen  to  have  been  in- 
variably included  aiiiong  the  ten  avataras  of  Vishnu; 
and  his  image  is  always  found  wherever  these 
avataras  are  portrayed.  The  most  fa\'ourite  posi- 
tion for  the  sculptor  to  introduce  these  avataras 
seems  to  have  been  in  the  prabhacali  round  the 
figure  of  Vishnu.  The  avatUras  beginning  from 
the  fish-incarnation  are  sculptured  in  order  from 
the  right  of  the  Vishnu  image  and  are  earned  over 
the  head  down  to  the  left  side.  (.See  the  figures  of 
Yogesvaramurti  on  PI.  XXIV,  of  Chennakesava  on 
PL  LXIX  and  of  Dattatreya  on  PI.  LXXIII).  In 
all  these  instances  Buddha  is  represented  in  the 
Dhydita  attitude,  with  his  legs  crossed  and  his 
hands  placed  upon  the  lap  in  the  ijogainudra  pose. 
In  the  very  same  attitude  are  found  all  over 
India  the  imaoys  of  the  twenty-four  Tirthankaras 
of  the  -Jainas;  and  even  highly  educated  people 
are  not  able  to  distinguisb  the  one  class  of  images 
from  the  other.  The  most  characteristic  features 
of  the  images  of  Buddha  are  the  cloth  worn  in 
the  npavltd  fashion  and  the  knot  of  hair  on  the  top 
of  the  head.  The  .Iain a  images  are  completely 
divested  of  clothing  a.ud  are  stark  naked ;  though 
they  may  sometimes  have  ringlets  of  hair  on  the 
bead,  there  is  not  enough  of  it  for  a  knot.  The 
i7i/v( /■.•,■«  mark  is,  according  to  the  BriJint-Muhhita. 


PLATE  liXYIII, 


Dhyaui  Buddha  from  Borobodur :  Stone. 


[To  face  page  221.] 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

required  to  be  shown  in  the  figures  of  the  Jaina 
Tirthankaras  also.  This  mark  is  generally  found 
on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  is,  in  many 
instances,  a  tiny  equilateral  triangle,  with  its  apex 
pointing  upwards. 

The  photograph  of  Buddha  reproduced  on 
PI.  LXVIII  is  copied  from  that  by  Dr.  Ananda- 
kumarasvaini  published  some  years  back  in  the 
Theosophist.  The  image  represents  Buddha  as 
engaged  in  meditation,  with  his  legs  in  the  yoga- 
Sana  posture,  and  his  left  hand  placed  on  the  lap 
in  the  tjoga-mudra  pose.  The  right  hand  is  in  the 
abhaya  pose.  The  figure  of  Buddha  is  seated  upon 
a  beautifully  worked  out  yadmasana.  The  closed 
eyes  expressive  of  the  mind  deeply  absorbed  in 
meditation,  the  calm  and  contemplative  face,  the 
crown  of  finely  carved  ringlets  of  hair  on  the  head, 
in  fact  the  whole  figure  and  all  its  details  are 
modelled  so  as  to  be  worthy  of  very  high  apprecia- 
tion. 

The  last  of  the  ten  avataras  of  Vishnu  is  the 
Kalkyavatara.     This    incarnation 

Kalkyavatara. 

has  not  yet  taken  place  and  is  pre- 
dicted to  coiue  off  about  the  end  of  the  Kali-yuga 
or  the  present  dark  age.  The  Agni-purana  says  — 
"  In  the  Kali-yuga,  thoughtless  men  will  begin  to 
commit  acts  fitting  them  for  hell :  and  the  confusion 

221 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

of  castes  will  continue.  Then  will  virtue  and 
religion  disappear,  and  scarcely  a  single  school  of 
learning  will  remain ;  and  barbarians,  under  the 
guise  of  rulers,  externally  arrayed  in  the  apparel  of 
justice,  but  internally  composed  of  injustice,  shall 
harass  the  people.  At  last  Vishnu  shall  appear  as 
Kalki ;  and  he  will  destroy  the  barbarians,  and  re- 
establish all  those  pure  customs  and  morals  which 
are  based  upon  the  due  observance  of  the  duties 
prescribed  to  the  castes  aud  the  four  orders. 
Thereafter  Hari  will  return  to  heaven  ;  and  the 
Satya-yuga,  then  again  returning,  will  restore  to 
the  world  purity,  virtue  and  piety." 

The  Vishnu -ptirana  gives  further  details  about 
this  tenth  incarnation.  "  Thus,  when  cerentouies 
based  upon  the  A^edas  and  the  institutes  of  the 
sacred  law  shall  have  nearly  ceased,  and  the  end 
of  Kali-yuga  will  approach,  a  portion  of  that  divine 
being,  who  is  the  creator  of  the  whole  universe, 
the  preceptor  of  all  immoveable  and  moveable 
beings,  who  i«  identical  with  Brahma  and  all 
created  beings,  shall  incarnate  himself  on  earth. 
He  will  be  born  as  Kalki,  in  the  familj-  of  one 
Vishnu-yasas,  an  eminent  Brahmana  of  Sambhala- 
grama,  and  will  be  endowed  with  all  the  eight 
superhuman  powers.  By  his  irresistable  heroism, 
he  will  slay  all  the  foreign  barbarians  and  thieves 

922 


DASAVATAEAS  OF  VISHNU. 

and  all  those  who  are  addicted  to  sin.     His  great- 
ness and  might  shall  unobstructedly  prevail." 

The  image  of  Kalki  should,  according  to  the 
Vaikhanasagcihia,  have  the  face  of  a  horse  and 
the  body  of  a  man  with  four  hands  carrying  res- 
pectively the  §aiiJiha,  the  ehakra,  the  khadga  and 
the  khetaka,  and  should  be  made  to  possess  a 
terrific  look.  The  kautuka-hera  of  this  avatara 
should  be  an  ordinary  Vishnu  image  with  four  arms. 
According  to  the  Agni-pityana,  Kalki  should  carry 
the  (llianas  and  the  hana  and  should  ride  on  a  horse. 
The  image  may  also  be  made  to  carry  the  khadga, 
the  hana,  the  chakra  and  the  saiikli a.  The  V/'shmi- 
dharmoiiara  which  is  generally  in  fair  agreement 
with  the  Agnl-purana,  prescribes  only  two  arms  to 
Kalki.  (See  PI.  XXXV  for  this  and  the  other 
avaiaras  of  Vishnu.) 


223 


CHATURVIMSATI-MURTAYAH. 


39 


THE  TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF 
VISHNU. 


IT  is  a  widely  known  fact  in  India  that  Vishnu 
possesses  a  thousand  names  by  which  he  is 
praised.  The  Vishnu-sahasra-navia  is  found 
given  in  the  Anusasanaparva7i  of  the  MaJiabha- 
rata.  Among  these  thousand  significant  names  of 
praise  relating  to  Vishnu,  twenty-four  are  con- 
sidered to  be  the  most  important  and  are  daily  re- 
peated by  many  Brahmanas  in  their  daily  prayers. 
Corresponding  to  these  twenty-four  names  images 
of  Vishnu  are  found  sculptured  in  the  Vaishnava 
temples  situated  in  the  old  Hoysala  land,  where 
indeed  they  are  met  with  more  frequently  than 
elsewhere.  All  these  twenty-four  images  are  very 
alike ;  they  are  all  standing  figures,  with  no  bends 
in  the  body,  possessing  four  arms,  and  adorned 
with  the  A^n^a-crown  and  other  usual  ornaments  ; 


227 


HINDIS   ICONOGEAPHY. 

each  of  them  stands  upon  a  padmasuna.  The 
difference  between  any  two  of  those  images  has  to 
be  made  out  by  the  way  in  which  the  saiikha,  the 
chaJcra,  the  gada  and  the  padriia  are  found  distri- 
buted among  their  four  hands.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  that  the  number  of  possible  permutations  of 
four  things  taken  four  at  a  time  is  exactly  twenty- 
four  ;  and  the  order,  in  which  the  permutations  of 
these  four  articles,  among  the  four  hands  is  to  be 
observed,  is  in  passing,  as  in  a  circle,  from  the 
upper  right  hand  to  the  upper  left  hand,  thence  to 
the  lower  left  hand,  and  from  there  lastly  to  the 
lower  right  hand.  For  example,  that  image  of 
Vishnu,  which  holds  the  sankha,  chakra,  gada  and 
■padiiui  in  the  four  hands  in  the  order  mentioned 
above,  beginning  from  the  upper  right  hand  and 
ending  with  the  lower  right  hand,  is  representative 
of  Kesava ;  that  is,  in  the  upper  right  hand  of 
Kesava  the  sankha  should  be  held ;  in  the  upper 
left,  the  chakra ;  in  the  lower  left,  the  gada ; 
and  in  the  loAver  right,  the  padma.  In  all  these 
twenty-four  cases  the  arrangement  of  these  four 
things  in  relation  to  the  four  hands  has  to  be 
observed  in  the  same  order.  The  following  table 
based  on  the  Bupamandaua  gives  the  twenty-four 
names  of  Vishnn  and  the  corresponding  arrange- 
ments of   the   four  articles  in  the  four  hands  in 


228 


PLATE  LXIX 


Chennakesava  :  Stone  ;  Belur. 


[To  face  page  228.] 


PLATE  LXX. 


% 


■ZW    -ii^ 


J'     f 

'  ■     '     I      ■ 


'2. 
m 


□ 
o 


> 
C5 


«^' 


>       ?  •  'v. » 


'^ 


>  t 


r- 


V 


/ 
-.^~***»- 


\ 


i. 


13 

m 

P 
O 

> 

,a 


>:-A 


IS 

Jl      1© 

■  1     M 


? 


CO 

3 

_a 


[To  face  page  229.] 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 


each  case,  and  is  intended  to  enable  the  reader  to 
notice  the  difference  between  tlie  various  images 
at  a  glance. 

Table  showing  the  arrangement  of  the  §ankha, 
chakra,  gadd  and  padma  in  the  four  hands  of 
each  of  the  twenty-four  Murtis  of  Vishnu  accord- 
ing to  the  Rupamandana. 


Ho. 

Name  of  tbe  Murti. 

Back 
right 
hsind 

Back 

left 

hand. 

Front 

left 

hand. 

Front 
right 
hand. 

1     Kus.i\a 

Sanklja 

Chakra 

Gada 

Padma 

2     Nilravunii 

Padma 

Gada 

Chakra 

Sankha 

3 

Madlavi' 

Chakra 

Sankha 

Padma 

Gada 

i 

Govinda 

Gada 

Padma 

Sankha 

Chakra 

5 

Vishnu 

Padma 

Sankha 

Chakra 

Gada 

6  i  Madhusudana 

Sankba 

Padma 

Gada 

Chakra 

7     Tvw  ikiama 

Gada 

Chakra 

Sankha 

Padma 

8 

Vamana 

Chakra 

Gada 

Padma 

Sankba 

9 

Sridhara 

Chakra 

Gada 

Sankha 

Padma 

10 

Hrishikesa 

Chakra 

Padma 

Sankha 

Gada 

11 

Padmanabba 

Padma 

Chakra 

(4  ad  a 

Sankha 

12 

Damodiira 

Sankha 

Gada 

Chakra 

Padma 

1.3  '  Samkarshana 

Sankha 

Padma 

Chakra 

Gada 

229 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 


No. 

Name  of  the  Murti. 

Back 
right 
hand. 

Back 

left 

hand. 

Front 

left 

hand. 

Front 
right 
hand. 

14 

Vasudeva 

Sankha 

Chakra 

Padma 

Gada 

15 

Pradyumna 

Sankha 

Gada 

Padma 

Chakra 

16 

Aniruddha 

Gada 

Sankha 

Padma 

Chakra 

17 

Purushottama 

Padma 

Sankha 

Gada 

Chakra 

18 

Adhokshaja 

Gada 

Sankha 

Chakra 

Padma 

19 

Nara8imha 

Padma 

Gada 

Sankha 

Chakra 

20 

Achyuta 

Padma 

Chakra 

Sankha 

Gada 

21 

Janardana 

Chakra 

Saiikba 

Gada 

Padma 

22 

Upendra 

Gada 

Ohakra 

Padma 

Sankha 

23 

Hari 

Cbakra 

Padma 

Gada 

Sankha 

24 

Sri-Krishna 

Gada 

Padma 

Chakra 

Sankha 

A  similar  list  has  been  prepared  from  the  des- 
cription given  in  the  Patala-khanda  of  the 
Padma-furana.  Evidently  this  second  list  is 
faulty ;  in  it  the  arrangement  of  the  emblems  in 
No,  1  is  identical  with  that  in  No.  15,  and  that  in 
No.  11  is  identical  with  what  is  to  be  found  in 
No.  17.  Hence,  on  the  basis  of  the  Padma- 
purana,  Kesava  cannot  be  distinguished  from 
Pradyumna ;  nor  can  Padmanabha  be  distinguished 


230 


PLATE  LXXI. 


vi' 


,  ^■""■-"''«tw«t<.^--.»,.„.,  ,.^. 
1/  "" 


CD 

n 


,ri 

.    ■'■-.  '          Tr~    '     ■^'^            '  ^1          -; 

.05 

—  ^        '■  .        .  -         >.^-^"*'—      ■I'."        * 

« 

7f.    ;---r--v''^-'-    ^  ? 

o 

^       V  .           .            -—  -^          f  r*" 

CO 

1— ( 

,:/      •  ^-:.,_.    %;.-^-^r^ 

•^         -                                                r     -T  •     .r'.^ 

[To  face  page  231.] 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

from  Purushottama.  Moreover,  Nos.  9,  10,  11, 
13,  14,  21,  22  and  23  in  the  Padma-purana 
list  may  easily  be  seen  to  be  in  disagreement  with 
the  corresponding  numbers  in  the  Bupamandana 
list,  which  is  undoubtedly  the  correct  list,  in  as 
much  as  all  the  twenty-four  possible  permutations 
of  the  four  emblems  are  found  to  occur  in  it  accu- 
rately. Nevertheless  it  is  also  given  below  for 
comparison  : — 

Table  showing  the  different  arrangements  of 
the  ^anJcJia,  chakra,  gada  and  padma  in  the  four 
hands  of  the  twenty-four  images  of  Vishnu  accord- 
ing to  the  description  found  in  the  PdMa-Jchanda 
of  the  Padma-purana. 


No. 

Name  of  Vishnu. 

Upper 
right 
hand. 

Upper 

left 

hand. 

Lower 

left 
band. 

Lower 
right 
hand. 

1 

Kesava 

Sankha 

Chakra 

Gada 

Padma 

2 

Narayaria 

Padma 

Gada 

Chakra 

Sankha 

3 

Madhava 

Chakra 

Sankha 

Padma 

Gada 

4 

Govinda 

Gada 

Padma 

Sankha 

Chakra 

5 

Vishnu 

Padma 

Sankha 

Chakra 

Gada 

6  , Madhusudana 

Sankha 

Padma 

Gada 

Chakra 

7 

Trivikrama 

Gada 

Chakra 

Sankha 

Padma 

231 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 


No. 

Name  of  Visbnu. 

Upper 
right 
hand. 

Upper 

left 
hand. 

Lower 

left 
hand. 

Lower 
right 
hand. 

8 

Vamana 

Cbakra 

Gada 

Padma 

Sankha 

9 

Sridhara 

Chakra 

Padma 

Sankba 

Gada 

10 

Hrishlkesa 

Obakra 

Gada 

Sankba 

Padma 

11 

Padmanabba 

Padma 

Sankba 

Gada 

Cbakra 

12 

Damodara 

Sankha 

Gada 

Cbakra 

Padma 

13 

Samkarshan,a 

Sankha 

Padma 

Cbakra 

Gada 

14 

Vasudeva 

Cbakra 

Sankba 

Gada 

Padma 

15 

Pradyumna 

Sankba 

Cbakra 

Gada 

Padma 

16 

Aniruddba 

Gad  a 

Sankba 

Padma 

Chakra 

17 

Purusbottama 

Padma 

Sankba 

Gada 

Cbakra 

18 

Adbokshaja 

Gada 

Sankba 

Cbakra 

Padma 

19 

Nrisimha 

Padma 

Gada 

Sankba 

Cbakra 

20 

Achyuta 

Padma 

Cbakra 

Sankba 

Gada 

21 

Janardana 

Padma 

Cbakra 

Sankha 

Gada 

22 

Upendra 

Sankba 

Gada 

Cbakra 

Padma 

23 

Hari 

Sankba 

Cbakra 

Padma 

Gada 

24 

Sri-Krishna 

Gada 

Padma 

Chakra 

Sankba 

Corresponding  to  some  of  these  twenty-four 
images  of  Vishnu  there  are  specially  named  Saktis, 


232 


TWENTY-FOUB  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

whose  names  are  found  given  in  the  first  chapter 
of  the  third  Ratn  of  the  Narada-Pancharatragama 
as  under : — 


No.  ' 

Name  of  Vishriu. 

Corresponding  name  of 
the  Sakti. 

1 

Keaava 

Kirti 

2 

Narayaria 

Kanti 

3 

Madhava 

Tushti 

4 

Trivikrama 

Santi 

5 

Vamana 

Kriya 

6 

Achyuta 

Daya 

7 

Sridhara 

Medha 

8 

Hrishikesa 

Harsha 

9 

Padmanabba 

Sraddha 

10 

Damodara 

Lajja 

11 

Vasudeva 

Lakshmf 

12 

Sathkarshana 

Sarasvati 

13 

Pradyumna 

Priti 

14 

Aniruddha 

;  Rati 

; 

Why  each  of  the  remaining  ten  Murtis  of 
Vishnu  is  not  associated  with  a  specially  named 
i^akti,  it  is  not  possible  to  guess. 


233 


30 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

In  the  Pancliaratragama,  these  twenty-four 
Murtis  of  Vishnu  seem  to  be  of  some  special  im- 
portance. The  philosophical  meaning  underlying 
them  is  not  quite  patent.  Nevertheless  an  account 
of  their  origin,  as  given  in  certain  Sanskrit  works 
of  authority,  may  prove  interesting.  The  supreme 
Lord  Para-Vasudeva  is  conceived  to  be  the  posses- 
sor of  the  six  excellent  gunas  or  attributes  called 
jnana,  (knowledge),  kdil  (energy),  hala  (strength) 
aisvarya  (supremacy),  v'brya  (heroism)  and  tejas 
(brightness)  and  is  nir dosha  (free  from  evil).  From 
Him  sprang,  it  is  said,  divine  beings,  possessing 
each  a  couple  only  out  of  the  above  mentioned  six 
attributes,  thus  : — 

Samkarshan,a,  with  jnana  and  hala, 
Pradyumna,  with  aisvarya  and  virya,  and 
Aniruddlia,  with  sakti  and  tejas. 

The  Supreme  Being  in  association  with  these 
three  evolved  deities  makes  up  the  saJdi-maya- 
vyulia.  Prom  the  Ahirbudlinya-samhita  we  learn 
that  from  Para-Vasudeva  sprang  three  other 
deities,  namely,  Kesava,  Narayana,  and  Madhava. 
Similarly  from  Samkarshana  arose  the  three  deit- 
ies Govinda,  Vishnu  and  Madhusudana.  Again, 
Trivikrama,  Vamana  and  Sridhara  came  forth 
from  Pradyumna ;  and  lastly  Aniruddha  evolved 
out  of  himself  Hrishikesa,  Padmanabha  and  Damo- 

234 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

dara.     In  this  way,  the  evolution  of  sixteen  out 
of  the  twenty-four  Murtin  of  Vishnu  is  generally 
accounted   for ;    and    the   same    authority  further 
states  that  Vishnu  manifested  himself  in  thirty- 
nine  different  forms  and  gives  a  list  of  those  forms. 
Evidently  all  these  various  forms  of  the  Supreme 
Lord  Vishnu  are  representative  of  the  attributes 
with  which  His  worshipper  endows  Him  according 
to  the  mood  and  needs  of  his  own  prayerful  mind. 
The  Salti-maya-cijuha  is  described  succinctly 
in   ten   chapters  in  the  Brihad-brahma-samhita. 
That  Being  who  has  neither  beginning  nor  end, 
who  has  myriads  of  forms,  who  is   omnipresent 
and  resplendent  and  is  the  Supreme  Brahman,  is 
known  by  the  name  of  Vasudeva.     In  him  are  con- 
tained the  moveable  and  the  immoveable  worlds 
which  we  see  around  us ;  the  whole  of  the  universe 
is  evolved  out  of  Vasudeva  who  is  the  cause  and 
source  of  all  existing  things.     Nevertheless,  His 
contact  with  gross  matter  prahrlti  does  not  affect 
His  ever  pure  Being.     Even  in   the  various  incar- 
nations assumed  by  Him  prahriti  could  not  bedim 
the  faculties  of  Vasudeva  who  is   in  essence  the 
embodiment  of  all  knowledge  {J  nana -scar  a  pi).  The 
first    form   assumed   by  this    Supreme    Soul   is   a 
pacific  one,  with  only  two  arms  and  a  single  face  ; 
the  colour  of  this  form   of  Vishnu  is  pure  crystal 

235 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

white  ;  His  body  is  as  resplendent  as  a  crore  of 
suns,  ujoous  and  fircti,  all  put  together,  and  is 
adorned  with  the  Mr'da,  hara,  J^eijura  and  va7ia- 
iiiala.  This  manner  of  manifestation  of  Vasudeva 
can  be  conceived  and  comprehended  only  by 
the  minds  of  yogins.  From  out  of  this  form 
is  derived  Para-Vasudeva,  who  possesses  four 
hands  in  which  he  carries  padma — the  emblem 
of  creation,  chaJcra — the  emblem  of  protection, 
&ahkha — that  of  salvation,  gacla — that  of  de- 
struction. The  complexion  of  Para-Vasudeva  has 
the  lustrous  blue  colour  of  the  peacock ;  he  is 
to  be  clad  in  yellow  garments  and  adorned  with 
the  larlta,  Ixeijura.  and  other  ornaments.  This 
Para-Vasudeva  is  the  deity  who  is  responsible  for 
all  the  cosmic  functions  of  the  Creator.  Later 
on  Para-Vasudeva  assumes  a  form  with  four 
faces ;  this  latter  form  in  its  turn  breaks  up  into 
two  as  Narayana  and  Vasudeva.  Of  these  Nara- 
yana,  is  dark  in  colour  as  the  rain -cloud  and 
Vasudeva,  crystal  white.  From  this  last  Vasudeva 
just  mentioned  comes  forth  Samkarshana  ;  from 
Samkarshana  comes  forth  Pradyumna ;  and  from 
Pradyumna,  Aniruddha.  Every  one  of  these  four 
forms  is  possessed  of  four  arms.  Vasudeva  among 
them  possesses  all  the  six  attributes,  namely,  wis- 
dom {jnana),  energy  (sakti),  sovereignty  (aisvarya), 

236 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

streugth  {bala),  brightness  {tejas)  and  heroism 
(virya),  and  is  free  from  all  evil  (nirddsha).  Samkar- 
shana  possesses  more  of  jnana  and  less  of  the  other 
five  attributes,  while  in  Pradyumna  sakti  or  hala  is 
dominant ;  Aniruddha  is  endowed  with  the  pre- 
ponderance of  aisvarija.  From  out  of  these  four 
forms  of  the  Ijord  others  came  into  being.  From 
Vasudeva  came  forth  Kesava,  Narayana  and 
Madhava ;  from  Samkarshana  came  forth  Govinda, 
Vishnu  and  Madhusudana ;  from  Pradyumna  came 
forth  Trivikrama,  Vamana  and  Sridhara ;  and  from 
Aniruddha  came  forth  Hrishikesa,  Padmanabha  and 
Damodara.  Such  is  the  evolution  of  these  twelve 
different  divine  powers.  The  deities  Vasudeva 
Samkarshana,  Pradyumna  and  Aniruddha,  from 
whom  the  above  mentioned  evolution  took  place, 
themselves  assumed  secondary  forms  respectively 
known  also  as  Vasudeva,  Samkarshana,  Prad- 
yumna and  xlniruddha:  from  these  secondary  deities 
came  forth  Purushottama,  Adhokshaja,  Narasirbha 
and  Achyuta  respectively :  from  Purushottama 
came  forth  Janardana,  Upendra,  Hari  and  Krishna. 
Thus,  according  to  the  Brihad-brahma-samhita, 
did  these  twenty-four  forms  {Murtis)  of  Vishnu 
come  into  existence. 

Of  these  twenty-four  Murtis  of  Vishnu  some 
are  considered   to  be   fit   for  worship   by   certain 

237 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

classes  of  votaries,  and  others  by  other  classes. 
The  Bupamandana  states  that  happiness  comes 
to  Brahmans  by  worshipping  Kesava,  Narayana, 
Madhava  and  Madhusadana.  When  worshipped 
by  Kshatriyas  Madhusadana  and  Vishnu  bestow 
on  them  all  good,  while  the  Vaisyas  obtain  their 
good  by  adoring  Trivikrama  and  Vamana.  To  the 
Sudra  the  worship  of  Sridhara  is  considered  to 
be  specially  beneficial.  The  god  who  confers 
blessings  on  the  cobbler,  the  washerman,  the 
dancer,  the  hunter,  the  varata  and  the  Med'a- 
bhilla,  is  Hrishikesa.  Padmanabha  is  particularly 
the  god  of  the  potter,  the  petty  merchaat,  the 
harlot,  the  oil-monger,  the  vendor  of  liquors  and 
such  others.  The  yati  (mendicant  ascetic)  and  the 
hrahmachari  (student  anchorite)  should  offer 
their  worship  to  Damodara.  The  triple  god  Hari- 
Hara-Pitamaha,  who  is  the  same  as  Dattatreya, 
Narasimha,  Vamana  and  Varaha  may  well  be 
worshipped  by  all,  and  they  bestow  their  blessings 
on  all  alike. 

Among  these  twenty-four  forms  of  Vishnu, 
those  of  Vasudeva,  Samkarshana,  Pradyumna  and 
Aniruddha  are  considered  to  be  of  special  impor- 
tance for  the  reason  that  they  make  up  the 
Sahti-maya-vyuha ;  and  much  has  therefore  been 
written    about   them.     Evidently    for    the   same 

238 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

reason,  the  Vaikhanasdgavia  considers  these 
forms  of  Vishnu  to  be  very  much  higher  than 
even  the  ten   avatarns. 

Now,  in  regard  to  the  image  of  Vasudeva,  it  has 
to  be  observed  that  Vasudeva  is  invariably  looked 
upon  in  two  aspects,  a  human  and  a  purely 
divine  aspect.  Krishna,  incarnated  as  the  son  of 
Vasudeva,  is  the  human  Vasudeva  or  Manusha- 
Vasudeva;  and  Vasudeva,  conceived  as  the  one 
G-od,  in  whom  all  things  in  the  universe  live, 
move  and  have  their  being  and  who  is  at  the  same 
time  indwelling  in  all  the  beings  in  the  universe, 
is  the  supreme   Vasudeva  or   Para-Vasudeva.     It 

is  laid  down  that  the  image  of 
^Manusha-vasu-     Manusha-Vasudeva   should    be  in 

accordance  with  the  madlujama- 
daha-tala  measure  of  120  ahgulas ;  it  should  have 
only  two  hands  carrying  the  sanJcha  and  the 
chakra.  On  the  right  there  should  be  the  goddess 
Kukmini  and  to  her  right  there  should  be  Balarama 
wielding  the  plough  {liala)  and  Musala.  To  the 
right  of  Balarama  there  should  be  Pradyumna 
carrying  in  the  right  hand  the  sword  and  the  left 
hand  being  made  to  rest  upon  the  waist  in  the 
Jcatyavalambita  pose.  On  the  right  of  Pradyumna, 
there  should  be  the  four  faced  Brahma,  with 
four    arms.     A    little    to    the    left    of    Manusha- 


239 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

Vasudeva,  there  should  be  Aniruddha  carrying 
the  sword  and  the  shield ;  and  on  his  right 
there  should  be  Samba,*  with  the  right  hand 
in  the  ahhaya  pose  and  with  a  stick  in  the 
left  hand.  The  figure  of  Garuda  should  be 
on  the  left  of  Samba.  All  these  images  belonging 
to  this  group  should  be  worked  out  in  the  standing 
posture.  The  kautulca-bera  of  Manusha- Vasu- 
deva may  be  either  according  to  the  description 
given  above,  or  it  may  be  an  ordinary  four-armed 
image  of  Vishnu.     The  image  of  Daivika-Vasudeva 

should  be  seated  on  a  simhasana, 
deva!'"'^^"^^"'"     with   Sridevi  aud   Bhumidevi   on 

the  right  and  the  left ;  it  should 
have  four  arms.  In  the  upper  right  hand  Para- 
Vasudeva  should  hold  the  chalcra,  in  the  lower 
right  hand,  the  padma;  in  the  upper  left  hand,  the 
SanJcka ;  and  the  lower  left  hand,  the  gada.  On 
the  right  and  left  there  should  be  the  images  of 
the  gods  mentioned  above  in  association  with 
Manusha- Vasudeva.  In  addition  to  them  there 
should  be  by  the  side  of  Balarama  the  standing 
image  of  his  consort  Eevati-devi ;  on  the  left  of 
Aniruddha,  his  consort  Usha  ;  on  the  side  of 
Pradyumna,  his  consort  Eohini ;  and  on  the  side 

*  Some  manuscripts  have  Samba  instead  of  Samba. 
240 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

of  Samba,  his  consort  Indukari.  Such  is  the 
description  of  Para-Vasudeva  given  in  the  Vai- 
tihanasagama. 

Para-Vasudeva  might,  according  to  the  Agni- 
imrana,  also  be  sculptured  as  a  standing  image. 
In  this  case  there  should  be  on  either  side  the 
goddesses  Sri  and  Pushti,  carrying  respectively 
a  padma  and  a  vlna.  The  figures  of  these  god- 
desses should  not  reach  a  higher  level  than 
the  hip  of  Vasudeva.  In  the  prabhd,niandala, 
ornamented  with  the  figures  of  elephants  and 
other  animals,  two  flying  figures,  rc^presenting 
two  Vidyadharas,  carrying  each  a  fiower  garland, 
should  be  sculptured.  The  pit  Jin  on  which 
Vasudeva  and  the  Devis  stand  should  be  made 
to  have  the  brilliance  of  gold.  (See  fig.  150, 
p.  207,  of  V.  A.  Smith's  Historij  of  Finp  Arts  in 
Inrlia  and  CeijJon.) 

There  is  another  description  of  Para-Vasudeva 
given  in  the  Vif<hnndharmdttara.  The  image  of 
this  Vasudeva  should  according  to  this  authority, 
have  one  face  and  four  arms  :  it  should  have  great 
beauty  and  a  fine  appearance  ;  it  should  be  of  the 
dark  blue  colour  of  the  cloud,  should  be  adorned 
with  all  the  various  ornaments,  and  be  clad 
in  yellow  garments.  From  his  neck,  resembling, 
in   its    round    contour,    the   sahkha,  necklaces  of 


241 

31 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

excellent  workmanship  and  the  vana-inala  should  be 
suspended  so  as  to  reach  the  knees.  The  cloth  tied 
round  the  loins  should  descend  as  far  down  as 
the  knees.  Earn]  a  J  as  should  adorn  his  beautiful 
pendant  ears,  and  reflect  their  lustre  on  the  neck. 
On  the  arms  should  be  worn  the  aiigada  and  the 
Tceijura  ;  and  on  the  chest,  there  should  be  the  jewel 
Jcaustiibha.  The  head  should  be  covered  with  a 
Idnta ;  and  behind  it  there  should  be  the  i/irt§- 
chal-ra  in  the  form  of  a,  well-shaped  lotus.  The 
arms  of  Vasudeva  should  be  long  and  well  formed  ; 
and  the  fingers  of  the  hands  should  be  tipped  with 
nails  dyed  red.  In  one  of  the  right  hands  of 
Vasudeva  there  should  be  a  full-blown  lotus,  and 
in  onr  of  the  left  hands  the  sahlilia  h\  its  natural 
form.  To  his  right  should  stand  the  personified 
form  of  qada  as  a  goddess  with  slender  waist,  a 
largo  hip  and  a  vei-y  pretty  appearance.  She 
should  possess  two  bright,  playful  eyes  and  he 
bedecked  with  numerous  ornaments.  She  should 
hold  a  citamara  in  one  of  her  hands ;  and  the  other 
right  hand  of  A'asudeva  shijuld  be  made  to  rest 
upon  her  head. 

The  goddess  BhOmi,  with  a  gracefully  pro- 
tuberant belly  marked  with  three  gentle  folds, 
should  be  made  to  stand  between  the  legs  of  Vasu- 
deva and  embrace  thpui  with  her  anus.     The  legs 

242 


TWENTY-FOUR  IMAGES  OF  VISHNU. 

of  Vasudeva  should  be  kept  apart  by  a  distance  of 
about  a  foot,  and  the  right  leg  should  be  a  little  in 
front  of  the  left.  On  the  left  side  of  Vasudeva 
should  stand  the  personified  figure  of  cliaJcra — a 
male  figure  with  a  big,  hanging  belly  and  round 
wide  open  eyes.  This  figure  also  should  be  adorned 
with  various  ornaments,  should  hold  a  chamara  in 
the  hand,  and  be  shown  to  evince  a  desire  to  be 
ever  gazing  in  adoration  at  his  Lord.  The  left 
hand  of  A'^asudeva,  other  than  the  one  holding  the 
hahliha,  should  be  placed  upon  this  personified 
figure  of  chakra. 

In  illustration  of  the  twenty-four  Miuiis  of 
Vishnu  there  are  six  pictures  given,  all  of  which 
represent  images  found  in  the  Chennakesavasvamin 
temple  at  Belur  in  the  Native  State  of  Mysore. 
They  are  of  Kesava,  Madhava,  Govinda,  Madhu- 
SLidana,  Hari  and  Sri-Krishna  respectively.  Of 
these,  the  first  image,  that  of  Kesava  is  one  of  the 
very  best  specimens  of  the  Hoysala  school  of 
sculpture,  and  is  in  an  excellent  state  of  preser- 
vation. It  was  set  up  by  Santaladevi,  the  chief 
queen  of  Vishnuvarddhanadeva  of  the  Hoysala 
dynasty,  in  the  Kappe-Chennigaraya  shrine  in  the 
Chennakesavasvamin  temple.  On  the  base  of  this 
image,  and  in  the  front  tier  running  just  over  the 
head  of  Garuda,  is  a   single-line    inscription    in 

243 


HINDI   ICONOGRAPHY. 

Sanskrit  written  distinctly  in  Kannada  characters, 
mentioning  that  that  god  Chennakesava,  who 
brings  peace  to  all  the  created  beings  in  the  world, 
was  set  up  by  Santidevi,  queen  of  Vishnu.  This 
image  now  goes  by  the  popular  name  of  Kappe- 
Ghennigaraya,  and  is  not  in  puja.  In  the  'prabha- 
vali  might  be  noticed,  with  the  help  of  a  magnifying 
glass,  the  sculpturing  of  the  ten  avataras  of 
Vishnu  as  also  of  the  eight  diJc-palas  or  the  guard- 
ians of  the  cardinal  points.  The  other  five  images 
are  found  sculptured  on  the  walls  of  the  central 
shrine  of  Chennakesavasvamin  in  the  same  temple. 
It  may  be  noticed  that  the  first  five  of  these  six 
figures  wear  the  inaTiara-hundala,  the  last  alone 
has  the  ratna-hindala  given  to  it.  All  the  images 
are  well  executed,  and  bear  evidence  of  trained 
workmanship. 


244 


MINOR  AVATARAS  AND 
MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 


MINOE  AYATAKAS  AXD  MANIFESTA- 
TION OF  VISHNU. 


PURUSHA  is  described  in  the  VaiJihavasagama 
as  an    avaranadevaia,    that  is,  as  a  deity 
whose  image  is  placed  in  one  of  the  circuit  round 
the  central  shrine.     The  position  allotted  for  the 
image  of  Purusha  is  on  the  east 

Purusha.  ... 

in  the  nrst  avarana ;  and  the 
image  should  be  so  placed  as  to  be  facing  the 
east.  The  colour  of  this  image  should  be  white 
and  that  of  its  garment  yellow.  It  should  have 
on  its  sides  the  images  of  Sridevi  and  ^Fedinidevi 
respectively. 

Kapila  i.s  said  to  be  the  form  assumed  by  the 

divine  Pradyurana  when  he  became 

Kapila. 

free  from  the  miluence  of  all 
worldly  desires.  The  image  of  Kapila  should  have 
a  beard  ;  it  should  be  seati'd  upon  the  padniasana  ; 
near  him  there  should  be  the  vessel  l-a)iiandiilti 
such  as  the  one  used  by  sannyasiufi.  One  of  the 
hands  should  be  placed  in  front  on  the  crossed  legs. 
The  eyes  should  be  closed  indicating  dlujana  or 
meditation.     There  should   be   the  jata-mandala 

247 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

round  the  head ;  and  the  shoulders  should  be  high 
showing  that  Kapila  was  a  great  adept  in  controlling 
the  breath.  The  feet  of  the  image  of  Kapila  should 
be  marked  with  lines  resembling  the  outline  of 
the  lotus.  The  figure  ought  to  be  draped  in  deer- 
skin and  must  bear  the  /jajnopavlta.  This  Kapila 
is  generally  identified  with  Kapila,  the  founder  of 
the  Sahkhya  philosophy.  The  Vaikhanasagavia 
gives  a  somewhat  different  description  of  Kapila. 
Being  classed  as  an  apciranaderata,  the  image  of 
Kapila  is  alloted  a  place  in  the  south-east  corner  of 
the  first  avarana.  Kapila  is  here  said  to  be  an 
embodiment  of  the  Vedas  and  is  to  be  a  seated 
image  facing  the  east,  and  having  eight  arms.  Of 
the  four  hands  on  the  right  side  one  is  to  be  in  the 
ahliaya  pose  and  the  other  three  are  to  carry  the 
cJialra,  the  hliadga  and  the  hala ;  one  of  the  left 
hands  is  to  be  resting  on  the  hip  in  the  katjiava- 
Jambita  pose  and  the  other  three  should  carry  tho 
hahJcha,  \,h.e.  pasa,  and  the  ilandn.  The  colour  of 
the  garment  of  Kapila  should  be  red.  On  the  sides 
of  Kapila  should  stand  the  images  of  G-ayatri  and 
Savitri  respectively. 

Yajiiamarti    or    Yajiiesa    is    another    minor 

Yajnamurti    or     avafava  of  Vishnu  mentioned    in 

Yajnesa.  ^^^  Srl-Bhagacata.     He  is  looked 

upon  as  an  aoaranadevata  by  the  Valhliiiiiaxagavni, 

248 


MINOE  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

according  to  which  his  place  is  in  the  south-west 
corner  of  the  first  avarana.  His  image  must  be 
made  to  face  the  west.  The  image  of  Yajnesa 
should  have  two  heads,  seven  hands,  and  four 
horns.*  The  colour  of  the  body  of  this  image 
should  be  that  of  molten  gold.     The  hands  should 


*  Yajna  is  described  in  the  Eigveda  as  a  bull  having  four 
horns,  three  legs,  two  heads  and  seven  hands.  The  author  of 
the  Nirukta  explains  the  above  thus  :  the  four  horns  mention- 
ed in  the  Eik  stand  for  the  four  Vadas  ;  the  three  legs  for  the 
three  svanas,  namely,  the  pratassvana,  the  madhyandinasvana 
and  the  tritlyasvana ;  the  two  heads  for  the  ishtis,  the 
prayaniya-ishn  and  the  udayaniya-ishti ;  and  the  seven 
hands  for  the  seven  chhandas  or  mantras.  This  bull,  Yajna, 
acoording  to  the  Eik  referred  to  above,  is  said  to  be  tied  up  by 
three  ropes  and  is  bellowing ;  the  great  god,  Yajna  represented 
as  a  bull,  is  also  said  to  have  entered  into  the  bodies  of  men. 
The  Nirukta  explains  the  three  fold  binding  of  the  bull  as  its 
association  with  the  mantras,  the  brahmanas  and  the  kalpa- 
sUtras ;  the  bellowing  of  the  bull  is  said  to  be  the  praising  the 
gods  in  sacrifices  with  the  mantras  of  the  Eigveda,  making 
offerings  with  the  Mantras  of  the  Yajurveda  and  praying  to 
them  with  the  mantras  of  the  Samaveda.  The  god  Yajua  is 
said  to  have  entered  men  for  the  purpose  of  making  them  offer 
sacrifices.  Brahmanas  should  employ  this  mantra  when 
they  make  offerings  to  the  fire  in  the  moraing  and  the 
evening. 

The  symbolical  explanation  of  the  sacrifices  given  above 

249 
32 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

carry  the  sanl-ha,  the  clial;ra,  the  ajija-patra,  the 
sriik  and  the  sruva,  and  the  juliu,  Avhich  last,  is  a 
laddie  used  in  pouring  ghee  into  the  sacred  fire  in 
sacrifices.  Yajiiesa  should  have  three  legs  and  be 
adorned  with  various  ornaments.  On  the  right 
and  left  of  this  manifestation  of  Vishnu  the 
goddesses  Svaha  and  Svadha  should  be  made 
respectively  to  stand. 

The    Vishnu dharmottar a  contains  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  image  of  Vyasa.     It  is 

Vyasa. 

said  there  that  it  should  be  slender, 
of  black  complexion  and  wearing  dark  brown  ya^as. 
On  his  side  there  should  be  his  foui-  well-known 
disciples,  Sumantu,  Jaimini,  Pail  a  and  Vaisam- 
payana. 


has   been    incorporated    in  the  description   of  the   image   of 
Yajnaraurti. 

sf^  3T?^miiir^5^tq¥ft  ik^t^  ^"W^  ^r^t^ut  ^^^^31^- 

250 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

The  same  authority   Vishnudharmottara  says 
that  Dhanvantrin  should  be  sculp- 

Dhanvantrin, 

tured  as  a  handsome  person  carry- 
ing in  both  the  hands  vessels  containing  amrita, 
that  is,  the  ambrosia  of  the  gods. 

As  already  mentioned,  Dattatreya  is  one  of 

the    minor    avatar  as    of   Vishnu. 

Battatreya. 

The  story  of  his  birth  and  life  is 
given  in  detail  in  the  Markandeya-purana.  There 
was  a  certain  Brahmana,  a  Kausika,  in  the  city 
of  Pratishthana,  who  was  suffering  from  leprosy. 
His  wife  served  him  nevertheless  as  if  he  was  a 
deity.  Once  it  so  happened  that  the  sage  Ani- 
Mandavya  became  annoyed  with  this  leprous 
Kausika  and  uttered  a  curse  that  he  should  die 
before  the  next  sunrise.  Thereupon  his  chaste, 
faithful  and  devoted  wife,  relying  upon  the  power 
of  her  chastity,  ordered  the  sun  not  to  rise ;  and 
for  days  the  sun  did  not  rise.  The  gods  became 
frightened  at  this  and  approached  Anasuya,  the 
famous  wife  of  Atri,  and  requested  her  to  pacify 
the  wife  of  the  leprous  Kausika  and  make  the 
sun  rise  from  day  to  day  as  usual.  She  agreed 
to  do  as  desired,  and  went  to  the  Kausika's 
house.  There  she  was  received  by  his  wife  with 
all  the  due  rites  of  hospitality  and  was  asked 
the  purpose  of  her  most  welcome  visit.     On  being 

261 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

told  that  the  object  of  her  visit  was  to  allow  the 
sun  to  rise  as  before  from  day  to  day,  she  said 
that  she  would  gladly  do  so,  provided  that  thereby 
the  threatened  death  does  not  befall  her  lord  and 
master.  On  being  assured  of  this,  she  allowed  the 
sun  to  rise  ;  and  he  rose.  Her  husband,  however, 
fell  down  as  if  dead,  but  was  immediately  revived 
by  Anasuya  and  made  healthy,  strong  and  beauti- 
ful. The  gods  became  pleased  at  this,  and  asked 
the  worthy  and  honourable  wife  of  the  revived  and 
rejuvinated  Kausika  to  receive  a  boon  at  their 
hands,  to  which  she  readily  agreed.  And  the 
boon  she  wanted  was  that  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Siva — the  gods  of  the  Hindu  trinity — should  be 
born  as  her  sons.  They  were  so  born  ;  and 
Dattatreya  was  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu.  He 
became  in  his  life  famous  as  an  ascetic  and  great 
yogin,  and  is  even  now  considered  to  be  worthy  of 
worship  as  a  god. 

There  are  three  different  ways  in  which 
Dattatreya  is  represented  in  sculptures.  The  first 
manner  of  representation  is  to  have  Brahma, 
Vishnu  and  Siva  sculptured  so  as  to  be  standing 
side  by  side.  These  images  are  very  similar  to 
the  ordinary  images  of  these  gods.  Fig.  1,  PI. 
LXXII  is  a  photograph  of  Dattatreya  sculptured 
on  a  wall  of  the  Hoysalesvara  temple  at  Halebidu. 

252 


PLATE  LXXII. 


m^"^ 


a 
o 

-^ 

CO 


m 


[To  face  page  252.] 


PLATE  liXXIV. 


I 


^^4 


■*:':-^ 


Hari-Hara-Pifcamaha  :  Stone  :   Ajmere,  Kajapufcana  Museum. 


[To  face  page  253.] 


MINOE  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU- 

Here  the  figure  of  Brahma  is  seen  to  carry  in  its 
upper  right  hand  the  sruk  and  the  sruva,  in  the 
lower  right  hand  the  alishainala,  in  the  upper  left 
hand  the  pasa  and  in  the  lower  left  hand  the 
Jcamandalu.  The  figure  of  Siva  carries  the  sTda 
and  damaru  in  the  two  back  hands  and  the  aJcsha- 
niala  and  the  [nistaJca  in  the  front  two  hands.  The 
figure  of  Vishnu  holds  in  its  four  hands  the  padma, 
the  gada,  the  cliahra  and  the  saiikha.  The  figures 
of  Siva  and  Vishnu  are  each  associated  with  a 
Devi ;  but  Brahma  has  no  goddess  by  his  side. 
This  first  variety  of  the  representation  of  Datta- 
treya  is  given  a  somewhat  novel  turn  in  the  figure 
which  is  reproduced  on  PI.  LXXIV.  Here  the 
three  deities  are  each  seated  respectively  on  a 
padmasana  supported  on  swans,  on  the  Garuda 
and  on  the  bull  forming  their  distinctive  vehicles. 
Brahma  is  seated  in  the  posture  known  as  the 
uthutikasana,  his  middle  face  has  a  beard  and  his 
two  crossed  legs  are  supported  by  the  yoga-patta, 
which  is  a  broad  ribbon  passing  tightly  round  the 
body  and  the  legs.  The  right  upper  hand  is  broken ; 
and  it  is  not  possible  to  make  out  what  object  it 
carried.  In  the  other  hands  are  seen  the  pustaJca, 
a  Jcamandalu  and  an  aJcshamala.  Though  the 
upper  and  the  lower  right  hands  of  Vishnu  are  also 
broken,  it  is  easily  made  out  that  they  held  the 

253 


HINDU  ICONOGBAPHY. 

gada  aud  the  padma ;  the  left  hands  carry  the 
clialwa  and  the  sanhha.  Siva's  right  hands  are 
also  broken  off.  It  seems  evident  that  the  upper 
right  hand  held  in  it  a  kula.  It  is  difficult  to  find 
out  what  objects  were  in  the  left  hands.  Though 
so  injured,  this  is  a  remarkable  piece  of  sculpture 
belonging  to  the  Eajputana  Museum  at  Ajmere. 
The  sculptor  has  executed  his  work  in  a  very  finish- 
ed style  and  it  is  almost  perfect  in  every  detail. 

The  second  manner  in  which  Dattatreya  is  sculp- 
tured is  as  Vishnu  in  the  yoga  posture,  and  his 
triple  nature  is  indicated  by  the  lanclihanas,  the 
characteristic  emblems,  the  swan,  the  G-aruda  and 
the  bull,  of  the  three  gods  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Siva,  being  carved  on  the  pedestal,  which  is  a 
padmasana.  In  the  photograph  of  Dattatreya  re- 
produced on  PI.  LXXIII,  the  figure  of  Vishnu  may 
be  seen  to  have  aujatd-inakuta  on  the  head,  and  a 
few  jatas  or  ropes  of  matted  hair  also  shown  to  be 
hanging  down  from  it.  The  chakra  and  the  sanhha 
are  in  two  of  the  hands,  while  his  other  two  hands 
rest  upon  the  crossed  legs  in  the  yoga-vmdm  pose. 
On  the  prabhdvali  the  ten  avatdras  of  Vishnu  are 
carved.  It  may  also  be  noted  that  in  the  right 
ear  Dattatreya  wears  a  sarpa-Jcimdala,  which  is 
characteristic  of  Siva,  and  in  the  left  ear  the 
mahara-Jcundala,  characteristic  of  Vishnu.     This 


254 


PLATE  LXXIII. 


Dattatreya  ;  Stone  :  Badamf. 


[To  face  page  254.] 


MINOR  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

piece  of  sculpture  belongs  to  Badami  and  may 
well  be  assigned  to  tbe  later  Chalukya  period.  It 
is  a  remarkably  well  finished  piece  of  sculpture 
and  is  very  pleasing  in  its  effect  in  exhibiting 
the  philosophic  peace  and  calmness  which  it 
seems  to  have  been  specially  intended  to 
convey. 

Fig.  2,  PI.  LXXII,  is  another  illustration  of 
the  same  variety  as  the  above,  but  here  the  image 
is  a  standing  one.  It  carries  in  its  hands  the  sula, 
the  chaJiva,  the  liamandalu  and  perhaps  the  aksJia- 
mala.  It  may  be  noticed  that  the  padma,  the 
Garuda  and  the  bull,  the  characteristic  emblems  of 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva  respectively,  are  carved 
on  the  pedestal.  On  either  side  stand  a  few  figures 
which  appear  to  be  some  devotees. 

The  third  way,  which  is  evidently  a  more 
modern  way,  in  which  Dattatreya  is  represented 
is  as  a  human  being  with  three  heads  and  four 
arms,  and  as  attended  by  four  dogs  of  diiiferent 
colours,  said  to  represent  the  four  Yedas,  and  also 
by  a  bull. 

It  may  be  said  here  that  the  Vishnu- 
(IharmoUara  lays  down  that  Dattatreya  should  be 
sculptured  almost  exactly  like  Valmiki.  The 
Eupamandana  gives  the  description  of  Dattatreya 
under  the  name  of  Hari-Hara-Pitamaha.     Accord- 


255 


HINDU  lOONOGKAPHY. 

ing  to  this  authority,  the  image  of  Hari-Hara- 
Pitamaha  should  have  four  faces,  six  hands,  and  a 
single  body  made  to  stand  on  a  pitlia.  The  right 
hands  should  carry  the  akshamala,  the  trUula,  and 
the  gada,  while  the  left  hands  should  be  made  to 
hold  the  Jcamandalu,  the  hliatvanga  and  the  cliahra. 
We  can  easily  recognise  in  these  six  articles  car- 
ried in  the  hands  of  Hari-Hara-Pitamaha,  that 
the  aJcshavzdla  and  the  Jcamandalu  are  emblematic 
of  Brahma,  the  cliah-a  and  the  gada  of  Vishnu, 
and  the  trUula  and  the  hliatvanga  of  Siva.  The 
idea  evidently  is  that  Dattatreya  is  an  incarna- 
tion of  all  the  three  deities  of  the  Hindu  trinity, 
although  in  a  special  sense  he  is  an  incarnation 
of  Vishnu  in  particular. 

Vaikuntha  or  Vaikunthanatha   should   have 
Vaikuntha  or       ^0*^^  faccs  and  eight  hands,  and  be 

Vaikunthanatha.      g^^^^^     ^^^^     ^^^     mythical     kite 

Garuda.  In  the  right  hands,  the  gada,  the 
Jchadga,  the  bdna  and  the  cliakra  should  be  held ; 
and  in  the  left  hands,  the  sahhka,  the  JchetaJca,  the 
dhanus  and  the  padma.  Of  the  four  faces,  the 
front  one  facing  the  east  should  be  that  of  a  man, 
the  one  to  the  south  should  be  that  of  Narasimha, 
the  one  to  the  west  that  of  a  woman,  and  the  face 
to  the  north  should  be  that  of  Varaha.  (See 
PL  LXXV.) 

256 


PLATE  LXXY. 


Yaikunfchanatha  :   Stone  :  Badami 


[To  face  page  isG.] 


MINOE  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

This  image  of  Vishnu  is  almost  similar  to 

Traiiokya-  ^^^'  °^  Vaikuntha  described  above  ; 

mohana.  ^j.  gj^Q^}^  g^\^Q  }xg^Ye  four  faccs  and 

be  made  to  ride  on  the  back  of  Garuda.  But  the 
number  of  hands  are  to  be  sixteen ;  in  six  of  the 
right  hands  are  to  be  placed  respectively  the  gada, 
the  chalra,  the  aiiJcusa,  the  bana,  the  saMi  and  the 
chakra  (/) ;  the  seventh  right  hand  is  to  be  in  the 
varada  pose  ;  in  seven  of  the  left  hands  should  be 
placed  similarly  the  mudgara,  the  ^^asa,  the 
dhanus,  the  saiilha,  the  padma,  the  hamandaUi 
and  the  sriiiqa  (a  horn)  ;  the  remaining  right  hand 
and  left  hand  are  to  be  held  in  the  yoga-mudra 
pose.  The  faces  should  be  in  order  those  of  a  man, 
of  Narasimha,  of  Varaha  and  of  Kapila. 

Ananta  has  several  forms  and  is  conceived  to 
be   endowed   with   almost  all  the 

Ananta. 

divme  powers  {safitis).  The  image 
of  this  deity  should  have  twelve  hands  and  four 
faces,  and  should  be  seated  upon  Garuda.  One  of 
the  right  hands  should  be  in  the  varada  pose,  and 
the  remaining  five  should  carry  the  gada,  the 
khadga,  the  chakra,  the  vaj7'a  and  the  anknsa  ;  in 
the  left  hands  should  be  held  the  sahklia,  the 
Jchetaka,  the  dhanus,  the  padma,  the  danda  and 
the  pdha.  The  image  of  Vishnu  conceived  as  the 
Infinite  Being  should  not  be  confounded  with  the 

257 
33 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

serpent  Ananta,   forming  an  accessory  to  certain 
Vishnu  images. 

This  conception  of  Vishnu  should  also  have 
four  faces,    which   are  to   be   the 

Visvaiaipa. 

same  as  in  the  case  of  Vaikuntha- 
natha ;  and  Visvarupa  also  should  be  ijiad(^  to  ride 
upon  Garuda.  The  image  of  Visvarupa  should 
have  twenty  arms ;  one  right  hand  and  the  corres- 
ponding left  hand  should  be  held  outstretched  as 
pataJr-a-hasta ;  another  of  the  right  hands  and  its 
corresponding  left  hand  should  be  in  the  ijdga- 
niudrZi  pose.  lu  seven  of  the  remaining  right 
hands  should  be  hold  respectively  the  hala,  the 
sanl-ha,  the  rajra,  the  aiih/sa,  the  bana,  the  chaln-a 
and  a  lime  fruit,  and  the  tenth  right  hand  should 
be  in  the  carada  pose.  In  the  left  hands  should 
be  held  the  danda,  the  pTisa,  the  gada,  the  IJiadga, 
the     padDia,    the    ifiiiga,     the     mnsain     and    the 

As  the  name  indicates,  Lakshmi-Narayana  is 
Lakshmi-Nara-     Vishnu  as  Narayana  in  the  com- 
y*""*'  pany  of  the  goddess  Lakshmi.    The 

goddess  is  generally  on  the  left  of  the  god.  The 
right  hand  of  the  goddess  should  be  thrown  round 
the  neck  of  Narayana,  whose  left  hand  in  turn 
should  be  made  to  embrace  the  goddess  round  her 
waist.     In   her  left   hand  Lakshmi  should  hold  a 


258 


PLATE  liXXYI. 


Lakshmi-Narayana  :   Stone  :  Belur. 


[To  face  page  259.] 


MINOE  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

lotus.     The  naturally  beautiful  and  youthful  figure 
of  Siddhi,  decorated  with  ornaments,  should  stand 
near  Lakshmi  and  Narayana  with   a  chamara  in 
her  hand.     Below  and  slightly  to  the  right  should 
be  the  image  of  Garuda.     The  Ayudha-purushas 
representing  the  sankJia  and  cliakra  should  also  be 
made  to   stand  by  the   side  of  Vishnu.     In  front 
there  should  be  seated  the  two  upasakas  or  worship- 
pers  consisting  of   Brahma  and  Siva  with  their 
hands  in  the  required  anjali  pose.     The  former  of 
these  divine  worshippers  of  Yishnu  should  wear  a 
broad  belt  round  the  waist,  and  the  latter  should 
wear  the  yoga-faUn  and  carry  a  skull.     Such  is  the 
Lakshml-Narayana  group  of  images  as  described  in 
Sanskrit  authorities. 

The  illustration  of  Lakshmi-Narayana  given 
here  (PI.  LXXVI)  represents  a  piece  of  sculpture 
found  in  the  Kappe-Chenigaraya's  temple  at  Belur. 
Here  Vishnu  has  his  consort  Lakshmi  seated  on 
the  left  side  of  his  lap  and  is,  with  his  lower  left 
hand,  embracing  Lakshmi.  Instead  of  the  weapons 
being  represented  by  their  personified  forms,  as 
required  by  the  Visvakarma-sastra,  they  are  worked 
out  as  actual  weapons.  The  goddess  Siddhi, 
wearing  all  her  ornaments,  stands  with  a  cliamara 
in  hand,  to  the  left  of  Lakshmi-Narayana.  There 
is  also  another  female  figure  holding  a  sword  and  a 

259 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

shield  in  her  hands,  and  a  highly  ornamented  vessel, 
whose  significance  is  not  quite  clear. 

In  the  Devl-Bliagavata  it  is  stated  that   a 
Eakshasa  named  Hayagriva,  hav- 

Hayagriva.  .  .      ,  ,  ■     ■^       ^     ^^ 

ing  received  boons  similar  to  those 
received  by  Hiranyakasipu,  that  he  should  not  be 
assailable  by  man  or  beast,  began  to  give  trouble 
to  the  gods.  The  gods  thereupon  went  to  the  Devi 
and  implored  her  aid.  This  all-powerful  goddess 
directed  them  to  go  to  Vishnu  and  request  him  to 
be  born  upon  earth  with  the  face  of  a  horse  and 
the  body  of  a  man  and  kill  the  Eakshasa.  The 
gods  prayed  to  Vishnu  accordingly;  and  pleased  with 
their  prayer,  Vishnu  became  incarnated  in  a  form, 
half -horse  and  half-man  and  hence  known  as  Haya- 
griva, and  destroyed  the  Eakshasa  Hayagriva. 
The  god  Hayagriva  is  looked  upon  as  the  god  of 
learning  ;  his  functions  are  similar  to  those  which 
are  attributed  to  the  goddess  Sarasvati.  * 

The  VisJinudharmdttara  gives  the  following 
description  of  the  image  of  Hayagriva.  The  feet 
of  Hayagriva  should  be  placed  in  the  outstretched 
palms  of  the  goddess  of  Earth.  The  complexion 
of  Hayagriva  should  be  white  and  the  colour  of 

260 


PLATE  liXXVII. 


Hayagrfva :  Stone:  Nuggehalli. 


[To  face  page  261.] 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

the  cloth  worn  should  be  blue.  Hayagriva  should 
have  the  face  of  a  horse  and  possess  eight  arms  ; 
in  four  of  the  hands  he  should  carry  the  §ankha, 
the  chakra,  the  gada,  and  the  imdma  respectively. 
The  remaining  four  hands  should  be  placed  upon 
the  heads  of  the  personified  forms  of  the  four 
Vedas.  The  figure  of  Hayagriva  should  be  duly 
adorned  with  ornaments.  This  aspect  of  Vishnu 
is  believed  to  be  specially  related  to  Samkarshana 
in  the  Sakti-maya-iijuha. 

The   illustration   of  Hayagriva  given  on   PI. 

XXVII  is  the  representation  of  an  image  found  in 

the   temple   at  Nuggehalli.     The    label   engraved 

below  the  image  informs  us  that  it  was  sculptured 

by  Malitamma.    The  other  short  inscription  on  the 

pedestal  tells  us  that  the  figure  is  that  of  Hayagriva. 

As  required  by  the  Sanskrit  authorities  the  figure 

has  eight  hands  ;  but  they  all  carry  the  gada,  hana, 

chakra,    khadga,    saiikha,    khetaka,    dhanus,   and 

padma  respectively.     Below  the  feet  of  Hayagriva 

is  shown,  as  lying  in  an  abject  condition,  a  Kakshasa 

carrying  a  sword  and  a  shield,  who,  of  course,  is 

the  Hayagriva  Eakshasa  defeated  and  thrown  down. 

Adimijrti  is  a  seated   figure,  sitting  upon  the 

serpent    Adisesha,  with  the  right 

Adimurti.  ^ 

leg  hanging  and  the  left  one  folded 
and   resting   upon   the  seat.     The  colour  of  the 

261 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

figure  is  coral-rod  ;  it  is  dooorated  witli  lUl  orna- 
ments. Tim  imago  ha.s  four  liamls.  One  of  llio 
right  hands  rowts  upon  the  woat,  and  a  lofL  liaml  is 
stretched  out  upon  the  loft  kiioo.  The  roiuainiug 
two  hands  carry  the  rhakra  and  the  .hmk/ia.  'I'lio 
hood  of  AdiSSsha  may  havo  oiLlior  live  or  Kovim 
heads  and  il  should  bo  so  soulpturod  iw  to  liiilo 
slightly  Llu)  /n'lUd.  of  LIm  image.  On  the  rif^ht 
side  the  sage  Biirif^u,  and  on  tlio  loft  the  hh.|^o 
Markandelya,  are  figured  as  kuooliiig  on  ono  knee. 
The  figures  of  Braluna  and  6iva  are  shown  in  a 
prayerful  aLLiLudo  (^n  the  rij^hL  and  lofL  roH|)(!ot- 
ivoly  of  Adimurti. 

The  illustration  on  PI.  LXXVJTI,  iw  Lho 
reproduction  of  lite  photograph  of  n,\\  imago  of 
Adimurti  to  be  found  in  tho  tenipio  at  Isln{.;'gohn,!!i. 
In  this  piece  of  sculpture  AdinjiirLi  in  noon  Hoatod 
on  the  serpent  AdiwuHha  uudur  a  Lroo.  'I'lio  hood 
of  Adi^esha  has  seven  heads  and  its  body  is  coiled 
into  three  turns.  Adimrirti  lias  his  lofL  log  foldod 
and  routing  upon  the  seat  and  his  loft  front  iuuul 
is  stretched  out  on  iho  loft  l<ru)o.  Tho  right  log  of 
the  imago  is  let  down  hanging  luid  the  right  front 
hand  in  seen  resting  upon  tho  serpent  soat.  'i'ho 
§ankha  and  the  chahm  are  held  in  the  loft  and 
right  back  hands  respo(;Livoly.  IJolow  tho  soat 
and  on  the  right  is  tho  flguro  of  Garu^a  in   tho 


i(^H 


PLATE  LXXYIII. 


,    ;f^; 


■     Mr   ♦.-  -V. 


Adimurfci  :  Stone  :  Nuggehalli. 


[To  face  page  262.] 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

alWidsana  posture  with  its  hands  folded  in  the 
anjali  pose.  On  the  left  are  the  figures  of  Brahma 
and  Siva  also  standing  in  reverential  attitude. 
There  is  another  figure  in  front  of  those  of 
Brahma  and  Siva ;  its  head  is  broken  and  in  its 
present  condition  it  is  difficult  to  guess  as  to 
vi'hom  it  represents.  The  figure  of  Adimurti  is 
decorated  with  all  ornaments  which  are  carved  in 
a  very  elaborate  manner.  Under  the  seat  is  an 
inscription  which  informs  us  that  the  image  was 
sculptured  by  Baichoja  of  Nandi  already  men- 
tioned. 

This  aspect  of  Vishnu  is  the  one  conceived 
to  be  assumed  by  him  at  the  end 

Jalasayin. 

of  the  iuaha-pralaya  or  the  great 
deluge  of  universal  dissolution.  The  Jalasayin  is 
an  image  of  Vishnu  shown  to  be  lying  in  the  midst 
of  waters,  resting  on  the  Adisesha,  his  serpent- 
couch.  The  top  of  the  head  of  Vishnu  is  difficult 
of  discernment  on  account  of  the  excess  of  lustre 
proceeding  from  the  jewels  on  the  heads  of 
Adisesha.  In  reclining  upon  the  serpent,  three- 
fourths  of  the  body  of  Vishnu  is  made  to  lie  flat 
upon  it,  and  the  remaining  fourth  towards  the 
head  is  slightly  lifted  up  and  inclined.  One  leg  of 
this  image  of  Vishnu  rests  upon  the  lap  of 
Lakshmi  and  the  other  is  somewhat  bent  and  then 


263 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

thrown  upon  the  other  leg.  One  arm  of  Jalasayin 
is  stretched  along  the  body  so  as  to  make  the 
hand  reach  the  navel,  while  the  other  correspond- 
ing to  it  supports  the  head ;  two  other  hands 
grasp  the  santana-vianjaii.  On  the  lotus  sprung 
from  the  navel  of  Vishnu  is  seated  Brahma,  the 
creating  god,  and  adhering  to  its  stalk  are  the  two 
demons  Madhu  and  Kaitabha.  The  personified 
weapons  of  Vishnu  are  all  shown  on  Adisesha  sur- 
rounding the  figure  of  Vishnu.  In  some  instances 
the  figures  of  the  ten  avataras  of  Vishnu  are  required 
to  be  carved  above  the  reclining  figure  of  Vishnu- 
Jalasayin.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  con- 
ception of  God  brooding  upon  the  waters  of  the 
ocean  of  chaos  at  the  time  of  universal  dissolution 
with  that  of  Vata-patra-sayin,  the  infant  god 
floating  on  a  banyan  leaf  in  the  chaotic  waters  of 
the  dissolved  cosmos,  assuring,  as  it  were,  that  the 
dissolution  of  the  cosmos  is  in  fact  the  infancy  of 
its  evolution. 

The  drawing  of  Jalasayin  on  PI.  LXXIX,  is 
that  of  the  image  of  this  god  found  in  the  central 
shrine  of  the  Vishnu  temple  found  in  the  middle  of 
the  village  of  Halebidu.  In  this  it  may  be  noticed 
that  Lakshmi  is,  as  required  in  the  Sanskrit 
authorities,  seated  near  the  feet  of  Vishnu,  while 
what  appears  to  be  the  figure  of  Bhumidevi  is  seen 

264 


PLATE  LXXIX, 


w 


cc 


[To  fane  page  264.] 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU 

seated  near  the  head.     One  of  the  left  hands  of 
Jalasayin  is  held  in  the  kataJca  pose.     The  weapons 
are  not  represented  in  this  case  as  their  personifi- 
cations, but  are  treated  as  actual  weapons.     In  the 
corner  near  the  head  of  Vishnu  is  a  small  figure 
seated  with  crossed  legs  ;  it  appears  to  represent  the 
sage  Markandeya,  who  is  reputed  to  be  immortal 
even  at  the  time  of  the  deluge.     Above  the  figure 
of  the  reclining  Jalasayin   are  sculptured  the  ten 
avataras  of    Vishnu    as   described   in   the   Eupa- 
mandana  * ;    it    is    interesting   to   note   that   the 
avatdirifi,    Matsya    and   Kurma,    are    represented 
by  a  fish  and  a  tortoise  respectively,  and  the  incar- 
nation of  Buddha  is  shown  as  a  Dhyani-Buddha  and 
the  Kalkyavatara  is  shown  as  a  man  riding  a  horse. 
Near  the  foot  of  Vishnu  stands  what  is  evidently 
the  figure  of  Garuda  with  hands  held  in  the  anjali 
pose. 

Dharma   is   one   of   the     minor   avataras   of 
Vishnu.     It  is  said  in  the  Brihad- 

Dharma.  "  i  -i-,  '  _ 

dharma-jjurana  that  Brahma,  as 
soon  as  he  created  the  universe,  was  looking  for 
some  one  to  protect  it.  Then  there  sprang  from 
his  right  side  a  Being  who  wore  hundalas  in  his 
oar,  a  garland  of  white  flowers  round  his  neck  and 
white  sandal  paste  on  his  body ;  he  had  four  legs 

*  ^^r^cTR^fg^fr^^r^q^  ^r^S^jftssTfr  l  (Rupamandana) 

265 
34 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

and  resembled  a  bull.     He    was  called  Dharma. 
Brahma  called  Dharma  and  asked  him  to  be  his 
eldest  son  and  protect  the  universe  created  by  him- 
self.    Dharma  is  said  to  have  possessed  four  legs 
in  the  Kritayuga,  three  in   the   Tretayuga,  two  in 
the  Dvaparayuga  and  only  one  in  the  Kali  or   the 
present  yuga.     The  limbs  of  Dharma  are  said  to  be 
satya,  (truthfulness),  daya  (mercy),  santi  (peaceful- 
ness)  and  ahimsa  (kindness).     The  Sanskrit  word 
vrisha  means  dharma  as  also  a  bull,  a  fact  which 
seems  to  have  induced  the  imaginative  Hindu  to 
associate  Dharma  with  a  bull.     According  to  the 
Aditya-purdna  the  figure   of  Dharma   should   be 
white  in  colour  and  have  four  faces,  four  arms  and 
four  legs,  be  clothed  in  white  garments  and  be 
adorned  with  all  ornaments,  should  carry  in  one  of 
the  right  hands  the   akshamdld,  the    other  right 
hand  being  made   to  rest  upon  the  head  of  the 
personified  form  of  vyavasdya  (industry).     One  of 
the   left   hands   should  keep  a  pustaha   and    the 
remaining  left  hand  should  carry  a  lotus  and  placed 
on  the  head  of  a  good  looking  bull. 

The  story  of  Vishnu  delivering  Gajendra,  the 

varadaraja  or    lo^d  of  elephants,  from   the  grip 

Karivarada.  ^f  ^   crocodile    is    given   in    the 

Bhdgavata-purdna.     In  the  garden   of  Ritumat, 

on   the    mountain    Trikuta,  which  is  surrounded 

266 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

by  the  ocean  of  milk,  there  is  a  tank,  to  which 
Gajendra,   the  lord  of  the  elephants,  repaired  one 
day  to  allay  its  thirst.     As  soon  as  it  got  down  into 
the  water,  a  crocodile  caught  hold  of  one  of  the 
legs  of  the  elephant.    For  a  long  time  the  elephant 
struggled  to  liberate  itself  from  the  crocodile,  but 
was  unsuccessful.     At  last,  with  a  lotus  flower  in 
its    trunk   it   began  to  praise  Vishnu  and  so  be- 
sought his  help.     Pleased  with  the  prayers  of  the 
elephant,  Vishnu,   riding  upon  the  shoulders   of 
Garuda,  appeared  on  the  scene  at  once  and  killed 
the  crocodile  with  his  chakra  and  saved  Gajendra. 
It  is  said  that  Gajendra  was  a  Pandya  king  named 
Indradyumna  in  his  former  birth,    and  became  an 
elephant  on  account  of  a  curse  which  was  pro- 
nounced against  him  by  Agastya,  to  whom  the 
king  did  not  pay  sufficient  respect  at  the  time  the 
sage  came  to  see  him.     This  king  became  free  now 
of  his  elephantine  condition  of  existence  through 
the  touch  of  Vishnu ;  and  as  a  reward  for  his  good 
deeds  in  the  previous   birth,  be  was  received  by 
Vishnu  to  be  one  of  his  parishadas  or  body-guards. 
The  crocodile  was  in  reality  a  gandharva  named 
Hahu  in  its  past  birth,  and  had  been  cursed  by  the 
sage  Devala  to  become  a  crocodile.    Varadaraja 
means  King  among  Boon-bestowers ;  and  Vishnu  is 
80  called  because   he  saved  and  bestowed  boons 

267 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

upon  Gajendra.  As  a  deliverer  of  Gajendra,  Vishnu 
is  praised  in  several  places  in  the  Divya-prabandha 
of  the  Srivaishnava  saints  of  Southern  India  and 
the  temple  of  Varadaraja  at  Kafichi  is  one  of  the 
most  famous  Vaishnava  temples  in  the  Madras 
Presidency.  Sculptures  of  this  deity  are  common 
enough  in  this  Southern  Presidency.  Fig.  1, 
PL  LXXX  is  from  the  Mysore  State.  Here  Vishnu 
is  seen  riding  on  the  shoulders  of  Glaruda,  with  the 
chaJcra  in  his  back  right  hand,  which  is  lifted  up, 
the  saoiJcha  in  the  back  left  hand,  the  padma  in 
the  front  left  hand,  and  the  gada  in  the  front  right 
hand.  The  uplifted  hand  is  supposed  to  be  in  the 
act  of  hurling  the  chahra  against  the  crocodile 
which  has  caught  hold  of  the  leg  of  the  elephant 
Gajendra.  The  feet  of  Vishnu  rest  upon  the  opened 
out  palms  of  the  hands  of  Garuda.  Below  Garuda 
is  to  be  found  the  afflicted  Gajendra  praying  to 
Vishnu  with  its  trunk  carrying  a  lotus  in  it  and 
kept  uplifted.  The  figure  of  the  crocodile  is  seen 
apprehending  with  its  powerful  teeth  the  leg  of 
Gajendra.  On  its  back  is  seen  sculptured  the 
chalcra  of  Vishnu  and  a  human  figure  seated  with 
crossed-legs  and  with  the  hands  in  the  anjali  pose. 
The  chahra  is  sculptured  on  the  back  of  the  croco- 
dile to  convey  the  idea  that  it  has  killed  the  croco- 
dile  and  that   the   human  figure  represents   the 

268 


PLATE  LXXX. 


il-'ii;.  1.1    Kari-A'ai'ada:   Stone 
Mysore  Province. 


li'ig.  2.)   Varadaraja  ;  Stone:  Deadikkombu. 

[To  face  page  268.] 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

Grandharva  who  was  relieved  from  his  existence  as 
a  crocodile.  The  water  of  the  tank  is  shown  in 
the  conventional  way  by  means  of  wavy  lines. 

The  second  figure  on  the  same  plate  represents 
a  piece  of  sculpture  to  be  found  in  the  Varadaraja- 
svamin  temple  at  Dadikkombu.  In  this  the  figure 
of  Gajendra  and  the  crocodile  are  not  shown  ; 
Vishnu  is  seated  upon  Garuda,  who  is  seated  in 
the  alidhasana,  and  bearing  in  his  palms  the  feet 
of  Vishnu.  The  figure  of  Vishnu,  has  here 
eight  hands  carrying  respectively  the  chakra, 
saiiklia,  gada,  khadga,  khetaha,  dhaniis,  bana  and 
padiiia. 

The  temple  of   Varadaraja   at  Conjeevaram 
is    one    of    the   three    important 

Bauganatha, 

Vishnu  temples  of  South  India, 
the  other  two  being  those  of  Eahganatha  at 
Srirahgam  and  Vehkatesa  at  Tirupati.  Of  the 
three  temples  above  mentioned  that  of  Eahganatha 
is  the  most  sacred  to  the  Srivaishnavas  and  is 
known  to  them  by  the  distinguished  name  of '  the 
temple '.  This  temple  appears  to  have  come  to 
occupy  this  foremost  position  on  account  of  its 
great  antiquity  and  historical  association  with 
famous  Srivaishnava  teachers  and  saints.  The 
god  Eanganatha  is  pf  the  type  of  the  Yogasayana- 
murti  already  described. 


269 


HINDU  lOONOGBAPHY. 

The  god  Venkatesa,  who  is  better  known  to 
North  Indian  Hindus  by  the  name 
of  Balaji,  has  his  temple  on  the  top 
of  the  Tirupati  hill.  Various  are  the  opinions  re- 
garding this  deity  :  the  Vaishnavas  contend  that  the 
god  is  Vishnu:  the  Saivas  claim  Venkatesa  to  be 
Siva,  or  Subrahmanya  ;  while  a  third  set  of  people 
think  that  the  Tirupati  temple  was  originally  a 
Devi  temple  and  was  converted  into  a  Vishnu  tem- 
ple at  some  later  period.  The  doubt  as  to  its  being 
a  Saiva  or  a  Vaishnava  temple  appears  to  be  of  a 
long  standing  character,  as  it  is  evident  from  the 
fact  that  in  the  days  of  Eamanuja  the  Saivas 
threatened  to  take  possession  of  it  and  that  Eama- 
nuja succeeded  in  retaining  it  for  the  Vaishnavas. 
The  basis  of  the  quarrel  between  these  two  Hindu 
sects  appears  to  be  due  to  the  duplicate  nature  of 
the  image  itself,  which  is  described  by  one  of  the 
early  Srivaishnava  saints  as  Harihara.  In  the 
famous  Tamil  epic,  the  Sila/ppadigd.ram,  the  deity 
on  the  hill  at  Vengadam,  which  is  Tirupati,  is  de- 
finitely described  as  Vishnu,  and  all  the  inscriptions 
found  on  the  walls  of  this  temple  uniformly  declare 
it  to  be  a  Vaishnava  shrine.  The  notion  that  it 
was  originally  a  temple  of  Subrahmanya  may  be 
due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  on  a  hill,  a  positiiou  pecu- 
liarly' assigped  to  Subi?ahmariy*a  in  this  p'art  of  the 

270 


MINOE  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

country.  The  image  of  Venkatesa  is  even  to  this 
day  that  of  Harihara,  the  right  half,  as  usual,  being 
that  of  Hara,  that  is,  Siva  and  the  left  half  of  Hari, 
that  is,  Vishnu ;  on  the  right  forearm  is  to  be  seen 
the  bhuj'anga-valaya  or  the  bangle  of  snake,  an 
ornament  characteristic  of  Siva.  Venkatesa  is  a 
standing  image  with  four  hands,  the  back  two  of 
which  carry  the  saiikha  (?)  and  the  chakra ;  the 
other  right  hand  is  held  in  the  abhaya  pose  and 
the  remaining  left  hand  is  made  to  rest  upon 
the  hip. 

The  most  famous  Vishnu  temple  of   Western 
Pandharinatha     I^dia  is  that  of  Pandharinatha  or 
or  vithoba.  Vithoba.     The  name  of  his  goddess 

is  Rukmabayi.  The  following  legend  explains  how 
Vithoba  or  Vithala  happened  to  appear  in  Pandha- 
ripura.  A  Brahmana  named  Pundali  started  out 
on  a  pilgrimage  to  Benares  with  his  wife  and  his 
aged  parents.  On  the  way  he  paid  little  or  no 
attention  to  his  old  father  and  mother  but  was  all 
attention  to  his  wife.  His  conduct  pained  the 
parents  very  much  at  heart,  and  still  they  followed 
their  son  to  Benares.  One  day  the  party  halted  on 
their  way  for  the  night  at  Pandharipura  in  the  house 
of  a  Brahmana.  There  Pundali  noticed  the  defer- 
ence shown  by  the  host  to  his  own  parents  and  his 
host's   superior  filial  feeling  made  Pundali  go  to 

271 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

bed  with  a  depressed  heart.  On  rising  early  in  the 
morning,  he  noticed  three  very  beautiful  women 
doing  domestic  duties  in  the  house  of  his  Brah- 
mana  host ;  Pundali  approached  them  and  ques- 
tioned them  who  they  were.  They  replied  that 
they  were  the  river  goddesses  Gahga,  Yamuna  and 
Sarasvati,  who  had  come  to  the  house  of  that 
excellent  householder,  the  host  of  Pundali,  and  at 
the  saiiie  time  asking  him  not  to  approach  them, 
because  he  was  a  sinner  whose  very  presence  they 
detested.  Pundali  immediately  felt  a  shock  of 
remorse  for  his  past  remissness  in  the  matter  of 
his  duty  towards  his  parents,  gave  up  the  idea  of 
approaching  by  going  to  Benares  the  rivers  Gahga, 
Yamuna  and  Sarasvati,  and  set  himself  to  serve 
his  parents  then  and  there  in  an  ideal  manner. 
Vishnu  thereupon  became  pleased  with  the  genuine 
devotion  of  Pundali  to  his  parents,  appeared  before 
him  and  blessed  him.  It  is  this  Vishnu,  who  so 
appeared,  that  is  enshrined  in  the  temple  at 
Pandharipura. 

The  image  of  Vithoba  is  about  three  feet  in 
height  and  is  made  of  stone.  It  is  a  standing 
figure  with  two  hands.  The  feet  rest  firmly  on  the 
floor  and  there  are  no  bends  in  the  body  ;  it  belongs 
therefore  to  the  samabhanga  variety  of  images. 
The  two  hands  rest  upon  the  hips  ;   the  head  is 

272 


PLATE  LXXXI. 


Yitlhala  and  Eakhmabavi. 


[To  (ace  page  272  ] 


MINOR  AVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

adorned  with  a  Jcirlta  which  is  said  to  have  a  lingu 
mark  upon  it.     (See  PI.  LXXXI.) 

Equally  famous  with  the  temples  of  Ranga- 
natha  in  the  south  and  Vithoba  in 
the  west  is  that  of  Jagannatha  in 
the  east   of  peninsular    India.     This    celebrated 
temple  is  situated  at  Puri  and  is  visited  by  innumer- 
able pilgrims  from  all  parts  of  India.     The  temple 
of  Jagannatha  is  believed  to  have  belonged  to  the 
Buddhists  at  one  time  and  to  have  been  converted 
into  a  Vishnu  temple  at  a  later  date.     The  image 
of  Jagannatha  is  an  ill-shaped  log  of  wood  with 
two  big   eyes   marked  on  it  rather    prominently. 
Once  in  twelve  years  the  log  is  renewed,  the  log 
being  every  time  brought  mysteriously  from  some 
unknown  land.     This  is  utilised  for  carving  a  new 
image  of  Jagannatha,  in  which  some  ancient  relic 
is  considered  to  be  embedded.   It  is  the  insertion  of 
this  relic  which  sanctifies  the  new  image.     This 
relic  is  believed  by  some  to  be  a  relic  of  Buddha. 
The  Hindu  conception  is  that  it  is  Krishna,  who 
is  worshipped  at  Puri  as  Jagannatha  or  Lord  of 
the  World  in  company  with  his  sister  Subhadra. 
It  is  said   in  the  Mahabharata  that   Arjuna 
Nara-Narayana     ^nd  Krishna  were  in  one  of  their 
or  Hari-Krisuna.     f^^^^^,     incamations     Nara     and 

Narayana,   two  risliis   or   sages   who   resided    in 

273 

33 


HINDU  lOONOGEAPHY. 

Badari  on  the  Himalayas  performing  severe  reli- 
gious penances ;  they  were  possessed  of  divine 
powers  and  always  lived  and  acted  together.  In 
the  Vana-'parvan  it  is  stated  by  Siva  that  Nara 
and  Narayana  were  the  most  supreme  among  men 
and  that  the  world  was  being  upheld  by  their 
power.  The  greatness  of  Nara  and  Narayana  is 
brought  out  by  the  defeat  inflicted  by  them  on 
Dambodbhava  as  described  in  the  Udyoga-parvan. 
Dambodbhava  was  once  ruling  as  a  universal 
sovereign  and  was  full  of  conceit  and  of  the  pride 
of  his  own  power.  He  learnt  that  on  the  heights 
of  mount  Q-andhamadana  there  were  two  very 
great  sages,  Nara  and  Narayana,  who  were  invin- 
cible even  to  Indra.  He  wanted  to  put  their 
greatness  to  test,  went  thither  and  challenged 
them  to  fight.  They  tried  to  avoid  having  to  do 
anything  with  him  by  telling  him  that  they  had 
divested  themselves  of  all  earthly  passion  and  were 
living  in  an  atmosphere  of  spiritual  peace.  This 
answer  did  not  satisfy  Dambodhava  ;  he  still  in- 
sisted on  their  accepting  his  challenge.  Then 
Narayana  took  a  handful  of  grass  and  threw  it 
against  Dambodbhava,  which  rendered  him  at 
once  weak  and  powerless.  Narayana  afterwards 
admonished  him  for  his  haughtiness  and  advised 
him  to  be  humble  in  the  future  and  to  lead  a 


274 


MINORlAVATAEAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

righteous  life.  Many  such  stories  are  told  of 
them.  They  probably  represent  the  inseparable 
association  of  love  between  the  individual  soul  and 
the  Supreme  Soul,  that  is,  between  man  and  God. 
In  the  BMshma-imrvan,  Narayana  is  praised  as 
the  Being  who  forms  the  highest  mystery,  the 
highest  existence,  the  highest  Brahman  and  the 
highest  renown.  This  Being  is  further  said  to  be 
undecaying,  undiscernible  and  eternal.  This 
Being  is  hymned  as  the  Purusha,  but  is  not 
known.  This  Being  is  celebrated  by  Visvakarman 
as  the  highest  power,  as  the  highest  joy,  as 
the  highest  truth-  In  the  Santi-pavvan,  Nara 
and  Narayana  are  concretely  described  thus : 
'  The  most  excellent  risliis  performing  penance 
and  of  surpassing  splendour,  bearing  the  srlvatsa 
mark,  wearing  a  circle  of  matted  hair,  web- 
footed  and  web-armed,  with  the  mark  of  the 
chaJira  on  their  feet,  broad-chested,  long-armed, 
with  four  testicles,  sixty  teeth  and  eight 
grinders,  with  voices  sonorous  as  the  clouds, 
with  beautiful  countenances,  broad  foreheads, 
handsome  brows,  chins  and  noses,  were  beheld  by 
Narada'. 

The  manner  in  which  the  images  of  Nara  and 
Narayana  to  be  made  is  given  in  the  Vishnu - 
dliarmottara.     It  is  stated  therein  that  the  image 

275 


HINDU  ICONOGBAPHY. 

of  Nara  should  be  of  grass  colour  and  have  two 
heads ;  it  should  be  made  to  look  powerful. 
Narayana  should  possess  four  arms  and  be  of  blue 
complexion.  Both  of  them  should  be  seated  under 
a  hadara  tree.  They  should  be  clad  in  hrishnajina 
(deer-skin)  and  wear  the  jata-mandalas.  Or,  they 
might  be  seated  in  a  chariot  having  eight  wheels, 
with  their  legs  crossed. 

The   image   of  Manmatha,  who,   as   already 
stated,    is    indentical     with     the 

Maumatlia.  , 

Pradyumna    of    the   SaMi-maya- 
vyuha,  should,  according   to    the  Silparatna*   be 


276 


PliATE  LXXXII. 


o 

03 


P3 
a 

C3      ^ 

s  ™ 

,-a    rt. 

a 

c3 


CM 

oi 


«o-  *  - 


r 


■^. 


x\ 


7  ,^—  ^  '^S;{^  . 


^iC'"     * 


CQ 


M 


a  M 

a 


00 


[To  laoe  page  27  7.] 


MINOE  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

made  to  carry  a  bow  of  sugar-cane  in  the  left  hand 
and  to  hold  in  the  right  hand  five  flowery  arrows. 
The  complexion  of   Manmatha  should   be  either 
green   or   red ;  and  his  beautiful  form  should  be 
adorned  with  appropriate  ornaments  and  a  closely 
knit  garland  of  flowers.     Vasantha,  the  personifica- 
tion of  the  spring  season,  should  be  standing  on  one 
side  of  Manmatha  as  his  friend.     He  should  be 
adorned  with  various  kinds  of  flowers  and  dressed  in 
the  leaves  of  the  a§dha  tree ;  he  should  have  for  his 
ear-rings  two  pomegranate  flowers,  and  round  his 
neck  there   should  be   a   garland  of   the   Jcesara 
flower.     On   the  other  side   of  Manmatha   there 
should  be  the  figure  of  his  flag-bearer  having  the 
face  of  a  horse  carrying  the  maTtara  banner ;  this 
flag-bearer  is  looked  upon  as  the  producer  of  the 
erotic    feelings.     Besides   these   two    companions 
there  should  be  on  the  right  and  left  of  Manmatha 
his  two  goddesses  Priti  and  Eati  translatable  as 
Love  and  Delight.     Of  these  the  former  should 
have  in  her  possession  various  kinds  of  well  sea- 
soned and  tasteful  articles  of  food  and  the  latter 
should  appear  to  be  anxiously  forward  to  the  com- 
pany of  her  lord.     There  should  also  be  by  the  side 
of  Manmatha  a  soft  bed  placed  near  a  canal  asso- 
ciated with  sarasa  birds  and  running    through  a 
fine  pleasure  garden. 

277 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

The  Vishnudharmdttara*  gives,  however,  a 
different  description  of  Manmatha.  According  to 
it,  the  image  of  Manmatha  should  have  eight 
hands,  four  of  which  should  be  made  to  carry  the 
hahJcha,  chaJcra,  clhanus  and  bana,  while  the 
remaining  four  should  be  placed  on  the  bosoms  of 
his  four  highly  beautiful  consorts  Eati,  Priti, 
Sakti  and  Mada-Sakti.  His  eyes  should  be  expres- 
sive of  thoughts  of  love.  The  emblem  on  his 
banner  should  be  the  fish  shown  as  carrying  in  its 
mouth  his  five  flowery  arrows. 

Four  pictures  of  Eati  and  Manmatha  are 
given  on  Pis.  LXXXII  and  LXXXIII. 

The  images  represented  as  figs.  1  and  2, 
PI.  LXXXII  and  fig.  1,  PL  LXXXIII  belong  to  the 
same  period,  and  are  almost  similar  in  their 
characteristics.  The  piece  of  sculpture  represented 
as  fig.  1  on  PI.  LXXXII  belongs  to  the  Hoy- 
salesvara  temple  at  Halebidu.     In  this  Manmatha 

^:  atf!r^«n  ^i%#^5n%^«r>^r  ii 
%3^  ^^i-  ^:  "T^^rirg^  ^wi.  i 

278 


PLATE  LXXXIII. 


-4,' 


<D 

a 
o 


00 


>5 


M 


[To  face  page  278.] 


MINOR  AVATARAS  &  MANIFESTATION  OF  VISHNU. 

is  seen  standing  with  a  bow  of  sugar-cane  in  his  left 
hand  and  an  arrow  of  flowers  in  the  right  hand. 
To  the  left  of  Manmatha  is  the  figure  of  his  wife 
Eati  holding  a  fruit  in  her  right  hand  and  a  lotus 
in  the  left  hand.  On  the  right  of  Manmatha  may 
be  seen  his  standard-bearer  holding  with  both  of 
his  hands  the  banner  peculiar  to  this  Hindu  god  of 
love.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  flag-bearer  is 
found  in  the  Halebidu  sculpture  and  in  none  of  them 
is  Vasanta  shown.  The  photograph  reproduced  as 
fig.  2  on  PI.  LXXXII  is  that  of  an  image  of  Man- 
matha found  in  Angur  in  the  Bellary  district  of  the 
Madras  Presidency,  and  the  photograph  marked 
fig.  1,  PI.  LXXXIII  belongs  to  Nuggehalli  in  the 
Native  State  of  Mysore.  The  picture  shown  as 
fig.  '2  on  PL  LXXXIII  represents  an  image  to 
be  found  in  the  Visvanathasvamin  temple  at 
Tenkasi  and  like  all  the  other  pieces  of  sculpture 
of  that  temple,  belongs  to  the  latter  Pandya  period 
(15th  Century  A.D.).  Manmatha  in  this  sculpture 
has  four  hands,  in  three  of  which  he  holds  his 
flowery  arrows  and  in  the  fourth  carries  the  sugar- 
cane bow.  The  manner  of  the  moustaches,  the 
long  conical  head-gear  and  other  ornaments  are 
characteristic  of  the  sculpture  of  this  period  and  of 
the  part  of  the  country  to  which  the  image  belongs. 


279 


GARUDA  AND  AYUDHA- 
PURUSHAS. 


36 


GARUDA  AND  AYUDHA-PURUSHAS. 


THE  following   is    a  summary  of  the  account 
found  in  the  MaJidbharata   about  Garuda, 
the  bird-vehicle  of  Vishnu.     Garuda  was  born  to 
Kasyapa  and  Vinata  and  was   the 

Garuda. 

younger  brother  of  Aruna,  the 
charioteer  of  the  sun-god  Surya.  When  Garuda  first 
came  out  of  the  egg,  the  gods  mistook  him  for  Agni 
and  praised  him  and  prevailed  upon  him  to  diminish 
his  splendour  and  glory  a  little.  Bearing  Aruna  on 
his  back,  Garuda  went  from  his  father's  home  to 
where  his  mother  was,  and  there  learnt  that  she  was 
held  in  slavery  by  his  father's  other  wife  Kadrii.  The 
sons  of  Kadru  who  were  all  snakes  promised  to  free 
Vinata,  if  Garuda  managed  to  bring  for  their  use 
the  ambrosia  of  the  gods  from  their  celestial  world. 
Gai'uda  started  out  at  once  on  this  mission  of 
securing  the  ambrosia  for  his  step-brothers,  and  on 
his  way  lived  upon  the  Nishadas.  When  he  ap- 
proached the  lake  called  Alamba,  he  caught  there 

283 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

an  elephant  named  Supratika  and  a  tortoise  named 
Vibhavasu,  and  seizing  both  of  them  in  his  talons, 
he  alighted  upon  a  large  banyan  tree.    The  branch 
of  the  tree  could  not  bear  the  weight  and  gave  way. 
On  this  branch  were  the  rishis  Valakhilyas  suspend- 
ed with  their  head  downwards  and  doing  penance. 
Fearing  he  would  cause  the  death  of  these  sages, 
Garuda  himself  held  up  and  carried  the  branch  to 
the   hermitage    of  his    father    Kasyapa.     There 
Kasyapa  exhorted  the  Valakhilyas  to  quit  that  tree- 
branch.     They  quitted  it,  and  G-aruda  then  threw 
down  the  branch  and  made  a  hearty  meal  of   the 
two  animals — the  elephant  and  the  tortoise.  Then 
he  proceeded  to  the  capital  of  Indra,  the  chief  of 
the  gods  ;  and  after  a  hard  fight  there  with  the  ap- 
pointed guards  of  the  pot  of  ambrosia  succeeded  in 
taking    away   from   their    possession    the   pot    of 
amrita.     On  the  way  from  the  world  of  the  gods  he 
met  Vishnu,  and  promised  to  serve   him   as   his 
vehicle  and    also   as  the   device  on    his   banner. 
Garuda   thus   brought  to    his   step-brothers,    the 
snakes,  the  pot  of  ambrosia  and  placed  it  on  a  heap 
of  kusa  grass.     On  seeing  this,  the  snake-sons  of 
Kadru  set  Vinata  free,  and  went  to  attend  to  the 
religious  rites  preparatory  to  their  partaking  of  the 
ambrosia.     Meanwhile  Indra  came  and  took  away 
his  pot  of  amrita.     The  snakes  returned,  and  were 

284 


GARUDA  AND  AYUDHA-PUEUSHA8. 

disappointed  at  the  disappearance  of  the  much  co- 
veted pot  of  ambrosia,  and  licked  the  grass  upon 
which  that  pot  had  been  placed.  The  sharp  edges 
of  the  grass  cleft  their  tongues,  and  the  snakes 
came  to  possess  split  tongues.  Thereby  the  Tcusa 
grass  also  became  sacred,  because  the  pot  of  amrita 
was  placed  upon  it  by  Garuda.  This  mythical 
kite  really  represents  the  sun,  and  is  therefore 
associated  with  Vishnu,  who  is  a  solar  god  in 
origin. 

The  image  of  Graruda  should  have  the  colour 
of  the  emerald,  and  the  beak  and  the  legs  should 
be  made  to  resemble  those  of  a  kite.  The  eyes 
should  be  roundish,  and  the  image  should  have 
four  arms  and  possess  also  a  pair  of  powerful 
wiags  of  golden  yellow  colour  and  bright  lustre.  In 
one  of  the  hands  there  should  be  held  an  umbrella 
and  in  another  the  pot  of  amrita  ;  the  two  remain- 
ing hands  are  to  be  in  the  anjali  pose.  Garuda 
should  be  fashioned  with  a  flabby  belly.  Such  is 
evidently  the  description  of  the  image  of  Garuda, 
when  he  is  sculptured  independently  as  apart  from 
Vishnu.  When  the  image  is  associated  with 
Vishnu,  the  two  hands,  carrying  respectively  the 
pot  of  ambrosia  and  the  umbrella,  should  both  be 
engaf^ed  in  supporting  the  feet  of  Vishnu,  riding 
astride  on  the  shoulders  of  Garuda. 


285 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

The  Silparatna  gives  two  somewhat  different 
descriptions  of  Garuda.  According  to  one  descrip- 
tion the  iroage  should  have  the  golden  yellow 
colour  from  the  feet  to  the  knees,  should  be  snow- 
white  from  the  knees  to  the  navel,  scarlet  from  the 
navel  to  the  neck  and  jet  black  from  the  neck  to 
the  head  ;  the  eyes  should  be  yellow  and  the  beak 
blue ;  there  must  be  a  terrific  look  in  the  eyes  of 
Garuda,  and  he  should  have  only  two  hands  one  of 
which  is  to  be  in  the  abhaya  pose.  In  the  other 
description,  the  Silparatna  states  that  Graruda 
should  have  eight  hands  in  six  of  which  he  should 
be  carrying  respectively  the  pot  of  ambrosia,  the 
gacld,  the  saiiJiha,  the  cliahra,  the  sword  and  a 
snake.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  two  other  hands. 
Instances  of  Garudas  of  this  description  have  not 
been  met  with  in  actual  sculptures. 

Yet  another  description  of  Garuda  is  met  with 
in  the  8rl-tatva-nidhi.  Therein  it  is  stated  that 
Garuda  should  be  kneeling  on  his  left  knee,  and 
that  his  crown  should  be  adorned  with  snakes. 
His  legs  and  knees  should  be  made  stout.  Garuda 
should  possess  the  face  and  body  of  human  beings, 
but  his  nose  should  be  raised  and  pointed 
prominently.  He  should  have  only  two  hands 
held  in  the  anjali  pose.  Obviously  this  is  the 
description  of  the  image  of  Garuda  as  found  set  up 

286 


PLATE  liXXXIV, 


a 
o 


m 


c3 


tTo  face  page  287. j 


GAEUDA  AND  AYUDHAPURUSHAS. 

generally  in  front  of  the  central  shrine  in  Vishnu 
temples. 

Of  the  two  illustrations  of  Garuda  given  on 
Pis.  LXXXIV  and  LXXXA^  the  first  is  found 
in  the  rock-cut  cave  Xo.  Ill  at  Badami  cawed  on  the 
front  gable ;  the  second  one,  which  is  carved  in 
wood,  is  preserved  in  the  Siva  temple  at  Palur  in 
the  Native  State  of  Travancore.  In  both  the  in- 
stances Garuda  has  a  beak-like  nose,  round  eyes, 
two  outstretched  wings  and  a  pair  of  arms.  In 
addition  to  these,  the  Badami  sculpture  has  a  flabby 
belly  and  is  seen  holding  in  his  right  hand  a  snake, 
and  wearing  various  ornaments.  The  Palur  Garuda 
is  one  of  the  finest  specimens  of  wood-carving  of  the 
Malabar  country ;  it  is  less  than  two  centuries  old. 
It  is  seen  carrying  in  the  right  hand  the  elephant 
Supratika,  one  of  whose  legs  is  held  between  the 
talons  of  Garuda.  In  the  left  hand  of  Garuda  is  to 
be  seen  the  tortoise  Vibhavasu  ;  the  left  wing  of 
this  image  of  Garuda  is  lost.  The  Palur  Garuda 
is  carved  so  as  to  be  hung  on  the  ceiling  by  means 
of  a  chain. 

The  various  weapons  and  emblems,  such  as 
vajra,  saktl,  dantla,  kJiadga,  pdsa,  aiihuka,  gada, 
triiiila,  padma,  cJiakra  and  dhvaja,  which  are 
generally  found  in  the  hands  of  the  images  of 
Vishnu,  Siva,  and  the  other  gods,  are  personified 

287 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

under  the  name  of  Ayudha-purushas  and  are  also 
Ayudha-puru-     Concretised   as    images.     Some  of 
^^^^'  them    are    represented    as   males, 

some  as  females  and  some  as  eunuchs.  For  in- 
stance, the  8aJiti  and  the  Gada  are  worked  out  as 
females  ;  the  AnJaisa,  the  Pasa,  the  Sula,  the 
Vajra,  the  Khadga  and  the  Danda  as  males ;  and 
the  GhaJira  and  the  Padma  as  eunuchs.  The  sex 
of  a  personified  Ayudha  is  however  determined 
merely  with  reference  to  the  gender  of  its  name  in 
Sanskrit.  Thus,  the  gender  of  the  words  saMi  and 
gada  is  the  feminine,  hence  the  Ayudha-purushas 
representing  them  are  to  be  females  :  similarly,  the 
words  chaJcra  and  padma  are  in  the  neuter  gender, 
and  the  weapons  denoted  by  them  are  consequently 
represented  as  eunuchs.  In  the  same  way  vajra 
and  the  other  words  mentioned  above  are  in  the 
masculine  gender  and  the  corresponding  Ayudha- 
purushas  are  sculptured  as  males.  It  is  required 
that  the  Ayudha-purushas  should  be  made  accord- 
ing to  the  ashta-tala  measure,  that  they  should 
each  have  only  one  face  with  a  pair  of  eyes,  that 
the  head  should  be  adorned  with  the  Jcaranda- 
viahuta  and  that  each  of  them  should  have  only 
two  hands  held  over  the  chest  in  the  anjali  pose. 
When  their  hands  are  in  the  anjali  pose  the  parti- 
cular emblem  or  weapon  which   each  of  them  is 

288 


PLATE  LXXXY. 


-t^™. 


« 


J3 

a 


'2 


[To  face  page  288.] 


a 


GARUDA  AND  AYUDHA-PURUSHAS. 

intended  to  represent,  is  shown  over  the  crown  worn 
on  the  head  ;  otherwise,  the  weapon  or  emblem  is 
placed  between  the  hands. 

The  Sakti  has  to  be,  as  has  already  been  stated 
a  female  figure :  it  should  be  of  red  colour  and  seat- 
ed  upon  a  vrtha  or  wolf.     The  Danda  is   to  be  a 
male  of  black  colour,  with  red  eyes  and   a  fearful 
look.    The  Khadga  should  be  a  male  figure  of  dark 
complexion  and  angry  look.     The  Paka  should  be 
sculptured  as  a  male  snake  with  seven  hoods.    The 
Dhvaja  should  be  a  sturdy  looking  male  of  yellow 
complexion  with  the  mouth  wide  open.    The  Gada 
should   be  a  female    figure  of   yellow   colour   with 
large  glutials  ;   the  Vislinitdhanndttara   says   that 
she   must    have    a    slender   waist,  and  be   adorn- 
ed  with   various  ornaments ;  she  should   be  made 
to  carry   a    vhamara    in    her   hands.     The   right 
hand  of   Vishnu   should  be   made    to   touch   the 
head  of  Gada.     The    Trishla    has   to  be    a  good- 
looking  black  complexioned  male,  with  handsome 
brows.     The  ^ahkha  should  be  lepresented  as  a 
white  male  figure  with  pretty  eyes.     The  Heti — a 
weapon  like   the  hatchet — is  a   female,  while  the 
Bhindi — the  sling  for  throwing  stones,  is  a  male. 
The  Bana  has  to  t)e  a  male  figure  with  a  red  body 
and  with  good  looking  eyes;  the  Vaihhaitasagama 
states  that  the   Bana  is    napiimsaka — a  eunuch — 

289 
37 


HINDU  ICONOGEAPHY. 

and  should  be  of  black  complexion  with  three  eyes, 
should  be  draped  in  white  clothes  and  capable  of 
producing  the  fearful  noise  of  the  sea.  The  valiana 
or  vehicle  of  this  personified  weapon  is  the  wind, 
Vaiju,  and  its  banner  is  the  feather.  It  must  carry 
an  actual  arrow  on  its  head.  The  birth  star  of 
Bana,  whatever  it  means,  is  given  as  the  Sata- 
bhishang-nalsJiatra  in  the  month  Mdgha  and  its 
hijahsliara  is  said  to  be  sa.  The  personified  Dlianiis 
is  a  female  figure  carrying  a  stringed  bow  on  her 
head ;  her  complexion  should  have  the  red  colour 
of  the  lotus.  Chohra  is  described  in  the  Vishnu- 
liJtarinditara  as  a  male  figure  with  round  eyes  and 
a  drooping  belly  ;  this  image  of  Ghahra  should  be 
adorned  with  various  ornaments  and  should  carry 
a  eliaviara.  It  should  be  sculptured  so  as  to  indi- 
oriito  that  it  is  evincing  a  desire  to  gaze  upon 
Vishnu  ;  and  the  left  hand  of  Vishnu  should  be 
made  to  rest  upon  the  head  of  the  CliaJiva-imrusha. 
Another  characteristic  form  of  the  Clial'ra 
which  is  found  in  all  important  Vishnu  temples  is 
called  the  Sudarsana-cliah'u-  In  Tamil  it  is 
known  as  Chalnxittalrar.  This  is  occasionally  set 
up  as  a  main  image  in  a  shrine  attached  to  certain 
Vaishnava  temples.  It  is  in  outline  a  chal-ra  of  the 
ordinary  non-personified  form  with  a  fearful  figure 
of  Vishnu  with  eight  hands  in  a  standing  posture 

290 


GARL'DA  AND  AYUDHA-PURUSHAS. 

occupying  the  interior  of  a  shat-kona-chakra  con- 
sisting of  two  interlacing  equilateral  triangles.    On 
the  reverse  there  is  the  figure  of  a  Yoga-Narasiihha, 
seated  on     a    tri-kona-rhakra,    that    is.    on    an 
equilateral  triangle  with  its  apex  pointing  to  the 
top.    (See  fig.  2,  PI.  LXXXV  and  PI.  LXXXVI.) 
The  description    of   Sudarsana   as  given  in  the 
Silpamtna     is    as    follows :— "  The    Chakra-rupi 
Vishnu*  should  have  in  his  hands  the  cliakra,  the 
gada,  the  iiraga  (a  snake),  the  padma,  the  musala, 
the  travisa,  the  pasa  and  the  ankiisa.     He  should 
have  his  hair  standing  out  in  twenty  jatas  or  plaits 
which  are  like  the  flames  of  the  flaming  god  of 
fire.     His  hody  should  be  resplendent  as  the  sun 
and    should    enlighten    all   the    quarters    of  the 
universe.     He  should  have  a  terrific  look,  and  the 
face   should   have   clearly    visible    curved    tusks. 
According  to  another  description  of  Sudarsana,  the 
obverse  should  exhibit  the  terrific  figure  of  Vishnu, 
with   sixteen  hands,  holding  the  weapons  cliakra, 


'  The  Ahirbudhnya-samhita  deals  largely  with  the  great- 
ne:ss  of  the  Sudarsana-chakra  ;  in  it  Sudarsana  is  defined  as 
the  original  thought  of  Para-brahman  when  it,  of  its  own 
accord,  conceived  the  idea  of  expanding  into  space  and 
thus  bringing  into  existence  the  universe,  This  thought 
of  the  Supreme  Being  which  is  indestructible  is  called 
Sudarsana. 


291 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

sankJia,  dhanus,  parasu,  asi*  (a  sword),  bana,  sula, 
paia,  ahkuka,  agni,  khadga,  Tthetalta,  hala,  musala, 
gada  and  hunta.  He  should  have  fearful  tusks 
and  the  hair  on  his  head  should  be  repre- 
sented as  shining  and  highly  towering.  He  should 
possess  three  eyes  and  have  a  golden  coloured 
body,  resting  on  the  back  of  a  shat-hona-chaJcra. 
On  the  reverse  there  should  be  the  figure  of 
Nrisimha  in  the  yoga  attitude,  with  his  two  front 
hands  resting  upon  the  knees,  the  bent  legs  being 
crossed  in  front.  In  the  back  pair  of  hands  he 
should  be  holding  the  chahra,  and  the  sahJeha. 
He  should  be  bright  like  the  fire  and  be  surround- 
ed by  streams  of  flames.  This  killer  of  Hiranya- 
kasipu  should  have  brightly  resplendent  nails. 
His  three  eyes  are  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  fire ; 
he  should  have  a  brilliant  tongue  and  also  very 
bright  tusks  which  strike  terror  into  the  mind  of 
the  wicked ;  and  his  hair  should  be  like  flaming 
fire. 

This  Sudarsana-chakra  is  praised  as  the  des- 
troyer of  the  life  of  all  enemies — ripu-jana  prana- 
samhara-chah'a'm.  The  weapons  described  above 
have  all  a  symbolic  meaning  underlying   them. 

*  Vajra     according   to    the     Pancharatrdgama    which 
appears  to  be  correct. 

292 


GARUDA  AND  AYUDHA-PURUSHAS. 

This  meaning  is  variously  described  in  several 
Sanskrit  works.  For  instance,  the  Vishnu-purana 
says  that  thegada  represents  the  Sahkhya  principle 
called  buddhi  and  the  sahkha  indicates  the  prin- 
ciple ahahkaia  viewed  in  relation  to  the  bliTita- 
tanmatras  (in  the  material  aspect) :  the  niana-s 
(mind)  and  its  changeability  is  represented  by  the 
chakra,  which  is  besides  an  emblem  of  power.  The 
bd7ia  symbolises  the  haiimndiiyaa  and  the 
jnanendriyas.  The  asi  or  khadga  is  emblematic  of 
vldya  (spiritual  wisdom)  while  the  scabbard  in- 
which  it  is  kept  represents  auidtja  (ignorance). 
The  lord  of  the  indriijas,  Hrishikesa,  though  per- 
sonally bodiless  assumes  a  body  for  the  sake  and 
benefit  of  his  creatures.  The  idea  intended  is  obvi- 
ously to  denote  that  the  powers  of  prakrifi  or 
nature  are  in  fact  the  powers  of  God  who  is  the 
Lord  of  Nature. 

The  Kamikagavia  and  following  it,  some  of 
the  other  Saivagamas  attach  the  following  signi- 
ficance to  the  various  ayudJias  of  ^iva  ;  the  trikula 
indicates  the  three  giinas  of  prakriti  respectively 
called  safca,  rajan  and  tamas.  The  parasu  repre- 
sents Siva's  divine  strength  and  power  {§akti),  the 
khadga,  his  valour  ;  the  vahni  (fire)  his  samMra- 
iakti  or  power  of  destruction  ;  this  last  one,  namely, 
the  vahni  is  further  conceived  to  destroy  all  pdsaa 

293 


HINDU  ICONOGRAPHY. 

or  bonds  and  attachments,  and  is  consequently 
emblematic  of  the  enlightenment  which  comes 
after  the  bonds  of  sin  and  sorrow  are  broken  as- 
under and  destroyed.  The  nagas  serving  as  orna- 
ments on  his  body  show  the  fortitude  of  Siva  as 
also  the  inviolability  of  viclhi,  or  his  com- 
mandments and  laws.  The  pMa,  which  is  a  three- 
fold cord  or  rope,  indicates  the  threefold  bondage 
of  incarnated  life  consisting  of  Tcarma,  maya  and 
mala,  that  is,  of  work,  delusion  and  impurity.  The 
ghanta  (bell)  is  the  symbol  of  sound  looked  upon 
as  the  original  cause  of  creation,  and  is  indicative 
of  the  mantra-svampa  of  Siva,  which  is  his  mystic 
sound-form.  The  ankiisa  stands  for  the  selective 
faculty  in  choosing  what  is  enjoyable  for  the  atman 
as  soul.  In  the  Saivagamas  the  weapons  and 
emblems  of  Siva  are  made  to  convey  the  same 
fundamental  conception  as  the  weapons  and 
emblems  of  Vishnu  do  in  the  Vaishnavagamas, 
namely,  that  Siva,  as  the  Lord  of  Nature,  is  the 
wielder  of  his  own  powers  as  well  as  of  the  powers 
of  Prakriti. 

Bhaskararaya  in  his  commentary  on  the  Lali- 
tasahasranama,  explains  in  his  own  way  the  sym- 
bolic meaning  underlying  the  pdsa,  the  ankusa 
and  other  weapons  and  emblems  which  are  usually 
carried  by  the  goddess  Sakti^  who  herself  symbo- 

294 


GARL'DA  AND  AYUDHA-PURUSHAS. 

Uses  Nature  or  prah-iU  as  they  would  say  in 
Sanskrit.  He  of  course  quotes  authorities  in 
favour  of  the  explanation  he  gives  ;  and  even  here 
what  we  are  led  to  see  is  that  these  weapons  and 
emblems  symbolise  the  powers  of  Nature  and 
also  of  this  goddess  as  the  Supreme  ^listress  of 
Nature. 

The  Varaha-pumna  says  that  the  sanhha  is 
the  destroyer  of  aridija  or  ignorance,  the  Ihadga 
is  the  sunderer  of  ajnana  or  unwisdom,  the  chnh-a 
is  the  wheel  of  time,  and  lastly  the  gada  is  the 
destroyer  of  adharma  or  unrighteousness.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  here  the  symbolism  is  made  to 
be  more  markedly  ethical  than  in  the  previous 
interpretations  to  which  we  have  referred. 

Thus  we  may  see  that,  in  relation  to  these 
various  weapons  and  emblems  found  in  the  hands 
of  the  images  of  Hindu  gods  and  goddesses  there 
is  a  consensus  of  opinion  showing  that  the  early 
Hindus  had  probably  a  systematised  symbolism  as 
appertaining  to  their  iconoclastic  art  in  its  appli- 
cation to  religion.  The  key  to  this  symbology  if 
evidently  lost  and  cannot  be  easily  recovered. 
Yet,  even  here,  research  need  not  despair ;  and  to 
the  earnest  investigator  nothing  is  more  valuable 
asset  than  his  unabated  optimism  and  untiring 
hopefulness.     Till    this  lost  key  is  recovered  and 

29J 


HINDU  lOONOGBAPHY. 

established  to  be  the  true  key  according  to  strict 
scientific  canons,  nothing  more  than  making  mere 
guesses  in  the  dark  regarding  the  meaning  and 
moral  aim  of  Hindu  icons  is  really  possible. 
However,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  even  such 
guesses  have  their  value  to  those  who  earnestly  try 
to  find  out  the  truth  and  proclaim  it  after  it  is 
discovered. 


2tf6 


