TRANSLATION OF THE 
AITAREVA BRAHMANA 


14 


{ H 0.11. acl 




pa:&cika I 

The Soma Sacrifice 
ADHYAYA I 

The Consecration Sacrijice. 

i. 1. Agni^ is the lowest^ of the gods, Visnu the highest ; between them 
are all the other deities. A cake to Agni and Visnu on eleven potsherds they 
offer in connexion with the consecration ; verily thus they offer it without 
omission to all the deities. All the deities are Agni ; all the deities are 
Visnu ; Agni and Visnu are the two terminal forms of the sacrifice. In that 
they offer the cake to Agni and Visnu, verily thus at the ends they prosper 
as regards the gods.^ They say ‘ In that the cake is on eleven potsherds, 
and Agni and Visnu are two, what is the arrangement here for the two, 
what the division 1 ’ That for Agni is on eight potsherds ; the Gayatri has 
eight syllables ; the metre of Agni is the Gayatri. That for Visnu is on three 
potsherds, for thrice did Visnu stride across this. This is the arrangement 
here for the two, this the division. A pap in ghee should he offer, who 
considers himself unsupported ; in this (earth) does he not find support who 
does not find support. Ghee is the milk of the woman, the rice grains that 
of the man ; that is a pairing ; with a pairing verily thus does he propagate 
him with offspring and cattle, for generation ; he is propagated with offspring 
and with cattle who knows thus. He has grasped the sacrifice, he has 
grasped the deities, who offers the new and full moon sacrifices. Having 
sacrificed with the new moon or full moon oblation he should consecrate 

' AB. i. 1-6, corresponding to KB. vii. 1-4, secondarily correspond with the position 

deals with the consecration sacrifice which of the gods at the sacrifice. Both sides 

according to different authorities pre- of the relation are clearly present to the 

cedes or follows the consecration proper. Br^hmana. Cf. RV. iv. 1. 5 ; iii. I* 

For the ritual see AiJS. iv. 2. 1-3 ; 3. 1 ; v. 2. 3. 6 ; KB. vii. 2 ; TS. v. 6. 1. 4 

V.3. 1-9; Caland and Henry, L’Agrnwfowa, cited by Aufrecht, who, for Agni as all 

pp. 15, 16. other gods, cites TS. vi. 2. 2. 6 ; TB. iii. 

2 Sayana refers these terms to the place of 2. 8. 10. 

the deities in the litanies of the Agni- * In Haug's view the sense of rdh with acc. is 
stoma, the Ajya ^^^tra being addressed ‘ make to prosper rather than ‘satisfy* 

to Agni, and the last ^astra, the Agni- as taken in BR., or ‘ worship as in 

maruta, containing a verse to Visnu, Sayana’s paricaranti. Rather the accusa- 

while Haug insists that the terms are of tive is one of reference ; see Keith, 

locality in the universe, and hence only Taitiirlya Sathhitd, p, 100, n. 3. 



[108 


i, 1 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

himself in the same oblation, the same strew; this is one consecration.^ 
Seventeen ® kindling verses should he recite ; Prajapati is seventeenfold ; 
the months are twelve, the seasons five through the union of winter and 
the cool season ® ; so great is the year ; Prajapati is the year. With these 
(verses) which abide in Prajapati does he prosper who knows thus. 

i. 2. The sacrifice went, away from the gods; it they sought to start up 
with offerings ; in that they sought to start it up with offerings that is why 
offerings have their name. They found it ; he prospers having found the 
sacrifice who knows thus. The libations (dhv>ti) are callings by name, for 
by them the sacrificer calls to the gods ; that is why libations have their 
name. Ways ' (uti) rather are they called by which the gods come to the call 
of the sacrificer ; paths and passages are ways ; verily thus are they the 
roads to heaven of the sacrificer. They say, ‘ Since another pours the Ubation, 
then why do they style Hotr him who recites (the invitatory verses) and 
says the offering verses 1 ’ In that he here according to their portion invites 
the deities, (saying*) ‘ Bring hither N. N,, bring hither N. N.’, that is why 
the Hotr has the name. A Hotr becomes he, a Hotr they call him who 
knows thus. 

i. 3. Him whom they consecrate the priests make into an embryo again. 
With waters they sprinkle ; the waters are seed ; verily having made him 
possessed of seed they consecrate him. With fresh butter they anoint ; to 
the gods appertains melted butter, to men fragrant ghee, .slightly melted 
butter to the fathers, fresh butter to embryos.’ In that they anoint with 
fresh butter, verily thus they make him successful with his own portion. 
They anoint him completely ; ointment is the brilliance in the eyes ; verily 
thus having made him possessed of brilliance they consecrate him. With 
twenty-one handfuls of Darbha they purify him ; verily thus purified and 
pure they consecrate him. They conduct him to the hut of the consecrated ; 
the hut of the consecrated is the womb of the consecrated ; verily thus they 
conduct him to his own womb ; therefore (in and) from a firm womb he 
stands and moves ; therefore (in and) from a firm womb embryos are placed 
and grow forth. Therefore the .sun should not rise or set on the con8ecrate<l 

* The rule is laid down by A^S. iv. 1. 1 that fifteen only are prescribed in 998. v. 3. 8 

the new and full moon sacrifices should and in KB. 

precede the Agrayana,the Nirudhapa 9 U, ® Cf. Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 110, 
the O&turmftsyas, and the Soma sacrifice, 111. 

but he admits (iv. 1.2) that the reverse ^ As Aufrecht points out, this derivation is 
order was possible and the other Sutras not intended as grammatically correct, 

leave the order undecided. The sacrifice * See A^S. i. 2. 6 ; 99®* ^* ®^* 

here laid down for the consecration is in i. 3. ^ Cf. TS. vi. 1. 1.4 ; iii- 1. 8.8 ; and for 
fact a mere variant of the full moon rite. §§ 9 and 10, 11, 16 and 18, 19, cf. TS. vi. 

® i. e. the usual fifteen, A^S. i. 2. 7, and two 1. 2. 1 ; 2. 5. 5 ; 1. 3. 2 ; 4. 3 ; L^vi, La 

Dhayyas, iv. 2. 1 . On the other hand, doctrine du sacrifice, pp. 103-106. 



109] 


The Consecration Sacrifice [ — i. 4 

elsewhere than in the hut of the consecrated, nor should they call out to him. 
With a garment they cover him ; the garment is the caul of the consecrated ; 
verily thus they cover him with a caul. Above that is the black antelope 
skin ; the placenta is above the caul ; verily thus they cover him with the 
pJacenta. He closes his hands ^ ; verily closing its hands the embryo lies 
within ; with closed hands the child is born. In that he closes his hands, 
verily thus he clasps in his hands the sacrifice and all the deities. They say, 

‘ There is no competing pressing ^ for him who is first consecrated ; the 
sacrifice is grasped by him, the deities are grasped ; no misfortune is his as 
there is of him who is not consecrated first.’ Having loosened the Idack 
antelope skin, he descends to the final bath ; therefore embryos are born 
freed from the placenta ; with the garment he descends *, therefore a child 
is born with a caul. 

i. 4. ‘ Thou, 0 Agni, art extending ’ and ‘ O Soma, thy wondrous ’ should 
he recite as invitatory verses^ for the butter portions for him who previously 
has not sacrificed ; ‘ with thee they extend the sacrifice ' (he says ‘^) ; verily 
thus for him he extends the sacrifice. ‘ Agni with ancient thought ’ and 
‘ O Soma, with verses thee ' (he should use for him who has sacrificed 
before ; in the word ‘ ancient ’ he refers to the former offering. This is not to 
be regarded. ‘ May Agni slay the foe ' and ‘ Thou, O Soma, art very loi’d ’ 
(these should he recite and) make (the butter portions) contain a reference 
to the slaying of Vrtra.^ Vrtra he slays to whom the sacrifice condescends ; 
therefore should they be made to contain a reference to the slaying of Vrtra. 
‘Agni the head, the first of the deities’ and ‘ With Agni, O Visnu, the 
highest great penance ’ are the invitatory and offering verses of the oblation 
for Agni and Visnu ^ ; they are perfect in form as being addressed to Agni 
and Visnu ; that in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, that 
rite which as it is performed the verse describes. Agni and Visnu are the 
guardians of consecration of the gods ; they are lords of the consecration ; 
in J;hat the oblation is for Agni and Visnu, (it is because they desire ®) ‘ May 
those who are the lords of the consecration, being delighted, confer con- 
secration, may those who consecrate consecrate.’ They are Tristubh verses, 
to secure power. 


« See Ap9S. xi. 18. 7. 

3 i. e. ii sacrifice instituted at the same 
time and place by another sacrificor ; 
a mountain or stream constitutes a suffi- 
cient local differentiation ; see A 9 S. vi. 
6 . 11 . 

^ RV. V. 18. 4 and i. 91. 9. These are the 
sadvantau which are used in the ordinary 
Isti ; see KB. i. 1 ; 95®* ii. 2. 18. 


2 RV. V. 13. 4 e?. 

3 RV. viii. 44. 12 and i. 91. 11 

♦ RV. vi. 16. 34 and i. 91. 5. 

3 Not in RV. and therefore given in full in 
A9S. iv. 2. 3. 

® The correct sense of the use of iti is realized 
by Sayana; it is very common in the 
AB. and KB., especially the latter, but 
is normally disregarded by Haug. 



i. 5—] 


The Soma SacriJiGe [110 

i. 5. Gayatri verses ^ should he use as the invitatory and olFering verses of 
the Svistakrt, who desires brilliance or splendour ; the Gayatri is brilliance 
and splendour ; brilliant and resplendent does he become who knowing thus 
uses Gayatri verses. Usnih verses ^ should he use who desires life ; the 
Usnih is life ; he lives all his days who knowing thus uses Usnih verses. 
Anustubh verses ^ should he use who desires the heaven ; of two Anustubhs 
there are sixty-four syllables ; three worlds each twenty-onefold are there 
stretching upwards ; with twenty-one (verses) each he mounts these worlds ; 
with the sixty- fourth he finds support in the world of heaven ; support he 
finds who knowing thus uses Anustubh verses. Brhati verses^ should he 
use who desires prosperity and glory ; the Brhati is prosperity and glory 
among the metres ; verily prosperity and glory he places in himself who 
knowing thus uses Brhati verses. Pankti verses ^ should he use who desires 
the sacrifice ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; verily the sacrifice condescends to 
him who knowing thus uses Pankti verses. Tristubh verses ® should he 
use who desires strength ; the Tristubh is force, power, and strength ; 
possessed of force, power, and strength does he become who knowing thus 
uses Tristubh verses. Jagati verses^ should he use who desires cattle; 
cattle arc connected with the Jagati ; he becomes possessed of cattle who 
knowing thus uses Jagati verses. Viraj verses® should he use who desires 
proper food ; the Viraj is food ; therefore he who here has most food is most 
glorious in the world ; that is why the Viraj has its name (the glorious). 
Glorious among his own is he, best of his own <loes lie become who knows 
thus. 

i. 6. Now the Viraj is a metre of five strengths; in that it has three Padas, 
it is the Usnih and Gayatri ; in that its Padas have eleven syllables, it is the 
Tristubh ; in that it has thirty-three syllables, it is the Anustubh, for metres 
are not different by reason of one syllable, nor yet by two ; in that it is the 
Viraj, that is its fifth (strength). The strength of all the metres he wins, 
the strength of all the metres he attains, unity with and identity of form 
and world with all the metres he attains, an eater of food, a lord of food 
he becomes, with his offspring he attains proper food, who knowing thus 
uses Viraj verses. Therefore should Viraj verses® be used, namely ‘ Kindled, 
O Agni ’ and ‘ These, O Agni The consecration is holy order, the consecra- 
tion is truth ; therefore by one who is consecrated should truth alone be 
spoken. Rather they say, ‘ What man ought to speak all truth ; the gods are 

' RV. iii. 11. 2 and 1. For samydjye see A^S. ® RV. v. 6. 1 and 2. 

ii. 1. 21. The term is not used in ® ^ 

2 RV. i. 79. 4 and 5. ^ RV. v. 11. 1 and 2. 

* RV. i. 46. 1 and 2. * RV. vii. 1. 3 and 18. 

* RV. vii. 16. 1 and 3. 



Ill] 


The Introductory Sacrifice 


of truth compact,^ but men of untruth compact.’ He should speak with 
(the word ‘ discerning ’ ; ‘ the discerning is the eye, for by it he sees dis- 
tinctly ’ (they say). Now the eye is truth deposited among men ; therefore 
to him who narrates they say, ‘ Hast thou seen ? ’ If he replies ‘ I have 
seen then him they believe. But if a man himself sees, he believes not 
even many others. Therefore should he speak with (the word) ‘dis- 
cerning ’ ; his speech is uttered as essentially true.^ 

ADHYAYA II 

The Introductory Sacrifice. 

i. 7 (ii. 1). In ^ that there is the introductory (sacrifice), thereby they 
advance to the world of heaven ; that is why the introductory (sacrifice : 
Prayaniya) has its name (advancing). The introductory (sacrifice) is 
expiration, the concluding (sacrifice) is out-breathing, the Hotr is common, 
for expiration and out-breathing are common, for the arrangement of the 
breaths, for the discrimination of the breaths. The sacrifice went away from 
the gods ; the gods could do nothing, they could not discern it. They said to 
Aditi, ‘ Through thee let us discern the sacrifice.’ She said, ‘ So be it, but let 
me choose a boon from you.’ ‘ Choose ’ (they replied). This boon she choose, 
‘ Let the sacrifices begin from me and end with me.’ ‘ So be it ’ (they 
replied). Therefore there is a pap to Aditi as introductory (offering) 
(a pap) to Aditi as concluding (offering), for as a boon by her was this 
chosen. Moreover she chose this boon, ‘ Through me shall ye know tlie 
eastern quarter, through Agni the southern, through Soma the western, 
through Savitr the northern.’ He says the offering verse for Pathya ; in 
that he says the offering verse for Pathya, therefore does yonder (sun) 
arise in the east and set in the west, for it follows Pathya. He says the 
offering verse for Agni ; in that he says the offering verse for Agni, there- 
fore from the south the plants come first ripe, for the plants are connected 
with Agni. He says the offering verse for Soma ^ ; in that he says the 

^ Cf. 9®* fidtymn eva devd anrtmh sacrifice as in KB. vii. 5-9 ; for the ritual 

manusydh, see A^S. iv. 3. 1-3 ; g^S. v. 5. 1-7 ; Caland 

* The point is that he is to add in his addresses and Henry, L' Agnistoma, pp, 28, 29. For 

the word vicaksa^a to the proper name §§ 2 and 3 cf. KB. vii. 5, 6, 8 ; for § 3 

or (according to ApgS. x. 12. 7, 8) canasita TS. vi. 1. 5. 1 ; MS. iii. 7. 1 ; gB. iii. 2. 3. 

in the case of a Brahman. The passage is 1 seq, ; Levi, La doctrine dii sacrifice^ pp. 49, 

boriQwed in GB. vii. 23. 50. 

* So Sayana ; the compound can be reduced * RV. x 63. 15 and 16 are the verses used at 

into satyd uitanly the rest of his speech is the sacrifice. 

made true by using vicaksana. For the 3 rv. i. 189. 1 ; x. 2. 3. The use of dyanti sug- 
superiority of sight to hearing cf. TB. i. gests rice brought north from S. India. 

1. 4. 2 ; gB. i. 3. 1. 27 ; below AB. ii.40. * RV. i. 91. 1 and 4. 

i.7, ^ AB. i. 7-11 contains the introductory 



i. 7—] 


[112 


The Soma Sacrifice 

offering verso for Soma therefore westward flow many rivers, for the waters 
are connected with Soma. He says the offering verse for Savitr ; in that 
he says the offering verse for Savitr, therefore on the north-west he that 
blows blows most, for he blows instigated by Savitr. For Aditi ® last he 
says the offering verse ; in that he says the oflering verse for Aditi last, 
therefore yonder (sky) wets tliis (earth) with rain and snufls it up. For 
five deities does he say the offering verses ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; all 
the regions are in order, the sacrifice also is in order, for that people is (all) 
in order, where there is a Hotr knowing thus. 

i. S (ii. 2). He who desires brilliance and splendour should turn towards 
the east with the libations of the fore-offerings; the eastern quarter is 
brilliance and splendour ; brilliant and resplendent does he become who 
knowing thus goes to the east. He who desires proper food should 
turn towards tlie south with the libations of the fore-offerings; Agni 
is eater of food and lord of food ; he becomes an eater of food, a lord 
of food, with his offspring he attains proper food who knowing thus 
turns to the south. He who desires cattle should turn west with the 
libations of the fore-ofterings ; the waters are cattle; he becomes possessed 
of cattle who knowing thus turns west. He who desires the drinking 
of Soma should turn north with the libations of the fore-offerings; Soma 
the king is in the north ; he obtains the drinking of Soma who knowing 
thus turns north; the upward region is heavenly; in all the quarters 
he prospers. These worlds are turned towards one another ^ ; turned towards 
him these worlds shine for prosperity for him who knows thus. For Pathya 
he says the offering verse ; in that he says the offering verse for Pathya, 
N^erily thus at the beginning of the sacrifice he gathers speech together. 
Agni and Soma are expiration and inspiration, Savitr (serves) for instiga- 
tion, Aditi for support. Verily for Pathya he says the offering verse ; in that 
he says the offering verse for Pathya, verily thus with speech he leads the 
sacrifice to the path. Agni and Soma are the eyes ; Savitr (serves) for 
instigation, Aditi for support. By the eye the gods discerned the sacri- 
fice ; by the eye that is discerned which cannot be discerned ; therefore 
even after wandering in confusion, when a man perceives with the eye 
immediately,^ then he discerns indeed. In that the gods discerned the 
sacrifice, in this (earth) they discerned, in it they gathered together ; from ^ 
it is the sacrifice extended, from it is it performed, from it is it gathered 

® RV. X. 82. 7 and 9. which agrees generally with kendpi yaina^ 

® RV. X. 63. 10 and tho verse mahim u sie, AV. vfpMena. 

vii. 6. 2. 8 S&ynna has the loc. as the explanation ; so 

^ The sense is uncertain ; Sayana has svodta- Haug, but abl. or dat. alone can be 

bhogapradUf Haug * linked together meant. 

^ Anusthyd is rendered * successively ’ by Haug, 



113 ] The Introductory Sacrifice [ — i. lo 


together, for Aditi is this (earth). Thus he says the offering verse for Aditi 
last ; in that he says the offering verse for Aditi last, it is for the discern- 
ment of the sacrifice, for the revealing of the world of heaven. 

i. 9 (ii. 3). ‘ The subjects of the gods should be brought into order,' they 
say ; ‘ as they are brought into order, the subjects of men come into order/ 
All the subjects come into order, the sacrifice comes into order also, (all) is 
in order for that people where there is a Hotr knowing thus. He recites,^ 

‘ Prosperity to us in the ways, in the deserts, 

Prosperity in the waters, in the abode which hath the light, 
Prosperity to us in the wombs that bear children, 

Prosperity for wealth do ye, O Maruts, bestow.' 

Tho Maruts are the subjects of the gods ; verily thus at the beginning of 
the sacridce he brings them into order. * With all the metres should he say 
the offering verse,’ they say ; having sacrificed with all the metres, the gods 
conquered the world of heaven ; verily thus the sacrificer having sacrificed 
with all the metres conquers the world of heaven. ‘ Prosperity to us in the 
ways, in the deserts ' and ‘ The highest safety in the way ’ are the Tristubh 
verses for Pathya Svasti.^ ‘ O Agni, lead us by a fair path to wealth ’ and 
‘ We have come to the path of the gods ’ are tho Tristubh verses for Agni.^ 
‘ Thou, O Soma, skilled in thought ’ and ‘ Thine abodes in the sky, on the 
earth ’ are the Tristubh verses for Soma.^ * The god of all, the lord of the 
good ' and ‘ Who all these beings ’ are the Gayatri verses for Savitr.® ‘ The 
good protector, the earth, sky unequalled ’ and ‘ Tho great one, the mother 
of those of good vows’ are the Jagati verses for Aditi.® These are all the 
metres, Gayatri, Tristubh, and Jagati, the others are dependent (on them), 
for these are used most prominently in the sacrifice. By means of these 
metres the sacrificer has sacrificed with all metres, who knows thus. 

i. 10 (ii. 4). The invitatory and offering verses of this oblation contain the 
words ^ ‘ forward ‘ lead ’, ‘ path ’, and ‘ prosperity ’ ; having sacrificed with 
them the gods won the world of heaven; verily thus also the sacrificer 
having sacrificed with them wins the world of heaven. In them there 
is the line, * Prosperity for wealth do ye, O Maruts, bestow ' ; the Maruts, 
as subjects of the gods,® occupy the atmosphere ; whoever without notifica- 
tion to them goes to the world of heaven they are likely to obstruct him or to 
crush him. In that he says, ‘Prosperity for wealth do ye, O Maruts, 
bestow,’ he announces the sacrificer to the Maruts the subjects of the gods ; 


1 RV. X. 63. 16. 

2 RV. X. 63. 16 and 16. 

5 RV. i. 189. 1 and x. 2. 3. 
* RV. i. 91. 1 and 4. 

» RV. V. 82. 7 and 9. 

15 [h.O.S. 8b] 


« RV. X. 63. 10 and AV. vii. 6. 2. 
i. 10. ^ The word mtr occurs only in the form 
naya, but the way of denoting roots varies 
greatly in AB. and KB. ; cf. p. 80. 

* Cf. KB. vii. 8 ; TS. vi. 1. 6. 3. 



[114 


i. 10 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

the Maruts, the subjects of the gods, do not obstruct him as he goes to the 
world of heaven, nor do they crush him. Prosperously they speed him to the 
world of heaven who knows thus. The invitatory and offering verses of the 
oblation for Svistakrt should be the two Viraj ^ verses of thirty-three syllables, 
‘ May Agni here be above the other Agnis ’ and ‘ The Agni who guardeth 
from the foe*. Having sacrificed with the two Viraj verses, the gods won the 
world of heaven ; verily thus also the sacrificer having sacrificed with two 
Viraj verses wins the world of heaven. They are of thirty-three syllables ; 
the gods are thirty-three, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, 
Prajapati, and the vasat call. Thus at the very beginning of the sacrifice 
he makes the deities sharers in the syllables; verily thus syllable by 
syllable he delights a deity; verily thus by a vessel for the gods he 
gladdens the deities. 

i. 11 (ii. 5). ‘The introductory (sacrifice) should be performed with the 
fore-oflerings but without the after-offerings * they say ; ^ ‘ in that there are 
after-offerings in the introductory (sacrifice), there is deficiency as it were, 
and delay as it were.’ That is not to be regarded. It should be performed 
with the fore-offerings and also with the after-offerings ; ^ the fore-offerings 
are the breaths, the after-offerings offspring ; if he were to omit the fore- 
offerings he would omit the breaths of the sacrificer ; if he were to omit the 
after-offerings, he would omit the offspring of the sacrificer; therefore should 
it be performed with the fore-offerings and also with the after-offerings. 
He should not perform the joint sacrifices for the wives (with the gods), 
nor should he offer with the concluding Yajus. By so much is the sacrifice 
incomplete. He should preserve the scrapings of the introductory (sacrifice) 
and mingle them with the concluding (sacrifice), for the continuity of the 
sacrifice, to prevent a breach in the sacrifice. Or rather in the pot in which 
he throws the introductory (sacrifice) into that he should throw the con- 
cluding (sacrifice). By so much the sacrifice becomes continuous and without 
a breach. ‘ Thereby they prosper in yonder world, not in this,* they say, ‘ in 
that it is introductory (advancing); as introductory they offer, as intro- 
ductory they proceed ; verily the sacrificers advance away from this world.* 
In ignorance verily they say thus. He should intertwine the invitatory 
and the offering verses ; the invitatory verses of the introductory (sacrifice) 
he should make the offering verses of the concluding (sacrifice) ; the invita- 
tory verses of the concluding (sacrifice) he should make the offering verses 
of the introductory (sacrifice). Thus he intertwines for success in both 
worlds, for support in both worlds; in both worlds is he successful, in 


s RV. vii. 1. 14 and 15. 

’ For this discussion see TS. vi. 1. 5. 8. 

* For the former see A^S. i. 5. 5 seq . ; 99®* h 


6. IGscg'. ; for the latter A 9 S. i. 8. 7 ; 99®* 
i. 12. 13 seq. 



116 ] 


The Buying of the Soma [ — i. 13 

both worlds he finds support. He finds support who knows thus. There 
is a pap for Aditi at the introductory, and one for Aditi at the concluding 
(sacrifice), for the support of the sacrifice, for the tying of the knots of the 
sacrifice, to prevent the slipping of the sacrifice. Just as then, he used to 
say, one ties the knots at both ends of a rope to prevent slipping, so at 
both ends of the sacrifice he ties knots to prevent slipping, in that there is 
a pap for Aditi at the introductory and also one for Aditi at the concluding 
sacrifice. With Pathya Svasti hence they advance, in Pathya Svasti they 
end ; prosperously hence they advance, prosperously they end. 

ADHYAYA III 

The Buying of the Soma 

i. 12 (iii. 1). In^ the eastern quarter the gods bought Soma the king; 
therefore in the eastern quarter is he bought. Him from the thirteenth 
month they bought; therefore the thirteenth month is not known; the 
Soma seller is not known, for the Soma seller is evil. Tlie strengths and 
powers of him when bought and going towards men went away to the 
quarters; them they sought to win with one verse; they could not win 
them ; them with two, with three, with four, with five, with six, with seven 
they could not win ; with eight they won, with eight they obtained ; that 
is why eight has its name. Whatever he desires he attains who knows 
thus. Therefore in these rites eight (verses) each are repeated, to win 
powers and strengths. 

i. 13 (iii. 2). ‘ For Soma when bought and being brought forward, do thou 
say the invitatory verse ’ the Adhvaryu says. ‘ From good to better do 
thou come forward ’ he says ; ^ this world is good ; than it yonder world 
is better ; verily thus he causes the sacrificer to go to the world of heaven. 
‘ Let Brhaspati be thy harbinger ’ (he says) ; Brhaspati is the holy power ; 
verily thus he makes the holy power precede him ; what has the holy power 
come to no harm. ‘ Do thou stay on the chosen spot of earth * (he says). The 
chosen spot of earth is the place of sacrifice to the gods ; verily thus he settles 
him on the chosen spot of earth. ‘ Do thou drive afar the foes, with all 
powers ’ (he says) ; verily thus he drives away the evil rival who hates him, 
and brings him low. "0 Soma, thy wondrous ’ this triplet to Soma^ in Gayatri 

1 AB. i. 12-14, like KB. vii. 10, treats briefly form as here in the Yajus recension is also 

of tlio ceremony of carrying forward the found at AV. vii. 8. 1 with the bad 

Soma when bought. For the ritual see variants dthemdm asyd ^dirum and sdrva^ 

A^S. iv. 4. 1-8 ; V. 6. 1-3 ; Caland vxram. For § 1 cf. KB. vii. 10. 

and Henry, VAgmatoma, pp. 60, 61. * RV. i. 91, 9-11. 

i. 13. ^ This verse which is found in the same 



i. 13 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [116 

he recites when Soma the king is being brought forward ; verily thus with 
his own deity, his own metre he makes him successful. ‘ All rejoice in the 
glory that hath come’ he recites;^ Soma the king is glory; every one 
rejoices in his being bought, both he who is to gain something in the 
sacrifice and he who is not. ‘The comrades in the comrade strong in 
the assembly, (he says); 'Soma the king is the comrade, strong in the 
assembly, of the Brahmans. ‘ Saving from sin * (he says) ; he indeed is 
a saviour from sin. He who is successful, he who attains pre-eminence, 
becomes sinful ; therefore they say,^ ‘ Do not recite, do not proceed ; let 
them not have sin to requite/ ‘ Winner of nourishment ’ (he says) ; nourish- 
ment is food ; nourishment is the sacrificial fee ; thereby he wins it ; verily 
thus he makes him a winner of food. ‘ Ready is he for manly force ’ 
(he says) ; manly force is power and strength ; manly force is not lost by 
him up to old age who knows thus. ‘ The god hath come * (he says ®), for 
he has come now ; ‘ With the seasons may he prosper the dwelling ’ (he says). 
The seasons are the royal brothers of Soma the king, as of a man ; verily 
thus with that he causes him to come. ‘ May Savitr bestow upon us fair 
progeny and sap ’ this benediction he invokes. ‘ May he quicken us with 
nights and days * (he says) ; the days are days, the nights are nights ; verily 
then for him with the days and the nights he invokes this benediction. 
‘ Wealth with offspring may he accord to us ’ this benediction he invokes. 
‘ Thine abodes which they worship with oblation ’ lie recites ; ® ‘ All these of 
thine be encompassing the sacrifice ; conferring wealth, accomplishing with 
good heroes ’ (he says) ; verily thus he says ‘ Be thou a conferrer of cattle 
on us and an accomplisher.’ ‘ Slayer of heroes, 0 Soma, go forward to the 
doors’ (he says); the doors are the house; the house of the sacrificer is 
afraid of Soma the king as he advances ; in that he recites this (verse), 
verily thus he calms him ; he calmed injures not his offspring or cattle. 
‘This prayer of thy suppliant, O god’, with (this verse) to Varuna he 
concludes; so long as he is tied up, Varuna is his deity, so long as he 
proceeds to the closed places; verily thus with his own deity, his own 
metre, he makes him successful. ‘ Of thy suppliant, 0 god ’ (he says ^) ; he 
who sacrifices is a suppliant. ‘Insight and skill, O Varuna, do thou 
quicken* (he says); verily thus he says, ‘Do thou, O Varuna, quicken 
strength and knowledge.’ ‘Let us mount that ship fair ci’ossing by 

S BV. X. 71. 10. great prosperity danger of sin is near at 

^ The version of Sayana takes ma pracarih as liand. 

addressed to the Adhvaryu and ydtayan ® Agan is taken as past by the BrS^hmana, 
as prdpnuvantahy but this seems unduly to though S&yana renders it as imperative, 

minimize ydtayan. The idea is that in too The verse is BV. iv. 53. 7. 

• BV. i. 91. 19. 7 BV. viii. 42. 3. 



117] The Buying of the Soma [ — i. 14 

which we may pass over all evils ’ (he says) ; the ship fair crossing is the 
sacrifice ; the ship fair crossing is the black antelope skin ; the ship fair 
crossing is speech; verily thus having mounted upon speech with it he 
crosses over to the world of heaven. These he recites eight in number, 
perfect in form ; that in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, 
that rite which as it is performed the verse describes. Of them he recites 
the first thrice, the last thrice ; they make up twelve ; the year has twelve 
months ; Frajapati is the year ; verily with those whose abode is Frajapati 
he prospers who knows thus. Thrice he recites the first, thrice the last ; 
verily thus he ties the ends of the sacrifice, for firmness, for might, to 
prevent slipping.® 

i. 14 (iii. 3). One of the two oxen should be yoked,^ the other unloosened ; 
then they should take down the king ; if they were to take down when both 
were unloosed, they would make the king have the fathers as his deity; 
if when yoked, lack of peace and rest would come on offspring ; offspring 
would scatter. The ox which is unyoked is the symbol of offspring who 
sit in the house ; the yoked one is that of those on a journey. Those who 
take down when one is yoked and one unyoked, produce both peace and 
rest. The gods and the Asuras strove for these worlds ; they contended for 
this eastern quarter ; the Asuras conquered them thence ; they contended for 
the southern quarter ; the Asuras conquered them thence ; they contended 
for the western quarter; the Asuras conquered them thence; they con- 
tended for the northern quarter ; the Asuras conquered them thence. They 
contended for the north-eastern quarter ; they were not conquered thence. 
This is the unconquered quarter ; therefore in this quarter one should strive 
or cause striving ; ^ for he has power to dispose of debts. The gods said, 
‘ Through our lack of a king they conquer us ; let us make a king.’ ‘ Be it 
so ’ (they said). They made Soma king ; with Soma as king they conquered 
all the quarters. He who sacrifices has Soma as king. While (the cart) 
stands facing east, they place on (the Soma) ; thereby he conquers the 
eastern quarter ; him they carry round to the south ; thereby he comjuera 
the southern quarter; him they turn round to the west; thereby he 
conquers the western quarter ; him they take down from (the cart) facing 
north ; thereby he conquers the northern quarter. By Soma the king he 
conquers all the quarters who knows thus. 

• Cf. TS. ii. 6. 7. 1. See Calaud and Henry, L'Agntstoma, 

» Cf. TS. vi. 2. 1. 1 ; MS. iii. 7. 9 ; 9 B. iii 4. p. 54. 

1. 4 disagrees with TS., MS., and AB. * The sense of yai is probably no more definite 

than tliis. 



i. 15—] 


[118 


The Soma Sacrifice 

The Guest Reception of Soma 

i. 15 (iii. 4). The^ oblation of the guest reception is offered, when Soma 
the king has come ; Soma the king comes to the house of the sacrificer ; to 
him this oblation of the guest reception is offered ; that is why the guest 
reception has its name. It is offered on nine potsherds ; the breaths are 
nine ; (it serves) to arrange the breaths, to recognize the breaths. It is for 
Visnu; the sacrifice is Visnu; verily thus with his own deity, his own metre, 
he makes him successful. All the metres and the Prsthas follow Soma the 
king when bought. As many as follow Soma the king, to all these is the 
guest reception performed. They kindle the fire, when Soma the king has 
come. Just as in the world when a human king has come, or another 
deserving person, they slay an ox or a cow that miscarries ; so for him they 
slay in that they kindle the fire, for Agni is the victim of the gods. 

i. 16 (iii. 5). * Recite for Agni being kindled* the Adhvaryu says; ‘To 
thee, O god Savitr,* (this verse) to Savitr he recites. They say ‘ Since it is 
for Agni being kindled that he recites by order, then why does he recite 
(a verse to Savitr ? * Savitr is lord of instigations ; verily thus on the 
instigation of Savitr they kindle him ; therefore he recites (a verse) to 
Savitr. ‘ May the two great ones, sky and earth, for us,’ (this verse) to sk|r 
and earth * he recites ; they say, ‘ Since it is for Agni being kindled that he 
recites by order, then why does he recite (this verse) to sky and earth ? * 
By means of sky and earth him when born the gods grasped ; by these two 
even to-day is he grasped ; therefore he recites (this verse) to sky and earth. 
‘ Thee, O Agni, from the lotus ’ this triad in Gayatri to Agni^ he recites when 
the tire is being kindled ; verily thus with his own deity, his own metre he 
makes him successful. ‘ Athar van kindled forth* is perfect in form; that 
in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, that rite which as it is 
performed the verse describes. If he is not born, if he is long in being 
born, then should be repeated Gayatri verses,^ Raksas slaying, namely, 
‘ O Agni strike down the foe ’ for the smiting away of the Raksases. The 
Raksases seize them when he is not born and is long in being bom. If he 
is bom when one only has been recited, or when two, then he should recite 
an appropriate (verse ®) containing (the word) ‘ born ‘ Let men say * for him 
when born. That which in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. ‘ Whom 
with the hand like a quoit * (he says ®), for with the hands they kindle him. 

^ AB. i. 15-18 describe the guest reception vi. 3. 5. 3 ; for § 2 KB. viii. 1. 

of Soma; cf. KB. viii. 1 and 2. For the ® RV. iv. 56. 1. 
ritual see A(}S. iv. 5; ggS. v. 7. For » RV. vi. 16. 13-16. 

§ 2 cf. TS. vi. 2. 1. 2. See also Caland * RV. x. 168. 
and Henry, VJgnistomay pp. 53, 57-60. ® RV. i. 74. 3. 

i. 16. 1 RV. i. 24. 3. For §§ 1 and 20 cf. TS. « RV. vi. 16. 40. 



119 ] 


The Guest Reception of Soma [ — i. 16 

‘ The child born ’ (he says) ; Agni is a first-born child as it were ; ‘ Like (it) 
they bear, Agni of the folk, good sacrificer ’ (he says) ; om is for them what na 
is for the gods. ‘ Forward bear the god to the feast for the gods, best winner 
of wealth' is the appropriate (verse for him when being taken forward ; that 
which in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect, ‘ Let him seat himself in 
his own place of birth ' (he says) ; he is his own place of birth in that Agni 
is Agni's. ‘ Bom in the all-knower ' (he says ®) ; one is born, one is the 
all-knower. * Quicken the dear guest ’ (he says) ; he is his dear guest in 
that Agni is Agni’s. ' On a smooth (place) the lord of the house ' (he says) ; 
verily thus be places him in health. ‘ By Agni is Agni kindled, the sage, 
the lord of the house, the youthful, bearer of the oblation, with the ladle in 
his mouth ' is the appropriate (verse ^) ; that which in the sacrifice is appro- 
priate is perfect. ‘ For thou, O Agni, by Agni, sage by the sage, good by 
the good ' (he says ^®) ; one is a sage, the other a sage ; one is good, the other 
good. ‘Friend with friend thou art enkindled' (he says); he is his own 
friend in that Agnids Agni’s. ‘Him they make bright, the skilled, the 
victor in contests, the mighty one in his own dwellings ’ (he says ^^) ; he is 
his own house in that Agni is Agni's. ‘ With the sacrifice the sacrifice the 
gods sacrificed', with the last^^ he concludes; with the sacrifice the gods 
sacrificed the sacrifice in that with Agni they sacrificed to Agni ; they went 
to the world of heaven. ‘ These laws were first ; these greatnesses resort to 
the sky, where are the ancient Sadhya gods * (he says ^^) ; the Sadhya gods 
are the metres ; they first sacrificed to Agni with Agni ; they went to the 
world of heaven. The Adityas and the Ahgirases were here; they first 
sacrificed with Agni to Agni ; they went to the world of heaven ; the 
libation to Agni is a heavenly libation. Even if he who sacrifices is not 
a Brahmana^^ or is wrongly spoken of, nevertheless his libation goes to the 
gods and is not united with evil ; his libation goes to the gods, and is not 
united with evil, who knows thus. These thirteen he recites perfect in 
form; that in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, that rite 
which as it is performed the verse describes. Of these he recites the first 
thrice, the last thrice. They make up seventeen ; Prajapati is seventeenfold, 


7 RV. vi. 16. 41. 

® RV. vi. 16. 42. 

» RV. i. 12. 6. 

>0 RV. viii. 43. 14. 

RV. viii. 84. 8. 

12 RV. i. 164. 60; see A^S. ii. 16. 7, 8 ; cf. 
99s. V. 16. 6. 

12 Sayana gives two views of dbrdhmana, either 
as one who is not instigated by a Br.ah- 
mana or one who is declared to bo a non- 
Brahman as explained by 9aiatapa in his 


Smrti. On the whole the use is probably 
in each case the same, ^ one who is said 
to be not a Brahman a non-Brahman 
(opposed to suhrdhmana, Wackernagel, 
Altind, Oram, ii. i. 261) or durukta. The 
alternative is to take ukta as ‘ instigated *, 
* directed by * one who is not a Brahman 
or is ill-spoken of. See AB. ii. 17. L^vi 
{La doctrim du sacrifice^ p. 123) has ‘on 
sacrifice sans Tavis d’un brahmane ou si 
on est diffamc,^ which is difficult. 



[120 


i. 16 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


the months are twelve, the seasons five; so great is the year; Prajapati is 
the year ; verily thus with these which have their abode in Prajapati he 
prospers who knows thus. He recites the first thrice, the last thrice ; verily 
thus he ties the ends of the sacrifice, for steadiness, for might, to prevent 
slipping. 

i. 17 (iii. 6). ‘With the kindling-stick honour Agni’ and ‘Swell up; be 
there gathered for thee* are the invitatory verses^ of the two butter 
portions, referring to the guest reception and perfect in form ; that in the 
sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, that rite which as it is being 
performed the verse describes. (The verse) to Agni contains (the word) 
‘ guest not that to Soma ; if (the verse) to Soma contained (the word) 
‘guest*, it would clearly® be (the verse to be used); but it does contain 
(the word) ‘ guest * as it contains (the word) ‘ made fat * ; when they serve 
him with food, then does he become fat. For them he says as offering 
verses ^ ‘ Delighting *, ‘ Over this Visnu strode * and ‘ To his beloved place 
may I win * are (two verses) to Visnu.^ Having used (a verse) of three 
Padas as invitatory verse, he says one of four as offering verse, there are 
seven Padas ; the guest reception is the head of the sacrifice ; there are 
seven breaths in the head ; verily thus he places breaths in the head. 
‘The Hotr of the sacrifice with brilliant car* and ‘Famed far is the Agni 
of Bharata* are the invitatory and offering verses of the Svistakrt,® 
referring to the guest reception and perfect in form ; that in the sacrifice 
is perfect which is perfect in form, that rite which as it is being performed 
the verse describes. They are Tristubh verses, to secure power. (The 
sacrifice) ends with the sacrificial food; the gods prospered by means 
of the guest reception ending with the sacrificial food ; therefore should 
it be performed ending with the sacrificial food. In this case they offer 
the fore-offerings, not the after-offerings. The fore-offerings and the after- 
offerings are the breaths ; the fore-offerings are those breaths in the head, 
the after-offerings those below. If in the case one were to offer the after- 
offerings, that would be as if one were to break off* those breaths and seek 
to place them in the head. That would be superfluous ; these breaths, 
both those and those, are united together ; ® verily thus in that they offer 
the fore-offerings, not the after-offerings, they obtain their desires in the 
fore-offerings and in the after-offerings. 


1 RV. viii. 44. 1 and i. 91. 16. 

> This seems here the sense of the ambiguous 
word fapva^, which is common in AB. in 
this form. Cf. Eggeling SBE. xxti. xxx. 
* i. e. the usual verses jiwsana agnir djyasya letu 
and jutdnah soiyia djyasya haviso vehi, A^S. 
i. 6, 29 ; ?5S. i. 8. 3 with haviso in the 
first also. 


< RV. i. 22. 17 and i. 154. 5. 

® RV. X. 1. 6 and vii. 8. 4. 

^ Sayana takes this as a potential and as 
explaining atiriktamj but it seems neces- 
sary to use it as explaining the next 
sentence, the breaths are united and so 
are in a sense one, ims . . . tnM because 
gestures are used. 



121 ] 


The Pravargya 


[— i. 19 


ADHYAYA IV 

The Pravargya. 

i, 18 (iv. 1). The^ sacrifice went away from the gods (saying), ‘I shall 
not be your food.* ‘ No replied the gods, ‘ Verily thou shalt be our food.’ 
The gods crushed it ; it being taken apart was not sufiicient for them. 
The gods said ‘ It will not be sufficient for us, being taken apart ; come, 
let us gather together the sacrifice.* (They replied) ‘Be it so*. They 
gathered it together ; having gathered it together they said to the Afvins, 
‘ Do ye two heal it *, the A 9 vins are the physicians of the gods, the 
A 9 vins the Adhvaryus ; therefore the two Adhvaryus gather together 
Ihc cauldron. Having gathered it together they say, ‘ O Brahman, we 
Sshall proceed with the Pravargya offering ; O Hotr, do thou recite.’ 

i. 19 (iv. 2). With ‘ The holy power born first in the east’ he begins;^ 
Brhaspati is the holy power ; verily thus with the holy power he heals 
him. ‘This royal one goeth in front to the father* (he says®) ; the royal 
one is speech; verily thus he places speech in him. ‘The great one 
hath established the two great ones, when bom * is addressed to 
Brahmanaspati ; ® Brhaspati is the holy power ; verily thus with the holy 
power he heals him. ‘ Towards the god Savitr in the bowls * is addressed 
to Savitr Savitr is breath ; verily thus he places breath in him. With* 
‘ Sit thou down ; thou art great * they make him sit down. ‘ Whom they 
anoint, the sages, as it were extending’ is (the verse*) appropriate for 
the anointing ; that which is appropriate in the sacrifice is perfect. ‘ The 
bird anointed by the skill of the Asura *, ‘ The foe who secretly may attack 
us, O Agni *, and ‘ Be thou well disposed to us, O Agni, at our approach ’ 
are sets of two appropriate (verses’^); that which in the sacrifice is ap- 
propriate is perfect. ‘ Make thou thy brilliance like a broad net ’, (these) are 


* AB. i. 18-22 and KB. viii. 3-7 describe the 
Pravargya as a necessary preliminary to 
Uie Soma sacrifice. For the ritual see 
AgS. iv. 6 and 7 ; 99S._ v. 9 and 10 ; 
B9S. ix. 1-16 ; M9S. iv ; Ap^S. xv. 99 S. 
does not require it for a first sacrifice, GB. 
vii. 6 borrows this. KB. viii. 3 allows it 
for a first sacrifice in certain cases. 9®* 
xiv. 2. 2. 44, 46 ; K 9 S. viii. 2. m ; xxvi. 7. 
53 forbid it in any case ; TA. v. 0. 3, 
however, allows it generally, and M 9 S. 
iv. 1. 3, 4 ; Ap. in certain cases. For it 
cf. Hillebrandt, ZDMG. xxxiv. 319 seq , ; 
Keith, Taittirlya Samhitay i. cxxiii-cxxv. 

16 [h.o.s. 25] 


For the death of the sacrifice, cf. L4vi, 
La doctrine du sacrifice, p. 80. 
i. 19. * Given in A 9 V. and 9^nkh. as not in the 
Saihhita ; see RVKh. iii. 22 (Schefte- 
lowitz, pp. 107-109) ; AV. iv. 1. 1 ; KB. 
viii. 4. Cf. Oldenberg, Prolegomena pp. 
363 seq. 

* Also in A 9 V. and 9ahkh. 

3 Also in A 9 V. and 9^nkh. 

* Also in A 9 V. and 9ASkh. 

6 RV. i. 36. 9. 

« RV. V. 43. 7. 

7 RV. X. 177. 1 ; V. 5. 4 ; iii. 18. 1 with the 

next verse in each case. 



[122 


i. 19 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

five (verses ®) referring to the slaying of Raksases, for the smiting away 
of the Raksases. ‘Round thee, O singer, the songs', ‘In the two hast 
thou placed the word of praise ‘ Pure is one of them, worthy of sacrifice 
one ' and ‘ I saw the guardian never resting * are four isolated (verses ^). 
They make up twenty-one ; man here is twenty-onefold, ten fingers, ten 
toes, and the body as the twenty-first; this twenty-onefold self he 
prepares. 

i, 20 (iv. 3). ‘ They of the sounding deep have sounded at the rim ' are 
nine (verses for Soma the purifying ; the breaths are nine ; verily thus 
he places the breaths in him. ‘May Vena impel those born of Pr^ni* 
(he says^); Vena is (this breath) here; above this here some breaths 
circulate below others; therefore is it Vena; ‘ the breath being 

here hath not feared (ndhheh) * (they say) ; therefore is it the navel ; that 
is why the navel has its name; verily thus he places breath in him. 
‘ Thy strainer is outspread, O lord of holy power ‘ The strainer of the 
scorcher is outspread in the expanse of sky * and ‘ What time the Dhisan^ 
spread out the strainer' (he says®); these breaths are connected^ with 
(the word) ‘strained'; those breaths below are connected with seed, urine, 
and excrement ; them verily thus he places in him. 

i. 21 (iv. 4). ‘ Thee lord of hosts we invoke' is addressed to Brahmanas- 
pati ; ^ Brhaspati is the holy power ; verily thus with the holy power he 
heals him. ‘ Of which extending and far extending are the names ^ are the 
bodies of the cauldron ; ^ verily thus ho makes him possessed of body and 
form. ‘ The Rathantara Vasistha hath brought ' ; ‘ Bharadvaja hath fetched 
the Brhat of Agni ' (he says ®) ; verily thus he makes him possessed of 
the Brnat and the Rathantara. ‘ I saw thee deep in thought ' (he says ^) ; 
it contains (the word) ‘ offspring ' and is addressed to Prajapati ; verily thus 
he confers offspring upon him. ‘What offering will win your favour, 
O Afviiis ' are nine (verses in different metres ; that is the entrails of the 
sacrifice; the entrails are mixed as it were, some smaller some thicker; 
therefore are they in different metres. With these Kaksivant went to 


» RV. iv. 4. 1-5. 

9 RV. i. 10. 12 ; 83. 3 ; vi. 58. 1 ; x. 177. 3. 

1 RV. ix. 73. 1. Of. KB. viii. 6. 

2 RV. X. 123. 1. The explanation is purely 

artificial, like nahheh below, which is 
probably best taken as a third, not 
second person. It is not to be pressed as 
a piece of grammar, being an etymology ; 
cf. Liebich, Pdmnt, p. 27, who, with 
Say ana (Aufrecht has na), treats nd asmd. 
* RV. ix. 88. 1, 2, and given in full in A9V. 
and i^iihkh. 


* The sense ife> that those breaths below being 

in need of purification obtain it via these 
three verses. 

i. 21. ^ RV. ii. 23. Cf. KB. viii. 5. 

* RV. X. 181. 1-3. 

» RV. X. 181. Id; 2c and d. 

* RV. X. 188. 1-3 ; the hymn is attributed to 

Prajavant Priljapatya, and the words here 
are therefore taken even by Aufrecht as 
the name of the author, but the trans. 
adopted seems less unlikely. 

» RV. i. 120. 1-2. 



123 ] 


The Pravargya [ — i. 22 

the dear home of the A9vins ; he won the highest world ; he goes to the 
dear home of the A9vins, he wins the highest world who knows thus. 
‘ Agni shineth as the forefront of the dawns ’ is a hymn.® ‘ O A9vins, to the 
swelling cauldron ^ is appropriate ; that which in the sacrifice is appropriate 
is perfect. It is in Tristubh verses ; the Tristubh is strength ; verily then 
he places strength in him. ‘ Like the two pressing-stones for the one purpose 
ye sing ’ is a hymn ; by enumerating the members in ‘ like the two eyes, 
like the two ears, like the two nostrils *, verily thus he places the senses 
in him. It is in Tristubh verses ; the Tristubh is strength ; verily thus 
he places strength in him. ‘ I praise sky and earth for first inspiration ’ 
is a hymn® and ‘Agni, the cauldron, the shining, for hastening on the 
way ’ is appropriate ; that which in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. 
It is in Jagati verses ; cattle are connected with the Jagati ; verily thus 
he confers cattle upon him. ‘ By which ye did help N. N., by which ye 
did help N. N.’ (he says); so many desires do the A9vins see in it; them 
verily thus does he place in him ; verily thus with them he makes him 
successful. ‘The tawny one, the chief, hath made the dawns to glow’ 
is (a verse containing (the word) ‘ glow ’ ; verily thus he confers glowing 
upon him. ‘ With days and with nights guard us around ’, with the last 
(verse ^®) he concludes, ‘With those unharmed and bringing good fortune, 
O A9vins; may this Mitra and Varuna accord us; Aditi, Sindhu, earth 
and sky’; verily thus with these desires he makes him successful. Such 
is the first section. 

i. 22 (iv. 5 ). Then comes the second (section). ‘ I hail this fair milking 
cow’, ‘Making hin, the lady of riches’, ‘Towards thee, O god Savitr’, 
‘ Like a calf with the mothers ‘ With the mothers like a calf ‘ Thy teat, 
exhaustless spring of pleasure’, ‘The cow hath lowed after the blinking 
young one ‘ With homage approach ‘ In unison have they sat down 
kneeling’, ‘By the ten of Vivasvant’, ‘Seven milk one’, ‘Enkindled Agni, 
O A9vins ’, ‘ Enkindled Agni by the strong, the harbinger of heaven 
‘ This is his most evident deed ’, ‘ The living cloud is milked of ghee and 
milk ‘ Rise up, O Brahmanaspati ‘ He hath milked the swelling drink 
‘ Come up with the milk, milker of cows, swiftly ’, ‘ In the passed pour 
the admixture ’, ‘ Assuredly of the A9vins the seer *, and ‘ Together these 
mighty waters * are twenty-one ^ appropriate (verses), that which in the 

• RV. V. 76. 1 RV. i. 164. 26, 27 ; i. 24. 3 ; ix. 104. 2 ; 

’ RV. ii. 39 ; the expressions cited are from 105. 2 ; i. 164. 49, 28 ; ix. 11. 1 ; i. 72. 6 ; 

vv. 6 and 6. viii. 72. 8 ; 7 ; two verses only in A^S. 

* RV. i. 112. Cf. for cattle and the Jagati iv. 7. 4 ; RV. i. 62. 6 ; ix. 74. 4 ; i. 40. 1 ; 

TS. vi. 1. 6. 2. viii. 72. 16 ; in A^S. iv. 7. 4; RV. viii. 

» RV. ix. 83.3. Cf. KB. viii. 6. 72. 13; 9. 7; 7. 22. Cf. KB. viii. 7; 

RV. i. 112. 25. 95s. V. 10. 



[124 


i, 22 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. With^ ‘Up this god Savitr with the 
golden ' he rises up after (the others) ; with ^ ' Let Brahmanaspati move 
forward* he follows after; with^ ‘The Gandharva here guardeth his 
abode* he looks at the Khara; with"' ‘The eagle flying in the vault’ he 
takes his place ; in the forenoon he uses as offering verses ® ‘ The heated 
cauldron reacheth you, self -offerer ’ and ‘Both drink, O Alvins'. At 
‘ 0 Agni, enjoy ’ he says the second vasat, taking the place of the SvisUkrt. 
‘The ghee the milk ofiered in the cows’ and ‘Drink of this, O A 5 vins’ 
he uses as offering verses'^ in the afternoon; at ‘ O Agni, enjoy’ he says 
the second vasat, taking the place of Svistakrt. Of these three oblations 
they do not take portions for the Svistakrt, Soma, the cauldron, and the 
strengthening drink. In that he says the second vasat, (it is) to avoid 
omitting Agni Svistakrt. ‘ Through all the regions, seated in the south ’ 
the Brahman * mutters ; ‘ The pure cauldron among the gods over which 
the call of Hail! is uttered’, ‘From the ocean the wave Vena sendcth 
forth ‘ The drop that goeth over the*[ocean ’, ‘ O friend, do thou turn 
towards the friend’, ‘Upright to our aid’, ‘Upright do thou protect us 
from tribulation’, and ‘Him indeed his worshippers’ are appropriate^ 
(verses) ; that which in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. With ‘ O 
thou of pure brilliance, around thy dwelling’ he desires food.^® With 
‘The oblation ofiered, the sweet oblation, on the fire that is most full 
of Indra, may we eat of thee, O divine cauldron, full of sweetness, full of 
nourishment, full of strength, full of the Angirases ; homage to thee ; 
harm me not ’ he partakes of the cauldron. ‘ Like an eagle its nest, the 
seat wrought with prayer ’ and ‘In which the seven Vasavas’ he recites 
for him when being deposited. ‘The oblation, O thou rich in oblation, 
the great divine seat ’ (he says on the day on which they are going 
to remove (the cauldron), ‘ From the good pasture niayst thou be of 
good fortune’, with the last (verse he concludes. The cauldron is a 
divine pairing ; the cauldron is the member, the two handles the testicles, 
the spoon the thigh bones, the milk the seed ; this seed is poured in Agni 
as the birthplace of the gods, as generation; the birthplace of the gods 
is Agni ; he comes into existence from Agni as the birthplace of the gods, 
from the libations ; having come into existence as composed of the Rc, 


2 RV. vi. 71. 1. 
s RV. i. 40. 3. 

* RV. ix. 83. 4. 

« RV. ix. 86. 11. 

® Only in A^S. iv. 7. 4 (cf. AV. vii. 78. 6) and 
RV. i. 46. 16. 

Only in A 9 S. iv. 7. 4 (cf. AV. vii, 73. 4) and 
RV. viii. 6. 14. 


8 In AgS. iv. 7. 4. 

9 In AgS. iv. 7. 4 ; RV. x. 123. 2, 8 ; iv. 1. 3 ; 

i. 36. 13, 14 ; viii. 69. 17. 

10 RV. iii. 2. 6. 

RV. ix. 71. 6 and A^S. iv. 7. 4. 
w RV. ix. 83. 5. 

« RV. i. 164. 40. 


7 



126 ] 


[ — i. 23 


The Upasads 

the Yajus, and the Saman, and of the Veda, and of the holy power, and 
as immortal, he attains to the deities who knows thus and who knowing 
thus sacrifices with this sacrificial rite. 


The Upasads. 

i, 23 (iv. 6). The ^ gods and the Asuras strove for these worlds ; the 
Asuras made these worlds as citadels, just as those who are more mighty and 
forceful. They made this (earth) an iron (citadel), the atmosphere one of 
silver, and the sky one of gold ; thus they made these worlds as citadels. 
The gods said, ‘ The Asuras have made these worlds as citadels, let us make 
these worlds as citadels in opposition.’ ‘ Be it so ' (they replied). They made 
out of this (earth) as a counterpoise the Sadas, the Agnidh's altar from 
the atmosphere, the two oblation holders from the sky. Thus they made 
these worlds as citadels in opposition. The gods said, ‘ Let us have recourse 
to the Upasads ; by siege (Upasad) they conquer a great citadel.’ ‘ Be it so * 
(they replied). With the first Upasad which they performed they repelled 
them from this world ; with the second from the atmosphere, with the 
third from the sky. Thus from these worlds they repelled them.'* The 
Asuras, repelled from these worlds, had recourse to the seasons. The 
gods said, ‘ Let us have recourse to the Upasads.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they replied). 
These three Upasads they performed one by one twice each ; they made 
up six ; the seasons are six ; them they repelled from the seasons ; they, 
repelled from the seasons, the Asuras, had recourse to the months. The 
gods said, ‘ Let us have recourse to the Upasads.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they replied). 
These Upasads being six they performed one by one twice each ; they made 
up twelve ; the months are twelve ; them they repelled from the months. 
The Asuras, repelled from the months, had recourse to the half-months. 
The gods said, ‘ Let us have recourse to the half-months.’ ^ Be it so ’ 
(they replied). These Upasads being twelve they performed one by one 
twice each ; they made up twenty-four ; the half -months are twenty-four 
them they repelled from the half-months. The Asuras, repelled from 
the half-months, had recourse to day and night. The gods said, ‘ Let us 
have recourse to the two Upasads.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they replied). With the 
Upasad which they performed on the forenoon they repelled them from 
the day, by that on the afternoon, from the night ; thus from both they 
excluded them. Therefore one should proceed with the first Upasad early 

^ AB. i. 28-26 and KB. viii. 8 and 9 deal with v. 11 ; Oaland and Henry, VAgnUtomaj 

the Upasads ; cf. TS. vi. 2. 3. 1 ; ^B. iii. 4. pp. 67-70. For the varying number of 

4. 3. For the ritual see A^S. iv. 8 ; 99 S. Upasads cf. A 9 S. iv. 8. 13 ; TS. vi. 2. 5. 1. 



i. 23 — ] The Soma Sacmjice [126 

in the forenoon, with the second early in the afternoon. So much only 
of space does he leave to his enemy. 

i. 24 (iv. 7). The Upasads are called victories ; by them the gods won an 
unrivalled victory; an unrivalled victory does he win who thus knows. 
The victory which the gods won over these worlds, the seasons, the months, 
the half-months, the day and night, that victory he wins who knows 
thus. 

The ^ gods were afraid, ‘ Through our disagreement the Asuras will 
wax great here.’ Having gone apart they took council ; Agni went out 
with the Varus, Tndra with the Rudras, Varuna with the Adityas, 
Brhaspati with the All-gods. Having thus gone apart they took council ; 
they said, " Come, our dearest bodies let us deposit in the house of king 
Varuna; with them may he not be united who shall transgress this, who 
shall seek to cause trouble.’ 'Be it so’ (they replied). They deposited 
their bodies in the house of king Varuna ; that became their bodily 
covenant ; that is why the bodily covenant (Ttounaptra) has its name. 
Therefore they say, ' One should not show treachery to one united by 
the bodily covenant.’ Therefore the Asuras do not wax great here. 

i. 25 (iv. 8). The guest reception is the head of the sacrifice, the Upasads 
the neck ; they are performed on the same strew, for the head and the 
neck are the same. In the Upasads the gods fashioned an arrow ; of it the 
point was Agni, the socket Soma; the shaft Visnu, the feathers Varuna.^ 
It they discharged, using the butter as a bow ; with it they kept piercing 
the citadels ; therefore these have butter as the oblation. At the Upasads 
he has first recourse to four teats for the fast milk, for the arrow is com- 
posed of four elements, point, socket, shaft, and feathers ; three teats he 
has recourse to for the fast milk in the Upasads, for the arrow is composed 
of three elements, point, socket, and shaft ; two teats he has recourse to for 
the fast milk in the Upasads, for the arrow is composed of two elements, 
the socket and the shaft only ; one teat he has recourse to for the fast 
milk in the Upasads, for it is called the one thing ‘ arrow ’, by one is 
strength exercised. These worlds are broader above and narrower below ; 
he performs the Upasads from the top downwards, for the conquering of 
these worlds. ‘ To the generous to be adored ’, ‘ This kindling stick of mine, 
O Agni, this waiting upon thee do thou accept’ are sets of three kindling 

^ For tliis rite see A^S. iv. 5. 3 ; 55*^- ’7* ^ doctrine du sacrificcy p. 78. 

2 ; LgS. V. 6. 6 ; KgS. viii. 1 . 23-26. Cf. i. 25. ^ Cf. TS. vi. 2. 3. 1 ; ^B. iii. 4. 4. 14 ; and 
TS. i. 2. 10. 2 ; vi. 2. 2. 1 ; MS. iii. 7. 10 ; for § 4 KB. viii. 9 ; TS. vi. 2. 5. 2. For 

GB. vii. 2 ; iii. 4. 2. 9 ; Caland and the parts of the arrow cf. Vedic Index i. 8 ; 

Henry, L'Agnistoma, pp. 61, 62. The ^B. Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 108, n. 2, who takes 

assigns the Eudras to Soma. Cf. L6vi, ^alya as ‘ barb ’ ; Muir, OST. v. 381, 383. 



127] The Upasads [ — i. 26 

verses,* perfect in form ; that in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in 
form, that rite which as it is being performed the verse describes. Ho 
should use (verses®) containing (the word) ‘ slay’, as invitatory and offering 
verses, ‘ Let Agni slay the foes,’ ‘ Who is dread, as it were, a slayer with 
darts,’ ‘Thou, O Soma, art very lord,’ ‘Bestowing prosperity, slayer of 
disease,’ ‘ Over this Visnu strode,’ ‘ Three steps he strode apart,’ these are 
they. He sacrifices in the afternoon with (the verses) inverted. With 
these in the Upasads the gods kept slaying and destroying the citadels. 
They should be of the same metre, not of different metres; if he were 
to make them of different metres, he would cause swelling on the neck ; 
he would produce boils; therefore should they be made of the same 
metre, not of different metres. Now as to this Upavi Jana 9 ruteya 
used to say, that is in his explanation of the Upasads, ‘ In that * the face 
of even an ugly Qrotriya is seen as joyous as it were and as singing, (it is) 
because the Upasads have butter as the oblation, and (it is) a face placed on 
the neck ’ ; therefore was he wont to say this. 

i. 26 (iv. 9). The' fore-offerings and the after-offerings are divine armour ; 
(this rite) is without fore-offerings and after-offerings, to sharpen the arrow 
and to prevent rending. Having once stepped over ho makes (him) proclaim, 
to master the sacrifice and to prevent its departure. They say, ‘ A cniel 
thing do they in the neighbourhood of Soma the king,* in that they offer the 
ghee in his neighbourhood, for by ghee as a thunderbolt Indra slew Vrtra,’ 
in that they make the king to swell, (saying) ‘ May every shoot of thine, 
O god Soma, swell for Indra who obtaineth the chief share ; may Indra 
swell for thee ; do thou .swell for Indra ; make us as comrades to swell ; 
with gain, with insight, prosperously may I attain the conclusion in the 
pressing of thee, O God Soma ’ ; verily thus they make whole whatever 
cruel as it were they do in his neighbourhood ; moreover they cause him to 
grow. Soma the king is the embryo of sky and earth ; in that, (saying) 
‘ Sought by sacrifice is wealth, sought are good things, for strength, for 
prosperity; holy order to the speakers of holy order; homage to sky. 


® RV. vii. 16. 1-7 and ii. 6. 1-7. 

» RV. vi. 16. 34, 39 ; i. 91. 5, 12 ; i. 22. 17, 8. 

^ The sense is uncertain, as, if iti in rebhanvety 
is taken as ending the quotation, then 
the sentence is hard to construe, unless 
it is made to mean ^ From whatever (side) 
the face is seen >, which is harsh. On the 
other hand yasmdt . , . hi contrast well 
and the omission of iti as in AB. iii. 8. 4 
is not difficult. Yet tasmdt points to a 
reason given by the text, not by Upavi. 
Weber takes it as ‘ In the Brfthmana is 


to be found the reason that, &c. ^ For 
Brahmana in this sense of. 9B. iv. 1. 5. 
14 ; iii. 2. 4. 1. The sage is called Aupavi 
in 5B. V. 1. 1. 6, 7. janito^ must be active, 
not pass., as Delbruck, Altind, iSijnt. p. 430. 

^ The chief point of this chapter is the 
Nihnavana, for which see A^S. iv. 6. 7 ; 
99 s. V. 8. 6 ; Oaland and Henry, L'Agni- 
stoma, pp. 63, 64. The Mantras occur in 
TS. i. 2. 11 and its parallels. For deva- 
vanna cf. TS. ii. 6. 1. 6. 

* Cf. TS. vi. 2. 2. 4. 



[128 


i. 26 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

homage to earth ! ’ they make . (their amends) on the strew, ^ verily thus 
they pay homage to sky and earth ; moreover they cause them to grow. 


ADHYAYA V 


The Bringing forward of the Soma and the Fire. 

i. 27 (v. 1). Soma ^ the king was among the Gandharvas ; the gods and 
the seers meditated on him, * How shall Soma the king come hither to us V 
Speech said, ‘ The Gandharvas love women ; with me as a woman do ye 
barter it.’ ' No,’ replied the gods, ‘ how could we be without you?’ She 
replied, ' Still do ye buy ; when ye will have need of me,* then shall 
I return to you.’ * Be it so ’ (they replied). With her as a great naked 
one they bought Soma the king. In imitation of her they bring up a young 
immaculate cow to buy Soma ; with her they buy Soma the king. Her he may 
repurchase again, for (speech) went back to them. Therefore one should speak 
inaudibly when Soma the king had been bought, for then speech is among 
the Gandharvas ; when the lire is again brought forward, she returns again. 

i. 28 (v. 2). ‘ Recite for Agni as he is being brought forward,’ the 
Adhvaryu says. 

* Forth the god with the thought divine, 

Do ye bear the all-knower, 

May he bear our libations daily,’ 

this Gayatii verse ^ should he recite for a Brahman; the Brahmin is 
connected with the Gayatri; the Gayatri is brilliance and splendour; 
verily thus with brilliance and with splendour he makes him prosper. 
‘To him the mighty, meet for assembly, the strengthening hymn,’ this 
Tristubh he should recite for a Rajanya ; the Rajanya is connected with the 
Tristubh; the Tristubh is force, power, and strength; verily thus with 
force, power, and strength he makes him prosper. ‘ Ever uttering they 
have brought forward to the one worthy of praise’ (he says); verily, 
thus he makes him attain pre-eminence over his own people. ‘ Let him bear 


* nthnavate is clearly wrong : nihnuvafe must 

be read as pointed out by Aiifrecht (AB. 
p. 429) ; but nihnave in 'AB. vii. 17 is 
supported by niknamrite in iv. 6. 7 ; 

viii. 13. 27, where, however, there is 
difference of reading, nihnuvante occurring 
in some MSS. (see Weber, Ind. Shid, ix, 
221). Cf. (?B. iii. 4. 3. 19-21. 

* AB. i. 27 and 28 and KB. ix. 1 and 2 deal 

with the carrying forward of the fire to 
the high altar from the old Ahavaniya 


which now takes the place of the Garha- 
patya ; see AfS. iii. 7. 8 ; ii. 17. 3 ; 95®* 
iii. 14. 8-14 ; Schwab, Das cUttndische 
Thieropfer, pp. 30-83. For this legend cf. 
TS. vi. i. 6. 5 ; 10. 4 ; 5 B. iii. 2. 4. 3. 

* Or possibly ‘ when your object shall be 
(accomplished) through me % but this is 
less likely. 

i.28. ’ RV. X. 176. 2. Cf. KB. ix. 2; 5B. iii. 
6 . 2 . 2 . 

a RV. iii 64. 1. 



129] The Bringing forward of the Fire [ — i. 28 

us with the splendours of his home ; let Agni hear us immortal with his 
divine (splendour) ; until old age on him he shines immortal, who thus 
knows.’ ‘ He here first hath been set down by the ordainers *, this Jagati 
verse® should he recite for a Vaifya; the Vai5ya is connected with the 
Jagati ; cattle are connected with the J agatl ; verily thus with cattle he 
makes him prosper. ‘Variegated in the woods, manifested for every 
people’ is an appropriate (verse ^); that which in the sacrifice is appro- 
priate is perfect. ‘ Here the godly *, in this Anustubh ® he utters speech ; 
the Anustubh is speech ; verily thus in speech he utters speech. In that 
he says ‘ Here *, verily thus speech declares ‘ Here am I come who afore- 
time have dwelt with the Gandharvas.* ‘ Agni protecteth here * (he says ®), 
Agni here protects ; ‘ As from the immortal race ' ; verily thus he confers 
immortality upon him. ‘ Stronger than the strong the god made for life ’ (he 
says), for Agni is a god made; for life. ‘ Thee in the footstep of the 
sacrificial food, on the navel of the earth ’ (he says '^) ; the navel of 
the high altar is the footstep of the sacrificial food. ‘ 0 All-knower, we 
deposit thee * (he says), for they about to deposit him. ‘ O Agni, to carry 
the oblation * (he says), for he is about to carry the oblation. ‘ O Agni of 
fair face, with all the gods, sit first on the birthplace rich in wool ' 
(he says®) ; verily thus he makes him sit with all the gods. ‘Making 
a nest, rich in ghee, for Savitr ’ (he says) ; a nest as it were is made in the 
sacrifice by the enclosing sticks of Pitudaru wood, bdellium, the wool 
tufts, and the fragrant grasses. ‘ Lead the sacrifice well for the sacrificer ' (he 
says) ; verily thus he establishes straight the sacrifice. ‘ Sit, O Hotr, in 
thine own place, discerning * (he says ®) ; the Hotr of the gods is Agni ; 
the navel of the high altar is his own place. ‘ Do thou place the sacrifice in 
the birthplace of good deeds * (he says) ; the sacrifice is the sacrificer ; verily 
thus for the sacrificer he invokes this benediction. ‘ Seeking the gods, do 
thou sacrifice to the gods with oblation, O Agni, do thou accord great 
power to the sacrificer ’ (he says) ; power is breath ; verily thus he places 
breath in the sacrificer. ‘The Hotr in the Hotr^s seat, well knowing* 
(he says ^®) ; the Hotr of the gods is Agni ; the navel of the high altar is his 
Hotr*s seat. ‘ Shining, resplendent, he hath sat, the well skilled * (he says), 
for he is seated here. ‘ With vows and foresight undeceived, most bright * 
(he says) ; Agni is the most bright of the gods. ‘ Bearing a thousand, 
Agni, of pure tongue * (he says) ; for this is his character of bearing 

3 RV. iv. 7. 1! ® RV. X. 176. 4. 

* RV iv. 1 Id. ^ RV. iii. 29. 4. 

5 RV. X. 176. 3. avdksam is merely a play on * RV. vi. 16. 16. 

vdCf not a genuine form ; see Liebich, ® RV. iii. 29. 8. 

Pdninif p. 27. Cf. AB. viii. 9 ; above, p. 72. RV. ii. 9, 1. 

17 [h.o«s. 2Ij] 



[130 


i. 28 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

a thousand, that him being but one they carry apart in many directions ; 
prosperity a thousandfold he obtains who knows thus. ' Thou art a herald, 
thou also our protector from afar/ with this last (verse he concludes. 
‘ Thou, O strong one, art the leader to greater wealth ; O Agni, for 
ourselves, our children and offspring, be thou the guardian, resplendent 
and never failing’ (he says); Agni is the guardian of the gods; verily 
thus does he place Agni as a guardian on all sides for himself and for the 
sacrificer, when one knowing thus concludes with this (verse) ; moreover, 
thus he produces prosperity for a year. Eight he recites, perfect in form ; 
that in the sacrifice is perfect which is perfect in form, that rite whicli 
as it is being performed the verse describes. Of these he recites the first 
thrice, the last thrice ; they make up twelve ; the year has twelve months ; 
Prajapati is the year ; verily thus with those that have their abode in 
Prajapati he prospers who knows thus. He repeats the first thrice, the last 
thrice ; verily thus he ties the two ends of the sacrifice, tor firmness, for 
might, to avoid slipping. 

i. 29 (v. 3). ' Recite ^ for the two oblation holders being brought forward ’ 
the Adhvaryu says. * I yoke your ancient holy power with praises ’ 
he recites ; ^ with the holy power the gods yoked the two oblation holders ; 
verily thus with the holy power he yokes the two ; what has the holy power 
come to no harm. ‘ Let the two come forward with weal for the sacrifice,’ 
this triplet ^ to sky and earth he recites. They say, ‘ Seeing that he recites 
by order for the two oblation holders being brought forward, then why 
does he recite a triplet to sky and earth? ’ Sky and earth were the oblation 
holders of the gods ; even to-day also are they the oblation holders, for 
within these is here all oblation and whatever there is ; therefore he recites 
a triplet to sky and earth. ‘ What time ye came like twins striving ’ (he 
says ^), for moving like twins they come in an even line. ‘ Pious men bore you 
forward’ (he says), for pious men bear them forward. ‘ Sit down in your 
own place, well knowing ; be of secure abode for our Soma drop ’ (he says) ; 
the drop is Soma the king ; verily thus he makes the two for Soma the 
king to sit on. ‘In the two thou hast placed the word of praise’ (he 
says®), for on the two the third, the covering, is deposited. In that he 
says ‘ The word of praise ’, and the word of praise is the sacrificial rite, 
verily with it he makes the sacrifice prosper. ‘ Who in union with 

RV. ii. 9. 2. The sense of tokasya nas tane Caland and Henry, Z’vlj 7 /ws/o?na,pp. 82^93. 

tanundm and its construction is un- Cf. iii. 5. 3. 16. 

certain. * RV. x. 18. 1. 

' AB. i. 29 and KB. ix. 3 and 4 deal with the ^ ii. 14. 19-21 ; cf. AB. ix. 3. 

bringing forward of the two Soma carts to * RV. x. 13. 2. 

the high altar ; see A(?S. iv. 9 ; ggS. v. 13; ® RV. i. 83. 3 : ‘ restrain » is used in yafasnicu. 



131] The Bringing forward of Agni and Soma [ — i. 30 

uplifted ladle pay honour ; unrestrained he dwelleth in thine ordinance, 
he doth flourish ’ (he says) ; the line containing the word ‘ jrestrain ’ which 
he yonder first said, that with this he appeases, for appeasement. ‘ May thy 
strength be favouring to the sacrificer who poureth (oblation) ’, he invokes 
this benediction. ‘All forms the sage doth assume,’ this' ‘All form’ 
(verse®) he recites; he should recite looking at the fronton, for the 
fronton has as it were all forms, white as it were, and black as it were. 
Every form he wins for himself and for the sacrificer when one knowing 
thus recites the verse while looking at the fronton. ‘ Around thee, 
O singer, the songs ’, with this last (verse ‘^) he concludes. When he thinks 
that the oblation holders are covered, he should conclude then. The wives 
of the Hotr and the sacrificer are not likely to become naked, when one 
knowing thus concludes with this (verse) when the oblation holders have 
been covered. By a Yajus * are the oblation holders covered ; verily thus 
with a Yajus they cover the two. When the Adhvaryu and the Pratipra- 
.sthatr strike in the posts on both sides, then should he conclude ; for then are 
the two covered. Eight he recites, perfect in form ; that in the sacrifice is 
perfect which is perfect in form, that rite which as it is being performed 
the verse describes. Of them he recites the first thrice, the last thrice ; 
they make up twelve ; the year has twelve months ; Prajapati is the year ; 
verily thus with those whose abode is Prajapati he prospers who knows 
thus. He recites the first thrice, the last thrice ; verily, thus he ties the 
two ends of the sacrifice for firmness, for might, to prevent .slipping. 

The Bringing forward of Agni and Soma. 

i. 30 (v. 4). ‘ Recite for Agni and Soma being brought forward ’ the 
Adhvaryu says.' ‘ Do thou pour forth, O god, for the first the father ’, (this 
verse “) to Savitr he recites. They say, ‘ Since he recites by order for 
Agni and Soma being brought forward, then why does he recite a verse to 
Savitr ? ’ Savitr is lord of instigation ; verily thus instigated by Savitr 
they bring them forward ; therefore he recites (a verse) to Savitr. ‘ Let 
Brahmanaspati move forward ’, (this verse) to Brahmanaspati he recites ® 
they say, ‘ Since he recites by order for Agni and Soma being brought forward, 
then why does he recite (a verse) to Brahmanaspati?’ Brhaspati is the holy 

® RV. V. 81. 2, raredyd is a variant form of holder ; see ACJS. iv. 10 ; v. 14 ; 

rardtfj not loc. as Sayana. Caland and Henry, VAgnistomay pp. 110- 

7 RV. i. 10. 12. 116. Cf. 9B. iii. 6. 3. 9. 

8 See TS. i. 2. 13 k. * Not in RV. : given in A^S. iv. 10. 1 ; ^9®* 

* AB. i. 30 and KB. ix. 5 and 6 deal with the v. 14. 9 ; cf. AV. vii. 14. 3 ; KS. xxxvii. 9; 

bringing forward of Agni and Soma and TB. ii. 7. 15. 1 ; KB. ix. 5 

the placing of Soma in the right oblation ^ RV. i. 40. 3. 



[132 


i. 30 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

power ; verily thus he makes the holy power their harbinger ; that which 
contains the holy power comes not to harm. ‘ Let the goddess move forward, 
the bounteous (he says) ; verily thus he makes the sacrifice possessed of boun- 
teousness ; therefore does he recite (a verse) to Brahmanaspati. ‘ The Hotr, 
the god, the immortal this triplet* to Agni he recites, when Soma, the king, 
is being brought forward. Soma the king the Asuras and the Baksases sought 
to slay as he was being brought forward between the Sadas and the oblation 
holders ; Agni by his cunning led him past. ‘ He goeth before by cunning ’ 
he says, for he led him past by cunning ; therefore in front of him they 
carry Agni. ‘ To thee, O Agni, day by day ’ and ‘ To the dear the adorable ’ 
these three and one * he recites ; these two, corning together, are liable to 
injure the sacrifieer, he that was formerly taken out and he whom after they 
bring forth. In that he recites three and one, verily thus he unites them in 
unison ; verily thus he establishes them in security, to prevent injury to 
himself or the .sacrifieer. ‘O Agni, rejoice; be glatl in this prayer’ he 
recites ’ when the libation is being offered ; verily thus he causes the libation 
to gladden Agni. ‘ Soma goeth, who knoweth the way’, this triplet® in 
Gayatri to Soma he recites, when Soma the king is being brought for- 
ward; verily thus with his own deity, his own metre, he makes him 
prosper. ‘ Soma hath sat him on his place ’ he says ; for he is going to 
take his seat here ; having gone beyond and placing the Agnidh’s altar at 
his back a.s it were should he recite. ‘ This of him King Varuna, this the 
Alvins’, (this verse ®) to Visnu ho recites ; ‘ Attend the insight of him with 
the Maruts, the ordainer ; he doth support the strength, the highest, that 
knoweth the day ; the stall doth Visnu with his comrades reveal ’ (he 
says) ; Visnu is the door guardian of the gods ; verily thus he opens the 
door to him. ‘ When within thou hast come forward, thou shalt be Aditi ’ 
he recites when he is being put in place. ‘ Like an eagle his nest, the seat 
wrought with devotion ’ (he says '*) when he has been put in place. ‘ To the 
golden to sit on the god hasteneth ’ (he says) ; golden as it were he spreads 
thus for the gods as a cover the black antelope skin. Therefore does he 
recite this (verse). ‘ He hath established the sky, the Asura, all-knower ’ 
with (this verse) to Varuna he concludes; so long as he is tied up he has 
Varuna as his deity, so long as he is approaching the covered (places) ; 
verily thus with his own deity, his own metre, he makes him prosper. If 
they should run up to him or seek safety, he should conclude with the 
following (verse *®), ‘ Do thou welcome Varuna the great.’ For so many as 

* EV. iii. 27. 7-9. * RV. i. 166. 4. 

6 RV. i. 1. 7-9. viii. 48. 2. 

» RV. ix. 67. 29. " RV. ix. 71. 6. 

1 RV. i. 144. 7. RV. viii. 42. 1. 

• RV. iii. 62. 13-16. Cf. KB. iv. 4. RV. viii. 42. 2. 



133] The Bringing forward of Agni and Soma [ — i. 30 

he desires freedom from fear, for so many as he contemplates freedom from 
fear, to so many is freedom from fear accorded, when one knowing thus 
concludes with this (verse). Seventeen (verses) he recites, perfect in form ; 
that in the sacrifice is perfect, which is perfect in form, that rite which as 
it is being performed the verse describes. Of them he recites the first thrice, 
the last thrice ; they make up twenty-one ; Prajapati is twenty-onefold ; 
twelve months, five seasons, these three worlds, yonder Aditya as twenty- 
first, the highest support. This is the divine field, this prosperity, this is 
overlordship, this the expanse of the tawny one, this the abode of Praja- 
pati, this self-rule. Verily thus he prospers as regards him^^ with these 
twenty-one (verses). 

For the construction see above i. 1, n. S. C'onnechc7i^.4ca^.xv.68; Bloomfield, JAOS. 

For akar na vai above, which Bfihtlingk xxvii. 77 ; Wackernagel, Qramm. i. 

condemns, may be cited MS. i. C. 10 ; 191. mahdnagnyd is apparently the 

10. 10, 18; Jl. 10; iii. 6. 10; iv. 2. 1; MS. tradition in i. 27, but may be a later 

perhaps i. 8. 7 (Caland, VOJ. xxiii. 58); Prakritism. 

JUB. i. 5. 1 ; TH. i. 208. 6 ; Oertel, Trans. 



PANOIKA II 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

ADHYAYA I 

The Animal Sacrijice. 

ii. 1 (vi. 1). By ^ means of the sacrifice the gods went upwards to the 
world of heaven ; they were afraid, ‘ Seeing this of us men and seers will track 
us/ Them they obstructed by means of the sacrificial post ; in that they 
obstructed them by means of the post, that is why the post has its name. 
Having fixed it point down, they went upwards. Then men and seers came 
to the place of sacrifice of the gods, ‘ Let us seek something to track the 
sacrifice.’ They found the post only, established with point downwards. 
They perceived, ‘ By this the gods have blocked the sacrifice.* Having dug 
it out they fixed it upwards ; then did they discern the world of heaven. 
In that the post is fixed upright, (it is) to track the sacrifice, to reveal the 
world of heaven. The post is a thunderbolt ; it should be made of eight 
corners ; the bolt is eight-cornered. This he hurls as a weapon at the rival 
who hates him, to lay him low who is to be laid low by him. The post is 
a bolt ; it stands erect as a weapon against the foe. Therefore also to him 
who hates there is displeasure in seeing, ‘ This is N. N.’s post, this is 
N.N.’s post.’ Of Khadira wood should he make the post who desires 
heaven ; by means of a post of Khadira the gods won the world of 
heaven; thus verily also the sacrificer by a post of Khadira wins the 
world of heaven. Of Bilva should he make the post, who desires proper 
food and desires prosperity. Year by year is Bilva taken ; this is the symbol 
of proper food. It should be covered with branches up to the root, this is 
(the symbol) of prosperity. He prospers in offspring and cattle who knowing 
thus makes the post of Bilva. Now as to (his using) Bilva, ^ they say 
‘ Bilva is light ’ ; a light he becomes among his own people, he becomes the 
chief of his own people, who knows thus. Of Pala 9 a should he make the 
post, who desires brilliance and desires splendour. The Pala 5 a is the 
brilliance and splendour of the trees ^ ; brilliant and resplendent he becomes 

1 AB. ii. 1-14 and KB. x deal with the animal * TJie Pluti here accentuates the word. For 
sacrifice. The Sutras (AgS.iii.lse^.; Bilva cf. TS. ii. 1. 8. 1. 

V. 16) are cited in full in Schwab, Das * For the Parna cf.TS. iii. 5. 7. 2, whence its 
altindische 'rhieropfer. For § 1 cf. TS. vi. name of hrahmavrksa like ^rlirksa for the 

3. 4. 7 ; Schwab, p. 2. Bilva. 



136] The Animal Sacrifice [ — ii.2 

who knowing thus makes the post of Pala9a. As to (his using) Fala9a, the 
Pala9a is the birthplace of all trees ; therefore they speak with the word 
‘ Pala9a ' of foliage generally, as ‘ the foliage of N. N. ; the foliage of N. N.’ 
The desire in all trees is obtained by him who knows thus. 

ii. 2 (vi. 2). ‘ We are anointing the post ; do thou recite * the Adhvaryu 
says. * They anoint thus at the sacrifice, pious men ' he recites,^ for at the 
sacrifice pious men anoint him. ‘ O tree, with divine sweetness ’ ; the butter 
is the divine sweetness. ‘ What time thou dost stand aloft, then give us 
riches, or what time thou dost dwell in the lap of the mother ’ (he says) ; 

‘ if thou shalt stand or thou shalt lie, bestow wealth upon us ' he says in effect. 
‘Rise erect, O lord of the forest ’ is the appropriate (verse for it being raised ; 
that which in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. ‘ On the surface of the 
earth ’ (he says) ; that is the surface of the earth where they set up the 
post. ^ Being set up with careful setting, do thou bestow radiance on 
the bearer of the sacrifice,* this benediction he invokes. ‘ Rising before 
the kindled ' (he says ^), for it is erected before the kindled (fire). ‘ Winning 
the holy power unaging, with good heroes *, this benediction he invokes. 

* Driving misfortune far from us * (he says) ; miwsfortune is hunger, the evil ; 
verily thus he drives it away from the sacrifice and from the sacrificer. 

‘ Rise erect for great good fortune,* this benediction he invokes.^ ‘ Aloft to 
our aid do thou arise like the god Savitr * * ; ‘ the na of the gods is their 
om * (they say) ; verily thus he says ‘ stand like the god Savitr *. ‘ Aloft as 
the gainer of booty * (he says) ; verily thus he gains it as a gainer of booty 
and winner of riches. ‘ What time with skilled singers we vie in calling * 
(he says) ; the skilled singers are the metres ; by means of them the sacri- 
ficers vie in calling the gods ; ‘ To my sacrifice come ye, to my sacrifice.* 
Even if many as it were sacrifice, the gods come to the sacrifice of him 
where one knowing thus recites this (verse). ‘ Aloft protect us from tribu- 
lation, with thy beams do thou consume every devourer * (he says ®) ; the 
devourers are the Raksases, the evil; verily thus he says, ‘Burn the 
Raksases, the evil.* ‘ Make us erect for motion, for life,* in that he says 
thus, verily he says ‘Make us erect for moving, for life.* Even if the 
sacrificer is seized as it were, verily thus he gives him to the year. ‘ Find 
our worship among the gods *, this benediction he invokes. ‘ Born he is 
born in the fairness of the days ’ (he says ’^), for born he is thus born. 
‘ Waxing great in the mortal ordinance * (he says) ; verily thus they make 


1 RV. iii. 8. 1. cr. KB. x. 2 ; lii. 7. 1 . 

^ Schwab, Das altindische ThUiop/n', 
pp. 70, 71, 73. 

2 RV. iii. 8. 3. 
s RV. iii. 8. 2. 


^ RV. iii. 8. 2 d. 

5 RV. i. 36. 13 ; see Schwab, p. 71. 

RV. i. 86. 14. 

’ RV. iii. 8. 6. 



[136 


ii. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

it grow. ‘ They purify him, the clever, the busy, with skill * (he says) ; 
verily thus they purify it. * The sage uttereth his speech desirous of the 
gods’ (he says); verily thus he announces it to the gods. ‘The youth, 
well clad, covered round, hath come with this last (verse *) he concludes ; 
the youth well clad is the breath ; it is enclosed with the bodily parts. 
‘ Better he becometh being bom ’ (he says), for ever better he becomes being 
born. ‘Him the wise sages raise up, the prudent, the pious with their 
minds ’ (he says) ; the sages are the learned ones ; verily thus they raise 
it up. Seven (verses) he repeats, perfect in form ; that in the sacrifice is 
perfect which is perfect in form, that rite which as it is being performed the 
verse describes. Of them he says the first thrice, the last thrice ; they make 
up eleven ; the Tristubh has eleven syllables ; the thunderbolt of Indra is 
the Tristubh ; verily thus with those whose abode is Indra he prospers who 
knows thus. He recites the first thrice, the last thrice ; verily thus he ties 
the ends of the sacrifice, for firmness, for might, to prevent slipping. 

ii. 3 (vi. 8). ‘ Should the post stand ? Or should he throw it (into the 
fire) ? ’ they say. It should stand for one desiring cattle. Cattle would not 
serve the gods for slaying as food. They having departed kept disputing ; 
‘ Ye shall not slay us, not us.’ Then the gods saw this post as a thunderbolt ; 
they raised it up against them; fearing it they came back; verily even to-day 
they come up to it. Thereafter the cattle served the gods for slaying as 
food. Cattle serve for slaying as food him who knows thus and for whom 
knowing thus the post continues standing. He should throw (it) after for 
one who desires heaven ; the ancients used to throw it after, (thinking) 
‘ the post is the sacrificer, the strew the sacrificer ; Agni is the birthplace of 
the gods ; he, having come into existence from Agni as the birthplace of 
the gods from the oblation, with a body of gold will go aloft to the world 
of heaven.’ Then those who were later than they saw this chip as a frag- 
ment of the post ^ ; it should be thrown after at this time ; thence is obtained 
the desire in the throwing after, thence the desire is obtained which is in the 
standing. Himself to all the deities he offers who consecrates himself ; all 
the deities are Agni ; all the deities are Soma ; in that he offers a victim to 
Agni and Soma, verily thus the sacrificer redeems himself from all the 
deities.*^ They say, ‘ As victim for Agni and Soma should be offered one of 
two colours,^ for it is for two deities.’ That is not to be regarded. It should 
be offered as fat ; cattle are characterized by fat ; the sacrificer becomes 
emaciated as it were ; in that the victim is fat, verily thus he makes the 
sacrificer prosper with his own fat. They say, ‘ He should not eat of the 

* RV. iii. 8. 4. * Cf. TS. vi. 1. 11. 6 ; KB. x. 3. 

^ Cf. TS. vi. 3. 4. 9 ; K8. xxvi. 6 ; MS. iii. 9. 4 ; ® Cf. (JJB. iii. 3. 4. 23 ; KB. x, 3 ; Levi, La 

gB. iii. 7. 1. 32. doctrine du sacrifice, p. 182. 



137] 


r * * 

[— 11 . 4 


The AnwMil ScLcriJice 

victim for Agni and Soma ; of a man he eats who eats of the victim for 
Agni and Soma, for thereby the sacrificer redeems himself.’ That is not to 
be regarded.^ (The victim) for Agni and Soma is an oblation connected with 
the slaying of VHira ; by means of Agni and Soma Indra slew Vrtra ; they 
said to him, ‘ Through us two thou hast slain Vrtra; let us choose a boon 
from thee.’ ‘ Choose * (he said). They chose this boon, the victim on the 
jAressing day of to-morrow. This is regularly performed for those two, for 
it is chosen as a boon for them. Therefore should the victim be partaken 
of, and one should be fain to take it. 

ii. 4 (vi. 4). With the Apri verses he delights ; ^ the Apri verses are bril- 
liance and splendour; verily thus with brilliance and splendour he causes him 
to prosper. He says the offering verses for the kindling-sticks ; the kindling- 
sticks are the breaths, for the breaths enkindle all that there is here ; verily 
thus he delights the breaths, he places the breaths in the sacrificer. He 
says the offering verse for Tanunapat ; Tanunapat is the breath, for he pro- 
tects bodies ; verily thus he delights the breath, he places the breath in the 
sacrificer. He says the offering verse for Nara 9 ausa ^ ; men are offspring ; 
praise is speech ; verily thus he delights offspring and speech ; offspring and 
speech he confers upon the sacrificer. He says the offering verse for the 
sacrificial food ; the sacrificial food is food ; verily thus he delights food ; 
food he confers upon the sacrificer. He says the offering verse for the 
strew ; the strew is cattle ; verily thus he delights cattle ; cattle he confers 
upon the sacrificer. He says the offering verses for the doors ; the doors 
are rain ; verily thus he delights rain ; rain and proper food he bestows 
upon the sacrificer. He says the offering verse for dawn and night ; dawn and 
night are day and night ; verily thus he delights day and night ; in day and 
night he places the sacrificer. He says the offering verse for the divine Hotrs ; 
the divine Hotrs are expiration and inspiration; verily thus he delights expira- 
tion and inspiration ; expiration and inspiration he confers upon the sacrificer. 
He says the offering verse for the three goddesses ; the three goddesses are 
expiration, inspiration, and cross-breathing ; verily thus he delights them ; 
them he confers upon the sacrificer. He says the offering verse for Tvastr ; 
Tvastr is speech, for speech creates ^ all this as it were ; verily thus he 
delights speech ; he confers speech on the sacrificer. He says the offering verse 

* Cf. TS. vi. 1. 11. 6. is invoked by the Vasisthas and ^unakas 

^ The literal sense is of course intended as the other families keep to the 

well as the derivate ‘ say the Apris For offering to Tanunap&t as the second of 

the verses see A^S. iii. 2. 5 scg. ; v.lG. the eleven fore-offerings ; see AfS. i. 5. 

5-7. Cf. KB. X. 3, and for §§ 1 and 4 9®* 21; Weber, Ind. Stud, x. 88 seq, 

iii. 8. 1.2; ix. 2. 3. 44. Cf. also Schwab, » Cf. RV. x. 180. 1; Wackernagel, Altind, 

Das altindische Thieropfer, pp. 90-92 ; Max Gramm, i. 176, 274 ; Oldenberg, Rgveda- 

Miiller, Anc, Sansk, Lit. pp. 468 seq, Noterij ii. 366, 

^ According to ApfS. xxiv. 12. 16 Narkoahsa 
18 [h.o.s. 2b] 



[138 


ii. 4— ] The Soma Sacrifice 

for the lord of the forest ; the lord of the forest is the breath ; verily thus 
he delights the breath ; the breath he places in the sacrificer. He says the 
offering verse for the calls of Hail I ; the calls of Hail ! are a support ; verily 
thus on a support at the end he establishes the sacrificer. For these should 
he use (verses) by the ancestral seer ; in that he uses (verses) by the seer, 
verily thus he does not set loose the sacrificer from his connexion. 

ii. 5 (vi, 5). ‘Recite for' the carrying round of fire* the Adhvaryu says. 
‘ Agni, the Hotr, at our sacrifice *, this triplet ^ to Agni in Gayatrl he recites 
when the carrying round of fire is being performed; verily thus with 
his own deity, his own metre, he makes him prosper. ‘Being a steed 
he is carried round* (he says), for him being as it were a steed they 
carry round. ‘ Thrice round the sacrifice Agni goeth like a charioteer * 
(he says), for he like a charioteer goes round the sacrifice. ‘ The lord 
of strength, the sage ’ (he says), for he is the lord of strength. ‘ Do thou 
give the supplementary direction, O Hotr, for the oblations for the gods * 
the Adhvaryu says. ‘ Agni hath conquered,^ he hath won strength *, thus 
the Maitravaruna begins the supplementary direction. They say, ‘ Since the 
Adhvaryu gives the order for supplementary directions to the Hotr,^ then 
why does the Maitravaruna begin the supplementary direction ? * The 
Maitravaruna is the mind of the sacrifice; the Hotr is the voice of the 
sacrifice ; instigated by mind voice speaks, for the speech which one speaks 
with his mind elsewhere, that speech is demoniacal and not acceptable to 
the gods. In that the Maitravaruna begins the supplementary direction, 
verily thus with mind he sets speech in motion ; with speech set in motion 
by mind he provides the oblation for the gods. 

ii. 6 (vi. 6). ‘ O divine slayers and O human (slayers) make ready ’ ho 
says ; the slayers of the gods and those of man, them thus he instructs. 
‘ Bring ye (it) to the doors of sacrifice,^ ordaining the sacrifice for the lords 
of the sacrifice ’ (he says). The sacrifice is the victim ; the lord of the 
sacrifice the sacrificer ; verily thus he makes the sacrificer prosper with his 
own sacrifice. Or rather they say, ‘To whatever deity the victim is 
slaughtered, that is the lord of the sacrifice.* If the victim be for one 
deity, ‘ for the lord of the sacrifice * he should say ; if for two deities, 
‘for the two lords of the sacrifice’; if for many deities ‘for the lords 
of the sacrifice \ That is the rule. ‘ Forward for him bear Agni ’ (he 

* RV. iv. 16. 1-3 ; see A^S. iii. 2. 9. Cf. KB. li. 6. ^ The phrase Sayana takes as havinndrgan 
X. 3; 5®' 8. 1. 6 ; 9?®* or vi^asanahctih, Cf. A^S. iii. 3. 1; KB. x. 

Schwab, Das altindiscJie Thieropfcr, p. 93. 4 ; 99^. v. 11 ; TO. iii. 6. 6. 1 ; KS. xvi. 

2 A9S. iii. 2. 20 ; 99 S. v. 16. 9. 21 ; MS. iv. 13. 4 ; B 9 S. v. 2. 9 ; Schefte- 

2 In this case Hotr is addressed to the lowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rrjveda, p. 164 ; 

Maitr&varuna, the generic term being Schwab, Das alUndUche Thieropfer^ pp. 

used for the specific. 102 seq . ; Roth, Niritkia, pp. xxxviii. sq. 



139] Jlie Animal Sacrifice [ — 7 

says) ; the victim as it was borne along saw death before it, and was not 
willing to go to the gods; the gods said to it, ‘Come; we shall make 
you go to the world of heaven.’ It replied ‘Be it so; but let one of 
you go before me.’ ‘Be it so’ (they replied). Before it went Agni; 
it followed after Agni. Therefore they say, ‘ Every animal is connected 
with Agni, for after Agni it followed.’ Therefore also they bear Agni 
before it. ‘Spread the strew’ (he says); the victim has plants as its 
body ; verily thus he makes the victim have its full body. ‘ May its mother 
approve it, its father, its brother from the same womb, its comrade from 
the same flock ’ (he says) ; verily thus they slay it with the approval of 
its generators.'** ‘ Place its feet north ; make its eye go to the sun ; let loose 
its breath to the wind, its life to the atmosphere, its ear to the quarters, 
its body to earth’ (he say.s); verily it he thus places in these worlds. 
‘Flay off its skin in one piece; before cutting the navel force out the 
omentum ; keep its breath within ’ (he says) ; verily thus he places the 
breaths in cattle. ‘ Make ** its breast an eagle, its two front legs hatchets, 
its two fore feet spikc.s, its shoulders two tortoi.ses as it were, its loins 
uncut, its thighs two door leaves, its knees oleander leaves ; its ribs arc 
twenty-six; them in order remove; make each limb of it perfect’ (ho 
.says) ; verily thus its members and its limbs he delights. ‘ Make a hole 
in the earth to cover the oftal ’ he says ; the offal is connected with plants ; 
this (earth) is the support of plants ; verily thus at the end he establishes 
it in its own support. 

ii. 7 (vi. 7). ‘ Unite the Raksases with the blood ’ he .says.' With the 
husks and the polishings the gods deprived the Raksases of the offerings 
of oblations (of cereals, &c.), with blood of the great sacrifice. In that 
he says ‘Unite the Raksases with the blood’, with their own share he 
excludes the Raksases from the sacrifice. They say ‘He should not at 
the sacrifice make mention of Raksases ; what Raksases are there ? The 
sacrifice is without Raksases.’ They say, however, ‘ He should make 
mention ; if a man deprive one with a portion of his portion, he revenges 
hiiiuself on him, or if he does not revenge him.self on him, then on his 
son, or on his grand.son, but he does revenge himself on him.’ If he make 
mention he should do so inaudibly ; the inaudible part of speech is hidden 
as it were, the Raksases are hidden as it were. If he were to make 
mention audibly he would make his speech the .speech of the Raksases. 

* An interesting example of the common Aavasafrdrwt and for this cf, fcams of doors 

practice of deprecating the anger of the in MS. iii. 10. 2 ; VS. xxix. 5. 

relatives of the dead victim, ' Cf. ^B. xi. 7. 4. 2. See AfS. iii. 3. 1-4 

8 The details of the cutting up are obscure ; 95®* ^7. 8 seq, raksohhasah is taken as 

Sky ana has for pragasa prakrstachedanau, acc. by Say ana, as gen. by BR,, cf. i, 25. 

for ^ald ^atakukaraii, karaioru is rendered For drp cf. Oertel, Cormect. Acad. xv. 159. 



[140 


ii. 7 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

He who speaks the speech of the Rak^es (speaks) that speech which 
a proud person or a man distraught speaks ; that is the speech of the 
Raksases. He does not himself become proud, nor in his offspring is 
a proud son bom who knows thus. ‘Its entrails'^ do not cut deeming 
them an owl (in that shape), lest in your family and offspring a howler 
may howl, O slayer * (he says) ; to the divine and the human slayers 
verily thus he hands it. over. ‘O Adhrigu, toil, carefully toil; toil, 
O Adhrigu * thrice should he say and ‘ O free from sin ’ ; ^ the slayer of the 
gods is the Adhrigu, the Nigrabhitr the one free from sin; verily thus 
he hands it over to the slayers and the Nigrabhitrs. ‘O slayers, 
whatever here shall be well done, to us that ; whatever ill done, elsewhere 
that * (he says) ; Agni was the Hotr of the ^ gods ; with speech he 
dissected it ; by speech the Hotr dissects it. Whatever they cut below or 
above,* whatever is done to excess or defectively, verily thus he indicates 
it to the Nigrabhitrs and the slayers; prosperously verily is the Hotr 
set free with full life for fullness of life ; all his life he lives who thus knows. 

ii. 8 (vi. 8). The gods slew man as the victim. When he had been slain 
his sap went out; it entered the horse; therefore the horse became fit 
for the sacrifice, and him whose sap had departed they dismissed ; he 
became a monkey.^ They slew the horse ; it went away from the horse 
when slain ; it entered the ox ; therefore the ox became fit for sacrifice, 
and it whoso sap had departed they dismissed ; it became a Gauramrga.'^ 
They slew the ox ; it departed from the ox when slain ; it entered the 
sheep ; therefore the sheep became fit for sacrifice, and it whose sap 
had departed they dismissed; it became the Gayal. They slew the 
sheep ; it departed from the sheep when slain ; it entered the goat ; 
therefore the goat became fit for sacrifice, and it whose sap had departed 
they dismissed; it became the camel. It dwelt for the longest time in 
the goat ; therefore the goat is of these animals the most often employed. 
They slew the goat ; it departed from the goat when slain ; it entered this 
(earth); therefore this (earth) became fit for sacrifice, and it whose sap 
had departed they dismissed ; it became a (^arablia.'*^ These animals whose 

* Sayana takes rdvitta as ‘cut’ but ravat as * himpurusah is ot very doubtful sense, but 

‘ make a noise i. e. weep for a cause of * monkey ' seems much more likely than 

grief, and this must be right. Schwab ‘dwarf* suggested by Haug. Cf.^B. i. 2.3. 

(Dos altindische T?iteropfer, p. 105) thinks 6-9; iii. 8. 3. 1 ; Weber, Jnd, Stud. ix. 246. 

Mruka and renders ned=<=‘ and not ^ Of uncertain nature; ‘white deer’. Hang. 

ru = ‘ cut ’ ; BR. take m ~ ‘ cry’ both times. S&yana says ‘ whose horns even are hairy ’ ; 

5 Cf. TB. iii. 6. 6. 4 ; Schwab, p. 106, n. Bos gaurus is the accepted version. 

* I. e. too low or too far up ; there must be ^ Of uncertain nature ; mentioned in AV. ix. 

an error, not merely a description here 5. 9 (galahha in Ppp.) ; VS. xiii. 51, &c. ; 

as in S&yana; Haug has ‘too soon* and an eight-footed lion-killer is Sayaiia’s 

‘ too late *. version. 



141] 


The Animal Sacrifice 


[ — ii. 10 


sap is departed are unfit for sacrifice ; therefore one should not eat of 
them. It they followed in this (earth) ; it, followed, became rice ; in 
that they offer also a cake in the animal sacrifice (it is because they 
think) ‘Let our sacrifice be with a victim with sap, let our sacrifice be 
with a victim whole.* * His sacrifice is performed with a victim with sap, 
his sacrifice is performed with a victim whole who knows thus. 

ii. 9 (vi. 9). The cake (which is offered) is the victim which is killed ; 
the chaffs of it is the hairs, the husks the skin, the polishings the blood, the 
pounded grains and fragments the flesh, whatever is substantial the bone. 
With the sap of all animals he sacrifices who sacrifices with the cake. 
Therefore they say, ‘The cake offering is the people’s sacrificial session.* 

‘ Ye two, Agni and Soma, of joint power, have placed 
These constellations in the sky ; 

Ye too the rivers from unspeakable misfortune, 

O Agni and Soma, set free when fast held ; ’ 

this offering verse ^ he says for the omentum. By all these deities is 
he seized who becomes consecrated. Therefore they say ‘ He should not 
eat (the food) of one consecrated.’ In that he says as offering verse for 
the omentum ‘ O Agni and Soma ye set free when fast held verily thus 
from all the deities he sets the sacrificcr free. Therefore they say ‘ One 
should eat when the omentum has been ottered, for he then becomes the 
sacrificer.* ‘ Another from the sky Matari 9 van bore * he says as offering 
verse ^ for the cake. ‘ Another from the mountain the eagle pressed out ’, 
(he says) for hence as it were is he, hence is the sap gathered. ‘ Make 
ready the oblations, shape food forth ’ he uses as offering verse ^ for the 
Svistakrt of the cake (offering). Verily thus he makes ready the oblation 
for him and places sap and strength in himself. He invokes the sacrificial 
food;'" the sacrificial food is cattle;® verily thus he invokes cattle; he 
confers cattle on the sacrificer. 

ii. 10 (vi. 10). ‘ Recite for the oblation being cut off for Manota ’ the 
Adhvaryu says. He recites the hymn ^ ‘ For thou, O Agni, are the first 
thinker.* They say ‘ Since the victim is for other deities also, then why 

* For this idea see the next sentence, ii. 9; ^ RV. i. 93. 6; see A^S. i. 6. 1 adfiru 

‘ whole sacrificial essence Haug. ^ RV. iii. 64. 22 ; see A^S. iii. 5. 9. Cf. 

1 The senses of the words are not all clear, Schwab, Das altindische Thieropfer, p. 138. 

but Sayana's views seem reasonable. ® AfS. i. 7. 7 ; 55®* ^ 12. 1 ; though Sayana 

Aufrecht maintains yat kimcHkam against gives TB. iii. 6. 8. 1 as an alternative. 

PW. and Weber, Ind. Stud. ii. 9 ; lokyam ® Sayana cites for this TS. i. 7. 2. 1. 

must have some such sense as rendered, ii. 10. * RV.vi. 1. Cf. KB. x.6 ; 9®- “1. 8. 3. 14 ; 

not merely =prc/ffamyam. A^S. iii. 6. 1 ; 55®* ^* Maitra- 

* RV. i. 93. 6 ; A5S. iii. 8. 1 ; 55®* ^* ^^* varuna says it ; Schwab, Das altindische 

For the gen. dVesitasya cf. K 5 S. xxv. 8. 16 ; Thieropfer^ p. 187. 

TB. i. 3. 2. 7 ; KS. xiv. 5 ; JUB. i. 67. 1. 



[142 


ii. 10 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

does he recite (verses) to Agni alone for the oblation being cut off for 
Manota ? ’ Three are the Manotas of the gods, for in them are their minds 
woven. Speech is the Manota of the gods ; for in it are their minds 
woven. The cow is the Manota of the gods, for in it are their minds 
woven. Agni is the Manota of the gods, for in him are their minds woven. 
Agni is all the Manotas ; in Agni the Manotas unite. Therefore he recites 
(verses) to Agni only for the oblation being cut off for Manota. ‘ O Agni 
and Soma, of the oblation set forward ’ he uses as offering verse * for the 
oblation. In ‘ of the oblation * it is (appropriate and) perfect in form, 
as ‘ set forward * it is perfect in form. Made perfect with all perfections 
his oblation goes to the gods who knows thus. He says the offering verse 
for the lord of the forest ; the lord of the forest is the breaths ; with 
life his oblation goes to the gods when one knowing thus says the 
offering verse for the lord of the forest. He says the offering verse oi 
the Svistakrt;'^ the Svistakrt is a support; verily thus on a support 
at the end he establishes the sacrifice. He invokes the sacrificial food ; ® 
the sacrificial food is cattle ; verily thus he invokes cattle ; he confers 
cattle upon the sacrificer. 


ADHYAYA II 

The Animal Sacrifice {continued). 

ii. 11 (vii. 1). The gods performed the sacrifice ; towai-ds them as they 
performed it came the Asuras, (saying) ‘ We shall make a disturbance of 
their sacrifice.' When over the victim had been sairl the Apris, before as 
it were the circumambulation with fire they attacked the post from 
the east. The gods, perceiving, placed around three forts consisting of 
citadels made of Agni, to protect themselves and the sacrifice. These Agni- 
made citadels kept shining and blazing. The Asuras, in terror, ran away ; 
verily with Agni before and Agni behind they smote away the Asuras 
and the Raksases. Verily then also the sacrificers in that they perform 
the circumambulation with fire place around three forts, consisting of 
citadels made of Agni, to protect the sacrifice and themselves. Therefore 
they carry fire round ; therefore for the carrying round of fire he recites. 
The victim over which the Apris have been said and round which fire 
has been carried they lead northwards.^ They carry a torch before it, 
(thinking) ‘The victim is in essence the sacrificer; by this light the 
sacrificer with light before him will go to the world of heaven.' By 

2 RV. i. 93. 7 ; 95^* ^ 21-23. There is no Nigada. 

s See 99 s. V. 19. 18-20. The verse is RV. x. » See 99 S. v. 19. 24, Cf. AB. ii. 9. 11. 

70. 10. * Cf. TS. iii. 1. 3. 2. 



143] The Animal Scbcrijice [ — ii. 12 

this light the sacriticer with light before him goes to the world of heaven. 
When they are about to kill it, then the Adhvaryu throws the strew 
below. In that they lead it outside the altar when over it has been said 
the Apris and round it fire has been carried, verily thus they make it 
sit on the strew. They dig a hole for the offal; the offal is connected 
with plants ; this (earth) is the support of plants ; verily thus in its support 
it at the end they establish. They say, ‘ This animal is the oblation ; 
now much of it goes away, hair, skin, blood, dewclaws, hooves, the two 
horns, the raw flesh falls away ; by what is this made up ? ’ In that they 
offer a cake also at the animal sacrifice, thereby is this made up for it. 
The saps went away from animals ; becoming rice and barley were they 
born ; in that in the animal sacrifice they offer also a cake, (it is because 
they think) ‘ Let our sacrifice be with a victim with sap ; let our sacrifice 
be with a victim whole.’ His sacrifice is performed with a victim with 
sap ; his sacrifice is performed with a victim whole who knows thus. 

ii. 12 (vii. 2). Having forced out its omentum they bring it up; the Adh- 
varyu covering it with butter froiri the dipping ladle says, ‘ Recite for the 
drops.* In that the drops are dropped, (it is because he thinks) ‘ The drops 
are connected with all the deities ; let these not, undelighted by me, go to 
the gods.* ‘ Rejoice in the most extending * he recites.^ ‘ This speech most 
pleasing to the gods, offering the oblations in thy mouth * (he says) ; verily 
thus he offers them in the mouth of Agni. ‘This our sacrifice place 
among the immortals *, this hymn ^ he recites. In ‘ Rejoice in these 
oblations, 0 all-knower * he invokes rejoicing in the oblations. ‘ Of the 
drops, O Agni, of fat, of ghee * (he says), for they arc of fat and of ghee. 
‘ O Hotr, eat first seated * (he says) ; Agni is the Hotr of the gods ; verily 
thus he says ‘ O Agni, eat, first seated.* ‘ Rich in ghee, O purifying one, 
for thee the drops of fat are dropped * (he says),*^ for they arc of fat and of 
ghee. In ‘ Bestow upon us in thy wont that mast worthy thing meet for the 
enjoyment of the gods * he invokes a benediction. ‘ To thee, the sage, the 
drops drop ghee, O Agni, who art to be appeased * (he says),‘‘ for they drop 
ghee. In ‘ As best seer art thou kindled ; do thou become the helper of the 
sacrifice * he invokes the perfecting of the sacrifice. ‘ For thee they drop,® 
0 Adhrigu, 0 mighty one, the drops, 0 Agni, of fat and of ghee* (he 
says), for they are of fat and of ghee, ‘ Praised by the poet with great 
blaze hast thou come ; rejoice in the oblations, O wise one *, with this he 
invokes rejoicing in the oblations. 


' RV. i. 75. 1 ; see Schwab, Das altindischc ^ KV. iii. 21. 2. 

Thieropfer, pp. 114, 115. * RV. iii. 21. 3. 

2 RV. iii. 21. 5 RV. iii. 21. 4. 



ii. 12 — ] 


[144 


The Soma Sacrifice 

< For thee from the middle the best fat is taken out, 

We give it forth unto thee ; 

For thee, O bright one, the drops drop on the skin. 

Taste of them among the gods ’ 

(he says) ; ® verily thus he says the vasal call over them, just as in ‘ O 
Agni, taste the Soma.’ In that the drops are dropped, and the drops 
are connected with all the deities, therefore the rain comes divided into 
drops. 

ii. 13 (vii. 3). They say,^ ‘ What are the invitatory verses of the calls of 
Hail ! What the direction ? What the oflering verse ? ’ These which he 
recites are the invitatory verses, the direction is the direction ; the offering 
verse the offering verse. They say, ‘ What is the deity of the calls of 
Hail ! ? ’ ‘ The All-gods ’ he should reply. Therefore they use as offering 

verse ‘ May the gods eat the oblation over which has been said the call 
of Hail ! ’ The gods by the sacrifice, by zeal, by fervour, by the libations 
went to the world of heaven ; when the omentum had been offered the 
world of heaven was discerned by them ; having offered the omentum, 
disregarding the other rites they went aloft to the world of heaven. Then 
the men and the seers came to the place of sacrifice of the gods, ‘ Wo shall 
seek something of the sacrifice for discernment.’ They went round, and lo 
the victim lying without entrails They perceived ‘The victim is just 
so much as the omentum.’ The victim is just so much as the omentum. 
In that having cooked it they offer it at the third pressing, (it is because 
they think) ‘ Let our sacrifice be performed with many libations ; let our 
sacrifice be with the victim whole.’ His sacrifice is performed with many 
libations ; his sacrifice is with the victim whole who knows thus. 

ii. 14 (vii. 4). The libation of the omentum is a libation of ambrosia ; the 
Agni libation is a libation of ambrosia; the libation of butter is a libation 
of ambrosia; the libation of Soma is a libation of ambrosia. These are 
the incorporeal libations; with those libations which are incorporeal the 
sacrificer conquers immortality. The omentum is seed ; seed disappears 
as it were, the omentum disappears as it were ; seed is white, the omentum 
is white ; seed is incorporeal, the omentum is incorporeal. The blood and 
the flesh are the body. Therefore should he say ‘ As much as is bloodless, 


« RV. iii. 21. 5. 

‘ The Puronuvakyas are those given above in 
AB. ii. 12 ; the Praisa is that of the fore- 
offering hota yaksad agnim svdhdjyasya ; 
and the Yajya is that of the last AprI 
verse. The first ten fore-offerings take 
place before the circumambulation with 


fire ; the last fore-offering after the drops 
are offered and before the omentum is 
offered. See Schwab, Das aUindischt 
Thieropfery pp. 116, 116. 
ait is changed by Weber to ed = a + id, as often 
in 9B. i. 6. 2. S ; ii. 2. 3. 3 ; iii. 4. 2. 2, 
&c. ; KS. viii. 10 ; Caland, VOJ. xxiii. 61. 



146] The Morning Litany [ — ii. 15 

so much do thou cut off.’ (The offering) is made in five pori^ions j ^ even 
of the sacrifice is a four-portioner, still the omentum is made into five 
portions. He makes a basis of butter, a fragment of gold (comes next), 
the omentum, a fragment of gold ; above he makes a layer of butter. 
They say ‘ If there is no gold, how shall it be ? ’ Having made two bases 
of butter, having made a portion of the omentum, then he makes two 
layers of butter on the top ; butter is ambrosia ; gold is ambrosia ; therein 
he obtains the desire which is in the butter, therein he obtains the desire 
which is in gold. They make up five ; man is fivefold and disposed in 
five parts, hair, skin, flesh, bone, marrow. Having made ready the sacri- 
fice in the same extent as is man, he offers in Agni as the birthplace of 
the gods ; Agni is the birthplace of the gods ; he having come into being 
from Agni as the birthplace of the gods, from the libation, with a body of 
gold, he goes aloft to the world of heaven. 

The Morning Litany. 

ii. 15 (vii. 5). ‘For^ the gods that move at morn recite, O Hotr’ the 
Adhvaryu says. Agni, IJsas, and the Ayvins are the gods that move at 
morn ; they come with seven metres each ; the gods that move at mom 
come to the call of him who knows thus. When Prajapati himself as 
Hotr was about to recite the morning litany, both the gods and the 
Asuras resorted to the sacrifice, (thinking) ‘ For us will he recite, for us.’ 
He recited for the gods alone ; then did the gods prosper, the Asuras were 
defeated. He prospers himself, the evil rival who hates him who knows 
thus is defeated. In the morning he recited it for the gods ; in that he 
recited in the morning, that is why the morning litany has its name. It 
should be recited in the deep of the night, to secure the whole of speech, 
the whole of the holy power. If a man prospers or attains pre-eminence, 
his speech as uttered others repeat ; therefore should it be recited 
in the deep of the night; before the utterance of speech must it be 
recited. If he should recite, when speech has been uttered, verily he 
would make him a repeater of what has been said by another; there- 
fore in the deep of night should it bo recited. Before the speaking of 
the fowls * should he recite ; the birds, the fowls, are the mouth of Nirrti ; 

^ For this see Schwab, Das a?«n(iwcAe27«cro2?/e?*, ii. 15. ^ For the morning litany see KB. xi. 
pp. 119, 120. Bhar. vi. 16. 4 and 5 are For the ritual see A^JS. iv. 13 ; vi. 2 ; 

an obvious quotation from this passage. Caland and Henry, VAgnittoma, pp. 130- 

The omentum is not divided, but the 132. 

offering is made of five portions. For a Cf. TS. vi. 4. 3. 1 as further explained by 
the Avad&nas see also Hillebrandt, Neu- Ap^S. xii. 3. 14, 16, purd vd vayobhyah 

nnd VoUmondscpfer^ pp, 108 seq, pravaditofy, 

19 fn.o.s. 26l 



[146 


ii. 16 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

now as to his reciting before the speaking of the fowls (it is because 
they think), ‘ Let us not speak after speech has been uttered unconnected 
with the sacrifice/ Therefore it should be recited in the deep of the night. 
Or rather when the Adhvaryu begins, then he should recite; when the 
Adhvaryu begins, verily with speech he begins, at speech the Hotr 
recites, for speech is the holy power. Herein is the desire obtained which 
is in speech and in the holy power. 

ii. 16 (vii. 6). When Prajapati himself as Hotr was about to recite the 
morning litany, all the deities expected ‘ With me will he begin ; with me/ 
Prajapati pondered, ‘ If I shall begin with one specified deity, then by what 
means shall I obtain the other deities ? * He saw this verse,^ ‘ O waters, 
the rich ones*; the waters are all the deities; the rich ones are all the 
deities. With this verse he began the morning litany. All these deities 
were delighted, * With me has he begun ; with me ! * All the deities delight 
in him beginning the morning litany. By him who knows thus the morning 
litany is provided with all the deities. The gods were afraid, ‘ The Asuras 
will take from us this morning sacrifice, just as those that have more force 
and might/ To them said Indra ‘ Fear not ; against them in the morning 
shall I hurl my thunderbolt thrice made perfect/ This verse did he speak ; 
it is a thunderbolt, in that it is addressed to the son of the waters ; it is 
a thunderbolt, in that it is a Tristubh; it is a thunderbolt in that it 
is speech. It he hurled against them ; with it he slew them ; thus indeed 
the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He prospers himself, the 
evil rival who hates him is defeated, who knows this. They say ‘ He indeed 
would be a Hotr who in this verse could produce all the metres ’ ; this thrice 
repeated supports all the metres ; this is the generating of the metres. 

ii. 17 (vii. 7). A hundred (verses) should be recited for one desiring life ; 
man has a hundred (years of life), a hundred strengths, a hundred powers ; 
verily thus he confers upon him life, strength, and power. Three hundred 
and sixty should be recited for one desiring the sacrifice ; three hundred 
and sixty are the days of the year ; so great is the year ; Prajapati is the 
year ; the sacrifice is Prajapati. To him the sacrifice condescends, for whom 
one who knows thus recites three hundred and sixty. Seven hundred and 
twenty should be recited for one desiring offspring and cattle. Seven 
hundred and twenty are the days and nights of the year ; so great is the 
year; Prajapati is the year; he through whose propagation atl this is 
propagated ; verily thus through Prajapati being propagated he is propa- 
gated with offspring and cattle for propagation; he is propagated with 
offspring and cattle who knows thus. Eight hundred should be recited for 


J RV. X. 30. 12. Of. KB. xi. 4 ; A^S. iv. 13. 6. 



147 ] 


The M(yrniifig Lit(my [ — ii. ig 

one who is called not a Brahman ' or who being ill-spoken of and seized 
with defilement sacrifices ; the Gayatri has eight syllables ; by means of the 
Gayatri the gods smote away the evil, the defilement; verily thus by 
the Gayatri he smites away the evil, the defilement. A thousand should be 
recited for one desiring heaven ; the world of heaven is at a distance of 
a thousand journeys ^ of a horse hence ; (they serve) for the attainment 
of the world of heaven, the securing, the going to (the world of heaven). 
An unlimited number should be recited; Prajapati is unlimited; the 
morning litany is the litany of Prajapati ; in it are all desires obtained. 
In that he recites an unlimited number, (it serves) to win all desires ; all 
desires he wins who knows thus. Therefore should an unlimited number 
be recited. In seven metres he recites for Agni ; seven are the worlds of 
the gods ; in all the worlds of the gods he prospers who knows thus. In 
seven metres he recites for Usas ; seven are the tame animals ; he wins the 
tame animals who knows thus. In seven metres he recites for the Afvins ; 
in seven ways spoke speech ; so much spoke speech ; (they serve) to secure 
the whole of speech, the whole of the holy power. To three deities he 
recites; three arc these threefold worlds; verily (they serve) to conquer 
these worlds. 

ii. 18 (vii. 8). They say ‘ How is the morning litany to be recited ? ’ The 
morning litany is to be recited according to the metres ; the metres are the 
limbs of Prajapati ; the sacrificer is Prajapati ; that is meet for the sacrificer. 
The morning litany should be recited by feet ; cattle have four feet, for the 
winning of cattle. By half-verses should it be recited, just as one usually 
recites it, for support ; man has two supports, cattle four feet ; verily thus 
the sacrificer with two supports he establishes among four-footed cattle ; 
therefore should it be recited by half- verses. They say ‘ Since the morning 
litany is transposed,^ how does it become not transposed?’ ‘Since the 
Brhati does not depart from the middle of it,’ he should reply, ‘ For this 
reason.’ Some deities have the libations as their portion, others the Stomas 
and the metres. The libations which are offered in the fire, by them he 
delights those whose portion is the libations ; in that they sing and recite, 
thereby those whose portion is the Stomas and the metres. Both sets of 
deities are delighted and sacrificed to by him who knows thus. Thirty- 
three are the gods that drink Soma, thirty-three that do not drink Soma ; 
eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Prajapati and the vasat call are 

' Cf. also AB. i. 16, ii. 13. Anustubh, Tristubh, and Brhati ; Usnili, 

* For other estimates see Weber, Ind, Stud, ix. Jagati, and Panktl, not the normal 

360 ; cf. Vedic IndeXj i. 70. (avyUdlia) order by fours upwards, which 

ii. 18. ^ This refers to the order of the metres is given in the enumerations in the 

on the morning litany, viz. G&yatri, Afmkramant, ggS. v. 27, &c. 



ii. 18 — ] The 8orm Sacrifice [148 

the deities that drink Soma; the eleven fore-offerings, the eleven after- 
offerings, the eleven subordinate ^ offerings, are those that do not drink the 
Soma and have the victim as tlieir portion ; by Soma lie delights the Soma 
drinkers, by the victim those that do not drink Soma. Both sets of deities 
are delighted and sacrificed to by him who knows thus. ‘ Usas with her 
ruddy kine hath appeared with this last (verse he concludes. They say 
^In that he recites for thrce'rites, to Agni, to Usas, and to the A9vins, how 
are all these rites concluded by him when he concludes with one verse 
only ? ’ ‘ Usas with her ruddy kino hath appeared ’ is the characteristic of 

Usas ; * Agni in due season hath been placed ’ of Agni ; ‘ Your chariot hath 
been yoked, 0 ye of great wealth, wonder-workers, the immortal, lovers of 
sweetness, hear ye my call ’ of the Alvins. So all three rites are concluded 
by him when he concludes with one verse only. 

ADHYAYA III 

The Aponaptrlya. 

ii. 19 (viii. 1). Thc^ seers performed a sacrificial season on the Sarasvati ; 
they drove away Kavasa Ailusa from the Soma, ‘The child of a slave 
woman, a cheat, no Brahman ; how has he been consecrated in our midst ? ' 
They sent him out to the desert, (saying) ‘There let thirst slay him; 
let him drink not the water of the Sarasvati.’ He sent away to the 
wilderness, afflicted by thirst, saw the ‘ child of the waters ’ hymn/-^ ‘ Forth 
among the gods let there be speeding for the Brahman.’ Thereby he 
went to the dear abode of the waters; him the waters welled out after; all 
around him Sarasvati hastened. Therefore they call it here Parisaraka, in 
that Sarasvati went all around him. The seers said ' The gods know him ; 
let us summon him.’ ‘Be it so’ (they replied). They summoned him; 
having summoned him they performed this ‘child of the waters’ (hymn), 
‘ Forth among the gods let there be speeding for the Brahman ’ ; therewith 
they went to the dear home of the waters, of the gods. He goes to the dear 
home of the waters, of the gods ; he conquers the highest world who knows 
thus, and he who knowing thus performs the ‘ child of the waters ’ (hymn). 
It he should recite continuously ; Parjanya comes to rain continuously ^ for 

2 For theso see TS. i. 3. 11. Kavasa cf. KB. xii. 3 ; L^vi, La doctrine du 

2 RV. V. 76. 9. sacrifice^ p. 150. 

1 AB. ii. 19 and 20 and KB. xii. 1 and 2 deal * RV. x. 30. The sense of the verse is doubt- 
with the recitation for the drawing of ful : Caland and Henry render ‘Que, 

the water for the Soma ; see A<JS. v. 1 ; pour le service divin, la marcho(du saori- 

Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 232, n. 2 ; Caland fice'i aille aux dieux \ 

and Henry, L^Agnistomay pp. 139 seq. For * Not jimutavarmy i. e. * from passing clouds ’ 

(Sftyana absurdly ‘ on the mountains *). 



149] The Apona^ptrlya [ — ii. 20 

offspring when one knowing thus recites this continuously. If he were to 
recite with divisions, then Parjanya would rain with clouds for offspring ; 
therefore should it be recited continuously only. Of it he recites the 
first (verse) thrice continuously ; verily thereby tlie whole is continuously 
recited. 

ii. 20 (viii. 2). These nine (verses) he recites without omission. ‘ Send 
forth our sacrifice with divine offering’ (he says) as tenth.^ ' Winding hither- 
ward those of two streams ’ (he says 2 ), when the Ekadhana (waters) are 
turned hitherward ; ‘ What time the waters are seen coming forward ’ (he 
says when they are being seen ; ‘ May the cows with milk, eager for the end ’ 
(he says^), when they are coming up; ^Some come together, others come 
up ’ (he says ®) when they come together. The waters were in conflict, ‘ we 
shall first bear the sacrifice; we’; both these Vasativari waters, which are 
drawn on the previous day and the Ekadhana (waters which are drawn) in 
the morning. 

These Bhrgu saw, ‘ These waters are in conflict.’ Them with this verse 
he brought into harmony, ‘ Some come together, others come up.’ They 
came into harmony; in harmony they support his sacrifice who knows 
thus. ‘ Like the waters divine they come up to the vessel of the offering ’ 
he recites® when they are being poured together into the Hotr’s goblet, 
both the Vasativari and the Ekadhana (waters). ‘Hast thou seen the 
waters, O Adhvaryu ? ’ the Hotr asks the Adhvaryu ; the sacrifice is the 
waters; verily thus he says ‘Hast thou seen the sacrifice?’ ‘Yea, they 
have indeed condescended ’ the Adhvaryu replies ; verily thus he says ‘ Look 
upon them.’ ‘ In these, O Adhvaryu, shalt thou press for Indra the Soma 
rich in honey, full of rain, bitter at the end, thick meanwhile,^ for him with 
the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Rbhus, the Vibhus, with Vilja, with 
Brhaspati, with the All-gods, of which having drunk, Indra shall slay the 
foes; he shall overcome their tribes’; (so saying) he rises to meet (them); the 
waters are to be met ; men rise to meet a superior when he comes ; therefore 
is he to rise to meet them. He must turn round behind them ^ ; they turn 
round behind a superior ; therefore must he turn round behind them. As 
he recites he should move after them ; for even if another be the sacrificer 


MIV. X. 30. 11. Cf. KB. xii. 1. 

2 KV. X. 80. 10. dvrttasu must be read. 

8 RV. X. 80. 18. 

* RV. V. 48. 1. 

8 RV. ii. 35. 3. 

® RV. i. 83. 2. The na is very curious and appa- 
rently untranslatable; Calandand Henry 
suggest ^ Les deesses incarn<Ses en eaux *, 
but cf. Oldenberg, J^gveda-Noten, i. 83. 


So BR. V. 55 against Sayana. Oldenberg 
(on RV. X. 42. 8) takes the contrast to be 
not of the plant but the Savanas, the last 
being of tm-a Soma. Vdjavate may mean 
* full of strength. For the passage above 
cf. TS. vi. 4. 3. 4. 

8 Sayana tries to make onw- and pary^dvrtydh 
into two categories, which is impossible. 



ii,20 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [160 

still fame will fall to the Hotr ; therefore should he move after them as he 
recites. Reciting this (verse ®), ‘ The mothers go with the paths/ should he 
move after. ‘The sisters of those that sacrifice, mixing the milk with 
honey ’ (he says) who being without taste of the honey drink desires to win 
fame. ‘ Those that are in the sun or with which is the sun ’ (he says 
who desires brilliance and splendour. ‘ I invite the waters, the goddesses, 
where our kine drink ' (he says who desires cattle. Reciting all these 
should he move after, to win these desires. These desires he wins who 
knows thus. ‘ They have come rich with living gifts ’ he recites as the 
Vasativari and the Ekadhana waters are being set down; ‘They have 
come, the waters, eager to this strew,’ when they have been set down. 
With this lie concludes. 


The Updhgu and Antarydma Gups. 

ii. 21 (viii. 3 ). Thc^ morning litany is the head of the sacrifice; the 
Upari9u and Antaryama (cups) are expiration and inspiration ; speech verily 
is a thunderbolt. Before the Upah5u and Antaryama (cups) have been offered 
the Hotr should not utter speech ; if, before the Upa£i9u and the Antaryama 
(cups) have been offered, the Hotr should utter speech, with speech as 
a thunderbolt he would interrupt the breaths of the sacrificer. If one 
were to say then of him, ‘ Witli speech as a thunderbolt he has interrupted 
the breaths of the sacrificer, breath will forsake him,’ it would assuredly 
be so. Therefore the Hotr should not utter speech before the Upan9u and 
Antaryama (cups) have been offered. With ‘ Support expiration ; hail ! thee, 
O easy to invoke, to the sun ! ’ he should accompany the Upan9u (cup) ^ ; 
towards it he should breath forth with ‘O expiration, support my expira- 
tion.’ With ‘ Support inspiration ; hail ! thee, O easy to invoke, to the sun ! ’ 
he should accompany the Antary toa (cup) ; towards it he should breath in 
with ‘0 inspiration, support my inspiration’; ‘To cross-breathing thee!’ 
with this he utters speech, having touched the stone for pressing (the Soma 
for) the Upah9U. Verily thus the Hotr, having placed the breaths in the 
body, utters speech, with the whole of life, for the whole of life ; a full life 
he lives who knows thus. 


» RV. i. 23, 16. 

RV. i. 23. 17. 

RV. i. 23. 18. 

»» RV. X. 30. 14. 

« RV. X. 80. 15. 

1 AB« ii. 21 and KB. xii. 4 deal with the 
first two cups offered, the Upah 9 U and 


Antaryama ; see AfS. v. 2 ; 99®* ® » 

Calund and Henry, UAgnistomaf pp. 165- 
167, 160-162. 

^ < Restrain ’ is also possible as a rendering ; 
* O well-calling one * is Eggeling’s version 
(SBE. xxvi. 264, n. 4). 



161] 


The Sarpana and the Cakes 


The Sarpana. 

ii. 22 (viii, 4). They ^ say ‘ Should he creep ? Should he not creep ? ’ ‘ He 
should creep * hold some, saying ‘ The Bahispavamana is the food of both 
gods and men ; therefore they go together towards it/ That is not to be 
regarded. If he were to creep, he would make the Be a follower of the 
Saman. If one here were to say of him, ‘ This Hotr has become a follower 
of the Saman singer ; he has conferred glory on the Udgatr ; he has fallen 
from his place; she will fall from her place,* it would certainly be so. 
Therefore seated here he should recite, 

‘ The Soma drink of the gods here, 

At the sacrifice, on the strew, on the altar, 

Of this, we are eating.’ 

So his self is not excluded from the Soma drinking. Moreover he should 
say, ‘ Thou art the mouth ; may I become the mouth * ; the Bahispavamana 
is the mouth of the sacrifice; the head among his own he becomes, the 
chief of his own he becomes, who knows thus. An Asura woman,® named 
Long Tongue, licked the morning pressing of the gods ; it became drunk. 
The gods sought to remedy it; they said to Mitra and Varuna, ‘Do ye 
remove this (intoxication).* They replied, ‘ Be it so ; let us choose a boon 
from you.’ * Choose * (they said). They chose this boon, the milk mess of 
the morning pressing. This is their fixed portion, for it is chosen as 
a boon by the two. Thus what by her was made intoxicated, as it were, is 
made perfect by this (milk mess), for by it the two removed what was 
intoxicated as it were. 

The Cakes. 


ii. 23 (viii. 5). The ^ pressings of the gods were not firm. They saw these 
cakes ; they offered them at each pressing, to support the pressings ; then 
indeed were their pressings made firm. In that the cakes are offered at 
each pressing, (they serve) to support the pressings, for so are those of them 
made firm. The cakes the gods made citadels,® that is why the Puroda^as 


^ AB. ii. 22 and KB. xii. 5 deal with the 
sarpana of the priests for the Bahispava- 
m&na Stotra ; see Af S. v. 2. 4. 5 ; Caland 
and Henry, VAgnUtoma, pp. 171, 172. 
The Mantra is spoiled in metre by the 
insertion of iha. Of. also 9®. iv. 2. 4. 7; 
Eggeling, SB£. xxvi. 249, n. 2. As the 
S&man tune is based on the Rc (GU. iii. 

6. 1), it is secondary. 

2 The legend explains the use of a milk mess 
at the Bahispavamkna. The tale of the 


Asuri is found in the Talavnkara tradi- 
tion referred to here by SEyana, and 
published by Oertel, JAGS. xix. 120 ; 
cf. L^vi, La doctrine du sacrifice, p. 155. 

ii. 28 ^ AB. ii. 28 and KB. xiii. 8 deal with 
the cakes for the three pressings of Soma. 
For the rule of eleven potsherds see TB. 
ii. 6. 11. 4; Caland and Henry, VAgnU 
stoma, p. 184. 

• purah is presumably the noun rather than 
the prefix, cf. AB. i. 28. 1. 



[162 


ii. 28 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

have their name. They say ‘ He should offer the cakes at each pressing, 
one on eight potsherds at the morning pressing, one on eleven potsherds at 
the midday pressing, one on twelve potsherds at the third pressing, for such 
is the characteristic of the pressings, such of the metres.’ That is not to be 
regarded. The cakes at each pressing are all offered to Indra ; therefore he 
should offer them on eleven potsherds. They say ‘ From that part of the 
cake should he eat where it is not anointed with ghee, to protect the Soma 
drink; for by ghee as a thunderbolt Indra slew Vrtra.’ That is not to be 
regarded. That which is purified is the oblation ; what is purified is the 
Soma drink ; therefore should he eat from nny part whatever of it. From 
all sides these oblations, butter, fried grains, mush, the pap, the cake, and 
the milk mess flow up to the sacrifice!’ as delights ; on all sides delights flow 
up to him who knows thus. 


The Sacrijice of Five Oblations. 

ii. 24 (viii. 6), He ^ who knows the sacrifice with five oblations prospers 
with the sacrifice of five oblations ; the sacrifice of five oblations is made up 
of fried grains, mush, the pap, the cake, and the milk mess ; this is the sacri- 
fice of five oblations ; he who knows thus prospers with the sacrifice of five 
oblations. He who knows the sacrifice of five syllables prospers with the 
sacrifice of five syllables ; the sacrifice of five syllables is m mat pad vag de ; 
he prospers with the sacrifice of five syllables who knows thus. He who 
knows the sacrifice of five Nara^ahsas * prospers with the sacrifice of the 
five Narafahsas ; the morning pressing has two Nara9ahsa (cups) ; the mid- 
day pressing two Nara5ausas ; the third pressing one Nara^ahsas ; this is 
the sacrifice of five Nara9ahsas ; he prospers with the sacrifice of five Nara- 
9ausas who knows thus. He who knows the sacrifice of five pressings 
prospers with the sacrifice of five pressings ; the sacrifice of five pressings 
is the victim on the fast day, three pressings, the concluding victim ; he 
prospers with the sacrifice of five pressings who knows thus. ‘ With the 
bay steeds let Indra eat the fried grains ; with Pusan the mush ; with Saras- 
vati, with Bharat!, the pap (is for Indra) ; for Indra the cake ’ is the offer- 


* AB. ii. 24 and KB. xiii. 2 deal with the 
sacrifice of five oblations, and AB. adds 
speculations on other fivefold elements 
in the sacrifice ; see Calaiid and Henry, 
VAgnistoma^ pp. 134, 135. See also TS. 
vi. 5. 11 4 which very closely agrees. 

2 This refers to the fillings of the goblets, two 
for the first two pressings and once at 


the third. For the sense see AB. vii. 34. 

3 The Mantra is defective as regards the 
milk mess (payasyd) and the construction 
is broken, the panvdpa being meant for 
Indra with Sarasvatl and Bharatl. It is 
apparently older than the ritual to which 
it is accommodated. Cf. PB. i. 5. 11 ; 
99s. V. 4. 3. 



1 53 ] The Oujps for two Deities [ — ii. 26 

ing verse for the five oblation (sacrifice) ; the two bays are the Rc and the 
Saman ; Pusan is cattle ; mush is food ; ‘With Sarasvati, with Bharat! ’ (he 
says) ; Sarasvati is speech, Bharata is the breath ; ‘ the pap, for Indra the 
cake * (he says) ; the pap is food, the cake is power ; verily thus he makes 
the sacrificer attain union and identity of form and world with these deities ; 
he is united with a stronger, he obtains pre-eminence who knows thus. 
‘ Enjoy, O Agni, the oblation ’ he says as offering verse for the Svis^krt of 
the cake at each pressing. Thereby did Avatsara go to the dear home of 
Agni ; he conquered the highest world. He goes to the dear home of Agni ; 
he conquers the highest world, who knows thus and who knowing thus 
sacrifices with this (sacrifice of) five oblations and who says the offering 
verse/ 


ADHYAYA IV 


The Cups for tivo Deities. 


ii. 25 (ix. 1). The^ gods could not agree in the drinking first of Soma, 
the king ; ‘ Let me drink first ; let me drink first ’ they desired. They said 
seeking agreement, ‘ Come, let us run a race ; he who of us wins shall drink 
first of the Soma.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they replied). They ran a race ; of them 
running the race when they had started Vayu first took the lead, then 
Indra, then Mitra and Varuna, then the Afvins. Indra perceived of 
Vayu ‘ He is winning.’ He ran up after him (saying) ‘ Let us share 
together ; then let us win.’ He answered, ‘ No ; I alone shall win.’ 
* A third for me ; then let us win ’ (he said). ‘ No,’ he answered, ‘ I alone 
shall win.’ ‘A fourth for me ; then let us win’ (he said). ‘Be it so ’ (he 
replied) ; he admitted him to a fourth share ; therefore Indra has a quarter 
as his portion, Vayu three-quarters. Indra and Vayu won together, then 
Mitra and Varuna, then the A9vins. Their feeding is in accord with their 
winning; first for Indra and Vayu, then for Mitra and Varuna, then for 
the A9vins. The Indra- Vayu cup is drawn with a quarter for Indra. 
Seeing this the seer declares ^ ‘ With the teams, with Indra as charioteer.’ 
Therefore now also (when) the Bharatas attack the property of the Satvants, 


^ Yajate yajafiti ca is very curious, though the 
sense is clear. Presumably Hi here is 
used to point the contrast of yajate and 
yajati. For the use of na cf. perhaps the 
Kanva text of 5®* iv. 2. 1. 7 ; ncty u tac 
cakdra. Cf. AB. ii. 80. 5 : samavanayati and 
^nayate. 

AB. ii. 25>28 and 30 and KB. xiii. 5-8 (cf, 
20 [b.o.s. 25 ] 


9 B. iv. 1 . 3. 11 ) deal with the cups for two 
deities, those for Indra and Vayu, Mitra 
and Varuna, and the A 9 vin 8 ; see AfS. 
V. 6 ; 99s. vii. 2. 1-3. 5 ; Caland and 
Henry, VAgnistoma, pp. 199-208 ; for the 
race motive cf. Oertel, Trans. Conn. Acad. 
XV. 174 ; AB. iv. 7. 

2 RV. iv. 46. 2 6 or 48. 2 h. 



ii. 26 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [164 

the charioteers claim a fourth (of the booty) by force of the example since 
then Indra becoming a charioteer as it were conquered.® 

ii. 26 (ix. 2). The cups for two deities are the breaths ; that for Indra and 
Vayu is speech and breath; that for Mitra and Varuna eye and mind ; that 
for the A§vin8 ear and self. Now some make the invitatory verses for that 
for Indra and Vayu Anustubhs, and the offering verses Gayatris (saying), 
‘The cup for Indra and Vayu is speech and breath ; thus will the two be in 
accord with metres also/ This is not to be regarded. Imperfection is pro- 
duced in the sacrifice when the invitatory verse is longer than the offering 
verse ; when the offering verse is the longer, that is perfect, and so also 
when they are equal. For whatever desire in speech or breath he thus 
acts, that is herein obtained. The first invitatory verse is addressed to 
Vayu, the second to Indra and Vayu^ and so with the offering verses.® 
With the one addressed to Vayu, he puts breath in order, for breath is 
Vayu; then with the Indra line of (the verse) to Indra and Vayu he puts 
speech in order, for speech is connected with Indra. He obtains the desire 
in breath and speech ; he makes no unevenness in the sacrifice. 

ii. 27 (ix. 3). (The cups) for two deities are the breaths ; they are drawn 
in one vessel ; therefore the breaths have one name. They are offered in two 
vessels^; therefore the breaths are in pairs. With the Yajus with which 
the Adhvaryu offers, the Hotr accepts. With ‘This the wealthy one, of 
much wealth ; here the wealthy, of much wealth ; in me the wealthy, of 
much wealth ; protector of speech, protect my speech ’ he partakes of (the 
cup) for Indra and Vayu. ‘ Invoked is speech together with breath ; may 
speech together with breath invoke me; invoked are the seers, divine, 
guardians of the body, born of fervour ; may the seers, the divine, invoke 
me, guardians of the body, born of fervour ’ (he says) ; the seers, divine, 
guardians of the body, born of fervour are the breaths ; verily thus he 
invokes them. With ‘ This the wealthy, finding wealth ; here the wealthy, 
finding wealth ; in me the wealthy, finding wealth ; guardian of the eye, 
guard mine eye ’ he partakes of (the cup) for Mitra and Varuna. ‘ Invoked 
is the eye together with mind ; may the eye together with mind invoke 
me ; invoked are the seers, divine, guardians of the body ; born of fervour ’ 
(he says) ; the seers, divine, guardians of the body, born of fervour are the 


^ That Saivant and Bharata are proper 
names is only to be believed, though 
S&yana does not recognize either. This 
involves the change of Satvanam to 
Satnaitdm as in (^B. xiii. 5. 4. 21. Of. 
below AB. viii. 14 ; Weber, Ind, Stud. ix. 
258, 254 ; Vedic Index^ ii. 421. 

1 UV. i. 2. 1 and 4. Cf. KB. xiii. 15. 


2 RV. iv. 46. 1 and 2. Haug has misinterpreted 
this cliapter as allowing, and not as for- 
bidding inequality, not observing that 
the verses used are in Gayatrl. 
ii. 27. 1 I. e. by the Adhvaryu and Prati- 
prasthatr ; see Calandand Henry, VAgni- 
stoma y p. 199. Cf. for the chapter TS. vi. 
6. 9. 3, 4 ; 9B. iv. 3. 1. 



166] The Gups for two Deities [ — 28 

breaths ; verily thus he invokes them. With, ‘ This the wealthy, collecting 
wealth ; here the wealthy, collecting wealth ; in me the wealthy, collecting 
wealth ; guardian of the earth, guard mine ear * he partakes of (the cup) 
for the A 9 vins. ‘ Invoked is the ear together with the self ; may the ear 
together with the self invoke me ; invoked are the seers, divine, guardians 
of the body, born of fervour ; may the seers, divine, guardians of the body, 
born of fervour, invoke me* (he says) ; the seers divine, guardians of the body, 
born of fervour, arc the breaths ; verily thus he invokes them. He partakes 
of (the cup) for Indra and Vayu front to front therefore expiration and 
inspiration are in front ; he partakes of (the cup) for Mitra and Varuna 
front to front ; therefore the eyes are in front ; he partakes of (the cup) for 
the Afvins carrying it all round ; therefore botli men and beasts hear speech 
speaking on all sides. 

ii. 28 (ix. 4). (The ^ cups) for two deities are the breaths ; without taking 
in breath he should say the offering verses for (the cups) for the deities, for 
the continuity of the breath and to avoid splitting the breaths. (The cups) 
for two deities are the breaths ; he should not say the second vasat for (the 
cups) for two deities. If he were to say the second vasat for those for two 
deities, he would bring to rest the unresting breaths ; the second vasat call 
is the ending. If one were then to say of him ‘ He has brought to rest the 
unresting breaths ; breath will forsake him,* it would certainly be so. 
Therefore he should not say the second vasat for (the cups) for two deifcies. 
They say ‘ Having twice expressed approval the Maitravaruna twice gives 
directions; having once expressed approval the Hotr twice says vasat \ 
what is the expression of approval of the Hotr ? * (The cups) for two 
deities are the breaths ; the expression of approval is the thunderbolt ; if 
the Hotr were to express approval between, with the expression as a 
thunderbolt he would pierce the breaths of the sacrificer. If one were then 
to say of him, ‘ With the expression of approval as a thunderbolt he has 
pierced the breaths of the sacrificer,* it would certainly be so. Therefore 
the Hotr should not express approval between (the two offering verses). 
Moreover the Maitravaruna is the mind of the sacrifice, the Hotr is the 
voice of the sacrifice. Impelled by mind speech speaks, for the speech 
which he speaks with mind elsewhere is demoniacal and not welcome to the 
gods ; verily thus in that the Maitravaruna twice utters the expression of 
approval, this is the expression of approval of the Hotr. 

^ I. e. the mouth of the cup is placed opposite space to intervene between the two oifer- 

his mouth, and he does not drink pro- ing verses ; see A^S. v. 5. 4, and 21, 

miscuously from any part. where a memorial verse is cited on the 

* This chapter explains the omission of the anuvasatkara. The latter peculiarity is 

amuoasatkara in the offering and the fact again referred to in AB. iii. 6. 

that there is only one tigur as there is no 



ii. 29—] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


[156 


The Seasonal Cups. 

ii. 29 (ix. 5). The offerings to the seasons ^ are the breaths ; in that they 
proceed with the offerings to the seasons, verily thus they place the breaths 
in the sacrificer. Six (priests) offer (saying) ‘ With the season ’ ; verily thus 
they place expiration in the sacrifice ; four with ‘ With the seasons ’ offer ; 
verily thus they place inspiration in the sacrifice ; twice with ' With the 
season ’ later ; verily thus they place cross-breathing in the sacrificer. This 
breath is divided in three ways, expiration, inspiration, and cross-breathing. 
In that they offer (saying) ‘ With the season,* ‘ with the seasons,’ ‘ with the 
season,* (it is) for the continuity of the breaths, to avoid splitting the 
breaths. The offerings to the seasons are the breaths ; he should not say 
the second vasat for the offerings to the seasons ; the seasons are unresting ; 
each (follows) each. If he were to say the second vasat for the offerings to 
the seasons he would bring to rest the unresting seasons ; the second vasat 
is an ending. If one were then to say of him ‘ He has brought to rest the 
unresting seasons; it will be an ill season’, it would certainly be so. There- 
fore he should not say the second vasat for the offerings to the seasons. 


The Cups for two Deities {continued). 


ii. 30 (ix. 6). (The cups ^) for two deities are the breaths ; the sacrificial 
food is cattle. Having partaken of (the cups) for two deities he invokes the 
sacrificial food ; the sacrificial food is cattle ; verily thus he invokes cattle ; 
he confers cattle upon the sacrificer. They say ‘ Should he eat first the sub- 
divided sacrificial food ? (Or) should he partake of the Hotr’s goblet ? * First 
should he eat the subdivided sacrificial food, and then should he partake 
of the Hotr’s goblet. In that he partakes first of (the cups) for two deities, 
thereby is the Soma drink first partaken of by him ; therefore should he 
first eat the subdivided sacrificial food, and then partake of the Hotr’s 
goblet; then on both sides he envelopes food with Soma drinkings, to 
envelope food. (The cups) for two deities are the breaths; the Hotr’s 


^ AB. ii. 29 and KB. xiii. 9 deal with the 
offerings of cups to the Ktus ; see ^B. iv. 
8. 1 ; A^S. V. 8 ; 99®. vii. 8 ; Caland and 
Henry, VAgnisUma, pp. 224-229. Gf. TS. 
vi. 5. 8. 2 ; GB. viii. 7 borrows from AB. 
as usual. The cups are drawn by the 
Adhvaryu and Pratiprasth&tr for the 
seasons and offered to the various deities 
by the different priests, the gods being 


invited to partake ‘with the seasons 
(season)* ; Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 319. 

ii, 30. 1 Cf. TS. vi. 4. 9. 3. 

2 The avanfaredd is a portion of the idd which 
is itself subdivided, and held by the Hotr 
from before his recitation to before he 
partakes of the i(^ proper ; see A 9 S. i. 7 ; 
99^* 10-12 ; Weber, Ind, Stud. ix. 225, 

226. 



167] 


The Silent Praise 


[ — ii. 31 

goblet is the body ; the remains of (the cups) for two deities he pours down 
into the Hotr’s goblet ; verily thus the Hotr places the breaths in the body, 
with full life for fullness of life ; a full life lives he who knows thus. 


The Silent Praise. 

ii. 31 (ix. 7). What ^ the gods did at the sacrifice, that the Asuras did ; 
they were of even strength and were not discriminated. Then indeed the 
gods saw this silent praise ; that of them the Asuras could not follow. The 
silent praise is a silent essence. Whatever weapon the gods raised against 
the Asuras that the Asuras perceived and countered ; then the gods saw this 
silent praise as a thunderbolt ; they raised it against them ; it the Asuras 
did not counter ; it they hurled at them ; with it not countered they smote 
them ; then indeed the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He 
prospers himself, the wicked rival who hates him is defeated, who knows 
thus. The gods, regarding themselves as victors, were performing the sacri- 
fice; to it the Asuras came (thinking) ‘We will make a confusion of the 
sacrifice.’ They saw them ranged round on all sides, daring ; they said, 
‘ Let us conclude this sacrifice ; let not the Asuras injure our sacrifice.* 

‘ Be it so * (they replied). They concluded it in the silent praise. With 
‘ Bhuh^ Agni, light, light, Agni * they concluded the Ajya and Praliga 
(Qastras). With ‘ Indra, light, hhuvah, light, Indra * they concluded the 
Niskevalya and Marutvatiya (Qastras). With ‘ Surya, light, light, uvar, 
Surya ’ they concluded the Vai9vadeva and Agnimaruta (Qastras). So they 
concluded it in the silent praise ; having thus concluded it in the silent 
praise they attained the end with it uninjured. Then indeed does the 
sacrifice come to a conclusion, when the Hotr recites the silent praise. If 
any person should after the recitation of the silent praise reproach him or 
curse him, he should say of him, ‘ He will fall into this misfortune (he 
invokes ^). Early to-day we complete this when the silent praise is recited. 
Just as one may attend upon one come to his house with due performance, 
even so now do we attend upon this.* He falls into this misfortune who 
knowing thus, after the silent praise is recited, either reproaches or curses. 
Therefore one who knows thus should not reproach or curse when the silent 
praise has been recited. 

ii. 32 (ix. 8). The silent praise is the eyes of the pressings. ‘ Bhuh, Agni, 
light, light, Agni * is the eyes of the morning pressing. ‘ Indra, light, 

^ AB. ii. 81 and 82 contain the treatment of VAgnistoma, p. 282. Cf. KB. xiv. 1 ; 

the silent praise, which is part of the v. 9. 1 ; ^ii* 1* 

Ajya 9^stra ; see Caland and Henry, ^ This seems to be the force of etdm. 



[168 


ii. 32 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

bhuvah, light, Indra ’ is the eyes of the midday pressing. ‘ Surya, light, 
light, svar, Surya ’ is the eyes of the third pressing. He prospers with 
pressings possessed of eyes ; with pressings possessed of eyes he goes to the 
world of heaven who knows thus. The silent praise is the eye of the sacri- 
fice. The exclamation being one is said twice ; therefore the eye being one 
is (manifested) twice. The silent praise is the root of the sacrifice : if he 
desire of a man ‘ May he be homeless he should not recite the silent praise 
at his sacrifice ; verily thus he comes to ruin along with the sacrifice which 
being without a root falls to ruin. They say ‘ He should certainly recite ; 
it is not good for the priest, if the Hotr do#"s not recite the silent praise, for 
on the priest rests the whole sacrifice, on the sacrifice the sacrificer ; there- 
fore must it be recited.’ 


ADHYAYA V 

The Ajya Qastra. 

ii. 33 (x. 1). The^ call is the holy power, the Nivid the lordly power, 
the hymn the people; he calls, then he inserts the Nivid; verily thus he makes 
the lordly power dependent on the holy power. Having inserted the Nivid 
he recites the hymn ; the Nivid is the lordly power, the hymn the people ; 
verily, thus he makes the people dependent on the lordly power. If he 
desire of a man, ‘ Let me deprive him of the lordly power,’ he should recite 
the hymn in the middle of the Nivid; the Nivid is the lordly power, the 
hymn the people ; verily thus he deprives him of the lordly power. If he 
desire of a man, ‘ Let me deprive him of the people,’ he should recite a Nivid 
in the middle of the hymn; the Nivid is the lordly power, the hymn the 
people; verily thus he deprives him of the people. But if he desire of 
a man ‘ May all be in due and proper order and correct for him,’ he should 
call, then insert the Nivid, and then recite the hymn. Thus is the ordering 
of all. Prajapati was here being one only in the beginning. He desired 
‘ May I be propagated and become greater ’ ; he practised fervour ; he 
restrained speech ; at the end of the year he uttered twelve times. The 
Nivid has twelve clauses; it was just the Nivid that he uttered; after it 
were all beings created. Beholding this the seer declares^ — 

‘ He at the call aforetime of Ayu with his wisdom 
Brought into being these sons of man.’ 

' AB. ii. 88~41 and KB. xiv. 1-3 deal with vii. 9 ; Caland and Henry, VAgnUtoma^ 

the Ajya Rostra ; see A^JS. v. 2 ; 9?®* PP* 280-284. 

a RV. i. 96. 2. 



169 ] The Ajya Qastra [ — ii. 35 

In that he inserts the Nivid before * the hymn (it serves) for propagation ; 
he is propagated with oflspring, with cattle who knows thus. 

ii. 34 (x. !?). ‘ Agni god-kindled’ he recites ; Agni yonder is god-kindled, 
for the gods kindle him ; verily thus he establishes him in that world. 
« Agni man-kindled ’ he recites ; Agni here is man-kindled, for men kindle 
him ; verily thus he establishes him in this world. ‘ Agni the good kindler ’ 
he recites; Agni the good kindler is Vayu, for Vayu himself kindles 
himself, himself all this whatever there is here ; Vayu verily thus 
he establishes in the world of the atmosphere. ‘The Hotr god-chosen’ 
he recites; the Hotr god-chosen is yonder (sun), for he is chosen on all 
sides by the gods; verily thus he establishes him in that world. ‘The 
Hotr chosen by man ’ he recites ; the Hotr chosen by man is Agni here, 
for he is chosen on all sides by men; verily thus he establishes him in 
this world. * Leader of the sacrifices’ he recites ; the leader of the sacrifices 
is Vayu, for, when he breathes forth, then there is the sacrifice, then the 
Agnihotra; verily thus he establishes Vayu in the world of the atmo- 
sphere. * The charioteer of the offerings ’ he recites ; the charioteer of the 
offerings’ is yonder (sun), for he as he wanders yonder is as it were 
a charioteer ; verily thus in yonder world he establishes him. ‘ The Hotr 
uncrossed ’ he recites ; the Hotr uncrossed is Agni here ; no one whatever 
crosses him ; verily thus he establishes Agni in this world. ‘ The 
crosser, the bearer of the oblation’ he recites; the crosser, the bearer 
of the oblation is Vayu, for Vayu at once crosses all that whatever 
there is here, Vayu carries the oblation to the gods; verily thus he 
establishes Vayu in the world of the atmosphere. ‘May the god bring 
hither the gods ’ he recites ; yonder god brings the gods ; verily thus he 
establishes him in that world. ‘ May Agni, the god, offer to the gods ’ 
he recites. Agni here as a god sacrifices to the gods; verily thus he 
establishes A gni in this world. ‘Let him perform the sacrifices, All- 
knower’ he recites; the All-knower is Vayu, for Vayu makes all that 
whatever there is here ; verily thus he establishes Vayu in the world of 
the atmosphere. 

ii. 35 (x. 3). ‘ Forward to your god Agni’ are Anustubh (verses’). He sepa- 
rates the two first Padas ; ^ therefore a woman separates her thighs. He 
creates the last two Padas ; therefore a man unites his thighs. That is a 
pairing ; verily thus he makes a pairing at the beginning of the litany, for 
generation ; he is propagated with offspring, with cattle, who knows thus. 

® Hence it is called a Purorue, Weber, Ind. ii. 85. * RV. iii. 13 ; anufMhah may be goni- 
atud. X. 8B4, n. 3. So AB. ii. 41. live or nom. pi. 

» Cf. TS. ii. 6. 9. 2 ; Bggeling, SBE. xxvi. “ Cf. KB. xiv. 2 ; Livi, La doctrine du sacrifice, 
826, n. 1. P. 107. 



[160 


ii* 35 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

* Forward to your god Agni ’ are Anustubh (verses). He separates the first 
two Padas, verily thus he makes a thunderbolt broader below ; he unites 
the last two Padas ; at the beginning a thunderbolt is narrow, and so of 
a club and of an axe ; verily thus he hurls a thunderbolt at the foe who 
hates him, as a weapon to lay low whom he has to lay low. 

ii. 36 (x. 4). The gods and the Asuras fought over these worlds ; ^ the 
gods made the Sadas their refuge ; they conquered them from the Sadas ; 
they went to the Agnidh’s altar ; they were not conquered thence. Therefore 
they spend the fast day at the Agnidh’s altar, not in the Sadas, for they 
were supported at the Agnidh’s altar ; in that they were supported at the 
Agnidh’s altar that is why the Agnidh*s altar has its name. The Asuras 
made a scattering of the fires of those gods in the Sadas ; the gods drew 
off the fires in the Sadas from the Agnidh’s altar ; with them they repelled 
the Asuras and the Raksases ; verily thus also the sacrificers draw off the 
fires in the Sadas from the Agnidh’s altar ; verily thus they repel the 
Asuras and the Raksases. In the morning they kept conquering by 
the Ajyas ; in that they kept conquering {djayanta dyam) by the Ajyas 
that is why the Ajyas have their name. Of the Hotr offices which continued 
conquering, that of the Achavaka was left out ; in it Indra and Agni took 
their place; Indra and Agni are the most forcible, mighty, strong, rich, 
and effective of the gods; therefore (a hymn) to Indra and Agni the 
Achavaka ^ recites at the morning pressing, for Indra and Agni took their 
place in it. Therefore the other Hotrakas creep to the Sadas in front, 
the Achavaka behind, for being left behind as it were be is anxious to 
follow after. Therefore a Brahman, skilled in the Rc verses and strong, 
should perform the Achavaka’s part ; thereby it docs not become neglected. 

ii. 37 (x. 5). The sacrifice is a chariot of the gods ; the Ajya and the 
Praiiga (^astras are its inner reins in that with the Ajya he follows 
in recitation the Pavamana, with the Praiiga the Ajya (Stotra), verily 
thus he separates the inner reins of the chariot to prevent confusion ; in 
imitation thereof they separate the inner reins of the chariot of men to 
prevent confusion. His chariot, whether of the gods or men does not become 
confused who knows thus. They say ‘As is the Stotra, so the Qastra; 


» Cf. TS. vi. 3. 1. 1 ; iii. 6. 1. 27-29. 

2 For the ^astra of the Achavaka seo v. 
10. 28 ; 99®* » Caland and 

Henry, VAgniitoma, pp. 262, 263. 
li. 87 ^ The sense seems clearly to be that there 
are four reins, two for each horse, the outer 
being the Pavamana and Ajya Stotras, 
the inner the Ajya and Praiiga ; 

the two Ajyas if joined would mean thus 


that the two reins (outer and inner) of 
the horse would be held together, whereas 
by having Pavamana and Ajya, Ajya and 
Praiiga, the result is that one hand holds 
outer and inner, another inner and outer, 
so that the two inner do not fall together. 
Sayana misses the point by not seeing 
that four reins are referred to. 



161 ] 


The Ajya Qastra [ — ii. as 

the Saman singers sing to verses for Soma, the purifying; the Hotr 
recites the Ajya to Agni ; how then does he follow in recitation the verses 
to Soma, the purifying ? * Soma, the purifying, is Agni ; that is declared 
by a seer. 2 ‘ Agni, the seer, the purifying ’ ; therefore although he proceeds 
with verses to Agni, still he follows in recitation the verses to Soma, 
the purifying. They say ‘ As is the Stotra so the Qastra ; the Saman 
singers sing to verses in Gayatri ; the Hotr recites the Ajya in Anustubhs ; 
how then by him are Gayatris followed in recitation.* * By conversion ’ he 
should reply. There are seven Anustubhs ; they become eleven through the 
first being repeated thrice and the last thrice ; the twelfth is theViraj offering 
verse ; not by one syllable do metres change, nor yet by two. These make up 
sixteen Gayatri verses. Thus by him although he proceeds with Anustubhs 
are Gayatris followed in recitation. ‘ O Agni with Indra, in the home of 
the generous one *, (this verse to Agni and Indra he uses as offering verse. 
These two as Indra and Agni did not conquer ; being Agni and Indra they 
did conquer ; in that he uses (a verse) for Agni and Indra as offering verse 
(it serves) for conquest. The Viraj is of thirty-three syllables; the gods 
are thirty-three, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Prajapati, 
and the vasat call. Thus in the very beginning of the litany he makes 
the deities sharers in the syllables ; syllable by syllable the gods drink in 
order ; verily thus the gods delight in the vessel for the gods. They say, 
‘ As is the (^astra so the offering verse ; the Hotr recites the Ajya to Agni, 
then how does he use (a verse) to Agni and Indra as offering verse.’ Be it 
to Agni and Indra or to Indra and Agni, the litany is connected with both 
Indra and Agni through the cup and the silent praise ; with ^ 

^ O Indra and Agni come hither to the pressed (drink) 

• The delightful cloud, for our prayers ; 

Of it do ye drink, impelled by our desire ’ 

the Adhvaryu draws the cup for Indra and Agni. ‘ Bhuh, Agni, light, 
light, Agni; Indra, light, bhuvah, light, Indra; Surya, light, light, svar, 
Surya ; ’ the Hotr recites as silent praise ; therefore as is the Qastra, so is 
the offering verse. 

ii. 38 (x. 6). He mutters the muttering of the Hotr ; ^ thus he pours seed ; 
inaudibly he mutters ; inaudible as it were is the pouring of seed. Before 
the call he mutters ; whatever there is after the call, that belongs to the 
Qastra. To him he calls as he lies on all fours with averted face ; there- 
fore turning their backs quadrupeds pour seed ; when he faces him who 

* BV. ix. 66. 20. 
s BV. iii. 26. 4. 

* BV. iii. 12. 1. 

^ The Japapraisa is laid down in AfS.v. 9. I ; 

21 [h.0.8. ss] 


ggS. vii. 2. 1 ; TS. v. 6. 8. 1, which differ 
considerably in text ; see Scheftelowitz, 
Die Apokryphen des ^gveda, p. 154. 



[162 


ii. 38 — The Soma Sacrifice 

faces him he becomes two-footed ; therefore bipeds facing (each other) 
emit seed.** ‘Father Matari 5 van,’ he says; the father is the breath; 
Matarifvan is the breath ; seed is the breath ; thus he pours seed. ‘ Make 
the lines unbroken’ (he says); what is unbroken is seed, for hence he 
arises imbroken. ‘ May the poets sing unbroken litanies ’ ; the poets are 
the learned ; ‘ May they propagate this unbroken seed,’ he says, in effect. 
‘ May Soma, All-knower, guide the songs, Brhaspati recite the litanies and 
the exclamations !’ (he says) ; Brhaspati is the holy power. Soma the lordly 
power, the songs and the litanies with the exclamations are the Stotras 
and the Qlastras. Verily thus instigated by the holy power divine and the 
lordly power divine he recites the litanies. These two are the lords of in- 
stigation of all this whatever there is here. What he does without instigation 
by these two that is not done ; ‘ He has done what is not done,’ they say, 
in blame. What is done is done, what is done is not undone by him who 
knows thus. ‘ Speech, life, of all life, all life ’ he says ; life is the breath ; 
seed is the breath ; the womb is speech ; thus having created a womb he 
pours seed. ‘ Who (lea) will recite this ? He will recite this,’ he says ; 
Prajapati is who ; verily thus he says ‘ Prajapati will propagate this.’ 

ii. 39 (x. 7). After the call, he recites the silent praise ; thus he develops 
the seed poured ; first is then pouring, then development. Inaudibly he 
recites the silent praise; inaudible as it were is the pouring of seed. 
Secretly as it were he recites the silent praise;’ secretly as it were are 
seeds developed. Of six sentences he recites the silent praise ; sixfold is 
man, with six members ; ^ verily thus he develops the self as sixfold and 
of six members. Having recited the silent praise he recites the Puroruc ; 
thus ho propagates the seed when developed; first there is development, 
then birth. Aloud ho recites the Puroruc, verily openly he propagates 
him. He recites the Puroruc in twelve sentences ; the year has twelve 
months ; Prajapati is the year ; he is the propagator of all this. He who 
is the propagator of all this propagates him with offspring and cattle, for 
generation. He is propagated with offspring, with cattle, who knows thus. 
He recites the Puroruc to Jatavedas, with an allusion to J atavedas. They say, 
‘ Since the morning pressing is the abode of Jatavedas, then why at the 
morning pressing docs he recite a Puroruc to Jatavedas?’ Jatavedas is 
the breath, for he knows of bom creatures. Of so many creatures as he 
knows, they become ; for how could they exist of whom he knows not ? 
If one knows the making of the self in the Ajya, that is well known. 


2 Cf. Levi, La doctrine da saciifice^ p. 107. well as at the end, when six are to be 

^ See A^S. v. 9. 11 : there is a pause after used. 

each jyolih in the middle of the three as * Cf. TS. v. 6. 9. 1. 



163] 


The Ajya Qastra [ — ii. 41 

ii. 40 (x .8). ‘ Forward to your god, Agni/ he recites.^ ‘ Forward ’ is the 
breath, for all these creatures advance following after the breath ; verily 
thus he creates the breath, he makes breath perfect. ‘ Radiant, unparalleled,' 
he recites ; ^ mind is radiant, for there is nothing prior to mind ; verily 
thus he creates mind, he makes mind perfect. ‘ He for us protection for 
our enjoyment,’ he recites ; ^ protection is speech ; therefore of one follow- 
ing him in speech he says, ‘ I have accorded him what has a protection ’ ; 
verily thus he creates speech, he makes speech perfect. ‘ Do thou aid us, 
O Brahman ’ he recites ^ ; the holy power is the ear, for by the ear the holy 
power hears, in the ear does the holy power find support ; verily thus he 
creates the ear, he makes the ear perfect. ‘ He is the holder, the sage, of 
them’ he recites;® the holder is inspiration, for expiration here is 
restrained by inspiration and departs not ; verily thus he creates inspira- 
tion, he makes inspiration perfect. ‘The righteous, of whom the two 
worlds’ he recites;® the right is the eye; therefore when two contend, 
whichever says ‘I actually have seen it with my eye,’ him men believe ; verily 
thus he creates the eye, he makes the eye perfect. ‘ Do thou accord us 
wealth with a thousand, with offspring, with prosperity ’, he recites the 
last (verse) as concluding verse ; the self when put together is possessed 
of a thousand, offspring, and prosperity ; verily thus he creates the self as 
a complex, he makes the self as a complex perfect. He sacrifices with an 
offering verse ; the offering verse is acquisition, prospering destiny ; verily 
thus he creates a prospering destiny, he makes a prospering destiny perfect. 
He knowing thus, having come into being as composed of the metres, the 
deities, the holy power, immortality, goes to the gods, he who knows thus. 
If one knows how having come into being as composed of the metres, the 
deities the holy power, immortality, he goes to the gods, that is well 
known. So with regard to the self ; now with regard to the deities. 

ii. 41 (x. 9). He recites the silent praise as of six clauses ; the seasons are 
six ; verily thus he places the seasons in order ; he goes to the seasons. 
He recites the Puroruc as of twelve clauses ; the months are twelve ; 
verily thus he places the months in order; he goes to the months. 
‘ Forward to your god, Agni ’ he recites^ ; ‘forward’ is the atmosphere, for all 
these creatures advance following the atmosphere ; verily thus he places the 
atmosphere in order ; he goes to the atmosphere. ‘ Radiant, unparalleled ’ 
he recites ; ^ he who yonder gives heat is radiant, for there is nothing that is 

j RV. iii. 13. 1. < RV. iii. 13. 6. 

2 RV. iii. 13. 5. 5 rv. iii. 13. 3. 

5 RV. iii. 13. 4. asmd aydnsi read by Aufrecht ® RV. iii. 13. 2. 

is clearly right though Sayana had RV. iii. 13. 7. 

aydnsi. So also Weber (Ind. Stud. ix. ii. 41. ^ RV. iii. 13. 1. 

265). 2 RV. iii. 18. 6. 



ii. 41] The Soma Sacrifice [164 

before him ; verily thus he places him in order ; he goes to him. ‘ He for 
us protection for our enjoyment ’ he recites ; ® Agni accords protection as 
proper foods ; verily thus he places Agni in order ; he goes to Agni. ‘ Do 
thou aid us, O Brahman ’ he recites ; * the holy power is the moon ; verily 
thus he places the moon in order ; he goes to the moon. ‘ He is the holder, 
the sage, of them ’ he recites ; ® the holder is Vayu, for this atmosphere 
held by Vayu does not fall in; verily thus he places Vayu in order; he 
goes to Vayu. ‘The righteous of whom the two worlds ’he recites;* 
the two worlds are sky and earth ; verily thus he places sky and earth in 
order ; he goes to sky and earth. ‘ Do thou accord us wealth with a thou- 
sand, with offspring, with prosperity with the last (verse he concludes ; 
the year as a complex possesses a thousand, offspring, and prosperity ; 
verily thus he places the year as a complex in order ; he goes to the year 
as a complex. He sacrifices with an offering verse ; the offering verse is 
rain and lightning, for lightning here gives rain and proper food ; verily 
thus he places lightning in order; he goes to the lightning. He who 
knows this becomes thus composed, composed of the deities. 

’ RV. iii. 13. 4. « RV. iii. 13. 2. 

« RV. iii. 13. C. 7 RV. iii. 13. 7. 

5 RV. iii. 13. 3. 



PASTCIKA III 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

ADHYAYA I 

The PraUga ^astra. 

iii. 1 (xi. 1). The ^ Praiiga is a litany of the cups ; nine cups are drawn in 
the morning; with nine (verses) do they sing in the Bahispavamana 
(Stotra) ; when the Stoma has been performed, he draws the tenth ; the 
sound hin of the other (verses) is the tenth; thus is there equality. 
(A triplet®) to Vayu he recites; thereby has the Vayu (cup) its litany. 
(A triplet®) to Indra and Vayu he recites ; thereby has (the cup) for Indra 
and Vayu its litany. (A triplet^) for Mitra and Varuna he recites; 
thereby has (the cup) for Mitra and Varuna its litany. (A triplet®) for 
the A 9 vins he recites; thereby has (the cup) for the A 5 vins its litany. 
(A triplet*) for Indra ho recites; thereby have (the cups) Qukra and 
Manthin litanies. (A triplet ’) for the All-gods he recites ; thereby lias 
Agrayana cup its litany. (A triplet®) for Sarasvati he recites; there is 
no cup for Sarasvati, but Sarasvati is speech ; whatever cups are drawn 
with speech, they have all litanies recited for him, they become possessed 
of litanies for him, who knows thus. 

iii. 2 (xi. 2). By the Prauga he wins proper food ; now various fleitics 
are celebrated in the Prauga, different litanies are performed in the 
Prauga, different kinds of food are placed in the cups of him who knows 
thus. Now the Prauga is the most related to the self of the litanies for 
the sacrificer as it were ; ‘ therefore it is most to be perfected as it were 
by him, they say, ‘ for by it the Hotr makes him perfect.’ (A triplet ^) 
to Vayu he recites; therefore they say ‘The breath is Vayu, seed is the 

^ AB. iii. 1-4 and RB. xiv. 4 and 5 deal with ^ RV. i. 2. 7-9. 
the Prauga or second Rostra of the Hotr ® RV. i. 3. 1-3, 

Jit the morning pressing ; see A 9 S. v. 10; ® RV. i. 3. 4-6. 

99 s. vii. 10 ; Caland and Henry, VAgni- RV. i. 3. 7-9. 
ttoma, pp. 239-241. 8 Ry. i. 3. 10-12. 

2 RVV i. 2. 1-3. iii. 2. » RV. i. 2. 1-3. 

8 RV. i. 2. 4-6. 



[166 


iii. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

breath; seed comes into existence first when man comes into existence.’ 
In that he recites (a triplet) to Visnu, verily thus he makes his breath 
perfect. (A triplet 2) to Indra and Vayu he recites ; where there is expira- 
tion, there is inspiration; in that he recites (a triplet) to Indra and Vayu, 
verily thus his expiration and inspiration he makes perfect. (A triplet 
to Mitra and Varuna he recites; therefore they say ‘The eye comes into 
existence first when man comes into existence.’ In that he recites (a 
triplet) to Mitra and Varuna, verily thus he makes his eye perfect. 
(A triplet^) to the A 5 vins he recites; therefore they talk of a child born 
‘ He is trying to listen ; he is taking notice.’ In that he recites (a triplet) 
to the A9vins, verily thus he makes his ear perfect. (A triplet ®) to Indra 
he recites ; therefore they talk of a child born, ‘ He is holding erect his 
neck, and also his head ’ ; in that he recites (a triplet) to Indra, verily thus 
he makes his strength perfect. (A triplet®) to the All-gods he recites; 
therefore a child born crawls on all fours, for the limbs are connected with 
the All-gods; in that he recites (a triplet) to the All-gods, verily thus 
he makes his limbs perfect. He recites (a triplet ^) to Sarasvati ; therefore 
to a child born speech comes last, for Sarasvati is speech; in that he 
recites (a triplet) to Sarasvati, verily thus he makes his speech perfect. 
He being born is born from all these deities, from all the litanies, from 
all metres, from all Praiigas, from all pressings, who knows thus and for 
whom knowing thus they recite thus. 

iii. 3 (xi. 3). The Praiiga is a litany of the breaths ; seven deities he 
celebrates ; seven are the breaths in the head ; verily thus he places the 
breaths in the head. ‘ Should he consider the good or evil of the sacrificer ’ 
he used to say,^ ‘ whose Hotr he is ? ’ He should do to him at this point 
as he may desire. If he desire of a man ‘ Let mo deprive him of expira- 
tion’, he should recite (the triplet) to Vayu for him in confusion ; a verse 
or a line he should pass over ; thereby is it confused ; verily thus does 
he deprive him of expiration. If he desire of a man ‘Let me deprive 
him of expiration and inspiration, he should recite for him (the triplet) 
to Indra and Vayu in confusion; he should pass over a verse or a line; 
thereby is it confused; verily thus he deprives him of expiration and 
inspiration. If he desire of a man ‘ Let me deprive him of the eye ’, 
he should recite for him (the triplet) to Mitra and Varuna in confusion; 
he should pass over a verse or a line ; thereby is it confused ; verily thus 


2 RV. i. 2. 4-6. 

RV. i. 2. 7-9. 
* RV. i. 3. 1-3. 
« RV. i. 3. 4-6. 
c RV. i. 3. 7-0. 


RV. i. 3. 10-12. 

^ For the references see above AB. iii. 1 and 
2. For the sentiment cf. L^vi, La doctrine 
du sacrifice, p. 128. The teacher is meant. 



167 ] The Prailga Qastra [ — 4 

he deprives him of the eye. If he desire of a man ‘ Let me deprive him 
of the ear he should recite for him (the triplet) to the Afvins in confu- 
sion ; he should pass over a verse or a line ; thereby is it confused ; verily 
thus he deprives him of the ear. If he desire of a man ‘ Let me deprive 
him of strength he should recite for him (the triplet) to Indra in confu- 
sion ; he should pass over a verse or a line ; thereby is it confused ; verily 
thus he deprives him of strength. If he desire of a man ‘ Let me deprive 
him of limbs’, he should recite for him (the triplet) to the All-gods in 
confusion ; he should pass over a verse or a line ; thereby is it confused ; 
verily thus he deprives him of limbs. If he desire of a man ' Let me 
<leprivc him of speech he should recite for him (the triplet) to Sarasvati 
in confusion ; he should pass over a verse or a line ; thereby is it confused ; 
verily thus he deprives him of speech. But if he desire of a man ‘ With 
all his members, with all the self, let me make him to prosper*, verily 
let him recite for him thus in due and proper order; verily thus he 
makes him prosper with all liis members, with all his self. With all his 
members, with all his self, he prospers who knows thus. 

iii. 4 (xi. 4). They say ‘ As is the Stotra, so the (^astra ; the Saman singers 
sing to (verses to) Agni ; ^ the Hotr starts with one to Vayu ; how does he 
follow in recitation (verses) to Agni ? ’ These deities are all forms of Agni ; 
in that Agni burns forward as it were that is his form as Vayu ; thereby 
he follows in recitation that (form) of his.^ Again in that making two as 
it were he burns and Indra and Vayu are two, that is his form as Indra 
and Vayu ; thereby he follows in recitation that of his. Again in that he 
leaps up and down, that is his form as Mitra and Varuna; thereby he 
follows in recitation that of his. Again in that Agni is dread of contact, 
that is his form as Varuna; in that him being dread of contact they 
serve with friendliness, that is his form as Mitra; thereby he follows 
in recitation that of his. Again in that they kindle him with both arms 
from the two fire sticks and the Alvins are two, that is his form as the 
A 5 vins ; thereby he follows in recitation that of his. Again in that with 
loud noise, thundering, and making the sound ha ha ha he burns, whence 
creatures shudder away, that is his form as Indra; thereby ho follows 
in recitation that of him. Again in that him being one they carry apart 
in many places, that is his form as the All-gods ; thereby he follows in 
recitation that of him. Again in that he burns, roaring and uttering 
speech as it were, that is his form as Sarasvati; thereby he follows in 
recitation that of his. So though he begins with (a verse) to Vayu, in 

' I. e. the Ajya Stotra on RV. vi, 16. 10-12. 2 This version is possibly correct, or iad » 

For the rule of consonance see TB, ii. 2. * thus^ ; ‘thus with this (form) of his he 

6. 3. imitates in recitation ’. 



[168 


iii. 4 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

each triplet through these deities he follows in recitation (the triplet) 
of the Stotra. Having recited the Vai^vadeva litany® he uses (a verse) 
to the All-gods as* offering verse. 

‘ With all the sweet Soma drink, 

O Agni, with Indra, with Vayu, 

Do thou drink according to Mitra’s laws.' 

Accor din g to their portion he thus delights the deities. 


The Vasat Gall. 

• • 


iii. 5 (xi. 5). The^ vasat call is a vessel of the gods; he says the vasat 
call ; verily thus with a vessel of the gods ho delights the deities. He 
says a second vasaO Just as in this world men delight horses or cows 
by renewed attention, verily so they delight the deities by renewed atten- 
tion in that he says the second vasat. ‘ These fires they worship ' they say, 
‘ the Dhisnyas ; then why do they offer in the former (fire), and say 
vasaf in the former ? ' In that with ‘ O Agni, enjoy the Soma ' he says 
the second vasat call, thereby he delights the Dhisnyas. ‘ They partake 
of the Soma draughts when incomplete/ they say ‘for whom he does 
not say the second vasat call;^ what now is the portion for Svistakrt of the 
Soma ? * In that with ‘ 0 Agni, enjoy the Soma * he says the second 
vasat call, thereby they partake of the Soma draughts when complete ; 
this is the Svis^krt portion of the Soma. He says the call vasat 

iii. 6 (xi. 6). The vasat call is a thunderbolt ; he should think of him 
whom lie hates when about to say the vasat call ; verily in him he places 
the thunderbolt. In the vasat call he says (the word) ‘ six ’ ; the seasons 
are six ; verily thus he puts in order the seasons ; the seasons he 
establishes; all this whatever there is here finds support through the 
seasons finding support. He finds support who knows thus. As to this 
Hiranyadant Baida ^ used to say ‘These six thereby he establishes; sky 
is established on the atmosphere ; the atmosphere on the earth ; the earth 
on the waters; the waters on truth; truth on the holy power ; the holy 


* Probably uktham here merely refers to the 

fact that the Praiiga ^^^stra includes all 
the gods ; so the Ajya Stotra is called 
ksullaka-vai^adevay the full term Vai- 
<;vadeva belonging to the ^aatra and 
Stotra of the evening pressing. 

* RV. i. 14. 10. 

‘ GB. viii. 1-6 follow AB. iii. 6-8. 

^ The term means that there is said a second 
vauSiat with the words somasydgne viht 3 


(see Hillebrandt, Biiudllitteraiurj p. 102 ; 
Caland and Henry, VAgnistomaj p. 234). 
Of. A5S. v^5. 19; 99 S. vi‘i. 3. 6; Vait. 
xviii. 10 ; Ap^S. xix. k 1. The repetition 
of the vausat follows from A^S. i. 6. 5 ; 
95 s. i. 1. 39, and the words above are 
not the anuvasatkdra. It is correctly ex- 
plained by BR. vi. 824. 

3 See above AB. ii. 28. 
iii. 6.^ Of. AA. ii. 1.5 with Keith’s note. 



169] The Vasat Gall [ — iii. 8 

power on fervour/ All this whatever there is here finds support in these 
supports finding support. He finds support who knows thus. He says 
vausat as the vasal call; van is yonder (sun), sat (six) the seasons; verily thus 
he places him in the seasons, he establishes him in the seasons ; whatever 
as it were he does to the gods, that as it were the gods do to him. 

iii. 7 (xi. 7). There are three vasal calls, the thunderbolt, the hider of his 
abode, the empty. The vasal call which he makes aloud and forcibly is the 
thunderbolt ; it he hurls as a missile at the rival who hates him to lay him 
low whom he should lay low. Therefore is it the vasal to be said by one 
with rivals. That which is even, continuous, and without loss of (part of) 
the verse, ^ is the hider of his abode ; on it depend offspring and cattle ; 
therefore it is the vasal to be said by one desiring offspring and cattle. 
That one wherein the sal fails ^ is the empty ; he empties himself, he 
empties the sacrificer ; the saycr of vasal becomes worse, he becomes worse 
for whom he says vasal. Therefore he should not desire it. ‘Should 
he consider the good and evil of the sacrificer \ he used to say, ‘ whose 
Hotr he is ? ’ He should do to him herein as he may desire. If he desire 
of a man ‘ As he has been before sacrificing, so let him be after sacrificing \ 
he should say the vasat call for him as he recites the Rc for him ; verily 
thus he makes him the same. If he desire of a man ‘ Let him be worse 
having recited the Rc for him in a more raised tone he should say the 
vasal call in a more depressed tone; verily thus he makes him worse. 
If he desire of a man ‘ May he be better \ having recited the Rc for him 
in a more depressed tone, he should say the vasal call in a more raised 
tone; from^ prosperity he places him in prosperity. The vasal is said 
continuously with the Rc,^ for continuity ; he is united with offspring and 
cattle who knows thus. 

iii. 8 (xi. 8). He should meditate on the deity for whom the oblation is 
taken when about to say the vasal ] verily thus openly he delights the 
deities; before all eyes he sacrifices to the deity. The vasal call is a 
thunderbolt ; it shines when hurled if not appeased. Of it not every man 
as it were knows the appeasing nor the support. From it even now there 
is often as it were death. The appeasing of it, the support is ‘Speech^ 


1 I. e. without the loss of the last syllable of 

the Rc merged in the om. See n. 4. 

2 Sayana says that mt = vasat and the loss is 

in a low pronunciation. The sense seems 
to be that the sat is lost through imperfect 
utterance. 

^ piye Sayana, but ^riyah seems at least as 
probable. For the mode of pronunciation 

22 [h.O.S. 26] 


see AfS. i. 5. 6 ; (which 

allows samo va). 

* Whether with Pluti or not, 9^8. i. 1. 42, 
43. _ 

iii. 8. ^ A9S. i. 5. 17 : vdg ojah saha ojo mayi 
irrandpanau] 99^* 1. 39 has a slightly 

different form. 



[170 


iii. 8 — ] Tht Soma Sacrijice 

Therefore after each vasat call he should recite as accompaniment 
^ Speech " ; appeased it injures him not. With ' O vasat call, do not injure 
me ; let me not injure thee ; with the great I invoke mind, with cross- 
breathing body; thou art a support; win support; make me attain 
support * he should accompany the vamt call. As to that he * used to say 
‘ That is long, yet it is impotent. With “ Force, strength, force ” he should 
accompany the vamt call ; force and strength are the two dearest forms 
of the vasat call; verily thus he unites it with its abode; with a dear 
abode does he prosper who knows thus.’ The vasat call is speech and 
expiration and inspiration; they depart when each vasat call has been 
said. Them he should accompany with ‘ Speech, force, strength, force, 
in me expiration and inspiration’; verily doth the Hotr establish speech 
and expiration and inspiration in the self, with a full life, for fullness of 
life ; a full life he lives who knows thus.*^ 

iii. 9 (xi. 9). The sacrifice went away from the gods ; they sought to start 
it up with the directions; in that they sought to start it up with the 
directions, that is why the directions have their name (praisa). It they 
made radiant with the Puroruces ; that is why the Puroruces have their 
name. It they found on the altar; in that they found it on the altar, 
that is why the altar has its name (vecli). It, when found, they drew off* with 
drawing (cups) ; in that they drew it off with drawing (cups), that is why 
the cups have their name (yraha). Having found it they made it known 
by Nivids; in that having found it they made it known {nyavedayan) 
by Nivids, that is why Nivids have their name. He who seeks what is 
lost desires something great or small; of the two he who desires the 
greater has the better desire ; he who knows the directions as ever greater, 
knows them better, for the directions are a seeking for what is lost ; there- 
fore standing bent forward ^ he gives directions. 


The Nivids. 

iii. 10 (xi. 10). The Nivids are the embryos of the litanies ; in that they 
are inserted before the litanies at the morning pressing, therefore embryos 
are deposited at the back and come into being at the back. In that they 
are inserted in the middle at the midday, therefore embryos are held in 
the middle. In that they are placed at the end at the third pressing, 

* I. ©. as Kausitaki is often cited in the KB., ^ The reason given by SSyana is (1) in respect 
so Aitareya is thus meant in the AB. as to a father or teacher or (2) as a mode 

There is no iti to end the quotation. of concealment in finding a lost article : 

3 The beginning of the chapter is found also obviously (8) stooping to seek what is lost 

in Y&ska, Nirukta, viii. 22. is possible. 



171 ] 


The Nivids 


[ — Hi. 11 


therefore offspring are bom downward thence, for generation. He is 
propagated with offspring and cattle who knows thus. The Nivids are 
the ornaments ^ of the litanies ; in that they are inserted at the morning 
pressing before the litanies, that is as if one were to make a decoration 
in the upper part of the warp ; in that they are inserted in the middle 
at the midday, that is as if one were to make a decoration in the middle ; 
in that they are inserted at the end at the third pressing, that is as if 
one were to make a decoration in the lower part of the warp. On all 
sides he shines with the decoration of the sacrifice who knows thus. 

iii. 11 (xi. 11). The Nivids are deities connected with the sun ; in that 
they are inserted before the litanies at the morning pressing, in the middle 
at the midday pressing, at the end at the third pressing, verily thus they 
follow the course of the sun. By quarters the gods gathered together the 
sacrifice ; thereby by sentences are the Nivids recited. In that the gods 
gathered together the sacrifice, therefore the horse came into being ; there- 
fore they say ‘ A horse should he give to the reciter of Nivids ’ ; that boon 
indeed do they give. He should not pass over a sentence of the Nivid ; 
if he were to pass over a sentence of the Nivid, he would make a break in 
the sacrifice; as the break in the sacrifice grows the sacrificer becomes 
worse. Therefore should he not pass over a line of the Nivid. He should 
not invert two sentences of the Nivid ; if he were to invert two sentences 
of the Nivid, he would confuse the sacrifice ; the sacrificer would be confused. 
Therefore he should not invert two sentences of the Nivid. He should not 
unite two sentences of the Nivid ; if he were to unite two sentences of the 
Nivid, he would contract the life of the sacrifice, the sacrificer would be 
likely to die. Therefore he should not unite two sentences of the Nivid. 
‘Forward this holy power; forward this lordly power,’ these two only 
should he unite, to unite the lordly power with the holy power ; therefore 
are the lordly and the holy powers united. He should not go beyond (a hymn) 
of three or four verses for inserting a Nivid ; each single sentence of a Nivid 
is a counterpart^ to a verse, (even) to a hymn; therefore one must not go 
beyond (a hymn) of three or four verses for inserting a Nivid, for by the 
Nivid in itself the Stotra is exceeded in recitation. Having left one (verse) 
over should he insert a Nivid at the third pressing ; if he were to insert having 
left two over, he would injure the propagative power ; thus he would deprive 
people of embryos ; therefore having left one only over, he should insert 
a Nivid at the third pressing. He should not go past the Nivid with the 

’ pe^lh and pe^as in one passage are curious, sense must be that he is to use no hymn 

but no doubt the desire to represent of 3 or 4 verses for a Nivid. This cannot 

nividah more accurately is the cause. be correct, Sayana holds that no shorter 

iii. 11. ^ Haug against Sayana takes that the hymn is to be used. 



[172 


iii. 11 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

hymn ; if with a hymn he goes past the Nivid, he should not return there ; 
verily that stays in its place ; having taken another hymn of the same deity 
and metre he should insert in it the Nivid. ‘ Let us depart not from the 
way * he recites ^ before the hymn ; he goes from the way who is confused 
at the sacrifice. ‘ Not from the sacrifice with Soma, O Indra * (he says) ; 
verily thus he falls not away from the sacrifice. ‘ May not evil spirits stand 
within us ’ (he says) ; verily thus he smites away those who plot evil. 

That which accomplisheth the sacrifice 
The web spread out among the gods, 

May we accomplish, when offered ’ 

(he says ^). The web is offspring ; verily thus he secures offspring for him 
(he says®). ‘Mind we invoke with Soma for Nara^ansa ’ (he says^); by 
mind the sacrifice is carried on, by mind it is performed. This here is the 
expiation. 


ADHYAYA II 


The Marutvatlya Qastra. 


iii. 12 (xii. 1). ‘The^ subjects of the gods must be brought into order’ 
they say, ‘ The metre must be made to rest on the metre.* ‘ Let us two praise * 
is his call of three syllables at the morning pressing ; ‘ Let us recite, 0 divine 
one* is the Adhvaryu’s response in five syllables; that makes up eight 
syllables ; the Gayatri has eight syllables ; verily they place the Gayatri in 
front at the morning pressing. ‘ The hymn hath been recited * he says, having 
recited, in four syllables; ‘Yes, reciter of hymns’ replies the Adhvaryu 
in four syllables; that makes up eight syllables; the Gayatri has eight 
syllables ; verily thus they place the Gayatri on both sides at the morning 
pressing. ‘ O Adhvaryu, let us two recite * is his call of six syllables at mid- 
day ; ‘Let us recite, O divine one * the Adhvaryu replies in five syllables ; that 
makes up eleven syllables ; the Tristubh has eleven syllables ; verily thus 
they place the Tristubh in front at the midday (pressing). ‘ The hymn hath 
been uttered to Indra’ he says, having recited, in seven syllables; ‘Yes, 
reciter of hymns ’ replies the Adhvaryu in four syllables ; that makes up 
eleven syllables ; the Tristubh has eleven syllables ; verily thus they place 


» RV. X. 57. 

» RV. X. 57. 2. 

« RV. X. 57. 3. 

' For the calls and replies see KB. xiv. 3 ; 
Galand and Henry, VAgnistomaf p. 232 ; 
Weber, Ind. Stud. x. 86. They are to be 
8, 11, and 12 syllables at the three 


pressings in order. The calls are all 
clearly mutilated forms from gms with 
om, Cf. also TS. iii. 2. 9 ; GB. viii. 10 
imitates as usual. Hillebrandt (JRitmU 
litteratuTf p. 104) sees in daiva a corruption 
of modeva. 



173] The Marutvatlya Qastra [ — 14 

the Tristubh on both sides at the midday (pressing). ‘ 0 Adhyaryn, so let 
us two recite ’ is his call of seven syllables at the third pressing ; ‘ Let us 
recite, O divine one * the Adhvaryu replies in five syllables ; that makes 
up twelve syllables; the Jagati has twelve syllables; verily thus they 
place the Jagati in front at the third pressing. ‘The hymn hath been 
uttered to Indra, to the gods ’ he says, having recited, in eleven ^ syllables ; 

‘ Yes ' replies the Adhvaryu in one syllable ; that makes up twelve syllables ; 
the Jagati has twelve syllables; verily thus they place the Jagati on both 
sides at the third pressing. Seeing this the seer declares it a verse,'* 

^ That the Gayatrl is deposited on the Gayatrl, 

Or that they fashioned the Tristubh from the Tristubh, 

Or that the Jagati Pada is placed on the Jagati, 

They who know this obtain immortality.* 

Verily thus metre on metre he establishes. The subjects of the gods he 
sets in order who knows thus. 

iii. 13 (xii. 2). Prajapati assigned to the gods the sacrifice and the metres 
in portions. He allotted the Gayatri at the morning pressing to Agni and 
the Vasus, the Tristubh to Indra and the Rudras at the midday (pressing), 
the Jagati to the All-gods, and the Adityas at the third pressing. Now, 
the metre that was his own, the Anustubh, he pushed out to the end to 
the office of the Achavaka; she, the Anustubh, said to him ‘ Assuredly thou 
art the worst of the gods whose own metre I am and who yet hast pushed 
me to the end to the office of the Achavaka.* This he recognized ; he took 
his own Soma offering; he brought the Anustubh round to the very 
beginning in his own Soma offering ; therefore the Anustubh is employed 
at the very beginning of all the pressings- The very first does he become, 
pre-eminence doth he attain, who knows thus. He arranged this in his own 
Soma offering ; therefore whenever it falls under the power of the sacrificer 
the sacrifice is in order ; (all) is in order for that people when a sacrificer 
knowing thus has power. 

iii. 14 (xii, 3). Agni was the Hotr of the gods ^ ; for him death waited in 
the Bahispavamana (Stotra) ; he began the Ajya ((^astra) with an Anustubh ; 
verily thus he evaded death. For him it waited in the Ajya (Stotra) ; he 
began with the Prauga ; verily thus he evaded death. For him it waited in 
the Madhyamdina Pavamana ; he began the Marutvatiya with an Anustubh ; 
verily thus he evaded death. For him it could not wait in the Brhati verses 
in the midday (pressing) ; the Brhati verses are the breaths ; verily thus it 

^ But there are only ten, oven with the berg, ProUgomeTia, p. 376) det)elhi{y)ah, 

necessary break of Sandhi, avdei may be * RV. i. 164. 23. 
read, but far more probably (see Olden- ^ Cf. KB. xv. 5. 



[174 


iii. 14 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

could not penetrate the breaths. Therefore at the midday pressing Hotr 
begins with a strophe in Brhati ; the Brhati verses are the breaths ; verily 
thus he begins with reference to the breaths. For him it waited in the 
third Pavamana; he began the Vai 9 vadeva (Qastra) with an Anustubh; 
verily thus he evaded death. For him it waited in the Yajhayajniya ; he 
began the Agnimaruta (Qastra) with (a triplet) for Vai§vanara; verily thus 
he evaded death. That for Vai 5 vanara is a thunderbolt, the Yajnayajniya 
is a support ; verily thus by the thunderbolt he drives away death from the 
support. He having unloosened all the nets, all the posts, of death, was 
released in safety ; in safety verily is the Hotr released with full life, for 
fullness of life ; a full life he lives who knows thus. 

iii. 15 (xii. 4). Indra ^ having slain Vrtra, thinking ‘ I have not laid (him) 
low went to the further distances ; to the very furthest distance he went ; 
the very furthest distance is the Anustubh ; the Anustubh is speech. He, 
having entered speech, lay there ; him all creatures severally searched for. 
Him on the previous day the fathers found, on the second day the gods. 
Therefore on the previous day is offering made to the fathers, on the second 
day they sacrifice to the gods. They said, ‘ Let us press ; so assuredly most 
quickly will he come to us.’ They pressed ; with ^ ‘ Thee like a car for aid ’ 
they turned him towards (them) ; at (the verse praising the pressed (drink)? 
‘ This drink, O bright one, is pressed ’ he became revealed to them. With ^ 
* O Indra, come nearer ’ they brought him into the midst ; with a sacrifice 
to which Indra has come he sacrifices, with a sacrifice possessing Indra he 
prospers, who knows thus. 

iii. 16 (xii. 5). When indra had slain Vrtra all the deities left him, thinking 
‘ He has not laid (him) low ’ ; the Maruts only, his true comrades, did not 
leave ; the Maruts, true comrades, are the breaths ; the breaths did not then 
leave him. Therefore this unchanging Pragatha^ containing (the word) 
‘ true friend ’ is recited, ‘ Hither, O true friend, with true friends.’ liven if 
here onwards a recitation to Indra is recited, the whole is the Marutvatiya, 
if this unchanging Pragatha is recited, containing (the word) ‘ true friend ’, 
‘ Hither, O true friend, with true friends.’ 

iii. 17 (xii. 6). He recites a Pragatha ^ to Brahmanaspati ; with Brhaspati 
as Purohita the gods conquered the world of heaven, and conquered in the 


' AB. iii. 12-14 contains introductory matter ; 
15-21 and KB. xv. 2 and 3 deal with the 
Harutvatiya 9^tra,_the first of the mid- 
day pressing ; see A^S. v. 14 ; 59 S. vii. 
fi-25 ; viii. 16 ; Caland and Henry, 
VAgniftoma, pp. 299-304. For this 
chapter cf. TS. ii. 6. 3. 6 ; (JB. i. 6, 4. 1. 

2 RV. viii. 68. 1. 


3 RV. viii. 2. 1. 

* RV. viii. 53. 5. 
iii. 16. ^ RV. viii. 53. 5 and 6. 
iii.l7. ^ The Pavam&na is composed of 3 Gayatrl 
verses, SV. ii. 22-24 ; 2 Brhati, ii. 25, 
26; and 3 Tristubh, ii. 27-29. The Brhati 
and Qayatri verses are made up to 6 each, 
2 Brhatis as usual being made to give 3. 



176] The Marutvatiya Qastra [ — ^iii. ig 

world. Verily so also the sacrificer with Brhaspati as Furohita conquers 
the world of heaven and conquers in the world. These two Fragathas, 
though not being chanted, are recited with repetitions. They say ' Seeing 
that nothing which is not chanted is recited with a repetition, then how are 
these two Fragathas, which are not chanted, recited with repetitions ? ' The 
Marutvatiya is the litany of the Favamana (Stotra) ; there they chant to 
six Gayatri verses, six Brhati verses, and three Tristubh verses ; this is the 
midday Favamana, in the Faiicada9a (Stoma), with three metres. They say 
‘How is this midday Favamana, in the Fancada5a, with three metres 
followed in recitation 1 ’ The two last verses of the strophe are in Gayatri, 
the antistrophe is in Gayatri ^ ; by these the Gayatri verses are followed in 
recitation ; by the two Fragathas the Brhati verses are followed in recita- 
tion. In these Brhati verses the Saman singers chant with repetitions with 
the Raurava and Yaudhajaya (Samans) ; ^ therefore these two Fragathas, 
though not chanted, are recited with repetitions ; thus with the Qastra he 
follows the Stotra. By the inserted verses in Tristubh * and the Tristubh 
Nivid insertion® the Tristubh verses by him are followed in recitation. 
Thus indeed is the midday Favamana in the Pancada^a with three metres 
followed in recitation by him who knows thus. 

iii. 18 (xii. 7). He recites the inserted verses ; by the inserted verses Fraja- 
pati milked from these worlds whatever desire he desired ; by means of the 
inserted verses he milks from these worlds whatever he desires, who knows 
thus. Now as to these inserted verses, whenever the gods observed a breach 
in the sacrifice that they closed up by the inserted verses ; that is why the 
inserted verses have their name. With a sacrifice without breach does he 
sacrifice who knows thus. Now as to these inserted verses, the inserted 
verses are the sewing of the sacrifice ; just as one continues putting together 
a garment with a needle, so does he continue with these putting together 
the breach in the sacrifice who knows thus. Further as to the inserted 
verses, the inserted verses are the recitations for the Upasads ; ‘ Agni is the 
leader' (he says^) ; the first Upasad is connected with Agni ; of that this is 
the recitation. ‘ Thou with insight, 0 Soma’ (he says ; the second Upasad 
is connected with Soma ; of that this is the recitation. ‘ They swell the 
waters ’ (he says ; the third Upasad is connected with Visnu ; of that this 
is the recitation. So much space as by sacrifice with the Soma sacrifice he 

* BV. viii. 68. 1-8, and 2. 1-3 for antistrophe. ® See AB. iii. 19. 

The two Fragathas are RV. viii. 53. 6, 6 ; ^ B V. iii. 20. 4. In §§ 3, 6, 6 ad Jin. new 

i. 40. 5, 6. clauses should begin with yad and not as 

* These are those to which SV. ii. 25 and 26 in Aufrecht. 

are sung ; cf. Simon, Pu$pa Su/ra, p. 769. * RV. i. 91. 2. 

* See AB. iii. 18. s RV. i, 64. 6. 



iii. 18—] 


The Soma Sacrifice [176 

conquers, that he conquers with each Upasad who knows thus and who 
knowing thus recites the inserted verses. As to this some hold ‘ You the 
great’ should he recite;* saying ‘We know that this (verse) is recited 
among the Bharatas.’ That is not to be regarded. If he were to recite it, 
Parjanya would be liable not to rain.® ‘ They swell the waters ’ only he should 
recite; that line has rain in it; it mentions the Maruts in ‘Maruts’, and 
contains (the word) ‘lead’ in ‘ Like a steed to make rain they lead about’ ; 
that which has (the word) ‘lead’ has the word ‘stride’; that which has 
‘ stride ’ is connected with Visnu ; ‘ The strong one ’ (he says) ; the strong 
one is Indra. In this (verse) there are four clauses, referring respectively 
to rain, the Maruts, Vi.snu, and Indra. This verse which has its place in 
the third pressing is recited at the midday (pressing) ; therefore the cattle 
of the Bharatas now spend the evening in the cattle-ground, and at the 
midday come up to the cattle-shed.® It is in Jagatl, for cattle are connected 
with the Jagati; the midday is the self of the sacrificer; thus he confers 
cattle on the sacrificer. 

iii. 19 (xii. 8). He recites a Pragatha* to the Maruts; the Maruts arc cattle ; 
the Pragatha is cattle; (it serves) to win cattle. ‘Thou hast been bom 
dread, for impetuous strength’, this hymn® he recites. This hymn is 
a propagation of the sacrificer; the sacrificer by it he propagates from the 
sacriflce°as the birthplace of the gods. It is a bringer of victory ; he gains 
victory and is victorious. It is by Gauriviti. Gauriviti g&ktya went nearest 
to the world of heaven ; he saw this hymn ; with it he conquered the world 
of heaven. Verily so also the sacrificer with this hymn conquers the world 
of heaven. Having recited half its (verses), leaving half over, he places 
a Nivid in the middle ; the Nivid is a mounting to the world of heaven ; 
the Nivid is a ladder to the world of heaven. It he should recite climbing 
up as it were; and he should take hold® of the sacrificer who is dear to 
him. So for one de.siring the heaven. Now for one practising witchcraft. 
If he desire ‘ May I smite the people by the lordly power’ thrice should he 
here separate with the Nivid the recitation of the hymn ; the Nivid is the 
lordly power, the hymn the people ; verily thus by the lordly power he 
smites the people. If he desire ‘May I smite the lordly power by the 
people ’, thrice should he here divide the Nivid in recitation by the hymn ; 
the Nivid is the lordly power, the hymn the people; verily thus he smites 
the lordly power by the people. But if he desire ‘ On both sides let me 

* RV. ii. SI. 11. Hoad abhivya” ; cf. p. 86. * BV. x. 73. The word is really inserted after 

» The oonstr. is as in AB. iii.48 ; PB. xvi. 15.0. v. 6 of the 11 verses ; A 9 S. v. 14. 20. 

« Against the time of heat, as S.ayana ex- = i. e. he should hold him while imitating 

plains ; see Vedic Index, i. 232 ’ the climbing of a ladder, by puffing 

> BV. viii. 80. 3 and 4. vigorously as Sayana says. 



177] 


The Marutvatlya Qastra [ — iii. 20 

sever him from the people he should here on both sides of the Nivid utter 
the call ; on both sides thus he cuts him off from the people. So for one 
practising witchcraft, but the other way for one desiring heaven. ‘The 
birds, fair winged, have approached Indra*, with this last (verse he 
concludes ; ‘ the Priyamedhas, the seers, seeking aid ; do thou unroll the 
darkness * (he says). The darkness by which he deems himself surrounded 
that should he approach in mind ; that from him is removed. ‘ Fill the eye 
with this he should rub his eyes ; possessed of sight until old age becomes 
he who knows thus. ‘ Release us that are bound as it were with a net ’ 
(he says); a net is snares; verily thus he says ‘Release us being bound 
from a snare as it were ’. 

iii. 20 (xii. 9). Indra\ being about to slay Vrtra, said to all the deities 
‘ Do ye support me ; do ye call to me.* ‘ Be it so * (they replied). They 
ran forward to slay. He perceived ‘ They are running hither to slay me ; 
well, let me terrify them/ Against them he breathed forth; before his 
snorting in haste all the gods ran away, but the Maruts did not abandon 
him ; saying ‘ Smite, O blessed one ; strike, show thy strength * they 
supported him. Seeing this the seer declares ^ 

‘ Before the snorting of Viira in haste. 

All the gods, thy comrades, abandoned thee ; 

With the Maruts, O Indra, be there friendship for thee ; 

Then shalt thou conquer every foe/ 

He perceived ‘ These indeed are my friends ; they showed me love ; well, 
let me give them a share in this litany,* He gave them a share in this 
litany ; to that time both litanies were his only. He draws the cup for the 
Maruts, he recites the Pragatha to the Maruts, he recites the hymn to the 
Maruts, he inserts the Nivid to the Maruts ; this is the portion of the Maruts. 
Having recited the litany to the Maruts, he uses (a verse) to the Maruts as 
offering verse ; thus in due portion he delights the deities. 

‘ Those who magnified thee, O bounteous one, at the slaying of the serpent, 
Those who, O lord of the bays, at the affair with 9^mbara, the cattle foray, 
Those who now, the sages, rejoice with thee. 

In union with the Maruts, drink, O Indra, the Soma ’ 

(he says ^). Wherever with them he conquered, wherever he showed his 
strength, thus by mentioning that also he makes them share the Soma 
drink with Indra. 

< RV. X. 73. 11. 

* Cf. KB. XV. 2. 

23 [h o s. 25 ] 


* RV. viii. 96. 7. 
5 RV. iii. 47. 4. 



[178 


iiL2l] The Soma Sacrijice 

iii. 21 (xii. 10) Indra,' having slain Vrfcra, having won all victories, said to 
Prajapati * Let me be what thou art ; let me be great/ Prajapati replied, 
‘ Then who am I ? " ‘ Even that which thou hast said ’ he answered ; then 
indeed did Prajapati become Who by name ; Prajapati is Who by name.^ 
In that Indra became great, that is why Mahendra has his name,^ He 
having become great said to the deities ‘ Assign me a choice portion just 
as one desires here, who prospers, who attains pre-eminence, who becomes 
great.^ The gods said to him * Claim thyself what is to be for thee/ He 
claimed this cup for Mahendra, the midday of pressings, the Niskevalya of 
litanies, the Tristubh of metres, the Prsths of Samans ; this choice portion 
they assigned to him. They assign a choice portion to him who knows 
thus. To him the gods said ‘ All hast thou asked ; let us have a share here 
also.* * No *, he replied, ‘ how can you have a share also ? ’ They answered 
‘ Let us have a share also, O bounteous one.* He merely looked at them. 


The Niskevalya Qastra, 

iii. 22 (xii. 11). The^ gods said ‘ Here is the dear wife, the favourite of 
Indra, Prasaha by name ; from her let us seek (our desire).’ ‘ Be it so * 
(he said). From her they sought ; she said to them ‘ In the morning shall 
I tell you.* Therefore wives seek from a husband, therefore a wife seeks 
from her husband in the night. To her they went in the morning ; she 
replied with (the verse ‘^) : 

' Since many a time he hath conquered, enduring, 

Indra hath made good his name as slayer of Vrtra ; 

The mighty lord of strength hath been perceived : ’ 

the mighty lord of strength is Indra. 

‘ What we desire of him to do, let him perform that,’ 

verily thus she said to them ‘ What we have said, that he has done.* The 
gods said ‘ Let her have a share also, since she has not yet obtained one ^ in 


' Sayana quotes TB. ii. 2. 5. 2. 

« Cf. TS. vi. 5. 5. 3. 

These words as Aufrecht points out destroy 
the sentence in form ; yo would save this, 
iii. 22. ^ AB. ii. 22-24 and KB. xv. 4 and 6 deal 
with the Niskevalya 5astra of tlie Hotrat 
the midday pressing ; see A^S. v. 15 ; 95 S. 
vii. 20; viii. 17; Caland find Henry, 
VAgnis[oma^ pp. 310-813. 

* RV. X. 74 6. The interesting episode of the 


shame of the daughter-in law isdealt with 
by Liebich, VOJ. xxvii. 474-477. For 
magic in the Brahmanas cf. L^vi, La doc- 
trine du sacrifice j p. 139. For vdvdtd cf. Vedic 
IndeXf i. 478 ; ii. 290. For Indra as son of 
Prajapati Sayana cites TB. ii. 2. 10. 1 ; for 
sendf ii. 2. 8. 1. 

* Liebich (Pdniniy p. 72, n. 2) suggests yd n$ 
’sminn avaikam avidatj easier syntax but 
different if possible sense. 



179] The Ni§kevalya Qastra [ — ^iii. 23 

this of ours.' ‘ Be it so ' (they said). They gave her a share then ; there- 
fore herein is recited (the verse) ‘ Since many a time he hath conquered, 
enduring.' The dear wife, the favourite, Prasaha by name, of Indra, is his 
host ; her father-in-law is Prajapati named Who. Therefore he who desires 
the victory of a host standing away from it at half distance, should cut 
a grass blade at both ends, and throw it towards the other host, saying 
‘ Prasaha, Ka seeth thee.' Then, just as in this world, a daughter-in-law 
keeps hiding in modesty before her father-in-law, so also the host keeps 
shrinking away in confusion, where one knowing thus, having cut a grass 
blade at both ends, hurls it against the other host (saying) ‘ Prasaha, Ka 
seeth thee.' To them said Indra ' You may have a share hero also.' The 
gods replied ^ ‘ Let the Viraj of thirty-three syllables be the oftering verse of 
the Niskevalya.' The gods are thirty-three, eight Vasus, eleven Budras, 
twelve Adityas, Prajapati and the vasat call ; he makes the gods share 
the syllables ; syllable by syllable the gods drink in turn ; verily thus with 
a vessel of the gods the gods are satisfied. If he desire of a man ‘ Let him 
be without an abode let him use for him as olfering verse a Gayatri, 
a Tristubh or some other metre, not a Viraj, and say the v(isat call; 
verily thus he makes liim without an abode. If he desire of a man ‘ Let 
him liave an abode he should use for him as offering verse ^ a Viraj ‘Drink 
the Soma, 0 Indra ; let it delight thee ' ; verily thus with it he makes him 
have an abode. 

iii. 23 (xii. 12). The Be and the Saman were here in the beginning. The 
Be was called ‘ she the Saman ‘ he '.^ The Be said to the Saman ‘ Let us be 
united for generation.' ‘ No ', replied the Stoian, ‘ my greatness is above 
thine.' She becoming two spoke (to him) ; he did not at all consent. Having 
become three she spoke ; with three he united. In that with three he 
united, therefore with three they chant, with three sing, for with three is 
the Saman commensurate. Therefore one (husband) has many wives, but 
not one (woman) at once many husbands. In that thus he and she were 
united, thus came into being the Sama {sd-anui ) ; that is why the Saman 
has its name. He becomes ^ fair who knows thus ; he who prospers, who 
attains pre-eminence, he becomes fair, for as ‘unfair' men reproach (a man). 


^ No tU to make the end of the quotation 
clear, so above iii. 8. 

5 RV. vii. 22. 1. 

' The same derivation in CU. iii. 6. 1-6. SB. 
viii. 20 and 21 follows AB. 

^ saman bkavati can only be construed as a loc. 
but apparently the sense is as taken by 
Sayana on its second occurrence. Weber 
(Znd. Sind. ix. 263) offers no translation, 


and on its first Sayana renders sarvair 
ahhyarhitaih sadr^o bkavati. BR. (vii. 929) 
has ‘ er sitzt in der Fiille ’ (from sd), and 
Beussen {Sechsig Upanishads, p. 86) sees 
in CU. ii. 1. 1-8 a play on these senses 
of Saman, those of richness, friendliness, 
and the Skman. Probably all are in 
essence one, resting on the root idea 
‘ conciliate ‘ please 



iii. 28 — The Soma Sacr^ice [180 

They came into order becoming one five, the other five ; (namely) the call 
and the hin call, the prelude and the first Rc, the principal part and the 
middle Rc, the response and the last ]^, the finale and the call. In 

that the two came into order becoming one five, the other five, therefore 
they say ‘The sacrifice is fivefold; cattle are fivefold.’ In that, further, 
they made up, as a set of ten, the Viraj, therefore they say ‘ In the Viraj, as 
a set of ten, the sacrifice finds support.’ The strophe is the self, the anti- 
strophe offspring, the inserted verses the wife, the Pragatha cattle, the 
hymn the house. He in this and in yonder world abides with offspring 
and cattle in his home who knows thus. 

iii. 24 (xii. 13). He recites the strophe * ; the strophe is the self ; it he 
recites with a middle tone ; verily thus he makes the self perfect. He recites 
the antistrophe®; the antistrophe is offspring ; the antistrophe is to be recited 
in a louder tone ; verily thus he makes his offspring better than himself. 
He recites the inserted verse ® ; the inserted verse is the wife ; the inserted 
verse must be recited in a lower tone as it were ; in his house his wife is 
not likely to answer back, when one knowing thus recites the inserted verse 
in a lower tone. He recites the Pragatha * ; it is to be recited with sonorous 
voice ; sound is cattle, the Pragatha is cattle ; (it serves) to win cattle. He 
recites the hymn ® ‘ I shall declare the mighty deeds of Indra.’ Thus is the 
hymn devoted only to and dear to Indra, by Hiranyastupa. By the hymn 
Hiranyastupa Angirasa went to the dear abode of Indra, he won the highest 
world. He goes to the dear abode of Indra, he wins the highest world who 
knows thus. The hymn is a house, a support. Therefore it should be 
recited in the most firm tone. Therefore even if a man gets cattle at a dis- 
tance as it were, he desires to bring to his house; for a house is the 
support of cattle. 

ADHYAYA III 


The Vaigvadeva and the Agnimai'uta. 


iii. 26 (xiii. 1). Soina^ the king was in yonder world, on him the gods 
and the seers reflected ‘ How shall Soma the king come to us ? ’ They said 
to the metres ‘ Do ye fetch for us this Soma the king.’ • Be it so ’ (they 
replied). Having become birds they flew up. In that having become birds 
they flew up, that (tale) those who know stories call the Sauparna ; thus 


1 RV. vii. 82. 22, 28. 

» RV. viii. 8. 7, 8. 

^ Above AB. iii. 22. 

^ RV. viii. 3. 12, 13. 
t RV. i. 32. 

iii. 25. ^ AB. iii. 25-32 and KB. xvi. 4 and 5 


deal with the Vai 9 vad 6 va 
Hotr at the evening pressing ; see A^S. v. 
18; 99^* Oaland and Henry, 

L'Agnistomay pp. 864>86l. For the legend 
cf. TS. vi. 1. 6. 2 ; PB. viii. 4. 1 ; fB. iv. 
3. 2. 7 ; Bloomfield, JAOS. xvi. 1 seq. 



181 ] The Vaigvadeva Qastra [ — 27 

the metres went towards Soma, the king. The metres then were of four 
syllables each only. The Jagati being of four syllables first flew up ; she 
having flown up and having gone half of the way felt weary ; having laid 
aside three syllables, and becoming of one syllable, she flew back down 
again, bearing consecration and fervour. Therefore by him is consecra- 
tion obtained, is fervour obtained, who has cattle, for cattle are connected 
with the Jagati, for the Jagati brought them back. Then the Tristubh 
flew up. She having flown up and having gone more than half the way 
felt weary ; she having laid aside one syllable, having become of three 
syllables, came back again, bearing the sacrificial fees. Therefore at the 
midday the sacrificial fees are taken, in the place of the Tristubh, for the 
Tristubh brought them back. 

iii. 26 (xiii. 2). The gods said to the Gayatri ‘ Do thou fetch the Soma, the 
king, for us.* ' Be it so,* she replied, ‘ do ye accompany me with the recita- 
tion of the whole (formula for a) safe passage.* * Be it so * (they said). 
She flew up ; her the gods accompanied with the recitation of the whole 
(formula for a) safe passage, containing the words ‘forward* and ‘hither*. 
(The words) ‘ forward * and ‘ hither ’ are the whole (formula for a) safe 
passage ; therefore him who is dear to him he should accompany with 
this (recitation) containing ‘ forward * and ^ hither * ; verily safely he goes, 
safely he returns. She, having flown and having terrified the guardians of 
the Soma, grasped with foot and mouth Soma the king, and also grasped 
the syllables which the other two metres had dropped. Having shot at 
her, Krfanu, a Soma guardian,^ cut off the nail of her left foot; that 
became a porcupine ; therefore is it like a nail. The fat that flowed became 
the barren cow ^ ; therefore is it the oblation as it were. The socket and the 
point became a serpent, not biting ; from its swiftness (came) the viper ; 
the feathers became flying foxes, the sinews earthworms, the shaft the 
blind snake. Thus became the arrow. 

iii. 27 (xiii. 3). What she grasped with her right foot became the morning 
pressing; the Gayatri made it her own abode ; therefore they regard it as 
the most perfect of all the pressings. The very first he becomes, he attains 
pre-eminence who knows thus. What she grasped with her left foot became 
the midday pressing ; it slipped ; having slipped it did not match the former 
pressing. The gods sought to remedy this ; in it they placed the Tris- 
tubh of metres, Indra of deities ; thereby it became of equal strength with 
the former pressing; with the two pressings of equal strength and of 
similar quality he prospers who knows thus. That which she grasped with 
her mouth became the third pressing. Flying she sucked its sap ; having 


1 See TS. i. 2. 7 ; vi. 1. 10. 4 ; gH, i,7,l,lseq . ; iii. S. 4. 10. 
a See TS, ii. 1. 2. 3. 



[182 


iii. 27 — ] The Soma Sacrijwe 

its sap sucked,^ it did not equal the two former pressings. The gods sought 
to remedy this ; they saw it in cattle. In that they pour in an admixture 
(of milk), and proceed with the (offering of) butter ^ and the animal (offer- 
ing), thereby it became of equal strength with the previous pressings. With 
all the pressings of equal strength and of similai* quality he prospers who 
knows thus. 

iii. 28 (xiii. 4). The other two metres said to the Qayatri ‘ Our property, 
the syllables have come round with (you)/ ‘No,* replied the Gayatri; 
‘ ours are they as they were found (by us).* They disputed before the 
gods ; the gods said ‘ They are yours as they were found (by you)/ There- 
fore even now in a question of property they say ‘ It is ours by right of 
finding.* Then the Gayatri was of eight syllables, the Tristubh of three, 
the Jagati of one. The eight-syllable Gayatri supported the morning 
pressing ; the Tristubh with three syllables could not suppoi*t the midday 
pressing ; to her the Gayatri said ‘ Let me come ; let there be a portion for 
me here also.’ ‘ Be it so,’ replied the Tristubh, ‘ Do thou unite me with 
these eight syllables/ ‘ Be it so ’ (she said) ; her she united ; thus to the 
Gayatri at the midday belong the last two (verses) of the strophe of the 
Marutvatiya and the antistrophe. ^ She, having become of eleven syllables, 
supported the midday pressing. The Jagati having one syllable could not 
support the third pressing ; to her the Gayatri said ‘ Let me come ; let there 
be a portion for me here also. ‘ Be it so,’ replied the Jagati, ‘ Do thou unite 
me with these eleven syllables.’ ‘ Be it so * (she said) ; her she united ; 
thus to the Gayatri at the third pressing belong the last two verses of the 
strophe of the Vai9vadeva and the antistrophe. Having become of twelve 
syllables she supported the third pressing. Then indeed the Gayatri became 
of eight syllables, the Tristubh of eleven syllables, and the Jagati of twelve 
syllables. With all the metres of equal strength and of similar quality he 
prospers who knows thus. That which was one became three ; therefore 
they say ‘ It should be given to one who knows thus * ; foi* being one it 
became three. 

iii. 29 (xiii. 5). The gods said to the Adityas ‘ With you let us support this 
pressing.’ ‘ Be it so * (they replied). Therefore the third pressing begins 
with the Adityas ; the cup for the Adityas ^ is before it. He uses (a verse ^) 
containing (the word) ‘ be drunk ’ and so perfect in form, as offering verse, 
‘ Let the Adityas and Aditi be drunk ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ be 
drunk ’ is a characteristic of the third pressing. He does not say the second 

^ See TS. vi. 1. 6. 3. v. 17. 1-3; 99®* viii. 1. 3-7; Oaland and 

* All things connected with cattle. Henry, VAgnittoma^ pp. 332, 338. 

iii. 28. 1 See AB. iii. 17. 5. _ RV. viii. 51. 2. 

iii. 2i). ^ For this cup see KB. xvi. 1 ; A 9 S. 



183 ] 


The Vaigvadeva Qastra [ — iii. 30 

vasat, nor eat (thinking) ‘ The second vasat call is a conclusion ; eating is 
a conclusion ; the Adityas are the breaths ; let me not bring the breaths 
to a conclusion.’ The Adityas said to Savitr ‘ With thee let us support this 
pressing.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (he replied). Therefore the strophe ® of the Vai 9 vadeva 
is addressed to Savitr, the cup for Savitr is before it. He uses (a verse *) con- 
taining (the word) ' be cli-uuk and so j^erfect in form, as offering verse, ‘ God 
of the home Savitr the delectable ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ be 
drunk is a symbol of the third pressing. He does not say the second 
vasat nor eat, (thinking) ‘ The second vasat call is a conclusion ; eating is a 
conclusion ; Savitr i.s the breath ; let me not bring the breath to a conclusion.’ 
Savitr drinks of both these pressings, the morning pressing and the third 
pressing. In that there is in the beginning of the Nivid® to Savitr a sentence 
containing (the word) ‘ drink ’ and at the end one containing (the word) ‘ be 
drunk ’, verily thus he gives him a .share in both pressings, the morning 
pressing and the third pressing. Many verses to Vayu are recited in the 
morning, but one ® only at the third pressing ; therefore the upward breaths 
of a man are more numerous than the lower. He recites (a hymn ’) to sky 
and earth ; sky and earth are supports ; this (earth) is a support here, 
yonder (.sun) yonder. In that he recites (a hymn) to sky and earth, verily 
thus he establishes him on a pair of supports. 

iii. 30 (xiii. 6) He recites (a hymn) to the Bbhus ^ j the Bbhus by fervour 
among the gods won the drinking of Soma. For them they desired to arrange 
it at the morning pressing; them Agni with the Vasus repelled from the 
morning pressing. For them they sought to arrange it at the midday pressing ; 
them Indra with the Rudras repelled from the midday pressing. For them 
they desired to arrange it at the third pressing ; them the All-gods ener- 
getically repelled, (saying) ‘They shall not drink here, not here.’ Prajapati 
said to Savitr ‘ These are thy pupils ; do thou drink together with them.’ 
‘ Be it so,’ replied Savitr, ‘ Do thou drink round them on both sides.’ Praja- 
pati drank round them on both sides ; these two inserted verses ® without 
mention (of the deity), intended for Prajapati, are recited round (the 
hymn) for the Rbhus, ‘ The maker of fair forms for aid ’ and ‘Let Vena 
here impel those bom of Pr^ni’; verily thus does Prajapati drink on both 
sides of them. Therefore does one of high rank honour at his table him 
whom he desires. The gods had loathing of those because of the human 

® RV. V* 82. 1-3. G jjfot in the SamhitS. 

^ For the cup ttee KB. xvi. 2 and 3 ; A^S. v. ’ RV. i. 169. 

18. 1, 2; ggS. viii. 8. 1-4; Caland and ^ RV. i.lll. The reading hdcikalpayUan is 
Henry , pp. 362-864. given by Caland, VOJ. xxiii. 64 ; Weber, 

In somasya pibatu and scmasya maisat respec- Jnd. Stud, ix. 264. 

timely. 2 RV. j. 4.1; x. 123. 1. 



The Soma Sacrifice 


iii. 30 — ] 


[184 


scent; they interposed these inserted verses^ ‘In whom the mother' and 
‘ To the father 

iii. 31 (xiii. 7 ). He recites (a hymn to the All-gods ; as are peoples, so is 
the Vai 9 vadeva. As are the peoples within, so are the hymns ; as the wastes 
so the inserted verses. On both sides of the inserted verse he utters the call ; 
‘ therefore these being wastes seem not to be such by reason of the beasts 
and birds' he used to say. As is a man, so is the Vai^vadeva; as are his 
members within, so are the hymns; as his joints, so the inserted verses. 
On both sides of the inserted verse he utters the calls ; therefore the joints 
of a man being slack are made firm, for they are made firm by the holy 
power. The inserted verses and the offering verses are the root of the 
sacrifice ; if they were to use different inserted verses and offering verses, 
they would uproot the sacrifice ; therefore they should be the same. The 
Vai 9 vadeva litany is connected with the five folks ; it is the litany of all 
the five folks, gods and men, Gandharvas and Apsarases, serpents and fathers ; 
of these five folks is it the litany ; all the five folks know him ; to him from the 
fivefold folk sacrificers go who knows thus. He who recites the Vai 9 vadeva 
is the Hotr connected with all the gods. Of all the quarters should he 
think when about to recite ; verily thus in all the quarters he places sap. 
He should not think of that quarter in which there is one whom he 
should hate ; by omitting it he appropriates his strength. He concludes 
with the last (verse 2) ‘ Adi ti is the sky, Aditi the atmosphere'; Aditi is 
this (earth) ; the sky this (earth), the atmosphere this (earth). ‘ Aditi is 
mother, is father, is son ' (he says) ; the mother is this (earth), the father 
this (earth), the son this (earth). ‘ Aditi is the All-gods, the five folks’ (he 
says) ; in this are the All-gods, in this the five folks. ‘ Aditi is what is 
born, Aditi is what is to be born ’ (he says) ; what is born is this (earth) ; 
what is to be born is this (earth). He recites twice by lines the concluding 
(verse) ; cattle are four-footed ; (verily it serves) to win cattle ; once by 
half verses, for support. Man has a double support, cattle have four feet ; 
verily thus he causes men with his double support to find support in 
four-footed cattle. He should always conclude with (a verse) connected 
with the five folks ; touching the earth should he conclude. Thus in the 
very place where he brings together the sacrifice in that at the end he 
establishes it. Having recited the Vai 9 vadeva litany he uses (a verse) to 
the All-gods as offering verse,'* ‘ 0 All-gods, harken to this my call ' ; 
thus according to their portions he delights the deities. 

iii. 32 (xiii. 8). The ^ first offering verse for the ghee is addressed to Agni, 


^ RV. X. 63. 3 ; iv. 50. 6. 
* RV. i. 89. 
s RV. vi. 52. 18. 


iii. 32. ‘ Tliis chapter deals with the ofiFering 
of a pap to Soma between libations of ghee 
to Agni and Visnu ; see A^S. v. 19. 1-6 ; 


2 RV. i. 89. to. 



186 ] 


The Agnimdruta Gastra [ — iii. 33 

the offering verse for (the pap for) Soma is addressed to Soma, the offering 
verse for the ghee is addressed to Visnu. For (the pap for) Soma he uses as 
ofienng verse ® ‘ Thou, O Soma, in unison with the fathers,’ which contains 
(the word) ‘ fathers They slay the Soma in that they press it ; for it they 
perform (the offering of) a barren cow in the form of (the pap) for Soma ; 
the barren cow is for the fathers; therefore (a verse) containing (the 
word) ‘fathers’ he uses as offering verse for (the pap for) Soma. They 
have killed Soma in that they pressed it ; thus do they again bring 
it into being ; they swell it up again with the symbol of the Upasads, 
these deities, Agni, Soma, and Visnu are the symbol of the Upasads. 
Having taken (the pap) for Soma before the Saman singers the Hotr 
should look into it ; some indeed give it first to the Saman singers, but 
that he should not do. ‘ The sayer of vaqat eats first all foods ’, he used 
to say ; in this way therefore the sayer of vamt should first look into it, 
then they give it to the Saman singers. 

The Agnimdruta Rostra. 

iii. 33 (xiii. S)). Prajapati * felt love towards his own daughter, the sky 
some say, Usas others. Having become a stag he approached her in the 
form of a deer. The gods saw him, ‘ A deed unknown Prajapati now does.’ 
They sought one to puni.sh him ; they found him not among one another. 
These most dread forms they brought together in one place. Brought 
together they became this deity here ; therefore is his name containing (the 
word) Bhuta ; he prospers who knows thus his name. To him the gods 
said ' Prajapati here hath done a deed unknown ; pierce him.’ ‘ Be it so,’ he 
replied, ‘ Let me choose a boon from you.’ ‘ Choose ’ (they said). He chose 
this boon, the overlordship of cattle ; therefore does his name contain the 
word ‘cattle’.* Rich in cattle he becomes who knows thus this name 
of his. Having aimed at him he pierced him ; being pierced he flew 
upwards;® him they call ‘the deer’. The piercer of the deer is he of 
that name. The female deer is RohinI ; the three-pointed arrow is the 

99 s. viii. 4. 1 -6 ; Caland and Henry, * The two names are BhQtapati and Pa; upati 
L* Agni^^oma, pp, 362--864. according to S&yana, and this is more 

* RV. viii. 48. 13. plausible than Weber’s vaguer reference 

' AB^ iii. 38-38 and KB. xvi. 7 deal with the to Bhava (Jnd. Stud, ix. 269, 270), 

Agnimdruta ^^stra of the Hotr at the ^ udaprapata of the MSS, of Haug and Weber, 
evening pressing ; see A^S. v. 20; whence the latter conjectured udapravata 

viii. 6 ; Caland and Henry, VAgnistomaj is to bo read with Aufrecht as udaprapatat 

pp. 372^380. The astronomical data liere before tarn. The form is so irregular that 

given afford Tilak the source of his work Aufrecht suggests udapatat, Bohtlingk 

Orion \ cf. Whitney, JAOS. xvi. xcii, xciii. (BKSGW. 16 Dec. 1900, p. 417) prefers 

For the legend cf. 9®* h 7. 4. 1 ; RV. x. (xdapravaia. 

61. 6-9. 

24 [h.o.s. 2c] 



iii. 33 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [186 

three-pointed arrow. The seed of Prajapati outpoured ran ; it became a 
pond. The gods said ‘ Let not this seed of Prajapati be spoiled.’ It became 
‘ not to be spoilt ; ’ that is why ‘ not to be spoilt ’ (madum) has its name ; 
connected with man is called ' not to be spoilt ’ ; that being ' not to be 
spoilt ’ they call mystically ‘ connected with man {mdnusa) for the gods 
are lovers of mystery as it were. 

iii. 84 (xiii. 10). It they surrounded with Agni ; it the Maruts blew 
upon ; Agni could not make it move ; they surrounded it with Agni Vai 9 va- 
nara; the Maruts blew upon it ; then Agni Vai^vanara caused it to move. The 
first part of the seed that was kindled up b*icame yonder Aditya ; the second 
became Bhrgu; him Varuna took; therefore is Bhrgu descended from 
Varuna,^ The third (part), that was brilliant (adldet) as it were, became the 
Adityas. The coals became the Angirases ; in that the coals after being 
quenched blazed forth again, Brhaspati came into being. The extinguished 
coals became black cattle; the reddened earth ruddy (cattle). The ash 
which there was crept about in diverse forms, the buffalo, the Gayal, the 
antelope, the camel, the ass, and these ruddy animals. To them this god 
said ‘ Mine is this, mine is what remains.’ ^ Him they deprived of a claim 
by this verse which is recited as addressed to Rudra,® 

‘ 0 father of the Maruts, let thy goodwill approach us ; 

Do thou not sever us from the sight of the sun ; 

Do thou, hero, be merciful to our steeds ' ; 

so should he say, not ‘ Towards us ’ (in the last line) ; this god is not likely 
to attack offspring then ; 

^ May we be multiplied with children, 0 thou of Budra,’ 

so he should say, not ‘ O Rudra to avoid the use of the actual name. Or 
rather he should recite^ ‘Weal for us let him make’; with ‘weal’ he 
begins, for weal for all. ‘ For men, for women, for cows ’ (he says) ; men 
are males, women are females; (verily it serves) for weal for all. This 
verse, being without mention (of the name of the deity) though addressed 
to Rudra, is appeased ; with full life, for fullness of life, a full life he lives 
who knows thus. It is a Gayatri ; the Gayatri is holy power ; verily thus 
with the holy power he honours him. 

iii. 35 (xiii. 11). He begins the Agnimaruta with (a hymn ^) to Vai9va- 
nara ; Vai 9 vanara caused to move the seed when poured ; therefore with a 

^ The sense * adopted* is supported by S&yana * RV. ii. 33. 1, with ivdm for abhi in c and 

and the declaration of relation of father ri4driya for nidra in d. 

and son in TU. iii. 1. The preceding * RV. i. 43. 6. 

passage may be referred to in (JB. i. 7. 4. 4 ; ^ So Aufrecht for so nirvkta of the MSS. which 

iv. 6. 1. 8 ; Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 387, n. 4. Weber (ind. Stud, ix. 271) reads. 

8 So TS. iii. 1. 9. 5. iii. 36. i RV. iii. 3. Cf. KB. xvi. 7. 



187] The Agnimdruta Qastra [ — iii. 37 

hymn to Vai 9 vanara he begins the Agnimaruta. Without taking in breath 
the first verse is to be recited. He who recites the Agnimaruta keeps quench- 
ing the fires which have not been appeased, the blazing flames; verily 
thus with the breaths he crosses the fires. In reciting he may err; he 
should seek another to point out; verily thus making him a bridge he 
crosses. Therefore at the Agnimaruta he should not himself correct, 
a corrector (of errors) should be found. He recites (a hymn *) to the 
Maruts ; the Maruts by blowing caused to move the seed when poured ; 
therefore he recites (a hymn) to the Maruts. ‘ At each sacrifice to Agni ' 
and ‘ The god wealth gives to you \ the basis ^ (of the Stotra) and the 
antistrophe ^ he recites in the middle ; in that in the middle he recites the 
basis (yoni) and the antistrophe, therefore is the womb placed in the 
middle. In that he recites after reciting two hymns, verily thus he places 
the organ of propagation above the two supports for generation. He is 
propagated with offspring and cattle who knows thus. 

iii. 36 (xiii. 12). He recites (a hymn ^) to Jatavedas ; Prajapati created 
offspring; they created went away and returned not. Them he sur- 
rounded with Agni ; they came up to Agni ; to him to-day even they come 
up. He said ‘Offspring born by him I have found.’ In that he said 
‘ Offspring born by him I have found \ that became (the hymn) to Jatavedas; 
that is why Jatavedas has his name. They, surrounded by Agni, and 
controlled, kept scorching and blazing; them he sprinkled with water. 
Therefore after (the hymn) to Jatavedas he recites the Apohisthiya ; 
therefore should it be recited by one who is appeasing. Having sprinkled 
them with water he thought that he had destroyed them; in them by 
means of the dragon of the deep ^ he mysteriously placed brilliance. Agni 
Garhapatya is the dragon of the deep ; verily thus by Agni Garhapatya 
mysteriously he places brilliance in them. Therefore they say * He who 
offers is more brilliant than he who does not offer.’ 

iii. 37 (xiii. 13). He celebrates the wives of the gods ^ after Agni, the lord 
of the house ; therefore the wife sits behind the Garhapatya. They say 
‘ Let him celebrate Baka first ; a sister has the first drink.’ That is not to 


a AV. i. 87. 

3 BV. i. 168. 1 and 2 ; the translation is 
doubtful. 

* BV. vii. 16. 11 and 12. These are the con- 
necting links with the Skman, the yoni 
being the Stotriyapragatha correspond- 
ing to the Yajukyajhlya S&man, SV. ii. 
53 and 54. 

1 RV i. 148. 

2 RV. X. 9. 

^ RV. vi. 60. 14 is the verse referred to. 


nijdsyaiva cannot be taken as svaklyafy as 
by S&yana ; the sense must be something 
like ‘ destroy ’ or * injure ’ and the Dhdtu- 
pdtha root (xxvi. 102) jas in its causative 
form is clearly meant. Of. Weber, Jnd. 
Stud, ix. 272. 

iii. 37. 1 RV. v. 46. 7 and 8. Probably may 
here simply have its normal sense of 
Upraise*, or the terms may be used as 
brief descriptions of the verses recited. 



[188 


iii. 37 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

be regarded ; the wives of the gods he should celebrate first. Agni 
Qarhapatya places seed in the wives; verily thus in these wives with 
Agni Garhapatya openly he places seed, for propagation. He is propagated 
with ofispring and cattle, who knows thus. Therefore a sister, though 
of the same womb, lives as inferior to a wife, though of a different womb. 
He celebrates Raka;^ Raka is it that sews this suture in man which 
is in the organ. Male sons are born for him who knows thus. He 
celebrates Paviravi ; ® Paviravi is speech, Sarasvati ; verily thus he places 
speech in speech. They say ‘ Should he recite (the verse) to Yama first ? 
Or that for the fathers ? ' That to Yama should he recite first. ‘ This strew, 
O Yama, do thou sit upon ’ ; the first drink is the king’s ; therefore should 
he recite (the verse to Yama first. ‘ Matali with the sages, Yama with 
the Angirases he recites ® after (it) for the sages. The sages are inferior to 
the gods, but above the fathers ; therefore he recites it after (the verse to 
Yama). ‘ Let them arise, the lower, the higher ’, (these verses®) to the fathers 
he recites. ‘ The midmost fathers, loving the Soma ’ (he says) ; the lowest, 
the highest and the midmost, all these without omission he delights. 
‘I have found the kindly fathers* he recites as the second (verse). ‘ Who 
sitting on the strew (the drink) pressed with the call * (he says) ; ‘ sitting on 
the strew * is a reference to their dear abode (the strew) ; verily thus 
with their dear home he makes them prosper. With a dear home he 
prospers who knows thus. ‘ May there be this homage to the fathers 
to-day * he recites, containing the making of homage, at the end ; there- 
fore at the end is homage paid to the fathers. They say ‘ Should he recite 
(the verses) to the fathers separating (them) with the call ? Or without 
separating (them) with the call.’ He should recite separating (them) with 
the call ; the good of the sacrifice to the fathers is incomplete ; he who 
recites separating (them) with the call completes the incomplete sacrifice to 
the fathers ; therefore it is to be recited separating (them) with the call. 

iii. 88 (xiii. 14). ‘ Sweet indeed is he, full of honey is he ’, he recites 
(verses^ to) Indra for the drinking after of Indra ; by these Indra drank after 
(the other gods) the third pressing ; that is why (the verses) for the drinking 
after have their name. The deities become drunk as it were in that the 
Hotr recites these verses ; therefore in their case the response (of the 


a RV. ii. 82. 4. 

» BV. vi. 49. 7. 

« RV. X. 15. 4. 

» RV. X. 14. 8. 

^ RV. X. 15. 1 -8, but 2 is recited before 3. 

^ This is curious : S&yana and Haug take 
sUdhu as ‘ is to be made complete *. Weber 
(Jnd. StMd, ix. 273) renders ‘ The incom- 


plete is suitable for the .sacrifice to the 
fathers ; ho wlio recites without the 
call {*vy&hdmm)* But this is doubtful, 
and the rendering above given is prefer- 
able in any case as giving more accurately 
the sense of vya~hve. 

’ RV. vi. 47. 1-4. Of. KB. xvi. 8. 



189] The Agnimantta Qastra [ — iii. 39 

Adhvaryu) should contain ^ (the word) ‘ be drunk \ ‘ By whose might the 
regions are established this verse ® to Mitra and Varuna he recites ; Visnu 
guards what is ill offered in the sacrifice, Varuna what is well offered ; verily 
(it serves) to appease them both. ‘ I will proclaim the mighty deeds of 
Visnu (this verse ^) to Visnu he recites. As is a roller, so is Visnu to the 
sacrifice. Just as one may keep making well ploughed and well rolled what 
has been ill ploughed and ill rolled, so, in that the Hotr recites this verse, 
he keeps making well sung and well recited what has been ill sung and ill 
recited in the sacrifice. * Weaving the web from the darkness follow to the 
light (this verse ®) to Prajapati he recites ; the web is offspring ; verily thus 
he weaves the web of offspring for him. ‘ Guard the paths, full of light, 
wrought by prayer ’ (he says) ; the paths full of light are those that go to 
the gods ; verily thus he extends them for him. With ‘ Weave without 
a flaw the works of the singers ; be Manu, bring to birth the divine folk ' 
verily he extends him with the offspring of Manu, for generation. He is 
propagated with offspring and cattle who knows thus. ^ Do thou to us, the 
generous one, Indra, the resplendent with this last (verse®) he concludes ; 
the generous one, Indra, the resplendent, is this (earth) ; ‘ May he make 
true (blessings), supporter of the folk, the unequalled ' (he says) ; the true, 
supporter of the folk, the unequalled is this (earth) ; ‘ Do thou, king of 
beings, confer upon us * (he says) ; the king of beings is this (earth). ‘ The 
great fame that is a singer’s ’ (he says) ; great is this (earth) ; fame is the 
sacrifice ; the singer is the sacrificer ; verily thus he invokes this benediction 
for the sacrificer. Touching the earth should he say the conclusion ; verily 
thus in the very same place in which he gathers together the sacrifice, in 
that he establishes it at the end- Having recited the Agnimaruta litany he 
recites (a verse '^) to Agni and the Maruts as offering verse * O Agni with 
the Maruts brilliant and resounding thus according to their portions he 
delights the gods. 


ADHYAYA IV 

The Characteristics of the Agnistoma. 

iii. 39 (xiv. 1). The ^ gods undertook battle with the Asuras, for con- 
quest ; them Agni was not willing to accompany. To him the gods said 

^ I. e. maddmo daivam In place of garisdtno ^ RV. iv. 17. 20. Tho AB. takes satyd as fern, 
daivom ; see A^S. v. 20. which is quite impossible. 

3 Not in the Satkhitdf but also in AV. vii. ^ BV. v. 60. 8. 

26. 1. ^ AB. iii. 39-44 contains miscellaneous re- 

4 X 54 . 1 . marks on the Agnistoma and its relation 

5 RV. X. 53. 6. to other rites. The passage seems a later 

addition ; 'cf. Weber, Jnd. Stud. ix. 276. 



[190 


iii. 39 — ] The Soma SacHfice 

‘ Do thou come too ; thou art one of us.* He replied ‘ I shall not follow you 
if I am not sung to ; sing now to me.’ They, having risen, and having re- 
turned, praised him ; them praised he followed. Becoming in][three rows, he 
went to battle for conquest with the Asuras in three columns ; ‘in three rows’ 
(he says); verily he made the metres rows ; ‘in three columns’ (he says); the 
pressings (he made) thQ columns. Them he defeated invincibly; then 
indeed the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He prospers himself, 
the evil rival who hates him is defeated, who knows thus. The Agnistoma 
is the Gayatri ; the Gayatri has twenty-four syllables ; there are twenty- 
four Stotras and Qastras in the Agnistoma. This is why they say ‘ A horse 
well loaded gives (its rider) comfort.^ This is the Gayatri; the Gayatri 
is not content with the earth ; taking with it the sacrificer it goes aloft 
to the sky.’ This is the Agnistoma ; the Agnistoma is not content with the 
earth ; taking with it the sacrificer it goes aloft to the sky. The Agnistoma 
is the year ; the year has twenty-four half-months ; there are twenty- four 
Stotras and Qastras in the Agnistoma. As in the ocean all streams, so in 
it all the sacrificial rites are resolved. 

iii. 40 (xiv. 2). The consecration offering^ is performed; all those offer- 
ings after it verily are resolved in the Agnistoma. He invokes the sacri- 
ficial food ; the sacrifices of cooked (food) have the form of the sacrificial 
food ; all the sacrifices of cooked (food) are resolved in the Agnistoma, At 
evening and morning they offer the Agnihotra ; evening and morning they 
gave the fast (milk) ; with the call of Hail ! they offer the Agnihotra ; 
with the call of Hail! they gave the fast (milk). Through the call of 
Hail ! the Agnihotra is resolved in the Agnistoma. Fifteen kindling 
verses he recites at the introductory (oftering), fifteen in the new and full 
moon sacrifices ; through the introductory (offering) the new and full moon 
sacrifices are resolved in the Agnistoma. They buy Soma, the king ; Soma, 
the king, is connected with plants ; with plants they heal whom they heal ; 
therefore through the purchase of Soma, the king, whatever medicines 
there are, all these are resolved in the Agnistoma. They kindle Agni by 
friction at the guest reception, Agni at the four-monthly sacrifices ; through 
the guest reception the four-monthly sacrifices are resolved in the Agni- 
stoma. With milk they proceed at the Pravargya, with milk at the 
Daksayana sacrifice ^ ; verily through the Pravargya the Daksayana sacri- 
fice is resolved in the Agnistoma. There is a victim on the fast day ; verily 

^ So also TS. V. 5. 10. 7, and below, AB. iii. their connexion with the sacrificial food, 

47 ; of. Keith, Taittiriya Samhitd, i. xcviii. TS. i. 7. 1. 1. Gf. Weber, Ind, Stud. ix. 

The omiesion of any express object ie 227, 228. 

natural enough in a proverb. * For this see AfS. ii. 14. 7 ; KB. iv. 4 ; TS. 

1 For the Pilkayajnas see A^S! i. 1. 1, and for ii. 5. 5. 4. 



191] The Characteristics of the Agni§toma [ — iii. 42 

through it all animal sacrifices are resolved in the Agnis^ma. There is 
a sacrificial rite called the Idadadha;^ it they perform with curds; with 
curds they perform the pot of curds ; verily through the pot of curds the 
li^adha is resolved in the Agnistoma. 

iii, 41 (xiv. 3). So now as to previous (rites) and next as to subsequent 
(rites). There are fifteen Stotras in the Ukthya, fifteen Qastras; that 
makes up a month ; by months is the year arranged ; Agni Vai 9 vanara is 
the year ; the Agnistoma is Agni ; verily through the year the Ukthya is 
resolved into the Agnistoma. Through the resolution of the Ukthya the 
Vajapeya is resolved, for it is an Ukthya. There are twelve night rounds,^ 
all in the Pancada^a Stoma ; taking these by two they make up thirty. 
The Soda 9 in Saman is the Ekavin 9 a, the Sandhi (Saman) is the Trivrt ; 
these are thirty, the month ; the nights of the month are thirty ; the year 
is arranged by months; Agni Vai 9 vanara is the year; the Agnistoma is 
Agni ; verily through the year the Atiratra is resolved in the Agnistoma ; 
through the resolution of the Atiratra the Aptoryama is resolved, for it is 
Atiratra. Thus all the sacrificial rites previous to and subsequent to (the 
Agnistoma) are resolved into the Agnistoma. Of it, taking the Stotras 
together, in all there are a hundred and ninety^ Stotriya verses. The 
ninety corresponds to ten Trivrt (Stomas) ; then the (next) ninety to ten 
more ; of the ten (that remain) one Stotriya verse is in excess, a Trivrt is 
left over ; it yonder gives heat as the twenty-first placed over (the rest). 
It is the midmost ^ of the Stomas ; before it are ten Trivrts, after it ten ; 
in the middle this twenty-first gives heat placed over on both sides. The 
Stotriya verse over is incorporated in this ; it is the sacrificer ; it is the 
divine lordly power, might and strength : he attains the divine lordly 
power, might and strength, he attains union and identity of form and 
world with it, who knows thus. 

iii. 43 (xiv. 4). The gods having defeated the Asuras went aloft to the 
world of heaven. Agni arose aloft touching the sky : he opened the door of 

* For this see A^S. ii. 14. 11 ; KB. v. 5. For - Thus made up : the morning pressing has 
the pot of milk offering of the Agnistoma a Trivrt and four Pahcada 9 a 8 = 69 ; the 

see A^S. v. 18 ; 95S. vii. 18 ; Caland midday pressing has a Paricada 9 a 

and Henry, V Agnistoma^ p. 283. and four Saptada 9 a 8 » 83 ; the evening 

^ The Atiratra after the Soda 9 in Graha adds pressing has a Saptada 9 a and £kavih 9 a — 

four rounds, headed by the goblets of the 38 ; viz. 190 =10x9 + 10x9 + 10 ( = 

Hotr, Maitravaruna, Brahmanacchahsin, 9 + 1). 

and Ach&v&ka respectively Those are, ^ As £kaviii 9 a Stoma. For the sun as 
of course, accompanied by recitations * ekavinga see AB. i. 30. The forms of these 
and Stotras and the later are Pahcada 9 a Stomas are given in PB. ii. 1. 1 (Trivrt) ; 

in Stomas, each of which doubled = 30 4. 1 (Pancada 9 a) ; 7. 1 (Saptada 9 a) ; 14. 1 

verses. The £kavih 9 a and Trivrt Skmans (£kavih 9 a). 

similarly have 21+9 verses. 



iii. 42 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [192 

the world of heaven ; Agni is the overlord of the world of heaven. To him 
first came the Vasus ; they said to him ‘ Let us through ^ ; make room for 
us.’ He replied ‘ Unless I am praised, I shall not let you through ; praise 
me now.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they said) ; they praised him with the Trivrt Stoma ; 
being praised he let them through ; they went to their due place. To him 
came the Rudras ; they said to him ‘ Let us through ; make room for us.’ 
He replied ‘ Unless I am praised, I shall not let you through ; praise me 
now.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they said) ; they praised him with the Pancadafa Stoma ; 
being praised, he let them through ; they went to their due place. To him 
came the Adityas ; they said to him ‘ Let us through ; make room for us.* 
He replied ‘ Unless I am praised, I shall not let you tlirough ; praise me now.’ 
‘ Be it so ’ (they said) ; they praised him with the Saptada 9 a Stoma ; being 
praised, he lot them through ; they went to their due place. To him came 
the All-gods ; th^y said to him ‘ Let us through ; make room for us.’ He 
replied ‘ Unless I am praised, I shall not let you through ; praise me now.’ 
‘ Be it so * (they said) ; they praised him with the Ekavihfa Stoma ; being 
praised, he let them through ; they went to their due place. With each 
Stoma the gods praised him ; them praised he let through ; they went to 
their due places. So he who sacrifices praises him with all these Stomas, 
and he who knows thus him will he let pass ; him he lets pass to the world 
of heaven who knows thus. 

iii. 43 (xiv. 5). The Agnistoma is Agni ; in that they praised him, there- 
fore is it the praise of Agni (agnistoma) ; it, being the praise of Agni, they 
call Agnistoma mystically, for the gods love mystery as it were. In that 
four sets of gods praised him with four Stomas, therefore is it of four 
Stomas (catn-stoma) ; it being of four Stomas they call it Catustoma 
mystically, for the gods love mystery as it were. Again in that they 
praised him when aloft and having become light (jyoiis)^ therefore is it the 
Jyotistoma; it being the Stoma of light, they call it the Jyotistoma mysti- 
cally, for the gods love mystery as it were. This is the sacrificial rite 
without beginning or end ; the Agnistoma is like a chariot wheel endless ; 
a>s is its beginning so is its end ; as to this a sacrificial verse is sung : 

‘ That which is its beginning is also its end, 

That again which is its end is also its beginning, 

Like the creeping of a snake is the movement of the (^akala ' (ritual), 
They discern not which of the two is the subsequent ’ ; 

^ Aufrecht (p. 430) conjectures arjasi or The reference to the 9&kala is seen by 

arjasK<i, the latter of which Beihtlingk Weber {Ind. Stud, ix. 277), and though 

(BKSOW. 15 I)ec. 1900, p. 416) ap- not apparently accepted by Aufrecht or 

proves. others appear to me correct, 

iii. 48. ' A kind of snake (Sayana) is absurd. 



193] The Characteristics of the Agnistoma [ — iii. 45 

for (they say) ‘ As the beginning, so should be the end.’ As to this they 
say ‘ Seeing that the beginning has the Trivrt, the end the Ekavih 9 a, how 
are the two alike % * ‘ For the reason he should reply, ‘ that the Ekavih 9 a 
is threefold and moreover that both consist of repeated triplets. 

iii. 44. (xiv. 6). The ^ Agnistoma is he who gives heat here ; it is one to 
be finished in the day ; with the day should they complete it ; its name is 
what is finished with the day. They should proceed with it without haste ; 
as at the morning pressing, so at the midday, so at the third pressing. 
So the sacrificer is not likely to perish. In that they proceed without 
hastening at the two former pressings, therefore here the villages of the east 
are densely populated ; in that they proceed hastening at the third pressing, 
therefore here to the west there are long forests. Thus the sacrificer is 
likely to perish. Therefore without hastening they should proceed ; as at 
the morning pressing, so at the midday, so at the third pressing. So the 
sacrificer is not likely to perish. He should follow in recitation the move- 
ment of this (sun) ; when he rises in the morning, then he gives a gentle 
heat ; therefore he should recite in a gentle tone at the morning pressing. 
Then when he comes forward, he gives stronger heat ; therefore at the 
midday should he recite with a stronger tone. Then when he comes still 
further forward, he gives his strongest heat ; therefore he should recite at 
the third pressing with the strongest tone. So should he recite if he be 
lord of speech, for the Qastra is speech. He should begin in the tone in 
which he can complete, increasing in height ; that is the best way of reciting. 
The (sun) never really sets or rises. In that they think of him ‘ He is 
setting verily having reached the end of the day, he inverts himself ; thus 
he makes evening below, day above. Again in that they think of him ‘ He 
is rising in the morning *, verily having reached the end of night he inverts 
himself ; thus he makes day below, night above. He never sets ; indeed he 
never sets, union with him and identity of form and world he attains 
who knows thus.^ 

ADHYAYA V 

Miscellaneous Points regarding the Sacrifice. 

iii. 45 (xv* 1). The sacrifice as food departed from the gods ; the gods said 
‘The sacrifice as food hath left us ; this sacrifice, food, let us search for.’ They 
said ^ How shall we search 1 ’ ‘ By the Brahman and the metres, they said.’ 

They consecrated the Brahman with the metres ; for him they performed 
the sacrifice up to the end ; they also performed the joint offerings to the 

^ Copied in GB. ix. 10. For the forests of the ii. 466 ; MS. iv. 6. 3 ; KS. xxvii. 8 ; TS vi. 

west cf. 9®* » Caland, 

2 For this theory of the sun’s motion see VO.T. xxvi. 119. 

Speyer, JR AS. 1906, p. 723 ; Vedic Index, 

25 [h.O.S. 26] 



[194 


iii, 46 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

wives (of the gods). Therefore now also in the consecration olFering they 
perform the sacrifice right up to the end, they also perform the joint offer- 
ings to the wives. According to this rule did they proceed. They per- 
formed the introductory (offering) ; to him with the introductory (offering) 
they came nearer ; they hastened with the performance. They made it end 
in the Qamyu. Therefore now also the introductory (offering) ends in the 
^amyu. According to this rule did they proceed. They performed the 
guest reception ; to him with the guest reception they came nearer ; they 
hastened with the performance. They made it end in the sacrificial food. 
Therefore now also the guest reception ends in the sacrificial food. Accord- 
ing to this rule did they proceed. They performed the Upasads ; to him 
with the Upasads they came nearer ; they hastened with the performance ; 
having repeated three kindling verses, they offered to three deities. There- 
fore now also in the Upasads having repeated three kindling verses,^ they 
offer to three deities. According to this rule did they proceed. They per- 
formed the fast day ; him on the fast day they obtained ; having obtained 
him they performed the sacrifice ; they also performed the joint offerings to 
the wives. Therefore now also on the fast day they perform the sacrifice 
to the end ; they also perform the joint offerings to the wives. Therefore 
in these previous rites he should recite more and more gently ; for 
they followed him creeping after.^ ‘Therefore with whatever voice he 
desires, he should recite on the fast day, for he is then obtained ’ (they say). 
Having obtained him they said ‘ Serve us for food ' ; ‘ No,' he replied, 
‘ how can 1 serve you ? ' Them he only looked at. To him they said 
‘ With the Brahman and the metres becoming united do thou serve us as 
food.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (he replied). Therefore now also the sacrifice becoming 
united with the Brahman and the metres bears the sacrifice to the gods. 


Errors in the choice of Priests, 

iii. 46 (xv. 2). Three things are performed at the sacrifice, eating, 
swallowing, and vomiting. What is eaten is when he makes as priest one 
that expects ‘ May he give to me, or may he choose me.' That is remote 
like something eaten ; that does not profit the sacrifice!*. Again what is 
swallowed is when fearing he chooses a priest, ‘ Let him not either oppress 
me, nor let him make confusion in the sacrifice for me.' That is remote 
like something swallowed ; that does not profit the sacrificer. Again what 
is vomited is when he chooses as priest one who is spoken ill of. Just as 
here men are disgusted by what is vomited, so therefore the gods. That is 

' A^S. iv. 8. 6. 

* anutsdram conjectured by Aufrecht is clearly right. 



195] The Offerings to the Minor Deities [ — 47 

remote like something vomited; that does not profit the sacrificer. He 
should not desire these three. If against his desire he should have one of 
these three, there is in the Stotra of the Vamadevya^ an expiation for it. 
The Vamadevya (Saman) is this, the world of the sacrificer, the world 
of ambrosia, the world of heaven. It is three syllables short; having 
crept up for the chanting'of the (Saman), he should divide the self into three, 
pu, ru, and sa. He places the self in these worlds, in this world of the 
sacrificer, in this world of ambrosia, in the world of heaven ; he overcomes 
all errors in sacrifice. ‘ Even if the priests are perfect,' he used to say, ‘ he 
should mutter this.' 

The Offerings to the Minor Deities, 

iii. 47 (xv. 3). The ^ metres having carried the oblation to the gods being 
wearied stand at the back part of the sacrifice ; just as if a horse or a mule 
stands having carried (its load). He should offer to them the oblations to 
the minor deities after the cake of the animal (offering) to Mitra and 
Varuna, To Dhatr (he should offer) a cake on twelve potsherds; Dhatr 
is the vamt call. To Anumati (he should offer) a pap; Anumati is the 
Gayatri. To Raka (he should ofier) a pap; Raka is the Tristubh. To 
Sinivali (he should ofier) a pap; Sinivali is the Jagati. To Kuhu (he 
should oflier) a pap; Kuhu is the Anustubh. These are all the metres; 
Gayatri, Tristubh, Jagati, Anustubh; on (them) the others (depend), for 
these are performed most prominently at the sacrifice. By means of these 
metres the sacrificer sacrifices with all the metres, who knows thus. This 
is why they say ‘ A horse, well loaded, gives (its rider) comfort ^ ' ; this is 
the metres; the metres place him in comfort. A world which misses 
nothing he wins who knows thus. Now some say ‘ To Dhatr in front of 
each of these (deities) should he ofier with butter ; thus in all of them he 
makes pairing.' As to this they say ‘ There is tediousness in the sacrifice 
when on the same day he uses the same verses as offering verses.' Even if 
there are many wives as it were, one husband is a pair with them. In that 
before them all he oflfors to Dhatr,^ he makes pairing in all of them. 
So now for the minor deities. 

1 SV. ii. 32-84: ; RV. iv. 31. 1-3 ; the last versos are often rubricated (v. 16. 1 ; vii. 

verse has throe Padas of seven syllables, 4. 2 ; viii. 12. 18 ; 14. 18). 

acc. to Sayana, but Oldenberg {Frole- iii. 47. ^ For the rites on the conclusion of the 
gmnenai p. 373) more correctly takes the sacrifice, viz. the barren cow to Mitra and 

shortage to lie in the words madanam^ Varuna and the oblations to the Devikas 

sakhindmf and jarUfndm, leaving bhavdsi see A^S. vi. 14 ; 95®* » Caland 

utibhify in the last verse uncontracted ; and Henry, VAgnistoma, pp. 407-409. 

hence the insertion of purusa. The ’ Above AB. iii. 39. 5. 
practice is not given in A^S., though the ^ For the Mantra see A^S. vi. 14. 16. 



[196 


ii. 48 — The. Soma Sacrifice 

iii. 48 (xv. 4). Now as regards the goddesses.^ To Surya (he should 
offer) a cake on eleven potsherds ; Surya is Dhatr, and he is also the vasat 
call. To sky (he should offer) a pap; the sky is Anumati ; she is also the 
Gayatri. To Usas (he should offer) a pap; Usas is Baka; she is also 
the Tristubh. To the cow (he should offer) a pap; the cow is Sinivall; 
she is also the Jagati. To earth (he should offer) a pap. Earth is Kuhu ; 
she is also the Anustubh. These are all the metres; Gayatri, Tristubh, 
Jagati, Anustubh ; on (them) the others (depend), for these are performed 
most prominently at the sacrifice. By means of these metres the sacrifice!' 
sacrifices with all the metres, who knows thus. This is why they say ‘ A 
horse, well loaded, gives (its rider) comfort ’ ; this is the metres ; the metres 
place him in comfort. A world which misses nothing he wins who knows 
thus. Now some say ‘ To Surya before each of tlieso he should offer with 
butter ; thus in all of them he makes pairing ’. As to this they say ‘ There 
is tediousness in the sacrifice when on the same day he used the same verses 
as offering verses.’ Even if there are many wives as it were, one husband 
is a pair with them. In that before all of them he offers to Surya, he makes 
pairing in all of them. Those here are those yonder; those yonder are 
those here ; by either set he obttiins the desire which is in both. Both 
sets he should offer for one desiring propagation who has attained pros- 
perity, but not for one who is seeking it. If he were to offer them together 
for one who is seeking only, the gods would be liable to be ill pleased in his 
gains since ‘ he has thought he has enough ’. (^ucivi-ksa Gaupalayana offered 
both together at the sacrifice of Vrddhadyumna* Abhipratarina. He 
(Qucivrksa Gaupalayana) having seen his skilled charioteer plunging (in the 
water) said ‘ Here for this king I liave delighted together at the sacrifice both 
the minor deities and the goddesses in that his skilled charioteer plunges.’ 
Sixty-four armed warriors assuredly were his sons and grandsons. 

Tlie Ukthya 

iii. 49 (xv. 5). In ^ the Agnistoma the gods took refuge, in the Ukthas 
the Asuras ; they were of equal strength ; they could not be discriminated. 
These Bharadvaja among the seers saw ‘ These Asuras are resting in the 
Ukthas; them no one of these (gods) sees.’ He called to Agni*^ ‘Come, 
I shall proclaim to thee, O Agni, other words.’ Other words are those of 
the Asuras. Agni, rising up, said ‘ What does this lean, tall, grey-haired 

• See A9S. yi. 14. 17 ; 99S. ix. 28. 4 m- ni" 49. * For tlie Ukthya and the three addi- 

* The construction is not rare, o, g, i, 1. tional Ulctha Stotras and ^astras seo KB, 

2. 22 ; V. 1. 1. 9 ; xiii. 8. 4. 11. xvi. 11 ; A9S. vi. 1 ; 99S. ix. 1-4 ; M9S. 

3 For him cf. 99S. xv. 16. 10; Weber, Rdja- ii. 6. 8; Ap9S. xiv. 1-4. Cf. also PB. 

siiyay p. 27, n. 2. The reference is perhaps viii. 8. 

to the final bath of the A9vamedha. * RV. vi, 6 16, 



197] 


The Ukthya [ — iii, 50 

one desire to say to me?' Bharadvaja was lean, tall, and grey haired. 
He replied ‘ These Asuras are resting in the Ukthas ; them no one of you 
sees/ Agni, becoming a horse, rushed to and beyond them ; in that Agni, 
having become a horse, rushed to and beyond them, that was the origin of 
the Sakama^va Saman ; that is why the Sakama^va has its name. They 
say ‘ He should begin the Ukthas with the Sakama^va ; the Ukthas have 
no proper beginning other than the Sakamafva.' ' With the Pramahhisthiya ^ 
he should begin,' they say. By means of the Pramahhisthiya the gods repelled 
the Asuras from the Ukthas. Thus he may begin with the Pramahhisthiya, 
or with the Sakama 9 va. 

iii. 50 { XV. 6). The Asuras took refuge in the litany of the Maitravaruna ; 
Indra said ‘ Who with me will repel hence these Asuras ? ' ‘I too ' replied 
Varuna. Therefore the Maitravaruna recites (a litany) to Indra and 
Varuna^ at the third pressing, for Indra and Varuna drove them thence. 
Being driven thence, the Asuras took refuge in the litany of the Brahma- 
nacchahsin ; Indra said ‘ Who with me will repel these Asuras hence ? ' ‘I too ' 
replied Brhaspati. Therefore the Brahmanacchansin recites to Indra and 
Brhaspati^ at the third pressing, for Indra and Brhaspati drove them 
thence. Being driven thence, the Asuras took refuge in the litany of the 
Achavaka; Indra said ‘Who with me will repel them hence?' ‘I too* 
replied Visnu. Therefore the Achavaka recites to Indra and Visnu ® at the 
third pressing, for Indra and Visnu drove them thence. Jointly with 
Indra the deities are celebrated ; a couple is a pairing ; therefore from 
a couple a pairing is produced, for propagation; he is propagated with 
offspring and cattle who knows thus. There are four offerings to tlie 
seasons of the Potr and the Nestr, and six versos they make up the 
tenfold Viraj ; thus in the tenfold Viraj they establisli the sacrifice.® 

® SV. ii. 65-57 ; the other two are Saubhara i. 166; A^S. vi. 1. 2; ix. 4. 3-5 

(ii. 58, 69) and Narniedhasa (ii. 60-62) ; differs. 

A^B. vi. 1. 2 ; 99^. ix. 2. 1, 2 ; 3. 1, 2 ; ^ I. e. the 2nd and 8th and 8rd and 9th of the 

4. 1, 2. Rtuyfijas (AB. ii. 29) and the six offering 

^ SV. ii. 228, 229. Uktlia here probably verses of the two priests at the prasthita 

means Uktha Stotra as taken by Sayana, offerings. 

or perhaps rather includes both Stotra ^ The 9astras of the Hotrakas at the evening 
and (see AB. iii. 60), since the pressing of the Ukthya are thus : — 

latter adopts the former as usual. The (1) Maitravaruna : RV.vi. 16. 16-18, 19-21 ; 
option here is not in the Sutras. iii. 61. 1-3 ; viii. 42. 1-8 ; vii. 82, 84; vi. 

J RV. vii. 82. Cf. KB. xvi. 11. It follows 68. 11. 

RV. iii. 61. 1-3; viii. 42. 1-8; A9S. vi. (2) Brahmanacchansin : RV. viii. 21. 1, 2, 
1. 2 ; 99 s. ix. 2. 8, 4. 9, 10 ; i. 67 ; x. 68, 43; vii. 97. 10. 

* RV. X. 68 and x. 43, following RV. i. 67 ; (3) Achavaka: RV. viii. 98. 7; viii. 13.4; ii. 

A 9 S. vi. 1. 2 ; 99 s. ix. 3. 3, 4 differs. 13 ; vii. 100 ; i. 166 ; vi. 69 ; vi. 69. 8. 

^ RV. vi. 69. It follows ii. 13; vii. 100; So A 9 S. vi. 1.2. 99^* 

2-4). 



PAl^CIKA IV 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued) 

ADHYAYA I 
TJie Sodafin. 

iv. 1 (xvi. 1). The ^ gods by the first day collected the thunderbolt for 
Indra ; by the second day they dipped it ; by the third day they presented it ; 
it he hurled on the fourth day. Therefore on the fourth day he recites 
the Soda9in. The Roda^in is a thunderbolt ; in that on the fourth day he 
recites the Soda9in, verily thus he hurls at the rival who hates him the 
thunderbolt as a weapon to lay him low who is to be laid low by him. 
The Soda9in is a thunderbolt, the litanies cattle ; putting it round after 
the litanies he recites. In that putting it round after the litanies 
he recites, verily thus with the Soda9in as a thunderbolt he surrounds 
cattle. Therefore cattle, being surrounded by the Soda9in as a thunder- 
bolt, come up to man. Therefore a horse or a man or a cow or an 
elephant being surrounded, led by itself, comes up when bidden by the 
voice ; by merely seeing the Soda9in as a thunderbolt, he is surrounded by 
the Soda9in as a thunderbolt, for the thunderbolt is speech, the Soda9in 
speech. They say ‘ Why has the Soda9in this name ? ’ Of the Stotras it 
is the sixteenth ; the sixteenth of the Qastras ; with sixteen syllables he 
commences ; with the (next) sixteen he says om ; ho inserts a Nivid of 
sixteen sentences; that is why the Soda9in has its name. Two syllables 
are left over ^ when the Soda9in is made into an Anustubh ; these are the two 
breasts of speech ; these are truth and falsehood ; truth aids him, falsehood 
harms him not, who knows thus. 

iv. 2 (xvi. 2). He who desires brilliance and splendour should use as the 
Soda9in Saman the Gaurivita ; ^ the Gaurivita is brilliance and splendour ; 
brilliant and resplendent he becomes who knowing thus uses the Gaurivita 
as Soda9in Saman. ‘ The Nanada ^ should be used as the Soda9in Saman ’ 

’ AB. iv. 1~4 and KB. xvii. 1-4 deal with the independent rite of that name is denied. 

§oda9in rite ; see A9S. vi. 2 and 8 ; 99S. For § 5 cf. GB. ix. 19. 

ix. 2 seq . ; Ap^S. xiv. 2 ; K^S. xii. 6. * See SV. ii. 302. 

20 seq. The Soda9in is treated here as iv. 2. ^ SV. ii. 302-304 ; A^S. vi.8. 1. This is 

performed on the fourth day of a ^adaha ; the vihrta form of the Sodayin. 

cf. TS. vi. 6. 11. 1 where a distinct and * SV. i. 852-354 according to SS.yana. Cf. 

KB. xxiii. 2 ; Nar&yana on A^S. vi. 8. 2. 



199] 


The Soddgin [ — ^iv. 3 

they say ; Indra lifted up his thunderbolt against Vrtra ; he hurled it at 
him ; he smote him. He, being smitten, cried aloud ; in that he cried aloud, 
the Nanada Saman came into existence ; that is why the Nanada has its 
name. That is a Saman without rivals, one that destroys rivals, the Nanada ; 
without rivals, a destroyer of rivals, he becomes who, knowing thus, uses 
the Nanada as the Soda^in Saman. If they use the Nanada, the Soda 5 in 
must be recited without intermingling;^ for they chant to the (verses) 
without intermingling. If it is the Gaurivita, the Soda 9 in must be recited 
with intermingling, for they chant to them with intermingling. 

iv. 3 (xvi. 8). Then he intertwines the metres. In * Let the bay steed 
carry thee hither’ and *Do thou hearken to our words’ he intertwine^ 
Gayatri ^ and Pahkti ^ verses ; man is connected with the Gayatri ; cattle are 
connected with the Pahkti ; verily thus he intertwines man with cattle, in 
cattle he makes him find support. The Gayatri and the Pahkti are two 
Anustubhs ; thereby he does not depart from the symbol of speech, the symbol 
of the Anustubh, and the symbol of the thunderbolt. In ‘ What time, O Indra, 
in the conflict ’ and ‘ Let this delightful one be to you ’ he intertwines Usnih ^ 
and Brhati^ verses; man is connected with the Usnih, cattle with the 
Brhati ; verily thus he intertwines man with cattle, in cattle he makes him 
find support. The Usnih and the Brhati are two Anustubhs ; thereby he 
does not depart from the symbol of speech, the symbol of the Anustubh, 
and the symbol of the thunderbolt. In ‘On the yokes for him’ and 
‘ O Brahman, O hero, rejoicing in the making of holy power ’ he intertwines 
(a verse of two Padas and a Tristubh ; ® man has two feet, the Tristubh 
is strength; verily thus he intertwines man with cattle; in strength he 
makes him find support ; therefore man, being established in strength, is 
the strongest of all cattle. In that (the verse) of two Padas has twenty 
syllables and there is a Tristubh, there are two Anustubhs; thereby he 
does not depart from the symbol of speech, the symbol of the Anustubh, and 
the symbol of the thunderbolt. In ‘ This Brahman ’ and ‘ I shall declare to 
thee the bay steeds in the great assembly ’ he intertwines (verses) of two 
Padas ^ and Jagatis;® man has two feet; cattle are connected with the 


^ The vtharana is described in A^S. vi. 8 ; it 
consists of mixing up the verses by 
reciting their Padas interlaced, tliat is, of 
3 Gayatri Padas and 5 Pahkti Padas (RV. 
i. 16. 2 and 82 3) is made up a verse form 
of Gayatri + Pahkti thrice and then two 
Pahkti Pada verses. According to AfS. 
vi. 2. 2 the aviJirta form hasRV. i.84. 1-6 
(SV. i. 347 seq,) as its strophe and anti- 


strophe, and this may really be meant as 
the Nanada. 

1 RV. i. 16. 1-3; A^JS. vi. 2. 8. 

2 RV. i. 82. 1 (and vv, 3 and 4) ; AfS. vi. 2. 4. 

3 RV. viii. 12. 26-27 ; A 9 S. vi. 2. 5. 

^ RV. iii. 44. 1-3 ; AgS. vi. 2. 6. 

6 RV. vii. 34. 4 ; A^S. vi. 2. 6. 
fi RV. vii. 29. 2 ; A^S. vi. 2. 6. 

Only in AgS. vi. 2. 6 ; SV. i. 438, etc. 

« RV. X. 96. 1-8. 



[200 


iv. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

Jagati ; verily thus he intertwines man with cattle ; in cattle he makes 
him find support. Therefore man, being established in cattle, both eats 
them and masters them ; and these are in his power. In that (the verse) 
of two Padas has sixteen syllables, and there is a Jagati, there are two 
Anustubhs; thereby he does not depart from the symbol of speech, the symbol 
of the Anustubh, and the symbol of the thunderbolt. In ‘ In the bowls the 
buffalo the barley-mixed ’ and ‘ Forward for him, with his chariot forward ’ 
he recites Atichandas verses;® the sap of the metres that flowed over, that 
flowed over to the Atichandas verse ; that is why the Atichandas has its 
name. The Soda 9 in is fashioned out of all the metres. In that he recites 
Atichandas verses, verily thus he fashions it out of all the metres. With 
the Soda^in fashioned out of all the metres he prospers who knows thus. 

iv. 4 (xvi. 4). He adds the additions of the Mahanainnis.^ The first 
M ah anamTii is this world, the second the world of the atmosphere, the third 
yonder world. The Soda 9 in is fashioned out of all the worlds ; in that he 
adds the additions of the Mahanamnis, verily thus ho fashions it from all the 
worlds. With the Soda 9 in fashioned out of all the worlds he prospers who 
knows thus. In ‘ Forward for you the Tristubh sap ’.‘Praise, praise forth’, and 
‘ He who hath made to bound the steeds ’ he recites as normal Anustubhs.® 
As one who has wandered here and there out of his path comes back to the 
path, so it is in that he recites normal Anustubhs. He who considers him- 
self complete and at the height of prosperity should make him recite the 
Sodagin without intermingling, (thinking) ‘ Let me not fall, through the 
miseiy of the metres.’ But he, who is desirous of removing evil, should 
make bitn recite the Soda 9 in with intermingling ; man is, as it wore, 
intertwined with evil ; verily thus he smites away the evil stain which is 
intertwined for him ; evil he smites away who knows thus. ‘ When up 
to the place of the bright one ’, with this last ® he concludes ; the place of the 
bright one is the world of heaven ; verily thus he causes the sacrificer to 
go to the woi’ld of heaven. ‘ Thou hast drunk of the ancient draughts, 
O lord of the bays ’ he uses as offering verse * ; the Soda^in is fashioned out 
of all the pressings ; in that he uses as offering verse ‘ Thou hast drunk of 
the ancient draughts, 0 lord of the bays ’, and the morning pressing contains 
(the word) ‘ drink ’, verily thus he fashions it out of the morning pressing. 
‘ Now let this pressing be thine only ’ (he says) ; the midday pressing (is 
Indra’s)only; verily thus he fashions it^from the midday pressing. ‘Be drink 
with the Soma, rich in honey, O Indra’ (he says) ; the third pressing contains 
(the words) ‘ be drunk ’ ; verily thus he fashions it out of the third pressing. 

» EV. ii. 22. 1-8 ; x. 138. 1-3 ; A 9 S. vi. 2. 6. ’ RV. viii. 69. 7 ; A 9 S. vi. 2. 12. 

' I. o. the verses in AA. iv ; A 9 S. vi. 2. Gsej. * RV. x. 96. 13 ; A 98 . vi. 2. 12. 

“ RV. viii. 69. 1-3 ; 8-10 ; 13-15 ; A9S.vi. 2. 9. 



The Atirdtra 


201 ] 


[ — ^iv. 6 


‘ Do thou ever, O courser, press into thy belly ’ (he says) ; that which contains 
(the word) ‘ courser * is a symbol of the Soda9in ; the Soda5in is fashioned 
out of all the pressings ; in that he uses as offering verse ‘ Thou hast drunk 
of the ancient draughts, O lord of the bays verily thus he fashions it out 
of all the pressings. With the Soda^in fashioned out of all the pressings he 
prospers who knows thus. He adds five-syllable additions ® of the Maha* 
namnis to Padas of eleven syllables ; the Soda9in is fashioned out of all the 
metres ; in that he adds four-syllable additions of the Mahanamnis to Padas 
of eleven syllables, verily thus he fashions it out of all the metres. With the 
Soda9in fashioned out of all the metres he prospers who knows thus. 


The Atirdtra. 

iv. 5 (xvi. 5). In ^ the day the gods took refuge, in the night the Asuras ; 
they were of equal strength ; they could not be discriminated. Indra said 
‘ Who with me will attack (to drive) hence these Asuras through the night ? ’ 
He found no one among the gods, they were afraid of night, the darkness, 
death. Therefore now also in the night if one has gone away any distance 
whatever, he is afraid, for the night is darkness as it were, death as it were. 
The metres alone followed him ; in that the metres alone followed him, there- 
fore Indra and the metres bear the night. No Nivid is recited, nor Puroruc 
nor inserted verse, nor is any other deity celebrated ; for Indra and the 
metres alone bear the night. They repelled them by going round in rounds ; 
in that they repelled by going round in rounds, that is why the rounds have 
their name. Them they repelled from the first part of the night by the 
first round, from the middle of the night by the second, from the last 
part of night by the last. ‘Up from the night do we follow' they said. 
‘ Bordering on night are these metres ’ he used to say ; for these rescued 
Indra when afraid from night, the darkness, death ; that is why the 
Api9arvaras have their name. 

iv. 6 (xvi. 6). ‘ Drink of the Soma juice ' with this Anustubh^ containing 
(the word) ‘ Soma juice ’ he begins the night ; the night is connected with 
the Anustubh ; this is the symbol of night. The offering verses contain 
(the words) ‘ Soma juice ‘ drink ' and ‘ be drunk \ and are appropriate ; what 
in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect. They chant the first round ; they 
repeat the first Padas ; their horses and cows, thereby they take from them. 

5 I. o. evd hy eva ; eva htndra (as 6 hi indra) ; rite is the addition of four Paryilyns of 

evdhi^akro; va^i hi gakrafy ; A^S. vi. 2. 12 throe ^^stras each. GB. x. 1-3 follow 

and 3. 16. AB. iv, 5 and 6, Cf. .TB. i. 208 j Oertel, 

* AB. iv. 6 and 6 andKB. xvii. 5-9 deal with Tram, Conn. Acad. 170, 

the Atiratra form of the Jyotistoma; see iv. 6. ^ RV. viii. 92. 13 ; AfS. vi. 4. 10 ; 95S. 
A^'S. vi. 4. The characteristic of this ix. 7. 1. 

26 [h.o.s. as] 



iv. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [202 

They chant the second round ; they repeat the middle Fadas ; their carts ^ 
and chariots,^ thereby they take from them. They chant the last round ; 
they repeat the last Fadas ; their clothes, their gold, the jewels on their 
bodies, thereby they take from them. He takes the property of his foe, 
he repels him from all these worlds, who knows thus. ‘The day has 
Favamana (Stotras) ’, they say, ‘ the night has no Favamanas ; how have 
both Favamanas, and through what have they equal portions ? ’ In that 
‘ To Indra, the drunken, the pressed (drink) ’, ‘ This Soma juice hath been 
pressed, O bright one ’, and ‘ This hath been pressed with might ’ they chant * 
and recite, thereby the night has Favamanas; thereby the two become 
possessed of the Favamanas; thereby they become of equal portions. 
‘ The day has fifteen Stotras ’, they say, ‘ the night has not fifteen Stotras ; 
how have both fifteen Stotras and through what have both equal portions 1 ’ 
The Api9arvaras are twelve Stotras ; they sing the Sandhi (Saman) ^ to the 
Bathantara with three deities ; thereby the night has fifteen Stotras ; 
thereby both have fifteen Stotras ; thereby they become of equal portions. 
They chant a limited amount, they i-ecite an unlimited amount, (thinking) 
‘ What has been is limited, what is to be is unlimited, (it serves) to win what 
is unlimited.’ He recites more than the Stoti’a ; offspring is beyond the 
self, cattle are beyond. In that he recites beyond the Stotra, verily thereby 
he wins whatever in him there is beyond the self. 


ADHYAYA II 


The Agvina Qastra, 


iv. 7 (xvii. 1). Frajapati ^ gave his daughter to Soma, the King, even 
Surya Savitri ; for her all the gods came as groomsmen ; for her wedding 
ceremony he made this thousand (of verses) which they call the Alvina 
(Qastra). What is less than a thousand is not the Alvina ; therefore he 
should recite a thousand or more. Having eaten of ghee, he should recite. 
Just as in this world a cart or a chariot, when oiled, goes (well), so he when 
oiled goes. He should call (making a posture) as of an eagle about to fly 
up. The gods did not agree as to this, ‘ Let this be mine ; let this be 
mine.’ They said coming to agreement ‘ Let us run a race for it ; his who 


2 manorathdh in Aufrocht is clearly a slip. 

^ RV. viii. 92. 19-21 ; 2. 1-3 ; iii. 61. 10-12 ; 
AfS. vi. 4. 10; g^JS. ix. 10. 1 ; 14. 1 ; 15. 1. 

* See SV. ii. 99-104 ; to Agni, Usas, and 

AQvins, two verses beingturned into three. 

* AB. iv. 7-11 and KB. xviii, 1-5 deal with 

A 9 vina Qastra which follows up the 


Sandhi Stotra of the Atiratra and is 
characterized by litanies for Agni, Usas, 
and tho^AQvins. See AgS. vi. 5 and 6 ; 
ggS. ix. 20. For the race cf. PB. ix. 1. 
35, 86 ; JB. i. 213 ; Levi, La docti ine da 
.sac/ iJicBj p. 72 ; Oertel, Trans, Conn, Acad, 
XV. 174. 



203] The Alvina Qastra [ — iv. 9 

wins shall it be They made the course from Agni, the lord of the house, 
to the sun ; therefore the beginning ^ (verse) is addressed to Agni in the 
Afvina, ‘ Agni is the Hotr, the lord of the house, he the King.’ As to this 
some say ‘ “ Agni, O dear father, Agni friend ” with this ^ should he begin ; 
“ In the sky the pure, the sacrificial, of the sun ” with this as first verse he 
reaches the goal.’ This is not to be regarded. If one were now to say of 
him ‘ He has had recourse to “ Agni ” and ‘‘ Agni ”, he will fall into the 
fire ’, it would certainly be so. Therefore should he begin with ‘ Agni is 
the Hotr, the lord of the house, he the King.’ It contains (the words) 
‘ lord of the house * and ‘ generation and is propitious ; with full life for 
fullness of life, a full life he lives who knows thus. 

iv. 8 (xvii. 2 .) As these deities were running the race, and had started, 
Agni took the lead first ; the Alvins followed him ; to him they said ‘ Give 
way ; we two will win this.’ ‘ Be it so ’, he replied, ‘ Let me have a share 
here.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (they said). For him they made a share herein ; therefore at 
the Alvina (Qastra) (a litany) to Agni is recited. They followed after Usas ; 
to her they said ‘ Give way ; we two will win this.’ ‘ Be it so ’, she replied, 
‘ Let me have a share here.’ " Be it so ’ (they said). For her they made 
a share herein; therefore at the A9vina (a litany) to Usas is recited. They 
followed after Indra ; to him they said ‘ We will win this, 0 generous 
one ’ ; they did not dare to say to him ‘ Give way ’. ‘ Be it so ’, he replied, 

‘ Let me have a share herein.’ ‘ Bo it so ’ (they said). For him they made 
a share herein ; therefore at the A9vina (a litany) to Indra is recited.’ The 
A9vins won the race ; the A9vins attained it. In that the A9vins won the 
race the A9vins attained it, therefore they call it the A9vina. He attains 
whatever he desires who knows thus. They say ‘ In that there are here 
recitations to Agni, to Usas, to Indra, then why do they call it the 
A 9 vina 1 ’ (It is) because the A9vins won the race, the A9vins attained it. 
In that the A9vins won the race, the A9vins attained it, therefore they 
call it the A9vina. He attains whatever he desires, who knows thus. 

iv. 9 (xvii. 3 ). By ineansof a mule chariot Agni ran the race ; as he drove 
on he burned their wombs ; therefore they conceive not. With ruddy cows 
Usas ran the race ; therefore, when dawn has come, there is a ruddy glow ; 
the form of Usas. With a horse chariot Indra ran the race ; therefore it as 
neighing aloud and resounding is the symbol of lordly power; for it is 
connected with Indra. With an ass chariot the A9vins won, the A9vins 
attained ; in that the A9vins won, the A9vins attained, therefore is his speed 
outworn, his energy spent ; he is here the least swift of all beasts of burden ; 
but they did not take the strength of his seed ; therefore has he virility and 

* RV. vi. 15. 13 ; A^S. vi. 5. 6 ; 55^. ix. 20. 7. * See A^S. vi. 5. 18 for his share ; it follows 

^ RV. X. 13. 3. the verses to Surya. So 99^* 



[204 


iv. 9 — ] The Soma ScbcHJice 

possesses a double seed. ‘ Seven metres should he use in reciting to Surya 
they say, * as in (the recitations) to Agni, Usas, and the Afvins ; the 
worlds of the gods are seven ; he prospers in all the worlds of the gods/ 
That is not to be regarded. Three only should he use in recitation ; three 
are these threefold worlds ; (they serve) to win these worlds. They say 

* He ^ should begin those for Surya with “Up this all-knower That is 
not to be regarded. That would be as if one having gone should miss the 
goal. He should begin ^ with ‘ Let Surya protect us from the sky ’ ; that is 
as if one having gone should reach the goal. He recites second ‘ Up this all- 
knower \ ‘The radiant countenance of the gods hath come forth’ is a 
Tristubh Yonder (sun) rises as the radiant one of the gods ; therefore 
he recites this. ‘ Homage to the eye of Mitra and Varuna’ is in Jagatl 
this has a Pada containing a benediction; verily thus he invokes a 
benediction for himself and the sacrificer. 

iv. 10 (xvii. 4.) They say ‘ Siirya should not be passed over in recitation ; 
the Brhati should not be passed over; if he were to pass over Surya, he 
would pass over splendour ; if he were to pass over the Brhati, he would 
pass over the breaths.’ ‘ O Indra bear to us inspiration ’ he recites as 
a Pragatha to Indra.^ ‘ Guide us, O much invoked, in this way ; alive may 
we attain the light ’ (he says) ; the light is yonder (sun) ; thereby he does 
not pass over Surya. Moreover in that it is a Pragatha in Brhati, thereby 
he does not pass over the Brhati. In ^ ‘ Towards thee, O hero, we utter 
praise’ he recites the basis of the Rathantara (Saman) ; they chant to the 
Bathantara the Sandhi for the A 9 vina ; in that he recites the basis of the 
Rathantara, it is to provide the Rathantara with its basis. ‘ Lord of 
this world, beholding the light ’ (he says) ; yonder (sun) is he who beholds 
the light ; thereby he does not pass over Surya. Moreover, in that it is 
a Pragatha in Brhati, thereby he does not pass over the Brhati. In® 
‘Many, sun-eyed’ he recites a Pragatha to Mitra and Varuna; Mitra is 
the day, Varuna the night; both day and night does he lay hold on, 
who undertakes the Atiratra. In that he recites a Pragatha to Mitra and 
Varuna, verily thus he establishes him in day and night. ‘Sun-eyed ’ (he 
says); thereby he does not pass over Surya. Moreover, in that it is a 
Pragatha in Brhati, thereby he does not pass over the Brhati. In ‘ May 
the two great ones, sky and earth, for us ’ and ‘ For they, sky and earth, all 
weal-producing ’ he recites (two verses ^) to sky and earth ; sky and earth 

1 RV. i. 60 ; A9S. vi. 6. 18; ggS. ix. 20. 21, iv. 10. » RV. vii. 32. 26, 27; AgS. vi. 6. 18 ; 
which omits RV. x. 168. 55®* 20. 24. 

RV. X. 168 ; A5S. vi. 6. 18. * Ry, 32. 22 and 27 ; A5S. vi. 6. 18. 

8 RV. i. 116 ; A5S. vi. 6. 18 ; 55 S. ix. 20. 22. s RV. vii. 66. 10 and 11 ; A 5 S. vi. 5. 18. 

* RV. X. 87 ; A5S. vi. 6. 18 ; 55 S. ix. 20. 23. < RV. i. 22. 18 and 160. 1 ; A 5 S. vi. 6. 18 ; 

55 s. ix. 20. 25 has i. 22. 13-15. 



206 ] The Agvina Qastra [ — iv. ii 

are supports ; this (earth) is a support here, yonder (sun) yonder. In that 
he recites (two » verses) to sky and earth, verily thus he establishes him in 
sky and earth. ‘ The god, the goddess, according to the law, Surya, the 
pure ’ (he says) ; thereby he praises Surya. Moreover, in that (the two 
verses) Gayatri and Jagati make up two Brhatis, thereby he does not pass 
over the Brhati. In 

‘ Goddess of aU the perishable kind 
Who shall not bo wrath, nor seize (us)," 

he recites (a verse) of two Padas The A 9 vina they used to call a litany in 
which (the funeral) pyre is piled. Nirrti with her noose used to await 
(thinking) ‘ When the Hotr concludes, then shall I let loose my nooses against 
him Then indeed Brhaspati saw (this verse) of two Padas. ‘ Who shall not 
be wrath, nor seize (us) ’ ; therewith he cast below the nooses of Nirrti with 
the nooses; in that the Hotr recites (this verse) of two Padas, verily thus he 
casts below the nooses of Nirrti with the nooses; verily thus in safety the Hotr 
is released, with full life, for fullness of life ; a full life he lives who knows 
thus. ‘ Of all the perishable kind " (he says) ; yonder (sun) causes to perish 
as it were; thereby he does not pass over Surya. Moreover in (the. verse) 
of two Padas is man’s metre ; it includes all the metres ; thereby he does 
not pass over the Brhati. 

iv. ll(xvii. 5). He concludes with a verse to Brahmanaspati; Brhaspati is 
the holy power ; verily thus at the end he establishes him in the holy power. 
With ^ ^ To the father, with all the gods, the strong ’ should he conclude 
who desires ofl’spring and cattle. ‘ O Brhaspati, with good offspring, with 
heroes ’ (he says) ; by offspring he has good offspring and heroes. ‘ Let us be 
lords of wealth ’ (he says) ; he becomes possessed of offspring, of cattle, 
of wealth, of heroes, when one knowing thus concludes with this (verse). 
With ^ * O Brhaspati, that which may surpass the foe ’ he should conclude, 
who desires brilliance and splendour; beyond all others he deserves splendour. 
‘ Brilliant ’ (he says) ; ‘ Brilliantly splendour shines ’ (they say) ; splendour 
shines as it were. ‘ That shall shine with radiance, 0 thou born of holy 
order ’ (he says) ; splendour is brilliant. * Upon us do thou confer varied 
wealth ’ (he says) ; splendour is radiant as it were. Resplendent and 
glorious becomes he, when one knowing thus concludes with this (verse). 
Therefore he who knows thus should conclude with this (verse). (It is ad- 
dressed) to Brahmanaspati ; thereby he does not pass over Surya. In that he 
recites thrice (this) Tristubh and it includes all the metres, thereby he does 

» Not in RV. ; AfS. vi. 5 18 ; ix. 20. 2G, a RV. ii. 23. 15 ; A 9 S. vi. 6. 19 ; ggS. ix. 20. 

which has mr^ayasya and grabhah, 27. 

* RV. iv. 50. 6. 



[206 


iv. 11 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

not pass over the Brhati. With a Gayatri and a Tristubh he should say 
the vasat call ; the Gayatri is the holy power, the Tristubh is strength ; 
verily thus he unites the holy power with strength. Resplendent and 
glorious and full of strength does he become, when one knowing thus with 
a Gayatri ^ and a Tristubh ^ says the vasat call, ‘ O A5vins, skilled ones, 
with Vayu’ and ‘Do ye. both drink, O Alvins*. With a Gayatri and a 
Viraj he should say the vasat call ; the Gayatri is the holy power ; the 
Viraj is food ; verily thus he unites proper food with the holy power. 
Resplendent and glorious he becomes, he eats food made edible by the holy 
power, when one knowing thus says the oasat call with the Gayatri and 
the Viraj. Therefore he who knows thus should say the vasat call with 
the Gayatri and the Viraj,® with these (verses), ‘ For you the Soma juice 
is ready to be drunk * and ‘ Do ye both drink, 0 Alvins 


The Caturvihga and Mahdvrata Days. 


iv. 12 (xvii. 6). Now ^ they proceed to the Caturviii^a day as the begin- 
ning, by it they grasp the year, by it the Stomas and the metres, by it all 
the deities. Not grasped in that metre, not grasped that deity, which is not 
grasped on this day. That is why the Arambhaniya has its name. The 
Stoma is the Caturvin9a ; that is why the Caturvih9a has its name ; the 
half-months are twenty-four; verily thus by half-months they grasp 
the year. It is an Ukthya ; the Ukthas are cattle ; (it serves) for the 
winning of cattle. It has fifteen Stotras, fifteen Qastras ; it is the month ; 
verily thus by months they grasp the year. These are in the three hundred 
and sixty Stotriya verses ; so many are the days of the year ; verily thus 
by days they grasp the year. ‘ The day should be an Agnistoma,’ they say, 
‘ the year is the Agnistoma ; no other than an Agnistoma supports the day 
or discriminates it.' If it is an Agnistoma, the three Pavamanas should be 
Astacatvarih9as, the other Stotras Caturvih9as. Here also there are three 
hundred and sixty Stotriya verses; so many are the days of the year; 
verily thus by days they grasp the year. It should be an Ukthya ; the 
sacrifice is made perfect by the animal (ofiering), the Sattra is made perfect 
by the animal (offering) ; all the Stotras are Caturvin9as, for this is openly 
the Caturvinja day ; therefore let it be an Ukthya. 


® RV. i. 46. 15 ; 99®* ^** ^0. 34 (optional). 

^ RV. iii. 68 . 7 ; 99 S. ix. 20. 32. 

» RV. vii. 68. 2 ; A^S. vi. 6. 24 ; 99 S. ix. 20. 
32. 

^ AB. iv. 12-14 and KB. xix deal with the 


Caturvih 9 a as the opening day of the 
Gavam Ayana Sattra, corresponding to 
the Mahavrata at the end ; see A 9 S. vii. 
1-4 ; 99®* ^i* 2seg. 



207 ] 


The Caturvihga Day [ — iv. 14 

iv. 13 (xvii. 7). The Samans are the Brhat and the Rathantara.^ These 
are the two ships which carry across the sacrifice ; verily thus by them they 
cross over the year. The Brhat and the Rathantara are the two feet, this 
day the head ; verily thus by the two feet they approach the head which is 
prosperity. The Brhat and Rathantara are the two wings, this day the 
head; verily thus with the two wings they unite the head, which is 
prosperity. The two are not both to be laid aside ; if they were to lay 
them both aside, just as a vessel which has parted from its fastening floats 
moving to either bank, so the performers of Sattras would float, moving 
to either bank, if they were to lay aside both together. If they were to 
lay aside the Rathantara, then by the Brhat both are not laid aside ; if 
they were to lay aside this Brhat, then by the Rathantara both are not 
laid aside. The Vairupa is the Rathantara ; the Vairaja is the Brhat ; 
the Qakvara is the Rathantara ; the Raivata is the Brhat. So these two 
become not laid aside both together. Those who knowing thus perform this 
day (rite), having obtained by the days the year, having obtained it by the 
half months, having obtained it by the months, having obtained the Stomas 
and the metres, having obtained all the deities, practising fervour, partaking 
of the Soma drink, continue pressing (Soma) all the year. Those who 
straight on from the day perform the year (rite) they lay upon themselves 
a heavy burden, the heavy burden crushes them. He, who having obtained 
it with the rites straight forward approaches it (with the rites) reversed, 
attains in safety the other side of the year.^ 

iv. 14 (xvii. 8). The Mahavrata is the Caturvin 9 a ; by means of the 
Brhaddiva (hymn ^) the Hotr pours seed on this day ; it on that day with 
the Mahavrata day he propagates ; in a year seed poured is born. There- 
fore the Brhaddiva is the common Niskevalya (Qastra). He having 
obtained it with the rites straight forward approaches it (with the rites) 
reversed, who knowing thus approaches this day. In safety he attains the 
other side of the year who knows thus. He, who knows this side and 
the other side of the year, in safety attains the other side of the year. The 
introductory Atiratra is this side, the concluding (Atiratra) is the other 
side. In safety he attains the other side of the year who knows thus. 


‘ This chapter is intended to show that in 
every case one or other of those Samans 
is used whether in Abhiplava or Prsthya 
Sadahas. The six Samans are based on the 
following verses rRathantara, SV. ii. 30, 31 ; 
Brhat, SV. ii. 169, 160 ; Vairupa, ii. 212, 
213; Vairaja, ii. 277-279; ^^-J^vara, ii. 
1151-3; Raivata, ii. 434-436. Cf.AB. iv. 
15, n. 1. 

2 I. e. without change of order according 


to Sayana; Haug treats it as merely 
meaning ‘ proceed with and takes dbhi 
nidadhaip. as ‘ lay down *. The point is 
as in n. 3. 

3 The second six months are intended to be 
a reverse of the first six. For the ship 
metaphor cf. AB. vi. 6. 6 ; (}B. iv. 2. 5. 
10 ; Levi, La doctrine da sacrifice^ p. 88. 

iv. 14. 1 RV. X. 120. For the year cf. Keith, 
JRAS. 1917, p. 137. 



[208 


iv, 14 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

He, who knows the descent and ascent * of the year, obtains in safety the 
other side of the year. The introductory Atiratra is the descent, the 
concluding (Atiratra) the ascent. In safety he attains the other side of 
the year who knows thus. He, who knows the expiration and the 
ending ® breath of the year, attains in safety the other side of the year. 
The introductory Atiratra- is the expiration, the concluding (Atiratra) the 
ending breath. In safety he reaches the other side of the year, who knows 
thus. 


ADHYAYA III 

The Sadahas and the Vimvant. 

iv. 15 (xviii. 1). They proceed with the Stomas, Jyotis, Go, and Ayus ; 
the Jyotis is this world, the Go the atmosphere, the Ayus yonder world. 
There is the same second set of three days ; there are three days, Jyotis, Go, 
and Ayus ; there are three. Go, Ajnis, and Jyotis. The Jyotis is this; world, 
the Jyotis is yonder world. These two Jyotis (days) look together on 
both sides ; thereby they proceed with this set of six days with a Jyotis 
on either side. In that they proceed with this set of six days with a Jyotis 
on either side, verily thus they continue to find support on both sides in these 
two worlds ; in this world and in that world, both. The Abhiplava Sadaha 
is a circling wheel of the gods. The Agnis^mas on the two sides of it are the 
felloes ; the four Ukthyas in the middle are the nave. He goes with it 
turning wherever he desires ; thus in safety he attains the other side of 
the year who knows thus. He, who knows the first set of six days, in 
.safety attains the other side of the year; (so) he who knows the second, 
he who knows the third, he who knows the fourth, he who knows the 
fifth.i 

iv. 16 (xviii. 2). They perform the first set of six days,^ there are six days ; 
the seasons are six ; verily thus by the seasons they obtain the year ; by the 
seasons they continue finding support in the year. They perform the second 
set of six days ; these are twelve days ; the months are twelve ; verily thus 
by months they obtain the year ; by months they continue finding support 
in the year. They perform the third set of six days; they are eighteen 
days ; these are twofold, one set of nine, one set of nine. There are nine 

2 Ava° and udrodhanam clearly have this ’ The Abhiplava Sadaha is dealt with in A^S. 

sense, from ru?i, not rudh, as Sayana and vii. 6-7 and the Prsthya in vii. 10-12 ; 

Hang. The contrast is as in. parastdt and viii. 1-4 ; in 95®* order is reversed, 

avastdt. v^^* x. 1-8. See also B 9 S. xvi, 

3 The vdCina here must be the apdno, but used 4, 6 ; Ap9S. xxi. 1-8. 

for udanlya as suggested by Sayana. iv. 16. ' See A 9 S. xi. 7 ; 99®* 



209] 


The Gavdm Ayana 


[ — iv. 17 


breaths, nine worlds of heaven ; verily thus they obtain the breaths and 
the worlds of heaven ; verily thus they continue finding support in the 
breaths and the worlds of heaven. They perform the fourth set of six 
days; these are twenty- four days; the half-months are twenty-four; 
verily thus by half-months they obtain the year; by half-months they 
continue finding support in the year. They perform the fifth set of six 
days ; they are thirty days ; the Viraj has thirty syllables ; proper food is 
the Viraj ; verily thus they continue producing the Viraj month by month. 
Desiring proper food they performed the sacrificial session.^ In that they 
continue producing the Viraj month by month, verily thus they continue 
winning proper food month by month, for the world and for that, for both. 

iv. 17 (xviii. 3). They proceed with the way of the cows;^ the Adityas are 
the cows ; verily thus they proceed with the way of the Adityas. The cows 
performed a sacrificial session seeking to win hoofs and horns ; in the tenth 
month their hoofs and horns came into being. They said ‘ That desire for 
which we have consecrated ourselves we have obtained ; let us cease.’ 
Those that ceased aie those possessed of horns. Those who performed, 
(thinking) ‘ We will complete the year they had only mock horns, these 
are the hornless ; but they produced ^ strength. Therefore they having made 
up all the seasons, then cease, for they produced strength. Dear to all are 
cows, beloved by all. Dear to all, Bbloved by all, does he become who 
knows thus. The Adityas and the Angirases contended for the world of 
heaven,® " We will go first, we ' ; the Adityas went first to the world of 
heaven, behind the Angirases by sixty years. The way of the Adityas is 
thus,^ an introductory Atiratra, the Caturvinja Ukthya, all the Abhiplava 
Sadahas, other Aksyant^ days; the way of the Angirases is thus, an 


2 Aaate would beem more natuiiJ, but tho 

imperfect may convey the view in the 
minds of those performing the Sattra 
when they undertook it 

1 For this see TS. vii. 6 . 1. 2 ; PB. iv. 1. 
Aufrecht considers that wa must be read 
as apparently by Sayana ; tho alternative 
is to read apaddJiatjd ^rngdni as one term 
as suggested by BR. or to pravartanta 
as «= ‘fell oK\ Cf. Keith, Taitthiya Sam- 
hitdj I. xcviii, xeix. Ldvi {La doctrine du 
sacn/ 2 ce, p. Ill) renders the TS. passage 
without commenting on the sense. 
asanvan is obvious (as in TS.) but needless 
as asunvan makes sense. 

3 Cf. 9B. xii. 2. 2. 9. 

* yathd vd is odd ; vd=^\ai has just before 
occurred, but yatkd seems needless and in 

27 [h.o.s. 25] 


clause 7 is not inserted, but it can easily 
bo taken in its usual sense. Sayana’s 
attempt to make it allude to the mode 
of tho Gavam Ayana is absurd. The 
Sattras are quite diflerent in A^S. xii. 
1 . 1 ; 99 s. xiii. 21 , 22 . 

® This word is doubtful. Aufrecht takes it as 
‘stattige umwandelbaro Tage ^ (— a/rsi- 
yanti), Sayana cites Baudhayana as 
restricting it to the Abhijit, Visuvant, 
Vi 9 vajit, the tenth day (oftheDvfida 9 aha), 
the Mahavrata and the concluding Ati- 
rfitra ; 9 ^^^^^ including in it all save 
the Sadahas, and Aupamanyava as in- 
cluding in it all save the Sadahas and 
the tenth day. Cf. Ap9S. xxiii. 9. 16 ; 
9 B. xii. 2. 3. 1 ; Eggeling, SBE. XLiv. 
155, 156 ; Weber, Ind, Stud, ix. 282. 



[210 


iv. 17 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

introductory Atiratra, the Caturvih 9 a Ukthya, all the Prsthya Sadahas, 
other Aksyant days. The Abhiplava Sadaha is the path that leads straight 
to the world of heaven ; again the Prsthya 8adaha is a great circuitous 
route to the world of heaven. , In that they proceed with both, and going 
bj^ both he comes to no ill, (it serves) to obtain both desires, that in the 
Abhiplava Sadaha and that in the Prsthya.® 

iv. 18 (xviii. 4). They perform the Ekavih 9 a day, the Visuvant,^ in the 
middle of the year; by the Ekavih^a.the gods raised up the sun to the 
world of heaven ; it is here the Ekavih^a ; below this Divakirtya are ten 
days, ten above ; in the middle is the Ekavih^a resting on both sides in 
the Viraj, for on both sides does he find support in the Viraj. Therefore 
he going between these worlds does not shake. The gods were afraid of 
this Aditya falling down from the world of heaven ; him with three worlds 
of heaven from below they propped up ; the three worlds of heaven are the 
Stomas. They were afraid of his falling away up; him with three worlds of 
heaven from above they propped up ; the three worlds of heaven are the 
Stomas. Thus below there are three Saptada^a (Stomas), three above; in the 
middle is the Ekavin 9 a on both sides supported by the Svara Samans, for 
he is supported on both sides by the Svara Samans.^ Therefore he going 
between these worlds does not shake. The gods were afraid of this Aditya 
falling from the world of heaven ; ^ him with the highest worlds of heaven 
they propped up from below ; the highest worlds of heaven are the Stomas. 
They were afraid of his falling away up ; him with the highest worlds of 
heaven they propped up from above ; the highest worlds of heaven are the 
Stomas. Thus there are three Saptada 9 a (Stomas) below, three above. 
Making them up by twos they are three Catustrin 9 as ; the Catustrin 9 a is 
the highest of the Stomas. Placed over these it gives heat, for he placed 
over these gives heat. He is higher than all this that has been and will 
be ; he shines over all this whatever there is here ; he is higher ; thus he 
becomes who knows thus higher than he than whom he desires to be 
higher. 

iv. 19 (xviii. 5). They perform the Svara Samans ; the Svara Samans are 
these worlds. They saved these worlds with the Svara Samans ; that is why 


« The Gavam Ayana has a mixture of four 
Abh^plavas and a Prsthya in the month ; 
see A 9 S. xi, 7. 1 scq. It is Prayanlya ; 
CaturviA 9 a ; 5 months of 4 Abhiplavas 
and 1 Prsthya l^adaha ; 3 Abliiplavas, 
1 Prsthya, Abhijit, 3 Svara Samans; Visu- 
vant ; 3 Svara Samans, Vi^vajit, 1 Prsthya, 
3 Abhiplavas ; 4 months of 1 Prsthya 
and 4 Abhiplavas ; 3 Abhiplavas, Go, Ayus, 


a I)a 9 aratra ; the MahS.vrata and Udaya- 
nlya, with variants. 

^ AB. iv. 18-22 and KB. xxv, 1-10 deal with 
Uie Visuvant and connected rites; see 
A9S. Yin. 5-7 ; 99 S xi. 13. 

2 For these as Saptada(;as see TB. i. 2. 2. 1, 
Cf. A 9 S. viii. 5. 10 seq. ; 99 S. xi. 11, 12. 

“ Cf. PB. iv. 6. 8 which has avapdddU 



211 ] 


The Ehavihga and the Svara Sdmans [ — iv. 20 

the Svara Samans have their name. In that they perform the Svara 
Samans, they give him a share in these worlds. The gods were afraid of the 
sinking down of these Saptada9as, ‘ The Stomas are alike and unprotected ; 
let them not sink down.’ They secured them with all the Stomas from 
below, with all the Prsthas from above ; in that the Abhijit with all the 
Stomas is below, the Vi9vajit with all the Prsthas above, thus they secure 
the Saptada9as on both sides for security and to prevent sinking down.^ 
The gods were afraid of this Aditya falling from the world of heaven, 
they fastened him up with five ropes ; the Divakirtya (Samans) are the 
ropes ; the Prstha is the Maha-Divakirtya,^ the Saman of the Brahmana- 
cchansin is the Vikarna,^ the Agnistoma Saman is the Bhasa,^ the 
Brhat and Rathantara are those of the Pavamanas ; thus they fasten up 
Aditya with five ropes, for support, to avoid falling down. When the sun 
has arisen, he should recite the morning litany, for all the day (rite) is to be 
performed during the day time. They should offer as the victim to Surya 
(an animal) without blemish and white, in addition to (the victim) for the 
pressing, for this day has Surya as its deity. He should recite twenty-one 
kindling verses,® for this day is openly the Ekavin9a. Having recited fifty- 
one or fifty-two ® he places a Nivid in the middle ; so many alfter he 
recites. Man has a hundred (years of) life, a hundred powers, and a hun- 
dred strengths; verily thus he confers upon him life, strength, and 
power. 

iv. 20 (xviii. 6). He mounts the difficult mounting ; the difficult mounting 
is the world of heaven ; verily thus he mounts the world of heaven who 
knows thus. As to its being the difficult mounting, he that gives heat 
yonder is hard to mount, and whoever goes there, in that he mounts the 
difficult mounting, verily tlius he mounts him. He mounts (with a verse ^) 
containing (the word) ‘ gander ‘ The gander seated in purity ’ ; he is the 
gander seated in purity. ‘The Vasu seated in the atmosphere' (he says) ; 
he is the Vasu seated in the atmosphere. ‘The Hotr seated at the altar' 
(he says) ; he is the Hotr seated at the altar. ‘ Tlie guest seated in the 
house ' (he says) ; he is the guest seated in the house. ‘ Seated among men ' 

1 TheVisuvantday isprocededby(l)theAbhi- the 8th or 9th verso ; see A^S. viii. 6. 13 

jit, (2) the Svara Samans, and followed with comm. 

by (1) Svara Samans, (2) the Vi9vajit. iv. 20. ^ KV. iv. 40. 5. Cf. KB. xxv, 7; Levi, 

* On RV. X. 170. 1. 3 ; SV. ii. 802-804 ; A^/S. La doctrine dn sacrificcj pp. 88, 89. For the 

viii. 6. 7, 8 ; contrast 95®* ^i* 1^. 24. mode of recitation see A9S. viii. 2. 13-16 ; 

3 On RV. vi. 8. 1-3 ; ArS. iii. 8-10. 6. 14, 16 ; it is first by Padas, then by 

* The same verses as in n. 3 are used according half- verses, then by three Padas, then by 

to Sayana and A9S. viii. 6. 22 ; 99®* *^* whole verse, and then in descending 

13. 28. order. Cf. 99S. xi. 14. 13 ; xii. 11. 12. 

” See A9S. viii. 6. 3 ; RV. iii. 27. 6-10. The recitation of the Tarksya takes place 

* I. e. RV. i. 31 is to be divided either after at the end of the Niskevalya. 



iv. 20 — The Soma Sacrifice [212 

(he says) ; he is seated among men. ‘ Seated in the best (abode) (he says) ; 
he is seated in the best (abode) ; the best of abodes is that in which seated 
he gives heat. ‘Seated in holy order' (he says); he is seated in truth. 

‘ Seated is the sky ’ (he says) ; he is seated in the sky ; the sky is that seat 
in which seated he gives heat. ‘ Bom of the waters ’ (he says) ; he is bom 
of the waters ; from the yvaters he rises in tlie morning, into the waters 
he enters at evening. ‘ Born of the cow ’ (he says) ; he is bom of the 
cow.‘ Bom of holy order ’ (he says) ; he is born of truth. ‘ Born of the 
mountain ’ (he says) ; he is bom of the mountain. ‘ Holy order ’ (he says) ; 
he is trath. He is all these things. In the metres this (verse) is 
most manifestly as it were a symbol of him. Therefore, whenever he 
performs the difficult mounting, should he mount with (the verse) containing 
(the word) ‘ gander ’. With the Tark.sya * (hymn) should he mount for one 
desiring the heaven. Tarksya aforetime made the journey when yonder 
the Gayatri in the form of an eagle brought the Soma. Thus, just as one 
makes one knowing the place a guide on a journey, so is it in that (he 
mounts) with the Tarksya : he who blows is Tark.sya ; he is the bearer to 
the world of heaven. ‘ This steed, god-strengthened ’ (he says) ; he is the 
steed, god-strengthened. ‘ Enduring, the bearer of the cars ' (he says) ; he 
bears across enduring, for he at once crosses these worlds. ‘ With chariot 
r im unharmed, the warrior, swift’ (he says); he is the one with chariot 
rim unharmed, the warrior, swift. ‘ For safety ’ (he says) ; he invokes 
safety. ‘Tarksya let us summon hither’ (he says); verily thus he 
summons him. With ‘ Invoking by sacrifice the favour as of Indra for 
safety ’ he invokes safety. ‘ Like a ship let us mount ’ (he says) ; verily 
thus he mounts it for the attainment, the winning, the arrival at the world 
of heaven. ‘ Like the two broad ones, wide, large, deep, may we not be 
harmed at your going and coming ’ (he says) ; verily thus he recites for 
these two, when going to and returning.® 

‘ He who at once with his glory over the five peoples 

Like Sorya with his light over the watera extondeth ’ 

(he says) ; openly he mentions the sun. 

‘ A thousandfold, a hundredfold bestowing, is his onset ; 

They cannot stay him like a young dart ’ 

(he says) ; verily thus he invokes a benediction for himself and the 
sacrificers. 


2 RV. X. 178: it has 3 versos; here cited in ® The root here in wesi/an explains 
full. xxxiv. 18, ml 1 or 10. 



213] The Durohana and the Tdrhsya [ — iv. 22 

iv, 21 (xviii. 7). Having uttered the call, he mounts the difficult mount- 
ing; thedifficultrnountingis the world of heaven; the call is speech ; speech 
is the holy power ; in that he calls, thus with the call as the holy power 
he mounts the world of heaven. He mounts by Padas first ; thus he obtains 
this world ; then by half-verses ; thus he obtains the atmosphere ; then by 
three Padas ; thus he obtains yonder world ; then with the whole (verse) ; 
thus he who gives heat here finds support in this (world). By three Padas 
he descends as one holding a branch;' thus he finds support in yonder 
world; by half- verses (he descends; thus he finds support) in the atmosphere; 
by Padas (he descends ; thus he finds support) in this world. Thus, having 
obtained the world of heaven, the sacrificers find support in this world. For 
those who desire one only, (the world of) heaven, he should mount in the 
forward direction only ; thej^ will conquer the world of heaven, but they 
will not have long to live in the world. Pairing hymns are recited, Tristubh 
and Jagati; cattle arc pairing; the metres are cattle; (verily they servo) to 
win cattle. 

iv. 22 (xviii. 8). The Visuvautislikeaman; the first half of the Visuvant 
is like the right half of a man ; the second half of the Visuvant is like ' 
the left half ; therefore they call it the latter. The Visuvant is tfie head 
of a man standing on the level ; man is composed of (two) sections ; thus 
there is seen in the middle of his head a suture as it were. They say 
* On the Visuvant alone should he perform (the recitations of) the day ; 
the Visuvant is the Ukthaof Ukthas ; (holding that) ‘‘ The Visuvant is that 
which has the Visuvant (Qastra) ” they become the head, they attain pre- 
eminence.’ That is not to be regarded. He should recite it only in the 
year ; verily thus they keep holding the seed for a year. Whatever seeds 
are born before the year, of five months or six months, these wither ; they 
do not profit by them ; those that are born in ten months or a year, by these 
they profit. Therefore should he recite it in].the year, for the year contains 
this day ; as the year they obtain this day. He smites away evil by the 
year, by the Visuvant ; from the limbs he drives away evil by the months, 
from the head by the Visuvant. He smites away evil by the year, by the 
Visuvant, who knows thus. As additional to (the victim) for the pressing, 
they should offer to Vijvakarman a bull of two colours, variegated on both 


1 Cf. PB. xviii. 10. 10 ; yatha ^dkhaydh ^dkhdm 
dtambham updvarohed evam etenemam lokam 
updvarohati pratisthdyai, 

iv. 22. ^ The lirst view, here rejected, must have 
held that the Visuvant rite might be per- 
formed always as a special rite on that day 
and not merely as part of a Sattra. The 
second view of the text appears to allow 


its use at a Sattra only (eva), the Visuvant 
having its full meaning only as the middle 
day of such a rite. So Sayana who, however, 
takes visuvdn visuidn Hi merely as saying 
that the tiUdmesasamkrdnti is thus called. 

2 Narayana on A 9 S. viii. 6. 4 makes this an 
additional, S&yana lias a substituted 
victim. 



[214 


iv. 22 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

sides, on the Mahavrata day. Indra having slain Vrtra became Vi^vakarman ; 
Prajapati having created offspring became Vi^vakarman; Vi9vakarman is the 
year ; verily thus Indra whose self it is, Prajapati, the year, Vi5vakarman, 
they obtain; verily thus in Indra whose self it is, Prajapati, the year, 
Vi9vakarinan, they find support at the end. He finds support who 
knows thus. 


ADHYAYA IV 

The Dvada^aha. 

iv. 23 (xix. 1). Prajapati felt desire ‘ May I bo propagated, may I become 
greater.’ He practised fervour; he, having practised fervour, saw the 
twelve-day (rite) in the limbs and the breaths of his self ; he meted it out 
from the limbs and the breaths of his self twelvefold ; he grasped it, and 
sacrificed with it. Then indeed he prospered himself, he was propagated 
with oftspring and cattle. He prospers himself, he is propagated with off- 
spring and cattle who knows thus. He felt desire, ‘ How can I now, having 
encircled the twelve-day (rite) with the Gayatri on all sides, prosper with all 
prosperity ? ’ It he encircled in front with brilliance, in the middle with 
the metres, at the last with the syllables ; having encircled the twelve-day 
(rite) with the Gayatri on all sides he prospers with all prosperity. With 
all prosperity he prospers, who knows thus. He who knows the Gayatri 
as possessed of wings, of eyes, of light, and ^ of brilliance, goes to the 
world of heaven with the Gayatri as possessed of wings, of eyes, of light, 
and of brilliance ; the twelve-day (rite) is the Gayatri as possessed of 
wings, of eyes, of light, and of brilliance. The two Atiratras on either 
side are the wings the two Agnistomas within are the two eyes; the 
eight Ukthyas in the middle are the body. With the Gayatri as possessed 
of wings, of eyes, of light, and of brilliance, he goes to the world of heaven, 
who knows thus. 

iv. 24 (xix. 2). The twelve-day (rite) consists of three sets of three 
days, the tenth day and two Atiratras.^ For twelve days is he conse- 
crated ; ^ verily through them he becomes fit for sacrifice. He performs 
Upasads for twelve nights; verily with them he shakes clear his body. 
Having pressed for twelve days continuously, having become born anew, 
having shaken clear his body, pure and purified, he goes to the gods who 


^ For the Dvada^alia see A^S. x, 6 ; 99®- 
For the beginning cf. TS. vii. 2. 9. 1. 

2 See A 9 S. X. 6 . 10 : aUrdtram agre Hhdgnistomam 
athdstd ukihydn athdgnistomam ath&tiratram, 
iv. 24. 1 A according to Sayana is used here 


either in tlie sense of exclusion or limit 
(jnarydda) ; it is accepted as exclusive 
by Detbriick, Altind, Synt. p. 452, n. 1. 

Cf. Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 442, n. 1. 



216] The Dvadagdha [ — iv. 26 

knows thus. The twelve-day (rite) is one of thirty-six days ; the Brhatl 
has thirty-six syllables; the twelve-day (rite) is the way of the Brhati; 
by means of the Brhati the gods attained these worlds. They attained 
this world with ten syllables, the atmosphere with ten, the sky with ten, 
the four quarters with four ; with two they found support in this world. 
He finds support who knows thus. They say ‘ Seeing that other metres 
arc greater and have more syllables, then why do they call it the 
Brhati ? ’ Since by it the gods attained these worlds. They attained this 
world with ten syllables, the atmosphere with ton, the .sky with ten, the 
four quarters with four; verily with two they found support in this 
world; therefore do they call it the Brhati. Ho attains whatever he 
desires who knows thus. 

iv. 25 (xix. 3). The twelve-day (rite) is a sacrifice of Prajapati; Prajapati 
at first sacrificed with this twelve-day (rite). He said to the seasons and 
to the months ‘ Make sacrifice for me with the twelve-day (rite).’ Having 
caused him to consecrate himself, having made him move where he could 
not depart, they said to him ‘ Give to us ; then shall we sacrifice for thee.’ 
To them he gave sap and strength ; sap is depo.sited in the seasons and 
in the months ; they made sacrifice for him when giving; therefore should 
sacrifice be made for one when giving; they made sacrifice for him 
when receiving ; therefore should sacrifice be made by one receiving. Both 
prosper, those who knowing thus sacrifice and make sacrifice. These 
seasons and months thought themselves heavy having received (gifts) at 
the twelve-day (rite); they said to Prajapati ‘Make sacrifice for us with 
the twelve-day rite.’ ‘Be it so’, he replied, ‘Do you consecrate your- 
selves.’ Those of the first half consecrated themselves first; they smote 
away evil; therefore they are the daylight cOS it were, for the daylight 
as it were are those who have smitten away evil. Those of the second 
half consecrated themselves next; they did not at' all smite away evil; 
therefore they are darkness as it were, for darkness as it were are those 
who have not smitten away evil. Therefore one who knows thus should 
ever seek to be first consecrated when men consecrate themselves. He 
smites away evil who knows thus. Prajapati as the year found support 
in the seasons and the months ; these seasons and months found support 
in Prajapati as the year ; these find support in one another. So he who 
sacrifices with the twelve-day (rite) finds support in the priest. There- 
fore they say ‘ No evil man should be sacrificed for with the twelve-day 
(rite), (thinking) “ Let not this one find support in me.” ’ The twelve-day 
(rite) is the oldest sacrifice, for the oldest of the gods it was who in 
the beginning sacrificed with it. The twelve-day (rite) is the best 
sacrifice, for it was the best of the gods who in the beginning sacrificed 



[216 


iv. 25 — ] 'the Soma Sacrifice 

with it. The oldest and the best should sacrifice; here there becomes 
a good season. No evil man should be sacrificed for with the twelve- 
day (rite), (thinking) ‘Let not this one find support in me.’ The gods 
did not admit the seniority and superiority of Indra ; he said to Brhaspati 
‘Make sacrifice for me with the twelve-day (rite).’ For him he made 
sacrifice ; then indeed did. the gods admit his seniority and superiority. His 
superiority and seniority they admit, and his pre-eminence his own (people) 
accord, who knows thus. The first set of three days is in ascending order, 
the middle transverse, the last in descending order.^ In that the first set 
of three days is in ascending order, therefore Agni here is kindled upwards, 
for his quarter is upwards ; in that the middle is transverse, therefore 
Vayu here blows transversely, the waters flow transversely, for his quarter 
is the transverse ; in that the last is in descending order, therefore yonder 
sun gives heat downward, it rains downward, and the constellations 
(shine) downward, for his region is downward. These worlds are in unison ; 
these sets of three days are in unison ; in unison for him these worlds shine 
with prosperity, who knows thus. 

iv. 26 (xix. 4). Consecration departed from the gods; it they sought to 
grasp with the two months of spring ; it they could not obtain with the 
two months of spring. It they sought to grasp with the two months of 
summer, of the rainy season, of autumn, of winter; it they could not 
obtain with the months of winter. It they sought to grasp with the two 
months of the cool season ; it they obtained with the two months of the 
cool season. He obtains whom he seeks to obtain, his enemy obtains him 
not, who knows thus. Therefore he to whom the consecration for the 
sacrificial season may condescend ^ should consecrate himself when these 
two months of the cool season have arrived. Obviously thus does he 
consecrate himself, when consecration has arrived ; manifestly he encircles 
consecration. Therefore in these months of the cool sea^son the cattle of 
the village and of the wild become thin and shaggy; verily thus they 
acquire the form of consecration. Before the consecration he offers a 
victim to Prajapati ; first he should recite seventeen kindling verses ; 
Prajapati is seventeenfold; (they serve) to obtain Prajapati. The Apris 
verses for it are by Jamadagni.^ They say ‘ Seeing that in the case of 
the other victims the Apris are according to the (ancestral) seer, then why 


^ The metres for the three pressings vary 
from (1) Gayatri, Tristiibh, and Jugati to 
(2) Jagatl, GayutrT, and Tristubh and (3} 
Triatubh, Jagatl, and Gayatri. 


iv. 2G. ^ The Dvrida 9 aha is here treated as u 
Sattra. 

* RV. X. 110. Cf. Max Muller, Anc, Sansk, Lit, 
p. 466 ; Weber, Ind, Siui. x. 88 seq, ; 
AgS. vii. 2. 6-8 ; ggS. v. 16.5,6. 



217 ] 


The Dvadcigdha [ — iw.27 

in this case are the verses by Jamadagni used by all?’ The verses by 
Jamadagni are of all forms, all perfect; the victim is of all forms, all 
perfect ; in that they are verses by Jamadagni (they serve) to secure the 
possession of all forms, all perfections. The cake offering for the victim 
is for Vayu. They say ‘ Seeing that the victim is for other deities also, 
then why is the cake offering for the victim performed for Vayu.’ ‘ The 
sacrifice is Prajapati, to prevent the exhaustion of the sacrifice ’ he should 
reply. In that it is for Vayu, thereby he does not depart from Prajapati, 
for Prajapati is Vayu. It is declared by the seer ^ ‘ Prajapati, the 
blowing.’ If it is a sacrificial session, they should offer after depositing 
the fires together, all should be consecrated, all should press. With 
spring he ends ; spring is strength ; verily thus he ends with sap and 
strength. 

iv. 27 (xix. 5). The metres desired one another’s abode; the Gayatrl 
desired the abode of the Tristubh and the Jagati, the Tristubh that of 
the Gayatri and the Jagati, and the Jagati that of the Gayatri and the 
Tristubh. Then indeed did Prajapati see this twelve-day (rite) . with 
the metres transposed; he grasped it and sacrificed with it. Thereby 
he made the metres attain all their desires. He attains all desires who 
knows thus. He transposes the metres to avoid exhaustion. Verily he 
transposes the metres. Just as in the world men go with relays of fresh 
horses or oxen, so with relays of fresh metres they go to the world of 
heaven, in that he transposes the metres. These two worlds were together ; 
they went apart ; no rain fell, there was no heat ; the five folks were not 
in harmony.^ The gods brought them together ; they uniting performed 
the divine marriage. By means of the Rathantara this (earth) quickens 
yonder (sky) ; by the Brhati yonder (sky) this (earth) ; by the Naudhasa ^ 
this quickens that; by the ^yaita that this. With smoke this quickens 
that ; with rain that this. This placed in that the place of sacrifice to the 
gods ; cattle that in this. In that this placed the place of sacrifice to the 
gods, in that there is dark as it were in the moon. Therefore on the 
waxing fortnights they sacrifice as they desire to win that.^ Yonder (sky) 
placed salt in the (earth) ; as to this Tura Kavaseya said ‘ Salt is nutriment, 
O my dear Janamejaya.’ ^ Therefore here also men considering a place 
for cattle ask ‘Are there salts there?’ for salt is nutriment. Yonder 


» RV. ix. 6. 9, 

) Of. PB. vii. 10. 1, and for the v^ha of the 
metres KB. xxvii. 1. 

^ Tliese are, according to S&yana, SV. ii. 299- 
301 ; ii. 163, 164. 

28 «] 


^ I. e. to see more distinctly as the moon 
waxes the black spot. 

* Ka S^yana takes as an interrogation, and is 
followed by Haug. 



Iv. 27 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [218 

world turned to this world ; then were sky and earth born ; neither from 
the atmosphere (comes) the sky,^ nor from the atmosphere earth. 

iv. 28 (xix. 6). In the beginning there were here the Brhat and the 
Batbantara ; they were speech and mind ; the Rathantara speech, the Brhat 
mind ; the Brhat as first born despised the Rathantara ; the Rathantara 
conceived and produced the Vairupa; having become two, the Rathantara 
and the Vairupa, they despised the Brhat. Then the Brhat conceived and 
produced the Vairaja ; having become two, the Brhat and the Vairaja, 
they despised the Rathantara and the Vairupa. Then the Rathantara 
conceived and produced the Qakvara: these having become three, the 
Rathantara and the Vairupa and the Qakvara, despised the Brhat and 
the Vairaja. The Brhat conceived and produced the Raivata. These three 
and those three were the Prsthas. The three metres were not enough for 
six Prsthas- The Gayatri conceived and produced the Anustubh; the 
Tristubh conceived and produced the Pankti; the Jagati conceived and 
produced the Atichandas. These three and those three others were the 
six metres ; the Prsthas were six ; thus they came into order. The sacrifice 
is in order; (all) is in order for that folk where one knowing thus this 
ordering of the metres and the Prsthas consecrates himself. 


ADHYAYA V 
The Pr§thya Sadaha. 

iv, 29 (xx. 1). Agni^ as deity bears the first day, the Trivrt Stoma, the 
Rathantara Saman, the Gayatri metre. With it according to the deity, the 
Stoma, the Stoan, the metre, he prospers who knows thus. That which 
has (the words) ‘ hither ’ and ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. That 
which contains (the word) ‘ yoke (the word) ‘ car (the word) ‘ swift (the 
word) ‘ drink ’, (the fact) that the deity is mentioned in the first Pada, that 
this world is referred to, that which is connected with the Rathantara, which 
is connected with the Gayatri, the future tense, these arc the symbols of 
the first day. ‘ Advancing forward up to the sacrifice ' is the Ajya * of the 
first day ; (the word) ‘ forward ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first day. 
‘0 Vayu, come hither, O lovely one' is the Praiiga^; (the word) ‘hither’ 

® dydvd is here probably merely « ‘ sky *, and Prsthya Sadaha. Cf. A^S. vii. 10-12 j 

not as usual ‘ sky and earth \ The use viii. 1-4 ; 95®* 

is natural, as it is merely an analysis of * RV. i. 74 ; A 9 S. vii. 10. 3 ; 95®* ^* 

dvdvdprthivi. 3 RV. i. 2 and 8 ; A 9 S. r. 10. 5 ; 99 S. vii. 

^ AB. iv. 29-v. 15 and KB. zxii and xxiii 10. 9. 

describe in detail the 9 A‘ 3 tras of the 



219] 


The Prsthya Sctdaha — First Day [ iv. 30 

on the first day is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Thee like a car forward ’ 
and ‘ This Soma juice, O bi'ight one, hath been pressed ’ are the strophe and 
antistrophe ^ of the Marutvatiya ; that which contains (the words) ‘ car ' 
and ‘ drink ' on the first day is the symbol of the first day. ‘ O Indra come 
nearer is the Pragatha ® invoking Indra ; in the first Pada the god is men- 
tioned, on the first day it is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Let Brahmanaspati 
move forward is (the Pragatha) to Brahmanaspati ® ; (the word) * forward ’ 
on the first day is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Agni the leader’, ‘ Thou, 
0 Soma, with inspiration and ‘ They swell the waters ’ are the inserted 
verses ; in the first Padas the deities are mentioned ; on the first day it is 
a symbol of the first day. ' Forward to Indra, the great ’ is the Marutvatiya 
Pragatha ® ; (the word) ^ forward ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first 
day. ‘ Let Indra come hither for lielp to us ’ is the hymn ^ ; (the word) 
* hither on the first day is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Towards thee, 
O hero, we utter praise ’ and ‘ Towards thee for the first drink ’ are the 
Rathantara as Prstha on the Rathantara day, the first day, it is a symbol 
of the first day. ‘ Since many a time he hath conquered, enduring ’ is the 
inserted verse 5 in ‘ Indra hath made good (a . . . uprah) his names as slayer 
of Vrtra (the word) ‘ hither (a) ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first 
day. ‘Drink of the pressed juice full of sap’ is the Pragatha of the 
Saman ; containing (the word) ‘ drink ’ on the first day it is a symbol of the 
first day. In ‘ This steed, god-strengthened ’ he recites the Tarksya (hymn) 
before the hymn; Tarksya is safe passage; (verily it serves) to secure 
safety. Verily he secures a safe journey, he attains the other side of the 
year who knows thus. 

iv. 30 (xx. 2). ‘ Hither to us, O Indra, hither to us, from afar, from near ’ 
is the hymn.^ (The word) ‘ hither ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first 
day. In the Niskevalya and Marutvatiya ((^astras) (the hymns) in which 
Nivids are inserted are contiguous. V amadeva saw those worlds ; to them he 
flew up with the Sampatas; because he flew up with the Sampatas,thatis why 
Sampatas have their name. In that he repeats the two Sampatas on the first 
day, (it is) for the attaining, the securing, the union with, the world of heaven. 


< RV. viii. 68. 1-3 and 2. ; A^S. v. 14. 4 ; 

95 s. vii. 19. 8. 

RV. viii. 63. 6 and 6 ; A^S. v. 14. 5 ; 9 CS. 
vii. 19. 10. 

« RV. i. 40. 3 and 4 ; A 9 S. v. 14. 6 ; 99 S. vii. 
19. 11. 

7 RV. iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; i. 64. 6 (already 
cited in AB. iii. 18) ; A 9 S. v. 14. 17. 

* RV. viii. 89. 8 and 4 ; A 9 S. v. 14, 18. 

RV. iv. 21 ; A9S. vii. 5. 18 ; 99 S. i. 2. 4. 


RV. vii. 32. 22 and 23 ; viii. 8. 7 and 8 ; 
A 9 S, v. 16. 2 as applied by vii. 6. 2 seq. ; 
99 s. vii. 20. 3. 

RV. X. 74. 6 (already cited in AB. iii. 22) ; 

A9S. V. 15. 21; 99s. vii. 20. 5. 

RV. vi. 46. 9 and 10 ; A 9 S. vii. 3. 19 ; 99 S. 
X. 4. 10. 

” RV. X. 178 (cited above in AB. iv. 20) ; 
A 9 S. vii. 1. 13. 

1 RV. iv. 20; A 9 S. vii. 5. 18; 998 . x. 2. 6. 



[220 


iv. 30—] The Somt Sacrifice 

‘ That of Savitr we choose ’ and ‘ To-day for us, O god Savitr ’are the strophe 
and antistrophe of the Vaifvadeva* ; on the Rathantara day, on the first day, 
(it is) a symbol of the first day. ‘ They yoke their mind, they also yoke their 
thoughts ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr* ; containing (the word) ‘yoke ’ (it is) on 
the first day a symbol of the first day. ‘ Forward sky and earth, increasing 
holy order, with the sacrifices ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth *• ; “ forward ” 
on the first day is a symtol of the first day. ‘ Here, here, in mind is your 
relationship, O heroes ’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ® ; (the words) ‘ hither 
and ‘ forward ’ are symbols of the first day ; ‘ if (the word) “ forward ” had 
been used throughout, the sacrificers would have gone out forward from 
fhia world ’ (they say). In that on the first day he recites as (hymn) to the 
Rbhus, ‘ Here, here, in mind is your relationship, O heroes ’, and ‘ here, 
here ’ is this world, verily thus he makes them remain in this world. ‘ The 
gods I invoke of great fame for safety ’ is (the hymn) to the All-gods ® ; in 
the first Pada the gods are mentioned ; on the fii-st day (this is) a symbol 
of the first day. A long journey are they about to go who perform the 
year (session) or the twelve-day (rite). In that he recites as (the hymn) to 
the All-gods on the first day ‘ The gods I invoke of great fame for safety 
(it serves) to secure safety. Verily thus he secures a safe passage ; in safety 
he attains the other side of the year who knows thus and those for whom 
one as Hoty knowing thus recites on the first day as (the hymn) to the 
All-gods ‘The gods I invoke of great fame for safety’. ‘To Vai^vanara, 
with broad radiance, bard ’ is the beginning of the Agnimamta in the first 
Pada the deity is mentioned ; on the first day (this is) a symbol of the first 
day. ‘Forward pressing, mighty, and resounding’ is (the hymn) to the 
Maruts * ; (the word) ‘ forward ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first 
day. ‘To Jatavedas let us' pour the Soma’, (this verse) to Jatavedas® he 
recites before the hymn. The verses to Jatavedas are a benediction; 
(verily it serves) to secure safety. Verily thus he secures a safe passage ; 
in safety he attains the other side of the year who knows thus. ‘ Forward 
the strong, new, hymn to Agni ’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; (the word) 
‘ forward ’ on the first day is a symbol of the first day. The Agnimamta 
is the same as in the Agnistoma ; through that which is performed the same 
in the sacrifice, offspring breathe together. Therefore the Agnimamta is 
the same. 

» RV. V. 82. 1-3 and 4-6 ; A^IS. v. 18. 6 ; 9(!S. * RV. x. 66 ; A^S. vii. 5. 23. 

viii. S. 8. " RV. iii. 8 ; A(?S. v. 20. 6 ; ggs. viii. 6. 2. 

3 RV. V. 8. 1 ; IgS. vii. 6. 23 ; ggS. r. 2. 7. ’ KV. i. 87 ; A^S. v. 20. 6 ; ggS. viii. 6. 4. 

* RV. i. 162 ; A^S. v. 18. 6 ; ggs. viii. 8. 11. » RV. i. 92. 1 ; AQS. vii. 1. 14. 

® RV. iii. 60 ; AgS. vii. 6. 28 (i« caiaaratf ) ; RV. i. 148 ; AgS. v. 20. 6; ggS. viii. 6. 6. 

ggs. X. 2. 7. 



[ — iv. il 


221] The Pr^thya Sadaha — Second Day 


iv. 81 (xx, 3), Indra as deity supports the second day, the Pahcada 9 a 
Stoma, the Brhat Saman, the Tristubh metre. With it according to the 
deity, the Stoma, the Saman, the metre, he prospers who knows thus. That 
which has not either ‘ hither ’ or ‘ forward ^ that which has (the word) ‘stand' 
is a symbol of the second day. That which contains (the word) ‘ upright 
(the word) ‘ towards ', (the word) ‘ between (the word) ‘ strong (the word) 

‘ grow (the fact) that in the middle Pada the deity is mentioned, that the 
atmosphere is referred to, that which is connected with the Brhat, that which 
is connected with the Tristubh, the present tense, these are the symbols of the 
second day. ‘ Agni we choose as envoy ' in the Ajya ^ of the second day ; the 
present tense on the second day is a symbol of the second day. ‘ O Vayu, thy 
thousands * is the Praiiga ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ grow ’ on the second 
day ^ in ‘ The Soma hath been pressed, O ye that make holy order to grow it 
is a symbol of the second day. ‘ Lord of all men ' and ‘ Indra is the Soma 
drinker alone ’ are the strophe and antistrophe of the Marutvatiya ^ ; as 
containing (the words) ‘grow* and ‘between* on the second day it is a symbol 
of the second day. ‘ 0 Indra, come nearer * is the normal Pragatha ; ‘ Arise 
up, O Brahmanaspati ' is that for Brahmanaspati ; as containing (the word) 

• upright * it is on the second day a symbol of the second day. ‘ Agni, the 
leader *, ‘ Thou, 0 Soma, with inspiration *, and ‘ They swell the waters * 
are the normal inserted verses.*^ ‘ Sing aloud to Indra ’ is the Marutvatiya 
Pragatha ® ; as containing (the word) ‘ grow * on the second day in ‘ Where- 
with men, making holy order to grow, produced tlie light*, it is a symbol of the 
second day. ‘ O Indra, lord of the Soma, drink this Soma * is the hymn ® ; 
as containing (the word) ‘ strong * on the second day in ‘ In unison with 
the Rudras, show thyself strong,* it is a symbol of the second day. ‘ Thee 
we invoke * and ‘ Do thou come to the worshipper * are the Brhat as 
Prstha ; on the Brhat day, the second day, (it is) a symbol of the second 
day, ‘ Since he hath conquered * is the normal inserted verse.^“ ‘ Both let 
him hear for us * is the Pragatha of the Saman ; as containing ‘ What here 
to-day and what was yesterday * on the Brhat day, the second day, (it is) 


1 RV. i. 12 ; A<?S. vii. 10. S ; ^igS. x. 3. 2. 

2 RV. ii. 41 ; A^S. vii. 6. 2 ; ggS. x. 3. 5. 

» RV. ii. 41. 4. 

* RV. viii, 68. 4-6 ; 2. 4-6. avUar is in viii. 2. 
5 ; vrdh in 68. 5 ; A^IS, vii. 6. 6 ; 95®. x 
3. 6 * 

® RV. viii. 53. 5 and 6 (already cited in AB. 
iv. 29). 

6 RV. i. 48. 1 and 2. 

^ RV. iii. 20. 4; i. 91. 2 ^ i. 64. 6 (already 
cited in AB. iii. 18) ; AgS. v. 14. 17. 


'' RV. viii. 98. 1 and 2 ; A9S. vii. 3. 2 ; 99S. 
X. IS. 10. 

RV. iii. 32 ; A9S. vii. 6. 4 ; 99S. x. 8. 
RV. iii. 32. 2. 

RV. iv. 46. 1 and 2; viii. 61. 7 and 8; 
A 9 S. V. 15. 3 ; 95®* vii. 20. 4. Probably as 
shown in iv. 29 (cf. v. 1, 4) by ratfiantaram 
the reading should bo hr hat prstham here 
.‘ind elsewhere, not as a eompouiid. 

1“ RV. X. 74, 6 (already cited in AB. iii. 22). 
RV. viii. 61. 1 and 2 ; A9S. vii. 3. 18 ; 99S. 
vii. 20. 7. 



iv. 31 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [222 

a symbol of the second day. ‘ This steed, god-strengthened * is the normal 
Tarksya (hymn). 

iv. 32 (xx, 4). ‘ Thy nearest, furthest help ' is the hymn as containing 
(the word) * strong ’ on the second day in ' Slay the strong ones, make them 
depart it is a symbol of the second day. 'Let every man of the god that 
Icadeth ‘ That desirable of Savitr ' and ' Lord of all, lord of the good ’ are the 
strophe and antistrophe of the Vaiyvadeva^; on the Brhat day, the second 
day, they are a symbol of the second day. ‘ Up the god Savitr with the 
golden ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ upright ’ on the 
second day it is a symbol of the second day. ‘ They, sky and earth, all 
weal producing ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth ^ ; as containing (the word) 

‘ between * on the second day in ‘ Between the two bowls of high birth he 
moveth it is a symbol of the second day. ' They have wrought the cai', 
well rounded, whose skill is known ’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ® ; as con- 
taining (the word) ' strong * on the second day in ' They have wrought the 
two bay steeds that draw Indra, with strong wealth \ it is a symbol of the 
second day. ‘ The charioteer of the sacrifice, the lord of the folk ’ is (the 
hymn) to the All-gods ; ® as containing (the word) ‘ strong ’ on the second 
day in 'The strong beacon, the holy one, hath attained the sky* it is 
a symbol of the second day. This hymn is by Qaryata. The Ahgirases 
were performing a sacrificial session for the world of heaven ; whenever 
they came to the second day they used to go wrong. Them Qaryata 
Mtoava made to recite this hymn on the second day; then indeed did 
they discern the sacrifice, the world of heaven. In that he recites the hymn 
on the second day, (it serves) to discern the sacrifice, to reveal the world of 
heaven. ‘ The might of the swift, strong, ruddy one * is the beginning of the 
Agnimaruta ; that which contains (the word) ‘ strong * on the second day 
is a symbol of the second day. ‘ To the strong host, the majestic, the wise * 
is (the hymn) to the Maruts * ; that which contains (the word) ‘ strong ’ on 
the second day is a symbol of the second day. ‘ To Jatavedas let us pour 
the Soma ’ is the normal verse to Jatavedas.® ‘ With the sacrifice make 
Jatavedas^ to grow * is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; that which contains 
(the word) ‘ grow * on the second day is a symbol of the second day. 

RV. X. 178 (already cited in AB. iv. 20) ; * RV. i. Ill ; A^S. v. 18. 5 ; gfS. viii. 3. 14. 

A^S. vii. 1. 13. _ 6 RV. x. 92; AfS. vii. 4. 12; x. 3. 14. 

1 RV. vi. 25; v. 3 is that cited below ; A 9 S. For ^iiryata see Vedic Indw^ ii. 376. 

vii. 6. 4 ; ^gs. x. 8. 9. ’ RV. vi. 8 ; Ags. vii. 4. 13 ; g^. x. 3. 16. 

* RV. V. 60. 1 and iii. 62. 10 and 11 ; v. 82. * RV. i. 64 ; AgS. vii. 4. 13 ; ggS. x. 3. 15. 

7-® ; Ags. vii. 6. 6 ; ggS. x. 3. 11-18. ® RV^i. 99. 1 (already cited in AB, iv, 30) ; 

3 RV. vi. 71. 1-3 ; AgS. vii. 4. 12 ; ggS. x. AgS. vii. 1. 14. 

RV. ii. 2 ; Ags. vii. 4. 13. 

^ RV. i. 160; Ags. vii. 4. 12; ggS. x. 3. 14. 



PAf^CIKA V 

The Soma Sacrifice { continued ). 

ADHYAYA I 

The Prsthya Sadaha {continued). 

The Third and Fourth Days. 

V. 1 (xxi. 1). The All-gods as deities support the third day, the Saptada9a 
Stoma, the Vairupa Saman, the Jagati metre. With it according to the 
deity, the Stoma, the Saman, the metre, he prospers who knows thus. That 
which has the same endings is a symbol of the third day ; that which con- 
tains (the word) ‘horse’, (the word) ‘end’, that which is repeated, that 
which is alliterated ; that which contains (the word) ‘ stay the word 
‘surpass’, (the word) ‘three’, that which is a symbol of the end, (the 
fact) that the deity is mentioned in the last Pada, that yonder world is 
referred to, that which is connected with the Virupa, that which is connected 
with the Jagati, the past tense, these are the symbols of the third day, 

‘ Yoke thou those best fitted to invoke the gods, thy steeds, O Agni, like 
a charioteer ’ is the Ajya ^ of the third day. By the third day the gods went 
to the world of heaven ; the Asuras and the Raksases sought to hinder them. 
They kept prospering (saying) ‘ Become misshapen, become misshapen ’ ; in 
that they kept prospering (saying) ‘ Become misshapen, become misshapen.’ 
the Vairupa Saman came into existence; that is why the Vairupa has its name 
(misshapen). They followed after them; they were united with them; them, 
having become horses, they smote away with their hoofs. In that, having 
become horses, they smote them away with their hoofs, that is why horses 
have their name. He attains whatever he desires who knows thus. There- 
fore a horse is the swiftest of animals ; therefore a horse strikes backwards 
with his foot. He smites away evil who knows thus. Therefore this Ajya 
contains (the word) * horse ’ ; on the third day it is a symbol of the third 
day. ‘O Vayu, come for enjoyment’, *0 Vayu, come from the sky, 
auspicious’, ‘With Indra Vayu, of these pressed draughts’, ‘Indra and 

‘ BV. viii. 76. Cf. KB. xxii. 8-6 for the third day. See A^JS. rii. 10. 4 ; 9^8. x. 4. 2. The 
derivation of the Vairupa is remarkable, but no other version is really possible. 



V. 1 — ] The Soma Sacrijice (224 

Varuna we’, ‘O Ajvinscome hither’, 'Come to that pressed with the stones’, 
‘ In unison with the All-gods ‘ Dear for us among the dear ’ is the PraOga * in 
Usnih verses ; that which has similar endings on the third day is a symbol 
of the third day. ‘ It for great gain ’ and ‘ Three Soma draughts for Indra ’ 
are the strophe and antistrophe of the Marutvatiya ® ; that which has 
alliteration and contains. (the word) ‘ three ’ on the third day is a symbol of 
the third day. ‘ O Indra come hither ’ is the normal Pragatha *. ‘ For- 

ward now Brahmanaspati ’ is (the Pragatha) to Brahmanaspati ® ; as con- 
taining an alliteration on the third day it is a symbol of the third day. 
‘ Ag ni, the leader’, ‘Thou, O Soma, with inspiration', ‘They swell the 
waters ’ are the normal inserted verses.® ‘ No one hath surpassed the chariot 
of Sudas, nor caused it to pause ’ is the Marutvatiya Pragatha ’ ; as con- 
taining (the word) ‘ surpass ’ at the third pressing, it is a symbol of the third 
pressing. ‘ Three friendships hath man’s worship ’ is the hymn * : that which 
contain.s (the word) ‘ three ’ on the third day is a symbol of the third day. 
‘ If a hundred skie.s, O Indra, were thine ’ and ‘ If, O Indra, as many as 
thou ’ are the Vaiiupa as Prstha ® ; on the Rathantara day, the third day, 
this is a symbol of the third day. ‘ Since he hath conquered ’ is the normal 
inserted verse.^^* In ‘ Towards thee, O hero, we utter praise he brings back 
the basis of the Rathantara,” for this day is connected with the Rathantara 
in its place. ‘ O Indra, threefold protection ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman ** ; 
,‘i8 containing (the word) ‘ three ’ on the third day it is a symbol of the 
third day. ‘ This steed, god-strengthened ’ is the normal Tarksya (hymn). 

V. 3 (xxi. 2). ‘ Who i.s born first the thinker ’ is the hymn * ; that which 
has the same endings on the third day is a symbol of the third day. It has 
(the words) ‘ He, O men ’; (the hymn) with (the words) ‘ He, O men ’ is the 
power of Indra ; on it being recited power enters Indra. As to this the 
Saman singers say ‘ On the third day those of many verses recite the power 
of Indra ’. It is by Grtsamada. By it Grtsamada went to the dear abode of 
Indra ; he conquered the highest world ; he goes to the dear abode 

ram which explains ratavat ; A^S. vii. 
3. 2. 

8 KV. V 29 ; A^S. vii. 7. 1 ; x. 4. 8. 

« RV. viii. 70. 5 .and 6 ; vii. 32. 18 and 19 ; 
A 9 S. vii. 10. 8. 

w RV. X. 74. 6 (already cited in AB. iii. 22) ; 

A9S. V. 16. 21 ; 99 s. vii. 20. 6. 

^ • RV. vii. 32. 22 and 23 ; see above AB. iv. 
29 

BV. vi. 46. 9 and 10 ; A^S. vii. 8. 19; 99S. 
X. 4. 10. 

>» BV. X. 170 ; A5S. vii. 1. 18. 

J BV. U. 12 ; AgS. vii. 7. 1 ; x. 4. 11. 


“ BV. v. 61. 3 witli viii. 26. 23-25 ; v. 61. 6-8 ; 
73. 1-8 ; 76. 7~9j 40. 1-3 ; vii. 34. 16-17 ; 
vi. 61. 10-12 ; A9S. vii. 10. 5 ; ggS. X. 
4. 6. 

3 BV. viii. 68. 7-9 ; 3. 7-‘J ; A 9 S. vii. 10. 8 ; 
99s. X. 4. 6. 

1 RV. viii. 63. 6 and 6 (already cited in AB. 
iv. 29). 

* RV. i. 40. 6 and 0 (already cited in AB. iv, 
29). 

« RV. iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; i. 64. 6 (already 
cited in AB. iii. 18 ; iv. 31). 

’ RV. vii. 32. 60. Here is found a form of 



225] 


[ — V. 3 


The Prsthya Sadaha — Third Day 

of Indra, he conquers the highest world who knows thus. ‘ That of Savitr 
we chose ’ and ‘ To-day for us, 0 god Savitr ' are the strophe and anti- 
strophe of the Vai 9 vadeva^ ; on the Rathantara day, on the third day, it is 
a symbol of the third day. ‘ That desirable greatness of Savitr the god ' 
is (the hymn) to Savitr * ; greatness is the end ; the third day is the end ; 
on the third day it is a symbol of the third day. ‘ With ghee sky and earth 
enveloped ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth ^ ; in ‘ Mixed with ghee, drop- 
ping ghee, ghee anointed ' there is repetition and alliteration ; on the 
third day this is a symbol of the third day. ' Bom without steed, without 
reins, worthy of praise ’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ® ; as containing (the 
word) ‘ three’ on the third day in ‘ The chariot of three wheels it is a symbol 
of the third day. ‘ Those who from afar would assume kinship ’ is (the 
hymn) to the All-gods ® ; from afar is the end ; the third day is the end ; 
on the third day it is a symbol of the end. That is by Gaya ; by it Gaya 
Plata went to the dear abode of the All-gods ; he conquered the highest 
world ; he goes to the dear abode of the All-gods ; he conquers the highest 
world who knows thus. ‘ To Vai 5 vanara, the praise, increasiiig holy order ’ 
is tlie beginning of the Agnimaruta ^ ; the praise is the end ; the third day 
is the end ; on the third day it is a symbol of the end. ‘ Pouring showers, 
the Maruts, of daring might ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ® with much to be 
recited ; what is much is the end ; the third day is the end ; on the third 
day it is a symbol of the third day. ‘ To Jatavedas let us pour the Soma ’ 
is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas.® ‘ Thou, O Agni, the first Angiras, the 
Rsi ’ is (the liymn) to Jatavedas ; that with the same beginning on the third 
<Iay is a symbol of the third day. In ‘ Thou ’ and ‘ Thou ’ he refers to the 
several sets of three days, for continuity. With sets of three days, un- 
interrupted and continuous, they proceed who proceed knowing this.^^ 

V. 3 (xxi. 3). The Stomas are fully obtained, the metres obtained on the 
third day; verily this only is left over, namely speech alone.^ This one element 
is three syllables ; speech is one element, element is three syllables ; this is 
the third set of three days, speech one, Go one, Dyo one. Therefore indeed 


- RV. V. 82. 1-3 and 4-6 ; see also AB. iv. 30. 
» RV. iv. 63. 1-3; AgS. vii. 7. 2. 

^ RV. vi. 70. 4-6 ; vii. 7. 2 
RV. iv. 36 ; A^S vii. 7. 2. 

RV. X. 63 ; AgS. vii. 7. 2. 

' RV. iii. 2 ; A^S. vii. 7. 2. 

« RV. ii. 34 ; A^S. vii. 7. 2. 

^ RV. i. 99. 1 ; above AB. iv. 30 ; A^S. vii. 1. 
14. 

10 RV. i. 31 ; A9S. vii. 7. 2. 

29 [u.O S. 2 b] 


11 ninrtta is clearly the alliteration produced 
by repetitions of one vowel or consonant ; 
Sayana shows this in his de6nition(though 
he gives another) as 8varavi(iesenak9aranam 
. . . dvartanena where vipMa 3 = especially, 
not ‘ with a difference ^ asWeber {Ind. Stud, 
ix. 285, 286) thinks, a view which does 
not suit RV. vi. 70. 

1 Cf. 5B. vi. 3. 1. 43. 



V. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [226 

speech supports the fourth day. In that on the fourth day they utter the 
sound they extend this syllable, they make it to grow, they magnify^ it, 
to support the fourth day. The sound o is food ; when the farmers run about 
shouting, thus does food come into existence ; in that on the fourth day they 
say the sound o, verily thus they produce food ; (it serves) for the produc- 
tion of food. Therefore the four days contain (the word) ‘ bom ‘ With the 
first four syllables should he say o* they say; cattle are four-footed ; (verily 
it serves) to win cattle. ‘ With three syllables should he say o * they say ; 
there are three threefold worlds ; (verily it serves) to conquer these worlds. 
‘ With one syllable should he say o * used Lahgalayana Brahman Maudgalya 
to say ; * Speech has one syllable ; he says o in truth now who says o with 
one syllable *. With two syllables should he say o, for a support ; man has 
two supports, cattle four feet ; verily thus he makes the sacrificer with two 
supports to find support in fourfooted cattle. Therefore should he say o 
with two syllables. At the beginning in the morning litany he says o ; by 
the mouth ofispring eat food ; at the beginning of proper food he places the 
sacrificer. In the middle in the Ajya ^astra he says o ; in the middle food 
quickens offspring ; verily thus in the middle of proper food he places the 
sacrificer. At the beginning^ in the midday he says o; by the mouth 
offspring eat food ; verily thus at the beginning of proper food he places 
the sacrificer. Thus on both sides he grasps the saying of o with the 
pressings, to grasp proper food. 

V. 4 (xxi. 4), Speech as deity supports the fourth day, the Ekavin^a Stoma, 
the Vairaja Saman, the Anustubh metre. With it according to the deity, 
the Stoma, the Saman, the metre he prospers who knows thus. That which 
has ‘hither* and ‘ forward’ is a symbol of the fourth day, for the fourth 
day is the first day over again. That which contains (the word) ‘ yoke *, 
(the word) ‘chariot*, (the word) ‘swift’, (the word) ‘drink*, (the fact) that the 
deity is mentioned in the first Pada, that this world is referred to, that which 
contains (the word) ‘ born *, (the word) ‘ call *, (the word) ‘ bright that which 
is the symbol of speech, that which is by Viinada, that which is sounded, 
that which has various metres, that which is deficient, redundant, that 
which is connected with the Vairaja, that whicli is connected with the 


^ The Nyuhklia is dealt with at length in 
A^S. vii. 11. It is in the morning litany 
to take place at the second syllable of 
each half verse and consists in altering tho 

vowel of that syllable to 0 3 cTo 0^0^ 0 3 

OOOOO 03 0 0 0, with accents on the 
three protracted 0 sounds. In the Ajya 
it is used in the third Padas, save in the 


last verse, A<JS. vii. 11.8. 

3 The monstrous pravibhdvayisanti was rea<i 
by Say ana whose explanation is prahhuU 
vam vibhutvam vaksarasya kartum ichantis 
and it is kept in the Anand. ed. 

* See A^S. vii. 11. 28. The Nyubkha is 
appropriate to the fourth day. Cf. KB. 
xxii. 7. 



227] 


[-V.4 


The Prsthya Sadaha — Fourth Day 

Anustubh, the future, that which is a symbol of the first day; these are the 
symbols of the fourth day. ‘With offerings for ourselves Agni*' is the 
Ajya of the fourth day ; it is by Vimada and is sounded^ ; being of the seer 
who is sounded, on the fourth day it is a symbol of the fourth day. It is 
of eight verses in Pankti ; the sacrifice is fivefold, cattle are fivefold ; 
(verily it serves) to win cattle. These are ten Jagati verses ; this set of 
three days has the Jagati at the morning pressing; thereby is there a 
symbol of the fourth day. They are fifteen Anustubhs, for the day is 
connected with the Anustubh ; thereby is there a symbol of the fourth day. 
They are twenty Gayatri verses, for this day is a repeated introduction ; 
thereby is there a symbol of the fourth day. This hymn, unsung, unrecited, 
unexhausted, is the sacrifice made manifest. In that this is the Ajya of the 
fourth day, verily thus from the sacrifice they extend the sacrifice ; verily 
thus they revert again to speech for continuity. With sets of three days, 
uninterrupted and continuous, they proceed who proceed knowing thus, 
‘ O Vayu, for thee the pure hath been prepared ‘ Enjoy the fresh offerings \ 
‘ O Vayu, a hundred bay steeds ‘ With Indra, O Vayu, of these pressed 
draughts ‘ 0 wise one, those of good insight ‘ Hither to us with all aids *. 
‘ This for you I have sent forth * Away the wicked foe and ‘ 0 best of 
mothers, O chief of streams \ arc the Praiiga ^ in Anustubhs ; (the words) 
‘ hither ‘ forward and ‘ pure ’ on the fourth day are symbols of the fourth 
day. ‘ Thee with the sacrifices we invoke * is the beginning ^ of the 
Marutvatiya ; as regards ‘ we invoke’, this day is to be secured as it were ; 
thereby is there a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ This Soma juice hath been 
pressed, 0 bright one ‘ O Indra, come nearer ’, ‘ Let Brahmanaspati move 
forward ’ ‘ Agni the leader ’ ‘ Thou, O Soma, with inspiration ’ ‘ They swell 
the waters ‘ Forward to Indra, the great ’ are the continuation (of the 
Marutvatiya) being the same as that of the first day ; on the fourth day 
this is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Hear our call, O Indra, harm us not * 
is the hymn ® ; as containing (the word) ‘ call ’ on the fourth day, it is a 
symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Indra with the Maruts, the bull,for joy ’ is the 

1 RV. X. 21 ; A^s. vii. 11. 14, 17 ; paring virihhiia in comm, on Pan. vii. 2. 

6,2. For this day see KB. xxii. 6-9, 18. Hang's view is < contained in an 

2 Doubtful in sense : Sayana connects, but no alliteration in it (yi vo made) \ 

doubt wrongly, with the Nyunkha, which ^ RV. iv 47. 1 ; 48. 1, 5 ; 47. 2-4 ; v. 66. 1-8 ; 
is indeed used in both x. 21 and 22 (see vii. 24. 4-^; vi. 44. 4-6 ; 51. 13-15 ; ii. 

below AB. V. 5), but also in the morning 41. 1-3; A^S. vii. 11. 22 ; 55®* 5. 4. 

litany, which is not by the sage Vimada. ^ RV. viii. 68, 10-12 ; A^S. vii. 11. 24 ; ffS, 
Possibly the reference is to the fact that x. 6. 6. 

both hymns begin with rough sounds ® RV. viii, 2. 1-3 ; 63. 6, 6 ; i. 40. 3, 4j iii. 20. 
(suvrktibhih And kuha^uta indra]!/), Weber 4; i. 91. 2 ; 64. 6; viii. 89.3; A 9 S. vii. 

(Ind, Stud, ix. 286) renders ' the seer 2. 24 ; 99^* 5. 6, 7 ; above AB. iv. 29. 

distinguished by ("Wohl-) Klang*, com- • RV. ii. 11 ; A 9 S. vii. 11. 25; 9?®* 



[228 


V. 4 — The Somet Sacrifice 

hymn^; as containing (the word) ‘call’ in* 'Dread, giver of strength, let 
118 call him ’ on the fourth day, it is a symbol of the fourth day. This is in 
Tristubh. With this (hymn), with its feet supported, he maintains the 
pressing; verily thereby it leaves not its place. ‘Him the cunning 
I call ' is the conclusion ® ; as containing (the word) call on the fourth day 
it is a symbol of the fourth day. These are Gayatri verses ; the Gayatri 
support the midday (pressing) of this set of three days; that metre 
is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore in the Gayatri verses he 
inserts a Nivid, ‘ Drink the Soma, O Indra, let it gladden thee ’ and 
‘ Hear the call of the much drinking stone’ are the Vairaja as Pratha^®; on the 
Brhat day, the fourth day, it is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ What he hath 
conquered ’ is the normal inserted verse In ‘ Thee we invoke ’ he makes 
to follow the basis of the Brhat, for the day is connected with the Brhat in 
place. ‘ Thou, O Indra, in the conflicts ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman ’ ’ ; 
as containing (the word) ‘ born ’ in ‘ slaying imprecation, cause of birth ’ on 
the fourth day, it is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘This steed, god- 
strengthened ’ is the normal Tarksya *■* (hymn). 

V, 5 (xxi. 5 ). ‘ Where is Indra famed, in what to-day 1 ’ is the hymn * by 
Vimada, which is sounded ; being of the seer who is sounded, on the fourth 
day it is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Of thee the roarer, the bull self- 
ruling ’ is the hymn ® ; as containing (the word) ‘ bom ’ on the fourth day in 
‘ Dread, deep, by birth, to the dread ’ it is a symbol of the fourth day. It 
is a Tristubh ; with it with its feet supported he maintains the pressing;* 
thereby it leaves not its place. ‘ Him of you ever enduring ’ is the con- 
clusion. ‘ Secured in all speech ’ (he says) ; this day is to be secured 
as it vrere ; thereby is there a symbol of the fourth day. They are 
Gayatri verses ; the Gayatri verses support the midday (pressing) of this 
set of three days: that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted; there- 
fore in the Gayatri verses, he inserts a Nivid. ‘ Let each man of the god 
that leadeth ’ ; ‘ That desirable of Savitr ’, and ‘ God of all, lord of the good ’ 
are the strophe and antistrophe of the Vai9vadeva^ ; on the Brhat <lay, the 
fourth day, it is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Let the god, Savitr, with 
fair jewels come hither ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr ' ; (the word) ‘ hither ’ on the 
fourth day is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Forward the sky and earth 

’ BV. iii. 47 ; A9S. vii. 11. 26 ; 99S. x. 6. 8. RV. viii. 99. 6 ; A^S. vii. 8. 19. 

» RV. iiL 47. 6. “ RV. x. 178 ; A^S. vii. 1. 18. 

» RV. viii. 76, 18 ; A^S. viii. 8. 2 ; 998. x. ' BV. x. 22 ; A^JS. vii. 11. 28; 99S. x. 6. 20. 

6. 8. * RV. iii. 46 ; A9S. vii. 11. 28 ; 99S. x. 6. 20. 

>» RV. vii. 22. 1-8 and 4-6 ; A9S. vii. 11. 27 ; • RV. viii. 92. 7-9; A9S.viii.8. 2 ; 99S.X.6. 20. 

998. X. 6. 9. ‘ RV. V. 60. 1 ; iii. 62. 10, 11 ; v. 82. 7-9 ; sec 

** RV. X. 74. 6 ; see above AB. iv. 29, above AB. iv. 82. 

RV. vi. 46. 1 and 2 ; see AB. iv. 81. ® RV. vii. 46 ; A^S. viii. 8. 4 ; x. 5, 23. 



[— V. 6 


229] The Pr^thya Sadaha — Fourth Day 

with sacrifices, with homage ' is (the hymn) to sky and earth ® ; (the word) 
‘ forward * on the fourth day is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Forward to 
the Rbhus like a messenger shall I speed my speech * is (the hymn) to 
the Rbhus ^ ; (the words) * forward * and ‘ Shall I speed my speech ’ are 
symbols of the fourth day. ‘ Forward the pure, the divine, hymn ’ is (the 
hymn) to the All-gods * ; (the words) ‘ forward * and ‘ pure * on the fourth 
day are symbols of the fourth day. These are in varied metres, there are 
verses of two Padas, there are verses of four Padas ; thereby is there a 
symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Let us enjoy the loving kindness of Vai 5 vanara’ 
is the beginning of the Agnimaruta ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ born ’ in 
‘ Born hence * on the fourth day it is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Who 
are these heroes revealed, of one home 1 ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; as 
containing (the word) ‘ birth ’ in ‘ No man knoweth their place of birth 
on the fourth day it is a symbol of the fourth day. These are in varied 
metres ; there are verses of two Padas, there are verses of four Padas ; 
thereby is there a symbol of the fourth day. ' To Jatavedas let us pour the 
Soma’ is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas*^. ‘Agni men with devotion 
from the fire sticks ’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; as containing (the word) 
‘ born ’ in ‘ By movements of the hands have made to be born ’ on the fourth 
day it is a symbol of the fourth day. These are in different metres ; there 
are Viraj verses, there are Tristubh verses ; thereby is there a symbol of 
the fourth day. 


ADHYAYA II 

The Prsihya Sadaha {contmued). 

The Fifth and Sixth Days. 

v. 6 (xxii. 1). The cow as deity supports the fifth day, the Trinava Stoma, 
the Qakvara Saman, the Pankti metre. With it according to the deity, 
the Stoma, the Saman, the metre, he prospers who knows thus. That 
which has not (the words) ‘ hither ’ and ‘ forward ’, that which has (the 
word) ‘ stand ’, is a symbol of the fifth day, for the fifth day is a repetition 
of the second day. That which contains (the word) ‘ upright (the word) 
‘ to (the word) ‘ between ’, (the word) ‘ strong ’, (the word) ‘ grow (the 
fact) that the deity is mentioned in the middle Pada, (the fact) that the 
atmosphere is referred to, that which contains (the word), ‘ milk *, (the word) 

6 RV. vii. 53 ; A^S. viii. 8. 4 ; <?9S. x. 5. 23. RV. vii. 56 ; A^S. viii, 8. 4 ; 99S. x. 5. 24. 

7 RV. iv. 88 ; A^S. viii. 8. 4 ; 99S. x. 5. 28. RV. i. 99. 1 ; A^S. vii. 1. 14. 

* RV. vii. 34 ; A9S. viii. 8. 4 ; 99S. x. 5. 23. »» rv. vii. 1 ; AiJS. viii. 8. 4 ; 99S. differs. 

® RV. i. 98 : A^S. viii. 8. 4 ; differs. 



[230 


V. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

‘ udder (the word) ‘ cow (the word) ‘ dappled (the word) * be drunk that 
which is a symbol of cattle, that which has an addition, — for cattle are as 
it were of varied size — that which is connected with the Jagati — for cattle 
are connected with the Jagati — , that which is connected with the Brhat — 
for cattle are connected with the Brhat — , that which is connected with 
the Pahkti — for cattle are connected with the number five — , that which is 
desirable — for cattle are desirable, that which contains (the word) ‘ obla- 
tion ' — for cattle are the oblation — , that which contains (the word) ‘ form ’ 
— for cattle are form — , that which is connected with the Qakvara, that 
which is connected with the Pankti, the present tense, that which is a 
symbol of the second day ; these are symbols of the fifth day. ‘ This guest 
of yours waking at dawn ’ is the Ajya^ of the fifth day; it is in Jagati, 
contains an addition, is a symbol of cattle and so on the fifth day it is a 
symbol of the fifth day. ‘ Hither to us the sacrifice, touching the sky *, 

‘ Hither to us, O Vayu, to the great rite ‘ With the chariot of broad 
radiance ‘ The many, sun-eyed ‘ These morning offerings you’, ‘ Drink the 
pressed draught, rich in sap ‘ Each god for grace and ‘ A great speech dost 
thou sing ’ are the Praiiga ^ in Brhati ; on the fifth day it is a symbol of the 
fifth day. ‘ When with the folk of the five peoples ’ is the beginning of the 
Marutvatiya ^ ; (the word) ‘ of the five peoples ’ on the fifth day is a symbol 
of the fifth day. ‘ Indra is the Soma drinker alone ‘ O Indra, come near ’, 
' Rise up, O Brahmanaspati, ^ Agni the leader’, ‘ Thou, O Soma, with inspira- 
tion’, ‘They swell the waters’, and ‘Sing aloud to Indra ’ are the continuation 
being the same as that of the second day ; on the fifth day it is a symbol of 
tl\e fifth day. ‘ Thou art the helper of him who presseth, who plucketh the 
grass ’ is the hymn ; as containing (the word) ‘ be drunk ’, and being in the 
Pankti metre, and of five Padas, on the fifth day, it is a symbol of the fifth 
day. ‘ Thus in the Soma, in the drink’ is the hymn as containing (the word) 
‘ be drunk ’ and being in the Pankti metre and of five Padas, on the fifth 
day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ O Indra, drink ; for thee is it pressed 
to be drunk ’ is the hymn containing (the word) ‘ be drunk ’ and in the 
Tristubh metre ; with it with its feet supported he maintains the pressing ; 
thereby it departs not from its abode. ‘ O Indra with the Maruts, O 
bounteous one ’ is the conclusion It has neither (the word) ‘ hither ’ nor 

‘ RV. vi. 15 ; A^S. vii. 12. 6 ; x. 6. 2. 91. 2 ; 6 ; viii. 89. 1 ; A^S. vii. 12. 9 ; 

Cf. KB. xxiii. 1. AB. iv. 29 ; 99®* ^* ^ differs. 

^ RV. viii. 101. 9, 10 ; 46. 25 ; iv. 46. 5, 6, 7; vii. ® RV. viii. 36 ; AgS. vii. 12. 9 ; 99S. x. 6. 9. 

66. 10-12 ; 74. 1-3 ; viii. 8. 1-3 ; 27. 13-15 ; ® RV. i. 80 ; AgS. vii. 12. 9 ; 99S. x. 6. 9. 

vii. 96. 1-3 ; A 9 S. vii. 12. 7 ; 99 S. x. 6. 6. ’ RV. vi. 40 ; AgS. vii. 12. 9 ; 99 S. differs. 

^ RV. viii. 68. 7 ; A 9 S. vii. 12. 9 ; 99 S. x. 6. 8. » RV. viii. 76. 7-9 ; igS. viii. 8. 2 ; 99 S. x. 

* RV. viii. 2. 4 ; 58. 5 ; i. 40. 1 ; iii. 20. 1 ; i. 8. 6. 



231] The Pr^thya Sadaha — Fifth Day [ — ^v. 8 

(the word) ‘ forward ’ ; on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. 
They are Gayatr! verses ; Gayatrl verses support the midday (pressing) of 
this set of three days ; that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; 
therefore in the Gayatri verses he inserts a N^ivid. 

V. 7 (xxii. 2). Here they chant the Mahanamni verses ^ to the Qakvara 
Saman ; on the Bathantara day, the fifth day, it is a symbol of the fifth 
day. By them Indra fashioned himself as great ; therefore are they called 
Mahanamnis ; moreover these worlds are the Mahanamnis and these are 
great. Having created these worlds Prajapati had all power whatever 
there is here. In that having created these worlds Prajapati had all power 
whatever there is here, therefore they become the Qakvari verses ; that is 
why the ^akvaris have the name (powerful). Beyond the boundary he 
created them ; so that he created them beyond the boundary, they became 
the Simas ; that is why the Simas have their name. ‘ Of the sweet thus 
diffused’, ‘To our pressed drink with the dappled steeds’, and ‘ Indra all made 
grow ’ are the antistrophe ® ; as containing (the words) ‘ strong ’, ‘ dappled ’ 
‘be drunk’ and ‘grow’ on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. 
‘ What he hath won ’ is the normal inserted verse ®. In ‘ Towards thee. 
O hero, we utter praise ’ he makes to follow the basis * of the Bathantara ; 
for this day is connected with the Bathantara in place. ‘ Not then any of 
thy worshippers ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman ; * as having an addition it is 
on the fifth day a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ This steed, god strengthened ’ 
is the normal Tarksya ® (hymn). 

v. 8 (xxii. 3). ‘ Thou hast furthered our prayer in the overcoming of 
Vrtra’ is the hymn'; asbeinginthePanktimetreandhavingfivePadasonthe 
fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ Indra hath u^axed for the drink ’ is 
the hymn * ; as containing (the word) ‘ be drunk ’ and as being in the Pankti 
metre and having five Padas on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. 
‘ Ever for all men are thy drinkings ’ is the hymn,® containing (the word) 
' be drunk ’ and in Tristubh metre ; with it with its feet supported he main- 
tains the pressing ; thereby it departs not from its place. ‘ Him Indra we 
strengthen ’ is the conclusion ' ; as being a symbol of cattle in ‘ May he 
become a strong bull ’ on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. 


’ Cp. above AB. iv. 4 ; KB. xxiii. 2. The 
mode of using the verses in the case of 
the Prstha Stotra being in the ^^kvara 
is given in A^S. vii. 12. 10-14 ; 99 S. x. 
6. 10-13. 

« RV. i. 84. 10 ; viii. 98. 31 j i. 111. 1 ; A^S. 
vii. 12. 16. 95®* <iiffers here and in the 
rest. 

’ RV. X. 74. 6 ; see AB. iv. 29. 


* RV. vii. 32. 22, 23 ; see AB. iv. 29. 

® RV. vii. 32. 1 and 2 ; A 9 S. vii. 3. 19. 
c RV. X. 178 ; A 9 S. vii. 1. 13. 

* V. 8. RV. viii. 37; A 9 S. vii. 12. 16. Cf. 

KB. xxiii. 8. 

2 RV. i. 8. 1 ; Ags. vii. 12. 16. 

» RV. Vi. 86 . 1 ; A 9 S. vii. 12. 16. 

« RV. viii. 98. 7-9 ; A 9 S. viii. 8. 2 ; 99 S. x. 
6. 16. 



V. 8 — J 


The Soma Sacrijice 


[232 

These are Gayatri verses ; Gayatri verses support the midday (pressing) of 
this set of three days ; that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; 
therefore he inserts a Nivid in the Gayatri verses. ‘ That of Savitr we 
choose/ and ‘ To-day for us, 0 god Savitr * are the strophe and antistrophe ’ 
of the Vai 5 vadeva ; on the Rathantara day, the fifth day, it is a symbol of 
the fifth day. ‘ Up the' god Savitr of the home ' is (the hymn) to Savitr^ ; 
in ‘ May he instigate much that is desirable to the generous one ’ the desir- 
able is a symbol of cattle ; on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. 
‘ The great ones, sky and earth, here the oldest * is (the hymn) to sky 
and earth ; in ‘ Roaring, the bull ’ there is a symbol of cattle ; on the fifth 
day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘To us Rbhus, Vibhvan, Vaja, Indra’ is (the 
hymn) to the Rbhus ® ; cattle are Vaja (strength) ; as being a symbol of cattle 
on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ^ I praise the man, of good 
vows, with a new song ' is (the hymn) to the All-gods ® ; as having an addi- 
tion and being a symbol of cattle on the fiftli day it is a symbol of the fifth 
day. ‘ The swelling oblation, unaging, in the finding of light ’ is the 
beginning of the Agnimaruta ; as containing (the word) ‘ oblation ’ on the 
fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ Even to the wise let it be 
a wondrous thing ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; as containing (the word) 
‘ wonder* on the fifth day it is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘To Jatavedas 
let us pour the Soma ’ is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas.'^ ‘ Agni is the Hotr, 
the householder, the king ’ is (the hymn) to J atavedas ; as containing an 
addition and being a symbol of cattle on the fifth da 3 % it is a symbol of the 
fifth day. 

V. 9 (xxii. 4). The sixtli day is a field of the gods ; those who approach the 
sixth day approach a field of the gods. ‘ The gods dwell not in one another’s 
houses, nor a season in the house of a season * they say. Therefore in due 
order the priests perform the sacrifice to the seasons, not handing them over 
(to others). Thus they arrange in order the seasons according to the season, 
and place in order communities.^ They say ‘ No directions should be given 
with the Rtupraisas, nor should the vasat call be said wdth the Rtupraisas. 
The Rtupraisas are speech ; on the sixth day speech is made up.’ If they 


® RV. V. 82. 1-3 and 4-6 ; see AB. iv. 30. 

RV. vi. 71. 4-6 ; A^S. viii. 8. 6 ; 99S. x. 6. 
18. 

7 RV. iv. 56. 1-4 ; A^S. viii. 8. 6 ; ggS. x. 6. 

18. 

8 RV. iv. 34 ; A9S. viii. 8. 6 ; 99S. x. 6. 18. 

'• RV. vi. 49 (^v. 8 is specially referred to); 

A9S. viii. 8, 6 ; 99s. X. 6. 18 differs. 

10 RV. X. 88 ; A9S. viii. 8. 6 ; 99S. x. 6. 19. 
RV. vi. 66 ; A9S. viii. 8. 6 ; 99S. x. 6. 19. 


« RV. i. 99. 1 ; A9S. vii. 1. 14. 

« RV. vi. 15. 13-15 ; A9S. viii. 8. 6 ; 99S. x. 
6. 19. 

' The point is that in this case the Adhvaryu 
and the Yajamana repeat their own 
Yajyas and do not leave that function to 
the Hotr as in the normal sacrifice to 
the season.**. GB. xi. 10 and 11 follow 
AB. v. 9-12. 4. 



233] The Pr§thya Sadciha — Sixth Day [ — v. 12 

were to give directions with the Rtuprai^s, if they were to say mimt with 
the Rtupraii^, verily thus they would go to speech when made up, weary, 
with galled shoulders, groaning under the yoke. But if they were not to 
give directions with them, if they were not to say vcmit with them, they 
would depart from the norm of the sacrifice, from the sacrifice, from breath, 
from Prajapati, from cattle they would go away. Therefore directions 
should be given only after that which contains a Rc, and the vusat call said 
only after that which contains a Rc ; then they do not go to speech when 
made up, weary, with galled shoulders, groaning under the yoke, nor do 
they depart from the norm of the sacrifice, nor from the sacrifice, breath, 
Prajapati, cattle do they go away.^ 

V. 10 (xxii. 5). In the first two pressings he inserts (verses) by Parucchepa^ 
before the offering verses for the Prasthita libations ; the metre of the Paru- 
cchepa (verses) is the mounting ; by it Indra mounted the seven worlds of 
heaven ; he mounts the seven worlds of heaven, who knows thus. They say 
' Seeing that (verses) of five Padas are a symbol of the fifth day, and (verses) 
of six Padas of the sixth, then why are (verses) of seven Padas recited on 
the sixth day ? ' By six Padas they make up the sixth day, cutting off as 
it were the seventh day ; that they keep grasping by tffe seventh Pada. 
Verily thus they approach speech again, for continuity. With sets of three 
days, uninterrupted and continuous, they proceed who proceed knowing thus. 

V. 11 (xxii. 6). The gods and the Asuras were in conflict over these worlds. 
The gods by the sixth day repelled the Asuras from these worlds ; taking 
all the wealth that was within reach, they cast ^ it into the sea. Following 
up they rescued by this metre the wealth within reach ; in that this Pada 
is a repeated Pada, it is a hook to fasten on. He secures the wealth of him 
who hates him, he repels him from all these worlds who knows thus. 

V. 12 (xxii. 7). The sky as deity supports the sixth day, the Trayastriii^a 
Stoma, the Raivata Saman, the Atichandas metre. With it according to 
the deity, the Stoma, the Saman, the metre, he prospers who knows thus. 
That which has the same endings is a symbol of the sixth day, for the sixth 
day is a repetition of the third day. That which contains (the word) 


* Here the point is that the normal rule of 
Praisa and Yajya in Praisa form with 
vatat call is to be observed, subject to 
the concluding of either with a Rc, 
the verses being given by S&yana as RV. 
ii. 36 and 37. See A^S. viii. 1. 6-8 who 
prescribes hotd yaktat + Praisa + + hotar 

yaja for the Praii^ and ye yajdmahe 
+ y^'y^ + Rc + vowiajffor the Yajya. Cf. 

X. 7. 8. rgma must be interpreted in 

30 [b. 0.8. Jfl] 


the light of A^S. and not as ^ beginning 
with a Rc.* 

' For them see A^S. viii. 2. 2 and 4. The 
verses are RV. i. 139. 1-11 ; 130. 2-10. 
Cf. KB. xxiii. 4 and 6 ; 99^* 

See also Vait, xxxi. 27 ; GB. xi. 10. 

^ V. 1 1. The passive praxtpxjania is an odd use, 
which, however, can hardly reasonably 
be corrected. 



[234 


V. 12 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

‘ horse *, (the word) ‘ end that which is repeated, that which is alliterated, 
that which contains (the word) ‘ stay that which contains (the word) 
' surround that which contains (the word) ‘ three that which is a symbol 
of the end, (the fact) that the deity is mentioned in the last Pada, (the fact) 
that yonder world is referred to, that which is connected with Parucchepa, 
that which has seven Padas, the Nara5ah8a, the Nabhanedistha, the 
Raivata, the Atichandas metre, the past tense, that which is a symbol of 
the third day ; these are the symbols of the sixth day. ‘ He is born in the 
ordinance of Manu ’ is the Ajya ^ of the sixth day ; as being by Parucchepa, 
in Atichandas metre, and of seven Padas, on the sixth day it is a symbol of 
the sixth day. ‘ Come to our strewn grass for enjoyment,’ ' Let the chariot 
with the steeds bear you hither for aid,’ ‘ We have pressed with the stones ; 

0 come ye ’ ; ‘You pious men with praises, O A9vins,’ ‘ Thou hast revealed 

the mighty, O Indra,’ ‘ O strong Indra,’ ‘ Be it so ; let it be heard,’ 
‘ Hearken to us, O Agni ; thou art praised,’ ‘ The eleven gods in the 
sky,’ and ‘ She gave the impetuous one, canceller of debts ’ are the 
Praiiga ; as being by Parucchepa, in Atichandas metre, and of 
seven Padas, on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ He 
first of the great ’ is the beginning of the Marutvatiya ^ ; the great is the 
end ; the sixth day is the end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth 
day. ‘ Three Soma draughts for Indra,’ ‘ O Indra, come near,’ ‘ Forward now 
Brahmanaspati,’ ‘Agni the leader,’ ‘Thou, O Soma, with inspiration,’ ‘ They 
swell the waters,’ ‘ No one the chariot of Sudas ’ are the continuation"^, being 
the same as that of the third day ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the 
sixth day. ‘ The chariot which thou, O Indra, for the winning of the offer- 
ing ’ is the hymn ; as being by Parucchepa, in Atichandas metre, and of 
seven Padas, on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ The strong 
with the strong in one dwelling ’ is (the hymn ^') ; as having the same end- 
ings on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ O Indra with the 
Maruts here drink the Soma’ is the hymn^; ‘With them let him drink, 
the destroyer of Vrtra’ (he says) ; the destroyer is the end ; the sixth day 
is the end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. It is in 

1 RV. i. 128. Cf. KB. xxiii. 6 ; A^S. viii. 1. * RV. viii. 2. 7-9 ; 53. 5 and 6 ; i. 40. 5 and 0 ; 

9 ; X, 8. 1. iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; 64. 6 ; viii. 32. 10 ; 

2 RV. i. 135. 1-3; 4-6; 135. 4-6; 137. 1-3; A^S. viii. 1. 14; see AB. v. 1. 

139. 4-6; 133. 6, 7 ; 139. 6, 1, 7, 11 ; vi. ® RV. i. 127 ; AgS. viii. 1. 14. 

61. 1-3 ; A^S. viii. 1. 12. ® RV. i. 100 : the refrain is Marutvdnno bhavaiu 

3 RV, viii. 63. 1-3 ; Sayana says that the Indra uii ; A^S. viii. 1. 14. 

argument is either that mahdndm ends RV. iii. 51. 7 : v. 9 contains the citation, 
the Pada or that a groat thing has It is noteworthy that this is not a hymn 

nothing after it. Haug suggests that in the Samhitdj but begins at iii. 51. 7. 

mahdntam as the strong base is the ex- A^S. viii. 1. 14 calls it tisraJ} ; 99®* ^* 

plauation ; but this is needless. 8 a irca. This use of sukta is not rare. 



[— V. n 


236 ] The Prsthya Sadaha — Sixth Day 

Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he maintains the pressing ; thereby 
it departs not from its place. ‘ This is he by whom this ’ is the conclusion® ; 
‘ sky was won with the Maruts’ aid * (he says) ; won is the end ; the sixth 
day is the end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the end. These are 
Gayatri verses ; Gayatri verses support the midday (pressing) of this set of 
three days ; that metre is a support, in which a Nivid is inserted ; 
therefore he inserts a Nivid in the Gayatri verses. ‘ Rich be ours in joint 
carouse ’ and ‘ Rich the praise of the rich ’ are the Raivata as Prstha ® ; on 
the Brhat day, the sixth day, it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ What he 
hath won * is the normal inserted verse.^‘‘ In ' Thee we invoke ’ he makes to 
follow the basis of the Brhat, for this day is connected with the Brhat in 
place. ‘ Indra for divine service ’ is the Pragatha of the Stoan ; as con- 
taining alliteration on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ This 
steed, god strengthened ’ is the normal Tarksya (hymn). 

V. 13 (xxii. 8). ‘ 0 Indra, come to us from afar’ is the hymn ^ ; as being 
by Parucchepa, in the Atichandas metre, and of seven Padas, on the sixth 
day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ The greatnesses of the great one ’ is 
the hymn ^ ; as having the same endings on the sixth day it is a symbol of 
the sixth day. ‘ Thou hast become the one lord of wealth ’ is the hymn ^ ; 
‘ Stand on thy dread chariot, O thou of impetuous manhood ’ (he says) ; 
standing is the end ; the sixth day is the end ; on the sixth day it is 
a symbol of the end. It is in Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he main- 
tains the pressing ; thereby it departs not from its place. ‘ To our pressed 
drank with the steeds ’ is the conclusion ^ ; as having the same endings on 
the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. These are Gayatri verses ; 
Gayatri verses support the midday (pressing) of this set of three days ; that 
metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore he inserts 
a Nivid in the Gayatri verses. ‘ To the god Savitr in the bowls ’ is the 
beginning of the Vai 9 vadeva^; as being in the Atichandas metre, on 
the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ That desirable of Savitr ’ 
(he says ® ) ; ^ The evening hath come ’ is the antistrophe ^ ; what has gone is 
the end ; the sixth day is the end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the 


« RV. X. 65. 4-6 ; A^S. viii. 8. 2 ; 99S.X. 6. 9. 
^ RV. i.30. 13-16 ; viii. 2. 13-15 ; A9S.viii. 1. 16. 
10 RV. X. 74. 6 ; see AB. iv. 29. 

RV. vi. 46. 1 and 2 ; see AB. iv. 31. 
w RV.viii. 3. 6 and 6 ; A 9 S. vii. 3. 19 ; 99 S. x. 

6. 18 (fourth day : here, x. 8. 8, it differs). 
« RV. X. 178 ; A9S. vii. 1. 13. 

1 RV. i. 130 ; A 9 S. viii. 1. 17 ; 99 S. x. 8. 9. 
Cf. KB. xxiii. 7. 8. 

RV. ii. 15 ; A 9 S. viii. 1. 17 ; 99 S. x. 8. 9. 


3 RV. vi. 31. V. 5 is referred to ; A 9 S. viii. 
1. 17; 95^* day; here it 

differs). 

< RV. viii. 93. 31-33; A 9 S. viii. 8. 2; 99 S. 
X. 8. 9. 

^ See above AB. i. 19 ; A 9 S. viii. 1. 18. 

^ RV. iii. 62. 10 and 11 ; these form the 
strophe with the preceding verse ; see 
A9S. vjii. 1. 18; cf. 99 S. x. 8. 11-13. 
Cited in A 9 S. viii. 1. 18. 



V. 13 — ] 


The Soma Sacrijice 


[236 


end. ^ Up the god Savitr for instigation ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr * ; ‘ Forever 
he hath stood, the bearer intent on his work ’ (he says) ; standing is the end ; 
the sixth day is the end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. 

* Which is the first, which is the latter of these two ? ’ is (a hymn) to sky and 
earth ^ ; as liaving the same endings on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth 
day. ‘ Why hath the belst, why liath the youngest come to us ? ' and ‘ To our 
sacrifice, O Vajas, O Rbhuksans * are (a hymn to the Rbhus and one con- 
nected with Nara 9 ansa ; as having (the word) ‘ three ’ on the sixth day it is 
a symbol of the sixth day. ‘ This dread thing he of glad speech ’ and ‘ Those 
who through the sacrifice are endowed with the fee’ are the Vai 5 vadeva.^^ 

v. 14 (xxii. 9). He recites the Nabhanedistha ^ ; Nabhanedistha Manava 
when he was performing his studentship, his brothers deprived of any share 
(in his father’s property). Having returned he said to them ‘ What have you 
allotted to me ? ’ ‘ This judgement giver, the decider ’ they replied. There- 
fore now here the sons call the father ‘ The judgement giver, the decider.’ He 
having gone to his father said * O father, they have allotted thee to me.’ 
To liim said his father, ' Do not care for that, O my boy. These Angirases 
arc performing a sacrificial session for the world of heaven ; they fall into 
confusion whenever they reach the sixth day ; make them recite these tw^o 
hymns on the sixth daj' ; when they go to the world of heaven they w ill 
bestow on thee the thousand which is the gift at the session.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (he 
said); he went to them (saying) ‘Accept the Manava, O wise ones 2’. 
They replied to him, ‘ What dost thou desire wdien thou sayest this ‘ J^et 
me reveal to you the sixtli day,’ lie replied, ‘ And when ye go to the heaven, 
do you give me the thousand w^hich is the gift at the session.’ * Be it so’ 
(they said). Them he made to recite these two hymns on the sixth day ; 
then indeed did they discern the sacrifice, the world of heaven. In that 
he recites these tw^o hymns on the sixth day, (it is) to discern the 
sacrifice, to reveal the wrorld of heaven. To him as they w^ent to 
heaven they said ‘This thousand is for thee, O Brahman.’ As he was 
gathering it together, a man in black garments, coming from the north^ 
said to him ‘ Mine is this ; mine is what is left on the place (of sacri- 
fice).’ He said ‘To me have they given it.’ He replied ‘Then let us 
question thy father.’ He went to his father, to him his father said ‘ Did not 

* RV. ii. 88 ; A^S. viii. 8. 18 ; 99^- x. 8. 11. 61 and 62 are the Nabhanedistha. Cf. 

9 RV. i. 185 ; 99 S. x. 8. 14 ; A 9 S. vii. 7. 8. below AB. vi. 27 ; A 9 S. viii. 1. 20-24 ; 

It* RV. i. 161. 1-13; iv. 87. 1-4; see A 9 S. 99S. x. 8. 14. 

viii. 8. 6; 95®- ^idrd^ansa7n in * This is taken verbally from RV. x. 62, not 

S^yana's view means * in which heroes as suggested by Geldner vice versa ; see 

are praised’, but cf. ZDMG. liv. 49 -57. Oldenberg, J^eda-Nolen, ii. 269, whose 

RV. X. 61 and 62. See AB. v. 14. reconstruction of the legend is given, 

' Cf. l^S. iii. i. 9. 4. The two hymns RV. x. ibid. li. 261, 262. 



237 ] The Story of Nahhunedi^tha [ — v, 15 

they give it to thee, 0 son ? ' ‘ They did give it/ he replied, ‘ but a man in 
black garments came from the north upon me and (saying) “Mine is 
this ; mine is what is left on the place (of sacrifice) ” has taken it away. 
To him said his father, ‘ His it is, O my boy ; but he will give it to thee/ 
Returning he said ‘ Thine is this, O blessed one, so my father tells me 
He replied ‘ I give it to thee who hast spoken the truth.’ Therefore by one 
who knows thus should truth alone be spoken. The Nabhanedistha is 
a speech to win a thousand j a thousand comes to him, with the sixth day 
he discerns the world of heaven, who knows thus. 

V. 15 (xxii. 10). These they call accompaniments ; the Nabhanedistha, 
the Valakhilya,^ the Vrsakapi,* and the Evayamarut '' (hymns). Them he 
should recite together. Whichever of them he should omit, that of the 
saci'ificer he would omit. If the Nabhanedistha, he would omit his seed : of 
the Valakhilyas he would omit his breaths; if the Vi'sakapi, he would omit 
his body ; of the Evayamarut, he would remove him from support, both 
divine and human. With the Nabhanedistha he poured seed ; that he dis- 
criminated by the Valakhilyas : with (the hymn of) Sukirti Kaksivata ^ he 
made (it) leave the womb (saying) ‘ That we may rejoice in thy broad pro- 
tection, 0 Indra.’ Therefore the embiyo, being larger, yet does not harm 
the womb which is smaller ; for it is made proper by the holy power. By 
means of the Evayamarut he produces motion ; by it set in motion all 
whatever there is here moves, ‘ The dark ^lay and the bright day is the 
beginning of the Agniinaruta ® ; in ‘ day and day ’ is there repetition and 
alliteration; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘Of the 
sweet juice, the Marut name, O holy ones * is (the hymn) to the Maruts ® 
wherein is much to be uttered ; much is the end ; the sixth day is the 
end ; on the sixth day it is a symbol of the end. ‘ To Jatavedas let us pour 
the Soma ’ is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas.' ‘ He born of old with 
strength ’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas® ; as having the same endings on the 
sixth day it is a symbol of the sixth day. ‘They supported/ ‘They 
supported/ he recites ; he fears the slipping down of the end. Just as a man 
ties the end, twining it again and again intertwining it, or as one sticks in 
a peg at the end to keep (a skin) taut, so is it in that he recites ‘ They sup- 
ported ‘ They supported for continuity. With sets of three days, un- 
interrupted and continuous, they proceed, who proceed knowing thus.^ 

1 RV. viii. 49-59. See below AB. vi. 28. ’ RV. i. 99. 1 j AgS. vii. 1. 14. 

RV. X. 86. See below AB. vi. 29. * RV. i. 96 : dharayan is the refrain in d of 

3 RV. V. 87. See below AB. vi. 30 and 31. each verse ; AgS. viii. 8. 9 ; wrongly 

< RV. X. 131. See below AB. vi. 29. attributed in the Vedic Concoidance. 

® RV. VI. 9. 1-8 ; A9S. viii. 8. 9 ; 99 S. x. 8. ® This chapter appears to require the Hotr 

15 which differs for the rest. himself to perform all those recitations 

« RV. vii. 67 ; A^S. viii. 8. 9. contrary to the view in vi that the 



V. 16—] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


[238 


ADHYAYA III 

The Chandomas. 

V. 16 (xxiii. 1). That which has (the words) ‘hither’ and ‘forward’ is 
a symbol of the seventh day, for the seventh day is a repetition of the first 
day. That which contains (the word) ‘yoke’, (the word) ‘chariot’, (the 
word) ‘swift’, (the word) ‘drink’, (the fact), that the deity is mentioned 
in the first Pada, (the fact) that this world is referred to, that which contains 
(the word) ‘ born ’, that which has no express mention (of the deity), the 
future tense, that which is a symbol of the first day ; these are the symbols 
of the seventh day. ‘ From the ocean the aroma of sweetness hath arisen ’ 
is the Ajya ^ of the seventh day ; as not containing any express mention of 
the deity, on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. The ocean 
is speech ; speech wastes not away, the ocean wastes not away. In that 
this is the Ajya of the seventh day, verily thus from the sacrifice they 
extend the sacrifice ; verily thus they again approach speech for continuity. 
With sets of three days, uninterrupted and continuous, they proceed who 
proceed knowing thus. The Stomas are obtained, the metres are obtained 
on the seventh day. Just as they smear with butter again the portions cut 
off to refresh them, so here they perform again the Stomas and the metres 
to refresh them, in that this is the Ajya of the seventh day. It is in 
Tristubh ; this set of three days has the Tristubh at the morning pressing. 
‘ O Vayu, drinker of the pure, come hither to us/ ‘ With which thou dost 
come forward to the bounteous one,’ ‘ To our sacrifice hither with hundreds 
of steeds,’ ‘ The lively pressor at the sacrifices hath arisen forward,’ ‘ The 
draughts delighting Indra,’ ‘ Thy hundred steeds, thy thousand,’ ‘ When 
forward, 0 Mitra and Varuna, for you they struggle/ ‘ Hither, O Nasatyas, 
with chariot rich in cattle,’ ‘ Come hither to us, O god, O impetuous one/ 
‘ Forward to you in the sacrifices the pious have sung,’ and ‘ Forward she 
hasteneth with her nourishing stream’ are the Praiiga.^ (The words) 
‘ hither ’ and ‘ forward ’ on the seventh day are symbols of the seventh day. 
It is in Tristubh ; this set of three days has the Tristubh at the morning 
pressing. ‘ Thee like a car for aid,’ ‘ This Soma juice hath been pressed, 


Valakhilyas, the Vrsakapi and the Evaya- 
marut fell normally to the Hotrakas. 
See however vi. 21, whence ^ans seems 
to have a looser sense than merely recite 
as it covers_paJtsai/ant. 

^ RV. iv. 59 ; AgS. viii. 9. 2 ; cf. (}(}S. x. 9 


which differs considerably ; see KB. 
xxvi. 7, 8 ; B^S. xvi. 6 ; A^S. xxi. 8. 11, 
12 . 

* RV. vii. 92. 1, 3, 6, 2, 4 ; 91. 6 ; vi. 67. 9-11 ; 
vii. 72. 1-3 ; 30. 1-3 ; 43. 1-3 ; 99. 1-3 ; 
A9S. viii. 9. 2. 



The Ghandomas 


[ — V. 16 


239 ] 


O bright one/ ‘ O Indra come near/ ‘ Let Brahmanaspati move forward/ 
‘Agni, the leader/ ‘Thou, O Soma, with inspiration,’ ‘They swell the 
waters/ and ‘ Forward to Indra, the great * are the continuation,^ being the 
same as that of the first day ; on the seventh day it is a symbol of the 
seventh day. ‘ With what array, of one age, of one home ’ is the hymn ; ^ 
as containing (the word) ‘ born ’ in ‘ Neither he that is being born nor he 
that is born shall attain ’ on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh 
day. It is the ‘ With what array (hymn) ; the ‘ With what array ’ hymn is 
one producing agreement and continuing (life). By it Indra and Agastya 
and the Maruts came to agreement ; thus, in that he recites the ‘ With that 
array’ (hymn), (it serves) to produce agreement. It is also life-giving; 
therefore for him who is dear to him he should perform the ‘ With what 
array ’ hymn. It is in Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he maintains 
the pressing ; thereby it departs not from its place. ‘ That ram that winneth 
the light I glorify ’ is the hymn ; ^ as containing (the word) ‘ chariot ’ in 
‘ Like a strong steed the chariot hastening at the call ’ on the seventh day 
it is a symbol of the seventh day, It is in Jagati; Jagati verses support 
the midday (pressing) of this set of three days ; that metre is a support in 
which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore he inserts a Nivid in the Jagati verses. 
Pairing hymns are recited, in Tristubh and Jagati; cattle are a pairing; 
the Ghandomas are cattle ; (they serve) to win cattle, ‘ Thee we invoke ’, 
and ‘ Do thou come to the worshipper ’, are the Brhat as Prstha ® on the 
seventh day ; that is what belongs to the sixth day ; the Kathantara is the 
Vairupa, the Brhat the Vairaja ; the Rathantara the Qakvara, the Brhat 
the Raivata; in that there is the Brhat as Prstha, verily thus with the 
Brhat they support the Brhat, to avoid cleaving the Stomas. If it were to 
be the Rathantara, there would be a cleavage (of the Stomas). Therefore 
the Brhat only is to be used. ‘ What he hath won ’ is the normal inserted 
verse.*^ In ‘ Towards thee, O hero, we utter praise ’ he makes to follow the 
basis of the Rathantara,^ for this day is connected with the Rathantara in 
place. ‘ Drink of the pressed draught rich in sap ’ is the Pragatha® of the 
Saman ; as containing (the word) ‘ drink ’ on the seventh day it is a symbol 
of the seventh day. ‘ This steed, god strengthened ’ is the normal Tarksya 
(hymn). 


3 RV. viii. 68. 1-3 ; 2. 1-3 ; 63. 6, 6 ; i. 40. 3, 
4 ; iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; 64. 6 ; viii. 89. 3 ; 
see AB. iv. 29. 

^ RV. i. 166 : V. 9 is cited ; A 9 S. viii. 6. 6 ; 
99 s* X* For the legend cf. Sieg, 

Sagenstoffe des ligveda^ pp. 116 seq. ; v. 
Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, pp. 91 
seq., 102 soq. ; Hertel, VOJ. xviii. 153 ; 


Oldenberg, ^gveda-Noten, i. 170. 

5 RV. i. 52 ; A 9 S. viii. 6. 6 ; 99 S. x. 9. 12. 

® RV. vi. 46. 1, 2 ; viii. 61. 7, 8 ; see AB. iv. 
31. 

7 RV. X. 74. 6; see AB. iv. 29. 

» RV. vii. 32. 22, 23 ; see AB. iv. 29. 

» RV. vii. 3. 1, 2 ; see AB. iv. 29. 

*0 RV. X. 178 ; A9S. vii. 1. 13. 



[240 


V, 17 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

V. 17 (xxiii. 2). ‘ I shall proclaim the mighty deeds of Indra ’ is the hymn ; * 
the word ‘ forward ’ (in ‘ pinclaim ’) on the seventh day is a symbol of the 
seventh day. It is in Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he maintains 
the pressing; thereby it departs not from its place. ‘Towards the ram, 
much invoked, worthy of praise ’ is the hymn ; ® ‘ towards ’ is equivalent to 
‘ forward ' ; on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. It is in 
Jagati; Jagati verses support the midday (pressing) of the set of three 
days; that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted; therefore he 
inserts a Nivid in the Jagati verses. Pairing hymns are recited in Tristubh 
and in Jagati ; cattle are a pairing, the Chandomas cattle ; (they serve) to 
win cattle. ‘ That of Savitr we choose,’ and ‘ To-day, for us, O god Savitr ’ are 
the strophe and antistrophe of the Vai 9 vadeva on the Rathantara day, 
the seventh day, it is a symbol of the seventh day. ‘ Towards thee, O god 
Savitr’ is (the triplet) to Savitr.* ‘Towards’ is equivalent to ‘forward’; 
on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. ‘ Let them come 
forward with weal for the sacrifice’ is (the triplet) to sky and earth;® 
‘ forward ’ on the seventh day is a .symbol of the seventh day. ‘ This to 
the race divine ’ is (the triplet) to the Rbhus ; * as containing (the word) 
‘ born ’ on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. He recites 
(the verses) of two Padas,’ ‘ Come hither with thy beauty ’ ; man has two 
feet, cattle four feet ; the Chandomas are cattle ; (verily they serve) to win 
cattle ; in that he recites (verses) of two Padas, verily thus he makes the 
sacrificer with two feet find support in four-footed cattle. ‘ Hither to our 
service, the songs, O Agni ’ is the (hymn) to the All-gods ; ® ‘ hither ’ on the 
seventh day is a symbol of the seventh day. These are Gayatri verses ; 
this set of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. ‘ Vai^vanara 
hath produced ’ is the beginning of the Agnimaruta ; ® as having (the word) 
‘ bom ’ on the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. ‘ Forward to 
you, the Tristubh, food ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; ‘ forward ’ on the 

seventh day is a symbol of the seventh day. ‘ To Jatavedas let us pour the 
Soma’ is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas.” ‘ Your envoy, with all know- 
ledge' is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; *** as not having the deity mentioned on 
the seventh day it is a symbol of the seventh day. These are Gayatri 
verses ; this set of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. 

> RV. i. 82; A9S. viii. 6. 12 ; iiol in 99s. ’ RV. x. 172;_A9S. viii. 9. 6 ; 99a x. 9. 16. 

Cf. KB. xxvi. 9, 10. • RV. i. 14 ; A9a viii. 9. 6. 

s RV. i. 61 ; A9S. viii. 6. 12 ; 99S. x. 9. 13. » See A9S. ii. 16. 2 ; A9S. viii. 9. 7. Cf. 

» RV. V. 82. 1-S ; 4-6 ; see AB. iv. 29. 99S. x. 9. 17 ; 10. 8. 

‘ RV. i. 24. 3-5 ; A9a viii. 9. 6. '* RV. viii. 7 ; A9S. viii. 9. 7 ; 99S. x. 9. 17. 

‘ RV. ii. 91. 19-21 ; A9S. viii. 9. 6 ; 99S. x. “ RV. i. 99. 1 ; A9a vii. 1. 14. 

9. 16. ■* RV. iv. 8 ; A9a viii. 9. 7. 

« RV.i.20.1-3; A9S.viii. 9. 6 ; 99S.X.9. 16. 



241] 


[ — V. 18 


The Ghandomas — Eighth Day 

V. 18 (xxiii. 3). That ^ which has not (the words) ' hither ’ and ‘ forward 
that which has (the word) ' stand is the symbol of the eighth day, for the 
eighth day is a repetition of the second day. That which contains (the 
word) * upright (the word) ‘ to (the word) ‘ between (the word) ‘ strong *, 
(the word) ‘ grow (the fact) that the deity is mentioned in the middle Pada, 
(the fact) that the atmosphere is referred to, that which has Agni twice, 
that which contains (the word) ‘great*, that which contains a double 
invocation, that which contains (the word) ‘ again \ the present tense, that 
which is a symbol of the second day ; these are the symbols of the eighth 
«lay. ‘Agni for you the god in union with the flames* is the Ajya^ of the 
eighth day ; as containing Agni twice, on the eighth day it is a symbol of 
the eighth day. It is in Tristubh ; this set of three days has the Tristubh 
at the morning pressing. ‘Were not they who were made great with 
homage ?,* ‘ Those rich of food, wealth gathering, the wise one,* ‘ The dawns 
with fair days, spotless have dawned,* ‘ Guardians infallible, eager envoys,’ 
‘ So far as the power of the body, so far as the might,’ ‘ To you two at the 
rising of the sun with hymns,* ‘ The cow milking the desire of the ancient 
one,* ‘To our prayers come, O Indra, knowing,* ‘Agni, upright, hath 
established the favour of the bright one’ and ‘May Sarasvati for us 
rejoicing* are the Praiiga;^ as containing (the words) ‘ to ‘ between *, an 
invocation of two deities and ‘ upright ’ on the eighth day it is a symbol of 
the eighth day. It is in Tristubh ; this set of three days has the Tristubh 
metre at the morning pressing, ‘ Lord of every man,’ ‘ Indra is the Soma 
drinker only,* ‘ O Indra, come near,* ‘ Rise up, O Bralimanaspati,* ‘ Agni, the 
leader,* ‘Thou, O Soma, with inspiration,’ ‘They swell the waters,* and 
‘ Sing aloud to Indra * are the continuation * being the same as that of the 
second day ; on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ I praise 
groat Indra in whom all ’ is the hymn ; ® as containing (the word) ‘ great ’ 
on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ Even from great, 
O Indra, these that approach ’ is the hymn ; ^ as containing (the word) 
‘ great * on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eightli day. ‘ Drink the 
Soma, towards which, 0 dread one, thou hast penetrated ’ is the hymn ; as 
containing (the word) ‘ great *, in ‘ The cattle stall, being greatly lauded, 
O Indra ’ on the eighth day, it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ Great is 

’ For the eightli or second Chandoma see * RV. viii. 68. 6 ; 2. 4 ; 33. 5, 6 ; i. 40. 1, 2 ; 

KB. xxvi. 11-13. iii, 20. 4 ; i. 41. 2 ; 64. 6 ; viii. 87. 1 

^ RV. vii. 3 ; A^S. viii. 10. 1 ; 99^. x. 8. 1. and 2. 

It differs in detail throughout. ® RV. iii. 19 ; A^S. viii. 7. 22. 

« RV. vii. 91. 1, 3; 90. 4; 91. 2, 4, 6; 66. « RV. i. 169; A^S. viii. 7. 22. 

1-3; iii. 68. 13; vii. 28. 1-3; 39. 1-3; ^ Ry, ^1. 17; A^S. viii. 7. 22. 

95. 4-6 ; A9S. viii. 10. 1. 

31 [bo.8. jb] 



V. IS—] 


[242 


The Soma Sacrifice 

Indra, man-like, spreading over mortals ' is the hymn ; ® as containing (the 
word) ‘ great ' on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. It is in 
Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he maintains the pressing ; thereby 
it departs not from its place. ‘ Him sky and earth of one mind * is the 
hymn ; ® as containing (the word) ‘ great ’ in ‘ When he went displaying his 
greatness, his power ’ on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. It 
is in Jagati ; Jagati verses support the midday (pressing) of this set of three 
days ; that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore he 
inserts a Nivid in the Jagati verses. Pairing hymns are recited in Tristubh 
and Jagati; cattle are a pairing, the Chandomas are cattle; (verily they 
serve) to win cattle. Hymns containing (the word) ^ great ’ are recited : 
the atmosphere is great; (verily they serve) to obtain the atmosphere. 
Five hymns are recited ; the Pahkti has five Padas ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; 
cattle are fivefold ; the Chandomas are cattle ; (verily they serve) to win 
cattle. ‘ Towards thee, 0 hero, we utter praise ' and ‘ Towards thee for the 
first drink’ are the Rathantara as Prstha^® on the eighth day. " What he hath 
won ’ is the normal inserted verse.^^ In ‘ Thee we invoke ’ he makes to follow 
the basis of the Brhat, for this day is connected with the Brliat in place. 
‘ Both may he hear for us ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman ; ^ that which is 

lasting and that which was yesterday ’ (he means) ; on the Brhat day, the 
eighth day, it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ This steed, god strengthened ’ 
is the normal Tarksya^^ (hymn). 

V. 19 (xxiii, 4). ‘ Many not of old to him ’ is the hymn ; ^ as containing 
(the word) ' great ’in ‘To the great, the hero, impetuous, eager ’ on the eighth 
day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ This fame for thee, O bounteous 
one, though thy greatness ’ is the hymn ; ^ as containing (the word) ‘ great ’ 
on the eighth day it is the symbol of the eighth day. ‘ Thou art great, 
O Tndra, who by thy might ^ is the hymn;'* as containing (the word) 
‘great’ on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘Thou art 
great, 0 Indra ; to thee the earth ’ is the hymn ; ^ as containing (the word) 
‘great’ on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. It is in 
Tristubh ; with it with feet supported he maintains the pressing ; thereby it 
departs not from its place. ‘ Though the width of the sky is outspread ’ is 
the hymn;® as containing (the word) ‘great’ in ‘Not Indra in greatness’ 

8 RV. vi. 19 ; Ags. vii. 9. 22. ^ rv. x. 178 j Ags. vii. 1. 18. 

•* RV. X. 113; AgS. vii. 9. 22; it precedes ^ RV. vi. 32; AgS. viii. 7. 23; ggS. x. 10. 6. 

there RV. vi. 19. Cf. KB. xxiii. 12, 18. 

10 RV. vii. 33. 22, 23 ; viii. 3. 7, 8 ; see AB. ^ RV. x. 54 ; AgS. viii. 7. 23 ; ggS. x. 10. 6. 

iv. 29. 3 RV. i. 63 ; AgS. viii. 7. 28 ; ggS. x. 10. 6. 

11 RV. X. 74. 6 ; see AB. iv. 29. * RV. iv. 17 ; AgS. viii. 7. 23 ; ggS. x. 10. 6. 

1* RV. vi. 46. 1 and 2 ; see AB. iv. 31. o RV. i. 56; Ags. viii. 7. 23 : it precedes 

1* RV. viii. 61. 1 and 2 ; see AB. iv. 31. RV. iv. 17 there ; not in ffS. 



243] The Chandomas — Eighth Day [v. 19 

on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day\ It is in Jagati; 
Jagatl verses support the midday (pressing) of this set of three days; that 
metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore he inserts a Nivid 
in the Jagati verses. Pairing hymns are recited, in Tristubh and in Jagatl ; 
cattle are a pairing, the Chandomas cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle. 
Hymns containing (the word) ‘ great ’ are recited ; the atmosphere is great ; 
(verily they serve) to obtain the atmosphere. Two sets of five hymns are 
recited; the Pankti has five Padas; the sacrifice is fivefold; cattle are 
fivefold ; the Chandomas are cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle. They 
are separate, five in one set, five in the other ; they make up ten ; the Viraj 
is a set of ten ; the Viraj is food ; cattle are food, the Chandomas cattle ; 
(verily they serve) to win cattle. ‘ Let each man of the god that leadeth,’ 
‘ That desirable of Savitr ’ and ‘ God of all, lord of the good ' are the strophe 
and antistrophe of the Vai 9 vadeva.® On the Brhat day, the eighth day, it 
is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ The golden-handed to aid * is (the triplet) 
to Savitr ; as containing (the word) ‘ upright ’ on the eighth day it is 
a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ May the two great ones, sky and earth, for 
us ’ is (the triplet) to sky and earth ; ^ as containing (the word) ^ great ' on 
the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ Youthful the parents 
again ’ is (the triplet) to the Kbhus ; ® as containing (the word) ' again * on 
the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. He recites (verses) of two 
Padas, ' These worlds let us subject * ; man has two feet, cattle four feet ; 
the Chandomas are cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle. In that he 
recites (verses) of two Padas, verily thus he makes the sacrificer with two 
feet to find support among four-footed cattle. ‘ The great aid of the gods ' 
is (the hymn) to the All-gods ; as containing (the word) ‘ great ’ on the 
eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. These are Gayatri verses ; 
this set of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. ‘ The righteous, 
belonging to all men ’ is the beginning of the Agnimaruta ; as containing 
(the word) ‘ great ' in ‘ Agni, of all men, the great ' on the eighth day it is a 
symbol of the eighth day. ‘ The sporting troop of the Maruts ' is (the hymn) 
to the Maruts ; as containing (the word) ‘ grow * in ‘ With the taste of the 
sap it grew great ’ on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth day. ‘ To 
Jatavedas let us pour the Soma' is the normal (verse) to Jatavedas.^^ 


c RV. V. 50. 1 ; 82. 7, 8 ; see AB. iv. 32. 

7 RV. i. 22. 6-7; A9S. viii. 10. 2; 99S. x. 
10. 7. 

« RV. i. 22. 13-15 ; A9S. viii. 10. 2 ; 99S. x. 
10. 7. 

9 RV. i. 20. 4-6 ; A9S. viii. 10. 2 ; 99S. x. 
10. 7. 


10 RV. X. 157 ; 99s. X. 10. 7 ; A9S. viii. 7. 24. 
RV. viii. 83; A9S. viii. 10. 2; 99S. x. 
10, 7. 

12 In A9S. viii. 10. 3 ; 99S. x. l^^ 8. 

” RV. i. 37 ; A9S. viii. 10. 3. 

RV. i. 99. 1 ; A9S. vii. 1. 14. 



V. 19 — ] 


[244 


The Soma Sacrifice 

‘O Agni, be kind; thou art great’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; ^ ’ as 
containing (the word) ‘ great * on the eighth day it is a symbol of the eighth 
day. These are GayatrJ verses; this set of three days has the Gayatrl 
metre at the third pressing. 


ADHYAYA IV 

The Chandomas {continued). 

V. 20 (xxiv. 1). That ^ which has the same endings is a symbol of the 
ninth day ; for the ninth day is a repetition of the third day. That which 
contains (the word) ' horse (the word) ‘ end that which is repeated, that 
which is alliterated, that which contains (the word) ' stay ’, (the word) ‘ sur- 
pass (the word) ‘ three tliat which is a symbol of the end, (the fact) that 
the deity is mentioned in tlie last Pada, (the fact) that yonder world is 
referred to, that which contains (the word) ‘ pure (the word) ‘ true (the 
word) ‘ dwell (the word) ‘ gone (the word) ‘ dwelling the past tense, that 
which is a symbol of the third day ; these are the symbols of the ninth day. 

* We have gone with great praise to the youngest \ is the Ajya ^ of the ninth 
day ; as containing (the word) ‘ gone ’ on the ninth day it is a symbol of the 
ninth day. It is in Tristubh ; this set of three days has tlie Tristubh 
metre at the morning pressing. ‘Forward to thee the pure are ottered 
boldly ‘ They perceiving with time mind ‘ Dwelling in the sky, from tlie 
atmosphere, on tlie earth ‘ Come hither to us with all boons, O Alvins 
‘ The Soma, O Indra, is pressed for thee ‘ The Brahmans, the Ahgirases, will 
attain ‘ Sarasvati pious men invoke ‘ Hither to us from the sky, from 
the great mountain’ and ‘O Sarasvati lead us to prosperity’ are the Praiiga'^ : 
as containing (the words) ‘ pure ‘ true ’, ‘ dwell ’, ‘ gone ’, and ‘ house 
on the ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. It is in Tristublj ; this set 
of three days has the Tristubh metre at the morning pressing. ^ Him foi- 
great gain ’, ‘ Three Soma draughts for Indra ’, ‘ O Indra, come near ’ 
‘ Forward now Brahmanaspati ’, ‘ Agni, the leader ‘ Thou, O Soma, witli 
inspiration ‘ They swell the waters’, and ‘No one the chariot of Sudas’ 
are the continuation being the same as that of the third day ; on the nintli 
day it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ Let Indra drink whose Soma, hail ! ' 

RV. Lv. 9 ; A^S. viii. 10. 3. 42. 1-3 ; x. 17. 7-0; v. 48. 11-13 ; vi. 61. 

’ For the ninth day see KB. xxvi. 14-17. 14-16 ; AfS. viii. 11. 1 ; x. 11. 4, 6. 

2 RV. vii. 12 ; A^S. viii. 11.1; x. 11. 1 * RV. viii. 6a 7-9 ; 2. 7-9 ; 53. 5, 6 ; i. 40. 5, 

with varisnts throughout, 6 ; iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; 64. 6 ; vii. 32. 10. 

» RV. vii. 90. 1, 6 ; 64. 1 ; 70. 1-3 ; 29. 1-3 ; See AB. v. 1. 



246 ] 


[ — V. 21 


The Chandomas — Ninth Day 

is the hymn ^ ; the call of Hail t is the end ; the ninth day is the end ; on 
the ninth day it is a symbol of the end. ‘ Let him say the Saman> spring- 
ing forth as of a bird ’ is the hymn ® ; (containing) ‘ Let us sing that which 
becometh heavenlike ’ ; the heaven is the end ; the ninth day is the end ; 
on the ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ Stand on the steeds 
being yoked to the chariot ’ is the hymn ^ ; standing is the end ; the ninth 
day is the end ; on the ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. ' Those 
of many a poet' is the hymn (containing) ‘ The hymns him that standeth 
on the chariot ' ; standing is the end ; the ninth day is the end ; on the 
ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. That is in Tristubh ; with it 
with its feet supported he maintains the pressing ; thereby it departs not 
from its place. ‘ Sing ye forth to the glad one the song rich in food ' is the 
hymn ® ; as having the same endings on the ninth day it is a symbol of the 
ninth day. It is in Jagatl ; Jagati verses support the midday (pressing) of 
this set of three days ; that metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted : 
therefore he inserts a Nivid in the Jagati verses. Pairing hymns are recited, 
in Tristubh and in Jagati ; cattle are a pairing ; the Chandomas are cattle ; 
(verily they serve) to win cattle. Five hymns are recited ; the Pahkti has 
five Padas ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; cattle are fivefold ; the Chandomas are 
cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle. ‘ Thee we invoke ' and ‘ Do thou 
come to the worshipper ' arci the Brhat as Prstha on the ninth day. ‘ What 
he hath won ' is the normal inserted verse.^^ In ^ Towards thee, O hero, we 
utter praise ' he makes to follow the basis of the Rathantara, for this day 
is connected with the Rathantara in place. ‘ O Indra, threefold protection ’ 
is the Pragatha of the Siiman ; as containing (the word) ‘ three ' on the 
ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ This steed, god strengthened ' 
is the normal Tarksya (hymn). 

V. 21 (xxiv. 2). ‘ Tn thee from of old the songs have gone together, 
O Indra ' is the hymn ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ gone ' on the ninth day it 
is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ When shall our prayers dwell in the chariot ' 
is the hymn ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ dwell ’ it is a symbol of the end ; 
having gone to the end he dwells as it were; on the ninth day it is a 
symbol of the ninth day. ‘ May the true one come hither, the generous, he 
of the Soma lees ’ is the hymn ^ ; as containing (the word) ‘ true ' on the 

» KV. iii 50 ; A^S. viii. 7. 23. RV. x. 74. 6 ; see AB. iv. 29. 

« KV. i. 173 ; AgS. viii. 7. 23 ; g^S. x. 11. 0. Ry. vii. 82. 22 and 28 ; sec AB. iv. 29. 

7 RV. iii. 35 ; IgS. viii. 7. 23 ; ggs. x. 11. 6. RV. vi. 46. 9 and 10 ; see AB. v. 1. 

» RV. vi. 21 ; AgS. viii. 7. 23. RV. x. 178 ;_AgS. vii. 1. 13. 

9 RV. i. 101 ; AgS. viii. 7. 23 : it precedes i RV. vi. 84 ; AgS. viii. 7. 24. Of. KB. xxvi. 

RV. vi. 21 there ; ggS. x. 11. 6. 16, 17. 

10 RV. vi. 46. 1, 2 ; viii. 61. 7, 8 ; see AB. iv. 2 RV. vi. 85 ; IgS. viii. 7. 24. 

31. 3 RV. iv. 16 j AgS. viii. 7. 24 ; ggS. x. 11. 17. 



V. 21 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [246 

ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ That highest power of thine 
is on high ' is the hymn ^ ; the highest is the end ; the ninth day is the end ; 
on the ninth day it is a symbol of the end. It is a Tristubh ; with it with 
feet supported he maintains the pressing ; verily it departs not from its 
place. * I am the first lord of wealth ’ is the hymn (containing the words) 
‘ I win wealth of every man " ; what is won is the end ; the ninth day is the 
end ; on the ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day. It is in Jagatl ; 
Jagati verses support the midday pressing of this set of three days; that 
metre is a support in which a Nivid is inserted ; therefore he inserts a 
Nivid in the Jagati verses. Pairing hymns are recited, in Tristubh and in 
Jagatl ; cattle are a pairing ; theChandomas are cattle ; (verily they serve) 
to win cattle. Two sets of five hymns are recited ; the Pankti has five 
Padas; the sacrifice is fivefold; cattle are fivefold; the Chandomas are 
cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle. They are separate, five in one 
set, five in the other; they make up ten; the Viraj is a set of ten; the 
Viraj is food ; cattle are food ; the Chandomas are cattle ; (verily they 
serve) to win cattle. ‘ Tliat of Savitr we choose ' and ‘ To-day for us, O god 
Savitr ’ are the strophe and antistrophe of the Vai9vadeva ^ ; on the Rath- 
antara day, the ninth day, it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ The evening 
hath come ’ is (the triplet) to Savitr ^ ; what has gone is the end ; the ninth 
day is the end ; on the ninth day it is a symbol of the ninth day ; ' Forward 
towards you mightily sky and earth ’ is (the triplet) to sky and earth ® ; as 
containing (the word) ‘ pure ' in * To the pure the praises ’ on the ninth day 
it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ Let Indra give for sap to us ' and ‘ Give 
ye jewels ’ are (the triplet) to the Rbhus ® ; as containing (the word) ‘ three ’ 
in ‘ Three sevens to the presser ’ on the ninth day it is a symbol of the 
ninth day. He recites (verses) of two Padas ' Brown is one, active, 
bounteous, youthful’; man has two feet, cattle four feet ; the Chandomas 
are cattle ; (verily they serve) to win cattle ; in that lie recites (verses) of 
two Padas, verily thus he makes the sacrificer with two feet find support 
in four-footed cattle. ‘ That are three over thirty ' is (the hymn) to the 
All-gods ; as containing (the word) ‘ three ’ on the ninth day it is a 
symbol of the ninth day. These are Gayatri verses ; this set of three days 
has the Gayatri metre at the third pressing. ‘ Vai9vanara, to our aid ’ is the 
beginning of the Agnimaruta (containing) ‘ Let him come hither from 

^ RV. i. 103 ; Ags. viii. 7. 24 ; ggS, x. 11. 17. » RV. viii. 93. 34 ; i. 20. 7 and 8 ; AgS. viii. 

RV. X. 48; AgS. viii. 7. 24: it precedes Jl. 3 ; ggS, x^H. 8. 

RV. i. 103 here ; 99 s. x. 11. 7. 10 RV. viii. 29 ; A 9 S. viii. 7. 24 ; 99 S. x. 

« RV. V. 82. 1-3 ; 4-6 ; see AB. iv. 30. 11. 8. 

’ See above AB. v. 13 ; A 9 S. viii. 11. 3. RV. viii. 28 ; A 9 S. viii. 11. 3 ; 99 S. x. 11 .8. 

« RV. iv. 56. 5-7 ; A 9 S. viii. 11. 3 ; 99 S. x. 12 See A 9 S. viii. 11. 4; AV. vi. 35. 1 : TS. i. 

11, 8. 5. 11. 1 and its parallels. 



[ — V. 22 


247] The Chandomas — Ninth Day 

afar ’ ; from afar is the end ; the ninth day is the end ; on the ninth day 
it is a symbol of the end. * 0 Maruts in whose dwelling ’ is the hymn 
to the Maruts ; as containing (the word) ' dwell Mt is a symbol of the end ; 
having gone to the end he dwells as it were; on the ninth day it is a 
symbol of the ninth day. ‘To Jatavedas let us pour the Soma’ is the 

normal (verse) to Jatavedas ‘ Forward to Agni, move your speech ’ is 

(the hymn) to Jatavedas ; as having the same endings in the ninth day 
it is a symbol of the ninth day. ‘ May he convey us beyond our foes, may 
he convey us beyond our foes ’ he recites ; in the set of nine nights much 
is done that is forbidden ; verily (this serves) for atonement. In that he 

recites ‘ May he convey us beyond our foes ; may he convey us beyond 

our foes verily thus he releases them from all sin. These are Gayatri 
verses ; this set of three days has the Gayatri metre at the third pressing. 


2Vie Tenth Day. 

V. 23 (xxiv. 3). They ^ perform the Prsthya Sadaha. As is the mouth, so 
is the Prsthya Sadaha ; as within the mouth arc the tongue, palate, and teeth, 
so are the Chandomas ; now that by which he makes speech distinct, by 
which he discerns sweet and not sweet, is the tenth day. As the two 
nostrils, so the Prsthya Sadaha, as that within the nostrils, so the Chan- 
domas ; now that by which he discriminates scents is the tenth day. As is 
the eye, so is the Prsthya Sadaha ; as the black within the eye, so the Chan- 
domas ; now the pupil, by which he sees, is the tenth day. As is the ear, 
so is the Prsthya Sadaha ; as what is within the ear, so the Chandomas ; 
now that by which he hears is the tenth day. The tenth day is prosperity ; 
they attain prosperity who perform the tenth day (rite). Wherefore the 
tenth day is one on which corrections are not to be made (thinking) ‘ Let us 
not speak ill of prosperity ’, for it is unwise to speak ill of a superior. 
They creep thence, they purify themselves, they enter the hut of the wives ; 
of those he who knows this libation should say ‘ Hold ye on to one another ’. 
He should offer with ‘ Here stay, stay ye here ; here be support, here self 
support ; O Agni ; vat ! Hail ! vat ! ’ In that he says ‘ Here stay ’ he 


RV. i. 86; A9S. viii. 11. 4; 99S. x. 11. 9. 
RV. i. 99. 1 ; A9S. vii. 1. 14. 

15 RV. X. 187 ; A9S. viii. 11. 4. 

15 In each verse of RV. x. 187. 

1 AB. V. 22-28 and KB. xxvii. deal with the 
tenth day following the nine (Chandomas 
and Prsthya ^adaha); for the day, cf. 
99s. x.’ * 13-21; B9S. xvi. 6-9; Ap9S. 


xxi. 9-12 ; A9S. viii. 12. 10-13. 2 for the 
rites here prescribed ; for tho avivdkya 
character see TS. vii. 3. 1. 1 ; B9S. xvi. 
6 ; Ap9S. xxi. 9. 

Hang, contra Sayana, translates ^ we 
shall not bespeak (the goddess of) 
wealth.* 



V. 22 — ] 


[248 


The Soma Sacrifice 

makes them stay in this world ; in that he says ‘ Stay ye here * he makes 
offspring stay in them. In that he says ‘ Here be support ; here self-support 
verily thus he confers speech and offspring upon the sacrificers. The 
Rathantara is ' O Agni, vdt ! the Brhat is ‘ Hail ! vcit \ The Brhat and 
Bathantara are a pairing of the gods ; verily thus by a pairing of the gods 
they win a pairing ; by a pairing of the gods they are propagated in pair- 
ings ; (therefore this serves) for propagation ; he is propagated with offspring 
and cattle who knows thus. They creep thence ; they purify themselves ; 
they go to the Agnidh’s altar ; of them he who knows this libation should 
say * Hold ye on to one another He should offer with ^ 

‘ Sending the sucking calf (to its mother), 

Himself a sucking calf sucking his mother, 

Increase of wealth, sap, and strength 
May he support in us ; hail ! ’ 

Increase of wealth, sap and strength he wins for himself and the sacrificers 
when one knowing thus offers this libation. 

v. 23 (xxiv. 4) They creep thence ; they go to the Sadas; the other priests 
creep out severally according to their wont ; the Udgatrs creep together. 
They chant to the verses of the serpent queen. The serpent queen is this 
(earth), for this (earth) is the queen of what creeps ; this (earth) in the 
beginning was bare ; she saw this spell ' ‘ The dappled bull hath come ' ; 
this dappled colour, of various forms, entered her; whither she desired, 
whatever there is here, plants, birds all forms (entered her). The dappled 
colour enters him with various forms, whatever he desires who knows thus. 
With mind he utters the prelude, with mind he sings, with mind he 
responds; with voice he recites. Speech and mind are a pairing of the 
gods, verily thus with a pairing of the gods they win a pairing, 
by a pairing of the gods they are propagated in pairings; (verily it 
serves) for propagation ; he is propagated with offspring and cattle who 
knows thus. Then the Hotr recites ^ the Four Hotrs ; verily thus he accom- 
panies in recitation the song. The Four Hotrs are the sacrificial, secret 
name of the gods ; in that the Hotr recites the Four Hotrs, verily thus he 
reveals the sacrificial, secret name of the gods ; that revealed reveals him. 
He is revealed who knows thus. ‘ That Brahman, to whom, though learned, 
fame does not come he used to say, ‘ having gone into the wild should 
gather a bunch of Darbha grass, points upward, and, placing to his right 

^ Cf. vs. viii. 51. In both cases the A 9 S. 26. Of. KB. xxvii. 4 ; iv. 6. 9. 17. 

viii. 18. 1 and 2 merely has juhvati and * Cf. below AB. v. 25. Vydeaks means * ex- 
NUrftyana says that this or the Sutra pound ' and the word has now a special 

mode may_be adopted. propriety in its double force. See A^S. 

1 RV. X. 189 ; A^S. viii. 13. 3-6 ; 99 S. x. 18. viii. 13. 6-9 ; 99 S. x. 18. 27 and 15. 



[ — V, 25 


249] T?te Tenth Day 

a Brahman, recite the Four Hotrs; the Four Hotrs are the sacrificial, secret 
name of the gods ; if he were to recite the Four Hotrs, he thus reveals the 
sacrificial, secret name of the gods ; that revealed reveals him ; he is revealed 
who knows thus/ 

v. 24 (xxiv. 5) Then ^ they together lay hold of an Udumbara (branch) 
with ‘ Sap and strength I lay hold of The Udumbara is strength and 
proper food. In that the gods distributed sap and strength, thence the 
Udumbara came into being. Therefore thrice in a year it ripens. Thus 
in that they lay hold together of the Udumbara (branch), verily thus they 
lay hold together on sap and strength. They restrain their speech ; the 
sacrifice is speech ; verily thus they restrain the sacrifice. They suppress 
the day; the world of heaven is the day; verily thus they press down 
the world of heaven. They sliould not utter speech by day ; if they were 
to utter speech by day they would leave the day over to a rival. They 
should not utter speecli by night ; if they were to utter speech by night, 
they would leave the night over to a rival ; let the sun be half set ; then 
should they utter speech ; so much only of space do they leave over to a 
rival. Or ratlier, when the sun is set, should they utter speech ; verily 
thus they make the rival who detests them have the darkness as his portion. 
Having gone round the Ahavaniya should they utter speech ; the Ahavaniya 
is the sacrifice, the Ahavaniya the world of heaven ; verily thus by the 
sacrifice as the world of heaven they go to the world of heaven. With 
^ What we have done here defective, 

What we have done in excess, 

To Prajapati the father 
Let that go.’ 

they utter speech. Through Prajapati are oflspring born ; Prajapati is the 
support of what is defective and excessive ; them neither defect nor excess 
harms. To Prajapati they transfer defect and excess who knowing thus 
utter speech with this (verse). Therefore those who know thus should 
utter speech with this (verse) 

v. 25 (xxiv. 6) * O Adhvaryu ’ he calls when about to speak out in the 
Four Hotrs. This is the form of the Call, ‘ Yes, O Hotr ; be it so, O Hotr ’ 
is the response of the Adhvaryu at each pause in the ten sentences.^ 

‘ Their offering spoon was thought. 

(Their) butter was intelligence. 

(Their) altar was speech. 

1 Cf. TS. vi. 6. n. 6. Anup. iii. 12 ; L^S. iii. v. 25. ^ This is part of the Caturhotr ; see A^S. 

1. 13. For this passage cf. KB. xxvi. 5. viii. 13. 10 ; 95®* 1^* ^""'7* where the 

2 For the ritual see A^S. viii. 13. 22-26 ; Mantra differs. Here it is corrupt. 

99s. X. 21. 6 seq, ; B9S. xvi. 9. 

32 [h.o.s. *5] 



V. 26 — 1 


[260 


The Soma Sacvijice 

(Their) strew was learning. 

(Their) Agni was insight. 

(Their) Agnldh was knowledge. 

(Their) oblation was breath. 

(Their) Adhvaryu was the Saman. 

(Their) Hotr was Vscaspati. 

(Their) Upavaktr was mind. 

They drew this cup (with) 

“ O Vacaspati, 0 worshipper, 0 name. Let us worship thy name. Do thou 
worship, with our name go to the sky. That prosperity with which the gods 
with Prajapati as householder prepared, that prosperity shall we attain.” ’ 

Then he runs over the Bodies of Prajapati and the riddle. 

‘ Eater of food and mistress of food ' : the eater of food is Agni ; the 
mistress of food Aditya. 

‘ The fair and the beautiful ^ : the fair is Soma, the beautiful is cattle. 
'The unresting and the fearless’: the unresting is Vayu, for he never 
rests ; the fearless is death, for all fear it. 

* The unattained and the unattainable ’ : the unattained is the earth ; the 
unattainable is the sky. 

‘ The unattackable and the irresistible ’ : the unattackable is Agni ; the 
irresistible is Aditya. 

‘ That which has no prius and no rival ’ : that which has no prius is 
mind ; that which has no rival is the year. 

These are the twelve Bodies of Prajapati ; this is the whole of Prajapati, 
thus the whole of Prajapati he obtains on the tenth day. 

Then they say the riddle^. 

* “Agni is the householder ” some say : he is the householder of the world. 
“Vayu is the householder ” some say: he is the householder of the atmo- 
sphere. 

“ He who gives heat yonder is the householder ” some say : he is the lord, the 
seasons are the house. The householders prosper, the sacrificers prosper, for 
whom there is as householder one knowing the god as householder. The house- 
holder smites away evil, the sacrificers smite away evil for whom there is as 
householder one knowing the god who most effectively has smitten away evil.” 
0 Adhvaryu we have won 

2 For the riddle here cf. KB. xxvii. 5; A^S. xii. 4. 21 ; Eggoling, SBE. xxvi. 462, 

viii. 18. 14 ; 99S. x. 20 ; for the bodies 463 ; Ap^S. xxi. 12 takes the view of 

of Prajapati see KB. xxvii. 5 ; A^S. viii. PB. unfavourable to Prajapati* 

18. IS ; iJfS. X. 19 (in this case very * This is used as Yajya ; see A<JS. viii. 13. 
elaborate). Botli seem called Brahmodya 15, 16. 

in gB. iv. 6. 9. 20 ; cf. PB. iv. 9. 14 ; KgS. 



251] 


The Agnihotra 


[ — V. 27 


ADHYAYA V 

The Agnihotra. 

V. 26 (xxv. 1) ‘ Take^ out the Ahavaniya’ he says on the afternoon: what^ 
ever good he does on the day, verily thus, by taking it out and bringing 
forward, he places in security. ^ Take out the Ahavaniya ' he says on the 
morning ; whatever he does well by night verily thus, by taking it out and 
bringing it forward, he places in security. The Ahavaniya is the sacrifice, 
the Ahavaniya the world of heaven ; verily thus in the sacrifice as the 
world of heaven, he places the world of heaven who knows thus. He who 
knows the Agnihotra as connected with the All-gods, of sixteen parts, and 
finding support in cattle, prospers with the Agnihotra. as connected with the 
All-gods, of sixteen parts, and finding support in cattle. When in the cow, 
it is Rudra’s ^ ; when allowed to drop, it is Vayu’s ; when being milked, it is 
the Alvin’s ; when milked, it is Soma’s ; when put on the fire, it is Varuna’s ; 
when swelling up, it is Pusan’s : when pouring over, it is the Maruts’ : when 
bubbling, it is the All-gods’ ; when covered with a film, it is Mitra’s ; when 
removed, it is sky and earth’s ; when it is ready (for the Hotr), it is 
fSaviti-’s ; when it is being taken (for the oblation), it is Visnu’s ; when put 
(on the altar), it is Brhaspati’s ; the first libation is for Agni ; the next for 
Prajapati ; the offering is Indra’s. This is the Agnihotra, connected with 
the All-gods, of sixteen parts, and finding support in cattle. With the 
Agnihotra, as connected with the All-gods, of sixteen parts and finding 
support in cattle he prospers who knows thus. 

V. 27 (xxv. 2) (They ask) ‘ If the^ Agnihotra cow, when united (with its 
calf) and being milked sits down, what is the expiation then ? ’ He should 
address it with 

^ That from fear of which thou dost sit down 
Thence give us security ; 

Guard all our cattle ; 

Homage to Eudra, the bountiful.’ 

He should make her rise with ^ 


^ AB. V. 26-31 and KB. ii, deal witli the 
Agnihotra. Cf. AfS. iii. 11. 

- Cf. 5^* • samudantam is found in 

A^S. ii. 3. 8; TB. ii. 1. 7 and K^S. xxv. 
2. 3 have udanta and GB. iii. 12 samud- 
vdntam. Weber {Ind, Stud, ix. 291) prefers 
vispandamdnam, an obvious v.l , ; see below 
a’b. V. 27, n. 5. 


V. 27. ' Repeated with all down to paragraph 
iv in AB. vii. 3. See A 9 S. iii. 11. 1 ; JB. 
i. 58. 1 ; TB. iii. 7. 8. 1 ; ^IB. xii. 4. 1. 9 ; 
A^y. iii. 21 ; Ap^S. ix. 5. 1 seq ; Atharva- 
praya^cittUy ii. 4 and 5. 

See AgS. iii. 11. 2 ; TB. i. 4. 8. 1 ; MfS. 
iii. 2. 1. 



V* 27 — ] 


The Agnihotra 


[252 


‘ The goddess Aditi hath arisen, 

She hath bestowed life upon th^"Iord of the sacrifice ; 

Making good fortune for Indra, 

For Mitra and for Varuna.’ 

Then should he place on her udder and her mouth a pot of water, and then 
give her to a Brahman# That is the expiation in this case. ‘ If one’s Agni- 
hotra cow, when united and being milked, calls aloud, what is the expiation 
then’ (they ask). She calls aloud foreseeing hunger for the sacrifices^ ; he 
should make her eat food, for expiation ; food is expiation. (He says *) 
‘ From eating the good pasture mayst thou be of good fortune ’. That is 
the expiation in this case. ‘ If one’s Agnihotra cow when united and being 
milked stumbles, what is the penance then?’ (they ask). If she causes 
any (milk) to spill, he should toucli it and mutter ^ 

That milk which to-day hath crept over the earth 
That which hath crept over the plants, the waters 
The milk in the house, the milk in the cow. 

The milk in the calves, that milk be mine.' 

He should offer with the remainder of the milk, if it be enough for an obla- 
tion. But, if all be poured out, then he should summon another (cow) and 
milk her and offer with it, but there must be an offering, even if only in faith.® 
That is the expiation in this case. All becomes for him suited for the strew, 
all is secured, who knowing thus ofters the Agnihotra. 

v. 28 (xxv. 3) The sacrificial post is yonder sun, the altar the earth, the 
strew the plants, the kindling wood the trees, the sprinkling waters the 
waters, the enclosing sticks the quarters. Whatever of his is lost, or dies, 
or men drive away, all of that comes to him in yonder world who knows 
thus to offer the Agnihotra, just as what is placed on the strew would 
come. Both sets, gods and men, reciprocally he leads as fees and all this 
whatever there is here. Men by the evening libation he leads as fees to the 
gods and all this whatever there is is here ; they lie as it were relaxed and 
at home, when taken as fees for the gods. The gods by the morning 
libation he leads as fees to man and all this whatever there is here. They 


’ Sayana and Haug take this as ^ to reveal 
her hunger to the sacrificer’ but this 
is forcing the sense of praWchydya ; cf. 
Weber, Jnd. Stud, ix, 291. Cf. Atharva- 
prdya^itta, ii. 4 which has smhpro^hydya, 

* RV. i. 164. 40; AV. vii. 73. 11 ; AgS. iii. 
11. 4 ; ApgS. ix. 5. 4. 


spanilela which may be preferred ; Ap^S. 
ix. 5. O ; M^S. iii. 2. 1 ; JAOS. xxxiii. 
115, n. 728 ; cf. ?B. xii. 4.1. 6; JB. i. 58. 1. 

® The sense hero, as given by Sayana, is that 
if all else fails he must offer faith only 
aJiaih fraddhdm juhomij not as Haug that 
he is to offer with faith in any case. 



[ — V. 29 


263 ] The Agnihotm 

leap up ^ recognizing this as it were (saying) * That shall I do ; there shall 
I go The world which a man conquers by giving all this, that world he 
conquers who knowing thus offers the Agnihotra. By the evening libation 
for Agni he begins the Alvina (Qastra) ; speech utters the response ^ in 
‘ Speech, speech \ By Agni, by the night, is the A 9 vina recited by him who 
knowing thus offers the Agnihotra. For Aditya by the morning libation 
he begins the Mahavrata; breath utters the response in ‘ Food ; food’ ; by 
Aditya, by the deity is the Mahavrata recited by him who knowing thus 
offers the Agnihotra. Of this Agnihotra there are seven hundred and 
twenty evening libations in the year; there are also seven hundred and 
twenty morning libations in the year. So many are the bricks accompanied 
by Yajus verses of the fire By the year, by the fire fully does he sacri- 
fice who knowing thus offers the Agnihotra. 

V. 29 (xxv. 4) Vrsa 9 usma Vatavata Jatukarnya said ‘ We shall declare 
this to the gods ; the Agnihotra which used to be performed on both 
days is now performed on alternate days only \ This also said a maiden 
seized by a Gandharva ‘ We sliall declare this to the fathers ; the Agnihotra 
which used to be performed on both days is now performed on alternate 
days only.^ ' The Agnihotra is offered on alternate days in that one offers 
it on the evening after sunset and in the morning before sunrise. The 
Agnihotra is offered on both days in that one otters it in the evening after 
sunset and in the morning after sun rise. Therefore the offering should 
be made after sun rise. He who otters before sunrise obtains the world of 
the Gayatri in the twenty-fourth year ; in the twelfth he who offers after 
sunrise. If he offers for two years before sunrise tlien he has really sacri- 
ficed for one only ; he who sacrifices after sunrise with the year obtains the 
year, he who knowing thus offers after sunrise. Therefore should one offer 
after sunrise. He offers in the brilliance of day and night who offers in 
the evening after sunset and in the morning after sunrise. By Agni as 
brilliance the night is brilliant, by Aditya as brilliant the day is brilliant. 


’ The sense is clearly that the gods also act as 
fees ; hence Weber's view {Ind. Stud. ix. 
290) ^vivaddndh is wrong. Sayana offers 
an alternative that the men are meant, 
having obtained the fees in the shape of 
divine favour. 

* The point is that the opening to Agni of 
the A 9 vina is compared with the offering 
to Agni at evening : the Pratigara is 
according to Sayana vded tea Jwtrd : see 
Ap^/S. vi. 1. 2 ; and in the next case of 
the offering to Aditya annam payo veto 


'smdsu dJieht ; see Ap9!S. vi. 11. 5 ; 
iv. 13. 1. 

^ Weber (Ind, Stud. ix. 291) refers them to 
360 yajupnatyah and 360 pandit bricks in 
9B. X. 4. 2. 2. 

V 29. ^ This is the reasonable sense and con- 
struction ; cf. KB. ii. 9. The yad may be 
* that \ one iti being only usual to cover 
iivdcut or it may be the relative, in 
which case there is a slight anacoluthon 
but the first view is perhaps the best. 



V. 29 — ] The Agnihotra [264 

In the brilliance of day and night does he offer who knowing thus offers 
after sunrise. Therefore should one offer after sunrise \ 

V. 30 (xxv. 5) Day and night are the wheels of the year ; verily thus with 
them he goes through the year. If he offers before sunrise, that is as if 
one were to go with (a chariot with) a single wheel. But if he offers after 
sunrise, that is as if one were swiftly to perform a journey with (a chariot 
with) wheels on both sides. As to this the sacrificial verse is recited : 

* This goeth yoked with Brhad and Bathantara, 

All that hath been and is to be ; 

With them should he go who is wise taking the fires, 

By day should he offer one, by night another." 

The night is connected with the Rathantara, the day with the Brhat ; Agni 
is the Rathantara, Aditya tlie Brhat. Those deities make him attain the 
vault of the tawny one, the world of heaven, who knowing thus offers after 
sunrise. Therefore should one offer after sunrise. As to this, the sacrificial 
verse is recited 

‘ As one may go with a single horse 
Having nothing else for harnessing, 

So many men go, 

Who offer the Agnihotra before sunrise." 

The deity as it proceeds, all this wliatever there is here follows upon it , 
of the deity all this whatever there is here is a follower ; this deity is that 
which has followers. A follower he finds, a follower is his who knows 
thus. He is the one guest, he lives among the offerers. This is wliy there 
is in the world the following verse 

^ Let him heap blame on the blameless, 

Or take away blame from the blameworthy, 

The one guest at evening he turns aw^ay, 

The thief who stole away the lotus fibres.’ ^ 

2 Weber {Ind. Stud, ix. 292) points out that 4646 and 4647-4600) and in the JdtaLa 

in the Avesta there is expressed a prefer- no. 488, and in which the Rsis in order 

enco for the period from the first appear- to release themselves of the accusation of 

ance of light to the sunrise as the proper being guilty of the theft of lotus fibres 

time of sacrifice, while the time of the swore frightful oaths, one of which is 

sunrise is the daevayapia. hero recorded, hut which has no parallel 

1 JKo for so is an obvious correction suggested in the Mahdbhdrata or the Jdtaka. See 

first by Weber and later by Geldner. Charpentier, ZDMG. Ixiv. 66 seq, ; Ixvi. 

The stanza was partly intelligible to 44 seq. ; Geldner, Ixv. 806, 307 (who 

Sayana, as he makes it said as an oath overlooks Weber's suggestion of yo) ; 

by one accused of stealing lotus fibres. Oldenberg, GGN. 1911, p. 464, n. 2 who 

The verse is clearly cited from a story suggests runenddhu as a possibility, a very 

of which we have divergent versions in plausible conjecture, 

the Mahdbhdrata (2 accounts ; xiii. 4896- 



[ — V. 31 


266 ] The Agnihotra 

He is the one guest, he dwells among offerers ; this deity he turns away who 
being fit for the Agnihotra does not offer the Agnihotra. This deity being 
turned away turns him away from this world and from yonder, both of 
them, who being fit for the Agnihotra does not offer the Agnihotra. There- 
fore he who is fit for the Agnihotra should offer it. Therefore they say 
‘ A guest at evening should not be turned away ’, knowing this Nagarin 
Jana$ruteya said as to Aikada 9 aksi ^ Manutantavya ‘ In his offspring will we 
know him if he offer with knowledge or without knowledge ’. Of Aikada(;a- 
ksi the offspring became as kingly person ; as a kingly person his offspring 
becomes, who knowing thus offers after sunrise. Therefore after sunrise 
should offering be made. 

V. 31 (xxv. 6) Aditya on rising unites his rays with the Ahavaniya ; if 
one offers before sunrise, that is as if one were to offer the breast to a 
child unborn or to a calf unborn. But, if he offers after sunrise, that is as 
if one were to offer the breast to a child bom or a calf bora.^ Through his 
being united in both worlds proper food is offered both from this world and 
from yonder to him. If he offers before sunrise, that is as if one were to offer 
to a man or an elephant, without hand stretched out ^ if he offers after 
sunrise it is as if one were to offer to a man or an elephant, with hand 
stretched forth. He having taken him with his hand and dragged him 
upwards places him in the world of heaven, who knowing thus offers after 
sunrise. Therefore one should offer after sunrise. Aditya as he rises leads 
forward all creatures ; therefore they call him breath. In breath does he 
sacrifice who knowing thus sacrifices after sunrise ; therefore one should 
sacrifice after sunrise. Speaking truth he offers in truth who offers in the 
evening after sunset and in the morning after sunrise. With bhuh, bhuvah, 
svar, om ; Agni is light, light is Agni ’ he offers in the evening ; with ‘ bhiih, 
bhuvah, svar, om ; Surya is light, light is Surya ’ in the morning. By him 
speaking truth in tmth is the offering made, who knowing thus offers after 
sunrise ; therefore should one offer after sunrise. As to this a sacrificial 
verse is sung ; 


* Aikddafdktim should probably be read as 
suggested by tasya below where Atkdda^ 
fdkse as a locative is very difficult. 

I Cf. 5B. ii. 2. 1. 1. 

=* So Sayana and Haug : but of course prayate 
and aprayate may equally well be datives, 
and the sense be * put into the hand of 
a man who is not coming *, as Weber 
(Iwd. Stud. ix. 293), prefers as in KB. ii. 9. 

® S&yana consistently here and in the clause 


above tarn asftnai pratidhlyamdnam takes 
the worshipper and the sun as the two 
persons though he renders the passive 
erroneously as an active. This seems 
correct, as the only real alternative is 
to assume that the sun and the sacrifice 
are meant which is very difficult in the 
second passage, as tarn must correspond 
with ya since esa clearly is the sun. 



V. 31 — 1 


[266 


The Soma Sacrifice 

‘ Every morning they tell falsehood 
Who offer the Agnihotra before sunrise, 

Declaring what is to be declared by day on what is not day, 

Sarya is the light ; there is not then light for them.^ ' 

Errors in the Sacrifice. 

V. 32 (xxv. 7) Prajapati’ desired * May I be propagated ; may I be multi- 
plied He practised fervour ; having practised fervour he created these 
worlds ; the earth, the atmosphere, the sky. He brooded over these worlds ; 
from these worlds when brooded over these luminaries were born ; Agni was 
bom from the earth, Vayu from the atmosphere, Aditya from the sky. He 
brooded over these luminaries. From these brooded over the three Vedas 
were born ; the Rgveda was born from Agni, the Yajurveda from Vayu, the 
Stoaveda from Aditya. He brooded over these Vedas; from these (Vedas) 
when brooded over three pure (sounds) were born ; bhnh from the Rgveda 
was born, hhuvah from the Yajurveda, svar from the Samaveda. He 
brooded over these pure ones : from them when brooded over the three 
sounds were born ; the letter the letter u, and the letter m. Them he 
brought together ; that made (the word) om. Therefore with om does he 
say the Pranava. Om is the world of heaven ; om is he that yonder gives 
heat, Prajapati extended the sacrifice ; he took it ; he sacrificed with it. 
He performed the Hotr’s office with the Rc alone, the Adhvaryu’s with the 
Yajus, the Udgatr’s v/itli the Saman. He performed the Brahman’s office 
with the pure (part) of the threefold knowledge. Prajapati handed over the 
sacrifice to the gods ; the gods extended the sacrifice ; they took it, they 
sacrificed with it. They performed the Hotr’s office with the Kc alone, the 
Adhvaryu’s with the Yajus, the Udgatr’s with the Saman. They performed 
the Brahman’s office with the pure (part) of the threefold knowledge. 
The gods said to Prajapati ‘If there be trouble in our sacrifice from 
the Rc, or from the Yajus, or from the Saman, or an unknown (trouble) or 
a complete failure, what is the expiation ? ’ To the gods said Prajapati 
‘ If there is trouble in your sacrifice from the Rc, do ye offer on the 
Garhapatya, with 'bhuh * ; if from the Yajus, with * bhnvah ’ on the Agnidh’s 
altar, or on the Anvaharyapacana at oblation sacrifices ^ ; if from the Saman, 
with ‘ svar ’ on the Ahavaniya ; if (the trouble) is unknown or a complete 

5 The last words really give a further asser- CU. iv. 17 ; ^B. i. 5. 6-8 ; JB. i. 867, 368 ; 

tion of what is already said in adivd, JUB. iii. 16. 4-17. 10; Oertel, JAOS.xviii. 

which is based, of course, on diva ; snryo 33^ ,34 j Trans, Conn, Acad, xv. 165 sq. 

jyotih is clearly a citation without iti, 2 As opposed to the Soma sacrifice where alone 

1 KB. xxvi. 3-6 has a Praya^citta section, but there is an Agnidh's altar, 

only remotely similar, Cf. *1- 8 ; 



257] 


[— V. 34 


Erro7*s in the Sacrifice 

failure, running through all "bhuhy hh'nvahy 8var\ do ye offer on the 
Ahavanlya only \ These exclamations are the internal fastenings of the 
Vedas; just as one may unite one thing with another or joint with 
joint, or with a cord unite an object of leather or something which has 
come apart, so with these he unites whatever in the sacrifice has come apart. 
These exclamations are an expiation for all ; therefore this expiation only 
should be performed in the sacrifice. 

V. 33 (xxv. 8). Important sages say ‘ Since the Hotr^s office is performed 
with the Rc, the Adhvaryu’s with the Yajus, the Udgatr’s with the 
Saman, the threefold knowledge is taken up ; how then is the Brahman’s 
office performed ? ’ * With the threefold knowledge he should say. He' 

that blows here is the sacrifice ; two paths it has, speech and mind, for 
by speech and by mind the sacrifice proceeds. Speech^is this (earth), mind 
yonder (world) ; by speech as the threefold knowledge they make ready one 
side, by mind the Brahman makes (another) ready,^ Now some Brahman 
priests, when the morning litany is begun, having muttered the Stoma- 
bhagas wait talking. As to this ^ a Brahman said, seeing the Brahman 
talking when the morning litany was begun, ‘ They have omitted half of 
this sacrifice ’. Just as a man with one foot when going, or a chariot 
with a wheel on one side when moving, fails, so the sacrifice fails and 
through the failure of the sacrifice the sacrificer fails. Therefore the 
Brahman priest, when the morning litany is begun, should remain silent 
until the offering of the Upan9U and Antarytoia (cups) ; when the Pava- 
manas have been begun, until the conclusion ; again, in the case of Stotras 
accompanied with (^astras, he should be silent until their vasat call. Just 
as a man with both feet when going, or a chariot with wheels on both sides 
when moving, does not come to any harm, so the sacrifice does not come 
to harm, and through the sacrifice being unharmed, the sacrificer is not 
harmed. 

V. 34 (xxv. 9). They say ^ Seeing that the fees are brought for the 
Adhvaryu (by the sacrificer thinking) ‘ He has drawn the cups for me, he has 
acted for me, he has offered the libations for me ’, for the Udgatr (thinking) 
' He has sung for me’, for the Hotr (thinking) ‘He hassaid the invitatory verses 
for me, he has recited (the litanies) for me, he has said the offering verses for 
me what has the Brahman priest done for the fees brought for him ; or is 
it that without action he is to receive them ? ’ The Brahman is the physician 

3 Sayana justifies the rendering by a reference * For these cf. PB. i. 8, 9; TS. hi. 5. 2; iv. 

to OU. iv. 17. 7, where cases of other 4. 1 ; v. 3. 6 ; KS. xvii. 7 ; xxxvii. 7 ; 

things are given. MS. ii. 8. F; VS xv. 6. 

1 CU. iv; 17. 1. ^ Sec GB. iii. 2, 3. 

33 [hO..S. 26 ] 



[258 


V. 34—] The Soma Sacrijice 

of the sacrifice ; he I’eceives for making medicine for the sacrifice. More- 
over in that (the Brahman) performs his function as Brahman -with the 
greatest amount of holy power, with the sap of the metres, therefore is he 
the Brahman ; in the beginning the Brahman was a sharer of half with 
the other priests ; a half (of the holy power) was the Brahman’s, a half the 
other priests. Therefore if there is trouble in the sacrifice from the Rc 
the Brahman should offer on the Garhapatya with ‘ hhuh ’ ; if from the 
Yajus, on the Agnidh’s altar, or on the Anvaharyapacana at oblation 
oflFerings with ‘ hhuvah ’ ; if from the Saman with ‘ s/vdv ’ on the Ahavanlya ; 
if (the trouble) is unknown or a complete failure, he should run over all 
‘ hhuh, hhuvah, svar ’ and offer on the Ahavanlya only. The Prastotr when 
the Stotra is being begun, says ‘ O Brahman,^ shall we chant, 0 Pra^astr ? ’. 
At the morning pressing the Brahman should .say ‘ bhuh I with Indra do ye 
chant ’ ; ‘ hhuvah ’ he should say at the midday pressing ‘ With Indra do 
ye chant ’ ; ‘ svar ’ he should say at the third pressing, ‘ With Indra do ye 
chant ’. ‘ hhuh, hhuvah, svar ’ he should say at an Uktha or Atiratra, ‘ With 

Indra do ye chant’. In that he says ‘With Indra do ye chant ’, and the 
sacrifice is connected with Indra, and the god of the sacrifice is Indra, 
verily thus he makes the chanting possessed of Indra, verily to them he 
says in effect ‘ Let it go not from Indra ; with Indra do ye chant ’. 

» For Uiis cf. A(!S. v. 2. 11-10 ; 99 S. vi. 8. enco to the AV. U strongly in favour of 

6, 6. For tho Brahman’s activity see the priority of the AB. ; cf. Bloomfield, 

KB, vi. 12. See also M^S. iii. 1. 11 seq , ; Athniareda^ p. 4. 

Ap^S. ix. 16. 4,6. The absence of refer- 



PANCIKA VI 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Hecitations of the Hotrakas. 

ADHYAYA I 

The Offices of the Suhrahmanyd and Grdvastut. 

vi. 1 (xxvi. 1). The^ gods performed a Sattra at Sarvacaru they could 
not smite away evil. To them said Arbuda Kadraveya, the serpent seer, 
the maker of spells, ^ One Hotr's office has not been performed by you, 
that will I perforin for you; then will you smite away evil. They said 
‘ Be it so'. At each midday he crept out for tliem ; he praised the pressing 
stones ; therefore at each midday they praise the pressing stones in 
imitation of him. The way by which he crept out is now called the 
creeping out of Arbuda. Them the king made drunk ; they said ‘ It is 
a poisonous snake that looks at our king ; come, with a turban let us bind 
his eyes ‘ Be it so ' (they said) ; with a turban they bound ^ his eyes ; 
therefore winding round a turban they praise the pressing stones in 
imitation of him. The king still made them drunk ; they said ‘ With his 
own spell he praises the pressing stones; come, let us mingle the spell 
with other verses.' ‘ Be it so ' (they said) ; with other verses they mingled 
his spell ; then he did not make them drunk. In that they mingle his 
spell with other verses, verily (it serves) for expiation. They smote away 
evil ; in accordance with their smiting away the serpents smote away evil ; 
having smitten away evil they lay aside their old worn out skin and go on 
with a new one. He smites away evil who knows thus. 

vi, 2 (xxvi. 2). They say ‘With how many verses^ should he praise?' 

1 For tho activity of the Gravastut see KB. 331, 332; Cf. L6vi, La doctrine dii sacrifice^ 

xxix. 1 ; his part is described in full in pp. 142, 143. 

A 9 S. V. 12; 99 s. vii. 15, His special 2 ^ place according to Sayana: Aufrecht 
Arbuda hymn is RV. x. 94 with x 76 supplies yajtie ; a man, BR. 

and X. 176 before the last verse ; these ^ Aptnahyus is a wholly anomalous and in- 
are preceded by RV. i. 24. 3 ; v. 81. 1 ; correct form ; probably merely a blunder, 

viii. 81. 1; 1. 1; Eggeliiig, SBE. xxvi. vi. 2. ^ I. e. of the Pavamanl verses which 

he is to use. 



vi. 2 — ' The Qastras of the Hotvahas [260 

‘ With a hundred ’ they say ; man has a hundred (years of) life, a hundred 
strengths, a hundred powers ; verily thus he places him in life, in strength, 
in power. ‘ Or with thirty-three ' they say ; ‘ he smote away the evils of 
thirty-three gods ; thirty-three were the gods for him.' With an unlimited 
number should he praise ; Prajapati is unlimited. The Hotr function of 
the Gravastut is Prajapati’s ; in it all desires are won. In that he praises 
with an unlimited number, (it serves) to win all desires. All desires he 
wins who knows thus. Therefore should he praise with an unlimited 
number only. They say ‘ How is he to praise ? ' ‘ By syllables ? ' ‘ By 

sets of four syllables ? ' 'By Padas V 'By half- verses V 'By verses ? ' 
By verses does not fit, nor again does by Padas fit ; as to by syllables or 
sets of four syllables, the metres would be broken up so, many syllables 
would so be omitted. By half verses only should he praise, for support. 
Man has two supports, cattle four feet ; verily thus he makes the sacrificer 
with two supports find support in four-footed cattle. Therefore should 
he praise by half verses only. They say ' Since it is at the midday only 
that he praises the pressing stones, how is the praising at the other press- 
ings performed by him 1 ' In that he praises with Gayatri verses, and the 
morning pressing is in Gayatri, thereby (is the praise accomplished) at 
the morning pressing ; in that he praises with Jagati verses, and the third 
pressing is in Jagati, thereby at the third pressing. So by him who 
knows thus, although he praises the pressing stones only at the midday, is 
praising accomplished in all the pressings. They say 'Seeing that the 
Adhvaryu directs the other priests, then why does he undertake this with- 
out a direction ? ' The office of the Gravastut is mind ; mind requires no 
direction ; therefore he undertakes this without a direction. 

vi. 3 (xxvi. 1). The Subrahmanya^ is speech ; its calf is Soma the king ; 
when Soma the king has been bought, they summon the Subrahmanya, 
just as one summons a cow ; with this as calf it milks all desires for the 
sacrificer. All desires speech milks for him who knows thus. They say 
'Why has the Subrahmanya its name?’ 'It is speech’, he should reply; 
' speech is the holy power and the good holy power {sub-hrahma).' They 
say ‘ Why then do they call him that is male female as it were ? ’ ' Because 
the Subrahmanya is speech ’ he should reply, ‘ for that reason.’ They say 
'Seeing that the other priests perform their priestly functions within 
the altar, and the Subrahmanya without the altar, how is his function 
performed within the altar ? ’ ' From the altar they throw up the rubbish 
heap ; in that standing on the heap he calls ’, he should reply, ' for that 


^ For the Subrahmanya formula see “i* 
3. 4. 17 seq . ; TA. i. 12. 8, 4 ; L^S. i. 3 ; 


Oaland and Henry, VAgnisfoma, pp. 65 
seq. ; Oertel, JAOS. xviii. 34. 



26 IJ The Suhrahmanyd and the GrUvastut [ — vi. 4 

reason.’ They say ‘ Then why does he stand on the heap when calling 
the Subrahmanya ? ’ The seers performed a sacrificial session; to the 
tallest ^ of them they said ‘ Do thou call the Subrahmanya ; from nearest 
wilt thou summon the gods.’ Verily thus they make him the tallest; 
moreover thus he delights the whole of the altar. They say ‘ Why do they 
drive up a bull as the fee for him 1 ’ ‘ The bull is male, the Subrahmanya 

female ; that is a pair ; for the propagation of this pair ’ (he should reply). 
Inaudibly * the Agnidh utters the offering verse for the cup for (Tvastr) 
with the wives ; the cup for (Tvastr) with the wives is seed ; seed is poured 
inaudibly as it were. He does not say the second vasat (thinking) ‘ The 
second vasat call is a completion; let me not bring seed to completion.’ 
The incomplete state of seed is perfect; therefore he does not say the 
second vasat. Seated on the lap of the Nestr he partakes; the Nestr 
represents the wife ; ^ Agni places seed in tlie wives for propagation ; verily 
thus by Agni he places seed in the wives for propagation. He is propa- 
gated with offspring and cattle who knows thus. After the fees the 
Subrahmanya is completed ; the Subrahmanya is speech ; the fee is food ; 
verily thus in proper food and speech at the end they establish the 
sacrifice. 


ADHYAYA II 

The Qastras of the other Ilotrahas at Sattras and Ahlnas. 

vi. 4 (xxvii. 1). The' gods performed a sacrifice ; as they were performing 
it the Asuras came up to them (saying) ‘We will make a confusion of 
their sacrifice.’ From the south they approached them, where they 
thought was the thinnest part of the sacrifice. The gods perceiving this 
put Mitra and Varuna around on the south; by means of Mitra and 
Varuna on the south at the morning pressing they smote away the Asuras 
and the Raksases. Verily thus also the sacrificers by means of Mitra 
and Varuna on the south at the moraing pressing smite away the Asuras 
and the Raksases. Therefore the Maitravaruna recites (the litany) to 
Mitra and Varuna at the morning pressing, for by means of Mitra and 
Varuna the gods smote away the Asuras and the Raksases on the south 
at the morning pressing. Smitten off at the south the Asuras entered 

* ‘Eldest’ Sayana and Haug, but ‘tallest’ ‘ For this Sayana cites TS. vi. 6. 8. 6. Cf. 
above gives a reply to the question of the also fB. iv. 4. 2. 17 ; ^9S. viii. 6. 3, 4. 

use of the Utkara. ' This chapter merely gives explanations of 

^ For the omission of the (tHuva^ikdra see the origin of the several 9estras of the 

A^S. V. 6. 21. three Hotrakas. 



vi. 4 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas [262 

the sacrifice in the middle. The gods perceiving this placed Indra in the 
middle; they with Indra in the middle smote away the Asiiras and 
Raksases at the morning pressing. Verily thus also the sacrificers with 
Indra in the middle smite away the Asuras and tlie Raksases at the 
morning pressing. Therefore the Brahmanacchahsin at the morning 
pressing recites (a litany) to Indra, for with Indra in the middle the gods 
at the morning pressing smote away the Asuras and the Raksases. The 
Asuras, smitten off in the middle, entered the sacrifice from the north. 
The gods, perceiving this, put Indra and Agni around on the north ; with 
Indra and Agni on the north at the morning pressing they smote away 
the Asuras and the Raksases. Verily thus also the sacrificers with Indra 
and Agni on the north at the morning pressing smite away the Asuras 
and the Raksases. Therefore the Achrivaka at the morning pressing 
recites (a litany) to Indra and Agni, for with Indra and Agni on the 
north at the morning pressing the gods smote away the Asuras and 
the Raksases. The Asuras smitten off on the north ran round to tlie 
front in battle array. The gods perceiving this placed Agni around in 
front at the morning pressing; with Agni in front at the morning 
pressing they smote away the Asuras and the Raksases. Verily thus 
also the sacrificers with Agni in front at the morning pressing smite 
away the Asuras and tlie Raksases. Tlierefore the morning pressing is 
connected with Agui. He smites away evil who knows tlius. The Asuras, 
smitten off in front, having gone round to the back entered. The gods, 
perceiving this, put the All-gods, as their self, around behind at the third 
pressing; they with the All-gods, as themselves, behind at the third 
pressing smote away the Asuras and the Raksases. Verily thus also the 
sacrificers with the All-gods, as themselves, behind at the third pressing 
smite away the Asuras and the Raksases. Therefore the third pressing 
is connected with the All-gods. He smites away evil who knows thus. 
So the gods smote away the Asuras from the whole of the sacrifice. Then 
the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He prospers himself, 
the evil rival who hates him is defeated, who knows thus. The gods wnth 
the sacrifice so ordered smote away the Asuras, the evil, and conquered 
the world of heaven. He smites away the evil rival who hates him and 
conquers the world of heaven who knows thus and who knowing thus 
orders the pressings. 

vi. 5 (xxvii. 2). They make the strophe the antistrophe of the strophe ^ 

^ The point is that the ^astras of tlie Hotrakas not be done at the other pressings because 

are made up at the morning pressing of the Stotras there (Prstha and Uktha) do 

the Stotriya (taken from the correspond- not from day to day remain in tlie same 

ing three Ajya Samans) and as Anurupa ritual form. The idea occurs in AB. vi. 

the Stotriya of the next day. This can- 17. See A 9 S. vii. 2. 2seg. Cf. GB. vii. 11. 



263] 


[ — vi. 7 


The (^astrcbs of the Hotrakas 

at the morning pressing ; verily thus they make one day the counterpart 
of the other; verily thus by the preceding day they lay hold of the 
subsequent day. But this is not the case at the midday (pressing) ; the 
Prsthas are prosperity; they have not the position ^ for the purpose of 
making the strophe the antistrophe of the strophe. By reason of the 
same distinction they do not at the third pressing make the strophe the 
antistrophe of the strophe. 

vi. 6 (xxvii. 3). Next as to the commencing verses.^ ‘ With true guidance 
for us, let Varuna’ is that of the Maitravaruna ^ (containing) ‘Let Mitra 
lead us knowing ' ; the Maitravaruna is the leader of the Hotrakas ; therefore 
this (verse) contains the word ‘leader’. ‘ Indra for you on all sides’ is 
that of the Brahmanacchahsin,-^ (containing) ‘ We invoke for men ’ ; verily 
with this (verse) day by day they invoke Indra. When they invoke in com- 
petition no other appropriates Indra, where a Brahmanacchausin knowing 
thus day by day recites this (verse). ‘ What time, when the Soma was 
pressed, men ’ is that of the Achavaka ; ^ ‘ invoked Indra and Agni ’ (it 
continues); verily with this (verse) day by day they invoke Indra and 
Agni. When they invoke in competition no other appropriates Indra 
and Agni, where an Achavaka knowing thus recites this (verse) day by 
(lay. They are ships which carry over to the world of heaven ; verily with 
these (verses) they cross to the world of heaven. 

vi. 7 (xxvii. 4). Next as to the concluding verses. ‘ May we be thine, 
O god Varuna’ is that of the Maitravaruna;^ ‘Sap and light may we 
obtain ’ (it ends) ; ‘ sap ’ is this world ; ‘ light ’ is yonder world ; verily with 
this (verse) they lay hold of both worlds. ‘ He hath traversed the atmo- 
sphere ’ is that of the Brahmanacchahsin,^ a triplet, containing the word 
‘ apart ’ ; verily with these he puts apart the world of heaven for them. 
‘In the joy of the Soma the worlds, when Indra broke Vala’ (he says); 
the consecrated ones are eager to win ; therefore this (verse) contains the 
word ‘ hole ’ (vala). 

‘ He drove out the cows for the Angirases, 

Eevealing them that were in secret, 

Headlong he hurled Vala ; ’ 

verily with this (verse) he wins booty. ‘ By Indra the spaces of the 

2 Aufrecht with Sayana and Haug and the * I. e. after the Stotriyas and Anurupas of 
Anand. ed. read tatsthanani : AVeber AB. vi. 6 in sacrifices of a series of days. 

{Ind, Stud. ix. 295) suggests the alteration 2 rv. i. 90. 1 ; vii. 2. 10 ; 95®. xii. 2. 14. 
tasthdndniy quoting the precise parallel ^ RV. i. 7. 10 ; A 5 S. vii. 2. 10. 
with yad in 5®* xii. 5. 1. 1-3, but this is ^ RV. vii. 94. 10 ; A 5 S. vii. 2. 10. Cf. 55®* 
no doubt wrong : cf. Eggeling, SBE. xii. 2. 19. 

xxvi. 242, n. 1 ; KB. xxvi. 8 : etatsthdne vi. 7. ^ RV. vii. 66. 9. 

. . . ^asydya. 2 RV. viii. 14. 7-9. 



vi. 7 — The Qastras of the Hotrakas [264 

sky’ (he says); the spaces of the sky are the world of heaven; by 
Indra (they) 

‘ Are made firm and established 
The firm are not to be moved away ’ ; 

verily with this (versa) day by day they continue to find support in 
the world of heaven. ‘I seek of those with Sarasvati’ is that of the 
Achavaka;® Sarasvati is speech; verily thus he says ‘of those with 
speech ’ ; ‘Of Indra and Agni the aid ’ (he says) ; speech is the dear abode 
of Indra and Agni ; verily thus he unites these two with their dear abode. 
With a dear abode does he prosper who knows thus. 

vi. 8 (xxvii. 5). There are two kinds of concluding verses of the Hotrakas, 
at the morning and at the midday, those of the Abina and those of the 
one day rites. The Maitravaruna concludes with those of the one day 
rite only ; ' thereby he departs not from the world. With those of the 
Ahina the Achavaka,® to obtain the world of heaven. Both are used by 
the Brahmanacchansin ; ® thereby grasping both he goes to this and to 
yonder world; moreover he goes grasping both, the Maitravaruna and 
the Achavaka, the Ahina and the one day rite, the year and the Agnistoma. 
Now at the third pressing the concluding verses of the Hotrakas are those 
of the one day rite only ; * the one day (rite) is a support ; verily thus 
at the end they establish the sacrifice on a support. Without taking 
a breath he should say the offering verse at the morning pressing ; save 
for one or two (verses) he should not recite beyond the Stoma,® (thinking) 
‘ That is as if one were to give quickly to one neighing and thirsting ; 
moreover I shall swiftly give proper food and Soma drinking to the gods.’ 
Swiftly he finds support in the world. (He uses) an unlimited number 
at the two latter pressings ; the world of heaven is unlimited ; (verily it 
serves) to obtain the world of heaven. At pleasure the Hotr may recite 
whatever the Hotrakas may recite on the previous day ; or the Hotrakas 


S RV. viii. 38. 10. 

* I, G, at the two Savanas of morning and 
midday he uses the same concluding 
verse (the plural being prayogahahuivd- 
peksam) they are RV. vii. 66. 9 and iv. 16. 
21 (cf. AB. vi. 23). See A<?S. v, 10. 28 ; 
16. 1 ; vi. 18. 5. 

9 RV. viii. 38. 10 and vii. 94. 9 ; RV. ii. 11. 
21 (AB. vi. 23) and iii. 30. 22 are those 
for the Ahina and Ekaha respectively. 

3 This means that at the morning pressing he 
used different verses in the Ekaha and 
Ahina (RV. viii. 93. 3 ; 14. 9), but at the 


midday pressing the same (RV. vii. 23. 6). 

* Yiz. RV. vii. 84. 1 ; x. 43. 1 ; vi. 69. 1 ; see 
A9S. viii. 2. 16 ; 3. 34 ; 4. 3. 

9 The sense as taken by Sayana and Haug 
scorns that meant ; cf. AB. vi. 23. 10 for 
the same use : Weber (Ind, Stud, ix. 296) 
objects on grammatical grounds to the 
wording and prefers the normal ^He 
should use one or two verses, but not 
over recite the Stoma * ; but this is really 
not consistent with the context in vi. 23 
and A^S. vii. 13. 2 expressly says that 
there is ati^ansana in one or two verses. 



266] The Recitations of the Hotrakas [ — vi. 9 

what the Hotr may recite ; the Hotr is the breath, the Hotrakas the 
limbs ; in common does this breath go througli the limbs. Therefore at 
pleasure the Hotr may recite what the Hotrakas recite on the previous 
day, or the Hotrakas what the Hotr (recites). The Hotr keeps concluding 
with the ends of the hymns. Moreover the concluding veraes of the 
Hotrakas are the same at the third pressing ; the Hotr is the body, the 
Hotrakas the limbs; the ends of the limbs are the same; therefore the 
concluding verses of the Hotrakas at the third pressing are the same. 


ADHYAYA III 


The Qastras and other Recitations of the Hotrakas. 


vi.9(xxviii. 1). ‘Let^ the bays carrytheo hither’ he recites at the morning 
pressing for the (goblets) being filled, (verses) containing (the words) 
‘ strong ’, * drink ‘ pressed and ‘ be drunk ’ and so perfect in form. They 
are (verses) to Indra which he recites ; the sacrifice is connected with Indra. 
They are Gayatris which he recites ; the morning pressing is connected 
with the Gayatri. Nine small * (verses) he recites at the morning pressing ; 
in what is small is seed poured ; ten at the midday he recites ; seed poured 
in the small having attained the middle part of the woman becomes most 
firm ; nine small (verses) he recites at the third pressing : from what is 
small are offspring born. In that he repeats the whole of the hymns, verily 
thus he propagates the sacrificer as an embryo from the sacrifice as the womb 
of the gods. Some recite seven verses each, seven at the morning pressing, 
seven at the midday (pressing), seven at the third pressing ; saying ‘ The 
offering verses should be as many as the invitatory verses ; ® seven eastward 
say the oflfering verses, seven say the vamt call ; these are the invitatory 
versos of those ’. That he should not do so ; they injure the seed of the 
sacrifice and morever the sacrificer himself, for the Ixymn is the sacrificer. 
By nine (verses) the Maitravaruna carries him from this world to the 
world of the atmosphere, by ten from the world of the atmosphere to yonder 
world, for the world of the atmosphere is the longest,* with nine from 


1 This chapter, in part, like KB. xxviii. 2 and 
3 deals with the Maitravaruna's recita- 
tions at the three pressings, which are 
RV. i. 16 (A^S. V. 5. 14), vii. 21, and iv. 
35 complete in each case as against the 
alternative of sets of seven verses. 

* The argument is that as ten is the norm, 

34 [h.O.S. 26] 


nine is small ; or defective. 

3 I. e. at the Prasthita otfering ; see A^S. v. 
6. 15-18 ; ggS. vii. 4. 2-10 ; Caland and 
Henry, L* Agnistoma, pp. 209, 211, 212. 

* Sayana treats this as if it were antariksalokdd 
dhi : the world meant is in his view the 
ndkaprstha. 



[266 


vi. 9 — ] The ^astras of the Hotrakas 

yonder world to the world of heaven. They cannot bear the sacridcer to the 
world of heaven who recite sets of seven. Therefore as wholes should he 
recite the hymns. 

vi. 10 (xxviii. 2). Farther he says ‘ Seeing that the sacrifice is for Indra, 
then why do two only at the morning pressing use as offering verses for the 
Frasthita (libations) verses manifestly addressed to Indra, namely the Hotr 
and the Brahmanacchansin : ‘ This Soma drink for thee ’ is the offering 
verse of the Hotr,^ ‘ 0 Indra, thee as a bull we ’ is that of the Brahmana- 
cchahsin.^ The others use (verses) to various deities ; how are their verses 
connected with Indra ? ’ The Maitravaruna ® uses as offering verse ‘ Mitra 
we hail ’ ; ‘ Varuna for the Soma drinking ’ (he says) ; whatever Pada con- 
tains (the word) ‘ drink ’ is a symbol of Indra ; thereby he delights Indra. 
The Potr * uses as offering verse ‘ O Maruts, in whose dwelling ’ ; ‘ He is 
best protected of men ’ (he says) ; the protector is Indra ; this is a symbol 
of Indra ; thereby he delights Indra. ‘ O Agni, bring hither the wives ’ the 
Nestr ® uses as offering verse ; ‘ Tvastr to the Soma drinking ’ (he says) ; 
Tvas^r is Indra ; this is a symbol of Indra ; thereby he delights Indra. ‘ To 
him whose food is the ox, whose food the cow ’ the Agnidh* uses as offering 
verse ; ‘ Soma-backed, the creator ’ (he says) ; the creator is Indra ; this 
is a symbol of Indra ; thereby he delights Indra. 

‘ Come hither with those that move at dawn, 

The gods, ye that have excellent wealth, 

Indra and Agni, to the Soma drinking ’ ; 

is the offering verse of the Achavaka,'^ being in itself perfect. So are these 
verses to Indra ; in that they are addressed to various deities, thereby he 
delights the other deities. In that they are in Gayatri, thereby they are 
connected with Agni ; these three with them he obtains. 

vi. 11 (xxviii. 3). ‘ There^ hath been pressed the divine Soma juice mingled 
with milk ’ he recites at the midday for (the goblets) being filled, (verses) 
containing (the words) ‘ strong ’, ‘ drink ’, ‘ pressed ’, and ‘ be drunk ’ and so 
perfect a form. (The verses) which he recites are addressed to Indra ; the 
sacrifice is connected with Indra ; they are Tristubh verses which he recites ; 


> RV. viii. 66. 8 ; IgS. v. 6. 18 ; ^gS. vii. 4. 

8. Of. KB. xxviii. 8 ; GB. vii. 20. 

» BV. iii. 40. 1 ; AgS. v. 6. 18 ; ggs. vii. 4. 7. 
» RV. i. 28. 4 5 IgS. v. 6. 18 ; ggS. vii. 4. 6. 

* RV. 1. 86. 1 ; AgS. v. 6. 18 ; ggS. vii. 4. 8. 

' RV. i, 22. » j igS. V. 6. 18 ; vii. 4. 9. 

« BV. viii. 48. 11 ; AgS. v. 6. 18 ; ggS. vii. 

4. 10. 

’ BV. viii. 88. 7 ; AgS. v. 7. 6 ; ggS. vii. 7. 2. 


vi. 11. • This chapter gives thehymn for the 
filling of the goblets and the Frasthita 
libations; for the former see AgS. v. 6. 14; 
13. 11 ; ggs. vii. 17.3 ; it is merely alluded 
to in KB. xxix. 2. hymn is RV. vii. 
21 : the word gorfika is quite uncertain ; 
‘ dont la flbche est la vache’ is Caland and 
Henry’s rendering L’Agnistonta, p. 284. 



267] The Recitations of the Hotrakas [ — ^vi. 12 

the midday pressing is connected with the Tristubh. They say ‘ Seeing 
that (the word) “ be drunk ” is a symbol of the third pressing, then why does 
he recite verses containing (the word) “ be drunk ” and why do they use such 
verses as offering verses ? ’ At the midday the gods become drunk as it 
were ; they also at the third pressing become drunk together ; therefore at 
the midday he recites (verses) containing the word ‘ be drunk ’ and they use 
such (verses) as offering verses. All of them at the midday use for the 
Prasthita libations ^ verses manifestly addressed to Indra. Some use verses 
containing (the words) ‘ penetrate towards The Hotr ^ uses as offering 
verse ‘Drink the Soma towards which O dread one thou hast penetrated". 
The Maitravaruna ^ uses as offering verse ‘ Drink it, thou that art impetuous, 
penetrating The Bralmianacchahsin ^ uses as offering verses ‘ Do thou 
drink as of old ; let it delight thee The Potr ® uses as offering verse ‘ Come 
hither; Soma lover they call thee". The Nestr*^ uses as offering verse 
‘ Thine is this Soma ; do thou come hither The Achavaka ® uses as offer- 
ing verse ‘ For Indra the Soma draughts found aforetime The Agnidh ^ 
uses as offering verse ‘ Filled is his cup; hail I " Of these those contain (the 
words) ‘ penetrate towards " ; Indra was not victorious at the morning press- 
ing ; with these (verses) he penetrated towards the midday pressing ; in 
that he penetrated towards, therefore do these verses contain (the words) 

‘ penetrate towards 

vi. 12 (xxviii.4). ‘ Come ^ hither, O sons of strength " he recites at the third 
pressing for (the goblet) being filled, (verses) containing (the words) ‘ strong ", 
‘ drink ", ‘ press ", and ‘ be drunk ' and so perfect in form. They are addressed 
to Indra and the Rbhus. They say ‘ Since they do not chant (verses) to the 
Rbhus, then why do they call it the Arbhava Pavamana ? ’ Prajapati as 
father having made immortal the Rbhus being mortal gave them a share in 
the third pressing ; therefore they do not chant (verses) to the Rbhus, but 
they call it the Arbhava Pavamana. Further he says ‘ Seeing that in the 
two first pressings he recites according to the metre, Gayatri verses at the 
morning pressing, Tristubhs at the midday pressing, then why does he recite 
Tristubh verses at the third pressing which is connected with the Jagati? * 


2 For the Prasthitas, see A^S. v. 6. 19 ; 99®* 

vii. 17. 6-11 ; Caland and Heni-y, pp. 286, 
287. 

3 RV. vi. 17. 1 : this and the next two contain 

forms of ahhi^trd A^S. v. 5. 19 ; 95®* 

17. 5. Cf.GB.vii.21. 

< RV. vi. 17. 2 ; A9S. v. 6. 18 ; 99S vii. 17. 6. 

6 RV. vi. 17. 3 ; A9S. v. 6. 19 ; 99S. vii. 17. 7. 

6 RV. i. 104. 9 ; A9S. v. 6. 19 ; 99S. vii. 17. 8. 

’ RV. iii. 35. 6 ; A9S. v. 5. 19 ; 99S. vii. 17. 9. 


8 RV. iii. 86. 2 ; A9S. v. 6. 19 ; 99S. vii. 17. 

10. A9S. inverts the order of the pre- 
ceding and this. 

9 RV. iii. 32. 15; A9S. v. 5. 19; 99S. vii. 

17. 11. 

^ For the filling of the goblets to RV. iv. 85 
see A 9 S. V. 5. 14 ; 95®* 2- 3 ; Caland 

and Henry, VAgnistomaj pp. 345, 346. 
It is merely referred to in KB. xxx. 1. 
Cf. GB. vii. 22. 



[268 


vi. 12 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas 


‘ The third pressing has the sap sucked out; the Tris^ubh metre is one with 
the sap not sucked out but full of pure juice ; (therefore it serves) to make 
it full of sap ’ should he reply ; ‘ Moreover he thus gives Indra a share in 
the pressing Further he says ‘Seeing that the third pressing is connected 
with Indra and the Rbhus, then why does he, the Hotr, alone at the third 
pressing use for the Prasthita libations ® what is manifestly (a verse ®) to 
Indra and the Rbhus “ O Indra with the Rbhus, full of strength, the well 
blended”, while the others use (verses) to various deities, and how are 
these (verses) connected with Indra and the Rbhus The Maitravaruna * uses 
as offering verse ‘ 0 Indra and Varuna, drinkers of the pressed this pressed 
(juice)’ ; in ‘Your chariot the sacrifice for the enjoyment of the gods ’ he men- 
tions many ; that is a symbol of the Rbhus. The Brahmanacchahsin ® uses as 
offering verse ‘ With Indra, O Brhaspati, drink the Soma ’ ; in ‘ Let the drops 
well formed enter you ’ he mentions many ; that is a symbol of the Rbhus. 
The Potr ® uses as offering verse ‘ May the steeds, swift speeding, bring you 
hither ’ ; in ‘ Swiftly leaping, come ye forward on their backs ’ he mentions 
many ; that is a symbol of the Rbhus. The Nestr ’’ uses as offering verse 
‘As at home come ye to us, swift to listen’; in ‘Come ye’ he mentions 
many; that is a symbol of the Rbhus. The Achavaka® uses as offering 
verse ‘ O Indra and Visnu drink of this sweet drink ’ ; in ‘ The sweet Soma 
juices of you two have come ’ he mentions many ; that is a symbol of the 
Rbhus. The Agnidh ^ uses the offering verse ‘ This praise to Jatavedas who 
doth deserve it ; in ‘ Like a chariot let us magnify with devotion ’ he mentions 
many ; that is a symbol of the Rbhus. So are these verses addressed to 
Indra and the Rbhus. In that they are addressed to various deities, thereby 
he delights the other deities. In that they consist mainly of Jagati verses,^® 
and the third pressing is connected with the Jagati, verily (they serve) to 
make perfect the pressing. 

vi. 13 (xxviii. 5). Further he says ‘ Seeing that some of the Hotr’s ofiices 
have litanies and others have no litanies, how are they all made by him to 
have litanies, and be equal and perfect ? ’ In that naming them together ^ 
they call them Hotr’s offices, thereby are they equal. In that some of the 
Hotr’s offices have litanies and others not, thereby are they different. So 
they all become for him possessed of litanies, equal and perfect. Further 


2 For the Prasthita libations see A^S. v. 5. 
19; 55s. viii.2.4~12 ; Caland and Henry, 
pp. 846-849. _ 

s RV. iii. 60. 6 ; A^S. v. 5. 19 ; 99S. viii. 2. 5. 
* RV. vi. 68. 10 ; A^S. v. 5. 19 ; ffS. viii. 
2 . 6 . 

« RV. iv. 60. 10 ; A9S. v. 5. 19 ; 99S. viii. 
2. 7. 


8 RV. i. 86. 6 ; A9S. v. 5. 19 ; 99S. viii. 2. 8. 

7 RV. li. 36. 3 ; A9S. v. 5. 19 ; 99S. viii. 2. 9. 

8 RV. vi. 69. 7; A9S. v. 5. 19; 99S. viii. 

2 . 10 . 

9 RV. i. 94. 1 ; A9S. v. 6 19; 99S. viii. 2. 11. 

19 Weber compares praya in 99®* 26. 6. 

1 Weber (Jnd. Stud* ix. 298) suggests as an 
alternative * ubereinstimmend 



269] The Litanies of the Hotrakas [ — vi. 14 

he says ‘The Hotrakas recite at the morning pressing and recite at the 
midday pressing ; how do they recite at the third pressing ? ’ ‘In that at 
the midday they recite two hymns apiece’, he should reply, ‘for that 
reason/ Further he says ‘Seeing that the Hotr has two litanies, how 
have the Hotrakas two litanies?’ ‘In that they use as offering verses 
(verses) addressed to two deities he should reply, ‘ for that reason/ 

vi. 14 (xxviii. 6). Further he says ‘ Seeing that these three Hotr’s offices 
are possessed of litanies, how have the others litanies ? * The Ajya is the 
litany of the Agnidh’s office, the Marutvatiya of the Potr’s, the Vaifvadeva 
of the Nestr’s ; these Hotr’s ofiices contain the characteristics accordingly.^ 
Further he says ‘ Seeing that some Hotrakas have one direction only given 
to them, then why has the Potr two directions given, and the Nestr two^? ’ 
When the Gayatri yonder having become an eagle brought the Soma, Indra 
having cut off the litanies of these Hotr’s offices gave them to the 
Hotr (saying) ‘ You have called to me ; you have known this ’. The gods 
said ‘With speech let us strengthen these two Hotr’s offices ’. Therefore 
have they two directions. By speech they strengthened the Agnidh’s office ; 
therefore his offering verses are one verse larger.® Further he says ‘ Seeing 
that the Maitravaruna gives directions to the Hotr with ‘ Let the Hotr say 
the offering verse ; let the Hotr say the offering verse ’, then why does he 
give directions with ‘ Let the Hotr say the offering verse ; let the Hotr say 
the offering verse ’ to the Hotra 9 ahsins who are not Hotrs ? ’ The Hotr is 
the breath ; all the priests arc the breath ; verily thus he says in effect ‘ Let 
breath say the offering verse ; let breath say the offering verse ’. Then he 
says ‘ Is there a direction for the Udgatrs, or is there not ? ’ ‘ There is ’ he 

should reply. In that the Pra 9 astr, after muttering, says ‘ Do ye chant ’, 
this is their direction. Further he says ‘Is there a choosing^ of the 
Achavaka ? Or not ? ’ * There is ’ he should reply. In that the Adhvaryu 
says to him, ‘ O Achavaka, say what is to be said by you’, this is the choice 
of him. Further he says ‘ Seeing that at the third pressing the Maitra- 
varuna recites (a litany) to Indra and Varuna, then why are the strophe 
and antistrophe addressed to Agni?’ With Agni as their head the gods 
smote away the Asuras from the litanies ; therefore its strophe and anti- 
strophe are addressed to Agni.® Further he says ‘ Seeing that the Brahmana- 
cchahsin recites (a litany) to Indra and Brhaspati at the third pressing, 

1 The offering verses of the three priests con- * The Agnidh has an extra vers,e RV. iii. 6. 

tain references to Agni, the Maruts, and 9 ; A^S. v. 19. 7 ; 99®* ^* 

the All-gods. * There is no formal Pravara ; ^see A 9 S. v. 

2 I. e. at the Rtuyajas of the twelve Praisas, 3. 12. 

the Potr number 2 and 8, the Nestr 3 and ® RV. vii. 82 and 84 are the 9^*^«*^ra ; vii. 16. 

9. The text is given in full in Schefte- lC-18 ; 19-21 are the Stotriya and 

lowitz. Lie Apoh'yphen des Rgveda^ as v. 7. Anurupa. 



vi. 14 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrahas [270 

and the Achavaka one to Indra and Visnu, how are their strophes and 
antistrophes addressed to Indra Indra drove away the Asuras from 
the litanies ; he said ‘ With me who ? ’ With ‘ I ' and ‘ I " the deities followed 
after ; in that Indra was the first to drive away, therefore their strophes 
and antistrophes are addressed to Indra; in that with ‘I’ and ‘I’ the 
deities followed after, therefore do they recite to various deities. 

vi. 15 (xxviii. 7). Further he says ‘Seeing that the third pressing is 
connected with the All-gods, then why are these hymns to Indra in Jagati 
recited as the commencement at the third pressing?' ‘Verily laying hold 
of Indra by them they proceed' he should reply. Moreover in that the 
third pressing is connected with the Jagati, it is for desire ^ of the Jagati. 
Whatever metre is recited thereafter, it is all in the Jagati if these hymns 
to Indra in Jagati are recited as the commencement at the third pressing. 
Then at the end the Achavaka recites a hymn in Tristubh ^ ‘ With the rite ’ ; 
the rite which is to be praised he refers to. ‘ With sap ’ (he says) ; sap is 
food ; (verily it serves) to win proper food. ‘ With safe paths furthering 
us ' (he says) ; verily thus he recites for safety day by day. Further he 
says ‘ Since the third pressing is connected with the Jagati, then why have 
they concluding verses in Tristubh ? ’ The Tristubh is strength ; verily thus 
at the end they keep finding support in strength. ‘ This speech of mine 
hath reached Indra, Varuna ' is that of the Maitravaruna ; ^ ‘ May Brhaspati 
protect us around behind ' that of the Brahmanaechahsin ; ^ ‘ Both have 
conquered' is that of the Achavaka, '' for they two are victorious; ‘They 
are not conquered, he is not conquered ’ (he says), for neither of them has 
conquered. 

‘ What time, O Visnu, with Indra ye did strive 
Then did ye two divide in three the thousand ’ 

(he says). Indra and Visnu fought with the Asuras; having conquered, 
them they said ‘ Let us make an arrangement ’. The Asuras said ‘ Be it so 
Indra said ‘So much as Visnu three times traverses, so much be ours; let 
the rest be yours '. He traversed these worlds, then the Vedas, then speech. 

® KV. i. 57 ; X. 68 and 43 are the ^Astra ; viii. mitrakrtyu in AB. iii. 4. 6 is not probably 

21, 1~2 ; 9-10 are the Stotriya and a parallel, but hhuyaskamya occurs in a 

Anurupa of the Brahmanacchansin ; ii. Kanva passage of the fB., cited by 

13 ; vii. 100 ; i. 156 ; vi. 69 ; and viii. Eggeling, SBE. xxvi. 42, n. 2. 

98. 7-9 ; 13. 4-6 are the verses of the * yJ, 09^ 

Achavaka referred to. All these are the 3 Ry. yji, 34, 5 

Qastras of the Hotrakas at the third ^ RV. x. 43. 11 (not 42. 11 as Haug, the last 
pressing in the Ukthya ; see A^S. vi. hymn being x. 48). 

1. 2 ; 99s. ix. 1-4 ; AB. iii. 49, 50. 5 Ry. Yi. 69. 8 ; cf. fB. iii. 8. 1. 13 ; Eggeling, 

^ Cf. KB. XXX. 2, 3 and see also VaiL xxxii. 85. SBE. xxvi. 62, n. 2. 

The form jagatkamyd is very abnormal ; 



271 ] 


The Sampdta and other Hymns [ — vi. 17 

They say ‘ What is the thousand ? ’ ‘ These worlds, these Vedas, moreover 
speech* he should reply. ‘Did ye divide’ the Achavaka repeats in the 
Ukthya, for he is then the last; the Hotr at the Agnistoma and the 
Atiratra, for he is then the last. ‘Should he repeat at the Soda^in? 
Or should he not repeat ? ’ ‘He should repeat * they say ; ‘ Why should he 
repeat in the other days and not at this ? ’ Therefore he should repeat.® 
vi. 16 (xxviii. 8). Further he says ‘Seeing that the third pressing is 
connected with the Nar^ahsa, then why does the Achavaka at the end 
recite in the Qilpas verses without reference to the Nara 9 ahsa.^ The 
Nara 9 ahsa (h 3 niin) is a development ; some seed is developed as it were ; 
this is already developed and so propagated. Again the Nara9ahsa hymn 
is soft and slipping; but the Achavaka is the last; (they think) ‘We 
shall establish it in something firm for the sake of firmness *. Therefore 
the Achavdika at the end in the Qilpas recites (verses) without reference to 
the Nara^ansa (thinking) ‘ We shall establish it in something firm, for the 
sake of firmness *. 


ADHYAYA IV 


The Sam^^dta and other Hymns. 

vi. 17 (xxix. 1). The strophe of the next day they make the antistrophe, 
at the morning pressing ^ for the continuity of the Ahina (sacrifice). Just as 
the one day (rite) pressing, so the Ahina; just as the pressings of the 
one day (rite) as a pressing keep united, so the days of the Ahina keep 
united. In that they make the strophe of the next day the antistrophe at 
the morning pressing for the continuity of the Ahina, verily thus they 
continue the Ahina. The gods and the seers planned ‘ With what is the 
same, let us continue the sacrifice ; they saw this similarity in the sacrifice. 


® The last four syllables are repeated ; see 
A^S. vii. 1. 12. 

* S&yana explains the term N&rft^aAsa as 
praise of men like the Rbhus or Ahgi- 
rases. In vi. 32 the NiLra 9 aftsI verses 
(Danastutis) are mentioned. Of. how- 
ever the Nara 9 aAsa hymn, RV. x. 62 in 
AB. vi. 27 ; KB. xxiii. 8. There can be 
no real doubt that the real reference is 
to RV. X. 62 with its generative reference. 
The reply to the objection is twofold ; 
in the first place the seed when developed 


needs no further aid and as the Ach&vaka 
is late in the ritual it is developed when 
it reaches him. Secondly the hymn is 
soft and so a bad ending. The term 
Nara 9 afi 8 a occurs in yet another use of 
the cups of the libations (Caland and 
Henry, VAgiMoma^ p. 220; the con- 
nexion with N&r& 9 afi 8 a and the manes is 
discussed by Oldenberg, ZDMG. liv.49s«9. 
and Hillebrandt, Vedo Mjfth. ii. 102), but 
this is not here in place, 
vi. 17. ’ Cf. above AB. vi. 5. 



[272 


vi. 17 ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas 


the Pragathas the same,^ the beginnings ^ the same, the hymns ^ the same. 
Indra is a house frequenter ; where Indra goes first, then he returns again ; 
verily (it serves) to secure Indra in the sacrifice. 

vi. 18 (xxix. 2). These Sampatas Vi^vamitra first saw; them seen by 
Vi^vamitra Vamadeva created,^ ‘ Thee, O Indra with the thunderbolt ; That 
which of ours Indra rejoiceth in and desireth and ‘ How ? of what Hotr 
hath he made great ? ’ To them he swiftly moved ; in that he swiftly 
moved (savfKxpdtafjj that is why the Sampatas have their name. Vi^va- 
mitra considered ‘ The Sampatas which I saw Vamadeva has created , what 
hymns now can I create as counter Sampatas ? ’ He created these hymns 
as Sampatas their counterparts.^ * Straightway on birth, the bull, the 
youngling,* ‘ Indra, breaker of citadels, overcame the Dasa with his beams,* 
‘This offering do thou make attain,’ ‘Thy comrades. Soma-loving, desire 
thee,’^ Ordering the bearer hath gone to the grandson of the daughter , and 
‘Like a carpenter, have I fashioned a thought,’ ‘ Who alone is to be invoked 
by mortals* Bharadvaja^ (saw). ‘ With sharp horns, like a terrible wild 
beast’, and ‘Praises have been offered in desire of glory* Vasistha^ (saw). 
‘To him the eager, the impetuous* Nodhas^ (saw). Having recited at the 
morning pressing the strophes of the six-day (rite), at the midday they 
recite the Ahina hymns. These are the Ahina hymns ; ‘ Let the true one 
come hither, the bounteous, he of the Soma lees * the Maitravaruna ® (recites) 
containing (the word) ‘true*. ‘To him the eager, the impetuous* (this 
hymn) containing (the word) ‘ prayer * in ‘ To Indra the prayers most truly 
given * and ‘ O Indra, these prayers have the Gotamas made * the Brahmana- 
cchahsin ^ recites. ‘ Ordering the bearer * (this hymn) containing (the word) 
‘bearer’ in ‘They have produced the bearer* the Achavaka"^ recites. They 
say ‘Why does the Achavaka recite this hymn containing (the word) 
“ bearer ** both in the days that go away and those that come up again ? 


2 See A^S. vii. 4 6 ; see below AB. vi. 21. 

2 See A^S. vii. 4. 7 ; below AB. vi. 22. 

* Not the ahlnasuktiini as Sayana but the 

aharahah^asydni ; see A^S. vii. 4. 8 and 9 ; 
AB. vi. 20. Mokahsdrl he secs a cat. 

1 RV. iv. 19, 22, 23 ; A^S. vii. 6. 20. 

2 RV. iii. 48, 34, 36, 30, 31, 38 ; AgS. vii. 6. 

20 omits iii. 48 and iii. 38 ; see AB. vi. 
20 . 

3 RV. vi. 22 ; A^S. vii. 5. 20. 

* RV. vii. 19, 23 ; A^S. vii. 5. 20 omits vii. 

23; see AB. vi. 20. It is really not a 
Sampata proper. 

RV. i. 61 ; A^S. vii. 4. 8 ; xii. 4. 17, 
18. 


8 RV. iv. 16 ; AgS. vii. 4. 9 ; ggS. xii. 3. 13, 
14. 

RV. i. 61 ; Id and 16 are refoired to. 

8 KV. iii. 31 ; AgS. vii. 4. 9 ; ggS. xii. 6. 16, 
17. This is repeated both on the days of 
the Sadahas and also on the days, which 
onco past do not recur, here specified ; for 
its use on the Sadahas, see AB. vi. 19. 4. 
The term Ahina is here a quite peculiar 
one, the days being single days in se. The 
order is (1) strophe and antistrophe ; (2) 
the Kadvant Pragatha ; (3) the Aram 
bhanlya ; (4) the aharahah^asya ; (5) the 
Ahina for the MaitrEvaruna ; (4) and C5) 
being inverted for the other two ; see 
AgS. vii. 4. 



273] 


The Sampdta and other Hymns [ — vi. 19 

The knower of many Res is powerful; the hymn contains (the word) 
‘ bearer ’ ; the bearer bears the yoke to which it is yoked. Therefore the 
Achavaka recites in both cases this hymn containing (the word) ‘ bearer 
both in the days that go away and in those that come up again. These are 
on five days, the Caturvin^a, Abhijit, Visuvant, Vifvajit and Mahavrata; 
these days are Ahinas, for nothing in them is left out ; these days go away 
without recurring ; therefore they recite them on these days. In that they 
recite them, (they hope) ‘ Let us obtain the worlds of heaven without defect, 
with all forms, with all perfection. In that they recite them, they invite 
Indra with them, like a bull to a cow. In that moreover they recite them, 
it is for the continuity of the Ahina ; verily thus they continue the Ahina. 

vi. 19 (xxix. 3). These three Sampata (hymns) the Maitravaruna recites 
one by one day by day, alternating their order on the first day (he 
recites) ‘ Thee O Indra, with the thunderbolt ’, on the second ‘ That which 
of ours Indra rejoiceth in and desire th\ on the third ‘How? of what Hotr 
hath he made great ? * Three Sampatas the Brahmanacchansin recites one 
by one day by day, alternating their order,* on the first day ‘ Indra, breaker 
of citadels, overcame the Dasa with his beams ’, on the second ‘ Who alone 
is to be invited by mortals *, on the third ‘ With sharp horns, like a terrible 
wild beast Three Sampatas the Achavaka recites one by one, day by day, 
alternating their order on the first day ‘ This offering do thou make attain 
on the second ‘ Thy comrades. Soma-loving, desire thee *, on the third 
‘ Ordering the bearer hath gone to the grandson of the daughter These 
number nine; there are three to be recited every day;* these make up 
twelve ; the year has twelve months ; Prajapati is the year ; the sacrifice is 
Prajapati; thus they obtain the year and Prajapati; thus they continue 
day by day to find support in the year, in Prajapati, in the sacrifice. 
Between them they should insert an insertion, Viraj verses and verses® by 
Viinada without repetition of o on the fourth day, Pankti ® verses on the fifth, 


1 RV. iv. 19 j iv. 22 ; iv. 23. viparydsam pre- 
sumably means that on the last three 
days of the Sa^ha they are repeated in 
the same order. These hymns replace 
the Ahina hymns of the special days (AB. 
vi. 18, n. 8). See AfS. vii. 5. 21, 22 ; cf. 
Vait xxxi. 26. 

* RV. iii. 34 ; vi. 22 ; vii. 19. 

3 RV. iii. 36 ; iii, 30 ; iii. 31. 

* See for these AB. vi. 20. 

5 RV. vii. 22. 6-8 ; vii. 31. 10-12 ; see KB. 
xxix. 6 where they are called ^^Ipas. 
These are made into three triplets and 
inserted by the three priests on the fourth 

36 [o.0.6. 


day of the ^daha ; the verses by 
Vimada are not an alternative as sug- 
gested by S&yana {ekah paktah . . . pdksdn- 
taram) but an addition, and the Anand. 
ed. reads vaimadi^ ca oaturthe (which is of 
course palaeographically practically the 
same as the reading vatmad7(;ca^ur^Ae). The 
verses are RV. x. 23. 1~7 ; the first three 
verses in each case go to the Maitra- 
varuna ; the Br&hman&cchansin has 3- 
6 ; the Achavaka 6-7. See A^S. vii. 11. 
34 seq , ; VaiU xxxii. 7. 

« RV. i. 29. 1-7 ; A 9 S. vii. 11. 39. Ct. 99 S. 
xii. 6. 12 ; Vait xxxii. 8. 



[274 


vi. 19 — ] The (^astras of the Hotrakas 

and verses by Parucchepa ^ on the sixth. Moreover on those days which 
have great Sfeomas the Maitravaruna ® should insert ‘ What friend of man 
to-day, god-loving the Brahmanacchahsin,^ ‘He who hath been pUiced 
as it were in the forest delighting,* and the Achavaka^® ‘Come hither, 
standing on thy chariot ;3eat *. These are the insertions ; by means of these 
insertions the gods, the seers, conquered the world of heaven. Verily thus 
also the sacrificers by these insertions conquer the world of heaven. 

vi. 20 (xxviii. 4) ‘ Straightway on birth the bull, the youngling * the 
Maitravaruna^ recites day by day before the hymns. That hymn is 
heavenly ; by this hymn the gods conejuered the world of heaven, by this 
the seers. Verily thus also the sacrificers by this hymn conquer the world of 
heaven. It is by Vi 9 vamitra ; Vi 5 vamitra was the friend of all; all 
becomes friendly to him who knows thus and to those for whom a Maitra- 
varuna, knowing thus, recites this before the hymns day by day. It con- 
tains (the words) ‘ bull * and ‘ cattle * ; (it serves) to win cattle. It is of 
five verses; tlie Pafikti has five Padas; food is the Pafikti ; (it serves) to 
win proper food. ‘Praises have been offered in desire of glory* the 
Brahmanacchansin - recites day by day the hymn containing (the word) 
‘ praise * and so perfect. This hymn is heavenly ; by this hymn the gods 
conquered the world of heaven, by this the seers. Verily thus also the 
sacrificers by this hymn conquer the world of heaven. It is by Vasistha; 
by it Vasistha went to the dear abode of Indra, he conquered the highest 
world. He goes to the dear abode of Indra, he conquers the highest 
world wlio knows thus. It has six verses ; the seasons are six , (it serves) 
to win the seasons. He recites it after the Sariipatas. Having obtained 
thus the world of heaven the sacrificers find support in this world. ‘Like 
a carpenter have I fashioned a thought’, the Achavaka^ recites day by 
day, containing (the word) ‘ towards ’ and a symbol of continuity. ‘ Ponder- 
ing on the dear (days) to come * (he says) ; the days to come are dear ; 
verily thus they proceed pondering on, laying hold of, them. The world of 
heaven is to come as compared with this world ; verily thus he alludes to 
it. ‘ I long to see the sages, with wisdom * (he says), our seci-s who are 
departed are the sages ; verily thus he refers to them. It is by Vigvamitra ; 
Vi^vamitra was the friend of all ; all becomes friendly to him who knows 
thus. That which he recites has no deity mentioned and is connected with 

’ RV. i. 131. 1-7 ; AfS. vii. 11. 40. Cf. g^S. KV. iii. 43 ; AgS. vii. J2. 1. 

xii. 3. 12 ; Vait, xxxii. 9. ^ RV. iii. 48. Cf. AgS. vii. 4. 8 

» RV. iv. 25 ; Ags. vii. 12. 1 ; Vait, xxxiii. * RV. vii. 23. Cf. AgS. vii. 4. 9 ; ggs. xii. 

18 ; QB. xi. 1. These are used for the 4. 3. 

Ciiandomasas the Stomas increase in size. ’ RV. iii. 38. Cf. AgS. vii. 4. 9; ggS. xii. 

RV. X. 29 ; AgS. vii. 12. 1 ; VaiU xxxii. 10 ; 5. 3. 

GB. xi. 2. 


0 



275] 27ic Kadvant Pragdthas [ — vi. 22 

Praj&pati. Prajapati is he whose name is not mentioned ; (it serves) to 
obtain Prajapati. Once* he mentions Indra; thereby he departs not from 
the Indra form. It is in ten verses ; the Viraj has ten .syllables ; the Viraj 
is food ; (it serves) to win food. As to its being of ten veraes, the breaths 
are ten ; verily thus they obtain the breaths, they place breaths in the 
body. He recites it after the Sampatas ; verily thus having obtained the 
world of heaven, the sacriflcers find support in this world. 

vi. 21 (xxix. 5). ‘ Who, O Indra, him that hath thee as his wealth 
‘ What newe.st of prai.ses and ‘ What hath not been wrought by him ’ are 
the Pragathas ‘ containing the word ‘ who ' which are recited day by day 
at the beginning. Prajapati is Who ; (verily they serve) to obtain Praja- 
pati. Moreover in that they contain (the word) ‘ who ’ and who is food, 
(they serve) to win food. Moreover as to their containing (the word) 
‘ who ’, day by day they praise employing the Ahina hymn, duly appeased, 
and it is by the Pragathas containing (the word) ‘ who ’ that they appease 
them. Appeased they bring them prasperity {ka ) ; aj)peased they carry 
them towards the world of heaven. The beginnings of the hymns which 
they recite .should be in Tristubh ; these some recite before the Pragathas, 
calling them inserted ver.sc.s. That he should not do so. The Hotr is lordly 
powei', the Hotra^ansins arc the people ; verily thus they would make the 
people reiraetory to the lordly power which is a confusion. He should 
know ‘ These my hymn beginnings are Tristubhs ’. J ust as men set sail on an 
ocean so set they sail who perform the year or a twelve day (rite) ; just as 
men desiring to reach the other shore mount a ship well found, .so do they 
mount the TrLstublis. That metre having made them go to the world of 
heaven does not fail, for it is the strongest of all. He should not utter the 
call for these (verses) (thinking) ‘ The metre is the same ; moreover let mo 
not make them inserted vei'ses.’ In that they recite these (verses), (they 
think) ‘Let us mount the hymns with the recognized beginnings of the 
hymns.’ In that they recite these (verse.s), verily with them they summon 
Indra, like a bull to the cow. Moreover in that they recite them, (it 
serves) for the continuity of the Ahina ; verily thus they continue the Ahina. 

vi. 22 (xxix. 6). ‘O Indra drive away all our enemies in front’ the 
Maitravaruna * recites day by day before the hymns : 

* RV. iii. 38. 10. RV. iv. 1C ; vii. 23 ; iii. 38 ; then the 

^ RV. vii. 32. 14 and 15 ; viii. 3. 13 and 14 ; concluding verses ; AB. vi. 18, n. 8 ex- 

66. 9 and 10. In this chapter the order plains the order of iii. 48 and iv. 16 (for 

of the various parts of the litanies agrees the opposite order see AB. vi. 18 and 20;. 

clearly with that in A 9 S. vii. 4 (mis- A^antani may be read, 

interpreted by Haug, ii. 412, n. 8) ; viz. * Cf. below AB. vii. 13 ; BR. vii. 1199. 
the Pragathas ; then the Tristubh verses ; vi. 22. ' RV.x. 131. 1. Cf. A^S. vii, 4. 7 ; 
then RV. iii. 48 ; i. 61 ; iii. 31 ; then xii. 3. 6 ; KB. xxix. 4. 



[276 


vi. 22 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas 

‘ Drive away thode behind, O overpowering one, 

Drive away those to the north, O hero, those below to the south 
That we may delight in thy wide protection ’ 

(he says) ; it is a symbol of freedom from fear ; for he desires as he pro- 
ceeds freedom from fear, * Those yoked with prayer, I yoke with prayer * 
the Brahmanacchahsin ^ recites day by day ; in ‘ I yoke ’ it contains (the 
word) yoke, since the Ahina is yoked as it were ; (therefore) it is a symbol 
of the Ahina. ‘ To wide space thou Icadest us after knowing ’ the Achavaka ^ 
recites day by day ; since the Ahina goes as it were, (the words) ‘ Thou 
leadest after * are a symbol of the Ahina ; (the words) ‘ Thou leadest ’ are 
a symbol of the proceeding of the sacrificial session. These are recited day 
by day. They should conclude with the same verses ; ^ Indra is a home- 
goer as regards their sacrifice ; as a bull to the cow, or as a cow to its well- 
known place of pasture, so does Indra come to their sacrifice. He should 
not conclude with the ' Prosperity let us invoke ' verse ^ the Ahina (hymn) ; 
the Ksatriya departs from his kingdom ; his rival he then summons. 

vi. 23 (xxix, 7). Then follows tlie yoking and releasing of the Ahina (rite), 
with ^ ‘ He traversed the atmosphere’ he yokes ; with ‘ So Indra’ he releases ; 
with 2 * I of the two connected with Sarasvati ’ and ‘ Surely this of thee ’ 
he yokes the Ahina ; with ^ ‘ Let us be thine, O god Varuna ’ and ‘ Chant ye ’ 
he releases. He is worthy to weave the Ahina who knows how to yoke and 
to release it. In that they are yoked on the Caturvin^a day is the yoking ; 
in that they are released before the concluding Atiratra is the releasing. 
If on the Caturvin 9 a day they were to conclude with (the verses) of the 
one day (rite), they would conclude the sacrifice, and would not make it an 
Ahina ; if they were again to conclude with the concluding verses of the 
Ahina, the sacrifice would perish, just as one wearied and not being released 
perishes. With both sets should they conclude.^ That is as if one were 
to go a long journey unyoking from time to time ; the sacrifice becomes 
continuous, and yet they release (it). He should not over-recite the Soma by 


2 RV. iii. 35. 4. Cf. A^S. vii. 4. 7 ; fgs. xii. 

4. 2. 

s RV. vi. 47. 8. Cf. A^S. vii. 4. 7 ; 99 S. xii 

5. 2. 

♦ Viz. RV. iv. 16. 21 (Maitravaruna) ; vii. 
23. 6 (BrahmanAcchaiisin) ; ii. 11. 21 
Achftv&ka) ; see AB. vi. 23. 

0 RV. iii. 38. 10. See A^S. vii. 4. 10. 

^ RV. viii. 14. 7-9 ; vii. 23. 6 (the BrfthmanA- 
cchaiAsin), for the morning and mid> 
day pressings as concluding verses. Cf. 
GB. xi. 5. 


2 RV. viii. 38. 10 ; ii. 11. 21 (the Achavaka) ; 
the second refers to the release. 

® RV. vii. 66. 9 ; iv. 16. 21 (the Maitrava- 
runa) ; the first refers to the joining. 

* I. e. the MaitrAvaruna with those of the 
one day rite only ; the AchavAka with 
those of the Ahina; the BrAhmanA- 
cchahsin with those of the Ahina in 
the morning and those of the one day 
rite at the midday pressing : above AB. 
vi. 8. 



277] 


The Ahlna Rite 


[ — vi. 24 


more than one or two verses at the two pressings ® ; when a Stoma is over- 
recited by many verses then come into existence long stretches of wild ; 
he may use an unlimited number at the third pressing; the world of 
heaven is unlimited ; (it serves) to obtain the world of heaven. He grasps 
the Ahina continuous and firm who knowing thus performs the Ahina. 

vi. 24 (xxix. 8). The gods saw the cows in a cave ; they sought to win 
them with the sacrifice ; they obtained them with the sixth day. At the morn- 
ing pressing with Nabhaka’s (hymn) they tore open (wibh) the cave ; in that 
they tore it open, verily thus they loosened it. On the third pressing having 
destroyed the cave with the Valakhilyas as the thunderbolt and (the verse) 
of one Pada as the hammer of speech, they drove out the cows. Verily thus 
also the sacrificers tear open the cave at the morning pressing with 
Nabhaka’s (hymn) ; in that they tear it open, verily thus they loosen it. 
Therefore the Hotrakas at the morning pressing recite triplets^ by 
Nabhaka. ‘ When supporting the summits the Maitravaruna, ‘ O Indra, 
ancient arc thine addresses *, the Brahmanacchansin ; ‘ The middle of con- 
flicts *, the Achavaka. At the third pressing having destroyed the cave 
with the Valakhilyas as the thunderbolt and (the verse) of one Pada as the 
hammer of speech they obtain the cows. First he transposes by Padas ^ the 
six hymns of the Valakhilyas, by half verses the second time, by verses 
the third time. When transposing by Padas be should place (a verse) of one 
Pada in each Pragatha; that is the hammer of speech. There are five 
(verses) of one Pada ; four from the tenth day, one from the Mahavrata. 
There arc the Mahanamni Padas of eight syllables ; he should recite as 
many of these as he requires to complete ; he should disregard the others. 
When transposing by half verses he should recite these (verses) of one 
Pada, and these eight-syllable Padas of the Mahanamnis. When trans- 


® Cf. AB. vi. 8. 5 ; here an unlimited number 
is allowed for the third pressing only, a 
view which really is not consistent with 
that view ; cf. AfS. vii. 12. 6 with comm. 

1 RV. viii. 41. 4-6 ; 40. 9-11 ; 3-6 ; A^S. vii. 
2. 17. They follow the Anurupas or 
Tristubhs. 

® The mode of recitation is given by A^S. 
viii. 2. 19-21. The first six hymns (RV. 
viii. 49-64) are recited by Padas, half 
verses, and verses; the order is first 
Pada of first verse of first hymn, then 
second Pada of second verso of second 
hymn ; first Pada second verse second 
hymn, second Pada first verse first hymn 
and so forth. The Pragftthas are made 
up of two veraes; this done, an eight- 


syllable verse is added, viz. indro vi^vasya 
gopatih ; indro mgoobsya hhupatih ; indro 
vi^sya rdjati ; indro vifvasya cetati ; indro 
vigvarh virdjaii ; further the eight-syllable 
Padas of the Mahanamnis are added (from 
A A. iy,pracetanapra ceiayaj &c.) so far as is 
needed to fill up the number of Pragathas. 
The transposition of half verses follows in 
precisely the same way, thus viii. 49. 1 a 
and 6 ; 60. 2 c and d ; that by verses viii. 
49. 1 ; 60. 2, &c. A^S. viii. 2. 23 says that 
the Mahanamnis yield with the pumas 
23 sets of eight syllables to fill up the 28 
Pragathas of the six Valakhilya hymns. 
Below in AB. vi. 28 two other ways of 
the recitation are referred to. 



vi. 24 — ] The (^astras of the Hotrahas [278 

posing by verses, he should recite these (verses) of one Pada and these 
eight-syllable Padas of the Mahanamnls. In that he transposes for the 
first time the six hymns of the Valakhilyas, verily thus he transposes breath 
and speech ; in that for the second time, thus he transposes eye and mind ; 
in that for the third, thus he transposes ear and self. Thus is the desire in 
the transposition obtained, in the Valakhilyas as the thunderbolt, in (the 
verse) of one food as the hammer of speech, in the arrangement of the breaths. 
For the fourth time he recites the Pragathas without transposition; the 
Pragathas are cattle ; (they serve) to win cattle. He should not here insert 
(the verse) of one Pada ; if he were to insert (the verse) of one Pada, by the 
hammer of speech he would strike off cattle from the sacrificer. If a man 
were to say to him then * You have struck off cattle from the sacrificer, you 
have made him witliout cattle ’, it would certainly be so. Therefore he should 
not insert (the verse) of one Pada. He inverts the last two hymns ; this is 
their transposition. This to Saubala Sarpis Vatsi recited ; he said ' I have 
secured ^ the most abundant cattle in this sacrifice ; not the least will come 
to me." To him he gave (fees) as to great priests. That recitation is rich 
in cattle and heavenly ; therefore he recites it. 

vi. 25 (xxix. 9). He mounts the difficult mounting ; the explanation of 
this has been given.^ In (a hymn) to Indra‘^ should he mount for one desiring 
cattle ; cattle are connected with Indra. It should be in Jagati ; cattle are 
connected with the Jagati; it should be a great hymn; verily thus he 
establishes the sacrificer in most numerous cattle. In (a hymn) by Baru 
should he mount ; it is a great hymn and in Jagati. In (a hymn) to Indra 
and Varuna ^ should he mount for one desiring support. This Hotr’s office 
has these as deities, and has support in these ; in that (the ofiering verse is) 
addressed to Indra and Varuna,^ verily thus he establishes it in its own 
support as the end. As to (his mounting) in (a hymn) to Indra and 
Varuna, there is here a Nivid; by a Nivid are desires obtained. If he 
mounts in (a hymn) to Indra and Varuna, it should be in (a hymn) by 
Suparna. Thus is obtained the desire in (the hymn) to Indra and Varuna, 
in (the hymn) by Suparna. 

vi. 2G (xxix, 10). They say ‘ Sliould he recite together ^ on the sixth day ? 

* Cf. AB. vi. 35, n. 3, iii, 12. 14) given as an alternative by 

^ Soo AB. iv. 21 ; KB. xxx. 5. The Durohana Sayana. This is given as the hymn in 

follows the Valakhilyas and the subso- A 9 S. viii. 2. 13-15 in which tlie Durohana 

quent hymn, before its last verse. is to be performed (see AB. vi- 26). Cl. 

^ RV. X, 9C; it begins pra VO ma/ie ; butSSyanu 11* 17. 

sees here in mahdsukta the same use as in * BV. vi. 68. 11 ; see A^S. vi. 1. 2. 

AA. ii. 2. 2. Cf. 9?^* ^4. 10, 20, vi. 26. ^ I, e. the question is whether the 

* RV. viii. 59 by Suparna is clearly nieant ordinary 9aBtra is to be performed or not 

and not the hymn pra tlhdra yantu (AGS. with the Durohana. Cf. AB. vi. 36. 



279 ] The Durohaum [ — vi. 27 

Or should he not recite together ? ’ ‘He should recite together ’ they say ; 
‘Why should he recite together on the other days and why not recite 
together on this?* Or rather they say ‘He should not recite together. 
The sixth day is the world of heaven ; the world of heaven is not a place 
where all meet ; only certain ones meet in the world of heaven *. If he 
were to recite together, he would make it common ; in that he does not 
recite together, it is a symbol of the world of heaven. Therefore he should 
not recite together. Again as to his not reciting together, the strophe is 
the body, the Valakhilya^s the breaths ; if he were to recite together, from 
these deities he would sever the breaths of the sacrificer; if one were 
to say of him then ‘From these two deities he has severed the breaths 
of the sacrificer ; breath will leave him *, it would certainly be so. There- 
fore he should not recite together. If he should reflect ‘ I have recited the 
Valakhilyas ; let me recite together before the difficult mounting *, he should 
not on any account so desire. But if pride seizes him, let him recite many 
hundreds after the difficult mounting ; therein is obtained that in desire of 
which he does so. The Valakhilyas are addressed to Indra; they have 
Padas of twelve syllables ; therein is there obtained the desire that is in 
the Jagati (hymn) to Indra.'^ Moreover there is this hymn to Indra and 
Varuna,® and a closing verse for Indra and Varuna ; therefore he should not 
recite together. They say ‘ As is the Stotra, so the Qastra ; the Valakhilyas 
are recited transposed, is the Stotra transposed or not transposed?* 
‘Transposed* he should reply, ‘A twelve-syllable within eight-syllable^ 
(Padas).* They say ‘ As is the Qastra, so the offering verse ; three deities 
are praised, Agni, Indra, Varuna, but he uses (a verse) to Indra and Varuna 
as offering verse ; how is it that Agni is not omitted ? * Varuna is Agni, 
this also is declared by a secr.^ ‘ Since thou, O Agni, art born as Varuna * ; 
thus in that he uses (a verse) to Indra and Varuna as offering verse, Agni 
is not omitted. 

ADHYAYA V 
The Qilpas. 

vi. 27 (xxx. 1). They recite the Qilpas.^ These are the works of art of 
the gods ; in imitation of these works of art here is a work of art accom- 
plished ; an elephant, a goblet, a garment, a gold object, a mule chariot are 

* I. e. RV. iii. 51. 1-3 (A^S. vi. 1. 2; 95®* ^ Stotra is prepared on the Dvipadg 

ix. 3. 3) is to be omitted in favour of verses, RV. v. 24. 1-3. 

the RV. vii. 84 ; see Ags. viii. 2. 16. » RV. v. 3. 1. 

The sense of vi + i as sever (from) seems * Of. KB. xxix. 5 for a diAereiit view of the 
necessary ; cf. PB. xiv. 6. 6. word ; the paralhd is xxx. 4U They are 

* RV. vii. 84. said at the 3rd pressing normally on the 

6th day of the Prsthya l^adaha. 



vi. 27 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas [280 

works of art; a work of art is accomplished in him who knows thus. As 
to these ‘ works of art ' (^astras), the ^ilpas are a perfection of the self ; 
verily by them the sacrificer perfects himself as composed of the metres. 
He recites the Nabhanedistha ^ (hymn) ; the Nabhanedistha (hymn) is seed ; 
thus he pours seed ; he recites it without mention (of the deity) ; without 
mention is seed secretly poured in the womb. He becomes mingled with 
seed : ‘ United with earth he sprinkled seed ' (he says) ; verily (it serves) to 
perfect seed. He recites it with the Nara 9 ahsa^ (hymn) ; man is offspring, 
praise speech ; verily thus he places speech in offspring, therefore offspring 
are born speaking. Some recite it before saying ‘ Speech has its place in 
front’; others after saying ^Speech has its place behind*; in the middle 
should he recite it ; speech has its place in the middle ; in a place nearer 
the end ; speech is nearer the back as it were. It the Hotr having poured 
in seed form hands over to the Maitravaruna,^ (saying) ‘ Do thou provide 
the breaths for it ’. 

vi. 28 (xxx. 2). He recites the Valakhilyas ; ^ the Valakhily^ are the 
breaths ; verily thus he provides breaths for him. He recites them trans- 
posed ; these breaths are transposed, expiration (linked) with inspiration, 
cross breathing with inspiration. Ho transposes by Padas the first two 
hymns, by half verses the second two, by verses the third two. In that he 
transposes the first two hymns, thus he transposes breath and speech ; in 
that the second two, thus he transposes eye and mind ; in that the third two, 
tlius he transposes ear and self. Some transpose, putting Bi liati verses and 
Satobrhati verses in twos together ; then the desire that is in transposition 
is obtained, but Pragathas do not come about. He should transpose with 
intermingling ; thus are Pragathas produced. The Valakhilyas are to be 
Pragathas ; therefore should he transpose with intermingling ; as to his 
intermingling, the Brhati is the body, the Satobrhati the breaths ; he recites 


2 RV. X. 61 ; V. 5 is referred to. See A^S, 
viii. 1. 20, Cf. above AB. vi. 16. 

* RV. X. 62. It is inserted after RV. x. 61. 25 ; 
see A^S. viii. 1. 20. 

^ The ^ilpas of these priests have two forms, 
the xihrta at the third pressing of the 
sixth day, at the Vivvajit, and ;if the 
fSaman chanters use Dvipad^s at the 
third pressing of any Ukthyaday ; this is 
the form contemplated in AB., save in vi. 
30, 31 ; in the case that the sixth day or the 
Vi^vajit is an Agnistoma or the Dvipad&s 
are not used, tlien a simpler form of 
pas appears at the midday pressing, the 
Achavaka discontinuing his Evay&marut 


and the Maitravaruna using only the 
Brhati hymns ; see A^S. viii. 4. 4-12. 

‘ A^S. viii. 2. 5 seg. (cf. 99®. xii. 6. 12 seq,) 
gives the modes of reciting here men- 
tioned as two, the Mahavalabhid, adopted 
in AB. vi. 24. 5 wherein all the six hymns 
are recited in the three ways, and the 
two Haundinas in which the hymns are 
divided into three sets of two each (so 
KB. xxx. 4) ; the first of the Haundina 
methods uniting the Brhatfs and the 
Satobrhatis in twos, while the other is 
here preferred, and unites on the basis 
of vi. 24. 



281 ] 


The SuJcirti, Vrsakapi^ and Evayamarut [ — vi. 80 

the Brhati, it is the body, then the Satobrhati, it is the breaths ; then the 
Brhati, then the Satobrhati ; thus he continues to strengthen the body with 
the breaths around. Therefore should he transpose with intermingling. 
Again as to his intermingling, the Brhati is the body, the Satobrhati cattle ; 
he recites the Brhati, it is the body, then the Satobrhati, it is cattle ; then the 
Brhati, then the Satobrhati ; thus he continues to strengthen the body with 
cattle around. Therefore should he transpose with intermingling. He 
inverts the two last hymns ; ^ this is their transposition. The Maitravaruna 
having made the breaths for it hands it over to the Brahmanacchaiisin 
(saying) ‘ Do thou propagate it \ 

vi. 29 (xxx. 3). He recites the Sukirti ^ (hymn) ; the Sukirti hymn is a 
birthplace of the gods ; thus he produces the sacrificer from the sacrifice as 
a divine birthplace. He recites the Vrsakapi ^ (hymn) ; the Vrsakapi is the 
body ; verily thus he makes a body for it. He recites it with the sound o ; 
the sound o is food; thus to it on birth he gives food as the breast to 
a child. It is in Pankti verses; man is fivefold and arranged in five 
divisions, hair, skin, flesh, bone, marrow. As great as is man, so great 
does he make the sacrificer. Having produced him the Brahmaria^chansin 
hands him over to the AchILvaka (saying) ‘Do thou fashion a support 
for him *. 

vi. 30 (xxx. 4). He recites the Evayamarut ^ (hymn) ; the Evayamarut 
(hymn) is a support; verily thus he makes a support for him. It he 
recites with the sound o ; the sound o is food ; verily thus he places food 
in him. It is in Jagati or Atijagati ; all the world is connected with the 
Jagati or Atijagati. It is addressed to the Maruts; the Marutsare waters, 
food is water ; verily thus in order he places proper food in him. These 
they call the accompanying (hymns), the Nabhanedistha, the Valakhilyas, 
the Vrsakapi, the livayamarut. These he should recite together or not 
recite together ; if he recites them separately ; that would be as if one 
were to divide in two a man or seed; therefore he should recite them 
together or not recite them together. Bulila A 9 vatara A 9 vi being Hotr at 
the Vi 9 vajit meditated ‘Of these Qilpas two are liable to be performed 
at the midday in the Vi 9 vajit in the year (rite) ; come, let me here have 
recited the Evayamarut (hymn) *. He then had recited the hymn. When 
it was being recited thus, Gau 9 la came up ; he said ‘ O Hotr, how is that 
your Qastra is wandering without a wheel*. ‘What has happened* (he 

2 AB. vi. 24. 15. * RV. x. 86. See A^S. viii. 8. 4-6 ; 59®* 

1 RV. X. 131. Cf. KB. xxx. 6. It follows the 13. 1. 

strophe and antistrophe, RV. x. 157. 1-5 ; vh 80. ^ RV. v. 87; see A 9 S. viii. 4.2; 99®* 
vi. 17. 6 ; see A 9 S. viii. 3. 3 ; 99 S. xii. xii. 26. 10. Cf. AB. v. 15. 

13. 1. 

36 [h.o.s. 2b] 



[282 


vi. 30 — ] The Qastras of the Hotrakas 

replied). " The Evayamarut is being recited further on ’ ; * he replied, * the 
midday is connected with Indra ; why do you seek to draw Indra away 
from the midday? ’ * I do not seek to draw Indra away from the midday ; 
he said. ‘But this text is not appropriate for the midday; it is Jagatl or 
Atijagati; all this is connected with the Jagati or Atijagati; it also is 
addressed to the Maruts; do not recite it’ (he replied). He said ‘Stop, 
O Achavaka * ; then he sought instruction from him.^ He said ‘ Let him 
recite (a hymn) to Indra* -with a reference to Visnu ; then do thou, O Hotr, 
after the inserted verse to Rudra® and before (the hymn) to the Maruts 
insert this (Evayamarut) hymn. He caused the recitation to be made so ; 
now to-day it is thus performed.^ 

vi. 81 (xxx. 5). They say ’ ‘ Seeing that in the Vi5vajit, in the Atiratra 
form/ 2 and so on the sixth day the sacrifice comes into order, the generation of 
the sacriticer comes into order, how is it that here, while the Nabhanedistha 
hymn is not recited, the Maitravaruna recites the Valakhilyas ; they are 
the breaths ; seed comes first and then breath. So the Brahmanacchansin : 
while the Nabhanedistha is not recited, he recites the Vrsakapi ; it is the 
body; seed is first, then the body ; how then is the sacrificer produced ? How 
are the breaths not confused ? ’ ‘ By means of the whole sacrificial rite they 
prepare the sacrificer ; like an embryo in the womb, so he lies growing. 
Not at once in the beginning does it come into being whole ; separately each 
member comes into being as it comes into being ’ (is the reply). If they 
perform all on the same day, the sacrifice comes into order, the generation 
of the sacrificer comes into order. Moreover, the Hotr recites at the third 
pressing the Evayamarut (hymn); verily thus at the end he establishes 
him in a support. 

vi. 82 (xxx. 6). When the metres had been obtained by the sixth day the 
sap poured over ; Prajapati was afraid ‘ This sap of the metres going away 


‘ North ’ is Sayana*s version, i. e. by the 
Ach&vaka, wliose altar is north of the 
Hotr’s. 

^ S&yana takes Ise^ichami and makes this a 
quotation obviously in error. Weber 
(Ind. Stud. ix. 303) corrects the version of 
Skyana wliich takes ^ansista as third 
person sing. 

^ RV. vi. 20 ; v. 2 refers to Visnu ; seo AfS. 
viii. 4. 10 ; 99 S. xii. 6. 14. 

* RV. i. 48. 6 ; see Galand and Henry, VAgnU 
stoma, pp. 373, 375. 

® I. e. at the Vi9vajit, the other two ^ilpas 
being transposed to the midday ; see 
AfS. viii. 4. 7-9 ; 59 S. xi, 16. 10. 


* This refers to the Vi 9 vajit in a Sattra where 

the Nabhanedistha of the Hotr is as usual 
in the Vaivvadeva ^^stra in the third 
pressing. The ^astras of the Maitra- 
varuna and the Brahmanacchahsin then 
loose their special predecessor ; being 
transferred to the midday ritual, in the 
Agni8tomaform;cf. KB. xxv. 12-14. The 
answer is that all the are per- 

formed though not in tlie same order, 
the Evayamarut being also found in the 
Hotr’s recitation. 

* I. e. as an Ekaha, and also on the sixth 

day, an Ukthya (reitd uhthyasamsthdtvena 
in comm.). Cf. A^S. viii. 4. 6, 6. 



283 ] 


The Kunta/pa Hymns [ — ^vi. 32 

will go over the worlds. It he grasped around from above with the metres, 
that of the Gayatri with the Nara^ahsi, that of the Tristubh with the 
BaibhI. that of the Jagati with the Pariksiti, that of the Annstubh with 
the Karavya. Thus he placed again the sap in the metres. He sacrifices 
with metres full of sap, with metres full of sap he extends the sacrifice who 
knows thus. He recites the Nara^ansi (verses) ^ ; men are ofispring, praise 
is speech ; verily thus he places speech in offspring ; therefore offspring here 
are born speaking (for him), who knows thus. As to the Nara^ansls, by recit- 
ing the gods and the seers went to the world of heaven ; verily thus also the 
sacrificers by reciting go to the world of heaven. These he recites taking 
apart, ^ as (he recites) the Vrsakapi (hymn) ; for it is connected with the 
Vrsakapi ; thus it follows the rule of the Vrsakapi. In them he should not 
say the sound o ; he should accent specially,^ for it is their sound o. He 
recites the Raibhi (verses)^; the gods and the seers making a noise went 
to the world of heaven ; verily thus the sacrificers making a noise go to the 
world of heaven. These he recites taking apart, like the Vrsakapi, for it 
is connected with the Vrsakapi; thus it follows the rule of the Vp^kapi. 
In them he should not say the sound o ; he should accent specially, for it is 
their sound o. He recites the Pariksit ® (verses) ; Pariksit is Agni, for Agni 
dwells around {pari kseii) these creatures ; for round Agni these creatures 
dwell ; he attains union and identity of form and world with Agni who 
knows thus. As to these being Pariksit (verses), Pariksit is the year, for 
the year dwells round these creatures, for round the year these creatures 
dwell. He attains union and identity of form and world with the year 
who knows thus. These he recites taking apart, like the Vrsakapi, for it 
is connected with the Vrsakapi; thus it follows the rule of the Vrsakapi. 
In them he should not say the sound o ; he should accent specially, for it is 
their sound o. He recites the Karavya® (verses). Whatever good thing 
they did, the gods obtained with the Karavyas; verily thus also the 
sacrificers obtain with the Karavyas whatever good thing they do. These 


^ All these are to be reeitod by the Brahma- 
nacchahsin (see AB. vi. 29). The whole 
is the Kuntapa, referred by Sayana to 
a book called the Kuntapa being a Khila. 
See AV. xx. 127. 1^3 ; RVKh. v. 8 ; 
xii. 14. 1-3. See also A^S. viii. 3. 10 seq . ; 
Vait, xxxii. 19 seq. Of. KB. xxx. 5-7. 

^ 1. 0 . pausing at each Pada. In § 3 above 
the words yad eva ndrdfansih should go 
with the next clause, as in §§ 13 and 14. 
For the Nara 9 afisls ^distinct from the 
N&r&^ahsa in AB. vi. 16 and 27) see 
Fedtc Index f i. 445, 446 ; SB£. xlii. 690 seq. 


3 The Ninarda is a species of accent described 
in AfS. viii. 3. 9 seq , ; Kai^ xxxii. 14-17. 
It affects the second vowel of the third 
Pada, the normal place of the Nyuhkha. 
The first vowel is pronounced as anuddtfa, 
the second as uddtta, the next eka^ti. 
The Pratigara is othdmo daivom, 

* AV. XX. 127. 4-6 ; RVKh. v. 9 ; 99 S. xii. 

15. 1 ; 14. 4, 6. Cf. Vait, xxxii. 19^ 

6 AV. XX. 127. 7-10 ; RVKh. v. 10 ; 9^8. xii. 
17. 1. 1-4. 

6 AV. XX. 127. 11-14; RVKh. v. 11 , 99 S. xii. 
15. 2-4. V. 12 occurs in AB. viii. 11. 5. 



[284 


vi. 32 — The Qastras of the Hotrakas 

he recites taking apart, like the Vrsakapi, for it is connected with the 
Vrsakapi ; thus it follows the rule of the Vrsakapi. In them he should not 
say the sound o ; he should accent specially, for it is their sound o. He 
recites the orderings of the quarters;’ verily thus he puts in order the 
quarters; five he recites; these quarters are five, four transverse, one 
upwards. In these he should not say the sound o, nor should he accent 
specially ® (thinking) ‘ Let me not make to move these quarters ’. These he 
recites by half- verses, for support. Ho recites the man-ordering (verses) ; ** 
the man-ordering (verses) are offspring ; verily thus having put in order the 
quarters he establishes offspring in them. In these he should not say the 
sound 0 nor accent specially (thinking) ‘ Let me not make to move these 
offspring’. These ho recites by half-verses, for support. He recites the 
Indragathas ; by the singing against them of the Indragathas, the gods 
overpowered the Asuras; verily thus also the sacrificers by singing the 
Indragathas against the hated rival overpower him. By half-verses he 
recites these, for support. 

vi. 33 (xxx. 7). He recites the prattle of Aita^a ’ ; Aita 9 a, the sage, saw 
the life of Agni ; ‘ the unwearied part of the sacrifice ’ say some. He said to 
his sons ‘ My boys, I have seen the life of Agni ; I shall chatter it ; what- 
ever I say do not disregard '. He began ‘ These horses float up to Pratipa 
Pratisatvana ’ ; (his son) Abhyagni Aita 9 ayana, having come, arriving at 
a wrong moment, seized his mouth (saying) ‘ Our father has become out of 
his mind ’. He said to him ‘ Go hence; thou hast been a sluggard in spoil- 
ing my speech ; I was about to make the cow of a hundred (years of) life, 
Tnn.Ti of a thousand (years of) life ; worst of all do I make thine offspring 
since thou here hast fastened on me ’. Therefore they say ‘ The Abhyagnis 
Aita 9 ayanas are the least of the Aurvas ’. Some recite it of longer length ; 
he should not prevent it ; ‘ Recite as much as is desired ’ he should say ; 
the prattle of Aitafapa is life ; verily thus he prolongs the life of the sacri- 
ficer who knows thus. As to there being the prattle of Aita 5 a ; the prattle 
of Aita 5 a is the sap of the metres ; verily thus he places sap in the metres. 
He sacrifices with metres full of sap and with metres full of sap he extends 
the sacrifice who knows thus. Again as to the prattle of Aita^a; the 


’ AV. xx. 128. 1-6 ; RVKlj. v. 12 ; 99 S. xii. 

20. 2. 1, 8, 2, 4, 6. 

* nenvaiva is read by S&yana but it is very odd 
to liave two era’s thus used ; it is natural 
to suppose iva is once meant as above it 
is always ni viva nardet. 

^ AV. XX. 128. 6-11 ; RVKh v. 13 ; xii. 

21 . 2 . 1 - 6 . 

AV. XX. 128. 12-16 ; RVKh. v. 14 ; 12, 18, 


and 15 occur in 99^* 16. 1. 

» AV. XX. 129. 1 seq. See KB. xxx. 6 ; Vait. 
xxxii. 20 ; GB. xi. 12 seq, A^S. viii. 8. 

14 prescribes 70 Padas or 18, viz. 1-8 a ; 

15 d-17 6 ; 17 d ; 18 6. See RVKh. v. 15 ; 
(17x4+2); 9gS. xii. 18. 2. 1-9; 1. Il- 
ls has eight of the verses. Gf. A^S. viii. 
3. 14 seq. for the following ; Bloomfield, 
AtharvavedUf pp. 98 seg. 



[ — vi. 34 


285 ] The Prattle of Aitaga 

prattle of Aita 9 a is freedom from exhaustion and unfailingness ; (he thinks) 

‘ Let there be freedom from exhaustion in my sacrifice, unfailingness in my 
sacrifice'. He recites the prattle of Aita 5 a, taking it by Padas, like 
a Nivid. He says om with the last Pada as in the case of a Nivid. He recites 
the riddle verses.* The gods having confounded the Asuras with the 
riddles overcame them ; verily thus also the sacrificers having confounded 
the hated rival with the riddles overcome him. These he recites by half 
verses, for support. He recites the Ajijnascnya (verses) ; ^ by means of the 
AjijMsenya verses the gods recognizing the Asuras overcame them ; verily 
thus also the sacrificers by means of the Ajijnasenya (verses) recognizing 
the hated rival overcome him. These he recites by half verses, for support. 
He recites the Pratiradha ; ^ by the Pratiradha the gods overpowered the 
Asuras and overcame them ; verily thus also the sacrificers overpower the 
hated rival and overcome him. He recites the Ativada ; ® by means of the 
Ativada the gods outspoke the Asuras and overcame them ; verily thus also 
by means of the Ativada the sacrificers outspeak the hated rival and over- 
come him. These by half verses he recites, for support. 

vi. 34 (xxx. 8). He recites the Devanitha the Adityas and Angirases 
disputed as to the world of heaven. ‘ We shall go first, we \ The Angir- 
ases first saw the Soma pressing on the next day for the world of heaven. 
They dispatched Agni — Agni is one of the Angirases — (saying) ‘ Go, tell 
the Adityas of our pressing to-morrow for the world of heaven'. The 
Adityas having seen Agni saw the pressing on the same day for the world 
of heaven. To them he said on his arrival ‘ We announce to you the press- 
ing to-morrow for the world of heaven '. They said ‘ But we announce to 
thee the pressing on this day for the world of heaven ; with thee for Hotr 
we shall go to the world of heaven ‘ Be it so ' he said and returned with 
his reply. They said ‘ Didst thou announce ? ' ^ I announced ' he replied ; 

‘ moreover they gave me a reply '. ‘ No : surely thou didst not respond ? ' 
(they said). ‘ I did respond ' he replied ; ‘ With fame he* approaches who 
approaches with the priestly function ; if one were to refuse him, he would 


2 AV.xx. 133. 16; RVKh. v. 16; xii. 
22. 1-6 ; VaiU xxxii. 21. Qovindasyamin 
and S&yana take pravalhya as = cheating 
with fair words. 

8 AV. XX. 184. 1-4 ; RVKh. v. 17 ; 99 S. xii. 
23. 1. In VaiL xxxii. 22 and 23 these 
and the next are confused. 

< AV. XX. 136. 1-8; RVKh. v. 18 ; ggS. xii. 
23 2. 

6 AV. XX. 186. 4 ; RVKh. v. 19 ; xii. 23. 
4 ; Vait, xxxii. 26 {attvdda). 


I AV. XX. 136. 6 seq. ; RVKh. v. 20 ; ^^S.xii. 
19. 1-4 ; VaiU xxxii. 28 ; see A^S. viii. 8. 
25. Of. KB. xxx. 6 ; Levi, La doctrine du 
sacrifice, pp. 66, 66. 

* The offerer, rather than as Skyana, the 
priest, tarn is naturally masculine and 
yajflam is not very easily to be supplied. 
Cf. 5®* 1- 18-17. no , . . na above 

is overlooked by Delbrilck, Altind, Synt. 
p. 644. 



vi. 34 — 1 The Qastras of the Hotrakas [286 

refuse fame ; therefore I did not refuse \ If one desire to refuse (to officiate 
at a sacrifice) on account of (another) sacrifice^ should he refuse it. But 
if (the offerer) is one for whom it is not suitable to sacrifice, spontaneous 
refusal is appropriate. 

vi. 85 (xxx. 9). The ,Angirases sacrificed for the Adityas ; to them as 
sacrificing for them, they gave this earth full of fees ; being accepted it caused 
them to bum ; they cast her away ; she becoming a lioness with gaping 
jaws assailed men. Of her as she burned came forth thin fissures which are 
now upon her ; aforetime she was all even, as it were. Therefore they say 
‘ He shall not accept a gift laid aside’, (thinking) ‘Let it not, being pierced with 
heat, pierce me with heat.’ But if he should accept it, he should give it to 
a hated rival ; he is ruined. Now as to yonder sun : he having taken the 
form of a white horse with its body bound with a horse halter went (to 
them) (saying) ‘ This we bring (as a fee) for you.’ Thus is the Devanitha^ 
recited, 

‘ The Adityas, 0 singer, brought a fee to the Angirasos ; 

This, O singer, they did not approach * ; 
for they did not approach the (earth). 

‘ But this, 0 singer, they did approach ’ 
for they did approach yonder (sun). 

‘ This, O singer, they did not accept,’ 

for they did not accept this (earth). 

‘ But this, O singer, they did accept,’ 
for they did accept yonder (sun). 

‘ Lest the days be without discrimination ’ 
he is the discriminator of the days. 

‘ Without a leader * the sacrifices ’ 

the fee is the leader of the sacrifices ; just as in this world a wagon with- 
out a leader comes to harm, so the sacrifice without a fee comes to harm ; 
therefore they say ‘ At the sacrifice a fee should be given, if but a small one,’ 
‘ White and swift of motion, 

And most rapid of foot, 

Swiftly it accomplisheth its purpose ; 

The Adityas, Eudras, Vasus praise thee, 

This gift do thou accept, O Angiras ’ ; 

® This must bo the souse, as Sayana takes it : ix. 306) suggests ned asann * that they 

asmdt drtvijydt. may not be * in this and the next case. 

^ The text is the same in its variants save * Again the text is hopeless. Haug as before 
that 99 s. has deia and The text is renders ‘he being carried away', the 

hopeless; Haug renders* he being carried wise men were without a leader (from 

away neta{h) nitah. Weber (Jnd. Stud. Sayana) Read below atyaZpikdpi. 



[ — vi 36 


287] The Devanliha 

Verily thus they sought acceptance of their gift. 

‘ This gift, great and broad, 

Let the gods give as a boon. 

Let that be pleasing to you. 

Given be it day by day, 

Do ye accept it.* 

Verily thus they accepted^ it. He recites this Devanitha taking it by 
Padas like a Nivid ; he says om with its last Pada as in the case of a Nivid. 

vi. 36 (xxx, 10). He recites the Bhutechads ^ ; by means of the Bhutechads 
the gods assailed the Asuras with battle and with craft. The gods, having 
obscured by the Bhutechads the might of the Asurjis, overcame them ; verily 
thus the sacrificers having obscured by the Bhutechads the mightof the hated 
rival overcame him. These he recites by half verses, for support. He recites 
the Ahanasya (verses) ; ^ from this organ is seed poured, from seed offspring 
are born ; verily thus he secures propagation. Ten he recites ; the Viraj 
has ten syllables ; the Viraj is food ; from food is seed poured ; from seed 
offspring are born ; verily thus he secures propagation. In them he inserts 
the sound o ; the sound o is food ; from food is seed poured, from seed off- 
spring are born ; verily thus he secures propagation. In ‘ T have celebrated 
Dadliikravan* he recites the Dadhikra (verse) Dadhikra is the divine filter ; 
herein he has said a speech full of impurity ; thus speech he purifies with 
the divine filter. It is in AnUvStubh ; the Anustubh is speech ; thus with its 
own metre he purifies speech. In ‘ The most sweet draughts are pressed ' 
he recites (verses) to Soma, the purifying ; ^ (verses) to Soma, the purifying 
are a divine filter ; herein he has said a speech full of impurity ; thus with 
the divine filter he purifies speech. They are in Anustubh ; the Anustubh 
is speech ; verily thus with its own metre he purifies speech. In ‘ The 
drop hath mounted An 5 umati ’ he recites a triplet to Indra and Brhaspati ; 

* The hosts, godless, as they attacked, 

With Brhaspati to aid, Indra overwhelmed * 


* Silyana clearly read ajagrahhaisan which in 
sense is right, despite Aufrecht. In AB. 
vi. 24 occurs paryagrahaisam. The most 
probable reading is ctjigrabhtsan with i as 
elsewhei-e (Whitney, Sanik, Qr, § 1031 h ; 
cf. $ 801 i), unless we allow ai as an 
abnormality for i. 

> AV. XX. 136. 11-13; RVKh. v. 21; 99 S. 
xii. 16. 4, 5, 3 ; VaiL xxxii. 30. 

2 AV. XX. 136. 1-10; UVKh. v. 22. 1-10; 
VaiU xxxii. 81 ; A^S. viii. 3. 30-32 ; cf. 
KB. xxx. 6 ; 59 s. xii. 24. 2 ; 26. 1. 


» AV. XX. 137, 3; RV. iv. 39. 0; RVKh. v. 
22. 13 ; cf. KB. xxx. 8 ; VaiU xxxii. 33 
The sense of vyahanasyam is not quite 
certain, as though Sayana takes it vii^ista 
still vi without * miglit do. 

^ RV. ix. 101. 4-6 ; A 9 S. viii. 3. 32 (reading 
ca tisrafy for catasrdfy ) ; 99 S. xii. 25. 2 ; 
VaiU xxxii. 38. 

^ RV. viii. 96. 18-16 ; AV- xx. 137. 7 - 9 ; A 9 S 
viii. 3. 33 ; 9?®* 26. 2. 'ndCicdrya h 

corrupt; Weber (Jnd, Stud. ix. 307) sug 
gests ®cdft ; BR. v. 1412 nddearya. 



vi. 36] The Qastras of the Hotrakas [288 

(he says) ; the Asura folk were rebellious towards the gods ; Indra with 
Brhaspati as companion smote away the Asura hue when attacking ; 
verily thus also the sacrificers by means of Indra and Brhaspati as aid 
smite away the Asura hue when attacking. They say ‘ Should he recite 
together ® on the sixth, day.”^ Or should he not recite together ? ’ ‘ He 

should recite together* they say,® ‘why should he recite together on the 
other days and not recite together on this ? ’ Or rather they say ‘ He 
should not recite together ; the sixth day is the world of heaven ; the world 
of heaven is not a place where all meet ; only certain people meet in that 
world. If he were to recite together, he would make it common. In that 
he does not recite together, that is a symbol of the world of heaven ; there- 
fore he should not recite together. Again as to his not reciting together ; 
the litanies here are the Nabhanedistha, the Valakhilyas, the Vn^kapi and 
the Evayamarut ; if he were to recite together, he would loose the desire 
that is in these. The Vrsakapi is eonnected with Indra; the prattle of 
Aitafa is all the metres ; herein is the desire obtained which is in (the hymn) 
in Jagati to Indra ; moreover the hymn is addressed to Indra and Brhas- 
pati ; the concluding verse is addressed to Indra and Brhaspati ; therefore 
he should not recite together. 

® With the normal form, RV. i. 57 ; AB. lii. I. e. RV. viii. 00 (n. 5). 

50, This explains Vait xxxii. 35 which ® Cf. above AB. vi. 26. 

Caland has not ich'ntifiori. 



PANCIKA VII 


Supplementary Matter and the Rajasuya. 

ADHYAYA I 

Tlie Division of the Sacrificial Animal, 

vii. 1 (xxxi. 1). Now ^ regarding the division of the sacrificial animal ; we 
shall declare the division. The two jaws along with the tongue belong to 
Prastotr ; the breast in eagle shape to the Udgatr, the palatal part of the 
throat to the Pratihartr, the right loin to the Hotr, the left to the Brahman, 
the riglit thigh to the Maitravaruna, the left to the Brahmanacchahsin, the 
right side with the shoulder to the Adhvaryu, the left to the Upagatrs, the 
left shoulder to the Pratipasthatr, the right lower foreleg to the Nestr, the 
left to the Potr, the right foreleg to the Achavaka, the left to the Agnidh, 
the right upper foreleg to the Atreya, the left to the Sadasya, the scat 
and spine to the householder, the two right feet ^ to the man who gives 
the fast milk to the householder, the two left feet to him who gives 
the fast milk to the wife of the householder,^ the lip is common to 
the two ; this the householder should leave over. They take the tail to the 
wives, but they should give it to a Brahman. The fleshy growth on the 
neck and three ribs belong to the Gravastut ; three ribs and half the flesh ^ to 
the Unnetr, the other half of the flesh and the lungs to the slaughterer ; it 
he should give to a Brahman, if he is not a Brahman. The head belongs to 
the Subrahmanya priest, the skin to him who declares the pressing on tlie 
next day ; the sacrificial food to all or to the Hotr. These thirty-six each 

‘ The division is given in A^S. xii. 9, the * Sayana holds that the terms doh and 
probably original source ; it is borrowed bd/m exhaust the forelegs, but this .seems 

from AB. in OB. iii. 18. The Upagatrs unlikely ; the term here is pada ‘ foot 

are subordinate Saman priests who acconi- ^ Apparently this sense is meant, and so with 

pany the chants of the Saman singers ; enayoh, but Sayana’s comment is con- 

the Atreya is not a normal priest, but he fused. 

appears as specially privileged elsewhere, * The vaikaiia is an unknown part, but 
e. g. K 9 S. X. 2. 21 ; KS. xxviii. 4. Of. the apparently near the kikasd, here perhaps 

part of the Atreya in 95®* 

Weber, Ind, Stud, x, 384. See for the ® I. e. the Agnidh ; see A 9 S. vi. 11. 16. 
division 9®* ^* ^ > Schwab, Das Weber {Ind. Stud, ix. 808) cites PB. xvi. 

Altindische Thieropfer, pp. 126-130. 18. 10 ; L 9 S. i. 1. 9, 12 ; 95®* 

37 [h.o.s. 2 b] 



[290 


vii. 1 — ] The Division of the Sacrificial Animal 

of one foot support the sacrifice ; the Brhati has thirty-six syllables ; 
the worlds of heaven are connected with the Brhati ; verily thus they 
obtain the breaths and the worlds of heaven ; verily thus they proceed 
finding support in the breaths and in the worlds of heaven. It is a 
heavenly victim for those who thus divide it. But those who do it other- 
wise, it is as if robbers or evildoers should rend an animal. This division 
of the victim Qrautarsi Devabhaga knew ; but he left the world without 
proclaiming it. But it is a superhuman being proclaimed to Girija 
Babhravya ; since that time on men study it. 


ADHYAYA II 


Expiations for Errors in the Agnihotra, &c. 

vii. .2 (xxxii. 1). They^ say "If one who has established the fires dies on 
the fast day, how is it with his sacrifice? ’ ‘ He should not sacrifice for him’, 
they say, ‘ for he has not arrived at the sacrifice.’ They say ‘ If one who 
has established the fires dies when the Agnihotra has been put on the fire or 
the Samnayya milk or the oblations, what is the expiation here ? ’ He should 
put them all around so that they may all bo burned together. That is the 
expiation here. They say ‘ If one who has established the fires dies when 
the oblations have been put in place, what is the expiation here ? ’ (Saying) 
‘ Hail !’ to those deities for whom the libations were drawn he should offer 
them whole in the Ahavaniya. That is the expiation here. They say " If 
one who has established the fires dies in absence, how is his Agnihotra to 
be performed ? ’ He should oflfer with the milk of (a cow) with a calf to 
which it is to be won over ; ^ the milk of (a cow) with a calf to which it 
is to be won over is dififerent, as it were, the Agnihotra of the dead is 
different as it were. Or they may offer with milk from whatever source. 
Moreover they say ‘ They should keep kindled these fires, without offering, 
until the bones are collected.’ If the bones cannot be found, having 
gathered three hundred and sixty leaf stalks,® and having made of them 


41. 11. The presence of the Sadasya, 
■who is not recognized by the A 9 valayana 
school, blit only by the Kausitaki, is 
another sign of later origin, as in the use 
of the ■word vibhdga; probably, as Lindner 
(Pdninif p. 79) suggests, an older account 
has been superseded by the Sutra version. 

' For the PrS,ya 9 citta 8 cf. ^B. xii. 5. 1 seq . ; 
ITaup. xiv ; AfS. iii ; Xp. ix ; Atharva- 


ptdya^tta (JAOS. xxxiii. 71 seq.). For 
this case cf. JB. i. 57. 1-3 ; 9®* 4. 

2. 5. 

2 See TS. i. 8. 5. 1 ; TB. i. 6. 8. 4 ; Sayana’s 
derivation from ^vd is very bad : Nara- 
yana on A^S. iii. 10. 17 recognizes the 
root van ; Vedic Index, i. 462. 

s foftih is one of the extraordinary forms of the 
tradition : iasttm must no doubt be read. 



291] Expiations for Errors in the Sacrifice [ — ^vii. 5 

a human figure as it were, they should perform on it the usual round (of 
ceremonies) and thus after mingling, the (fires) with the bones gathered 
together remove them. A hundred and fifty should he place on the body, 
a hundred and forty on the thigh bones, fifty on the thighs, and the rest on 
the head. That is the expiation here. 

vii. 3 (xxxii. 2). [As in AB. v. 27}] 

vii. 4 (xxxii. 3). They say ‘If a man’s Samnayya^ milked in the evening 
becomes spoiled or some one carries it away, what is the expiation here ? ’ 
Having divided into two the morning’s milking, he should curdle one half of 
it and sacrifice with it. That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If the morning 
milking of the Samnayya becomes spoiled or some one carries it away, what 
is the expiation here ? He should prepare in its place a cake for Indra or 
Maliendra and sacrifice with it. That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If 
the whole of his Samnayya becomes spoiled or some one carries it away, 
what is the expiation here. (He should offer) a cake for Indra or Mahendra 
just as above. That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If the whole of his 
oblation becomes spoiled or men take them away, what is the expiation 
then ? ’ Having made them according to the deities out of butter, he 
should offer with a butter oblation and thus perform another offering 
without a flaw. The sacrifice is the expiation of the sacrifice. 

vii. 5 (xxi. 4). They say ‘ If on to a man’s Agnihotra when put on the fire 
something not fit for sacrifice falls, what is the expiation here ? * Having 
poured it all into the offering spoon, and having gone east, he places the 
kindling stick on the Ahavaniya, and having taken off’ a hot coal from the 
north of the Ahavaniya he should pour the offering, cither in silence or with 
a verse to Prajapati.^ That is both offered and not offered. If it happens 
when (the spoon) has been filled once or twice, the same procedure applies. 
If he can remove it, having poured off the spoilt portion, and having poured 
the unspoiled portion (into the off’ering spoon) he should offer it in the 
ordinary way.- That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If a man’s Agni- 


Webor (Ind.Stud. ix. aiO) suggests parna- 
sadah (cf. ggs. xii. 23. 13). The parallel 
texts giving tlie rite have pald^aipitdni 
(ggs. iv. 15. 19; Kgs. XXV. S. 15) or 
^tsarfindm {Kav^\ 83) or pitlu^atsai'iim {Ath. 
Pray, iii. 8). For rmfc = dvixinr^e cf. 
Wackernagel, Altind. Gram, II. i. 30, 31. 

* The only changes are the omission of the 
last sentence and the insertion of ‘ They 
say ’ before each hypothesis. 

vii. 4. ' I. e. the mixture of milk prepared at 
the evening and on the morning for the 


Agnihotra. The evening milk is made 
sour and mixed with the fresh milk. Cf. 
Atharvaprdya^ciMa^ ii. 1. 
vii. 5. 1 RV. X. 121. 10. Cf. AgS. iii. 20. 23. 
TB. i. 55. 3 and SB. xii. 4. 2. 4 differ. 
See also Atharvaprdya^citta, i. 3 seq. 

2 I. e. in the usual mode of iinnayana^ pouring 
into the spoon ; TB. ii. 1. 3. 5. The 
form vyapanayiium is very irregular ; for 
parallels see W^hitney, Sansk, Gr. § 9G8 d. 
Cf. JAOS. xxxiii. 73, n. 49. sa yadi is a 
sign of lateness. 



[292 


vii. 6 — ] Expiations for Errors in the Agnihotra 

hotra when put on the fire spills or pours over, what is the expiation 
here 1 ’ He should pour water on it for expiation ; waters are expiation ; 
then he touches (the rest) with his right hand and mutters. ‘ To the sky 
a third, to the gods the sacrifice hath gone; thence may wealth come 
to me ; to the atmosphere, a third, to the fathers the sacrifice hath gone ; 
thence may wealth come to me ; to the earth a third, to me the sacrifice 
hath gone ; thence may wealth come to me.’ He then mutters (a verse) 
to Visnu and Varuna,® ‘ By whose might the regions are established ; 
Visnu guards that of the sacrifice which is well sacrificed, Varuna that 
which is ill sacrificed ; verily (it serves) to appease both of them. That 
is the expiation here. They say ‘ If, as he goes eastwards,* the Agnihotra 
which has been put on the fire spills or falls out, what is the expiation 
here?’ If he were to fetch it again, he would turn the sacrifice away 
from the world of heaven ; he should stay where he is and others should 
fetch to him the remains of the Agnihotra and he should ofier it in the 
usual way. That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If the offering spoon 
splits, what is the expiation here ? ’ He should fetch another spoon and 
offer ; then he should put on the Ahavaniya the broken spoon ; handle 
in front, bowl behind. That is the expiation here. They say ® ‘ If there 
is fire on a man’s Ahavaniya, but that on the Garhapatya is extinguished, 
what is the expiation here ? ’ If he were to take out (the fire) to the east, 
he would fall away from his abode; if to the west he would perform 
the sacrifices like the Asuras; if he were to kindle afresh he would 
produce a rival for the sacrificer ; if he should make (the Ahavaniya) 
also go out, breath would forsake the sacrificer ; verily having gathered 
the whole of it with the ashes he should put it in the place of the Garhapatya 
and from it take out the Ahavaniya to the east. That is the expiation 
here. 

vii. 6 (xxxii. 5). They say ' ‘ If they take out a fire (and put it with) 

^ Above AB. iii. 38. tinguish the Ahaviiniya also, and (6) to 

* The anacoluthon seems clear and Sayana so remove the whole lire to the Garhapatya 

takes it. Weber (Jad.Sfwd. ix. 311) refuses and then take out the Ahavaniya. All 

to accept it, but does not explain yastja tho modes are allowed by AfS. iii. 12. 

and the verbs do not suit that view. 21-^25 in defiance of tlie Brahmana. The 

® The Ahavaniya is normally taken out to same result is arrived at by the xii. 

the east from the Garhapatya which 4. 3. 6-10 by somewhat different argu- 

alone remains in ; the five alternative merits. Cf. Ath, Pray. i. 5 ; JB. i. 61. 3~7 

courses in the circumstances are (1) to which agrees closely with ^B. (JAOS. 

to take as tho Garhapatya the Ahavaniya xxiii. 343, 844). 

and then take out tlie Ahavaniya from ^ The readings (abhyuddharei and ahhyuddha- 
it ; (2) to take out the Garhapatya from reyuh) of JB. i. 65. 2 and 9®* 3. 4 

tho Ahavaniya, like the Asuras (TB. i. 1. suggest the rendering followed ; the fire 

4. 4; ; (8) to rekindle the fire ; (4) to ex- taken out being from the Garhapatya ; 



293] 


Expiations for Errors affecting the Fires [ — vii. 7 

a man’s fire what is the expiation then ? * If he can see it, removing the 
former (fire) he should put down the other ; if however he cannot see it, 
he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni with Agni ; the invita- 
tory and offering verses for it are^ ‘Agni by Agni is kindled’ and ‘For 
thou, O Agni, by Agni.’ Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya 
with ‘ To Agni with Agni hail ! ’ That is the expiation here. They say 
‘ If a man’s Garhapatya and Ahavaniya unite together what is the expiation 
here?’ He should offer to Agni as delight a cake on eight potsherds; 
its invitatory and offering verses are*^ ‘O Agni come for delight’, and 
‘ Who Agni for the delight of the gods.’ Or he should offer a libation 
in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni as delight hail ! ’ That is the expiation 
hero. They say ‘ If all a man’s fires should unite together, what is the 
expiation here ? ’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni as 
discrimination; its invitatory and offering verses are^ ‘He hath shone 
like the sun at the breaking of the dawns ’ and ‘ Thee, 0 Agni the tribes 
of men praise.’ Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with 
‘ To Agni as discrimination hail ! ’ That is the expiation here. They say 
‘If a man’s fire unite with other fires, what is the expiation here?’ 
He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni the charred ;*'' its 
invitatory and offering verses ^ are ‘ Agni hath roared like Dyaus thunder- 
ing ’ and ‘ As our fathers of old.’ Or he should offer a libation in the 
Ahavaniya with ‘To Agni the charred hail!’ That is the expiation 
here. 

vii. 7. (xxxii. 6). They say ‘ If a man’s fires are involved in a village fire, 
what is the expiation liere ? ’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to 
Agni, the spoiler ; the invitatory and offering verses are ^ ‘ In our cattle 
fray ’ and ‘ Do not as in the great contest.’ Or he should offer a libation 
in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni, the spoiler, hail ! * That is the expiation 
here. They say ‘ If a man’s fires be united with a divine conflagration, 
wliat is the expiation here ? ’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds 

else the seniso might bo, if people iiooj- cf. 95*^* J o,S: JB. i. 64. 1 ; M^S. 

lessly take out an Ahavaniya, wliore iii. 4. 4,5; Ap^S. ix. 3. 18; xii. 4. 

there is an Ahavaniya ; tlien the old one 4. 2. 

if still recogniztable is to bo extinguished. ^ Ksdniatont is doubtful : cf. NS. i. 8. 9 ; 
The reading of Aufrecht yculy u for ycuUja Sayana tukes it as = ksajndvanf, *• patient’ 

of the MSS. is essential. or ‘ forgiving * ; Ap^S. ix. 3. 17 has a 

2 RV. i. 12. 6 ; viii. 43. 14 ; A^'S. iii. 13. 3, 12 ; different use of it ; cf. Ath. Pray, v. 4. 

cf. ggS. iii. 4. 1 ; 5. 1 ; JB. i. 65. 3 ; gB. « RV. x. 45. 4 ; iv. 2. 16; AgS. iii. 13. 4, 12 
xii. 4. 3. 6. with different order of verses and a new 

^ RV. vi. 16. 10 ; i. 12. 9 ; A^S. iii 1 . 6, 12 ; sense ; cf. ggS. iii. 4. 13. For the whole 

cf. ggS. iii. 4. 3 ; 5. 2 ; JB. . 65. 4. cf. Atharvaprdya^citta, ii._7 ; v. 4, 5. 

* RV. vii. 10. 2 ; V. 8. 8 ; AgS. iii. 13. 5, 12, ^ RV. viii. 75. 11 and 12 ; AgS. iii. 13. 7, 12 ; 

where the offering verse is RV. vi. 6. 3 ; iii. 4. 5 5. 4 ; gB. xii. 4. 4. 3. 



[294 


vii. 7 — ] Expiations for Eiv*ors in the Sacrifice 

to Agni as in the waters ; its invitatory and offering verses are ^ ‘ In the 
waters, 0 Agni, is thy seat ’ and ‘ The clever, of pure insight hath wrought 
a wondrous deed/ Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with 
^To Agni as in the waters hail!’ That is the expiation here. They 
say ‘ If a man’s fires are united with the fire which burns a corj)se, what 
is the expiation here?’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to 
Agni, the pure ; its invitatory and offering verses are ^ ‘ Agni of purest 
vows ’ and ‘ Up, 0 Agni, thy pure (rays)/ Or he should offer a libation 
in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni, the pure, hail ! * That is the expiation 
here. They say ‘ If a man’s fires are involved in a forest fire, what is the 
expiation here ? * He should mount (the fires) on the two fire sticks ^ or 
take out a fire brand from the Ahavaniya or from the Garhapatya ; if he 
cannot so do, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the 
spoiler ; its invitatory and ottering verses have been given. Or he should 
otter a libation in the Aliavaniya with ‘To Agni, the spoiler, hail!’ 
That is the expiation here. 

vii. 8 (xxxii. 7). They say ‘ If at the fast day one who has established the 
fires weeps, what is the expiation here ? ’ He should otter a cake on eight 
potsherds to Agni, the supporter of vows ; its invitatory and offering verses 
are ^ ‘ Thou, 0 Agni, art the supporter of vows, the pure ’ and ‘ Supporting 
vows, guardian of vows, undeceived.’ Or he should offer a libation in 
the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni, supporter of Vows, hail ! ’ That is the 
expiation here. Tliey say ‘ If one who has established tl)o fires on the 
fast day should happen to commit a breach of his vow, wliat is the 
expiation here?’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, 
the lord of vows ; its invitatory and offering verses are ^ ‘ Thou, O Agni, 
art the guardian of vows ’ and ‘ If we have contravened your vows.’ 
Or he should otter a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘To Agni, the lord 
of vows, hail!’ That is the expiation here. Thej^ say ‘If one who has 
established the fires should omit the ottering at new' or at full moon, 
what is the expiation here?’ He should otter a cake on eight potsherds 
to Agni, the maker of ways ; its invitatory and offering verses are ‘ For 
thou knowest, 0 wise one, the w'ays’ and ‘We have come to the way of 


‘ RV. viii, 4.*3. 9 ; iii. 1. 3 , Hi. 13. 8, ll! 
with viii. 43. 28 as s(‘corid ; cf. 95^- iii- 
4. 7 ; 5. 5 ; 9^. xii. 4. 4. 4. 

' RV. viii. 44. 21 and 17 ; A9S. iii. 13. 4 ; 
99^* iii* ^* verses are given in 

A9S. Cf. 9B. xii. 4. 4. 5. 

^ Cf. 9B. xii. 4. 3. 10 ; 4. 1 ; 5. 2. 1 ; xiii. 6. 
2. 20 ; iv. 6. 8. 3 ; 99S. ii. 17. 1-5 ; K9S. 
V. 3. 1 ; xxi. 1. 17. Cf. also Afharia- 


j^jraya^citiaj ii. 7 and 8. 

' A9S. iii. 12. 14; TB. ii. 4. 1. 11 : 99S. iii. 
4. 12 ; 5. 9. Cf. .TAGS, xxxiii. 85, n. 257. 

2 RV. viii. 11. 1 ; X. 2. 4 ; A9S. iii. 13. 2, 12; 

cf. 9CS. iv. 4. 11. 

3 RV. vi. W. 3 ; X. 2. 3 ; A9S. iii. 10. 10-12 ; 

cf, 99^- i''- 1. 2 : 5. 7 ; JAOS. xxxiii, 80, 
n. 143. 



295] Expiations for various Errors [ — vii. 9 

tlie gods/ Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘To 
Agni, the maker of ways, hail ! ’ That is the expiation here. They say 
‘ If all a man's fires are extinguished, what is the expiation here ? ’ He 
should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the fervid, connected 
with man, the purifying ; its invitatory and offering verses are ^ ‘ O come 
with fervour among men' and ‘Come to us with fervour among men.' 
Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘To Agni, the 
fervid, connected with men, the purifying hail ! ' That is the expiation 
here. 

vii. 9 (xxxii. 8). They say ‘ If one who has established the fires eats 
new food without making the Agrayana offering, what is the expiation 
here!' He should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vai^vanara; 
its invitatory and offering verses are^ ‘Vai(;vanara hath produced' and 
‘ Present in the sky, present Agni on earth.' Or he should ofier a libation 
in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni Vaievanara hail ! ' Tliat is the expiation 
here. They say ‘ If one has established his fires and a potsherd be lost 
what is the expiation here ? ' He should offer a cake on two potsherds 
to the Afwins; its invitatory and offering verses^ arc ‘O Alvins to our 
abode ' and ‘ With chariot rich in cattle O Nasatyas.' Or he should offer 
a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To the A 9 vins hail ! ' That is the 
expiation here. They say ‘ If one has established the fires and the filter 
be lost, what is the expiation here?' He should offer a cake on eight 
potsherds to Agni with the filter ; its invitatory and offering verses are ^ 
‘ Thy filter is outstretched, O lord of prayer ' and ‘ The filter of the 
burning one outstretched in the sky.' Or he should offer a libation in 
the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni with the filter hail ! ’ That is the expiation 
here. They say ‘If one has established the fires and the gold be lost, 
what is the expiation here ? ' He should offer a cake on eight potsherds 
to Agni with the gold; its invitatory and offering verses arc^ ‘Golden 
haired in the expanse of the atmosphere' and ‘The well winged ones 
strengthen in the ways.' Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya 
with ‘ To Agni with the gold hail I ' That is the expiation here. They 
say ‘If one who has established the fires were to offer without having 
bathed in the morning, what is the expiation here ? ' He should offer 


^ RV. again has not this ; see A^^S. iii. 12. 27. 
Agni asjanadvarU is one connected with 
the root jian seen in janesu, Sayana leaves 
it untranslated. Cf. MS. i. 8. 9. 

' Above AB. v. 17 ; RV. i. 98. 2 ; only in A^S, 
ii. 16. 2 in another ritual. 


2 RV. i. 92. 16 ; vii. 72. 1 ; not in A^S. in 
this use. 

s RV. ix. 83. 1 and 2 ; not in A^S. in this 
use. 

* RV. i. 77. 1 and 2 ; not in this sense in 
A^S., which has it in the Kariri^ti, ii. 
18. 7. 



vii. 9 ] Expiations for Errors in the Agnihotra [296 

a cake on eight potsherds to Agni as Varuna; its invitatory and offering 
verses are® ‘Thou for us 0 Agni, knowing Varuna’ and ‘Thou O Agni 
be nearest with aid to us.’ Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavanlya 
with ‘To Agni as Varuna hail!’ That is the expiation here. They say 
‘If one who has established the fires should eat the food of a woman 
with child, what is the penance here ? ’ He should offer a cake on eight 
potsherds to Agni of the thread; its invitatory and offering verses are® 
‘ Extending the thread of the atmosphere do thou follow the light ’ and 
‘ Do ye, O Soma bom, bind the axle strings.’ Or he should offer a 
libation in the Ahavanlya with ‘ To Agni of the thread hail ! ’ That is 
the expiation here. They say ‘If one who has established the fires 
should live, hearing himself spoken of as dcad,^ what is the expiation 
here?’ He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni the fragi-ant; 
its invitatory and oft'ering verses arc ® ‘ Agni as Hoti hath .set down, 
good sacrificer’ and ‘True he hath made to-day our ofiering to the god.s.’ 
Or he should offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘ To Agni, the fragrant, 
hail ! ’ That is the expiation here. They say ‘ If one has established 
the fires and his wife or a cow produces twins, what is the expiation 
here?’ He should offer a cake on thirteen potsherds to Agni with the 
Maruts: its invitatory and offering verses arc® ‘0 Maruts in whose 
dwelling ’ and ‘ Like the spokes, none last, like the days.’ Or he should 
offer a libation in the Ahavaniya with ‘To Agni with the Mamts hail!’ 
That is the expiation here. They say ‘ Should a man without a wife 
offer the Agnihotra? Or .should he not offer it?’ ‘He .should offer’ 
they say; if he were not to offer he would be a mock man.’® ‘What 
is a mock man ? ’ (they ask) ; ‘ One who (offers) neither to gods nor to 
the fathers nor to men.’ Therefore, even if one has no wife, he should 
offer the Agnihotra. With regard to this a sacrificial verse “ is recited 

‘ Even one who has no wife and who drinks no Soma 

Should sacrifice in the Sautiftmanl ; 

“ Sacrifice to free thyself from debt to father and mother ” 

In accord with this command is this rule of scripture.’ 


Therefore .should he make one, who is connected with the Soma, sacrifice. 


RV. iv. 1. 4 and 5 ; not in A^S. 

KV. X. 63. 6 and 7. In A^JS. ix. 10. 15 tlie 
first verse is used otherwise ; see below 
AB. vii. 12. 

^ The construction is so odd that seems 
obviously needed ; A^S. iii. 13. 11 has 
yasminjive wrtot^ctbdah, Cf. JAOS. xxxiii. 
98, n. 498. 


® RV. V. 1. 6 ; X. 53. 3 ; A 9 S. iii. 13. 11 has 
svrabhaye for surdbhimate. 

» RV. i. 86 . 1 ; V. 58. 5 ; A 9 S. has not thest* 
verses in this use. 

JO The anaddhdpurusa appears in a different 
connexion in the 9 II J s©® Eggeling, SBE. 
xli. 197, 206, 207. 

The verse is bad metre : ayam with saufrii- 



297 ] 


[— vii. 11 


The Rule of Fasting 

[vii. 10 (xxxii. 9), They ^ say * Why does a man without a wife offer at 
command the Agnihotra ? ‘ If one has commenced ^ (the sacrifice), and his 
wife dies or disappears, how does he offer the Agnihotra ? * ‘ Sons, grand- 

sons, and great grandsons (he wins) ’ they say, ‘ in this and yonder world ; 
in this world is yonder (world) of heaven, by that which is not heaven one 
mounts to the world of heaven/ He maintains the continuity of yonder 
world. Therefore they perform the piling for one without a wife. How 
does one without a wife perform the Agnihotra ? ‘ The wife is faith, the 

sacrificer truth ; faith and truth are the highest pair ; by faith and truth 
as a pair he conquers the worlds of heaven * (he should reply). 

vii. 11 (xxxii. 10). They ^ say, ‘In that he fasts at the new and full 
moon, it is because the gods do not eat the oblation of one who does not keep 
his vow of fasting ; therefore does he fast (thinking) ‘ May the gods cat my 
oblation.’ ‘ On the first ^ full moon day should he fast * is the view of 
Paifigya ; ‘ on the second ’ that of Kausitaki. The first full moon day is 
Anumati, the second Raka ; tlie first new moon day is Siiiivall, the second 
Kuhn. The period is that when (the sun) sets near or I'ises towards the 
moon. On the first full moon should he fast. In that he begins not having 


manya might do as a correction. Aufrecht 
points out that anrnl is really the origin 
of tlie gloss anrndrtfidt. The construction 
seems to be abljroviatod : the rule is laid 
down in the first line and the reason 
given in the second, and grutth strictly 
speaking requires iti in front of it. The 
Sautnunani is to be performed ; a foUiori 
tho Agnihotra. Sayana cites the rule of 
the three debts to the gods, fathers, Rsis 
(TS. vi. 3. 10. 5), and Visnu’s rule that 
sacrifices are to bo continued even on 
a wife's death using a substitute for 
tho wife, for which he cites tho Smrti 
authority. On the other hand Manu (v. 
168) prescribes the burning of a wife in 
tho fires and a repiling, contrary to AGS, 
vi. 10. 9 ; Bharadvaja and a Maitrayani 
9ruti. Cf. Yajn. i. 88. 

^ Sayana, who explains this after the next 
chapter, expressly states that in some 
de^as tliese two chapters were not read, 
and that his predecessors did not com- 
ment on them. This chapter is clearly 
in part at least corrupt. 

2 nivinte, according to Sayana, refers to one 
who has commenced his duties as a house- 
holder including the Agnihotra. The 
repetition of (ignihotram is as in § 4. The 
38 [b. 0 . 8 . 25 ] 


point of tlie sentence following is hope- 
lessly obscure. Ilaug takes druroha as a 
first person and, following Sayana, yas- 
yaisdm painm naichet as ‘who does not 
wish for a (second) wife^, but this is 
impossible unless ya . . nechft is road. 
Weber despairs of the passage ; perhaps 
yasyaisd patiCi n(t(}yet, 

vii. 11. ^ This is a mutilated and partially 
unintelligible version of KB. iii. 1 ; cf. 
Weber, dyotisfia, pp. 61, 62. 

2 This is clearly a reference to the doctrine of 
two (new and) full moon days (5?S. i. 3. 
3-6), one of which is when the sun and 
moon when full are visible together at 
sunset, and one when the full moon is 
only visible after sunset. Sayana, how- 
ever, takes the sense that the time for 
the rite falls on the period between sun- 
rise and sunset, which may be connected 
with the fourteenth and first days of the 
two halves of the month, llaug gets the 
same result by taking tithi as defined in 
terms of the setting and rising of the 
moon. But the sentence is a mere cor- 
ruption of KB. iii. 1 : yam paryastamayam 
utsarped iti sa sthitih ; the tithi is a concep- 
tion of the Sutra period only. For the 
names cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. v. 228, 229. 



[298 


vii. 11 — Expiations for Errors in the Agnihotra 


discerned the moon in the east at the new moon, and in that he sacrifices, 
thereby they purchase the Soma, thereby the second.® On the second 
should he fast; on the latter days Soma sacrifices in accord with 
Soma the deity * ; the moon is the Soma of the gods ; therefore should he 
fast on the second day.} 

vii. 12 (xxxii. 11). They say.^ ‘ If the sun rises or sets on a man’s fire 
before it is taken out, or if being taken forward it dies out before the 
oblation, what is the expiation here?’ He should put gold in front when 
taking it out in the evening ; gold is a pure light, yonder sun is a pure light ; 
verily thus gazing on the pure light he takes it out. Having interposed 
silver he should take it out in the morning ; that is a symbol of the night. 
Before the blending of the shadows ho should take out the Ahavaniya ; 
the shadow is the darkness, death ; verily thus with this light he crosses 
over the shadow, the darkness, death. That is the expiation here. They 
say, ‘ If a wagon or a chariot or a dog ® come between the Gilrhapatya and 
the Ahavaniya, what is the expiation here ? ’ ‘He should not pay heed to 
it,’ they say, ‘ on his self are the (fires) placed ®.’ If he .should pay heed to it, 
he should draw a continuous stream of water from the Garhapatya to the 
Ahavaniya with ^ ‘ Stretching the thread of the atmosphere do thou follow 
the light.’ That is the expiation here. They say, ‘ When he is piling on 
fuel to the fires should ho procure the Anvaharyapacana ? Or should he 
not procure it ? ’ ‘He should procure,’ they say ; he places the breaths in 
himself who piles the fires; the Anvaharyapacana is the most fond of 
food of them ; in it ho offers the libation with ‘ Hail to Agni, the eater 
of food, the lord of food.’ An eater of food, a lord of food, he becomes, he 
attains with his offspring proper food who knows thus. When about to 
offer he should move between the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya ; when 
he moves by this way the fires know ‘ He .is going to offer in us.’ ‘ When 
he moves by this way the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya smite away his 
guilt ; he with guilt smitten away goes aloft to the world of heaven ’ ; 
so they quote a Brahmana. They say, ‘ How should one revere the fires 
when about to go away, or when having returned after absence or 


3 Sayana did not read tena somam kr'manti 
and the words are apparently corrupt ; 
so after temitardm something seems to 
be missing unless it bo yajanti under- 
stood, which is poor sense. KB. has a 
a different reading with good meaning. 

* The sense here is clearly imperfect, and, as 
KB. shows, corrupt. 

1 Cf. 9B. xii. 4. 4. G. 

^ Afvd in Aufrecht’s edition is imiirobable 
though ajjva occurs in M 9 S. iii. 4. 9, as 


the verb is singular and fra seems clearly 
right, afvdh is also used by Haug ; Sayana 
does not interpret, naturally enough. 
Cf. iii. 10-15 where fra is men- 
tioned. So ii. 0.13: pdpade gate ; 

Ags. ix. 10. 15; ^B. xii. 4. 1. 4 ; JB. i. 
51. 4. 

3 hi id apparently was road by Sayana and so 

the Anand. ed. But hitdh is much better. 

4 RV. X. 53. 0 ; AgS. iii. 10.’ 15 ; 9gS. ii. 0. 

13. 



299 ] 


[ — vii. 13 


The Legend of Qunahgepa 

day by day?’ ‘In silence/ they say; in silence men await a superior’s 
orders. But also they say, ‘ Day by day tliey fear through the sacrificer’s 
lack of faith removal or extinction. He should revere them with, ‘ Safety 
to you, safety to 7ne.’ Safety becomes his lot.^ 


ADHYAYA HI 


TJi(* Legend of Qnaahgepa, 

vii. 13 (xxxiii. 1). Hari^caiidra^ Vaidhasa Aiksvaka was the son of a 
king ; a hundred wives were his, but he had no son from them. In his 
house dwelt Parvata and Narada ; he asked Narada : 

‘ Since ^ now men desire a son, 

Both those that have and those that have not knowledge 
What doth a man gain by a son ? 

Tell me that, O Narada.’ 

He, asked in one verse, replied in ten : 

* A debt he payoth in him. 

And immortality he attaineth,^ 

That father who seeth the face 
Of a son born living. 

The delights in the earth. 

The delights in the fire, 

The delights in the waters of living beings, 

Greater than these is that of a father in a son. 

By means of a son have fathers ever ^ 

Passed over the deep darkness ; 

The self is horn from the self 


® Tlie Ap^S. vi. 27. 2 ascribes to a Bah viva 
Brahmana the use of a Mantra immo to 
jp) avaUyami (or prdvdtsam ; so read for 
"^fsyaht) for one who is about to go and 
for ono on his return. This does not 
agree with cither the text or the KB. ii. 
5, tliough tlio latter does not specify tlie 
Mantras, nor with 99^* Keith, JRAS. 
1915, pp. 493-498. 

^ Tlie tale of 9unah(;epa is to be repeated to the 
king after the anointing at the end of the 
MarutvatTya, by the Hotr sitting on a 
golden seat south of the Ahavanlya ; the 
response of the Athvaryu to each Gatha 
is tathdj to each Rc om, to the prose of 
course nothing ; see A 9 S. ix. 3. 9-ir>. The 
legend also occurs in 99^- 


lias been edited in both versions by 
Max Miiller in liis History of Ancient 
Sanskrit TAteiature (1859), pp. 573-588, by 
Fr. Streiter (Berlin, 1861), and trans- 
lated also by Roth (IS. i. 457 ; ii. 112). 
A revised text is given in the 2nd ed. of 
B<>htlingk’s Chrestoniath ie, 

- yan= yad should be read, perhaps, thougli 
yam is good enough sense. 9?^* kas tan 
nahprabrdhi Narada. 

•” rindale, 99^* 

* Or ‘ the fathers passed assuredly \ For sa 
irdvati which is the reading of all the 
MSS. in 99^* also, BOhtlingk has saird- 
cati ; see AB. vi. 21. In c there is in the 
MSS. of the 99^* variant yajna and so 
the Mitdksard cited liy Max Muller. 



vii. 13 — ] The Rajasuya [300 

The (son) is (a ship), well-found, to ferry over. 

What is the use of dirt, what of the goat-skin ? 

What of long hair, and what of fervour ? 

Seek a son, O Brahmans, 

This is the world’s advice 

Food is breath, clothing a protection, 

Gold an ornament, cattle lead to marriage, 

A wife is a comrade, a daughter a misery. 

And a son a light in the highest heaven.*^ 

The father entereth the wife. 

Having become a germ (he entereth) the mother. 

In her becoming renewed, 

He is born in the tenth month.' 

A wife hath her name of wife. 

Since in her he is born again 
He is productive, she productive, 

The seed is placed here.* 

The gods and the seers 

Brought her together as great brilliance ; 

The gods said to men 
This is your mother again.” 

A sonless one cannot attain heaven,” 

All the beasts know this ; 

Therefoi’e a son his mother 
And his sister mounteth. 

This is the broad and auspicious path 

Along which men with sons fare free from sorrow ; 


® vaddi-adah is probably to bo road as an in- 
tensive like caldcalfij cai'dcara, cf. Wacker- 
nagel, Altind. Gramm, ii. 1. 147. Sayana 
avaddvadah as - not deserving blame, 
Koth (/nd. Stud. i. 458) rendered * He is 
a blameless world so Streiter and 
Weber ; ‘he is undoubtedly tho world ' 
M:ix Muller. The comm, sees hero a 
reference to the four but without 

ground. 

* The connexion of cattle and marriage is 
reasonable enough, and the conjecture 
accepted by Bohtlingk 'vivdhdh is very 
unnatural. Bohtlingk also suggests 
kanyd for duhitd metri causaj but this is 
wholly unnecessary and in AB. viii. 22. 
6 we have ddhyaduhitrndm where duhi^ « 
one syllable. He takes annam, as is na- 
tural, predicatively, but this is against 


the context. 

For the ten- 

month year of gestation cf. the old Roman* 
year, Ccnsorin. dc die nutahy c. 20 ; Vedic 
Index, ii. 150 

^ Tho sense of dbhutir esd dWidiih as is neces- 
sary for the metro is uncertain and 
obscure : Bblitlingk quite needlessly 
reads a hhiimir etd bhavali, Hillebrandt 
suggests that the sense is ‘ She is pro- 
creation ; the germ Is procreation ; it is 
hidden in her,^ but it is more reasonable 
to assume that the two dhhuti forms are 
father and mother. Sayana renders as if 
hhu tiha nd dhh iltih were read . Max Muller 
has ‘ She is a mother, because she brings 
forth 

* This veise is transposed in 95^. with the 
next. 



301J 


[ — vii. 14 


The Iiegend of Qunah^jya 

On it beasts and herds gaze 
For it they unite even with a mother.*® 

Thus he told hiiii.^^ 
vii. 14 (xxxiii. 2). Then he said to him, ‘Have recourse to Varuna, the 
king, (saying) ‘ Let a son be born to me ; with him let me sacrifice to thee/ 

‘ Be it so,* (he replied). He went up to Varuna, the king, (saying) ‘ Let 
a son be bom to me ; with him let me sacrifice to thee/ ‘ Be it so ’ (he 
replied). To him a son was born, Kohita by name. To him he said ‘ A son 
hath been born to thee ; sacrifice to me with him.* He said ‘ When a victim 
is over ten days old then it becomes fit for sacrifice ; let him become over 
ten days old ; then let me sacrifice to thee with him.* ‘ Be it so * (he replied). 
He became over ten days old. He said to him ‘ He hath become over ten 
days old ; sacrifice to mo with him.* He said ‘ When the teeth of a victim 
appear, then it becomes fit for sacrifice ; let his teeth appear ; then let me 
sacrifice to thee (with him).’ ‘ Be it so* (he replied). His teeth appeared ; 
he said to him ‘ His teeth have appeared ; sacrifice to me with him.’ He 
said ‘ When the teeth of a victim fall, then it becomes fit for sacrifice ; let 
his teeth fall: then let me sacrifice to thee.* ‘Be it so’ (he replied). His 
teeth fell ; he said to him ‘ His teeth have fallen ; sacrifice to me with him/ 
He said ‘ When the teeth of a victim appear again, then it becomes fit for 
sacrifice ; h^t his teeth appear again : then let me sacrifice to thee.’ ‘ Be it 
so * (he replied). His teeth appeared again ; he said to him ‘ His teeth have 
appeared again ; sacrifice to me with him.’ He saiil ‘ When the Ksatriya is 
fit to bear arms,- then is he tit for sacrifice ; let him win his arms ; then let 
me sacrifice to thee.’ ‘Be it so’ (he replied). He won*^ his arms; he said 
to him ‘ He hath now won ^ his arms ; sacrifice to me with him.’ ‘ Be it so ’ 
he said and addressed his son ‘ O my dear one, this one gave thee to me ; 

iitaii) devatjannh in jnid in 0 W<‘ber, on the ground that iti ha sma 

V&iidl\ramani€ iminno tje vu^ohah] in c it docs not elsrwlioro precede an absolute ; 

omits ca ; and in d ends miflmninh caranti for atha after an absolute see Delbriick, 

and h;us iuntaiy apt. iat te is preferred by AlUnd. Synf, p. 409. 

Bohtlingk, and without ie is also ^ The two verses heie differ slightly: 95^* 

pos.'>ible. The practice here referred omits the words at the end of AB. vii. 13 

is rejiorted of the Irisli by Strabo iv. 5. 4 ; after ifi and has aa hovdeay sa vai me hruhi 

its prevalence in Iran (cf. Meyer, yafhd 7ne p^Hro jdyetettf tarn fmdea, &,c. 

dti VAntiq. i. 33) is not in all probability - samndfiam 2^'rdpnoti 99^., clearly inferior, 
here refi‘rrcd to, though, of course, it The form sdmndhuka is irregular for 

may bo suggested that a reference is samndhiiKa. 

meant. * pulpat iii both versions must be prdpa as 

hdsmat is, of course, necessary for the Bohtlingk xioints out. 

grammar. 99®* omits it. Aufrecht (p. * prdpat of 99®* clearly necessary. 

431) prefers ha smdsmd dkhydya ; Boht- ® cakte 99®* » which is, of course, the older 
lingk (BKSGW. 15 Dec. 1900, p. 417), form; but contra below AB. vii. 16, n. 4. 

however, prefers hdsmdy as suggested by 



vii. 14 — ] 


The Bdjasuya 


[302 


come, let me sacrifice to him with thee/ ‘ No ’ he said and taking his bow 
went to the wild, and for a year he wandered in the wild. 

vii. 15 (xxxiii. 3). Then Varuna seized Aiks vaka ; his belly swelled up. 
This Rohita heard ; he went from the wild to the village. To him Indra 
came in human form and vsaid 

* Manifold is the prosperity of him who is weary,” 

So have we heard, O Rohita ; 

Evil is he who stayeth among men, 

Indra is the comrade of the wanderer.^ 

Do thou wander (Thinking) ‘ This Brahman hath bidden me “ wander ”, 
he ^ wandered for a second year in the wild. He came from the wild to 
the village. To him came Indra in human form and said 
‘ Flower-like tlie heels of the wanderer, 

Ilis body groweth and is fruitful ; 

All his sins disappear. 

Slain by the toil of his journeying.^ 

Do thou wander’. (Thinking) ‘This Brahman hath bidden me “wander”, 
he wandered for a third year in the wild. He came from the wild to the 
village. To him came Indra in human form and said 

‘ The fortune of him who sitteth also sitteth, 

But that of him who standeth standeth erect ; 

That of him that reclineth lieth down ; 

The fortune of him that moveth shall move indeed.'^ 


Do thou wander,’ (Thinking) ‘ This Brahman hath bi<klen me “ wander", 
he wandered for a fourth year in the wild. He came from the wild to the 
villaire. To him came Indra in human form and said 

o 


^ Kali he becometh who lieth, 
Dvapara when he riseth, 
Treta when he standeth erect 
And Krta when he moveth.'^ 


1 The reading is clearly right as nand ; Sayana 

recognizes as an alternative ndm^nlnfdifa. 
There is a v. I, cana for janah Weber 

{Ind, Stud, ix. 314) with Streiter renders 
as ndnd a^runtuya. The curious nrsadvara 
Bohtlingk (on Katha Up, y, 2) derives 
from nrsad varasad in RV. iv. 00. 5. 95^* 
has nisadvarah, 

2 Rohita is added in 9?^» ^^^^d through- 

out. 

2 sa in 99^* throughout. 

* 99 s. puts the verso after Kalih, &c. It has 
phalagrahih and femfe ^sya. 


° cardii is not only certain, but clearly correct, 
both for metrical r<‘a.sons and as more 
pointed than caratL 

^ 99^' purusah for bJiavati, and utihitah for 
attisthfw. The tlirows of dice are clearly 
meant, not as Sayana, the four Yugas, 
despite the agreement of Max Miiller 
^1/ic. Sans/t. Lit, p. 412) and Weber (ind. 
Stud, ix. 315) : Manu, ix. 302 is no 
<*vidence for tlie AB. and the ages are not 
Vedic, as AV. x. 8. 39, 40 (cited by 
Jacobi, GGA. 1895, p. 210) is not thus to 
be understood. 



303] The Legend of Qunahqe'pa [ — vii. le 

Do thou wander.’ (Thinking) ‘ This Brahman hath bidden me wander ”, 
he wandered for a fifth year in the wild. He came from the wild to the 
village ; to him Indra came in human form and said 

‘ Wandering one findeth honey, 

Wandering the sweet Udumbara fruit, 

Consider the pre-eminence of the sun. 

Who wearieth never of wandering.^ ' 

Do thou wander.’ (Thinking) ‘ This Brahman hath bidden mo “ wander ”, 
he wandered for a sixth year in the wild.^ He found in the wild Ajigarta 
Sauyavasi, a seer, overcome with hunger.^ Three sons were his, (^unahpucha, 
Qunah9epa, and ^unolahgula. He said to him^® ‘O seer, I offer thee a hundred ; 
let me redeem myself with one of these.’ Keeping back the eldest son, he 
said ‘ Not this one * ; ‘ nor this one ’ (said) the mother, (keeping back) the 
the youngest son. They made an agreement regarding the middle one, 
Qunah5epa. Having given a liundred for him taking him, he went from 
the wild to the village. Going to his father he said, ' O father dear, come, 
let me redeem myself with this one.’ He went^^ to Varuna, the king 
(saying) ‘ With this one let me sacrifices to thee.’ ‘ Be it so ’ (he replied) ; 
‘A Brahman is higher than a Ksatriya’ Varuna said. To him he pro- 
claimed this sacrificial rite, the Rajasuya. On the day of anointing he took 
the man as victim. 

vii. 16 (xxxiii. 4). For him Vi^vamitra was the Hotr, Jamadagni the 
Adhvaryu, Vasistha the Brahman, and Ayasya the Udgatr.^ When he had 
been brought up tliey could not find one to bind him ; Ajigarta Sauyavasi 
said ‘ Give me another hundred, and I shall bind him.’ They gave him 
another hundred ; he bound him. When he had been brought up, bound, 
and the Apri verses had been said over and fire carried round him,^ they 
could not find one to slaughter him ; Ajigarta Sauyavasi said ‘ Give me 
another hundred, and I shall slaughter him.’ They gave him another 
hundred and he whetting" his knife went forward. Then Qunah^epa 


" (^mmanam road by Hillebrandt in 99^- > 
where there is good MS. authority for 
(^rayamdnam, 

^ 9?^'^* anotlier vers<* and another year of 
wandering. 

® 99^* insertion of puftixm l)haks{y)a~ 

wdnam and reads a^anCiyapa^ltamy which 
is a much better form. 

99^* varies the wording slightly and 
inverts the two clauses, reading daddni 
and inserting gavdnij both loss primitive 
features. 


“ fastja may mean ‘ to him ’ as usually taken, 
but this is not necessary. 

99'^- dmanfraydm cakre which is inferior, 
and inserts fathefy iiktvd which is verbiage, 
(peydn 99^* 

^ The transposition of the clause to second 
place in 99^* clearly a later trait. 

2 99^’ omits dprVdya; above it has niyuyoja 

for AB. nmiyoja which is absurd, and 
below vigdstd'i am. 

3 nihfydnah 99®* Bbhllingk. nih^dna is, 

of course, incorrect. 



[304 


vii. 16 — ] The Rajasuya 

reflected ^ ‘ Like one that is not a man, they will slaughter me ; come, let 
me have recourse to the deities/ ^ He had recourse to Prajapati first of the 
deities with the verse ® ‘ Of whom now, of which of the immortals ? ’ To 
him said Prajapati ‘ Agni is the nearest of the gods ; do thou have recourse 
to him/ He had recourse to Agni with the verse ‘ ‘ Of Agni first of the 
immortals we/ To him said Agni ‘ Savitr is the lord of instigations ; 
do thou have recourse to him/ He had recourse to Savitr with the triplet * 
‘ To thee O god Savitr/ To him Savitr said ' For Varuna, the king, art 
thou bound ; do thou have recourse to him/ He had recourse to Varuna the 
king with the following thirty -one^ (verses). To him said Vainina ‘ Agni is 
the first of the gods, the best friend praise him, and we shall deliver thee^b’ 
He praised Agni with the next twenty-two (verses). To him said Agni 
‘ Praise the All-gods , then we shall deliver thee.’ He praised the All-gods 
with the verse ' Homage to the great, homage to the small ! To him 
said the All-gods ‘ Indra is the mightiest, most powerful, strongest, most 
real, and most cflective of the gods : praise him and we shall deliver thee.' 
He praised Indra with the hymn^^’ ‘ Whatever, O true one, the drinkers of 
Soma ' and fifteen (verses) of the following one. To him Indra, delighted 
in mind with the praise,^^ gave a chariot of gold. He approached him with 
this (verse) ' Ever Indra.’ To him said Indra * Praise now the A 5 vin 8 , 
then shall we deliver thee.’ He praised the A9vinB with the following 
triplet.’® To him said the A(^yms ‘ Praise now Usas, then we shall deliver 
thee,’ He praised Usas with the following triplet.’^ As each verso was 
said by him a bond was loosened-^ the belly of Aiksvaka became smaller; 
when the very last verse was said the (last) l)ond was loosened and Aiks- 
vaka became free from disease. 

vii. 17 (xxxiii. 5). To him the priests said ‘ Do thou devise for us the 
performance of the day.’ Then Qunaheepa saw the immediate pressing ; it 


Iksam asa 59 ^* contra above AB. vii. 14, 
‘n. 5. 

** upadhdvaniti 9?^* above daddni for AB 
daddmi. But after hanta the subj. is 
most natural and should be read. 

® RV. i. 24. 1. Prajiipati’s reply in 99^* 
agner vai nedistho 'si, 

7 RV. i. 24. 2. 

8 RV. i. 24. 3-5. 

9 RV. i. 24. 6-25. 21. 

10 Suhrdayam is read by Hillebrandt in 99^* 

11 99®* 1^*1® singular hero and elsewhere. 

12 RV. i. 26. 1-27. 12. 

18 RV. i. 27. 13. 

1* Omitted down to iam, with indram instead 
in 99 s. 


le RV. i. 2\) ; 30. 1-15. 

99®* omits pritah. 

RV. i. 30. 16. 
i« RV. i. 30. 17-19. 

RV. i. 30. 20-22. 

25 viiardm is read by Roth, and Bdhtlingk for 
vi because of nitardm in 99®* 
is needless, and nitardm may easily be a 
correction by some one who could not 
understand the sense of vi pd^ mumuce ; 
Weber {Ind. Stud. ix. 816) suggests that 
the second vipdgo is a compound, but this 
is very improbable. 

21 uttamdydm ha sma 99®* 

28 habhuva 99®* 



806 ] The Legend of Qunah^epa [ — vii. j 7 

he pressed with these four verses ^ ‘ Whatever thou in every house \ Then 
he cairried it to the wooden tub with the verse ^ ‘ Take up what re- 

maineth in the bowls Then as he took hold of him, he offered with the 
four preceding verses ^ with calls of Hail ! Then he led him to the final bath 
with the two ^ (verses) ' Thou, O Agni, knowing Varuna \ Then he next made 
him pay reverence to the Ahavanlya ® with ‘ Qunah^epa bound from a 
thousand Then Qunah9epa sat on the lap of Vi^vamitra. Ajigarta 
Sauyavasi said ‘ O seer, give back to me my son'. * No ' said Vi9vamitra ; 
‘ the gods have given him to me'. He was Devarata Vai9vamitra, and his 
descendants are the Kapileyas and the Babhravas.® Ajigarta Sauyavasi 
said ‘ Come now ; let us invito him ^ Ajigarta Sauyavasi said 

‘ Thou art an Angiras by birth, 

Famed as a sage, son of Ajigarta ; 

O seer, thine ancestral line 
Abandon not, return to me.' 

Qunah9epa said 

‘They have seen thee knife in hand, . 

A thing they have not found even among ^Qdras. 

Three hundreds of kine didst thou, 

0 Angiras, prefer to me * 

Ajigarta Sauyavasi said 

‘ Remorse it cause th me, dear one, 

The evil deed done by me, 

1 would obliterate it in thine eyes ; 

Thine be the hundreds of kine".’ 


^ KV. i. 28. 5-8. In this chapter slight verbal 
differences between the two versions 
increase. 

2 RV. i. 28. 9. 

s RV. i. 28. 1-4. 

^ RV. iv. 1. 4, 5. The object is presumably 
Ilari^candra, not the preparation for the 
ceremony. * 

a RV. V. 2. 7. 

6 The clause tasyaite as omitted in 99^., and 
Delbriick suspects the whole from deva 
on. 

^ tvam V ehi is clearly meant by Panini, viii. 8. 
3S, as BOhtlingk points out. The two are 
not mother and father, as taken by 
Sayana and Max Miiller, nor father and 
son. 99®* vihvaydvdhai 

which Hillebrandt alters to tarn, and the 

39 [h.o.s. ss] 


sense is really good, as it is the boy 
the tv'o invito in turn, first the father 
talks to the son, and then Vi 9 vamitra 
as taken by Weber, Ind. Siiid, ix. 316, 
317. 

« For alapsa^a(3rdplur. s. aor.) there is in99®- 
a variant aHipsataj but the conditional is 
here in proper use and alapsyata seems a 
natural conjecture. The sense would be 
the same, since the generic singular is 
also possible. 

» niJinave is the reading of the overwhelming 
authority of the MSS. of the AB., and 
though 99®* nihnuvcj it is a mistake 
to insert it as is done in the Anand. ed. 
of AB. d may mean as rendered or ‘ go 
back’ to the giver, as taken by Weber, 



vii. 17 — ] The Rajasuya [306 

(^unah9epa said 

^ He who once doth what is evil 
Would do that evil again ; 

Thou hast not abandoned thy ^Qdra way ; 

What thou hast done is irreparable 

At the word ‘ irreparable ’ Vi^vamitra joined in (the discussion ; Vi9va- 
mitra said 

‘ Dread indeed was Sauyavasi when, 

Knife in hand, ready to slaughter ; 

He stood erect ; be not his son ; 

Become thou a son of mine'®.’ 


Qunah9epa said 

‘ As thou hast intimated to us, 
8 o, 0 son of a king, tell 
How being an Ahgiras 
I can become thy son 


Vi9vamitra said 

^ Thou wouldst be the eldest of my sons, 
Thy offspring would hold the highest place. 
Accept my divine inheritance, 

Unto this I invite thee 


*0 59s. in some MSS. reads cnas, but this is 
needless, and enat is found in the best 
MSS. there also. Sayana seems to recog- 
nizo enaty while the comm, on 99^* 
enas. In c 99®* has widpagfdA : metrically 
na apdgafy must be read ; in both cases 
there are variants of faudrdn nydydt which 
is certain and is recognized by Sayana. 
Max Muller has * Thou wilt not abstain ’. 
n 99®^ inserts vd avocad iti ; the sense given 
by Sayana of 'upa papdda is * supported 
by proofs*, but this is wrong, nor, as 
Haug and Max Muller, can the word 
asamdheyam bo given to Vi9vamitra. 

99 ®* has vifdfisat 

j9iapaya is read in 99®* Sftyana renders 
jridyase ^as a Brahman’, but this is not 
possible, though Max Muller accepts it, 
and is not supported by a verse cited by 
him as expressing the sense : purdtmdnam 


nrpam vipra tapa^d h rtaiun asi which moans 
that he had made himself a king by 
tapaSj and not vice versa ; apparently 
this verse took the sense as Jnapayd 
rdjaputra Hhou art known as a king’s 
son* ; clearly in view of the agreement 
of the MSS. (both Aufrecht’s and those 
of the Anand.) any alteration of this 
verse is incorrect, and also clearly it is 
only to be explained as above. J9iapayd 
is, if it is to be taken as correct, a subj., 
and the sense must bo ‘ tell us how thou 
wilt arrange*, or something similar. It 
seems easier to read ^jnapayo and render 
‘ as thou hast said ’, referring to his offer 
made just above. Bohtlingk adds 'ham 
before sann^ metrt causa. 

Here Vi9vamitra offers only daivam ddyamj 
but in point of fact he allowed him suc- 
cession to both ; see AB. vii. 18. 9. 



307] The Legend of Qunahgepa [ — vii. is 

Qunahfepa said 

^ Bid these agree 

For friendship and prosperity to me 
That I may, 0 bull of the Bharatas, 

Become thy son 

Then Vigvainitra addressed his sons 

‘ Do thou, Madhuchandas, and do ye hearken, 

Ksabha, Eenu, and As^ka 
And all their brothers, 

Do ye accept his superiority 

vii. 18 (xxxiii. 6). Vifvamitra had a hundred and one sons, fifty older than 
Madhuchandas, fift)’' younger. Those that were older did not think this 
right. Tliein he cursed (saying) ‘ Your offspring shall inherit the ends^ (of 
the earth).* These are the (people), the Andhras, Pundras, Qabaras, 
Pulindas, and Mutibas,^ who live in large numbers beyond the borders; 
most of the Dasyus are the descendants of Vi^vamitra. Madhuchandas 
with tlie otlier fifty said 

^ What our father agreeth to 
That we accept ; 

We all place thee before us, 

We are after thee,’^ 

Then Vi^vamitra, pleased, praised his sons 

‘ 0 my sons, rich in cattle 
And with heroic offspring, shall ye be, 

Who, accepting my will. 

Have made me possessed of heroic offspring. * ^ 

** hruyah is read in some MSS, of 95®., but in impossible. 

most bruydtj and Sayana as well as the ^ 99®* antam, Sayana renders canddld- 
MSS. have hruydt at this place. It cannot dirupdn mcajdtivi^esdn. 

be rendered satisfactorily as ^ every one * ^9®* bas no Pulindas, and reads Mucipdh. 
of your sons ’ with Sayana, nor as ‘ may It also roads, very badly, uda%cah^ and 

the leader of the Bharatas say so, in the bahudasyavahy and ends tty uddharantiy 

presence of his agreeing sons', and very and extends the sentence regarding 

possibly samjndnam esu should be read Madhuchandas. For the tribes men- 

with Aufrocht. In b BChtlingk restores tioned, doubtless non-Aryan in the 

mamay and Hillebrandt has me ... me by main, see Vedic IndeXy s.vv. 

conjecture, but this is not probable as ^ purastdt, 

the Pada is independent and should not * viravantah is replaced by prajdvantali in 59®. 
begin with an enclitic. It is possibly really a reference as in tbe 

99®* sthd and tisthadhvam, Btihtlingk next verse to the lira Devarata, and not 

suggests tisthaiay metri causa, Haug’s in- to prajd generally, 

terpretation of sthana as stha na is quite 



vii. 18 — ] 


[308 


The Rdjasuya 


With a hero to lead you, 

With DevarEta, O Gathinas, 

Shall ye all prosper, 0 my sons ; 

He shall discern the truth for you.® 

This is your hero, O Ku^ikas, 

DevarEta ; him follow ; 

As inheritance from me shall he obtain you 
And the knowledge which we know.® 

In agreement the sons of Vi^vEmitra, 

All together joyously, 

Accepted the control of DevarEta,^ 

And his pre-eminence, the GEthiiias. 
DevarEta was granted 
Both inheritances, the sage, 

The overlordship of the Jahnus, 

And the sacred lore of the Gathinas.® 


® Gdthind in some MSS. of 95^* needless. 
99 s. has in a majority of MSS. rddhyds 
tu and esa vas tad vivdcanahf while Hille- 
brandt with Streiter would read sadviva- 
canal}. The change is clearly needless. 

99 ^’ copetdm. The sense is clearly as 
above; SEyana takes ddyam as subject, 
and ca he refers to Devarata ! Aufrecht 
suggests ynsmCj but the sense is not ‘ ho 
shall inherit among you * but ‘ he shall 
inherit you^ as becoming the head 
{^resthin) of the family. 99®* 1^^® 
uta which is a less good reading. For 
upetd see Whitney, Sansh, Gr. § 187 b. 

99®* jy<x>i9thye and ^rai$thye; sardiayah is, 
as Aufrecht points out, an artificial word 
on the basis of ardtij * foe \ 

* 99®* ®nds Jahnundm cddhitasthire daive vede 
ca Gdthindh. This version cannot be made 
to mean anything else than a statement 
that the Gathinas were prominent among 
the Jahnus and in sacred lore (cf. Weber, 
Episches im vedischen Ritual, pp, 16 ^q.\ 
the two ca’s being explained in this way 
{daive and vede cannot really, as by 
Weber, be made consistently contrasts). 
This view then treats the Jahnus as the 
whole and the Gathinas a class of them, 
not necessarily rulers (even priestly), 
but as great priests. The AB. version 
must be regarded as an explanation of 
the ubhayoh and the term seems to need 
explanation, and therefore a priori, pace 


Weber, the AB. is the older version, as it 
normally is superior to the 99®* More- 
over the term rdjaputra in AB. vii. 17, 6 
points to royal claims on the part of 
Vi 9 vamitra (quite contrary to the ?gveda 
tradition, where he is the Puroliita of 
Sudas, a view here also accepted from 
the tradition), and this agrees with the 
tradition of the PB. xxi. 12. 2 where 
Vi 9 vamitra is styled Jdhnavo raja. The 
AB. veraion must therefore moan that 
Devarata succeeded to the overlordship 
over the Jahnus and the divine lore of 
the Gathinas at one time. SEyana’s 
version treats the two inheritances, as is 
Weberns view and also that of Max Muller 
{Anc. Sansk, Lit, p. 418, n. 2), as that of 
the Ajigarta family (Jahnus), and of 
Vi 9 vamitra, but there is to this the 
serious objection that the young man 
definitely leaves his connexion with 
Ajigarta, and therefore cannot be said to 
succeed to the overlordship of that family 
in any sense, even if there were any other 
suggestion that the Ajigarta family was 
called Jahnu, as there is not. adhiyata is 
no doubt from dM, not, as Max Miiller, 
from adhi + i, Gdthindm is merely, in all 
probability, a brief form of Gathinandm, 
though a change of stem is conceivable ; 
if the former, the use is rare ; cf. Lanman, 
Nouninjt, p. 853; Macdonell, Ved. Gramm, 

p. 262. 



309 ] 


The Legend of Qunahgepa [ — vii. 19 

This is the tale of Qunah9epa, with a hundred Rc verses as well as Gathas.® 
This the Hotr tells to the king after the anointing. He tells it seated on 
a golden cushion ; seated on a golden cushion he responds ; gold is glory ; 
verily thus he makes him prosper by glory. Om is the response to a Rc, 
‘ Be it so ’ to a Gatha ; om is divine, ‘ Be it so * human ; verily thus with 
what is divine and what is human he frees him from eviP* and from sin. 
Therefore a victorious king should, even when not sacrificing, make him 
narrate this tale of Qunah9epa ; not the least tinge of sin will be left over in 
him. A thousand should he give to the narrator, a hundred to him who 
makes the response; the seats and a white mule chariot (should also 
be given) to the Hotr. Those who desire sons also should have it narrated ; 
they obtain sons. 


ADHYAYA IV 


The Raj as uy a. 

vii, 1 9 (xxxiv. 1 ). Prajapati created the sacrifice ; ^ after the creation of the 
sacrifice the holy power and the lordly power were created ; after the holy 
power and the lordly power both kinds of offspring were created, those who 
eat the oblations and those who do not eat the oblations ; after the holy 
power those that cat the oblations, after the lordly power those that do not 
eat the oblations. The lirahmans are the offsping that eat the oblations ; 
the Rajanya, Vai9ya, and Qudras those that do not eat the oblations.^ 
From them the sacrifice departed ; it the holy power and the lordly power 
pursued ; the holy power pursued with the weapons of the holy power ; 
the lordly power with those of the lordly power. The weapons of the 
holy power are the weapons of the sacrifice ; the weapons of the lordly 


'' 99^’ aparimitam. The number is 97 of 
9 unali 9 opii, three not by him, and thirty- 
one GSthas. Weberns rendering {op, cit^ 
p. 10) ‘liber 100" is less probable than 
that of BR. adopted above. 

I.e. the Adhvaryu. 

sai'vasmM enamh sampmmumati 
(with v.ll, sampramucifate, °nte). 

99 ®* understood by the 

comm, as vijayasamarihah. But this is 
not at all necessary and Narftyana on 
A 9 S. ix. 8. 13 has clearly yah para- 
balam yuddhena viJUavdn where yudhe na 
is not really possible, pace Hillebrandt. 
The V, 1. in 99®* yajamdnah is a bad 
one. Weber {Ind, Stud, ix. 318) prefei*s 


*vijiUy but Aufrecht retains the view of 
Sayana. In his Rdjasuya^ p. 8, n. 2, Weber 
renders rdjdvijitin in the Kdtkaka as ‘ von 
(anderen) KOnigen unbesiegt \ 

This sentence down to hotah is not in 99®* 
which divides the spoil less unfairly. 
Indie, in 99®* 

^ Cf. TS. i, 6. 8. 2. Generally speaking, for 
the Rajasuya of the AB. there is no 
parallel elsewhere. A 9 S. has only a few 
scattered sentences in ix. 8 and 4. The 
whole rite is elaborately dealt with by 
Weber, Vber den Rajasuya {Ahh, Berl. Akad, 
1898). 

2 Cf. 9B. iv. 5. 2. 16. 



[310 


vii. 19 — ] The Bdjasuya 

power are the horse chariot, the corslet, the bow and arrow. The lordly 
power returned without attaining it; from its weapons it turns away 
trembling. The holy power followed it and obtained it ; having obtained 
it it kept blocking it from above ; it being obtained and blocked from above 
standing, recognising its own weapons, went up to the holy power. There- 
fore even now the sacrifice finds support in the holy power and in the 
Brahmans. The lordly power then followed it ; it said ‘ Do thou call upon 
me in this sacrifice ‘ Be it so * it replied ; * Lay aside thine own weapons, 
and with the weapons of the holy power, the form of the holy power, 
becoming the holy power, do thou come to the sacrifice \ ‘ Be it so ' (it said). 
Thus the lordly power, having laid aside its own weapons, with the 
weapons of the holy power, with the form of the holy power, becoming 
the holy power, went to the sacrifice. Therefore now also the Ksatriya, as 
sacrificer, having laid aside his own weapons, with the weapons of the holy 
power, with the form of the holy power, becoming the holy power, goes to 
the sacrifice. 

vii. 20 (xxxiv. 2). Then comes the begging of a place of sacrifice. They 
say ‘ Seeing that a Brahman, a Rajanya, a Vai^ya, when about to consecrate 
himself asks a Ksatriya for a place of sacrifice, whom is the Ksatriya to 
ask V ‘He should ask the divine lordly power ' they say. The divine 
lordly power is the sun ; the sun is the overlord of these beings. On the 
day on which he is going to consecrate himself, on that day in the forenoon 
he should revere the rising sun ; with ^ 

‘ This is the best of lights, the highest light.’ 

With ‘ 0 god Savitr, give me a place of sacrifice for sacrifice to the gods ’ 
he asks for a place of sacrifice. In that being asked here he goes on his 
upward course,^ ‘ Yes, I give it * he says in effect. No harm befalls him 
instigated by the god Savitr ; ever increasing prosperity he attains ; he 
attains lordship over offspring and supremacy, who having thus paid 
reverence, having asked for, having settled on a place of sacrifice, consecrates 
himself, being a Ksatriya.'^ 

vii. 21 (xxxiv. 3). Then comes the prevention of decay of the sacrifice and 
the gifts (to the priests) for a Ksatriya as sacrificer. Before the consecra- 
tion he should offer a libation of butter in tour portions, in the Ahavaniya 
to prevent the decay of the sacrifice and the gifts, with 

‘ Let Indra, the bounteous, restore to us 
The holy power ; let him give again the sacrifice, the gifts ; hail I ’ 

1 RV. X. 170. 3. * For the devayajana cf. SB. ii. 10 ; PB. xxiv. 

^ uitardm is adverbial as in AB. iii. 44 : 18. 2 ; ^B. iii. 1. 1. 4 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. 

ahhitardm ; 24 : nicaistardm and often. x. 356, n. 3. 



311] The Holy Power and the Lordly Power [ — vii. 23 

Then after the concluding formulas of the final offering of a cow ^ 

^ Let Agni, all knower, restore to us 

The lordly power ; let him give again the sacrifice, the gifts ; hail I ’ 

These two libations are the prevention of decay of the sacrifice and the 
gifts for a Ksatriya as sacrificer ; therefore should they be offered. 

vii. 22 (xxxiv. 4). As to this Saujata Aralhi used to say ‘ These two liba- 
tions are not a winning again of what has decayed \ ‘ As he desires he may 
perform these two, who takes his instruction hence * (he said ') ; but the 
following he should certainly offer with 

^ I have recourse to the holy power ; may the holy power guard me from 
the lordly power ; to the holy power hail ! * 

'Thus, thus' (he said). He who has recourse to the sacrifice has 
recourse to the holy power; the sacrifice is the holy power; moreover 
from the sacrifice is he who consecrates himself born again. Him who has 
recourse to the holy power the lordly power does not oppress. ‘ May the 
holy power guard me from the lordly power * he says, in order that the 
holy power may guard him from the lordly power ; ‘ To the holy power 
hail ' (he says) ; thus he delights it. Thus it delighted guards him from the 
lordly power. Then after the concluding formulas of the final offering of 
a cow (he says) 

‘ I have recourse to the lordly power ; may the lordly power guard me 
from the holy power ; to the lordly power hail ! ' 

‘Thus, thus' (he said). He who has recourse to the kingship has 
recourse to the lordly power, for the kingship is the lordly power. Him 
who has recourse to the lordly power the holy power does not oppress, 
‘ May the lordly power guard me from the holy power ' he says, in order 
that the lordly power may guard him from the holy power ; ‘ To the lordly 
power hail ! ' (he says) ; thus he delights it. Thus it delighted guards him 
from the holy power. These ^ two libations are the prevention of decay 
of the sacrifice and the gifts ; therefore they must be offered. 

vii. 23 (xxxiv. 5). Now the Ksatriya has Indra as his deity, the Tristubh 
as his metre, the Pancada^a as his Stoma, and is Soma in kingship, the 
Rajanya in relationship. Being consecrated he attains Brahmanhood in that 
he puts on the black antelope’s skin, in that he performs the vow of one 

1 See TS. i. 4. 44. 3 for the Samistayajunsi, iat tad iti recurs in AB. vii. 26 ; viii. 

vii. 22. ^ The iti is a little awkward; but 6 and 9. BR. take ” as a Dvandva ; 

presumably it represents the views of Sayana treats ajtta as ajtiay both without 

Saujata. Weber (/>ad. Stud, ix. 820) does point, ito refers to the view in vii. 21, 

not indicate how he takes the clause, not to Saujata. 

translating as if there was no iti. * i. e. » ime above. 



[312 


vii. 23— ] The Rajasuya 

consecrated, in that Brahmans come around him. As he is being conse- 
crated Indra takes his power, the Tristubh his strength, the Pancada^a 
Stoma his life, the Soma his kingdom, the fathers his fame and renown, 
saying ‘ He is becoming other than we ; he is becoming the holy power ; he 
is joining the holy power’. He should offer a libation before the con- 
secration and adore the Ahavaniya (saying) 

' I depart not from Indra as my deity, nor from the Tristubh metre, nor 
the Pancada 5 a Stoma, nor Soma the king, nor my relationship with the 
fathers. Let not Indra take my power, nor the Tristubh my strength, 
nor the Paneada^a Stoma my life, nor Soma my kingdom, nor the fathers 
my glory and fame. With my power, strength, life, kingdom, glory, 
relationship, I approach Agni, the Gayatrl metre, the Trivrt Stoma, 
Soma the king; I have recourse to the holy power; I become a 
Brahman.’ 

Indra does not appropriate the power, nor the Tristubh the strength, nor 
the Pancada9a Stoma the life, nor Soma the kingdom, nor the fathers the 
glory and fame of him who having offered thus this libation and having 
adored the Ahavaniya consecrates himself, being a Ksatriya. 

vii. 24'(xxxiv. 6). Now the Ksatriya has Agni for his deity, when conse- 
crated, the Gayatrl for his metre, the Trivrt for his Stoma, and is the Brahman 
in i-elationship ; when he concludes he assumes his Ksatriya character; 
when he concludes Agni takes his brilliance, the Gayatri his strength, the 
Trivrt Stoma his life, the Brahmans his glory and fame, saying ‘ He is be- 
coming other than we ; he is becoming the lordly power ; he is joining the 
lordly power ’. After the concluding formulas of the final offering of a cow 
he should offer a libation and adore the Ahavaniya with 

‘ I depart not from Agni as my deity, nor from the Gayatrl metre, nor 
from the Trivrt Stoma, nor from the holy power as relation. Let not 
Agni take my brilliance, nor the Gayatrl my strength, nor the Trivrt 
Stoma my life, nor the Brahmans my holy power, glory, and fame. With 
brilliance, strength, life, the holy power, glory and fame, I approach 
Indra the deity, the Tri.stubh metre, the Pancadaja Stoma, Soma the 
king ; I have recourse to the lordly power ; I become a Ksatriya. 

0 gods, 0 fathers, 0 fathers, 0 gods, I offer being he who I am. 

This is my sacrifice, my gift, my toil, my offering. 

Be Agni here my witness, Vayu my hearer, Aditya yonder my pro- 
claimer ; 

1 who am I am L’ 

Agni does not appropriate his brilliance, nor the Gayatri his strength, nor 
the Trivrt Stoma his life, nor the Brahmans his holy power, glory and fame 



313] The Portion of the Sacrijicer [ — vii. 26 

who having offered thus this libation and having adored the Ahavaniya 
concludes, being a Ksatriya. 

vii. 25 (xxxiv. 7). Then as to the announcement of the consecration. They 
say ‘ Seeing that they announce the consecration of a Brahman when conse- 
crated with “ The Brahman hath consecrated himself ”, how is one to announce 
(the consecration) of a Ksatriya?* 'As in the case of a Brahman when 
consecrated they announce the consecration with “ The Brahman hath conse- 
crated himself”, so should he announce (the consecration) of a Ksatriya, 
with the Rsi descent of his Purohita^* (they say) ; ‘Thus, thus* (they say). 
Having laid aside his own weapons, with the weapons of the holy power, 
with the form of the holy power, having become the holy power, he 
resorted to the sacrifice. Therefore should they announce his consecration 
with the Rsi descent of his Purohita ; with the Rsi descent of the Purohita 
they should perform the ancestral invocation.^ 

vii. 26 (xxxiv. 8). Then as to the share of the sacrifice!*. They say ‘ Should 
a Ksatriya eat the sacrificer’s share ? Or should he not eat ? * If he who is 
not an eater of the oblations were to eat, by eating the oblation he would 
become worse; if he were not to eat, he would shut himself out from the 
sacrifice ; the share of the sacrificer is the sacrifice. It is to be handed over 
to the Brahman. The Brahman priest is in the relation of Purohita to the 
Ksatriya ; the Purohita is half the self of the Ksatriya. Secretly verily it 
obtains the appearance of being eaten ; it is not openly consumed by him. 
The Brahman is manifestly the sacrifice, for in the Brahman the whole 
sacrifice finds support, in the sacrifice the sacrificer. They place the sacrifice 
in the sacrifice, as water in water, fire in fire ; thus it is not superfluous, 
thus it harms him not. Therefore should it be handed over to the Brahman. 
Some make an oftering in the fire with 

‘Prajapati’s is the world named Vibhat ; in this 1 place thee with 
the sacrificer ; hail ! ’ 

That he should not do so. The share of the sacrificer is the sacrificer ; he 
places on the fire the sacrificer. If a man were here to say to him ‘ Thou 
hast placed the sacrificer on tlie fire ; Agni will bum his breaths ; the 
sacrificer will die it would certainly be so. Therefore he should not 
desire this. 


1 For this rule see A^S. i. 3. 3; xii. 15. 4. 

2 I. e. on the invocation of Agni by the 

ancestral names ; cf. Weber, Ind, Stud. 
ix. 321-326. In this, as in the exclusion 


of the prince from the drinking of the 
Soma, the Brahmana shows its high 
claim for its caste. 


40 [bob. «s] 



vii. 27 — ] 


The Bdjasiiya 


[314 


ADHYAYA V 

The Proper Food of the King in lieu of Soma. 

vii. 27 (xxxv. 1). Vi 9 vantara Sausadmana, despising the Qyaparnas, per- 
formed a sacrifice without the Qyaparnas.* Perceiving this the Qyaparnas 
went to the sacrifice and sat down within the altar. Seeing them he said 
‘There sit those doers of an evil deed, speakers of impure speech, the 
(^yaparnas ; remove them ; let them not sit within my altar . ‘ Be it so 
(they replied). They removed them. They being removed cried aloud 
‘ Heroes had the Ka 9 yapas among them in the Asitamrgtis who, at the 
sacrifice from which Janamejaya Pariksita excluded the Ka 9 yapas, won 
the Soma drinking from the Bhutaviras. What hero have we among us 
who will win this Soma drinking ? ’ * ‘I am the hero for you ’, said Rama 
Margaveya; Rama Margaveya was a learned member of the Qyaparnas. 
When they were rising up, he said ‘ Can it be that they are removing, 
O king, from the altar one who knows thus ? ’ ‘ What is that thou 
knowest, O worthless Brahman’ (he replied). 

vii. 28 (xxxv. 2). ‘ When the gods excluded Indra (saying) ‘ He hath mis- 
used Vi 9 varupa, son of Tvastr, he hath laid low Vrtra,he hath given the Yatis 
to the hyaenas, he hath killed the Arurmaghas, he hath contended with 
Brhaspati then Indra was deprived of the Soma drinking, and in accordance 
with the deprivation of Indra the lordly power was deprived of the Soma 
drinking. Indra obtained later a share in the Soma drinking, having 
stolen the Soma of Tvastr, but to day even the lordly power is deprived of 
Soma drinking. How can they remove from the altar him who knows 
the food which belongs to the lordly power now that it is deprived of the 
Soma drink, and by which the holy power is made prosperous ? ’ ‘ Dost 
thou know, O Brahman, this food?’ (he asked) ‘I know it’ (lie replied). 


‘ Cf. Weber, Ind. Slud. x. 32, 33, who seeks to 
see in this a case of punishment for dis- 
loyalty, as in PB. xiv. 6. 8, where, how- 
ever, the position is much clearer than 
here. The impure speech need not be 
more than a ritual defect of the priests, 
especially as it is made good by a point 
of ritual. Cf alsoZOMC. Hi. 737 ; liv.611. 

Buhtlingk (BKSGW. 15 Dec. 1900, p. 419) 
suggests asmdko, 

vii, 28. ^ Cf. the similar lists in KIT. iii. 1 ; TS. 
ii. 5. 1 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. i. 409 ; Rdjaauya, 


p. 109, n. 2. In Brkaspaieh praiyavadhlt 
J^ayana sees the sense xakyam, and this is 
apparently meant : he cites ApDS. ii. 2. 5. 
11. The aorist is natural and proper and 
needs no special explanation (cf. Del- 
briick, Altind. Synt. p. 281). The Arurma- 
ghas are connected by Eggeling (SBE. 
xii. 57, n, 1) hesitatingly with the demon 
Araru j cf. Weber, Ind. Stud, i. 411. The 
curious way in which Indra loses his 
place in favour of the priestly Brhaspati 
is noted by Weber, RdJasuyaj p. 110. 



315] The Proper Food of the King [ — vii. 31 

‘Do thou tell it to me, 0 Brahman’ (he said). ‘(I shall tell it) to thee, 
O king ’ he said. 

vii, 29 (xxxv. 3). ‘ They will bring one of three foods, the Soma or curds 
or water. If ^ the Soma (they bring up), that is the food of the Brahmans; 
with this food thou wilt strengthen the Brahmans ; in thine offspring will 
be born one like a Brahman, an acceptor of gifts, a drinker (of Soma), 
a seeker of livelihood, one to be moved at will.* When evil happens to 
a Ksatriya one like a Brahman is born in his offspring; the second or 
third from him may become a Brahman ; he is fain to live as a sort of 
Brahman. If curds (they bring), it is the food of the Vai^yas; with this 
food thou wilt strengthen the Vai 5 yas; in thine offspring one like a Vai 9 ya 
will be born, tributary to another, to be eaten by another, to be oppressed 
at will. When evil happens to a Ksatriya, there is born in his offspring 
one like a Vai^ya ; the second or third from him may become a Vai 9 ya ; he 
is fain to live as a Vai 9 ya. If water (they bring), it is the food of the 
Qudras ; with this food thou wilt strengthen the Qudras ; in thine offspring 
one like a Qudra will be born, the servant of another, to be removed at will, 
to be slain at will. When evil happens to a Ksatriya, there is born in his 
offspring one like a Qudra; the second or third from him may become 
a Qudra ; he is fain to live as a Qudra/ 

vii. 30 (xxxv. 4). ‘ These are the three foods, 0 king he said ‘ which a 
Ksatriya as sacrificer should not desire. Now this is his proper food ; ho 
should press together^ the descending growths and the fruits of the 
Nyagrodha and (the fruits of) the Udumbara, A 9 vattha and Plaksa trees, 
and partake of them. This is his proper food. On the place whence by 
offering the sacrifice the gods went to the world of heaven they tilted 
over (nyithjan) the goblets ; they became the Nyagrodha trees. Even to-day 
in Kuruksetra they call them the Nyubjas. They were the firstborn of 
Nyagrodhas ; from them are the others bom. In that they grew down- 
wards, therefore the Nyagroha grows downwards ; its name is Nyagroha ; 
it being Nyagroha the gods call Nyagrodha mysteriously, for the gods love 
mystery as it were.' 

vii. 31 (xxxv. 5). ‘ The sap of the goblets which went downwards became 

^ Sayana needlessl}^ takes sa as referring to wliich is impossible, though allowed by 

an ignorant priest ; very possibly this is Weber (Ind. Stud. ix. 826; x. 14), who 

the common use in and less often prefers ‘dwelling everywhere’ for dva- 

elsewhere of sa yadi^^yadi, or, of course, sdyi\ cf. Vedic Index^ ii. 82. 

a second form or verb may be supplied. vii. 30. ^ The construction is awkward ; the 

2 Sayana recognizes the passive sense of nom. aiwodMf c«p/mlawicawhich,asAB 

yathdkdmapraydpyahj but Haug suggests vii. 81 shows, applies to the Nyagrodha, is 

* roam about according to pleasure ’ altered to the acc. with dbhisunuydU 



vii, 31 — ] The Rajasuya [316 

the descending growths; that which went up the fruits. This Ksatriya 
does not depart from his proper food, who eats the shoots and the fruits of 
the Nyagrodha. Mysteriously verily he obtains the Soma drinking ; it is 
not consumed openly by him. The Nyagrodha is mysteriously Soma the 
king ; mysteriously does the Ksatriya assume the form of the holy power, 
through the Purohita, through the consecration, through the ancestral 
invocation. The Nyagrodha is the lordly power of the trees, the Rajanya 
is the lordly power, for the Ksatriya here dwells fastened as it were to the 
kingdom, and supported as it were, and the Nyagrodha is fastened as it 
were by its descending growths to the ground, and supported as it were. 
In that the Ksatriya as sacrifice!- cats the descending growths of the 
Nyagrodha and the fruits, verily thus he establishes in himself the lordly 
power of the plants and in the lordly power himself. In the lordly power, 
in himself he establishes the lordly power of the plants, like the Nyagrodha 
with its descending shoots in the earth, in the kingdom he finds support, 
dread becomes his away and unassailable, who as a Ksatriya when sacrificing 
eats thus this food.’ ’ 

vii. 32 (XXXV. 6). ‘ Now as to the (fruits) of Udumbara. The Udumbara 
tree was bom from strength and proper food ; this is the pre-eminence of 
the trees; verily thus he places in the lordly power strength, proper 
food, and the pre-eminence of the trees. Now as to the (fruits) of A^- 
vattha. The A 9 vattha tree was born from brilliance ; this is the over- 
lordship of the trees; verily thus he places in the lordly power the 
brilliance and the overlordship of the trees. Now as to the (fruits) of 
Plaksa. The Plak.sa tree was bom of might; it is the self rule and the 
control of the trees ; verily thus he places in the lordly power the self rule 
and the control of the trees. These are first of all prepared and then they 
buy Soma, the king. They proceed with the rites ^ according to the manner 
of the (sacrifice of Soma) the king up to the fast day ; then comes the fast 
day. These things the Adhvaryu should make ready in advance ; the skin 
for pressing, the two pressing boards, the wooden tub, the filter cloth, the 
pressing stones, the vessel for the pure Soma, the stirring vessel, the vessel, 
the drawing cop, and the goblet. When they press the king in the morning. 


^ The inferior position of the Ksatriya here 
may be contrasted with the fact that 
L^S. ix. 2. 4 allows him at the consecra- 
tion to drink the Soma, and even K^S. 
XV. 8. 19-21 reaches the same conclusion ; 
see Weber, Rajasuya^ pp. 80, 81, 109, 117, 
134. 

vii. 32. ^ prative^ih is not certain in sense : 


Sayana has prasiddhaih kriydvi^rsaihj and 
this can be made to agree with the sense 
‘ auxiliary ’ by referring it to the rites 
prior to the first day. Weber (Jnd. Stud. 
ix. 327) has, instead, the rendering * the 
fruits substituted for the Soma’, but this 
is doubtful, for the ordinary Soma sacii- 
fice is daily offered. 



317] The Proper Food of the King [ — vii. 34 

then he should divide these (fruits) in two ; some he should press, the rest 
leave over for the midday pressing/ 

vii. 33 (xxxv. 7). ‘ When they fill up the goblets, then he should fill up the 
goblet of the sacrificer ; in it should have been cast two Darbha shoots. When 
the vasat call has been uttered he should throw the first of them within the 
altar, with the verse ^ ‘ I have celebrated Dadhikravan * accompanied by 
the call of Hail ! The second (he should throw) after the second vasat call 
has been said with ^ ‘ Dadhikra with his brilliance the five folks When 
they take up the goblets, then he should take up the goblet of the sacrificer. 
When they lift them up (to the mouth), then he should lift it up after them. 
When the Hotr invokes the sacrificial food, when he partakes of the food in 
the goblet, then he should partake of it with ^ 

^ That which is left over of the pressed juice rich in sap, 

Which Indra drank mightily, 

Here with auspicious mind this of him, 

I partake of Soma the king.’ 

Auspiciously to him this (food) from the trees is consumed with auspicious 
mind, dread is his sway, unassailable, who as a Ksatriya when sacrificing 
partakes thus of this food. With 

‘ Be thou kindly to our heart when drunk, 

Do thou extend our life, to live long, 0 Soma ’ ; * 

the touching of himself (is accompanied). If not touched this (drink) is liable 
to destroy the life of man (thinking) ‘ An unworthy one is partaking of 
me’. In that he touches himself with it, verily thus he prolongs life. 
With the appropriate (verses ^) ‘ Swell up, let them come together for thee ’ 
and ‘ Let the milk unite for thee, the strengths ’ he makes the goblet full ; 
that which is appropriate in the sacrifice is perfect.* 

vii. 34 (xxxv. 8). ‘ When they put the goblets in place, then he should put 
in place the sacrificer’s goblet. W'hen they move them forward, he should 
move it forward after them. Then he should take it and partake of it. 

^ O god Soma, of thee that art drunk by Nara 9 ansa, that findest the 
mind, that art partaken of by the fathers, the helpers, I partake 

^ RV. iv. 89. 6. Not in A^S. in this use. ** A variant of RV. viii. 48. 4 with which h 

But this and iv. 38. 10 occur in an Isti agrees, and which is used in A^S. v. 6. 

in ii. 12.5 and this is used by the priests 26 in the Agnistoma. 

when they drink in vi. 12. 12. ^ RV. i. 91. 16 and 18; A^S. v. 6. 27 in the 

* RV. iv. 38. 10. Agnistoma. 

® KS. xvii. 19 ; MS. ii. 3. 8 ; iii. U. 7 ; TB. i. vii. 34. ^ The nine Soma goblets when emptied 

4. 2. 3 ; Ap^S. xix. 3. 4. A variant and filled are the Nara 9 uhsas (cf. M^S. ii. 

with riptam occurs in the Sautr^mani in 4.2.32); they belong rather to the fathers 

ACjJS. iii. 9. 6. Cf. AB. viii. 20. 4. (cf. PB. i. 5. 9). The name is either 



[318 


vii. 34 — ] The lidjasuya 

is the partaking connected with Nara9ahsa at the morning pressing ; at the 
midday (pressing) ‘ the great ’ is used ; at the third pressing ‘ the sages ’ is 
used (as epithet of the fathers). The fathers are helpers at the morning 
pressing, the great at the midday, and the sages at the third pressing; 
verily thus he makes 'the fathers immortal and sharers of the pressings. 

‘ Every one is immortal Priyavrata Somapa used to say, ‘ who is a sharer 
in the pressings.’ Immortal become his fathers and sharers in the pressings, 
dread his sway becomes and unassailable, who as a Ksatriya when sacrificing 
partakes thus of this food. The touching of himself is the same and the 
same the filling up of the goblet. They should proceed at the morning 
pressing in the manner of the morning pressing, in that of the midday 
(pressing) at the midday, and in that of the third pressing at the third 
pressing.’ This food Rama Margaveya proclaimed to Vifvantara Sausad- 
mana ; when it had been proclaimed he said ‘ A thousand we grant to you, 
O Brahman ; my sacrifice will be performed by the Qyaparnas ’. This also 
Tura Kavaseya proclaimed to Janamejaya Pariksita; this Parvata and 
Narada proclaimed to Somaka Sahadevya, to Sahadeva Sarnjaya, Babhru 
Daivavrdha, Bhima of Vidarbha, Nagnajit of Gandhara ; ^ this Agui pro- 
claimed to Sana^ruta Ariindama and to Kratuvid Janaki;"' tliis Vasistha 
proclaimed to Sudas Paijavana. All of them attained greatness having 
partaken of this food. All of them were great kings ; like Aditya, estab- 
lished in prosperity, they gave heat, obtaining tribute from all the quarters. 
Like Aditya, established in prosperity, he gives heat, from all the quarters 
he obtains tribute, dread his sway and unassailable, who as a Ksatriya 
when sacrificing partakes thus of this food. 


derived from the use here, or because 
Soma is addressed as Nanl 9 ansa in the 
Mantra (59®. vii. 5. 21), or because the 
fathers are praised by men (Sayana on 
PB. 1. c.). Cf. AB. vi. 16 for another 
use of Nara^ahsa in a different con- 
nexion ; ZDMB. liv. 49 seq. 

2 Sayana, who is hopelessly perverse in dis- 
secting the names, tries to make out a 
succession of teachers ; this is clearly 


wrong ; the names are those of king'), 
not of sagos. 

Agni is no doubt the god, not the imaginary 
sage of Sayana. This is a variant prova- 
edfni^ whence Weber {Ind. Stud. ix. 880) 
creates an A 9 ni, but this is no more 
than a misread gn as p, though Wober 
{RdjasUyaj p. 109) still keeps the other 
reading. 



PA^CIKl VIII 
The Rajasuva 
ADHYAYA I 

The Qastras and Stotras of the Soma Sacrifice. 

viii. 1 (xxxvi. 1). Now regarding the Stotras and the Castras. Theraorn- 
ing pressing follows the one day (rite), the third pressing follows the one day 
(rite). The pressings which follow the one day (rite) are appeased, well 
ordered, and established ; (they serve) for expiation, arrangement, support, 
and to prevent falling. The midday Pavamana of the day with two 
Samans and the Brhat as its Prstha has been described,^ for both Samans 
are employed. ' Thee like a car for aid ’ and ‘ This juice hath been pressed, 
O bright one’ are the strophe and antistrophe* connected with the 
Rathantara. The Marutvatiya is the litany of the Pavamana; in the 
Pavamana liere they employ the Rathantara (tune), and the Brhat for the 
Prstha to create a balance. The Rathantara when sung he follows in 
recitation with these (verses) as strophe and antistrophe. Now the 
Rathantara is the holy power, the Brhat the lordly power; the holy 
power is prior to the lordly power ; (it is his wish) ‘ Let my sway, with 
the holy power before, be dread and unassailable.’ Now the Rathantara 
is food ; verily thus he places food before for him. Again the Rathantara 
is this earth ; this earth is a support ; verily thus he places a support in 
front for him. The invocation of Indra is the same, and unaltered ; it is 
(that) of the days. (The Pragatha) addressed to Brahmanaspati con- 
tains (the word) ‘up’;^ it is a symbol of that which has two Samans, 
for both Samans are performed. The inserted verses are the same and 

^ The form has been mentioned in so far 11. 2). The Kaihantara is used for the 

as the verses are mentioned in AB. iv. Pavamana, the Brhat for the Prstha 

29, where also the Rathantara Saman Stotra. See A 9 S. ix. 8. 8. 

is mentioned. The rule is a rare one as * RV. viii. 68. 1-3 ; 2, 1-3 ; A^S. v. 14. 4. For 
two Samans, viz. Brhat and Rathantara, the invocation of Indra (RV. viii. 53. 5, 

are rarely used together, the Abhijit and 6), see AB. iii. 16. 

Visuvant days being the chief excep- ^ I. e. RV. i. 40. 1 and 2; above AB. iv. 31 ; 
tions (others are given in 95^* 2. 1 ; the inserted verses are in iii. 18. 



viii. 1 — ] Tlie Rajasuya [320 

unaltered ; they are (those) of the days. The Marutvatiya Fragatha * is 
that of the one day (rite). 

viii. 2 (xxxvi, 2). ‘ Thou heist been born dread, for impetuous strength ’ 
is the hymn ' containing (the words) ‘ dread ’ and ‘ strength ’ ; this is 
a symbol of the lordly power. In ‘Exalting, most mighty’ it contains 
(the word) ‘ might ’ ; that is a symbol of the lordly power ; in ‘ Full of 
pride {ahhi-mdna) ’ it contains (the word) ‘ towards {ahJd) ’ ; this is a symbol 
of overpowering. It is of eleven verses ; the Tristubh has eleven syllables ; 
the Rajanya is connected with the Tristubh ; the Tristubh is might, 
power, strength ; the Rajanya is might, the lordly power, strength ; thus 
he makes him prosper with might, the lordly power, strength. It is by 
Gauriviti ; the Gauriviti (hymn) is the perfect Marutvatiya ; the explana- 
tion of it has been given. In ‘Thee we invoke’ it has the Brhat as 
Prstha;* the Brhat is lordly power; verily thus he makes the lordly power 
prosper with the lordly power. Moreover the Brhat is the lordly power; 
the Niskevalya is the body of the sacrificer ; in that it has the Brhat as 
Prstha, and the Brhat is lordly power, verily thus he makes it prosper 
with the lordly power. Moreover the Brhat is the highest ; verily thus 
he makes him prosper with the highest. Moreover the Brhat is the best ; 
verily thus he makes him prosper with the best. In ‘ To thee, O hero, 
we utter praise ’ they make the Rathantai-a the antistrophe ; ^ the Rathan- 
tara is this world ; the Brhat yonder world ; yonder world is the counter- 
part of this world ; of yonder world this world is the counterpart. In that 
they make the Rathantara the antistrophe, verily thus they make both 
these worlds possessed of enjoyment for the sacrificer. Moreover the 
Rathantara is the holy power, the Brhat the lordly power ; on the holy 
power is the lordly power established, on the lordly power the holy power; 
moreover (it serves) to secure the Saman its birthplace. ‘ What he hath 
won ’ is the inserted verse ; * the explanation of this has been given. 

‘ Both let him hear for us ’ is the Pragatha® of the Saman ; it is a symbol 
of (the day) with both Samans, for both Samans are performed. 


* RV. viii. 89. 3 and 4 ; above AB. iil. 19. 
The days are, of course, naturally taken 
by Weber and Haug as rites extending 
over several days, Ahinas But this is 
not the view of Sayana, and in fact the 
verses referred to are used at the day 
rite as well as the Ahinas, and in the 
case where there is a divergence, the 
Pragatha for Brhaspati, the reference to 
the days is omitted. 


J RV. X. 73, Sue also AB. iii. 19. 2 ; A^S. v 
4. 19. 

2 RV. vi. 46. 1 and 2 ; A^S. v. 15. 3. See also 

V. 15. 16-18 for the order, hrhaiprstham 
is hero taken as a compound by Sayana, 
Weber, and Aufrecht, but it may not 
be so. 

3 RV. vii. 82. 22 and 23 ; A^S. v. 15. 2. 

< RV. X. 74, 6. See AB. iii. 22 ; A^S. v. 15. 
21 . 

8 RV. viii. 61. 1 and 2. See AB. iv. 81 ; v. 18. 



321] The Qastras and Stotras [ — viii. 4 

viii. 3 (xxxvi. 3). ‘ Praise him who hath force to overcome * is the 

hymn;^ as containing (the word) ‘to’ it is a symbol of overcoming. In 
‘ Unsupportable, dread, enduring ’ it contains (the words) ‘ dread ’ and ‘ en- 
during ’ ; it is a symbol of the lordly power. It is in fifteen verses ; the 
Fancada^a (Stoma) is might, power, and strength ; the Rajanya is might, 
the lordly power, and strength ; thus he makes him prosper with might, 
the lordly power, and strength. It is by Bharadvaja; the Brhat is by 
Bharadvaja ; by reason of the authorship it is similar.^ That sacrifice of 
a Ksatriya is perfect which has the Brhat for its Prstha; therefore 
whenever a Ksatriya sacrifices, the Brhat should be the Prstha ; that is 
perfect. 

viii. 4 (xxxvi. 4). The Hotr offices are taken from the one day (rite) ; the 
Hotr offices as taken from the one day (rite) are appeased, well ordained, 
and supported ; (they serve) for expiation, arrangement, support, and to 
prevent falling away. These are of all forms, all perfect (and serve) to 
secure all forms, all perfection ; (they think) ‘ With the Hotr offices of 
all forms, all perfect, let us obtain all desires.’ Tlierefore, whenever the 
one day (rites) have not all the Stomas and the Prsthas, the Hotr offices 
of the one day (rite) should be used ; that is perfect. ‘ This should be 
a fifteenfold XJkthya’ they say^: ‘the Pancada5a (Stoma) is might, power, 
and strength ; the Kajanya is might, the lordly power, and strength ; thus 
he makes him prosper with might, the lordly power, and strength. It has 
thirty Stotras and Qastras ; the Viraj has thirty syllables; proper food 
is the Viraj ; verily thus he establishes him in the Viraj as proper food. 
Therefore should it be a tifteenfold XJkthya’ they say. It should be 
a Jyotistoma of the Agnistoma form. The Trivrt of Stomas is the 
holy power, the Pahcada9a the lordly power; the holy power is prior 
to the lordly power ; (it is his wish) ‘ May my sway with the holy power 
in front be dread and unassailable.’ The Saptadafa is the people, the 
Ekavin9a the Qudra class; verily thus they make the people and the 
Qudra class obedient to him. Moreover the Trivrt of Stomas is brilliance, 
the Pancada9a strength, the Saptada9a generation, the Ekavih9a support ; 
thus he makes him prosper with brilliance, strength, generation, and 
support at the end. Therefore it should be a Jyotistoma. It has twenty- 
four Stotras and ^astras ; the year has twenty-four half months ; in 
the year is all proper food ; verily thus he establishes him in all proper 
food. Therefore it should be a Jyotistoma of the Agnistoma form. 

^ RV. vi. 18. accord with his theory of drteya, Cf. 

* This is clearly the sense, and S&yana seems Weber, Ind» Stud. ix. 331. 

to have had it in mind on taking safoma •• viii. 4. * So A^S. ix. 3. 8, despite tho deci- 

sarhpurnah. Hang renders Ms in direct sion here ; in the very faintly parallel rite 

relationship with the ancestral fire * in in 99^- ^4 the suiya day is solcL^a, 

41 [h.0.8. 26] 



viii. 5 — ] 


The Rajasuya 


[322 


ADHYAYA II 


The PunarahhiseJca. 


viii. 6 (xxxvii. 1). Now as to the renewed anointing. His lordly power 
is consecrated, who being a Ksatriya consecrates himself. When he 
concludes, after coming out of the concluding bath and having offered the 
final offering of a cow, then they again anoint him when the concluding 
offering has been completed. For him in advance the following prepara- 
tion has been made : a throne of Udumbara^ ; its feet should be a span in 
size, the head (and foot) and the cross (boards) an ell in size, the cover 
seat of Mufija grass, the spread a tiger skin ; a goblet of XJdumbara ; 
a branch of XJdumbara. In this goblet are poured eight elements ; curds, 
honey, melted butter, the waters of rain during heat, grass and green 
barley, liquor and Durva grass. Where the line drawn by the sword 
on the south of the altar is, there he places the throne facing east. Two 
of its feet are within, two outside the altar. Prosperity is the (earth). 
What is within the altar is its limited form ; what is without the altar 
is the unlimited space. In that its two feet are within the altar, two 
outside of the altar, (it serves) to obtain both desires, that which is within 
the altar and that without the altar. 

viii. 6 (xxxvii. 2). Hecovers(it) with a tiger skin, skin uppermost, neck 
in front. The tiger is the lordly power of the wild animals, the Eajanya 
is the lordly power; thus he makes the lordly power prosper with the 
lordly power. From behind it he approaches it facing east bending 
the right knee, and taking hold of it with both hands ho addresses 
it with 

‘ May Agni in unison with the Gayatri metre mount thee ; Savitr with 
the Usnih, Soma with the Anustubh, Brhaspati with the Brhati, Mitra 
and Varuna with the Pahkti, Indra with the Tristubh, the All-gods with 
the Jagatf.’ 

With ^ After them I mount for kingship, for overlordship, for paramount 
rule, for self rule, for sovereignty, for supreme authority, for kingship,^ 
for great kingship, for suzerainty, for supremacy, for preeminence.’ 


1 For the throne cf. AV. xv. 3. 2 in the case 
of the Vratya; Vedtc Index, i. 71. The 
A^S. and 95®. have nothing of this or of 
the following rites. Say ana explains the 
Punarabhiseka as one following on that 
already performed by the Adhvaryu after 
the Mfthendra Saman, clearly referring 
to Ap5S. xviii. 15. 10 : mdhendrasya 


stoiram praty dbhisincati, Ap. quote.<i in 
viii. 8, 7 SL Balivrcabrahmana ( road irini 
sastifaidni) which is not AB. or KB. Cf. 
Weber, Rajasuya, pp. 110 seg. ; Qold- 
stiicker, Sanscrit DicU pp. 279 seq, 
viii. 6. ' Weber (Rdjasuya, p. 112, n, 3) sug- 
gests that the original list was rdjyaya 
alone, since it twice occurs here. 



323] The Punarahhiseka [ — 7 

He should mount the throne, with the right knee first, then the left. 
‘ Thus, thus (is it to be performed) ’ (they say). The gods in unison with the 
metres increasing by four syllables mounted on the prosperity on which 
they now are established, Agni with the Qayatri, Savitr with the Usnih, 
Soma with the Anustubh, Brhaspati with the Brhati, Mitra and Varuna 
with the Pahkti, Indra with the Tristubh, the All-gods with the Jagati. 
These two are mentioned^ in ‘The Gayatri hath become the yoke fellow 
of Agni’. Fortune attendwS him, prosperity ever increasing he attains, 
he attains control and overlordship over people who, being a Ksatriya, 
thus mounts this throne after those deities. Then being about to anoint 
him, he makes him recite the appeasing of the waters 

‘ With eye propitious regard me, 0 waters ; 

With propitious body touch my skin ; 

All the Agnis that sit on the waters I invoke you ; 

Confer on me radiance, force and might,* 

(thinking) ‘ Let not the waters, unappeased, strike away the strength of 
him when anointed.’ ^ 

viii. 7 (xxxvii. 3). Tlien he anoints him, placing the Udumbara branch 
between, with 

* These waters are most auspicious. 

These healing all. 

These prosper the realm, 

These support the realms and are immortal. 

With these by which Prajapati anointed Indra, 

Soma the king, Varuna, Yama, Manu, 

With these waters I anoint thee, 

Do thou become here the overking of kings. 

Thee great, of the great 
People the ruler. 

The lady, thy mother, bore 
The noble lady, thy mother bore. 

On the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the A9vins, with 
the hands of POsan, with the brilliance of Agni, with the radiance of the 
sun, with the power of Indra I anoint thee, for might, for prosperity, for 
glory, for the eating of food.’ 

With hhuh (he concludes) if he desire of him ‘May he eat food’; with 
hhuhf bhuvah, if he desire thus of him with two descendants ; ^ with bhuh, 

2 RV. X. 130. 4. but Aufrecht prefers Sftyana’s version 

3 Cf. L^vi, La doctrine du sacrifUe, p. 108. quoting tripurwa^ ‘ with three assistants ', 

1 Weber {Ind, Stud. ix. 336) prefers to take of the Hotr. There is no reference to a 

dvipuruea as the sacrificer and his son, temporary kingship. 



[324 


viiL 7 — ] The RdjasUya 

bhuvah, svar if he desire thus of him with three descendants, or without 
rivals. Some say ‘ These exclamations are an obtaining of all ; by using 
too much it is performed by him for another.' He should anoint him with 
this (formula) 

‘ On the instigation of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Alvins, with 
the hands of PQsan, with the brilliance of Agni, with the radiance of 
the sun, with the power of Indra I anoint thee, for might, for 
prosperity, for glory, for the eating of food.’ 

This again they reject. ‘ If he is anointed without the whole of speech, 
he is liable to depart before his day’, Satyakama Jabala used to say, 
‘ whom they do not anoint with these exclamations.’ ‘ He is liable to live 
the whole of his life, and to obtain “ all by conquest’, Uddalaka Aruni 
used to say, ' whom they anoint with these exclamations. Him he should 
anoint with this (formula) 

^ On the instigation of the god Savitr, with the arms of the A 9 vins, 
with the hands of Posan, with the brilliance of Agni, with the radiance 
of the sun, with the power of Indra I anoint thee, for might, for 
prosperity, for glory, for the eating of food ; hhuhy bhuvah, svar.' 

These things have departed from a Ksatriya who has sacrificed ; the holy 
power and the lordly power, strength, the eating of food, the sap of the 
plants and the waters, splendour, refreshment,^ growth and propagation ; 
moreover, as this is a symbol of the lordly power, the sap of food, the 
lordly power of the plants and support. In that he offers beforehand 
these two libations, thus he confers on him the holy power and the 
lordly power. 

viii. 8 (xxxvii. 4). In that the throne is of Udumbara, the goblet of 
Udumbara, and there is a branch of Udumbara, and the Udumbara is 
strength and the eating of food, verily thus he confers upon him strength 
and the eating of food. In that there is curd, honey, and ghee, and it 
is the sap of the plants and the waters, verily thus he confers upon him 
the sap of plants and the waters. In that there are waters of rain in 
sunshine, and the waters of rain in sunshine are brilliance and splendour, 
verily thus he confers on him brilliance and splendour. In that there 
are grass and green barley, and these are a symbol of refreshment and 
growth, and also of propagation, verily thus he confers upon him refreshment 
aud growth and also propagation. In that there is Sura, and this is 

** apnot is very strange in tense and probably stood as an unusual form. 

impossible : Sptor is a most simple correc- ^ xrdpustih is taken as one word, annasamrddhifyy 
tion : naturally misread and misunder- by Sayana. 



326] 


The Punai'dbhiseka [ — viii. 9 

a symbol of the lordly power, and also the sap of food, verily thus he 
confers upon him the symbol of lordly power and also the sap of food. 
In that there is Durva grass, the Durva is the lordly power of the plants, 
the Rajanya is the lordly power, for the Ksatriya dwelling in the kingdom 
is fastened here as it were, and supported as it were ; the Durva is 
fastened as it were to the ground with descending growths, and is sup- 
ported as it were. Thus in that there is Durva grass, verily thus he 
confers upon him the lordly power of the plants and also a support. Those 
that have departed from him after sacrificing he thus confers upon 
him ; verily thus he makes him prosper with them. Then he places in his 
hand a bowl of Sura with ^ 

^ With thy sweetest, most intoxicating 
Stream be thou purified, O Soma, 

Pressed for Indra to drink.’ 

Having placed it with (this verse), he makes him recite the expiation 

‘ Separate for you is the place made by the gods. 

Be ye not unite d in the highest heaven, 

Sura thou art, the impetuous ; he is king Soma ; 

Harm him not, when entering your own place of birth.' * 

This is the discrimination of the drinking of Soma and of Sura. Having 
drank he should give it to him whom he deems generous, for that is 
a symbol of friendship; verily thus at the end he establishes it in a 
friend; for he thus finds support in a friend. He finds support who 
knows thus. 

viii. 9 (xxxvii. 5). Then he descends towards ^ the Udumbara branch ; the 
Udumbara is strength and the eating of food ; verily thus he descends 
towards strength and the eating of food. Sitting down he places his feet 
on the earth and says the descent formula ^ 

‘ I find support in the sky and the earth ; I find support in expiation 
and inspiration ; I find support in day and night ; I find support in food 
and drink ; in the holy power, in the lordly power, in these three 
worlds I find support.’ 

At the end he finds support with his whole self ; in all this he finds support, 
prosperity ever increasing he attains, he attains sovereignty and overlord- 

* RV. ix. 1. 1. 2 This is probably tlie sense as taken by 

* See TB. i. 4. 2. 2 ; A^S. iii. 9. 4 ; VS. xix. 7 ; Sayana in view of the instr. below. 

^B. xii. 7. 3. 14 ; K^S. xix. 2. 21. Otherwise it could be the gerund as 

viii. 9. ' The branch is now placed on the Weber (Ind. Stxid, ix. 387) thinks, 

ground and he descends down towards it. 



viii, 9 — ] The Rajasuya [326 

ship over people, who, anointed with the renewed anointing, being a Ksatriya 
descends thus. Having descended with this descent formula he sits facing 
east, making a lap, and thrice pays honour to the holy power with ‘ Homage 
to the holy power! Homage to the holy power! Homage to the holy 
power.’ Then he utters spe^h with ‘ A boon I give for conquest, for 
victory, for winning, for success.* In that he pays thrice homage to the holy 
power with ‘ Homage to the holy power I Homage to the holy power ! 
Homage to the holy power ! * verily thus the lordly power falls under 
the influence of the holy power. When the lordly power falls under the 
influence of the holy power, that kingdom is prosperous, rich in heroes ; 
in it 3 a heir is bom. In that he utters speech with ‘ A boon I give for 
conquest, for victory, for winning, for success *, that is the conquest [of 
speech in that he says * I give Moreover as to the conquest of speech, 
(he thinks) ‘ Through this my rite shall be completed *. Having uttered 
speech, and having risen up he places a kindling stick on the Ahavaniya 
with 

' Thou art a kindling stick ; kindle thou,^ with power, with strength, 
hail ! * 

Verily thus at the end with power and strength he makes himself to 
prosper. Having put on the kindling stick he steps out three strides nortli- 
east. (Saying) 

* Thou art the orderer of the quarters, 

In me be ye ordered for the gods ; 

Mine be good fortune 
Freedom from fear be mine,* ® 

he reveres the unconquered quarter, to secure the permanence of his conquest. 
‘ Thus, thus (is it to be performed) ’ (they say). 

viii. 10 (xxxvii. 6). The gods and the Asuras strove for these worlds ; they 
strove for the eastern quarter ; the Asuras drove them thence ; they strove 
for the southern quarter ; the Asuras drove them thence ; they strove for the 
western quarter ; the Asuras drove them thence ; they strove for the 
northern quarter ; the Asuras drove them thence ; they strove for this inter- 


® Or, a« Sayana, ‘ to him 
< For sam v enksva Sayana ha^ indriyapdtavena 
^afirasdmarthyena ca sathyojaya ; Aiifrocht 
suggests sam mentsva as the original, wiili 
ifiktva for intsva like avdksam for avdtsam 
in i. 28 above (cf. Weber, Ind. Siud ix. 
245). Buhtlingk (BKSGW. 15 Dee. 1900, 
p. 419) argues against inksva but accepts 


md in place of u. 

* Aufrecht suggests, after di^dm, dip me kaU 
pantdm, but that is not good metrically : 
possibly diph should be added after 
dipm, KaZpata as active 2nd pi. is very 
strange, and Weber 'Ind. Stud. ix. 338) 
suggests taking it as a 3rd pers. sing, 
injunct. 



327 ] The Punarabhi§eka [ — viii. ii 

mediate quarter, the north-east ; they thence defeated them. If, when two 
armies meet, a Ksatriya runs up to him (saying) ‘ So do for me that I shall 
conquer that army ’, and if he reply ‘ Be it so he should touch the body of 
his chariot with^ ‘ O tree, be thou strong limbed ’ and then say to him 

‘ Do thou mount, to this quarter for thee let the chariot, well tied, 
advance, to the north (let it advance), to the west, to the south, to the 
east, against the foe.’ 

With 2 ‘ With the attacking oblation ’ he should make him turn ; then he 
should look at him with the Apratiratha,^ Qasa,^ and Sauparna ® hymns. 
He conquers that army. If again he runs up to him when about to engage 
in battle (saying) * So do for me that I shall conquer in this battle he 
should make him contend in this quarter ; he conquers in this battle. If 
again he run up to him, being expelled from his kingdom (saying) ‘ So do 
for me that I may be restored to this kingdom he should make him go 
away to this quarter ; so does he again become restored to his kingdom. 
After the paying of reverence, he goes to the house saying (the verse) for 
the driving away of foes,® ‘ Drive away, O Indra, all my foes to the east ’ ; 
from all sides freedom from foes and danger becomes his, prosperity ever 
increasing he attains, he attains sovereignty and overlordship over people 
who goes to the house saying thus this (verse) for the driving away of foes. 
Having gone to the house he sits down behind the household fire and holds 
on to the priest who at the end offers three butter libations to Indra, in four 
portions, with the bowl, in the Prapad way,"^ for freedom from distress, 
injury, loss, and danger, 
viii. 11 (xxxvii. 7). 

‘ Do ^ thou pour forth for the winning of strength ; the foe around— 
BMh ; the holy power, breath, immortality, this N. N. approacheth, 
protection, guarding, freedom from fear, for safety, with offspring, with 
cattle — 

overcoming : 

To overwhelm the foe thou movest like one taking payment for 
a debt ; hail ! 


‘ RV. vi. 47. 26. 

RV. V. 174. 

» RV. X. 103. 

< RV. i. 152. 

® See above AB. vi. 26. 7. Sayana here, how- 
ever, gives jwa dhdrd yantu (AiJJS. iii. 12. 14) 
as meant; cf. KB. xviii. 4 ; RVKh. i. 3. 

« RV. X. 131. 1. 

I. e. in equal parts with insertions as in 
AB. viii. 11. 


viii. 11. ^ The verses treated are RV. ix. 110. 
1-3 : the verses consist of Padas of 12 + 
8 + 12 sylla])lea respectively. The treat- 
ment accorded is to insert after 16 + 16, 
irrespective of the forms and metre, the 
insertion ; thus in a sense the versos are 
reduced to normal Anus^bU verses. The 
Prapad mode is defined in a verse cited 
by Sayana as — 

pddd yasya tu ydvanto ydvadakMrasammitdh 



[328 


viii. 11 — ] The R&jasuya 

In thee when pressed, 0 Soma, we delight, in the great — 

Bhuvah ; the holy power, breath, immortality, this N. N. approacheth, 
protection, guarding, freedom from fear, for safety, with oifspring, with 
cattle — 

kingship of concourse : 

For the booty, 0 purifying one, thou dost plunge ; hail ! 

Thou hast brought to life, 0 purifying one, the sun ; in the pail — 

8var\ the holy power, breath, immortality, this N. N. approacheth, 
protection, guarding, freedom from fear, for safety, with offspring, with 
cattle— 

with might the milk ; 

In eagerness with the milk that is thy living gift ; hail ! ’ 

Free from harm and injury, unoppressed, protected on every aide, by the 
form of the threefold knowledge he wanders through all the quarters, find- 
ing support in the world of Indra, for whom the priest at the end offers those 
three libations of butter in four portions with the bowl, in the Prapad manner. 
Then at the end he invokes propagation for cows, horses, and men with ^ 

* Here ye cows, be ye propagated. 

Here ye horses, here ye men ; 

Here with a thousand fees to give 
Let the hero, the protector, sit down.* 

He becomes multiplied with offspring and cattle who thus at the end invokes 
the propagation of cows, horses, and men. This Ksatriya is never brought 
low, for whom those knowing thus sacrifice, But they bring him low for 
whom they sacrifice not knowing thus: just as outcasts,^ or robbers, or 
evildoers, seizing a wealthy man in the wild, fling him into a pit and run away 
taking his wealth, so these priests fling the sacrificer into a pit and run away 
taking his wealth. Knowing this Janamejaya Pariksita used to say ' Those 
who know thus sacrifice for me who know thus ; therefore I conquer the 
assailing host, I conquer with an assailing host. Me neither the arrows of 
heaven nor of men reach. I shall live all my life, I shall become lord of 
all the earth.* Him neither divine nor human arrows reach, he lives all 
his life, he becomes lord of all the earth, for whom men, knowing thus, 
sacrifice. 

rcy adhyayanam etesam prapadarh tad vidur his MSS. which has pratd^ a blunder for 

budhdh, irdtd ; RVKh. v. 11. 2. 

* Cf. AV. XX. 127. 12 ; 99®. xii, 15. 3 where ® For the Niimdas see Weber, Jnd. Stud* ix. 
Hillebrandt reads in d *pi puad against 340 ; Vedic Jn(Ux, i. 468, 464, 



329 ] 


The Mahahhiseka of Indra 


[ — viii. 12 


ADHYAYA III 

The Mahahhiseka of Indra. 

viii. 12 (xxxviii. 1.) Now comes the great anointing of Indra. The gods 
with Prajapati said ‘ He is of the gods the miglitiest, the most powerful, 
the strongest, the most real, the best to accomplish ; let us anoint him.* 
^Be it so* (they replied). Thus (they did anoint) Indra. For him they 
brought together the throne called Rc ; as its two front feet they made the 
Brhat and the Rathantara,^ as its two back feet the Vairupa and the 
Vairaja, as the head (and foot) (planks) the Qakvara and the Raivata, as 
the cross (planks) the Naudhasa and Kaleya, as the lengthwise ropes the 
Rc verses, as the cross-ties tlie Samans, as the holes the Yajuses, as the 
coverlet glory, as the pillow prosperity. Savitr and Brhaspati supported 
its front feet, Vayu and Pusan the back feet, Mitra and Varuna the head 
(and foot) (planks), the Alvins the cross (planks). He mounted this throne 
with^ 

‘Let the Vasus mount thee with the Gayatri metre, the Trivrt 
Stoma, the Rathantara Saman ; after them I mount for overlordship. 
Let the Rudras mount thee, with the Tristubh metre, the Pahcada^a 
Stoma, the Brhat Saman ; after them I mount for paramount rule. Let the 
Adityas mount thee with the Jagatl metre, the Saptada 9 a Stoma, the 
VairUpa Saman ; after them I mount for self rule. Let the All-gods 
mount thee with the Anustubh metre, with the Ekavih 9 a Stoma, 
the Vairaja Saman ; after them I mount for sovereignty. Let the 
Sadhya and the Aptya gods mount thee with the Pahkti metre, the 
Trinava Stoma, the Q^kvara Saman ; after them I mount for kingship. 
Let the Maruts and the Ahgirases the gods mount thee with the 
Atichandas metre, the Trayastrih 9 a Stoma, the Raivata Saman ; after 
them I mount for supreme authority, for great kingship, for suzerainty, 
for supremacy, for pre-eminence ; ’ 

he mounted the throne. When he was seated on the throne the All-gods 
said ‘ If Indra is not proclaimed he cannot display his strength ; let us pro- 
claim him.* * Be it so.* Him the All-gods proclaimed (saying) 

‘ Do ye proclaim him, O gods, as overlord and overlordship, as para- 
mount ruler and father of paramount rulers, as self ruler and self rule, as 
sovereign and sovereignty, as king and father of kings, as supreme lord 
and supreme authority. The lordly power hath been born, the Ksatriya 

1 See for the S&mans above AB. iv. 13 ; for the throne AB. viii. 5. 

* For the same series of metros cf. AA. v. 1. 4 ; *vii. 16. 1. 

42 [ h . 0 . 8 . 25] 



[330 


viii. 12 — ] 


Tlie Rdjasuya 


hath been born, the suzerain of all creation hath been born, the eater of 
the folk hath been born, the breaker of citadels hath been born, the slayer 
of the Asuras hath been born, the guardian of the holy power hath been 
born, the guardian of the law hath been born.’ 

When he had been proclaimed Prajapati, being about to anoint him, 
addressed him with the verse 

viii. 13 (xxxviii. 2). 

* Vanina within the waters' 

Hath set him down, preserving order. 

For overlordship, for paramount rule, for self rule, for sovereignty, for 
supreme authority, for kingship, for great kingship, for suzerainty, for 
supremacy, for pre-eminence, the wise one.’ 

Him when seated on the throne, Prajapati, standing in front of him, facing 
west, anointed through a branch of Udumbara, dry but with leaves, and 
a golden strainer, to the accompaniment of the triplet^ ‘These waters are 
most auspicious *, the Yajus formula ‘ (On the instigation) of the god thee’, 
and the exclamations bhuh, bhuvaht svar. 

viii. 14 (xxxviii. 3). Then the Vasus,the gods in the eastern quarter anointed 
him with six days with the Pancavihfa,^ and with this triplet and this 
Yajus and these exclamations, for overlordship. Therefore in this eastern 
quarter, whatever kings there are of the'eastern peoples, they are anointed for 
ovcrlordship ; ‘ 0 Overlord ’ they style them when anointed in accordance 
withthe action of the gods. Then in the southern quarter the Rudras, the gods, 
anointed him with six days with the Paheavih^a, and with this triplet and 
this Yajus and these exclamations, for paramount rule. Therefore in this 
southern quarter, whatever kings there are of the Satvants, they are 
anointed for paramount rule ; ‘ 0 paramount ruler * they style them when 
anointed in accordance with the action of the gods. Then in the western 
quarter the Adityas, the gods, anointed him with six days with the Panca- 
vih 5 a,and with this triplet and this Yajus and these exclamations, for self rule. 
Therefore in this western quarter, whatever kings there are of the 
southern and western peoples, they are anointed for self rule ; ‘ O self ruler * 
they style them when anointed in accordance with the action of the gods. 
Then in the northern quarter the All-gods anointed him with six days with 


* This is RV. i. 26. 10 extended. 

* See AB. viii. 7. 

viii.l4. * Sayana hsiS ekatrin^atsv ahasmy which 
is no doubt wrong. But Aufrecht in sug- 
gesting 6 X 25 « 150 seems unjustified : his 
reason is that there is no Pahcayih9a 
Stoma at the Rftjasuya, but here we have 


direct evidence that it was used in that 
of the gods, and we need not go beyond 
that. There is no use of 160 days in the 
Rajasuya either, so that Aufrecht’s own 
sugge.stion is equally out of place, and it 
is bad grammar. 



331] The Mahdhhiseka of Indra. [ — viii. 15 

the Pancavihfa, and^ with this triplet and this Yajus and these exclama- 
tions, for sovereignty. Therefore in this northern quarter, the lands of the 
Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras, beyond the Himavant, their (kings) ^ 
are anointed for sovereignty ; * O sovereign ’ they style them when anointed 
in accordance with the action of the gods. Then in this firm middle estab- 
lished quarter the Sadhyas and the Aptyas, the gods, anointed him with 
six day with the Paficavih^a, and with this triplet and this Yajus and these 
exclamations, for kingship. Therefore in this firm middle established 
quarter, whatever kings there are of the Kuru-Pancalas with the Va5a8 
and U 9 inaras, they are anointed for kingship ; ‘ king* they style them when 
anointed, in accordance with the action of the gods. Then in the upward 
quarter the Maruts and the Ahgirases, the gods, anointed him with six 
days with the Paficaviufa, and with this triplet and this Yajus and these 
exclamations, for supreme authority, for great kingship, for suzerainty, for 
supremacy, for pre-eminence. He became the supreme authority, as con- 
nected with Prajapati. Anointed with this great anointment Indra won 
all victories, found all the worlds, attained the superiority, pre-eminence 
and supremacy over all the gods, and having won. the overlordship, the 
paramount rule, the self rule, the sovereignty, the supreme authority, the 
kingship, the great kingship, the suzerainty in this world, self- existing, 
self-ruling, immortal, in yonder world of heaven, having obtained all desires 
he became immortal. 


ADHYAYA IV 

The Mahdhhiseka of Kings* 

viii. 15 (xxxix. 1 ). If he who knows thus should desire of a Ksatriya ‘ May 
he win all victories, find all the worlds, attain the superiority, pre-eminence 
and supremacy over all kings, and overlordship, paramount rule, self rule, 
sovereignty, supreme authority, kingship, great kingship, and suzerainty ; 
may he be all encompassing, possessed of all the earth, possessed of all life, 
from the one end up to the further side of the earth bounded by the ocean, 
sole ruler he should anoint him with this great anointing of Indra, after 
adjuring him 

* The sense is clear, though the construction is ceivable. 

careless : Haug, however, seeks to render ’ Here rdjd is meant, and therefore the other 
the janapaddl^ as subject and as being names of no distinct form may be nom. 

‘ without kings’, which is wholly incon- or voc. as hhoja clearly is. 



[332 


viii. 16 — ] The Rdjasuya 

‘ From the night of thy birth ' to that of thy death, for the space between 
these two, thy sacrifice and thy gifts, thy place, thy good deeds, thy 
life, and thine ofFspjring let me take, if thou dost play me false.’ 

If a Ksatriya who knows thus desire ‘May I win all victories, find all 
worlds, attain the superiority, pre-eminence, and supremacy over all kings 
and overlordship, paramount rule, self rule, sovereignty, supreme authority, 
kingship, great kingship and suzerainty; may I be all encompassing, 
possessed of all the earth, possessed of all life, from the one end up to the 
further side of the earth bounded by the ^ ocean sole ruler he should not 
doubt, but say with faith 

‘ Prom the night of my birth to that of my death, for the space between 
these two, my sacrifice and my gifts, my place, my good deeds, my life, 
and mine offspring mayest thou take, if I play thee false.’ ® 

viii. 16 (xxxix. 2). Then should he say ‘Bring together four things of 
the trees, of the Nyagrodha, Udumbara, Ayvattha, and Plaksa’. Tlie 
Nyagrodha is the lordly power of the trees ; in that they bring together 
Nyagrodha (products), verily thus he confers on him the lordly power. 
The Udumbara is the paramount rule of the trees ; in that they bring 
together Udumbara (products), verily thus he confers upon him the para- 
mount rule. The Afvattha is the overlordship of the trees ; in that they 
bring together Afvattha (products), verily thus he confers upon him over- 
lordship. The Plaksa is the self rule and sovereignty of the trees ; in that 
they bring together Plaksa (products), verily thus he confers upon him 
self rule and sovereignty. Then should he say ‘ Bring together the four 
things of the plants, in the shape of the green shoots of rice, large rice, 
panic seed and barley/ The rice is the lordly power of the plants ; in that 
they bring together the green shoots of rice, verily thus he confers upon him 
the lordly power. Large rice is the overlordship of the plants ; in that they 
bring together the green shoots of large rice, verily thus he confers upon 
him overlordship. Panic seeds are the paramount rule of the plants; in 
that they bring together the green shoots of panic seeds, verily thus he 
confers upon him paramount rule. Barley is the leadership of the plants ; 
in that they bring together the green shoots of barley, verily thus he 
confers upon him leadership. 


* ajdyethah and vrnjiyam are strange and really 
impossible blunders. For others in this 
book of. AB. viii. 23 : avapadyeyam and 
28 : prajighyaiif jdgriyat ; Bohtlingk, 
BKSGW. 16 Dec. 1900, p. 414. 

3 S&yana sees in pardrdha a term of time. 


Weber {Ind, Stud, iz. 843) suggests the 
rendering adopted. 

5 In Kauf, xvii. 4-8 the oath of priest and 
king is a mutual one, and very probably 
reflects a more primitive state of usage ; 
cf. Weber, Rdjcuuyaf pp. 142, 148. 



333] 


The MahahhiseJca of Kings. [ — viii. 17 

viii. 17 (xxxix. 3). They then bring for him a throne of Udumbara ; the 
explanation of it has been given. There is a goblet of Udumbara or a bowl, 
and a branch of Udumbara. Having collected these preparations, they 
should throw them together in the bowl or goblet of Udumbara, and, when 
these have been mixed together, he should put curds, honey, melted butter, 
and water of the rains with sunshine, and, setting them down, he should 
address the throne with ^ 

‘Let the Brhat and the Rathantara be thy two front feet, and the 
Vairapa and the Vairaja thy back feet, the ^^kvara and the Raivata the 
head (and foot) (planks), the Naudhasa and Kaleya the cross (planks), 
the Rx 5 verses the lengthwise ropes, the Samans the cross-ties, the Yajuses 
the holes, glory the coverlet, prosperity the pillow. Let Savitr and 
Brhaspati support thy front feet, Vayu and Pusan thy back feet, Mitra 
and Varuna the head (and foot) (planks), the A 9 vins the cross (planks)/ 

Then he should make him mount the throne. With 

‘ Let the Vasus mount thee with the Gayatrl metre, the Trivrt Stoma, 
the Rathantara Saman ; after them do thou mount for overlordship. Let 
the Rudras mount thee with the Tristubh metre, the Pahcada^a Stoma, 
the Brhat Saman ; after them do thou mount for paramount rule. Let 
the Adityas mount thee with the Jagatl metre, the Saptada 9 a Stoma, the 
VairUpa Saman ; after them do thou mount for self rule. Let the All- 
gods mount thee with the Anustubh metre, the Ekavih 9 a Stoma, the 
Vairaja Saman ; after them do thou mount for sovereignty. Let the 
Maruts and the Ahgirases, the gods, mount thee with the Atichandas 
metre, the Trayastrih 9 a Stoma, the Raivata Saman ; after them do thou 
mount for supreme authority. Let the Sadhya and the Aptya gods 
mount thee with the Pankti metre, the Trinava Stoma, the ^akvara 
Saman; after them do thou mount for kingship, great kingship, 
suzerainty, supremacy, and pre-eminence ’ ; 

he should make him mount the throne. When he is seated on the throne 
the king-makers should say ‘ The Ksatriya if not proclaimed cannot show 
his strength ; let us proclaim him ‘ Be it so ’ (they reply). Him the 
king-makers proclaim (saying) 

‘ Him do ye proclaim, 0 men, as overlord and overlordship, as para- 
mount ruler and father of paramount rulers, as self ruler and self rule, as 
sovereign and sovereignty, as supreme lord and supreme authority, as 

1 See above AB. viii. 12. The slight variant (cf. AB. viii. 6) than the number (17) of 

is presumably deliberate, two clauses be- the Yajus ritual, and sees in this a sign 

ing inverted in order. Weber {Rajasuya, of the old character of the simple punar- 

p. 116) points out that the number of dbhiaeka at least (ibid. p. 113). 

materials of the ointment is much less 



viii. 17 — ] The Bdjamya [334 

king and father of kings. The lordly power hath been born, the 
Ksatriya hath been born, the suzerain of all creation hath been born, the 
eater ^ of the folk hath been born, the slayer of foes hath been born, the 
guardian of the Brahmans hath been born, the guardian of the law hath 
been born.’ 

When he has been proclaimed one knowing thus, being about to anoint him, 
should address him with this verse 

viii. 18 (xxxix. 4). 

‘ Varuna ^ within the waters 

Hath sat him down, preserving order, 

For overlordship, for paramount rule, for self rule, for sovereignty, for 
supreme authority, for kingship, for great kingship, for suzerainty, for 
supremacy, for pre-eminence, the wise one.’ 

Him when seated on the throne one who knows tlms standing in front, 
facing west, anoints through a branch of Udumbara, dry but with leaves, 
and a golden strainer, to the accompaniment of the triplet ‘ These waters 
are most auspicious the Yajus ' (On the instigation) of the god thee’, and 
the exclamations t/m/i, hhuvahy svar. 

viii. 19 (xxxix. 5), 

^ In the ^ eastern quarter let the Vasus, the gods, anoint thee with 
six days with the Pahcavih 9 a, and with this triplet and this Yajus and 
these exclamations, for overlordship. 

In the southern quarter let the Eudras, the gods, anoint thee with six 
days with the Pahcavifi 9 a, and with this triplet and this Yajus and these 
exclamations, for paramount rule. 

In the western quarter let the Adityas, the gods, anoint tliee with six 
days with the Paheavih^a, and with this triplet and this Yajus and these 
exclamations, for self rule. 

In the noi-thern quarter let the All-gods anoint thee with six days 
with the Paiicavih 9 a, and with this trip nd this Yajus and these 
exclamations, for sovereignty. 

In the upright quarter let the Maruts and Afigirases, the gods, anoint 
thee with six days with the Paiicavih 9 a, an i with this triplet and this 
Yajus and these exclamations, for supreme authority. 

In this firm middle established quarter let the Sadhya and the Aptya 
gods anoint thee with six days with the Pahcavih 9 a, and with this triplet 
and this Yajus and these exclamations, for kingship, for great kingship, for 
suzerainty, for supremacy, and for pre-eminence.’ 

* For this common description cf. Weber, ^ See above AB. viii. 18. 

Jnd. Stud. X. 8, 14 ; Rdjasuyaj pp, 66, n. 2, viii. 19. i See above AB. viii. 14. 

116, n. 2. 



335] The Mahahhiseka of Kings. [ — viii. 20 

He becomes the supreme authority, as connected with Prajapati. The Ksatriya 
anointed with this great anointing of Indra wins all victories, finds all 
worlds, attains the superiority, pre-eminence, and supremacy over all kings, 
and having won overlordship, paramount rule, self rule, supreme authority, 
kingship, great kingship and suzerainty in the world, self-existing, self- 
ruling, immortal, in yonder world of heaven having obtained all desires 
he becomes immortal, whom as a Ksatriya he anoints with this great 
anointing of Indra, after adjuring him. 

viii. 20 (xxxix. 6). Curds is power in this world ; in that he anoints him 
with curds, verily thus he confers power upon him. Honey is the sap in 
plants and in trees ; in that he anoints with honey, verily thus he confers 
sap upon him. Ghee is the brilliance of animals ; in that he anoints with 
ghee, verily thus he confers brilliance upon him. Waters are the immortal 
in the world ; in that he anoints with water, thereby he confers immortality 
upon him. Being anointed he should give gold to the Brahman who 
anoints ; a thousand should he give, a field and quadrupeds ; moreover 
they say ‘ He should give an uncounted, an unlimited, guerdon ; the 
Ksatriya is unlimited ; (it serves) to attain the unlimited.* Then he places 
in his hand a bowl of Sura (saying ') 

‘ With thy sweetest, most intoxicating 
Stream be thou purified, 0 Soma, 

Pressed for Indra to drink.’ 

He should drink it (saying 

‘ That which is left over of the pressed juice, rich in sap 
Which Indra drank mightily 
Here with auspicious mind this of him, 

I partake of Soma, the King. 

To thee, 0 bull (the Soma) being pressed, 

I offer the pressed juice to drink ; 

Eejoice and make thyself glad.’ 

The Soma drink which is in the Sura is what is drunk by the Ksatriya 
when anointed by this great anointing of Indra ; not the Sura. Having 
drunk it he should address it with ^ ‘ We have drunk the Soma ’ and ‘ Be 
thou propitious to us.’ Just as in the world a dear son touches a father or 
a dear wife a husband pleasantly and auspiciously up to decay even so 
Sura or Soma or any other food in the case of a Ksatriya anointed by the 
great anointing of Indra touches him auspiciously and pleasantly up to 
decay. 

1 See above AB. viii. 8. • Probably until old age, cf. Sftyana^s version 

^ See above AB. vii. 38 and RV. viii. 45. 22. dehapdtax^aryantam, 

3 RV. viii. 48. 8 ; x. 87. 10. 



[336 


viii.21 — ] The Rdjasuya 

viii. 21 (xxxix. 7 ). With this great anointing of Indra Tura Kavaaeya 
anointed Janamejaya Pariksita. Therefore Janamejaya Pariksita went 
round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and offered the horse 
in sacrifice. Eegarding this a sacrificial verse ’ is sung 

‘ At Asandivant a horse, grass eating, 

Adorned with gold and a yellow garland. 

Of dappled hue, was bound 
By Janamejaya for the gods.’ 

With this great anointing of Indra Cyavana Bhargava anointed Qaryata 
Manava. Therefore Qaryata Manavn. went around the earth completely, 
conquering on every side, and offered the horse in sacrifice at the sacrificial 
session of the gods he was the householder. With the great anointing of 
Indra Soma^usman Vsjaratnay ana anointed Qatanika Satrajita. Therefore 
Qatanika Satrajita went round the earth completely, conquering on every 
side, and offered the horse in sacrifice. With the great anointing of Indra 
Parvata and Narada anointed Amba-sthya. Therefore Ambfisthya went 
round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and offered the horse 
in sacrifice. With this great anointing of Indra Parvata and Narada 
anointed Yudhaih 9 rausti Augrasainya. Therefore Yudham 9 rausti Augra- 
sainya went round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and 
offered the horse in sacrifice. With this great anointing of Indra Ka 9 yapa 
anointed Vi 9 vakarman Bhauvana. Therefore Vi 9 vakarman Bhauvana went 
round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and offered the horse 
in sacrifice. The earth sang, they tell ® 

‘ No man whatsoever ought to give me, 

0 Vi 9 vakarman Bhauvana, thou hast been fain to give me ; 

1 shall plunge into the middle of the water ; 

Vain was this thy compact with Ka 9 yapa.’ 

With this great anointing of Indra Vasistha anointed Sudas Paijavana. 
Therefore Sudas Paijavana went round the earth completely, conquering on 
every side, and offered the horse in sacrifice. With this great anointing of 
Indra Saihvarta Angirasa anointed Marutta Aviksita. Therefore Marutta 
Aviksita went round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and 
offered the horse in sacrifice. Regarding this, this verse is sung ® 

* See also ^B. xiii. 6. 4. 2 ; 99s. xvi. 9. 1, 16. 8 has d as in 9B. and upamanksye but 

with the reading dbudhndd a^vam sdrali- otlierwise agrees with AB. 

gam, ’ So 5^- ^ Avik$itasyagnih 

* a, 9B. xiii. 7. 1. 15 where manda dsitha ktaita, xvi. 9. 16 agrees with 

replaces diddsUha, uyamaukfyati syd and These texts deal with the horse sacrifice. 

mrsaisa te samgarah Ka^yapdya ; xvi. Cf. Oldenberg, ZDMG. xxxvii. 80, 81. 



337] 


[ — 23 


The Mahdhhiseka of Kings. 

* The Maruts as attendants 
Dwelt in the house of Marutta ; 

Of Aviksita Kamapri 
The All-gods were the assessors.’ 

viii. 22 (xxxix. 8). With this great anointing of Indra Udamaya Atreya 
anointed Ahga. Therefore Ahga went round the earth completely, conquering 
on every side, and offered the horse in sacrifice. He whose limbs were not 
defective said ‘ Ten thousands of elephants, ten thousands of female slaves, 
I offer to thee. O Brahman ; invite me to the sacrifice.’ Regarding this 
these verses are sung 

‘ Of the cows for which Udamaya 
The Praiyamedhas aided in his sacrificing ^ 

' Two thousand of the myriads (day by day) 

Atreya gave at the middle (of the offering). 

Eight and eighty thousand 
White horses, Vairocana, 

Side steeds,* loosing them, 

Gave when his Purohita «vas sacrificing. 

Of those brought from each country, 

All daughters of wealthy men, 

Ten thousands he gave, 

Atreya, with necklaces on their necks. 

Ten thousands of elephants, 

Atreya, having given at Avacatnuka, 

Wearied, sought for attendants,® 

By reason of the gift of Ahga, the Brahman. 

‘‘ A hundred to you, a hundred to you,” 

So saying he grew weary ; 

By saying ‘‘ A thousand to you ” 

He got back his breath.’ 

viii. 23 (xxxix. 9). With this great anointing of Indra Dirghatamas 
Mamateya anointed Bharata Dauhsanti. Therefore Bharata Dauhsanti went 
round the earth completely, conquering on every side, and offered the horse 
in sacrifice. Regarding this these verses are sung ^ 

1 This seems to he the sense accepted by gave fees, but the plur. is against this. 

Sayana,Colebrooke, and Weber; assuming ^ prasti is here as usual of doubtful sense 
the Praiyamedhas to be Rsis, as it seems and possibly is more generally merely 

they were from the other references to ‘ leading horses’ ; Vedic Index, ii. 615. 

their ancestors, as seers of RV. viii. 1-40, ® To give the gifts away. 

&c. otherwise the more natural way viii. 23. ' See 5®* xiih 

would be to treat them as princes who 

43 [n.o.s. 26 ] 



viii. 23 — ] 


[338 


The Rdjasuya 

‘ Covered with golden trappings, 

Beasts Idack with white tusks, 

As Masnara Bharata gave, 

A hundred and seven myriads. 

This is the fire of Bharata Dauhsanti 
Piled at SacTguna, 

At which a thousand Brahmans 
Divided cows in myriads." 

Eight and seventy did Bharata 
Dauhsanti on the Yamuna, 

On the Gahga for tbo slayer of Vrtra he bound 
Five and fifty steeds. 

A hundred and thirty-three steeds, 

The king having bound for the sacrifice, 

Dauhsanti surpassed all other kings. 

In craft, the more crafty.® 

The great deed of Bharata, 

Neither men before or after, 

As the sky a man with his hands 
The five peoples have not attained it.’' 

This great anointing of Indra Brhaduktha the seer proclaimed to Dur- 
mukha, the Pancala. Therefore Durmukha Paficala, being a king,^ by 
this knowledge went round the earth completely, conquering on every 
side. This great consecration of Indra Vasistha Satyahavya proclaimed 
to Atyarati Janaihtapi. Therefore Atyarati Janaihtapi, though not a king, 
through his knowledge went round the earth completely, conquering on 
every side. Vasistha Satyahavya said ‘Thou hast conquered entirely the 
earth on every side : do thou make me great.' Then said Atyarati Jtoaiii- 
tapi ‘ When I conquer, O Brahman, the Uttara Kurus, then thou wouldst be 
king of the earth, and I should be thy general.' Vasistha Satyahavya 
replied ‘ That is a place of the gods ; no mortal man may conquer it. Thou 
hast been false to me ; therefore I take this from thee.* ® Then Amitra- 
tapana Qusmina Qaibya, a king, slew Atyarati Janaihtapi, whose strength 


* hadva as a hundred kotis is given by Sd.yana ; 
sahasram is taken by Weber with gah and 
badvafah as ^by flocks', but this makes 
the number too low. 

^9^* Saudyumnir atyasthdd any an amdydn 
and Aufrecht suggests amdyino as better 
sense and metre. Weber (/nd. Stud. ix. 
S4C) reads ^mdydn. 


^ rdjd is read by Sftyana, but the parallelism 
below certainly suggests Vdjd, as taken 
by Haug. 

^ d ta (i. e. te) must of course be read ; Weber, 
Rdjasuya^ p. 118, n. adruksah is an odd 
form, for which Liebich {Pdnini, p. 77) 
would restore adhrukndfyf but Whitney 
{Sansk, Oramm, § 920/) accepts the form. 



339] The Purohitaship [ — viii. 25 

had been taken away and who had lost his power. Therefore one should 
not play false with a Brahman who knows thus and has done thus (thinking) 
‘ Let me not loose my kingdom,® nor let breath forsake me/ 

ADHYAYA V 

The Purohitaship. 

viii. 24 (xL 1). Now as to the Purohitaship. The gods eat not the food 
of a king without a Purohita. Therefore a king when about to sacrifice 
should select as Purohita a Brahman (wishing) ‘ May the gods eat my food.* 
The king in appointing a Purohita takes out the fires that lead to heaven. 
The Purohita is the Ahavaniya, his wife the Garhapatya, his son the 
Anvaharyapacana. What he does to the Purohita, verily thus he offers 
in the Ahavaniya ; what he does to his wife, verily thus he offers in the 
Garhapatya ; what he does to his son, verily thus he offers in the Anvaharya- 
pacana. They, being appeased in body, having received the offerings and 
propitiated, carry him to the world of heaven, to the lordly power, might, 
the kingdom, and the people. They, if not appeased in body, not having 
received the offering and not being propitiated, repel him from the world 
of heaven, from the lordly power, might, the kingdom, and the people. 
The Purohita is Agni Vai 9 vanara, possessed of five missiles ; in his speech is 
one missile, in his feet one, in his skin one, in his heart one, in his organ 
one. With these flaming and blazing he approaches the king. In that he 
says ‘ Where, O blessed one, hast thou been dwelling ? Bring ye grass for 
him *, thereby he appeases that missile of his that is in his speech. In that 
they bring to him water for the feet, thereby he appeases that missile of his 
that is in his feet. In that they adorn him, thereby he appeases that missile 
of his that is in his skin. In that they delight him, thereby he appeases 
that missile of his that is in his heart. In that he dwells unimpeded in his 
dwelling, thereby he appeases that missile of his which is in his organ. 
He, having been appeased in his body, and having received offering and 
being delighted, carries him to the world of heaven, the lordly power, 
might, the kingdom, and the people. He also, if not appeased in body, and 
not offered to and delighted, repels him from the world of heaven, from the 
lordly power, might, the kingdom, and the people. 

viii. 25 (xl. 2.) The Purohita is Agni Vai 9 vanara with five missiles ; with 
these he keeps enveloping the king as the ocean the earth. His kingship 
perishes not in its youth, life leaves him not before his time, up to old age 

• For avapadyeyam cf. AB. viii. 16, n. 1. The Delbruck, Altind. Synt. p. 646. jahat may 

constr. with ned is unparalleled. See be subj. or inj. ; ibid. p. 369. 



viii. 25—1 Rdjasuya [340 

he lives, he lives a full life, he dies not again,' who has for Purohita to guard 
the kingdom a Brahman with this knowledge.^ 

By the lordly power he conquereth the lordly power, 

By might he attaineth might, 

Who hath for Purohita to guard the kingdom 
A Brahman with this knowledge, 

For him are his people in harmony, 

With one aspect and one mind, 

Who hath for Purohita to guard the kingdom 
A Brahman with this knowledge. 

viii. 26 (xl. 3). This is also declared by a seer ' 

‘ The king all hostilities 
With his onset, his might, doth overcome 

Hostilities arc the rivals who vie with and hate him ; verily thus he over- 
comes them with his onset and his might. 

' Who supporteth Brhaspati in comfort \ 

Brhaspati is the Purohita of the gods; analogues of him are the other 
Purohitas of human kings. In that he says * Who supporteth Brhaspati 
in comfort verily he says in effect * Who supporteth a Purohita in comfort 

‘ Who treateth him kindly, and maketh welcome the first sharer 
(he says) ; verily thus he mentions honour for him. 

^ He dwelleth in ease in his own abode ’ * 

(he says) ; the abode is the house ; verily thus he dwells at ease in his own 
house. 

‘ For him fare is ever plentiful ’ 

(he says) ; fare is food ; verily thus for him food is ever full of strength. 

‘ To him the peoples of themselves pay homage ’ 

(he says); the peoples are the kingdoms; verily thus spontaneously the 
kingdoms pay him homage. 

^ In whose reign the Brahman goeth first 
(he says) ; verily thus he refers to the Purohita. 

‘ Unsurpassed he winneth wealths ’ * 

* This is the only occurrence of the idea in comes distinct : as below in AB. viii. 27, 

AB. Cf. L6vi, La doctrine du sacrificej 2 and 3. 

pp. 96 seq. ayuvamdri (not ayuvam) is viii. 26. ' RV. iv. 50. 7. 
clearly right. Weber has ‘ free from * RV. iv. 60. 8. 
death of young men ’. ® RV. iv. 60. 9. 

* The true character of the passage now be- 



[ — viiL 27 


341 ] The Purohitaship 

Wealths are kingdoms ; them he wins unsurpassed. 

‘ Of his foe as of his kin * 

(he says) ; the foe are the rivals that vie with and hate him ; them he 
conquers unsurpassed. In that he says^ 

‘ Who maketh wide room for him that seeketh aid,’ 
verily he says in effect ‘ Who maketh riches for the poor/ 

‘ The king for the Brahman, him the gods aid 
(he says) ; verily thus he refers to the Purohita. 

viii. 27 (xl. 4). He who knows the three Purohitas and the three appointers, 
that Brahman is to be made Purohita. He should say for the Purohitaship 
‘ Agni is the Purohita, the earth the appointer ; Vayu is the Purohita, 
the atmosphere the appointer; Aditya is the Purohita, the sky the 
appointer.’ 

He who knows this is chosen as Purohita, he who does not know this is 
rejected. 

A king is the friend of him, 

He repulseth the foe 

Who hath for his Purohita to guard the kingdom 
A Brahman with this knowledge. 

By the lordly power he conquereth the lorcjjy power, 

By might he attaineth might 

Who hath for his Purohita to guard the kingdom 

A Brahman with this knowledge. 

For him are his people in harmony, 

With one aspect and one mind. 

Who hath for his Purohita to guard the kingdom 
A Brahman with this knowledge. 

Bliuh^ l)lmvah, svar, om,^ 

I am that, thou art this ; thou art this, I am that. I am sky, thou 
art earth. I am the Saman, thou the l^c. Let us two unite. Save us 
from great danger. ^ 

Thou art the body ; protect my body. 

The plants whose king is Soma, 

Manifold, with a hundred forms. 

In this seat do ye to me 

* The ceremony of selection is here described samvivahdvahai is possible, but the text 

on the exact lines of a marriage (Weber, may mean * let us fare together ’ ; cf. 

Ind, Stud, V. 216, 882, 848, 868 ; Whitney Oldenberg, Rel, des Veda^ p. 376. 

on AV. xiv. 2. 71) to which samvakdtjahai 2 purdni appears corrupt (pur is the old form) ; 
refers, though Sayana does not recognize possibly it might be an irregular form, 

the force, and endeavours to construe it ♦ let me escape from *, but, as no sp>ecial 

with purdni as villages in the kingdom. danger is mentioned, it may be an old 

Weber (Jnd. Stud, x. 160) suggests tdv ehi ; error for pdrayd no (glossed asmdn). 



viii. 27 — ] 


The Rdjasuya 


[342 


Accord unfailing protection.® 

The plants whose king is Soma, 

Which are scattered over the earth, 

In this seat do ye to me 
Accord unfailing protection. 

In this kingdom I make prosperity to dwell, 

Then I behold the waters divine.® 

I purify my right foot ; I place power in this kingdom. 

I purify my left foot ; I increase power in this kingdom. 

First one, then another, I purify my two feet, 

O gods, for the protection of the kingdom, to win security from danger. 
Let the waters for the foot- washing burn away my foe. 

viii. 28 (xl. 5). Now comes the dying round the holy power. He who 
knows the dying round the holy power, round him the rivals that vie with 
and hate him die. He who blows here is the holy power ; round him die 
these five deities, the lightning, the rain, the moon, the sun, the fire. The 
lightning after lightening enters into the rain ; it is concealed ; then men 
do not perceive it. When a man dies, then he is concealed, then men do not 
perceive him. He should say at the death of the lightning ‘ Let my enemy 
die, let him be concealed, may they not perceive him.* Swiftly they 
perceive him not. The rain having rained enters into the moon ; it is 
concealed; then men do not perceive it. When a man dies, then he is 
concealed, then men do not perceive him. He should say at the death 
of the rain ‘ Let my enemy die, let him be concealed, may they not perceive 
him.* Swiftly they perceive him not. The moon at the conjunction enters into 
the sun ; it is concealed ; men do not perceive it. When a man dies, then 
he is concealed, then men do not perceive him. He should say at the death 
of the moon ‘ Let my enemy die, let him be concealed, may they not 
perceive him.* Swiftly they perceive him not. The sun on setting enters 
into the fire ; it is concealed ; men do not perceive it.^ When a man dies, 
then he is concealed, then men do not perceive him. He should say at the 
death of the sun ‘ Let my enemy die, let him be concealed, may they not 
perceive him.’ Swiftly they perceive him not. The fire, breathing forth, 
enters into the wind ; it is concealed ; men do not perceive it. When a man 
dies, then he is concealed, then men do not perceive him. He should say 
at the death of the fire ‘ Let my enemy die, let him be concealed, may they 
not perceive him,’ Swiftly they perceive him not. Thence are these 
deities born again ; from the wind is born the fire, for from breath it is 

* rdjadaitavistardhhimantravmm according to the ceremony of feet washing which is 

Sayana. accompanied by the following Mantras. 

5 This is used for the water brought up for ^ Cf. TB. ii. 1. 2. 0. 



343 ] 


[ — viii, 28 


The Purohitaship. 

born, being kindled by strength. Having seen it he should say ‘ Let the 
fire be born ; let not my enemy be born ; far hence may he hasten * away,* 
Far hence he hastens away. From the fire is the sun born ; having seen it 
he should say ‘ Let the sun be born ; let not my enemy be born ; far hence 
may he hasten away.^ Far hence he hastens away. From the sun is the 
moon born. Having seen it he should say ‘ Let the moon be born ; let not 
my enemy be born ; far hence may he hasten away.* Far hence he hastens 
away. From the moon is rain born. Having seen it he should say ‘ Let 
the rain be born ; let not my enemy be born ; far hence may he hasten 
away.* Far hence he hastens away. This is the dying round the holy 
power. This dying round the holy power Maitreya Kau.wava proclaimed 
to Sutvan Kairi 9 i Bhargayana the king. Round him died five kings ; then 
Sutvan attained greatness. His vow is ‘ One should not sit down before 
the foe ; if he think him to be standing, he should stand also. Nor should 
he lie down before the foe ; if he think him to be sitting he should sit also. 
Nor should he go to sleep before the foe ; if he think him awake, he should 
keep awake also. Even if his enemy has a head of stone,® swiftly he lays 
him low.* 

* These forms are of doubtful value and of hi and as act. with paran adverbial, 

reality : of. jdgriyat here and above AB. * A helmet like stone is Sayana’s version, but 
viii. 16, n. 1. Liebich (Pdnmi, p. 76) this seems needless ; cf. Colobrooke, 

