THE CAVE TEMPLES 
OF INDIA 



FRONTISPIECE. 




MaKMODI CllAITTA CAVE, JUNNAIt. 

From 8 photograph. 



THE CAVE TEMPLES 
OF INDIA 



By JAMES FERGUSSON, D.C.L., F.R.S., V.P.R.AS., 



AND 



JAMES BURGESS, F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., 

KEHBRE DB LA SOCI^TE A81ATIQUR, ETC.; ARCHAEOLOGICAL SDRTETOB AND 
11EPOUTER TO GOVERNMENT, WESTERN INDIA. 




Capital or Tec from a Book-cat Digoba at Bhaja. 



WHBffM. UWII 



Oriental Books Reprint Corporation 
Book Publithtrs, 10-B, Subhash Marg, Dtlki-6. 



FIRST PUBLISHED 1880, 
BY ORDER OF HER MAJESTY'S SECRETARY OF STATE . 

REPRINTED MAY, 1969. 



PUBLISHED BY MRS. NIRMAL D. JAIN FOR ORIENTAL BOOKS REPRINT CORPORATION, 

' BOX 1 165, DELHI-6 AND PRINTED BY MR. G. D. MAKHIJA AT INDIA OFFSET PRESS, DELHI-6. 



CONTENTS. 



PART I.— THE EASTERN CAVES. 
Br James Ferousbon. 

Preface 
Introduction - 

Ethnography 

History 

Religions - 

Chronology 

Architecture 
/Chapter I.— Barabak Group 
Chapter II. — Rajgib 

Sita Marhi Cave 
Chapter IIa. — Katak Caves 

Introductory 
Chapter III. — Hathi Gumpha ..... 

Bagh and Sarpa, or Tiger and Serpent Caves and smaller Cell9 

Ananta Cave ....... 

Vaikuntha Cave ....... 

Jaya Vijaya and Swargnpuri Caves .... 

Rani ka Mr 

Ganesti Gumpha ....... 

Chapter IV. — Undavilli Caves on the Krishna River near Bkjw 
Chaiter V. — Mahavallipur, or the seven Pagodas 

Introductory 
Chapter VI. — Ratiias, Mahavallipur 

Ganesa Hatha 

Draupadl's Ratlin - 

Bhima's Ratlin 

Arjuua and Dharaaraja Rathas 

Sahndeva's Katha - 
Chapter VII.— The Caves, Mahavallipur 

Saliwankuppam 

Great Bas-relief - 

Kulumulu • 

Conclusion - 



Page 

- xiii 

3 
5 
9 

- 12 

- 21 

- 27 

- 37 

- 44 

- 52 

- 55 

- 55 

- 66 

- 68 

- 70 

- 75 

- 76 

- 77 

- 86 

- 95 
■ 105 

- 105 

- 113 

- 114 

- 116 

- 117 

- 122 

- 135 

- 141 

- 153 

- 155 

- 159 

- 159 



IV CONTENTS, 

PART IL—CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 
Br Jakes Burgess. 

Page 

CHAPTEB L— INTRODUCTION - - - - . • - 165 

Classification of Buddhist Monuments • - • > - 171 

Chronology of Buddhist Caves - • - • - - 181 

Chapter II.— Cats Temples, &c., in Kathiawak - - - - 187 

Introductory ........ 187 

Kathiawir caves ........ 193 

Two-storeyed Bock-cut Hall at Junagadk - - • • - 197 

Other Caves in Kathiawar ....... 200 

Talaja 201 

Sana 202 

Chapter HI. — The Buddhist Cave Temples in the South Konkah - 204 

Caves of KudA , - - - 204 

Mhar 209 

KM, Sirwal, W&i, &c. 211 

Xarldh 213 

Chapter IV. — The Caves in the vicinitt or Ka&lk and the Bor Ghat 218 

Kondane - - 220 

Bliaja 223 

Bock Temples of Bedsa 228 

Karle 232 

Pitalkhora Bock Temples - ■ - - - - - 242 

Sailarwadi Caves ........ 246 

Chapter V.-YL— The Junnar Caves - - - - - 248 

Chapter VII.— Nabik Caves - - - - - - - 263 

Chapter VIII. — The Ajanta Cave Temples .... 280 

Paintings ......... 284 

Early Buddhist Caves ....... 289 

B00K1L 

Chapter L— Later or Mahatana Caves at Ajamta - - - 297 

Chapter II. — Latest Caves at Ajanta ..... 320 

Chaitya caves ........ 841 

Caves of Ghafotkach ....... 346 

Chapter HL— Kanhkei Caves - . . . . .348 

Chaitya caves ........ 850 

Darbarcave ........ 853 

Kondiwte ......... 860 

Chapter IV.— The Caves of Bagh - - - . . - 863 

Chapter IVa^-The Buddhist Caves at Eujba - - - - 367 

Viswakarma cave ........ 377 

The Do Thai 379 

The Tin Thai 88 1 



CONTENTS. V 

Page 
Chapter IVb. — Adrangabad Cave Temples- .... gss 

Dhamnar ......... 392 

Kholvi caves - - - - - . - . 395 



BOOK III.-THE BRAHMANICAL CAVES. 

Chapter I. — Introductory ---.... 399 

Chapteb IL— Cate Temples Ar Aihole and Badami in the Dekhan - 404 

Cave-temples at Badami ....... 405 

Chapteb III. — Kaeusa Caves ...... 417 

MahadeWs cave ........ 419 

Lakola's cave ........ 422 

Chatter IV. — Brahmanical Caves in the Dekhan, Mominabad, Pooka, 

&c. - - - - - - - - - - 423 

Cave-temples of Bhamburd&, Rajapuri, &c. ..... 426 

MiJkeswara ........ 427 

Patur ......... 428 

Rudreswar ----.-..- 428 

Patna - 428 

Dhokeswara ........ 429 

Chapter V. — Bbahmanical Cave-Temples at Eluua - - - 431 

Ravana-ka Khai ........ 432 

The Dasa Avatara cave ....... 43.5 

Rameswara ..------. 438 

Caves north of Kailasa ....... 441 

Nilakaatha ......... 443 

Teli-ka-Gana ----.... 444 

Kumbharwada ---.-... 444 

Janwasa --.--.... 444 

The Milkmaid's cave ....... 445 

Sita's NanL, or Dumar Leua ...... 446 

Kailasa or the Ranga Mahal ...... 448 

Dhamnar Brabmanical Rock-cut temple ..... 463 

Chapter VL — Late Brabmanical Caves - - - . 465 

Elephanta ......... 465 

Jogeriwari or Amboli ....... 475 

Hariichandragad Brabmanical caves ..... 477 

Ankai-Tankai Brabmanical caves ...... 480 

Christian Cave Church at Mandapeswar - - . . - 481 

Concluding remarks ....... 482 

BOOK IV.— THE JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Chapter I. — The Jains and Jinab ...... 485 

Chapter II. — Jaina Cave Temples ...... 490 

Badami Jaina cave - • • • • - - - 491 

Aihole ...... ,. . . 491 



V! 



CONTENTS. 



Jaiun caves at Patna 

CMinar Lena 

Bhamer 

Bamchaudra 
Chapter III. — Jaina Caves at Eluka 

Chhota Kailasa 

The Indra Sabha - 

The Jagannatha Sabha 

F&r&wanatha 
Chapter IV.- Jaina Cave-Temples 

Dharasi&va 

Ankai-Tankai Jaina Caves • 

Gwalior 

Concluding remarks 
Appendix 



492 
498 
494 
494 
496 
490 
496 
£00 
£02 
£03 
£03 
£05 
£09 
£10 
£13 



LIST OF PLATES. 



Map showing the Localities of the Caves. 

Plate 

I. Sculptures from the Ktitak Caves. 

II. Junagarb, plan of caves at Bawa Pyaras Math. 

III. „ 1, two doors in cell K. ; 3, column in Upnrkof Hall ; 4, WaJI 

ornament in ditto. 

IV. „ Rock-cut hall in the Uparkot, plans and section. 

V. Kudi plan of Cave VI. ; Karadh Cave V. ; Sailarwadi, three caves. 
VI. Karadh Cave XLVIIL, plan and section ; front of Cave V. 
VII. Rail at Kuda; Buddhist symbols at Kondan*;, Bhaja, and Bedsa. 
VIII. Kond&ne, plan and section of Vihara ; plan of Chaitya. 
IX. Bhaja, plan of several caves and dagobas; section of Chaitya. 
X. Bedsa Vihara, plan and section. 
XI. Kftrle Chaitya, plan and section. 
XII. „ pillar and three capitals. 

XIII. „ umbrella. 

XIV. ,, part of front screen and two capitals. 

XV. Pitalkhora, plan and section of Chaitya ; ditto of Vihara. 
XVI. „ capitals in Vihara. 

XVII. „ cell, plan and sections ; Junnar facades at Tulja Lena and 

Mamnodi. 
XVIII. Junnar, plans and sections of several caves. 
XIX. Nasik, plans of Caves III. and VIE 
XX. „ door of Caves III. 

XXI. „ I, pilaster in Cave III. ; 2, dagoba in ditto ; pillar in Cave XV. 
XXII. „ frieze in Cave III. 

XXIII. „ 1, pillar at §ailarwadi; 2, do. at Bhamchandra ; 3 and 4, capitals 

at Nasik, Care VIII. 

XXIV. Plan and section of Chaitya Cave XIII. 
XXV. „ door of Chaitya. 

XXVI. „ plans of XIV. and XV., and section of part of X 1 V. 

XXVII. Ajan{a, plan and section of Cave XIL 

XXVIII. „ plans and sections of Caves X. and IX. 

XXIX. „ old painting from Care X. 

XXX. „ pillar in Cave XI. ; shrine door in Cave VL 

XXXI. » Cave VII. sculptured side of antechamber. 

XXXII. „ plans of Cave VI. (2 storeys). 

XXXIII. „ plans of Caves XVI. and XVII. 

XXXIV. „ pillar and pilaster in Cave XVI. 
XXXV. „ imago and pillar in Cave XVII. 

XXXVI. „ section of Cave XIX. 



VlU LIST OP PLATES. 

Plate 
XXXVII. Ajanta, plan of Cave XLX. (Chaitya) and of Cave XXVL (Chaitya). 
XXXVJII. „ dftgoba in XXVI. ; and pillar in Cave XIX and in Cave L 
XXXIX. Naga Raja. 

XL. Ajanta, plans of Cave I. 
XLI. „ frieze in Cave I. 
XL1I. „ shrine door and pillar in Cave I. 
XL1II. „ painting in Cave I. 
XLIY. „ ceiling panel in Cave I. and plan of Cave II. 
XLV. „ 1, shrine door in Cave II. ; 2, pillar of antechamber ; and 3, 

bracket in Cave XVI. 
XLVL „ Cave IV., plan. 
XLVII. „ „ hall door. 

XLVin. „ „ pillar. 

XLIX. „ Cave XXI. front of a chapel; pilaster in XXI. ; do. in VI. 
L. „ Nirvana from Cave XXVL 
LL „ Buddha and Mara in Cave XXVI. 
LII. Ghatotkachh, plan of viblra. 
LIII. Eanheri, plan of Chaitya, &c. 
LIV. „ Darbar or Maharaja's cave, &c. 
LV. „ 1, Buddhist Litany, and 2, Padmapani. 
LVL „ Buddha on Padmasana, with attendants. 
LVII. Elura (2nd, 3rd, and 4th), Buddhist Caves, (Dhcrwara, &c.). 
LVHL „ pillars in Dherwara and Tin Thai. 
LIX. „ planofMaharwara. 

LX. ,, adjoining Bauddha Caves. 
LXI. „ front of shrine in the 6th Cave. 
LXII. „ plan of VisVakarma. 
LXni. „ pillars in Viiwakarma. 
LXIV. „ Tin Thai, plan, ground floor. 
LXV. „ Upper floor, Tin Thai and Aurangabad Cave VII. 
LXVL Aurangabad Cave III. ; 1, plan ; 2, pillar ; and 3, pilaster. 
LXVU. Badami Caves I. and m. and Aihole Cave. 
LXVm. Amba Cave, plan. 
LXIX. Bhamburde Cave, plan. 
LXX. 1, DhokesVara ; 2, BAvana-ka-Khai, plan. 
LXXL Elura, pillar and pilaster in Bavana-ka-Khai. 
LXXII. „ Saptamatras in BAvana-ka-Khai. 
LXXni. „ Dai Avatara, plan, ground floor. 
LXXIV. „ „ upper floor. 

LXXV. „ 1, Narasinha from Dai Avatara ; 2, Trimnrti. 
LXX VL „ 1, plan in BamesVara ; 2, plan of small caves. 
LXXVTL „ doorofBAmeswara. 
LXXVin. „ door of Cave XX. 
LXXIX. „ Dumar Lena, plan. 

T.ygX. Kailasa, Dwajastambhas in Indra Sabba and Kailasa. 
LXXXL „ plan of lower floor, Kailasa. 
LXXXI A. „ plan of upper floor, Kailasa, 



LIST OF PLATES. IX 

Plate 
LXXXII. Kailasa, elevation. 

LXXXIII. „ 1, Gaja Lakshmi ; 2, Surya from Kumbarwarit. 

LXXXIV. „ pillars and pilaster. 

LXXXV. Elephanta, plan. 

LXXXVL Elura, Parswanatba image. 

LXXXVII. „ Indra Sabha, ground floor. 

LXXXVIII. „ „ upper floor. 

LXXXIX. „ „ door of shrine. 

XC. „ Jagannatlia Sabha; 1, lower ; 2, upper floors. 

XCI. „ 1, Indra ; 2, Tirthankaras. 

XCII. „ pillars. 

XCIII. Dharasinha, Cave I., plan. 

XCIV. Ankai-Tankai Cave I., plans and sections. 

XCV. „ door of Cave I. ; 2, map of Tirthankara. 

XCVI. Ancient VMra at Bhaja. 

XCVII. „ elevation and sections. 

XCVIII. „ sculptures. 




Late Mahayina representation of Buddha on his Lotus Throne, with Attendants, 
from Cetc No. XXXV. at Kanhh-i. 



LIST OF WOODCUTS. 



Page 

Frontispiece. — Manmddi Chaitya Cave, Junnar, from a Photograph. 

Opposite page. — Buddha on the Lotus Throne, from Cave XXXV. at Kanheri. 

No. 1. Front of the Chaitya Cave at Bhaja, from a Photograph - 30 

„ 2. View and Plan of Jarasandha-ka~Baithak, from Cunningham - 33 

„ 3. Facade of the Lomas Rishi Cave, from a Photograph - - - 39 

„ 4. Lomas Rishi Cave -------41 

„ 5. Sudama Cave - - - - - -- -41 

„ 6. Kondiwte Cave," Salsette - - - - - - 42 

„ 7. Plan Son Bhandar Caves, from Cunningham's Report, vol. iii. - - 46 

„ 8. Section Son Bhandar Caves, from Cunningham's Report, vol. iii. - 46 

„ 9. Front of Son Bhandar Cave, from a Photograph - - 46 

„ 10. Representation of a Hall, from Cunningham's Stupa at Bbarhut - 47 

„ 11. Plan and Section Sita Marhi Cave - - - 52 

„ 12. Tiger Cave, Udayagiri, from a drawing by Capt. Kittoe - 69 

„ 13. Plan of Ananta Cave - - - - - - -71 

„ 14. Trisula from Armravati - - - - - - 73 

„ 1 5. Trisula and Shield from Sanchi - - - - - - 74 

„ 16. Pilaster from Ananta Cave - - - - - - 74 

„ 17. Lower Storey, Rani ka Nur, from Plan by C. C. Locke - - 77 

„ 18. Upper Storey, RAni ka Nur - - - - - - 77 

„ 19. Diagram Section of the Rani k & Nur - - - - - 79 

„ 20. Ganesa Gumpha -.--...87 

„ 21. Pillar in the Ganesa Gumpha, from a Sketch by the Author - - 87 

„ 22. Yavana warrior, from the Rani ka Nur - - - . - 94 

„ 23. View of the Undavilli Cave, from a Photograph - - - 97 

„ 24. Section of the Cndavilli Cave, from a Drawing by Mr. Peters - - 100 

„ 25. General View of the Rathus Mah&vallipur, from a Sketch by the Author 112 

„ 26. View of the Ganesa Ratha, from a Photograph - - - - 114 

M 27. Draupadi's Ratha, from a Photograph - - - - - 116 

„ 28. Plan of Bhima's Ratha, from a plan by R. Chisholm - - - 118 

„ 29. Pillar from Bhima's Ratha, from a Drawing by R. Chisholm - - 119 

„ 80. Lycian Rock-cut Tomb, from a Drawing by Forbes and Spratta, Lycia - 120 

„ 31. Plan of Dharmaraja's Ratha, from a Drawing by R. Chisholm - - 123 

„ 32. View of Dharmaraja's Ratha, from a Photograph ... 124 

„ 83. Elevation of Dharmaraja's Ratha, Mahavallipur, from a Drawing by R. 

Chisholm - - - - - - - - 125 

„ 34. Section of Dharmaraja Ratha, with the suggested internal arrangements 

dotted in-------- 127 

„ 35. Burmese Tower at Buddha Gaya, from a Photograph - 134 



Xll LIST OF WOODCDTS. 

Page 

No. 36. Plan of Sahadera's Hatha, from a Drawing by R. Chisholm • . 186 

„ 37. Plan of Temple at Aihole ...... 186 

„ 38. View of Sahadeva's Ratha, from a Photograph - - - ■ . 187 

„ 39. Conventional elevation of the front of a cell, from a Sculpture at 

Jamalgiri ........ i3g 

„ 40. Front of Cave at Saliwankuppain, from a Photograph - - - 154 

„ 41. Head of NagA Raja, from Great Bas-relief at Mahavallipur - ■ 157 

„ 42. Capital from Cave XXIV. at Ajanta, from a Photograph - - 157 

„ 42. Rail from Sanchi, Tope No. 2 - - - - - - 173 

„ 43. Capital or Tee of Rock-cut Dagoba at Bhaja, from a Photograph - 227 

,, 44. Plan of the Bedaft Caves - - - - - - 228 

„ 45. Capital of Pillar in front of Bedsa, from a Photograph ■ ■ - 229 

„ 46. View of the Interior of the Chaitya Cave at Karle, from a Photograph - 233 

„ 47. Facade of Chaitya Cave at Karle, from a Sketch by J. F. - - 236 

„ 48. Iaon Pillar at Karle, from a Drawing - - - • • 289 

„ 49. Pillar in Nabapona Cave, Nasik, from a Photograph ... 269 

„ 50. Pillar in Gautamiputra Cave, Nasik, No. Ill, from a Photograph - 269 

„ 51. View of exterior of the Chaitya Cave at Nasik, from a Photograph - 273 

„ 52. Chhadanta Elephant, from Cave XVI. ----- 287 

„ 53. Front aisle in Cave XVL at Ajanta - 304 

„ 54. King paying homage to Buddha ..... 307 

„ 55. Buddha Teaching, from a wall painting in Owe XVI. - - - 308 

„ 56. Asita and Buddha - - - - - - - 308 

„ 57. The young Siddartha drawing the bow ----- 308 

„ 58. Figures flying through the air - - - - - - 810 

„ 59. Buddha and the Elephant - - - - - - 811 

„ 60. Wall painting in Cave No. XVII, Ajanta - - - - 312 

„ 61. Landing of Vijaya in Ceylon, nud his Coronation, from Cave XVII. - 314 

„ 62. Capital of Pillar representing Tree Worship, from the Chaitya Cave at 

Kanheri ........ 350 

„ 63. Screen in front of Chaitya Cave at Kanheri - - - - 351 

„ 64. Padm&pani, from a Nepalese Drawing ----- 857 

„ C5. Great Vihara at Bagh, from a Plan by Dr. Impey - - - 865 

„ 66. Facade of the Viswakarroa Cave at Elura - - - - 378 

„ 67. Caves at Dhamnar, from a plan by General Cunningham - - 894 

„ 68. Bhimburde Cave, from a Drawing by T. Daniell - - - 426 

„ 69. View of Kailasa from the West, from a Sketch by Jas. F. - - 449 

„ 70. Rock-cut Temple at Dhamnar, from a Plan by General Cunningham - 463 

„ 71. Pillar in Cave at ElephantA, from a Photograph - - - 467 

„ 72. Notre Dame de la Misericorde, Mandapeswar - - - - 481 

„ 73. Sri, Consort of Vishnu - - - - - - - 524 



PREFACE. 



In the year 1843 I read a paper to the Royal Asiatic Society on 
the Rock-Cut Temples of India, 1 in which I embodied the results 
obtained during several journeys I had undertaken between the 
years 1836 and 1842 for the purpose of investigating their history 
and forms, together with those of the other architectural antiquities 
of India. It was the first attempt that had then been made to treat 
the subject as a whole. Many monographs of individual temples or 
of groups, had from time to time appeared, but no general descrip- 
tion, pointing out the characteristic features of cave architecture 
had then been attempted, nor was it indeed possible to do so, before 
the completion of the first seven volumes of " Journal of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal " in 1838. The marvellous ingenuity which their 
editor James Prinsep displayed, in these volumes, in deciphering the 
inscriptions of Asoka and other hitherto unread documents, and the 
ability with which Tumour, Kittoe, and others who were inspired 
by his zeal, hastened to aid in his researches, revolutionised the 
whole character of Indian archaeology. The history of Buddha and 
of early Buddhism, which before had been mythical and hazy in the 
extreme, now became clear and intelligible and based on recognized 
facts. The relation, too, of Brahmanism and the other Hindu 
religions to Buddhism and to each other were now for the first 
time settled, on a basis that was easily understood and admitted of 
a logical superstructure raised upon it. 

"When all this was done the remaining task was easy. It only 
required that some one should visit the various localities where the 
caves were situated, and apply, the knowledge so amassed, to their 
classification. For this purpose I visited the eastern caves at Katak 
and Mahavallipur, as well as those of Ajanta, Elura, Karld, Kanheri, 

1 Journal of the Eoyal Asiatic Society, vol. viii., pp. 30 to 92, and afterwards 
republished with a folio volume of eighteen lithographic plates from my own sketches of 
the caves. 



XIV PRBKLC8B. 

Elephanta, and others in the west, and found no difficulty in Beeing 
at a glance, to what religion each was dedicated, and as little in 
ascertaining their relative ageB among themselves. A great deal 
has been done since by new discoveries and further investigations to 
fill up the cartoon I then ventured to sketch in, but the correct- 
ness of its main, outlines have never been challenged and remain 
undisturbed. 

One of the first works to appear after mine was the " Historical 
Researches " of Dr. Bird, published in Bombay in 1847," 1 but which 
from various causes — more especially the imperfection of the illus- 
trations — was most disappointing. Though this has been almost the 
only other work going over the same ground, the interest exoited 
on the subject, led to the formation of a Cave Commission in Bombay 
in 1848 * for the purpose of investigating the history of the caves 
and taking measures for their preservation. One of the first fruits 
of their labour was the production, in August 1850, of a Memoir on 
the subject by the late Dr. "Wilson, in the introductory paragraph to 
which he made the following statement, which briefly summarises 
what was then proposed to be done : — 

" The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland having, on the 
suggestion of James Fergusson, Esq., to whom we are so much indebted 
for the artistic and critical illustration of the architectural antiquities of 
India, represented to the Court of Directors of the East India Company the 
propriety of taking steps for the preservation, as far as possible, of the Cave 
Temples and other ancient religious memorials of this countay, and for their 
fall delineation and description, before the work of their decay and destruction 

1 Dr. Bird, in the preface to his Historical Researches, says : — 
" The Coort of Directors have at length responded to the Royal Asiatic Society's 
representation of the doty imposed on us, as a nation, to preserve the relics of ancient 
art, and hare accordingly sent out orders to each presidency that measures be adopted 
to keep them from farther decay. They are also about to institute an Arcbjeological 
Commission for investigating the architectural character and age of the several monu- 
ments; an inquiry which, though long neglected, and left to other nations, less 
interested than ourselves in India, is likely to aid in dispelling the mist which for 
centuries has enveloped the historical age of these excavations and the object of their 
structure." 

* The Bombay Cave-Temple Commsssion consisted of the Bev. Dr. J. Wilson, 
F.&&, President; Bev. Dr. Stevenson, Vice President; C. J. Erskine, C.S.j Capt. 
Lynch, I. N. ; Dr. J. Harkness ; Venavak Gangadhar Shastri ; and Dr. H. J. Carter, 
Secretary, and was appointed in terms of a resolution (No. 2606) of 81st July 1848 of 
the Government of Bombay. 



PREFACE. XV 

has made further progress, that honourable body has promptly responded to 
the -call which has been addressed to it, and already taken certain steps for 
the accomplishment of the objects which are so much to be desired. 1 With 
reference to the latter of these objects, it has determined to appoint a general 
Commission of Orientalists to direct its accomplishment in the way which 
may best tend to the illustration of the history, literature, religion, and art 
of ancient India. Preparatory to the commencement of the labours of that 
Commission, and the issuing of instructions for its researches, another of a 
local character has, with the approbation of the Government of India, been 
formed by the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society to make such 
preliminary inquiries about the situation and extent and general character of 
the antiquities, which are to be the subject of investigation, as may facilitate 
its judicious commencement and prosecution." 2 

This first Memoir was prepared by Dr. Wilson for the Bombay 
Cave Commission just referred to, in order to sketch the extent of 
the information then available on the subject, and to call forth 
additions from persons possessed of special local knowledge. 

In September 1852 he read to the same Society his Second Memoir, 
containing Bhort notices of the Aurangabad Caves and of a few 
others that had been brought to light during the preceding two 
years. 

Previous to this, about July 1851, Lieutenant Brett had been 

employed to take facsimiles of the inscriptions from the caves, a 

work strongly commended in the Court's despatch No. 13 of 4th 
May 1853. Reduced copies were made to accompany Dr. Steven- 
son's papers on the inscriptions, 8 but Lieutenant Brett s engagement 
was closed about the end of 1853, and his original copies were sent 
to England. In April 1856, Vishnu Shastri Bapat was engaged to 
continue Lieutenant Brett's work, and having some knowledge of 
the ancient characters and of Sanskrit, it was expected he would be 
serviceable in preparing translations also. Besults were promised 
from time to time, but delayed till September 1860, when it was 
reported that the Pandit had translated 88 inscriptions into Marathf ; 
but he died next year, and no results of his work were ever pub- 



1 Despatches No. 15 of 29th May 1844, No. 1 of 27th January 1847, and No. 24 
of 29th September 1847 ; also despatch of Lord Hardinge, No. 4 of 19th April 
1847. 

* Jottr. Bom. B. R. At. Soe. voL iii. pt. ii. p. 86. 

* Jour. Bom. B. R. As. Soe., voL t. 

Y18>. b 



XVI PREFACE. 

lished ; while the Commission itself ceased to exist early in 1861. 
It had, however, stirred up officers in different parts of the country 
to send in accounts of the antiquities in their districts, and among 
these the contributions of Sir Bartle Frere, Captain Meadows Taylor, 
Dr. B. Impey, Dr. Bradley, Sir W. Elliot, Mr. West, and others 
were valuable additions to our knowledge. At its instigation, also, 
the caves at Ajanta, Aurangabad, and Elephanta were cleared of 
accumulations of earth and silt. 

The fresco paintings in the Buddhist caves at Ajanta being of 
very special interest, Captain Robert Gill was appointed by the 
Madras Government to make copies of them in oils. The work 
was one of considerable labour, but in the course of eight or ten 
years he sent home full-size copies of about thirty fresco paintings, 
many of them of very large size. The greater number of these 
paintings were exhibited in the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, where 
they were most unfortunately destroyed by fire in 1866. Five of 
them only escaped, having remained in the stores belonging to the 
India Office, and consequently were not exhibited. 

From the time that Major Gill had been first appointed to copy 
them, till the destruction of his work, much of the fresco painting 
in the caves had fallen off or been destroyed. Still sufficient was 
left to make it desirable to secure fresh copies of what still 
remained, and in 1873 Mr. Griffiths, of the School of Art in Bombay, 
was engaged to make fresh copies. He has already spent three 
seasons at Ajanta with some of his students, and has copied, with 
great fidelity, a considerable number of the fragments that still 
remain in a sufficiently perfect state, to make it worth while to 
reproduce them. 1 

Meanwhile the Secretary of State for India in Council in a 
despatch, dated in November 1870, proposed a survey of the 
architectural antiquities of "Western India, and especially of the 
Cave-temples ; but no progress was made till 1873, when the 
Hon. J. Gibbs, C.S., prepared a minute on the subject in which 
he sketched a scheme for the Archaeological Survey, and to him 
chiefly belongs the credit of carrying into effect the objects of the 
despatch. 

The drawings for this work have been collected during the 

1 These copies are now in this country, principally in the British Museum, and a 
small portion in the India Museum, South Kensington. 



PREFACE. XVU 

six seasons since the Archasological Survey of "Western India was 
commenced, and some of them, ■with others not reproduced here, 
have appeared in the three yolumes of reports already published. 
There is, however, a very large collection of careful drawings 
illustrative of many details of sculpture, especially at Ajanta and 
Elura, which could not be reproduced in this work ; a and it is hoped 
a further selection from them may form a prominent feature in, if 
it does not constitute, the next volume of the Survey Reports. 2 If 
presented on a sufficiently large scale, these drawings would be most 
interesting to all engaged in the practice of art, as well as to all 
amateurs. With the frescoes of Ajanta and Bagh, and perhaps a 
very few other additions, .they would form a very complete illus- 
tration of Buddhist art in sculpture, architecture, and painting 
from the third before our era to the eighth century after it. 

One of the objects proposed at the time this survey was sanctioned 
was, that I, conjointly with Mr. Burgess, should, when the proper 
time arrived, write a general history of Cave Architecture in India. 
A scheme for this work was submitted to the Duke of Argyll, then 
Secretary of State for India, and sanctioned by his Grace in ] 871 . 
In order to carry this into effect Mr. Burgess remained at home, in 
Edinburgh, during the season 1877-78 to write his part, which forms 
practically the second part of this book ; but, owing to various causes 
it is not necessary to enumerate here, the whole of his part was not 
set up in type till just before his return to India in October last. 
The whole of my share, which forms practically the first part, was 
ready at the same time, and we were thus able to exchange parts 
and go over the whole together before his departure, and I was left 
to " make up " the whole and pass it through the press, which I 
have done during the past winter. 

1 After this work had been almost wholly written Dr. Ed. W. West and his brother 
Mr. Arthur A. West placed in my hands a very large collection of notes and drawings 
from the Rock-Temples of the Bombay Presidency, collected and prepared by them 
whilst in India, with full permission to make any use I chose of them. I have used 
one of these plans and part of another, but I still hope to examine them more carefully 
and perhaps to make further use of so valuable a collection. — J.B. 

2 Three volumes of Reports of the Survey and a collection of 286 Pali Sanskrit and 
old Canarese inscriptions have already been published. The Report* contain accounts 
of the Cave Temples at Badonii, in Kathi&war, at Dbarsinva, Karusa, Amba, and 
Aurangabad. Accounts of other groups had also appeared either separately or in the 
Indian Antiquary. 



XVUl PREFACE. 

This arrangement, though inevitable under the circumstances, 
has, I fear, been in some respects unfavourable to the unif ormity 
of the work. There is little doubt that if Mr. Burgess had been 
at home and in daily communication with me during the time the 
■work "was passing through the press, many points of detail might 
have been discussed and elaborated with more completeness than 
has been possible at a distance. There is, however, really nothing 
of importance on whioh we were not agreed before his departure. 
Had this not been the case, a better plan would probably have 
been to postpone indefinitely the appearance of the book. Had I 
been a younger man, I might possibly have recommended this 
course, especially if I had felt confidont that the Indian Government 
would at any future period have sanctioned the necessary outlay. 
The abolition, however, of the establishment at Peckham, the dis- 
persion of the India Museum, and other symptoms of economy 
in matters relating to literature and art, seem to render it ex- 
pedient to proceed while there is the opportunity. 

Supposing these personal difficulties had not existed, the work 
might certainly have been made more perfect if its publication had 
been delayed till the survey was complete, or at least more nearly 
so than it now is. At present our knowledge of the subject is 
rapidly progressive, and anything like completeness is consequently 
impossible. Sinoe, for instanoe, Mr. Burgess' return to India in 
Ootober last, two facts have been brought to light which have 
revolutionised our chronology of the old pre-Christian caves in the 
west, and gives our knowledge of them a precision that was not 
before attainable. One of these iB the discovery of inscriptions in 
the Mauryan character (they have not yet been deciphered) in the 
caves at Pitalkhora. The other the discovery of the very old 
Vih&ra at Bhaja, described in the Appendix. With two Buch dis- 
coveries in one reason there is every probability that others of great 
if not of equal importance may be made, and give the history of 
the western caves a precision it cannot now pretend to possess. 

One of the weak points in the chronology of the western caves 
arises from our inability to fix the dates of the Andhrabhritya kings, 
but in his last letter Mr. Burgess informs me that he has collected 
an immense number of inscriptions at Karlg and elsewhere, which 
he is examining with the assistance of Mr. Fleet, Dr. Biihler, and 
the Pandits, and he hopes to make even this point quite dear. 



PREFACE. XIX 

In fact, if the survey is carried on for another couple of years, 
which I earnestly hope and trust it will be, and with the same suc- 
cess which has hitherto attended its operations, there will not be a 
single cave in Western India whose date and destination may not be 
ascertained with all the requisite certainty, nor any antiquities of 
importance in the Bombay presidency that will not have been inves- 
tigated and described. Meanwhile, however, the present work may, 
at all events, serve to direct attention to the subject, and to some 
extent at least, supply a want which has long been felt by those 
interested in Indian archaeology. 

In order that readers may know exactly what part each of us 
took in the preparation of this book, it may be as well to explain 
that I wrote the whole of the first part (pp. 161), with the intention 
that it should serve as a general introduction to the whole, but at 
the same time Mr. Burgess contributed a certain number of pages, 
between 5 and 10 per cent, of the whole, even in this part. 

In like manner the whole of the second part has been written 
by Mr. Burgess (pp. 162 to 512), but during its passage through 
the press I have interpolated even a greater proportion of pages on 
the various subjects of which it treats. Thus, as I have no reason 
to suppose there is any difference of opinion on any material point, 
the work may fairly be considered a combined production, for the 
whole of which we are jointly and severally responsible. I selected 
the whole of the woodcuts, and all the new ones were executed under 
my superintendence by Mr. Cooper. The whole of the plates, except 
the first, are reduced copies of a few from among the mass of 
draAvings prepared by Mr. Burgess and his assistants during the 
progress of the survey, and were specially selected by him for this 
Avork to supply a want that had long been felt. At the present 
day photographs and sketches of almost all the caves can be had by 
anyone who will take the trouble to collect them, but correct planB 
and architectural details, drawn to scale, can only be procured by 
persons who have time at their disposal, and instruments and assist- 
ants which are only available for such a survey as that conducted by 
Mr. Burgess. The plates have been very carefully executed in 
photo-lithography by Mr. Griggs, under Mr. Burgess' superintend- 
ence, and serve to place our knowledge of the cave architecture 
of Western India on a scientific basis never before attainable. 

The woodcuts of the Raths at Mahavallipur are taken from a 
beautiful series of drawings of these curious monoliths prepared for 

Y 182 



XX PREFACE. 

me, at his own expense, by Mr. R. Ckisholm, of the Public Works 
Department at Madras. I only regret that owing to various un- 
toward delays they reached me so late that I was not able to avail 
myself of them to a greater extent than I have done. 

Jambs Fergusson. 
20, Langham Place, 

March 1880. 



NOTE. 

A word should be said about the mode of spelling Indian names 
adopted in this work. The rules recently adopted by Government 
for spelling names of places, and for the transliteration of Sanskrit 
and other Indian words, have generally been adhered to, but well 
established names have not often been interfered with. Where, how- 
ever, they have been spelt in a variety of ways, — and what Indian 
name has not ? — as Iloura, Yeloora, Elura, Elora, Ellorah, Elloora, 
Veroola, &c., a compromise approximating to the local pronunciation 
has been used, as Elura, or the vernacular name has been adopted in 
Romanised form, with the broad or long sounds of vowel letters 
marked by a circumflex or caret, as Bhaja, Karle, Stupa, &c. The 
cerebral letters t, d, th, dh, n, need not disturb though they hardly 
convey much meaning to the English readers. They are the hard 
sounds of these letters and in constant use in our own language ; 
r has been used freely for d, as to many ears the sounds approxi- 
mate closely, being formed with the tip of the tongue on the palate, 
and s has a decidedly more delicate aspiration than sh. 

Adjectivals are formed in the Indian language by lengthening the 
vowels, thus from Siva is formed the word Saiva, denoting anything 
relating to Siva or a member of the sect devoted to him ; so from 
Vishnu is f ormed Vaishnava ; from Buddha — Bauddha ; from Jina — 
Jama ; and from Sakti — Sakta. " Buddhist " has, however, been 
generally used throughout this work instead of Bauddha, as it has 
from long use become so much more familiar to English ears than 
its more correct Indian synonym. — J.B. 



THE CAVE TEMPLES OF INDIA. 



PART I. 



THE EASTERN CAVES. 



INTRODUCTION" 



Prom the earliest period at which the mention of India dawns 
upon ns, among the records of the past, her name has been sur- 
rounded by a halo of poetic mystery, which even the research and 
familiarity of modern times, have as yet failed to entirely dispel. 
Of her own history she tells us but little, and it was only in com- 
paratively modern times, when she came into contact with the 
more prosaic nations of the outer world, that we learned much 
regarding her former existence. So far as is at present known, 
no mention of India has yet been discovered among the records of 
Egypt or Assyria. No conquest of her country is recorded in the 
hieroglyphics that adorn the Temples of Thebes, nor been de- 
cyphered among the inscriptions on the walls of the palaces of Nineveh. 
It is even yet uncertain whether the Ophir or Tarshish to which the 
shipsof Solomon traded and" brought back gold, and ivory, and algum 
" trees, and apes, and peacocks," can be considered as places in India, 
rather than some much nearer localities in Arabia or Africa. The 
earlier Greek writers had evidently no distinct ideas on the subject, 
and confounded India with Ethiopia in a manner that is very 
perplexing. It was not, in fact, till the time of the glorious raid 
of Alexander the Great, that the East and the West came practi- 
cally into contact, and we obtain any distinct accounts, on which 
reliance can be placed, regarding that land which before his time 
was, to his countrymen, little more than a mythic dream. Fortu-: 
nately, as we now know, the visit of the Greeks occurred at one of 
the most interesting periods of Indian history. It was just when 
the old Vedic period was passing away, to give place to the new 
Buddhist epoch ; when that religion was rising to the surface, which 
for nearly 1,000 years continued to be the prevailing faith of northern 
India, at least. Though after that period it disappeared from the 
land where it originated, it still continues to influence all the forms 
of religious belief in the surrounding countries, to the present day. 

The gleam of light which the visit of the Greeks shed on the in- 
ternal state of India, though brilliant, was transitory. Before the 

Y182. WI.P801. A 2 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

great Mauryan dynasty which they found, or which they placed, on 
the throne of central India had passed away, her history relapsed, 
as before, into the same confused, undated, record of faineant kings, 
which continued almost down to the Moslem conquest, a tangle and 
perplexity to all investigators. It is only in rare instances that the 
problems it presents admit of a certain solution, while the records 
of the past, as they existed at the time when the Greeks visited the 
country, were, as may well be supposed, even more shadowy than 
they became in subsequent ages. 

It is so strange that a country so early and so extensively civilised 
as India was, should have no written chronicles, that the causes 
that led to this strange omission deserve more attention than has 
hitherto been bestowed on the subject by the learned in Europe. 
The fact is the more remarkable, as Egypt on the one hand and China 
on the other, were among the most careful of all nations in recording 
dates and chronicling the actions of their earlier kings, and they did 
this notwithstanding all the difficulties of their hieroglyphic or 
symbolic writing, while India seems to have possessed an alphabet 
from an early date, which ought to have rendered her records easy 
to keep and still more easy to preserve. There seems in fact to 
be no intelligible cause why the annals of ancient India should 
not be as complete and satisfactory as those of any other country 
in a similar state of civilisation, unless it lies in the poetic tem- 
perament of its inhabitants, and the strange though picturesque 
variety of the races who dwell within her boundaries, but whose 
manifold differences seem .at all times to have been fatal to that 
unity which alone can produce greatness or stability among nations. 

All this is the more strange, for, looked at on the map, India 
appears one of the most homogeneous and perfectly denned coun- 
tries in the world. On the east, the ocean and impenetrable jungles 
shut her out from direct contact with the limitrophe nations on 
that side, while in the north the Himalayas forms a practically 
impassible barrier against the inhabitants of the Thibetan plains. 
On the west the ocean and the valley of the Indus equally mark the 
physical features which isolate the continent of India, and mark 
her out as a separate self-contained country. Within these boun- 
daries there are no great barriers, no physical features, that divide 
the land into separate well defined provinces, in which we might 
expect different races to be segregated under different forms of 



ETHNOGRAPHY. O 

government. There seems certainly no physical reason why India, 
like China, should not always have been one country, and governed, 
at least, at times, by one dynasty. Yet there is no record of any such 
event in her annals. ASoka, in the third century B.C., may have 
united the whole of the north of India under his sway, but nothing 
of the sort seems again to have occurred till nearly 2,000 years 
afterwards, when the Moguls under Akbar and Aurangzib nearly 
accomplished what it has been left for us, to carry practically into 
effect. During the interval, India seems to have been divided into 
five great divisions, nearly corresponding to our five presidencies, 
existing as separate kingdoms and ruled by different kings, each 
supreme over a host of minor kinglets or chiefs, among whom the 
country was divided. At times, one of the sovereigns, of one of the 
five Indias, was acknowledged as lord paramount, nominally at least, 
but the country never was united as a whole, capable of taking a 
place among the great monarchies of the earth, and making its 
influence felt among surrounding nations. It never, indeed, was 
so organised as to be capable of resisting any of the invaders who 
from time to time forced the boundary of the Indus, and poured 
their hordes into her fertile and much-coveted plains. It is, indeed, 
to this great fact that we owe all that wonderful diversity of peoples 
we find in India, and, whether for good or for evil, render the popu- 
lation of that country as picturesquely various, as that of China is 
tamely uniform. It is this very variety, however, that renders it so 
difficult for even those who have long studied the question, on the 
spot, to master the problem in all its complexity of detail. It un- 
fortunately, too, becomes, in consequence, almost impossible to con- 
vey to those who have not had these advantages, any clear ideas 
on the subject, which is nevertheless both interesting and instruc- 
tive, though difficult and complex, and requiring more study than 
most persons are able or inclined to bestow upon it. 

Ethnography. 

The great difficulty of writing anything very clear or consecutive 
regarding Indian ethnography or art arises principally from the fact 
that India was never inhabited by one, but in all historical times, by 
at least three distinct and separate races of mankind. These occa- 
sionally existed and exist in their original native purity, but at 
others are mixed together and commingled in varying proportions 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

to such an extent as almost to defy analysis, and to render it almost 
impossible at times to Bay what belongs to one raoe, what to 
another. Notwithstanding this, the main outlines of the case are 
tolerably clear, and can be easily grasped to an extent at least suffi- 
cient to explain the artistic development of the various styles of art, 
that existed in former times in various parts of the country. 

When the Aryans, descending from the plateau of central Asia, 
first crossed the InduB to occupy the plains of the Panjab, they 
found the country occupied by a race of men apparently in a very 
low state of civilisation. These they easily subdued, calling them 
Dasyus, 1 and treated as their name implies as a subject or slave 
population. In the more fertile parts of the country, where the 
Aryans established themselves, they probably in the course of time 
assimilated this native population with themselves, to a great degree 
at least. They still however exist in the hills between Silhet and 
Asam, and throughout the Central Provinces, as nearly in a state of 
nature * as they could have existed When the Aryans first intruded on 
their domains, and drove the remnants of them into the hills and 
jungle fastnesses, where they are still to be found. "Whoever they were 
these Dasyus may be considered as the aboriginal population of 
India. At least we have no knowledge whence they came nor when. 
But all their affinities seem to be with the Himalayan and trans- 
Himalayan races, and they seem to have spread over the whole of 
what we now know as the province of Bengal, though how far they 
ever extended towards Cape Comorin we have now no means of 
knowing. 

The second of these great races are the Drcmdicms, who now 
occupy the whole of the southern part of the peninsula, as far 
north at least as the Krishna river, and at times their existence can 
be traced in places almost up to the Nerbudda, It has been clearly 
made out by the researches of Bishop Caldwell * and others that they 
belong to the great Twramiom family of mankind, and have affinities 
with the Finns and other races who inhabit the countries almost up 
to the shores of the North Sea. It is possible also that it may be 

1 Confr. V. de St Martin, Geog. du Veda, pp. 82, 99. 

• Gen. Dalton, Detcriptive Ethnography of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), is by far the 
best and most exhaustive work on the subject. 

8 Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian or South Indian Family of Language! 
by Bishop Caldwell, 2nd edit, 1875. 



ETHNOGRAPHY. 7 

found that they are allied to the Aocadian races who formed the sub- 
Btratum of the population in Babylonia in very ancient times. It is 
not however known when they first entered India, nor by what road. 
Generally it is supposed that it was across the Lower Indus, because 
affinities have been traced between their language and that of the 
Brahwis, who occupy a province of Baluchistan. It may be, however, 
that the Brahuis are only an outlying portion of the ancient inhabi- 
tants of Mesopotamia, and may never have had any direct communi- 
cation further east. Certain it is that neither they nor any of the 
Drayidian families have any tradition of their having entered India 
by this road, and they have left no traces of their passage in Sindh 
or in any of the countries to the north of the Nerbudda or Taptee. 
On the other hand, it seems so improbable that they could have 
come by sea from the Persian Gulf in sufficient numbers to have 
peopled the large tract that they now occupy, that we must hesitate 
before adopting such an hypothesis. When their country is first 
mentioned in the traditions on which the Bdmdyana is based, it seems 
to have been an uncultivated forest, and its inhabitants in a low state 
of civilisation. 1 In the time of Asoka, however (b.c. 250), we learn 
from his inscriptions, confirmed by the testimony of classical authors, 
that the Dravidians had settled into that triarchy of kingdoms, the 
Ch61a, Chdra, and Pandya, which endured till very recent times. 
Prom their architecture we know that these states afterwards de- 
veloped into a comparatively high state of civilisation. 

The third and by far the most illustrious and important of the 
three races were the Aryans, or Sanskrit speaking races, who may 
have entered India as long ago as 3,000 years ' before the Christian 
era. 8 In the course of time— it may have taken them 2,000 years to 
effect it — they certainly occupied the whole of India north of the 
Yindhya mountains, as far as the shores of the Bay of Bengal, entirely 

1 Bee Indian Antiquary, voL viii. pp. 1-10. 

* Confr. V. de St. Martin, Gtog. du Veda, p. 9. 

* I have always looked upon it as probable that the era 3101 years before Christ, 
which the Aryans adopt as the Era of the Kali Yug, may be a true date murking 
some important epoch in their history. But whether this was the passage of the Indus 
in their progress eastward, or some other important epoch in their earlier history, it 
seems impossible now to determine. It may, however, be only a factitious epoch arrived 
at by the astronomers, computing backwards to a general conjunction of the planets, 
which they seem to have believed took place at that time. Colebrooke's Etsays, voL i., 
p. 201 ; vol. iL, pp. 867, 416. 



8 INTKODUCTION. 

superseding the native Dasyus and driving the Dravidians, if t&ey 
ever ocoupied any part of the northern country, into the southern 
portion, or what is now known as the Madras Presidency. There 
never was any attempt, so far as is known, on the part of the Aryans 
to exterminate the original inhabitants of the land. They seem on 
the contrary to have used them as herdsmen or cultivators of the soil, 
but they superseded their religion by their own higher and purer faith, 
and obliterated, by their superiority, all traces of any peculiar civi- 
lisation they may have possessed. At the same time, though they 
never seem to have attempted physically, to conquer or colonise the 
south, they did so intellectually. Colonies of Brahmans from the 
northern parts of India introduced the literature and religion of the 
Aryans into the country of the Dravidians, and thus produced a 
uniformity of culture, which at first sight looks like a mingling of 
race. Fortunately their architecture and their arts enable us to 
detect at a glance how essentially different they were, and have 
always remained. Notwithstanding this, the intellectual superiority 
of the Aryans made so marked an impression during long ages on 
their less highly organised Turanian neighbours in the south, that 
without some such material evidence to the contrary, it might be 
contended that the fusion was complete. 

There are no doubt many instances where families and even tribes 
of each of these three races still remain in India, keeping apart from 
the rest, and retaining the purity of their blood to a wonderful 
extent. But as a rule they are so mixed in locality and so com- 
mingled in blood, that it is extremely difficult, at times, to define the 
limits of relationship that may exist between any one of the various 
peoples of India with those among whom they are residing. Their 
general relationships are felt by those who are familiar with the sub- 
ject, but in the present state of our knowledge it is almost impossible 
to define and reduce them into anything like a scientific classifi- 
cation, and it certainly is not necessary to attempt anything of the 
sort in this place. The main features of Indian ethnography are 
distinct and easily comprehended, so that there is little difficulty in 
following them, and they are so distinctly marked in the architecture 
and religion of the people, that they mutually illustrate each other 
with sufficient clearness, for our present purposes at least. No one, 
for instance, at all familiar with the subject, can fail to recognise 
at a glance the many-storeyed pyramidal temples of the DravidiansT 



HIST0KY. 9 

and to distinguish them from the curvilinear outlined towers uni- 
versally employed by the northern people, speaking languages 
derived from the Sanskrit. Nor when he has recognised these can 
he hesitate in believing that, when any given temple was erected, 
the country was either inhabited, in the one case by Dravidians, 
or by an Aryan people, more or less, it may be, mixed up with the 
blood of the native Dasyus j 1 but in either case the architecture 
marks the greater or less segregation of the race, by the purity with 
which the distinctive features of the style are carried out in each 
particular instance. 

Histoey. 

From the Greek historians we learn that at the time of Alexander 
the falsification of Indian history had only gone the length of dupli- 
cation. If we assume the Kaliyug, 3101 B.C., to represent the 
first immigration of the Aryans, the time that elapsed between 
that epoch and the accession of Chandragupta is, as nearly as may 
be, one half of the period, 6,042 years 8 , during which Aryan tells 
us 153 monarchs succeeded one another on the throne of India. 
As this is as nearly as may be the number of kings whose names 
are recorded in the Puranas, we may fairly assume that the lists 
we now possess are the same as those which were submitted to the 
Greeks, while as according to this theory the average of each king's 
reign was little more than 18 years, there is no inherent improbability 
in the statement. It is more difficult to understand the historian 
when he goes on to say, " During all this time the Indians had only 
the liberty of being governed by their own laws twice. First for 
about 300 years, and after that for 120." s If this means that at 
two different epochs during these 30 or rather 28 centuries the 
Dasyus had asserted their independence it would be intelligible 
enough. It may have been so. They had, however, no literature of 
their own, and could not consequently record the fact, and their 
Brahmanical masters were hardly likely to narrate this among the 
very few historical events they deign to record. If, however, it should 
turn out to be so, it is the one fact in Dasyu ancient history that has 
come down to our days. 

1 See History of Indian Architecture, p. 210 et jey, 319 et teq. in passim. 
* Jndiea, chap. ix. * Loc. cit. 



10 INTBODU0TI0N. 

The ancient history of the Dravidian race is nearly as barren 

as that of the Dasyus. It is true we hare long lists of names 

of Pandyan kings, but when they commenoe is extremely doubtful. 

There is no one king in any of the lists whose date can be fixed 

within a century, nor any event reoorded connected with any of these 

faineant kings which can be considered as certain. It is not indeed 

till inscriptions and buildings come to our aid after the 5th or 6th 

century of our era, that anything like history dawns upon us. 

Between that time and the 10th or 11th century we can grope our 

way with tolerable certainty, and by the aid of synchronisms with the 

other dynasties obtain a fair knowledge of what was passing in the 

south some 8 or 10 centuries ago. 1 

Though all this is most unsatisfactory from an historical point of 
view, it fortunately is of comparatively little consequence for the 
purposes of this work. It does not appear that the Dravidians ever 
adopted the Buddhist religion, to any extent at least, and never 
certainly were excavators of caves. The few examples that exist 
in their country, such as those at TJndavalli and Mahavallipur, 
are quite exceptional, and though extremely interesting from that 
very cause, would hardly be more so, if we knew more of the history 
of the gr eat dynasties of the country in which they are situated. 
They are not the expression of any national impulse, but the works 
of some local dynasties impelled to erect them under some excep- 
tional circumstances, we do not now know, and may never be quite 
able to understand. 

"We are thus for our history thrown back on the great Aryan 
Sanskrit-speaking race of northern India, and for our present purposes 
need not trouble ourselves to investigate the history of the long line 
of Solar kings. These from their first advent held sway in Ayodhya 
(the modern Oudh), till the time of the MaM Bhcvrata when, about 12 
centuries before the Christian era, they were forced to make way to 
their younger but less pure cousins of the Lunar line. Even then 
we may confine our researches to the rise of the Sisunaga dynasty 
in the 7th century B.C., as it was under one of the earlier kings of 
this dynasty that Sakya Muni was born about 560 B.C., and with 
this event our architectural history practically begins. 

It is fortunate we may be spared this long investigation, for evert 
the much lauded Vedas, though invaluable from a philological or 

1 Wilson, Essay J. R. A. $., vol.- Hi. p. 199, et seq. 



HISTORY. 11 

ethnographic point of view, are absolutely worthless in so far as 
chronology and history are concerned, while the Epics on which 
the bulk of our knowledge of the ancient history of India is based, 
present it in so poetic a garb that it is difficult to extract the small re- 
siduum of fact its passioned strophes may contain. For the rest of our 
ancient history we are forced to depend on the Purdnas, which have 
avowedly been falsified in order to present the history subsequently 
tO the Mahabharata or great wars of the Pandus as a prophecy 
delivered by the sage Vyasa who lived contemporaneously with that 
event. In this case it happens that a prophecy written after the 
events it describes, is nearly as unreliable, as writings of the same 
class, that pretend to foresee what may happen in the future. 

Had any fragments of contemporary Buddhist literature survived 
the great cataclysm that destroyed that religion in the 7th and 8th 
centuries of our era, we would probably know all that we now are 
searching for in vain. We know at all events that in the Buddhist 
island of Ceylon they kept records which when condensed into the 
history of the Mahdwamo x present a truthful and consecutive narrative 
of events. Meagre it may be, in its present form, but no doubt 
capable of almost infinite extension if the annals of the monasteries 
still exist, and were examined with care. In like manner we have 
in the half Buddhist country of Kashmir, in the Raja Tarangini the 
only work in any Indian language which, as the late Professor 
Wilson said, is entitled to be called a history. 2 If such works as 
these are to be found on the outskirts of the Buddhist kingdom, it 
can hardly be doubted that even fuller records existed in its centre. 
We have indeed indications in Hiuen Thsang 3 that in the great 
monastery of Nalanda the annals of the central kingdom of Magadha 
were in his time preserved with all the care that could be desired. 
The Chinese pilgrims, however, who visited India between the 4th and 
7th centuries were essentially priests. They came to visit the places 
sanctified by the presence and actions of the founder of their religion, 
and to gather together on the spot the traditions relating to him and 
his early disciples. Beyond this their great object was to collect the 
books containing the doctrines and discipline of the sect. Secular 
affairs and political events had no attraction for these pilgrims of 

1 Translated by the Hon. Geo. Tumour, 1 voL 4to., Colombo, 1837. 
8 Translated by Wilson, Asiatic Researches, vol. xv. p. 1, el seqq. 
* Kitten Thsang, translated by Stanislas Julien, vol. iii. p. 41, et seq. 



12 INTRODUCTION. 

the faith, and they pass them over with the most supercilious indiffe- 
renoe. It is true nevertheless that the great encyclopaedia of Ma- 
twan-lin does contain a vast amount of information regarding the 
mediaeval history of India, but as this has not yet been translated it 
is hardly available for our present purposes, 1 

Religions. 

The religions of India are even more numerous than her races, 
and at least as diffioult to describe and define, if not more so, as the 
two classes of phenomena are by no means conterminous, and often 
mix and overlap one another in a manner that is most perplexing. 
Yet the main outlines of the case are' clear enough, and may bo 
described in a very few words with sufficient clearness for our 
present purposes at all events. 

First comes, of course, the religion of the great immigrant AryaiT 
race, embodied in the hymns of the Vedas, and consequently called 
the Vedic. It seems to have been brought from the regions of Central 
Asia, and it and its modified forms were, to say the least of it, the 
dominant religion in India down to the middle of the third century 
before Ghrist. At that time Asoka adopted the religion of Buddha 
and made it the religion of the State, in the same manner that 
Constantino made Christianity the religion of the Roman world, at 
about the same distance of time from the death of its founder. 

For nearly 1,000 years Buddhism continued to be the State 
religion of the land, though latterly losing much of its purity and 
power, till the middle of the seventh century of our era, when it 
sunk, and shortly afterwards disappeared entirely, before the rising 
star of the modern Hindu form of faith. This last was a resuscita- 
tion of the old Vedic religion, or at least pretended to be founded on 



1 This was partially done by the late M. Pauthier, and his extracts republished, 
1837, iu the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. vi. p. 61, et teg., and 
Journal Asiatique, 1839; also partially by M. Stan. Julien in the Journal Atiatique 
and by M. Favre. These, however, are only meagre extracts, and not edited with the 
knowledge since acquired. There are scholars willing to undertake the task of trans- 
lation, but the difficulty is to obtain a copy of the original work. There are several 
in the British Museum, but the rules of that establishment do not admit of their 
being lent outside their walls, and as the would-be translators live at a distance, we 
must wait till this obstacle is removed before we can benefit by the knowledge we 
might thus attain. 



RELIGIONS. 1 3 

the Vedas, but bo mixed up with local superstitions, and so overlaid 
with' the worship of Siva and Vishnu, and all the 1001 gods of 
the Hindu Pantheon, that the old element is hardly recognisable in 
the present popular forms of belief. It is now the religion of 
upwards of 150,000,000 of the inhabitants of India. 

Jainism is another form of faith which sprung up contempo- 
raneously with Buddhism, and perhaps even a little earlier, for 
the date of nirvana of Makckira, the last of the Tirthankars or 
prophets of the Jains, is 526 B.C., and consequently earlier than that 
of Buddha. It never rose, however, to be either a popular or a 
State religion till after the fall of its sister faith, when in many 
parts of India it superseded Buddhism, and now, in some districts, 
takes the place that was formerly occupied by its rival. 

It would, of course, be vain to look for any written evidence of 
the religion of the Dasyus during the long period in which they 
have formed an important element in the population of Hindostan. 
They always were too illiterate to write anything themselves, and 
their masters despised them and their superstitions too thoroughly 
to record anything regarding them. What we do know is con- 
sequently only from fragments encrusted in the other and more 
advanced faiths, or from the practices of the people where they exist 
in tolerable purity in the remote districts of the country at the 
present day. From these we gather that they were Tree and Serpent 
worshippers, and their principal deity was an earth god, to whom 
they offered human sacrifices till within a very recent period. They 
seem too to have practised all kinds of fetish worship, as most men 
do, in their early and rude state of civilisation. 1 

The great interest to us, for the purposes of the present work, is, 
that if there had been no Dasyus in India, it is probable there 
would have been no Buddhist religion either there or elsewhere. 
Though Buddha himself waB an Aryan of pure Solar race, and his 

1 In his Hibbert Lectures Professor Max Miiller points out with perfect correctness, 
that the Aryans in India never were fetish worshippers, and argues, that as no fetishism 
is found in the Vedas, therefore it never existed, at least anywhere in India. From 
his narrow point of view his logic is unassailable, but he entirely overlooks the fact, 
that only a very small portion of the population of India over was Aryan, or in their 
early stages knew anything of the Vedas. Nine-tenths of the population are of 
Turanian origin, and judging from the results, indulged in more degrading fetish 
worship than is to be found among the savages in Africa and America till partially 
cured of these practices by contact with the Aryans. 



14 INTRODUCTION. 

earliest disciples were Brahmans, still, like Christianity, Buddhism 
was never really adopted by those by whom and for whom, it first 
was promulgated. It was, however, eventually adopted by vast 
masses of the casteless tribes of India, and by mere weight of 
numbers they seem for a long time to have smothered and kept 
under the more intellectual races of the land. It always wa"s, 
however, and now is, a religion of a Turanian people, and never was 
professed, to any marked extent, by any people of pure Aryan race. 

As we do not know exactly what the form of the religion of the 
Dasyus really was, we cannot positively assert, though it seems most 
probable that it was the earliest existing in India ; but at the same 
time, it is quite certain that the Vedic is the most ancient cultus of 
which we have any written or certain record in that country. It was 
based on the worship of the manifestations of a soul or spirit in nature. 
Their favourite gods were Indra, the god of the firmament, who 
gave rain and thundered ; Varuna, the Uranos of the Greeks, the 
" all-enveloper," the king of gods, upholding and knowing all, and 
guardian of immortality ; Agni, the god of fire and light ; Ushas, the 
dawn ; Vayu and the Maruts or winds ; the Sun, addressed as Savitri, 
Surya, Vishnu; and other less distinctly defined personifications. 
The service of these gods was at first probably simple enough, con- 
sisting of prayers, praises, libations, and sacrifices. The priests, 
however, eventually elaborated the most complicated ritual probably 
ever invented, and of course, as in other rituals, they arrogated to 
themselves, through the proper performance of these rites, powers, 
not only superhuman, but even super-divine, compelling even the 
gods themselves to submit to their wills. 

The system of caste — an essential feature of Brahmanism — had 
become hard and fast as early at least as the sixth century before 
Christ, and was felt, especially among the lower castes, to be an 
intolerable yoke of iron. Men of all castes — often of very low 
ones — in revolt against its tyranny, separated themselves from their 
kind, and lived lives of asceticism, despising caste as something 
beneath the consideration of a devotee who aspired to rise by the 
merits of his own works and penances to a position where he might 
claim future felicity as a right. The Tirthakas and others of this 
class, perhaps as early as the seventh century B.C., threw aside all 
clothing, sat exposed to sun and rain on ant-hills or dung-heaps, or, 
clothed in bark or in an antelope hide, sought the recesses of forests 



RELIGIONS. 15 

and on mountain peaks, to spend their days apart from the world 
and its vanities, in order to win divine favour or attain to the 
power of gods. 

The founder of Buddhism was one of these ascetics. Gautama 
" the Buddha " was the son of a king of Kapilavastu, a small state 
in the north of Oudh, born apparently in the sixth century B.C. 
At the age of 29 he forsook his palace with its luxuries, his wife 
and infant child, and became a devotee, sometimes associating 
with others of the class in their forest abodes in Behar, and 
sometimes wandering alone, and, unsatisfied with the dreamy con- 
jectures of his teachers, seeking the solution of the mystery of 
existence. After some six years of this life, while engaged in a long 
and strict fast under a pipal tree near G-aya, wearied by exhaustion 
like the North American Indian seers, he fell into a trance, during 
which, as he afterwards declared, he attained to Buddhi or " per- 
fected knowledge," and issued forth as the Buddha or " enlightened," 
the great teacher of his age. He is called by his followers Sakya 
Muni — the Muni or ascetic of the Sakya race ; the Jina, or " van- 
quisher " of sins ; Sakya Sinha, " the lion of the Sakyas ; " Tatha- 
gata, " who came in the same way " as the previous Buddhas, &c. 
He celebrated the attainment of the Buddahood in the stanzas- 
Through various transmigrations 
Have I passed (without discovering) 
The builder I seek of the abode (of the passions). 
Painful are repeated births ! 

house builder ! I have seen (thee). 
No house Bhalt thou again build me ; 
Thy rafters are broken, 

Thy ridge-pole is shattered, 

My mind is freed (from outward objects). 

1 have attained the extinction of desires. 1 

With its dogma of metempsychosis, Vedantism and Brahmanism 
provided no final rest, no permanent peace ; for to be born again, 
even in the highest heaven, was still to be under the empire of the 
law of change, and consequently of further suffering in some still 
future birth. Hence it had created and fostered the thirst for final 
death or annihilation as the only escape from this whirlpool of 

1 For Gogerly's version as well aa Tumour's, see Spence Hardy's Manual of 
Buddhism, pp. 180, 181. 



16 INTRODUCTION. 

miseries. The mission Sakya Muni, now at the age of 35, set 
before himself as the proper work of a Buddha, was to minister 
to this passion for extinction ; to point out a new religious path 
for the deliverance of men from the endleBS series of transmigrations 
they had been taught it was their doom to pass through, and to be the 
liberator of humanity from the curse of the impermanency, sorrow, 
and unreality of existence. His royal extraction, his commanding 
dignity and persuasive eloquence, the gentleness of his manners, 
his ardour and self-denying austerities, the high morality and the 
spirit of universal kindness that pervaded his teaching, fascinated 
the crowds, and he soon attracted enthusiastic disciples who caught 
something of the fire of their masters enthusiasm, and who were 
sent forth to propagate his new doctrines. 

Caste he set aside : " My Law," said Buddha, " is a law of grace 
for all." Belief in his doctrines and obedience to his precepts was, 
for Sudra and Dasyu as for the Brahman, the only and the wide 
door to the order of " the perfect." By the lower castes, whom 
the Brahmans had first arbitrarily degraded and then superciliously 
despised, such teaching would naturally be welcomed as a timely 
deliverance from the spiritual, intellectual, and social despotism of 
the higher classes. For them, evidently, and the despised aboriginal 
tribes, it was most specially adapted, and among such it was sure 
to find its widest acceptance. 

Accompanied by his disciples, Gautama wandered about from 
place to place, principally in Gangetic India, subsisting on the 
offerings placed in his alms-bowl, or the provision afforded him by 
his wealthier converts, teaching men the emptiness and vanity of 
all sensible things, and pointing out the paths that led to Nirvdiw, 
or final quiescence, " the city of peace," scarcely, if at all, distin- 
guished from annihilation. After 45 years thus spent, Sakya Muni 
died in the north of Gorakhpur district, in Bengal. His disciples 
burnt his body and collected bis relics, which were distributed 
among eight different cities, where they afterwards became objects 
of worship. 

Springing as it did from Brahmanism, of which it might be 
regarded as only a modification, or one of its many sects or schools, 
Buddhism did not at first separate from the older religion so as to 
assume a position of hostility to it, insult its divinities, or disparage 
its literature. It grew up slowlv, and many of its earlier and most 



EBLIGIONB. 17 

distinguished converts -were Brahmans. Though its founder had 
made many disciples during his lifetime, and sent them out to 
propagate his religion, it was not till the conversion of the great 
emperor A6oka that it acquired any political importance; under 
his royal favour and patronage it spread widely. He is represented 
as having lavished the resources of his realm on the Buddhist 
religion and on buildings in honour of its founder, who by that time 
had become almost mythical in his wonderful travels and teaching, 
the number of his discourses being reckoned at 84,000, and nearly 
every place in India having some legend of his having visited it. 

The Buddhist traditions are full of the name of Asoka as the 
founder of viharas or monasteries, stupas or dagobas, asylums, and 
other religious and charitable works. " At the places at which the 
Vanquisher of the five deadly sins (i.e. Buddha) had worked the 
works of his mission," says the Ceylon Chronicle, 1 " the sovereign 
(Asoka) caused splendid digobas to be constructed. From 84,000 
cities (of which Rajagriha was the centre) despatches were brought 
on the same day, announcing that the viharas were completed." 
After a great council of the Buddhist priesthood, held in the 17th 
year of his reign, 246 B.C., missionaries were sent out to propagate 
the religion in the ten following countries, whose position we are 
able, even now, to ascertain with very tolerable precision from their 
existing denominations: — (1) Kasmira; (2) Gandhara or Kandahar; 
(3) Mahisamandala or Maisur; (4) Vanavasi in Kanara; (5) Apa- 
rantaka — ' the Western Country ' or the Konkan, — the missionary 
being Yavana-Dharmarakshita.; — the prefix Yavana apparently in- 
dicative of his being a Greek, or foreigner at least ; (6) Maharatta or 
the Dekhan ; (7) The Yavana country, — perhaps Baktria ; (8) Hima- 
vanta or Nepal ; (9) Suvarnabhumi or Burma ; and (10) Ceylon. 
His own son Mahendra and daughter Sanghamitra were sent with 
the mission to Ceylon, taking with them a graft of the Bodhi tree 
at Buddha Gaya under which Buddha was supposed to have attained 
the^supreme knowledge. 

In two inscriptions from Sahasram and Rupnath, recently trans- 
lated, 2 Asoka mentions that in the 33rd year, " after he had become 
a hearer of the law," and " entered the community " (of ascetics) 



1 Tumour's Mah&vanio, p. 34. 

* Dr. Biihler in Ind. Ant^ vol. vi. p. 149, and vol. vii. pp. 141-160. 
Y 182. B 



18 INTRODUCTION. 

he had exerted himself so Btrenuously in behalf of his new faith, that 
the gods who previously " were considered to be true in Jambud- 
bipa " had, in the second year afterwards (b.c. 226-5), been abjured. 

To him, as already mentioned, the first Buddhist structures owe 
their origin. These were principally stdpas or ddgohas, that iB, monu- 
mental shrines or receptacles for the relics of Buddha himself, or of 
the Sthaviras, or patriarchs of the sect, — consisting of a cylindrical 
base, supporting a hemispherical dome, called the ga/rbha. On the 
top of this was placed a square stone box, commonly called a Tee, 
usually solid, covered by a series of thin slabs, each projecting over 
the one below it, and with an umbrella raised over the whole. These 
sttipas were erected, however, not only as monuments over relics, but 
set up also wherever any legend associated the locality with a visit or 
discourse of Buddha's — which practically came to be wherever there 
were a few Buddhist Bhikshus desirous of securing an easy livelihood 
from the neighbouring villagers : — for legends are easily invented in 
India. Asoka erected many of these over the length and breadth 
of his extensive dominions and raised great monolithic pillars, 
inscribed with edicts, intended to promulgate the spread of Buddhism. 
Edicts were also incised on rocks at Kapurdigiri near Peshawar, at 
Mount Q-iraar in Kathiawar, in Orissa, G-anjam, and the Upper 
Provinces. The stupas or topes at Bhilsa\ Sarnath near Ban&raB, 
Manikyala in the Panjab, and elsewhere, are examples of that class 
of monuments, of which there are also gigantic specimens in Ceylon, 
erected by Devanampriya Tishya, the contemporary of Asoka, and 
his successors. But these belong rather to a general history of 
Indian architecture than to a work especially devoted to the oaves. 1 

The Buddhist Bhikshus thuB soon became very numerous, and 
possessed regularly organised monasteries, or ViMras, in which they 
spent the rainy season, studying the Bacred books and practising a 
temperate asceticism. " The holy men were not allowed seats of 
costly cloth, nor umbrellas made of rich material with handles 
adorned with gems and pearls, nor might they use fragrant sub- 
stances, or fish gills and bricks for rubbers in the bath, except, in- 
deed, for their feet. G-arlic, toddy, and all fermented liquors were 

1 For an account of the stupas at Sanchi and Amravati, see FergusBon'a Tree and 
Serpent Worship, and Cunningham's Bhilsa Topes ; also Ferguason's Indian and 
Eastern Architecture, pp. 54, 60-65, 71-72, 92, 105 } and for Sarnath, Hid. pp. 65, 
68, 173, and Sherring's Sacred City of the Hindus, p. 230 ff, 



RELIGIONS. 19 

forbidden, and no food permitted after midday. Music, dancing, 
and attendance upon such amusements wore forbidden." 1 And, 
though seal rings or stamps of gold were prohibited, they might use 
stamps of baser metal, the device being a circle with two deer on 
opposite sides, and below the name of the vihara. 

Buddhism, after this, flourished and spread for centuries. Chinese 
pilgrims came to India to visit the spots associated with the founder's 
memory, to learn its doctrines, and carry away books containing its 
teachings. In the seventh century of our era it had begun to decline 
in some parts of India ; in the eighth apparently it was rapidly dis- 
appearing : and shortly after that it had vanished from the greater 
part of India, though it still lingered about Banaras and in Bengal 
where the Pala dynasty, if not Buddhists themselves, at least tolerated 
it extensively in their dominions. 8 It existed also at some points 
on the West coast, perhaps till the eleventh century or even later. 
It has been thought that it was extinguished by Brahmanical perse- 
cution, and in some places such means may have been used to put it 
down ; but the evidence does not seem sufficient to prove that force 
was generally resorted to. Probably its decline and final extinction 
was to a large extent owing to the ignorance of its priests, the corrup- 
tions of its early doctrines, especially after the rise of the Mahayana 
sect, the multiplicity of its schisms, and its followers becoming mixed 
up with the Jains, whose teachings and ritual are very similar, or 
from its followers falling into the surrounding Hinduism of the masses. 
Except in the earliest ages of its existence it probably never was 
predominant in India, and alongside it, during its whole duration, 
Saivism continued to flourish and to hold, as it does still, the alle- 
giance of the majority of the lower castes. 

Rock temples and residences for Buddhist ascetics are early referred 
to. Mahendra, the son of ASoka, on his arrival in Ceylon, erected a 
vihara on the summit of the Mihintala mountain, where he caused 
68 cells to be cut out in the rock, which still exist at the AmbuBtella 



1 Mrs. SpeuV Life in Ancient India, p. 317. 

* The date of the Pala dynasty has not been ascertained with accuracy. Abul Fazl 
in the Ayin Akbari assigns 689 years to their 10 reigns, which, however, is evidently 
too much. The most complete list is that inserted by General Cunningham in his 
Reports, vol. iii. p. 134, based on a comparison of the written authorities, with their 
existing inscriptions on copper and stone. He represents them as 18 kings, reigning 
from 765 to 1200, a.d., which is probably very near the truth. 

U 2 



"20 INTRODUCTION. 

dagoba. 1 We find also at Barabar (near Gaya) in Bihar, several 
oaves with inscriptions upon them, with dates upon them of the 12th 
and 19th years of Asoka himself, or in 251 and 244 B.C.* 

"We have no means of knowing what the primitive religion of the 
Dravidians was before their country was colonised by the Brahmans 
of the north, who imported with them the worship of Siva and Vishnu 
and all the multitudinous Gods of the modern Hindu Pantheon. 
It is probable that before that time, the Dravidians did possess a 
Pantheon distinct from that of their northern neighbours, but so little 
has the comparative mythology of India been hitherto studied, that 
it is impossible now to say how much of the present religion of the 
country is a foreign importation, how much an indigenous local 
growth. Siva is, and apparently as far as our information goes, 
seems alwayB to have been, the favourite deity in the South, 
and his name and that of his consort is mixed up with so many 
legends, and these extend so far back, that it almost looks as 
if his worship sprung up there. On the other hand, the earliest 
authentic mention of Siva is by a Greek author, Bardasanes, who 
describes him as worshipped in a cave not far from Peshawur in the 
early part of the third century, under the well-known form of the 
Ardhanari, or half man half woman. 8 He is also found unmiatake- 
ably represented on the coins of Kadphises * with his trident and bull, 
before the Christian era, and it is not clear whether these are fragments 
of mythology left there by the Dravidians, dropped like the Brahui 
language, on their way to India, or whether it is a local northern 
cult which the Brahmans brought/ with them into India, and finally 
transported to the south. 3 

Though the worship of Vishnu is as fashionable and nearly as 
extensively prevalent in modern times, in the south, as that of 
Siva, it certainly never arose among the Dravidian races. It is 
essentially a cultus that could only have its origin among the same 
people as those from whom the Buddhist religion first took its 
present form. It is in fact at the present day only a very corrupt 
form of that religion, so corrupt, indeed, that their common origin is 

1 Tumour's Mah&vano, pp. 103, 123 ; Emerson Tennent's Ceylon, voL ii. p. 607. 

2 Jour. At. Soc. Ben., vol. vi. p. 671. Cunningham Reports, vol. i. p. 44 ff. 

3 Stoebus' Phyaica. Gainsford edition, p. 54. 
* Wilson's Ariana Antiqua, Plate X. 

9 See Battel's Lingaculttu, 



CHRONOLOGY. 21 

hardly to be recognised in its new disguise, 1 but itill undoubtedly 
springing from a cognate source, though very f> -Tom emulating 
either the virtue or the purity of its elder sister iaith. Borrowing 
apparently a cosmogony from Assyria, Yishnuism separated itself 
from Buddhism, attracting to itself most of the local superstitions 
that had crept into that religion, and finally becoming fused by 
the all powerful solvent of the Vedas, it forms a powerful element 
in the modern Brahmanical religion as now existing in India. 8 

It is only now that we are beginning to see, dimly it must be 
confessed, the mode in which all the conflicting and discordant 
elements of the present Hindu religion were gathered from 1,000 
sources, and fused into the present gigantic superstition. The 
materials, however, probably now exist which would enable any 
competent scholar to reduce the whole to order, and give us an 
intelligible account of the origin and growth of this form of faith. 
The task, however, has not been attempted in recent times. When 
Moor's 8 and Coleman's* works were written, sufficient knowledge 
of the subject was not available to enable this to be done satis- 
factorily, but now an exhaustive work on the subject could easily be 
compiled, and would be one of the most valuable contribution we 
could have, to our knowledge of the ethnography as well as of the 
moral and intellectual status of the 250,000,000 of the inhabitants 
of a land teeming with beauty and interest. 

Chbonologt. 

As the Buddhists were beyond all shadow of doubt the earliest 
excavators of caves in India, and also, so far as we now know, the 
first to use stone as an architectural building material in that 
country, it will be sufficient for the purposes of this work to con- 
fine our researches in Indian chronology to the period subsequent 
to the reigns of the two kings Bimbasara and Ajatalatru. It was 
in the 16th year of the first-named king that Sakya Muni, then in 

1 How Buddhism may be transmogrified may be learnt from the tenets and practices 
of the Abyantra sect in Nepal. 

* The facts referring to the ethnography and religion oi India are stated more fully 
than it is necessary to do here in the introduction to my History of Indian Architec- 
ture, 1876, to 'which the reader is referred for further information. — J. F. 

* Hindu Pantheon, 4to., Plates, London, 1810. 

* Mythology of the Hindus, 4to., Plates, 1832. 



22 INTRODUCTION. 

his 35th year, attained Buddhahood, B.C. 526, and died in the 8th 
year of the reign of the last-named king, 481 years B.C. 1 

From this point down to the Christian era there is no great 
difficulty with regard to Indian chronology, and it may be as well, 
in so far as the first part of this work is concerned, to confine our 
investigations to these limits. Certain it is that no architectural 
cave was excavated in India before the Nirvana, and no king's name 
has even traditionally been connected with any cave in Eastern 
India whose ascertained date is subsequent to the Christian era. 
Indeed, in so far as the Bengal caves are concerned, we might 
almost Btop with the death of Vrihadratha, the last of the Mauryans, 
180 B.C., all the names connected with any caves being found among 
the kings of the earlier dynasties, if at all. 

When we come to speak of the western or southern caves, 
in the second part of this work, it will be necessary to pursue 
these investigations to more modern dates, but this will be better 
done when we come to describe the caves themselves, and then try 
to ascertain the dates of the local dynasties to which each indi- 
vidual series of caves practically owes its origin. 

As a foundation for the whole, and for our present purposes, it will 
probably be sufficient to state that the BuddhiBt accounts generally 
are agreed that Sakya Muni, the founder of their religion, died in 
the 8th year of Ajatasatru, king of Magadha or Bihar, and that 162 
years elapsed between that event and the rise of the Maurya dynaBty. 
This dynasty, as is well known, was founded by Chandragupta, the 
Sandrakottos of the Greeks, to whose court Megasthene's was sent 
by Seleucus aB an ambassador, and who, taking advantage of the 
unsettled state of India after the invasion of Alexander of Macedon, 
had, by the aid of an astute Brahman, named Vishnugupta Dramila,* 

1 When previously writing on this subject, I have always adopted the Ceylonese 
date 543 B.C. as that of the Nirvana as the most likely to bo the correct one, according to 
the information then available. I was of course aware that so long ago as 1837 Tumour 
had pointed oat (J.A.S.B., vol. vi. p. 716 et seg.) that there was a discrepancy in the 
pre-Mauryan chronology of Ceylon, of about 60 years. But how that was to be 
rectified he could not explain. I do not yet despair of some new solution being found, 
but meanwhile the discovery of the Rupnatb. and Sahasrara inscriptions — both of the 
time of Asoka — point so distinctly to the date of the Nirvana given in the text, 61 or 
68 later than the usually accepted date, that for the present at least it seems impossible to 
adopt any other. — J. F. 

1 He is often designated by the patronymic Chanakya, or by the epithet Eautilya 
• the Crafty/' See Wilson's works, vol. xii. p. 127 et seqq. 



CHRONOLOGY. 23 

raised himself to the throne of Northern India somewhere between 
320 and 315 b.c. 1 This connexion with western history, therefore, 
enables us to place the date of the Nirvana of Buddha between 482 
and 477 b.c. Again, Asoka, the third king of the Maurya dynasty, 
in the 12th year of his reign, in an inscription, mentions the names 
of the Greek kings Antiochus of Syria. P tolemy of Egyp t, Anti g onos 
of Macedon, Magas of Cyrene, and Alexander of Epirug , 2 and as 
Antiochus only came to the throne in 261 b.c, and it must have 
been engraved some time subsequent to that event, possibly 
about 252 b.c. 3 the first year of ASoka may have been 263 b.c. 
Chandragupta had ruled 24 years, and Bindusara, the father of 

1 The ascertained chronology of the time and the references of classical writers 
ought to enable us to fix this date within very narrow limits. Wilford (Asiat. Res. 
vol. v. p. 279 fi\, and ix. p. 87) placed the commencement of Chandragupta's reign in 
315 B.c. Prinsep (I. A. Us. Tab. p. 240), Max Miiller {Hist. Sans. Lit. p. 298), and 
most other writers have agreed to this. Lassen (I. A. II. 64) seems to hesitate between 
the years 317 and 315, but finally decides for the latter (II. 67, 222, 1207). Cunning- 
ham (Bhilsa Topes, p. 90) arrives at 316 B.C. ; Dr. H. Kern {Over de Jaartelling, 
p. 27) assumes 322, Rhys Davids (Anc. Coins of Ceylon, p. 41) B.c. 320. 

There is no bint, however, that Chandragupta rose to power before the death of 
Ponis, who by the partition at Triparadeisus, b.c. 321, was allowed to retain his 
kingdom, while SeleucuB Nicator obtained the satrapy of Babylon. Between 320 
and 316 " Seleucus was laying the foundation of his future greatness " (Justin, xv. 4), 
and in 317 Eudemus, who had put Porus to death (about 319), left the Panjab with a 
large army to assist Eumenes, affording an opportunity for the revolt of Chandragupta 
and apparently the occasion alluded to by Justin. Then the expeditions of Seleucus 
to Bactria and afterwards to India took place about 303-302 (Clinton, F. H. vol. iii., 
p. 482) ; the alliance with Chandragupta and the embassy of Megasthenes were at a 
later date (conf. Plutarch, Alex, 62), possibly after the battle of Ipsus, b.c. 301, when 
Seleucus was finally confirmed in his kingdom ; and as Megasthenes resided perhaps 
for several years at the court of Chandragupta (Arrian Exp. Alex. V. vi. and 2 ; 
Solinus Polghistor., c. 60 ; Robertson's India, p. 30), we are forced to allow that the 
latter was alive after b.c. 300, so that his reign must have begun after 323 ; possibly 
it was dated from the death of Porus between 320 and 317 B.C. : no earlier date seems 
reconcileable with our information. — J.B. 

2 The accession and death of each of these kings are placed as follows ; — 

Antiochus Theos - - - b c. 261 to 246 

Ptolemy Philadelphus 285 to 247 

Antigonus Gonatas - - - 283 to 239 

Magas - - - 301 to 25$ 

Alexander II. of Epirus - - 272 to 254 

8 If we assume that the arrangement alluded to by Asoka was made with all these 
kings at the same time, the latest date available would be b.c. 258, which would 
place Asoka's adhislieka in B.C. 270, the death of Chandragupta in 302, and his 
accession in 326 B.C., while Alexander was still in India. But agreements of the kind 



24 INTRODUCTION. 

Asoka, 28 years ; but the latter was not inaugurated till the 4th 
year after his father's death, or 218 years after the Nirvana. 
There is some doubt about the precise duration of his reign, 
depending on whether we are to reckon its commencement from 
his father's death (oir. 267 B.C.), or as is usual with the Hindus, from 
his ahMsheka or inauguration four years later. Assuming the later 
to be the correct mode, the following table will give the early 
chronology of Buddhism to the death of Asoka — liable pos- 
sibly to some modifications to the extent possibly of some 4 or 
5 years, for the determination of which we must await further 
discoveries * : — 
B.C. 560 Gautama Buddha born at Kapilavastu. 

531 „ became an ascetic. 

526 „ assumed Buddhahood in his 35th year. 

481 Buddha died, the era of the Nirvana and date of the 
first Buddhist Council. 

381 The second Council held in the 10th year of the reign of 
Kalavarddhana. 

were most probably made first with the nearer kings of Syria, Egypt, and Gyrene, aud 
afterwards with the more remote rulers of Macedon and Epirus, while the embassy on 
its way back through Persia may have renewed the arrangements which were not 
finally reported in India till as late as 252 b.c. 

1 The following list of contemporary events may enable the reader to realise the 
importance of the period between Buddha and Asoka, and to fix these dates in the 
memory : — 

B.c. 560 Nerighssar king of Babylon. 

548 Cyrus overthrew Crasus on the Halys. 

530 Cambyses king of Persia. 

480 Xerxes defeated at Salamis, 

400 Socrates put to death. 

321 Partition of the conquests of Alexander at TriparadeiBus. 

317 Eudemus left the Pan jab with a large force to aid Eumenes. 

316 Seleucus fled from Babylon to Egypt to escape from Antigonus. 

312 „ returned to Babylon. Era of the Seleucidsa, 1st Oct. 

306 „ assumed the regal style, and pushed his conquests to the north 

and east. 

303 „ invades Bactria and India. 

301 Battle of Ipsus ; Seleucus confirmed in the East. 

283 Ptolemy Philadelphus succeeds to the throne of Egypt, and Antigonus 
Gronatus in Macedon. 

280 Seleucus slain by Antiochus Soter.who sent Daimachus on an embassy to 
Amitrochates (Bindusara), son of Sandracottos. 

256 Bactria revolted under DiodotuB. 

250 Arsacee founds the Parthian empire, 



CHRONOLOGY. 25 

B.C. 327 Alexander's invasion of India ; Philip made satrap. 

326 Alexander left Pattala after the rains ; Philip murdered 

by the mercenaries. 
323 Death of Alexander. 
321 Poms allowed to retain the Pan jab ; Seleucus obtains 

Babylon. 
319 Chandragupta founds the Maurya dynasty. 
295 Bindusara succeeds and rules 28 years. 
267 Bindusara's death. 
263 Asoka's abhisheka or coronation. 
259 As"oka converted to Buddhism in his 4th year. 
257 Mahendra, the son of Asoka, ordained a Buddhist priest 

in Anoka's 6th year. 
246 The third Buddhist Council held in his 17th year. 
245 Mahendra sent to Ceylon in his 18th year. 
233 Death of Asoka's queen, Asandhimitra. 
227 Asoka became an ascetic in the 33rd year after his 

conversion. 1 
225 Death of Asoka in the 38th year of his reign. 
After the death of Asoka, the Pauranik chronology of his suc- 
cessors stands thus : — 
B.C. 225 Suvasas. 
215 ? Dasaratha. 
200 ? Sangata, Bandupalita. 
195 ? Indrapalita, Salisuka. 
185 ? Somasarma. 
183 ? Sasadharma. 
180 Vrihadratha. 
The last of the Mauryas was overthrown by his general, Pushya- 
mitra, who established the Sunga dynasty, which probably lost hold 
of many of the southern provinces of the Maurya empire at an early 
date. The Pauranik chronology, however, stands thus, the dates 
being only approximate and liable to adjustment to the extent of 
from 10 to 15 years throughout : — 
b.c. 175 Pushyamitra. 
160 Agnimitra. 
134 Vasumitra. 

1 If ASoka's wholu veign extended to only 38 years, this and the preceding six dates 
should be altered to four years earlier. 



26 INTRODUCTION. 

b.g. 122 Badraka or Ardraka. 

110 Pulindaka, 

100 (xhoshavasu ? 
90 Yajramitra ? 
75 Devabhuti. 
The next dynasty of the Puranas is the KAnvas, who are said to 
have ruled 45 years, say B.C. 70 to 25. These, again, are represented 
as followed by the Andhbabhbityas, who ruled only over the Dekhan. 
From the character of the inscriptions on the western cares and on 
their coins, however, it may be doubted whether they were so late 
as the Pauranik statements would place them, and it may yet turn 
out that they were contemporary, to some extent, with both the 
Sunga and Kanva dynasties. The Pauranik chronology enumerates 
about thirty kings from Sipraka or Sisuka to Pulomavi III., the 
dynasty extending over about 440 years, 1 but no great dependence 
can be placed in their accuracy. 

There is in fact very little difficulty with regard to the chronology 
of the five centuries just enumerated. The great uncertainty 
prevails anterior to the advent of Buddha, and the great confusion 
began with the accession of the later Andra or Andrabhritya 
dynasty, about the beginning of the Christian era. For 10 
centuries after that time there are very few epochs which can be 
fixed with absolute certainly and very few kings whose dates are 
beyond dispute. By means of inscriptions and a careful analysis of 
Chinese documents we are now beginning to see our way with 
tolerable certainty through this wilderness, but it still is indispensable 
to state the grounds on which each date is founded before it can be 
used to determine the age of any cave or building on which it is 
found. Even then the dates can only be taken aB those most 
probable according to our present information, and subject to con- 
firmation or adjustment by subsequent discoveries. Still the 
sequence is no where doubtful, and the relative dates generally quite 
sufficient for the purposes of an architectural history of Mediaeval 
India. 



1 See Second Archaeological Report, pp. 131 ff; Bee also p. 265 (Part II.) below 
for Pauranik list and dates. 



architecture. 27 

Architecture 

It is fortunate that in the midst of all these perplexities and 
uncertainties there is still one thread which, if firmly grasped, will 
lead us with safety through the labyrinth, and land us on firm 
ground, od which we may base our explorations in search of further 
knowledge. India is covered with buildings from north to south, 
and of all ages, from the first introduction of stone architecture in 
the third century B.C. down to the present day. With scarcely an 
exception, these are marked with strongly developed ethnographic 
peculiarities, which are easily read and cannot be mistaken. Many 
of these have inscriptions upon them, from which the relative dates, 
at least, can be ascertained, and their chronological sequence fol- 
lowed without hesitation. In addition to this, nearly all those 
before the Moslem conquest have sculptures or paintings, which 
give a most vivid picture of the forms of faith to which they were 
dedicated, and of the manners and customs, as well of the state 
of civilisation of the country at the time they were erected. 

As mentioned above, the history of Buddhism as a state religion 
begins with the conversion of Asoka, in the third century B.C., and as 
it happens, he was the first to excavate a cave for religious pur- 
poses. He also was probably the author of the sculptures on the 
Buddha G-aya rails, 1 but whether this is certain or not, we have in 
the wondrous collection of sculptures found by General Cunningham 
at Bharhut a complete picture of Buddhism, and of the arts and 
manners of the natives of India in the second century before Christ. 2 
The tale is then taken up with the gateways at Sanchi, belonging 
to the first century of our era, which are equally full and equally 
interesting. 3 To these follow the rails at Amravati * in the fourth 
century, showing a considerable technical advance, though accom- 
panied with a decline of that vigour which characterised the earlier 

1 General Cunningham's Archceological Report, vol. L, Plates VIII. to XI., and 
B abu Raja ndralala Mitra's Buddha Gaya, Plates XXXIV. to XXXVIII., ancfone 
photograph, Plate L. ~ Ab none of these plates, -which are lithographs, are satisfactory, 
it is to be hoped that the whole may some day be photographed, like the last. There 
is no monument in India more important for the history of Art than this rail, which is 
probably the oldest example of Hindu sculpture we possess. 

' Description of the Stupa at Bharhut, by Gen. A. Cunningham, 4to., London, 1879. 

8 Illustrated in the first 45 plates of Tree and Serpent Worship, 2nd Ed. 4to., 
London, 1873. 

* Illustrated in the 55 remaining plates of that work. 



28 INTRODUCTION. 

examples. From the fourth century, to the decline of Buddhism in 
the seventh, there exist a superfluity of illustrations of its progress, 
in the sculptures and painting at Ajanta and in the western 
caves, while the monasteries of Grandhara, beyond the Indus in the 
north-west, supply a most interesting parallel series of illustrations. 
These last were executed under a singularly classical influence, 
whose origin has not yet been investigated, though it would be 
almost impossible to overrate itB importance. 1 

We have thus either carved in stone or painted on plaster as 
complete a series of contemporary illustrations aB could almost be 
desired of the rise, progress, and decline of Buddhism during the 
whole of the 1,000 years in which it existed as an important religion 
in India. We have also a continuation of the series illustrating the 
mode in which the present religious forms of India grew out of 
former faithB, and took the shapes in which they now exist in almost 
every part of India. 

"Were all these materials either collected together in museums or 
published in such a form as to be easily accessible to the public, 3 we 
would possess a more vivid and more authentic picture, not only 
of the ethnography, but of the ever varying forms of Indian civili- 
sation, than is to be obtained from any books, or any other form of 
evidence now available. 

The one defect in this mode of illustration is that it does not 
extend far enough back in time, to be all that is wanted. Neither 
in India, nor indeed anywhere else, were the Aryans a building 
race, nor did their cultivation of the fine arts ever reach that point 
at which it sufficed for historical illustration. They chose and 
throughout adhered, to the phonetic mode of expression, as both 
higher and more intellectual, and in this they were no doubt right 
in so far as all the higher forms of human intellectual expression 
are concerned. But books perish, and may be changed and altered, 



1 Neither the Ajanta frescoes nor the Gandhara sculptures have yet been published. 
The latter exist in the museums of Lahore, South Kensington, and Gen. Cunningham's 
possession. Photographs of nearly all the known specimens are in my possession. — J. P. 

s This could easily and speedily be done, as almost all these antiquities are public 
property, and nine-tenths of them have been photographed, and the negatives exist, 
generally in the hands of the Government. The only obstacle is the apathy and 
indifference of the public, and of those who might be expected to take most interest 
in the matter. 



ABCHITBOTUEE. 29 

and after all do not present so vivid and so permanent an illus- 
tration of contemporary feelings as those which may be expressed 
by buildings in stone, or by forms, in carving or in colour. 

Be this as it may, it is in consequence of this peculiarity of the 
Aryan mind, that the history of art in India begins with the upheaval 
of the Turanian element, and the introduction of Buddhism as a 
state religion under Asoka in the middle of the third century B.C., 
and it is consequently with that king's reign that our illustrations 
drawn from Indian architecture practically begin. 

When this fact was first announced, now some forty years ago, 
the evidence on which it rested was to some extent negative. No 
building had then been found which could pretend to an earlier date, 
nor has any one been discovered since ; but till we can feel sure 
that we know all the buildings in India, there is no absolute cer- 
tainty that some earlier example may not be brought to light. At 
present, however, with the solitary exception of Jarasandha-ka- 
Baithak, to be described presently, no building is known to exist nor 
any cave, possessing any architectural character, whose date can be ex- 
tended back to the time when Alexander the Great visited India. It 
may, of course, be disputed whether or not it was, in consequence of 
hints received from the Greeks that the Indians first adopted stone for 
architectural purposes ; but the coincidence is certain, and in the 
present state of our knowledge may be looked upon as an established 
fact. At the same time though, it is almost equally certain that 
stone was used in India as a building material for engineering pur- 
poses and for foundations, yet it is quite certain that nothing that 
can properly be called architecture is to be found there till considerably 
after Alexander's time. 1 

Besides the negative evidence above alluded to, we now have direct 
evidence of the fact in a form that hardly admits of dispute. We 

1 Even in Alexander's time, accodring to Megasthenes (Strabo p. 702), the walls of 
the capital city, Palibothra, were constructed in wood only, €vhw icfflu.ov c^oura*. A 
portion of the fortifications of minor cities were probably of the same convenient though 
combustible material. Notwithstanding this, Babu Rajendral&la Mitra in his work on 
Buddha Gaya, p. 167, and 168, asserts that the walls of this city were of brick, and as 
his authority for this, quotes the passage from Megasthenes above referred to. Besides 
being in brick, he adds (p. 168), apparently on his own authority, that they were 30 
feet in height. In so far as the testimony of a trustworthy eye witness is concerned, 
this statement of Megasthenes is entirely at variance with the Babu's contention, for 
the use of stone generally, for architectural purposes in India before Alexander's time; 
and Protanlo coufirms the statements made above in the text. 



30 



INTRODUCTION. 



have oaves like this one at Bhaja, which was excavated certainly 
after Anoka's time, in which not only every decorative feature is 
directly copied from a wooden original, but the whole of the front, 




No. 1. Front of the Cave at Bhaja, from a Photograph. 

the ribs of the roof, and all the difficult parts of the construction were 
originally in wood, and a good deal of the original woodwork remains 
in the cave at the present hour. But more than this, aB will be 
observed in the woodcut, the posts dividing the nave from the aisles 
all slope inwards. In a wooden building having a circular roof, 
the timber work of which was from its form liable to spread, it was 
intelligible that the posts that supported it, should be placed sloping 
inwards, so as to counteract the thrust. No people, however, who had 
ever built or seen a stone pillar, would have adopted such a solecism 
in the rock when copying t be wooden halls in which their assemblies 
had been held and their worship had previously been performed. 
In order to follow the lines of these sloping pillars, the jambs of 
the doorways were made to slope inwards also, and there is no better 



ARCHITECTURE. 31 

test of age than the extent to which the system is carried. By 
degrees the pillars and the jambs become more and more upright, 
the woodwork disappeared as an ornament, and was replaced by 
forms more and more lithic, till long before the last caves were 
excavated we can barely recognise, and may almost forget, the 
wooden forms from which tbey took their origin. 

Though therefore it is more than probable that the Indians 
borrowed the idea of using stone for architectural purposes from 
the Greeks, or to speak more correctly, from western foreigners 
bearing the Greek appellation of Yavanas, it is equally certain that 
they did not adopt any of the forms of Greek architecture or any 
details from the same source. It is indeed one of the principal 
points o# interest in this style, that we see its origin in the wood, 
and can trace its development into stone, without any foreign admix- 
ture. It is one of the most original and independent styles in the 
whole world, and consequently one of the most instructive for the 
philosophic study of the rise and progress of architectural forms. 

While asserting thus broadly that stone architecture commenced 
in India only 250 years before Christ, there are two points that 
should not be overlooked, not that they are likely to disturb the facts, 
but they may modify the inferences to be drawn from them. The 
first of these is the curious curvilinear form of the Sikharas or spires 
of Hindu temples, which cannot at present, at least, be traced back 
to any wooden original. It is true the earliest example whose date 
can be fixed with anything like certainty is the great temple at 
Bhuvaneswar, 1 which was erected in the 7th century of our era. It 
is however then complete in all essentials, and though we can follow 
its gradual attenuation down to the present day, when it becomes 
almost as tall, in proportion, as a gothic spire, we cannot advance one 
step backwards towards its origin. My impression is, that it was 
originally invented in the plains of Bengal, where stone is very rare 
indeed, and that the form was adopted to suit a brick and terra-cotta 
construction for which it is perfectly adapted. 8 But it may also be 
derived from some lithic form of which we have now no knowledge, 
but be this as it may, the uncertainty that prevails regarding the 
origin of this form prevents ub from saying absolutely that there were 
no original forms of stone architecture in India anterior to the time of 

1 History of Indian Architecture, page 422, Woodcut 233. 
8 Ibid., page 223, Woodcut 124. 



32 INTRODUCTION. 

the Greeks. Whether, however, it was derived from wood or brick 
or stone, it may be the elaboration of some Dasyu form of temple 
of which we have now no trace, and regarding which it is con- 
sequently idle to speculate. But till we can more nearly bridge over 
the 7 or 8 centuries that elapsed between the first Buddhist caves 
and the earliest known examples of Hindu architecture, we cannot 
tell what may have happened in the interval. For our present 
purposes it is sufficient to say that if there is no evidence that the 
temples of the Hindus were derived from a wooden original, there is 
as little that would lead us to suspect that the form arose from any 
necessity of stone construction. 1 

Even, however, though it may be proved to demonstration that- 
stone was not employed for architectural purposes before tRe age of 
Aioka, we must still guard ourselves from the assumption that it 
was either from want of knowledge or of skill that this was so. 
They seem deliberately to have preferred wood, and in every case 
where great durability was not aimed at, and where fire was not 
to be dreaded, they no doubt were right. Larger spaces could far 
more easily be roofed over with wood than with stone, and carvings 
and decoration more easily and effectually applied. They think so 
in Burmah to the present day, and had they not thought so in India 
in the third century B.C., it is clear, from what they did at Bharhut 
and Buddha G-aya, that they could as easily have employed stone 
then, as they do now. At Bharhut, for instance, the precision with 

1 In a recent number of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. xlvii., 
Part I., for 1878, Mr. Growse, of the B.C.S., expresses astonishment that I should 
perceive any difficulty in understanding whence the form of these temples was derived. 
There are at Mathura several abnormal Hindu temples erected during the reign of the 
tolerant Akbar, the sikharas of which are octagonal in plan, and with curved vertical out- 
lines, from which Mr. Growse concludes that the form of the Hindu sikharas unquestion- 
ably originates in the Buddhist Stupas. I have long been personally perfectly familiar with 
these Mathura temples, and knowing when they were erected, always considered them as 
attempts on the part of the Hindus of Akbar's day to assimilate their outlines to those of 
the domes of their Moslem masters which were the most charactirestic and most beautiful 
features of their architecture. If these outlines had been derived from stupas, the earliest 
would have been those that resemble these Buddhist forms most, but the direct con- 
trary is the fact. The earliest, like those at Bhuvaneswar are the squarest in plan, 
and the most unlike Buddhist forms that exist, and it is strange that the similarity 
should only be most developed, in the most modern, under Akbar. The subject I 
confess appears to me as mysterious as it was before I became acquainted with 
Mr. Growse's lucubrations. — J.F. 



ABCHITECTUKE. 



33 



which architectural decorations are carved in stone 150 years B.C. 
has hardly been surpassed in India at any time, and whatever we may 
think of the drawing of the figure sculptures, there can be no hesita- 
tion as to the mechanical skill with which they are executed. The 
same is true of what we find at Buddha Gaya, and of the gateways at 
Sanchi. Though the forms are all essentially borrowed from wooden 
constructions, the execution shows a proficiency in cutting and carving 
stone materials that could only be derived from long experience. 

As hinted above, the only stone building yet found in India that 
has any pretension to be dated before Asoka's reign is one having the 
popular name of J arasandha- ka-Baithak, 1 at Rajgir. It is partially 
described by General Cunningham in the third volume of his Archae- 
ological Reports, but not with such detail, as he no doubt would have 
bestowed upon it, had he been aware of its importance. As will be 
seen from the annexed woodcut, it is a tower about 85 feet square 
at base and sloping upwards for 20 or 28 feet 2 to a platform mea- 
suring 74 feet by 78. It is built wholly of unhewn stones, neatly 
fitted together without mortar ; and its most remarkable peculiarity 
is that it contains 15 cells, 
one of which is shown in the 
woodcut. They are from 
gJoJLJeeljnZIixigtib, with 
abo ut half that in breadth. 
Their position in height is 
not clearly marked in Gene- 
ral Cunningham's drawing, 
but Mr. Broadley describes 
them as on the level of the 
ground, and adds that they 
are inhabited up to this day, 
at times, by Nagas or Sad- 
hus, Jogis whose bodies are 
constantly smeared with 




No. 2. View and Flan of Jarasandha-ka-Baithak, from 
Cunningham. 



1 There is another erection bearing the same name at Giryek, about 7 or 8 miles 
eastward of Rajgir ; that however is a brick stupa of comparatively modern date, and 
probably as General Cunningham suggests, the Hansa St&pa or goose tower, and derives 
its name from a very famouB Buddhist Jataka which he quotes. Reports, vol. i. p. 18, 

Plate XV. 

a Broadley in Indian Antiquary, vol. i. p. 72. 
Y 182. 



34 INTRODUCTION. 

ashes. 1 Immediately behind this Baithak General Cunningham dis- 
covered a cave, -which he unhesitatingly identifies t he Pipala Cave, 
•where, according to Fahi an, Buddha wa s aooustomed t o ait in deep 
meditation after his mid-day meal. 8 It is a rude cavern some 25 by 
28 feet, the roof of which has partially fallen in. It seems, at one 
time to have been partially lined with brick, but is otherwise quite 
rude and unornamented. The General considers it undoubtedly the 
quarry hole from which the stones were taken to build the Baithak, 
and either it, or the tower in Hiuen Thsang's time bore the name 
of the palace of the Asuras. 3 

The interest of this group, for our present purposes, rests princi- 
pally on the three following considerations : — 

First, we have a cave with which Buddha's name seems insepa- 
rably connected. It is rude and unhewn, like all those which, bo 
far as we at present know, are assigned to his age. 

Secondly, we have the earliest vihara or monastery yet found in 
India, built of unhewn stones, and wholly unornamented from an 
architectural point of view. Originally it may have been three 
storeys in height, and with steps leading to each, but these are gone 
and probably cannot now be recovered.* 

Thirdly, though this at present may be considered as purely 
speculative, the arrangements of the Baithak point almost undoubt- 
edly to Assyria as the country from which its forms were derived, 
and the Birs Nimrud, 5 with its range of little cells on two sides, 
seems only a gigantic model of what is here copied on a Bmall and 
rude scale. "Without attempting to lay too much stress on the name 
Asura, 6 the recent discovery by General Cunningham of a pro- 
cession headed by a winged human-headed bull, 7 points beyond all 

1 Broadley in Indian Antiquary, vol. i. p. 72. 

2 BeaPs Fahian, clxxx. p. 117. 

8 Julien's Hiuen Thsang, Hi. p. 24. 

* In Bengal at the present day in remote villages, the inhabitants construct three- 
storeyed pyramids in mud, when they have no permanent temples, and generally plant 
a Tnlsi plant on the top. These temples are of course Vaiehnava. 

6 History of Architecture, vol. i., woodcuts 47 and 48, p. 153. 

6 I have always been of the opinion of Buchanan Hamilton (Bekar, p, 21), that the 
term Asura really meant Assyrian ; but these nominal similarities are generally so 
treacherous that I have never dared to Bay so. Recent researches, however, seem to 
confirm to a very great extent the influence Assyria bad in Magadha anterior to the 
advent of Buddha. 

f Cunningham, Reports^ vol. iii. p. 99, Plate XXVIII, 



ARCHITECTURE. 35 

doubt to an Assyrian origin, and fifty other things tend in the same 
direction with more or less distinctness. This iB not the place, 
however, to insist upon them, as they have very little direct bearing 
on the subject of this work. It is well, however, to indicate their 
existence, as Assyrian architecture, in the form in which it is 
found copied in stone at Persepolis, is the only style to which we 
can look for any suggestions to explain the origin of many forms 
and details found in the western caves, as well as in the G-andhara 
monasteries. 

When the various points hinted at above are fairly grasped, they 
add immensely to the interest of the caves to be described in the 
following pages. More than this, however, as the Buddhists were 
beyond doubt the earliest cave excavators in India, and the only 
ones for more than a thousand years after the death of the founder 
of that religion, these rock-cut temples form the only connecting 
link between the Nirv&na and the earliest Buddhist scriptures which 
have reached our times, in their present form. 1 Whether looked on 
from an ethnological, a historical, or a religious point of view, the 
Buddhist caves, with their contemporary sculpture and paintings, 
became not only the most vivid and authentic, but almost the only 
authentic record of the same age, of that form of faith from its 
origin to its decline and decay in India. If it is also true— which 
we have at present no reason for doubting — that the Buddhists 
were the first to use any permanent materials for building and 
sculptural purposes in -the caves, combined with the few fragments 
of structural buildings that remain, they have left a record which is 
quite unique in India. It is, however, a representation which for 
vividness and completeness can hardly be surpassed by any lithic 
record in any other country, of their feelings and aspirations during 
the whole period of their existence. 

Although the Brahmanical and Jaina caves, which succeeded the 
Buddhist, on the decline of that religion in the sixth and subsequent 
centuries, are full of interest, and sometimes rival and even surpass 
them in magnificence, they have neither their originality nor their 
truthfulness. They are either inappropriate imitations of the caves 
of the Buddhists, or copies of their own structural temples, whose 

1 The Mahawanso and other Ceylonese scriptures were reduced to the present form 
by Buddhtighosa in the beginning of the 5th century a.i>. It was then, too, that 
Fa Hian, the earliest Chinese pilgrim, travelled in India. 

c 2 



36 INTRODUCTION. 

details were derived from some wooden or brick original, and whose 
forms were designed for some wholly different application, without 
the least reference to their being executed as monoliths in the side 
of a hill. Notwithstanding these defects, however, there is an 
expression of grandeur, and of quasi eternity, in a temple cut in the 
rock, which is far greater than can be produced by any structural 
building of the same dimensions, while the amount of labour evidently 
required for their elaboration is also an element of greatness that 
never fails to affect the mind of the spectator. Taken by themselves 
it may be true that the later series of caves, notwithstanding 
their splendour, are hardly equal in interest to the earlier ones, not- 
withstanding their simplicity. It is, however, when looked at as a 
whole, that the true value of the complete series of rock-cut temples 
in India becomes apparent. From the rude Pippala cave at Rajgir in 
which Buddha sat to meditate after his mid-day meal, to tho latest 
Jaina caves in the rock at Gwalior, they form a continuous chain of 
illustration, extending over more than 2,000 years, such as can 
hardly in its class be rivalled any where or by any other nation. It is 
too, infinitely more valuable in India than it would be in any country 
possessing a literature in which her religious forms and feelings 
and her political history had been faithfully recorded, in other 
forms of expression. As in India, however, the written record 
is so imperfect, and so little to be relied upon, it is to her Arts, 
and to them only, that we can turn to realise what her position 
and aspirations were at an earlier age ; but this being so, it is 
fortunate they enable us to do this in a manner at once so complete 
and bo satisfactory. 



37 



EASTEKN CAVES. 



CHAPTER I. 

BARABAR GROUP. 

Although this work is principally intended to illustrate the 
splendid series of caves in Western India, there are four or five 
groups in the Bengal and Madras presidencies a knowledge of which, 
if not indispensable, is at least extremely useful to enable us to un- 
derstand the history of the cave architecture on the Bombay side of 
India. It is true that with the exception of the Mahavallipur group 
they cannot pretend to rival the western caves either in splendour or 
extent, but the Katak caves present features of great beauty and are 
interesting from their originality. The greatest historical interest, 
however, centres in the Behar series, which, though small, are impor- 
tant for our purposes, having all been excavated during the existence 
of the Great Mauryan dynasty, and being, therefore, the earliest 
caves, so far as we at present know, excavated for religious purposes 
in any part of India. 

The Barabar caves are situated in an isolated range of granite 
hills on the left bank of the Phalgu river about 16 miles due north 
from the town of Gaya. They are seven in number, and though 
differing in plan, are all similar in character and evidently belong to 
same age. Their dimensions are inconsiderable . The largest, calle d 
the .Nagarjuni cave , is a plain hall with circular ends measuring 46 feet 
by 19 feet 5 inches, and though two others, the Sudama and Lomas 
Rishi, are nearly as large, they are divided into two apartments, 
and consequently have not the same free area. 1 

Fortunately there is no difficulty whatever with regard to the date 
of these caves ; six out of the seven have inscriptions upon them, all 

1 Plans of all the caves are given by General Cunningham in vol. i. of his Reports, 
Plate XIX., and also by Kittoe, J.A.S.B., for May 1847, Plate VIII. There is no 
essential difference between these two sets of plans of these caves. The inscriptions 
were all copied by General Cunningham, and engraved, iu facsimile, on Plate XX. of 
the same work, with translations, pp. 47, et seq. 



38 EASTERN CAVES. 

in the oldest form of the Pali alphabet, identical with that found on 
Asoka's lata. More than this, the inscription on the Sudama cave 
states that it was excavated in the 12th year of that monarch or 
B.C. 252, and is therefore the earliest here. The latest is the Gopi or 
Milkmaid cave, in the Nagarjuni hill, which is dated in the reign of 
Dasaratha, the grandson of Asoka, in or about b.c 214. The whole 
group is therefore comprehended within about 40 years, and was com- 
menced apparently within 80 years after Alexander's visit to India. 1 
The only cave in this group that has no ancient inscription upon 
it is the Lomas E-ishi, but it is not difficult to see why this was the 
case. It is the only one which has any architectural magnificence ex- 
ternally, and was consequently selected by two kings, Sardula Varma 
and Ananta Varma, sons and grandsons apparently of Yajfia Sri 
of the Andra dynasty in the third or fourth century of our era, to 
adorn it with their inscriptions and to announce its conversion to the 
purposes of the Brahmanical faith. 2 Before doing this they no doubt 
carefully obliterated the more ancient inscription, which at that 
time was in all probability perfectly legible and easily understood. 
Whether this is, or is not the true explanation of the absence of an 
inscription in the lat characters in this cave, is of very little import- 
ance. It is so absolutely identical both in dimensions and disposition 
with the Sudama cave, which we know was excavated in the 12th 
year of As*oka, that there can be no doubt as to its age. Its archi- 
tecture alone, if it may be so called, would be sufficient to settle this 
point. As may be seen from the annexed woodcut it is as essentially 
wooden as any other cave facade in India. Whether it is more so 
than the cave at Bhaja quoted above (woodcut No. 1), is difficult to 
determine on its merits alone. If we had any Chaitya caves in 



1 When Hiuen Thsang was journeying from Patna to Gaya, in 637 a.d,, he visited 
these caves, as I pointed out in -1872, in my paper on bis travels in the Journal of the 
R. A. S., vol. vL, new series, p. 221, et seq. He, however, found them nearly deserted, only 
a few monks (quelques douzaines) remained, who acted as guides to show him the 
localities. . . . When I wrote that paper I was obliged to rely on tbe account in the 
life of the pilgrim, by Hoei li. Julien's translation of tbe Si-yu-ki, ou which General 
Cunningham principally relied, having a misprint of " 200 pas " instead of *» 200 ii " 
for the pilgrim's first journey from Patna. Tbe Rev. Mr. Beal, who is translating 
the work, assures me this is so, aud that I consequently was quite justified in rejecting 
the General's conjecture, and insisting on the fact that the pilgrim did visit these caves, 
Julien's Translation of tbe Si-yu-ki, vol. i., p. 139 ; vol. ii., p. 439, et seq. 

2 These inscriptions were first translated by Wilkins in the 1st vol, Asiatic Researches, 
afterwards by Prinsep, J. A. S. B. t vol. vi, p 671, et seq. 



BARABAR GROUP 



39 




No. 3. Facade of the Lomas Rishi Cave, from a Photograph. 

Behar which admitted of direct comparison it might be possible to do 
so, but when these eastern caves were excavated, the bold expedient 
had not occurred to any one of sinking a cave at right angles to the 
face of the rock, deep into its bowels, and leaving one end entirely 
open for the admission of light. All the Behar caves have their 
axis parallel to the face of the rock, and their entrances are placed 
consequently on one side, so as to act as windows to light their 
interiors as well as for entrances. Another peculiarity of the eastern 
caves is that no real woodwork was used in their decoration, while 
all the early Chaitya caves in the west, were adorned with wooden 
ribs internally, whose remains are to be seen at this day, and their 
facades were, as at Bhaja, entirely constructed in teak wood. It may 
be that the roofs of the buildings copied in the caves at Behar were 
framed in bambu, without wooden ribs, like the huts of the present 
day, and consequently they could neither be easily repeated nor imi- 
tated in the rock. But be this as it may, these differences are such 
that no direct comparison between the styles adopted in the two sides 
of India, could be expected to yield any very satisfactory results. It 
is consequently fortunate that in Asoka's time, as we know from the 
example at Bharhut, it was the fashion to inscribe everything. At 
Bharhut there is hardly a single person, nor a Jataka, or historical 
scene, which has not a name or a description attached to it, and this 
seems also to have been the case with these caves. Before the time 



40 EASTERN CAVES. 

when the gateways at Sanchi were erected, in the first century of our 
era, this good custom seems to have died out. All the rails there are 
inscribed with the names of their donors, but they are earlier than 
the gateways. They too, however, have also the names of their donors 
engraved on them, but unfortunately nothing to help us to discri- 
minate what the subjects are which are represented in the sculptures. 

One characteristic which is constant both in the early caves in 
the eastern and western sides of India is that all the doorways have 
jambs sloping inwards. This could only have arisen from one of two 
circumstances : either it was, as at Mycenae and in all the early Grecian 
buildings in pre-Hellenic times, for the sake of shortening the bearing 
on the lintel. The Pelasgi had no knowledge of the principle of 
the radiating arch, and used only Bmall stones in their architecture 
generally. It consequently, though awkward, was a justifiable 
expedient. In India it arose, as already pointed out, from a totally 
different cause. It was because the earliest cave diggers were 
copying wooden buildings, in which the main posts were placed 
sloping inwards, in order to counteract the outward thrust of their 
semicircular roofs. Though tolerable, however, while following the 
main lines of the building, the sloping jambs of the doorways were 
early felt to be inappropriate to stone constructions, and the prac- 
tice in India died out entirely before the Christian era. 1 

Although so differently arranged that it is difficult to institute 

1 General Cunningham and his assistants, like too many others, call these doorways 
14 Egyptian," though such forms are not known in that style of architecture except in 
the cockney example in Piccadilly. The truth is, even as early as the times of the 
Pyramids (b.c. 3700) the Egyptians had learned to quarry blocks of any required 
dimensions, and had no temptation to adopt this weak and unconstructive form of 
opening, and as they never, bo far as we know, used wooden architecture, they must 
always have felt its incongruity. If we expect to find such forms in Egypt we muBt 
go back some thousands of years before the time of the Pyramids, and I doubt much if 
sloping jambs could have existed in that country even then. 

In Greece, on the contrary, wherever the Pelasgic or Ionian race remained, they 
retained these sloping jambs from that curious veneration for ancient forms which per- 
vades all architectural history, and leads to the retention of the many awkward contri- 
vances when once the eye is accustomed to them. The sloping jamb, it need hardly be 
said, is never found associated with the Doric order, but was retained with the 
Ionic as late as the age of Pericles in the Erechtheum at Athens. See History of 
Architecture, vol. i. pp. 234 to 240, and 286, et acq. 

In niches, and as a merely decorative form, the sloping jambs were retained in the 
monasteries of Gandhara to the west of the Indus, till long after the Christian era, 
but never, so far as I know, in constructive openings. 



BARABAR GROUP. 



41 



any direct comparison between them and the western Chaitya or 
Church caves, it seems almost certain that none of the Barabar 
caves were meant as residences, but were intended for sacred or 
ceremonial purposes. The one most like a Vihara, or residence, is 
the Nagarjuni cave, called " the Milkmaid's cave," but even there a 
great hall 46 feet long, with rounded ends, and only one small dooF 
in the centre of one side, seems too large for the residence of one 
hermit, and it has none of those divisions into cells which are 
universally found in all western Viharas. 1 At the same time it 
must be confessed that our knowledge of Buddhist ceremonial in 
the age of Asoka does not enable us to say what kind of service 
would be appropriate to such a hall. It may, however, have been a 
Dharmasala or hall of assembly for the congregation ; a form of 
building which was probably usual with the Buddhists in all ages 
of their supremacy. 

The case is somewhat different with the j£arna Chopar cave, a rect - 
angular hall measuring 33 feet by 14, which was excavated in the 
19th year of Asoka. But here a vedi or s tone 
altar_at one end clearly indicates a sacred 
purpose. On the other hand, there can be no 
doubt but that the Sudama and Lomas Rishi 
caves, which are so nearly identical in form, 
were real Chaityas. Instead, however, of the 
circular dagobas, which in all instances occupy 
the centre of the apsidal inner termination of 
the western caves, its place is here taken by a 
circular chamber evidently meaning the same 
thing. It is difficult for us now to decide at 
the present day whether it was inexperience 
which prevented the early cave diggers from No. s. Sudama Cave, 
seeing their way to leave a free standing dagoba in their halls, or 




No. 4. Lomas Rishi Cave. 
Scale 50 feet to 1 inch. 




1 The only erections I know of, at all like this cave in plan, are the residences of the 
Naga chiefs, in the hills south of the Asam valley. Two of these are represented in 
Plate II. of the Journal of the Asiatic Society oj Bengal, vol. xli. for 1872, which with 
these rounded ends seem to resemble this so-called Milkmaid's cave in many respects. 
The mode in which the ridge poles are thrust through the roof occurs frequently in the 
sculptures at Bharhut and elsewhere. 

3 At Kondiwte in the Isle of Saleette there is a very old cave, very similar to those at 
Barabar, except that it is sunk perpendicularly into the hill aide. It has a circular 



42 EASTERN CAVES. 

whether it was that in structural buildings of that age a wooden 
or metal dagoba or relic shrine stood in a circular chapel, and they 
copied that. 2 But be that as it may, there seems no doubt that the 
oircular chambers in these two caves, were the sanctuaries which 
contained the object to be worshipped, whatever that was, and 
constituted their claim to rank as chapels, not residences. 

The remaining two are so small and insignificant as hardly to 
deserve notice, but one, the Vapiya or "Well Cave, seems to have got 
its name from a sacred well close by. It is a square cell with an 
antechamber, and is attached to another, called the Vadathi, which 
is the last of the series. General Cunningham seems to think there 
was a Stupa, or some sacred edifice, ereoted in brick or stone above 
these two caves, and that they formed only, as it were, its lower 
storey. 1 This on the whole seems so probable that it may be 
adopted without hesitation, though it will only be by careful exam- 
ination on the spot that it can be determined with certainty. 

Though the caves of this group are among the smallest and the 
least ornamented of any to be found in India, it still must have 
required a strong religious impulse to induce men to excavate even 
caves 30 and 40 feet in length in the hard granite rock, and to 
polish their interiors to the extent that some of these are finished, 
and all probably were intended to have been. Both internally and 
externally, however, they are so plain that but for their inscriptions 
we should hardly know to what age to assign them, were it not for 
the fortunate circumstance that a fa9ade was added to the Lomas 
Rishi Cave. When it, however, is compared with the caves at Bhaja, 
(woodcut No. 1), or with any of the pre-Christian caves of the western 
side of India, it is found to possess all the more marked peculiarities 
of their architecture. It has, as all the earlier caves have, the two 
great posts sloping inwards, and supporting in mortices, on their 
heads, the two great longitudinal ribs of the roof. It ha8, too, the 

chamber at its inner end, like that in the Lomas RiBhi cave, but in 

it stands a stone rock -cut dagoba, certainly of the same age as the 

cave itself. This makes it extremely probable that the Barabar 

chambers were occupied by dagobas in wood or metal, but no 

50 feet to otner Bimiuir chamber is known to exist in the West The 

l inch. circular chamber evidently is unmeaning, and its use was 

Ho. 6. Kondhrt&Cave, abandoned as soon as it was seen how much better the cave was 

S^ 6 - without it. 

1 Reports, vol. i. p. 49. 




BABABAB GBO0P. 43 

open framework of wood between them, which was equally universal, 
and the rafters and little fashion pieces which kept the lower parts 
of the roof in its place. In fact we have here in stone every feature 
of those wooden facades which the earlier excavators of caves 
copied so literally in the rock. It is unfortunately, however, only iu 
stone, and we cannot even now feel quite certain how the roof was 
covered, when erected as a building standing free. It looks as if 
formed of two thicknesses of wooden planks, one bent, and the 
other laid longitudinally, and with a covering of metal; it could 
hardly have been thatch, the thickness is scarcely sufficient, and 
when men were copying construction so literally, it would have 
been easy to have made the outer covering 9 inches or a foot in 
thickness instead of only the same aB the other two coverings. 1 Be 
this as it may, the age of the fajade is not doubtful, and so far as 
we at present know it is the earliest architectural composition that 
exists in any part of India, and one of the most instructive, from the 
literal manner in which it its wooden prototypes are copied in the 
rock.* 



1 The whole thickness of the roof bo far as I can make out from the photographs is 
only 9 or 10 inches. 

2 The buildings now existing in India, that seem most like these primitive caves in 
elevation, are the huts or houses erected by the Todas on the NUagiri hills. They are 
formed of bambu neatly bound together with rattans. Their section is nearly the 
Bame as that of the caves, and they are covered externally with a very delicate thatch. 
For an account of them see An Account of the primitive Tribes and Monuments 
of the Nilagiris, by J. W. Breeka, M.C.S., published by Allen & Co. for the India 
Office in 1873, Plates VIII. and IX. 



44 



CHAPTER II. 
RAJGIR. 
Rajagriha, or Rajgir as it is now popularly called, was the capital 
of Magadha or central India during the whole period of Buddha's 
ministrations in India. It was tho residence of Bimbasara, during 
whose reign he attained Buddhahood, and of Ajatasatru, in the 8th 
year of whose reign he entered into Nirvana, b.c. 481, according to 
the recently adopted chronology (ante, p. 24, 25). It is quite true that 
he resided during the greater part of the 53 years to which his mission 
extended at Benares, Sravasti, or Vaisaka (Lucknow 1 ), but still he 
frequently returned to the capital, and the most important transac- 
tions of his life were all more or less connected with the kings who 
then reigned there. Under these circumstances it is hardly to be 
wondered at that Rajgir was considered almost as sacred in the eyes 
of his followers, as Jerusalem became to the Christians, and that 
such pilgrims as Fa Hian and Hiuen Thsang, naturally turned their 
steps almost instinctively to its site, and explored its ruins with the 
most reverent care. Long beforo their time, however, the old city 
had been deserted. It never could have been a healthy or com- 
modious city, being surrounded on all sides by hills, which must 
have circumscribed its dimensions and impeded the free circu- 
lation of air to an inconvenient extent. It consequently had 
been superseded long before their time, in the fifth and seventh 
century, by a new city bearing the same name but of much 
smaller size just outside the valley, to the northward. This, 
however, could never have been more than a provincial capital. 
The seat of empire during Asoka's reign having been transferred 
to Palibothra (Patna) on the GangeB, which we know from the 

1 1 btatc this deliberately, notwithstanding what is said by General Cunningham in 
the Ancient Geography of India, p. 401, et scq., though this is not the place to attempt 
to prove it. Hiuen Thsang, however, places Vaisaka 500 li or 83 miles S.W. from 
&ravasti which can only apply to Lucknow, and Fa H ion's Sa-chi, measured from 
Canouge or Sravasti, equally points to Lucknow us the city where the " tooth-brush 
tree" grew. Neither of the pilgrims ever approached Ayodhya (Fyzabad), which 
had been deserted long before Buddha's time. If the mounds that exist in the city 
of Lucknow were as carefully examined, they would probably yield more treasures 
than even those of Mathura. — J.F. 



RAJGIR. 45 

accounts of Megasthenes was an important city in the days of his 
grandfather Chandragupta. At the same time, any ecclesiastical 
establishments that might have been attracted by the sanctity 
of the place, must have been transferred to Nalanda, between 6 and 7 
miles due north from the new city, where there arose the most 
important monastic establishment connected with Buddhism that, so 
far as Ave know, ever existed in India. 1 Fortunately for us Hiuen 
Tlxsang has left us a glowing description of the splendour of its 
buildings, and of the piety and learning of the monks that resided 
in them. With this, however, we probably must remain content, 
inasmuch as some excavations recently undertaken on the spot 
have gone far to prove that all the remains now existing belong to 
buildings erected during the supremacy of the Pala dynasty of 
Bengal (765 to 1200 a.d.). The probability is that all the viharas 
described by Hiuen Thsang were erected wholly in wood, which 
indeed we might infer from his description, and that the monastery- 
was burnt, or at least destroyed, in the troubles that followed the 
death of Siladitya in 650 a.d., 8 and they consequently can have no 
bearing on the subject we are now discussing. 

Under the circumstances above detailed leading to the early deser- 
tion of Rajgir, it would of course be idle to look now for any extensive 
remains of the buildings, if it ever had any, in stone or any permanent 
material, and equally so to expect any extensive rock-cut Yiharas or 
Chaitya caves in the immediate vicinity of such an establishment as 
that at Nalanda. Practically we are reduced for structural buildings 
to the Jarasandha-ka-Baithak, above described (woodcut No. 2), and 
for rock-cut examples to one cave, or rather pair of caves, known 
as the Son Bhandar or Golden Treasury. 

The larger of these two caves is very similar in plan to the 
Kama Chopar cave at Barabur and nearly of the same dimensions, 
being 34 feet by 17 feet. 3 Its walls are perfectly plain to the height 
of 6 feet 9inches, and thence rise to 11 feet 6 inches in the centre of a 
slightly pointed arch. The doorway is towards one end and has the 
usual sloping jambs of the period, the proportion between the lintel 
and sill being apparently as 5 to 6, which seems to be somewhat less 



1 See History of Indian Architecture, vol. i., p. 136. 

■ Hiuen Tlwang, vol. i., p. 151. ; Ma-twan-lin, J. A. S. B., vol. vi., p. 69, 

8 Cunningham, Reports, vol. v., Plate XIX. 



46 



EASTERN CAVES. 





No. 7. Plan Son Bhandur Caves. No. 8. Section Son Bhandar CareH. 

Scale 50 feet to 1 inch. Scale 25 feet to 1 inch. 

From Onnningham's Report, vol. iii. 

than the proportion at Barabar. 1 This doorway is balanced towards 
the other end of the cave by a window nearly 3 feet square, which is 




No. 9. Front of Son Biindhar Cave, from a Photograph. 

a decided innovation, and the first of its class known to exist in 
India. A still greater advance in cave architecture is the existence 
of a verandah 8 feet deep, extending along the front, and at one end 
some way beyond the cave. It existence is quite certain from the 
mortice holes still remaining in the rock into which the ends of the 
rafters were inserted, as shown in the woodcut. Its having been 
added here is specially interesting, as it certainly is, like the window, 
an improvement, and almost as certainly an advance on the design 
of the Barabar caves, and as clearly anterior to that of the Katak 
caves, where the verandahs are, as a rule, cut in the rock, with 
massive pillars in stone forming part of the original design. 

As will be explained in the subsequent pages of the work, nearly 

1 The greater part of the information concerning this cave is taken from General 
Cunningham's Reports, vol. iii. p. 140, Plate XLIII., but his drawings are on too small 
a scale and too rough to show all that is wanted. Kittoe also drew and described it, 
J. A. S. B., September 1847. It is also described by Broadley, Indian Antiquary 
voL L, p. 74, 



RAJGIB. 



47 



all the ornamentation of the Chaitya caves in the West down to the 
Christian era was either a literal copy of wooden construction, or 
was executed in wood itself, generally teak, attached to the rock and 
in very many instances, as at Bhaja, Bedsa, KarlS, and elsewhere, the 
actual woodwork still remains where it was fixed some 2,000 years 
ago. From the representations of buildings at Buddha Gaya and 
at Bharhut and from the front of the Lomas Rishi cave quoted 









■R : # ii|pi»ii 




No. 10. Representation of a Hall, from Cunningham's Stupa at Bharhut. 

above (woodcut No. 3) we know that precisely the same mode of 
decoration was employed in the eastern caves, that was usual in the 
western ones, but in none of the Behar caves have we any evidence 
of wood being so employed except in the verandah of this cave 
and in one or two doubtful instances at Katak. One example 
may not be considered as sufficient to prove a case, but as far as it 
goes, this seems to be a first attempt to remedy a defect that must 
have become apparent as soon as the Barabar caves were completed. 
With very rare exceptions all the caves on both sides of India have 
verandahs, which were nearly indispensable, to protect the openings 
into the interior from the sun, but in nearly all subsequent excava- 



48 EASTERN GATES. 

tions these were formed in stone, and became the most ornamental 
parts of the structure. 

The other Son Bhandar cove is situated at a distance of 30 feet 
from the larger one and in all respects similar except that its dimen- 
sions are only 22 feet by 17. The roof has almost entirely fallen in, 
and only one mortice hole exists to show that it had a "wooden 
verandah similar to that in front of the other cave. 

Between these two caves a mass of rock is left standing in order 
to admit of a flight of steps being cut in it, leading to the surface of 
the rock above the roof of these two caves. Whether this led to an 
upper storey either in woodwork or brick, or whetherjjiere was not 
a dagoba or shrine on the upper platform, can only be ascertained 
when some one visits_ the spot after having~hls attention specially 
directed to this object, from its analogywith what is foun d in oth er 
places. From the arrangements of so meoF^ he JJatak caves, 1 would 
rather expect to find the Tgmails_oiIan upper storey. BirHt^may be 
very difficult to determine this, for whether it was a stupa or dwel- 
ling, if in brick, it may have been utilised long ago. As before 
mentioned, General Cunningham seems to think that a vihara in brick, 
but with granite pillars, existed in a corresponding situation above 
the Yapiya and Vadathi caves at Barabar. 1 If he is right in this, 
which seems very probable, it would go far to establish the hypothesis 
of the existence of a second storey over the Son Bhandar cave. 

There seems to be nothing except its architecture by which the 
age of this cave can be determined. Kittoe, indeed, says " there are 
some rude outlines of Buddhas carved upon it," and there is also 
a handsome miniature Jain temple much mutilated, 8 which he gives 
a drawing of. The Buddhas I fancy are much more likely to be 
Jaina Tirthankaras, which are so easily added when there is so much 
plain surface, and as the " temple " BhowB that the cave was after- 
wards appropriated by the Jains, nothing is more probable than that 
they should ornament the walls by carving such figures upon them. 
Broadley is more distinct. " Outside the door," he says, " and 3 
feet to the west of it, is a headless figure of Buddha cut in the 
rock, and close to it an inscription in the Ashoka character." 3 
But as neither Cunningham nor Kittoe saw either, and they do not 



Reports, vol. i. p. 49. * Kittoe, J. A. S. B., Sept. 1847, Plate XLII. 

3 Indian Antiquary, vol. i. p. 74, 



RAJGIR. 49 

appear in Peppe's photograph from which the woodcut is taken, 
we must pause before accepting his statement. On the whole, 
therefore, taking the evidence as it stands, there seems no good 
reason for doubting that the Son Bhandar caves belong to the 
Great Mauryan dynasty, B.C. 319 to 180. At the same time the 
whole evidence tends to show that they are more modern than the 
dated caves at Barabar, and that they were consequently excavated 
sub sequen"tly" to the year 225 B.C. — ~ 

We are fortunately relieved from the necessity of discussing 
the theory, so strongly insisted upon by General Cunningham, that 
the Son Bhandar cave is identical with the Sattapanni cave, where 
the first convocation was held, 1 from the fortunate discovery by 
Mr. Beglar of a group of caves which almost undoubtedly were 
the seven caves that originally bore that name (Sapta parna, seven 
leaved). 8 On the northern side of "the Vaibhara (Webhara) hill 

1 Cunningham, Arch. Report, vol. iii. pp. 140 to 144. 

2 Although we may not be able to fix with precision either the purpose for which 
the Son Bhandar caves were excavated, nor their exact date, it is quite clear they are 
not the Sattapanni cave, near which, according to all tradition, the first convocation 
was held immediately after the decease of the founder of the religion. In the first 
place, a hall, only 34 feet by 17, about the size of an ordinary London drawing-room, 
is not a place where an assembly of 500 Arhats could assemble, and the verandah, 
8 feet wide, would add little to the accommodation for this purpose. It is hardly worth 
while attempting to refute in any great detail the various arguments brought forward 
in favour of this hypothesis, for there is no proof except the assertion of modern 
Ceylonese and Burmese authorities, who knew nothing of the localities, that the convo- 
cation was held in a cave at all, and everything shows that this was not the case. 
The Mahawanso (p. 12) states that it was in a splendid hall like to those of the Devas 
at the entrance of the Sattapanni cave. Mr. Beal's Translation of Fa Wan (p. 118) 
makes exactly the same assertion, but with an ambiguity of expression that might be 
construed into the assertion that it was in and not at the cave that the convocation 
was held. But Remusat's translation, as it is in strict accordance with the more 
detailed statements of Hiuen Thsang, is at least equally entitled to respect. He says : — 
" Au nord de la montagne, et dans un endroit ombrage, il y a une maison de pierre 
nomine Tchheti, e'est le lieu ou apres le Nirvana de Fofi, 500 Arhans recueillirent la col- 
lection des livres sacres." l Hiuen Thsang makes no mention of a cave, but describes 
the foundations which he saw of " une grande maison en pierre," which was built by 
Ajatasatru for the purpose in the middle of a vast forest of bambus. 2 Even the 
Burmese authorities, who seem to have taken up the idea of its having been held in a 
cave, assert that the ground was first encircled with a fence, — which is impossible 
with a cave, — and within which was built a magnificent hall. 3 The truth seems to be 



1 Fofi Kui! Ki, 272. s Julien, vol. iii. p. 82. 3 Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 354. 

Y U2. D 



50 EABTBEN CAVES. 

there exists a group of natural caverns, six in number, but there 
is room for a seventh, and evidence that it did originally exist 
there. As unfortunately Mr. Beglar is not an adept at plan 
drawing, his plan and section (pp. 92 and 96) do not make this so 
clear as might be desired, in fact without his text, his plans would 
be unintelligible. With their assistance we gather that owing to 
some abnormal configuration of the rocks there are at this spot a 
series of fissures varying in width as 4, 6, 8, and 10 feet, and ranging 
from 6 to 12 feet in depth (p. 96). What their height is is not 
stated, nor can the fact be ascertained from the drawings, it is not 
however of much importance. 1 The real point that interests us most 
in this instance is, that as in the Jarasandha-ka-Baithak (ante, p. 33) 
with its 15 cells, we have the earliest known example of a structural 
Vihara in India, so here we have the earliest known instance of a 
rock — we can hardly add — cut Vihara with 7 cells, and for both of 
which we have historical or at least traditional evidence, to show that 
they existed contemporaneously with, if not before, the lifetime of 
Buddha himself. Like all those, however, which have any claim to 
an antiquity earlier than the age of ASoka (b.c. 250), it is a mere 
group of natural caverns without a chisel mark upon them, or 
anything to indicate that they were not rather the lairs of wild 
beasts than the abodes of civilised men. 

There are still two other caves or groups of caves at Rajgir, which 
are of considerable interest from their historical, though certainly 

that the modern Buddhists, like the mediseval Christians in Palestine, thought every- 
thing was, or at ieast ought to hare been, done in a care, but when read with care, 
there is certainly nothing except in the most modern writings to indicate that this 
was the case in this instance, and there certainly is no cave in Rajagriha which is 
fitted or ever could have been made suitable for such a purpose. The convocation was 
in fact held In one of those great halls of which we have several instances among the 
western caves. The last woodcut, however, representing one from the rail at Bharhut, 
150 years B.C., and one at Kanheri shown in plan, Plate UlV., with the examples to be 
described hereafter at Mahavallipur and probably also the Nagarjuni cave at Barabar 
just described, show us the form of Dharmasalas that were in use among the Buddhists 
in that age, and were perfectly suited to the purposes of such an assembly. It pro- 
bably was a building measuring at least 100 feet by 60, like the cave at Kanheri, witfi 
a verandah of 10 feet all round. With the knowledge we now have of the archi- 
tecture of Aioka'e time there would be no difficulty in restoring approximately such 
a hall, and in a general history it might be well to attempt it, but it has no direct 
bearing on the history of cave architecture. 

1 Beglar on Cunningham'/ Reports, voL viii. pp. 89 to 99. 



RAJGIE. 51 

not from their artistic value. The first is known as the house or 
residence of Devadatta, the persistent enemy of Buddha. It is only 
a natural cavern situated at the foot of the hill in the north-eastern 
corner of the city at a spot marked M in General Cunningham's 
map (Vol. III., Plate XLL), but not described by him nor by Mr. 
Beglar, 1 but as it is merely a natural cavern this is of little conse- 
quence, except as affording another example of the primitive fonn 
of all the earlier caveB. In front of it is still to be seen the rock 
which, according to tradition, Devadatta rolled down from the 
mountain athwart Buddha's path and wounded a toe of his foot. 2 

The other group of caves is on the Gridharakuta hill, about 3 miles 
north-east from the city, iB of still greater interest, as it is described 
minutely by both the Chinese pilgrims as a place much frequented 
by Buddha and his companion Ananda. The elder pilgrim describes 
it in the following terms : " The peaks of this mountain are pic- 
turesque and imposing ; it is the loftiest of the five mountains that 
surround the town. Fah Hian having bought flowers, incense, and 
oil and lamps in the new town, procured the assistance of the aged 
Bikshus to accompany him to the top of the peak. Having arrived 
there he offered his flowers and incense, and lit his lamps, so that 
their combined lustre illuminated the glories of the cave; Fah 
Hian was deeply moved, even till the tears coursed down his 
cheeks, and he said, Here it was in bygone days that Buddha 

dwelt Fah Hian, not privileged to be born at a time when 

Buddha lived, can but gaze on the traces of his presence, and the 
place which he occupied." 3 

Neither General Cunningham nor Mr. Broadley ascended the peak 
high enough to reach these caves ; the hill may be 100 to 150 feet in 
height. It was consequently reserved for Mr. Beglar to make the 
discovery. He followed the causeway that led to them a few hun- 
dred yards further, and hit at once on two about 50 feet apart, 
which seem to answer to Buddha's meditation cave, and the Ananda 
cave as described by the Chinese pilgrims. They are both natural 
caverns, the larger measuring 12 feet by 10, of irregular shape, but, 
the irregularities slightly reduced by filling in with brickwork on 
which are some traces of plaster, and inside there are now found Borne 



1 Archaeological Report, vol. viii. p. 90. 

* Fah Hian, Beats Translation, p. 116 ; Julien, vol. iii. p. 27. 

s Ibid, vol. iii., p. 20. 

n 5> 



52 EASTERN CAVES. 

fragments of sculpture lying about, but evidently of a much more 
modern date. As Mr. Beglar's map is nearly as unintelligible as his 
drawings, we are left to conjecture which of the two caves marked 
upon it are those just referred to, nor how many more exist on the 
spot. The text says 7, 2-f-5, but only four are shown, and the other 
buildings- he describes cannot be identified on it. 1 Enough, however, 
is shown and said to make it quite clear that these are the caves 
referred to by the Chinese pilgrims, and to prove to us that, like all 
the caves connected by tradition with the name of Buddha, they are 
mere natural caverns untouched by the chisel, though their irregula- 
rities are sometimes smoothed down with brickwork and plaster, and 
that the latter may, in some instances at least, have been originally 
adorned with paintings. 

Sita Marhi Cave. 

Before leaving this neighbourhood there is still 
one small cave that is worth mentioning as the only 
other known of the same age as those of Barabar 
and Rajgir. 2 It consists of a chamber rectangular 
in plan, and measuring 15 feet 9 inches, by 11 feet 
3 inches, which is hollowed out of an isolated granite 
boulder lying detached by itself, and not near any 
other rocks. Inside it is as carefully polished as 
any of those at Barabar, except the inner wall where 
the surface has peeled off. 3 Its principal interest, 
however, resides in its section (woodcut, No. 11), 
No.n.PianandSection which is that of a pointed arch rising from the floor 
ita ar i ave i eve ^ without any perpendicular sides, which are 

1 The information regarding these caves is not to bo found in the body of Mr. 
Beglar's report, vol. viii., but in a prefatory note, pp. xv to xxi, -which makes no refer- 
ence to the text, which it contradicts in all essential particulars, or to Map XXII., 
which is equally ignored in the body of the work. In fact, it is very much to be 
regretted that the manner in which these reports are put together is not creditable 
to any of those concerned in their production. 

2 It is situated at a place called Sita Marhi, 14 miles south of Rajgir, and 24 east 
from Gaya, as nearly as I can make out from the map attached to Mr. Beglar's report, 
but the spot is not marked, though the name is. 

3 Mr. Beglar, from -whose report (viii. p. 106) these particulars are taken, men- 
tions some pieces of sculpture as existing, and now worshipped in the cave, but whether 
they are cut in the rock or detached is not mentioned, and is of very little consequence, 
as they are evidently quite modem. 




SITA MARIII. 53 

universally to be found in the other caves here. The jambs of the 
doorway also slope inwards nearly in the ratio of 3 to 4, from both 
which peculiarities I would infer that this may be the oldest cave in 
the neighbourhood. We must however have a more extended series 
of examples before we can form a reliable sequence in this direction, 
but it is only by quoting new examples as they turn up that we can 
hope to arrive at such a chronological scale ; in the meantime, how- 
ever, we may feel sure that this hermitage belongs to the great 
Mauryan age, but whether before or after Asoka's time must be left 
at present undetermined ; my impression at present is that it is the 
oldest thing of its class yet discovered in India. 

On the banks of the Sona river, above Rohtasgarh, there are 
several excavations, some of them apparently of considerable extent, 
but they have never yet been examined, so far at least as I can 
learn, by anyone who could say what they were, nor of what age. 
We must consequently wait for further information before attempt- 
ing to describe them. Further up, in the valley of the same river, 
at a place called Harchoka, there are some very extensive excavations, 
regarding which it would be very desirable some more information 
could be obtained. The place is situated in latitude 23° 51' 31", 
longitude 81° 45' 34", as nearly as may be 110 miles due south from 
Allahabad, and as it is only 70 miles south-east from Bharhut, it 
seems a pity it was not visited by General Cunningham, or one of 
his assistants, while exploring that country in search for fragments 
of that celebrated stupa. What we know of it is derived from a 
paper by Captain Samuells in Vol. XL. of the Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, p. 177 et seq., which is accompanied by a plan and 
section very carefully drawn, but the latter unfortunately on so 
small a scale that its details are undistinguishable. As Captain 
Samuells does not profess to be an archaeologist his text does not 
afford us much information, either as to the age of this excavation, 
nor as to the religion to which it was dedicated. If an opinion may 
be hazarded, from the imperfect data available, I would suggest 
that this cave is contemporary with the late Brahmanical caves at 
Elura, and consequently belongs to the 7th or 8th century, and that 
the religion to which it was dedicated was that of Siva. 1 

1 In the year 1794 Captain Blunt visited two extensive sets of caves at a place called 
Mara, in the neighbourhood, and described them in the seventh volume of the Asiatic 



54 EASTERN OAVES. 

It may at first sight appear, that more has been said in the pre- 
ceding pages, with referenoe to these Behar caves than their impor- 
tance justifies. Looked at from an architectural point of view, this 
is undoubtedly the case, but from their being the oldest oaves known, 
and their dates being ascertained with all desirable precision, a 
knowledge of their peculiarities forms a basis for what follows, 
without which our knowledge would still rest on a very unstable 
foundation. 

From the experience gained by our examination of these caves we 
gather, first : — 

That all the caves with which Buddha's name or actions are asso- 
ciated were mere natural caverns unimproved by art, except in so far 
as some of them have been partially lined with brickwork, but in no 
instance are they entitled to be called rock-cut. 

Secondly. That the earliest rock-out examples were, even inter- 
nally, plain unornamented chambers with polished walls, their roofs 
imitating the form of woodwork, or it may be that of bambu huts. 1 
That what ornament was attempted externally, as in the Lomas Bishi 
cave, was a mere copy of a wooden construction, and that any exten- 
sion that was required, as in the Son Bh&ndar cave, was actually 
executed in wood. 

Thirdly. That all the jambs of the doorways slope inward, follow- 
ing the lines of the posts supporting the circular roofs, which were 
made to lean inwards to counteract the thrust inherent in that form 
of construction. 2 

Lastly. That all the rude unknown caves may be considered as 
anterior to the age of Chandragupta, and all those, in Behar at 
least, with sloping jambs may be assumed to be comprehended within 
the duration of the Mauryan dynasty, which ended about 180 B.C. ; 
the angle of rake being probably the best index yet obtained for 
their relative antiquity. 

Researches, Captain Samuells seems also to have visited them, but as he does not 
describe them be probably thought them of less importance than those at Harchoka. 

1 In no instance is it possible to conceive that they were copies of constructions 
either on stone or brick. 

* I shall be very much surprised if it is not found that the -walls in the Barabar 
caves do also lean inwards • but they have not yet been observed with sufficient accuracy 
to detect such a peculiarity. 



55 



CHAPTER II. 

KATAK CAVES. 

Introductory. 

To the artist or the architect the group of caves situated on the 
Udayagiri hill in Orissa is perhaps even more interesting than those 
in Behar juBt described, but to the archaeologist they are less so, 
from the difficulty of fixing their dates with the same certainty, and 
because their forms have not the Bame direct bearing on the origin or 
history of the great groups of caves on the western side of India. 
Notwithstanding this, the picturesqueness of their forms, the richness 
of their sculptures and architectural details, combined with their 
acknowledged antiquity, render them one of the most important 
groups of caves in India, and one that it is impossible to pass over 
in such a work as this, without describing them in very considerable 
detail. 

The caves in question are all situated in a picturesque and well 
wooded group of hills that rise out of the level plains of the Delta 
of the Mahanaddi, almost like islands from the ocean. Their com- 
position is of a coarse sandstone rock, very unusual in that neigh- 
bourhood, but which from that circumstance offered greater facilities 
for their excavation than the laterite rocks with which the country 
everywhere abounds. Their position is not marked on any of the 
ordinary maps of the country, but may easily be fixed, as their 
bearing iB 17 miles Blightly to the east of south from Katak, and 
4 miles north-west from BhuvauosVar. The great Saiva temple of 
that city, one of the oldest and finest in India, being easily dis- 
cernible from the tops of the hills in which the caves are excavated. 

Besides the facilities for excavation, there were probably other 
motives which attraoted the early Buddhist hermits to select these 
bi lk as their abode and continue to occupy them during three or 
four centuries at least. We may probably never be able to ascertain 
with accuracy what these reasons were, or how early they were so 
occupied". "We know, however, that Asoka about the year 250 b.c. 
seleoted the Aswatama rooks, near Dhauli, about 6 miles south-east 



56 BASTEEN CAVES. 

from these hills, as the spot on which to engrave one of the most 
complete and perfect sets of his series of edicts, 1 and he hardly 
would have chosen so remote a corner of his dominions for this 
purpose, had the place not possessed some previous sanctity in the 
eyes of his co-religionists. Unfortunately we are not able to fix 
with anything like certainty the site of Danta-puri, the city in which 
the celebrated Tooth Eelic was enshrined, and where it remained till 
carried off to Ceylon in the beginning of the fourth century of our 
era. 2 It certainly was not far from this, and may have been in 
the immediate vicinity of the caves, though the evidence, as it at 
present stands, seems to favour the idea that it was at Puri where the 
famous temple of Jagannath now stands, some 30 miles south of the 
caves. The fact, however, that it is recorded by the Buddhists that 
the Tooth Relic was brought to this neighbourhood immediately 
after the cremation of his body, and the certainty of its being chosen 
by Asoka b.c. 250 to record his edicts, is sufficient to show that early 
in the history of that religion this neighbourhood was occupied by 
Buddhists. There is however no record or tradition of Buddha him- 
self ever having visited the locality, or of any event having occurred 
there that gave rise to the erection of any Stupa or other monument 
in the neighbourhood, and even Hiuen Thsang, when passing through 
the country in a.d. 640, does not mention any spot as sanctified by the 
presence or labours of Buddha or of any of his immediate disciples. 3 
There are some 16 or 17 excavations of importance on the Udaya- 
giri hill, besides numerous little rock-cut hermitages — cells in which 
a single ascetic could dwell and do penance. All these belong to the 
Buddhist religion and there is one Buddhist cave in the Khandagiri 
hill — the Ananta. The others there, though large and important, 
are much more modern and all belong to the Jaina form of faith. 
There is also a modern Jaina temple built by the Marathas on the 
top of that hill, and I cannot help believing that Kittoe was correct 
when he says that there has been a large circular building on the 
corresponding summit of the Udayagiri rock ; * but I have not been 

1 J, A. S. B., vol. xii. p. 436, for Kittoe' t plates and description of the locality. 

2 J. R. A. S., vol. iii. new series, pp. 149 et aeq. 
8 Julien, vol. i. 184; iii. 88. 

* J. A. S. B., xii. p. 438. In a private letter from Mr. Phillips, the joint magistrate 
of the district, he informs me " there are the remains of some building above the Rani 
ka nonr, i.e., on the top of the Udayagiri." It pro'bably wonld require excavation to 
ascertain its character. 



KATAK CAVES. 57 

able to ascertain for certainty whether the foundations still to be 
seen there are either ancient or in the form of a dagoba. 

These caves were first noticed and partially described by Stirling 
in his admirable account of Cuttack, in the 15th volume of the 
Asiatic Researches published in 1824, and that was the only authority 
existing when I visited them in 1836. At that time, however, all 
the more important caves were occupied by Fakirs and Bairagis 
who violently resented intrusion on their premises, and beBideB my 
time was too limited for any elaborate examination of the whole. 
In 1838 they were visited by Lieut. Kittoe, and his account, with 
the drawings that accompanied it, published in the seventh volume 
of Prinsep's Journal for 1838, still remains the best account of these 
caves yet given to the world. His visit, however, like mine, was too 
hurried to enable him to make plans and draw details, while in his 
time, as in mine, the caves were still inhabited ; otherwise with more 
leisure and better opportunities he would have left little to be done 
by his successors. Since then the caves have been photographed by 
Col. Dixon, Mr. Murray, and others, but without descriptions or 
plans, so that they are of very little use for our present purposes. 1 

1 Some 10 yours ago an opportunity occurred, which had it been availed of, would 
have gone far to remedy the deficiency of former explorers, and to supply an exhaustive 
account of these caves. In 1868-69 Baba Bajeadralala Mitra conducted an expedition 
for that purpose, accompanied by a staff of draughtsmen and students in the school of art 
at Calcutta, who were to be employed in making drawings and casts of the sculptures. 
Their labonrs, however, were almost exclusively directed to the temples at Bhuva- 
neswar, he himself making only personal notes of the caves. In consequence of this, 
mainly, if not wholly, in consequence of reclamations, made by me on the subject, a second 
expedition was sent down by the Bengal Government in the cold weather of 1870-71. 
This was conducted by Mr. C. C. Locke of the Government school of art, and resulted 
in his bringing back plans of all the principal caves and casts of all the more impor- 
tant sculptures. These were placed in Babu Rajendralala's hands for publication, 
which, however, he has not yet found it convenient to carry into effect, but meanwhile 
I have received photographs from the casts, and plans of the caves from Mr. Locke, 
and these form the basis of all oar real knowledge of the subject, and what is most 
relied upon in the following descriptions. (Two of the plans were published in my 
History of Indian Architecture, woodcuts 70 and 72, and five of the casts in my Tree 
and Serpent Worship, Plate C, published in 1873). 

Through the kindness of his friend, Mr. Arthur Grote, late B.C.S., I have been 
permitted to see the corrected proofs of the first 56 pages of the 2nd volume of Babu 
Bajendras' Antiquities of Orissa, which contains his account of these caves, with the ac- 
companying illustrations, but under a pledge that I would not make any quotations from 
them, as it is possible the Babu may yet see fit to cancel them, or at all events modify 



58 EASTERN OAVES. 

In attempting to investigate the history of these oaves, it is 
tantalizing to discover how narrowly we have missed finding in Orissa 
a chronicle of events during the whole Buddhist period as full, 
perhaps even more so, than those still found in Kashmir, Ceylon, or 
any other outlying provinces of India. It is true that the palm leaf 
records of the temple of Jagannath at Puri, in which alone the 
fragments of this history are now to be found, date only apparently 
from the 10th century, and it would be idle to look in a work 
compiled by Brahmans at that time for any record of the acts, even 
perhaps of the names, of Buddhist kings of that country, still less 
of their building temples or excavating caves, devoted to the 
purposes of their — to Brahmans — accursed hereBy. Notwithstanding 
this, if we possessed a continuous narrative of events occurring in 
the province we might be able to interpolate facts so as to elucidate 
much that is now inexplicable and mysterious. 1 

What these palm leaf records principally tell ub is, that from a 
period vaguely contemporary with Buddha, i.e.., from 538-421 B.C. 
till 474 a.d., in fact, till Yayati Kesari finally expelled the Buddhists 
and established the Brahmanical religion in Orissa, the country was 
exposed to frequent and nearly continuous invasions of Tavanas 
generally coming from the north-west. 8 Who theBe Yavanas were 

them to some extent before publication. This, for his own sake, I trust he will do, for as 
they now stand they will do him no credit either as an archaeologist or a controversialist, 
and he will eventually be forced to retract nearly all he has said in the latter capacity, 
go far as I am capable of forming an opinion on the subject, the conclusions he arrives 
at as to the age of the caves are entirely erroneous, and he does not pretend that his 
explanations of the sculptures are derived either from local traditions, or Buddhist 
literature, merely that they are evolved from his own inner consciousness. Others 
may form a different opinion from that I have arrived at regarding his interpretation 
of the scenes depicted in them ; to me they appear only as an idle waste of misplaced 
ingenuity and hardly worthy of serious consideration. — J. F. 

1 These chronicles were very largely employed by Stirling in his History of Orissa 
and Cuttack, in the 15th volume of the Asiatic Researches, and still more extensively 
by Mr. Hunter in his Orissa, published in 1872, vol. i. pp. 198 et seq. They were also 
further investigated by a Calcutta Brahman Bhawanicharan Bandopadhyaya, in a work 
be published in Bengali, in 1843, entitled Purtuhottama Chandrika, which was very 
largely utilised by W. W. Hunter in his last work on Orissa, vol. i. p. 198 et seq. 

1 The following chronological account of Yavana invasions is abstracted from Mr. 
Hunter's Orissa, vol. ii. p. 184 of the Appendix : — 

b.o. 538-421. Bajra Deva. — In his reign Orissa was invaded by Tavanas from 
Marwar, from Delhi, and from Babul Des, the last supposed to be Iran (Persia) 
and Cabul. According to the palm leaf chronicle the invaders-were repulsed. 



KATAK OAVES. 59 

it is nearly impossible to say. The name may originally have been 
applied to Greeks or Romans, but it afterwards was certainly 
understood as designating all who, from an Indian point of view, 
oould be considered as foreigners or outside barbarians, and so it 
must be understood in the present instance. 

The account of these Yavana invasions in the Puri Chronicle 
looks at first sight so strange and improbable that one might almost 
be inolined to reject the whole as fabulous, were it not that the last 
of them, that under Rekta Bahu, which Stirling looked upon as so 
extraordinary and incomprehensible, 1 has by the publication by 
Tumour of the Daladawansa, 2 been elevated to the dignity of an 
established historical fact, 8 and there seems no difficulty in believing 
that the others may be equally authenticated when more materials 
are accumulated for the purpose. 

It is of course impossible to form an opinion as to what reliance 

B.C. 421-306. Narsingh Deva. — Another chief from the far north invaded the country 
during this reign, but he was defeated, and the Orissa prince reduced a great part 
of the Delhi kingdom. 

306-184. Mankrisbna Deva. — Yavanas from Kashmir invaded the country, but were 
driven back after many battles. 

184-57. Bhoj Deva. — A great prince who drove back a Tovana invasion, and is said 
to have subdued all India. 

Here follows the usual account of Vicramaditya and Salivahana, and we hear no 
more of the Yavanas till — 

aj>. 819-323. Sobhan Deva. — During this reign of four years, the maritime invasion 
and conquest of Orissa by the Yavanas under Rekta Bahu, the Bed-armed, took 
place. The king fled with the sacred image of Jagann&th (the Brahmanical 
synonym for the tooth relic), and with those of his brother and sister Balbhadra 
and Subhadra, and buried them in a cave at Sonpur. The lawful prince perished 
in the jungles, and the Yavanas ruled in his stead. 

323-328. Chandra Deva, who, however, was only a nominal king, as the Yavanas 
were completely masters of the country. They put him to death 328 aj>. 

328-474. Yavana occupation of Orissa 146 years. According to Stirling these 
Yavanas were Buddhists. 

474-626. Yayati Kesari expelled the Yavanas and founded the Kesari or Lion 
dynasty. This prince brought back the image of Jagannith to Puri, and com- 
menced building the Temple City to Siva at Bhuvaneswar. 

After this we hear no more of Yavanas or Buddhists in Orissa. The Brahmanical 
religion was firmly established there, and was not afterwards disturbed till the invasion 
of the Mahomedan Yavanas from Delhi, repeated the old story in 1510 aj>. 

1 Asiatic Researches, .vol. xv. p. 263. 

* J. A, S. B., vol. vi. p. 856 et seg. 

9 Journal R. A. &, New Series, vol. iii. p. 149 et stq. 



60 EASTERN CAVKS. 

should be placed on the facte narrated in these palm leaf records till 
we see what the text is, in which they are imbedded. 1 All that at 
present can be said regarding them, is that they are curiously co- 
incident with what we know, from other sources, of the introduction 
of Buddhism into Orissa, and with the architectural history of the 
province. In the present state of our knowledge it is equally diffi- 
cult to say how far we may place any dependence on the tradition 
that immediately after his death, the relics of his body were rescued 
from the funeral pyre and distributed to eight different cities in 
India. 2 According to these accounts the left canine tooth fell to 
the lot of Orissa, and was received by a king named Brahmadatta, 
whose son named Kasi and grandson Sunanda continued to worship 
and hold it in the greatest possible respect. 3 These names, however, 
do not occur in any lists that have come down to our time, and the 
first, as king of Benares (Kasi), occurs so frequently in Buddhist 
legends and jatakas that no reliance can be placed in any tradition 
regarding him or his acts, as being authentic history. The second 
name looks like the name of his capital, and the third as one of the 
many Nandas who figure in the history of Magadha before the time 
of Asoka. Be this, however, as it may, it seems tolerably certain 
that a tooth, supposed to be that of Buddha, was enshrined in this 
province in a magnificent Chaitya, in a city called Dantapura from 
that circumstance, before A&oka's time, and remained there till the 
beginning of the fourth century a.d., when it was conveyed to 
Ceylon under the circumstances narrated in the Daladawansa, and 
where it now remains the palladium of that island under British rule. 4 
What we gather, from all this practically is, that Yavanas from 

1 A golden opportunity for effecting this was presented by Balm Iiajcndralala's 
mission to Katak in 1868-69. As a Brahman he had access to the temples and their 
treasures to an extent that could not be afforded to any Yavana inquirer, and indeed he 
seems to have intended to have transcribed and translated them { Hunters Orissa, 
vol. i. p. 198, note), bat his ambition to be considered an archiEologist of the European 
type, led him to neglect a task for which he was pre-eminently fitted, and to waste his 
time instead, in inventing improbable myths to explain the sculptures in the caves. 

s Journal Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, vol. vii. ; p. 1014 ; Foe Koue Ki, 240. 

3 Tumour's account of the Daladawansa, J. A. S. B., vol. vi., p. 856 et scq. 

* I have already detailed bo fully the circumstances under which the transfer took 

place in a paper on the Amravati tope, which I read to the Asiatic Society in 1847 

J. E. A. S., vol. iii. N.S., pp. 132 ct scq.), that I may be excused repeating what I 

then said. The particulars will also be found, Trie and Serpent Worship, pp. 

173 ctseq. 



KATAK CAVES. 61 

the north-west, probably bringing Buddhism with them, invaded 
Orissa before the time of As"oka, and consequently before the first 
rock-cut temple was excavated. It seems also nearly certain that 
Orissa remained Buddhist, and the tooth relic was honoured there 
— intermittently it may be by the kings — but certainly by the 
people, down to the year 322 a.d. x when it was transferred to Ceylon, 
and subsequently to this, that the province remained Buddhist under 
the last Yavana dynasty, 328 to 474 a.d., when that religion was 
finally abolished by the Kesari dynasty of kings. 

There is no evidence that this last dynasty excavated any caves, 
and as there are no remains of any structural buildings belonging 
to the Buddhist religion, in the province, our history halts here, and 
there is at present nothing to lead us to believe that any of the 
caves were excavated within even a century before 322. The archi- 
tectural history of the province, in Buddhist times is consequently, 
it must be confessed, very incomplete, and all that remains to 
be done is to try and find out when the earliest cave was excavated, 
and then to trace their development, so far as it can be done, till 
the time when cave digging ceased to be a fashion in Orissa. 

As just mentioned, history will hardly help in this. Such records 
aB we have, were written, or rather compiled, by Hindus, haters of 
Buddhism, and not likely to mention the names of kings belonging 
to that sect, and still less to record any of their actions or works. 
Inscriptions hardly give us greater assistance. It is true about one 
half of the caves at Udayagiri do bear inscriptions, but none of them 
have dates, and none of the names found in them have yet been 
identified with those of any king who figures in any of our lists. 
What they do tell us, however is, from the form of the cha- 
racters employed that all the inscribed caves are anterior to the 
first century B.C. Unfortunately, however, the two principal and 
most interesting caves, the K&ni k& Nur and the Ganesa Gumpha, 
have no contemporary inscriptions, so that this class of evidence for 
their age, is not available. There remains consequently only the 
evidence of style. For that, fortunately, the materials are abun- 

1 There is s discrepancy here of about 10 years between the dates in the Orissan 
chronicles and those derived from the Mahawanso according to Turnour. On the 
whole I am inclined, from various collateral pieces of evidence, to place most reliance 
on that derived from the Puri chronicles. 



62 EASTERN CAVES. 

dant, and the testimony is as complete as could well be expected. 
We have at least three monuments, whose date we may say is known 
with sufficient certainty for our purposes, and which, as we shall pre- 
sently see, were almost as certainly contemporary with these oaves. 

The first of these is the rail which ASoka (b.c. 250) is said to 
have erected round the Bodhi tree at Buddha Gaya. Very little of it 
remains, and none of it in situ, still there is enough of it existing to 
show exactly what the style of sculpture was at that age. Unfortu- 
nately, however, it has never been photographed, or at least no photo- 
graphs of it, except of one fragment, have reached this oountry, 
and the drawings that have been published are very far from being 
satisfactory. The best set of drawings yet made were by Major 
Markham Kittoe, more than thirty years ago. They are now in the 
library at the India Office, but have never been published. Those 
in General Cunningham's " Reports " are far from complete, 1 and 
by no means satisfactory, and the same may be said of the set 
engraved by Babu Bajendralala Mitra, in his work on Buddha 
Gaya, 2 just published. Fortunately the latter does give one photo- 
graph of one gate pillar (Plate L.), but whether taken from a cast 
or from the stone itself is not clear. Whichever it is, it is the 
only really trustworthy document we have, and is quite sufficient 
to show how little dependence can be placed on General Cunning- 
ham's representation of the same subject, and by implication on 
the drawings made by A. P. Bagchi for the Babu's work, which 
are in no respect better than the General's, if so good. It would 
of course be a great advantage if a few more of the sculptures 
had been photographed like the pillar represented on Plate L., 
but it, though it stands alone, is quite sufficient to show what the 
style of sculpture was which prevailed in the third century B.C., 
when it was erected. 

The Bharhut Tope, which is the second in our series, has been 
much more fortunate in its mode of illustration. All its sculptures 
have been photographed by Mr. Beglar and published with careful 
descriptions by its discoverer, General Cunningham. 8 The date, 
too, has been assumed by him to be from 250 to 200 b.c. on data 



1 Reports, vol. i. Plates VIII. to XI. ; vol. iii. Plates XXVI. to XXX. 

a Buddha Gaya, Plates XXXIH. to XXXVIII. 

* The Stupa of Bharhut, by General A. Cunningham, London, 1879. 



KATA.K CAVES. 63 

which are generally supposed to be sufficient for the purpose. I 
would suggest, however, that as this date is arrived at principally 
by calculating backwards at a rate of 30 years per reign from 
Dhanabhuti II., and as 16 years on the average is a fairer rate, 
it may be placed by him at least 50 years too early; the more 
especially as even that king's reign is only determined from a 
slight variation in the form of the letters used in the inscriptions, 
which is by no means certain. 1 On the whole I fancy 200 to 
150 B.C. is a safer date to rely upon in the present state of our 
knowledge. For myself I would prefer the most modern of these 
two dates as the most probable. It is, at all events, the one most 
in accordance with the character of the sculpture, which is, as nearly 
as may be, half way between those of the rail at Buddha G-aya, and 
those found on the gateways at Sanchi. 2 

1 The Stupa of BharhtU, pp. 15 and 16. 

* From the great similarity that exists between the alphabetical characters found at 
Bharhut, and those employed by Asoka in his numerous inscriptions, General 
Cunningham was no doubt perfectly justified in assuming that the stupa's age could 
not be far distant from that of his reign. At the same time, however, almost as if to 
show how little reliance can be placed on Palaeographic evidence alone, where extreme 
precision is aimed at, and no other data are available, he quotes an inscription found 
at Mathura recording some gifts of a king of the same name, whom he calls Dhana- 
bhuti II., and joins the two together in his genealogical list, with only one name, that 
of Vadha Pala, between them. {Stupa at Bharhut, p. 16.) 

When General Cunningham first published this Mathura inscription (Reports, III., 
p. 36, Plate XVT.) he placed it in a chronological series, between one dated Samvat 
98 and another dated Samvat 135, and from the form of its characters he was no 
doubt correct in so doing, more especially as in Plate XIV. of the same volume, he 
quotes another inscription of Huviskha dated Samvat 39, where the alphabet used is 
very little, if at all earlier. If the Samvat referred to in these inscriptions was that of 
Vikram&ditya, as the General assumes, this would place thiB second Dhanabhuti about 
a.d. 60 or 60. But as it seems certain this era was not invented at that time, it must 
be Saka, and accordingly he could not have reigned before the end of the second 
century of our era, and his connexion with the Bharhut stupa is out of the question. 

Another point that makes the more modern date extremely probable, is that the 
Boulpture on the Mathura pillar represents the flight of the prince, Siddhartha, with the 
Gandharvas holding up the feet of his horse in order that their noise might not awaken 
the aleeping guards (Stupa at Bharhut, p. 16). As General Cunningham knows, and 
admits, no representations of Buddha, are found either at Bharhut or Sanchi (Stupa at 
BharhtU, p. 107), and this legend, though one of the most common among the Gandhara 
sculptures, does not occur in India, bo far as iB at present known, before the time of 
the Tope at Amravati in the fourth century (Tree and Serpent Worship, Plate LIX. 



64 EASTERN CAVES. 

The Sanchi Tope, -which, forms the third of the series, has also 
been illustrated with all the detail requisite for a proper under- 
standing of its historical and artistic position. In the first place 
we have General Cunningham's work on the subject published in 
1854, which is the foundation of our historical knowledge of this 
tope, to which may be added an extensive series of photographs by 
Captain Waterhouse, made in 1862. We also possess a beautiful 
series of drawings by Colonel Maisey ; and in addition to an exhaus- 
tive transcript of its sculptures, by Lieutenant Cole, 1 there are also 
the casts he brought home, and copies of which are now in the South 
Kensington and Edinburgh Museums, 

From all these data the date of this monument has been ascer- 
tained with sufficient precision for our present purposes at least. 
The southern gateway, which is the earliest, seems to have been 
erected by a king who reigned between the 10th and the 28th year 
of the Christian era, and the other three gateways during the 
remaining three-quarters of that century.* 

There is still a fourth building equally important for the general 
history of architecture in India, though not bearing so directly as 
that of the caves in Orissa as the other three. The principal sculp- 
tures of the tope at Amravati were executed during the course of 
the fourth century of our era, 3 and are perhaps the most beautiful 
and perfect Buddhist sculptures yet found in India, and as such full 
of interest for the history of the Art. It cannot, however, be said 
that any of the sculptures in the caves at Udayagiri are so modern as 
they are, but this being so, marks at all events the limit beyond 
which the Orissan caves cannot be Baid to extend. On the other 
hand, with our imperfect knowledge of the Buddha Gaya rails it is 

fig. 1.), and consequently this sculpture cannot certainly be earlier than the second 
century a.d., and may be much more modern. It is just possible, no doubt, that it 
may not be integral, but may have been added afterwards when the larger rails were 
inserted, which cut through the inscription. This, however, is hardly probable, but 
until this is explained all the evidence, as it now stands, tends to prove that this 
Mathura inscription is much more likely to be 200 years after Christ instead of 200 
before that era, as General Cunningham seems inclined to make it. 

1 All these hare been utilised, and form the first 45 plates of my Tree and Serpent 
Worship, published in 1873, second edition. 

2 Tree and Serpent Worship, p. 99. 

a Tree and Serpent Worship, Plates XLVL to C. (For dates tee p. 178,) probably 
from about a-d. 322 to 380. 



KATAK CAVES. 65 

not eaBy to determine whether any of these caves are really bo old 
as the time of Asoka. From a comparison of their details we may, 
however, feel certain that some of these caves are certainly con- 
temporary with the rail at Bharhut, others with the gateways at 
Sanchi. Although, therefore, we cannot fix the limit either way 
with absolute certainty, we may feel confident that all those which 
are most interesting from an architectural point of view, were 
excavated during the three and a half centuries which elapsed 
between the years 250 B.C. and 100 a.d. Some of the smaller and 
ruder examples may be earlier, but none of them have any charac- 
teristics which would lead us to assign them to a more modern epoch 
than that just quoted. 



66 



CHAPTER HI. 
HATHI GUMPHA. 

All who have written on the subject are agreed that the Hathi 
Gumpha or Elephant Cave, is the oldest that exists in these hills. 
It is, however, only a natural cavern of considerable extent, which 
may have been slightly enlarged by art, though there is no distinct 
evidence that this was so. At all events there is certainly no archi- 
tectural moulding or form, to show that it was ever occupied by 
man and not by wild animals only, except a long inscription in 
17 lines engraved on the smoothed brow of the rock above it. It is 
consequently of no value whatever in an architectural object, and 
from an archaeological point of view its whole interest resides in the 
inscription, which, so far as is at present known, is the earliest that 
has yet been found in India. 

A very imperfect attempt to copy this inscription accompanies 
Mr. Stirling's paper on Cuttack in the 15th volume of the Asiatic 
Researches, but so badly done as to be quite illegible. The first 
real copy was made by Lieutenant Kittoe in 1837, and though only 
an eye sketch was done with such marvellous exactness, that 
Mr. Prinsep was enabled to make a very correct translation of the 
whole, which he published in the sixth volume of the Bengal Asiatic 
Jowmal (pp. 1080 et seq.). From the more matured and priestly 
style of composition with which it commences, he was inclined to 
consider it more modern than the edicts of Aloka, and assumed the 
date to be about 200 B.C., a date which I, and every one else, was at 
the time, led to adopt in deference to the opinion of so distinguished 
a scholar. It has since, however, been more carefully re-examined 
by Babu Rajendralala Mitra, by personal inspection on the spot, 
and with the aid of photographs. For reasons which seem to me 
sufficient to establish his conclusion, he places it about a century 
earlier, b.c. 300 or 325. One of the more important data for the 
earlier date is the occurrence in the 12th line of the name of Nanda, 
king of Magadha, of which Mr. Prinsep does not seem to have been 
aware ; and as it is used apparently in the past tense, it looks as if 
the king Aira who caused this inscription to be written, oame after 



HATHI CRJMPHA. 67 

these predecessors of the Mauryan dynasty. It may, however, be 
that he was only contemporary with the Nandas and with the first 
Mauryan kings. At the same time all the historical allusions which 
this inscription contains seems to show that he must have lived 
before the time when Asoka carved his edicts at Dauli. 

The Hathi Gumpha inscription represents the king as oscillating 
between the Brahmanical and the Buddhist forms of faith, and 
though he finally settled down to the latter belief, the whole tenor 
of the narrative is such, that we are led to believe that the 
Brahmanical was the prevalent faith of the country, and that he was, 
if not the first, at least one of the earliest converts to Buddhism. 
This could hardly have been the case had Asoka' s inscriptions at 
Dauli — almost in sight of this cave — been in existence when it was 
engraved, and he could hardly have failed to allude to so powerful 
an emperor, had he ruled in Orissa before his time. Altogether, it 
seems from the contents of the inscription so much more probable 
that Aira should have ruled before the rise of the great Maurya 
dynasty, than after their establishment, that I feel very little hesita- 
tion in coming to the conclusion that 300 B.C., or thereabouts, is 
the most probable date for this inscription. 1 

In so far as the history of cave architecture is concerned the 
determination of the age of this inscription is only a political 
question, not affecting the real facts of the case. As it is avowedly 
the earliest thing here, if its date is 200 B.C., all the caves that show 
marks of the chisel are more modern, and must be crowded into 
the period between that date, and the epoch at which it can be 
ascertained that the most modern were excavated. If, on the other 
hand, its date is about 300 B.C., it allows time for our placing the 
oldest and simplest caves as contemporary with those just described 
in Behar, and allows ample time for the gradual development of the 
style in a manner more in conformity with our experience of cave 
architecture in the west of India. 

1 It seeins that the vowel marks in the word which Prinsep read as " Suke " in the 
first line are so indistinct, that it is more probable the word ought to be read Saka : 
and if this is so it may lead to an. interesting national indication. I submitted the 
passage to Professor Eggling, of Edinburgh, and in reply he informs me that tne 
passage may very well be rend " By him who is possessed of the attributes of the 
famous Saka (race)." If this is so, be may have been either one of those Yavanas 
who came from the north-west, or at least a descendant of some of those con- 
querors. 



68 EASTERN CAVES. 

Though I am myself strongly of opinion that the true date of this 
inscription is about 300 B.C., the question may very well be left for 
future consideration. The important lessons we are taught by the 
peculiarities of the Hathi Ghunpha are the same that we gathered 
from the examination of those in Behar. It is that all the caves 
used by the BuddhistB. or held sacred by them anterior to the age 
of Asoka, are mere natural caverns unimproved by art. With his 
reign the fashion of chiselling cells out of the living rock commenced, 
and was continued with continually increasing magnificence and 
elaboration for nearly 1,000 years after his time. 

Before proceeding to describe the remaining excavations in these 
hills, it may be as well to advert to a peculiarity we learn as much 
from the sculptures of the Bharhut Tope as from the caves of Behar. 
It is, that during the reign of Asoka, and for 100 years afterwards, 
it was the fashion to add short inscriptions to everything. Not only 
as already pointed out are all the Behar caves inscribed, but almost 
all the Bharhut sculptures are labelled in the most instructive 
manner, which renders theBe monuments the most valuable contri- 
bution to Buddhist legendary history that has been brought to light 
in modern times. By the time when the gateways of the Sanchi Tope 
were erected, the fashion had unfortunately died out. It still con- 
tinued customary for donors of pillars, or of parts, to record their 
Dancvms or gifts, but no description of the scenes depicted, nor is 
any other information afforded, beyond the name and condition of the 
donor, who generally, however, was a private person, and his name 
consequently of no historical value. 1 

Baqh and Sarpa, or Tiger and Serpent Caves and smaller 

Cells. 

Guided by these considerations and the architectural indications, 
it is probable that we may assume the Tiger and Serpent caves to be 
the oldest of the sculptured caves in these hills. The former is a 
cwpriccio certainly, not copied from any conceivable form of stone 
architecture, nor likely to be adopted by any people used to any so in- 

1 In the old temple of Papan&th, at Pattadkal, this fashion seems to have been re- 
vived, for once at least, for all the sculptures on its -walls are labelled in characters 
probably of the fifth century. Arch. Survey of Wat. India, 1st Report, p, 86. 




BAGH AND SARPA. G9 

tractable material as Btone in their constructions. It is, in fact, a mass 
of sandstone rock fashioned into the semblance of the head of a tiger. 
The expanded jaws, armed with a row of most formidable teeth, 
form the verandah, while the entrance to the cell is placed where 
the gullet in a living animal would be. There is a Bhort inscription 
at the side of the doorway, which 
according to Prinsep reads " Exca- 
vated by Ugra Aveda " (the anti- 
vedist), which looks as if its author 
was a convert from the Brahmanical 
to the Buddhist religion. Before 
the first letter of this inscription 
there is a well-known Buddhist 
symbol, which is something like a 
capital Y standing on a cube or 

box, and after the la8t letter i8 No. 12. Ti^erCave, Udayapri.fromadraw- 

a swastika. 1 These two symbols "* by Capt Kittoe - 

are placed at the beginning and end of the great Aira inscription 
in the Hathi Gumpha, though there their position is reversed, the 
swastika being at the beginning, the other symbol at the end. 
The meaning or name of this last has not yet been ascertained, 
but it occurs in conjunction with the swastika very frequently on 
the earliest Buddhist coins. 2 The probability, therefore, is that these 
two inscriptions cannot be far apart in date, and as the jambs of 
doorway leading into the cell of the Tiger cave slope considerably 
inwards, there seems no reason for doubting that this cave may not be 
only slightly more modern than the Aira inscription in the Hathi cave 
here, and contemporary with the Asoka caves in the Barabar hills. 

The same remarks apply to the Sarpa or serpent cave. It is only, 
however, a small cubical cell with a countersunk doorway with 
jambs sloping inwards at a considerable angle. Over this doorway, 
in a semicircular tympanum, is what may be called the bust of a three- 
headed serpent of a very archaic type- It has no other sculptures. 
Its inscription merely states that it is u the unequalled chamber of 
Chulakarma." 

There is a third little cell called the Pavana, or purification cave, 



i~J.A. S. B., vol. vi. p. 1073. 

* J. A. S. B., ftud Thomas's Prinsep, vol. i. Plates XIX. and XX. 



70 EASTEBN CAVB8. 

which bears an inscription of the same Chulakarina, 1 but is of no 
architectural significance. All these, consequently, may be of about 
the same date, and if that is the age of Asoka, it makes it nearly 
certain that the Hathi Gumpha with its Aira inscription must belong 
to the earlier date ascribed to it above. If for no other reason at 
least for this, because after carving these, and a great number of 
small neatly chiselled cells, apparently of the same age, which exist 
in these hills, some inscribed, some not, it is impossible to fancy any 
king adopting a rude cavern, showing no marks of a chisel, as a 
suitable place on which to engrave his autobiography. 

Besides these smaller caves which, though numerous, hardly admit 
of description, there are six larger Buddhist caves in these hills, in 
which the real interest of the group is centred. Their names and 
approximate dates may be stated as follows : — 

The Ananta, on the Khandagiri hill 1 «oo to 150 

The Vaikuntha. Two-storeyed - J 

The Swargapuri 1 Nq ^ 8Cri tionB 150 ^ 50 BC . 

Jaya Vijaya -J 

Bani ka Nur. Two storeyed ; no inscription ; first century B.C. 2 

Ganesa. One Btorey ; no inscription ; first century a.d. 

Ananta. 

Though small, the Ananta is one of the most interesting caves of this 
group.' As will be seen from the annexed woodcut it is somewhat 

1 These inscriptions and with the information here retailed, are abstracted from 
Prinsep's paper in the sixth volume of his Journal, pp. 1072 et $eq. t and Plates LIV. 
sad LVHI. 

1 In his work on Buddha Gaya, just published, Babu Rajendralala Mitra, at p. 169, 
assigns these caves to " the middle of the fourth century before Christ," say 860 b.c, or 
about three centuries earlier than I place it. 

8 When I was at Khandagiri this cave was nut known, nor does Kittoe seem to have 
been aware of its existence. Even now I have been unable to procure a photograph of 
it, nor any drawing of its details, many of which would be extremely useful in determin- 
ing its peculiarities. We must wait till some one who knows something of Buddhism 
and Buddhist art visits these caves before we can feel sure of our facts. I wrote on April 
last to Mr. Locke, who made the casts of its sculptures, asking for some further parti- 
culars, but he has not yet acknowledged the receipt of my letter. I have, however, 
through the intervention of my friend Mr. W. W. Hunter. B.C.S., been able to obtain 
from the Commissioner at Katak nearly all the information I require. He instructed 




A5ASTA. 71 

irregular in plan ; its greatest length internally is 24 feet 6 inches, 

with a depth of only 7 feet. Its verandah measures ~~ 

27 feet on its inner side, but is only 5 feet in width. 

Its age, we may say, can be determined with precision 

from the fact of its architectural ornaments, and the . No - la - *** , of 

... Ananta Cave, scale, 

character of its sculpture, being nearly identical with 50 feet to i inch, 
those of the Bharhut Stupa (b.c. 200 to 150). The frieze, for instance, 
consisting of a pyramid of steps, with a lotus between each, (Plate I., 
figs. 1 and 2) being common to both, and is found nowhere eke in 
the same form that I am aware of, nor in any other age. It runs 
round the whole of the coping of the rail of the Stupa, and is extended 
interruptedly acroBS the front of this cave. The other sculptures in 
this cave show so marked a similarity in character to those at Bhar- 
hut as hardly to admit of doubt of their being executed about the 
same time. The jambs too of its doorways slope inwards, at what 
angle I have been unable to ascertain, but sufficiently so to show 
that the age of this cave cannot be far removed from that I have 
ascribed to it. 

This cave was originally divided from its verandah by a wall 
pierced with four doors, but the pier between two of these having 
fallen away has carried with it two of the semicircular tympana 
which invariably surmount the doorways in these caves, and which 
in the earlier ones are the parts which are usually adorned with 
sculpture. In Mr. Locke's plan it is the left one that has fallen, 
but according to the photographs of the casts (Plate I.) the two end 
ones are complete, and it is the centre pier that has been removed. 
This, however, is of very little consequence. Of the two that 
remain one contains a sacred tree within its rail, and a man and 
woman on either side worshipping it, and beyond a boy and a girl 
bring offerings to their parents. This tree, as is well known, is the 
most common object of worship, and occurs at least 76 times on the 
gateways at Sanchi, 1 we ought not, therefore, to be surprised to find 
it here. The other remaining tympanum contains an image of the 
goddess Sri or Lakshmi, but whether as the Goddess of Wealth or the 
wife of some fabled previous avatara of Vishnu, is not clear. As I 

the joint magistrate, Mr. Phillips, to visit the caves, and answer my questions, which he 
has done in a most satisfactory manner, and a good deal of what follows depends on 
the information thus afforded me. — JJ?. 
J Tree and Serpent Worihip, page 106. 



72 EASTERN CAVES. 

pointed out before, she occurs at least ten times at Sanchi in exactly 
the same attitude, standing on a lotus with two elephants, on lotuses 
also, pouring water over her. 1 General Cunningham has since 
pointed out another in the centre of the gateway of another tope, 
at Bhilsa, 2 and she occurs on a medallion on the Bharhut Rail, 
precisely as she is represented here. She is, in fact, so far as I 
can ascertain, the only person who was worshipped by the Buddhists 
before the Christian era, but her worship by them was» to say the 
least of it, prevalent everywhere. As a Brahmanical object of wor- 
ship she first occurs, so far as I know, in the caves of Mahavallipur, 
and in the nearly contemporary kailasa at Elura, in the eighth cen- 
tury, but afterwards became a favourite object with them, and 
remains so to the present day. 8 

From our knowledge of the sculptures of the Bharhut Tope we 
may safely predicate that, in addition to the Tree and the image of 
Sri, the two remaining tympana were filled, one, with a represen- 
tation of a wheel, the other, of a dagoba, the last three being 
praticaliy the three great objects of worship both there and at 
Sanchi. At the latter place, as just mentioned, the worship of the 
tree occurs 76 times, of dagobas 38, wheels 10 times, and Sri 10, 
which is, as nearly as can be ascertained from its ruined state, the 
proportions in which they occur at Bharhut, and there is consequently 



1 Loc. cit. 

* Notwithstanding this, General Cunningham {Bharhut Stupa, p. 117) states "that 
the subject is not an uncommon one with Brahmanical sculptors, but 1 am unable to 
give any Buddhistical explanation of it." Unfortunately the General considers it 
necessary to ignore all that has been done at Sanchi since the publication of his book 
on that Tope in 1854. He has not consequently seen Colonel Maisey's drawings, nor 
Capt. Cole's exhaustive transcripts, nor was he aware of the Udayugiri image published 
in the second edition of my Tree and Serpent FForghip, Plate C. It is not, therefore, 
surprising he should not be aware how essentially it is a Buddhist conceit adopted long 
afterwards by the Brahman s. It occurs frequently in the Buddhist caves atjunnar 
and Arungabad. 

8 One of the most curious representations of this goddess occurs on a tablet, Mr. 
Court callB it " tymbole" which was found by that gentleman at Mauikyala, and was 
lithographed by Mr. Prinsep from a drawing by htm and published as Plate XX. 
vol. V. of his Journal. The drawing probably is not quite correct, but it is interesting, 
as it represents the goddess with her two attendants and two elephants standing on a 
band containing eight easily recognised Buddhist symbols, such as the vase, the 
swastika, the wheel, the two fishes, the shield, and the altar. If the drawing is to be 
depended upon it may belong to the fourth or fifth century. It is not known what 
has become of this tablet. 



ANANTA. 



73 



every reason to suppose would be adopted in a contemporary monu- 
ment in Orissa. Whether any remains of the dagoba or wheel 
are still to be found in the ruined tympana remains to be seen. I 
fancy they are, but they have not yet been looked for. 

Scholars have not yet quite made up their minds what these three 
great emblems are intended to symbolise, but I think there is now a 
pretty general concensus that the Dagoba represents Buddha in the 
Buddhist trinity. It is always simulated to contain a relic of him, 
or of some of his followers when 
not otherwise appropriated, or to 
commemorate some act of his, or 
memorial of him, and may conse- 
quently be easily substituted for his 
bodily presence, before images of 
him were introduced. 1 The Wheel, 
almost all are agreed, represents 
Bharma, or the law, and if this is 
so, it seems almost impossible to 
escape the conviction that the tree 
is the real, as it would be the 
appropriate representation of the 
Sangha or congregation. 

Above the tympanum containing the sacred tree is the trisula 
ornament, General Cunningham calls it the tri-ratna or three 
jewels, which may be as correct a designation, though the former may 
be preferable as involving no theory. It is essentially a Buddhist 
emblem,* and I fancy symboliseB the Buddhist trinity, Buddha, 

1 General Cunningham admits " that even in the later sculptures at Sanchi which 
date from the end of the first century a.u., there is no representation of Buddha, and 
the sole objects of reverence are Stupas, wheels, and trees " (Stupa at Bharhut, p. 107). 
It is true he overlooks the representation of him at Sanchi on Plate XXXIII., Tree 
and Serpent Worship, but this might be expected. There he appears only as 
a man, before he attained Buddhahood, not in the usual conventional attitude in which 
he was afterwards worshipped. He may consequently have been overlooked ; but 
barring this, the General's testimony as to the limitation of objects of worship is most 
important. Babu Rajendralala Mitra also admits that no image of Buddha is to be 
found among these early sculptures. Buddha Gat/a, p. 128. 

* General Cunningham, at p. 112 of his Stupa at Bharhut claims the credit of having 
been the first, in his work on the BhiUa Topes, published in 1854, to have pointed 
out the resemblance between this triple emblem as used at Sanchi ( Tree and Serpent 
Worship, Plate XXX.) and the emblematic Jagannath with his brother and sister as now 




No. 14. Triiula from Amravati. 



74 



EASTERN CAVES. 



Dharma, Sangha, when used as it is here singly and by itself, but 
frequently it is found in combination with other emblemB. Some- 
times, for instance, with three wheels on the three points, but the 
most common combination seems to be with the shield ornament, 
as in the annexed illustration from the gateways at Sanchi. What 
the shield represents has not yet been explained. It occurs under 
the Swastika in the Hatlii Gumpha, and is the pendant to the trisula 
in this cave, being placed over the image of Sri, and occurs in similar 
positions in the Granesa cave and elsewhere. 




No. 15. Trisula and Shield from Sanchi. No. 16. Pilaster from Ananta Cave. 

In the Ananta cave (Plate I.) these two emblems are shown in 
connexion with two three-headed snakes, which form the upper 
member of the decoration of these doorways. 1 In that one over the 

worshipped at Pari. At p. 189 of my work just quoted, on the first occasion when I 
had an opportunity of so doing, I fully admitted, in 1873, the justice of this claim, and 
it wag consequently hardly necessary for him in 1879 to refer indignantly to the " able 
though anonymous reviewer of my work," to substantiate a claim no one ever dis- 
puted. I have always maintained that Vishuuism is practically only a bad and corrupt 
form of Buddhism, but the subject requires far more full and complete treatment than 
has yet been bestowed upon it by anyone. 

1 It would be curious to know what the two emblems are that adorned the two other 
tympana, and it is probable that enough remains to ascertain this, but our information 
regarding this cave is extremely limited and imperfect. 



VAIKUNTHA. 75 

tree there is a frieze of twelve geese or Hansas, bearing lotus buds in 
their beaks, which may be of any age, but over the other there is a 
fantastic representation of men struggling with lions and bulls, which 
so far as I know may be unique, though something like both these 
subjects occurs in two lats at Sanchi, 1 and in a very much more 
modern form at the base of the outer rail at Amravati." 

The pilasters that adorn the sides of the doorways are of a curious 
but exceptional class, and more like some of those found in early 
caves in the west than any others found on this side of India. They 
are evidently copied from some form of wooden posts stuck into 
stone vases or bases, as is usual at Karl6, Nasick, and other western 
caves. Here, however, in addition to the usual conventional forms, 
the surface is carved to an extent not found elsewhere, and betrays 
a wooden origin indicative of the early age to which I would assign 
the excavation of this cave. 

Taking it altogether, the Ananta is certainly one of the most 
interesting caves of the group. Even in its ruined state it presents 
a nearly complete picture of Buddhist symbolism, of as early an 
age as is anywhere to be found, excepting, perhaps, the great 
Stupa at Bharhut, with which if not contemporary, it was probably 
even earlier, and of which its sculptures may be considered as an 
epitome. As such it is well worthy of more attention than has yet 
been bestowed upon it. 

Vaikuntha. 

This is the name popularly applied to the upper apartment of a 
small two-storeyed cave. The lower ones, however, bear the names 
of Patalapura and Yomanapura. Though small and comparatively 
unadorned, it is interesting as being the prototype of the largest 
and finest cave of the series known as the Rani ka Nur or Queen's 
palace. When I visited the plaoe it was inhabited, the openings 
built up with mud and brick, and no access allowed. All conse- 
quently I could do was to make a sketch of its exterior, which was 
published as " a view of the exterior of a Vihara on the Udayagiri 
Hill." 8 

1 Tree and Serpent Worship, Plate XXXIX. 

> Loc. cit, Plates XLVIII. and LVII. 

3 Plate I. of my Illustrations of Rock-cut Temples of India, folio, London, 1845. 



76 EASTERN CAVES. 

There are inscriptions in the old Lat character on each of the 
divisions of this cave. One on the lower storey of the principal or 
Vaikuntha cave describes it as "the excavation of the Rajas of 
Kalinga, enjoying the favour of the Arhats " or Buddhist saints. 
Another as " the cave of the Maharaja Vira, the lord of Kalinga, 
the cave of the venerable Kadepa," and a third as the " cave of 
Prince Viduka." But as none of these names can be recognised 
as found elsewhere, this does not help us much in our endeavours to 
ascertain its age. 

There is, or rather was, a long frieze, containing figures of men 
and animals, extending across the whole front, but these are so 
time worn, and are so nearly undistinguishable, that no attempt 
was apparently made by Mr. Locke to take a cast of them, or even 
to bring away a photograph, so that there are really no materials 
available for a more perfect description of this cave. 

Jaya Vijata and Swargapubi Caves. 

The first named of this group waB drawn by Capt. M. Kittoe, 1 under 
the title of Jodev Garbha, and the sculptures between itB two doors 
were cast by Mr. Locke and appear on Plate I., fig. 3. The sculpture 
here is not in the tympanum above the doors, as in the earlier examples, 
but between them in the manner always afterwards adopted. It 
represents a tree worshipped by two men, one on either side, attended 
by two women, bearing trays with offerings, and beyond the tym- 
panum on either side are two men or giants, also bearing offerings. 
The whole character of the sculpture is, however, a very much more 
advanced type than that of the Ananta cave, and more nearly 
resembles that found at Sanchi than anything to be found at 
Bharhut. The centre pier of the verandah has fallen away, but at 
either end of it there is a figure carved in high relief, standing as 
sentinel to guard the entrance, one a male, the other a female. These, 
however, are of a comparatively modern type. 

This cave is two storeys in height, the two being perpendicular 
the one over the other, not like the Vaikuntha and Rani ka Nur, 
where the upper storey recedes considerably behind the lower. 

Attached to this cave, on the right hand as you look at it, is the 
Swargapuri cave. It has a plain but handsome facade, that apparently 

» J. A. S. B. t vol. vii., Plate XL1I. 



JAVA VIJAYA AND 8WARGAPTJRI 0AVE8. 



77 



was never covered by a verandah, at least in stone. Externally it 
consists of a single doorway of the usual type, Bunnounted by a tym- 
panum, which may originally have been ornamented by some carving, 
but nothing is now visible, — in the photographs at least. Above it is 
a rich and well sculptured band of foliage of the same type as that 
in the adjoining cave. On the right hand two elephants are seen 
approaching from a forest, represented by a single well sculptured 
tree, and a similar group seems to have existed on the left. The 
rock, however, has fallen away, and the front of only one elephant is 
now visible. 

There is no inscription found on any part of this group of caves, 
and we are left wholly to the character of the sculptures for the 
determination of their age. From this, however, we can have little 
hesitation in saying that they are very considerably more modern 
than the Ananta, how much more so we may be able to fix more 
exactly when we have examined the remaining sculptures. At 
present it may be sufficient to say that their date cannot be far from 
the Christian era, but whether before or after that epoch it is 
difficult to determine. 



Rani ka Nur. 

The excavation known popularly as the Rani ka Nur, or the 
Q ueen's Palace, j b by far thefinest and most interesting of those in 
the TTday affiri hill. Even it, however, is small when compared with 
the Viharas on the western side of India, and it owes its interest 
more to its Bculpture than to its architecture. As will be seen from 
the accompanying plans of its two storeys, it occupies three sides 





No. 17. Lower Storey, Rani ka Nur, from 
Plan by C. C. Locke. 



No. 18. Upper Storey, Rlsi ka Nur. 
Scale 50 feet to 1 inch. 



78 EASTERN OAVES. 

of a square courtyard.. The principal " corps de logis," facing the 
•west, consists of two storeys, not exactly over one another, as in 
the Elura oaves and elsewhere, but the upper receding behind the 
other, as shown in the diagram on the next page. 

This practice of setting back the upper storey may have been 
introduced here from the nature of the rock, and been intended to 
give more strength to the lower Btorey by relieving it from the 
pressure of the upper. My impression however is, that it was adopted 
in consequence of the Buddhist Viharas of that age — as will here- 
after be explained — being, "when of more than one storey in height, 
of a pyramidal form, each Btorey being consequently less in diameter 
than the one below it. This cave and the Vaikuntha are evidently 
intended to represent three sides of a structural Vihara turned inside 
out, to aocommodate them to the nature of the material and situa- 
tion in which they are excavated, all the dimensions, both in plan 
and section, being consequently reversed. If the wings could be 
wheeled back 180 degrees to first Bide — the principal one now stand- 
ing — they would with it, form the three sides of a free standing Vihara. 
It is impossible to represent the fourth side or back, from its situa- 
tion, in a rock-cut example. Supposing this to be the motivo of the 
design it appears to explain all the peculiarities of this cave. It is 
only necessary to assume that it is a copy of a structural Vihara, 
63 feet square at its base or lower Btorey, with 43 in the upper 
storey, and intended to have a third probably of"20 or 23 feet square. 
In this case the two little highly ornamented pavilions in the angles 
of the lower storey (shown in the plan), would represent the angle 
piers in which I fancy the staircases were situated in structural 
examples. All this, however, will be clearer when we come to 
describe the Baths at Mahavallipur, which are the only examples 
we possess showing what the external form of Viharas really was 
in ancient India. 

The verandah in the upper storey is 63 feet in length, and opens 
into four cells of somewhat irregular form, by two doors in each, 
making eight doorways altogether. The lower verandah is only 43 
feet long, and opens into three cells, the central one having three 
doors, the lateral ones only two each. In a structural Vihara these 
dimensions would of course be reversed : the upper storey being of 
course the smallest. Of the pillars in the upper verandah only two 
now remain out of nine that originally existed, and these are very 



BAirc ea mm. 



79 




No. 19. Diagram Section of the R&ni kft Nftr. 



much ruined, but their forms can easily be recovered from the antaB 
at either end. None of the pillars of the lower verandah now exist, 
nor can I learn if any, even of their foundations, are to be found 
m dim. Certain it is, however, that whether aB a part of the original 
design, or in consequence of an accident, the roof of this lower 
verandah was at one time framed in wood, as shown in the diagram. 1 

It will be observed that the 
upper part of the rock forming 
part of the roof of the upper 
verandah has fallen, and carried 
away the pillars that at one time 
supported it, and the fall of such 
a mass may at the same time have 
broken through the roof of the 
lower verandah and caused it to 
be replaced in wood. Except 
from the form of the two antee 
at either end of the range of 
columns, I would be inclined to 
believe it was originally of 
wooden construction; but they are so essentially lithic in their 
forms that the wood seems to be a later adaptation. In the earlier 
Vaikuntha, which, though on a smaller scale, seems to have been 
the model on which this one was formed, the whole is in stone, 
which to some extent favours the idea that this wooden verandah 
was a subsequent repair. In consequence, however, of its decay 
and destruction, which was sure to happen early in such a climate, 
the lower range of sculptures have from long exposure become 
so weather-worn as to be nearly undistinguishable. They may 
also have suffered from the original fall of the rock, while the 
upper sculptures are still partially protected by its projection, and 
consequently are much more perfect, and in them, as just men- 
tioned, resides the main interest of the cave. They are in fact 
the most extensive series of sculptured scenes to be found in any 
rock-cut examples of their age. In the weBtern caves such scenes 
or ornaments as are here found, were either painted on plaster or 

1 The diagram is compiled by me, from Mr, Locke's two plans and the photographs, 
and must not therefore be considered as quite correct, though sufficiently so to explain 
the text— J. F. 



80 EASTERN CAVES. 

carved in wood, but on this side of India, we know from what is 
found at Buddha Gay a and Bharhut, the prevailing fashion in that 
early age was to execute these things in stone, and consequently 
these sculptures, even in their ruined state, are full of interest to 
the history of cave architecture. They are far more extensive than 
in any of the caves of this group previously examined, and unlike 
them, instead of being confined to the tympana over the doors, are 
placed between them, so as to form a nearly continuous frieze, 
merely interrupted by the semicircular heads of the doorways. 

The first question that arises on examining these sculptures is, 
Are they Buddhist ? If they are, they are in some respects unlike 
any others belonging to that religion we are acquainted with. We do 
not, of course, at that early age expect to find any conventional repre- 
sentation of Buddha himself, nor even to be able to detect such scenes 
from his life as that represented on the Sanchi Tope. 1 But there is 
an almost total absence of all the Buddhist symbols, or objects of 
worship, which we find in the Ananta, the Jaya Vijaya, or Vaikuntha 
caves, and with which we have become so familiar from the sculptures 
at Bharhut or Sanchi. I fancy I can detect the Trisula and Shield over 
two doorwayB, 1 but there certainly are no dagobas, no wheels, nor 
are there any trees as objects of worship, and Sri too is absent. In 
fact, there is nothing essentially Buddhist about the cave ; but if this 
is so, it is equally certain that there is nothing that savours of the 
Brahmanical religion. There are no many-armed or many-headed 
figures, and no divinities of the Hindu Pantheon can be recognised 
in the sculptures, nor anything that can indicate that the caves were 
Jaina. We are consequently forced to the conclusion that they 
must represent scenes from the Buddhist Jatakas, or events occurring 
among the local traditions of Orissa. The latter is, however, so im- 
probable, that my conviction is that the solution will be found in the 
J&taka ; but out of the 505 births therein narrated only a few have 
been published, and these with so many variants that it is frequently 
very difficult to recognise the fable, even when the name is written 
over it, as is bo frequently the case at Bharhut, and it consequently 

i Tree and Serpent Worship, Plate XXXIII. 

2 The casts made by Mr. Locke are generally divided at the apex of the arch over 
the doorways, where these emblems are usually found. I cannot, therefore, feel 
certain that what I have taken for the Trisula and Shield emblems may not be, after 
ail, mere architectural ornaments. 



BANI KA NUB. 81 

beoomeB almost impossible to do so when we have no such indications 
to help ub. 1 

In a monograph of the caves in Katak, it might be expedient to 
describe the sculptures of the R&ni ka Nur in detail, but even then 
it would hardly be possible to render their story intelligible to others 
without publishing at the same time the photographs from the casts 
made from them by Mr. Locke in 1871-2. These have been 
entrusted to Babu Rajendralala Mitra for publication, 2 and when 
given to the world it may be worth while to go more carefully into 
the subject. At present it may be sufficient to indicate their general 
character. 

The frieze occupying the upper part of the verandah of the upper 
storey is divided by the heads of the eight doorways into seven 
complete and separate bassi rilievi with two half ones at the ends. 
The latter, which are about the best protected from the weather, 
are occupied by two running figures with their faces turned towards 
the centre; the one on the left bearing a tray, apparently with 
offerings, while the corresponding figure at the other end carries a 
wreath, such as that which forms the frieze of the outer rail at 
Amravati, 8 only of course on a much smaller scale. 

The first bas-relief between the doors represents three very small 
elephantB issuing from a natural rooky cavern, apparently to attack 
a man (query, giant), who is defending himself with an enormous club, 
worthy of Hercules. On his right hand in front of him is a Yakkhini, 
known by her curly locks, standing on end, and behind brm are a 
number of females either Beeking shelter in various attitudes of con- 
sternation, or by their gestures offering to assist in repelling the 
attack. If this is meant for history, it probably represents some epi- 
sode in the story of the conquest of Ceylon by Vijaya, which is a very 
favourite subject with Buddhist artists, and where elephants with 

1 1 have shown the photographs from the casts of the bas-reliefs to Messrs. Faosbdll, 
Rhys Davids, Se'nart, and Feer, who are perhaps the four persons who at the present 
day are most competent to give an opinion on such a subject, but none of them have 
been able to offer any plausible suggestions on this Bubject. 

* As the plates of this work have been complete for several years, and the text 
printed, it is much to be regretted that the Government did not entrust their pub- 
lication to Mr. Locke or someone else, bo that the public might have the advantage 
of the information obtained at their expense. I am afraid there is very little chance of 
their being published by the Babu within any reasonable time. 

» Tree and Serpent Worship, Plates UV1. and XCII. 
T189. 



82 EASTERN CAVES. 

Takkhos and Yakkhinis always perform important parts. It is one 
too of the most likely subjects to be depicted in these caves, as it is 
always from this country of Kalinga that the conquest of that island 
is said to have originated. 1 But it may be some Jataka to whose 
interpretation we have no clue, and regarding whioh it is conse- 
quently idle to speculate 

The second bas-relief (Plate I., fig. 4) is certainly the most interest- 
ing of the series, not only because it is one of the best preserved, 
but also because it is repeated without any variation in the incidents, 
though in a very different style of sculpture, in the Ganesa cave, to 
be next described. This bas-relief contains eight figures, four males 
and four females, in four groups. The first represents a man 
apparently asleep in the doorway of a hut, and a woman sitting by 
him watching. In front of these is a woman leading a man by the 
hand apparently to introduce him to the first pair. Beyond these, 
on the right, a man and woman are engaged in mortal combat with 
swords of different shapes, but both bearing shields of very unusual 
form, which I have never seen elsewhere. Beyond these, on the ex- 
treme right, a man is carrying off in his arms an Amazonian female, 
who still carries her shield on her arm, though she has dropped 
her sword, and is pointing with the finger of her right hand to the 
still fighting pair. Here again the first suggestion is Ceylon, for 
nowhere else, that I know of, at least, do Amazons figure in Buddhist 
tradition. But they are represented as defending Ceylon against 
the invasion from Kalinga in the great fresco in Cave XVII. at 
Ajanta, engraved by Mrs. Speir in her Ancient Life in India, and 
repeated further on in a woodcut in the second part. It is by no 
means impossible that this bas-relief may represent an episode in that 
apocryphal campaign. It may, however, from its being repeated 
twice in two different caves, be some local legend, and if so the key 
will probably be found in the palm leaf records of the province, 
whenever they are looked into for that purpose, which has not 
hitherto been done. If not found there, or in Ceylonese tradition, 
I am afraid the solution may be difficult. It does not look like a 
Jataka. At least there is no man in any of these four groups whom 
we can fancy could have been Buddha in any former birth. But 
nothing is so difficult as to interpret a Jataka without a hint from 
some external source. 

1 Tumour's Makawanso, chap. vi. p. 43, et seq. 



RANI KA NUB. 83 

The third compartment I have very little doubt contains a repre- 
sentation of one of the various editions of the Mriga or Deer Jataka ; 
not exactly that narrated by Hiuen Thsang, 1 nor exactly that repre- 
sented at Bharhut, 2 but having so many features in common with 
both, that it seems hardly doubtful the story is the same. The prin- 
cipal figure in the bas-relief is undoubtedly a king, from the um- 
brella borne behind him and the train of attendants that follow 
him. That he is king of Benares is also probable, from his likeness 
to the king represented at Sanchi in the Sama Jataka. 8 The 
winged deer is almost certainly the king of the herd, who was after- 
wards born as Buddha, but whether the second person represented 
is the king repeated, or some other person, — as wo aid appear to be 
the case at Bharhut, — I am unable to guess. The deer at his feet is 
probably the doe who admitted that her turn to be sacrificed had 
come, but pleaded that she ought to be spared in consequence of the 
unborn fawn she bore in her womb, whose time had not yet arrived. 
I am unable to suggest who the woman in the tree may be. I know 
of no Devatas or female tree divinities elsewhere, though there may 
have been such in Orissa. 

The fourth, which iB the central compartment, is the only one in 
which anything like worship can be traced, but at its right hand 
corner, though much injured, I think we can detect something like a 
miniature dagoba or relic casket with some one praying towards it, 
and above a priest or some one seated in the cross-legged attitude 
afterwards adopted in the statues of Buddha. To the left of these is a 
figure in an attitude sometimes found at Amravati, bearing a relic* 
It is difficult to say who the great man or woman is who is seated 
further to the left and surrounded with attendants. He or she is 
evidently the person in whose honour the puja or worship in the 
right hand corner iB being performed, but who these may be must 
be left for future investigation. 

The next compartment is so completely destroyed that no cast 
was taken of it, and its subject cannot of course be ascertained. The 
following one, however, containing three couples with possibly a 
fourth — for the right-hand end is very much ruined — at once calls to 

1 Translated by Julien, vol. ii. p. 355. 

8 The Stupa at Bharhtit, Plate XXV. Fig. 2. 

» Tree and Serpent Worship, Plate XXXVI. Fig. 1. 

* Ibid., Plate II., Fig. 1. 

F 2 



84 EA8TEBN OAVES. 

mind the scenes depicted at Sanchi on Plate XXXVIII. of Tree and 
Serpent Worship. The first pair are seated on a oouoh, the gentleman 
with his arms round the lady's waist, and a wine bottle on the ground 
in front of them. In the second group the lady is seated on the 
gentleman's knee, and there is a table with refreshments before them. 
The third it is difficult to describe, and the fourth is too nearly 
obliterated — if it ever existed — for anything to be made out regard- 
ing it. 1 

The seventh bas-relief is partially destroyed and was not cast. 

As it at present stands, the evidence derived from these bas-reliefs 
is -too indistinct to admit of any theory being formed of much value 
regarding their import. It looks, however, as if the first, the third, the 
fifth and seventh were Jatakas, while the even numbers — the re- 
maining four — represented local legends or sceneB in the domestic 
life of the excavators of the cave. 

Several of the reliefs on the front of the lower storey were oast 
by Mr. Locke, but they are so fragmentary and bo ruined by ex- 
posure to the weather, that no continuous group can be formed out 
of any of them, nor can any connected story be discerned either of 
a legendary or religious character. "Whether on the spot in the 
varying lights of the day, anything could be made out of them it is 
impossible to say, but neither the photographs nor the casts give 
much hope of thiB being done. They seem to represent men and 
women following their usual avocations or amusements, and cer- 
tainly nothing can be discerned in them that illustrates either the 
religion of Buddha, or the history of the country. 8 

This fortunately cannot be said of the sculptures on the right- 
hand wing, where they are perfectly well protected from the 
weather by a verandah 8 feet in depth. This leads through 
three doors into an apartment measuring 7 feet by 20, on the front 
of which there is consequently space for two full and two half 
compartments, which are filled with sculptures. In the left-hand half 
division, a man and his wife are seen approaching the centre with 



l A similar scene occcore at Buddha Gaya. See Cunningham's Report*, vol. i. 
Plate X., Fig. 33. Bajendralala's Buddha Gaya, Plate XXXIV., Fig. 8. It is moat 
unmistakably a love scene. 

* Tbey bare all been lithographed for Babu Bajendralala's second volume, so that 
when that is published the public will have an opportunity of judging how far this 
account of them is correct. 



BAM KA OTJR, 85 

their hands joined in the attitude of prayer. Behind them is a 
dwarf, and before them a woman bearing offerings. In the corre- 
sponding compartment at the other end of the verandah, three 
women — one may be a man — and a child are seen bearing what may 
also be offerings. The left-hand full compartment is occupied by 
a woman dancing under a canopy borne by four pillars, to the 
accompaniment of four musicians, one playing on a flute, 1 another 
on a harp, a third on a drum, and a fourth apparently on a Vina or 
some guitarlike instrument. In the other full division are three 
women, either sitting on a bench with their legs crossed in front, 
or dancing. My impression is that the latter is the true interpre- 
tation of the scene, from two women in precisely similar attitudes 
being represented as Boro Buddor, in Java, 8 but there so much 
better executed that there is no mistake as to their action. 
Whether, however, these women represent the audience, or are 
actually taking part in the performance, it is quite certain that the 
sculptures on this facade are of a wholly domestic character, and 
represent a Nach and that only. As Buch they would be quite as 
appropriate to a Queen's palace — as this cave is called — as to the 
abode of coenobite Priests, to which purpose it is generally supposed 
to have been appropriated. 

Besides the bassi rtiievi just described, there are throughout these 
caveB a number of single figures in alto rilievo. They are generally 
life-size and placed at either end of the verandahs of the caves, as 
dwarpalas or sentinels. They are generally dressed in the ordinary 
native costume, and of no especial interest ; but in this cave there 
are two which are exceptional, and when properly investigated may 
prove of the utmost value for the history of these caves. These 
two are situated at the north end of the upper verandah of this cave. 
The first is of a singularly Bacchic character, and is generally de- 
scribed as a woman riding astride on a lion, and is certainly so 
represented in Captain Kittoe ! s drawing. 8 From Captain Murray's 
photograph, however, the stout figure of the rider appears to 
me very much more like the Silenus brought from Mathura and now 



1 This, as in all the ancient sculptures in India, is the " Flauto Traverao," supposed 
to b« invented in Italy in the 18th or 14th century. 

* Boro Buddor, 4 vols, folio, published by the Dutch Government at Batavia, vol. i. 
Plate CX., Fig. 189. 

» J. A, S. Bengal, vol. vii. Plate XLI. 



86 EASTERN CAVES. 

in the Oaloutta Museum, and the animal is as likely to be a tiger aB 
a lion. 1 It is, however, too muoh mutilated to feel sure what it 
may represent. 

Behind this group stands a warrior in a Yavana costume, (woodcut 
No. 22), which, so far as I know, is quite unique in these caves 
though something very like it oocurs at Sanchi. 8 There, as here, 
the dress consists of a short tunic or kilt reaching to the knee, with 
a scarf thrown over the left shoulder and knotted on the right. On 
his left side hangs a short sword of curiously Roman type, and on 
his feet he wears short boots, or hose reaching to the calf of the 
leg, whether they are bound like sandals as at Sanchi is not quite clear, 
but the whole costume is as nearly that of a Scotch Highlander of the 
present day as it is possible to conceive. Those wearing this costume 
at Sanchi are known from their instruments of music aud other pecu- 
liarities to be foreigners, though whence they came is not clear, and 
this one, we may safely assert, is not an Indian, and his oostume not 
such as was adapted to the climate, or ever worn by the people ; nor 
is it found in any of the bas-reliefs just described. Bearing in mind 
what we learn from the palm leaf records of the Yavana invasions 
of Orissa, there seems little doubt that these two figures do represent 
foreigners from the north-west, or at least a tradition of their • 
presence here. In the present state of our knowledge, however, 
it is impossible to form even a plausible theory as to who they 
were, nor to guess at what time they may have been present in this 
country, beyond what we gather from the age of the caves in which 
they are represented. 

GANESA GUMPHA. 

The Ganesa Gumpha is the only other cave of any importance on the 
TJdayagiri Hill, which remains to be described. It is popularly known 
by the name of that Hindu divinity, in consequence, apparently, of 
the two elephants holding lotus buds in their trunks, who flank on 

1 There is a second figure of Silenug presented to the Calcutta Museum by Col. 
Stacey, brought also from Mathura, -with female attendants, the whole of which, with 
the trees behind, was certainly sculptured in India about the period to which I assign 
this cave. There is also the patera brought by Dr, Lord from Budakehan, now in 
the Indian Museum, representing Silenus in a chariot, drawn by panthers, also of 
Indian workmanship. 

* Tree and Serpent Worship, Plate XXV7H. Fig. 1. 



GANESA GTJMPHA. 



87 




No. 20. Ganesa Gumpha. 50 feet to 
1 inch. 



either side, the steps leading up to its verandah. It is a small cave 
divided into two cells, opening into a verandah about 30 feet in 
length by 6 in width. Originally it had 
five pillars in front, but two of these have 
fallen away. The remaining three are of 
the ordinary type of nearly all those in 
these caves, square above and below, but 
octagonal in the centre, and in this in- 
stance with a Bmall bracket capital evi- 
dently borrowed from a wooden form. 
There are four doorways leading from the 
verandah into the cells, and consequently 
room for three complete and two half re- 
liefs. Two only are, however, sculptured. 
The end ones and the centre compart- 
ments are filled only with the ordinary 
Buddhist rails. One of the remaining 
two (Plate I., fig. 5) contains, as already 
mentioned, a replica of the abduction 
scene, which forms the second in the Rani 
ka Nur. There are the same eight per- 
sons, and all similarly employed in both, 
only that in this one the sculpture is very 
superior to that in the other, and the attitudes of the figures more 
easy and graceful, more nearly, in fact, approaching those at Amra- 
vati, than even to the sculptures at Sanchi. 1 

At one time I was inclined to believe that the Btories represented 
in the sculptures here and in the Rani ka Nur were continuous 
and formed part of one connected history. A more careful study, 
however, of the matter, with the increased knowledge we now 
possess, has convinced me that this ib not the case, and that each 
division in the storied bas-reliefs must be treated as a separate 
subject. In this instance it seems the sculptor purposely left the 
centre compartment blank in order to separate the two so completely 
that no one should make the mistake of fancying there was any 
connexion between them. And the introduction of elephants, in 




No. 21. Pillar in the Ganesa Gum- 
pbn, from a sketch by the Author. 



1 It was well and carefully drawn by Kittoe, nnd lithographed by Prinsep, J. A. S. B. t 
vol. vii. Plate XLIV. 



88 EASTERN CAVES. 

the second bas-relief the difference of costume, and the whole 
arrangement of the subject seems to point to the same conclusion. 

This bas-relief contains sixteen persons, of whom eleven or twelve 
may be males and four or five females, but apparently of a totally dif- 
ferent character, and with different costumes, from those in the prece- 
ding sculpture. Instead, however, of being arranged in four groups, 
with two persons in each, as in the preceding bas-relief, there are here 
five groups ot three persons each, with one, apparently a slaughtered 
man, who does not count. The stone in which it is carved, however, 
is so soft and so weatherworn that it is extremely diffioult to follow the 
action and make out the details. One thing, however, is quite certain, 
which is, that it is a totally different scene from that which follows 
the abduction scene in the Rani ka Nur, proving clearly that 
neither here nor there do theBe bas-reliefs represent a continuous 
history. Instead of a king or kings on foot shooting deer, we 
have here a party of soldiers on foot, dressed in kilts, pursuing and 
slaying a man in a similar dress, who is prostrate on the ground. 
In front of him are three persons on an elephant, the hindermost of 
whom is seizing either the Bevered head or the helmet of the fallen 
soldier, it is impossible from tie state of the sculpture to make 
out which, while the principal person on the elephant shoots a 
Parthian shot from his bow at the pursuing soldiers, and they then 
escape from the wood in which the action takes place. 1 The 
remaining half of the bas-relief is made up of three groups of three 
persons each. In the first the elephant is kneeling, and the three 
persons, who apparently were those on his back in the first part, are 
standing behind him in the second. A Utile further to the right is 
another group of three persons, a man, a woman, and a boy, but 
whether they are the Same as the elephant riders or not, is not clear. 
Prom the costume of the man, which differs considerably, it is pro- 
bable they are not. In the last group of three the lady is sitting 
disconsolate on the ground, the man consoling her, and the boy, 
more than half concealed by the doorhead, holding the bow which 
he carried on the elephant. 

Without some hint from some external source, it seems idle to try 

1 From Mr. Phillips' letter above referred to, it seeins that the third person on the 
elephant is a man, and not a woman, which from the oast he might be mistaken for, and 
that he holds the head of the fallen man by the hair. It also appears that the head is 
quite severed from the body, which in Ktttoe's drawing is certainly not the case. 



GANESA GUMPHA. 89 

and find out what this bas-relief really is intended to represent. It 
may be a story from some Yavana conquest of Kalinga, or it may 
be a scene from some popular legend connected with some of the 
earlier Princes of the land, or, lastly, it may be a Jataka, representing 
some action that took place in one of the earlier births of Sakya 
Muni. In fact it may be anything, and as I know of nothing at all 
like it or that affords any hint of what the story may be, either in 
this or in its companion bas-relief, the abduction scene, I must be 
allowed to relegate it for further investigation when we possess more 
knowledge of the local and traditional history of Kalinga Desa. 

Like the Rani ka Nur, this cave is without any inscription 1 that 
can give us any hint as to the age when it was excavated, and we are 
consequently left wholly to the style of architecture and sculpture 
to enable us to fix its age in so far as it can be done, in the present 
state of our knowledge. 

The only Buddhist emblems that can be detected in this cave are 
the trisula and the shield, but they are most distinctly shown in the 
upper part of the semicircular framework over the doors. They 
are there, however, connected with foliaged ornaments of so much 
more refined and elegant a character than the corresponding orna- 
ments in the Rani ka Nur, that there can be no hesitation in ascribing 
them to a more modern date. The same is true of the figure sculp- 
tures in this cave. It is not only very much better than that at 
Bharhut, but approaches so nearly to that of Amravati in some 
respects, that it seems difficult to carry it back even to the age of 
the gateways at Sanchi, with which, however, it has perhaps, on the 
whole, the nearest affinity. The foliaged ornaments that are found 
surrounding the semicircular heads of the tympana over the door- 
ways are so nearly identical with Borne ornaments on the gateways 
at Sanchi* that they cannot be far removed in age. Similar orna- 
ments are also found on the jambs of the door of the Chaitya cave 
at Nasik (Plate XXV.), and elsewhere, which are either a little before 
or a little after the Christian era, so that altogether the date of this 
cave can hardly be considered as open to question. 

1 In Prinsep's plates, J. A. S. B., vol. vi. Plate LI V., there is an inscription said to be 
found in this cave, though even that is doubtful ; but supposing it to exist, as I pointed 
out in my original paper, R. A. S., vol. viii. pp. 31, 41, it is in so modern a character 
that it is absolutely impossible it could be coeval with the date of the excavation, 
though it might mark its appropriation by the Hindus at a long subsequent age. 

' Tree and Serpent Worthip, woodcuts 17 and 18, p. 114. 



90 EASTERN CAVES. 

Still) the inferiority in teohnical merit of the sculptures in the 
Rani ka Nur, and their more distinctly Indian oharacter as compared 
with those in this cave, for a long time made me hesitate before 
coming to a positive conclusion as to which was the earliest of the 
two. As a rule, the history of art in India, as I have frequently 
pointed out, is written in decay. As we trace it backwards, not 
only are the architectural details more elegant and better executed 
in each preceding century, but the figure sculpture improves in 
drawing and dramatic power, till, at least, we reach the age of the 
Amravati Tope in the fourth century. There was perhaps as much 
vigour in those of the Sanchi gateways in the first century of our 
era, but they lack the technical skill, and now that we know what 
was done at Bharhut and Buddha Gaya, two or three centuries 
earlier, we can state with confidence that there was distinct progress 
in sculpture from the age of Alexander to that of Constantine. The 
highest point of perfection was apparently reached in the fourth or 
fifth century, the decay, however, set in shortly after, and haB 
unfortunately oontinued, with only slight occasional oscillations 
towards better things, to the present day. With this knowledge- 
there can be little hesitation in placing the sculptures of the Rani ka 
Nur as earlier than those of the Ganesa cave, though at what 
interval it is difficult to say. There is, however, still one point in 
the architecture which points most distinctly in the same direction. 
All the jambs of the doorways in the Rani ka Nut slope inwards, 
not to such an extent as is found in the Behar caves, or even in the 
earlier ones here, but still most unmistakeably, and to such an extent 
as is not found in any cave either in the east or west of India after 
the Christian era. No such inclination of the jambs can be detected 
in the photographs of the Ganesa cave, and, in fact, does not exist ; 
and this, with the superior elegance of the sculpture, and delicacy 
of the architectural details, is more than sufficient to prove that the 
excavation of the GaneSa cave must, according to our present lights, 
be placed at an age considerably more modern than that assigned 
to the Rani ka Nur, whatever that may be. 

From what we now know of the sculptures of the Topes at 
Bharhut and Sanchi, we ought not perhaps to be surprised to find 
no scenes that can be directly traced to the legends of the life of 
Buddha in the sculptures in these caves ; nor till the whole of the 
Jataka stories are translated can we wonder that we cannot interpret 



GANESA GUMPHA. 91 

the soulptures from that vast repository of improbable f ableB. Still, 
having recognised beyond doubt the Wasantara, the Sama, and other 
Jatakas at Sanohi, where no descriptive inscriptions exist, 1 — and the 
inscribed ones at Bharhut show how favourite a mode of illustration 
they were at the age of these caves, — we ought not to despair that 
they may yet yield their secrets to future investigators. A more 
remarkable peculiarity of this group of caves is the total absence of 
any Chaitya caves, or of any sanctuary in the Viharas, which could 
ever have been appropriated to worship in any form. In all the 
western groups, such as Bhaja, Bedsa, Nasik, Ajanta, everywhere in 
fact, the Chaitya, or church cave, seems to have been commenced 
as early as the Viharas or monasteries to which they were attached, 
The two in fact being considered indispensable to form a com- 
plete monastic establishment. Here, on the contrary, though we 
have Aira in his famous inscription boasting that he had " caused 
to be constructed subterranean chambers and caves containing a 
Chaitya temple and pillars," a we find nothing of this sort anywhere. 
No traces of such excavation, have been found, and the Viharas also 
differ most essentially from those found on the western side of 
India. There in almost every instance the Vihara consists of a 
central hall, round which the cells are ranged ; nowhere do the cells 
open directly, — except in the smallest hermitages, — on the verandah, 
or on the outer air. 

The only means that occur to me of accounting for these differences, 
which appear to be radical and important, is by supposing that in 
Behar and OriBBa there existed a religion — Buddhist or Jaina — using 
the same forms, and requiring the same class of constructions, that 
were afterwards stereotyped in the caves. If this were so there 
probably existed, before Aioka's time, halls of assembly and monas- 
teries — constructed in wood of course — which were appropriate for 
this form of worship, and they continued to use these throughout 
the whole Buddhist period without, as a rule, attempting to imitate 
them in the rock. 

» Tree and Serpent Worship, Plates XXXVI. and XXXVUl The identification 
of these jatakas at that time was one of the most important discoveries made in modern 
times for the authentication of the Buddhist scriptures. Before that many were inclined 
to helieve that the Jatakas were mere modern inventions. Then for the first time it 
was proved that before the Christian era they existed, and very nearly in the same 
form as at the present day. 

» /. A, 8. B., voL vi. p. 1084. 



92 EASTERN CAVES. 

If we knew exactly when it was that Buddhism was first prac- 
tically established in the west, it might aid in determining this 
point. As before mentioned, it (vide ante, p. 17) is probable that it 
was not known there before the arrival of the missionaries sent by 
Asoka after the third convocation held in the 17th year of his reign, 
B.C. 246. If this is so, it is unlikely that any suitable places of 
worship were found there, or any habit of constructing them, while 
as these missionaries found everywhere a rock admirably suited to 
the purpose, they may at once have seized the idea of giving per- 
manence and dignity to the new forms by carving them in the 
imperishable rock. It is true, it may be objected, to this view that 
this almost necessarily presupposes the idea of > the inhabitants of the 
country having used caves as habitations, of some sort, anterior to 
the advent of the Buddhists, while, as none such have been found, it 
seems Btrange the habit should have become at once bo prevalent. 
If, however, any such earlier caves did exist, they must have been 
only rude unsculptured caverns, like the Hathi Gumpha and the rude 
caves in Behar, and would be undistinguishable from natural caverns, 
and it would be impossible now to determine whether they had ever 
been used by man for any purpose. Be this as it may, I know of no 
other mode of accounting for the general prevalence of Chaitya oaves 
in the west and their non-existence in the east of India than by sup- 
posing that on the one side of India they always had, and continued 
to use, wooden halls for this purpose, while on the other side, having 
no such structures, they at once adopted the idea of carving them 
in the rock, and finding that so admirably adapted for the purpose 
they continued to use it ever afterwards. 

As I hope to be able to show, in desmbing the Raths at 
Mahavallipur, a little further on, the Viharas of the Buddhists 
as originally constructed consisted of a square hall, the roof of 
which was supported by pillars, and with cells for the residence of 
the monks arranged externally round, at least, three sides of the 
hall, on the upper storeys, at least. In some, perhaps most 
instances, it was two or three or more storeys in height, each 
diminishing in horizontal dimensions, and the cells being placed 
on the roof of the lower storeys of the structure, which thus 
assumed a pyramidal form like the Birs Nimrud near Babylon. 
If any such monasteries existed in Katak they probably continued 
in use during the whole Buddhist period, and bo have been preferred 



GANESA OUMPHA. 93 

as residences to others cut in the rock. Whether this was so 
or not, it is clear that the eastern caves are not such direct 
copies from structural Viharas as those on the west, where the 
central hall, surrounded with cells on three sides, with a portico or 
porch on the fourth, was as nearly a direct copy as could well be 
made in the rock. In the east they proceeded on a different system. 
The hall was entirely omitted, and the cells open either directly 
on the outer air or into the verandah, while, as explained in 
describing the Bani ka Nur (ante, p. 78) all the other arrangements 
of the structural Vihara were turned topsy turvey. The difference 
probably arose from the fact the Udayagiri group of hills is literally 
honey-combed with little cells, of about 6 or 7 feet square, just 
sufficient for the residence of a single hermit. Most of them 
probably had a verandah in wood or shelter of some sort over the 
doorway to prevent the inmate being baked alive, which without 
such protection he certainly would have been. Some of the earlier 
carved caves, such as the Tiger cave, the Bhajana cave, and the 
Ananta, are still only single cells, with verandahs of greater or less 
magnificence. Some, like the Jaya Vijaya and Ganesa, are only two 
cells with verandahs to protect both, and others, like the Vaikuntha 
and R&ni ka Nur, contain three or four cells arranged in two storeys. 
Still these are only an assemblage of hermitages without any 
common hall or refectory, or any of the monastic arrangements 
which were so universally adopted in the western caves. At the 
same time it may be remarked that there being no halls in the eastern 
caves, accounts for the absence of any internal pillars at Udayagiri, 
though they form a marked and important feature in all the western 
caves of any pretension to magnificence. 

The absence of a Dagoba either in or about these caves may 
perhaps be acccounted for, as before hinted, by the Tooth relic 
being probably the great object of worship in this province during 
the Buddhist period, and it may have been preserved in a Dagoba 
or shrine of some sort, on the top of the Udayagiri hill, if this was 
Dantapuri. The local traditionSj it must be confessed, tend rather 
to show that Dantapuri was where the temple of Jugannath now 
stands at Puri on the sea shore, but the evidence is conflicting on 
this point. But be this as it may, it is quite certain, unless Kittoe 
is right about the remains on the Udayagiri hill, that there is no 
material evidence of a Dagoba, either structural or rock-cut, exist- 



94 



EASTERN CAVES. 



ing in connexion with these caves. On the other hand, it may pro- 
bably be asserted with equal confidence that in western India there 
is no group of caves, of anything like the same extent, which has 
not one or more of these emblems, either rock-cut or structural. 

There are several minor peculiarities pointing however to essential 
differences between the caves on the east and west of India, which 
will be described in the subsequent chapters of this work, when 
describing the western caves, but which it is consequently not 
necessary to anticipate at the present stage of the investigation. 




No. 22. Yavana warrior from the Rani ka Nur. 



95 



CHAPTER IV. 

UNDAVILLI CAVES ON THE KRISHNA RIVER NEAR 

BEJWARA. 

The caves of this group are not in themselves of any great 
interest, but the locality in which they are situated was one of great 
importance in early Buddhist times. It was in fact, so far as 
we at present know, the only place in Southern India where the 
Buddhists had any important establishments, or, at all events, no 
Buddhist remains have been found south of Kalinga, except those 
in this neighbourhood. This was probably owing to the fact, that 
it was from some port in the vicinity of the mouth of the Krishna 
and Godaveri that Java and Cambodia were colonised by Buddhists, 
and we know from the classical authorities that it was hence that 
communication was kept up between India and the Golden Cher- 
sonese at Thatun and Martaban. If no other evidence were available 
the existence of the Amravati Tope within a few miles of Bejwara 
is quiet sufficient to prove how numerous and wealthy the Budd- 
hist community must have been in the fourth and fifth century. 
While the account given of it by Hiuen Thsang in the seventh 
shows how much of its previous importance, in Buddhist eyes, it 
retained even then. 

Under these circumstances we might well expect that besides the 
Amravati Tope, other remains might still be found there, and they 
probably will be when looked for. This, however, has not hitherto 
been the case. The knowledge we do possess may be said to have 
been acquired almost accidentally, no thorough or scientific survey 
of the country having yet been attempted. 

Bejwara was the capital of the country of Dhanakacheka when 
Hiuen Thsang visited the place in 637 a.d., and he describes two 
great Buddhist establishments as existing in its immediate neigh- 
bourhood. One, the PurvaSila Sangarama, as situated on a hill to 
the east of the city, where its remains can still be traced. To the 
westward of the city he describes the Avara&la monastery, in his 
eyes a far more important establishment, and by which there seems 
little doubt he intended to designate the Amravati Tope, situated 



96 BASTBKN CAVES. 

on the opposite bank of the river, about 17 miles higher up. This 
was first explored by General Mackenzie in 1817-21, afterwards 
by Sir Walter Elliot, and recently by Mr. Sewell of the Madras 
Civil Service, and the results of their labours, except of the last 
named, are described in the second part, and last 56 of the plates of 
my Tree and Serpent Worship. Though it may not have been the most 
sacred, it certainly is, in an artistic point of view, the most im- 
portant Buddhist monument that has yet been discovered in India, 
and is quite unique in the part of the country where it is situated. 
Its magnificence, and the length of time it must have taken to 
execute its sculptures, prove that for a long period the Buddhists 
must not only have been all powerful in this part of India, but 
also the possessors of immense wealth, and it is consequently pro- 
bable that other remains of the same class may still be found, 
and more especially that contemporary caves may still exist in 
the sides of the hills in its neighbourhood. Those that have 
hitherto been discovered, hardly answer to the expectations thus 
raised, while such as have been described belong to a much more 
modern age, and to another religion. It will, consequently, only be 
when some contemporary series of caves is discovered that we can 
expect to find anything that is worthy to be classed with the sculp- 
tures of the Amravati Tope. 1 



1 In a paper read to the Royal Asiatic Society on the 17th of November last, Mr. 
Sewell adheres to the opinion he expressed in his original report to the Madras Go- 
vernment, that the Avarasila Sangarama of Hiaen Thsang was not identical with the 
Amravati Tope, bnt was a u rock cut " vihara situated on the side of a hill immediately 
overhanging the city of Bejwara. He admits that there are no remains of any struc- 
tural buildings on that hill, which could have belonged to ancient times, and no trace 
of the u caverns " mentioned by the pilgrim. All he contends for is that there are plat- 
forms cut here and there in " the rock," on which he thinks the buildings of the 
monastery may have been erected. 

Although it may fairly be admitted that the language of Hiuen Thsang may bear 
the interpretation Mr. Sewell puts upon it, it is so deficient in precision that it may 
with equal fairness be argued that the expression which be considers descriptive of the 
monastery in reality applies to the road. The M Via Sacra," with its statues and rest 
places, which its founder constructed to lead from the city to the sacred spot. As the case 
now stands we have before ub the substantial fact ofthe existence of the Amravati Tope, 
which from our knowledge of the sculptures found in the Gandhara monasteries we 
know was "adorned with all the art of the palaces of Bactria," and very similar in 
style to them. On the other hand we have only a hill side which has in some places 
been cut down to afford platforms for buildings, but of what form and of what age we 



UNDAV1LLA CAVES ON THE KRISHNA RIVER NEAR BEJWARA. 



97 



The principal cave that has yet been discovered in this neighbour- 
hood is situated in a small isolated hill about a mile from the town 
of Bejwada (the Bejwara or Bezwara of the maps), and is a four or 
rather five storeyed Vaishnava temple, dedicated to Anantasena or 
Narayana. It has been suspected of having been originally ex- 
cavated as a Buddhist Vihara ; but there is certainly no sufficient 
evidence to justify such a supposition. It is entirely Brahmanical 
in all its arrangements, and very similar to the contemporary caves 
belonging to that religion at Badami and Elura, and can from the 
character of its sculptures hardly date further back than the 7th or 
8th century of our era. It probably should be attributed to some of the 
Chalukya kings of Vengi, who like the elder branch of that family 
ruling at Badami, and later at Kalyana, were worshippers of Vishnu. 




No. 23. View of the (Jiidavilli Cave, from a Photograph 

The great interest of this cave for our present purposes, lies in its 

have no suggestion. Under these circumstances, and with the knowledge we now 
possess of Buddhist cave architecture, it is probubly safe to assert, that no such com- 
bination as Mr. Sewell suggests, of rock cut with structural buildings exists in India, 
and till some such are discovered I must be excused if I decline to register these 
" platforms " among the " Cave temples of India," or to believe that Hiuen Thsang did 
not mention the Amravali Tope under the designation of the A varasila Sangharama. 
Y 132. n 



98 EASTERN CAVES. 

enabling us to carry one step further back our researches into the 
external appearance of the structural Buddhist Viharas, which have 
disappeared from the land. In describing the Rani ka Nur, at 
Udayagiri (ante, p. 78) it was pointed out that the upper storey there, 
and in the Vaikuntha cave were set baok, not so much from con- 
structional motives, as in imitation of the forms of the structural 
Viharas of the period. Here we have the same system carried out 
through four — possibly five — different storeys. It is true the exact 
section of the cave may, to some extent, have been adapted to the 
natural slope of the hill, but it hardly seems doubtful that the suc- 
cessive terraces are adaptations to rock forms of the platforms which 
formed essential features of pyramidal Viharas of the Buddhists, 
and which became afterwards the fundamental idea of the Dravidian 
style of architecture, in the hands of the Brahmans of the south. 

As already mentioned the Undavilli cave is four storeys in height 
one above the other, but there is a fifth storey in front, shown in the 
view, woodcut No. 22, to the right, a little detached, but which may 
have been intended to be connected with and made part of the original 
design. The lowest of the four connected storeys is so entirely un- 
finished, and we cannot even guess what form it was ultimately 
intended to take, and how far it might be extended towards a lower 
one still, which certainly was commenced to the right, and may 
have been intended to extend across the whole front. 

When describing the Rani ka Nur at Udayagiri, it was suggested 
that the three sides of the court were really intended to represent 
the three sides of a pyramidal Vihara turned inside out. If this 
cave at Undavilli is carefully examined, it seems almost certain that 
it equally represents three sides of a similar building, its centre 
being three intercolumniations in width. The sides on the second 
storey having, or being intended to have, five, which was a greater 
number than it was possible to give to the centre from its situ- 
ation, flattened out on the rock. In the third storey they were 
all reduced to three intercolumniations, and the uppermost storey 
of all was only the dome which all the Viharas had, flattened out. 
These storeys in a structural Vihara would be in wood. The lowest 
only, if 1 am correct, in stone, and consequently more solid, and not 
admitting of the same minute sub-divisions. To all these points 
we shall have occasion to revert presently when describing the 
Mahavallipur Raths, but this cave is almost equally interesting, as 
a copy of a pre-existing form of building, but not being carved 



UNDAVILLA CAVES ON THE KRISHNA RIVER NEAR BEJWARA. 99 

out of an isolated block, it is flattened out into a facade, which is 
not at first sight so obviously a copy of a Vihara as they are. 
Notwithstanding this, however, it seems hardly to admit of any 
doubt, that though so essentially Brahmanical in its dedication, this 
cave is intended for as literal a copy as could well be made, in the 
rock, of one of the Buddhist Viharas that must have abounded in the 
neighbourhood at the time it was executed. Even if we did not 
know from Hiuen Thsang's account how essentially Bejwara was a 
Buddhist colony in the seventh century, the ruins at Amravati would 
be quite sufficient to show that every form of Buddhist architecture, 
in all probability, existed on the spot at the time it was excavated, 
and, as we gather from the result, were the only models the Hindus, 
at that time, had to copy, when designing structures for their own 
intruding faith. 

To these points we shall revert presently, but meanwhile to finish 
our description of this cave the following particulars based upon 
Mr. Sewell's plans and report. 1 

The front of the lower storey extends about 90 feet in length, and 
the excavation has been carried inward to various depths, leaving 
portions of three rows of massive 6quare stone pillars partially hewn 
out. On this facade was carved an inscription in one line in the 
Vengi character " of about the seventh or eighth century." 

The second floor is of much greater area, and has originally con- 
sisted of four separate apartments ; a door has been broken through 
the dividing wall between the third and fourth, thus throwing them 
practically into one apartment. The facades of these four apart- 
ments represent — if my theory of the design is correct — the four 
fronts that would have been found in the second storey of a structural 
Vihara, though in that case they would have surrounded only one 
hall instead of four, as is the case here. The south or left side hall 
is about 19-| feet square, the roof being supported by two plain 
pillars in front and two inside, all with heavy bracket capitals. At 
the back is a shrine cell, 10 feet square, with a vedi or altar in the 
centre, and a runnel for water round it, for the conveyance of which 
to the outside a small channel was cut under the middle of the 
threshold. The front of this hall is ascended to by eight steps from 
a platform \0\ feet broad, in front of it. 

1 Report by Mr. B. Sewell, M.C.S., issued by Governmeut of Madras, 1st Nov. 1878. 
No. 1620, Pub. Dcp., on which and the plans prepared by Mr, Peters, together with 
tho notes of Sir Walter Elliot ( Ind. Ant., vol. v. p. 80), this account is bawd. 

G 2 



100 



EASTERN CAVES. 



Outside is a cell in the left end of the platform, 6| feet by 4J, and 
bohind it a still smaller one, measuring only 3 feet by 2. On the 
rock above is a frieze of elephants and lions. 




No. 24. Section of the Undavilla Cave, from a Drawing by Mr, Peter*. Scale SO feet to 1 inch. 

The facade above the hall has a frieze of geese ; above this is a 
heavy projecting member, having the 0Aa%a- window ornament ; 
and above this a row of five protuberances too weatherworn to be 
recognisable; and over this, again, is a carefully carved diaper 
pattern on a flat band. On the rock on the north side of the platform 
is a long inscription, in Telugu, of the thirteenth century of the Saka 
era, recording large donations to the temple. Thus showing that it 
was still considered sacred in the fourteenth century after Christ. 
Long after Buddhism had entirely disappeared from India. 

To the right of this, and projecting about 10 feet further forward, 
is the principal or central hall of the whole, 29 ft. 9 in. wide by 
31 ft. deep, and varying in height from 7 ft. 3 in. to 8 ft. The roof 
is supported on sixteen square pillars chamfered in the middle of 
the shafts, arranged in four parallel rows, with pilasters in line with 
each row, which are advanced from 2£ to 3^ feet into the cave. At 
the back is a shrine, about 13£ feet square, with an empty vSdi or 
place for an image against the back wall, as in the Eavana-ka-Khai 



UNDAVIU.A CAVES ON THE KRISHNA RIVER NEAR BEJWARA. 101 

at Elura. On each side the shrine door are two standing figures 
cut in niches, one of them being Narasiiiha or the man-lion avatdra 
of Vishnu. Over the head of the door is a roll ornament or torana 
held by a pair of malcaras, or conventional Saurians, and carrying 
some object in the centre which rests on the back of an animal. On 
the left side of the hall, at the back, is a deep niche containing a 
figure of Ganesa, " which, like the others, has been heavily covered 
with plaster." 

The four pillars in the back row are much weatherworn, and some 
of them are broken away. They have been sculptured with ara- 
besques and lotuses, and on one a group of a man and his wife with 
a female attendant. The pillars in the next and front rows are 
almost entirely destroyed also. The bases and capitals of the second 
row are covered with lotuses, animal and human figures, &c, one group 
containing a figure of Maruti or Hanuman. Outside, on a portion 
of the rock face, is an elephant, with a man supporting its trunk. 

The third apartment has originally consisted of two rooms, that 
on the left measuring 19 ft. 9 in. wide by 17 ft. 7 in. deep, and its 
roof supported by four pillars bearing arabesque and lotus orna- 
ments. At the back is a cell, 1 1 feet square, with a pedestal for the 
image. The other room was 17-^ feet deep by 13£ wide, and has also 
a shrine, 4 feet square, with dwarpalas or doorkeepers at the entrance 
to it. On the west wall is a sculpture (perhaps of Vishnu in Vaikuntha) 
in which the principal male figure is seated on a couch with his wives 
and attendants, and with musical performers represented in front. 
The four pillars of this room have also arabesque and lotus ornaments 
on their capitals. 

A stair in the left side of the large hall leads up to the third storey, 
and lands in a great hall, 52 ft. 9 in. long by 30 ft. 3 in. deep, in- 
cluding the verandah, which is arranged on the same plan as the 
Badami caves. First there is a long verandah, with six pillars and two 
pilasters in front ; then in the back of the verandah, separating it 
from the hall, are four pillars in the middle, and a wall at each end 
extending the length of the opening between a pair of pillars, and 
carved in front with a dwdrpdla. The hall itself, about 8 feet high 
has two rows of six pillars each from end to end. There is no shrine 
in the back wall, but a cell, 12 ft. 9 in. square, in the left end. The 
pillars that support the hall are square masses, the corners of the 
middle section of each having been chamfered off so as to make 



102 EASTERN CAVES. 

that portion of each octagonal. On the front sides of the upper 
portions of each have been sculptured the avatdrad of Vishnu, and 
other figures ; the lower portions bearing elephants and sinhas or 
lions. At the left end of the back "wall, and partly on the return of 
the end wall, is a figure of Vishnu, as represented in the left end 
of the great cave at Badami, seated on the body of the serpent 
Ananta, while the hoods of the snake overshadow his head. He is 
four armed, holding the saiikha and cholera emblems in his hands, 
and is attended by Lakshmt. At the sides were thirteen figures, 
each about 2 feet high, listening to his discourse or worshipping 
him, but two of them are broken away. The local Brahmans call it 
" Vishnu and the Rishis." In the right end wall of this hall has 
been cut a gigantic recumbent figure of Narayana, 17 feet long, 
resting on Sesha, the great serpent, whose seven hoods canopy his 
head (woodcut 24). At his feet are two colossal figures, 8 feet 
high, and above and below the extended arm of Vishnu are attend- 
ant figures, with Brahma seated on the lotus that springs from 
Vishnu's navel. 

In front of the verandah is a platform, 48 feet long by 19£ feet 
broad, forming part of the roof of the storey below. On the 
northern half sits a fat male figure similar to what is found on some 
of the roofs of Xailasa, and on the hall in front of the Da£a Avatara 
at Elura ; on each side of him is a lion. On the southern half have 
been similar figures, but only the bases remain. 

The upper storey is reached by a series of steps in the rock at the 
left or south side. It represents the circular or domical termina- 
tion which crowns every square pyramidal temple, in the Dravidian 
style of architecture, in the south of India, without a single excep- 
tion, bo far as I know- Here it is of course flattened out to meet the 
exigencies of rock construction, but all its features are easily recog- 
nisable, and are identical with those found elsewhere. It stands on 
a plain platform over the roof of the verandah of the third storey 
with three circular cells or shrines in the back wall with a bench 
round each. They are apparently unfinished, but their existence here 
is interesting, as showing that the upper storey or domical part of 
these Viharas was intended to be inhabited. As it happens that 
at Mahavallipur they are solid we have no other absolute proof that 
this was the case. 

" Along the base and sides of this hill," according to Mr. Bos- 



UNDAVILLA CAVES ON THE KRISHNA RIVER NEAR BEJWARA. 103 

well, 1 " there are remains of a considerable number of rock-caves 
and temples, evidently of Buddhist origin." " There is a rock-temple 
in two storeys close to the village, which has recently been utilised 
as a granary." *' In various places the figures of elephants and other 
animals in the Buddhist style of representation 2 are to be seen 
depicted. At one place there is a Mantapam or porch cut out of 
the rock and supported by stone pillars, more solitary cells, and 
lastly a rock temple (that of Undavilli) in four storeys of con- 
siderable proportions." 

Among these it may hereafter be possible for some one thoroughly 
familiar with the details of Buddhist architecture to identify the 
" grande caveme" in which, according to the traditions reported by 
the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Thsang, Bhavaviveka resided awaiting 
the coining of Mai trey a Buddha to dissipate his doubts. 3 

There is, however, nothing about this Undavilli cave that could 
have been considered as old in Hiuen Thsang's time, and there is no 
form or feature about it that could at any time be ascribed to the 
Buddhists, while from the nature of its plan, and its being con- 
structed in the rock, it is impossible that all the Buddhist details — 
if they ever existed — could have been so altered and obliterated as 
to be no longer recognisable. We may say we now know exactly 
what the Rock-cut Architecture of the Buddhists was during the 
seventh and eighth centuries to which this cave certainly belongs, 
and it was not like this. At the same time, if the date assigned to 
the Raths at Mahavallipur, to be described in the next chapter, is 
correct, we may feel equal confidence in asserting that we know 
what the style was, which the Hindus adopted in the south of India, 

1 Report to the Madras Government., 1870. 

* It is difficult to say what the " Buddhist style of representation " of an elephant 
really is. There is a large bas-relief of an elephant at Ajanfa artd two others at Kuda in 
BuddKist caves, and many Entailer ones on friezes ; in the Hindu Knilasa, at Eluro, 
there are many in alto-rilievo, and two free standing ; there are four or five {ree stand- 
ing ones at Amba, a bas-relief at Karusa, and there was a colossal free standing one at 
Elophanta, all Brahmanical ; one free standing one and several in bas-relief at Maha- 
vallipur ; and there is a free standing one and many heads, &c. in the Jaina temples 
at Elura, but no antiquary can show that each sect had its " style " of representing 
elephants. The carving of all figures varies more or less with the age in which they 
were executed, but " elephants " less than almost any other figure, and usually they are 
better carved than any other animal. 

8 Mimoircs ntr leu Cont. Occid., torn. ii. p. 110. It is to be remarked that Hiuen 
Thsang says he "rested in the palace of the Asuras," not in* Buddhist temple. 



104 EASTERN OAVES. 

at the time when these caves were excavated, and it is as nearly 
as may be identical with what we find here. Everything about 
this cave is Hindu, and belongs to that religion, and is compara- 
tively modern — almost certainly after Hiuen Thsang's time. It is, 
in fact, like the Kailasa at Elura, only another instance of the manner 
in which the Hindus about the eighth century appropriated Buddhist 
sites, and superseded their rock-cut temples by others belonging to 
their own form of faith. They, however, differ so essentially in 
many important particulars, that with a little familiarity, it seems 
impossible to mistake the one for the other. If this is so, it is clear 
that this Undavilli cave never could have belonged to the Buddhists. 
It is as essentially Brahmanical as any of the caves belonging to 
that sect at Badaml or Elura, of about the same age, though by a 
curious inversion of the usual routine, its forms are as certainly 
copied from those of Buddhist viharas, like the raths at Mahavallipur, 
to be described in the next chapter. Proving as clearly as can well 
be done, that at the age when they were excavated, the Brahmins 
in the south of India had no original style of their own, and were 
consequently forced to borrow one from their rivals. 



105 



CHAPTER V. 
MAHAVALLIPUR, OR THE SEVEN PAGODAS. 1 

Intboductory. 

With the exception of the caves at Elephanta and Elura, there is 
perhaps no group of rock-cut temples in India which have been so 
often described, and are consequently so familiar to the English 
public, as those known as the Seven Pagodas, situated on the sea- 
shore 35 miles south of Madras. From their being so near and so 
easily accessible from the capital of the Presidency, they early 
attracted the attention of the learned in these matters. As long ago 
as 1772 they were visited by Mr. "W. Chambers, who wrote a very 
reasonable account of them, which appeared in the first volume 
of the Asiatic Researches in 1788. This was followed in the fifth 
volume of the same publication in 1798, by one by Mr. J. Golding- 
ham. Both of these, however, may be said to have been superseded 
by one by Dr. Guy Babington in the second volume of the Trans- 
actions of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1830. He was the first who 
attempted and succeeded in deciphering the inscriptions found at 
the place, and the illustrations of his paper, drawn by himself and 
his friend Mr. Hudleston, are among the best and most trustworthy 
of any that up to that time had been published of any Indian 
antiquities. Before his time, however, in 1816, they had attracted 
the attention of the indefatigable Colonel Colin Mackenzie, and he 
left a collection of 37 drawings of the architecture and sculpture of the 
place, which are now, in manuscript, in the India Office library. Like 

1 There Beems to be great difficulty in ascertaining what is the proper name of this 
place. In the beginning of the century it was the fashion to call it Maha Bali puram, 
which was the name adopted by Col. Mackenzie in his MS., and by Southey in his 
Curie of Kchama. Dr. Babington, in his paper in the second volume of the Trans. 
R. A. S., states that in the Tamil inscriptions in the Varahaswami Pagoda it is called 
Mahamalaipur, which he states means "city of the great hill." This is disputed by 
the Rev. G. Mahon and the Rev. W. Taylor, and they suggest (Carr. 66) Mamallaipur, 
Mahalaram, &c. I have adopted, as involving no theory, Mahavollipnr, by which it is 
generally known among Europeans, though for from pretending that it is the real 
name of the place. 



106 EASTERN CAVES. 

most of his collections of a similar nature, they are incomplete and 
without any descriptive text, so as to be nearly useless for scientific 
purposes. These earlier accounts were, however, to a great extent 
superseded by "A Guide to the Sculptures, Excavations, &c. at 
Mamallaipur, by Lieut. J. Braddock," which appeared in the Madras 
Journal of Literature and Science in 1844 l (vol. xiii). As this was 
based on personal knowledge, and he was assisted in the task by 
such experts as the Beverend G. W. Mahon, the Reverend W. 
Taylor, and Sir Walter Elliot, it contained, as might be expected, 
all that was then known on the subject. Unfortunately, however, it 
was not accompanied by maps or plans, nor, in fact, with any illus- 
tration, so that, except to those visiting the spot, it is of compara- 
tively little use. * 

All these — except the Mackenzie MS. — which may be considered 
the scientific illustrations of the subject, were collected by a Captain 
Carr, under the auspices and at the expense of the Madras Govern- 
ment. These were published in 1869 in a separate volume, with 
several additional tracts, and with reproductions of such illustrations 
as were then available, and a map of the locality reduced from the 
Revenue Survey, which is the beBt by far that has yet been pub- 
lished. As a manual for reference this work is certainly convenient, 
but as its editor had no real knowledge of the subject, and no special 
qualification for the task, it adds little, if anything, to what was 
previously known regarding the place ; while by rejecting Lieutenant 
Braddocks numbers, and adopting new ones of his own, scattered 
broadcast over his map, without any system, he has added consi- 
derably to the confusion previously existing in the classification of 
the various objects enumerated. 

In addition to these more scientific attempts at description, the 
place has been visited by numerous tourists, who have recorded their 

1 1 visited the spot in 1841, and my account of the antiquities was first published in 
the eighth volume of the Journal of the Royal Atiatic Society in 1848, and afterwards 
republished with a folio volume of illustrations in 1846. — J. F 

* The plans and sections nsed to illustrate this chapter are taken from a very com- 
plete set of illustrations of these Baths made for me, at his own expense, by Mr. R. 
Chisholm, Superintendent of the Government School of Art at Madras. They are 
all to a large scale — 2 feet to 1 inch— and are not only correct but full of detail beau- 
tifully drawn. They are in fact a great deal more than can be utilised in a work like 
this, but I hope may some day form the foundation of a monograph of these most 
interesting monuments. 



MAHAVALLIPUR. 107 

impressions of the place in more or less detail. Among these, none 
was more impressed with their importance than Bishop Heber, 
who described them with his usual taste and discrimination ; and 
Mrs. Maria Graham, in her journal and letters, devotes a consider- 
able space to them, and perhaps done as much as any one to render 
them popular with general readers. 1 Several views of them were 
published by Daniel in the beginning of this century. These, how- 
ever, have lately been superseded by photographs, of which several 
sets have lately been made and published. The most complete is by 
Dr. A. Hunter, late Director of the Government School of Art at 
Madras. They were also photographed by Captain Lyon for the 
Madras Government. But the best that have yet been done are 
by Mr. Nicholas, of Madras, which are superior to any that have 
hitherto reached this country. 

Notwithstanding all that has been said and written about them, 
there is no group of rock-cut temples in India regarding whose age 
or use it has hitherto been bo difficult to predicate anything that is 
either certain or satisfactory. They are, in fact, like the Undavilli 
cave just described, quite exceptional, and form no part of any 
series in which their relative position could be ascertained. They 
certainly had no precursors in this part of the country, and they 
contain no principle of development in themselves by which their 
progress might be compared with that of any other series ; one of 
the most singular phenomena regarding them being, that though 
more various in form than any other group, they are all of the same 
age, or at least so nearly so that it is impossible to get any sequence 
out of them. The people, whoever they were, who carved them 
seem suddenly to have settled on a spot where no temples existed 
before, and to have set to work at once and at the same time to 
fashion the detached boulders they found on the shore into nine or 
ten raths or miniature temples. They undertook simultaneously 
to pierce the sides of the hill with thirteen or fourteen caveB ; to 
sculpture the great bas-relief known as the penance of Arjuna; 
and to carve elephants, lionB, bulls, and other monolithic emblems 

1 At the end of Capt. Carr's book two pages (pp. 230, 281) are devoted to the 
bibliography of the subject, which is the most original and among the moat useful 
in his publication. 



108 EASTERN CAVES, 

out of the granite rocks around them. But what is even more 
singular, the whole were abandoned as suddenly as they were under- 
taken. Of all the antiquities on the spot not a single one is quite 
finished ; some are only blocked out, others half carved, but none 
quite complete. When, however, we come to ask who were the 
people who were seized with this strange impulse, and executed these 
wonderful works, history is altogether silent. They must have been 
numerous and powerful, for in the short interval that elapsed 
between their inception and abandonment they created works which, 
considering the hardness of the granite * rocks in which they were 
executed, may fairly be termed gigantic. Yet there is no trace of 
any city in the neighbourhood which they could have inhabited, and 
from whose ruins or whose history, we might get a hint of their 
age, or of the motives that impelled them to undertake to realize 
these vast and arduous conceptions. 

There are, it is true, numerous inscriptions on the raths, from which, 
being in Sanskrit, we gather that the people who engraved them 
probably came from the north, but they consist only of epithets of 
the gods over whose images they are written, and only one name of 
a mortal man can be gleaned from them all. Eventually, when the 
numerous inscriptions in the Madras Presidency are decyphered, we 
may come to know who Atiranachanda Pallava may have been. 2 At 
present we only know that it does not occur anywhere else ; but we 
gather indistinctly from it that the Pallavas lived before the rise of 
the Chola race, in the 10th and 11th centuries of our era. Chdla 
inscriptions in the Tamil language, recording gifts to these temples, 
occur on several of the rocks in this neighbourhood, 3 and tell us at 
least that, at that time, they had superseded the people who executed 
these wonderful carvings. 

In the absence of any real knowledge on the Bubject, the natives, 
who are never at a loss on such occasions, have invented innumerable 
fables and legends to account for what they did not understand. 
Some of these " guesses at truth " may be, and probably are, not far 
from the truth; but none of them, unless confirmed from other 

1 The proper description of the stone I believe to be quartzo-felspalhic gneiss. 

2 The Pallavas are distinctly mentioned as ruling in Kanchipura (Conjeveram) in an 
inscription dated 635 a.d. See Indian Antiquary, vol. viii,, p. 245. 

1 See Sir "Walter Elliot's paper in Madras Journal, vol. xiii., reprinted in Carr'a 
compilation, pp. 132 el seq. 



MAHAVALLIPUR. 109 

sources, can be considered as authentic history. It may also be 
added, that we are here deprived of one very common indication of 
age, for the stone out of which these monuments are carved is so 
hard that it shows no sign of weathering or decay, so as to give a 
hint of their relative antiquity from that cause ; all are fresh as 
the day they were executed, and the chisel marks appear everywhere 
as if executed only a few days ago. 

Under these circumstances it is hardly to be wondered at that 
authors have not been able to agree on any certain date for the 
execution of the works at Mahavallipur. Some have been inclined 
to believe, with Sir Walter Elliot, that they could not well have been 
made later than the 6th century. 1 Others to side with the Rev. 
W. Taylor, who " would place them (loosely speaking) between the 
12th and 16th centuries of our reckoning." 2 It was not, in fact, 3 till 
the publication of Mr. Burgess's account of the caves at Elephanta 
in 1871, 4 and of his si ill more important researches at Badami 
in 1874," that the public had any real data from which to draw any 
conclusions. To these have been added his subsequent investigations 
among the Brahmanical caves at Elura and along the whole western 
coast of India, so that now our knowledge of that branch of cave 
architecture may be said to be tolerably complete. Hitherto atten- 
tion has been mainly confined to the Buddhist caves ; they were 
infinitely more numerous, and extending through a period of nearly 
1,000 years— from B.C. 250 to a.d. 750 — it was easy to arrange them 
in a chronometric series, in which their relative age could be ascer- 
tained with very tolerable certainty. It still, however, remained 
uncertain when the Brahmans first adopted the practice of carving 
temples and caves out of the living rock, and the data were in- 
sufficient to allow of their sequence being made out with the same 
clearness as existed in the case of the Buddhist caves. The discovery, 

1 Cnrr'6 compilation, p. 127, reprinted from Madras Journal, vol. xiii. 

* Loc. cit., p. 114. 

3 When I first wrote on the subject, I felt inclined, for reasons given, to place them 
as late as Mr. Taylor (say 1300 a.d.), but from further experience in my later writings 
I have been more inclined to adopt Sir Walter Elliot's view. It now appears, bs is so 
often the case, that the truth lies somewhere between these two extremes. — J. F. 

* The Hock Temples of Elephanta orGharipuri, by James Burgess, Bombay, Tbacker 
Vining, & Co., 1871. 

1 Report of Operations in the JBelgdm and Kaladgi Districts in 1874, London, 
India Museum, and Allen & Co., 1874. 



110 EASTERN CAVES. 

however, of a Brahmanical oave dated in 579 a.d. at Badami v first 
gave precision to these researches, and with the dates, approximatively 
ascertained, of the temples at Pattadkal and Aihole\ made the fixation 
of that of the Kailasa at Elura and other temples of that class as 
nearly certain as those of the Buddhist caves in juxtaposition with 
them. This was all-important for the fixation of the date of the 
rock-cut structures at Mahavallipur, where, though the architectural 
forms, as we shall presently see, are exclusively Buddhist, there is 
not one single emblem or one mythological illustration that belongs 
to that religion. Everything there is Brahmanical, and executed by 
persons wholly devoted to that creed, and who, so far as their works 
there bear testimony, might be supposed never to have heard of the 
religion of the mild Ascetic. 

Another source of information which is almost as important for 
our present purposes has only, even more recently been made avail- 
able, by the publication of Mr. Arthur Burnell's researches in the 
Palaeography of Southern Indian alphabets. 1 Hitherto we have been 
mainly dependent on those published by James Prinsep in 1838, 8 
but they were compiled mainly from northern sources, and besides 
the science has acquired very great additional precision during the 
last forty years. It may consequently be now employed in approxi- 
mating dates, without much fear of important errors arising from its 
application for such purposes, provided the geographical position of 
the inscription and all the local peculiarities are carefully attended to. 

There are other minor indications bearing on this point which 
will be alluded to in the sequel, but for our present purpose it may 
be sufficient to state that both Mr. Burnoll and Mr. Burgess agree 
in fixing the year 700 a.d. as a mean date about which the temples 
and sculptures at Mahavallipur were most probably executed. It 
may be 50 years earlier or later. On the whole it seems more 
probable that their date is somewhat earlier than 700, but their 
execution may have been spread over half a century or even more, 
so that absolute precision is impossible in the present state of the 
evidence. Still until some fixed date or some new information is 
afforded, 650 to 700 may probably be safely relied upon as very 

1 Report on Belgdm and Kalddgu, p. 24. 

2 Research* in the Palaeography of the Alphabets of Southern India, by Arthur 
Burnell, M.C.S., 2nd edit., Trubner, London, 1879. 

» /. A, S. B., vol. vii. p. 277. 



MAHAVALLIPUE. Ill 

nearly that at which the granite rocks at Mahavallipur were carved 
into the wondrous forms which still excite our admiration there. 

If this date can be established, — and there seems no reason for 
doubting its practical correctness, — the first and most interesting 
inference we derive from it, is that as all the rock-cut structures at 
Mahavallipur are in what is known as the Dravidian style of archi- 
tecture of the south of India, they are the earliest known examples 
of that style. The proofs of this proposition are of course mainly 
of a negative character, and may, consequently, be upset by any new 
discovery, but this at least is certain, that up to the present moment 
no more ancient buildings in that style of architecture have yet been 
brought to light. No one has in writing described any one that 
can lay claim to an earlier date, and no photograph or drawing has 
exhibited any more Archaic form of architecture in the south of India, 
and so far at least as my researches extend, none such exist. The 
conclusion from this seems inevitable that all the buildings anterior 
to the year 700 or thereabouts, were erected in wood or with some 
perishable materials, and have perished either from fire or from 
causes which in that climate so soon obliterate any but the most sub- 
stantial erections constructed with the most imperishable materials. 

This conclusion is, it must be confessed somewhat unexpected and 
startling, inasmuch as it has just been shown from Asoka's lata, 
and from the rails at Buddha Gaya, and Bharhut, that stone was used 
for architectural and ornamental purposes in the north of India 
for nearly 1,000 years before the date just quoted, and though we 
might naturally expect a more recent development in the south the 
interval seems unexpectedly great. What makes this contrast of age 
even more Btriking is, the fact that in the neighbouring island of 
Ceylon stone architecture was practised in considerable perfection 
even before the Christian era. The great B-uanwelli Dagoba was 
erected by King Duttugaimani between the year 161 and 137 B.C., 
and the Thuparamya even earlier by King Devananpiatiesa, the 
contemporary of Asoka — and both these exhibit a considerable 
amount of skill and richness in stone ornamentation. 1 Still facts 
are stubborn things, and until some monuments are discovered in 
Dravida Desa, whose dates can be ascertained to be earlier than 
the end of the seventh century, we must be content to accept the 

1 History of Indian Architecture, p. 188, et seq. 



112 



EASTERN CAVES. 



fact, that the rock-cut temples at Mahavallipur are the earliest 
oxisting examples of the style, and must be content to base our 
reasoning, for the present at least, upon that assumption. 



The rock-cut remains at Mahavallipur may be divided into three 
very distinct classes. First there are nine Raths or Rathas, 1 small 
isolated shrines or temples each cut out of a single block or boulder 
of granite. 

Second, there are thirteen or fourteen caves excavated in a rocky 
ridge of very irregular shape, running north and south parallel with 
the shore, at a distance of half-a-inile inland', and two more at a place 
called Saluvankuppam about two miles further north. 

Third, there are two great bas-reliefs, 8 one wholly of animals, 
and a number of statues of elephants, lions, bulls, and monkeys, 
each carved out of separate blocks. 




No. 25. General View of the Rathas MahAvallipur, from a sketch by the Author. 



1 Hatha, from a root meaning * to move," " to run," is the Sanskrit word for a 
wheeled vehicle, chariot, or car of a god. The Tamil word is T£r. 

2 Perhaps the sculpture in the Krishna Mantapan ought to be enumerated as a third 
bas-relief, but it is under the cover of a porch, and there are no signs of any such 
being intended to cover the great bas-relief known as Arjuna's penance. 



113 



CHAPTER VI. 

RATHAS, MAHAVALLIPUR. 

The five principal Rathas, which are by far the most interesting 
objects here, are situated close together on the sandy beach, at 
some little distance to the southward of the hill in which the caves 
are excavated. They bear names borrowed from the heroes of the 
Mahabharata, but these are quite modern appellations applied from 
the popular belief that everything rock-cut, as in fact whoBe origin 
is mysterious, was executed by the Pandavas during their exile. In 
consequence of this the most southern of the Raths is called that of 
Dharmaraja, the next that of Bhima, the third that of Arjuna, and 
the fourth that of Draupadi, the wife of the five Pandavas. These 
four are situated in one line, extending about 160 feet north and 
south, but whether cut out of a continuous ridge, and only sepa- 
rated by art, or whether each was a separate boulder, cannot now be 
ascertained. My impression is that it originally was a single ridge 
rising to a height of about 40 feet at its southern end, and sinking 
to about half that height at its northern extremity, probably with 
fissures between each block now formed into a Rath, but hardly 
separated otherwise, from each other. The fifth, called after the 
twins Sahadeva and Nakula, is situated a little to the westward of 
the other four, and quite detached. 

The sixth, the Ganesa Rath l is situated near the northern end 
of the rocky ridge at a distance of three-fourths of a mile from the 
southern group, and near it are the remaining three, but they are 
merely commenced, and so incompletely blocked out, that their in- 
tended form can hardly be ascertained, and all that need be said of 
them is that they are in the same style, and evidently of the same 
age as the other six. 

1 Sometimes, but improperly, called Arjunas rath, a mistake first, I believe, made by 
Mrs. Graham, but especially to be avoided, as another Rath bears that name, and tho 
confusion is quite sufficient already -without this additional complication. 

Y 18*. H 



114 



EASTERN CAVES. 



Ganesa Hatha. 

As the Ganesa Ratha is the most nearly finished of any, it may be 
as well to begin with it, though it would be rash to say it is in 
consequence, the earliest. It does seem probable, however, that the 
masons would first select a suitable block among the many that 
exist, on the hill, for an experiment, before attempting the much 
more serious undertaking of fashioning the southern ridge or group 
into the Rathas bearing the Pandu names. 

As will be seen from the annexed woodcut the Ganesa Ratha 
is» though small, a singularly elegant little temple. In plan its 
dimensions are 19 feet by 11 feet 3 inches, and its height 28 feet. 
It is in three storeys with very elegant details, and of a form very 
common afterwards in Dravidian architecture for gopuras, or gate- 
ways, but seldom used for temples, properly so called, in the manner 
which we find employed in this instance. 




No. 26. View of the Gane&a Ratha, from a Photograph. 

The roof is a straight line, and was adorned at either end by a 
trisula ornament, and similar emblems adorned four at least of the 
dormer windows that cut into it. It is, however, no longer the triSula 
of the Buddhist, but an early form of the trident of Siva, who is the 
god principally worshipped in this place. Between the tridents the 
ridge is ornamented with nine pinnacles in the form of vases, which 



GANESA HATHA. 115 

also continue to be the ornaments used in similar situations to the 
present day. The roof itself is pointed, both internally and exter- 
nally, in a manner entirely suitable to the wooden construction from 
which it is copied. It is true that in most of the western caves the 
internal form of these roofs is of a circular section, but externally 
there always is and must have been a ridge, to throw off the rain 
water, so as to make the external form an ogee, and so it is always 
represented. In some instances, as the Son Bhandar cave at Rajgir 
(woodcut No. 7) and at Sita Marhi (woodcut No. 11), the internal 
form was also pointed, and so I fancy it generally was in the 
wooden structures from which these Raths were copied. 

Like all the many storeyed buildings of this class with which we 
are acquainted, this temple diminishes upwards in a pyramidal form, 
the offsets being marked by ranges of small simulated cells, such as 
no doubt existed in Buddhist viharas on a large scale, and were thus 
practically the cells in which the monks resided, or at least slept. 
In this instance they are more subdued than is usually the case, but 
throughout the whole range of Dravidian architecture, to the present 
day, they form the most universal and most characteristic feature of 
the style. 

The pillars in the porch of this temple are of a singularly elegant 
form, but so very little removed from their wooden prototypes as 
to be very unsuited for the position they here occupy in monolithic 
architecture. Their capitals, though much more slender, are of the 
Elephanta type, and their bases are formed by yalis or lions, which 
are clearly derived from some wooden originals, and are singularly 
unlike any lithic form (woodcut No. 29). They are, however, the 
moBt characteristic features of the architecture of the place, being 
almost universal at Mahavallipur, but not found anywhere else, that 

I know of. 

On each side of the entrance there is a dwarpala or porter, and 
on the back wall of the verandah is an inscription in a long florid 
character, dedicated to Siva, and stating that the work was executed 
by a king Jayarana Stamba, 1 but his name occurs nowhere else, and 
we can only guess his age from the form of the alphabet in which 
it is written, which, as before stated, is certainly not far removed 
from the year 700. 

The image in the small shrine inside is not cut in the rock, but of 

» 7><i«*. R. A. S., vol. ii. p. 266, Plate 14, Carr. pp. 57 and 201. 

ii 2 



116 



EASTERN CAVES. 



a separate stone, and has been brought and placed there, instead of 
a lingam, which in all probability, originally occupied the sanctuary. 

Draupadi's Hatha. 

The first or most northern of the great group of Raths bearing 
the name of Draupadi is the most completely finished of the five, 
probably because it is the smallest, and the simplest in its details. 

It is square in plan, mea- 
suring only 11 feet each 
way, and with a curvi- 
linear roof rising to about 
18 feet in height. 1 Above 
this there evidently was a 
finial of some sort, but 
being formed from a de- 
tached stone it has been 
removed or fallen down, 
and its form cannot now 
be ascertained, unless in- 
deed the original could be 
found by digging in the 
sand, where it now pro- 
bably remains. It would, 
however, be very interest- 
ing if it could be found, 
as the Rath is now unique 
of its kind, but must have 
belonged to an extensive class of buildings when it was executed, 
and their form consequently becomes important in the history of 
the style. 




No. 27. Draupadi's Ratha, from a Photograph. 



1 1 have frequently been inclined to suggest that this little Ruth a, which in reality 
only simulates a Buddhist hermitage or Pansala, contains in itself the germs from which 
the Hindu Vimana or spire was afterwards formed. The square base, the overhanging 
roof, its curvilinear form, are all found here, and nowhere else that 1 am aware of. 
The gulf, however, that exists between such a cell as this and such a temple as that at 
Bhuvaneswar, built on the same coast, and nearly at the same age, is so enormous that 
one hesitates before putting it forward, even as an hypothesis. All that can be said at 
present is, that it contains more elements for a solution, than any thing that has yet 
been put forward, to explain the difficulty. 



DRATTPADl's HATHA. 117 

There is a small cell in the interior, measuring 6ft. Gin. in 
depth from the outer wall to the back of the statue, and 4 ft. 6 in. 
across. At the back is a statue of Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, 
standing on a lotus, four-armed, and bearing the chakra and other 
emblems in her hand. Two figures are represented as worshipping 
her, one on either side, and above are four Gandharvas, or flying 
figures, two of them with moustaches, and bearing swords. 1 On 
either side of the doorway are two female dwarpalas, and there are 
also several similar figures in niches on either side, most of them 
females. 

Over the doorway is a curious carved beam of a very wooden 
pattern, which is principally interesting here, as one nearly identical 
exists, belonging to the cave called Kapal Iswara, on the rocky hill 
nearly opposite, proving incontestably, as in fact all its architecture 
does, that the cave, like everything else here, is of the same age as 
this Rath. 

Bhima's Ratha. 

In order to avoid repetition, it will probably be more convenient 
to pass over for the present Arjuna's Ratha, which comes next in the 
series locally, and to describe that in conjunction with the one bearing 
the name of Dharmaraja, which it resembles in every essential par- 
ticular, the one being a copy of a three-storeyed the other of a four- 
storeyed Buddhist Vihara. If this is done the next will be that 
called Bhima's Ratha, which is the largest of the group. It belongs 
to the same style as the Ganesa temple just described, except that, as 
in the two last mentioned examples, the conditions as to size are 
reversed ; the smaller, the Ganesa, is a three-storeyed, while Bhima's 
is a two-storeyed Dharmasala or hall of assembly. 

Its dimensions in plan are 48 feet in length by 25 in breadth, and 
it is about 26 feet in height. As will be seen from the annexed 
plan, it is a little difficult to say what its disposition internally may 
have been intended to have been if completed The centre was 
occupied by a hall measuring 9 or 10 feet by 30, open certainly 
on one, probably on both sides, and as probably intended to be 
closed at both ends. 

1 A representation of this sculpture will be found TVans. R. A. S., vol. ii. Plate X. 
Fig. 1. It ii reproduced by Carr with the same references. 



118 



EASTERN CAVES. 




No. 38. Plan of Bhima'a Hatha, from a plan by R. Chiaholm. Scale 10 feet to 1 inch. 1 

It is, however, by no means clear that the eastern wall was in- 
tended to be removed and pillars substituted for it. In the account 
of the hall in which the first convocation was held, it is stated in 
the Mahaioanso,* that the priest who read Bana, or the prayers, 
did so from a splendid pulpit at one end of the hall, but the pre- 
sident was seated in the centre of one side facing the assembly. 
The same disposition is described by Spence Hardy 3 and M. 
Bigandet,* and would exactly suit such a hall as this, supposing 
the wall on one side to remain solid, but would be inconvenient 
and unlikely, if it were removed and pillars substituted. As the 
Mahawatiso was probably describing (in the fifth century) some 
ordinary form of Buddhist ecclesia, or hall of assembly, it seemB 
not unlikely that this was the type of those in use at that time, 
and consequently that the wall on one side was solid and not pierced, 
except, perhaps, by doors. 

This central hall was surrounded by a verandah measuring 5 feet 
3 inches in the clear on the sides, but only 3 feet at the ends. 



1 The dotted linen on this plan represent suggested modes in which the rath might 
have been completed if finished as intended. 

1 Tumour's Translation, p. 12. » Eastern Monacfusm, p. 175. 

* Life of Gaudama, p. 354. 



nniMA s hatha. 



119 



Assuming, however, that the hall was open on both sides, there 
would then be twelve pillars in the centre and two at each end. One 
of these is represented in the annexed woodcut, and they are all 
of the same pattern, which, in fact, 
•with very slight modification, is uni- 
versal at Mahavallipur. They all have £ 
bases representing Yalis and conven- ' 
tional lions, with spreading capitals, 
and of proportions perfectly suited 
to a building of the dimensions of this 
one, if executed in wood. So little 
experience, however, had the Pallavas, 
or whoever undertook these works, 
in the material they were employing, 
that they actually set to work to 
copy literally a wooden building in 
granite. The consequence was, that 
even before they had nearly com- 
pleted the excavation of the lower 
storey, the immense mass of material 
left above, settled, and cracked the 
edifice in all directions, and to such 
an extent as to necessitate the aban- 
donment of the works, while they 
were in even a less finished state than 
those connected with the other Rathas. Not only is there a crack 
of some inches in width, right through the rock, but several of the 
little simulated cells have slipped down for want of support, and 
give the whole a ruined, as well as an unfinished aspect. 

The upper storey or clerestory, as we would call it in a Gothic 
building, with its five windows,— one over each intercolumniation, — 
is so nearly complete as to enable us to realise perfectly what was 
the structural form it was intended to imitate, but nothing to indi- 
cate with what material the roof of the original was covered. 
The most probable suggestion seems to be, that it was with thatch, 
though the thickness seems scarcely sufficient for that purpose, and 
metal could hardly have been laid on without rolls, or something 
to indicate the joinings. On the other hand, it is hardly conceivable 
that they could frame carpentry so solidly, as to admit of their 




So. 29. Pillar from Bhima'a Ratha, frim 
a drawing by R. Cblsholm. 



120 



EASTERN CAVES. 



roofs being coated with plaster or chunam, without cracking, to 
such an extent as to admit the rain. As represented here it con- 
sisted of a solid mass, about a foot in thickness, formed into a 
pointed arch with barge boards at the ends. It may have been 
thatched, but judging from the construction simulated both at the 
ends and sides, the roof must have been strongly framed in timber, 
both longitudinally and transversely. 1 Its ridge was intended to be 
ornamented a*> in the Ganesa temple, with a range of vases or 
kalasas, here 18 in number. All of these, however, with the two 
ornaments at either end — TriSuls — have all disappeared, if they ever 
existed. It is probable, it was intended to add them in separate 



1 Curiously enough exactly the same difficuly arises with reference to the Lycian 
tombs, which resemble the Indian rock-cut examples more nearly than any others that 

are known to exist elsewhere. As will be 
seen from the annexed woodcut, and the 
tombs themselves in the British Museum, 
they present the Mime close, imitation of 
wooden construction which form so re- 
markable a peculiarity of the early Budd- 
hist architecture of India. They have the 
same pointed form of roof, with a ridge, 
closely resembling the Ganesa and Bhima 
Ruthas, and the same matters are shown 
in the gables which are so universal in 
the western caves. When, however, we 
come to inquire how the roof itself was 
rz&r'-z. constructed, and how covered, we are 

f tu, Kl^fll |t/ again at fault and must wuit further in- 

formation before deciding. 

Generally it is assumed that these Ly- 
cian tombs are ancient, at least belonging 
to an age immediately succeeding the 
conquest of the country by Cyrus and 
Harpagus, but this seems by no means 
certain. The one illustrated in the woodcut 
bears a Latin inscription, showing that it 
was either carved or appropi iated for her 
own use and that of her sisters, by a Ro- 
man lady. It is not easy to decide which 
was the case, inasmuch as it is astonish- 
ing how long architectural forms continue 
to be employed when they become sacred, even after their use or meaning have become 
obsolete. 




No. 30. Lycian rock- cut Tomb, from a drawing 
by Forbea and Sprat ts, Lycia. 



bhima's hatha. 121 

stones, like the finial of the Draupadr Rath close by this one. It 
would have added enormously to the quantity of cutting required, 
to have carved them in the rock. 

Among the sculptures at Bharhut (b.c. 150) there is a bas- 
relief (cmte woodcut, No. 10) which not only enables us to rea- 
lise very completely the form of these halls, but to judge of 
the changes that took place during the nine centuries that elapsed 
between their execution. The pillars in the older example are 
unequally spaced, because on the right hand altar — if it is such — 
the sculptor wanted room for three hands between the pillars, for 
four in each of the two central compartments, and for five in 
that on the right. General Cunningham calls these the thrones 
of the four last Buddhas, 1 and he may be correct in this, though 
the reasons for that appellation are not quite evident. The roof 
of this Rath, as in the Grane^a, has nine pinnacles, though in this 
instance they are not vases but mere ornaments. The two end 
ones are broken off. 8 It is not quite clear from the bas-relief 
whether the light was introduced into the interior through the dor- 
mer windows only, or whether the spaces between the pillars of the 
clerestory were not also at least partially open. At Mahavallipur 
it is quite evident that it was through the windows alone that 
light was admitted to the interior of the upper storey wherever 
there was one. 

Besides its intrinsic elegance, which is considerable, the great 
interest that attaches to Bhima's Rath is, as just mentioned, that it 
is almost certainly the type of such a hall as Ajatasatru erected in 
front of the Sattapanni cave at Rajagriha, in order to accommodate 
the 500 Arhats who were invited to take part in the first convoca- 
tion, immediately after the death of the founder of the religion. It 
would require the dimensions in plan of this rath to be doubled to 
suit it, for that purpose, but a hall 100 feet by 50 would be amply 
large, and in wood its construction would be a matter of no difficulty. 
It might be necessary to increase the number of posts supporting the 
superstructure, but that would improve the appearance of the build- 
ing without detracting either from its convenience or the amount 
of accommodation it would afford. 

i Bharhut Stupa, p. 121, Plate XXXI. 

s It is not quite clear whether the peak on the right hand represents a tenth pinnacle 
or a finial. 



■ 



122 EASTERN CAVES. 

As before mentioned these buildings with straight roofs are very 
rarely introduced in Dravidian architecture except as gopuras or 
gateways, but in that form they are nearly universal. Except the 
one in the village of Mahavallipur, I know of no instance of this 
form being used for templeB. The straight roofed oblong form is 
however, sometimes found in the north of India. There is one 
at BhuvaneSwar called Kapila Devi or Vitala Dewal, 1 and another 
in the fort at Gwalior,* but they are very rare, and I do not know 
of any cave except the Dherwara at Elura (Plate LIX.) and another 
at Kanheri (Plate LIV.), which can fairly be said to represent such a 
hall as Bhima's Eath. The Kanheri example is especially interesting, 
as the plan more nearly resembles that of the hall erected to accom- 
modate the first convocation at Rajagriha (ante page 49) than that of 
any other caves now known to exist in India. The square forms of 
the halls of the Viharas may have been found more convenient and 
more appropriate to rock-cut dwellings, and thus prevented the 
oblong form of such a hall as this being repeated, especially in the 
rock, where it was impossible to enter at both ends, or to light it 
from both sides. 

Abjuna and Dharmaraja's Rathas. 

The two Rathas bearing the names of Arjuna and Dharmaraja, 
the second and fourth in this row, are identical in so far as their 
architectural ordinance and general appearance is concerned, the 
only difference being that the first named is very much smaller than 
the other. They in fact form a pair, and represent on a small 
scale the three and four storey ed Viharas of the Buddhists, in the 
same manner that the GaneSa temple and Bhima's Hatha may 
be taken as representations of the halls, or Shalas, which were 
adapted for ecclesiastical purposes by the votaries of the same 
religion from the earliest times to which we can go back. 

Arjuna's Ratha, though so very different in design, is very nearly 
of the same dimensions as that of Draupadi, which stands next to it. 
In plan it is a square measuring 1 1 feet 6 inches each way, or 
with its porch 11 feet 6 inches by 16 feet, and its height is about 
20 feet. Inside a cell has been excavated, and though only 4 feet 
6 inches by 5 feet, seems to have been the cause why the Ratha is 

1 Picturesque Illustrations of Ancient Architecture in India, Plate IV. 
' History of Indian Architecture, woodcut 262, page 458. 



ARJUNA AND DHARMARAJA 8 HATHA. 



123 



cracked from top to bottom, and a part of its finial fallen off. 
The roofs both of the lower and of the first storey of this little 
temple are ornamented with those ranges of little simulated 
cells which became the distinguishing characteristics of Dravidian 
architecture from that day to the present hour, and it is surmounted 
by a dome, which is an equally universal feature, though whether it 
is copied from an octagonal apartment, or from a Dagoba as at Boro 
Buddor, is not quite clear. There is no image in the sanctuary, 
though the first gallery is ornamented with 12 statues, three in each 
face, representing either gods of the Hindu Pantheon or mortals. 
Some have inscriptions above them, but none of these afford any 
information, we cannot gather from the statues themselves. 



The Hatha bearing the name of Dharmaraja is the most southerly 
and is the largest and finest of the group, though like everything 
else about the place it is unfinished. As will be seen from the 
annexed woodcut its dimensions in plan are 26 feet 9 inches by 
28 feet 8 inches, and its height is rather more than 35 feet. It 



t «.t ... 




A — *- 



W N.cl 

No. 31. Flan of Dharmarija's Ratha, from a drawing by R, Chisholm. Scale 10 feet to 1 inch. 

consequently occupies more than six times the area of Arjuna's 
Ratha, and is nearly twice as high, but even with these dimensions 



124 



EASTERN CAVES. 



it can only be considered as a model. It would require to be mag- 
nified to twice or three times these dimensions to be a habitable 
building. The four upper storeys of the Undavilli cave (ante, p. 96), 
which resemble this Batha more nearly than any other known 
building, are upwards of 50 feet in height, and they are only on 
the verge of habitability. The simulated cells there are still too 
email to be occupied by human beings. 

Its general appearance will be seen from the annexed woodcut, 
from which it will be perceived that it is a building of four storeys 
arranged in a pyramidal form. The lowest storey, which was also 




Ho. 32. View of Dhannaraja's Hatha, from a Photograph.* 

the tallest, in the building from which this one is copied, was probably 
intended to be constructed in stone, as the Gopuras and temples in the 
south of India almost invariably are, while all the upper or pyra- 
midal parts in them are as generally built with bricks and wood. In 
this instance, the upper part could only have been constructed with 
similar materials, and if meant to be inhabited, in wood only. The 
pillars of the basement all are, or were intended to be slender examples 



1 History of Indian Architecture, woodcut 363, p. 645. 



ARJUNA AND DHARMARAJ 8 RATHA. 



125 



of the Elephanta order, (woodcut No. 29), with yalis or conventional 
lions forming their base. The three upper storeys are all ornamented 
with those little simulated cells described above, in speaking of the 
Ganesa temple and Arjuna's Hatha, and which are so universal in the 
south of India, — there are 16 of these on the first story, 12 on the 
second, and eight on the third. The front of each of these cells with 




No. S3. Elevation of Dharmnrnpi's Rat ha, Mahavcllipur. 
From a Drawing by R. Chuholm. 



Scale 10 feet to 1 inch. 



their connecting links, is adorned with a representation of one of those 
semicircular dormer windows which are so usual in Buddhist archi- 
tecture. Here each has a human head represented as if looking out- 
wards. Behind these cells the walls are divided by slender pilasters 
into tall compartments, and in each of those which would have been 
an opening in the original building there is now placed the statue of 
either a deity of the Hindu pantheon, or of some now undistinguish- 



126 EASTERN CAVES. 

able mortal. Among the gods are found representations of Brahma, 

Vishnu, and Siva, but without any of those extravagances which 

afterwards deformed the imagery of the Hindu pantheon ; none of 

the gods have more than four arms, and except for this, are scarcely 

distinguishable from ordinary mortals. The Ardhanari, a favourite 

form of Siva, as half a male half female, occurs several times, and 

Vishnu as Narasimha or the boar Avatar. There is, however, no 

attempt at a bas-relief or any connected story, and unfortunately 

none of the inscriptions over these figures, though numerous and 

easily legible, do more than supply laudatqry epithets to the gods 

over whose heads they are engraved. 1 At each angle of the lower 

storey which was meant to be solid there are two niches, one of which 

contains a figure of Siva or Ardhanari, and another apparently a 

Deva, or it may be only a mortal. 

The whole of the three upper storeys are perfectly finished exter- 
nally. But in the present state of the monument it is difficult to 
say how far it was intended to excavate their interiors. The upper 
or domical storey was probably intended to be left quite solid, like 
that of Bhima's Ratha. A cell was, however, excavated to a depth of 
5 feet, in the third storey, and it may have been intended to have 
enlarged it. A similar attempt has been made in the second storey, 
but carried only to the depth of 4 feet, when it was abandoned. From 
there being six pilasters on the outside of the third storey, we gather 
that in a structural building its roof would have been supported by 
36 wooden posts, and in like manner that the second storey would 
have had 64 supports (8 X 8), but of course some of these might 
have been omitted, especially in the centre, in actual construction, 
though there probably would be no attempt to copy all these in the 
rock. From its extreme irregularity it is not so easy to suggest 
what may have been the intended arrangement of the lowest, but 
principal storey ; but from the wider spacing of its pillars externally, 
it is evident, that in a structural building stone, and not wood, 
would have been employed in its construction. From the- arrange- 
ment of the exterior we gather, with almost perfect certainty, that 
there would have been four free standing pillars in the centre, as 
shown in dotted lines in the plan and section. It is not clear, how- 
ever, how many of the eight piers or pillars that surrounded these 

1 Trans. R. A. S., vol. ii. Plates XVI. and XVII. ; see also Carr's compilation* 
p. 224, for Dr. Burnell's transliteration, unfortunately without translation. 



ARJUNA AND DHARMAEAJa'b RATHA. 



127 




No. W. Section of Dharmaraja Hatha, with the suggested internal arrangements dotted in. 

Scale 10 feet to 1 inch. 

four (woodcut No. 31) were free standing or attached as piers to the 
external walls. The four in the angles were almost certainly attached 
to the angle-pieces which in a structural building would have con- 
tained the staircases. Practically, therefore, this Hatha seems to 
have been designed to represent a building haying on its lower storey 
16 pillars besides piers, standing about 6 feet apart, from centre to 
centre, and being executed in some durable material. Above this 
the floors were supported by wooden posts less than half that distance 
apart. As before remarked, both these dimensions would require to 
be at least doubled to render them suitable for a habitable Vihara. 
Be this as it may, there can be very little doubt that it was 
the intention of those who designed this Hatha to have excavated 



128 EASTERN CAVES. 

the whole of the lower storey. It is probable, however, that, warned 
by the fate that attended their operations in the case of Bhima's 
and Arjuna's Raths, they desisted before excavating beyond a few 
feet on each face ; and it is fortunate they did so, for had they 
proceeded further inwards the mass of rock they must have left 
above, would certainly have crushed the four slender pillars they in- 
tended to leave in the centre, and fissures, if not ruin must have been 
the result. It may, however, be that some social or political revolution, 
of which we know nothing, was the cause why this Rath was also 
left incomplete. It certainly was not any physical cause which led 
to the abandonment of the works in the caves, or on the bas-roliefs 
before they were completed, as no danger of crushing existed there. 
In the case of the raths, however, as physical causes which we can 
comprehend, seem amply sufficient to account for their unfinished 
state, it seems hardly worth while to speculate on one of which 
we know nothing. Those who first attempted to carve those rocks 
were certainly novices at the trade when they began them, but their 
experience at Arjuna's and Bhima's Rathas must have taught them 
that wooden forms were not suited to monolithic masses, and that 
either they must desist from the undertaking, or must invent forms 
more appropriate to the material in which they were working. 

Although these two last named Rathas are sufficiently interesting 
as examples of the patient labour which the Indians have at all times 
been prepared to Bpend on their religious edifices, their true value, in 
so far as the history of Indian architecture is concerned, lies in the 
fact that they are the only known specimens of a form of Buddhist 
architecture which prevailed in the north of India for probably 
1,000 years before they were commenced, and they are the incunabula 
of thousands of Hindu temples which were erected in the south 
of India during the 1,000 years that have elapsed since they were 
undertaken. 

To those who are thoroughly familiar with the development of 
Buddhist architecture during its whole course, few things seem 
more self-evident than that the upper storeys of these viharas were 
in wood or Borne perishable materials, like the Kyongs of Burmah 
at the present day, and that their forms were pyramidal. It is owing, 
however, to the first named cause, that there is so much difficulty 
in making either of these propositions clear to those who have not 



ARJUNA AND DHARMARAJA's RATHA. 129 

studied the style in all the countries where it has been practised. The 
originals having all perished we are left to the careless description 
of unscientific writers, or to suggestions derived from conventional 
copies, for our knowledge of what they once were. Still there are 
some indications which can hardly be mistaken. There is, for 
instance, Fa Hian's description of the great Dakshina vihara, cut, he 
says, in the rock. This building had five storeys. The lower was 
shaped into the form of an Elephant, and had 500 stone cells in it ; 
the second was in the form of a lion, and had 400 chambers ; the third 
was shaped like a horse, and had 300 chambers ; the fourth was in the 
form of an ox, and had 200 chambers ; the fifth was in shape like 
a dove, and had 100 chambers in it. 1 We know perfectly what is 
meant by the various storeys being said to be in the forms of these 
animals, because we find them, as, for instance, at Halabid, 2 super- 
imposed one over another as string courses in the basement of that 
and other temples in the 13th and 14th centuries. The manner in 
which this is done there and elsewhere makes it evident that it was 
a custom in earlier times to adorn the successive storeys of buildings 
with figures of these animals, in the order enumerated. The point 
that principally interests us here is, the pyramidal form this vihara 
is said to have assumed, as indicated by the diminished number of 
apartments in each storey. 

The Lowa Maha Paya or great brazen monastery at Anuradhapura 
is said, in the Mafiawanso, 3 to have been originally nine storeys in 
height, but after being utterly destroyed by Mahasena in 285 a.d., to 
have been re-erected by his son, but this time with only five storeys 
instead of nine. The forest of stone pillars, each about 12 feet in 
height, which once supported it still remain, measuring in plan 250 
feet each way, but no remains are found, among them, either of the 
primitive monastery destroyed by Mahasena, nor of the subsequent 
erection, which was allowed to go to decay when the city was de- 
serted. This in itself is ahnost sufficient to prove that the materials 
of which the superstructure was formed were of a very perishable 
nature. 

It is in Burmah, however, that we see the system carried out to its 



i Beal's Fa Hian, pp. 139, 140. 

* History of Indian Architecture, p. 402, woodcut 226. 

' Mahawanso, p. 163. See also Hist, of Indian Arch. t p. 195. 

y 1*1. i 



130 EASTERN CAVES. 

fullest extent ; but even there it is now only a reflex of what it was 
in earlier times. There, however, all the Kyongs or Viharas, though 
generally supported, like the Lowa Maha Paya, on stone posts, have 
their superstructures, which are three, five, and nine storeys in 
height, constructed in wood, and all assume the pyramidal form. 
These differ, of course, from the earlier forms, but not more so 
than might be expected from their great difference of age. Perhaps, 
however, the best illustration, for those who know how to interpret 
it, is the temple of Boro Buddor, in Java. It is a nine-storeyed 
Vihara, converted from a residence for monks, into a temple for 
the reception of Buddhist images, and the display of Buddhist 
sculptures. 1 It is nearly of the same age, perhaps slightly more 
modern than these Mahavallipur Baths, and is a perfectly parallel 
example. In India it is an example of an earlier form, invented for 
utilitarian purposes, conventionalised into a temple for the worship 
of the divinities of a hostile religion. In Java of one as com- 
pletely diverted from its original purpose, though for the glorification 
of that religion for which the Viharas were originally invented. 

It was evidently owing to the perishable nature of the materials 
with which they were constructed that no remains of any of these 
many-storeyed Viharas of the Buddhists is now to be found in India. 
The foundations of several were excavated at Sarnath, near Benares. 
That one explored by Lieutenant Kittoe, and afterwards by 
M. Thomas, 8 was apparently only of one storey, the cells surround- 
ing an open court ; and the same seems to have been the case with 
another discovered in cutting through a mound in making the rail- 
way near Sultangunge, 3 on the Ganges ; and it is a question how far 
these cloister courts — if they may be so called — were the models for 
some at least of the rock-cut Viharas in the west. Others, however, 
have been excavated by General Cunningham, 4 which were evidently 
the foundations of taller buildings, such as those described by the 
Chinese pilgrims, and more resembling the Mahavallipur Baths in 
design. An opportunity occurred of ascertaining what their forms 
were when Mr. Broadley was authorised by the Bengal Government 
to employ 1,000 labourers to excavate what he supposed to be the 

1 History of Indian Architecture, p. 643 ct seq., woodcut 368. 
8 J. A. S. B., vol. xxiii. pp. 469 et seq. General Cunningham's Report, vol. I. 
Plate XXXU. 

* J. A. S. B., vol. xxiii. pp. 360 et seq. 

* lieportt, vol. i. Plate XXXIII. pp. 120 et teq. 



ARJUNA AND DIIARMARAJa's RATHA. 131 

Baladitya monastery at Nalanda. 1 He published a plan of this, said 
to be the result of his excavations, in a pamphlet in 1872, and a 
restored elevation of the building in the Journal of tlie Bengal Asiatic 
Society for the same year (Vol. XLI ) ; but in neither ease is it 
possible to make out what he found, or what he invented, and his 
text is so confused and illogical that it is impossible from it, to 
make the one agree with the other, or to feel sure of any of the 
results he attained. So far as can be made out it was a five- 
storeyed vihara, measuring about 80 feet square according to the 
text, though the scale attached to the plan makes it more than 
100 feet, and the two lower storeys averaging about 12 feet each, 
were found to be nearly entire, the height of the ruins still standing 
being on the different sides 30 or 40 feet. There was a portico on 
the east with 12 pillars, which led to a cell 22 feet square, in which 
waB found a headless statue of Buddha 4 feet in height. The 
Becond Btorey, 63 feet square, was set back 8 or 9 feet fx'om the 
lower one, and the whole may have made up five storeys, with a 
height of about 70 feet, assuming the proportions to have been 
about those of the Dharmaraja Ratha just described. The upper 
storey may, however, have assumed a moro spire-like form, as was 
the case in Burmah, and made up the total height of 100 feet, 
though this is still far from the height of 200 or 300 feet, which 
Hiuen Thsang ascribes to the building he saw. 2 

From a photograph it appears that the base, for a height of 
about 5 feet, was adorned with courses of brickwork richly moulded, 
and above that with a range of niches 3 feet 3 inches in height, 
between pilasters 4 feet G high. These bore a cornice in moulded 

1 1 am unable to asceitain how far these excavations are coincident with those of 
Captain Marshall in 1871. The latter are described by General Cunningham, rol. i. 
of his Reports, p. 33, but he does not, so far as I am aware, allude to Mr. Broadley's 
either in this or a subsequent Report, in his third volume published in 1874, and the 
dimensions he quotes in describing this Vihara by no means agree with those given by 
Mr. Broadlev. I have since the above was in type, received from Mr. Beglar, a 
photograph of the part uncovered by Mr. Broadley, but unfortunately taken from so low 
a point of view, as hardly to assist in understanding the form of the building. It is, 
however, sufficient to show how utterly worthless Mr. Broadley's drawings are, and to 
enable us to ascertain the date of the building with very tolerable certainty. 

2 Julien's Translation, vol. i. p. 160 ; vol. iii. p. 50. If the latter dimension is 
assumed as the correct one, as the Chinese foot is nearly 13 English inches, the 
Vihara must have been as high as the cross on the dome of St. Paul's. 

i 2 



132 EASTERN CAVES. 

brick, with stucco ornaments making up altogether about 12 feet. 
Above this the whole exterior of the building seems to have been 
made up of wooden galleries attached to a plain central core of 
brickwork, in four or five offsets. It is now of course idle to 
speculate on what the appearance of these galleries may have been, 
and for our present purposes it is not of much consequence, inas- 
much as an inscription found in its entrance, states that it waB 
erected by Mahipala, the third king of the Pala dynasty, who, accord- 
ing to General Cunningham, reigned in Bengal from 1015 to 1040 a.d. 1 

It might at one time have been open to doubt whether this 
inscription was integral, and whether consequently the building was 
really erected by Mahipala. The style of the architecture, however, 
and all the details of its ornamentation, as shown in the photograph, 
set that question quite at rest. The whole is comparatively modern, 
and must have been erected during the reign of some king who was 
contemporary with that dynasty of Burmese kings who built and 
ruled in Pagan between the years 850 and 1284. 8 This being so, 
although a more complete knowledge of this building would be of 
the utmost importance in a general history of Indian architecture, it 
is evident from its date, that its peculiarities can have only a very 
indirect and retrospective bearing on an investigation into the 
form of its rock-cut temples. 

Though the result of this Nalanda investigation is certainly a dis- 
appointment, there still remains the celebrated temple of the Bodhi- 
druma at Buddha Gaya, which might at first sight be expected to 
throw considerable light on the subject. It is a nine-storeyed Vihara, 
and so far as is known the only one that ever was erected, wholly with 
permanent materials, by Buddhists in India, or at all events is the only 
one of which any remains now exist, and had it consequently been 
built by natives, it could hardly have failed to be of extreme interest. 
It is evidently, however, of a foreign design, as there is nothing in 

1 Beportt, vol. iii. p. 134. 

* Yule's Mitrion to Ava, pp. 32 et seq.i Crate furd, pp. Ill et teq. of vol. i., 8vo. 
edition. It may be observed, there is a discrepancy of from 10 to 1 4 years in the dates 
of the kings' reigns quoted by Crawford aud Burncy, and those employed at the present 
day. This arises, as Sir Arthur Phayre informs me, from the Burmese having recently 
revised tbeir chronology, with the aid of inscriptions and other data hitherto neglected, 
and adopted revised lists, in many instances showing differences from the old ones to 
the extent just stated. 



ARJUNA AND DHARMARAJA's RATHA. 133 

the same style in India, either before or after it, and nothing indeed 
at all like it, except a little temple dedicated to Tara 1 Bodhisattwa, 
close alongside of it, and part in fact of the same design. When, 
however, the thing is looked into a little more closely, it is evident 
that it does not require the Burmese inscriptions found on the spot 1 
to convince anyone at all familiar with the architecture of the East 
that the building now standing there was built by the Burmese in the 
13th or 14th century of our era. 3 It need hardly be added, if this 
is so, that all the controversies that have recently raged about the> 
age and form of the arches which were introduced into its con- 
struction, fall to the ground with the foundations on which they 
rested.* If the Nalanda monasteries could be restored they would 

1 Jfiuen Tlwarty, vol. iii. p. 51. The modern Hindus have converted this into T&ra 
Devi, an idea adopted by Rajendralala Mitra, Buddha Gaya, p. 136, Plate XX., 
Fig. 1. Tara is one of the favourite Saktis of the modern Buddhists in Nepal. She 
is a MahAyana divinity associated with the Bddhisattwas, and figures in the Nasik, 
Elura, and Aurangal'ad caves. 

2 These inscriptions arc given at full length, and with all the necessary details and 
translations iu Rajendralala Mitra' a Buddha Gaya, p. 206 et seq. 

3 There is some little difficulty about the exact date of these inscriptions. Accord- 
ing to Sir Arthur Phayro, who is probably the best authority on the subject, there are 
two dates. The fti"st records the repairs or rebuilding of the temple by a Btirmese 
king, A.D. 1106. The second its final completion and dedication by a king of Arakan, 
1299 A.D., 193 years afterwards, during the reign of Nasiru'd-din, Sultan of Bengal. 
It is impossible now to discriminate between the parts that may belong to each of these 
two dates, or whether any parts of the older erection may be incorporated in the 
present building, but it seems quite certain that all its architectural features belong to 
the two centuries that elapsed between them. See Sir A. Phayre's pnper, J. A. S. B. t 
vol. xxxvii. p. 97. 

* Mr. Beglar, General Cunningham's assistant, has recently sent me home an account 
of certain arches of construction, which he has found inserted sporadically into certain 
brick buildings in Bengal. So far as I can make out from his photographs, all the 
temples or Topes in which these are found belong to the age of the Pala dynasty, and 
are consequently posterior to the beginning of the 9th century. Some of them con - 
aiderablv more modern. This is only what might be expected, as we know from Y tile's 
Mis$\on to Aoa, Plate 9, and other authorities, that arches, round, pointed, and flat, were 
currently used in the brick buildings at Pagan, between 850 and 1284 a.d, and this 
being so, it always appeared a mystery to mc that none were found in contemporary 
buildings in Bengal. One advantage of Mr. Beglar's discoveries is, that they tend to 
show that there was a considerable intercourse between Bengal and Burmah in these 
ages. This, however, has always been suspected though difficult to prove, and every 
step in that direction is consequently welcome, besides removing to a great extent, any 
difficulty that might be felt in believing that the Buddha Gaya temple was actually 
erected by the Burmese. 



134 



EASTERN CAVES. 



no doubt show a much greater affinity to those of Mahavallipur 

than this one does ; but 
its style having been 
elaborated in a foreign 
country, and under fo- 
reign local influences, 
we ought hardly to be 
surprised at it having 
assumed so totally dif- 
ferent an appearance 
during the seven cen- 
turies that elapsed be- 
tween their erection. 1 
Had it been erected by 
Indians it probably 
would have taken much 
more of the form of the 
Tanjore pagoda, and the 
numberless examples of 
the Dravidian style to 
be found in the south 
of India. As it is, it is 
nearly a counterpart of 
the Bodhidruma temple 
at Pagan, 2 erected by 
King Jaya Sinha between the years 1204 and 1227 . 5 The Burmese 
temple is, it must be confessed, a little broader in its base than that 
at Buddha Gaya, and its pyramid a little less steep, but this may 

1 In his work on Buddha Gaya, Babu Rajendral&la Miira adduces the form of the 
temple at Konch (Plate XVIII.) in support of bis theory of the Buddba Gaya temple. 
It would, however, be difficult to find two buildings so essentially different as these are. 
That at Konch is a curvilinear spire of the Northern Aryan or Bengal style; that at 
Buddha Gaya is a straight lined tnany-storeycd pyramid, deriving its form from those 
of the ancient Buddhist Viliaras. The only advantage that can be derived from their 
juxtaposition is to prove that they were built by different people, at distant times, and 
for dissimilar purposes ; there is absolutely no connexion between them. 

2 In a private letter to me Sir Arthur Phayre says that when be first saw the Buddha 
Gaya temple, he at once came to the conclusion, from the style of its masonry and 
whole appearance, that it must have been erected by the Burmese, nnd no one 
probably is a better judge and more competent than he is to give au opinion on the 
subject. — J.F. 

3 Ciawfurd's Embassy to Avn, vol. 1. p. 117, 8vo. edition. 




No. 35. Burmese Tower at Buddha Gaya, from a Photograph. 



AEJUNA AND DHARMARAJA's RATHA. 135 

have arisen from the architect in India being limited to the dimen- 
sions of the temple that existed there when Hiuen Thsang visited 
the place, and which he described as 20 paces — say 50 feet — square, 
which is very nearly that of the present temple. Its height, too, is 
nearly the same as of that seen by the Chinese pilgrim, 160 to 170 
feet, but how that was made up it is extremely difficult to say. 1 
Neither the Mahavallipur Raths, nor any other authority we have, 
give us a hint of how, at that age, a building 50 feet square could 
have been designed so as to extend to between three and four times 
the height of its diameter. 

As these Behar examples fail us so entirely it is very difficult to 
ascertain what other materials may exist in India to enable us to 
restore the external appearance of the tall Viharas of the Buddhists 
with anything like certainty. If it is decided that no structural re- 
mains exist, it only makes these Mahavallipur Raths the more valuable 
in the eyes of the antiquary. They certainly approach in appear- 
ance more nearly to what the ancient buildings were, from which 
they are copied, than anything else that has yet been discovered. 

Sahadeva's Rath a. 

There is still a fifth Ratha belonging to this group, which, though 
small, is one of the most interesting of the whole. It bears the names 
of Sahadeva and Nakula, the twins, but in order to avoid confusion 
it may be well to confine its designation to the first name only, as 
neither have any real bearing on either its history or use. It stands 
a little out of the line of the other four, to the westward, and like 
them it is very unfinished, especially on the east side. Its dimen- 
sions are 18 feet in length north and south, by 11 feet across, and 
the height is about 16 feet. Its front faces the north, where there 
is a small projecting portico supported by two pillars, within which 
is a small cell, now and perhaps always untenanted. The opposite 

1 In his work on Buddha Gat/a, at pp. 204 et seq., Babu Rajendralala proves beyond 
all cavil, that the famous inscription which Sir Charles Wilkins published in the first 
vol. of the Asiatic liescarc/ies is a manifest forgery. The fable, consequently, that this 
tower waa erected by the Brahman Amara, one of the jewels of the court of Vicrama- 
ditya in the sixth century, is shown to have no foundation in fact, and must be relegated 
to the company of many others which have been invented to account for the excep- 
tional appearance of this celebrated tower. It is curious, however, that the Bubu 
docs not Bee how completely his learning upsets his own theories of the history of the 
temple. 



136 



EASTERN CAVES. 




No.SG. Plan ofSahadevaV Rath, 

from a drawing by K. Chisholm. 

Scale 10 feet to 1 inch. 



end is, externally at least, apsidal, and so 
probably if on a larger scale, its interior 
would have been ; as it is, it is too small, 
being only 3 feet in depth by 4 feet 6 inches 
in width, to be utilised for any altar or 
image, and the square form is certainly more 
convenient in so small an apartment. 

The great interest of this Ratha lies in 
the fact that it represents, on a small scale, 
the exterior of one of those Chaitya caves, 
which form so important a feature in all 
the western groups, but all of which are in- 
teriors only, and not one is bo completely 
excavated as to enable us to judge of what 
the external appearance may have been, of 
the constructed Chaityas from which they were copied. There is 
one temple at Aihole dedicated to Siva which does show the 
<^^. external aisle and apsidal termination, and is probably 
/^■■%/\ of about the same age as this Ratha. 1 Unfortunately 
IIJI \ it has been used as a fortification, and its upper 
storey and roof removed, so that it is of little more 
use to us now than an interior would be for judging 
of what the effect of the exterior may have been above 
the first storey. From the evidence of this Ratha it 
seems almost certain that in the larger examples there 
was a range of small cells in the roof of the aisles, 
which would naturally be much wider in constructed 
examples than in caves where there was no possi- 
bility of introducing light except through openings 
in the facade. We may also gather from the Aihole example and 
other indications that an external verandah surrounded the whole, 
and if this were so the cells would have been placed over the 
verandah, and the roof of the aisles used as an ambulatory. 

One other peculiarity remains to be noticed. As will be observed 
from the woodcut representing the exterior, the interior of the roof 
is represented as semicircular, though the exterior is naturally 
pointed, or at least with a ridge to throw off the rain. This is the 
case with all the Chaitya caves in the west of India, and probably 
was the case with all sacred buildings. On the other hand, the evi- 



No. 37. Plan of 

Temple at Aihole 

SO feet to 1 inch 



1 Burgesd'8 Report on Bel yam and Kaladgi, Plates LI. and L1J. 



SAHADEVA B HATHA. 



137 



dence of the Ganesa temple and of Bhima's Ratha here, as well as 
that of the Behar caves, would go far to prove that in all Becular 
or quasi secular buildings, the form of the roof was that of a 
wooden framework of pointed form both externally and internally. 

One of the most curious illustrations connected with this little 
Ratha is to be found a very long way off, in the recently excavated 




No. 38. View of Sahadeva's Ratha, from a Photograph. 

monasteries at Takht i Bahi and Jamalgiri in the Yusufzai country, 
not far from Peshawar. In both these monasteries the principal 
court is surrounded by a number of small cells, very similar to this 
Rath. In that at Jamalgiri the court is circular, 45 feet in 'diameter, 
and is surrounded by 16 cells ranging from 6 feet 2 inches across 
to 11 feet 8 inches ; four of them, according to General Cunningham's 



138 



EASTERN CAVES. 



plan and restoration, are more than 1 1 feet across and 20 feet in 
height, and consequently larger than this Rath. 1 The restoration 
of their faeces is fortunately easy, not only from the numerous 
fragments found on the spot, but because of the great number of 
sculptured representations of them which exist there, used as frames 
for sculpture. One of these, with its sculptures, is shown in the 
woodcut below, and represents in all essential particulars just such 
a f acade as this. The lower part quite open to the interior ; the 
middle storey, in this instance, with lean-to roofs instead of cells, and 
above this an overhanging roof terminating upwards in an ogee form. 8 



1 These particulars are taken from Gen. Cunningham's Reports, vol. v. pp. 23 et 
seg. 43 et seq*, and Plates VIII., IX., ond XIV. See also Hist, of Indian Archi- 
tecture, p. 170 et seg., woodcuts 92 to l»5. 

* One of the moat interesting peculi- 
arities of the Peshawar, or rather Gand- 
hara sculptures is that it would not be 
difficult to select from among them several 
that would form admirable illustrations 
for a pictorial Bihle at the present day. 
One, for instance, is certainly intended to 
represent the nativity. The principal 
figure, a woman, is laying her child in a 
manger, and that it is intended to be such 
is proved by a mare with its foal, attended 
by a man, feeding out of a similar vessel. 
Above are represented two horses heads 
in the position that the ox and the a«s are 
represented in mediaeval paiutings. 

A second represents the boy Christ dis- 
puting with the doctors in the Temple. 
A third, Christ healing a man with a 
withered limb, either of which if ex- 
hibited in the Lateran, and re-labelled, 
might pass unchallenged as sculptures of 
the fourth or fifth centuries. 

The scene in the annexed woodcut may, in 
like manner, be taken to represent the 
woman taken in adultery. Two men in 
the back ground, it will be observed, have 
stones in their hands ready to throw at 
her. The similarity in this instance is a 
little more farfetched than in the others, 
but still sufficiently near to render a corn- 




No. 39. Conventional deration of the front 
of a cell, from a sculpture at Jarnalgiri, now 
in India Museum, South Kensington. 



parison interesting. The study of these most interesting sculptures is now rendered 
impossible from the closing and dispersion of the India Museum. 



bahadeva's ratha. 139 

Bach of these 16 cells at Jamalgiri, according to General Cun- 
ningham, originally contained a figure of Buddha seated in the usual 
cross-legged conventional attitude. This Rath may have contained a 
Linga, if that emblem was introduced into the south as early as 
700 a.d., or more probably a figure of Siva in some of hiB manifes- 
tations, but which, not being cut in the rock, has disappeared. 

The age of the Jamalgiri monasteries has not yet been settled, 
they are certainly earlier than the Raths at Mahavallipur, but their 
distance in time cannot be very great. The Buddhism there deve- 
loped is very similar to that found in the later caves at Ajanta, and 
elsewhere, ranging from the fifth to the Beventh century of our era, 
which cannot consequently be long subsequent to the date of these 
Peshawar monasteries, which cannot be very far removed from that 
of the Mahavallipur Raths. 

It may probably appear to some, that more space has been devoted 
to these Raths than is justified either by their relative dimensions or 
their artistic merits, but the fact is, that it seems almost impossible 
to overestimate their importance to the history of Buddhist archi- 
tecture. One of its most remarkable peculiarities is, that though 
we have some 700 or 800 caveB spread over the 1,000 years during 
which Buddhism flourished in India, we have not, excepting the 
Topes and their rails, one single structural building, and among the 
caves not one that has an exterior ; without exception the latter are 
only interiors with one f acade, through which the light is introduced. 
No Buddhist cave has even two, much less three, external sides, and 
not one has an external roof. Under these circumstances it is an ex- 
ceptional piece of good luck to find a petrified Buddhist village — on 
a small scale it must be confessed — and applied to the purposes of 
another religion, but still representing Buddhist forms just at that 
age when their religion with its architectural forms were perishing 
out of the land where it arose. At the same time no one who has paid 
any attention to the subject can, I fancy, for one moment doubt that 
Arjuna's and Dhamaraja's Rathas are correct models on a small scale 
of the monasteries or viharas of the Buddhists, that the Ganesa 
temple and Bhima's Raths are in like manner models of the Salas or 
Halls of the Buddhists, that Draupadi's Rath represents a hermitage 
and Sahadeva'B a chapel belonging to the votaries of that religions 
Tho forms of the two last named have fallen into disuse, their pur- 



140 EASTERN CAVES. 

poses being gone, but the other two have been adopted by the 
Dravidian Hindus, and repeated over and over again throughout the 
south of India, and continue to be used there to the present day in 
all the temples of the Brahmans. 

In the present state of our knowledge it ib to be feared that 
it is idle to speculate on the mode in which these anomalous 
phenomena occurred, but it may fairly be inferred from them, 
that in the seventh century of our era there was no original and 
appropriate style of Hindu architecture, in the south of India. 
It seems also most probable that the Pallavas, or whoever carved 
these Raths, came from some more northern country, where they 
were familiar with the forms of Buddhist architecture, and that 
when they resolved to erect temples to their gods, in their new 
country, they came to the conclusion that they could not do better 
than adopt the forms with which they were familiar. Having 
once adopted it in the rock, they seem to have applied it to their 
structural temples, and gradually dropping those features which 
were either inappropriate or difficult of execution, by degrees to have 
developed the Dravidian style of architecture as we find it practised 
in the south of India from their time to the present day. 

If all this is so, it may at first sight seem strange that no trace 
of this many-storeyed style of architecture is to be found adapted 
to Hindu purposes in those countries where the style first originated 
and had long been practised, and was consequently familiar to all 
classes of the inhabitants. The answer to this difficulty seems, 
however, not far to seek. In the north of India the Hindus early 
possessed styles of their own, from whatever source it may have 
been derived. They had temples with large attached porches, or 
Mantapas, and cubical cells surmounted by tall curvilinear towers, 
in which no trace of storeys can be detected. Having thus their 
own sacred formB they had no occasion to borrow from a rival and 
hated sect, forms which they could hardly be expected to admire, 
and which were inappropriate for their sacred purposes. The result 
seems consequently to have been that the two styles grew up and 
developed side by side, but remained perfectly distinct and without 
showing any tendency to fuse or amalgamate at any period of their 
existence. 



141 



CHAPTER VIL 

THE CAVES, MAHiVALLIPUB. 

Although not without a considerable amount of beauty and 
interest in themselves, the caves at Mahavallipur are far less im- 
portant to the history of Indian architecture than the Raths just 
described. They have none of the grandeur, nor of that purpose - 
like appropriateness of design, which is so characteristic of the 
earlier Buddhiste caves in Western India, nor have they the dimen- 
sions or richness of architectural decoration of the contemporary 
Brahmanical excavations at Badami, Elephanta, or Elura. Still 
they cannot be passed over, even in a work especially dedicated to 
the more important caves of the west, and have features which 
are well deserving of notice anywhere. 

Perhaps the most striking peculiarity of these caves is the 
extreme tenuity of their pillars and generally of their architectural 
details, when compared with those of the other groups of caves in 
the other parts of India. It is true, that when the Buddhists first 
began to excavate caves in the west of India before the Christian era, 
they adopted wooden forms and used details singularly inappro- 
priate of rock-cut structures. They, however, early perceived their 
incongruity, and in the progress of time evolved a style of archi- 
tecture of more than Egyptian solidity, which quite remedied this 
defect. In some of the later caves at AjantA, the pillars are under 
4 diameters in height, including their capitals, and in such caves as 
the Lankeswara at Elura they are little more than 2 diameters in 
height. At Mahavallipur, on the other hand, 7 and 8 diameters is 
usual, and sometimes even these are exceeded ; and generally their 
details are such as are singularly unsuited for cave architecture. 
This it appeara could only have arisen from one of two causes : either 
it was that those who excavated these caves had no experience in 
the art, and copied literally the forms they found usually employed 
in structures either wholly, or in part, constructed with wood or 
other light materials ; or it was, that so long an interval had 
elapsed between the excavation of the western caves and those at 



142 EASTERN CAVES. 

Mahavallipur, that the monolithic style was forgotten, and the 
artists had reverted to a style more appropriate to less monumental 
erections. These Mahavallipur caves were consequently either the 
earliest or the latest among the Brahmanical caves of India, and it 
was at first sight very difficult to determine to which of these two 
categories they may have belonged. Just as in Europe it is fre- 
quently very difficult to discriminate between the details of a 
building belonging to the fifth or sixth century and one of the 
fifteenth or sixteenth ; so in India, without some external evidence, 
it is very easy to confound details belonging to the sixth or seventh 
century with those of the thirteenth or fourteenth. In both cases it 
was either the beginning or the end of a particular phase of art, 
which had only a limited duration, and it is one whose history in 
this instance has only lately been ascertained from external sources. 

Forty years ago so little was known of the history of architecture 
in the Madras Presidency that tho more modern hypothesis seemed by 
far the most probable. No one then suspected that the introduction 
of the art was so very recent, and it seemed most improbable that 
these rock-cut monuments at Mahavallipur should really be the earliest 
specimens of architecture known to exist in the South. Every 
one knew that in the north of India men had dug caves and carved 
stone ornamentally for at least eight or nine centuries before tho 
date of these monuments — assuming them to belong to the seventh 
or eighth century of our era — and it seemed so much more likely that 
their very wooden forms were signs of a decadence rather than of a 
renaissance, that I, with most other inquirers adopted the idea that 
they belonged to a comparatively modern age. It was besides the 
one that seemed best to accord with such local traditions as existed 
on the spot. It now turns out, however, that the difference in style 
between the northern and the southern rock-cut temples is due not 
to chronological but to geographical causes. It is not that the 
inferiority of the latter is due to decay in the art of monolithic 
architecture, but to difference of locality. Those who carved the 
raths and excavated the caves at Mahavallipur had no previous 
experience in the art, but under some strange and overpowering 
religious impulse set to work at once to copy literally and ignorantly 
in the rock, a form of architecture only suited to buildings of a 
Blighter and more ephemeral nature. 

If there had been a difference discernible in the style of the various 



THE CAVES, MAHAVALLIPUR. 143 

monoliths at Mahavallipur, if, for instance, ve had been able to 
point out that one was more wooden than another, or more lithic, 
and exhibited the same progress from wooden to stone forms, as we 
find in the northern caves, this would have been detected long ago. 
But it is another of the marked characteristics of the place, that 
everything is of the same age. No one who either examines them 
on the spot, or compares the photographs that are to be had, can 
doubt that the Raths and the caves are of the same age, their 
details are so absolutely identical. The caves, it is true, do exhibit 
Borne slight difference in style, in parts at least, but nothing that 
can make out a distinct sequence. They may overlap the Raths 
by a few years either way, but there are no data from which a 
reliable sequence can be established, and the differences in parts 
are generally so slight that they may be owing to some individual 
or local caprice. 

Under these circumstances it is fortunate that the sculptures 
with which the Mahavallipur caves are so profusely adorned afford 
data from which their relative age can be ascertained with a pre- 
cision sufficient at least for our present purposes. The fortunate 
discovery by Mr. Burgess in 1876 of a cave with a dated inscription 
in it, a.d. 579, at Badami, has given a precision to our knowledge 
of the subject not before attained, and his report on these caves 
has rendered us familiar with the architecture and sculpture of 
the sixth century of our era. By a singular piece of good fortune 
one of the great sculptures of the Cave No. III. at Badami 1 is 
practically identical with one in the Vaishnava cave (Carr's 25) at 
Mahavallipur. 2 They both represent Vishnu as Trivikrama, or the 
" three stepper " in the dwarf Avatar ; practically they are the same, 
but with such difference that when compared with similar sculp- 
tures at Elura and elsewhere, we are enabled to say with tolerablo 
certainty that the Badami sculpture is the more ancient of the two. 
On the other hand, we have at Elephanta and Elura many examples 
representing the same subjects of Hindu mythology as are found 
at Mahavallipur, but with such differences of mythology and exe- 
cution as indicate with equal certainty that the southern examples 
are more ancient than the northern. As these latter may all be 

1 Report on Qelpdm, *«.. PJate XXXI. 

* Trans. S. A. S, \o). ii. Plate VI. of Mr. Babington'a paper. . 



144 EASTERN CAVES. 

dated within the limits of the eighth century, we have a limit 
beyond which it seems impossible to cany the date of the Maha- 
vallipur sculpture either way. They must be after the sixth and 
before the eighth century of our era, and, in so far as can now be 
ascertained, nearer the latter than the former date. It is, of course, 
impossible to speak of sculptures as affording the same precision 
for fixing dates as architecture is acknowledged to possess. There 
is so much more individuality in sculpture, and so much that 
depends on the taste and talent of the sculptor, and also on the 
material in which he is working, that a comparison with other 
works of the same age may sometimes lead to conclusions more or 
less erroneous. Architecture, on the other hand, is so much more 
mechanical, and its development depends so much on the progress 
of the Bchool in which it was created, as seldom to lead astray. 
But when sculpture is combined with mythology, as it is in this 
instance, its indications may become almost equally reliable, and 
when these are confirmed by the science of palaeography, as before 
mentioned, there is hardly room to question the conclusions that 
may be drawn from it. If this is so, there seems no reason for 
doubting that the caves as well as the Raths at Mahavallipur were 
excavated subsequently to the sixth and before the eighth century, 
and, taking all the circumstances of the case into consideration, 
there seems no reason for doubting that the date above assigned 
to them, 650 to 700 a.d., cannot be far from the truth, and may 
be accepted until at least some new discovery may afford addi- 
tional means for ascertaining with more precision the facts relating 
to their age- 
As these caves are scattered promiscuously without any order, on 
both sides of the low ridge of hills in which they are excavated, 
wherever a suitable piece of rock could be found, it is extremely 
difficult to hit on any classification by which a description of them 
can be made clear and intelligible. They are all, too, so nearly of 
the same extent, and richness of ornament, that they do not admit 
of classification from their relative importance. Being all, too, as 
just mentioned, of the same age, with the exception of the Krishna 
Mandapa, or at least so nearly so, that it is impossible now to 
discriminate between the older or more modern, and being all 
unfinished, no chronological arrangement is available for their de- 



THE CAVES, MAHAVALUPUR. 145 

Bcription. "We are even deprived here of the division of the different 
caves into classes, according to religions, which is one of the most 
obvious means of characterising them in almost all other groups. 
There is not in the sculptures at Mahavallipur a single trace of any 
anterior Buddhist or Jaina religion, or any feature that can be 
traced back to any pre-existing faith, except of course, as above 
pointed out, the mechanical forms of the architecture. One cave, 
the ninth in the following enumeration, may be said to be wholly 
Vaishnava, but in all the others, representations borrowed from the 
religion of Siva alternate with those relating to Vishnu, in a manner 
that is most unexpected, at least to anyone accustomed to the 
antagonism that grew up between these two religions after the rise 
of the Lingayets in the ninth century. This, however, is only a 
further proof, if any were requisite, that it was before that time 
that these caves were excavated. 

Under these circumstances the best mode will probably be to 
begin at the southern end of the ridge, nearly opposite the great 
group of Rathas above described, and take each cave, as nearly as 
can be done, in sequence as we proceed northward. Following this 
plan, we find — 

1. At the south end of the ridge is a very neat cave in excellent 
preservation known as Dharmaraja's Mandapa, 1 measuring 17 feet 
by 124, with four pillars, two in front and two in the middle, square 
above and below and octagonal in the middle. In the back wall 
are three empty Bhrines with steps ascending to their doors. Along 
the back wall is a moulded base, and the central door has had 
dwarpalas, now hewn off. 

2. Just behind the southern sculptured rock is another cave * 
with two pillars in front, but the work has been little more than 
begun. 

3. To the north of the first is the Yamapuri or Mahishamarddani 
Mandapa, a fine lofty cave 3 33^ feet long by 15 feet deep. In front it 
had originally four round pillars (the second is quite destroyed) and 
two pilasters. These pillars have a thick torus capital surmounted 
by a spreading cima recta, carrying a square tile. This upper portion 



1 Carr'B No. 44 ; Braddock, p. 103 (?). 
' Carr's map, No. 46. 

» Carr, No. 32 ; Braddock, No. 19, p. 96, see also pp. 7, 32, 49, 149, 208. 
Y lit. K 



146 EASTERN CAVES. 

is cut away from the third column, and from the manner in which 
this is done it would seem as if it was intended to remove the pillar 
entire, as was probably the case with its fellow. A short Bquare 
block carrying a wide bracket rises above the capitals of all these 
pillars. They have also moulded bases, and two belts of florid 
work round the shafts. Above the facade is a range of small 
simulated cells similar to those on the Raths, and such as are 
found on nearly all the cave facades here; but in this instance 
they are even more unfinished than usual, and it requires a practised 
eye to detect the intended design. There is a porch to the shrine 
advanced into the middle of the floor, with two pillars rising from 
yalis or sardulas at the corners of a platform. 

On the left or south wall is a large bas-relief of Narayana or 
Vishnu, reclining upon the snake Sesha, with his head to the east. 
Below are three worshippers or attendants. The third iB a female ; 
their headdresses are of the Elephanta type with regal mukutas or 
tiaras, and above two Gandharvas, a male and female. At Vishnu's 
feet are two giants struggling with each other, one said to be the 
partisan of Narayana, and the other of Mahishasura, the buffalo 
demon. 1 

At the other end of this hall is a sculptured tableau 12| by 8 feet, 
representing the strife between Mahishasura and Durga, the female 
counterpart of Siva. This group merits special attention, because 
of the spirited character of the style in which it is sculptured ; as 
Mr. Babington states he " has no hesitation in pronouncing this to 
be the most animated piece of Hindu sculpture he had ever seen." * 
The demon is represented with the head of a buffalo, a rainotaur in 
fact, and not as is often done in later sculptures as a buffalo itself. 
He holds a huge club with both hands, has a long straight sword 
by his Bide, and wears the wvufaita or tiara of a king with the chhatra 
or umbrella borne over it. Between his feet is a human head ; 
behind him are four figures, two with round shields, and one of 
them with a sword, while one seems to have fallen. In front of him 
is a fifth also with Bhield, while a sixth is represented falling 
headlong upon a female who is fighting with a crooked sword just 
at Mb foot. Durga is mounted on her lion, her eight arms girded 

1 See the legend, p. 99 of Chit's compilation. 
8 Trans. R. A. S., vol. ii. p. 261 ; Carr, 49. 



THE CAVES, MAHAVALLIPUR. 147 

for the strife and armed with bow, sword, club, Sanldia, axe, gong, 
&c, and canopied by the OKhatra, and attended by eight pramathas, 
some with bows and others with swords. 

In the back are three cells, with male dwarpalas by the doora of 
each; the central one is a shrine (called by the villagers KailAs), 
with a linga in the middle of the floor, and on the back wall is a 
sculpture of Sankara or Siva and Parvati seated together, she with 
Karttikaswami or Mahasena on her knee. Behind them is seen a 
figure of Vishnu, and to the left is Brahma, and below the seat is 
the bull Nandi and a female. This sculpture is exceedingly badly 
executed, and the style of headdress much higher than in either of 
the other sculptures. 

Immediately above this cave is the fragment of a structural 
temple, which forms one of the most conspicuous objects in the 
landscape from whichever side it is seen. 1 It is not, however, 
oentred exactly on the rock-cut portico below, 8 and is evidently the 
erection of a later age, though probably intended to complete what 
the original cave excavators had left, like everything else in this 
place unfinished. Ite dimensions are 22 feet by 16 feet in plan, and 
its height 16 feet. 3 What its interior dimensions are cannot now be 
ascertained, as its roof has fallen in. 

4. To the west of this at the foot of the hill is a temple of Varaha 
Svami, or the boar avatdra of Vishnu, but being still used for wor- 
ship it is not now accessible to strangers, and its contents are only 
known by hearsay, and from what can be seen from the outside. The 
rock excavation has four pillars and a shrine at the back. It con- 
tains (by report) the usual four-armed figure of Varaha holding up 
Prithvi, a four-armed Sakti, figures known as Raja Harisekhara and 
his two wives ; Sri as Gaja Lakshmi (attended by elephants) ; M&ruti 
worshipping Rama ; and others. In front of this rock-cut temple a 
modern mandap has been built, lighted only from the door, which 
now prevents the interior being seen.* 



1 Lord Valeitfia's Travels, f ol. i. Plate opposite p. 380. 

» Bock-cut Templet, folio, 1846, Plato XVII. 

3 Cut's compilation, quoting Braddock, p. 96. 

* On the rock to the left, but partly covered by the end wall of this erection, in a 
long inscription dated " in the ninth year of Koppari Kesarwarma, also called Udaiyar 
6ri fiajendra Devar, who having taken the whole of Imttaippadi seven lakhs and a 
half, having intimidated Abavaranlla in battle, Ac." Another inscription at Gangondaram 

K 2 



148 EASTERN CAVES. 

5. Ramanujya Mandapa. — This has been a small cave 18 J feet by 
10, with two pillars standing on lions' heads, well cut, with octa- 
gonal shafts in front. There are three cells at the back with some 
sculptures on the walls, but the back wall and divisions between the 
cells have been cleared away, and the sculptures hewn off the 
walls. 

At each end outside is a niche for an image surmounted by a little 
simulated cell like those found on all the Rathas, and in front a 
verandah supported on six pillars has been erected. 

On the threshold iB an inscription in three lines, of an old florid 
character. The facade of this cave has a bold projecting drip, and 
is ornamented above with dormer windows similar to those found on 
the structural or rock-cut Chaityas. The style altogether is very 
like that of the third or Bhima's Ratha. 

The Chakra and Sankh of Vishnu are carved on the returning 
walls at the end of the verandah, and at each end stairs ascend to the 
top where is the plain rubble temple, called by the natives Velugoti 
Singama Nayadu's Mandapa. Below in the valley is a stone couoh, 
and near the front of the cave lies the top of the dormer window of a 
Ratha. The Ratha itself has been totally quarried away. 1 

6. Mandapa to the west of OjakkanneSwaraswami's Temple.* 
This is an unfinished cave with four lion pillars blocked out in its 

front. 

7. Krishna's Mandapa. — Proceeding northward the next in order 
locally, is Krishna's Choultry, which cannot be passed over in a 

on the Kaveri speaks of "Ko-Viraja Kesarwarma named Rajendm Deva" as "having 
intimidated Ahavamalln of Kudala Sangama " (Bilhana'e Vikramakdvya) ; ami a third 
inscription at Anigiri in Dharwnd mentions the invasion of the Karnulic by Rajendra 
Chfila. 1 Now Someivara Deva Aliavamalla tlte Chalukya ruled (he Karnatic from 
Suka 962 to 991, a.d. 1040 to 1069, and Kajendra ChdUt succeeded his father BAjaraja 
ChSja in Saka 986, a.d. 1063, and his reign was a very long one. 1 The grants, for 
there are two, are thus fixed to belong to AJ>. 1072, but unfortunately they only record 
donations to the temple, which was probably excavated in a much earlier age.— J.B. 

1 Quarrying operations are going on on a very extensive scale among these caves at the 
present time, and it will be nothing new if the finest of them are sacrificed without a 
thought. 

1 No. 30 in Can's map, where it is placed much to the west of its real position. — Not 
mentioned by Braddock. 



1 Conf. Caldwell, Gram. int. pp. 185, 136. 
' Iitd. Ant, V. 821. 



TIIE CAVES, MAHAVALLIPUR. 149 

description of the caves at Mahavallipur, though it has very little 
claim to be considered as a cave, or as a rock-cut temple. It is quite 
exceptional here, and its structural arrangements belong to a 
different age from all those surrounding it. It probably was erected 
at the same time as the structural Vimana over the Yamapuri Cave 
described above, and may probably belong to the time of the Cholas, 
in or about the eleventh century of our era. 

It consists of a large Mandapa or porch 48 feet by 23, with twelve 
structural columns in three rows erected in front of a great bas-relief 
in a recessed portion of the rock. Six of the pillars have Sardulas or 
Yalis at the bottom, and the rest are square with carving upon them, 
but all have the drooping bracket capital so common in modern 
buildings in the south of India. The roof is formed of large slabs 
of gneiss laid over the lintels, which join the heads of the pillars. 

The sculptured decoration of the cave consists of one long bas- 
relief following the sinuosities of the rock some 45 feet in length 
and from 10 to 11 feet in height in the centre. It represents Krishna 
holding up the hill of Govarddhana. To the left is Balarama 
leaning on another male figure, and on each side are numerous Go- 
palas and Gopis with cows, calves, and a bull. On the return of the 
wall are lions and other animals. The sculpture of all these is much 
more developed than those in the Da£a Avatara and Kailasa at Elura, 
and is almost certainly of later date, thus confirming the compara- 
tively modern date of this hybrid temple, which, except from its 
locaHty as one of a series, is hardly worthy of much attention. 

On the top of the hill, but like the Vimana over the Yamapuri 
cave placed unsy metrically with this porch, a very splendid struc- 
tural Gopura has been commenced in the style of architecture 
prevalent in the eleventh or twelfth century, and evidently a part of 
some great design. It had not, however, been carried up higher 
than the sub-basement, and then like everything else at this place, 
abandoned and left unfinished. 

8. The Mandapa of the Pancha Pandavas. 1 — A few yards north of 
tho last, and adjoining the great sculptured rock, is a large but 
unfinished cave, 50 feet wide in front, and about 40 feet deep at the 
right end, and 33 feet at the left. It has six octagonal pillars in 
front rising from Sardula bases (one is broken) with broad square 



1 No. 15 on Carr's map ; Braddock's No. 12, p. 92 j see also pp. 4, 205. 



150 EASTERN CAVES. 

abacuses, and, in place of brackets, three rampant Sardulas, one on 
each side of the architrave. The second row of pillars are plain octa- 
gons standing on simple plinths, and behind them the front of the 
shrine occupies the width of four pillars or about 23^ feet. The shrine 
itself is an irregular small cell, unfinished, as are also the side aisles, 
in each of which three pillars are roughly blocked out. Over the 
facade, the rock is hewn into little models of cells, as on the 
Rathas and the fronts of the other caves. 

9. Vaishnava Cave. — Near to the isolated monolithic temple of 
Ganesa described above (p. 114) is a very neat excavation on the 
left of the pathway and facing west. 1 

In front it has two pilasters and two octagonal pillars rising from 
Mrdulas, the shafts half covered with minute florid work. The 
capitals have a thick heavy torus over a few members, forming an 
astragal round the neck, and above a cima recta spreads out under a 
plain square tile, and the brackets are separated from this by a 
square block, as in the third cave described above. 2 The eaves 
above are ornamented with six Chaitya dormer windows enclosing 
rosettes, and above, the facade is carved as in the Rathas. 

The hall measures 19£ feet by 9£ with a single shrine at the back 
which projects into the hall. In the left or north end is a sculpture 
of the four-armed Varaha or Boar Avatara and Prithivl, 3 or the earth, 
who, according to the legend, he had rescued from the deluge in 
which it or she had been submerged at the churning of the ocean in 
the previous Avatara. This sculpture is not unlike the figures in 
two of the Badami caves, but showing so much difference in style, 
and such general inferiority of design and execution, as to leave 
little doubt that this is the most modern example of the two. The 
geographical distance, however, of the two localities prevents any exact 
determination of the chronological interval that may have elapsed 
between the execution of the two examples. 

In the Mahavallipur example Varaha's right foot is placed on the 
head of the -seven- headed snake Sesha. To the left are two male 
figures one of them with a long crook. Behind is a four-armed 
figure with a bag or bottle in one of his left hands, and addressing 

1 Carr, 25 ; Braddock, No. 9, p. 81 Can's Plates V. to IX., and [>p. 6, 49, 
205. 

* Chit's 32 ; Braddock's 17. 

8 Trans. R.A.S., vol. ii., Plate V. ; see also Carr's plate with the same number. 



THE CAVES, MAHAVALDIPUR. 151 

another figure, perhaps a female, and above them in the comers 
are two smaller figures of Gandharvas. 

On the back wall adjoining this Varaha sculpture is a singularly 
interesting representation of Sri or Gaja Lakshmi, seated on a lotus 
flower, with her feet on the sepals of it, and two elephants above 
receiving pots of water from two female attendants on each side and 
pouring it on the goddess. The execution of this sculpture does 
not seem remarkable for its excellence. The interest lies in the 
fact of its being the first known example of this Goddess appearing 
in a Hindu garb. As above pointed out (p. 72) we know of some 
20 examples of her appearance in Buddhist monuments from the 
time of the Tope of Bharhut B.C. 150, to 6th or 7th century in the 
Panjab. From this time to the present day she is one of the most 
frequently represented deities of the Hindu pantheon, but does not 
afterwards, so far as is known, appear on Buddhist monuments. 

To the right of the shrine is a somewhat similar sculpture, but 
perhaps it may rather be considered as a representation of Durga ; 
though the Sankha and discus rather belong to Lakshmi, four armed, 
with umbrella over her head, a deer over her left shoulder, and a tiger 
over the other, while four gana, one with a sword, attend her. Below 
to the right is a suppliant, and on the left a man grasping his long 
hair with one hand and a long sword with the other, as if about to 
cut off his locks. 1 

On the right or south end of this cave is a representation of the 
result of the Waman, or dwarf Avatara, differing from similar sculp- 
tures at Badami inasmuch that the suppliants are omitted before the 
principal figure, which represents Vishnu with eight arms as Trivi- 
krama or the three stepper, taking the first step by which according 
to the legend he deprived Maha Bali of the dominion of the earth. 
The local pandits regard the figure seated at the right foot of 
Trivikrama* as Maha Bali, and the one behind him as his minister 
Sukracharya. On the return of the wall and on each side of the 
shrine are male dwarpalas or doorkeepers, but inside there is only 
a bench without any figure or image in it. 

10, 11. These two caves are close together on the west side of 
the rocks and face W.N.W. towards the last-mentioned pair of 
Rathas, The northern one is an unfinished cave about 36 feet long 



» Carr, Plate VIII., Fig. 1. ! Cnrr, Pkte VII. Fig. 1. 



152 EASTERN CAVES. 

and 10 deep, with four lion pillars blocked out in front (similar to 
Cave 6) which is not far to the south of this. A large recess is also 
roughly hewn out in the back. 

The other (11) is about 34 feet in length by 15 feet deep, and 
has four square and octagon pillars in front, with a second row 
inside, 16 sided, with capitals similar to those of the Raths, with 
brackets above, but no abacus over the torus. 

In the back are five cells, three of them with steps leading up to 
the doors, which have male dwarpalas by their jambs. Over the 
doors is a projecting cornice with a drip on which are carved 
Chaitya window ornaments each with a head within it. 

All the cells have had Ungams in them, which are now removed. 

12. Kotikal Mandapa. 1 

One hundred and twenty yards to the north-east of the last is a 
third cave on this west side of the rocks. Like the last, the two 
pillars in front are square below and above, and octagonal in the 
middle with brackets only roughly blocked out. It has only one 
shrine which i8 empty ; but the door has a female dwarpalas on 
each side, indicating that (like Draupadi's Hatha) it was dedicated 
to a goddess or Sakti. Over the door is a plain drip, no frieze but 
with small square holes countersunk in the rock as if a wooden 
verandah were once intended and perhaps executed. 

At first sight the style of this cave, externally, looks older than 
the others, and it may be so, but can hardly be removed from them 
by any great interval, and the contrast between the outer and the 
inner rows of pillars as in Cave 11 seems to be in favour of its being 
of about the same age. If its outer appearance only were taken 
into account it would be difficult not to believe that it was the 
oldest cave here. 

13. Kapul Iswara. — Proceeding from this to the north-east, we 
reach three shrines joined together cut in the face of the rock, with 
slender pilasters at the sides of their doors, and by each are dwarpalas 
with high, peaked caps ; those to the left are bearded. The cornice 
or drip is ornamented with Chaitya-window sculptures, each con- 
taining a head, and the facade above is carved in the usual Hatha 
style. On the rock to the right or south of these is an eight-armed 
Durga, standing on a buffalo's head. 

1 Carr, No. 52. 



BALIWANKUPPAM. 153 

Above this niche is a richly carved lintel, so absolutely identical 
with the one over the doorway of Draupadi's Rath (woodcut No. 27). 
that there hardly is any doubt that they are of the same age, almost, 
it might be supposed, that they were carved by the same sculptor. 

In the left shrine is Siva, four armed, wearing a deep necklace of 
large beads, rather balls, crossing on his breast, attended by two 
worshippers and two of his dwarf gana, one with a sword and the 
other with an offering. The central shiina is sculptured in nearly 
the same way, and the third contains Vishnu, similarly accompanied. 
Or was it intended that the first should be Brahma ? If so, it 
would only be another instance of a favourite habit at that age of 
representing the triad, as manifested in the Lankeswara cave in 
the flank of the rock of Kailasa at Ehira. and elsewhere. 1 In front 
of this cave is a great stone bowl. 

On the east side of this same rock are carved an elephant, about 
5 feet high, a monkey, and a peacock, with the heads of three 
smaller elephants. 

Quarrying operations are now going on quite close to this, if 
they have not already destroyed these shrines. 

13. The above exhausts the caves in the ridge, but to the south 
of the " Shore pagoda " are two rocks, each with a recess hewn 
in its west side. The northern one is surrounded by Yali or Sar- 
dula heads, like the one at Saliwankuppam, to be described here- 
after, and the other has one great Yali face above, and other figures 
round the front. Before it lies a large lion couchant on a stone, 
and on the back of the rock is carved a horse, and a great elephant's 
head with a small cell over it as at Saliwankuppam. The carving 
inside is so abraded as to be unrecognisable. 

North from the structural pagoda is another little shrine or cell 
in a rock. 

SALrWANKUPPAM. 

Three miles north from the last, among the sand on the sea 
beach, some rocks crop up, in two of which cells have been cut. 
One is a cave-temple called the Atichandeswara Mandapa, but 

1 Col. Mackensie made three careful drawings of these figures, which are in his 
volume on the Antiquities of Maha Bali Furaminthe India House Library, Nob. 15, 16, 
and 17. There seems little doubt that they are intended to represent the Hindu triad 
but in a very pure and simple form. 



154 



EASTERN CAVES. 



it is entirely filled up with sand which drifts into it from the shore. 
It contains some inscriptions j on the end walls are two copies in 
different alphabetical characters of one agreeing generally with that 
in the GaneSa temple, but differing in the fifth Sloka, which reads : — 
" Atiranachandra, lord of kings, built this place called Atirana- 
chandeswara." 

On the frieze above the entrance, also in each of the two alpha- 
betical characters, is the word — " Atiranachanda-Pallava." 

This Atiranachanda-Pallava was in all probability one of the 
Pallava kings of Kanchi (Konjiveram) ; but until some advance has 
been made in translating the inscriptions with- which the Madras 
Presidency abounds we must remain in ignorance of his date. Vina- 
yaditya Satyasraya in 694 a.d. claims to have subjugated them. 1 
Dr. Burnell {Pal., 2nd ed. p. 37 and Plate XII.) ascribes the elder 
character to a.d. 700, i.e., the llatlta character, but the style of the 
characters in his grants differs from either of Atiranachanda's 
inscriptions, and it was only in the eighth or ninth century, ac- 
cording to Ellis, 2 that the country was conquered by the Cholas 
to whom the Pallavas were afterwards tributary. 
The cell contains a lingam. 

Not far from this is an inscription on a rock, dated " in the 
37th year of Tribhuvana-Viradeva," otherwise called Vira Chola 





- 


' "■ J.-—T - | , 


_ 


-■rffcw 












"f^jj 


.■• 


IS ^ 


.. 








s>" ■ "^B^ 


„ _ • > 


J s 


Jb^. 


m 


^ 


i 


Slits^SS 


-- -V 


* 










'"/./A) '• jSt i : y.^\T^i&*< 






Kattj£fe|j^ 



No. 40. Front of CftTe at Sal i wank uppam, from a Photograph. 



1 Ind. Ant. VII. 303 ; also II. 272 ; III. 152 ; V. 164. 

1 Sec alto a paper by E. Buroouf in Journal Asiutiquc, 2nd vol. of 1828, p. 241. 



GREAT BAS-RELIEF, MAHAVALLIOUR. 155 

Deva (p. 140), which is believed to coincide with a.d. 1116, or 
thereabouts. 

The other cave is more accessible than that mentioned above. It 
is only a small coll cut out of a rock, with nine simlia or Yali heads 
round the front of it (woodcut No. 40), and small 8'imJias rampant 
in front of each jamb. 

It is a curious development of the idea of the Tiger cave at 
Katak (woodcut No. 12 ). There can be no doubt that the same 
fantasy governed both, but the steps that connect the two have 
been lost during the seven or eight centuries that elapsed between 
their excavation. 

To the left of it are two miniature cells over elephants' heads. 

Great Bas-relief. 

There still remains to bo described one of the most remarkable 
antiquities of the place, which, though rock-cut, can neither be 
classed among the templeB nor the caves. It is, in fact, a great 
bas-relief carved in two great masses of rock, and extending noarly 
90 feet north and south, with an average height of about 30 feet. It 
is popularly known as Arjuna's penance from the figure of Sanyasi 
standing on one leg, and holding his arms over his head, which is 
generally assumed to represent that hero of the Mahabharata, but 
without more authority than that which applies his name with 
that of his brothers and sister to the Rathas above described. 1 

The most prominent figure in the southern half of the rock is 
that of a god four-armed, probably Siva, but his emblems are so 
defaced that it is difficult to feel sure which god is represented ; 
but the attendant gana and generally the accompaniments make 
this nearly certain. On his left is the emaciated figure of a man 
doing penance, just referred to. Below him is a small one-storeyed 
temple, not unlike Draupadi's Hatha, but further removed from the 
original utilitarian type, and of a more architectural design. In 
the cell is seen an imago apparently of Vishnu, to which an old 

1 The bas-relief is very fairly represented in the Trans. H.A.S. vol. ii. in Plates I. 
aud II., Fig. 1, that accompany Dr. Babington'a paper. They arc reproduced in Can's 
compilation under the same numbers. I possess besides numerous photographs of it 
by Dr. Hunter, Cnpt. Lyon, Mr. Nicholas, and others, which enables me to bear testi- 
mony to the general correctness of Dr. Babington's drawings. 



156 EASTERN CAVES. 

devotee on the left hand, said to represent Dronacharya, is offering 
worship, with another a little lower on the right. Besides these 
there are some 13 or 14 human beings, men and women, life size, 
represented in this southern half, some six or seven gana or dwarfs, 
usually attendant on Siva, as many gandharvas or harpies, flying 
figures, the upper part of whose bodies are human, the lower 
extremities those of birds with claws. 1 In addition to these there 
are lions, deer, hares, monkeys, and birds ; and if the lower part of 
the rock had been complete — like everything here, it is left unfinished 
— it would have contained a whole menagerie of animals. 

The upper part of the right half bas-relief contains some 20 
figures of men and women with the same admixture of animals, 
gandharvas, and gana, like those on the southern half, all hurrying 
towards the centre, where the principal object of worship was 
evidently placed. The lower part of this half is occupied by two 
elephants, a male and female, life size, with four young ones, which 
are as perfect representations of those animals as were probably 
ever executed in stone. 

In the centre on a projecting ledge, between these two great masses 
of rock, once stood the statue of the great Naga Raja, who was the 
principal personage for whose honour this great bas-relief was de- 
signed. The upper part of the figure, above 5 feet in height, was 
that of a man overshadowed by a great seven-headed serpent hood 
(woodcut No. 41), below the figure was that of a Berpent. The upper 
part has fallen, but still remains on the ground, 8 the lower part is 
Btill attached to the rock. Below him is his wife, about 7 feet in 



1 These occur frequently at Sanchi {Tree and Serpent fVitrship, Plates XXV., 
XXVI., XXVII., XXVIII., and passim XXIV., Figs. 1 and 2, and in all Buddhist 
sculptures, though generally in a different form from those here represented. Also in 
the wall paintings in the AjantA Caves ; they are called Kinnaras. 

* It -was evident that the head of the Naga. Raja had fallen from the accident of its 
position, the artists having placed it in the centre, where it could have a shadow behind 
it, but where it had no support. I consequently wrote to my friend Dr. Hunter to try 
and find it. With the assistance of the then Madras Government he removed the sand, 
and found it lying where it fell. I afterwards made application to the Government to 
have it replaced, which could easily be done, and so give meaning to the whole bas- 
relief. This, I understood from my friend Mr. Campbell Johnstone, who took out my 
application, was also sanctioned and ordered to be carried out, but from photographs 
recently received it appears not only that this has not been done, but that the bust has 
been removed from where it originally stood after its recovery. 



GREAT BAS-RELIEF, MAHAVALLIPUR. 



157 



height, but with a hood of only three serpent heads, and below her 

again a simple head of a cobra. On either 

hand are other figures with serpent hoods, 

and men and animals, among which may be 

remarked a cat standing on its hind legs, 

and all doing homage to the great Naga 

Raja. 

Even if this great bas-relief does not afford 
us much information regarding the rock-cut 
architecture of Eastern India, it has at leaBt 
the merit of fixing almost beyond cavil the 
age of the various objects of interest at 
Mahavallipur. The sculptures, for instance, 
of Cave No. XXIV. at Ajanta, are so nearly 
identical that their age cannot be far apart. 
"We have in these the same flying figures, male and female, the 
same Kinnaras (harpies), the same style of sculpture in every respect, 




No. 41. Head of Naga Hajfi 
from Great Bas-relief at Maha- 
vallipur. 




No. 42. Capital frosn Cave XXIV. at Ajanta, from a Photograph. 

and such as is not found either before or afterwards. As this 
Ajanta cave is only blocked out, and only finished in parts, it is 
probably the latest excavation there, and may therefore with certainty 
be assumed to belong to the seventh century of our era, and most 
probably the latter half of it. The sculptures, too, at Elura and 
elsewhere, whose age has been ascertained, when compared with this 
bas-relief, so fully confirm this, and all we learn, from other Bources, 
that the date of rock-cut monuments at Mahavallipur can hardly 
now be considered as doubtful. 



If it were not that this work is expressly limited to the rock-cut 



158 EASTERN CAVES. 

examples of Indian architecture, few things would be more instructive 
for the history, of Dravidian architecture at least, than to describe 
also the structural examples of this place. The temple on the shore 
is not only one of the most elegant but one of the oldest examples 
of the style. 1 It is small, measuring only about 60 feet east and west 
and about 50 feet in height, and simulates a five-storeyed Vihara, 
though with considerable deviation from the forms originally used 
by the Buddhists and copied so literally in the Baths at this place. 
Its details had become at the time it was erected so far convention- 
alised that it is not at first sight easy to detoct the wooden original 
in all parts, and the general outline had become taller and more 
elegant than in the Raths. It has also the advantage, bo rare in 
the south, of being all in stone. In nine instances out of ten only 
the lower storey, which is always perpendicular, is in stone. The 
upper or pyramidal parts are in brickwork plastered or in terra- 
cotta or some lighter material. In this example the whole is in 
stone, and though weather worn from its being within the reach of 
the surf, it still retains its outline with sufficient sharpness to show 
what its original form must have been. 

Its age probably is about the 8th or 9th century, and if so is the 
earliest known structural templo in tho Dravidian regions. It cer- 
tainly is older than the Krishna Mantapa or than the frustum of 
a Vimana above the Yamapuri cave, at this place, and very con- 
siderably older than the present village temple, which is still used 
for worship by the inhabitants of Mahavallipur. 

This last probably belongs to the 12th or 13th century, and though 
comparatively modern, is an unusually elegant specimen of the class, 
and if illustrated, with the other antiquities of the place, would afford 
a complete history of the style during the six or seven centuries in 
which it flourished in the greatest perfection. As before mentioned 
it is one of the few temples that adopt the straight ridged form of 
Bhima's Rath, instead of the domical termination of the pyramid as 
exemplified in the Arjuna and Dharmaraja Raths. It has, however, 
a smaller temple alongside of it in the same enclosure, which follows 
the more usual patterns. Together they make a very perfect pair of 
temples, and notwithstanding their difference in age their details are 



1 A view of it will be found in my Picturesque Illustrations of Indian Architecture, 
PL XVIII., with description. 



KULUMULU. 159 

so little altered that thore is no difficulty in tracing all their forms 
back to the Rathe from which they were derived. 

Kijlumulu. 

At a place called Kulumulu, half way between Tinnevelly and 
Strivelliputtar, about 30 miles distant from each, there exist a 
number of rock-cut sculptures and temples, which if properly 
examined and described might prove of considerable interest. At 
present they are only known from Capt. Lyons' photographs, 1 and as 
no dimensions are given and the inscriptions are still untranslated, 
it is difficult to say much about them. 

On one side of the hill they all belong to the Jaina religion, and 
consist (photos. 337, 338, and 339) of a great number of Jaina figures 
of various sizes, and differently accompanied which were originally 
intended to be protected by a wooden roof, which has now dis- 
appeared. They are not of great beauty or antiquity, probably 
the 11th or 12th century. Indeed they are of so little interest, 
that the place would hardly be worth mention, were it not that on 
the other side of the hill there is a little rock-cut temple dedicated 
to Siva which is a gem of its class. It is almost a counterpart of the 
upper part of the Sikhara of the Kailas at Elura, and consequently 
probably of the same age. It is, however, even more elaborately 
sculptured than even that famous temple, and taken altogether it is 
perhaps, as far as it goes, as fine a specimen of its style as is to be 
found in India. It is, however, like most things in the Bouth, 
unfinished, and its cell untenanted. Still it is so beautiful that it is 
to be regretted that more is not known about it, especially as it 
probably is not unique, but other specimens of the class may be 
found in that neighbourhood when looked for. 

Conclusion. 

Although it is evident from the preceding investigation that these 
Eastern caves cannot compete — as previously hinted — either in 
extent or in magnificence, with the rook-cut temples found on the 
Western side of India, still it results from an examination of their 
peculiarities, that they are far from being devoid of interest in 

1 Photographs of Ancient Arch. i» Southern India., Nos. 337 to 342. 



160 EASTERN CAVES. 

themselves, and are, in some respects, of almost equal importance for 
the general history of architecture in India, as their rivals in the "West. 
Notwithstanding their comparative insignificance, the evidence de- 
rived from the Behar caves, proves more distinctly than anything 
else that has yet come to light, at what time, and in what manner, 
caves were first excavated in India for religious purposes. They also 
afford direct and positive proof, that before Anoka's time, in the 
middle of the third century before Christ, all the caves used by 
Buddhists were mere natural caverns very slightly, if at all, im- 
proved by art. They also tend, by inference, to confirm the postulate, 
that before Asoka's time stone was rarely, if at all used in India 
for purely architectural purposes. If what has been said above, is 
borne out by subsequent investigations, it resultB that the Pipala 
cave at BAjgir, and its accompanying Baithak, are not only the 
oldest buildings known to exist in India, but the most characteristic 
of the state of architectural art in the pre-Mauryan age. If this is 
sustained, its importance can hardly be overrated, as affording a 
firm basis for all further investigations into the origin of stone 
architecture and cave excavation in India. On the whole from the 
evidence, on these points, obtained from an examination of the Eastern 
caves is more complete than any derived from those in the West. 

The Orissa caves are not so important in a historical point of view, 
but they Beem to illustrate Buddhist art at a period when such 
illustrations are most valuable, and they supplement what is found 
in the Western caves in a manner that is most satisfactory. Taken 
together they afford a picture of the arts of architecture and sculp- 
ture as they existed in India immediately before and after the 
Christian era, which is full of interest, but which could hardly be 
considered as complete without the information to be derived from 
these Eastern examples. 

The greatest interest, however, of these explorations among the 
Eastern rock-cut temples, arises from the discovery at MaMvalli- 
pur of what may fairly be called a petrified Buddhist village. The 
great difficulty that has hitherto been experienced in investigating 
the history of Buddhist architecture in India has arisen from the 
fact that though we have hundreds on hundreds of caves and rock- 
cut examples, we have — with the exception of one or two topes — not 
one single structural example in the length and breadth of the land, 
and it consequently was most difficult to realise the external appear- 



CONCLUSION. 161 

anoe of the buildings. By the aid, however, of the Mahavallipur 
Raths, and the clumsy attempt to copy a Buddhist vihara in the cave 
at Undavilli, we are now enabled to understand to a very great 
extent, not only the appearance but the construction of all the 
varied forms of Buddhist architectural art. The Raths belong, 
unfortunately, to a late age, it must be confessed, but still before it 
had entirely passed away. 

Another almost equally important result for the general history 
of Indian Architecture, is obtained from a knowledge of the forms 
of the Raths at Mahavallipur and of the caves at Undavilli. It may 
now be said with confidence that we know for certain the origin of 
the Dravidian style of architecture, and the date when it was first 
introduced in the South, and we can also explain whence its most 
characteristic features were derived, and why they were adopted. 
All these points were little known before, and still less understood. 

It may be said, with some truth perhaps, that there is very little 
that is new in all this ; but a good deal of it was known only very 
hazily. The great advantage obtained from these investigations into 
the Eastern caves is, that we may now feel confident that we know 
exactly how and when Buddhist architecture was first introduced, 
and with the assistance of the Western caves can follow its progress 
step by step till its decline and extinction in the seventh or eighth 
century, after an existence of nearly 1,000 years. It is something 
too, to be able to say that we know when and how the Dravidian 
style arose, though we have not and never had any difficulty in tracing 
its history from the seventh or eighth century till the present day. It 
is true we have not yet been able to discover the origin of the 
curvilinear Sikhara or spire of Indo- Aryan style of the north of 
India, with its accompanying peculiarities. When, however, so 
much has been done, we may feel confident that before long, that 
last remaining obscurity that still clouds the history of Indian Archi- 
tecture may, too, eventually disappear. 



Y18S. 



PART II. 



CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 



L 2 



PART II. 



CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTION. 



If there had been no other examples of Cave Temples in India 
than those described in the preceding pages, the subject of its rock- 
out architecture, though interesting to local antiquaries and those 
specially connected with Indian matters, would hardly have been 
deemed of sufficient importance to attract attention in Europe. The 
caves in Behar are too small and insignificant to claim especial 
notice, except from their bearing on the general history of the 
subject. Those in Orissa, though larger and more elaborately 
finished, are too much isolated in their character to be of much 
value, except when studied in connexion with more extensive groups ; 
while those in the Madras presidency are interesting more from 
their bearing on the past history of Buddhist architecture in the 
north, and on the future of the Dra vidian style in the south, than from 
any peculiar merit of their own. When, however, these eastern 
caveB are taken in connexion with the whole subject, as we now 
know it, they become invaluable, as throwing light on the general 
history of cave architecture in India, and receive a reflected light 
from the western caves, which increases their importance to an 
extent they could hardly claim for themselves. When we turn to 
the Western caves the case is widely different. We there find at 
least one thousand excavations of various sorts and dimensions. 
Some of great size and of the most elaborate architecture, and all 
having a distinct meaning and bearing on the general history of 
architecture. When their story is carefully examined it appears 
that they are spread pretty evenly over more than 1,000 years of 
the darkest, though most interesting, period of Indian history, and 
throw a light upon it as great or greater than can be derived from 
any other source. In addition to these claims to attention the 



166 CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

western caves afford the most vivid illustration of the rise and 
progress of all the three great religions that prevailed in India in 
the early centuries of our era and before it. They show clearly how 
the Buddhist religion rose and spread, and how its form afterwards 
became corrupt and idolatrous. They explain how it consequently 
came to be superseded by the nearly cognate form of Jainism and 
the antagonistic development of the revived religion of the 
Brahmans. All this too is done in a manner more vivid and more 
authentic than can be obtained from any other mode of illustration 
now available. 

With all these claims to attention it is hardly to be wondered at 
that the western caves have attracted the attention of the learned 
both in India and in Europe from a very early period of their 
connexion with the East, and that a detailed statistical account of 
them may still be considered as a desideratum, which it is hoped 
this work may to some extent at least supply. 

It is not easy at first sight to account for the extremely rapid 
extension of Cave architecture in the West of India as compared 
with that in the East. Behar was the cradle of the religion that 
first adopted this monumental form, not any part of Western 
India, while it will probably be admitted the Buddhists were the first 
to introduce this form of architecture on both sides of the country. 
At the same time there seems no reason for supposing that Buddhism 
in any form existed in the West before missionaries were sent there 
by Asoka, after the convocation held by him in the seventeenth year of 
his reign, as detailed above (ante, p. 17). Before this time there is 
certainly no evidence to show that the inhabitants of the Western 
Ghats were dwellers in caves or used the rock for any monumental 
or religious purpose, but immediately afterwards they seem to have 
commenced excavating it and continued to do so uninterruptedly 
for a long series of years. 

It has been suggested that as the Egyptian rock-cut temples are 
principally in Upper Egypt above the Cataract and in Nubia, that 
their comparative proximity to India may have been the cause of this 
form being adopted there. The distance of date, however, between the 
latest Egyptian and earliest Indian examples quite precludes this 
idea. Besides the fact that no similarity of any detail can be traced 
between them, and there seoms no other country which could have 



PART II. — INTRODUCTION. 167 

influenced India in this respect. On the whole the explanation of 
the phenomenon is probably the prosaic fact that the trap rocks which 
overlie the country and form the hill sides everywhere in the West are 
exceptionally well suited for the purpose. They lie everywhere hori- 
zontally. Are singularly uniform in their conformation, and have 
alternating strata of harder and softer rocks which admit of caves 
being interpolated between them with singular facility, and they are 
everywhere impervious to moisture. 

With such a material it is little wonder that once it was suggested, 
the inhabitants of the Western Ghats early seized upon the idea of 
erecting permanent quasi eternal temples for the practice of the rites 
of their new religion, in substitution for the perishable wooden struc- 
tures they had hitherto employed, and once the fashion was adopted 
we ought not to be surprised it became so generally prevalent nor 
that it continued in use so long. 

At the same time it may be observed that under the circumstances 
the amount of labour expended in excavating a rock-cut temple in so 
suitable a material is probably less than would be required to erect a 
similar building in quarried stone. If we take, for instance, even such 
an elaborate temple as the Kailasa or Elura, it will be found that the 
cubic contents of the temples left standing is about equal to the 
amount of material quarried out of the pit in which it stands. It is 
at the same time evident that it would be much less expensive to chip 
and throw out to spoil this amount of material, than to quarry it 
at a distance and carry it to the temple, and then hew it and raise 
it to the place where it was wanted. The amount of carving and 
ornament being, of course, the same in both cases. It is not so easy 
to make a comparison in the case of a Chaitya cave or a vihara, but 
on the whole it is probable that excavating them in the rock would 
generally prove cheaper than building them on the plain. If this is 
so, it is evident that the quasi eternity of the one offered such advan- 
tages in such a climate over any ephemeral structure they could 
erect elsewhere, that we ought not to be surprised at its general 
adoption. The proof that they exercised a wise discretion in doing 
this, lies in the fact that though we have in the west of India nearly 
a thousand rock- cut temples belonging to the Buddhist, Brahmanical, 
and Jaina religions, we have only one or two structural examples 
erected in the same region at the very end of the period of time to 
which, these caves belong. 



168 CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

There are in "Western India upwards of fifty groups of rock-excava- 
tions, belonging to the three great sects, — Buddhists, Brahmans, and 
Jains, — and of these the great majority are within the limits of the 
Bombay Presidency, or on its immediate borders. Besides these 
there are a few insignificant groups in Sindh, the Panjab, Beluchis- 
tan, and Afghanistan. 

Geographically the Cave-Temples are distributed very irregularly, 
but the principal localities in whioh they exist may be enume- 
rated as follows : — 

1. In the province now known as Kathiawar— the ancient Sau- 
rashtra, forming the peninsular portion of Gujarat, between the 
Gulfs of Khambay and Kachh, — there are about half-a-dozen groups 
of caves scattered along the ranges of hills that run parallel to its 
southern coast. In these groups there are about 140 separate exca- 
vations. 

2. In the islands of Salsette and Elephanta close to Bombay there 
are at least 130 caves, — all within 9 miles north or south of the head 
of the Bombay harbour at Trombay, where stood the old town of 
Chemula — probably the great mart known to the early Alexandrian 
merchants as Semylla or Timula. 1 

3. Not quite 80 miles from Bombay as the crow flies, a little to 
the north of east, is the old city of Junnar — probably the Tagara of 
Ptolemy and the Pervplus, — round which are several groups con- 
taining not less than 120 separate caves, while at Harischandragad, 
Pulu Sonala, and Nanaghat, about 16 miles to the west of it, there 
are together about 25 more. 

4. About 50 miles east of Bombay and 42 south-west of Junnar is 
Karld, where there exists one of the finest Buddhist Cave Temples in 
India, and within a radius of little more than 20 miles from it are 
about 60 caves, several of them of special interest. 

5. A line drawn southwards from Poona nearly parallel to the 
"Western Ghats or Sahyadri Hills, passes through groups at Sirwal 
"Wai, and Karhad, embracing about 80 caves. 

6. Along the Konkan, on the western side of the same range, 
between the hills and the sea, at Kuda, Mhar, Chipalun, &o. the 
number of caves may be estimated at 60 more. 

1 Ptolemy (Geog. VII. i. 6 ; VHI. xcvi. 3) writes JfcxXXa, and (I. xvii. 4) T.JwuXa j 
and the author of the Periplus Mar. jEryth. (§ 53) Xijf«?to« ; see below, p. 205.) 



PAET II. — INTKODUCTION. 169 

7. Within a distance at most of 50 miles from the railway leading 
from Bombay to Nagpur, and lying almoBt in a straight line between 
Nasik and Patur, 20 miles east of Akola, are the important groups of 
Nasik, Ankai, Elura, Aurangabad, and Ajanta, with others of less 
note, numbering about 150 caves. 

8. About 250 miles. B.S.B. from Bombay, and 130 W.N.W. from 
Haidarabad is the small village of Karusa, where, and at Dharasinwa, 
40 miles to the west, and Kalyana — the old Chalukya capital 30 
miles south-east from it, — there are about 120 caves, some of con- 
siderable dimensions, though others are small and insignificant. 

9. On the north of the Narmada in Malwa are the groups at Bagh, 
Dhamnar, and Kolvi — neither of great importance ; and, lastly, far 
to the south, on the banks of the Malaprabha in Belgaum district 
are the caves of Badami and Aihole, architecturally among the 
most interesting Brahmanical groups in India, especially as affording 
a fixed date, by which that of others can be compared. 

This brings up the total to about 900 caves, and there are a few 
of little note scattered in ones and twos over the Bame area, so that 
we may safely estimate the total of known caves in the West 
at over 900 ; besides many which have not yet been visited by any 
European, and of which consequently no record exists. 

These are divided primarily into three classes according to the 
sects by whom or for whose use they were hewn out, viz., Buddhists, 
Brahmans, and Jains. The earliest examples we have belong to the 
Buddhists, and date from- the middle of the third century B.C., but 
excavations belonging to this sect, extend from that date down to 
near the end of the seventh century of our era, thus ranging through 
between nine or ten centuries. They are also the moBt numerous 
class, fully 75 per cent, of the whole being Buddhist caves. 

The next, in order of time, are those of the Brahmans, whether 
Saiva or Vaishnava, which range from about the fourth to the 
eighth century of our era, or perhaps later. Of the whole, about 
18 per cent, of the excavations are Brahmanical, but a large 
proportion of them are of very considerable dimensions, but, except 
at Karusa, and some scattered caves in the Satara district, few of 
them are small, whereas among the early Buddhist caves there are 
many which are insignificant. 

Lastly, there are the Jaina Cave-Temples, which are much less 
numerous than those of either of the preceding sectB, and of which 



170 CAVE TEMPLES OP WESTERN INDIA. 

the earliest may belong to the fifth or sixth century, and the latest 
perhaps to the twelfth, they are the least numerous of all, not ex- 
ceeding four per cent, of the whole. 

We may thus estimate their numbers as follows : — 

Buddhist excavations ... about 720 
Brahmanical - - - „ 160 

Jaina - - - - „ 35 l 

If to these we add the Eastern caves, described in the first part 
of this work, it may safely be assumed that the Rock-cut Temples of 
India, known at the present day, amount to more than a thousand 
separate excavations. 

All such excavations, it will be understood, were for religious 
purposes, some being temples — Chaityas, or Halls devoted solely 
to worship, others monasteries, or Viharas consisting of a hall for 
assembly, sometimes with an inner shrine for worship, and with cells 
for monks ; some were DharmaSalas, with or without cells, where 
councils or assemblies were held ; while in the more complete Bud- 
dhist establishments there were, first, the temple ; secondly, one or 
more monastic halls with surrounding cells ; and occasionally also 
separate dwellings, or hermitages for ascetic monks. 

For purposes of description, these works may be classified as 
follows : — 

I. — Buddhist Cave-Temples may be divided into two great classes : 
first, those which were executed, so far as can be judged from style 
or inscriptions, before the Christian era or during the first century 
after it. These belong to the Hinayana sect and are generally plain 
in style, and are devoid of images of Buddha for worship. 

II. — Buddhist Cave-Temples belonging to the Mahayana sect of a 
date subsequent to the year a.d. 100, after which images of Buddha 
first began to appear. These images gradually in the course of time 
supersede the earlier dagoba or relic-shrine, until, in the latest 
examples, the personages represented become numerous, and the 
pre-eminence of Buddha himself seems to have been threatened 
by the growing favour for Avalokiteswara B6dhisattwa, who, in 

1 The Jaina excavations in the rock at Gwalior extend down to the 14th and 15th 
centuries, but as these are not included in the limits of the Bombay Presidency, they are 
omitted in the above enumeration, but will be noticed further on, after those in the 
west have been described. They consist of upwards of 50 separate excavations, but 
all of very modern date. 



PART II, — INTRODUCTION. 171 

Nepal, under the better known name of Padmapani, had become the 
favourite divinity of the populace. 

III. — The Brahmanical Caves : The Brahmans were probably first 
led to excavate Cave-Temples in imitation of the Buddhists, and as 
a means of pressing their candidature for a larger share of popular 
favour. Their works are very similar to the later Buddhist Viharas, 
only without the side cells for monks — such being unnecessary in 
what were meant only as places of public worship for a religion in 
which monasticism was not an element. The shrine is usually in 
the back wall of the Vaishnava temples, but in those of the S'aiva 
sect it is generally brought forward into the cave with a pradakshind 
or passage for circumambulation round about it. 

IV. — The Jaina Caves are the least numerous, but among them 
are one or two very fine ones. They also are on the plan of the 
Buddhist Viharas, sometimes with cells in the walls, but more dis- 
tinguished by numerous figures of their Tirthankaras or Jinas, who 
hold the same place in their system as the various Buddhas do in 
that of the Buddhist sect. The Jains are now divided into two 
sections ; the Svetambaras or white-robed community, who are of 
more recent origin than the Buddhists, 1 and the Digambaras or 
naked Jains, who are generally understood to be an older sect than 
the followers of Buddha. It is to this latter division that all the 
Jaina caves belong, and as yet, with the exception of a small late 
group in the extreme south of the Peninsula, they have been found 
only in the Dekhan and Rajputana, or in the region ruled over by 
the Bathors or Balharas and Chalukyas. 

Classification of Buddhist Monuments. 

The various objects of Buddhist architecture may be catalogued 
as consisting of: — 1. Stnpas or Topes; 2. Ornamental Rails, which 
however are found only in connexion with stupas, pillars, sacred 
trees, and temples; 3. Stambhas or Lits; 4. Chaitya-halls or 
temples; 5. Viharas or monasteries (including Bhikshu-grihas or 
hermitages) ; and 6. Pondhis or cisterns. 

1. StApa, from a root meaning " to heap," " to erect," is applied 
to any pile or mound, as to a funeral pile, hence it comes to be 
applied to a Tumulus erected over any of the sacred relics of 
Buddha, or on spots consecrated as the scenes of his acts. Such 

1 Stan. Julien's Mem. star let ConU Occ. I., 163, 164. 



172 CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

were the Stupas erected by As*oka all over northern India, and the 
great Dagobas raised in Ceylon in early times. 1 But not only for 
Buddha himself, but also for the Sthaviras or Theros, — the elders 
of the Buddhist religion, were stupas erected ; and, in later times, 
probably for even ordinary monks. Moreover, when the relics of 
Buddha became objects of worship, as they did even before the 
time of .Aioka, it became neoessary that they should be exhibited 
in some way to the congregation, on some sort of altar or receptacle 
called a dhdtugarbha or dhdtugopa, abbreviated into Dagaba or 
Dagoba and Dagopa. 8 Stupa has been corrupted into the Anglo- 
Indian word " Tope," which is generally applied to such of those 
monuments as are structural and outside caves, — as Dagoba usually 
denotes those in caves or attached to them, and hewn out of the 
solid rock. 8 

i The origin of the domical form of all the stupas in India, has never yet been 
satisfactorily explained. It is not derived from an earthen tumulus, like the tombs of 
the Etruscans, or it would, like them, have been a straight-lined cone. Nor was it 
from a Dome of construction, as none such existed in India when the earliest examples 
were erected. It could, apparently, only be copied from such models as the 
tents of the Tartars or Kirghiz, which all, so far as we know, always were domical, and 
with a low circular drum, very like those of the Topes (see Yule's Marco Polo y vol. i., 
woodcuts, pp. 247, 395).— J. F. 

* TurnouT derives this word from dhata, a Telic, and gabban, a casket, receptacle, or 
shrine ; Wilson (As. Res, vol. xvii. p. 605) from deha, " the body," and gopa, " what 
preserves." The Chcntya, or the form of Stupa usually found in the Caves, consists of 
a short, wide cylinder or plinth, supporting a high dome, on which stands a Bquare 
neck, usually carved on the four sides, surmounted by a capital consisting of a number 
of flat tiles, each overlapping the one below it, and on this stands the chhatri, or 
umbrella. The most important feature is the dome called the garbha ; the neck or 
gala represents a box to contain a relic, and at Bbija it is quite hollow ; the capital or 
lorana forms the lid of this box, and served the purpose apparently of a small table or 
shelf, on which relics were displayed in small crystal caskets, over which hung the 
umbrella. In Nepal the gala is always marked with two eyeB, or a face, and over the 
capital rises a spire called chidamani — u the crest jewel "—of thirteen grades, typical of 
13 Bhuvanat, or heavens of the Buddhists, and the palus or finial which terminates it 
represents the Akanishtha Bhnvana, or highest heaven of Adi Buddha. In Burma the 
finial of the spire is called Hti, and popularly " Tee," a term which has frequently 
been applied to the capital of any chaitya (see Woodcut, No. 43, page 227). 

s The Dagoba is the Bymbolof Buddha, just as the Tree or Lion and the Wheel are pro- 
bably the symbols of the Assembly and the Law — the triratna or " three precious things" 
of the Bauddha creed. In some instances we find the tree apparently substituted for the 
Lion or Sinha (e.g., see figs. 38, 39, Fergusson's Ind. and East. Archil, pp. 101, 102). 
"The Parinibhan Suttan states that Chatty as or Stupas 'originated' upon the death 
of Gautama, when * eight thupas were built over the corporeal relics, a ninth over the 



PART II. — INTRODUCTION. 



173 



2. Ornamental rails. Though from their nature of difficult appli- 
cation to Caves, and comparatively of little importance in their 
architecture, ornamental rails are among the most original and 
important features of the earliest Buddhist architecture that have 
come down to our times ; and on them in some cases the most elabo- 
rate sculpture was lavished. They were employed round the sacred 
trees, stupas, pillars, and occasionally round temples. The smaller 
ones, however, have so far as we know all disappeared, and it is 
only some of those round the stupas that have come down to 
our time. The most remark- 
able are those of Bharhut, 
Sanchi, and Amravati, and the 
rectangular one at Buddha 
Gaya, — perhaps originally en- 
closing a temple. In the cave 
temples examples are hardly 
to be looked for, yet a form of 
them does occur in the caves 
of the Andhra dynasty, as at 
the great Chaitya Cave at 
Kanheri, and at Nasik. The 
simplest form of rail consists 
of square pillars set at little 
more than their own breadth (Rg-«0 Rail from sanchi, Tope Ko. 2.» 

kumbhan, and a tenth over the charcoal of his funeral pile ' {Jour. As. Soc. Beng. 
vol. vii. p. 1014). And it would seem from the same Suttan that Chaity&ni existed 
in several parts of the Madhyama desa even during the lifetime of Gautama. The 
Attkakathd explains that the Chaity&ni were not ' Buddhistical shrineB,' but Yakk- 
hattandni, ' erections for demon worship,' .... Gautama himself repaired to the 
Chipdta Chaitya for rest, and there expatiated on its splendour, as well as that of 
many others (J. As. S. Beng.^ vol. vii. p. 1001). It was doubtless from a contempla- 
tion of the buay throng of religious enthusiasts who crowded these monuments of 
worship, that Gautama gave his sanction for the erection of the thupas over his own 
relics and those of his disciples. Gautama's words were {Parinibhan Suttan), ' If 
in respect of thupas any should set up flowers, scents, or embellishments, or should 
worship (them), or should (by such means) cause their minds to be purified (pasddes- 
santi), such acts will conduce to their well-being and happiness .... Ananda, many 
thinking that "this is the thupa of the adorable, the sanctified, the omniscient, 
supreme Buddha," compose their minds ; and when they have caused their minds to 
be cleansed, they, upon the dissolution of the body after death, are born in a glorious 
heavenly world.* "— AIwLb, Buddhism, pp. 22, 23. 
1 From Fergusson's Ind. and JSast. Archit., p. 98. 




174 CAVE TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

apart, and joined by three thin broad bars rounded on the sides 
and placed near to one another and to the head rail which joins 
the tops of the pillars. In more ornamental examples the pillars 
are carved with a circular disc in the centre, and semi-circular 
ones at the top and bottom, usually carved with rosettes, but 
sometimes with animals, &c., and the interspaces chamfered. This 
is well exemplified in the rail round Tope No. 2 at Sanchi (Woodcut 
No. 42). Mr. Fergusson remarks that " the circular discs may be 
taken as representing a great nail meant to keep the centre bar in its 
place in the original carpentry forms ; the half discs, top and bottom, 
as metal plates to strengthen the junctions — and this, it seems, most 
probably, may really have been the origin of these features." 

In other rails a disc is also added on each bar, and the head rail 
carved with festoons. Copies of such rails are also employed as 
friezes, and the member under it is then sometimes carved with a 
line of animal figures in festoons. (See Plate XXII.) 

3. Stambhas or Lats are pillars, usually erected in front of a 
temple, whether Saiva, Vaishnava, Jaina, or Bauddha, and carrying 
one or more of the symbols of the religion to which it was dedi- 
cated ; the Buddhist Stambhas bearing the wheel representative of 
Dharma or the law, or Lions. The Saiva ones bear a triStda or 
trident ; the Vaishnava a figure of Garuda ; the Jaina a Chaumukfia 
or fourfold Tirtharikara. Some of the finest Buddhist Lats, 
erected by Asoka, are not apparently in connexion with any temple, 
but bear his edicts or other inscriptions ; they may, however, have 
been erected in connexion with wooden or brick buildings which 
have disappeared ages ago. 

4. Chaityas. Like Stupa, the word Chaitya is also derived from a 
root (ckitd) signifying " a funeral pile," " heap," and hence means 
" a monument " and " an altar," and in a secondary sense it is 
used by Jains and Buddhists to indicate " a temple containing a 
Chaitya." In Nepal and Tibet, and in Buddhist Sanskrit literature, 
the word is applied to the model of a stupa placed in the temples 
and to which we have applied the term Dagoba. These Chaityas or 
Dagobas are an essential feature of chapels or temples constructed 
solely for purposes of worship and which may therefore be appro- 
priately called Chaitya-Caves. Such temples never have cells for 
residence in their side walls. One or more of them is usually 
attached to every set of Buddhist caves. Their earliest form in 



PABT II. — INTRODUCTION. 175 

the rock in Western India is an oblong room, about double as long 
as wide, entered from one end, and with the Ghaitya or dagoba 
near the other. This, in some of the earliest examples, is connected 
with the roof, by a slender shaft representing the staff of the 
umbrella or chliatri, the flat canopy of which is carved upon the roof. 
Sometimes this is omitted, and the thin flat members which form 
the capital are attached to the roof. The end of the chamber behind 
the dagoba was at first square, but very early came to be cut in 
the form of a semi-circular apse, leaving a pradafoJdnd or passage 
for the circumambulation of the Cliaitya. The flat roof, however, 
was early replaced by a semicircular one, and then a side aisle 
was cut quite round, separated from the central nave by a row 
of plain octagonal shafts arranged close together, while the Dagoba 
was left to stand free, surmounted by an umbrella (or three of 
them) in carved wood and sometimes in stone. This last plan 
seems to have fully met the requirements of the worship, for, with 
the addition only of more ornamentation, it continues down to the 
latest example. 

When this form of temple became enlarged, however, the lighting 
became a difficulty, for it was necessary that a strong light should be 
thrown on the Cliaitya. To effect this, the front, instead of being left 
in the rock with only a large door, was cleared quite out ; the facade 
surrounding the arched opening thus formed was ornamented with 
carving, in which the " Buddhist-rail " pattern, the dagoba, and the 
horse-shoe arch were repeated of every size and in every variety of 
arrangement. The opening itself was in the oldest caves occupied 
by a wooden front, of which we have no example left ; but its chief 
features, as it once existed at Koudane, Bhaja, and Pitalkhora, can 
be easily recovered from what we still find at Ajanta, Karle, and 
Bedsa, where the wood is partly replaced by the rock over the doors 
and between them, leaving a large horse-shoe formed window above, 
partly screened by lattice-work, in wood. From the mortices left in 
the rock, we know that this once existed in all the older caves. At 
Karl6 the original woodwork still remains entire, and fragments of 
it have been found in other caves. 

5. VihAras. — These were for the accommodation of Buddhist 
Bhikshus, or mendicant monks living together in communities. The 
earliest form of vihara or monastery cave seems to have been that 
of one or more (grihas) cells with a verandah (padaUdla) or porch in 



176 CAVE TEMPLES. OF WESTERN INDIA. 

front. In many instances the cells were small ; in others they con- 
sisted of two apartments, the inner having a stone bench or bed (as 
in several instances at Junnar). This bed is a constant feature of all 
the earlier cells, but disappears in those excavated after the second 
century after Christ. A permanent spring or stream of water close 
by, or a cistern (pondhi) cut in the rock, usually beside or under 
the cell, was an indispensable accompaniment. The number of 
these cells at one place was often considerable. 1 

The next step in Western India was to introduce a square hall for 
assembling in, probably copied from some wooden and structural 
erection that existed before any rock-cut excavations were attempted, 
and often also used as a school : this must have been a very early 
accompaniment of every group of Bhikslvu-grilias or monks' cells. At 
first this room perhaps had no cells, but it would soon be evident that 
the walls of a large hall offered special facilities for excavating cells 
all round it, and, for purposes of worship, a larger cell was after- 
wards cut out in the back wall, containing a dagoba to serve in 
place of a separate chapel. At first, too, the smaller halls or iat'Z- 
agrilias might have been formed without pillars to support the roof, 
— the tenacity of the rock being assumed to dispense with the 
necessity of any prop between the side walls. Afterwards, how- 
ever, when the size was increased, it was found that this was unsafe, 
and that, owing to flaws and veins, large areas of roofing, if left 
unsupported, were liable to fall in. Pillars were then resorted to, as 
in the ordinary wooden buildings of the country, arranged either 
in rows running round the solas or halls, separating the central 
square area from the aisles, or disposed in equidistant lines, as in 
Cave XI. at Ajanta, and probably in the vihara at Pitalkhora. 

Little sculpture was at first employed in any of the caves ; but in 
later examples the pillars came to be elaborately carved ; and, 
though Buddha did not preach idol-worship, in course of time the 
plain dagoba ceased to satisfy the worshippers of certain sects, 
and the shrine came to be almost invariably occupied by an image of 
Buddha seated on a sort of throne, called a Swhdscma, or ' lion-seat,' 
because the ends of it rested on lions carved in bas-relief, — and 

1 Groups of caves are often called Lends, a word which Dr. J. Wilson derived from 
Sanek. layanam, "ornamentation"; but lay ana, "a place of rest, a house," from 
the root, li, " to adhere/' seems a more natural derivation, for the name of " an 
abode.'* 



PART II. — INTRODUCTION. 177 

usually with an attendant on each hand bearing a ckaiwi or fly-flap. 
Eventually this representation came to be repeated in all parts of the 
caves ; while in still later times, when the MaMydna sect became 
popular and influential, other beings were associated with him, 
first as attendants, and then as distinct and separate objects of 
adoration. Such were the Indras, Bodhisattwas, Padmapani, and 
Manjusri. 

This idolatry appears at first sight quite antagonistic to the 
principles taught by their great sage, for, having entered Nirvana, 
or perfect quiescence, he can no more hear or be in any way 
influenced by the worship of his followers. But they hold that this 
does not detract from the efficacy of the service, for the act is in 
itself an ojms operatum, and that as the seed germinates when it is 
put into the earth without any consciousness on the part of the 
elements relative to the vivifying influence they exercise, so does 
merit arise from the worship of the images of Buddha, though the 
being they represent is unconscious of the deed. And this merit is, 
in like manner, spontaneously and without the intervention of any 
intelligent agent, productive of prosperity and peace. For the same 
reason they worship the bodhi or bo tree, under which he attained 
to Buddhahood, and the relics of the sage and of his disciples, 
enshrined in dagobas, &c. 

In the Vihara-caves there is frequently in front of the shrine an 
antechamber forming the approach to it, and with two pillars and 
corresponding pilasters separating it from the great hall. All the 
Viharas have a verandah, or paddsdla, as it is termed, in front, 
frequently with cells or chapels opening from the ends of it ; and 
some are of two and three storeys. 1 

6. P6ni)His or cisterns are almost invariable accompaniments of 
mendicants' houses and Viharas, and are cut in the rock, usually near 
or at the entrance, and often extending partly under the caves. The 
water was brought to them by numerous small runnels cut in the 
rock, by which it was carried over the facade of the cave and otherwise 
collected from the face of the hill in which the excavations occur. 

1 The Viharaa of Nepal ac the present day are formed with an open court in place 
of the hall, surrounded by cloisters of one or two storeys, with a shrine or temple at 
the back of two or three storeys, usually containing an image of Sakya Muni, Dipau- 
kara Buddha, or of Padmapani. In the smaller side cells are images of Bodhisattwns 
and D6vis, while in the upper rooms live the priests and devotees. 

Y 182. M 



178 CAVE-TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

The entrance to the oistern is usually by a square opening 1 in the 
floor of a small reoess ; and on the back wall of this recess, or on 
the face of the rook over it, is frequently an inscription. Sometimes, 
but seldom, the jambs of the recess are carved with pilasters. 

In addition to the foregoing may be quoted the Images of Buddha 
found in so many of the Western Buddhist Caves, but perhaps in none 
earlier than the fourth or fifth century. These images 2 when found 
in the shrines are always represented as seated, though oftentimes 
attended by standing figures bearing fly-flaps. . The seated figures 
are distinguished by Buddhists according to the position of the hands. 
The most usual attitude of the great teacher is that in which he is 
represented as seated on a throne, the corners of which are upheld 
by two lions, with his feet on a lotus blossom and his hands in front 
of his breast holding the little finger of the left hand between the 
thumb and forefinger of the right. This is known as the JDkarma- 
cJiahra mvdra, or attitude of " turning the wheel of the law," that is 
of teaching. He is also sometimes represented standing, or with his 
legs doubled up under him and his hands in this mudrd or attitude. 

The next most common attitude of Buddha is that in which the 
JainaTirthankaras are always represented, viz., with their legs doubled 
under them in a squatting attitude, and the hands laid one on the 
other over the feet with the palms turned upwards. This position of 
meditative absorption is called the Jn&na or Dhydna imulrd. A third 
attitude in which he is sometimes represented, as when under the 
Bodhi tree, where he is said to have attained to Buddha-hood, is 
called the Vajrdsana or BMmisparsa itvMra, when the left hand lies 
on the upturned soles of the feet, and the right resting over the 
knee, points to the earth. He is also figured on the walls standing 
with the right hand uplifted in the attitude of blessing, or with the 

1 This was probably fitted with a square wooden cover to keep insects, leaves, Ac. 
out of the water. 

* The Singhalese and Chinese Buddhists have a legend that a Pilima image of 
Gautama was made during his lifetime by the King of Xosala. The Tibetan scriptures 
{Asiat. Re*, vol. xx. p. 476) speak of Buddha having lectured on the advantages of 
laying up bis image ; and the Divya Avaddna of Nepal gives a story (Speir's Life in 
Ancient India, p. 272) of his having recommended Bimbisara to send his portrait to 
Rudrayana, King of Roruka ; but all these stories are doubtless like very much besides 
in Buddhist literature, the invention of later times. The earliest mention of images in 
Ceylon is in the Mihintali inscription of 241 A.D. — Alwis, Buddhism, pp. 19, 20. 



PART II. — INTRODUCTION. 179 

alms bowl of the Bhikshu or mendicant, or, lastly, resting on his 
right side with the head to the north, in the attitude he is said to 
hare lain at his death or Nirvana. Behind the head is often re- 
presented a nimbus (Bhwmndala), or aureole, as in mediaeval figures 
of the saints. This occurs in the earliest sculptured and painted 
figures of Buddha, probably as early as the third century and 
possibly even earlier. 

On each side the principal image we usually find attendants, 
standing with clwwris or fly flaps in their hands. These are varied 
in different sculptures ; in some they are Sakras or Indras with high 
regal headdresses ; in others Padmapani l holding a lotus by the 
stalk is on one side, his hair in the jatd or headdress of a Bhikshu, 
and Manjusri or Vajrapani, — another Bodhisattwa, on the other. 2 

On the front of the seat, when the feet are turned up, is usually 
sculptured a wheel (chahra) turned " edgewise " to the spectator 
with a deer couchant on each side of it, and sometimes behind the 
deer are a number of kneeling worshippers on each side (Plate 
XXXV.) In more modern reliefs Buddha is often represented seated 
on a lotus, the stalk of which is upheld by Naga figures— people 
whose heads are canopied by the hoods, usually five, of a cobra. 

To what has already been said respecting Buddhism generally, 
it may here be added that the Buddhists are divided into two sects, 
the Hinayana and Mahayana or of the Lesser and Greater Vehicle. 
The original or Puritan Buddhists belong to the Hinayana or Lesser 
Vehicle, whose religion consisted in the practice of morality and 
a few simple ceremonial observances. The thirteenth 3 patriarch, 
Nagarjuna, a native of Berar, who lived 400, or according to 
others, 500 years 4 after Buddha, and shortly before the time of 
Kanishka, 5 was the founder of the new school of the Mahayana, 



1 In China Padmapani is called Kwan-yin, and is usually, though not always, re- 
presented as a goddess— of mercy : he is the Kan on of the Japanese. 

1 Ananda and Kasyapa are frequently placed on the right and left of Buddha in 
Chinese temples Edkins, Religion in China, p. 45. 

* Vassilief, Le Bouddisme, p. 214 ; Lassen makes him 14th ; Ind. Alt. II. 1203. 

* Vassilief, p. 81 ; Jour. As. 8. Beng. vol. v., pp. 530 ff. ; vol xviL pt. ii. pp. 616, 

617. „ . 

* Kanishka was a king on the North-west frontier of India in the first century ot 
the Christian era, and iB said to have been converted to Buddhism by Aryaheva the 
pupil of Nagarjuna. Vassilief, p. 76. 

M 2 



180 CAVE-TEMPLES OP WESTERN INDIA. 

which soon became very popular in the Dekhan ; it taught an abstruse 
mystical theology which speedily developed a mythology in which 
Buddha was pushed into the background by female personifications 
of Dharma or the Prajnd Pdramitd, and other goddesses or saktis, by 
Jfianatmaka Buddhas, or forms of the senses, &c. From all this, 
as might be expected, we find a very considerable difference between 
the sculptures of the cave temples of the earlier and later periods of 
Buddhism. This does not, however, become very early marked, and 
it is only after the fifth century that we have any very decidedly 
Mahayanist sculptures — as in the later caves at Ajanta, Elura, 
Aurangabad, and in one cave at Nasik. 

As already stated, the earlier temples in the West are the plainest in 
style. The Chaitya Caves are sculptured indeed on their fa9ades, 
but the ornaments consist almost solely of the " rail pattern " and 
models of the horse-shoe arch which formed the front of the temple ; 
human figures are rarely introduced. The sculpture, however, as 
will be indicated below, grows more abundant and varied as we 
descend the stream of history, and perhaps in the century preceding 
the Christian era, the custom began of introducing sculptures of the 
kings with their wives who executed the works. In the Assembly 
HaUs, as well as in the Chaitya-Caves, the only object of worship 
was the Dagoba, to which offerings of flowers and salutations were 
,made, and which was circumambulated by the worshipper repeating 
short prayers and mantras. . The Dagoba, be it remembered, was 
the emblem by which the memory of Buddha was represented, hence 
the step was an easy one to substitute the image of Buddha himself. 
But first with the dagoba was associated in a subordinate way the 
sinhastaniblia and clialcrastambJia or Lion and Wheel pillars, in front 
of the Chaitya-Caves. And when the image of Buddha came to 
be substituted in the Viharas for the Dagoba, he was seated on a 
ftinhdsana or Lion throne, and the Wheel was placed under the front of 
it. This, however, does not seem to have taken place till consider- 
ably after the Christian era. Indeed no imago of Buddha in the 
caves of Western India can belong to an earlier period than the 
fourth century ; possibly some of the wall paintings may however be 
older. The time that separates the older from the later style may be 
drawn approximately at the second century after the Christian era. 
Somewhere about that date, under the Andhrabhritya dynasty whose 
power extended southward from the Tapti or perhaps the Narmada 
river, probably to the northern boundary of Maisur and the Penar 



PART II.— INTRODUCTION. 181 

river, sculptured figures and paintings began to assume great promi- 
nence in the Cave Temples. 



Chronology of Buddhist Caves. 

The dates of the various groups of Buddhist caves, especially of 
the earliest ones, have not yet been ascertained with sufficient 
precision to admit of their being presented in anything like a 
tabular form. Their relative dates can generally be fixed, and their 
position in the sequence is sufficiently obvious, but till the chronology 
of the period is determined with more certainty than it is at present, 
epochal dates can hardly be attached either to the groups or to 
individual caves without the risk of their being upset by subsequent 
investigations. It is probable, however, that before long this state 
of affairs may be altered for the better. All the more important 
caves are inscribed, and when these inscriptions are re-examined by 
competent scholars, with the additional light that can now be thrown 
upon them, it seems more than probable that the uncertainty that 
now hangs on their dates may be removed. It unfortunately 
happenB, however, that the names in these inscriptions are either 
those of private individuals, whose personality affords no information, 
or, if of royal personages, they are of kings whose date has hitherto 
been only approximately ascertained. If we could depend on the 
Pauranik lists they would nearly suffice to remove the difficulty, but 
they have not yet been brought sufficiently into accord with the 
numismatic and paleographic evidence to be implicitly relied upon, 
though the discrepancies seem gradually disappearing. 

As a rule, the inscriptions are devoid of epochal dates, and when 
such exist the era from which they are calculated is in no instance 
specified. 1 If it should turn out, as is more than probable, that no 
era was used, at that age, in "Western India, except that of Saka 
(a.d. 78-9), one great source of uncertainty would be removed. But 
even then, till a greater number of dated inscriptions than are at 

1 In his Ancient Geography of India, Gen. Cunningham has quoted one, at page 533, 
as dated in the yew 30 of the Sakaditya Kala, and repeats this at page xxi. of the 
introduction of his first Animal Report. Unfortunately, however, neither Lieut 
Brett's copy of this inscription (J. B. B. R. A. S., vol. v. No. 10, p. 22) nor Mr. 
West's more exact transcript, vol. vii. of the same Journal, No. 39, p. 9, bear out the 
General's translation, which cannot consequently be relied upon. 



182 CAVE-TEMPLES OF WESTBSN INDIA. 

present known are found in these oaves, they do not suffice to 
enable us to arrange them all in chronological order. 

Under these circumstances we are forced to rely a great deal 
more than is desirable on palroographio evidence. In relative dates 
the varying progressive changes which the alphabetic forms assume 
are invaluable, and generally a safe guide ; but for epochal dates 
they are comparatively useless. The local or geographical position 
of the plaoe where an inscription is found is often a cause of greater 
change in the characters employed, than distance of time. It is 
only when the characters are compared within a certain limited 
area that they can be successfully employed for the purposes of 
chronology. Even then the results derived from such indications 
can only be considered as approximative, and never as capable of 
any great preoision. 

The architectural character of the caves is a far more distinct and 
constant characteristic than the alphabetic form of their inscriptions. 
All the caves have architectural features, and these, as in all true styles, 
all over the world change according to a certain law of progression 
that can never be mistaken when sufficient materials exist for com- 
parison. In Europe it has of late years been allowed to supersede 
all other evidence in ascertaining the age of mediaeval or classical 
buildings, and in no single instance has an appeal from its decision 
been sustained. If, for instance, we take such a cave as that at 
Bhaja (woodcut No. 1), the whole of the front of which was con- 
structed in wood, and where the pin holes still exist, by means of 
which the wooden ornaments were originally attached to the rock. 
Where the wooden ribs of the roof still remain in situ, and where 
the rock-cut pillars of the nave slope inwards in imitation of wooden 
posts, we may feel sure that we are at the very cradle of stone-cut 
architecture, and cannot get much further back without reaching a 
Btate of affairs where wood and wood only was employed. When 
on the other hand we compare this with the facade of the Lomas 
Rishi cave in Behar (woodcut No. 3), which we know was exca- 
vated by Asoka B.C. 250, we find the two so essentially identical, 
in style, that we may fix the date of the Bhaja cave at least as early 
as 200 b.c, and in doing so we may feel certain we do not err by 
many years, or in ascribing it to too ancient a date. 

If starting from this point we take a series of four such Chaitya 
caves as those of Bhaja, Bedsa, Karl6, and Nasik — to be described 



PAUT II. — INTRODUCTION. 183 

hereafter — and allow 50 years interval between each, we bring our 
history down nearly to the Christian era. When we look at the 
extent of the changes introduced, and the quantity of examples we 
have to interpolate, it seems improbable to allow a less period 
between each, nor that the position of any of these milestones can 
be shifted more than ten or a dozen years without a violation of the 
surest principles of archaeology. 

After the Christian eTa, it is not quite so easy to arrange the 
sequence of the caves, not from any change in the principles in -which 
this should be done, but from the variety of the features in the ex- 
amples, and the distance from each other of the localities in which 
they are found. It also appears that after the earlier centurieB of 
our era there seems to have been a pause in cave excavations. 
After the fifth and sixth centuries, however, when they were re- 
sumed, there is no longer any difficulty in ascertaining the age of 
any cave with almost as much precision as can be desired. 

The science of numismatics opens another source from which we 
may hope to obtain a considerable amount of precise information as 
to the age of the caves at some not distant date. In Gujarat and 
the cave region north of Bombay a great number of coins have been 
found belonging to a dynasty generally known as the Sah, kings of 
Saurashtra. Most of these bear dates from some unspecified era. The 
earlier coins are not dated, but the second series range from 102 to 
271 at least, 1 while the number of kings who reigned was certainly 
not less than 25 or 26.* 

Unfortunately numismatists have not yet been able to make up 
their minds as to the era from which these dates are to be reckoned. 
Mr. Newton assumes that it was the era of Vicramaditya, 56 B.C., 
but without stopping to inquire if that era had then been established. 
Mr. Thomas and others assume that they commenced earlier ; but on 
the whole it seems most probable that the era was that of Saka, 
a.d. 78-9, and if this is so we have a thread extending through our 
cave history down to the year 350 a.d., which eventually may be of 
the greatest use in enabling us to fix the dates of the caves belonging 
to that period of history. 

When all these various sources of information come to be 



i Newton on J. B. B., R. A. S., vol. viii. p. 27, et seg. 
" * Thomas in Burgess, 2nd Report, p. 44. 



184 CAVE-TEMPLES OP WESTERN INDIA. 

thoroughly investigated there can he little doubt that we shall ob- 
tain the dates of all the caves with all the precision that can be 
desired. But when actual dates are not available it is probable 
we must still to a great extent depend on the indications obtained 
from palroography and architecture. The first, as just mentioned, 
may be' used as a useful guide to relative dates where no other or 
better materials are available. The latter have been found in Europe, 
and still more in Asia, to be infallible, yielding results that admit 
of no dispute, and which are more generally relied upon by anti- 
quaries than those derived from any other source. 

Pending this being done, as an approximately chronological ar- 
rangement, the several groups of Buddhist Caves may be placed in 
the following order : — 

1. The oldest caves at Junagadh, the groups at Sana, Talaja, and 
other places in Kathiawar, may be considered as varying from 250 
B.C. to the Christian era. 

2. A number of groups in the Konkan and Dekhan, all to the 
south of Bombay, and all bearing a general character of small plain 
dwellings for Bhikshus, with flat-roofed shrines for the Dagoba 
and Viharas. The chief groups in the Konkan are at Kuda, and in 
the neighbourhood of Mhar and Kol ; those in the Dekhan on the 
other side of the Sahyadri Hills or Ghats are chiefly at Karadh, 
about 30 miles south of Satara, and at Wai and Sirwal, north of the 
same town. These range perhaps from 200 B.C. to a.d. 50. 

3. Almost due east of Bombay, in the Ghats, and close to the line 
of railway leading to Poona, there are important groups of caves at 
Kondane, Bhaja, Bedsa, and Karle, each with a Chaitya cave of 
some architectural importance ; and with these more notable groups 
may be taken those at Sailarwadi, Ambivle 1 , &c, all in the same 
neighbourhood. These may be placed within the three and a half 
centuries that elapsed between B.C. 250 and a.d. 100. 

4. A fourth group may be formed of the caves at Junnar, about 50 
miles north of Poona, the Nasik Buddhist Caves, about 50 miles north 
of Junnar, the Pitalkhora Buddhist Caves, 84 miles E.N.E.from Nasik, 
and the earliest of the Ajanta Caves, 55 miles east of Pitalkhora. 
These are of various ages, the oldest Cave at Nasik being about 100 
B.C., and the later ones there belonging to the second or third century 
a.d., while there are some that have been excavated or altered by 



PART II. — INTRODUCTION. 185 

the Mahayana sect at as late a date as the seventh century. The 
Junnar groups contain no excavation of note later than the second, 
or early in the third century, a.d., and many of the caves are perhaps 
one or two centuries earlier, while the earliest of those of Ajanta 
may range from b.c. 150 to the end of the first century of the 
Christian era. 

5. The fifth section will include those at Mardl or Kondivte, and 
the earlier portions of the great series at Kanheri, in the island of 
Salsette, at the head of Bombay harbour, which may be ascribed 
to the period between b.c. 100 and a.d. 150. 

These bring us down to nearly the end of the second century of 
the Christian era, and include all the known examples belonging to 
the first or Hinayana division of Buddhist Caves of Western India. 
These, when looked at as a whole, are easily to be distinguished 
from the more modern examples, first from their greater simplicity 
in ornament, and it may also be said by their grandeur of con- 
ception, as well as from the total absence of figures of Buddha or 
of Saints as objects of worship. 

The second or more recent series of Buddhist Caves belonging 
to the Mahayana sect, extending from the fourth to nearly the eighth 
century, comprises the following groups : — 

1. A cave or two-storeyed hall in the Uparkot or Fort of Juna- 
gadh, in Kathiawar probably of about a.d. 300 ; and, 

2. Ajanta, the later members of the group, a.d. 250-650 or even 
later ; and with these may be joined the small group known as 
Grhatotkach, near the village of Jinjala, about nine miles from 
Ajanta, and which date from about 500 to 600 a.d. 

3. The caves at Aurangabad in the north-west of the Nizam's 
territories, are so much like the later ones at Ajanta in general 
style, though the arrangements differ, that we may refer them to 
about the Bame age, though they belong to a different school of 
Buddhists. They principally belong to the seventh century. Some 
are even later than 650 a.d. 

4. Nearly as important as either of these, is the well known 
Buddhist group at Elura. Though somewhat overshadowed by the 
splendour of the Brahmanical and Jaina caves which succeeded them 
in the same locality, they are both extensive and interesting. They 
may be considered- as ranging from a.d. 450 to 700. 

5. In the south of Malwa, near the village of Bagh, is a group of 
Buddhist OaveB belonging to one of the purer sohools of the Hina- 



186 CAVE-TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

yana sect. There is no Chaitya Cave in the series as it now exists, 
but several caves have fallen in. This group may be placed about 
a.d. 350 to 450. 

6. Many of the Salsette Oaves at Kanheri and Magathana in 
Bombay harbour are of comparatively recent date, and their range 
is very extensive. They may be placed between a.d. 150 and 850. 

7. A small group of caves at Dhank, in the same provinoe, circa 
A.D. 700. 

8. The Buddhist Caves at Dhamnar and at Kholvi, must extend 
down to a.d. 700 at least, if not to even a later date. 

It is hardly probable that any subsequent researches will disturb 
this chronology, to any material extent. A thorough revision of the 
inscriptions, however, especially if it should result in enabling us to fix 
the dates of the Andhrabhritya kings with certainty, would give the 
list a precision in which, it must be confessed, it is in some instances 
deficient at present. 1 

1 Before leaving this branch of the subject, it may be interesting to allude to tho 
curious similarities that exist betweeen some of the Buddhist forms just referred to, 
and many of those which are found in Europe in the middle ages. 

The form of the Chaitya caves and the position of thu nltar and choir must strike 
anyone who compares these plans with those of early Christian churches, but the essen- 
tial analogy that exists between the dagoba and the altar is even more Btriking. Every 
dagoba had a relic in or on the table under the umbrella. There are evidences of this 
in every known instance, while no medieval altar was an altar, in a religious sense, 
until a relic had been put into it or under it. This is, in fact, what constitutes it an 
altar. 

The monasteries too, though existing before the Christian era, are in their forms 
and institutions so like those afterwards adopted in Europe, that their investigation 
opens up numerous important questions, that ought to interest, but can hardly be entered 
upon in a work like the present. 



187 



CHAPTER II. 

CAVE TEMPLES Ac, IN KATHIAWAR. 
Introductory. 

The peninsula of Kathiawar in Gujarat, the Saurashtra of earlier 
times and the Anarta of the Pauranik legends, with its Kolis, 
Rabaris, Ahirs, and other non-Aryan or mixed tribes, seems to 
have become, at a very early date, a great stronghold of Buddhism, 
just as in the present century it has so largely embraced the doctrines 
of Narayan Svami. Its famous Mount Revati or Ujjayanta, now 
Girnar, was, in all probability from the earliest times, looked upon 
as an abode of the gods — the Olympus of the pastoral inhabitants 
of the surrounding plains. As early as Asoka's time it had at- 
tracted the attention of the Buddhists, and at its foot he caused 
to be incised, on a mass of rock, his famous edicts in favour of 
Buddhism. The first opens thus : — 

" This is the edict of the beloved of the gods, the Raja Priyadarsi : 
— The putting to death of animals is to be entirely discontinued, 
and no convivial meeting is to be held, for the beloved of the gods, 
Raja Piyadarsi, remarks many faults in such assemblies, &c." 

In the second tablet he states that, in his whole kingdom and in 
neighbouring countries, the kingdom of Antiochus, the Grecian, &c, 
a system of care for the sick, both of men and beasts, has been 
established. In the third, that " in the twelfth year of his inaugura- 
" tion in the conquered country " it was ordained to hold quinquen- 
nial expiations for the enforcement of moral obligations. In the 
fourth he proclaims the cUtarma or religious duty, including the 
sparing of animal life, the gentle treatment of all creatures, respect 
for relatives, Brahmans, monks, obedience to parents, &c. In the fifth, 
dated in his thirteenth year, Dharma Mahamatra or great officers of 
morals are appointed. In the sixth he speaks of official inspectors 
of public places, &c. In the seventh, that ascetics are not to be 
molested. In the eighth, that himself leaves off hunting and takeB 
delight in charity. In the ninth he decries all superstitious obser- 
vances to bring luck, declaring that the performance of social duties, 



188 CAVE-TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

respectfulness, self-control, and charity, constitute true piety, and 
alone are meritorious. In the tenth he resigns all ambition, except 
the observance of moral duty ; and in the eleventh he praises dharma 
or religious virtue and charity ; but in the twelfth declares peace as 
more precious than beneficence, and proclaims that intrinsic worth 
is founded on discretion of speech, so that " no man may praise his 
own, or condemn another sect, or despise it on unsuitable occasions ; 
on all manner of occasions respect is to be shown. Whatever of 
good a man confers on any one of a different persuasion tends to the 
advantage of his own, but by acting in an opposite way he injures 
his own and offends the other 6ect also." The thirteenth tablet is a 
long one, and very unfortunately the repairers of the road that leads 
towards Girnar, some 60 years ago, seem to have broken off a large 
piece from the base of the stone, and so damaged what remains 
that it scarcely admits of translation ; and the unsatisfactoriness 
of the copies hitherto made of the Kapur-di-Giri version has ren- 
dered them insufficient to make up the loss. The remaining words, 
too, make us regret this ; for the thirteenth says " And the Yona 
King besides, by whom the cliattaro (four) kings, Turamayo (Ptole- 
maios), Antikona (Antigonos), Maga (Magas of Cyrene), and Alix- 
asunari (Alexander II.) both here and in foreign countries, everywhere 
(the people) follow the doctrine of the religion of Devanampriya 
wheresoever it reacheth." l 

The presence of this important inscription, we may naturally sup- 
pose, was not the only indication of Buddhism here, and that it was 
soon followed, if not preceded, by Viharas and other works. The 
remains of one sttlpa is known to exist in the valley at the foot of 
Girnar, and possibly careful exploration might bring others to light. 

The same stone that bears the Asoka inscription has also a long 
one of Rudra Daman, one of the Kshatrapa dynasty of kings who 
seem to have ruled over Malwa and Gujarat during the second, 
third, and fourth centuries. Previous to them, if not of their race, 

1 The date of these kings has already been discussed at length, ante, p. 23. The 
inscriptions themselves hare repeatedly been published. Recently in an exhaustive 
manner by General Cunningham, in his Corpus Iiucriptionum Tndicarum, Calcutta, 
1877, bat unfortunately without noticing Mr. Burgess' recent most accurate impres- 
sion from the rock itself, and his transcript, with the translations and emendations by 
Professor H. Kern, of Leyden, and others, as set forth in hie Second Report, 1876, 
pp. 96 to 127. 



BUDDHIST REMAINS IN KATHIAWAB. 189 

at Ujjain reigned a dynasty, calling themselves Kshaharata Ksha- 
trapas, (satraps) of which the principal king known to us was Naha- 
p&na, variously placed from B.C. 60 to a.d. 120. The dates in his 
inscriptions are 40 to 42, and if these are in the Saka era, which 
seems hardly doubtful, they fix his age about a.d. 118-120. 

TJshavadata, the son of Dinika, the son-in-law of Nahapana, is 
mentioned in several inscriptions, but we do not know that he ruled. 
Gautamiputra I., a powerful Andhra king of the Dekhan, in an in- 
scription at N&sik, says he entirely destroyed these Kshahar&tas. The 
succeeding kings, apparently descended from Bhadramukha Svami 
Chashtana, assume the title of Mahakshatrapas, though often errone- 
ously styled by antiquaries as Sahs. The early chronology of this 
dynasty as gathered from inscriptions and coins stands thus : — 

Dates in a.d. 1 

Chashtana, son of Ysamotika - cir. 122 

Svami Jayadaman, his son - - - „ 135 

Sv&mi Rudra Daman, his son, date 72 2 - „ 150 

1 This assumes that they dated from the Saka era, A.D. 78. — J. B. I entirely 
concur in this assumption. In the first place because I can find no trace of any king 
Vicramaditja in the first century B.C., from whom the only other known era could be 
derived. His name does not occur in any inscription nor on any coin. He is not 
mentioned in lists in the Pauranas or elsewhere. He was avowedly a king of the 
Brahmans, wherens the whole country from the Bay of Bengal to the Western 
Ocean was, as we know from the caves, Buddhist in the first century B.C., and, lastly, 
the mode in which his history is narrated is so improbable as to prove its absurdity. 

He is said to have established his era 56 B.C., and 135 years afterwards to have 
defeated the Buddhist Saka king in the battle at Karour, so giving rise to the esta- 
blishment of that era 78-79 a.d., and this last was the only era used by the defeated 
Buddhists afterwards during the whole of their supremacy. 

My conviction is that the great Vicramaditya of Ujain did defeat the Sakas in a 
great battle in or about a.d. 544, and that afterwords the Brahmans in the eighth or 
ninth century, wishing to establish an era antecedent to that of the Buddhists, chose 
a date 10 cycles of 60 years each or 600 years anterior to that event, and fixed on 56 
B.C., — 544 + 56, — as the one, which they afterwards employed. 

I embodied my reasons for this conviction in a paper I intended to publish, in 1 875, 
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, but was deterred from doing so by 
hearing that Dr. Buhler had found Vicramaditya's name in one of the Pauranas, and 
I consequently thought it better to print it for private circulation, which I then did. 

As nothing has como of Dr. Buhler's discovery, and I have since seen no reason 
for modifying my conclusions, I now intend to publish them. — J. F. 

* On the Girnar inscription. For Rudra Daman's inscription, see lna\Ant. vol. vii. 
p. 2VJJt i and for further information, Archaological Survey of Western India, Rep., 
vol. ii. p. 128 ff. 



190 CAVE-TEMPLES OF WESTERN INDIA. 

Dates in a.z>. 
Svami Rudra Sinha, his son, dates 102, 117 - cir. 180 

Svami Rudra S6na, his son, dates 127, 140 - „ 200 
Coins carry down the series of nearly twenty kings till about 170 
years later, or to 350 to 370 a.d., but until they are more carefully 
examined, the lists cannot command entire confidence. Rudra 
Daman was probably the most powerful prince of the dynasty, and 
pushed his conquests both westwards and southwards. 

The next great dynasty whose coins are found in Kathiawar is 
that of the Guptas ; it is not perfectly certain as yet from what era 
they date, and hence their position may be considered as doubtful ; 
but until we have better information, we may retain for the chro- 
nology of this race the epoch of a.d. 318-319, as given by Albirunf, 1 
and represent the dynasty thus : — 

Probable dates. 8 

1. Gupta .... cir. a.d. 318 

2. Ghatotkachha - - „ 335 

3. Chandragupta I. - „ 355 

4. Samudragupta „ 380 

5. Chandragupta II., dates 82, 93 - „ 395 

1 Eeinaud, Fragments arabes ct persons, pp. 142, 248 ; ArcJiceol. Surv. W. Ind., 
vol. ii., p. 28 ; Tod's Rajasthan, vol. i., p. 801 (Mad. ed., p. 705) ; Cunningham's 
Bhilsa Topes, p. 140 ; Prinsep's Essays, vol. i., p. 268 ff. 

2 It by no means follows tbat this era was established either to commemorate the rise 
or fall of the Guptas, or from any political event whatever. On the contrary, it seems 
almost certain that it only represents four cycles of 60 years each from the Saka era — 
78-9+240=318, 319, and was adopted by the Guptas and the Ballabhis as more con- 
venient thau a longer one, of which they do not seem to have appreciated the advantage. 

The Saka era I believe to have been established by the Saka king Kanishka, either 
at the date of his accession to the throne {Burgess' lleport, 1875, p. 24), or to com- 
memorate the third — or, as it is sometimes called — the fourth convocation held in his 
reign, and everything that has recently come under my notice has tended to confirm me 
more and more in this conviction. 

While stating this so strongly, I ought perhaps in fairness to say that I have lately 
seen a private letter from General Cunningham, in which he states that he has recently 
found several double-dated Gupta inscriptions. That is, with dates in the cycle of 60 yean, 
and with others in a cycle of months, and their differences or agreement will, he hopes, 
enable him to see the controversy about Gupta dates for ever at rest, and not in the 
manner assumed above. I need hardly add that the General calculates all the Mathuiu 
inscriptions and others of tliat class, as dating from the Vicramaditya Samvat, b.c. 56 
(Reports, voL iii. pp. 30, 41). When he publishes his Gupta discoveries we shall be 
in a better position to judge of their value and importance. At present the materials 
do not exist for doing so. — J. F. 



Probable dates. 


cir. A.D. 


415 


>» 


449 


5) 


470 


5> 


474 


5> 


510 



THE GKJFTA AND VALABHI DYNASTIES. 191 

6. Kumaragupta, 90, 121, 129 - 

7. Skandagupta, 130, 136, 138, 141, 146 

8. Mahendragupta - 

9. Buddhagupta, 155, 165, 182 
10. Banugupta, 191 

If this chronology be correct, it was during the reign of Chandra- 
gupta II. that the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hian travelled in India (399- 
413 A.D,). From the donations of this king to the stupa at Sanchi, 
he appears to have been favourably disposed to the Buddhists though 
probably himself a Hindu — as we might infer from other inscrip- 
tions on the Allahabad and Bhitari Lats. In 428 and 466, Ma-fcwan- 
lin records embassies from YueY-'a'i (i.e. Chandrapriya) King of Kia- 
pi-li (Kapila) in India, who, however, can scarcely be one of these 
kings, but some petty prince in the north. But in 502 Kio-to 
(Gupta) King of India, sent presents to the Emperor Wu-ti ; this was 
probably one of the later Gupta princes, who in his letter to the 
emperor calls himself a keeper of the law. 1 

They seem to have ruled over Central and Upper India. Kathia- 
war is said to have been conquered by Chandragupta II., and placed 
under Sendpatis or lieutenants. Bhatarka, one of these, afterwards 
seized the province ; his eldest son, Dharasena, however, still had 
only the title of Sendpati. A second son, Dronasiiiha, is said to 
have been crowned " by the Supreme Lord, the Lord Paramount of 
the wholo earth." 2 Kumaragupta's coins are found in such abun- 
dance in the province that we might suppose that he, or some of his 
successors, was this " Lord Paramount." 3 This was, however, pro- 
bably only a title of flattery bestowed on some much later and less 
powerful Gupta prince, such as Banugupta, and with this the dates 
of both dynasties harmonise. We have copper-plate grants of Dhru- 
vasena, a third son of Bhatarka, dated 207, 210, 216 : and, if these 
are in the Gupta era, they place him a century later than Kumara- 
gupta. A later Valabhi king, however, is mentioned by Hiuen 
Thsang (cir. a.d. 635-640) as Dhruvapatu, and we find a grant of 
S fladitya Dhruvabhata, dated 447. If these could be shown to be 
the same, this would place the initial date of the Valabhi. era about 

1 Pauthier, Exameii Mithodique des faits qui concernent h Thian- Tchu, pp. 30- 
88 ; St. Julien in Jour. As., ser. iv. torn. x. pp. 99, 100. 
1 Ind. Ant. vol. i. p. 61., vol. iv. p. 106 ; Second Archaol. Sur Rep., p. 80. 
3 It also happens that Skandagupta's coins are almost exclusively found in Eachh. 



192 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

a.d. 195, but the evidence is not sufficient to justify the acceptance 
of this, and we must suppose that Dharasena IV., or his father 
Dhruvasena II. was the king mentioned by the Chinese traveller. 
The dynasty then, for the present, stands thus : — 

Dates from 
Copper Plate dates. Valabhl era, 
A.v. 810. 

1. Bhatarka, Sendpati - — 500 

2. Dharasena L, Sendpati, son of — - 515 ? 

Bhatarka. 

3. Dronasinba Maharaja, 2nd son — - 520 ? 

of Bhat&rka. 

4. Dhruvasena I., 3rd son 

5. Dharapatta, 4th son - 

6. Guhasena, son of Dharapatta 

7. Dharasena II, son of Guhasena 

8. Siliditya I, Dharmaditya, 1st son 

9. Kharagraha I, 2nd son 

10. Sri Dharasena III, 1st son of 

Kharagraha. 

11. Dhruvasena II, Baladitya, 2nd son 

12. Dharasena IV, Cltakravartin, son of 

Dhruvasena. 

13. Dhruvasena III, grandson of 332 - 650 

Siliditya I. 

14. Kharagraha II, Dharmaditya, brother 335 - 563 

15. Slladitya II, nephew - 348 660 

16. Slladitya III, son - - 372-376 - 685 

17. Slladitya IV, son 403 710 

18. Siliditya V, son - - 441-740 

19. Siliditya VI, Dhruvabhatta, son, 447 - 765 
Some of these kings must have been powerful, and are said to 

have extended their sway over Kachh, Gujarat, and Malwa, and in 
Hiuen Thsang's time (a.d. 640) Dhruyapatu or Dhruvabhatta was 
son-in-law to the great Harshavardhana of Kanauj. 1 Several of 
the earlier kings in the above list patronised Buddhism and Buddhist 
monasteries. The dynasty probably perished through some internal 
revolution ; tradition hints that the last S iladitya was arbitrary and 
oppressive, and provoked his subjects to call in a foreign invader.* 

■M I ■■ ■ I ■■ I I I IPII ■ .. . — | — I I,. M .I II. I ■■ ■ ■>■- " P !■— » 

1 For farther information, see Archtol. lleporlt, vol. ii. pp. 80-86 ; voL iii. pp. 93-97. 
* Were these the Arabs?— J. F. 



207-216 


- 526 


* — 


- 535? 


236 


- 555 


252-272 


- 570 


286 


- 598 


— 


- 610? 


— 


- 618? 


310 


- 627 


322-330 


- 640 



KATHIAWAR CAVES. 193 

Although the Buddhist caves in this province are among the most 
ancient to be found in India, as well as the most numerous, they are 
far from possessing the same interest that attaches to many of the 
other groups found elsewhere. There is not among the 140 caves 
in this district one single Chaitya cave that can for one instant 
be compared with the great caves of this class that exist on the 
other side of the Ghilpb of Cambay. There are numerous cells, which 
may be called chapels, 1 5 to 20 feet in depth, containing Dagobas, 
but in most cases without internal pillars or ornament of any sort. 1 
The Viharas, too, are generally either single cells or small groups of 
cells, with a pillared verandah, but seldom, if ever, surrounding a 
hall, or forming any important architectural combination. Some- 
times, indeed, its excavations are expanded into halls of consider- 
able dimensions, 50 or 60 feet square, but then generally without 
cells or pillars. They seem, in fact, to have been plain meeting 
houses or dharma^alas, and such ornament as exists in them is of 
the plainest kind, and what sculpture is found upon them, of the 
rudest and most conventional kind. 

This marked difference between two groups of monuments situated 
so near one another, and devoted to the same purpose, must evidently 
have arisen from some ethnographic or other local peculiarity dis- 
tinguishing the people who excavated them. There seems no reason 
for believing that any form of Buddhism existed in the province 
before Asoka's missionaries were sent here to convert the people 
immediately after the convention held by him, b.c. 246. If they 
were the same people we might expect they would adopt the same 
richly sculptured forms we found in Orissa, or the same architectural 
grandeur which was displayed in the same age in the Sahyadri 
Ghats. No contrast, however, can be greater than that which exists 
between the caves at Udyagiri, described above (pp. 69 to 94), and 
these Kathiwar caves. Though their dimensions and mode of group- 
ing are ne&Tly the same, and their age is nearly as possible identical, 
the eastern group is profusely adorned with sculpture, and everywhere 
affects ornament of an elaborate character, and in a style quite up 
to the mark of its age. All this is as unlike as possible to what is 

1 The cave at Junagarh, marked F on Plato II., can hardly be said to be an excep- 
tion, though its dimensions are 20 feet by 26. It has no dagoba, and it is not clear if 
it ever had. 

Y 133. N 



194 EABLY BUDDHIST CAVB-TBMPLBS. 

found in the western caves, where no figure sculpture anywhere 
exists, and the ornamentation is rude and unartistio beyond any- 
thing we find elsewhere belonging to the period. When we know 
more of the ethnography of the province we may be able to explain 
why, in this country, they adopted so puritanioal a form of religious 
architecture. At present we can only note the fact, and leave the 
cause for investigation in the future. It may, however, be remarked 
that when Buddhism disappeared from the province, it was suc- 
ceeded not so much by the wild and extravagant forms of Hinduism 
as by the soberer and more cognate religion of the Jains. It is not, 
of course, intended to assert that the Saiva and Vaishnava religions 
did not prevail at Somnath and Dwarka in the interval between 
the decline of Buddhism and the Mahomedan conquest or subse- 
quently. The most marked feature, however, in the religious history 
of Kathiawar seems to have been a persistence in an ascetic atheism, 
antagonistic to the wild polythism of the Hindu religion. It may 
have been the prevalence of some such feeling among the early 
inhabitants of the province that led to the puritanical simplicity 
in the forms and the almost total absence of ornament that charac- 
terise the early groups of caves in Kathiawar. 

From indications still everywhere observable on the spot, it is 
evident that at early times large monasteries existed both at 
Junagarh and on Mount Girnar. Of those on the hill scarcely 
a trace now remains, and even their site has been built over 
by the Jains. But at Junagarh, though many rock-excavations 
had been quarried away since the Muhammadans took possession of 
the place 400 years ago, there were still many chambers on the 
outskirts of the fort, even in the first quarter of the present century, 
in which Colonel Tod remarked inscriptions in the same character 
as that used in the Asoka inscriptions. These have been almost 
entirely quarried away since, except a few fragments just under the 
scrap of the Upark6^ or fort, and at Naudurga close by. These 
were probably the oldest caves in Kathiawar, — or perhaps in India, 
with the exception of those at Barabar (ante, p. 37), which were ex- 
cavated during the reign of Asoka himself, but with which, some of 
theBe may be contemporary. Next to them, probably comes the 
upper range of caves on the east side of the town, but within the 
walls at Bawa Pyara's Ma^h or Monastery. But here, as elsewhere, 
the process of excavating fresh cells probably went on at intervals 
for a long period, and the lowest in the sloping rook are perhaps the 



CAVES IN KATHIAWAR. 195 

latest, though even they belong to an early date. A quarry has 
been opened behind them, and is wrought close up to and under the 
oldest of them : how many have been quite cut away no one can tell. 

These caves are arranged in three lines (see plan Plate II.), the first 
and third nearly parallel and facing south, and the second, at the 
eastern ends of the other two, faces east. The upper range, on the 
north, consists of a larger cave at the west end and three smaller ones 
in line. The hall of the larger cave (A, Plate II.) measures 28 feet 
by 16, and has two plain square pillars (perhaps originally three) in 
line supporting the roof ; at the west end it has a chamber (B), 17 feet 
by 6 screened off by two plain square pillars ; and at the back are 
three cells, each about 11 feet square. The front is partly destroyed, 
but has still three square pillars, chamfered at the necks. On the 
facade is the only fragment of carving, a semicircular arch in very 
low relief with a cross bar across its diameter, — forming, perhaps, 
the earliest example of the " chaitya-window ornament," that in 
later times became so fashionable as an architectural decoration. 

The three smaller caveB (D, Plate II.) each consist of a verandah, 
13 to 16 feet long, by 4^ to 5| wide, with two pillars in front, and 
a cell inside. These caves may belong to the second century B.C., 
or even to age of Asoka. 

To the south-east of these is an open court (E, Plate II.), about 50 
feet long, on the west side of which is a verandah, 39 feet long, and 
nearly 8 feet wide, in the back wall of which are three doors, the cen- 
tral one, 5 feet wide, leading into a room 20 feet wide (F, Plate II.), 
and fully 26 deep, to the extremity of an apse at the back. It is flat- 
roofed, but apparently had four square pillars supporting it ; if this 
cave was a Chaitya, as it seems most probably to have been, the dagoba 
must have been structural. The other two doors in the back wall of 
the verandah lead into cells. The verandah has six square pillars, each 
with a Btrut to the projecting drip, the struts being carved into the 
form of lions or sdrMlas — mythological animals with the bodies of 
lions, and having horns ; and at each end of the verandah one of these 
figures is carved in low relief on the wall. The facade of the 
verandah is also carved with rude chaitya-window ornaments, similar 
to the one on the first range. 

At the north end of the court, and at a higher level, approaohedby 
Steps, is a verandah (H.), 19 feet 7 inches by 6 feet 10 inches, which 
ffives access to two rooms at the back of it, each about 9f feet square. 
* N 2 



196 EAELY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

These caves also seem to belong to an early date. But on the east 
side of the court are two cells, each with a small verandah in front, 
and the commencement of a third — which seem to have been an 
after-thought, and the rock in which it was attempted to cut them 
was too low to allow of their execution without lowering their floors 
below the level of the court outside, which would have rendered 
them damp. In the court just in front of these is the base (a) of a 
square stone pillar, and beside it was found a loose slab, bearing 
part of a Kshatrapa inscription on its edge. Unfortunately it was 
of soft calcareous sandstone, and many of the letters indistinct. It 
belongs to the time of Swami Jayadaman's grandson — probably 
Rudrasinha, the son of Rudradiman, whose inscription is on the back 
of the rock, bearing the inscriptions of Asoka ; and from the occurrence 
of the word Kevalijndna, in what is left of it, Dr. Biihler conjecturos 
that it is Jaina ; and it may be, that these princes did favour Jainism 
and bestow on that sect this old Buddhist monastery. Outside this 
court to the south is a cave with a small sunk area in front 
(J, Plate II.). The cave consists of a verandah and two oells (K). 
On the doors are some roughly executed carvings, and over one of 
them is the swastika, and other Buddhist symbols (Figs. 1 and 2, 
Plate III.). These are certainly the rudest sculptures that have yet 
been found in any cave in India, and though it is hardly safe to com- 
pare things so far apart, we would probably be justified in assuming 
that they are consequently earlier than anything now existing in 
Orissa. If this is so, the first series of caves here (A to D) being cer- 
tainly older must be carried back at least to the time of Asoka, and 
this group (F to L) is the earliest complete Buddhist establishment 
we have, and most probably was excavated during the existence of 
the Mauryan dynasty. The emblems above the doorway (Fig.l, 
Plate III.) shows that it waB strictly Buddhist, though of a very 
primitive type. 

Next to this is another small cave with a bench round the small 
outer court. The door has a sort of arch traced over it. and the cell 
inside, though partially filled up with earth, is considerably lower in 
the floor than outside. 

The third line of caves begins at the back of this, and runs west- 
north-west, but are noways interesting, being perfectly plain, the 
only peculiarity being that in the second and largest of them (0, Plate 
II.) there is a single octagon pillar in the centre of the floor support- 



CAVES IN KATHIAWAB. 197 

ing the roof. The base of it is too much damaged to allow of its 
shape being determined ; but the capital consisted of an abacus of 
three thin members with the inverted water-jar form under it, as in 
the oldest caves at N&sik and Junnar. 

The remaining three caves are quite plain, consisting of verandahs 
with door and two windows, separated by square pillars, and two 
cells each inside, except the middle cave which has only one cell. 

The rock in which these caves are cut Blopes down considerably 
to the south, so that the roofs of the last line are considerably 
beneath the level of the floors of the first. 

In the waste overgrown space inside the north wall of Junagarh, 
at Mai Gadechi, under an old Hindu or Jaina temple, long since 
converted into a Muhammadan mosque, is another rock excavation, 
26 feet 8 inches wide and 13 deep, with a cell in one end. It has 
two octagonal pillars inside, with capitals that have been sculptured, 
but have been defaced by the Muhammadans. In the front it has 
two square pillars with sdrdula struts or brackets. It is not clear, 
however, that this has been a monastic abode, and from some points 
of likeness to another excavation in the TJparkot it seems probable 
that this may have been a garden retreat with a bath in front, now 
filled up, and built over by the sthdn or shrine of a Muhammadan 
saint. Its age is also uncertain, but it is undoubtedly very old. 



Two-Storeybd Rock-cut Hall at Junagadh. 1 

About 1869, some rock-cut apartments were discovered at the 
bottom of a descent on the north of the Jama' Masjid on the TJparkot 
or fort of Junagarh. They are of considerable interest, for though 
somewhat defaced, they manifest a high Btyle of art. Few bases 
for example, could be found anywhere to excel in beauty of 
design and richness of carving those of the six pillars in the lower 
hall.* 



1 Tbifl cave is described here because locally it forms one of the group, but from its 
age, probably belonging to the fourth century, it belongs to the second division of 
Buddhist caves according to the classification adopted above (p. 185). 

* See Plates XXIU and XXIV. in Second Archaeological Report. Quite close to 
these excavations on their Bouth side the ground sounds hollow, and there is a line of 
wall cropping up, exactly similar to those round the tops of the two openings which 
led to the discovery of those excavated. 



198 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The excavations (Plate IV.) opened up consist of a deep tank or 
bath (E) about 11 feet square, with a covered verandah on three sides 
of it ; that on the west side is occupied with a built seat like the dscma 
for an idol, possibly for laying the garments upon while bathing. The 
pipes for the water come down the wall from the surfaoe, pass the 
front of this seat, and enter a small cistern near the entrance door 
at the Bouth-west comer. The water must have been raised from 
some well in the neighbourhood and conveyed to the supply pipe ; 
and the small cistern may have been formed to assist in filtering the 
water pure into the bath. 

The corridor on the south side is supported by two columns with 
spiral ridges on their Bhafts, octagonal plinths, and carved bases and 
oapitals. The shafts of two corresponding attached pilasters on the 
north wall are divided into three sections each, having the grooves 
or ridges running in opposite spirals. 

Over the bath the roof is open, and round the opening a wall still 
stands a foot or so above the ground-level. 

In the north side over the bath is a large aperture or window 
into the next chamber. This apartment is entered from the north- 
east corner of the bath-room. It is a large chamber, 35 feet 10 
inches long by 27 feet 10 inches wide, with six columns supporting 
the roof ; the area between the first four of these, like that in the 
bath-room, is open to the air above, with a Burrounding wall on the 
surface of the rock. It is also open to a hall below ; and the four 
columns have been connected by a thin low parapet wall, about 20 
inches high and 6 inches thick, now entirely destroyed. The rest 
of the area is occupied by the corridor on three sides, and by the 
space on the north where the remaining two pillars stand. In the 
walls on the north east, and west sides are stone bench recesses 
divided into long compartments, with a base moulded in architectural 
courses below, and a frieze above, ornamented with Chaitya-window 
and chequer carvings. The four pillars round the open area are 
square, the other two are 16-Bided, and have been carved with 
animal figureB on the abaci. 

In the north-east corner a door leads into a small apartment which 
has a hole in the roof blackened with smoke, and which may have 
been used as an occasional cook-room, to prepare warm drinks, &c. 
for those who had been enjoying the bath. . By the side of this 



CAVES IN KATHIAWAR. 199 

apartment a door leads to a stair descending to the entrance of the 
hall below. 

This lower room measures 39| feet by 31 feet, and had evidently 
been filled up long before the one above it, and is consequently in a 
better state of preservation. It has been elaborately and very taste- 
fully carved. 1 On entering it we come on a platform on the left 
side, slightly raised and nearly square, with two short pillars on its 
west side, supporting a frame above, descending from the roof. 
What this was meant for is hard to say, unless the depression within 
was intended to be filled with cotton or other soft substance to form 
a dais or a seat. 

Except on the weBt side, the remainder of the walls is surrounded 
by bench recesses, divided at regular intervals, as in the apartment 
above. Over these recesses the frieze is ornamented with Ohaitya- 
windows having the Buddhist rail in the lower part of the opening, 
and two figures looking out of each ; in many cases two females with 
something lite " ears " on their head-dresses, but too indistinct to 
distinguish what they represent (Fig. 4, Plate III.). 

The four columns in the south end of this hall are larger than the 
two in front of the supposed dais, but the bases of all are alike, and 
the bodies of the capitals are similar. The rich bases have been 
already alluded to, and the drawing (Fig. 3, Plate III.), where the 
original pattern has been truthfully restored from the different frag- 
ments still left entire, will give a better idea of them than could be 
done by any description. 

The abaci are carved with lions couchant at the corners, and in 
the middle of each is a lion, facing outwards, with a human figure 
on each Bide of it. The body of the capital consists of eight divi- 
sions round, indicated by the breaks in the ledge at the bottom, on 
which the human figures of the different groups stand. Most, if not 
all, of the figures are females, nearly nude, and some standing under 
foliage. They have been cut with considerable spirit, and in high, 
almost entire, relief : unfortunately, many of them have been much 
damaged, — some even since the room was excavated. In the two 
smaller columns, the principal member below the body of the capital 
is carved with the heads of animals, mostly elephants and goats or 
rams. On the larger columns the corresponding member is not so 
deep, and is a serrated torus. At the back or west side of this hall 

* For drawings, Ac., Bee Second Arch. Report, p. 142, and plates xxi. to xxiv. 



200 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TBMPLBS. 

are two small rooms; that on the south with a single door, the 
other with three entranoes between jambs slightly advanced, and 
with a projecting frieze. 

On the north side of this is an irregular excavation, in a corner of 
which there seems to be a shaft of a ohoked-up well ; but the whole 
excavation here is more like the work of Mahmud Bigarah's quarry- 
men in the fifteenth century 1 than any portion of the original, — 
though it is quite probable that other chambers have been quarried 
away. 

These rooms could have been no part of a monastic establishment ; 
and the example of the old Mehal, just to the north of this, suggests 
that they may have been either a sort of garden-house belonging to 
the palace, or possibly the bath and pleasure-house of another palace 
now interred under the debris that covers the whole of the Uparko^. 
The style of carving is not unlike much that has been found about 
Mathura, and which I feel disposed to attribute to about the fourth 
century a.d. 

Other Caves in Kathiawar. 

About 30 miles north-west from Junagarh is Dhank, in early 
times an important city, and a few miles west from Dhank, towards 
the village of Siddhsar, in a ravine celled Jhinjuri-jhar, are five 
plain caves cut in calcareous sandstone. Probably there have been 
others further up the ravine ; but, if so, the decay of the rock has 
destroyed all trace of them. The furthest to the south has been a 
verandah facing east, with two cells. 

The third has two octagonal pillars in front, with square bases 
and capitals. The pillars are connected below with the pilasters by 
a low screen, carved in front with the Buddhist rail of a large 
pattern. This is the only trace of ornament about these caves. 

The last to the north is much larger, and has had six square 
pillars in front of a narrow verandah. It had an open area inside 
measuring 13 feet by 20, from which the roof had been cut out, 
similarly to what remains of a very extensive excavation known as 
Khengar's Palace at Junagarh. Around this central court it appears 
to have had a number of cells with a corridor in front of them. In 

i Mahmud Bigarah of Ahmad&b&d subdued Mandalika the last of the Churaeama 
kings of Junagarh, and took the fort in 1469-70 where he erected the great Jama' 
Masjid. Arch. Sur. W. India, voL ii. pp. 144, 16fi. 



CAVES IN KATHIAWAR. 201 

another ravine to the west of this, and running into it a little to the 
north-west, are other caves, but they are so plain that we need not 
occupy space describing them. 

At the village of Dhank itself there is also a group of small caves, 
but of much later age. They are the only caves in Kathiawar that 
have any mythological sculptures in them ; but they are of a very rude 
description and probably of late date. 1 And, again, to the north- 
west of it, on the way to Jodhpur and not far from the village of 
Hariesan, on the west side of the G-adhka hill, are some nine more 
caves. Like those at Siddhsar, they are perfectly plain, most of 
them with a verandah in front, and one or two cells at the back 
of it. 

Talaja. 

In the south-east of the Kathiawar peninsula, at Talaja, near the 
mouth of the SatruAji river, is an almost conical hill, called in 
Sanskrit Talugiri, and in modern vernacular parlance the Tekri of 
Talaja, crowned by two modern Jaina temples — one on the vertex, 
and the other on a sort of shoulder on the west face. The town lies 
on the north and west, slopes near the base, and has the Talaja, a 
small feeder of the Satrunji river, to the north of it. 

On the north-west face of this Talaja hill are a series of Buddhist 
caves, about thirty-six in number, with from fifteen to twenty tanks 
or cisterns for water. Both have once been more numerous ; but many 
of them have been destroyed, probably to make way for a passage up 
to the Jaina temples, or their predecessors on the top. These caves 
appear to have been first brought to notice by Mr. Henry Young, 
C.S., in 1835, and are briefly described in a paper by Captain Fulljames 
on fossil bones of mammalia in Kathiawar, written in 1841 (Jour. 
B. B. B. As. Soc. Vol. I., p. 32). Dr. J. Wilson included them in 
his First Memoir in 1850 ; and they were visited and described by 
the writer in May 1869. 

One of the largest of these caves, and the only one that now presents 
any remains of ornamentation, is at a height of fully a hundred feet. 
It is locally known as the Ebhal Mandapa, and measures 75 feet by 
67£, and is \7\ feet high. This large hall, without any cells in its 
side walls, had four octagonal pillars in front, but none inside to 
Bupport the roof ; nor has it the wall that, at Ajanta and elsewhere, 

1 See Second Arcfueological Report, p. 150. 



202 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

usually divides such excavations into an outer verandah and an inner 
hall. It seems to have been constructed as a place of assembly or 
religious instruction, a Dharmasala in fact, where the early Buddhist 
missionaries preached to the simple people of the district, and taught 
them the new doctrines. Outside the entrance are wells or tanks on 
both sides, and several cells. On its facade are fragments of a modi- 
fied, perhaps, a very primitive form of the horse-shoe or ohaitya- 
window ornament, and of the Buddhist rail pattern, but this is the 
only sculpture now traceable among these caves. 

The others are small plain caves not meriting description. In one 
of them is a dagoba or stone cylinder with hemispherical top of a 
very simple type, the base only entire, and the remains of the torana 
or capital still attached to the flat roof of the cave. The dagoba 
and general arrangements of these caves are sufficient indications of 
their being Buddhist works ; and though we have no very definite 
meanB of determining their antiquity, yet from the simplicity of 
their arrangements, and except that already mentioned on the facade 
of the Ebhal Mandap from the entire absence of sculpture, such as 
is common in all the later Buddhist caves, we may relegate them to 
a very early age, possibly even to that of Asoka or soon after. 

The rock is of very different qualities in different parts of the 
hill ; but where the existing caves are executed it is full of quartz 
veins ramified among nodules of varying degrees of hardness, and 
the disintegration of these under the effects of atmospheric in- 
fluences has so destroyed the original Burf ace, that if any inscriptions 
ever existed, they must have disappeared long ago. 

Sana. 

Considerably to the south-west of Talaja and a march from 
Eajula, is the village and hill of L6r or Lauhar, in Babriawad, in 
which are some natural caves appropriated to local divinities, and a 
small and perfectly plain excavation, probably a Buddhist ascetic's 
cell. Farther west, and not far from the village of Vankia, is the 
Sanit hill, a wild, desolate place, without a human habitation in 
sight. Close to the foot of the hill is a perennial stream which aids 
to redeem the view, and doubtless helped to tempt the first ascetics 
to hew out their dwellings in the adjoining rock. The hill consists 
of several spurs from a central ridge, on the top of which are some 
old foundations of very large bricks. 



CAVES IN KATHIAWAR. 203 

The hill is honey-combed by more than sixty caves, some of them 
much ruined, but all of the same .plain types as those at Talaja, 
Junagarh, and Dhank. Here, too, one of the largest, near the 
bottom of the hill, goes by the name of the Ebhal Mandapa. It is 
68^ feet by 61, and about 16£ feet high, originally with six pillars 
in front but none inside. About 120 feet higher up, on the face of 
the same spur, is a cave called the Bhima Chauri facing the north- 
east ; it has a verandah in front, and measures about 38 by 40jj feet, 
the roof being supported by four octagonal pillars, with capitals and 
bases of the Lota, or water-pot pattern so frequent in the Nasik and 
Junnar caves. Round the sides also runs a raised stone bench, a 
common feature in such caves. Close by is a Chaitya or chapel cave, 
18 feet wide by 31 feet deep, and 13^ feet high. The roof is flat, 
but the inner end or back of the cave is of the semi-circular form 
already "noticed at Junagarh and common in Chaitya caves. It wants 
the side aisles usual in such excavations ; and the dagoba, 7 feet 
10 inches in diameter, 1 is very plain and without ornament, while 
its capital is wanting, having been broken off by later Hindus in 
order to convert it into a huge linga or emblem of Siva, and it is 
now worshipped as such by the people of the villages in the neigh- 
bourhood. Some of the excavations consist merely of verandahs 
with cells opening from them, and having recesses in the walls for 
sleeping places ; others are halls like the Ebhal Mandapa with cells 
arranged near the entrance, while there are two other small Chaityas 
similar to that mentioned above. High up the face of the hill is a 
cistern of excellent water ; and large portions of the stairs hewn out 
in the rock and leading from one group of caves to another, are still 
pretty entire. 

These caves, like those at Talaja, from the simplicity of their 
arrangements and their flat-roofed chaityas, must also be referred to 
a very early age, possibly as a mean date about 150 B.C., though they 
probably range through at least a century between the earliest and 
the latest excavation. 



1 See Arc/utol. Stir of W. India Reports, vol. ii. p. 149, and Plate xxis. 



204 



CHAPTER III. 

THE BUDDHIST CAVE TEMPLES IN THE SOUTH KONKAN. 

The Korikan, as is generally known, is the appellation of the low- 
lying country between the Ghats or Sahyadri Hills and the shores of 
Indian Ocean, extending from Gujarat on the north, to Goa on the 
south. South of Bombay it is divided into the. districts of Kulaba 
and Ratnagiri, and is much broken up by spurs and outlying hills 
from the Gh&t range. In these we find several groups of caves. 
The first are about 30 miles south of Bombay, in a ravine a few 
miles north-east of Chaul, and consist of two small plain cells with- 
out any sculptures. 1 Further south at Kuda, and still further to 
the south-east at Mhar, on the Savitri river, are large groups to be 
noticed presently ; and in the Ratnagiri district, at Dabhol at the 
mouth of the VaSishthi river, at Chipalun to the eaBt of it, and at 
Sangameswar 25 miles south of the last, 2 are cells or caves but of 
little importance, those at Chipalun consisting of a hall 22 feet by 
15, with a dagoba at the back, a few cells, and a water cistern. 
Altogether there may be about 150 separate excavations in this 
district. Some of them as old as any in the west of India, but 
none of any great beauty or interest. Though not quite so plain as 
those of Kathiwar they are very rarely adorned with sculpture, and 
what ornament is found in them, is of a very rude class. No trace 
of painting is to be found anywhere, nor any indications that such a 
mode of adornment was ever attempted. In themselves they cannot 
consequently be regarded as of much interest, but a description of 
them cannot be omitted from a work aiming at being a complete 
account of the known Cave Temples of India. 

Caves of Kuda. 

Kuden, Kuda or Kura, is a small village on the shore of the Raja- 
puri creek which enters the west coast about 45 miles to the south of 

1 Jour. Bom. B. R. At. Soc., vol. iv. p. 342. 

8 At Wade-Pidel, find at S&gws, both Dear Wagotana, in the south of the district, 
are also some ruined cells, bat they are probably BrahmanlcaL See Jour. B. B, R. 
At. Soc, vol. v. p. 611. 



CAVES AT KtJDA. 205 

Bombay. It lies in lat. 18° 17' N., and long. 73° 8' E., 6£ miles 
east from Rajapuri, 17£ miles north-west from Godegahw, the 
principal town of the taluka in which it is now included, and 5 miles 
west from Tale. In Maratha, and even in recent English times, the 
taluka went by the name of Rajapuri, 1 and extended from the 
Kundalika river, at the mouth of which is the port of Chehwal 
(vulgo ' Chaul '), to the Habshi of Jinjira's territory and the taluka 
of Rayagadh on the south. This Rajapuri, it is not improbable, 
may have been Puri, — the capital of the Silaharas of the Konkan 
who claim the title of " rulers of the city of Tagara," 2 and of whom 
we have the names of eleven princeB from Kapardi I. in the ninth 
century to Chhitaraja in a.d. 1024. If, in still earlier times, as is 
probable, it was a place of note, it would help us to account for the 
numerous Buddhist excavations in its neighbourhood. The next 
town along the coast mentioned by Ptolemy from Simylla or Tiamula, 
is Hippokura, 3 and in the Periphis of tfie Erythrean Sea, (sec. 53), we 
have Mandagora, which Ptolemy places further down the coast. 
It seems almost certain, however, that from very early times the 
beautiful creek which still has Murud, Jinjira, and Rajapuri at its 
mouth, and villages like Tamane and Mhasla at its head, must have 
attracted the population of a considerable town. 

On the eastern shore of the northern arm of this creek, a low 
hill, sloping down to the north, contains a group of caves, twenty- 
two in number, large and small, which appear to have been first 
brought to notice in 1848.* They are all of a very plain type, only 
one having any sculptures, the rest being so much alike, except in 
size, that it doeB not Beem worth while describing each in detail. 
It will only be necessary to notice the principal ones. The lowest 
down and furthest to the north, now used as a cattle shed, may 
be designated No. I. It is one of four caves here that contain 

1 This place must not be confounded with RAjapur, a little farther south, at the 
mouth of the Savitri, where the East India Company early had a factory, of which they 
were dispossessed before tho French established themselves there in the time of Sivaji. 
Dellon's Voyage to the East Indies (Lond. 169ft), p. 55 ff. 

s Jour, S. As, Soc., vol. ii. p. 383 ; Ind. Ant., vol. v pp. 270-272. 

8 Ptol. Geog., VII. i. 6, a diflerent place from that mentioned in VII. i. 83 ; VIII. 
xxvi. 15. Lassen places Mandagara at lUjap&ri. See Ind. Alterth., III. 179, 181, 
184. May not Hippokoura be Godabandarin the Thana creek ? Three sites near Hilda 
seem to be named Mfrndad or Mand&r — a name suggestive of Manda(na)gara, 

* Jour. Bom. B, R. As. Soc., vol. iii. pt> ii. p. 44. 



206 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

dagobas. In front it had a verandah 22 feet by 7, with two plain 
octagonal pillars in front, now broken away ; at the left end is a 
cell, 7 feet square, with a bench bed in a recess in the right wall. 
A door 7 feet wide leads from the verandah into the hall, which is 
22 feet square, and had two octagonal pillars at the back standing 
on a low bench, one of them now destroyed. These separate the 
hall from an antechamber, 23 feet wide by 7 feet 3 inches deep, 
having a bench at the ends and along the back wall up to the door 
of the shrine. The shrine is about 15 feet wide by 14^- feet deep, 
and is occupied by plain dagoba reaching to the roof. 

In the end of the verandah is an inscription in late Mauryan 
character, in two long lines, going across it, and continued along 
the back wall to near the door. Though copied, this inscription has 
not yet been translated ; from the form of the letters, however, it 
may be inferred that it belongs to the second century before Christ. 

The next three caves are small, plain chambers in no respect 
worthy of eBpecial notice. 

No. V. is a large plain cave, having a verandah in front, with two 
octagonal pillars, a bench or seat between the pillars and the end 
pilasters, and two windows into the hall, which is 34£ feet wide, 
and nearly the same from front to back. It has no cells, only a 
bench round the three inner sides. Three slight recesses have been 
made in the back wall, but they seem to have been cut out, long 
after the cave was finished, for what purpose is not apparent. 

This cave has an inscription in six lines in the end of the veran- 
dah, of which only a few letters are injured. The alphabet is that 
of the Andhrabhritya age found at Nasik and elsewhere. It reads 
" Hail ! This cave and tank are the benefaction of the female 
" ascetic Paduminika, daughter of the female ascetic Naganika, the 
" sister's daughter of the Theras Bhadata Patamita and Bhadata 
" Agimita, together with her disciple Bodhi and her disciple ABal- 
" pamita." l This cave was evidently a Dharmaiala. 

Cave VI. is the principal one of the group ; like the two already 
described it may be called a Chaitya cave, that is, though flat-roofed, 
it has a dagoba in the shrine (Plate V., fig. 1). The roof in front 
of the verandah projects nearly 8 feet, and iB supported at each end 



1 Translated by Prof. Jacob!. Ind. Ant., vol. vii. p. 254. It would appear from 
this that female ascetics were sometimes mothers of families. 



BUDDHIST CAVES AT KUDA. 207 

by the fore part of an elephant. The verandah is about 24J feet 
long by 7 feet 8 inches wide, and has two octagonal pillars in front 
standing on a bench with a low back to the outside. The door into 
the cave is fully 6 feet wide, and on each side of it is a window. 
These light the cave quite sufficiently. The hall is 28 feet 9 inches 
wide by 29 feet 4 inches deep, with a seat surrounding the three 
inner sides. In the back is an antechamber measuring about 23 
feet by 7, and separated from the hall by two plain octagonal pillars, 
between which is the entrance. These also stand on the ends of 
short benches, whose backs are towards the hall, and are covered 
with animals " and gana along the middle, and with floral patterns 
above and below. See Plate VII., fig. 1. 

At the end of the antechamber is a cell with a stone bench or bed 
on the right side of it, and at the back of the bench a recess 2 feet 
8 inches by 5^ feet, apparently intended for storing away valuables. 
The shrine is 15 feet 4 inches wide by 20£ feet deep, and about 10| 
feet high, containing a perfectly plain dagoba 7 feet 3 inches in 
diameter, and reaching to the roof. 

This is the only cave here in which there are any sculptures ; but 
except the half elephants that support the projecting rock in front, 
and the carving on the rail at the back of the hall already mentioned, 
it appears to have all been executed after the cave had been finished. 
The two principal panels are at the corners on the back of the hall, 
and measure each about 5 feet by 6 feet 9 inches. That in the left 
corner contains life-sized figures of a man and woman, with a dwarf 
attendant. The man wears a heavy turban and large ear-jewels, and 
holds up his left hand. He wears no covering above the waist, but 
has long, heavy, tubular bracelets ; his clothing is held together by a 
belt and round his loins its a roll of cloth. The woman has a similar 
abundance of head-gear, but of a somewhat different style, with a 
round plate on the forhead, and wears little else besides this and 
some bells round the lower part of the trunk, with heavy round 
anklets. She rests one hand on the head of the dwarf, who kneels 
at her left side holding up her foot as if adjusting the heavy anklets. 
The corresponding panel in the left corner is very similar : the male 
figure points upwards with his left hand; the head-dress of the 
female differs from that in the other sculpture ; she had no wristlets ; 
and she holds up in her right hand three flower buds. These figures 
bear a very striking resemblance to those in the front wall of the 



208 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

great Chaitya cave at Karle" (Plate XIV., fig. 1) ; indeed, the figures 
are so alike, even in minute details, that there seems little reason 
to doubt that they all belong to about the same age, and that not 
much later than the time when these Kuda caves were first excavated, 
within the first century before Christ. 

On the right wall of the cave, and on the left side of the front of 
the verandah, are several figures of Buddha seated on the lotus, 
Borne with the legs down, and others with them doubled under him 
in the ascetic attitude, in one instance with the wheel below the 
lotus, three deer on each side, and under them two Naga figures 
holding a pillar on which the wheel rests, with their wives and a 
number of female worshippers behind them. In another sculpture 
the wheel and deer are wanting, and the worshipping figures are 
rudely sculptured below the Nagas and over a lotus plant, the 
Buddhist emblem of creation. These sculptures are of far later 
date than the first described ; indeed they may be of the fifth or 
sixth century a.d., and resemble in every essential particular a 
Bimilar composition inserted between the older figures on the front 
of the Karle* cave, as shown in the plate last referred to. 

Under part of the sculpture on this right wall, and on one of the 
pillars in the verandah, are short inscriptions in a character ap- 
proaching the Haja Kanada, but having been but lightly incised are 
illegible except a few letters. 

On the left or north end wall of the verandah is an inscription of 
seven lines in well-cut letters, each fully 3 inches in height, and in 
an old square character. It has not yet been translated, but the 
names Sivadata, Sivapalita, Skandapalita, Sivabhuti occurring in 
it, all testify to the prevalence of the worship of Siva alongside 
Buddhism. 

On the south Bide of this is cave VII., entered by a few stepB at 
the north end, and having two octagonal pillars in front, on a low 
bench, the raised back of which being to the outside is carved in the 
" rail pattern." But except for inscriptions this and the remaining 
caves are very much like those already described. Nos. VIII. and 
XV., like I. and VI., have dagobas in their shrines. Nos. XVI. to 
XXII., in the upper terrace, stretch to the north, and are all plain 
Vihara eaves, or verandahs with cells at the back, and some water 
cisterns among them. 

The whole series of the Kuda caves are so plain and so similar, 



CAVES AT MHAE. 209 

that, except for their inscriptions, they afford few points for com- 
ment. The inscriptions are donative, and, so far as they have yet 
been translated, afford no names otherwise known to us. Sulasadata, 
mentioned in two of them, we have also in one of the Junnar inscrip- 
tions, and if the same person is meant in both cases, we have a 
chronological point of contact. 

The cells of the Vihara caves have the stone benches or beds never 
found in any of the later Buddhist caves. 

Mhae. 

On the Savitrl * or Bankot river, 28 miles in a straight line to 
the south-east from Kuda, is Mhar, the principal town in the 
modern taluka of the same name, formerly called Rayagad from the 
hill-fort in the north of the district. Three-quarters of a mile north- 
west from Mhar is Pala, behind which in the perpendicular scarp of 
the hill is a group of 28 excavations. The first 20 are in the upper 
scarp, and the rest about 30 feet lower down. They have long been 
known to Europeans, and are probably those referred to by Niebuhr 
as "not far from Fort Victoria " (Bankot).* 

Beginning from the south end of the series No. I. is perhaps one 
of the latest excavated. It has a verandah in front 53 feet long by 
8 feet wide, supported by six pillars and pilasters at the ends, but 
only one pilaster at the south end and its neighbouring pillar are 
finished, the others are merely blocked out as square masses. The 
one pillar is square at the base, and to a height of 3 feet ; over this 
is an octagonal band 6 inches high, then 3 feet 2 inches of the shaft 
has 16 sides, returning through another octagonal band to the square 
form. The pilaster has a narrow band of leaf ornament at the top, 
and another similar at about 3 feet from the bottom, with a line of 
beads or flowers over the latter. 

The wall is pierced by three doors and two windows, and the hall 
inside measures 57-J feet wide along the front wall, and 62 feet at 
the back by about 34£ feet deep, with an average height of 10 feet 
four inches. Round all four sides of this hall runs a low bench. In 



1 " Tbe mjfier," a name of the sun before his rising. 

» « Pas loin du fort Victoire il y a (dit-on) aussi une grande pagode, Utilise daus un 
rocher, ou, comme un autre s'exprime, 26 maisons avec des chambres tailleea dans 
le rocher."-- Voyage, torn. II. p. 32. 

T 1*8. 



210 EABLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the south end four cells have been begun, but none of them finished. 
In the back wall, at each end, are also the commencements of four 
more, while in the centre is the entrance to the shrine, with a window 
at each side of it. The shrine measures 20 feet by 17 feet, and has 
a square mass of rock in the centre rising to the roof. On the front 
of this is sculptured an image of Buddha seated with wheel and deer 
beneath, chauri bearers at his side, and vidyddharas above. On the 
south and north faces are other chauri bearers, and on the back is 
roughly blocked out the form of a sitting Buddha. Everything 
about this cave indicates that it was left unfinished. 

The other caves are mostly small viharas or bhikshugrihas with 
one or two cells each of no note. In No. IV. was an inscription now 
nearly all peeled off. 

Cave VIII. is one of the largest caves here and is a dagoba cave, 
combining the characteristics of the flat-roofed chaitya and the vihara 
as at Kuda. The hall is 27 feet wide, 23 feet 9 inches deep, and 9 
feet 2 inches high, and has had only two pillars with their corre- 
sponding pilasters in front. The pillars, however, are broken away, 
except fragments of the bases and capitals, which show that they 
were of the antique type found both at Junnar and Karl£, and in 
some of the Nasik caves. Round the ends and back of this runs a 
bench. In each end wall are three cells, while in the back are two 
more, — all with stone benches; and the shrine about 15 feet square, 
which once contained a dagoba, as indicated by the umbrella left on 
the roof and the rough surface of the floor, but it has been entirely 
hewn away. 

It has an inscription also in pretty perfect condition, but not yet 
translated; the character, however, seems to belong somewhere 
about the Christian era. 

In No. XV. is a dagoba in half relief 4 feet in diameter and 6 feet 
2 inches high. The drum is surrounded at the upper edge by a plain 
rail pattern, and the tee is crowned by five thin slabs, the uppermost 
one joining the roof of the recess in which it stands. 

Cave XXI. is the first on the lower scarp and is a small room or 
shrine, in the middle of which stands a plain dagoba 4 feet 8 inches 
in diameter, the top of the capital touching the roof. Its only 
ornament is a band in the " rail pattern " round the upper edge 
of the cylinder. On the north wall is carved a figure of Buddha 
seated with his legs down, attended by cht/wn bearers and vidyddharas, 



CAVES AT MHAR. 211 

the latter holding a mitre over his head. Over this is a torana of 
flowers springing from the mouth of a malowa on each side. A 
sculpture precisely similar is to be found among the later insertions 
on the Bouth half of the screen wall of the great chaitya at Karle, 
as shown in the central compartment of Plate XIV. In the south 
side of this cave is a cell about 7f feet square with a stone bed in 
the back of it. 

On the wall outBide No. XXVII. is an inscription and a small 
dagoba in half relief standing on a bench ornamented with the rail 
pattern. Over the capital is carved an umbrella, the total height, 
including this, being 4 feet 2 inches. 

At the foot of the hill under some trees are three fallen dagobas, 
which must have stood close to where they now lie. Indeed, part of 
the base of the largest can be traced close behind them. 

Kol, Sirwal, Wai, &c. 

Kol is a small village, across the Savitri river to the south-east of 
the Mhar, and in the hill behind it are two small groups of caves : 
the first, to the north-east of the village, consists of a few dilapidated 
cells of no pretensions either aB to size or style. The other group, 
to the south-east, contains one cell, rather larger than any of the 
others, but all are apparently unfinished excavations, and have been 
much damaged by time. In this second group, however, are three 
short inscriptions. 1 

In a hill to the north-east of Mhar, a few small cells and cisterns 
were found by the survey party, but they are insignificant, as is also 
a cell in the hill to the south near the road leading to Nagotana. 

Passing next to the eastern or upper side of the Ghats, we have 
to the south of Poona a group of caves at 'Sirwal on the Nira river ; 
another near Wai, a sacred Brahmanical town, whence the ascent 
commences to the Sanatarium on Mahabale'swar Hill: 25 miles 
further south at Pate's war, 6 miles west of Satara was a small group 
to which a Brahman Saukar, about the beginning of the century, 
made bo many structural additions in converting them into a fane 
of Mahadeva, that little is now left to show what they were 
originally — but probably they were Brahmanical. About 30 miles 



» One reads, " A cave, the religious gift of ^eth Sagharakhita, son of Gahapati." 

o 2 



212 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

south of Satara, at Karadh on the Krishna is an extensive series of 
upwards of sixty oaves ; and, lastly, three miles north of the village 
of Patan, to the west of Karadh in the Keda valley, is a flat-roofed 
Chaitya cave of the Kuda type, with a dagoba and a small hall with 
two cells. 

The 'Sirwal group of caves is in the territory of the Pant Sacheva 
of B6r, on the north-east border of the Satara Zilla. They are 
between 2 and 3 miles south-west from the Sirwal traveller's bangala, 
4 east of B6r, and 13 north of Wai, or in long. 73° 59' E., lat. 18° 8' 
ST., at the head of a short narrow valley on the eastern slope of a 
spur from the Mandhardeva range of hills, 1 which bound the Nfra 
valley on the south. 

They face the north-east, and are of the same severely plain type 
as all the earliest caves. The first is a small chaitya cave 20 feet 
3 inches by 14 feet, square at the back, with a plain dagoba 5 feet 
3 inches in diameter, having a plain capital of four 3 inch fillets. 
The door is 5 feet wide, but the whole floor is bo silted up that no 
part of the interior is more than 5£ feet high. 

The second excavation has been a vihara, of which the whole front 
has disappeared with one of the cells on the right hand side. It has 
been about 26 feet square, with three cells on each side and in the 
back: in all, except two, are the usual stone benches. Four of 
them have small window openings, a foot square, with a counter- 
sunk margin on the outer side. Round the hall runs a bench, up 
to the level of the top of which the floor is filled with dry mud. 

The third is, apparently, a natural cavern, 17 feet deep, irregular 
in shape, and only about 3£ feet high. 

The remaining four in the lower tier and two in the upper are 
more or less irregular apartments, much ruined by the decay of the 
rock; one of them has two benched cells at the back, but they 
possess no special interest. There are also six small excavations on 
the south side of the ravine, filled up with rubbish. 

The caves near Wai, also in the district of Satara, are all of about 
the same early age as those of Kuda, Mhar, and Karadh. They 
are in the village of Lohari and near Sultanpur, about four miles 
north from Wai, and form a group of eight excavations, cut in soft 



1 They have been carefully surveyed by Major H. Lee, R.B., Superintending 
Engineer, Southern Division, on whose report and drawings this account lit baaed. 
They were examined by the Messrs. West in 1654. 



CAVES NEAR SIRWAL. 213 

trap rock, running from south-east to north-west, and facing south- 
west. They were first described about 30 years ago by Mr. (now 
Sir) H. Bartle E. Frere, then Commissioner of Satara. 1 The first 
from the south-east is a plain Vihara, about 27 feet by 21 feet, with 
three cells, and near it a tank. The second and principal cave has a 
hall 31 feet by 29| and 8£ feet high, with a bench along the left 
side and parts of the front and back ; four cells on the right side 
with bench-beds and small windows ; while in the back are two more 
similar cells, with a dagoba shrine between them, 16 feet square, 
originally with a door and two large windows to admit light into it. 
The capital of the dagoba has been destroyed to convert it into a 
gigantic linga, or emblem of S'iva 6 feet 4 inches high and 8 feet in 
diameter — styled Palkesvar or Palkoba. To the left of the cave is 
another excavation, much ruined. Two hundred yards north-west 
from this is another vihara, of which the hall is about the same size 
as the last, with a bench round the sides and back and four cells in 
the back and one on the left side, — also an entrance made in the 
right wall running up to what may have been intended for a chamber 
over the roof of the cave, but never finished. The roof has been 
supported by six octagonal pillars in two rows from front to back — 
with a stone joist running through the heads of each row, — but only 
fragments of them are left. On the right hand wall near the back 
are the remains of some human figures, apparently two standing 
females and two males seated, all now headless and otherwise muti- 
lated. The other caves are of smaller size, and not of much interest. 
Other two small excavations exist in the same neighbourhood 
between Panchgani and Bawadhan, 4 miles south-east of "Wai, very 
difficult of access. 

Karadh. 

The Karadh caves are in the hills to the south-west of Karadh in 
the Satara district, the nearest being about two and a half miles 
from the town, in the northern face of one of the spurs of the 
Agasiva hill, looking towards the valley of the Koina ; the most 
distant group are in the southern face of another spur to the south- 
west of the village of Jakhanwadi, and from three to four miles from 
Karadh. The town of Karadh is probably of considerable antiquity 



l Jonr. Bom. li. R. As. Soc., vol. iii. pt. ii. p. 55. 



214 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and gives name to a sect of Brahmans ; but its long occupation by 
the Muhammadans may well account for the disappearance of all 
traces of early works in it. 

The caves were first described by Sir Bartle Frere in 1849, and for 
our purposes it may be as well to follow generally his arrangement 
into three series, 1 viz. : I. The southern group, near the village of 
Jakhanwadi, consisting of 23 caves ; II. Those in the south-east 
face of the northern spur, about 19 caves ; and III. Those f aoing 
the valley of the Koina, which are more scattered, 22 caves ; — in all 
63, besides many small excavations of no note and an abundance of 
water-cisterns, — often two of them to a single cave. 

The absence of pillars in the larger halls, the smallness of many 
of the excavations, the frequency of stone benches for beds in the 
cells, the primitive forms of the Chaityas or Dagobas, and the almost 
entire absence of sculpture in these caves, combine to indicate their 
early age. Unfortunately they are cut in a very coarse, soft, trap 
rock, on which inscriptions could not be expected to remain legible 
for long ages, if very many of them existed ; and only a portion of 
one has been found, with the faintest trace of another. The letters 
are rudely cut, but appear to belong to the same period as most of 
the Karle inscriptions. From all such indications these caves may 
be placed approximately as about of the same age as those of S'ailar- 
wadi, and Kuda, Pala, &c, and not far from the age of the Junnar 
and Nasik caves. They were all probably excavated before the 
Christian era, but they are generally so much alike that few, if any, 
can be considered as a centxiry earlier. 

They are mostly so small and uninteresting that they need not 
be described in detail, only a few of the more noteworthy and 
characteristic being noticed. In the first group the most westerly 
cave, No. I., has had a verandah, perhaps with two pillars and 
corresponding pilasters ; but the front has been built up by a modern 
Jogi. Beyond this is a hall, 22 feet by 11 and 7 feet high, with a 
bench along the back and ends of it ; and at the back of this again 
are two cells with stone benches. Cave II. has a hall about 34 feet 
square, and its verandah has been supported by two square pillars. 

Cave V. is a Chaitya facing south-west, and is of the same style as 
one of the Junnar caves, but still plainer (Plate V., fig. 2). It 



1 /. 11. B. A. S. vol. 111., p. 108 et segq. 



OAVES NEAR KABADH. 215 

has a semi-circular apse at the back, and arched roof, but no side 
aisles, and in place of the later arched window over the door, it 
haB only a square one. At each side of the entrance is a pilaster, 
of which the lower portions are now destroyed, but which has the 
Nasik style of capital crowned by three square flat members sup- 
porting the one a wheel or chakra, the emblem of the Buddhist doc- 
trine or law, and the other a Lion or 8mha, a cognizance of Buddha 
himself, who is frequently designated as Sdkhya &mha, and perhaps 
also a symbol of the Sangha or assembly (Plate VI., fig. 3). The 
dome of the dagoba inside is about two-thirds of a circle in section, 
and supports a massive plain capital. The umbrella is hollowed 
into the roof over it, and has been connected with the capital by a 
stone shaft now broken. 

Cave VI. has had a verandah supported by two plain octagonal 
pillars with capitals of the Nasik, Kuda, and Pala type. The hall is 
16 feet 10 inches wide by 13 feet 5 inches deep, with an oblong 
chamber at each end, that on the left having a bench at the inner 
end, and the other a small cell. At the back is a room 12 feet wide 
by 18 deep, containing a dagoba nearly 7 feet in diameter, in the 
front of which an image of Vithoba was carved by a Gosain some 
35 or 40 years ago. 

Cave XI. is another rectangular Chaitya about 14 feet wide by 28 
feet 9 inches long, with flat roof. The dagoba is much destroyed 
below ; its capital is merely a square block supporting the shaft of 
the chliatri carved on the roof. Cave XVI. is another similar shrine 
but smaller ; the verandah supported by two perfectly plain square 
pillars without capital or base ; the hall is lighted by the door and 
two windows, and has a recess 15 feet square at the back, containing 
a dagoba, similar to that in No. XL, but in better preservation. 

Nos. IV., IX., and XX., are the largest of the other Vihara caves 
and have all cells with stone beds in them. 

The second group commences from the head of the ravine, the 
first cave being No. XXIV., which is a Vihara facing E.N.E., 21 
feet wide by 23 deep, and 7 feet 10 inches high, with a verandah 
originally supported by two plain square pillars. Carved on the 
south end wall of the verandah, near the roof, are four small Chaitya 
arches, with a belt of " rail-pattern " above and below, and a fretted 
torus in the spaces between the arches, much in the style of Cave 
XIV. at Nasik and Cave XII. at Ajanta. Below this the wall has 



216 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

been divided into panels by small pilasters, whioh were perhaps 
carved with figures now obliterated. On the north wall were three 
Chaitya arches, the central one being the larger, and apparently 
contained a dagoba in low relief, as at Kondane. Below this is a 
long recess as for a bed, now partly fallen into the water-cistern 
beneath. From the hall four cells open to the right, three to the 
back, and one to the left, each (except the centre one in the 
back) with a stone latticed window close to the roof, and about 15 
inches square. In No. XXIX., originally two caves, of which the 
dividing wall has been broken through, are similar windows into 
four cells. 

Cave XXX. is a ruined Vihara, 36$ feet by 19, with eleven cells 
round the hall and a twelfth entered from one of these. The next ex- 
cavations are situated about three-quarters of a mile from this, Nos. 
XXXI. to XXXV. of which are no ways noteworthy. Cave XXXVI., 
about 100 yards west from XXXV., consists of an outer hall about 
17 feet by 13, with a cell in each side wall, and through it a second 
smaller hall is entered which has six cells and two bench bed 
recesses. 

The third series is divided into two groups, the first facing north- 
wards, and the second in a ravine further west, and facing westwards. 
It consists of Caves XLII. to LXffi., few of them deserving of 
detailed mention. No. XLVII. consists of a room with a bench in 
each end, an unfinished cell at the back, and two others at the left 
end, on the wall of one of which is the only inscription of which many 
letters are traceable, ending in the usual lew deya dhanam, " religious 
gift of a cave" by some one. A few indistinct letters are juBt 
traceable also on the right hand side of the entrance, and near them 
the faintest trace of " the rail-pattern." No. XLVTII. (Plate VI., 
fig. 1) is a range of five cells with a verandah in front, supported on 
three square pillars and pilasters, the central cell, 27 feet by 11 feet 
3 inches and lOf feet high, contains a dagoba still entire, the upper 
edge of the drum and the box of the capital — which has no project- 
ing slabs over it — being carved with the rail-pattern. The umbrella 
is carved on the roof and attached to the box by a shaft. In front of 
this against the right hand wall is the only figure sculpture in these 
caves, and though much defaced, appears to have consisted of three 
human figures in alto rilievo about 5 feet high, the left one, a male, 
with high turban and front knob, similar to some of the older figures 



KARADH. 217 

at Karl6 and on the capitals at Bedsa, holding some objects in each 
hand. He wears a cloth round his neck, and another round his loins, 
which falls down in folds between the legs. His right hand is bent 
upwards towards his chin, and over the arm hangs a portion of the 
dress. He also wears armlets and bracelets. To his left a slightly 
smaller figure appears to be approaching him with some offering. 
Above this latter is a third, perhaps a female. At the right hand 
of this excavation is another cell, approached from outside. 

The rest of this group ending with LV. are small and uninterest- 
ing, and the cells are not so frequently supplied with stone beds as 
in those previously described. From No. LV. it is about a mile and 
a h alf to LVL, which has a verandah 25 feet 4 inches by 11 feet 
9 inches, with two plain square pillars in front. The hall is about 
24 feet square with ten ceUs, three in each side, and four at the back, 
several of them unfinished. Cave LX. is almost choked with earth, 
but is 38 feet long by 13 feet 10 inches wide, with a semi-circular 
apse at the extreme end and arched roof similar to the Bedsa Vihara. 
Outside and above the front, however, are traces of a horizontal row 
of Chaitya window ornaments, bo that, though there is no apparent 
trace at present of a dagopa having occupied the apse, the cave may 
have been a primitive form of Chaitya with a structural dagoba. 
From the ease with which such structures could be removed, we 
ought not perhaps to be surprised that none such have been found. 
But as the evidence now stands, it seems probable that a dagoba of 
masonry or brickwork may frequently have been introduced in the 
early caves in the West. 



218 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE CAVES IN THE VICINITY OF KARLE AND THE 

BOR GHAT. 

The next great division into which the older Buddhist caves of 
Western India naturally group themselves is v one to which unfortu- 
nately no specific name can well be applied. They are not all 
situated together like houses in a street, as are the caves at Ajanta 
or Elura, nor scattered like villas in close proximity to one another 
as at Kanheri or Junnar. Though generally situated near the head 
of the Bor Ghat, through which the railroad passes from Bombay to 
Poona, they consist of small detached groups, containing a Chaitya 
cave with a few subordinate and detached cells, complete in itself, 
and having no appparent connexion with any other establishment. 
It might be possible to designate it as the Karl£ group, from the 
name of ite principal and most characteristic cave, but that would be 
misleading if applied to Kondane, and especially to Pitalkhora, which 
is at some distance, and there is no district or geographical name 
that would include the whole. Perhaps The Great Central Group 
of Western Caves would be the most descriptive term that could be 
employed, and would be perfectly applicable. They are situated in 
the very centre of the cave region, and are in many respects the most 
remarkable of the whole. 

Notwithstanding this want of geographical definitiveness, the 
leading characteristics of this group are easily denned when carefully 
studied, and their difference from other groups easily perceived. In 
all of them the Chaitya is the most marked and leading feature to 
which the Vihara is always subordinate. Among them we have the 
Chaitya at Bhaja (woodcut, No. 1), which is probably the oldest and 
consequently one of the most interesting of the class, and we have 
also the Great Cave at Karl6, which is the largest and finest Chaitya 
in India. But the Viharas that are grouped with these cannot be 
compared in any respect with those of Nasik or Ajanta, and other 
groups where, as a rule, the monastery is the main feature and the 
church leBS prominent. 

The difference becomes at once apparent if we compare this group 



KABLE AND BOB GHAT. 219 

with the two principal ones already described. If we describe the 
Kathiawar group as the unornamented, the Orissa as the sculptural, 
and this one as the architectural, we at once grasp practically the 
leading features of each. The first two have no Chaitya caves, which 
form the leading features of the third, and though the last cannot 
boast of the exuberant richness of decoration which prevailed in 
Katak, it avoids the puritanical plainness of the first. It hits a 
happy medium between the two, and its productions may conse- 
quently be compared as specimens of architecture with the very 
best that have been produced in India at any age. As a rule they 
all belong to an early and pure school of native art, before it became 
the fashion to overload its productions with a superfluity of minute 
ornamentation utterly destructive of the simple grandeur, which is 
characteristic of this great central group. 

The differences between these groups are the more remarkable, as 
all three belong to the same age. They all begin with the age of 
Asoka, B.C. 250. None can be said to be older, and they extend 
down to the Christian era. Some examples — but not important 
ones — may be more modern, but the principal caves are spread 
tolerably evenly over these two centuries and a half, and all emanate 
from the impulse given to the diffusion of the Buddhist religion 
given by the convocation held by that monarch on his conversion 
in the third century before the Christian era. 

Whatever may have been the cause, whether the proximity of a 
large city, or something merely historical or traditional, 1 the head 
of the Bor Ghat, between Bombay and Poona, seems to have been 
the centre of a large number of Buddhist establishments. Kondane, 
Jambrug, and Ambivle are in the lower scarps of the Sahyadri 
range and are within a few miles from Karjat station at the foot 
of the Ghat ; Bhaja, Bedsa, and Karle in the spurs that strike out 
from the same hills into the table-land on the east. They all lie 
within short distances of the railway which passes up the B6r Ghat 
from Bombay to Poona. Karle is near the village of the same 
name and not far from Lanoli station 1 ; Bhaja is on the opposite or 



1 Dr. J. Wilson suggested that the name of the village of Lan&vali, not far from the 
caves of K&iU and Bhftja, might be a corruption of Len&v&li, the Grove of the Lena 
or Caves, noted even in recont tunes for its botanical peculiarities, — and which may 
have been a Buddhist town. 



220 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Bouth side of the railway and about a mile from it ; Bedsa is on 
the south side of the hills in which Bhaja is, and the others are 
scattered about among the hills around. 

Kondane. 

About four miles from the Karjat station, on the Great Indian 
Peninsula Railway, and at the base of the old hill fort of Rajmachi, 
is the Kondane group of caves, first brought to notice about 30 
years ago by the late Vishnu Sastri, and soon after visited by 
Mr. Law, then colleotor of Thana. 1 They are in the face of a steep 
scarp, and quite hidden from view by the thick forest in front of 
them. Water trickles down over the face of the rook above them 
during a considerable part even of the dry season, and has greatly 
injured them. So much so indeed that it is now difficult to determine 
whether they or the caves at Bhaja are the earliest. They must be 
nearly, if not quite contemporary, and as they must have taken some 
time to excavate, their dates may overlap to some extent. The Vihara 
at Kondane (Plate VIII., figs. 1 and 2) certainly looks more modern, 
while the Chaitya (Plate VIII., fig. 3), which is very similar in 
plan and dimensions to that at Bhaja, is so much ruined that it is 
impossible now to decide which may have been first completed. 

They face north-west, and the first to the south-west is a Chaitya- 
cave of very considerable dimensions, being 66^ feet from the line 
of the front pillars to the extremity of the apse, 26 feet 8 incheB 
wide, and 28 feet 5 inches high to the crown of the arch. The nave 
in front of the dagoba is 49 feet in length by 14 feet 8 inches, and 
the dagoba 9| feet in diameter, with a capital of more than usual 
height, the neck— representing the relic casket — being, as at Bhaja, 
of double the ordinary height, and representing two coffers, one 
above the other, carved on the sides with the Buddhist rail pattern. 
The fillets that covered this are decayed, as is also the whole of the 
lower part of the dagoba. The bases with the lower parts of all 
the thirty columns that surrounded the nave, as well as that of one 
of the two irregular columns that once ornamented the front, have 
also decayed, and positions only of most of them can now be ascer- 
tained. Between these two latter pillars a wooden screen or front 
originally filled the opening to a height of about 10 or 12 feet, in 

' Dr. J. Wilson's Memoir in Jour. B. B. R. At. Soc., vol. iii. pt. ii. p. 46. They 
have also been fully described by W. F. Sinclair, Bo. C.S., Jnd. Ant^ vol ▼. p. 309. 



K0NDAMB. 221 

which were the doorways leading to the interior and it was fixed to 
them, as seems to have been the case with all the earlier caves. 
The Chaitya Cave at Bhaja and that at Kondane had similar fronts 
constructed in wood. The caves at Bedsa and Karle are apparently 
among the earnest, where these screens were carved in the rock 
instead of being erected in the more perishable material. 

There are still, however, remains of seven pillars on the left side of 
the cave, and six on the south, which rake inwards, as do also those 
at Bhaja and Bedsa, to be described hereafter — a proof of the early 
date of the work ; l those behind the dagoba and six near the front 
on the right side have disappeared entirely. On the upper portion of 
one column on the left is a symbol or device somewhat resembling a 
dagoba, with a rude canopy over it. (Plate VII., fig. 2.) The arched 
roof has had wooden rafters as at Karle and elsewhere, but they are 
gone, and the only remains of the woodwork is a portion of the 
latticed screen in the front arch. The facade bears a strong family 
likeness to that at Bhaja. On the left side is a fragment of sculp- 
ture in alto rilievo — part of the head of a single figure about twice 
life-size. The features are destroyed, but the details of the head- 
dress show the most careful attention to finish of detail. Over the 
left shoulder is an inscription in one line in Mauryan characters of 
perhaps the second century B.C., or it may be earlier, which reads — 

Kanlvasa antevdsind Bcdakena katam, 

which Dr. Kern translates — " Made by Balakena, the pupil of 
Kanha (Krishna)." 

Over this head, at the level of the spring of the great arch in the 
facade, is a broad projecting belt of sculpture : the lower portion 
of it is carved with the rail pattern ; the central portion is divided 
into seven compartments, filled alternately, three with a lattice 
pattern and five with human figures —one male in the first, a male 
and female in each of the third and fifth, and a male with a bow — 
and two females in the seventh. Over these is a band with the 
representations of the ends of tie-beams or bars projecting through 
it, and then four fillets, each projecting over the one below, and the 
upper half of the last serrated. The corresponding belt of carving 
on the right side of the facade is much damaged by the falling away 
of the rock at the end next the arch. 

1 Fergusaon, 2nd. and East. Arehit^ p. 1 10. 



222 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

A little to north-east is No. II., a Vihara, of which the front of 
the verandah is totally destroyed except the left end. This verandah 
was 5 feet 8 inches wide and 18 feet long, with the unique number 
of five octagon pillars and two antse. (See plan and section, 
Plate VIII., figs. 1 and 2.) In the end of this verandah is a raised 
recess, and under a Chaitya arch ia a small dagoba in half relief, — 
apparently the only object of worship when these caves were ex- 
cavated. Inside, the hall is 23 feet wide by 29 deep, and 8 feet 
3 inches high, with 15 pillars arranged about 3ieet apart and 3$ feet 
from the side and back walls, but none across the front. The 
upper portions of these pillars are square, but about 1£ feet from 
the top they are octagonal : the bases of all are gone, but they 
also were probably square. The roof is panelled in imitation of a 
structural hall with beams 19 inches deep by 8 thick, 3 J feet apart, 
running across through the heads of the pillars, and the spaces 
between divided by smaller false rafters, 5 inches broad by 2 deep. 
There are three wide doors into the hall, though most of the front 
wall is broken away, and on each side Bix cells — 18 in all, each with 
the monk's bed in it, and the first on each side with two. Over the 
doors of 14 of these cells are carved Chaitya or horse-shoe arches, 
connected by a string course projecting 6 or 7 inches and carved 
with the rail pattern. (Plate VIII., fig. 1.) 

No. III. is a plain Vihara with nine cells, much ruined, especially 
in front, but it had probably three doors. 

No. IV. is a row of nine cells at the back of what now looks like 
a natural hollow under the cliff. Beyond them is a tank, now filled 
with mud, then two cells under a deep ledge of over-hanging rock, 
and, lastly, a small cistern. 

In a scarp over the village of Hal Khurd, eight miles south of 
Karjat, Mr. Sinclair describes a very plain Vihara, consisting of a 
hall, 12 feet by 11 feet, surrounded by six cells, two of them 
double-bedded. One on the left of the entrance has been con- 
verted into a shrine for Bhairava, for whose further convenience, 
or that of his worshippers, the front wall of the Vihara has been 
demolished within living memory. It is said to have borne an 
inscription. 1 

North from these, at Kothalgadh or Pe^h, are other excavations 

1 Jnd. Ant n vol v. p. 310. 



BHAJA. 223 

which, owing to the difficulty of reaching them, have not been 
examined by any European. 



Bhaja. 

Bhaja or Bhaje is a small village, about two miles south of Karl6 
village and at the foot of a spur of the hill, which is crowned by the 
old Isapur hill-fort. The cave temples just above the village are 
first referred to by Lord Valentia, 1 but were not examined by him- 
self or any of the Europeans that accompanied him. They face the 
west, and, counting upper storeys, &c, they may be reckoned as 
eighteen excavations altogether. 

Commencing from the north, the first is apparently a natural 
cavern, 30 feet long, slightly enlarged. The next ten are plain 
viharas, with but little particular about them. No. VI. is an irregu- 
lar vihara, much dilapidated and half full of silt. The hall has been 
irregular, but about 14 feet square, with two cells on each side and 
three in the back, and with Chaitya- window ornaments all round over 
the cell doors, as in Cave XII. at Ajanta, and again here, on the 
back wall of No. IX., where is a frieze projecting 2 feet 2 inches 
with four Chaitya arches connected by the rail-pattern ornament. 
There has been a verandah in front of this excavation, of which a 
fragment of the base of one of the pillars is left, and a broken capital 
with animal figures upon it, showing that the style was somewhat 
similar to that of Cave VIII. at Nasik. 

The Chaitya Cave of the group No. XII. is one of the most inte- 
resting in India, and certainly one of the most important to be found 
anywhere for the history of Cave architecture. It is hardly worth 
while to waste much time in the inquiry whether it or the caves at 
Kondan£ are the earliest. They are so like one another in all essen- 
tial respects that there cannot be much difference in their age. 
They are certainly both as early or earlier than 200 B.C., and neither 
can claim to have been excavated before the time of A6oka, B.C. 250. 
Be this as it may, if we had only the Kondane Cave, it is so ruined 
that we ahould hardly be able to understand from it, the peculiarities 

1 Travel*, vol. ii. pp. 165, 166. They are noticed also in the Jour. Bom. B. B. As. 
Soc., vol. i. pp. 439-443 ; voL iii. pt. ii. pp. 61, 52 ; Fergusson's Ind. and East. Arckit^ 
p. 110. 



224 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of the cave architecture of the age, while the Bhaja caves excavated 
in a better material are still so perfect as to explain every detail. 

A view of the front of this cave has already been given (woodcut, 
No. 1, page 30), which sufficiently explains its general appearance. 
The wooden screen that originally closed its front is, of course, 
gone, but we can easily restore it, in the mind's eye, from the literal 
copies of it in the rock which we find at B£ds&, Karl£, and elsewhere, 
aided by the mortices cut in the floor and at the sideB, showing how 
the timbers were originally attached to the rock. When this is 
realised it seems impossible that anyone can look at these caves and 
not see that we have reached the incunabula of stone architecture in 
India. It is a building of a people accustomed to wooden buildings, 
and those only, but here petrified into the more durable material. 
There is not one feature nor one detail which is not essentially 
wooden throughout, or that could have been invented from any form 
of stone construction, or was likely to be used in lithic architecture, 
except in the rock. What is equally interesting, and equally con- 
clusive on this point, is, that for 1,000 years after its date, we can 
trace the Indians slowly but steadily struggling to emancipate them- 
selves from these wooden trammels, and eventually succeeding in 
doing so. Unfortunately, however, it was when too late for the 
Buddhists, who were the inventors of the style, to profit by its 
resultant conversion into a perfected lithic style of architecture. 

From the Plan and Section, Plate IX., it appears that the Chaitya 
is 26 feet 8 inches wide and 59 feet long, with a semi-circular apse at 
the back, and having an aisle 3 feet 5 inches wide, separated from 
the nave by twenty-seven plain octagonal shafts, 1 1 feet 4 inches 
in height. These rake inwards about 5 inches on each side, so that 
the nave is 15 feet 6 inches wide at the tops of the pillars, and 
16 feet 4 inches at their bases. The dagoba is 11 feet in diameter 
at the floor, and the cylinder is 4 feet high ; the garbka or dome 
is 6 feet high, and the box upon it, like that at Kondane, is two- 
storeyed, the upper one being hewn out 19| inches square inside, 
with a hole in the bottom 20£ inches deep and 7 inches diameter, 
sunk down into the dome for the purpose of securing the shaft of 
the umbrella that once surmounted the dagoba. The upper portion 
of this box or capital being of a separate Btone and hewn out, indi- 
cates very distinctly that it was the receptacle of some relic. The 



BHAJA. 225 

usual thin flat members that surmount the capital are entirely want- 
ing in this and in other instances to be noticed below. Whether 
they were once supplied here in stone or in wood, we have no means 
now of knowing. On four of the pillars are carved in low relief 
seven ornaments or Bauddha symbols. On the seventh and eighth 
columns respectively, on the left side are the figures 9 and 10, 1 — the 
second apparently a conventional posy of sacred flowers, the first 
formed of four triSUlas round a centre, which perhaps contained a 
face, with buds and leaves at the corners. On the eighth pillar on 
the right side are the flowers 11,12, and what appears to be a fan — 1 3, 
and on the right-hand face tbe wreath represented fig. 14. 

The roof is arched in the usual way, the arch rising from a narrow 
ledge over the triforium, 7 feet 5 inches above the tops of the pillars, 
and attaining a height of 26 feet 5 inches from the floor. This is 
ribbed inside, as at Karle and elsewhere, with teak girders, the first 
four of which, and portions of some of the others, have given way, or 
been pulled down. 8 The front must have been entirely of wood, and 
four holes are chiselled in the floor showing the positions of the prin- 
cipal uprights. There are also mortices cut in the arch, showing 
where one of the main cross beams must have been placed, probably 
to secure the lattice-work in the upper part of the window. Almost 
the only difference in detail between this and the Chaitya at Kon- 
dane is, that in the latter the irregular pillars immediately in front 
of the nave, and nearly in line with those dividing off the aisles, 
were of stone, here they were of wood ; both temples are equally 
simple and almost identical in the styles of their facades, and only 
the difference just remarked seems to indicate that this Bhaja 
example is rather the earlier of the two. This gains support also 
from the introduction of columns into the hall of the Vihara at 
Kondane — in none of the Viharas here are they so employed. 3 

The fronton of the great arch is full of pin holes in three rows, 
about 170 in all— which indicate, beyond doubt, that some wooden 

* See drawings, Plnte VII. 

* Application having been made to the Government of Bombay to prevent the 
villagers from pulling down more of the woodwoik, and to fix what seemed to be in 
danger of falling, the engineer entrusted with the work inserted new ribs wherever he 
thought one had been pulled down ; iu fact attempted a restoration. 

* I am strongly of opinion for these and other reasons, which can only be explained 
by an attentive study of the photographs, that Bhaja is the earliest of the two, but the 
difference in age cannot be very great.— J. F. 

Yi38. P 



226 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and probably ornamental facing covered the whole of it in the 
maimer shown in all the faces of similar arches at Udayagiri (PI. I.) 
and at Bharhut, several of which are seen in Woodcut No. 10, and 
numberless examples in General Cunningham's work on that Stupa. 
The only pieces of figure sculpture are — a female figure high up on 
the left side of the front, much weather-worn, but with a beaded belt 
about the loins ; two half figures looking out at a window in the pro- 
jecting side to the right of the great arch, and on the same side the 
heads of others in two small compartments in the facade, and on a 
level with the top of the arch. These figures bear a close resemblance 
to those on the facade at Kondane. The struts or brackets cut in 
entire relief and the whole Btyle of every detail in the front is bo 
like wood-work, that there can be no doubt it was copied from an 
example in that material, and is without exception the closest copy 
we have. Next to it stand the cave No. IX. at Ajanta, and the Kon- 
dane and Bedsa Chaityas ; plainer caves into which pillars were not 
introduced, nor any attempt made to ornament their fronts in imita- 
tion of wooden examples, belong generally to an earlier age. 

By the side of this Chaitya, but with the line of its front coming 
forward to the south at an angle of 25° (see Plate IX), is a Vihara 
No. XIII., the front (if ever it existed in stone, which is very 
doubtful) has been quite destroyed, but it is probable that it must 
originally have been of wood. It is 30 feet long by 14£ feet deep, 
with a cell in each of the back corners standing out into this area. 
Each of these has a latticed window ; that on the left side has a 
fastening on the door jamb as if for a lock or bolt ; that on the right 
has an arched door, and contains a stone bench. In the back of the 
hall are three more cells, the side ones with a single bench, and the 
central one with two, and with a small recess under each. Over the 
doors of all these cells is the Chaitya arch, connected by a frieze of 
" rail pattern." Over the front, also, are ornamental arches and a 
double course of " rail pattern." 

Next to this, and facing a little more to the north, is Cave XIV., 
6 feet 8 inches wide and 25£ feet deep, with one cell at the back 
and three on each side ; the front ones have double beds with a receBS 
under each ; the second, on the left side, has no bed, but a square 
window ; and the third, on the right, also wants the bed, but leads 
into an inner cell with the usual stone bench. 



BHAJA. • 227 

Cave XV. is above XIII., and with No. XVI. is reacted by a stair 
to the south of No. XIV. It is a small Vihara, 12^ feet wide by 
10 feet deep, with a bench on the right side, and two semi-circular 
niches, 2 feet 8 inches wide, with arched tops, Burmounted by the 
Chaitya arch. At the back are two benched cells. The front wall 
has been thin, and is destroyed ; the terrace in front was about 
5 feet wide, and probably, as indicated by holes in the roof, framed in 
wood- work and projecting forwards : the facade above this and the 
next cave is carved with three Chaitya-arches and the rail pattern. 

Descending from these caves we come to Cave XVII., which has 
been a small Vihara, 18£ feet long by 12 £ feet deep, with three cells 
at the back and two at the right side, one of them with a bench in 
it. There is also a bench in the left end of the hall, and an irregular 
recess or cell. On the right side, beside the door of the second cell, 
is an inscription in two lines in early characters, of which the first 
is damaged. Near this are two wells in a recess, and over them an 
inscription, also in two lines. 

At some distance along the scarp, is a large excavation, containing 
a group of fourteen chaityas or dagobas of various sizes cut in the 
rock. 1 All have the Buddhist-rail pattern round the upper portion 
of the drum. The five under the rock vary in diameter from 6 feet 
3 inches to 4 feet 8 inches, and the front two have the relic box only 
on the dome, as in the great cave, while the three behind them have 
also heavy capitals, the largest on 
the left joined to the roof by the 
stone shaft of the chhatri or um- 
brella, while over the other two 
the circle of the chattri is carved 
on the roof with a hole in the 
centre, over a corresponding one 
in the capital, evidently for the in- 
sertion of a wooden rod. Of those 
outside, the first to the north has a 
handsome capital, 3 feet 8 inches 
high, very elaborately carved; , 

(Woodcut No. 43), mOSt Of the Bhftja, from a photograph. 

others are broken, so that it is not easy to say how they have been 
finished, except that the eighth, and possibly others, were of the 

1 See upper pnrt oi' Plate IX. on the right baud. 

p 2 




228 



EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



simple box form without any cornice. In four of the capitals 
under the roof there are holes on the upper surface as if for placing 
relics on them, and in two cases there is a depression round the edge 
of the hole as if for a closely fitting cover. On some of them are 
the names of TJieras y but nearly obliterated. 

Still farther along the scarp is a small chamber with a cell at the 
right end, much filled up with earth, but with a frieze, ornamented 
by caryatides and dagobas alternately in high relief, supporting a 
moulding with dagobas in half relief and with an arched roof, only 
half of which remains, the rest having fallen away. On the walls 
are some curious sculptures in the Sanchi style ; but it has not been 
excavated. 

Under the first waterfall is a small empty circular cell ; under the 
second is a large square room with three cells at each sido, partially 
filled with debris and much ruined ; under the third is a small 
circular cell with a dagoba in it. 

Rock-Temples of Bedsa. 

The caves of Bedsa — also known as Karunj-Bedsa, from the two 
villages, near the foot of the Supati Hills, where they are — lie 5£ 
miles in a straight line, east of Bhaja, and 4^ south of the station of 
Karkala, on the Great Indian Peninsula Railway. They are in a 
spur from the south side of the same range of hills as the Bhaja 
group, but look down upon the valley of the Pavna river, and are at 




No. 44. Plan of the Bcda* Cant. Scale, &0 feet to 1 in. 1 



1 From Fergusaon's Ind. and East. Archit., p. 118. 



BED8A. 



229 



a height of about 300 feet above the plain, or 2,250 above the sea- 
level. They form one of the smallest groups, consisting only of a 
Chaitya-cave and Vihara with some dagobas, wells, and cells, and 
were first described by Professor "Westergaard. 1 

The first excavation is a small circular chamber, containing an 
unfinished Dagoba. Eight yards north of it is a well with the 
remains of a dagoba on its north or right Bide, behind which is an 
inscription in two lines. Close to this is a second and third well, 
over the second of which is another inscription in three lines. 

Four yards from this is the entrance to the Chaitya-cave, which is 
reached by a passage 12 or 13 yards in length, cut through the rock, 
left in front of it in order to get sufficiently back to obtain the 
necessary height for the facade. This mass of rock, on both sides 
the entrance, hides the greater portion of the front. A passage, 
5 feet wide, has been 
cleared between them and 
the front of the two mas- 
sive octagonal columns 
(3 ft. 4 in. thick), and 
two demi-columns that 
support the entablature 
at a height of about 25 
feet. Their bases are of 
the lota or water-vessel 
pattern, from which rise 
shafts, slightly tapering 
and surmounted by an 
ogee capital of the Per- 
sepolitan type, grooved 
vertically, supporting a 
fluted torus in a square 
frame, as at Junnar, over 
which lie four thin square 
tiles, each projecting over 
the one below. On each 
cornerof these last crouch 




ha. 45. Capital of Pillar in front of Care at Bedsa (from 
a photograph). 1 



» Jour. Bom. B. R. A. Soc. t vol. i. p. 438; see also vol. iii. pt. ii. pp. 52-54 ; and 
vol. viii. p. 222 j Orient. Ckr. Spectator Jau. 1862, pp. 17, 18 ; Fergusson, Ind. and 
East Archit., pp. 112-114. 



230 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

elephants, horses, bullocks, sphinxes, with male and female riders 
exeouted with very considerable freedom, as shown in the Woodcut, 
No. 45, on the preceding page. 

The verandah or porch within these pillars is nearly 12 feet wide 
and in front 30 feet 2 inches in length, with two benched cells, 
projecting somewhat into it from the back corners, and one in the 
right end in front, having an inscription in one line over the door ; 
the corresponding cell in the opposite end has only been commenced. 1 
Along the base of the walls, and from the level of the lintels of the 
cell-doors upwards, the porch walls are covered with the rail-pattern 
on flat and curved BurfaceB, intermixed with Chaitya-window orna- 
ments, but without any animal or human representations. This 
and the complete absence of any figure of Buddha is one of the 
most decisive proofs of the early and Hinayana character of these 
caves. As remarked by Mr. Fergusson, the ' rail ornamentation ' 
" becomes less and less used after the date of the Bhaja. and BedsA 
" Chaitya caves, and disappears wholly in the fourth or fifth cen- 
" turies, but during that period its greater or less prevalence in 
" any building is one of the surest indications we have of the rela- 
" tive age of any two examples."* The rood screen is introduced 
in stone in front, from which we infer that it is later than Kondanfi 
and Bhaja, but it must follow pretty closely after them. 

The door-jambs slant slightly inwards, as do also the pillars 

inside, — another indication of its early age. The interior iB 45 feet 

4 inches long by 21 feet wide. The gallery, in the sill of the 

great window, extends 3 ft. 7 in. into the cave, which, beside the 

two irregular pillars in front, has twenty-four octagonal shafts, 10 feet 

3 inches high, separating the nave from the side aisles, 3J feet 

wide. Over the pillars is a fillet, 4 inches deep, and then the tri- 

forium, about 4 feet high. All the wood-work has disappeared 

within the last twenty years, for Westergaard (in 1844) describes 

it as ribbed, and a writer in the Oriental Christian Spectator, about 

1861, found fragments of the timber lying on the floor. On the 

columns, as late at least as 1871, could be distinctly traced portions 

of ancient painting, chiefly of Buddha with attendants; but a 



1 A view of thia porch from a photograph will be found in Fevgamon, Ind. and East. 
Architecture, p. 114, -woodcut 51. 
* Ind. and East Arthit^ pp. 1 15, 1 16. 



BEDSA. 231 

local official, under the idea of " cleaning " this fine cave, had the 
whole beslobbered with whitewash, and obliterated all the paintings. 

On five of the pillars on the right side, near the dagoba, are roses 
and other Bauddha emblems— the dharmachakra, Bhield, trisula, lotus, 
&c. {See Plate VII., figs. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 1U 

The dagoba has a broad fillet of " rail ornament " at the base 
and top of the cylinder, from which rises a second and shorter 
cylinder, also Burrounded above with the rail ornament. The box 
of the capital is small, and is surmounted by a very heavy capital, 
in which stands the wooden shaft of the umbrella,— the top has dis- 
appeared. This cave faces the east. 

Leaving this and passing a well not far from the entrance, at a dis- 
tance of eighteen yards, we reach a large unfinished cell, in the back of 
which is a water-cistern. Close by this is the Vihara, Plate X., quite 
unique in its kind, having an arched roof and circular at the back 
like a Chaitya. How it has been closed in front is not very clear (see 
Woodcut 44), but probably by a structural wall with some sort of 
window in the arch, as in the Chaitya caves. Outside are two 
benched cells, one on each side the entrance, which is 17 feet 3 inches 
wide, with a thin pilaBter, 3 feet 5 inches broad on each side. Within 
this it is 18 feet 2 inches wide and 32 feet 5 inches deep to the back 
of the apse, and has 11 cells, all with benches or beds. Their doors 
are surmounted by Chaitya-arches connected by a string-course of 
" rail-pattern," and in line with the finials of the arches is another 
similar course. The cell-doors have plain architraves, and outside 
each architrave a pilaster, a portion of which has the arrises taken 
off, after the style of the earlier forms of pillars. In the walls 
between the doors mock grated windows are carved. The whole 
haa been plastered, and probably painted, but it is now much 
smoked, — Bome devotee having made his asylum in it and carved his 
patron divinity on the back wall, to which ptljd is done by the 
villagers when they visit or pass the place. 1 

Beyond this, and under steps that lead up to the left, is a small 
cell, and in the stream or nala beyond is a small open tank, 3| feet 
by 7, with sockets cut in the rock. A dozen yards farther is another 
plain room, about 14 feet 8 inches square, with a door 7 feet wide. 

1 Tt hM also been carefully whitewashed by an orer eealous official, so as to vul- 
garise it entirely and to obliterate all its more important features. 



232 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



Karle. 



The caves now to be described have received the name they go by 
among Europeans from the neighbouring village of Karlen or Karla, 
on the Poona road, where there used to be a staging bangld or rest- 
houBe ; but they are much nearer and belong to the village of Vehar- 
gaum to the north of Karle. They are in the west flank of the spur 
just above the village, and consist of a large Chaitya and several 
Viharas — some of the latter much ruined. 

This Chaitya is, without exception, the largest and finest, as well 
as the best preserved, of its class. It has been so fully described 
by Mr. Fergusson, 1 that I shall here quote most of his account. 
As he remarks, it " was excavated at a time when the style was 
in its greatest purity. In it, all the architectural defects of the 
previous examples are removed ; the pillars of the nave are quite 
perpendicular. The original screen is superseded by one in stone 
ornamented with sculpture — its first appearance apparently in Buch 
a position — and the architectural style had reached a position that 
was never afterwards surpassed." 

In and about the cave there are many inscriptions and fragments 
of inscriptions, but they have not yet been investigated by competent 
scholars so to enable us to arrive at any very definite conclusions 
regarding their age. One, however, reads : — ** Peace ! By Usha- 
bhadata, the son of Dinika, the 8on-in-law of Raja Kshaharata Ksha- 
trapa Nahapana."* And as Nahapana's and Ushabhadata's names also 
occur at Nasik and Junnar, with dates ranging from 40 to 42. If we 
may assume them to be in the same era as the Kshatrapa dynasty, and 
that they were dated according to the Saka reckoning, we have a.d. 
120 as a limit, at least on one side. But from the position and cha- 
racter of the letters used in this inscription we may fairly infer that 
the Chaitya was executed some time previously. Two inscriptions, 
one in very large letters, of an earlier form, immediately above the 
elephants in the left side of the porch as we enter, and another on 
the great pillar in front, mention the great king Bhutapala and 
his son, Agnimitra, as establishing " this rock mansion, the most excel- 
lent in Jambudwipa." In the Pauranik lists (ante p. 25), Agni- 

1 Jnd. and East Architect., p. Il7ff. See also Hock-cut TcmpleM of India, 
J. R. A. S., vol. viii. p. 30, et $eqo. 
* Second Archazol. Report, p. 42. 



KARLE. 



233 



mitra appears as the second of the Sunga dynasty about 170- 
160 B.C., and one Devabhuti, who has been supposed to be the Bhuti 
or Bhutapala of these inscriptions, and was the last of the same 
dynasty about B.C. 70 ; but as Bhutapala is probably only an epithet 
for a great sovereign, we cannot trust much to this identification. 
From the form of the letters used in these last inscriptions, as well 
as from the style of its architecture, we shall probably not be far 
wrong in placing the excavation of this cave Blightly anterior to the 
Christian era. It belongs more probably to the first half century 
before that time, rather than to any period after it, but it cannot be 
far distant from the beginning of our reckoning either way. 

" The building," continues Mr. Fergusson, as will be seen from the 
plan and sections (Plate XI.) " resembles to a great extent an early 
Christian church in its arrangements, consisting of a nave and side 
aisles, terminating in an apse or semi-dome, round which the aisle is 
carried. The general dimensions of the interior are 124 feet 3 inches I 




No. 40. View of the Interior of the Chailya C»ve at KArle (from a photograph). 3 



1 These measurements have been corrected in accordance With those determined by 
the recent survey. — J. B. 

• From Fergusson's Ind. and East Architecture, p. 120. 



234 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

from the entrance to the back wall, by 45 feet 6 inches in width. The 
side aisles, however, are very much narrower than in Christian 
churches, the central one being 25 feet 7 inches, so that the others 
are only 10 feet wide, including the thickness of the pillars. As a 
scale for comparison, it may be mentioned that its arrangements and 
dimensions are very similar to those of the choir of Norwich Cathe- 
dral, or of the Abbaye aux Hommes at Caen, omitting the outer 
aisles in the latter buildings. The thickness of the piers at Norwich 
and Caen nearly corresponds to the breadth of the aisles in the Indian 
temple. In height, however, Karle is very inferior, being only 46 
feet from the floor to the apex." 

" Fifteen pillars on each side separate the nave from the aisles ; 
each pillar has a tall base, an octagonal shaft, 1 and richly ornamented 
capital, on which kneel two elephants, each bearing two figures, 
generally a man and a woman, but sometimes two females, 2 all very 
much better executed than such ornaments usually are. (See Plate 
XII., figs. 2, 3, and 4, and Plate XIV., figs. 2 and 3). The seven 
pillars behind the altar are plain octagonal piers without either 
base or capital, and the four under the entrance gallery differ 
considerably from those at the sides. The sculptures on the capitals 
supply the place usually occupied by frieze and cornice in Grecian 
architecture ; and in other examples plain painted surfaces occupy 
the same space. Above this springs the roof, semicircular in general 
section, but somewhat stilted at the sides, so as to make its height 
greater than the semi-diameter. It is ornamented, even at this day, 
by a series of wooden ribs, almost certainly coeval with the excavation, 
which prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that the roof is not a copy 
of a masonry arch, but of some sort of timber construction which we 
cannot now very well understand." 

" Immediately under the semi-dome of the apse, and nearly where 
the altar stands in Christian churches, is placed the dagoba"— in 
this instance a plain dome on a two-storeyed circular drum, similar 
to that at Bedsa, the upper margins of each section surrounded by 

1 The eighth pillar on the right is 16-sided, having, in basso-rilievo, on the central 
north face a small dagoba; on the right, a wheel on a support, with two deer at the 
foot; And on the left, adjacent side, n small representation of the lion-pillar. See 
Plate XII, fig. 1. 

* On the sides, next the aisles, are horses wilh single riders on each ; but, as is 
usually the case with the horse, they arc badly proportioned and ill executed. 



KARLE. 235 

the rail ornaments, and just under the lower of these are a series of 
holes or mortices, about 6 inches deep, for the fastenings of a cover- 
ing or a wood-work frame, which probably supported ornamental 
hangings. It is surmounted by a capital or tee of the usual form — 
very like that at Bedsa, and on this stands a wooden umbrella, much 
blackened by age and smoke, but almost entire. The canopy is cir- 
cular, minutely carved on the under surface, and droops on two sides 
only, the front and rear ; the seven central boards are as nearly as 
possible in one plane, and those towards the front and back canted 
each a little more than its neighbour. The accompanying plate 
(Plate XIII.) shows the amount as well as the beautiful character of 
the carving on the portion of it which is left. 

In the top of the capital, or tee near the north-west corner, is a hole 
about 10 inches deep, covered by a slab, about 10 inches square and 
4 inches thick, — doubtleBS the receptacle for the relic, which, how- 
ever, has been removed. Round the upper edge of the capital are 
mortice holes — eight in number, or three to each face — by which 
some coronet, metal umbrellas, or other ornament was attached. 

" Opposite this," to resume Mr. Fergusson's account, '* is the 
entrance, consisting of three doorways under a gallery, exactly 
corresponding •with our rood-loft, one leading to the centre and 
one to each of the side aisles ; and over the gallery the whole end 
of the hall is open as in all these Chaitya halls, forming one great 
window, through which all the light is admitted." In this instance, 
as will be observed from the last woodcut, the screen is cut in the 
rock as at Bedsa, and not in wood as at Bhaja or in the Chaitya at 
Kondane. The great window above the screen is formed in the 
shape of a horse-shoe, and exactly resembles those, used as or- 
naments, on the fa9ade of this cave, as well as on those of 
Bhaja, Bedsa, and at Kondane, and which are met with everywhere 
at this age. Within the arch is a framework or centering of wood 
standing free, shown in the woodcut in the following page. 

This, bo far as we can judge, is like the ribs of the interior, 
coeval with the building ; * at all events, if it had been renewed, 

1 A few years ago 1 reported that this ecieeu was lending out, and in danger of 
falling. Mr. Fergusson wrote me to endeavour to have it restored, and after some 
delay this was effected under tho superintendence of Colonel Goodfellow, R.E., Exe- 
cutive Engineer of the District. Mr. Fergusson remarks, " It would be a thousand 
pities if this, which is the only original screen in India, were allowed to perish." — 
J.B. 



230 



EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 




No. 47. Facade of Caaitya Cave at Karlc, from a sketch by J. V. 

which is most improbable, it is an exact copy of the original form, 
for it is found repeated in stone in all the niches of the facade, 
over the doorways, and generally as an ornament everywhere, and 
with the Buddhist * rail,' copied from Sanchi, forma the most usual 
ornament of the style. 

The presence of the wood-work in the forms here found is 
an additional proof, if any were wanted, that there were no arches 
of construction in any of these Buddhist buildings. None indeed 
are found in any Indian buildings, anterior to the Mahomedan Con- 
quest, except as mentioned above (p. 133), some few almost furtively 
introduced into some brick buildings of the Pala dynasty in Bengal, 
when they were borrowed apparently from the Burmese. They are 
the only examples known to exist in purely Hindu architectural 
buildings before the reign of Akbar (1556 a.d.). 1 

1 Ah this is the finest Chaityn cave in India, a quotation from my original paper 
on the architectural ordinance of these caves may not be misplaced. 

" However much they vary in size or in detail, their general arrangements are the 



KARLE. 237 

" To return however to Karld, the outer porch is considerably 
wider than the body of the building, being 52 feet wide," by 15 feet 

samo in every part of Iudiu, and the mode of admitting light, which Ls always so impor- 
tant a piece of architectural effect, is in all precisely identical. 

" Bearing in mind that the disposition of parts is exactly the same as those of the 
choir of a gothic round, or polygonal apse cathedral, the following description will he 
easily understood. Across the front there is always a screen with a gallery over it, 
occupying the place of the rood-loft, on which we now place our organs : in this there 
are three doors ; one, the largest, opening to the nave, and one to each of the side 
aisles; over this screen the whole front of the cave is open to the air, one vast window 
the whole hreadth and of the same section, stilted so as to be more than a semicircle in 
height, or generally of a horse-shoe form. 

a The whole light, therefore, fell on the D&goba, which is placed exactly opposite, 
in the place of the altar, while the aisle around and behind is thus less perfectly lit, the 
pillars there being always placed very closely together, the light was never admitted in 
sufficient quantities to illuminate the wall behind, so that to a person standing near the 
door in this direction, there appeared nothing but ' illimitable gloom.' 

** It does not appear whether the votary was admitted beyond the colonnade under the 
front, the rest being devoted to the priests and the ceremonies, as is now the case in 
China, and in Catholic churches, and he therefore never could see whence the light 
came, and stood in comparative shade himeelf, so as to heighten its effect considerably. 
Still further to increase this scenic effect, the architecte of these temples have placed 
the screens and music galleries in front, in such a manner as to hide the great window 
from any person approaching the temple, though these appear to have been omitted in 
later examples, as in the Viswak&rma of Elura, and the two later Chaitya caves at 
Ajanta, and only a porch added to the inner screen, the top of which served as the 
music gallery ; but the great window is then exposed to view, which I cannot help 
thinking is a great defect. To a votary once having entered the porch the effect is the 
same, and if the space between the inner and outer screen was roofed, which I suppose 
it may have been in the earlier examples, no one not previously acquainted with the 
desigu could perceive how the light was admitted. Supposing a votary to have been 
admitted by the centre door, and to have passed under the screen to the right or left, 
the whole arrangements were such that an architectural effect was produced certainly 
superior to anything I am acquainted with, in ancient or modern temples. 

" Something of the same sort is attempted in the classic, and in modern Hindu temples, 
where the only light admitted is by the door directly facing the image, which is thus 
lit up with considerable splendour, and the rest of the temple is left in a rather sub- 
dued light, so as to give it considerable relief. The door, however, makes but a clumsy 
window compared with that of the Buddhist cave, for the light is too low, the spectator 
himself impedes a portion of it, and, standing in the glare of day, unless he uses his 
hands to shade hi* eyes, he can scarcely see what is within. In the Hypaethral temples, 
this was probably better managed, and the light introduced more in the Buddhist 
manner ; but we know bo little of their arrangements, that it it is difficult to give an 
opinion on a subject so little understood. 

" Almost all writers agree that the Pantheon at Rome is the best lit temple that 
antiquity has left us. In one respect it equals our caves, that it has but one window, 



238 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

deep, " and is closed in front by an outer screen, composed of two stout 
octagonal pillars, without either base or capital, supporting what 
is now a plain mass of rock, but which was once ornamented by a 
wooden gallery, forming the principal ornament of the facade. 
Above this, a dwarf colonnade or attic of four columns between 
pilasters admitted light to the great window, and this again was 
surmounted by a wooden cornice or ornament of some 6ort, though 
we cannot now restore it, since only the mortices remain that 
attached it to the rock, which are not sufficient for the purpose." 

Considerable modifications have been made at some subsequent 
period in the sculptures in the porch : originally the fronts of three 
large elephants standing on a base carved with the ** rail pattern " in 
each end wall supported a framed frieze, also ornamented with the 
" rail " ; but on both ends this second " rail " has been afterwards 
cut away to insert figures of Buddha and his attendants, of which no 
representations existed when the cave was first executed. Above 
this was a thick quadrantal moulding, and then another " rail," the 
return of which forms the sill of the great window. On this stand 
miniature temple fronts, crowned with the Chaitya window, and 
between them pairs of figures similar to those described at Kuda 
(ante, p. 207), some of them among the best sculptures of the kind 
in India. Above this, the Chaitya arch and " rail pattern " are 
repeated again and again to the top. 

On the front wall of the cave both the " rail " at the bottom and 
that on a level with the heads of the doors, has been cut away in 
later times to make room for images of Buddha and his attendants 
— Padmapani, &c, and in doing so the older inscriptions have also 
been mercilessly hewn away. The pairs of large figures on each side 
of the doors alone appear, like those at Kanheri, to have belonged 
to the original design. In the middle of the space between the central 
and right-hand doors is inserted a sculpture which must be of a very 

and that placed high up ; but it is iuferior, inasmuch an it is seen to every one in the 
temple, aud that the light ia not concentrated on any one object, but wundera with the 
sun all round the building. 

" I cannot help thinking that the earlier Christian architects would have reinvented this 
plan of lighting had they been able to glaze so large a space ; but their inability to do 
this forced them to use smaller windows, aud to disperse them all over the building so 
as to gain a sufficiency of light lor their purposes ; and a plan having once become 
sacred it never was departed from in all the change* of style and detuil which after- 
wards took place." — J. F. in J. R. A. •&, vol. viii. pp. 6J-2. 



KAKLJB. 



239 



late date : Buddha is there attended by Padmapani and perhaps 
Manjusri seated on the dnltdsana with his feet on the lotus over a 
conventionalised wheel, supported by two deer, and under the wheel 
is a supporting pier held by Naga figures, while over Buddha's head 
two vidyddluiras hold a tiara. (Plat© XIV. ) 

In front of the outer screen 
stands the Lion-pillar (sinhastam- 
bha), a plain, slightly tapering, 
16-sided shaft, surmounted by a 
capital of the same style as those 
in the portico at Bedsa. On this 
stands four lions, their hinder 
parts joined, but there is no hole 
or mortice to lead us to suppose 
that any emblem in metal or 
wood was raised over them. The 
pillar stood on a raised circular 
basement or drum, carved with 
the rail-pattern, but now defaced. 
There are indications that show 
that, as at Kanheri and Kailasa 
at Elura, there was a correspond- 
ing pillar at the opposite Bide. 
the base of which is covered by 
the modern Saiva temple. The 
cap of the existing pillar is con- 
nected with the screen- wall by an attachment of rock, in which 
is cut a large square mortice ; and over the modern temple, on the 
south side, there remains two-thirds of a corresponding attachment 
with a similar mortice, as if to hold a beam horizontally across 18 
inches in front of the screen. This other pillar doubtless supported 
the ctiakra or wheel, the emblem of the law. 

** The absence of the wooden ornaments of the external porch," 
says Mr. Fergusson, " aB well as our ignorance of the mode in which 
this temple was finished laterally, and the porch joined to the main 
temple, prevents us from judging what the effect of the front w r ould 
have been if belonging to a free-standing building. But the pro- 
portions of such parts as remain are so good, and the effect of the 
whole so pleasing, that there can be little hesitation in ascribing 




No. 48. Lion Pillar at Karic, from u drawing. 



240 EARLY BDDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

to such a design a tolerably high rank among architectural com- 
positions. 

" Of the interior we can judge perfectly, and it certainly is as 
solemn and grand as any interior can well be, and the mode of 
lighting the most perfect, one undivided volume of light coming 
through a single opening overhead at a favourable angle, and 
falling directly on the altar or principal object in the building, 
leaving the rest in comparative obscurity. The effect is considerably 
heightened by the closely set thick columns that divide the three 
aisles from one another, as they suffice to prevent the boundary walls 
from ever being seen, and, as there are no openings in the walls, the 
view between the pillars is practically unlimited. 

" These peculiarities are found more or less developed in all the 
other caves of the same class in India, varying only with the age 
and the gradual change that took place from the more purely 
wooden forms of these early caves to the lithic or stone architecture of 
the more modern ones. This is the principal test by which their 
relative ages can be determined, and it proves incontestibly that the 
Karle cave was excavated not very long after stone came to be used 
as a building material in India." 

On the north-west of the lion-pillar are some cells, and a water- 
cistern, into which a dagoba that had stood on the roof of it has 
fallen. North from this is a large excavation, more than 100 feet 
in length, but very irregular ; it has been apparently two or three 
Viharas, in which all the dividing walls have been destroyed. At 
the north end of it are several cells, still nearly entire, three water- 
cisterns, and a small dagoba. 

Above these is a Vihara, about 28 feet by 27, and 8 feet high, with 
four cells in each side and five in the back, six of them with benches 
or beds of stone, as in most of the older Viharas, and in one is a 
ladder up to a stair leading to another cave above. The front of this 
cave, however, has given way. Still higher in the rock, and reached 
by a stair from the preceding, is another Vih&ra, 34 feet 6 inches by 
48, but not quite rectangular, and 8 feet ] 1 inches high. It has three 
cells in the right end and five in the left, with six in the back. 
Across the left end is a raised platform, about 8£ feet broad and 
18 inches high, along the front of which there seems to have been a 
wooden railing or screen. On the east and south walls are two 



KAELB. 241 

sculptures of Buddha, evidently of much later workmanship than the 
cave. The front wall iB pierced with four openings ; and the veran- 
dah, 40 feet 10 inches long, 7 feet wide, and 12 feet 3 inches high, 
has a low screen-wall in front, on which stand four columns between 
pilasters. Outside this screen, at the north end, is a water-cistern, 
and along the front a balcony. 

Further north (the lower part of the stair broken away) is another 
Vihara above those first mentioned. It is about 38^ feet long and 
17 feet deep, with two cells in each end and four in the back, five 
of them with stone-beds. In the front wall are a door and two 
windows, but the corridor of the verandah has given way. On the 
east wall of this cave iB an inscription fairly legible. From the 
character of the alphabet employed it may belong to the 2nd century 
of the Christian era. 

To the south of the Chaity'a there are also a number of excava- 
tions, the first being an unfinished hall, about 30| feet wide by 15^ 
feet deep. The next is a small room, of which the front is broken 
away, with a figure of Buddha on the back wall. Close to this is a 
water-cistern, and beyond it a Vihara, about 33 feet square and 9 feet 
5 inches high, with four cells (without beds) in the back, three in 
the left end, and two unfinished ones in the right, all having their 
floors about a foot higher than that of the hall. On the middle of 
the back wall is a figure of Buddha, seated with his feet resting on 
a lotuB, under which is the wheel between two deer, and behind arr 
two small worshipping figures. On each side are cliauri bearers, the 
one on his right holding a lotus stalk in his left hand ; and over their 
heads are vidyddharas. This hall bears evident marks on the floor, 
ceiling, and Bide walls of having been originally only 21 feet b' 
inches deep, but afterwards enlarged. 

The front wall is pieroed by a door and two windows ; and the 
verandah has a cell at the north end and two octagonal pillars 
between pilasters in front, each pillar being connected with its adja- 
cent pilaster by a low parapet or screen, which forniB the back of a 
bench on the inside, and is divided outside into four plain sunk 
panels, Bimilar to several at Mhar, Cave VI. at Ajant4, and others. 

Beyond this is a small unfinished room ; and at the turn of the 

hill facing south is another, with a bench along part of the east ^all. 

The front has gone, but on the wall under the eaves is a fragment 

of an inscription. 
Tin. 



242 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

A little to the east, and above the footpath, is another small eave, 
with a cell in the left wall having a bench or bed. And beyond this 
is a small water-cistern. 

In the hills near to Karle there are a number of cells and rock- 
cisterns. Thus in the hill above the village of Devagadh, a little to 
the south-west of Karle, is a half-finished Vihara cave, with two 
roughly-hewn square columns in front having bracket capitals ; and 
in the back of the cave a door has been commenced as if for a 
shrine. In a rising ground, eaBt of the village, is a rock-cut tank 
and some cuttings, as if intended for the commencement of a small 
cave with a cistern. 

Again, on the south side of the village of Seletana there is a large 
covered rock-cistern, originally with six openings ; and high up the 
hill to the north is a large cavern under a waterfall. In the north 
side is a round hole which has been fitted with a cover, and was 
perhaps intended for storing grain in. Beside this is a small cir- 
cular chamber which may have contained a structural dagoba. The 
roof of the cave has fallen in, and there has been a great flaw in the 
rock, which, perhaps, led to its never being finished. 

At Tankwe, still farther east, are two rock-cisterns ; and above 
Walak, in the face of the scarp, is a small round cell as if for a 
dagoba, and near it a cave without front, slightly arched roof, and a 
cell at the back, with a round hole near the entrance, possibly a place 
for holding stores. A flaw in the rock has also destroyed the back of 
this excavation. 

At Ayara, to the east of Bhaja, and in several places to the 
north-east of Karl6, there are also excavations, mostly single cells 
for hermits. 

PlTALKHOBA ROCK TEMPLES. 

The next group of caves are those of Pitalkhora or the Brazen 
Glen, about a mile and a half from the deserted village of Patna, 1 
which lies about twelve miles to the south of the railway station of 
Chalisgaum in Khandesh district, 1 and at the foot of the Indhyadri 

1 Patna is mentioned by Bh&skar&charya under the name of Jadvid. His grandson 
Changadera established a Math or college here in 1206 AJ>. to teach the Acbarya'fl 
works.— J. R. A. S. t N.S., vol. i., p. 410. 

* Long. 75° 2' E., lat. 20° 21' N. 



PITAX.EHORA. 243 

range which separates the Nizam's territories from the British. The 
long deserted village contains several ruined temples with inscrip- 
tions of the Yadava dynasty of Devagarh of the 12th and 13th 
centuries. 1 In the vicinity are also Brahmanical and Jaina caves. 
The Buddhist caves alluded to are near the head of a narrow 
ravine to the south-east of the ruined village, and consist of a 
Chaitya cave and some viharas in a very ruinous condition, arising 
apparently from the nature of the rock in which they are excavated. 
"Were it not for this they present features that would render them 
one of the most interesting of the minor groups in the west. The 
capital of the pillars, for instance, in the vihara (Plate XVI.) are 
quite exceptional, and unlike any others yet found in India. They 
have a strangely foreign look, as if copied from some Persian or 
even Assyrian examples, originally, of course, executed in colour, 
though here the painted forms are reproduced in stone. The double- 
winged animals that rest upon them are found currently at Sanchi, 
and in the Udayagiri caves, but not with the same accompaniments. 

Whoever excavated them, they form a singular contrast with the 
extreme plainness of the Kathiawar caves, of the same age, and form 
a sort of stepping stone between them and the Katak caves, though 
the absence of figure sculpture prevent them ranking with the eastern 
caves aB objects of art. 

The Chaitya (Plate XV., figs. 1 and 2) the whole front of which has 
been destroyed by the decay of the rock, is 34£ feet wide, and must 
have been 50 feet or more in length, and 30£ feet high to the top of the 
vaulted roof. The nave is 20 feet 8 inches wide, and separated from 
the side aisles by plain octagonal shafts 14 feet high, of which there 
are still left eleven shafts and fragments of fourteen others. Like 
those at Bhaja and Bedsa, they have a slight slope inwards. 
Above them the vault has had wooden ribs, as at Karle, Bhaja, 
&c., but only the mortices remain to show that they once existed. 
The Bide aisles have quadrantal stone ribs like those of Cave X. 
at Ajanta. It appears that iu excavating this cave originally, 
the workmen, after having made some progress, had come to a 
layer of very soft rock, about 4| feet thick. This seriously inter- 
fered with their work, but they tried to meet the difficulty by 
building up the lower portions of 20 or more of pillars, including 
all those round the apse, with large blocks of stone. The walls of 

1 Jovr. B, As. Soc, N.S., vol. i. p. 414 ; Ind. Ant. vol. viii. p. 39. 

Q2 



244 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the aiales, too, where thiB layer out them, were built up with a facing 
of stone, 6 or 8 inches thick, in large slabs. These blooks have 
mostly fallen out now, and the dagobas, probably also from the same 
cause, having been a structural one, has almost entirely disappeared, 
only portions of the solid basement remaining. The whole has 
been painted, as at Bedsa and Ajanta, with figures of Buddha in 
various attitudes, but almost constantly with the triple umbrella 
over his head. This painting is, doubtless, of later age than the 
excavation of the cave itself, which must belong to the same age 
as No. X., at Ajanta — whatever that may be — as it resembles this 
cave in every essential respect. 

To the right of it are several groups of cells all more or less 
destroyed. To the left, behind a great mass of de'bris, is a portion 
of a very curious vihara, the whole front of which has fallen. It is 
50| feet wide at the back, and appears to have been divided, like 
the Dai Avatara and Tin Thai caves at Elura, into corridors by 
rows of pillars parallel to the front wall, the pillars being square 
above and below, with the corners chamfered off in the middle, 
about 6 feet from centre to centre, and supporting an architrave, 
as in the vihara at Kondane\ Crossing the corridors are thin flat 
rafters supporting the ceiling. (See plan and section, Plate XV., 
figs. 3 and 4.) 

In the back wall are Beven cells, five of which, at least, had stone 
latticed windows. Over each door and window together is a Chaitya- 
window arch, with three more towards the left, over the other two 
doors, projecting forwards as in Cave XII. at Ajanta and in the 
Bedsa vihara; while between each pair of these canopies, except 
the second and third, is the highly ornamented capital of an octa- 
gonal attached half column. The capitals are bell-shaped, of small 
depth in proportion to their width, each carved in a slightly different 
pattern, and several of them very richly. (See Plate XVI.) This 
member is surmounted by four thin, flat ones, each projecting 
a little over the one below it, as in the capitals of dagobas, and the 
uppermost supporting a pair of couchant animals, except in one 
case, all of them winged. The pillar on the extreme right, between 
the sixth and seventh cells, supports a pair of couched Indian bulla ; 
the next to the left is a pair of animals with the heads of camels 
and the bodies and paws of a feline animal having long, narrow 
wings attached to the legs by a band under the shoulders. The 



PITALKHORA. 245 

next pair are maned lions ; the fourth, horses ; then elephants j and 
between the next pair of arches are the heads and tips of the wings 
of a pair of deer, the remainder with parts of the arches on each 
side being broken away, and the door of the cell widened so as to 
remove all trace of any pilaster, if such ever existed here. Over 
the next is a pair of animals, perhaps intended for wolves, with 
heavy paws and grinning teeth ; and lastly, in the left comer is a 
pair with human faces with large ears, on animal bodies, and one of 
them winged. Such figures as these are very uncommon in the Cave- 
Temples of Western India, but they are to be found on the gateways 
of the Sanchi Tope. 

Inside the arches the semicircular areas are divided, as usual, by 
imitation lattice-work, the interstices of which are filled with figures 
of horses, elephants, lions, makaras, &c, accommodated to the shape 
of the apertures they occupy. The first cell to the left has three 
bench beds, the next has one, and that on the extreme right has 
none ; the remaining four have two each — one on the left side, and 
the other a few inches higher across the back. The peculiarity of 
these cells, however, is that all their roofs are arched like Chaitya- 
roofs, with stone girders imitating wooden ones about 10 inches 
deep, overlaid by five rafters (Plate XVII., figs. 1, 2, and 3). 
The arch rises scarcely 2 feet, but the girders come 1 foot 10 inches 
down the walls as in the aisles of the Chaitya-cave. 

Of the right side of the cave a part of one cell and a piece of the 
roof of the next only remains. On the left side is a large irregular 
excavation. 

Prom the fragments of architectural ornamentation left on the 
rock outside above these caves it might at first sight appear that 
they belong to the same age as the earlier groups above described 
at Kondane and Bedsa, but the rock is so friable, and the whole in 
so ruined a state, that the materials for comparison hardly exist. 
There are, besides, peculiarities about these caves which render it 
difficult to Bpeak with certainty regarding them. Circular-roofed 
cells are, for instance, very rare in western caves, though they are 
common in the east as at Barabar (woodcut, No. 5), at R&jagriha 
(woodcut, No. 7), and Udayagiri (woodcut, No. 19), but none of 
these have the wooden rafters copied in stone as at Pitalkhora. 

The fact of these being in stone here would seem to indicate a 
more modern date than might at first sight be expected. 



246 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

On the whole it seems probable that the whole belong to the first 
century of the Christian era. But for the slight inclination of the 
columns of the Chaitya this would seem quite certain, but even that 
peculiarity may have lingered longer in one place than in another. 

Sailarwadi Caves. 

About two miles south of the small town of Tal£gaftw-Dabara, near 
the railway and twenty miles north-west from Poona, is the Grarodi 
hill, in which are a few early Biiddhist excavations. They are at a 
height of about 450 to 500 feet above the plain, and the first, which 
is high up in the scarp and now almost inaccessible, consisted appa- 
rently of a single cell, of which the front has fallen away. The next 
is a little lower, and, like the first, faces S.W. by W. (PI. V., fig. 3). 
It consists of a vestifcmle, 29 feet by 9f , and 8 feet 8 inches high, 
opening into four cells at the back. Between each pair of doors are 
two pillars attached to the wall — half octagons (Fig. 1, PI. XXIII.) 
with the lota or water-vessel bases and capitals, and with three 
animals — elephants, lions, or tigers, over each, supporting a pro- 
jecting frieze of " the rail-pattern." Along the ends and back, 
under the pillars, runs a stone bench. The cells within are per- 
fectly plain. The cave, however, has been appropriated by the 
modern Brahmans, and in the third cell from the left is installed 
the Saiva linga, with a small Nandi or bull in the vestibule and a 
dipamdld or lamp-pillar and Tulsi altar built outside. On the jamb 
of the cell door is a short, roughly-cut inscription recording the 
visit of a devotee and dated " 1361 Sidliarthi Samvatsare, Srdvcma, 
Sudha." 

North-west from this last and at some distance is a cistern, now 
dry ; and still further along is a small cave that has apparently had 
a wooden front, with four upright posts going into sockets in the 
rock above. In the left end is a recess, and in the back is a cell. 
A few yards beyond this is another rock well, near which is the 
fourth cave. PL V., fig. 5. The front is entirely gone, and a thick 
wall has been built, to form a new front, a few feet farther in 
than the original, with two circular arched doors. The hall has 
four cells on the right, two in the back, besides a large shrine, and 
three on the left,— a fourth being entirely ruined. In the shrine 
recess has stood a dagoba, the capital attached to the roof as in the 



8AILAEWADI. 247 

KudA oaves, — but this has been Hewn away to make room for a 
small low chwwrMiga or Saiva altar. 

Over this to the left is a cell, on the left end of the front wall of 
which is an inscription recording its excavation by a person from 
Dhanakataka, the capital of the Andhras. It agrees in the style of 
its letters with those used by the Andhrabhrityas and is placed by 
Bhagvanlil Indraji Pandit between the times of Vasishthiputra and 
Gautamiputra II, 

Crossing the ridge which connects the hill with another to the 
west of it, there are other two small caves — monks' cells, no ways 
noteworthy, and scarcely accessible. 



248 



CHAPTER V. 
THE JUNNAR OAVES. 

Junnar is the principal town of the northernmost taluka or divi- 
sion of the Puna Zilla or Colleotorate, and is distant from the latter 
city about 48 miles. The name is said to be a corruption of Jijmd~> 
nagura, " the ancient city," but what special name that ancient city 
bore seems entirely lost : it is probable that it was the Tagara of 
the Greek writers and of Hindu tradition and ancient inscriptions. 1 

Round this old city in various directions are Buddhist caves 
nearly equally distributed in five different localities, making altogether 
57 separate excavations : — 

1. In the scarp of the Sivaneri hill-fort to the west^south-west of 

the town. 

2. The group known as Tulja Lena, to the west. 

3. The Gane&l Lena in the Sulaiman hills, to the north of the 

town. 

4. A second group in a spur of the Sulaiman hills, about a mile 

from the Grane& Lena. 

5. The caves in Manmodi Hill south of Junnar.* 

Like those at Talaja, Sana, Kuda, Bhaja, and Bedsa, and all the 
older caveB in the west, those of Junnar are remarkably devoid of 
figure ornament or imagery, in this respect strongly contrasting 
with the later ones, Buch as those at Elura, Ajanta, and Aurangabad. 
The dagoba is common to all, but in the earlier caves it is perfectly 
plain, and in the later ones at Ajanta it has figures of Buddha carved 
upon it. The ornaments are the Chaitya-window with its latticed 
aperture, the Buddhist-rail pattern, and the Dagoba. Elephants, 

i Ptolemv, Geog., vii. i. 82 ; Periplut. Mar, Eryth*, 62 ; Ind. Ant,, vol. v. p. 280 
vol. vi. p. 75 ; ArchaoL Survey, vol. iii. p. 64 ; Elphinstcme's Hut, of Ind^ p. 228 
Atiat. Bet., vol. i. pp. 357, 369-375 ; Jour. R. At. Soe., vol. ii. pp. 888-485, 896 
Tram. B*rm. Lit. Soc., toI. iii. p. 392 ; Vincent's Periplut, pp. 878-875 ; Trans, 
Bom, Gtoy. Soc., vol. vii. p. 153. 

s A Bketch plan showing the distribution of these caret, and their relative position, 
was published by Lieut. Brett in the fifth volume of the /. B. B, R. A. &, p. 175. 



JUNNAR. 249 

tigers, and other animals appear on the capitals in one or two caves, 
the sacred tree and some other symbolical figures in others. 

Although none of these caveB can compare either in magnificence 
or interest with the Chaityas of Bhaja or Karle, or the viharas of 
Nasik, their forms are still full of instruction to the student of cave 
architecture. The group comprises specimens of almost every 
variety of rock-cut temples, and several forms not found elsewhere, 
and though plainer than most of those executed afterwards are still 
not devoid of ornament. They form, in fact, an intermediate step 
between the puritanical plainness of the Kathiawar groups and those 
of the age that succeeded them. 

It is not easy to speak with any great precision with regard to 
the age of this group. They certainly, however, all belong to the 
first great division of Buddhist caves. Some of the earliest as the 
Manmodi Chaitya, for instance, may be 100 or 150 b.c. ; the other 
chaitya on the Sulaimani hill may, on the contrary, be 100 or 150 A. D.; 
and between those two extremes the whole may be arranged from 
their styles without any material error being committed in so 
doing. 

The Sivaneri hill- fort, the birth-place of the Maratha champion 
Sivaji Bhohsle, lies to the south-west of the town, and going well to 
the south, along the east face of the hill, we reach several cells in 
the lower scarp, and then -a cave which has originally had two 
columns with corresponding pilasters in front of a narrow verandah. 
The cave has a wide door, and is a large square cell, containing the 
cylindrical base of a dagoba, coarsely hewn out. Can the top or 
garbha have been of wood or brick ? On the sides of the scarp to 
the north of these excavations are several water-cisterns. 

The ascent of the hill above this is peculiarly steep and difficult 
of ascent. On attaining the base of the upper scarp, at the south 
end, there is a cave of two storeys with a stair in the north end 
leading to the upper floor. It has been a small hall, of which the 
front is now entirely gone, except one pilaster at the south end. In 
the south wall is a small recess roughly excavated, and over it, near 
the roof, is an inscription, in one line, of deeply incised letters. At 
the beginning of it the same shield ornament occurs which marks the 
commencement of the Aira inscription on the Hathi Grumpha at Katak 
(ante, pp. G6 and 74, see also woodcut No. 15), and which occurs so 



250 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

frequently among Buddhist symbols at an early age. The oharacter 
of the letters are not so old as those employed at Udayagiri, but still 
certainly before the Christian era. 1 The lower hall has three cells in 
each side wall and four in the back, several of them unfinished. 

Further north, and somewhat higher, beyond a recess and a cis- 
tern with two openings into it, is a Vihara, the whole front of which 
is open. It has a plain pilaster at each end, with holes in them for 
the fastenings of a wooden front that has at one time screened the 
interior. This mode of closing the fronts of these rooms seems to 
have been employed in several instances here, and these, so far as 
can be oonjectured, are among the oldest caves. A bench runs round 
the interior walls, with an advanced dais or seat at the back, perhaps 
for a stfiavira or teacher. 

Next we come to some large cisterns, of which the roof has fallen 
in, and over the north side of them is a large vihara with four cells 
in the back and two in the south end. In this, again, there seems 
originally to have been only a wooden front, but in its place has been 
substituted a stone one, of ten courses of ashlar carefully jointed, 
with a lattice stone window and a neatly-carved door of the style of 
about the tenth or eleventh century. This alteration was probably 
made by some Hindu sect — not Buddhist. There is a fragment of 
an inscription outside, at the north end over a stone bench. At the 
commencement is the Buddhist trUUla symbol ; but only three or 
four letters in the line can be made out. 

North from this are some more cells, much decayed, but which 
had probably all wooden fronts. There are holes in the atone for 
fastenings which could only have been in wood, which clearly indi- 
cate that this was the mode employed to close the front. 

A difficult scramble along the face of the cliff brings us to the 
Bara Kotri — so called from a large vihara cave with twelve cells 
Firsts over a cistern, broken in, is a dagoba in half relief in front 
of a large cell with a stone bed in it, and having on the south side 
of the door an inscription in five lines of varying length.* Next 
are four cells, the last with a stone bed ; third, three cisterns with a 
small hall over the last which once has had two square pillars in 
front and reached by a stair. Fowfh, the vihara that gives name 

1 No. 11 in the series given in Ind. Ant., vol. vi., piste at p, 88, 
» No*. Vin. and IX. in J. B. J?. B. A. 8., vol. v. pp. 168, 164. 



JTJNNAB. 251 

to the group, — 36 feet 8 inches wide by 33 feet 5 inches deep with 
four cells in each of the three inner walls, and a bench running quite 
round the hall. It has two doors, and two large windows, one of 
them almost 10 feet wide, grooved in the sill and sides for a wooden 
frame. 

Beyond this are several more cells and a well, then a small vihara 
with three cells in the left wall and two in the back, and with a 
dagoba in half relief in a recess — a not uncommon feature in the 
very oldest caves : we have it at Kondane, and in another form in 
Cave III. at Nasik. 

The next is a lofty, fiat-roofed Chaitya cave. Plate XVJIL, 
figs. 1 and 2. The front wall was probably originally pierced only 
for two windows and the central door, 6 feet 1 inch wide, but the sill 
of the south window has been cut away until it also forms a door. 
Inside is an outer cross aisle or vestibule, separated from the hall by 
two free standing and two attached pillars, with water-jar bases and 
capitals as at Nasik. From the top of the abaci of these rise short 
square pillars, about 2\ feet in length, connecting the capitals with 
the architrave that runs across under the roof. The inner hall is 
30 feet 11 inches in length, 20 feet 6 inches wide, and about 18 feet 
high. Near the back of it stands a well-proportioned dagoba, 10 
feet 3 inches in diameter, the cylindrical base 5 feet 11 inches high, 
and surrounded on the upper edge by the " rail pattern" with what 
are intended to represent the ends of bars projecting out below it. 
The umbrella, as in the oldest Chaityas, is carved on the roof, and 
connected with the capital by a short stone shaft. The ceiling 
has been neatly painted, and still retains large portions of the 
colouring: the design is in squares, each containing concentric 
circles in orange, brown, and white. 

Outside is an inscription in three lines, which Dr. H. Kern 
translates — 

" A pious gift of charity, designed for a sanctuary, for the common 
weal and happiness, by Virasenaka, a distinguished householder, con- 
fessor of the Dharma." 1 From the form of the characters employed 

1 Jnd. Ant. vol. vL, p. 40. Dharmanigama, Dr. Kern says, he has not met with else- 
where, and supposes it to mean " one for whom the Dharma is the source of authority." 
This inscription was copied by CoL Sykes, Jour. R. As. Soe., vol. iv. p. 289, No. 7 ; 
and a translation attempted by Mr, Frinsep, Jour, As. Soe. Ben., vol xi. p. 1045, 
No. 8 ; a copy is also given and a translation attempted by Dr. Stevenson in Jour. 
B. B. B. A$. Soe., vol. v. p. 163, No. 7. 



252 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

it may have been inscribed about the Christian era, or probably a 
little earlier. 

Beyond this cave are only some wells and fragments of cells now 
destroyed. 

On the other side of the hill, facing the west, are a few others 
very difficult of access. The first from the north corner of the hill 
is a vihara, 30 feet 8 inches wide by 27 feet 6 incheB deep, and 
having two windows and a door in the front wall. Outside it has 
had a verandah, with four pillars in front, of which the four thin 
members of the abacus still remain attached to the roof, each with 
a hole about 2$ inches square on the under surface aB if to receive 
the tenon of a wooden shaft. On the roof is a small fragment of 
fresco-painting just sufficient to show that it has been coloured in 
the same style as the Chaitya cave on the other side of the hill. 

To the south of this is a group of five wells and a vihara with 
four cells. South from these, again, are fragments of three or four 
others facing west-north-west, but no ways remarkable. 

The T&lja Lena group lies in a hill about a mile and a half or 
two miles north-west from Junnar, beyond the north end of Sivaneri 
hill. They are so named, because one of them has been appropriated 
by the modern Brahmans as a shrine of Tulja Devi, a form of 
Bhavani, the consort of Siva. 

They run along the face of the cliff nearly from south-east to 
north-west, facing about south-west, but all the facades have fallen 
away. They consist of a number of cells and two small vi haras, 
with a Chaitya-eave of a form quite unique (Plate XVIII., figs. 3, 4). 
It is circular in plan, 25 feet 6 inches across, with a dagoba in the 
centre, 8 feet 2 inches in diameter, surrounded by twelve plain octa- 
gonal shafts 11 feet in height, supporting a dome over the dagoba. 
The surrounding aisle is roofed by a half arch rising from the wall 
to the upper side of an architrave 7 or 8 inches deep over the pillars. 
The dagoba is perfectly plain, but its capital has been hown off to 
convert it into a huge lihga of Siva, and even the dome is much 
hacked into, while some of the pillars have been notched and others 
broken. In front of this cave and the one on each side of it is a 
platform built by the modern voteries of T&ljfi, Devi. 1 



' Among die sculptures at Bharhiit is a bas-relief roproMotiog the exterior of a 
circular temple, such appornntly us this. (Stnpa at Bharhut, PI. XVI., fig. I. See 



JUNNAK. 253 

Over the front of one of the cells to the north-east of this are left 
some Chaitya-window ornamentation, — a larger one over where the 
door has been, the inner arch of which is filled with knotted ribbons, 
&c, similar to what is over the Chaitya-cave door at Nasik, while 
the front of the arch is carved with flowers. (Fig. 4, PI. XVII.) 
On each side of this is a smaller arch ; and farther to the left is a 
dagoba in half relief with the umbrella or chhatri over it, on each side 
a Ga,7ulJwva or Kinnara above, and a male figure below, — that to 
the right attended by a female, — but all of them weatherworn. 
Over all is a projecting frieze carved on front with the " Buddhist- 
rail pattern." 

Next to these are two more plain fronts, and then two with 
Chaitya-window heads over where the doors have been, and smaller 
ones between, and the " rail ornament " and quadrantal carved roll 
supported by slender brackets in entire relief, as at Bhaja. 

The next group is in the hills locally known as the GaneSa Pahar l 
or Sulaiman Pahar, about three miles north-north-east of the town, 
and about 360 feet above the level of it. The ascent is partly by a 
built stair which leads up to near the middle of the series. — to the 
sixth, counting from the east end, — from which, for convenience of 
reference, we shall number them. 

No. L, at the south-east end of the range, is a monk's residence or 
Bhiksku-griha, the front apartment of which is about 10 feet by 6, 
with a stone bench or bed at the left end, and two cells at the back, 
the one with stone beds. Outside has been a small verandah with 
two octagonal pillars supporting a projecting frieze carved with the 
" Buddhist-rail pattern " in front. In the east end cf the verandah 
is a stone seat. 

The next three are small caves and cells. 

We then descend a short distance * along the face of the rock to 
No. V., a small vihara, 25 feet wide by 29 deep and 8 feet 2 inches 
high, without any pillars. A stone bench runs round the three 



alto Hut. of Ind. and East. Arch., p. 168, woodcut 91). They probably were not 
far distant in ago. As this one at Junnar is unique, they present an early form 
of temple of which few traces remain, though it probably was common in early 
times. 

1 This hill is said to be mentioned iu the Ganiia Pvrana under the name of 
Layanidri. 

* The difference of lerel is about 12 or 13 feet. 



254 EARLY BDDDHIBT CAVE-TEMPLES. 

inner sides, and it has seven oells — three at the back and two at 
each side — for the resident monks. In these cells are high stone 
benches for their beds: on these they spread their quilt and enjoyed 
their rest, — simple beds for simple ascetic livers. The Sdla or hall 
of this their SaUagrilia or rock-mansion, which the first occupants 
doubtless regarded as spacious, is now used as a goat-shed. It had 
a door — of which the jambs are broken away — and two windows. 
Over the left window is an inscription in one line, preceded by a 
Bymbol of which the upper part is perhaps a sort of tri&iila or 
trident, and is followed by the swastika, or Buddhist cross. 1 

No. VI. — The next is the Chaitya-cave, facing south, and 
measuring inside 40 feet in length by 22 feet 5 inches wide and 24 feet 
2 inches high (Plate XVIII., figs. 9 and 10). The verandah in front 
has two free-standing and two attached pillars of the style so preva- 
lent at Nasik, — the capitals consisting of an abacus of three, four, or 
five thin square members each projecting a little over the one below. 
Under this is a thick-ribbed torus, enclosed in a Bquare cage formed 
by small pieces left at the corners connecting the fillets above and 
below. This rests on a deep member resembling an inverted water-jar. 
The shaft is octagonal, and the base consists of the same members 
as the capital, omitting the enclosed torus, but taken in reverse 
order. Over the abacus are figures of elephants roughly chiselled 
out, somewhat in the style we meet with in some of the Nasik 
viharas. The door is plain, 5 feet 9 inches wide, and lofty, and is 
the only entrance for light ; for the arched window of the later 
style of Chaitya-caves is merely indicated high up in the rock, as 
a shallow recess with a Chaitya window finial over it, too high, 
indeed, to correspond with the arched roof of the cave : but its 
carefully smoothed area shows that it was not intended to drive it 
through. 

Over the door is a well inciBed inscription in one long line, which 
is rendered by Dr. Kern — 

" A pious gift of charity, designed for a sanctuary, by the pure- 
hearted Sulasadatta, trader, son of Haranika." 

1 Ind. Art. u.8.No. 2. This is No. 1 of those copied by Lieutenant Brett, and tentatively 
translated by Dr, Stevenson, Jour. Bom. B. R. At. Soc., vol. t. p. 160 } and Ma 9 of 
Colonel Sykes's Jour. R. At. Soc., voL i v. p. 290, and Jour. As. Soc, Bm^ vol. vi. p. 1044, 
where Prinsep conjeciurally reads it, " lie hundred caves and the took of Dbirmika 
Seni — his act of piety and compassion.'' 



JUNNAB. 255 

From the form of the alphabet employed it seems probable that 
this inscription may be subsequent to the Christian era, though to 
what extent is doubtful. 

The nave is about 12 feet 9 inches broad, and 24 feet 6 inches 
up to the dagoba, limited on each side by five columns and one 
engaged, 10 feet 10 inches high, similar to those in the front, except 
that in the capitals the torus is not enclosed. Over the capitals are 
lions, tigers, and elephants, as in Cave VIII. at Nasik, fairly well cut. 
Thus on the first column on each side are a pair of elephants ; on 
the second on the right a pair of tigers, and on the left a tiger, and 
a sphinx with human face and animal's body and legs with hoofs, 
(as in the verandah of Cave VIII. at Nasik) ; on the third capitals 
on each side are elephants, on the fourth lions or tigers, and on the 
fifth elephants. In the apse round the dagoba, and about 3 feet 
from it, are six plain octagon shafts, without base or capital. The 
aisle behind the pillars is 3 feet 6 incheB wide, and iB ribbed over, 
like the roof of the nave, in imitation of wooden ribs. The dagoba 
is of the usual form, a plain circular drum or base, with a Buddhist- 
rail cornice supporting the garbha or dome on which stands the 
torana or capital, consisting of a square block, representing a box 
also ornamented with the " Buddhist-rail pattern," surmounted by 
an abacus of five thin slab-like members, each in succession wider 
than the one below, until on the uppermost is a slab 5 feet 10^- 
inches square, and a foot thick, with a hole in the centre of it, to 
support the shaft of a wooden umbrella, as at Karle, 1 and four 
shallow square ones for relics ; for it was on this torana, as on an 
altar, that the relics of Buddha or of Bauddha saints were deposited 
for adoration. In some cases, as at Bhaja, the box under tne capital 
was hollow, for the preservation of the relics. The face of this slab 
iB carved with five copies of the Buddhist insula, between little 
pyramids.* The whole height of this dagoba is 16 feet 5 inches. 

1 Dr. Wilson, writing 28 years ago, says this dagoba was surmounted by an um- 
brella } but, if so, this is only one case, among others, in which the woodwork has 
recently disappeared from Buddhist caves of Western India. See Jour. So. Br. S. 
An. Soc.y vol. iii. pt, ii. p. 62. 

* This style of ornament we find also in Cave XII. at Ajanta, and with lotuses 
between the pyramids in many of the earliest Buddhist works, as at Udavagirr (Fer- 
gusaon's T. £ Serp. Jfbr, Plate C.» p. 267), Amaravati (Ind. $ Bast. Arch., Fig. 40, 
p. 104), at Bharhut (lb., Fig. 27, p. 88, and Cunningham's Bharhut, Plates XII., 
XVII., XXXIII. Fig. 5 } XXXIX. Fig. 2, and XL. to XLVIII.), &c. 



256 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Though so small, this is one of the most perfect Chaityas to be 
found anywhere. Its proportions are good, and all those details 
which were employed tentatively at Karl6 and in the earlier caves 
are here well understood and applied without hesitation. It is, too, 
the earliest instance known in which not only the ribs of the aisles 
but those of the nave are in stone, and nothing was in wood but the 
umbrella, now removod. It is, in fact, the best example we have of 
the perfected Chaitya of the first century of the Christian era. 

Cave VII. — To the west of the Chaitya-cavea an ascending stair 
enters under the rock and lands in the verandah of the largest vihara 
cave here, — now known as the Ganesa Lena, because this fine cave 
has been appropriated by some low Brahmans in which to enshrine an 
image of the pot-bellied, elephant-snouted Ganapati. 1 The hall is 
50^ feet by 56 £- feet, and 10 feet 2 inches high, with three doors 
and two windows in front, and a stone seat round the three inner 
sides. It has seven cells on each side, and five at the back — the 
central one altered to make a shrine for the rat-riding god, whose 
large image is cut out of the rock*' probably f mm a dagoba in rilieoo 
that may originally have occupied this cell. Outside the cave is a 
narrow verandah, with six pillars and two attached ones, rising from 
a bench as in Cave III. at Kasik. The back of this bench forms the 
upper part of a basement, carved with the " Buddhist-rail pattern." 
This cave also resembles the style of the Nasik one, just referred to, 
in having animal figures over the capitals, but on the outside only, 
while inside rough blocks have been left out of which to carve them, 
and further — in both having a projecting frieze above, carved with 
" rail-pattern "' ornamentation, and in the absence of pillars in a 
hall of such a large size. 

The next seven are mostly small and without interest. 

Cave XV. is a rectangular, fiat-roofed Chaitya-cave, 21 feet 10 
inches deep, by 12 feet 9 inches wide, and 13 feet 8 inches high 
(Plate XVIII., figs, 6 and 7), with a dagoba standing 3 feet from the 
back wall, the capital of which is connected with the roof by the 



1 This perwMiificatiwi of the mWoruir-d is named Aihta Vinuyaka, at* Ix-ing, accord- 
ing to the Ganesu Purana, the eighth avatar a of thin deca, performed hereto please his 
mother, Girija. Ho it a favourite idol of the populace, and is visited from far and 
near at the annual yo/ra or fair held ii> his honour. The shrine is taken carr of hy 
& punch or committee, who pay the tpiru't wagt-a out of a yearly endowment, of Ks. 62 
per annum. The yurit goes there daily from Junnar. 



JUNNAR. 257 

stone shaft of the umbrella ; for here, as in the case of the dagobas 
under the rock at Bhaja, and elsewhere, the canopy of the umbrella 
is carved on the roof. The extreme simplicity of this arrangement 
and of everything about this cave seem to mark it as the earliest 
Chaitya-cave in the group, or perhaps in any of the various groups 
around Junnar. The verandah in front is only 2 feet 7 inches wide 
by 19 feet 5 inches in length, and has had two octagonal pillars in 
front with two engaged in antis. Their capitals have four thin fillets 
in the square abacus, a thin torus, not enclosed at the corners, and 
the inverted water-jar, and their bases were similar. 

On the left of the door, outside, is an inscription, in two lines, in 
the old square Pali character, and consequently probably at least 
100 d.c. Dr. Kern reads and translates thus : — 

" A pious gift of charity, designed for a sanctuary by Ananda, 
youngest son of the believer Tapala, and grandson of the believer 
Kapila." 

Eleven or more small caves with some cisterns and inscriptions 
extend along the face of the cliff beyond this. 

Passing round the east end of this hill, after a walk of fully a mile, 
or about four miles from the town, in another spur of the Sulaiman 
Pahar, we reach a group of caves in the face of the hill, 400 feet 
above the level of Junnar, and facing S.S.W. They are usually 
represented as inaccessible, from the precipice in front of them 
being almost perpendicular ; difficult of access they really are, and 
dangerous to attempt for any one not accustomed to climbing. 

The most easterly of them is a small Chaitya-cave only 8 feet 
3 inches wide, and 22 feet 4 inches in length, or 15 feet 4 inches 
from the door to the dagoba, which is 4 feet 10 inches in diameter 
and 9 feet 4 inches high. The walls are not straight, nor the 
floor level. The side aisles have not been begun, and altogether no 
part of the interior is quite finished, except the upper part of the 
dagoba. To the top of the architravo or triforium is 16 feet, and to 
the centre of the roof 18 feet 2 inches. Outside, the facade is 
carved with Chaitya-window ornaments, some enclosing a dagoba, 
and others a lotuB flower; while the rail ornament is abundantly 
interspersed in the usual way. The fronton round the window 
ia also carved with a geometrical pattern. The details of this cave 
seem to indicate that it is perhaps as early as those at Bddsa 
v J8»" b *_ 



258 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and Karld, and consequently it is among the earlier excavations 
about Junnar. 

Next to it, but higher up and almost inaccessible, are two cells ; 
then a well ; and, thirdly, a small vihara, with three cells, two of 
them with stone-beds. Some rough cutting on the back wall between 
the cell-doors resembles a dagoba in low relief, but it is quite un- 
finished. Outside are two more cells and a chamber or chapel at 
the end of a verandah that runs along in front both of the vihara 
and the cells. 

The Manm6di hill lies south-south-west from Junnar, about a 
mile to the west of the main road. It contains three groups of 
excavations,' the second of which is nearest to the road, and the 
first a considerable way along the north-west face of the hill, near 
where it turns to the north-east. The principal cave here is an 
unfinished Chaitya-cave. The door is nearly the whole width of the 
nave, and it has apparently had a small semi-circular aperture or 
window over it, but the lintel is broken away. This arch of the 
window, however, is not adjusted to the arch of the roof inside, 
which is much higher, nor does it occupy the relative position in 
the great arch on the facade assigned to the window in later 
examples at Ajanta, Nasik, &c. (See frontispiece.) Over the opening 
the place usually occupied by the window is divided fan-wise into 
Beven petal-shaped compartments with a semi-circular centre, round 
the edge of the inner member of which is an inscription, in one 
line, of Maury a characters, indicating a date not later than 100 b.c. 
In the middle compartment of the larger semi-circle is a standing 
female figure with a lotus flower on each aide, the next compart- 
ments have elephants standing on lotus flowers and holding water- 
jars, as so often represented beside the figures of Sri or Lakshmi 
on old Buddhist works (ante, pp. 71, 72). 1 In the next compartment 
on each side stands a male figure, his hands joined over or in front 
of his head, doing p&jd towards the central figure ; and in the two 
outer spaces are females in similar attitudes, with a lotus flower and 
bud beside each. The style of art in which the figure of Sri is here 
represented is so similar to that employed for the same purpose at 

1 Conf. Fergosson's Tree and Serpent Wer$hip, pp. 108, 112, 118, 120, 24$, and 
268; Arch. Sur. fVest. l*d., vol. i. p. 13, and voL iii. p. 76, and Plate LIU j also 
Cunningham's Bharhut, p. 1 17. 



JUNNAB. 259 

Bharhut, 1 that there can be little doubt that they are of about the 
same age. The material, however, in which they are executed, and 
their purposes are so different, that it would be impossible, from that 
alone, to say which of the two is the earliest Over and outside these 
the facade of the great arch projects, with ribs in imitation of wooden 
rafters under it. On each side the finial is a male figure : that on 
the left holds a cJiauri and has wings, and some animal's head above 
his jaunty turban ; the other holds some object in his right hand, 
and behind each shoulder are two snake-heads with their tongues 
hanging out. Right and left of these are dagobas in high relief, 
but roughly formed ; and on the right of the arch is a tree with 
objects hanging in it, but it has never been quite finished, parts 
being only outlined. On the projecting frieze over all are seven 
Chaitya- window ornaments, with smaller ones between their finials, 
and two on the faces of each jamb. Inside the cave, three octagonal 
pillars on the right side are blocked out, as is also the dagoba, but 
without the capital. There is a horizontal soft stratum in the rock, 
which has probably led to the work being relinquished in its present 
unfinished state. This is very much to be regretted, as the whole 
design of this cave is certainly the most daring, though it can hardly 
be called the most successful, attempt on the part of the early cave 
architects to emancipate themselves from the trammels of the 
wooden style they were trying to adapt to lithic purposes. At 
Barabar in the Lomas Rishi (woodcut 3) they only introduced ele- 
phants and trellis work, which we know from the Sanchi gateways 
were probably executed in wood and could easily have been so 
introduced. It would, however, have been very difficult to execute 
such a seven-leafed flower as this, in pierced work, even in wood, 
but it was an artistic mistake to introduce it above the real con- 
structive opening, on a false front, as is done in this instance. The 
system here begun was afterwards carried to an extreme issue in the 
(iandhara monasteries, where figures were introduced everywhere, and 
the architecture only used as a frame such as we employ for pictures 
(woodcut 38). Though its employment here is a solecism, this bas- 
relief is one of the most interesting pieces of sculpture for the 
history of the art, to be found in the whole range of the western 
caves. 

» Stupfc »t Bbftrfaut, Pie. XII. and XXXVI. See also Hist, of ItuL and East, Arch., 
p. 88, woodcut 27. 

R 2 



260 EABLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Higher up the rock, on the east or left side of this, are four cells 
with neatly-carved f acades, each door having a Chaitya- window arch 
over it, projecting ahout 15 inches ; and between the arches are two 
dagobas with chhatris in half relief ; while over the shoulder of each 
arch is a smaller one as an ornament, and the Buddhist-rail pattern 
along the tops. There is one plain cell beyond these, and under the 
five are some others filled up with earth ; while rather higher up on 
the east are four more. Under these latter is a vihara with two 
cells in the back and two in the left or east side, but the front is 
gone. It communicates by a passage with another to the west of 
it, nearly filled up with mud, and west of the Chaitya-cave are two 
small cells high up in the rock. 

Near the south-east end of the hill is the second group, consisting of 
an unfinished Chaitya-cave and a number of ruined cells and viharas. 
This Chaitya-cave is somewhat on, the plan of the Bedsa one — 
that is, it has two octagonal columns in front, supporting the entab- 
lature above the great window. These columns are of the style 
. already described as occurring at the Ganesa Lena, with water-pot 
bases and capitals ; but otherwise this cave is quite unfinished : the 
aisles have not been commenced ; the capital of the dagoba is roughly 
blocked out, and portions of a square mass of rock from which to hew 
out the dome of it ; but a great fault in the rock at the back of the 
cave seems to have stopped further operations. The front is quite 
rough, but, if finished, would probably have been similar to the Bedsa 
Chaitya cave. It is almost covered with inscriptions, 1 but from their 
positions and the roughness of the surfaces on which they are carved, 
it may naturally be inferred that they are only the work of visitors, 
perhaps long after the work was relinquished. Few of them can be 
made out with any certainty. The cave faces north by east, and the 
floor is much filled up with mud. At the east side of it is a cell, also 
deep in earth, in which is a dagoba, the clihotri or umbrella carved 
on the roof, but the staff has been broken — evidently with a view to 
convert it into the usual Saiva emblem. Beyond it are portions of 
other cells, and a fragment of an inscription beside some modern 
steps leading up to five cells above. The two at the west end are 

1 The inscriptions from the pillars in front were copied by Colonel Sykes and also by 
Lieutenant Brett; the latter also copied nine from the facade ;— none of them are in 
the square Maury* character, and many of them as late as the fifth century of our era. 
Tbey were also copied by the Messrs. Wests, but their copies were not published. 



JUNNAB. 261 

converted into one by cutting away the partition, and on the walls 
are three defaced figures perhaps of Buddha, but possibly they may 
be Jaina additions. This is now dedicated to the goddess Ambika,— 
a name of Parvati indeed, but also the idsanadem or patron goddess 
of Neminatha, one of the favourite Tirthankaras of the Jains. Here we 
have Brahmans worshipping the mutilated image of Buddhists or 
Jains as a Saiva goddess ! In the outer wall of another of these cells 
there have been a standing and a sitting figure of Buddha, but these 
are now almost obliterated. They are the only figures of the kind I 
have met with in the caves here, and were probably added at a late 
period, and perhaps by Jains. 

Around the Chaitya-cave are other cells and Bhikshu's houses, and 
some inscriptions. 

The third group is round a corner of the hill to the south-east of 
these last, and at a considerably higher level, — some of them almost 
inaccessible. The first reached is a recess over a cell or cistern, 
with an inscription : — 

Sivasamajmtasa Simtabhati ? no deyadliama pati. 

That is, " For a pious gift of charity, from Simtabhati, son of 
Sivasarman." 

A little beyond this, on the left side of a recess over the side of a 
water cistern, is another inscription in three lines, of which, however, 
the first letters are obliterated ; still we can make out that it was 
[constructed by] "Ayama, the minister of Mahakshatrapa Svami 
Nahapana." 1 

Scrambling along the face of a precipice to the south, we reach 
first a small vihara without cells or carving, then another cave 
(Plate XV1IL, fig. 8) with two octagonal pillars in the front of the 
verandah, and two engaged ones at the ends rising from a bench. 
The door is 5 feet 10 inches wide, and reaches to the roof of the 
hall, which has been frescoed. The back of the seat or low screen 
in front of the verandah is carved outside with the rail ornament ; 

1 Thu mention of Nahapana is of interest ; bis date is not fixed with certainty, 
but probably belongs to the beginning of the second century (ante, p. ). The 
alphabet of this inscription is evidently of a later date than of several others in the 
other groups of Junnar caves, and thus far confirms our relegating these cares to the 
second century of our era, aftor which time idol worship seems to have crept into 
Buddhism. 



262 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLK8. 

the columns are of the usual N&sik pattern, but without animal 
figures above : over them the frieze projects considerably, and is 
carved in the style of Cave IV. at N&sik, — the ends of the rafters 
projecting on the lower fascia, and the upper being carved with rail 
pattern. Over this is a recess some 2 or 3 feet deep, with the 
Chaitya arch over it, but without any carving. 

The hall is 33 feet deep, and about 12 feet wide ; but at the back 
stands a mass of rock over 8 feet wide by 5$ thick, with a squatting 
figure roughly sketched out on the front of it. This mass is 
very rotten behind, and at the left side of it is a well of excellent 
water. 

The other caves here are small and uninteresting. 



263 



CHAPTEE VII. 
NASIK CAVES. 

About fifty miles north from Junnar, but across some of the spurs 
of the Sahyadri hills, is Nasik in the upper valley of the Godavari 
river, and only four miles from the railway leading from Bombay to 
Calcutta. The town is a place of great antiquity and sanctity, being 
associated with the legend of Rama, who is said to have spent part 
of his exile at Panchavati, a suburb of Nasik on the north side of 
the Godavari or Ganga river. It is to a large extent a Brahmanical 
town, and may be regarded as the Banaras of Western India. It is 
mentioned under its present name by Ptolemy, and situated as it is 
just above one of the few easily accessible passes up the Ghats, and 
in the middle of a fertile plain interspersed with isolated hills, it 
must always have been a place of note. One of the oldest inscrip- 
tions in the neighbouring caves speaks of " Krishnaraja of the 
Satavahana race [residing] in Nasik," 1 which would almost seem to 
indicate that it was the capital of the dynasty ; but it is possible 
this Krishnaraja was only a member of the royal family. 

The Buddhist caves, locally known as the Pandu Lena, are in one 
of three isolated hills called in the inscriptions Trirasmi, close to the 
Bombay road, and about five miles S.S.W. from the town. They 
were first described by Captain James Delamaine, who visited them 
in 1823," and afterwards by Dr, J. Wilson and the Messrs. West, 
the latter with special reference to the inscriptions, of which they 
made copies, and which have Bince been translated by Professer 
Bhandarkar. 8 These inscriptions contain the names of several kings, 

as — 

Krishnaraja of the Satavahana race ; 

Maha-HakuBiri, who reigned certainly before the Christian 
era; 

» Trant. Orient. Cong., 1874, p. 338. 

» Asiat. Jo»r. N. &, vol. iii. (1830), pp. 275-288 ; Hitter, Erdk. it. i. 652. 

» Dr. Wibon visited them in 1831 and 1840. Jour. Born. B. R. A. S., vol. iii. 
pt. li. pp 65-69; and the Wests between 1861 and 1865, ib^ vol vii. pp, 37-52 ; 
Trans. Cong. Orient^ pp. 306-354 ; Ferguason's Ind. and East. Arch^ pp. 94, 115, 
16a 



264 EAELY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Nahapana the Kshaharata Satrap , and 

TJshavadata, son of Dinika, his son-in-law ; 

Satakarni Gautamiputra, and his queen VaSishthi ; 

Sri Pudumayi VaSishthiputra ; 

Yajfia Satakarni Gautamiputra; and 

King Virasena, son of Sivadata the Abhira, who reigned on 
certainly in the first centuries after Christ, though at what 
dates has not yet been settled with certainty. 

Several of these were " lords of Dhanakataka," that is, of the Andhra 
dynasty, and at Nanaghat we have of the same race — Satavahana, 
his son Satakarni (VediSri), and his sons, Kumara Satavahana, 
Kumara Hakusiri, and Kumara Bhaya(Za). At Kanheri we have 
some of the above and Sirisena Madhariputra ; 1 and coins give his 
name as well as those of the three last Satakarnis in the Nasik list. 
Now Ptolemy (cir. a.d. 150) mentions a Siri Polemios of Paithana, who 
may have been the Pudumayi of the above list ; and Rudra Daman 
in the Girnar inscription some time after the 72nd year (probably of 
the Saka era, or a.d. 150) boasts of having defeated " Satakarni, 
lord of Dakshinapatha." Which of the Satakarnis this was we have 
no means of knowing for certain as yet, nor shall we be able to do 
so till the chronology of the Andrabhritya kings is ascertained in 
a more satisfactory manner than it is at present. 

If the Krishnaraja of the inscriptions is the second of the 
Pauranik lists, as there seems little reason for doubting, it may 
fairly be assumed that the dynasty arose, as is generally supposed, 
immediately before the Christian era. If, too, Hakusiri was the 
excavator of the Chaitya cave at this place, "which, from the long 
inscription containing his name engraved on it, this seems nearly 
certain, we gain from its architecture at least an approximate date 
for the age in which he lived. It may have been excavated a few 
years before, but as probably a few years after, the Christain era, 
but cannot be removed from that epoch. 

The fixation of the dates of the kings who reigned after the 
Christian era is more difficult, owing to the paucity of the materials 
available for the purpose. It is now generally admitted that the 

1 Skandasrati of the Pauranik lists preceded Yajna Sri, and if Sivairi is the same as 
Srisena Madhariputra, he must be placed between these two ; but we have no coins of 
his nor any corresponding names in the inscriptions. 



NASIK. 



265 



Pauranik lists, 1 which are the only written document we possess 
bearing on the subject, cannot be implicitly relied upon. "We are 
consequently almost wholly dependent on the inscriptions, and they 
are few in number, and have not yet been examined with the 
care requisite for reliable results being obtained from them. Now, 
however, that such scholars as Buhler, Burnell, Fleet, and Bhagvanlal 
Indraji are available for their investigation, it seems most desirable 
that they should all be recopied in facsimile, so as to admit of 
comparison and translation. If this were done it is probable that 
all the difficulties that now perplex the subject would disappear. 
Pending this being done, if we may assume, as was done above 



1 The Pauranik lists give the following names and durations 


of reigns : — 




— 


Andnrabhritya Kings. 


Vayu 
Purdna. 


Matiya 
Purdna. 


Brafnaantfa 
Purdna. 






Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


1 


£fipraka, Sindhuka, or Sfiinka - 


23 


23 


23 


2 


Krishnaraja his brother 


10 


18 


18 


3 


S'atakarni I., Srlmallnkarni, or Suntukarna 


wanting 


10 (or 18) 


18 (or 10) 


4 


Pdrnotsanga or Paurnatnasa ... 


» 


18 


18 


5 


Skandhastatnbhi or Sfrlvasvami - - - 


ti 


18 





6 


S'atakarni II. - 


56 


56 


56 


7 


Lambodara - 


wanting 


18 


18 


8 


Ivtlaka, Aptlaka, or Apltaka 


12 


12 


12 


9 


Sangha or Megbasvati - 


wanting 


18 


18 


10 


SWkarrii III. or Svati - - - - 


— 


18 


12 


li 


Skandasvati - 





7 


7 


IS 


Mrigcndre or Maheudra Salakarni 


— 


8 


8* 


13 


Kuntala or Svatikarua - - - - 


— 


8 


8 


14 


Svatikarni or Svattthena ... 


— 


1 


1 


IS 


Pafumat, Patntnavi, or Pulomavi - 


24 


(36?) 


34 


16 


Arishtakarnl, Qaurakrishna, or Gorakshasva£ri • 


25 


25 


25 


17 


Ha!a or Haleya ..... 


1 


5 


S 


18 


Pattalaka or Mandalaka .... 


(5?) 


5 


5 


19 


Pravilasena or Purindraiiena 


21 


5 


12 


30 


Sundara &&takarpi .... 


1 


1 


1 


21 


Chakora Sfttakarni or Bajadasv&ti 


* 


i 


6 


22 


Sftvaav&ti ..... 


28 


28 


28 


23 


Gautamlputra S'atakarni .... 


91 


21 


81 


24 


Pulimat, Pulomavit, or Pudumayi Efetakarni 


wanting 


28 


29 


35 


Slvairi S'atakarni, or Avi ... 


it 


7 


4 


86 


Sivaskagda S'atakarni, or Skandhasvati - 


ti 


7(9) 


8 


87 


Yajnsiri or Yajna Satakarni Gautamlputra 


89? 


9 (20) 


19 


28 


Vijaya ------ 


6 


6 


6 


29 


Ohandrairi S'atakarni, Vada&rl, or Chandraryna. 


3 


10 


S 


80 


Pulomarchis or PulomaTi ... 


7 


7 


7 



The Vdyu Purdna says there were thirty kings, but gives the names of seventeen 
only; the Bhdgavata Purdna also gives thirty, but with the Vuhnu Purdna names 
only twenty-four, while the Matiya has twenty-nine names. The total periods also 
vary from 435$ to 456 and 460 years. And the Brahm&nda Purdna plans the 12tb, 
13th, and 1 4th of the above list after the 21st. 



266 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

(p. 189), that Nahapana's inscriptions are dated from the Saka era, 
we have in 118, 120 a.d., a fixed point from which to start, and the 
real crux of the whole is to ascertain what interval must be allowed 
between him and Gautamiputra Satakarni, who almost certainly 
was the 23rd king of Pauranik lists. According to them, if the 
Andrabhrityas began to reign about the Christian era, Gautamiputra 
must have reigned in the beginning of the 4th century and Yajnairi, 
the 27th, nearly a century later. Both the inscriptions, however 
and the architecture of Cave No. VIII. in this place, which belongs 
to Nahapana, when compared with those of No. III., which was 
excavated by Gautamiputra, render it improbable that so long an 
interval as two centuries should have elapsed between these two 
reigns. One century is possible, indeed probable, but what the exact 
interval may have been must be left for future investigations. 

The caves themselves are 17 in number, and though a small, are a 
very interesting group. The Chaitya itself is not so remarkable as 
some of those described above, but there are two viharas, Nos. III. 
and VIII., which are very far in advance of any yet met with, and 
display in their facades a richness of decoration quite unlike the 
modest exteriors of those excavated before the Christian era. Not- 
withstanding this they all, except Nos. II. and XVII., belong to the 
Hinayana or first great division of Buddhist caves, being devoid of 
images, or any representation of Buddha as an object of worship, or 
in fact of any of those characteristics which marked the introduction 
of the Mahayana theosophy. 

They are situated about 300 feet above the level of the plain below, 
have a northerly aspect, and extend about a quarter of a mile along 
the face of the hill. Beginning at the west end, they may con- 
veniently be numbered eastwards. But it should be remarked that 
large portions of the rock among these interesting caves, and even 
whole excavations, have been blasted away, whether to obtain me- 
talling and stones for the road and culverts when the neighbouring 
government road was constructed, or by Muhammadans at an earlier 
date, seems uncertain ; at the same time, I am not aware that either 
Hindus or Muhammadans applied gunpowder for blasting rock, until 
taught by our Public "Works officials, and if, under their directions, 
these caves were so damaged 60 years ago, it is only a single 
instance added to others of similar vandalism. 



NASIK. 267 

The terrace that extends all along in front of the caves is pro- 
longed westwards of the first excavation for several hundred feet, 
where there seem to have been some cisterns, and four or five places 
are scarped or quarried out. 

Except the ornamental frieze over the front of the first excava- 
tion, no part of it is finished ; it has been planned for a Vihara, with 
four columns between pilasters in front of a narrow verandah, but 
they are all left square masses. A cell has been begun at each end 
of the verandah. The front wall has been more recently partly 
blasted away. 

Cave II. is a small excavation that may have been originally a 
verandah, 11^ feet by 4£ feet, with two cells at the back ; but the 
front wall and dividing partition have been cut away, and the walls 
pretty nearly covered with sculpture, consisting of sitting and stand- 
ing Buddhas with attendant chatiri-bearera, in some cases unfinished. 
These are the additions of Mahayana Buddhists of the sixth or 
seventh century. The verandah has apparently had two wooden 
pillars, and the projecting frieze is carved with the " rail pattern," 
much weather worn, and apparently very old. On the remaining 
fragment of the back wall of the verandah, close under the roof, is 
a fragment of an inscription, which reads :— 

Sidham Ratio Vdsathiputasa sarapadwmayasa savackhare chlia (?) the 
6 gimapakhe pacham(e) divase .... 

" Siddham ! In the sixth year of the king, the prosperous 
Pudumaya, the Bon of Vasishthi, in the fortnight of Grishma, on the 
5th' (?) day." 

Between this and the next are a tank with two openings above it, 
a large Bcarped out place, and two decayed recesses, one of them a 
tank, and all along this space are blocks of rock blasted out, or fallen 
down from above. 

Cave III. is a large Vihara, the hall of which is 41 feet wide and 
46 deep, with a bench round three sides, and eighteen cells, seven on 
the right side, Bix in the back, and five in the left, besides two open- 
ing from the verandah. (See plan, Plate XIX.) The central door 
into this is rudely sculptured in a style that at once reminds the spec- 
tator of the Sanchi gateways; the side pilasters are divided into six 
compartments, each filled mostly with two men and a woman, in 
different stages of some story which seems to end in the woman 



268 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

being carried off by one of the men. 1 (Plate XX.) Over the door 
are the three symbols, the Bodhi tree, the ddgdba, and the chakra, 
with worshippers, and at each side is a dwdrpdla, or doorkeeper, 
of very ungainly proportions holding up a bunch of flowers. If 
the carving on this door be compared with any of those at Ajanta, 
it will be found very much ruder and less bold, but the style of 
headdress agrees with that on the screen walls at Karld and Kan- 
heri, and in the paintings in Cave X. at Ajanta, which probably belong 
to about the same age. The verandah has Bix octagonal columns 
without bases between highly sculptured pilasters (Plate XXI., 
fig. 1). The capitals of these pillars are distinguished from those 
in the Nahapana Cave No. VIII. by the shorter and less elegant 
form of the bell-shaped portion of them, and by the corners of 
the frame that encloses the torus having small figures attached 
(Plate XXII.) ; both alike have a series of five thin members, over- 
lapping one another and supporting four animals on each capital, 
bullocks, elephants, horses, sphinxes, &c, between the front and 
back pairs of which runs the architrave, supporting a projecting 
frieze, with all the details of a wooden framing copied in it. The 
upper part of the frieze in this case is richly carved with a string 
course of animals under a richly carved rail, resembling in its 
design and elaborateness the rails at Amravati, with which this 
vihara must be nearly, if not quite contemporary. The pillars stand 
on a bench in the verandah, and in front of them is a carved screen, 
supported by three dwarfs on each side the steps to the entrance. 
The details of this cave and No. VHI. are so alike that the one must 
be regarded as a copy of the other, but the capitals in No. VHI. 
are so like those of the Karle Chaitya, while those in the verandah 
of this cave are so much poorer in proportion, that one is tempted 
to suppose this belongs to a much later period, when art had begun 
to decay. The chronology, however, is merely conjectural, and it 
may turn out that Nahapana preceded Gautamlputra by a con- 
siderable period. 8 

> It is difficult to say whether this has any relation to the abduction scene in the 
Udayagiri caves (ante, p. 82). The other groups do not seem to have any affinity 
with those in the east, there certainly is no fighting group nor any other incidents 
which can be identified. 

* The inscriptions in the Nahapana cave No. VIII. ascribe the execution of it too 
distinctly to the members of his family to allow us to suppose that they were executed 



NASIK. 



269 



Next to this is No. IV., mucli destroyed and full of water to a 
considerable depth. The frieze is at a very considerable height, and 




No. 49. Pillar in Nahapana cave, 
Nasik. (From a photograph.) 




No 50. Pillar in Oautamiputra cave, Nasik, 
No. III. (From a photograph.) 1 



long after its excavation. Nor does the difference of character lietween the inscriptions 
Nos. 14, 17, 16, and 18 in Cave VIII., and Nos. 25, 26, and 26a in Cove III. seem 
to warrant any great lapse of time. The workmen of Nahapana, however, would be 
from the west and north, those of Gautamiputra from the south-east, and this most 
be allowed its weight in judging of differences of detail. 

1 The differences between the architectural details of these two viharas are so nearly 
identical with those, that it struck inc. in comparing the Chaitya Karle with that at 
Kanheri (Rock-cut Temples, Plate XI.), that the relative dates must be nearly the 
same. At the same time the architecture of the Nahapana caves (No. VIII.) is 
so simitar to that of the Karle Chaitya and that of Cave No. III. to that of the 
Kanheri Chaitya that the two viharas cannot be very distant in date from the two 
Chaityas. Whether the adjustment is to be made by bringing down the age of the two 
Chaityas to a more modern date than is assumed in the text, or by carrying back that 
of the viharas, or by separating them by a longer interval, can only be determined when 
the inscriptions are more carefully investigated than they have hitherto been. Their 
relative chronology is not doubtful, though their epochal dates are at present undeter- 
mined. — J. F. 



270 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

is carved with the " rail pattern." The verandah has had two octa- 
gonal pillars between antaa, with bell-shaped capitals, surmounted 
by elephants with small drivers and female riders. There has also 
been a plain doorway and two grated windows leading into the cave, 
but only the heads of them remain. From the unusual height and 
the chisel marks in the lower part, apparently recent, it seems as if 
the floor of this cave had been cut away into a cistern below it, 
Indeed, when the cave ceased to be used as a monastery, from the 
breaking through of the floor into the water cistern below, the floor 
seems to have been quite hewn out to form a cistern. This seems 
to have been done in many cases here. 

Cave VIII. is the second large Vihara, and contains six inscrip- 
tions of the family of Nahapana. 1 As already remarked, the six 
pillars (two of them attached) have more elegant bell-shaped Persian 
capitals than those in Cave III., and their bases are in the style of 
those in the Karle Chaitya, and in that next to the Ganesa L6na at 
Junnar ; the frieze also, like those that remain on the other small 
caves between Nos. IV. and VII., iB carved with the simple rail 
pattern. At each end of the verandah is a cell " the benefaction 
of Dakhamitra, the daughter of King Kshaharata Kshatrapa 
Nahapana, and wife of Ushavadata, son of Dinika." The hall 
is about 43 feet wide by 45 feet deep, and is entered by three plain 
doors, and lighted by two windows. It has five benched cells on 
each side and six in the back ; it wants, however, the bench round 
the inner sides that we find in No. III. ; but, aB shown by the capital 
and ornaments still left, it has had a precisely similar dagoba in 
basso rilievo on the back wall, which has been long afterwards hewn 
into a figure of Bhairava. Outside the verandah, too, on the left-hand 
side, have been two rilievos of this same god, evidently the later 
insertions of some Hindu devotee. 

Cave IX. is close to the last, but at a somewhat higher level. In 



1 Trans. Cong. Orient., No. 14, p. 386; 15, p. 841 ; 16, p. 334; 17, p. 336; 18, 
p. 331 ; 19, pp. 327-330. Nos. 16 and 18, however, should be read as one ; line 1 of 
No. 18 being a continuation of line 3 of 16, line 2 of 18 completes line 4 of 16, line 3 
of 18 follows line 5 of 16, and after the word tarva in (the printed copy, p. 834, of) 
line 6 of 16 comes lines 4 of No. 18. The mistake seems to have originated with 
Lieutenant Brett, who copied the portion of the inscription on the end wall as No. vi., 
and that on the back of the verandah as No. v. (Jour. B. B. R. As. Soc. vol. v., p. 56, 
pis. 10 to 12). This was followed by the Messrs. West (J.B. B.R.A. S., vol. vii. 
p. 50), who mode the same portions their Nos. 16 and 18 respectively. 



NASIK. 271 

the left end of the verandah is the fragment of a seat ; the room 
inside is 11 feet 7 inches by 7 feet 10 inches, having a cell, 6 feet 
8 inches square, at the left end, and another, not quite so large, at 
the back, with a bench at the side and back. In the front room 
is carved, on the back wall, in low relief, a sitting figure and attend- 
ants on a lion throne, and on the right-end wall a fat figure of Amba 
on a tiger with attendants, and an Indra on an elephant : all are 
Bmall, clumsily carved, and evidently of late Jaina workmanship. 
An inscription in two lines states that the cave was " the benefac- 
tion of Ramanka, the son of Sivamitra, the writer." 1 

No. X. is a group of chambers, probably the remains of three 
bhikshugrihas or hermitages, with one, two, and three cells respec- 
tively. The first has an inscription of Hamanaka, mentioning an 
endowment of 100 karshapanas for " a garment to the ascetic 
residing in it during the rains." 1 To the left is a tank, and then 
for thirty yards everything has been blasted and quarried away. 

No. XI. seems to be only the inner shrines of a two-storeyed 
cave, the whole front of which has disappeared, and the upper is 
only accessible by a ladder. Both have on each of their three walls 
a sitting Buddha with the usual standing attendants, similar to what 
we find in Caves II. and XVII., and in the later Ajanta CaveB. 
These are, apparently, Mahayana works. Beyond them, another 
fifty feet has been quarried away by blasting, which has been con- 
tinued along the outer portion of the terrace of Cave XII. 

Cave XII. is the third large Vih&ra, though smaller than Nos. 
III., VIII., or XV., and has been executed close to the upper portion 
of the Chaitya cave. The hall measures 22 feet 10 inches wide by 
32 feet 2 inches deep, and has a back aisle screened off by two 
columns, of which the elephants and their riders and the thin 
square members of the capitals only are finished. The steps of the 
shrine door have also been left as a rough block, on which some 
Hindu has carved the shdlunlcka or receptacle for a lihga. The 
shrine has never been finished. On the wall of the back aisle 
is a standing figure of Buddha, 3| feet high ; in the left side of the 
hall, 2 feet 3 inches from the floor, is a recess, 18£ feet long and 4 feet 
3 inches high by 2 feet deep, intended for a seat or perhaps for a row 

1 7Va«». Cong. Orient., 1874, No. 13, p. 346. 
» Trans. Cong. Orient., p. 345, No. 12. 



272 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of metallic images; a cell has been attempted at each end of this, 
but one of them has entered the aisle of the Chaitya-cave just below, 
and the work has then been stopped. On the right side are four 
cells without benches. The verandah is somewhat peculiar, and it 
would seem that, at first, a much smaller cave was projected, or 
else by some mistake it was begun too far to the left. It is ascended 
by half a-dozen steps in front between the two central octagonal 
pillars with very short shafts, and large bases and capitals, the latter 
surmounted by elephants and their riders, and the frieze above 
carved with the plain " rail pattern." They stand on a panelled 
base ; but the landing between the central pair is opposite the left 
window in the back wall of the verandah, to the right of which is the 
principal door, but to the left of the window is also a narrower one. 
The verandah has then been prolonged to the west, and another door 
broken out to the outside beyond the right attached pillar ; at this 
end of the verandah also is an unfinished cell. An inscription * in 
three and a half lines teUs us that it was the work of ** Indragnidatta, 
the son of Dharmadeva, a Northerner, a Yavanaka (or Greek), a 
native of Dattamitri (in the Sauvira country), as a shrine for a 
Chaitya in Mount Trira^mi." But inscriptions like this do not help 
us much as to dates, and all we can say of this cave is that it is 
evidently much later than the Chaitya next it, the verandah a little 
later in style than the Nahapana Cave No. VIII., and the interior 
probably executed at a much later date, or about the early part of 
the sixth century a.d., when image-worship had gained full ascen- 
dancy among the Mahayana Buddhists. 

The next, Cave No. XII., the only Chaitya cave of the group, 
belongs to a very much earlier date ; and though none of the three 
inscriptions* on it supplies certain information on this point, yet 
the name of Mah& Hakusiri, found in one of them, helps us to 
relegate it to some period about or before the Christian era. The 
carving, however, over the door and the pilasters with animal 
capitals on the facade on each side the great arch, and the inser- 
tion of the hooded snake, will, on comparison with the facades 
at Bedsa and Karld, tend to lead us to an early date for this 
cave ; the interior is severely simple, and there are hardly sufficient 

i Trans. Cong. Orient., 1374, p. 345, No. II. 

» Traiu. Cong. Orient., 1874, p. 343, Nos. 8, 9, 10. Prof. Bhandarkar haa 
not attempted the mutilated inecrif tion outside No. 7. 



NASIK. 273 

departures from the earlier forms in the ornamentation to lead us to 




No. SI. View of exterior of the Chaitya Cave at Nasik, from a photograph. 

y is*'-' s 



274 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

assign it to a much later date than the Bedsa and Kondane Ohaitya 
oaves, and I should be inclined to ascribe it to the century before — 
but not distant from — the Christian era, the date to which it 
would seem the next cave also belongs. The doorway (shown in 
Plate XXV.) is evidently of an early date, and the ornament up the 
left side is almost identical with that found on the pillars of the 
northern gateway at Sanchi, 1 with which it consequently is in all 
probability coeval (1st century a.d.). 

The carving over the doorway, which represents the wooden frame- 
work which filled all openings, of a similar class, at that age, is of a 
much more ornamental character than usual, or than the others, 
shown on this facade. Animals are introduced as in the Lomas 
Rishi (woodcut 3). So also are the trisul and shield emblems, in a 
very ornamental form, but almost identical with those shown in 
Plate XVII., fig. 5, as existing in the Manmodi cave at Junnar, 
which is probably of about the same age as this Chaitya. 

The interior measures 38 feet 10 inches by 21 feet 7 inches, and the 
nave, from the door up to the dagoba, 25 feet 4 inches by 10 feet, 
and 23 feet 3 inches high (Plate XXIV.). The cylinder of the 
dagoba is 5^ feet in diameter and 6 feet 3 inches high, surmounted 
by a small dome and very heavy capital. The gallery under the 
great arch of the window is supported by two pillars, which in all 
cases in the Chaitya caves are in such a form as strongly to suggest 
that a wooden frame was fastened between them, probably to hold a 
screen, which would effectually shut in the nave from observation 
from outside. Five octagonal pillars, with high bases of the Karle' 
pattern but without capitals, on each side the nave, and five without 
bases round the dagoba, divide off the side aisles. The woodwork 
that once occupied the front arch, and the roof of the nave has long 
ago disappeared. Whether there ever were pillars in advance of 
the present facade as at Bedsa, or a screen as at KarlS, cannot be 
determined with certainty, unless by excavating largely among the 
debris in front. I incline to think there was something of the kind, 
but the Viharas, inserted so close to it on either side, must have 
hastened the ruin of the side walls of it. 

Cave XTV. is at a rather lower level even than the Chaitya cave, 
and some distance in advance of it, but the front and interior have 

1 Tree and Serpent Worship, woodcuts 17 and 18, p. 114. 



NASIK. 275 

been so filled up with earth as to conceal it from general view. It 
is a small Vihara, 14 feet 3 inches square (Plate XXVI,, figs. 2 
and 3), with six cells, two on each side, filled nearly to the roof with 
earth, so that it is not known whether they contain stone bedB or 
not ; their doors are surmounted by the Chaitya-arch ornament con- 
nected by a frieze of " rail pattern " in some places wavy. In the 
front wall are two lattice windows, and in the verandah two slender 
square pillars, the middle portion of the shaft being chamfered to 
an octagonal shape. Over one of the windows is a Pali inscription 
stating that the cave " was constructed by the Sramana officer of 
Krishnaraja of the Satavahana race, residing in Nasika." If there 
was no other Krishnaraja of the Satavahana race but the one 
mentioned in the Purdnas, then, as he was the second of the Andhra- 
bhrityas, if we knew his age, 1 we should be able at once to fix that 
of this cave ; and its exceedingly plain style, and the remarkable 
rectangularity of all its parte, agree perfectly with what we might 
expect in a Vihara of the firBt or second century b.c. Its close 
family likeness to No. XII. at Ajanta and others at Baja and 
Kondane, all of the earliest age, would lead us to attribute it to 
about the same date. 

Over thiB last and close by the Chaitya-cave, from which it is ap- 
proached by a stair (being, like No. XII., at a considerably higher 
level) is No. XV., another large Vihara (see plan, Plate XXVI., 
fig. 1), its hall varying in width from 37^ feet at the front to 44 
feet at the back and 61^ feet deep. Originally it was little over 
40 feet deep, but at a much later date it was altered and extended 
back by one " Marma, a worshipper," as recorded on the wall. It 
has eight cells on each side, one on the right rather a recess than a 
cell, two on the left with stone beds, while in the back are two cells 
to the left of the antechamber and one to the right, with one more 
on each side of the antechamber and entered from it. The hall is 
surrounded by a low bench as in Cave III., and in the middle of the 
floor is a low platform, about 9 feet square, apparently intended 

1 He is placed by Prinsep and Mr. Fergusson about the Christian era ; by Jones in 
the 9th century B.C. ; by Wilford about 200 a.d. In my second Archaol, Report, I 
accepted Prinsep's assumption from the Pur&nas, that the Sungo, Kanwa, and Andhra 
dynasties succeeded one another in regular sequence ; as already indicated, I. doubt if 
this is correct, and suppose that the Andhra dynasty was to some extent contem- 
porary with tUe Pauranik fsungas and Kanwas. — J. B. 

S 2 



276 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

for an deana or seat ; but whether to place an image upon for wor- 
ship, or as a " seat of the law," where the Th6ra or high prieBt 
might sit when teaching and discussing, I am not prepared to say. 
On the right-hand side, and nearer the front, are three small circu- 
lar elevations in the floor much like ordinary millstones. Are these 
seats also for members of the clergy, or are they not rather baBes 
on which to set small moveable ddgcfoas, &c. ? But when the cave 
was altered and extended backward, the floor seems also to have 
been lowered a few inches to form the low dais and these bases. 

The antechamber is slightly raised above the level of the hall, 
from which it is divided by two richly carved columns between antae. 
(see Plate XXL, fig. 3). On either side the shrine door is a gigantic 
diodrpdla, 9£ feet high, with an attendant female, but so besmeared 
with soot — for the cave has been long occupied by Bhairagis, that minor 
details are scarcely recognisable. These dwdrpdlas, however, hold lotus 
stalks, have the same elaborate head-dresses, with a small dagoba 
in the front of one, and a figure of Buddha in the other, and have 
the same attendants and vidyddharas flying over head as we find in 
the later Buddhist caves at Aurangabad. In the shrine, too, is the 
colossal image of Buddha, 10 feet high, seated with his feet on a 
lotus flower and holding the little finger of his left hand between the 
thumb and forefinger of his right He is attended by two gigantic 
eAawn-bearers with the same distinguishing features as the dwdrpdla. 
All this points to about the seventh century a.d. or later, as the age 
of alteration of this cave. 

Fortunately we have an inscription of the seventh year of Yajna 
Satakarni Gautamiputra, stating that " after having been under 
excavation for many years " it was then carried to completion by 
the wife of the commander-in-chief. 1 Unfortunately the age of 
Yajfia £atakarni, who was one of the later Andhrabhrityas, has not 
yet been determined with anything like certainty. It must, con- 
sequently, for the present remain doubtful to what part of the cave 
this inscription refers. It is quite clear, however, that the inner and 
outer parts were excavated at widely different ages. The pillars 
of the verandah have the water-pot bases, and the bell-shaped 
capitals of those in Karlg Chaitya. Those of the sanctuary are 
represented (Plate XXI., fig. 3), and belong to a widely distant 

1 Tram. Cong. Orient., p. 339-40, No. 4 (misprinted "24" both on p. 839, 
340) j and Second Archaolog. Report of W. India, p. 182. 



KAS1K. 277 

age. 1 Like No. XII. it has a side door near the left end of the 
verandah, and a cell in that end. The facade has four octagonal 
pillars between antse, the shafts more slender than in any of the 
other caves, but the bases of the same pattern disproportionately 
large, as if the shafts had been reduced in thickness at a later date. 
They stand on a panelled base, with five low steps up to it between 
the middle pair. A low screen wall in front is nearly quite de- 
stroyed, except at the east end, where a passage led to a large 
irregular and apparently unfinished apartment with two plain octa- 
gonal pillars with square bases between pilasters in front, and having 
a water-cistern at the entrance. 

About a dozen yards from this, and approached along the side of 
the cliff by a few modern steps, is a plain unfinished chamber, and 
a little farther on is No. XVI., a decayed chamber half filled with 
rubbish. The rock has been much blasted and quarried below this, 
and the path along the intervening 30 or 35 yards is over rough 
broken scarp to No. XVII., a large, nondescript, irregular cave, 
about 30 feet deep, with three shrines. To judge from the holes in 
the floor and roof it might be supposed that the front and partitions 
in it had been of wood ; the whole facade, however, is destroyed. 
In front are several cisterns ; on the floor is a raised stone bench and 
a circular base as if for a small structural d&goba ; and all the shrines 
as well as many compartments on the walls are filled with sculptures 

1 I speak with diffidence, never having seen these caves, and in such cases personal 
inspection is so valuable for determining details. Hat, so far as I can judge trom pho- 
tographs, the facade of this cave belongs to the Nahapana age, or earlier, and could 
not have been executed after the Gautamiputra Cave No. III., and Yajna Sfi certainly 
came after that king. It is also a curious coincidence, that if the Pauranik date for 
the last-named king were correct (407 aj>.), the architecture and the imagery of the 
sanctuary of Cave XV. would be in perfect accordance with it. In fact, the age of 
these caves still remains to me a mystery. With regard to the Chaitya, and its accom- 
panying vihara (No. XIV.), there seemB little doubt they are before the Christian era. 
From that central point, the caves seem to spread right and left. I would place the 
facades of No. XV. next the Cave XII. After this the Nahapana Cave VI1L followed 
at a considerable interval by the Gautamiputra Cave III., and No. II. at one end and 
No. VII. at the other complete the Beries in the sixth and seventh century, and 
between these great landmarks the remaining caves are easily arranged. Whether this 
is so or not must be determined by investigation on the spot and a re-examination of 
the inscriptions. Meanwhile it seems at all events worth while drawing attention to 
this view whatever it may eventually prove to be worth.— J. F. 



278 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of Buddha attended by Padmapani and Vajrapani such as we have 
only met with here in the two shrines high up on the scarp at 
No. XI., but so like what is found at Aurangabad, Elura, and 
Ajanta, that there can be no hesitation in ascribing it to a late age. 
Among the many repetitions of Buddha and attendants is a small 
figure on the wall that cuts off the third shrine from the larger 
portion of the cave, of Buddha reclining on his right side as repre- 
sented entering nirvana, much as he is found in Singhalese temples 
at the present day, and of which larger representations are found at 
Ajanta, Kholvi, and Aurangabad. All these, and the female figures of 
Tara, L6chana, and Mamukhi found in the shrines, clearly show that 
this was a Mahayana temple. The pillars in front of the entrance 
to the first, shrine are also of a much more modern type than in 
any of the other caveB here. 

Farther on is a small rude chamber much ruined, and 45 yards 
from it is a recess with an inscription over it 1 of Pulumai, the Bon 
of Vasishthr, twenty or 25 yards beyond, along a difficult scarp, was 
a small Bhikshu's house, the lower part of which, as in Nos. IV., 
&c, has all been quarried away. It probably consisted of a 
verandah with two small chambers at the back. The frieze is still 
pretty entire, and whilst preserving the copies of wooden forms, it 
is ornamented with a string of animal figures as in that of Cave I. ; 
the ends of the projecting beams represented as bearing it, are 
carved with conventionalised forms of the Buddhist trisula or symbol 
of dharma, the prongs in one case being changed into cats or some 
such animals ; seated on the lower beam under the rock at the west 
end is carved an owl, and at each end of the ornamented " rail 
pattern " is a rider on a sort of female centaur, — probably a Greek 
idea. The inscriptions speak of a cave and two (if not three) tanks, 
but give no royal name. 1 

These Nasik caves, like those at Kanheri, belong principally to 
the times of the Kshaharata and Andhrabhritya kings, the former 
of Central India and the latter of the Dekhan. The silver coins of 
the first-named dynasty have been found in abundance in Gujarat, and 



1 Trans. Cony. Orient., p. 338, No. 3. Among the Andhrabhritya* there was a 
Putumayi, or Pulumavi, or PulomAvit, the successor of Gautamiputra. 
* Trans. Cong. Orient., 1874, pp. 842, 343, Nos. 1 and 2. 



NASIK. 279 

have been examined and described ; the coins of the Andhrabhrityas 
seem to have been mostly of lead, or a mixture of that metal with 
copper, and have been found at Kolapur and near the mouth of 
the Krishna, where the dynasty had their capital in later times. 
These coins are now attracting attention, 1 and when properly 
examined, they, together with the numerous inscriptions in these 
caves, when they too are correctly copied and translated, may lead 
to a solution of the chronological difficulties which still hang over 
the reigns of the kings of these two dynasties. It is to be hoped 
that this may be successfully accomplished before long, for if the 
dates of the Andhrabhritya ■ kings were ascertained there would 
practically be very little ambiguity about the age of any of the 
caves in Western India. 

1 Ind. AtU., voL vi. pp. 274, 277. 



280 



CHAPTER VIII. 
THE AJANTA CAVE TEMPLES. 

Ajanta, as is well known, is situated at the head of one of the 
passages or ghats that lead down from the Indhyadri hills, dividing 
the table-land of the Dekhan from Khandesh, in the valley of the 
Tapti. Four miles W.N/W. of this town are the caves to which it 
gives name. Most other groupB of Buddhist caves are excavated 
on the scarps of hillB, with extensive views from their verandahs ; 
those of Ajanta are buried in a wild, lonely glen, with no vista but 
the rocky Bcarp on the opposite side. They are approached from 
Fardapur, a small town at the foot of the ghat, and about three and 
a half miles north-east from them. They are excavated in the face 
of an almost perpendicular scarp of rock, about 250 feet high, 
sweeping round in a curve of fully a semicircle, and forming the 
north or outer side of a wild secluded ravine, down which comes a 
small stream. Above the caves the valley terminates abruptly in 
a waterfall of Beven leaps, known as the sdt kund, the lower of 
which may be from 70 to 80 feet high, and the others 100 feet 
more. The caves extend about 600 yards from east to weBt round 
the concave wall of amygdaloid trap that hems in the stream on 
its north or left side, and vary in elevation from about 35 to 100 
feet above the bed of the torrent, the lowest being about a third 
of the arc from the east end. 

The whole of the caveB have been numbered like houses in a street, 
commencing from the east or outer end, and terminating at the inner 
extremity by the caves furthest up the ravine. This enumeration, it 
will be understood, is wholly without reference to either the age or 
purpose of the caves, but wholly for convenience of description. 
The oldest are the lowest down in the rock, and practically near the 
centre, being numbers VIII. to XIII., from which group they 
radiate right and left, to No. I. on the one hand, XXIX. on the 
other. 

From the difficulty of access to them, the Ajanta caves Were but 
little visited until within the last forty years. The first Europeans 



AJANTA. 281 

known to have seen them were some officers of the Madras army in 
1819. 1 Lieutenant (now General Sir) James E. Alexander of the 
Lancers, on a tour which he made privately through the Nizam's 
territories in 1824, visited them and sent a short account of them 
and their wall paintings to the Royal Asiatic Society, which was 
published in their Transactions* in 1829. Captain Gresley and 
Mr. Ralph were there in 1828, when Dr. J. Bird was sent up by 
Sir John Malcolm to examine them. Mr. Ralph's lively notice of 
the paintings appeared in the Bengal Asiatic Society's Journal in 
1836. 8 Dr. Bird's account was published in his Historical Researches 
(1847), a work in which the erroneousness of the author's opinions 
on Buddhism 4 is only matched by the inaccuracies of the drawings 
that illustrate it. An interesting and trustworthy description of 
them appeared in the Bombay Courier in 1839, from Lieutenant 
Blake. 6 Mr. Fergusson visited them in 1839, and in 1843 laid before 
the Royal Asiatic Society his paper on the Rock-Cut Temples of 
India, about a dozen pageB of which is devoted to a critical architec- 
tural description of the Ajanta caves and their paintings. 8 

1 Trans. Bomb. Lit. Soc, vol. iii. p. 520. 

1 T. R. A. &, vol. ii. p. 362. 

8 J. A. S. B., vol. v. pp. 557-561 ; see also some copies of inscriptions by the same, 
ib. pp. 348, 556. 

* Conf. Jour. A. Soc. Beng., vol. v. p. 560. 

6 This was reprinted with other papers as A description of the ruined city of Alandu, 
$c., alto an account of the Buddhist Cave Templet of Ajanta in Khandes, with 
ground-plan illustrations, by a Subaltern (Bombay Times Press, 1844), 140 pp. cr. 8vo., 
with two plates. 

" Dr. John Wilson visited them early in 1838 (Life, p. 278), but his account of 
them (Jour. Bom. B. JR. A. Soc, vol. iii. pt. ii. pp. 71, 72) is a mere resume of what 
had previously been written by Mr. Fergusson and others. A good description of the 
principal caves appeared in Dr. J. Muir'a Account of a Journey from Agra to Bombay 
in 1854. 

About 1862 Major Gill's stereoscopic photographs of the Rock Temples of Ajanta and 
JEllora were published ; and in 1864 his One hundred Stereoscopic Illustrations of Archi- 
tecture and Natural History in Western India, — both volumes with descriptive letter- 
press by J. Fergusson, Esq., F.E.S. In 1863 Dr. Bhau Daji published transcripts and 
translations of the inscriptions which he found in the caves, — Jour. Bom. B. R. A. Soc^ 
vol. viL pp. 55-74 j these require careful revision. The writer visited them at Christmas 
1868, and again in 1867, and contributed his notes on them to the Times of India ; 
these were also printed separately ( l6mo, pp. 58) as The Rock-cut Temples of Ajanta, $c. 
Another visit was paid to them in May 1872 (Ind. Ant., vol. iii. pp. 269-274). An 
account of the wall-paintiugs, Ac. has also been printed officially by the Bombay Govern- 



282 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

In consequence of the interest this oreated in the subject, and 
representations addressed by him to the Court of Directors of the 
Bast India Company, Captain Gill, of the Madras Army, was appoin- 
ted, in 1845, to copy the paintings in these oaves, and for several 
years afterwards sent home a series of extremely beautiful facsimile 
copies of the principal subjects on the walls and roofs of these cavea. 
These paintings, all except in three or four, were unfortunately lent 
the Crystal Palace Company for exhibition at Sydenham, and were 
destroyed in the disastrous fire in 1860. Fortunately before that, 
tracings of several of them were made by Mr. Geo. Scharf , and repro- 
duced as woodcuts in Mrs. Speir's " Life in India," and are reproduced 
further on, woodcuts 54 to 61. 

Ajanta was not visited by Hiwen Thsang, the indefatigable 
Chinese pilgrim of the seventh century, but after visiting Pulikesi, 
the king of Maharashtra, at his capital, probably Badami, he says, 
— " Sur les frontieres orientales du royaume, il y a une grande mon- 
taigne qui offre des sommets entasses les uns Bur les autreB, des 
chaines de rochers, des pics a double e*tage, et des cretes escarpees,, 
Anciennement il y avait un couvent qui avait 6b6 construit dans une 
sombre vallee. Ses batiments Aleves et ses ealles profondes occupaient 
les larges ouvertures des rochers et s'appuyaient sur leB pics : ses 
pavilions et ses tours a double e*tage etaient adosses aux cavernes et 
regardaient la vallee. 

" Ce couvent avait e'te' bati par le Lo-han '0-tche-lo (lArhat At- 
chara). 

" Le Vihdra du couvent a environ cent pieds de hauteur. Au 
centre, s'eleve une statue en pierre du Bovddha, qui a environ soix- 
ante et dix pieds. Elle est surmontee de sept calottes en pierre, qui 
sont suspendues dans l'air, sans aucune attache apparente. Elles 
sont separees chacune par un intervalle d'environ trois pieds. D'a- 

ment as Notes on the Bauddha Bock Temples of Ajanta, their Paintings and Sculptures, 
$c. During the dry seasons of 1872-73, 1874-75, 1875-76, and l877-78,Mr. Griffiths, 
of the Bombay School of Art, was engaged with a staff of students recopying the 
frescoes, and finished most of what is left of them in Caves I. and II., with some parts 
of those in Caves VI., IX., and XVI., {Ind. Ant,, vol. i. p. 354 ; voL ii. p. 152 ; vol. Hi. 
pp. 25 If. ; vol. iv. p. 253). Two papers have appeared on some of these paintings, 
one by Bajendral&la Mitra, LL.D., " On Representations of Foreigners in the Ajanta 
frescoes" (Jow- A. S. Ben., vol. xlvii. pp. 62 ft) » and the other by J. Fergusson, D.C.L., 
F.RS., "On the identification of the portrait of Cbosroes II. among the paintings in 
the caves of Ajanta" (J. R. As. Soc. N.S., vol. xi. pp. 155 fl'.) 



AJANTA. 283 

pres les anciennes descriptions de ce pays, elles sont soutenues par 
la force des vcbux du Lo-han (de l'Arhat). 

" Suivant quelques personnes, ce prodige est du a la force de ses 
facult^s surnaturelles, et, selon d'autres, k la puissance de sa science 
m^dicale. Mais on a beau interroger lliistoire, il est impossible de 
trouver l'explication de ce prodige. Tout autour du Vihara on a 
sculpte" les parois de la pierre, et Ton a represents les evdnements de 
la vie de Jou-lai (du Tathagata) dans tous les lieux ou il a rempli le 
r61e' de Bddhisattva, les presages heureux qui ont signale son eleva- 
tion a la dignity d'Arhat, et les prodiges divins qui ont suivi son 
entree dans le Nirvdna. Le ciseau de 1' artiste a figure* tous ces faits 
dans les plus petits details, sans en oublier un seul. 

" En dehors des portes du couvent, au midi et au nord, a gauche 
et a droite, on voit un elephant en pierre. J'ai entendu dire k des 
gens du pays que, de temps en tempB, ceB (quatre x ) elephants pouss- 
ent des cris terribles qui font trembler la terre. Jadis Teh' in-na- 
p'ou-sa (Djina Bddhisattva) s'arreta souvent dans ce couvent." 2 

This account can only be applied to Ajanta, and though only 
reported on hearsay is remarkably descriptive of these caves, but of 
no other group. 

In some respects the series of caves at Ajanta is more complete 
and more interesting than any other in India. All the caves there 
belong exclusively to the Buddhist religion without any admixture 
either from the Hindu or Jaina forms of faith, and they extend 
through the whole period during which Buddhism prevailed as a 
dominant religion in that country. Two of them, a Chaitya cave 
and a vihara, IX. and VIII., certainly belong to the second century 
before Christ, and two others, No. XXVI., a chaitya at one end of the 
series, and No. 1, a vihara at the other end, were certainly not 
finished in the middle of the seventh century, when Buddhism was 
tottering to its fall. Between these two periods, the 29 caves found 
here are spread tolerably evenly over a period of more than eight cen- 
turies, with only a break, which occurs, not only here, but everywhere, 
between the Hinayana and Mahayana forms of faith. Five or six 
caves at Ajanta. belong to the former school, and consequently to the 
first great division into whioh we have classed these monuments. 

1 This interpolation of M. Julion's is evidently a mistake, only two elephants are 
spoken of. 

* Stan. Julien, Mem. sur iet Cant. Occident, tome ii. pp. 151-52. 



284 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The remaining 23 belong as distinctly to the seoond division, and 
possess all the imagery and exuberance of the latter school. 

Paintings. 

Another characteristic of these caves is that they still possess 
their paintings in a state of tolerable completeness. From the 
fragments that remain there is very little doubt that all the Buddhist 
caves were originally adorned with paintings, but in nine cases out of 
ten these have perished, either from the effects of the atmosphere, 
which in that climate is most destructive, or from wanton damage 
done by ignorant men. Forty years ago those at Ajan$a were very 
tolerably complete, and their colours exhibited a freshness which was 
wonderful, considering their exposure to the vicissitudes of an 
Indian climate for from 15 to 18 centuries. Since that time, how- 
ever, bees, bats, and barbarians have done a great deal to obliterate 
what was then so nearly perfect. Enough, however, still remains or 
has been copied, and so saved, to show what was originally intended, 
and how it was carried into effect. As no such series of pictures 
exists now in any other series of caves, its being found here adds 
immensely to the interest of this group. Besides this it affords an 
opportunity, not only of judging of the degree of excellence to 
which the Indians reached in this branch of the fine arts, but presents 
a more vivid picture of the feelings and aspirations of the Buddhists 
during their period of greatest extension in India than we can 
obtain from any other source. 

In "Western India the older caves seem as a rule to have been 
decorated with painting, l while sculpture was as generally employed 
in the East. To receive these paintings the walls were left somewhat 
rough on the surface, and were then covered with a thin coating of 
plaster composed of fine dust, in some instances at least, of pounded 
brick, mixed with fibres and the husks of rice. This was smoothed and 
covered with a coating of some ground colour, on which the designs 
were drawn and then painted. The pillars being smoothed with the 
chisel seem to have received only a heavy ground coating to prepare 
them to receive the scenes or figureB to be drawn on them. 

In about half the Ajanta caves there are no remains of painting, 
and in those that are unfinished there perhaps never was any ; but 

1 A somewhat detailed account of these paintings will be found in my Notes on the 
Bauddha Bock- Temples of Ajanfd, their Paintings and Sculptures, ifc, printed by 
the Government of Bombay, 1879 (112 pp. 4to., with 31 plates). 



AJANTA. 285 

in about 13 of them fragments of greater or less extent still exist, 
and most of these were no doubt originally covered with paintings. 
It is only, however, in about seven caves that the fragments left are 
large or of special interest ; these are caves Nos. I., II., IX., X., 
XVI., and XVII. 

Of the date of theBe paintingB it is difficult to form a very definite 
estimate, nor are they all of the same age. Over the door on the in- 
side of the front wall of Cave IX. is a fine fragment, which probably 
belongs to an earlier date than the major part of the paintings in 
Caves I., II., &c. ; while again on the front wall of Cave I. are two 
large fragments that seem probably to be of a later date than the 
others. There are, moreover, in Cave IX. some portions of one 
layer of painting over another, of which the lower must be the older, 
probably a good deal older than the upper, or indeed than most of 
the painting in the other caves. We shall probably not be far wrong 
if we attribute the generality of the paintings in Caves I., II., XVI., 
XVII., &c. to the sixth century, which we may gather from the style 
of alphabetical character used in a few painted inscriptions and 
names of figures is the date of these paintings. The later pictures 
may then be attributed to the seventh century, and the earlier ones, 
in Caves IX. and X., may possibly date even as far back as the 
second — in the time of the Andhrabhritya kings, the great patrons 
of Buddhism in the firBt three centuries of our era. 

The scenes represented are generally from the legendary history 
of Buddha and the Jdtdkas, the visit of Asita to the infant Buddha, 
the temptation of Buddha by Mara and his forces, Buddhist miracles, 
the Jataka of king Sibi, Indra and Sachi, court scenes, legends of 
the Nagas, hunting scenes, battle pieces, &c. Few of these pictures 
have ever yet been identified, because no visitor has had the time to 
spare on the spot and the books at hand to refer to, in order to 
determine which story each represents. The scenes depicted, too, 
separately cover a much larger space, and are more complicated, 
than would at first sight appear to be the case. They are divided, 
too, into separate acts or sections in a way that is sometimes 
perplexing. The copies hitherto made are often only of parts of a 
whole story, while large portions have been destroyed, — and this must 
be borne in mind by those who use them in attempting to read their 
contents. 

Certain parts of the pictures are always represented conventionally 



286 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and it is necessary to note this before further examination. For 
example, whenever the scene of any picture is intended to be among 
the Himalayas or other mountains, this is indicated by the background 
being chequered by what might seem to represent bricks, usually 
with one or two sides of a dark or bluish green and the other light ; 
these are the rocks, presented with a conventionalism worthy of 
Chinese artists. To interpret the meaning, however, there are 
frequently represented on these blocks, figures of birds and monkeys, 
and sometimes of Bhill or other wild tribes of bowmen and the 
fabled inhabitants of the hills — Kiratas, Guhyakas, and Kinnaras ; 
the latter are the musicians to the mountain gods with human busts 
and the legs and tails of birds. Torrents and trees are also occasion- 
ally depicted. 

It may be remarked that this mode of representing mountain 
scenery is employed also in the sculptures, — especially in the 
favourite one in Brahmanical caves where Ravana is represented 
under Mount Kailasa trying to carry it off. 

Rivers and the sea are equally fantastically drawn, and sometimes 
with rocky shores. But the fishes, sankhas, &c. in them and a 
boat, generally interpret the representation at once. 

Doors and gateways are represented always in one form, as an 
entrance between two jambs surmounted by a semi-circular coping 
terminating in the Chaitya window ornament at either end ; usually 
a dwdrapdla, dartmn, or chokidar is represented standing in or near it, 
but in many cases some other figure is passing in or out and 
connecting the scene inside with that in the court, street, or 
champaign. 

The palaces or buildings are represented by a flat roof over the 
heads of the figures, supported by slender pillars, often with blue 
capitals, and commonly dividing the area within into a central hall 
and two side aisles or verandahs. 

The dresses are very various but pretty clearly distinctive of the 
classes represented. The great ones, Devas, Rajas, Diwans, and 
nobles wear but little clothing, at least above the waist, but much 
jewellery, armlets, necklaces, fillets, and high crowns or mukiUas. 
Men of lower rank are often more covered, but have little or no 
jewellery. Bhikshus and monks usually are clothed by their $da. 
or robe, which leaves only the right shoulder bare. Ranis and 
ladies of distinction, and perhaps also their more personal servants, 



A.TANTA. 287 

wear much jewellery on their persons but of different sorts according 
to their rank. The Ranis are frequently, if not always, represented 
almost as if they were nude; very close examination, however, 
shows that that is not intended, but that they are dressed in — 

" A wondrous work of thin transparent lawn." 

— so thin indeed that the painter has failed to depict it, and has 
usually contented himself by slightly indicating it in a few very 
light touches of whitish colour across the thighs, and by tracing its 
flowered border, and painting the chain by which it was held up 
round the waist. 

Dancing women are represented much as they would be now in 
an abundance of flowing coloured clothing. Dam and Kaiichukmis 
— household slaves or servants — wear boddices or cholis and a sari 
round the loins, usually of striped cloth. 

Thirty years ago there were some fine fragments of painting on the 
walls of Cave X., the few portions of which now remaining have all 
been scribbled over by natives. These paintings are of a very early 
date, the figures, Plate XXIX., differing in costume from those in 
the other caves ; the dresses of the human figures belong to the 
age of the Satakarnis, and can hardly be attributed to a later date 
than the latter half of the second century a.d. They were nfostly in 
outline, but the drawing was strikingly bold and true ; on the left 
wall was a procession of men, some on foot and others on horseback, 
variously dressed and armed, some with halberts, and with them 
groups of women, who appear to have formed part of a procession, 
one carrying what appears to be a relic casket, with an umbrella 
borne over it, or over a raja who stands before it. In another place 
is the Bodhidruma or sacred tree hung with offerings, and people 
worshipping it, as is so frequently 
represented in the sculptures at 
Sanchi and elsewhere. There are 
also two drawings of a gateway, 
which at once remind us of those 
at the great tope of Sanchi in 
Bhopal, as well as of the mar- 
riage ioranas still set up in wood 
in Malwa. Elephants and people 

in prOCeBSlOn Covered a portion No 52. Chhadanta Elephant from Cave XVI. 




288 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of the right wall, and among the former was one with six tusks 
(chhadanta). 1 To the right of them was a building with peacocks, 
&c. about it; then a king and his rant, seated with attendants 
and approached by two figures, one of them carrying some objects 
hung from the ends of a pole. In the next scene the same two 
men were saluting or supplicating the raja and his consort; again, 
apparently the raja stands addressing her seated in an attitude 
betokening sorrow ; and still behind, to the right, were other figures. 

The paintings between the ribs of the aisleB of Cave X. are of much 
later date, and in one case at least there is a more modern inscrip- 
tion painted over the older work on the walls. Near the front, 
on the left wall, however, is a painted inscription in much older 
characters, like those of the inscription of Va&shthiputra on the 
right side of the great arch. 8 

In these and in the other old portions, the dresses, jewellery, &c. all 
remind us most vividly of the style of the early sculptures at Sanchi, 
in the verandah and capitals of the Karle Chaitya-cave, on the 
capitals at B&dsa, in the vihara of Gautamiputra I. at Nasik, and in 
the oldest discovered sculptures at Mathura. A broad heavy neck- 
chain is usually prominent, with large oblong discs or jewels slipped 
over it ; large earrings, sometimes oblong, and apparently resting 
on the shoulders ; many heavy rings on the wriBts and legs of the 
females, who also have the hair covered in front in a peculiar style, 
and have a circular yellow disc or tilaka on the forehead ; a sort 
of high turban with a knob in front is worn by the males, and the 
upper classes of neither sex wear much clothing except jewellery 
above the waist. Soldiers are armed with halberts, spears, and 
bows and arrows. 

Between the ribs of the arched roof there are figures of Buddhas, 
rosettes, &c, but they are not of earlier date than the sixth or 
seventh century. 

1 Mrs. Speire'e Life in Ancient India, p. 266, from which the woodcut is taken. Maya 
on the conception of Buddha ia said to have dreamed that she Baw a six-tusked white 
elephant descend through space and enter her right side (Beal's Romantic Hut. of 
Buddha, p. 87). The Ceylon books say she dreamed that an elephant from Chadanta 
(in the Himalayas, famous for its breed of elephants) rubbed her side. RajendralAla 
Mitra thinks it must hare been the Hippopotamus sivalensis : {Buddha Gayd, p. 214). 

1 In the Illustrated News (vol. xv. p. 173), Sept. 8, J 849, are small woodcuts of 
two of these wall scenes. 

• J. B. B. R. A, S., vol. vii. p. 63. 



AJANTA. 289 

Early Buddhist Caves. 

As mentioned above, five, probably six, of the caves at AjantS, 
belong to the first division of Buddhist Caves, and consequently to 
the older or Hinayana sect. The remaining twenty-three belong to 
the more modern class of caves of the Mahayana sect, and will 
be described in the next book which is their proper place. 

Although the older caves cannot boast among them of any Chaityas 
so magnificent as that of Karle\ nor any viharas to compare with Nos. 
III. and VIII. at Nasik, they form a very compact group. They 
are too of considerable interest, as being part of a series of caves so 
complete in themselves as those at Ajanta, and as illustrating in a 
marked manner the differences between the earlier and later forms of 
Buddhist art. 

The lowest down of the whole, and probably the oldest, is No. 
VIII., a small vihara, with a hall 32 feet 4 inches wide by about 17 in. 
deep and 10 feet high. There are two cells at each end, and two at 
each side of the antechamber to the shrine. The latter is entered by 
a low door, and contains only a low stone bench at the back, but no 
trace of an image. The whole of the front of this cave has fallen 
away, and it was so choked up with earth that it was only lately that 
it could be examined, and very little architecture remains by which 
its age could be determined. Its position, however, so low down in 
the rock is an almost certain indication of its antiquity, and it holds 
exactly the same relative position to No. IX., the oldest Chaitya 
here, which the Cave No. XIV. does to the Chaitya Cave at Nasik 
(ante, p. 274), that there can be little doubt that the two bear the same 
relation to one another, and whatever the age of No. IX. is deter- 
mined to be, that of No. VIII. follows as a matter of course, as its 
satellite. 

Cave IX. may for many reasons be considered not only the oldest 
Chaitya in Ajanta, but as one of the earliest of its class yet dis- 
covered in the west of India. It i8 probably not so old as that at 
Bhaja (woodcut, No. 1.), for the whole of its front is in stone, with the 
single exoeption of the open screen in the arch, which was in wood, as 
was the case in all the early caves of Hinayana class. There is, how- 
ever, no figure sculpture on the front, as at Karl§ and Kondan6, and all 
the ornaments upon it are copied more literally from the wood than 
in almost any other cave, except that at Bedsa, which it very much 

T1U. T 



290 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

t 

resembles. Another peculiarity indicative of age is that its plan is 
square (Plate XXVIII.), and the aisles are flat roofed and lighted 
by windows, and the columns that divide them from the nave slope 
inwards at an angle somewhere between that found at Bhaja and 
that at Bedsa. 

In many respects the design of its facade resembles that of the 
Chaitya at Nasik, but it is certainly earlier, and on the whole there 
can be little hesitation in classing it with the caves at Bedsa, and 
consequently in assuming its date to be about 100 B.C., and more 
probably rather a few years years earlier than a few later. 

This Chaitya is 45 feet deep by 22 feet 9 inches wide and 23 feet 
2 inches high. (Plate XXVIEL, figs. 3 and 4, p. 98.) A colonnade 
all round divides the nave from the aisles, and at the back the pillars 
form a semicircular apse, in the centre of which stands the ddgoba, 
about 7 feet in diameter ; its base is a plain cylinder, 5 feet high, 
supporting a dome 4 feet high by about 6 feet 4 inches in diameter, 
surmounted by a square capital about \\ feet high, and carved on 
the sides in imitation of the " Buddhist railing." It represents a 
relic box, and is crowned by a projecting lid, a sort of abacus con- 
sisting of six plain fillets, each projecting over the one below. This 
most probably supported a wooden umbrella, as at Karle 1 . Besides 
the two pillars inside the entrance, the nave has 21 plain octagonal 
columns without base or capital, 10 feet 4 inches high, supporting 
an entablature, 6 feet 8 inches deep, from which the vaulted roof 
springs, and which has originally been fitted with wooden ribs. 
The aisles are flat-roofed, and only an inch higher than the columns ; 
they are lighted by a window opening into each. Over the front 
doorway is the great window, one of the peculiar features of a 
Chaitya-cave : it is of horse-shoe form, about 11^ feet high, with 
an inner arch, about 9f feet high, just over the front pillars of the 
nave. Outside this is the larger arch with horizontal ribs, of which 
five on each side project in the direction of the centre, and eleven 
above in a vertical direction. The barge-board or facing of the 
great arch here is wider than usual, and perfectly plain. It probably 
was plastered, and its ornamentation, which was in wood at Bhaja, 
was probably here reproduced in painting. On the sill of this arch 
is a terrace, 2^ feet wide, with a low parapet in front, wrought in 
the " Buddhist-rail " pattern ; outside this, again, iB another terrace 
over the porch, about 3| feet wide, and extending the whole width 



AJANTA. 291 

of the cave, the front of it being ornamented with patterns of the 
window itself as it must have originally appeared, with a wooden 
frame of lattice-work in the arch. At each end of this, on the wall 
at right angles to the facade, is sculptured a colossal figure of 
Buddha, and on the projecting rock on each side there is a good deal 
of sculpture, but all of a much later date than the temple itself, and 
possibly of the fifth century. The porch of the door has partly 
fallen away. It had a cornice above supported by two very wooden- 
like struts, similar to those in the Bhaja Chaitya-cave. 

The paintings in this cave consist principally of figures of Buddha 
along the left wall, where there are at least six, each with a triple 
umbrella, and some traces of buildings. On the back wall is a 
fragment, extending nearly its whole length, containing figures of 
Buddha variously engaged, disciples, worshippers, a dagoba, &C. 1 
This is probably of older date than the generality of the paintings 
found in the other caves, but it may fairly be questioned whether 
it is of so early an age as the fragments on the walls in Cave X. 
It is of high artistic merit, however, which makes us the more 
regret that no more of it is left. 

On the front wall over the left window a layer of painting has 
dropped off, laying bare one of the earliest fragments left, possibly 
a version of the Jdtaka of Sibi or Siwi Raja, who gave his eyes to 
Indra, who appeared to him in the form of a mendicant to test him. 4 

Close to this is a Vihara No. XII., most probably of the same age. 
and one of the oldest here. Its front has fallen away with the 
verandah which in all probability covered it. What remains is a 
hall (Plate XXVII.) about 36|- feet square, with four cells in each 
of the three inner sides, — eleven of them with double beds having 
raised stone pillows. There are holes in the sills and lintels of the 
doorways for pivot hinges, and others in the jambs for fastenings. 
The upper portion of the walls are ornamented over the cell doors 
with canopies representing the Chaitya window, with others in the in- 
terspaces ; below these is a string course wrought in the " Buddhist 



1 This has been copied by Mr. Griffiths in four sections, marked A, B, C, D, of 
1874-75, and arc probably at South Kensington. 

• For the Jatuka, see Jour. Ceylon J5. R. As. Soc., vol. ii. (1858), pp. 5, 6; 
Sponce Hardy's Eastern MoHachism, pp. 277, 278, 279 ; or Notes oh Ajantd Roclt- 
Templrs, $c, p. 76 j conf. Fergiisson, Tree and Serp. WorsA., pp. 194, 225. 

T 2 



292 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

rail pattern," as in Cave XIV. at Nasik, which this cave resembles 
in almost every respect except dimension, this being by far the 
finest and largest of the two. Their details, however, are bo similar 
that there can be little doubt that they are not distant in age, as 
may be seen by comparing the elevations of their sides, Plates XXVL, 
fig. 3, and XXVII., fig. 1. 

Close to this is Cave XIII., which may be as old as anything at 
AjantA, but it is almost wholly without architectural form, and its 
front has fallen away like that of No. XII., so that it is impossible 
to say what its original form may have been. It is only a Layana 
or Bhikshu's room, such as one may fancy to have been the residence 
of some holy man with his disciples, whose sanctity may have 
attracted othera to the spot, and so have given rise to the excava- 
tion of this serieB of caves. 

The hall here is 13^ feet wide by 16£ deep and 7 feet high, and 
has seven cells,— three on the leftside and two on the back and right 
sides, — in all which are stone couches or beds, which are characteristic 
of all the cells of an early age. 

Cave X. is the second and largest Chaitya of the group, and must 
have been when complete a very fine cave. There is some little 
difficulty in speaking of the date with confidence, as the facade has 
entirely fallen away (Plate XXVII., figs. 1 and 2), and the pillars 
inside are plain octagons, without either bases or capitals, and having 
been at one time plastered and painted there are no architectural 
details by which its age can be ascertained. There is, however, one 
constructional feature which is strongly indicative of a comparatively 
modern date. The roof of the nave was adorned with wooden ribs, 
like all the caves described above, though all these are now gone ; but 
the aisles here are adorned with stone ribs carved in imitation o€ 
wood. In the next group of caves we have to describe — the Maha- 
yana caves — aJJ have stone ribs, both in the nave and aisles, and this 
seems a step in that direction, but so far as is known the first. 1 

Another circumstance indicative of a more modern date is the 
position of this cave in the series. It is higher up in the rock, and 
very much larger than No. IX. (see Plate XXVII.), and it seems most 
improbable that having a large and roomy Chaitya they should 

' A view of the interior of this cave will be found in my illustration of tie Rock- 
cut Temple*, folio, London 1845, PI. 111. 



AJANTA. 293 

afterwards excavate a smaller one close along side of it on a lower 
level, and in a more inconvenient form. The contrary is so much 
more likely to be the case, as the community extended, and more 
accommodation was wanted, that it may fairly be assumed, from this 
circumstance alone, that No. X. is -the more modern of the two 
Chaityas, though at what interval it is difficult to say in conse- 
quence of the absence of architectural details in the larger cave. 

It measures 41 feet 1 inch wide, about 95^ feet deep, and 36 feet 
high. The inner end of the cave, as well as of the colonnade that 
surrounds the nave, is semi-circular, the number of columns in the 
latter being thirty-nine plain octagons — two more than in the great 
Chaitya atKarl6, — but many of them are broken. They are 14 feet 
high, and over them rises a plain entablature 9£ feet deep, from 
which springs the arched roof, rising 12^ feet more, with a span of 
about 23£ feet. Like the oldest Chaitya caves at Bhaja, KarlS, 
Bedsa, Kondan6, &c, it has been ribbed with wood. The aisles are 
about 6 feet wide, with half-arched roofs, ribbed in the rock. The 
chaitya or ddgoba is perfectly plain, with a base or lower drum, 15-| 
feet in diameter ; the dome is rather more than half a sphere, and 
supports the usual capital, consisting of an imitation box, covered by 
a series of thin square slabs, each projecting a little over the one 
below it. There is an inscription on the front of the great arch at 
the right hand side, which reads : — 

Vdsiputasa hatahd dito gharmufcha danam. 

" The gift of a house-door (front) by Vasithiputra." 

If we could be certain that this was the Pulumavi Yasishthiputra 
of the Nasik inscriptions, we might at once refer this one to_ the 
second century a.d., and the alphabet would support such a date. 
But then does it mean that Yasishthiputra began the excavation 
and carved out the facade 1 or does it only imply that he inserted, 
in a Chaitya cave already existing, a new front ? Now, in excavating 
the floor under the great arch, I found that a wall had been built 
across the front of immense bricks of admirable texture and colour, 
several tiers of which still remain in situ. This may have been 
Y&sishthiputra's work, and the cave itself may be of an earlier date. 

The whole of this cave has been painted. 

Both these Chaitya Caves still retain a great deal of the fresco 
paintings with which they were at one time completely adorned. 
Those in number IX. have been minutely described by Mr. Griffith 
in a report to the Government (not published), and many of them 



294 EARLY BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

copied by him, and are in this country, but from the closing of the 
India Museum there is no place where they can be exhibited. They 
are, as just mentioned, of various ages, and none of them probably 
coeval with the cave. 

Those in Cave X. may possibly be of the age of Vasishthiputra, 
who certainly was one of the Satakarnis and contemporary with the 
Andhrabhritya, and possibly with the excavation of the cave. Their 
general character may be judged from Plate XXIX. Both figures and 
costume are very different from anything found in any of the other 
caves, but they resemble — as far as sculpture can be compared with 
painting — the costumes found among sculptures at Sanchi 1 in the 
first century of our era. They certainly are not Aryans, but are 
more like the Bhills and Brinjaris, and other low caste quasi abori- 
ginal tribes of the present day. 

Cave XI. 

The verandah of this cave is supported in front by four plain 
octagonal columns with bracket capitals and square bases, raised 
on a panelled base or parapet, similar to what we find in one of the 
Viharas at Karle and elsewhere. The roof also projects con- 
siderably in front of the pillars, and has been very elaborately 
painted with flowers, birds, and geometrical patterns. The veran- 
dah has a cell at either end, that on the right entering in by the 
side of the hall, whilst the end wall itself is sculptured in three 
compartments, two with seated Buddhas, attendants, and wor- 
shippers, and one with a standing Buddha with c/Kwnara-bearer 
and attendant. The door is plainer than in other Viharas, and 
the windows are each divided by two pillars into three openings. 
The hall is 37 feet wide by 28 deep and 10 high, and is supported 
by four octagonal columns of a more than usually clumsy and 
primitive style (Plate XXX., fig. 1), from which it has been inferred 
that this is one of the earliest examples of the introduction of pillars 
in Viharas. None earlier are known to exist anywhere, and the 
mode in which they are introduced here is so exceptional that the 
inference seems, to say the least of it, extremely probable. There is 
a sort of seat along the right side of the cave such as we find so 
frequently in the older caves, and three cells on the left side, also in 
the back two to the left and one to the right, of the sanctuary, 

1 Tree and Serpent tVorthip, first 45 plates. 



AJANTA. 295 

which opens directly from the cave, and is about 12 feet wide by 
19J deep, with the statue of Buddha separate from the back wall 
and seated on a sihkdsana with two well-cut deer on each side of the 
chakra or wheel, and lions behind them. There are no attendant 
cAawt-bearers, but above are flying figures or gandharvas. In front 
of the image is a charmingly natural figure of a man kneeling in 
adoration, or holding an alms-bowl, the face and hands unfortunately 
damaged, and probably wilfully. This was perhaps intended to 
represent the excavator of the cave. High up in the wall, and 
scarcely visible, is an aperture on the left side of the sanctuary, 
opening into a secret cell. 

It depends wholly on whether the age of Cave XI. is to be deter- 
mined from its architecture or from its sculpture to know whether 
it is to be classed among those of the first or Hinayana division, or 
to belong to the second or Mahayana class of caves. Its architecture 
certainly looks old, certainly much more so than the two great Viharas 
at Nasik, and can hardly be brought down below the first century 
of our era ; but there is an image of Buddha, unfinished, in the sanc- 
tuary, and bassi relievi at either end of the verandah containing 
seated images of Buddha. These last, however, are so like those 
figures which are avowedly late insertions on the front of the Karl£ 
cave that they cannot be considered as integral, and the same may 
be said of the image in the sanctuary. The probability is that this 
cave, like XV. at Nasik, was remodelled at some period long subse- 
quent to its original excavation, and that all its sculptures belong to 
a much later date than its architecture. If this is so it probably 
belongs to the same age as the Chaitya Cave No. X., and was 
excavated as its companion. From its position and its appearance 
this seems most probable. If this is so, the date of these two 
caves may be the first century a.d., or it may be even in a slight 
degree more modern. 1 

1 I am responsible for the arrangement and dates of these six caves. Mr. Burgess 
and I are perfectly agreed as to the age of the group, hut differ slightly as to their 
relative position inter te. I have consequently in his absence, when there was no 
opportunity of consulting him, been obliged to arrange them in the manner which, 
according to the latest lights, seems to me on the whole, most probable.— J. F. 



297 



BOOK II. 



CHAPTER I. 
LATER OR MAHAYANA CAVES AT AJANTA. 

The preceding six chapters have been devoted to the description 
of the various groups of caves known to exist in Western India 
belonging to the Hinayana sect, or the first division of Buddhist 
caves. They are so numerous that it has been impossible to describe 
them all, but enough has probably been said to make their charac- 
teristic features known, and to explain the limits within which 
further investigations are either promising or desirable. 

The caves belonging to the second division, or the Mahayana s ct, 
are much less numerous than those belonging to the first, owing 
principally to there being no Bhikshugrihas or hermitages among 
them. The monks were no longer content to live apart by them- 
selves, or with only one or two companions in rude caves, but were 
congregated into large and magnificent monasteries, richly adorned, 
and which, in that climate and at that age, may have been con- 
sidered as replete with every comfort, it may almost be said, with 
every luxury. 

The great and moBt essential change, however, which took place 
between these two classes was in the forms of worship which was 
characteristic of them. The Dagoba or relic shrine, which was so 
generally revered in ancient times, disappears almost entirely from 
the Viharas, and is only found in the Chaitya caves, and even then 
it always has an image of Buddha attached to it in front, and 
personal worship of him evidently, in these instances, replaced that 
of the symbol under which he had previously been adored. It is 
indeed this multiplication of imageB of Buddha which is most charac- 
teristic of the oaves of the Mahayana sect. Not only do figures of 
Buddha, as objeots of worship, take the place of the Dagobas in the 
sanctuaries of the Yiharas, but the insignia of the Bodhisatwas are 



"298 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

given to his CAawn-bearer, and these are increased in later times 
from two to four, and sometimes even to eight or more. In addition 
to these figures of Buddha with the Bodhisatwas, which are multi- 
plied almost everywhere on the walls of the caves, and they are 
frequently accompanied by female figures or SdldU, such as Tara, 
Marmukhf, Lbchana, and others. In fact, a whole system of idolatry 
is introduced into them, at total variance with the simpler form 
of faith that characterized the earlier caves. 

The architecture of the later caves belonging to the Mahayana sect 
exhibits almost as great a change as their imagery. The grandiose 
design, and simple detail of the early caves, gives place to facades 
and interiors crowded with pillars, carved or painted with the most 
elaborate and minute ornaments. The animal figures disappear 
from the capitals, and are replaced by brackets richly ornamented 
and filled with figures and mythological representations of the most 
varied kind. The doorways of the caves too are occasionally marvels 
of elaborate decorations. The change is, in fact, quite as great as 
that which took place between the early English style that prevailed 
in this country betweeen the reigns of Henry II. and Henry III., 
and the decorated style introduced by Edward III., and which pre- 
vailed till the time of Richard III. The change was perhaps even 
greater, and accompanied, in India certainly, by a far greater change 
of ritual than was introduced into England with the change of 
architectural style. 

It is not at present possible to state with precision the exact period 
at which the transition from the Hinayana to the Mahayana sect took 
place. As stated above, the last caves of the Hinayana are those at 
Nasik, and their age depends on our being able to ascertain when 
Gautamiputra excavated No. III., and what YajnaSri really did in 
No. XV. Even then the uncertainty that hangs over the lists of the 
Andhrabhrityas prevents our being able to fix these dates with cer- 
tainty. It is probable they reigned in the third century, but nearly 
as probable, that the last-named king flourished in the fourth. Be 
this as it may, there seems to have been a pause in the fashion of 
excavating caves after the disappearance of these Satakarnis. We 
have no cave that can with certainty be dated in the fifth century, 
probably not one in the latter half of the fourth, but with the sixth 
century the practice was resumed with vigour, and during the next 
century and a half nearly all the Mahayana caves were excavated. 



AJANTA. 299 

It certainly seems to be the case tbat all or nearly all the remaining 
21 cares at Ajanta were excavated between the years 500 and 650, 
with a very little margin either way before or after these dates. 1 

When we pass over the gulf, and it is a vast one, that separates 
the older from the more modern caves, at Ajanta we come first on a 
very small and somewhat abnormal group, consisting of only two 
caves, Nos. VII. and VI., which, whatever their other characteristics 
may be, most distinctly belong to the Mahayana school. 

Cave VII. is a Vihara somewhat differing in type from any yet 
described. In front of the verandah were two porches, each sup- 
ported by two advanced octagonal pillars with capitals somewhat like 
those in Cave II. and at Elephanta. The frieze above is ornamented 
with the favourite Chaitya-window device. The verandah measures 
62 feet 10 inches long by 13 feet 7 inches wide and 13 feet 6 inches 
high. There is no hall, but in the back wall are four cells and the 
antechamber leading to the shrine ; and at each end of the veran- 
dah are rooms at some height above the floor with two pillars in 
front, each again opening into three cells, about 8£ feet square. 
The shrine is an unequal four-sided room, in which Buddha is 

1 One of the most curious results obtained from recent discoveries in Afghanistan 
is the apparent certainty of the prevalence of Mahayana doctrines on the Indus, and 
beyond it, long before their introduction in India. Near Ali Musjid a tope has 
recently been excavated by M. Beglar, and photographs of it have been sent to me by 
General Cunningham — but not yet published — with a letter in which he informs me 
it contains coins of Yasu Deva, and he considers that it certainly belongs to his age. 
Inscriptions of thiB king have been found at Mathura (Cunningham, Reports, vol. iv. 
pp. 34 and 35), dated Samvat 83 and 98. Now, assuming these to be dated from the 
Saka Samvat, which there seems no reason for doubting was the case, this would 
only bring his reign down to 162-177 a,d., and there is nothing in the architecture of 
the tope to contradict this date. It is adorned with the bell-shaped capitals so common 
in India at about this date, and they are surmounted by the double animals as usual. 
The sculpture, however, is wholly of the Mahayana school. There are not only one, 
but dozens, it may almost be said hundreds, of figures of Buddha in all the usual 
conventional attitudes, and of a type that does not appear in India till at least two or 
three centuries afterwards. It may be a question for future investigation whether 
we ought to bring the date of the Afghanistan lopes further down, or whether we 
ought to carry the introduction of Mahayana further back ; the evidence of the caves 
seem to indicate ihe latter as the mort probable alternative. I am strongly impressed 
with the idea — from the evidence as it at present stands — that the bulk of the Guudhara 
topes were erected between the age of Cons tan tine and that of Justinian, but we 
mutt wait for further information before this can be determined. — J. F. 



300 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

seated at the back on a low Smhdsana or lion-throne, having in 
front of the seat two lions at the ends, and two antelopeB facing 
each other, with a small wheel or chakra between them, with his legs 
crossed under him, his right hand raised in the asiva mudrd or 
attitude of blessing, and the left holding his robe, and with high 
mukuta. From behind Buddha a makara's head projects on each 
side ; there is a figured halo behind his head, and much carving 
round about him ; a male chawrir-be&rer stands on either side behind 
the makara's head ; and in the corners above their heads are Qand- 
harms, Vidyddharas or Buddhist cherubs. The projection of the 
smhdsana is carried round the sides of the room, and carved in front 
with eight squatting Buddhas on each side. Upon this projection 
stand three tall Buddhas on each side, also with nimbi behind 
their heads; those next the central image are of smaller stature, 
but the other two are gigantic figures ; each holds up his left hand, 
with the edge of his robe in it, up to his breast, whilst the 
right hangs by his side with the palm turned out. Between 
these-figures are other small cross-legged ones. The sides of 
the antechamber are entirely covered with small Buddhas sculp- 
tured in rows of five to seven each, sitting or standing on lotuses 
and with lotus leaves between them {see Plate XXXI.). The 
stalk of the lowest central lotus is upheld by two kneeling figures 
with regal headdresses, canopied by the many headed ndga behind 
each, on the left is a kneeling figure and two standing Buddhas, 
and on the right a Buddha is behind the ndga, and behind him three 
worshippers with presents. The door into the sanctuary has four 
standing and three sitting Buddhas on each side, carved in alter- 
nate compartments of the architrave, and eight sitting ones above, 
while at the foot of the architrave is a lion's head and paws. The 
pilasters outside the architrave are supported by dwarfs, and divided 
into three compartments each, containing a standing Buddha in the 
lower and cross-legged ones in the compartments above, whilst over 
the capitals a female figure stands under foliage and on a malcara. 
Beyond this the wall is divided into three nearly square compart- 
ments, each ornamented with small pilasters at the sides, and all 
except the two upper ones on the right having gandharoas in the 
corners over the large cross-legged Buddhas which occupy them; these 
have all aureoles behind their curly- haired heads, except the upper one 
on the right, which has the protection of the snake with seven heads. 



AJANTA. 301 

Cave VI. is of two storeys, Plate XXXII. The whole of the veran- 
dah has fallen away from the lower part. The outer wall is panelled 
under the four large windows which light a hall, 53 feet 4 inches 
wide and 54 feet 10 inches deep, the front and back aisles being 
about 71 feet long with chambers 8 feet by 10 at the ends of each. 
Having been occupied by natives who used to light their fires in it, 
this cave is much ruined, and has a very dilapidated appearance. 
The columns are arranged in four rows of four each, 16 in all, but 
only seven are now standing with four thin pilasters in the lines of 
the rows on each wall. Five columns have fallen within the last 40 
years. Between the pilasters are three chambers on each side, each 
fully 8 feet by 9, and all with niches in their back walls. The pillars 
are about 13 feet high, plain octagons to about three-fourths of their 
height, above which they are 16-sided, without bases, and having 
a cincture under a 16-sided fillet at the top ; imitation beams only 2 
or 3 inches deep run from one pillar to another. The columns in 
front of the antechamber are somewhat similar in character to those 
in the porticoes of Cave VII. The antechamber is 13 feet 4 inches 
deep, and the sanctuary is 10 feet by 15} ; the figure of Buddha, 
which has apparently been painted blue, is seated in the dharmachahra- 
mudrd, on a pedestal 3 feet high, with wheel and small deer in front 
and supported at the corners by lions ; the usual attendants are 
wanting. It is quite separate from the back wall, along the upper 
part of which is a recess. Over the door to the sanctuary is an 
ornamental arch, with makara toranas at the spring of it, and 
a Ndga figure with two attendants under the centre of it. 

The stair in the front aisle, leading to the upper storey, has been 
broken away below. It lands in the verandah above. This 
verandah has been supported by four columns and two pilasters ; 
but only one of the latter now remains, which is a particularly fine 
one. Above the stair landing are many small Buddhas carved on 
the walls and two dagobas. Outside the verandah there are small 
chapels with sculptured Buddhas. There are also at each end of 
the verandah open chambers with carved pillars, and inside these 
chambers there are rooms 11 feet by 9. The entrances have plain 
mouldings, and over them are figures in bas-relief of Buddha and 
the Dagoba. Plate XXX., fig. 2, represents the one in the 
right end of the aisle. The hall is 53 feet wide by 50 feet 
deep and 11} high, supported by 12 plain columns, enclosing 



302 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the usual square area. The pillars have square bases and octagonal 
shafts, changing to square under the bracket capitals, which are 
sculptured with figures of Buddha in small recesses. Opposite the 
central interspace of each side, and at the end of the left aisle, are 
chambers or chapels with pillars in front, each leading to an inner 
cell. There are also three cells on each side, and one at the end of 
the right aisle. Over the chapel on the left of the entrance the 
frieze is carved with elephants, spiritedly cut, one of them killing a 
tiger. 

The antechamber is 16 feet by 8£, and has colossal figures on each 
side of the shrine door, and others in the ends of the room. The shrine 
contains the usual statue of Buddha, with two antelopes on the 
front of the throne. The cave has been painted, but it has almost 
entirely disappeared. It has also a larger number of sculptured 
figures of Buddha than any other Vihara at Ajanta, some of them 
probably carved after the cave was occupied. 

There is very little except their local position in the serieB that 
enables us to speak even hesitatingly regarding the age of these two 
caves. Their disposition is abnormal, the one being the only two- 
storeyed cave in the group, and the other, with its two porches 
and no hall, are quite unlike any others, and their architecture, too, 
is of type not exactly found elsewhere. It is still sufficiently similar 
in character to enable us to say that they are earlier than the five 
caves that follow them to the end of the series, V. to I., and are 
separated by a vast interval from the earlier group, Nos. VII. to XIII., 
described above; 450 a.d. is certainly the earliest date that can be 
assigned to them, and 500 is as likely to be nearer than that date, 
or even perhaps 550 a.d. 

The next, which may be considered as the great central group of 
Ajanta caves, is perhaps the most interesting of any. It consists of 
seven caves, Nos. XTV. to XX., and although XIV., XV., XVIII., 
and XX. are not very remarkable, though they might be considered 
so elsewhere, the remaining three, — two Viharas, XVI. and XVU., 
and the Chaitya cave No. XIX., 1 are, both from their architecture 

1 Views of the interiors of Caves XVI. and XVIL, and of the interior and exterior 
of No. XIX., will be found in my illustrations of the Rock-cut Templet of India, 
folio, 1845, Plates IV., V., VI., and VII., and woodcut illustrations of them, Hist, of 
Eastern and Indian Architecture, woodcuts 60 and 61, 84, 66, 86. 



A.TANTA. 303 

and their paintings, as full of beauty and of interest as any caves in 
the West of India. 

Cave XIV is just over XIII. , and is reached by a rough ascent 
over the rock from No. XII. The verandah is 63 feet long by 11 
feet 1 inch wide and 9 feet high, with six pillars and two pilasters 
in front of it, differing in style from any other here, being square 
piers, divided by two slightly sunk, fluted bands about 11 inches 
broad. The body is vase-shaped, with a flat inverted shield on each 
side, and a plain abacus above. Into the cave, which has never been 
nearly finished, there is a very neat central door and two side ones, 
with two windows. It was intended to be 61 feet wide by 25£ deep, 
with a row of six columns and two pilasters running along the 
middle of it, but only the front half has been partially finished. 
This is probably a comparatively late excavation. 

Cave XV. — The next is a few yards farther on. The verandah is 
about 30 feet long inside by 6| wide, and had two columns and two 
pilasters ; but the front has fallen away, a fragment of one pillar 
lying in the verandah, showing that they had a toruB and fillet at 
the base, above which they were octagonal, changing to 16 sides, 
and thence to 32 flutes. The architrave of the door is plain, but 
the pilasters beyond it are similar to those in other caves. On the 
upper member of the frieze are carved four birds in low relief. The 
hall inside has no columns, and is nearly square, 34 feet each way 
by 10 feet 2 inches high. It has four cells on each side and one at 
each end of the verandah ; the antechamber has two plain pilasters 
in front and two columns with square bases, then octagonal and 
16-sided shafts returning through the octagon to square heads. 
The shrine contains an image of Buddha with the feet turned up on 
a sihhdsana, having only the wheel and lions in front. It standB 
against the wall, and is without attendants, but with small flying 
gandharvas above. In the hall, to the left of the antechamber, are two 
pieces of carving, representing Buddha and attendants. The roof of 
the antechamber retains only a fragment of painting. 

Cave XVI. 

Nos. XVI. and XVIL, though not the largest, are certainly the 
finest and most interesting Viharas at Ajanta. They, are both 
nearly of the same age, and were excavated at about the same time 



304 



LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



with No. XIX., which is the best finished Chaitya cave of the series. 
If to these then we add No. XX. beyond the last-named, we 
have a group of four caves, all of about the same age, and whether 
looked at from an architectural or pictorial point of view they are 
superior to any at Ajanta, or indeed perhaps any similar group in 
any part of India. 

Of these four No. XVI. is certainly the earliest and in some 
respects the most elegant. Its verandah (Plate XXXIII., fig. 1), 
65 feet long by 10 feet 8 inches wide, had six plain octagonal pillars 
with bracket capitals and two pilasters, of which all are gone except 
one. The cave has a central and two side doors with windows 
between. The pilasters on each side the principal door are sur- 
mounted by female figures standing on the heads of makaras. The 

front aisle is longer 
than the cave, mea- 
suring 74 feet ; whilst 
the body of the hall 
is 66 feet 3 inches 
long, by 65 feet 3 
inches deep, and 15 
feet 3 inches high, 
supported by twenty 
octagonal shafts. The 
middle pair in the 
front and back rows, 
however, have square 
bases, and change 
first to eight, and then 
to 16 Bides on the 
shafts, with square 
heads and bracket 
capitals. The roof of 
the front aisle is cut 
in imitation of beams 
and rafters, the ends 
of the beams being 

Front able in Cave XV!. at Ajapt*. Supported by Small 

fat figures as brackets, in the two central cases single, in the others 
by two, and in one or two by male and female figures of Kinnara&t 




No. 5U. 



AJANTA. 305 

&c. This curiously wooden construction of the roof will be best 
explained by the preceding woodcut (53) from a photograph. 1 It 
is in fact the mode of framing floors and roofs still in use in India 
at the present day, and what is here carved in the rock is only 
painted in Caves XII., II., and I., with flowers and other ornamentB 
to fill the interspaces. 

There are six cells in each side, two in the back wall, and one in 
each end of the verandah. The adytum or shrine is entered direct 
from the hall and has a chamber on each side, separated from it by 
a screen of two pillars and pilaBters. The gigantic statue of Buddha 
sits with the feet down and the hands in what is called the dharma- 
chalcra mudrd or teaching position, that is, he holds the little finger 
of the left hand between the thumb and forefinger of the right, 
with the other fingers turned up. There is a passage quite round 
the image ; and on each side are octagonal pillars screening off side 
aisles, entered by small doors from the hall, and further lighted by 
small square windows near the roof. 

At the left end of the facade of this cave is an inscription of 
about 27 lines, unfortunately mutilated, but partially translated by 
Dr. Bhau Daji. It begins — *' Having first saluted (Buddha who is 
renowned) in this world for the removal of the intense fire of misery 

of the three worlds I shall relate the genealogy of the King 

Vindhyasakti, whose power extended over the great," &c. It 
then goes on to mention six or Beven other kings of the Vakataka 
dynasty ; but most of the names are more or less mutilated ; they 
mostly appear, however, in the Seoni copper-plate grant deciphered 
by Mr. J. Prinsep, 2 being — 

Vindhyasakti, cir. 400 a.d. 

Pravarasena I. 

Devasena. 

Rudrasena I., grandson of Gautami, the daughter of 
Bhavanaga. 8 

1 From Mm. Manning, formerly Mrs. Speir's, Ancient and Mediceval India. We are 
indebted for this and the following eight woodcuts to the kindness of Miss Manning, 
who was left literary executor to her aunt. 

* Jour. Ait. Sot. Beng. t vol. v. pp. 726-731. For another inscription of this dynasty, 
see nay Notes on the Hock Temples of AJanfd, p. 54 ff. 

• Cunningham gives a list of a Naga dynasty of Narwar (Archceol. Surv. liep., voL ii. 
p. 810), which l.e considers to have been tributary to the Guptas. If, as we suppose, 

V 132. U 



306 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE- TEMPLES. 

Prithivisena. 

Rudrasena II. 

Pravara8ena II., son of Prabhavatf Gupta, daughter of the 
great King of Kings Sri Deva Gupta. 1 
Of this Vindhyaiakti or Vakataka * dynasty we know but little ; it 
was probably a subordinate kingdom, extending over Berar and 
parts of the Narmada and Central Provinces in the fifth century ; 
and from the style of architecture of this cave and the character of 
the alphabet used in the inscriptions, we may with very considerable 
probability assign it to a date very near to 500 a.d.- 

A stair leads down from the front of this cave, and turns to the 
left into a chamber, on the back wall of which was found, on exca- 
vating it, a figure of Naga Raja seated upon the coils of the snake 
whose hoods overshadow his high flat topped muhuta or tiara. A 
door leads out from the front of the room towards the river, to 
which a stair must have descended. This door is flanked outeide by 
two elephants in relief, but much damaged. 8 

In this Cave (XVI.) very little of the painting now remains in 
the verandah, but there are still some very noteworthy pieces in the 
hall. On the left wall is a picture that has attracted much attention, 
representing, it is supposed, the death of a princess.* A lady of 
rank sits on a couch leaning her left arm on the pillow and an 
attendant behind holds her up. A girl in the background places 
her hand on her breast and looks towards the lady. Another, with 
a sash across her breast, wields the pankM, and an old man in white 
cap looks in at the door, while another sits beside a pillar. In the 
foreground sit two women. In another apartment are two figures ; 
one with a Persian cap has a vessel (halasa) and a cup in the mouth 
of it ; the other, with negro-like hair, wants something from him. 
To the right two Jcanchukinis, or household slaves, sit in a separate 

the Guptas ruled from the 4th to the 6th century, this Bhavanaga may have been one 
of these Nagna. 

1 This may have been one of the latest Guptas, about the end of the 6th or the 
beginning of the 6th century a.d. 

* There is a Bakajaka mentioned as a district apparently, in Rndra Deva'a inscription 
at Wamngol, Jour. At. Soc. Beng-, vol. vii. p. 90S. 

1 Can these be the luw-elephauts referred to by Hi wen Thsang {Mem. turiet Com. 
Qccid^ u ii. p. 153) ? S. Julien says, " ce» (quatre) elephants," but Mr. Beal Informs 
me the Chinese text speaks only of two. 

* See Jnd. Ant., vol. Hi., p. 25 6% where a drawing of this scene is given. 



AJANTA. 



307 



apartment. Mr. Griffiths very justly remarks on this picture that 
" for pathos and sentiment and the unmistakeable way of telling its 
story this picture, I consider, cannot be surpassed in the history 
of art. The Florentines could have put better drawing, and the 
Venetians better colour, but neither could have thrown greater 
expression into it." 

" The dying woman with drooping head, half closed eyes, and 
languid limbs, reclines on a bed, the like of which may be found in 
any native house of the present day. She is tenderly supported by 
a female attendant, whilst another, with eager gaze, is looking into 
her face, and holding the sick woman's arm as if in the act of 
feeling her pulse. The expression on her face is one of deep anxiety 
as she seems to realise how soon life will be extinct in the one she 
loves. Another female behind is in attendance with a pankhd y 
whilst two men on the left are looking 
on with the expression of profound grief 
depicted in their faces. Below are seatod 
on the floor other relations, who appear to 
have given up all hope, and to have begun 
their days of mourning, for one woman 
has buried her face in her hand and ap- 
parently is weeping bitterly." 

On the same wall is Buddha represented 
with the begging dish (patra) in his hand, 
while a raja with rich diadem kneels and 
pays him reverence. 1 

Again he is represented teaching in a vi- 
hara' (woodcut No. 55). On the same wall he is represented as seated 
on a throne, of which the seat is upheld by lions that bear a strong 
family resemblance to some Assyrian figures. On the back wall is 
a large scene with elephants ridden by rajas, with attendants bearing 
musical instruments and soldiers with long blue curved swords. In 
another scene Buddha sits enthroned teaching a great assembly of 
crowned princes. On the right wall were several interesting Bcenes 




No. 54. King paying homage 
to liuddha. 



1 From Mrs. Speir's Life in An. Jnd., p. 305. 

* The woodcut is from Mrs. Speir's Life in Ane. India, p. 197. The eight wood- 
cats, No*. 54 to 61, are from the same source. They were reduced by Mr. George 
Bcharf from Major Gill's copies at the Crystal Palace, for Mrs. Speir's work. 

v 2 



308 



LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 




No. 55. Buddha Teaching, from a wall painting in Cave XVI. 1 

from the legend of the Buddha, such as Asita with the infant 
Buddha in his arms, Siddhartha at school, drawing the bow, &c„ 





No. 56. Asita and Buddha. 1 



No. 57. The young Siddirtha drawing the bow.* 



but many of them have been ruined within the last few years by a 
native official at Ajanta. 



1 From Mrs. Speir's Life in Ah. Jnd., p. 248. For the story see p. 257, and Laltia 
Vutara; t&solnd. Ant., vol. vii. p. 232 ff.; Jour. At. S. Beng., voL vii. p. 801 ; Bed's 
Rom. Leg. of Buddha, p. 56 ff. 

* From Mrs. Speir, «. t. p. 279, and see p. 258, Rom. Leg. of Buddha, p. 88 ff 



AJANTA. 309 



Cave XVII. 



The next is another fine Vihara cave similar to the last (Plate 
XXXIII.), and apparently executed at no distant date from the other. 
Still there is so much difference in the architecture of these two caves, 
and so much progress Bhown in the style of painting, that some 
interval must have elapsed between the time when they were ex- 
cavated. The form of the characters uBed in the long inscription on 
its verandah, when compared with the Vindhyas'akti inscription in 
Cave XVI., shows such an advance that, though it may Bafely be 
assumed that they were both excavated within the limits of the sixth 
century, there may be an interval of 50 years between the two. 

Outside to the left, over a cistern and under an inscription, is a 
triple compartment of sculpture ; in the centre Buddha Bquats under 
an ornamental arch or torana, with Vidyddharas above, and wheel, 
deer, and lions below. On each side is a Buddha standing on a lotus 
with worshippers below. At the right end opposite this several 
rows of squatting Buddhas have been sculptured on the rock, a 
piece of which has broken and falleD away, leaving a higher portion 
to slide down into its place. 

The verandah has been supported by six plain octagonal columns 
with bracket capitals and neat bases resembling the Attic base, but 
without its lower torus. The hall is entered by a central door, re- 
sembling that in No. XVI., with a row of painted Buddhas over it, 
and by two side doors. It is further lighted by two windows. This 
apartment is 63| feet wide by 62 feet deep, and 13 feet high, its 
roof being supported by twenty octagonal pillars, — all plain, except 
the two in the middle of the front and back rows, which have square 
bases, shafts partly octagonal and partly sixteen sided and more 
ornamented. 

The antechamber is small with two figures in front, — but the 
shrine is 17f feet wide by 20 deep, and in front of the great image 
there stands on the floor two figures, one holding the alms-bowl of 
the Bhitehu, the other damaged. There are also two attendants on 
each side of the Buddha and two c/uMm-bearers. 

Besides the two in the verandah, this cave contains sixteen cells. 
At the right end of the verandah there is a small hole in the floor 
into a fine cistern of water, the entrance to which is up a flight of 
steps between this cave and No. XVI. 



310 



LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



There is an inscription at the left end of the verandah, outside, of 
about the same length as that on Cave XVI. Dr. Bhau Daji's 
translation of it gives us the names of certain princes of Asm&ka, — 
Dhritarashtra ; 
Hari Samba, his son ; 
Kshitipala Sauri Samba, his son ; 
Upendragupta ; and 
Skacha, his son. 

Of these we know nothing more ; they may have been petty rajas 
of the sixth century. 

This cave ib Bometimes called the Zodiac cave, from its containing 
at the left end of the verandah a circular piece of painting, divided 
into eight compartments by radii from the centre. This has been 
much injured by visitors attempting to remove parts from the wall. 1 
The compartments have been filled with human figures, variously 
employed, and it may possibly have been a saugata mandate, or 
mystic circle representative of existence. In one a man is repre- 
sented alone ; in another he 
is accompanied by animals; 
in the next utensilB are in- 
troduced ; then buildings, 
streets, &c., with numerous 
men and women variously 
engaged. The rim of this 
circle is divided into sixteen 
compartments containing 
symbols, and is upheld by 
a pair of long green arms. 
To the left of it, on the re- 
turn of the front wall, is 
painted a large yellow spotted 

No. 58. Figure* dying through tbe «ir. ■> •« _ ■ • • * 1 

6 ^ snake bent in a semicircle 

with rocks on the outer side, and many figures on the other carrying 
various sorts of burdens. 1 




1 In 1828 lieutenant Blake counted 78 figures in three divisions of this shield, vary- 
ing from 5 to 7 inches in height, and apparently only about a third of it was then 
wanting ; Dr. Bird is believed to have removed some of tbe figures from it, and a mere 
fragment now remains. 

1 la this a representation of the tnake-hke stream hemmed in by roths, with the 



AJANTA. 



311 



Below the great circle is a green raja-like figure labelled Mmih- 
hadra, and to the left of it a painting of the Litany now much 
defaced. On the upper part of the back wall is a good deal of paint- 
ing in fragments. To the right a group of three female and one male 
figure floating through the air accom- 
panied by two swans (woodcut No.58). 1 
It is not easy to feel sure what this 
picture is meant to represent. It 
lookB like three Apsarasas bearing or 
rather accompanying the soul of a 
deceased saint to heaven, or it may be 
merely a Gandharva accompanied by 
Apsarasas. Such flying figures are 
very usual, in pairs, in Buddhist 
Bculptures of this age. Be this as 
it may, however, whether we look at 
its purity of outline, or the elegance 
of the grouping, it is one of the most 
pleasing of the smaller paintings at 
Ajanta, and more nearly approaches 
the form of art found in Italy in the No - 59 - Baddha and the Elephant. 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries than any other example there. 
The easy upward motion of the whole group is rendered in a manner 
that could not easily be surpassed. Towards the right end of the 
verandah and partly on the end wall is the scene in which Deva- 
patta tries to get Buddha destroyed by an enraged elephant, which 
however kneels at Buddha's feet (woodcut 59). 2 

The ceiling of the verandah is still pretty entire, and was copied 
by the late Major Gill, his copy being at South Kensington. 

This cave contains more remains of painting than any other, 




Sangha bringing offerings to the Ajan$ Bhikshus ? A sketch of it is given in my 
Note* on Ajanfd Templet and Pai«Ungs t Plate XVI. 

i From Mrs. Speir's L. in An. Ind. p. 370. 

1 From the same, p. 290. This scene occurs also in the Amaravati sculptures ; 
Ferguason'B Tree and Serpent Worehip, 2nd ed., Plate LXXXII., Fig. 2. For the 
story see Bigandet's Legend of Gaudama, 2nd ed., p. 250; conf. Vie de Hiouen 
Thtang, p. 153; Mim. sur les Cont. Occid. t. ii. p. 16. 



312 



LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



though even here much has been wilfully destroyed * since they became 
known to European visitors. 

In the hall the paintings are tolerably entire, but bo smoked 
and dirty that little or nothing can be seen over large areas. On 
the wall of the left aisle are two large and interesting scenes, whose 
story might be made out if we had only copies of them. On the left 
end of the back wall is a very large one. So much of which, as was 
transferred from Major Gill's copy, is given in the accompanying 
woodcut from Mrs. Speir's Ancient India' In it a king is re- 




No. 60. Wall painting in Cave No. XVU.'AjbmIA, fromMre. Speir's Life in Ancient India. 

1 Mr Griffiths proposed years ago that doors and shutters should bo employed to 
•hat oat bats and nest building insects from the fen cares that contain much painting, 
bat this excellent suggestion was only carried out in the case of Cave I. Were these 
caves anywhere else but in India they would be most carefully looked after. 

» P. 313. 



AJANTA. 313 

presented seated on his throne, with his usual female attendants 
behind him, and his prime minister seated on a low stool in front. 
A crowd in front of him are either lodging a complaint against one 
who seems to be brought up as a criminal, or it may only be bring- 
ing intelligence about a lion who appears to be the hero of the story. 
On the right of the palace court in which he is seated are the 
stables. On his left the office or court of justice in which a 
culprit is being beaten and led off to prison. Below this the king 
issues from the palace gate with a large sowari on a hunting expedi- 
tion, accompanied by dogs and huntsmen. The centre of the picture, 
on the left, represents a forest in which a lion is seen licking the feet 
of a man who is asleep, and above as his companion. Above this 
the same lion is seen apparently worshipped by the villagers ; but 
also as attacked by the same king and with the same party which, 
in the lower part of the picture, are seen issuing from the city gate. 
Whether this has any reference to the legend of Sinha or Siha as 
narrated in the Mahawanso is not quite clear. It is there said that a 
king of Vanga, Eastern Bengal, had a daughter named Supradevi, 
whose mother was a princess of Kalinga. She is said to have eloped 
with the chief of a caravan, but he and his party were attacked by a 
lion (Sinha), who carried her off and hunted for her support. In 
course of time she bore a son, Sinhabahu, and a daughter Sinhast- 
wali. When these grew up they escaped with their mother, but 
the lion soon after began to ravage the country. The king offered 
a large reward to any one who would kill it, and Sihabahu, against 
the wishes of his mother, accepted the offer. When the lion saw 
him it only fawned upon him with delight, and he soon destroyed 
his putative father. 1 

If this picture has any connexion with this legend it must refer to 
some earlier passage in the life of Sinha, not to the abduction of the 
princess nor to his tragic end. The legend is a favourite one with 
the Buddhists, as the son of this Sihabaha was Vijaya who afterwards 
conquered Ceylon, and gave it the name of Sihala from his lion 
ancestors. Whether this identification can or cannot be maintained 
there is little doubt that most of the other pictures in this cave do 

1 Mahdvdnto, pp. 44-46, and conf. introd. p. lxxxvi. The details vary in different 
accounta; conf. Stan. Julien, Vie de Hioucn Tfisanff,pp. 194-198; Mem. stir la Cont. 
Occid. t ii., pp. 126-180 : Laidlay's Fa Hian, pp. 336-338 ; Beal's Travels of Bud. 
Pilg^ p. 149 j Mrs. Speir, p. 300. 



314 



LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



refer to the conquest of Ceylon by Vijaya. The lion licking the 
feet of a man apparently asleep occurs elsewhere also among the 
paintings. 

To lie right of this picture is another in which about a dozen 
soldiers are attacking a tall crowned raja who is coming out of his 
palace, and represented in the act of throwing a javelin at his 
enemies, of whom two lie slain. 

In the left end of the antechamber is a fine scene in which a great 
assembly or sangha of rajas and their attendants, among whom are 
several in Persian dreBS, attend Buddha on his right hand, while 
on his left are his beloved Bhikshus. 

On the wall of the right aisle were some scenes in which Kak- 
Bhasts — female, demons with tusks and long dishevelled hair — are 
represented devouring their human victims, attacked by men, or 




Mo. 61, Landing of Vijiya in Ceylon and bit coronation, from Cbtc XVII. 

otherwise employed. And below is an animated scene, which 
almost certainly represents the landing of Vijaya in Ceylon, 1 and the 



1 Mn. Speirt Ancient Life in India, p. SOS. 



AJANTA. 315 

conquest of its Rakshasi inhabitants. 1 Fortunately a very reduced 
copy of this scene has been preserved in the accompanying wood- 
cut, No. 61. It is rapidly being destroyed by the native official 
who has done so much mischief also in Cave XVI. The march, the 
landing on elephants and horses from boats, with the struggle on 
the shore, and the abhishekha or anointing of the king, are vividly 
portrayed. 

Though on too small a scale to do justice to them, the two last 
woodcuts (Nos. 60 and 61) are probably sufficient to convey an idea 
of the mode in which historical subjects are treated in these caves. 
The grade of art and the mode of treatment is very similar to that 
shown in the nearly contemporary hunting scenes at Takt-i-Bostan 
in Persia. 4 As nearly at least as sculpture, which is there em- 
ployed by Chosroes, can be compared with painting, which is the 
mode of representation here adopted. Neither can be said to be the 
highest class of art, but they are wonderfully graphic, and tell their 
story with a distinctness not often found in works of a higher order 
of design. 

In the front aisle Indra appears as an aged mendicant before Sibi 
Raja and his queen, begging for an eye. Here we are at no loss, 
for Sibi ana Indra appear twice over, with their names written on 
them. 1 Besides these there are many interesting scenes depicted 
on the walls of this fine cave. 

Cave XVIII. is merely a porch, 19 feet 4 inches by 8 feet 10 inches, 
with two pillars, apparently intended as a passage into the next 
cave. 

Cave XIX. — This is the third of the Chaitya caves, and differs 
only in its details from Nos. IX. and X. As will be seen from the 
plan, Plate XXXVII., fig. 1, it is 24 feet wide by 46 feet long and 

' According to the legends Vijaya Sifihala went to the island of Ceylon with a large 
following ; the Rakshaais inhabiting it captivated them by their charms, but Sifihala 
warned in a dream escaped on a wonderful horse. He collected an army, gave each 
soldier a magic mantra, and returned. Falling upon the Rakshaais with great impe- 
tuosity, he totally routed them, some fleeing the island, and others being drowned in the 
sea. He destroyed their town and established himself as king in the island, he gave 
it the name of Sifihala. Conf. Stan. Julien, Mem. sw let Cont. Chad., t. ii. pp. 131— 
189 ; Laidlay's Fa Hian, note by Landresse, p. 338 ; Mrs. Speir, p. 301. 

' Ker Porter, Travels in Persia, voL ii. p. 64. 

8 This Jdtaka is also represented in the Amar&vati sculptures, Tret and Serp. 
Worship, pp. 194, 225, and Plate LXXXHI., Fig. 1, and see above, p. 285. 



316 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

24 feet 4 inches high. But whereas the former two were perfectly 
plain, this is elaborately carved throughout. Besides the two in 
front, the nave has 15 columns 11 feet high. These pillars are 
Bquare at the base, which is 2 feet 7 inches high with small figures 
on the corners; then they have an octagonal belt about a foot 
broad, above which the shaft is circular, and has two belts of 
elaborate tracery, the intervals being in some caseB plain and in 
others fluted with perpendicular or spiral flutes (see Plate XXXVIII., 
fig. 2) ; above the shaft is a deep torus of Blight projection between 
two fillets, wrought with a leaf pattern, and over this again is 
a Bquare tile, supporting a bracket capital, richly sculptured with 
a Buddha in the centre and elephants or slrdulas with two riders 
or flying figures, on the brackets. The architrave consists of two 
plain narrow fascias. The whole entablature is 5 feet deep, and the 
frieze occupying exactly the same position as a triforium would 
in a Christian church, is divided into compartments by rich bands 
of arabesque, and in the compartments are figures of Buddha — 
alternately sitting cross-legged and standing (Plate XXXVI.) The 
dome rises 8 feet 4 inches, whilst the width of the nave is only 
12 feet 2 inches, so that the arch is higher than a semicircle, and 
iB ribbed in stone. Between the feet of every fourth and fifth rib 
iB carved a tiger's head. 

The Chaitya or ddgoba is a composite one ; it has a low pedestal, 
on the front of which stand two demi-columns, supporting an arch 
containing a basso-rilievo figure of Buddha. On the under part of 
the capital above the dome there is also a small sculpture of 
Buddha, and over the chudamani, or four fillets of the capital, are 
three umbrellas in stone, one above another, each upheld on four 
aides by small figures. These may be symbolic of Buddha. — " the 
bearer of the triple canopy — the canopy of the heavenly host, the 
canopy of mortals, and the canopy of eternal emancipation," or they 
are typical of the bhuvanas or heavens of the celestial Bddhisattwas 
and Buddhas. 

The roof of the aisles is flat and haa been painted, chiefly with 
ornamental flower scrolls, Buddhas, and Chaityas, and on the walls 
there have been paintings of Buddha — generally with attendants, 
the upper two rows sitting, and in the third mostly standing, but all 
with aureoles behind the heads. 

There is but one entrance to this cave. The whole is in excellent 



AJANTA. 317 

preservation, as is also the fa9ade and the lower part, the ac- 
cumulated materials that had fallen from above have now been 
removed, and display entire what must be considered one of the 
most perfect specimens of Buddhist art in India. Over the whole 
facade of this Chaitya temple projects a bold and carefully carved 
cornice, — broken only at the left end by a heavy mass of rock having 
given way. In front has been an enclosed court, 33 feet wide by 
30 feet deep, but the left side of it has nearly disappeared. The 
porch and whole front of the cave is covered with the most elaborate 
and beautiful carving, which it is impossible to describe. 

There is no inscription on this cave by which its date could be 
ascertained, but from its position and its style of architecture 
there can be little doubt that it is of about the same age as the two 
Vih&ras, XVI. and XVII., which are next to it, and consequently 
it may safely be assumed that it was excavated near the middle of 
the sixth century — a few years before or after 550 a.d. 

Beside the beauty and richness of the details, it is interesting as 
the first example we meet with of a Chaitya cave wholly in stone. 
Not only are the ribs of the nave and the umbrella over the Dagoba, 
but all the ornaments of the facade are in stone. Nothing in or 
about it is or ever was in wood, and many parte are so lithic in 
design that if we did not know to the contrary, we might not be 
able to detect at once the originals from which they were derived. 
The transformation from wood to stone is complete in this cave, and 
in the next one we meet. The Viswa Karma at Elura the wooden 
type is still further left behind. 

Outside to the left, and at right angles to the facade of the 
cave, is a sculpture representing a N&ga r&ja and his wife (Plate 
XXXIX.). He with a seven-headed cobra hood. She with one 
serpent's head behind her. At Sanchi in the first century when the 
Naga kings first appear the Berpent has only five heads, 1 but the 
females there are still with only one. At Amr&vati the heads of the 
serpent were multiplied to 21," and in modern times to 100 or 1000. 
Who these N&ga people were has not yet been settled satisfactorily. 
They occur frequently on the doorways and among the paintings at 
Ajant&, and generally wherever we find Buddhism there we are sure 

1 Tree and Serjtent Worthip, Plato XXIV. 
« hoc. cit., LXXVI. 



318 LATER BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

to find Nagas when looked for. They were also adopted by the 
Jainas and Vaishnaves, but their origin is certainly Buddhist, and 
they must represent some class of the Dasya people who, as 
mentioned above, were those who first adopted Buddhism. Whether 
the Naga tribes in Sylhet and Asan have any affinity with them 
beyond the name is not clear. They certainly belong to the same 
race, and their locality is favourable to the idea that they had some 
connexion with the serpent worshipping races in Cambodia, 1 but 
no reverence for serpents has been traced among their religious 
observances. 2 

On the other side opposite this image of the Naga Raja is a 
porch, with two pilasters in front, which probably was a chawap, 
or place of rest for pilgrims. It has a room at each end, about 
10 feet by 8 feet 4 inches. The capitals of the pillars in front of 
it are richly wrought with mango branches and clusters of grapes 
in the middle of each. 

On each side the great arch is a largo male figure in rich headdress, 
that on the left holds a bag, and is Kubera, the god of wealth, a 
favourite with the Buddhists. The corresponding figure on the 
right is nearly the same, and many figures of Buddha sitting or 
Btanding occupy compartments in the facade, and at the sides of it. 

Cave XX. is a small Yihara with two pillars and two pilasters in 
front of its verandah. One pillar is broken, but on each side of 
the capitals there is a pretty bracket statuette of a female under a 
canopy of foliage. The roof of the verandah is hewn in imitation 
of beamB and rafters. There is a cell at each end of the verandah and 
two on each side of the hall, which iB 28 feet 2 inches wide by 25 feet 
4 inches deep and 12J feet high, and has no columns. The roof is 
supported only by the walls and the front of the antechamber, which 
advances 7 feet into the cave, and has in front two columns in antis, 
surmounted by a carved entablature filled with seven figures of 
Buddha and attendants. The statue in the shrine has probably 
been painted red, and is attended by two large figures of Indras, 



i 



Loe. cU. p. 60. India* and Eastern Architecture, p. 664 et tegg. 
* It is to be regretted that no one has yet read my work on Tree and Serpent 
Worship, who was capable of carrying die subject further, ami of expressing an opinion 
regarding it. No one, at least, has done so yet. These many beaded serpents occur 
no frequently,' and in such prominent positions, that their classification would certainly 
resnlt in important mythological and ethnological discoveries. — J. F. 



AJANTA. 319 

with great tiaras, bearing cfowris and some round object in the 
left hand, while on the front of the seat, which has no lions at 
the corners, are carved two deer as vdhcma, with a chakra or wheel 
between them. The painting in this cave has now almost entirely 
disappeared. 

The probability is that this cave should not be considered so much 
as a Vihara or a Dharma£ala as the vestry hall or chapter house 
of the group. If this is so these four caves, XVI. to XX., form 
the most complete Buddhist establishment to be found among 
the "Western caves. Two Viharas, one Chaitya, and one place of 
assembly. Hitherto it has generally been supposed that the halls 
of the Viharas formed the place of meeting for the monks, and so 
that probably it did, each for their convent, but it seems probable 
that besides this there was a general hall of meeting attached to 
each group, and that this was one of them. 



320 



CHAPTER II. 
LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 

The third group of twelve caves, into which the Ajant& excavations 
naturally divide themselves, is the largest ; consisting of the first five 
caves from the western end and the last seven at the other extremity. 
In some respects also it is the most magnificent. Caves I. and IV. 
being the largest Viharas here, and also the most elaborately orna- 
mented, and XXVI. the richest, though not the largest of the 
Chaityas. They have not, however, the same beauty of design and 
detail which characterises the central group, and show evident 
symptomB that the art was tending towards decay. 

There are no inscriptions from which their age can be ascertained 
with precision, but their architectural details and other indications 
are sufficient to enable us to feel confident that nearly the whole of 
them belong to the seventh century, as those of the central group 
belong certainly to the sixth. Some of them it is true may have 
been commenced in the sixth, but none were finished before the 
following century, and the works, some of them, such as those from 
XXII. to XXTV., which are unfinished, were probably continued till 
nearly the end of it. They certainly were not abandoned before 650, 
and may have been continued 20 or 30 years after that time. 

Cave I. is one of the finest Viharas of its kind. Certainly no 
Vih&ra at Ajanta has been so handsomely ornamented as this one. 
Ite facade is the only instance here of a Vihara decorated with sculp- 
ture. In front of the verandah there has been a porch (Plate XL.), 
supported by two advanced columns, of which only fragments of the 
bases and elegant capitals remain ; at each end, outside the verandah, 
there is a room whose open front is supported by two pillars* the 
floors being raised a few steps in order that the elaborate entabla- 
ture of the facade might be carried round the whole front at the 
same level. The room on the east opens into another nearly 13 J feet 
square, and all but perfectly dark ; that on the left opens into two 
others somewhat smaller. In the verandah are six columns and two 
pilasters (Plate XLI.) The pair in the middle, which originally formed 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 321 

part of the porch, like all the others, have square bases and 
elaborately carved bracket capitals. Above the bases they are first 
ootagonal, then there is a belt of 16 faces, above which they are 
fluted with bands of beautifully elaborate tracery up to the thick 
compressed cushion between two fillets, on which rests the carved 
fascia under the capital. The next pillars on either side are similarly 
rich in carving, but have narrower bands of tracery round the upper 
portion of the fluting, and their flutes are spiral. Outside these are 
two octagonal pillars with three bands of tracery round them, sup- 
porting a very deep square carved fascia under the bracket capital. 
The pilasters beyond these have short fluted necks with tracery 
above and below them, more like what we should work in metal 
than attempt in stone. The central compartment in each capital 
has its own group of human figures. 

The architrave all along the front is sculptured ; (Plate XLI.) 
above each column there is a compartment containing human figures 
only ; at the corners are terminal figures apparently intended for 
lions or Sdrdulas ; and the remaining spaces are filled principally 
with elephants in every variety of attitude, and cut with great spirit 
and correctness. 

The part over the front of the porch has been mostly destroyed 
when the pillars gave way, but from a fragment that remains, the 
lower frieze or architrave seems to have been filled with groups of 
figures, possibly scenes from the life of Buddha. The left side is 
carved with elephants fighting, and with the figure of a rider on a 
sdrdula at the corners. Continuing the same member along the facade 
to the left, after the usual corner Sdrdula, we have representations of 
two figures beating drums and one playing on some sort of flute fol- 
lowed by others with Nepalese swords, oblong shields, three figures 
on horseback, one blowing a long trumpet, then three elephants and 
another horse with their riders. The next to the left is an in-door 
scene, a raja and his wife in earnest converse with three attendants. 
Outside, a saddled horse is being led out towards a tree, and to the 
left is a little figure carrying a bag on his back towards two figures 
sitting and talking under foliage with birds in it. Beyond these a 
male elephant stands facing a man sitting at the foot of a tree with 
a stick in his hand. Then comes another in-door scene, in which 
the wife has her arms round her husband's neck and two female 
household servants (dads)- stand by. Outside are four elephants, the 
y is*. x 



322 BUDDHIST CAVB-TEMPLBS. 

first butting against a tree, the next, a young one, following its dam, 
who is pinning a tiger to the ground ; the fourth is behind, and has 
apparently turned tail. Then come two buffaloes fighting, a man 
behind each urging it on. To the left are other two human figures 
in front of the corner idrd&a. 

This band is continued across the front of the left side chapel. 
To the left of the SdrdiUa are four figures, a woman, a man with a 
stick or sword, another with a shield, and a figure sitting on the 
ground. Towards these comes Buddha in his chariot with two 
horses and the driver. Next is a royal figure seated on a seat in a 
garden under a tree, while a woman plays on a musical instrument 
to him, and another waits on him behind. A palm tree separates 
this from the next scene, in which Buddha is driving to the left,, 
and passing a plantain tree, meets an aged man with a staff. 
Behind him is Buddha in his car again, and just before some men 
carrying a dead body and a woman wailing by it. The rock iB here 
broken, but to the left we have a royal figure seated again on an 
dsana with attendants, and a horse looking at him ; beyond is a man 
walking out, and, after another defaced piece, a horse with an 
attendant beside it. This sculpture then represents the so-called 
predictive signs l which led to Siddhartha, afterwards the Buddha, 
becoming an ascetic, and his escape. 

On the right side of the porch, the soulpture is a representation 
of a hunt of the wild ox, spiritedly carved. On the front of the 
facade, to the right of it, is another hunting scene, perhaps of deer ; 
the first horseman on the left is spearing one, and by the side of the 
next runs a dog or cheetah. Behind are three elephants with riders, 
followed by a fat ill-proportioned figure, bearing some load at the 
ends of a pole over his shoulder. In the next compartment is a 
domestic scene, a stout squatting figure with a cup in his hand, 
caressed by his wife, behind whom Btands a servant with a flagon. 

To the right of this is an out-door scene, first an elephant, before 
whom a man sits as if feeding it or addressing it, while beyond him 
another stands with a staff in his left hand. A woman proceeds to 
the right with a vessel on her left hand towards a man who squats 
under a tree addressing another woman, who kneels before him in 
an attitude of supplication. Behind her is a dwarf with a bag on 

1 Beat's Bom. Leg. of 8. Buddha, pp. 117 ff. 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 323 

his back, and beside it a man leading a saddled Horse, behind which 
stands another man holding an umbrella, probably the attendants of 
the kneeling woman. Another small compartment to the right of 
this represents a raja and his wife seated together attended by two 
female servants. The next contains six wild elephants, the first 
two fighting and the next dragging a huge snake in his trunk ; then 
a SdrdUla terminates the front. 

Over the right side chapel the continuation begins as usual with 
the idrdilla, in front of a group of cattle, behind which are two 
figures seated, and beyond them is seen the head of a bearded old 
man. Then, under trees, are two more men with beards and their hair 
done up in the ja(d style of devotees ; behind them a third head is 
seen. One has a bottle, and beside the other the same vessel is hung 
in the tripod stand represented in front of the dying Buddha in Cave 
XXVI. (Plate L.), and elsewhere. Another bearded ascetic is leaving 
these, with something like a club in his right hand and a bent rod over 
hie left shoulder. He is meeting a man who appears to address him, 
but to the right is another with an uplifted sword as if about to 
strike this last. To the right is a plantain tree and a saddled horse 
led by a man. The second compartment is a small interior scene 
in which a man sits listening to a lady attended by two female 
servants. The last compartment is broken, but began with a 
kneeling figure offering some present to a portly man seated. 

Above the entablature is a projecting band, carved with represen- 
tations of the Chaitya window, each containing a human head ; then 
comes a frieze, ornamented with compartments, containing human 
pairs in different attitudes, attended by female servants. These are 
separated by spaces filled with figures of the sacred goose {Kansa), 
in varieties of position, with the wings extended into elaborate 
floriated tracery so as to fill the spaces, a device well known 
in works of about the sixth century in Northern India and in 
Singhalese art ; and on the Buddhist carvings of Ceylon we find the 
elephant and the hania constantly occurring, whilst the latter also 
figures on the standard of Burma. Above this frieze is a line of 
tigers' heads, then a dentilated fillet, then another with a line of 
string tracery, surmounted by a belt, containing human heads within 
miniatures of the Chaitya window, each with the hair represented as 
if a sort of heavy wig. The specimen given in Plate XLL, being 
the left-half of the facade, will illustrate the style of these sculptures. 

x 2 



324 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The wings of the brackets of the columns are ornamented with 
gandharvas and apasarasas, the central panels with figures of Buddha 
and his worshippers ; but on the sixth pillar it is apparently a 
version of the temptation of M&ra. On his left are two females. 
On his right, a man is shooting at him with a bow, another above, 
in a peaked cap, is in the attitude of throwing a stone at him. 

The verandah is about 64 feet long by 9£ wide and 13£ high, and 
has a chamber at each end (see Plate XL.), A wide door in the centre, 
with elaborately carved jambs and entablature, leads into the great 
hall, and there are smaller doors near each end and two windows. The 
great hall, or Sold, is nearly 64 feet square, and its roof is supported 
by a colonnade of 20 pillars, leaving aisles of about 9^ feet wide all 
round. The columns are about 5| feet apart ; but the middle ones 
on each side of the square are 6£ feet asunder. Their bases are 
about 2f feet square, and with the four pilasters in continuation of 
the front and back row are mostly very richly carved. 

The front of the brackets in the first row of columns in the hall 
and the inner sides of all the rest are sculptured ; the inner side of the 
front row and those that face the side and back aisles have been 
painted with similar figures. 

The sculptures on the other sides of these brackets are of some 
interest. The wings of the brackets are very much alike : of thoBe 
facing the front aisle, the two central and two corner pillars have 
sdrdulas or horned lions with riders ; the other two pillars have 
elephants with two riders on each of those that face the inner area 
of the hall ; the two central ones on each side have an apmrasa and 
gandharva ; and the others a human figure coming out of the mouth 
of a makara, except that the first column on the left side has two 
fat figures on each wing, and the fourth Vidyddharas. The central 
panels are more varied. In the two middle pillars in the front row 
are figures worshipping a ddgoba; in the pair outside these is a 
small fat figure (in one case carrying a load) under an arch (torana) 
thrown over him between the mouths of two makaras ; in the corner 
pair is Buddha seated in the usual fashion between two cftattn- 
bearers ; in the middle area of the hall the two central columns on 
the right hand have, in this position, four deer so arranged that one 
head serves for any of the four (Plate XXXVIII., fig. 3), a curious 
conceit which seems to have been in favour with the early Hindu 
sculptors, as we find similar combinations elsewhere; the panels 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 325 

of the brackets on each side these have elephants fighting. The 
left central pillar on the left hand has a raja, his wife and child, 
diwan, two cMma/ra bearers and an attendant, perhaps Suddhodana 
and Mahaprajapti with the infant Buddha ; and on the right hand 
one, two rajas seated, with attendants, much as in the two chapels 
of Cave II. The first pillar in the left row has an eight-armed 
fat dwarf attended by two others, one of them probably a Naga 
figure ; in the fourth, two Naga rajas are worshipping the ddgoba 
(Plate XLII., fig. 2). In the back row, the two central columns 
have Naga figures with their Ndgalcanyas, worshipping richly 
decorated dagobas ; on the first pillar, to the left hand, are two 
half human figures with a lotus flower between them, and on the 
fourth, two deer with the wheel between them — the usual chvnha or 
cognizance of Buddha. 

The most elaborate description would convey but a faint idea of 
the rich tracery and sculpture on the shafts of the back ro«r 
of pillars ; above the base they are ornamented by mythological 
makaras or dragon b ; the upper part of the shaft is encircled by a 
deep belt of the most elaborate tracery, in which are wrought 
medallions containing human figures ; the fascia above is supported 
at the corners by dwarfs. 1 Again on the left side, on the corners of 
the bases, we find the mahara and dwarf together, and on eight 
facets round the upper part of the columns are pairs of rampant 
antelopes, bridled by garlands held in the mouths of grinning faces 
between each pair. The corner pillars have three brackets each. 
On each side of the cave there are five cells or grihas for the monks, 
and in the back four, two on each side of the shrine. 

In the middle of the back wall are two pillars with brackets of 
human figures, and between these we pass into an antechamber, 
about 10 feet by 9, leading into a shrine, about 20 feet square, 
in which is a colossal statue of Buddha, with a figure of Indra 
at each side as his supporters, wearing rich headdresses (mukutas), 
and their hair in curls. That on Buddha's left has the vajra, or 
thunderbolt, in his left hand. The wheel in front of the throne 
is set edgewise, as with the Jainas, between two deer, with three 
worshippers on Buddha's left and five on his right, behind the deer. 
The shrine door (Plate XLII., fig. 1) is one of the moat elaborate 



» One of these pillars is represented, Plate XLU., fig. 2. 



326 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

in these caves. At the bottom on each side is a dwarp&la, with a 
five-headed snake hood, above which are four oompartments, with 
a male and female figure in each, and beyond and outside these two 
female figures standing on the head of pillars representing — it iB 
generally understood — the rivers Ganges and Jumna. The figure so 
sculptured is of considerable elegance, but is surpassed as in these 
later caves, by the sculptured foliage with which it is interwoven, 
which is here of great beauty. 

The whole of this cave has been painted, though near the floor it 
has entirely disappeared. Within the last fourteen years much of 
the painting in all the caves has either fallen off or been wantonly de- 
faced ; yet there are some as interesting fragments in this as in any 
other cave, and most of what does remain has been copied by 
Major Gill and Mr. Griffiths. The ceiling of it has been copied in 
about a hundred separate panels. 1 Mr. Griffiths thus describes it : — 
" Having divided the ceiling into a number of panels, with a circle 
for variety in the central division, we find theBe panels filled with 
ornaments of such variety and beauty, where we have naturalism 
and conventionalism bo harmoniously combined as to call forth our 
highest admiration. For delicate colouring, variety in design, flow 
of line, and filling of space, I think they aro unequalled. Although 
every panel has been thought out, and not a touch in one carelessly 
given, yet the whole work bears the impression of having been done 
with the greatest ease and freedom, not only freedom of execution, 
but also freedom of thought, as a reference to the copies made 
will testify. 

" The ornament in the smaller squares is painted alternately on a 
black and red ground. The ground colour was first laid in, and 
then the ornament was painted solidly over this in white. It was 
further developed by thin, transparent colours over the white. 

" In order fully to appreciate the copies of the paintings, it is 
necessary to bear in mind that the originals were designed and 
painted to occupy certain fixed positions and were seen in a subdued 
light. Many of the copies of the panels, on close inspection, appear 
coarse and unfinished ; but seen at their proper distance (never less 
than 7 feet from the spectator) apparent coarseness assumes a deli- 
cate gradation." 

On three of the panels of this ceiling a striking group of figures 

1 These arc now at the India Muflcum. 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 327 

recurs : l This is a Persian figure apparently of a king attended by 
his queen and servants. Rajendralal Mitra has called attention to 
these panels, 8 but describes them as Baktrian figures. Mr. Fergus- 
son more correctly identified them as Iranian, and, taking them in 
connexion with the reception of an embassy painted on the front 
wall, supposes that they represent Khosru Parwiz and his qvieen the 
fair Shirin. 8 (Plate XLIV., fig. 1.) The reception of an embassy 
on the front wall is evidently of a later date than those on the other 
walls, or by a different artist, but the ceiling may be of the same 
date with it. It represents a pale-skinned rfcja seated in Darbar 
on a cushion placed on a dais, higher than usual, with a semicir- 
cular canopy of green over the middle of the back of it, just behind 
his head, and having a gilt border with little vidyddhcvra figures on 
each side of it, and makara's mouths at the corners of the back. 
From the right three fair, bearded men, in Iranian costume, with 
peaked caps and completely clothed, approach him in crouching atti- 
tude ; the first bearing a string of pearls,* the second a jug or 
bottle (of wine perhaps), and the third a large tray filled with presents. 
Behind the third stands another figure near the door in white cloth- 
ing, perhaps the porter, with a stick in his hand and a dagger in 
his belt, apparently speaking to another Iranian in the doorway, 
also bringing in some present. Behind the porter is another 
foreigner in full white clothing, with stockings, curled hair, and 
peaked cap, holding a vessel in his hands, and with a long straight 
sword at his back. 

Behind the throne stands an attendant and a female with chdinara ; 
to the right of her a reddish fair figure in blue clothes ; and beside 
him one still fairer with a rich headdress and striped loin-cloth 
holding a green stick. In front of him again is a stool, broad at the 
upper and lower ends {bhadrdsana) ; and to the right are a red and 
a fair man— the latter with his arms crossed on his breast and wear- 
ing a red turban. In front of this last is a reddish skinned man, his 
left hand on his knee, while he bends forward and holds up the 
fingers of the right hand as if addressing some information to the 

* It mi probably repeated again in the centre of the fourth quarter, bat it has 
almost entirely fallen off*. 

» Jour. A. Soe. Beng. t voL xlvii. (1878), pp. 68-72. 
» See Jovr. B. At. Stoc, vol. xi. pp. 156-170. 

* And eoine object in his left hand supposed to be a letter. 



328 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

raja : probably he is the interpreter. Beyond him, to the right, are 
other two figures, one having in his hand a dish, perhaps with fruit, 
and a spear with a small flag attached to it. 

In front of the three Iranians sit three royally dressed figures, 
perhaps members of the royal family (Raja Jcwrrw-as), the reddish 
one in the centre, possibly the Yuvaraja. To the left of them is a 
man with a basket, and in front of the throne a woman sits with a 
chdmara, and beside her is an elegantly chased spittoon. 

On the left (at the proper right side of the throne) sits another 
lady with richhead dress, a " breast-band," a basket beside her, and 
some object in her lap. Behind her is a short female or dwarf, of 
red complexion, with blue earring, and not so richly dressed. Behind 
these two again is a third richly dressed young woman with breast- 
band also, and looking towards the raja. Above is a fourth with a 
chdmara, while a fifth face looks over the back of the throne on the 
r&ja's right. 

Outside the palace, to the right, an Iranian, like the one seen in 
the door, appears speaking to a green man with a stick in his hand. 
Behind are several horses, and in front of them a svpdhi or soldier, 
with a sword. A portion to the left of this interesting memento of 
some embassy from Persia, probably in the seventh century, is com- 
pletely destroyed. 1 

On the left end of the antechamber is the representation of Buddha 
beset by the emissaries of Mara, a favourite subject with the Buddhists. 

This picture when complete occupied the whole left wall of the 
antechamber to the sanctuary, 12 feet 9 by 8 feet 4J ; but a portion 
has been entirely destroyed, i.e., 1 foot from the top and 3 feet 
5 inches from the bottom.* Even as it is, however, it forms one of 



1 Mr. Ferguason ingeniously points out that Khoaru Farwiz, the Cbooroes II. of the 
Greek writers, who reigned 591-628 A.D., was not only contemporary with Pulikeat 
(aj>. 609-640), the king of Maharashtra, but appears from Tabari to have had re- 
lations with him ; Zotenberg's Talari, u u. pp. 828 ff. In the Arabic version of 
Tabari there is even a letter from Pulikesi to Shiruyieh, the son of Khoaru. — J.B.A.8. 
(N.8.),toL xL pp. 165, 166.--J.B. 

2 This is marked "X" among Mr. Griffith's copies made in 1875-76, and now at 
South Kensington, and a photograph from his copy forms Plato II. of Babu Rajendra- 
lalas work on Buddha Gaya. For a detailed account of the attack of Mara, see Beat's 
Rom. Leg. of 8. Buddha, pp. 205-224; Bigandet's Gaudama (2d ed.), pp. 80 flu j 
and S. Hardy's Manual of Buddkum. 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 329 

the most complete and graphic representations of that celebrated 
episode in Buddha's life that is known to exist anywhere. The scene 
is, however, so varied and so strange that it is impossible to convey 
any correct idea of its appearance by mere words, and it is of the 
less importance to attempt this here, as a bas-relief of the same 
subject, with only a little less detail, is found in Cave XXVI., and 
represented in Plate LI., so as to convey a fair notion of the strange 
accompaniments with which the Buddhists in the seventh century 
had invested the legend. 

On each side of the shrine door are fragments of figures of Indra 
and his consort Sachl, with attendants. The right hand wall of the 
antechamber is covered with numerous painted Buddhas. with the 
bMmaiidala or aureole round their heads, mostly seated, but some 
standing on lotus flowers, the leaves and stalks filling all the vacant 
Bpaces. Mr. Griffiths remarks that " the delicate foliage which fills 
in the spaces between the figures will give some idea of the power 
of these old artists as designers, and also of their knowledge of 
the growth of plants." 

Between the front of the antechamber and the first cell-door to 
the right, is a scene in a mountain * represented in the usual conven- 
tional style. In the centre is a colossal figure of a raja with richly 
jewelled mukuta or crown, holding a flower in his right hand and 
leaning his left on the shoulder of an attendant, whose left hand 
passes through a black leather Btrap which comes over his shoulder 
and supports a long straight sword at his back, the ends of the strap 
being fastened by a buckle. This man has a chain about his neck. 
Behind him is a tall female figure, perhaps a c/wm-ara-bearer, and 
above to the right is part of a sitting figure with his legs crossed. 

At the raja's right side is — perhaps the Yuvaraja, or heir-apparent 
(distinguishable by his crown), bringing forward and offering a trayful 
of flowers. Between the raja and him, a bald-head is thrust forward 
from behind — perhaps that of a eunuch (kanchuki), who is richly 
dressed, and rests his chin upon his right hand. In front of him, 
and to the left, are two ladies in the dress of rdpis, with coronets on 
their heads, leaving the presence, one with a tray of flowers, looking 
wistfully back. 

To the right of this and over the two cell doors is a large indoor 



1 Mr. Griffiths' copy of this is in the India Museum At South Kensington. 



830 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMP1ES. 

Boene in whioh a snake charmer is exhibiting a large cobra before a 
raja and his court. 

Below thiB, and between the cell-doors in this wall, is another very 
interesting and animated indoor scene (see Plate XLIIT.) 1 The two 
prominent figures in it are a Naga Raja, on the left with the five- 
hooded snake overshadowing his head, and on the right another 
royal personage, seated on a large draped couch, talking interestedly. 
The Naga Raja seems to be speaking, and to the left is a female 
with chdmara. Her hair and that of the two principal figures 
are all bound with fillets. Behind the Naga King is a dark red 
attendant with a straight sword, the richly-jewelled hilt held up, and 
then a female holding a chased casket in her left hand and a jewel 
with a string of pearls depending from it in her right. She has a 
Berpent at the back of her head, and may therefore be considered 
of the same race and rank as the seated figure, probably his wife. 
Next to her, and behind the second speaker, is a man with blue and 
flowered gold robe, and an Iranian headdress, also holding a sword 
with a blue hilt. To the left of the Naga Raja site a female in blue 
and white striped kirtle, the face turned up and the left hand 
stretched forward as if speaking or calling attention to something 
she bad to say. She, too, has a serpent at the back of her head. 
Behind the other raja one female is handing a tray with flowers 
in it to another, and in front of the second a third brings in 
another flat vessel covered with flowers and leans forward as if 
listening. Behind this last stands an old man, very fair skinned, 
with wrinkled brow, and white hair. In front, on the left, are two 
ladies seated and listening with interest. Most of the females in 
this picture have their hair hanging in ringlets. 

Outside the doorway, to the left, a raja is departing with high 
rrmkuia on his head and thechhatra or state umbrella borne over him, 
and with him is another figure with a large five-hooded snake canopy 
(pahcha-'phcma naga chhatra) over his head. Beyond them are two 
elephants, one with a rider holding an ankuia or driving hook in 
his hand. 

M Parts of this picture," Mr. Griffiths remarks, " are admirably 
executed. In addition to the natural grace and ease with which she 
is standing, the drawing of the woman holding a casket in one hand 



i This i> the picture of which Mr. Griffiths' copy is indicated by the letter « N." 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 331 

and a jewel with a string of pearls from it in the other, is most 
delicately and truly rendered. The same applies to the woman seated 
on the ground in the left-hand corner. The upward gaze and sweet 
expression of the mouth are beautifully given. The left hand of 
the same woman, which, by the way, I did not discover until I had 
been at work for some weeks, is drawn with great Bubtlety and 
tenderness." 

To the right of the second cell-door iB a picture that seemB to be 
related to the last. 1 The dresses are very nearly, if not quite the same, 
and some of the figures seem to be identical. It is also a palace 
scene, in which four of the seven figures left have the snake hood over 
their heads, three females, each having one serpent, and another one 
with five heads. Their hair falls down in ringlets, heid back in some 
cases by a fillet. On the left is the Naga Raja, and beside him sits 
another without the snake-hoods, but over his head a bearer behind 
holds the chhaira. A Naga figure, with a single hood and loose hair, 
stands a little behind and seems to be receiving a long straight 'sword 
of state from a female still more to the right and also with a Naga 
hood and long ringlets, who holds it up by the scabbard, whilst 
apparently Bpeaking to the others. Before, and either kneeling 
or sitting, is a lady of rank, looking importuningly at the face 
of the raja. Behind her is still another Ndgakanyd, and in front 
of her is a portion of one more. "The porch behind," as Mr. 
Griffiths remarks, " with the partly open door, is a very fair piece 
of perspective." 

These Naga paintings are of especial interest here, as they are the 
only representations we have of that interesting people in colour. 
In stone they abound at Bharhut, Sanchi, and Amravati. They 
occur everywhere in Ceylon, and still more so in Cambodia. They 
are found at Karld, and in all the later sculptures in the western 
caves ; in fact wherever Buddhism exists in India or the neighbour- 
ing country. It is only, however, from these paintings that we learn 
that in feature, in colour, and in dress they do not differ from the 
other races with whom they are mingled. Whoever they were we 
gather not only from their sculptures and paintings, but from all 
Buddhist tradition that they were the most important of all the races 
that adopted that religion. If consequently their origin and affini- 

i Mr. Griffiths' copy of this is designated by " Q. n Report, 1874-75. 



332 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

ties could only be ascertained it would probably throw more light on 
the peculiarities of that religion than can be obtained from any other 
source that now remains open to us. Only one attempt 1 has yet 
been made to investigate this question, and that being manifestly not 
sufficient it is hoped it may soon be taken up by those who are com- 
petent to the task. 

The painting on the right wall is so destroyed by holes made in it 
by bats as almost to defy description. 

Above, between the second and third cell-doors, and cut off from 
the next portion by a white gateway is a large scene much destroyed. 
Above are eight elephants. In front have been numerous soldiers, 
one on horseback, one green-skinned,* dressed in striped dlwtis 
and armed with the long crooked Nepalese swords. Three figures 
have deep collars round their necks, and all advance towards the left 
after some elephants without any housings. Other scenes may also 
be more or less distinctly made out. 

Cave II. 

Cave II. is another Vihara, similar but smaller than the preced- 
ing, and somewhat different in the style of its front columns. The 
verandah (Plate XLIV., fig. 2), is 46£ feet in length, supported in 
front by four pillars and two pilasters, all of the same style, having 
a torus and fillet at the base, but no plinth ; to about a fourth up they 
have 16 sides, above that they have 32 flutes with belts of elaborate 
tracery. The capitals are flower-shaped, along which the flutes of the 
column are continued as petals : first there is a deep calyx, widest 
near the bottom and terminating in a double row of petals ; then, 
above a very small fillet, is a thick projecting torus, surmounted by 
a bell-shaped flower of about the same depth as the torus, and on 
this rests a thin abacus. Over them runs a plain architrave on which 
the roof rests, and beyond which it projects very considerably, with 
indications of the patterns in which the under side of it was once 
painted.* At each end of the verandah are chambers similar to those 
in Cave I. (see plan, Plate XLIV.), — the architrave above the pillars 



1 Tree and Serpent Worship, quarto, London, 1873. 

* Can it be that these green people are intended to represent the lower castes ? 
» A view of this verandah forms Plate IX. of my picturesque illustration* of the 
Rock-ctU Temples of India, folio, London, 1845. — J. F. 



LATEST CAVES AT AJANTA. 333 

in front of them being filled with carving. In the central compart- 
ment of the facade of the chapel, in the right end of the verandah, 
is a Naga Raja and attendants. In that on the left end is a female 
and child. The side compartments in both are occupied by fat male 
figures. Bach chapel opens into an inner cell. At the left end of the 
fa9ade in a niche, is Buddha squatting in the dharmachakra mudrd, 
and over each shoulder is a smaller one. The cave has two windows, 
and a fine central door with an elaborate architrave, at the bottom 
of which are dwdrpdlas with five hooded snake-canopies, each 
apparently holding a flower ; above this, the compartments on each 
side are filled with pairs of standing figures, male and female, in 
varied attitudes ; above the door the figures are sitting ones, with 
a single fat one in the centre compartment. Outside the architrave 
are three members of florid tracery, then a pilaster, similar in style 
to the columns, and surmounted by a female figure standing under 
the foliage of a tree and leaning on a dwarf. (Plate XLV., fig. 2.) 
Over the upper architrave is a line of prostrate figures with what 
resembles a crown in the centre. 

The hall inside is 47 feet 7 inches wide, by 48 feet 4 inches deep, 
and is supported by twelve pillars, similar to those in the last cave 
the moBt highly ornamented being those just in front of the 
sanctuary. These pillars are very similar to those in Cave I. 
Those in the front row and the central pair in the back row have 
little fat dwarfs with four arms supporting the corners of the abaci. 
The central pairs of pillars in the back and front rows are the 
richest in carving, and the corner ones have flutes running in spirals 
up two belts of the Bhaft. The brackets have Vidi/ddharas and Ap- 
mrasas on the projections. In the central panels of the brackets in 
the back row are numbers of people worshipping the dagoba ; in 
those of the right side row are single fat figures canopied by toraiias 
rising from the mouths of makaras, and in the rest a fat raja, his 
wife and other female attendant*. The pilasters are beautifully 
carved. 

In a line with each side aisle, in the back wall, is a chamber with 
two pillars and pilasters in the front. In the chamber on the right 
or east side of the sanctuary, are sculptured a pair of portly sitting 
figures, both with rich headdresses : the woman holds a child on 
her knee, apparently amusing it with a toy held in her right hand ; 
to the right and left of them are female Blaves with cliaurU, whilst 



334 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

one behind holds a parrot and fruit. Below are eleven small figures, 
some of them making rams butt, others wrestling, and some playing 
on musical instruments for the ohild's amusement. This is probably 
intended to represent the infancy of Buddha nursed by his mother 
Mayadevt (or Mahaprajapate) with a peculiar round headdress, who 
sits by his father, Suddhodana. In the upper corners are repre- 
sentations of a holy man giving instruction to a woman and her 
child ; and of Buddha attacked by a four-armed demon with skull, 
necklace, club, snake, &c. 

In a corresponding apartment on the other side there are two fat 
male figures with elaborate headdresses, neck-chains, and armlets, 
the one holding an egg-shaped object in his hand. The frilled back 
to the headdress on the right-hand figure is of the style in vogue -in 
sculptures of about the Bixth or seventh century a.d. Female slaves 
with chawrk stand on either side, and Gandharvas or BuddhiBt 
cherubs with large wigs appear in the upper corners. Below are 
two semicircular representations ; but whether intended for vege- 
table food or not, is uncertain. Over the fronts of these side chapels 
in the back wall are also groups, the central one over the left chapel 
having a Naga Raja and his family in it. 

The shrine itself is about 14 feet by 11 ; but, owing to the cave 
being only 11 feet 5 inches high, it is verj dark, and smells strongly 
of bats. The Buddha squats in the dhannacfuikra mvdrd with the 
wheel and two deer in front, and behind them, to the right, a female 
in the attitude of adoration before a male, with a long object like an 
empty bag ; to the left is a female kneeling with a long-twisted 
object, and behind her a kneeling male worshipper. The right 
cAanwwa-bearer is richly dressed with muhufia and nimbus ; the left 
one is Avaldkitesvara ; he has the jatd headdress, and in his left 
hand a bottle-shaped object. The other has a rich headdress. 

The doorway to the shrine (Plate XLV., fig. 1) is a rich and elegant 
specimen of its class, though hardly of so pleasing a design as that of 
Cave No. I. (Plate XLIL). The inner pilaster consists of five panels, 
each containing two figures, a male and a female, the male is in the 
lowest compartment, being represented by a dwarf. The outside face 
equally consists of five panels, but only with single figures in each, 
all except the top one males with five-headed snake hoods. The 
lintel is adorned with seated figures in pairs, with three figures in 
the central compartment. The figure sculpture on this doorway 



LATE8T CAVES AT AJANTA. 335 

seems to be superior to that in Cave No. I., but the architectural 
ornaments are certainly inferior both in the design and execution. 

A good deal of the painting still remains in this cave. In the 
verandah, so much of the beautifully decorated ceiling is left that 
the pattern can be completely made out. When entire it must have 
been remarkably beautiful both in colour and design. The few 
fragments that remain on the wall indicate that it also was of a 
very high order as regards design, drawing, and colour. 

Inside, the ceilings of the great hall and aisles, the antechamber, 
shrine, and chapels are all admirably designed, and though (espe- 
cially in the hall) blackened with smoke, 1 they contain many striking 
examples of floral decorations, Naga and flying figures, and others 
with human and animal heads, but the lower extremities ending in 
scroll work. 

It is the only cave that retains any fragments of painting in the 
Bhrine, the ceiling being especially fine. " On entering the sanctuary 
with a light," says Mr. Griffiths, "the effect produced is one of 
extreme richneBS, the floating figures in the spandrils standing out 
with startling effect. These figures are bringing their gifts of 
flowers to present to the gigantic Buddha below. The wreath of 
flowers is admirably painted, and the band of black and white with 
its varied simple ornament is a most happy idea, giving additional 
value to the rest of the design. The eye would have been satiated 
by the amount of colour were it not for the relief it derived from the 
imposition of this band." 

The painting in the two chapels is of a yellower tone than most 
of the other wall paintings, and is filled with standing figures, 
many of them females, some with aureoles round their heads, 
and is possibly of later date than the rest, probably of the 
seventh century. On the right wall of the hall is one of the most 
interesting groups of pictures now left, of which it is to be regretted 

1 It is to be regretted that some precautions have not long ago been taken for 
preserving these interesting relics, for the bats have recently attacked the ceilings and 
will soon ruin tbem unless shut out. " What would be the effect," says Mr. Griffiths, 
" if a few hundred of them were allowed to flutter over Michael Angelo's fresco on the 
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, or among the paintings of the greatest of the Venetians 
in the Camera di Collegio in the Ducal Palace ? . , . 1 am fully convinced that they 
have been one of the principal agents in hastening the destruction of the paintings." — 
Report, 1872-73, p. 11. 



336 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

no copy has yet been made. It would occupy too much space to 
describe the whole, even if it were possible to do so intelligibly 
without some sort of copy of it. In one of the scenes, between the 
second and third cell doors below, is the retinue of a r&ja. He goes 
out on a large elephant with the umbrella of state over his head, 
and the anfat^a or goad in his hand ; behind him is an attendant 
with the chhatra ; at his side goes a smaller elephant, with a rider 
now defaced, and before it walks a man with some load in a bag on 
his back. In front (to the left) five horses (two of them green) 
advance ; the men on the green horses looking back to the rii ja. • 
There are also fourteen men on foot, of whom eleven seem to be 
soldiers, some carrying oblong shields, and three round ones with a 
great grinning Gorgon face painted on the front of each. Two 
above on the extreme left have swords in scabbards, nino others 
have Nepal swords known as kkukharis or dabiyas, but very long ; 
other two men play flutes, and one beata a drum (dale). 

Between the first and Becond cell doors is represented, with a con- 
ventionalism worthy of the Chinese, a river with many fish and Bhells 
in it. A boat with three masts, a jib sail, and an oar behind, and 
filled towards the stern with ten inatkds or earthenware jars, carries 
a man in it with long hair, who is praying. In the heaven behind 
Chandra, the Moon, a figure with a crescent behind him, is repre- 
sented as coming to him, followed by another figure. A Naga Raja 
and his wife in the water seem to draw the boat back ; and below is 
represented in the water another similar figure with a human head 
and long tail. On the left, to which the boat is going, is Buddha on 
the shore and a figure worshipping him. On the shores rocks are 
conventionally painted. 

The upper part of this wall is covered with interesting Bcenes, 
and much remains on the other walls also well deserving of 
publication. 

Cave III. 

This is a small Vihara higher up on the face of the rock, but 
quite unfinished. The verandah is 29 feet by 7, and supported 
by four pillars and two pilasters, only blocked out. An entrance 
has been made for the hall, but little of it has been excavated. 
There is also a commencement of an under-storey to this cave. 



AJANTA. 337 



Cave IV. 



We now come to Cave IV. (Fergusson's No. 3), the largest Vihdra 
of the series (see plan on Plate XLVI.). The verandah is about 87 
feet long, llf wide, and 16 feet high, supported by eight octagonal 
columns with plain bracket capitals. There is a room 10 feet by 
8^ at each end, entered by a small door with three steps. The cave 
has had a facade outside, carved with chaifyu- window ornaments 
containing figures of Buddha. 

The windows are surrounded by neat tracery with a female and 
attendant at the bottom of each jamb. The hall is entered by one 
central and two side doors, and has two windows between the doors. 
The large door, though considerably damaged for about two feet 
above the floor, to which depth the cave was long filled Avith earth, 
is one of the most elaborate to be found here ; generally it resem- 
bles that of Cave II., but no mere description can convey an idea of 
its details, which can be better studied from the drawing (Plate 
XLVII.) than from any verbal account. The dicdrapdl were as 
females attended by dwarfs. The upper compartment of the archi- 
trave on the right contains a bull, lying much as the Nandi does 
before Saiva temples ; and on the upper member of the cornice, at 
the extreme right, two monkeys are carved. The frieze is ornamen- 
ted by five models of the chaitya window, three containing Buddhas, 
and the end ones pairs of human figures. At the upper corners of 
the door are figures somewhat like goate rampant (sdrdiilas) facing 
each other, and which have had riders, but they are broken. 

To the right of the door, and between it and the architrave of 
the window, there is a large compartment sculptured with a variety 
of figures at the side, and in the middle a large one of Padinapani, 
the Bodhisattwa of Amit&bha, the fourth Jtidm, or divine Buddha, 
and who is supposed to be incarnate in the Dalai Lama of Lhasa. 
The arms are both broken, but the figure of Amitabha Buddha is 
on his forehead. The head is surrounded by a nimbus, and the 
remains of the lotus may be traced in his left band. The com- 
partments, four on each side, 1 represent the Bauddha Litany. This 



1 In China Padmapani, known as Kwan-yin, " who saves from the eight forms of 
■offering," u usually represented aa a female. The principal seat of his (or her) 
worship is at the island of Puto. — Edkins, Religion u Chiita, (2nd ed.,) pp. 100, 101. 



338 LATEST BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

may be regarded as an evidence of the later age of this cave, 
probably contemporary with those of the pherwara at Elura and 
Cave VII. at Aurangab&d, 1 where this litany iB also found. There 
are also pieces of sculpture very similar to this behind one of 
the dagobas in the vihara to the right of the chaitya, and in 
some of the smaller caves at Kanheri, and there are two copies 
outside the facade of Cave XXVI. here, as well as a painted 
one in Cave XVII. Above this is a small horse-shoe shaped com- 
partment with a Buddha sitting inside. The pillars inside are plain 
octagons, except two in the middle of the back row (Plate XLVIIL), 
which are richly decorated. 

There is no painting in the cave, except traces of a small frag- 
ment in very brilliant colours on the roof of the verandah to the 
right of the central door. Portions of the roof inside appear as if 
a layer of the rock had fallen off, near the front, and the workmen 
had begun to smooth it again from the back. It was, however, 
never finished. 

The antechamber is 21 feet by 13. On each side the shrine 
door is a large standing Buddha, and on each end wall of the ante- 
chamber are two similar figures, but, with the shrine and cells, it is 
much infested with bats. The Buddha in the shrine is in the usual 
dhaiinachakra mudrd, the left-hand attendant holding a lotus in hia 
left hand. The wheel and deer are in front, and quite a group of 
worshippers at each corner of the throne. The hall is 87 feet 
square, and is supported by 28 columns, 3 feet 2 inches to 3 feet 
3 inches in diameter, of the same style as in the verandah, plain, 
and without the elaborate tracery in Caves I. and II., but with a 
deep architrave over them, as at Ghatotkach, which raises the roof 
of the cave considerably. The front aisle is 97 feet in length and 
has a cell at each end. 

We descend to the next by a rough rocky path. 

Cave V. 

Cave V. is only the commencement of a vihdra, the verandah 
of which is 45£ feet by 8 feet 8 inches ; but of the four pillars, 
only one is nearly finished, and it is of the same style as the 

1 See Archaeological Surrey of Western India, vol. {ti. Plate LIU. 



AJANTA. 339 

last, only shorter and with a square base. The door has an archi- 
trave round it, divided into six compartments on each Bide, and 
each filled by a pair of standing figures in various attitudes. In 
the lintel are nine divisions, the central one with Buddha and 
attendants and the other with pairs of seated figures. Two very 
neat colonettes support the frieze in which are five chaitya-vnndow 
ornaments. Outside is a roll-pattern member and a border of 
leaves ; but at the upper corners these are carried outwards so as to 
surround a female standing on a makara under foliage of the ASoka 
and Mango trees, and attended by a small dwarf. 

The left window is also richly carved, but scarcely any progress 
has been made inside. 



Cave XXI. 

On leaving No. V., which is the last of the latest Mahayana caves 
of the North-western group, and passing over the 15 caves already 
described, we reach No. XX., from which we descend and then ascend 
again by a steep path for a considerable distance along the face of 
the scarp to No. XXI. Its verandah has fallen away, but the elabo- 
rately carved pilasters at each end, in the style of Cave I., Plate 
XL1X., fig. 2, indicate that it was probably finished with the same 
richness of ornamentation. At each end is a neat open chapel like 
those in Caves I. and II., separated from the verandah by two pillars 
of elegant design with the corresponding pilasters (Plate XLLX., 
fig. 1), in these the falling leaf is introduced probably for the first 
time over the bowl of the capital. The frieze above this is divided 
into three compartments by dwarf pilasters, ornamented by what is 
called " jewel pattern," which is one of the most usual and typical of 
all the ornaments used in the seventh century. It occurs everywhere 
in caves and buildings of that age. The hall is 514 ^ eei ^ide 
by 51 feet deep, and has chambers with pillared fronts in the middle 
and at the ends of the side aisles, each leading into an inner cell, besides 
which there are four other cells on each side of the cave. The pillars 
in front of the cells at the back are surmounted by some very good 
carving and devices. The roof of the hall is supported by twelve 
columns, ornamented in a Btyle similar to those in Cave II. The 
entrance to the adytum is unfinished, and the image sits cross-legged, 
has huge ears, and is attended by dwHH-bearers, holding fruits or 

r 2 



340 LATEST BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

offerings in their Lands, and with high ornate tiaras; they are 
perhaps intended to represent Indras or Sakras. The paintings on 
the left wall are much destroyed since first known to Europeans. 

Cave XXII. 

The next 1 is a very small Vihara, about 16£ feet square and 
9 feet high, with four unfinished cells, no window, a very pretty 
door, and a narrow verandah, of which both the pillars are broken, 
ascended by two steps. The sanctuary opens directly from the 
cave, and contains an image with its feet on the lotus, the Bud- 
dhist emblem of creative power. On front of the sitihdsana or seat is 
the chakra, the chinha or cognizance of Sakya, with two small deer 
as vdhana or supporters. To his right, beyond the chauri-bearer, is 
Padmapani, and on the left another attendant. On the right 
side, under a row of painted Buddhas, are their names : — " Vipasyi, 
Sikhi, Visvabhu, . . . Kanakamuni, Kasyapa, Sakya Muni, 
Maitre(ya)," the missing name being Krakutsanda or Kakusanda, 
the first Buddha of the present kalpa or regeneration of the world ; 
for the Buddhists believe that the world is destroyed and regenerated 
at the end of immensely long periods or kalpas ; and that each 
kalpa has one or more Buddhas, thus in the third past regeneration 
Vipasyi was the Buddha in the last Sikhi and ViSvabhu ; and in 
the present Krakuchchhanda, Kanakamuni, Kasyapa, and Sakya Muni 
or Gautama have already appeared as Buddhas whilst Arya 
Maitreya, the last, is yet to come, 5,000 years after Sakya. These 
are also known as the " mdimshya or earth-born Buddhas." Below 
the names is painted : — " The charitable assignation of Sakya 
Bhikshu . . . May the merit of this ... be to father and mother 
and to all beings . . . endowed with beauty and good fortune, good 
qualities and organs, the bright . . . protectors of light . . , thus 
become pleasing to the eye." 

Cave XXIII. 

This is another twelve-pillared Vihara. 50 feet 5 inches wide by 
51 feet 8 inches deep, and 12 feet 4 menes high. The four columns 
of the verandah are all entire. They have bases, 2 J to 3 feefc square ; 

1 High up in the rock above the itcarp, between No*. XXI. and XXII. and almost 
inaccessible, is another small Vihara, numbered XXVIII. in thin arrangement. 



AJANTA. 341 

the shafts are circular, the end ones fluted, and on the torus of the 
capital are four dwarfs, upholding the corners of a square tile under 
the brackets. The door has small dwdrpdlas, canopied by the many- 
hooded snake. There are chapels at the ends of the verandah and of 
the left aisle, but the sanctuary is only commenced. There is no 
trace of painting in this cave. 

Cave XXIV. 

Cave XXIV. was intended for a 20 pillared vihara, 73£ feet wide 
by 75 feet deep, and if completed it would probably have been one 
of the most beautiful in the whole series, but the work was stopped 
before completion. The verandah was long choked up with earth, 
and of the six pillars in it only one is now standing ; the rest appear 
to have fallen down within the last thirty years. The bracket 
capitals still hang from the entablature, and the carved groups on 
them are in the best style of workmanship. 1 In two of the capitals 
and in those of the chapels at the end of the verandah the corners 
are left above the torus, and wrought into pendant scroll leaf orna- 
ments. The work on the doors and windows is elaborate. Inside 
only one column has been finished. 

Here we learn how these caves were excavated by working long 
alleys with the pickaxe into the rock and then breaking down the 
intervening walls, except where required for supporting columns. 
There is some sculpture in an inner apartment of the chapel outside 
the verandah to the left, but much in the usual style. 

Cave XXV. 

This is a small vihara with a verandah of two pillars ; the hall 
is 26 feet 5 incheB wide by 25 feet 4 inches deep without cell 
or sanctuary. It has three doors ; and at the left end of the 
■verandah iB a chamber with cells at the right and back. In front is 
an enclosed space, about 30^ feet by 14, with two openings in front, 
and a door to the left leading on to the terrace of the next cave. 

Chaitya Cave No. XXVI. 

This is the fourth Chaitya-cave, and bears a strong resemblance 
to Cave XIX. It is larger however, as may be seen from the two 

1 Woodcut No. 42 is a rei>rcw* , ntwtioi) of one of the capitals of the verandah of this 
cave. 



342 LATEST BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES, 

plans engraved on Plate XXXVII., and is very much more elaborately 
ornamented with sculpture, but that generally is somewhat inferior 
in design, and monotonous in the style of its execution, showing a dis- 
tinct tendency towards that deterioration which marked the Buddhist 
art of the period. It is also certainly more modern than No. XIX., 
though the two are not separated by any long interval. Still the 
works in Cave XXVI. seem to have been continued to the very 
latest period at which Buddhist art was practised" at Ajan^a, and 
it was contemporary with the unfinished caves which immediately 
preceded it in the series. It may possibly have been commenced in 
the end of the sixth century, but its sculptures extend down to the 
middle of the seventh, or to whatever period may be ascertained as 
that at which the Buddhists were driven from these localities. 
This was certainly after Hiwen Thaangs visit to the neighbourhood 
in 640, 1 and it may not have been for 10 or 20 years after this time. 
Once it had a broad verandah along the whole front, supported 
by four columns, of which portions of three still remain, and at each 
end of the verandah there was a chamber with two pillars and 
pilasters very like those in the left side chapel of Cave III. at 
Aurangabad. The court outside the verandah has extended some 
way right and left, and on the right side are two panels above one 
another, containing the litany of Aval6kiteswara, similar to that in 
Cave IV., and to the right of it is a standing figure of Buddha in 
the Mva mudrd, holding up the right hand in the attitude of 
blessing. One of these panels, however, is much hidden by the 
accumulation of earth in front of them, and the other is entirely 
concealed by it. Over the verandah, in front of the great window, 
and upper facade of the cave, there was a balcony, about 8| feet 
wide and 40 feet long, entered at the end from the front of the last 
cave. The sill of the great arch was raised 2$ feet above this, and 
at the inner side of the sill, which is 7 feet 2 inches deep, there is 
a stone parapet or screen, 3| feet high, carved in front with small 
Bnddhas. The outer arch is 14| feet high, but the inner one from 
the top of the screen is only 8 feet 10 inches. The whole facade, 
outeide the great arch and the projecting side-walls at the ends of 
the balcony, has been divided into compartments of various sizes 
sculptured with Buddhas. On each side the great arch is a seated 



' Julieu's TrsnBlation, vol. Ji. p. lfiO. 



AJANTA. 343 

figure of Elub&ra, the Hindu god of wealth, and beyond it, in a pro- 
jecting alcove, is a standing Buddha. On the upper parts of the end 
walls of this terrace there is, on each side, a figure of Buddha standing 
with his hid or robe descending from the left shoulder to the ankle, 
leaving the right shoulder bare: these figures are about 16 feet 
high. 

Under the figure on the left is an inscription in a line and a half, 
being a dedication by the Sakya Bhikshu Bhadanta Gunakara. On 
the left of the entrance is a longer inscription 1 recording the 
construction of the cave by Devaraja and his father Bhavviraja, 
ministers of Asmakaraja. This is important as connecting the exca- 
vators of this cave with Cave XVII. and the large Vihara at Ghatot- 
kacha. 

Besides the central door, there is a smaller side one into each 
aisle. The temple is 67 feet 10 inches deep, 36 feet 3 inches wide, 
and 31 feet 3 inches high. The nave — besides the two in front, has 
twenty-six columns, is 17 feet 7 inches wide, and 33 feet 8 inches 
long to the front of the dagoba ; the pillars behind it are plain 
octagons, with bracket capitals, and the others somewhat resemble 
those in the verandah of Cave II. ; they are 12 feet high, and a four- 
armed bracket dwarf is placed over each capital on the front of the 
narrow architrave. The frieze projects a few inches over the archi- 
trave, and is divided into compartments elaborately sculptured. 
The stone ribs of the roof project inwards, and the vault rises 12£ 
feet to the ridge pole. 

The body of the chaitya or dagoba is cylindrical, Plate XXXVIII., 
fig. 1 , but with a broad face in front, carved with pilasters, cornice, 
and mandapa top ; in the centre is a Buddha sitting on a sihhdsaiia 
or throne with lions upholding the seat, his sdd reaching to hiB 
ankles, his feet on a lotus upheld by two small figures with Ndga 
canopies, behind which, and under the lions, are two elephants. 
The rest of the cylinder is divided by pilasters into compartments 
containing figures of Buddha standing in various attitudes. The 
dome has a compressed appearance, its greatest diameter being at 
about a third of its height, and the representation of the box above 
is figured on the sides with a row of 8 tan ding and another of sitting 



1 Jovr. Bom. B. B, A*. Soc. toL vii, p. 61, and ray Notts oh Aja*l&, p. 83, and 
Plate XXL 



344 LATEST BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Buddhas ; over it are some eight projecting fillets or tenias, crowned 
by a fragment of a small stone umbrella. The aisles of this Chaitya- 
cave contain a good deal of sculpture, much of it defaced. In the 
right aisle there are large compartments with Buddhas sculptured in 
alto rilievo, with attendants ; their feet rest on the lotus upheld by 
JVo^o-protected figures with rich headdresses, and others sitting beside 
them. Over the Buddhas are flying figures, and above them a line 
of arabesques with small compartments containing groups. 

On the left wall, near the small door is a gigantic figure of 
Buddha about 23 feet 3 inches in length, reclining on a couch (see 
Plate L.) This represents the death of the great ascetic. " It is," 
says Fahian, " to the north of Kusinara " (probably Kusia, between 
Betiya and Gorakhpur) " betwixt two sal trees on the bank of the 
river Hiranyavati (probably the Gandak) that the ' IllustriouB of the 
Age,' his face turned to the north, entered nirvana. There where 
Subhadra long after obtained the law, and where they adored for 
seven days in his golden coffin the ' Illustrious of the Age ;' there 
where 4 the hero that bears the diamond sceptre ' (Vajrapani) let go 
the golden pestle, and where the eight kings divided the sariro (or 
relics), in all these places they established Sangharamas or monas- 
teries which exist to this day." 1 The visitor will observe a tree at 
the head and another at the foot of the figure, and Ananda, the 
relative and attendant of Buddha, standing under the second. This 
figure has also its face turned to the north. "In a great chapel 
erected at Kusinara," says Hiwen Thsang — writing about a.d. 640 
— is a " representation of the nirvana of the Tathagata. His face 
is turned to the north, and hath the appearance of one slumbering."' 

Above the large figure are several very odd ones, perhaps repre- 
senting the decas " making the air ring," as tho legend says, ** with 
celestial music, and scattering flowers and incense." Among them 
is perhaps Indra, the prince of the thirty-two devas of Trayastrinshaa, 
on his elephant. In front of the couch are several other figures, his 
disciples or bhikshus, exhibiting their grief at his departure, and a 
worshipper with a flower in his hand and some little offerings in a 
tray. 

> Foe Kcrae Ki, Chapter XXIV. 

* General Cunningham in a pritate letter to me report* that be bus discovered this 
figure, but nothing hut yet been published legarding it.— J. F. 



AJANTA 345 

Farther along the wall, beyond a figure of Buddha teaching 
between two attendants — a Bodbisattva on the left and perhaps 
Padmapani on the right — there is a large and beautiful piece of 
sculpture that has perplexed every one who has attempted to explain 
it. (Plate LI.) To the left a prince, Mara, stands with what 
appears to be a bow and arrow in his hands and protected by 
an umbrella, and before him — some sitting, others dancing — are 
a number of females, his daughters Tanha, Rati, and Ranga, with 
richly adorned headdresses. A female beats the three drums, two of 
which stand on end which she beats with one hand, and the other 
lies on its side while she almost sits on it and beats it with the other 
hand. Mara appears again at the right side, disappointed at his 
failure. Several of the faces are beautifully cut. Above are his 
demon forces attacking the great ascetic sitting under the Bodhi 
tree, with his right hand pointing to the earth and the left in his 
lap (the bhumufparsa mudrd), while the drum of the dews is being 
beat above him. This is the same subject that is represented in 
painting in Cave No. I. above alluded to. The painting contains 
more detail, and a greater number of persons are represented in it, 
than in this sculpture, but the story and the main incidents are the 
same in both. On the whole this sculpture is perhaps, of the two, the 
best representation of a scene which was so great a favourite with 
the artists of that age. Besides this it is nearly entire, while a great 
deal of the plaster on which the other was painted has pealed off, 
leaving large gaps, which it is now almost impossible to fill up. 1 

1 One of the most interesting results obtained from a study of (he sculptures iu this 
cave is the almost absolute certainty that the Great Temple of Boro Buddor in Java 
was designed by artiitU from the west of India, and almost as certainly that it was erected 
in the last half of the wventh century, or it may be somewhat later, as such a temple 
must probably have taken uearly 100 yvnra to complete. The style of execution of the 
figure sculptures in the two templea resemble each other so nearly that we might 
almost fancy they were carved by the same individuals, and the "jewelled pattern " 
and other architectural ornaments are ao nearly identical that they uiupt be of the same 
age, or very nearly bo. The Mahiyina doctrine*, as portrayed at Boro Buddor, are 
somewhat more advanced than anything found at Ajant&, especially in the upper 
storey*, but that may have arisen from the time the works were in progress 

The time and manner of the Buddhist migration to Java hare hitherto been a com- 
plate mystery. In th« beginning of the fifth century Fi Hian, who resided there five 
months, confesses that there * heretics and Brahmat b nourish, but the law of Buddha 
" is not much known." l It probably, however, was not long after that time that they 

* Ikal't Translation, p. 16*. 



346 LATEST BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



Caves XXVII. to XXIX. 



Cave XXVII. is the last accessible vihara. The front is broken 
away and a huge fragment of rock lies before the cave, which is 
about 43£ feet wide and 31 deep, Mithout pillars. It has never 
been finished, and the antechamber to the shrine is only blocked 
out. There are three cells in the left side, two in the back, and one 
in the portion of the left side that remains. 

Cave XXVIII. is the beginning of a Chaitya cave high up on the 
scarp between Nos. XXL and XXII. ; but little more than the top 
of the great arch of the window has been completed. 

Cave XXIX. is the verandah of a vihara beyond XXVII., sup- 
ported by six rough-hewn pillars and two pilasters. No. XXVIII. 
is very difficult of access, and XXIX. is inaccessible. 

Caves op Ghatotkach. 

The caves of Ghatotkach are situated in a gorge near the village 
of Jinjala, about eleven miles west from Ajanta and three south- 
west of Gulwada, and consist of two Buddhist excavations, a larger 
and a smaller cave. They were first brought to notice by Captain 
Rose and described by Surgeon W. H. Bradley. 1 

The larger Vihara (Plate LII.) in plan closely resembles Caves VI. 
and XVI. at Ajanta : it is a twenty-pillared hall, with the front aisle 
somewhat longer than the width of the cave, the corner and two 
middle pillars on each side being of one pattern, square bases changing 
into octagon, sixteen-sided, and then 32 flutes, returning through the 
sixteen and eight-sided forms to the square under the plain bracket 
capitals. The remaining two pillars on each side have octagonal 
shafts, square heads, and brackets. There are pilasters on the side 

migrated there in sufficient cumbers to build Cbaityso and VihAraa, for there is u 
certain local character and indigenous looking deUiU at Boro Buddor, which it must 
have taken some time to assimilate. But from the identity of the figure sculpture and 
the general similarity of design, it *eem« nearly certain that it was not till the end of 
the aeventh century that they were in sufficient number* and with sufficient wealth to 
contemplate such ao undertaking as that gtcat temple, certainty the most magnificent 
temple of the Buddhists now, at all event*, existing. The migration to Cambodia 
seems to have been undertaken later. The temples there are hardly Buddhist at II 
that religion being there overwhelmed and buried in local superstitions and serpent 

worship, so as to be barely recognisable, if, in fact, il pre-existed at all J. P. 

J Jour. B. R. B. A. Soe., vol. v. p. 117. 



GHATOTKACH. 347 

walls in line with the front and back rows of pillars, those behind 
being richly carved, and the front left side one bearing a figure 
of Buddha with an inscription over it in rather badly formed 
characters. It is merely the Baudda creed. In the middle of the 
back wall is an antechamber with two pillars in front, and behind it 
is the sbrine containing a figure of Buddha with his legs doubled 
under him, hands in the teaching mvdrd, with gigantic r.hauri bearers, 
and vulyddliaras on clouds. In front of the throne is the usual 
wheel, on each side of which are couchant deer, and behind them on 
either side two kneeling figures in entire relief and four others in 
half relief from the throne. 

In the back wall on each side the shrine and in the middle of 
each side wall is a chapel with two pillars in front, and three of 
the chapels with inner cells. There are also four cells in the right 
side and six in the left. 

In the extension of the front aisle to the right there is a dagoba 
in half relief, and on the other two walls of the same recess are a 
number of standing and squatting Buddhas all cut into the wall, 
and possibly of later date than the excavation. 

In the front wall are three doors, a central one and two at the 
ends, and two windows, the central door carved in the style of most 
of the doors in the caves at Ajanta, but at the upper corners the 
female figures stand on boars instead of 7nakara$, and the windows 
and side doors are ornamented with the Chaitya arch containing 
figureB of Buddha, with globular forms on the finials. At the ends 
of the verandah are two small chapels each with two pillars between 
pilasters supporting their fronts, similar to those in the chapels 
of Caves XXIV. and XXV. at Ajanta. On the back wall of the 
verandah at the north end (the cave faces south-west) is an 
inscription of the Asmaka prhices much defaced, but originally 
cut in small well formed letters, each line containing one Sloka. 

The whole front of the verandah is ruined, not a vestige of a 
pillar being left. 

The second was a small cave, the front supported by two pillars 
and two pilasters, but now almost entirely destroyed, the bracket 
of one pillar and pilaster only remaining, and in the middle com- 
partment of the bracket of the pillar is a representation of four 
deer with one common head as in Cave I. at Ajanta. 



348 



CHAPTER III. 
KANHERI CAVES. 

The Island of Salsette, or Shatshashthi, at the head of the Bombay 
harbour, is peculiarly rich in Rock-Temples, there being works of 
this kind at Kanheri, Mar6l, Magathana, MandapesVar, and JogeS- 
w&ri. The most extensive series is the group of Buddhist caves at 
Kanheri, a few miles from Thana, in which are about 109 separate 
caves, mostly small, however, and architecturally unimportant. 

From their position, within easy acceBB from Bombay and Bassein, 
they early attracted attention, and were described by Portuguese 
visitors in the 16th century, 1 and by European voyagers and tra- 
vellers like Linechoten, Fryer, Gremelli Careri, Anquetil, Du Perron, 
Salt, and others. 1 

They are about six miles from Thana, and two north of the Tulai 
lake, recently formed to increase the water supply of Bombay, 
and, as described by Mr. Fergusson, 3 " are excavated in one large 
bubble of a hill, situated in the midst of an immense tract of forest 
country. Most of the hills in the neighbourhood are covered with 
the jungle, but this one is nearly bare, its summit being formed by 
one large rounded mass of compact rock, under which a softer 
stratum has in many places been washed out by the rains, forming 

1 Diogo de Couto(1603), Da Asia Dec. vii., lir., iii., cap. 10 (Ed. Lisboa), torn. vii. 
Translated in Jour. Bom. B. R. A Soc., vol, i. pp. 34-41. 

* J. H. Van Linechoten (1579), Discourse of Voyages, Book I., cli. xliv. p. 80 ; 
Fryer (1673), New Account of East India and Persia, Let. ii. ch. ii. pp. 72, 73 ; 
Gemelli Careri (1693), Voyagt (Fr. «d. 1727), torn. ii. pp. 51-75 j A. Da Perron, Zend 
Aoesta, Prel. Disc, cccxciv., ccccxiiL, ccccxix. : Hunter in Arckaologia, to!, vii. pp. 
299-902; S. Lethieullier, *&., pp. 333-336: H. Macueil, to., vol viii. pp. 251-268; 
Salt, Trans. Bom. Lit. Soc, vol. i. pp. 46-52 ; Erskine, to., voL iii. p. 527 1 Wilson 
Jour*. Bom. B. R. A. Soc., vol. Hi. pt. ii. pp. 39-41 ; Stevenson, ib. t vol. iv. pp. 131- 
134 ; vol. v. pp. 1 ff. ; Wwt, ib., vol. vi. pp. 1-14, 116-120, 157-160; BhaoDiji, ib^ 
voL viii. pp. 227 ff. ; Bird, Jour. A. S. Beng., vol x. p. 94 ; Hutor. Re**, pp. 10, lit 
Hamilton'* Dese. of Hindustan, vol. ii. p. 171 i Hebera Journals ,• Ferguwon, /. R, A. 
Soc., vol. viii. 

* Rock-cut Temples, p. 34. 



KANHEKI. 349 

natural caves ; it is in the stratum again below this that most of 
the excavations are situated." ' The rock in which the caves are 
is a volcanic breccia, which forms the whole of the hilly district 
of the island, culminating to the north of the caves in a point about 
1,550 feet above the sea level. 

In so large a group there must be considerable differences in the 
ages of some of the excavations. These, however, may generally 
be at least approximate vely ascertained from the characters of the 
numerous inscriptions that exist upon them. Architectural features 
are necessarily indefinite where the great majority of the excava- 
tions consist of a single small room, usually with a little verandah 
in front, supported by two plain square or octagonal shafts, and 
stone-beds in the cells. In the larger and more ornate caves they 
are, of course, as important here as elsewhere. Their style is cer- 
tainly primitive, and some of these monks' abodes may date from 
before the Christian era. One small cave of this type (No. 81) in 
the ravine, consisting of a very narrow porch, without pillars, a 
room with a stone bench along the walls, and a cell to the left, has 
an inscription of Yajfia Sri Satakarni 1 of the Andrabhritya race, 
whose date iB still undetermined (ante, page 265), and it is probable 
that numbers of others in the same plain style may range from the 
second to the fourth century. Others, however, are covered inside 
with sculpture of a late Mahdydna type, and some have inscriptions 
which must date as late as the middle of the ninth century. 

The existence of so many monastic dwellings in this locality is 
partly accounted for by the neighbourhood of so many thriving 
towns. Among the places mentioned as the residences of donors to 
them, occur the names of Surparaka, the Supara of Greek and the 
Subara of Arab writers, the ancient capital of the northern Konkan ; 
Kaly&n, long a thriving port; Chemula, 8 the Samylla of Greek 

' J. B. B. R. A. Soc.. vol. vl. pp. 171, 172. 

» Bird's Plat« XLIV.. No. 14 j Stevenson, J. B. B. R. A. Soc.. vol. t. p. 23, ud 
No. 18 of Brett's copies ; Weal's No. 44, J. B. B. R. A. S.. vol. vi. p. 10. 

8 It ia mentioned sa Chemuli in a grant of the Silihaias of 1095, a.d. Mas'udi 
( Murvju'l Zahab) gays be visited Scymur in a.d. 916, which was one of the depen- 
dencies of the Balhari, and the ruler of the port was called Janja j now we find a 
Jbanjha, one of the Sil&haro princes, mentioned in copper-plate inscription!; found n 
Thinft and the neighbourhood (J. R. As. Soc, vol. iv. p. 109; Asia/, JSex^ vol u 
p. 858 ; In<L Ant., vol. v. pp. 276, 279) who must nave been alive »• this wy date, 
his grandfather navtng been alive in 877 a.d. under Amoghavarsha, the Rashtrokut.t 
king (/. B. B. R. A. S,, vol. xiii. pp. 11, 12.) j see also Ind. Ant , vol. vi. p. 72. 



350 



BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 






geographers, on the island of Trombay ; and Vasya perhaps Vasai 
or Bas8ein. Sri Staanaka or Thana itself, and Ghodabandar were 
also doubtless thriving towns. 

Chaitya Caves. 

The cave first met in the way up the hill, and the most important 
one in the whole series, is the great Chaitya cave, Plate LOT., so 

often described. On the jamb of 
the entrance to the verandah of it 
is an inscription of Yajfia Srt Sata- 
karni or Gautamiputra II., the 
same whose name we have just 
mentioned as found on No. 81 ; 
indeed, the inscription here being 
much mutilated, it is only by help 
of the other that we can hope to 
make it out. 1 It seems, however, 
to be integral, and it is conse- 
quently not improbable that the cave 
was excavated during his reign. 

Till, however, the dates of the 
reigns of the Andhrabhritya kings 
are determined with more preci- 
sion than they are at present,* the 
exact date of their excavation must 
remain for future investigation. 
The fact is we meet here exactly 
the same problem that prevented 
our being able to fix the dates of 




N«. G2. Capital of Pillar representing Tree 
Worship, from the Chaitya Ca»e at Kanberi. 



1 But few of the inscriptions in these caves have yet been satisfactorily deciphered. 
Many of thein are much abraded, and owing to the weatherworn uneven surface of the 
rock it is difficult to take good impressions of them. Dr. Stevenson attempted to 
translate them from Lieut. Brett's copies (Jour. B. B. B. A. Soc^ vol. v. pp. 1-34), 
bnt they were inaccurate. A better eeries of copies were taken by £. W. West, Esq. 
(J. B. B. 1L A. S., vol. vL pp. 1—14), but some of them were lithographed on much too 
small a tcale. Bhagwanlal Indraji Pandit has given a good transcript and translation 
of Mr. West's No. 19 from Cave 86 (J. B. B. B. A. Soe., voL xi. p. 407), contain the 
name of Madariputra, one of the Andra kings; and also versions of Nos. 15 and 42, 
A., vol. xiii. p. II. 
* See list of the Andhrabhritya kings, page 265, ante. 



KANHERT. 



351 



the Nasik caveB within any narrow limits. From the style of the 
architecture we are able to state with certainty that the Cave XII. 
at Nasik is contemporary, or nearly so, with the great Chaitya at 
Karle, and that the Nahapana Cave there (No. VIII.) is more 
modern than No. XII., but at no great interval of time. The 
Gautamiputra Cave No. III. succeeded to these after a considerable 
lapse of time, but which we are not at present in a position to 
measure, while anything that Yajna Sri may have done there 
must, of course, have been executed within a short interval of time 
after that. On the other hand, whatever its date may be, it is 
certain that the plan of this Chaitya Cave (Plate LIII.) is a literal 
copy of that at Karle (Plate XI.), but the architectural details show 
exactly the same difference in style as is found between Caves XII. 
and [II. at Nasik. If, for instance, we compare the annexed 
woodcut 62, representing one of the capitals in this cave, with those 




No €8. Screen in front of Chaitya Cave at Kanheri. 

shown in Plate XII. we find the same degradation of style as is 
exhibited in woodcuts No. 49 and No. 50, page 269. 1 The screen, 

' When I first saw these caves I was so struck with the vast inferiority of style in 
this cave that 1 was inclined to believe that the interval between these two Chaityas 
was much greater than it now seems possible to make it, and in my folio volume of 
plates 1 drew the pillars in each (Plate IX.) in order to explain why I did no. On 
architectural grounds I do not even now see any reason for doubting that the interval 
between them may be at least four centuries, nnd though the reading of the inscriptions 
seems at present unfavourable to this view, nothing would surprise me less than that 
the opinion I have recently advocated (/no*, and East. Arch., p. 129) should prove 
correct, end it turn out. that this cave was excavated in the first years of the fifth 
century. — »T. F. 



352 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

too, in front of this cave (woodcut 63), though very much weather- 
worn and consequently difficult to draw, is of very nearly the same 
design that is in the Grautamiputra Cave at Nasik, and in its com- 
plication of discs and animal forms seems almost as modern as 
what we find at Amravati, which there seems little reason for 
doubting belongs to the fourth or fifth century after Christ. 

This temple is 86^ feet long by 39 feet 10 inches wide from wall to 

wall, and has thirty -four pillars round the nave and the dagoba, only 

6 on one side and eleven on the other having bases and capitals of 

the Karle Chaitya-cave patterns, but not so well proportioned 

nor so spiritedly cut, while fifteen pillars round the apse are plain 

octagonal shafts. The dagoba is a very plain one, nearly 16 feet in 

diameter, but its capital is destroyed ; so also is all the woodwork 

of the arched roof. The aisle across the front is covered by a 

gallery under the great arched window, and probably the central 

portion of the verandah in front was also covered, but in wood. At 

the ends of this verandah are two colossal figures of Buddha, about 

23 feet high, but these appear to be considerably later than the 

cave itself. The sculpture on the front screen wall is apparently 

a copy of that in the same position at Karl6, but rather better 

executed, indeed, they are the best carved figures in these caves ; the 

rock in this place happens to be peculiarly close grained, and the 

Btyle of dress of the figures is that of the age of the great Satakarnis. 

The earrings are heavy and some of them oblong, while the anklets 

of the women are very heavy, and the turbans wrought with great 

care. This style of dress never occurs in any of the later caves or 

frescoes. They may, I think, with confidence be regarded as of the 

age of the cave. Not so with the images above them, among which 

are several of Buddha and two standing figures of the Bodhisattwa 

Avatokiteswara, which all may belong to a later period. So also 

does the figure of Buddha in the front wall at the left end of the 

verandah, under which is an inscription containing the name of 

Buddhaghosha, in letters of about the sixth century. 

The verandah has two pillars in front, and the screen above them 
is carried up with fve openings above. In the left side of the 
court are two rooms, one entered through the other, but evi- 
dently of later date than the cave. The outer one has a good deal 
of sculpture in it. On each side of the court is an attached pillar ; 
on the top of that on the west side are four lions, as at Karle ; on 



KANHERI. 353 

the other are three fat squat figures similar to those on the pillar 
in the court of the Jaina Cave, known as Indra Sabha, at Elura ; 
these probably supported a wheel. In front of the verandah there 
haB been a wooden porch. 

On the left of the court is a small circular cell containing a solid 
Dagoba, from its position almost certainly of more ancient date than 
this cave. On the right also, and pressing very closely upon it, is 
a long cave, now open in front, and which contained three dagobas, 
one of them now broken off near the base. These also are pro- 
bably older than the Chaitya cave, which seems to have been thrust 
in between these two caves at a later date ; but this long room has 
been so much altered at different times that it is not easy to make 
out its original arrangements. On the rock surrounding the dagobas 
are sculptures of Buddha, a litany, &c, but all these are probably 
of later date. 

South of the last is another Chaitya cave, but quite unfinished and 
of a much later style of architecture, the columns of the verandah 
having square bases and compressed cushion-shaped capitals of the 
type found in the Elephanta Cave. The interior can scarcely be said 
to be begun. It is probably the latest excavation of any importance 
attempted in the hill, and may date about the ninth or tenth century 
after Christ. 

Darbar Cave. 

To the north-east of the great Chaitya cave, in a glen or gully 
formed by a torrent, is a cave bearing the name of the Maharaja or 
Darbar Cave (Plate LIV.), which is the largest of the class in the 
group, and, after the Chaitya Caves, certainly the most interesting. 
It is not a Vihara in the ordinary sense of the term, though it has 
some cells, but a Dharraaiala or place of assembly, and is the only 
cave now known to exist that enables us to realise the arrangements 
of the great hall erected by Ajata Satru in front of the Sattapanni 
Cave at Rajagriha, to accommodate the first convocation held im- 
mediately after the death of Buddha. According to the MahawanBO 
(page 12), " Having in all respects perfected this hall, he had in- 
valuable carpetB Bpread there, corresponding to the number of 
priests (500), in order that being seated on the north side the south 
might be faced; the inestimable pre-eminent throne of the high 
priest was placed there. In the centre of the hall, facing the east, 

Y 132. / 



354 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the exalted preaching pulpit, fit for the deity himself, was erected." 
t is described nearly in the same words by Spence Hardy in his 
Eastern Monachism, p. 175, and Bigandet in his Life of Gaudama, 
p. 354, after even a fuller description, adds, " The seat of the 
President was placed opposite, in the northern part. 1 In the centre, 
but facing the east, a seat resembling a pulpit was raised," &c. If 
from this we ttirn to the plan of the cave, Plate LIV., it will be 
observed that the projecting shrine occupies precisely the position of 
the throne of the President in the above description. In the cave it 
is occupied by a figure of Buddha on a sinhasana,- with Padmapani 
and another attendant or chauri-bearers. This, however, is exactly 
what might be expected more than 1,000 years after the first convo- 
cation was held, and when the worship of images of Buddha had taken 
the place of the purer forms that originally prevailed. It is easy to 
understand that in the sixth century, when this cave probably was 
excavated, the " present deity " would be considered the sanctifying 
President of any assembly, and his human representative would 
take his seat in front of the image. In the lower part of the hall, 
where there are no cells, is a plain space, admirably suited for the 
pulpit of the priest who read Bana to the assembly. The centre 
of the hall, 73 feet by 32, would, according to modern calcula- 
tion — 5 square feet to each individual — accommodate from 450 to 
500 persons, but evidently was intended for a much smaller con- 
gregation. Only two stone benches are provided, and they would 
hardly hold 100, but be this as it may, ifc seems quite evident that 
this cave is not a Vihara in the ordinary sense of the term, but a 
Dharmasala or place of assembly like the Nagarjuni Cave, Barabar 
(p. 41), Bhima's Ratha at Mahavallipur (p. 118), and probably 
Cave XX. at Ajanta. The Maharwadi Cave at Elura, to be de- 
scribed hereafter, is probably another of this class, and others may 
be found when they are looked for. 2 



1 There is some confusion here between the north and houih sides of the hall, but not 
in the least affecting the position of the President Jelatively to the preacher. From 
what we know, ante, page 50, it seems, as might be expected, the Mnhawanso is correct. 
The entrance to the hall would be from the north, and the President's throne would 
naturally face it. 

* It is curious that this cave should retain a popular name, which is a translation of 
the original correct designation. 



KANHERI. 355 

There axe two inscriptions in this cave, 1 but neither seems to be 
integral, if any reliance can be placed on the architectural features, 
though the whole cave is so plain and unornamented that this 
testimony is not very distinct. The pillars of the verandah are 
plain octagons without base or capital, and may be of any age. 55 In- 
ternally the pillars are square above and below, with incised circular 
mouldings, changing in the centre into a belt with 1G sides or flutes. 
and with plain bracket capitals. Their style is that of the Viswa- 
karma temple at Elura, and even more distinctly that of the Chabri 
in the Mokundra pass. 3 A Gupta inscription has lately been found 
in this last, limiting its date to the fifth century, which is probably 
that of the Viswakarma Cave, so that this cave can hardly be much 
more modern. The age, however, of this cave is not so important 
as its use. It seems to me to throw a new light on the arrange- 
ments in many Buddhist Caves, whose appropriation has hitherto 
been difficult to understand.* 

Directly opposite to it is a small cave B with two pillars and two 
half ones in the verandah, having an inscription of about the 9th or 
10th century on the frieze. Inside is a small hall with a rough cell 
at the back, containing only an image of Buddha on the back wall. 

The next, on the south side of the ravine, is also probably a com- 
paratively late cave. It has two massive square pillars in the 
verandah, with necks cut into sixteen flutes as in the Darbar cave 
and some of the Elura Buddhist caves, it consequently is probably 
of the same age. The hall is small and has a room to the right of 
it, and in the large shrine at the back is a well cut dagoba. 



1 One (West's No. 15) is dated Saka 775 in the time Kapardi, a Silahara feudatory 
of Amoghavarsha, the Rash^rakuta or Balhara sovereign. Another (No. 42) is dated 
in Snka 799 (a.d. 877) in the time of the same princes. 

8 A view of the exterior of this cave forms Plate XIII. of my illustrations of the 
Hock-cut Temples, folio, 1845. The dotted lines in the plan, Plate LIV., which is 
taken from a plan by Mr. Arthur A. West, show the position and size of a small rough 
cave imder the front of the large cave. In the same plate the excavations opposite and 
lower down the stream are also shown. 

8 Picturesque Illustrations of Ancient Architecture in Hiwt ostein, jiage v. 

* I am responsible for the indentification of this cave as a Dhannasala, and conse- 
quently for the above description. — J. F. 

6 No. 78 in Dr. Bhau Daji's numeration, which is an unfortunately uwkward one, no 
system having been followed, but as the numbers are painted on the caves, and have 
been used by Messrs. West and others, it doos not seem desirable to chunge them now 

z 2 



356 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The next 1 consists of a small hall, lighted by the door and a small 
latticed window, with a bench running along the left side and back 
and a cell on the right with a stone bed in it. The verandah has 
had a low screen wall connecting its two octagon pillars with the 
ends. Outside, on the left, is a large recess and over it two long 
inscriptions. 2 Close to this is- another cave 8 with four benched 
chambers ; possibly it originally consisted of three small caves, of 
■which the dividing partitions have been destroyed ; but till 1853 
the middle one contained the ruins of four small dagobas, built of 
unburnt bricks. These were excavated by Mr. E. W. West, and led 
to the discovery of a very large number of seal impressions in dried 
clay, many of them enclosed in clay receptacles, the upper halves of 
which were neatly moulded somewhat in the form of dagobas, and 
with them were found other pieces of moulded clay which probably 
formed chhatris* for the tops of them, making the resemblance 
complete. 

Close to the dagobas two small stone pots were also found con- 
taining ashes and five copper coins apparently of the Bahmani 
dynasty, and if so, of the 14th or 15th century. The characters 
on the seal impressions are of a much earlier age, but probably 
not before the 10th century, and most of them contain merely 
the Bauddha creed : " Ye dharma h6tu prabhava hetun teshan 
Tathagato hyavadat-teshan cha yo nirodha evam vadi Maha- 
Sramana." 

The next cave 6 on the same side has a pretty large hall with a bench 
at each side, two slender square columns and pilasters in front of 
the antechamber, the inner walls of which are sculptured with four 
tall standing images of Buddha. The shrine is now empty, and 
whether it contained a structural sinhdsana or a ddgoba is difficult to 
say. 

Upon the opposite side of the gulley is an immense excavation 8 so 
ruined by the decay of the rock as to look much like a natural cavern ; 
it has had a very long hall, of which the entire front is gone, a square 
antechamber with two cells to the left and three to the right of it. 

1 No. 12. 2 No. 16 of West's copies. 8 No. 13. 

* The supposed «• earrings " of brass, may have been meta) chhatris for others, only 
Ibey were found in a ball of ashes. Jour. B. B. R. A. Soc, voL vi., Plate VIII., Fig. 
19, and p. 160. 

* No. 14. 6 No. 83. 



KANHERI. 



357 



The inner shrine is empty. In front haa been a brick dagoba rifled 
ong ago, and at the west end are several fragments of caves ; the 
fronts and dividing walls of all are gone. 

Some way farther up is a vihara 1 with a large advanced porch 
supported by pillars of the Blephanta type in front and by square 
ones behind of the pattern occurring in Cave XV. at Ajanta. The 
hall door is surrounded by mouldings, and on the back wall are the 
remains of painting, consisting of Buddhas. In the shrine is an 
image, and small oneB are cut in the side walls, in which are also 
two cells. In a large recess to the right of the porch is a seated 
figure of Buddha, and on his left is Padmapani or Sahaarabahu- 
lokeswara, with ten additional heads 2 piled up over his own (see 
Plate LV., fig. 2) ; and on the other side of the chamber is the 
litany with four compartments on each side. This is evidently a 
late cave. a 

Altogether there are upwards of 30 excavations on both sides 
of this ravine,* and nearly opposite the last-mentioned is a broken 
darn, 5 which has confined the water above, forming a lake. On the 
hill to the north, just above this, is a ruined temple, and near it 
the remains of several stupas and dagobas. Just above the ravine, 
on tbe south side, is a range of about nineteen caves,* the largest of 



1 No. 21. i Notes on Ajanfd, fyc, p. 100. 

3 This representation of Padmapani with maDy heads 
is a very favourite one with the modern followers of the 
Mahayana Beet in Nepal, and is found also among the 
ruins of Nakon Thorn in Cambodia (Gamier, Atlas, 
p. viii) and probably elsewhere. So far as 1 know it 
is not found in Java, and one would hardly expect to fiud 
it here in a cave which from its architecture can hardly 
be later than the eighth or ninth century (see Picturesque 
Illustrations of Rock cut Temples, fol. , Plate XIV.), 
but it is interesting to be able to trace these strange 
aberrations even so far back as that, in India. When 
their gods were represented with 1 1 heads it is evident 
the Buddhist could no longer reproach the Hindus for 
their many-headed and many-armed divinities, and that 
the simplicity and purity which sustained it in its early 
days had long since passed away. — J. F. 

* These are numbered 5 to 23, 9b, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 
and 78 to 87. 

B Said to have been destroyed by the Portuguese. 

9 TheBe are awkwardly numbered from west to east thus : — 29-33, 34, 77, 76, 75, 
74, 73, 99, 44, 43, 42, 72, 71, 70, 69. In six of these there are insci iptions. 




No . 64. Padmapaoi, from ft 
Nepaleae drawing. 



358 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMI>LES. 

which is a fine vihara cave, with cells in the Bide walls. It has four 
octagonal pillars in the verandah connected by a low screen wall 
and seat, and the walls of the verandah, and sides and back of the 
hall, are covered with sculptured figures of Buddha in different 
attitudes and variously accompanied, but with so many female 
figures introduced as to show that it was the work of the Mahayana 
school. There is reason, however, to suppose that the sculpture is 
later than the excavation of the cave. 

Behind and above these is another range," 1 in some parts double, 
three near the east end * being remarkable for the profusion of their 
sculptures, consisting chiefly of Buddhas with attendants, dagobas; 
&c. But in one 3 is a fine sculptured litany (Plate LV., fig. 1), in 
which the central figure of Avaldkiteswara has a tall female on each 
side, and beyond each are five compartments, those on the right 
representing danger from the elephant, lion, snake, fire,* and ship- 
wreck ; those on the left from imprisonment (?) Garuda, 6 Sitala 
or disease, sword, and some enemy not now recognisable from the 
abrasion of the stone. 

In another is a similar litany representing Buddha seated on the 
Padmasana, or lotus throne, supported by two figures with snake 
hoods, and surrounded by attendants in the manner so usual in 
the Mahayana sculptures of a later age in these caves (Plate LVL). 
There are more figures in this one than are generally found on 
these compositions, but they are all very like one another in their 
general characteristics. 

Over the cistern and on the pilasters of the verandah are inscrip- 
tions which at first sight appear to be in a tabular form and in 
characters met with nowhere else ; they are in Pehlavi. 

Lastly, from a point near the west end of this last range, a series 
of nine excavations 6 trend to the south, but are no way re- 
markable. 

What strikes every visitor to these Kanheri caves is the number 
of water cisterns, most of the caves being furnished with its own 
cistern at the side of the front court, and these being filled all the 

» This includes Nos. 35, 49, 48, 47, 46, 45, 56 to 68. 

* Nob. 64, 66, and 67. » No. 66. 

* Oddly enough represented as a flame with a face in the middle oi' it. 

* The supplicant for deliverance in this case is a Naga figure, conf. Boyd's N&ffd- 
nanda, art. iv. 

* Nos. 90, 91, 50, 51, 37, and 52 to 55. 



KANHERI. 359 

year round with delicious pure water. In front of many of the 
caves too there are holes in the floor of the court, and over their 
facades are mortices cut in the rock as footings for posts, and holdings 
for wooden rafters to support a covering to shelter the front of 
the caves during the monsoon. 1 

All over the hill from one set of caves to another steps are cut on 
the surface of the rock, and these stairs in many cases have had 
handrails along the sides of them. 

Passing the last-mentioned group and advancing southwards by 
an ancient path cut with steps wherever there is a descent, we reach 
the edge of the cliff and descend it by a ruined stair about 330 
yards south of the great Chaitya cave. This lands in a long gallery 
extending over 200 yards south-south-east, and sheltered by the over- 
hanging rock above. The floor of this gallery is found to consist of the 
foundations of small brick dagobas buried in dust and debris, and 
probably sixteen to twenty in number, seven of which were opened 
out by Mr. Ed. W. West in 1853. 2 Beyond these is the ruin of a 
large stone siupa, on which has been a good deal of sculpture, and 
which was explored and examined by Mr. West. In the rock 
behind it are three small cells also containing decayed sculptures, 
with traces of plaster covered with painting. Beyond this the floor 
suddenly rises about 14 feet, where are the remains of eleven small 
brick stupas ; then another slight ascent lands on a level, on which 
are thirty-three similar ruined stupas buried in debris. Overhead 
the rock has been cut out in some places to make room for them. On 
the back wall are some dagobas in relief and three benched recesses. 
The brick stupas vary from 4& to 6 feet in diameter at the base, but 
all are destroyed down to near that level, and seem to have been all 
rifled, for in none of those examined have any relics been found. 

There were other large stupas in front of the great Chaitya cave, 
but these were opened in 1839 by Dr. James Bird, who thus de- 
scribed his operations 5 : — "The largest of the topes selected for 
examination appeared to have been one time between 12 or 16 feet 
in height. It was much dilapidated, and was penetrated from above 
to the base, which was built of cut stone. After digging to the 



i In some of the inscriptions mention is said to be mode of donutions to pay the 
expense of these temporary erections, 
s J. B. B. B. A. S. } vol. vi. pp. 116 ff. 
a Jour. A. S. Beng., vol. x. p. 94 ; conf. Bird. MUt. Res., p, 7. 



360 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

level of the ground and clearing away the materials, the workmen 
came to a circular stone, hollow in the centre, and covered at the 
top by a piece of gypsum. This contained two small copper urns 
in one of which were some ashes mixed with a ruby, a pearl, small 
pieces of gold, and a small gold box, containing a piece of cloth ; in 
the other a silver box and some ashes were found. Two copper 
plates containing legible inscriptions, in the Ldt or cave character, 
accompanied the urns, and these, as far as I have yet been able to 
decipher them, inform us that the persons buried here were of the 
Buddhist faith. The smaller of the copper plates bears an inscrip- 
tion in two lines, the last part of which contains the Buddhist 
creed." 

Dr. Bird, like too many other dilettanti, kept these plates in his 
own possession, and they are now lost, all we have to indicate their 
contents being a corrupt copy of his cwn making, which Dr. Steven- 
son attempted to decipher and translate, 1 making out, erroneouslv 
as it now appears, that it was dated " in the reign of Kripa Karna 
in the year 245/' and that it mentions " the exalted Srami Karna of 
the victorious Andhrabhritya family." * 

On the east side of the hill are many squared stones, foundations, 
tanks, &c, all betokening the existence at some period of a large 
colony of monks. 

Kondiwte. 

Considerably to the south of Kanheri, near KondiwtS, and about a 
mile north of the village of Mar61, is a group of sixteen small Bauddha 
caves, four on the west and twelve or fourteen on the east side of the 
summit of a hilL* Among them is one Chaitya-cave of rather peculiar 
plan, resembling the Sudama cave at Barabar,* but with a dagoba 

1 J. B. B. R. A. Soc., vol. v. pp, 32 ff. ; also Bird, flitter. Ret., pp. 7, 64, and PJates 
XLVH., XL VIII. Nos. 28, 29. 

2 It has since been ascertained that Dr. Stevenson's translation cannot be relied upon, 
especially as regards the names quoted above. The date, however, is quite certain, 
being written in words as well as in figures, and if from the Saka era, which there 
seems no reason for doubting, were written in 324 A.D. 

s They have been long known to Europeans, for Mr. Wales the artist in the end of 
last century communicated an inscription from them through Sir C. W. Malet to Lieut. 
Wilford (Atiat. Ret., vol. vi. pp. 140, 141). The latter had no idea of even the alpha- 
bet of the inscription, as is shown by his transliteration. 

* Ferguson, E. and Tnd. 4rcki(., p. 108. For plan of this cave see above, p. 42, 
woodcut 6. 



K0NDIWTE. 



361 



in the circular domed chamber at the back. It is 17 feet 4 inches 
wide by 9 feet 3 inches high, with side walls 29£ to 30 feet 9 inches 
in length ; the wall in front of the dagoba cell is only about 8 inches 
thick, and has a lattice window on each side the door, with an 
inscription over the one on the right. On the right wall is also & 
group of Buddhist sculpture of the usual description, the largest 
compartment containing Buddha on the lotus-throne supported by 
Nagas and with chauri-bearers and G-andharvas. The next contains 
a standing figure of Buddha, similar to those on the facades of the 
Chaitya-caves of Ajanta. Above are small seated and squatting 
figures, similar to those in the upper storey of Cave VI. at Ajanta. 
All this may be of much later date than the cave itself. 

Other small caves have been inserted, afterwards probably, so 
close on each side of this as to endanger the walls of it. Passing a 
number of cells to the left or south of this, we come to a regular 
vihara cave, with four pillars in front of the verandah, which has a 
room opening from its left end. The large hall has three doors and 
two windows, with a stone bench nearly surrounding it. On each 
of the three interior sides is a chamber with two square pillars in 
front, the recesses in the two side walls have each three cells behind,- 
those in the left-hand side much broken. Another cave to the south 
of this measures about 24 feet by 14, with numerous sockets in the 
side walls, and a pedestal against the back, over which is a dagoba 
in bas-relief recessed in the wall, and with a number of sockets in a 
semicircle over it. In the verandah are four square pillars and 
pilasters, with low bases, standing on a platform carved with rail 
pattern, and in the floor are four holes into water cisterns. 

Near the north end of this range is another pretty large vihara. 
It is entered by steps up to a platform in front of the verandah over 
which the roof extends. The verandah has two pillars and pilasters 
in front, and three doors lead from it into the hall, the roof of 
which is supported by four octagonal pillars disposed in a square : 
these have low bases, and capitals somewhat of the type found in 
the first two large Buddhist caves at Elura. In each of the three 
inner walls are three cells, three of them with bench beds. The 
south end of the verandah has been broken into one of the cells of the 
neighbouring cave, which is perhaps the older of the two. 

The caves on the west side of the hill are small and huddled 
together 



362 BCDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 



Magathana. 



The caves at Magathana were also Buddhist, 1 but small and so 
dilapidated as not to merit much attention. They are excavated in 
the lower district of the island, and even in the hot season they 
stand in pools of water. In the back of the hall of the principal 
cave is a large figure of Buddha, squatted in the Jnydna Mudra, or 
attitude of abstraction, and above his shoulders are other smaller 
images in the same attitude. The other walls of this shrine or recess 
have also been sculptured with numerous figures of Buddha on the 
lotus throne upheld by Naga figures, &c. Over the arched entrance 
to it is a fine torana or ornamental frieze between two makara heads. 
This frieze is continued in compartments to the right and left along 
the side walls, and in one panel is a dagoba in bas-relief with traces 
of two worshipping figures beside it. The pillars are of the style 
of Cave VII. at Ajanta. 

1 Strangely enough Dr. Wilson describes them as Biahmanica). 



363 



CHAPTER IV. 
THE CAYES OF BAGH. 

In the south of Malwa, about twenty-five miles south-west of Dhar, 
and thirty miles west of Mandu, is the village of Bagh, three miles to 
the south of which is a group of Viharas, now much ruined, from the 
rock in which they are cut being stratified and having given way 
in many places ; indeed, one, if not more, of the caves have fallen 
in altogether. Some of them are so entirely in possession of wild bees 
that it is difficult getting access to them. 

They were first described by Lieutenant Dangerfield in the Trans- 
actions of the Bombay Literary Society, 1 1818, and more in detail by 
Dr. E. Impey in the Journal of the Bombay Branch Asiatic Society* 
in 1854. 

The first cave from the east is a large Vihara, about 82 feet by 80, 
with twenty pillars in the square, or six in each face counting both 
the corner pillars, and four additional pillars in the centre introduced 
to support the rock, which is too much stratified to sustain a bearing 
of any considerable length. The pillars have bases consisting of 
a plinth and two toruses ; the four in the middle have round shafts 
with spiral ridges, and taper to the necks, changing through 16 and 
8-sided bands to square under the brackets. Of the others, two 
in front and back are square to about a third of their height, then 
change through 8 to 12 sides and to circular with spiral ridges, 
then by bands of 24 and 12 sides to the square ; the rest have sections 
of 8, 16. and 8 sides only, between the lower square portion of the 
shaft and its head. There are seventeen cells in the hall, four of them 
in the back. The antechamber has two twelve-sided pillars in front. 
The walls of this room are adorned with sculpture ; on each end is a 
standing image of Buddha between two attendants, one of whom 
eeems to be Padmapani, but not of so late and fully-developed a 
type as we find at Ajantfi, Elura, and Aurangabad. On the back 



1 Vol. ii. pp. 194-201, with throe Plates. 

* Vol. v. pp. 543-573 ; tee also vol. iii. pL ii. pp. 72, 73. 



364 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

wall are two more tall standing figures in arched recesses, one 
Padmapani and the other probably some B6dhisattva, with a bottle 
or water-gourd in his hand. The faces and hair of some of these 
figures are really well cut ; but a Jogi, who has taken possession 
of the cave, is rapidly besmearing them with soot from his fires. 

In the shrine iB a Chaitya or dagoba, 14^ feet high and 10 feet 
3 inches in diameter at the plinth of the octagonal-moulded base, 
which is 4 feet high ; it then becomes round for 3 feet 9 inches, 
with a diameter of about 7 feet, also moulded. This supports the 
dome, about 4f feet high — being considerably more than a hemi- 
sphere. The box above is a mere short neck to the five overlapping 
slabs which crown it. This form of Chaitya we find again repeated 
in the third cave. 

In the back of a cell in the east side is an aperture which leads 
into another cell, and from that into an area, much choked up 
with fallen rock, but which is the corner of another Vihara, of 
which the whole roof has fallen in. 1 

No. II. Beems to have been left unfinished, and is much ruined. 
It has had four pillars in a front hall, of which two are gone. 
Behind this another hall has been roughly blocked out with two 
rows of four pillars each across it. In the sides of the front hall 
are apartments with two pillars in front, and inside what appears 
to be a small shrine in the middle and two cells at each end. 

No. III. is known as " the painted cave," from its having been 
covered with fresco painting, apparently quite as good as any at 
Ajanta, but somewhat different in the subjects and arrangement. 
The roof has been in compartments as at Ajanta, and about 4 feet 
of the upper portion of the walls covered with intertwined vegetable 
patterns, while below were figures and scenes, Buddhist Jatakas, &c, 
now very much injured by the fall of much of the roof, as well as 
from natives having scribbled their names over it, and from decay. 

The hall is a magnificent one, about 96 feet square, with twenty- 
eight pillars round it, having high square bases, but a band of soft 
earth just at the bottom has ruined many of them ; inside there is 
an octagon of eight round pillars, within which again are four square 
built piers. The rock in which the cave is cut is stratified, the diffe« 

1 In Captain Dangerfield's plan a series of six cells are represented in line one behind 
another: the first two only exist as shown, the others are in the wall of the cave which 
is entered beyond the second. 



BAOH. 



365 




No. 65. Great Vih&ra at B&gh. (From a plan by Dr. Impey.)' 

rent layers varying from a light ochrey tint to a dirty dark grey, 
and apparently a portion of the roof inside the octagon had given 
way while the work was being executed. The piers were then intro- 
duced, and the damaged portion of the roof was hewn out, leaving 
the central area higher than the rest of the cave ; the architraves 
forming the inner sides of this, are carved with a double row of 
Chaitya window ornaments. 

This hall has nine cells on each side and six in the back — twenty- 
four in all, while in the middle of the back wall is the shrine having 
a Ddgoba or Chaitya precisely similar to that in No. I. The whole 
hall is filled up half way to the roof with fallen rock. 

No. IV. is entered from the same verandah as No. III., and is a 
plain room, 94 feet by 44, with two rows of eight pillars, each run- 
ning from left to right. Mr. Impey calls it " the shala or school- 
room," but it evidently is a Dharmasala like the Darbar cave at 
Kanheri and not unlike it in dimensions, though the pillars are 
differently arranged. From it a passage leads into the next cave, 
which with two or three beyond are much ruined, and scarcely 
worth detailed description. 

These two caves have a common verandah 220 feet in length, and 
which once had twenty pillars, but they have all fallen. The back 
wall of this was adorned with a series of very beautiful frescoes, 
rivalling in excellence those at Ajanta. Processions on elephants 



1 From Fergusson'a /. and E. Archil., p. 160. 



366 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and horseback, musical entertainments, and the like, form the prin- 
cipal subjects, and the number of women considerably exceeds that 
of the men. 1 

There are no inscriptions to help us either with historical names, 
or even the style of their characters, to the age of these caves. 
From the simplicity of their sculptures we may perhaps be justified 
in relegating them to about a.d. 450 to 500, and regarding the wall 
paintings as belonging to the sixth century. 

1 See my Notes on the Bock- Temples of AjaAfd, pp. 94 ff. 



367 

CHAPTER IV. 
THE BUDDHIST CAVES AT ELURA. 

The largest and most varied group of Cave Temples in India are 
certainly those at Verule, Elora or Elura, 1 about twelve miles east 
of Aurangabad, in the Nizam's territory, consisting as they do, of 
some of the largest and finest examples of the works of all the three 
sects — Buddhists, Brahmans, and Jains. 

The caveB are excavated in the face of a hill, or rather the scarp 
of a large plateau, and run nearly north and south for about a mile 
and a quarter, the scarp at each end of this interval throwing out a 
horn towards the west. It is where the scarp at the south end 
begins to turn to the west that the earliest caves— a group of 
Buddhist ones — are situated ; and in the north horn is the Indra 
Sabha or Jaina group, at the other extremity of the series. The 
Brahmanical group is situated between the two, and the ascent of 
the ghat passes up the south side of Kailasa, the third, and over the 
roof of the Das Avatara, the second of them. Sixteen caves lie to the 
south of Kailasa, fourteen being Buddhist, — and nearly as many to the 
north — Brahmanical and Jaina, but scattered over a greater distance. 

From their great extent and magnificence the Elura caves have 
attracted considerable attention,* and weTe described by Theve- 

1 The Brahmauical name for the modern shrine at the village of Elura is Ghrishnes- 
wara, Archceol. Sur. Rep., vol. iii. p. 82. It ia one of the twelve sacred tirthaa, con- 
taining Ldngcu of Siva, the others being, — Somnath in Ka^hiawaf ; Mah&kala at 
Ujjain ; Omkara on an island in the Narmada ; Tryarabak near Nasik ; Nagan&th in 
the Nizam's territory, east of Ahmadnagar ; Vaidyanath in the Dekhan ; Bbimasankar 
at the source of the Bhima, north-west of Poona ; Kedareswar in the Himalayas ; VH- 
wan&th in Banarus ; Mallikarjuna, ou Srisaila mountain in the Karnatic ; and Ramcswar 
in the extreme Bouth on an islaud opposite to Ceylon. 

8 The earliest mention made of them seems to be that of Masu'di. In B. de Moy- 
nard's trauslaiiou we read : — " Nous avows decrit lea temples de Plnde consacres aux 
idoles qui ont la forme de bodrak (sans douto pradjapati) e'est-a-dire du germe qui 
parut dans PInde a l'originc des temps; le grande temple notnme Aladra [^.^V 1 for 
jTijV' Alura], oii les Indiens se rendent en pelerinage des regions Ies plus £loig- 
nees, le temple a une vilLo eutiere a titre de foundation pieuse et il est entoure de mille 
cellules oil vivent les devots qui se coneacrent a Padoration particuliere de cette idole," 
torn. iv. p. 95, I owe this reference to Mr. E. Rehataek. Ferishtah also refers to 
them. 



368 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

not, 1 Anquetil du Perron in 1758,* by Sir Charles W. Malet 3 in 
1794. Colonel Sykes* visited them about 1820, and many others 
have since then visited and described them." 

In 1803 Thomas Daniell published 24 views of these caves in 
folio, accompanied by plans made under his direction by James 
Wales, which are by far the most splendid and accurate account 
of these caves, as a whole, which has yet been published. 

Beginning at the extreme south end of the series, where the oldest 
are situated, we find a group of Buddhist caves, apparently ranging 
from about a.d. 350 to 550, and popularly known as the Dherawara, 
or low caste's quarter. It is not clear whether this term was applied 
out of contempt for the Buddhists by the modem Hindus, or is 
a corruption of Therawara or quarter of the Th6ras 6 or teachers, 
or, from their having in later times been occupied by ph6rs. 

The first cave is much filled up with earth. It is, however, of no 
great interest, except as perhaps one of the oldest here, and probably 
attached to the next. It was a Vihara or monastery with eight cells 
inside for monks, four in the back and four in the south side. It is 
41 feet 6 inches wide and 42 feet 3 inches deep. The front has all 



1 Voyage des Indes, pp. 221-223. 

2 Zend Avesta. Disc, prel., pp. ccxxxiv-ccxlix. He calls the place Iloura ; R. 
Gough's Comparative View, pp. 60 ff. 

3 Ariat. Res., vol. v. pp. 382-424, with nine plates, and plan of Kailas, but exceedingly 
inaccurate. 

* Trans. Bomb. Lit. Soe^ vol. Hi. pp. 265-323. with thirteen Plates, and two sheets 
of inscriptions. The drawings are by no meanB correct, but they are much better than 
Malet's. 

6 Capt. J. B. Seeley visited them in 1810, and wrote an octavo volume of 560 pages, 
entitled The Wonders of Elora, &c (published in 1824), giving a long inflated account 
of these temples, and of his own adventures, &c. The frontispiece, plan of Kailas, 
and two other plates, are evidently copied from those in Malet's paper without acknow- 
ledgment, and signed " J. B. S. delt." For other notices see Bird's Historical He- 
searches, pp. 18-30 ; Trans. R. As. Soc, vol. ii. pp. 326, 328, 487 ; Sykes, Jour. R. As. 
Sbc, vol. v. pp. 81-90 ; FerguBson, ib., vol. viii. pp. 73-83, or Rock-cut Temples, pp. 

44-54 ; and Ind. and East. Arch., pp. 127, 163, 262, 334-337, 445 j Buckley 

Calcutta Rev., vol. xxi. p. 457 ; Wilson, ib., vol. xlii. ; J". B. B. R. A. Soc, vol. iii. 
pt. ii. pp. 80-«4 ; Muir, Notes of a Trip, &c, pp. 53-63 ; The Rock Temples of Elurd 
or Vet id, by J. Burgess (Bombay, 1877). 

8 There was a Buddhist school culled Therowadls, conf. Oldenberg's Vinayapi(aham, 
Int. p. xli. 



ELUBA. 369 

fallen, except one pillar near the south end. Outside, in the south 
end of what may have been a verandah, is another cell or room. 

The second is a large and interesting cave, and was, doubtless, a 
chapel or hall for worship. It is approached by a flight of steps 
leading to the top of a stylobate, the front of which has been 
carved in compartments with fat gana or dwarf figures, often in 
grotesque attitudes. On this, four pillars, with pilasters at the 
ends, once supported the roof of the verandah, but this is now 
entirely gone (see plan, Plate LVIL, fig. 2). 

At the north end of the verandah is a fat squatting figure with 
a high and elaborate headdress or muhita, a jewelled cord over 
his breast, and a bouquet of flowers in bis right hand, attended by 
a chauri-bes,rer with his fly-flap. Right and left are small figures 
of Buddha sitting, with attendant chauri-be&reTB. On the south 
was probably a similar female figure, but only the attendant is left, 
and a gandharva or cherub holding a garland over her head. These 
figures are often met with, and may be conventional representations 
of the prince who executed the cave, and his wife, or possibly 
Suddhodana and Mayadevi, or (as in the Ajanta paintings) of Sakra 
or Indra,-— a favourite divinity with the Buddhists and Jains, and 
represented as almost a servant or attendant on Buddha, — with his 
wife Sachi or Amba. 

Two tall guardians or dwdrpdlas stand by the door with lofty 
head-dresses and aureoles, gandharvas or cherubs over tneir 
shoulders, and a female figure with an aureole or nimbus behind 
her head, standing between the dwdrpdla and the door. 

The front wall iB pierced by a door and two windows, and much 
of the remaining wall, together with the jambs of the windows, 
is covered with sculptures of Buddha. The cave is peculiar in 
having lateral galleries along each side, and, exclusive of these, 
measures nearly 48 feet square. The roof is supported by twelve 
massive columns arranged in a square, with elegant cushion capitals 
and high square bases, of the type found at Elephanta, standing on 
a platform raised about 18 inches above the front and side aisles, 
which are about 17 feet high. Except the four in the back row, 
they have little dwarf figures on the upper corners of the square 
portions of the shafts; above these they are circular and fluted, 
while the spaces between the dwarf figures and a belt below them 
are covered with rich and varied arabesques (see Plate LVIIL, fig. 1). 
y »»»• A A 



370 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The side galleries have each four pillars in front, of a different 
design, while the fronts of the galleries are carved with florid work 
and musicians. In the five compartments of the back of each gallery 
are as many Buddhas seated in the Bame attitude as the colosBal one 
in the shrine, and with his usual cfonm'-bearers, the one on his 
right hand usually holding also a lotus-bud. These side galleries 
were perhaps an afterthought, for in that on the north side some of 
the figures are quite unfinished. 

The dwdrpdlas of the shrine are large figures, 13 to 14 feet high : 
that on the left or north side is Padmapani, very plainly dressed, 
with his robe fastened round the waist by a string ; his headdress 
is the jatd of plaited hair worn by ascetics ; he has a small image 
of Amitabha Buddha as a crest on the front of it, and holds a maid 
or rosary in his right hand, and a lotus-stalk in hiB left. The 
other (on the south side) perhaps Indra, — as is almost always the 
case — has a very richly jewelled headdress, with a small dagoba on 
the front of it, bracelets, armlets, a thick jewelled Brahmanical 
cord or jamvi, and a small bouquet of flowers in his right hand. 
Both are attended by two pairs of flying gandharvas above, while 
about midway up the wall are others with curly wigs, bearing 
garlands. Between each dwdrpdla and the door . is a female 
worshipper with a flower in her right hand. 

The Bhrine contains a colossal Buddha seated on a throne borne 
up at the corners by lions. His feet reBt on a nearly circular 
plinth ; his hands are in the dharmacJiakra mudrd, and through the 
palm of the left hand passes the corner of his robe. This attitude, 
as well as a few others, are repeated scores of times, and is that of 
the Teacher enumerating, like Socrates, the points of his argument 
or lecture on his fingers. His head, always represented as covered 
with small knobs as of short-cut curly or woolly hair, and with a 
pile of them on the top, is surrounded by the usual nvnibus. On 
each side of it are gandharvas. At each end of his throne stand his 
attendant cfto^ri-bearers, who are just the duplicates of the warders 
outside. And on each side wall is a colossal standing figure of a 
Buddha. His right hand hangs down, and has the palm turned 
out ; the left is bent upwards, and holds a part of his robe. In 
the cornel's next to these are four worshipping figures, one above 
the other. This cell is dark, but one of the least damaged of the sort 
here. The nose of Buddha has been broken off, probably within the 
last few years. 



ELURA. 371 

On each side of the shrine is a double cell in line with the side 
aisles. In the outer of these, and all over the front wall, are many 
figures of Buddha in different attitudes, with his attendants — the 
largest figure, however, being of a female on the front wall, right 
opposite to the north dwdrpdla of the shrine, and with similar 
head-dress, lotus, &c, attended by two smaller females with lotus 
flowers. It is difficult to say who this may represent. It may be 
Maya, the mother of Buddha, or his wife YaSodhara, or probably 
Tara — a female counterpart of AvalokitesVara or Padmapani, — all 
of whose symbols she possesses. In other places, too, we find 
Padmapani attended by a female, and frequently by two. 

The horse-shoe-shaped arch, representing the window of a GhaUya 
cave, the Buddhist-rail pattern, and the dagoba in bas-relief, which 
are almost the sole ornaments in the early Buddhist caves at Bhaja, 
Bedsa, Kondane, and Nasik, have in this, and in the other caves 
here, almost entirely disappeared ; we find only two small dagobas 
in relief over an image of Buddha in the cell on the south of the 
shrine, and a third on the end of the south gallery. This and the 
profusion of imagery would seem to indicate a late date for the cave. 
Moreover, though evidently intended, like the Chaitya caves, solely 
as a place for worship, it has not the arched roof so general in such 
caves. It is very difficult to fix an age for it, but it may have been 
begun in the fifth or sixth century, while the carving may have 
been continued down to the seventh. 

Proceeding northwards ; between the last cave and the third is a 
water cistern, now filled up with earth. 

The third cave, somewhat lower down in the rock, is a Vihara or 
monastery, and belongs to about the same age as the second ; it is 
probably the older of the two, but, like it, never seems to have been 
perfectly completed. The south half of the front wall is now en- 
tirely gone, as is also the verandah before it. It measures nearly 
46 feet square and about 11 high, the roof being supported by 
twelve square columns with drooping ears falling over circular 
necks, — a sort of Indian Ionic. Three of them on each side are 
only blocked out, with octagonal necks. The cells for the monks 
have been twelve, — five on each Bide and two in the back,— but the 
front one on the south side is now broken away. Between the two 
cells in the back is the shrine,— smaller than in the last cave, and the 
figures more abraded, but otherwise almost exactly the same ; the 

u2 



37 2 BUDDHIST CAVE- TEMPLES. 

uppermost of the four supplicants in the corners, however, has no 
attendants. See plan, Plate LVIL, fig. 3. 

On the north wall of the cave are two small sculptures (one of 
them just begun) of Buddha and attendant cAawi-bearerfl. 

There is a window in the front wall, north of the door, which has 
been divided by two colonnettes, both broken. It is bordered out- 
side by a neat florid pattern. In the north end of the verandah is a 
chapel containing a Buddha with Mb legs crossed in front, and, as 
usual in most of the caves, with his hands in the teaching vnvdrd. 
He is seated on a lotus, the stalk of which is supported by small 
figures having snake or ndga-hooda over their heads,— the males 
usually with three, five, or Beven hoods, and the females with one 
or three. This sort of seat is known as a padmdsana, or lotus- 
throne. Buddha is attended, as usual, with two cftaurt-bearers, the 
one on his left having a jatd or headdress of plaited hair, with 
long locks hanging over the front of his shoulders, and a lotus 
in his left hand. Above their heads are gandharvas, or Indian 
cherubs. 

On the right of this apartment is a much damaged copy of the 
pictorial litany described in No. VII. of the Aurangabad caves, but 
on a much smaller scale. 

The next four or five caves are somewhat difficult to arrange 
satisfactorily ; indeed, they are so damaged that it is not easy to 
say how many of the apartments were separate caves, or how many 
belonged to one. We shall, however, take first the lower floor of the 
next as No. 4, Plate LVII. It is much ruined, the whole of the outer 
half of it having disappeared. It measured 35 feet wide by 39 deep 
up to two pillars and pilastere with capitals having drooping florid 
ears, the shafts Bquare below, and the necks having 32 flat flutes. 
Behind these is a cross aisle, and at the left or north end of it is a 
prominent figure of L6ke&wara Beated like Buddha, with high jatd 
headdress, a small image of Buddha as a crest on the front of it, 
and his locks hanging down upon his shoulders, a deer-skin over 
his left shoulder, a maid or rosary in his righti hand, and clasping a 
lotus to his left thigh. He is attended by two femaleB, one on his 
right hand with a rosary, the other holding a flower bud. Above 
the first is a standing Buddha, and over the latter another seated 
cross-legged on a lotus, with his right hand raised and the left 
down. 



ELURA. 



373 



In the wall are doors to two cells and the shrine. The dwdrjmlas 
are carved with elaborate hoaddresBes, and a dwarf stands between 
each and the door. In the shrine Buddha is seated in the usual 
teaching attitude with a nvnibus behind his head, and the foliage of 
the sacred Bo or Bodhi-tree rising from behind it. The chawri- 
bearers in this case stand behind the throne, and are only in bas-relief. 
The tall attendant on his left is richly dressed, and wears a jewelled 
cord like the Brahmanical jdhvi across his breast; the other is 
destroyed. 

In a cell on the south side of this cave is some sculpture. The 
west side is broken away, and blocked up by a mass of rock that has 
slipped down from above. The figures are principally Buddha with 
attendants, and a female with a rosary, &c. ; but to the west of the 
door is a Padmapani, and half of what has been already described in 
the last cave as a sort of litany, only that here there are two suppli- 
cants in each case, and that a smaller flying figure of Padmapani is 
represented before each group. 

The Maharwada cave. 1 — Ascending a few steps we enter the fifth 
excavation, a very large Vihara cave, about 117 feet deep by 58^ 
wide, exclusive of two large side recesses, Plate LIX. The roof ib 
supported by twenty-four pillars with square shafts, and capitals of 
the type found at Elephanta, and in the second cave here, having 
a thick torus or compressed cushion as the chief feature of the 
capital. They are arranged in two rows extending from front 
to back, and the space between is divided into three passages by 
two low stone benches, similar to those found in the Darbar cave 
at Kanheri (Plate LIV.). Their presence here at once suggests that 
this cave may have been used for the same purposes. That in fact 
it was the Dharmasala of the group, though, it must be confessed, 
it is not so easy to demonstrate its appropriateness for that pur- 
pose, as in the case of the Kanheri cave, nor to reconcile its dispo- 
sition with the descriptions of Buddhist authors. Its arrangements 
generally do not seem well adapted to a hall of assembly, but 
it must be recollected that it is a very late cave of the sixth. 



1 There is some confusion about the name of this cave. In 1803 it was called the 
Dherwara by Daniell, and has since generally borne that name. Mr. Burgess, however, 
is quite certain that that appellation belongs to the caves represented on Plate LV11., 
and that this cave was properly called by natives on the spot " MaharwRra."— J. F. 



374 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

possibly of the seventh, century, and we ought not to be surprised 
at any vagary the Buddhist architects indulged in at that period. 
It has been suggested that it was a refectory, but solid tables that 
you cannot get your legs under, nor get close to while squatting, are 
not a likely arrangement, nor one adapted to the simple fare of 
ascetic monks ; besides these tables are very much in excess of the 
accommodation required for the 20 monks this cave might accommo- 
date. Till therefore some better explanation of its peculiarities is 
brought forward, we are probably justified in assuming that it was 
the chapter house, or hall of assembly, of this group of Buddhist, 
caves. 

At the entrance of the left aisle is a chapel which contained a 
sitting figure of Buddha, now quite destroyed. In the shrine at the 
back is a large seated Buddha with attendants, and on each side the 
door, in arched recesses, as at a Bagh, are attendants separately ; 
Padmapani, on the north side, attended by two small female figures 
with headdresses resembling royal crowns. The other figure is 
more richly bejewelled and similarly attended, while above gand- 
harvas or cherubs on clouds bring garlands and presents to them. 

Connected with this cave on the south side is another shrine, 
over the Cave No. 4, Plate LVIL, but the rock having fallen 
away it is inaccessible without a ladder. This shrine contained 
the usual image of Buddha and attendants : also a female figure 
holding a lotus-stalk, with her attendants. Round it was a passage 
or pradakshina for circumambulation, as in Hindu temples. Prom 
this passage and the vestibule in front several cells were entered. 
The half of the shrine, however, has slid down, and now blocks up 
the west side of the front cell of the Cave No. 4 just below it. 

Northwards from this we enter a hall with a stair landing in it 
from the cave below. This hall, of which the west side is entirely 
gone, is 26 feet from north to south, and 28f- from east to west. 
On the east side it has three cells, and on the north has been 
separated from a still larger and very lofty hall by two pillars and 
their corresponding pilasters, of which only one pillar and pilaster 
remain. The central hall was 26^ feet wide and about 43 feet in 
length, exclusive of the antechamber at its east end, cut off from it 
by two pillars and their pilasters, as was also another hall on the 
north, 27 feet by 29, similar to that on the south, with three cells in 



ELTJRA. 375 

the back, and as many in the east end, all with very high steps 
(see Plate LX., fig VI.). 

The antechamber in the front of the shrine is filled with sculpture. 
On the north end is a female dressed exactly in the garb of Padma- 
pani. On the south end is a similar female figure, supposed to 
represent Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, with a peacock at her 
left hand ; below it a pandit reading. Neither of these are seen in 
the Plate No. LXL, which represents this facade. In it on the left, 
or north side, of the cell door is Padmapani with his usual attributes, 
and two gandharvas above, and a male and female attendant below. 
It is not so clear who the corresponding figure of a dwarpala on 
the right may represent, probably ManjuSri. Both are tall, carefully 
executed in all their details, and the figures by which they are 
accompanied, and the foliage above their heads, are of very conside- 
rable elegance. The frame work of the door of the cell is simpler 
than is generally found at that age, and in better taste than in most 
examples of its class. 

In the shrine is a large image of Buddha seated, with the usual 
attendants. On the side walls are three rows containing, each, three 
Buddhas with their feet turned up, while below them on each side 
are worshippers and others. 

On the north side of the front hall, a passage, divided from a balcony 
or small cave by two pillars, is the only way of access now left to a 
shrine which we may call the ninth cave. This has a well-carved 
facade, as seen from tho south, which it faces. It consists of a small 
outer balcony and an inner covered portico, separated by two pillars, 
square below, octagonal above, and with drooping- eared capitals. 
On the back wall are two deep pilasters or attached column, with 
the compressed cushion capitals of the Elephanta cave style. These 
divide the wall into three compartments : in the centre one is a 
seated Buddha with four gaiuLlmrvas above ; in the left one is 
Padmapani with two female attendants and two fat gandharvas 
above ; in the east one is Buddha's other usual attendant, whether 
Indra, Manjusri, or Vajrapani, with two females, &c. 

Returning now through No. VI. to the stair, we descend into 
the seventh, a large plain Vihara, 51^ feet wide by 43| deep, the roof 
supported by only four square columns. It has five cells in the 
back, and three on each side, but is no ways interesting, and appears 
never to have been finished. 



376 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The eighth may be entered from the last by a roughly-cut 
passage, or perhaps unfinished cell, in its north wall, and may 
be described as consisting of two rooms and the shrine, with its 
circumambulatory passage. The inner hall is 28 feet by 25, with 
three cells on the north side, and is cut off by two pillars and 
pilasters at each end, on the east from the shrine, with its sur- 
rounding pradakshina, and on the west from the outer apartment. 

The shrine has the usual dwwrpdlas and their attendants at the 
door ; and inside is the seated Buddha with his attendants, but in 
this case Padmapani has four arms, holding the chduri and the lotus 
in his left hands, and over his shoulder hangs a deer-skin. At his 
feet are small figures of devotees, and behind them is a tall female 
figure with a flower in her left hand, and a gandharva over her head. 
The other tall male attendant has a similar companion on his left, 
with a lotus flower and a rosary in her hands. 

On the wall, at the south entrance to the pradakshina, is a sculp- 
ture of Saraswati, somewhat similar to the one in the cave above. 
Opposite is a cell, and in the passage two more, while behind the 
shrine is a long, raised recess with two square pillars in front. 

The outer room is 28 feet by 17, with a Blightly raised platform 
filling the west end of it. On the north side is a chapel on a raised 
floor with two slender columns in front, on the back wall of which is 
a seated Buddha, with attendants dressed nearly alike, with Brah- 
manical cords, necklaces, and armlets, but no chau/ris, the one on 
Buddha's left holding in his hand a three-pronged object, which is 
half of what we shall find as his frequent cognizance in other caveB, — 
the vajrd or thunderbolt, whence he may be styled Vajrapani. On 
the west wall is Padmapani with the female figure that we find so 
frequently associated with him. 

Coming out of this by the large opening on the south side, just 
under the ninth cave, we find on the face of the rock to the west, but 
partly broken away, a sculptured group of a fat male and female, 
the latter with a child on her knees, and attendant, which we find in 
other caves, 1 and have supposed to represent the parents of Buddha, 
and himself as an infant, in fact, a Buddhist Holy Family. 

There is now a break in the continuity of the caveB, and we have 
to go some way northwards to the next and probably most modern 
group of all the Buddhist caves. 

1 In Cave IV. at Ajnpta and Cave VII. at Aurangabftd for example. 



KLURA. 377 



VlSWAKABMA CaVE, 



The next cave is locally known as the Sutar ka jhopra or Vis- 
wakarma, and is much frequented by carpenters who come to 
worship the image of Buddha as Viswakarma, the patron of their 
craft. It is the only Chaitya cave here, the cathedral temple of 
the Buddhist caves. And, though not so magnificent in its propor- 
tions, or severe in its decoration, as the great cave at Karle, it is 
still a splendid work, with a large open court in front surrounded by 
a corridor, and a frieze above its pillars carved with representations 
of the chase, &c. The inner temple, consisting of a central nave 
and side aisles, measures 85 feet 10 inches by 43, and 34 feet high. 
(See plan, Plate LXII.) The nave is separated from the aisles by 
28 octagonal pillars, 14 feet high, with plain bracket capitals, 
while two more square Ones, just inside the entrance, support the 
gallery above, and cut off the front aisle. The remote end of the 
nave is nearly filled by a high dagoba, 15 4 feet in diameter, and 
nearly 27 feet high, which, unlike older examples, has a large fron- 
tispiece, nearly 17 feet high, attached to it — as on that in the Caves 
Nos. XIX. and XXVI. at Ajanta — on which is a colossal seated 
figure of Buddha, 11 feet high, with his feet down, and his usual 
attendants, while on the arch over his head is carved his Bodhi- 
tree, with ga-ndharvas on each side. 

The arched roof is carved in imitation of wooden ribs, each rising 
from behind a little Ndga bust, alternately male and female, and 
joining a ridge piece above. The triforium or deep frieze above the 
pillars is divided into two belts, the lower and narrower carved with 
crowds of fat little gambolling figures (gouaa*) in all attitudes. The 
upper is much deeper, and is divided over each pillar so as to form 
compartments, each usually containing a Beated Buddha with two 
attendants and two standing Buddhas or B6dhisattvas. The inner 
side of the gallery over the entrance is also divided into three com- 
partments filled with figures. 

At the ends of the front corridor, outside, are two cells and two 
chapels with the usual Buddhist figures repeated. From the west 
end of the north corridor a stair ascends to the gallery above, which 
consists of an outer one over the corridor, and an inner one over the 
front aisle, separated by the two pillars that divide the lower por- 
tion of the great window into three lights. The pillars of these 



378 



BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 




No. 66. Fuyade of the Viswakarma Cave at Elura. 1 

corridors are generally of great elegance, having tall square bases 
changing into octagons, and then to 1 6 and even more sides, and 
under the capitals returning to the square by the " vase and falling 
leaf pattern" {see Plate LXIIL). The most remarkable feature, 
however, of the facade of this cave is that instead of the great horse- 
shoe window, which is characteristic of the Chaitya caves, from the 
earliest at Bhaja to the latest at Ajanta, we here find it cut up into 
three divisions, like a modern Venetian window, with an Attic window 
over the centre opening. Then for the first time we begin to lose all 
trace of the wooden forms with which we have bo long been familiar, 

1 From Fergusson'a I.Sf E. Arc.hit. p. 128. 



ELUBA. 379 

and find at last Buddhist architecture assuming lithic forms, from 
which all trace of their origin would soon disappear, but as this cave 
is the last of its class that is known to exist, we are unable to say 
what the next change would be, but we may safely predict that it 
would be even more appropriate to stone architecture than even this 
facade. 

From the outer area, four small chapels are entered, each contain- 
ing sculptures of Buddhist mythology, and where the very elaborate 
headdresses of the females of that period may be studied. Over 
the chapel to the right of the window is a remarkable group of 
fat little figures (gana), similar to those in the Rameswara Brah- 
manical cave near by ; and the projecting frieze that crowns the 
facade is elaborately sculptured with pairs of figures in compart- 
ments. 

High up on each side are two small chapels, difficult of access, 
and not specially interesting. 

From the developed state of the mythological sculptures on the 
balcony and dagoba, the ornate headdresses of the figures, and the 
very marked departure in architectural style in this from the Other 
Chaitya caves, we can hardly assign it a date earlier than first 
half of the seventh century a.d. Much later we can hardly venture 
to place it, because after that period we have little evidence that 
works of the kind were executed by Buddhists. 

The Do Thal. 

A little further north is the cave known as Do Thai, because 
it has for long been regarded as consisting only of two Btoreys. 
In 1876 the excavation of the earth from what was then the 
lower floor revealed the landing of a stair from a cave below. 
This was partially excavated in 1877, and laid open a verandah, 
102 feet in length by 9 feet wide, with two cells and a shrine behind, 
in which is Buddha with Padmapani and Vajrapani or Indra as his 
attendants, the latter with the vajra or thunderbolt in his right hand. 

The stair leads into a similar verandah above, with eight square 
pillars in front, the back wall pierced with five doors. The first, at 
the stair landing, is only the commencement of a cell. The second, 
to the south, leads into a shrine with a colossal Buddha, his right 
hand on his knee, and the left in his lap. In front of the throne, 



380 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

rising from the floor, is a small female figure holding up a water- 
jar, and to the right another sitting on a prostrate figure. Buddha's 
left-hand attendant has a flower stalk by his left side, and over the 
bud is a vajra or thunderbolt — a short object with three prongs on 
either end. On the same (or right) wall are three other tall stand- 
ing males. The one next Vajrapani has a similar flower-stalk sup- 
porting an oblong object which strongly resembles a native book 
tied up with a string ; this may perhaps be Manjusri. The next 
holds a lotus-bud, and the last a pennon. On the return of the wall 
is a tall female figure with a flower. On the north side are also 
three figures, one of which holds a very long sword ; and on the 
return of the wall on this Bide a fat male figure, adorned with garlands 
and necklaces, with a round object like a cocoanut in his right, 
and perhaps a money-bag in his left hand — possibly meant to repre- 
sent the excavator. Above these figures on either side are seven 
figures of Buddhas, the foliage of the peculiar Bodhir-tree of each 
extending over his head like an umbrella. The central door leads 
into a small hall with two square pillars, and partially lighted by 
two small windows. Behind it is a shrine with a Buddha on a 
sinhdsana, or throne supported by lions, hiB feet crossed in front of 
him, his right hand hanging over his knee — in the Bhwmisparia or 
Vajrdeana mudrd. Vajrapani here holdB np his vajra in his right 
hand. 

The fourth door has a carved architrave, and leadB into a Bhrine 
very similar to the corresponding one on the other side the central 
area. Buddha, as usual, with hiB attendants Padmapani, bejewelled 
and wearing a thick cord or necklace, and Vajrapani with three tall 
figures on either side, the one next to Vajrapani having a book on 
the top of the flower-bud he holds, the strings by which it is held 
together being distinctly visible. There are seven squatting Buddhas 
above, with the foliage extending over their heads; and on the 
inside of the front wall, on the north, a fat male figure with gar- 
lands and necklaces, a round object, — perhaps a cocoanut — in bis 
right hand, and in his left what appears to be a purse from which 
coinB are dropping out ; on the south side stands a female with a 
flower in her left hand : theBe again possibly represent the patron 
and patroness of the cave. The last door leads into a cell. 

At the north end of the verandah the stair ascends to the upper 
storey. It requires little description : it was intended to have three 



BLURA. 381 

shrines as below ; the south one, however, has not been commenced ; 
the north one contains a squat, and the central a sitting Buddha 
with two attendants only. On the walls are many small Buddhas, a 
Padmapani with four arms, females with lotus-buds, &c. 

There are several cells in the court; but, as it has not been 
cleaned out, and is deep in silt, only one of them is accessible, con- 
taining a headless image of Buddha, a seated Loke£vara, and other 
sculptures. 

The Tin Thal. 

The court of this fine cave has been thoroughly cleaned of the 
silt that filled it, and thus (thanks to the Nizam's Government) 
its ample area and great depth is now shown off to advantage. 
The labour in originally excavating Buch a court alone out of the 
solid rock must have been enormous. (See plan, Plate LXIV.) 

Like the last, it is of three storeys, the first entered by a few steps 
ascending from the court. It has eight square columns with bases, 
and plain brackets in the front, the upper portion of the central 
pair being covered with very pretty florid ornamentation. Behind 
the front row are other two lines of eight pillars each, and in the area 
that recedes back in the centre are six more columns, making thirty 
in all. 

In a large compartment on the back wall, to the left of the 
approach to the Bhrine, is a sculpture in nine squares : in the centre 
Buddha with chauri-hearera ; to his right and left Padmapani and 
Vajrapani; and, above and below, the six figures found in the 
shrines of the Do Thai, with book, sword, flag, buds and flowers. 
This sculpture is repeated over and over again in different parts of 
this cave. In the corresponding position on the south side has been 
a seated Buddha, now quite destroyed. In three cells in the north 
side are stone couches for the monks. In central recesses right 
and left of the vestibule to the shrine are Buddhas squatting on 
sinhdsanos, the left attendants having different flowers in each case. 

On each side the shrine door is a fat, seated guardian, with 
flower-stalks, that on the south side having the book laid over a 
bud. 

The shrine contains an enormous squat Buddha, over 11 feet from 
the seat to the crown of the head. High up on each side wall are 



382 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

five squat Buddhas, and below are larger sitting figures : to the left, 
1st, Padmapani with his lotus ; 2nd, a figure with something very 
like a crozier ; 3rd, one with a sword over a flower ; and, 4th, with 
fruit and a flag. On the right, 1st, Vajrapani, defaced ; 2nd, a figure 
with a flower ; 3rd, one with flower-stalk and book ; 4th, with lotus 
bud. On the inside of the front wall are — on the north a squatting 
female with a belt over her breasts ; and on the s6uth, one with 
four arms, a bottle, and a flower.. 

From the south end of the front aisle the stair ascends, and from 
the first landing a room is entered on the south side of the court, 
with two pillars in front. On the back wall is a Buddha on a high 
throne with his usual attendants ; and on the west side is Padmapani 
seated between a male and female — the latter, perhaps, his wife. 
Inhere are many smaller figures, four-armed Devis, &c, in this 
room. 

From this the stair leads up to the first floor. It has a long open 
verandah in front, and a large central entrance divided by two square 
pillars leads into the hall. There are also entrances from near each 
end of the verandah. These lead into a long hall, 11 feet 5 inches 
high, divided into three aiBles by two rows of eight pillars each. 
On the ends of the central vestibule are many sculptures, — among 
them Padmapani seated between two females (one of them with a 
bottle), a ddgdba, figures of Buddha, females, &c. 

The shrine door has two fine dwdrpdlas. Padmapani on the north 
side holds a fully blown lotus and a rosary or maid, and the other his 
vajra ; both have jewelled belts, &c. Inside is an enormous squat- 
ting Buddha, and in front of the low throne is a female holding up 
a lota, and opposite her a smaller one standing over a prostrate 
figure. At the ends of the throne are large figures of Padmapani 
and Vajrapani with their emblems, and on each side wall four figures 
— ^while on the front wall are the usual male and female, which I 
have supposed to represent the patron of the cave and his wife. 
Above are seven squatting Buddhas on shelves. 

In the north end of the verandah is Buddha sitting with the wheel 
between his heels, and two deer on the ground in front. On each 
side are his usual attendants and a standing Buddha — coarsely exe- 
cuted. From this point the stair ascends, and in the jamb of the 
window at the first landing is a figure on horseback with two 
attendants ; above is a female with a flower. 



ELURA. 383 

The upper floor is the most striking among the Buddhist caves. 
It is divided into five cross aisles by rows of eight pillars, which with 
two in front of the shrine, are forty-two in all, perfectly plain square 
columns (see Plate LXV). In recesses at the ends of the aisles are large 
figures of Buddhas seated on thrones, with their usual attendants. 
At the south end of the back aisle the Buddha is on a sirihmana with 
the wheel in the middle, and lying in front two finely-cut deer, unfor- 
tunately broken by some barbarian. Possibly this may be intended 
as an allusion to Buddha's teaching in the Mrigadava or deer-park 
at Banaras — which seems to have been a favourite resort of his. In 
the north end of the same aisle Buddha is represented in a squatting 
attitude, his feet drawn up in front of him, and his hands in the 
teaching mMrd. He sits on a throne with a lion in the centre, but, 
instead of his usual attendants, on either side of him are (1) a squat- 
ting Buddha with hands in his lap, in the act of ascetic meditation, 
by which he attained Buddhahood ; (2) above this is Buddha soaring 
to the heavens to preach his law to the gods ; and (3) Buddha dying 
or entering nirvana — everlasting, undisturbed, unconscious repose. 
These are the great scenes in his life as a Teacher. 

To the right of this figure, on a raised basement, along the back 
wall, extending from the corner to the vestibule of the shrine are 
seven large squat meditative Buddhas, all perfectly alike, except 
that each has the foliage of a different Bodhi-tree represented over 
his head springing from behind the nimbus or aureole. These are the 
seven human or earth-born Buddhas, painted also in Cave XXII. at 
Ajanta with the name below each, as Vipasya, Sikhi, VisVabhu, 
Krakuchchhanda, Kanaka Muni, Kasyapa, and Sakya Sinha. 

On the south side of the vestibule is a similar row of seven medi- 
tating Buddhas, 1 being perhaps the representations of the same 
personages, only with umbrellas over their heads, as symbols of 
dominion, instead of the Bodhi-treea. 

The vestibule of the shrine contains two tall dtvdrpdlos with 
crossed arms and lofty headdresses ; on each end wall are three female 

1 The Jnani or divine Buddhas ore only Ave : — (1) Vairochana, (2) Akshobhya, 
(3) Ratna Sambhava, (4) Amitabha, and (5) .amogha Siddha — the mental creations of 
Adi Buddha, and each of whom respectively produced a Bodhisattwa, vk. (1), Samanta 
Bhadra, (2) Vajrapftni, (3) Ratnapani, (4) Padmapani, and (6) Viiwapani. Had there 
been seven Jnani Buddhas we might have supposed that this second group represented 
them. 



384 BUDDHIST CAVB-TBMPtES. 

\ 

\ 

figures seated on a high basement, with the right foot down and 
resting on a lotus, and the left turned under her. The one next 
the corner on each side has four arms, and holds a mdld or rosary 
and a crooked rod ; she is, doubtless, the counterpart of some Hindu 
Devi, like Lakshmi or Saraswatt, introduced into the Buddhist 
mythology. On the back wall on each side are three similar figures, 
but all with two arms, and each holding some symbol, as a flower, 
vajra, &c. They sit on padmdsanas, or lotus-thrones, supported by 
7w^a-canopied figures, standing among lotos leaves, fish, birds, &o. 
They are perhaps Lochana, T&ra, and M&mukhi, female counter- 
parts of the Bodhisattwas we have already met with in the shrines. 
Above all are four Buddhas on each division of the back wall, and 
five on each end wall. 

In the shrine is the usual very large squat Buddha, which the 
natives persist in worshipping as Rama. His nose and lips have 
long been wanting, but these as well as mustachios are supplied in 
plaster, and whenever they fall or are knocked off, their place is 
speedily restored by fresh ones. On his left is Padmapani or Ava- 
lokiteswara, with a clumri, and, as usual, a small figure of Amitabha 
Buddha on the front of his cap ; next to him is a figure with a bud ; 
then one with a long sword on his right, with a flower in his left 
hand ; a fourth with a fruit and flower or small chauri, and the fifth 
with some unrecognisable object and a branch or flower. On 
Buddha's left are Vajrapani and four other similar figures. On the 
inside of the front wall are a male and female— the male with a 
purse and money. Above, on each side, are squatting figures of 
Buddha. 

In the north side of the court of this cave is a small one with two 
pillars in the east face, and containing a water-oistern. 

This is* the last of the Buddhist caves here ; it bears decided 
evidences of belonging to the latest form of the Mahdydna sect in 
India, and was perhaps one of the latest executed — probably not 
before 700 a.d. 



385 



CHAPTER IV. 

AURANGABAD CAVE TEMPLES. 

The group of caves at Aurangabad, though one of the smallest and 
least known, is far from being one of the least interesting among the 
Cave Temples of Western India. With the exception of a small and 
ruinous Chaitya, and some insignificant cells', they are all of one 
age, and that of the latest known. They are, in fact, the last dying 
effort of the style, and, like most architectural objects similarly situa- 
ted, these caves display an excess of ornamentation and elaborateness 
of detail, whioh, though pleasing at first sight, is very destructive of 
true architectural effect. To the historian of art they are not, how- 
ever, less interesting on that account, nor less worthy of attention in 
this place. 

The hills in which these caves are situated lie to the north of 
the city, about a mile from the walls, and rise to a height of about 
700 feet above the plains, presenting a precipitous scarp to the 
the south — the side in which the caves are excavated. 

They may be divided into three groups, scattered over a distance 
of fully a mile and a half, the first and Becond of which are Buddhist 
of a late date ; and the third— from their unfinished condition and 
the entire absence of sculpture in them, it is difficult to say to what 
sect they belonged. 

The first group consists of five caves lying nearly due north from 
the city. They are reached by a footpath ascending the right side 
of the gorge or recess of the hill in which they are, at a level of 
about 300 feet above the plain. Commencing from the west end 
of the series, or that farthest from where the path lands, we shall 
number them towards the east. 

Cave L, the most westerly of this group, is reached by a preoipi- 
tous and difficult footpath leading up to it from the others, which 
are all at a lower level. The front, which is 74 feet in length, has 
had four advanced pillars forming a porch, and supporting a great 
inasB of rock projecting far in advance of the pillars of the veran- 

Y 138. B B 



386 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

dah. 1 A great Blab of rook, however, several feet 
than fifty in length, has Bplit off by a horizontal i 
down on the platform, crushing the pillars of the po: 

The verandah is 76 feet 5 inches long and 9 feet i 
pillars in front, each with square baseB and roun 
shafts of four different patterns, and bracket capil 
under each wing of the bracket, carved mostly with 
The whole style of these columns is so similar to 1 
Cave I. at Ajanta, and of others near the eastern e 
group, they must be assigned to the same age, while 
bably the last cave attempted here, it fixes the late 
series as about coeval with or slightly subsequen 1 
at Ajanta — say towards the middle or end of the seve 

The back wall of the verandah is pierced for three 
windows. It waB intended for a 28 pillared Vihara 
was stopped when only the front aisle, about 9 feet 
roughly cleared out. 

Cave II. — Descending now to the second cave, we 
been a temple intended solely for worship, and 
pattern usually designated Chaitya caves, but of a 
borrowed by the Mahdydtui sect of Buddhists from t 
temples. The front is quite destroyed, but it has 
verandah or open hall, 21 feet 6 inches wide by If 
deep, with two pillars and their corresponding pil 
Behind this the floor is raised about 2 feet, and on 
square pillars neatly carved on the upper halves 
Inside these is an aisle, about 9 feet wide and 21 fee 
of the shrine, which is surrounded by a jpradakshind 
circumambulation — a ceremony probably taken ov 
from the Brahmanical religions, and employed by \ 
primitive Buddhists in connexion with the Chaih 
Malidyma or later development of the sect, as in tl 
nexion with the shrine containing the principal imag 

At the doorway of this shrine stand two tall figui 
lotus flower. That on the left of the door is th 
dressed, and from the small image of Buddha on k 



AURANGABAD CAVES. 387 

the lotus stalk he grasps in his right hand, at the top of which is 
also a figure of Buddha, we may suppose it was meant for Padma- 
pani or AvaldkitesVara, and the more elaborately-dressed one on 
the other side for Indra. Each is attended by a vidyddhara or gan- 
dharva and by a Ndga figure with the five-hooded cobra. Inside 
is a seated Buddha, 9 feet high, his feet on a lotus footstool, and 
his hands in the dharmachakra or teaching vrmdrd, with celestial 
admirers over each shoulder. On the walls are four rows of smaller 
figures, each with his attendant chawri bearers, and some in the 
Jndna and others in the dharmachakra rrmdrd. 

The walls of the pradakshind are also covered with multitudes of 
similar figures. This cave is hardly earlier than the first, but not 
separated from it by any long interval. They were probably exca- 
vated within the same century. 

Cave III.— The next is the finest cave in the group. It is a vihara, 
of which the hall is 41£ feet wide by 42£ feet deep, with twelve 
columns, all richly carved in a variety of patterns combining the styles 
of Caves I. and XXVI. at Ajanta. 1 One pillar and a pilaster on 
Plate LXVI. illustrate the style, but as all are varied, and some richer 
than even these, they convey no idea of the richness of effect produced 
by the elaborate and elegant decorations of this cave. On each side 
of the hall are two cells, and a room or chapel with two pillars in 
front ; those on the left side are marvels of elaborate sculpture. The 
verandah has been 30^ feet long by 8 feet 9 inches wide, with four 
pillars in front, and a chapel at each end, but it is entirely ruined. 
The antechamber to the shrine has two pillars and pilasters in front, 
with struts from their capitals consisting of female figures stand- 
ing under foliage. The shrine is occupied by the usual colossal 
Buddha, his feet down, and hands in the dharmacha.kra mudrd, 
-but the face and one knee have been damaged. (For Plan and 
details, see Plate LXVI.) 

It has one striking peculiarity, however, not noticed elsewhere, 
namely, two groups of worshipping figures about life-size which 
occupy the front corners of the shrine, seven on one side and six 
on the other, both male and female, some with garlands in their 



1 For details see Archenlogical Reports, voL iii. pp. 64-72, and Plates XLIII. to 
XLVI1I. 

BB 2 



888 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

hands, mostly with thick lips and very elaborate headdresses * and 
necklaces. 

It is difficult to conjecture the age of this work, but it may be 
approximately placed about 640 to 650 a.d., or even later, for it is 
evident from an inspection of its plan that the original idea of 
a Vihara as an abode of monks had almost as entirely died out, aa 
in the latest caves at Elura. There are only four cells in the angles 
which could be used for that purpose. The back and sides are used 
as chapels, and adorned in the most elaborate manner, and the whole 
is a shrine for worship rather than a place of residence. We cannot 
tell how far the same system might have been adopted in the latest 
caves at Ajanta. The corresponding caves there, XXIII. and IV., 
are only blocked out, and their plans cannot be ascertained. But 
this one is certainly later than No. I. there, Plate XL., which still 
retains all the features of a Vihftra as completely as the Nahapana 
caves at Nasik. 

Cave IV. — A few yards to the east of the last is the Chaitya 
cave, very much ruined, the whole front being gone, and what is 
left filled with fallen rock, &c. Its dimensions seem to have been 
38 feet in length by 22^ wide, with seventeen plain octagonal 
pillars and a Ddgoba, 5 feet 8 inches in diameter. From the pri- 
mitive simplicity of this cave we can hardly suppose that it was 
excavated after the middle of the fourth century, and may be even 
earlier. If this be the case, then we must suppose that there were 
monks cells and Viharas of a much earlier type than any that now 
remain. These may have been enlarged, and altered into Caves II. 
and V., or, which seems very probable, they were to the eaBt of 
No. V., where there is now a large hollow under the rock partially 
filled up with de'bris. 

Cave V. appears to have been originally a small temple like 
No. II., but without any dwdrpdlas to the shrine, which is all that 
is left. Inside it is about 8 feet square, and contains a large image 
of Buddha, now appropriated by the Jains of the neighbouring city, 
and dedicated to Parswanatha. 

The second group of caves is about three-quarters of a mile 
farther east in the same range of hills. 

Cave VI., the most westerly of this second scries, is considerably 



1 See Archmohgical Reports, vol. iii., Plate XL1X. 



AUKANGABAD CAVES. 389 

higher up in the rock than the next two. It also combines the charac- 
teristics of a Vihara and a temple, consisting of a shrine with its 
antechamber in the centre, surrounded by a passage or p-adakshind, 
with four cells in each side and two in the back — the latter contain- 
ing images of Buddha. The front has been supported by four 
square pillars, of which little more than the bases are left. In 
front of the antechamber are two square pillars and their corre- 
sponding pilasters, with bracket capitals, standing on a step about 
15 in. high. On each side the shrine door is a tall dwdrpdla as in 
No. II., each accompanied by a smaller female worshipper on the 
side next the door. By the door jambs stand small male figures, 
each with the snake-hood canopy. Inside is a colossal Buddha 
attended by two c^atwi-bearers, 7 ft. high. Here, again, in the 
front corners of the shrine are worshippers, but not so large as in 
Cave III., — five male figures on the right and five females on the left 
of the entrance. 

There are traces of painting left on the roof of the front aisle of 
this cave in the same style as is used in the roofs of the verandahs 
at Ajanta, and probably of about the same age. 

Cavb VII. is (after No. III.) the most interesting of this series. 
The front hall is about 14 ft. deep by 34 ft. in length, with four 
square pillars and their pilasters in front, and a chapel raised a few 
steps and cut off by two smaller pillars at each end. From the plan 
(Plate LXV.) it will be observed the arrangements of this cave make 
a still further step in advance towards those afterwards found in 
Brahmanioal temples. The cells containing the image of Buddha is 
boldly advanced into the centre of the cave, and with a pradakshind, 
or procession path, round it, so that it can be circumambulated by 
worshippers, as the Dagoba was in the earlier oaves. The two cells 
at the ends of the verandah, and the two at the back of the cave, are 
filled with sculpture, but there are still six remaining, which are 
suitable for the abode of monks. Notwithstanding this, from the 
arrangement of its plan and the character of its sculptures, it may 
be considered one of the very latest caves here, and probably con- 
temporary with the Do Tal or Tin Tal Caves at Elura, and conse- 
quently as excavated after the middle of the seventh century. 

In this cave we have the Mahdydna mythology full-blown, with a 
pantheon rivalling the ordinary Brahmanical one, but differing from it 
in a remarkable way. The hideous and terrible Rudra, Bhairava, and 



390 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Kali have not found their counterparts: its divinities are kindly 
and compassionate, and may be appealed to for protection. Buddha 
has passed nirvana, and is unaffected by aught that takes place in 
the sphere of suffering humanity, but a legend has sprung up of a 
Bddhisattwa of such compassion and self-denial that he has pledged 
himself never to seek, through nirvana, to enter " the city of peace " 
until he has redeemed the whole race from ignorance and Buffering. 
Such is Padmapani or Aval6kit6swara Bddhisattwa — "the mani- 
fested lord " or " the lord who looks down "— the lover and saviour of 
men, — evidently borrowed from some western and Christian source. 1 
To the left of the entrance into the inner cave is a large tableau in 
which he is represented with the jafd headdress of the ascetic, 
holding the padma or lotus which is his cognizance in his left hand 
and a maid or rosary in his right. At each side of the nimbus 
which surrounds his head is a vidyddhara with a garland, and 
behind each an image of Buddha squatted on a lotus. At each side 
are four smaller sculptures, which form a pictorial litany cut in 
stone, executed with such simplicity and clearness that it is read at 
a glance. In each scene two figures are represented as threatened 
by some sudden danger, and praying to the merciful lord Avald- 
kitdswara, are met by him flying to their deliverance. In the 
uppermost, on his right hand, the danger is fire ; in the next, the 
sword of an enemy ; in the next, chains ; and in the lowest, ship- 
wreck; on his left, again, the uppermost represents the attack of 
a lion, the second of snakes, the third of an enraged elephant, and 
the last of death represented by the female demon Kali about to 
carry off the child from the mother's lap. 

This scene, as we have already remarked, is represented also at 
Ajanta, and in painting in Cave XYII. there, as also at Elura and 
at kanheri (Plate LV). 

On the other side of the door another tall figure is represented 
with both human and celestial worshippers. The right hand, which 
probably held a cognizance, is broken ; but from the high and very 
rich headdress we may infer that it is intended for Manjusri, the 
patron of the Makdydna sect, and who is charged with the spread of 
the religion. 

1 See Pro£ Cowell in Jour, of Philology, vol. vi. (1876), pp. 222-281, and Jnd. 
Ant., voL TJii. ; VaasUiefs Lc BoucUBime, pp. 121, 125, 212, &b, and Third Arch. 
Repv pp. 74 ff. 



AURANGABAI) CAVES. 391 

The inner hall is mostly occupied by the shrine, round which 
there is a pradafahvnd with three cells in each side aisle, and two 
small shrines in the back wall, each containing a seated figure of 
Buddha. The front of the principal shrine is covered with sculpture, 
chiefly of female figures, three on each side the door, nearly life-size. 
The centre figure in each case stands on a lotus, has the nimbus 
behind the head, holds a lotus or other flower-bud in one hand, and, 
like her companions, wears a headdress of extraordinary dimensions 1 
and elaboration. They probably represent Tara — a favourite with 
the Nepalese,— but whether Bhrikuta-tara and TJgra-tara, or only 
one of the forms, is not clear. The two attendants on the right 
side of the door carry chauris, and one of them is attended by a 
dwarf; those on the left bear flowers, and one is attended by a 
bandy-legged male dwarf, the other by a female one. The two 
larger figures in these cases may be Mamukhi and Ldchana. Above 
are vidyddharas with garlands, and over each side passage are two 
figures of squatting Buddhas. 

Inside is the usual colossal Buddha, with gandhcurvas and apsarasas 
on clouds over his shoulders. On the right wall are standing male 
and female figures with attendant dwarfs ; and on the opposite side, 
apparently, the representation of a nachh or dance, with six female 
musicians. On the walls are many small figures of Buddha. 

In the chapel, in the left end of the front hall, are represented 
eight figures : on the right Buddha standing, then six females, each 
distinguished from the other by the style of her coiffure, standing 
on lotuses and with nimbi, and, lastly, a Bddhisattwa —perhaps 
Padmapani. 

In the corresponding chapel, at the east or right end, is a Boulpture 
of a fat pair of squatting royal personages, the female with a child 
on her knee, a female attendant at each side, and vidyddharas in the 
clouds above with garlands. This is probably intended to represent 
Suddhodana and Maya, the parents of Buddha, with the infant 
reformer. 

No. VIII. — Close to the last is a large recess under the rock, 
probably the remains of a large ruined cave ; over it is the com- 
mencement of another, the hall measuring 27 feet by 20, with some 
sculpture, but quite unfinished. 

— — — J ■ 

» See Third Arch. Report, Plate LIIL Fig. 2, and Plate LIV. Figa. 1, 2, and 3. 



392 BUDPHIST CAVE-TBMP1ES. 

No. IX. is at a somewhat higher level, but is very much ruined, and 
filled up with mud. Its front hall has been 85 feet long by nearly 
19 feet deep, with three smaller ones at the back, each leading into a 
shrine, but much of the cave has been left unfinished. On the walls 
are several female figures larger than life, and on the west wall 
Buddha iB represented, 16 feet in length, lying on his right side, dying 
or entering nirvana, while on the back wall, at his feet, is a 
four-armed image of Padmapani — the only one of the kind here. 

The other caves in the same hills are perfectly plain and some of 
them unfinished, with little or nothing to indicate whether they were 
Buddhist or Brahmanical. 



Dhamnab. 

The caves of Dhumnar or Dhamnar, 1 near the village of Ohan- 
dwas in Rajputana, are about 75 miles north of Ujjain, 70 south of 
Kota, and 22 miles north-west from those of Kholvi. They were 
first noticed by Colonel Tod who visited them in December 1821,' 
and they have since been examined by Mr. Fergusson, 8 and General 
Cunningham/ the latter of whom has given a plan of the principal 
group of Buddhist caves, but on rather too small a scale and with 
too few details to be of much service. 

The flat-topped hill in which they are excavated is composed of 
a coarse laterite not at all favourable to the execution of the minute 
details of sculpture. In this hill there are four groups of caves, — 
two in the north-west, one at the point of a spur to the west, and 
the fourth and only important group in a bay to the south. Most 
of them are small, being merely cells, and altogether they may 
amount to about sixty or seventy, 8 

The principal group on the south face of the hill are all Buddhist 
caves, and from the style of their architectural details and their 

1 Tod writes u Dhoomnar," Cunningham " Dhamnar." 

1 Ann. and Antig. of Rajatthan, voL iL p. 721 ff., or Madras ed., vol. ii. pp. 660 ff. 
Tod was muled by his Jain attendant in regarding the Buddhist caves as dedicated to 
be Tirthankaras. 

8 Bock-cut Templet of India, p. 40 ; and Ind. and East. Arekit^ pp. 181-162. 

* Archaeological Report, voL a. for 1864-65, pp. 270 ff. 

•FergusBon's Rock-Templet, p. 42; Tod Bays he counted "one hundred and 
seventy," Rajatthan, vol ii. p. 721 conf. Cunningham, Arch. Rep., vol. ii. p. 275. 



DHAMNAR. 393 

arrangements they are evidently of a late date. Cunningham 
assigns them " to the 5th, 6th, and 7th centuries of our era," and 
there can be little doubt that some of these and in the neighbouring 
group at Kholvi were probably the last executed Buddhist caves in 
India, and can hardly be dated before the 8th century a.d., though 
there may, of course, be some much older caves among them, though 
from the extreme coarseness of the material in which they are exca- 
vated, it is impossible to speak with any confidence as to their age. 
Some of the detached celk may be earlier, but the larger caveB are 
certainly of very late date. 

Several of them are small caves consisting of a small verandah 
or outer room and one or two cells behind. Two forms of Chaitya 
caveB occur, the one flat-roofed and the other arched. Dagobas are 
also placed in cells as at Kuda, &c. One known as the Bard Kacheri 
is a vihara cave, the hall of which is 20 feet square with four pillars, 
with three cells on each side, and a shrine containing a dagoba in 
the back. The facade is not unlike that of some of the Kanheri 
caves, being supported by two plain pillars, with the side openings 
closed by a stone screen, only the pillars have bracket capitals in the 
style of those inside the Viswakarma cave at Elura. The archi- 
trave consists of plain members, and the frieze has a dagoba in bas- 
relief in the centre and Chaitya-window ornaments on each side. 1 

Passing a small cave the next to the east, known as the Chhotd 
Kacheri, is an arched roofed Chaitya cave 23£ feet by 15, with a 
dagoba on a moulded base 9£ feet square at the foot. 

A little eastward is another hall, shown in the left of the woodcut 
(No. 67) on the following page, similar to the first described, but 
without any shrine or cells inside. To the left of the entrance, 
however, are four or five cells, and a dagoba in half relief similar to 
what we find in the Ghatotkachh cave. 

The great cave is locally known as " Bhim Sing-ka Bazar " and 
presents peculiarities of arrangement not met with elsewhere. It 
is in fact a Chaitya-cave surrounded by a Vihara (woodcut No. 67).' 
The Chaitya-cave measures 35 feet by 13^, with a vaulted roof 
ribbed in stone, and having a porch or antechapel in front, on the 
walls of which are sculptured six dagobas in half-relief. The usual 



1 See sketch view in Cunningham's Reports, voL ii, Plate LXXX. at p, 271. 
* From Fergusson'B ItuL and East Archil., p. 131. 



394 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

pillared aisle is outside the walls of this cave, and encloses a corridor 
that runs round the west and north sides, and part of the east, from 
which four cells of various sizes are entered on the north side, ten 
on the west, mostly about 7^ feet square, and three on the east, the 
central and largest one being a Chaitya cell containing a dagoba. 
To the left of the entrance also is a similar room ; and in advance 
of the front are two small dagobas 5 feet in diameter, which seem 
to occupy the place of the stambhas in the older Chaitya-caves. As 




No. 67. Caves at Dhaninar. (From a plan by General Cunningham.) 

Scale, 50 feet to 1 inch. 

Mr. Fergusson remarks the whole makes "a confused mass of 
chambers and Chaityas, in which all the original parts are con- 
founded, and all the primitive simplicity of design and arrange- 
ment is lost, to such an extent that, without previous knowledge, 
they would hardly be recognisable." \ 

The next cave to this is a flat-roofed Chaitya-cave, with an apse 
at the back and a plain rude circular dagoba reaching to the roof. 
To the east of it is a small Chaitya cell, and then a cave partially 
fallen in, but the inner room contained a dagoba on a base 8| feet 
square, and behind it is a shrine with the pradakshind or passage for 
circumambulation round it, as in some of the Aurangabad and 
Elura caves. The shrine inside is 10 feet square and is occupied 
by a seated figure of Buddha 8 feet high. There are dwdrpdlas at 

1 //i(7. and East Arch., p. 131. 



KHOLVI CAVES. 395 

the door 10 feet high, as in Cave III. at Aurangabad and in several 
of the Elura BuddhiBt temples ; and on the walls of the pradahshmd 
are standing and seated figures of Buddha, and on the right side, 
with " the head to the north " as in all such cases, is the Buddha 
reclining with his hand under his head, 15 feet in length, as he 
entered nirvana. 1 On the east side of the dagoba are two cells, one 
containing a small dagoba and the other a Buddhist image. 

Kholvi Caves. 

As already mentioned the other group of caves in Malwa is at 
the small village of Kholvi, in the Kota territory, about 22 miles 
south-east from Dhamnar and 55 miles north of Ujjain. They 
were first described by Dr. E. Impey in 1853,' and afterwards, but 
in less detail, by General Cunningham in 1864-65. 

They are, like those of Dhamnar, excavated in a hill of coarse 
laterite to the north-east of the village, and may be divided into three 
groups, — on the south, east, and north sides of the hill, numbering 
between forty and fifty excavations in all, the principal caves being 
in the group on the south face. The most marked feature about 
them is the presence of some seven stupas, with square bases, in all 
the larger of which there are cells for images of Buddha. They 
are, in fact, in their arrangements more like Hindu temples than 
anything we have hitherto found in Buddhist architecture, though 
they still retain the circular plan and domical top which were the 
essential characteristics of the Dagoba in all ages. 5 The first of 

1 Tod Bays M 10 feet in lenglh,'-' Rajasthan, vol. ii. p. 723. Conf, Cunningham, 
Archeeol. Rep., vol. ii. p. 274. 

* Jour. Bom. B. R. As. Soc., vol. v. pp. 336-349 ; Cunningham, Arch. Report, vol. 
ii. pp. 280-288. 

3 If anything could convince Mr. Growse (J. A. S. B., vol. xlvii., p. 114) how 
erroneous hie views are as to the origin of the Hindu Sikhara, it wonld be the examina- 
tion of these temples. There is at Dhamnar a Hindu rock-cut temple (Hist, oflnd. and 
East Arch., p. 446) which is as complete and perfect an example of the style as the 
Temple at Barolli or Bhu vanes war. Square in plan, and with the curvilinear Sikhara 
and Amlikn termination, in fact, all the features of the style perfected as if they had 
been practised for centuries. At the same time we have close by, in the same material, 
and at the same age, temples of the Buddhists of the same size, and used for the same 
purpose, but as unlike them as it is possible to conceive two classes of buildings to be. 
The latter retain all the circular forms of the Dagoba both in plan and section, and show 
as little tendency to copy the Hindu style as the Brahmans showed to imitate them. — 
J. F. 



396 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

these, beginning from the west, stands on a base 28 feet square. 
"On this base," says General Cunningham, "is raised a square 
plinth 8 feet high with a projection in the middle on each side, 
which on the east is extended into a small portico supported by 
two square pillars. Above this rises a seoond or upper plinth 
of II feet, which is circular in form," 18 feet in diameter, 1 "but 
with the same projections continued on the four faces. All these 
projections, as well as the intervening spaces, are decorated with 
a bold trefoil moulding with a circular recess in the middle," — a 
modernised version in fact of the Chaitya-window ornament. As 
the cop of this plinth is on a level with the summit of the hill the 
dome and capital must have been structural, and given it a total 
height when entire of about 40 feet. 

The cell inside measures 6£ by 5£ feet, and 11 feet high, and 
contains a seated figure of Buddha in the Mdna, mudrd, or attitude of 
abstraction, about 5 feet in height, but much abraded. 

The other stupas are smaller; the next one to this having an 
octagonal base 6 feet across ; the third stands on a base 18 feet 
square, surmounted by a dome three-fourths of its diameter in 
height, and with a shrine inside containing the pedestal for the 
image, which however has been a moveable one, and is gone ; the 
fourth is the only one that seems to have been under cover, and the 
side walls of the cell inside have been prolonged forward and arched 
over, while outside is a passage all round forming a very peculiarly 
shaped Chaitya cave. The fifth stdpa has a base 15 feet square, and 
9 high, on which stands a circular drum 12 feet in diameter and 
7 high, supporting a dome 1\ feet high, making a total of 23£ feet 
in height. On the outer face of the drum is a niche containing a 
seated image of Buddha. The sanctum is placed to the west of the 
centre, but the image has disappeared from it. On the right side 
of a platform immediately behind is a standing figure of Buddha 
upwards of 12 feet in height ; and behind this platform is the largest 
cave in the group, 42 feet wide by 22 deep, with two rows each of 
four square columns running from right to left, each of the three 
aisles thus formed having a vaulted roof. 

These caves, as already remarked, are of very late date, and are 

1 This is on General Cunningham's authority, bat oa his plan it measures 23 feet. 
Dr. Impey says " 28 feet " («. *. p. 842). 



KH0LVI CAVES. 397 

curious examples of the works of the last of the Hinayana school. 
Neither here nor at Dhamnar are there any evidences of the worship 
of Bodhisattwas, or Saktis. The Dagoba and the great Teacher 
seem alone to have been venerated, and it is curious to remark that 
whilst in the earliest times the Dagoba alone was regarded as a 
sufficient qeblah, and the only emblem of Buddha — the model of the 
monument that enshrined his ashes — the principal alteration from 
this, among the school that deviated least from the earlier doctrine, 
was the introduction of an image into the very place the relics might 
be supposed to occupy. 

These works belong, so far as we can judge from the details we 
possess, to the end of the eighth century, or possibly even to a later 
date. 1 

It seems probable that these caves at Dhamnar and Kolvi, if not 
the last, are at least among the very latest works of the Buddhists 
in Western India. It might indeed be expected that the religion 
would be found lingering in the fastnesses of Bajputana, and in a 
remote island like Salsette, for some time after its followers had 
been expelled from the fertile plains and the rich cities, in whose 
neighbourhood the greater number of the caves are found. It is 
difficult, however, to speak with precision on such a subject, for 
when it is looked into, it is startling to find how wholly dependent 
we are on the caves for our knowledge of the subject. Except from 
Borne vague hints in classical or Byzantine authors, we have no 
external evidence that a Buddhist community ever existed in Western 
India. There is not one single passage in any work by any native 
historian or author that mentions the fact ; but for the brief account 
of the country by the Chinese traveller, Hiwen Thsang, we might — 
but for the caves — have remained ignorant of the fact. It is almost 
equally astonishing to find that there has not been found in 
the whole cave region any remains of any structural buildings 
belonging to the sect. The Viharas and Chaityas, being presumably 
all in wood, may have perished of course ; but we might expect 
that the foundation at least of some of the larger stupas would 
yet remain. Except, however, the remains of some insignificant 

1 From their square bases, and tall forms, these Kolvi dagobas resemble those found in 
Afghanistan near Jellalubad more nearly than any others found in India ; but it seems 
impossible, at present at least, to bring down these latter to anything like the same age. 



398 BUDDHIST CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Dagobas on the island of Salsette, nothing of the sort has been 
discovered. 

This negative result is the less to be expected, inasmuoh as we 
know from the erection of the Tope at Sarnath, and the rebuilding 
of the Great Monastery at Nalanda, that Buddhism flourished in 
Bengal under the Pala dynasty from the 9th to the 12th century (mte, 
p. 132), and this seems no d, priori reason why this might not have 
been the case in the West as well as in the East of India. There is 
perhaps no country in the world, however, in which it is so unsafe to 
rely on historical analogies as it is in India. The history of each pro- 
vince must be taken by itself, and, however likely or unlikely it may 
be, it is seldom tihat what may have happened in one province has so 
direct bearing on what may have occurred in another, that it can be 
used as an argument to illustrate any particular development either 
of religion or art. 

Under these circumstances it is fortunate that in the thousand 
and one caves of the West, we have a complete series of perfectly 
authentic illustrations of the rise and fall of the Buddhist religion 
in that region, from the time of its introduction in the age of 
Asoka, in the third century before Christ, till its extinction, when 
the Eathors eclipsed for a time the glories of the great Chalukya 
race in the eighth century. The BuddhiBts then disappear as 
suddenly as they rose, being either absorbed among the Jains, with 
whose faith they had many points in common, or by being converted 
to that of Vishnu, towards which they had long been tending, or 
crushed by the followers of Siva, who in many places superseded 
them. During the 1,000 years, however, of their existence in the 
West they have left in their caves a complete record of the 
vicissitudes of Hinayana and Mahayana sects among themselves, 
and of their rise and progress till their decline and fall. As a 
chapter of architectural history it is one of the most complete and 
interesting known to exist anywhere. It is almost the only one 
example of a stone architecture which we can trace back with 
absolute certainty to its wooden original, and can follow it through- 
out its whole course without detecting any foreign influence in the 
introduction of any borrowed forms, and in which we can watch its 
final extinction, in the district where it arose, together with the 
religion to which it owed its origin. 



399 



book in. 



THE BRAHMANICAL OAVES. 



CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTORY. 



It iB sufficiently evident, from what has been Baid in the pre- 
ceding pages, that the Buddhists were the first to appreciate the 
fitness of the stratified rocks of India for the construction of temples 
appropriate to the purposes of their religion, and as abodes for the 
priests who were to serve in them, and they retained a monopoly of 
the idea long enough to perfect a style of their own, without any ad- 
mixture of elements borrowed from any other form of faith. When, 
however, in the decline of their religion the Brahmans were com- 
peting with them for popular favour, they eagerly seized on a form 
of architectural expression which evidently had gained a Btrong 
hold on the public imagination, and in the sixth and seventh centuries 
commenced the excavation of a number of caves which rival those 
of their predecessors in extent and elaborateness of decoration, 
though certainly not in appropriateness for the purposes for which 
they were designed. 

With them monasticism does not occupy so prominent a place as 
with the Buddhists, and is not connected in any way with the 
popular worship, so that monastic abodes were not required, and all 
the Brahmanical caves copied from the Viharas became simply 
temples of the new faith. Nor were the ceremonials of their rituals 
at all alike, and as it happened that the Ohaitya form of temple was 
not so suitable for either the Saiva or Vaishnava cults, as the later 
form of Buddhist Vihara ; it seems accordingly to have been chosen 
as the first model. The side cells were, of course, dispensed with, 



400 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and the walls occasionally carved with rUieoos of their mythology, 
the shrine at the back was retained, and in Saiva temples it was 
soon surrounded by a pradakshind or passage for circumambulation, 
it being considered a reverential and potential mode of salutation to 
go round the image or shrine of Siva, keeping the right side towards 
it. 

Other modifications suggested themselves by degrees: in some 
cases, as in the Dumar L£na at Elura, and at Elephanta and JogeS- 
wari, the hall was brought more into accordance with the cruciform 
plan of the structural temples of the sect, and entrances excavated at 
the sides, while the shrine was brought out of the back into the area 
of the temple, and instead of the large central area and side aisles of 
the Buddhist caves, rows of pillars were carried across the hall, 
forming a succession of aisles. 

As time went on other changes, both in plan and detail, were 
introduced, till after persevering in thiB course for about a century 
and a half the design of the Brahmanical caves had acquired a form 
and consistency which almost entitled them to rank as a separate 
style of their own. The original form of the Vihara was almost 
entirely obliterated by the introduction of new features required to 
adapt it to the purposes of the Brahmanical faith, and in a few years 
more all traces of its origin might have been lost, when the progress 
of the style was interrupted by a revolution which changed the 
whole aspect of the case, but which at the same time proved to be a 
last expiring effort, and was ultimately fatal to the progress of cave 
excavations on the part of the Brahmans. 

This time the revolution came from the south. When, as just 
mentioned, the Rathors superseded the Chalukyas in cave regions 
south of the Nermada ; they brought with them their own Dravidian 
style of architecture, and instead of continuing the almost hopeless 
task of converting a Buddhist vihara into a Brahmanical temple, 
they boldly cut the knot and at once resolved to copy one of 
their own structural temples in the rook. The result was the 
Kailas Temple at Elura, an effort on a grand scale to form out 
of the living rock a shrine, complete in itself, with all necessary 
accompaniments. It was in reabty a great monolithic temple hewn 
out of the living rock, highly sculptured outside and in, nearly 100 
feet in total height, with surrounding shrines, etambhas or ensign 
pillars, gigantic elephants, corridors. &c, all in imitation of the 



INTBODUCTOBT. 401 

most perfect structural examples, and forming one of the most 
beautiful and interesting monuments in India. 

It was a daring effort, and the result has been one of the most 
remarkable monuments in India ; but a temple in a pit, which this 
practically is, is an anomaly that could not be persevered in. It 
was only very rarely that the Brahmans could find detached boulders, 
or even ridgeB as at Mahavallipur, out of which to hew their shrines, 
and when these did not exist, the proper effect of a monolithic temple 
cannot be obtained, as it is evidently impossible, in most cases, to 
remove the mountain to a sufficient extent to admit of its being 
properly seen. In this respect the Buddhists were more successful, 
because more logical than their successors. All their rock-cut 
temples are interiors — are caves in fact — and as such perfectly suited 
to the place where they are found. When, however, the inevitable 
logic of facts had proved to the Brahmans, after their experience in 
the matter, that interiors could not supply all they wanted for 
architectural effect, they boldly attempted to supplement the defi- 
ciency by adding the external forms they were familiar with to the 
small modicum of accommodation that was required for the purposes 
of their religion. They failed in effecting this at Mahavallipur from 
their ignorance of the nature of the granite material in which they 
were working, and their inexperience of the forms necessary to meet 
the difficulties consequent on the nature of the mass. At Elura, 
from their long experience of the material in which they were 
working, they were perfectly successful, from a mechanical point of 
view, but artistically the Kailasa was a mistake it was hardly pro- 
bable would be repeated. So the Brahmans seem to have thought, 
for though their greatest effort it seems also to have been their last. 
There are no later Brahmanical rock-cut temples in India. What 
few cave temples there are after this date belong to the sect of the 
Jains, and except those excavated within sight of the Kailasa at 
Elura, they are not remarkable either for their beauty or their 
magnificence. 

It is difficult to fix with any certainty the age at which these 
Brahmanical temples were first constructed in the rock. It would 
seem, from a remarkable passage in Porphyry, 1 that there were 

1 StobaeuB I. iv. 56 ; Elephanta, § 38, and note 58. Priaulx'B Apollonhu, p. 15. 
T 138. C C 



402 BBAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Saiva caves in India before the end of the second century ; for, in 
one described, there is a distinct aocount of Arddhanari, the union 
of the male and female forms in one body. 

That Saivism flourished all through the Buddhist period, we have 
ample proof even in the names of the excavators of Buddhist caves ; l 
and in the great cave at Badami we have a Vaishnava temple 
executed in the latter half of the sixth century. Saiva caves are by 
far the most numerous, and some of them may go back as far as the 
second century ; but it is probable that only from the fourth century 
did they become at all common, and nearly all the latest ones belong 
to this sect. It is only at Badami that we have two Vaishnava 
ones, probably both of the sixth century, a single example at Elura, 
another at Undavalli (ante, p. 95) on the lower Krishna, and there 
may be one or two others elsewhere. 

Saivism being the older and popular religion of the masses, was 
also patronised by their rulers : Vaishnavism being of more recent 
origin was only favoured where it had most effectively gained the 
adherence of individual princely families, like the Chalukyas of 
Karnataka and Yengi; hence the relative disproportion in the 
number of the temples of the two Beets. Another cause tending, 
perhaps, also to this result, was the extreme tolerance of the Saivas 
previous to the Lingayata movement. In temples dedicated to Siva 
or his partner, with the lihga or Bhavani in the shrine, it was appa- 
rently usual to find side chapels and sculptures appropriated to 
Vishnu and his Avataras of Varaha, Vaman, Narasinha, &c. ; and 
shrines in which these were prominent, like the caves known as 
Bavana-ki-kai and the DaSa Avatara at Elura, or Mahadeva's cave 
at Karusa, doubtless Berved at once for the worshippers of Siva and 
Vishnu alike. 

The age of cave excavation among the Brahmans probably passed 
away in the eighth century, none of any importance are known to 
have been excavated in the ninth. The absence of all inscriptions 
on their works, with the exception of that of Mangali£a on the great 
cave of Badami, a few names and titles of gods and one or two late 
inscriptions on the Rathas at Mahavallipur, and a quite illegible one 
on the Dasa Avatara at Elura, 2 leaves us entirely dependent on the 

1 For example, in the inscriptions of Kuda and Junnar. 

' Since paritally deciphered and found to contain the names of Karka, Indra, 
Dantidurga, and other kings of the Bashtraktita dynasty, 660 to 850 A.D. 



INTRODUOTOET. 403 

characteristics of their styles for any approximation to their relative 
ages. As already stated, all the more important temples of the 
Brahmans were excavated between 500 and 800 a.d., though some 
comparatively insignificant ones may be traced back to as early a 
date as the fourth century. 

Liable to some transpositions we may arrange the Brahmanical 
caves in the following approximately chronological order : — 

1. Saiva cave at AihoJ6 in the Kaladgi district, south of Bijapur, 

a.d. 500-550. 

2. Badami caves — one Saiva and two Vaishnava caves, in Kaladgi 

district, a.d. 550-579. 

3. Karusa caves, between Ansa and Kalyana in the Haidarabad 

territory, a.d. 500-700. 

4. Jogai Amba Mandap, a Saiva cave near Mominabad in 

the Dekhan, and BhamburdG cave near Poona, a.d. 550- 
600. 

5. Dhokeswara cave, between Junnar and Ahmadnagar, a.d. 

550-600. 

6. Bameswara cave at Elura, a.d. 600-650. 

7. Bavana-ka Khai and Dai Avatara at Elura, a.d. 600-700. 

8. Dumar Lena and Elura caves, north of Rameswara, a.d. 650- 

725. 

9. Mahavallipur Bathas, and caves on the coast thirty miles 

south of Madras, a.d. 650-700. 

10. Undavalli Vaishnava cave on the Krishna at Bejwada, a.d. 

650-700. 

11. Elephanta, Jogeswari, and Mandapeswara caves, near 

Bombay, a.d. 725-775. 

12. Caves at Patur, in Berar, Rudrelwara, not far from Ajanta, 

Patna, in Khandesh, and scattered caves in the neighbour- 
hood of Satara, a.d. 700-S00. 

13. Kailasa monolithic Saiva temple at Elura, with its adjuncts, 

a.d. 725-800. 

14. Dhamnar Brahmanical caves, 750-800. 



404 



CHAPTER n. 

CAVE-TEMPLES AT AIHOLE AND BADAMI IN THE 

DEKHAN. 

A little to the north-west of the village of Aihole, 1 on the Mala- 
prabha river, in the Kaladgi district, in the south of the Bombay , 
Presidency, is a small Brahmanical temple, probably one of the oldest 
yet discovered. It consists of a hall, 18$ feet by 13$ and 8 feet 
9 inches high, with two plain square pillars in front ; on each side the 
hall is a chapel, and behind it the shrine, each raised by five steps 
above the level of the hall floor, and the front of each divided by 
two pillars with square bases and sixteen-sided shafts. 8 In front of 
this shrine has been an antechamber, at one time separated from 
it by a carved doorway built in, but now destroyed. The chapel on 
the right of the hall measures about 12 feet by 14, but is either 
quite unfinished, or, having been originally like the other, it has 
afterwards been enlarged. In the left side chapel is a sculpture, on 
the back wall, of a ten-armed Siva dancing with Parvati, Ganesa, 
Kail, a horse-headed Gana, Bhringi and others of his gana or fol- 
lowers, all with very high headdresses as at Badami. 

In the corners of the hall are larger figures — in one of Arddhanarl, 
the androgynous form of Siva — in another of Siva and Parvatf with 
the skeleton Bhringi ; while out of Siva's headdress rise three female 
heads representing the river goddesses Ganga, Yamuna, and Saras- 
wati, or the female triad of TJma, Lakshmf, and Saraswati. 8 

In a third corner is another form of Siva, with cobra, &c, and in 
the fourth, Siva and Vishnu, or Hara and Hari, standing together. 
In the left end of the antechamber is Varaha, or the boar incarnation 
of Vishnu, and in the right is Mahishasurt, a form of Durga, slaying 
the buffalo-demon. On the roof are other carvings, and in the shrine 
a plain chwvwranga or base for an idol. 

1 It is the ancient Ayy&vole, in Lat 16° 1' N., Long. 76° 67' E. in the Hungund 
t&luka. In the seventh and eighth centuries it was a capital of the Western Chalukya 
dynasty. — Ind. Ant., vol. viiL pp. 237, 287. 

* See Firat Arch. Report, Plate XLVIII. and p. 88. 

3 See my Elephanta, § 44 and notes. 



BADAMI OAVES. 405 

The sculptures in this cave being bo simple, and the arrangement 
bo little developed, we may perhaps be justified in placing this cave 
even before those at Badami. 

Cave-Temples at Badami. 

Badami is a moderate-sized town in the Kaladgi Collectorate, 
about 23 miles south-east from the district town of Kaladgi and 
nearly three from the Malaprabha river. It is the chief town of a 
taluka of the same name. A little to the south of it is Banasamkarl ; 
among the hills to the east is Mahakuta ; eight miles to the east and 
on the river is Pattadkal ; and another eight miles down the river is 
Aihole — all noted for their ancient temples and inscriptions. 1 
As pointed out by Mr. Fleet, there seems little doubt but that 
Badami was the ancient Vatapipuri, or Vatapinagari, of the Cha- 
lukya kings of the Kanarese country, and made the capital by 
Pulik6si I. early in the sixth century of the Christian era. In the 
seventh century it is mentioned by the name also of Badavi ; Pattad- 
kal is the old Pattadakisuvojal, the capital of the Sindavamia chiefs 
about 1162 a.d. ; and Aihole, another early capital, is the Ayyavole 
mentioned in a grant of the reign of the Chalukyaking Vikramaditya 
the Great, 1093 a.d. 

Badami is situated at the outlet between two rocky hills on its 
north and south-east Bides, a dam to the east of the town between the 
bases of the hills forming a large tank for the supply of water to 
the town. All along the north side of this small lake are old 
temples, most of them built of very large blocks of hard stone, while 
on the hill behind them is a ruined fort that must have been a place 
of great strength in early times. The passages through it are cut 
to great depths in the rock, and are narrow, long, and winding, so 
that, if the gate were stormed, the besieged had their enemies far 
below them, and from above they could easily hurl destruction on 
the heads of all that could enter the pathways before any of them 
could reach a place of vantage. In and about this rock-fort are 
some temples sIbo. But it is in the scarp of the hill to the south- 
east that the cave-temples are excavated. They are four in number : 
tile lowest, on the west end of the hill, is a Sivalaya or Saiva cave ; 

1 Ind. Ant,, vol. iii. p. 805 ; vol. v. pp. 19, 51, 67, 68, 71. 174, 844 ; toI. vi. pp. 72, 
74, 86, 187, 139. 142. 



406 BRAHMANICAL OAVB-TBMPLES. 

the next is a Vaishnava temple considerably higher up in the rook, 
and to the north-east of the Sivalaya ; the largest, also Vaishnava, 
is still further to the east on the north face of the hill ; and the last 
is a little beyond it, but is a Jaina cave, and of much smaller dimen- 
sions than the preceding three Brahmanical ones. All four are still 
in unusually excellent preservation, and are very rich in mythological 
sculpture. 

Cave No. IE. or Great Cave is by far the finest of the series* and 
one of the most interesting Brahmanical temples in India ; it is also 
the only cave-temple the age of which is known with certainty, for it 
is in it that the inscription of Mahgaltsa, the son of Pulik6st I., the 
Chalukya king, who made Badami his capital, is found. Though it 
cannot compare with Elephanta or some of the larger caves at Elura 
in dimensions, it is still a temple of considerable size, the verandah 
measuring nearly 70 feet in length, and the cave inside 65 feet, 
with a total depth from the front of the verandah pillars to the 
back wall of 48 feet, — the shrine going into the rock about 12 feet 
further, while the general height throughout verandah and hall is 
15 feet. 1 (Plate LXYIL, fig. 2.) It is higher up in the rock than the 
other Vishnava cave, and is entered by an ascending stair through a 
door in the west end of a square court in front of it, the north Bide 
of this court being formed by a large mass of rock left unexcavated 
there. The east and west ends are formed by old walls of masonry, 
that on the east entirely precluding all access from this side to the 
Jaina cave just beyond it, so that the Jainas must have formed a 
path for themselves from the shore of the lake or taldo below up 
to their rock-cut shrine. 

The cave faces the north, and the level of the floor is eight or 
nine feet above that of the court outside. A narrow platform is 
built up outside the whole length of the front, the cave being 
entered by a flight of steps in the centre of it, but which have now 
been torn down, — probably because the long treads of the steps 
were found useful for some purpose or other in the village. The 
front of the platform has a moulded cornice, and under it a dado 
of blocks, many of them seven feet long, divided into more than 
thirty compartments throughout the length of it, and in each com- 
partment two of those little fat dwarfs or garta* that are such 



i For plan and details eee Arehml. Sur. W. Ind., vol. i. 



BADAMI CAVES. 407 

favourites with the early Hindu sculptors for the decoration of 
basements, and which they were fond of representing in every 
possible attitude and in every form of grimace, or even with the 
heads of animals. All sects — Buddhists, Brahmans, and Jains — 
seem to have employed such figures in similar positions : in fact, 
they appear to have been conventionalities dependent more upon 
the taste and imagination of the craftsmen than upon the mytho- 
logy of the sect for which any particular temple was constructed. 

The verandah is supported in front by six pillars, each two and a 
half feet square, and two pilasters, with pretty deep bases and capi- 
tals, — the latter almost hid by the three brackets attached to the 
lower part of the capitals on the backs and sides of each, and by the 
eave or drip which comes down in front. The brackets on each 
side the pillars, in every case but one, represent a pair of human or 
mythological figures — a male and female standing in various attitudes 
under foliage, in most cases attended by a small dwarf figure ; the 
only exception to the pair of figures is one in which Arddhanari is 
represented, four armed and with two dwarf attendants. The 
brackets on the backs or inner sides of the pillars are all single 
tall female figures, each with one or two small attendants. These 
brackets extend from near the bottom of the capitals to the roof. 
The necks of the pillars below the capitals are carved with broad 
bands of elaborate beaded festoon work, and on each of the four 
sides of the lower portions of the shafts are medallions carved with 
groups of figures within a border. 

The verandah is 9 feet wide, and is separated from the hall by 
four free-standing columns and two demi-columns in antis, all with 
high bases, the two central pillars being of that purely Hindu type, 
consisting of a square shaft with thin and slightly narrower slabs 
applied to eaoh face : in this case two of these slabs are superimposed 
on each side, forming five exterior angles at each of the four 
corners. The two pillars outside these are octagons with capitals of 
the Elephanta type. There are thus left for sculptures the two ends 
of the verandah, and the spaces on the back between the attached 
pillars and the ends. 

In the east end of the verandah is a large figure of Vishnu seated 
on the body of the great snake Sesha or Ananta, which is thrice 
coiled round below him, while its hoods — five in this instance — are 
spread out over and round his big mukuta or crown, as if to protect 



408 BBAHMANICAL OAVE-TBMPLBB. 

it. He is represented as four-armed (Chatfcurbhuj) — the front left 
hand resting on the calf of his leg, and the other holding up the 
ianJcha or conch-shell, one of his characteristic emblems. 1 In the 
front right hand he holds some object perhaps representing wealth 
or fruit, and in the other his cholera or discus, — a sharp-edged 
heavy quoit, which seems to have been used as a missile instrument 
in early warfare by the Hindus, being thrown with force against 
the enemy, and recovered by a string attached to it. 8 He has 
three necklaces, each formed with a mass of gems in front. Bound 
his waist is another belt of gems, while over his left shoulder and 
under his right arm hangs a thick cord apparently formed of 
twisted strands or strings of beads ; and again round his loins are 
other richly embroidered belts ; on his arms and wrists also he wears 
rich armlets and bracelets. At his right, below, sits Gforuda, his 
vdhana or vehicle who carries him, and attends him also as a page. 
Opposite to him is a little female figure with high muhda, which 
may possibly represent Lakshmi, the wife of Vishnu. Above these 
Stand two taller female figures, each holding a chmuri or fly-flap : 
they have jewelled headdresses and large chignons, out of which 
rises a single cobra-hood overshadowing the head. These attendants 
remind us of the supporters we so often find under the padmdsanas 
or lotus-thrones of figures of Buddha. 

This large sculpture fills the end compartment of the verandah. 
Under it is a plinth, the front of which is carved with little fat 
gambolling figures or ganas. 

Turning to the right, we find on the back wall of the verandah 
another large sculpture, and one which in the early ages seems to have 
been a great favourite, for we seldom miss it in a Vaishnava shrine. 
It is also repeated in several of the Saiva rock-temples of Elura, 
and always in nearly the same form as here. It is the Varaha 
or boar avatdra which Vishnu assumed to rescue the Earth from the 
Asura Hiranyaksha, the chief of the Danavas, who had carried it off 
to the bottom of the ocean, when Vishnu, taking the form of a boar, 
dived down and rescued it, after a contest of a thousand years. 3 
Here he is represented again as four-armed, similarly dressed as in 

1 Wilson, Vishnu Purina, 1st ed., p. £62 ; Harivamda, cap. 89 ; Wilford in Am, 
Res., vol. viii. ; Moor's Hindu Pantheon, p. 218. 
* Harivamda, cc. 9 and 215. 
< Conf. Harivaikso, cc. 41, 223, 224. 



BADAHI CAVES. 409 

the other figure, and with the chakra and Smkha in his up-lifted 
hands, but with a boar's head, standing with his left foot on the coil 
of a snake, the head of which is human, with five hoods behind it. 
In one of his left hands he holds a lotus flower, on which stands 
Prithivl, also called Bhumide'vi or Bhud^vi— the Earth personified 
— steadying herself against his shoulders. 1 

In front of Varaha's knee kneels a human figure with the 
five Naga-hoods over his jewelled nmkuta, and behind stands a 
female c7ww*n-bearer with the single hood ; another figure lies 
between Varaha's feet, holding by the long cord or yajnopcvdta that 
hangs down from his shoulder. Over Varaha's shoulders are two 
pairs of vidyddharas, each apparently with offerings. 

On the pilaster by the side of this sculpture is the inscription of 
Mangalisa, dated in Saka 500 a (a.d. 579). 

At the west end of the verandah is another of the avatdras, namely, 
the Narasinha or man-lion. The demon Hiranyakas'ipu, the son of 
Kasyapa and Diti, and brother of Hiranyaksha, having, in conse- 
quence of severe penance, obtained from Brahma the boon that he 
should be invulnerable to gods, men, snakes, &c, became imperious, 
and troubled earth and heaven, when, at the desire of Prahlada, the 
son of Hiranyaka&pu, Narasinha bursting out of a column destroyed 
him, to the great joy of the deoatas. He is here represented four- 
armed, one of the left arms resting on his huge club or gadha, 
besides which stands Garuda in human form. On the other side is a 
dwarf attendant, and above Narsinha's shoulders are figures floating 
with garlands and gifts. Over the lion-head is a lotus, and his 
jewelled necklaces are elaborately carved. 

On the other side of the front pilaster of the verandah from thig 
last is a large and very striking sculpture, repeated also on a smaller 
scale in the other Vaishnava cave here, in the Dasa Avatara cave 
and in other places at Elura, Mahavallipur, &c. Locally it is called 



1 Prithivi is the wife of Yishnu in his Yaraha avdtara. She is represented in my- 
thology as a woman with two arms, standing on a lotas-flower, and holding in one hand 
another lotus-blossom, with a crown on her head, her long black locks reaching to her 
feet, of yellow complexion, and with a tUaka of red paste on her forehead. Bhumid£vi 
is the goddess of patience and endurance, but receives no special worship. See, how- 
ever, Manu. iii. 85, 86 ; ix. 311 ; Colebrooke's JEuays, vol. L p. 137. 

* For a full translation of this tee Lid. Ant., voL iii. p. 805 ff. j or vol. vL pp. 863 S. • 
and see Archaol. Rep., vol. iii. p. 120. 



410 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Viratrupa, but there oan be no doubt that it relates to Vishnu in the 
fifth or Vamana avatdra. He is represented in this ease as eight- 
armed (Ashtabhuja), with chakm, sword, gadha or club, and arrow 
in his right hands, and Sankha, bow, and shield in the left, while 
with the fourth on that side he points to a round grinning face, 
perhaps Rahu, to which he lifts also his left foot. Over this face is 
the crescent moon ; beside Vishnu's jewelled nmhwta is a Varaha 
and two other figures, and below on his right is his attendant 
(Jaruda. 1 In front stand three figures, probably representing Bali 
and his wife, with Sukra his councillor, the first holding the pot 
out of which he had, against Sutra's advice, poured the water on 
the hands of the dwarf in confirmation of his promise to grant 
Vamana's request for as much as he could compass at three strides. 
But scarcely was the water poured on his hands when, say the 
legends, " he developed all his divine form. The earth became his 
feet, the heaven his head, the sun and moon his eyes, the PiSachas 
his toeB, &c, &c. At the sight of this divine form, the Asuras, 
Bali's subjects, enraged dashed at him." They were of all animal 
and monstrous shapes, and armed with all sorts of instruments, 
their heads decked with diadems, earrings, &c. Vishnu's form, 
however, grew as he dispersed them, until the sun and moon were 
no higher than bis breast, and still he grew.' 

Holding by his thigh is Garuda, and above the heads of the three 
figures before him is one with sword and shield falling down, and a 
half-figure behind. 

Facing tl» B at the other end of the verandah, just outside the 
pilaster that separates it from the first described of the sculptures, 
is another large one representing Vishnu eight-armed, with chahra, 
arrow, gadha, and sword in his right hands, and in the left the 
iahkha, shield, and bow (sa/rnga), the fourth hand placed against his 
loin. Behind the head a portion of the headdress is formed into a 
circular frill, Bomewhat resembling an aureole : this may be observed 
also both in the last described figure and in the next. He wears 

1 Garuda corresponds to the eagle of Jove; he is the v&hana or conveyance of 
Vishnu, and is usually placed before Vaishnava temples, as Nandi is in front of Saiva 
ones. 

> See HarivaHua, ec. 254-257. The account of the contest bears a strong likeness 
to that of the onset of Mora's emissaries upon Buddha, as given in Spence Hardy's 
Manual of Budhitm. 



BADAMI GATES. 411 

long pendant links hanging down from the ears, similar to what is 
found in many Buddhist images, and in the lower portion of the 
link is hung a heavy ear-drop that rests against the collar. Prom 
the top of his high wrwkuta or cap springs a figure of Narasinha* 
four-armed and with chahra and icmkha. 'Whom this is intended 
to represent is somewhat difficult to say ; as it occupies a position 
beside the entrance, it may be intended merely as a figure of 
Vishnu in his more active and terrible form, while the next, inside, 
represents him in repose seated on Sesha, or it may be for Balarama, 
the seventh avatdra. It is, like the others, well cut in a close- 
grained rock, and the only damage it has suffered is a piece out of 
the long sword, and some slight injury near the ankle. The dress 
is knotted behind the thighs, and round his body and thighs he 
wears a belt. 1 

The last large sculpture to be noticed in this cave is a figure on 
the back wall of the verandah, adjoining that of Narasinha, and 
locally known as Harihara. This name is applied to the Ayinar 
of Southern India, the alleged son of Siva by M6hint, and who is 
the only male Gramaderata worshipped by the Tamils. There 
is, however, another legend of Harihara as a form of Siva assumed 
to contend with the Asura, called Gruha. 2 Here the left side of the 
figure represents Hari or Vishnu with the Sanhha in his uplifted 
hand, the other resting against his haunch, while the earring and 
cap are of a different pattern from that of Hara or Siva, on which 
is the crescent and a withering skull, while a cobra hangs from 
his ear, another from his belt, a third is on the front of his mukuta, 
and a fourth twines round the parasu or axe he holds in one hand. 
In the other hand he has some oval object. 

The roof of the verandah is divided by cross beams into seven 
receBsed panels, each filled with sculptures. In the central circular 
compartment in each of these panels is one of the favourite gods, 
Siva, Vishnu, Indra, Brahma, Kama, &c, surrounded in most cases 
by smaller sculptures of the eight Dikpalas, or regents of the points 
of the compass, the corners being filled up with arabesques. 8 

1 Perhaps fbe same as the Bdhupaddai of Southern India, represented as worn by 
pages and other holy beings when they sit. 

* See Foulkes's Legends of the Shrine of Harihara, pp. 37-41 ; Harivamia, cc. 
180, 181 ; Ward's Hindus (ed. 1817), vol i. p. 242. 

* For a full description of these, see Jnd. Ant., vol. vi p. 861. 



412 BRAHMANICAl CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The roof of the front aisle of the hall is likewise divided into com- 
partments, in the central one of whioh are a male and female figure 
floating on clouds — the male (Yaksha) carrying sword and shield. 
The panels right and left of this are occupied by expanded lotus 
flowers. The hall roof is divided into nine panels by divisions very 
Blightly raised from the level of the ceiling. In the central one, in 
front, is a Deva riding on a ram — perhaps Agni — with a figure before 
him and another behind. In the other central panels are Brahma 
and Varuna ; in other compartments are flying figures, &c. 

Cave II. is considerably to the west of the large cave, and like it 
faces north. The front of it is raised a little above the level of the 
area before it, and the face of the basement is sculptured with 
gana. 1 Three steps have been built against the middle of the front 
by which to ascend to the narrow platform outside the verandah. 
At the ends of this platform are dtodrpdlas, each 5 feet 10 inches 
high. The verandah has four square pillars in front minutely carved 
from the middle upwards. Above them, slender makara or yaM 
brackets project to support the drip, which is ribbed on the under 
side. The central areas of the bracket capitals of the pillars are 
filled with sculpture. 

At the left end of the verandah iB Varaha, the boar avatara, and 
at the right or west end the Vamana amtwra, neither of them so 
large as in the great cave. The roof is divided into compartments 
and sculptured, and the frieze that runs all round the wall head 
is carved with numerous scenes from the legends of Krishna or 
Vishnu.* 

The entrance from the verandah to the cave is by three openings 
divided by two pillars, each 8 feet &\ inches high, neatly carved 
with arabesques or figures in festoons, &c, standing on a step 
7 inches above the level of the floor. 

Inside, the roof is supported by eight square pillars, arranged in 
two rows across the hall, which is 33 feet 4 inches wide by 23 feet 
7 inches deep and 11 feet 4 inches high. 8 The brackets to the 

i See First Arch. Report, Plate XXI. 

1 See Ind. Ant., vol. vi. pp. 864, 865. It is a remarkable proof of the late develop* 
ment of the Krishna cult, that eo few sculptures referable to it are to be found. The 
series of small ones on this frieze are almost the only examples to bo found in a rock- 
temple. 

> See plan in Second Arch. Report, Plate XXII. 



BADAMr CAVES. 413 

rafterd are lions, human figures, vampires, elephants, &c. The 
shrine is approached by five steps, which raise the floor of it 3 feet 
above that of the hall ; it measures 8 feet 9 inches by 7 feet 5^ 
inches, and contains a ckavaranga or square altar, but the idol that 
stood in it is gone. 

Cave No. I. (Plate LXVTL, fig. 3) is on the north-west side of the 
hill, and only about 50 feet above the level of the town streets. It is 
entered by a few steps rising from what may have been a small court, 
but which the decay of the rock has carried away. Along the front 
on each side of the steps are the gana of Siva — dwarfs, with human, 
bovine, and equine heads, capering and posing in all sorts of attitudes. 
On the right or west side, above the return of this base, is a figure of 
Siva, 5 feet high, with eighteen arms, dancing the tandava 1 or wild 
dance of demoniac rage which he is fabled to perform when he 
destroys the world — Nandi, G-anapati, and the drummer Narada 
being the only audience. Between this figure and the cave is a 
small chapel * with two pillars in front, standing on a base or raised 
step, the face of which is also sculptured with rollicking gana, — and, 
as at Elephanta, and on the four-armed figures that support the 
brackets in some of the Ajanta caves, one of these gana has a tor- 
toise as a pendant to his necklace. Inside this chapel, round the 
ends and back, are more of these gana. Above them, on the back 
wall, is a pretty perfect figure of Mahishasuri or Durga as the 
destroyer of the buffalo-demon. On the right wall is (xanapati, and 
on the left Skanda or Mahasena, the god of war, and the ifcufo-deva 
of the Chalukya royal family. 

At the other end of the front of the cave is a dwdVpdla, 3 6 feet 
2 inches high, with the trifula of Siva in his hand ; and below is a 
figure composed of a bull and elephant in such a way, that when the 
body of the bull is hid the elephant is distinctly seen, and when 
the body of the elephant is covered the remainder is a bull. The 
front of the verandah is supported by four square pillars and two 
pilasters, their upper halves and brackets carefully carved with 
festoons of beaded work. Over the brackets against the archi- 
trave, and hidden from outside by the drip in front, are a series of 

1 See my Elephanta, § 69, and notes. 

2 First Arch. Report, Plates XVIL, XVIII. 

3 lint Arch. Report, Plate XX, Fig. 2. 



414 BEAHMANICAL OATB-TEMPIJBB. 

squat male figures, eaoh different, and acting as braokets to the 
roof above. 

Inside the verandah, at the left end, is a figure of Harihara, the 
joint form of Siva and Vishnu, 7 feet 9 inches high, 1 attended by 
two females, perhaps Lakshmt and Uma, with elaborate girdles, 
head-gear, and bracelets. At the right end is another large Boulpture 
—that of Arddhanariswara.* 

As is usually the case at Elephanta and elsewhere, the god is 
attended by his favourite white bull Nandi, — a form of Dharmadfiva, 
the god of justice, who offered himself to Siva in this form as a 
vehicle. Behind Nandi, with clasped hands, stands Bhringi — a 
favourite devotee, or perhaps KA1, a form of Eudra or Siva himself 
as the author of destruction, — a gaunt and hideous skeleton. At 
the left or female side stands a female richly decked, and bearing 
some flat object in her left hand. 

The right side, which is always the male, half, represents Siva,— 
the crescent moon and skull on his headdress, a snake in his ear, 
another coiled round his arm, a third hanging from his belt — (the 
heads of them broken off), — and a fourth twisting round the battle* 
axe he holds in his uplifted hand ; a portion of the tiger-skin, in 
which he wraps his person, hanging down on his thigh ; with richly 
jewelled necklaces, bracelets, &c. 

The left half, representing Umas'aktf, has a large flat earring, 
necklaces, belt, armlets, and bracelets of different patterns from thoBe 
on the male half. The hair is made up in a sort of chignon over the 
shoulder, much as it is still worn by the lower classes in the Madras 
Presidency, and is covered with a network of pearls or gems. A 
cord hangs down in front of the thigh, terminating in a small flat 
heart-Bhaped end — an ornament specially noticeable on many of the 
figures in the Kailasa temple at Elura. On the foot are two heavy 
anklets, and these and the very long bracelets on the wrists, and 
also on the female companion, cannot fail to remind the observer of 
the similar abundance of bone and brass rings worn by the Banjarls 
and other aboriginal tribes to the present day. She holds up a 
flower, and with the other hand grasps one end of a stick or lute, 
the other «nd of which is held by the front hand of the male half. 

* First Arch. Report, Plate XIX. Fig. 4. 

* " Arddhaniriivari, Arddhanefoari, or Arddhanarraateiwara," it the union of 
&v» and Pinrati, in a half male half female form. 



BADAMI CAVE8. 415 

The attendant female wears a loose kirtle held up by a richly 
jewelled belt. Her earrings are different — that in the right ear 
consisting of a long link hanging down to the shoulder, and in the end 
of it a thick jewelled ring and short pendant ; the other is a broad 
thick disc like that known in Bengal by the name of dhenri. 1 
Floating overhoad on each side are two figures, male and female, 
with offerings, and having elaborate headdresses. Her hair is done 
up in a very elaborate style, with a profusion of pearls over the 
forehead. This union of Siva and Parvati in a single body per- 
sonifies the principle of life and production in its double aspect — the 
active principle under the name of Purusha, and the female or 
passive under that of Prakriti. 2 On the male side the figure of 
Arddhanarinateswara is usually painted dark blue or black, and 
vermilion or orange on the left or female side, but sometimes the 
colours are white (Siva's proper colour) and yellow. 

The roof is divided by imitation beams into five compartments. In 
the central one is a figure of the serpent Sesha very similar to that 
over the antechamber in the great temple at Pattadkal. 3 The head 
and bust are well formed, and project boldly from the centre of the 
coil. In a compartment to the right, on a cloud or boss 2 feet 6 
inches in diameter, are a male and female well cut, the male (Yafaha) 
with a sword, and the female (Ajxaras) drawing forward a veil that 
floats behind her head. In the corresponding compartment on tie 
other side are two rather smaller figures ; and in the end panels are 
lotuses. 

The entrance to the hall itself, as in the two already described, 
differs from what we found in the Buddhist cave-temples. The 
front wall of the Vihara with its small windows and doors admitted 
too little light ; and so here, while retaining the verandah in front 

1 Bajendrala Mitra's Antiquities of Orissa, vol. i. p. 98, and Plate XXVII, Fig. 
118. It is to be regretted that we have no descriptive catalogue of female ornaments 
used in India. 

» It embodies the central idea of nature-worship, and occurred to the early Greeks, 
as we see from the old Orphic hymn preserved by Stobseus, beginning 
Z«v'< apm)» ylrtn, Zvl; aufipm< erUrt riufa. 

" Zeus was a male, Zeus became a deathless damsel." 
Stobsus, Eclog. Phys., ed. Heeren, vol. i. p. 42 ; conf. Muir, Grig. Sansk. Text*, 

vol. i pp. 9, 36 j vol. iv. p. 331 -, and voL v. p. 369. 

» Sec first Arch. Report^ Plate XX., Fig. 4, and Plate XL., Fig. 5. This one is 

also represented on the cover of Mr. FerguBSon's Tree and Serpent Worship. 



416 BRAHMANICAL CAVB-TEMPLE8. 

and further protecting the hall from rain and sun by projecting 
eaves, a large portion of the front was left open, the whole, indeed, 
except in front of the side aisles. In this case the entrance is 
21 feet wide, divided into three by two pillars. These pillars have 
simple bases, square shafts, the upper part of each ornamented 
with arabesques, birds, &c. The capitals are circular, and so much 
in the style of those at Elephanta as to suggest no great difference 
of age, 1 and the brackets are similar to those over the back columns 
in Cave XVL at Ajanfa. 

The hall measures 42 feet 1 inch wide by about 24$ feet deep, the 
roof being supported, as in Cave II., by two rows of four columns, 
each parallel to the front and similar to those in the verandah. 
It iB divided into compartments by imitation joists and rafters. In 
the first, immediately within the middle entrance, are a pair of 
figures (a Yaksha and Apsarasa), the male having sword and shield ; 
in the next or central compartment is a lotos ; and the rest are plain. 

The shrine is irregular in shape, varying from .6 feet 11 inches 
to 8 feet 3 inches deep, by 9 feet 6 inches wide, and contains a 
square altar or chavarahga, with a small linga or phallic emblem of 
Siva in it. 

The fourth cave at B&dami ib the Jaina one, and will be noticed 
in its proper place. 

1 See First Arch. Report, Plate XX., Fig. 1. 



417 



CHAPTER III. 

KARUSA CAVES. 

About a quarter of a mile to the east of the village of Karusa 
and about 43 miles east of Dharasinwa, in the south-west of the 
Nizam's territory, is a low but steep hill of laterite, in which soft 
rock a range of caves are excavated ; but, as may easily be supposed, 
the coarse conglomerate character of the rock not being favourable 
for the execution of fine sculptures, these have been originally but 
clumsily cut, and subsequent decay has in many places rendered 
them still worse. Owing to the circumstance, and perhaps also to 
their remote situation, none of this group of caves — except perhaps 
that known as the Mahadeva Cave — are of much beauty or interest. 
That one, however, would be a really fine cave anywhere if the 
material out of which it is excavated had been such as to admit of 
its design being adequately elaborated. Another cave, the Lakola, 
is also of some merit, but very inferior to the other. All the others 
are extremely rude, but not without some interest from their pecu- 
liarities of design. 

At the south end of the hill is a cave quite ruined by the fall of 
nearly the whole roof and front. It has been about 45 feet wide, 
and probably of considerable height. A little to the north, along 
the west face of the hill, is a small shrine with a rude imitation of a 
hkliar or low spire, — or rather pyramidal roof, — carved on the rock 
above it. Next is a rude cell, 12 feet by 6, with an inner one of 
smaller dimensions. In front is a recess in the rock about 15 feet 
wide, which can hardly ever have been covered ; and at the north 
side of this, again, is a small monolithic temple measuring only 3£ 
feet by 3 inside, with a small door, the outside of the roof being 
carved into a sikhar, as in the previous instance. 

For some distance from this, along the face of the scarp, there are 
no more caveB ; then we come to the principal group consisting of 
larger ones. The first of these is of irregular shape, 11 to 15 feet 

Y 13*. D D 



418 BKAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

wide by 13 feet 2 inches to 14 feet 8 inches deep, much filled up, 
and with a cell or plain shrine at the back, but nothing to indicate 
to what sect it belonged. Above it is another small monolithic 
temple. 

About six yards to the north of this is a second, 23 to 25£ feet 
wide by 16-J feet deep, with a cell in the north wall, of very irregular 
shape. In the south wall is also the commencement of a cell. 
None of the walls are straight or perpendicular. It contains a very 
rude image of a Jina or Tvrthahhara, perfectly featureless, seated 
with his legs crossed under him as usual. 

Beyond this are remains of cuttings in the rocka, as if for open 
courts, and perhaps a well, and a stair leading to the top of the hill ; 
theD, thirty yards from the last, we reach one of the largest of the 
series ; — a double cave of two storeys, very irregular in plan, and 
roughly about 50 feet deep by 70 feet wide, divided into two halls 
above and below. Close to the front of the north half of the cave 
stands an octagonal pillar, the mouldings about the top of which, 
however, are almost effaced. In the top iB a hole about a foot 
square and the same in depth, but whether it held the trtiula of Siva 
or a cresset for fire, is left to conjecture. In the floor of the north 
side of the excavation there have been sixteen square pillars of rough 
form, with rudely blocked out bracket capitals ; but, except seven, 
all are rotted away. At the back is the shrine standing forward 
into the cave, and from the way the excavations terminate on each 
side of it, it would seem that it was intended to carry the 
pradakskina quite round it. The shrine is an oblong cell with 
sculptures on the back wall, which are much obliterated. The 
central figure has lost his head, but he had a battle-axe or pardm in 
the upper right hand, a small trtiula or trident in the upper left, 
while the lower hands seemingly rested against the thighs. All 
this is distinctly enough applicable to Siva. The right side figure 
appears to have been Vishnu : while the left-hand one had the throe 
faces usually assigned to Brahma. 

The floor of the south half of this cave is about 6 feet 5 inches 
below that of the other hall. In front it has a screen with two 
pillars supporting a massive lintel ; but, inside this, what may be 
termed the verandah, it is open above, and has a roughly fashioned 
dwdrpcUa or door-keeper on the south end and an unfinished one on 
the other. A descent of seven steps leads down to the floor of the 



KABDBA CAVES. 419 

hall, which seems to have been a very rude imitation of a Buddhist 
Chaitya-cave. It was evidently intended to have four square pil- 
lars on each side with aisles behind, but the left aisle ran into the 
other half of the cave, and spoilt the plan. The nave has a low 
arch with ribs across it, and the aisles are much lower. The shrino 
is in the back wall, but the figures are so decayed as to be nearly 
undistinguishable ; they were probably Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva — 
the Hindu Triad, as in the other shrine. 

At each end of the front, and in the block of rock left between 
these halls, is a small linga shrine. 

A stair in the left wall of the north hall leads up to the apart- 
ments above. The north one, in which it lands, is somewhat in the 
style of the hall just described. It has three pillars on each side, 
with a low arched roof having a ridge pole along the centre, and 
rough ribs running up to it. The side aisles are narrow and low. 
At the back is a shrine with a larger square pillar left in front on 
each side and carved each with a dwarpala. Behind this are two 
other similar blocks or pillars, each with diodrpdlas on the front and 
back. Between these last stands a large lihga nearly 4 feet in 
diameter at the base and 3 feet 2 inches at the top. In front of it is 
a sort of trough in the floor. 

A door in the wall leads into the south hall, about 30 feet wide 
by 54 feet from the front to the back wall. It has four pillars 
along each wall, but the roof is flat, and slopes upwards towards 
the back. There is a pradakshina round the shrine, the rock in the 
south-east corner of which has been broken through from above, 
and this corner is now filled with debris. Three figures in the 
shrine are about 5$ feet high, were probably Vishnu, Siva, and 
Brahma, — but all are much defaced. 

Above the north end of the facade of this cave are some sculp- 
tures, but bo worn that little can be made of them. 

Adjoining the upper floor on its north side are a number of 
irregular apartments with a good deal of rude Saiva sculpture. 

Mahadeva's Cave. 

Fifty feet north of the large cave is another, known as Mahadeva's, 
having an extreme width of 60 feet by 64 feet in depth, with a 
fragment of a small square maptfapa in front for the Nandi or bull 

nn 2 



420 BRAHMANICAL OAVB-TEMPLBS. 

of Siva. The facade is 4&J feet long, "with, a low parapet wall in 
front, from behind which rise four square pillars with thin bracket 
capitals. The roof is supported by six lines of three pillare, each 
running from front to back, — one row on each Bide having five 
pillars, and running up the yradakshina. There are thus twenty-six 
pillars in all, including the four in front, all approximately square 
except four immediately in front of the shrine, which stand on low 
octagonal plinths, and have shafts with sixteen shallow flutes, then 
a thick square member, and above it the capital, the lower portion 
of it being a conoidal frustrum fluted to the neck, and the upper part 
octagonal with a few Bimple members. 1 

The shrine is about 16 feet by 11 and 8 high, has four doors, 
and contains a large lihga in a ialunlehd or altar, not 2 feet above 
the level of the floor. The front of the shrine is carved with two 
rude dw&rapdlas, each leaning on his club. The door has a narrow 
architrave and slender pilaster on each side, outside which are two 
huge snakes,— their tails are grasped by a human figure over the 
door, and their human heads turned up below. On the basement, 
on each side the steps, and below the dwdrapdla, is an elephant in 
bas-relief. 

At the sides of the south door of the shrine are a pair of tall male 
and female figures, the male in each case next to the door, and 
leaning on a heavy club, — the female attended by a small dwarf. 
At the north door are similar pairs of guardians, but without the 
dwarfs. 

The sides of the cave are covered with large sculptures, but in 
many places bo damaged as to be almost unintelligible. Along the 
south or right wall they are generally Vaishnava, while those on the 
north side are Saiva. All have been at one time covered with 
plaster, and the appearance of the whole must have depended 
greatly on the manner in which this was done. Beginning on the 
south side, — just behind the pilaster, on the back of the front wall, 
— are represented a number of men with clubs or swords, as if 
engaged in an action, below are two elephants and several human 
figures Bome of them greatly defaced. 

Beyond these and on the return of the wall are two figures wrest- 
ling, and above them other two apparently similarly engaged. The 



See Third Arch. Report, PUte XIV. 



KABUSA CAVES. 421 

next figure below appears to be escaping from the next group, of 
which the principal figures are a tall male standing on the low nar- 
row bench or base that runs along under all the sculptures, holding 
up a sort of whip in his right hand, as if about to strike with it a 
Ndga whose long tongue he holds with his left hand. The Naga, has a 
human head and bust, with his hands joined in the attitude of sup- 
plication ; over hie head is the five-fold snake-hood, whilst his tail 
is coiled up below. To his left is a smaller female Ndgaru in a 
similar attitude. Some small figures below are obliterated. Above 
are several others : one man is seizing an animal like a horse by 
the mouth ; another twists the head of a bull right round by the 
muzzle and one horn ; and others are not so distinct. 

The next group is the common one of Varaha or ViBhnu of the 
boar'B head avatara. To the left of this is a still larger group, 
intended to represent the contest between Vishnu and the Asuras, 
the concluding scene in the Vamana or Dwarf Avatara, and somewhat 
similar to those at Badaini. 

Near the east end of this wall is the Narasifiha avatara, or Vishnu 
of the Lion-head, four-armed, holding the chakra and iahleha in two 
hands, and with the others tearing out the bowels of the impious 
Hiranyaka&pa, the brother of Hiranyaksha, who still grasps his 
sword and shield. Beside this is Vishnu represented as a two- 
armed man holding up the hill of Govardhana over the herds of 
Vraj which are represented by some badly-formed cattle between 
him and Naraiuftha, 

In the return of the wall, to the left of this, is the door of a small 
cell with a carving on the back apparently intended for Karttikeya, 
or Mahasena, the god of war. 

Entering the pradakshina or circumambulatory passage, on the 
south side, the wall up to the door of another cell is occupied by a 
scene 13 feet in length. On the right, in a very rude chariot drawn 
by two small horses, is a figure shooting from a bow against two 
tall bowmen close in front. Behind them is a male with high cap, 
holding a female by the arm. In the chariot is a very diminutive 
driver, and beyond or above it are seen about seven warriors with 
bows and clubs, while high up on the left are two pairs, apparently 
interested spectators. Whether this represents a scene in the war 
of the P&ndavas or in the story of Rama is not very clear. 

On the back wall is another large tableau ; below, seven figures are 



422 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

represented, four of whom appear to be carrying weighty objects* 
one is either building a pillar or sacrificing, and another is crouching 
below at the foot of it. Above the pillar two figures are stretched 
at ease looking on, and behind are two men, and a female between 
them. To the left, and over the first mentioned figures, are four 
men and a woman, apparently dancing. Above them lies a man 
with three women attending on him, and at his feet three men in 
attitudes as if hopping. To the right of these, again, is a man 
standing with a long bow, and a female seated with uplifted hand. 

On the north of the shrine, and on the back wall, is a figure with 
a bow drawn against two figures struggling together. Above are 
five or six people, worshipping or supplicating. 

On the north wall of the praduksldna is a much-defaced group 
consisting, apparently, of one tall male figure and four females. On 
the west of this is the door of a small irregular cell, and to the left 
of it, again, is a large sculpture of the churning of the sea of 
milk, — a story frequently alluded to in sculptures. 1 In the 
sculpture here a solitary Daitya has got hold of the head of Vasuki, 
and three others appear behind him, while at least three of the 
Suras have a hold of the tail, and other three stand close by. Brahma 
and another god, four-handed, are above, and on the top of Mount 
Mandara, used as a churning staff, Vishnu appears helping to twirl 
it round. 

In the cell which opens from the aisle of the cave is a figure 
which appears to be intended for Vishnu. 

On the north wall of this aisle are the Saiva sculptures. The first 
in the direction in which we are now proceeding is Havana under 
Kail&sa. 

A little to the left of this, Siva and Parvati are represented sitting 
together. The bull Nandi stands in front, with the almost undistin- 
guishable traces of gambolling gana* monkeys, &c. round him. The 
next scene is Siva in the tmdava dance, with Parvati at his left knee, 
and some small figures among his feet. 

Lakola's Cave. 

In its plan, and the general character of its sculptures, this cave 
so nearly resembles the three Brahmanical caves of Badami, that it 

1 For an aceovnt of this sep Third Arch. Report, pp. 16, 17. 



KARU8A CAVES. 423 

must be very nearly of the same age. It may consequently be safely 
assigned to the latter half of the sixth century, though from the 
coarseness of the materials out of which it is excavated, it is difficult 
to ascertain its date with any great precision. 

A little to the north of Mahadeva's cave is an unfinished cell, and 
at twenty yards from the same is a cave, locally known as Lakola's. 
Its entrance is reached up six or more steps. It has four pillars in 
front and twenty-four inside, about 2 feet square. The cave 
measures from 41 to 49 feet wide by about 58 feet deep to the back 
of the pradahhma and about 10 feet 4 inches high. In front is a 
low half screen wall with a descent of four steps down into the cave. 

In the cell on the south side are five female figures on the back 
wall, a male and female on the left wall, and Ganapati and a male 
on the right, all dancing. One of those on the back wall has a 
horse's head. In the back cell on the same side is a male figure 
with two arms, but defaced. 

In the shrine is a four-armed figure of Vishnu, 6 feet high, and 
formed of a different and more compact stone than the rock in 
which the cave is cut. In his left hand he has the chahra and 
iankha, and in the right a huge club and some round object. He 
wears a high cap, with the radiated broad frill like a nimbus behind. 

A Btair leads down from the north side of this cave into the next, 
in which are four pillars with corresponding pilasters, but the 
pillars are much eaten away. It measures about 21 feet wide by 23 
feet deep, and has a small shrine in the back wall. On each side 
the outer door has been a window in latticed stone work, now 
broken away. 

Above this cave are two cells, one with Ganeia roughly carved on 
the wall, and a small v&Li or altar in a shrine behind it. 

Between this last and the next an elephant is rudely carved on a 
projecting rock, but apparently has never been finished. The next 
cave was probably a large one, but is entirely ruined by the fall of 
the rock which formed part of the roof of it. It was, perhaps, 
never finished, as the back wall is very irregular. 

To the north of this again is a low-roofed cave, with two octago- 
nal pillars in the hall, somewhat of the pattern of those in front of 
the shrine in Mahadeva's cave. The hall is about 17 feet wide by 
23 feet deep, but the pradakskitia, extends to 34 feet 10 inches in 
length behind the shrino, the cave being irregular in form. The 



424 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLBS. 

shrine inside is about 6 feet 9 inches square, and contains a figure 
of Vishnu, cut from the rock in situ, and very much decayed. 

Higher up on the scarp are three or four cells and small shrines. 
Then we come to a cave varying in width from 25^ feet in front to 
43| at the back, about 30£ feet deep and 8£ feet high. ' It has two 
pillars, with rough pilasters in front — two pillars in the second row, 
and four in the back one. The shrine, about 8 feet by 7, is in the 
back wall, there being no pradahhina, and contains an oblong altar 
in which is placed a modern tinga of hard stone. Still to the north 
are two cells, the second with G-anesa carved on the south wall, and 
Mahishasuri, the slayer of the buffalo-demon. 

On the ascent of the hill, in front of Mahadeva's cave and the 
two-storeyed one, are seven or eight very small monolithic temples, 
mostly ruined. 

Round the north end of the hill are upwards of forty very small 
shrines, some with facades cut on the rock over them, and dedicated 
— some to the lihga, and others to Vishnu. 

The extreme simplicity of the carving in these caves might 
incline us to think they were early. This however may arise from 
the nature of the rock in which they are excavated, and these sculp- 
tures are, at all events, sufficient to show that they were made before 
the rise of the Lingayats. They are probably, as just mentioned, 
of about the same age as those at Badami described above. 

Nine miles north from Karusa, and as far east of AwBa, ib a 
solitary hill near the village of Hasagahw. In the east side of it 
were two large caves ; but, owing to disintegration of the rock, 
they are worn almost to the appearance of natural caverns. On the 
west side is another, 49 feet deep by 41 wide, with a pradakskina 
round the shrines. It had some sculpture right and left of the 
shrine door, but they are much decayed. This cave had probably 
twelve columns, in three rows across, but no trace whatever is left 
of the two immediately in front of the shrine door. 



425 



CHAPTER IV. 

BRAHMANICAL CAVES IN THE DEKHAN, MOMINABAD, 

POONA, &c. 

At Mominabad or Jogai Amb&, in the Nizam of Haidarabad's 
territory, are Bome Brahmanical and Jaina caves, architecturally of 
a very plain type, to which it is difficult to assign an age with any 
confidence. They are just outside the town, in two low rocky knolls. 
The largest (Plate LXVIII.) has an open court in front, measuring 
about 90 feet by 85, in the middle of which stands a low pavilion 
about 34^ feet square outside, with a sloping roof. Inside it is an 
oral platform for the Nandi or bull, the vehicle of Siva. The roof 
within is supported by four perfectly plain square pillars. The hall 
of the cave is 91 feet long by 45 deep, and its roof is upheld by 
thirty-two similar pillars, 2 feet 3 inches square, each Burmounted by 
a bracket block, 5 feet long and 10 inches deep, on which lie the 
architraves which run from end to end of the cave. In the back 
wall are three small rooms and the principal shrine, containing the 
faint traces of what appears to have been a Trimurti or triple-headed 
image of Siva as combining the three characters of Rudra, Vishnu, 
and Brahma. There is another small shrine in the left end of the 
third aisle. Along the back wall has been a good deal of the 
ordinary Saiva sculptures — the Saptamata-as, the tdndava dance, 
MahiBhasuri, &c, which may be of almost any age. 

In the court, at each end of the front of the cave, stand two 
large elephants cut out of the rock, and behind the mandap are other 
two. 

To the west of this, across a small Btream, are the remains of 
other caves, but much destroyed by a current of water that runs 
through them, and overgrown by prickly-pear, &c. One of them 
has been fully 100 feet long by 41 deep, but its roof is almost totally 
destroyed. Like the Dasa Avatara at Elura, the great cave at 
Karusa, and others, the walls of it have been covered with rude 
sculptures both of the Avataras of Vishnu and of the forms and 
feats of Siva and his conBort. 1 



1 For more details and plona see Third Archteol. Report, pp. 50-52, and Plates 
XXX1H., XXXIV. 



426 



BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 



Cave-Temples of Bhamburde, Rajapuri, &c. 

At the small village of Bhamburde to the north of Poona is 
another Saiva rock-temple, very closely resembling that of Jogai 
Amba both in style and arrangements, only that the Nandi pavilion 
in front is round instead of square, as may be seen from the plan, 
Plate LXIX., and the annexed woodcut. The shrine is advanced into 




Ko. 68. Bliamburde Caw, from a. drawing by T. Duniell. 

the floor, instead of being a cell in the back wall. It is somewhat 
larger however, being 160 feet in one direction by about 100 across, 
and, as may be seen by comparing these plates, it is altogether of a 
finer and more monumental character, and hence probably of a more 
ancient date. The roof of the pavilion slopes, and has been hewn 
with ridges or ribs after the shape of an umbrella. Owing to 
there being no exit for the water that accumulates in the trench 
round this mandap — for it sits quite in a pit — it stands for a large 
part of the year in a sheet of water that reaches from the Nandi 
in the centre of it to the entrance of the cave. 

Rajapuri is a small village about 8 miles to the west of Wa'i in 
the Satara district, near the source of the Krishna. 1 The caves are 
in a spur of the MahabalesVar range, on the south-west of the 
Krishna, and at a height of 1,200 or 1,300 feet above the valley, but 



1 These caves have not heen described in any detail hitherto. They were surveyed 
by the Messrs. West in 1853, who have kindly placed their collections at my disposal. 



BI1AMBURDE. 427 

not difficult of access. They are cut in a soft ochrey coloured rock, 
juBt below the laterite. 

The caves are irregular and rudely cut, and extend about thirty 
yards along the face of the cliff. The largest somewhat resembles 
the DhokesVara cave : a structural wall is inserted in front, inside 
which are four plain square pillars in two rows in front of the shrine 
which is about 7 feet square inside, but irregular in its outer form. 
There is also another smaller linga shrine in the right wall of the 
front area, and two cells, one unfinished, in the back of the pradakshina. 
A low passage leads to the right into a room, of which the front is 
blocked up and which has a smaller room behind it. From the left 
side there is also an entrance into other two rooms, and from the 
front one, a low passage leads into an irregular area containing two 
tanks, and a cell dedicated to Bhavani. In front is an inscription 
on a loose slab in an old form of Devanagari — perhaps of the 14th 
century a.d. 

The Pateswara caves are a small group of some five excavations 
near the top of a hill about six miles south-east from Satara. They 
are, like the Bajapuri caves, very rudely excavated, and have been 
much altered and enclosed with buildings during last century, but 
from the number of loose lirigas lying about, and their plans, so far 
as they can be made out, they appear to have been Brahmanical. 

About twenty miles in a straight line to the E.S.E. of Karadh is 
the town of Kandal, in a hill near which are some 16 Brahmanical 
caves, mostly small, cut in a soft reddish rock, and divided into two 
groups, one of thirteen caves on the north-eastern face, and the other 
of three on the southern face of the hill. One contains traces of some 
rude sculptures. Like those at Pateswara, they have been altered 
and added to by building, but are probably not of very ancient 
date. 

Malkeswara. 

Thirteen miles south-west of the Kandal caves and about IS 
miles north from Kolapur, in a hill near the village of Malwadi, is a 
o-roup of seven Brahmanical caves, mostly very small. The largest 
lias a hall about 20 feet by 21 1, with four massive square pillars, 
bavins circular necks and a projecting member under the brackets 
resembling what we find in structural columns of the 12th and 
13th centuries- This cave has an antechamber to the linga shrine, 



428 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and also a small shrine on the right side of the hall. Like the 
Pateswara and Kandal caves, these have also been modified in very 
recent times by building. 

Patur. 

Patur is a village twenty miles to the east of Akola, the chief town 
of Berar. To the west of the village are two caves facing east, and 
each consisting of a sort of double verandah, fully 40 feet in length, 
divided by a step with two plain square pillars and pilasters upon it. 
The outer verandah has also two square pillars in front, and is 
about 9 feet wide, while the inner one or hall is 13 to 13^ feet deep, 
in the back of which is a cell about 11 feet square. The southern 
one at least has once contained a linga ; possibly the other may have 
been dedicated to Vishnn, or perhaps Bhavani ; it contains a 
chavaranga or image altar, and the hall is only 31 feet by 14 feet, 
and 12 to 13 feet high. There are some names on the pillars in old 
Devanagari characters of about the ninth century. A line on one 
pillar has been supposed to be in Pehlvi ; but it is too faint to be 
made out, though it was probably in Hala-Kanada. 

Rudreswar. 

Near the village of Guhvada (besides the Buddhist cave known as 
Ghatotkacha) there is a rude Brahmanical cave or small group of 
excavations in which are figures of Ganesa, Bhairava, Narasinha, 
the Saptamatras, &c, but all weatherworn and dilapidated. There 
is nothing of architectural interest about the place, and the whole is 
probably of comparatively recent origin. 

Patna. 

On the west of the deserted town of P&tna in Khandesh, already 
mentioned in connexion with the Pitalkhora caves, is the hill fort of 
Kanhar, and on the west side of the hill or that farthest from the 
ruins of the town, and up a torrent bed, is a Brahmanical cave, pro- 
bably Vaishnava, and locally known as Sringar Chavadi. It consists 
of a plain hall or shrine 19 feet wide by 17 feet 6 inches deep, and 
varying in height from 6 feet 8 inches in front to 8 feet at the back. 
The entrance door is neatly carved, with two high steps, with 
moulded pilasters, small standing figures, &c. at each side, much in 



DHOKESWARA. 429 

the style of the early structural temples, such as that at Ambarnath 
and the Hemadpanti temples of the Dekhan. 

In front is a verandah about 7 feet wide, returning outwards on 
the right Bide. Besides the double pillar at the corner, this is sup- 
ported by two pillars and a pilaster in front of the cave, and by one 
pillar and pilaster in the return. These pillars support a narrow 
entablature carved with arabesques, and are hidden on the outside, 
to fully half their height, by a curtain, carved in the style of the 
corresponding portions in the Kailas temple at Elura, and of the 
first of the old Jaina temples at Belgaum, and which may belong to 
about the 11th century a.d. It is thus perhaps one of the latest 
excavated of the Brahmanical caves, and possibly the work of some 
local chief under the Yadavas of Devagiri. Inside is an Old or 
seat about 2 feet high. Outside is a water-tank. 

Dhokeswara. 

The Brahmanical caves of Dhokeswara are in the east side of a hill 
near the village of Dhdke, in the Parner Taluka, about twenty miles 
west of Ahmadnagar. 

The principal cave (Plate LXX., fig. 1) is irregular in shape, but 
about 45 feet wide in front, and upwards of 50 feet deep. In front 
it has two massive pillars between pilasters, and 14^ feet behind 
them other two pillars, standing on a raised step, square below, 
changing above into eight and thirty-two sides, with square capitals 
having pendant corners, under brackets of the ordinary form. The 
front pair of columns have more carving on the lower halves, but 
are square up to the capitals. 

The shrine is cut in the solid rock, with a wide pradalcshina quite 
round it, and with doors in front and in the right end. On each 
side of the front one is a dioarpala, with nimbus behind the head, 
holding up a flower in his right hand ; his headdress is high, and 
in a style representing twisted locks of hair. These figures are 
similar to thoBe on the sides of the shrine at Blephanta and the 
Dumar Lena at Elura. Over their shoulders are vidyddharas. Under 
the right hand of the divdrpdla, to the left of the shrine door, is a 
figure standing with folded arms and a triSuJa or trident set on his 
head as a cap. Other figures are carved to right and left. In the 
shrine is a Binall linga, and on an earthen platform in front, among 



430 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

many fragments of sculpture of all ages, is a modern hollow copper 
Hi) get with a human face in front, a snake coiled round it, and the 
seven hoods raised over it. 

On the south wall of the cave are the Matras, eight female 
divinities, with GranesTi at their head, and on the side of the pilaster 
next him a tall naked figure, probably Kala. Varahi, the third, 
has a boar's head ; each has her cognizance below and a nimlnus 
behind her head ; they are seated under the foliage of five trees ; 
and beyond the last is a form of Siva. The work is of a very inferior 
sort. On the deep architrave over the inner pair of pillars in the 
centre is the common sculpture of Lakshmi and the elephants pouring 
water over her, and to the left some other figures. 

At the north end is a chapel with two pillars in front, and on the 
back wall a large sculpture of Bhairava and some snake figures. 
Outside, at each end of the facade, is a tall standing female figuro 
with lofty headdress, and holding an opening bud in one hand. 

In a recess to the north of the shrine is a coarsely hewn out 
bull. In the back are three small recesses, and in the south end 
a raised platform with a seat at the back, at the end of which a 
hole has been made into a large cistern, the entrance to which is 
a dozen yards to the south of the cave. Between the great cave 
and the cistern and some way up the face of the rock, approached 
by a risky stair, is a small cave, low in the roof, with a built front, 
the original having given way. On each side of this is a sort of 
cell with an opening into it, about 2 or 2\ feet from the floor. In 
the left front corner is a trap-door into some sunk apartment 
partially filled up. 



431 



CHAPTER V. 
BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES AT ELURA. 

As before mentioned the Buddhist group occupies the southern 
extremity of the crescent in which the caves of Elura are situated. 
At a later age the northern horn was taken possession of by the 
Jains, who excavated there a remarkable series of caves to be de- 
scribed hereafter. But between these two, at an intermediate age, 
the Brahmans excavated some 15 or 16 caves, rivalling those of their 
predecessors in magnificence, and exceeding them in richness of deco- 
ration. In their earlier caves the Brahmans copied to a certain 
extent the arrangements of those belonging to the Buddhists, though 
gradually emancipating themselves from their influence till the series 
culminated in the Kailasa, which is not only the largest and most 
magnificent Rock-cut temple in India, but the one in which its 
authors most completely emancipated themselves from the influence 
of Buddhist cave architecture. 

The Brahmanical caves begin at a distance of about 40 yards north 
of the Tin Thai, or last Buddhist cave, the first one being a large 
perfectly plain room, of which the front has been destroyed by the 
decay of the rock, and the floor is deep in earth. It may probably 
have been a dliannasdla or rest-house for visitors. Close to this, and 
to which it doubtless belonged, is the cave known as Ravan-ka Khai ; 
and next to it, but higher up in the rock, is the Das Avatara, between 
which and the famous Kailasa the road passes up the hill to the 
town of Rozah. 

To the north of Kailasa is a deep ravine, and beyond it are four 
or five caves not usually distinguished by separate names. Then 
follow those known as Rameswara, Nilakanth, a small cave, Teli-kti 
Gana, Kumbarwara, Janwasa, and the Milkmaid's cave. This last 
is near a high waterfall, at the north side of which is excavated 
the magnificent temple known as Sita's Nhani, or Dumar Lena, tho 
most northerly of the Brahmanical series. 

Fortunately the age of these caves can be ascertained within very 
narrow limits from the style of their architecture and local pecu- 



432 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

liarities, though there are hardly any inscriptions or traditions that 
tend to elucidate the matter. They certainly are all subsequent to 
the caves at Bada^ni (a.d. 579), and anterior to the Kailasa, which, 
as we hope presently to show, was commenced in or about 725. These 
are at least the extreme limits within which the age of the group is 
comprised, though it is hardly probable that the earliest of them 
overlap the Buddhist series to the extent which that would imply. 
Both in their plans, and in the style of their architectural details, 
they resemble so nearly the latest caves at Ajanta and Aurangabad 
that it is probable they belong generally to the second half of the 
seventh century rather than the first. Their succession appears to 
be nearly as they are situated locally, and enumerated in the follow- 
ing pages — beginning with those situated nearest to the Buddhist 
group, and ending with the Dumar Lena, the most northern, which 
may be assumed to be the last excavated, anterior to the Kailasa, 
which probably, however, was not completed before the end of the 
century. 

Ravana-ka Khai. 

The Brabmanical shrine locally known as Ravana-ka Khai has 
four pillars in front and 12 inside the open hall, which measures 
54 feet wide by 55^ to the front of the shrine. The shrine is 
surrounded by a wide passage or pradakskind for circumambulation, 
making the total depth of the excavation 85 feet. The central area 
is 14£ feet high, and the side aisles 13 feet 8 inches (Plate LXX., 

Two pillars in front and one inside the front aisle are gone. They 
have high square bases and drooping-eared florid capitals, with 
circular necks of varied patterns (Plate LXXI). The pilasters, fig. 2, 
are carved from the floor to the brackets, fig. 1. The former recall 
the style of decoration found in the caves at Aurangabad (Plate 
LXVI.) and in the latest caves at Ajanta. This would indicate 
that the age could hardly be earlier than the middle of the seventh 
century, while the pilasters are in a style more closely resembling 
what was afterwards developed at Elephanta and in the Brabmani- 
cal caves of the beginning of the following century. All the 
compartments of the wall between the pilasters are filled with 
sculpture ; but even within the last ten years the faces have been 
hacked and destroyed by Musalmans. 



RAVANA-KA KHAI — ELURA. 433 

The south wall is covered with Saiva sculptures ; beginning at 
the front they are — 

1. Mahishasuri killing the buffalo-demon. 

2. Siva and Parvati on a raised platform playing at chauear or 
chatvpat, a sort of chess played with dice. Ganapati and another 
attendant wait behind Siva, and two females and a male behind 
Parvati, while between hut beyond them Bhringi looks on at the 
game. Five of the faces in this compartment have been hacked 
within the last ten years. Below is Nandi, the bull of Siva, and 
thirteen small fat gana rollicking. This sculpture seems to be 
peculiar to Elura, where it occurs several times in different caves, 
but while most of the other Saiva sculptures occur at Elephanta and 
elsewhere, this does not. Siva as Mahayogi, which is twice repeated 
at Elephanta, occurs at Elura only in the Dumar Lena cave, and there 
in a scarcely finished form. 

3. Siva dancing the tdndava, or great dance, which he performs 
over the destruction of the world ; three figures with drums and 
fifes are to his right ; Bhringi, his skeleton attendant, is behind, 
and Parvati and two gana — one with a cat's face — are on his left ; 
above are Brahma and Vishnu on his left, and on his right Indra 
on his elephant, Agni on his ram, and two others. 

4. Bavana, the demon king of Lanka or Ceylon, proud of his 
immeasurable strength, got under Kailasa, the White Mountain or 
heaven of Siva, intending to carry it off ; Parvati got alarmed on 
feeling the place shake, and clung to Siva, who fixed Bavana under 
the hill with his foot until he repented of his temerity. Bavana had 
ten heads and twenty arms, and often on the top of his cap an 
animal's head is represented, some say that of an ass. Four gmas 
here mock him. Siva and Parvati have each their attendants, and 
two guardians stand at the sides. The peculiar conventional mode 
of representing a mountain by means of brick-shaped blocks may 
be noted ; it recurs again and again, and, as already mentioned, is 
employed also in the paintings at Ajanta. 

5. Bhairava, the destructive form of Siva, his foot on a large fat 
dwarf, another at his side, Ganapati behind him, and holding up 
with two of his hands the elephant-hide in which he wraps himself, 
with other two he holds the spear with which he has transfixed 
his puny enemy Ratnasura ; in one is a long sword, and in another 
a bowl to receive the blood of his victim. 

Y 182. E B 



434 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

These last four are frequently represented in other oaves with 
more or less detail. 

6. In the pradakshina on this side is a remarkable group (Plate 
LXXII). The first portion of it is very much in shade, but consists 
of three skeletons ; K&l, four-armed, with a scorpion on his breast ; 
K&li, the female personification of Death ; and a third kneeling. Then 
comes Q-anapati eating his favourite balls of sweetmeat, beyond 
whom are the seven divine mothers, four-armed, each with a child, 
and, on the base below, her cognizance— (1) perhaps Chamunda' 
with the owl, (2) Indrani with the elephant, (3) Varahi wiiih the 
boar, (4) Vaishnavi or Lakshmi with Garuda, (5) Kaumari with the 
peacock, (6) Maheswari with the bull, and (7) Brahmi, Brahmani, or 
Sarasvati with the Jvansa or goose. 1 On the return of the wall at 
the back is Siva seated with the mace or axe and damru or small 
hand-drum. 

On the north wall, commencing from the front, are — 

1. Bhavani or Durga, four-armed, with her foot resting on her 
tiger, holding a trisula or trident in her upper right hand ; the 
others are broken. 

2. Lakshmi, the "wife of Vishnu, over a mass of lotuses, in which 
are Naga-canopied figures holding up water jars, and a tortoise among 
them. She has two arms, but her attendants on each side holding 
water-pots have four ; one on her right also holds a Sahlclia or conch, 
one of the symbols of Vishnu. Elephants bathe her with water 
from jars, as in the similar Buddhist sculptures. 

3. Varaha, the boar-incarnation of Vishnu, his foot on Sesha, the 
great serpent, holding up Prithvi, the personification of the Earth, 
whom he rescues from destruction. A snake-demon is between his 
feet, and figures with Naga-hoods over their heads stand on each 
side, one supplicating. 

4. Vishnu, four-armed, in his heaven of Vaikuntha, sitting 
between his wives Lakshmi and Sita, and four attendants behind 
with cMmaraa. Below is Garuda and several males and females, 
some of them playing on musical instruments. 

5. Vishnu and Lakshmi seated on the same couch under a torana 
or ornamental arch, with attendants behind. Below are seven 
dwarfs seated, four of them with musical instruments. 

1 See Indian Antiquary, vol. vi. p. 74, note ||. 



DASA AVATAKA — ELUBA. 435 

The front of the shrine has two very tall male dicdrpdlas and a 
number of other figures, principally females and attendant dwarfs, 
fat gaiidharvas with curly wigs and garlands, &c. Inside is an altar 
against the back wall, and a broken image of Bhavani or Durga, to 
whom the temple was doubtless dedicated. There are four holes, as 
if for fire-pits {agnihmdas), in the floor of the hall. 

The Dasa Avataka Cave. 

The second of the Elura. series, usually known as the Das Avatara 
Cave, resembles, both in plan and in its style of architecture, the 
Jogai Amba, Bhamburde, and the great cave at Karusa, and may 
consequently be assumed to be of the same age, or nearly so. From 
the pathway to the Buddhist caves and Bavana-ka Khai there is 
a very considerable ascent by means of steps up the rock to it. 
Like the last two Buddhist caves here, the whole court has been 
hewn out of the solid rock, leaving a curtain wall across the front 
of it, and a sacrificial hall in the middle, with a number of small 
shrines and a cistern in the surrounding rocky-walls (Plate LXXIII.) 
This central hall has had a porch to the west, supported by two 
square pillars in front of a perforated window, over which is a long 
Sanskrit inscription, — nearly obliterated however {ante, p. 402). The 
entrance faces the cave on the east, and inside it has four pillars on a 
raised platform in the floor — possibly for a Nandi. In the back is a 
single round hole, perhaps a fire-pit. The outer walls have a good 
deal of figure-carving, and the flat roof is surmounted outside by lionB 
at the corners, and fat human figures between, along the edges, — 
resembling in this respect the cave at Undavilli. 

The cave itself is of two storeys, the lower being a few feet above 
the level of the court, supported by fourteen plain square pillars, 
and measuring 95 feet in length, with two cells in the back wall 
near each end. In the north end of the front aisle the stair ascends, 
and is lighted by a window at the landing where it turns to the 
right. On tho wall of this landing are eleven compartments, each 
about two feet high, with bas-reliefs of Ganapati, Parvati, Surya or 
Vishnu with a lotus in each hand and two attendants, Siva and 
Parvati, Mahishasuri — the head of the buffalo struck off, and the 
Asura coming out of the neck ; Arddhanari, the androgynous form 
of Siva, four-armed, with trisvla and looking glass ; Bhavani, four- 

ee 2 



436 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

armed, on her tiger, with trUula and damru; TTma or Parvatl with 
water-pot and rosary, practising tapas or asceticism between two 
fibres, with Brahma and others looking on ; Kali or Bhavani, four- 
armed, with sword, triiula, bowl, and a piece of flesh at which a dog 
snatches, &c. 

Another flight of steps leads into the end of the front aisle of the 
great hall above, 95 feet wide by 109 deep, inclusive of the vestibule 
to the shrine, and supported by forty-four square columns, inoluding 
two in front of that vestibule (Plate LXXIV.). Those in front 
are richly carved with floral ornamentations, in which dwarfs, snakes, 
&c. are also introduced. Between the pilasters in each side wall are 
deep recesses filled with large sculptures, mostly in almost eutire 
relief, and some of them cut with great boldness and power. Like 
the Ravana-ka-Khai Cave, the sculptures on one side are mostly 
Vaishnava, and on the other entirely Saiva. Outside the front, at 
either end of the balcony, is a gigantic Saiva dwdrpdla. 

Beginning on the north side with the Saiva sculptures — the first 
from the door is Bhairava or Mahadeva in his terrible form ; and a 
more vivid picture of the terrific, a very diseased imagination only 
could embody. The gigantic figure lounges forward holding up his 
elephant-hide, with necklace of skulls {mundrndld) depending below 
his loins ; round him a cobra is knotted ; his open mouth showing 
large teeth, while with his trisula he has transfixed one victim, who, 
writhing on its prongs, seems to supplicate pity from the pitiless ; 
while he holds another by the heels with one of his left hands, 
raising the damru as if to rattle it in joy, while he catches the blood 
with which to quench his demon thirst. To add to the elements of 
horror, Kalf, gaunt and grim, stretches her skeleton length below, 
with huge mouth, bushy hair, and sunken eyeballs, having a crooked 
knife in her right hand, and reaching out the other with a bowl, as 
if eager to share in the gore of the victim ; behind her head is the 
owl (the symbol of destruction) 1 or a vampire as fit witness of the 
scene. On the right, in front of the skeleton, is Parvatl; and 
higher up, near the foot of the victim Batnasura, is a grinning face 
drawing out its tongue. Altogether the group is a picture of the 
devilish ; the very armlets Bhairava wears are ogre faces. 

The second chapel contains Siva dancing the tdndava ; .the third 

1 One small speciet of owl is called Bhairava. 



DASA AVATARA — ELUEA. 437 

has an altar, perhaps for Bhavani, never quite finished ; the fourth 
contains Siva and Parvati at the game of chausar, with Nandi and 
the rollicksome gana below ; the fifth is the marriage scene of 
Siva and Parvati, in which, contrary to the usual representations, 
she is at his left side. Brahma with triple face squats below to 
perform the priestly functions, while above are the gods, riding 
on various animals as witnesses of the scene. The sixth chapel 
contains the usual representation of Ravana under Kailasa. 

On the back wall we have, first, Siva springing out of the Imga to 
protect his worshipper Markandeya, whom Yama, the Hindu Pluto, 
has noosed and is about to drag off to his dark abode. 

The second has Siva and Parvati. Siva holds a lock of his hair 
with one hand, and a rosary or mala in the other. On his right is 
the bull Nandi, and beyond it is Bhringi ; over him is an elephant, 
and above this a squatting ascetic. To the left of the nimbus round 
Siva's head is a deer — one of his symbols. 

We now come to the antechamber or vestibule of the shrine. On 
the left end of it is a huge Ganapati. On the floor at the back 
corners are lions, carved with considerable spirit. On the back wall, 
to the left of the Bhrine door, is Parvati with a rosary, and on each 
side of her musicians. She sits on a padmdsana or lotus seat, upheld 
by two figures among the leaves. The dwdrpdlas of the shrine are 
four-armed, with snake, club, and vajra. Inside the sanctuary, the 
Sdluhklia, or altar, round the linga or emblem of Siva, is broken. 

To the right of the shrine door is the favourite sculpture of Gaja 
Lakshmi or Sri, with four elephants pouring water upon her, while 
two male attendants offer jars of water and hold the sahlcha, chahra 
or discus, and lotus : she has a lotus and a sitdphal or custard-apple 
in her hands. In the south end of this vestibule is Vishnu with his 
lotus and trUsulu, somewhat differing from Siva's, and with a large 
bird (Garuda) at his right hand. 

In the south side of the back wall is, 1st, Siva inside a linga with 
flames issuing from the sides of it. Vishnu is represented below on 
the right as Varaha — the boar-avatdra — digging down to see if he 
can reach the base of the great linga ; having failed to do so, he is 
also represented as worshipping it. On the other side is Brahma 
ascending to discover the top of it, which he also failed to do, and 
stands as a worshipper. Thus Siva is said to have proved to these 
rival divinities his own superiority to both of them. 



438 BRAHMANICAL OAVE-TEMPLES. 

2nd, Siva having seized the chariot of the sun, made the four 
Vedas his horses, and Brahma his charioteer, is going out to war 
against the Asura Taraka. 

We now came to the south wall, and proceeding towards the front 
we have, 1st, Vishnu, six-armed, his left foot on a dwarf holding up 
the hill Govardhan to protect the flocks of Vraj from the deluge of 
rain that Indra sent down. 2iul, Vishnu Narayana resting on Sesha, 
the great serpent, with a human head and five hoods ; while out o£ 
Vishnu's navel springs a lotus on which Brahma is seated. Lakshmt 
rubs her lord's feet, and seven figures are represented below. 3rd, 
Vishnu riding on Garuda. £th, a sdlunkM or altar, which has been 
protected by a high screen in front. 5th, Varaha, the bo&r-avatdra 
of Vishnu, holding Prithvi (the Earth) on his hand, with three 
snake figures or Nagas below. 6th, Vishnu in the Wamana or dwarf 
incarnation, in which he deceived the good king Bali, obtaining 
from him a promise of all he could cover at three strides. The 
dwarf then burst into tremendous proportions, strode over earth and 
heaven at two strides, and, though Bali tried to appease him with 
a pot full of precious stones, nothing would do but a third stride, 
and placing his foot on Bali he thrust him down to Patala, or Hell. 
Garuda behind him binds a prisoner. This is the same scene that 
appears twice an Badami, and also at Mahavallipur and elsewhere. 
7th, Narasinha, or the lion-arafara of Vishnu, wrestling with his 
enemy, who is armed with sword and shield, but with two arms can 
have no fair chance with his eight-armed enemy. Plate LXXV., fig. 1. 
Notwithstanding its mutilated state, this sculpture shows a vigotir 
rivalling that of the Durga bas-relief at Mahavallipur, and so like it 
in style as to indicate that they must belong to the same age. The 
distance between the two places where they are found, and the 
difference of the material in which they are carved, render it difficult 
to say from that alone which may be the earliest of the two, but 
they cannot be distant in date. 

Rameswaba. 

Passing Kailasa, and four other caves at some distance to the 
north of it, is the cavo-temple locally known as Rameswara, — a lofty 
and interesting Saiva temple, behind a fine large platform. (Plate 
LXXVL) In the court before it, on a lofty pedestal with bas-reliefs 



RAME8WARA — ELURA. 439 

on the sides of it, couches the Nandi ; in a chapel on the north side, 
with two pillars in front, is Granapat; ; and between it and the 
pilaster is a gigantic female standing on a makara, with dwarf 
attendants, cfawtn-bearer, and gandlmrvas ; on the south side is a 
similar figure on a tortoise, — both river goddesses — Yamuna and 
G-ahga. A screen wall, half tho height of the pillars, connects the 
front ones. The capitals of the four in front are carved in repre- 
sentation of a water-vessel (kamandala), with plants growing out 
of it and drooping over on each side. To this are added struts 
carved with female figures standing under foliage, with their atten- 
dant dwarfs, somewhat in the style already noticed in the largo 
cave at Badami. On the brackets above are horned monster Sdrdiilas 
or grdsdas. The frieze above is carved in compartments of ara- 
besques divided by fat gay as. 

The hall is 15^ feet high, and measures 69 feet by 25, with a 
chapel at each end, cutoff by two pillars with cushion-capital. Each 
of these chapels is surrounded by sculptures. In the south one we 
find, — 1, on the right wall, a tall, four-armed, ghastly skeleton with 
a broad, short, pointed knife ; another skeleton clasps his leg while 
it looks up to Kali, just behind, who seizes it by the hair, while she 
holds a dissevered head in her left hand, and wears a snake (not a 
cobra) round her neck. Another skeleton, also with a snake round 
its neck, grins over her head. A more hideous group could not well 
be conceived. In front of the tall skeleton (Edl) stands a figure 
with a sword, and overhead is a c/midliarva with an offering. 2. On 
the back wall is Ganesa, Beven four-armed devis (the Saptamatra.), 
and a musician. . The clrihhas below are mostly rotted away. Except 
in the elaborateness of their headdresses they are nearly the same 
as already described in Ravana-ka-Khai. 3. On the east end is 
Siva dancing, eight-armed, while gods riding on peacock, elephant, 
ox, Garuda, &c, appear in the clouds over his shoulders; Parvati 
and attendants, with four musicians, look on below ; and a small 
Bhringi dances behind Siva's leg. 

In the north chapel are, — 1. On the left end, a tall four-armed 
figure standing with a chick in one left hand, and holding a large 
bird by the neck with the other ; right and left are attendants with 
rams' heads. On the back wall are— 2. Brahma seated on a chair, 
with an attendant behind him, addressing a squatting figure with a 
female behind. 3 Tho marriage of Siva — Brahma on the extreme 



440 BRAHMANIOAL CAVE-TEMPMSS. 

left, with a fire before him, while a bearded figure is seated on the 
other side of it. Behind him are two males, one carrying a box. 
Then oomes Parvati or Uma, with a female behind her, and a male 
with a round jar : Siva takes Parvatl's hand, and in front iB a small 
figure of Ganeia, while behind Siva is a dwarf and four other 
attendants, one with a Scmkha. 4. Parvati or Uma, the daughter 
of Himalaya, as an ascetic, amidst four fires, a rosary in one hand, 
and rocks behind her : this tapas she undertook to gain the love of 
Siva, Her maid kneels at her right hand, and on her left is a tall 
female with a box. Siva or a Yogi approaches her with a water- 
bottle, and behind him are lotuses, and overhead fruits. Next, to 
the right, is a tall female addressing a figure, — possibly K&madeva 
or Makaradwaj, the Hindu Cupid, — with shaven crown, coming out 
of a makara's mouth; and behind him is another male figure. 5. 
On the base of this tableau is a most remarkable row of ganas very 
spiritedly carved. 6. On the east end of the chamber is Mahishasuri 
slaying the buffalo-demon ; a four-armed figure with a club stands 
in front, and one with a sword behind : above are gandharvas. 

On each side of the approach to the shrine is a large sculpture : — 
1. On the north side Havana under Kailasa, with five heads and an 
animal's — poBsibly a boar's — rising out of the top of his high cap ; 
Siva and Parvati with their attendants are represented above. 2. 
On the south, Siva and Parvati playing at chwi&ar, with Bhringi 
beyond, resting his chin and hand on his knee. Parvati is attended 
by females, one plaiting her hair. The dispute between the game- 
sters is here pretty well represented. Below is the bull, with the 
usual gambolling gana. 

In front of each pilaster of the antechamber stands a female 
chmri-heozer with dwarf attendants. The two columns here are of 
the Elephanta style, or with compressed cushion capitals, but in 
place of brackets they have deep square abaci carved with figures. 
The door of the shrine is also elaborately carved (Plate LXXVH.), 
and very similar in style to some of the later doorways at Ajanta. 
Those of Cave I. (Plate XLII.) and Cave IV. (Plate XLVII.) present 
nearly the same architectural arrangements, and even their figure 
sculptures are not so diverse as might be expected to result from 
the difference of the two religions to which they are dedicated. 
This doorway, in fact, might have been applied to a Buddhist cave 
without any one being able to detect any incongruity in such an 



CAVES NORTH OP KA1LASA — ELURA. 441 

application, and their age is undoubtedly very nearly the same. On 
each side of the doorway of the shrine is a gigantic dwdrpdla with 
wigged dwarf attendant, one of them with a high cap having the 
prongs of the trtiula projecting from the top of it, a broad dagger, 
a sword, and round his loins a cobra. 

The shrine contains a square Sdlimkhd with a water-rotted Knga 
in it. A wide and lofty pradakshma surrounds it. 



Caves North op Kailasa. 

The next large cave north of Kailasa at Elura is across a deep 
ravine, and till 1876 was filled to a depth of 6 or 7 feet with earth 
so that only the capitals of the pillars were visible. It was, however, 
well worth excavating, and has been cleared with care, and without 
damage to the carving. This and the next are called by the natives 
" Dum&r Lena," — a name, however, which has been attached by 
Europeans to the most northerly of the Brahmanical aeries. 

This is a Saiva temple with three rows of four pillars from side to 
side : the front and back aisles being 64 feet long, and the depth up 
to the front of the shrine 37 feet, or over all 76 feet. In front has 
been a porch raised by seven or eight steps above the level of the 
court, on two massive square pillars, one of which is gone, and the 
other reduced to a shapeless mass, principally by the weather and 
a pvpal tree that has taken root against one of them. Surround- 
ing the court on three sides has been a low covered corridor 
with a small door in the- centre of the front for ingress. Over 
this corridor, at each end of the facade, is a sculptured com- 
partment: that on the south contains Brahma with two female 
attendants and two gandharvas on clouds: the other, probably 
Vishnu, four-armed, with female attendants ; a hole, broken through 
the lower portion of it, opens into the verandah of the next cave. 

The extreme pillars of the front are plain square ones with bracket 
capitals; the inner pair have deep brackets on two sides, carved 
with female figures and dwarf attendants. The middle pair in the 
next row have cushion capitals with female figureB, &c. as struts on 
their inner sides, and fat dwarfs on the corners of the high square 
bases ; the braoketB above have not been finished. The outer pillars 
in this and the next row are in section " broken squares," so 
favourite a form in later structural temples,— the form being that 



442 BRAHMANICAI. CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of a square with thin pilasters of less breadth attached to each side. 
The middle pillars in the next row are unlike any others here : the 
base is of the " broken square " pattern, •with female figures carved on 
the principal faces, and males on the corner ones. Over this is a 
Dravidian moulding as in the pilasters of Ravana-ka-Khai, then a 
belt with floral ornament in the centre, and two dwarfs at each 
corner. Over this is a 16-sided neck, and then the stmts with female 
figures and attendants on three sides. These columns are too heavy 
to be elegant. 

The shrine door is boldly moulded in the Dravidian style. The 
dwdrpdlas have each only two hands, and hold flowers — no clubs, but 
each is attended by his dwarf and gandharvas. Inside is a large 
square Sdluhkhd and rotted lihga. The pradakshina is entered by a 
door on each Bide the shrine. 

The only sculptures on the walls inside are, — Mahishasuri on the 
south end of the front aisle, and (xanapati — four-armed — on the 
north, both well preserved, from having been so long buried in 
the earth. 

The second cave is close to the last, and measures 67 feet by 
55 over all. It has four clumsy unfinished columns in front, and a 
deep recess at each end inside. At the back of the hall is a ves- 
tibule or antechamber to the Bhrine, 30 feet by 10£, with two pillars 
and corresponding pilasters in front. Some plaster, consisting of 
mud with vegetable fibres in it, adhereB to parts of the walls and 
pillars of this cave, and on one of the last a few letters of a painted 
inscription in Devanagari are still visible. In the shrine is a 
round Sdlurthhd set on a base, and of a different stone from the cave. 

In front, in the UBual place for the Nandi, is a square trough : 
possibly an agnihmda or fire-pit. 

Descending to a slightly lower level, a little further along 
the scarp, we come to a primitive-looking cave. Part of the 
roof has fallen in ; it has not been excavated ; the rain-water stands 
long in it, and it stinks from the bats that infest it. The front 
pillars have gone, and for some distance inside the entrance the cave 
is not so wide as it is in the middle, where four pillarB on each side 
screen off recesses ; in line with the fourth of these are four more in 
front of the shrine, which contains a broken Sdfmkhd and linga. 
The pillars are very rude attempts at the Elephanta style, with 
cushion-shaped capitals. 



JTOAKANTHA— - BLURA. 443 

Close to the next is another unexcavated cave, all ruined, and 
overgrown by underwood. 

Ascending again, we come to a small lihga shrine, originally 
with two pillars in front, — now gone, but which, as the pilasters 
show, were probably of the Elephanta pattern. Outside the fa9ade 
on the north is Ganapati, and on the south Mahishasuri. The 
shrine has a wide pradatohina round it, and in each entrance to 
it is a large cell with two square pillars, haying octagon necks in 
front. Inclusive of these chambers, this cave measures 53 feet by 
SO over all. 

The shrine door is carved round with veli or creeper and roll 
patterns. On each side is a tall dwdrpdla, with a smaller female 
figure between him and the entrance (see Plate LXXVIIL). This 
again is so like the arrangement of the front of the shrine in the 
Buddhist represented in Plate LXL, that we cannot doubt that they 
are of the same age, and are rather staggered to find they do not 
both belong to the same religion. 

Ntukastha. 

A short distance to the north from the last, and the fifth from 
Rameswara, we enter a court 42 feet square, within which an ascent of 
three steps leads to a slightly sloping platform on which stands the 
Nandi Mandapa — a four-doored chamber, partially ruined. On the 
south side of the court is a low chapel with the Ashtdmdtrd, or eight 
divine mothers, all four-armed, and the eighth — Brahmi — with three 
faces. Thirteen steps lead up to the cave, in front of which, at each 
end, is a dwdrpdla besmeared with paint. This excavation is 70 feet 
by 44, including the end chapels and vestibule of the shrine, and 
12 feet high. It has four pillars in front, and two on each of the 
other three sides of the hall, — all square plain shafts with bases and 
bracket capitals. At each end is a chapel with an altar. On the 
walls of the vestibule are a few sculptures, — Gan&ia, three d&vls, — 
one on a crocodile, — and a four-armed Vishnu, or perhaps K&rttikeya. 
In the shrine is a round SdluhJchd, and a highly polished lihga, still 
worshipped, and which the local Brahmans pretend to show blueish 
streaks upon: hence the name given to the oave — Nilakantha — 
" blue-throated," one of the names of Siva. 

On a rather higher level is a low cave consisting of a verandah 



444 BKAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

(partly double) with five doors entering into Bmall cells, one of them 
containing a round Isalunkhd and linga, with, a Trimwti on the back 
wall. 

Teli-ka-Gana. 

Below the front of the last is a serieB of five low cells, known as 
" the Oilman's mill." They contain some small sculptures of no 
special interest. 

A little to the north, in the course of a torrent, just where it falls 
over a cliff, a beginning of a cave has been made, but a flaw in the 
rook seemingly has stopped progress. 

KlJMBHARWADA. 

The whole front of the Kumbharwada Cave, which is the next to 
the north, must have been supported by six columns and pilasters, 
but it has fallen away. The hall, including recess, is 95 feet long, 
the width about 27 feet, and height 13 feet 10 inches. An image 
has been placed on a pedestal at the north end, and at the south is 
a recess with a shrine behind it containing an oblong altar. Between 
the front of this recess and the pilaster of the front of the cave is a 
fat male seated on a rich gadi or seat, with a bag in his hand. 

At the back of the hall are four free-standing and two attached 
square pillars with moulded bases. The smaller hall behind these 
measures 57 feet by 23, and has two pillars in the ends and two at 
the back, with two attached ones dividing it from the vestibule of 
the shrine, 30 feet by 9. On the ceiling of the vestibule is a figure 
of Surya — the Sun-god — in his chariot drawn by seven steeds, and 
a female at each side shooting with a bow (see Plate LXXXHL, 
fig. 2). Was this a Sun-temple ? In the shrine, 15 feet square, is an 
oblong altar. 

Janwasa. 

The columns of this temple are quite of the Blephanta pattern. 
It has four in front, and two pilaster ; and at the back two with 
pilasters. At each end of a spacious hall, 16 feet 6 inches high, is 
a chapel raised three or four feet above the floor on a moulded base. 
The total length, including these chapels, is 112 feet, and the depth 
to the back of the pradakskina 67 feet. 



SMALLER CAVES — BLURA. 445 

In front of each pilaster of the vestibule is a female ehan/n-hearer 
— her hair carefully crimped — with dwarf attendant. At the shrine 
door are two large dwdrpdlas, one with a flower ; and stout attend- 
ants, one with a very high cap terminating in a sharp spear-point, 
with a skull on the right side of it. In the shrine is a large square 
ialmkhd and linga. The pradakshina is wide and lofty. 

The Milkmaid's Cave. 

This is on the south edge of a ravine that separates it from the 
last Saiva cave, and over the scarp at the head of which is a fine 
water-fall after heavy rain. One octagonal pillar and a fragment of 
another are left in the verandah : it had, perhaps, two more pillars. 
The back wall of the verandah is pierced for a door and four win- 
dows. On this wall are a few carvings : — Lakshmt with two male 
attendants ; Vishnu four-armed, with club, cholera, and rosary ; 
Siva with cobra and trident ; Brahma, three -faced, with staff, water- 
pot, and rosary ; aud Mahishasuri with the buffalo. In the north 
end is Varaha with Prithvi, and in the south Narayana on Sesha, 
half finished. Inside is a hall 53 feet by 22, and 11 feet 8£ inches 
high, beyond which is a vestibule to the shrine, 23 feet by 10, with 
a raised floor and two short square pillars in front. 

In recesses on each side the shrine door are Vaishnava dwdrpdlas, 
and inside is a long oblong altar at the back of the Bhrine. 

It was doubtless a Vaishnava cave, but the style of it says but 
little for the wealth or influence of the sect in the days when it was 
executed. 

Under the cliff over which the stream falls are the remains of a 
couple of cells, and a vestibule and shrine with dwdrpdlas — perhaps 
Vaishnava — at each side of the door. Inside is the base of a square 
altar, and on the inside of the front wall is an eight-armed devt with 
attendants, still worshipped. 

A footpath leading up to the plateau, on the north side of the 
great pit in which Kailasa stands, passes some small caves, in the 
shrine of one of the first of which is a Trimurti or Triad figure, 
representing Siva or Mahad6va under the threefold aspect of the 
creator, preserver, and destroyer (Plate LXXV., fig. 2). Though 
not equal to the celebrated one in the Elephanta cave, it iB a fine speci- 
men of a class of soulpture very common at that age, in India. Being 



446 BRAHMANICA1 CAVE-TEMPLES. 

nearly uninjured it supplies some features which are not easily re- 
cognisable at Elephanta. Some way further up, and not easily dis- 
covered, are several larger cells ; and about a quarter of a mile far- 
ther north, on the sides of the stream which comes over the cliff at 
the point we have now arrived at, is a considerable group of small 
shrines, the plan of a number of which is given (Plate LXXVL, 
fig. 2). Some of these are curious from having small open courts 
entered by a door with a Dravidian pediment over it, similar, on a 
small scale, to what we meet with at the entrance to the Jaina cave, 
here known as the Indra Sabha. Others have Trimurtis on the back 
walls of the little shrines, with round (instead of square) MlunkJtas 
for the lingas, a pretty sure indication of their late date. On the 
ceilings of two of them are some pieces of painting indistinctly 
traceable. 

Sita's Nam, or Dumar Lena. 

In the projecting scarp on the north side of a waterfall that 
divides the last caves from the next is excavated one of the largest 
caves in the series, known as Sita's Nani (or Bath), and sometimes 
as Dumar Lena (Plate LXXTX.). 

This cave is often compared with that at Elephanta or Garapuri, 
to which it bears a striking resemblance, but it is larger and in some 
respects a finer cave. It is in fact the finest cave, of its class, known 
to exist in India, and probably also the oldest. The other two — that at 
Elephanta and the cave at Jog6swari — show a deterioration in archi- 
tectural style, and a divergence from Buddhist forms of representation 
in sculpture, that seem to mark the progressive steps by which the 
change was gradually spreading itself over the forms of two great 
religious faiths then prevailing. 

The great hall, including the shrine, is 148 feet wide by 149 deep 
and 17 feet 8 inches high, but the excavation, including the entrance 
court, extends to more than 200 feet in a direct line north and south. 
Two large lions, with small elephants under their paws, guard the 
steps which lead into the hall from three sides. Before the west 
approach is a large circle for the Nandi. The hall is in the form of 
a cross, the roof supported by twenty-six massive pillars. 

In the front aisles on three sides are large sculptures at each end. 
These are so like those of Elephanta, in the account of which they 
will be described more at length, that we need here only indicate 



DUMAB IiBNA — ELURA. 447 

briefly what they are. In the west aisle, south end, is Havana 
shaking Kailasa, as usual, and in the north end Bhairava with two 
victims. In the south verandah there is a large pit opposite the 
landing : in the west end Siva and Parvati are playing chauswr ; 
Nandi and the gdna are below, Vishnu to the right of them, and 
Brahma to the left. 

In the east end is the marriage, with gods and goddesses above 
It is thus described by K&lid&sa : 

" E'en Brahma came — Creator — Lord of might, — 
And Vishnu glowing from the realms of light. 

****** 

By Indra led, each world-upholding lord 
With folded arms the mighty god adored, — 
In humble robes arrayed, the pomp and pride 

Of glorious deity were laid aside. 

****** 

Around the fire in solemn rite they trod — 
The lovely lady and the glorious god ; 
Like Day and starry Midnight when they meet 
In the broad plains at lofty Meru's feet. 
Thrice at the bidding of the priest they came 
With swimming eyes around the holy flame ; 
Then at his word the Bride in order due 
Into the blazing fire the parched grain threw, 
And toward her face the scented smoke she drew, 
While softly wreathing o'er her cheek it hung, 
And round her ears in flower-like beauty hung. 
• **••• 

* Thifl flame be witness of your wedded life, — 
Be just, thou Hufiband, and be true, thou Wife!' 
Such was the priestly blessing on the Bride ; — 
Eager she listened, as the earth when dried 
By parching summer sun drinks deeply in 
The first soft dropping when the rains begin. 
' Look, gentle Urna,' cried her lord, ' afar ! 
See'st thou the brightness of yon polar star ? 
Like that unchanging ray thy faith must Bhine ! ' 
Sobbing she whispered—' Yes, for ever thine. ' " l 

Outside the pilaster to the south of this is a gigantio devi with 
round headdress peaked in front. Above are four mums or sages, 



1 Griffithfl's translation of the Kumdra Sambhava, or Birth of the War-God. 
(Trubner, 1879). For fully detailed accounts of these sculptures see my Elephanta. 



448 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and below, three females ; a bird or goose pulls at her mantle ; may 
it not be Sarasvati — " Queen of Speech " ? 

To the south of this is a stair descending down to the stream 
below. 

In the north verandah is Siva as Mahayogi, seated on a lotus, with 
a club in his left hand: the stalk of the lotus (as in Buddhist caves) 
being upheld by Naga-hooded figures, with two worshippers behind 
them. This differs very markedly from the corresponding sculpture 
in the left side of the entrance at Elephanta, where the whole accom- 
paniments of his asceticism in the Himalayas are indicated, — the 
surrounding rocks and jungle, and the approach of Uma as described 
in the glowing verses of Kalidasa's Kumdra Scumbhava. Opposite to 
this is Siva dancing the tdndava, with very fat legs : Parvati is 
seated at his left, perhaps because this dance is said to be executed 
by him occasionally for her pleasure. 

On the east wall, outside the pilaster, is a tall female figure — a 
river goddess — standing on a tortoise, with a single female attendant 
and gamdharvas. This is in a small court on the north side of the 
cave, in the east of which is a low cave much silted up, with a large 
oblong block of stone inside. 

The shrine is in the back wing or recess of the cave, and is a small 
square room with lihga in it, with four doors, each guarded by a pair 
of gigantic dwdrpdlas, each holding a flower in his right hand, and 
with a female attendant also holding a flower. 

The headdresses are varied in almost every case. In the south 
pradaJcshma is a square cell, and through it another is entered with 
a deep hole in one corner. 

This is the most northerly of the Brahmanical caves here (below 
the great scarp) ; and from this we return southwards to the famous 
Kailaea or Ranga Mahal — the Fainted Palace. 

Kailasa oe the Banga Mahal. 

The plans of all the Brahmanical caves above described are so 
manifestly copies of the Buddhist viharas which they were intended 
to supersede, that they present very little of novelty. Their archi- 
tectural details, too, are so similar that it requires a practised eye 
to detect the difference, and were it not for the absence of cells 
for the residence of monks, and the character of the sculpture 



KAILASA— ELURA. 



449 



by which they are replaced, it would be difficult to feel sure to 
■which religion any particular caves might belong. It is true that 
after a century of perseverance in practising the style, the Brahmans 
began to draw away from the Buddhist originals which they had 
been copying, and in the Sita ka Nani and in other later caves 
Beemed on the verge of creating a new style. Before, however, 
they had done much in this direction their progress was stopped by 
a revolution of rather a startling nature. From motives we are 
only now beginning to understand, those who designed the Kailasa 
resolved to cut the gordian knot, and instead of a temple which 
could in any sense be called a cave, determined on excavating what 




No. 69. View of KailAsa from the West, from a sketch by Jus. F. 

could only be designated as a roclc-cut temple. "With the exception 
of the Rathas at Mahavallipur, perhaps the first of its class that 
had been executed in India. 

Fortunately we have now the means of perceiving with tolerable 
clearness how and when this revolution took place. During the 
struggle that took place between the Buddhist and Brahmans in 
the latter half of the seventh century, the Chalukyas held sway at 



Y 132. 



F F 



450 BItAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Kalyan, and in the country where all the principal caves are situated. 
Even if not very strict Buddhists themselves, they at least tolerated 
it, and apparently favoured it more than the rival faith. At the end 
of that century, however, a new dynasty known as the Rashtrakutas 
or Rathors arose at Malkh§d~the Mulker of the maps — near 
Kalbarga, and 50 miles south of Kalyan, who under various names 
during the next two centuries eclipsed, even if they did not entirely 
supersede the power of the Chalukyas in these regions. 1 The fourth 
king of this dynasty, Dantidurga, was one of the most remarkable 
and powerful sovereigns of his age in that country. During his 
reign (725-755 a.d.) he conquered the whole of the Dekhan up to 
the Narmada 2 (Nerbudda), and consequently held sway over all these 
regions in which Elura and the other great cave centres are situated. 
As he was so powerful a king and a zealous worshipper of Siva, 
nothing is more likely than that he should undertake Buch an excava- 
tion as that of the Kailasa. Those among his successors who were 
sufficiently powerful to do so, such as Govinda III. (a.d. 785-810) 
and Amoghavarsha (810), were too late for the style which we 
fortunately know was that which prevailed during the reign of 
Dantidurga. No one will probably hesitate to accept this as a 
fact, who is familiar with the plan and details of the great Saiva 
temple at Pattadkal near Badami, and not far from the capital of 
this king. The arrangements of the plan and even the dimensions 
of the two temples are almost identical. The style is the same, and 
even the minutest architectural ornaments are so alike as almost to 
be interchangeable. 8 In fact it would be difficult to find in India 
two temples so like one another, making allowance, of course, for 
the one being structural and the other cut in the rock, and the one 
being consequently one storey in height, the other two. Barring 
these inevitable peculiarities they both might have been erected by 
the same architect, and certainly belong to the same age. "What 
that was has been ascertained from an inscription on the Pattadkal 
Temple, which states that it was erected by the Queen of the second 



1 J. R. A. SL, vol. iv. p. 7, et seqq. 

* Burgess's Archaeological Reports, vol. iii. p. 23, etseqq.; 0. Biibler, in Indian 
Antiquary, vol. vi. p. 69, et teqq., where all the known details regarding these Bathors 
wQI be found. 

* Arehteoloffical Reports, vol. L, Plates XXXIX. and XL., for plan and details ; and 
Architecture of Dharuar and Mysore, Plates 54 to £7, for views. 



KAILASA — ELURA, 451 

Vikramaditya Chalukya in the year 733 a.d., 1 and consequently during 
the reign of Dantidurga. Thus confirming the probability, in so 
far as architectural evidence can do so, that the Kailasa was 
excavated during the reign of that monarch. 

Although it is extremely improbable that the Pattadkal temple 
is the earliest example of a structural temple in the Dravidian style 
in India, it certainly is the earliest to which an authentic date can 
be attached, and none with an older appearance have yet been found. 
If, however, our chronology is correct, the Raths at Mahavallipur 
are at least half a century earlier, and even there the conversion of 
the wooden forms of Buddhist viharas into lithic temple architecture 
is bo complete that their intermediate forms must have pre-existed 
somewhere. 

As the case at present stands, those Raths at Mahavallipur are the 
earliest examples known to exist in India of rock-cut, as contra- 
distinguished from cave temples — the Kailasa the latest, and unless 
some detached hills or boulders suitable for the purpose could be 
found, — a temple in a pit is so illogical and such an anomaly 
that none were probably ever executed anywhere else. Besides 
this both the Raths and the Kailasa being in the Dravidian style 
of architecture they belong properly to the south country, where 
caves never were the fashion. The latter, in fact, is the farthest 
north specimen known to exist of the style, and is altogether so 
exceptional that it seems in vain to look for any repetition of it in 
the cave regions. 

Notwithstanding the defects arising from its situation and its 
anomalous design, the Kailasa is by far the most extensive and 
elaborate rock-cut temple in India, and, in so far as dimensions and 
the amount of labour bestowed upon it are concerned, will stand a 
comparison with those of Egypt or any other country. Now, too, that 
its history is practically known, it is one of the most interesting, as 
well as the most magnificent, of all the architectural objects which 
that country at present possesses. 

At the Kailasa the work, instead of being commenced as in all 
antecedent cave temples from the face of the rock, was begun by 
cutting down three mighty trenches in the solid rock, two of them 

1 Archernlogical Reports, vol. iii. p. 81. 

FF 2 



452 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

at right angles to the front of the rock and more than 90 yards m 
length, and the third, connecting their inner ends, over 50 yards 
in length and 107 feet deep, leaving the nearly isolated mass in 
the middle to be carved both on the outside and interior into a 
great monolithic shrine with numerous adjuncts. In front of the 
court in which it stands, a mass of rock has been left to represent 
the Gopura, or great gateway pyramid, which is an indispensable 
adjunct of Dravidian temples. These generally are in atone only 
to height of one storey, above which the pyramidal part is in most 
instances in brick and some lighter substance. Here it is in two 
storeys, the lower one adorned on the outside with the forms of Siva, 
Vishnu, and their congeners, and with rooms inside it. It is not clear 
whether it ever was intended to carry it higher than it now is, but 
from the existence of a diminutive roof-formed projection in the 
top, cut in the rock, it is probable the intention was at all events 
abandoned, if ever proposed. It is besides unlikely, as it would have 
hid the temple entirely from the outside. This Gopura is pierced in 
the centre by an entrance passage (A.> Plate LXXXI.) * with rooms on 
each side. Passing this the visitor is met by a large sculpture of 
Lakshmi seated on lotuses, with her attendant elephants. There are 
some letters and a date on the leaves of the lotus on which she sits, 
but illegible, and probably belonging to the 15th century. On the 
bases of the pilasters on each side have been inscriptions in characters 
of the eighth century, but of these only a few letters remain legible. 
Here we enter right and left, the front portion of the court, which 
is a few feet lower than the rest; and at the north and south endB of 
it stand two gigantic elephants, — that on the south much mutilated. 
Turning again to the east and ascending a few steps, we are in the 
great court of the temple, which measures 276 in length, with an 
average breadth of 154, and with a scarp 107 feet high at the 
back. In the front part of the court stands a mandapa or shrine for 
the Bull Nandi (B. in plan LXXXI.), 26 feet square and two storeys 
in height ; the lower one solid, the upper one connected with the 
Gopura, and with the Temple itself, by bridges cut in the rock. On 
each side of this porch stands a square pillar or dwajastambha or 
ensign staff, 45 feet in height. But to this must be added what 



1 In order that the plans of the Kailasa may he introduced into the work without 
twice folding, the scale on which they are engraved has been reduced to S6 feet to 1 inch 
instead of 25 feet to I inch, which is that usually adopted for plans throughout. 



KAILASA — ELURA. 453 

remains of the trisula of Siva on the top, making up the total height 
to 49 feet, as represented on Plate LXXX., fig. 1. 

A little further back in this court stands the temple itself (0. in 
plan), measuring 164 from east to west, and 109 across where widest, 
and rising to a height of 96 feet to the top of its dome. Like the 
Nandl shrine, its basement is solid, and, as will be seen from the 
plan (LXXXI.), very irregular in form, being a curious example of 
symmetriphobia, which is characteristic of all the Hindu buildings 
of that age. This irregularity is hardly perceived in the elevation 
(Plate LXXXIL), which is in itself a most remarkable conception. 
Between a bold podium and its cornice, it is adorned with a frieze of 
huge elephants, Sa/rdiMas, or griffins, and other mythological animals. 
These are in every possible attitude, feeding, fighting, and tearing 
each other to pieces, but all executed with considerable spirit and 
truth to animal forms, and notwithstanding the freedom with which 
they are executed, all seeming to support the temple above. 

Under the bridge connecting the temple with the mwndapa are 
two large sculptures, — on the west Siva as Kal Bhairava with flam- 
ing eyes and in a state of frenzied excitement, with the Saptdmdtras 
at his feet ; on the other he is represented almost exactly in the 
ascetic attitude of Buddha — as Mahayogi the great ascetic, with 
attendant munis or hermits, and gods. At each side of this bridge a 
stair leads up to the great hall of the temple. On the outer wall of 
the south stair is carved, in a series of lines, the story of the Bdmd- 
yana or war of Rama, aided by Hanuman and his monkeys with 
Havana, the demon king of Lanka ; and on the north side are some 
of the episodes from the other great Hindu epic— the Mahabhdrata or 
account of the great war between the Pandavas and their relatives 
the Kauravas. Behind these bas-reliefs the sculptures of the lofty 
basement of the temple commence, with its row of huge elephants, 
iardMaa, &o. This line is unbroken except on the south side, 
where there has been a bridge across from a balcony of the temple 
to a cave in the scarp, but this bridge has long since fallen. 
Under this is a somewhat spirited sculpture of Ravana under 
Kailasa. Parvati is stretched out clinging to Siva ; while her maid, 
in fright at the shaking of the ground under her feet, is represented 
in the background fleeing for safety (see Plate LXXXIL). 

The interior of the temple and parts at least of the exterior, if 
not the whole, have been plastered over and painted, whence, perhaps, 



454 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the name Ranga Mahal, or Painted Palace, by which it is generally 
known among the natives to the present day. Where the painting 
has not very long ago peeled off, it has had the effect of pre- 
serving the stone inside from the smoke of wandering jogis' and 
travellers' fires, with which it must for ages have been saturated. 

On the roof of the porch of the upper temple some bits of old 
fresco paintings still remain, of two or three successive coatings, that 
might help to give an idea of the style of decoration that at one 
time covered the whole of this great fane. The door of the upper 
temple (C, Plate LXXXI A.), which rests in the solid basement just 
described, is guarded by gigantic Saiva dwdrpdlas, leaning on heavy 
maces. The hall (C), 57 feet wide by 55 deep, has a wide central 
and cross aisle, while in each corner thus formed four massive 
square columns support the roof (Plate LXXXIV., fig. 3). The 
four round the central area are of one pattern, differing only in the 
details of their sculptures ; the remaining twelve are also of one 
general type ; while the sixteen pilasters (Plate LXXXrV., fig. 1) 
are more of the style of the four great central columns. At each 
end of the cross aisle is a door leading out into a side balcony with two 
pillars in front of it richly carved in florid ornamentation. 1 

The effect of this hall crowded by 16 great square piers on its floor 
is extremely different from what we have been accustomed to find in 
Buddhist viharas. In them a large open space was always reserved 
in the centre for the use of the monks and the service of the shrine, 
and the well proportioned pillars are arranged so as to produce the 
best possible architectural effect, by dividing the hall into a centre 
and side aisles. Here, on the contrary, the 16 pillars are spread 
pretty evenly over the whole floor of the hall, evidently for the pur- 
pose of supporting the roof, and being square and massive they do 
produce an almost Egyptian effect of solidity and grandeur unlike 
anything else even in cave architecture known to exist in India. At 
Pattadkal a the 16 pillars are even more evenly spaced over the floor, 
but that being a structural building they are more slender, and do 

1 If the details of these pillars and pilasters are compared with the pilaster repre- 
sented in Plate XL., fig. 1, of Mr. Burgess* first Archaological Report, they will see 
at a glance how nearly the style of the great Saiva temple at Pattadkal resembles that 
of the Kailasa. I am not aware of anything at all like them occurring anywhere else, 
except perhaps in the temple of Aibole close by, and of the same age.— J. F. 

"• Archaological Survey of Western India, vol. i., Plate XXXIX. 



KAILASA — EM7RA. 455 

not crowd it to the same extent. Perhaps it was the failure that 
followed from the architect not providing sufficient supports at 
Mahavallipur (ante, p. 118), which may have induced those who 
designed the Kailasa to err, if error it is, on the side of over 
solidity. But whatever the cause the result gained is satisfactory, 
beyond anything of its class elsewhere in India. 

At the east end of the hall is the vestibule of the shrine (H). On the 
roof is Lakshmi or Anna Purna, standing on a lotus, with high jatd 
headdress. Brahma squats at her right elbow, and perhaps Vishnu 
at her left, with gandharvas at the corners of the sculpture. On the 
north wall of this vestibule was Siva and Parvati, engaged at chausar, 
but the gods are now almost totally destroyed ; on the south waB 
Siva and Parvati upon Nandi couching on a slab supported by four 
gana, and a fifth at the end. Siva has a child on his right knee, 
and behind him are four attendants. 

The dwdrpdlas on each side the shrine door were females, — pro- 
bably Gafiga and Yamuna, one on a mahara, and the other on a 
tortoise (hirma), but the heads of both have been destroyed. 

The shrine is a plain cell 15 feet square inside, with a large rosette 
on the roof. The present altar or sdluhkhd is a modern affair. 
What originally occupied it is uncertain ; it was probably a liiiga- 
shrine from the first, though the female dwdrpdlas might suggest 
that this " Ranga Mahal," or Painted Palace, was dedicated to one 
of the forms of Parvati or Bhavani. 1 

A door in each of the back corners of the hall leads to the terrace 
behind, on which a wide path leads quite round the outside of the 
shrine, which formB the base of the vimdna, sikhara, or spire. This 

1 Tradition says that Raja II of Ilichpur, in Berar, cleaned out and painted the 
Elvira Caves, and that he was afterwards killed in battle by Sayyid Rihman Daulah in 
A.H. 384 or a.d. 994 : this is evidently much too early a date for any Muhammadun 
invasion of the Dekhan. It is possibly connected, however, with part of a painted 
inscription still traceable under a relief of Siva and Yuma near ihe north corner of the 
•west face of the great temple, beginning "Sake 1384 (a.d. 1463), when Kailasa at 
least must have been covered with a freBh coating of plaster and painted in the debased 
style of the age. The temples doubtless suffered severely when Alau'd-Jin took 
Devogiri (now Daulntabad) and forced Raja Ramadeva to cede Ilichpur to his uncle 
Jelalu'd-din, cir. 1294. They were sure also to suffer at the hands of Muhammad 
Tughlik, when he attempted to make Daulatabad his capital (1325-1351) (Elliot and 
Dowson's Hist, of Ind,, vol. vii. p. 189) ; but trudition ascribes their final desecration 
and most of the destruction of the sculpture to Aurangzeb, cir. 1684. 



456 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLEH. 

spire rises to a height of 96 feet from the court below, and is all 
elaborately carved. Below are compartments between pilasters, with 
richly-sculptured finials over each, and the centre of each compart- 
ment is occupied in most cases by some form of Siva, with Vishnu. 
(Plate LXXXII.) On the wall above these are flying figures, and 
over them the horizontal mouldings of the Sikhara begin. 

On the outer side of this platform are five small shrines, in four 
of which are altars as if for the worship of goddesses : the fifth is 
empty. 

Besides their value here as elegant and appropriate adjuncts 
Burrounding the central shrine, these five cells are interesting, as 
illustrative of the class of cells that apparently, at one time 
existed on the terraces of all the pyramidal Buddhist Viharas. 
At Mahavallipur and on the great Sikara here, they have become so 
diminutive that they are unfit for human habitation, and are only 
reminiscences of the original types, and so they remained throughout 
the whole Dravidian period. Here, on the contrary, they are some- 
what exaggerated in the opposite direction, to convert them from 
the abodes of men to temples for gods. But be this as it may, 
it is evident that these shrines are only part of that system by which 
the Viharas of the Buddhists were converted into temples in the 
Dravidian style of architecture, of which the Kailasa is one of the 
oldest and most conspicuous examples known to exist anywhere. 

B-eturningto the entrance of the hall we pass across the bridge out- 
side the porch to a pavilion (B 1 .) with four doors and a broken Nandi 
in it — probably not the original one, for this is but a small bull. 
Beyond this, to the west, are a number of chambers over the entrance 
porch. From these there is access to the roof of the small chambers 
which form the screen in front of the court, and from it good 
views along each side of the great temple can be had. 1 

Descending to the court we may again scramble up (for the steps 
are broken away) into a cave under the scarp on the south Bide ( W), 
measuring about 37 feet by 15, with two square pillars and pilasters 
in front, each pillar having a tall female warder with her hair 
hanging in loose folds towards her left shoulder and with two dwarf 



1 It is from the terrace of south wing that the view in the last woodcut, No. 69, is 
taken. 



KAILASA — ELURA. 457 

attendants. Behind each pillar on the floor is a low square 
pedestal, as if for an altar ; and round the three inner sides of this 
yajnaSdla, or sacrificial hall, as it is sometimes called, are the female 
monsters the Brahmans delighted to teach their votaries to revere 
as the mothers of creation. First, on the •west end, comes 
Wagheswari, four-armed, with trUula, and under her feet the tiger ; 
then a second, somewhat similar figure ; and next, Kal, a grinning 
skeleton with cobra girdle and necklace, seated on two dying men 
— a wolf gnawing the leg of one, — while behind him is Kali, and 
another skeleton companion. On the back wall is (1) Ganapati as 
usual. (2) A female, almost quite destroyed, with a child, sitting 
on a wolf. (3) Indrani, also destroyed. (4) Parvati with a bull in 
front of the seat as a cognizance, her head and the child destroyed. 
(5) Vaishnavi, her arms and the child destroyed, and Garuda 
below. (6) Karttikeyi, bust gone, child crawling on the knee, 
with peacock holding a snake as a chmha or cognizance. (7) A Devi 
with trisula, and having a humped bull below. (8) Saraswati holding 
a rosary. (9) Another Devi, two of her four arms broken off, 
holding a shallow vessel. On the east end are three female seated 
figures without the nimbus and cognizances that mark the others, 
and each holding a chauri or fly-flap : l these are separated from 
the preceding by a fat dwarf, who sits with his back to the 
three. All the figures are quite separate from the wall, and form 
a somewhat imposing assemblage. 

Descending to the court again : under the west end of the yajna- 
Sala is a small low cave (.F., Plate LXXXL), the verandah divided from 
the inner room by a torana or ornamental arch from two attached 
pillars. Inside is an altar for some idol, probably a moveable one. 

Opposite the sculpture of Havana already described, the ascent to 
the seoond storey of the cave in the scarp (£?'.) may be effected by means 
of a ladder. The verandah is 61 feet by 22, inclusive of the two 
pillars in front, and inside is a dark hall 55 feet by 34, with four 
heavy plain pillars, — the shrine scarcely more than begun. A stair 
at the west end of the verandah leads to a third storey, not shown 
in the plan, but almost identical in dimension and arrangement, with 
similar verandah and hall. It is however lighted by two windows, 

1 These three figures are sometimes named by the local Brahmans fovakali, Bhadra- 
kali, and MahakalL They and the dwarf are represented (rather too artistically) in a 
fine plate bj Captain Grindlay in Tratu. B. As. Soc^ rol. ii. p. 487. 



458 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

besides the door, and by an opening in the roof up into a small 
cave that may be noticed at the roadside on the asoent of the 
ghat ; its four pillars support arches on the four sides of the central 
square. 

Passing now to the north side of the court, nearly opposite the 
obelisk, we enter a corridor 60 feet long (E.), with five pill are in the 
front. At the east end is an ascent of two or three steps to a figure of 
Sri or G-aja Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity, with a lotus in each 
hand, and four attendant elephants 1 (Plate LXXXIII., fig. 1). The 
stair to the left of this is badly lighted, but ascends to a fine cave 
called Lank A or Lankeswara, 123 feet long from the back of the 
NandiBhrine to that of the pradakshina, and 60 wide inside the front 
screen. On entering from the stair a low screen-wall, connecting 
the west line of pillars, faces the visitor : to the left, and directly 
in front of the Nandi, which occupies a large recess in this end, is 
the entrance into the hall. 

The roof is low, and supported by 27 massive pillars, besides 
pilasters, most of them richly carved, and of singularly appropriate 
design, but evidently of a later style than the central temple. As will 
be seen from the plan (Plate LXXXI A.) the arrangement of the 
16 pillars in the centre is identical with that of the greater temple, 
only that the central and central cross aisle is somewhat wider, 
and being open on the west and south sides the hall has a more 
spacious and more cheerful appearance than the porch of the temple 
itself, though its dimensions are nearly the same. The pillars are 
all varied in design,* no two of them being exactly alike, and, being 
hardly more than three diameters in height, are more appropriate 
for rock-cut architecture than almost any other in India (Plate 
LXXXTV., fig. 4), and in strange contrast with quasi wooden 
posts that deformed the architecture of Mahavallipur about a cen- 
tury earlier. 



1 We have had occasion to remark the frequency of this sculpture in Buddhist works 
both of early and late date. Like Aphrodite, she sprang from the froth of the ocean 
(when it was churned) in full beauty, with the lotos in her hand. The representation 
of her, bathed by elephants, Beems to have been an equal favourite with the Brahmans. 
With whom is prosperity, abundance and fortune, not a favourite ? 

3 A view of the interior of this temple forms Plate XVI. of my Illustration* of the 
Bock-cut Temples of India, fol., 1845. 



KAILASA — ELURA. 459 

On the inner side each of the pillars on the south face are con- 
nected by a low screen, which, like that at the western entrance, 
is adorned with sculptures. They have been cut with considerable 
care, and the stone being in this place very close-grained the 
carving has been sharp, and would have stood for ages, had not the 
bigotry of ignorant iconoclasts spared no pains to deface the in- 
offensive stone. In the south-west corner was Mahishasuri ; on the 
second pillar Arddhanari, — the face and breast broken, perhaps not 
very long Bince; the third was Bhairava or Virabhadra, terribly 
mutilated ; the fourth Siva and Parvati — entirely gone except the 
feet ; and the fifth, Siva with his left foot on a dwarf, and Parvati 
at his right hand. At the end of the aisle has been a boldly exe- 
cuted Siva dancing the tdndava, with a skull withering in his head- 
dress. 1 

On the right-hand Bide of the entrance to the pradakshina is a 
sculpture of Siva and Parvati with Havana below, and a maid 
running off; in the north entrance are the same gods playing at 
chmusar — the board distinctly represented, a plantain-tree behind, 
and the Nandi and gana below. 

On each side the shrine door is a female guardian, one standing 
on a malcara, the other on a Jedrma or tortoise, — probably Gang4 and 
Yamuna, as in the great temple. The Mluhhhd or altar inside the 
shrine has been smashed. On the back wall of the shrine, in very 
low relief, is a grotesque Trimurti, or bust of Siva with three faces, 
representative of three phases of his supposed character as Brahma, 
Vishnu, and itudra. 

In the back aisle of the cave are a series of pretty large sculp- 
tures : — 1. At the east end is Vishnu as Surya or the Sun-god, 
with two hands, holding flowers, and with male and female atten- 
dants on each side holding buds, — one with a spear and oval shield. 
2. On the back wall, Varaha holding up Prithvi. 3. Parvati or Uma 
performing austerity or tapas between two fires, four-armed, and 
holding up GTanapati as an ensign or dwaja. 4. In the middle com- 
partment are three figures, — in the centre Siva, four-armed, with 
brihda and cobra, Nandi on his left, and an attendant on right ; to 
the left of Siva is Vishnu ; and to the right a three-faced Brahma. 

1 This is the subject of Capt. Grindlay's fourth plato at p. 326, Tram. & As. Soc., 
vol. ii. 



460 BRAHMANICAL CAVB-TBMPLEB. 

5. In the next recess is Narasinha, the lion-avatdra of Vishnu, 
tearing the bowels out of his victim, and supported by GTaruda and 
gana. 6. A large Ganapati. 

On each side the recess for Nandi, in the west end of the hall, is a 
four-armed dwdrpdla, with huge clubs having axe-edges protruding 
from the heads of them. 

In a recess at the east end of the balcony in front are the Sapta- 
matra on a small scale, and some remains of grotesque paintings. 

In the court below, just behind the northern elephant, is a small 
shrine with two pillars in front (/.). The back wall is divided into 
three compartments, each containing a tall river goddess with 
creepers, water plants, and birds in the background. They stand re- 
spectively on a tortoise, a makara, and a lotus, and must represent 
Ganga, Yamuna, and Sarasvati. Above this is a small unfinished 
cave (i*), whioh it was apparently intended to extend considerably 
inwards, but only the drift ways, have been excavated. 

Returning now to the south side of the court a doorway at the 
east end of the unfinished hall ((?.), under the fallen bridge that 
once led from the upper temple to the scarp, leads into the corridor 
which surrounds the whole back half of the court on the ground 
floor. On the south side (J.) it measures 118 feet in length. 
The wall is divided by pilasters into twelve compartments, each 
containing a large sculpture. They are as follows : — 

1. Perhaps Anim PArna, four-armed, holding a waterpot, rosary, 
spike or bud, and wearing her hair in the jatd style, resembling 
Lakshmi. 2. Said to be Siva as Balaji who slew Indrajit, the son 
of Ravana, but very like Vishnu, four-armed with club, discus or 
chakra, and conch or iahkha, with a supplicant, and a small female 
figure in front of his club. 3. Vishnu, four-armed, with the Sahkha, 
holding by the tail the seven-hooded snake Kaliya, he is armed with a 
sword, and has his foot on its breast. 4. Varaha raising Prithvi ; he 
is four-armed, with chakra and Sahkha, and has the snake under his 
foot. 5. A four armed Vishnu on Garuda, the man-eagle that 
carries him. 6. The Vamana or dwarf incarnation of Vishnu, six- 
armed, with long sword, club, shield, chakra, and Sahkha, with his 
foot uplifted over the head of Bali holding his pot of jewels, as in 
the Das* Avatara. 7. A four-armed Vishnu upholding the lintel 
of the compartment, intended to represent the base of a hill, over 



KAILASA— ELtJRA. 461 

the flocks of Vraj. 8. Sesha Narayana, or Vishnu, on the great 
snake, and Brahma on the lotus springing from his navel, with five 
fat little figures below. 9. Narasifiha, or the lion-incarnation of 
Vishnu tearing out the entrails of his enemy. 10. A figure with 
three faces, and four arms trying to pull up the lihga. 11. Siva, 
four-armed, with his bull Nandi. 12. Arddhanari, or the androgy- 
nous personification of Siva, four-armed, with Nandi. 

The sculptures in the 12 corresponding bays (K., Plate LXXXI.), 
on the north side of the court are, beginning in like manner from 
the west end: — 1. The linga of Maha D6va surrounded by nine 
heads and supported by Ravana. 2. Gaura Parvati, and beneath 
Havana writing. 3. Maha Deva, Parvati, and beneath Nandi. 

4. The same subject slightly varied. 5. Vishnu. 6. Gaura Parvati. 
7. Bakta (a votary of Vishnu) with his legs chained. 8. Gaura 
Parvati. 9. The same subject differently treated, as indeed are all 
the bas-reliefs, when the same deities are represented. 10. Another 
repetition of the same subject. 11. Vishnu and Laksmi. 12. Bala 
Bhadra issuing from the pinda or linga of Maha Ddva. 

The 19 subjects occupying the compartments (L.) at the east end 
of the courtyard, beginning from the northern end, are *. — 1. Gaura 
and Parvati. 2. Bhdru with Gdvinda Raja transfixed on his spear. 
3. Daitasur on a chariot drawing a bow. 4. Gaura and Parvati. 

5. Kala Bheru. 6. Narasifiha Avatara issuing from the pillar. 
7. Kala Bheru. 8. Bala Bheru. 9. Vishnu. 10. Govinda. 11. 
Brahma. 12. Lakshmi Das. 13. Mahmund. 14. Narayana. 15. 
Bheru. 16. Gdvinda. 17. Bala Bheru. 18. Gdvinda Raja and 
Lakshmi. 19. Krishna Das. 1 Showing throughout the same ad- 
mixture of Saiva and Vaishnave mythology which characterises all 
the Brahmanical temples, anterior to the rise of the Lingayet Beet. 
After that time the two sects became distinct, and no such toleration 
of rival creeds is anywhere to be found. 

While passing along these corridors the visitor has the best 
opportunity of studying the variety in, and effects of, the great 
elephant base that surrounds the central temple. 

1 A description of these sculptures on the north and east sides of the courtyard 
having beeu omitted from Mr. Burgess' account of this temple I have supplied them 
from Sir Charles Malet's description {Asiatic Researches, vol. vi., p. 409). The 
mythological determinations I have no doubt are correct, though the descriptions 
are not so full, nor the transliteration from the Sanskrit names may not be so perfect 
as Mr. Burgess might have made it. — J. F. 



462 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

A door from the north corridor (K.) leads into a continuation of it, 
57 feet long, (M.) but without sculptures at the back : the two front 
pillars however, as seen from the court, are elegantly ornamented. It 
is situated immediately under the Lankeswara cave, and at one time it 
Beems to have been intended to continue it inwards, but whether 
from fear of endangering the stability of that cave, or from some 
other cause the idea was abandoned. 

Assuming the temple itself to have been excavated by Danti 
Durga (725-755), it is evident, both from its position in the scarp 
and the style of its ornamentation, that the Lankeswara was ex- 
cavated subsequently to the great temple, though at what interval 
of time it is impossible to say. The same may be said of this gallery 
(«/"., K., and L.), surrounding the inner side of the court on the ground 
floor, which, from the way the rock overhangs it, was evidently no 
part of the original design. The probability seems to be that these 
parts may have been added by the second or third Gdvindas, 765 to 
810, or even by Amogha Varsha, whose reign began in the last 
named year. 1 In fact, we are probably justified in considering this 
great temple and its adjuncts occupied some 80 or 100 years in 
execution. Bach successive sovereign of the Rathor or Balhara 
dynasty contributing, according to his means, towards its completion. 

It is indeed difficult to understand how so vast a work as the Kai- 
lasa, with its surroundings, could have been completed in less time 
with the limited mechanical means available at that age. Even 
allowing all the time this would imply, and granting that all the 
superfluous wealth of the Rathor princes was placed at the disposal 
of the Brahmans, to commemorate their triumph over the Buddhists, 
the Kailasa must always remain a miracle of patient industry applied 
to well defined purpose. It far exceeds, both in extent and in elabo- 
ration, any other rock-cut temple in India, and is and muBt always 
be considered one of the most remarkable monuments that adorn a 
land so fertile in examples of patient industry and of the pious 
devotedness of the people to the service of their gods. 

On the face of the hill above the scarp in which the caves from 
Kailasa to Sita's Nani are excavated, are a large number of small 
caves, scattered in groups up and down, but many of them on the 
stream that comes over the cliff near the last-named cave. Some of 



Indian Antiquary, vol. vi. p. 72. 



DHAMNAR CAVES. 



463 



these are curious from their having small open courts entered by a 
door with a Dravidian pediment upon it ; others have Trimurtis on 
the back wall of the shrines, which contain round sdlunlchds and 
lingas in them : the oldest sdlwnlchds are square. On the ceilings of 
two of them fragments of paintings are still left. 



Dhamnar Brahmanical Rock-cut Temple. 

About the same time that the Brahmans undertook the excavation 
of the Kailasa at Elura, they also commenced a rock-cut temple for 
a similar purpose at Dhamnar. As before mentioned {ante, p. 392), 
the Buddhist caves there are excavated in the scarp of a hill of coarse 
laterite. On the top of this, in the centre of the caves, the Brahmans 
have dug a pit, mea- 
suring 104 feet by 
67, in the centre of 
which they have left 
standing a mass of 
rock which they have 
hewn into a mono- 
lithic temple, 48 feet 
in length by 33 feet 
in width across the 
portico. This time, 
however, instead of being like the Kailasa, in the Dravidian style 
of architecture, it is in the Indo-Aryan style of the north of India, 
and instead of being dedicated to Siva it is wholly Vaishnave, being 
dedicated to Chatturbhuja, the four-armed manifestation of Vishnu. 
It is true, a linga has recently been introduced into the cell, but 
there is no doubt about its original dedication. Externally its 
architecture very much resembles that of the temple at Barrolli* 
situated about 50 miles further north, and of about the same age, 
though the porch at Dhamnar is larger and somewhat differently 
arranged, more resembling that of the Kailasa, though on a much 
smaller scale. 

As will be seen from the plan the principal temple is surrounded, 
like the Kailasa, by five smaller shrines. These, however, are here 




No. 70. Rock-Temple at Dhamnar, (From a plan by General 
Cunningham.) Scale SO ft. to 1 in. 



1 Picturesque Illustrations of Ancient Architecture in JJindostan, folio, London, 
1847, Plate VII. 



464 BUAHMANICAL CAVE -TEMPLES. 

quite detaohed, and stand by themselves on the ground, and two 
more are placed on the right and left of the entrance. Owing to their 
exiguity theBe Bmall detached cells, for the display of the various 
manifestations of the deity, have in most instances disappeared in 
India, but in Brahznanical temples in Java, about the same age, the 
ByBtem was carried to excess. At Brambanan the central temples 
were surrounded by 16, 160, and even 238 small detached shrines, 
each containing an image of the god to whom the principal temple 
was dedicated, or some sculptured representation connected with his 
worship. 1 In India a more frequent mode of displaying these was 
to arrange them in a continuous gallery, such as that round the 
eastern end of the court of the Kailasa, and such as are generally 
found in Jaina templeB. Either of these plans was preferable to 
the Dravidian mode of crowding these cells on the successive storeys 
of their Gopurae or their Temples, and placing the images, or the 
manifestations of the God, outside in front of the cells. 

A crooked passage, 282 feet long, leads from the face of the rock 
to the courtyard of the temple, so that it is not seen from the 
outside at all, and all the anomalous effects of a temple in a pit 
which were pointed out in speaking of the Kailasa are here 
exaggerated to a ten-fold extent. Besides these defects in design, 
this temple at Dhamnar is so small that it would hardly merit 
notice here, were it not, that like the Kailasa it marks the final 
triumph of the Brahmans over the Buddhists in the eighth century, 
and was placed here for that purpose. In an architectural sense, 
however, it is valuable, as being a perfectly unaltered example of 
the northern, as the Kailasa is of the southern, style of architecture 
as practised at an age when the idea of utilising the living rock 
for the purposes of architectural display was fast dying out. 

1 Hut. of Indian and East. Arch., p. 652. 



465 



CHAPTER VI. 
LATE BRAHMANICAL CAVES. 
Elephanta. 

The island of Elephanta or G-harapuri, as it is called by the 
Hindus, is about six miles from Bombay, and four from the shore of 
the mainland. 1 It was named Elephanta by the Portuguese from a 
large stone elephant 13 feet 2 inches in length, and about 7 feet 4 
inches high, that stood near the old landing-place on the south side 
of the island. 

The great cave is in the western hill of the island, and at an 
elevation of about 250 feet above high-water level. It is hewn out 
of a hard compact trap rock, which has also been cut away on either 
side, leaving open areas affording entrances from its east and west 
sides. The principal entrance faces the north. 

The accompanying ground plan (Plate LXXXV.) will convey the 
best general idea of the form and arrangement of the parts of the cave. 
From the front entrance to the back it measures about 130 feet, and 
its length from the east to the west entrance is the same. It does 
not, however, occupy the entire square of this area. As in the 



1 The principal notices of Elephanta are in J. H. Van Linschoten (1579) Discourse 
of Voyages (Lend. 1598), Boke I. ch. xliv. p. 80; Diogo de Couto (1603), Da Asia, 
Dec. VTIma. liv. iii. cap. 11; Fryer (1673) New Account of East India and Persia, 
p. 75 ; J. Ovington, Voyage to Suratt in 1689, pp. 158-161 ; Capt. A. Hamilton, 
Nev> Account of the East Indies (ed. 1744 \ vol. i. pp. 241, 242; Pyke (1712) in 
Archaologia, vol. vii. pp. 323-332 ; A. du Perron, Zend-Avesta, disc. preL torn. i. 
pp. ccccxix-ccccxxiii. ; C. Nicbuhr (1764), Voyage en Arabic, S(C, tom.ii. pp. 25-33 ; 
Grose, Voyage from England to India (1750), vol. i. pp. 59-£2 ; Dr. W. Hunter, in 
Archaologia, vol vii. pp. 286-295 ; H. Macneil, ib., voL viii. pp. 270, 277 ; Asiat. 
Res. vol. iv. pp. 409-417 ; Forbes, Oriental Memoirs, vol. i. pp. 423, 432-435, 441- 
448; Erekinein Trans. Bom. Lit. Soc. vol. i. pp. 198-250; Fergusson, Rock-Cut 
Temples, pp. 54, 55 ; Dr. J. Wilson, Calcutta Review, vol. xlii. (1866) pp. 1-25 ; and 
my Rock Temples of Elephanta or Gharapuri (illustrated), Bombay, 1871. 
V 1M. Q Q 



466 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Dumar Lena at Elura (Plate LXXIX.), which it closely resembles 
even in details, the porticoes on the three open sideB are only about 
54 feet long and 16£ feet deep. Omitting these and the back aisle, 
in front of three of the principal sculptured compartments, and 
which is of about the same dimensions as each portico, we may con- 
sider the body of the cave as a square of about 91 feet each way. 
It is supported by six rows of columns, six in each row, except at 
the corners and where the uniformity is broken on the west side to 
make room for the shrine or Sacellum, which occupies a space equal 
to that enclosed by four of the columns. The' plan shows too the 
irregularities of the dimensions, irregularities that do not at first 
sight strike the eye, but, as may be observed in the ground plans, 
which prevail in almost all the cave-temples. By actual measurement 
it is found that scarcely two columns are exactly alike in the sizes of 
even their principal details, and often are not even square, nor three 
of them in a line. The angles at the corners differ considerably from 
right angles, and the depth of the cave as well as its height varies 
in the east and west sides. 

The porticoes have each two pillars and two pilasters or demi- 
columns in front. The columns are very massy and were originally 
twenty-six in number with sixteen attached ones. But eight of the 
separate pillars have been destroyed, and others are much injured. 
As neither the floor nor the roof are perfectly horizontal, they vary 
in height from 15 to 17 feet. The aisle at the back has a chamber 
at each end of it 16 feet by 17^ or 18 feet. The portico on the 
east side opens into a court, from which an ascent of a few steps 
on the south leads into a smaller cave. At the other end of the 
great hall is also an open court, with a water cistern on the south 
side, of which a portion of the roof has fallen in, and with other 
debris now almost fills it up. At the west side of this court is 
a small open chapel with a liiiga shrine at the back. 

The pillars closely resemble those of the Dherwara Buddhist caves, 
and of several of the Brahmanical caves at Elura, with a thick 
projecting cushion-shaped member as the principal feature of the 
capital. Imitations of wooden beams over the pillars run across 
the cave. (Woodcut 65.) 

It is a matter of some difficulty to fix the age of this temple, and 
the only record that could have helped us to its solution, like too 



ELEPHANTA. 



467 



many others that have been re- 
moved from their original sites by 
officious or dishonest pedantry, has 
long been lost. Diogo de Couto, 
the Portuguese annalist, says: — 
" When the Portuguese took Bacaim 
and its dependencies they went to 
this pagoda and removed a famous 
stone over the entrance that had 
an inscription of large and well 
written characters, which was sent 
to the king, after the Governor of 
India had in vain endeavoured to 
find out any Hindu or Moor in 
the Bast who could decipher them. 
And the king D. Io&o III. also 
used all his endeavours to the same 
purpose, but without any effect, 
and the stone thus remained there, 
and now there is no trace of it." 1 Architecturally we may regard 
it as probably belonging to the latter part of the eighth or begin- 
ning of the ninth century of our era. 2 

The most striking of the sculptures is the famous colossal three- 
faced bust, at the back of the cave facing the entrance, called a 
Trimurti, or tri-form figure. It occupies a recess 10i feet deep, and 
is 21 feet 6 inches in width, rising from a base about 2 feet 9 inches 
in height. In the corners of the opening, both in the floor and 
lintel, are holes as if to receive door posts, and in the floor is a 
groove, as if a screen had been used for occasionally concealing the 
sculpture, or perhaps ' there was a railing here to keep back the 

crowd. 

The central face has a mild and tranquil appearance ; s the lower 




No. 6.5. Pillar in Cave at Elephauta, from 
a photograph. 



1 De Couto, Da Asia (ed. Lisboa, 1778), Dec. VII. liv.iii.cap. 11. in torn. vii. p. 259. 

* I would feel inclined to place it slightly earlier. The Dumar Lena I take to be 
earlier than the Kailasa at Elura, and consequently was moat probably excavated 
between 700 and 725 a.d. This cave seems to have followed almost immediately after- 
wards, and may therefore have been well advanced if not completed before 750 aj>. — 

J.F. 

* The general arrangement aud appearance of this sculpture may be gathered from 
the neatly contemporary one at Elura, Plate LXXV., fig. 2. 

G G 2 



468 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

lip is thick ; the breast is ornamented with a necklace of large stones 
or pearls, and below it a rich jewel breast ornament ; in the left 
hand he holds what may represent a gourd, as the kamandala or 
drinking vessel of an ascetic Brahman or Yogi. The right hand, 
like the nose, has been mutilated, but when it was entire, it 
perhaps held the snake, the head of which still remains behind 
his right ear. The headdress or mukuta is fastened by the 
folds or bands that encompass the neck ; it is richly wrought, and 
high up on the right side it bears a crescent, a peculiar emblem of 
Siva. The jewel in front " is certainly," as Mr. Erskine remarks, 
" both for elegance of design and beauty of execution one of the 
finest specimens of Hindu taste anywhere to be met with." 

The face to the spectator's left is that of Eudra, or Siva as 
the Destroyer. His right hand comes up before his breast, and the 
cobra, one of his favourite Bymbols, is twisted round the wriBt, 
and with its hood expanded looks him in the face, while he ap- 
pears to contemplate it with a grim smile. His tongue appears 
between his slightly parted lips, and at the corner of the mouth 
a tusk projects downwards. The brow has an oval prominence in 
the centre, representing the third eye which Siva has in his fore- 
head — always represented on his images vertically bb opening up the 
forehead. 

The third face of the Trimurti, that to the spectator's right, has 
generally been regarded, and perhaps correctly, as Siva in the 
character of Vishnu the Preserver, holding in his right hand one of 
his emblems, a lotus flower. It is very tastefully sculptured with 
festoons of pearl pendants on the head-dress. 

On each side of the Trimurti recess is a pilaster in front of which 
stand gigantic dwarpalas or doorkeepers. The one to the right (at a 
on the plan) is 12 feet 9 inches high, and is now the most entire of the 
two. The cap, like most of those on the larger figures, is high and 
has round it a Bort of double coronal of plates. The left arm leans 
on the head of a Ptidcha, or dwarf demon, who is about 7 feet high, 
and has on his head a wig with a smooth surface ; he wears a neck- 
lace and a folded belt across his stomach. 

The dwarpala, on the east side, is 13 feet 6 inches high, and is 
similarly attended by a dwarf Pisacha standing in a half crouching 
attitude, with prominent eyes, thick lips from between which his 
tongue hangs out. 



ELEPHANTA. 469 

In approaching the Trimurti we pass the shrine or garbha of the 
temple on the right. It is entered by a door on each of the four 
sides, each approached by six steps, which raise the level of the 
floor of the sanctuary 3 feet 8 inches above that of the temple. On 
each Bide the doors is a gigantic dwarpala (woodcut No. 65) or guard, 
from 14 feet 10 inches to 15 feet 2 inches in height, and each 
standing on a low base, several of them attended by dwarfs. 

The doors into the shrine have plain jambs with two plain fascias 
round them. Inside are the sockets of the door posts both in the 
floor and roof. The chamber or sacellum is perfectly plain inside, 
and about 19^ feet square. In the middle of the room stands a base 
or altar (vedi) 9 feet 9 inches square, and about 3 feet high. In the 
centre of this is placed the Linga, cut from a stone of a harder and 
closer grain than that in which the cave is executed. The lower 
end of the Linga is 2 feet 10 inches square, and is fitted into a hole 
in the vedi or base. The upper portion is circular, of the same 
diameter, about 3 feet in height and rounded above. This plain 
stone — the symbol representative of Siva as the male energy of pro- 
duction, or source of the generative power in nature, as the Toni or 
circle in which it stands is of the passive or female power — is the 
idol of a Saiva temple, the central object of worship, to which every- 
thing else is only accessory or subsidiary. The Sdluhkd or top of 
the pedestal is somewhat hollowed towards the linga, to receive the 
oil, ghi, <&c, poured on it by the worshippers, and which are carried 
off by a spout or prandlikd on the north side, but this is now broken 
off. 

The compartment to the east of the Trimurti (marked A on the 
plan) contains many figures grouped about a gigantic Arddhanari 
not unnaturally mistaken by European visitors ignorant of Hindu 
mythology for an Amazon. This figure is 16 feet 9 inches in 
height ; it leans to the right, which, as usual in the representations 
of Arddhanari, iB the male Bide, and with one of its four arms rests 
on the bull Nandi. The headdress is the usual high one, with 
two heavy folds descending on the left or female side of it and 
reaching the shoulder, while the right side differs in ornamentation 
and bears a orescent. On the left Bide the hair falls down along the 
brow in a series of small ringlets, while on the right there is a line 
of knobs at the under edge of the cap. The female breast and 
pelviB on the left are much exaggerated. The back pair of hands is in 



470 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

fair preservation, the right holds up the ndga or cobra, the left a 
metallic mirror, and has rings on the middle and little fingers. 
Opposite to the upturned back left arm Vishnu is represented riding 
upon Garuda. Vishnu has here four arms, the front left hand 
seems to have rested on his knee, the other is raised and holds 
his ckakra or discus. 

On the right or male side of Arddhanari, and on a level with 
Vishnu and Garuda, are Indra and Brahma, the latter seated on a 
lotus throne supported by five wild geese which are his vdhana. 

In a recess between Brahma and the uplifted right arm of Ard- 
dhanari is Indra the King of the Vaidik gods, the Jupiter Pluvius -of 
the old Hindus, the god of the firmament, riding on the celestial 
elephant Airavati who sends the rain from his trunk. He holds the 
vajra or thunderbolt in his left hand, and in his right what may have 
been the ankus or goad for driving the elephant. Numerous other 
figures fill up the remainder of the compartment. 

The compartment to the west of the Trimurti (marked B on the 
plan) is 13 feet wide by 17 feet 1 inch in height, with a base rising 
2 feet 6 inches from the floor. The two principal figures are Siva, 
and at his left hand his sakti — Parvatl or Uma. 

The figure of Siva is 16 feet high and has four arms ; the two left 
ones are now broken off. As elsewhere, he has a high cap with three 
pointed plates rising out of the band of it, and a smaller one in front 
of that on the forehead. Between these is a crescent over each 
temple. From the crown rises a sort of cup or shell in which is a 
singular three-headed female figure of which the arms are broken 
off. It probably represents the three principal streamB, which, 
according to Hindu geography, form the main stream of their sacred 
river, namely, the Ganga, the Yamuna or Jamna, and the Saraswati, 
or it is a female triad, the mythological union of the idklfo or con- 
sorts of the three great divinities ; it is repeated in the Brahmanical 
cave at Aiho}£. 

On Siva's left stands Parvati, about 12 feet 4 inches high, wearing 
a oirclet round the brow, from under which the hair is represented in 
small curls round the brow. The headdress rises in tiers, and has a 
pointed plate in front, and behind the neck on the right side is a 
sort of cushion, perhaps of the back hair. Her dress comes over the 
right leg, the corner falling to the ankle, and then passes over the 
left leg, and a Ioobo robe hangs over her right arm. 



ELEPHANTA. 471 

On Siva's right, as in the last compartment, are Brahma and Indra. 
On Parvati's left we find Vishnu on Graruda. 

Passing by the south side of the shrine to the west porch, we 
come to the fourth compartment (marked C in the plan), which 
represents the marriage of Siva and Parvati, in which she stands 
at his right hand, a position which the wife rarely occupies except 
on the day of her marriage. 

Siva wears the usual high mulcuta or cap corrugated above, and 
which has behind it a sort of oval disc occupying the place of the 
nimbus or aureole. 

Parvati or Uma is 8 feet 6 inches high ; her hair escapes in little 
curls from under the broad jewelled fillet that binds the brow ; and 
behind the head is a small disc, possibly in this case a part of the 
dress. She wears heavy ear-rings and several necklaces, from one 
of which a string hangs down between her breasts and ends in a 
tassel. The robe that hangs from her zone is indicated by a series 
of slight depressions between the thighs. 

At Siva's left, crouching on his hams, is a three-faced Brahma 
who is acting the part of priest in the ceremony. 

The fifth compartment is that (marked D on the plan) on the 
south side of the eastern portico. Siva and Parvati are represented 
in it seated together on a raised floor and both adorned as in the 
other sculptures. Behind Parvati's right shoulder stands a female 
figure carrying a child astraddle on her left side ; this is probably 
intended to represent a nurse bearing Karttikeya called also Skanda 
and Mahasena, the war-god, the son of Siva, born to destroy the 
power of Tarak, a giant demon, who by penance secured such 
power that he troubled earth, hell, and heaven, deprived the gods of 
their sacrifices, and drove them in pitiable fright to seek the aid of 
Brahma. Other figures of attendants fill up the rest of the com- 
partment. 

The rock over the heads of Siva and Parvati is carved into 
patterns somewhat resembling irregular frets disposed on an uneven 
surface intended to represent the rocks of Kailasa. On clouds on 
each side are the usual celestial attendants or (xandharvas and 
Apsarasas rejoicing and scattering flowers. 

On the north side of the east portice is a compartment facing the 
last and similar to it (marked E on the plan) in which Siva and 
Parvati again appear seated together in the upper half of the recess 



472 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

attended by Bhringi, GaneSa, and others. Under them is the ten- 
faced Havana, King of Lanka or Ceylon, the grandBon of Pulastya. 
According to the legend Havana got under Kailasa or the Silver 
mountain that he might carry it off to Lanka, and so have 
Siva all to himself and make sure of his aid against Rama. 
Parvati perceiving the movement, called in fright to Siva, on 
which he, raising his foot, pressed down the mount on Havana's 
head, and fixed him where he was for ten thousand years, until his 
grandfather Pulastya taught him to propitiate Siva and perform 
austerities, after which he was released, and became a devoted Saiva. 
Havana's back is turned to the spectator, and a sword is stuck in hi8 
waistband ; his faces are entirely obliterated, and only a few of his 
twenty arms are now traceable. 

Passing again to the west end of the cave to the compartment marked 
F on the plan, the principal figure — Kapalabhrit — has been a standing 
one about 11^ feet in height. The headdress is high and has much 
carving upon it, with a Bkull and cobra over the forehead and the 
crescent on the right. The face is indicative of rage, the lips set, 
with tusks projecting downwards from the corners of the mouth, 
and the eyes large as if swollen. Over the left Bhoulder and across 
the thighs hangs the mvmdamdld or rosary of human skulls. A 
weapon seems to have been stuck into the waist cloth, of which some 
folds hang over the right hip. His arms were eight, but five of 
them with both the legs are now broken. The small human body 
on his left was transfixed by a short spear held in the front left 
hand, as in the Das Avatara sculpture of the same scene. The 
second right hand wields a long sword, without guard, with 
which he seems about to slay his victim, the third left hand 
holds a bell as if to intimate the moment to strike the fatal blow, 
and the second presents a bowl under the victim to receive its blood, 
while a cobra twists round the arm. The third right hand held up 
a human form by the legs. 

This is Bhairava or Kapalabhrit, a form of Hudra or Siva, and 
one of the most common objects of worship among the Mara^ha 
people. 

The eighth compartment is that on the right side when entering 
the north portico (marked Q on the plan). The compartment is 
13 feet wide and 11 feet 2 inches high, raised on a low base. The 
figure of Siva in the centre is about 10 feet 8 inches in height It 



ELEPHANTA. 473 

has had eight arms, nearly all broken. The headdress secured by 
a band, passing under the chin, is the usual high one. 

To the left of Siva is a female figure 6 feet 9 inches high, probably 
Parvati. She wears large ear-rings, rich bracelets, and a girdle 
"with carefully carved drapery, but her face and breasts are defaced. 
Brahma, Vishnu, Indra, Bhringi, GaneSa, and others, attend on 
Mahadeva as he dances the Tandava. 

Facing the last (at H on the plan) is a compartment containing 
Siva as Mahayogi, or the Great Ascetic. Not only in the position 
given to the ascetic does this figure resemble that of Buddha, but 
many of the minor accessories are scarcely disguised copies. Siva 
has only two arms, both of them now broken off at the shoulder ; he 
is seated cross-legged on a padmdsana or lotus seat, and the palms of 
his hands probably rested in his lap, between the upturned soles of 
the feet, as in most images of Buddha and the Jaina Tirthankaras. 
The stalk of the lotus forming the seat is upheld by two figures, 
shown only down to the middle, corresponding to the Naga-canopied 
supporters of the padmdsana of Buddha. The attendants of course 
are different, one of them being Uma or Parvati. 

By a flight of nine steps we descend from the eastern side of the 
Great Temple into a court fully 55 feet in width, which has been 
quite open to the north, but the entrance is now filled up with earth 
and stones. In the middle of the court is a circular platform only 
2 or 3 inches in height and 16 feet 3 inches in diameter. It is 
directly in front of the shrine in the temple to the south, and also in 
that of the great cave to the west of it, and was most probably the 
position of the Nandi or great bull which always faces the Linga 
shrine, but no trace of it is known to exist now. 

The temple on the south of this area is raised on a panelled 
basement about 3£ feet high, which again stands on a low platform 
2 feet 4 inches in height. The front is about 50 feet in length and 
18J feet in height from the platform. It was divided into five 
spaces by four columns and two pilasters, but there are now only 
traces of the column in the west end of the facade. 

On each side the steps leading up to this temple are bases (n m), 
on which stand tigers or leogriffs, as at the Dumar Lena. 

Inside, the mandapa or portico of this temple measures 58 feel 
4 inches by 24 feet 2 inches. At each end it has a chamber, and at 



474 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

the back the garbha or linga shrine with a pradakshina or passage 
round it. The shrine is 13 feet 10 inches wide and 16 feet 1 inch 
deep. In the middle of the floor stands a low square altar, in the 
middle of which is a linga of the same compact stone as that in the 
shrine of the Great Temple. 

At the back of the mandapa near the east end is a gigantic statue 
or dwarpala with two attendant PiSachas. Near the west end is a 
similar Btatue, reaching nearly to the roof, with four arms and the 
usual protuberance indicative of the third eye in the forehead. 

At the west end of this portico is a small chapel marked N on the 
plan, 11 feet 7 inches in depth by about 27 feet 7 in width inside, and 
with two pillars and two pilasters in front. Inside this, at the 
south end, is a large figure of Ganesa, with several attendants. 

A.t the north end is a standing figure of Siva, holding in his hands 
the shaft of what was probably a triiula. On his right is Brahma, 
supported by his hansas, and other figures. On the left of Siva iB 
"Vishnu on Garuda, holding his mace in one of his right hands. In 
one of his left hands he has his chakra, and in the other his §ahk1ia. 
On the back wall of this chapel are sculptured ten principal 
figures, probably the Matras or divine Mothers, with Ganapati — but 
all much defaced. Opposite this chapel, at the east end of the 
portico, is another also with two pillars, and two pilasters in front, 
but perfectly plain inside. 

Besides the Great Temple there are three others at no great 
distance, though quite distinct from it. The first of these is 
towards the south-east on the same level and faces E.N.E. Its 
extreme length is about 109^ feet, inclusive of the chapel at the 
north end. The facade, however, is completely destroyed, and the 
entrance almost filled up with a bank of earth and debris. The front 
was nearly 80 feet in length, and must have been supported by a 
number of columns, now all perished. Inside, the portico or mandapa 
was 85 feet long by 35 feet deep. At the north end of this is a 
chapel supported in front by four octagonal columns. The chapel 
is about 39 feet in width by 22 in breadth, and perfectly plain 
inside. At the back of the portico are three large chambers or 
linga shrines. 

At the south end of the portico of this cave is the second detached 
cock-temple, still more dilapidated than the last. The width of its 



JOGESWAItl. 475 

mandapa or portico can scarcely be determined, the length inside 
was about 50 feet 2 inches. At each end there seems to have been 
a chapel or room with pillars in front, and cells at the back. 

The shrine is a plain room 19 feet 10 inches deep by 18 feet 
10 inches wide with a low vedi or altar 7 feet square, containing a 
lihga. On each side is a cell about 15 feet square entering from, 
the portico by doors which have projecting pilasters and ornamental 
pediments. They are much destroyed, but the horse-shoe ornament 
so frequent in the Buddhist caves is repeated several times over the 
door and forms the principal feature. 

Crossing the ravine in front of the first three caves, and ascend- 
ing the opposite hill to a height of upwards of 100 feet above the 
level of the Great Temple, we come to a fourth excavation bearing 
nearly E.N.E. from it. 

The portico has four pillars and two pilasters 8 feet 5 inches high 
and about 3 feet square at the base. The style of moulding is 
similar to those of the columns in the other caves, but the propor- 
tions differ ; they are square to a height of 4 feet 6^ inches from the 
step on which they stand, and above this they are sixteen sided with 
the exception of a thin crowning member of 1^ inches, which is 
square. The mandapa is 73 feet 6 inches long, and about 26£ feet 
wide with three cells at the back. The end cells are empty, and the 
central chamber is the shrine, the door into which has neat pilasters 
and a frieze. About 150 yards to the north of this last is another 
small excavation, being little more than the commencement of 
what was perhaps intended for three cells. Still farther on to the 
north-east, and just under the summit, are three wells cut in the 
rock, with openings about 2i feet square, similar to the cisterns 
found beside many Buddhist excavations. 

JOGESWAKI OR AMBOLI. 

A short distance to the south of the Mahakal or Kondivte caves, 
in the island of Salsette, is the Jogeswari Cave with its appendages, 
excavated in a rising hummock of rock, and at so low a level that 
water stands in the floor of the great hall most of the dry season. 

This is the third of the great Brahmanical caves of its class known 
to exist in India. The other two being the Dumar Lena, or Sita ka 
Nani at Elura, and the great cave at Elephanta. It resembles them 



476 BRAHMANICAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

in many respects, but the hall here is square instead of being star- 
shaped as in them, and the sanctuary is situated exactly in the 
middle of the hall surrounded by an aisle separated from it by pillars 
equally spaced. 1 Though the hall itself is practically of the same 
size as that at Elephanta, being internally 92 feet square, the lateral 
porticoes and courts are on so much more extensive a scale as to 
make this one the largest of the three. The most interesting fact, 
however, connected with this cave is, that the mode in which these 
adjuncts are added, is such that we lose nearly all trace of the 
arrangements of the Buddhist Vihara in its plan, and were it not for 
the intermediate examples would hardly be able to find out whence 
its forms were derived. It is on the whole so much more like the 
more modern structural temples, that with the details of its architec- 
ture, and the fact that it is unfinished, leave no doubt that it is the 
most modern of the three. If we may assume that the Dumar Lena 
at Elura was excavated in the first quarter of the 8th century, and 
that the great cave at Elephanta followed immediately afterwards, 
then this Jogeswari Cave may safely be dated in the last half of that 
century. The three being thus excavated concurrently with the 
Kailasa, worthily conclude the series of pillared Brahmanical caves 
by one in which the features of their Buddhist prototypes are almost 
entirely obliterated, and the elements of the succeeding styles are 
faBt developing themselves. 

The court on the south appears to have been left in a very un- 
finished state, though this side was doubtless intended as the front. 
Only a narrow winding passage on the east, leads into this partially 
excavated court, in which stands the verandah of the cave, supported 
by ten columns of the Elephanta pattern with pilasters. On the capi- 
tals of these pillars are struts, carved with a female figure and dwarf 
standing under foliage as at Rameswara and in the great cave at 
Badami. This verandah is about 120 feet in length, and at its back 
has three doors and two windows looking into the great hall. This 
is a somewhat irregular quadrangle about 92 feet each way, with 
twenty pillars arranged in a square, in the middle of which stands 

1 A plan of this cave accompanied Mr. Salt's description of it in the 1st vol. of ihe 
Transaction* of the Littary Society of Bombay \a 1819, and was apparently engraved 
with a reprint of it in the Calcutta Journal of the same year. It was re-engraved 
by Mr. Langles in bis Monuinenti de PHindouttar^ folio, vol, iL, Plate 77 In*. 



HARISCHANDRAGAD. 477 

the shrine, about 24 feet square, with four doors and a large Hnga 
on a square idlwilchd inside, as at Elephanta and Dumar Lena at 
Elura. 

The approach from the east is by a descending passage and a 
flight of steps from 10 to 12 feet wide, landing in a small court in 
front of a neat doorway with fluted pilasters having sdrdula brackets 
and a bas-relief under an arch over the lintel. This is the entrance 
to a covered porch about 36 feet long by 45 feet in width, with four 
pillars on each side, separating it from two apartments, the walls of 
which have been covered with sculptures. A similar doorway leads 
from this first porch into a court about 42 feet by 66. On the opposite 
side of this court are three entrances into a second porch 60 feet 
wide and 28 deep, with two rows of four columns each across 
it, from front to back, and from this again three other doors, one in 
each bay, lead into the great cave, the central door having sculptures 
on each side of it. The whole distance from the eastern entrance 
porch to that on the west, including the courts mentioned above, but 
excluding the passages, is thus about 250 feet in a straight line, 
which exceeds that of any other Brahmanical cave known, except of 
course the Kailasa. 

The approach on the west side is also by a descending passage 
cut in the rock, into a partially roofed court, whence steps lead down 
into a small cave with two side recesses, each with two pillars in 
front. From this there is a door into the great cave. 

On the south side of the cave is a large cell, a lihga shrine, a small 
one for a deti, and other small rough excavations. 

Harischandragad Brahmanical Caves. 

About 20 miles to the north of Junnar, and a few miles north-east 
from Nanagbat stands the great mountain of Harischandragad, lift- 
ing its giant head considerably over 4,000 feet above the plains of the 
Konkan at its base, with its tremendous scarps down to them. It is 
the culminating point of the ridge that from it stretches eastward 
from the Sahyadri hills dividing the basins of the Godavari and the 
Bhima, a feeder of the Krishna. The top is somewhat triangular 
and is somewhat longer from north to south than across the southern 
and loftier end, which is about four miles in length. Its surface is 
very unequal, the small fort on the very summit being about 500 
feet above the level of the caves which are to the west of the 



478 BRARMANTCAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

centre. The ascent from the south-east is steep and dangerous ; 
from Ank6la on the north-east it is said to be more easy. 

The caves 1 are principally in a low scarp of rock to the north of 
the summit, and face JS'.N.W., and consist of some eight or nine 
excavations, none of them large, and Avithout much sculpture The 
pillnrs are mostly plain square blocks ; the architraves of the doors 
are carved in plain facets ; and there are a few sculptures of Grana-* 
pati, who also, as the symbol of a Saiva temple, is represented also 
on the lintels of some of the doors. This marks the character of these 
caves, and moreover, as this symbol is perhaps "of late adoption, were 
there no other indications it would lead us to assign a comparatively 
late origin to these caves. But the style of the low doorways, and 
of the pillars in the second cave from the east end of the range, the 
detached sculptures lying about, and some fragments of inscriptions, 
all seem to point to about the tenth or eleventh century. 

The first cave at the east end of the range is about 17 \ feet square, 
and has a low bench round three sides. The door is only 4 feet in 
height, with a high threshold, and has a plain moulding round the 
head of it. On the west side of it is a water-tank. 

No. II. is eight or nine yards from the first, and is one of the 
largest in the group. The verandah is 23£ feet long and about 7^ 
wide, with an entrance into a large cell from the left end. The hall 
measures about 25 feet by 20, and varies in height from 8 feet \\ 
inches to 8 feet 11 inches, and has one cell on the right side and 
two in the back with platforms, as for beds, from 6 inches to a foot 
high. Outside on the right is another cell leading into a larger one 
at the right end of the verandah. The verandah is not quite open 
in front, the space between the left hand pillar and the pilaster at 
that end being closed, and the central and right hand space only left 
open. The two square pillars, of which only one stands free, are 
6 feet A\ inches high with a simple base, and a great number of 
small mouldings on the neck and capital which occupy the upper 
2 feet 7 inches of them. The door is surrounded with plain mould- 
ings, and has a small Gane.^a on the lintel. Two square windows 
help to light the principal room. 

The third is an unfinished cave, somewhat on the same plan, but 

1 Mr. W. P. Sinclair was the first to give An intelligible account of these caves in 
J*rf. Ant., vol. v. pp. 10, 11 ; ami separately by the Bombay Government in Notes on 
the Atit. ofPartur, $r. (Arekmol. Sur , No. <5), 1877. 



HAR1SCHANDRAC.AD. 479 

half of the front wall of the hall has been cut away, and a large 
image of Gane\sa is carved on the remaining half, while in a cell to 
the right is a vedi or altar for a Liriga. 

The fourth is only an oblong cell, and the fifth in the bed of a 
torrent is apparently unfinished, and has a structural front inserted 
in it. It has a broad high stone bench round three sides. The 
sixth, seventh, and eighth are similar to the fourth, but a bed of 
soft clay has destroyed the walls of the first two. In the shrine of 
the sixth is a long vedi as if for three images, and next to the last is 
a deep stone tank 10 feet Bquare. 

To the north of theBe caves is a somewhat lofty structural temple 
without any mandap, but consisting only of a shrine with a spire 
over it in the northern Hindu style of architecture, and the west 
side of the court of this temple is hewn into caves, which seem never 
to have been ueed for any other purposes than for the residence of 
yogis attached to the temple. They are very irregular in plan and 
without any architectural features whatever. About fifty yards 
further down the ravine is a cave about 55 feet square with four 
columns in front, each about 3 feet square, with plain bracket 
capitals 9 inches deep and 6 feet 10 inches long. In the middle of 
the hall is a large round idluhklid containing a liriga, and surrounded 
by four slender columns of the Elephanta type. All round these, to 
the walls and front of the cave, the floor is sunk fully 4 feet and is 
always full of water, so that the worshippers can only approach the 
liriga by wading to it or swimming, and to perform the pradalcshina 
by swimming may have special merits. On the left end is a relief 
carved with a liriga and worshippers on each side of it. 

It would seem from the absence of shrines in the caves here 
(except some very inferior ones in one or two of them) that with the 
exception of the last described cave they were chiefly intended as 
dharma&dla* or rest houses for pilgrims to the temple, and if so, 
must be as recent as the establishment of such a shrine. And the 
temple seems quite as old as the caves, so that they probably formed 
part of one Beat of Saiva worship here, erected in the tenth century 
A.D., or soon after. They are thus as much beyond the true age of 
cave excavating as they are beneath the preceding examples in 
design. They are useful here as negative proofs how completely the 
art and fashion of excavating temples in the rock had passed away, 
but are hardly worth quoting otherwise for their own sake. 



480 brahmanical cave-temples. 

Ankai-Tankai Brahmanical Caves. 

Four or five miles south from the railway station of Manmad to 
the east of Nasik and twelve miles south-east of Chandwar is a hill — 
or rather two joined together by a short connecting ridge. The 
western hill is called Ankai, and is crowned by the ruins of what 
has been a very strong Maratha hill-fort within the area of which 
are some Brahmanical caves. To the north-east of it is the Tankai 
hill which has also been fortified, and on the ascent to the con- 
necting ridge, on the south face of this hill, is a group of Jaina 
caves to be noticed in their place. Below them is the now almost 
deserted village of Ankai. 

The Brahmanical rock-temples of Ankai are three in number, 
very rough and unfinished. The first is just inside the second gate 
on the ascent up to the fort, and is an unfinished Linga shrine. The 
entrance is 17 feet 9 inches wide, and on each side of it is a small 
group of sculpture just outside the pilaster, consisting of a central 
female figure with a chfiatri or umbrella carried over her head by a 
second female, while she is also attended by a dwarf : one of two 
figures on the outer side of the pilaster seems to have been a male, 
attended by a dwarf. Behind the females is a pilaster with much 
carving on the face of it. From the entrance to the front of the 
shrine is about 13£ feet. The shrine is the usual square room with 
dwarpalas on each side the door wearing high rounded headdresses 
and inside a base for a Linga inside. The pradakshind round it has 
been left unfinished, as also a chamber to the right of the entrance. 
There is a Trimurti on the back wall of the shrine, somewhat of the 
style of those in the small caves at Elurd, and this and the style of 
execution of the pilasters arid sculptures lead me to regard this as a 
very late cave, probably of the 10th or 11th century. 

The other two caves are at the base of a knoll that rises on the 
plateau of the hill. They are without ornament or sculpture of any 
kind. One of them is a hall 31 } feet wide by 48} deep with two 
plain square pillars in front. Three cells have been begun in the 
left wall. The area is divided by brick and mud partitions, and it 
has evidently been used for other than religious purposes ; indeed 
it seems rather to have been a magazine or place for keeping stores 
in. The third is a very irregular excavation H2 feet wide with two 
rough pillars in front, and other two further back. Below the front 
of it is a water cistern. 



MANDAPESWAR. 



481 



Christian Cave Chuech at Mandapeswar. 

At Mandapeswar, called by the Portuguese Montpezir, in the 
north-west of the Island of Salsette, there is a Brahmanical Temple 
of some extent, not very remarkable in itself, but worth noticing, as 
one of few instances of a Saiva Cave converted into a Roman Catholic 
Church. This was the case when this cave was made a component 
part of an extensive monastic establishment founded in the 16th 
century by P. Antonio de Porto. The King Don John III. trans- 
ferred the revenues, which sufficed to support 50 jogis, from the 
Temple to the Church, and built a very extensive monastery in con- 
nexion with it. 1 The cave was dedicated to Notre Dame de la Mise- 
ricorde, and was converted into a church by having a wall built in 
front of it, as shown in the woodcut No. 72, and the Saiva sculptures 
either screened off by walls or covered up with plaster. Some 
strange feeling of reverence seems to have prevented the priests 
from destroying them altogether, for now that the plaster has fallen 
off and the walls gone to decay they seem almost entire. 




£ni*L~L. 



•P&t* 



No. 72. Notre Dftine de la Misericords, Mandapeswar. 

The mandaporhall measures 51 feet by 21 inside, with four pillars 
in front of the Elephanta type, but more richly ornamented, and 

* Tbesc particulars are taken from Salt's paper in the first volume of the Trans- 
actions of the Literary Society of Bombay, p. 45, and from Langles* Hindoustan, 
vol. ii. p. 201, quoting Da Couto and others. 

T 18S. H H 



482 BBAHMANICAl CAVJ5-TEMPLES. 

evidently of more modern date. At each end is a smaller room, 
divided from the hall by two pillars and their pilasters. That to 
the left has been entirely soreened off by a built wall, but behind 
the wall a large sculpture was found of Siva dancing with accom- 
panying figures. In the back of the hall is a small square room at 
each end, which led into an inner one, with two pillars in front ; 
these are now walled up. In the middle of the back wall is the 
vestibule of the shrine, with two pillars in front of it. The shrine 
itself is about 16 feet square, but is now empty. 

The cave faces the east, and is cut into a low rock. On the top 
of it stands a large monastic building, now rapidly going to decay ; 
one of the many remains of the power and piety of the Portuguese 
when they were in possession of the island. 

Concluding Kemakks. 

Although it must be admitted that the Brahmanical Cave-Temples 
are wanting in that purpose-like appropriateness which characterised 
the Buddhist Viharas, from which they are derived, still they have 
merits of their own which render them well worthy of attentive 
study by thoBe interested in such researches. Their architectural 
details are generally as rich, and, as mere matters of ornament, fre- 
quently as elegant and as well adapted to their purposes as any used 
by their predecessors ; in some instances, indeed, more so. Nothing, 
for instance, in any Buddhist Cave is bo appropriate to rock-cut 
architecture as the pillars in the LankeSwara Caves, and in the 
Kailasa generally. The architects seem there to have felt the re- 
quirements of cave architecture fully, and, having no utilitarian 
necessities to control them, used massiveness as a mode of expres- 
sion in a manner that was never surpassed, not even perhaps in 
Egypt. If the masses thus introduced had been mere unornamented 
blocks, the effect might have been far from pleasing, but in nothing 
did their architects show better taste than in the extent of ornament 
used, and the manner of its application. The expression of power 
gained by the solidity of their forms is never interfered with, though 
the amount of ornament is such as in less skilled hands might easily 
have become excessive and degenerate into bad taste. This, how- 
ever, is never the case, and though as architectural forms they are 
to us unfamiliar, and consequently often appear strange, the prin- 



CONCLUDING REMARKS. 483 

ciples on which they are designed are well worthy of attentive 
study. 

By their employment of sculpture, in preference to painting, for the 
decoration of their caveB, the Brahmans had, for us at least, an advan- 
tage which is now very striking. Except in the caves at Katak, and 
some perhaps of the earliest in the west side of India, sculpture was 
rarely employed by the Buddhists, and for all historical and legendary 
purposes painting no doubt afforded them facilities of which they 
were not slow to avail themselves. The Brahmans, on the other 
hand, had no story to tell. Their mythology required only repre- 
sentations of single acts, or manifestations of some individual deity, 
easily recognised by his attributes, and consequently easily repre- 
sented in sculptured groups consisting only of a few figures. These 
could be more easily and forcibly reproduced in a cave by form than 
by colour. From their greater durability, these, in most instances, 
remain, and, though mutilated in many instances, have not lost their 
value as architectural decorations, while, except in some caves at 
Ajanta and at Bagh, the paintings have perished so completely that 
it is only by analogy that we can feel sure that they ever existed. 
If, however, the paintings in the Buddhist caves were as complete 
now, as there is every reason for believing they once were, they no 
doubt would afford illustrations of history and mythology far more 
complete than can be gathered from the more limited scope of the 
Brahmanical sculptures. As they, however, have so generally been 
obliterated, while the sculptures in the caves at Mahavallipur, at 
Elephanta, and Elura remain so nearly complete, the Brahmanical 
caves do, — at the present day at least — possess an interest that hardly 
attaches to the earlier and more appropriate caves of their prede- 
cessors. 

However these artistic questions may ultimately be decided, there 
is no question as to the extreme historical interest of the Brah- 
manical Cave Temples. They afford us a more vivid picture than 
we obtain from any other source of the arts and aspirations of the 
Hindus during the whole of the seventh century, to which nearly the 
whole of them practically belong. 

On the disappearance of the Guptas, who, if not Buddhist them- 
selves, at least favoured Buddhism during the whole of the fifth 
century, an immense impulse was given to the cultivation of Hindu 
literature and the revival of the Brahmanical religion by the splen- 

hh 2 



484 BKAHMANIOAL CAVE-TEMPLES. 

dour of the court of the great Vioramaditya of TJjjain, and the learn- 
ing of the so-called nine jewels who adorned it. It is not clear that 
any overt acts of aggression against the Buddhists were attempted 
during his reign (a.d. 520-550 P), 1 but at the end of that century we 
find the Brahmans (579) excavating caves at Badami, where, however, 
there is no evidence of Buddhists having previously existed, so that 
this can only be considered as a challenge from afar. In the following 
century, however, they boldly enter into competition with them at 
Elura, Dharasinwa, and along the whole line wherever they were most 
powerful. In the eighth century they signalize their triumph by 
excavating such temples as the Kailasa and those at Elephanta and 
JogesVari. In the ninth the struggle is over, and there were no longer 
any motives to attempt to rival the Buddhists by excavating temples 
in the rock. Brahmanism reigned supreme in the length and breadth 
of the land, and when the curtain 1b again drawn up, after the dark 
and impenetrable night that hangs over India during the tenth cen- 
tury, there were no longer any Buddhists in the cave regions of the 
west, at least. It still lingered in Bengal till the Mahomedan con- 
quest, but there are no caves there that throw any light on the mode 
in which the second struggle terminated in the final expulsion of the 
Buddhists from India. We have no written record of this momentous 
revolution, except of the preliminary grumblings of the coming 
storm in the works of the Chinese pilgrim, Hiwen Thsang (a.j>. 630 
to 644), but the record of the Brahmanical caves, as we are now able 
to read it, throws a clear and distinct light on the whole of the events 
of the period, which is invaluable to those who know how complete 
our ignorance otherwise would be, of the history of these dark ages 
in India. 

1 Journal Royal Asiatic Society, vol. iv. pp. 81, ct seqq. See also paper on the 
same subject in the present April number of the some journal, where the origin of the 
Saka and Samvat eras is discussed by the light that recent discoveries in Afghanistan 
and elsewhero have thrown on the subject, — J. F. 



485 



BOOK IV. 



THE JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE JAINS AND JINAS. 

The third sect that excavated cave-temples 'were the Jains, who 
have many points of belief and ceremonial in common with the 
Buddhists. Like them the Jains are atheists, believing in no 
supreme moral ruler, but in the attainment of mokslia or nirvana as the 
result of a long continued course of moral and ceremonial obser- 
vances in a succession of lives. As their name implies, they are 
followers of the Jinas, or " vanquishers " of vice and virtue — men 
whom they believe to have obtained nirvana or emancipation from 
the power of transmigration. They reject the details of Buddhist 
cosmogony, but have framed a system of their own, if possible more 
formal. They believe that the world iB destroyed and renewed after 
vast cycles of time, and that in each of these aeons or renovations 
there appear twenty-four Jinas or Tirthankaras at different periods, 
who practise asceticism and attain nirvana. Besides the Tirthankaras 
of the present (avasarpini) cycle, they name those also of both the 
preceding and the coming cycles. 1 Rishabha, the first Jina of the 
present cycle, is pretended to have been of immense stature, to have 
been 2,000,000 great years of age when he became Chakravartti 
or universal emperor, to have ruled 6,300,000 great years, and then 
to have practised austerity for 100,000 years before attaining nirvana 
on Mount Satrunjaya in Gujarat, shortly before the end of the 
third age of the present great cycle. At an immense distance of 

time, Ajitanatha, the second Jina, appeared, was not quite so tall, 

i ■ 

1 Hemaclwndra, Abhid&na Chintdmapi , $J. 58-70; Briggs, Cities of Gujarashtra 
p. 849 5 Ind. Ant^ vol. ii. p. 140. 



486 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

nor lived quite so long; and so with each suocessor — their stature 
age, and distance of time after the preceding diminishing in a 
regular progression, till we come to the twenty-third, named 
Parswanaiha, said to have been born at Banaras, married the 
daughter of King Prasenajita, adopted an ascetic life at the age 
of 30, and died at the age of 100 years while performing a fast 
on Samet Sikhar or Mount Parisnath in the west of Bengal, 250 
years before the death of the last Tirthankara (i.e., about 777 
B.C.). Vardhamana or Mahavira, 1 the last, began his austerities at 
the age of 30, and continued them for 12^ years as a Digambara or 
naked ascetic without even a bhikshu's begging dish. Finally he 
became an Arhat or Jina " worthy of universal adoration, omniscient 
and all seeing," and at the age of 72, at the court of King Hastipala, 
h© entered nirvana, leaving Gotama Indrabhiiti, the chief of his 
initiated disciples, to propagate his doctrines. Different dates are 
given for this event, but the majority of Jaina books place it in 
526 B.C. 8 

The Jains are divided into two great sects, the Digambaras, " sky- 
clad," also called Nirgranthas, " without a bond," and Nagnatas, 
" naked mendicants," * and the Swetdmbaras or " white-robed." The 
first are frequently mentioned in early Buddhist literature under the 
name of Nirgranthas* and seem to have been know even in Buddha's 
own times. They are still found both in Maisur and Rajputana, 
but do not appear naked in public. To them all the Jaina cave- 
temples appear to belong. The Swetambaras are probably a later 
sect. Hiwen Thsang seems to refer to their origin in his account 
of Sinhapura in the Panjab, near which he says " the founder of the 
heretical sect who wear white garments" began to expound his 
doctrine. " The law," he adds, " that has been set forth by the 
founder of this sect has been largely appropriated from Buddhist 



1 His real name seems to have been Nirgrantha Jfiatiputra; he is referred to in the 
Buddhist Pifakat under the Pali form of Nigantha Nataputta, and one of his disciples 

ie called Makkhali Gosala Biihler, Ind. Ant., vol. vii., p. 148 ; And Jacobi, Kalpa 

Sutra, pp. 1, 2, 6. 

* Weber would lower this to B.C. 348 or 349 B.C. ( Ubtr Catr. M&hdt, p. 12). 

3 Biihler, Ind. Ant., vol. vii. p. 28. 

4 Burnell, Ind. Ant., vol. i. p. 310, n. § ; and conf. St. Julicu'u Mem. tur let Cont. 
Occ., U i. pp. 41, 354 ; t. ii. pp. 42, 93 ; Vie dc H. T., pp. 224, 228 ; Laidlaj's Fa- 
JJitut, pp. 144, 145 ; Jour. R.A.S., vol. vi. p. 2G7. ; J. B. B. Ii. At., vol. v., pp. 40fi, 407. 



THE JINAS. 487 

books, by which, it is guided in establishing its precepts and rules." 
" In their observances and religious exercises they follow almost 
entirely the rule of the Sramanas" (Buddhists). "The statue of 
their divine master, by a sort of usurpation, resembles that of 
Buddha, it only differs in costume ; its marks of beauty are exactly 
the same." 1 

All this holds perfectly true of the Jains, whose leading doctrines 
are : —the denial of the authority of the Vedas, reverence for the 
Jinas, who by their austerities acquired a position superior even to 
that of the Hindu gods, to whom the sect pays a qualified reverence ; 
and the most extreme tenderness of animal life, which they do not 
distinguish from " soul," and believe to be one in gods, men, brutes, 
and demons, only in different stages according to its merits acquired 
in previous states of existence. Through the annihilation of virtue 
and vice it attains nirvana. The moral obligations of the Jains are 
summed up in five great commands almost identical with the yaiicha 
vila of the Buddhists, care not to injure life, truth, honesty, chastity, 
and the suppression of worldly desires. They enumerate four merits 
or dlumrws, liberality, gentleness, piety, and penance ; and three 
forms of restraint, government of the mind, the tongue, and the 
person. Their minor obligations are in many cases frivolous, 
such as not to deal in soap, natron, indigo, and iron ; not to eat in 
the open air after it begins to rain, nor in the dark, lest an insect 
should be swallowed ; not to leave a liquid uncovered, lest one should 
be drowned ; to keep out of the way of the wind, lest it should blow 
an insect into the mouth ; water to be thrice strained for the same 
purpose before it is drunk, and the like. 2 

The proper objects of worship are the Jinas or Tirthankaras, but, 
like the Buddhists, they allow tho existence of the Hindu gods, and 
have admitted into their worship such of them as they have connected 
with the tales of their saints, such as Indra or Sakra, Garuda, Isana, 
Sukra, Saraswati, Lakshmi, and even Bhavani, Hanuman, Bhairava, 
and Gariesa, besides which they have a pantheon of Bhuvanapatis, 
Asuras, Nagas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas, &c. inhabiting celestial and 
infernal regions, mountains, forests, and lower air. 

Each Tirtharikara is recognisable by a cognizance or ehinha. 



1 Mem., t. i. pp. J 63, 164 ; conf. Jnd. Ant., vol. ii. p. 16. 

2 See lnd. Ant., vol. ii. p. 17; Kalpa Sutrn, and Nava Tattva. 



488 



JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 



usually placed below the image; they have also their peouliar 
complexions or colours, though these are not often represented 
except in the case of Neminatha and Parswanatha, whose images 
are often of black basalt or marble. The following is a list of the 
twenty-four 1 with their cognizanoes : — 



No. 


Name. 


Chinha or Distinctive 
Sign. 


Colour. 


Plaoe of Nirvana. 


l 


Adin&tha or Rishabha 


Bull ivfisha) 


Yellow or 
Golden. 


Mount Satrofijaya in 
Gujerat. 


2 


Ajitanatha 


Elephant (y<ya) - 


n 


Samet Slkbar.' 


3 


SambhaTa 


Horse (aiva) 
Ape (ptavaga) - 


r> 


» 


4 


Abhinandasa 


» 


>i 


6 


Snmati - 


Curlew (ArouwcAa) 


•i 


n 


6 


Fadmaprabha 


Lotus (abja) 


Rod 


i» 


7 


Supariwa 


The swastika mark 


Golden 


tt 


8 


Chandraprabha - 


Moon {(aft) 


White or fair 


rt 


9 


Pn&hpadanta 


Crocodile (wwAnro) 


i» 


>» 


10 


STtalan&tha 


The Srlvatsa mark 


Golden 


i» 


11 


S'ri Ansan&tha - 


Rhinoceros (ihadgi) 


n 


it 


12 


Vasupujya 


Buffalo (mafttgna) 


Bed 


Champapuri. 
Samet Sikhar. 


13 


Vimalanatha 


Bonr (Stikara) - 


Golden 


14 


Anontanutbn 


Falcon («yena) - 


it 


tt 


15 


Dhannan&tha 


Thunderbolt {yajra) 


ji 


ti 


16 


Sttntinatha 


Antelope (mriya) 


» 


M 


17 


Kunthnnithn 


Goat (e tou'yo) - 


!» 


» 


18 


Aranatha 


The JSandt/avarta mark - 


tJ " 


tt 


19 


Mallinatha 


Water jar {{/hat a) 


Blue 


tt 


20 


MuniEuvrata 


Tortoise (Aiinwa) 


Black 




21 


Kamioatha 


Blue water-lily (nliutpala) 


Yellow 


tt 


22 


Neminatha 


Conch (iatdiJia) - 


Black 


Mount Giroar. 


23 


Parswanatha 


Hooded snake (aesAa) 


Blue 


Samet S'ikbar. 


24 


Mab&vlra 


Lion (<ij*Aa) 


Yellow - 


Pawapnri. 



Among these, the favourites are the first, sixteenth, and three last, 
which are regarded as principal Jin&s, and with the Digambaras the 
image of Gotama Swami the disciple of Mahavira is often repre- 
sented, especially in Kanara and the Malabar coast, where there are 
several gigantic images of him. 8 He is also, with Parswanatha, 
frequently figured in their cave sculptures, both always as naked, 
with creeping plants growing over their limbs, and Parswanatha 

1 For a complete tabular view of tin- particulars relating to each of the Tirthnnknras, 
see the Jainn work Bainasdra, bhitg ii. p. 708 ff. 

2 The celebrated Mount Parswanatha or Farisnuth new Ramgar In Lower Bengal. 
'One at Sravana Belgola, in Maisur, is 56 £ feet in height (Tnd. Ant.,\6l. ii. 

p. 129 ff. ; vol. iii. p. 166) ; another ut Yenfir is about 38 feet high (ih. t vol, v. p. 87) ; 
and one at Kfirkaja, twenty-four miles west from Yonfir in Kanara, is 4l£.feet high, 
and goes by the same name, though an inscription on it calls it Bahubalin, who was 
the son of Ri«hablta/levB {Ind. Ant., vol. ii. p. 853). See also BUt. of Ind, and East 
Architecture, p. 267 et tcq. 



the jiKAfl. 489 

usually having a polyceplialouB snake 1 overshadowing him with its 
hoods.' 

1 Dharona or Dharanldhara, the N&ga King, Satrunjya M&hat., xiv. 31-35 ; conf. 
Bigandet, Legend of Gaudama (2nd ed.), p. 99; Hardy, Budktim, p. 182 ; Delamaine, 
TV. R. Am. Soc., vol. 1. pp. 428-486. 

1 The best accounts we yet possess of the Jains and their tenets are the very brief 
one by Goldstucker in Chambers's Encyclopaedia ; by Colebrooke in his Essays, vol. ii. ; 
and by H. H. WilBon, Works, voL i. 



490 



CHAPTER n. 
JAINA CAVE TEMPLES. 

The cave-temples of the Jains are not of so early an age as those 
of either of the other two sects, none of them perhaps dating earlier 
than the seventh century. Nor are they numerous : there is one at 
Baddmi in the south of the Bombay Presidency, one at Karusa, 
another at AmM or Mominabad, a small group at Dharasinw& north 
of Solapur, another at Chamar Lena, a few miles from Nasik, a 
cave at Chandor, another at Bhamer, a third at Pitalkhora, and 
a group at Ankai in Khandes. All these are comparatively insigni- 
ficant, and except in a work like the present would hardly deserve 
much attention. It is only at Elura that there are any large caves be- 
longing to this sect in Western India. Among its caves, however, 
there are two groups known as the Indra Sabha and Jagannatha 
Sabha, which, both for extent and elaborateness of decoration, are 
quite equal to any of the Brahmanical caves in that locality, with 
the single exception, of course, of the Kailasa. At Gwalior are 
some excavations and large images cut in the rocks, and in Tinne- 
velly are some unfinished monolithic temples. 

As might be expected from their later age they show all the 
characteristics of detail of the structural temples of the same period. 
They consist of halls, much like the Brahmanical cave-temples, but 
always with the shrine in the back wall, and in some cases with 
others in the sides. These halls at Elura are large and numerous, 
probably to afford as much accommodation as possible to the large 
Sahglim or assemblies that come together at the annual pilgrimages. 
The doorways are richly carved with numerous mouldings and high 
thresholds are introduced. The pillars have the heavy bases and 
capitals of the age, with a triangular facet on each side, and images 
are introduced sometimes wherever there is space for them. 

The principal images are of course the Tirtharikaras, who, in the 
shrines always, and elsewhere generally, are represented as seated on 
a sihlmwita with their feet doubled up in front of the body, and the 



BADAMT AND AIHOLE CAVEB. 491 

hands laid on their soles, one over the other with the palms turned 
upwards, in the Jndna mudrd position. All are perfectly alike and 
can only be distinguished by their chinlias. ParSwanatha is some- 
times represented standing with the snakes' hoods overshadowing 
him, and with attendants or worshippers on each side, and some- 
times, like the trial of Buddha by M&ra, he is represented immobile 
under the assaults of his demon foe Kamatha and his forces. 

Badami Jaina Cave. 

Besides the three Brahmanical cave-temples at Badami, there is, 
a little to the east of the largest one, a small Jaina cave differing 
perhaps little in age from its neighbours, but certainly more modern, 
and may therefore be considered to have been excavated about the 
middle of the following century, say about 650 a.t>. The verandah is 
31 feet long by 6i, wide, and the whole depth of the cave is only 
about 16 feet. In the front are four square pillars resembling the 
Elephanta type with bracket capitals, and in the back of the verandah 
two freestanding and two attached ones. Behind these the apart- 
ment that does duty for a hall is only about 6 feet deep by 25| 
wide, and from it an ascent of four steps leads into the shrine, 
in which is a seated figure of Mahavira on a sinJidsana against the back 
wall, Avith chauri-bearers, s&rdulas, and makara's heads in bas-relief 
on either side. In the ends of the verandah are figures of Gotama 
Swami attended by four snakes, and Parswanatha about 7£ feet 
high with their usual attendants. Figures of Tirthankaras are also 
inserted in the inner pillars, and on the walls in large numbers. 1 

Aihole. 

At Aihoje there is another Jaina cave somewhat larger than that 
at Bad&mi. It is in the face of a rocky hill west-south-west from 
the village, and faces S.S.W. The verandah is about 32 feet long 
inside by 7^ feet wide, and supported in front by four square plain 
pillars. In front of them, however, a wall has been built of three 
courses of very large blocks of ashlar, leaving only an entrance 
between the central pair. The roof of the verandah is sculptured 
with makarae, frets, and flowers, and on the left end wall alto- 
rilievo is P&rsVanfttha Seshphani, as at Badaini, attended by a male 

1 For a mora detailed account, with drawings and a photograph, sec Arch. Sur. W. 
Ind. Rep., vol. i. p. 25. 



492 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

and female Naga figure. At the right end is a standing Jina with 
two female attendants, and behind him a tree with two figures 
among the branches of it to the left. 

The entrance into the hall is 8 feet wide divided by two pillars, 
much of the same pattern as those in the Brahmanical cave not far 
off. The hall is 15 feet by 17 feet 8 inches with a chapel at each 
side 14 feet by 5, divided off by two pillars in front of each. The 
roof is carved with a large central rosette or lotus and four others 
at the corners, the interspaces being filled with makaras, fishes, 
flowers, and human heads with arabesque continuations. 

At the back of the hall are two dwarpalas with high headdresses 
and frill behind, as in the Elephanta sculptures, and attended the 
one by a male dwarf, and the other by a female. The entrance to 
the shrine like that to the hall is divided into three apertures by 
two pillars. The shrine, about 8 feet 3 inches square, a sitting 
figure of the Tirthankara very similar to that at Badami. 

The walls of the chapel to the left of the hall are covered with 
sculpture consisting of Mahavira on his sinhasana on the middle of 
the back wall with chauri-bearers, and about a dozen other figures, 
some on elephants, apparently come to do him homage ; the whole 
seems to be a sort of Jaina copy of the Raja Mandala of Buddha, 
where the rajas and great ones come to do him homage. This 
sculpture, however, has never been finished. 1 

Jaina Caves at Patna. 

In the west side of Kanhar Hill fort, which overhangs the east 
side of Patna village, near Pitalkhora, are two rock excavations 
known as Nagarjuna's Kotri and Sita's Nhani. 

The second of these consists of a verandah 28 feet in length with 
two pillars rudely blocked out, and inside an irregular room about 
24 feet by 13, with two rough pillars near the middle of it. Nagar- 
juna's Kotri is the same in general plan, irregular in shape, but 
with a good deal of Digambara Jaina sculpture. The verandah is 
18 feet long by 6 feet wide at one end and about 4 at the other, 
supported in front by two pillars, one square and the other rhom- 
boidal, with moulded capitals. In the left or south end of the 
verandah is a small room with a bench along the back wall ; and 
outside the verandah at this end is cut in the rook a SaM stone, 

* See Arch. Sur. W. Jnd., First Rep., p. 87. 



CHAMAB LENA. 493 

about 6 feet high including the base, and with carvings of the usual 
sort upon it. 

Inside, the hall is about 20 feet wide by from 14 to 16 feet deep 
with two irregular pillars in the middle. At the base of the left 
one sits a fat male figure upon a mass of uncarved rock, and with 
a similar mass over his head ; at the base of the other is a female 
figure with a child on her left knee seated on a plain seat, and a tree 
carved over her head with squirrels, birds, and fruits among its 
foliage. These two figures correspond to those known as Indra and 
Amba or Indian! in the Jaina caves of Elura. 

On the back wall, on a slightly raised dais or throne, is an image 
of a Jina or Tirthankara, squatted on a lotus, the back of the throne 
being richly carved with two elephants' heads, two standing Jinas, 
two chauri-bearers, maka/ras, vidyddharas, &c., and over the head a 
conventionalised triple umbrella, with foliage hanging over it. On 
either side beyond and a little back from this sits another cross- 
legged Jina figure about 2 feet high. 

On the south wall, near the back, is a life-size standing Jina, with 
nimbus, triple umbrella, and small attendant figures on each side of 
his head and shoulders. There is a small irregular cell in the back 
wall near the south end ; and three niches in the north wall with one 
in the south, as if for movable images. 

This cave bears a close analogy to the latest Jaina excavations at 
Elura, and is probably of the same age. Like them it may belong 
to the ninth or even to the tenth century a.d. 

Chamab. Lena. 

The Ohamar Lena hill lies a few miles north-west from Nasik, 
and contains a few excavations at about 450 feet above the level of 
the road which passes not far from the foot of the hill. They are 
late Jaina work of the 11th or 12th century, or it may be even 
later, cut in a coarse porous rock. There are two caves containing 
a good deal of rude sculpture of Jinas seated in meditation or 
standing in ascetic abstraction, with the usual Indras and Ambikas. 

On the wall of one of them is a small image of a Tirthankara 
seated on a sinhasana with celestial attendants, two other small Jinas 
at each side of his head, and nineteen more in the sculptured border 
around, making the 24 in all. Beside the caves is a large open 
excavation with a colossal bust haying a snake hood over it but 
never finished. 



494 jaina oavb-temples. 

Bhambr. 

The fort of Bhamer in the Nizampur division of Khandesh lies 
30 miles west by north from Dhulia. There is one plain monk's 
dwelling in the western of the two hills above the village, and two 
of those in the other are mere cellars, but the third is a cave or 
rather three of more pretensions ; it has had a verandah 74 feet in 
length with an unfinished cell at the left end ; from the verandah 
three doors open into as many small but dark halls, each about 24 
feet by 20, with four square pillars supporting the roof, and having 
corresponding pilasters on each wall. 

There are a number of rude sculptures on the walls, of P&r6wan&th 
and other Jinas, much defaced from the decay of the rock, but 
apparently of the same coarse rough type as those on the Chamer 
Lena hill. 

Bamchandra. 

About twenty-five miles north-west from Poona and seven W.N.W. 
from Chakan, over the village of Bamchandra, is one small rock- 
temple and the commencements of two other excavations. 

The cave here is now occupied as a linga shrine, but it is somewhat 
doubtful whether it was not excavated by Jains. The mandapa or 
hall is only \5\ feet square, low in the roof, and supported by four 
massive pillars. (Plate XXIII., fig. 2.) The front wall is structural 
and the jambs and lintel of the door of the shrine are formed of a 
different stone and let in. It has very small dwarp&las and slender 
pilasters. On the lintel was a chinlta, but it has been daubed over 
with red lead and oil till it is quite unrecognisable. The frieze is 
carved with small figures — one of them with an umbrella. On the 
roof of the shrine is a rosette, and in the middle of the floor a 
modern small linga. The hall has a raised circular platform on a 
square one which occupies the whole central area between the pillars, 
a feature which, though common in Saiva temples, is also found in 
Jaina ones, as for example in the principal old Jaina shrine in 
Be] gaum fort. 1 

1 Ftrtt Arch. Rep. W. Ind., p. 8. 



495 



CHAPTER III. 
JAINA CAVES AT ELURA. 

The Jaina caves at Elura are separated by a distance of about 
200 yards from the Dumar Lena, the most northerly Brahmanical 
temple, and occupy the northern spur of the hill, called by them 
Charanadri. They are not numerous, consisting of only some five or 
six large excavations, but some of these are really extensive works, 
comprising several hallB in one temple. They are of various ages, 
dating probably from the eighth to the thirteenth century. 

It may be as well to take them in the order in which they occur, 
though by so doing two that may be the lateBt in the group come 
first. 

Chhota Kailasa. 

The most southerly of the group is a little way up the face of the 
hill to the south-east of the others. It has been little frequented by 
visitors or even by natives, and was so silted up till recently that 
there was considerable difficulty in getting inside it. It was, 
however, partially excavated in 1877 by orders of the Haidarabad 
Government. It is known as Chhota Kailasa, and is a curious 
example of the imitation of the works of one sect by the votaries of 
another, for there can be no doubt that this was undertaken in 
imitation of the great Brahmanical temple of Kailasa, but on a 
much smaller scale. The hall or mandapa is 36 feet 4 inches square 
and like its great prototype has sixteen columns. The porch in 
front is about 10 feet square, and the shrine at the back meaEures 
14£ feet by 11£. The whole temple is situated in an excavated pit 
80 feet wide by about 130 feet long, with a small excavation in 
each side. The outside is in the Dravidian Btyle, but the Sikliar or 
spire is low, and the workmanship stiff, while it has been left 
unfinished, though from what cause we have at present no means of 
ascertaining. Its similarity, however, to the Kailasa in design, and 
the fact that the Dravidian style is not known to have been practised 
so far north, after the destruction of the Rashtrakutas in the ninth 
century, would lead to the inference that these two temples cannot 



496 JAINA CAVH-TEMPLES. 

be far distant in date. Except the Dhamnar Temple, which belongs 
certainly to the eighth century, no other temples in pits are known to 
exist in India. During the partial excavations some loose images 
were found, one of them bearing the date Saka 1169, or a.d. 1247, 
which may, however, be considered as much too modern to belong 
to the age when this temple was first excavated. 

Near to this is another excavation also unfinished and filled with 
earth to the capitals of the pillars; The porch is hewn out entirely 
on three sides from the rock, and stands in a deep excavated pit, like 
a structural work against a wall of rock. The pillars have " com- 
pressed-cushion " capitals, and have been carefully chiselled ; those 
of the porch stand on a screen supported by elephants, and with 
water-jars in compartments as ornamention. A large portion of 
the earth m front has been removed, but inside it is left nearly 
full. 

The Indba Sabha. 

The Indra Sabha, or " Court of Indra " so called, is rather the group 
of Jaina caves than a single one and its appendages ; in reality two 
double-storeyed caves and a single one, with their wings and subordi- 
nate chapels, &c. The first, however, is pretty well known to Euro- 
peans as the Indra Sabha, and the second as the Jagannath Sabha. 
The court of the Indra Sabha proper is entered through a screen 
wall facing the south. Plate LXXXVH. OutBide this on the east 
side is a chapel with two pillars in front, and two more at the back. 
The walls are sculptured with Parswanatha on the north end, nude, — 
as in all cases in these caves, — with a seven-hooded snake overshadow- 
ing him, a female attendant with a snake-hood bearing a chhatri or 
umbrella over him. (See Plate LXXXVI.) Below the chhatri- 
bearer are two young naganis, and above a male figure riding on a 
buffalo, and above gandharvas and a figure playing on a conch 
shell. On the right side of the sculpture is the demon Kamatha 
riding on a lion, and below him two worshippers, apparently a male 
and female. The whole scene has a considerable likeness to the 
temptation of Mara, depicted in Plate LI., but even wilder in design, 
and very much inferior in execution. On the south end is Gomata, 
or Gotama Swami, also nude, with creepers twining round his limbs, 
with female attendants and worshippers, and in the shrine we find 



INDBA SABHA — ELURA. 497 

Mahavira, the last of the Jaina Tirthankaras. These figures are re- 
markably like the figures of Buddha in the meditative attitude with 
his hands in his lap, only they are usually represented as nude, and 
have a drammer and other musicians over their heads. On the back 
is a figure, generally known as Indra, under a tree with parrots in it 
seated on an elephant and with two attendants ; on the right side is 
a female divinity locally known as Indrani, the wife of Indra, but 
properly it is Amba or Ambika, a favourite female divinity of the 
Jainas. 

Entering the court ; on the right side is a large elephant on a pedes- 
tal, and on the left stood a fine monolithic column 27 feet 4 inches high, 
with a quadruple or chwummkha image on the top (see Plate LXXX., 
fig. 2), but it fell over against the rock the day after Lord North- 
brook visited the caves. In the centre of the court is a pavilion or 
mcmdapa over a quadruple image, — either of Rishabanatha, the first 
of the twenty-four Tirthankaras, or of Mahavira, the last; 1 the 
throne is supported by a wheel and lions, as in Buddhist temples. 
The style of the pavilion and of the gateway leading into the court 
is nearly as essentially Dravidian as the Kailasa itself, and so very 
unlike anything else of the kind in the north of India that it pro- 
bably was excavated during the supremacy of the Rathors, and is 
of about the same age as the Jaina cave at Badami. The details, 
too, of that cave have so marked a similarity to those of the Indra 
Sabha, that the probability is they all belong to the eighth century. 

On the west side of the court is a cave or hall with two pillars in 
front and four inside. In the central compartment of the south 
wall is Parswanatha, the 23rd Tirthankara ; and opposite, with deer 
and a dog at his feet, is Gomata or Gautama. In this cave these 
figures are larger than those in the shrine outside the gate, and they 
recur again and again in these caves with only slight variations in the 
surrounding figures. On the back wall are Indra and Ambika, and 
in the shrine is Mahavira on a sinhdscma, with a triple umbrella over 
his head. Between this and the main oave, but lower, is a small 
chapel long partially filled up, in which the Indra and Ambika are 
peculiarly well out, though recently the face of the latter seems to 
have been wilfully damaged. Over this chapel is another similarly 
furnished, and directly opposite is still another like it. 



1 A view of this pavilion, with the entrance doorway or miniature gopura, is given in 
ay Jnd. and East Arch., p. 262, woodcut 147. 

TIM. I i 



498 JA1NA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

Entering the lower hall, we find it has a sort of double verandah, 
divided by a screen, beyond which is a twelve-pillared hall, few of 
the columns of which, however, have been entirely cut out from the 
rock, and the aisles are little more than begun. At the left end of 
the front verandah, on the pilaBters, are two colosBal nude images of 
Santinatha, the 16th Ttrthankara, with an inscription under that on 
the right in characters of about the eighth or ninth century : — 

8ri Sohila fera/i/mo- 
chdrinah Santibhattd- 
ralca fratimeyani. 

" The image of Santibhattaraka, (made by) Sohila, a Brahmacharin 
{i.e. pandit of the Digambara Jains)." 

Beyond this is a chapel with shrine and the usual sculptures. 
Inside the hall on one of the pillars is another large nude image, 
with one line underneath : — 

Sri Ndgavannma lcritd pratimd, 
" The image made by Sri Nagavarmma." 

Near the east end of the verandah a stone stair leads to the upper 
storey, and facing the bottom of it is a chapel sculptured much as 
the rest, — Parswanatha on the right, Gotama on the left, Indra and 
Ambika at the back, and Mahavira on the throne in the shrine. 

The stair lands in the verandah of the grand hall, Plate 
LXXX VU-L, once all bright with painting, of which some smoked 
fragments still remain, especially on the roof. Two pillars of 
"broken square 1 ' pattern, with their pilasters connected by a low 
wall, support the front; two others with boldly moulded square 
bases and sixteen-sided shafts and capitals, with a low partition 
between, form the back of the verandah, dividing it from the hall ; 
and twelve, of four different patterns, surround the hall inside. 
Comparing the pillars Nos. 2 and 3 in Plate XCIL, which are both 
about the same age, with that in the LankeiSwara caves, Plate 
LXXXIV., fig. 4, it will be seen how nearly identical they are, 
and if we are right in ascribing the last-named cave to the latter 
half of the eighth century, these two Jaina Sabhas cannot be much 
more modern. The Brahmans and the Jamas seem to liave been 
together in the field to share the spoils of the Buddhists, but the 
former were certainly the earliest to take advantage of their decline, 



INDRA SABHA — ELURA. 499 

and the most powerful at Elura at least, and their caves consequently 
the most numerous and most magnificent. 

Colossal figures of Indra and Ambika, with their usual attendants, 
the one under a banyan, the other under a mango-tree, occupy the 
ends of the verandah, Plate XCL, fig. 1, which is 14£ feet high. The 
walls of the side and back aisles are divided into compartments filled 
with Jinas or Tirthankaras. The centre space on each end has a 
large Jina on a sinliAsana, ; one on each side the shrine door is 
devoted to Parswanatha and Gotama ; and the others have two 
Mahaviras each, under different -Bo-trees, as with the Buddhas, but 
between the trees is a figure holding up a garland, and above him 
another blowing a conch, while at the outer sides are gandharvas. 
On the pilasters on each side the shrine door is a tall nude guardian 
and on the next pilaster a squat Mahavira. The door, which is 
richly ornamented, has two slender advanced pillars, beaten by the 
Brahman guides to show the reverberation, and called by them the 
damrw or drum of the idol. Over and around this door is a mass 
of carving, represented in Plate LXXXIX. The shrine, 12 feet 
3 inches high, is, as usual, occupied by Mahavira. 

In the centre of the great hall in a sort of sdluhkhd has stood 
a quadruple image (chaumuhlia), now destroyed ; and over it on 
the roof is an immense lotus-flower on a square slab with holes in 
the four corners and centre, as if for pendent lamps. 

A door in the south-east corner leads through a cell with a sort 
of trough in the corner of it, and a natural hole in the roof, into a 
small cave on the east side of the court. The few Bteps leading 
down to it occupy a small lobby carved all round with Jinas, &c. 
ThiB hall has a verandah in front, and inside are four square 
pillars with round capitals. Gotama occupies a recess on the right, 
and Parswanatha another on the left. Indra, with a bag in his left 
and a cocoanut in his right hand, occupies the south end of the 
verandah, while Ambika faces him in the entrance, — in fact they 
occupy much the same places as the supposed patrons occupy in 
Buddhist caves. Nude Jaina dwdrjxtlas guard the entrance of the 
shrine, which contains the usual image. Some scraps of painting 
still remain on the roof of this apartment. 

Returning through the great hall, a door in the north-west corner 
leads through a small room into the temple on the west side corre- 
sponding to the last described. It has a carefully carved f acade, the 

ii 2 



500 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

sculpture still sharp and spirited. In the entrance to it on the right 
hand is a four-armed Devi -with two discs in the upper hands, and a 
vajra in her left on her knee ; and on the left another Devi, — perhaps 
Sarasvati, — eight-armed, with a peacock. The hall is exactly similar 
in plan to that on the east, but the four central pillars have capitals 
■with looped drooping ears, as in the great hall, and everything has 
been finished in the close grained rock more elaborately and sharply. 
Indra, Gotama, and ParSwanatha recur in their usual positions. 

The Jagannatha Sabha. 

A little beyond the Indra Sabha is another cave-temple, with a 
court in front, known as the Jagannatha Sabha or Court of Jagan- 
natha (lord of the world) : the screen, if any, and the chawnukha 
mandapa, however, must have been structural, and have now dis- 
appeared ; while the number of fragments of loose images that 
were discovered in cleaning out the court of this cave testify to the 
quantity of sculpture that must have been in these caves in addition 
to what was cut in the rock on the original execution of the work. 

On the west side of the court is a hall with two heavy square 
pillars in front, and four in the middle area (Plate XC, fig. 1). It 
is sculptured like all the rest, Parswanatha on the left and Gotama 
on the right, with MahaVira or some other Jina in the shrines, on 
pilasters, and in a few recesses. Indra occupies the left end of 
the verandah, and Ambika the right or north end. There are some 
inscriptions, a few letters of which are legible, on the pillars of this 
cave. They are in the old Canarese character, and may belong to 
about a.d. 800-850, though such evidence can hardly be much relied 
upon for the date of a cave so far from the country to which that 
alphabet belongs. 

Right opposite to this is a chapel with a pretty large cell inside ; 
this is carved with the usual figures also. The cave at the back of 
the court has been long filled with earth, and the sculpture in it is 
generally in a remarkable state of preservation. In the ends of the 
front aisle are Indra and Ambika under trees, with attendants, all 
very sharply cut, and the features as yet but little injured. The 
front pillars are square and fluted ; those behind the front aisle, 
square below and sixteen-sided above ; and the four in the inner 
area are square with drooping-eared capitals. The shrine has a 



JAGANNATH SABHA — ELUKA. 501 

vestibule entered under a torana or ornamental arch. Parwsanatha, 
Gotama, &o. recur as before. 

To the east side of the entrance, and also facing the south, is a 
chapel with Mahavira or Santinatha on each end, and further back 
Parswanatha on the left and Gotama on the right. 

On the right of this is the stair leading to the upper storey, fig. 2, 
consisting of a great twelve-pillared hall, varying in height from 
13 feet 10 inches to 14 feet 6 inches. Two columns in front and as 
many in the back row have square bases, and round shafts with 
florid shoulders : the others are square, except the neck and cushion 
capital, which are round but not well proportioned : all have massive 
bases. Two more pillars stand on the bench screen wall that forms 
the front of the cave. The roof has been painted in large concentric 
circles, and on the walls Mahavira is sculptured between fifty and 
sixty times, Parsvanatha perhaps nine or ten times, and over the 
heads of the Jinas the space has also been painted with more Jinas 
and their worshippers. Indra and Ambika are on the back wall 
outside the dwdrpdlas. In the shrine is a Jinendra with four lions 
on the front of the throne, and a wheel upheld by a dwarf. Over the 
Jina is a triple umbrella, and dogs and deer lie together at the foot 
of the throne. A low-doored cell on the right side of the shrine, 
and a square hole in the floor, were perhaps for concealing objects 
of value. 

A door in the west end of the front aisle enters a low cell, the 
side of which has been cut away in excavating the hall below it. 
Through a cell in the other end of the front aisle a hole in the wall 
leads into the west wing of the Indra Sabha. 

A little to the west of the preceding is the last cave of the series. 
The verandah, which had two square columns and pilasters in front, 
is gone. The front wall is pierced for a door and two windows. 
Inside, the roof, 9 feet 8 inches high, is supported by four short 
pillars square below, with moulded bases, and having a triangular 
flat shield on each side— a mark of their comparative modernicity. 

The right side wall has cut into a cell of the west wing of the 
Jagannatha Sabha. Indra and Ambika are in compartments on the 
back wall, and the other figures are repetitions of those in the other 
Jaina caves ; on the side walls Tirthankaras are represented in pairs 
with rich florid sculpture over their heads. One of these compart- 
ments is represented in Plate XCL, fig. 2. Having been inaccessible 



502 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

till 1876, when the earth that filled it was taken out, most of the 
sculptures in this cave are comparatively sharp and fresh. 

Parswanatha. 

Over the top of the spur in which the caves are, is a structural 
building facing W. by N., erected early last century by a Banya of 
Aurangabad over a gigantic image of Parswanatha, cut in the red 
trap of this part of the hill. It measures 9 feet from knee to knee, 
and 10£ feet from the topknot to the under-side of the cushion on 
which it squats, and 16 feet from the Bnake-hoods over his head to 
the base of the sinhdsana>, which has a wheel set edgewise in front. 

Right and left of him are "worshippers, among whom are Siva and 
Bhavani. On the cushion on which he sits is an inscription dated 
1234-5 a.d., which is thus rendered by Dr. Buhler : — 

" Hail ! In the year 1156 of the famous Saka era, in the year (of 
the Brihaspati cycle) called Jaya. 

"In Sri (Va)rddhanapura was born Ranugi ...his son (was) 

Galugi, (tlie tetter's wife) Svarna, (dear) to the world. 

" From those two sprang four boub, Chakreswara and the rest. 
Chakreswara was chief among them, excelling through the virtue of 
liberality. 

" He gave, on the hill that is frequented by Charanas a monu- 
ment of Parswanatha, and by (this act of) liberality (lie made) an 
oblation of his karma} 

" Many huge images of the lordly Jinas he made and converted 
the Charanadri thereby into a holy tirtha, just as Bharata (made) 
Mount Kailasa (a tirtha). 

*' The unique image of faith, of firm and pure convictions, kind, 
constant to his faithful wife, resembling the tree of paradise (to 
liberality), Chakreswara becomes a protector of the pure faith, a 
fifth Vasudeva.* Quod felix faustumque sit I Phalguna 3, Wed- 
nesday." 

Below this, on the slope of the spur, are several small caves, all 
Jaina, but now much ruined ; and near the summit is a plain cavo 
with two square columns in front. 

1 I.e. destroyed his karma, which bound him to the Samsara. 

2 Name of a class of demigods peculiar to the Jains ; among the Brahmanicttl 
Hindus VaaudeVa is a name of Kfishna. 



503 



CHAPTER IV. 
JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

DHARA.SINVA. 

Dh&r&sihva is a town on the brow of the . ghat that forms the 
western border of the Nizam's territories, and about thirty-seven 
miles north of Solapur on the railway from Poona to Madras. 
About two miles north-east from this town, in the north side of a 
ravine facing the south, is a small group of Jaina caves, with some 
other unfinished ones on the opposite side, some of which seem to 
have been intended as Vaishnava temples. 

The Jaina caves are now almost deserted by the sect, and a 
substantial temple has been erected to Mahadeva just in front of 
them, which at first, at least, must have acted as a decoy. 

The caves are excavated in a soft conglomerate rock of very 
unequal texture, containing haematite, and they are greatly dilapidated 
through its decay. 

At the west end is a small unfinished cave, but the next has been 
a large and handsome cave with a verandah 78 feet long by 10 feet 4 
inches wide, the whole f acade of which, however, has fallen. Judging 
from the pilaster left at one end, it must have been supported by 
masBive square pillars with bracket capitals richly carved. Above 
the pillars was a frieze sculptured with Tirthankaras, and " chaitya- 
window " ornaments. Five doors apparently led into the hall 82 feet 
deep and from 79 to 85 feet wide, the roof supported by thirty-two 
columns arranged in a square of twenty and an inner one of twelve 
square columns (Plate XCIIL), with bracket capitals and some of 
them with floriated ornamentation. Four in front of the shrine, 
however, have round shafts, and " compressed-cushion capitals." 
Round this hall are twenty-two cells, and the shrine in the back. 
The image is that of Parswanatha Seshphani with the seven hoods 
of a snake, each head with a small crown on it, and seated on a 
throne in the jhana mudrd. Hanging from the seat is carved the 



504 JAINA OAVE.TEMPLES. 

representation of rich drapery ; in front of it has been a wheel set 
edgewise, now broken away, with antelopes at each side ; and from 
behind his cushion appear on each side a idrdMa or nondescript 
monster, a chauri-bearer with high regal tiara, and a very fat 
vidyddhara with coronet and moustache : the figures have all been 
repaired with plaster. Round 'this image is a pradahshitia. 

There has been an open court in front of this cave as at the Indra 
sabhi at Elura, but only the pediment of the entrance is now visible 
among the de'bris of the f agade. On the left of the entrance is a 
water-cistern. 

The front aisle is peculiar in having a gable-shaped roof with 
an opening in one end into a passage whioh runs over the water- 
cistern and comes out beyond it ; what it was meant for is difficult 
to conjecture. 

The third cave has a hall about 59 feet square by 11 feet 3 inches 
high, with twenty square columns J arranged in a square with six on 
each side, and twelve cells in the sides and back besides the shrine, 
which has been a copy of that in the second ; there are also images 
in bas-relief in two of the cells in the back. The hall has five doors 
and the verandah is supported by six plain octagonal columns, and 
has an unfinished cell in the right end, with a large square block or 
pillar of rock in the middle of it. 

The fourth is a hall 28 feet deep by about 26^ wide whioh has 
had four columns, four cells in the walls, and a shrine ; but all the 
columns are broken, only the capitals hanging by the roof ; and the 
shrine wall has been broken through into the cell on the right of it. 
The pillars in both the last two caves are of a simple not inelegant 
type resembling the Tuscan order, but with a neck of the Elephanta 
type, and a collar of ornamental carving round Ihe upper edge of 
the Bhaft. 

As to the age of these caves it is difficult to speak with much 
confidence ; the absence of wall sculptures and the style of the pillars 
in all of them seem certainly to mark them as of a considerably 
earlier type than the Elura Jaina caves, and compared with the 
architectural features of Brahmanical and Buddhist caves, I am 
disposed to assign them to about the middle of the seventh century 
of our era. 

1 Four pillars, two on each side* are round. See Arch. Sur. W. India, toL iii. 
Hate VII. 



ANKAI TANKAI CAVES. 505 

The other caves in the neighbourhood are all Brahmanical, much 
ruined, and never seem to have been of much importance, being 
small and almost devoid of carving. They are probably older than 
the Jaina ones, and may belong to the sixth oentuTy. 1 

Ankai-Tankai Jaina Caves. 

At Ankai, already mentioned, there is a group of some seven 
Jaina caves, small, but very rich in sculptures, though unfortunately 
much defaced. They face the south looking down upon the village 
of Ankai, from which they are hardly a hundred yards distant. 

The first is a two-storeyed cave ; the front of the lower storey is 
supported by two pillars, with a figure at the base of each and facing 
one another, and occupying the place of small dwdrpdlas. Low 
parapets, ornamented on the outside, join each pillar to the end walls. 
The door leading from the verandah into the hall is very richly 
sculptured, overloaded indeed with minute details and far too mas- 
sive and rich for the small apartments it connects. (See Plate XCV 
fig. 1.) 

The hall inside is square, its roof supported by four columns, 
much in the style in vogue from the tenth to the twelfth century, 
the capitals surmounted by four brackets, each carved with fat little 
four-armed figures supporting a thin flat architrave. The enclosed 
square is carved as a lotus with three concentric rings of petals. 

The shrine door is ornamented similarly to the entrance one, the 
lower portion of the jambs being carved with five human figures on 
each. There is nothing inside the cella. 

The upper storey has also two pillars in the front of the verandah 
similar to those below, but not so richly carved. The hall inside is 
perfectly plain (see plan and section, Plate XCIV.). 

The second cave is very similar to the first, being also two-storeyed, 
only the verandahs are shut in, and form outer rooms or vestibules 
to the halls. On the lower floor the verandah measures 26 feet by 12, 
and has a large figure at either end ; that at the west or left end is the 
male figure usually known as Indra seated on a couched elephant, but 
instead of being reliefs in this case, the elephant and Indra are each 
carved out of a separate block, and set into a niche cut out to receive 
them. Opposite him is Indrani or Amba, which the villagers have 



1 For & fuller account of these caves, see Archmot. Survey W. India, vol. iii. 



506 JAIKA OAVE-TEMPLES. 

converted, by means of paint, tinsel and paper, into a figure which 
does duty as Bhavani DeM. 

The door into the hall is of the same elaborate pattern as those in 
No. I. The hall is about 25 feet square and similar in details to the 
last, but more coarsely carved. There is a small vestibule to the 
shrine at the back. The shrine door is much plainer than those 
already mentioned, having a pair of pilasters only on eaoh side and 
a small image of a Tlrthahkara on the centre of the lintel. The 
shrine itself is about 13 feet square and contains, a seat for an image 
with a high back rounded at the top. It seems as if it had been 
intended to carry a pradalcshind behind it, but this has not been 
completed. 

The upper storey, reached by a stair from the right end of the 
front room below, has a plain door, and is also partly lighted by 
square holes pierced in geometric patterns. The door leads to a 
narrow balcony, at each end of which is a full-sized lion carved in 
half relief. The hall inside was apparently intended to be about 
20 feet square with four pillars, but only part of it is excavated. 
The shrine is about 9 feet by 6, with a seat against the wall for an 
image. 

No. HI. is like the lower storey of the last, with a perforated 
screen wall in front, much injured by time and weather. The front 
room is about 25 feet long by 9 wide, the ends occupied by large 
reliefs of Indra and Amba, the former much destroyed and his 
elephant scarcely recognisable ; he wears a high tiara of a late type, 
and is attended by chauri-bearers and gamdha/rvas. A pilaster at each 
side of the compartment is crowned by a four-armed dwarf as a 
bracket, and supports a malcara and a human figure. Between the 
makaras is the torana arch so common in such positions in modern 
Jaina shrines. Amba has also her attendants — one of them riding 
on a small defaced animal with a large club in his hand ; another an 
ascetic with a long beard and carrying an umbrella. The mango 
foliage usually represented over this figure is here conventionalised 
into six sprays hung out at equal distances under the straight tora^a 
that (with a kirttirmkh or grinning face, in the centre) extends across 
the top of the sculpture. 

The hall is entered by a door with only a moderate amount of 
ornament, and measures 21 feet by 25, the roof supported by four 
pillars as in the others. The lotus, however, that fills the central 



ANKAI TANKAI OAVES. 507 

square is much richer and more curious than in the others. It has 
four concentric rows of petals, the inner and outer ones plain, but in 
the second, counting outwards, each of the sixteen petals is carved 
with a human figure, mostly females, and all dancing or playing on 
musical instruments; the third circle contains twenty-four petals, 
each carved apparently with divinities, singly or with a companion, 
and mounted on their mhanas or vehicles — mostly animals or birds. 

The whole lotus is enclosed in an octagonal border carved with a 
lozenge-and-bead ornament, outside which, in one corner, is a single 
figure standing on one foot; in the others there are three each — 
a larger in the centre dancing or playing, and two smaller atten- 
dants. 

On the back wall, on each side the vestibule of the shrine, is a 
standing nude Jaina figure about life-size, with accompaniments. 
That on the left is one of the Tirthankaras, probably Santinatha, 
for he stands on a low basement, carved with a devotee at each end, 
a lion next, then an elephant on each side a central wheel, not set, 
(as in most cases) with the edge towards the front, but with the side ; 
under it is an antelope (mriga), the chmha of the 16th Tirthankara, 
with a very small worshipper at each side. The Jina has a diamond- 
shaped mark on the centre of the breast; and drops his hands 
straight down on either side to meet with the finger points some 
objects held up by devotees wearing loin-cloths. The sculpture has 
a pilaster on each side, in front of which stands ParsVanath in the 
same attitude as the central figure but only about a third of the 
size, and distinguished by the pentecephalous snake (pdncliarSesha- 
pliana) overshadowing him. In a recess in the top of each pilaster 
on a level with Santinatha's head is a seated Jina ; and outside the 
pilaster on the left is a female chauri bearer. Over the shoulders 
of Santinatha are small Yidyadharas, above which, on projecting 
brackets, stand two elephants holding up their trunks towards a very 
small figure seated like Sri, behind the point of a sort of crown or 
turreted canopy suspended over the Tirthankara's head. On each 
side this figure and above the elephants are four males and females 
bringing offerings or worshipping it. Over them is a iorana with 
a Hrttvmukha and six circles in it, each filled with a sort of 
flew de lis ornament, and above this, under the arch that crowns the 
compartment, are seven little figures each holding up a festoon with 
both hands. All this is so like what we find in Jaina temples even 



508 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

of the present day, that it cannot be ancient, and probably belongs 
to the twelfth or thirteenth century. 

The ParsVanatha, on the other side, gtands in the same stiff 
attitude, touching with the points of his fingers the heads of two 
little attendants. On the left stands a female with an offering, and 
on the right is a seated figure with a pointed cap. The pilasters on 
each side this compartment are plain, and over the snake hoods 
canopying ParsVanatha's head is an almost hemispherical formed 
object intended for an umbrella. Over this is a figure with his 
hands clasped, and two others on each side bearing oblong objects 
like bricks, which they seem about to throw down on the ascetic. 

The door of the shrine is moulded but without figure ornament, 
and the sanctum is about 12 feet square with a seat for an image in 
the middle of it. Behind this to the right is a trap hole into a 
small room below, with a Tirthankara in it evidently thrown down 
from the shrine. The custom of providing sunk hidden rooms for 
theso images came into vogue after the inroads of Mahmud of 
Ghazni; whether this one was formed when the excavation was 
made, or afterwards,' it shows that the shrine was in use in times 
when all idols were special objects of Muslim iconoclasm, as they 
were during the bloody rule of Alau'd-din Khilji. 

The fourth cave has two massive plain square pillars in front of its 
verandah, which measures about 30 feet by 8. The door is similar to 
that in Cave 1, with a superabundance of small members, and having 
a Jina on the lintel. The hall is 18 feet deep by 24 wide, its roof 
supported by two pillars across the middle, with corresponding pilas- 
ters on the side walls, also on the front and back, quite in the style 
of structural temples of the present day. They have no fat figures 
on the brackets which are of scroll form. A bench runs along the 
back wall, which serves as a step to the shrine door. The seat for 
the image is against the back wall, in which an arched recess has 
been begun but left unfinished. 

On the left pillar of the verandah is an inscription scarcely legible, 
but in characters of about the eleventh or twelfth century. 

The remaining excavations to the east are smaller and much 
broken and damaged ; they have doors similar to those in the first 
and second, and in the shrine of one of them is an image of a 
Tirthankara (Plate XCV., fig. 2). They are partly filled in with 
earth and need not further detain us. 



GWA1I0R. 509 



GWALIOE. 



The well known fortress of Gwalior is situated on a perfectly 
isolated flat-topped hill of sandstone, rising like an island from the 
plains around it. It is nearly two miles in length, north and south, 
and about half a mile across in the centre where broadest. The 
central plateau is bounded on all sides by a perfectly perpendicular 
cliff some 300 feet in height, with one ravine, the Urwahi running 
into it for some 2,000 feet on its western side. There are no 
ancient buildings in the fort, nor any evidence of its having been 
considered sacred by the Jains, or indeed any other sect, anterior to 
the 11th century. The Sasba.hu, or as it is generally called the 
great Jain temple, was probably erected in a.d. 1093, 1 and the others 
such as the Teli ka Mandar, which was originally dedicated to 
Vishnu, are not very much earlier. 

In the 15th century, during the reign of the Tomara Rajas, the 
Jains seem to have been seized with an uncontrollable impulse to 
convert the cliff that sustains tne fort into a great shrine in honour 
of their religion, and in a few years excavated the most extensive 
series of Jaina caves known to exist anywhere. Unfortunately 
their date is so modern that their style of execution is detestable, 
and their interest, consequently, very inferior, not only to that of the 
group at Elura, but even to that of the detached caves found 
elsewhere, though these are comparatively insignificant in number 
and extent. 2 

The principal group is situated on the Urwahi ravine, and consists 
of 22 colossal figures of the Tlrthankaras, all of which are entirely 
naked. One is a colossal seated figure of Adinath, the first of the 
Jain pontiffs ; another, a seated figure of Neminath, is 30 feet in 
height, but the largest in the group — indeed of all those at Gwalior — 
is a standing colossus 57 feet in height. These are interspersed 
with smaller figures, and the nicheB in which they stand are orna- 
mented with architectural details of great elaborateness, though 
generally in very questionable taste. 9 

1 Cunningham, Reports, vol. it. p. 360; Hist, of Indian $ East. Architecture, p. 452. 

• The following account of these caves is almost entirely based on Gen. Cunning- 
ham's account of them iu the second volume of his Reports, p. 364, et seqq. 

3 Two views of this group are given in Rousselet's L'Inde des Rajas, pp. 369 and 
371. As these are engraved from photographs they give a fair idea of the state of the 
art at the time the sculptures were executed. 



510 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

The second great group extends for upwards of half a mile on 
the opposite face of the cliff, and contains 18 great statues from 20 
to 30 feet in height, and at least as many more from 8 to 15 feet 
high. There are also some real caves on this side, but they are 
at present inhabited by Bairagis, and consequently inaccessible. 

There are three other smaller groups, but they contain little 
that is remarkable, except in that to the south-west, where a 
sleeping female figure is represented, 8 feet long and highly 
polished, and close to this a group of a male and female with a 
child, but there is nothing to show who these are intended to repre- 
sent. 

The most remarkable thing about these sculptures is, if the 
numerous inscriptions upon them are to be depended upon, that 
they were all executed in 33 years, or between the years of 1441 
and 1474 a.d. As General Cunningham points out, however, the 
inscriptions are not all integral. Some, at least, were added after- 
wards, but be this as it may, there seems no reason for doubting 
that they all belong to the 15th century, and this is quite sufficient 
to account for the inferiority of style in which they are executed. 

Concluding Remabks. 

It would, of course, be absurd to attempt to institute any compari- 
son between the Jaina caves in India and those excavated either 
by the Buddhists or the Brahmans. The Jains never were cave 
excavators, and it was only at the last when Buddhism was 
tottering to its fall, and the Brahmans were stripping them of their 
supremacy and power, that the Jains seem to have awakened to the 
idea that they, too, might share in the spoil. The consequence was 
that, timidly at first, in Dharwar and the Dekhan, they seem to have 
put in their claim to a share in popular influence, and afterwards at 
Elur& boldly asserted their position as co-heirs of the expiring 
Buddhists. Though existing long before, this was practically the 
first appearance of the Jains on the public stage in India. The fact 
being that the Jains have left very few material evidences of their 
existence before the sixth or Beventh centuries. A few inscriptions 
at Mathura and some fragments of statues 1 are nearly all that 

1 Gen. Cunningham, Reports, vol. Hi., p. 80 et tcqg. 



CONCLUDING EBMABKS. 511 

recall to us that such a congregation really held together anywhere 
in India. 

There seems, nevertheless, no reason for doubting that the Jains 
are as early a sect as the Buddhists, perhaps even earlier, but the 
teaching of Mah&vlra seems to have been wanting in some element 
that would successfully recommend it for general acceptance, or. 
it may only be that his doctrines never had the good fortune to 
obtain the patronage of so powerful a king as Asoka, to whom the 
Buddhists owe so much. From whatever cause, however, it arose, 
the fate of the two religions was widely different. From and after 
the third century before Christ, the doctrines promulgated by the 
Buddhists spread everywhere over India and into Ceylon, and in 
the first century after our era they were carried to Burmah and the 
Indo-Chinese provinces, and spread themselves extensively even in 
the Celestial Empire itself, till they became the faith of a greater 
number of human beings than ever before adopted the creed of any 
single prophet. 

During the greater part of this time the doctrines of Mahavira 
remained dormant in comparative obscurity, and only flickered into 
a transitory brilliancy on the decline of Buddhism. Their real 
revival was some two or three centuries afterwards, when we find 
them erecting buildings of extreme beauty and splendour on Mount 
Abu, at G-rinar, or at Palitana. Nothing in India surpasses the 
beauty of the temples with whic^ the Jains adorned all their sacred 
sites in Gujerat during the 11th and 12th centuries ; but it was not 
the architecture of the caves which they employed in them, or 
anything derived from cave architecture. It would, for instance, 
be difficult in India to find any architectural forms more dissimilar 
than those displayed in the temples of Vimala and Tejpala at Abu, 
when compared with those in the Indra and Jagannath Sabhas at 
Elura. The former are light and elegant to an extent hardly found 
in any other style in India, and their beautiful horizontal domes 
supported on eight pillars, which are their most characteristic 
features, are not found anywhere else at that time. They had, in 
fact, a structural style of their own, whose origin we have not yet 
been able to trace. Their rock- cut style was only a passing episode 
in their architectural history, and was evidently borrowed from that 
of the Buddhists and Brahmans, but it was dropped by them when it 



512 JAINA CAVE-TEMPLES. 

was no longer wanted, without having had any permanent influence 
on their own peculiar style. 

Under these circumstances, though it was of course impossible to 
omit a description of these forms in a work like the present, it is 
evident that a study of the Jaina caves adds but little to our 
knowledge of the subject. It neither reveals to us what the archi- 
tecture of the Jains was before they adopted this passing fashion, 
nor does it throw any light on the origin of the style they afterwards 
developed with such success in their structural temples. Notwith- 
standing this, however, the architects who excavated the two great 
Sabhas at Elura certainly deserve a prominent place among those 
who, regardless of all utilitarian considerations, sought to convert the 
living rock into quasi eternal temples in honour of their gods. 



APPENDIX. 



Since Mr. Burgess' return to India in October last, a fresh cave 
has been discovered at Bhaja, which, though one of the smallest, 
seems to be among the oldest, and certainly one of the most interest- 
ing known to exist in India. Mr. Cousins' drawings of it, reproduced 
in Plates CXVL, CXVIL, and CXVIIL, did not, from various causes 
reach this country in time for a description of this cave being in- 
serted in its proper place, along with that of the other caves of the 
group. This, however, is hardly to be regretted, as the cave is 
quite unique, and presents so many features of novelty, giving rise 
to fresh subjects of inquiry, that it may be as well that it should 
be treated apart by itself, rather than that the narrative should be 
interrupted by entering upon them in the middle of the work. 

When first discovered, the cave was filled nearly to the roof of 
the verandah with mud, and a great bank of earth and debris accu- 
mulated in front of its fa§ade, which had to be cut through before 
it could be cleared out. It is owing to this circumstance that the 
sculptures which it contains are in so remarkable a state of preserva- 
tion. No wilful injury has been done to any of them, nor, indeed, 
to any part of the cave, except to the sides of the entrance doors, 
where the wall being very thin the rock has been broken away, 
and the sculptures on either side slightly damaged. The pillars, too, 
of the verandah have been broken away. This, however, is hardly 
to be wondered at, as they are less than a foot in diameter, and 
were easily broken from their exposed situation. 

The cave faces the north, and, as will be seen from the plan (Plate 
XCVL, fig. 1), is a small vihara, with a hall of a somewhat irregular 
form, measuring 16 feet 6 inches north and south, and 17 feet 6 
across, in the opposite direction. There are two cells in the inner 
wall, one with a stone bed, the other without, and two in the east 
wall. There are besides these, a larger cell, with a stone bed at one 
end of the verandah, and two smaller, similarly provided, at the 
other end. The latter, however, are partially detached, their proper 
entrance being from the front, outside the Vihara. At this end 
there ib a pillar and pilaster (Plate XCVIL, figs. 1 and 2), whose 

Y 188. K K 



514 APPENDIX. 

capitals (Plate XCVL, figs. 2 and 3) are familiar to us, the one 
as an example of the bell-shaped quasi Persepolitan capitals, 
which we find surmounting the lats of A£oka at Sankiasa and 
Bettiah 1 whioh are certainly of his time, and which afterwards 
assumed the more Indian forms we find at Bedsa (woodcut 45) 
and at Karl6 (Plate XII.) as well as elsewhere; the other as 
the original of those found at Kanheri in the great cave there, as 
well as in numerous vih&ras, and which long afterwards bloomed into 
the cushion capitals of Elephanta (woodcut, p. 467). These pillars 
are surmounted by figures, as is so generally the case in the early 
caves, but in this instance they are exceptional, being fabulous 
animals, human female busts united to bovine bodies. Not, con- 
sequently, centaurs, but sphinxes, and, except in the Nahapana cave 
at Nasik (Plate XXI JUL., fig. 3), nearly if not quite unique. 

The eastern (Plate XCVIL, fig. 3) and inner sides of the cave are 
very nearly similar, except that the latter is slightly more elaborate, 
and the jambs of its two doorways slope inwards at rather a greater 
angle. The west side, however, has no doorways, but their place 
ib supplied by two niches, in one of which is an ascetic, with his 
hair twisted into a high top knot, and with a staff in his hand. In 
the other is a layman, probably a prince, and as probably the ex- 
cavator of the cave, but there is nothing about him by which he can 
be identified with any known personage. 

The sculptures in the verandah are, however, much more remark- 
able than those in the interior. Beginning at the east end (Plate 
XCVill.) wo have a prince mounted on a richly caparisoned elephant, 
with an attendant behind, who carries a standard, surmounted by 
the trisula ornament, as at Sanchi, and also what apparently was 
meant as the chattri or umbrella of state. He drives himself, having 
the ankusa in his hand, and the elephant has apparently torn up a 
tree from its roots, and is brandishing it in his trunk. In front of 
hirn are several small figures, some apparently floating in the air. 
The most remarkable of these, however, are three : — two male and 
one* female — with the most extraordinary head-dresses, standing on 
the top of a tree, of a species not seen in any other sculptures, but 
surrounded by a rail, and with a goose or some such bird behind 

1 Hat. of Indian and East Architecture, Woodcuts 6 and 6. 

*. There are figures surmounting capitals at Buddha Gaya (RajendraUUa Mitra Bud. 
Gaya, Plate L.) which seem to represent the same symbolism, but they are so weather 
worn that it is difficult to {eel sure what they are intended to represent 



ANCIENT VIHARA AT BHAJA. 515 

it. Below the tree a king, on a very much smaller scale, in seated 
on his morha, under an umbrella of state, and with a female ehauri 
bearer and two musicians beside him. Below these again is one 
woman dancing, and one, or it may be two, though only two legs are 
seen, playing and dancing. In the centre of this lower compart- 
ment is a sacred tree, surrounded by a rail, hung with garlands 
and surmounted by an umbrella, but it, like the other, is of a species 
not represented in any other sculptures known. Beyond these, too, 
there is a man and a Kinnari — a woman with a horse's head. In 
this instance she is not quite naked, as she is represented on the rail 
at Buddha Graya, 1 having a bead-belt round her waist. The rest of 
this portion of the bas-relief is filled with lions and monsters of 
various kinds preying on one another. 

The first impulse on looking at this extraordinary sculpture is to 
assume that it is intended to represent the god Indra on his elephant 
Airavata, but on the whole it seems most probable it is intended 
only as a glorifioation of the king or prince who excavated the cave. 
The exaggeration of his Bize and of that of his elephant, which is 
greater than in any other Indian sculptures known, may only be an 
attempt to express his greatness relatively to other men, and to the 
king his father, who seems to be the figure seated in front of him. 

The bas-relief on the other side of the doorway is of a much simpler 
character. It represents a prince in his chariot drawn by four 
horses, and attended by two females with most remarkable head- 
dresses. One bears a ehauri in her right hand, and behind the prince 
is a staff, which may have been intended to symbolise or support an 
umbrella, whioh has now however been entirely obliterated. Two men 
on horseback attend them. The most remarkable part of this group 
are the hideous female monsters which apparently support the 
chariot, and the architectural features of the cave. They are so 
totally unlike anything known to exist in any cave, in any age, and, 
so far as I know, in any mythology, that we must pause before 
attempting an explanation of their appearance here. 

The three figures of men that adorn the front of the cave beyond 
and between the doorways are extremely well designed, and very 
remarkable for their costumes, which are unlike any others known 
anywhere else. The most eastern one (Plate XCVL, fig. 5) is sin- 
gularly elegant and well drawn, though his head is somewhat too 

1 Dr. RftjendralWa Mitrn, BuddJta Gat/a, Plate XXXI V. Pig. 2. 

KK 2 



516 APPENDIX. 

small for his other proportions, but the amount and character of 
jewels he wears is most remarkable. His gold earrings rest on his 
shoulders, and his arms are nearly covered witharmlets of pearls (?), 
while the pnir-de-lys ornament he wears on his right arm is not 
only elegant but most unusual. 

No inscription of any sort has been found in this newly discovered 
cave, which either from its purport or the form of its letters gives 
us a hint of what the age of this Vihara may be. We are thus left 
almost wholly to rely on local and architectural evidenoes for ascer- 
taining this. These, fortunately, especially the latter, are, in this 
case, as satisfactory as almost could be wished for, and leave little 
room for doubt that if not the very oldest it is at least among 
the most ancient excavations, of its class, that has yet been dis- 
covered in India. 

The situation of this cave, as forming part of a group where all 
the others are old, raises at first a strong presumption that it, too, 
may be as ancient as the others are. The Chaitya cave here 
(woodcut No. 1) I have always looked upon as the oldest of itB 
class on the western side of India, and its accompanying Viharas 
(Plate IX.) are certainly of the same age. Recent researches have 
somewhat modified this conclusion, and it is now doubtful whether 
the caves at Pitalkhora (Plate XV.), and that at Kondane (Plate 
VIII.) may not be as old, and, on the whole, there seems so very little 
difference between them, that it is hardly worth arguing the point. 
These groups may overlap each other, as to their dates, and may 
be considered as contemporary, till something turns up to decide the 
question of priority. 

Though the fact of its being associated with an old group of 
caves may render it probable that it, too, is ancient, it is far from 
proving it to be so ; but if any reliance can be placed on architec- 
tural evidence, this is amply sufficient to render its antiquity beyond 
all cavil. Any one familiar with the subject, on looking at the 
doorways of the interior (Plate XCVIL), will see at a glance that 
their form is more ancient than that of any others yet adduced 
in this work. Those most like them are those in the Vihara at 
Bedsa (Plate X.), but these are not so rude as in this cave, and 
their jambs do not slope inwards to anything like the same extent/ 
while as mentioned above (p. 40 et seq.), in describing the Eastern 
caveB, this iB one of the most certain indications of their relative 



ANCIENT VIHARA AT BHAJA. 517 

antiquity. The decorations of the walls of the Vihara No. XII. at 
Ajanta resemble those of this cave even more closely, as that cave 
has the square sinkingB or niches "between the doorways (Plate 
XXVII.) which are only found there and in this cave. The Ajanta 
example, though universally admitted to be the oldest cave there, 
has not, like the Bedsa one, the sloping jambs nor the great posts 
on the Bides of the doors which are so characteristic in this Bhaja 
cave and of the Lomas Eishi cave at Barabar (woodcut No. 3), which 
latter, we may say with certainty was excavated in the time of Asoka. 

The cave most like it in plan, is Cave No. XIV. at Nasik (Plate 
XXVL) ; but it is regular and formal in every respect, and, though 
excavated probably one or two centuries before Christ (p. 275), is 
evidently a much more modern example. On the whole, the cave 
most resembling it is, perhaps, the Vihara at Pitalkhora (Plate XV., 
figs, 3 and 4), but.even this has the sloping jambs, only in an almost 
imperceptible degree, if at all. 

When the description of the Pitalkhora caves was written in the 
body of this work (pp. 242 to 246), there seemed no data available 
from which their age could be ascertained with anything like pre- 
cision, while the frequent substitution of stone ribs in the roofs, 
instead of wooden ones, seemed to warrant their being brought 
down to a more modern date than we now find to be justifiable. 
In a letter received from Mr. Burgess, at Bombay, dated on the 
28th of last month (February 1880), he informs me that inscriptions 
have been found on the Pitalkhora caves, " in the Mauryan character," 
from which he infers that " they must be very old." This fact, 
coupled with the discovery of this Vihara at Bhaja, has thrown a 
flood of light on the history of the most ancient forms of these 
caves, which was not available a few months ago, and we now see 
our way to ascertain their dates with a degree of precision not 
hitherto attainable. 1 



1 J« his recent communications Mr. Burgess has given mc the following list of these 
old Chaitya caves, with the dates he is now inclined to attach to them, though without 
insisting ou thera, till he has loisure to go over the whole subject with all the docu- 
ments before him : — 

Pitalkhora and Bhaja - - 250 to 200 b.c. 

Kondanfi - - - - 200 to 150 b.c. 

No. IX and X. Ajanta - - 150 to 200 „ 

Bedsa and Nasik - - - 100 to 50 „ 

\rk T \$ ... - First century of our era. 



518 APPENDIX. 

Now that the age of these Pitalkhora oaves may be said to be ascer- 
tained, it is evident that that of No. X. Ajant& may be carried back 
to any age, which from other indications may be considered reason- 
able, but, above all, it enables us to understand the arrangement 
of the verandah in this Bhaja Vihara which before looked very 
anomalous. Its form is, however, quite unique, so far as is at pre- 
sent known, being a quadrant of a circle, projecting forwards and 
externally, probably, of an ogee form. 1 Internally it waB framed 
as if with wooden ribs, supporting horizontal rafters, all copied in 
stone exactly in the same manner and to the same extent as was 
practised at Pitalkhora (Plate XVII.), and with the same windows 
formed of cross-bars, originally, undoubtedly, in wood, but like 
everything else here, copied in stone. Though arising probably 
from a different cause, it will be observed the roof of this verandah 
has the same diagonal slope as is observable in the Pitalkhora 
Vihara (Plate XV., fig. 3). Altogether there is a remarkable affinity 
between the two caves, which is most satisfactory now that their 
ages are at least approximately known, and that it is nearly if not 
quite certain that these two are the earliest caves, of an ornamental 
character, known to exist in Western India. 

Whatever doubt may hang over other matters connected with 
this cave, or over the subjects meant to be portrayed in its 
sculptures, there is fortunately none as to the religion to whioh it is 
dedicated. We have been accustomed, in the caves at Katak and at 
Bharhut and Sanchi to Buddhism without Buddha, but at the two 
last-named places we have, thanks partly to inscriptions, partly to 
the extent of the sculptures, been able to identify jatakas and 



This list appears to me to represent very correctly the present state of oar knowledge 
of the age of these old cares. The Vihara No. XII. at Ajanti, which this cave to much 
resembles in detail, has always been admitted to be the oldest cave there, and earlier 
than either of the Chaityas DL or X. at that place. 

1 There is no other instance known of thtB form of verandah in any other cave, bat 
it mast have been common in structural buildings of the Buddhists in that and perhaps 
in all ages. At least it is found repeated in all the great Dravidian buildings down at 
least tOl a eentury or two ago. At Vyyanagar (Captain Lyons' photographs, No. 509 
et teg.) aid at Avadea Covil (photo, 881) there are repetitions of this form almost 
exactly of the same dimensions and with the same ribbed construction internally. It 
is, in fact, the most characteristic feature of the Dravidisn style, and is found in every 
conceivable position and of all dimensions. 



ANCIENT VIHAEA AT BHAJA. 519 

legends which leave no doubt in the matter. At Katak we have 
not even a dagoba, and the emblems are few and far between. In 
this Bh&ja cave the frieze of dagobas of a very early type round 
the verandah (Plate XC VII., figs. 1, 2, and 3) quite sets the question 
at rest, and though we have no wheels, which is very remarkable, 
we have tree worship, though of an unusual type, and the trisula 
only doubtfully once on a standard. There is certainly nothing in 
the sculpture that can be interpreted as a jataka, and altogether, 
though certainly Buddhist, the sculptures look as if they belonged 
to an earlier type than anything yet found in any other cave. 

There is still one other subject connected with the Vihara which 
I approach with diffidence, as it raises a question, to which I am not 
prepared with an answer, and which is still so important that some 
may think it neutralises all the other arguments that can be adduced 
to establish the antiquity of this cave. On looking attentively at 
the bas-relief that is found at one end of the verandah (Plate 
XCVX, fig. 4) . it will be observed that the man on horseback, a 
little to the left of the centre, has his feet in stirrups, and there can 
be no doubt that this bas-relief forms part of the original decoration 
of the cave, and is coeval with the other sculptures. The winged 
horse (Pegasus) on the left, and the two primeval bulls fighting over 
the prostrate body of a man, and the whole character of the frame- 
work that surrounds the sculpture, all indicate an antiquity as great as 
that of any part of the cave. The two horsemen who accompany 
the chariot (Plate XCVIII.) certainly do not use stirrups, and there 
is not any such harnesB found either at Bharhut nor even at Amravati, 
where the sculptures are so minute and realistic that it must have 
been detected if it existed, and there is only one doubtful example at 
Sanchi. On the western gateway there, a man mounted apparently 
on a mule does seem to have his foot in a stirrup, 1 but, so far as I 
know, it is a solitary example in these sculptures. This evidence 
of their use is certainly slight, but there is an engraved vase in the 
India Museum at South Kensington which seems to set the matter 
at rest. It was described by Mr. Charles Home, late of the Bengal 
Civil Service, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society y with two 



Tree and ScrprtU Worship, Plate XXXVIII., Fig. 2. 



520 APPENDIX. 

plates. 1 It was found on Lahoul in Kulu in the Himalaya, having 
apparently been washed out of the ruins of some Buddhist buildings 
which had been undermined by the river. There was nothing, how- 
ever, either in the vase or in the remains around it to indicate its 
age. Mr. Home comes to the conclusion that, though " the drawing 
" indicates a period somewhat earlier than the carving in the Sanchi 
" topes," and everything points to a very early date, from the 
historical subject portrayed, he is inclined to place it about 200 to 
300 a.d. (p. 375). 

The sculptures in this cave may probably justify us in placing 
the age of the vase, as many years before our era, for the curiouB and 
interesting fact is, that the scenes portrayed on the vase are aB exact 
a copy of those in this cave, as it is well possible to execute with a 
graver on metal, of bassi rilievi on a large scale in stone. We have 
the same prince driving his own elephant with an attendant of 
doubtful sex behind him. We have evidently another prince in his 
four-horsed chariot, accompanied by a female chauri-bearer, and 
another female who in the bas-relief sits behind, but on the vase who 
acts as charioteer. Both on the vase have state umbrellas over 
their heads. The chariots are almost identical in form, and the 
head-dresses of the females, and indeed of all, are of the same 
exaggerated type in both. There are no monsters on the vase, but 
instead a female, or it may be a male figure leading the procession, 
followed by a graceful female playing on a harp and another play- 
ing on a very long flute, which seems to have been the favourite 
national instrument in all the old sculptures. 

These, however, are minor peculiarities, and do not interfere with 
the inference that the cave sculptures and the vase represent the same 
scenes whatever they may be, though it is probable they may not be 
of exactly the same age. The sculptures on the vase do indeed look 
more modern, though it is difficult to institute a comparison between 
them, the mode of expression and the material are so different. But 
be that as it may, the point that interests ub most here is that the 
two men on horseback who accompany the chariot have, on the 
vase, their feet undoubtedly in stirrups, not of metal it is true, but 
a doubled strap serving the same purpose. 

1 J. H. A. &, vol. v., New Sent* for 1871, pp. 867 to 375. 



ANCIENT VIHARA AT BHAJA. 521 

The question thus arises, is it conceivable that if the Indians used 
stirrups in the third century before Christ, neither the Greeks nor 
the Romans took the hint and adopted them also ? It is one of 
those inventions which, like printing with moveable types, seem 
only to require to be suggested to be universally adopted, but the 
evidence of all antiquity seems against the idea. The Nineveh 
sculptures seem to prove that their use was unknown in Assyria, 
and if they were used either in Greece or Rome it is most 
improbable that the keen eyes of antiquaries would not have de- 
tected evidence of their employment. How on the other hand 
cavalry could exist and be efficient without the employment of 
stirrups is almost as mysterious, but that is a question that cannot 
be argued here. All that it is necessary to state here, is that in so 
far as the evidence now available can be relied upon, it goes to 
establish the fact that the use of stirrups was known in India in the 
third century before Christ. 

Figure sculpture is so extremely rare in these western caves that 
it is very difficult to institute any comparison that will enable us to 
judge either of the relative antiquity or comparative merit of the 
sculptures in this cave. There are, it is true, groups in the caves at 
Kuda and Karle (pp. 207 and 238), but they are only of two figures 
each, a man and his wife, apparently the founders or benefactors of 
the Chaitya, with very scant clothing and no emblems. There are 
also single figures, as at this very place of Bhaja and elsewhere, but 
nothing like an attempt to tell a story has anywhere been found, 
nor any mythological representations in any cave before the Christian 
era. 

The sculptures in this cave are unlike anything found in the 
Katak caves, though how far that may be owing to distance of the 
locality, or to the nature of the material in which they are carved, 
it is difficult to say. They do not resemble those of the Bharhut 
Stupa. All these again are small and crowded, and applied to such 
different purposes that it would be dangerous to rely on any com- 
parison that could be instituted between them. The same may be 
said of the Sanchi sculptures, though these are so much more 
methodical, and bring us bo much more nearly within the circle of 
our knowledge of Buddhist literature, as we now know it, that it can 
hardly be doubted that they are much more modern. 



522 APPBNWX. 

If we Lad photographs of the sculptures of Buddha Gaya, we 
might perhaps ascertain something of their age by a comparison 
with them. But the drawings that have hitherto been published of 
them are such that no reasoning can be based on them. The one 
that has been photographed 1 represents the Sun, Surya* driving a 
four-horsed chariot, from which his two wives, Prabha and Chhaya, 
shoot at the BAkshasas of darkness. 8 The subject is therefore 
different, and the chariot being seen in full front doos not admit of 
comparison, but the two pillars on either side are as nearly identical 
with the two in the verandah here (Plate XCVL, figs. 2 and 3) as it 
is almost possible they should be. The one is bell-shaped, the other 
cushioned, and they are surmounted by sphinxes. They are unfor- 
tunately considerably worn, but their main features are quite 
unmistakeable. In so far, therefore, as architectural evidence can 
be relied upon there seems no doubt that thiB cave is of about the 
same age as the Buddha Gaya rail. "Which is the earliest may be 
allowed to remain an open question, but meanwhile it may be safe 
to assume 250 B.C. as the most probable date for this cave, and con- 
sequently there seems no reason for doubting that the sculptures in 
this Bhaja Vihara are the oldeBt things of their class yet discovered 
in India. If there was any reason for supposing that Buddhism 
penetrated into Maharashtra before the missionaries were sent there 
by Asoka, after the great convocation held by him in 246 B.C., it 
might be considered an open question whether this might not pos- 
sibly be even earlier than his reign ; but that is a question that need 
not now be broached. A more important one, which I thought had 
been set at rest by the discovery of the Bharhut Tope, must now be 
re-opened. The sculptures of that monument seemed to prove that a 
school of native sculptural art had arisen and developed itself in 
India, wholly without any foreign influence. If, however, the age of 
these Bhaja sculptures is admitted, it seems difficult to refuse to 
believe that it is not to some Baktrian or Yavana influence that they 
may owe their most striking peculiarities. The figure of the spear- 

1 Dr. Bajendralala Mitra'a, Buddha Gayd, Plate L. 

* There seems no doubt that General Cunningham is quite correct in identifying the 
Charioteer with the sun god, but the plate (Reports, vol HL, Plate XXVII.) in which 
he is represented is so incorrect as to he open to Dr. Bajendralola's criticism. 

3 T^ie same subject is represented in the Knmbbarw&ra Cave At Elura (Plato 
LXXXIIL, fig. 2), but in a much more modern, and less artistic form. 



ANCIENT VIHARA AT BHAJA. 523 

bearer, for instance (Plate XCVL, fig. 5), is so unlike anything else 
found in India, and so like some things found among the quasi Greek 
sculptures in Gandhara, with a strong reminiscence of Assyrian art, 
that the presence of a foreign element can scarcely be mistaken. 
It recalls at once the Assyrian, or as we were in the habit of calling 
it, the Ionic honeysuckle ornament of Aioka's lats at Allahabad and 
Sankissa, 1 and the strong traces of western influence that are found 
in his edicts as well as in his works. The bell-shaped quasi Per- 
sepolitan capitals which generally crown his lats, and are the most 
usual features in this and in all the western caves anterior to the 
Christian era, tell the same tale. They are the only features that 
cannot be traced back to a wooden original, and must apparently 
have been imported from some western source. 

The truth of the matter appears to be, that there was, in very 
early times a school of sculpture in India, represented by those at 
Bharhut and Sanchi, which was wholly of native origin, and in 
which it is almost impossible to trace the influence of any foreign 
element. On the other hand the sculptures of the Gandhara 
monasteries are unmistakeably classical, and the influence of that 
sohool was felt as far as Mathura, certainly as early as the Christian 
era. Combined with an Assyrian or Persian element, it existed in 
Behar in Asoka's time and in this cave at Bhaja, and subsequently 
made itself most undoubtedly felt in the sculptures at Amravati. 
We have not yet the materials to fix exactly the boundaries of 
these two schools of sculpture, but their limits are every day becom- 
ing better denned, and may before long be fixed, with at least a 
fair amount of precision. 

Whatever conclusions may eventually be evolved from all this, it 
probably will be admitted in the meanwhile, that the discovery of 
this Bhaja Vihara, in combination with the Pitalkhora inscriptions, is 
one of the most curious and most interesting contributions that has 
of late years been made, and may yet do a great deal towards 
enabling us to elucidate the history and understand the arts of the 
Cave-Temples of India. 

J. F. 



1 Hist, of Indian and Eastern Architecture, woodcuts 4, 5, and 6. 




No. 73. KVi, Consort of Vishnu, seated on a Lotus, with two 

elephant* pouring -water over her. from a modern 

image brought from Iadore. 



INDEX. 



Abbaye aux Homines, 234. 
Accadian races, 7. 
Afghanistan, caves in, 1C8. 
Agni, the god of fire, 14, 412, 433. 
Agnimitra, a king, 25, 232. 
Ahavamalla, a Chalukya king, 147k, 148«. 
Aiho)e, Temple, 110, 13G, 403. 
„ Brahmanical cave, 169, 47(>. 
,, Jaina care, 491. 
Aira (or Vera), king, 66, 67, 69, 76, 01. 
AJBQtA Buddhist care*, 28, 167, 318, 244, 280 ff. 

320JF. 
Ajant*, Early, 289Jf. 
„ Later, 297 ff. 
„ Lateit 320 Jf. 
„ Cave L (Vibara) 820 ff, 886. 
M H.,832^. 
„ HI-V., 336 jf. 
„ VI., 241, 301, 846. 
„ VII., 299, 362. 
„ VIII., 289. 
„ IX. (ChaUya), 289. 
„ „ X. (Chaitya), 243, 268, 292. 

„ XI. (Vibara), 176,294. 
„ XII., XUI-, 244, 275, 291. 
„ XIV., XV., 808, 357. 
„ „ XVI., 303, 846, 416. 

„ XVII., XVIII., 308,809. 
„ XIX. (Chaitya), 802,315. 
„ „ XX. (Vihara), 818, 354. 

„ „ XXI.-XXV., 889, 383. 

„ XXVI. (Chaitya), 320, 841, 877. 
„ XXVII.-XXIX., 346. 
„ Paintings, 98, 284 ff, 
AjAtasatru (king), SJ, 22, 44, 121, 853. 
AjitanJuha (a Jaina Tirthankara), 485. 
Akbar, 5, 32 a, S36. 
Attu'd-dln.Khuji,608. 
Albirunl, 190. 

Alexander the Great, 8, 92, 26, 39. 
Alexander II. of Spinas, 23, 188. 
Alexander, Lieut-General Sir J. S., 281. 
Ahris's Buddkum, 173a. 
Amba or A»nW>ta, mother, a goddess, a favourite 

with the Jaina, 261, 271, 869, 498, 498, 505. 
Amba or MominabAd caves, 423, 435, 490. 
AmbWele, cavea, 184, 219. 
AffiittbhaBnddh»,s JfiAnt Buddha, lord of the 

weatem heavens. 837, 870, 888 a. 
Amitrokhades (Bimbisara), 24 a. 



Auioghavaroha, a RAshtrakuta king, 849 *, 355, 

450, 462. 
Amravati stupa, 27, 64, 75, 81,90, 95 Jf., 173, 

268, Slln, 817,331,519, 523. 
Ananda, 51,257, 344. 
Ananta cave, 56, "Off., 80. 
Anantasena, Vishnu, 97. 
Anantavarma, 38, 102, 407. 
Anarta, Paoranik name of KAthiawAr, 167. 
Andhra, Andhrabhptya, a dynasty ruling over 

the Dekhan in the first century of the Christian 

era, 26, 173, 180, 186, 247, 264, 276, 278, 298, 

349, 860. 
Ankai Tankai, Brahmanical caves, 169, 480. 

„ „ Jaina caves, 490, 505. 

ankuia, the elephant goad, 336, 469. 
Anna Pftrna, a goddess, 455, 460. 
Antigonas Gonatus, 23, 188. 
Antiochus Theos, 23, 18". 
Anur&dhapura, 129. 

Apar&ntaka, western country, tbe Koi'ikan, 17. 
Apsaras, wife of a Gandharva, a damsel of 

Indra's heaven or Swarga, 811, 324, 383, 891, 

415, 471. 
Architecture, 27. 
Arddhan&rtiwara, the androgynous form of Siva, 

20, 126, 415, 485, 459, 461, 469. 
Arhat, the highest rank in the Buddhist hierarchy, 

a Jina, a superior divinity of the Jains, 76, 

283, 486. 
Arjuna's Ratha, 113, 117, 122, 189, 158. 

„ Penance, 155Jf. 
Arrian's Indika, 9. 
Aryan race, 6ff., 12, 14, 28, 187. 
Asita, " dark," name of the ascetic who foretold 

the greatness of the infant Boddha, 885, 80S. 
Hi mudrd, attitude indicative of bestowing a 

blessing, 800, 308. 
Aimaka, a country, 810,843,847. 
Aioka, 5, 7, 12, 28, 29, 83, 41, 61, 65, 68, 91, 

111, 160, 174, 187, 198,889, 511, 514, 522,328. 
Aioka, bis inscriptions, 7, 17, 58, 55, 67, 111, 

182, 193, 195, 302, 219. 
Assembly. See Sangk* tftke BuddhitU. 
Asura, a spirit, a demon, 84, 408,411, 485, 487 
Aswatama (Aivasthami) rocks, 55. 
Atirsnachandra Pallava, 10ft, 154. 
Atichandeswara Mandapa, 198. 
AurangibAd Buddhist cares, 169, 180, 185, 248, 

876, 888, 868, 885, 894. 



526 



INBEX. 



Aurangseb, 5. 

AvalokitegwaTa, a name of Padmap&ni Bodhi- 

sattwa, 170, J 79*, 934, 397k, 943, 852, 958, 975, 

879/f., 384,887, 390. 
Avaraitla Sangharama, western monastery sear 

Bejwara, 95. 
Ayarfi, 842. 
Ayodhya (Oudh), 10. 

Babbgtoo, Dr. Guy, 105, 146, 155». 

Bad&mi, Brahmanical caves, 97, 101, 110, 143, 

169,402,405,422,492. 
Bad&mi, Jaina cave, 490, 491. 
Bagh, Buddhist caves, 109, 185, 363, 472. 
bdhvpaddai, a belt or sash worn by women across 

the breasts,* 411. 
BalhAras or Bashtrakntas, a dynasty ruling at 

Malked in the Dekhan, 171, 450. 
Bali or Mahabali— a mythical king of Mahlba- 

Kpur, destroyed by Vishnu in the V&man 

AvatAra, 151, 410, 438, 460. 
Binasaakara, 405. 

Barabar caves, 80,87, 41, 47,49, 69, 194,354,517. 
Baa relief at MabJvallipur, 155. 
Bedsa, Buddhist caves,47, 91, 165, 182, 184,317, 

228 to 881, S85, 243, 257, 272, 516. 
Behar caves, 37 to 54, 67, 90, 135, 165, 182. 
Bejwara, 95, 97, 99, 403. 
Berar, 179, 306, 408, 428. 
bhadrdsana, a stool, 837. 

Bhairara, a terrific form of Sira, 282, 270, 480, 433. 
Bhajft, Buddhist caves, 80, 38, 42, 91, 175, 184, 

223,243,255,289,871,521. 
Bhaja, ancient Tihara at, Appendix, 518 ff. 
Bhajana Cave, 93. 

bhAvtaufala, a nimbus or aureole, 179, 829. 
Bhaioburde cave, 403, 426, 485. 
Bhamer, Jaina cave, 490, 494. 
Bhinugupta, 191. 
Bharbut Stupa, 27, 32, 89, 47, 62, 68, 71, 83, 

90, 181, 178, 226, 259, 518, 528. 
Bhajirka, founder of the Yalabhi dynasty, 191, 

192. 
Bhavanl, a form of Parvatl, the wife of STiva, in 

her amiable or peaceful form, 852, 427, 484, 

486, 437, 455, 487, 502, 506. 
Bhikshugrihas, eells for Bhikshus to live in, 176, 

210,253,271,297. 
Bbikahu*, mendicant ascetics, 18, 175, 184. 
Bhilai topes, 18, 72. 
Bhlma's Hatha, US, 117 jf., 187, 139, 148, 158, 

854. 
Bhringt, a skeleton attendant of Siva, 404, 483, 

487. 
Bhumidevl, a name of Prithvi, the Earth goddess, 

409. 
bkimtsparia vatdra, attitude of the hand pointing 

to the earth, 178, 345,880. 



Bhutapila, a merchant of Vijayanti, 282, 238. 
bhuuanat, heavens of the Buddhists, 318. 
BhuvanAswar, in Crista, 81, 32a, 55, 122. 
Bimbasara, early king of Magadha, 21, 44. 
BindueAra, the father of Atoka, 23, 25. 
Bird, Dr. J., 281, 859. 
Bloke, Lieut., 281. 
Bo, or bodbi-tree, Bodhidruma, the tree sacred to 

a Buddha or Tirthaakara, 17, 62, 177, 268, 

287, 345, 380, 499. 
Bodhisattwas, Buddhist saints, who in the next 

birth become Buddbas, 138, 170, 283, 297,816, 

345, 352, 364, 377, 883«, 890, 397. 
BorGhit. 212, 218,219. 
Boro-Buddor, 85, 123, 180, 345h. 
Braddock, Lieut. J., 106. 
Brahma, one of the gods of the Hindu Triud, 126, 

153, 409, et passim, up to 474. 
Brahmadatta raja, 60. 

Brahmanical caves, 97, 141, 169, 170, 899/7". 
Brahm!, one of the Saptamatrls, the Sfakti of 

Brahma, 438, 443. 
Brahuis, 7, 20. 

Breeks's Tribes of the NUagirit, 48. 
Buddha, Sakya Muni, 14, 15, 16, 84, 50, 51, 56, 

60, 73, 80, 103, 170, 208,285, 305, 829,840, 

383, 497. 
Buddha, images of, 177, 178, 179, 180, 185, 208, 

215, 230,241, 866,897. 
buddhi, perfected knowledge, the acquirement of 

which frees from further transmigrations, 15. 
Buddhist Bock-Temples, 55 to 86, 165 to 395, 613. 
Buddhism, 12 to 21, 37. 
BurneU'a Paleography, 110, 154. 

Caldwell's Comparative Grammar, 6. 

Carr, Capt^ 106 et ttqq. 

Caves, their numbers, 169. 

Ceylon, 11, 86, 318, 881, 439, 471, 511. 

Chaitya caves, 88, 41,45, 60, 89, 100, \*1jf.,\Uff., 

180, 289, Miff. 
Chakra, the Wheel, the emblem of the Buddhist 

Law, 148, 178, 289, 268, 408, 423, 487, 445, 

460, 474. 
Ckabattambka, a pillar supporting a Chakra, 

180. 

Cbalukyas, a dynasty in the Dekhan, 97, J71, 

400, 405, 449. 
Chamar Lena, Jaina caves near Nlaik, 490, 494. 
Chambers, W., 105. 

ChimuridA, one of the Saptamatrls, 484. 
Chandor, Jaina Cave, 490. 
Chandragapta, founder of the Maurya dynasty, 

819 B.C., 92, 23, 25, 45, 64. 
Chaodragupta 12. of the Gupta dynasty, 190, 191. 
Chiranadri, name of the hill m which tho Jaina 

caves at Blurt are, 495, 502. 
Chaahtana, Kshatrapa, king of Ujjafn, 189. 



INDEX. 



527 



Chatturbhuj, ViBhnn with four snot, 408, 468. 
ehavaraiga, a square altar, or pedestal for the 

Linga, 404, 413. 
Chaul or Chenwal, 304, 205. 
Chtaanuhha, a quadruple image, or fow images of 

a Tirthankara placed back to back, 1 74, 497, 499. 
Chaupat or Chautar, a game played with dice, 

433, 455. 
Chauri, th'o tail of the Yak used as a fly-flap, 

177, 179, 298, 298 leq. 
Ch6mu}a, (or Chemuda), the Scmylln of Greek 

writers, 168,805,349. 
Chera, 7. 

Chhadanta Elephant, one with six tasks, 287, 288. 
Chhatri, an umbrella, symbolical of dominion, 

147, 172s, 227, 466. 
chihna, a cognizance, 439, 487, 491, 494, 507. 
Cbiaholm, Mr. B., 106n, 118, 119, 123, 136. 
Chipalon Caves, 168, 204. 
Ch&bis, 7, 108, 149, 154. 
Chronology of the Caves, 31, 181, 184, 403. 
chUdamatfi crest-jewel, finial, 172a, 316. 
Chulakarna, 69, 70. 

DAbhol, 204. 

Da Couto's Decades, 481 u' 
DAgoba, 17, 18, 73,93, 111, 172, 180, 193,211, 
227, 229, 248, 298, 297, 301 , 8 1 6, 343, 356, 365, | 
397. 
Dalada-wanSa, History of the Ceylon tooth- 
relic, 59, 60. 
Dalton's Ethnology of Bengal, 6». 
DakshinApatha, the Dekhan, 264. 
Daniel, Mr., 107. 
Dantapuri, 56, 60, 93. 
Dantidorgu, 450. 

Mi Avatars Cave at ElurA, 149, 244, 402, 435. 
Dsiaratha, 25, 88. 

Ddtit, household female servants, slaves, 287,821 . 
Dasyut, aborigines, 6, 8, 9, 18, 14, 82, 818. 
Devabhuti, 26, 283. 
Devadatta, 51. 
Devagadh cave, 242. 
Deva Gupta, 126, 306, 412, 457. 
DevAnAmpriya Twhya, Asoka, 18, 188. 
Dh&mnAr Buddhist caves, 169, 186, 392, 496. 

„ BrahmaDical caves, 463. 
Dhanabbuti, 63. 
Dbanaka?aka, capital of the Andhrabhrityaa, 95, 

247, 864. 
Dhank caves in KAthiAwAr, 166, 200, 801. 
DhAr. 368. 

DbiractAwA Jaina eaves, 169, 417. 
Dhartna, religious law or ritual, 78, 74, 174, 180, 

188, 851, 487. 
Jkarwuekatra vatdra, attitude of teaching, 1?8, 

801,805, 98S, 888, 870, 886. 
Dharmaxija's Batha atMahAvallipnr, 117, 1S8 JF, 
189. 



DharmarAja's Mandflpa, 145. 

DharooaiAlA,41, 117, 170, 853, 865, 378. 

Dhauli in Katak, 55, 67. 

dhUi i, a fiat earring, 415. 

Dhokeiwara, Brahmanical cave, 403, 427. 

DaravapataofValabhi, 191, 192. 

dhmajattamba, flagstaft^ pillar bearing an ensign, 

452. 
Digambaras, naked Beet of Jains, 171, 488, 498. 
DikpAlas, divinities of the eight points of the 

compass, 411, 
Dipankara (ligbt maker), a Buddha, 177b. 
D6 Thai or Vbh Thai, Buddhist cave at Elnri, 

379,381,389. 
Draupadl's Batha, at MabAvallipur, 113, U6jf, 

121, 139, 153. 
Dravida, the south of the peninsula of India, 111. 
Dravidians, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 98, 134, 140, 446, 

497. 
Dravidian architecture, 122, 158, 161, 400. 
Dr6n4cb&rya, teacher of the Kuru and Paijdu 

princes, 156. 
Drogasinha, king of Vsllabhi, 191, 192. 
Dnmar LeuA cave, ElurA, 400, 446. 
DurgA, mountain-born, a name of PAmtt wife 

of Siva, 146, 151, 404 to 501. 
DwArpAlas, door-warders, 115, 117, 147, 276, 

833, 370, 492. 
Elephanta or GhArApuri, Brahmanical caves, 105, 

109. 143, 406 to 429, 464. 
Elephants, 103», 129, 168. 
Elliot, Sir "Walter, 106, 109. 
ElurA, Buddhist Caves, 169, 185, 867 to 884. 
„ Pherw&ra, 368 if. 
MAhArwArA, 373. 
, „ Viswakarma Chaitya, Z'lff. 

„ Do Thil, 879#. 
„ Tin Thai, 881. 
„ Brahmanical caves, 143, 481 to 484. 
BAvana-ka Khai, 432. 
DASa AvatAra, 435. 
„ „ KailAsa monolithic temple, 

448 to 463. 
„ „ Caves between KaiUsa and 

Bameiwara, 441. 
„ „ Bameiwara, 438. 

„ „ Ntlakan^ha, 448. 

„ Teli-kA Gana, 444. 
„ „ KnmbhArwArA, 444. 

„ „ Janw&sa, 444. 

„ Milkmaid's Cave, 445. 
„ „ Small caves above the scarp, 

445. 
„ „ Duinar Lena, 446. 

„ Jaina Caves, 495. 

„ ChotaKauAsa.435. 
„ Indra SabhA, 496. 
„ Jagannlih Sabbi, 500. 
Ethnography, 5. 



528 



INDEX. 



Fa-Hian, Chinese traveller in India, cir. 400 a.d., 

34, 358, 44, 49 n, 51, 189, 191, 344, 845*. 
Flauto traverso, 85n. 

Gaja Lakshmt, Sri or Lakshmt, the goddess of 
prosperity represented as seated oil a lotus and 
bathed by elephants, see Lakshmi, 437. 

gala, the neck, of the capital of a dagoba, 1 72a. 

Gaps, followers, demon attendants on Siva, 404, 
406, 418, 423, 489, 459. 

Gapapati, lord of the demon hosts, the elephant- 
headed god of prudence and success, 118, 256, 

4S3, 433, 437, 440. 
Gandharft, 17, 28, 35, 40*, 138a, 259, 523. 
Gandharvas, husbands of the Apsarasas, cherubs, 

usually represented with their wives over 

images of Buddha or the Hindu gods ; they 

reveal divine truth), 117, 151, 295, 300, 361, 

370,375, 435,439, 440, 448. 
Gane£a, Gaoapati, q. v. 
Gan£sa Gurophi cave, 61, 70, 86 to 94. 
Gancsa Len&, Buddhist caves, at Junnar, 253, 

254, 256, 260, 270. 
Garcia Ratha at Mah&vallipur, 113 to 116. 
Gang*, the river Ganges, 326, 439,455,460, 470. 
garbha (the womb), the shnnc of a temple ; the 

dome of a dagoba, 18, 172 a, 255, 473. 
Garuda, the man eagle which carries Vishnu, the 

enemy of the Nflga race, 174, 246, 358, 408, 

434, 457, 470, 487. 
Gautama Buddha, see Buddha. 
Gautamiputra I., a great Andhrabhriya king, 

189, 268, 298. 
Gautamiputra II. or Yajfta Sri, 38, 247, 264, 276, 

298, 349, 351. 
Gay a or Buddha Gayi in Bebar, 15, P2, 33, 87, 

47.52H, 62, 64, £0, 111, 132 ff, 173. 
Gh&r&puri, Elephanta, q. v. 
Ghatotkach, Buddhist caves not fer from Ajanfa, 

346, 347. 
Giriyek, 33 a. 

Girnar, Mount in Sorafh, 18, 187, 194, 264. 
Goldingham, J., 105. 
Goplcave, 88, 149,464. 
Gopura, a gate, or ornamental gateway tower in 

front of the court of a Dravidian temple, 124, 

452. 
Gorakhpur, 16, 844. 
Gotama Indrabbud or Gotama Swami, 468, 496, 

498, 500. 
Govarddhana, 149, 421, 488. 
Graham's, Mrt> Maria, Journal, 107, 118a. 
Gridbraku^ Vulture peak, 61. 
grihat, cells, residences, 175. 
Gnha,<n. 

Guhyakas, troglodytes, cave dwellers, demi-gods 
attendant on Kuvera, 286. 



Gujarat, 168, 192, 204, 485. 

Gulwada, near Aja?ta, 846. 

Gupta dynasty, 190, 191. 

Gwnlior Jaina caves, 86, 122, 490, 306. 

Hakusiri, an Andhrabhritya prince, 268, 864. 

Halabtd in Maisur, 129. 

Hal Khurd cave, 222. 

Hamilton, Buchanan, 34 n. 

hawsa, tbo sacred goose, the vehicle of Brahma 

75,323,474. 
Hora, Siva, 404,411, 
Harchoka caves, 53: 
Hari, Vishpu, 404. 

Hariichandragad, Brahmanical caves, 168, 477. 
Harshnvardhana, king of Kanauj, 192. 
Hasagaiiiw caves, 424, 
Hathi Gumpha cave, 66 to 66, 70, 92, 249. 
Himavants, the Himalayan country, 17. 
Hin&yana, the followers of " the lesser vehicle," 

the purer sect of Buddhists, 170, 179, 185, 280, 

266, 283, 289, 295, 38G, 398. 
Hiranyokasipu, a Daitya or enemy of the gods 

destroyed by Narasiiiuu, 409. 
Hiranj iksha, brother of Hiranvaltusipu destroyed 

by Varaha,409, 421, 
Hiucu or Hiwen Thaang, Chinese traveller in 

India in the 7th century, 11, 34, 38n, 44, 45, 

46, <9», 56, 83, 95, 103, 131, 135, 191, 282, 

342, 344, 484. 
Hti (Tec), the finial and umbrella on a Burmese 

dagoba, 18, 172m. 
Hunter's Oriua, 58 n. 

Images of Buddha. Vide attic, Buddha, images 

of. 
Indbyadrl hills, 242, 280. 
Indra, god of the firmanent, 14, 318, 829, 367, 

370, 375, 879, 411, 470, 498, 497. 
Indr&ni, Aindrt, Sachi, or Mihendrt, wife of 

Indra, 457. 
Indra Sabhi, Jaina cave, 496 to 501. 

Jagannilh, lord of the world, 56, 58, 59a, 73a, 500. 

„ Jaina cave at Eluri, 490. 
Jainism, 13, 485 J". 
Jaina, 19,48, 80, 167, 171, 195, 261, 867, 898, 

401,425,485,437. 
Jaina eaves, 56, 169, 171, 490. 
Jakhanwidi, near Earha^, 213, 214. 
Jamalgiri monastery, 187 to 139. 
Jambrug cave, 219. 

jdivi, the Brahmanical cord, 8?0, 878. 
Janwaaa, Janmavasu cave, Blurt, 444. 
Jarasandha ka Baithak (Jariaandha was a 

warrior king of Magadha), 99, S3, 46, 50, 160. 
ja(d, locks of hair plaited into a headdress won 

by ascetics, 179, 884, 870, 872. 



INDEX. 



529 



Jataka, a legend of Buddha in some previous 

birth, 89, 80, 82, 83, 84, 89, 90, 91, 285, 364, 
JayadAman, a Kshatrapa king, 189. 
Jayarana Stambha, 1 19. 
Jaya Vijaya cave, 70, 76, 80, 98. 
Jhaujha or Zanza, a tfilahara prince of Chemuja, 

849n. 
Jina, victor over the feelings, &c., a Ttrthankara, 

16, 418, 48S, 487, 492. 
jiidna mudrd, attitude of abstraction, 178, 362, 

396, 491, 603. 
JnAnabnaka Buddha, all knowing Buddha, Jfilni 

Buddha, 180, 337. 
Jodeva Oarbha cave, 76. 
Jogeimri, Brahmanical cave, 446, 475, 476. 
Junagarh, Buddhist caves, 164ff., 194, 200. 
Junnar caves, 168, 18t, 248 to 262. 

Kadphises, 20. 

Kailasa, the White Mountain, diva's heaven, 

monolithic temple at Elura, 102, 104, 110, 149, 

158, 159, 167, S39, 400, 448 to 462. 
K&la, death, Yama the god of death, 448Jf. 
Kalavardhana orK&laioka, a king about 880 n.c, 

94. 
KA1 Bhairavo, a destructive form of S>na, 414, 

484, 439, 453, 457. 
Kali, fern, of K&la, 890,436, 439, 457. 
Kalid&sa, Sanskrit poet, 448. 
Kaliyug era, begins 3101 B.C., 7n, 9. 
Kalyana, 97, 349, 403, 450. 
kawaiufalu, gourd or water vessel of an ascetic, 

439, 467. 
Kamatha, a Daitya, 491, 496. 
K&AChl, Conjcveram, 154. 
Kanehukluis, fern, of Kanchuki, a eunuch, a 

female attendant, 287, 306, 329. 
KAohori Buddhist caves, 122, 173, 185, 186, 218, 

338,348 to 360, 365, 393. 
Kanishka, 179. 
KAnwa dynasty, 26, 275n, 
Kapalabbrit, wearing the garland of skulls, a 

form of Rudra or Siva in his terrific aspect, 472. 
Kap&HsVara cave at Mahavallipur, 117, 152. 
Kapardi, name of two SilahAra princes, 205, 355». 
Kapilavastu, birth-place of Buddha, 15, 24. 
Kapurdigiri inscription, 18, 188. 
KarAdh Buddhist caves, 168, 184, 212 to 217. 
Kftrle Buddhist caves, 168, 184, 208, 214, 232 to 

342. 
Kama Chopar cave, 41, 45, 46. 
KarttikaswAmi, Karttikeya, or MahAsena, god of 

mtr, son of Sfiva, 147, 421, 457, 471. 
Karnsa, Braomauical oaves, 169, 424, 490. 
Kashmir, 11,17,58. 
Kasyapn, 340, 383, 409. 
Katak caves, 87, 46, 55 to 95. 
K&thi&war caves, 16, 168, 187, 193, 201. 
T182. 



KauniAri, one of the SaptamAtris, 434. 

Keiari dynasty, 61. 

Khandagiri, 56, 70. 

Kholvi caves, 169, 186, 278, 395. 

Khosru Parviz, 327, 828n. 

Kia-pi-li, 191. 

Kinnarat — "What people?" — Divine musicians, 
fabled inhabitants of the IlimAlayas by the 
Buddhists represented with human beads and 
busts and the tail and legs of a fowl ; in the 
service of Kuvera ; in Brahmanical mjthology, 
they have human bodies and the heads of 
horses, 157, 253, 286, 304, 515. 

Kio-to, Gupta, (]. v., 191. 

KirAtas, forest dwellers, hillmeu, 28G. 

Kirttimukh, " face of fame," an ornament repre- 
senting a grinning face, 506, 507. 

Kol, Buddhist caves, 184, 211. 

KolApur, 279. 427. 

Kond&nfi Buddhist caves, 175, 184, 220 to 223. 

Kondivte „ „ 4 In, 42, 185, 360. 

Konkan, caves in the, 168, 184, 204 JT., 349. 

Koppan Kesarivarmi, 14"ii, 148m. 

Kothalga(J, 222. 

Kotikal Mandapa at Mahaiallipur, 152. 

Krishna, an avatAra of Vishnu, 149, 221, 279. 

Krishna Mantapa, at MahAvallipur, 144, 148, 
158. 

KrishnarAja, 263, 275. 

Kshaharata dynasty, 189, 232, 264, 270, 2*8. 

Kshatrapa dynasty, 183, 188, 189, 19G, 270. 

KubAra or Vaisravana (PAh-Vossavano), chief of 
evil spirits, god of riches, 318, 343. 

Kuda Buddhist caves, 168, 204 to 209, 212, 213. 

Kulumulu Jaina excavations, 159. 

KumbbarvtArA cave at Elura, 431, 444. 

Kusinlra, 344. 

Kwan-yin, Queen of heaven, Chinese name of 
AvalokiU'Jwara, g.v., 179», 337n. 

Kyongs of Burma, 128, 130. 

Lakshnit, Sri, the consort of Vishnu, 71, 76, 102, 

117, 147, 151, 258, 384, 404, 408, 414, 430, 

437, 445, 460, 487, 524. 
Lankelwara, cave at Elura, 141, 158, 458 to 460, 

483. 
LA^s, monolithic pillars, 171, 174. 
Lena*, caves, 176n, 248. 
LiiigAyata, a worshipper of the Lwga, a follower 

of Basava, 402, 424, 461, 479. 
Lion, a Buddhist symbol, siuha, 172k. 
Lion-pillar. 239. 

Litany (Buddhist), 311, 337, 353, 358. 
Lochana (fr. lochana, the eye, illuminating), a 

favourite Sfaktl of the Mahayana sect, 278, 298, 

384,391. 
Lokeswara Bodbisattwa, one of a class of Buddhist 

divinities, 372, 381. 

LL 



530 



INDEX. 



Lomafa Ilishi cave, 37, 89, 41, 42, 47, 54, IBS, 359, 

517. 
Ldr or Lauli&r cove, 202. 
Lycian tomb, 120. 

Mackenzie, Colonel Colin, 96, 105, 106. 
MAdhariputra, an Andhrabhritya king, 264, 850». 
Magas of Cyreue, S3, 180. 
MAgA$hlna Buddhist caves, 186, 348, 362. 
Mah&bhdrata, the great epio on the war of the 

PAndus and Euros, 10, 11, 113, 155, 453. 
Mah&praj&patt Gautami, Sakya Muni's aont and 

foster mother, the first woman who adopted 

Buddhism, 325, 334. 
MAhAnradft care at Eluri, 354, 373. 
Mahaseno, king, 129. 
Mahisena, see Karttikeya. 
MahAvallipur, 10, 87, 105 to 157. 
MahAvlra, the last Jaina Tlrthaukara, 13, 491, 

492,500,511. 
Mahuwa**o, history of the Great Dynasty of 

Ceylon, 11, 85*, 118, 129, 318, 853. 
Mah&yana, the sect of " the greater Tehicle," a 

later and corrupt form of Buddhism, 19, 170, 

177, 179, 180, 185, 266, 271, 272, 283, 292, 

297 to 299,339, 345a, 349, 357*, 358,384, 389. 
MahAyogi, the great ascetic, a form of Siva, 433, 

448, 453, 472. 
Mahendra, son of A£oka, 17, 19, 25. 
MaheSwart, PArvati, Dnrga, 434. 
Mahipala, 132. 

Mabiahamardani Manfapa at MahAvallipur, 145. 
Mohitihamandala, or Mysore, 17. 
Mahishasura, the buffalo demon, 146. 
Mauisb&furi, Dorgi as the slayer of Mahishasunt, 

404, 425, 433, 440, 442, 445, 459. 
Mahinud Bigarah, 200, 508. 
waltara, a crocodile, a fabulous monster, 101, 

2-15,300,801,304,333,412,445,506. 
Ilnkamdhwaja, Kama the god of love, baring a 

makara ou liis ensign, 440. 
ui'ih'i, a string of beads, a rosary, 870, 382, 384, 

3'JO. 
Malkhfrd, capital of the IUsbtrakutas, in the 

Dekhao, 450. 
Malk&wara cave, 427. 
Mandagoru (? MadaDgurb), 205. 
ManguHIa, a Chalukya king, 402, 406, 409. 
Manibhadra, a king of the Yukshas, 311. 
Manikyala, 18. 

Masjufri, a Bodhisattwa, 179, 239, 375, 880, 
Manmodi, caves near Junnar, 242, 248, 249a, 258, 

274. 
MAra, the wicked, the tempter, 285, 824, 328, 345. 
Mirkandcya, a devout worshipper of 8Sva, 487. 
IlarM, in Salsette, 185, 348, 360. 
Maruts, Ycdicgods of the wind, 14, 101. 
Maruti, ton of Marat, Uannntan, the monkey god, 

101, 147*. 



Masu'di, 849m, 367k. 

Ma(hur4, 68n, 85, 200, 288, 899a, 310. 

Maurya dynasty, 4, 22, 25,37, 49, 67, 306, 981. 

MegasthenSs, 22, 29a, 46. 

MharJ or MahAd, Buddhist eaves, 168, 184, 209, 

211,241. 
Miga JAtaka, a Buddhist able (mriga, an ante* 

lope), 83. 
Mihintale.Mt in Ceylon, 19, 178. 
Mohint (confusing), an Apsaras, 411. 
Moktha, Mj*r«<j«a, blessedness, 485. 
Mominabad, 403, 425, 490. 
Mrigadava, deer park, 883. 
mmdmdld, necklace of skulls, 436, 472. 
mudrdt, attitudes of the hands, 178, 325,347 87S. 
umAufa or makufa, headdress, tiara, 286, 800, 

325, 330, 334, 407, 409, 467, 470. 
Mycenso, 40. 

Nigas, a race, 208, 239, 305a, 817, 825, 881, 835, 

843, 369, 377. 
NAga-rAja, 156, 157, 306, 819, 826, 331, 888, 834, 

409, 421, 448, 469. 
NAgArjuna, a Buddhist innovator, founder of the 

MahAyAna school, 179, 854. 
NAgArjuna kotri, 179,492. 

„ cave, 87, 41. 
NagnAtas, Jains, 489. 
NahapAna, a Eahahariu king, 189, 232, 261, 264, 

268, 270, 272, 277», 85J, 388. 
NAlanda, II, 46, 131 to 188, 898. 
NAnAghAt, 168, 264, 477. 
Nandas (The), 60, 67, 453, 456. 
Karasii'iba, the man lion, an avatira of Vishnu, 

101, 128, 402, 409, 421, 428, 460, 461. 
NArityana, Vishuu, 97, 102, 146, 445. 
NAsik Buddhist caves, 75, 69, 168, 178, 180, 

184,206, 263 to 279 851. 
NeminAtha, the 22nd Jaina Ttrtha&kara, 261, 609. 
KepAl, 17, 171, 174, 821, 332, 891. 
Nilakantha cave, Bluri, 481, 448. 
Nirgranthas, Jainas, 486. 
nirvdifa, 16, 22, 24, 44, 177, 344, 388, 485, 487. 

0|akkapaetauraswatni care, 148. 
Opbir, 3. 

Oriasa, cave* at, 35 to S3. 
Ornamental rails, 173. 

pajatfla, appendage to a temple, corridor, veran- 
dah, 175, 177. 

padma, the lotus, 890. 

Padmapani, see Avalokitejmn, 171, 177, 179, 
989, S78, 837, 843, 884, 887, 868, 864, 370, 
874, 876, 881, 883a, 890, 392. 

Padmaaana, a lotus teat, 872, 878, 884, 408, 487, 
478. 

Pagan Bodhidruma temple, 189, 184. 

Pagodas, the seven, 105. 

Painting* at Ajaota, 984 ff. 



INDEX. 



531 



Painting! at Bagh, 864. 

Faitha^a, 864. 

Pala caves, 209, 214, 275. 

PAla dynasty, 19, 46, 192, 188», 286, 257,898. 

Palibothra, 29», 44. 

PalkcsVara cave, 213. 

Pallavas, 108, 119, 140, 154. 

PAncha PAndnva Mandap, 149. 

pdnchiiila, five great precept* of the Buddhists, 

487,507. 
Panchsvatt, at Naaik, 268. 
FMui, PAodavas, 118, 368, 421. 
PA^dya, dynasty, 7, 10. 
Panj&b caves, 168, 486. 
FAriwanAtha, a Jaina Tlrthaikara, 388, 486, 491, 

496, 500, 508, 508. 
Parfwanftiha, Hill in Eastern India (see Samet 

Sikhara), 807. 
PArvatt, consort of Sfiva, also called UmA, Burga, 

BhavAnt, ftc., Ml, 488, 436, 440, 448, 473. 
PAtalapura, Palibothra, 75. 
PAteiwara cave, 209, 427, 438. 
PAtna in Khandesh, Buddhist caves, 242, 403,428. 
PAtna Jaina cave, 242, 492. 
Pattadkal, 68, 110, 450,451, 454. 
FAtur, Brahmanical cavas, 169, 403. 428. 
Fehlavi inscriptions, 858, 428. 
Pehugi, 40. 

Prripiii of tie Erytkr&in Sta, 205. 
Fersepotis, 86. 

Persians in AjaijtA paintings, S37, 328. 
Pillars or Stambhat, 174. 
Pippala cave, 34, 86, 160. 
PiiAcba, a fiend or goblin, one of the gaua of 

STiva, 468, 470, 478. 
Pitatthort oaves, 175, 184. 218, 242 to 24C, 428 , 

317. 
Po^dhls, or cisterns, 171, 176, 177. 
Poms, 28a, 25. 
Porphyry, 401. 
pradahkina, turning to the right, circumambula- 

tory passage, 175, S74, 387, 891, 418, 421, 424, 

484, 480, 506. 
PrahlAdA son of Biraoyakasipn, 409. 
PrajfiA-pAramltA, a sacred book of the Buddhists, 

personified as Dharma, 180. 
Prakriti, original element, 415. 
prmt&lihA, a gutter or spout for draining off the 

water poured on a liiga, 469. 
Prasenajita, raja, 480. 
Pravarasena, raja, 805, 806. 
Prithvt, the earth a* a goddess, Bhumidflvl, 147, 

ISO, 409, 484, 445, 460. 
Ptolemy, Alex, 168*, 205, 268. 
Ptolemy Fhiladelphoa, 88, 24a, 188. 
Pudumiyi, JLitdhrabhritya king, S6, 264, 267, 

fiT8a,298. 



Pulikeft, Chalukya king, 282, S28», 405, 406. 

Pulu-SonAlA caves, 168. 

Puratfcu, legendary Brahmanical books, 9, 11, 

26. 
Purl, 56, 58, 59, 205. 
Purusha, man, tha Bupreme soul, 415. 
Purvaiila SangarAma, eastern rock-monastery at 

BejwArA, 95. 
Pushyamitra, 25. 

Qeblah, 397. 

Rajagriha, R&jgir, g. v. 

BAjauiandala, royal assemblage, 492. 

Rajapuri caves, 204, 205, 426, 427. 

R&jataranginl, history of Kashmir by Kalharta, 1 1 . 

RAjendra ChMa, 148». 

R&jendral&la Mitra, Dr., 57n, 60», 02, 66, 70n, 

81, 133, 134», 135, 282, 288n, 327. 
RAjgir, Bajagriha, 17, 33, 36, 44 to 52, 122, 160, 

245, 353. 
RAkshasls, female demons, subjects of Bavaria 

king of Ceylon, and cannibals, 314, 315, 487. 
fialpn, Mr., 281. 

RAmAmijiya Mandap at Mah&vallipur, 148. 
Rdmdyana, epic on the exploits of RAma, 7, 453. 
RAmeswara cave at ElarA, 379, 403, 431,438. 
Bani-ka Nur cave, 61, 70, 76 to 86, 87. 
Bash^rakutas, R&thod kings of Malkhfed, the Bal- 

hiras, 171, 400, 450, 462, 495. 
Rathas of MahAvalJipur, 76, 112, 1 13 to 140. 
R&thors, see RAshtrakutas. 
RAvana, king of Lanka, the country of the BAk- 

shasas, 286, 422, 433, 440, 4C0. 
BAvana-kA Khai, cave at Elura, 100, 404, 432. 
Rekhta Bahu, 59. 
Religions of India, 12. 
Bevati, Mt GirnAr, 187. 
Rishabha, the first of the Jaina Ttrthankaras, 

488. 
Ruanwelli dagoba, 111. 

Budra, terrific form of Siva, 425, 459, 467, 472. 
Rudra Daman's inscription, 188, 189, 264. 
Rudra Sena, 190, 305, 306. 
Rudrasuhha, 190,196. 
Rudreswara cave, 402. 
Bupnftth inscription, 17. 

Sfacht (strong), the spouse of Indra or Sfakrn, 

285, 329, 869. 
Sahadeva's Ratha at MnhAvallipur, 113, 1S5> 

to 189. 
Sahasram inscription, 17. 
SahyAdri hills, Western Ghats, 168, 184, 193, 

204, 477. 
Sailacrrihas, rook-dwellings, 176, 254. 
SailanrAdi, or Selarwidi Buddhist c&vea, 184, 

214, 246, 247. 
Saivism, 402.0: 



532 



INDEX. 



gakra, India, god of power, 179, 840, 869, 487. 
Sakti, female energy, goddess, 147, 1S3, 180, 897, 

470. 
Sakya Muni, Buddha, 10, IS, 16, 21, 82, 89, 340, 

883, 510. 
SWivankuppam, 112, 153 to 155. 
Sal&ette island, 168, 185, 348, 897, 481. 
l&Uikhi, top of the linga altar, £71, 420, 437, 

441 to 445, 449, 499. 
Saina Jataka, a Buddhist tale, 83, 91. 
Samet Slkhara, Mt, Parasnith, in Western 

Bengal, 486, 507. 
Sana caves, 184, 202, 248. 
Sanchi Stupas,27, 33, 40, 63, 64, 72, 80, 86, 90, 

173, 191, 243, 274, 817, 514, 320, 628. 
Sanchi rail, 27, 40, 63, 71, 75, 173, 236. 
Sondrakottoe, Chandragupta Maurya, 22. 
SaAgha, the assembly, Buddhist church, priest- 
hood, 73, 74, 215, 490. 
Sangameiwara, 204. 
Sankara, Siva, 147. 
Sfenkha, conch shell, a symbol of Vishnu, 148, 

151, 286, 408, 410, 431, 437, 440, 474. 
Stimtinatha, the 16th Jaina Tlrthaukara, 507. 
Sapuunatrls, the seven divine mothers, 428, 453. 
Saraswati, goddess of learning, spouse of Brahma, 

376, 884, 404, 434, 457, 460, 470, 487. 
SArddJa, a panther or tiger, a farabha or fabulous 

animal, with the body of a tiger and horns, 

149, 150, 195, 316, 321, 322,323,337, 439, 504. 
gArdulararmi, a king, 88. 
Sarnath, St&pa, near Benares, 18, 130, 398. 
Sarpa care, Katak, 68, 69. 
Sasadharma, 25. 
Satakarni,a title of the Andhrabhrityas,864,287, 

294, 298, 352. 
8atara cares, 169, 184, 211, 213, 403, 427. 
Sfttarahana, surname of some of the Andhra- 

bhrityaa, 263, 264, 275. 
Sfanuijaya, sacred mount of the Jains in Kathia- 

wir, 485. 
Sattapanni (Saptaparui) cave, 49, 121, 353. 
Saugata mandala, s Buddhist circular figure or 

diagram, 310. 
Sa>urashtra,Kathiawar, 168, 183, 187. 
Savitri river , 204. 
tfeletana, village, 242. 
Seleueus, 22, 24n, 25. 
Bemylla, Simylla, 168,205, 349. 
Stesha, a thousand headed serpent, the emblem of 

eternity (hence called also Aaania), the coach 

and canopy of Vishiiu), 146, 150, 411, 434, 

438, 461. 
Estahaphani, protected by a S'esha, Parfwanatha, 

491, 603. 
Sewell, B., 96, 99. 

fc'ihi or Siwi-rija, king of Aritha, 285, 291, 815. 
Bidbasar or Sidaar caves, 300, SOI, 332. 



Sihabahu, 318. 

iWtara, a spire, point, mountain peak, 81, 159, 

161,417,435,495. 
Sfikhi, name of the 6th Buddha before flaky* 

Muni, 840, 883. 
flflah&ras, a dynasty in the west of India, 206, 

849m, 355n. 
Silenus, 85. 

Staylla, Sftmylla, 168, 206, 349. 
Sindh oaves, 7, 168. 
Sinha, a lion, 215, 318. 

„ or Slhe, a king, 913. 
Siohapura, 486. 
iinhdtam, a throne supported by lions, 176, 900, 

303, 840, 343, 490, 493, 499. 
riihtutambka, a pillar bearing lions, 180, 289. 
Sftpraka, lee Slsuka, 26. 
Sfirwal, Buddhist caves, 168, 184, 311, 212. 
fliiuka, Siodbuka or flipraka, the founder of the 
Andhrabhritya dynasty in Telingana, 26, 265k. 
Sttl, wife of Rama and of Viahnu, 434. 
SHa's Nahni or Sumar Lena at Elnri, 431, 449, 

462. 
Sita's Kahni, Jaina cave at Pa^na, 492. 
Sita-Marhi cave, 52, 116. 
Stall, goddess inflicting small pox, 858. 
Aire, Mah&dev* or the great god, worshipped 
under the emblem of the linga or phallus, 18, 20, 
53, 136, 145, 159, 203, 400, 420,440, 450, 502. 
Sflv&ji, the founder of the Marsha kingdom, 249. 
flivalaya, abode of flive, 405. 
Sivaneri Buddhist caves, 248, 249, 252. 
Skandagupta, 191. 
Skandasvati, one of the Andhrabhritya dynasty, 

265 a. 
Somaiarman, 25. 

SomeaVara, JLhavamalla, a Cbllukyn king, 148a. 
Son-bhandar cave, 45,46, 47 to 49, 54, 115. 
Speir's Lift ra Ancient India, 82, 283, 888», 

805n, 307a, 812. 
flramaoa, a Buddhist ascetic, 275, 856, 487. 
flravastl, capital of Kosala, 44. 
flri, ue Lakshml, 71, 72, 74, 147, 161, 199, 487, 

524. 
itambka, a monolithic pillar, 171, 174, 180. 
Stitavira or Sthavira (in Pali, Thtro), aa old 
man, a Buddhist high priest, 18, 172, 306, 338, 
250, 276, 368. 
Stirling's Hittory «/ Cnltack or Oriua, 57, 58, 66. 
Stobeus's Phptiea, 20n, 401. 
Stupe (Pali, Mimo), a mound or funeral pik, * 
hemispherical shrine, 18,42, 56, 71, 78, 151, 
17), 173, 336, 859, 898. 
Sudhamma cave, 87, 88, 41, 860. 
flnddhodana, the father of flaky*. Mnni, 886, 884, 

869, 391. 
ffukra or tfukrechirya, the preceptor of the 
Daltyas, Dlwla of Ball, 161, 410,487. 



INDEX, 



533 



tfunga dynasty, 25, 26, 288. 

Snpradftvl, daughter of the king of Vanga, 813. 

Suras, gods, 422. 

Gfarparaka or £?orpsraka, Sup&ra in the KoAkau, 

tho capital of Apartotaka, 349. 
Surya, the sun god, 14, 434, 444, 459, 522. 
Swargapuri cave, 70, 76, 77. 
SwaitiAa, a mystical cross denoting good luck, 

69, 74, 196, 254. 
Bwetimbaras, white robed, one of the two great 

sects of the Jainas, 171, 486. 

Tagara, 168,205, 248. 

Takht-i-Bahi monasteries, 137. 

Tattjft (Talngiri) caves, 184, 201, 202, 203, 248. 

tindava, the frantic dance of Siva, 413. 422, 43S, 

472. 
Tanjorc pagoda, 134. 
Tankwc, 242. 
Tarft, the wife of Buddha Amoghasiddha, also 

a Jaina Saktt, 133 », 278, 298, 384, 371, 391. 
Tara Bodhisattwa, 133. 
Taraka, a Daitya conquered by India and Kartti- 

keytt, 471. 
Tarshisb, 3. 
Tathigata, "one who goes iu like manner," ft 

mortal, a Buddha, 15, 283, 344, 356. 
TeUi-ki Gana cave at Elura, 431, 444. 
Thero, ttt Slhdvira, 206, 228, 276, 368. 
ThauA, 220,348, 850. 
Thupartma Dagoba, IU. 
Timula, tet B4mylla. 
Tin Tlwl care at Elura, 244, 981, 431. 
Ttrthaka (Pali, titthiyo), a sectarian, an heretic, 14. 
Ttrtha&kara, one who has passed out of the circle 

of transmigration, a Jina, worshipped by the 

Jainas, 18,48, 171, 178,261,485, 490, 493, 507. 
Tope, corruption of the Pali, tkupo, tet Stupa, 
loraM, an arch, a festoon or ornamental arch, 

capital, 101, 211, 225, 301, 309, 833, 362, 434, 

607. 
Triad, 419; female triad, 404. 
Trlbhuvnna Vlradeva, 154. 
Trimurti, the Hindu triad, or united forms of 

Brahma, Vishiju, and Sfiva, 435, 444, 445, 459, 

468, 480. 
Triraimi, hill in which UieNasik caves arc, 363, 

272. 
Trinthia, or ralnairat/a, the three gems, Buddha, 

Dharma the Law, and S&ngha the Church, or 

Clergy, 73, 172«. 
Tritula, a trident, a weapon of Siva's, 73, 80, 

120, 174, 858, 416, 429, 436, 457, 474, 
Trfvikrama, three stepper, Vishnu in the V&man 

avatars, 143, 151. 
Troisbay island, 168, 350. 
TOJJa, Lena caves, 248, 258, 253. 
Turanians, «, 8, 14. 



Udayagiri cares, 55, 56, 61, 64, 86, 98, 124, 193, 

226, 243. 
Ujjsyanta, Mount Girnar, 187. 
Um&, Uma Sakti, Parv&ti, or Bhav&ni, 414, 440, 

448, 470, 473. 

(JndavaUi, Yaishuava cave, 10, 95 to 104, 124. 
Uparkot, at Juulgarh, 185, 194, 197, 200. 
Upendragupta, 310. 

Usabhadata, or UshavadAta, son-in-law of Nuha- 
pana, 189,232,264,270. 

Vadathi cave, 42, 48. 

VagheSwarl, or WfigheSwarl, tiger goddess, 457. 

v&hana, a vehicle, conveyance, animal used in 

riding, 340, 469, 507. 
Vajbhira, or Baibhar Hill, 49. 
Vaikuntha, the heaven of Vishnu, 93, 98, 434. 
Vaikuntha cave, 70, 75, 76, 79, 80. 
Viu»l)navi, one of the Saptamatris, 97, 318, 434. 
vajra, a thunderbolt, 325, 379, 384, 469. 
Vajrapani, bearer of the vajra, a Bodhiaattwa, 

179, 278, 344, 375, 379jf, 384. 
vajritaua mudr&, attitude of the hand pointing to 

the earth, 178,380. 
VAk&taka, a dynasty ot Berar, 305, 306. 
Valabhl dynasty, 191. 
Vaman, or Waman, dwarf avatira, of Vishnu, 

151,402,410,421,438,460. 
Vanavasi, 1 7. 
Vanga, Bengal, 313. 
Vapiya cave, 42, 48. 

Varuha, Vishnu in the boar avatara, 147, 150. 
Vardhamana, 402, 410, 434, 445, 460, 486. 
Varuna, Vedic god of heaven, Uranus, 14. 
Vasai, Bassein, 350. 
VAsistyhtputra, an Andhrabhritya, 247, 267, 278, 

288, 293. 
Vusuki, name of a serpent, sovereign of the 

snakes, 423. 
V&t&pipuri, anc. name of Eadami, 405. 
Vayu, god of the winds, 14. 
Vcdas, the most ancient sacred books of the 

Hindus, 10, 12, 13«, 21, 438, 487. 
volt, on altar, seat for an image, 423, 468, 474, 479. 
Velugoli Singama, K&yadu's Mandapa, 148. 
Yeugt, capital of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty, 

97, 99, 402. 
Yidukn, a prince, 76. 
Vidyadharas (fr. vidya, knowledge), a particular 

class of spirits attending upon the gods, Buddha, 

&c, and offering garlands, &c, 210, 239, 241, 

270, 300, 309, 324, 333, 387, 409, 507. 
Vihuras, monasteries, 18, 41, 50, 75, 78, 92, 129 

to 130, 175 to 177. 
Vgaya, conqueror of C«ylon, 81, 82, 313, 314. 
Vinayadityu Satyliniya, Chalukja king, 154, 

405,451. 
Vuidhya mountains, 7. 
Vindyasakti dynasty of Berar, 805, 306, 309, 



534 



INDEX. 



Vin (Maharaja), 76. 

Vita Ch6]a Deva, 154. 

Viiwakarma (the all-maker, who presides over 

all mechanical arts), Buddhist Chaitya at Elura, 

317, 355, 377, 393. 
Vishnu, second god in the Hindu Triad, the god 

of day, the supremo object of worship with 

the Vaishnavas, 13, 14,20,71, 97,101, 145, 151, 

820, 398, 40S, 410, 42S, 448, 309. 
Yiahnugupta Dramila, the Muni Chanakya, who 

raised Chandragupta Haurya to the throne, 

22. 
Vraj, (a herd), country round Mathura, 421, 

438, 461. 
Vrihadratha, 22, 85. 

Wai cares, 168, 184, 211, 218. 
Walak, 242. 
Wasantarajataka, 91. 



Wert, Dr. Ed., 181*, 263, 859. 
Wilson, Dr. J., 176, 263. 

Yajfla SM gatakarnl, Oautamtpntra II., 38, 247, 

264,276,298,349,351. 
yqjnipavtia, the sacred thread worn by the first 

three castes, 409. 
Yakkhinl, fern, of yaWo (Pali),they are subjecta 

of Eubera, mostly inimical to man, 81, 82. 
Yaksha, Sans, for ydUAo, 412, 415, 
Yalis, a Tamil name for Sirdiiat, g. v., 115, 119, 

158, 155. 
Yamapurl kfantapam or cave, 145, 149, 158. 
Yamuna, the river Jumna, a river goddess, 489, 

455,460, 470. 
Yaranas, Western people, Ionian*, Baktriant, etc., 

17, 31, 58, 59, 61, 86, 89, 272, 522. 
Yaytti Eeteri, 58. 
Yuei-'al, (Chandrapriya), 191. 



ERRATA. 



Fagc 9, line 17, for Aryan, read Arriao. 

„ 30, note 3, for Stmbus', read Stobasus's. 

„ 2 1 , note 1 , for Ahy antra, read Abhyantra. 

„ 32, note, line 9, after 68, read yean. 

„ 84, note 1, line 4, for Nerighss&r, read Neriglissar. 

„ 29, note, line 1,/or accodring, read according. 

n 29, note, lino 2, /or eiXuw, read £ikiyoy 

„ 29, note, lino 1 1,/or JVotanto, read pro (auto. 

„ 83, note, line 11, for iiupaa, read stupas. 

„ 41, note 2 belongs to the third line of page 42. 

„ 51, line 19,/or Bikshns, read Bhikshus. 

„ S3, line 26, for Royal, read Bengal. 

„ 96, note, line 13,/or road. The, read rood— the. 

„ 97 to 103, bead linu8,/or Undavilla, read Uudavilli. 

„ IIS, note 2, for Mantapan, read Mantapam, 

„ 122, line 28,/or Sfh&lAs, read silAs. 

„ 125, Una 7, for Dharmaniga's, read Dharmaraja's. 

„ 126, line 7, for boar, read lion. 

„ 179, note 6, for Aryaheva, read Aryadeva. 

„ 193, line 4 from bottom, for is nearly, read is as nearly. 

„ 206, line 6, 7 from bottom,/or Asalpomita, read Asilhamita. 

„ 219, line 7 from bottom, for Ambivle, read Ambivale. 

„ S29. Under the woodcut for a photograph) 1 , read a photograph) 5 ; and in the footnote read 
5 Ferguston, Ind. Arch., £c. 

„ 332, line 3 from the bottom, dele From <f mention. &c." to page 233, line 5, " identification," 
and lubstiUU " state that the ' S<Hh (or merchant) Bhutapala from Vejayanti established 
4 this rock-mansion, the most excellent in Jambudwipa' and that ' Aguimitra son of Goti, 
1 a great warrior, presented the lion pillar s' but they contain no name of a king." 

And add as a footnote to this : — Over the centra] door are two inscriptions of later 
date, the one of Usabbadata son of Dinika and son-in-law of Nahap&na, and the other in 
the 7th year of Vasithlputa. Both record gift* to the tangha of Valurakn. (Kirle) ; so 
that the excavation most date before either of these kings.— J.B. 

„ 243, line 3, for Devagarh, read Deragiri. 

„ 261, note, line 2, after p., read 1 89. 

n 292, line 81, for facade has entirely fallen away, read lower facade, which was stroctural, has 
fallen away. 

„ 313, line 4 from bottom, /or Sih&baba, read Slhabihu. 

„ 834, line &,for Mabipraj spate, read MahAprtjapatL 

„ 949, line 14, for Thsangs, read Thsang's. 

H 349, last line,/or Hamylla, read Semyllo. 

M 930, lino 2, far Staiuaka, read Sthinaka. 

n 804, lino t,fot t is, read it is. 

„ 858, line I9,far litany, read compartment 

„ 860, notes. Add:— The date is in "the 245th year of tho Trikntakss," and Dr. Buhlar 
regards It as dating from the Gupta era. — J.B. 

„ 862, line 6, far Jnyana, read Jutoa. 

n 888, line 10, far group, they, read group, that they. 



536 ERRATA. 

Page 393, note 2, line 8, for be, read the. 
„ 897, note, for Koivi, read Kholvi. 

„ 402, note 2, for 660 to 850 A.D., read cir. 600 to 750 A.D. 

„ 423, line 8 from bottom, dele the title Lakola's Cavb, and insert it uftor lino 4 on p. 423. 
„ 423, line 10, for bond, read hands. 
„ 424, liue 4 from bottom, for sculpture, read sculptures. 
„ 499, last line, after platform insert a semicolon. 
„ 456, line 7. Add as a note : The first of these small shrines, that on the couth, was dedicated 

to the SaptumAtras, tho next to Chanda, the third, on the cast, to DurgA, the fourth to 

Bhatrava, and the fifth, on the north side, to Gaiusii. — J. 15. 
„ 461, footnote. For another list of the sculptures here referred to, see my Hock Templet of 

Ehird or Verml (1877), pp. 47, 48.— J.B. 
„ 461, line, 28, and 463, line 25,/ar Vaishmave, read Vuishnava. 
„ 470, line IB, for Airavati, read Airavata. 
„ 471, line 3 from bottom, for porticc, read portico. 
„ 501, line I, for Parwlanatha, read FArawanatha. 
„ 511, line 23,/or Grinar, read Giruar. 



NOTE. 

Since this work was printed off I have had occasion to refer to the fragments of sculpture now in 
the Louvre, brought by M. Texier feu a Doric temple, erected at Assos in the Troad in tho fifth or 
sixth century B.C., and have been so much struck with the similarities that exist between them and 
those in the ancient Vihara at Bhaju described in the Appendix, that I avail myself of this oppor- 
tunity of directing attention to the fact, whatever the result of further investigations may be. . 

The principal ornaments of the facade, according to M, Texier'* restoration, 1 are two groups of two 
bulls fighting, very similar to those represented on Plate XCVL, fig. 4, but without the prostrate man. 
In the centre are two sphinxes, winged, and their bodies leonine instead of bovine, aa in the Cave, 
and between these two groups are lions devouring animals, as in the lower part of Plate XCVlll. 
Only two metopes were found. In one of these the sphinxes were repeated, in the other was a mole 
centaur, and there can, from the general character of the sculpture-*, tie little doubt that females of the 
same class existed in others. No fragment was found of the sculptures in the tympana, so that no 
complete comparison of the whole can be instituted. 

The Architecture of the temple, of course, differs absolutely, as in every other known instance, both 
in principle and detail from that exhibited in this or any other Cave in India, but both the style and 
symbolism of the Sculpture seems undoubtedly to point to a common origin. The two monuments 
are too distant both in locality and date to admit of any direct copying being possible, but the 
similarity of their sculptures seems a satisfactory confirmation of the remark haxarded on page 523 
regarding the influence of a strongly marked Tavana clement in those of the Bhija Vihara. — J. ¥. 

1 AtieJtinnrt, voL iL pp. lis to IU Ur.; Texier aud FuUan's Principal HuUdtufit i» Aala Minor, Plate I. 
ljcna on . IMS. 



r, 



9315 



ttHHHHHBHttBMMi 



^■1 



v , K ,,- 




wmmmBnmBEmmimtmmmsffissnBm 



■ WSBSmBBKBBBBBlSBtm 



JUNAGARH. 
PLAN OF THE CAVES AT BAWA PYARAS MATH. 



Plate II. 




J. Surgeu. 



■■>..;. • ' 



W. CMCGS, fMOTO tITM. LONDON. ». t- 



*> fcM. 



JUNAGARH. 
PLAN OF THE CAVES AT BAWA PYARAS MATH. 



Plate II. 




J. Surgeu. 



■■>..;. • ' 



W. CMCGS, fMOTO tITM. LONDON. ». t- 



*> fcM. 






JUNAGARH. 



Plate III. 



3. COLUMN IN THE UPARKOT. 
LOWER HALL. 




s^u* 



f~*. 



W. CRICCJ, fMOTO LITH. LOMOOK. ». «. 



JUNAGARH. 

ROCK -CUT HALL IN THE UPARKOT. 



Plate IV. 



SECTION. 




UPPER FLOOR. 




LOWER FLOOR. 




SuUiJ 



w f**t 



J. Burftu, 



W. CKICSS. I-HOTO LITH. LONDON. I < 



Plate V. 



I. KUDA CAVE VI. 



2. KARADH CAVE V. 





PLAN 




SAILARWADI CAVES. 

3. 5- 






■!>.:U .( 



3mm-^ 






*. offices, r«oro urn. lonocw. ». «- 



J. Hurga*. 



U. Couscns del. 



KARADH BUDDHIST CAVES. 



Plate. VI. 







SECTION AND PLAN OF CAVE XLVI1I. 




S^.mf 



,{*ut. 



3. FRONT OF CAVE V. 




J. Burgtu. 



S. J. Pachec* del. 



W. GtlGliS, l-KOTO U.ITH. LOUDON, i. *. 



BUDDHIST ROCK TEMPLES. 



Plate W/. 




I. CARVED RAIL IN KUDA CAVES. 
KONDANE BAUDDHA SYMBOLS. 













J. £«If «U- 



m. OftlttH. IttOTO-UTM. LUNMK. t. K, 



Jayrao Raghoba. del. 



Plate VIII. 



KONDANE. 
I. SECTION OF VIHARA. 




2. PLAN. 




s*JLW 



JK 



3. PLAN OF CHAITYA. 




/. Ourgtm. 



W> ^ 



llTinuu 



w. ones, rHoro um. lokdoh. «. & 



Gmxjft PurtJtolmm Jrt. 



Plate. IX. 




UTK tOKDOK. *. ». 



H. Coutent dtt. 



Plate X. 



BEDSA. 

VIHARA CAVE. 




-W.- • 



• *%*£ 



UTH. LOKDOH. S. S. 



H. CoutfTU del. 



KARLE. 

CHAITYA CAVE. - PILLARS. 



Plate XII. 







W. OKI001. rMOlO UTH. IOVD0K » 



Jafraa ftagkttti. </*l. 



' 



KARLE. 
THE CHHATRA OR UMBRELLA. 



Plate. X///. 





**""7 ! .■■ ■ ■ »' «« 



[f* 



W CIIIXV f HOTO UTM. LOKDOK. » «. 



If. Cwm JW. 




KARLE. 
I. CHAITYA CAVE. - PART OF FRONT SCREEN. 



Plate XIV. 




CAPITALS OF TWO PILLARS. 





w. gmiooc. nroto urn u»nxw. * «. 



Jayrm Rafkot*. dtl 



pitalkhorA. 



Plate. XV. 



I. SECTION OF THE CHAITYA CAVE. 




2. PLAN OF CHAITYA CAVE. 




3. SECTION OF VIHARA. 



^^g^^^^^^sR^mp^ii^ 



h 



^!?j 






4. PLAN OF VIHARA. 




., w 



H. Cuustnt del. 



•a ciucat, h«i>to litm lOhdoh. s. «. 



PITALKHORA. 

CAPITALS FROM THE BUDDHIST VIHARA. 



Plate XVI. 






9. 





w. auact, moro-utH. uutoam. «. s. 



Jmyrao Kaghoba del. 



- 



I. SECTION OF CELL AT PITALKHORA. 



Plate XV/A 

2. CROSS SECTION. 





3. PLAN OF CELL. 

| j I 



4. FRIEZE OF TULJA LENA, JUNNAR. 




5. FACADE OF CELL AT MANMODI, JUNNAR. 




J, JSTwf NH. 



W. OXXOQft. PHOTO UTX. LONDON. «. C 




JUNNAR BUDDHIST CAVES. Plate. XVW. 

3. S. 






J. Bvrgttt. 



Ganpal Ptmhatam del. 



w CUQU, WOTO UTK.LOOTMIM.I.B 



NASIK. 

I. PLAN OF VIHARA, NO. III. 



Plate. XIX. 




2. PLAN OF VIHARA. NO. VIII. 




J. Btu%ttt. 



A.- - . - 



r«." 



W. omtcot, photo urn. lomdom. •. x. 



2 



■ 



< 

D 

a* 

(9 
O 




>< 








* 








-as 


. 






« 


> 






s» 


X 






tt« 






1 




£ 








< 








u 








55 








H 








OS 








a 








u 




• 




& 




■ 

i 




<n 




Ji J / 



»""t 
V) 

< 
2 



< 



a! 
w 

S 




s 



mm* 



5S^J* iS ««wU»* W W >*>** .« ■***■ 



3 




3 



: 



-ji 






1 



i 



■8 



en 

< 

a 
o 







3> 

as 



ft 




•I 
•i 

X 

g 

s 

x 

5 



Plate XXIV. 



NASIK. 

PANDU LENA CHAITYA CAVE -TEMPLE. 
LONGITUDINAL SECTION. 



w 








PLAN. 




s™u>fiiu==i= 



J. JBurgcu id.. 



W. CIUCCS, KIOTO LITK. LONDON, i. t- 



Plate XXV. 



NASIK. 

DOOR IN CHA1TVA CAVE. 




J. Butftu. 



C. M. Syktt <U. 



W. CUCCk. PHOTO LI TH. LONDON. L K. 



Plate XXVI. 



NASIK. 

I. PLAN OF CAVE XV. 



m 






mm i 



j_JF— *% 




2. PLAN OF CAVE XIV. 



3. WALL ELEVATION IN CAVE XIV. 




tmU * - 



a r 




W. GRIGGS. fKOTO UTK. LOXOOM. S. «. 



AJANTA. 
V1HARA NO. XIL 



Plate. XXVII. 



SECTION. 




PLAN. 




J- Bmrtta 



or. GMGC*. PHOTO UTH. LONDON i. I 






H. Commi del. 



A J ANT A. 

1. CHAITYA-CAVE. NO. X. -SECTION. 



Plate XXVIII. 







2. PLAN. 




3. CHAITVA. NO. IX. -SECTION. 




4. PLAN. 



**w 




PHOTO imt LOHDOW. t- % 



Gvtpat PurtkaUm dd. 



AJANTA. Plate XXIX. 

FIGURES FROM THE EARLIEST PAINTINGS IN CAVE X. 




/. Bttrgtu. 



w. cmcct, n«oto-ut»«. lokoon, s. m. 



Jayr+a RagHoba, JM 



s 



5 



w 



< 



2 

X 

(A 



S 




M 

u 

2 



i 



AJANTA. PlateXXXI 

SCULFTURE ON THE LEFT SIDE OV THE ANTECHAMBER, CAVE VII. 




J. Burgm. 



SJJSuJim.Jel 



W. GUICC*. moTO-LITN. LONDON. L M. 



AJANTA: CAVE VI. 
UPPER STOREY. 



Plate XXXI I. 




J. liurgcu. 



m. ckiccv. moTo uni i okdok. «. «. 



Gmnpat PurtMolam rirf. 



I 




2 

as 
< 



8 







] 



! 



AJANTA: CAVE XVII. 



I. LEFT CENTRE PILLAR IN FRONT AISLE 



Plate XXXIV. 



2. LEFT PILASTER IN THE VERANDAH. 




J. Jriityrai. 



w. GJUGOS, rKoro jjth. London, s. w. 



S. J. PaeJUeo dei. 






< 

H 

< 



x 

X 

w 



o 

•—■ 

H 
U 
Id 
W 

•J 

< 

5 

H 

O 

3 




s 



-pp umtoiumj nxfim*) 



-a •« -aoaaori iuji cuov* 'bobo -« 




1AXX ON 3AVD VA.LIVHO 




XIX ON 3AVD VAXIVHO 
VXNVfV 



UAXXxwnd 



x 

a 



3 



5? 

H-l 
■J 



X 

£2; 



&. 

n 





S 



Plate XXX/X. 



AJANTA. CAVE XIX. 

NAGA RAJA. 




J. Bvitn. 



m. GK1GCS. PHOTO UTH. U3HDOM. i. «. 



Plate XL. 



AJANTA. 

CAVE I. 




.*-«■ 4 



-» 



T !!«■■■ T ■'^ 



J. £*tr««- 



«. CUSO, rKOTO UTK. LOMOOM. «. «. 



Ganfwt PurshutaTH drl. 



> 
< 
U 

In 
o 

H 

< O 
H « 

< w 



> 
o 

M 

N 
W 

— < 

ei 




a' 



: 



•■ 



! 
•5 



s 



> 
< 
u 

I* 
o 



It) 



as 
-J 




3 



I 



z 

QS 

O 
5 
a 

w 
x 

(A 




* 



:*.- 






w 
> 

< 

V 

u, 

o 

z. 



< 




AJANTA. 

CAVE II. 



I. SHRINE DOOR. 



Plate XLV. 

2. PILLAR IN ANTECHAMBER. 





3. BRACKET IN CAVE XVI. 




s..i. W 



J. Burfttt, 



*. 0*ICGI, PHOTO UTK. LONDQK. s. «. 



5. J. Packico dtL 



AJANTA. 

PLAN OF CAVE IV. 



PlaUXLVI. 



J. Jiurfru 




Plate XLV/f. 



AJANTA: CAVE IV. 
HALL DOOR. 




«r C*IGO>, rHOTO UTH. LONDOV. t. I 



Plate. XLVIIl. 



AJANTA: CAVE IV. 

I. LEFT CENTRE PILLAR IN BACK AISLE. 2. SIDE VIEW 




W. r.llGGS. rHOTO LIT*. LOHOOX. i. B. 



S.J. Ptckno dtl. 



A}ANTA. 
TEMPTATION OF BUDDHA. CAVE XXVI. 



Plate LI. 




J, Burgtu. 



w. auaot. t moto urn. u>»do»- •■ *> 



Juyrao Raghoia. itl. 



Plate Lll. 



VIHARA AT GHATOTKACH. 




*•*. 



r r rf 



J* Jhu%tiM* 



m gugc*. racrro urn. umoom. l e. 



KANHERI. 



Plate LIU. 



<a^ 




PLAN OF 

CHAITYA & ADJOINING 

CAVES. 



$mk* m 



w 



W. OtlGGi, rKOTO MTU. tOND«* i * 



A. Wt* del. 



78 



d' 



S> 



ir* 



H r 



IzL 



te 



If 



_£L 



/o 



P/ato I/K 



J 



M 





KANHERI. 
MAHARAJA OR DARBAR HALL 4.C. 



iu»L.. i Li-jf 



^ W/ 7 /~ 



D 



J«. W'u< **. 






< 

04 



W 
H 

X 

o 

< 



4 . -V 




3 

I 
I 






5s 
2 



f- 

V) 

X 

a 

a 

D 
CD 



fl - - - ' 


•i 


s" :: 


m 




X 


f * 


8 


i „~ 


5 


»-- 


9 




i 



Plate LVl. 



KANHERI. 

BUDDHA ON PADMASANA WITH ATTENDANTS. 




J. 



Sts.1, *i 



■JBJL KSX— 



4,' 



« ciicci. rworo un. umbo*. «. w. 



S.J. Pm tktm M. 



«*m 



plate 



I.VH- 



^\V^ 



cv 



<&> 







i.-* 



Plate LVf II. 



ELURA. 



I. PILLAR IN DHERWARA CAVE. 








^.PILLAR AT THE ENTRANCE OF 
THE TIN THAL. 




s~L * 



J. 



-t ' 1 M 



m. ouioai. raoro uw. lok dom. s. «. 



C MS. Sykm i*L 



**r 



at -iiouwoi mn ouhm 'wh» •« 



"J«p ttwyroy; rirfwi*) 



i>rr 



mS/ng / 




T/7 ^<r 



•aAVD xsiHaana vuvmhvhvk 
"\THmH - 



ELURA. 

BUDDHIST CAVES. 



Tied* LX. 




ScmUh 



H. C<M**> **• 



J Mur$tu 




I 



-,--.-:■«*» .?-S4i" 5 ^.y v ;y 



ELURA. 

VISWAKARMA CHAITYA CAVE. 



Plate. LXII. 




J. B* Jta. 



W Guam, fKOTO UT«. LONDON. V L 






§ 

8 



w 




< 



£ 

£ 






§ 

en 

p 
u 



o 



x 
8 




» 



s 



ELURA. Plale LXIV. 

GROUND PLAN OF THE TIN THAL BUDDHIST CAVE TEMPLE. 




J. hurfru. 



Ganpat Purtkoum del- 



StmU *f ■ 



«. C»IGfK. I-HOTO lltM tOKOO*. V *. 



3 




H 

■< 
-J 




/-w 



u 



I 



> 

o 

Q 

< 

pa 

< 
O 

D 




,1 
•3 



< 




I. AIHOLE CAVE. 



Plate LX//A 





mm i 


w riifl 










unins 


hiii w=a 








J.J- J . 


nun 

'----■* 


1 



.. A.t. 



2. BADAMI CAVE I. 
SECTION 



3. BADAMI CAVE III. 
SECTION. 




PLAN. 





PLAN. 




J. Surgcu. 



W. GEIG05. PHOTO LITH. LONDON. C C. 



AMBA. 
JOCAIS MANDAP. 



PlaULXVIH. 




J -*' Tm m i .. d =Z= 



J. Burgets. 



m. cucss, raoTO urn loxsom. s. k- 



GawfwU Purthotam M. 



bhAmburde. 



CAVE TEMPLE OF PANGMALESVAR MAHADEVA. 



Plate LXIX. 




ScmUd 



J. Burftu 



«r. omoct, r»oxo urn. u>mi>ok. ». ■. 



Batuji Goemi. l^ 
Sakmram. Gof*l.) 



Plate LXX. 



I. DHOKE CAVE OF MAHADEVA. 

" '" ' ,'■.:•'--•••. '-'/:,,, 

■ .,■'•■'■:■ ■■■■■■'■,, ■ . ; . ■ - •> ' 




2. elura: RAVANA ka khai. 




/«* 



J. 



W. OUGCU. MOTO UTB. LOKDOK. S. E. 



Gcnpot rurvwtdH del* 






►J 



< 

X 

< 
< 

I 

Pi 







3 
i 

I 




r. 

i 
3 

3 

2 

I 

A. 

j 
1 

* 



5 

I 




t 






1 



Piatt LUIII. 



ELURA. 

PLAN OF THE DAS AVATARA - GROUND FLOOR. 




J. Burgtst. 



Sc*U *f » i 



Canpat Pursholam del. 



W Cmt.fS. rHOTO LITH. LONDON. S. «- 



ELURA. 



Plate LXXIV. 



PLAN OF THE UPPER FLOOR OF THE DAS AVATARA. 




"'^.i 



J. Uuigeu. 



W GUIGCS, PltOTO J.IT1I. IOKDON. S. «. 



Ganpat Purihatam Del. 



ELURA. 

I. NARASINHA AND HIRANYAKASIPU FROM DAS AVATARA. 



Plate LXXV. 




2. TRIMURTI IN CAVE ABOVE THE TELI-KA GANA CAVE. 



J. Tlurgea. 




W. CRK.GS, PHOTO UTH. LONDON S. t. 



layraa Raghoba. dtt. 



ELURA. 

1. PLAN OF RAMESWARA. 



Plate LXXVI. 




2. PLAN OF SMALL CAVES UP THE STREAM. 




suUJ 



J. Burgt"- 



w'cMtCOS, fHOTO UTH. tONDON. S. «. 



C. Af. Syka deL. 



ELURA. 

DOOR IN RAMESWARA. 



Plate LXXVll. 







/~ 



J. Burgas. 



Scmlt if 



C. M. Sykrs Del. 



»». CK1GC1. HIOTO-LITH. LONDON. S K. 



•4 



IT, 



Si 



> 

(J 

<< J 

D £ 
»J en 

W 

en 

w 

HI 
S 

h 
O 

H 

a 

o 



e 




Plate LXXIX. 



ELURA. 

PLAN OF DUMAR LENA OR SITA'S NANI. 




J. Burgtsi. 



S„ktf 



.fiu 



W. GKIliCS, THOTO UTH. LONDON. S. B. 



ELURA. 

TLAN OF DUMAR LENA OR SITA'S NANI. 



Plate LXX/X. 




J. Burgta. 



SttU>f 



M It M ft «■ 



W. CKIOGS, fHOTO LITH. LONDON. S. B. 



ELURA. Plat <- L m 

1. DWAJASTAMBHA IN KAILASA. 2. INDRA SABHA. MONOLITHIC COLUMN. 



&& 



simmmmt 




''^bM 




J. Burgess. 



U. Cousenx del. 



C. M. Sykes del. 



W. CKIGCS. mOTO-UTM. LONDON. %. B. 




tba*^ 



1 « » 1* M 



JLm-Jf** 



I J. Burfeu. 



Sbfu&'to cru-Jnck. 

■m. oucot piioto lith. ukom. C.I. 



JET. Coujmt. dot. 



?r :,-,.. 



Plate. LXXXll. 



n 










J. }hujtxs 



■ 
j J — j '; 'i 't H-r 1 



dtS> 






ELURA. 
1, SRI OR LAKSHMI IN KAILASA. 



Plate LXXXtll. 




2. SURYA IN KUMBHARWARA CAVE. 




J. Burf*** 



m. GMCttt. MtOTO UTH. LOHOON. t. «. 



Jayrao Aofkani. M. 



1 

I 



Pi, 
D 

-J 
W 




a 



w 

♦4 

S 



a 




is 



I 

* 



* 1 



ELURA. 
PARSWANATH FROM INDRA SABHA. 



Plate LXXXVt. 




*/- BUPgttB, 



Jagaruuitk AnjuUm d$U 



■m. cmoa* rnoTt> lith. xM n oom. t, a. 



ELURA. 

INDRA SABHA-LOWER HALL 



Plate IXXXV//. 




j. 



w. ouoo*, pifOTO un. lokdoh. s. h. 



Gmpat PurtJlctotm <W. 



Plate IXXXKf/A 



ELURA. 

INDRA SABHA— PLAN OF UPPER HALL, W & E. WINGS. 




w. </ 



f~^ 



J. 



w onaa, mora ut>, u>«oon *. m. 



C* H* Sykn mu 



elurA. 

INDRA SABHA SHRINE DOOR. 



Piatt LXXX/X. 




t..U > 



C. M. Syktt 4ti. 



w. cuccs, more um umdoh. a. n. 



ELURA. 
JAGANNATH SABHA. LAST JAINA CAVE. 
I. GROUND FLOOR. 



Plate XC. 




2. UPPER FLOOR. 



■ 

WL 
P 


■ 


m 


m 




in 


■ 


m 



J. JBtaxru. 



w. onioos, moro um. uwim». «. m. 



Genpat Punhotam eU. 



ELURA. 

I. INDRA FROM THE JAINA CAVES. 



Plate. XC/. 




2. TIRTHANKARAS IN THE JAINA CAVES. 




Ktz^zi— x.-Tr—/:~ ~3 t ~ 



J. B*rgt». 



W 0»l<KiS, »MOTO UTH. UIXIMH. S. & 



Jaynw KoffM*. «W, 



51 



to 
w 
> 

< 
u 

< 



'< 
ai 
D 

►J 



< 

GO 
< 
vt 

X 

55 

Z 

< 

o 

< 

u. 

o 

X 



3 




Plate XCIII. 



dhArAsinva-cave I. 

PLAN. 




J. Burge—. 



W. C1IICCS, rUOTO LITH. LOKDO*. *. K. 



Ganpal Punkatam dA. 



■' '■.' :. "■ 



■.';- '''V:. 



ANKAI JAINA CAVE. NO. I. 

I. SECTION. 



Plate. XCIV. 




2. UPPER FLOOR. 




W. CKIGGS, mOT» UTM. LOHDOM. ». t 



Garrpat Punholam <M. 



WBP 



ANKAI JAINA CAVES. 
ENTRANCE DOOR TO LOWER STOREY OF CAVE I. 



Plate. XCV. 




IMAGE OF TIRTHANKARA. 




J. Surgeu. 



W. nlOO. PMOTO MTM. LOHOON. S. «. 



E. Coumu del. 






<< 

a 

e 

H 
< 

< 

< 
X 



H 

55 
W 

u 

as 
< 






1 




'■:*i'^.Ki'.'.-.. .".:."' ;•■■ :'.;•'.).;■-. 'i/. : 'asS'^vfeisr';,';-' /';:':■:■:.;'"- VaV'-S;; ■'.'■ ■':'.' 



ANCIENT VIHARA AT BHAJA 



Plate XCVII. 



■mm 




Stmt* fff 



J. Burgta, 



w. anogf, nto-ro utk. umtooh. «. s. 



r>* 



RCtmxau SA. 



._•.- >•-, . 



'"■■,:;v:j'- : '"/-:^ ; 



2: 



<< 

K 

CQ 

H 

< 

< 
X 

£ 

fr- 
iz 

W 

z 

< 



s 
< 
o 

< 
u 

W 

>• 

Ik 
O 

Q 

w 

H 

< 

« 

>-} 

w 
ei 

■< 
« 




