GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
AfiCH^LOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 

CENTRAL 

ARCHEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCIiSSION NO.. 3^ 3? 
CALL No. 


n.c.A, 



■p. 


















I 


A 



t 


I 





f 




















i 
















1 




V 















.jJppR' 


THE DANCE OF ^IVA 


FOURTEEN INDIAN ESSAYS 


BY 


ANANDA COOMARASWAM Y 
WITH AN INTRODUCTORY PREFACE 


ROMAIN ROLLAND 




Co^ THE SUNWISE TURN. INC. 


5t EAST +lt« STREET 
NEW YORK 

LONDON ! SIMPKIN.MARSHALU 
HAMILTON, KENT & Co. Ltd., E.C.4 

, 1924 



I 








pmxKTMD IT UDXLkv atos. Lm 

WlirrKPKTAtS KOUSX^LONDOy, V.C 4 
CQTVJLICIHT, 1918 
THE SUNWISE TUENp INC* 





CONTENTS 


FACE 

Foreword ^ ^ i 

What His India Contriljut&i to Hunian Welfare? , . * . * 1 

Hindu View of Art: Historical ^ ^ ^ 

Hindu View of Art: Theory of Beauty 30 


That Beauty is a State .,...****,#** 3a 

Biiddliiit Primitives ... - ^ 

The Dance of Siva * , . . . » p * . « ^ « 56 

Indian Images With Many Armi « « ^ « p ^ » 63^ 

Indiaii Music , . ^ * p * * , , * . - ^ * * . - 72 

Status of Indian W'otnen ^ > 0^ 


Sahaja * * ^ ,.,,*** 103 

IntencctuaJ Fraternity ppHPP*P.>i*»*p 112 
Cosmopolitan View of Nietzsche . , * * p p p ^ * US 

Young India p + ^- .- pppp#-*- -* * 122 

Individuality^ Autoooniy and Function pip,,,,. 13? 



















^ -r* 


TrTi- 





, I 


^ ^ T 

, ' ‘i 

* ' I ' 





LIST OF PLATES 


■ETWSEir FACES 


Frontispiece—Cosnuc Osuce oi IZtli Century. 

L Fkure fl.-.Avaloldteivnra llodhmttvn. Sth C«^. 
Fijurf t,—Siva and ParvjMi on Ml Ksuinja, aui Cen¬ 
tury 

II. Fiauft &fain.itbpuranL 8lh Century. 

Figure t.—EltpIiaoK Maiualbiwrani, 8lli Century - 

III. Krishna DUgiuscd as a MilkmalEl. I'th Century . . 

IV. Ajanfa Fresco. 6i]i or 7»li Century. 

V. Fioure r—T emple at Badasiu 8lll Century. 

Figure t,—Mookey family. Mamallapuram, 8th Cen- 

toiy . 

VL Figure o—Seated Buddha, Gandhara. 1st century, A,t>. 
Figure t.—Dtyad, Sanchi, 2nd century, BC._ 

Figure t ,—Lay Worshippers at a Buddha ahrtue, Znd 
Century 

VH Buddha in SamSdhi « 

Vlll. Standing Bodhisattra, 2tid Century, A. D. , . . 

IS. Standing Buddha, Ceylon, 2nd Century, A. D. . . 
X. Siandiog Buddha, 2nd century, A.D, 

XL Standing Images Oif Buddha, 2nd Century, A. D. , . 

XII. Btahma, Elephanta, 8ih Century 

XIII. Dnrga as Chandl slaying Mahista, llth Century . , 

XIV. Death nf IliranyakaSipu. Elflta, Bth Ceniuiy , . - 

XV, 'ChatEtber-music of an aristocratic society,' iSih Cen¬ 
tury 

XVI. Ratan Devi.. 

XVH. Todi Rlgipl (a mtuical mode), 16ih Cesrtury , , . 
XVin. Madhu-mldhavi R5gii.ti (a musical mode). Itith Cen¬ 
tury, . ... 

XiX. Todi RiginT (a musical mode). I8ih Century . . . 
XX. A Hindu lady at her toilet, Ifith Century .... 
XXL Chind Bilil, called Chand Sultan, I8th Century . . 
XXII. Hindu Marriage, about IfiOO A. D. ..... . 

XXIII. Radha in her Idtchcn, Kristina at the window, 1st Cen¬ 
tury .. 

XXIV. "Where each is botii,** Sib Century 
XXV, A School ol pytosofiliy, iSth Century . . . , . 

XXVT. fipurc R—One of the gates of Jaipur. 

Figure b .—^Laying a warp in Madura .... 

XXVn. The Bathing Ghat at Benares 


24-25 

26-27 

28-29 

40-41 

42-43 


4647 

4849 

50-51 

52-53 

52-53 

S4-S5 

66-67 

68-69 

70-71 

72-7J 

74-75 

76-77 

78-79 

80-81 

8445 

86-87 

8849 

90^91 

101-105 

130-131 

132-133 

134-135 


CENTRAL ARCHAEOi.OGlGAL 
LIBRARY. NEW DELHI. 

Aoo. ..— ••• 


















FOREWORD 


There pre ^ number of us In Europe for whom Europc^tn 
otviJlsatioci no tonger sufficeti~r3issatisfied cbildreo of the spirit 
of the West^ who feel ourselves cramped in our old abode, 
and who, without depreciating the subtlety^ the brilliance, 
the heroic energy of a philostiphy w hkh conquered and ruled the 
world for more than two thousand years* nevertheless have had 
to confess its insufficiencies and its limited nrrogance. We few 
look towards Asia 1 

Asia* the great land of which Europe is but a peninsulfl, the 
advance guard of the army, the prow of the heavy ship* laden 
with a thousand wisdoms - - . from her have always come to us 
our gods and our ideas. But, in the course of the many circuits 
made by our peoples who foJtowed the track of the sun, losing 
contact with our native Eastt we have deformed, for our own ends 
of violent and limited action, the universality of her g™t thoughts. 

And now the Western races find themselves trapped deep in 
a blind alley* and are savagely crushing each other out of exist* 
encfc Lit us snatch our souls from the bloody rout I Let us 
strive to win back to the great crossways w'hence flow out to the 
four points of the sky the streams of human genius. Let us climb 
back to the high plains of Asia ! 

It is true that Europe has never scorned the roads of Asia 
when the business in hand was pillage or extortion, or exploita* 
tio« of the material rickes of her countries under the banner of 
Christ or of Civilisation. But what benefit has she drawn from 
Asia's spiritual w^callh? That has kin buried in collections and 
in archa^pgical museums* A few brilliant tourists* members of 
Academies, have nibbled at its crumbs* but the spiritual life of 
Europe has derived no benefit from it* 

Who* amid the disorder in which the chaotic conscience of the 
West k stmgglingi has sought whether the forty-century-old 
civilisations of India and China had uc^ answers to <dfer to our 
griefs, models* it may be, for our aspirations? The Germans, 
with their more exacting and unhappy vitality, have been the first 
to ask of Asia that food which their stan^ed spirit can no 
Ivnger find in Europe; and the disasters of thcfc la.'.l years 


ii 


FOREWORD 


have precipitated this moral cvolutiDd^ arising out of the dis¬ 
illusionment of politicnL action and the exaltation of the interior 
Life. A few noble ploneerSi like Count Kaysrerlln^^ have popy- 
lanscd the wisdom of Asia. And certain of Germany *^5 purest 
poetSj as Hermann Hesse ^ have so far fallen under the spell of 
Eastern thought as to subside into silence among the soub of 
the artjst-sages of the Celestial Empire. 

Francet although similar cunents have begrun to make them¬ 
selves felt within her, and although certain little-knoK'n Frenchmen 
are counted among the pioneers of the Re-Awakcnlog of Asia— 
has held back from this movemeot of fruitful sympathy and curi¬ 
osity, Nowhere in Europe have Tagore's recent journey and his 
appeal for communal work in Euiopean’'Asiatic culture been 
heeded less. A wall of seirsatisfied indifference separates this 
country from the life of the rest of the world. Not long ago the 
fiery Bjdmson made a justifiable reproach against France on this 
count. But he was unjust in not recognising the ceaseless efforts 
of a small number of Frenchmen to open a breach In the walk 
And even that little group, led by the staunch Bazalgette—the 
brotherly friend, in \\Tiitman*s meanings of all that is human— 
bears splendid testimony^ Let us widen the breach 1 And through 
the opening may the message of India make itself heard Ln France I 

Ananda Coomaraswamy Is one of those great Hindus who, 
nourished like Tagore on the culture of Europe and of Asia, and 
justifiably proud of their splendid civilisation, have conceived; the 
task of working for the union of Eastern and Western thought 
for the good of humanity. The spectacle of the recent war, which 
has rendered manifest the signs of the approaching ruin of the 
whole fabric of European life, has shown them the urgency of 
their mission. Even while the harmonious voice of Tagore js 
inviting us to collaborate in his International University oJ Sau- 
tJaiketan, Coomaraswamy raises his try of alarm. He says to 
us: ** Save Asia! Her idealism is in danger. If you do not save 
her, beware lest great Nemesis turn back on you, by the hand of 
Asia» the imperialism of wealth and of violence with which you 
will have armed her The degradation of Asia will be the cause 
of your ruln+ In her uplift lies your safety.” 

But Europe in her arrogance docs not admit that she can have 
need of Asia, whom for centuries she has trampled under foot, 
without once the suspicion stirring that she w^as playing the part 
of Alaric on the ruins of Rome. But Romo has vanquished the 


FORE\TORt> 


111 


conquering us Greece has vanquished Rdme, as India 

and China wilJ finally vanquish Europe—a victory to the souL 

The purpose of Coomarasivamy^s boolc is to show the power 
q( this soulf to show alt the riches that it holds stored up, with 
which to ennobfe and render happy the human race* In a series 
of Essays, which are apparently detached, but aU of which spring 
from the same central thought and conveigc into one design, the 
vast and tranquU metaphysic of India Is unlplcled; her coaception 
of the universe, her social organisation, perfect in its day and still 
capable of adaptation to the demands of modern times; the sotutJJ^n 
which she od'ers for the feminist problem, for the problems of the 
fainlly, of love, of marriage; and lastly, the magnificent revektlon 
of her art. The whole vast soul of India proclaims from end to end 
of Its crowded and well^rdered edifice the same domination of a 
sovereign s}^ thesis. 

There is no negation. All is harmonised- AU the forces of life 
arc grouped like a forest, whose thousand waving arms are led by 
hfataraja, the master of the Dance^ Ever^'thing has its place, every 
being has Its functloo^ and all take part in the divine concert, their 
dif erent voices, and their very dlsscpnanccs, creating, in the phrase 
of Heraclitus, a most beautirul harmony. Whereas in the West, 
cold, bard logic isolates the unusual, shutting It o(f from the rest of 
life into a definite and dlstiDct compartment of the spirit, India■ ever 
mindful of the natural differences in souls and in philosophies* 
endeavours to blend them into each other* so as to re-create in its 
fullest perfection the complete unity. The matching of opposites 
proftuccs the true rhythm of life. Spiritual purity may not shrink 
from allying itself with sensual joy, and to the most licensed 
sexuallsm may be joined the highest wisdom. (The amazing 
Sahaja La an extreme example, a paradoxical challenge to forces 
opposed and mated.) 

In the masterpieces of art we see beauty wedded to science or 
to religion, For the harvest of the intensely lived life is Invariably 
garnered from the intermingling of many different seeds. And 
alway.«, from the depths of millioas of eyes, we meet the look of 
the One. Tagore has sung this thought in deathless lines: 

1 sIihII find filddco Tliy iDfinlti! Jey 

in every spkndcmr al sinetl and visicm and iH>iind^ 

Eiren while a theusend fetters ttiU bind rne te the wheel 
I shill tailfl Thy infinite liberty^” 

Of course, this entire fabric of Indian life stands solidly on 
faith, that Is to say (as can be said of all raiths)i on a slender and 


I? 


FOJUEWORD 


y 


emotiofial hypothesis. (But amid all the beliefs of Europe^ and 
of Asia I that of the Inoian Brahinins sl^cms to me infinitely the 
most ally ring'. ]f I do not at all despise ihe others. The ecstatic 
intellecluabsm of the primitive Buddhist^ or the radiant serentK of 
the vwd inhaled in L^o-Tsc^ are infinitely dear to me; but I find 
in them only rarci exception fil moinentS:, only the di^^ylng peaks 
of the spiritual life, /And the reason why I love the Brahmin more 
than the Other schools of Asiatic thought is because it seems to 
me to contain them all. Greater than all European philosophies> 
It is even capable of adjusting' itself to the vast hypotheses of 
inadcm science. Our Chrisian religions have Uied in vain, when 
there tvas no other choice open to them^ to adapt themselves to 
the progress of science; but one would think^ Indeed* that they 
have difGculty in forgetting that heaven of Hipparchus and Ptolemy 
which they saw above them in their infancy. ^ 

But after having allo^ved myself to be swept aw'ay by the ptiw^er- 
ful rhythm of Brahmin thought, along the curvx of Hfe^ with its 
nwrement of aitemating ascent and return, I come back to my 
ewn century^, and w^hile Ending therein the immense projections of 
a new' cdsmogtiny, offspring of the genius of Einstein, of deriving 
freely from his dlsco^Trles^ 1 yet do not feel that I enter a strange 
Land.^ For^, In the journey of the spirit across stellar space, even 
to the deeps of the planetary void, amid the Islands of the cosmas, 
the nebular spirals, the countless Milky Ways, and through the 
minions of creations which sweep along down Space^and^Time, 
that endless, limitless arc^ the rays of whose suns, reviving 
eternally, could light up phantom, iosubstantiai w'orlds^ I yet can 
hear resounding still the cosmic symphony of all these planets 
which forever succeed each other, are extinguished and once more 
illumined, w'ith their living souls, their humanities, their gods— 
according to the law" of the eternal To Bccofne, the Brahmin 
Samsara—I hear Siva dancing, dancing in the heart ol the world, 
ID my cfwn heart. 

I do not suggest that Europeans should embrace an Asiatic faith, 
1 W'Ould merely invite them to taste the delight of this rhythmic 
philosophy^ this deep, slorw breath of thought From it they 
would learn those virtues which above all others the soul of 
Europe (and of America !)* needs to-day : tranquillity, patience, 
manly hope, unrufiled joy, like a lamp in a windless place^ that 
does not flicker.^'f 

* Sinu, tst all I hate wrilien hett about Europe &pptE» equAlly 

Ifii tli&se Eurape^n Tam which h^v-e p^pledi the New 

t Bbagavaii Gillr 


FOREWORD 


V 


Th« Western world* abcmdontog: itself utterly to its searcti ot 
individual and social happinessi malms and disfinfurcs life by the 
very frenay of its baste, and kills tn the shell the happiness wliich 
it pursues. Like a runaway hcjrse who from between hia blinkers 
sees only the blinding road before him^ the average European can¬ 
not see beyond the boundaries of his individual life, or oi the life 
of his class, of his country, err of his party. Within that nafro^*^ 
pale he imprisons of his own will the realisation of the human 
ideal. At all costs be must be assured that he will see it* with his 
own eyeSf or (supreme sacriBce w^bich he must needs concede to 
the slow mrPk'ement of human progress!) that his children at least 
w^ill harvest its fruits* Hence these eternal and tumultuous hopeSj, 
lent out on short credit and inevitably to be lo&t> hence these 
dreams of Ficrocholes, these social Paradises realised on earth, 
with maxim guns and ruthless edicts^ hence this short-sighted 
hunting I this violence. And as deception must of necessity follow, 
the enthusiasts think that all is loist; and their brief hour of 
feverish exaltation gives way to a long term of morbid depression. 

In the great philosophy of Brahma, such violent turns of the 
scale are quite unknown* It does not expect that the world will 
be suddenly and miraculously transformed by a w ar or a 
revolution, or an act of God- It embraces vast stretches of timep 
cycles of human ages^ whose sueccssive lives gravitate in con* 
centric circles, and travel ever slowly to\:ards the centrei the 
Place of Deliverance—already attained in certain of the souls of 
the Prophets. Such a philosophy knows no discouragement j it 
is never impatient. It knows that there b time. The disasters 
of the journey bring forth neither anger nor defeat. Error for 
it IS not sin but only youth. The full cycle of Time must be 
accomplished. It watches the turn of the wheel and it waits- And 
its vision, penetrating far beyond the shifting horizons of good 
and evil, judges clearly and calmly the stream of passing souls— 
gentle with the frailties of the weak, stern only whh the strong. 
For this proud philosophy demands most of those who are 
capable of most ^ and its w^hotc conception of the hierarchy ol 
castes^ which at first sight seems so scornfully aristocratic, is 
based on this lofty principle (diametrically opposed to that of the 
scU-seeking democracies of the West)* that the higher wc cUmb* 
less become our rights, greater our obitgattons I ... In fine, 
everyone* however low hb status, shall cHmb higher, everyone 
knm^s that, sooner or later* in the normal unfolding of his lives, 


FOREWORD 


▼i 

he will be ^ble to attain to the ctilminating' point on the curve, 
whence, along the way of Return, the soul will escape from nme 
and its vicissitudca. 

Thus the infinite diversity of souls and of desires is brought 
into accord with the eternal rhythm which holds them in the one 
great current which travels on to Unity. 

But it is not intended that this stately fabric of the soul should 
cast over Europe the cfolden shadow of its dome. No, there ts 
no wish that Europe should beconifi Asia I But she must not try 
to make Asia become Europe f She must leam to respect this 
colossal personality to which she herself is complementary. 
Without seeking (oh, vain dreams I) to restore a fictitious life 
to the forms of the past, may these two worlds of huinaij beings, 
allying their distinctive spirits, build up by their union the road 
of the future. 

This is the wish which Ananda Coomaraswamy expresses at 
the conclusion of this book, setting against the nationalism of 
Young India the high idealism of Asia : 

“ Nationalism does not suliiee for the great idealists of 
Young India. Patriotism is but a local interest. . . , Great 
souls have greater destinies to fulfil. Life, not merely the life of 
India, demands our great devotion. The happiness of the human 
race ts of more import to us than any party triumph. The chosen 
people of the future can be no nation, no race, but an aristocracy 
^ the ivholc world. In whom the vigour of European action will 
be united to the of Asiatit^ thoug-ht I . , * 

We take within our own, this band which India extends to us. 
Our cause is one: the saving of human unity and its full accord. 
Europe, Asia, our streogths are different. Let us unite them for 
the accomplishment of a common task, for the achievement cf 
human ^lus. Teach us to understand all things, Asia, teach 
ns your nowedge of life I And learn of us aettoo, achievement! 

RoMAtf? RoLtAND. 


tcDc J m jDmine tcgeilier in tbii »fii«nce iwo 
twees field ilK Idtelk^iua: IroibcthiiKhd und Ymiitg fadit. 









t 

, I* ‘ 


ft:. 

• 


f 



, I 


r 


f 






y :k 





::i 


WHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED 
TO HUMAN WELFARE?' 

Each race coatributcs something essential to the world's 
civiii^tion in the course of its own selt-expression and self- 
realisation* The character built up in solviog its own problems, 
in the experience of its own misfortunes, is itself a gift which 
each offers to the world* The essential contribution of India, 
then, is simply her Indianness; her great humiliation would be to 
substitute or to have substituted for this own character 
bhitva^ a cosmopolitan veneer, for then Indeed she must come 
before the world emptj'^handed* 

If now we ask what is most distinctive in this essential contri¬ 
bution^ \ve tdust first make it clear that there cannot be an)^ing 
absolutely tmique in the experience of any race. Its peculiarities 
\rill be chiefiy a matter of selection and emphasis^ certainly not 
a difference in specific humanity* If we regard the world as a 
family of nations, then we shall best understand the position of 
India by recognizing in her the elder, who no longer, it is true, 
possesses the virility and enterprise of youth, but has passed 
through many experiences and solved many problems which 
younger races have hardly yet recognized* The hesart and essence 
of the Indian experience is to be found in a constant intuition of 
the unity of all life, and the instinctive and ineradicable conviction 
that the recognition of this unity is the highest good and the 
uttermost freedom. All that India can offer to the world pro* 
cceds from her philosophy. This philosophy is not, indeed, 
unknown to others—it is equally the gospel of Jesus and of Blake, 
Lao Tze, and Runff—but nowhere else has it been made the essen¬ 
tial basis of sociology and education. 

Every race must solve own problems, and those of its own 
da}-, I do not suggest that the ancient Indian solution of the 
special Indian problems, though its lessons may be many and 
valuable, can be directly applied to modem conditions. What I 
do suggest is that the Hindus grasped more firmly than others 
the fundamental meaning and purpose of life, and more ddiber* 

> First publUhcd in the ■ Athenaettic,' London, I9ll 


3 


WHAT HAS LNDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


ately than others oi^anized society with a view to the attatoment 
of the fruit of life; and this organization was designed^ not for 
the advantage of a single dassj butj to use a modem fornnila;, to 
take from each according to his capacity^ and to give to each 
according to his needs. How far the fishis succeeded in this 
aim may be a matter of opinionu We must not Judge of Indian 
society* espedaJly Indiait society in its present moment of decay, 
as if it actually realized the Brahmanical social ideas; yet even 
with all its imperfections Hindu society as it survives will appear 
to many to be superior to any form of social organization attained 
on a large scale anywhere and infinitely superior to the social 
order which we know as "^modern civilization." But even if it 
were impossible to maintain this vlevf—and a majority of Euro¬ 
peans and of English-educated Indians certainly believe to the 
contrary—what nevertheless remains as the most conspicuous 
special character of the Indian culture, and its greatest signifiance 
for the modern worlds is the evidence of a constant effort to 
understand the meaning and the ultimate purpose of life, and a 
pu^pos^^"e organization of society in harmony with that order, 
and with a view to the attainmrat of the purpose.^ The Brah- 
manical idea is an Indian "City of the gods"—as devani^gari, the 
name of the Sanskrit script^ suggests. The building of that 
city anew is the constant task of civilization; and though the 
details of our plans may change, and the contours of our buildingp 
we may team from India to build on the foundations of the 
religion of Eternity* 

’W^ere the Indian mind differs most from the average mind of 
modern Europe is in its view of the value of philosophy. In 
Europe and America die study of philosophy is regarded as an 

1 Lcsi I should seem to c^ggerate the importance whldi Hindiis attach 
to AdhydlmS-vidy4, the Science of the Self, I quote from ihc * Bhagatrad 
Gila,* lx. 2: " It h the Idngly sdenc)^ the royal sccrtl, sacred surpassinKly. 
It supplier the only sanction nnd support to rightmusties;^ and In benefits 
may be seen even with ihe eyes of the flesh as bringins peace and pertni- 
nence d£ happiness to men and from Manm *It 10©! ^Dnly he who 
knows the Vcdaiastia* only he deserves to he the Leader of Annies^ ibe 
W^elder of the Rod of the King of Men, the SuEeraJn and Overlord 
of Kings.'^ 

The reader who desires to follow up the subject of this essay is strongly 
recommended to the work of Bbai^vaii DaSp * Thf Samet of Soci^ 
OrganL^otionf Loudon and Benares, lOlff 


WHAT HAS DfDlA COKTRIBUTED? 


3 


end in itselfj and 5ttc|i it seems of but litUe importance to the 
ordinary man. In, India, on the contrary, philosophy is not 
regarded primarily as a mental gymnastic, but rather, and with 
deep religious conviction, as our salvation (nioksha^ from the 
ignorance (orndyfl) which for ever bides from our eyes the vision 
of reality. Philosophy is the key to the map of life, by which are 
set forth the meaning of life and the means of attaining its goal. 
It is no wonder, then, that the Indians lave pursued the study 
of philosophy with enthusiasm, for these are matters that con¬ 
cern all. 

There is a fundamental difference between the Brahman and 
die modern view of politics. The modem politician considers 
t h a t idealism in politics is impractical; time enough, he thinks, 
to deal with social luisfortnncs when they arise. The same out¬ 
look may be recognized in the fact that modem medicine lays 
greater str^s on cure than on prevention, t, e., endeavours to 
protect against unnatural conditions rather than to change the 
social environment. The Western sociologist is apt to say: “The 
teachings of religion and philosophy may or may not be true, but 
in any case they have no significance for the practical reformer." 
The Brahmans, on the contrary, considered all activity not 
directed in accordance with a consistent theory of the meaning 
and purpose of life as supremely unpractical. 

Only one condition permits as to eiccuse the indifference of the 
European ludividual to philosophy; it is that the struggle to 
exist leaves him no time for reflection. Philosophy can only be 
known to those who are alike disinterested and free from care; 
and Europeans are not dius free, whatever their political status. 
^Vhere modem Industrialism prevails, the Brahman, Kshattiiya, 
and Sudra alike are exploited by the Vaishya,^ and where in this 
w'ay commerce settles on every tree there must be felt continual 
anxiety about a bare subsistence; the victim of Industry must 
confine his thoughts to the subject of to-morrow's food for him¬ 
self and his family; the mere Will to Life takes precedence of 
the Will to Power. If at the same time it is decided that every 
man’s voice is to count equally in tiie councils of the nation, it 
follows naturally that the voice of those who think must be 

JBiahcnaii. Kshattriya. Vauhya, Sildra—ibe four primary types of 
Brahmantcal sodoloBy. wr,, philosopher and educator, administrator and 
soldier, intdesman and herdsman, craflsman and labourer. 


4 


WHAT HAS IN'DIA CO^’TRIBUTED? 


droiTiTied by that of those who do not think and have ao Jebure. 
This position leaves all classes alike at the mercy of unscrupulous 
iudividual exploitation, for all political effort lacking a philo¬ 
sophical basis becomes merely opportuoisL The problem of 
modem Europe ts to discover her own aristocracy and to leam 
to obey its ivUL 

It is just this problem which India long since solved for her¬ 
self ill her own way. Indian philosophy is essentially the cre¬ 
ation of the two upper classes of society, the Brahmans aad the 
Kshattriyas. To the latter are due most o( its forward move¬ 
ments^ to the former its elaboration, systeiiiaiization, mythical 
representation, and application. The Brahmans possessed not 
merely the genius for organisation, but also the power to enforce 
tlieir wiU f for, whatever may be the failings of Individuals, the 
Brahmans as a class are men whom other Hindus have always 
agreed to reverence, and still regard with the highest respect 
and affection. The secret of their power is man!fold ^ but it Is 
above all in the nature of their appointed dharma, of study, teach¬ 
ing, and renunciation. 

Of Buddhism I shall not speak at great length, but rather to 
parenthesis; for the Buddhists never directly attempted to organ¬ 
ize human society, thinking that, rather than concern himself 
with polity, the wise man should leave the dark state of life in 
the world to follow the bright state of the mendicant.^ Buddhist 
doctrine is a medicine solely directed to save the individual from 
burning, not in a future hell, but In the present fire of his own 
thirst. It assumes that to escape from the eternal recurrence is 
not merely the summutn bon urn, but the whole purpose of life; 
he is the wdsest who devotes himself immediately to this end; 
be the most loving who devotes himself to the enlightenment of 
others. 

Buddhism has nevertheless deep and lasting effects on Indian 
stato-craft. For just as the Brahman philosopher advised and 
guided his royal patrons, so did the Buddhist ascetics. The senti¬ 
ment of friendliness (metifya), through its effect upon individual 
character, reacted upon social theory, 

It is difficult to separate what is Buddhist from what is Indian 
generally; but we may fairly take the statemanship of the great 

^DhommefaJa, 87; also the /aiaiattiihl of Arya SGra. sijt. Z7. 


UHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


S 


Buddhist Emperor Aioka ^ iin example ot the effect of Buddhist 
teaching upon character and policy^ His famous edicts very v.eil 
illustrate the little accepted truth that ‘'in the Otieut, from 
ancient times, national government has been based on benevolence, 
and directed to securing the welfare and happiness of the pen^ 
plc/^^ One of the most significant of the edicts deals with 'True 
Conquest/* Previous to his acceptance of the Buddhist dborma 
Asol^ had conquered the neighbouring kingdom of the Kalingas, 
and added their territory to his own; but now, says the edict. 
His Majes^ feels "remorse for having conquered the Kalingas, 
because the conquest of a country previously unconquered in¬ 
volves the slaughter, death, and carrying away captive of the 
people* That is a matter of profound sorrow and regret to His 
Sacred Majesty * . , His Sacred Majesty desires that all animate 
beings should have security, self-control, peace of mind, and 
jojousness. *. *My sons and grandsons, who may be, should not 
regard it as their duty to conquer a new conquest If perchance 
they become engaged in a conquest by arms, they should take 
pleasure In patience and gentleness, and regard as (the only true) 
conquest, the conquest won by piety. That avails both for this 
world and the nexL** 

In another edict “His Sacred and Gracious Majesty the King 
does reverence to men of all sects, whether ascetics or house¬ 
holders." Elsewhere he announces the establishment of hos-^ 
pitals, and the appointment of officials “to consider the case 
where a man has a large family, has been smitten by calamity, 
or is advanced in years"; he orders that animals should not t>c 
killed for his table; he commands that shade and fruit trees 
should be planted by the high roads; and he exhorts all men to 
“strive hard." He quotes the Buddhist saying, “All men are my 
children." The annah of India, and especially of Ceylon, can 
show us other Buddhist kings of the same temper. But it will 
be seen that such effects of Buddhist teaching have their further 
consequences mainly through benevolent despotism, and the moral 
order established by one wise king may be destroyed by his suc¬ 
cessors. Buddhism, so far as I know, never attempted to 

^ VUcount Torio In Th^ /apan DaUy Ifelf, November 1S90L 

The essay, of which a gtsod part is quoted in i.^rcadlo Htarn^s 

*GtimpSff (?/ |7jifaHn'Jiiir Japanf k a scatching ctilidsm o£ Western polity, 
regarded from the sfjuidpoiut of a tnodem Buddhist, 


6 


WHAT has INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


formulate a constittition or to detettairte the social order. Just 
tliiSi however, the Ei^hniaiis attempted in many ways^ and to a 
great extent achieved^ and it is mai^y their appLication of religi- 
j oiis philosophy to the problems of sociology wbidi forms the 
* subject of the present disctissiom 

The Kshattriya-Brahnian solution of the ultimate problems of 
life is given in the early Upanidiads/ ft is a form of absolute 
(accordliig to ^ankarachaiya) or modified (according to 
Ramanuja) Monism. Filled with enthusiasm for this doctrine of 
the Unity or Interdependence of all life^ the Brahman-Utopists set 
themselves to found a social order upon the basis provided. In 
the great epics^ they represented the desired social order as 
having actually existed in a golden pasC and they put into the 
mouths of the epic heroes not only their actual philosophy, but 
the theory of its practical application—this, above all, in the long 
discourses of the dying Bhishma* The heroes themselves they 
made ideal types of character for the guidance of all subsequent 
generations! for the education of India has been accomplished 
deliberately through hero-worship. In the 'Dharmafastra* of 

/ Manu^ and the ' ArthaMstra^ of Qianahj'a—^perhaps the most 
remarkable sociological documents the world possesses—they set 
forth the picture of the ideal society, defined from the standpoint 
of law. By these and other means they accomplished what has 
not yet been effected in any other country in making religious 
philosophy the essentia! and intelligible basis of popular culture 
and national polity* 

^ Dcussen, The FhUcs^phy e/ ihf Upaniih^ds, translated A S. Geden. 
Loudofip 1906. 

* The " MahAbharata ' and ‘ The THkc can be studied in the 

prose inmslatluas by P, C. Ray and M. N. Dutt, ptibtished in Calcutta. 

* This most Important document is best expounded by Bhafiavan Das, 
The Sci^Rte of Socid OrgatiUoHan, London and Benares, lO-lO; also 
translaied in full in Qjc ^'Sacred Books of the Easl,^' voL xxt. ^'Hcrdii,*' 

^ says Manu (i 107, llS), “are declared the good and evil results of 
Tarioua deeds, Ad herein arc expounded the eternal principles of all the 
four uf human bdngs, of many lands, uatiotis, tribes, and fatrnlies^ 
and also the of eiHl men^” 

‘if. N. Law, Studits in AndtKl Hindu Potity, London, i9t4. The 
following preoeiit may sen* as an example etf the text! that the fclng 
who ha$ aoiuired new tenitoiy "sbould follow the people in their faith, 
with which they celebrate iheir national, rcUeiDtu, and oon^egatiotud 
festivals and amunemeuts.” 


WHAT has IJTDIA COSTElBUTEDf 


7 


\V1iat, tben, is the Brahman view of life? To answer this at 
length, to expound the Science of the Self {AdhydUnS-vidydy, 
which is the reli|^oii and philosophy of India, would require con¬ 
siderable space. We have already Indicated that this sdcuce 
recognizes the unity of all life—one source, one essence, and one 
goal—and regards the realization of this unity as the highest good, 
bliss, salvation, freedom, the final purpose of life. This is for 
Hindu thinhers eternal life; not an eternity in time, but the 
recognition here and now of All Things in the Self and the Self 
in All. "More than all dse,” says Kabir, who may be said to 
speak for India, ^*do I cherish at heart that love whi^ makes me 
to live a limitless life iu this world.** This inseparable unity of 
the materia] and spiritual world is made the foundation of the 
Indian culture, and determines the whole character of her social 
ideals. 

^How, then, could the Brahmans tolerate the practical diversity 
of life, how provide for the fact that a majority of individuals 
are guided by selfish aims, how could they deal with the problem 
of evil? They bad found tire Religion of Eternity (iViVjuno 
Vidyd) i what of the Religion of Time (So^huo VtdyS) ? 

This is the critical point of religious socioI(®f, when it remains 
to be seen whether the older idealist (it is old souls that are 
idealistic, tlie young are short-sighted) can remember his youth, 
and can make provision for the interest and activities of spiritual 
immaturity. To fail here is to divide the church from the every¬ 
day life, and to create the misleading distinction of sacred and 
profane; to succeed is to illuminate daily life with the light of 
heaven. 

The life or lives of man may be regarded as constituting a curve 
-^an arc of time-experience subtended by the duration of the 
individual Will to Life, The outward movement on tliis curve— 
Evolution, the Path of Pursuit—the Provj-itti JlfJripi—-is char¬ 
acterized by self-assertion. The inward movement—^Involution, 
the Path of Return—the ATfiyifti Mdrga —is characterized by 
increasing Self-realiiatiou.* The religion of men on the outward 


^ It is 3 eotnniDn convention of Indlanists to print the world “sdf’ in 
lower case when the ego (tttfStiHOu) U intended and with a capital when 
the hicher self, the divine nature (pammJfwoit). is referred to. Spiritual 
freedom—the true goal—is the release of the self from the ego concept 


8 


WBAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


path is the Rdigion of Time; the religion of those who return 
is the Religion of Eternity^ If we eoDsider life as one wholCi 
certainly Self-realization must be regarded as its essential pur¬ 
pose from the beginning; aU our forgetting is but that we may 
remember the more vividly* But though it is true that in most 
men the two phases of experience interpenetraie^ we shall best 
understand the soul of man—dra™ as it is in the two opposrtep 
or seeming opposite^ directions of Affirmatioii and Denial VVill 
and Will-surrender—by separate consideration of the outward 
and the inward tendencies. Brahmans avoid the theological use 
of the terms ^'good" and “evU/^ and prefer to speak of “knowl¬ 
edge^^ and “ignorance” (indyd and and of the three 

qualities of sattva, rajas^ and lamoj. As knowledge increasesp so 
much the more will a man of his own motion, and not from any 
sense of duty^ tend to return, and his character and actions will 
be more purely sdttvk. But we need not on that account condemn 
the self-assertion of the Ignorant as sin; for could Self-realiza¬ 
tion be where self-assertion bad never been? It b not sin* but 
TOuth* and to forbid the satisfaction of the thirst of youth b not 
a curej rather, as we realize more clearly everj" day desires sup¬ 
pressed breed pestilence^ The Brahmans therefore, notwithstand¬ 
ing the austere rule appointed for themselves^ hdd that an ideal 
human society must provide for the ^joyment of all pleasures 
by those who wish for them; they w^ould say, perhaps, that 
those who have risen above the mere gratification of the senses* 
and beyond a life of mere pleasure, however refinedp are Just 
those who have already tasted pleasure to the full 
For reasons of this kind it was held that the acquisition of 
\vea!th (arrAo) and the enjoyramt of sense-pleasure (feiS?iia)p 
subject to such law as maj- protect the ’iveak against 

the strongp are the legitimate preoccupations of those on the 
outward path. This b the stage attained by modem Western 
societyp of which the norm is competition, regulated by ethical 
restraint. Beyond this stage no society can progress unless it is 
subjected to the creative will of those who have passed beyond 
the stage of most extreme egoism, whether we eall them heroes, 

IS that morality by wluch a given soda! order Is protected 
“ It h by Dharma that dviliradon is maintained ” (Afefjyo PurtSna^ ocJv. 
27). may abo I# trajislatcd as soda! norm, moral law* order, 

dutjv ri^lccutsne&fp or as rcligioiip mainly in Lis exoteric aspects. 



WHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


9 


guardians, Brahuians, S^ui^j or simply men of genius. 

Puritanism consists in a desire to impose the natural asceticism 
of age upon the young, and this position is largely founded on the 
untenable theories of an absolute ethic and an only true theology. 
The opposite extreme is illustrated in industrial society^ whJdi 
accepts the principles of competition and self-assertion as a mat¬ 
ter of course, while it denies the value of philosophy and dis^ 
ciplinc. Brahman sociology, just because of its philosophical 
basis, avoided both errors in adopting the theory of JM-d/icnwo, 
the "ovua-mofality^' appropriate to the individual according to his 
social and spiritual status, and the doctrine of the many forms 
of Isv^ara, which is so clumsily interpreted by the missionaries as 
polytheistic. However much the Btahmans held Self'feaiLmtioii 
to be the end of life, the rtimmiim toitum, saw very dearly 
that it would be illogical to Unpoae this aim immediately upon 
those members of the community who are not yet weary of self- 
assertion. It is most conspicuously in this understanding toler* 
ance that Brahman sociology surpasses other systems. 

At this point we must digress to speak briefly of the doctrine 
of reincamalion^ which is involved in the theory of eternal recur¬ 
rence. This doctrine is assumed and built upon by Brahman 
sociologists, and on this account we must dearly understand its 
practical applications. We must not assume that reincarnation is 
a superstition which, if it could be definitely refuted (and that 
is a considerable would have as a theory no practical value. 
Even atoms and electrons are but symbols^ and do not repre¬ 
sent tangible objects like marbleSp which we could see if we 
had large enough microscopes j the practical value of a theory 
does not dq^end on its representative character, but on its efficacy 
in resuming past observation and forecasting future events. The 
doctrine of rdnearnatiou corresponds to a fact which everyone 
must have remarked; the varying age of the souls of men, irre- 
spective of the age of the body counted in years. man is 
not an elder because his head is grey*^ 360), 

Sometimes we see an old head on young shoulders. Some men 
remain irresponsible, sdf-asscrtive, uricontrolled, unapt to their 
last day; others from their youth are serious^ self-controIIed, 
talented, and friendly. We must understand the doctrine of 
reincarnation at any rate as an artistic or mythical representation 
of these facts. To these facts the Brahmans rightly attach^ 


JO WHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 

great importancej for it is this variation of temperament or inheri¬ 
tance ^vhich constitutes the natural inetjuality of men, an inequality 
that is too often ignored in the theories of Western democracy. 

We can now examine the Brafamanical theory a little more 
closely. An essential factor is to be recognized in the dogma 
of the rhyitmic character of the worid'process. This rhythm ia 
determined by the great antithesis of Subject and Object, Self 
and not-Self, Will and Matter, Unity and Diversity, Love and 
Hate, and all other '‘Pairs.'' The interplay of these opposites 
Constitues the whole of sensational and registrateable existence, 
the Eternal Becoming (ram^dro), which is characterised by birth 
and death, evolution and involudoii, descent and ascent, sfislili 
and sattshSra. Every individual life—mineral, vegetable, animal, 
human, or personal god—^has a beginning and an end, and this 
creation and destruction, appearance and disappearance, are of 
the essence of the world-process and equally originate in the 
past, the present, and the future. According to this view, then, 
every individual ego (fivAtman), or separate expression of the 
general Will to Life (icAcAAd, trisAiJo), must be regarded as hav¬ 
ing reached a certain stage of its own cycle igati}. The same 
is true of the collective life of a nation, a planet, or a cosmic 
system. It is further considered that the turning point of this 
cuHi’e is reached in man, and hence the immeasurable value which 
Hindus (and Buddhists) attach to birth in human fornt. Before 
the turning point is reached—to use the language of Christian 
theologj'—the natural man prevails r after it is passed, regenerate 
man. The turning point is not to be regarded as sudden, for the 
two conditions interpenetrate, and the change of psychological 
centre of gravity may occupy a succession of lives; or if the turn¬ 
ing seems to be a sudden event, it is only in the sense that the 
fall of a ripe fruit appears sudden. 

' According to their position on the great curve, that is to say, 
according to their spiritual age, we can recognize three prominent 
types of men. There is first the mob, of those who are pre¬ 
occupied with the thought of I and Mine, whose objective is self- 
assertion, but are restrained on the one hand by fear of retaliation 
and of legal or after-death punishment, and on the other by the 
begitmings of love of family and love of country. These, in the 
main, are the "Devourers" of Blate, the "Slaves" of Nietzsche. 
Next there is a smaller, but still large number of thoughtful and 


\VHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


II 


good men whose bdiavioiir is largdy dctcrmmcd by a sense ol 
duty^ but whose inner life b sUll the field of conflict between the 
old Adam and the new man. Men of this type are actuated oa 
the One hand by the love of power and fame^ and ambitiDn more 
or less noble* and on the other by the disinterested love of man- 
kincL But Ihb type b rarely pan-humaup and its outlook b often 
simultaneously unselfish and narrow. In times of great stress, 
the men of tbb tjpe reveal their true nature^ showing to what 
extent they have advanced more or less than has appearecL But 
all these* who have but begun to taste of freedomp must still be 
guided by rules. Finally* there is the much simUer number of 
great men—heroes, sa\aotirs, saints* and avatars—^w-ho have defi¬ 
nitely passed the period o£ greatest stress and have attained peace* 
or at least have attained to occasional and unmistakcable vision 
of life as a whole. These are the "Prolific** of Blake* the 
'"Masters” of Kielxsche* the true Brahmans in their own right* 
and partake of the nature of the Superman and the Bodhisattva. 
Their activity is determined by their love and wisdonip and not 
by rules. In the world* but not of it, they are the flower o£ 
humanity* our leaders and teachers. 

These classes constitute the natural hierarchy of human society^ 
The Brahman sociolo^sts were firmly convinced that m an ideal 
society^ L c.* a society designed deliberately by man for the fubfiU 
ment of his own purpose (fiurush^rtka)^^ not only must oppor¬ 
tunity be allowed to every one for such experience as his spiritual 
status reqxiircs* but also that the best and wisest must rule. It 
seemed to them impossible that an idea! society should have any 
other than an aristocratic basis* the aristocracy being at once 
intellectual and spiriluaL Being firm believers in heredity, both 
of blood and culture, they conceived that St might be possible to 
constitute an ideal sfjciety upon the already existing basis of 
occupational caste. 'Tfp" thought theyp 'hve can determine natural 

^ Fmiti This IS the Brahmanical formula of utility* formlfig^ 
the siatidard uf social ethics. A given activity b useful and ihercfore 
riehtp if It conduces to the attainmeni of dAarwiO* artha, and moksha 

{fimtflon, prcupciity.^ plcasdr^^ and spintual freedom), or any 
one or mere of these without detnment to any other. Brabmanicat ufiilty 
tr.kcs into aKount the whole man. Industrial sodologbts dtertalii a 
much narrower view of utility: “If b wlih utiUlks that have a price that 
poUfiol econoniy is mainly cotacemed" (Nicholson, P™dpks 0 / Foh'fi- 
ref ed Z, p- 2S), 


la WHAT IL^S INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 

classes, then let us assign to each Its appropriate duties (^■u- 
dhorma, own norm) and appropriate honour; this will at once 
facilitate a convenient division of necessary labour, ensure the 
handing down of hereditary skill in pupillary succession, avoid 
all possibility of social atnbition, and will allow to every iri^vLd.ual 
the experience and acti\ity which he needs and owes.” They 
assumed that by a natural law, the Individual ego is always, or 
nearly always, bom into its own befitting environment. If llicy 
were wrong on this point, then its remains for others to discover 
some better way of achieving the same ends. I do not say that 
this is impossible; but it can hardly be denied that the Brah- 
manical caste system is the nearest approach that has yet b«ii 
towards a society where there shall be no attempt to realise 
a competitive equality, but where all interests are regarded as 
identical. To those who admit the variety of age in human souls, 
this must appear to be the only true communism. 

To describe the caste system as an Idea or in actual practice 
would require a whole volume. But we may notice a few of its 
characteristics. The nature of the difference between a Brahman 
and a Sudra is indicated in the view that a Sudra can do no 
wrong,' a view that must make an immense demand upon the 
patience of the higher castes, and is the absolute converse of the 
Western doctrine that the King can do no wrong. These facts are 
well illustrated in the doctrine of legal punishment, that that of 
the Vaishya should be twice as heavy as that of the Siidra, that 
that of the Kshattriya twice as heavy again, that of the Brahman 
twice or even four times as heavy again in respect of the same 
offence; for responsibility rises with intelligence and status. The 
gudra is also free of innumerable forms of self-denial imposed 
upon the Brahman; he may, for example, indulge in coarse food, 
the widow may re-marry. It may be observed that it was 
stron^y held that the Sudra should not by any means outnumber 
the other castes; If the Sudras are too many, as befdl in ancient 
Greece, where the slaves outnumbered freemen, the voice of the 
least wise may prevail by mere weight of numbers. 

Modem craftsmen interested in the regulation of machinery will 
be struck by the fact that the establishment and working of large 
machines and factories fay individuals was reckoned a grievoua 


J ^ Mantle X. 126. 



WHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 13 

sm: large organizations arc only to be carried ofl in the public 

Given tbe natural classes^ one of the good elements of what b 
now regarded as democracy was provided by making the castes 
self-governing; thus it was secured that a man should be tried 
by his peers (whereas, under Industrial Democracy, aa artist may 
be tried by a jury of tradesmen, or a poadier by a bench of 
squires). Within the caste there existed equality of opportunity 
for ail, and the caste as a body had collective privileges and 
responsibilities. Society thus organized has much the appearance 
of what would now be called Guild SocLahsm. 

In a just and healthy society, function should depend u^n 
capacity; and in the nonnal individual, capacity and inclination 
are inseparable (this is the 'instinct of workmanship’). We are 
able accordingly to recognize^ in the theory of the Syndicalists, as 
well as in the caste organization of India, a very nearly ideal com¬ 
bination of duty and pleasure, compulsion and freedom; and the 
words vocation or dharma imply this very identity. Individual¬ 
ism and socialism are united in the concept of function. 

The Brahmanical theory has also a far-reaching bearing on the 
problems of education. "Reading," says the Carwia Puf&na, "to 
a man devoid of wisdom^ is like a mirror to the blind." The 
Brahmans attached no value to uncoordinated knowledge or to 
unearned opinions, but rather regarded these as dangerous toob 
in the hands of unskilled craftsmen. The greatest stress b laid 
on the development of character. Proficiency in hereditary apti¬ 
tudes is assured by pupillary succession within the caste. But 


/1 Manu, xi, 63^ tiA. 

A truly progrewivv sodely ii only possible where there is tiiiity of pur¬ 
pose. How rapidly the soda! habit can then be changed is well ISIustrated 
by the action of many of the Allied Covemments in taking con¬ 
trol of several departments of mdustrial prodiaetioa. It b only sad to 
reflect that it needed a great disaster to compel so dinpic an act as the 
linutation of profits. In the same way vast stuns are now spent on 
caring for the welfare of an army of soldiers who woold be^ and wiU 
again be; left to the tender tnercies of the labour market m times of 
pfia fT , If the nation were as united in peace by a determination to make 
the best of life bow much could not be accomplished at a f raaion of the 
cost of war? 11 a nation can co-operate for sell-defence, why not also 
for self-development? 1 


14 


WHAT HAS INDIA CONTIHBUTED? 


It Is In respect of what we generally understand by higher plica¬ 
tion that Ibe Brahman method differs most from modem ideab^ 
for it IS not even contemplated as desirable that all knowledge 
should be made accessible to alL The key to education is to be 
found in personality, There should be no teacher for ^vhom 
teaching is less than a vocation (none may ^bell the Vedas"), and 
no teacher should impart his knowledge lo a pupil until be finds 
the pupil rcad}^ to receive it, and the proof of this is to be 
found in the asking of the right questions, the man who 

Jigs with a spade obtains water, even so an obedient pupil obtains 
ihe knowledge which is in his teacher.*^ 

The relative position of man and woman h also very note¬ 
worthy. Perhaps the woman is in general a younger soul, ^ 
Paracebns puis it, "nearer to the w^orld than man." Bui there b 
;;o war of words as to which is the superior, which inferior j for 
the question of competitive equality is not considered. The Hindu 
luaniage contemplates identityp and not equahty." The pri’ 
iiiary motif of marriage is not merely individual satisfaction, but 
ihe achievement of Puru^h^ftha^ the purposes of life, and the 
wife is spoken of as sahadhortmcHrinl^ "'she who cooperates in 
the fulfillment of social and religious duties." In the same way 
for the communiiy at large, the system of caste b designed rather 
to unite than to divide. Men of different castes have more in 
cofTimon than men of different classes. It is in an Industrial 
E)emocracy, and where a system of secular education prevail?, 
that groups of men are effectually separated; a Western professor 
£nd a navvy do not understand each other half so well as a 
Brahman and a Sudra. It has been justly remarki^ that "the 
lowest pariah han^ng to the skirts of Hindu society is in a 
sense as much the disciple of the Brahman Ideal as an^*' priest 
himself*" 

It remains to apply what has been said to immediate problems. 
I bavc suggested that India has nothing of more value to offer to 
the world than her religious philosophy, and her faith in the 
application of philosophy to social problems. A few w^ords may 


1 Mmnii. U. llfi, . * , 

^Maau, ix. 41 “The man is mt ihe Piau alone; he u the Tnin, the 
wQuiaru and the progenVi The Sage£ have declared that the husband Is 
the same as the wife."' 





WHAT HAS IKDIA CONTRIBUTED? 

be added on tbe present crisis" and the relationship of E^t and 
West, Let us understand first that what we see in India is a co¬ 
operative society in a state of decay. Western society has never 
been so highly organized, but in so far as it organized, Us 
disintegration has proceeded much further than is yet the case in 
India. And we may expect that Europe, having sunk into in- 
dustrial competition first, w ill be tbe first to energe. The see® 
of a future co-operation have long been sown, and we can dearly 
recognize a conscious, and perhaps also an unconscious, effort 
towards reconstruction. 

In the meantime the decay of Asia proceeds, partly of internal 
necessity, because at the present moment the social change from 
co-operation to competifion is spoken of as progress, and because 
it seems to promise the vdtimate recovery of political power, and 
partly as the result of destructive exploitation by the Industrial¬ 
ists. Even those European thinkers who may be called the 
prophets of the new age are content to think of a development 
taking place in Europe alone. But let it be clearly realized that 
the modem world is not the ancient world of slow commwi- 
cations; what is done in India or Japan to-day has immediate 
spiritual and economic results in Europe and America, To say 
that East is East and West is West is simply to bide ones 
head in the sand,’ It will be quite impoMiblc to establish any 

If do iwt mean the present war. *s such, but dvilintlon at the parting 

of the ways- . , * 

SI shotild like lo pwat out here that Mr, Lowes Ihckiiuoni retunj |o 
this position CAn Esiay on Indio. China, and /o^on/ and ' Appcerwcft/ 
both 1914 L is very unforttniale. He says the reHgioii of India is tbe 
Rcli^on of Eternity, the religion of Europe the RcUgion of Tune, and 
ehooKS the latter. These phrases, by tbe way. are escdlent renderings 
of Pravritli dhorma and Nwritti dharma. So far as Mr. KclduMu-s dis¬ 
tinction is true, in ao far dat is as India suffers from premature vatrOgya. 
and Europe from excessive activity, so far each exhibits an^ excess^ which 
each should best be able to corrert. But an antiihesh of tins sort is only 
conceptually possible, and no race or nation has ever followed ether of 
the religions exclusively. AU true dviliialion is tbe due adjustment of 
the two points of view. And just because this babnee has been so con¬ 
spicuously attained in India, one who knows tar more of India than 
Mr. Dickinson remarks that she “maj- yet be destined to prepcire the way 
for the rectindliauon of Christjanitv with the world, and tbrou^ the 
practieaT identification ol the spiritual with the lemrorat lifd to hasted 
the period of that third step forward in the moral development of human- 


HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


l6 

higher socbl order in the West so long the East remains in¬ 
fatuated with thc^ to her, entirely novd and fascinating theory of 
laisscjs-faire. 

The rapid degradation of Asia is thus an evil portent for the 
future of humanity and for the future of that Western social 
idealism of which the beginnings are already recognizable- If, 
cither in ignorance or in contempt of Asia, constructive EuropKin 
thought omits to seek the ccMsperatioii of Eastern philosophers, 
there avtII come a time when Europe will not be able to fight 
Industrialisirip because this enemy will be entrenched in Asia* It 
is not sufficient for the English colomes and America to protect 
themselves by immigration laws against cheap Asiatic labour; 
that is a merely temporary device, and likely to do more harm 
than good, even apart from Its injustice* Not will It be possible 
for the European nationalist ideal that every nation should choose 
its ouTi form of goverdjnent, and lead its own lifep^ to be realized, 
so long as the Europ^ut nations have, or desire to have, 
possessions in A^. WTiat has to be secured is the conscious 
co-operation of East and West for common ends, not the sub¬ 
jection of either to the other, nor their lasting estrangement. For 
if Asia be not with Europe* she will be against her. and there 
may arise a terrible conflict* economic, or even armedj between 
an idealistic Europe and a imterialized Asia* 

To put the matter in another wayp we do not fully realke the 
debt that Europe already owes to Asiatic thou^t, for the dls* 
coveiy^ of Asia has hardly begun. And, on the other hand, Europe 
has inflicted terrible Injuries upon Asia in modem times,^ I do 
not mean to say that the virus of '^civilization" would not ha^ne 
spread through Asia quite apart from any direct European at¬ 
tempts to effect such a result—quite on the contrary; but It can¬ 
ity, when there will be no divisians of face, crec4 of class, or tiafionality 
betwccii men* by whatever name they tnay be calledL for they wUI all 
be one In ihe acknowledgmem of their common Brotherhood'^ {Sir George 
Birdwood, Sva, 

iTbe ideal of sclf-dctenninalioii (jpMdj) for which the Allies claira 
to be fighting. 

*For taample—and ^'ithout the least iIbwUl—the Engllsb in India 
who unconsdoosly erealed social confusion simply because ihey could not 
understand W'hal they saw, and endeavoured lo fit a co-operative structure 
Into the categories of modem polilicn! theory. 


VVHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED? 


17 


not be denied tbat tbose wbo have b«n the uncomdou^ instru¬ 
ments of the degradation of Asiatic sociel^f front the basis of 
dhartna to the basis of contract have incurred a debt 
The “dear atr" of Asia is not nierdy a dream of the past 
There b idealism, and there are idealists in modem India, even 
amongst those who have been corrupted by half a centur>- of 
squalid education. We are not all deedved by the illusion of 
progress, but, like some of our European colleagues, desire “the 
coming of better conditions of life, when the whole world will 
again learn that the object of human life is not to waste it in a 
feverish anxiety and race after physical objects and comforts, 
but to use it in developing the mental, moral, and spiritual 
powers, latent in man,”^ The debt, then, of Europe, can best 
be paid—and with infinite advantage to herself—by seeking the 
co-operation of modem Asia in every adventure of the spirit 
ivhicb Europe would essay. It is true that this involves the hard 
surrender of the old idea that it is the mission of the West to 
civilize the East; but that somewhat Teutonic and Imperial view 
of kultur is already discredited. What is needed for the com¬ 
mon civilization of the world b the recognition of common prob¬ 
lems, and to co-operate in their solution. If it be adeed w'hat 
inner riches India brings to aid in the realization of a civilization 
of the world, then, from the Indian standpoint, the answer must 
oe found in her religions and her philosophy, and her constant 
application of abstract theory to practical life. 


1S. C. Bmu, Thf Daily Praetiet of the //iWnf, 2nd ed, p. 4. 


HINDU VIEW OF ART: 

1. niSTORV OP .estbetic 

The earliest Indian art of which we have any iiifom»tion or 
concerning which we are able to diaw reasonably certain infer¬ 
ences, we may designate as Vedic, since we can hardly imde^e 
here the discussion of the perhaps contemporaiy culture of the 
early Dravidians. Vedic art w-as essentially practical. About 
painting and sculpture we have no knowledge, but the carpenter, 
metal-worker aud potter and weaver efficiently provided for man s 
material requiremeuts. If their work was decorated, we may be 
sure that its ‘omament* had often, and perhaps always, a magical 
and protective significance. The ends of poetry were also prac¬ 
tical. The Vedic hymns were designed to persuade the gods to 
deal generously with men: 

"As birds extend their sheltering wings. 

Spread your protection over us." 

(Rigveda,') 

Much of this poetry is descriptive; it is nature-poetry in the 
sense titat It deals with tiatuml phenomena. Its most poetica.! 
quality is its sense of wonder and admiration, but it is not lyrical 
in any other sense. It has no tragic nr reflective dements, except 
in some of the later hymns, and there is no question of ‘resthetic 
contemplation,’ for the conception of the sympathetic con¬ 
stantly prevails. The poet sometimes comments on bis owm 
work, which he compares to a car well-built by a deft craftsman, 
or to fair and well-woven garments, or to a bride adorned for her 
lover; and this art it was that made the hymns acceptable to 
the gods to whom they were addressed- Vedic Esthetic consisted 
essentially in the appreciation of skill. 

The keynote of the age of the Upanishads (800 b> c) mo 
Pali Buddhism (500 ». c.) is the search for truth- The anaent 
hymns had become a long-established institution, taken for 
granted; ritual was followed solely for the sake of advantage 
ia this world or the next. Meanwhile tlie deeper foundations 


HliJDU VIEW OF ART; HISTORICAL 


*9 


o£ Indian culture were in process of detennination ui the mental 
struggle of the 'dwellers In the foresL' The language of the 
Upanishads combines austerity vrith passion, but this passion is 
the eyaltarion of mental effort, remote from the common life of 
men in the world. Only here and there we find glimpses of the 
later fusion of lyric and religious experience, when, for example, 
in the Brihaddraf}yaka Ufanishad, the bliss of atman-inluition, 
or the intuition of the Sdf, is compared with the happiness of 
earthly lovers in self-forgetting dalliance. In general, the Upani- 
arc too much preoccupied with deeper speculations to ex¬ 
hibit a conscious art, or to discuss the art of their times t in, this 
age there Is no explidt ,^thetic. 

When, however, we consider the Indian way of regarding the 
Vedas as a whole, ive shall find iroplidt in the word ‘srut? a very 
important doctrine; that the Veda is eternal, the sacred books are 
its temporal expression, they have been 'heard.' Thb is not a 
theory of 'revelation' in the ordinary sense, since the auditi(m 
depends on the qualification of the hearer, not on the \vill 
and active manifestation of a god. But it is on all fours with 
the later Hindu view which treats Uic practice of art as a form 
of yoga, and identifies aesthetic emotion with that felt when the 
self perceives the Self. 

In Pali Buddhism generally, an enthusiasm for the troth, 
unsurpassed even in the Upanishads, h combined with mon^iic 
institutionalism and a rather violent polemic against the joys 
of the world. Beauty and personal love are not merely evanes¬ 
cent. but arc snares to be avoided at all costs; and it is dearly 
indicated that the Early Buddhist iEsthetlc is strictly hedonistic. 
The indications of this point of view are summed up in the fol¬ 
lowing pages of the Mogga : "Living beings on account 

of thdr love and devotion to the sensations excited by forms and 
the other objects of sense, give high honour to painters, musicians, 
perfumers, cooks, elixir-prescribing physicians, and other like 
persons who furaish us with objects of sense." 

' In the Upanishads on the one hand, and in the teachings of 
Buddha on the other, the deepest problems of life were pene^ 
trated: the mists of the Vedic dawn had mdted in the fire of 
austerity (fo^os), and life lay open to man's inspection as a 
thing of which the secret mechanism was no more myst^ous. 
We can scarcely exaggerate the sense of triumph with which the 


20 


HINDU ^lEVV OF ART: IHSTORICAL 


doctrines of the Atman or Self and tbe gospel of BudtUu per¬ 
meated Indian society. The imnscduite result of the acceptance 
of these views appeared in an organized and deliberate endeavour 
to create a form of society adapted for the futhlment of the 
pnrposes of life as seen in the light of the new philosophies. To 
the ideal of the saint in retirement v-as very soon added that of 
the man who remains in the world and yet acquires or possesses 
the highest wisdom—'Tt was with works that Janaka and others 
came unto adeptship” (Ctld, liL 20). There was now also evolved 
the doctrine of union by action (^arflia-yoi?o) set forth in the 
Bha^auad CJtdt as leading even the citizen on the path of sal¬ 
vation. The emergence of a definitely Brahmanical rather than a 
Buddhist scheme of life U to be attributed to the fact that the 
practical energies of Buddhists were largely absorbed within the 
limits of its monasticism: the Buddhists in the main regard Nir¬ 
vana not merely as the ultimatef but as the sole object of life. 
But the Brahmans never forgot that this life is the field alike of 
Pursuit and Ketum. Their scheme of life is set forth at great 
length in the Sutra literature, the DhfO'ma Sdstras and the Epics 
(in general, 4th—1st centuries b. c.). 

This literature yields sufficient material for an elucidation of 
the orthodox view of art. But notwithstanding the breadth of 
the fourfold plan, we find in this literature the same hedonistic 
./Esthetic and puritanical applications as are characteristic of Pali 
Buddhism. Thus, Manu forbids the householder to dance or sing 
or play on musical instruments, and reckons architects, actors and 
singers amongst the tmivorthy men who should not be invited to 
the ceremony of offerings to the dead. Even Chanakya, though 
he tolerates musicians and actors, classes them with courtesans. 
The hedonistic tbcoiy still prevailed. In later rimes the 'defence" 
of any art, such as poetry or drama, was characteristically based 
on the fact that it could contribute to the achievement of all or 
any of the Four Aims of Life. 

Meanwhile the stimulus of discovered truth led not only to 
this austere formulation of a scheme of life (typically in Mann), 
hut also to the development of yoga as a practice for the attain¬ 
ment of the desired end; and in this development an almost equal 
part was taken by Brahmans and Buddhists (typically in Patafi- 
jali and Nagarjuna). 

We shall digress here, and partially anticipate, to discuss briefly 




HINDU VIEW OF ARTS HISTORICAL 




ihe important part onicc played in Indian itonght by tbc 
concept of Art ^ Yoga, a subject suffidoit in itself for a 
whole volume. It will be remembered that the purpose of 
is mental concentration, carried so far as the overlooking of 
all distinction between the subject and the object of contempla¬ 
tion ; a means of achieving harmony or unity of consciousness. 

It was soon recognized that the coacentration of the ^st was 
of this very nature; and ;vc find such texts as Sulorachirya s: 

"Let the imager establish imagw in temples by meditatioii on 
the deities who are the objects of his de votion. For the successful 
aduevement of thb yoga the lineaments of the image are 
described in books to be dwelt upon in detail. In no other »way, 
not even by direct and immediate vision of an actud object, is it 
possible to be so absorbed in contemplation, as thus in the making 


of images." . 

The manner in which evfm the lesser crafts constitute a practice 
facharya) analogous to that of {satnprajSatd) >-oga is indicated 
incidentally by Sanfcaracharya in the commentary on the 
Sutra, 3, 2, 10. The subject of discussion is the distinction of 
swoon from waking: in svvt»n the senses no longer perceive their 
objects. Sankarachatya remarks, "True, the airow-maker per¬ 
ceives nothing beyond his work vrhen he is buried in it; but e 
has nevertheless consciousness and control over his body, both 
of which are absent in the fainting person.*t^ The arrow-maker 
seems to have afforded, indeed, a proverbial instance of smgle^ 
minded attention, as we read in the BhUgavala Parana. 

"T have learned ccjficcntraticMi from the maker of arrOTsrs. 

A connection betis'een dream and art is recogniaed tn a pasMge 
of the^piti PurHya^ where the imager is instructed, on the night 
before beginning his work, and after ceremonial punfication, to 
prav. "O thou Lord of all tlie gods, teach me in dreams how to 
carry out all the work I have in my mind/* Here again we see 
an anticipation of modem views, which associate m 3 -th and dream 
and art as essentially similar and representing the draraausatton 

of man's innermost hopes and fears. 

The practise of visualisation, referred to by gukracharya, is 
identical in worship and in art. The worshipper recites the 

Mff«f Farilya, ck rilil. Cf. Patafijali. Y^ga S9tf« 1, 38. For tb= 
flf dreams sec at« Upanbk^. v. & and Brthad^r^gycka 

iv. 3, 9-14 and 16-ja 


HINDU VIEW OF ART; HISTORICAL 


dhy^na maniram desciibing the ddt}% and forms a corresponding 
mental picture, and it is then to this imagined form that hb 
prayers arc addressed and the offerings are made. The artist 
foLlows idendcal prescriptions, but proceeds to represent the 
mental picture in a -visible and objective fom^ by drawing or 
modelling. Tbus^ to take an example from Buddlnst sources 

The artist or as he b variously—and 

significantly—called), after ceremonial purification, is to proceed 
to a solitary place. There he is to perform the -'Sevenfold 
OEicej^' beginning with the invocation of the hosts of Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas^ and the offering to them of real or imaginary 
flowers. Then he must realize in thought the four infinite moods 
of friendliness, compassion, sympathy, and impartiality. Then 
he must meditate upon the emptiness (fiiwyoM) or non-cxisteacc 
of all things, for ""by the fire of the idea of the abyss# it b said, 
there are destroyed beyond recover>' the five factors" of ego- 
consdotisness.* Then only shoutd he invoke the desired divinity 
by the utterance of the appropriate seed-word {&f/a) and should 
identify himself completely with the divuuty to be represented. 
Then finally on pronouncing the dhy&nu wiowtram^ in w^hich the 
attributes are defined, the divinity appears visibly# "like a reflec¬ 
tion," or "os in a dream" and this brilliant image b the artist's 
model. 

This ritual is perhaps unduly elaborated, but in essentials it 
shows a dear understanding of the psychology of the imagioa- 
tion. These essentials are the setting aside the transformations 
of the thinking principle* | self-idmtification with the object of 
* Condensed from Foucfaer« Ixt^^rQ^ftcphlt Bcuddhiiisit^ 11. 8-1L 
^ Similar views are met with again and again in fn-odem aesthefic. 
Goethe perceived that he who attains to the vision of beauty is from 
hitn^elf set frce± RIdotto Dioudo cxinarks that the secret of all art is sdt* 
forgetfulness: aad laurence Binyou tha,t "we too should make ouriclves 
empty, that the great soul of the tmiverso may fill with its breath 
(/dear 0 / Etui and Atlantic Motilhly. 1^13). 

■ Wagner speaks of " on iniernal sense which becomes dear and active 
when all the others directed outward, sleep or dream" (Combariet^ IfuaiV,, 
ilj Lawj and EvalnHant p. 63). That God b the actuaJ theme of aJI art 
U suggested by ^sinksirichaTya in the CGBuaentary on the Brahmd SUfra^ 
U I 20-21., where he Indicated the Brahmin as the real theme of secular 
as well as spiritual sougal md according to Behmca, "It Is nought indeed 
but thine own heating and willing that do hinder theev so that thou dost not 
see and hear God (Dialoguts on fht Snptrt^niual Life.} 


HINDU MEW OF ART: HISTORICAL 




the work;* and viv-idnesa of the final image.* 

There are abundant literary parallels for this conception of 
as yoga. Thus Valmiki, although he was already familiar with 
the story of Rama, before composing his ovm. RdwiiJyflrtfl sought 
to realize it more profoundly, and "seating himself with his face 
towards the East^ and sipping water according to rule (». t. cer^ 
monial purification), he set himself to yoga-contemplatioa of to 
theme. By virtue of his yoga-poiver he dearly saw before bun 
Rama, Zjikshniana and Sita, and Dasaratha, together wth his 
wives, in his kin^om laughing, talking, acting and moving as if 
in real life ... by yoga-power that righteous one behdd M that 
had come to pass, and all that was to come to pass in the future, 
like a nellt fruit* on the palm of his hand And having truly seen 
all by virtue of his concentraiioiiji the gencraiiia sage began the 

setting forth of the history of Rama." * - t _j 

Notice here particularly that the work of art is completed 
before the work of transcription or r^resen^tion is begun. 
"The mind of the sage," says Chuang Tzu, "being m repose, to 
comes the mirror of the universe, the spccuLuni of all cation 
Crdce is entirely correct when he speaks of the artist, w o 
never makes a stroke with his brush without having previously 
seen it with his imagination’' and remarks that the exte^Usation 
of a work of art "implies a vigilant will, which persists in not 
allowing certain visions; intuitions, or representations to be lost. 


rCf the phrase ^Devata bhum. dtvam yaUr : to w&rihip the god 
become the god That which rtmaim lor us object, remam* unknown. 

s- He whifdoes not Imagine in stranger and betttf hneaments, said 
Blake, "and in stremgeT and better light than his pcnshing mortal eye can 

lec. rfoM not Iciu^ffiEC at . . . e * - t 

*Pky!imthut embHic. the rtnind fniit of 
an ordinary marblt The siaiile is a commen fudian formula for clear 

insight 


• RdnUlyflHo, Bilakaodam. , 

• Cf. Ccefflaraswaioy and Dug^rala, Tke iftrrtr of Geiturt, 
tion, p. 3. So Vasutondhu speaks of the 

a jujube iruii. lying within the hollow of ks hands ^ 

caJi) "It seems to me" Wiliam Morris wrote, "that no hour of the 
day pasMS that the whole world does not show itself to me t and Mag- 
nusson records of Win. referring to5i£|*riif tht Voliung and ot^r poems, 
that "in each case the subject matter had taken smj a d«rly defimte 
shape in his mind, as he told m^ that it only remained to write it donn. 

• Croce, AeJlhelit^ pp. 162, ICA 






24 HINDU VIEW OF ART: HISTORICAL 

It should ^ understood that yoga ('^unioo') is not merely a 
mental ^ercise or a religious disdpiUie^ but the most practical 
preparation for any undertaking whatever. Hanuman, for «- 
ample, before searching the Asoka grove for Sita, "prayed to the 
gods and ranged the forest in imagination till be found her"; 
then only did he spring from lire walls of Lanka, like an arrow 
from a bow, and mter the grove in the flesh. Throughout the 
Hast, w'herever Hindu or Buddhist thought have deeply pene¬ 
trated, it is firmly believed that all knowledge is directly accessible 
to the concentred and 'one^pomted' mind, wilhoul the direct 
intcn-ention of the senses. Probably all inventors, artists and 
mathematicians arc more or less aware of this as a matter of 
personal ^T>ericdoe. In the language of psjxho-analysis, this 
concentration preparatory to undertaking a specific task is "the 
willed mtroversioa of a creative mind, which, retreating before 
Its ovi-n problem and inuardly collecting its forces, dips at least 
for a moment into the source of life, in order there to wrest 
a little more strength from the mother for tlie completion of its 
work ” and the result of this reunion is “a fountain of youth and 
new fertility/*'^ 

We hai-e spoken so far of yoga, but for the artist this was 
rather a means than an end. Just as in Mediaeval Europe, so too, 
and perhaps even more conspicuously in India, the impulse to 
iconolatry derived from the spirit of adoration—the loring and 
passionate devotion to a personal divinity, which we know as 
bhabti. Patanjali, in the Yoga Satra, mentions the Lord only as 
One amongst other suitable objects of contemplation, and without 
the use of any image being implied; but the purpose of the lover 
is precisely to establish a personal relation with the Beloved, 
and the plastic symbol is created for this end. A purely ab¬ 
stract philosophy or a psychology like that of Early Bud¬ 
dhism do« not demand esthetic expression; it was the spirit 
of worship which built upon the foundations of Buddhist and 
Vedantic thought the mansions of Indian religion, which shelter 

all those whom purely intellectual formulae could not satisfy_ 

the children of this world who will not hurry along the path of 
Belease, and the mystics who find a foretaste of freedom in the 
love of eveiy cloud in the sky and flower at thdr feet. 


^ Ptyeholcg^ r?/ ih^ pp. 330, 33d. 



INDIAN SCULPTL’RE, 


Pf JVTE i 



Figure a, AvalokiteivafaBodhLsattvs. DudilEist bronic. CcyJon, Sth Ceotury, 
Museum of Fine Arts, Soston. 



Fijrufc b. S'jva and Pirvail on Mt. KaiJiUa. BTahmanical stone sCDlpiurCj 

Elflra, 8th Century. 
























ET A 






HINDU VIEW OF ART: HISTORICAL 


2 S 


This was indeed a return to superstition, or at any 

duality; but what in this ""^oralrth^ who are 

—certamiy noi provided. The 

not yet Idealists the ^ ^ Christianity, aceom- 

supcfitiLoni ^ diose of modem matenal- 

W «rbS.:J « a« id*..,, idoutn. »d 

arc not Inseparable.^ „< iSe iniacer was ndlhcr 

Le, u. h«. *'.£‘'^1,^ H.td no. *«». 

h« a«t. P'f o™ or to fdlo».' wo* .‘'0» d“ 

canon.* He did not lega _ --ihciicisni—not, that is to say, 

standpoint of connoisseur ship ^ n.ethete but from that 

Lo. *0 .'oodpoio. o£ to TrS “ li .!.« « 

oi 1 from astoSc iMcntion.' 

beauty in his work, this ^ nd unconsdotis expression. In 

t„t iron, o ..a« »' ““it;?, id»M 

S U preotrupied Wid. hi. <h«n.. U U oaly m 
r.omenoii— the artist is P _ i rather than artists — or if 

looking backw-ard, and as ^ ^be philosophic 

,ve am also artists, a rare peroelve that 

„d oo. to «U.«ic .id. of oar ^torurdri-nte. 

„„ qrf., of b«.»«r o. o wo* o' •« fc,, „ov.r 

of te .h*.. Thro «. O" *P'to. wo. '«« ■« ■■'O' 
born rcdirf »«?• •■['.'^ ^ ^ „ point a b«n..ital 

s:i r;.?..tiSpa 1 ^ -owo., .h. .*].« to, b, 

s" to d.. to.*.' <0 •h' 

‘‘?^'’aa,ol UKi. to^d.'Jni 

Hindu art ^ the pictures, thougli tb^ are ^t 

U pTe-delennwed ui hierature. _ pieturcs for 

ai„«»dto i. d.. towtoto" ?'*. i,.. 8...^*. 

vcm. iost U OJ. StoatorfO- "i. '• h" 

»«Evbi the nusshapen *f » B J^nflina-t in 

p«fcr«d to ihe „ cutivieiion to preUinHS. 

with our mwicni -vierr, tpai prciei* 




26 


HINDU ’VIEW OF ART; HISTORICAL 


lovely, tie dancer rMy be ravishing, but tie picture and the dance 
are not rfuat'anf. The theory' of beauty is a matter for philosoph¬ 
ers, and artists strive to demonstrate it at their risk* 

The Indian imager was codccmed with his own problem. It is in- 
teresiing to see the kind of man he was expected to be. According 
to one of the Silf^ Sastras “The fiilpan (artificer) should under¬ 
stand the Atharv^a Veda, the thirty-tiiS'O Silpa Sastras^ and the 
Vedic mantras by which the deities are invoked. He should be 
one who wears a sacred thread, ^ necklace of holy beads« and a 
ring of ku^a grass on his finger; delighting in the worship of God, 
faithful to bis wife, avoiding strange women, piously acquiring a 
knowledge of various sdences,. such a one is indeed a crafts* 
raan/'^ Elsewhere it is said “the painter must be a good man, no 
sluggard^ not given to anger; holy, learned, $elf-controlled, devout 
and charitable, such should be his characterp'''^ It is added that 
he should work in solitude, or when another artist is present, 
never before a layman. 

In this connection it is very importaut to realise that the artisan 
or artist possessed an assured status in the form of a life coutract, 
or rather an hereditary office. He was trained from childhood as 
his father's disciple, and followed his fathers calling as a matter 
of course* He was member of a guild, and the guilds were 
recognized, and protected by the king. The artificer was also 
protected from competition and undercutting; it is said: “That 
f any other than a gilpan should build temples, towns, seaports. 
I tanks or wells, is comparable to the sin of murder/'* This was 
^ guild socialism in a non-compelitivc society/ 

The earliest impulses of Indian art appears to have been more 
or less practical and secular, and it is perhaps to this fact that we 
may partly trace the distrust of art exhibited by the early hedo- 


^ Frum a Tamil %-flrsloB of a Silpa Siatra* quoted by Kearny Iridbn 

Antiquary, voL v,, lS76. 

> Gruawedel, Myth^iogU dtj BaddhiimviM pr 152. Cf* Ccianiie, I 
have never permitted anyone le watch me wluk 1 w'ork I refine to 
do anything Ixforc anrone * (quoted W. K. Wright. Modem FotHfiaj, 
p. 1S2). 

■Keami* loc. dt. _ ^ t>- j 

*The Sociology is discussed more fully in Sir George Birdwoods 
l/pfEfwJfriaf j4rfj of Indin, and SvtK and my Mediaeval /!r# and 

Indian Craftsman. 





INDIAN SCULPTURE 


PLATE H 






rigtirc a. Di:ef| M^maHapurair, Century. 



Figure b* Elephants, MimaUapuirsin, Sth Centnr)- 






siMsi, 




A 










HINDU VIEW OF ART: HISTORICAL 


27 


nists. On the other hand, the dominant motifs governing its 
evolution from the third century fi,C. onwards, and up to the 
close of the eighteenth cenhay, are devotion (bhakti) and 
reunion (7070). Keither of these is peculiar to India, but thqr 
c:!i:hibit there a pectiliar character which leaves its mark on evcT?^ 
thing Hindu or Buddhist. Let us now follow these traces in a 
very summary reference to actual documents, 

I have dbcussed in another chapter the beginnings of Buddhist 
art.* It is in tlie southern primitives at Amaravatl and Anuri- 
dhapura rather than in the semi-Roman figures of the North-west 
that we can best observe the development of an art that is 
distinctively Indian. This is the main stream; and it is these 
tj-pes from which the suave and gracious forms of Gupta sculp¬ 
ture derive, and these in turn betame the models of all Buddhist 
art in China, lu India proper, they grow more and more 
tnouvemente, more dramatic and vigorous, in the classic art of 
Elura and Elephanta, Mamallapuram and Ce3'lon, and form the 
basis of the immense developments of colonial Buddhist and 
Hindu art in Java and Cambodia. Gupta and classic painting 
are preserved at AjantL 

The tender humanism and the profound nature sympathi^ 
which are SO conspicuous in the painting of Ajan^ and the 
sculpture of Mamallapuram are recognaabk equally in the work 
of poets like Asvaghosha and Arya Sura and dramatists like 
Kalidasa. Aivaghosha says of Prince Siddhartha that one day as 
he was riding in the country "‘he saw a piece of land being 
ploughed, with the path of the plough broken like waves of the 
water... .And regarding the men as they ploughed, their faces 
soiled by the dust, scorched by the sun, and chafed by the wind, 
and their cattle bcw'itdercd by the burden of drawing, the Alt-noble 
One felt the uttermost compassion ,* and alighting from the back 
of his horse, he passed slowly over the earth, overrame with 
sorrow—pondering the birth and destruction proceeding in the 
world, he grieved.'* Nor can anything be more poignant than 
Santi Deva's expression of his sense of the eternal movement 
and unstdistantiality of li£e^‘'\Vho is a kbsman, and who a 


r The beginmngs of Hindu art also go back to the second or third 
century B. C. but apart from a few coin.^ little 01 nothing has been pre¬ 
served of earlier date than the third or fourth eentuty A D, 




HINDU MEW OF ART; HISTORICAL 


28 

friend^ and Unto y\?h.om?* Tlie Itterature of love Is no kss 
remarkable. We recognize here, just as in tho palndng and 
sculpture, what is eternal in ail art, and universal^—impassioned 
vision based on understandings correlated with doudless thought 
and devoid of sentimentality. There is every reason to believe too 
that this was the time of highest attaifiment in music. Lastly^ 
tills was a time of progress in the field of pure science^ especially 
mathematics and astronomy, Froui the fourth to the end of 
the eighth century we must regard as the golden age of Indian 
dvilization. This was the period of Wei and T'ang in China; 
Eastern Asia rcprcsimted then to all intents and purposes the 
civilization of the worli 

After the ninth or tenth century there is a general, though cer¬ 
tainly not universal, decline m orthodox art* of which the 
formube were rapidly stereotyped in their main outUnes, and 
rendered florid in their detalL Classical Sanskrit liierature also 
came to an end in a forest of elaborate emhroider)% But great 
forces (sometimes grouped under the designation of the Pau- 
ranic Renaissance) had long been at work preparing the way 
for the emergence of the old cults of Siva and Vishnu in forms 
which gave renewed inspiration to art—sculpture and poetry in 
the South, and poetry and painting in the North. In these 
devotional faiths was completed the cycle of Indian spmtuaJ 
evolution from pure philosophy to pure mysticism, from knowh 
edge to love. The inner and outer life were finally unified—a 
development entirely analogous to that of Zen Buddhism in the 
Far East. The transparencj' of life so clearly expressed in Uic 
paintings of Ajanti i$ indicated ivilh a rencw'cd emphasis—above 
all in the R^dha-Krishiia cults—and in all the Northern Yaish- 
nava poetry and painting^—the tradition in w^hidi Rabindranath 
Tagore is the latest singer, and of which the theory is plainly set 
forth in his song: 

Not my way of salvation, to surrender ihe world f 

Rather for me the taste of Infinite Freedom 

WTiile yet I am bound by a thousand bondu to the whe^l , * . 

In each glory of sound and sight and scent 
I shall find TTiy infinite joy abiding! 

My passion shall bum as the flame of salvation, 

Tlie flower of my love shall become the ripe fruit of devotion. 


PLATE Itr 


INDIAN PAINTING* 



Krii^hna disgitif^d a milkmaid. Rajput Painting, 

Fine AitE, Bosinn. 


17 th Century . 


]^Lu^iim of 








1 








HINDU VIEW OF ART: HISTORICAL 


29 


But such a theory is now rather a sitirival of all that was uni¬ 
versal in Indian religion, rather than a new point of departure. 
The current ^Esthetic of 'educated' India—a product of a wide 
misooroprehension of Western culture and a general surrender 
to Nonoomformist ethics—^is again realistic and hedonistic, and 
perhaps for the first time illustrative, peisooal, and seutimental 


HINDU VIEW OF ART: 

thejory of beauty 

We have so far discussed the Hindu view of art maiMy from 
the bitemal evidence of the art itsdf. There remains, what ts 
more exactly pertinent to the title of these chapters, to discuss 
the Hindu ^thetic as it is expressly formulated and elaborated 
in the abundant Sanskrit and Hindi literature on Poetics and the 
Drama. We shall find that general condusious are reached which 
are applicable, not only to literature, but to all arts alike* 

The discussion begins with the Defence of Poesy. This is 
summed up in the statement that it may contribute to the achieve^ 
ment of all or any of the Four Ends of Life. A single word 
rightly employed and understood is compared to the 'cow of 
plenty/ yielding every' treasure; and the same poem that is of 
material advantage to one, may be of spiritual advantage to an¬ 
other Of upon another occasion. 

The question follows: What is the essential element in poetry? 
According to some authors this consists in style or figures, or in 
suggestion (vyaBjand^ to which wc shall recur in discussing the 
Tarieties of poetry)* But the greater writers refute these views 
and are agreed that the one essential element in poetry^ is what 
they term ifojj, or Flavour. With this term, which is the equiva¬ 
lent of Beauty or Esthetic Emotion'^ m the strict sense of the 
philosopher, must be considered Uie derivative adjective ras&vaTit 

1 Eapectally ViivanJtfia bi the S^hiiya ca. 1450 A D. (trans, 

Bihliothixa lndica, B^lantyiie}* Also In the Jlffni and the 

Vy^kti Vm€kB. 

*A5 rrmarked by W. R&thenftem, **\\Tiat is wriura upon a single 
work should enable people to apply dear principles to all works they 
meet with'" (Two Drawings by 1510). Also BcncdcUo Croce, 

^laws rdaling to special branches are not conceivable''' (jlAflliclEVp 
p. 350). 

■ Such words as saundarya and rUpa should be translaled as lovclmrsr 
or 

N^o one suggests that nielfe niakcs poetry* This error was hardly to 
be expected in a country where even the dryest treatlsts on law and 
Ic^c arc composed in mclrc. Metrical poetry is padya prole 

poetry is pedyo but it is rasa that makes them poetry. 


HINDU VIEW OF ART: THEORY OF BEAUTY 31 


‘having rasa/ applied to a work of art, and the derivative sub¬ 
stantive rasiko, one who enjoys rasa, a oonnoissew' or lover, and 
finally rosisv^dgna, the tasting of rasa, i. e,, sesthetic contempla¬ 
tion. 

A whole literature is devoted to the discussion of rasa aod the 
conditioiis of its experience. The theory, as we have remarited, 
is worked out in relation to poetry and drama, especially the 
classic drama of Kalidasa and others. WTieu we consider that 
these plays are essentially secular in subject and sensuous in ex¬ 
pression, the position arrived at regarding its significance will 
seem ail the more remarkable^ 

Aesthetic emotion—rasa—is said to result in the spectator— 
rasika—though it b not effectively caused^ through the operation 
of determinants (t/iWaSira), consctiuents {anttbk^pa), moods 
and involuntary emotions (jotftroiAtfi'o).* Thust 
DETEaMiNAKTs; the sesthetic problem, plot, theme, etc,, viz: the 
hero and other characters and the circumstances of time and 
place. In the terminology of Croce these are the "physical 
stimulants to tcsthctic reproduction," 

Consequents: deliberate manifestations of feeling, as gestures, 
etc. 

Moods; transient moods (thirty-three in number) induced in 
the characters by pleasure and pain, e. g., joy, Station, im¬ 
patience, etc. Also the permanent (nine), viz; the Erotic, 
Heroic, Odious, Furious, Terrible, Pathetic, Wondrous and 
Peaceful. 

Inx'OLUNtasy Emotions; emotional states originating In the 
inner nature; involuniary expressions of emotion such as 
horripilation, trembling, etc, (eight in all). 

In order that a work may be able to evoke rasa one* of the 
permanent moods must form a master-motif to which all other 
expressions of emotioti are subordinate.* That is to say, the 
first essential of a rasavant work is unity— 

As a king to his subjects, as a gum to his disciples. 
Even so the master-motif b lord of all other motifs.* 

^ IV^ 1. 

2 Of aJiy two rasas cojiilnnc4- 

* iv* 44 

* A^Jfjd SdsirOt 7^ 8L 


32 


UIKDU VIEW OF ART; THEORY OF BEAUTY 


Ifp on the contrai^^ a transient emotion i$ made the mo tit of 
the whole work, this ‘^extended development of a transient emo-^ 
tion tends to the absence of rasa/'^ or as we should now say, Lhe 
work becomes sentimental. Pretty art svhich emphasises passing 
feelings and personal emotion is neither beautiful nor tmer it 
tells us of meeting again in heaven^ it confuses time and eternity^ 
loveliness and beautjv partiality and love. 

Let us remark in passing that while the nine permanent moods 
correspond to an identical da;ssih cation of rasas or flavours as 
nine in number, the rasa of which we speak here is an absolute^ 
and distinct from any one of these. The "nine rasas *are no more 
than the various colottrings of one experience, and are arbiiraiy 
terms of rhetoric used only for convenience in dassLheation: just 
as we speak of poetry categorically as lyric, epic, dramatic, etc., 
without implying that poetry is anything but poetry* Kasa is 
tasted—^beauty is felt—only by empathy, ^einfuhlung' (joJAdr- 
ana) ; that is to say by entering mto^ feeling, the permanent motif; 
but it is noE the same as the pennanent moEif itself, for, from this 
point of view, it matters not with which of the permanent motifs 
we have to do* 

It h just here that we see how far Hindu Aesthetic had now 
departed from its once practical and hedonistic character; the 
DaJarupa declares pbinly that Beauty is absolutely independent 
of the s>Tnpathetic—^'Delightful or disgusting, exalted or lowly, 
cruel or kindly, obscure or refined, (actual) or imaginary, there 
is no subject that cannot evoke rasa in man.^" 

Of course^ a work of art may and often does afford us at the 
same time pleasure in a sensuous or moral way, but this sort of 
pleasure is derived directly from its material qualities, such as 
tone or texture, assonance,^ etc., or the ethical peculiarity of its 
theme, and not from its ^theticqualities: the xsthctic experience 
is independent of this, and may even, as Dhanamjaya says, be 
derived in spite of sensuous or moral displeasure. 

Incidentally we may observe that the fear of art which prevaib 

1 DoSanipa^ iv. 45. 

Blak?, tM, Bays that "Ketiwledge of Heal Beatity is not to be acquired. 
It h bom With ui.'’ And as P'u Snne-ling retnarks: "Each interprets in 
his own way the tnude of heaven: and whether it be discord of not, 
depend! upon antecedent caxisei" {Giles, Strangr S/orwj fram a Chinese 


HINDU VIEW OF ART; THEORY OF BEAUTY 


33 


amongst Puritans arises partly from the failure to recognize that 
seslhetic experience does not depend on pleasure or pain at all: 
and when tins Is not the immediate difficulty^ then from the dis¬ 
trust of any experience which is “beyond good and evil” and so 
devoid of a delimtely mcrai purpose. 

The tastbg of rasa—the vision of beauty—is enjoyed, says 
Viivanatha, "only by those who are competent thereto'*: and he 
quotes Dharmadatta to the effect that “those devoid of imagina¬ 
tion, in the theatre, are but as the wood-work, the walls, and the 
stones/^ It is a matter of common experience that it is possible 
for a man to devote a whole life time to the stud}' of art^ without 
having once experienced aesthetic emotion: “historical research" 
as Croce expresses it* “directed to illumiae a work of art by plac¬ 
ing us in a position to judge it, does not alone suffice to brmg it 
to birth in our spirit/' for “pictures, poetiy, and cver}^ work of art 
produce no effect save on sotib prejKired to receive them/^ Vis- 
vanatha comments very pertinendy on this fact when he says that 
“even some of the most eager students of poetry ate seen not to 
ixave a right perception of rasa*" The capacitj' and genius nec- 
essar>' for appreciation are partly native {'andent') and partly 
cultivated ("cpotemporaTy'): but cultivation alone is usele^s^ and 
if the poet is bom, so too b the rasika, and criticism is akin to 
genius. 

Indian theory is very clear that instruction is not the purpose 
of art. On thb paint Dhanamjaya is sufficiently sarcastic: 

'^As for any simple man of little intelligence/' he writes, ^^vho 
sa}^ that from dramas, which distil joy* the gain is knowledge 
only^ as in the case of history and the like (mere statementp nar^ 
rative, or illustration)—homage to him, for he has averted his 
face from what is delightftiL''^ 

The spectator's appreciation of beaurir depends ort the effort 
of his own imagination, “just as in the case of children playing 
with day elephants/'* Thus, technical elaboration (realism) in 
art is not by itsdf the cause of rasa : as remarked by Rabindra- 

1 , 

^DaJarQpa, IV* 50l Cf- Goedre, *^Hc who wedd work for the 
lUge * , * should leave Nature hi her [vroper place and lake careftil 
heed not to have recoune to anything but what may be performed by 
ctiildrcfi wilh puppets upon beards and lath:^ toseth^r with sheets of 
cardboard and iinco'* —quoted tn *Tlie Mask,' Voi \\ p. 3. 


yi HINDU VIEW OF ART; THEORY OF BEAUTY 

nath TagDTe “in our couniTy, those of the audience who are 
cMMt to porfoct Iho tong in thnr “'"f 
W tho fot« oi Uteir o™ f«liitg.- This is not vtnr dtfformt 
from what is said by Sukracharya with reference to images; the 
defects of images are constantly destroyed by the power of Jo 
virtue of the worshipper who has his heart always Kt on Ood. 

If this attitude seems to us dangerously uncritical, that is to ay 
dangenSSTETaTt, or rather to accompUshment, let us^remmi^r 
that it prevailed cvetyw'here in all periods of |r«t c^^ve_afi 6 y; 
ity : and that the decline of art has always followed the decline pi, 

iove and faith. . . 

‘ Tolerance of an imperfect work of art may ansc in two 
the one Hnrrff.Vo/, powerfully swayed by the sympathetic and too 
easily satisfied with a ytry inadequate correspondence J:lween 
content and form, the other creative, very httle swayed by con¬ 
siderations of charm, and able by force of Ime imapnalion to 
complete the correspondence of content and form which is not 
achieved or not preserved in the original. Uncritical tolerance is 
content viith prettiness or ediftealton, and rccoib from auty 
that is ‘difficult: creative tolerance is indifferent to prettmess 
or edification, and is able from a mere suggestion, such as aa 
awkward ‘primitive’ or a broken fragment, to create or recreate 

a perfect experience. . , 

“Also “the permanent motif becomes rasa through the rasika s 
onm capacity for being delightcd-^not from the character of tiie 
hero to be Imitated, nor because the work aims at the produ^on 
of Esthetic emotion.”* How many works which have aimed at 
the production of Esthetic emotion," that is to say, which were 
Intended to be beautiful, have failed of ihcir purple! 

The degrees of excellence in poetry are discussed m the Adpya 
PrakoJa and the SJihUya Darptna. The best is wheTe_ there is 
a deeper significance than that of the literal sense. In minor 
poetry the sense overpowers the suggestion. In poctiy, 

significantly described as ‘variegated’ or ‘romantic 
only artistic quality consists in the ornamentation of the li er 
sense, which conveys no suggestion beyond its face meaning. 
Thus narrative and descriptive verse lake a low 
portraiture does in plastic art I and, indeed, the SiUittya Darpona 

^ pp. 

3 Da£ariLpa^ 47. 




HL*n >0 VIEW OF ART; THEORY OF BEAUTY 35 

excludes the last kind of poetry altogetli':’'* ^ obse^ed 

that the kind of suggestion meant is something more than implica¬ 
tion or dovhle enti^dre: in the first case we have to do with me™ 
abbreviation, comparable with the use of the words it cejera, m 
the second we have a mere play on words. What is understood 
to be suggest^ is cme of tbe nine rasas* 

It is worth noting that we have here a departure from, and I 
think, an improveroent on Croce's definitioin *txpressiiiH ir art. 

A mere sUtement, however completely expressive, su^ as: 
"The man walks/' or {n+by = is not art Poetry 

b indeed a kind of sentenced but what kind of sentence, A 
sentence ensouled hy rasa/ i. e,, in which one of the nine rasa? 
is implied or suggested: and the savouring of this flavour, ras- 
Ost Sdana, through empathy, by those possessing the necessary sen¬ 
sibility is the condition of beauty, 

"What then are rojo and rasdsvSdana, beauty and aesthetic «n^ 
tion ? The nature of this experience b discussed by Visvanatha in 
the SshUya Uorfewo*: "It is pure, indivisible, self-manifested, 
compounded equally of joy and consciousness, free of admixture 
rvith any other pcrcepfion, the very twin brother of mystic ex^ri- 
ence iohodarali), and the very Ufe of it is 

stiperscnsuous {hhottara) wonder."* Further, "It is enjoyed 
by those who are competent thereto, in identity/ just as the form 
of God is itself the |oy with which it is recognized" 

For that very reason it cannot be an obj'ect of knowledge, its 
perception being indivbible from its very existence. Apart from 
perception it does not exist It Is not on that ac^nt to ^ 
regarded as eternal tti time or as interrupted: it is timeless. It 
k agiaifi, superscnstious, hyperphysical {d^kika), and the only 
proof of its reality is to be found in experience? 

Religion and art are thus names for one and the same expen- 

1 The laieiiess of aesthelic to lirgaislic is indicated inDaiarlt^o, iv. 46. 

9 FdiyoiM rtuSlmatam rSeakam—SShilya DarpaHO^ 5. 

< WoSer is defined as a kind of expaTidlng of the mind in 'admirntion.' 
iThe ewresskm nadroffdoeo h ficiiiinuj, bcmtise msasvidaiia is i^a. 
and tier VffJft In iMthetlc pontHrplation, as m perfect worship there 
ii identity oi subject arid object, cause and _ 

iThe raslka U therefore unable to mnvmce the railisUne by arr^* 
meet: he can but *ay. Taste and «e that it i* good-for / tflcw .0 what 
I have bciicvcd- 




2^ HINDU VIEW' OF ART: THEORY OF BEAUTY 

cn«—an intuition of reality and of identity. This is not, of 
course, exclusively a Hindu view: it has been expowid^ by 
niimy others, such as the Neo-platonUts, Hsieh Ho, Goethe, Blake, 
Schopenhauer and Schiller. Nor is it refuted by Croce. It has 

been recently restated as follows: 

"In those moments of exaltation that art can give, it is easy to 
believe that we have been possessed by an emotion that ci^es 
from the world of reality. Those who take this view will have 
to say that there is in all things the stuff out of which art is made 
—reality. The peculiarity of the artist would seem to be that he 
possesses the power of surely and frequently seizing 
{generally behind pure form), and the power of expressing his 

setiBc of it, in pure form always l'*^ , . , 

Here pure form means form not clogged with umesthetic mat¬ 
ter such as associations. ^ 

It will be seen that this view is monistic: the doctrine of the 
universal presence of reality' is that of the immanence of the Absc^- 
lute. It is inconsistent with a view of the n'orld as absolute 
or utterly unreal, but it implies that through the false world of 
everyday experience may be seen by those of pienetrating vision 
(artists, lovers and philosophers) glimpses of the real subs^te. 
This world is the formless as we perceive it, the unknowable as 

we know it i t. 

Precisely as love Is reality experienced by the lover, and truth 

is reality as experienced by the philosopher, so beauty is rrali^ 
as experienced by the artist: and these are three phases of the 
Absolute. But it is only through the objective work of art ttot 
the artist is able to communicate his experience, and for this 
purpose any theme proper to himself will serve, since the Abso¬ 
lute is manifested equally in the little and the great, animate and 
inanimate, good and evil. 

We have seen that the world of Beauty, like the Absolute, 
cannot be known objectively. Can we then reach this world by 
rejecting objects, by a deliberate purification of art from all asso¬ 
ciations ? We have already seen, however, that the mere intention 
to create beauty is not sufficient: there must exist an object o 
devotion. Without a point of departure there ran be no flight 
and no attainment; here also "one does not attain to perfection 


1 Cklve Bell, Art p. 


37 


HINDU VIEW OF ART; THEORY OF BEAUTY 

by mere renunciation,"* We can no more aebieve Beauty than 
we can find Release by tumittg our backs on the world: we 
cannot find our way by a mere denial of things, but only in 
learning to see those things as th^ really are, infinite or beau¬ 
tiful. The artist reveals this beauty rvherever the mind attaches 
itsdf: and the mind attaches itsdf, not directly to the Absolute, 

but to objects of choice. ,. c j 

Thus rve return to the earth. If we supposed we should find 
the object of search elsewhere, we we« mistaken. The two 
worlds, of spirit and matter, Purusha and Prafcriti, are one: and 
this is as dear to the artist as it b to the lover or the philosopher. 
Those Philistines to whom it is not so apparent, vve should speak 
of as materialists or as nihilists—exclusive monists, to whom the 
report of the senses is ather all in all, or nothing at all. The 
theory of rasa set fortJi according to Visvanitha and other astlie- 
ticiaiis, belongs to totalistic monism; it marches with the Vedanta ^ 
In a country like India, where thought is typically consistent with 
itself, this is no more than we had a ri^t to expect. 


111. 1^4 


THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE 

It is v«ry generally held that naiural objects such as human 
beings, animals or landscapes, and artificial objects such M fac- 
tories^ textiles or works of intcntiorial artj pn be classified ^ 
beautiful or ugly* And yet no general principle of classification 
has ever been found: and that which seems to be beautify to 
one is described as ugly by another. In the words of Plato 
"Everj'one chooses his love out of the objects of beauty accord¬ 
ing to bis own taste." 

To take, for example, the human type: every race, and to 
some e.'ctent cveiy huhvidual, has an unique ideal. Nor can we 
hope for a final agreement: we cannot expect the European to pi^ 
fer the Mongolian features, nor the Mongolian the European. Of 
course it is very easy for each to maintain the absolute I'alue o 
his oy^ taste and to speak of other types as ugly; just as the 
hero of diivalty maintains by force of aroK that hb own bdoved 
is far more beautiful than any other. In like manner the vanoiw 
secu maintain the absolute value of their own ethics. But it is 
clear that such claims are nothing more than siateinents of preju¬ 
dice, for who is to decide which racial ideal or which morality is 
"best”? It is a little too easy to decide that our own is best; wc 
are at the most entitled to believe it the best for us, Tins rcl^ 
tivity Is nowhere better suggested than in the classic saying 
uted to Majnun, when U was pointed out to him that the world 
at large regarded his Laila as far from beautiful, se- t i- 

beauty of Laila," he said, '‘requires the eyes of Majnun,' » ^ 

It Is the same with works of art. Different artists are inspired 
by different objects; what is attractive and stimulating to one is 
depressing and unattractive to another, and the choice also vanes 
f rom race to race and epoch to epoch. As to the appreciation of 
such works, it is^Hhe same; for men in general admire only sutt 
works as by education or temperament they are predisposed to 
admire. To enter into the spirit of an unfamiliar art d^nd.s a 
greater effort than most are willing to make. The classic 
starts convinced that the art of Greece has never been «iuaU^ 
or surpassed, and never will be; there are many who think, Uke 
Michelangelo, that because Italian painting is good, therefore 


THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE 


< 39 


good painting is Italian. There are many who never yet felt the 
beauty of Egjptian sculpture or Chinese or Indian painting Of 
music: that th^ have also the hardihood to deny their beautj', 
however, proves nothing. 

It is also possible to forget that certain works are beautifull 
the eighteenth century' had tlius forgotten the beauty of Gothic 
sculpture and primitive Italian painting, and the memory of their 
beautv was only restored by a great effort in tlie course of the 
ninetwnth. There may also exist natural objects or works of 
art whidi humanity only very slowly leams to regard as in any 
■way beautiful; the wcslcm {esthetic appreciation of desert and 
mountain scenery, for example, is no older than the nineteenth 
century; and It is notorious that artists of the highest rank are 
often not understood till long after their death. So that the more 
■we consider the variety of human election, the more we must 
admit the relativity of taste. 

And yet there remain philosophers fflianiy convinced that an 
absolute Beauty (roja)^ exists, just as riithers maintain the con¬ 
ceptions of absolute Goodness and absolute Truth. The lovers 
of God identify these absolutes with Him (or It) and maintain 
that He can only be known as perfect Beauty, Love and 
Truth, It is also widely held that the true critic (rdrifen) is able 
to decide which works of art are beautiful {riuavant) and which 
are not; or in simpler words, to distinguish works of genuine art 
from those that have no claim to be so described. At the same 
we must admit the relativity of taste, and the fact that all 
gods {det'as and are modelled after the likeness of metu 

It remains, then, to resolve the seeming contradictions. This 
is only to be accomplished by the use of more exact terminology. 
So far have I spoken of ‘beauty’ without defining my meanings 
and have used one word to express a multiplicity" of ideas. But 
we do not mean the same thing when we speak of a beautiful girl 
and a beautiful poem; it will he still more obvious that we mean 
tw-o different things, if we speak of beautiful wither and a beauti¬ 
ful picture. In point of fact, the conception of brauty and the ad¬ 
jective ■'beautiful" belong exclusively to esthetic and should only 
be used in‘^thetic judgment. We.seldora make any such judg¬ 
ments wh^ we Bp^ of natural objects as beautiful; we gen- 

» Raia. rotevani and ra$ita are the piindpal tenas of Indian tsthedcs, 
explained in the pTweding chapter. 


40 


THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE 


erally mean that such objects as we call beautiful are congenial 
to us, f>racdcally or ethically. Too often we pretend to Judge a. 
work of art in the same way;, calling it beautiful if it represents 
some form or activity of whidi we heartily approve, or if it 
attracts us by the tenderness or gaiety of ils colour, the swccE- 
ness of its sounds or the charm of Its tnovcmetiL But when we 
llius pass judgment on tlie dance in accordance wdth our sympa’- 
ibctic attitude towards the dancer's charm or skill, or the mean¬ 
ing of the dance^ we ought not to use the language of pure 
seslhetlc. Only when we judge a work of art aesthetically may 
wc speak of the presence or absence of beauty, we may call the 
work rasavani or otherwise* but when we judge it from the 
standpoint of activity, practical or ethical, we ought to use a 
corresponding terminology, calling the picture, song or actor 
^lovdy,” that h to say lovable, or othcrw ise, the action '"noble,” 
the colour "^hrilliant,” the gesture "graceful,” or othcriivise, and 
so forth. And it wdil be seen that in doing this we are not reahy 
Judging tlie work of art as such, but only the material and the 
separate parts of which it is made, the activities thej' represent, 
or the feelings they express. 

Of course, when we come to choose such wrorks of art to live 
writh, there Is no reason why w e should not allow the sympathetic 
and ethical considerations to influence our judgment Why should 
the ascetic invite auncyance by hanging in his cell some repre¬ 
sentation of the nude, or the general select a lullaby to he per¬ 
formed upon Uie eve of battle? When every ascetic and every 
soldier has become an artist there wdll be no more need for w'orfcs 
of art: in the meatiwhile ethical selection of some kind is allow- 
able and necessary^ But in this selection %ve must clearly under¬ 
stand what we are doing, if we would avoid an infinity of error, 
culminating in that t>'p<s of sentimentality which regards the 
Useful, the stimulating and the moral elements In works of art as 
the essential. ought not to forget that he who plays the 
villain of the piece may be a greater artist than he who plays the 
hero. For beauty—in the profound words of MiIIct“docs not 
arise from the subject of a work of aii^ but from the necessity 
that has been felt of representing that subject. 

We should only speak of a work of art as good or bad with 
reference to its aesthetic quality ; only the subject and the material 
of the work are entangled in relati^'Ity. fn other words, to say 


INDIAN PAINTING. 


PLATE IV 



Ajaiitd Itckq 1 right, Bodhisattva; left, C(»ontttion. Buddhist Painting of 

6th or 7th Centufj*. 










41 


that beauty is a state 

Uiat a work ot art is more or less bcautifu], or rasavant, h to 
define the esieot to ^vJucb it 13 a work of art, rather than a mere 
However important the element of sympathetic 
m such a work may be, however important its practical 
appJjQtions, It IS not m these that its beauty consists. 

to speak of di^s works as beautiful or rasovantf WTiat is this 
sole quahty which the most dissimilar w-orks of art possess in 
common? Let us ret^l the history of a work of ^ i^ 

{ ) an {esthetic intuition on the part of the original artist —the 
^ or creator; then (2) the internal expression^ is mt^tio„! 

bv«tl^lT the indication of this 

the purpose of commimication, 

-the techracal activity; and finally, {4) the resulting siimulatit: ’ 

of SLrannr "P™<l«ction of the original intuition, or 

ot some approKimation to it. 

The source of the original intuition may, as we have s«n be 
any aspect of h fe ivliatsoeven To one creator the scales olTfish 
suggest a rhy^ical design, another is moved by certain land* 

palaces, a fifth may express the idea that all things are enlinfced 

exo.^ thenamoured in terms of the General Efence, or he may 

row^llff* tr* Vividly by saying that “not a spar- 

row falls to the ground without our Father's knowledge." Every 

it when 

testes of the same expencnce through the medium of the external 

be «.d to exist m certain things and not in others. It may then 
be claimed that beauty exists everywhere; and this I do not denv 
Ihon^i I prefer the clearer statement that it may be discovered 
anywhere. If ,t could be said to exist everywhere in a material 
and intrinsic ^nse, we could pursue it with our cameras and 

of ihe experimental psychologists: but 
if w-e did so, we should only achieve a certain acquaintance with 

^w! discover a means of distinguishing 

forms that are beautiful from forms that arc ugly. Beauty can 

never ^us ^ measu^, for it does not exist apart from the artist 
himseff, and the rofiAa who enters into his experience.* 

• Cf. “The iKfet of art lies in the artist tiinseir.^Kao Jo f Pth 
century), quoted m T/te Kokke, JTft, 244. ^ 


that beauty is a state 


A2 

All a.fdaitcctlirc is what you do to Jt wlien you look upofl _ 

Did yoti think it waa m Uit white of grey stone? or the lines at Uie 

artbea and coniiGcs? . i- - . 

music is what gtwakea in you when you arc reminded at il by the 

inslruincnls^ . . , . 

It is not the violins and the camcis » - ^ nor the score ol the hanlcMic 

sinifer 

It is nearer and Inrther than ihey.^ 

WtLcn every sympathetic consideration has been esdoded. how¬ 
ever, there still remains a pragmatic value in the classification 
of works of art as beatitiful or ugly. But what precisely do 
mean by these designations as applied to objects? In the works 
called beautiful we recognize a correspondence of theme and ex¬ 
pression, content and form: while in those called ugly ivc find 
tne content and form at variance. In time and space, however, 
the correspondence never amounts to an identity; it is our own 
activity, in the presence of the work of art, which completes ^e: 
ideal relation, and it is in this sense that beauty is what we "do 
to" a work of art rather than a quality present in the object. 
With reference to the object, then "more*’ or "less’' beautiful 
will imply a greater or less correspondence between content and 
form, and this is all that we can say of the object as such: or 
in other words, art is good that is good of its kind. In the 
stricter sense of completed intemal sesthetic activity, however, 
beauty is absolute and cannot have degrees. 

The vision of beauty is spontaneous, In just the same sense 
as the inward light of the lover It is a state of grace 

that cannot be achieved by deliberate effort; though perhaps «c 
can remove hindrances to its manifestation, for there are many 
witnesses that the secret of all art is to be found in self-forget¬ 
fulness.* Mi we know that this state of grace is not achieved 
in the pursuit of pleasure; the hedonists have their reward, but 
they are in bondage to loveliness, while the artist is free In 

beauty. , * i * 

It is further to be observed that when we speak seriously of 

works of art as beautiful, meaning that they are truly works of 
art, valued as such apart from subject, association, or technical 
charm, we still speak elliptically. We mean that the external 

^ W^lt WTiitmaju 

a E, G, Ridolla C^niido: '*lt b liat ih? secret of ^31 art . - . 

lies in Ibc faculty of sctf-obthiart”—^ ^ Reil^on m Fuiurt}. 


INDIAN ARCHiTECTUftE AND SCULPTURE. 


P[,AT£ V 



Figure a. Temple at Bid amt, Bth Century. 



Figureb. Monkey family. Stone sculpture, Miinallapuram, «tli Century. 












THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE 


43 


signs—poems, pictures, dances, and so forth — arc effective re¬ 
minders. We may say that they possess signlhcant form. But 
this can only mean that they possess that kind of form whidi 
reminds us of beaut^'^, and awakens in tis zsthetic emotion. The 
nearest explanation of significant form should be suck farm as 
cjckithts ihc inner retalions of ihings; or^ after Hsieh Ho, "which 
reve^ds the rhythm of the spirit in the gestures of living things.** 
All such works as possess significant form are linguistic; and, if 
we remember this^ we shall not fall into the error of those who 
advocate the use of language for language's sake^ nor shall we 
confuse the significant forms, or their lo^cal meaning or moral 
value, with the beauty of which they remind us. 

Let us insist, however* that the concept of beauty has ori^nated 
with the philosopher, pot with the artist: he has been ever con¬ 
cerned mth saying dearly what had to be said. In all ages of 
creation the artist has been iu love with his particular subject— 
when it is not so, we see that his work is not ^felt^—he has never 
set out to achieve the Beautiful* in the strict sesthetlc sense, and 
to have this aim is to invite disaster* as one who should seek to 
fiy without w*ingis> 

It 13 not to the artist that one should say the subject Is imma¬ 
terial : that b for the philosopher to say to the pbilistuie who dis¬ 
likes a work of art for no other reason than that he dislikes iL 

The true critic (rariito) perceives the beauty of which the 
artist has exhibited the signs. It is not necessary that the cridc 
should appreciate the artist's meaning—every work of art is a 
k&modkenu, yielding many meanings—for he knows without 
reasoning whether or not the work is beauriful* before the mind 
begins to question what it is "about.*' Hindu writers say that the 
capacity to feel beauty (to taste roso) cannot be acquired by 
study, but is the reward of merit gained in a post life; for many 
good men and would-be historians of art have never perceived 
iL The poet is bom, not made; but so also is the rasika, whose 
genius differs m degree, not in kind* from that of the original 
artist In western phraseology we should express this by saying 
that experience can only be bought by experience; opinions must 
be earned We gain and fed nothing merely when we take it on 
authority that any particular works are beautiful. It is far better 
to be honest, and to admit that perhaps we cannot see thdr 
beaut)'. A day may come when we shall be better prepared 


44 


THAT BEAin^ IS A STATE 


The crilic, as soon as he becomes an exponent, has to prov« 
his ease; and he cannot do this by any process of argument, but 
only by creating a new ^vork of art, the criticism. His audience, 
catching the gleam at second-hand—but still the same gleam, for 
there ts only one—has then the opportunt^ to approach the 
original work a second time, more reverently. 

men I say that works of art are reminders, and the aaivity 
of the critic is one of reproduction, I suggest that the vision of 
even the original artist may be rather a diseoverj' than a creation. 
I £ beauty awaits discovery everywhere, that is to say that it waits 
upon our recoUcctioti (in the Sufi sense and in Wordstvorth’s): 
in sesthetic contemplation as in love and knowledge, we tnoniCT- 
larily recover the unity ol our being released from individuality. 

There are no degrees of beauty; the most complex and the 
simplest expression remind us of one and the same state. The 
sonata cannot be more beautiful than the simplest liTtc, nor the 
painting than the drawing, merely because of their greater elabo¬ 
ration. Civiliaed art is not more beautiful than savage art, merely 
because of its possibly more attractive etkot, A mathematical 
analogy is found if we consider large and small circles; these 
differ only iu their content, not in their circularity. In the same 
im'ay, there cannot be any continuous progress in art. Immediately 
a given intuition has attained to perfectly clear expression, it 
remains only to multiply and repeat this e.'(pr«ssIon. This repe¬ 
tition may be desirable for many reasons, but it almost invariably 
involves a gradual decadence, because we soon begin to take the 
experience for granted- The vitality of a tradition persists only 
so long as it is fed by intensity of imagination. What we m«n, 
by creative art, howe\'cr, has no necessary conncctioa with 
novelty of subject, though that is uoi excluded Creative art Is 
art that reveals beauty where we should have otherwise over¬ 
looked it, or more dearly than we have yet received. Beauty is 
sometimes overlooked just because certain expressions have be¬ 
come what we call ‘‘hackneyed’^; then the creative artist dealing 
with the same subject restores our memory. The artist Is 
challenged to reveal the beauty of all experiences, new and old 
Many have rightly insisted that the beauty of a work of art ia 
independent of its subject, and truly, the humility of art, which 
finds its inspiration evetywhere, is identical with the liutnility 
of Love, which regards alike a dog and a Brahmau—and of 


THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE 


45 


Science, to which the lowest form is as signUicant as the higbesL 
And this is possible, because it ts one and ^e same undivided 
all. "If a beauteous form we view, Tis His reflection shining 
through.” 

It will now be seen in what sense we are justified in speaking 
of Absolute Beauty, and in identifying this beauty with God. 
We do not imply by this tliat God (who b without parts) has a 
lovely form which can be the object of knowledge; but that in 
so far as we see and feel bcau^, we see and arc one with Him. 
That God is the first artist does not mean that He created forms, 
which might not have been lovely had the hand of the potter 
slipped: but that every natural object is an iitunediate realization 
of His being. This creative activity is comparable with aesthetic 
expression in its non-volitional character; no element of diotix 
enters into that world of imagination and eternity, but there is 
always perfect identity of intuition-expression, soul and body. 
The bunian artist who discovers beauty here or there is the 
ideal ffuru of Kabir, who "reveals the Supreme Spirit wherever 
the nsiod attaches ilselL" 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


Th« Early Buddhist view of art Is strictly hedonistic. Just as 
littJc as Early Buddhism dreamed of an expressioii of its char- 
aeteristic ideas through poctiy ^ drama, or music* so little was it 
imagined that the arts of sculpture and painting could be anything 
but worldly in their purpose and effect. The arts were looked 
upon as phj^sical luxuries, and loveliness as a snare* '*Beaut}'^ is 
nothing to me,’^ $ays the Dasa Dhammu Suifa, ^'neither the 
beautj^ of the body nor that that comes of dress/' The Brethren 
^ere forbidden to allow the figures of men and women to be 
painted on monastery walls^ and were permitted only representa¬ 
tions of wreaths and creepers*^ The psychological foundation of 
this attitude is nowhere more clearly revealed than in a passage 
of the Fistiddhi Magga^ where we find that painters, musicians, 
perfumers, cooks^ and elixir-prescribing physicians are all classed 
together as purvey^ors of sensuous luxuries, whom oUiers honour 
"on account of lov^e and devotion to the sensations excited by 
forms and other objects of sense/' This is the dmractcristJC 
hlinayana position throughout, and it is, of course, conspicuous 
also in die Jaitia ^stem, and in certain phases of Brahmanical 
thought, particularly in the period contemporary ^rith early 
Biiddhlsnu 

It is only in the third and second centuries b. c. that we find the 
Buddhists patroniamg craftsmen and emploj-ing art for edifying 
ends. From what has just been said, however, it will be wdl 
Understood that there had not at this time come into being any 
truly Buddhist or Brahmanical idealistic art; and thus ^Early 
Buddist" art was necessarily the popular Bnihinaiiical art and 
animistic art of the day, adapted to Buddliist requirements* The 
only exception to this rule is that special phase of Early Buddhist 
art which is represented by the capital of the Asoka columns, of 
which the forms arc not merely non-Buddhist* but of extra-Indian 
origin*^ 

The Indian tion-Buddhist art that we have evidence of in the ^ige 

^ Cuitinjoff^a, vi* Z 

® Fii&Bfrflr7Pia^ 80, 81. 


13LTDDH1ST PKIMITIVES. 


PLATE V* 




Figure si. Scaled B.jddha^ G:iiidhaTa^ 
cjntun'p A.D. 


Figure b, Dryad, SIncbT, 
and century, B.C, 


Lay worshipped at a Buddha Shrine, Aiuar^vaUp and tentury^ A I>. 













BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


47 


of Asoka and in the period immediatciy following Asoka, is 
chiefly concerned with the cult of nature-spirits—the Earth God¬ 
dess, the Nagas or Serpent kings of the waters, and the Yaksba 
kings who rule the Pour Quartets* The Maury a types arc rep¬ 
resented by the well-known free-standing female figure at Besna- 
gar/ and the Parkham figure* now in the Mathura Museum* 
The early Buddhist art of SandiT and Bharhut, probably' slightly 
later, reflects the prevalence of the animistic cults in placing tow- 
relief figures of the Yaksba, guardians of the Four Quarters, as 
protectors of the entrance gateways.* That the nature-s[Mtits 
should thus act as guardians of Buddhist shrines reflects the 
essential victory of Buddhism, precisely as the story of the Naga 
Muclialinda, who, in the llteraty tradition, shelters the Buddha 
during the week of storms. 

Besides the Guardians of the Quarters we find at Sinchi flgures 
of beautiful Yakshinis or dryads, whose function may be partly 
protective, but is also in large degree honorary and decorative. 
The Yakshim figure here reproduced [Pi-ate VT, b] is topical of 
all that is best in the art of Sinchl; but in what different world 
this happy dryad moves from that of the Pali Suttas, where 
orthodox Buddliism tries to prove that "as the body when dead 
is repulsive, so also is it when alive”! Buddliist monasticism— 
to use the language of Blake—sought consistently to bolt and bar 
the “Western Gates”: but our Sanchl dryad rather seems to say 
"the soul of sweet delight can never be defiled," 

The art of SanchT is essentially pagan, and this appears not 
only in its fearless happiness, untinged by puritan misgiving or 
by mystic intuition, but also in the purely representative and real¬ 
istic technique. It w'as in the main a later MahayEna and Vaish- 
nava achievement of the Indian lyric spirit to discover that the 
two worlds of spiritual purity and sensuous delight need not, and 
perhaps ultimately cannot, be divided. 

In any case the Sinchl art is plainly not an expression of Early 
Buddhist feeling; and so also it is not primitive, but, on the con- 
iraiy, it is the classic achievement of an old popular art already 
long practised in less permanent materials. If there is at this 

3 2 &. ^ 

3 A mudi later eiamptc pf tlic Earoc arranfietncftl is llluilraied xn 
VUvakarm^, 75 . 




4S 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


ttme any BuddliUt art that can be fairly called primitive^ it is 
only to be rccognLEcd In archiiecturep where the simple 
forms of ihe early stupas^ and their nndecorated railings^ and the 
severe design of the early excavated c/mi/yo-hails truly reflect 
the intcllecLual and austere enthusiasm of Early Buddhism. 

Another part of the art of the Bharhut railing and the Slnchl 
gateways b devoted to the illustration of edifying legends^ partic¬ 
ularly stories of the former lives of the Buddha, and of the last 
iacamation. The work is delicately executed m low relief—wer 
know from a contemporary tnscripdon that amongst the crafts¬ 
men who contributed to the decoration of the Sanchi i&rana^ 
were the ''ivory-workers of Bhilsa"—and affords us a remarkable 
record of Indian life, with its characteristic environmentp manners 
and cults set ont with evident realism and a w^ealth of circum- 
stantial detail* But for all their interest these reliefs^ too^ arc 
essentially illastrations of edifying anecdotes^ and only to a 
limited extent“less, for example, than the similar^ hut, of course, 
very much later, illustrations at Borobodur—directly express the 
Early Buddhist view of life and death. 

There is, however, one respect in which that view^ is perfectly 
reflected; in the fact that the figure of the Master himself is 
nowhere representeA Even in the group of episodes which 
illustrate the Great Renunciation—Prince Slddhattha^s departure 
from home, riding upon the back of the horse Kanthaka, and 
attended by the groom Channa—Kanthaka's back is bare, and 
we see only the figures of the Devas who lift up the feel of the 
horse lest men should be roused by the sound of his hoofs, while 
the presence of the Prince is only indicated by the parasol of 
domirLion home beside the horse. In other compositions the 
Buddha is represented by symbols such as Ihe Wsdom Tree or 
the conventionally represented footprints, the '"'Feet of the Lord'* 
[ Plate VI, c]. It will be realized at once that the absence of tli« 
Buddha figure from the \vorId of living men—where, hov/ever, 
tlierc yet remain the traces of his ministry, literally footprints 
on the sands of time—is a true artistic rendering of the Master'^s 
guarded silence respecting the after-death state of those who have 
attained Nirvana: "the Perfect One is released from this, that 
his being should be gauged by the measure of the corporeal 
world/^ he is released from ^'"name and form/' In the omission 
of the figure of the Buddha, the Early Buddhist art is truly Budd- 


ni I>r>Hl?iT PRIMITIVES, 


Pl.\TE VM 



Buddha in Satnidhi. Stone sculpture. Ceylon, jnd eciitury. A,X>. 







BUDDH J ST PR IM i TIV ES 


49 


dhist: for the restj it is an art about BtiddhUin, i*ather than Bud¬ 
dhist art 

Changes were meanwhile proceeding in the material of Bud¬ 
dhist belief. This belief is no longer mcreJy intdlectual, but has 
undergone an ecnotioiial devdopment akin to that which finds 
expression in the bhukti doctrine of the Bhagavad Gud* 

Even th^' that be bom of evto womecc traffickers, and 5>erf^ 
ii they turn to Me* come to the Stfpreme Path: be assured, O aon 
of Kiifiti, ihjLt none who is devoted to Me Is Iqsl 

Similarly we find* even in so early a text as the Mnjjhhna 
Nikdya that those who have not yet even entered the Paths^ ''are 
sure of heaven if they have love and faith towards Me/' Gradu¬ 
ally the idea of Buddhnhood replaces that of Arahatta: tJie orig- 
' inal agnosticism is ignored* and the Buddha is endowed with all 
the qualities of transcendental godhead as well as with the physical 
peculiarities or perfections of the Supermaii (ma/id-^wriijAa). 
The Buddha thus conceived, together with the Bodhisattvas or 
Buddhas-to-bc* presently engaged in ilie active work of salvation^ 
became the object of a cult and w^as regarded as approachable 
by worship. In all this wre see not merely an internal develop¬ 
ment of metaphysics and theology * but also the influence of the 
lay community : for a majority of men, and still more the majority 
of w'omen, have always been more ready to worship than to know. 

At Amaravati wc still find that the Buddha is represented by 
symbols, but it may be dearly seen froin the passionate devotion 
of those "who worship at the symboI-shrines^—and many of these 
are women, as in the case of the fragment here reproduced m 
Plate VT. c— that the One adored must have been conceived in 
others terms than those of a purely intdlcctual psychological 
analysis. Even before the Buddha figure b represented in official 
Buddhist art, the Buddha had become an object of adoration, a 
v^ry personal god: and it cannot surprise tis that the Master's 
figure should soon appear w^herever Buddhist piety erected shrinesi 
and monuments. We know that images of Hindu gods were 
already in use in the second century, b. c, and it is highly probable 
that Buddha figures were in similar private use long before they 
took their place in a public culi^ 

Before, however* we speak of the Buddha images, we must 
refer to a second phase of religious experimce, which plays a 


£0 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


great part aliko in the dev^^Iopnieut of Buddhism and Hinduism. 
This is the practice of Yoga^ whereby cnlighteniricnt and eniincl- 
pation arc sought to be attained by meditation calculated to 
release the individual from empirical consciousnessp Even in the 
earliest Buddiiist praxis it would be dlffictik to exaggerate the part 
which these contemplative exercises play in the spiritual history 
of the Brethrenp and to a lesser extent of laymen, for while the 
most abstract meditations lead to the attainment of Nirvana and 
the station of '"No-rcturn/* the leaser no less certainly led to 
rebirth in ilic higher heavens. It is just for purposes of medita¬ 
tion that lonely places and roots of trees are so highly praised in 
the Buddhist literature, and of this the classic example is that or 
the Btiddha himself, who reached the final enlightenment while 
seated in yogi-fashion at the foot of the ’Wisdom-tree. The 
essence of the method lies in the concentration of thought upon 
a single point, carried so far that the duality of subject and 
object is resolved into a perfect unit)*—^'^wlien,” in the words of 
Schellingp "the perceiving self tnerges In the sclf-pereeivcd. At 
that moment we annihilate time and the duration of time; \vc arc 
no longer in time, hut time, or rather eternity itself* is in us/' A 
very beautiful description of the yogi is given as follows in the 
Shagavad and as quoted here in a condensed form applies 
almost equally to Buddhist and Erahmanical practice, for the 
yoga is a pra.xis rather than a form of sectarian belief:— 

Abiding alone in a stem place, without cmvtng and withonl 
s<issioii 3 , he sJisJl lake bis seat upon n firm seat, neither over-high 
nor Dvtf-lovv, and with ibe working of the mind and ol the dentes 
held in diedc* with body, bead and neck maiiilaincd in perfect eqid- 
poise;! looking not round about him, so let him meditate, and thereby 
reach the jieace of the Ab^-ss: and the likeness of erne such, VkHo 
I mows the boundless joy ihut lies bejond the petts^ and I, 
by intuition, and who swen^ not from the truths iv that of a bmp 
in a wiudlesi place that docs not flicker. 

Long before the Etiddha image became a cult object, the 
familiar form of the seated yogi must have presented itself to 
ihc Indian mind in inseparable association with the idea of a 
mental dtsdplinc and of the attainment of the highest station of 


^Ekegavad CW4L vi. 10-21—tsndltins ths thdstic ckmerlf. 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES, 


rL,\TE VIII 



SUtiding Bodhisattva, Stone sculpture, Ceylon, Jnj century, A,t>. 







BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


51 


self-oblivion; and when ihe development of imagery foUov.id 
tliere was no other form which could have been made a uni¬ 
versally recognized symbol of Him-who-had-thus-attained. 

This figure of the seated Buddha-ynogi, with a far deeper 
content, is as purely monumental art as that of the Egyptian 
pyramids; and since it represents the grpiest ideal which Indian 
sculpture ever attempted to eicpress, it b ivcll tliat we find pre- 
ser%’ed e\’«i a few magnificent examples of comparatively early 
date Amongst these the colossal figure at Anuradfaapura b 
almost certainly the best IPutiE VIll. The same andent Bud¬ 
dhist site a^ords examples of a BodWsattva, here repr^uced on 
PLAtB \TlIj and of two standing Buddhas, illustrated in Plates 
IX and X, whae nearly related to these arc the standing 
figures of Buddhas lately excavated at Amaravati, reproduced 
on Plate XL To all these works we may fairly assign the 
honoured name of primitives, since their massive forms 
and austere outline are immediately determined by ^the moral 
grandeur of the thesis and the suppressed emotion of its realiaa- 
tion, without any intrusion of individuality ot parade of skilL 
The fulness of the modelling expresses a high degree of vitality, 
but does not yet show the conscious elegance and suavity of 

Gupta types. , . 

We are not in position to precisely date these Buddhist pnmi- 
tives of Anuradhapura and AmaravatT, but they may not be 
earlier tlian the first or second ccotufy A. d* and can hardly be 
later than the third or fourth. In describing these works as 
primitive, it is not, of course, su^sied that they arc the earliest 
or nearly the earliest of Buddha figures extant, nor that all ot 
them are absolutely free from any clement of western formulation, 
but merely that in them the primitive inspiration is better pre¬ 
served than anywhere else. I have already suggested that the 
figures of the seated Buddha, if not the standing ty^. probably 
rame into use as cult objects a good deal earlier, perhaps in the 
second century B. c; and if these were generally made in wood 
or other impermanent materials, iliis would be tn accord w-ith ail 
that we know of the general development of IndiM plastic art 
and architecture. In any case, as M. Foudier points out/ the 

• Foochef (A.>, L'OnVtcW grecque de flmagr da Eouddha, Paris, 1913* 
I». 31. 


?."032 





3 ^ 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


C{:knv«ntioiiaL character of the Buddha fi^re of the Kanishka 
reliquar)' 

denote mt art deja stereotype, ct . . . 3;uilit pour reporter d'au 
moiiii rent ans cn amire et falre par suite remonter ati si^le 
noire b ci^iion du type plasllqiic du BieoheuretuL 

The same may be said of the Bodhisattvas. Indra and Brahma 
were perhaps the types from which the sculptural representations 
of Avalokstcsvara. and Maitreya were evolved, and Mr. Spooner 
has recorded his view that this evolution "was an accomplished 
fact prior to any form of the Gandhara school with which we are 
yet familiar/^ pointing out here too that ''the forms of both are 
-Stereotyped” already in the earliest examples from Gandhara.^ 
We have so far left out of accotinl the abundant and well- 
Icnotvn Grseco-Buddhist art of Gandhara^ dating from the IsE to 
the 4 th century A- D.* as well as the school of Mathura, which in 
part derives from the older art of Sanchi and Bharhut, and is 
partly dependent upon Gandhara. This omission is not* as M, 
Foucher \vould suggest* ^^par engouement d'estheticien ou ran- 
cune de nationaliste/*^ but because w'c arc here concerned to 
discover the sources of inspiration of Buddhist imagery and to 
learn how this inspiration was first and most fully expressed 
That many western formula %vere absorbed into Indian art 
through Gandhara does not touch the question of feeling; wc 
Tiitsst avoid the common error of confusing "Formensprache^* 
with ^'Getst.''' It is even easy to exaggerate the importance of the 
westem formul®^ as such, for whatever else in Buddhist art is 
borro\ved^ the cro$s-Iegged figure seated upon a lotus throne is 
entirely Indian in form as well as in idea; and besides this seated 
figure^ the standing Btiddha and the images of all the Buddhist 
gods are but of secondary importance- 

For several reasons^ it ^ms probable that tlie aciua! Gand- 
hara sculptures are mainly the wrork of ivestern craftsmen em¬ 
ployed by the Gandhara kings to interprei Buddhiiit ideas, rather 
than Indian workmen under western guidance; and if some of 
the workmen w^ere Indian by birth, they nevertheless did not give 
expression to Indian feelbg. We have die parallel modem 

^ Spooner* D. B, Archacofogjcal Siirvfj- of India, Ann Rep., 1507-4 

(mn*p. m 

* Foticher (A.), he. eit^ p. 4L 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


PLdVTE IX 









standing BUDDHA. 

Stone sculpture, Ceylon, snd century, AD, 





















pirate X 


BL'DDHtST PRIMITIVES, 


Standing Buddba. Stone sculpture, Ceylon, jtiJ century, A,D 





BUDDHIST FltlMrnVES 


5S 


example of the bte Raja Ravi Varma. who, despStc the m^io^y 
Indian subject matter of bb paintings, entirely fails to reflect the 

K!iidi3A spirit- 

The nianner in which the western fonnuhe have been grad^ly 
Indianizcd, alike in the northwest and in the school of 
and thus, as Professor Oskar Muosterberg remarks, first dt^ 
veloped under national and Buddhist inspiration into a new and 
cenuine art "* has been studied in considerable detail by many 
scholars; but wfiat b equally or more significant for our enquiry 
b the manner in whidi certain Indian forniute and Indian ideas 
are misrepresented at Gandhara, for misrepresentation iiecessanly 
implies the prc-existcnce of a type to be misinterpreted- The 
plainest case b afforded by the Buddha figure seated on a lotus 
throne” (ptjdm6sam), !n Gandhara sculpture the seated figure 
is uncomfortably and unstably balanced on a lotus flower that li 
far too snd with its pointed petals^ like an artichoke* 

gests a seat of penance rather than of ease (Platb VI, a). e 
true sense of the padmOsana b, of course, to indicate spmtu^ 
purity or divinity, and the symbol is only appropriately combmrf 
u-ith that of the seated yogi, when this function is fulfilled with¬ 
out detracting from the one essential quality of repose. It is 
specially emphasized in yoga texts that the seat of the yo^ 
is to be firm and easy, ^'sthira-sukha" and where tWs conditioii is 
overlooked, it b impossible to recognize an immediate expression 
of the original thesis. 

The foregoing ailment supports the view already men¬ 
tioned, that die seated Buddha image in the age of 
Kanbhka was sthiatypH’ It takes us, however, 

somewhat further, for in connection with the far stren^r, 
though to arciwologists less convincing, atsthetic evidenM, 
it shDwa plainly that Gandhara sculpture is not pnmilive 
Buddhist art. When, then, are we to look for the proto¬ 
type of the seated figure thus "d^Ji st^r^otype?" Can we 
postulate a Roman yogi, seated on a lotus throne, and with hands 
in the dhyani rtudrS, to set beside the Lateran Sophocles of 
v'bich the influence is erident in standing images? The sug¬ 
gestion is sufficiemly absurd to need no refutation. The seated 

* A cbaraclerisiie ezampte may be studied in Vinceni Suudi. History 

cf Fint Art iJi Itidia Plate 

* (O-}* hunsiffit^hKhlc, p. 117* n- 




54 


BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


Buddha, as we have already suggested on d ^rtoW grounds, can 
only be of Indian origin; and this being so, it will be seen how 
great an cjtaggeration is involved in speaking of the Greelc 
Origin of the Image of Buddha." 

It has been sufFicicnt for our purpose to e^tplaiti in what senses 
Gandhara sculpture cannot be regarded as primitive and autoch¬ 
thonous Buddhist art; it has not been necessary to eraphasiac ajso 
how little the smug and complacent features of the Gandham 
Buddhas and Bodhisattv-as, and their listless and effeminitc ges¬ 
tures, reflect the intellectual vigour or the devotional passion o£ 
Buddhist thought. For the benefit of M. Foucher. howev^, and 
of other scholars who may suppose, with him, that Mr. Havel 1, 
Professor Munsterberg, and I, have cared more for Indian art 
than for art, I may point out that our estimate of Gandhara 
sculpture as of small iesthetic significance must not be taken ^ 
evidence of anr prejudice against the art of Europe; it swnply 
indicates concurrence in the view that "in the long sands imd flats 
of Roman realism the stream of Greek inspiration is lost for 
ever/' T* admire Gandhara art^ as art, b not a complimmt to 
the weatness of the Greeks, but only shows how far t^t great- . 
ness has been misunderstood. If it is possible for a Ewopean ^ 
critic to write of the mosaics of the Galla Plaadia at Ravenna..^ 
that they are "still coarsely classical," and that "there is a nasi^ ‘ 
woolly realism about the sheep, and about tbe good , 

than a suspicion of the stodgy^ Gneco-Romao po o, ^ . 
surely we may critieije the sculptures of ^ndham m the same 
terms without incurring charges of bad faith. 

To resume i Earlv Buddhist art is popular, sensuous and am- 
mistic Indian art adapted to the purpose of the lUustration of 
Buddhist anecdote and the decoration of Buddhist monuments. 
Gandham art is mixed, and misinterpreted equally both eastern 
and western formula, which must be older *an itself, ‘J 

net Buddhist in expression; the 
Buddhist art properly so-called are probably lost. 

Indi, the .ble. of prl».Lv« » P=rtfy .P b. '>r 

fact to 

direct creation, but in a ap _£ ^ Ceylon the same energy 

spiritual ends. In soulhem India and ey 


-/ 


^BeU (Clive), 4ri,p. 12^ 



BLTIDHIST PRIMITIVES. 


PIATE XI 









BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES 


5S 


.hough the Am...uvaU «.ag™8«»' 

«..S'wrt, .W .t B.<idh«. prW8v=. 


I 


— ■ J TnMft la also “pridtiliTft" in «i«e 
1 Early art i^Euwpc preserved Us piimi* 

^thetic sense, preosely « because "some new rw* «as 

ave inspiralioii for ^ ^ n and feelins and ceprtsaing U Vfilb prumlivc 
always eaicWng the uispitation and ieeMS 

MosibilUy and passioit" 




m 


THE DANCE OF SIVA 

^*The Lord of TiHai^s Court a mj'stic dance performs; 
what's that* my dear?""—XU, 

Amongst the greatest of the names of Siva is Natarija, Lord 
of Dancers, or I^g of Actors. The cosmos is His theatre, there ' 
are many different steps in Hia repertory. He Himself is actor 
and audience— 

Wlien the Actor beateth the drum, 

Eveiy'body cometh to see the show; 

Wlien the Actor coJketeth the stage properties 

He abideth alone in His happiness. 

How many variotis dances of Siva are Imoi™ to His worship¬ 
pers I cannot saji^ No doubt the root idea behind aU of these 
dances is more ot less one and the same^ the manifestation of 
primal rhythmic energy. Siva is the Eros Frotogonos of Lucian* 
when he wrote: 

'"It would seem that dancing came into being at die beginnings 
of alt things, and was brought to light together with Eros^ that 
ancient one, for ivc see this primeval dancing dearly set forth in 
the choral dance of the constellations, and in the planets and 
fixed stars* their interweaving and interchange and orderly har¬ 
mony." 

I do not mean to say that the most profound interpretation of 
Siva's dance was present in the minds of those who first danced 
in frantic, and perhaps intoxicated energjv in Honour of the pre- 
Ary^an hill-god, afterwards merged in Siva, A great motif tn 
religion or art, any great symbol becomes all things to all menj 
age after age it yields to men such treasure as they find in iheir 
own,hearts. Whatever the origins of Siva's danccj, it became 
in time the clearest image of the a^riivUy of God w^hich any art 
or religion can tx>ast oL Of the various dances of Siva I shall 
only speak of three, one of them alone forming the main subject 
of interpretation. The first is an evening dance in the Hima- 
la>-as, with a divine chorus, described as follows in the 
Pradosha SMra: 



THE DANCE OF SIVA 


S7 


^'Placing the Mother of the Three Worlds tjpou a golden thronei 
studded with precious gems^ Sulap^i dances on the heights of 
Kailasa, and ali the gods gather round Him: 

^'SarasvatJ plays on the Indra on the Hute^ Erahmi holds 
the time-marking Tcymhab^ Lakshmf begins a song^ Vishnu plays 
on a drum^ and ail the gods stand round about i 

"Gandhan^^ YaJishaSp Patagas^ UragaSp Siddhasi Sadhyas^ 
Vidyadharas^ Amajasp Apsarasesj and all the bcLngs dwelling 
in the three worlds assemble there to witness the celestial dance 
and hear the music of the divine choir at the hour of twiJight,^^ 

This evening dance b also referred to in the invocation preced* 
ing the Kaths 5an'f S^ora. 

In the pictures of this dance^ Siva is two-handed^ and the co~ 
operaiion oi the eods is clearly indicated in thetr position of 
chorus. There is no prostrate Asura trampled ttn-jer diva's feet 
So far as 1 knov,\ no special interpretations of this dance occur 
in Saiv^a literature. 

The second well known dance of Siva is called the T^tndava^ 
and belongs to Hia aspect as Bhairava or Vira-bhadra« 

It is performed iry^cemeteries and burning grounds, vvhere Siva* 
usually in teii’^amiRd fomip dances wildly with Devf, accompanied 
by troops of cafrring imps. Representations of this dance are 
common among^ ancient sculptures^ as at ElQra^ Elephanta^ 
and also Bhuv:peivara. The fd^datt^a dance is m ori^n that 
of a pre-Ar}'an diviJiity, half-god, half-Jemon, who holds his 
midnight revels in die buming ground. In later times, this dance 
in the cronation ground, sometimes of Siva, sometimes of Devj^ 
is interpreted t]i Saiva and Sakta literature in a most touching 
and profound s ense. 

Thirdly, we h^vc the Nadinta dance of Nataraja before die 
assembb-^ (sabhd) in Uie golden hall of Qiidambarani or Tilbl* 
tlie centre of the Universe, first revealed to gods and rishis after 
the submission of the latter in the forest of Taragam, as related 
in the Koyil Purdijam. The legend, which has after all, no very 
dose connection with the real meaning of the dance* may be 
summarised as follows: * ^ 

In the forest of Taragam dwelt multitudes of heretical rishis, 
following of the MfmSmsa, Thither proceeded Siva to confute 
them, accompanied by Vishnu disguised as a beautiful woman, 
and Ati-Sesham The rishis w^ere at first led to violent dispute 





Tim DANCE OF SIVA 


moagst tiictasdvw, but their anger was soon directed against 
&vya, and fEq? endeaTOured to destroy Him by means of inSnta- 
tions. A fierce tiger was created in sacrificial fires, and rushed 
«IK)o Hmy but smijmff gently. He seized it and, witlt the nail of 
His little fin^r, stnped off its skin, and wrapped it about Him¬ 
self like a silkm doth," Undjscouraged by failure, the sages 
renewed their offerings, and produced a monstrous sement, which 
however, ^va seized smd wreathed about His neck like a gar¬ 
land- Then He began to dance; but there rushed upon Him a 
last monster m the shape of a malignant dwarf, Muvalaka. Upon 
him the pressed the tip of His foot, and broke'the creature's 
back, so tfet It writhed upon the ground; and so. His last foe 
prorate, Sira resumed tlie dance, witnessed by gods and rishis 

TTku Ad Seshan worshipped Siva, and prayed above all things 
for the boon, once more to behold this mystic dance; Siva prom¬ 
ised that he should behold the dance again in sacred Tillai, the 
centre of the Unlver$e« , 

This dance of Swa In Chidambaram or Tillai forms the motif 
of tl^ South Indian copper images of Sri Nataraja, the Lord of 
the Dance. These images vary amongst themselves in minor 
details, but all express one fundamental concebtiou. Before priv 
ceeding to enquire what tliese may be, it wifl be necessary to 
describe the image of gri Nataraja as topically represented. The 
ima^s then, represent .^iva dancing, having four hands, with 
braided and jewelled hair of which the lower locks are whidinf 
in ^e dance. In His hair may be seen a ivrelithing cobr^ a 
skull, and the mermaid figure of Ganga; upon it r ^sts the crescent 
moon, and it is crowned mth a ivrcalb of Cassia leaves. In His 
right ear He wears a man's carring, a woman's in the left; He is 
adorned with necklaces and armlets, a jcwellei 1 belt, anklets, 
bracelets, finger and toe-rings. The chief par of His dress 
consists of tightly fitting breeches, and He wears ilso a fluttering 
scarf and a sacred thread. One right hand bol Is a drum, the 
other IS uplifted in the sign of do not fear; onePeft liand holds 
fire, the other points down upon the demon Mumlaka, a divarf 
holding a cobra; the left foot is raised. There is a lotus pedestal, 
from which springs an encircling glory (Hnit-aji), fringed with 
flame* and touched within by the hands holding drum and fire. 

^ elscwliefe related about ar elephajitj: and thefc 
account for the chphant or tiger sldio, which Siva wcftti 



THE DAKCE OF SIVA 


59 




l 


The images are of all siies, rarctj* if ever exceeding four feet in 
I- total height* 

X Even without reliance I3p<m literary references, the interpreta¬ 
tion of this dance would not be difficult Fortunately, hosvever, 
,nve have the assistance of a copious contemporary literature, which 
enables us to folly explain not only the general signifi^M of the 
^ ^ dance, hut equally, the details of its concrete symbolism. Some 
of the peculiarities of the Nataiaja images, of course, belong to 
' the conception of Siva generally, and not to the dance jn particu¬ 
lar, Such arc the braided locks, as of a yc^: the Cassia garland: 

( the skull of Bralima i the figure of Ganga, (the Ganges fallen from 
heaven and lost in diva's hair) : the cobras; the different eomogs, 
betokening the dual nature of hfahadev, 'whose half is Uma’; Md 
* the four arms. The drum also is a general attribute of Siva, 
■ belonging to his character of Yogi, though in the <^nce, it has 
' further a special signlficmce. What then is the meaning of ^ iva s 
Nad^ta dance, as understood by Saivas? Its essential signifi¬ 


cance is given In texts such as the following; 

"Our Lord is tic IDanccr, who. like tire heat latent in firewood, 
f diffuses His power in mind and matter, and makes tliem dance 
in their turn,"* 

The dance, in fact, represenU His five activites (Poficairitya), 
i via; Srishti (overlooking, creation, evolution), Sthiit (preserva- 
Ition, support), Samhara (destruction, evolution), Tirobkava 
1 (veiling, embodiment, illusion, and also, giving rest), Aituffrafta 
! (release, salvation, grace) ■ TTiese, separately considered, are the 
I activities of the deities Brahma, Vishnu. Rudra, hlahesvara and 

Sadasiva. _ . r* 

I This cosmic activity is the central motif of the dance. Fiirtner 

quotations will illustrate and explain tlie more detailed siiabol- 
I isms. Untnai Vihkkam, verse 36 , tells us; 

I "Creation arises from the drum: protection proceeds from the 
Ihaod of hope: from fire proceeds destruction; the foot hdd aloft 

iRadaviil MinwHilvar's TiniedfjHurJr PurJrtojn, Puttaraiyaill. Venra- 
[ anikkam, staiua 75, iTanslaled liy Wallasvaini Tillal, StfoinAHaboikam, 
74. This conld also be rendered: 

Like heat latent in firewood, he fills all bodies: 

Our Father dances, tnovirg all wuts tnlo action, know yel 
Compare Eddiart, "Just w the lire infuses the essence and ckafuesi 
' into the dry wood, so has God done wiih iTtaiL“ 


THE DANCE OF MV A 


Go 

gives release/* It vill be observed that the fotttth hand points 
to this lifted footj the refuge of the soul. 

We have also the following from CAfiuin Mummetni Kotm:^ 
“O jnjr Lord, Thy hand holding the sacred drum has tnade and 
ordered the heavens and earth and other worlds and innumerable 
souls. Thy lifted hand protects both the conscious and tinoon- 
scious order of thy creation. AH these worlds are transformed 
by Thy hand bearing Ere* Thy sacred foot, planted on the 
ground^ gives an abode to the tired soul struggling in the toils 
of causality. It is Thy lifted foot that grants eternal bliss to 
those that approach Thee* These Five-*'VcEons are indeed Thy 
Handiwork-** 

The following verses from the TirukQttii Dstrsfiiina (Vision of 
the Sacred Dance), formitsg the ninth tantra of TirumillarV 
Tirnmanitam^ expand the central motif furllicr: 

**His form is evcQ'where; all-pen-ading in His ^iva-Sakti: 
Chidambaram is cvcr^Tivhere, everywhere His dance: 

As Siva is all and omnipresent, 

Everyiiihere Is Siva^s gracious dance made manifesL 
His Eve-fold dances are temporal and limdcss* 

His fi^'c^fold dances are HU Five Actiii’ties* 

By His grace He performs the Eve acts. 

This is the sacred dance of Uma^Sahaya* 

He dances with Water, FirCp Wind and Ether, 

Thus our Lord dances ever in the court. 

Visible to those who pass over hlaya and Mahimiyi (lUusion 
and super-illtision) 

Our Lord dances His eternal dance. 

The form of the Safcti is all defight— 

This united delight is UmS's body: 

This form of Sakti arising in time 
And uniting the tu'ain is the dance"* 

His body is Ak^, the dark cloud therein is Mujralafca* 

The eight quarters are His eight arms. 

The three lights are His three ejnes. 

Thus becoming. He dances in our body as the congregation/^ 
This is His dance. Its deepest significance is felt when it is 
realised that it takes place within the heart and the self. Every- 
wllerc is God: that Everywhere h the heart. Thus also we find 
another verse t 


rim DANCE OF SIVA 


6i 


'*Thc dancing foqt, ihe of ihe linkling bdb^ 

The songs iliat are stmg nnd the vafying step^, 

The form rtssumed by our Dancing Gunipora— 

Fmd oul these wiihia jTjorself, then shall yoitr fetters faH away." 

JTo thb end, alt else but die thought o! God must be cast out of 
the heartp that lie atone may abide and dance tbereiit In 
{/nfftoi Vilakkatn^ we fiiidi 

*"The silent sages destroying the threefold bond are established 
where their selves are destroyed. There they behold the sacred 
and are Gltcd vyith bUss. This is the dance of the Lord of the 
assembtyi "wtiose very form h Grace*/' 

With this reference to the ''silent sages' compare the beautifu] 
words of TimmCilari 

"WTien resting Lbere they (the yogis who aUaiit the highest 
place of peace) lose themselves and Wcome idJe^ - . . Wliere the 
idlers dwell h the pare Space. Where the idlers sport is the 
Light, What the idlers know is VcdSnia. Wliat the idlers find 
is the deep sleep therein,** 

Siva IS a destroyer and loires the baming ground. But what 
docs lie destroy? Koi merely the heavens and earth at the close 
of a w'orId-cycle, but the fetters that bind each separate sou!/ 
WTiere and what is ihe burning ground ? It is not the place where 
our earthly bodies are cremated p but the hearts of His lovers, laid 
w^ste and desobte. The place w^hert the ego is destroyed sig* 
nifies the state where iUuslon and deeds are burnt awayi that is 
the crematorium* the btiruLng-grcund wliere Sri NatarSja dances, 
and whence He is named Sudalaiyidii Dancer of the burning- 
ground. In this simile* we recogniae the histotical connection 
between Siva*s gracious dance as Natarajai and His wild dance 
as the demon of the cemetety. 

This conception of the dance b current also amongst .^Uktas, 
especially in Bengal, w^here the Mother rather than the Father* 
aspect of Siva b adored, K3II is here the dancer, for whose 

^ Cf- Hared SchwoK Lt LrtTc dr 

“This Is the twiqng : Destroy, desiroyi dfairey. Destroy wldua ttmr- 
sdr, destroy all arotmd you. Make rooni for jioiiT tool and for oiher 
soolx Destroy, because alt ciraiion proewds from destroctiofl , , . . 
For an bidldtng up Li tlciae w^iih dchtb. tuid notlunff in the world is new 
Imt ihapcs. But the shapes miut lie perpetually destroyed , , * Bre^ 
e^ery rop from which you drmk." 


THE DANCE OF SIVA 


(iZ 


cntt'^mcc Uit lieiirE mu^t be punflcti Ly fire, made empty by rcmin- 
ciatioti, A Bengali Hynm to Kali voices liiLs prayer: 

'■Eccatise Thou lovest the Burniog-ground, 

1 have made a Btirning-ground of my heart— 

That Thou, Bark One, haunter of the Burtiiug-ground* 
Mayest dance Thy eternal dance. 

Nought else is within my heart, O Mother: 

Day and night blazes the funeral pyre; 

The ashes of the dead, strewn all about, 

I have preseived against Thy coming, 

Wth death-conquering Mahakala ncalh Thy feet 
Do Thou enter in, dancing Thy rhythmic dance. 

That I may behold Tliee with closed ej'ea.*' 

Returning to the South, we fmd that in otlier Tamil tests the 
purpose of Six-a's dance is explained. In &k'ajMn& SiddU\y&t, 
Supalcsha, Sutra V, 5, we £ad, 

'Tor the purpose of securing both kinds of fruit to the count¬ 
less souls, our Lord, n-ith actions five, dances His dance.Botli 
kinds of fruit, that is lham, reward m this world, and Pamm, bliss 
in Mukti. 

Again, Uamai Vilakkantf v. 32,35^, 39 inform ns 

"The Supreme Intelligence dances in the soul . , , for tlie 
purpose of removing our sins. By these means, our Father 
scatters the darkness of iUusion bums the thread of 

causality (karwio), stamps do™ evil (mala, H^ava. avidyd), 
showers Grace, and lovingly plunges tlie soul in tlic ocean of' 
Bliss (diiundu). Tliey tiCA-er see rebirths, who behold this 
mystic dance," 

The conception of the world process as the Lord's pastime or 
amusement (tita) is also pnonunout in the Satva scriptures. Thus 
Tinmular writes, “The perpetual dance b His play." TJtis spon¬ 
taneity of Sira's dance is so dearly e.xpresscd in Skq'abin’s Poem 
of Ecstasy that the extracts follow'ing will serve to explain it 
better than any more formal exposition—\di3t Skr^wbin wrote 
is precisdy what the Hindu imager moulded; 

“The Spirit (^urirrAo) playing, 

The Sjarit longing, 

The Spirit with fancy (yo^a-wJyJ) creating all, 

Surrenders himself to the bliss (tfKowrfp) of love , , . 


THE DANCE OF SIVA 

Amid the flowers o£ His creation (prakriti)^ He lingers in a. 
kiss. ^ ^ . 

Blinded by their beauty^ He rushes. He frolics. He danceSp 
He whirls. . - . 

He is nil rapture, all bliss, tn this play {fl/n) 

Free^ divine, in this love struggle. 

In the marvellous grandeur of sheer aimlessness. 

And m the union of counter-aspirations 
In consciousness atone^ in love alone. 

The Spirit leoms the nature (jt^oA/iara) of His divine 
being, , * . 

' O* my worldj my life, my blossoming, my ecstasy 1 

Your every' moment I create 

By negation of all forms previously lived through : 

I am eternal negation (urh', iirfi). . . / 

Enjo^'mg this dance^ choking in tliis whirlwind. 

Into the domain of ecstasvj He takes swift flight. 

In this tmceasing change whyo t/nil's), in this 

flightp aimless, divine 
The Spirit comprehends Himself, 

In the power of mlk atone, free, 

Ever-creating, all-irradiating, all-vivifying, 

Divinely playing in tlie multiplicity of forms, He compre¬ 
hends Himsdf* * 1 ^ * 

^ I already dwell in thee, O* my world. 

Thy dream of me;—’twas I coming into existence. . * , 

And thou art all—one wave of freedom and bliss^ , ^ / 
By a general conflagration (wioAtf-^rn/ffya) the universe 
{samsSra) is embraced 

The Spirit is at the height of beingp and He feds the tide 
unending 

Of the divine power (Sakti) of free will He is all-daring: 
Wliat menaced, now is excitement^ 

WTiat terrified^ is now defight. * ♦ » 

And the univer^ resounds Vs'itli the joyful cry 1 
This aspect of Siva*s immanence appears to have given rise to 
the objection that he dances as do tliose who seek to please the 
eyes of mortals; but it is answered that in fact He dances to 

^ From the tranilstlon hj' LydiaL H PimenofF mTltll^died in the 

Boii&n Symphony Onhtitra l^roffromrnr^ October 1^17* 



(m 


THE DANCE OF SIVA 


maintain the life of the cosmos and to give release to those who 
seek Him. Moreover* if we understand even the dances of 
human dancers rightly* we shall see that they too lead to free¬ 
dom^ But it is nearer the truth to answer that the reason of 
His dance lies in His own nature* all his gestures are ouTi-nature* 
bom {sz'abMvQ~jali)f spontaneousp and purposeless—-for His be¬ 
ing is beyond the realm of purposes^ 

In a much more arbitrary way the dance of Siva is identified 
With the Panc&kshiira, or five sjdlables of the prayer Si-va-ya-na- 
im* 'Hail to Siva*' In we are told: *"If this 

beautiful Five-Letters be ineditated upon, the soul will reach the 
land where there is neither light nor darkness^ and there Sakti 
w ill make it One with Sivam.'"^ 

Another verse o£ Ui^mai Vitakkem explains the fiery arch 
(/iVwTJjj); The Fafichakshara and the Dance are identified tviiJi 
the mystic syllable *Om/ the arch being the kombtt or hook of 
the ideograph of the written symboh ^The ardi over Srt Nata- 
raja is Ontkara; and the akshara which is never separate from 
the Omkara is the contained splendour. This is the Dance 
of the Lord of Chidambaram*” 

The Tiru-Arul-Faymi however {Ch. ix. 3 ) explains the firuv^ 
more naturally as representing the dance of Nature^ contrasted 
with Siva^s dance of wisdom. 

"The dance of nature proceeds on one side: the dance of en¬ 
lightenment on the other* Fix your mind in the centre of the 
latter/' 

I am indebted to Mr. Kallasv^i Pillai for a commentary on 
this: 

The first dance is the action of matter—materral and individual 
energ)*. This is the arch^ tiruvdsi, Omkara* the dance of KalL 
The other is the Dance of Siva—the akshara inseparable from 
the Omkara—called ardhamdtra or the fourth letter of the Pra- 
Mva—Chaturtam and Tuiiyam* The first dance is not possible 
unless Siva wills it and dances Himself* 

The general result of this interpretation of the arch is* then* 
that it represents matter, nature* Prakriti; the contained splen¬ 
dour* Siva dancing within and touching the arch tvith head* 
hands and feet* is the universal omnipresent Spirit (Pifrwjjto), 

*Sce NandikeivarA, Tht Wrrrr cf Cfsiuri^ translated by Ccoteira- 
swaoiy and Duggimta, p. II. 


THE DANCE OF SIVA 65 

Bctwcai these stands the individuat soul» as ya 1 $ between Si~^'a 
and niB-jfia. 

Now to summame the whole interpretation wt find that Tht 
Essenthi Siffnifiemce of Sivd's Dana is (hrccfdd: Firsi^ ti is 
thf image cf hh Rhythmic Play as t!ie Source of alt Movement 
tvjV/iifl the Cosmos^ which is Represented by the Arch: Secondly^ 
the Purpose of his Dance is to Release (he Countless souls of 
men from the Snore of Ittusion: Thirdly the Place of the Dana^ 
CAidoiiitorflffj, the Centre of the Universe^ is within the HeorL 

So far I have neframed from all aestlietic critjcism and have 
endeavoured only to translate the central though: of the con¬ 
ception of Siva^s dance from plastic to verbal expressiofi^ with¬ 
out reference to the bcatiiy or imperfection of individual worts. 
But it may not be out of place to call attention to the grandeur of 
this conception itself as a sjmthesis of science, religion and art. 
How amazing the range of thought and sympathy of tliose rishi* 
artists who first Conceived such a 15 ^ as tbis^ affording an image 
of reality^ a key to the coinplot tissue of life, a theory of namret 
not merely satisfactorj* to a single clique or race, nor acceptable 
to the thinkers of one centtuy onlyi but universal in Its appeal 
to the philosopher, the lover, and the artist of all ages and all 
countries. How supremely great in power and grace this danc¬ 
ing inaage must appear to all those who have striven in plastic 
forms to give depression to their in ttilticiii of Life! 

In these days of spccializatioiip we are not accustomed to such 
a synthesis of thought; hut for those who *sa\v’ such images as 
this, there could have been no division of life and thought into 
water-tight compartments. Nor do we always realize, when we 
criticise the merits of itidividual works, the full extent of the 
creative ixiiver which, to borrow a musical analog}'* could dis¬ 
cover a mode so c.xpressive of fundamental rhythms and so pro¬ 
foundly significant and inevitable. 

Eveiy part of such an image as this is directly expressive, not 
of any mere superstition or dogma, but of evident facts. No 
artist of today, however great, could more exactly or more wisely 
create an image of that Energy which science must postulate 
behind all phenomena. If we would reconcile Time with Eter¬ 
nity, we can scarcely do so otherwise than by the conception of 
alternations of phase extending over vast regions of space and 
great tracts of time. Especially Etgni Scant, then, is the phase 


66 


THE DANCE OF 5IVA 


alternation implied by the drum, and the fire whiclt 'changes, 
not destroys. These are but visual symbols of the theory of the 
day and night of Brahma. 

In the night of Brahma, Nature is inert, and cannot dance till 
Siva wills it; He rises from His rapture, and dancing send* 
through inert matter pulsing waves of awakening sound, and 
lol matter also dances appearing as a glory round about Him. 
Dancing, He sustains its manifold phenomena. In the fulness of 
time, still dancing, he destroys all forms and names by fire aud 
gives new rest. This is poetry; but none the less, science. 

It is not strange that the figure of Nataraja has commanded 
the adoration of so many generations past: familiar with all 
scepticisms, expert in tracing all beliefs to primitive supersti¬ 
tions, explorers of the infinitely great and infinitely small, we are 
worshippers of Nataraja stilt 


/ 


IMAGES WITH MANY ARMS 


PLATE XH 



71rahin&. Brahmanical stone sculpture, Elephanta, Bth Century 







INDIAN IMAGES WITH MANY ARMS 

Certain writers^ speaking of the many-armed images oi Indian 
artj have treated this peculiarity as an tinpardonable defect. 
^^Aflcr 300 says Mr. Vincent Smith* “Indian sculpture 

properly so-called hardly ilcscrv'<^ to be reckoned as art The 
figures both of men and animals become stiff and formal, and the 
idea of power b clumsily expressed by the multiplication of 
members. The many-headed^ many-armed gods and goddesses 
whose images crowd the ’^^Us and roob of mediaevd temples 
have no pretentions to beauty, and are frequentl}- hideous and 
grotesque,"'* Mr, Maskell speaks of “these hideous deities witii 
animals' beads and innumerable arms Sir George Bird wood 
considers that ‘'the monstrous shapes of the Puranic deities are 
unsuitable for the higher forms of artistic representation; and 
this is possibly why sculpture and painting are unkuov™ as fine 
arts in India/"* Quotations of this kind could be multiplied* but 
enough has been given to show that for a certain class of critics 
there exists the underlying assumption that in Indian art the 
multiplications of limbs or heads* or addition of any animal at^ 
tributes, is in itself a very grave defect, and fatal to any claim for 
merit in the works concerned 

In reply to criticisms of this kind it would be useless to cite 
examples of Greek art such as the \^ctory of Samothrace or the 
head of Hypnosi of Egjptian* such as the figures of Sekhet or 
Ollier animal divinities: of By^ntine or mediaeval angels: or 
modem urorks such as some of M* Rodm^s* For it is clear that 
all these* if the critics be consistent, must suffer equal condem¬ 
nation. 

Let me digress at this point to class the critics: for I fear that 

Ga^fUttr i>/ /wefto, 1010* vol. H. 

affflnVjT, 1915. p, 332 * * , 

^Inditsfria! Arfi cf India, 18S0* p- 125. If the fine ari? T?t.re until 
recently "unknown in Intlia*" perhaps this can be eitpiained by the 
fcmafk of H+ Baden-Powell, whp say* that "In a country like this 
we muit not expect to find anylhin^ that appeals to itiind or deep 
fcclioi?/* For "unknown** lo Sir George Birdwood or Ifr. Baden- 
Powefl need Pot imply arwitdne more than “anrecoiniiied.'^ 

^ It is fair to say that Mr. Vincint Smiti/s opinions have been con- 
tidcrahly modified since 1910, 


6S IXDIAN IMAGES WITH MAXV ARMS 

I ought to apologise for putting forward In this diapter v/hM is 
obvious. The difficulty Is one that has been raised exclusively 
by philologists and historians: in a considerable experience I have 
never heard these objections raised by artists or by connoisseurs. 
These notes are dedicated^ tben^ only to the philologist and the 
historianj and may be neglected by all others. 

The condemnations quoted are certainly to be justified if vtt 
are to agree to find the final aim of art in representation: then 
let tis seek the most attractive models and carefully copy them. 

But this test of verisiuiilitude has never been am’thing more 
than the result of a popular inisunderstanding. Let us submit 
the Indian, Greek or Bgyplian figures to recognized standards, 
and to criticism a little more penetrating than is invotved in 
merely counting h^ds or arms. 

Leonardo says that that figure i$ most worthy of praise which 
by its action best expresses the passion that animates it. 

Hsieh Ho demands that the work of art should exhibit the 
fusion of the rhythm of the spirit with the movement of living 
things. 

Mr. Holmes suggests that a work of art must possess in some 
degree the four qualities of Unity, Vitality, Infinity and Repose* 

In other words, a work of art is great in so far as it expresses 
its own theme In a form at once rhythmic and impassioned: 
through a defidite pattern it must express a motif deeply felt 

Prom this point of view it w^ould seem tlvat we must take each 
work of art upon its own merits. To apply the simplest tests just 
quoted—1 wish to speak with the greatest possible simplicity—an 
image with many arms or heads may be called an Inferior w^ork 
of artp or inartistic, if it lacks any one of the four qualities 
demanded by Mr. Holmes, or as we may say, i f it is not * felt.' But 
if it has such qualities, if it is felt, need we further conceni 
oursch^es with arithmetic? 

The artist does not choose his oto problems: he finds in the 
canon instruction to make such and such images in such and 
such a fashion—for example, an image of Nataraja with four 
arms (Frontispiece), of Brahma with four heads, Puate XTL of 
Mahisha-mardinI with ten arms, PlATE XIII, or o£ Ganesa with 
an elephant's heud. Our critics are bold enough to assert that 
in obeying these instructions he cannot create a work of art. It 
would have been fairer and more moderate to suggest that the 


d 



IMAGES WITH MANY ARMS. 


pi-ATE xm 







INDIAN IMAGES WITH MANY ARMS 69 

pfoblcm^ p]iopound<!fl arc often very dilGcult; ttis would have left 
open the way to recognize a successful effort, if such could be 
found* To have overcome the difficulties would then a proof 
of artistic capacity—and I suppose it should be the aun of tlie 
historian of art to discover such proofs. 

The accompanying illustration, Plate XIII, shows a Javanese 
ffeurc of Mahisha-mardioi with ten arms, slaying the d^on Ma- 
hisha. She is here a dread avenging power: yet she is neither 
cmcl nor angrj’, but rather sad with the sadness of those who ate 
wise, playing an inevitable part, though at heart no more than the 
spectator of a drama. This entire figure, damaged as it is, 
shows what tenderness may be expressed, even in tilmasic miagcs- 
And this peace and tenderness find expression in the movement 
of the whole figure, and not by any aibitraiy means: no part 
of the whole is at war w-ith any other, and this is what we mean 
by unity. It would indeed be futile to condemn an image such 
as this because it has ten arms. Or take the Natarap image of 
the primal rhvthmk energy underlying all phenomenal appear¬ 
ances and activity: here is perpetual movement, perpetually 

poised—the rlijlbrn of the spirit 

The death of Hiranyakasipu, Plate XIV, is a work that may 
be called grotesque. We have long learnt however that tliis cannot 
be used as a mere term of abuse. It would be difficult to jma^nc 
a more splendid rendering of the well knovm theme of the impious 
king who met his death at the hands of the avenpng deity in man- 
lion form. The hand upon the shoulder, the shrinking figure with 
the mocking smile that has had no time to fade^what rould 
more terrible? These are figures expressing by tlieir action their 
animating passions: or if not so, then none luve ever t^n. It 
would be unkind to contrast a work such as thb with the truth to 

nature’ of the Laokoon. ^ 

In these figures we cannot speak of the many arms as addi¬ 
tional members’ because in a human being they might appear to 
be such. We have here a work of art w'hich is, or is oot a unity. 
If the work is a unity we can no more speak of added elements, 
tlun we can speak of ornament in a work of art w wmetog 
added to an expression that would not otherwise be bcauliiu. 
It is not by addition or removal that we create. Before ftese 
vrorks we can only ask, are these, or are they not, clear and in^ 
passioned expressions of their subject matter? Alt unprejudiced 


JO JXDJAN IMAGES WITH MAIJY ARMS 

and codcipetcnt observers would tlien agree that amongst Indian 
images there are some of which we can say that they are such 
adequate expressions, and of others that they are not; but to 
recognize those and these requires a rather more subtle approach 
than tliat involved in the arithiitetica] process of cottatUig arms 
or heads. 

Certain developments in the most modem art could be quoted 
in camparison with the Indian complex figures, and, indeed, the 
method of these is more than moderru Some painters of the 
present day have souglit by many strange devices to create a 
sjTithetic and s}Tnphonic art representiug a continuity of thought 
or action, and an mterpretaiiou of ideas belonging to more than 
a single phase of personality—an art of interpretation. And if, 
as we now realise, even the human personality Is compound, w'e 
should understand that this must be even more true of a cosmic 
divinity, ^vho is, indeed^ able by a division of uf^^dhts^ to func¬ 
tion in many places at one time. To reflect such conceptions in 
art demands a synthetic rather than a representative language^ 
It might well be claimed, tlien, that this method adopted some¬ 
times in India, sometimes in sometimes in Greece, and 

still employed, has proved successful from the practical point of 
view, of pure expression, the getting said w'hat had to be said i 
and this is after all the sure and safe foundation of art. 

These forms remain poientiaJJy equally satisfactory'^, too, 
whether as philosophers we regard them as purely abstract ex¬ 
pressions, or with the artists themselves regard them as realistic 
presentations of another order of life than our own, deriving 
from a dna-hka, other than the world w'e arc familiar with, 
but not necessarily unknow'able or ahvays invisible^ The distinc¬ 
tion in any case is slight, for ilie images equally belong to a 
world of their own, however ive regard them. 

The criticism of the philologists ultimately resolves itself into 
a complaint that the art is not aU^-ays representative ('true to 
nr.ture'). I have tried to show that it is true to experience and 
fcding. But aside from that^. whatever in a work of art is 
ostensibly representative must be judged according to the logic 
of the world it represents—even if that w^orld be no other than 
the idea-^vorld of the sddhsms and dhydua muntrams. All w orlds 
are idea-w^orlds of one kind or another, and we should also remem¬ 
ber that 'recognition* does not necessarily imply any real knowh 


IMAGES WITH MASV ARMS. 


PL\TE XIV 




Death of Hiraiiyaka»ipo. Drshmanical stotie sculpture. Elam, 
8 th Century, 













'A\,, 


Hn 







“■• - *. .iru.. r:4, '■ 

■f'^t"- ,v. j.’' 




tu 


1 ^ 









‘-‘?_. . 
[^; fe'S 




•w. 

- .*' * " 4 ' ,^ 

' '. - " ■ *1li /■'•-ttjc-'^i* ■ '■ * 

-• •-•• ■ ■-,,. ^, Vf■ fr‘.>|^' ;' 

■ -'■ ■• ■ i-. v.-"’^ 



: ii ^V I *f*li* 






14 


i i ^ 


1 :':^ 


^ , yIM' 







IXT>IAN IMAGES WITH MAJTY ARMS 


n 


cticc ol tilings in thcmselvc^wc do not know that men ^vc 
rSly two amis, that is tnerdy an ‘intelligible reprcsenlaHom 
It Is no criticism of a faiiy tale to say that in our world we meet 
no fairies: we should rather, and do actuaUy, condemn on the 
score of insmoerlty, a faiiy tale which should be so made as to 
sucKest that in the writer's world there were no fairies. It is no 
eritkism of a beasMable to say that after all animals do not 
talk English or Sanskrit. Nor is it a criticism of an Indian ic^ 
to point out that we know no human bemgs with more than 

*^To^reciate any art, moreover, we ought not to c^centratc 
our attention upon its peculiarities-^iihical or formal^but should 
endeavour to take jot stanted whatever the ar^t 
granted. No motif appears bmaTre to those who f^vc been 
familiar with it for generationa: and ia the last analysts it must 
remain bejond the reach of all others so long as it remams m 

their eyes primarily bmarre, . 

If drcuinstances then compel the philologist and the historian 
to classify die extant materials for the study of Indan art, their 
studies will be the more valuable the more strictly they are con¬ 
fined to the archieological point of view. For those should not 
air their likes and dislikes In Oriental art, who when they speak 
of art mean mere illustration: for there they will rarely meet with 
what they seek, and the expression of their disapporntment be- 
comes wearisome. 




INDIAN MUSIC 


Music has been a cultivated art in India for at least three 
thousand years. The chant is an essential ekment of Vedic 
ritual; and the references in later Vedic literature, the scriptures 
of Buddliism^ and Uie Brahmanical epics show that it was already 
highly developed as a secular art in centuries preceding the begin¬ 
ning of the □irbtian era. Its zenith may perhaps be assigned 
to the Imperial age of the Guptas—from the fourth to the sixth 
century A. D* This was the classic period of Sanskrit literature, 
culminating in tlte drama of Kalidasa ^ and to the same time is 
assigned the monumental treatise of Dharata on ihc theory of 
music and drama. 

The art music of the present day is a direct descendant of 
these ancient schools^ whose tradidons have been handed down 
with comment and expansion in the guilds of tlie hcreditniry 
musicians, \Vhilc the words of a song may have been composed 
at any date* the musical themes communicated orally from master 
to disciple are essentially ancIeuL As in other arts and in life, 
so here also India presents to us the wonderful spectacle of the 
still surviving consciousness of the ancient world, with a range 
of eniotlonal experience rarely accessible to those who are pre¬ 
occupied with the activities of ovcr-productiorip and intimidated 
by the economic insecurity of a social order based on competitiorL 

The art music of India exists only under cultivated patron¬ 
age, and in its own intimate environment. It corresponds to all 
tliat is most classical in the Euroi>ean tradition. It is the chamber- 
music of an aristocratic society, where the patron retains music¬ 
ians for his ov^m entertainment and for the pleasure of the circle 
of his friends ^ or it is temple tnusic^ where the musician is the 
seiv'ant of God. The public concert Is unknown^ and the liveli¬ 
hood of the artist docs not depend upon his abilit}- and will to 
amuse the crowd. In other words, the musician is protected 
Under these circumstances lie is under no temptation to l^e any¬ 
thing but a musician; his education begins in infanej^ and his 
art remains a vocation. The dvilbations of Asia do not afford 
to the inefficient amateur those opportunities of sdf-expression 


l\t>tAS MUSIC 


PLATE XV 



Chiimbcf-musk of uti aristocratic sascbtj’Late Mughal paintmg^ i3i3i tury 





















INDIAN MUSIC 


7S 


vrhlch are so highly appreciated m Europe and America, The 
arts ate nowhere taught a$ a social accompllsJiEneiit ; on the one 
hand there b the proiessioual, proficient in a traditional art^ and 
on the other the lay public^ The musical ctiltivatlon of the public 
does not consist in "everybody doing it ” but in appreciation and 
reverence, 

I have indeed heard the strange objection raised that to smg 
the musk of India one must be an artist i and this objection seems 
to voice a typically demcra^tic disapproval of superiority. But 
it would be nearly as true to say that the listener must respond 
with an art of his own, and this would be entirely in accord with 
Indian theories of ssthetk. The musician in India finds a 
model audience—technically critical E3>ut somewhat indifferent to 
voice produciiorL The Indian audience listens rather to the song 
than to the singing of the song: those who are mtisical^ perfect 
the rendering of the song by the force of their own Imagination 
and emotion. Under these conditions the actual music is better 
heard than where the sensuous perfection of the voice is made a 
jiwe qua non: precisely as the best sculpture is primitive rather 
than suave, and we prefer conviction to pretiiness—Tt is lifce 
the outward poverty of God,^ whereby His glory b nakedly 
revealed*" None the less the Indian singer^s voice b soimetijnes 
of great intrinsjc beauty, and sometimes used wdth sensitive 
intelligence as well as skill* It b not, how'ever, the voice that 
makes the singer, as so often happens in Europe, 

Since Indian music is not written, and cannot he learnt from 
books, except in theory, it will be understood that the only way 
for a foreigner to leant it must be to establish between hintsdf 
and his Indian teachers that specif relationship of disciple and 
master which bdonp to Indian education m oh its phases: he 
must enter Into the inner spirit and must adopt rnany of the 
outer conventions of Indian life, and his study must continue 
until be con improvise the songs under Indian conditions and to 
the satisfaction of Indian professional listeners. He must possess 
not only the imagination of an artist, but also a vivid memory 
and on ear sensitive to microtonal mficctlons. 

The tbeorj" of scale is eveiyivhere a generalisation from the 

I who wanders throtigh ihc world a pettniless and naked 

ascetic. 



74 


INDIAN MUSIC 


facts of sonif. The EMtopean nn scale has been reduced to 
lirclvc fixed nates bj merging^ nearly idcnlical intervals such ^ 
D shatp and H Qal^ and it ts also tempered to fadlitate madulation 
and free cliange of key. In oLher words, the piano is out of 
tunc by hypatbeiis;^ O^Ijr this eompromise^ neecssi rated in the 
devebpUMnt of hatmonyp has made possible the triumphs of 
enodem orchestration. A purely melodic art, howcveri may be 
no less intensdy cullivatcdp and retains the advanlagcs of pure 
intonation and modal colouringp 

Apart from the keyed mstrumctits of modem Europe there 
scarcely esdsts an absedutely fixed scale: at any rate^ in India 
the thing fixed b a group of mtervab, and the precise vibration 
value of a fsote depends on ils position in a progression, not on 
iti ndblion to a tonic. The scale of twenty-two notes is simply 
I he sum of aJJ the notes used in all the songs—no musician sings 
a dtrofuatk scale from C to C with twenty-two stopping places, 
for this would be a mere iQnr de forct. 

The 'quarter-tone' or iru/f h the micrototia] Interval between 
two successive scale notes: but as the theme rarely emp%i 
■hvo and never ihite scale notes in succession, the microtonal 
inter%al is not generally coaspicaous except in omainent. 

Every Indian song is said to be in a particular or rO^jinl 
—ligini being the feminine of riga, and mdicating an abridge¬ 
ment or modification of the main theme. The ragap like the old 
Creek and the ccclcsiasticaJ mode, is a selection of five, six, or 
seven notes, distributed along the scale; but the rSga b more 
partitularbcd than a mode, for it has certain characteristic pro¬ 
gressions, and a chief note to which the singer constantly rciuros, 
i^one of the ra^gas employs more than sevto substantive m>te$, and 
there is no modulation: the strange tonality of the Indian song 
is due to the use of unfamiliar intervaJsp and not to the use of 
many successive notes with small ^visions. 

The riga may be best defined as a melody-mould or the ground 
plan of a song. It i$ thb ground plan which ilic master first of 
all communicates to the pupil; and to sing b to improvise upon 
the theme thus defined^ The possible number of rfigas, is very 
targe, but the majority of systems recognise thir^'-iixp that h to 
^y six ragas, each with five rlgbils. The origin of the lagas 
is various: some, like Pahiil, are derived from locz\ folk-song, 
others, like Jogp from the songs of tvandering ascetics, and still 



INDIAN MUSIC. 


plate XVI 


Indian jionss in America 
(Photosmph by Arnold Gtntbe.} 















INDIAN MUSIC 


75 

othe« are the creation of great musicians by whose names they 
are Imown. More than sixty are mentioned in a Sanskrit-Tibetan 
voabulary of the seventh cenmr>v with names such as ‘Wiih-a- 
i-oio^JjJre-a-^tinder-cloud,' ‘Like-the-god-Iadra/ and ‘Delighting- 
the heart. Amongst the raga names in modem use may be cited 

Spring, Evemng beaut)-,' 'Hono’-flower/ 'The swing/ 'Intoxt- 

cation. 

Psycholopcally the word raga, meaning coiouring or passton 
sug^ts to Indwn ears the idea of mood; that is to say that pre¬ 
cisely as m ancient Gree«, the musical mode has definite ethot. 
It IS not the puipo^ of the song to repeat the confusion of life, 
put to express and arouse particular passions of body and soul 
m man and nature. Each riga is associated with an hour of 
t^ day or mght when it may be appropriatefy sung, and some 

definite magic 

effects. Thus there is still bdteved the well-known stonr of a 
musician w^se roj-al patron arbitrarily insisted on hearing a 
sorig m the Di^k raga, which creates fire; the musician obeyed 
under prol«t. but as the song proceeded, he burst into flames 

T he sprang into the 

walere of the Jamna. It »juat because of this element of magic 

and the asswiation of the ragas with the rhyUimic ritual of daily 
and seasonal life, that their clear outlines must not be blurred by 
n^ulation; and this is expressed, when the ragas are person!- 
fied as musical ^n, by sajing that ‘to sing out of the raga* Is 

? r ^ characteristic stoty 

urT l! prophet Namda, when he was still but a learned 
He tliought that he had maste^ the whole art of music; but 
1 Vishnu, to cuih his pride, revealed to him in the 

^■orld of tlie gods, a spacious building where there lay men and 
worn™ weeping over their broken arms and legs. They were 
the ragas and riginis, and they said that a certain sage of the 
jame of NSrada, i^orant of music and unskillful in petformance 
had smg them amiss, and therefore their features were distorted 
^d their hmbs broken, and until they were sung truly there would 
^ no wre for fficm. Then Narada was humblet^ and kneeling 
b^ore Vishnu prayed to be taught the art of music more per- 

l»came the great mustdim priest 

Indian music is a purely melodic art. devoid of any harmonised 


INDIAN MUSIC 


76 

accompatiiment other than a drone. In modem European art^ 
the meaning ot each note of the theme is mainly brought out by 
the notes of the chord which arc heard with it; and even in 
unaccompanied mdo<Jy, the musician hears an imphed harmony. 
Unaccompanied folk-song does not satisfy the coaccrt-goer's car; 
as pure mdody it is the province only of the peasant and the 
specialist. This is partly because the folk-air played on tlie 
piano or written in staff notation is actiially falsified; but much 
more because tinder the conditions of European art^ melody no 
longer wsts in its own right, and music is a compromise between 
melodic freedom and harmonic necessity". To hear the musk of 
India as Indians hear it one must recover the sense of a pure 
intonation and must forget all hnpUed harmonics. It is just like 
the effort which we have to make ivhen for the first time, after 
being accustomed to modem art^ we attempt to read the language 
of early Italian or Chinese painting, where there is expressed 
with equal economy of means all that intensity of experience 
w^hich now^adays we are accustomed to understand only througli 
a more involved technique. 

Another feature of Indian song—and so also of the instru¬ 
mental solo—is the elaborate grace. It is natural that in Europe^ 
where many notes are heard Simultaneously^ grace should appear 
as an unnecessary elaboration, added to the note, rather than a 
structural factoii But In India ihe note and the microtonal 
grace compose a closer unity, for the grace fulfiU just that func¬ 
tion of adding light and shade lYhich in harmonised music is 
attained by the Yaiyang degrees of assonance. The Indian song 
without grace would seem to Indian ears as bald as die European 
art song without the accompaniment which it presupposes. 

Equally distinctive is the constant portamento, or rather^ 
glissando. In India it is far more the interval than the note that 
is sung or played, and we recc^ize accordingly a continuity of 
sound t by contrast with tlns^ the European songp W'hich is verti¬ 
cally divided by the harmonic interest and the nature of the 
keyed instruments which are heard with the voice, seeim to un¬ 
accustomed Indian ears to be “full of holes." 

All the songs, except the 'alips' arc in strict rhythms. These 
are only difficult to follow at a first heating because the Indian 
rhythms are founded, as in prosody, on contrasts of long and 
short duration, while European rhythms are based on stress, as 


INDIAN MUSIC. 


PI„^TE XVII 



Todi RSgmi {a mtiaicaJ mode}^ Rajput painting, iljth cetitmy* Mu^in ol Fina 

Arts, ^ston. 

























t 


INDIAN MUSIC 


77 


in dance Of marching* The Indian musician does not mark the 
beginning of the bar by accent. His fkxtd unit is a section^ or 
group of bars which arc not necessarily allke^ while the Euro¬ 
pean fbced unit is t)'picalty the bar^ of which a varying number 
constitute a section. The European rhythm is counted in mul¬ 
tiples of 2 or the Hindu in sums of 2 or 3. Some of the 
countmgs are very elaborate: Ata Taia^ for example^ is counted 
as 5 plus 5 plus 2 plus 2, The frequent use of cross rhythms 
also complicates the form, Indian music is modal iu times as 
well as melody. For all these reasons it is difficult to grasp 
immediately the point at which a rhythm begins and ends^ alUiough 
this is quite easy for the Indian audience accustomed to quanti¬ 
tative poetic recitation. The best way to approach the Indian 
rhythm is to pay attention to the phrasing, and ignore pulsation. 

The Indian art-song is accompanied by drums, or by the instru¬ 
ment known as a or by both. The tamhura is of the 

lute tribCj but without frets: Uie four very long strings are tuned 
to sound the dominant, the upper tonic tviice, and the octave 
bdo\\\ which are common to all ragas: the pitch is adjusted to 
suit die singer's voice. The four strings are fitted with simple 
resonators—shreds of wool between the string and the bridge— 
which are the source of their *life': and the strings are continu- 
onsly sounded, making a pedal point background veiy rich in 
overtones, and against this dark ground of infinite potentjality 
the song stands out like an elaborate embroideiy. The tambura 
must not be regarded as a solo instniment^ nor as an object of 
separate interest like the piano accompaniment of a modem song: 
its sound is rather the ambient in which the song lives and moves 
and has its being. 

India has, besides the tambura, many solo instruments. By 
far the most important of these is the vtijd. This classic instni- 
ment, which ranks with the violin of Eimope and the koto of 
Japan, and second only to the voice in sensitive response, differs 
chiefly from the tambura in having frets, the notes being made 
with the left hand and the strings plucked with the right The 
delicate nuances of microtonal grace are obtained by deflection 
of the strings, whole passages being played in this manner solely 
by a lateral movement o£ the left hand, without a fresh plucking. 
While the only difficulty in playing the tambura is to maintain 
an even rhythm independently of the song, the vifi§ presents all 


INDIAN MUSIC 


7Z 


the difficulties of technique that can be iniagiiied> and it is said 
that at least twelve years are required to attain proficiency. 

The Indian singer is a poet, and the poet a singer. The 
dominant subject matter of the songs is human or divine love in 
all Its aspects, or the direct praise of God, and Uie words are 
^ways sincere and passionate. The more essentially the singer 
is a musician, however, the more the words arc regarded merely 
as the vehicle of the music: in art-song the words are alw-ays 
brief, voicing a mood rather than telling any story, and they are 
used to support the music with little regard to their own logic— 
precisely as the representative dement in a modem painting 
m^ly serves as the basis for an organisation of pure form or 
CO In the njusical form called an improvisation on 

the rafia theme, this preponderance of the musk is carried so far 
that only meaningless syllables are used. The voice itself is a 
musical instrument, and the song is more than the words of the 
song. This form ts especially favoured by the Indian virtuoso, 
who naturally feels a certain contempt for those whose first 
interest in the song is connected with the words. The voice has 
thus a higher status than in Europe, for the music exists in its 
own ng^t and not merely to illustrate the words. Rabindranath 
Tagore has written on this: 


J nummed the tunc, 1 wrote the first line of the sone. ‘1 know thee 
S}®the"tu Burb^tif; Jower" of thl SSj 


'\Vaiid«inE over the v/orld 
I cwnc lo ihy land! 

I am A guest at thy door. Uiou stranger/ 


Otic day, inaay days aflerwards, there 
road sipgingj 


was soracotie EOing along the 


docs that iinlcnovm 
Could I but eatch it^ 1 


go to and away from the cage? 

&el iht cLaia of my mind about Jtf fcetl* 



INDIAN MUSIC. 


PLATE XVI11 



Madhii-niAtlliavI H^inl (a myisical mod*?)* ^ The sweet, sweet nimblini' of thunder 
is heard/ Hajput painting i6th century, Museum of I-me Arts, Beston. 



















INDIAN MUSIC 


79 


I saw that Ibal lolfc-s&ngf said tlic very same tiling! SomeEimcs 
tbe uuknowfi bird Qomzh to ibe dosed and speaks a word of the 
limitless no known—the mind would keep it forcyeTp but cannot What 
but the tunc of a song could report the coming and going of that 
nnknowu bird? Because of this 1 always feel a hesita^on in publUb- 
ing a book of songs, for in such a book tbe main thing is Left out. 

This Indian music is css^tially iinpersonal: it reflects an 
emotjon and an experience which are deeper and wider and older 
fban the emotion or tvisdom of any single IndividuaL Its sorrow 
is without tears^ its joy without exultation and it is passionate 
w ithout any loss of serenity* It b in the deepest sense of the 
w ords all-human. But w^hen the Indian prophet speaks of inspira¬ 
tion, it is to say that the Vedas are eternal^ and all that the poet 
achieves by his devotion is to hear or soej it is then Sarasvaif^ 
the goddess of speech and learnings or Nlrada^ whose mission tt 
is to disseminate occult knowledge in the sound of the strings of 
his vTna^ or Krishna^ whose flute is forever calling us to leave the 
duties of the w^orld and follow Him—it b thw, rather than any 
human individual who speak through the singer's voioc^ and are 
seen in the movements of the dancer. 

Or we may say tliat this is an imitation of the music in heaven^ 
The master musicians of India are alw^ays represented as the 
pupils of a god, Of as visiting the heavcnworld to leam there the 
music of the spheres—that is to say, their knowledge sprinp 
from a source far within the surface of the empirical activity 
of the waking consciousness* In this connection it is explained 
why it is that human art must be studied, and may not be identi¬ 
fied w'ltli the imitation of our everyday behaviour.^ WTien 5iva 
expounds the technique of iJic drama to Bhamta—the famous 
author of the Ndfya —he declares that human art must he 

subject to law^ because in man the inner and outer life arc still 
in conflict. Man has not yet found Himself, but all his activity 
proceeds from a laborious working of tlie mind, and all bb virtue 
is sclf-couscious. What we call our life is uncoordinated, and 
far from the harmony of art, which rise$ abo%^e good and cvtl. 
It b otherwise with the gods, whose every gesture immediately 
reflects the affections of the inner life. Art is an imitation of 
that perfect spontaneity—the identity of intuition and expression 
in those w^ho are of the kingdom of heaven, which is within us* 

♦This is like the piindfilc of * consdottS conlror advanced by F* M. 
Alexander in Sa^mnr luhmlatice. 


INDIAN MUSIC 


bo 

Thus it Is that art is nearer to life than any faet can be; and Mr. 
Veats has reason when he says that Indian music, though its 
theory is elatx}rate and its technique so difficult, is not an ait^ 
but life itself. 

For it is the inner reality of things, rather than any transient 
or partial experience that the singer voices, 'Those who sing 
here," says Sankaraebarya^ "sing God"j and the Vishnu Purina 
adds, "All songs are a part of HLtn^ who wears a form of sound:"^ 
We could deduce from this a metaphysical interpretation of 
technique. In aU art there are monumental and articulate ele- 
meuts, masculine and feminine factors which are unihed in 
perfect form. We have here the sound of the tambura which is 
heard before the song, during the song, and contmues after it: 
that is the timeless Absolute, which as it was in the beginning, 
is now and ever shall be. On the other hand there is the song 
itself TA-hich is the variety of Nature, emerging from its source 
and returning at the close of its cycle. The harmony of that 
undivided Ground with this intricate Pattern is the unity of 
Spirit and Matter, We see from this why this music could not 
be improved by hamnonisatton^ even if harmonisation were pos¬ 
sible without destroying the modal bases: for in breaking up the 
ground into an articulate accompaniment, we should merely create 
a second melody^ another universe, competing with the freedom of 
the song itself^ and we should destroy the peace on w*hich it rests^ 

This would defeat the purpose of the singer. Here* in this 
ego-consclous world we arc subject to moitaJityH But this mor¬ 
tality is an illusion^ and all its truths are relative: over against 
this world of change and separation there is a timeless and space¬ 
less Peace which is the source and goal of all our being—"that 
noble Pearl/' !n the words of Behmen, "which to the World 
appears Nothing, but to the Children of Wisdom is All Things."' 
Every religious teacher offers u$ those living waters. But the 
’ivay is hard and long: we are called upon to leave houses and 
lands^ fathers and mothers and wives to achieve an end Avhich 
in our imperfect language we can only speak of as Non-existence. 
Many of us have great possessions, and the hardest of these to 
surrender arc our own will and identity. ’What guarantee have 
we that the reward will be commensurate with the sacrifice ? 

^ Cf= the Granik Saklb (Japji xxvit) : "How many tnusidans, how many 
rSgas and and how many smgers sing Thee?"' 


INDIAN MU^IC 


PLAIE XiX 



Todi Kigm] [3, musical mode), Kajput painttngp ifith cutitunv Calcutta Scliool 

of Art. 









|i r". 





t 

^ * M 


--;f! 


1 



f' 

i 









INDIAN MUSIC 


8l 


Indian theory declares that in the ecstasies of love and art we 
^ready receive an mtimation of that redemption. This is also 
the kathorsis of the Greeks, and it is found in the esthetic of 
modem Europe when Goethe says 

For beauty they have sought iq every age 
He who perceives it is froia himself set free- 

•oiM aicA entruckl. We are assured by the experience of sesthetic 
contemplation that Paradise is a reality. 

In other words the ma^caJ effects of a song^ in working mere 
miracles are far surpassed by its effects upon our inner being. 
The singer is still a magician, and the song is a ritual, a sacred 
ceremony, an ordeal which is designed to set at rest that wheel 
of the imagination and the senses w'hJch atone hinder us from 
contact with reality. But to achieve this ordeal the hearer 
must cooperate with the musician by the surrender of the will, 
and by drawing in his restless thought to a single point of con¬ 
centration i this is not the time or place for curiosity or admira¬ 
tion. Our attitude towards an unknown art should be far from 
the sentimental or romantic, for it can bring us nothing that we 
have not already with us m our own hearts; the peace of the 
Abyss which underlies all art is one and the same, whether we 
find it in Europe or in Asia. 


STATUS OF INDIAN M^OMEN 

In the Mahabh^rata there is reported a conversation between 
Siva and Uma. The Great God asks her to describe the duties 
of women, addressing her, in ho doing, in terms which acknowl¬ 
edge her perfect aitainmcnt of tlic highest wisdom possible ta 
nmn of god — terms w^hich it would be hard to paraUd anywhere 
in western literature. He says: 

'"Them that doi^t know the Self atid the aot-Sell^ expert in every 
work: endowed with self-restraint and perfect samc-sigbtedite^s 
towards every creator e; free from the seme of I and my— thy [>owgt 
and energy are eqkial lo my own, and thou hast practised the most 
severe discipline O Daughter of HimaJaS'a, of fairest eyebrows, 
and w'bose hair ends in the fairest eurls« expound to me the duties 
of women in full.'^ 

Then She^ who is queen of heaven, and jet so s\veetlj human^ 
answers : 

'The duties of woman are created In the rites of wedding when 
in presence of the nupdal bre $he becomes I be associate of her X,ordp 
for tbt perfonnance of afl zi^teous deeds. She should be beautiiul 
and gentle, ootisideritig her husband as her god and serving htm as 
such in fortune and mii fortune, health and sickness^ obedient even 
if commanded to unrighteous deeds or acts that may lead to her own 
destructioiL She should rise early, serving the gods, a]wa>'s keeping 
her house clean, tending to the domestic sacred 6re, eating only 
after ihe needs of gods and guests and servants have been satfsIiedL 
devoted to her father and mother and the father and mother of her 
husband. Devotion to her Lord is woman''s honour, it is her tteinal 
heaven; and O MahdvaniL,'^' 

she adds^ with a most touching human cry, 

desire uot paradise itself If thou arc not satished with me I" 

"She is a true wife who gladdens her husband " says Raja- 
ickhara in the Kurfura M&njari, The extract following is from 
the Laws of Manu : 

^'Though destitute of virtue, or ^eeldug pleasure elsewhere, or 
devoid of good qualities, a husband must be constanlly worshipped 
as a god by a faichfuJ wife ^ ^ , If a mfe obeys her husband, she 
will for that reason alone be exalted tn htavei*-^^ 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 83 

pmduttion of cbildrcnp thti imrtiirie of those boit^ and the 
daily life of mtiK of these mitters woman U visibly the cause.*^ 

"She who controlling her thoDghts; s£»eecfa and acts^i vtoIaUs pot 
her dtity to her Lord, dwells with hiot after death 10 beavco^ and in 
this world \s called the xirtuom n faithful wife.** 


Similar texts from a variety of Indian sources could be tiidefl- 
nftely multiplied. 

I f such are the duties of women^ womeii are accorded corres¬ 
ponding honour, and exert a corresponding influence upon society. 
This power and influence do not so much belong to the merely 
young and beautiful, nor to the wealthy, as to those who have 
lived—mothers and grandmothers—or who follow a rehi^ous 
discipline—widows or nuns. According to Manu: "A master 
exceedeth ten tutors in claim to honour; the father a hundred 
masters; but the mother a thousand fathers in right to reverence 
and in the function of teacher,* When Rama accepted Kaikeyrs 
decree of banishment, it was because ^ a mother should be as 
much regarded by a son as is a father/ Even at the present day 
it would be impossible to over-emphasbe the influence of Indian 
mothers not only upon their cMldreu and in all household affairs^ 
but upon their grow^n-up sons to wrhoni their w'ord is law. Ac¬ 
cording to my observation, it is only those sons who have received 
an "English* education in India who no longer honour their fathers 
and mothers. 

No story is more appropriate than that of Madalasa and her son 
VUcranta to illustrate the position of the Indian mother as teacher. 
As VikrinU grew up day by day, the Mdrkaudeya Purdna relates, 
Madalasu "taught him knowledge of the Self^ by ministering to 
him irt sickness ; and as he grew in strength and there waxed in 
him his father's heart, he attained to. knowledge of the Self by 
his mother's words/ And these were Mada1asa*s words, spoken 
to the baby crying on her lap: 

“My child, thou art without a name or form, and it is hut in 
fantasy that thou hast been given a name. This thy body, framed 
of the five elements, is not thine in sooth, nor art thou of it Why 
dost thou weep? Or, maybe, thou weepcst not; it is a sound 
self^bom that cometh forth from the king's son... .In the body 


^ ^fCnoW'lcdge of the Self— tbe Adhydimihddyd rtferred to above, p. "A 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


*4 

<lweUs another self, and Uierewltli abideth not tlie thought that 
'This is mine,' which appemiaetli to the flesh. Shame that man 
13 so deceived I" 

Even in recent tunes, in families where the men have received 
an English education unrelated to Indian life and thought, the 
inheritance of Indian modes of lliought and feeling rests in the 
main with women; for a definite philosophy of life is bound up 
with household ritual and traditional etiquette and finds expreS' 
sion equally in folk tale and cradle-song and popular poetry, and 
in those pauranic and epic stories which constitute the household 
Bible literature of India. Under these conditions it is oft^ 
the case that Indian w'omen, with all their faults of sentimentality 
and ignorance, have remained the guardians of a spiritual culture 
which is of greater worth than the efficiency and information of 
the educated 

It is according to the Tantrik scriptures, devoted to the cult 
of die Mother of the World, that women, who partake of her 
nature more essentially than other living beings, are especially 
honoured; here the woman may be a spiritual teacher (^uru), 
and the initiation of a son by a mother is more fruitful than any 
other. One doubts how' far this may be of universal application, 
believing with Paracelsus that woman is nearer to the world than 
man, of which the evidence appears in her always more personal 
point of view*, But all things arc possible to women such as 
hladalasa. 

The claim of the Buddhist nun—'How should the woman’s 
nature hinder us?*—^has never been systematically dented in 
India. It would ha%c been contrary to the spirit of Indian culture 
to deny to individual women the opportunity of saintship or 
teaming in the sense of closing to them the schools of divinity 
or science after the fashion of the Western academies in the 
nineteenth century. But where the social norm is found in mar¬ 
riage and parenthood for men and women alike, it could only 
have been in exceptional cases and under exceptional circum¬ 
stances that the latter specialised, whether in divinity, like Auwai, 
Mira Bal, or the Buddhist nuns, in science, likeLi1av*atT, or in war, 
like Chand BTbl or the Rani of JhansT. Those set free to niltlvatc 
e,xperl knowledge of science or to follow with undivided allegi¬ 
ance either religion or any art, could only be the joowydjml or 
devotee, the widow, and the courtesan. A majority of women 


PTJVTE XX 


INDIAN WOMEN. 



A Hiodu lady at her toilet. 


Rajput draw lug8 th 
the author. 


CoUectkui ol 















STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


S5 

have always^ and natinraJly, pref«rr€d marriage and oiotltcrtiOQd 
to either oi these condidons, Eut those who lelt the call of rdi' 
giotip those from whom a husband's death removed the central 
motif of their llfe^ and those trained from chiidhood as expert 
artists, have always maintained a great tradition in various 
branches of cultural activity^ sucit as social service or musicL 
WTiat we have to observe is that Hindu sociologists have always 
regarded these specializations as more or Less incompatible widi 
wifehood and motherhood; life Is not long enough for the achieve¬ 
ment of many different thing?, 

Hinduism justifies no cult of egCHexpression, but aims con¬ 
sistently at spiritual freedom. Tfiosc who are conscious of a 
suf&cient inner life become the more indifferent to outivard cx^ 
pression of their own or any changing personality'. The ultimate 
purposes of Hindu social discipline are that men should unify 
their indiriduaiity with a wider and deeper than individual life^ 
should fulfil appointed tasks regardless of failure or success, 
distinguish the timeless from its shifting forms^ and escape the 
all-too-narrow prison of the T and mine/ 

Anonymity is thus in accordance with the truth* and it 
IS one of the proudest distinctions of the Hindu culture* 
The names of the 'authors* of tlie eptes are but shadows, 
and in later ages it was a constant practise of writers to 
suppress their own name^ and ascribe their work to a mythical 
or famous poet, thereby to gain a better attention for the tnitli 
that they would rather claim to have *heard* than to have ^tnade/ 
Similarly, scarcely a single Hindu painter or sculptor is known 
by namej and the entire range of Sanskrit literature cannot 
exhibit a single autobiography and but little histOTj* Why should 
women have sought for modes of sclf-advertis^ent that held no 
lure even for men? The governing concept of Hindu ethics is ^ 
vocation (dharma) ; the highest merit consists in the fulfilment of 
"one's own duty/ in other words, in dedication to one's calling, 
Indian society was highly organized; and where it -was considered 
wrong for a man to fulfil the duties of another man rather than 
his own, how much more must a confusion of fimciioa as between 
woman and man have seemed w rong, where differentiatiori is so 
much more evident In the words of Manu: To be mothers were 
women created, and to be fathers men / and he adds significantly 
'therefore are religious sacraments ordained in the Veda to be 


86 


STATUS OF INDIAW WOMEif 


observed by the husband together wiUi the wife.'^ 

Tlie Asiatic theory of marriage, wlilch would have been per¬ 
fectly comprehensible in the Middle Ages, before the European 
woman had become an ecoriomic parasite, and which is still very 
little removed from that of Roman or Greek Christianity, is not 
readily intelligible to the industrial democratic coosciousness of 
^ Europe and America, which is so much more concerned for rights 
^ than for duties, and desires more than anything else to be released 
from responsibilities— regarding such release as freedom. It is 
thus that Western reformers would awaken a divine discontent 
in the hearts of Oriental wotnen, forgetting that the wav of ego- 
assenlon cannot be a royal road to realisation of the Self, The 
industrial mind is primarily sentimental, and therefore cannot 
reason dearly upon love and marriage; but the Asiatic analysis 
is philosophic, religious and practical. 

Current Western theory seeks to establish marriage on a basis 
of roiuaniic Jove and free dioice; marriage thus depends on 
the accident of 'faliing in love," Those w'ho are ^crossed in love' 
or do not love are not required to many. This individualistic 
position, however, is only logically defensible if at the same dme 
it is recognized that to fall out of love must end the marriage. 
It is a high and religious ideal which justifies sexual relations only 
as the outward expression demanded by passionate love and re¬ 
gards an intimacy' continued or begun for mere pleasure, or for 
reasons of prudence, or even as a duty, as essentially immoral; 
it is an ideal which isolated individuals and groups have constantly 
upheld; and it may be that the ultinjaie development of idealistic 
individualism will tend to a nearer realisation of it. But do not let 
us deceive ourselves that because the Western marriage is nomi¬ 
nally founded upon free choice, it therefore secures a permanent 
imity of spiritual and physical passion. On the contrary, periiaps 
in a majority of cases, it holds together those W'ho are no longer 
'in lovef; habit, considerations of prudence, or, if there are chil¬ 
dren, a sense of duly often compel the passionless continuance of 
a marriage for the initiation of w’hich romantic love was felt to 
be a ji«e qua non. Those who now live side by side upon a basis 

^Jaliatigir obiems in his ‘Memolri' that the Hindu woman ‘h the 
half of a man. and hh conpajuoa la religious cercinonies.’ Cf. the Freau* 
Sinara, eh. xxlv; ‘withotit a wife a sacnfice Is not fruitful' 


INDIAN WOMEN. 


PL.4TE NX I 



HU 


wtm 

MPHUMlIi 



. ■ 


— ■ r.-3h „ . 

. 


Chinil BIhl, cail«l Chand Sultan. Defender ot Ahmadnagnr aj^aiiist Akbar^ 
1^5. pamting^ iSth c«itur>', CDllectjon of Lady Heriinghan], 

























STATUS OF INDIAN WOW£N gj 

of affection and commern interest would not have entered upon 
marriage on this basis alone^ 

If the home is worth presening under modem conditions—and 
in India at any rate, the family is still the centra element of social 
organization, then probably the 'best solution' vrill always be 
found In some such compromise as is implied in a more or less 
permanent marriage; though greater tolerance than is now usual 
must be accorded to exceptions above and bdow the norm* What 
are we going to regard as the constructive basis of the normal 
marriage ? 

For Hindu sociologists marriage is a social and ethical relation¬ 
ship^ and the begetting of children the parent of a debt. Ro¬ 
mantic love is a brie! experience of timeless freedom, essentially 
religious and ecstatic, in itself as purely antisocial as evary glimpse 
of Union is a denial of the Relative j It Is the way of Mary, It 
h true the giamour of this experience may persist for wedes and 
months, when the whole of life is illumined by the partial merg¬ 
ing of the consciousness of the lover and beloved; but sooner or 
hter in almost every case there must follow a retuni to the world 
of unreality, and that insight which once endowed the beloved 
with innumerable perfections fades in the light of commonsense. 
The lovers are fortunate if there remains to them a basis of com¬ 
mon interest and commoa duty and a mutuality of temperament 
adequate for friendship, affection and forbearance; upon this 
chance depends the possibility of happiness during the greater 
part of almost every married life. The Hindu marriage differs 
from the marriage of sentiment mainly in putting these considera¬ 
tions first Here, as elsewhere, happiness wiU arise from the fub 
filment of vocation, far more than when immediate satisfaction 
is made the primary end. I use the term vocation advisedly; for 
the Oriental marriage, lihe the Oriental actoris art, is the fulfil¬ 
ment of a traditional design, and docs not depend upon the acci¬ 
dents of sensibility. To be such a man as Rima, such a wife as 
Sita, rather than to express 'oneself,^ is the aim. The formula is 
predetermined ; husband and wife alike have parts to playj and 
it is from this point of view that we can best understand the 
meaning of Manu's law, that a wife should look on her husband 
as a god, regardless of his personal merit or demerits—it would 
be beneath her dignity to deviate from a woman's norm merely 
because of the failure of a man. It is for her own sake and for 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


88 

the sake of the conununityi father than for lus aloae* that life 
must be attuned to the eternal unity of Punisha and Prakrit!, 
Whatever the ultimate possibilities of Western individuaHsroi 
irlindu society was established on a basis of group morality* It is^ 
true that no ahsolute ethic is held binding on all classes alike; 
but within a given class the freedom of the individual b subordi¬ 
nated to the interest of the group, the concept of duty is para¬ 
mount How far this concept of duty trenches on the liberty of 
the individual may be seta in Ramans repudiation of Sita, subse¬ 
quent to the victory in Lanka and the coronation at Aycdhya * 
although convinced of her perfect fidelitjv Rama* who stands in 
epic history as the mirror of social ethics, consents to banish his 
wife, because the people murmur ag^nst her. The argttmcnt is 
that if the king should receive back a wife who had been living 
in another man's house, albeit faithful, popular morality would 
be endangered, since others might be moved by love and par¬ 
tiality to a like rehabilitation but with less justiheation. Thus the 
social order is placed before the happiness of the individual, 
whether man or woman. This is the c?^pLanation of the greater 
peace which distinguishes the arranged marriage of the East from 
the self-chosen niarriage of the West; where there is no deception 
there can be no disappointment. And since the conditions on 
which it is founded do not change* it is logical that Hindu mar¬ 
riage should be indissoluble; only when social duties have been 
fulfilled and social debts paid, is it permissible for the housdiolder 
to relinquish sunultaneously the duties and the rights of the social 
individual. It is also logical that when the marriage is childless, it 
is permissible to take a second w'ife with the consent—and of ten 
at the wish—of the first 

It b somehnies asked^ what opportunities ate open to the Ori¬ 
ental woman? How can she express herself? The answer is 
that life IS so designed that she h given the opportunity to be a 
woman—in other words, to realise^ rather than to express herself* 
It is possible that modem Europe errs in the opposite directioiL 
We must also remember that very much w^hich passes for edu¬ 
cation nowadays is superficial; some of it amounts to little more 
than parlor tricks^ and nothing is ^incd by contmunicating this 
condition to Asia^ where I have heard of modem parents who 
desired that their daughters should be taught 'a little French' or 'a 
few strokes on the vtoliru* The arts in India are professional and 


INDIAN WOMEN 


PI„\T1-: NXII 



Hindu marriage. Prom a Mbglial painting, about i(ioo» 




















i. 


'•r ' 


\i r- 




i 


s 




I 


! 

j 

ii 

I 

i 




I 


m 


1 

i 

I 

I 



f 

J 

1 






STATUS OF INDIA?! WOMEN 


89 


vocaticmalp demanding undivided scn^ice; nothing is taught to 
the aoialeur by way o£ social accomplishment or studied super¬ 
ficially. And woman represents the continuity of the racia] life, 
an energy which cannot be divided or diverted without a corres¬ 
ponding loss of racial vitality; she can no more desire to be so-mc- 
thing other than herself^ than the Vaishya could wish to be knoi^n 
as a Kshattriya, or the Kshattriyap as a Brahman* 

It has been shown in fact^ some seventy^-five per cent of West¬ 
ern graduate ^vomen do not m^rry; and apart from thesti if 
it be true tliat five-sixths of a child's tendencies and activities 
are already determined before it reaches school age, and that the 
habits then deeply rooted cannot be greatly modified, if it be true 
that so much depends on deliberate training while the mstincts 
of the child are still potential and habits unformed^ can we say 
tliat w^omen whose social duties or pleasures^ or self-elected 
careers or unavoidable ^vage slavery draws them into the outer 
world, are fulfilling their duty to the race, or as ^vc should sa>\ 
the debt of the ancestors ? The modem suffragist declares that the 
state has no right to demand of woman^ whether directly or 
indirectly, by bribe or pressure of opinion, that she consider her¬ 
self under any obligation, in return for the protection afforded 
herp to produce its future citizens. But w'e are hardly likely to 
see this point of view accepted in tJiese days when the right of 
society to conscript the bodies of men is almost universally con¬ 
ceded- It is true that many who do not acquiesce in the existing 
industrial order are prepared m resist conscription in the military 
sense, that is to say, conscription for destruction; but we are 
becoming accustomed to the idea of another kind of conscription^ 
or rather co-operatiotip based on serv^ice, and indeed, aca^rding 
to either of the two dynamic theories of a future society—^the 
symdJcaJist and the Individual islic—It must appear that without 
the fulfilment of function there can exist no rights^ From the co^ 
operative point of view society has an absolute right to compel 
its members to fulfil the functions that are necessary to it; and 
only those who, like the anchorite, voluntarily and entirely re¬ 
nounce the advantages of society anti the protection of law have 
a right to ignore the ebims of society.^ From the individualist 

^ A vigorous sodety can wdl afford to supirfirt, and in the Interests ol 
Kpirtlual ^'oliicf \ril[ gladly support, so far as support is necessary'; nol 
only thinkers and artists^ whose function U obvious but aho a certaia 


9 *> 


status of IKDIAN WOMEN 


point of vieWj on the other hMd^ the fulfalment of function is 
regarded as a spontaneous activiij^ as is even now true in the 
cases of the thinker and the nrtbtj but even the individualist does 
not expect to get something for nothing, and the last idea he has is 
to compel the serv ice of others. 

I doubt if anyone will deny that it is the function or nature of 
women, as a group—not necessarily in evciy^ individual case—^in 
general, to be mothers, alike in spirituaJ and physical senses. 
UTiat we have to do then, is not to assert lire liberty of women to 
deny the duty or right of motherhood, however we regard it, but 
to accord this function a higher protection and honour than it 
now receives. And here, perhaps, there is still something to be 
learnt In .Asia, There the pregnant woman is auspicious, and 
receives tlie highest respect^ whereas in many industrial and 
secular Western societies she is an object of more or less open 
ridicule, she is ashamed to he seen abroadp and tries to conceal 
her condition, sometimes even by means that are injurious to her 
own and the child^s healtlu That this was not the ease in a more 
vital period of European dvilization may be seen in all the 
literature and art of the Middle Ages, and particularly in the 
status of the Virgin Mary, whose motherhowl endeared her to 
the folk so much more nearly than her virginity. 

To avoid misunderstanding, let me say in passing, that in 
depicting the life of Hindu women as fulEILing a great ideal, 
1 do not mean to indicate the Hindu sodal formula as a thing to 
be repeated or imitated. This would be a view as futile as that 
of the Gothic revival in architecture; the reproduction of period 
furniture docs not belong to life. A perfection that has been can 
never be a perfection for us. 

Marriage was made for man, not man for marriage. One vrould 
gladly accept for Europe very soon, and for Asia in due timCp 
temporaiy^ marriage, the endotvmcnt of motherhood, and matri- 
archai succession, or whatever other forms our ot.™ spiritual and 
economic necessity may determine for us—not because such 
forma may be absolutely better than the Asiatic or mediaeval 
European institutions, but because they correspond more nearly 

niEinber ef thomugh^gmtig tthch who to alt appeataiicei are mere idlers. 
But the idlefi w^hclhcr anchorite or courtcEan, muit not demand to be 
supported in luxury, and must recogoixe that whatever he or receives 
ii given in and not according to 



PLATE XXlil 


INDIAN PAINTING, 



•, 'I ^ L “1^ 

RMM ID her kitchen ; Kri^hDa at the window^ Rajput palntin^^ iSth century^ 

Lahore Mu^um. 

































STATUS OF INMAN WOMEN 


9^ 

to our inner life. In comparing one social order ^ith anotber, I 
have no faith in any millennium past or future, but only in the 
best attainable adaptation of means to ends; and, 'let the ends 
determine the means,' should be the evidence of our idealism. 

Let us now return to the Indian Sati and tty to understand her 
better. The root meaning of the word is essential being, and 
ivc have so far taken it only in the wide sense. But she who 
refuses to live when her husband is dead is called Sati in a more 
special sense, and it is only so that the word (suttee) is well- 
known to Europeans. This last proof of the perfect unity of body 
and soul, this devotion beyond the grave, has been chosen by many 
Western critics as our reproach; we differ from them in thinking 
of our ‘suttees' not with pi^, but with understanding, respect, and 
love. So far from being ashamed of our ‘suttees' we take a pride 
in them; that is even true of tlic most 'progressive' amongst us. 
It is very much like the tenderness w^hich our children's children 
may some day feel for those of their race who were willing to 
throw away their lives for 'their country nght or wrong/ though 
the point of view may seem to us then, as it seems to so many 
already, evidence rather of generosity than balanced iudguient. 

The criticism we make on the institution of Satf and woman's 
blind devotion is similar to the 6nal Judgment we are about to 
pass on patriotism. We do not, as pragmatists may, resent the 
denial of the ego for the sake of an absolute, or attach an undue 
importance to mere life; on the contrary we see clearly that the 
re^less and useless sacrifice of the 'suttee* and the patriot is 
spiritually significant And what remains perpetually dear is 
the superiority of the reckless sacrifice to the calculating assertion 
of rights. Critidsm of the position of the Indian woman from 
the ground of assertive feminism, therefore, leaves us entirely 
unmoved: precisely as the patriot must be unmoved by an appeal 
to self-interest or a merely utilitarian demonstration of futility. 
We do not object to dying for an idea as 'suttees' and patriots 
have died; but we see that there may be other and greater ideas 
we can better serve by living for them. 

For some reason it lias come to be believed that Sati must have 
been a man-made Institution imposed on women by men for 
reasons of their oivn, that it is associated with feminine servility, 
and that it is peculiar to India. We shall sec that these views are 
historically unsound. It is true that in aristocratic clrdes Sad 




93 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


became to some degree a soctal coaveotion/ and pressure was put 
on uflwtlliog lodivJduals, precisely as conscripts are even now 
forced to suffer or die for other people's ideas; and from this 
point of view we cannot but be glad that it was prohibited by law- 
in 1H29 on tbe imUative of Eaja Ranunohun Roy. But now 
that nearly a century has passed it should not be difficult to 
review the histoiy and significance of Sati more dispassionately 
than was possible in the hour of controversy and the atmosphere 
of religious prejudice. 

It Is not surprising that the idea of Sat! occupies a considerable 
place in Indian literature. Par\‘ati herself, who could not endure 
the insults levelled against her husband by her father, is the proto- 
tj-pe of all others. In the early Tamil lyrics we read of an earthly 
bride whom the Brahmans seek to dissuade from the sacrifice; 
bul she answers that since her lord is dead, the cool waters of the 
the lotus pool and the dames of the funeral pyre are alike to her. 
Another pleads to share her hero's grave, telling the potter that 
she has fared with her lord over many a desert plain, and ask* 
ing him to make the funeral um large enough for both. Later 
in lustory we read of the widowed mother of Harsha that she 
replied to her son's remonstrances: 

"I am the lady of a great house; have you forgottai that I am 
the lioness-mate of a great spirit, who, like a lion, had hts delight 
in a hundred battles?" 

A man of such towering genius and spirituality as Kabtr so 
takes for granted the authenticity of the impulse to Sat! that he 
wnstantly uses it as an image of surrender of the ego to God; and 
indeed, in all Indian mystical literature the love-rdatioti of woman 
to man is taken unhesitatingly as an immediate redection of spiri¬ 
tual experience. This is most conspicuous in all the Radhi- 
Krishna literature. But here let us notice more particularly the 
beautiful and very interesting poem of Muhammad Riea NauT, 
written in die rrign of Akbar upon the 'suttee' of a Hindu girl 
whose betrothed was killed on the very day of the marriage. 
This Musulman poet, to whom the Hindus were 'idolaters,' does 
not relate his story in any spirit of religious intolerance or 
ethical condescension; he is simply amaaed 'that after the death 
of men, the woman shows for^ her marvellous passion.' He 

^ ^Seoal ConvendoBi' are rarely 'Man-made laws' alaae. 


status of INDIAN WOMEN 


9 ^ 

does not wonder at the wickedness of men, but at the generosity 
of women; how different from the modem critic who can sec 
no motive but self-interest behind a social phenomenon that 
passes his comprehension! 

This Hindu bride refused to be comforted and wished to be 
burnt on the pjre of her dead betrothed, men Akbar was 
tnfortned of this, he called the girl before him and offered 
wealth and protection, but she rejected all his persuasion as 
well as the counsel of the Brahmans, and would neither speak 
nor hear of anything but the Fire. 

Akbar was forced, though reluctantly, to give his consent to 
the sacrifice, but sent with her his son Prince Daai}-at who con- 
tinu^ to dissuade her. Even from amidst the fiames, she replied 
to his remonstrances, 'Do not annoy, do not annoy, do not annoy.* 
*Ah,' exclaims the poet: 

"Let those whose hearts am ablaie wish the Fire of Love learn 
courage from ihia pmn may I 

Tcarh O Go4» the Way of Love,, and my heart ivilh Tfii^ 

maiden's Firt-"* 

Thus ht prays for himself; and for her: 

Do O Cod^ the he^id of that, fare hlddeii virgin^, whose 

purity exceeded ihat of the Hooris, 

Do Thou endear her to the first kissing of her King, and gradouily 
accept her fiacrifiec** 

Matter of fact accounts of more modem 'suttees' are given by 
Englishmen who have witnessed them. One which took place in 
Baix^a in 1825 is described by R. Hartley Kennedy, the widow 
persisting In her intention in spile of “several fruitless endeavours 
to dissuade her." A more remarkable case is described by Sir 
Frederick Halliday. Here also a widow resisted all di^^s nasmn, 
and finally proved her determination by asking for a lamp, and 
holding her finger in the flame until it was burnt and twisted 
like a quill pen held in the flame of a candle; all this time she 
gave no sign of fear or pain whatever. Sir F. Halliday had 
therefore to grant her wish, even as Akbar had had to do three 
centuries earlier. 

It is sometimes said by Indian apologists that at certain dines 
Of places in India—amongst the Buddhists, or the Marathis, or 
in the c^ic^lhere was no purdah; or that certain historic or 
mythic individual women were rot secluded. Such statements 


94 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


ignore the fact that there are other kinds of seclusion than those 
afforded by palace walls. For example^ though Rama^ Laksh- 
man and STta had lived together in forest exile for many years 
in closest affection, it is expressly stated that Lakshman had 
never raised his eyes above his brother's wife*s feet, so that 
he did not even know her appearance. To sp^ more generally, 
it b customary for Hindus^ when occasion arises for tliem to 
address an unknown woman, to call her "mother' irrespective 
of her age or conditiom These unseen walls are a sedusion 
equally absolute with any purdah. One result is that the streets 
of an Indian city by night are safer for a woman than those 
of any city in Europe. I have known more than one European 
womaUp acquainted w^th India, express her strong conviction of 
this. 

Western critics have often asserted that the Oriental woman 
is a slave, and that we have made her what she is. We can only 
reply that we do not identify freedom with self-assertion, and that 
the Oriental WDimin is what she is, only because our social and 
religious culture has permitted her to be and to remain essentially 
feminine. Exquisite as she may be in literature and art, we dare 
not claim for ourselves as men the w'hole honour of creating 
such a type, however persistently the industrious industrial critic 
w'ould thrust it upon us. 

The Eastern woman is not, at least we do not claim that she is, 
superior to other women in her innermost nature; she is perhaps 
an older, purer and more specialised t}^, but certainly an uni¬ 
versal ty^, and it is precisely here that the industrial woman 
J departs from type. Nobility in women does not depend upon 
rate, but upon ideals * it is the outcome of a certain view of life. 

Savitrip Fadmavaii^ Siti, RadhI, Umi, Lllavatl, Tara—our 
divine and human heroines — have an universal fellowsliip, for 
eveiything feminine is of the Mother. Who could have been 
more wholly devoted than Alcestls, more patient than Griselda, 
more loving than Deirdre, more soldier than Joan of Arc, more 
Amazon than Brynhild ? 

When the Titanic sank^ there were many women who refused 
—perhaps mistakenly, perhaps quite rightly—that v^as thdr ouTt 
affair—^to be rescued without their husbands, or were only tom 
from them by force; dramatic confirmatjo<n of the conviction that 
lovfr-heroism is always and everywhere the same, and not only 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


9S 


in India^ nor onJy in a^cs past^ may b« stmager than deatk 

i do not thidk that the Indian ideal has ever been the exclusive 
treasure of any ooe race or time, but rather^ it reappears wherever 
woman is set free to be truly herself, that is wherever a suffid- 
entJy religious^ heroic and aesthetic culture has aSorded her 
the necessary protection. Even the freedom which she seeks in 
modem self-assertion^—which I would grant from the stand¬ 
point of one who will not govern—is merely an inverted concept 
of protection, and it may be that the more she b freed the more 
she w^iU reveal the very type we have most adored in those who 
seemed to be slaves* Either w^ay would be happier for men than 
the necessity of protecting women from themselves, and the 
tyranny of those who are not capable of friendship, being neither 
bound nor free. 

The cry of our Indian Sati, "Do not aimoy^ do not annoy/" and 
"No one has any right over the life of another; is not that my 
own affair is no cry for protection from a fate ^e does not 
seek; it is individualistic^ and has been uttered by every woman 
in the world who has followed love beyond the grave. Deirdre 
refused every offer of care and protection from Conchubar: "It 
is not land or earth or food 1 am wnating,"^ she said, gold or 
silver or horses,, but leave to go to the grave w^hcre the sons of 
Usnach are lying/' Emer called to Cuchullain slain: "Love of 
my life, my friend, my sweetheart, ray one choice of the men of 
the world, many Is the wed or unwed, envied me until 

loHlay, and now I will not stay living after you," 

Irish women w'ere free, but w'e are used even more to look on 
the old Tcuronic type as representative of free and even ama- 
^odian vromanhood. We do not think of Brynhild, Shidd-may and 
Victory'-wafterp as compelled by men to any action against her 
will, or as w'eakly submissive* Yet when Sigurd was slain she 
became 'suttee' i the prayers of Gunnar availed as little as those of 
Conchubar w-kh Deirdre. He 'laid his arms about her neck, 
and besought her to live and have wealth from hirn ; and all others 
in like wise letted her from dying; but she thrust than aU from 
her, and said that it was not the part of any to let her in that 
w hich w^s her wull," And the second heroic woman 6gurcd in the 
saga, w’cdded to Sigurd, though she did not die, yet cried when 
he was betrayed: 


96 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


Now am I as Httlfi 
As the leaf may be 
Amid wind-swept wood> 

Now when dead he Heth. 

*^She who is courteous in her mind/" says the Shocktafilsk^ 
"'with shyness shall her face be bright ^ of all the beatides of the 
bodyj none is more shining than shyness/’’ This theory of 
courtesy, of supreme gentleness—"full sweetly bowing dovra 
her head,'" says the English Merlin, "as she that w'as shame fast/' 
runs also through all medical chivalry. Yet it is about this shy 
quiet being, a mystery to men, that ^e whole medieval world 
turns; "first reserve the honour to God/’ says Malory^ "^and sec¬ 
ondly, the quarrel must come of thy lady/^ Like Uma and Sita, 
Virgin Mary is the image of a perfect being— 

For in this rose oonteined w^s 
Heaven and earth in litel space— 

and for a little while, in poetry and architecture, we glimpse an 
idealisation of woman and woman's love akin to the praise of 
RadM in the contemporary songs of Chandidas and Vidyapati* 
But for our purpose even more significant than the religious 
and knightly culture, the product of less quickly dianging con¬ 
ditions, and impressible too in its naivete, is the picture of the 
w'oman of the people which w'e can gather from folk-song and 
IjTic, Here Avas a being obviously strong and sensible, not wlth^ 
out knowledge of life, and by no means economically a parasite. 
If wt study the folk speech anywhere in the world we shall see 
that it reveals w^oman, and not the man, as typically the lover; 
Avhen her shyness allows, it is she w'ho Avould pray for man's love, 
and will serve him to the utmost. Industriahsm reverses this 
relation, making man the suppliant and the servant, a condition 
as unnatural as any other of its characteristic perversions^ 

The w'oman of the folk does not bear resentment. Fair Helen, 
who followed Child Waters on fool, and bore his child in a stable, 
is overheard singing: 

Lullaby, my oAvne deerc child t 
I w'old thy father were a king. 

Thy mother layd on a beere. 

Is she not like the Bengali Mafanchamala. whose husband had 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


97 


married a second wife* and left her imloved and fotgolten—^who 
says^ "though I die now, and become a bird or a lesser creature 
or whatever befall me, I care not, for I have seen my darling 
happy 

If woman under industriaUsm is unsatis^ed, it would be diffi¬ 
cult to say how much man also loses^ For woman is naturally 
the lover^ the bestower of lifer 

Conjunction with me renders life long. 

I give youth when I enter upon amorousness.^ 

Her complaint b not that man demands too much^ but tlmt 
he will accept too little. 

Long time have I been waiting for ihe coming of my dear ; 

Sometimes I am uneasy and troubled in my mind^ 

Sometimes I think HI go to my lover and tell him my mind 

But if I should go to my lover, my lover he will say me oay^ 

If I show to him my boldness^ he'll ne'er love me again.’ 

^Vnd it is to serve him, not to seek service from hSm that 
she dcsirest 

In the cold stormy weather, when the winds are a-blowing, 

My dear, I shall be willing to wait on you then.’ 

The Oriental w oman, perhaps is not Oriental at ail, but simply 
woman. If the modem woman could accept tins thought, per-^ 
haps she would seek a new way of escape, not an escape from 
love, but a w^ay out of industrialisin. Could we not undertake this 
quest together? 

It is true that the modem woman is justified in her discontent. 
For of what has she not been robbed ? The organitation of society 
for competition and e^tploitation has made possible for the few, 
and only the very few, more physical comfort and greater security 
of life; but even these it has robbed of all poise, of the power 
to walk or to dress or to many^ wisely, or to desire children or 
lovers, or to believe m any power not legally e:^teriorised. From 
faith in herself to a belief in votes, w^hat a descent! 

Decade after decade since the fourteenth century has seen her 

^ NiEimL 

^ Eastern Cbtmdcs folk-wng. 

* Somerset folksong. 


98 


status of INDIAN WOMEN 


Ldfiuence reduced, li was paramount in relifion^ Ln poetry, in 
mmic, in ardii lecture and in all lift But men, when they 
reformed the church and taught you that love not a sacra- 
ment without the seal of clerical approval; when they forced 
your music into modes of equal temperament; when they substi¬ 
tuted knowledge for feeling and wisdom in education,^ when they 
asked you to pinch your shoes and your waists^ a^d persuaded you 
to think this a refinement, and the language of Elizabethan poetry 
coarse; when at last they taught you to become ImperralistSj and 
went away alone to colonise and civilise the rest of the world, 
leaving you in England with nothing particular to do; when, if 
you have the chance to marry at all, it is ten or fifteiin j^ears too 
late— who can wonder that you are dissatisfied^ and dairn the 
right to a career of your own '"not merely to cam your livelihood,, 
but to provide yourself with an object in life?"" How many 
women have only discovered an object in life since the energies 
of men have been employed in activities of pure destruction? 
What a confession! To receive the franchise would be but a small 
compensation for all you have suffered, if it did not happen that 
we have now seen enough of representative government and the 
tyranny of majorities to understand their futility. Let women as 
well as mtUj turn away their eyes from the ddosions of govern¬ 
ment, and bepn to understand direct action, finding ^ough to 
do in solving the problems of thdr own lives, withoni attempting 
to regulate those of other people* No man of real power has 
cither time or strength for any other man's work than his own, 
and this should be equally true for women. Aside from ail 
questions of mere lust for power or demand for rights, untold 
evils have resulted from the conviction tliat It is our God-given 
duty to regulate other people's lives—the effects of the current 
theories of 'uplift/ and of the 'white man's burden' are only single 
c,^amples of this; and even if the Intentions are gcjod, w^e nwd 
not overlook the fact that the way to hdl is often paved with good 
intentions. 

Meanwhile there lies an essentia] weakness in the propaganda 
of emancipation, Inasmuch as the argument is based on an imques- 
tioning acceptance of male values. The so-called feminist is as 
much enslaved by masculine ideals as the so-called Indian nation- 

* Cf, Tlic Crffll p. 127, 

■From an advcrdscmeint b the EnffIiihwoman*i Mook, 1911 , 


STATUS OF IKDIAN WOMEK 


99 


alLst h enslaved by European ideals^ Like industrial man^ the 
modern woman values industry' more than Idsure^ she seeks m 
c^'cry way to externalise her lifCj to adiieve success in men's 
professions, she feigns to be ashamed of her sexual naturep she 
claims to be as reasonable^ as learned, as expert as any man^ and 
her best men friends make the same claims on her bchalL But 
just in proportion as she lacks a genuine feminine idealbnip inaS" 
much as she vrishes to be samething other than herself, she lacks 
pQwer^ 

The claim of women to share the loaves and fishes v/ith indus¬ 
trial man may be as just as those of Indian politicians^ But the 
argument Uiat women, can do what men can do ("we take aU 
labour for our province" says Olive Schreiner) like the argu¬ 
ment that Indians can be prepared to govern themselves hy a 
course of studies in democracyi implies a profound self-distrust* 
The claim to equality W'ith msi,^ or with Englishmcfi—what an 
honour! That men^ or Eni^ishmen, as the case may be, should 
grant the daim—what a condescension t 

If there is one profound intuition of the non-industrial coa^ 
sciousness, it is that the qualities of men and women are incom¬ 
mensurable. "The sexes are differently entertained/' says Nova- 
lis, ^*inan demands the sensational in intellectual form^ woman 
the intdlectual in sensational foim What is secondary to the 
man is paramount to the womam Do they not resemble the 
Infinite, since it is impossible to square (^iwidri«n) them^ and 
they can only be approached through approximation?'" Is not 
the Hindu point of view* possibly right; not that men and woman 
should approach an identity of temperament and function, but 
that for the greatest abundance of life^ there is requisite the 
greatest possible sexual differentiation? 

WTiat is it that great men—poets and creators* not men of 
analysis—demand of women? It is, surely, the requirements of 
the prolific, rather than of the devourers, w'hich are of most 
significance for the human race, w'hich advances under the guid* 
ance of leaders, and not by accident The one thing they have 
demanded of women is Life* 

To one thing at least the greatest men have been always indif¬ 
ferent, that is, the amount of knowledge a woman may possess* 
It w'as not by her learning that Beatrice inspired Dante, or the 
washerwoman Chandldiis* 'When Cudiullain chose a wife, it was 



TOO 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


Emcr^ because she had ihe six gift 5 oi beauty^ volce^ sweet 
speech^ needlework, wisdom and charity. We know only of 
Helen that "strangely like she was to some immortal spirit;** in 
otlier words* she was radiant. Radha's shitiing made the gmund 
she stood on bright as gold. The old EngLish poet wrote o£ one 
like her 

Her luve lumes liht 

A$ a launteme a nyhL 

1e is this radiance in women, more than any other quaJityj that 
urges men to e^ety sort of heroism* be it martial or poedc. 

Every^one understands the heroism of war j we are not surprised 
at Lady Hamilton's adoration of Nelson, But the actiTity of 
w'ar is atavistic, and highly civilised people such as the Chinese 
regard it with open contempt* What nevertheless w e do not yet 
understand is the heroism of art, that e.xhatisting and perpetual 
demand trhich all creative labour makes alike on body and soul. 
The artist must fight a continual batde for mastery of himself 
and his environment; his work must usually be achieved in the 
teeth of violent, ignorant and often well-organised opposilioa, 
or against still more wearing apathy* and in any case, even at the 
best, against the intense resistance w'hidi matter opposes to the 
moulding force of ideas, the tamasic quality m things* The 
ardent love of women is not tCM> great a reu-ard for those who 
are faithful. But it is far more than the reward of action, it is 
the energy without which action may be impossible. As pure 
male, the Great God is inert, and his 'power' is alw'ays feminine^ 
and it is she vrho leads the hosts of heaven against the demons, 

^Vhen man of necessity spent his life in vrar or in hunting, 
when women needed a persona! physical as well as a spiiitual 
protection, then she could not do enough for him in personal 
service; we have seen in the record of folk-song and epic how 
it is part of woman's itinermost nature to worship man. In the 
words of another Indian scripture* her husband is for her a 
place of pilgrimage, the giving of alms, the performance of vows, 
and he is her spiritual teacher—this according to the same school 
which makes the tnitiation of son by mother eight times more 
efficacious than any other. WTtat we have not yet learnt is that 
like relations are needed for the fine,st quality of life, even under 
conditions of perpetual peace; the tenderness of w^omen is as 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


tot 


necessary to man mw, as ever it was when, iii? first duty was that 
o£ physical warfare, and few men can achieve greatness, and then 
scarcely without the danger of a one-sided development, whose 
envlronnient lades this atnuaspbeie of tenderness. Woman pos¬ 
sesses the power of perpetually creating in man the qualities she 
desires^ and this is for her an infinitely greater power than the 
possession of those special qualities could ever confer upon her 
directly. 

Far be it from us^ however, to suggest the forcing of any 
preconceived development upon the modern individualist. We 
shall accomplish nothing by pressing anything in moulds. \Vh^l I 
have tried to explain is that notwithstanding that the formula of 
woman's status in Oriental society may have ere now crj-stalfised 
—as die formulae of dassic art have become academic—neverthe¬ 
less this formula represented once, and stiH essentially represents, 
although ■ unfelf in realisation, a veritable expression of woman'^ 
own nature. If not so, then the formula stands sdf-CDndemncd. 
I do not know if through our modern idealistic mdiridtialism it 
may be xx>ssible to renounce all forms and fonnulae for ever— 
fear that it ts only in heaven that there shall be neither marrying 
nor giving in marriage—but were that the case, and ever}" creature 
free to find itself, and to behave according to its own nature, then 
it is possible, at least, that the ^natural' rdation of woman to 
man would after all involve the same conditions of magic that are 
implied in the soon-tE?-be-discarded conventional and calculated 
forms of mediaeval art and Oriental society* If not, we must 
accept things as the}" really arc—however they may be. 

Meanwhile, it %vou]d be worth while to pause before we make 
haste to emancipate, that is to say, reform and industrialise the 
Oriental w^oman. For it is not for Asia alone that she preserves 
a great tradition, in an age that is otlierwise preoccupied. T£ she 
too should be persuaded to expend her power upon externals, 
there might come a lime on earth when it could not be beliCTcd 
that such w*om^ had ever lived* as the ancient poets describe; it 
vrould be forgotten that w'oman had ever been unselfish, sensuous 
and shy. Deirdne, BrynhUd, Alcestis, Sita, Ridha, would then 
be empty names. And that would be a loss, for already it has 
been felt in Western schools that we *'are not furnished with 
adequate womanly ideals in history and Uterature/^^^ 

3 Stanley Hall, YwiK cd p. 2SA 


102 


STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN 


The industrial revolution in India is of externa] and very recent 
origin: there b no lack of men, and it is the sacred duty of pa.T- 
cots to arrange a marriage for every daughter: there Is no diverg¬ 
ence of what is spiritual and what b sensuous: Indian women 
do not deform their bodies in the interests of fashion: they are 
more concerned about service than H^ts: they consider barren¬ 
ness the greatest possible misfortune, after widowhood fn 
a word, it has never happened in India that women have been 
ju(^ by or have accepted purely male standards. What pos¬ 
sible service then, except in a few externals, can the Western 
world render to Eastern women? Though it may be able to 
teach us much of the means of life, it has everything yet to relearn 
about life itself. And what we still remember there, we would 
not forget before we must. 


SAHAJA 

Saliaj^ s^aja, e^rcfyoiie Aptmks of sahaja. 

Uni who kaow& what uhaja cti^ajMf 

--^Cha^^dis, 

The last achievement of all thought is a recognition of the 
idcntilj- of spirit and matter, subject and object; and this reunion 
IS the marriage of Heaven and Hell, the reaching out of a con- 
tnctfd universe towards its freedom, in response to the love of 
Eternity for the productions of time. There h then no sacred 
or profane, spiritual or sensual, but everything that lives is pure 
and void. This very world of birth and death b also the ereat 
Abyss. 

In India we could not escape the conviction that sexual love 
has a deep and spiritual significance There is nothing with 
which we can tetter compare the 'mystic union’ of the finite with 
Its infinite ambient—that one experience which proves itself and 
is the only ground of faith—than the sclfn^blivioo of earthly 
lovera locked in each other's arms, where 'each is both.' Physical 
proxmiity, contact, and interpenetration are the expressions of 
love, only tecause love is the recognition of identity. These two 
are one flesh, because they have remembered their unity of 
spinL This is moreover a fuller identity than the mere s>wipatby 
of two individuals; and each as individual has now no more 
significance for the other than the gates of heaven for one who 
stands within. It t$ like an algebraic equation where the equation 
IS the only truth, and tlic terms may stand for anything. The 
least intrusion of the ego, however, involves a return to the illu¬ 
sion of duality. 

^ This vision of the beloved has no necessaiy relation to empir¬ 
ical reality. The beloved may be in every ethical sense of the 
word unworthy—and the consequences of this mav be socially or 
ethicdly disastrous; but nevertheless the eye of'love perceives 
her divine perfection and infinity, and is not deceived. That one 
is chosen by the other Is therefore no occasion of pride: for the 
same perfection and Infinity are present in every grain of sand, 
and in the raindrop as much as in the sea. 

To carry through such a relationship, however, and to reach a 
goal, to really progress and not merdy to achieve an intimation— 


SAHAJA 


la; 

for this it i$ necessary that both the lover and the beloved should 
be of one and the same spiritual age and of the same moral fibre. 
For if not, as Chandidas says, the woman who loves an unworthy 
man will share the fate of a flower that is pierced with thorns, 
she will die of a broken heart: and the youth who falls in love 
with a woman of loiver spiritual degree will be tossed to and 
fro in great unrest and will give way to despair. 

Because the stages of Imman love rcRect the stations of spiritual 
evolution, it is said that the relationship of hero and heroine re¬ 
veals an esoteric meaning, and this truth has been made the basis 
of the well knovvti allegories of Radha and ICrishna, which are 
the dominant motif of mediseval Hinduism. Here, illicit love 
becomes the veiy tj^pe of salvation; for In India, where social 
convention is so strict, such a love involves a surrender of all 
that the world values, and sometimes of life itself. When Krishna 
receives the milkmaids, and tells them he owes them a debt that 
can never be paid, it is because they have come to him "like the 
vairtiffl who has renounced his home'—neither their duties nor 
their great possessions hindered them from taking the way of 
Mary. The great seducer makes them his o\ni. 

All this is an allcgoiy—the neRection of reality in the mirror of 
illusion. This reality is the inner life, where Krishna is the 
Lord, the milkmaids are the souls of men, and Brindaban the 
field of consciousness. The relation of the milkmaids with the 
Divine Herdsman is not in any sense a model intended to be 
realised in human relationships, and the literature contains explicit 
warnings against any such confusion of planes. 

The interpretation of this mystery, however, is so well known 
as to need no elaboration. But there is a related cult, which is 
called Sahaja,^ which constitutes a practical discipline, a 'rule/ 
and what we have to speak of here concerns this more difficult 
and less familiar teaching. 

In sahaja, llie adoration of young and beautiful girls was made 
the path of spiritual evolution and ultimate emancipation. By 
this adoration we must understand not merely ritual worship 
(the Kitmari Puja), but also 'romantic love.* 

This doctrine seems to have originated with the later Tantrik 
Buddhists. Kanu Bhatta already In the tenth century wrote 
Sahaja love songs in Bengal, The classic exponent, however, is 
^ Root cacaninE. cognate, or inaatc, and hence, “spontancciijj.'' 


PL.VTE XXIV 


INDtAX SCLLrrLRE. 



\\ here eaeli is both." Knelt-cut sculpture, Bruhtunnical. Elura, 

Bth center}'. 









5AHAJA 


10 $ 


Cboadidas, who lived in the fourteenth century. Many other 
poets wrote in the same seme. Oiandidm himself was called a 
mathnan—a term in Bengali vrliich signi6es a man of ecoentiic 
ideas who oev'erthdess endears himself to ever^'one. He was 
Brahman and a priest of the temple of Vasuli Devi near Bolpur, 
One day he was walking on the river bank where women were 
w'ashing clothes. By some chance there w'as a young girl whose 
name W‘as Rami; she raised her to bis. There was a meet¬ 
ing of Dante and Beatrice. From this time on Qiandidls was 
filled with love. Rami was very bcautifulr but in Ifindu society 
what can a washerwoman be to a Brahman? She could only 
dust of his feet. He, however, openly avowed his love 
in his songs, and neglected his priestly duties. He would fall into 
a dream whenever he was reminded of her. 

The love songs of Chapdid^ were more like hymns of devo¬ 
tion: 'T have taken refuge at your feet, my beloved. When I 
do not see you my mind has no rest. You are to me as a parent 
to a helpless child. You are the goddess herself—the garland 
about my neck—my very universe. All b darkness without you, 
you are the meaning of my prayers. I cannot forget your grace 
and your charm—and yet there is no desire in my heart." 

Chandidas was excommunicated, for he had affronted the 
whole orthodox community. By the good offices of his brother 
he once on the point of being taken back into society, on 
condition of renouncing Rami forever, but when she was told 
of thb she went and stood before him at the place of the reunion 
—^never before had she looked upon his face so publicly—then he 
forgot every promise of reformation, and bowed before her with 
joined hands as a priest approaches his household goddess. 

It b said that a divine vision was vouchsafed to certain of the 
Brahmans there present—for Ram! was so transfigured that she 
seemed to be the Mother of the Universe herself, the Goddess: 
that is to say that for them, as for Chandidas himsdf, the doors 
of perception w-erc cleansed, and they toe saw her divine per¬ 
fection. But the rest of them saw only the washerwoman, and 
Chandidas remained an outcast 

He has e.Yp]ained in his songs what he means by Sahaja. The 
lovers must refuse each other notlung, yet never fall. Inwardly, 
he says of the woman, she will sacrifice all for love, but out¬ 
wardly she will appear indifferent This secret love must find 



SAHAJA 


xo6 

e.'tpfcssioD in secret: but she must not yield to desire. She must 
cast hersdf freely into the sea of eomempt, and yet she mtist 
never actually drink of forbidden waters; she minsr not be shaken 
by pleasure or pain. Of the man he says that to be a true lover 
be must be able to make a frog dance in the mouth of a srtalte, 
or to bind an elephant with a spider’s web. That is to say, that 
although be plays with the most dangerous passions, he must not 
be carried away. In this restraint, or rather, in the temper that 
makes it possibly lies his salvation. "Hear me," says Oiandidis, 
to attain salvation through the love of woman, make your body 
like a dry stick^—for He that pervades the universe seen of none, 
can only be found by one who knows the secret of love." It is 
not si^rising if he adds that one such is hardly to be found in 
a miltion. 

^This doctrine of romantic love is by no means unique: lye meet 
with it also at the summit levels of European culture, in the thir¬ 
teenth eeniury. "And so far as Jove is concerned," says a modem 
Russian (Kuprin), "I tell you that even this has its peaks 
which only one out of millions is able to dimb." 

Before attempting to understand the practise of Sahaja we must 
define the significance of the desired salvation—^the spiritual free¬ 
dom (moisAo) which is called the ultimate purpose, the only true 
meaning of life, and by hypothesis the highest good and per¬ 
fection of our nature. It is a release from the ego and from ' 
becoming; it is the realisation of sdf and of entity—when 'noth¬ 
ing of ourself is left in us.’ This perfect state must be one with- 
desire, because desire tinpiies a lack: whatetrer action the 
/Ivan muhta or spiritual freeman performs must therefore be of 
the nature of mamfestation, and will be without purpose or inten¬ 
tion. Noting that he docs will be praiseworthy or blameworthy, 
and he will not think m any such terms,— as the MahdbhSrata 
says with many like texts, 'He who considers hlmsetf a doer of 
good and evil knows not the truth, I trow/ Nothing that the 
freeman does will be 'sdfish,' for he has lost the dlusian of the 
ego. Ris entire being will be m all he does, and it is this which 
makes the virtue of hts action. This is the iofioccnce of desires. 
Then and then only is the lover free—when he is free from 
wiUmg. He who is free is free to do what he will—hut first, 
as Nietzsche says, he must be such as can will, or as Rumi ex¬ 
presses it, must have surrendered will. This is by no means the 


SAHAJA 


107 


same as to do what one likes, or avoid what one does not like, 
for he is very far from free who is subject to the caprices or 
desires oi the ego. Of course, if the doors of percepticm were 
cleansed we should know that we are alwajs free (‘It is nought 
indeed but thine own hearing and willing that do hinder thee, 
so that thou dost not hear and see God’)—for the w’orid itsrif 
is manifestation and not the handiw'ork of the Absolutes The 
most perfect love series nothing for itsrif, requiring nothing, and 
offers nothing to the beloved, realizing her infinite perfection 
which cannot be added to; but we do not know this except in 
moments of perfect experience. 

Very surely the love of w'oman is not the only way to approach 
this freedom. It is more likely by far the most dai^erous way, 
and perhaps for many an impossible way. We do not however 
write to condemn or to advocate, but to explain. 

In reading of romantic love we are apt to ponder over what 
15 left unsaid. ^\Tiat did the writers really mean? What waa 
the actual physical relation of the Provencal lover to bis mistress, 
of Chandidas to Rami? I have come to see now that even If we 
knew this to the last detail it would tell us nothing. He who 
looks upon a woman with desire (be it even his wife) has already 
committed adultery with her in his heart, for all desire is adultery. 
We remember that saying, but do not always remember that the 
con\‘erse is also true—^that he who embraces a woman without 
desire has added nothing to the sura of his mortality. Action is 
then inaction. It is not by non-participation but by non-attach¬ 
ment that we live the spiritual life. ^ that be in Sahaja who 
merdy represses desire, fails. It is easy not to walk, but we have 
to w*alk without touching the ground. To refuse the beauty of 
Uie earth—which is our birthright—from fear that we may sink 
to the level of pleasure seekers —that inaction would be action, 
and bind us to the very flesh we seek to evade. The virtue of 
the action of those who are free betnp lies in the complete co¬ 
ordination of their being—body, soul and spirit, the inner and 
outer man, at one. 

The mere action, then, reveals notliing. As do die slaves of 
passion impelled by purpose and poverty, so do the spiritually 
free, out of the abundance of the bcstowiiig virtue. Only the 
searcher of hearts can sift the tares from the wheat; it is not for 
mortal man to judge of another's state of grace. 


io8 


SAHAJA 


When we ay that the Indian culture U spiritual, we do not 
nwao that it is not ansuous. It is perhaps more sensuous tbaft 
has ever been ^Itsed—because a sensuousness such as this, 
which can classify three hundred and sixty kinds of the 6ne 
emotions of a lover’s heart, and pause to count the patterns gentle 
teeth may leave on the tender skin of the beloved, or to decor¬ 
ate her breasts with painted Bowers of sandal paste-^sad carries 
perfect sweetness through the most erotic art—is inconceivable 
to those vbo are merely sensual or by a superhuman effort are 
m^ly self-controlled. The Indian temperament makes it pos^ 
sible to speak of abstract tilings meme entre Us baisers^ 

For this to be possible demands a profound culture of the 
sexual tdationship—something altogether different from the ’'in¬ 
nocence” of Western girthood and the brutal violence of the "first 
night" and the married org)-. The mere understanding of what 
w meant by Sahaja demands at least a racial if not an individual 
eduation in love—an education related to athletics and dancing, 
music and hj'giene. The sexual relation in itself must not be so 
rare or so exciting as to intoxicate! one shotild enjoy a woman 
as one enjoys any other living thing, any forest, flower or moun¬ 
tain that reveals itself to those who arc patient One slimild not 
be forced to the act of love by a merely physical tension; minutes 
st^ce for that, but hours are needed for the perfect ritual 
WTiat the lover seeks should be the full response, and not his 
mere pleasure; and by this I do not mean anything so sentimental 
as forbearance-' or ’'self-sacrifice," but what will please him 
i™t. Under these conditions violence has no attractions; in 
Arabia, Burton the MtLsabnans respected evea iheir 

slaves, and it was "pundonor,’' a point of culture, that a slave 
tike any other woimn, must be wooed. (There has been no actual 
Slavery in India, or \ety little). 

Ijfca^Q Hearn las pointed out the enormous degree to which 
m^cm European literature is permeated with the idea of love, 
^is IS however as nothing compared siuth wdiat we find in the 
Vaish^ava literature of Hindustan. There, however, there is al¬ 
ways interpretation; in European romantic literature there is 
rarely anything better than' description. That should be only a 
passing phase, for the real teodenqr of Western sexual freedom 
IS certainly idealistic, and its forms are destined to be developed 
until the ^i ritual significance of love is made clear. 


SAHAJA 


109 


Under the sway of modem hedontsm^ where nothing is accepted 
as an end^ and everythii^ h a means to sornething dse^ the pre- 
cimdiLions for understanding Sahaja scarcely exist. Sahaja has 
nothing to do with the ctdt of pleasure: It is a doctrine of the 
TaO| and a path of non^pursuit. All that Is best for us comes of 
itself into our hands—but if we strive to ovenaJkc it* it perpetu¬ 
ally eludes us. 

In the passionless spontaneous relation of Sahaja, arc we to sup^ 
pose that children are ever to be begotten? I thinJr not* It b 
true that in early times it was considered right for the hermit 
who has renounced the world and the flesh to grant the request 
of a w'oman who comes to him of her own will and desires a 
child. But this is quite another matter—and inddentally a wnse 
eugenic disposition, removing an objection lo monasticisfii w^hich 
some have found in its sterilisation of the best blocnl The Sahaja 
relation, on the contrary, is an end in itsdfp and cannot be assod^ 
ated with social and eugenic ideas* Those wito are capable of 
such love must certainly stand on the plane of the "men of old** 
who did not long for defendants, and said 'Why should we 
long for descendants^ w^e whose self is the universe? For 
longing for chiidreu is longing for possessions* and longing 
for po.^5cssion5 is longing for the world: one like the' other is 
merely longing.'^ We cannot admit such a longing in Sahaja^ 
It is however just possible that such a relation as this might be 
employed by the Powers for the birth of an avatar: and in such 
a case we should understand what w^as meant by immaculate 
conception and virgin birth—she being virgin who has never 
been moved by desire. 

The Sahaja relation is tncommcnsunible with marriage, eate- 
ffOTically regarded 01 coniraet, inasmuch as this relation is under¬ 
taken for an end, the definite purpose of 'fulfilling social and 
refigious duties,^ and in particular, of paying the 'debt to the 
anc^lors' by begetting children. 

Those whose view of life is exclusively ethical wil] hold that 
sexual intimacy must be sanctified, justified or expiated by at 
least the wish to beget and to accqjt the consequent responsibili¬ 
ties of pan^thood. There is, indeed, something inappropriate 
in the posiltoa of those who pursue the pleasures of life and 




no 


SAHAJA 


by arti 5 cial means thcLr natura] fruit But ttus pemt 
of view presupposes timt the sexual Intimacy was a sought pleas* 
urc: what vve have discussed b somethjng quite other than this^ 
and w ithout an dement of seeking. 

It b only by pursuing what is not already ours by divine rig^t 
that we go astray and bring upon ourselves and upon others infi¬ 
nite suffering—to those w'ho do not pursue^ aE things will offer 
themselves. What we truly need,^ we need not strive for. 

It wEl be seen from aU this how necessary it is that sexual in¬ 
timacy should not in itself be considered an unduly exciting ex» 
perience* It b more than likdy also that those who are capable 
of this spontaneous control will have been already accustomed 
to willed control under other circumstances; and a control of 
this kind implies a certain training. We may remark in passing 
tliat in 'birth conlror we see an objection to the use of artificial 
means—an objection additional to w'hat is obvious on aesthetic 
grounds—in tlie fact that such means remove all incentive to the 
practice of self-corLtroL Those w^ho have good reason to avoid 
procreation at any time^ should mahe it a point of pride to ac¬ 
complish this by their own strength—and in any case, no man 
who has not this strength can be sure of his ability to play his 
part to perfection^ but may at any time meet with a woman vrhom 
be cannot satisfy. 

How is one to avoid m such a relation as Sahaja the danger 
of self-deception/ the p^tilence of suppressed desires, and even 
of physical overstrain and tension? 

For very highly perfected beings it may be true that those 
subtle exchanges of nerv'ous energy w^tuch arc effected in sextial 
intercourse—and are necessary to full vitality—can be effected 
by mere intimacy, in a relation scarcely passionate in the com¬ 
mon sense. We read^ indeed^ of other w^oiids where even gen¬ 
eration may be effected an exchange o£ glances^ But it is 
given to few to function always on such a plane as this. Are we 
then to forbid to those who need the consolations of mortal af¬ 
fection—are we to forbid to these the passionless intimacy of 
Sahaja? "Why should we do so? Even for those who cannot 
renounce the sheltered valleys of the personal life for ever, it 
b wcU sometimes to breathe the cold air of the perpetual sno\v^, 

nicely can Imi beg for a piece of spirit, wheti flesh Ia 

denied ii Klct^sthe. 


SAHAJA 


III 


Wt should add that 'to whom chastiQr is difficulti it is to be dis¬ 
suaded"^ la order to be sure of our ground we should not at¬ 
tempt the practise of a degree of continence beyond our power. 
We should also be careful not to *mbc our planes' or to mate 
one thing an excuse for another. We must recognise everything 
for what it really is^^he relative as relative^ the absolute as abso¬ 
lute—and render tmto Oesar those things^ and only those, which 
are lawfully his« 

We arc now, perhaps* in a better position to know what is 
meant by Chandidas when he speaks of the difhculties and the 
meamng of Sahaja. What he intends by 'never fallingf {sail) 
b a perpetual uncalculated life in the present^ and the mainte¬ 
nance, not of deliberate control* but of unsought, unshaken seren¬ 
ity in moments of greatest idtiinacyi he means that under cir¬ 
cumstances of temptation none should be fdt—not that tempta¬ 
tion should be merely overcome. And to achieve this he does 
not pray to be delivered f rom temptarion* but courts iL 

Here nothing is to be done for one anoLher, but all for love. 
There is to be no eflFort to evoke response* and none to withhold 
it. All this is far removed from the passion and surrender, the 
tricks of seduction* and the shyness, of the spiritual allegory and 
of the purely human experience. 


INTELLECTUAL FRATERNITY ‘ 

"To niafk by some celebration tbc intellectual iratemity of 

iTiaiikln(L" 

Alike to those who grieve for Europe iu her hour of civil war^^ 
Md to those who would offer tribute at the shrine of William 
Shakespeare, it must appear appropriate and significant to^ pi^ 
lish tokens of the brotherhood of man in art For it is likely the 
prestige of Empire may be completely shattered in the present 
conflict of rival imperialisms: it may appear henceforth a mattff 
for shame to exercise political domination over men of anothef 
race: and where until lately it has been the custom to prodaim 
the conqueror^s civilizing purposes, a common civilization of the 
world will demand of us a mutual understanding carried at least 
so far that we may substitute for the endeavour to do one another 
good, an effort based on common needs and human purposes^ c<m- 
ceived in intellectual fraternity. None has been more dUtiu- 
guished than William Shakespeare, in tus profound appreciation 
of the common humanity of an infinite variety of man. Civiliza¬ 
tion must henceforth be human rather than local or national, or 
it cannot exist. Xn a world of rapid communications ii must be 
founded in the common purposes and intuitions of humanity^ 
since in the absence of common motives, there cannot be coopera- 
tiou for agreed ends. In the decades lately p5^5cd—in terms of 
*real duration,* now so far behind us—^it has, indeed, been fash¬ 
ionable to insist upon a supposed fundamental divergmee of 
Eunapean and Asiatic character: and those who held this view 
were not eotirdy illofi<^ in thinking the wide earth not wide 
enough for Europe and Asia to live in side by side. For artificial 
harriers are very frail: and if either white or yellow peril were 
tn truth an essentially inhuman force, then whichever pan^ be^ 
lievcd itself to be the only human element, must have desired the 
extermination, or at least the complete suhordiuatioii of the other^ 

But the premises were false: the divergences of character are 

^Coatrihutfid to the **EDck of Homage to S!iakcsi>arer edited by 
Tirmd Goltancz, London 1916. 


INTELLECTUAL FRATERNITY 


113 


superficial, and the deeper wc penetrate, liie more we discov« 
an identity in the inner life of Europe and Asia. wc, in 

fact, point to any elemental experience or to any ultiniatc goal 
of man which is not equally European and Asiatic? Dms one 
not see that these are the same for ail ages and continents? 
WTio that has breathed the dear mountain air of Upanishads, of 
Gautama, Sanlcara and Eabir, of RumT, of Laotse and Jestts (I 
mention so far Asiatic prophets only) can be alien to those who 
have sat at the feet of Plato and Kant, Tader, Behmeu and 
Ruysbroeck, Whitman, Nietzsche and Blake? The latter may 
well come to be regarded as the supreme prophet of a post- 
industrial age, and it is significant that one could not find in 
Asiatic scripture a more typically Asiatic purpose than is reveded 
in his passionate will to be delivered from the bondage of division. 


"I irill E6 down tQ self-annihilation and Eternal Death. 

Lest the Last jradgment come and find me unaiiniiiiiatc, 

And 1 be sc«ed and giv*n into the hands of my owo SelHiOOd. 


But it is not only in Philosophy and Religion—^Truth and 
Love—but also in. Art that Europe and .'^sla arc united: and from 
this triple likeness we may well infer that all men are alike in 
their divinity. Let us only notice here the singular agreement of 
Eastern and Western theories of Drama and Poetry, illustrating 
what has been said with special reference to the hero of our cele* 
bration: for the work of Shakespeare is in close accordance with 
Indian canons of Dramatic Art. 


«I made this Drama," says Drahma, "to accord with the movement of 
the world, whcihcr at work or play, in peace or laughter, battle, lust or 
slaughtei-yiclding the fruit of ri^teousaess to those who am follows 
of a moral law, and pleaanrcs to the followers of pJeasure-iofonn^ wi^ 
the divers moods of the soul—followinc the order of ihe world and all ns 
weil and wot That which a not to be found herein ii neither craft nor 
wisdom, nor any art. nor is it Union. That shall be Drama which affor^ 
a of cntertaitmtenl in llic worlC and a place audience for im 

Vedai, for phiksojiby and for the sHiociice of cvtnts.** 

And poetry U justified to itimi inasmuch as it j^elds the four¬ 
fold Fruit of Life—Virtue, Pleasure, Wealth and Spiritual Free¬ 
dom, The Western reader may inquire, "How Spiritual Free¬ 
dom?" and the answer is to be found in the dismterest^css of 
esthetic contemplation, where the spirit is momentarily freed 


114 


INTELLECTUAL FRATERNITY 


from the cRtacglemeiit of good and evU. We read in the 
dramatic canon of Dhaoamjaya, for example; 

"Tkere is no tbcme, wlicther delif^htful or disgusting; cruel or gra¬ 
cious, kigii or Jow, obscure or ptaio, of fact or lutcy, tkat tnay not 
be succcssfuliy employed to communicate aesthetic emotian.” 

We may also note the ivords of OraatigTzu; 

"The mind of the sage being in repose, becomes the niirror of tUe 
Universe," 

and compare them with those of Whitman, who avows himself 
not the poet of goodness only, but also the poet of tvicloedness. 

It is sometimes feared that the detachment of the Asiatic vision 
tends towards inaction. If this be partly true at the present 
moment, it arises from the fullness of the Asiatic experience, 
which still contrasts so maricedly witli Europeoa youth. If the 
everlasting conflict between order and diaos Is for tlie present 
typically European, it is because spiritual wars no less than pliysi- 
cal must be fought by those who are of military age. But the 
impetuosity of youth cannot completely compensate for tlie insight 
of age, and we must demand of a coming race tliat men should 
act with European cnerg>-, and think with Asiatic calm—the old 
ideal tauglil by Krishna upon the field of battle: 

'‘fndiffercrLt to pleasure and pain, to gain and Joss, to con truest and 
defeat, thus make ready for tke Jigkt ... As do the foolisk, 

^tt^hed to works, so shoulij the wise do, bat without attachtnent, 
seeking to tstabU^ll order in the world,” 

Europe^ too^ in violent reaction from die anarchy o£ ItiUstr::- 
fairc, 1$ conscions of a ’n'ill to the establLshinent of order in the 
world But European progress has long remained in doub^ 
because of its lack of orientation. It b significant diat the 
dbcovery of Asia should coincide ilh the present hour of 
decision; for Asiatic thought again afEmis die unity and inter¬ 
dependence of all life, at the moment when Europe begins to 
realize that the Fruit of Life is not easily attainable tet a society 
based upon divisiorL In honouring the genius of Shakespeare, 
then, we do not merely offer homage to the memoiy of individual^ 
but are witnesses to the intellectual fraternity of mankind; and 
St IS that fraternity which assures us of the possibility of coopera¬ 
tion in a common ta3k> the creation of a stscial order founded on 
Union, 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW 
OF NIETZSCHE 


Cert^nly, Kiftzsche was not a philosopher in the strict sense 
of the word. He is essentially a poet and sociologist, and above 
all, a m)'stic; He stands in the direct line of European tnysticLsm, 
and though less profound, speahs witli the same voice as Blake 
and '\i\'hitoian. These three might, indeed, be said to voice the 
rcli^^on of modem Europe—die rdtgion of Idealistic Individual¬ 
ism, If it were realised that his originaUt)'' does not coorist in 
an mcomprehensible and unnatural noveltj-, but in a poetic re¬ 
statement of a very old position, it might be less needful to waste 
our breath in the refutation of theses lie never upheld. 

It is true that we find in his work a certain violence and exag¬ 
geration: but its very nature is that of passionate protest against 
unworthy values, Pharisaic virtue, and snobisme, and the fact that 
this protest was received wnth so mucli execration suggests that 
he may be a true prophet. The stone which tlic builders rejected: 
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you. Of special significance 
is the beautiful doctrine of the Supennan—so like the Chinese 
concept of the Superior Man, and the Indian Mahs Puntsha, Bo~ 
dhisallva and /tttm-ffjMJt/ii. 

Amongst the chief marks of the mystic are a constant sense of 
tlie unity and interdependence of all life, and of the interpaietra- 
tion of the s|»ritual and material—opposed to Puritanism, W'hich 
distinguishes the sacred from tlie secular. So too is the sense of 
being everywhere at home—unlike the religions of reward and 
punislunent, which speak of a future paradise and hell, and attadi 
an absolute and eternal value to good and evil. "All things," he 
says, "are enlinked, enlaced and enamoured": "I conjure you, 
my brethren, remain true to the earth, and believe not those who 
speak to you of superearthly hopes”: "For me—how could there 
be an outside of me? There is no outside”: "Every moment 
beginneth existence, around ever^* ‘Here’ rolleth the ball There,' 
The middle is everywhere": "Becoming must appear justified at 
every instant ... the present must not under any circum¬ 
stances be justified by a future, nor the past be justified for the 


ii6 COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE 

$ake of the present'" All these are characieristic mystic intul- 
tions^ or logical deductions from monism, in close accord with 
the Brahmamtal formula^ ^“That art thou*” 

The doctrine of the Superman, whose virtue stands ^l^eyond 
good and evil/' who is at once the Bower and the leader and 
saviour of merij has been put foiw^ard again and again in the 
world's history* A host of names for this ideal occur in Indian 
literature: he b the Arhat (adept), Buddha (enlightened)^ Jina 
{conqueror}* Ttrthakara (finder of the fcird)j the Badhhativa 
(iacamation of the bestowing virtue)^ and above all /fT^art-nitti/a 
{freed in this life)* who$e actions are no longer good or bad, but 
proceed from his freed nature. 

Let us see what Nietzsche himself has to say of the Superman* 
“UpAvard goeth our course onivard from genera to super-genera* 
But a horror to me is the degenerating sense, which saitli 'All 
for myself'*" Is that the doctrine of selfishness? As well accuse 
the Upanishad, where it decipres that all thinp are dear to us 
for the sake of the Self. For the monSst there is no true distinc¬ 
tion of selfish and unselfish, for all interests are identical. Sdf- 
realisation is perfect service, and our supreme and only duty is to 
become what we are (That art thou)* This is idealistic individ- 
ualisiu* and this doctrine of inner harmony is ^^lid on all planes,^ 
for we are not saved by what we do* only by what w^e are. "'^Ye 
constrain/' he says, "all things to flow tow^ards you and into you, 
so that they shall flow bade again out of your fountain as the 
gifts of your love. Verily* on appropriator of all values must 
such a bestowing love become : but healthy and holy call I this 
selfishness , , . But another selfishness there is, an alHoo- 
poor and hungry land, which would always steal—with the eye 
of the thief it looketh upon all that is lustrous: with the craving 
of hunger it measureth him who hath abundance: and ever doth 
it prowl round the table of besto\verSp" It is the author of a 
supposed apotheosis of the ^Blonde Beast," who exclaims: 
"Better to perish than to fear and hate: far better to perish than 
to be feared and hated 1" 

Nietzsche has certainty a contempt for pity—that is, for senti- 


lor example, Art-ubaihers Sanint^ where the one man who 
i» at peace wilb himself, though far from a highly spiritual type, is 
still the moat lovable. 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETCSCHE 


117 


mental over one's o^vti sufferings or those of others- Natu¬ 
rally, life b hard: for the higher man it should be ever harder 
by choice* *'My suffering and my fellovv-suffering—what matter 
about them V* ”Ye tell me 'Life is hard to bear/ But for w^hat 
purpose should ye have your pride In the morning and yonr 
resignation in the evening?*" This is certainly different from the 
"greatest happiness of the greatest number/* w^hich Western 
democracies have made their aim* 

It is hardly worth while to refer to those who bracket our 
poet-philosopher and mystic wuth the Treitschkes and Crambs^ 
and vvould make him one of the prime instigsitors of a "Euro- 
Nietischean" w^r* It would be easy to show by quotation how 
he scorned alike the mediocrity of Germany and England, and 
how he regarded France as "still the seat of the most intelligent 
and refined culture of Europej” and contrasted die French esprit 
with "our German infirmity of taste/' Better than this^ however^ 
will be to show how well he understood the fundamental tmitj' of 
Europe—a unity of suffering now, but then as now a unity of 
movement, by the side of which the present hatreds assume die 
proportions of a mere episode—and how little be could ever have 
associated patriotism with greatness: 

"Owing/" he saj^s, "lo the morbid estrangement which the 
nationality-craze has induced and still induces amongst the nations 
of Europe, ow ing also to the short-sighted and hasty-handed poli¬ 
ticians, who with the help of this craze, are at present in power^ 
and do not suspect to what extent the disintegrating policy diey 
pursue must necessarily be only an interlude policy—owing to 
all this, and much more that is altogether unmentionable at pres¬ 
ent^ the most unmistakable signs diat Europe wishes io be one^ 
are now overlooked, or arbitrarily and falsely misinterpreted. 
With all the more profound and large-minded men of this century, 
die real general tendency of the mysterious labour of their souls 
was to prepare the way for that new synihtsii and tentatively to 
antidf^te the European of the future; only in their sinlulations, 
or In their weaker moments, in old age, perhaps, did they belong 
to the ^fatherlands'—they only rH.ted from themseh^es when they 
became 'patriots'-" And what may he said to prove the truth of 
this sense of European unity, which even ten years ago might have 
seemed a too brilliant generalization, is the fact that we see now, 
that not only Europe, but the whole world, and in precisely the 

i 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE 


llS 

same wayj. through the mysterious labours of great men^ has long 
striven to be one, and is now^ perhaps for the first time in histor^v 
%vithin a measurable distance of realising its unconscious purxxjse. 

The “Will to Power" has nothing to do with tj-ranny—it is 
opposed alike to the tyranny of the autocrat and the tyranny of 
the majoriiy. The Will to Power asserts that our life is not to 
be swtayed by motives of pleasure or pajn* the "pairs of opposites^,'* 
but b to be directed towards its^ goal, and that goal is die free¬ 
dom and spontaneity of the Ilvon-mukia. And this is beyond 
good and evil. This also set out in the Bhagervad Glt^: the hero 
must be superior to pitj' (^ocydnanval&eastvam); resolute for 
the fray, but unattached to the result^ for^ as Whitman expresses 
it, ^'battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.^^ If he 
be wounded, he w'iQ urge his comrades onward, rather than ask 
them to delay lo condole with him : and he will not insult them by 
supposing that they In their tum would do otherwise. ^*Let your 
love be stronger than your pity'll but that ia not self-lovoi it is 
not even neighbour-love or patriotism—“Higher than love to your 
neighbour is love to the furthest and future ones: higher still than 
love to men is love to things and phantoms , . * 'il^^sdf do I 
offer unto my love, and my neighbour as myself*—such is the 
language of all creators/^ *^Ah! that ye understood my word*" 
he says: “do ever what ye w’ill—but first be sudi as can will 
* . , , He who cannot command himself shall obey.^* This 
is infimtely remote from the doctrine of “getting our own way^* 
or "doing what we Uke"^—"a horror to us/* as he says, “is the 
degenerating sense, which saith *A11 for myself".^' 

The teaching of Nietzsche is a pure dhanna: "Do I 

then strive after kappintssf I strive after my workl*^ and “All 
those modes of dunking/* he says, “wiikh measure the w orth of 
things according to pleasure and pain, are plausible modes of 
thought and naivetfsp which oveiy^one conscious of creative 
powers and an artist's conscience will look down upon with 
scorm” For tJie Superman, as we should sa>% is not sivayed by 
the pairs of oprposites* *I>o w’^hat ye will*: this doctrine is neither 
egotistic nor altrtiistic* Not egotistic, for to yield to all the 
promptings of the senses, to be the slave of caprice, is to be 
moulded by our environment, and the very reverse of far-willing : 
it 1$ precisely himself the Superman may not spare. It is not 
altruistic, for where there is naught external to myself, there 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE 


ri9 

cati be n<i altruisiii^ The highest duty is fliat of self-rcalisatjOJXi 
"Physician, heal thyself," exclaims Nietzsche: ''then wilt thou 
iilso heal ihy patient. Let it be fiis best cure to see with his 
eyes him who maheth himsetf whole.” This is nothing but the 
old doctrine of Chuang Tzu: "The sages of old first got Taa 
for themselves, and then got it for others. Before yon possess 
this yourself, what leisure have you to attend to the doings of 
w'icked men? Cherish and preserve your o^vn sdf, and all the 
rest wilt prosper of itself.” It reminds us also of Jesus: "First 
cast out the mote from thine own eye,” 

The leaders of humanity have never been such as have acted 
from a sense of duty^ in the ordinary sense of the w'ord Duty is 
but a means of playing safe for those who lack the Bestowing 
Virtue. The activity of genius is not an obedience to rules* but 
dedication of life to what is commanded from within* even 
though it should appear to all others as evil. 

Was Jesus humble, or did He 
Give any proofs of humility? 

When but a child He ran away. 

And left His parents in dismay: 

These were the words upon His tongue 
"/ am doing My Fatke/s business/* 


What consiitutes the virtue of any action U the complete co* 
ordination of the actor* We should act according to our own 
nature: and when that nature has developed to its fuUest stature* 
then what is divine attains complete mani fetation. It is w'ith 
preoccupations such as this that Nietzsche exclaims Tvith such 
profound convictiGn: 

''That ye might become iveaiy of saying; 'that an action is 
good because it is unselfish.* Ah I my friends f That your very 
self be in your action, as the mother is in the child; let that 
your formula of virtue.” 

This is the very prayer of ScMrrates, “and may the out^vard and 
inward man be at one"—all ehe is hypocrisy^ The inferior r r*^n 
regulates his life hy externals; inasmuch as he is canstraiued by 
desire for long life, reputation, riches* rank or offspringp he is 
not free* The superior man is of another sort, and of him it 


£20 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE 


may be said, with Chuang Tzu, they live in accordance with 
their £yvm nature. In the whole world they liave no equals They 
regulate their life by inward things/^ 

"'What are not the powerful doing?'' says the Prema Sd^ar^ 
"Who knows their course of acUoii? They^ indeed, do nothing 
for themselves * but to tliose that do them honour and seek their 
aid, they grant their prayers. Such b their path, that they appear 
united to all: but upon reflection thou shalt perceive that thQ^ 
stand aloof from al!, as the lotus leaf from water/^ 'The man 
of perfect virtue*' (Superman)» says Chuang Tzu again, '*in 
repose has no thoughts^ in action no anxiety. He recognizes no 
rights nor wrong, nor good, nor bad. Within the Four Seas, when 
all profit—that b hb pleasure; when alt share—that is his repose. 
Men ding to him as children who have lost their motliers; th^ 
rally round him as wayfarers who have missed tlieir road*" For 
hb b the Bestowing Virtue* 

According to Asvaghosha, too, “it b said that we attain to Nir¬ 
vana and that various sp&ntansaifs displays of activity are accom* 
plished." The Bodhisattvas do not consider the ethics of their 
behaviour: "they have attained to spontaneity of action, because 
their discipline is in unison with the wisdom and activity of alt 
Tathagatas." '*Jcsus wtis all virtue, because he acted from int- 
pulse and not from rules/' 'When Kietodie says that the Super¬ 
man b the meaning of the earth he means what w^e mean when 
we speak of a Bodhisattva^ or of a Jivon^muifd. This type which 
represents the highest attainment and purpose of humanity b the 
most difficult thing for self-assertive minds to grasp, A being 
"beyond good and evil," a law unto himself, "How wicked T* 
exclaims the ordinary man: "for even / feel it my duty to con¬ 
form to the rules of morality and to restrain wiy selBsh desires.*^ 

Thus we shall never comprehend the selfishness which Nietzsche 
and other mptics praise, if we interpret it according to the lights 
of those who believe that all actions should be praiseworthy. 
The pattern of man's behaviour is not to be found in any code, 
but in the principles of the universe, ’ivhtch b continually reveal¬ 
ing to us flj nature. Consider the lilies * * * 

There exists a voluptuomnesg that b not sensuality, a passion 
for power that is not self-assertion, and a selfishness that is more 
generous than any altruism. These are distinctions which Nietz¬ 
sche himself is careful to insist upon, and only wUful nusunder- 


COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE 


121 


Standing ignores it. It is precisely of the great man who fails 
that he says: "Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sen¬ 
sualists are they nowf^ ''Art thou the victorious one (fim}/* he 
says, '"the selfH;ouqueTor,r the ruler of thy passions, the master of 
thy virtues? Thus do I ask thee. Or docs tlie animal speak in 
thy wish, and necessity ? or isolation? or discord hi thee ?” "^Vhat 
1 warn people against « « » confounding debauchery^ and the 
priuciple Vnijjcr ei/er' (i. "never mind') with the Wih to 
Powers—the latter is the exact reverse of the fonmer," "And 
verily^ it is no commandment for to-day and to-morrow to learn 
to love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the hnest, subtlest^ last 
and paticntest^* "True and ideal selfishness consists in always 
watching over and restraining the $ouI^ so that otir productiveness 
may come to a beautiful terminatioiu" 

So far^ then^ from a doctrine of sclf-indulgenee, it a fomi of 
ascelidsm or ardor {tapas) which Nietrsche would have us im¬ 
pose on ourselves, if we are strong enough* This was precisely 
the view of Manu when he establbhed a severe rule of life for 
the Brahman, and one far easier for the :Siidra, And understand¬ 
ing this, Kietische has praised the institution of caste, for he 
thought it fight that life should grow colder towards the summit 
As the Mdrjtfif^idfya Pur&iia pronounces, a Brahman should do 
Dothing for the sake of enjoyment* 

Those vrbo have compr^ended the decline and fall of Western 
civiLLtation will recognize In Nietzsche the reawakenhig of Ihe 
conscieuce of Europe^ 



YOUNG INDIA 


In order to understand Young India, one must understand 
world. What is the meaning of youth or age tn Q-dcs of civili¬ 
sation, as well as in individuals ? In terms of reality, 4is is not 
a question of dates or years, but of experience. India is at once 
unbdievably old and incredibly young, utterly sophisticated 
pathetically naive. Her great achievements o! the past—m philos¬ 
ophy, art and social orgauiaatlon—possess an indestructible value, 
and there can be no true citii^hip of the world of which the 
roots do not reach back into this ground, at least as far as they 
reach back into the classic culture of the Mediterranean. There 
is no point at which the speculation, experiment, success or failure 
which constitute Indian civiliiatlon do not touch the vital prob¬ 
lems of the present day. And yet we cannot say that modem 

India has created anything. ,• 

We stand in the West at the dose of the great cycle of ainsiian 
civilization which attained its zenith, let us say, in the twelfth or 
thirteenth century, when the creative will of man swept far teyond 
its personal boundaries, striving to establish an order in the 
outer world to correspond with the universal order of the world 
of imagination or eternity. From the thirteenth to the twentieth 
century one can follow the progressive decay of life—the e\'er 
fainter expression of the creative will, loosening social integra¬ 
tion, the substitution of contract for status, the advancement of 
material and moral to the exdusion of spiritual values, the decline 
of vision, up to this present hour of pure chaos, when life and 
art are eddence of centuries of aimlessness. ^ 

The war in Europe is no im fortunate accident, but the inevit¬ 
able outcome of European civiliaation. How clearly this was 
already apparent towards the close of the nineteenth century Is 
to be seen in the remarkable words of Viscount Torio, published 
in 1690: "Occidental dviHzation , . . must ultimately end In 
disappointment and demoralization. . . . Peaceful equality can 
never be attained until built up among the mins of annihilated 
Western States and the ashes of extinct Western peoples. And, 
indeed, we cannot be surprised that the philosophy of internecine 



YOUNG INDIA 


123 


peace have been transferred at last to the visible ^dd of 

battle. 

We fed that the intention of this war has been to make the 
world safe for exploitation; this might have been accoraplished 
by a decisive victory on either side. And ^'Victory breeds 
hatreds because the conquered are unhappy/^* The best one 
could hope for was that the struggle would go on long enough and 
be sufficiently inconclusive to destroy the prestige of Itnperialisni 
and exploitation for many centuries. Nevertheless^ democracy 
understood politically as the tyranny of a majoriiy is no more 
congenial to liberty than an autocracyp for it implants or asstimes 
in t^try one the desire to govern. But those only are worthy 
to govern* as the Chinese say, who would rather be excused- 
Representative govemnjent has everywhere been found to involve 
no more than the victory of the most powerful interestsw And 
even revolts have not created liberty— 

The Iron hand crushed the tyrant's head 

And became a tyrant in his stead. 

Every oppressed nationality oppresses some other or etobraces 
the oppression of class by class. Our sympathies are th^ not 
only udth the oppressed* but with the oppressor^ for both alike 
are in need of salvation from tlie same group of false values. 
The liberty that we concede is of far greater siguiGcance to us 
than any liberty we can take by force or receive by gift. 

Perhaps we ought not to include the Russians in these criti¬ 
cisms. In Russia more clearly than anywhere else* the religion 
of Europe—the idealbtic individualism of Blake and Whitman 
and Nictzschc“has found expression in art and actiotL It U a 
tragic reSeetton that those who laid down their arms were not 
wrong, but only too tight. Yet w-e cannot collectively abandon 
the use of force in a day or establish the kingdom of heaven In 
a week: to find the Paradise still upon earth is possible only for 
the individual, nei'er for the race . . * If we cannot see our 
way to the end of all govemment, howcveti. we can sec that the 
least amount of government It is possible to live with is the best* 
and the less we are mixed up with it the better for us: or^ rather* 




J 24 


YOUMG INDIA 


the better we are, the less we shall wish to be involved in it Need¬ 
less to say, Ui refusing to govern^ we do not refuse to cooperate: 
hut to accompibh this, we must ser^'e, not one another^ but ends 
beyond ourselves* 

Let us pause now to see svhat has been going on in India, and 
first to consider the past as It survives side by side with the Young 
India that is the final subject of our argumenL Broadly con¬ 
trasted with the opportunist industrial order of today des¬ 
perately precarious institutional situation^*) where the whole 
energ)^ of man b used up in making sure of mere cxistencep the 
dviliiation of India presents to ns the spectacle of something 
^/stable and leisurely* and this not merely by virtue of some kind 
of inertia, but as the result of deliberate organization based on 
a definite view (definite, whether right or wrong) of the mean¬ 
ing and purpose of life. The principles of government arc de- 
finedp not hy the interestedi, but by the disinterested; that is to 
say, by the philosopher who has no personal ends to serve and 
no "s^c in the country"; he b the law-giver, and the status of 
the executive powder is inferior* In a stable cooperative society 
the achievement of mere life, the solution of the bare economic 
problem, is taken for granted, and there remains abundant energy 
for the pursuit of the real ends of life. These w^erc defined in 
India in the famous formula of "Human Aim" ifttrushdrilm)^ 
on the one hand temporarily as vocational activity (functiofip or 
duty), winning wealth and enjoying pleasure; and on the other 
hand eternally as spiritual freedom. Obviously the latter object 
b the main concern of all higher men. 

Here are the criteria of ethical judgment. That is a priori 
right, which tends to the achievement of one or all of these ends 
(all being good in their degree or kind), and that is wrong, which 
involves the attainment of any end not appropriate to the indi¬ 
vidual concerned, or involves a failure to attain what is appro¬ 
priate. We speak of right or wrong accordingly as purely rela¬ 
tive to Individuality and circumstance; and since all men are really 
unlike^ it requires but a slight development of the doctrine of 
"own-moralit/' of the vocational groups, which is the basis of 
organized ethics, to reach the pure individualism which is the 
ultimate religion alike of Asia and modem Europe. The indi- 


^ Vebltn^ Tkt Imirntt 0/ 


young INDIA 


123 


vidual who attains this ground of liberty is called in India ''jivan- 
mukta,” free in this life, since nothing of himself is left in him. 
This is the concept of superman; but it demands also the entirety 
of ntan at every stage of developmenL There can be no doubt 
that this tatter end of spiritual freedom—to become w'bat tve 
are—dominated in Io<Jia all others; so that the connotation of 
success in India has but little in common with its connotation in 
America. 

Let us speak of two conspicuous features of the Hindu social 
order. First, the caste system. This system, of w'hicb the lines 
are drawn at once ethnically and culturally (not pecuniarily), 
represents an integration (not a division) of society in vocational 
groups internally democratic, and outwardly answerable to other 
groups only for the fulhUment of their 'own fenction.' It is 
somewhat as if, for example, the farmers of the whole United 
States should be answerable to the community at large only for 
the production of good and sufficient food, in return for the*/ 
means of production guaranteed to them, while as a group they 
should remain completely autonomous in all other respects, e. g., 
in matters of marriage and divorce, education, wages and hours 
of labor, etc., while none could be called on for any other public 
service than their own. In place of States, then, we should 
have nation-wide, someday perhaps "world-wide, vocational groups 
directly founded on the instinct of -workmanship and the inheri¬ 
tance of aptitude. 

It was assumed in India that her^ity determined birth in the 
appropriate environment. This may have been true of an ordered 
society like that of ancient India, but it could not apply to the 
melting pot, and we may expect that the coming development 
of syndicalism vfill differ chiefly from the caste system in per¬ 
mitting intermarriage and choice or change of occupation under 
certain conditions, though still recognizing the general desirability 
of marriage within the group and of following one's parent's 
calling. In such a reinstatement of the instinct of workmanship 
in the West, and a certain relaxation of caste rule in the East, 
it IS possible to foresee a common sociological agreement of the 
workers of the world. ^ 

Secondly, marriage. In India the home is still the foundation 
of all social thought; in Europe and America the home as deter¬ 
mined by existing tradition is already a lost cause—a profound 


126 


YOUNG INDIA 


distiaction, and yet, under the same Influences the same result 
is bound to succeed even in India, though the ancient order may 
be long in dying. The Indian marriage is an impersonal con¬ 
tract, undertaken as a social debt, by men and vromen alike, not 
for bappin^s, but for the fulfillment of social and religious 
duties. It is not based on romantic love or passion, and it ts 
indissoluble, just because it is undertaken for ends that are real¬ 
izable apart from individual interest. To be perfect wife or hus¬ 
band is not so much a question of personal adaptation as of edu¬ 
cation, since ethical culture is achieved through hen^worship and 
the general knowlet^ of epic literature. The end is a perfect 
harmony based on self-forget fulness—an order exquisite in form, 
and possibly superior to the romantic concept of the harmony of 
selves which underlies the modem theory of marriage or liaison 
based on love, but incongruous with our necessity to prove for 
ourselves the spiritual and dynamic value of passion. 

One further observation on the past! it was from beginning 
to end an era of proficiency in handicraft, rather than of ingeni¬ 
ous mechanism. The industrial arts attained an unsurpassed 
perfection with great economy of means. Sculpture had already 
declined, but painting and architecture were still at a very high 
level at the end of the eighteenth century. Music, poetry and 
dancing survive today, however, precariously, 

lu the nineteenth ccntuiy we have to remark two special 
conditions beside the survival of the past in the present First, 
that the Indian culture was already decadent, that is to say, suf¬ 
fering from the inevitable consequences of all formulation. The 
formula, however admirable, is inherited rather than earned, it 
becomes an end instead of a means, and its meaning is forgotten, 
so that it is insecure. Secondly, political subjection coincided 
wiA the impact of the industrial revolution and of the dead 
weight of empirical science apprehended simply as the basis of 
economic success. All this implied a transvaluation of all values, 
in an arbitrary rather than a constructive sense—in the main a 
of values and a diversion of energy compressing into 
half a century a process that has occupied five hundred 3fears in 
Europe. 

Let us emphasize again that the war is merely the evidence 
and not the cause of European chaos: there is immediate hope 
for Europe since he that is down need fear no fall. Western 


YOUNG INDIA 


X 27 


civilization stands at the beginning of a new movement, and is 
not without renewed religious motivation. But India affords the 
most tragic spectacle of the world, since wre see there a living and 
magnificent organization, akin to, but infinitely more complete 
than that of mediaeval Europe^ still in the process of destruction. 
Inheriting incalculable treasure, she is still Incalcutabty poor, 
and most of all in the naivete with which she boasts of the pov* 
erty that she regards as progress. One questions sometimes 
whether it would not be w'iser to accelerate the process of destrec- 
lion than to attempt to preser^'c the broken fragments of the 
great tradition. 

It is hard to realize how completely the continuity of Indian 
life has been severed. A single generation of English education 
suffices to break the threads of tradition and to create a nonde¬ 
script and superficial being deprived of all roots—a sort of intel¬ 
lectual pariah who does not bdong to the East or the West, the 
past or the future. The greatest danger for India is the loss of 
her spiritual integrity. Of all Indian problems the educational 
is the most difficult and most tragic. As things now stand it is 
dominated by political considerations in the sense that loyalty 
is more essential than personality in a teacher—even university 
professors are subject to espionage and their activity to censor¬ 
ship; it is dominated by economic considerations, too, for the 
present system is really a vested interest in the hands of Mac¬ 
millans and Longmans and the younger graduates of Eog^ish 
nniversities, w*hilc the power of the missionary school is derived 
from the contributions of those who are interested much more in 
proselytizing than io education. In all government and missioo- 
ary' institutions there is the widest possible divcigence between 
the ideals of the school and the ideals of the home; the teachers 
do not in one case in a hundred effect any real contact with their 
pupils, whatever they may believe to the contrary. 

Modem pedagogic theory teaches us that the aim of education 
should be not so much the levelling up of faculties and the pro¬ 
duction of uniform types as the intensive cultivation of the facul¬ 
ties we have. Ruskin was never more right than when he said 
that education means finding out w'hat people have tried to do, 
and helping them to do it better. There has been no "finding out” 
in India, but only a complete inversion of values. And what does 
this imply? From the home to the world, from the freedom of 


YOUNG INDIA 


US 

the spirit it was the aim of every great Hindu to attain, frotfi the 
great example of Bhlshma and Rama, from the pursuit and 
acquisition of Yoga, from the celestial songs of Radhl and 
Krishna, from the knowledge which is in unity to the knowledge 
of manifold things, thb was a descent from the Himalayas to 
the plains.* It Is true that this was inevitable. The English, in 
spite of Macaulay and Cramb, are not entirely to blame for it. 
A renunciation of what appears to be obsolete is Justified; polit¬ 
ical and economic problems cannot be ignored; man and man’s 
world are still to be explored: but with all that there has been 
too little love, too much of snobism, too indiscriminate a taste, and 
too little distaste, and now only the greatest souls by a supreme 
effort can achieve a synthesis of the past and the future. 

In the midst of all these conditions we have seen the rise of 
Indian Nationalism, the growth of Young India. Fimdamentady 
this has been a political movement covering a wide range of pur¬ 
poses, from those of the Moderates who desire to see a gradual 
progress towards colonial self-government, to those of the Ex¬ 
tremists who would like to see the last EngUshmen driven out of 
India at the earliest opportunity. 

There is no question but that India has had and stiH has many 
just grievances, some Inseparable from any foreign domination 
and some peculiar to the present situation. For example, Indians 
are excluded to a very large extent from the higher paid posts 
of the civil and educational service: while India is freely open 
to British economic exploitation, Indian settlers are arbitrarily 
excluded from other parts of the Empire. The system of police 
espionage and the searching of private houses, the censorship of 
pri%'ate correspondence, the law against the possession of arms, 
the not infrequent imprisonment and even deportation of influ¬ 
ential men without charge or trial, and particular measures such 
as the partition of Bengal are constant provocatives of a very 
natural resentment. The color prejudice is such that educated 
Indians are often Insulted by Englishmen m railway trains and 
to all intents and purposes are excluded from English society. 
Many of these grievances depend immediately on the fact that 
India is never regarded by the Englishman as his home: a cem- 
quest resulting in the establishment of an English dynasty related 


* Dinesh Chandra Sen. Hiitery e/ Btngali Ijtnguagt and IJttralarf. 


YOUNG INBIA 


by mamage to the lodiaxi aristocracy (however the latter might 
have resented it}p and identihed with Indian interests^ would 
have involved far more vital integrations than now exist This 
was what happened in the case of the Mughats. As it is, the 
sympathy between mlers and ruled and the common undjcrstand- 
ing are admittedly less than was the case fifty years ago. 

A large part of the Indian unrest is^ of course* economic, and 
due to the disturbance of settled conditions by industrial compe¬ 
tition, and the impact of the era o£ technology upon an era of 
handlcrafL Conditions of this kind are not so much traceable 
to foreign domination as to world-wide economic disorder As 
for the war* it can only be said to concern the Indians indirectly* 
or rather* they are directly concerned only because of the political 
association w ith BritauL It h interesting to note that two particu¬ 
lar grievances have been remedied since the outbreak of the war i 
the excise dut^' on cotton has been removed^ and very recently^ 
Indians have been allow^ed to qualify as commissioned officers. 
It is certain that far-reaching changes In the direction of self* 
government will be made immediately after the war, and this 
niust result equally from the actual situation and from the prin¬ 
ciples of freedom to which the Allies have declared their alle- 
loanee. It is* however* with a certain distaste that one is com¬ 
pelled to emimerate these various grievances and to refer to the 
inevitable resentments they must e\oke: for Indian national 
idealism has a w'lder significance than the redress of grievances* 

Moderate nationalism has found expression not only in polit¬ 
ical* but also m economic, social and educational activities^ Eco¬ 
nomically in the Sw^adeshi ("own-country*) movement, w^hich, 
despite the heroic idealism of commumties and individuals* in the 
main represents a rather pathetic endeavour to "get back' at 
European trade, without much reference to the quality or desir- 
abiJit}'' of particular industries or the conditions of manufacture. 
Indian ecotiomJsts are shit or have remained until very recently 
in the early Victorian stage, enthusiastic believers in faclmy pro¬ 
duction and laissez-faire: * Even in Western universities the 
student is rarely brought in touch with current thought, and this 
is still more true of universities in India. The Indian student has 
little opportunity to realise that the accepted forms of European 
thought are necessarily far behind its real development Western 
society is in process of such rapid change that it must be regarded 


130 


YOUNG INDIA 


AS tragic or ridiculous, that the prestige of power should have 
provoked imitation: and this at the best implies provincial tsm, for 
sociological^ like sartorial fashions^ travel round the world at 
second hand long after they have been forgotten at their sourcei 
Creation or death. 

Social endeavor has been m the nature of what is here knoiivn 
as “uplift/" and has been especiaily directed to the elevation of 
the depressed classes^ the reduction of caste institutionalism* and 
the "ismancipation^ of women* A fccrudscence of purilanism, 
like a return to the early Buddhist fear of the worlds but really 
of Christian missionary and bourgeois origin^ and no better rea¬ 
soned than similar movements in modem America, leads to the 
condemnation of exquisite national costumes as ''indecent" and 
to absurd apologies for classic literature and art: and the dancer 
has been driven from the temple to the streets. We must 
class here also as Moderate activities such movements as are 
represented by the Bengal National College, the Fergusson Cob 
lege, Poona, the diffusion of popular education in Baroda^ and 
part of the work of the Arj^a Samaj, and the Servants of India* 
The effects are meritorious rather than inspiring^ Sometimes the 
genuine English educationalist seeking to restore the Indian 
dassies or vernaculars to thctr real place in Indian airricula, is 
met by the deiermined opposition of the Nationalists: and it is 
not Without reason that Professor Patrick Geddes, who, I am 
glad to say, has been entrusted with the organization of the Hindu 
University at Benares^ has remarked that it would be a mistake 
to allow the Europeanked Indian graduates to have their way 
with Indian education: "that urould be continuing our mistake/^ 
as he ^ays, "not correcting iL" 

There have been somewhat paralld developments in rdigion* 
typified in the edectidsm of the Brahmo Samaj—a sort of 
Unitarianisra combining Hindu philosophy with Nonconformist 
ethics* 

The keynote of most of these activities, as of the political pro¬ 
gramme of the National Congress and tlie Mtxlcrate press, is to 
be recognized in a complete acceptance of Euro|>ean models, and, 
indeed, of European sources of inspiration: they represent the 
just wish of Indians to do for themstlvcs what is now done or 
left undone by others. But this is a somewhat uninspiring and 

^ 5iacc wridug this t ieatp xiith regret ihat this is ilo loii,gcr the case 


Pt^ATE XXV 


INDIAN PAINTING. 



A School of Philosophy- Kojput pmntiog, i8tti ccntuiy. Collection of tJic 

author^ 

















YOUNG INDIA 


13 1 

insufficient programme, regarded from the standpoint of futurist 
Europeans, who ecpect from the East, not a repetition of their 
own mistakes, but a positive contribution to the solution of prob¬ 
lems that face the whole world, and no longer merely a single 
race or continent. 

The beauty and logic of Indian life belong to a dyiitg past; the 
nineteenth century has degraded much and created nothing. If 
any blame for this is to be laid on alien shoulders, it should be 
only in the sense that if it must be that offences come, woe unto 
them through whom they come. It is an ungrateful and unro- 
mantic tasic to govern a subject race. England could not in any 
case have inspired a new life: the best she could have done w'ould 
have been to understand and conserve through patronage and 
education the surviving categories of Indian civilization—archi- 
fcctufc, music, handicrafts, popular and classic literature, and 
schools of philosophy—and that she failed here is to have been 
found wanting in imagination and sympathy. It should not have 
been regarded as the highest ideal of Empire “to give to all men 
an English mind" 

If I speak now of the Idealists as distinguished from the 
Moderates, it is because they alone possess a genuine sense of 
ffie future. Needless to say, it is not the idealist who is 
“impatient*'; it is the opportunist who has not the patience to 
pursue a distant end. It ^ould also be emphasized that there 
is never a hard and fast line separating the Idealist from 
the Moderate; these are tj-pes that may be combined in a single 
individual, and are almost always represented in any group, 
I also dismiss the questions of disloyalty and sedition as irrele¬ 
vant for the present discussion; and as I have said elsewhere, 
loyalty is too often sentimentality or interest and disloyalty no 
more than irritation—if loyalty were always friendship and dis¬ 
loyalty detachment one could welcome cither. 

The first reaction of the idealist is recognizable in disDIiision;. 
He begins to see that people are not inspired or made happy by 
government but by themselves—he loses faith in politics, and 
turns to direct action, more often than otherwise, educational. 
He is no longer deceived by the prestige of European pow'er— 
very often he has lived for many j^ears in Europe or America, 
and has learnt to regard both "progress" and "civilization" with 
distaste and distrust. He begins to see things as they really arc 


133 


YOUNG INDIA 


3Jid regards his Indian life no longer with disparagement^ but 
writh a new understanding and aEectiou^ He b^ns to see that 
life is an art^ and 1$ rather a mean^ than an end. 

The first expression of national idealism is then a rehabilita¬ 
tion of the past We have turned from the imitation of European 
formulae to follow the historical developmeiit of our own beliefs^ 
our architecture, sculpture* music and literature, and of all the 
msdtutionSj social and religious, with which they arc inseparably 
mtert^vined j and to preserve and defend the Prolific against the 
Devon rers. This is fundamentally a process of creative intro¬ 
spection preparatory to renewed activity. 

It does not matter that the realization of what we have lost has 
come too late i this was inevitable. For a moment, perhaps^ we 
desired to turn back the hands of the clock, but that was only 
sentimentality, and it w*as not long before we remembered that 
fresh waters are ever flowing in upon us. We have learnt that we 
are exiled - but we would not and cannot return. In India, as in 
Europe, the vestiges of ancient civillzatJon must be renouncedi 
we are called from the past and must make our home in the future. 
But to tinderstand, to endorse with passionate conviction, and to 
love what we have left behind us is the only possible foundation 
for power* If the timre has hardly yet come for the creation of 
new values—and It cannot long be delayed—let us remenber 
that time and suffering arc essential to all creation. 

\Vc see now springing up all over India societies of literary 
or historical research or sociological experiment* and schools of 
national education. In Bengal* for example* the S^it>'a Parishad 
(library, MSS. and research)* in the United Provinces the Na- 
gari PracMrini Sabha (Hindu texts and a great dictionary)* in 
Poona the Gayan Samaj {study and encouragement of pure 
music)* in Madura the Tamil Sangam (modelled after the oM 
Tamil literary academies), religious organizations such as the 
Arya Samaj (in part)* the Ramakrishna order, the Vivekananda 
societies, and the Theosophical society (in pai^): and the Bud¬ 
dhist revival in Ceylon. There arc signs of life even in the uni¬ 
versities, though the most interesting development in this direc¬ 
tion Is the newly estabiished Hindu University in Benares, which 
gives at least an equal place to indigenous and to foreign leaming, 
A time must come and will come when Indian universities will 
he once more places of pilgrimage for foreign students. Beside 


PLATE XXV r 




Kigiire b. Laying a warp in ^^aduFa. 


•’ .MERELY AN INHERITANCE.” 

r~ ^ 


Kigurc a. One of Ihe gates of Jaipur* 
(I^hotograph by Mr. Tbomton OakIe\'.) 













i 

i 

I 





' 4 . 

' 5 


1 

f 

I 

1 - 

H 

•i 


i 


■V 

‘ > 

♦ 


«r9 


YOUI^G INDIA 


133 


thjs there are m^iiy individiial Indian scholars piiblishiii^ ihcir 
results in association with European savants^ with the Archaeo¬ 
logical Survey of India or through the varioits Asiatic societies 
or in separate volumes. Private eollectlonj of ancieat works of 
art are being made and interest is taken in museums and the 
preservation of ancient momroieuts. 

The inner mining of most of these activities Is to be found in 
the concept of National Education: a return to the aims of 
Oriental education in general, the development of personality 
rather than the mere acquisition of knowledge, and above all, a 
reunion of those links of understanding which have been so 
roughly broken i and to the end that we may see the last of those 
“educated" Indians who are Indian only in name. Up till now 
the sterility of higher education in India has been far mare 
unfortunate than the absence of elementary literary education for 
the masses and for women. The latter have always possessed 
and have not yet lost, wkat the progressive amongst the men have 
lost, the incalculable advantage of familiarity through oral tradi¬ 
tion with an epic Utemture vast in amount and saturated with 
3 great philosophyi To some e^ctent, indeed, India may be said 
to be now a land of cultivated peasants and uncultivated leaders 
—“Their ordinary Plowmen and Husbandmen*" said Knox 
without exaggeration, “do speak elegantly and are full of compli¬ 
ment. And there is no difference beiween the ability and speech 
of a CountryTnan and a Courtier"—a fact which affords us a good 
deal of food for reflection. 

Amongst the schools of national education two or three are of 
special importance: Sir Rabindranath Tagore*s school at Bolputp 
the Kilasala at Masulipatam, and the Gurukula of the Aryu 
Sama] at Hardwan In all these the mother^tongue is made the 
medium of instruction, and English takes a second though stilt 
very important place: there had been danger of creating an edu¬ 
cated class unable to express itself perfectly in any language. The 
Gurukula, it has been said very truly, is perhaps the most fas¬ 
cinating educational e.xperiment m the world. It Is for boys of 
all casteSp from the highest to the low^cst, and no disdnetious are 
made. Tuition Is free and the teachers arc impald The first 
seven years are devoted entlrdy to Sanskrit^ religion and physical 
culture, and the twelve years following to Western literature, 
science and laboratory work ‘ at the age of twentj'-five the man 


134 


YOUNG INDIA 


is ready to go oot into the woriiL During the whole of this time 
the pupils remain in charge of their teacher, without returmng 
home, nor are th^ permitted to meet any women except Lhdr 
mothers. There are institutions for the education of girU on 
somewhat similar but less severe lines: since the marriage of 
spiritual equals is taken for granted in the foundations of Hindu 
society. The most conspicuous feature of the system is its return 
to the impersonal and philosophic concepts of culture which have 
always been characteristic of the Hast, and the combination of 
this ancient wisdom with modem and practical knowledge. 

At the same time the return of idealism has brought with it 
a renewed appreciation of indigenous art and popular mythology, 
and has sought expression in creative activity. These matters 
have been closed books to the politicians and social reformers: 
even now tliere h perhaps no country in the world so completely 
lacking in cultivated and conscious taste as modem India, for 
as we have said, all that is so beautiful in the life thar we see 
by riverside, in temples or homes, and in the streets, is 
merely an inheritance, and those who have been mis'cducated 
would gladly exchange it all for the cheapest commercial art of 
^Vestem stores and music halls and for the villa architecture of 
a London suburb. 

There has been a revival of painting in Boigal, inspired by 
Ahanindronath Tagore and his brother, nephews of the well 
known poet. But important as this movement has been, its main 
significance belongs to appreciation rather than production. It 
may be compared rather to the work of the pre-Baphaelites than 
to that of the great post-impressionists—the time for these has 
not yet arrived. It has proved impossible for those who have not 
seen the ancient gods to represent them: and the powers to be 
are not yet seen or heard, only the movement of their dance is 
faintly felt 

But for the great idealists of younger India, nationalism is not 
enough. Patriotism is parochial, and even banal, and there are 
ner parts great souls may play. Certainly not as missionaries or 
projug^dists the day has gone by for sectarian groupings and 
or invitations to be '*one of tis*': but as equally concerned with 
all others in the exploration of the thousand paths that have ne\'er 
yet been trodden. It is life, and not merely Indian life that claims 
our loyalty. The pursuit of mere liberty is not enough: it is not 


f 


MERKl.V AX rXHERITAXCE 


rLVtK XXVtt 



The Bftthuie Ghat at Bcaaica. 







Pi * •- HKvnm ■■ ^^*4 ft‘i J.5.'^ --*< > .dii'*f* *.• _r» iiJK ^" * 




Vt “•'V%'*.'- 


^ . --V 


—' I —' - ^ ■'-.* 

>' ft' 'I^S ...,, ..•,, .;- ^ 

’ ■•'#■! ■'• • t • "V • 


•Tt'^ .- *' - rw.^ib '.■«■■'-i-VS' ■ '• ■V ' TOi 

- r• ^irc -.' * , -.’i^ -‘^ ■; e--. c 










r-:T .‘»^ 

-• .• «:» ','.'»Tfe< 


4 


-;}-K^;ii%;v;' ' - -^M-^ 

'i : ' V. V-.'^ ^7■'TW'■’•■•FaS^ 


SSLI’ I 


. 4 /:* 

V-' ••'■ 

!W *■ ,' 


«m. 


• ‘ irJw V 

;..iL? 3 Wfc 


^ 5 -I.- 







YOUNG INDIA 


ns 

bis happiness, but his task that concerns the idealist' For those 
who pursue a distant cud there is no time to devote to what is 
momentary, 

Freedom is always open to those who are free. And free for 
what? For the very same ends that are foreseen by the idealists 
of Europe; how could there be a divergence of idealism from 
idealism ? The chosen people of the future cannot be any nation 
or race, but an aristocracy of the earth uniting the virility of 
European youth to the serenity of Asiatic age. Already the 
leaders of thought in every nation understand each other very 
well, and alt significant movements are international and wT>rld- 
wide—as has always been the case to a greater extent than we are 
apt to rcalire. We only await the declaration of peace to renew 
our camaraderie with the other idealists, and meanwhile we will 
not betray our common cause. The flowering of humanity is 
more to us than the victory of any party. The only condition of 
a renewal of life in India, or elsewhere, should be a spiritual, not 
merely an economic and political awakening, and it is on this 
ground alone that it will e\'er be possible to bridge the gulf which 
has been supposed to divide the East from the West 

To the Idealist all interests are identical because all life is one. 
The only and real significance of Young India for the world wilt 
be revealed in the great men who are given to the common life: 
one great philosopher, poet, painter, scientist or singer shall be 
accounted in the last judgment more than all the concessions won 
by all the Congresses in a hundred yrars. 

And so while India b occupied with national education and 
social reconstruction at home, she must also throw in her lot 
with the world: w'hat we need for the creation of a common 
civilization is the recognition of common problems, and to coop¬ 
erate in thdr solution. ^ 

Meanwhile tt ts not sufficient for the Western world to stand 
aside from the development of Asia, with idle curiosity or appre¬ 
hension wondering what will happen next. There is serious 
danger that the degradation of Asia will ultimately menace the 
security of European social idealism, for the standing of idealism 
is even more precariotK in modem Asia than in modem Europe; 
and that would he a strange nemesis if European post-industrial- 
ists should utimately be defeated by an Industrialism or Imperial¬ 
ism of European origin established in the Eastl 


13^ 


YOUNG INDIA 


Asia is like the artist in the modem city —doing nothing great, 
mainly because nothing heroic is demanded of him ; it is enough 
if he pleases and amuses us, we do not take him seriouslyp It is 
with something of this romantic attitude that Europe and Amer¬ 
ica have regarded India, The merely philological studies of the 
universities have been conducted in such an arid fashion as to 
be comparatively inaccessible to artistic spirits: on the other hand, 
Indian thought has been popularized and pen^erted in many forms 
that are vaguc^ mysterious, and feminine, and so brought into 
disrepute* What is really needed is a point of view which is 
practical p rather than scholastic or sentimentak some power to 
grasp what is essential, disentangled by clear thinking from a 
mass of incorrect assumptions. The cdiallenge of the East is vety 
precise: To what end is your life? Without an answer to this 
question there may indeed be change, but progress is impossible! 
for without a sense of ditectioUj who knows if we do not return 
upon our footsteps in everlasting circles? I conclude then with 
this reminder: that the future of India depends as much upon 
what is asked of her as upon what $he 




INDIVIDUALITY, AUTONOMY 
AND FUNCTION' 


The object of govertunent is to make the governed behave as 
the govemors wislu This is true of 'good^ and *had^ govern- 
mcfit alike^ and alike of the rule of a conqueror, of a hereditary 
monarchy and of majority government by representation* 

The repudiation of tyranny must ultimatdy involve a repudia¬ 
tion of majority rule- Consider a community of five* It ts im¬ 
possible to deny that the rule of three, in so far as it affects the 
otlier two* b as much an arbitrary constraint as the rule of one 
affecting the other four* It is very liable to be less intdligenL 
In any case, however, the rule of three becomes, on the basis 
of votes, a rule of two: and a majority government will mean 
the role of two over three* 

Inasmuch, however, as each of the five is unique, and 'one 
law for the lion and the ox is oppression/ there can be no 
entirdy just solution outside the autonomy of each. This, which is 
widely admitted to be true for nations,, is no less true for 
individuals^ 

From an existing tyranny it is possible to arrive at an indi¬ 
vidual autonomy in t\vo w'ays* In the first place four of the five 
may revolt against the arbitrary rule of the one* setting up in 
place of it the rule of the majority^ The remaining tw'o may 
then assert thdr 'right^ of sdf-determination as against the major- 
ity* Ultimately each of the five will become autonomous: each, as 
it were* sitting armed in his own house, prepared to repel the 
intruder. This may be described 05 a disintegration sanctioned 
by the presumed diversity of interests which a pluralistic philoso¬ 
phy must assert- 

Since, however, each still desires to govern {to feel it one's 
Muty^ to govern is only the same thing in other words), and 
nothing prevents the exercise of governing powers but fear of 
resistance, the desire will be translated into action as soon as 
opportunity affords: and one, or a group of tw'o, threep or four 
of the five must be regarded as merely awaiting (consdously or 

1 Jra-Mdra, Jiw-nJjya, .spo-^harma. 


j 38 INDIVIDUAUTY, AUTONOMY AND FUNCTION 

unconsciously) ilic favorable moment. In ilie me^tUno co¬ 
operation for c<wninoii ends is excluded by muttp.] suspicion; each 
of the five will have to exercise all of ihe functions necessary 
to the existence of an tndividualj and only a fraction of tl^e 
activity of each will be vocational. This is the inevitable cons^ 
quence of resistance^ and of that sort of desire to take part in 
government which finds expression in the demand for votes. 

The anarchy approached by self-assertion, however justified, is 
therefore the anarchy of chaos: resistancep however inevitable, 
can of itself only create an unstable equilibriunip which must tend 
to reconstitute the status quo <inie. 

The second approach to individual autonomy is through rciittn- 
ciation — a repudiation of the will to govern. As wt are speaking 
in terms of tiniCj we must conceive of this idea as originating 
w'ith one of the fivCj and spreading to the others^ Let US| how- 
ever^ ignore the transirion period, and suppose that the idea of 
government has become^ for each of the five, even more distaste¬ 
ful than the idea of being governed 

In this situation there is nothing to prevent a recognition of 
common interests^ or co-operation to achieve them (co-operation 
is not goveiiiment}^ This will be an integration founded on the 
presumed identity of all interests which a monistic philosophy 
must assert. Neither of the five will expect to receive from 
any of the others something for nothing: but the principle 
of mutual aid or co-operation will permit each one to fulfil his 
owm function. Activity will be vocational^ that is to sayp willing. 

The anarchy approacbecS by renunciation is thus an anarchy 
of spontaneity: only a renunciatjon of the will tq_gover n could 
create a stable equilibrium. Everyone who believes in the self- 
determination of national groups is to that extent an anarchist. 
And while we must acknowledge that a state of entire liberty 
can never be attained because the will to govern can never be 
totally eradicated^ nevertheless it can be shown that activity based 
on anarchic principles may be and often is'far more inimediately 
and practically effective than an activity of controL Contrasty 
for example, the result of granting a large measure of autonomy 
to the Boers with the consequences of withholding it in Ireland. 

'The last ideal of a future slate/' says Dmitri Mcrezhkovski, 
"can only consist "ui the creation of new religious forms of 
thought and affairs: ^ religious sj'nthesis betw*een the in- 


1 NDI\TDUAUTY. AUTONOMY AND FUNCTION 139 

dividual and society, composed o£ unending love and unen(ing 
liberty." Far be it from me to assert tiiat suet a millniniiiin 
could ever be realised- But he who iftows not whither he mileth 
Jbnwj fiat which is o fair or a fotU wind for him. It cannot ^ 
unwise to shape our course towards the desired haven, ^ So 
much, at least, is possible to every individual; and only he is an 
individualist in truth, who does not will to govern any other 

than himself. . ^ t. » 

The 'will to govern' must not be conftssed with the will 

to power/ The will to govern is the will to govern others: the 
will to power is the will to govern oneself. 

Those who W'ould be free should have the will to power without 
the will to govern. If such as these are chosen to advise the 
executive, which cannot be entirely dispensed with, tbb should 
tend to the greatest degree of freedom and justice practically 
possible. 


Certain of these essays now rewritten 
*first appeared m the Burlington Maga¬ 
zine, the Athenaeum, the Modern Re¬ 
view, tlte Afitsieal Quarterly, the Socio¬ 
logical Review and the Modern School 
MagasUie. 
























. I 


A, 






r.‘3 

1 



» 



- V* 

















Ceatral Archaeological Library^ 

NEW DELHI. 


3.3 c2±J 


l^v 


Call No."Y ^ ^ ^ 

i ^ 1 

Autlior^— “^5^^I 

!_ ^ - ■ 

( ir 

■ 

^^OLOG;^ : 

^ GOVT. OF INDIA 

^ Department of Archaeology ^ 

NEW DELHI. ^ 

Please help us tP keep the book 
clean and moving. 


M.EIUHI. 













